
The Life and Death of King Iohn 









Tomb of King John^ Worcesler CathedraL 



A NEW VARIORUM EDITION 


OF 



T 


LIFE 


Ft; 


U TH 


OF 


K I. 


ijr 



EDITED BY 

HORACE HOWARD FURNESS, Jr., A,-B.; Litt. D. 



PHILADELPHIA & LONDON 
J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY 



Copyright, 1919, by H. H. Furness, Jr, 



TO 

L. B. W. F. 


Yet be most proud of that which I compile 
Whose influence is thine and born of thee. 





PREFACE 


The earliest text of King John is that contained in the Folio 
of 1623. As far as the mere text is concerned the task of the 
editor is comparatively light, and those passages requiring typo- 
graphic deciphering are pleasurably few. It is become so much 
the custom to speak derogatively of the editorship and the 
printing of the Folio that it is pleasant to speak in commen- 
dation of any part of that work. King John, in the Folio, 
contains a little over two thousand seven hundred lines. In the 
Cambridge text there are but fourteen examples wherein the 
Folio reading has been abandoned as corrupt and an emendation 
by a modern editor adopted. A table showing these will be found 
in the Appendix to this volume. A further evidence of the excel- 
lent state of the text may be seen in the list of Cruces, prepared 
by F. A. Leo, for all the plays {Jahrbuch, xx, p. 158) ; therein King 
John provides twenty-four passages, but this does not, by any 
means, imply that these are all due to corruptions of the text; 
in the majority of passages given by Leo the crux consists in the 
fact that a word, or expression, has given rise to a discussion as 
to a particular meaning or interpretation, such, for example, as 
^Alcides shooes upon an Asse ■; 'greefe is proud and makes his • 
owner stoope'; *a new un trimmed bride,* etc. Upon passages 
such as these the editors and commentators have expended their 
labor and ingenuity; in fact, an examination of the Notes will 
show that passages which have been fruitful of discussion are, in 
number, greater than in almost any other Play in this series, 
but, as has been already said, this does not mean that the 
Text itself is come down to us imperfect or corrupted. This 
is, however, not the case as far as the Act and Scene divisions 
are concerned, and modern editors have not hesitated to alter 
the headings where necessary, a source of great confusion to the 
student using a modern text and with the Folio text before him, 
as in the present volume. For example, Act I, sc. ii. of the Folio 
is in all modern editions Act II, sc. i. ; Act II. in the Folio is but 


V 



VI 


PREFACE 


77 lines, and, accordingly, modern editors, following Theobald, 
have made this Act III, Sc. i, and the Folio’s Act III, sc. i. a 
continuation of the scene where Constance awaits the return of 
the wedding procession with the two Kings. And here at once a 
difficulty confronts us. If we retain the Folio divisions com- 
pletely, the modern line numbers are utterly useless for reference; 
if we adopt the modern division completely, the line numbers in 
Act III, sc. i. (the Folio’s Act II.) up to line 77 will be repeated 
in the Folio’s actual Act III, sc. i, which in the modern text is 
made a continuation of the preceding scene. In disentangling 
this I fear I have been only partly successful. It seemed too 
drastic a treatment of the Folio text to suppress entirely the head- 
ing Act III, sc. i. and all the line numbers. I hcive, therefore, 
retained the Folio heading Act III, sceiia prima, and its line 
numbers, placing in brackets the line numbers as in the Cam- 
bridge text. This will enable the student with a modern text 
before him to locate any passage, which othei^'ise would be a 
matter of some difficulty and consequent loss of time. 

The question of the exact year — even the month — wherein 
each of Shakespeare’s plays w-as written was, for the earliest 
editors, one of singular interest. Any passage which might be 
supposed to refer, even remotely, to, an event of the historic days 
of Shakespeare’s life in London was eagerly seized upon as a 
means to settle the question once for all. This is termed internal 
evidence; again, manifest allusions to the play, or parts of it, by 
contemporary writers are taken as external evidence. In later 
years much time has been expended in classifying the plays ac- 
cording to the structure of the verse; this belongs also to the 
class of internal evidence. 

King John is included in Meres’ list in the Palladis Tamia, 
1598, and, although there are several commentators who have 
adopted an earlier date of composition, this same year has been 
accepted by the majority. The dates range, however, between 
1592 as the earliest and 1611 as the latest; this last having but 
one proposer and supporter. Beyond its inclusion in Meres’ 
list, we have no other piece of external evidence for a date of 
composition of King John^ and it is not, moreover, given in the 
list entered by Jaggarb and Blount when applying for license 
to print the First Folio in 1623. The Applicants then gave the 
titles of all those other plays of Shakespeare the licenses for 



PREFACE 


Vll 


which had not been assigned to other men. The reason for this 
complete omission from the Stationers' Registers is now impos- 
sible of explanation. Halliwell suggests that, either it was a 
mere oversight on the part of the printers, Jaggard and Blount, 
or that the license to print Shakespeare’s play had already 
been assigned to another; if this latter, where then is the entry 
of that other license in the Registers ? 

As to internal evidence, Warburton decided that King John’s 
berating Hubert for a too zealous following out of a hint to put 
Arthur to death was suggested by Elizabeth’s anger at Davison 
for like behavior towards Mary Queen of Scots, who was executed 
in 1587; but, as was quickly demonstrated, this was far too early 
a date, and it was hardly probable that an audience would recog- 
nise and apply an occurrence of several years before, granting even 
that knowledge of the Queen’s action was widely and publicly 
known. Constance’s heart-rending grief and passionate words on 
the loss of Arthur was accepted by Malone as the outpouring of 
Shakespeare’s sorrow and personal loss of his little son Hamnet 
in 1596, and this date with Malone receives corroboration from 
the description by Chatillon (Act I, sc. ii.) of the expedition ac- 
companying King John against France, being like to the expedi- 
tion of Raleigh and Essex against Spain at this same period, but 
for this last suggestion Malone acknowledges his indebtedness to 
a remark on this similarity by Dr. Johnson. Malone’s theory 
of Shakespeare’s method of composition, to me at least, does 
not commend itself. Are the jealous pangs of Othello; Cleo- 
patra’s infinite variety; Falstaff’s buffoon jests; King John’s 
despicable villainy, but reflections of some exterior impulse on 
Shakespeare, or due solely to a passing mood? Such a suppo- 
sition, instead of enhancing, detracts from our awe at the power 
of that mind which could so project itself into the innermost 
thoughts of any and all types of mankind. 

Metrical, and other verse-tests, are corroborative of the conclu- 
sion that King John belongs to Shakespeare’s early period, and 
we cannot, therefdreVbe” farwrong in assigning it to a date some- 
where between 1596 a^^^ which, for all practical purposes, 

is quite close enough. 

For the main conduct of his drama Shakespeare did not, as 
with several others of the Histories, have recourse directly to the 



PREFACE 


viii 

Chronicles, The basis of King John is an older play, The Trouble- 
some Raigne of John^ King of England^ in two parts, first issued 
anonymously in 1591; it was re-issued in 1611 with the super- 
scription ‘by W. Sh/ on the title-page, evidently for the purpose of 
deceiving the public, that this was Shakespeare’s play, which 
had appeared in the interim. A third edition was printed in 
1622 and the letters ‘W. Sh.’ on the title-page were changed to 
‘W. Shakespeare.’ The proximity of this last date to that of 
the First Folio might possibly be a reason for the omission of 
Shakespeare’s play from the list given by Jaggard and Blount, 
as before mentioned; there is, unfortunately, no entry of The 
Troublesome Raigne to be found in the Stationers' Registers for 
the year 1622, but the play was printed in that year, and its 
re-issue shows that it was well known. 

The complete lack of cumulative interest and absence of char- 
acter development are inconsistent with the assumption that 
Shakespeare was wholly responsible for this examplar of the 
two-part tragedy or historical play. Nevertheless, so astute a 
critic as Capell declared in favor of Shakespeare’s authorship, 
and saw in the later King John but a rewriting of one of Shake- 
speare’s own juvenile productions. SxEEyENS likewise included 
The Troublesome Raigne among the twenty Shakespearian plays 
published in quarto during the life of Shakespeare, but later 
admitted that he recanted from this opinion and was content to 
allow the Author his anonymity. The most steadfast opponent 
of those who refused to accept Shakespeare as the author of 
the older play was Ludwig Tieck, who discerned in The Trou- 
blesome Raigne a power and beauty which has curiously been in- 
visible to the English Commentators ; he declared that, had this 
play but been the acknowledged work of one of Shakespeare’s 
lesser brethren, the opinion as to its position among the works 
of that age would have been far different. Unlike Steevens, 
Tieck maintained his opinion to the last, and, in spite of the 
adverse views and criticism bestowed upon him by his own 
countrymen, declared that further examination but confirmed 
his first decision. Coleridge, in his first tentative chronological 
order of the plays, placed The Troublesome Raigne in the earliest 
or prentice period of Shakespeare’s work, characterizing the 
work as ‘not his but of him’; in later attempts Coleridge 
rightly rejected the older play, but hesitated as to assigning its 
true authorship. This last question is fully discussed in the . 4 ^- 



PREFACE 


IX 


pendix to this volume, and therefore need not be repeated 
here. 

The anonymous author drew the main incidents of his plot 
from Holinshed's Chronicle, and therefore Shakespeare, as he 
closely followed his predecessor, was indirectly indebted to the 
early historian. Although the general order of Tfe froublesome 
Raigne is followed, there is substantially not a scene or speech 
which is not entirely recast; in but one or two instances has 
Shakespeare reproduced even so much as an entire line, and 
has compressed the two parts of five acts each into one drama of 
five. A careful study of Shakespeare’s procedure in the present 
instance will be, for those interested in either the theory or prac- 
tice of play-writing, a task both pleasant and certainly profitable. 
His keen intuition as to the dramatic value of any incident; the 
equally clear perception as to what was retarding the progress of 
his drama with its consequent omission, and, over and above all, 
his marvellous use of every means to develop and make real each 
and every character— all these are excellent object-lessons in 
the art of dramatic construction. 

There was an older play than The Troublesome Raigne on the 
subject of King John's contest with the Pope, written by John 
Bale, Bishop of Ossory, entitled Ky^nge Johan. From its general 
style and what is known of Bale its probable date of composition 
lies between the accession of Elizabeth and the year 1563, the 
date of Bale’s death. Beyond the fact that both the anony- 
mous author and Bale used the historical material furnished by 
the there is no evidence to show that the author of 

The Troublesome Raigne hzA any recourse to the work of his pre- 
decessor; still less that Shakespeare even knew of its existence. 
Bale’s work is now chiefly interesting to students of the devel- 
opment of dramatic forms. It is the earliest known example of 
a drama in English wherein personages connected with public 
affairs in England are represented; and since abstract impersona- 
tions, such as Civil Order, Verity, Sedition, are also introduced, 
it bears a certain relation to the older moralities, occupying 
an intermediate place between these and the later historical 
plays. It is the only example of this form which now exists. 
An analysis of Kynge Johan, witii copious extracts, is included 
in the Appendix to this volume. J 

Coming down to more modern "times, in 1745 we find Colley 
Cibber, doubtless incited by the alarming attempts of Charles 



X 


PREFACE 


Edward Stuart, backed by the Church of Rome, using Shake- 
speare’s King John as political fuel for the flames. His altera- 
tion bore the clumsy title Papal Tyranny in the Reign of King 
John; it was produced at Drury Lane in 1745, Cibber himself 
playing the r 61 e of Pandulph. It was not received with favor 
either by the critics or public, and after ten performances was 
withdrawn, Cibber retiring from the stage with its last presen- 
tation. 

In the dedication to the Earl of Chesterfield Cibber declares 
that he endeavored to make his version 'more of a play than he 
found it in Shakespeare’; possibly he thought he had, but the 
wilful public preferred Shakespeare’s tragedy as produced at 
the rival house, Covent Garden, and Papal Tyranny sank into 
dramatic oblivion, where it still deservedly remains. Needless 
to say it did not have the political effect intended by its author. 

Nearly sixty years later, in 1800, R. Valpy, Head-Master of 
Reading School, produced an alteration of King John even more 
drastic than Cibber’s. As had Cibber, Valpy omitted the 
whole of the First Act, beginning his play with the scene before 
Angiers, leading to that between Philip and John. But Valpy 
apparently was not satisfied with any speech or series of speeches 
as written by Shakespeare, and, with fool-hardy presumption, 
therefore rewrote and recast all to conform to a style, which he 
strangely imagined, was more forceful and impressive. As adap- 
tations go, Valpy’s may take its place with Davenant’s per- 
version of Macbeth; Tait’s desecration of King Lear ; and 
Dryden’s travesty of The Tempest. It was prepared for the 
use of his scholars, and for such a purpose it should have had 
but a very limited audience, but Valpy was ambitious, and 
shortly after its performance at Reading School it was produced 
in London; Papal Tyranny, it had but a brief career, and 
has never since been revived. 

Sjiakesfbarb^s King John hdiSf of course, survived both of 
these attempts upon its dramatic life; but among his English 
Histories it has never been one of the favorite or stock-plays, 
such as Henry IV. or Richard III. Various are the reasons 
assigned for this, but chiefly that the titular hero is not the 
protagonist. 

Faulconbridge carries all before him from his first scene, where 
he at once captivates the King and Queen Elinor, to the final 
words of the play put in his mouth as the one best typifying the 



PI^EFACE 


xi 

rugged warrior Englishman of the time. Critics have not been 
slow to note the gradual change in his character. The brag- 
gart of the early scenes is drawn on the same plan as that of the 
Faulconbridge of The Troublesome Raigne, and in the older play 
he maintains practically the same character throughout. It . 
was the intuitive perception of Shakespeare that grasped the 
dramatic possibilities of such a character and showed how a man 
of Faulconbridge’s temperament attains to full strength and fine- 
ness by responsibility placed upon him, and by the confidence 
of one who trusts him implicitly. ‘ Have thou the ordering of the 
present time' are almost the last conscious words addressed to 
Faulconbridge by the King, as he hands over to him the conduct 
of the campaign against the Dauphin’s invasion, and this after 
Faulconbridge’s scathing comment on the Kang’s announcement 
that Pandulph has offered to make a compromise with the in- 
vaders. Once only can we detect a slight wavering in his al- 
legiance. The dead body of Arthur, found under such suspicious 
circumstances, almost shakes his faith, and wrings from him the 
admission that he begins to lose his way amid the thorns and 
dangers of this world ; and that Heaven itself frowns upon the land 
where such deeds can be committed. His righteous indignation Is 
forgotten as he stands beside the dead body of the King; his last 
words breathed in the dead ears are, that he but stays to avenge 
the murder, and then his soul shall wait on his benefactor to 
heaven as it has been but his servant upon earth. In adapting 
the older play it must have been at once apparent to the Play- 
wright that King John’s was not a character which lent itself to 
dramatic treatment. He was utterly perfidious, a poltroon, and 
a moral coward without one redeeming feature. Richard, Duke 
of Gloucester, ruthless and cruel though he was, had at least the 
saving grace of a grim humor; and his resourcefulness on all occa- 
sions excites a dreadful interest in his fate. But John was with- 
out even these signs of strength; his defiance of the Pope Is mere 
bluster, he cringes abjectly when he is made actually to realize 
the power of the Church, and accedes to all the conditions, forcing 
himself to believe that all this was done not on compulsion, but 
as a voluntary act on his part. 

That the full title of this Play in the Folio is misleading 
cannot be gainsaid. The action, in fact, deals with but a 
small number of the vicissitudes pf John’s stormy career as King; 
and that incident which in later ages was regarded as the bul- 



PREFACE 


xii 

wark of the people against the despotic acts of the crown — 
Magna Charta— is entirely omitted. Shakespeare’s reasons for 
ignoring an episode of such historic interest has been the source 
of varied speculation and comment. The anonymous author 
of The Troublesome Raigne had before him in the Chronicles a 
full account of the signing at Runnymede. It evidently did not 
appeal to him as a matter of importance politically, and quite un- 
necessary dramatically, as his main object was to make hateful 
to his hearers the acts of the Pope, and with such the Great 
Charter had had no connection whatever. What more natural, 
then, that what his predecessor had cast aside as extraneous 
Shakespeare should likewise neglect? It is more than doubtful 
that Magna Charta, in the days of Elizabeth, was regarded as of 
any import, and equally certain that the people of that period 
actually preferred a monarch uncurbed by conditions, who should 
rule absolutely without recourse to appeals to Church or state. 
Had Shakespeare accepted the incident of John’s signing the 
Charter for a subject of a part of his drama, it is impossible to 
believe that we should not have had a scene equally as fine as 
many in his other historical plays, for example, the scene of 
Richard’s renunciation of the crown to Bolingbroke. I, for one, 
wish that he had attempted it. 

The words put by Shakespeare into the mouth of John when 
defying the Pope are thought to indicate that Shakespeare was 
merely using King John as a mouthpiece to voice his own opinions 
as to Papal authority; such sentiments also render doubtful the 
question whether J ohn Shakespeare was a Romanist or had con- 
formed to the acts first issued by Elizabeth. That there is quite as 
much to be said in favor of one as the other will be seen by a refer- 
ence to the notes on III, i, 78, and to the views of various commen- 
tators in the article Shakespeare and Roman Catholicism in the 
pendix to this volume. I cannot reconcile myself to the opinion 
that Shakespeare ever made use of his dramatic art for the pur- 
pose of instructing, or as a means of enforcing his own views, any 
more than I believe that his poetic inspiration was dependent on 
his personal experience. 

In conclusion let it be admitted that King John as an acting 
play Is not to be ranked with the greater productions of Shake- 
speare, but this is not, by any means, to say that it is lacking 
in dramatic interest. What other playwright has ever produced 



PREFACE 


XIll 


the thrilling horror of King John's veiled hints at murder and 
death in his instigation of Hubert ? Where will be found words 
of grief and despair equalling those of Gonstance on the loss of 
Arthur ? What moralist could picture a scene of retribution 
more complete than John’s miserable death by poison in the 
orchard of Swinstead Abbey ? These scenes, be it remembered, 
written by a dramatist not yet thirty-five years old. How in- 
credulous would have been that young playwright had there stood 
beside his elbow a seer, who in strange words should inform him, 
as he finished the last ringing lines of his play, that four hundred 
years from that time those words should still find a responsive echo 
in the ears of his countrymen. And that he, the humble play- 
wright, and not all the historians, had placed upon King John's 
unworthy brows the wreath of immortality. 

It is again my pleasant task to return thanks to the Librarian 
of the Philadelphia Library, Mr. George M. Abbot, and his 
efficient assistants, Mr. Govan and Mr. Knoblauch, for unfail- 
ing courtesy in response to many demands. Also to Mr. H. S. 
Jones for painstaking research in the Libraries of New York 
and -Boston; likewise to Dr. H. C. Folger and Mr. J. Pierpont 
Morgan for placing at my disposal their unrivalled collections 
of Folios for purposes of collation. 


JunCt 1919 . 


H. H. F., Jr. 





Dramatis Perfonse 


King John. 2 

Prince Henry, Son to the King* 

Arthur, Duke of BretaigUj and Nephew to the King, 4 


1. Dramatis Per/omz] First given by 
Rowe. 

2. King John] John^ King of Eng- 
land. Cap. Sta. 

3. ...Henry, Son.. .King] Cam.-p. his 
Son. Coll. Wh. i. ...Henry, his son, 
afterwards Henry III. Cap, et cet. 


(subs.) 

4. Bretaign] Britaine Ktly. Bre- 
tagne Pope et cet. 

and...King] his Nephew. Cap. 
Om. Coll. Wh. i. son of Geffrey, late 
Duke of Bretagne, the elder brother of 
King John. Mai. et cet. 


2. King John] F. Gentleman: The character of King John, except in two 
scenes and a few speeches, lies heavy on the actor; who therefore requires great 
judgement, with deep and strong expression, to assist the author; dignity of person 
and deportment are also necessary. [Reed, the Editor of Biograpkia Dramatica, 
concludes his article on Gentleman with the following: ‘He was the author of the 
Dramatic Censor; and had the discredit of being editor of the worst edition that 
ever appeared of any English author: we mean Shakespeare, as printed by Mr. 
Bell, 1774.^ — Gentleman^s remarks reflect, however, a certain patronising attitude 
towards Shakespeare that was unfortunately characteristic of the Tatter part of 
eighteenth century criticism, and for that reason — not for their intrinsic value — are 
they here included. — Ed.] — Oechelhausee {Einfiihrungen, i, 8) concurs with Gen- 
tleman, whom he does not, however, quote, that the part of King John is unremu- 
nerative for the actor because ‘he must endeavor to arouse antipathy instead of 
sympathy, antagonism and not agreement in the audience; and yet every artistic 
effort must be exerted to excite an interest in the part; since John must be shown, 
in the early scenes, endowed with a strength and energy which later degenerate 
into cowardice and crime.’— [Estimates of the character of King John as por- 
trayed by Shakespeare and as given by historians will be found in the Appendix.] 

3. Prince Henry] French (p. 5): This Prince was born October i, 1206, and 
immediately after his fatlier’s death w^as proclaimed king by the loyal earl of 
Pembroke, and crowned October 26, 1216; he was therefore only ten years old 
when he put on ‘The lineal state and glory of the land.’ [Shakespeare’s Henry is, . 
howrever, a youth of apparently, seventeen or eighteen. — Ed.] — OECHELHAtiSER • 
(Einfurungen, i, 12): The part of Prince THenry may be best represented by a 
young actress. On account of the importance which this short role bears in the 
closing scene of the play its assignment demands a certain amount of consideration. 
Princely bearing and youthful modesty, together with deep pity for his father’s suf- 
fering and death, should characterise the part. 

4. Arthur] F. Gentleman (ap. Bell’s ed., p. 13) : Arthur should be a boy of small 
size, of tender, insinuating utterance, with sensibility of feeling. — Kreyssig (i, 391) : 
In the delineation of Arthur Shakespeare had a delicate task to discharge, all 



2 


DRAMATIS PERSONM 


[4. Arthur] 

the more so since his earlier, masterly portrayal of a situation quite similar must 
have acted strongly upon his perception. With the simple moti\'e of innocence 
trampled under foot by all the world, here, if anywhere, it would seem that a 
repetition was unavoidable. Like the sons of Edward, Arthur became, in fresh 
and sinless youth, the hapless victim of a question of legitimate succession to the 
crown. In the present play, as in Richard III, the tragic conflict lies not in the 
personality of the sufferer, but in his connection with those around him. In both 
cases there is grave danger of failure to obey that fundamental law of Tragedy 
which banishes from the realm of aesthetic representation the morally repugnant 
appearance of wholly unmerited suffering. It is, moreover, both remarkable and 
instructive to see how excellently the poet, avoiding any repetition, has accom- 
plished this seemingly insuperable task in two totally different ways — and it is 
doubly instructive, since in both cases the material prescribes that the catastrophe 
be from without, and allows the poet a free hand only in development of character 
and motive, as well as peculiarities of execution. In one as well as in the other both 
renderings are carried out in a manner as masterly as it is original The two youths 
themselves are drawn from a somewhat similar pattern, alike in age, situation, and 
fate, alike also through a passivity demanded by the circumstances. — ^Hiidson 
{Life, Art Ssr Characters, etc., ii, 29): As Shakespeare used the allowable license 
of art in stretching the Kfe of Constance beyond its actual date, that he might enrich 
his work with the eloquence of a mother’s love; so he took a like freedom in making 
Arthur younger than the facts prescribed, that he might in larger measure pour in 
the sweSness of childish innocence and wit. Both of these departures from strict 
fihistQric order are highly judicious; at least they are amply redeemed by the dra- 
;i matic wealth which comes in fitly through them. And in the case of Arthur there 
is the further gain, that the sparing of his eyes is owing to his potency of tongue 
and the piercing touch of gentleness; whereas in the history he is indebted for this 
to his strength of arm. ‘'^The Arthur of the play is an artless, gentle, natural-hearted, 
but high-spirited, eloquent boy, in whom we have the voice of nature pleading 
for nature’s rights, unrestrained by pride of character or place; who at first braves 
his uncle, because set on to do so by his mother; and afterwards fears him, yet 
knows not why, because his heart is too full of the ‘holiness of youth’ to conceive 
how anything so treacherous and unnatural can be, as that which he fears. And 
he not only has a most tender and loving disposition, such as cruelty itself can hardly 
resist, but is also persuasive and wise far beyond his years; though his power of 
thought and magic of speech are so managed as rather to aid the impression of his 
childish age. Observe, too, how in the scene with Hubert [IV, i.] his very terror 
operates in him a sort of preternatural illumination, and inspires him to a course of 
innocent and unconscious cunning,*— the perfect art of perfect artlessness. . . . 
Shakespeare has several times thrown the witchery of his genius into pictures 
of nursery life, bringing children upon the scene, and delighting us with their in- 
nocent archness and sweet-witted prattle; as in the case of Mamilius in The Winter's 
Tale, and of Lady Macduff and her son; but Arthur is his most charming piece in 
that line.^ That his great, simple, manly heart loved to play with childhood is 
indeed evident enough. Nor is it the least of his claims to our reverence, as an 
organ of Nature’s bland and benignant wisdom.— Boas {Sh. and His Predecessors, 
•p. 246) compares, as does Kreyssig, the situation of the young Princes in Richard 
tiiat of Arthur. ‘The nephews of Richard,’ says Boas, ‘ were marked 



DRAMATIS PERSONS 


3 


Pembroke, 

Essex, 

Salisbury, 

Hubert, 

Bigot, 


English Lords. 


5 


9 


6. Rowe,+, Cap. Yarn Earl 
of Essexy Jeffrey Fitzpeter, Chief Jus- 
tice of England Ran. Gefrey Fitz- 
Peter, Earl of Essex. Coll. Geffrey 
Fiiz-JPeter, Earl of Essex, Chief Justic- 
iary of England. Mai. et cet. 

7. Salisbury] Rowe,H-, Cap. Varr. 
Earl of Salisbury, William Longsword, 
son to Henry II. by Rosamund Clifford. 
Ran. Earl of Salisbury. Cam.-f. 
William Longsword, Earl of Salisbury 
Mai. et cet. 


8 . Hubert] Pope, Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Hubert, an English Gentle- 
man. Han. Hubert, Confidant of K. 
John Cap. Hubert de Burgh. Cam.-f-. 
Hubert de Burgh, Chamberlain to the 
King. Mai. et cet. 

9. Bigot] Pope,-}-, Cap. Varr. MaL 
Bigot, Roger, Earl of Norfolk and Suf- 
folk. Ran. Hal. The Lord Bigot. Cam. 
-{-. Robert, Bigot, Earl of Norfolk 
Mai. et cet. 


by an ability and spirit beyond their years, and the elder bore himself with a true 
touch of regal dignity. Arthur is of an essentially different nature. He is a 
saintly, gentle child, without a touch of worldly ambition. . , . Arthur escapes the 
cruel doom of blinding, but we feel instinctively that he is one of the saintly crea- 
tures who are not long for this world. Thus Shakespeare showed his usual fine tact 
in choosing the tradition which represented him as perishing in an attempt to leap 
from his prison walls.’ 

5. Pembroke] ‘William Marshal, Lord Marshal of England, was created Earl of 
Pembroke by King John in 1201; and on the accession of Henry III. (then only ten 
years of age) was declared protector of the realm. Upon coming into power he was 
fortunate enough to appease the minds of the discontented people, and took the 
sensible measure of republishing, at this critical juncture, the Magna Charta, in 
Henry’s name. After several engagements, he succeeded in driving the French 
out of England, and thus restored peace to his distracted country, which had long 
been torn by faction, the unhappy result of John’s pusillanimous reign. Pem- 
broke survived not long the pacification which had been chiefly owing to his wisdom 
and valour; he died in 1219, lamented by the whole kingdom. This steady and gal- 
lant patriot, who saved his country from a foreign yoke, was buried in the Temple 
Church, in London, where his efiSgy is still to be seen, clothed in mail, in the centre 
of the group of antique tombs’ {Hist. Dramas of Sh. Illustrated, i, 78). — French 
(p. 7) : William Marshall obtained the title of Pembroke through his marriage with 
the great heiress Isabel de Clare, daughter of the potent earl Richard Strong-bow; 
and his five sons by her . . . were, in succession, lords marshal and Earls of Pem- 
broke. The noble in this play did not fall away, as therein implied, to the French 
interest; on the contrary, he remained faithful to King John. . . . His eldest son, 
of the same name, one of the twenty-five Barons who obtained Magna Charta 
from John, was among the nobles who joined the Dauphin, and hence the mistake 
of the poet. [Shakespeare is, however, not singular in this error, as the anony- 
mous author of the older play, The Troublesome Raigne of John, which he closely 
follows, has made Pembroke the spokesman for the revolting nobles. See Appendix: 
Troublesome Raigne, Part 2: I, iii, p. 519,, — ^Ed.] — ^Miss Norgate (p. 177, foot- 



4 


DRAMATIS FERSONjE 


[5. Pembroke] 

note): John, who in his prosperous days made almost a parade of disbelief in 
WiUiam’s loyalty, and delighted in straining it to the uttermost by saying and 
doing everything he could think of to insult and provoke William, ne\'ertiieless 
knew well that in moments of peril William was the one counsellor to whose dis- 
interestedness he could safely trust, the one follower on whom he could count un- 
reservedly, the one friend whom he could not do without. 

7. Salisbury] Steevens: Son to King Henry II. by Rosamund Clifford. — 
Wright: If the play were historical, Salisbury would be William Longsword, 
Earl of Salisbury, son of Henry II. and Fair Rosamund. But in the old Play he is 
called ‘Thomas Plantaginet, Earle of Salisburie.’ Thomas Piantagenet was, how- 
ever, not Earl of Salisbury; he was simply entitled Thomas of Lancaster. — 
French (p, 8): [William Long-sword’s half-brother, Richard I,] had bestowed 
upon him the hand of a great heiress, Ela, daughter of William de Evereux, Earl 
of Salisbury, to which title Long-sword succeeded* at the death of his father-in-law. 
In the beginning of John’s reign he was Sheriff of Wilts., and Warden of the Welch 
Marches, and he was one of the King’s securities for the observance of Magna 
Charta. With other peers Salisbury joined the army of the Dauphin, but on the 
accession of Henry III. returned to his allegiance. He afterwards served with dis- 
tinction in the Holy Land, and died on his return thence in 1226. Sir Walter 
Scott, in his delightful Tale of the Crusaders, The Talisman^ introduces William 
Long-sword as one of the companions of Coeur-de-Lion in Palestine. — [In a review 
of French’s volume in the Herald ajid Geneologisty July, 1870, the anonymous re- 
viewer remarks: ‘Mr. French is not quite accurate. . . . Ela’s father was not sur- 
named de Evereux^ nor was it until after her father’s death that she was bestowed 
with her earldom upon William Longespee.’ — ^This is, however, a point of historic 
interest only, as the wife of Salisbury is not included among the characters in the 
present play. — E d.]— H. T. Haix (p. 152) : [As portrayed by Shakespeare] Salis- 
bury is a purely natural man, strong in love, a true friend, an excellent neighbour, 
but no politician. Lacking politics, Salisbury does not attract much attention 
until the close of the history. He is a man of feeling, not of reasoning powers, and 
by his feelings he is mostly actuated and directed. — Kreyssig (i, 395) : In contrast 
to the two kings, to the Dauphin and to the Legate, this upright, honourable soul 
stands like Nature in comparison to a degenerate painting. Nature in her purity, 
but certainly also with her narrowness. The difference between the ideal, invio- 
lable king and the chance unworthy possessor of the sublime position is too delicate 
for him. His righteous anger at the murder of an innocent child recognises in the 
voice of fate the inclination of the heart, and persuades him that, under the banner 
of France, he is following not the destroyer of his country, but the avenger of inno- 
cence wronged. But this cosmopolitan virtue finds no favor in the eyes of the 
English poet. No bitter, painful consequence of his action, as beautifully human 
as politically blamable, will be spared Salisbury, that the spectator may learn that, 
fundamentally, the purest humanity becomes an empty phrase if it be not founded 
upon positive love of country. [See V, ii, 11--42.] 

8. Hubert] Courtenay (i, 26); We now regard Hubert de Burgh as the very 
•essence of nobility; but, although at a later period of his life he was an eminent 
member of the aristocracy, he was, I believe, the artificer of his own fortune, and 
had not at this time attained the dignity of the peerage, though he had held im- 

» portant offices under the King. According to Dugdale (Bar,, i, 693) he was nephew 



DRAMATIS PERSONjE 


5 


[8. Hubert] 

to William Fitz Adelm, a favorite and servant of Henry II, and ancestor to tbe 
Earls of Clanricarde. He was himself created Earl of Kent by Henry III. in the 
13^^ year of his reign; and in that reign, though sometimes in much favour with the 
king, he was repeatedly charged, both by king and nobles, with crimes of all sorts, 
political and personal. These occurrences may have been the original foundation 
for the jealousy and contempt of Hubert, which the play ascribes to the peers, — 
French (p. 9) : There is nothing in the play to denote the proper rank of this cele- 
brated person, who was of lofty lineage, and a noble of distinguished ability and 
great power. He was descended from Charlemagne . . . and his more immediate 
ancestor was Robert, Earl of Montaigne and Cornwall. ... By King John he was 
made Lord Chamberlain, Warden of the Welch Marches, Sheriff of five counties, 
Seneschal of Poitou, and Governor of several castles. He sided with John in his 
contest with the Barons, and was one of his securities to the Great Charter, and on 
the day that it was signed at Runny-mead he was made justiciary of England, 
afterwards loaded with many honours and important posts, among them having 
the custody of Dover Castle. This key to the kingdom was defended by Hubert 
de Burgh with only 140 soldiers for four months against all the ejfforts of the French 
to take it, and when the Poet makes Faulconbridge say, *A 11 Kent hath yielded, 
nothing there holds out But Dover Castle,’ [IV, i, 33], it should be borne in mind 
who was the castellan by whom it was so well guarded. [The Hubert de Burgh of 
history was undoubtedly the intrepid defender of Dover Castle, but the Hubert of 
Shakespeare’s creation was occupied far otherwise as messenger between King John 
and the disaffected peers during those important military operations. (See IV, ii, 
iii.). — E d.] — ^Anon. {Herald and Genealogist, July, 1870, p. 316): In Hubert, the 
compassionate jailor of the lovely Prince Arthur, we have evidently a name derived 
from the great justiciary, Hubert de Burgh, Earl of Kent. In the Dramatis Persona 
Hubert is classed, accordingly, among the Lords of the English court; but the 
fact that Shakespeare himself regarded him very differently is proved by the alter- 
cation in IV, iii, 86-92, where Hubert tells the Earl of Salisbury that he was pro- 
voked by the Earl’s behaviour to forget ‘Your worth, your greatness, and nobility’; 
and the Lord Bigot, a by-stander, exclaims ‘Out, dunghill! darest thou brave a 
nobleman?’ Now, admitting that Hubert is identical with Hubert de Burgh, 
there could not be a stronger example of Shakespeare’s deficiency in genealogical 
lore, inasmuch as Hubert de Burgh was descended in the male line from the Em- 
peror Charlemagne, and his own marriages were with royal houses, whilst he was 
justiciary of England in the reign of John, and Earl of Kent in the next reign. — 
Oechelhauser {Einfuhrungen, etc., i, 12): The character of Hubert seems at first 
misanthropic, and capable of the commission of a gruesome deed. He interprets 
at once John’s murderous hints and goes with determined mien upon his dreadful 
errand. At the same time he should not be represented as a typical villain since 
otherwise the sudden change to softer and more humane impulses will seem un- 
natural, but he should be shown rather as an embittered man, one who sees 
himself, on account of a repulsive exterior, misjudged by the world. In such men 
a misanthropic, cruel disposition is easily developed, which incites them to sinful 
deeds in order that they may thus be revenged upon mankind. On the other hand, 
such natures are quite as strongly influenced if one approaches them in a friendly, 
kindly manner. Thus Hubert’s temptation is facilitated by the hypocritical, ful- 
some flatteries of King John, while later the innocent, touching appeals of Arthur 



6 


DRAMATIS PERSONS 


Faulconbridge; Bastard-Son to Richard the First. lo 


,io. Faulconhridge,,. First] Pope,-}-, 
Var. ’78, ’85. Philips his bastard 
Brother, begotten by K. Richard. Cap. 
Philip Faulcombridge, his half-brother. 
Coll. Falconbridge... First Dyce, Hal. 
Huds. ii, Words. Philipp the bastard, 


his half-brother Cam.-f*. Philip Faid- 
conbridge, his half-brother... First. Mai. 
et cet. 

10. ...the First.] ...the First; after- 
wards knighted by the name of Sir 
Richard Plantaganet. Han. 


lead him the more easily to the path of humanity, wherein from that point on he 
remains. In his whole development I cannot detect any psychological inconsist- 
ency; although Hubert protests too much in saying: ‘Within this bosom, never 
entered yet The dreadful motion of a murderous thought.’— -[IV, ii, 265]. The 
blinding of Arthur was even worse than murder, granting that the implied inten- 
tion be taken for the actual deed. He wished actually to commit a crime, but he 
could not. A better nature lived concealed in him beneath a repulsive exterior, as 
he himself tells the king. To portray his conversion, and its accompanying in- 
ward struggle, in Act IV, Scene i, as well as his grief over Arthur’s death demands 
a capital actor, wherefore this r 61 e should be entrusted only to a character-actor of 
the first rank. Hubert should be represented as a man between fifty and sixty, 
of plebeian bearing, with dark, baleful features and hoarse, rough voice. His in- 
nermost thoughts must be reflected in his looks. 

9. Bigot] PnENCH (p. 9) : This baron has almost always been incorrectly called 
Robert Bigot, but history does not record any Earl of Norfolk, of the family, who 
bore that Christian name. The first of this family, Roger Bigot, came over with 
the Conqueror, and was rewarded with numerous lordships in Essex and Suffolk. 
His son, Hugh Bigot, was steward to King Stephan, who gave him the Earldom 
of Norfolk, which was confirmed to him by Henry II. He died in the Holy 
Land in 1177, leaving by his wife, Juliana, daughter of Alberic de Vere, his 
eldest son, Roger Bigot, second Earl of Norfolk, the personage in this play. He 
enjoyed the favour of Richard I, but was one of the twenty-five Barons against 
Eang John. 

10. Faulconbridge] Steevens: Though Shakespeare adopted this character 
of Philip Faulconbridge from the old play [The Troublesome Raigne] it is not im- 
proper to mention that it is compounded of two distinct personages. Matthew 
Paris says: ‘Sub iUius temporis curriculo, Falcasius de Brente, Neusteriensis, et 
spurius ex parte matris, atque Bastardus, qui in vili jumento manticato ad Regis 
paulo ante clientelam descenderat,’ &c., [ed. Luard, iii, 88]. Paris, in his History 
of the Monks of St Albans^ calls him Fake, but in his General History, Falcasius de 
Brente, as above. Holinshed says that ‘Richard I. had a natural son named 
Philip, who, in the year following, killed the viscount de Limoges to revenge the 
death of his father.’ [This assertion by Steevens, that Shakespeare’s Faulcon- 
bridge is compounded of two distinct characters mentioned in widely separated 
passages by two chroniclers, has been accepted heretofore without question. 
Steevens was doubtless influenced only by the slight similarity in the two names; 
nevertheless, even at the risk of being accused of presumption, I must say that 
I regard any such deduction as open to grave objection, Falcasius de Breaute, not 
de Brente, as Steevens gives it, was a man of evil reputation during the reigns of 
John and Henry III. ' He was a man of great courage but of savage and cruel nature, 
and was chosen by King John to be Warden of the Welch Marches. On one occa- 



DRAMA TIS PERSONM 


7 


[i o. , F atdconbridge] 

sion he pillaged the town of St. Albans and exacted a large sum of money from the 
Abbot; later he was employed by John in his raid upon the Barons, and, having 
taken Bedford Castle, John, through fear of him, gave it over to Falcasius. His name 
was among those proscribed for banishment in Magna Charta. In the reign of Henry, 
for various offences, he was besieged in Bedford Castle by the outraged barons in 
1224; it was taken and, though he escaped, the castle was razed to the ground. 
His delayed sentence of banishment was put into effect and three years later, in 
1227, he died in exile. The passage quoted by Steevens is an addition by Matthew 
Paris to Roger of Wendover’s account of the siege of Bedford Castle, and the King 
therein referred to is Henry III, not John; Giles translates it thus: ‘About this 
time there was one Faulkes de Breaute, a native of Normandy, a bastard by his 
mother’s side, who had lately come on a scurvy horse, with a pad on his back, to 
enter the King’s, service’ (vol. ii, p. 454). As far as can be determined by an ex- 
amination of the various passages in which Falcasius is mentioned in Wendover 
and in Paris, this is the only one wherein he is called Falcasius de Brente, and Luard, 
in his careful edition of Paris’s Chronica Majora^ prepared for the Rolls Series of 
English Chronicles, uniformly gives the name throughout his Index as Fawkes de 
Breaute. It is reasonable to conjecture that as he was illegitimate he received 
this name from the district in Normandy whence he came, and this is slightly cor- 
roborated by the fact that there is a small town, Breaut6, in the district of Caux. 
This is, however, a minor point and is pure surmise on my part; that which is more 
important is, whence arose the changes in his name from Brent6, as given by Paris; 
Brents, as it appears in the quotation by Steevens; and Breaut6, as given by Luard? 
At first sight the simplest solution would seem to lie in a confusion of the written 
n and «; but curiously enough Fuller, in his Worthies, among those of Middlesex 
says: ‘Falcatius, or Falke de Brent, was a Middlesex-man by his nativity, whose 
family so flourished therein in former ages (remaining in a meaner condition to 
this day) that an antiquary [Norden] will have the rivulet Brent, which denom- 
inateth Brentford, so named from them; which is preposterous in my opinion, be- 
lieving them rather named from the rivulet’ (ed. Nuttall, vol. ii, p. 321). Fuller 
then gives the history of Falcasius as related by Paris; in another passage (vol. i, 
p. 137) he calls him Falco or Falkerius de Breantee, and again the confusion be- 
tween n and u confronts us — Breaute, Breantee (the e of the French name 
will account for the ee). We seem to have wandered far from Shakespeare 
and Faulconbridge in this discussion, but the question is not as irrelevant as, at 
first sight, it appears, and I should not have gone so fully into the mere spelling 
of the name were it not that both Lloyd, in his Critical Essay on King John, md 
French, in h\s> Shakspeareana Gemalogica, have adopted Steevens’s suggestion 
that Falcasius de Brente was the prototype of Faulconbridge; neither, be it said, 
referring to Steevens as their authority. I fear that Lloyd has, however, read both 
Wendover and Paris to but little advantage— he admits that his examination has 
been cursory — ^when he says of Falcasius that ‘he was a great figure for good or ill, 
but ever for energy as servant of King John,’ Both historians are singularly reti- 
cent as to any good actions, and equally in agreement as to his evil deeds. ‘ Wicked 
robber,’ ‘iniquitous thief,’ ‘traitor’ are but a few of the epithets applied to Fal- 
casius. The passage which Lloyd quotes from Paris refers to John’s appoint- 
ment of Fawkes to the Wardenship of the Welch Marches, and is — ^Hke that given 
by Steevens— an addition by Paris to Wendover’s account of the year 1212. Later, 



8 


DRAMATIS PERSONjE 


[lo. Faulconbridge] 

it is quite true, John made use of Fawkes in his expedition against the Barons, but 
Paris distinctly says that John through fear of Fawkes was quite under his domi- 
nation. Few, I think, will agree with Lloyd that from Fawkes de Brente to Faul- 
conbridge is an easy transition, yet, as has been said, this slight similarity in 
sound suggested this to Steevens and to Lloyd, coupled with the fact that Fawkes 
and Philip were bastards, and both on one occasion plundered an Abbey. On the 
other hand, there is not the slightest similarity in their characters. The pride 
of bearing and intense love of king and country shown both by the Philip of tlie 
older play and the Faulconbridge of Shakespeare are quite lacking in the reprehen- 
sible robber Fawkes de Breaute or de Brente. This question of the exact spelling 
of the name is one which I must leave for some student of history to decide, and it 
is to be regretted that French, whose volume on the historical characters in Shake- 
speare^s plays is such a valuable contribution to the subject, should not have 
thrown a little more light on this puzzling question. Foulke de Breante is the 
name which French assigns to the prototype of Faulconbridge, accepting without 
question the conclusions of Steevens and Lloyd. On the authority of Sir Nicholas 
Harris Nicolas, French says that Foulke de Breante was a baron by tenure, one of 
the managers and disposers in King John’s will, and also one of the noble persons 
named in the first great charter of Henry III. But all this merely tells us more 
in regard to Falcasius or Foulke; it has not given us any more valid reasons for 
identifying him with Faulconbridge. We must have grounds more relative than 
any so far presented. — ^Moberly, in a note on the first appearance of the name in 
the text, says that it is ^the anglicized form of “Falkenberg,” much as ^‘Bridg- 
water” is a corruption of “Burgh Walter.” The family is not the same as that of 
Lord Fauconberg, Cromwell’s son-in-law, which belonged to the North Riding of 
Yorkshire, and had the family name of Bellasys.’ Again he says {Introd,, p. xi.): 
‘Of the Faulconbridges of that time [the thirteenth century], one is recorded as 
having lost his estates for rebellion against King John, but having been restored 
by Henry III. Another may perhaps be the “Falco” of whom we read as “raven- 
ing like a lion” during John’s expedition to Yorkshire, . . . Dugdale has no record 
of the time when the family settled in England.’— I regret that I am unable to iden- 
tify Moberly’s reference to the Faulconbridge who lost his estates in the time of 
King John; that name does not appear in the pages of Wendover, Paris, or Holin- 
shed, but — surgit antari aliquid — can it be that the arch-traitor, free-booter, and 
villain, Falcasius de Breaute, is once more obtruding his unwelcome presence in 
borrowed robes? There is, however, a Eustachius de Faulconbridge mentioned 
by Sto'w {Surmy of London, ed. 1618, p. 904) in that part of his work treating of 
the Spiritual Government under the year 1221, and Stow quotes Paris as his au- 
thority for calling Faulconbridge Treasurer of the Exchequer; in 1223 he w'as ele- 
vated to the see of London and— here is a curious coincidence— Stow says that 
Falcatius de Brent was delivered to the custody of Faulconbridge in 1224. Does 
not this some'what militate against the suggestion that the name Faulconbridge is 
one formed from Falco de Brente or, rather, that one name suggested the other? 
Camden {Remains, p. 174) also alludes to this preferment of Eustachius from Treas- 
urer to Bishop, and the name, in the margin, is there printed ‘de Fauconberge’— 
a corroboration, if one be needed, of Moberly’s derivation of the name. — ^The 
original note by Steevens has, I fear, been submerged beneath this sea of historical 
data, let us return, therefore, to that point. As regards his other quotation Steevens 


DRAMATIS PERSONS 


9 


Robert Faulconbridge, supposed Brother to the Bastard* 1 1 

II, suppos’d... Bastard] Pope,-{“. half. ..bastard. Var. ’78, ’85. Son of a Sir 
Robert Faulconbridge. Cap. et cet. (...Falconbridge Byce, Hal. Huds. ii. 
Words.) 

is quite correct in saying that Holinshed gives the name of Philip to Richard, 
Coeur de Lion’s illegitimate son; the passage which Steevens quotes, in part, 
reads thus: ‘The same yere [1199] Philip, bastard sonne to King Richard, to 
whome his father had given the Casteli and honor of Coinacke, killed the vicount 
of Limoges, in revenge of his father’s death’ (ed. 1585; vol. hi, p. 160, col. b). — 
Malone quotes a passage from the continuation of Hardyng’s Chronicle^ ‘One 
Faulconbridge, therie of Kent, his bastarde, a stoute-hearted man’ (fol. 24, b. ad 
ann., 1472), and suggests tentatively that this induced the author of the Trouble^ 
some Raigne ‘ to affix the name of Faulconbridge to King Richard’s natural son.’ 
He adds: ‘Who the mother of Philip was is not ascertained. It is said that she 
was a lady of Poictou, and that King Richard bestowed upon her son a lordship in 
that Province. In expanding the character of the Bastard Shakespeare seems to 
have proceeded on the following slight hint in the original play: “Next them, a 
bastard of the King’s deceased, A hardie wild-head, rough, and venturous.” ’ — 
Staunton considers that the latter part of this note by Malone has too long 
passed unchallanged. ‘How far this statement is justifiable,’ he adds, ‘let 
the reader determine after perusing only a few extracts from the earlier 
work. . . . We miss in the original the keen but sportive wit, the exuber- 
ant vivacity, the shrewd worldliness, and the military genius of Shakespeare’s 
Bastard; but his arch-type in the old piece was the work of no mean hand.’ 
— ^Malone’s quotation from Grafton — although it refers to a later period — is cer- 
tainly more to the purpose than all the passages from Paris and Wendover in re- 
gard to Fouike de Breaut6 or Falcasius de Brente, since it does not necessitate any 
violent change either in sound or spelling. We must not, however, lose sight of 
the fact that the mere question of the name or its invention is of but slight im- 
portance as regards Shakespeare’s Faulconbridge; that name he found ready to his 
hand in the older play; but how the unknown author obtained it can be answered 
only by one far abler than the present Ed.] 

II. Robert Faulconbridge] Marshall (Irving^ s Sh,, iii, 209): In the old play 
Look About You, 1600, the husband of Lady Fauconhridge is called Sir Richard 
Fauconhridge* That play deals very fully with the intrigue between Prince 
Richard and Lady Faulconbridge, so that probably there was some story or tradi- 
tion on the point of which the author of Look About You and the author of the 
Troublesome Raigne of John both made use. [Inasmuch as there is a period of 
over ten years between The Troublesome Raigne and Look About You it is probable 
that the author of the latter comedy made use of certain characters from his prede- 
cessor’s work. The style and method of Look About You clearly show it to belong 
to a date close to its first appearance in print, 1600. — Greizenach (p. 185) calls 
attention to the fact that Lady Fauconhridge is therein represented as the sister 
of the duke of Gloster, the hero of the piece, and that ‘Robin Hood bears a prom- 
inent part in the intrigue between Richard and the Lady. ’—This is, however, 
Robin’s only appearance in such a character. Neither Ritson nor Child in their 
exhaustive collections of the Ballads and Legends dealing with the exploits of that 
Famous Hero— though they refer to this comedy—furnish any source for such 



10 


DRAMATIS PERSONjE 


James Gurney, Servant to the Lady Faulconbridge, 12 

Peter of Pomfret, a Prophet. 

Philip, King of France. 

Lewis, the Dauphin. 

Arch-Duke of Attsiria. 

13. Prophet.] Prophesier. Cap. sup- Louis,... Dyce, Wh. i, Words. Lewis, 

posed prophet. Sta. ^ the Dolphin Ktly. 

15. Lewis, the Dauphin] Dauphin, his 16. Afch-Duke...] Duke... Cap. Ly- 
Son; afterwards Lewis VIII. Cap. moges. Duke... Cam. Neils. 

an episode other than the imagination of the anonymous author of Look About 
You. — En.] 

12. James Gurney] Malone: Our author found this name in perusing the 
history of King John, who not long before his victory at Mirabeau, over the French, 
headed by young Arthur, seized the lands and castle of Hugh Gorney, near Bute- 
vant, in Normandy. — Wright: It is more probable that the name Gurney or 
Gourney was a familiar one to Shakespeare. 

14. Philip, King of France] ‘Philip II. (surnamed Augustus) ascended the 
throne of his father in the year 1189, and in the fifteenth year of his age. 
He soon gave proofs of consumma.te judgment; for, by his prudence, he 
dissolved a powerful league which had been formed among some of the 
greatest princes of France. He was religious, but his mind was not enfeebled by 
bigotry. ... In his twenty-fifth year he made a league with Richard I. of Eng- 
land, founded on the most firm and cordial friendship. Those two young and 
warlike monarchs, inflamed with the enthusiasm of the times, resolved to make an 
expedition, with their united forces, to the Holy-Land, and set sail together; but 
some dissension having arisen between them at Sicily, it increased to a mutual dis- 
trust. . . . [King Philip died at Mantes] on the 25^15 of July, 1223, in the year 
of his age and the 44^^ of his reign. He was a well-made man, but had a defect 
in one of his eyes. Laborious and active; undertaking nothing without deliber- 
ation, but executing what he had undertaken with celerity and ardour, he was, 
therefore, generally successful, and was honoured by his first historians with the 
surname of the Conqueror, which has been changed to the more elegant appellation 
of Augustus’ {Sh. Illustrated, i, 83). 

15. Lewis, the Dauphin] French (p. 15, foot-note): Perhaps it is too early 
to assign the title of ‘Dauphin’ to the eldest son of a French monarch at this date, 
as it is generally understood that it came in the next century on thip wise: Hum- 
bert III, the Count-Dauphin of the Viennois, about the year 1345 bequeathed or 
ceded his territory to. Philip of Valois [Philip VI.] on condition of hia eldest son 
taking the title of Dauphin and the arms of the province. The style had been 
first assumed circa 1140 by Guy IV, Count of the Viennois, who took the dolphin 
for his arms from the name of the province, Dauphiny. Philip, son of Philip of 
Valois, is believed to be the first prince who bore the style and arms of the Dol- 
phin, as he was called, or Delphinus. 

16. Arch-Duke of Austria] See note, III, i, 44. Oecheihauser (Einfukrungen, 
i, 22): The Archduke of Austria is a character which the Poet found in the older 

play Decked out in the historic lion’s skin of Richard he is from the crown of 

his head to the sole of his foot a cowardly poltroon, in whom there is not a spark of 



DRAMATIS PERSONM 


II 


Pandulpho, Pope's Legate. 17 

17. Fandulpho] Pope. Card, or Cardinal Pandulpho Theob.+, Varr, Mai. 
Steev. Pandulph Cap. Sta. Cardinal Pandulph. Var. ’03 et cet. 


manliness or honourable feeling. Faulconbridge seems, the Archduke is, a swag- 
gerer; the words of the former are completely concealed by his acts, with the latter 
it is all empty sound. The contemptuous remarks of the Bastard, who, at the 
first sight of him, as the murderer of his father makes him his butt, affect him as 
little as the still sharper tongue-lashings of Constance. By-play forms a very im- 
portant part of the task of both Faulconbridge and Austria in both the scenes, 
Act II, scene i, and Act III, scene i. Although the whole figure of this vain poltroon 
is drawn in a comic style, yet the comic objective must not go beyond the bounds 
of ignominious derision; and assuredly it should not go so far as to make of Austria 
an utter clown, as one often sees on the German stage and always on the English, 
such was surely never the intention of the poet. Dress, manners, bearing, features, 
all must work naturally together, to give this figure its characteristic make-up; 
self-satisfied vanity particularly reflects itself in a sweet, weak smile which is con- 
stantly upon his lips. 

17. Pandulpho] Davies (Dram. Miscellanies^ i, 39): The character of Pandulph 
has not, as yet, been represented with that air of dignity and importance which it 
demands. Macklin, whose skill in acting is acknowledged to be superior to that 
of any man, who is the best teacher of the art, and is still, at a very advanced age, 
a powerful comedian as well as a good comic writer, should have refused this part; 
neither his person, voice, action, or deportment conveyed any idea of a great dele- 
gate from the head of the church, the spiritual monarch of Christendom. Quin, 
who was present at the revival of King John zX Drury Lane, said Macklin was like 
a Cardinal who had been formerly a parish clerk. And yet, it must be owned, 
Macklin understood the logic of the part, if I may be allowed the expression, better 
than anybody. But the man who presumes to control the will of mighty mon- 
archs should have a person which bespeaks authority, a look commanding respect, 
graceful action, and majestic deportment. But Colley Cibber^s Pandulph was 
less agreeable to an audience than Macklin's; the voice of the latter, though rough, 
was audible. The former’s pipe was ever powerless, and now, through old age, so 
weak that his words were rendered inarticulate. His manner of speaking was 
much applauded by some, and by others as greatly disliked, in the Pope’s Legate, 
as in most of his tragic characters. The unnatural swelling of his words displeased 
all who preferred natural elocution to artificial cadence. The old man was contin- 
ually advising Mrs Pritchard, who acted Lady Constance, to tone her words; but 
she, by obe3dng her own feelings and hstening to her own judgement, gained ap- 
probation and applause; which was not the case with his son, Theophiius, who 
acted the Dauphin, and Mrs Bellamy, who played Lady Blanch. They, by con- 
forming to their director’s precepts, were most severely exploded. But Colley’s 
deportment was, I think, as disgusting as his utterance. He affected a stately, 
magnificent tread, a supercilious aspect, wdth lofty and extravagant action, which 
be displayed by waving up and down a roll of parchment in his right hand; in short, 
his whole behaviour was so starchly studied that it appeared eminently insignifi- 
cant, and more resembling his own Lord Foppington than a great and dignified 
churchman. [The part of Pandulph in Shakespeare’s King John is not given in 



12 


DRAMATIS PERSON jE 


Melun, a French Lord. 

Chattilion, Ambassador from France io King John. 
Elinor, Queen-Mother of England. 


18. Melun] Meloone Ktly. 

19. Chattilion] Cam. -I-. Chatilion 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Chatillion 
Var. ^73, Ktly. Chatilion. Johns, et 
cet. 


20. Queen-Mother of England] Pope, 
4 -, Varr. Mother to King John. Cam. 
+. Widow of Henry II. Del. Widow 
of Henry II. and Mother of King John. 
Mai. et cet. 


Genest’s list of characters acted by Colley Cibber. The foregoing acrimonious 
criticism by Davies refers to Cibber’s performance of the character in his own alter- 
ation of Shakespeare’s play, entitled Papal Tyranny in the Reign of King Johi, 
which was produced at Covent Garden, February 15, i 745 j close of Cibber’s 
career. After the tenth performance on February 26th Cibber retired from the 
Stage. For an account of Cibber’s Adaptation, see Appendix. — Ed.|— H. T. 
Hall {Sh. Fly-Leaves, p. 180): The character of Cardinal Pandulph is not 
only essentially true in its relation to humanity, but it is also true to history. 
The Annals of the Monastery of Burton, recently published, show how thoroughly 
correct Shakespeare is in his delineation of this papal prelate. Haughty and 
arrogant, the result of his vanity and the office which he held, Shakespeare fails 
not to pourtray these features of his character, and he justly puts in his mouth 
language by which the desires of the dictatorial priest are fully developed; language 
which cannot fail to awaken in a discerning and patriotic audience an intense 
disgust and hatred of papal pride and papal intolerance. — Calvert (p. 141) : An 
important character in the play of King John is Cardinal Pandulph, the Pope’s 
legate. At that period papal power was paramount. Of Pandulph Shakespeare 
avails himself to represent a typical priest, that is, a man who assumes that he is 
empowered by Heaven to be the exclusive infallible expounder and interpreter of 
heavenly things, to guide and rule the spirituaKty of other men, — an assumption 
which, concentrating in itself the guilt of usurpation with the iniquity of despotism, 
is a blasphemy towards God and an offense and an insult to man. — ^Deighton 
Pandulph is a hard, unlovely character; but he is what his pro- 
fession made him, and we cannot altogether refuse a kind of admiration to the 
stern consistency of purpose with which, in the service of the church, he sweeps 
away all obstacles, even though among his weapons unblushing casuistry and 
chicane are those most frequently used. 

19. Chattilion] For the accentuation of this name, see note I, i, 6. 

20. Elinor] Mrs Jakeson (ii, 233): Elinor of Guienne and Blanche of Castile, 
who form part of the group around Constance, are sketches merely, but they are 
strictly historical portraits, and full of truth and spirit. At the period when 
Shakespeare has brought these three women on the scene together, Elinor of Guienne 
(the daughter of the last Duke of Guienne and Aquitaine, and like Constance, 
the heiress of a sovereign dutchy) was near the close of her long, various, and 
unquiet life— she was nearly seventy; and as in early youth her violent passions 
had overborne both principle and policy, so in her old age we see the same character 
only modified by time: her strong intellect and love of power, unbridled by con- 
science or principle, surviving when other passions were extinguished, and rendered 
more dangerous by a degree of subtlety and self-command to which her youth had 



DRAMATIS PERSONAE 


13 


Constance, Mother to Arthur. 


21 


been a stranger. — Stubbs (Preface to Historical Collections of Walter of Coventry, 
voL ii, p. xxviii.) : Few women have had less justice done them in history than 
Eleanor. I do not speak of her moral qualities: although probably her faults 
have been exaggerated, she can hardly be said to shine as a virtuous woman or a 
good wife; but of her remarkable political power and her great influence not only 
in her husband’s states, but in Europe generally; of her great energy, not less con- 
spicuous than her husband’s, both in early youth and in extreme old age, there can 
be no question. In an age of short-lived heroes one scarcely realises the length of 
her adventurous life or the great area of her wanderings. Fifty years before this 
[the first year of John’s reign] she had gone on crusade, and by her undisguised flirta- 
tions had spread confusion and dismay and discord in the noblest host that ever 
went to the East. Her divorce [in 1154] had overthrown the balance of power in 
two kingdoms, producing in one of them a disruption which it required four hundred 
years of warfare to remedy. Her quarrel with her second husband [Henry II.] 
long retarded the reforming schemes of his great administrative genius, and con- 
signed her to fourteen years of captivity. Yet those fourteen years appear but a 
short period in her long life. Flenry’s death brought her from prison to supreme 
power. As Richard’s representative in England she repressed the ambition of 
John and thwarted the designs of Philip; she found time and strength at seventy 
to journey to Messina with a wife for her son, to Rome on an embassy, and to 
Germany with the ransom that her energy had helped to accumulate. After a 
few years of rest she is again on foot at Richard’s death. To her inspiration John 
owed his throne; her influence excluded, no doubt, the unhappy, misguided Arthur; 
she herself took command of the forces that reduced his friends in Anjou to sub- 
mission; she travelled to Spain to fetch the grand-daughter whose marriage was to 
be a pledge of peace between France and England. She outlived, it would seem, 
the grandchild who had outraged her. She lived long enough to see Philip’s first 
attacks on Normandy; from her death-bed she was writing to the barons to keep 
them in their allegiance, and her death at the age of eighty-two was followed by 
the subversion of all the continental projects of her husband. But her own domin- 
ions in great part remained to her son’s son, as if her mighty shade were able to 
defend them at least from the hateddflspring of Lewis VII. [For a more complete 
study of the historic character of Elinor, see Miss Strickland’s Queens of England, 
voL i, pp. 287-358, and voL ii, pp. 1-69 . — Ed.] 

21. Constance] F. Gentleman (ap. Bell’s ed.,p. 14) : Constance should be an 
amiable appearance, possessed of features to describe settled sorrow and wild 
despair, with notes of voice answerable to such affecting sensations. — Corson (p. 
165) : The Play [of King John] on its political side quite ignores the facts of history. 
So, on the personal side, there is an i^oring, to a greater or less degree, of the 
characters as represented by history of some of the dramatis pefsonce; mA this is 
especially so in the case of Constance and Arthur, who must be estimated inde- 
pendently of history and almost as purely fictitious. We must not inquire of 
history what manner of woman Constance was— we must consider exclusively 
what she is in the play. And the same may be said of Arthur. Again, as I read 
the play, I see a purpose throughout to intensify the injustice, and crime, and 
baseness of John’s usurpation through the characters given to Constance and 
Arthur. 



14 


DRAMATIS PERSONjE 


Blanch, Daughter to Alphonso, King of Castile, and 22 

Niece to King John. 

Lady Faulconbridge, Mother to the Bastard and 

Robert Faulconbridge. 25 

Citizens of Angiers, Heralds, Executioners, Messengers, 
Soldiers, and other Attendants, 

The Scene, sometimes in England, a^id sometimes in 

France. 29 


22. Daughter... of Spain, Cam. 
[Capell adds: an Officer under 
Hubert; a Servant. 

26, 27. Citizens.. .Soldiers] Lords, La- 
dies, and divers other Attendants. 


Sheriff, Heralds, Officers, Soldiers, Mas- 
sengers,... Mai. et seq. 

28, 29. The...France] Scene dispers’d; 
in England and France. Cap. Om. 
Sta. 


22. Blanch] Mrs Jameson (ii, 236) : Blanche of Castile was the daughter of 
Alphonso IX. of Castile and the grand-daughter of Elinor. At the time that 
she is introduced into the drama she was about fifteen, and her marriage with 
Louis VIII, then Dauphin, took place in the abrupt manner here represented. It 
is not often that political marriages have the same happy result. We are told by 
the historians of that time that from the moment Louis and Blanche met they 
were inspired by a mutual passion, and that during a union of more than twenty- 
six years they were never known to differ, nor even spent more than a single day 
asunder. . . . There cannot be a greater contrast than between the acute under- 
standing, the steady temper, and the cool intriguing policy of Blanche, by which 
she succeeded in disuniting and defeating the powers arrayed against her and her 
infant son, and the rash confiding temper and susceptible imagination of Con- 
stance, which rendered herself and her son easy victims to the fraud or ambition of 
others. Blanche, during forty years, held in her hands the destinies of the greater 
part of Europe, and is one of the most celebrated names recorded in history — but in 
what does she survive to us except in a name? Nor history, nor fame, though 
^ trumpet-tongued,’ could do for her what Shakespeare and poetry have done for 
Constance. The earthly reign of Blanche is over, her sceptre broken, and her 
power departed. When will the reign of Constance cease? When will her power 
depart? Not while this world is a world, and there exist in it human souls to kindle 
at the touch of genius, and human hearts to throb with human sympathies! 



The life and death of King John 


A6itis Primus , Scana Prima. 


Enter King John, Queene Elinor, Pembroke, EJJex, and Sa- 
lisbury, with the Chattylion of France. 

King lohn^ 5 

Ow fay Chatillion, what would France with vs ? 

Chat Thus (after greeting) fpeakes the King 7 
of France, 

2. Acflus Primus, Scsena Prima] Act 
I. Scene i. Rowe. 

The Court of England. Pope,-f • 

King John’s Palace. Cam. 4 -. North- 
ampton, A Room of State in the Pal- 
ace. Cap, et cet. 

3. Enter... Elinor,] Enter King John, 
attended; Elinor, the Queen-Mother; 

Cap. King John discovered upon a 
throne. Bell, Kemble (subs.) 

3, 4. and Salisbury] Salisbury, and 
Others. Cap- Mai. et seq. 

4. with the Chattylion of France] Ff. 
witii Chattilion. Rowe, with Chatil- 

I. The life . . . King lohn] Theobald: Though this play have the title of 
The Life and Death of King John, yet the action begins at the thirty-fourth year 
of his life, and takes in only. some transactions of his reign to the time of his demise, 
being an interval of about seventeen years. — ^Malone: It takes in the whole of his 
reign, which lasted only seventeen years: his accession was in 1199, and his death 
in 1216. — Pope: The Troublesome Teign of King John was written in two parts, 
by W. Shakespeare and W. Rowley, and printed 1611, But the present play is 
entirely different, and infinitely superior to it. [Strict chronological sequence 
would demand this note by Pope precede that of Theobald. Pope’s assertion was, 
however, the occasion of some discussion dealing with the authorship of the older 
play, rather than with the question of the exact title of Shakespeare’s; this must, 
therefore, be an excuse, if one be needful, for this reversal. — Ed.J—Johnson: 
The edition of 1611 has no mention of Rowley, nor in the account of Rowley’s 
works is any mention made of his conjunction with Shakespeare in any play. 
King John was reprinted, in two parts, in 1622. The first edition that I have 
found of this play, in its present form, is that of 1623, in folio. The edition of 1591 

IS 


ion. Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. King 
takes his State; Enter Chatillion, 
usher’d. Cap. with Chatillion. Var. 
’73, Ktly. with Chatillon. Johns, et cet. 

6. Now Jay] Ff. Now say, Rowe,+, 
Knt, Fleay. Now, say. Cap. et cet. 

Chatillion] Fa, Cap. Var. ’73, Ktly. 
Chattylion F3F4. Chattilion Rowe. 
Chatiiion Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
Chatillon Johns, et cet, 

7. Thus {after greeting)] Thus, after 
greeting, Rowe et seq. 

France^ France. Ff. France 
Rowe, Cam. 4 ** 






THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. I. 


I6 


[i. The life . . • King lohn] 

I have not seen. [Johnson’s note is decidedly ambiguous, owing to his confusion 
of two plays. The King John which he speaks of as printed in two parts in 1622 is 
The Troublesome Raigne, to which Pope refers; by the words ^ this play, in its present 
form,’ Johnson means Shakespeare’s King John; and finally ‘the edition of 1591 
refers again to the first edition of The Troublesome Raigne.—TA^u^R remarks that 
Johnson is mistaken in saying that there is no mention of any collaboration be- 
tween Shakespeare and Rowley, as The Birth of Merlin entered at the Stationers 
in 1653 is ascribed to them jointly. T cannot,’ adds Farmer, ‘believe Shakespeare 
had anything to do with it’ — (with which opinion the present Ed. is quite in 
accord). Farmer thus continues: ‘Mr Capell is equally mistaken when he says 
(Preface f p. 15) that Rowley is called his partner in the title-page of The Merry 
Dml of Edmonton. There must have been some tradition, however erroneous, 
upon which Mr Pope’s account was founded. I make no doubt that Rowley 
wrote the first King John; and when Shakespeare’s play vras called for, and could 
not be procured from the players, a piratical bookseller reprinted the old one, 
with W* Sk in the title page.’ — On the point of authorship thus raised by Fanner, 
Collier (Ed. i, hitrod., p. 4) remarks: ‘There is, however, reason to believe that 
Rowley was not an author at so early a date: his first extant printed work was a 
play, in writing which he aided John Day and George Wilkins, called The Travels 
of Three English Brothers 1 1607. In 1591 he must have been very young; but wt 
are not therefore to conclude decisively that his name is not, at any period, and 
in any way, to be connected with a drama on the incidents of the reign of King 
John; for the tradition of Pope’s time may have been founded upon the fact 
that, at some later date, he was instrumental in a revival of the old King 
John* — SxEEVENS regarded Shakespeare as the author of the older play and 
included both parts of The Troublesome Raigne of John among the twenty 
plays which he published from the early quartos in 1766; subsequently he 
acknowledged that a more careful perusal disposed him ‘to recede from that 
opinion.’ — ^Malone, without giving any reasons, is of the opinion that either 
Greene or Peele was the author of the older play. (See Afpendix: TrotMe- 
some Raigne^ for further discussions as to authorship.)— It may have been an 
oral tradition to which Farmer leniently refers in order to excuse Pope’s inac- 
curate statement coneeming the joint authorship of The Troublesome Raigne. 
We have but few means of tracing the bibliographical knowledge in regard 
to dramatic compositions In Pope’s day, the basis for such is mainly furnished 
by the lists of plays issued by publishers from time to time. Those of Rogers & 
Ley, 1656; Archer, 1656; and Kirkman, 1661 and 1671, are now accessible and 
made easy for reference, thanks to the painstaking efforts of Wk W. Greg in the 
^PP^^dix II. of his List of Masques and Pageants prepared for the Bibliographical 
Society, 1902. John^ King of Engtandy both partSf 8.^pesLrs in the list of Rogers 
and Ley, 1656; JohUy King of Englandy both Will. Shakespeare, in that of 

Archer, 1656; Will. Shakespear. John K. of England, ist part. Will. Shakespear. 
John K. of England, 2^^ part, are entered in Kirkman’s lists of 1661 and 1671. 
These are entries which refer to the older play alone, and there is no mention of 
Rowley as part author. Langbaine’s Some Account of the English Dramatic Poets, 
1691, is the earliest Dictionary of Authors and works, but neither under the names 
of W. Rowley nor Shakespeare does Langbaine include The Troublesome Raigne as 
their joint work. It is, I think, reasonable to suppose that Pope simply con- 



ACT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


17 


[i. The life . . . King lohn] 

fused The Birth of Merlin with The Troublesome Raigne, In this connection 
Maione somewhat sharply remarks that ‘Mr Pope is very inaccurate in matters 
of this kind, ^ but — to err is human, to forgive divine, and it is Pope himself who 
supplies this soft answer to turn aside our wrath. — Ed.] 

1. King lohn] Mabie (p. 184): King John . . . marks the transition from the 
chronicle play to the true drama; in which incidents and characters are selected 
for their dramatic significance, a dramatic motive introduced, dramatic movement 
traced, and a climax reached. The older playwrights, dealing with the events of a 
whole reign, would have given the play an epical or narrative quality; Shakespeare 
selected, compressed, foreshortened, and grouped events and figures in such a way 
as to secure connected action, the development of character, and a final catastrophe 
which is impressive if not intrinsically dramatic. He instinctively omitted certain 
coarse scenes which were in the older play; he brought into clear light and con- 
sistency certain characters vrhich were roughly sketched in the earlier work; in 
the scene between Hubert and Arthur he struck a new note of tenderness and 
pathos; while in giving marked prominence to the humour of Faulconbridge he 
opened the way for that blending of comedy with tragedy and history which is one 
of the marks not only of his maturity but of his greatness. The play has no hero, 
and is not free from the faults of the long line of dramas to which it belongs, but 
Shakespeare’s creative energy is distinctly at work in it. 

2. Actus Primus] French (p. 3): The action of this is mainly confined to the 
relationship between the usurping uncle and his hapless nephew. The first scene 
opens with a demand from the King of France that John should yield up his crown 
in favour of young Arthur, This scene, in which John is seated in his palace, sur- 
rounded by the chief nobles of his court, must have taken place in 1199, soon after 
his coronation, Ascension Day, May 27. The Fourth Act closes with the death of 
the Young Prince, but even in the Fifth Act his right is made use of by the Dauphin 
as a pretext for invading England. [French is possibly right in placing the time of 
this opening scene shortly after John’s accession; such would undoubtedly be the 
fitting point for France’s protest. At the same time it is well to remember that 
dates counted for little either with the earlier dramatist or Shakespeare; both of 
them refer to but two of John’s coronations, whereas, actually John was crowned 
four times. See IV, ii, 3, and notes thereon. — Ed.] — Calvert (p. 124) : In the first 
thirty lines of the opening scene are epitomized the drift and substance of the 
whole play. , . . How natural this is, and easy, how unavoidable! Each speech 
seems to carry the very words the speaker ought to utter; each speaker says just 
what he should say, neither more nor less. 

3. Enter King lohn, etc.] Cambridge Edd. {Note H.): We have not followed 
Capell and the more recent editors in attempting to define the precise locality at 
which each scene took place, where none is mentioned in the body of the play or 
in the stage directions of the Folio. (See Text. Notes.) Nothing is gained by an 
attempt to harmonize the plot with historical facts gathered from Holinshed and 
elsewhere, when it is plain that Shakespeare was either ignorant of them or indif- 
ferent to minute accuracy. For example, the second scene of Act IV. is supposed 
to occur at the same place as the first scene of that Act, or, at all events, in the im- 
mediate neighborhood, and in England. But Holinshed distinctly states that 
Arthur was imprisoned first at Falaise and then at Rouen (pp. 554, 555, ed. 1577). 
— Ordish (SKs London, p. 27); The opening scene in King John is laid in ^King 



jg the life and death [act I, sc . L 

In my behauiour to the Maiefty , ^ 

8. behauiour] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Cam. 8. Maiefiy,] Majesty Has. majesty-’ 

4 ". behaviour, Theob. et cet. Words. 

John’s Palace.’ This has been supposed by some editors to mean the King’s palace 
at Northampton. Without being in the least disputatious, it is allowable to refer 
the reader to the text. A Sheriff enters and tells the King there is the strangest 
controversy ‘come from the country’ to be judged by him. The disputants are 
Philip FaulcOnbridge and his brother; and presently Philip says to Queen Elinor, 
‘Our country manners give our betters way.’ These are indications that the two 
youths had come up to London from Northamptonshire to lay their case before the 
King. In Shakespeare’s time there was a tradition, mentioned by Stow, that a 
certain house, called Stone House, in Lombard Street, was formerly King John’s 
House [Survay, ed. i6i8, p. 375], and it is at least probable that the London play- 
goer would interpret the legend, ‘King John’s Palace,’ as referring to this house. 
In this case, the Sheriff who came in to make the announcement to the King would 
be understood as being a sheriff of the city. [While I fully agree with Ordish that 
this scene is evidently laid in London, yet I think it hardly just to characterize as 
supposition the reason which led the earher editors to place this at Northampton. 
As will be seen from the Text. Notes Capeil was first so to designate it, and though 
he gives no ground for this specific locality, it may be inferred that his reason for 
so doing was based on a passage in the corresponding scene in The Troubles omt 
Raigne, wherein occur these words spoken by Salisbury, ‘Plea.se it your Majestie, 
heere is the Shrive of Northamptonshire, with certaine persons that of late com- 
mitted a riot.’ Perhaps in those days the Sheriff accompanied those w^ho wished 
to lay a case before the King; if so that would account for his presence in London; 
but at all events Capeli had internal evidence from the earlier work to corroborate 
his choice of locality. (See note on i. 50, below). — E d,] 

4, 6. Chattylion . . . Ghadllion] Walker (Vers., 184), followed by R, G. 
White, calls attention to tlie metrical requirement of pronouncing this name, as 
also Rousillon in All’s Well, as a trisyllable with the accent on the second syllable. 
—Dawson (New Sh. Soc. Trans., 1887-1892, p. 137) adds to the numerous exam- 
ples of such pronunciation in the present play one from Henry F: ‘laques of 
Chatilion Admirall of France.’— IV, viii, 95. 

4. Chattylion of France] French (p. 18) : As King Philip would, without doubt, 
send a person of exalted rank upon so important an embassy as that which opens 
this play, it may be inferred that this individual is Hugh de Chatilion, who is 
named, with his brother Guy, Count de St. Pol, among the Grand Peers of France, 
who were assembled in a Parliament at Paris in 1223. In the treaty between King 
Richard and Philip Augustus, dated July 23, 1194, the concluding article sets forth, 
—‘Now Gervais de Chatilion, as representative of the King of France, has sworn 
to observe all the articles above recited, and maintain the trace,’ He, therefore, 
might be the person sent as ambassador to England five years after the above 
date. The family has played an important part in history.— Ivor John: The 
Folios read ‘with the Chattylion of France.’ Perhaps ‘Lord’ had dropped out be- 
fore ‘Chattylion,’ or perhaps ‘Chattylion’ was taken to mean ‘Chatelain’ or some 
sMar title. [Stow (Survay, ed. 1618, p. 107) gives as the titles belonging to Robert 
Fitzwater, those of ‘Chastilian and Banner-bearer of London,’ which he held by 
right of his ownership of Castle Baynard in the city. — ^E d.] 

8. In my behauiour] Johnson; The word ‘behaviour’ seems here to have a 



ACT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


19 


The borrowed Maiefty of England heere. 

Elea. A ftrange beginning : borrowed MaieflyP 


9, 10. borrowed,.. borrowed] Ff, Wh. i, 
Cam. 4 ”. borrow^d,..borrowed Hal. bor- 
rowed. ..borrowed Rowe et cet. 

10. beginning: borrowed Maiefty?] Ff. 
beginning; borrowed Majesty! Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. begin- 


10 

ning. Borrowed majesty! Johns, be- 
ginning! — borrowed majesty! Var. ’73, 
Huds. Wb. i. beginning: ^borrowed 
majesty ! ' Cam. + • beginning; — bor- 
rowed majesty! Var. ^78 et cet. 

10. Maiefty?] majesty — Words, 


signification that I have never found in any other author. ‘The king of France,’ 
says the envoy, ‘thus speaks in my behamour to the majesty of England’; that is, 
the king of France speaks in the character, which I here assume. I once thought 
that these two lines had been uttered by the ambassador, as part of his master’s 
•message, and that ‘behaviour’ had meant the conduct of the King of France to- 
wards the King of England; but the ambassador’s speech, as continued after the 
interruption, will not admit this meaning. — ^Malone: ‘In my behaviour’ means, 

I think, in the words and action that I am now going to use. Compare: ‘Now hear 
our English King For thus his royalty doth speak in me.’ — V, ii, 134. — Knight: 
Saviour j behaviour ^ is the manner of having^ the conduct. Where then is the diffi- 
culty which this expression has raised up? The king of France speaks, in the con- 
duct of his ambassador, to ‘the borrowed majesty of England’; a necessary ex- 
planation of the speech of Chatfilon, which John would have resented upon the 
speaker, had he not in his ‘behaviour’ expressed the intentions of his sovereign. — 
John Hunter: That is, in the tone or manner in which I speak. — Fleay: Not 
only in my words, but in my bearing and manner; my assumption of superiority to 
the ‘borrowed majesty’ of John. — ^Wright: That is, as represented in my person 
and by my outward acts and deportment. [For this use of ‘in’ Wright cites the 
passage given by Malone, and adds thereto: ‘The cunning of her passion Invites 
me in this churlish messenger.’ — Twelfth Night, II, ii, 24.] — ^Moberly: As in 
German ‘das aiissere Behaben’ means the outward demeanour, so here ‘in my be- 
haviour’ means, in the tone and manner which I have assumed. — Ivor John: 
That is, through my conduct as ambassador. Compare: ‘inferior eyes, that bor- 
row their behaviours from the great.’ — V, i, 54. — ’[This chronological arrangement 
of the interpretations of a passage is, I think, not uninstructive, showing in how 
many ways the same idea may be expressed in slightly differing words. Were it 
possible to form a composite sentence from these, as is done with photographs to 
produce a t3^ical face, we should probably find that the first one given, that of 
Johnson — ‘the king of France speaks in the character which I here assume’ — 
would be the resultant sentence. His introductory remark that the word ‘be- 
haviour’ here bears a meaning which he had never found in any other author is 
significant, when it is recalled that the Dictionary antedates his notes on this 
play by nearly ten years- This statement, furthermore, has not been refuted 
by later lexicographers. — Schmidt (Xe.'c.), after giving numerous examples of 
‘behaviour’ in the sense of ‘external carriage and deportment, as it is expressive 
of sentiments and disposition,’ places the present by itself, under the caption ‘Re- 
markable passage,’ with the interpretation ‘in the tone and character which I 
here assume,’ evidently derived from the German, as Moberly also suggests. — 
Murray {N. E. D., s. v. i. fc.) quot^ the present line as the only example wherein 
‘behaviour’ is used in the sense of ‘bearing of the character of another; personifiica- 



20 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i» 


KJohnSilence (good mother) heare the Embaffie. ii 

ChaU Philip of France^ in right and true behalfe 
Of thy deceafed brother, Geffreyes fonne , 

Arthur Plantaginet, laies moft lawfull claime 

To this faire Hand, and the Territories : i5 

To Ireland^ PoySHers^ Aniowe, Torayne, Maine, 


II. Silence {good mother)] Ff. Silence, 
good Mother, Rowe, Pope, Han. Si- 
lence, good mother; Theob. et cet. 

Emhajfie] embassy Johns, et seq. 

13. deceafed] deceased Dyce, Huds. 
Words. 

brother,] brother F4 et seq. 
Geffreyes] Geffreyes Rowe et seq. 

14. Plantaginet] Piantaganet Fj. 
Piantagenet F4 et seq. 


14. moft] Om. Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb, Johns. 

15. Territories:] territories , — Dyce, 
Huds. Fie. Words. 

16. Aniowe] Anjowe Ff, Ktly . A njou 
Rowe et cet. 

Torayne] Lorayne Fa. Loraine 
F3F4, Touaine Rowe i. Toraine Ktly. 
Touraine Rowe ii. et cet. 


tion, ‘‘person.’’ ’ — ^The line from Act V, quoted in illustration by Ivor John, is not, 
I think, a parallel. To ‘borrow behaviour’ from another is rather to imitate or to 
adopt the actions and expressions of that other. Chatillon does not, howe'\''er, 
mean that he is imitating the king of France, but rather that he is speaking as his 
representative. Under the foregoing interpretation of borrow Murray quotes this 
example given by Ivor John. — E d.] * 

10. Elea. A strange . . . Maiesty] Calvert (p. 126): Observe how this open- 
ing scene is enlivened by the interruption of Elinor; an interruption which Shake- 
speare would not have allowed her to make, had she not, in making it, given a 
strong taste of her quality as a proud, grasping, intermeddling Queen-dowager. 
While adding life to the scene, the line she utters characterizes herself. Shakespeare 
thus kills two birds with one stone, and both game-birds, a proceeding which he 
repeats oftener than—I had almost said — ^^all other poets put together. 

12--14. Philip . . . Arthur Plantaginet] Courtenay (i, 3): I do not find, 
either in Holinshed or in any other history, English or French, that Chatillon, or 
any other diplomatic agent, was sent by Philip Augustus to John; or that the crown, 
of England was demanded by the French King on the part of Arthur, Philip 
apparently, and with reason, disclaimed an interest in the disposal of that crown; 
whereas, of the transmarine possessions of the Kings of England, as well as of Brit- 
tany, he claimed to be lord paramount. 

13. the Territories] Ivor John: There is no other case of the use of ‘the terri- 
tories’ in this way by Shakespeare. One is tempted to suggest either ‘and the 
territories Of Ireland,’ or ^her territories.’ In The Troublesome Raigne, ed. 1591, 
we have ‘to England, Cornwall and Wales and to their territories.’ — II, iff. 

16. Poyctiers, Aniowe, Torayne, Maine] Hudson: Arthur held the duchy of 
Brittany in right of his father Geffrey Piantagenet, an elder brother of John. 
Anjou, Touraine, and Maine, the ancient patrimony of the house of Anjou, were his 
by hereditary right. As Duke of Brittany Arthur was a vassal of Philip Augustus; 
and Constance engaged to Philip that her son should do him homage also for 
Normandy, Maine, Anjou, Touraine, and Poictou, on condition that Philip should 
support this claim to the English croTO. England ha\dng declared for John, the 



ACT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


21 


Defiring thee to lay afide the fword 1 7 

Which fwaies vfurpingly thefe feuerall titles, 


play opens with Philip's interference in behalf of Arthur. Appendix: Trouble- 
some Raigne, pt. i: I, i, 29-34.1 

18. Which fwaies vfurpingly, etc.] Warner (p. 27): There was never any 
question among Englishmen as to John’s right to reign over them until toward the 
end of his career, when the Barons were exasperated into the attempt of dethroning 
him as a liar, a slanderer, a breaker of promises, and a bawd of the nation’s honor.— 
[John’s legal or moral right to the crown during Arthur’s lifetime is a question which 
concerns the student of history more fitly than readers of Shakespeare, for whom King 
John is a usurper. The following extract from Hallam is, however, interesting as tes- 
timony on the other side: *The succession of John has certainly passed in modem 
times for an usurpation. I do not find that it was considered as such by his con- 
temporaries on this side of the Channel. The question of inheritance between an 
uncle and the son of his deceased elder brother was yet unsettled, as we learn from 
Glanvil, even in private succession. In the case of sovereignties, which were some- 
times contended to require different rules from ordinary patrimony, it was, and 
continued long to be, the most uncertain point in public law. John’s pretensions 
to the crown might therefore be such as the English were justified in admitting, 
especially as his reversionary title seems to have been acknowledged in the reign of 
his brother Richard .’ — {Middle AgeSy ii, 325.) — Roger of Wendover’s account of 
John’s installation and coronation is as follow's: ‘About this time [1199] John Duke 
of Normandy came over into England, and landed at Shoreham on the 25th of May; 
on the day after, which was the eve of our Lord’s Ascension, he went to London to 
be crowned there. On his arrival, therefore, the archbishops, bishops, earls, and 
all others, whose duty it was to be present at this coronation, assembled together 
in the church of the chief of the apostles at Westminster, on the 27th of May, and 
there Hubert, Archbishop of Canterbury, placed the crown on his head and an- 
ointed him king.’— To this account Matthew Paris adds: ‘The Archbishop standing 
in the midst addre.ssed them thus, “Hear, all of you, and be it known that no one 
has an antecedent right to succeed another in the kingdom, unless he shall have 
been unanimously elected under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, on account of the 
superior merits of his character, after the example of Saul the first anointed king, 
whom the Lord set over his people, not as the son of a king, nor as bom of royal 
ancestry, , . . Thus those who excelled in vigour are elevated to kingly dignity. 
But, if any relations of a deceased king excel others in merit, all should the more 
readily and zealously consent to his election- We have said this to maintain the 
cause of Earl John, who is here present, brother of our illustrious King Richard, 
lately deceased without heirs of his body, and as the said Earl John is prudent, 
active, and indubitably noble, we have, under God’s Holy Spirit, unanimously 
elected him for his merits and his royal blood,” Now the archbishop was a man 
of bold character and a support to the kingdom by his steadiness and incomparable 
wisdom; no one, therefore, dared to dispute what he said as knowing that he had 
good cause for what he did. Earl John and all who were present acquiesced, and 
they unanimously elected the earl, crying out, **God save the king!” Archbishop 
Hubert was afterwards asked why he acted in this manner, to which he replied that 
he knew John would one day or other bring the kingdom into great confusion, 
wherefore he determined that he should owe his elevation to election and not to 



22 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i. 


And put the fame into yong Arthurs hand , 

Thy Nephew, and right royall Soueraigne. 20 

KJohn. What followes if we difallow of this? 

Chat. The proud controle of fierce and bloudy warre, 

To inforce thefe rights, fo forcibly with-held, 

K. lo. Heere haue we war for war, & bloud for bloud, 
Controlement for controlement : fo anfwer France. 25 


19. Arthurs] Arthur^s F4 et seq. 

20. NepkeWj] nephew Knt, Dyce, Wh. 
i, Ktly, Sta. Cam. 4 -, Fie. Me. 

21. followes]'Fi. jhZ/om Wh. Cam,-h, 
Glo. Cla. Rife, follows^ Rowe et cet. 

2^. To inforce] Ff, Rowe. T inforce 
Pope, 4 -, Fie. T' enforce Dyce ii, iii, 
Huds. ii, Words. To enforce Cap. et cet. 


23. rights,] rights Rowe et seq. 
with-held,] with-held. Rowe,-{-, 

Cap. withheld. Ff et cet. 

24. war, 6*] F3F3. war Cam.-f, 
Glo. Wh. ii. war, and F4 et cet. 

2$. for controlement] for control 
Vaughan. 


hereditary right.^ — (Ed. Giles, ii, 181). — See also Hallam, op. et loc. ciL, and Stubbs, 
Constitutional History, i, 578 . — ^Ed.J 

21. disallow] Murray (iV. E. D., s. v. 3. b.): To refuse to accept with approval; 
to reject, disown. [The present line quoted.] 

22. controle] Johnson: That is, opposition. — Mason: I think it rather 
means constraint, or compulsion. So, in Henry F, when Exeter demands of the 
King of France the surrender of his crown, and the King answers: *Or else what 
follows?’ Exeter replies: ‘Bloody constraint; for if you hide the crown, Even in 
your hearts, there will he rake for it.’ — [II, iv, 97.] The passages are exactly simi- 
lar. [So they may be, but only in respect of the similarity of situation; but in one 
case Shakespeare uses the word ‘control’ and in the other ‘constraint.* The 
primary meaning of constraint is compulsion, just as the elemental meaning of con- 
trol ls restraint, or opposition, as Johnson gives it. For a parallel use of ‘control’ 
compare ‘Even where his lustful eye or savage heart Without control lusted to make 
his prey.*— Ill: III, v, 84. And for ‘proud’ in the sense of vigorous as ap- 
phed to an adversary compare: ‘Our partie may well meet a prowder foe.’ — V, ii, 
84.— Ed.] 

24, 25. Heere haue we war . . , controlement] Sxeevens: King John’s recep- 
tion of Chatillon not a little resembles that which Andrea meets with from the 
King of Portugal, in the First Part of Jeronimo, 1605: ^And. Thou shalt pay 
tribute, Portugal, with blood. BaL Tribute for tribute then; and foes for foes. 
And. I bid you sudden wars.’ [Haz.-Dods., iv, p. 363. This assignment of the 
date 1605 to Jeronimo was at once questioned by Malone, who asserts that ^Jeron- 
imo was exhibited on the stage before the year 1590.’ Steevens replies with a quo- 
tation from a poem by Bamabie Googe, written in 1562, containing an apparent 
reference to the Tragedy of Jeronimo, thus showing it to have been composed much 
earlier than 1590. Malone returns to the charge and by quoting more of the con- 
text than had Steevens, shows that the lines refer to a translation by Ne^dlle, a 
friend of Googe. To this Steevens makes no reply. These quotations fill nearly 
three-quarters of a page in the Variorum of 1821; they are there produced in a dis- 
cussion of the date of composition of Jeronimo, and, apart from the fact that the 
present passage in King John bears a slight resemblance to one in Jeronimo, have 




ACT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


23 


ChaU Then take my Kings defiance from my mouth, 26 
The fartheft limit of my Embaffie. 

K, lohn. Beare mine to him, and fo depart in peace, 

Be thou as lightning in the eies of France] 29 

2y.farihe(l] furthest Steev. Varr. Sing. 28. peace,] peace. Rowe, 4 -, Coll. Wh. 

Dyce, Hal.' Words. Craig. i, Ktly. Sta. Del. Fie. Rife. 

29. des] eyes Fa. 


but a slight interest in a note on Shakespeare^s play; for this reason they are not 
here repeated. — E d.] 

25. Controlement . . . France] Cambridge Edd. {Note III.): This line must 
probably be scanned as an Alexandrine, reading the first 'controlment' in the time 
of a trisyllable and the second as a quadrisyllable. [For this note Clark is, I think, 
solely responsible; in the Clarendon Edition, of which Wright, twenty years later, 
was editor alone, there is the following: ‘The word is spelt “controlement” in the 
Folios, but this does not imply that it was pronounced as a quadrisyllable, for in 
Tit. And. we find in the first Folio: “Without controlement, lustice, or reuenge.”^ — 
II, i, 68. In broken lines like the present it is not uncommon to find an unemphatic 
extra syllable introduced after the pause.* — ^Wright has, however, retained the note 
without change in the second Cambridge Edition, also edited by him alone in 
1891. Clark died in 1878.— Ed.] — ^Hilgers (2 AUhdlung, p. I.) : In Shakespeare*s 
early plays, both those with ryhme and with blank verse, there seldom occur lines 
with an extra syllable in the regular ten syllable iambic verse, for example, in TU. 
And., in Hen. VI., in the Com. of Err., the Two Gentlemen, and Mid. N. Dream. 
The assertion that no use was made of this jingling caesura in the so-called histories 
is quite erroneous, certainly it is not so frequent in these as in the other plays. 
[Hilgers quotes the present line with but seven other examples from King John as 
a proof of this play *s early composition, as against nearly two hundred examples 
from Othello alone. Hilgers*s other exaunples from King John will be referred to as 
they occur in the course of the play.— Ed,] 

29. Be thou as lightning] Johnson: The simile does not suit well, the light- 
ning, indeed, appears before the thunder is heard, but the lightning is destructive, 
and the thunder innocent.— Rixson {Remarks, ^Iq., p. 80): The allusion may, 
notwithstanding, be very proper, so far as Shakespeare had applied it, i. e., merely 
to the swiftness of the lightning, and i\s preceding ond foretelling the thunder. But 
there is some reason to believe that thunder not thought to be innocent in our 
author *s time, as we elsewhere leam from himself. See Lear, III, ii, 4, $; Ant. 
Cleo., II, v, 77; Jul. Cms., I, iii, 49; and still more decisively if /or Meas., II, ii, 
IIO-II6. — M. Mason: King John does not allude to the destructive powers either 
of thunder or lightning; he only means to say, that Chatillon shall appear to the 
eyes of the French like lightning, which shows tiiat thunder is approaching: and 
the thunder he alludes to is that oi his cmnon : — Bye (p. 139) : Shakespeare is 
shown by Ritson to have imputed a destructive quality to thunder in several pass- 
ages; but this is certainly not one of them, for if it is, he must also impute a destruc- 
tive quality to the report of the cannon, and not the ball. — ^Fleay: That is, be thou 
the lightning; my cannon shall follow with the thunder. The allusion is to the 
rapidity with which the thunderclap follows the lightning flash; not to the destruc- 
tive power of lightning, nor to its telling us that thunder is approaching. [The fol- 



24 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i. 


For ere thou canfl report, I will be there: 30 

The thunder of my Cannon fhali be heard. 

30. For] For, Ktly, Fie. Huds. ii. 31. heard,] Ff. Rowe,+, Coll. Wh. i, 

report,] Ff, ]Rowe,+. report Cap. Fie. Craig, heard: Cap. et cet. 

et cet. 


lowing extracts from Batman vpon Bartolome — De Proprieialibus Rerum, 1582, are 
perhaps of interest in this connection, showing that the thunder and lightning were 
regarded as two manifestations: ^And with thunder commeth lightning, but 
lightening is sooner scene, for it is cleere and bright: and thunder commeth later 
to our eares, for the wit of sight is more subtil then the perseuerance of hearing. . . . 
Aristotle saith, That thunder is nought else, but quenching of fire in a Clowde. 
For dry vapour arreareth and setteth it on fire and on flame, with heate of the aire & 
when it is closed in a clowde it is sodeinly quenched. And of such quenching the 
noise of Thunder is gendered. As when firie hot yron is quenched in water, it 
maketh greate boyling and noyse. Oft thunder commeth with lightening: and 
then he greeveth much, as Beda sayth. And so it scorcheth fruit, & come, when he 
commeth without raine. And if he commeth with raine hee doth good, as he sayth. 
And thunder with his mouing, beateth and smiteth all things, stirreth the braine, 
and feareth the wit.’ — ^Liber, xi, chap. 13. The next two chapters treat of differ- 
ent kinds of lightning: ^The lightening that is called Fulmen,h vapour sette on fire, 
and is fast and sadde, and falleth downe with great swiftnesse, and is of more 
strength then the lightening that is coXkd Fulgur. And this lyghtening smiteth, 
thirleth and burneth things that it toucheth, and multiplyeth, and cleaueth and 
breaketh, and no bodilye thing withstandeth it.’ — Ibid., chap. 15.— Ed.] 

31. my Cannon] Knight: We have the same anachronism in Hamlet and in 
Macbeth. It is scarcely necessary to tell our readers that gunpowder was invented 
about a century later than the time of John, and that the first battle-field in which 
cannon were used is commonly supposed to have been that of Cressy. And yet 
the dramatic poet could not have well avoided this literal violation of propriety, 
both here and in the second Act, when he talks of ‘bullets wrapp’d in fire.’ He 
uses terms which were familiar to his audience, to present a particular image to 
their senses. Had he, instead of cannon, spoken of the mangonell and the petraria, 
— the stone-flinging machines of the time of John,—- he would have addressed him- 
self to the very few who might have appreciated his exactness; but his words wmid 
have fallen dead upon the ears of the many.— R. G. White {Sk. Scholar, p. 298) 
cites with approval Emight’s justification of the introduction of this anachronism 
and adds: ‘Shakespeare never, I think, introduces anachronism in the actions of 
his personages.’ — Criezenach (p. 156): Anachronisms play a great part in the 
dispute over the extent of Shakespeare’s education, which aroused so much eager 
controversy among the English critics during the eighteenth century, . . . But in 
most instances these anachronisms appear to have been due to the indifference of 
genius rather than to intention. This was probably the case with the oft-quoted 
cannon in King John and Macbeth, for that part of Holinshed’s Chronicle which 
Shakespeare had studied before writing Henry VL must have already acquainted 
Mm with the fact that the bombardment of a town with artillery was still a com- 
plete novelty at the seige of La Mans in 1424. In addition to all tMs, it would have 
been impossible, even with the best intentions, for a poet to maintain any accuracy 



OF KING lOHN 


25 


ACT I. SC. i.] 


32 


So hence : be thou the trumpet of our wrath, 

And fullen prefage of your owne decay : 

33. ieca,y-\ Ff, Rowe. feay. Pope,+, 
Craig, decay.- Cap. et 

cet. ' — 


32. So hence:] Ff, Rowe, Fie. So 
hence! Pope, Theob. i, Sta. Cam.+, 
Rife. So, hence! Theob. ii. et cet. 


of historical setting at a period when the arts of scenic mounting 
were completely inadequate for the purpose. ^ ^ appUed 

33. sullen presage] Johnson: By the epithet^ suggested a new 

to a trumpet, it is plain that our author s invasion, be a Urd of 

idea. It is as if he had said, be a to alarm ^h_om mv« ^ 

ill-omen to croak out the prognostic of your own rum. propriety 

why the epithet ‘sullen’ may not be appUed to a “ S ’-I. i, loe 

as to a beE. In 2 Henry IV. we find: ‘ Sounds ever after as ^ as Milton 

hu applied it to . Mf ‘.-rngioB M.soh (&««<»*. 

more propriety than to the sharp sound of a trumj« . - . ^ trumpet, 

etc., p rs 3 ): Johnson says that the epithet ‘suUen’ cannot be applied to a trump 

and founds upon that prindple a very “f^^^rmy/and hea^d a trum- 

if he had ever attended to that instrument, as used in an ar y Blanche 

pet sound to horse, he would have found the epithet pecutoty ”dt 

afterwards calls a trumpet ‘the braying trumpet, an epit 
with that of ‘suUen.’-[Mason’s Comments upon ^e ^ Variorum of 

ens’s edition of 1778 are, for the most part, included m t “ so much 

1821. The foregoing is, however, an proper use of a word, 

as a valuable contribution to the discussion of Shak®speare P P ^ 
but rather as a curious illustration of association of ideas. ^ y S 
the loud, somewhat discordant blast of a trumpet h ^ first idea 

it be inseparably cormected with the image of ^ don ^y b ^ epithets be 
suceested hy sn^Qn,^ gloomtness, moroseness? How tnen can c f 

second of them has not been lucloly explained. The suue p ® 
decay’ means the dismal passing beU, that announces your 

solution. [This note, even with a slight condemnation of ^ e^lanation by M 
great partner, Steevens withheld until after Johnsons d^th. It did not app 

.pp,«,i.n U, Wp.1 .t .«- "ta-by to 

Trumpet of Doom, and according to Ws accustomed constmct ^ ^ ^ 

with the principal word of the sentence by the copuk “ ^ . 

It seems difificult to imagine how the sound of a trumpet ^ 

although it might give a snUen warning of appr^^h oj th^ 
tireless, we leave ‘sullen’ in the text, as the word m aU e« y 
epithet not wholly inapplicable, although the 

rid sudden. One word might be misheard for the other; and ‘sullen is act^y 
misprinted sudden in the FoEo, 1623. «» ^ek. II: I, m. [P- ^ 7 ’ • . , 

difference between ‘suEen’ and sudde^ in sound is played upon in Hetcher s 
Woman’s Prize, TV, iv. where a servant brings news of the lEnras o 1 . . 

Is faEen sick o’ the sudden. RawZ. How, o’ the sullens? Serv. 0 the sudde n.sn, 
I say; very sick.’ See also Bonduca, V, ii, where Suetonius wishes some suEe 


26 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i. 


An honourable condu( 5 l let him haue, 

Pembroke looke too^t : farewell Chatillion. 35 

Exit Chat, and Pern, 


Ele, What now my fonne, haue I not euer faid 
How that ambitious Constance would not ceafe 
Till fhe had kindled France and all the world, 

Vpon the right and party of her fonne. 40 

This might haue beene preuented,and made whole 
With very eafie arguments of loue, 

Which now the mannage of two kingdomes mufl 

With fearefull bloudy iffue arbitrate. 44 


35. Pembroke] Hubert Kemble. 

tooH:] FaFj, toH: F4, Rowe,4-, 
Cap. Van. Mai. Steev. Van. Sing. 
Knt. toH, Coil, et cet. 

35. Chatillion] Fa. Chatilion F3, 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Chattylion 
F4. Chatiilion Rowe. Chatillion Cap. 
Var. ’73, Ktiy. Chatillion FI. Chatil- 
Ion Johns, et cet. 

36. Exit] Exeunt Warb. et seq. 

37. What now my fonne,] What now, 


my son! Dyce, Hal. Ktly , Cam. + , Words. 
Rife. What now, my Son, F4 et cet. 

39. kindled] kindVd Cap. 

France] Ff, Rowe, 4 ", Dyce, Wh. 
Cam. + , Fie. Words. France, Cap. et cet. 

43. mannage] manage Rowe. 

44. fearefull bloudy iffue] fearful, 
bloody issue, Pope, fearful, bloody is- 
sue Theob. i, Var. ^73. fearful, bloody, 
issue Theob. ii, Warb. Johns, fearful- 
bloody issue Craig con j. John. 


plague^ to fall on Petillus, and where the epithet certainly ought to be sudden — 
some instant plague. [Although Collier at this period does not advocate a cor- 
rection of the text, in his third edition he adopts this emendation of the MS. cor- 
rector.—ED.]— Singer {Sh, Vindicated, p. 82): The Corrector has an unreason- 
able dislike to this expressive word, for he would again change it as unwarrantably 
in Othello^ [See Coll. Notes, etc., ed. ii, p. 476.] But Shakespeare has also used it 
for sad, gloomy, in Rich. II. and in 2 Henry VI. — ^Wright: Although ^sullen' may 
not appropriately describe the trumpet’s note, it may fitly characterise the mourn- 
ful and threatening message which it accompanied. — Deighton: It is not neces- 
sary to see here any allusion to the ‘passing bell,’ which was tolled after death, 
and while the spirit was supposed to be on its way to its new abode. All that 
seems to be meant is ‘the gloomy foreteller of your own (France’s) perdition,’ in 
which sense ‘decay’ is often used by Shakespeare, e. g., Rich. II: III, ii, 102: ‘Cry 
woe, destruction, ruin and decay.’ [The excellent interpretation suggested by 
Steevens, that ‘sullen’ here qualifies the word ‘presage,’ and does not necessarily 
apply to the sound of the trumpet, renders quite unnecessaiy any change such as 
that of Collier’s MS. corrector. — Ed.] 

39. kindled] For other examples of ‘kindle’ in the sense to incite, see Schmidt, 
Lex., s. V. (b.). 

40. Vpon the . . . party] Compare: ‘—and hopes to find you forward Upon 
his party for the gain th&xeoV’—Rick. Ill: III, ii, 47, 

43. mannage] Steevens: That is, condua administration. Compare: ‘Now 
for the rebels which stand out in Ireland, Expedient manage must be made my 
liege.’— Ric/t. II: I, iv, 38.— Wright: For the form of this word, a substantive 
derived from a verb, see I, ii, 269; III, iii, 119. 




ACT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


27 


K, lohn. Our flrong poffeffion, and our right for vs. 45 

Eli, Your ftrong poffefsio much more then your right, 

Or elfe it mull go wrong with you and me, 

So much my confcience whifpers in your eare, 

Which none but heauen, and you, and I, fhall heare. 49 


45- right] right, Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, 
Ran. Mai. Steev. Varr. Hal. Sta. Del. 

!?.?.] us , — Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Var. ’73. 

46. [Aside to K. John. Dyce ii, iii. 
right,] right FaF^. 

47. you and me,] you, and me: Cap. 
Var. ’78, Ran. Mai. Steev. Varr. 
Sing. Coll. Huds. you and me, Niels. 


49. heauen,] Heaven, Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. Fleay. 

you, and I,] you and I FjF^, Rowe, 
Dyce, Wh. Cam.-|-, Huds. iii. you, 
a^ I Pope,+- you and /, Hal. Coil, 
iii. 

heare,] heare: Fa. hear F^. hear, 
F4 et seq. 


45. Our strong possession ... for vs] Rushton (Sh*s Legal Maxims, p, 12): 
‘Jw aequalijure melior est conditio possidentis^ (Plowden, 296). Where the right is 
equal the claim of the party in possession shall prevail. The lowest and most im- 
perfect degree of title consists in the mere naked possession, or actual occupation 
of the estate; without any apparent right, or any shadow or pretence of right, to 
hold and continue such possession. This may happen when one man invades 
the possession of another, and by force or surprise turns him out of the occupation 
of his lands; which is termed a dessdsen, being a deprivation of that actual seisen, 
or corporal freehold of the lands which the tenant before enjoyed (2 Black. Com., 
195; I Inst., 345). Or it may happen that after the death of the ancestor and 
before the entry of the heir, or after the death of a particular tenant and before 
the entry of him in remainder or reversion, a stranger may contrive to get pos- 
session of the vacant land, and hold out him that had a right to enter. In such 
cases the wrong-doer has only a mere naked possession, which the rightful owner 
may put an end to by a variety of legal remedies. But until some act be done by 
the rightful owner to divest this possession and assert his title, such actual pos- 
session is prima facie evidence of a legal title in the possessor; and it may by length 
of time, and negligence of him who hath the right, by degrees ripen into a perfect 
and indefeasible title (2 Black. Com., 196). King John seems to refer to this 
maxim when he says: ‘Our strong possession, and our right for us,’ but Elinor 
replies: ‘Your strong possession, much more than your right,’ because John was 
not in aequalijure with Arthur, but he was a wrong-doer, having merely a naked 
possession; for after the death of Richard I. John occupied the throne in defiance 
of the right of his nephew Arthur. [See 1 . 18 awte; extract from Wendover and 
Paris. — Ed.] — Moberly: Shakespeare here makes hereditary right much more 
absolute than it was in the time of the Norman sovereigns, as, in fact, it only began 
to be really lineal in the generations from John to Richard II. John, according to 
Blackstone (i, 20), claimed as being next of kin to Richard; Arthur, as his brother’s 
son, being one degree more remote. Even in common inheritances it was at that 
time, as Blackstone remarks (ibid.), a point undetermined whether the child of an 
elder brother should succeed to the land by right of representation, or the younger 
sur^dving brother in right of proximity of blood. 


28 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i. 


Enter a Sheriffe. 50 

Effex. My Liege, here is the ftrangeft controuerfie 
Come from the Country to be iudg’d by you 52 


50. Enter a Sheriffe.] Ff, Cam. 4 '. 
Om. Rowe, 4 - . Enter Essex. Johns. 
Enter the Sheriff of Northamptonshire, 
and whispers Essex. Cap. Enter a 
Sheriff [and whispers to Essex] Neils. 
Enter the sheriff of Northamptonshire 
who whispers Essex. Var, ’73 et cet. (after 
1 . 44), Kemble, C. Kean, Marshall. 


50. a Sheriffe,] English Herald. 
Kemble (after 1 . 44). 

51. Effex.] Salisbury Fleay conj. 

51, 52. controuerfie... you] Ff, Rowe, 
Pope i, Han. Glo. Wh. ii, Cla. Rife, 
Neils, controversie ... yoUy Pope ii, 
Cam. controversy, ... you, Theob. et 
cet. 


50. Enter a Sheriffe] Cambridge Edd. {Note IV.): Here Steevens [Var. 1773] 
gives the same stage-direction as Capell [See Text. Notes], changing merely *and* 
to 'who," and, as usual, ignoring Capell, says in a note that he had taken it from the 
Old Quarto. He convicts himself of plagiarism, for the ‘Old Quarto’ has: 'Enter 
the Shrive and whispers the Earle of Salis. in the eare." It was Capell who changed 
‘Salis,’ to 'Essex." The second and third editions of the Old Quarto (i6ri, 162a) 
agree in this stage direction literatim. The edition of 1591 has 'Scds" for * Salis.’ — 
Marshall: In following Charles Kean’s Acting Edition [and placing the entrance 
of the Sheriff after 1 . 44] we only follow the dictates of common sense. There must 
be some little time allowed for the Sheriff to impart his information to Essex be- 
fore Essex can impart it to the king. The Sheriff is whispering to Essex during 
Elinor’s speech. [Kean was anticipated in this arrangement by J. P. Kemble. 
See Text. Notes. — -Ed.] 

51. Essex] Fleay {Introduction, p. 24): In the old play the Sheriff enters and 
whispers to Salisbury; but Essex, at the king’s request, interrogates the Faul- 
conbridges; in the present play Essex, not Salisbury, announces their approach, 
and the king interrogates them himself. As Essex speaks only three lines, and 
never reappears all through this play, and these three lines are taken from the 
speech of Salisbury in The Troublesome Raigne, I have no doubt that this charac- 
ter was intended to be struck out altogether, and only remained by inadvertence. 
This would be especially probable in 1596, in which year the Earl of Essex first 
grew out of favour with Elizabeth, and the name of Essex would consequently be 
avoided by contemporary dramatists. In fact, the name of Essex never occurs in 
the text of any play of Shakespeare; while those of Pembroke, Salisbury, and 
Norfolk (Bigot) are found in many of his histories. Note also that Pembroke 
does not speak in this scene in the present play. He does in the older play; 
hence his retention, as a mute, in the later version. — [Fieay’s reference to events 
in the career of Essex during 1596, as a reason for the omission of that name in 
the present play, is, I think, unfortunate. It will be remembered that it was in 
June of that year that Essex and Raleigh made their successful expedition 
against Spain, and captured the city of Cadiz. Essex on his return became the 
popular idol of the hour. Fleay dates the first production of King John Octo- 
ber, 1596; it seems likely then that the name of Essex would be one put promi- 
nently forward rather than suppressed. Essex did not actually fall into disfa- 
vor until 1599, after the disastrous campaign in Ireland. — Ed.] 

52. to be iudg’d by you] Veeplanck: The Aula Regis of £he first Norman 
kings was the highest court; followed the person of the king; was composed of his 



ACT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


29 


That ere I heard : fhall I produce the men ? 53 

KJohn. Let them approach: 

Our Abbies and our Priories fhall pay 55 

This expeditious charge : what men are you ? 

Enter Robert Faulconhridge,and Philip. 

Philip. Your faithful! fubiedl, I a gentleman, 

Borne in NorthamptonJhirej and eldefl fonne 

As I fuppofe, to Robert Faulconbridge , 60 


53. heard:] heard. Johns. Var. ’73, 
Ktly. 

men?] men F4. 

[Exit Essex. Johns. [Exit Sheriff. 
Var. ’73 et seq. 

54. approach:] Ff, Rowe, approach. 
Pope,+, Cam.-h, Fie. approach . — 
Var. ^73 et cet. 

[Exit Sheriff; and Re-enters with 
Philip, the Bastard Faulconbridge, and 
Robert, his brother. Cap. 

56. expeditious] Fleay. expeditions 
F3F3. Expedition's F4 et cet. 

charge:] charge. Ff, Rowe, Dyce, 
Sta. Cam. +, Bel. Fie, Words. Neils. 
charge — Pope,+, Cap. charge . — Var. 
’78 et cet. 

57. Scene n. Pope, Han. Warb. 
Johns. 

Enter... and Philip] Ff, Rowe,-f 
{—Var. ’73), Neils. Re-enter sheriff 


with Robert Faulconbridge, and Philip, 
his brother (after pay^ 1 . 55) Varr. Ran. 
Mai. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Coll. Hal. 
Wh. i, Ktly, Huds. (after cJiarge, 1 . 56) 
Dyce, Sta. Cam. 4 * (reading: Enter... 
Philip, his bastard brother). Del. FL 
Huds. ii, Words. Rife, Craig. 

57. Faulconbridge] Falconbridge 
(throughout) Dyce, Hal. Huds. ii, 
Words. 

Philip.] Ff. the Bastard. Rowe, 
Pope. Philip, his brother. Theob. Han. 
Johns. Varr. Ran. Philip, his brother, 
the Bastard. Warb. Philip, his half- 
brother. Words. Philip, his bastard 
brother. Mai. et cet. 

$S.ftMedtf I a] subject /, a Rowe,-]-. 
subject I; a Coll. Wh. i, Sta. Huds. Fie. 
subject I, a Cap. et cet. 

fonne] son^ Rowe et seq. 

60. Robert] Om. Ff, Rowe. 


officers of state, sitting in his hall wherever he was; and in theory, and sometimes 
in fact, held by the Mng in person. This was changed, by Magna Chatia^ to a sta- 
tionary court, at Westminster Hall, with regular judges. Thus King John, in 
the early part of his reign, was the last sovereign who could thus have had a * con- 
troversy come from the country to be judged’ by him. A few years later it would 
have come before the Common Pleas, at Westminster Hall. [For an account of 
the rise and progress of this judicial chamber, which Hallam ttjms,' Ctiria Regis^ 
see his Europe during the Middle Ages, ii, 332.— Ed.] — ^Mobeely: The notion that 
the king might judge causes in person was not finally extinct till James I. tried the 
experiment of sitting in his own courts, but was told by the judges that he could 
not legally pronounce an opinion (Blackstone, iii, 41). 

55. Our Abbies and our Priories] Fleay: The first indication of the ill-feeling 
between John and the clergy. 

56. expeditious] As will be seen from the text. Notes, all editors, with the ex- 
ception of Fleay, regard this as a misprint and accept the reading of Fa, expeditions. 
Justification, if it be needed, may be found for this change in the fact that ^ex- 
peditious’ in the sense speedy occurs only in The Tempest, V, iii, 315; and Murray 
(N. E. D,, s. V.) gives this latter line as the earliest use of the word in this sense. 
The present play antedates The Tempest by at least twelve years. — E d. 


30 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i. 

6i 


A Souldier by the Honor-giuing-hand 
Of Cordehofij Knighted in the field. 

KJohn. What art thou? 

Robert. The fon and heire to that fame Faulconbridge. 
KJohn. Is that the elder, and art thou the heyre? 65 

You came not of one mother then it feemes. 

Philip. Moft certain of one mother, mighty King, 

That is well knowne,and as I thinke one father: 

But for the cerraine knowledge of that truth, 

I put you oTe to heauen, and to n^y mother; 70 

Of that I doubt, as all mens children may. 

Eli. Out on thee rude man, y doft fhame thy mother, 72 


61. Souldier] Souldier^ F4. soldier, 
Rowe et seq. 

Eonor-giuing-kand] Ff, Rowe i. 
honor-giving hand Rowe ii. et seq. 

62. Cordelion,] Ff, Rowe, Dei. Fie. 
Cceur-de-lion, Pope, Theob, Coeur-de- 
lion Han. et seq. 

63. What] And what Cap. 

65. heyre?] heyr? F^. Heir? F4 et seq. 

66. then] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. then, 
Theob. et cet. 

JeeTnes.] feems? F4, Rowe,-}-. 
seems. Cap. et seq. 

67. King,] King-- Wh. i, Dyce ii, iii, 
Words. Rife. 

68. and as I thinhe] F2F3. — and as I 
think, Wh. i, Rife, and, as I think, F4 
et cet. 


6g. But] Ff, Rowe,-}-, Coll, i. Cam. 4 *, 
Dyce ii, iii, Huds. ii, Words. But, 
Cap. et cet. 

cerraine] Fi. 

71-92. Of that.Jent vs here?] Om. 
Words. 

70, 78, 91. heauen] Heaven Rowe,-}- 
(— Var. ’73). 

70. mother;] mother : — Dyce, Hal. 

Wh.i. 

71. mens] mens'* Warb. Johns. 

72. Out...y doji] Out, out. .Dost Craig 
conj. 

thee] thee, Rowe et seq. 
rude man,] Ff, Rowe, Pope. 
rAde-man, Fie. rude man! Theob. et 
cet. 

y] thou Ff. 


71. Of that I doubt] Steevens: The resemblance between this sentiment and 
that of Telemachus, in the first book of the Odyssey, is apparent. The passage is 
thus translated by Chapman: 'My mother, certaine, says I am his sonne; I know 
not; nor was ever simply knowne, By any child, the sure truth of his sire.^ [ 1 . 335]. 
Mr Pope has observed that the like sentiment is found in Euripides, Menander, 
and Aristotle. Shakespeare expresses the same doubt in several of his other plays. 
— ^Marshall: A correspondent has sent (under the signature M. M.) an ingenious 
communication, proposing to amend the line thus: Tf that I doubt,' etc.— -taking 
the speech of Eleanor’s which follows to be an interruption. The writer’s argu- 
ment amounts to this: that the Bastard would not at this point ‘commit himself 
to an avowal of a definite belief’ in his own illegitimacy. But this cynical avowal 
of doubt is in accordance with Philip Faulconbridge’s character, as Shakespeare 
has drawn it; and by 'Of that I doubt’ he merely means to say that the legitimacy 
of every child is a fair subject for doubt; a variation of the old proverb that 'It 
is a wise child who knows his own father.’ Facetious allusions to this doubt as to 
a child’s paternity are to be found in all dramatists down to the time of Sheridan. 

72. mde man] Walker {Crit., ii, i$6): Rickman, youngman, oldman, deadman. 



ACT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


31 


And wound her honor with this diffidence. 73 

PMl. I Madame ? No, I haue no reafon for it, 

That is my brothers plea, and none of mine, 75 

The which if he can proue, a pops me out, 

At leaft from faire hue hundred pound a yeere : 

Heauen guard my mothers honor, and my Land. 

K. lohn, A good blunt fellow : why being yonger born 
Doth he lay claime to thine inheritance? 80 

PhiL I know not why, except to get the land : 

But once he flanderd me with baftardy: 82 


74. 1 Madame? No,] F2. I Madam? 
iVo? F3F4. I, Madam? No: /, 

madam! no, Ktly. I, Madam? No, 
Rowe ii. et cet. 

it,] it? Pope ii. (misprint), it , — 
Dyce, Hal. it: Wh. i, Huds. Del. it. 
Ktly. it; Theob. et cet. 

76. a pops] he pops Pope, 4 -. pops 
Cap. et seq. 

out,] out Rowe et seq. 

77. pound] pounds Neils. 

a yeere:] a-year: Elnt, Sta. Fie. 
a year. Coll. Del. Rlfe,‘ Neils. 

78. honor,] honour— Wh. i, Rife. 


78. Land.] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Fie. 
Imtd! Theob. et cet. 

yg. fellow: why... born] fellow: why... 
born, F4, Rowe, fellow: why, ...born, 
Pope,+- fellow: — Why, ...born, Cap. 
Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. Mai. Steev. Varr. 
Sing. Knt. fellow. — Why, ...born, Coll, 
et seq. (subs.) 

82. But once] But, once, Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Var. ’73, Del. 

flanderd] Jlandered Ff. slanderd 
Rowe et seq. slander W. W. Lloyd 
(Athen., Aug. 24, 1878). 


In fact, man, in combinations of this kind, — such of them, I mean, as from their 
nature are of frequent occurrence, — ^had an enclitic force. This is evident not only 
from their being so frequently printed either in the manner above, or with a hyphen, 
but also from the flow of the verse in many of the passages where they occur- 
[The present line quoted.] Was *rudeman* a common phrase like goodman, &c.?— - 
[Fleay, in hyphenating these two words, intends, perhaps, to answer Walker’s 
Query in the affirmative. See Text. Notes.— 'K' d.] 

73. diffidence] That is, distrust; the opposite of confidence. 

76. a pops me out] How eminently characteristic of Faulconbridge is this humor- 
ously contemptuous description of the outcome of his brother’s suit. Its utter 
disregard for anything like conventional deference in language, in the presence of 
majesty, evidently appealed to the king, as is shown by his next remark. — En. 

82. But once] Delius: *Once’ is hardly here used as referring to some par- 
ticular time, but rather in the sense once for all. As in CorioL: ^Once, if he do re- 
quire our voices, we ought not to deny him.’ — ^II, iii, i, — Weight objects to this 
interpretation of Delius on the ground that ‘this would require sla^iders rather than 
slanderd, and there is no reason to suppose that the word “once ” is used in other 
than its usual sense in reference to past time.’ — N[. W. Lloyd (Athemum, 24'^ 
Aug., 1878, p. 240), apparently unconscious that he has been anticipated, proposes 
the same interpretation of ‘once,’ in the sense once for all, as does Delius. Lloyd 
also suggests that ‘there is fair reason typographically for challenging the last d 
in “ slandered.” The general rule [in the Folio] when the last syllable of a participle 
or preterite is required by the metre to be contracted, is for the contraction to be 



32 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i. 

83 


But where I be as true begot or no, 

That Hill I lay vpon my mothers head, 

But that I am as well begot my Liege 85 

(Faire fall the bones that tooke the paines for me) 

Compare our faces, and be ludge your felfe 
If old Sir Robert did beget vs both, 

And were our father, and this fonne like him : 

0 old fir Father, on my knee 90 

1 giue heauen thankes I was not like to thee. 


83. where] FaFj. whether F4, Rowe, 
4 -, Cam.-]-, wktr Byce, Huds. ii. 
as] Om. Pope, Han. 
true begot] Ff, Rowe,-h, Dyce, 
Ktly, Cam.+j Fie. Neils, true-begot 

Bel. Craig. true begot, Cap. et 
cet. 

85. But, ..well begot] But,,„well begot, 
Cap. Varr. Ran. Mai. Steev. Varr. 


Knt, Byce, Ktly. But...well-begot Bel. 
Craig. 

86. me] me! Theob. et seq. 

87. Jelfe] self. Rowe et seq. 

90. 0 ] 01 Coll. Sing, ii, Wh. i, Huds. 
Oh! Ktly. 

Robert] Robert, Pope et seq. 
[kneeling. Coll. ii. 

91. thee.] thee! Byce et seq. 


marked by an apostrophe; ‘‘slanderd,^’ therefore, if the received reading is carried, 
should have appeared as slandered; there is, therefore, a typographical lapse in any 
case — either an apostrophe is wanting or a final letter is superfluous.’ 

82. slanderd] Craigie {N. E. B., s. v. vb. 3. b.): To accuse (unjustly or other- 
wise) v/, charge or reproach with, something discreditable. Also with that and 
clause. [Compare: ‘Then let not him be slander’d with revolt,’ — x Henry IV: I, 
iii, 112.] 

83. But] Wright: We should rather expect How, the printer having repeated 
the ‘But’ from the previous line. 

83. where] This contraction when the metre requires that whether be read as a 
monosyllable is quite common in the Folios; although, as the Cambridge Edd. 
note, the Folios are not therein consistent. ‘They have, for instance, “Whether” 
in 1. 142 of the present scene.’ — Ed. 

85. But ... as well begot] Vaughan (i, 3) : There is only one point on which 
the speaker professes himself to make any statement, and that is whether under 
either supposition as to legitimacy he was as well begotten as his brother or not. 
Yet [not ‘But’] is the right word to introduce his single statement. 

85. as well begot] This is spoken with marked irony. Philip while seeming to 
praise is actually condemning the weak ‘and slight figure of his brother by compar- 
ing it with his own manly form. The next line is in reference to the stalivart frame 
of his putative father, vrhoever he was, who took the pains to beget him. — Rolfe 
is, I think, mistaken in referring this to ‘the frame that bore the pains of maternity.’ 
See L 129 below.— -E d. 

89. And were our father] Moberly: The ‘were’ expresses doubt of itself, and 
would be emphasized on the stage. Compare: ‘I think my wife be honest, and 
think she is not.’ — Othello, III, iii, 384. [The metrical accent falling on ‘were’ is 
corroboration of Moberly’s sagacious comment. — E d.] 

90, old sir Robert Father] Fleay:. Certainly no comma after ‘Robert’; ‘old 
Sir Robert father’ is one compound. noun. 



ACT I, SC. i.] OF KING 10 HN 33 

K. Jote.Why what a mad-cap hath heauen lent vs here? 92 
BXen, He hath a tricke of Cordelions face, 

The accent of his tongue affedleth him : 

Doe you not read fome tokens of my fonne 95 

In the large compofition of this man? 

92. hni] sent Heath, Huds. ii. Bel. Fie, Coeur-de4ion^s Pope et seq. 

93. a tricke] the trick Vaughan. 94. him:] him. Wh. i, Ktly, Cam.+, 

Cordelions] Cordelion's F4, Rowe, Bel. 

92. lent] Halliwell: That is, given, from the old English verb kne, to give. 
The expression in the text is of usual occurrence in works, especially in the metrical 
romances, of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, but it was getting obsolete in 
Shakespeare’s time. ‘A fuile harde grace was hir lentte Er she owt of this worde 
[sic Qu. worlde? — Ed.] wente.’ — ^MS. Cantab. Ff. v. 48, f. 43. — Both Heath {Re^ 
visd, p. 222) and Walker (Crit., iii, 117) suggest that ‘lent’ should here be changed 
to sent. Walker’s unconsciousness that he was thus anticipated may be accounted 
for by the fact that he had, unfortunately, but few opportunities for consulting 
either earlier editors or commentators. Walker’s Editor, Lettsom, adds in a foot- 
note: ‘Compare Rom. 6^ Jul., “That God hath sent us but this only child.” — III, 
V, 166, where all the old copies but Qi read lent.* — Vaughan (i, 4), without refer- 
ence either to Heath or Walker, also proposes the like change. — Ed. 

93-98. He hath . . . Richard] Were it not that the last words of 1 . 98, ‘sirra 
speake,’ are so closely connected with what follows, it would seem as though there 
were some corruption in the text and that these two speeches of Eleanor and John 
had been misplaced. There has been nothing said so far which might lead Eleanor 
to suspect the truth of Philip’s paternity. Is it quite in Shakespeare’s manner 
thus to anticipate that which is to be revealed in the next speech? Or are we to 
suppose that the resemblance was so striking that Eleanor could not restrain a 
remark upon it? In the corresponding scene in the Troublesome Raigne she does 
not acknowledge any likeness until after Robert has declared his suspicions. If, 
therefore, any change be necessary these two speeches might very fittingly follow 
1 . 141. — Ed. ■ . ■ ■ 

93. tricke of Cordelions face] Mushay {N. E. B., s. v. trick, sb. II, 8. b.): A 
characteristic expression (of the face or voice); a peculiar feature; a distinguishing 
trait. (The present line quoted. Steevens, on the other hand, takes ‘trick’ 
here in the sense of a ‘tracing of a drawing’; it is quite true that this is one of its 
meanings, but only in the language of heraldry, a fact of which Steevens was ap- 
parently cognisant since he endeavors to strengthen his interpretation by explain- 
ing that the word here means that ‘peculiarity of face which may be sufficiently 
shown by the slightest outline.’ — Ed.] 

94. affecteth him] Wright: That is, is an imitation of his. ‘Affect’ is used in 
Shakespeare in the sense of imitate, but not elsewhere with a personal object. 
Compare: 'Apem. Men report thou dost affect my manners, and dost use them. 
Tim, ’Tis then because thou dost not keep a dog Whom I would imitate.’ — 
Timon, IV, iii, 199. 

96. large composition] C. & M. CowDEN Clarke: This expression finely brings 
to the eye those magnificent proportions of manly strength that characterised 
Richard I, and which helped to make him the heroic ideal of his English 
hearts. 



34 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i. 


K.Iohn. Mine eye hath well examined his parts, 97 

And findes them perfedl Richard : firra fpeake, 

What doth moue you to claime your brothers land. 

Philip. Becaufe he hath a half-face like my fatherp loo 
With halfe that face would he haue ail my land, 

A halfe-fac^d groat, hue hundred pound a yeere? 102 


97-102. Mine eye,..a yeere?] Om. 
Words. 

97. examined] examined Dyce, Sta. 
Fie. Huds. ii. 

98. Richard:] Richard. Johns, et 
seq. 

firra] firrah F3F4. Sirrah^ Rowe 
et seq. 

99. land] land? Ff et seq. 

100. half -face] half -face, F4, Rowe et 
seq. 


100. father?] father, Ff, Rowe, 4 * • 
father. Cam. 4 -, Neils. Craig, father! 
Del. father: Cap. et cet. 

101. halfe that face] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Coll, i, Cam. 4 -, Del. Neils. Craig. 
half the face Anon. ap. Cam. half a face 
Vaughan, that half-face Theob. et cet. 

102. Om. Donovan. 

a yeere?] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. a year. Cap. a-year! 
Knt, Sta. Fie. a year! Johns, et cet. 


101. halfe that face] Theobald: But why ‘with half that face?’ There is no 
question but the poet wrote as I have restored the text. [See Text. Notes ] — 
Collier (ed. i.) : The meaning is, that because Robert had only a thin narrow face, 
like his father, yet with only half the face of his father, he would have all his father’s 
land. [Theobald’s alteration] does not express what the poet seems to have in- 
tended. Philip ridicules Robert for having, in fact, only half of the half-face of 
his father, yet claiming all the inheritance by reason of it. [In his second edition 
Collier accepts Theobald’s reading, though ‘somewhat reluctantly,’ as he acknowl- 
edges. He yields, however, only because it is corroborated by the MS. Corrector. — 
Ed.] — Dyce {Remarks, etc., p. 87) : The ‘half that’ of the Folio is merely a transpo- 
sition made by a mistake of the original compositor. . . . The context proves 
Theobald’s alteration to be absolutely indispensable. According to the old read- 
ing (in spite of Collier’s strange explanation) the second line contradicts the first. 
It may, perhaps, be worth remarking here that the following line of Rom. & JuL, 
II, vi, 34, ‘I cannot sum up half my sum of wealth,’ is given in the old editions 
thus (the words ‘half my’ being shuffled out of their right place): ‘I cannot sum 
up sum of half my wealth,’ and ‘ I cannot sum up some of half my wealth.’ [Where- 
in does one line, as printed in the folio, contradict the other? Collier’s explanation, 
so far from being ‘strange,’ is, to my mind, a most lucid and convincing argument 
against any alteration of the text. — Ed.] 

102. halfe-fac’d groat] Theob.axd calls attention to the anachronism in thus 
alluding ‘to a coin not struck till the year 1504, in the reign of Henry VII, viz.: 
a groat, which as well as the half-groat, bore but half-faces impressed. The 
poet sneers at the meagre sharp visage of the elder brother, by comparing him to a 
silver groat that bore the king’s face in profile, so showed but half the face. [It 
will be noticed that Theobald here inadvertently refers this epithet to the wrong 
brother, Philip was the elder; the whole point of the controversy turns on the fact 
that the younger brother, Robert, claimed the inheritance. Theobald also says 
that although groats were coined in the time of Edward III, they, as well as all 
other coins, bore the king’s face in full. He dtes, in corroboration of the half-faced 
groat of Henry VII, Stowe: Survay of London, p. 47; Holinshed; Camden: Remains 



ACT I, SC. I.] 


OF KING JOHN 


35 


Rob, My gracious Liege, when that my father liu^d, 103 
Your brother did imploy my father much. 

Phil. Well fir, by this you cannot get my land, 105 

Your tale muft be how he employ’d my mother. 

Rob. And once difpatch’d him in an Embaffie 
To Germany, there with the Emperor 108 


104, 106. imploy. ..employed] imploy... 
imploy^ d Ff. (imploi’d Fa), Rowe,-h- 
employ... employ d Cap. et seq. 

104. much^ much — Rowe, Han. Var. 
’73, Ktly. much. — Coll, much ; — 
TFeob. et cet. 

105, 106. Om. Words. Donovan. 


107. And] —And Wh. i, Huds. iii. 
dif patch’d] despatcht Fie. 

in] on Ran. 

108. Germany,] Germany; Pope, 4 '. 
there] Ff, Rowe,+ (—Var. ’73), 

Dyce, Cam.+. there j Cap. et cet. 


Concerning Britain. — Ed.] — Steevens: The same contemptuous allusion occurs in 
The Downfall of Robert Earl of Huntington, 1601, ‘You half-fac’d groat, you thick- 
cheeked chitty-face. — [V. i; Haz.-Dods., p. 188.] Again, in Histriomastix, 1610: 
^Whilst I behold yon half-fac’d minion.’ — [IV, i, 57; ed. Simpson.] — Nares (Gloss., 
s. V. Half-faced): Falstaff ridicules Shadow for his thin face, with the same con- 
temptuous epithet: ‘This same half-faced fellow, Shadow — ^he presents no mark 
to the enemy.’ — 2 Henry IV: III, ii, 283. I am inclined to think that no more 
than a contemptuous idea of something imperfect is meant by ‘half-faced’ in the 
famous rant of Hotspur: ‘But out upon this half-faced fellowship!’ — 1 Henry IV: 
I, iii, 208. It has been supposed to allude to the half-facing of a dress; but that 
seems too minute. Here also it means merely imperfect: ‘ With all other odd ends 
of your half-faced English.’— rNashe: Apology for Pierce Penilesse. [This last 
reference from Nashe is quite wrong. In the first place, there is no such title among 
Ms writings, as given either in Grosart’s or McKerrow’s editions. The quotation 
is, however, correct, and is to be found in the tractate Strange Newes of the Inter- 
cepting Certaine Letters, ed. Grosart, vol.ii,p. 210. TMs inaccurate reference would 
hardly be worth the correction, were it not that unfortunately Nares has misled 
the astute editor of the N. E. D., who has copied this fictitious title as a reference 
for the use of ‘half-faced’ in the sense imperfect, citing (N) as the authority, pre- 
sumably Nares; but without reference to volume or page in any edition. From 
the context in all the passages quoted it is quite evident that ‘half-faced’ in the 
present line in King John means unfinished, imperfect. Does it not almost exactly 
correspond with what Gloucester says of Mmself? — ‘Deform’d, unfinished, sent be- 
fore my time Into tMs breathing world scarce half made up.— Rich. Ill: I, i, 20. 
—Ed.] 

103. when that] For other examples of ‘that’ used as a conjunctional affix, see, 
if needful, Abbott, § 287. 

107, 108. an Embassie To Germany] Boswell-Stone (p. 50): Perhaps Sir 
Robert Faulconbridge usurped the mission of Williaoi Longchamp, Bishop of Ely, 
and Chancellor; sent by Richard in 1196 to confer with the Emperor Henry VI, 
who was annous to prevent peace being made between the King and Philip of 
France. Or we may imagine that Sir Robert was one of the ‘diverse noble men’ 
who represented Richard at the coronation of the Emperor Otto IV. in 1198. 
The objection that neither of these dates is consistent with Faulconbridge’s dra- 
matic age need not trouble us, for Richard— who sent Sir Robert to Germany— 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i. 


36 


To treat of high affaires touching that time: 

Th'aduantage of his abfence tooke the King, no 

And in the meane time foiourh'd at my fathers ; 

Where how he did preuaile, I fhame to fpeake : 

But truth is truth, large lengths of feas and fliores 
Betweene my father, and my mother lay, 

As I haue heard my father fpeake himfelfe 1 15 

When this fame lufly gentleman was got: 

Vpon his death-bed he by will bequeath^ 

His lands to me, and tooke it on his death 
That this my mothers fonne was none of his; 

And if he were, he came into the world 120 


109. time. F4, Johns. Var. ’73, 
CoU. Hal. Ktly, Glo. Cla. 

no. Th^\ Ff, RGwe,-f (—Var. ’73), 
Knt, Wh. i, Dyce ii, iii, Fie. Huds. ii. 
The Cap. et cet. 

1 1 2. Where..,pfmaile^ Where^...pre- 
milf F4, Rowe, -f . W kere...prevail Coll. 
Cam. 4 -, Bel. 51 e.^ 

fpeake:] speak. Ktly. 

113-116. Om. Wordsworth. 

1 13, 114. 0m. Donovan. 

1 13. truihf large] truth; large Pope et 
seq. 

large,.Jhores\ And true it is, my 
father Words. 


1 13 lengths] length Cap. conj. 

115. As. ..himfelfe] F2F3. As...him- 
fdf F4, Rowe, Coll. Cam.-f, Del. 
Words. Fie. {As. ..himself ) Pope et cet. 

1 16. got:] Ff, Cap. got. Rowe et cet. 

1 1 7. he...'bequeaiKd\ did. ..bequeath 
Words. 

1 18. death] oath Anon. conj. ap. Cam. 
119-141. Om. Words. 

ixg. this. ..fonne] Fa. this. ..son F3F4, 
Rowe, Pope, Sing. Ktly, Huds. Cam. 4 “, 
Fie. Mfe. this, ...son, Theob. et cet. 

120. And] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. An Han. Del. S. Walker. 
Cap. et cet. 


began to reign in 1189, and Faulconbridge could not therefore have numbered 
more than ten historic years at the opening of Act I. in 1 199. 

1 1 8. tooke it on his death] SxEEVENS i Thatis, entertained it as his fixed opinion 
when he was dying. — Staunton dissents from this interpretation by Steevens, and 
adds: * We believe it was a common form of speech, and signified that he swore, or 
took oath, upon his death, of the truth of his belief. Thus Falstaff says: “ — and 
when mistress Bridget lost the handle of her fan, I took’t upon my honour thou 
hadst it not.” — Merry Wives, II, ii, ti. So also, in Beaumont & Fletcher’s Lover’s 
Progress: — upon my death I take it uncompelled, that they were guilty.” ’ — 
V, iii. — ^M obebly: * Wished that he might die if it was not true.’ Why should 
anyone propose to read oath, especially as Falstaff says: T’ll take it on my death I 
gave him this wound’? — i Henry IV: V, iv, 153. — Weight: That is, maintained 
it by an oath, the asseveration being as true as his death was certain; or, as I 
rather incline to believe, staking Ms life as security for his truth. See Hall’s 
Chronicle, Henry VII, fol. 51b: ‘And there Perkyn standyng on a lytle skaffolde, 
redde hys confession, whiche before you haue heard, and toke it on hys death to 
be true.’ [Wright quotes two passages from Holinshed wherein this and a like 
phrase of asseveration are used as guarantees for the truth of a statement. Such 
examples might doubtless be multipfied, tut these are sufficient to show that 
Steevens is dearly wrong in putting a too literal interpretation on the phrase.— 



ACT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


37 


Full fourteene weekes before the courfe of time: 121 

Then good my Liedge let me haue what is mine, 

My fathers land, as was my fathers will. 

K, lohn. Sirra, your brother is Legittimate, 

Your fathers wife did after wedlocke beare him: 1 25 

And if fhe did play falfe, the fault was hers, 

Which fault lyes on the hazards of all husbands 

That marry wiues : tell me, how if my brother 

Who as you fay, tooke paines to get this fonne, 1 29 


1 21. time:] time. Johns, et seq. 

122. Then...Liedge] Then...Liege, F4. 
Then,...Liegey Pope et seq. 

124. Sirra,] Sirrah, F4 et seq. 
Legittimate] Fi. 

126-136. And if. ..fathers heyre] Om. 
Donovan. 

126. And] Ff, Rowe, 4 -, Coli. Wh. 
Dyce, Cam.+* And, Cap. et cet. 


127. hazards] hazard Pope,-!"# Var. 
’78, ’85, Ran. 

128. wiues:] wives. Rowe et seq. 

129. Who] F2F3, Pope, Han. Sta. 
Huds. Cam.-f, Del. Words. Neils. 
Craig. '-Who Ktly. Who, F4 et 
cet. 

fay,] say Pope, Han. 
fonne,] son — Ktly. 


1 21. Full fourteene weekes] On the question of the viability of a child thus 
prematurely born, see, if needful, Chesney: Sh. as a Physician, p. 33 et 
seq . — Ed. 

124. your brother is Legittimate] Grey (i, 275): Shakespeare appears to be 
out in his law; [since Robert says] That his father was sent into Germany, and the 
king took advantage of his absence. Which was proof that his brother Philip was 
illegitimate. It would have been reckon’d otherways, if his father had been any- 
where witMn the four seas (the jurisdiction of the Kling of England)'. See Wood’s 
Institute of the Laws of England, 'hook I, chap. 6. — C. K. Davis (p. 144) : [In ancient 
common-law] a child born after the marriage, and during the, husband’s life, was 
presumed to be legitimate. It was formerly the established doctrine that this pre- 
sumption in favor of legitimacy could not be rebutted, unless the husband was ab- 
sent during the whole period of the wife’s pregnancy. So, if a man be within the 
four seas and his wife hath a child, the law presumeth that it is the child of the 
husband; and against this presumption the law will admit no proof {Co. Litt., 373U; 

I PMU. Ev. marg.j p. 630), . , . Sir Robert was not absent in Germany during the 
whole period of the wife’s pregnancy, and for that reason the presumption of the 
legitimacy, as it was at that time, became conclusive. It is also to be remarked 
that the king pays no attention to the declarations said to have been made by Sir 
Robert denying his paternity of Philip. In this he rules correctly, for nothing is 
better settled than that the declarations of father or mother are inadmissible to 
bastardize their children. This grotesque affront to common sense has long since 
ceased to be law. Evidence is admissible in our day to attack the legitimacy of a 
child even where the father was infra quaimr marihus during the whole period from 
conception to birth. The testimony, however, must be of the most cogent charac- 
ter, and leave no room for doubt. 

127. Which fault] Compare III, i, 42; and for other examples of ^ which’ used 
as an adjective, see Abbott, § 269. 

129. you say, tooke paines] This is not, I think, any inadvertence on Shake- . 



38 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i. 


Had of your father claim’d this fonne for his, 130 

Infooth,good friend, your father might haue kept 
This Calfe, bred from his Cow from all the world: 

Infooth he might; then if he were my brothers. 

My brother might not claime him, nor your father 

Being none of his, refufe him ; this concludes, 135 

My mothers fonne did get your fathers heyre, 

Your fathers heyre muft haue your fathers land. 

B-oh. Shal then my fathers Will be of no force. 

To difpoffeffe that childe which is not his. 139 

130. his^ Ff, Rowe, Pope, his — 

Ktly. his? Theob. et cet. 

132. Cow] Coiv, F4, Rowe,+. 
world:] world. Pope, Theob. Han. 

Warb. worlds Johns. 

133. might:] might, Ktly. 

134. claime] clam F4. 

135. him:] him. Fleay, Neils. 
concludes,] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 

Theob. Han. Warb. Ktly. concludes. 

speare’s part; but one of those happy touches which contribute so much to the 
natural flow of the dialogue. It is quite in keeping that the king should not at 
once recall that it was Philip who used this phrase in regard to himself. (See 1 , 86, 
ante.) — ^Ed. 

132. Calfe, bred from his Cow] Steevens: The decision of King John coincides 
with that of Menie, the Indian lawgiver: ‘Should a bull beget a hundred calves on 
cows not owned by his master, those calves belong solely to the proprietors of the 
cows.’ See The Hindu Laws, etc., translated by Sir W. Jones, London edit., p. 251. 
[See also F. F. Heard: Sh. as a Lawyer, p. 97.] 

135. concludes] Johnson: This is a decisive argument. As your father, if he 
liked him, could not have been forced, to resign him, so, not liking him, he is not 
at liberty to reject him. — Delius considers that according to the punctuation of 
the Folio ‘this concludes’ is to be connected with the succeeding sentence, and 
therefore does not bear the interpretation given by Johnson. — ^Wright, in sup- 
port of Johnson, quotes: ‘The text most infallibly concludes it .’ — Lovers Labour's 
Lost, IV, ii, 120. 

13S, 139. Will ... no force, To dispossesse] Verplanck: The dramatist is 
both legally and historically accurate. From the time of the Norman conquest 
lands in England ceased to be devisable, as they had been under the Saxon law. 
This remained in force until the Statute of Wilis, in 32 Henry VTII, authorising 
the devises of real estate, under some restrictions, afterwards re-enacted and ex- 
tended under Charles II. (See II. Blackstone’s Commentaries, 374-6.) One of 
the exceptions to this rule was in the county of Kent, which did not apply here, as 
the lands are described in Northamptonshire. I do not mention this as bearing on 
the question of Shakespeare’s asserted legal studies, because it is taken from the old 
King John, and it is probable it was founded on a traditional account of a true in- 
cident. 


Johns, concludes; Cam.+, Del. Fleay, 
Huds. ii, Neils. Craig, concludes , — 
Cap. et cet. 

138. Shal then] Shall then Ff. Shall, 
then, Coll. Dyce, Hal. Wh. i, Sta. Huds. 
Fleay. 

forced force F4, Rowe,-}-, ColL 
Dyce, Wh. i, Fleay. 

139. his.] his? F4 et seq. 



ACT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING lOHN 


39 


PHh Of no more force to difpoffeffe me fir, 140 

Then was his will to get me, as I think. 

Eli, Whether hadft thou rather be a Faulconbridge , 

And like thy brother to enioy thy land : 

Or the reputed fonne of Cordelion, 

Lord of thy prefence, and no land befide. 145 


140. me, F4 et seq. 

141. T}ieri\ Than F4. 

142. Whether] Say, Pope, Han. 
WheW Sta. conj. Fleay, Huds. ii. 

rather he] rather, — be Cap. Var. 
’78, ’85, Ran. Mai. Steev. Varr. Sing. 

Faulconbridge] Falconbridge 
Dyce, Hal. Huds. ii, Words. 


143. And., .hr other] F2F3, Huds. ii. 
And...brolher, F4, Rowe,+, Hal. Wh. i, 
Dei. And., jbr other. Cap. et cet. 

144. Cordelion,] F2F4, Rowe, Del. 
Fleay. Cordelion F3. Cceur-de-Hon 
Pope et cet. 

145. thy] the Warb. 
befide.] befide? F4 et seq. 


142, 143. hadst thou rather ... to enioy] Wbight: In such clauses it is not 
uncommon to insert ‘ to ’ before the second infinitive, though it is omitted before 
the first. Compare: ‘Brutus had rather be a villager Than to repute himself a 
son of Rome.’ — Jut, Cces., I, ii, 173. [For other examples, see Abbott, § 380; and 
for an account of the origin of this phrase, see Mason: English Grammar and 
Analysis, § 529, foot-note.] 

145. Lord of thy presence] Warburton: ‘Lord of thy presence’ can signify only 
master of thyself, and it is a strange expression to signify even that. However, that 
he might be, without parting with his land. We should read — ‘Lord of the pres- 
ence,’ i. e., prince of the blood. — ^Heath (p. 222) : ‘Lord of the presence’ never yet 
signified ‘a Prince of the blood,’ nor can Mr Warburton produce a single instance 
of this expression. The common reading means, Lord of thine own person, which 
comprehends the whole of thy lands, lordships, and titles. Mr Warburton objects, 
that Robert [sic Qu. Philip?] ‘might be lord of his person without parting with 
his land.’ So undoubtedly he might; but our critick seems not to have understood 
the alternative proposed by Queen Elinor, which was this: Whether he would 
choose to be the heir of Faulconbridge with the enjoyment of his lands, or to be the 
acknowledged son of Coeur de Lion at the expense of giving up his claim' to those 
lands, to which, if he were really the son of Coeur de Lion, he could not have the 
least title. — ^Johnson: ‘Lord of thy presence’ means: master of that dignity and 
grandeur of appearance that may sufficiently distinguish thee from the vulgar 
without the help of fortune.’ Lord of his presence apparently signifies: great in his 
own person, and is used in this sense by King John in one of the following scenes [I, 
ii, 389]. — F. Gentleman (ap. Bell’s ed., p. 9): This encouragement to own Bas- 
tardy upon supposition is a very indelicate stroke of her majesty’s; and King John’s 
knighting him without any merit to claim that honour, but impudence, is as silly 
a promotion as some other Kings have made.— Knight: ‘Presence’ may here 
mean priority of place, pres^ance. As the son of Coeur de Lion, Faulconbridge 
would take rank without his land. If Warburton’s interpretation be correct, the 
passage may have suggested the lines in Sir Henry Wotton’s song on a Happy Life: 
^Lord of himself, though not of lands, And having nothing, yet hath all.’ — C. & M. 
CowDEN Clarke {Sh. Key, p. 629): In this play twice occurs an expression which 
is to be found nowhere else used by Shakespeare. It is ‘Lord of thy presence’ and 
‘Lord of our presence,’ employed to signify: , master of thine own individuality, and: 



40 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i. 
146 


Baft. Madam, and if my brother had my fliape 
And I had his, fir Roberts his like him, 


146. Bafl.] Phil. Theobald, Warb. 
Varr. Ran. Words. Bono. 

and if] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Fieay. an if Han. et cet. 

147. hiSy fir Roberts his] hiSy Sir 
Robert’s his F4. his, Sir Robertas his, 


Rowe, Cap. Var. ’73, ’78, Hal. Cam.+. 
his; Sir Robert’s his, Pope, his, Sir 
Robertas, kis, Han. his Sir Roberts; his, 
Fieay. just Sir Robert’s shape, or just 
Sir Robert his Vaughan, his, Sir 
Robert his, Theob. et cet. 


master of our own individuality. In the first of the two passages we think it is 
meant to include the sense of: master of that fine manly person inherited from 
Cosur-de-Lion, as well as, master of thine own self. — Ivor John suggests that this 
phrase may here *bear the meaning of: Lord from thy very appearance, that is, 
your mere appearance would tell people that you were nobly born.’ [That ‘of* 
may have the force oi from or m consequence of, Abbott (§ 168) shows by several 
examples, but is it necessary here so to understand it, as Ivor John suggests? 
Heath’s interpretation, as it is the simplest, seems to be all sufficient. — Ed.] 

146. Bast.] Wright calls attention to this change in designation of Philip, fol- 
lowing directly upon his choice. 

147. sir Roberts his like him] Johnson: This is obscure and ill expressed. 
The meaniug is — ‘If I had his shape, sir Robert’s~~as he has.’ Sir Robert his for 
Sir Robert’s is agreeable to the practice of that time, when the ’s added to the 
nominative was believed, I think erroneously, to be a contraction of his. [The gen- 
itive or possessive case in Anglo-Saxon is formed by adding as to the nominative. 
The apostrophe, therefore, represents the omitted letter a. — Ed.] — Malone fol- 
lows Theobald’s regulation of the text (see Text. Notes), and points out that ‘his’ is 
here redundant, ascribing its use, as does Johnson, to the mistaken formation of the 
possessive.— Walker {Crit., iii, 117), referring to Johnson and Malone’s explana- 
tion, says: ‘But his in this construction, without a substantive, is a different idiom, 
and one of which I have met with no example; nor is there any necessity of metre to 
palliate such a violence on language.’ Walker conjectures that a comma should 
be inserted after ‘Sir Roberts’, wherein, as his editor Lettsom points out, Walker 
is anticipated by Hanmer (see Text. Notes). Lettsom adds: ‘I believe [the Folio 
reading] to be the genuine one, though I must own I doubt Walker’s interpretation. 
The double genitive, though denounced by Malone, is occasionally heard even now 
in the mouths of the vulgar; and, though it may not accord with modern notions 
of grammar, it is not more repugnant to them than the double nominative, “ God he 
knoweth,” or the double accusative, “God I pray him,” both of w^hich examples 
(not to mention others elsewhere) occur in Rich. III.’ — John Hunter: That is, 
And if Sir Robert had his shape like him; if Sir Robert’s shape was like my brother’s. 
[Hunter follows Theobald, but omits the comma after ‘Robert.’] — Fleay: I un- 
derstand the passage thus: His (my brother’s) shape of Sir Robert; his (my broth- 
er’s); like him (my brother) — Philip pointing at his brother at the words his and 
him. I take ‘his Sir Robert’s* to be a compound phrase, *his’ being an attributive 
to ‘Sir Robert’s’ (shape). — ^Wright; [Following the Folio], that is, his shape, which 
is also his father Sir Robert’s, — Gollancz: Surely his is used substantively with 
that rollicking effect which is so characteristic , of Faulconbridge. There is no 
need to explain the phrase as equivalent to his shape, which is also his father Sir 
Robert’s; ‘Sir Robert’s his’ ~ Sir Robert’s shape, ‘his’ emphasizing substantively 


ACT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


41 


And if my legs were two fuch riding rods, 14S 

My armes, fuch eele-skins fluft, my face fo thin, 

That in mine eare I durfl not fticke a rofe, 

Left men fhould fay, looke where three farthings goes, 151 

149. ftufl] Ff, Rowe, 4 -, Cap. Varr. 151. loohe.,.goes,] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 

Ran. stuffed Dono. stuffed Mai. et Han. ‘Iook...goesI Theob. Warb. 
cet. Look,, ..goes! Johns, et cet. 

the previous pronominal use of the word.— Hertford quotes with approval the 
foregoing explanation by Gollancz, and adds: ^The line might be paraphrased: 
‘‘And I had his shape, in other words, a his of Sir Robert’s.’’ ’ — [Any interpretation 
which wrests an intelligible meaning from the Folio text without change of letter 
or punctuation is assuredly alluring. If ^his’ be here used substantively it is a 
&'ira^ not only for Shakespeare but all other writers according to that 

court of last appeal, the New English Dictionary; such being the case we must, I 
fear, reluctantly accept the decision of that lesser court, Schmidt’s Lexicon, that 
‘ Sir Robert’s his ’ is here a reduplicated genitive. — Ed.] 

148. riding rods] Craigie {N. E. D., s. v.) quotes in illustration: 1555 Rutland 
MSS (1905), IV, 376: Paid for ij ryding-roddes of bone for my Ladie, and. other 
thinges, xxijd. 

150, 151. rose . . . three farthings [Theob aid: In this very obscure passage 

our poet is anticipating the date of another coin; humorously to rally a thin face, 
eclipsed, as it were, by a full blown rose. We must observe, to explain this allusion, 
that Queen Elizabeth was the first, and indeed the only prince, who coined in 
England three-half-pence, and three-farthing pieces. She coined shillings, six- 
pences, groats, three-pences, two-pences, three-half-pence, pence, three-farthings, 
and half-pence; and these pieces all had her head, and were alternately with the 
rose behind, and without the rose. The shilling, groat, two-pence, penny, and half- 
penny had it not: the other intermediate coins, m., the sixpence, three-pence, three 
half-pence, and three-fartliings, had the rose.— Wareurton: The sticking roses 
about them was then all the court-fashion, as appears from this passage of the 
Confession CathoUque du S. de Sancy, 1 . ii, c. i: / Je luy apprish, mettre des roses 
par tons les coins’: i. e., in every place about him, says the speaker of one whom he 
had taught all the court fashions. [Does ‘ tons les coins ’ not rather mean in every cor^ 
ner or in all places? It can hardly refer to personal adornment, — Ed.] — Steevens, 
in corroboration of the appearance of the Tudor rose on coins of that time, 
quotes: ‘ — ^Here’s a three penny-piece for thy tidings. Firk. ’Tis but three half- 
pence I think: yes, ’tis three-pence; I smell the rose.’^ — Shoemaker^s Holiday, [ed. 
Pearson, vol. i, p. 41]. And in regard to the fashion mentioned by Warburton says: 
‘ The roses stuck in the ear were, I believe, only roses composed of ribbons. In Mar- 
ston’s You> Will is the following passage: “Dupatzo, the elder brother, the fool, 
he that bought the half-penny ribband,wearing it in his ear,” &c. [IV, i; ed. BuMen, 
p. 391]. Again, in Every Man out of his This ribband in my ear, or so.” 

[II, i; ed. Gifiord, p. 70]. Again, in Love and Honour (D’Avenant, 1649) ^ Lch on 
the left side, so rarely hung With ribbanding,” &c.’ [II, i; ed. Maidment, p. 128]. 
*I think I remember,’ adds Steevens, ‘among Vandyck’s pictures in the Duke 
of Queensbury’s collection at Ambrosbury, to have seen one, with the lock nearest 
the ear ornamented with ribbands which terminate in roses; and Burton, in Anatomy 
of Melancholy, says, “that it was once the fashion to stick real flow^ers in the ear.” 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i. 


42 

And to his fliape were heyre to all this land, 152 

152. And to his Jhape] And with his seq. 
shape Han. And, to his shape, Cap. et 152. this land] his land Vaugiian. 

At Kittling (vulgarly pionounced— Callage) , in Cambridgeshire, the magnificent 
residence of the first Lord North, there is a juvenile portrait (supposed to be of 
Queen Elizabeth), with a red rose sticking in her ear." — Malone: Marston in his 
Satires, 1598, alludes to this fashion as fantastical: 'Ribbanded ears, Grenada 
nether-stocks.’ [Scourge of Villanie: Address to Reader; ed. Hallowell, iii, 243.] 
And from the Epigrams of Sir John Davies, printed at Middleburgh, about 1598, it 
appears that some men of gallantry in our author’s time, suffered their ears to be 
bored, and wore their mistress’s silken shoe-strings in them. [‘Yet for thy sake I 
will not bore mine ear To hang thy dirty silken shoe-tires Ckexe:—Ignoto, Dyce’s 
Marlowe, iii, 263,— That such a fashion as tying ribbons in the ears was practised 
by the gallants of the latter years of Elizabeth and the early years of King James, 
these passages quoted by Steevens and Malone abundantly prove, but that there is 
a reference to this fashion in the present passage in King John is not, I think, so 
clearly evident. Steevens’s reference to the supposed portrait of Elizabeth with the 
red rose in the ear is much more to the point. Planche (ii, 232) alludes to this 
latter fashion, giving as illustration of it a portion of a contemporaneous portrait 
of Richard Lee wherein a rose is worn in the same way, appending as ejqplanation 
these lines from King John, There is, of course, the difficulty contained in Philip’s 
words ‘in my ear,’ but we need not place too literal a meaning on the preposition, 
since the reference is to the appearance of the face on a coin with a rose as its back- 
ground. Moreover, the word ‘rose’ applied to a bunch or knot of ribbon was not 
in use until after 1600, and even then was almost exclusively used to describe the 
ornament on a sKbe. It is noticeable that in none of the quotations given by 
Steevens and Malone is this decoration called by any other name than a ribbon, 
whereas Philip distinctly mentions that which is, presumably, the weD-knowm 
badge of the Tudors — a rose. The following passage in Burton’s Anatomy of 
Melancholy is, I think, the one to which Steevens refers: ‘’Tis the common humor 
of all suitors to trick up themselves, to be prodigal in apparel, pure lotus, neat, 
comb’d and curl’d, with powder’d hairs, comptus et calamistraius; with a long love- 
lock, a flowre in his ear, perfumed gloves, rings, scarfs, feathers, points, &c.’ — Part 
3, Sec. 2, Mem. 4, Subsec. i. — ^E d.] 

iSx. three farthings] Halliwell says that ‘the expression three farthings 
came to be used as typical of any thing or person very worthless or mean,’ quoting 
in support of this, from Nomenclator, 1585: ‘The least peece of coine or currant 
monie, as three-farthings with us.’—MoBEisuLy objects to Theobald’s explana- 
tion, as in the foregoing note, on the ground that ‘it seems a little hazy; for the 
rose was on other coins, and not only on the three-farthing piece; so why should 
laughers be particularly reminded of the latter? On the other hand, if we suppose 
the joke to mean that the rose was to the face as a halfpenny to a farthing, this is 
just the kind of disproportion which the nund of the lieges would be prepared duly to 
resent and stigmatise.’ — [Is it necessary to limit the exact meaning conveyed by this 
contemptuous remark? It hardly needs Halliwell’s assertion that ‘ three-farthings ’ 
was symbolical of paltriness; the very name of the coin suggests it, conveying the 
idea of smallness and incompleteness; it is not even so much as a penny; and the 
triplex dental sound of the words is almost the same as fie! or faugh!— Ed.] 



ACT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


43 


153 


Would I might neuer ftirre from off this place, 
I would giue it euery foot to haue this face: 

It would not be fir nobbe in any cafe. 


i53‘. W ould.^.^placeX In parentheses, 
Del. 

Would\ Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
i, Han. Coll. Dyce, Hal. Wh. i, Sta. 
Cam.+, Del. ’Would, Theob. ii. et cet. 
154. I would., .euery] Ff, Rowe, Knt, 


155 

Cam.-h. JW...ei>Vy Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Johns. Fd... every Cap. et cet. 
xS4.face] hand Fleay. 

155.//] Knt. Deli. / Ff. et cet. 
fir nohhe] Sir Nobbe F4, Rowe,H-. 
sir Nob Cap. et seq. 


152. his shape . . . this land] Malone: There is no noun to which 'were^ can 
belong, unless the personal pronoun in the last line but one be understood here. I 
suspect that our author wrote ‘And though his shape were heir to all his land.’ 
Thus the sentence proceeds in one uniform tenour — ‘and if my legs were,’ &c . — ^and 
though his shape,’ &c. — M. Mason {Comments on Beaumont d* Fletcher: Appendix, 
p. 35): The difficulty in this passage arises from a transposition of the words ‘his’ 
and ‘this’; it should run thus: ‘And to this shape were heir to all his land.’ 

‘this shape’ Faulconbridge means the shape he had just been describing. — 'v 
Steevens: The old reading is the true one. ‘To his shape’ means, in addition to 
it. So, in Tro. d* Cress.: ‘The Greeks are strong, and skilful to their strength, 
Fierce to their skill, and to their fierceness valiant.’ — I, i, 7. [For other exam- 
ples of this construction, see Abbott, § 185.] 

iS4> 155* I would ... in any case] W. G. Stone {Notes b* Queries, 1886, 
VII, i, 143) : Halle relates that Dunois, natural son of Louis, Duke of Orleans, 
preferred, like the Bastard in King John, a splendid illegitimacy to a respectable 
name and an inheritance attached thereto. When Dunois was a year old his 
mother and nominal father, ‘the lorde of Cauny,’ died, shortly after Orleans’s 
murder in 1407. The infant’s paternity was debated before the Parliament of 
Paris by his mother’s relatives and Cauny ’s next of kin, but the question remained 
undecided until Dunois was eight years old, ‘at whiche tyme,’ says Halle, ‘it was 
demaunded of hym openly whose sonne he was: his frendes of his mothers side ad- 
uertised him to require a day, to be aduised of, so great an answer, whiche he asked, 

-& to hym it was graunted. ... At the daie assigned, . . . when the question was 
repeated hym again, he boldly answered, “my harte geueth me, & my noble corage 
telleth me, that I am the sonne of the noble Duke of Orleaunce, more glad to be his 
Bastarde, with a meane liuyng, then the lawfall soime of that coward cuckolde 
Cauny, with his four thousand crounes [a year].” ’—Halle’s Chronicle, ed. 1809, pp. 
144, 145. What authority had Halle for this story? I have not found it in Mon- 
strelet and his continuators {Chroniques Nationales Francaise, ed. Buchon), A 
similar story is recorded by Stow, under the year 1213: ‘Morgan Prouost of 
Beuerley, Brother to K. John, was elected byshop of Durham, but he comming to 
Rome to be consecrated returned againe without it, for that he was a bastard, and 
K. Henry, father to K. John, had begotten him of the wife of one Radulph Bloeth, 
yet would the Pope have dispensed with him, if he would have called himself the 
son of the knight, and not of the king. But he vsing the aduise of one William of 
Lane his Clarke, aunswered, that for no worldly promotion, he would deny the 
kings blood.’ — Stow’s Annales, 1605, p. 256, — Stow’s authority appears to be Lib[er] 
Bermond[sey]. — ^P. Simpson {Notes fir Queries, 1900, IX, v, 393) quotes a passage 
from B. Riche: The Irish Hvbbvb, 1617 i wherein is related an incident from a 



44 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i. 


Elinor. I like thee well : wilt thou forfake thy fortuae, 156 
Bequeath thy land to him, and follow me? 

I am a Souldier,and now bound to France. 

Bajl. Brother, take you my land, He take my chance; . 
Your face hath got fiue hundred pound a yeere, 160 

Yet fell your face for fiue pence and 'tis deere; 

Madam, He follow you vnto the death. 

Elinor. Nay, I would haue you go before me thither. 163 


156. well: w-ill] well. Wilt Johns 
Coll. Wh. i, Ktly, Sta. Del. Fleay, 
Dono. 

fortune] fortunne Fa. 

159, 162. lie] rie F4. 

^-60. pound] pounds Steev. Varr. 


Sing. Coll. Wh. i, Ktly, Huds. ii, Del. 
Dono. Craig. 

160. a yeere] a-yeat K.nt, Sta. 
Fleay. 

161. deere:] deere. Fa. dear. F3F4 et 
seq. 


.^‘'French Historic/ closely following that given by Stone from Halle’s Chronicle^ save 
/that the names are changed from the Duke of Orleans to the ‘Duke of Guyses’ 
and Cauny to ‘Monsieur Granduyle.’ The reply of the Bastard is almost in the 
same words as in Halle. [It is neither a profitable nor a pleasant task to collect 
further examples of such a choice as Philip Faulconbridge’s; but the mere mention 
of the name of William D’Avenant will doubtless recall another case, certainly more 
widely known than any of those just given. See, if needful, Diet. NaU ^iog.^ s. v. 
D’Avenant, William, vol. V, p. 552,— En.] 

154. face] Fleay: My emendation [hand for ‘face’] is necessary for the rhyme, 
and also for the antithesis to ‘foot,’ which, after Shakespeare’s usual custom, is 
used in a double sense, one meaning being merely glanced at. 

155. It would not] Malone: I am not sure that the correction [by the editor of 
Fa] is necessary. — The Cambridge Edd. {Note VII.) call attention to a like apparent 
misprint in Twelfth Night: ‘I cannot be so answered.’ — II, iv, 87, where all the 
Folios read ‘It cannot,’ etc. In the present passage Knight and Delius (ed. i.) 
retain the reading of the Folio and thus make ‘It would’ refer to ‘this face.’ 

155. sir nobbe] Capell (I, pt. ii, p. 118) : ‘Nob’ is a cant word for head; and from 
its relation in sound to another cant word Bob for Robert, it may well be that that 
name too is alluded to, as well as the brother’s face, who was a knight and a Robert. 
[Has not Capell confused the father with the younger son? King John later makes 
the distinction between Philip, after his knighting, and Robert, who is left merely 
as a squire. — ^Knight, and the Cowden-Clarkes likewise, interpret ‘Nob’ here as 
the cant word for head, apparently independently. Excellent as the suggestion is, it 
is quite untenable, as the word ‘nob,’ in this sense, was unknown before 1700. — Ed.] 

157. Bequeath] Murray (N. E. D., s. v. II, 4.): To make a formal assigna- 
tion of property of which one is possessed to anyone, so as to pass to him at once: 
To transfer, hand over, make over. (Obs.) [The present line quoted.] 

162. vnto the death] Compare: ‘You are both sure and will assist me? Conr, 
To the death, my lord .’ — Much Ado, I, iii,, 71. 

163. Nay . . . before me thither] Deighxon: Elinor, playing upon his words, 
says: ‘ Nay, I would rather you should precede me thither, i. e., on the road to death,’ 
to which the Bastard, keeping up the joke, answers, ‘our rustic manners teach us 
to ^ve precedence to our superiors.’— [Deighton is possibly right; at the same time, 


ACT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


45 


Baft, Our Country manners giue our betters way. 

K,Iohn, What is thy name? 1^5 

Baft, Philip my Liege, fo is my name begun, 

Philipigood. old Sir Roberts wiues eldefl fonne. 

Klohn^ From henceforth beare his name 
Whofe forme thou beareft : 

Kneele thou downe Philipp but rife more great, 170 

Arife Sir Richard, and Plantagenet, 


166. Philip] Philip, F,. 

Liege,., .begun,] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
4 ’. liege, — ...begun, — Dyce, Hah Sta. 
Words, liege,... begun; Cam.-p. liege; 
...begun Cap. et cet. 

167. Philip] Om. Dono. 
wiues] wife’s Rowe et seq. 
eldeji] eld’st Dyce ii, iii, Fleay. 

true eldest Dono. 

168. 169. From. ..beareft] One line 


Pope et seq. 

169. beareft] Ff, Rowe, Knt, Coll. 
Dyce i, Wh. i, Sta. Del. Craig, bear’st 
Pope et set. 

170. downe] down, Ktly. 

rife] Ff, Rowe, Mai. Var. '21, 
Coll. Cam.-f* rise up Pope,-p, Cap. 
Marsh, to rise Ktly. arise Var. ’73 et 
cet. 

1 71. [knighting him. Capell. 


since ‘to the death’ was a familiar phrase, Elinor may refer to the expedition to 
France, and object to the Bastard’s too literal interpretation of her word ‘follow,’ 
which she here uses in the sense of entering her service. — Ed.] 

164. Our . . . betters] Wright: ‘Betters’ in this sense will never become obso- 
lete so long as it is retained in the Church Catechism. 

167. eldest] Walker (Vers., 167) quotes the present line among others as ex- 
amples wherein for the sake of the metre the e in superlatives is often suppressed. 
(See also, I, ii, 189.) 

170. but rise more great] As wdll be seen in the Text. Notes there have been va- 
rious suggestions to amend the iregularity in the metre of this line.— -Malone’s 
remark that ‘more is here used as a dissyllable/ provoked a characteristically sar- 
castic retort from Ritson (Cursory Criticisms, p. 61): ‘What an admirable thing is 
it to have a delicate ear! A plain hobbling fellow unblessed with that advantage 
would have only thought the little word up wanting, and spoiled, of course, a most 
excellent monodissyllable.’— Steevens reprints Malone’s note, not wishing, as he 
says, to ‘suppress it/ though he does ‘not concur.’ Malone’s last word on the sub- 
ject appears in the Variorum of 1821; where he still maintains his preference for 
the dissyllable, and adds that ‘ Colonel Roberts suggested to him to read rise up,’ 
thus ignoring Ritson and inadvertently betraying the fact that he had not consulted 
the texts of his predecessors, Pope, Theobald, Hanmer, Warburton, Johnson, and 
Capell.— Abbott (§ 506) quotes this line among otheis as an illustration of a gesture 
used to supply the place of a syllable or foot in lines with four accents where there 
is an interruption; thus here the King’s action of dubbing Philip at the words 
‘But rise,’ etc., fills out the line. — Ed. 

1 71. Plantagenet] Malone: It is a common opinion that Plantaganet was the 
surname of the ‘royal house of England from the time of King Henry II.; but it 
is, as Camden observes in his Remaines Concerning Britaine, 1614, a popular mis- 
take. Plantaganet was not a family name, but a nick-name, by which a grandson 
of Geoffrey, the first Earl of Anjou, was distinguished, from his wearing a broom- 
stalk in his bonnet. But this name never borne either by the fii^t Earl of 



46 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, SC. i. 


Baft. Brother by th’mothers fide, giue me your hand, 172 
My father gaue me honor, yours gaue land: 

Now blefled be the houre by night or day 

When I was got, Sir Robert was away. 175 

Ele. The very fpirit of Plantaginet: 

I am thy grandame Richard, call me fo. 

Baft. Madam by chance, but not by truth, what tho; 
Something about a little from the right, I 79 


172-184. Om. Words. 

172, Brother] Brother — Sta. 

ih'] Ff, Rowe, Pope,-}-, Wh. i, 
Fleay, Huds, ii. the Cap. et cet. 

173, land:] Ff, Knt, Sta. Huds. Cam. 
-f , Del. Rife, Craig, land : — Cap. Var. 
’78, ’85, Ran. Mai. Steev. Varr. Sing. 
Huds. land. Rowe et cet. 

174, 175. Om. Dono. 

174. blejjed] hlessM Dyce, Huds. ii. 
he] hy Pope. 

houre...day] F3F3, Fleay. hour.., 
dayj Sing. Huds- hour,,„day, F4 et cet. 
I 7 S- ioh] got Fj, Coll. 

away.] away! Han. Warb. Johns. 
Var. "73, Dyce, Hal. Wh. i, Cam.-f , 
Del. Huds. ii, Rife, Craig. 


176. Plantaginet:] Plantaganet. Fa- 
F3, Fleay. Plantaganet: F4, Rowe. 
Plantaganet! Pope et seq. 

177. grandame] grandam F4, Rowe, 
Pope,+, Dyce, Hal. Cam. 4 “» Del. 
Coll, iii, Huds. ii. 

grandame Richard,] F2F3. (rmw- 
dam, Richard, F4, Rowe. Grandam; 
Richard, Pope,+. grandame, Richard; 
Cap. et seq. 

178. truth, what tho;] Ff, Rowe, Pope. 
truth; what tho^? Theob. Johns. Var. ’73. 
truth: — What tho^? Cap. truth. What 
though? Ktly, Sta. Fleay. truth; what 
though? Warb. et cet. 

179. about] F2F3, Pope, about, F4 
et cet. 


Anjou, or by King Henry II, the son of that Earl by the Empress Maude, he being 
always called Henry Fitz-Empress; Ms son, Richard Cceur-de-Lion; and the prince 
who is exhibited in the play before us, John Sans-terre, or Lackland . — [James Tait 
{Diet, of Nat. Biog., s. v. Plantaganet, Family of) says that the family did not assume 
the surname until the middle of the fifteenth century, and that the explanation of 
its traditional derivation from Geoffrey’s adorning his cap with a sprig of the p anta 
genista * cannot be traced to any mediaeval source. One version ascribes it to his 
‘^having applied some twigs of the plant to his person by way of penance” {Ves- 
tigia Anglicana, i, 266 ).’ — Ed.] 

178. by chance, but not by truth] Johnson: That is, I am your grandson, 
madam, by chance, but mthy honesty; what then?— Moberly: Elinor of Guienne 
was not likely to object much to this freedom of tone, considering the youthful 
passages which had led to her divorce from Louis le Jeune, after the second Crusade. 

179. Something about, etc.] Johnson: TMs speech, composed of allusive and 

proverbial sentences, is obscure. I am, says the sprightly knight, your grandson, 
a little irregularly, but every man cannot get what he wishes the legal way. He 
that dares not go about his designs by day^ must make his in the mg/z/; he, 

to whom the door is shut, must climb the window, or leap the hatch. This, however,, 
shall not depress me; for the world never enquires how any man got what he is 
known to possess, but allows that to have is to have, however it was caught, and 
that he who wins shot well, whatever was Ms skill, whether the arrow fell near the 
mark, ox far off it. — ^W eight: The proverbial sayings which follow are characteristic 



ACT I, SC, i.] 


OF KING lOHN 


47 

i8o 


In at the window, or elfe ore the hatch : 

Who dares not ftirre by day,mufl walke by night, 

And haue is haue, how euer men doe catch : 

Neere or farre off, well wonne is flill well fhot. 

And I am I, how ere I was begot. 

K*Iohn. GoOf Faulconbridgejiiow hafl thou thy defire, 185 
A landleffe Knight, makes thee a landed Squire: 


180, 182. hatch:.., catch:] hatch:. ..catch. 
Coll. Wii. i, Del. hatch.. ..catch. Ktly. 

183. well jfhot] wdUshot Pope, Theob. i. 

184. how ere] how eWe F4. howder 
Rowe et seq. 

185. Faulconbridge] Falconhridge 
Dyce, Hal. Huds. ii, Words. 


186. Knight,] Knight Rowe ii, et 
seq. 

Squire:] ^Squire: Pope,+, Cap. 
^squire . — Var. ^78, ’85, Ran. Mai. 
Steev. Varr. Sing. Coll. Hal. Wb. i. 
squire. Elnt, Dyce, Ktly, Sta. Huds. 
Cam. 4 “. 


of the Bastard’s rusticity of breeding. [Wright compares Coriol., I, i, 199: 'They 
said they were an-hungry; sighed forth proverbs.’] 

180. In at the window] Steevens: These expressions mean, to le horn out of 
wedlock. So, m The Family of Love, Middleton, 1608: 'Woe worth the time that 
ever I gave suck to a child that came in at the window!’ [IV, iii, 113; ed. Bullen, p. 
83.] So, in Northward Hoe, Dekker & Webster, 1607: ‘ — ^kindred that comes in 
o’er the hatch.’ [I, i; ed. Pearson, p. 7.] Such another phrase occurs in Anything 
for a Quid Life, [Middleton, 1662]: ' — then you keep children in the name of your 
own, which she suspects came not in at the right door.’ [Ill, ii, 215; ed. Bullen, 
p. 299.] Again, in The Witches of Lancashire, Hey wood & Brome, 1634: ' — It 
appears then by your discourse that you came in at the window.’ [I, i; ed. Pear- 
son, p. 174.1 Again, '—to escape the dogs hath leaped in at a window — ’Tis thought 
you came into the world that way,— because you are a bastard.’ [Ibid., II, i; ed. 
Pearson, p. 198.] 

181. Who dares . . . by night] Johnson’s paraphrase of this line, 'He that 
dares not go about his designs by day, must make his motions in the night,’ leaves 
it much as it was before, without a hint as to its special application. It is, how- 
ever, with the greatest diffidence that I offer a possible explanation of this puzzling 
phrase — a proverb of the Bastard’s own invention, as far as I have been able to as- 
certain. Thus: There is a very marked antithesis between the first part of the 
sentence and the second half. He who does not even dare to move in the day-time 
will be compelled to walk in the dark. That is, in seeking to avoid that which is 
easy, he must do that which is difficult; and Philip thus applies it to his case. 
If he had not dared to renounce the ownership of lands and money, mere outward 
ornaments, he would have been forced to forego the much higher honor of being 
Coeur de Lion’s son. — ^E d. 

183. Neere or farre off] Page dissents from Johnson’s explanation ('he who 
wins shot well whether the arrow fell near the mark or far off it’) on the ground 
that 'near or far off’ father means whether the contestant were near or far of, 
as the winning depends on the arrow falling near or on the mark. Page is undoubt- 
edly right. A contestant whose arrow fell wide of the mark would never be de- 
clared a winner. — ^E d. 

186. a landlesse Knight] John Hunter refers this to the king himself on ac- 



48 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I. sc. i. 


Come Madam, and come Richard, we muft fpeed 187 

For France, for France, ior it is more then need. 

Bajl, Brother adieu, good fortune come to thee, 

For thou waft got i^th way of honefly. 190 

Exeunt all hut bajlard. 

Baft, A foot of Honor better then I was. 

But many a many foot of Land the worfe* 193 

187. Maiaw,... Richard,] Madam,... 

Richard; F2. madam, — ...Richard, — 

Cap. Madam, — ...Richard; Dyce, Hal. 

Sta. Huds. ii, Words. 

188. For France, for France] For 
France, — for France! Hal. For France, 
for France! Sta. 

then] than F4. 

189. 190. Om. Dono. 

189. Brother adieu,] Ff, Rowe, Pope. 

Brother, adieu. Ktly. Brother, adieu; 

Theob. et cet. 

thee,] Fi, Rowe, Pope,+j Var. 

’78, ^85. Coll, thee! Cap. et cet. 

190. Om. Words. 
waft] was Pop€,+ ( — Var. ^73). 

count of his being known as Sans-terre or Lackland, but, as both Rolfe and Deighton 
remark, it can refer to Philip only, who by resigning his lands has made his brother 
a ‘landed squire.* 

189. good fortune come to thee] Collier: Alluding to the proverb that ‘bas- 
tards are born lucky.* Philip wishes his brother good fortune, because Robert was 
not a bastard; had he been illegitimate, the wish, according to the proverb, would 
have been needless. [This may be called a superstitious belief rather than a 
proverb. It is given in Lean’s ii, 609.—E1).] 

19 1. Exeunt all but bastard] Capell (I, pt ii, p. iiS): To this editor [this] 
appears a direction of mere convenience, put in by the players; his cause of think- 
ing so, this; The letters [Scene m.] that stand before: ‘A foot of honour,’ etc. . . . 
indicate an intended re-entry; [see Text. Notes] which some words of both the 
speeches before it make apparently proper, and has this propriety further — in 
admitting a new scene for the ‘Lady’ and her servant to enter on, which the first 
was most unfitted for certainly. The instant coming-in of a character who has but 
just made his exit is faulty, but not without its examples. [In support of this, see 
Macbeth, V, viii, where, after Macbeth’s defiance of Macduff, the stage-direction in 
the Folio reads: ^Exeunt ftghiingf which is immediately followed by: 'Enter 
Fighting and Macbeth slaine. Retreat, and Flourish^ etc. — EdJ 

192. A foot of Honor] Johnson: That is, a step, un pas. 

193. many a many] This is the only passage in Shakespeare wherein precisely 
this construction occurs. It is, moreover, the only example quoted by Bradley 
{N. E. D.) under ‘many’ used emphatically. — Schmldx compares Hamlet, III, iii, 
9: ‘Most holy and religious fear it is To keep those many many bodies safe,’ — 


190. Fih] F2F3. i’th F4, Rowe, Pope, 
+, Wh. i, Fleay. i’ the Cap. et cet. 

honefty] honesty! Var. ’73, ’78, 
’85, Rann. 

191. all but baftard] Om. Cap. Dono. 
Scene hi. Pope, Han. Warb. Johns. 
Scene ii. The same. Ante-room of 

the same. Enter Bastard. Capell. 

Scene ii. Before the Castle. Enter 
Richard. Donovan. 

192. Baft. A foot...] A foot... Rowe, 
4 -, Varr. Mai. Steev. Varr. Sing, Knt, 
Coll, Dyce. 

193. many a many] many, a many 
Pope, many, many a Han. many, ah! 
wafjy a Coll. ii. (MS.). 



ACT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


49 


Weil, now can I make any loane a Lady, 

Good den Sir Richard ^ Godamercy fellow, I9S 


194. Lady,] Lady; Ff, Rowe. lady. 
Pope,-}"? Knt, Ktly, Cam.-}-, Fleay. 
lady: — Cap. et cet. 

195-215. Mnemonic Warb. 

195. Good den] Good denne F2F3. 
Good denne, F4. Good-denn Rowe. 
Good-den Pope,+, Cap. Good den, Var. 
^73 et cet. 

Richard,] Robert Johns. Rich- 


ard! Cam.-h, Ktly. Richard. Coll. 
Huds. Sta. Wh. i, Del Fleay. 

195. Godamercy fellow)^ — Goda- 
mercy fellow, Pope,-f, Knt, Coll, ii, iii, 
Hal. Sta. — 'God-a-mercy, fellow !^ — 
Wh. Ktly, Cam.-f , Huds. ii. God-a- 
mercy, fellow; Fie. — God-a-mercy, fel- 
low, — Cap. et cet. 


Abbott (§ 87) says: was frequently inserted before a numeral adjective for the 

purpose of indicating that the objects enumerated are regarded collectively as one, 
. . . The fl in “a many men” is perhaps thus to be explained.’ Abbott quotes from 
this play, ^ A many thousand warlike French,’ IV, ii, 209, and, as a still more curious 
example, the present passage, adding: ‘Some explain “a many” by reference to 
the old noun “many,” “a many men,” for “a many (of) men.” And the word is 
thus used: “A many of our bodies,” Henry V: IV, iii, 95.’ — [Abbott does not, I 
think, intend this as an explanation of the line under discussion; the use of the 
singular after the second ‘many’ precludes this. The lack of examples seems to 
point to this repetition being here used merely for emphasis; and that it is not a 
peculiar construction. — Ed.] 

194. Well, now can I make] Davies {Dram, MiscelL, i, 16) tells an odd anecdote 
in regard to Spranger Barry’s first appearance as the Bastard: ‘It v/as a matter of 
astonishment to every spectator that Barry, wdth the superior advantage of a fine 
person, should make so little of the Bastard. He seemed in that part to be quite 
out of his road: all the humour, gaiety, ease and gallantry of Falconbridge were 
lost in Barry. . . . On his endeavoring to repeat the following words in the First 
Act of the play, ‘Well, now can I make any Joan a lady,’ he was so embarrassed 
in the" delivery of this single line that, not being able to repeat the words, he was 
forced to quit the stage, amidst the general applauses of the audience, who saw and 
felt his uneasiness. But, what is still more surprising, after going off and returning 
three several times, with the same kind encouragement of the spectators, he was 
forced to give it up; and I believe he did not recover himself till he was relieved by 
the entrance of Lady Falconbridge.’ 

194. any loane] That is, any peasant girl; Joan was as common a name for a 
woman as Jack was for a man. — ^Wright compares: ‘Some men must ioVe my lady 
and some Joan.’““X£?z>e’x I/a&owr’i-, III, i, 207 .~Ed. 

195. Good den] That is, Good e^en, good even; fox examples, see Shakespeare 

passim,, ■ ■ 

195. Sir Richard] Steevens: In Act IV, [scene iii, 1 . 45] Salisbury calls him 
Sir Richard and the King has just knighted him by that name. The modern 
editors arbitrarily read, sir Robert. Faulconbridge is now entertaining himself 
with ideas of greatness, suggested by his recent knighthood. — ‘ Good den, sir Rich- 
ard,’ he supposes to be the salutation of a vassal; ‘God-a-mercy, fellow,’ his own 
supercilious reply to it. [The only editor, ancient or modem, whose text reads 
‘sir Robert’ is Dr Johnson, later Steevens’s colleague in editing the Variorum of 
1773. It is doubtless a typographical error; but Steevens was quite well aware that 



THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i. 


SO 

And if his name be George^ lie call him Peter; 196 

For new made honor doth forget mens names: 

’Tis two refpe< 5 liue, and too fociable 198 

196. 7 /d He Fa. Tie F4. 198. too Jociahle] unsociable Pope, 

197. n&w made\ new-made Pope et seq. Theob. Han. Warb. Johns, insociable 

198. two\ Fi. Mason, too sociable. Coll. MS. 

Johnson printed from Theobald’s second edition, and without examining that text 
was thus, perhaps, misled. Steevens did not correct this mistake in any subsequent 
edition. — E d.] 

198. respectiue] Craigie {N. E. D,, s. v. 2.): Of conduct, etc. Marked by re- 
gardful care or attention; heedful. Now rare; 1598 R. Haydocke tr. Lomazzo II, 
65: *To be very pleasant, but with such respective moderation, that their laughter 
exceed not.’ 

199. your conuersion] Steevens: [The Folio reading] may be right. It seems 
to mean, his late change of condition from a private gentleman to a knight. — [As 
may be seen in the Text. Notes Steevens was not fully convinced of the correctness 
of the Folio until his own edition in 1793.— Ed.] — ^Malone: Mr Pope, without 
necessity, reads — ^for your conversing. Our author has here, I think, used a license 
of phraseology that he often takes. The Bastard has just said that ‘new-made 
honour forget men’s names’; and he proceeds as if he had said, ‘does not re- 
member men’s names.* To remember the name of an inferior, he adds, has too much 
of the respect which is paid to superiors, and of the friendly familiarity of equals, 
for your conversion, — ^for your present condition, now converted from the situation 
of a common man to the rank of a knight. [Knight and R. G. White also thus 
interpret that ‘forget’ is here equivalent to not to remember, without reference, 
however, to Malone’s note. — Ed.]— Walker {Crit., ii, 43) quotes this passage as 
an example of the ‘abstract for the concrete (understanding “conversion” in the 
sense of change); though this latter seems harsh.’ [See also I, ii, 257, 258.] — 
Collier,' whose MS, corrector places a period after ‘sociable,’ 1 . 198, and here reads 
diversion instead of ‘conversion,’ thus interprets: ‘It was common to entertain 
“picked men of countries,” for the diversion of the company at the tables of the 
higher orders, and this may be what the Bastard is referring to in the last two 
lines, while the sense of the first two is completed at “sociable.” We are, neverthe- 
less, disposed to adhere to the old reading.’ — Singer {Sh. Vindicated, p. 83), com- 
menting on this correction, says: ‘The punctuation in the First Folio is entirely 
against this innovation, which may have been probably suggested by Pope, who 
took the same erroneous view of the passage and read “for your conversing.” 
Malone’s view of the old authentic reading is quite satisfactory.’— [The sting con- 
tained in this consists, of course, in the hint that a modern editor suggested the 
change to the unknown corrector. Collier frequently remarks that Theobald and 
Pope have been anticipated by some of the suggested readings of his MS. corrector; 
Singer is, however, here comparatively mild, in fact, many of his comments unfor- 
tunately manifest quite as much of a spirit of Vindictiveness to Collier as a Vindi- 
cation of Shakespeare.— Ed.]— Knight (Stratford Sh., i, 255): And so this feeble 
platitude of the diverting traveller is to supersede the Shakespearean satire, that 
when there is a ‘conversion’— a change of condition in a man— to remember names 
is too respective, and too sociable, for new-made honour.— Halliwell: The prob- 
ability is that ‘conversion’ is an archaic term used in the sense of conversation. 



ACT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


SI 


For your conuerfion, now your traueller, 

Hee and his tooth-picke at my worfhips meffe, 200 

199. For your conuerfion^] For Conner- Var. ^78, ^85. convertion, Hal. (mis- 
sation. Lloyd. print?), conversion. Cap. et cet. diver- 

conuerjion^ conversing. Pope, 4 -, sion Coll. MS. 

So, in Englishmen for my Money j Hmpudent villaine, and lascivious girles, I have 
ore-heard your vild conversions,* [I, i; Hazlitt-Dods., x, p. 477 ]. — ^Murray {N. E. 
D., s. V. Conner sion j I. 5. Rhet.) quotes Huloet, 1552: ‘Conuersion, or speakynge 
one to another,* and Wilson, Rhetoric^ 107b: ^Conversion is an ofte repeatyng of the 
laste worde, and is contrarie to that whiche went before.* This, among the several 
senses of ‘ conversion * given by Murray, is the nearest to that of conversation . — 
Fleay: Should there not be a period at ‘sociable,* and in that case may not ‘con- 
version’ mean conversation, as converse does now? Mr P. A. Daniel thinks we 
should read convertant, one returned from travel. [Though Fleay does not refer to 
Collier’s MS. correction, it is, perhaps, unjust to decide that he was quite unaware 
that he was anticipated in this conjectural punctuation. Daniel’s suggestion is 
not among his Conjectural Emendations published in 1870; but as Fleay acknowledges 
in his Preface, and in the Appendix to his edition, indebtedness to Daniel for sug- 
gestions and help in the preparation of the text of the Troublesome Raigne, it is reason- 
able to suppose that this conjectural reading is contained in a separate communica- 
tion. — Ed.] — ^Wright: That is, for one who has undergone such a change of rank 
as you have. It may be that ‘your’ is used in the colloquial indefinite sense of 
that which is familiar to everyone; just as in the next sentence ‘your traveller,’ 
and as Bottom says {Mid. N. Dream, IV, i, 36): ‘I could munch your good dry 
oats.’ It does not appear certain that in the passage [quoted by Halliwell] ‘con- 
version’ is intended to be equivalent to conversation. [The context shows, I think, 
that ‘vile conversions’ may be understood in the sense of wicked changes of condi- 
tions or thoughts, more fitly than as conversations . — Ed.] 

199. now your traueller] Johnson: It is said, in AlVs Well, that ‘a traveller is 
a good thing after dinner.’ In that age of newly excited curiosity one of the 
entertainments at great tables seems to have been the discourse of a traveller. — 
Wright points out that the quotation to which Johnson refers is as follows: ‘A 
good traveller is something at the latter end of a dinner.’ — ^II, v, 30. Johnson 
evidently trusted to his memory. — Steevens likewise quotes from The Partyng of 
Frendes, a Copy of Verses subjoined to Churchyard’s Praise and Reporte of Maister 
Martyne Forboisher^s Voyage to Meta Incognita, &c., 1578: ‘ — ^and all the parish 
throw At church or market in some sort, will talke of trav’lar now.’ [Steevens’s 
faculty of supplying an apt quotation is remarkable, but this is not a happy in- 
stance of it; the last words here evidently mean that everyone is talking about 
the traveller, not that the traveller is discoursing of his adventures. — Staunton 
quotes, more oppositely, from Edward II: 'Gan. What art thou? M an. A traveller. 
Gav. Let me see— thou wouldst do weU To wait at my trencher, and tell me lies at 
dinnertime.’ — ^I, i. — Ed.] 

200. Hee and his tooth-picke] Johnson: It has been already remarked that to 
pick the tooth, and wear a piqued beard, were, in that time, marks of a man’s 
affecting foreign fashions. [The remarks to which Johnson refers may be found in 
his own edition, vol. ii, pp. 181 and 325; Or in Variorum 1821, vol. iv, p. 394; and 
vol. xiv, p. 395.— Ed.]— Steevens: Among Gascoigne’s poems I find one entitled: 


52 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i. 


And when my knightly ftomacke is fuffis^d, 201 

Why then I fucke my teeth, and catechize 

My picked man of Countries : my deare fir, 203 


201. And] — And Neils. 

203. picked] piked Pope, Han. Warb. 
Johns. Cap. Varr. Ran, picqued Theob. 
pkkhd Dyce, Sta. Fie. Huds. ii, Words. 
Dono. 


203- Countries: my.,] Ff, Rowe. 
cou 7 ttries.-~-' My:... Wh. i, Ktly, Neils. 
countries: ^My... Sta. Cam.-j-, Fleay, 
Huds. ii. countries y—^y... Pope et 
cet. 


Councell given to Maister Bartholomew Withipoll, a little before his latter Journey 
to Geane, 1572. The following lines may, perhaps, be acceptable to the reader 
who is curious enough to enquire ahout the fashionable follies imported in that age: 
‘Now, Sir, if I shall see your mastership 
Come home disguis'd, and clad in quaint array: 

As %vith a pike-tooth byting on your iippe 
Your brave mustachios turned the Turkie way,' [ed. Cunliffe, i, 346]. 
Again in Jonson: Cynthia* s Revels: ‘A traveller, one so made out of the 
mixture and shreds of forms, that himself is truly deformed. He walks 
most commonly with a clove or pick-tooth in his mouth.' [II, i; ed. Gif- 
ford, p. 264. Steevens gives two other passages wherein the tooth-pick is men- 
tioned as the distinctive mark of the traveller, and Malone quotes from Over- 
bury's Characters {Atticlcy an Affected Traveller): ‘his tooth-pick is a main part, of 
his behaviour.’ — Raleigh (p. 58); In this age of cheap printed information 
we are too apt to forget how large a part of his knowledge Shakespeare must have 
gathered in talk. Books were licensed and guarded; but in talk there was free 
trade. He must often have listened to tales, like those told by Othello, of the 
wonders of the New World. He must often have seen the affected traveller, de- 
scribed in King JohUy dallying with his tooth-rpick at a great man’s table, full of 
elaborate compliment. The knowledge that he gained from such talk, if it was 
sometimes remote and curious, was neither systematic nor accurate; and this is the 
knowledge reflected in the plays. 

200. at my worships messe] Malone: This means, at that part of the table 
where I, as a knight, shall be placed, ‘Your worship’ was the regular address to a 
knight or esquire in our author's time, as ‘your honour' was to a lord. [‘Your 
worship* appears to have been the commonest form of address from an inferior to 
a superior. Notice, for example, its indiscriminate use throughout Merry W'ives. 
Slender and Shallow are thus uniformly addressed, and also Fenton by Mistress 
Quickly. — ^En.] — ^Weight: A mess was properly a party of four, as at the Inns of 
Court still, and Nares {Gloss.) says that at great dinners the guests were always 
arranged in fours. — Rev. John Hunter, doubtless on the ground that this sentence 
lacks a verb, interprets this as meaning: ‘He and his tooth-pick mess at my vrorships 
house, or table.* [This is, I think, untenable, as Murray (iV. E. D.) does not record 
any use of the word in this sense prior to 1700.-— Ed.] — ^Moore-Smith: I incline to 
think that after ‘messe’ a line has dropped out of the text. 

202. I sucke my teeth] R. G. White: The travelled man picked his teeth: the 
home-bred man sucked his. [Rev. John Hunter makes the same suggestion that 
‘'picked* in the next line is used as a word-play on ‘tooth-pick’; but is not this too 
slight and trivial? See next note. — ^E d.] 

203. picked] Murray {N. E. D., s, v. 2.): Adorned, ornate, trimmed; exquisitely 



ACT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


53 


Thus leaning on mine elbow I begin, 

I fliall befeeeh you ; that is queftion now, 205 

And then comes anfwer like an Abfey booke: 

O fir, fayes anfwer, at your befl command, 

At your employment, at your feruice fir: 

No fir, faies queftion, I fweet fir at yours, 209 


205 . 1 JhalLn.now] Misplaced in Sing, 
ii, to follow 1. 234. 

you; that] Ff, Rowe, Fleay. you, 
— that Pope et cet. 

206. Abfey booke] F2. Absey-book F3- 
F4, Rowe, Knt, Sing, ii, Coll, ii, iii, Hal. 
Wh. i, Ktiy, Del. a-b-c, book Cap. 
Abcee-book Dyce, -Words. Absey book 
Cam. 4 ', Fie. A B C-book f'ope et cet. 


208, 209. fir:...yourSf] Sir: — ...yours^ 
— Popej-F* sir: — ...yours: Var. ’78, ’85, 
Ran. Mai. Steev. Varr, Sing. Coil, i, ii, 
Sta. Huds. sir:. ..yours. Coll, iii. 

209. No fir^] Ff, Pope. NOi Sir, 
Rowe et cet. 

I fweet fir] I sweety Sir, F4, Rowe 
i. J, sweet Sir, Rowe ii. et seq. 


fashioned or apparelled, spruce, refined, exquisite, nice, finical, particular, fastidious. 
[Compare ‘He is too picked, too spruce, too affected, too odd, as it were .’ — Lovers 
Labour^ s, V, i, 14. The consensus of opinion is in favor of this interpretation of 
‘picked.’ Pope’s reading of piked (see Text. Notes) naturally led to his explana- 
tion that this refers to the traveller being ‘formally bearded’ and was also the 
occasion for Johnson’s reference to the traveller’s beard in his note on 1 . 200. Theo- 
bald says : ‘ The Author certainly designed picqued (from the French Verb, se piguer ) ; 
i. e., touchy, tart, apprehensive, upon his guard.’ Theobald in his second edition 
retains the reading picqued, but does not repeat the above explanation of it.— En.] 

203. picked man of Countries] Hsath (p. 223) suggests that a comma be placed 
after the word ‘man; that is, And catechize the man I have vouchsafed to cull out 
for my entertainment, concerning the countries he hath seen.’^ — [Heath’s volume 
appeared in 1765, and in the Variorum of 1773 Steevens makes this same sug- 
gestion, with but a very slight change in the wording of Heath’s explanation. 
Steevens was, unfortunately, not too punctilious in assigning credit where it was 
due.— Maloi® acclaims Steevens’s change and explanation as ‘undoubtedly the 
true, one,’ which shows, perhaps, that as he did not know of Heath’s note Steevens 
may also have been unaware tliat he was anticipated. — ^E d.] — ^Moberly: This is one 
of the many instances of Shakespeare’s truly English contempt for foreign ways. 

205. beseech] In my copy of the Folio this word is thus printed; so it appears in 
Staunton’s fac-simile of the Ellesmere Folio, and also in Sidney Lee’s fac-simile of 
the Devonshire Folio, but in the Booth reprint the word is plainly befeeeh. This 
trifling deviation from the original seems hardly worth noticing, were it not that 
even such slight deviations are of the rarest in Booth’s scrupulously exact reprint, 
wherein every battered letter and fault in alignment is accurately reproduced. 
Mr Charles Wright, the editor, informed a friend, in a letter, that in the prepara- 
tion of Lionel Booth’s reprint he had collated seven copies of the First Folio. It 
is but just, I think, to give Wright the benefit of the doubt and to believe that the 
copies which he consulted were printed after this slight change had been corrected 
by the printers while the pages were in course of printing.— Ed. 

206. Absey booke] Murray (N. E. D., s, v. A B C. 4.): A B C-book, primer, 
horn-book; an introductory book to any subject, often in catechism or dialogue 
form. [The present line quoted.] 



54 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. L 


And fo.ere anfwer knowes what queftion would, 210 

Sauing in Dialogue of Complement, 

211— 213, In parentheses Pope, Han. 211. Sauing] Serving Warb. Theob. i, 
Cap. Varr. Ran. Mai. Steev. Varr. Sing. Han. Salving Vaughan. 

Hal Ktly, Sta. Huds. 

211-213. Sauing in Dialogue . . . riuer Poe] Warburton: At the first intima- 
tion of his desire to hear strange stories, the Traveller complies, and the answer 
comes as easy as an A, b, c book. Now, Sir, says the Knight, this is my question: 
The over-ready Traveller will scarce give him leave to make it, but, e’er Answer 
knows what question would, — What then? Why according to the Stupidity of the 
hitherto receiv’d reading, it grows towards supper time, And is not this worshipful 
Society? To spend all the time betwixt Dinner and Supper, before either of them 
knows what the other would be at. So absurdly is the sense vitiated by putting the 
three lines in a parenthesis [see Text. Notes]] which, we may suppose was first 
occasioned by their blunder in the word 'Saving,’ instead of the true word, serving. 
Now my emendation gives the text this turn: 'And e’er Answer knows what the 
Question would be at, my Traveller serves in his Dialogue of Compliment, which is 
his standing Dish at all tables, then he comes to talk of the Alps and Appenines, &c., 
and by the time this discourse concludes it draws towards Supper.’ All now here 
is sense and humour; and the phrase ‘serving in’ is a very humourous one, to signify 
that this was his Worship’s second course. — Capell (I, pt ii, p. 119): The second 
modern [Pope] only has pointed rightly, giving some lines their parenthesis, [which] 
will be sufficient to set aside a nonsensical reading of the three that come after him — 
Serving for 'Saving,’ whose sense is excepting. Excepting, says the Bastard, that 
question gives occasion to much compliment, and to scraps of discourse concerning 
Alps and the rest, supper is well-nigh come without Answer’s knowing even the 
meaning of what Question propounds to him, he’s so lost in his compliments. — 
Heath (p. 223): If we follow Pope’s punctuation the construction, as well as the 
sense, is extremely clear. ... [I] have not yet been able to discover how it appears 
that answer knows what question would be at, one jot the sooner or the better in Mr 
Warburton’s correction, than in the former reading. But there is a farther objec- 
tion to this conjecture (as it is scarce possible to adjust error so well with truth but 
the seam will betray itself somewhere or other), serving in is a participle, and con- 
sequently requires a substance. Now I would fain know what substantive it can 
be joined with in this passage consistently with grammatical construction. I must 
own myself utterly at a loss to find one, unless we should suppose, He, the said 
answer, to be understood, which if Mr Warburton pleases to accept, it is entirely 
at his service. But in truth our critic did not comprehend the delicacy of the poet’s 
satire, which represents the traveller, after having sufficiently established his 
character for good breeding by the compliments in vogue, as laimching out into a 
tedious common-place relation of his travels, without giving himself the leisure to 
inform himself, with what view, and to what purpose his patron had begun his 
enquiry, [Heath, in his laudable desire to rebuke Warburton, sometimes over- 
reaches himself, as, I think, he has here. The substantive antecedent to the parti- 
ciple is undoubtedly the personified Answer; just as in 1 . 207 ' O sir, says answer,’ and 
in 209 ' No sir, says question.’ The picture presented by Warburton of the Travel- 
ler serving up a dialogue of compliments, wherein he must be both question and 
answer, is certainly 'humorous’; though possibly not quite in the way Warburton 



ACT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


55 


And talking of the Alpes and Appenines, 212 

The Perennean and the riuer Poe, 

It drawes toward fupper in conclufion fo. 

But this is worfhipfull fociety, 215 

And fits the mounting fpirit like my felfe; 

For he is but a baflard to the time 217 


213. Perennean\ Pyrennean Ff, Rowe. 
Pyreneans Coll. ii. (MS.). Pyrenean 
Pope et seq. 

Poe] Po Rowe et seq. 

214. toward] F2, Cap. Var. ’78, ’85. 
towards F3F4, RowCj+j Sing. Hal. Ktly, 
Huds. 


214. /upper] Fx. 

Jo] Om. Cap. Ran. 

216. the] a Coll. MS. 

Spirit like] Ff, Rowe, Pope,+, 
Knt, Dyce, Sta. Cam.+, Neils, spirit, 
like Cap et cet. 


intends. The latter part of Heath’s explanation is much more satisfactory. Philip 
cares nothing about Alps, Apennines, or rivers, what he wants to know concerns 
only manners, customs, and good behaviour. — Ed.] — Ivor John: If we take the 
line as it stands — ‘ Before the answering man knows what the questioner would, 
except in so far as customary complimentary retorts are concerned’ — we leave 
‘And so’ in the air; but having regard to the looseness of structure of the whole 
speech, this may not be impossible. We may shuffle out of the difficulty by sus- 
pecting a dropped line. — [Is it not simpler to follow Pope’s arrangement, including 
these three lines in a parenthetical clause? ‘And so’ then has the force of in this 
manner. — Ed.] 

21 1. Dialogue of Complement] Toixet: Sir W. Cornwallis’s 28^ Essay thus 
ridicules the extravagance of compliment in our poet’s days, 1601 : ‘We spend even 
at his (i. e., a friend’s or a stranger’s) entrance a whole volume of 'words. — ^What 
a deal of synamon and ginger is sacrificed to dissimulation! “ 0 , how blessed do I 
take mine eyes for presenting me with this sight!” “0 Signior, the star that gov- 
erns my life in contentment, give me leave to interre myself in your arms! ’’—“Not 
so, sir, it is too unworthy an inclosure to contain such preciousness,” &c., &c. 
This, and a cup of drink, makes the time as fit for a departure as can be.’ — ^Wright: 
The cynic Jaques in . 4 .? You Like It (II, v, 56) compares [such a dialogue] to ‘the 
encounter of two dog-apes.’ 

214. in conclusion so] Capell, regarding ‘so’ redundant, omits it; but is it not 
here used for the more emphatic form also, as in ‘Mad in pursuit, and in possession 
so,’ — Sonnet cxxix. (See Abbott, § 65.) — Moberly interprets these words as mean- 
ing ‘In this kind of trial at conversation’; apparently understanding ‘conclusion’ 
as in the phrase ‘to try conclusions,’ but the construction hardly admits this. — ^E d. 

216. the mounting spirit] Madden (p. 204) compares the present line to a 
passage in 2 Henry VI: II, i, 5 et seq., wherein is shown a royal hunting party with 
their falcons; and particularly the lines given to Gloucester, ‘My lord, ’tis but a 
base ignoble mind That mounts no higher than a bird can soar.’ — Ed. 

2 17-2 23. bastard to the time . . . poyson for the ages tooth] The following 
observations by Capell on the concluding lines of this soliloquy, although they 
somewhat anticipate other remarks, are so closely connected with each other that 
it seems better to give them here in full: ‘And now we shall wind up our string of 
observations on this soliloquy, with acknowledging our own former ignorance of 
the sense of some parts of it, and certain consequent errors in the reading of this 



THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i. 
218 


56 

That doth not fmoake of obferuation, 

218, 219. fmoake.. Jmacke] smack.., seq. 
smoak Pope, smack. ..smack Theob. et 218. ob/efuaiion] observatiou Fleay. 


copy. “Too/* the Oxford editor's [Hanmer] reading in 1 . 222 [see Text. Notes], was 
embrac’d with great readiness; and his comment upon the words of next line seem’d 
a likely and just one, —that its “poison” flattery: but when these were acceded 
to, it was perceiv’d that the parts of this period, read and pointed as now, did not 
accord nor had proper construction. To make the latter out tolerably, 1 . 222 must 
have another change yet, and “dehver” must be delwers; and to make the com- 
ment complete, must be taken extensively, and comprehend its exteriors of 

complaisance and address; after which and with the pointing that follows it is 
conceiv’d the speaker’s sense will be clear: “For he is but a bastard to the time, 

I That doth not smack of observation,— | And so am I, whether I smack, or no; 

( And not alone in habit and device, | Exterior form, outward accoutrement, 1 But 
from the inward motion too, delivers | Sweet, sweet, sweet poison for the age’s tooth. ” 
“Observation” must be observation of foreign manners and things; and “poison” 
lyes not in that, unless it be in its nothingness, and the misspending of time in 
hark’ning to it, which is no mighty injury: persons void of this talent, — or not 
smacking of it, in this speaker’s language,— are, according to him, “bastards to the 
time”; meaning that the time held them cheap, set as little by them as bastards. 
And having vented this maxim, and the wipe or gird on himself, he turns to another 
traveller’s talent, which is a poison indeed, and of all ages; and yet the person that 
wants it, is as much in common esteem as he that wanted the other; and his rising 
to honour will be with difficulty, for this and no other talent strews the footsteps are 
made to it, makes the road to it easy. Thus understood, the construction and con- 
cord:— “he is but a bastard to the time, that doth not smack of observation and 
he another, that not delivers sweet poison, &c., in habit and device alone, &c., but from 
the inward motion too”: the last expressions importing that the party must be 
sincere in his flattery, or have the appearance of being so; and in the expressions 
before them,— “device,” “habit,” &c.,— the necessity of address is insinuated, which 
has its flattery too, and produces all the efifects of it.’ [Capell has not, I think, 
shown in the foregoing his usual sagacity. In the first place, Hanmer’s emendation, 
even with Capell’s grammatical correction of the verb, is hardly to be commended; 
in fact, it completely alters the sense, where all was plain before, and is, therefore, 
unnecessary. Secondly, Capell refers the phrase ^bastard to the time* to the attitude 
of the polite world towards one who does not conform to usage; Malone likewise 
interprets these words and thus paraphrases it: *He is accounted but a mean man, 
in the present age, who does not show, by his dress, his deportment, and his talk 
that he has travelled and made observations in foreign countries.’ Does not this 
expression rather mean, as Wright inteiprets, Tie is no true child of this age’? 
Compare 'son to the King’ in any Dramatis Personm. Capell, on the other hand, 
is quite right in rejecting Hanmer’s explanation of the 'sweet poison’ flattery, 
his own w^ords are, however, more suo, so obscure and his sentences so involved that 
it is not, at first, quite apparent that the 'traveller’s talent,’ to which he refers, is 
the 'deceit’ mentioned By Faulconbridge in 1 . 225, .Thus the sweet poison for the 
age’s tooth is mere outw^ard show both, in accoutrement and speech. Deception 
both in speech and action. — ^E d.] 



ACT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


57 


And fo am I whether I fmacke or no: 

And not alone in habit and deuice, 220 

Exterior forme, outward accoutrement; 

But from the inward motion to deliuer 

Sweet, fweet, fweet poyfon for the ages tooth, . 223 

219. am L.. fmacke] Ff, Rowe, Pope. 222. motion] motion, Sta. Fleay. 

am I, ...smack TFeob.-f, Dyce, Ktly, to deliuer] to deliver Han. too, 

Cam,-f, Fleay. am I smacks Cap. deliver 
et cet. 


218. smoake of obseruation] Rann: That is, exhibit some spice of foreign man- 
ners; and that not only by his outward habit and address, but also by the infallible 
criterion of politeness, a perpetual propensity to flattery, that sweet poison so highly 
palatable to the age’s tooth. — * Observation’ here seems to mean not so 
much the knowledge and experience gained by taking notice of what goes on around, 
as the habit of paying personal attention or court. It is derived from observe as 
used in 2 Henry IV: IV, iv, 30: ‘For he is gracious if he be observed.’ So Hamlet 
was the ^observed of all observers’ (III, i, 162), to whom they all paid court. 
[The whole tenour of the passage seems confirmatory of this excellent suggestion. 
— Ed.] — Miss C. Porter: Theobald’s change is all that remains of various changes 
formerly made in this speech. Why is that left? What is meant by saying, I 
am one who smacks whether I smack or not? It is a curious contradiction, and 
seems less clear to the present writer than the unchanged original. Smoke is the 
sign of fire, as observation is of the time. The speaker who is not a bastard to the 
time, ‘smokes’ of it, is redolent of this universal trait of observation. So he is, 
whether he relishes it or not, whether I smack or no. [Miss Porter’s attempt to 
wrest a meamng, from what has been accepted heretofore as a misprint in the 
Folio, is certainly praiseworthy; but has she not misunderstood Philip’s parenthet- 
ical remark? See next note. — Ed.] 

219, 222. And so . . . to deliuer] Belden {Tudor Sh.)i [He also is] not a true 
child of the age, being without fashionable dress and manners, and without the 
disposition to flatter. ‘From,’ 1 . 222, is equivalent to iy reason of the lack of [any 
inward motion]. Yet he will arm himself against the flattery which will be strewn 
in the path of his social ascent. [Mooeje-Smith’s interpretation is substantially 
the same as the foregoing. — Ed.] 

219, And . . . or no] Warburton: A nonsensical line of the players. 

221, 222. outward accoutrement , . . inward motion] Rushton {N. Q., IV, x, 

515] compares: ‘This face were faire, if it were toumed, noting that the inward 
motions would make the outward favour but counterfeit.’— Lyly: Euphues atzd 
his England, [ed. Bond, ii, 61]. 

222. motion] Bradley (N. E. D., s. v. 9.): An inward prompting or impulse; an 
instigation or incitement from within; a desire or inclination. Also a stirring of the 
soul, an emotion. [Compare IV, ii, 264, 265; ‘Within this bosome, never entred 
yet The dreadfull motion of a murderous thought.’] 

222-225. to deliuer ... I meane to learne] Hudson (ed. ii.): Something of 
obscurity here. But I take the infinitive ‘to deliver’ as depending upon ‘I am.’ . . . 
So that Sir Richard means tliat he is going to humour the world in his outward man, 



58 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i. 


Which though I will not pra6lice to deceiue, 

Yet to auoid deceit I meane to learne; 225 

For it fhall ftrew the footfteps of my rifing: 

But who comes in fuch hafte in riding robes ? 

What woman poll is this? hath flie no husband 
That will take paines to blow a home before her ? 

O me, Tis my mother : how now good Lady, 230 

What brings you heere to Court fo haflilyP 


224. 'WUc}i\ Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Cap. This Johns, conj. 
Dono. Which, Han. et cet. 

though] tho Pope ii, M Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Var. ’73. 

mil] would Words. 

225. Yet, ..deceit] r2F3, Knt. Yet,.., 
deceit, F4 et cet. 

226. rifing:] rising. Pope et seq. 
227-289. Om. Dono. 

227. hafie in] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 4 ’, 
Dyce, Cam.-h, Fleay, Huds. ii. haste, 
in Cap. et cet. 


227. riding robes] riding-robes Dyce, 
Hal. Hnds. Cam.+, Fleay. 

228. woman poft] woman-pofi F4. 

229. her?] her, Rowe i. 

230. 0 me^ Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Fleay. Oh, me! Ktly. 0 me! Theob. et 
cet. 

His] it is Pope et seq. 
mother:] mother. Coll, et seq. 
how now] F2F3. now, Pope,+. 
how now, F4 et cet. 

Lady,] Ff , Rowe, Pope, + . lady! 
Coll. Dyce, Hal. Wh. i, Cam. i, 4 -. 
lady? Cap. et cet. 


and at the same time be thoroughly sound within; or that he appear ssth.z.t the age 
craves, and yet be what he ought. The ^ Which,’ in this latter member of the 
sentence, I understand as referring to the whole sense of the preceding member. 
The speaker means to learn the arts of popularity, and to practice them, not hol- 
lowly, that he may cheat the people, or play the demagogue, but from the heart, 
and that he may be an overmatch for the cheats and demagogues about him. The 
Poet here prepares us for the honest and noble part which Faulconbridge takes in 
the play; giving us an early inside taste of this most downright and forthright 
humorist, who delights in a sort of righteous or inverted hypocrisy, talking like a 
knave, and acting like a hero. 

225. to auoid deceit] That is, to avoid being deceived. 

226. strew . . . my rising] Ivor John: As I rise flattery wiU be strewn before 
me like flowers before one making a progress.— -[Miss Porter’s interpretation is, I 
think, preferable, that deceit shall ^smooth his way, alluding to the rushes strewing 
the presence-chamber of the king, also the stage floor.’ Philip’s practical mind 
looks forward to an easy ascent, not a flowery path.— E d.] 

229. blow a home] Johnson: He means that a woman who travelled about like 
a ‘post’ was likely to ‘horn’ her husband.— Coluer: The allusion is, of course, 
double, — to the horn of a post, and to the horn of such a husband as Lady Faul- 
conbridge had rendered hers. [Hudson also sees here this double allusion. It is 
somewhat rash to question the opinions of two authorities such as these; I can but 
say that I prefer to think them mistaken. In the first place Philip does not recog- 
nise the ‘woman-post’ until her nearer approach; secondly, it is not pleasant to 
think that he would thus make a jest of Ms mother^s infidelity. Is not Johnson’s 
explanation quite sufficient? — Ed.] 



ACT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


59 


Enter Lady Faulconbridge and lames Gurney, 232 

Lady, Where is that ilaue thy brother? where is he? 

That holds in chafe mine honour vp and downe. 

Baft, My brother Robert j old Sir Roberts ionne: 235 

Colbrand the Gyant, that fame mighty man^ 

Is it Sir Roberts fonne that you feeke fo? 

Lady, Sir Roberts fonne, I thou vnreuerend boy, 

Sir Roberts fonne? why fcorn^ft thou at fir Robert ? 

He is Sir Roberts fonne, and fo art thou. 240 


Scene iv. Pope, Han. Warb. Johns. 

232. Enter...and lames Gurney] Ff, 
Rowe, Pope,+. After mother: 1 . 230, 
Sta. Fleay. After 1 . 230 Cap. et cet. 

Faulconbridge] Falconbridge 
Dyce, Hal. Huds. Words. 

lames Gurney.] Servant. Ca- 

peil. 

233. Jlaue thy] Jlave, thy F4 et seq. 
233, 234. he?,.. downe,] he, ...down? 

Theob.-h, Sing. Coll. Dyce, Hal. Wh. i, 
Ktly, Huds. Cam. 4 -* he?,.. down? Cap. 
Var.^’78, ’85, Ran. Mai. Steev. Varr, 
Rnt,"Sta. Fleay. 

235, 236. Rohertj...fonne:.,.man,] Ff, 


Rowe, Pope,+. Fleay. Robert? ...son? 
...man? Cap. et cet. 

238. Jonne, I] F3F3. Son, I, F4. Son! 
ay, Rowe i, Ran. Mai. Steev. Varr. 
Sing. Knt, Coll. Dyce, Hal. Sta. Huds. 
son; ay Fleay. Son? ay, Rowe ii. et cet. 

vnreuerend] unrevWend Pope, 
Theob. Warb. Johns, unr&c'reni Han. 
unreverent Del. 

239. fonne?] F2, Knt. jo»/*Ktly. Jon, 
F3F4 et cet. 

/corn'' ft] Jcorneft F4, Rowe. 

240. fonne,] son! Rowe ii, Pope, son; 
Theob. Warb. Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. 
Mai. Steev. Varr. Knt. 


232. Enter Lady Faulconbridge] Moberly: By an admirable instinct Shake- 
speare has departed from the old play, which made Lady Faulconbridge present 
all through the unseemly discussion between the two brothers, and even bearing a 
disgracefully prominent part in the dialogue. In much the same spirit Desdemona, 
when summoned to declare whether she really was more the wooer than Othello, 
puts all such questions aside with the utmost dignity, by declaring that her duty is 
now to the Moor, as her mother’s had been to her father. 

234. holds in chase] Compare ‘Spies of the Volsces Held me in chase, that 
I was forced to wheel Three or four miles ahouV—CorioL, I, vi, 19. This is not, 
as might seem, a term peculiar to hunting or the chase. It does not occur either 
in Turberville’s Noble Arte of Venerie, 1576, or in N. Cox’s Gentleman^ s Recreation, 
1674. — Ed. 

236. Colbrand the Gyant] Johnson: Colbrand was a Danish giant, whom Guy 
of Warwick discomfited in the presence of King Athelstan. The combat is very 
pompously described by Drayton, in l[n& Polyolbion, [Twelfth Song, 11 . 2i6--235.— 
Ed.]. — Collier: This line reads as if quoted from an old romance or baUad, in 
which the acts of Guy and Colbrand w^ere celebrated. The History of Guy, Earl of 
Warwick, by S. Rowlands, did not come out until 1607; but a romance on the 
same incidents had appeared long before, having been printed by W. Copland and 
J. Cawood. A fragment of an edition, from the types of Pynson, or Wynkyn de 
Worde, is also in existence. 




6 o 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i. 


Baft* lames Gotcrniej'wilt thou giue vs leaue a while? 241 
Gour. Good leaue good Philip. 

Baft. Philip, fparrow, lames, 243 

241. Goumie] Goxirney F3F3. Gur- Han. Philip! — sparrow — Johns. Var, 

neyF4etseq. ’73- Philip! sparrow: Cap. Cam.-h, 

a while?\ awhile? Hal. Huds. Wh. ii, Philip! sparrow! Del. Huds. ii, 
Cam.-F . Rife, Neils. Craig. Philip? sparrow? 

243. Philip, Jparrow,] Ff, Rowe, Fleay. Philip? — sparrow! — Upton, 

Pope. Philip! — we, Warb, Theob. Var. '78 et cet. (subs,). 

242. Gout. Good leaue good Philip] C. & M. Cowden Clarke: Coleridge, in 
one of his Table Talks, said: *For an instance of Shakespeare’s power in minimis^ I 
generally quote James Gurney’s character in King John. How individual and com- 
ical he is with the four words allowed to his dramatic life!’ [March 12, 1827. — Ed.| 
They certainly suffice to show us the free-and-easy style of the confidential servi- 
tor; one entrusted with the family secrets of this country household; one accus- 
tomed to treat the eldest son, but not the heir, with a coolly easy familiarity toler- 
ated by the good-humored young man, and only lightly waved aside by the new- 
made knight. — H. Reed (p. 71) : Notice the familiar and affectionate tone of this 
intercourse, as they address each other by their Christian names, and then the fine, 
gentlemanly, and considerate feeling which prompts Falconbridge to promise the 
old servant^ — his domestic friend — to tell him more after awhile as a kind of in- 
direct apology for even asking him to withdraw. Minute as the instance is, it is a 
historical illustration of the gentleness with which the genuine principles of chivalry 
looked down to the humble, as well as upward to the high born. — [Rowe, who was 
the first to give a list of the Dramatis Personce, has in the present instance been 
uniformly followed in designating James Gurney as ‘servant to Lady Faulcon- 
bridge.’ Coleridge did not, I think, so understand the character. He was the 
first to call attention to the clearness with which in a few words the personality 
of Gurney is shown; and those show that the mode of address both by him and 
by Fauiconbridge is certainly not that of young master and old servant. In the 
first place the master — ^the acknowledged elder son — would not address an attend- 
ant on his mother with so much ceremony, giving the full name and requesting 
his departure; secondly, an old family servant would not have addressed the master 
by his first name. Notice, for example, Adam’s form of address to Orlando and Olir 
ver, in As You Like It; it is uniformly ‘young master,’ *my kind master,’ or ‘masters 
both.’ Excellent as are the remarks of Charles and Mary Cowden Clarke and of 
Reed, it is to be remembered that they are building a romance, concerning a faith- 
ful old servitor, oh information furnished not by Shakespeare, but by Rowe. All 
that Shakespeare shows us is that James Gurney and Philip Fauiconbridge were on 
easy terms of friendship; they were probably young men of about the same age; 
Gurney is merely acting as escort to Lady Fauiconbridge. Had he been her at- 
tendant would he not have preceded her to announce her coming? It w^as the ab- 
sence of such a vaunt-courier that called forth Philip’s somewhat derogatory re- 
mark. — Ed.] 

243. Philip, sparrow, lames] Pope: Philip is a common name for a tame 
sparrow. — Theobald: [According to Pope’s Faulconbrdige would say, Call 
me Philip? You may as well call me Sparrow. The allusion is very mean and tri- 
fling; and everybody, I believe, will choose to embrace Mr Warburton’s emendation. 



ACT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


6l 


[243. Philip, Sparrow, lames] 

[See Text. Notes.] Spare me and Forbear me, it may be observed, are our author’s 
accustomed phrases; either when any one wants another to leave him, or be rid of 
a displeasing subject. — ^V ^^arburton naturally adopts this reading in his own edi- 
tion, and explains it thus: ‘Don’t affront me with an appellation that comes from a 
family which I disclaim.’ [It will be noticed that this is quite different from Theo- 
bald’s interpretation. — Ed.] — Grey (i, 277): If there’s any room to alter the old 
readings, it should, I think, come as near the trace of the letters as possible, and 
might be read as follows: ‘Philip — spare oh! James.’ But I imagine that Shake- 
speare had an eye to Skelton’s poem, entitled Fhilip Sparowe. Faulconbridge might 
resent James’s freedom, in calling him plain Philip, after he had received the order 
of knighthood from the king. What, call me Philip without any additional title? 
If you call’d me Philip Sparow it would not be so contemptible, but rather add to 
the dignity. Skelton, after he had lamented the death of Philip Sparow, and raised 
a monument of praise to its memory, gives it the preference to all sparrows; and puts 
it upon a footing with its royal namesake, Philip of Macedon. [For Skelton’s 
poem, see Dyce’s edition, vol. i, p. 51. The Laureate’s muse was ever prolific, and 
in the present instance his lament runs on for over thirteen hundred lines. — Ed.] — 
Capell (I, pt 2, p, 120) : Words can hardly explain this, but tone readily; so read- 
ily that none who has heard a sparrow call’d Philip, and attends to what is in 
hand, will ask for more; and if he further attends to the speaker’s manner and 
character, he will scarce relish a change of ‘sparrow^’ to spare me . — Upton (p. 156): 
’Tis not to be wonder’d that Mr Theobald should turn a deaf ear to whatever Mr 
Pope offers by way of criticism. [A very shrew^d remark; the Dunciad, it will be 
remembered, appeared about five years before Theobald’s edition. — Ed.] — ^Heath 
( p. 224) : Mr Theobald and Mr Warburton concur in discarding the common read- 
ing; the first, evidently , because he did not understand it, as appears from his own 
note; the second, because he had forgot the distinction between a Christian name 
and a surname, or a family name. . . . The sense of the genuine reading is: Dost 
call me Philip? Call a sparrow so, James, but not me for the future. The reason 
of this inhibition was his having been just knighted, and new christened, which, 
being then engaged in conversation with his mother, he had not leisure to inform the 
servant of. This is plainly implied in the next line.-— S teevens: Gascoigne has 
likewise a poem entitled The Praise of Philip Sparrow, [ed. Cunliffe, i, p. 455]. 
Again, in The Northern Lass, [Brome], 1633: ‘A bird whose pastime made me 
glad, And Philip ’twas my sparrow,’ [Act III, sc. ii; ed. Pearson, p. 52]. Again, 
in Magnificence, an ancient interlude by Skelton, published by Rastell: ‘With me 
in kepynge such a Phylyp Sparowe,’ [ 1 . 1580; ed. Dyce, p. 276 . — Halliwell- 
Phillipps has collected other passages wherein the sparrow is given the name of 
Philip (see his note on the present passage in Folio ed.); but those already given are 
sufficient to show the prevalence of the idea that the sound of the bird’s chiiping 
resembled the name. Other bird-names derived in the same manner will readily 
suggest themselves.— Ed.]— Coleridge (p. 158): Theobald adopts Warburton’s 
conjecture of ‘spare me.’ 0 true Warburton! and the sancta simplicitas of honest, 
dull Theobald’s faith in him. Nothing can be more lively or characteristic than 
‘Philip? Sparrow!’ Plad Warburton read old Skelton’s Philip Sparowe, an ex- 
quisite and original poem, no doubt popular in Shakespeare’s time, even War- 
burton would scarcely have made so deep a plunge into the bathetic as to have death- 
ified ‘sparrow’ into spare mel'—J, W. Green Qlotes b* Queries, 1885, VI, xi, 182): 



62 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i. 


There^s toyes abroad, anon He tell thee more. 

Exit lames, 245 

Madam, I was not old Sir Roberts fonne, 

Sir Robert might haue eat his part in me 
Vpon good Friday, and nere broke his fall: 

Sir Robert could doe well,marrie to confeffe 

Could get me fir Robert could not doe it; 250 


244. There^s] There’ re Hal. 
lie] He F,. PleF,. 

245. lames.] Servant. Cap. Gurney. 
Mai. et seq. 

246-266. Om, Words. 

249. marrie to confejfe] F2F3. marry, 
to confefs F4, Rowe. marry confess! 


Pope. marry, confess! Theob. Han. 
Warb. Johns. Var. ’73. marry to confess 
the truth Ktly. marry, to confess, Cap. 
et cet, 

250. get we] get me, Ff. get me! Rowe. 
not get me; Dyce i, Coll. MS. get me, 
Vaughan, he get me? Pope et cet. 


It appears to me that the common punctuation is wrong and that it should be writ- 
ten and spoken thus: ‘Philip Sparrow!’ with a contemptuous falling accent on the 
‘ Sparrow,’ The allusion is, of course, to Skelton’s Philip Sparowe, the elegy on 
Jane Scroop’s sparrow. The Bastard expresses his contempt by adding a ridiculous 
surname to his old Christian name. — Br. Nicholson (N. Q., 1885, VI, xi, 244) : The 
Bastard’s ‘Philip!— sparrow!’ is not, ‘of course,’ as Mr J.W. Green says, ‘an allusion 
to Skelton’s Philip Sparowe,’ but both speak of the name Philip as that ordinarily 
given to a pet sparrow. The new Sir Richard, as any one can see, disdains his old 
name and repeats it contemptuously. Hence the ordinary punctuation has every 
right to stand. 

244. toyes] That is, idle fancies, rumours; for other examples, see Schmidt {Lex), 

247, 248. eat his part . . . nere broke his fast] Steevens: This thought occurs 
in Heywood’s Dialogues upon Proverbs, 1562: ‘ — he may his parte on good Fridaie 
eate And fast never the wurs, for ought he shall geate,’ [ed. Farmer, ii, 36]. 

249. marrie to confesse] J. M. Mason: We should read: marry confess. The 
present reading is an error of the press. [See Text. Notes .] — Steevens: I rather 
think ‘to confess’ means to come to confession. ‘But, to come to a fair confession 
now (says the Bastard), could he have been the instrument of my production?’— 
Schmidt (Leie.) quotes the present line as the only example wherein ‘to confess’ 
may be taken in the sense sooth to say. 

250. Cotdd get me] Collier {Notes, etc., p. 200): Modern editors have intro- 
duced he and a mark of interrogation. On the other hand, the MS. Corrector merely 
inserts a negative [after ‘could’]; and if, in the manuscript used by the printer, a 
mark of interrogation had been found in this place, it would hardly have been 
omitted.— Vaughan (i, 9): These interpretations [Collier’s Corrector and Steev- 
ens’s] are objectionable. They begin with an admission that Sir Robert could in 
such matters do well, whereas Philip Faulconbridge throughout insists that he 
could not do well, and for this very reason could not have been his real father. In 
truth, ‘could he get me’ is correct, but it is not a question; it is a conditional not an 
interrogative sentence, equivalent to ‘if he could get me.’ The passage means: 
‘Sir Robert could do well (to speak blunt truth in my own praise) if he could get, — 
but he could not get me. Tell me then, mother, who did get me.’ So in i Henry IV: 
n, ii, 97: ‘Now could thou and I rob the thieves and go merrily to London, it 
would be argument for a week ’ 



ACT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


63 

251 


We know his handy-worke, therefore good mother 
To whom am I beholding for thefe llmmes? 

Sir Robert neuer holpe to make this legge. 

Lady. Haft thou confpired with thy brother too, 

That for thine owne gaine Ihouldfl defend mine honor? 255 
What meanes this fcorne, thou moft vntoward knaue? 

Baft* Knight, knight good mother, Bafilif co-like: 257 


251. know] knew Johns (misprint). 
handy-worke] handiwork Steev. 

Knt. ii, Dyce, Hal. Sta. Cam.«f . 

handy-worke^ therefore] handy- 
work: — Therefore, Cap. Varr. Ran. Mai. 
Steev. Varr. Sing, i, Knt, Dyce, Huds. 
Cam. -{- . handy-work. — T her ef ore, 

Coll. Sing, ii, Sta. Del. 

252. heholdinf\ Ff, Rowe, Coll. Dyce, 
Huds. Cam.-{-. beholden Pope et 
cet. 

limmes] limbs F3F4. 

253. holpe] help'd Pope, Han. 


254. confpired] conspir'd Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. conspired Dyce, Huds. Fleay. 

257. Knight, knight good mother, 
Bafilif co-like:] F2. Knight, knight, good 
mother, BafiUfco-like. F3F4, Rowe i, 
Cam.-p, Fleay, Om. Rowe ii. Knight 
— Knight, good mother, Basilisco-like 
Pope, Knight, knight, good mother, 
Basilisco-like: Cap. Ktly. Knight, 
knight, good mother — Basilisco like. 
Theob. et cet. 

Bafilif co-like:] Basilisco; ^slight 
Theob. conj. (withdrawn). 


251. handy-worke] Wright: ^Handiwork’ being the Anglo-Saxon 
should not be divided as it is commonly, ‘handj^-work,’ but hand-ywork. 

257. Knight, knight . . . Basilisco-like] Theobald: Faulconbridge’s words 
here carry a concealed piece of satire on a stupid drama of that age printed in 1599, 
and called Soliman and Perseda. In this piece there is a character of a bragging 
cowardly knight called Basilisco. His pretension to valour is so blown and seen 
through, that Piston, a buffoon-servant in the play, jumps upon his back, and will 
not disengage him, till he makes Basilisco svrear upon his dudgeon-dagger to the 
contents, and in the terms he dictates to him; as, for instance: ^Pist. I, the afore- 
said Basilisco.-— BfZJ. I, the aforesaid Basilisco,— knight, good fellow, knight. Fist. 
Knave good fellow, knave, knave.’ So that, it is clear, our poet is sneering at this 
play; and makes Philip, when his mother calls him 'knave,’ throw off that reproach 
by humourously laying claim to his new dignity of knighthood; as Basilisco arro- 
gantly insists on his title of knight in the passage above quoted. The old play is 
an execrably bad one; and, I suppose, was sufficiently exploded in the representa- 
tion, which might make this circumstance so well known as to become the butt 
for a stage-sarcasm. [Soliman and Perseda is printed in Ha'wkins: Origin of the 
English Drama, vo\. ii, and in Haz.-Dods., voL; v. In a preliminary note the 
editor of the latter says: 'Though not printed tiU 1599, the introduction of a part 
of the story into Kyd’s Spanish Tmgeiy, licensed in 1592, may seem to show that 
the play had been written, partly or wholly, several years before. —Sxeevens re- 
marks that 'The character of Basilisco is mentioned in Nashe’s Have with you to 
Safron Walden, printed in the year 1596’ (ed. Grosart, iii, 150).— Ed.]— Capell 
(I, pt i, p. 120) : The first known edition [of Soliman and Perseda] is of the year 99; 
which, if it were the date of its birth, would prove the alter’d King John of that 
year or later; but this has no probability, either on the side of that play or of this 
John; the stage’s state in that year, possess’d of many good plays of Shakespeare 
and others, makes it very unlikely that such nonsense as Soliman would then be 



64 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i. 

258 


What, I am dub^d, I haue it on my fhoulder: 
But mother, I am not Sir Roberts fonne. 


I haue difclaim^d Sir Robert and 

258. Ff, Rowe, Fieay. Why 

Pope. Why^ Han. What! Theob, et cet. 
duh'd] dubb'd! Cam. 4 -* 

Jhoulder:] shoulder. Cap. et seq. 


my land, 260 

260. Robert... /aw?,] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Walker. Robert ... land; Cam.-p. 
Robert ; ... land^ Fie. Robert , ... land; 
Theob, et cet. 


received on it, and its strain has an apparent similitude to plays that are earlier; 
and this John has one as apparent to such plays of its author as preceded his 
Romeo. But this matter may have a fuller discussion. [See Appendix: Trouble- 
some Raigne of John. — Ed.] — ^W.arburton acknowledges the origin of this expression 
as shown by Theobald, and adds: ‘But the beauty of the passage consists in his al- 
luding, at the same time, to his high original. His father, Richard I, was surnamed 
Cceur-de-lion. And the Cor Leonis, a fixed star of the first magnitude, in the sign 
Leo, is called Basilisco. — ^Johnson’s only comment on the foregoing note by War- 
burton is: ‘Could one have thought it!’ — ‘Could one have thought it, indeed!’ 
says Kjenrick, Johnson’s truculent reviewer, ‘A mighty pretty way this of writing 
annotations on Shakespeare! To copy two long notes from Theobald and War- 
burton, and then to exclaim, concerning some conundrum of the latter, Could one 
have thought it! Neither your subscribers, nor your book-sellers, I believe. Dr John- 
son, thought you would have fobbed them off so shabbily- For, indeed, when a 
man promised so fair, Could one have thought it? But perhaps this is another stroke 
of our editor’s wit. It Is—ha! — like enough — but, could one have thought it ?' — 
[One is moved to ask if this be likewise a sample of Mr Kenrick’s wit! — and also 
whether Warburton was gratified by his doughty champion’s characterising his 
high-flown interpretation as a ‘conundrum.’ — Ed.]— Edwards (p. 119) : Warburton 
should have said that the Cor Leonis is Basiliscus, or Regulus; for those are the 
names it goes by; but then there would have been no foundation for this, which is 
absolutely the conundrum of a Hypercritic. The words, put out of verse, are 
these: I say, like Basilisco in the play, call me (not knave but) knight, good mother. 
What pretence is here for any allusion to a star; which it does not appear that 
Shakespeare ever knew or thought of? Or how could the Bastard be in this in- 
stance like the Cor Leonis; unless that star were knighted, which Mr Warburton 
will as easily prove, as what he asserts of the allusion. [Needless to say Warbur- 
ton’s extravagant allusion does not appear in any edition subsequent to Johnson, 
and no commentator other than Edwards refers to it. That Cor Leonis is the same 
as Coeur de Lion and that the name of the star is Basiliscus, which name appears 
here, is a curious coincidence and as such has but a passing interest in any note on 
2k lint In King John . — Ed.] 

258. What] Fleay: ‘What’ is here equivalent to Why, not to what! as usually 
printed. — [Schmidt {Lex., s. v. (e)) cites the present line as an example of ‘what’ 
used as ‘a word of exclamation expressing surprise, exultation, or impatience.’ — 
Ed.] 

260. Sir Robert and my land] Fleay: I think my punctuation gives the bet- 
ter sense. [See Text. Notes, I am inclined to agree with Fleay. ‘Disclaim’ can 
hardly mean both disavow and renounce; here it seems to apply to Sir Robert alone, 
—Ed.] 



ACT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


6S 


Legitimation, name, and all is gone; 261 

Then good my mother, let me know my father, 

Some proper man I hope, who was it mother.^ 

Laiy. Haft thou denied thy felfe a Faulconhridgel 

Baft. As faithfully as I denie the deuill. 265 

Lady. K%ng Richard Cor delion was thy father, 

By long and vehement fuit I was feduc’d 
To make roome for him in my husbands bed: 

Heauen lay not my transgreffion to my charge, 

That art the iffue of my deere offence 270 


262. Then] Then, F4. 

263. hope, who...] hope. Who... Ktly, 
Neils. 

264. denied] deny'd F4, Rowe, Pope,+, 
Cap. Varr. Rann, Mai. 

266. Cordelion] Ff, Rowe, Tel. Fie, 
CceuT’delion Pope et cet. 

267, 268. Om. Words. 

267, /educed] seduced. Rife. 

26k To...hed] Om. Rife. 

269. Heauen] Heaven Rowe, Pope, 4 “ 


( — Var. *73). Heaven, Sing, i, Coll, 
ii, Wh. i. Heaven! Knt, Coll, i, iii, 
Huds. i. 

269. to my] to thy Sta. conj. Long MS. 
ap. Cam. Huds. ii. 

charge,] Ff, Rowe, Knt, Coll, i, 
Huds. i. charge. Fleay. charge! Pope 
et cet. 

270. Thai] F2F3, Knt, Coll, i, Huds. 
i, Del. i. Thou F4 et cet. 

270-289. Om. Words. 


263. who was it mother] C. &M. Cowden Clarke: No one like Shakespeare for 
setting straight before the imagination the very look, gesture, and tone with which a 
few simple words should be uttered. By the way he has written these two lines, intro- 
ducing the sentence at the close, we see the son’s hugging arm thrown round her, 
the close drawing her to him, the manly wooing voice by which he accompanies 
this coaxing question. 

265. denie the deuill] Is there not here possibly a faint echo of the phrase used 
both in the office of baptism and in the Catechism, ‘renounce the devil and all his 
works’? The adverb ‘faithfully’ is a slight corroboration.— Delius thinks that 
the word ‘deny ’ is used by the mother in the sense disavow (verlaiignen), and by the 
Bastard as meaning abjure (absagen Einem)l That the word may bear several 
meanings cannot be denied; also that Shakespeare uses it in various ways, but here 
it is used in both lines simply with the sense of disaww . — Schmidt (Lex.) so takes it, 
explaining ‘ thyself a Faulconbridge,’ 1 . 264, as the double accusative. Compare 
Matthew, xxvi, 34 . — Ed. 

270. That art] EInight; [The Folio reading] appears to us more in Shake- 
speare’s manner than the customary text, Thou art. Lady Faulconbridge is not 
invoking Heaven to pardon her transgression; but she says to her son, for Heaven’s 
sake, lay not (thou) my transgression to my charge that art the issue of it. The 
reply of Faulconbridge immediately deprecates any intention of upbraiding his 
mother. — Collier (ed. i.) : The meaning is: Let hot heaven and you, that art the 
issue of my dear offence, lay the transgression to my charge. The modem reading 
has generally been to make a period at ‘charge,’ and to begin a new sentence with 
‘Thou art’; but no alteration [of the text of the Folios] is required. [In his second 
edition Collier, having the authority of his MS. corrector, accepts the reading 
^Thou artj which, by the way, is not a modern correction, but that of the Fourth 
5 




66 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i. 


Which was fo ftrongly vrgM paft my defence. 271 

Bajl, Now by this light were I to get againe, 

Madam I would not wifh a better father: 

Some finnes doe beare their priuiledge on earth, 

And fo doth yours : your fault, was not your follie, 275 

Needs muft you lay your heart at his difpofe, 

Subiefted tribute to commanding loue, 277 


271. wg'd] Ff, Rowe, Pope,+j Van. 
'73, '78, ’85. wg’dy Cap. et cet. 

272. NowHight] Now, .Eight, F4 et 
seq. 

2^^. father:] father. Rowe et seq. 


275. fault,] fault F3F4 et seq. 

yotir follie^ you folly F2. your 
folly, Ktly. 

277. Subiedled] Subjected Steev. Van. 
Sing. Dyce, Huds. ii. 


Folio. Malone assigns it to Rowe; this, I think, misled Collier, as it has several 
other editors. — Ed.] — Staunton: Some alteration was certainly required; but 
[Thou] is not satisfactory. I am half persuaded the misprint to be corrected is in 
the preceding line, and that we ought to read ^to thy charge.’ She had a moment 
before confessed that Richard Cour-de-Lion was his father; and ‘Thou art the 
issue’ is a needless repetition of the avowal. [Hudson (ed. ii.) adopts in his text 
this conjecture by Staunton.] — R. G. White: The whole goes to show that Lady 
Faulconbridge is solicitous only on her own account. [White, therefore, dismisses 
as ‘forlorn expedients’ the attempts of Knight and Collier to wrest a meaning from 
the Folio text by making these two lines an address to the Bastard. He explains 
the misprint of ‘That’ for Thou through ‘y« being mistaken for y^.’ — Ed.]— 
Delius fed. i.), retaining the reading of the Folio, connects ‘That’ with ‘transgres- 
sion.’ This note he does not, however, repeat in his second edition, but with the 
majority of editors accepts the reading of the Fourth Folio. — Mooee-Smith: 
It is possible that ‘That’ is right, that ‘lay’ in 1 . 269 is an imperative, and that 
Shakespeare wrote ‘Good, lay not’ (compare Tempest, I, i, 3), which was misread 
God and then softened to ‘Heaven.’ — ^Ivor John: Evidence and probability seem 
equally balanced between Lady Faulconbridge’s praying that she should not be 
punished for her transgression since she was forced into it, and praying that her 
transgression should not be visited upon the innocent issue of it. If we read ‘ That ’ 
with the Folio, then it seems necessary to read ‘ thy charge,’ with Staunton. Delius’s 
[connecting ‘That’ with ‘transgression’] is hardly so likely. 

274. Some sinnes ... on earth] Johnson: There are sins that whatever be 
determined of them above, are not much censured on earth . — ^Mobeely: That is, 
Bear their own immunity on earth, on the principle, probably, that as kings may 
not ‘cut and carve’ for themselves when they marry, so they are to be allowed a 
little compensative freedom in wandering love. — ^Beandes (i, 171): In later years, 
at a time when his outlook upon life was darkened, Shakespeare accounted for the 
villainy of Edmund in King Lear, and for his aloofness from anything like normal 
humanity, on the ground of his irregular birth; in the Bastard of this play, on the 
contrary, his aim was to present a pictmre of all that health, vigour, and full-blooded 
vitality which popular belief attributes to a ‘love-daild*’ 

276. dispose] That is, disposed. For other examples, see Schmidt (Lex.). 

277, Subiected] Onions (N, E. D., s. v. 2.): Reduced to a state of subjection; 


hCT I, SC. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


67 

Againfl whofe furie and vnmatched force, 278 

The awleffe Lion could not wage the fight, 

Nor keepe his Princely heart from Richards hand : 280 

He that perforce robs Lions of their hearts, 

May eafily winne a womans; aye my mother, 

With all my heart I thanke thee for my father: 

Who Hues and dares but fay, thou didft not well 

When I was got, lie fend his foule to hell. 285 

Come Lady I will fhew thee to my kinne, 


278. vnmatched] unmatched Dyce, 
Sta. Fie. Huds, ii. 

280. hand:] F2F3, Dyce, Hal. Coll, iii, 
Huds. hands: F4. hands. Rowe, Pope, 
+. hand. Cap. et cet. 

281. He] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Dyce, Hal. 
Cam.-f . He, Theob. et cet. 

perforce] per force F4, Rowe, 


Pope, Han. 

282. womans; aye] Ff, Rowe, wom- 
an's. Akj Cap. Mai. woman's. Ay^ 
Pope et cet. 

283. father:] father. Pope,-}- ( — ^Var. 
’73). father! et seq. 

285. He] He Fa. rie F4. 

286. thee] the F4. 


under the dominion or authority of another. Hence, submissive, obedient. [The 
present line quoted.] 

280. keepe his ... heart from Richards hand] Percy: Shakespeare here 
alludes to the old metrical Romance of Richard Cwur-de-Lion, wherein this once 
celebrated monarch is related to have acquired his distinguishing appellation by 
having plucked out a lion’s heart, to whose fury he was exposed by the Duke of 
Austria, for having slain his son with a blow of his fist. From this ancient romance 
the story has crept into some of our old chronicles; but the original passage may be 
seen at large, in the introduction to the third volume of Reliques of Ancient Poetry. 
[An abstract with certain passages in full is also contained in Ellis’s Specimens of 
Early English Metrical Romances^ vol. ii, pp. 186-290. That portion relative to 
Richard’s combat with the lion will be found on p. 206 et seq. Ellis, in his Intro- 
duction, says that the earliest edition is that of W. de Worde, 1509. — Ed.] — Grey 
quotes the following account from Rastell’s of People, 1529: Tt is sayd 

that a lyon was put to kynge Rycharde, be3mge in prison to have devoured hym; 
and when the lyon was gapynge he put his arme in his mouth, and pulled the lyon 
by the harte so harde that he slewe the lyon, and therefore some say he is called 
Rycharde Coure de Lyon. But some say he is called Coure de Lyon because of his 
boldenesse and hardy stomake,’ [ed. Dibdin, p. 171]. — Farmer: I have an old 
black-letter History of Lord Faulconbridge whence Shakespeare might pick up, this 
circumstance. — [Malone says that the earliest edition of this History is 1616. 
See Appendix: Source of Plot. — Ed.] — ^Malone: In Hey wood’s Downfall of Robert, 
Earl of Huntington, 1601, there is a long description of this fabulous achievement, 
[ed. Haz.-Dods., viii, 178]. The same story is told by Knighton, inter Decern 
Scriptores, and by Fabyan, who calls it a. fable, [ed. Ellis, p. 304]. It probably took 
its rise from Hugh de Neville, one of Richard’s followers, having killed a lion when 
they v/ere in the Holy Land; a circumstance recorded by Matthew Paris. 

283, 284, 286. thee . . . thou • . . thee] Page: Observe the use of ^ou’ and 
^ ^ thou ’ in this speech. When he is speaking to her as a lady — 'Madam, ’ [1. 273] — 


68 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act I, sc. i. 
287 


And they fliall fay, when Richard me begot, 

If thou hadft fayd him nay, it had beene finne; 

Who fayes it was, he lyes, I fay twas not. 

Exeunt, 290 

289. fayes it was,...! fay twas\ Ff, Rowe, Pope, Dyce, Cam.-j-. says, it was.,.! 
say, ^Pwas Theob. et cet. 

be uses the complimentary *you’; when he addresses her as ^mother,’ he employs 
the familiar ‘thou,’ and continues it to the end of the speech. 

289. Who . . . twas not] Halliwell: This is confused even to contradiction. 
The Bastard says that he will show his mother to his new royal kindred, and they 
shall say if she had said nay to Richard it would have been sin; he then adds, who 
says it was a sin, lies; for I say it was not. The meaning intended by the Poet is, 
who says the yielding to Richard was a sin, lies; I say ’twas not a sin to yield to his 
begetting me. — Vaughan (i, 10) : ‘ Who says it was ’ — what was? T say ’twas not ’ 
— what was not? The stanza is nonsense as the last line now stands, unless, al- 
though the first ‘it’ before ‘had been sin’ must refer to ‘said him nay,’ the second 
‘ it ’ before ‘ was ’ without any intervening antecedent be by an unwarrantable license 
applied to ‘Richard me begot,’ in the sense ‘Whoever says that when Richard begot 
me a sin was committed.’ Shakespeare unquestionably wrote ‘ Who says “ ay ” was, 
he lies; I say ’twas not.’ We have the same contrast below: ‘If you say ay, the 
king will not say no,’ [HI, iii, 188]. ‘Aye’ is constantly in the old copies printed 
as it was written, ‘i’; ‘i,’ however, being mistaken for the first personal pronoun 
which could make no sense, or, being misread, was changed into ‘it’ by the simple 
addition of a letter. The poet’s meaning is clear — ‘They shall declare that if you 
had said Richard “nay” it would have been sin, and if anyone of them maintains, 
on the contrary, that your saying Richard “ay” was a sin, — he lies; I say it was no 
sin.’ — ^IvoR John: Vaughan’s suggestion seems quite un-Shakespearean. Still 
literally the stanza is nonsense in its present shape. The meaning is obvious, but 
we arrive at it by wresting round the ‘it’ in the last line to mean Lady Faulcon- 
bridge’s surrender to Coeur-de-lion. — [Vaughan’s suggestion is not only ‘quite 
un-Shakespearean,’ as John says, but it is, I think, far from being an ‘unques- 
tionable’ reading. The first, and principal, objection to it is, that it depends 
wholly on the eye and not on the ear — the printed word, not the word as uttered. 
Would any auditor comprehend the meaning at once, and understand that the ‘I’ 
In the last line was the affirmative and not the personal pronoun? It is but neces- 
sary to repeat the line with Vaughan’s emendation, as it might be uttered on the 
stage, to realise that the phrase would be incomprehensible in the sense Vaughan sug- 
gests. Secondly, Vaughan’s explanation of the origin of the error in this line weakens, 
rather than strengthens, his argument; that the affirmative ‘ay’ was almost univer- 
sally represented in print by the single letter J— -and doubtless also in MS. — ^is so 
well known as to require no corroboration, but Vaughan would, I think, find some 
difficulty in furnishing an example wherein ‘ ay ’ was represented by the lower case 
and not the capital; the Folio text in the line he quotes from this play reads, ‘If 
you say, I.’ Ivor John’s explanation of this very elliptical sentence must com- 
mend itself, although, as he says, ‘ the meaning is obvious,’ — ^E d.] 



ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


69 


Sccsna Secunda. 

\Act II. 

scene u] 

Enter before Angiers, Philip King of France, Lewis, DauU 2 

phin, Austria, Conftance, Arthur. 

1. Scsna Secunda.] Ff, Rowe i, Fleay. 
Act I, Scene iii. Dono. Act II, Scene i. 
Rowe ii. et cet. 

Scene: The French King’s Tent. 
Dono. Before the Walls of Angiers. 
Rowe et cet. (subs.). 

2, 3. Enter... Arthur.] Ff. Enter 
Philip, King of France, Lewis the Dau- 
phin, the Arch-Duke of Austria, Con- 
stance, and Arthur. Rowe,-}-. Drums, 
&c. Enter Austria, and Forces, on one 
side: on the other King Philip of France 

and his Power; Lewis, Arthur, Con- 
stance, and Attendants. Capell, Cam« 
-p. Enter on one side, the Archduke 
of Austria and Forces; on the other 
Philip, King of France, and Forces, 
Lewis, Constance, Arthur and Attend- 
ants. MaL et cet. 

2, 3. Lewis, Daulphin,] Ff, Fie. 
Louis, Dyce, Hal. Wh. i. (through- 
out). 

3. Austria,] Austria Booth reprint, 
Furnivall (Old Spel. Sh.). 


1, Scsena Secunda] In the Folios this is the second scene of Act I, but as all 
modern editions subsequent to Rowe ii. make this the first scene of Act II, this 
latter arrangement is here adopted merely in order to facilitate reference to the 
modern editions. — Ed. 

Act II, scene i.] F. Gentleman (Dram. Cens., ii, 156): We apprehend the 
play would have begun with much more propriety at this period, and there is 
not a single passage in the First Act, save King John’s reply to Chatillion, that 
could cause taste or judgment to lament the omission of it.— Boswell-Stone 
(p. 51): The historic time of Acts II. and III. extends to nearly three years, be- 
ginning at the interview of John and Philip ‘on the morrow after the feast of the 
assumption of our ladie’ (August 16), 1199, and ending ‘on Lammas daie’ (August 
i), 1202, when Arthur was taken prisoner by John. — Mooee-Smith: In spite of 
the fact that in the opening scene of the play Arthur’s claim is represented as a 
just one, and John as a usurper, the present scene by no means enlists sympathy 
on behalf of Arthur’s supporters. The very words in which Philip [Lewis] intro- 
duces Austria as the cause of the early death of Richard Cordelion are as a warning 
to the audience not to find their heroes here. 

2. Angiers] ‘Angers, or Angiers, anciently Juliomagus, Andegavum, and Andes, 
the capital of the government of Anjou, in France, situated a little above the place 
where the little rivers Loire and Sarte fall into the Maynne; which last river divides 
this city into two parts. Its ancient name it had from Julius Caesar, who built 

it The first walls of this city were raised by John, surnamed Lackland, who was 

king of England, and Duke of Anjou. But Prince Lewis, son of King Philip Augus- 
tus, and afterwards King Lewis VIII, demolished these w^alls. His son and suc- 
cessor, St. Lewis, built them up again in the maimer in which they still are; and 
besides these, it is surrounded with antique fortifications. Illustrated^ 
vol. i, p. 79.— Moberly: Shakespeare well divines the character of this city, 
the cradle of the Plantagenets, warlike and powerful, a bulwark of France against 
the Dukes of Bretagne. M. Michelet remarks that its architecture even now shows 






70 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act II, sc. i. 


Lewis. "Qtioxe Angiers well met hxBXie Aujlria^ 4 

4, 21. Lewis.] K. PM. Theob. conj. 4. Auftria,] Ff, Rowe i. Austria! 
(Nichols, ii, 388), Dyce ii, iii, Col. iii, Huds. ii. Austria. Rowe ii. et cet. 
Huds. ii, Vhi. ii, Words. Dono. Craig. 

traces of this character, the walls of its cathedral being covered not with sculptured 
saints, but with armed warriors. 

4. Lewis] Theobald {Nichols^ ii, 388) : Why does the Dauphin take upon him 
to anticipate his father in welcoming Austria, and his father here in presence? I 
doubt not but this speech should be placed to King PMlip. — [This conjecture, 
made in a letter to Warburton in 1729, Theobald did not repeat in either his first 
or second editions. — Ed.] — Collier (ed. ii.) : It has been suggested, with some 
plausibility, that the King of France ought to open this scene, and that such is 
usually the case when Shakespeare introduces a king on the stage. This rule is 
by no means without exception, and, of course, we do not feel authorised upon 
mere speculation to alter the invariable regulation of the Folios.- — [In Ms ed. iii. 
Collier assigns this and the next speech, 1 . 21, to Philip, and says that the prefix 
Dewis* is doubtless an error, since the tenor of tMs speech and others shows that 
it belongs to Philip and not to Lewis.— Ed.]—W. W[illiams] {Parthenon, 16 
August, 1862, p. 506): TMs speech is given to Lewis, although the line ^At our 
importance hither is he come’ is alone suflficient to show to whom it should belong. 
Again, after a few words from Arthur to the Duke, Lewis patronisingly commends 
him as ^A noble boyJ Yet we know that these young princes were about the 
same age and had been educated together. This blind adherence to the prefixes 
of the Folio (elsewhere admittedly most inaccurate) appears to have arisen from 
Shakespeare having crowded into this drama the events of several years. In the 
later acts Lewis plays a conspicuous part and heads the invasion of England; but 
at the period in question he was a mere youth, and was evidently so considered by 
the dramatist. If we read the whole of tMs scene carefully we can hardly fail to 
perceive that Lewis is not intended to speak until called upon to express his senti- 
ments with regard to marrying the Lady Blanch, When King John proposes the 
marriage to King Philip, the latter addresses his son by ^What say’st thou, boy?’ 
and King John afterwards asks 'What say these young ones?* How, consistently 
with real or dramatic decorum, could a ‘beardless boy,’ 'a cockered silken wanton,’ 
as Lewis is described by Faulconbridge, be the first to welcome the Duke of Austria 
before Angiers, and this in the presence of Ms father, the King of France? The 
first speech given to King Philip in the received text commences with 'Well, then, 
to work,* and implies that he had previously spoken. With a few unimportant 
exceptions Shakespeare invariably makes his monarchs and great personages open 
and conclude the dialogue whenever they appear. This further exception in 
King John would be a strange and most suspicious instance of the reverse. I may 
add, too, that in the old play, The Troublesome the corresponding speech 

is assigned, and with undeniable propriety, to King Philip.— [On the authority of 
Dyce the Shakespearean notes in The Parthenon (a weekly publication discontinued 
in 1863) are assigned to Mr W. W. Williams. The name does not appear in the 
Dictionary of National Biography, in AllibonPs Dictionary of Authors,- 01 in Jag- 
gard’s Bibliography & M. Cowden Clarke: In our previous editions 
we left the speech assigned [as in the Folio] under the impression that the forward 
part taken elsewhere by the Dauphin in the French political procedure warranted 


ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 




[4. Lewis] 

tlie assumption that here he takes the initiative, even in his father’s presence. 
But on more mature consideration of the whole question (besides bearing in mind 
the frequent errors in prefixes made by the Folio), we think there is little doubt 
that King Philip is the speaker here. The expression ‘At our importance hither 
is he come,’ which we imagined might be spoken by Lewis in his royal father’s 
name and his own, is, we confess, more consistent with the regal style put by 
Shakespeare into the mouths of his monarchs. Moreover, the word ‘ boy/ addressed 
to Arthur, makes for the belief that it is the French king who speaks, and not Lewis; 
since the latter is himself called by his father ‘boy’ further on in this same scene, 
and one so young would probably not use this epithet. The same argument ap- 
plies to the next speech but one — ‘A noble boy’ — ^which has also the prefix ‘Lewis* 
in the Folio, but which, from its tone of protection, seems properly to belong to the 
king. — Fleay (Introd., p. 28) : In this scene, 11 . 4-204, the King of France is called 
‘Lewis* in the text, 1 . 153, and in the prefixed names, lines 4, 21, 160. In this 
scene only are some of his speeches assigned to King simply. Editors have tried 
emendation unsuccessfully. They either make Lewis two syllables, or Philip one; 
neither of which are admissible in the metre of this play. It seems more reasonable 
to infer that these two hundred lines and also III, ii, i-io were inserted hurriedly 
after the rest of the play had been written. This would also account for the con- 
fusion in the division into acts and scenes. The metrical test, which shows only 
two rhymes in these two hundred lines, and no rhyme in III, ii, confirms this con- 
jecture; and when we consider that the passage alluding to the English fleet of 1596 
( 11 . 76-79) is also contained in these lines, I feel little doubt that these subsequent 
insertions were made after Flamnet’s death, and that the blunders of Philip for 
Richard and Lewis for Philip are to be attributed to the confusion caused by grief in 
Shakespeare’s mind. None but those who have had to write compulsorily under 
similar bereavements can tell how errors do creep in at such times. That the errors 
remained uncorrected causes no difficulty, for this play was not printed during 
Shakespeare’s life, and its probable revivals in 1611 and 1622 took place after his 
retirement from the theatre, according to the most probable chronology, which 
gives 1611 for the production of his last complete play; the two plays produced 
afterwards being finished by Fletcher. The excision of the character of Essex 
from this play may also have been made after August, 1596, and with the same 
want of care; which would account for his name being left in the prefix to I, i, 51.— 
Brandes (i, 174): All the scenes in which Arthur appears are contained in the 
older play, and, among the rest, the first scene of Act II, which seems to dispose 
of Fleay ’s conjecture that the first two hundred lines were hastily inserted after 
Shakespeare had lost his son. Nevertheless almost all that is gracious and touch- 
ing in the figure is due to the great reviser. [See III, iv, 98 and notes thereon. 
—Ed.]— Miss G. Porter: The main dramatic object is to let the audience know 
the relation of Austria to Kichard the Lionheart, and thereby to Faulconbridge, 
as well as to Arthur. But the most skilful way is to give the information to one 
in the play who does not know its relation to himself, and also to make this sub- 
sidiary matter a mere preliminary to the -main business,— the. attack on Angiers, 
the hearing of Chatiliion, the reception of John, etc.,— in all of which the King 
leads necessarily. By means of this change [from King Philip, as in the older 
play, to Lewis], moreover, the two new characters of whom the audience has 
before heard nothing— Lewis -and Austria—^re both at once introduced and time 



72 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act II, sc. i. 


Arthur that great fore-runner of thy bloud, 5 

Richard that rob^d the Lion of his heart, 

And fought the holy Warres in Palejiine, 

By this braue Duke came early to his graue: 8 

5. Arthur] Ff. Arthur! Pope,+. Arthur, Rowe et cet. 

is saved. Shakespeare’s speaker is not 'welcoming Austria,’ but bidding little 
Arthur to welcome him, and the speech is recast [from the older play] to suit, 
abridgement and new uses. 

4. Before Angiers . . . Austria] Rose {Sh. Soc. Trans. ^ 1S80, p. 49): If we want 
to be sure of Shakespeare’s method of work we cannot do better than look at him 
actually in the workshop; not creating beings of his own, but improving, dovetail- 
ing together, planing down, or filling out other men’s faulty work; adapting old 
plays, that is, and putting any amount of honest toil into the business. . . . Take 
a very small example: In reading the old Troublesome Raigne of John it struck me 
that after the first scene, when all the English characters had gone off and the 
French came on, the audience must be puzzled, for the first dozen lines or so, to 
know where they were and whom they had before them. It was a small enough 
matter, and the uncertainty would not last very long; yet I thought I would see 
whether Shakespeare was more or less careful in such things. I found that in his 
King John the very first line spoken on the entry of the French was this: 'Before 
Angiers well met, brave Austria!’ In six words the place and person were set be- 
fore the audience! 

4. Angiers] B- Dawson {Sh. Soc. Trans. j 1887, p. 172), in speaking of Shake- 
speare’s accentuation of proper nouns, shows that the accent is on the first syllable 
of Angiers in ail cases where it occurs in this play, and he 'therefore claims "An- 
giers” as a Spondee in the present line. It consists of Iamb, three Spondees, Iamb; 
for as beat falling upon the a of “Austria” (which has neither accent nor emphasis) 
indisputably makes the line end in an Iamb, so surely may beat falling upon the 
^giers of Angiers (also without accent or emphasis) make it a Spondee.’ — [It is, I 
think, reasonable to suppose that the g is here soft, as in the somewhat similar name 
Algiers. — -E d.] 

5. fore-runner of thy bloud] Wright: By some strange carelessness Shake- 
speare here makes Arthur in the direct line of descent from Richard. [See note by 
Moberly, 1 . 16.] 

6. rob’d the Lion of his heart] See note on I, i, 280. 

8. By this braue Duke] Capell (i, pt i, p. 121) : A great falsification of history; 
and a wilful one certainly, for the purpose of blending two characters, and gi\dng 
spirit to the Bastard’s resentment which follows presently. Richard’s chronicle 
story, — so much of it as concerns the explanation of Shakespeare, — ^is this: That, 
in Ms return from the Palestine wars, he was drove ashore on an enemy’s country — 
the Duke of Austria — ^was discover’d by him and imprison’d, but purchas’d his 
liberty at last by a great ransom, his imprisoner dying soon after by a fall from his 
horse; that, warring some years after in France, he 'was kill’d by an arrow before 
the castle of a vicount of Lymoges, which vicount in .some other encounter was 
kill’d by the Bastard. . , . Shakespeare revives Austria, and makes him Lymoges 
too; brings him so intitl’d to Angiers in the spoil of his prisoner, whose death he 
attributes to him, and kills him then by the Bastard in revenge of that death. — 


ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING lOHN 


73 


And for amends to his pofleritie, 

At our importance hether is he come, lo 

To fpread his colours boy, in thy behalfe, 

And to rebuke the vfurpation 

Of thy vnnaturall Vncle, Englifh lolfin^ 

Embrace him, loue him, giue him welcome hether. 

Arth, God fhall forgiue you Cor delions death 15 

The rather, that you giue his off-fpring life, 

Shadowing their right vnder your wings of warre: 17 


9. And] And, Cap. et seq. 

10, 14. hether] FI. hither Ff. et cet. 
10. is he] he has Words. 

12. vsurpation] usurpation Fie. 

13. Vncle^] Uncle F3F4. 

lohn,] Ff. John. Rowe,-H, Ktly, 


Del. Neils. John: Cap. et cet. 

1 5 . Cordelions] F2F3. Cordelion’s F^, 
Rowe, Del. Fie. Cmur~de 4 ion*s Pope 
et cet. 

16. rather, that] rather that F4, Rowe i, 
Wh. 5 , Cam.*f , Huds. ii. 

17. their] his Coll. MS. 


Steevtns: The old play, [The Troublesome Raigne\, led Shakespeare into this error 
of ascribing to the Duke of Austria the death of Richard. [Ibid., note on III, i, 
44.] In the person of Austria Shakespeare has conjoined the two well-known ene- 
mies of Coeur-de-lion. Leopold, Duke of Austria, threw him into prison in a former 
expedition (in 1193); but the castle of Chaluz, before which he fell (in 1199), be- 
longed to Vidomar, viscount of Limoges; and the archer who pierced his shoulder 
with an arrow (of which wound he died) was Bertrand de Gourdon. The editors 
seem hitherto to have understood Lymoges as being an appendage to the title of 
Austria, and therefore enquired no further about it. Austria in the old play 
(printed in 1591) is called Lymoges, the Austrich duke. With this note I was 
favoured by . . , my friend Henry Blake, Esq. — Malone: Harding says, in his ‘ 
Chronicle, that the cause of the quarrel was Richard’s taking down the Duke of 
Austria’s arms and banner, which he had set up above those of the King of France 
and the King of Jerusalem. The affront was given when they lay before Acre in 
Palestine, [ed. EUis, p. 264]. Fabian says that Richard ‘toke from a knighte of the 
Duke of Ostrich the sayd dukis banner, & in despy te of the sayd duke, trade it 
under foote, and dyd unto it ail the despyte he myght,’ [ed. Ellis, p. 301]. This 
circumstance is alluded to in the old King John, where the Bastard, after killing 
Austria, says: ^And as my father triumph’d in thy spoils, And trod thine ensigns 
underneath his feet.’ 

10. importance] Johnson: That is, importunity. Compare: ‘Maria writ The 
letter at Sir Toby’s great importance .’ — Twelfth Night, V, i, 371. — [According to 
Schmidt (Le^r.) these are the only examples of Shakespeare’s use of ‘importance’ 
in this sense. — Ed.] 

16. off-spring] Delius thinks that by ‘off-spring’ Arthur here means not him- 
self, but rather the whole of Richard’s family collectively, as is shown by the use of 
‘their’ in the next line.—MoBEELY: Of course Arthur was only nephew to Richard 
I, not Ms ‘offspring,’ Yet Shakespeare is only following the style of official docu- 
ments in which kings are held to be fecewded from their predecessors. So even 
Henry VII. repeatedly speaks of ‘our royal progenitor, King Edward the Fourth.’ 

17. Shadowing] Weight: That is, sheltering. Compare: ‘Behold, the Assyrian 


74 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act ii, sc. i. 

i8 


I giue you welcome with a powerlefTe hand, 

But with a heart full of vnftained loue, 

Welcome before the gates oiAngiers Duke. 20 

Lewis. A noble boy, who would not doe thee right? 

Aujl. Vpon thy cheeke lay I this zelous kiffe. 

As feale to this indenture of my ioue: 

That to my home I will no more returne 

Till Angiers,^nd the right thou haft in France, 25 

Together with that pale, that white-fac'd fhore. 

Whole foot fpurnes backe the Oceans roaring tides. 

And coopes from other lands her Handers, 

Euen till that England hedgM in with the maine, 

That Water- walled Bulwarke, ftill fecure 30 


18. fowerlejfd powerless Pope,-h 
(— Var. ’73)- 

19. vnftained] unstainhd Dyce, Sta. 
Fie. Huds. ii, Words, unstrained Coll, 
ii, iii. (MS.), unfeignld Bailey (ii, 

244). 

20. Angiers] Anglers, F4. 

21. A noble boy,] Ff, Rowei, Fie. A 
noble boy! Rowe ii. et cet. 


23. A. Johns. Var. ’73. 

2$, 29, 32, 33, 36. Till] ’Till Rowe, 
Pope, Han. Cap. Var. ’78, ’85. 

28. Handers] Iftanders F3F4. 

29, 32. Euen] Ev’n Pope, Theob. Han. 
Wark Johns. Fie. 

29. England] England, F4. 

30. Water-walled] water-wallH Dyce, 
Sta. Fie. Huds. ii, Words. Dono. 


was a cedar in Lebanon with fair branches, and with a shadowing shroud.^ — 
Ezekiel, xxxi, 3. So 'shadow^ is used in the sense of shelter, protection in 2 Henry 
IV: ^ Alack what mischiefs might he set abroach In shadow of such greatness!’ — 
IV, ii, 14. 

17, 18. their right . . . powerlesse hand] Thummel (Jahrbuch, x, p. 8) points 
out that this is Arthur’s only attempt at politics as an heir to the throne, and, even 
so, the young Prince hastens to modify the slight force of .his greeting by words 
which are anything but political, inasmuch as he asserts his own lack of power. 

19. vnstained] Collier (Notes Emend., p. 261) : The love of such a child would, 
of course, be ‘unstained’- what he meant to say, according to the MS. Corrector, 
was that he bade Austria welcome with a heart full of love, which without effort 
flowed from it: ‘with a heart full of unstrained love.’ — Singer (ed. ii.): The antith- 
esis of the hand •without power, but love without is both lucid and forcible. 
Collier-'s MS. Corrector substitutes unstrained, which, in the sense of unconstrained, 
would be plausible, but Shakespeare twice applies to love and to faith and 

troth as expressive of the implied sense is, therefore, not suitable to Shake- 

speare’s phraseology. — Dyce (ed. ii, p. 78): Against [the MS. Corrector’s] very 
plausible alteration Mr Knight (Spec, of the Stratford Shakspere, p. 2) has adduced 
from Pericles: ‘my unspotted fire of love.’ — ^I, i, 53. Compare, too, a passage of 
the present play: ‘And the like tender of our love we make, To rest without a spot 
for evermore.’ — V, vii, 115. [The above quotation from Pericles Knight did not 
include among the Various Readings when the Stratford Shakspere was published 
in 1854. The Specimen appeared in 1853; and was later issued, with some addi- 
tional matter, under the title Old Lamps or New?—ED.] 

26-31. that white-fac’d shore , . . forreine purposes] Ivor John: This speech 



ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


75 


And confident from forreine purpofes, 3 1 

Euen till that vtmoft corner of the Weft 
Salute thee for her King, till then faire boy 
Will I not thinke of home, but follow Armes. 

Conji. O take his mothers thanks, a widdows thanks, 35 
Till your ftrong hand fhall helpe to giue him ftrength , 

To make a more requital! to your loue. 

Aujl, The peace of heauen is theirs y lift their swords 
In fuch a iufl and charitable warre. 

King, Well, then to worke our Cannon fhall be bent 40 


31. forrdne] forraine Fa. forrain, 
foreign F4. 

32. vtmoft] ouimoft F4. Rowe,-{-- 

33. King^ Ff, Pope,-f . King; Rowe 

et cet. ^ 

35. 0 iahe] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Fie. 0 ! 
take Coll. Huds. i, Del. Craig. Oh! 
take Ktly, 0 , take Theob. et cet. 

38. heauen] Heaven Rowe, 4 - ( — Var. 
’73), Fie. 

y] who F4, Rowe, 4 -. that F2F3 et 


cet. 

40. King.] K. PMlip. Rowe et seq. 
(subs.). 

then to worke] F2F3. then to work^ 
F4. then, to work, Rowe, then to work, 
Pope, then, to work. Coll. Wh. i, Ktly, 
Huds. ii, Del. Rife, Dono. then, to 
work! Neils, then, to work; Theob. et 
cet. 

Cannon] engines Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. Johns. 


recalls Gaunt’s dying words in Richard II, and may have some bearing on the ques- 
tion of the dating of King John and Richard IK 

31. forreine purposes] Moberly: In 1599, which was certainly about the time 
when this play was written, great preparations were being made against a new in- 
vasion from Spain, from which the Spaniards hoped better things than had come 
from the Arniada eleven years before. Probably the burst of patriotism from 
Leopold’s lips may be due to Shakespeare’s feeling about the invasion, and intro- 
duced into the play some time after its first composition. 

35. a widdows thanks] Maxone: This was not the fact. Constance was at 
this time married to a third husband, Guido, brother to the Viscount of Touars. 
She had been divorced from her second husband, Ranulph, Earl of Chester. 

36. shall helpe] For other examples of the future tense used where we should 
use the infinitive or subjunctive, see, if needful, Abbott, § 348. 

37. a more requitall] That is, a greater. For other examples, see Shakespeare 
passim . — ^Delitjs says that a more rational construction is here to consider ^more’ 
as composite directly connected with ‘requital,’ as in ‘her best is better’d with a 
more delight.’ — Ven. Ad., \. 10. 

40. Cannon] See note on I, i, 31. 

40. bent] Wright: That is, aimed, directed. The terms of archery were applied 
to other weapons than the bow. So of a cannon, as here, in 3 Henry VI: ‘To bend 
the fatal instruments of war Against his brother and his lawful king.’ — V, i, 87. 
And in Stow’s Annales: ‘The same night, and the next morning, he bent seauen 
great peeces of Ordinance Culuerings, and Demi Canons, full against the foote of 
the Bridge and against Southwarke.’ Also of a sword, as in Richard III: ‘Queen 
Margaret saw Thy murderous falchion smoking in his blood; The which thou once 
didst bend against her breast.’ — ii, 95. 



THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act II, sc. i. 


76 


Againft the browes of this refilling towne, 41 

Call for our cheef ell men of difcipline , 

To cull the plots of best aduantages: 

Wee’ll lay before this towne our Royal bones, 

Wade to the market-place in French-mens bloud, 45 

But we will make it fubie< 5 l to this boy. 

Con. Stay for an anfwer to your Embaffie, 

Left vnaduis’d you ftaine your fwords with bloud, 

My Lord Chattilion may from England bring 

That right in peace which heere we vrge in warre, 50 

And then we lhall repent each drop of bloud, 

That hot ralh halle fo indiredlly fhedde. 52 


41. towne^ Ff, Rowe,-f, Coll. Huds. 
ii. town. — Cap. et cet. 

43. aduantages:] advantages. Rowe, 
Pope,-!-, Coll, i, ii, Wh. i, Ktly, Huds. 
Del. Rife, Dono. 

44. Weeni] Wen F3. Weni F4. 

4$. French-wewd F2F3. French- 
mem^ Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. Var. ’73. 
Frenchmen* s Cap. et seq. 

45. 51. hloud] blood F3F4. 


4$. hloud,] blood, F3F4. blood. Rowe, 
Pope,-b, Coll. Wh. i, Ktly, Huds. Del. 
Rife, Neils. Craig. 

49. Chattilion] Ff, Rowe. Chatilion 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. ChatilUon 
Cap. Var. ^73, Ktly, Fie. Chatilion 
Johns, et cet. 

52. indirectly] indiscreetly Coll, ii, iii. 
(MS.), Sing, ii, Ktly. 


43. To cxill . . . aduantages] Henley: That is, to mark such stations as might 
most over-awe the town. — ^W eight: To select the positions which are most favour- 
able for attack. 

46. But we will make it] That is, unless or except we make it. Compare, per- 
haps, ‘No jocund health that Denmark drinks today. But the great cannons to the 
clouds shall tell.’ — Hamlet, I, ii, 126. 

$2. indirectly] Collier (Notes 6* Emend., etc., p. 201): The MS. corrector says 
that we ought to read, ‘indiscreetly shed.’ Nevertheless, our great Poet sometimes 
uses ‘indirectly’ in a peculiar manner. — Singer (Sh. Vind., p. 84) rather grudgingly 
admits that this change is to be commended as having the ‘character of correc- 
tion of a printer’s error.’— -Anon. Maga., Sept., 1853, p. 304): ‘In- 

directly’ is Shakespeare’s word. The MS. corrector suggests indiscreetly — a most 
unhappy substitution, which we are surprised that the generally judicious Mr 
Singer should approve of. Indiscreetly means imprudently, inconsiderately. 
‘Indirectly’ means wrongfully, iniquitously, as may be learnt from these lines in 
Henry V, where the French king is denounced as a usurper, and is told that Henry 
‘bids you then resign Your crown and kingdom indirectly held From him the native 
and true challenger.’— Ill, i, 275. It was certainly the purpose of Constance to 
condemn the rash shedding of blood as something worse than indiscreet — as crim- 
inal and unjust— and this she did by the term ‘indirectly’ in the Shakespearean 
sense of that word. — [On the authority of Fxxmivall this anonymous review of 
Collier’s volume has been ascribed to W. N, Lettsom (N. & Q., 1877, V, vii, 224); 
but evidently through some error, since Dyce, who in his second ed. gives several 
notes by Lettsom, also quotes from these remarks made by the anonymous reviewer. 


ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING lOHN 


77 


S3 

55 


Enter Chattilion, 

King . ' A wonder Lady : lo vpon thy wifh 
Our Meffenger Chattilion is arriu’d, 

What England faies, fay breefely gentle Lord, 
We coldly paufe for thee, Chatilion fpeake. 


54. wonder Lady: 16 \ wonder^ Lady; 
lo F4. wonder^ Lady! lo! Rowe, Ktly. 
wonder, Lady! lo, Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Cap. wonder, lady: lo, Fie. 
wonder, lady! — Lo, Johns, et cet. 

55. Chattilion] Rowe. Chattillion Fa- 
Fj. Chattilion F4. Chatilion Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. Chatillion Cap. 
Var. *73, Ktly, Fie. Chatilion Johns, 
et cet- 


57 

55. arriud,] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. arriv’d! Dyce, Hal. Cam. 
-h, Rife, Words. Neils, arrived.— 
Johns, et cet. 

57. thee,] thee. Rowe, Pope,“f . thee; 
Cap, et seq. 

Chatilion] Pope, Theob. Han, 
Warb. Chatillion Ff, Cap. Var. *73, 
Ktly, Fie. Chattilion Rowe. Chatilion 
Johns, et cet. 


In the present instance, after giving the foregoing comment, Dyce quotes the fob 
lowing by Lettsom: ‘Read indiscreetly with Collier’s Corrector. Staunton would 
have it that “indirectly” may mean wrongfully; but wrongfully would make much 
more sense here than indiscreetly.’ It will be seen that this is in complete contra- 
diction to the opinion of the anonymous review'er. — E d.] — R. G. White (Sh. 
Scholar, p, 298) : There can be no doubt of the propriety of the correction [‘indis- 
creetly’]. The Constable begs them to ‘stay for an answer,’ ‘lest unadvised’ they 
stain their swords with blood; and, in addition to this, the use of ‘so’ indicates that 
indiscreetly and not ‘indirectly’ was the word. ‘That rash, hot haste so indirectly 
shed’ is not sense. The typographical error might easily have been made. — [Is 
it not passing strange that so careful and conscientious an editor as White should 
herein make such a curious blunder as to ascribe this speech to the ^Constable’? 
There is, of course, no such character in the whole play as the Constable of France 
which was evidently in W’hite’s mind; he w-as misled doubtless by the prefix Const. 
It will also be noticed that he quotes the line ‘That rash, hot,’ etc., whereas it 
reads: ‘hot, rash.’ In his edition a few years later White explains ‘so indirectly’ 
as here meaning ‘so from the purpose, so extravagantly, and therefore wantonly’; 
and characterises the correction indiscreetly as ‘a somewhat plausible emendation.’ 
—Ed.] — Ivor John: ‘Indirectly’ generally means widerha'ndedly in Shakespeare. 
Compare: ‘Indirectly and directly too Thou hast contrived against the very life,’ 
— Mer. of Yen., IV, i, 359. The meaning here is nearer to indiscreetly than to 
underhandedly, although precipitating a fight before the return of a possibly peace- 
ful answer from the opponent might be called ‘indirection’ by an honourable sol- 
dier. Cotgrave has ^ Indirectement: in-directly ... by unfit means.’ 

54. A wonder Lady] Johnson: The wonder is only that Chatilion happened to 
arrive at the moment when Constance mentioned him; which the French king, 
according to a superstition which prevails more or less in every mind agitated by 
great affairs, turns into a miraculous interposition, or omen of good. 

57. coldly] Mgberly: That is, in unwilling inaction (not in the mere sense of 
tranquilly) , — Wright : Calmly, without passion or feverish impatience. Compare 
Rom. dr JuL, ‘Either withdraw unto some private place, And reason coldly of your 
grievances, Or else depart.’— Ill, i, 55. And Much Ado: ‘Bear it coldly but till 
midnight, and let the issue show itself.’— Ill, ii, 132. 



78 


THE LIFE AND DEATH [act ii, sc. i. 


Chat, Then turne your forces from this paltry fiege, 5B 
And ftirre them vp againft a mightier taske : 

England impatient of your iuft demands, 60 

Hath put himfelfe in Armes, the aduerfe windes 
Whofe leifure I haue flaid, haue giuen him time 
To land his Legions all as foone as I : 

His marches are expedient to this towne, 

His forces flrong, his Souldiers confident: 65 

With him along is come the Mother Queene, 

An Ace ftirring him to bloud and ftrife, 67 


58. paUry\ pauUry Rowe,+- 

59. taske:] task, F4, Rowe et seq. 

60. England] England, F4, Rowe et 
seq. 

61. Armes,] Ff, Rowe, arms, Dono. 
Neils, arms; Pope et cet. 

62. ftaid] stay'd Cap. Coll. Dyce, 
Hal. Wh. Cam.+j E>el. Fie. stayed 
Dono. 

giuen] giv'n Pope,+ ( — ^Var. ’73), 
Fie. 


63. as /;] as 7 . Rowe, Pope,+, Coll. 
Wii. i, Ktly, Huds. Del. Dono. 

65. confident:] confident. Rowe et seq. 

66. Mother Queene] Mother-Queen F4 

et seq, 

67. An] As Coil. MS. 

Ace] Ate Rowe, Cap. Glo. Wh. ii, 
Neils. Craig. Ati Wh. i, Huds. At^y 
Pope et cet. 

firife^ Ff , Rowe ii. strife. Rowe i. 
Pope, 4 -. strife; Cap. et cet. 


64. expedient] That is, quick, expeditious. Compare 1 . 239 below, and for other 
examples, see Schmidt (Tex., s. v. b.). 

67. An Ace] Steevens: ^Ate’ [see Text. Notes] was the Goddess of Revenge 
This image might have been borrowed from the celebrated libel, called Leicester's 
Commonwealth, originally published about 1584: ‘She standeth like a fiend or fury, 
at the elbow of her Amadis, to stirre him forward when occasion shall serve.^ — 
[ed. 1641, p. 91. Seyfiert {Diet, of Classical Ant,, ed. Nettleship, Sandys, s. v. Ate) 
says: ‘According to Homer, the daughter of Zeus; according to Hesiod, of Eris or 
Strife, She personifies infatuation; the infatuation being generally held to imply 
guilt as its cause, and evil as its consequence. ... In later times At6 is transformed 
into an avenger of unrighteousness, like DiM, Briny s, and Nemesis' — ^Ed,] — 
Walker {Crit,, ii, 274) remarks that the corruption of t into c is frequent in old 
books, giving as examples the present line and ‘Thus placed in habiliments of 
war,’ for plated. — Richard II, Folio, p. 25, col. 2. — Craik (p. 299), in a note on 
Jul, Caes., Ill, i, 271, ‘With At6 by his side,’ says that ‘this Homeric goddess had 
evidently taken a strong hold on Shakespeare’s imagination’; in corroboration 
Craik quotes the present line from King John and ‘You shall find her the infernal 
Ate in good apparel .’ — Much Ado, 11 , i, 263; also, ‘More At6s, more At6s; stir 
them on I stir them on!’ — Love's Labour's, V, ii, 694. ‘Where,’ asks Craik, ‘did 
Shakespeare get acquainted with this divinity, whose name does not occur, I believe, 
even in any Latin author?’ — [In the note on ‘At6 in good apparel,’ Much Ado, this 
edition, the Editor, after giving the foregoing note by Craik, suggests that Shake- 
speare ^ might have learned about At6 in Spenser,’ and W. A. Wright quotes from 
The Faerie Queene, IV, i, 19-30, wherein the description of At6 and her dwelling 
occurs. Ate is mentioned several times throughout this Book of The Faerie 
Queene, and always as the instigator of strife and turmoil, as thus: ‘Her 




ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


79 

68 


With her her Neece, the Lady Blanch of Spaine, 

With them a Baflard of the Kings deceaft, 

And all thVnfetled humors of the Land, 70 

Rafh, inconfiderate, fiery voluntaries, 

With Ladies faces, and fierce Dragons fpleenes, 

Haue fold their fortunes at their natiue homes, 

Bearing their birth-rights proudly on their backs, 74 


69. Kings] King Ff, Rowe, Pope,+, 
Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Rann, Steev. Var. 
’03, ’13, Huds. ii. 

deceaft] deceafd F3F4, Rowe et 
seq. 

70. th’vnfetled] Ff, Rowe, Pope,-f-, 
Coll. Wh. i, Dyce ii, iii, Fie. the un~ 
settl’d Cap. the unsettled Var. ’73 et cet. 

71-75. Rajh...heere:] Om. Donovan. 

71. 72. In parentheses Ktly, Sta. 


Dyce ii, iii, Huds. 

71. inconfiderate] inconsiderate Pope, 

fiery] firy Mai. Steev. Var. ’21. 
voluntaries] Volunteers F4, Rowe i. 

72. Ladies... Dragons] ladies’ ...drag- 
ons’ Theob. ii. et seq. 

74. birth-rights] Fa, Cap. birth-right 
F3F4. birthright Rowe, Pope, Han. 
birthrights Theob. et cet. 


name was Ate, mother of debate And aU dissension, which dayly grow 
Amongst fraile men, that many a pubiike state And many a priuate oft doth 
ouerthrow.’ — ed. Grosart, IV, i, 11 . 168-171; again, ‘Thereto him Ate stird, new 
discord to maintaine.’ — Ibid., v, 1 . 203. This last is quite apposite to the present 
line in King John. At6 is one of the Dramatis Personce in Locrine, 1595, and there 
enacts the part of Chorus at the beginning of each Act and speaks the final speech 
as an Epilogue. In the note on the passage from Jul. Cms. (quoted above) in this 
edition I hazarded the conjecture that Shakespeare may have obtained his knowl- 
edge of At6 from a passage in Chapman's translation of Homer’s Bk xix, 11 . 
91-94; this, I now see, is quite untenable. The first seven books were translated 
in 1598, but the whole of the work did not appear until 1611, which is too late either 
for any reference in Jul. Cm. or in the present play, I therefore now incline to 
regard Spenser as the likely source of Shakespeare’s knowledge on this point.— 
Ed.] — Singer ( 5 ^. Vind., p. 84) : The correction of ‘An Ace ’ to A71 Ate, which had 
been set right since Rowe’s time, is certainly not improved by being changed to 
As Ate [by the MS. Corrector]. 

69. With them . . . deceast] Malone: This line except the word ‘With’ is 
borrowed from the old play, The Troublesome Raigne, [see Appendix, p. 483, 1 . 68]. 
Our author should have written But there is certainly no corruption, for 

we have the same phraseology elsewhere. [Compare Pericles: ‘She was of Tyrus 
the king’s daughter.’— IV, iv, 39.] 

74-79. Bearing . . . Christendome] Malone Order ^ etc., Var. ’21, 

vol. i, p. 312): Perhaps the description contained in these lines was immediately 
suggested to Shakespeare by the grand fleet which was sent against Spain in 1596. 
It consisted of eighteen of the largest of the Queen’s ships, three of the Lord Ad- 
miral’s, and above one hundred and twenty merchant ships and victuallers, under 
the command of the Earls of Nottingham and Essex. The regular land forces on 
board amounted to ten thousand; and there was also a large body of voluntaries 
(as they were then called) under the command of Sir Edward Winkfiield. Many 
of the nobility went on this expedition, which was destined against Cadiz. The 



8 o 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act n, sc. i. 


To make a hazard of new fortunes heere: 75 

In brief e, a brauer choyfe of dauntleffe fpirits 
Then now the Englijli bottomes haue waft oTe, 

Did neuer flote vpon the fwelling tide, 

To doe offence and fcathe in Chriflendome: 

The interruption of their churlifh drums 80 


75. heere:] Ff, Rowe, Dyce, Cam. 
here. Pope et cet. 

76. choyfe] Choice F4. 

77. Then] Than F4. 

79. fcathe] Ff, Rowe, Pope,-!-, Dyce 


ii, iii, Col. iii, Huds. ii, Words. Craig. 
scath Cap. et cet, 

79. Chriflendome:] Christendom. Rowe 
et seq. 


fleet sailed from Plymouth on the third of June, 1596; before the end of that month 
the great Spanish armada was destroyed, and the town of Cadiz was sacked and 
burned. . . . Many of our old historians speak of the splendor and magnificence dis- 
displayed by the noble and gallant adventurers who served in this expedition. 

74. birth-rights ... on their backs] Johnson: So in Henry VIII: ^ — ^many 
Have broke their backs with laying manors on them.’ — I, i, 84. — [Upton, whose 
Remarks on three of Jonson^s Plays appeared in 1749, quotes (p. 65) the present 
passage as an allusion to the expedition of 1596, comparing it to one in Epiccene: 
‘I had as fair a gold jerkin on that day, as any was worne in the Hand- voyage, or 
at Cadiz.’ — ^I, iv. (ed. Gifford, p. 362). It is but fair, I think, to give Malone the 
benefit of the doubt that he was not aware of his having been thus anticipated. — 
Ed.] — Staunton (Introd.y p. 391), in commenting upon the foregoing observation 
by Malone, which he, however, ascribes to Johnson, says: ‘We must be cautious in 
attaching particular meaning to descriptions which would apply with equal truth 
to almost any expedition. The fleet which the Earls of Nottingham and Essex 
led against Cadiz was not the only one which had been partly manned by gentle- 
men. History furnishes too many instances where men “Have sold their fortunes 
at their native homes” that they might participate in adventures of a similar kind; 
and Shakespeare may have derived the materials of Chatillon’s description from the 
chronicles of different periods and various countries.’ — [The same idea occurs in 
Gascoigne’s EpUo gus to Xko Steele Glasy 1575: ‘The elder sorte, go stately stalking 
on. And on their backs, they beare both land and fee, Castles and Towres, revenewes 
and receits, Lordships and manours, fines, yea fermes and ah’ (ed. Cunliffe, i, 173). 
—Marshall likewise furnishes a passage ixom Buxton f Anat. of Melan.f'^tis an 
ordinary thing to put a thousand okes, and an hundred oxen into a suit of apparel; 
to wear a whole manour on his back,’— -Part iii, Sec. 2, Mem. 3, Subs. 3. — Ed.] 

77. waft] For other examples of the past tenses and participles of verbs ending 
in t, where the present remains unaltered, see Walker, Cni 5 ., ii, p. 324 et seq., or 
Abbott, § 242. Compare ‘The iron of itself though heat red hot.’— IV, i, 69. 

79. scathe] That is, harmy injury. Compare ‘To pray for them that have done 
scathe to us.’ — Rich. Ill: I, iii, 317. 

80. churlish drums] Wright: The same epithet is applied to the drum in Venus 

Adonis: ‘Scorning his churlish drum and ensign red, — 1 . 107. 

80. drums] Moberly: As Shakespeare introduces drums at Athens and Rome, 
he may well use them in France in the twelfth century. The word ‘timbale,’ 



ACT II, SC. i.] OF KING lOHN 8 1 

Cuts off more circumftance, they are at hand, 8i 

Drum heats. 

To parlie or to fight, therefore prepare. 

Kin, How much vnlook^d for, is this expedition. 

Aujl, By how much vnexpe< 5 led, by fo much 85 

We mull awake indeuor for defence, 

For courage mounteth with occafion, 

Let them be welcome then, we are prepared. 


Enter K, of England^ Baftard, Queene, Blanch, Pembroke, 
and others, 9^ 


K,Iohn. Peace be to France: If France in peace permit 
Our iuft and lineal! entrance to our owne; 

If not, bleede France, and peace afcend to heauem 
Whiles we Gods wrathfull agent doe cbrredl 
Their proud contempt that beats his peace to heauen* 95 

Fran, Peace be to England, if that warre returne 


81-83. handy„To parlie or to fighi^ 
hand. To parley or to fight, Pope,-}-. 
hand, To parley, or to fight; Cap. et scq. 

82. Drum beats.] Drummes beats. 
F2F3, Drums beat. F4. etseq. (subs.). 
84. expedition.] Expedition! F4 et seq. 

86. indeuor] endeavor F3F4. 

87. occafion] occasion Fleay, 

88. Scene n. Pope, Han. Warb. 
Johns. 

89, 90. Enter..,and otbers.] Ff, Rowe, 
Pope,-f. Enter King John, Elinor, 
Blanch and Richard. Donovan. Flour- 
ish: Enter King John, and his Power: 
Bastard, and Lords with him; Elinor 
and Lady Blanch. Cap. et cet. 

89. K.] King. Ff, Rowe, Pope,-}-. 
King John. Cap. et seq. 

Baflard,] Faulconbridge, Theob. 
Warb. Varr. Rann. Falconbridge, 
Dyce, Hal. Huds. ii. Words. 


89. Queene] Elinor Pope et seq. 
Pembroke] Pembrook F5F4. 

90. and others.] and Forces. Mai. 
et seq. 

91. France;] France! Huds, i. 

92. owne;] Ff, Rowe, Pope,-}-, Coll. 
Wh. i, Ktly, Huds. i, Cam. own. Fleay. 
own! Cap. et cet. 

93. If not,] If not; Cap. Varr. Mai. 
Steev, Varr. Sing. Ktly. If not , — Hal. 

9S,9S- heauen..,.heauen.]’Fi. Heaven, 
,.,IIeav‘n, Rowe, Warb. Johns. Heaven! 
...heavefi Pope, Theob. Han. heaven; 
...heaven. Coll. Wh. i, Ktly. heaven,... 
heaven. Cam.F, Del. Fie. Heaven!... 
heaven. Cap. et cet. 

94. Whiles] Whilst Rowe, Pope,-}-. 

95. heats] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Coll. Sing, ii, Wh. i, Ktly, 
Sta, Cam.-f, Fie. Done, tor Han. 
et cet. 


being derived, according to Diez, from the Arabic proves the Oriental origin 
of this instrument, which, in fact, came from the Moors in Spain. 

96. if that warre retume] Mobeelv; Perhaps Philip points at the English army 
(war) as he speaks. — [The image evoked of a personified War returning to England 
‘there to live in peace’ is certainly unusual; but is it any more so than that of 
‘grim-visaged War’ smoothing his ‘wrinkled front’ and capermg ‘nimbly in a 
lady’s chamber,’ as in the first lines of Richard JJJ.?— Page explains this line sub- 
stantially as Moberly above, taking ‘that’ as redundant instead of demonstratively; 

6 



82 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act ii, sc. L 


From France to England, there to Hue in peace : 97 

England we loue, and* for that Englands fake, 

With burden of our armor heere we fweat : 

This toyle of ours fliould be a worke of thine; 1 00 

But thou from louing England art fo farre, 

That thou haft vnder-wrought his lawfull King, 

Cut off the fequence of pofterity , 

Out-faced Infant State, and done a rape 

Vpon the maiden vertue of the Crowne: 105 

Looke heere vpon thy brother Geffreyes face, 

Thefe eyes, thefe browes, were moulded out of his; 

This little abftradl doth containe that large, 108 

g7. peace:] Ff. peace. Rowe, Pope, Var. ’73, ’78, ’85. Rann. her Coll. ii. 
Johns. Coil. Wh. i, Ktly, Huds. Cam. (MS.), this S. T. P. (N. & Q., V, i, 263). 
-h, Del Fie. Rife, Neils. Craig, peacel 103-105. Om. Words. Dono. 

Theob. et cet. 104. Out-faced] Outfaced Dyce, Sta. 

98. and for] Ff, Rowe, Popey-f , • Fie. Huds. ii. 

Dyce, Huds. Cam. 4-, Neils, and, for 105. maiden ’oeriui[ maiden-virtue 
Cap. et cet. Rowe, Pope, Ktly. 

99. burden] burthen F4, Rowe, Pope, Crowne:] crown. Rowe et seq. 

-f, Varr, Rann. Mai. Wh. i. 106. Geffreyes] Geffrey's Rowe. 

> fweat:] sweat. Coll. Dyce, Hal. face,] Ff, Rowe, Pope,-!- ( — ^Var. 

Wh. Ktly, Huds. Cam.-F, Neils. ’73). face; Csup. face. Ktly. face ; — 

101. farre] far F4. Var. ’73 et cet. 

102. his] its Rowe, Pope,-|-, Cap. 108-110. Om. Donovan. 


but is it not here the conjunctional affix, equivalent to if {so he) that, as explained 
by Abbott (§ 287), with the example, Hf that the youth of my new interest here 
Have power to bid you welcome.’ — Mer. of Yen., Ill, ii, 224? — Ed.] 

102. vnder- wrought] Steevens: That is, underworked, undermined. 

102. his] Collier (ed. ii.) : Countries are usually spoken of in the feminine, 
and the MS. Corrector properly substitutes her for ‘his’j her oxiA ^his’ vrere fre- 
quently confounded because both, of old, were spelt with the same vowel. — 
[Wright, commenting on this alteration, says: ‘ *'his” is, however, the neuter 
possessive pronoun.’ See 1 . 202, below. — Ed.] 

104. Outfaced Infant State] Wright: That is, browbeaten, put down by 
intimidation or bravado, the state that belongs to an infant. See V, i, 53: ‘out- 
face the brow Of bragging horror,’ and Hamlet: 'Dost thou come here to whine 
To outface me.’ — V, i, 301. And compare Henry V: 'I will not say so for fear I 
should be faced out of my way.’ — III, vii, 90. 

io8~iio. abstract . . . breefe] H. Bayley (p. 189) compares, for this use of 
'abstract’ and 'breefe’ as classicisms, ' — whose body is an abstract or a brief 
Contains each general virtue in the world.’— Anon., 1596, Edward III: II, i, 82. — 
Rolpe compares: 'Behold, my lords, Although the print be little, the whole 
matter And copy of the father.’ — Wihter^s Tale, II, iii, 97. 

108. that large] Page: We take 'large’ here as a noun antecedant to ‘which,’ 
and equivalent to largeness, full she, full growth. Arthur’s little form is a com- 


ACT II, SC. i.] OF KING JOHN 83 

Which died in Geffrey\zxiA the hand of time, 

Shall draw this breefe into as huge a volume: iio 

That Geffrey was thy elder brother borne, 

And this his fonne, England was Geffreys right, 

And this is Gefreyes in the name of God : 113 


109. died] dfd Rowe, 4 -, Varr. Rann, 
Mai. 

no. huge] large Rowe,+ ( — Var. ’73). 

112, fonne,] son; Pope, 4 , Cap. 
Geffreys] Geffrey es Fa. 

1 13. this] Ms Mason (Comments, p. 
iS4)> Wh. Dyce ii, iii, Huds. ii, Words. 


113. Geffreyes] F3. Geffreyes: Fa. 
Geffreys, F4. Geffrey’s, Knt. Geffrey’s. 
Coll. Sing, ii, Wh. i, Ktly, Sta. Dei. 
Dono. Craig. Geffrey’s son Jervis. 
Geffrey’s; Rowe et cet. 

God:] God Pope, Han. Sta. Cam. 
4 , Fie. Wh. ii, Neils. God. Rnt. 


plete abstract or miniature copy of the fully-grown Geoffrey- ‘That large’ is 
thus in antithesis with ‘this brief’ in 1. no, as well as with ‘little abstract’ in this 
same line. 

no. this breefe ... a volume] Moberly: Shakespeare’s experience of law- 
deeds was in many ways sufficient to show him the expansive force in such docu- 
ments when paid for by the line. 

no. huge] Cambridge Edd. (Note VIH, p. 99): Large, which was doubtless 
a misprint for ‘huge’ in Rowe’s edition, remained uncorrected by Pope, Theobald, 
Hanmer, Warburton, and Johnson, though Grey noticed the mistake (Notes, i, 
p. 230). Capell restored the true reading, 

113. this is Geffreyes] Mason (Comments, p. 154): I have no doubt but we 
should read — ‘And Ms is Geffrey’s.’ The meaning is, ‘England was Geffrey’s 
right, and whatever was Geffrey’s, is now Msf pointing to Arthur.— Knight: 
We have restored the punctuation of the original: ‘And this is Geffrey’s, in the 
name of God.’ Perhaps we should read with Mason: ‘his is Geffrey’s.’ In either 
case, it appears to us that King Philip makes a solemn asseveration that this 
(Arthur) is Geffrey’s son and successor, or ‘Geffrey’s right’ is his (Arthur’s) — 
the name of God; asserting the principle of legitimacy by dmne ordinance. As 
the sentence is commonly given, Philip is only employing an unmeaning oath. — 
[As will be seen, Knight’s punctuation— a period at the end of the line — ^is not a 
‘restoration’ of the Folio text, but is a reading original with Knight.— Ed.] — ^R. G. 
White: Although it passes the power of human understanding to comprehend 
what would, by [the Folio] reading, be spoken of as Geffrey’s, it has been hitherto 
retained. Mason corrected the almost obvious typographical error, one easily made 
at any time, and still more probable here on account of the occurrence of ‘And 
this’ iinmediately above.“C. & M. Gowden Clarke: The construction of the 
sentence ‘this his son’ in the previous line, being elliptical for ‘this boy is his son,’ 
leads us to believe that ‘this is Geffrey’s’ elliptically implies ‘this boy is Geffrey’s’ 
— meaning: ‘this boy’s right is what was Geffrey’s,’ or ‘to this boy now belongs 
that which was Geffrey’s.’ The repetition of a word in a sequence of sentences, 
like ‘this’ in the present one, is quite accordant with Shakespeare’s style; and he 
has instances of the possessive case understood instead of expressed. — ^Hudson 
(ed. ii.) : I suspect the correction ought to be carried still further [than Mason’s 
Ms for ‘this’], and Arthur's substituted for ‘Geffrey’s’: ‘England was Geffrey’s 


84 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act ii, sc. L 


How comes it then that thou art called a King, 

When liuing blood doth in thefe temples beat 115 

Which owe the crowne, that thou ore-mafterefl? 

KJohn. From whom hafl thou this great commiffion 
To draw my anfwer from thy Articles? {France ^ 

Fra. Fro that fupernal ludge that ftirs good thoughts 
In any beaft of ftrong authoritie, 120 

To looke into the blots and ftaines of right, 


1 16. owe] own Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Johns. 

1 1 7. commifi'On] Commiffion, F4. 
(France] Om. Rowe. 

front thy] to thy Pope,-f . forth 
by Vaughan (i, 21). 


1 19. Fro] From Ff. 

120. heaji] Ft. hreafi Ff. 

1 21. blots] holts Warb. (misprint). 
right,] Ff, Rowe, right: Cam, 

+, Wh. ii. right. Pope et cet. 


right, and his [right] is Arthur’s. —Vaughan (i, 12): [This and the preceding 
line] imply that the speaker has already shown some living person to own the 
crown of England; and yet such an assertion is not to be found elsewhere than in 
the reading, ‘England was Geffrey’s, and is this Geffrey’s?’ I think it most 
probable, therefore, that Shakespeare wrote: ‘And is this Geffrey’s?’ but if not so, 
thus: ‘And this is Geffrey.’ — ^Miss C. Porter: That is, this right is Geffrey’s. 
The word right — ^which implies England also, that being Geffrey’s right — ^is carried 
over in thought from the preceding line. It has been explained otherwise: i. e., 
‘this is Geffrey’s heir.’ But the argument proceeds vcith some form, and, on the 
stage, must have been accompanied with gestures toward Arthur, at ‘this is son,’ 
his ‘eyes’ and ‘brows.’ This personal designation must render further repetition 
of the assertion needless, and the formal progress of the argument demands a 
conclusion. As the last step of the speech it comes — ^the England, the crown 
that was Geffrey’s right is Geffrey’s son’s right, and is his crown.— Hereord: 
That is, this boy is Geffrey’s son (and as such inheritor of his right to England). 
The phrase is ambiguous, but the other possible interpretations (e. g., this terri- 
tory is Geffrey’s) are less natural. 

1 16. Which . . . that] Compare, for this use of ‘which’ and ‘that,’ ‘If he see 
aught in you that makes him like That anything he sees which moves his liking,’ — 
h. 536, 537 below. See, if needful, Abbott, § 267. 

1 18. from thy Articles] Collier: It has been suggested that we ought to read 
Uo thy articles’; but the old wording is very intelligible; the answer of John was 
to be drawn from the articles of the King of France, just before propounded. — 
[Collier refers, I think, to a note on this passage in the Variorum of 1821 signed 
simply ‘Roberts’; but the change is more than a suggestion; it is the reading of 
ah editions from Pope to the Variorum of 1773. Collier’s note did not appear 
in either of his subsequent editions. — ^E d.] 

1 19-12 1. Fro that ... of right] Snider (ii, 297): The character of the man 
in other situations can leave no doubt concerning the sincerity of these words; 
it is the religious conscience which speaks in him and directs his actions. He, 
therefore, win develop a twofold conflict with the influences of his own party, 
besides Ms struggle with John. He is not a mere politician, hence he will collide 



ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


85 


That ludge hath made me guardian to this boy, 122 

Vnder whole warrant I impeach thy wrong, 

And by whofe helpe I meane to challife it. 

KJohn-Klz-cVi thou dofl vfurpe authoritie. 125 

124. And] And, Cap. Varr. Rann, Sing. Knt i, Dyce, He. 

Mai. Steev. Sing. Knt, Hal. Ktly. 125-159. In margin, Pope, Han. 

chajiife] chdstise Steev. Varr. 


with the political selfishness which is seeking to control the French expedition; 
nor is he a mere devotee of the Church, hence he will oppose its violation of good 
faith and moral rectitude. Conscience thus arrays him against the policy of the 
Dauphin and the policy of the Legate. — ^Moberly; The idea of these lines seems- 
to be that God sets in motion the authority of kings, as the judge of a supreme 
court does that of inferior judges by mandamus. So in 1 . 122 God is like the Lord 
Chancellor, who appoints guardians to heirs during their minority. [Lines 120, 
121] might, perhaps, be stopped as follows: ‘In any breast — of strong authority 
To look into the blots,’ etc. 

1 21. blots and staines] Johnson: Mr Theobald reads, with the first Folio, 
‘blots,’ which being so early authorised, and so much better understood, needed 
not to have been changed by Dr Warburton to bolts, though bolts might be used 
in that time for spots; so Shakespeare calls Banquo spotted with blood, ‘the blood- 
boltered Banquo.’ The verb to ‘blot’ is used figuratively for to disgrace in 11 . 139, 
141. And, perhaps, after all, bolts was only a typographical mistake, — [Heath 
(p. 225) also concludes, that this unnecessary change by Warburton is an error of 
the press. — Ed.] — Steevens: ‘Blots’ is certainly right. The illegitimate branch: 
of a family always carried the arms of it with what, in ancient heraldry, was called 
a blot or difference. So, in Drayton’s Epistle from Queen Isabel to King Richard II: 
‘No bastard’s mark doth blot his conquering shield.’ — [ed. Hughs, p. 99]. ‘Blots^ 
and ‘stains’ occur together again in Act III, scene i, [ 1 . 47]. — Malone: ‘Blot’ had 
certainly the heraldical sense mentioned by Steevens. But it here, I think, means 
only blemishes. [That ‘blot’ ever had any special heraldic meaning is, I think, 
very doubtful. It is not included in the glossaries appended to Guillim’s Dis- 
play of Heraldry, Edmondson’s Complete Body of Heraldry, or in Boutell’s Hand- 
booh of English Heraldry. Murray {N. E. D.) does not include any such technical 
sense of the word among its several significations. The general meaning given by 
the latter is blemish. I am inclined to think that Steevens was misled by a note 
on the line from Drayton which he has quoted, wherein occurs the following: 
‘Showing the true and indubitate birth of Richard, his right unto the crown of- 
England, as carrying the arms without blot or difference.’ This might be taken 
to mean that the words ‘blot’ and ‘difference’ were synonymous; but a more 
likely interpretation is that ‘blot’ is used in the sense oi blemish and ‘difference’ 
as the badge of cadency; that is, neither blemish nor mark of cadency (bastardy) 
appear on Richard’s shield. — ^E d.] 

125. K. lohn. Alack thou dost vsurpe] F. Gentleman (ap. Bell, ed. 16): 
This encounter of the Kings is not unlike that of Prettyman and Volscius in The 
Rehearsal; with this difference, that the burlesque Princes are rather more polite 
than the real Monarchs; and the Bastard, regardless of all decorum, appears a 


86 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act ii, sc. L 
126 


Fran. Excufe it is to beat vfurping downe. 
Queen. Who is it thou doft call vfurper France! 


1 26. Excufe ii w] Ff, Rowe i. Excuse 
iiy His Rowe ii, Pope, Theob, Han. 
Warb. Jobns. Excuse it; His Cap. Varr. 
Rann. Excuse^ — it is Dyce, Hal. Sta. 


Huds. ii, Words. Excuse, it is Fie. 
Rife. Exctise; it is Mai. et cet. 

127. is it] isH Rowe ii, Pope,-f-. 
thou] that thou Rowe, Pope, 4 ** 


Billingsgate bravo. The scene as here oiffered to view [in the acting copy] is 
considerably and, we think, very justifiably, curtailed. 

126. Excuse it is] P. Simpson (1900, N. 6* Q., IX, v, 164): Malone’s punctua- 
tion is now, I think, generally accepted; but this absolute use of the verb ‘excuse’ 
seems very un-English. I should either keep [the Folio reading] as it stands, or 
perhaps put a comma after the word ‘is,’ taking the line to mean: ‘It is sufficient 
excuse for my usurpation of authority that I am fighting against usurpation.’ — 
[Miss Porter {Folio ed.) and Belden {Tudor Sk,) also thus interpret; and, on the 
whole, this is, I think, much to be preferred either to Rowe’s ‘Excuse it, ’tis,’ 
which seems somewhat too deferential, or Malone’s punctuation where ‘excuse’ is 
used in a rather forced construction, as Simpson points out, — E d.] 

127. Queen. Who is it . . . France] Fletcher (p. 35): Small a space as Queen 
Elinor occupies in the dialogue of this play, it is important to mark the clear in- 
dications, which every line of it assigned to her, affords us of the character as con- 
ceived by the dramatist. Here, indeed, we have arrogance and unscrupulous love 
of power personified, and, accordingly, her vehemence in repelling the charge of 
usurpation against herself and John is proportioned to the clear consciousness 
which she betrays of the justice of the imputation. In her violent altercation with 
Constance she makes up for the inferiority of her eloquence to that of her rival by 
boldness of assertion and fierceness of reproach. Her sentences are brief, but 
each one speaks a volume respecting her own predominant qualities; and her 
vituperation, it must be owned, is truly imperial. — ^H. Coleridge (ii, 151): I 
should be glad to find that this altercation was transferred from the old Trouble- 
some Raigne, for it is very troublesome to think it Shakespeare. I do not exactly 
know how great ladies scold, and there are reasons for supposing that Queen 
Elizabeth herself was not always quite queenlike in her wrath; but there is so little 
of humour, propriety, or seemliness in the discourse of the two princesses, and 
Constance is at last so confused and unintelligible, if not corrupt, that the whole 
might well be spared. Massinger, in The Dtike of Milan, has a yet grosser dialogue 
between Mariana, Isabella, and Marcelia, but it is not so utterly out of place; 
and, besides, Massinger’s ladies are seldom gentlewomen. — ^Weiss (p. 240): None 
of the women in the historical plays stand by the men so emphasized as the mother 
of Arthur is; she agitates Ms claims with a passionate intensity that ought to have 
kept Mm alive to reign. A high-minded man who claims his rights, and a high- 
minded woman who does the same, express themselves in different styles. The 
feminine style is shown in Constance with great discrimination. Both sexes can 
hate injustice, and may be opposed to compromises. Both can have indignation 
for a crime. But see how Constance puts into these moral feelings a scorn and a 
swiftness of dissent, urged by a volubility more native to a woman than to a man. 
Woman is apt, indeed, to be too voluble: each minute of her phrases breeds new 
ones; so she does not stop to notice that her indictment is shorter than her 
breath. . , . But the invective of Constance is the swift weapon-play of mater- 



ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING lOHN 


87 

128 


Confi., Let me make anfwer : thy vfurping forme. 

Queen. Out infolent, thy baftard fliall be King, 

That thou maift be a Queen, and checke the world. 130 

Con. My bed was euer to thy fonne as true 
As thine was to thy husband, and this boy 132 


128. anfwer: ihy] Ff, Rowe, Pope,-!-, 
Cam.-}-, answer; — iky Cap. et cet. 

129-161. Om. Dono. 

129. Out infolent] Out insolent! Pope. 


Outj insolent! Theob. et seq. 

1 29-141. Om. Words. 

130. maiji] may^fl F4. 

world.] World! Rowe et seq. 


nity: it flashes through every guard, touches rapidly to and fro, and draws 
blood at every unexpected touch. 

130. That thou maist be a Queen] Malone: ‘Surelie,’ [says Holinshed,] ^queene 
Elianor, the kings mother, was sore against hir nephue Arthur, rather mooved 
thereto by enuie conceived against his mother, than vpon any iust occasion giuen 
in behalfe of the child, for that she saw, if he were king, how his mother Constance 
would look to beare most rule within the reahne of England, till hir sonne should 
come to lawful! age, to gouerne of himselfe. So hard a thing it is to bring women 
to agree in one mind, their natures commonlie being so contrarie.’ — [vol. iii, p. 
158]. — CoESON (p. 166): These words have, I think, misled many commentators; 
and they have made ambition the ruling motive of Constance. It is not safe to 
take the opinions which hostile characters in Shakespeare^s plays, and sometimes 
characters which are not hostile, are made to express of each other as opinions 
which must go for anything in our estimation of the characters; quite as unsafe as 
it sometimes is in real life to judge of people by what we hear others say of them. 
In Shakespeare’s T>lays what characters say must often be taken as representing 
themselves rather than others. This is especially true in the case of Elinor. We 
do not learn what others are from what she says of them; we certainly do not learn 
what manner of woman Constance really is; but we learn a great deal of what 
she is. . . . No careful reader of the play will, I ^m assured, take Elinor’s accusa- 
tions as at aU representing the Poet’s dramatic purpose in Constance. The old 
Elinor is the political genius and guide of her son John, and we must not look for 
the truth from her in regard to Constance. . . . But what Constance says of 
Elinor we can take as the truth in regard to the old queen mother. 

130. checke the world] Staunton: It has been doubted whether Shakespeare, 
who appears to have had cognizance of nearly every sport and pastime of his age, 
was acquainted with the ancient game of chess; we believe the present passage may 
be taken to settle the question decisively. The allusion is obviously to the Queen 
of the chess-board, which, in this country, was invested with those remarkable 
powers that render her by far the most powerful piece in the game, somewhere about 
the second decade of the i6th century. — Fleay: ‘Check,’ that 1 % overhear. No 
allusion to chess, as Staunton thinks; this game is only mentioned once in Shake- 
speare {Tempest^ F, i, stage-direction), — ^W right compares: ‘But to command, 
to check, to o’erbear such As are of better person than myself.’ — 3 Henry VI: 
III, ii, 166. 

132, As thine . . . thy husband] Vaughan (i, 13); This line, although hith- 
erto unsuspected, involves a difficulty. It is scarcely possible that Constance should 
have vindicated her son’s legitimacy by affirming that her own fidelity to her 



88 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act ii, sc. i. 


Liker in feature to his father Geffrey 

Then thou and lohUj in manners being as like , 

As raine to water, or deuill to his damme; 

My boy a baflardp by my foule I thinke 
His father neuer was fo true begot, 

It cannot be, and if thou wert his mother. ( ther 

Queen, Theres a good mother boy, that blots thy fa- 


133 

135 


139 


134. Then] Than F^. 

lohn, in manners] Ff, Rowe, 
Pope, 4 “ > Kilt, Coll. Sta. Del, Fie. 
John^ in manners; Var. ’73. John in 
manners, — Dyce, Hal. Wh. i, John 
in manners, Neils. John in manners; 
Roderick, Cap. et cet. 

135. damme;] Dam, Rowe et seq. 


136. hajiard'i] Bastard! Rowe et seq. 
Joule I thinke..,] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 

Craig, soul, I think... Dyce, Wh. i, 
Huds. Cam.-p. soul, I think,... Theob. 
et cet. 

137. true begot] true-begot Theob. Han. 

138. and] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Fie. an 
Theob. et cet. 


husband was as unimpeachable as that of Elinor to hers. In the first place, she 
afterwards declares that Elinor’s motherhood was a sujQficient proof in itself of the 
illegitimacy of any child of which she was mother. ... In the second place, Con- 
stance proceeds immediately to advance a second argument for the lawful parent- 
age of her son founded on a resemblence between him and her husband, equal 
to the resemblance of Elinor’s child, not to Elinor’s husband, but to Elinor herself, 
thus carefully avoiding any supposition of Elinor’s fidelity, although it would have 
best suited her argument to make it; and here it is observable that the very same 
emphatic assertion of the resemblance of a child to his mother, Margaret of Anjou, 
is in Henry VI. accompanied by the direct and notorious imputation to that mother 
of infidelity to her husband. The first two lines of the reply of Constance were, 
or ought to have been, written thus: ‘My bed was ever to thy son as true, As to 
me was my husband.’ How easily would the words ‘to me’ pass into the word 
‘thine,’ and how frequently my and ‘thy’ are exchanged cannot need proof. — 
Ivor John: It may be that Shakespeare was content to make Constance femininely 
illogical in her passion. Mr Craig’s suggestion that Constance meant ‘My bed 
was at least as true as yours’ avoids the difficulty. 

134. Then thou and lohn, in manners] Roderick (ap. Edwards, p. 251): It 
does not appear that EKnor and John were alike in feature, though they were 
mother and son; and what follows, ‘ — in manners being as like As rain to water,’ 
etc., comes in but awkwardly. But the transposition of one comma makes all 
easy and natural. John had before been pretty rough with King Philip; and 
Elinor, in the speech to which this is an answer, calls Constance’s son Arthur a 
Bastard. To which she, taunting Elinor’s gross expression, says in reply that 
her son Arthur is ‘Liker in feature to his father GeofiErey, Than thou and John in 
manners; i. e., as like him as possible; for (says she) you two are equally unman- 
nerly, and in that as like one another as Rain and Water, or Devil and Dam. — 
Carell (i, pt 2, p. 121): [Roderick] puts a wrong sense on ‘manners,’ referring it 
to, what he calls, John’s unmannerliness; whereas the word’s general sense is in- 
tended — to wit, general manners — a sense of much more severity. 

138. and if . , . his mother] Malone: Constance alludes to Elinor’s infidelity 


ACT n, sc. i.] 


OF KING lOHN 


89 

140 


Conji* There^s a good grandame boy 
That would blot thee. 

Peace. 

Bafi. Heare the Cryer. 

Aujt. What the deuill art thou? 

One that wil play the deuill fir with you, 145 

And a may catch your hide and you alone: 

You are the Hare of whom the Prouerb goes 
Whofe valour plucks dead Lyons by the beard; 

He fmoake your skin-coat and I catch you right, 149 


140, 141. One line Pope et seq. 

141. v)oul^ wouldst Theob. i. 

142. Peace,] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Fie. 
Peace , — Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. 
Peace ! — Var. ’73. Peace! Cap. et cet. 

145. deuill fir] Devil y Sir^ F4. 

146. And a] Ff, Rowe, Pope. And ’a 
Hal. Dyce ii, iii, Huds. ii. An* a 


Theob. et cet. 

146. alone:] alone, Theob. Han. Warb. 
Johns. Cap. Varr. Rann, Mai. Steev. 
Varr. Sing. Knt, Dyce. 

147. Hare] Hare, F4, Rowe, 4 -. 

i4.g. Ile,„skin-'COcd] rie,„Skin<oai, F4. 
aftd] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Fie. an 
Theob. et cet. 


to her husband, Louis VII, when they were in the Holy Land, on account of which 
he was divorced from her. She afterwards (1151) married King Henry II. — 
Moberly: In her passion Constance attempts to prove too much; for if Geoffrey 
were not legitimate he would have no title to hand down to Arthur. 

143. Heare the Cryer] Malone: Alluding to the usual proclamation for silence 
made by criers in courts of justice, beginning Oyez, corruptly pronounced 0 -Yes, 
Austria has j'ust said ‘Peace r 

147, 148. Hare . . . dead Lyons] Steevens: So, in The Spanish Tragedy, 'He 
hunted well that was a lion^s death; Not he that in a garment wore his skin: So 
hares may pull dead lions by the beard. Wl, ii, 170; ed. Boas, p. 12]. — ^Malone: 
The proverb alluded to is, 'Mortuo leoni et lepores insultant.’ — ^Erasmi, Adagia . — 
Grey (i, 280): This proverb is an allusion to the ill-usage which the body of Hector 
met with from the Greeks, after he was slain by Achilles. — Green (p. 304): Claude 
Mignault, in his notes to Alciatus {Emblem, 153), quotes an epigram from an un- 
known Greek author, which Hector is supposed to have uttered as he was dragged 
by the Grecian chariot: 'Now after my death ye pierce my body The very hares 
are bold to insult a dead lion.V. . . The device itself [in Alciatus, Reusner, and 
Whitney] is a representation of Hares biting a dead Lion, [with the motto: 
Cum laruis non luctandum],---WmGB'i:: To pluck by the beard was a mark 
of contempt.— [Compare Gioucester’s indignant remonstrance: 'By the kind 
gods, ’tis most ignobly done To pluck me by the beard .’ — King Lear, III, vii, 
35.— Ed.] 

149. He smoake your skin-coat] DELros sees in these words an allusion to the 
use of smoke for expelling moths from fur garments. The Bastard, in like man- 
ner, will drive Austria from his skin-coat. — ^Wright, justly, dissents, remarking 
that 'in the North Country Dialect 'Ho smoke” is synonymous with to thrash, 
and Carr, in his Craven Glossary, quotes Miege (Ff. Diet), “I shall smoke ye for ’t, 




90 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act II, sc. i. 


Sirra looke too’t,yfaith I will, yfaith. 150 

Blan. O well did he become that Lyons robe, 

That did difrobe the Lion of that robe. 

Baft. It lies as fightly on the backe of him 
As great Alcides fhooes vpon an Affe: 154 


150. Sirra] Sirrah, Rowe. 

tooH,] ioHy F3F4, Rowe, Pope, 
Han. toH; Theob, et cet. 

yfaith.. .yfaith] VfaUh..,ifaith F4. 
I SI. 0 ] 0 / Coll. Del. Oh, Ktly. 

did] doth Anon, ap Cam. 

152. rohe.] Ff, Rowe,-h, Coll, robe! 
Cap. et cet. 


154. fhooes] F2F3. Jhoos F4. shoes 
Rowe, Pope, Var. ’78, ^85, Rann, Mai. 
Steev. Vairr. Sing. Knt, Coll, i, ii, Dyce 
i, Hal. Huds. i. Fie. showed Ktly. 
does Vaughan, Huds, ii. spoil Kinnear. 
shews or shows Theob. et cet. 

A ffe:] ass. — Coll. Wh. i, Huds. 
ape Fie. Orger, 


je vous punirai de la belle maniereJ^ ^ — In explanation of the word 'skin-coat^ 
Wright also quotes: ‘Cotgrave (s. v. En), en auray (blowes being vnderstood) 
I shall be well beaten; my skin-coat will be soundly curried.” And again (s. v. 
ContrepoinctS) : “ I’ ay la peau toute contrepoinctee de coups, My skinne-coat 
hath received as many knockes as a quilt hath stitches.” ’ 

1 51. Blan. O well . . . that Lyons robe] C. & M. Cowden Clarke: This speech 
has struck us as more fitly belonging to Constance than to Blanche; who seems in- 
tended by the dramatist to take no part in what is going forward, until there is a ques- 
tion of her marriage with the Dauphin, and she is addressed by him. Whereas, from 
Constance, the implied sneer at Austrians unfitness to wear the spoil that so well 
became Coeur-de-lion, comes precisely in accordance with her subsequent more 
open and violent vituperation, where she exclaims, ‘Thou wear a lion’s hide! 
Doff it for shame.’ The misappropriation of the Folio prefixes in this scene, 
as in many others, helps to confirm our opinion; yet, such is our reluctance to 
alter, that we leave the text as it is, contenting ourselves with the present sug- 
gestion. — ^Rolfe, in answer to the foregoing note by the Clarkes, points out that 
Shakespeare is here following the older play ‘in which Blanch says: ‘‘Joy 
tide his soul, to whom that spoil belong’d: Ah Richard how thy glory here is 
wrong’d!” ’ 

154. Alcides shooes vpon an Asse] Theobald: But why his ‘shoes,’ in the 
name of propriety? For let Hercules and his shoes have been really as big as 
they were ever supposed to be, yet they (I mean the shoes) would not have been 
an overload for an ass. I am persuaded I have retrieved the true reading 
(shews); and let us observe the justness of the comparison now. Faulconbridge, 
in his resentment, would say this to Austria: ‘That lion’s skin, which my great 
father King Richard once wore, looks as uncouthly on thy back, as that other 
noble hide which was borne by Hercules would look on the back of an ass.’ A 
double allusion was intended; first, to the fable of the ass in the lion’s skin; then 
Richard I. is finely set in competition with Alcides, as Austria is satirically coupled 
with the ass. — Capell (I, pt ii, p. 121): [Theobald’s] shews and Alcides' apos- 
trophiz’d are both indisputable; and the line, in his reading, wants no comment, 
other than that ^role' is understood before shewsy and shews put for ‘would shew.’ — 
Malone: That is, upon the hoofs of an ass. Theobald thought the shoes must 
be placed on the back of the ass. This endeavor to make our Author’s similes 



ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


91 


[154. As great Alcides shooes vpon an Asse] 
correspond exactly on both sides is, as has been more than once observed, the 
source of many errors. — Ste evens: The ‘ shoes ^ of Hercules are more than once 
•introduced in the old comedies on much the same occasions. So, in The Isle of 
Gulls, J. Day, 1606: '—are as fit ... as Hercules’s shoe for the foot of a pigmy,’ 
[ed. Bullen, p. 6]. Again, in Greene’s Epistle Dedicatory to Perimedes the Black- 
smith, 1588: ' — and so lest I should shape Hercules’ shoe for a child’s foot, I com- 
mend your worship to the Almighty,’ [ed. Grosart, vii, 6]. Again, in Greene’s 
Penelope's Web, 1601: 'I will not ... go about to pull a Hercules shoe on Achilles 
foot,’ [ed. Grosart, vii, 203]. Again: ‘Hercules’ shoe will never serve a child’s 
foot,’ [Ibid., vii, 229]. Again, in Gosson’s School of Abuse, 1579: ‘ — to draw the 
lien’s skin upon ^Esop’s asse, or Hercules’ shoes on a child’s feete,’ [ed. Arber, 
p. 21. — To these Rushton (1873, N. 6" Q., IV, xii, 304) adds: ‘And therefore me 
thinketh, the time were but lost, in pullyng Hercules shooe vppon an Infants foot.’ 
— Lyly: Euphues and his England, 1580 (ed. Bond, ii, 41).] — Davies (Dram. 
MiscelL, i, 27) opines that the frequent mention of the shoes of Hercules among 
old authors is apparently suggested by the proverb ex pede Herculem.—h. E. B. 
(N. Q., 1853, I, viii, 29): Out of five quotations given by Steevens there is 

not one in which tHe shoes are not provided with feet. But Shakespeare nowhere 
alludes to feet! His ass most probably had feet, and so had Juvenal’s verse (when 
he talks of his ‘satyr 4 sumente cothurnam’), but neither Shakespeare nor Juvenal 
dreamed of any necessary connection between the feet and the shoes. Therein 
lies the difference between Shakespeare and ‘our old poets’; a difference that 
ought to be sufficient, of itself, to put down the common cry that Shakespeare 
borrowed his allusions from them. If so, how is it that his expositors, with these 
old poets before their eyes all this time, together with their own scholarship to 
boot, have so widely mistaken the true point of his allusion? It is precisely be- 
cause thty have confined their researches to these old poets, and have not followed 
Shakespeare to the fountain head. There is a passage in Quintilian which, very 
probably, has been the common source of both Shakespeare’s version and that of 
the old poets. Quintilian is cautioning against the introduction of solemn bom- 
bast in trifling affairs: ‘To get up,’ says he, ‘this pompous tragedy about mean 
matters is as though you would dress up children with the mask and buskins of 
Hercules.’ Here the addition of the mask proves that the allusion is purely 
theatrical. The mask and buskins are put for the stage trappings, or properties 
of the part of Hercules: of these, one of the items was the lion's skin; and hence the 
extreme aptitude of the allusion as applied by the Bastard to Austria, who was 
assuming the importance of Coeur-de-lion. It is interesting to observe how nearly 
Theobald understood the necessity of the context. [The latter part of Theo- 
bald’s note is here quoted.] One step further, and Theobald would have discovered 
•the true solution; he only required to know that the shoes, by a figure of rhetoric 
called synecdoche, may stand for the whole character and attributes of Hercules, 
to have saved himself the trouble of conjecturing an ingenious, though infinitely 
’worse, -woid as a substitute. — [The latter half of this note appears in Halliwell’s 
Folio, ed. 1859, but signed Anon. I strongly suspect that the initials A. E. B. 
stand for Andrew Edward Brae, the doughty opponent of Collier and Dyce. — 
EdJ — Keightley (N. & Q.j 1853, I, viii, 267): It appears to me that [Theo- 
bald] came very near the truth and would have hit it completely if he had re- 
tained Alcides', for it is the genitive, with robe understood. Were it not that 


92 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act ii, sc. i. 


[154. As great Alddes shoocs vpon an Asse] 
doth is the usual word in this play, I might be tempted to read does. In reading 
or acting, then, the cesura should be made at Alcides\ with a slight pause to give 
the hearers time to supply rohe. I need not say that the robe is the lion’s skin, and 
that there is an allusion to the fable of the ass. — [Had Keightley but read Theobald’s 
note more carefully he would have seen, I think, that Theobald did not intend to 
place Alcides on the ass’s back. The apostrophe marking the possessive case is 
plainly marked in Theobald’s text. In 1867 Keightley published his Esposiior; 
in reference to this passage he there says: ‘This line and all that has been written 
upon it is sheer nonsense.’ In this sweeping condemnation of the work of his 
predecessors it is hardly to be supposed that he wishes to include his own remarks 
made fourteen years before. He does not, however, repeat his conjecture doth 
or does^ but says (p. 220) : T prefer shewed to Theobald’s shms in the conjunctive 
mood. We might also, and better perhaps, read should. “After Alcides’” lion’s 
robe is, of course, to be understood.’ — ^E d.] — P. Muirson (N. 6* Q.j 1853, I, 
viii, 384): I consider shows to be the true reading; the reference being to the 
ancient mysteries^ called also shows. The machinery required for the celebration 
of the mysteries was carried by asses. Hence the proverb: ‘Asinus portat mys- 
teriae.^ The connection of Hercules with the mysteries may be learned from 
Aristophanes and many other ancient writers. And thus the meaning of the 
passage seems to be: The lion’s skin, which once belonged to Richard of the Lion 
Heart, is as sightly on the back of Austria as were the mysteries of Hercules upon 
an ass. — ^R. G. White accepts without hesitation Theobald’s correction; and re- 
marks that Malone’s reason for retaining the Folio reading is untenable, since the 
word ‘lies’ in the preceding line answers for the whole sentence. White likewise 
points out that in the examples wherein occur references to the shoes of Hercules 
‘the allusion is to the unfitness of Hercules’ shoe to a smaller foot.’ ‘He might,’ 
adds White, ‘as well have quoted passages in which the demigod’s club was men- 
tioned.’ — ^W. N. Lettsom (ap. Dyce, ii.): The Variorum argument [in defence of 
the old reading] amounts to this: Some inferior writers have made an allusion with 
propriety; therefore we are warranted in believing that one infinitely their superior 
made the same allusion ridiculously. — F ee ay, in support of the Folio reading, 
quotes the passage from Gosson, given above by Steevens, and thus continues: 
‘There are two allusions. The error lies in the word “ass” repeated (as so often 
happens) from the line below. Read child^ apSj or some equivalent word 

for “ass.” I insert, provisionally, ape^ as most like in the duckcs liter arum, for 
the word “asse” in the Folio. The pronunciation of “shoes” and shows was, 
however, the same; in Solyman and Perseda, I, iii, shoes rhymes to blows.’ — [Orger 
( p. 10) also suggests that we here read ape for ‘ass.’] — V aughan (i, 14): It seems 
clear that the dress intended here, whether shoes or other raiment, was not con- 
ceived by Shakespeare as clothing any part of the animal but its back; for the 
speaker proceeds: ‘But, ass, I’ll take that burden from your back.’ Theobald, 
therefore, I consider to have been justified in rejecting ‘shoes’ as the right reading. 
. . . But shows isinot by any means a perfect synonym of ‘lies’ and does not so well 
accord with ‘as sightly’; there being some tautological weakness in ‘shows as 
sightly.’ I propose confidently to read ‘As great Alcides’ doeSy etc.; that is, ‘as 
great Alcides’s robe does upon an ass.’ Nothing could be more appropriate. As 
the ass in the fable put upon himself, as a robe, the lion’s skin, which when taken 
from the lion by Hercules had been worn by Hercules, so the Duke of Austria 



ACT n, sc. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


93 


But Affe, He take that burthen from your backe, 155 

Or lay on that ihall make your Ihoulders cracke. 

Auji, What cracker is this fame that deafes our eares 
With this abundance of fuperfluous breath? 

King Lewis j determine what we fliall doe flrait. 159 


155. Ile]rie^^, 77 / Rowe. 

burthen] FaF4, Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. Wh. i, Cam.-f. 
burden Fj et cet. 

159. King Lewis, determine.,.] Ff, 
Rowe, Pope, Var. ’73, ’78, ^85. Phi. 
Lewis, determine... Cap. (K. Phi.) Rann, 
Mai. Steev. Varr. Sing, i, Coll. Dyce, 
Wh. Huds. Cam. i, Gio. King , — 
Lewis, determine... Elnt, Del. Craig, 


Dtn, Lewis, determine Sing. ii. Kind 
Lewis, determine Vaughan. Lew. Let 
us determine Orger. King Philip, 
determine Theob. et cet. 

159, 160. Lewis.. .Lew.] Louis. ..'Lon. 
Dyce i, Wh. i. 

i$g.firait] F^F^, Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Var. *73, ’78, 85. Jlreigkt F4, Rowe, 
Pope, straight Han. et cet. 


had assumed for a robe the lion’s skin, which as taken from the lion by Richard 
had been worn by Richard; and the one robe lay upon the Duke of Austria as 
sightly as the other robe did upon the ass. — ^Wiught: Theobald’s emendation may 
not be absolutely necessary, but it makes the comparison more complete, and 
also lends some probability to Dr Ingleby’s suggestion that in Hamlet, I, ii, 147, 
*Or ere those shoes were old,’ ‘shoes’ is a misprint for shows, the mourning gar- 
ments of the widow. In Middleton’s Family of Love ‘shoes’ is printed showes 
(ed. Dyce, ii, 127 ). — ^Mahshall adopts Theobald’s emendation, characterising 
the Folio reading as ‘a ridiculous mistake; for a donkey would hardly attempt to 
wear Hercules’ shoes; nor can that reading be justified by the various passages quoted 
by Steevens.’ — ^Moore Smith suggest that possibly Shakespeare wrote this line 
‘with a confused recollection of Gosson’s sentence in his mind.’ [See note by 
Steevens, ante.]— Ivor John: [Theobald’s emendation] is in any case preferable 
to the Folio’s reading, which can only be defended by supposing that Shakespeare 
was guilty of a most senseless confusion. There is no possible point in speaking 
of an ass wearing the shoes of Hercules. [John’s text reads, however, ‘Alcides 
shows,’ i. e., the nominative and not the possessive; possibly this is but an error of 
the press. — Ed.] — Deighxon: That is, it looks as well on his back as the lion’s 
skin worn by Hercules would look on the back of an ass. Malone seems to me to 
make the absurdity [of defending the Folio reading] complete when he explains 
‘upon an ass’ to mean ‘upon the hoofs of an ass.’ The allusion is, of course, to the 
fable of the ass wearing the lion’s skin. — Schlegel, inhis translation of this passage, 
has, I think, quite misunderstood Theobald’s correction, since he makes it refer not 
to the robe or ornaments of Hercules, but to Hercules himself; and Tieck thus 
interprets: ‘As Alcides would look, riding on an ass’ (ed. 1830, iii, 341).— Ed. 

157. cracker] Murray (iV. E. D., s. v. 2.): A braggart, a boaster. [The present 
line quoted,] — Fleay: Note the triple pun in ‘ cracker (i) an impudent boy; 
(2) a firework; (3) to break down, in previous line. 

159. King Lewis] Carell (I, pt ii, p. 122): Why is Lewis call’d King? or why 
in this passage only? and, secondly, why addressed for such business and his father 
in presence? The father, indeed, may very reasonably make his son the declarer 
of a thing preconcerted, and the Poet has cause to put him on doing so; for, first, 
it shows the son’s consequence and weight with the father; and, next (which is 



94 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act II, sc. i. 


[159. King Lewis] 

cause enough of itself), rescues him from the state of a cypher in a scene of great 
length, for he has no other speech in it from his second in its very beginning to 
its final conclusion. Such are the objections to both the old and new readings of 
this line, and such the reasons for making Lewis the speaker in those that follow 
it; and we may throw in another to make the matter full weight, namely, their 
free manner of opening, which has a juvenile air with it. The correction before 
us sets all matters right; which we may call a slight one; for ’tis founded on the 
only supposal that the copy had ‘King' for French King, without scoring or 
stopping it, and that the printer was too faithful. — ^Malone, without referring to 
Theobald or Capell, and with Steevens’s approval, makes the same change in this 
line as does Capell, and accounts for the Folio reading substantially in the same 
way; he says in conclusion: ‘I once thought that this line might stand as part of 
Austria's speech and that he might have addressed Philip and the Dauphin by 
the words: ‘‘King — Lewis,” &c., but the addressing Philip by the title of King, 
without any addition, seems too familiar, and I therefore think that the error hap- 
pened in the way above stated.' — Knight: We have here restored the original 
reading [see Text. Notes]. Austria is impatient of the ‘superfluous breath' of the 
Bastard, and appeals to Philip and the Dauphin. — [As will be seen, Knight’s 
restoration is, actually, the reading which Malone first proposed and later rejected. 
In the Smtford Shakspere^ i8S4j Knight deserts the Folio text and adopts Theo- 
bald's correction without comment. — ^Ed.] — Collier adopts Theobald's correc- 
tion, since this line ‘clearly belongs to King Philip.' — ^Walker (Fer^., p. 4) says 
that this line as given in the Folio is correct, since the metre requires ‘Lewis’ to 
be a monosyllable, which, as he shows by several examples, it frequently is.— 
Dyce opines that reasons are not wanting for considering that the word ‘King' 
is the prefix to this line. ‘In the first place,' he continues, ‘the Folio prefixes 
“iriwg” to the three earliest speeches of Philip in this scene. Secondly, if Austria 
were here addressing Philip, he would not term him simply “King,” but “King 
Philip,” as he afterwards does: “King Philip, listen to the cardinal.” — III, i, 130; 
“Do so, King Philip; hang no more in doubt.” — Ibid., 154. Thirdly, if Austria 
had called on Philip, and Louis to determine what was to be done, we can hardly 
suppose that the Dauphin would take upon himself to speak before his father had 
uttered a word. . . . The commencement [of the next line] is, however, more suited 
to the young and impetuous Dauphin than to his father.' — Halliwell: The next 
speech seems clearly to be spoken by the King of France, who makes the claim 
on King John. The Dauphin would scarcely be represented as speaking in these 
terms, ‘do I claim of thee.’ In support of Theobald’s first alteration it is to be 
observed that Austria elsewhere addresses France as King Philip. On the other 
hand, 1 . 159 seems scarcely appropriate to Austria, who is in great indignation at 
the taunts of the Bastard, and seems then attentive to little else; unless, indeed, we 
presume he knows he will be foiled in repartee, and is anxious to change the subject, 
— C. & M. CowpEN Clarke: At one time we believed that [the prefix ^Lewis’ to 
line 160] was in consonance with his father's referring the decision to him, and with 
his own more vivacious manner. But the ‘I claim' in 1. 163, though it might 
by possibility have been uttered by the Dauphin in his father’s name, yet seems 
more naturally to come from the king himself; while the reply of John — ‘I do defy 
thee, France' — appears conclusively to settle the point that we ought to assign 
this speech to King Philip.— Cambridge Edd. (Note IX,): The objections to the 




ACT n, sc. i.] OF KING lOHN 95 

Lem}, Women & fooles, breake off your conference. 160 

1 60. Lew.] K. Philip or King PM. Rife, Cla. Words. Neils. Craig, King. 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Var. ’73, ^78, ’85, Orger. Dtn. 

Hal. Ktly, Sta. Dyce ii, iii, Cam. ii, 160. df] and Ff. 

Folio reading are, of course, first, that Lewis was not a king, and, secondly, that 
Austria would rather have appealed to Lewis’s father. The objection to the 
usual emendation [Theobald’s] is that throughout the scene King Philip is not 
designated in the stage-directions as King, but as Fran, or Fra . — [The Editor of the 
2nd Cambridge ed., Dr W. Aldis Wright, adds to the foregoing: ‘But, on the whole, 
Theobald’s reading seems preferable, as the lines 160-164 are more appropriate 
to Philip than to Lewis, who is regarded as a youth.’ — ^E d.] — Moberly: Capell’s 
alteration to ‘Lewis,’ and his assigning the words to the King of France, are not 
happy; for why should Philip Augustus refer such a matter to Ms son? and why 
should the Dauphin adopt such a tone to Leopold as to class him among the fools 
who are to hold their peace? — Wright {Clarendon Ed.): Although Capell’s reading 
has been most generally followed, it seems extremely probable that Theobald’s 
emendation is the true one. ... It is hardly probable that Lewis, who is treated in 
this scene as a mere boy, would be appealed to for the purpose of deciding so im- 
portant a question, or would adopt such a tone in his reply. — ^Marshall’s objec- 
tions to the prefix ^Lenjo^ of the next speech are substantially those of the Clarkes; 
and he considers these lines as they stand in the Folio ‘undoubtedly wrong.’ 
Marshall thus concludes: ‘The objection that the reading “King Philip,” 1 . 159, 
gives a redundant syllable is of no importance, as, in the case of proper names, 
Shakespeare often does not strictly adhere to the metre; and it is possible Philip 
might be pronounced sometimes as a monosyllable.’ — ^Moore Smith: If tMs is 
what Shakespeare wrote, it was a strange slip to call the king of France here Lewis 
and not Philip. Many editors read ‘King Philip,’ but, unfortunately, the metre 
is against this change. While ‘Lewis’ is generally a monosyllable in Shakespeare, 
‘Philip’ is never so.— [If this be a slip on the part of Shakespeare, as Moore Smith 
says, he Mmself demonstrates how easily confusion of these very names may occur; 
see Ms note on line 1, this scene.— Ed.]— Ivor John decides that as ‘Lewis was not 
king, and Austria was not likely to appeal to him for a final decision in anything 
of moment, we must suppose a mistaken substitution of Lewis for Philip.’ — 
Miss Porter: Under a pretence of annoyed superiority Austria is really scared. 
There is a good deal of cloTOishness in the fun of Faulconbridge’s desire to get at 
the pretentious coward. The stage action probably brought this out fully, and, 
here, it best explains what seems a blunder in this line. Austria, anxious to divert 
Faulconbridge’s belligerent attentions from himself, calls first on the king, who 
was occupied with John, and then on Lewis, nearer him and disengaged. ‘King, 
—Lewis,’ is the form in which the line might be punctuated to explain it as it 
stands. So Knight puts it, but he seems blind to the humor of the scene. With 
France hectoring England in a dignified way, Constance railing at Elinor, and 
Faulconbridge spoiling for a fight with a man who is trying to cover his fright with 
dignity, there could be no one disengaged to heed him except Lewis. — Deighton: 
It seems altogether improbable that the decision in the matter should be made to 
rest with Lewds, though Austria might not improperly appeal to both for their 
opinion. — [Deighton therefore adopts Malone’s conjectural reading, credit for 
which has been, by some editors, assigned to EMight. — Ed.] 


THE LIFE AND DEATH [act ii, sc. i. 

King John, this is the very fumme of all: 

England and Ireland, AngierSjToraine^ Maine f 
In right of Arihtcr doe I claime of thee: 

Wilt thou refigne them, and lay downe thy Armes? 

John, My life as foone : I doe defie thee France, 3[^5 

Arthur of Britaine, yeeld thee to my hand, 

And out of my deere loue He giue thee more, 

Then ere the coward hand of France can win; 

Submit thee boy. 

Queen. Come to thy grandame child. 

ConJ. Doe childe,goe to yt grandame childe, 

Giue grandame kingdome, and it grandame will 
Giue yt a plum, a cherry, and a figge, 

There’s a good grandame. 

Arthur. Good my mother peace, 175 


162. Anglers] Ff, Rowe, Pope. Am- 
jowe Ktly. Anjou Theob. et cet. 

Toraine] Ff, Ktly. Tourain 
Rowe. Touraine Pope et seq. 

163. doe I] I do Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Var. 73 . 

165. foone:] Ff. soon. Rowe, Pope, 
Han. Ktly. soon . — Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Var. ’73. soon ; — Cap. soon ! — 
Sta. soon : — Var. ’78 et cet. 

165, 169. thee] thee, F4. 

165. France,] France. Rowe et seq. 
Donovan here inserts 11 . 211- 

213; Some trumpet... or lohns. 

166. Britaine] Fa, Ktly, Fie. Brit- 
tain F4. Britain F3, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Var. ’73. Bretagne Han. 
et cet. 

167. And...loue] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 4 -j 


Cam.-f . And,.. .love, Cap. et cet. 

167. He] Tie F4. ril Rowe. 

168. Then] Than F4. 

coward hand] coward-hand Warb. 
Johns. Var. 73 . 

win;] win. Pope et seq. 

169-210. Submit thee...repetUions:] In 
margin Pope, Han. 

170, 171, 172. grandame] FaFj, Cap. 
Knt, Sta. Fie. Grandam, F4 et cet. 

1 71. Doe childe, goe] Do, child, go F4. 
Do, go, child, go; go Cap. Do, child, go, 
child, go Lettsom (ap. Dyce ii.). 

1 71, 172. yt...U] it...U Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
-p, Wh. Ktly, Sta. Cam.+, Del. ifs... 
iTs Cap. if ...if Johns, et cet. 

173. yt] it Ff. 

175. peace,] peace; Theob. Warb. 
Johns, peace! Cap. et seq. 


171, 172. yt . . . it] Walker (Fer^., iii, 118): I suspect this is merely an old 
form for its. The old poets certainly employed * it ’ now and then^ — probably only 
under particular circumstances—where we should use its . — [To this Walker^s 
editor, Lettsom, adds in a foot-note: ‘I may observe, however, that Constance 
here is evidently mimicking the imperfect babble of the nursery. —On this point 
Earle (p. 456), quoting the present passage, says: Tt seems as if children in Shake- 
speare’s time used it for the adjectival its. The possessive its is not yet found 
either in Shakespeare or in our Bible of 1611. Where we now should use its, these 
have his ,* — For the etiology of its, see Murray, N. E. D., s. v.—En.]— Dyce (ed. 
ii.) : With Mr Lettsom’s observation I am quite in accord. — ^Moberly: Such changes 
as Capell’s [see Text. Notes] forget that on the stage a sardonic laugh might follow 
the first two words and occupy the time of a foot. 


ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


97 

176 


I would that I were low laid in my graue, 

I am not worth this coyle that^s made for me* (weepes. 

Qu. Mo, His mother fhames him fo, poore boy hee 
Con, Now fhame vpon you where fhe does or no, 

His grandames wrongs, and not his mothers fhames 180 

Drawes thofe heauen-mouing pearles fr 5 his poor eies. 

Which heauen fhall take in nature of a fee: 

I, with thefe Chriflall beads heauen fhall be bribed 

To doe him Iuftice,and reuenge on you. 184 


176. low laid] low-laid Ktly. 

178. Qu. Mo.] Eli. Rowe et seq. 

179. Now,..or no,\ Om. Bono. 
where] F2F3, Rowe, Pope, Knt i. 

wheWe F4, Theob. Warb. whether Johns. 
Var. ’73, Cam. 4 ”« “^her Knt ii, Hal. 
wh^ Byce, Huds. ii, Words. wheW 
Fie. Wh. ii, Neils, whe^r Han. et cet. 
w,] no. Rowe, Pope, no! Theob. 

et seq. 

180. grandames] FaF^, Cap. Knt, Sta 
Fie. Grandames F4 et cet. 


180. wrongs] wrong F4, Rowe, Pope, 
4 '. 

181. Drawes] F4, Rowe, Pope,-!-* 
Cam.-f-, Fie. Draw Cap. et cet. 

181, 182, 183, 185, 186. heauen] heaven 
Rowe, Pope,!-. 

183. /] Ay Rowe, Om. Han. 

iheje] ihefe sad F4, Rowe, Pope, 
Han. those Ktly. 

heauen Jhdll] shall heaven Coll. 

MS. 


177. coyle] That is, disturhance, turmoil^ confusion; for other examples, see 
Shakespeare passim. 

179. where] That is, whether; compare I, i, 83. . 

179. she does] Ritson: Read ‘whe^r he does or no!’ i. e., whether he weeps or 
not. Constance, so far from admitting, expressly denies that she shames him.— 
Bouce (i, 402): It may be answered that this reading [Ritson’s] is equally objec- 
tionable; for Constance admits also that her son wept. In either case there is 
ambiguity; but the words as they stand are infinitely more natural, and even 
defensible, according to common usage. — ^V aughan (i, 23); Ritson errs in his 
emendation and in his reason for it. Constance does not expressly deny that she 
shames her son. All editors and critics, too, have misunderstood the connection 
of her ideas and words. We should print and punctuate: ‘Now shame upon you! 
— ^whether she does, or no,’ etc. Constance affirms that, whether she shames her 
son or not, her son’s tears are due not to his mother’s shames, but to his grand- 
mother’s injuries. — [As will be seen from the Text. Notes, the majority of editors 
follow Theobald’s punctuation, placing an exclamation point at the end of the 
line instead of after the word ‘you.’ It is this which has brought upon them 
the general accusation of misunderstanding conveyed in the foregoing note. 
■—Ed.] ■ ' 

182. in nature of] Weight: That is, as a kind of fee. Compare: ‘The state 
of man . . . suffers then The nature of an insurrection.’ — Jul. Cces., II, i, 69. 
[Also, ‘Of a strange nature is the suit you follow.’ — Mer. of Ven., IV, i, 177.] 

183. beads . . . brib’d] John Hunter: There is here an implied reference to 
prayers as one of the meanings of the word ‘beads.’ — Ivor John: Mr Craig sug- 
gests that here we have a reffection of the old voyagers’ stories of bribing Indians 
with beads. 

184. To doe him lustice] Carter {Sh. 6* Holy Scripture, p. 204) quotes in illus- 



^8 THE LIFE AND DEA TH [act ii, sc. i. 

Que. Thou monftrous flanderer of heauen and earth. 185 
Con. Thou monftrous Iniurer of heauen and earth, 

Call not me flanderer, thou and thine vfurpe 
The Dominations, Royalties, and rights 
Of this oppreffed boy ; this is thy eldeft fonnes fonne, 
Infortunate in nothing but in thee: 19 ° 

Thy finnes are viflted in this poore childe. 


185. earth.] earth! Theob. et seq. 

186. earthy] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
earth; Sing, earth! Han. et cet. 

187. not me] me not F4, Rowe, Pope, 

+• 

flanderer^ Ff. slanderer! Huds, 
i, Neils, slanderer; Rowe et cet. 

thou and thine] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Dyce, Wh. i, Rtly. Cam.-p. thou, and 
thine, Theob. et cet. 

188. Dominations] domination Ff, 
Rowe, Pope, 4 -* 

189. opprejed] oppressed Dyce, Huds. 
Dono. oppress! Fie. 


189. hoy;] boy. Johns. Var. ’73, Coll. 
Sing, ii, Wh. i, Ktly, Sta. Huds. Del. 
Fie. Rife, Neils, boy: Cap. Var. ’78, 
’85, Rann. Mai. Steev. Varr. Sing, i, 
Knt, Dyce. boy^ Coll. MS. 

this w] Om. Ritson, Coll. MS. 
Huds. ii, Words, this’ Fie. this 
Vaughan (i, 15). 

eldeji] eld’st Cap. Coll. MS. 
Walker (Vers., 167), Hal. Dyce ii, hi, 
Cam.-p, Huds. ii, Fie. Words. 

fonnes fonne,] Son’s Son, F4, 
son’s son. Warb. son’s Dono. 

190. thee:] thee. Neils. 


tration of these lines: ‘Yee shall not trouble any widowe, nor fatherlesse child. 
If thou vexe or trouble such and so he cal and cry unto Mee, I will surely heare 
his cry. Then shall My wrath be kindled and I will kill you with the sword, and 
your wives shall be widowes and your^ children fatherlesse.^ — Exod., xxii, 22 {Gene- 
van Version). 

189. this is . . . sonnes sonne] As will be seen by the Text. Notes, there have 
been several attempts to render regular the metre of the latter half of this line; 
such are, perhaps, unnecessary, since Guest (i, 86) says: ‘All words which qualify 
others, as adjectives, adverbs, and others of the same class, receive a fainter accent 
than the words qualified. It has been observed {Edin. Rev., N°' 12, Art. 10) 
that when “a monosyllabic adjective and substantive are joined, the substantive 
has the acute, and the adjective the grave, unless the adjective be placed in an- 
tithesis, in which case the reverse happens.^^ This rule might have been stated 
more generally. The primary accent of the adjective ought always, when not 
emphatic, to be weaker than that of the substantive.’ — Guest, among other ex- 
amples, quotes the present passage, where the word ‘eldest’ is the adjective that 
thus receives a weaker accent than the w^ord ‘son’s.’ (See also Ibid., pp. 263, 
264, where this line is quoted as an example of a modern Alexandrine.) — Ed. 

189. eldest] For numerous examples in justification of the cacophonous elision 
dd’st, see, if needful, Walker (Fer^., 167) or Abbott, § 473. 

190. Infortunate] Wright: In V, ii, 283, the Quartos read: ‘ — ^most 

infortunate man,’ where the Folios have ‘unfortunate.’ On the other hand, in 
II, iii, 42, the Folios have: ‘I am infortunate in the infirmity,’ while the Quartos 
read ‘unfortunate.’ 

191. visited] Whitnev {Cent. Dkt., s,v. 5.): In Scriptural phraseology: (a) 
To send a judgment from heaven upon, whether for the purpose of chastising or 



ACT II; sc. i ] 


OF KING JOHN 


99 


The Canon of the Law is laide on him, 192 

Being but the fecond generation 
Remoued from thy fmne-conceiuing wombe. 

John, Bedlam haue done. 195 

Con. I haue but this to fay, 

That he is not onely plagued for her fm, 197 


192-203. Om. Dono. 

192. Canon[ cannon Rowe ii. 

194. wombe] self C. Clarke. 

195. Bedlam] Beldam Ritson, Rann, 
Mitford (Gentleman's Maga., Aug., 


1844), S. T. P, (N. & Q., 4 Aprilv 
1874). 

197. he w] he^s Cap. Varr. Rann, Mai. 
Steev, Varr. Sing. Rnt. she^s Lettsom, 
her fm] her sins Vaughan. 


afflicting, or of comforting or consoling; judge, ‘Oh visit me with thy salvation.' 
— Psalm cvi, 4. {b) To inflict punishment for (guilt) or upon (a person), ‘Visiting 
the iniquity of the fathers upon the children.’ — Exodus, xxxiv, 7. — [This last 
quotation is, of course, ‘the Canon of the Law’ to which reference is made in the 
next two lines. — Ed.] 

191. in] Wright compares: ‘Yet execute thy wrath in me alone.’ — Rich. Ill: 
I, iv, 71. 

195. Bedlam] Wright: That is, lunatic. So in Lear: ‘Let’s follow the old 
earl, and get the Bedlam To lead him where he would.’ — III, vii, 103. — [With 
this interpretation Ritson’s conjectural emendation (see Text. Notes), though 
attractive, is quite unnecessary. — Ed.] 

197-202. That he is not ... of this childe] Johnson: This passage appears to 
me very obscure. The chief difficulty arises from this, that Constance, having 
told Elinor of her ‘sin-conceiving womb,’ pursues the thought, and uses ‘sin” 
through the next lines in an ambiguous sense, sometimes for crime and sometimes 
for offspring. He is not only made miserable by vengeance for her sin or crime, 
but her sin, her offspring, and she are made the instruments of that vengeance on 
this descendant, who, though of the second generation, is plagued for her and 
with her; to whom she is not only the cause but the instrument of evil. The next 
clause is more perplexed. I point thus: ‘ — plagu’d for her And with her. — Plague 
her sin! his injury Her injury, the beadle to her sin.’ That is, instead of inflicting 
vengeance on this innocent and remote descendant, punish her sin, her immediate 
offspring; [This is evidently a misprint, as in the Variorrum of 1773 it is corrected 
to read ^her Ed.] then the affliction will fall where it is deserved; Ms injury 
will be her injury, and the misery of her sin; her son will be a beadle, or chastiser, 
to her crimes, which are now <dl punished in the person of this child. [The 
Cambridge Edd. {Note X.) say: ‘The word “sin” is twice printed by mistake for 
“son” in Johnson’s note.’ — ^The sentences to which they thus refer are presumably 
(i) the misprint which was corrected in the next edition; and (2) ‘ He is not only made 
miserable by vengeance for her sin ot crime, but her sin, her offspring and she,’ 
etc., which seems as though we should read ‘her son, her offspring.’ Inasmuch as 
this is not changed, and as Johnson begins by saying that ‘sin’ here is ‘sometimes 
used for crime and sometimes for offspring,^ the note as given is, I think, in accord 
with his reasoning. — Ed.]— Roderick (ap. Edwards, p. 252): Constance had 
before said that Elinor’s sins were visited upon her grandson, Arthur; in this 




ICX> 


THE LIFE AND DEA TH 


[act II, sc. i. 


I197-202. That he is not ... of this childe] 
speech she adds farther — ^That He was not only punished for Her sins, but that 
God had been pleased to make use of Her as the Means, the Instrument, whereby 
that punishment was inflicted on him. This is all the sentiment of the speech; 
which (for the sake of a miserable jingling between Plague and Sin) is thrice re- 
peated, with varied expressions. Read and point 11 . 199, 201 thus: ‘On this re- 
moved issue; plagu’d for her And with her plagued; Her sin, His injury, Her in- 
jury the Beadle to her Sin.’ The last line and a half may want some little explana- 
tion: ‘Her sin, his injury — i. e., his loss, his damage, his punishment. ‘Her in- 
jury the Beadle to her Sin’ — ^Her injury — her injustice — her violence in taking 
part with King John in his endeavors to rob him of his right to the crown. (And, 
by the way, this using the same word — Injury — in the same sentence in two dif- 
ferent senses is not at all disagreeable to Shakespeare’s usual manner.) The 
Beadle in a Corp>oration is the officer whose business it is to execute the sentences 
pass’d upon any offenders; such as Whipping, &c., to which Shakespeare alludes; 
and because her injustice was the instrument by which the punishment of her 
sins was inflicted upon Arthur, he therefore calls it the Beadle to her sins. — Capell 
(I, pt ii, p. 122): For the speech’s sense, it is this: John, Arthur, and Elinor, and 
the speaker’s self in the end are said in jingling expressions to be punish’d and 
plagu’d for the only sins of that Elinor: John is spoke to first, and denoted by 
pointing; and, — after tracing Arthur’s misfortunes, and Elinor’s own, to the root 
she set out with, — the speaker ends with herself; who, though guiltless, had her 
punishment too in her child’s punishment, brought upon him by Elinor: What 
she says of herself is oblique, and convey’d in ‘All’: what of Elinor, must be 
piec’d in this manner — ^And in sinning as she does against Arthur, she finds her 
own plague; his injury is her injury, the headle to her slnj i. e., lasher or whipper 
of it: The plagues of John and his mother are — this war and their own troubles 
for Arthur. — Steevens {Variorunij 1778): We may read: ‘ — this I have to say. 
That he’s not only plagued for her sin, But God hath made her sin and her the 
plague On this removed issue, plagu’d for her; And, with her sin, her plague, his 
injury Her injuiy, the beadle to her sin,’ i. e., God hath made her and her sin together, 
the plague of her most remote descendants, who are plagued for her; same power 
hath likewise made her sin her own plague, and the injury she has done to him her 
awn injury, as a beadle to lash that sin, i. e., Providence has so ordered it that she, 
who is made the instrument of punishment to another, has, in the end, converted 
that other into an instrument of punishment for herself. — [The principal change 
made by Steevens is in 1 . 200, where it will be seen that the words ‘plague’ and 
‘sin’ are transposed as in Capell’s text, but not so credited by Steevens. The 
slight change in the words of 1 . 196, ‘this I have to say,’ is not, I think, Intended 
by him as a new reading; if so, he later withdrew it, as it does not appear in the 
repetitions of this note Variorum of I78s» — ^En.]— T ollet: Constance 

observes that he (jste), pointing to King John (‘whom from the flow of gall she names 
not’), is not only plagued (with the present war) for his mother’s sin, but God hath 
made her sin and her the plague also on this removed issue, Arthur, plagued on her 
account, and by the means of her final offspring, whose injury (the usurpation of 
Arthur’s rights) may be considered as her injury, or the injury of her sin-conceiving 
womb; and John’s may also be considered as the beadle, or officer of correction, 
employed by her crimes to inflict ail these punishments on the person of this child. — 
Malone {Variorum, 178^)1 If part of this obscure sentence were included in a 



ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


lOI 


[197-202. That he is not ... of this childe] 
parenthesis the sense would, perhaps, be somewhat clearer: ‘But God hath made 
her sin (the plague On this removed issue — ^plagued for her, And with her) plague 
her son; his injury,’ etc. Instead of ‘beadle to her sin, I would read ^sins.^ ‘i?e- 
movedj^ 1 believe, here signifies re^note. So in Mid. N. Dreanty ‘From Athens is her 
house remov’d seven leagues.’ — [I, i, 159. Is not ‘removed’ used in this line in 
precisely the same sense as in 1. 193, where it means relationship of the second 
generation? We still use the phrase ‘cousin once removed’ to designate a parent’s 
cousin. In his own edition, published five years later, Malone substitutes the 
following: ‘Not being satisfied with any of the emendations proposed, I have 
adhered to the original copy. I suspect that two half lines have been lost after the 
words “And with her” — . If the text be right, “with,” I think, means by, and 
Toilet’s interpretation the true one.’ — ^He retains, however, his interpretation of 
‘removed.’— Ed.] — Rank also, with a few slight verbal changes, accepts ToUet’s 
explanation. — ^Henley: The key to these words is contained in the last speech of 
Constance, where she alludes to the denunciation of the second commandment. 
Young Arthur is represented as not only suffermg from the guilt of his grand- 
mother; but also by her, in person, she being made the very instrument of his 
sufferings. As he was not her immediate, but removed, issue — the second genera- 
tion from her sin-conceiving womb — it might have been expected that the evils to 
which, upon her account, he was obnoxious would have incidentally befallen him; 
instead of his being punished for them all, by her immediate infliction. He is not 
only plagued on account of her sin, according to the threatening of the command- 
ment, but she is preserved alive to her second generation, to be the instrument of 
inflicting on her grandchild the penalty annexed to her sin; so that he is plagued 
on her account, and with her plague, which is, her sin, that is (taking by a common 
figure the cause for the consequence), the penalty entailed upon it. Eis mjury, 
or the evil suffers, her sin brings upon him, and her injury, or, the evil she inflicts, 
he suffers iiom her, as the beadle to her sin, or executioner of the punishment an- 
nexed to it.— Knight offers neither comment nor explanation.— Collier remarks 
that though the text is ‘involved the sense is sufficiently clear.’ — ^Hudson and 
Singer accept Henley’s elucidation without attempting to intrinsicate some of 
his involutions.— Arrowsmith {N. Q., 1837, II, iv, 469): At their commence- 

ment the reproaches of Constance are couched in general terms. Elinor and 
Arthur are an exemplification of the canon of the law, of the sins (in the plural) 
of the grandmother visited upon the grandchild, punished, as she aggravates the 
case, in the second generation. The phrase ‘sin-conceiving womb,’ being alike 
applicable to all mothers, has no farther special force here, than as a mother of a 
King John may be considered an eminent illustration of its truth. To attach such 
a significance to the epithet ‘sin-conceiving’ as, bye and bye, in the same sentence, 
under the word sin to jumble together the guilt for which Elinor was justly ac- 
countable, with a sinful offspring, from which no mother is exempt, introduces a 
solecism in discourse that requires better warrant than the lame and impotent con- 
struction of the sequel, which it was devised to bolster up. [See note by John- 
son, ante.] When she resumes her upbraidings, Constance enters into partic- 
ulars. ... It is sin in the singular, a specific sin, of which Constance now speaks; 
that sin the second line and the rest of the context clearly show to be Elinor’s 
instrumentality in depriving Arthur, the rightful heir, of Iris kingdom. ‘God 
hath made her sin and her (the crime and the criminal) the plague on this removed 



102 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act II, sc. L 


[197-202. That he is not ... of this childe] 
issue’; before, when speaking generally, it was, as we have seen, an aggravation 
that the sins should be visited upon ‘but the second generation’; now the remoteness 
of the issue adds emphasis to the wrong; that injury should be sustained immedi- 
ately at the hands of the grandmother by an issue so far removed as her grand- 
child. ‘Plagued for her and with her plague, her sin’; he is plagued for her, and he 
is plagued by and with her. He suffers for the guilt of her sin, and he suffers 
the evil of her sin, and that evil he suffers as penalty for the guilt; so that the evil 
of the sin being identical with the penalty of its guilt, the whole mischief of the 
sin lights upon him; but by virtue of the relationship between them, it also recoils 
upon Elinor, because the defeat of a grandchild’s inheritance, whether she so re- 
gard it or not, is an injury to the grandmother; or, as Shakespeare pursues the 
argument, ‘his injury is her injury,’ and thus the evil of her sin, redounding upon 
herself, becomes the beadle to its guilt; yet, as Elinor was a willing agent, and 
volenti non fit injuria^ it is ‘all punished in the person of this child, and all for her, 
a plague upon her’; and I fear the intelligent reader will add, a plague upon you 
too, that have superfluously explained what again and again explains itself. — 
Cambridge Edd. {Hole X.): Mr Roby, whose punctuation we have adopted, 
says: ‘I suppose the sense to be: “God hath made her sin and herself to be a 
plague to this distant child, who is punished for her and with the punishment 
belonging to her: God has made her sin to be an injury to Arthur, and her injurious 
deeds to be the executioner to punish her sin; all which (viz., her first sin and her 
now injurious deeds) are punished in the person of this child. ” ’ Mr Lloyd, 
who, with the same punctuation, would read [1. 200] ‘her sin, her injury,’ inter- 
prets thus: ‘Elinor’s injuries to Arthur are God’s agents to punish him, both for 
the sin of being her grandchild, and for the inherited guilt of these very injuries.’ 
— Staunton: The thought running through this passage and which sufficiently 
explains it seems to be that there is peculiar hardship in Arthur suffering not only 
for the sins of the grandmother (which might be regarded as the common lot — 
‘the canon of the law’), but by the instrumentality of the person whose sins were 
thus punished; the grandmother being the agent inflicting retribution on her grand- 
son for her own guilt. — R. G. White: [Line 200, ‘And with her plague,’] is quite 
incomprehensible, in spite of two pages and a half of not very valuable comment 
in the Variorum [of 1821]. With the simple correction of an easy misprint, which 
was suggested by Roderick, the passage is as plain as any other in these plays. 
The allusion to the denunciation of vengeance upon children for the sins of their 
parents, in the second commandment of the Mosaic table, is obvious. — ^J ohn 
Hunter [reading 1 . 200 according to Roderick]: The remainder of Constance’s 
speech is grossly misprinted in the Folio. The meaning is: Plagued on her account 
and plagued by means of her; her sin being the wrong he suffers, and her wrong- 
doing being the chastiser of her sm. — Fleay: I follow the Folios . . . and interpret 
thus: Plagued on her account, and by means of her wrong-doing, which is a plague 
inflicted by her (cf. ‘her sin . . . the plague,’ 1. 198); the injury inflicted on him, the 
injury inflicted by her, being the beadle, the chastiser (in Arthur’s sufferings), of 
her original wrong-doing. Editors have altered and given various inteipretations 
of the text in several ways (surely without cause).— Herr (p. 20): The word 
‘plague’ has as various meanings in this passage as they are variously played upon 
by Constance; but these can be best understood by paraphrasing thus: ‘I have 
but this to say: Arthur is not only punished for Elinor’s sin, but God has made 



ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


103 


[197-202. That he is not ... of this childe] 
her sin and herself the evil-worker on this displaced offspring, who is punished for 
her, and through her evil work and her sin; He has made his wrong-suffering 
grow out of her wrong-doing — which wrong-doing serves as the scourger to her own 
sin — or the lash to her own sin; all, sins and injuries inflicted, punished in the 
person of this child, and all on her account; may a curse light upon her!’ That 
such was the general thought and idea of Constance may be fairly inferred from 
her preceding words uttered a few lines back, 11 . 191-194. It will be seen that the 
same idea pervades both passages, only expressed in a different form. So in the 
least manner to mar the text, and in order to convey the above interpretation, 
the lines should run thus: ‘And by her plague and her sin: made his inj’ry Through 
her inj’ry, — the beadle to her own sin.’ To omit the Italicized words is to leave 
the passage a puzzle; to retain them is to make its meaning clear to the general 
reader — they are, in fact, merely ellipses restored. At least it is essential that 
*‘made^ should be retained, as it is the key of the whole passage, and will be seen 
properly to refer to ‘God hath,’ [ 1 . 198]. ^ Through^ is important as marking the 
different kinds of injuries meant. — [Herr also suggests that, in order to preserve the 
metre of 1. 201, ‘ beadle ’ is to be pronounced as a monosyllable; how this is either pho- 
netically or intelligibly to be accomplished is not very apparent. — Ed.] — Moberly: 
The notion is like that in Hamlet, ‘It hath pleased high heaven To visit me with 
this, and this with me’; that is, to lay this enterprise like a curse upon me, and at 
the same time to make my weak nature a curse upon the enterprise. So here 
Arthur has not only to suffer the consequences of Elinor’s sin, but she herself and 
her evil nature are of themselves a curse beyond any consequence. [Roby’s] is 
clearly the right punctuation. ... It would be easy on the stage to indicate the 
double meaning of ‘injury’; the second being like ‘injurious Hermia’ in Mid, N, 
Dream. — ^Wordsworth in his edition omits 11 . 201-203, remarking: ‘The modicum 
of sense, and the tautology of these three lines, together with the metrical defect 
in 1 . 203, seem to warrant their omission. . . . King Philip may well condemn 
“these ill-timed repetitions”; and more than enough remain to justify the con- 
demnation.’— -Hereord follows Capell’s interpretation, only referring the words 
‘All punish’d’ to ‘Elinor’s sin and her present injurious deeds.’ He adds: ‘Mr 
Roby understands “with her plague” to be “with the punishment belonging to 
her,” which is not supported by the parallel clauses below: “her sin his injury,” 
“her injury . . . sin.” ’ — ^Miss Porter: The clew to this word-puzzle may lie not 
in further metaphysics, but in the invective of insult intended by Constance 
against Elinor’s virtue. Suspicion that Elinor’s rumoured infidelity is true grows 
in Constance. From his ‘grandames wrongs’ to Arthur, she infers, now, that 
John is a child of sin, and therefore favoured by his mother to ‘usurp’ the ‘royal- 
ties and rights’ legitimately belonging to Arthur. According to the Scriptures 
... he is now suffering because of Elinor’s ‘sin-conceiving womb.’ In further 
applying these ideas Constance has W this to say: Not only is Elinor’s ^ > 
general way, visited upon him, but, actually in this war against them, the issue of 
her sinne — ^John, and Elinor, herself, are themselves the plague that plagues him. 
So Arthur is plagued on her account, because of her sin and at her instigation, and 
along with the plague of her — ^herself, he is plagued with the sinne of her — ^John. 
And with her plague her sinne: his injury (Arthur’s injury, i, e., Elinor herself), 
Her injurie (her injurious deed, i. e., the issue of her infidelity — ^John), both being 
the Beadle to her sinne (that infidelity itself) ; and all, viz., this her sin and these 



104 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act ii, sc. i. 
198 


But God hath made her fmne and her, the plague 
On this remoued iffue, plagued for her, 

And with her plague her fmne: his iniury 200 

Her iniurie the Beadle to her fmne, 

All punifh'd in the perfon of this childe, 

And all for her, a plague vpon her. 

Que. Thou vnaduifed fcold, I can produce 204 

198. her fmne] her son Spence (N. & Neils. Craig. And with her plague, her 

Q., 27 Jan., 1894). sin; Mai. et cet. 

199. remoued] removM Dyce, Fie. ■ 200. his iniury] his injury; Sing. ii. 

Huds. ii. 201-203. Om. Words. 

iffue issue; — Sing, ii, Sta. 201. Eer iniurie] Her injury, Rowe, 
Huds. Pope,+, Cap. Varr, Rann. Sing, i, Ktly. 

plagued] plagu'd Cap. Varr. Eer injury, — Mai. Steev. Varr. Knt, 
Rann, Mai. Steev. Varr, Sing. Knt. Dyce, Hal. Sta. Huds. 
plagued Dyce, Fie, Huds. ii. Beadle] bedel Han. 

for her,] for her; Cap. 202, 203. All.. And all] All. ..And pun- 

200. And with her plague her finne:] ished all or Are.. .And punished all 
Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Vaughan. 

Coll. And with her. — Plague her sin; 203. /or her,] for her; Rowe, Pope,+, 
Johns. And with her. — plague her son! Cap. Varr. Wh. i. for her. Fie. Huds. 
Id. conj., Var. ’78, ’85. And, with her ii. forjter — For her: Marshall, Craig. 
sin, her plagtie, Cap. Atid with her vpon her.] upon her! Theob. et 

plagu'd; her sin; Roderick, Rann, Sing. seq. 

ii, Dyce ii, iii, Hunter, Huds. ii, Words. 204. vnaduifed] unadvised Dyce, Fie. 
And with her plague — her sin: Stsi.. And Huds. ii, Words. 
with her plague; her sin Roby, Cam.+, 

executant personified injuries are punished upon Arthur, for her sake. No change 
in words or pointing are required with this explanation. This denunciation of 
Elinor demands passionate gesture, the injuries claimed being personified, and the 
sin an accusation, — [On the conclusion of this long note I have but this to say: 
The interpretation offered by Roby, accepted by the Cambridge Editors, by Dr 
Wright in the Clarendon ed,, and later editors, as it is the simplest, is the one 
w’hich is unhesitatingly accepted by the present Ed.] 

197. plagued] That is, punished. Compare: * And God, not we, hath plagued 
thy bloody deed,’ — Richard III: I, iii, 181. Both noun and verb bear this meaning 
throughout these lines; Constance herself so interprets the verb in 1 . 202. 

203. And all . . - vpon her] Walker (Crit.,m, iig) prints this line with a Qu., 
on which his editor Lettsom says in a foot-note: ^TMs is the usual reading, which 
Walker evidently intended to alter, though, by a slip of the pen, he left it as he 
found it. Qu .“And all for hex, and by her; a plague upon her.’” — [Collier 
(ed. hi.), in a note on this line, without giving any name, says: Toetry-patchers 
would insert “and by her” in the middle of this line, most injuriously.’ Lettsom 
died ten years before the appearance of Collier’s third edition. — Ed.] — Moberly: 
Either ‘then’ has fallen out, or the line was ended on Shakespeare’s stage by 
some gesture more emphatic than elegent — spitting, we may fear, (So Queen 
Elizabeth sometimes expressed disapprobation.) — ^Dawson likewise suggests that 
a gesture was here introduced to complete the metre. 

204. vnaduised] That is, lacking consideration, rash. Compare 1 . 48, ante. 




ACT 11, SC. i.] OF KING JOHN 105 

A Will, that barres the title of thy fonne. ‘ 205 

Con, I who doubts that, a Will : a wicked will, 

A womans will, a cankred Grandams will. 

Fra, Peace Lady, paufe, or be more temperate, 

It ill befeemes this prefence to cry ayme 209 


206. 1,.ihaQ Ay^.^thai? Rowe et seq. 
that] Om. F4. 

a Will:] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Ktly, 
Fie. a will ! — Theob. et cet. 

207. cankred] FaFs, Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Varr. ^73, ’78, ’85. cankered F4. 
cankered Fie. cankered Rowe et cet. 

207. Grandams] grandame^s ' F2F3, 
Cap. Knt, Sta. Fie. 


208. Ladyy] lady! Coll. Dyce, Hal. 
Wh. Huds. Cani.+, Del. Words. 

temperate^ temperate. Coll, i, ii, 
Wh. i. Rife, Words. Neils, temperate, 
[exit Constance. Dono. 

209, 210, Om. Donovan. 

209. ayme] ay me Ff, Rowe i. Amen 
Rowe ii, Pope. aimiStdi, Ae^^jMoberly 
conj. aim Theob. et cet. 


205. A will . . . thy soiine] Roger of Wendover, under the year 1190, says: 'At 
this time Tancred, king of Sicily (who had succeeded to king William), in order 
to keep on peaceable terms with king Richard, gave to that king twenty thousand 
ounces of silver in discharge of all his claims against him, and the same quantity 
of gold as a quit-claim of the will, which king William had made in favour of king 
Henry, Richard’s father, and in consideration of the marriage which had been 
agreed to be contracted between Arthur, Duke of Brittany, and the daughter of 
king Tancred; on which king Richard appointed the before named Arthur his 
heir, in case of his dying i^^ithout any la'v\dul heir, after which he set out on his 
pilgrimage’ (ed. Giles, ii, 95). This Richard revoked at his death in 1199; Holin- 
shed says: ' — feeling himselfe to wax weaker and weaker, preparing his mind to 
death, which he perceiued now to be at hand, he ordeined his testament, or rather 
reformed and added sundrie things vnto the same which he before had made, at 
the time of his gooing foorth towards the holie land, Vnto his brother John he 
assigned the crowne of England, and all other his lands and dominions, causing 
the Nobles there present to sweare fealtie vnto him’ (iii, 155, 6).— CotnaTENAY (i, 8) 
cites Hoveden, p. 791, as the contemporary authority ‘for the dying declaration 
of Richard in favor of John.’ On this Woiudswoiith (i, 436) remarks: ‘Doubtless 
his change of purpose was caused, more or less, by his mother’s influence— “the 
woman’s wilV^—to which Constance, playing upon the word, alludes; and the 
mother, we may suppose, was influenced by jealousy of her daughter-in-law.’ — 
[Possibly; but Elinor was not present at the time of Richard’s death at Chaluz; she 
was in England with John. — En.] 

207. A womans . . . Grandams will] Collier: So in the old play Elinor says: 
—I can infer a will That bars the way he urgeth by descent,’ And Constance 
replies: ‘A will indeed! a crabbed woman’s will.’ — [Part i, sc. ii, 1 . zoo], 

209. to cry ayme] Johnson: That is, to encourage. I once thought it was bor- 
rowed from archery; and that aim! having been the word of command, as we 
now say present! ‘to cry aim,’ had been to incite notice or raise attention. But 
I rather think that the old word of applause was Faiine, which the English, not 
easily pronouncing Je^ sunk into aime or aim. Our exclamations of applause 
are stiU borrowed, as hravo and encore.— \lt is, perhaps, not wholly fair to Dr John- 
son’s reputation as a philologist to repeat this conjectural derivation; but he him- 
self made no attempt to suppress it in later editions. — En.] — Steevens: Dr John- 



io6 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act ii. sc. i. 


To thefe ill-tuned repetitions: 210 

Some Trumpet fummon hither to the walks 
Thefe men of Angiers, let vs heare them fpeake, 

Whofe title they admit, Arthurs or lohns. 

Trumpet founds, 

^nter a Citizen vpon the walles, 215 

CiL Who is it that hath warnM vs to the walles? 

Fra, ^Tis France, for England. 217 

210, ill-tuned] Ff, Cap. Var. ’78, 85, sounds...citi2ens...tlie walls. Knt, Dyce, 

Rann, Mai. Steev. Varr. ill-turned Hal. Wh. i, Sta. Hiids. ii, Craig. 

Rowe i. ill-iunH Dyce, Fie. Huds. ii, Trumpet sounds... certain citizens...tiie 

Words, ill tuned Rowe ii. et cet. walls. Cam.+, Words. Trumpets 

repetitions:] repetitions. Rowe et sound. Enter Citizens. Dono. Trumpet 

seq. (repetitiSns. Fie.). sounds...tlie walls [attended]. Neils. 

211, Some Trumpet] Sound trumpet! Trumpets sound. ..citizens.. .the walls. 

Craig conj. Var. ’73 et cet. 

212, Angiers] Angiers. Neils. Scene m. Pope, Han. Warb. Johns. 

Jpeake,] speak. Theob. i. (mis- 216. Cit.] Knt, Coll. Wh. i, Ktly, 

print). Cam.-f , Neils. Sta. Huds. Citti. Fa. Citi. F3F4, Rowe, 

214. 215. Trumpet founds.. .the Pope,-f . i. c. Capell. i Cit. Var. *73 

walles.] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. et cet. 

Warb. Fie. Trumpets sound ... the 217. Fra.] Ff, Fie. K. Philip. Rowe 
walls. Johns. Trumpet. Enter certain et cet. (throughout). 

Citizens on the walls. Cap. Trumpet 

son’s first thought, I believe, is best. So, in Beaumont and Fletcher’s Love's 
Cure: 'Can I cry aim To this against myself?’ — [ed. Dyce, IV, ii, p. 166]. Again, 
in Tarlton's Jests j 1611: 'The people had much ado to keep peace: but Bankes 
and Tarleton had like to have squared and the horse by, to give aime,' — [Ashbee 
reprint, sig C2, verso]. Again, in Churchyard's Charge^ 1580: 'Yet he that stands, 
and giveth aime, Maie judge what shott doeth lose the game.’ — ^p. 8, b. Again, in 
Merry Wives, Ford says; ' — and to these violent proceedings my neighbors shall 
cry aim.’ — ii, 45. — [J, Crosby, in the American BiUiopoUst, August, 1875, in 
explanation of the phrases 'cry aim’ and 'give aim,’ calls attention to a note by 
Gifiord on Massinger’s The Bondman, II, iii, which in part is as follows: 'To 
cry aim! . . . was to encourage; to give am was to direct, and in these distinct and 
appropriate senses the words perpetually occur. There was no such oflSce as 
aim-cryer; the business of encouragement being abandoned to such of the specta- 
tors as chose to interfere; to that of direction, indeed, there was a special person 
appointed. Those who cried aim! stood by the archers; he who gave it was sta- 
tioned near the butts, and pointed out, after every discharge, how wide or 
how short the arrow fell of the mark.’ — ^Wright also points out that Steevens 
has here confused these two phrases, and quotes the latter part of Gifford’s 
note. — En.j 

215. Enter a Citizen] Collier: The economy of our old stage could only allow 
one citizen to make his appearance. 

216. warn’d] Wright: That is, summoned. Compare: 'And sent to warn 
them to his royal presence,’ — Richard III: I, iii, 39. 




ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


107 

218 


lolin. England for it felfe: 

You men of Anglers, and my louing fubiefts. 

Fra. You louing men of Anglers, Arthurs fubiedls, 220 

Our Trumpet call’d you to this gentle parle. 

lohn. For our aduantage, therefore heare vs firft: 

Thefe flagges of France that are aduanced heere 
Before the eye and profpe< 5 l of your Towne, 

Haue hither march’d to your endamagement. 225 

The Canons haue their bowels full of wrath, 

And ready mounted are they to fpit forth 
Their Iron indignation ’gainft your walles: 

All preparation for a bloody hedge 

And merciles proceeding, by thefe French. 230 

Comfort yours Citties eies, your winking gates : 


218. it felfe:] itself. Coll. Wh. i, Huds. 
Cam.+, Bel. Neils, Craig. 

219. fubiedts.] Ff, Knt i, iii. subjects! 
Knt ii. subjects — Rowe et cet. 

220. Arthurs] Arthur’s F4. 

221. park.] parle — Rowe, Pope,-}-, 
Knt ii, Sta. Dyce ii, iii, Cam.+, Del. 
Rife, Words. Craig. 

222. aduantage,] Ff. advantage; Rowe, 
Pope,-f-, Coll. Dyce, Wh. i, Ktly, Neds. 
cdvaniage;— et cet. 

vs firft-] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. us first:-— Johns. Var. ^73. 
us first. Cap. Mai. Knt, Dyce, Sta. 
Cam.+, Fie. Words. Neils, us first— 
Rann . us first. — Var. ’78 et cet. 

223. aduanced] advanced Dyce, Fie. 
Huds. ii, Words. 


229. preparation] preparations Pope, 
+ (—Var. ’73). 

fiedge] Siege F4. 

230. And. ..proceeding, ...French.] Ff. 
And...proc€eding,.. .French, Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. Var. ’73, Knt, 
Hal. Sta. Fie. And,. ..proceeding,.., 
French, Theob. i. And. ..proceeding... 
French Dyce, Wh. Cam.-f, Huds. ii, 
Neils. Craig. And,..proceeding... French, 
Han. et cet. 

231. Comfort yours] Fz. Comfort your 
F3F4, Coll. i. Confront your ’R.QwejFope, 
+, Steev. Varr. Sing. Wh. i, Dyce ii, 
iii, Huds. Del. Coll, iii, Dono. Come 
fore your Coll. ii. (MS.), Ktly. Con- 
fronts your Cap. et cet. 


218. it selfe] Wright: This shows that ‘his’ in 1 . 102 is not masculine, but 
neuter. 

222. lohn. For our ... vs first] Capell (I, ii, p. 123): He were hardly an 
Englishman that is not charm’d with John’s brisk interruption and conquest of 
Philip in this line; it is but imperfectly seen in other copies, for want of the break 
[see Text. Notes]; which shows that the parts of the line are address’d differently, 
the first to Philip himself . 

222. our aduantage] Tyrwhitt: If we read ‘For yw advantage,’ it will be 
a more specious reason for interrupting Philip. 

223. aduanced] That is, raised, lifted up. Compare: ‘ — beauty’s ensign yet 
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks, And death’s pale flag is not advanced 
there.’ — Rom. Jul., V, iii, 94. 

231. Comfort] Knight, accepting Gapell’s emendation, remarks: ^Although 
■“comfort” might be used by John in irony, . . . “preparation” is here the nomi- 




lo 8 the life and death - [act ii, sc. L 


[231. Comfort yours Citties eies, your winking gates:] 
native, and therefore we use confronts (ed. i.) justifies the Folio reading 
on the ground that ^King John is evidently speaking ironically/ — ^To this Dyce 
(Remarks, etc., p. 88) replies: 'Mr Knight was the first who suggested that "'Com- 
fort’ might be used by John in irony”; and if this suggestion had been thrown out 
by Steevens, I should have supposed that it had originated in the hope of inducing 
the next editor to adopt a reading which the "malicious George” would after- 
wards have great satisfaction in pronouncing to be an absurdity. ... I appeal to 
the plain sense of the most uncritical reader, if he can discover in [the whole 
speech] even a shadow of irony; a rhetorical figure, indeed, which would naturally 
be avoided by King John, whose object in the present address is to gain over the 
citizens of Angiers.’ — Collier evidently felt the force of this remark; in his Notes 
and Emendations, p. 202, he says: ‘It has been urged by those who wished to 
adhere to the text of the Folios, as long as it was unimpugned by any old author- 
ity, that "comfort” was here used ironically. Rowe did not think so when he 
printed confront; but the MS. Corrector, with less violence, has "Come ’fore.”’ — 
It is, I think, somewhat diiSdcult to explain this slightly veiled sneer at those who 
wished to force a meaning from the Folio reading; Collier himself and Knight being 
the only two. In his 2nd Edition Collier omits all mention of an ironical meaning 
to ‘comfort,’ and adds to his comment on the MS. correction: ‘There is a singular 
confirmation of the misprint of Comfort for "Come ’fore” in the Folio of 1632 
itself, for in 2 Henry VI: III, ii we meet with a line which stands thus: " Comfort, 
my sovereign, gracious Henry com foteT In the last instance "comfort” ought, 
of course, to be repeated.’ [Even at the risk of appearing captious on a point so 
slight, it is well, I think, to say that in the 2nd Folio the line is divided at the first 
syllable ‘com’ with a very perceptible hyphen connecting the next syllable ‘fore’ 
in the next line. This is quite different from the MS. correction come fore ,} — 
Knight (Stratford Sh.,i, p. 256) says: ^Conte fore may be rejected as a slavish ad- 
herence to ten syllables. Shakspere would have written come before! — Haluwell 
concurs with Dyce that the whole tenour of this speech precludes taking ‘com- 
fort’ as spoken ironically; Rowe’s or Capell’s emendation is, therefore, neces- 
sary. — ^Moberly: Capell’s correction is manifestly right, though perhaps 
froni would be still more accurate, as the preparation is for a siege, and also for 
‘merciless proceedings.’ — [It is hardly likely that so careful an editor as Moberly 
was unaware that Capell’s is but an emendation of Rowe’s reading. With the 
first portion of his note I quite agree,— En.] 

231. yours] Lettsom (ap. Walker, Crfi., ii, 591, foot-note) explains the pres- 
ence of the superfluous 5 as having been removed from the end of the preceding 
word. This is a corroboration of the correctness of Capeil’s emendation confronts, 
231. your winking gate^] Malone: That is, gates hastily closed from an ap- 
prehension of danger. So in 2 Henry IV: ‘And winking leap’d into destruction.’ 
— ^I, iii, 33- — [Beyond the fact that the word ‘winking’ occurs in both passages, 
there is no similiarity. In the line from Henry IV, ‘winking’ means, as often 
used, closing the eyes tightly. — Steevens quotes, in illustration of the present line, 
‘Whether it were lead or lattin that haspt [downe] those winking casements, I 
know not’ (Old Fortunatus, Dekker; ed. Pearson, p, 124); but this is really no 
better than Malone’s, as the speaker is referring to the eyes of two who have fallen 
asleep. It is, in fact, exactly the'reverse of this line in King John; Shakespeare 
compares the gates to eyes hastily closed; Dekker compares the eyes to windows 



ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


109 


And but for our approch, thofe fleeping ftones, 232 

That as a wafte doth girdle you about 
By the compulfion of their Ordinance, 

By this time from their fixed beds of lime 235 

Had bin difhabited, and wide hauocke made 
For bloody power to rufti vppon your peace. 

But on the fight of vs your lawfull King, 

Who painefully with much expedient march 

Haue brought a counter-checke before your gates, 240 

232. And] And, Theob. Warb. Cap. 

Varr. Rann, Coll. Dyce. Hal. Wh. i, 

Ktly, Huds. Del Words. 

approch] approach F4. 

• 233. wafte] waifte F4. waist Var. *78 
et seq. 

doth] Ff, Wh. Cam. 4 -, Fie. 

Neils, do Rowe et cet. 

234. Ordinance,] Ff, Ktly, Sta. ord- 
nance Mai. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Coll. 

Dyce, Hal. Wh. i, Huds. Del. ordi- 
nance Rowe et cet. 

235. fixed] fixhd Dyce, Fie. Huds, ii, 


Words. 

2s6, di/habited] dishabit^ Fie. 

237. peace,] peace, F3F4. 

238- 241. But,.,cheekes:] Cm. Dono. 

238. But. ..vs] Ff, Rowe, Pope,-}-, 
Cam.-f. But,., MS, Cap. et cet. 

on] for Ed. conj. 

239- 241. Who...cheekes:] Ff, Rowe, 
Knt, Coll. Wh. Sta. Cam.-f, Del. Fie. 
Neils. In parentheses Pope et cet. 

239. Who painefully] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
-h, Cam.-}-. Who painfully, Mai. et 
cet. 


hastily shut. — ^Wright, for a like use of 'wink,^ compares: ‘Was this the face 
That, like the sun, did make beholders wink?’ — Richard II: IV, i, 284. — Ed.] 

232-235. sleeping . . . beds] Whiter (p. 91): Can the reader doubt that the 
words ‘sleeping’ and ‘beds’ in this passage were inpressed on our Author by the 
preceding image of the ‘city’s eyes’ and the ‘winking gates’? The metaphor is 
not continued, though the words belonging to it succeed. — [The avowed purpose 
of Whiter’s volume, as expressed in his title page, is to explain Shakespeare’s use 
of certain similes through the association of ideas. — John Hunter also calls atten- 
tion to the continuation of the metaphor in ‘winking,’ ‘sleeping,’ and ‘beds.’ 
—Ed.] ^ 

233. waste] That is, a girdle, or garment for the, waist; compare: ‘ — the noble 
Talbot W^ho now is girdled with a waist of iron And hemm’d about with grim de- 
struction.’ — X Henry VI : VI, ill, 20. 

233. doth] For other examples wherein the relative takes a singular verb, though 
the antecedent be plural, see, if needful, Abbott, § 247. 

236. dishabited] Steevens: That is, dislodged, violently removed from their 
places; a word, I believe, of our Author’s coinage. — [Murray {N, E, D.), in con- 
firmation of this supposition by Steevens, gives the present line as the only 
example of ‘dishabit’ used in this sense. — Delius quotes from Carew, Survey of 
Cornwall, ‘dishabited towns’ (67a), but this means towns deprived of inhabitants, 
and is a variant of disinhabited, of which Murray gives other examples. — Ed.] 

239. expedient] Compare 1 . 64, ante. 

240. counter-checke] Murray {N, Ei D., s. v. sb. 2.): A check that opposes or 
arrests the course of anything. [The present line quoted.] 



no 


THE LIFE AND DEA TH 


[act II, sc. i. 


To faue vnfcratchM your Citties threatned cheekes: 241 

Behold the French amaz’d vouchfafe a parle, 

And now infteed of bulletts wrapt in fire 
To make a lhaking feuer in your walles, 

They fhoote but calme words, folded vp in fmoake, 245 

To make a faithleffe errour in your eares, 

Which trufl accordingly kinde Cittizens, 

And let vs in. Your King, whofe labour’d fpirits 
Fore- wearied in this adlion of fwift fpeede, 

Craues harbourage within your Citie walles. 25a 


241. mJcratcKd] unscratcht Fie. 
threatned] F3F4, Rowe, Popej-h* 

threatened F., Cam.-f . threatened Fie. 
Neils, threatened Cap. et cet. 

242. Behold the French amazed] Ff, 
Rowe, Pope, Han. Behold, the French 
amazed Coll. Wh. Cam.+, Del. Be- 
hold! The French amazed, Ktly. Behold, 
the French, amazed, Theob. et cet. 

vouchfafe] youchfafe Methuen 
facsimile F4. 

243. And now] And now, Theob. et 
seq. 

infteed] inftead F3. in ftead F4. 


243. wrapt] wraped Rowe, Pope,-{-, 
Var. ^78, ^85. wrapped Mai. et seq. 

248. vs in. Your King,] Ff, Rowe, 
Knt, Sta. in us, your king, Pope, 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Var. '73. in 
your king, Han. us in, your king; Cap. 
et cet. 

249. Fore-wearied] Forwearyed Var. 
^78 et seq. 

250. Craues] Ff, Rowe, Knt. Crave 
Pope et cet. 

Citie walles] city-walls Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Var. ’73, Dyce, Hah 
Ktly. 


245. words ... in smoake] Malone compares: ‘This helpless smoke of words,, 
doth me no right. ’ — Lucrece,\. 102^. 

246. faithlesse errour] Schmidt {Lex., s. v. faithless) cites the present line under 
the meanings disloyal, perfidious, taking ‘error’ in its usual sense of a mistake . — 
Moberly explains the passage as ‘A disloyal confusion.’^ — [Is it not rather, de- 
ception in which all trust is lacking? In any case the adjective ‘faithless’ seems, 
tautological. — Ed.] 

249. Fore-wearied] Wright: That is, exhausted. Spelt ‘forewearied’ in the 

Folios; just as'it is usual to write instead oi forgo, while no one would use 
forebid oi for eget ioi forbid sxid forget. Compare: ‘Thine armes shalt thou sprede 
abrede, As man in warre were forwerede.’-— Rownwn/ of the Bose, 1 . 2563. Pals- 
grave {Lesclarcissement de la langue Francoyse) has, ‘I forwerye.’ — le lasse, prim, 
conj. So also Spenser: ‘And well I wote, that of your later fight Ye all forwearied 
be.’ — Faerie Queene, I, i, 32. — [For-, as a prefix to verbs, has usually an inten- 
sive force, or preserves the sense of /row, to which it is nearly related,’ Skeat 
(Diet .).] — Knight, in defence of the Folio punctuation of 1 . 248, says: ‘It is to be 
observed that “forweary” and weary art the same; and that “forwearied” may 
be used not as a participle requiring an auxiliary verb, but as a verb neuter. 
“Our spirits wearied in this action” would be correct even in modem construe* 
tion.’ , ■ , ■ ■ ■■ ■ , 

250. Craues] Knight: ‘Your king’ is the nominative to ‘craves.’ (See pre- 
ceding note.)“-WRiGHT: The Folios have ‘craves,’ which is not an instance of the 
surrival of the ancient plural in s, but a blunder due to the singular ‘speed,’ which 


ACT 11, SC, ij 


OF KING 10 HN 


III 


France. When I haue faide, make anfwer to vs both. 251 
Loe in this right hand, whole protedlion 
Is moft diuinely vow^d vpon the right 
Of him it holds, ftands yong Plantagenet, 

Sonne to the elder brother of this man, 255 

And King ore him, and all that he enioyes : 

For this downe-troden equity, we tread 

In warlike march, thefe greenes before your Towne, 

Being no further enemy to you 

Then the conllraint of hofpitable zeale, 260 

In the releefe of this oppreffed childe, 

Religioufly prouokes. Be pleafed then 
To pay that dutie which you truly owe, 

To him that owes it, namely, this yong Prince, 264 


252. Loe] Lol Theob, Han. Warb. 
Johns. Var. '73, Coll. Wh. i, Ktly, Huds. 
i, Del. Craig. Lo, Cap. et cet. 

protedion] protection Fie. Words. 
256. enioyes:] enjoys. Pope,-|-, Coll. 
Wh. i, Ktly, Del. Dono. Neils. 

258. warlike march,] warlick march. 
F4, Rowe i. warlike march Pope et 
seq. 

2$^. further] farther Coll. Wh. i. 


260. Then] Than F4. 

261. oppreffed] oppressed Dyce, Fie. 
Huds. ii, Words. Dono. 

262. pleafed] pleasH Dyce, Fie. Huds. 
ii, Words. 

264. owes iif] Ff, Rowe, Coll. Dyce, 
Hal. Wh. i, Huds. Cam.-h, Del. Fie. 
Words, owns it. Pope, Han. owns it; 
Theob.“f. owes it, — Knt, Sta. owesii; 
Cap. et cet. 


comes between the nominative spirits T and the verb. — [I am not altogether cer- 
tain that either Pope^s or Capelins change is here necessary. The Folio reading, 
with its emphatic Tt is your king craves harbourage,’ is more forceful than a ref- 
erence to Ms wearied spirits requiring a resting place. — Ed.] 

252. in this right hand] Wright: Compare: Ted in the hand of her kind aunt 
of Gloucester.’ — Richard III: IV, i, 2. And Genesis, xxi, 18: ^ Arise, lift up the 
lad, and hold him in thine hand.’ Hagar was ordered not to take Ishmael in her 
arms, but to lead him by the hand. 

253. vow’d vpon the right] Compare, for this construction, * — ^you both have 
vow’d revenge On him, his sons, his favourites and his friends.’ — 3 Henry VI: I, 
i, 55; and ^That he may vow, in that sad hour of mine, Revenge on him.’ — Lucrece, 
1 . II79- 

258. greenes] Walker {Crit., ii, 348) quotes the present line as an example 
wherein greens’ is used ^for plants or vegetation in general.’ This is, of course, 
a perfectly logical explanation, but is the word not here used in the sense of an open 
space covered with grass? This use is common in England; Murray {N. E. D., 
s.y. green, 12. b.) gives many examples, the earliest dated 1477, and continuing 
to the present time. — Ed. 

263, 264. owe . . . owes] The first ^owe’ is here used in its modern sense; the 
second, in that of owns, as so frequent in Shakespeare and other authors of that 
time. — Schmidt (Lex.) furnishes many examples. 


112 THE LIFE AND DEATH [act ii, sc. L 

And then our Armes, like to a muzled Beare, 265 

Saue in afpe6l, hath all offence feaFd vp : 

Our Cannons malice vainly ftiall be fpent 
Againfl th’involuerable clouds of heauen, 

And with a bleffed and vn-vext retyre, 

With vnhack’d fwords, and Helmets all vnbruis’d, 270 

We will beare home that luftie blood againe, 

Which heere we came to fpout againfl your Towne, 

And leaue your children, wiues, and you in peace. 

But if you fondly paffe our profferM offer, 

^Tis not the rounder of your old-fac’d walles, 275 

Can hide you from our meffengers of Warre, 

Though all thefe Englifh, and their difcipline 

Were harboured in their rude circumference: 278 


265-268. And...heauen] Om. Dono. 

265. muzled] muzVd Cap. 

266. ajpe(^] aspect Dyce, Fie. Huds. 
ii, Words. 

hath] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Gam.+j Fie. have Han. 
et cet. 

268. involuerable] invulnerable Ff. 
heauen] heaven Rowe, Pope+» 

269. And] Ff, Rowe, Pope,+, Coll. 
Cam. 4 *> Del. And^ — Cap. Then 
Dono. And^ Var. 73 et cet. 

hlejjed] hlessH Dyce, Fie. Huds. 
ii, Words. 

vn-vext] unvex^d Var. ’73 et seq. 


27s. and you] Ff, Rowe, Pope,-f, 
Dyce, Cam.-f . and yoUy Cap. et cet. 

274. our] your Theob. i. 

proffer'd offer] proper offer Jervis 
(Emend., p. 14) . proffers here Vaughan 
conj. (withdrawn), proffer'd terms, or 
favours Id. conj. proffer'd peace Huds. 
% proffer by Mobtily con] . 

275. rounder] Ff, Rowe, Pope, +, Knt, 
Huds. i. rondure Sing, ii, Dyce, Hal, 
Ktly, Huds. ii, Words, roundure Cap. 
et cet. 

277. Though] Tho Pope ii,-f. 

278. circumference:] circumference. 
Pope et seq. 


266. aspect] The accent, as in nearly all cases, is on the second syllable in this 
word; compare IV, ii, 74 and 234. 

274. proffer’d offer] Walker (CrfA, i, 290) : The bad English (^ proffered offer’) 
the cacophony, and the two-syllable, ending, so uncommon in this play, prove 
that ' offer ’ is a corruption originating in ‘proffer’d.’ Read, I think, love. Compare 
I Henry VI: * But if you frown upon this proffer’d peace.’ — W, ii, 9; and just 
below, L 14, ‘if you forsake the offer of their love.’ [Wordsworth adopts, in his 
text, Walker’s conjecture, Hudson (ed. ii.): ‘Proffer’d offer’ seems to me a 
plain instance of sophistication in order to avoid a repetition of ‘peace’ [in 1. 273]. 
But I should rather say that the word ought to be repeated here, for peace is 
precisely what the speaker has just proffered. 

275. rounder] Steevens: ‘Roundure’ means the same as the French rondeur, 
i. e., the circle. Compare: ‘ — all things rare, That Heaven’s air in this huge 
rondure hems.’ — Sonnet xxi. 

278. rude circumference] Collier (ed. ii.): A correspondent (Mr W.W. Williams 
of Tiverton) suggests that we ought here to read ^wide circumference,’ and in 
L 21$ ‘Md-fac’d’ for ‘old-fac’d.* We cannot concur in either proposal; the walls 


ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


I13 


Then tell vs, Shall your Citie call vs Lord, 

In that behalfe which we haue challeng’d it? 280 

Or lhall we giue the fignall to our rage , 

And ftalke in blood to our polTeffion? 

Cit, In breefe, we are the King of Englands fubiedls 
For him, and in his right, we hold this Towne. 

Idhn. Acknowledge then the King, and let me in. 285 

CiU That can we not: but he that proues the King 
To him will we proue loyall, till that time 287 


279. Then\ Then^ Cap. et seq. 
vSf] us, — Wh. i. 

280. which] in which Ktly. 

it?] it; Var. ’73. it, CoU. Del. 
282. pojfejion] possession Fie. 


283. Cit.] Ff, Rowe, Pope,+, Ktly, 
Sta. Huds. Del. Neils, i. C. Capell. 
First Cit. Dyce, Hal. Cam -F, Craig. 
I. Cit. Mai. et cet. 

Englands] England’s F4. 

287. loyall,] loyal; Rowe et seq. 


of Angiers may most properly be termed ^old-fac’d^ from their ruggedness and 
their antiquity, and ‘rude’ is also a most applicable epithet. If any alteration 
of the text were needed the case would be different, but here all is intelligible and 
appropriate. — [Williams did not repeat either of these conjectures among those 
communicated to The Parthenon in 1862-63. They may, therefore, be considered 
as withdrawn. — Ed.] 

280. In that behalfe which] For other examples of this construction, see Abbott, 
§394. — Belden {Tudor Sh.) here takes ‘which’ as used adverbially, and thus 
interprets: ‘In the interest of him on whose behalf we have demanded the lord- 
ship of the town.’ 

284. For him . . . this Towne] Collier: So in the old King John, [The Trouhle- 
some Raigne, ate.,] the Citizen on the wall replies: ‘For him, and in his right, we 
hold our town.’ — [Marshall calls attention to the fact that in the older play 
these words are taken from a passage in prose, not verse, as it might seem from 
Collier’s quotation. — ^E d.] 

286, 287. he that ... To him] Abbott (§ 417), s. v. Noun Absolute, quotes the 
present line, also: ‘Rather proclaim it, Westmoreland, through our host That he 
which hath no stomach to this fight, Let him depart.’ — Henry V: IV, iii, 34, and 
adds in e^q^lanation: ‘“He,” being regarded as the normal form of the pronoun, 
is appropriate for this independent position. So “But I shall laugh at this a 
twelvemonth hence That they who brought me in my master’s hate I live to look 
upon their txagedyl— Richard III: III, ii, 57. These three examples might, 
however, come under the head of construction changed through change of 
thought.’ 

286, 287. proues the King . . . proue loyall] Moulton {Moral System, etc., p. 
272): The citizens of Angiers have exactly anticipated the spirit of the future 
■Jacobite' toast: 

‘God bless the King; God bless our faith’s defender; , 

God bless — ^no harm in blessing— the Pretender, 

But who pretender is, and who is King, 

God bless us aU, that’s quite another thing!’ 



THE. LIFE AND DEA TH 


[act II, sc. i. 


1 14 


Haue we rammed vp our gates againfl the world. 288 

John. Doth not the Crowne of England, prooue the 
King ? 

And if not that, I bring you Witneffes 290 

Twice fifteene thoufand hearts of Englands breed. 

Baft. Baflards and elfe. 

lohn. To verifie our title with their hues. 

Fran. As many and as well-borne bloods as thofe. 

Baft. Some Baftards too. 295 

Fran. Stand in his face to contradidl his claime. 

Cit. Till you compound whofe right is worthiefl, 297 


291. breed ] Ff. breed — Rowe, Pope, 
+, Ktly. breeds — Cap. et cet. 

292. Baffc....e//e.] Om. Words. Dono. 
Baft.] Faulc. Theobald, Warb. 

Johns. Varr. Rann. Bast. [Aside.] Coll, 
ii, Hal. Sta. Fie. 

Baflards and elje.] Ff, Rowe. 
(Bastards and else) Pope,-]-* Bastards, 
and else. Cap. et cet. 

293. To..^ —To... Varr. Rann, Wh. i, 
Huds. ii. 

294. As many] F2F3, Dyce, Hal. . 4 s 
many, F4 et cet. 


294. as thofe.] as those — Rowe et seq. 

295. Baft..../i?i?.] Om. Words. Dono. 
Baft.] Bast. [Aside.] Coll, ii, 

Hal. Fie. 

Some. ..too.] (Some. ..too) Pope, 

4 ". 

Baflards] Baflards, F4, Coll. Sta. 

Huds. 

296. Stand] Stand Varr. Rann. 
Wh.j,Huds. 

297. compound] compound, Theob. 
Warb. 


[Bartlett (Fam. QuoL, pth ed., p. 351) assigns these four lines to John Byrom 
not as a ‘Jacobite toast,’ but as extempore To an Officer. The first line also differs 
slightly from that given by Moulton: ‘God bless the King, — mean the faith’s 
defender.’ — Ed.] 

289. Crowne . . . prooue the King] C. K. Davis (p. 150) : In this instance King 
John asserts the law of a sovereign de facto, as afterwards declared by the statute of 
Henry VII: Tf there be a king regnant in possession of the crown, though he be but 
rex de facto and not de jure, yet he is seignior le roy; and if another hath right, if 
he be out possession, he is not within the meaning of the statute,’ — 2 Henry VII: 
c. I, 3 Inst. 7. 

292. Bastards and else] Moore Smith: Thaf is, Bastards and otherwise (not, 
I think, as Schmidt says, ‘bastards and such like’). Philip’s humorous inter- 
polation adds a touch of realism to the scene. 

297. compound] Devecmon (p. 35) compares, for this use of ‘compound,’ ‘And 
we here deliver . . . what We have, compounded on.’ — Coriol., V, vi, 84; ‘Content 
you, gentlemen; I mil compound this strife.’ — Tam. of Shrew, II, i, 343. This 
last is quoted by Davis, p, 124, as a legalism, on which Devecmon remarks: ‘To 
“compound” is in all these cases used in the general sense of to settle or determine; 
but in a legal sense it is to settle in a particular manner, as where a creditor agrees 
to receive part of his debt in satisfaction of the whole. . . . Today in general 
literature the word is used in pretty much the same sense as Shakespeare uses it 
— ^perhaps this is due to the force of his great example.’ 



ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


IIS 

298 


We for the worthiefl hold the right from both. 

John, Then God forgiue the fmne of all thofe foules, 

That to their euerlafting refidence, 300 

Before the dew of euening fall, fhall fleete 
In dreadfull triall of our kingdomes King. 

Fran. Amen, Amen, mount Cheualiers to Armes. 

Ba^. Saint George that fwindg’d the Dragon, 

And ere fince fit^s on’s horfebacke at mine Hofteffe dore 305 


298. We...worthieJi] Wej...wortMesty 
Cap. Varr. Rann, Mai. Steev. Varr. 

Sing. Knt, Hal. Sta. Huds. Fie. Neils. 

from] for Wh. ii, Neils. 

both] both. [Exeunt Citizens. 

Dono. 

299. finne] sins Coll. MS. Craig. 

300. refidence^] residence Coll. 

2^01. fall fall F2F3, Coll. i. 

Jhall fleete] shall fleet, Pope et seq. 

302. King.] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Fie, 

King! Theob. et cet. 

303-311. Fran. Amen...rore] Om. 

Dono. 

$0$. Amen, Amen, ]'Fi. Amen, Amen. 

Rowe, Pope, Fie. Amen, Amen . — 

Theob. Warb. Johns. Varr. Rann, Coll. 

Wh. i, Del. Amen, Amen! Han. et cet. 

Cheualiers] Ff, Rowe, chevaliers, 

304, 305. Saint George ... at mine Hostesse dore] Knight: How exceedingly 
characteristic is this speech of the Bastard! ‘Saint George’ was the great war-cry 
of Richard; but the universal humorist lets down the dignity of the champion in 
a moment by an association with the hostess’s sign.— Haiuweli. (Folio ed., p. 
394) calls attention to the fact there is here a slight anachronism, since the inn-sign 
with such a figure, though familiar in the time of Elizabeth, could hardly have 
existed in the time of King John. In support of its popularity he quotes from 
Brathwait’s Strappado for the Divell, 1615: ‘What fame in forraine coasts this 
hero got, The lake Silene shewes, if we should not; Where in the reskew of a lovely 
mayde, A fearefuU dragon he discomfited, So as we have portraide to every viewe, 
On signes of innes, how George the dragon slew.’ — [Lyly, possibly referring to 
the same sign-board, twice uses the painted figure of St George as an example 
of arrested motion: ‘But I would not have young men slowe to followe my pre- 
cepts or idle to defer the time lyke Saint George, who is euer on horse backe yet 
neuer rideth .’ — Euphues and Ms Ephoebus, ed. Bond, vol. i, p. 260, 1. 24, Again, 
T have fulfilled thy request, but I feare me thou wilt vse them as 5 . George doth 
his horse, who is euer on his backe but neuer rideth .’ — Euphues to Philautus, 
Ibid., p. 313, 1 . 13.— Ed,] 

305. sit’s on’s] Lettsom, the editor of Walker’s Criticisms and Versification, in 
his Preface, p. xiii, gives this line as it appears in Walker’s MS,: ‘Swings on his 
horse’ back,’ etc., and Lettsom thus comments: ‘Had this mistake occurred in 


Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. Fie. chev- 
aliers! Cap. et cet. 

303. Armes.] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
arms! Theob. et cet. 

304, 305. Saint George., .A wd ere fince] 
One line Pope et seq. 

304. fwindg^d] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Knt, 
Sta. Fie. swinged Cam.-h. swinged 
Theob. et cet. 

305. ere] eWe F2F4. e’er Rowe et seq. 
fiCs] fits F3F4. 

on's] on his Pope,-!-, Cap. Varr. 
Rann, Mai. Steev. Varr. 

horfebacke] horse'hack Walker 
(Vers., 253), Dyce, Hal. Wh. i, Fie. 
Huds. ii, Words, horse back Cam.-f. 

dore] dore, Fa. door , — Cap. 

door, FjF 4 et cet. 


ii6 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act II, sc. i. 
306 


Teach vs fome fence. Sirrah, were I at home 
At 3 rour den lirrah, with your Lionneffe, 

I would fet an Oxe-head to your Lyons hide; 

And make a monfler of you. 

Auft. Peace, no more. 

Baft, O tremble: for you heare the Lyon rore. 

John. Vp higher to the plaine, where we^l fet forth 
In befl appointment all our Regiments. 

Baft . Speed then to take aduantage of the field. 

Fra, It fhall be fo, and at the other hill 3^5 


306. fence.] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Warb. Johns, fence; — Sing. i. fence! 
Han. et cet. 

306-309. Sirrah.. .you.] Om. Words. 

306. Sirrah,,..] [To Aus.] Sirrah,... 
Coll. Sing, ii, Dyce, Hal. Wh. i, Ktiy, 
Huds. Cam. 4 *, Del. 

307. den] den, F4. 

firrah,] sirrah, [to Aus.] Cap. 
MaL Steev. Varr. Sing, i, Knt, Sta. 

308. 1 would] Ff, Rowe, Coll. Dyce, 
Hal. Wh. Huds. Cam.+, Del, Fd 
Pope et cet. 

309. you,] you. [To Austria, Rowe ii, 
Var. ^85. you. — [To Austria. Theob. 
+, Var. ^78, Rann. 

310. Peace,] Peace! Coll. Dyce, Hal. 
Wh. Huds. Cam. 4 , Del. Peace! 


Peace! I say. Words. 

311. 0 tremble'] Ff, Rowe, Pope. 0 ! 
tremble. Coll. Huds. i, Del. Craig. Oh! 
tremble; Ktly. 0 , tremble; Theob. et cet. 

rore] roar! Dyce, Hal. Wh. i, 
Sta. Huds. ii. 

312. plaine,] plain! Johns. plain; 
Cap. et seq. 

314. aduantage] tW advantage Pope,+ 
(—Var. ’73). 

field] field, [Exeunt English. 

Cap. 

315, 316. Fra. It...right] Om. Dono. 
315. fo] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 

Han, Warb. so; — Varr. Rann. so ; — 
[to Louis] Dyce, Wh. i, Huds. ii. so; 
Cam. 4 » so; [to Lew,] Cap. et cet. 


the First Folio, and had any poor editor proposed to substitute for swings the 
genuine word “sits,” his proposal would no doubt have been condemned as wan- 
ton and unnecessary, and the other reading would have been stoutly defended 
as an instance of Shakespeare^s propensity to play on words.’ — Cambridge Edd. 
(Note XII.) : CapelFs copy of Fa has 'sit’s on’s’; that which belonged to Dr Long 
has it’ [My copy likewise reads as Capell’s; and so also does the Methuen 

facsimile. It is possible that Long’s copy was an earlier printing, and later im- 
pressions were corrected while the type was still in the chase. Examples of such 
variations in copies of Fi have been noticed.— Ed.] 

305. horsebacke] For examples, wherein the plural and possessive case of nouns, 
in which the singular ends in s or xe, are frequently written, and, still more fre- 
quently, pronounced without the additional syllable, see, if needful, Abbott, § 471. 

315. the other hill] Miss Porter: An indication that the stage of Shakespeare 
had a slanting elevation arranged at the rear, on either side of it. In the battle- 
scenes of JuL C<jes. and Ant, Cleo, mention of this simulation of a hill also oc- 
curs. . . . The entire fore-stage and platform, here spoken of as the 'plaine’ and 
the 'field,’ was open to the manoeuvres of the two armies. And it may be sus- 
pected that the hill, or hills, was a device to bring the comers of the rear-stage into 
better \dew of the audience, as well as to give the impression of bilk in the open 
country near the walls of Anglers. 



ACT 11, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


117 

Command the reft to ftand, God and our right. Exeunt 316 
Heere after excurfions^ Enter the Herald of France 
with Trumpets to the gates, 

F. Her, You men of Angiers open wide your gates, 

And let young Arthur Duke of Britaine in, 320 

Who by the hand of France this day hath made, 

Much worke for teares in many an Englifh mother, 322 


316. ftand, \ Ff. stand, Rowe, Pope, 
+, Cam.+* stand . — Var. ’73 et cet. 

right.] right! Rowe ii. et seq. 
Exeunt] exeunt French. Cap. 
Exeunt severally the English and 
French Kings, etc. Dyce, Hal. Words. 
Exeunt on opposite sides, the English 
and French kings with their Forces. 
Wh. i, Huds. ii. Exeunt all severally. 
Coll. iii. 

Scene iv. Pope, Han. Warb. Johns. 
Scene ii. The same. Cap. Varr. Rann, 
Mai. Steev. Varr. Sing, Knt, Coll. Ktly, 
Sta. Huds. Del. Act II, Scene i. The 
same. Fie. Dono. 

317. Heere after,..of France] Ff, 
Rowe, Pope, Han. Cam.+, Fie. A 


long charge sounded: then, after...of 
France Theob. Warb. After.. .of 

France Johns. Varr. Rann, Dyce, Hal. 
Huds. ii. Alarums as of a battle join’d; 
Excursions; afterwards Retreat. En- 
ter a French Herald. Cap. Enter a 
French Herald, meeting Citizens who 
have been summoned. Dono. Alarums 
and Excursions; then a Retreat. Enter 
a French Herald. Mai. et cet. 

318. gates.] gates [The Citizens on 
the Walls.] Fie. 

319. You] Ye Johns. Var. ’73. 

3 20. Britaine] F2, Ktly. Britain F3F4, 
Rowe i. Bretagne Rowe ii. et cet. 

321. Who] Who, Varr. Rann, Mai. 
Steev. Varr. Knt, Sing. Dyce, Hal. Fie. 


316. God and our right] Douce (i, 402): An English motto is here improperly 
put into the mouth of a Frenchman. Richard the First is said to have originally 
used Dusu et mon droit. 

317. Heere after excursions] F. Gentleman (ap. Bell, p. 19): This fighting a 
battle behind the scenes, and leaving the stage empty till it is fought, we consider 
a violent attack upon critic patience; and we think this indeterminate engagement 
should be omitted by leaving out 11. 317-372; performed so, the scene would give 
less offence to probability, and save the stunned ears of an audience from much 
tmnecessary drumming and trumpeting. 

317. Enter the Herald] R. G. White: [A change of scene here] is not only un- 
necessary and unwarranted, but entirely at variance with actual fact, and no less 
with dramatic truth. The kings leave the gate only for a better fighting ground; 
and, after a brief and indecisive onset, they return, preceded by their heralds to 
the same gate, upon the battlements over which the ^scroyles of Angiers’ have 
remained during the skirmish, and where they find the citizen who had harangued 
them before ready to give them further advice in the premises. Even in actual 
representation the scene must remain open and unchanged; unless indeed it were 
to change to the battlefield merely to show the fight, and back again when the 
heralds enter.—CAMBRiDGE Edd. (Hate XIIE): The word 'Heere/ used in the 
stage-direction, seems to indicate that the scene was supposed to continue. 

319. You men of Angiers, etc.] Johnson: This speech is very poetical and, 
except the conceit of the ^widow’s husband’ embracing ‘the earth,’ is just and 
beautiful. [Sqq Appendix: Cn/tetew: J. M. Robertson, p. 636.] 


Ii8 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act II, sc. i. 


Whofe fonnes lye fcattered on the bleeding ground: 323 

Many a widdowes husband groueling lies, 

Coldly embracing the difcoloured earrh, 3^5 

And vi6lorie with little Ioffe doth play 
Vpon the dancing banners of the French, 

Who are at hand triumphantly difplayed 
To enter Conquerors, and to proclaime 

Arthur of Britaine, Englands King, and yours. 33^ 

Enter Englijh Herald with Trumpet, 

E,Har, Reioyce you men of Angiers,ring your bels, 332 


323. fcattered] Ff, Wh. Cam.-j-. 
scattered Fie. scattered Rowe et cet. 

ground:] ground. Ktiy, Neils. 

324. Many] And many Pope,-h. 

$2$. difcoloured] Ff, Wh. Cam.+. 

discoloured Rowe et cet. 

earrhj] Fx. earth, Ff, Rowe, 
Pope, 4* > Coll, earth; Cap. et cet. 

326. And\ While Pope,-!-- 
vidtorie.JoJfe] victory, .Joss, Cap. 

et seq. 

327. French,] French; Theob. Han. 
Warb. Johns. Varr. Rann, Mai. Steev. 
Varr. Sing. Knt, Sta. Huds. 

328. Who. .difplayed] Triumphantly 
displayed; who are at hand, Ktly. 

hand] hand, Cap. et seq. 
difplayed] Ff. displayed Rowe, 
Var. ^73. displayed, Neils, display’d, 
Theob. et cet. 

329. Coyiquerors,] conquerors; Rowe, 


Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Var. ’78, 
Rann, Mai. Sta. Del. conquerors Cam. 
+• 

330. Britaine,] Fa, Ktly. Britaine 
FjF 4, Rowe i. Britaine Fie. Bretagit, 
Dyce, Cam.H-, Del Huds. ii, Rife, 
Words. Neils. Craig. Bretagne, Rowe ii. 
et cet. 

330, 333- B:nglands] England’s F4. 

SSO.King,] King Dyce, Cam.+, 
Huds. ii, Me, Words. Neils. Craig. 
yours.] yoursl Sta, 

331. Enter ...Trumpet.] Ff, Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. Enter an... trumpets, to 
the same. Capell Enter...Heralds,... 
trumpets. Rann. ■ Enter...Heraid. 
Done. Enter...trumpets. Han. et cet. 

332. E.Har.] E. Her. F4. 

Reioyce ... Angiers , ... hels^ Re- 
Joice,...Angiers;..Mls; Rowe, Pope,-!-- 
Rejoice, ..Angiers, ..Mis; Cap. et seq. 


328, Who , . . displayed] Keightley {Exp., p. 221) considers the transposition 
he makes in this. line as necessary (see Text. Notes), remarking, Tt is strange that 
no one seems to have observed the error.’ — [Keightley is possibly right; but the 
placing of the words triumphantly displayed’ between the relative and its ante- 
cedent, 'banners,’ is both awkward and unusual. I am inclined to think, there- 
fore, that ‘displayed’ refers not to the banners, but to the French army; it is used 
in the technical military sense. — Murray {N. E. D., s. v. display, vb. i. b.) gives 
’'To spread out (troops) so as to form a more extended line = Deploy.’ He quotes 
as examples of this use: '15S1, Savile, Agricola (1622), igS: Agricola . * . fearing 
lest hee should be assailed on the front and flankes both at one time, displayed 
his army in length’; and, '1581. Tacitus’ History, iv, xxxv. (1591), 196: Fought 
with troops displayed out thinnely in length.’ It is, however, but fair to say that 
this is the only passage in Shakespeare wherein ‘display’ may be understood in 
this technical sense. In 1. 340, below, it occurs with its usual signification. — E dJ 
— ^AIooee Smith: These words, which refer to the banners, are inserted in the 
clause ‘Who . . which refers to the French. 

332. E, Har. Reioyce, etc.] Johnson: The English Herald falls somewhat below 



ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING lOHN 


1 19 


King lohn^ your king and Englands, doth approach, 333 

Commander of this hot malicious day, 

Their Armours that marched hence fo filuer bright, 335 

Hither returne all gilt with Frenchmens blood: 

There ftucke no plume in any Englifh Creft, 

That is remoued by a ftaffe of France: 

Our colours do returne in thofe fame hands 

That did difplay them when we firfl marcht forth : 340 

And like a iolly troope ofHuntfmen come 

Our luftie Englifh, all with purpled hands, 

Dide in the dying flaughter of their foes, 343 


334. day,] Ff . day! Cap. Varr. Rann. 
Mai. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Sta. Huds. 

i. day: Dyce, Hal. Cam.+i Huds, ii. 
day. Rowe et cet. 

335. Armours] armours, Rowe et 
seq. 

fduer bright] Ff, Rowe, Han. 
silver-hrigU Pope et cet. 

336. with] in Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. 

Frenchmens] Frenchmens^ Theob. 

ii, Warb. Johns. Var. ^73, ’78, ’85. 
Frenchmen\^ Cap. et seq. 

blood:] blood. Del. Rife, Dono. 

Neils. 

338. remoued] removH Dyce, Fie. 
Huds. ii, Words, removed CoU. ii. 


338. by a] by any Coll. ii. (MS.). 
France:] F2F3, Coll. France. F4, 

Rowe, Pope,-}-. France; Cap. et cet. 

339. thofe] thoj F4. 

340. marcht] Ff, Fie. marcFd Rowe 
et cet, 

341. And...HuniJmen] Ff, Rowe, 
Pope, Han. Coll. Wh. i, Huds. And,... 
huntsmen, Theob. et cet. 

342. purpled] purpl’d Cap. 

343. hide] F2F3. Stain’d Pope, Han. 
Died Steev. Varr. Knt i. Dyed Sing. 
Coll. Knt ii, Ktly, Sta. Cam.+, Fie. 
Huds. ii. Dy’d F4 et cet. 

foes,] foes. Ff, Rowe, Pope,-}-. 
CoU. Ktly. Coll, et cet. 


his antagonist. Silver armor gilt with blood is a poor image. Yet our author has it 
again in Macbeth: ‘Here lay Duncan, His silver skin laced with his golden blood,’ 
[II, iii, 117]. — Steevens, in further illustration of this use of ‘gilt,’ quotes: ‘The 
carets from great Hector’s breast, all gilded with his gore.’ — Chapman, Iliad, 
bk xvi, [ 1 . 773]; and also, ‘And showed his point gilt with the gushing gore.’ — 
Ibid., Odyssey, xix, [ 1 . 627].-— [Murray (N. E. D.) gives several other examples, 
but quotes the present line in King John as the earliest use in this sense. — Ed.] 
342, 343. hands, Dide in the . . . slaughter] Johnson: It was, I think, one of 
the savage practices of the chase for all to stain their hands in the blood of the 
deer as a trophy.—DAViES (Dram. MiscelL, i, 28): There is in Jul. C(Bs.,lll,i, 205 
a passage quite similar to this; Mark Antony in an apostrophe to the dead body of 
C:esar compares his murderers to hunters stained with the blood of the slain deer : 
‘ — ^here thy hunters stand Sign’d in thy spoil, and crimson’d in thy iethe.’ Upon 
looking into Turberville’s book of Hunting, I can see no trace of that practice 
[alluded to by Johnson]; but there are two different accounts of the French and 
English manner of dissecting or breaking up the deer. In dividing the several 
parts of the deer the French employed the hands of huntsmen alone; but our 
English kings, barons, and other great men took part of that office upon themselves. 
‘Oure order is,’ says Turberville, ‘that the Prince or chiefe (if so please them) doe 
alight and take assaye of the Deare with a sharpe knyfe, the whiche is done in this 



120 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act II, sc. i. 


Open your gates, and giue the Victors way. 

Hiw&^r^.Heralds, from off our towres we might behold 345 

345. Hubert.] Knt, Sta. Hunter. Rowe et cet. 

Hub. Ff. I. Cit. Capell. First Cit. 345* tomes] F^. towWs Pope, Theob. 
Dyce, Hal. Cani.+, Huds. Craig. Citi. Han, Warb. Johns, towers F3F4 et cet. 

maner. The deare being layd upon his backe, the Prince, chiefe, or such as 
they shall appoint, commes to it: And the chiefe huntsman (kneeling if it be to 
Prince) doth holde the Deare by the forefoote, whiles the Prince or chief, cut a 
siyt drawn alongst the brysket of the deare, somewhat lower than the brysket 
towards the belly. This is done to see the goodness of the flesh, and how thick it 
is. This being done we use to cut off the deares heades. And that is commonly 
done by the chiefe personage,’ [ed. 1576, Clarendon reprint, p. 133]. In these 
operations the dissectors must necessarily be sprinkled or besmeared with the blood 
of the animal, and to this our author, in both passages, seems plainly to allude. — 
Steevens (ed. 1793), Knight, and Madden (p. 64) also quote the passage from 
Jul. Cms. in illustration of the present lines, but without further corroboration 
of the staining the hands of the hunters with the blood of the deer as a common 
practice. [For a discussion of this hunting-custom, see JuL C(Bs.j this edition, 
p. 155,— Ed.] 

345. Hubert] Knight: Without any assigned reason the name of this speaker 
has been altered by the modem editors to Citizen, The Folio distinctly gives this, 
and all subsequent speeches of the same person to the end of the Act, to Hubert, 
The proposition to the kings to reconcile their differences by the marriage of Lewis 
and Blanche would appear necessarily to come from some person in authority; and 
it would seem to have been Shakspere’s intention to make that person Hubert de 
Burgh, who occupies so conspicuous a place in the remainder of the play. In the 
third Act John says to Hubert: * thy voluntary oath Lives in this bosom.’ It might 
be his ^voluntary oath’ as a Citizen of Angiers, to John, which called forth this ex- 
pression. — [The voluntary oath to which John refers is, I think, more likely that 
made by Hubert, when, as one of the very few, he sided with John in his contest with 
the barons. See Dram, Tersonce: Hubert ,- — ^Ed.] — Collier: Possibly the actor of the 
part of Hubert also personated the Citizen in order that the speeches might be well 
delivered, and this may have led to the insertion of his name in the MS. — ^The 
Cambridge Edd. {Note XIV.) also offer this explanation of the substitution of 
names; adding that ‘in the old play the Citizen who proposes the league to the 
two kings is a distinct person from Hubert de Burgh.’ — Hudson: This and the follow- 
ing speeches are most evidently from the same person who was introduced as Citizen 
at the opening of the preceding scene, and whose speeches there have the prefix 
Cit, What makes the case stili stronger is, that in the original the two scenes are 
printed as 07 ie, the Citizens having remained on the walls during the fight. [In 
corroboration of Collier’s suggestion Hudson says]: It was certainly not uncom- 
mon for two or more parts to be sustained by one actor, and this often occasioned 
mistakes in the distribution of the dialogue. [The present instance is given by 
Walicer {CriLi ii, §lxxxv.) among many others wherein there is either a mistake 
or substitution of the prefixes.]— R. G. White: Hubert de Burgh was an English- 
man, and a nephew to William Fitz Adelin, who was in the service of John’s 
father. But even supposing that Shakespeare did not know these facts, what 
was the Chamberlain to King John doing in Angiers at such a time? The prefix 



ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING lOHN 


I2I 


From firfl to laft, the on-fet and retyre 346 

Of both yonr Armies, whofe equality 

By our bell eyes cannot be cenfured : (blowes : 

Blood hath bought blood, and blowes haue anfwerd 349 

346. on-fet] onset Rowe et seq. Huds. ii, Words. Dono. censured. Ktly, 

347. yonr] Fi. Sta. Neils. 

Armies,] armies; Cap. et seq. 349. Uood^ blond, F2. 

348. cenfured:] censured: Dyce, Fie. 


is, doubtless, a trace of tLe prompter's book, resulting from the fact that the 
actor who played Hubert was expected to ‘double’ in the Citizen of Angiers. — 
John Huntes: We believe that Shakespeare in the present scene meant to rep- 
resent Hubert de Burgh as a Citizen of Angiers. — ^Miss Porter: There are some 
signs that Shakespeare chose to differ from the older play herein, as in many 
things bearing on character and human nature. Hubert’s proposition denoted 
him to be the man of resource in Angiers. As a leader there John would seek to 
attach him to his person, rewarding him as the proposer of the match, attaching 
him to service as he had Faulconbridge, and acting magnetically towards him as 
he does toward King Philip. In accord with such probabilities drawn from 
Shakespeare’s conduct of the Play are John’s profession that his mother and 
he ‘owe’ Hubert ‘much,’ and that he has given them his ‘voluntary oath,’ and 
Hubert’s reply that he is ‘much bounden’ to John, and Melloone’s message to one 
Hubert with your King. The propriety of giving into French hands the charge 
of Geffrey’s son, and the scorn of the English lords for Hubert are in general agree- 
ment with the implication that John picked out for trust and preferment this 
clever and gentle Angevin, whose French name also suits it. — ^[The same objec- 
tions as were urged against Knight’s explanation of Hubert’s voluntary oath are 
equally applicable to Miss Porter’s amplification of this point. John and Hubert’s 
mutual protestations of friendship may be more probably referred to Hubert’s 
loyalty and John’s recognition of it. The suspicion and hatred of the English 
lords is due to the same cause. The propriety of John’s placing Arthur in the 
hands of a citizen of Angiers is not very apparent; John had but just defeated the 
French, and they were as much his enemies as Arthur of Bretagne. Hubert de 
Burgh had long been in his councils and John knew he could be trusted. I 
therefore, albeit reluctantly, decide against the Folio text, and accept Collier’s 
explanation. — ^En.] 

345. Heralds, from off our towres, etc.] Johnson: These three speeches seem to 
have been laboured. The Citizen’s is the best; yet ‘both alike we like’ is a poor 
gingle. 

347. equality] Malone: Our author ought rather to have written ‘whose 
superiority,^ OX ^who^e inequality f cd^miot he cerxsmed. 

348. censured] Murray (iV. E. i}., s. v. i.): To form or give a ‘censure’ or 
opinion of; to estimate, judge of, pass judgement on, criticize, judge.—MARSHALL: 
‘Censured’ is generally explained as estimated, determined. But does it not rather 
mean here questioned? The sense seems to be that the two armies have shown 
themselves to be so equally matched that the citizens cannot say which is the 
superior; as the speaker says below: ‘Both are alike, and both alike we like.’ — ^1. 351. 



THE LIFE AND DEATH 


122 


[act II, sc. i. 


Strength matcht with ftrength, and power confronted 350 
power, 

Both are alike, and both alike we like: 

One muft proue greateft. While they weigh fo euen, 

We hold our Towne for neither: yet for both. 


EnUr the two Kings with their powers, 

at f euerall doores, 355 

lohn, France, haft thou yet more blood to caft away? 

Say, ihall the currant of our right rome on, 357 


350. maicht] Fa, Fie. match F3. 
match'd Rowe et cet. 

power Ff. power, Rowe, Pope, 
4. (-— Var. *73), Neils, power: Cap. 
et cet. 

351. like:] like. Cap. et seq. 

352. greateJL\ Ff, Rowe, Popej+j 
Neils, greatest : — Var. '73. greatest; 
Sing. Ktly, Huds. greatest: Cap. et cet. 

Scene v. Pope, Han. Warb, Johns. 
354, 35$. Enter... doores.] Flourish. 
Enter King John, and his Power, on 
one side, Bastard, Elinor, Blanch, &c. 
On the other, King Philip, and French, 
Austria, and Lewis. Capell. Enter at 
one side King John, with his power; 
Elinor, Blanch, and the Bastard; at the 


other. King Philip, Lewis, Austria, and 
Forces. Malone, Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, 
Coll. Wh. i, Huds. i, Del. Re-enter, 
on one side King John, Elinor Blanch, 
the Bastard, Lords and Forces; on the 
other King Philip, Louis, Austria, and 
Forces. Dyce, Hal. Sta. Huds. ii. Words. 
Re-enter the two Kings, with their 
powers, severally. Cam.-f, Neils. Craig. 
Enter...doores, [Elinor, Blanch, Bas- 
tard, Lewis and Austria.] Fleay. 

356. blood] blond F2. 

357-362. Say, ..Ocean] Om. Dbno. 

357. rome] runne Fa. roam Malone, 
Var. ’21, Knt. Coll, i, ii, Wh. i, Huds, i, 
Del. run F3F4, Rowe et cet. ' 

on] on? Pope et seq. 


3S4, 355. Enter the two Kings ... at seuerall doores] Collier calls attention 
to the simplicity of this stage-direction, remarking that *it is worth preser^dng, on 
account of the manner in which the two armies, headed by their kings,are rep- 
resented to come upon the stage.* 

357. rome on] Malone: The ecHtor of the Second Folio substituted runne, 
I do not perceive any need of change. In The Tempest we have: 'the wandering 
brooks,* [IV, i, 128. ' Wandering* is Steevens*s emendation for windring ol 
original text; the adjectival participles are doubtless synonyms. — -Ed.]— Steevens: 
I prefer the reading of the Second Folio. So in Henry V: 'As many streams run 
into one self sea,* [I, ix, 209; the Qq. reading]. The King would rather describe 
his right as running on in a direct than in an irregular course, such as would be 
implied by the word 'roam.* — ^Knight: Neither the poetry nor the sense appear 
to have gained by the fancied improvement [of the Second Folio]. — Singer (ed. ii.) : 
I differ from Knight, for surely a current does not roam, but ‘run right on.* The 
whole context shows that this is the true reading. — Dyce suggests that the word 
in the MS. may have have been written 'ronne,* and in defense of the Second 
Folio reading compares: 'And calmly run on in obedience Even to our ocean, to 
our great King John*— V, iv, 60.— R, G. White: 'Rome* might be. an easy mis- 
print of runne. But it is to be observed that the comparison is to the current 



ACT II, SC. i.] OF KING JOHN 123 

Whofe paffage vext with thy impediment, 358 

Shall leaue his natiue channell, and ore-fwell 
with courfe diflurb’d euen thy confining Ihores, 360 

Vnleffe thou let his filuer Water, keepe 

358. pajfage] passage, Rowe, Pope,-{-. 361. Water,] F2F3. waters Coll. iii. 

vext]vex‘dM.?\. QtSQq^. (MS.), Wh. i, Dyce ii, iii, Huds. ii, 

360. euen] ev^n Pope,-|— Words, water F4, Rowe et cet. 


of a stream whose ‘silver waters keep a peaceful progress to the ocean.’ Now 
such a stream does not run directly, but always roams about; and especially is 
this true in England; and if it be objected that Shakespeare’s metaphors are rarely 
correspondent, the answer is that they sometimes are, and that according to 
authentic evidence here is one, at least, that is so. And besides, Shakespeare 
evidently had in his mind’s eye the same stream that furnished him with the 
comparison which he puts into Julia’s mouth in the Two Gentlemen, in eight of 
the loveliest lines he ever wrote. The very details of the two pictures are alike, 
although the earlier is the more highly iSnished: 

‘ The current that with gentle naurmur glides, 

Thou know’st being stopped impatiently doth rage; 

But when his fair course is not hindered, 

He makes sweet music with th’ enamell’d stones, 

Gi\dng a gentle kiss to every sedge 

He overtaketh in his pilgrimage 

And so by many winding nooks he strays 

With willing sport to the wild ocean.’ — [II, vii, 25-34]. 

Is there in all literature a more marked instance of the use of the same thoughts 
twice? This passage forbids us to change the reading of the Folio. — [Few will, 
I think, deny that White’s comparison is very striking. Is it, however, hyper- 
critical to point out that the present play antedates the Two Gentlemen, and that, 
therefore, the passage quoted is an amplification of this in King John? — ^Ed.] — 
Walicer {Grit., i, 155), in a section devoted to illustrations of Ovid’s influence on 
Shakespeare, quotes: ‘Sic ego torrentem, qua nil abstabat eunti.’ — Metam,, iii, 
56S, remarking, ‘Is it fanciful to suppose that this simile caught Shakespeare’s 
fancy, and recurred to him on many occasions? Two Gentlemen, II, vii, 25-34; 
Mcas. for Meas,, III, i, 249; Venus ^ Adonis, Ivi, and Lucrece, xciii, clx.’ — 
Schmidt (Lex.) quotes the present line, s. v. roam, and thus explains it: ‘Shall the 
current continue to overswell its banks, instead of remaining in its channel? ’ — 
Wright, in referring to this interpretation, says: ‘But an overflowing river which 
has broken its banks can hardly be said to ^‘roam,” and John implies that it has 
not left its native channel.’ 

561. Water! R. G. White: There is no doubt that Collier’s Folio in reading 
‘silver waters’ corrects a trivial misprint. In Shakespeare’s time, as w-ell as in 
ours, the singular was not used except in speaking of water as a fluid, not as a body. 
Thus the waters of the sea are blue; but sea- water is salt. [Compare: ‘If by 
your art, my dearest father, you have Put the wild waters in this roar, allay them.’ 
— Temp., I, ii, i; and: ‘our garments . . . being rather new-dyed than stained with 
salt wsLteiJ—Ibid., H, i, 62.] 



124 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act n, sc. 1. 


A peacefull progreffe to the Ocean. 362 

Fra. England thou haR not fau’d one drop of blood 
In this hot triall more then we of France, 

Rather loR more. And by this hand I fweare 365 

That fwayes the earth this Climate ouer-lookes, 

Before we will lay downe our iuR-borne Armes, 

Wee’l put thee downe, ’gainR whom thefe Armes wee 
Or adde a royall number to the dead : (beare. 

Gracing the fcroule that tels of this warres Ioffe, 37° 

With flaughter coupled to the name of kings. 

Baft. Ha MaieRy : how high thy glory towres. 

When the rich blood of kings is fet on fire: 

Oh now doth death line his dead chaps with Reele, 

The fwords of fouldiers are his teeth, his phangs, 375 


362. Ocean] oceHn Ktly, Fie. 

364. iriall...France,] trial ^...France; 
Rowe et seq. 

365. Rather] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 4 *, Fie. 
Rather j Cap. et cet. 

more.] Ff, Rowe, Pope,+, Ktly, 
Sta. Cam.-p, Fie. Neils, more; Hal. 
more: Var. ^73 et cet. 

366. earth] earthy Fie. 
ouer-lookes,] over-looks, — Cap. 

Van. Rann. Mai. Steev. Van. Sing, 

367. lay downe] lay hy Pope,+, Var. 
’78. 

370. fcroule] scroll Steev. et seq. 

371. coupled] coupVd Cap. 

372. Ea Maiefty:] Ff. Ha! Majesty; 
Rowe, Pope, Han. Ha! Majesty , — 
Theob. Warb. Joims. Var. ’73, Coll. 


Wh. i. — Ha, Majesty! Ktly. Ha, 
Majesty, Fie. Ha, majesty! Cap. et cet. 

372. towres] Fa. tow'rs Wh. i. towers 
F3F4 et cet. 

373. fire:] Ff. Rowe, Wh. L 

fire! Pope et cet. 

374'”377- Oh now... of kings] Om. 
Dono. 

374. Oh now] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Fie. 
Oh, now Theob. Han. Warb. Johns- 
Var. ’78, ’83, Rann. Oh, how Var. ’73. 
O! now Coil. Sing, ii, Wh. i, Hnds. i, 
Del. Craig. Oh! now Ktly. 0 , now 
Cap. et cet. 

374? 37 S' ••phangs,] Ff. steel;... 
phangs, Theob. steel;. ..phangs; Rowe 
et cet. 

375. phangs] fangs Steev. et seq. 


365. this hand] That is, Arthur's hand, which the King here holds aloft; that he 
does not swear by his own hand is shown by the next line. — Ed. 

366. Climate] Wright: That is, region of the sky. Used also of a region of 
the earth in Rich. II: ‘0 forfend it God, That in a Christian climate souls refined 
Should show as heinous, black, obscene a deed!'' — ^IV, i, 130. [In this latter sense 
Schmidt {Lex., s. v.) quotes also: ‘—they are portentous things Unto the climate 
that they point upon.’ — Jul. C(bs., I, iii, 31; and gives the present line as an ex- 
ceptional use of this word in reference to a region of the sky. — Ed.] 

371. the name of kings] Deighton: That is, with the record of the slaughter of 
kings; though the plural is used, the king refers to himself only. 

372. glory] Walker {Crit., iii, 119) quotes the present line in illustration of 

‘glory’ used in the sense of ^ vaunting, ut Schmidt {Lex.) does not, however, 

include that meaning among the several which are assigned to this word. He 
cites the present as an example of splendor, magnificence. 



ACT II, SC. L] OF KING lOHN 125 

And now he feafts, moufing the fiefh of men 376 

In vndeterminM differences of kings. 

Why Hand thefe foyall fronts amazed thus: 

Cry hauocke kings, backe to the ftained field 

You equall Potents, fierie kindled fpirits, 380 


376. moufing mouthing Popej+j Var. 
^78, ’8s, Steev. Var. ’03, ’13. morning 
Cap. mounching Orger. 

377. differences] differences Pope, 
Theob. Plan. Warb. Johns. 

kings.] kings . — [Aside. Ktly. 

378. amazed] amazM Dyce, Fie. 
Huds. ii, Words. 

thus:] thus? F4, 

37g. Cry hauocke kings ^] Ff. Cry 
Havockj KingSy Rowe, Pope, Fie. Cry 
havocky Kings; Theob. Han. Warb. 
Johns. Cry havock, kings! Var. ’73, 
Ktly, Pluds. Rife. Cry ^havoc* Kings! 
Dyce ii, iii. Cry ^ havoc! ^ kings; Cam. 


+, Words. Craig. Cry, havoc! kings. 
Neils. Cry, havock, kings! Cap. et cet. 

^yg.Jiained] stainld Dyce, Fie. Huds. 
ii, Words. 

380. equall Foients,] equal potent. Coll, 
ii, iii. (MS.), equal-potents, Sta. Del. 
Dono. Craig. equal-potent Walker, 
Dyce ii, iii, Huds. ii, Words. 

fierie kindled Spirits,] Ff, Rowe. 
firy-kindled spirits! Mai. Steev. Var. ’21. 
fire-ykindled spirits, CoU. ii, iii. (MS.), 
fiery kindled spirits! Cam.-p. fire-en- 
kindled Lettsom conj. fiery-kindled 
spirits. Fie. fiery-kindled spirits! Pope 
et cet. 


376. mousing] Malone deprecates Pope’s change of this word (see Text. Notes), 
and in support of the Folio quotes: ‘Well moused, lionl’ — Mid. N. Dream, V, i, 274; 
and: ‘Whilst Troy was swilling sack and sugar, and mousing fat venison, the mad 
Greekes made bonefires of their houses.’ — Dekker, 1603, Wonderful Year, [ed. 
Grosart, p. loi]. ‘Mousmg is, I suppose,’ says Malone, ‘mamocking, and de- 
vouring eagerly, as a cat devours a mouse.’ — ^Murray {N. E. D., s. v. Mouse, 
vb, 3.) gives two examples prior to the present line wherein the word bears this 
sense.— Steevens, in justification of Pope, quotes: ‘First mouthed to be last 
swallowed.’ — Hamlet, IV, ii, 20, and adds: ‘Shakespeare designed no ridicule in 
this speech; and therefore did not write (as when he was writing the burlesque 
interlude of Fyramus and Thisbe) “mousing.”’ — Malone, well seeing that this 
is but begging the question, replies: ‘Shakespeare is perpetually in the habit of 
using familiar terms and images in his most serious scenes.’ And in proof of this 
quotes from the present play: ‘Now for the bare-picked bone of majesty Doth 
dogged war bristle his angry crest.’—IV, ii, 158; ‘Have I not here the best cards 
for the game.’ — V, ii, no; ‘Unthread the rude eye of rebellion.’~V, iv, 15. — [The 
Text. Notes will show that Steevens is quite in the minority. — E d.] — Ivor John: 
A much better sense [than ‘tearing as a cat tears a mouse’] is given by taking the 
more obvious meaning of gnawing, nibbling as a mouse does. The ‘Well moused 
Lionl’ of Mid. N. Dream will also bear this interpretation. 

379. Cry hauocke] Johnson; That is, command slaughter to proceed. So, in 
Jul. Coes., ‘ Cry, havoc, and let slip the dogs of war.’ — [III, i, 273. For illustra- 
tions of the use of this phrase, see note on above line from Jul. Cces., this ed., 
p. 161, where it is opined that ‘ to “cry havoc” was the prerogative of the Monarch.’ 
— Murray {N. E. D., s. v. Havoc, I.) gives as a partial explanation of the origin 
that it is from the ‘Anglo-French havok, altered in some way from Old French 
havot (c. 1150 in Du Cange havo), used in same sense, especially in phrase crier 
havot. Probably of Teutonic origin.’ — ^E d.] 

380. Potents] Steevens: That is, potentates. So, in Ane verie excellent and 



126 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act II, sc. i. 


Then let confufion of one part confirm 381 

The others peace : till then, blowes, blood, and death. 

John. Whofe party do the Townefmen yet admit,? 

Fra. Speake Citizens for England, whofe your king. 

Hub. The king of England, when we know the king. 385 
Fra. Know him in vs, that heere hold vp his right. 

John. In Vs, that are our owne great Deputie, 

And beare pofleffion of our Perfon heere, 

Lord of our prefence Angiers,and of you. 3^9 


382. till] Hill Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Han. Cap, Varr. Rann. 

death] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Warb, Johns. Var. ’73, Ktly, Fie. 
death! Han. et cet. 

384. Speake Citizens] Speak, citizens, 


Johns, et seq. 

384. whofe] who^s Ff. et seq. 

3S7- Deputie] Deputy. F2. Deputy 
F4. 

388. pojjejfion] procession Coll. MS. 

389. of you] if you F2F3. 


delectahill Treatise intituUt Philotus, 1603: ‘Ane of the potentes of the town.’ — ' 
[Murray (N. E. D., s, v, sb^. B. 2.) quotes the present line as the earliest example 
of ^Potent’ used in the sense *of one having authority, a power,’ and gives but 
one other passage, dated 1642, wherein it is so used. Steevens’s somewhat in- 
definite reference is, I fear, open to suspicion. — ^Lextsom (ap. Walker, Cn^., i, 28) 
notes that Hhis is the only passage in which Shakespeare uses ‘^potent” as a 
substantive.’— Ed.] — Collier: ^Po tents’ may, as Steevens says, be put for po^ 
tentates; but by ‘equal potents’ the Bastard seems rather to mean that the victory 
being undecided, the two kings are equi-potent. — Kinnear (p. 192): ‘Equal’ is 
equivalent to equally, — equally potent is explained by ‘undetermined differences,’ 
1 . 377. ‘Equal’ is so used, Henry VIII: I, i, 159, ‘for he is equal ravenous As he 
is subtle.’ Equally potent is equivalent to equally prevailing in this undecided 
action; so the Citizen’s speech ‘whose equality By our best eyes cannot be censur’d.’ 
‘Equal potent’ has no reference to the relative general potency of the two kings. 
‘Potents’ [in the Folio is] an instance of the misprint of adding a final 

380. fierie kindled] Collier (ed. ii.): It is, we think, beyond dispute a restora- 
tion of the genuine language of the Poet to print the passage as in the corrected 
Folio [see Text. Notes], meaning that the kings and their armies are equally strong 
and ‘&:e-ykindledf not fiery-kindled. — ^IvoR John: I would suggest ^fury-kindled 
spirits.’ Compare: ‘Or that enkindled fury turn to fiame.’— Edw'd III: III, 
ill, 1 13; and, ‘Wrath-kindled gentlemen, be ruled by nml^Rich. II: 1 , i, 152. 

388. beare possession of our Person] Moberly: This may be a corruption for 
^har possession of our person’ (or ‘in our person’); that is, ‘I in my own person 
bar the possession which you claim as Arthur’s attorney’; as a suitor would who 
by the remedy called ‘assize’ establishes his title to land by showing his own or 
his ancestor’s possession of it (Blackstone, iii, 184). As this process was applicable 
in cases where the wrong done was (i) recent, (2) after the death of father or 
mother, brother or sister, uncle or aunt (Ibid., 185), the allusion suits the matter 
here in hand. The word har, it may be remarked, occurs with peculiar frequency 
in this play, — [This is a slight exaggeration; the word occurs in two passages — I, 
ii, 20s and III, i, 118, — Ed.] 



ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


127 


Fra. A greater powre then We denies all this, 390 


390. Fra.] Citi. Rowe, Pope,+, Var. 
’78, ’85. I. C. Capell. I. Cit. Malone 
et seq. (subs.). 

powre] F2. pow'r Pope, Theob. 


Han. Warb. Johns. Wh. i. power F3F4 
et cet. 

390. thefi\ than F4. 

We] ye Warb. Theob. Han. 
Johns. Cap. Var. ’73, ’78, ’85, Words. 


390-393. A greater powre then We . . . Kings of our feare] Theobald: We 
must certainly read, as Mr Warburton acutely observ’d to me: ^ A greater pow’r, 
than Fe, denies all this’; i. e., Tho’ each of you pretend to be our rightful Kings, 
you are yet only so in swaying over our fears, in the terrors we have of you; not 
acknowledg’d Kings in our obedience. — ^Warburton: We should read ‘than yeJ 
What power was this? thdi fears. It is plain, therefore, we should read: ‘Kings 
are our fears,’ — i. e., our fears are the Kings which at present rule us. — Capell 
(I, i, p. 123): That the citizens should be ‘Kings of their fear, till their fears were 
depos’d’ is a piece of evident nonsense; but, evident as it is, the certainty of its 
correction is more so, if ‘depos’d’ be reflected on: For what is to be deposed? why, 
their ‘fears’: their fears then are the ‘Kings’; and are and fears a true reading, 
spoil’d by printers. And now we come at the sense of the words ‘greater power’; 
and, with it, the propriety of the correction that follows — ye for ‘we’: the city ’s 
fears’ were [sic] that power; and a power so strong at that time that it made her 
set at defiance the power of both kings, till she could be satisfied rightly who was 
her king. — [Theobald’s better judgment was at times overborne by the remarks 
of his dogmatic correspondent, Warburton; but it is strange that an editor so 
conservative as Capell should commend, and adopt, the needless change of ‘we’ 
to ye. In corroboration of the correctness of this line, compare: ‘A greater power 
than we can contradict Hath thwarted oiir intents.’ — Rom. 6* Jul.y V, iii, 153.*“ 
Ed.] — Tollet: ‘A greater power than we’ may mean, ‘the Lord of hosts who has 
not yet decided the superiority of either army; and till it be undoubted the people 
of Anglers will not open their gates.’ Secure and confident as lions, they are not 
at all afraid, but are kings, i. e., masters and commanders of their fears, until their 
fears or doubts about the rightful King of England are removed, — ^Tyrwhitt: 
I)r Warburton saw what was requisite to make this passage sense; and Dr John- 
son, rather too hastily, I think, has received his alteration into the text. As the 
same sense may be obtained by a much slighter alteration [than Warburton’s] 
I am more inclined to read: ‘King’d of our fears’; King’d is used as a participle 
passive by Shakespeare more than once I believe. The Dauphin says of England: 
‘she is so idly king’d.’ — He?zry V: II, iv, 26. It is scarcely necessary to add that 
‘of’ here (as in numberless other places) has the signification of by. — ^Malone: 
‘King’d of our fears’; i. e., our fears being our kings or rulers. King’d is again 
used in Richard II: ‘Then am I king’d again.’— [V, v, 36]. It is manifest that 
the passage in the old copy is corrupt, and that it must have been so worded that 
theii fears should be styled their kings ot masters, and not they kings or masters 
of their fears; because in the next line mention is made of these fears being deposed. 
Tyrwhitt’s emendation produces this meaning by a very slight alteration, and is, 
therefore, I think, entitled to a place in the text. The following passage in our 
author’s Lucrece strongly, in my opinion, confirms his conjecture: ‘So shall these 
slaves [Tarquin’s unruly passionsVhe kings, and thou their slave,’ [ 1 . 659]. 
Again, in King Lear: ‘It seems she was a queen Over her passion, who, most rebel- 



128 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act II, sc. i. 


[390-393. A greater powre then We . . . Kings of our feare] 
like, Sought to be Ung o'er her.'— [IV, iii, 75].— Knight: The change of this 
passage is amongst the most remarkable of the examples which this play furnishes 
of the unsatisfactory nature of conjectural emendation. ... If the safe rule 
of endeavoring to understand the existing text, in preference to guessing what the 
author ought to have written, had been adopted in this and hundreds of other 
cases, we should have been spared volumes of commentary. The two kings per- 
emptorily demand the citizens of Anglers to acknowledge the respective rights of 
each, — England for himself, France for Arthur. The Citizens, by the mouth of 
Hubert, answer, ‘A greater power than we denies all this.' Their quarrel is un- 
decided — the arbitrement of Heaven is wanting. ^And until it be undoubted, 
we do lock Our former scruple in our strong-barr'd gates, Kings, of our fear,’ on 
account of our fear, or through our fear or hy our fear, we hold our former scruple, 
kings, until our fears, resolv’d, ‘Be by some certain king purg'd and deposed.’ — 
Collier (ed. i.) : The sense does not require us to alter [the Folio reading]. The 
meaning of the Citizens is that they wiU be ruled by their fear, admitting no other 
monarch, until it shall have been seen which power is the strongest, that of England 
or France. [In his second edition Collier adopts Tyrwhitt’s change and Malone’s 
interpretation, adding: ‘We were originally anxious to preserve the reading of the 
Folios, but this is a case in which we think it must be relinquished.’] — ^Veeplanck: 
I understand ‘Kings of our fear’ to be meant as an address to the two sovereigns: 
‘We say to you, sovereigns whom we fear, that we must bar our gates against both, 
until that fear is dissipated by the victory or withdrawal of one of you.’ If this 
is not satisfactory, ‘King’d of our fear' must be adopted. — Hudson: It is not 
easy to extract a meaning out of the original text, as may be seen by consulting 
Knight and Collier. Tyrwhitt’s emendation seems to us eminently happy. — 
Delius: ‘Kings’ is a vocative, the usual recurrent address to both Kings, which 
is here interjected into the connected sentence ‘our strong-barred gates of our 
fear,’ i. e., our gates strong-barred of our fear. — Staunton: The meaning of 
the speaker, however quaintly expressed, we imagine to be simply this: Each 
of you lays claim to our allegiance, but neither has produced satisfactory 
proof of his right to it; and until all doubts upon that point are resolved 
we shall trust to our strong barred gates as the protectors, or Kings, of our 
fear. — [Haluwell (Folio Ed.) offers the same interpretation without, how- 
ever, mentioning Staunton’s. It is, I think, hardly fair to accuse Halliwell of 
plagiarism, since both editors were working almost contemporaneously, and 
Halliwell may not have seen Staunton's note — Ed.] — C. & M. Cowden Clarke 
adopt Tyrwhitt’s correction, since it is difficult to make clear sense of the Folio 
reading. They thus interpret the whole passage: ‘Till our scruple be satisfied, 
we lock it within our strong-barred gates: kinged only by our fears, until our 
fears, set at rest, be dispersed and deposed by some ascertained sovereign.’ — 
Keightley (Expositor y p. 221): We should punctuate, ‘Kings of our fear!’ i. e., 
Elings whom we fear. — [Has not Keightley overlooked the fact that the Citizens 
have so far recognised but one king— the King of France? How could there then 
be two? — ^Ed.] — Fleay: We lock up our fear within our gates, and so are kings 
over it, till it (this usurping fear) be laid at rest and deprived of power by some as- 
certained King of England; or it may mean, ‘Made kings (however unwillingly) 
by our fear.’ But Tyrwhitt’s conjecture, tided by, gives a clearer meaning. — 
Moberly interprets I 390 thus: ‘It does not appear that Providence has yet 



ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


129 


And till it be vndoubted,we do locke 391 

Our former fcruple in our flrong barred gates: 

Kings of our feare, vntill our feares refolu^d 
Be by fome certaine king, purgM and deposM. 

Bafi, By heauen, thefe fcroyles of Angiers flout you 395 
And ftand fecurely on their battelments, Tkings, 


391. Afidl And^ Cap. Varr. Rann. 
Mai. Steev. Varr. Sing. 

till] Hill Rowe, Pope,H-. 

392. Jlrong barred] strong-barred Pope 
et seq. 

gates:] gates, Pope,+. gates , — 

Ktly. 

393 j 394' Kings ^.deposed] In margin 
Pope, Han. Om. Dono. 

393. Kings of our feare,] Ff, Rowe, 
Pope, Fie. Neils. Kings of our fears , — 
Theob. Var. ’78, ’85. Kings are our 
fears, — Warb. Johns. Cap. Var. ’73. 
Kings, of our fear; Knt, Sta. Del. Kings 
of our fear; Coll. i. Kinged of our fear. 


Dyce i, CoU. ii, iii, Flal. Wh. i, Huds. i. 
Kings of our fear! Ktly. Kings of our- 
selves; Del. conj. Craig. Kinged of our 
fears Tyrwhitt, Mai. et cet. 

393. feares ref clued] fears, resolved, 
Cap. et seq. 

394. king^ king F3F., et seq. 
purged, . .deposed] purged.. .deposed 

Fie. 

395. heauen] Heaven Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. Fie. 

thefe] the Warb. Johns. 

fcroyles] scrolls Hal. 

you kings,] you, kings; Cap. et 

seq. 


willed that the battle should be so decisive as you each maintain.’ — Wright: 
Tyrwhitt’s conjecture [is] unquestionably the true reading, as the context shows. 
The Folio has ‘Kings of our fear.’ It is evident, however, that the citizens were 
not masters of their fear, but were overpowered by it, and resolved to acknowledge 
no other sovereign till it was allayed by the appearance of the rightful king. Knight, 
adopting the words, but changing the punctuation of the Folios, gratified his con- 
servatism by a reading which is not, indeed, nonsense, but has no point.— Dawson: 
The Folio reading does not give a satisfactory meaning, because the Citizens were 
not masters of their fears, but were mastered by them. Their fear of admitting 
the wrong king is to serve as their interim king. — ^Deighton: Toilet thought that 
the ‘greater power’ might mean the Lord of Hosts; but, surely, the ‘greater power’ 
is their fears. The sense of the passage will be: Owing allegiance to our fears, 
recognising them only as the masters we must obey, until those masters are de- 
posed, those fears resolved, by one or other of you proving himself our King. — 
[Deighton is, I think, correct in rejecting Toilet’s interpretation. Reference 
to the Lord of Hosts is, here, quite irrelevant; what follows shows that their 
fear is that greater power. I am also strongly inclined to accept Staunton’s ex- 
cellent suggestion that the phrase ‘Kings of our fear’ refers not to the Citizens 
themselves, but to the strong-barred gates. This is further commendable since 
it avoids all necessity for either Warburton’s or Tyrwhitt’s alteration.— Ed.] 

395. Bast. By heauen . . , kings] Moberey: This burst of passion is exactly 
like Coeur-de-Lion’s fierce threat to hang all the garrison of Chaluz down to the 
children in arms. 

395. scroyles] Craigie (N. E. D,): A scoundrel wretch. (The conjecture that 
it is from Old French escroele, scrofulous sore, is not quite satisfactory as to form, 
and the assiuned development of sense, though plausible, has no evidence.) — 
Craigie {N* E. D.) quotes the present line as ^ to example; also 


9 



130 


THE LIFE AND DEA TH 


[act II, sc. 1. 
397 


As in a Theater, whence they gape and point 
At your induflrious Scenes and a6ls of death. 

Your Royall prefences be rul^d by mee, 

Do like the Mutines of lerufalem, 400 


398. indujlriotts] illustrious Cap, conj. 
Mai. conj. (withdrawn). 

399. Your. ..prefences] You... presences, 
Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han; Warb, 


399. mee,] me: — Dyce, Hal. Wh. i, 
Words, me. Ktly. me; Sta. 

400. Do] Do, Hal. 


Jonson, Poetaster, 1601: T cry mercy (my good scroile) was ’t thou.’ — ^IV, iii, 35. — 
SxEEVENS likewise quotes from Jonson, Every Man in his Humour, ‘Hang them, 
scroyles! there’s nothing in them in the world.’ — ^I, i. 

398. industrious Scenes] Steevens: That is, your laborious industry of war. 
So in Macbeth'. ‘ — and put we on Industrious soldiership.’ — [V, iv, 15]. 

399. Your Royall presences] Cajpell (I, i, 124): A tenderness has been shown 
in this passage that we should have dispensed with; for though let may be under- 
stood before ‘Your,’ and a sense struck out that way, yet the passage wants the 
ease in this reading that moderns have given it by making ‘Your’ You, and print- 
ing ‘presences’ vocatively. [See Text. Notes] ‘Presence’ and ‘presences’ are 
words very indefinite; as that critic will find who shall go about to interpret them 
in I, i, 145, in 389 above, and in this passage with the precision expected: per- 
sonages may do for the latter; but for the former, person (the only word that 
occurs) serves very inadequately. 

400. like the Mutines of lerusalem] Malone: The ‘mutines’ are the mutineers, 
the seditious. So in Hamlet: ‘ — and lay Worse than the mutines in the bilboeis.’ 
— [V, ii, 6]. Our Author had probably read the following passages in A Compendious 
and Most Marvellous History of the Latter Times of the Jewes Common-Weak, &c., 
written in Hebrew by Joseph Ben Gorion, — translated into English by Peter 
Morw3mg, 1575: ‘The same year the civil wars grew and increased in Jerusalem; 
for the citizens slew one another without any truce, let or quietnesse. The people 
were divided into three parties; whereof the first and best followed Anani, the high- 
priest; another part followed seditious Jehochanan; the third, most cruel Schimeon, 

. . . Betweene these three there were also most cruel battailes for the space of four ^ 
daies. Titus’ campe was about six furlongs from the towne. The next morrowe 
they of the towne seeing Titus to be encamped upon Mount Olivet, the captaines 
of the seditious assembled together, and fell at argument every man with another, 
intending to turn their cruelty upon the Romaines, confirming and ratifying the 
same atonement and purpose, by swearing one to another; and so became peace 
amongst them. Wherefore joyning together, that were before three several! 
parts, they set open the gates, and ail the best of them issued out with an horrible 
noyse and shoute, that they made the Romaines afraide withall, in such wise that 
they fled before the seditious, which sodainly did set upon them unawares.’ This 
allusion is not found in the old play. — Collier; Joseph Ben Gorion’s Historie 
[was] translated by Peter Morwyng, and originally published, not, as Malone 
states, in 1575, but in 1558. Henslowe, in his Diary, mentions a play to which he 
gives the title of Titus and Vespasian, under date April, 1591, perhaps relating to 
the siege of Jerusalem, in which the combination of the ‘mutines of Jerusalem’ 
might form an incident. [Since Collier, in his second edition, omits this con- 



ACT 11, SC. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


131 


Be friends a-while, and both conioyntly bend 401 

Your fharpefl Deeds of malice on this Towne. 

By Eaft and Weft let France and England mount. 

Their battering Canon charged to the mouthes, 

Till their foule-fearing clamours haue brauFd downe 405 

The fiintie ribbes of this contemptuous Citie, 
rde play inceffantly vpon thefe lades, 

Euen till vnfenced defolation 

Leaue them as naked as the vulgar ayre: 

That done, diffeuer your vnited ftrengths, 410 

And part your mingled colours once againe, 

Turne face to face, and bloody point to point: 412 


401. a-while] Fa. awhile Coll. Dyce, 
Hal. Wh. Huds. Cam. 4 -, Del. Fie. 
Words. Craig, a while F,F4, Rowe et 
cet. 

402. Towne.] town: Cap. Varr. Rann, 
Mai. Steev. Varr. town; Hal. 

403. mount.] mount Ff, 

404. hatterin^-haWring Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. Johns. 

charged] charghd Dyce, Sta. Fie. 
Huds. ii, Words. 

mouthes,] mouths; Theoh. Warb. 
Johns. Cap. Varr, Rann, Mai. Steev. 
Varr, Rtly. 


jecture as to the source of Shakespeare’s knowledge of the incident, it may, I 
think, be considered as withdrawn. — Ed.] — ^Wright says that Josephus, in his 
Jewish War (v, 6, § 4), gives an account of the manner in which the leaders of the 
factions in Jerusalem ceased their assaults upon each other to combine in resisting 
the Roman attack; but as no translation of Josephus into English appears to have 
existed before 1602, Shakespeare might have derived his knowledge from 
Morwyng’s translation, as Malone has shown. 

405. soule-fearing] That is, soul-af righting. For other examples of ^fear’ 
used in the active sense, see Schmidt {Lex., s. v. vb. 2). 

405. brauFd downe] Is there, possibly, here a faint suggestion of a reference 
to the walls of Jericho thrown down by the clamour of the trumpets of Joshua? 
^So the people shouted, when they had blowen trumpets: for when the people 
had heard the sounde of the trumpet, they shouted with a great shoute: and the 
wal fell downe flat : so the people went up into the citie, every man streight before 
him and they tooke the citie.’ — Joshua^ vi, 20, Geneva Vers . — Ed. 

409. naked as . . . ayre] That is unarmed, defenceless. Compare: 'Look in 
upon me then and speak with me. Or, naked as I am, I will assault thee." — 
Othello, V, ii, 258. 

412. point to point] Compare: 'Point against point rebellious, arm ’gainst 
arm.’ — Macbeth, I, ii, 56. 


405. hrauVd] brawl’d Cap. et seq. 

406. Citie,] Ff. city. Rowe, Popej-f-? 
Ktly, Rife, Neils, city; Hal. city: Cap. 
et cet. 

407. lades,] jades; Rowe, Pope,+, 
Cap. 

408. Euen] Ev’n Fie. 

vnfenced] unfencH Dyce, Fie. 
Huds. ii. Words. 

409. ayre:] air. Pope et seq. 

41 1, againe^ Ff, Pope, Sta. Fie. 
again. Rowe, again; Theob. et cet. 

412, point:] point. Pope,--h. 



132 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act II, sc. i. 


Then in a moment Fortune fhall cull forth 4^3 

Out of one fide her happy Minion, 

To whom in fauour fhe fliall giue the day, 415 

And kiffe him with a glorious vidlory: 

How like you this wilde counfell mighty States, 

Smackes it not fomething of the policie. 

lohn. Now by the sky that hangs aboue our heads, 

I like it well. France, fliall we knit our powres, 420 

And lay this Angiers euen with the ground. 

Then after fight who fliall be king of it? 

Baft, And if thou hafl the mettle of a king. 

Being wronged as we are by this peeuifh Townc: 

Turne thou the mouth of thy Artillerie, 425 

As we will ours, againfl thefe fawcie walks, 

And when that we haue dafliM them to the ground, 427 


413. Then... moment] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 

■F, Fie. TheUy.. moment f Cap. et cet. 

414. fide] fide, F^. 

Minion,] Minion. FsF4, Rowe 
i. minion; Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. 
Varr. Rann. Mai, Steev. Varr. 
Sing. Knt. Ktly, Sta. Neils, minion, 
Fie. 

416. vidory:] victory. Rowe et seq, 

417. States,] states? Pope et seq. 

41$. Smackes ... policie. Om. Pope, 

Han. 

policie.] policy? Ff. 

, 420. well.] well : — Cap. Varr. Rann. 
Mai. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Sta. 

powres] powers Ff . powers, Pope, 


+ (— Var. ’ 73 ), Wh. i. 

422. Then after] Ff, Rowe, Cam.-pi 
Fie. Neils. Craig. Then after, Pope, 
Theob. Han. Then, after, Warb. et 
cet. 

423. And if] Ff, Rowe, Pope, -f, He. 
Dono. An if Cap. et cet. 

king,] king , — [to Phi. Capell. 

424. Being...Townc:] — Being...town — 
Ktly. 

wrong^d...are] Ff, Rowe, Pope,4-, 
Coll. Wh. Huds. Cam.4-, Dono. 
wrong^ dy. .are, Cdup. at cet. 

Townc] Fr. 

426. walles^ walls; Pope et seq. 

427. dajhft] dashtEla. 


418. the policie] Fleay: Not elsewhere in Shakespeare with the defi- 
nite article. The politic art, the art of Machiavel,—IvoR John quotes two 
passages from Middleton’s Roaring Girl and one from Webster’s Vittoria 
Coromhona to show that this policy, in * Elizabethan plays, denotes crafty 
dealings.’ [So it does in those passages quoted by John; but Muhhay (iV^. 
E. D., s. V. Policy, sb. 3) ^ves a number of quotations wherein this word means 
merely political sagacity, expediency, as well as cunning, craft. Here ‘pol- 
icy,’ I think, means oniy strategy, as suggested by Fleay and Wright. Crafty 
dealing conveys an idea of underhandedness or secrecy which is quite lack- 
ing in the open proposal of Faulconbridge in the hearing both of the kings and 
the citizens. — Ed .] — ^Wright: That is, the policy which is so much thought 
of. Compare: ‘O, ’tis the curse in love .’ — Two Gentlemen, V, iv, 43, [For 
other examples of this use of ‘the’ used to denote notoriety, see, if needful, 
Abbott, § 92.] 



Acxn, SC.i.3 OF KING JOHN 1 33 

Why then defie each other, and pell-mell, 42 B 

Make worke vpon our feiues,for heauen or hell. 

Fra. Let it be fo : fay, where will you affault? 430 

John. We from the Weft will fend deftru6lion 
Into this Cities bofome. 

Auji, I from the North. 

Fran, Our Thunder from the South, 

Shall raine their drift of bullets on this Towne. 435 


Bajl, O prudent difcipline! From North to South: 

Auftria and France flioot in each others mouth. 437 


428. Why then^.other, and\ Ff, Rowe, 
Pope, Han. Cam, 4 -, Neils. Why then,.., 
other; and, Theob. Why then... other; 
and, Johns. Var. ’73. Why, then. ..other, 
and, Coll. Dyce, Hal. Wh. i, Del. Words- 
Dono. Why, then. ..other; and, Warb. 
et cet. 

429. Jelues,] /elves FjF4, Rowe, Pope, 
+ (~-Var. ’73), Coll. Hal. Wh. i. 

heauen] Heaven Rowe, Pope,-]- 
(■—Var. ’73). 

430. Jo: Jay,] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 4 '. 
$0: — Say, Cap. Mai. Steev. Varr. 


Sing. Knt, Huds. i. so. — Say, Coll, 
et cet. 

431. dejlrudiion] destruction Fie. 

434. Thunder] thunders Cap. conj. 
Wh. Ktly, Dyce ii, iii, Huds. ii, 
Words. 

436-438. Baft. 0 prudent... away.] 
In margin Pope, Han. Aside. Cap. 
Ktly, Huds. Del. Dono. 

43 7 » 43 S. Auftria ...to it] Aside. 
Varr. Rann. Mai. Steev. Varr. Sing, 
Knt, Coll. Dyce, Hal. Wh. i, Sta. 
Fie. 


428, 429. Why then ... or hell] In the earlier play, Richard III, there is a 
couplet somewhat similar: ^ March on, join bravely, let us to ft pell-mell If not to 
heaven, then hand in hand to hell. ~V, iii, 312. 

429. Make worke] Schmidt {Lex,, s. v. Make, 3) gives many examples wherein 

the verb ^make’ is joined in periphrastical way to various substantives to denote 
the performance of the respective action; and under the division ‘make work’ he 
cites, besides the present line, seven examples from Coriol. In five of these occur 
the words ‘make good’ or ‘fair work’; and in each case the phrase seems to have a 
direct reference to feats of arms; for example, ‘List what work he makes Amongst 
your cloven army.’ — ^I, iv, 20. Again: ‘Alone I fought . . . And made what 
work I pleased,’ — ^I, viii, 9. And it is, perhaps, in this sense that the words are 
here used by Faulconbridge. Compare also 1. 321 above, which is likewise cited 
by Schmidt: ‘Who by the hand of France this day Hath made much work for 
tears,’ 'etc,— Ed. . . 

436. O prudent discipline] Talbot: The Poet has made Faulconbridge forget 
that he had made a similar mistake. (See 11 . 403, 404.) — C. & M. Cowdeh 
Clarke defend Shakespeare of this charge of forgetfulness, rather considering 
that this is ‘One of Shakespeare’s ironical phrases. The speaker has just before 
slily suggested this very course of firing from opposite quarters; and now rejoices 
to see his suggestion blindly adopted.’-— Moore Smith, in reply to Talbot’s note, 
says: ‘But the two cases are not parallel, France and Austria being allies, and 
England and France enemies.’ 



134 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act II, sc. i. 


He ftirre them to it : Come, away, away. 438 

Hub. Heare vs great kings, vouchfafe awhile to flay 
And I fliall Ihew you peace, and faire-fac’d league: 440 

Win you this Citie without ftroke, or wound, 

Refcue thofe breathing Hues to dye in beds. 

That heere come facrifices for the field. 

Perfeuer not, but heare me mighty kings. 

lohn. Speake on with fauour,we are bent to heare. 445 

Huh. That daughter there of Spaine, the Lady Blanch 
Is neere to England, looke vpon the yeeres 447 


438. lie] Tie F4. 

to it:] toH Sing. i. to it. — ColL 
Dyce, Hall. Wh. Ktly, Huds. Cam.+, 
Del. Rife, Words. Dono. Neils. Craig. 

Come^ away, away.] Ff, Fie. 
come away, away. Rowe, Pope, Han. 
come, awayl away! CoU. ii. come, away, 
away! Theob. et cet. 

[Enter Elinor and BlancbeJ 
Donovan. 

439. kings,] Ff, Rowe, kings! Sing. 
Coll, ii, Rtly, Huds. Neils. kings; 
Pope et cet. 

awhile] FaFj, Dyce, Hal. Cam.H-, 
Del. a while F4 et cet. 

440. faire-fac^d] fair-faced Steev. Varr. 
Rnt, Cam.-f, Fie. 


440. league:] Ff, Hal. Wh. Ktly, Sta. 
league. Rowe et cet. 

443. field.] Ff, Coll. Neils. field; 
Rowe et cet. 

444. Perfeuer] Perfevere F3F4, Rowe, 
Pope, Han. Rann, 

445. Speake on with fauour,] Ff. 
Speak on; with favour Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Rann. Mason (Com., p. 15s). Speak on 
with favour; Cam.+> Fie. Neils. Craig. 
Speak on, with favour, Theob. et cet. 

447. neere] niece Coll, ii, iii. (MS.), 
Sing, ii, Dyce, Wh. Ktly, Cam.-f-, Del. 
Huds. ii, Words. Dono. Neils. 

England^ Ff, Rowe. England. 
Del. Dono. Neils. England; Pope et 
cet. 


447. neere to England] Steevens: The Lady Blanche was daughter to Alphonso 
IX, King of Castile, and was niece to Eling John by his sister Eleanor. — Collier 
{Notes 6* Emend,, etc., p, 202) : The MS. Corrector tells us, naturally enough, to 
read: Hs niece to England.* This is unquestionably right, and the mistake was 
readily made; we only wonder that it was not till now corrected. — Singer {Sh. 
Vind., p. 84); The correction of ‘near* to niece is quite legitimate and undoubted 
on all accounts. — [In his second edition Singer follows this correction, remarking 
that ‘the error is an easy one.* ‘No doubt of it/ replies Collier in his second edi- 
tion, ‘and so are many other errors which, till pointed out in the corr. fo. 1632, 
neither Mr Singer nor any other editor during the last century and a half thought 
of setting right.* — any justification be sought for such a personal and wholesale 
attack by Collier it may be found in the fact that this is one of the very few MS. 
corrections which Singer, in his volume, accepted half-heartedly, treating the 
majority with severe censure and thinly veiled hints of grave doubt as to their 
validity. — En.] — ^Anon. (New Readings, etc., Blackwood’s Maga., Sept., 1853, 
p. 304): For ‘near* the MS. correction is niece. But the Lady Blanch is repeat- 
edly, throughout the play, spoken of as niece to King John and the Queen Mother. 
Therefore, if for no other reason than ’that of varying the expression, we must 
give our suffrage most ' decidedly in favour of the original reading. ^Near to 
England* of course means nearly related to England; and it seems much more 



ACT II, SC, i.] 


OF KING lOHN 


I3S 

448 


OiLewes the Dolphin, and that lonely maid. 

Ifluftie lone fhould go in quefl of beautie, 

Where fhould he finde it fairer, then in Blanch: 450 

448. Lewes] Lewis Ff. Louis Dyce, Dauphin Rowe et cet. (passim). 

Hai. Wh. Huds. ii, Words. 449. lufiie] youthful Words. 

Dolphin] Ff, Wh. Ktly,' Fie. 450. then] than Ff. 

natural, as well as more poetical, that the Citizen should speak in this general way 
of Lady Blanch, than that he should condescend on her particular degree of 
relationship, and ‘style her the 'niece to England.' — Dyce (ed. ii.) unhestitatingly 
accepts the MS, correction for the very same reasons that prompt its rejection 
by the anonymous writer in Blackwood, i. e., that the Lady Blanch is repeatedly 
referred to as the niece of King John. Dyce adds: ‘Lest some over-subtle critic 
should object to this very slight alteration, on the ground that the Folio gives 
“neece” [in other passages] with a capital letter and “neere” without one, I may 
observe that, as a matter of course, the compositor would not use a capital letter for 
a word which he had erroneously supposed to be an adjective.’ — ^Keightley 
{Expositor, p. 221); In Two Gentlemen we have: 'An heir and niece allied unto the 
Duke.’ — I'V, i, ‘49. — [This is Keightley’s justification of the present reading of 
the Folio; but it is not, I think, quite to the point. The line from Two Gentlemen 
reads, in the Folio, 'And heire and Neece, allied unto the Duke.’ The first 'And’ 
is corrected in the 3d Folio, and Theobald, who made the change of 'Neece’ to 
wear, remarked, pertinently, that 'Shakespeare would not have been guilty of such 
tautology as to say that the lady was a niece and allied to the Duke’; but this 
objection does not apply to the present line in King John; no other relationship 
is mentioned, Keightley is to be commended for adhering to the Folio text, but his 
reason for so doing is unfortunate. — Ed.] — ^Miss Porter: Why is this expression 
for the niece already introduced, and here spoken of as held dear by John, not 
better in this place than the repetition, Neece? It seems to be an utterly needless 
change. [The opinion expressed in the last sentence is quite in accord with that 
of the present Ed.] 

448, the Dolphin] R, G. White: So the Folio invariably, whenever this title 
occurs, either in this or any other of these plays; and so the Chronicles and all 
the contemporary literature; the old French word, too, was not Dauphin, but 
Daulphin, This is consequently not an old irregular spelling (which, indeed, it 
could not be), but an old English form of the title, which, therefore, an editor 
has not the right to change. And, indeed, there is no more cogent reason for 
calling Louis the Dauphin, than for calling Philip the Roi of France, except the 
usage of the present day, with which we have not to do. With the modern 
form of the title Talbot’s punning sneer, 'Pucelle or puzzel, Dolphin or dog- 
fish’ {i Henry VI: I, iv), would be utterly pointless. [See Dr a^n. Persons, s. v. 
'.Lewis: 'note by French.] ■ ' ' ■ 

449"’453* lustie loue . . . of birth] Rushton (5/2. and The Arte of Eng, Poe., 
p. 13s) quotes these lines in illustration of what Puttenham calls ' Symploche or 
the Figure of Reply.’— 'In the works of many of the authors of Shakespeare’s 
time,’ says Rushton, 'this form of Repetition appears. It is very old. Homer 
makes use of it in the Iliad, xiv, 317.’ As other examples from Shakespeare he 
gives: Rich. Ill: ¥,1^,255-262; U. 736-749. Appendix: Criticism, 

BR.4NDES.] 



136 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act ii, sc, i. 


If zealous loue fhould go in fearch of vertue, 451 

Where fhould he finde it purer then in Blanch ? 

If loue ambitious, fought a match of birth, 

Whofe veines bound richer blood then 'L^idy Blanchl 

Such as fhe is, in beau tie, vertue, birth, 455 

Is the yong Dolphin euery way compleat, 

If not compleat of, fay he is not fhee, 

And Ihe againe wants nothing, to name want, 

If want it be not, that fhe is not hee: 459 


^Si.Jhould] Om. Ff. 

452. then] than Ff. 

454. blood] blond Fa. 
iheYi\ than F4. 

Blanch] Blanch^ Walkfer (Vers., 

266). 

457-463. If not,.dn him.] Om. Words. 
Dono. 

457. compleat ofy fay] compleat of , — 
say Theob. compleat, oh! say, Han. 
Warb. Johns. Cap. Varr. Rann. Mai. 
Steev. Varr. Sing, i, Sta. Dyce, ii, iii, 


Coll, iii, Marsh, complete of, say, Knt, 
Coll, i, ii, Sing, ii, Ktly, Del. Fie. coin- 
plete them; say Moberly conj. of way 
complete Herr, complete so, say Kin- 
near. 

45S. to name want] (to name want) 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Var. ^73. 

459. not, that] but that Jervis, Lett- 
som. Huds. ii. that not Herr. 

te;] Ae. Rowe, Pope, Var. ’85, 

Ktly. 


451. 2ealous] Johnson: ‘Zealous’ seems here to signify pious, or influenced by 
motines of religion. [Schmidt (Lex., s. v. zealous) quotes other examples besides 
the present line where ‘zealous’ conveys the idea of religious piety: Sonnet xxvii, 
6 ; AWs Well, 111 , iv,iv, Richard HI: IH, vii, 94.] 

457-463. If not ... in him] Wordsworth (i, 436), in justification of his omis- 
sion, says: ‘These lines appear so unworthy of Shakespeare, even as put into the 
mouth of a citizen, that I was unwilling to retain them in the text.’ 

457“459* If ^ot compleat of . . . not hee] Pye (p. 139) : I cannot but think 
these lines, so disgraceful to a most beautiful passage, are the interpolation of 
some person who could not reconcile the Dauphin being complete with his being 
only the half part of a blessed man, and so inserted this stuff to make up the de- 
ficiency, whereas the word ‘complete’ is used here by no very uncommon irregu- 
larity of our Vott lot completely; the meaning of these lines is: that the Dauphin 
was as completely endowed with beauty, virtue, and birth as the Lady Blanch; 
but for both to be as completely happy as they are completely accomplished they 
must each possess their counteipart in marriage. 

457. compleat of, say] Knight: Hanmer’s change, ‘0 say,’ is to substitute the 
language of the eighteenth century for that of the sixteenth.— Coluer: The mean- 
ing is that if the Dauphin be not complete of, or in, these qualities, it is merely 
because he is not Blanch. — [Hudson’s interpretation and that of the Cowden 
Clarkes is substantially the same as Collier’s; in his second ed. Hudson rejects the 
Folio reading, remarking that it ‘can hardly be made to yield any sense at all’; for 
the word ‘of’ he substitutes adding, ‘The context naturally suggests this 
reading; but possibly we ought to read: “If not complete he, say he is not she.” ’] 
— ^Wright, following Hanmer, says: ‘The misprint is a very easy one, and no 
parallel use of “of” has, so far as I am aware, been found.’ 



ACT 11 , SC. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


137 

460 


He is the halfe part of a bleffed man, 

Left to be finifhed by fuch as fhee, 

And fhe a faire diuided excellence, 

Whofe fulneffe of perfe6lion lyes in him. 

O two fuch filuer currents when they ioyne 
Do glorifie the bankes that bound them in : 465 

And two fuch fhores, to two fuch ftreames made one, 

Two fuch controlling bounds fhall you be, kings, 

To thefe two Princes, if you marrie them: 

This Vnion fhall do more then batterie can 

To our faft clofed gates : for at this match, 470 

With fwifter fpleene then powder can enforce 

The mouth of paffage fhall we fling wide ope, 

And giue you entrance : but without this match. 

The fea enraged is not halfe fo deafe, 

Lyons more confident, Mountaines and rockes 475 


460. 461. b!ejfed...finijhed] blesshd.., 
finished Dyce, Huds. ii, Fie. Words. 

461. as Jhee] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Coll, i, 
Ktiy, Cam.-}-, Del. Neils. a She 
Thirlby, Tbeob. Coll. ii. (MS.) et cet. 

462. faire diuided] fair-divided Walker 
(Crit., i, 3S). 

464. 0 two] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. i. 
Ohl Two Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. Var. 
’73. Of two Han. Coll. Wh. i, Huds. i, 
Del. Craig. 0^, two Var. ’78, ^85, Rann. 
0, iwi? Cap. et cet. 


468. them:] them. Pope et seq. 

469. then] than Ff. 

can] Coll. Dyce, Wh. Cam.-f-, 
Del. Neils, can, Ff. et cet. 

470. faji clofed] fast-closed Theob. et 
seq. fast-closed Dyce, Huds. ii, Fie. 
Words. Dono. 

4^1. fpleene] sfieedVopt^Htn. 

then..,enforce] than.. .enforce, Ff. 
474. enraged] enraged Dyce, Huds. ii, 
Fie. Words. Dono. 

475> 476. more.. .More] S0...S0 Pope, 
-}-, Cap. 


463. perfection lyes in him] Rolfe: For the idea that woman was completed, 
or perfected by marriage, compare Twelfth Night, I, i, 38 et seq., and II, iv, 42. 
See also Lord Berners^s translation of Froissart: *My daughter should be happy 
if she might come to so great a perfection as to be enjoined in marriage with the 
Earl of Queries’; Overbury, The Wife: ‘Marriage their object is; their being 
then, And now perfection, they receive from men,’ [Capell’s Prolusions, p. 4,] and 
Donne, Epitkalamium: ‘Weep not, nor blush, here is no grief nor shame; To-day 
put on perfection, and a woman’s name,’ [ed. Grosart, p. 275]. 

470. at this match] Johnson: l am loath to think that Shakespeare meant to 
play with the double of /match’ lot nuptial, ojid the ‘match’ of a gun,—~\To 
Johnson, in his immortal Preface, we are indebted for the trenchant phrase that: 
A quibble was for Shakespeare the fatal Cleopatra for which he lost the world, and 
was content to lose it.— Ed.] 

471. swifter spleene] Theobaud: That is, with a passion of desire more swift 
in its influence than your fire and fury can compel us to. The Poet uses this 
word again afterwards in this play in the very same sense: ‘Oh, I am scalded with 
my violent motion And spleen of speed to see your majesty.’ — [V, vii, 56]. 



THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act II, sc. i. 


138 

More free ftom motion, no not death himfelfe 476 

In mortall furie halfe fo peremptorie, 

As we to keepe this Citie. 

Bafl. Heeres a flay, 479 

4.j6.ftom motion] Fi. apart. Coll. iii. 

no not] no, not Theob. et seq. 479. ftay] flaw Johns, conj. Huds. ii. 
— no, not Ktly. say Sing. ii. (Becket). story or storm 

478. Citie] city. [The Kings, &c., talk Spedding (ap. Cam.), style Vaughan. 

479. Heeres a stay] Johnson: I cannot but think that every reader wishes for 
some other word in the place of ‘stay,^ which though it may signify an hindrance, 
or man that hinders, is yet very improper to introduce the next line. I read: 
‘Here’s SLflawJ That is, here is a gust of bravery, a blast of menace. This suits 
well with the spirit of the speech. ‘Stay’ and flaw, in a careless hand, are not 
easily distinguished; and if the writing was obscure, flaw being a word less usual, 
was easily missed. — Steevens (Var., 1778): Perhaps the force of the word ‘stay’ 
is not exactly known. I meet with it in Damon ^ Pythias, 1582: ‘Not to prolong 
my lyfe thereby, for which I reckon not this. But to set my things in a stay.’ — 
[Haz. Dods., iv, 54]. Perhaps by a ‘stay,’ in this instance, is meant a steady 
posture. Shakespeare’s meaning may therefore be: ‘Here’s a steady, resolute 
fellow, who shakes,’ etc, A ‘stay,’ however, seems to have been meant for some- 
thing active in the following passage in the 6th Canto of Drayton’s Baron’s Wars: 
‘Oh could ambition apprehend a stay, The giddy course it wandereth in, to guide.’ 
Again, in The Faerie Queene: ‘Till riper years he raught, and stronger stay.’— 
II, X, [20]. Perhaps the metaphor is from navigation. Thus, in Chapman’s version 
of the tenth book of Homer’s Odyssey: ‘ Our ship lay anchor’d close, nor needed 
we Feare harm on any stays,’ [ 1 . 123]. A marginal note adds: ‘For being cast on 
the stales, as ships are by weather.’ [In all subsequent editions Steevens, wisely I 
think, omits this last conjectural explanation which has no possible bearing on the 
use of ‘stay’ in the present line in King John. In its place he follows the quotation 
from Spenser, with this amplification: ‘Shakespeare, therefore, who uses wrongs for 
wrongers, &c., might have used a “stay” for a stayer. Churchyard, in his Siege 
of Leeth, 1575, having occasion to speak of a trumpet that sounded to proclaim 
a truce, says: “This staye of warre made many men to muse.” — [ed. Chalmers, 
p. 92], I am therefore convinced that the first line of Faulconbridge’s speech 
needs no emendation.’ — It is to be regretted that Steevens has not furnished an 
example wherein Shakespeare uses wrongs for wrongers; if there be such it has 
escaped the vigilant eyes of both Schmidt (Lex.) and Abbott. Steevens’s quota- 
tion from Churchyard is certainly apposite to the present passage, whether ‘stay’ 
be taken to mean stayer or pause. His complete rejection of Johnson’s emenda- 
tion was doubtless withheld during the lifetime of his greater co-editor. — Ed.] — 
Malone: ‘Stay,’ I apprehend, here signifies a supporter of a cause. Here’s an 
extraordinary partizan, that shakes, &c. So, in this play: ‘What surety of the 
world, what hope, what stay.’— V, vii, 76. Again, in 3 Henry VI: ‘Now thou 
art gone, -we have no staff, no stay.’ — pT, i, 69]. Again, in Rich. Ill: ‘What 
stay had I, but Edw^ard, and he’s gone.’— [II, ii, 74]. Again, in Davies’s Scourge 
of Folly, 1611: ‘England’s fast friend, and Ireland’s constant stEy.’— [Epigram 
189; ed. Grosart, p. 29]. It is observable that partizan, in like manner, though 
now generally used to signify an adherent to a party, originally meant a pike or 



ACT II, SC. i.] 


Oir KING JOHN 


m 


[479. Heeres a stay] 

halberd. Perhaps, however, our Author meant by the words, ^Here’s a stay.^ 
Plere’s a fellow, who whilst he makes a proposition as a stay or obstacle, to prevent 
the effusion of blood, shakes, &c. The Citizen has just said: ^Hear us, great 
Kings, vouchsafe a while to stay. And I shall show you peace.’ It is, I conceive, 
no objection to this interpretation that an impediment or obstacle could not shake 
death, &c., though the person who endeavored to stay or prevent the attack of the 
two kings might, Shakespeare seldom attends to such minutice. But the .first 
explanation seems to me more probable. — ^Mason {Comments, etc., p. 155): I have 
no doubt but Johnson is right in reading flaw instead of ^stay.’ Steevens says 
that possibly by ‘stay’ is meant a steady posture. But I don’t see how a steady 
posture could shake the carcase of death out of his rags. — [Steevens evidently felt 
the force of Mason’s objection, since this explanation is omitted in his own edi- 
tion of 1793 and subsequent ones. — ^En.] — Knight: Malone and Steevens have 
two pages to prove, what requires no proof, that ‘stay’ means interruption . — 
Singer, without assigning his authority, more suo, adopts Malone’s first explana- 
tion, that ‘stay’ here means a supporter of a cause. He speaks in commendation 
of the conjecture say (Becket’s, by the way, though Singer does not give the name), 
and adopts it in his ed. ii.j remarking in a note: ‘The context shows that “stay” 
was a mere misprint for say. What follows, “Here’s a large mouth, indeed, that 
spits forth death,” etc., is, I think, quite conclusive. . . . Mr Knight does not tell 
us how interruption could “shake old death out of his rags.” A vehement speaker 
Shakespeare has elsewhere described as tearing “a passion to tatters, to very rags.” 
And in a future scene in similar language Constance says: “0 that my tongue 
were in the thunder’s mouth. Then with a passion would I shake the world 
And rouse from sleep that fell anatomy Which cannot hear a lady’s feeble voice.”’ 
— Cartwright {New Readings, p. 15) also suggests this emendation, but ‘after 
a six-months’ ecstasy over this word say, so apposite and so characteristic of the 
dashing, roHicking speaker,’ finds he is ‘anticipated and the emendation rejected 
by at least one editor,’ — [It would, I think, be nearer the mark to say that it had 
been accepted by at least one; thus far Singer is the only editor who has admitted 
the word to his text.— En.]— Collier (ed. ii.): We cannot see the necessity for 
changing ‘stay’ to any other word, least of all, to say, which Shakespeare never 
uses as a substantive. Sir Roger Lestrange, according to our dictionaries, was the 
first to employ say in that manner. If we made any, it might be to story, which, 
as Mr W. W. Williams suggests, was easily misprinted ‘stay’; but no emendation 
whatever is called for. What the Bastard refers to is the pause and silence 
naturally occasioned by the unexpected speech of the Citizen, which induced all 
parties to gaze upon each other. The Bastard ought not to begin speaking until 
the two Kings have for some little time. — ^Verplanck: As the Citizens 

have just before asked the kings to ‘stay,’ the Bastard ridicules their proposed 
‘stay’ being accompanied by so many bold and big words. — ^Delius: ‘Stay,’ in 
the smst oi oil interruption, obstruction, is here evidently used for interrupter, inas- 
much as the Citizen, by his proposition, opposes the project of the two kings. — 
Staunton: ‘Stay,’ if that be the Poet’s word, is used, we suppose, in the sense of a 
sudden check or obstacle. It may not be the most suitable expression to intro- 
duce tlie following line; but it appears at least as good as flaw or say, which have 
been proposed to supersede it.—WALKER {Crit, ii, 294): Johnsords flaw is indis- 
putably right; flawe — stay is like the error in Romeo Juliet, II, i, foL, p. 59, coL 



140 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act II, sc. i. 


[479. Heeres a stay] 

I, ‘Prouant, but Loue and day"* for Tronounce but Loue and done* — C. & M, 
CowDEN Clarke; Tbe word ^stay^ has been objected to here; but we think it 
is not only far better than either of the substitutions proposed, but that it conveys 
the sense intended to be conveyed. The Citizen has previously said, ‘Vouch- 
safe a while to stay^; that is, to restrain yourselves, to hold your hands, to forbear; 
consequently he is banteringly called a ‘stay,’ in the sense of a restraint, or prudent 
restrainer. Spenser and Bacon use the word ‘stay’ in the sense of staid judgment, 
wise discretion; and Phillipps also has a passage aptly showing that it bore this 
signification: ‘With prudent stay he long deferr’d the rough contention.’ Else- 
where, when Shakespeare uses the word as a noun, he employs it in the sense of 
a prop, support; therefore, inasmuch as the Citizen is upholding the cause of the 
city, and vindicating its firm resolution, the epithet ‘stay’ has double force of 
propriety. That a restraint and a support should be personified sufficiently to be 
supposed capable of shaking ‘the rotten carcass of old Death’ is not beyond that 
which is permitted to the license of poetry in figurative language.— -Lettsom 
(ap. Dyce, ii.) : ‘Stay’ is perhaps the last word that could have come from Shake- 
speare. Steevens and Malone defend it by the customary argument: A crowd 
of ordinary writers have used ‘stay’ properly; therefore Shakespeare must have 
used it improperly. — ^Forsyth (p. no): We suspect that the word in the text, 
along with the words suggested as substitutes, are all wrong, and that Shake- 
speare wrote storm, in the sense of a hurricane of high-flown verbiage, which 
agrees with the remainder of the passage. [Forsyth is herein anticipated by 
Spedding. Text. Notes .] — Fleay: That is, an obstacle to our course, running 
against which produces violent shaking by collision. Commentators have in 
several ways amended and misinterpreted. — ^Herr (p. 22): The difficulty consists 
in finding a word that will correspond with the image and various figures of the 
. speech that follow; and such a word, fulfilling these requirements, I confidently 
believe is expressed in that oi sway . . . . Shakespeare uses the word further on: 
‘This sway of motion, this commodity,’ L 604. And again: ‘Are not you moved 
when all the sway of earth Shakes like a thing unfirm?’— Cces., I, iii, 3]. 
Here ‘sway’ and ‘shakes’ are brought into juxtaposition with the like words in 
the passage in question, and furnish stronger confirmation of the correctness of 
the emendment.— [While Herr may gain adherents for his conjectural change — 
even as did Johnson and Becket— there wiH scarcely be found one, I think, who 
will accept his illustrative examples as apposite. In the line from this play ‘sway’ 
clearly means that which motion; and in Jul. Cm. it has been explained 

as the whole dominion ol the earth. To speak of the whole earth shaking is cer- 
tainly proper; but to speak of a governing power, or a dominion, that shakes death 
out of his rags is beyond even poetic license.— Ei>.]—Elze (Jtoceww, June 22, 
1S67, p. 821); I think we should read, ‘Here’s a 5 fuy.’ The Heralds both of the 
besiegers and the besieged play a conspicuous part in this scene and have just 
opened the parley with the blowing of their trumpets; King Philip says (L 222)1 
‘Our trumpet call’d you to this gentle parle.’ Under such circumstances the 
citizen of Angiers may be said hot inappropriately to ‘bray out’ his defiance 
to the kings like a ‘harsh-resounding trumpet’ (see Rich. II: I, iii, 135, ‘With 
harsh-resounding trumpets dreadful bray’), and, in the Bastard’s language, by 
such a clang to shake ‘the rotten carcass of old Death out of his rags.’ Com- 
pare Hamlet: ‘The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out The triumph of 


ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


14I 


[479. Heeres a stay] 

Ms pledge.’— 'I, iv, ii.— Br. Nicholson {New Sh. Soc. Trans., 1880, p. 107), 
in reference to tMs conjecture, says: ‘Professor Elze . . . forgets two circum- 
stances: I. That the citizens answered neither of the summonses to a parley 
by a trumpet. 2. That no trumpet, if used, could then be called a note of 
defiance, and especially on this third occasion, when the sole intent is to pro- 
pose a peaceful solution. It is to this occasion alone that the fiery but practical 
Richard, son of Cceur-de-Lion, can refer.’ — Elze (Notes, etc., 2nd Series, p. 199) 
thus replies: ‘Dr Nicholson entirely mistook my meaning in thinking that I re- 
ferred my conjectural emendation bray ... to the blowing of trumpets by the 
men of Angiers. I referred (and still refer) bray to the defiant speech of the 
Citizen of Angiers, and think it quite immaterial whether or not the customary 
trumpets were blown on the occasion of this parley; only the expression would 
be so much the more appropriate if they were. I am ready to grant that there 
were no trumpets in the case, since Dr Nicholson attaches so much importance 
to their absence; but still I uphold my conjecture as stoutly as before. Compare 
Greene, Dorastus and Fawnia, “ — who as in a fury brayed out these bitter speeches” 
(Sh. Library, ed. Hazlitt, I, iv, 43).’ — ^Moberly: Either ‘stay’ means ‘Here’s a 
check’ or Johnson’s reading must be accepted. — Kinnear (p. 193) adopts Sped- 
ding’s second alternative reading, storm; and in regard to Johnson’s conjecture, 
flaw, says: ‘Shakespeare does not use this word as a figure for stormy words, but 
for sudden impetuous violence; as of Prince Hal: “As humourous as winter, and as 
sudden As flaws congealed in the spring of day.” — 2 Henry IV: IV, iv, 35; of Jack 
Cade’s insurrection: “Like to the glorious sun’s transparent beams, Do calm the 
fury of this mad-bred flaw.” — 2 Henry VI: III, i, 354.’ — Wright: That is, a 
check or hindrance, that calls upon us to stop. We must not examine too nicely 
the figure which follows, or enquire how a stay can be said to shake anytMng. — 
Page: That is, here’s an interruption or obstacle to our course, that shakes, etc. 
The Bastard sarcastically continues the inflated language of the Citizen. The 
commentators have looked in vain for any definite or consistent meaning where 
none is intended. — ^Miss Porter: The objection [to the word ‘stay’] vanishes 
if the idea of an authoritative and sudden stay of proceedings be understood to be 
called out, as in a tournament when, in the set-to of a deadly encounter, the 
trumpet to part the combatants halts them so suddenly that it shakes them on 
their steeds as the ‘carkasse of old death’ by this ‘stay,’ disappointed of his prey, 
is said to be similarly shaken. — Belden (Tudor Sh.) considers this ‘a humorous 
comment on the close of the Citizen’s speech. His resolution to hold the city is 
so strong that “old Death” himself, charging against it in peremptory fury will 
find his rotten carcass jarred out of its rags.’— Deighton: That is, Here’s an 
obstacle, check; which makes old Death so furious with rage, at having the career 
of carnage interrupted, that he ahnost bursts his tattered clothes. His rotten- 
ness makes him all the more easily shaken. So far from ‘ stay ’ being inappropriate 
here, as it is contended, it seems to me peculiarly appropriate. Death would 
not be alarmed by either a boast or a menace; but his terrible agitation is natural 
at the thought of being disappointed of the feast that was ‘toward,’ provided 
that the kings were not dissuaded by the Citizen from their first intention. It 
is to be noticed that the remainder of the speech, wMch deals with the boastful 
character of the Citizen’s declaration, has reference to the effect which the Bastard 
humourously pretends it has had upon the hearers, but no reference to the effect 



142 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act II, sc. L 
480 


That fliakes the rotten carkaffe of old death 
Out of his ragges. Here^s a large mouth indeede, 

481. ragges.] rags! Cap. et seq. 

produced upon Death. — [Although chronologically out of its proper position, I 
have here placed at the end of this long note the following excellent elucidation 
contributed to the Transactions of the New Sh. Soc. for 1880 (p. 107) by that most 
sagacious of commentators, Dr Brinsley Nicholson. It constitutes a summing 
up of the whole discussion so complete that any remarks thereafter by me would, I 
feel, be quite superfluous: ‘Various of the conjecturers, and even some critics, have 
expended a surplus portion of their ingenuity on this line. Johnson suggested 
flaw in the sense of “gust or blast”; that is, some of the storm of war being over- 
past, this peaceful proposal which comes like a great calm is likened by him — not 
Shakspere — to such a sudden gust or flaw as, for instance, sunk the Eurydice. 
Spedding’s storm may be classed with this. His story is no better, for I know not 
how a calm, peaceful story can — as a story — ^shake death out of his rags. BeckeCs 
say, adopted by Singer, only requires mention to cause the usual result of his 
conjectures.^ [Here follows Nicholson^s objections to Size’s conjecture hr ay, 
see ante.] ‘Let us now turn to the original. Lettsom will have it that “‘stay’ is 
perhaps the last word that would have come from Shakspere.” But he, though 
very ingenious and acute, is too fond of seeking that which will suit his own sup- 
position of what Shakspere must have meant, instead of seeking for his author’s 
intent and meaning. Preferring this latter plan, I would say that “stay” is one- 
of the best words that could have been chosen. The opposing armies have hurried 
up to engage one another, and the Bastard, taking part of his metaphor from this 
hurrying up, and continuing the line of thought expressed in his previous speech, 
“0 now doth Death line his lean chops with steel,” speaks of Death as impetuously 
hurrying up in anticipation of great gala days. But now comes this sudden com- 
promise; instead of “soldiers’ swords being Death’s fangs,” he, in his hot haste, has 
run against an unexpected st2i.y, an unseen impediment, as an impetuous boy runs 
against a man, post, or wall. If readers in this nineteenth century cannot remem- 
ber their boyish days, they can at least remember the effects of a railway collision, 
which is enough in sober prose to shake one’s rags off one’s body, and, in the case 
of Death, would probably injure his scythe-handle. An eminent Shaksperian — 
though it should be added a German one — ^has since written to me that “stay” in 
the senses of stop or hindrance is not given in our Dictionaries. I reply that all I 
know of, from Cotgrave downwards, give these senses. Richardson, besides the- 
meanings “to stop . . . obstruct or hinder,” And besides giving quotations both of 
the verb and substantive in these senses from other authors, has this from Holland’s- 
Fliny, bk ix, c. 27, where there are also two other examples of the verb: “Our Stay- 
Ship Echeneis, TreUus Niger saith, is a foot long . . . and that oftentimes it stayeth 
[hindreth] a ship.” Shakspere uses it in JuL Cms., “Nothing but death shall 
stay me.” — ^IV, hi, 127. “A stay,” in nautical or mechanical idiom, is used in the 
secondary sense of “support,” because it stays or hinders the mast, &c., from fall- 
ing. “This is a stay (hindrance) ” is, too, a recognised phrase, like “It stays me.” 
Indeed, even if the substantive did not— as it does— follow the senses of the verb,, 
as stop, the act of stopping, does the intransitive, and stop, the cause of stopping, 
or hindrance, the transitive form, every Englishman, besides Shakspere, would, 
be entitled so to use them.’] 



ACT 11, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


143 

482 


That (pits forth death, and mountaines, rockes, and feas, 

Talkes as familiarly of roaring Lyons, 

As maids of thirteene do of puppi-dogges* 

What Cannoneere begot this luflie blood, 485 

He fpeakes plaine Cannon fire, and fmoake, and bounce, 

He giues the baftinado with his tongue: 

Our eares are cudgebd, not a word of his 
But buffets better then a fift of France: 

Zounds, I was neuer fo bethumpt with words, 49a 

Since I firfl caPd my brothers father Dad. 

Old Qu. Son, lift to this coniundlion, make this match 
Giue with our Neece a dowrie large enough, 

For by this knot, thou (halt fo furely tye 

Thy now vnfur d affurance to the Crowne, 495 


484. pup pi-do gges.] Ff. (puppy-dogs.) 
Rowe, Pope, 4 - , Coll. Del. puppy- 
dogs! Cap. et cet. 

485. luflie bloody] lufly hloud, F2. 
lusty blood? Pope et seq. lusty-hlood 
Anon. ap. Cam. 

486. Cannon jirey]Fi^ Rowe, Cam. 4 , 
Neils, cannon- fire. Pope, 4 , Coll. Wh. 
i, Sta. Huds. i. Fie. cannonr-jire Dyce, 
Huds.ii, Words, cannon, fircy Cap. et cet. 

487. bajlinado] bastonado Theob. 
Zounds^ Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 

Han. Huds. ii. ^Zounds, Faith, 

Words. Zounds! Warb. et cet. 


490. hethumpt[ bethump’d Mai. et seq. 
491 . 1 firfl] first I Anon. ap. Cam. 
father] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 4 - Coll. 
Dyce, Wh. Huds. Fie. Cam. 4 * father , — 
Hal. father, Cap. et cet. 

492. Old Qu.] Eli. Rowe et seq. 
492-503. Son.. .what it wa5.] Aside to 
John. Capell, Dyce ii, iii, Huds. ii, Craig. 

492. match] match, Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
4. wu/c/s; Cap. etseq. 

495. now vnfur d] now vnfurd Ff. 
now-unsurd Pope, Theob. i, Dyce, L’, 
iii, Huds. ii, Words, now unsured'. 
Cam.4. now unsure Anon. ap. Cam. ii. , 


486. He speakes . . .bounce] Steevens suggests that Shakespeare ‘seems to 
have taken the hint of this speech from a passage in The Famous History of Thomas 
Stukely, 1605: “Why here’s a gallant, here’s a king indeed. He speaks all Mars, 
Tut, let me follow such a lad as this, This is pure fire; every look he casts Flasheth 
like lightning; there’s mettle in this boy He brings a breath that sets our sails 
on fire, Why now I see we shall have cuffs indeed,”’ [ed. Simpson, vol. i, p. 252, 
d. 2357-2362. While such insiimations by the eariier editors as to a lack of in- 
ventiveness in Shakespeare are somewhat irritating, in the present instance there 
is, perhaps, a little more probability than is at first apparent. Simpson (School 
of Shahspere) includes this Play of Stucley among those early dramatic pieces upon 
which Shakespeare may have tried his ’prentice hand. The date given by Steevens 
is 1605, but this is from the printed title-page; the date of composition has been 
shown to be nearly twenty years anterior to this; and Simpson goes even as far as 
to indicate a short passage which may be ascribed to Shakespeare; who the other 
authors are need not concern us. It is to be deeply deplored that Simpson did not 
live to see his work in print; but few, if any, have gainsaid his conclusions. — Ed.] 

491. I , . . father Dad] Ivor John: An inimitable turn of a common saying 
to suit the Bastard’s own case. 

495. vnsur d] Schmidt (Lex.) records this as the only passage wherein ‘ unsured 



144 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act II, sc. i. 
496 


That yon greene boy fliall haue no Sunne to ripe 
The bloome that promifeth a mightie fruite. 

I fee a yeelding in the lookes of France: 

Marke how they whifper, vrge them while their foules 
Are capeable of this ambition, 500 

Leafl zeale now melted by the windie breath 
Of foft petitions, pittie and remorfe, 

Coole and congeale againe to what it was. 503 


496. yon] you F^. yond’ Coll. Wh. i, 
Huds. i. 

497> fruite.] fruit, Ff. fruit: Rowe. 

499. Marke...whif per,] Ff, Rowe, 
Pope, Han. Mark, ...•whisper. Ktly, 
Neils. Mark, ...whisper; Theob. et cet. 

500. ambition] ambition Fie. Words. 


501-503. Leaft..:U Om. Dono. 

501. Leafi] Left F4. 

zeale now melted] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Warb. Johns, zeal, now melted 
CoU. Dyce, Hal. Wh. Huds. Cam.H-, 
Fie. Words. Neils. Craig, zeal, now 
melted, Han. et cet. 


is used in the sense made uncertain or unsafe . — ^Abbott (§ 294) and Wright in- 
terpret ‘unsured' as here meaning unassured, insecure. 

498. I see a yeelding, etc.] Walker {Crit., iii, 119): Compare, * I see a blessed 
yielding in thy eye.’ — ^Middleton, Triumph of Truth, ed. Dyce, vol. v, p. 231. 

499, 500. vrge them , . . ambition] C. Cowden Clarke {Sh. Char., p. 324): 
This is counsel not unworthy of a Richelieu or a Mazarin. Mrs Montague’s 
was a felicitous illustration of the genius of Shakespeare when she compared him 
to that dervis who possessed the power of trajecting his soul into the body of any 
individual that suited his purpose (p. 37). The mind that conceived the spirit 
of Ariel, and the spotless innocence of Miranda, is here equally at home in des- 
jfdribing the crooked and thorny policy of a court intriguer. 

I 501-503. Least zeale . . . Coole and congeale] Johnson: We have here a very 
, unusual and, I think, not very just image of zeal, which in its highest degree is 
represented by others as a flame, but by Shakespeare as a frost. To repress 
zeal, in the language of others, is to cool; in Shakespeare’s, to melt it; when it 
exerts its utmost power it is commonly said to flame, but by Shakespeare, to be 
congealed. — ^Steevens; Sure the Poet means to compare ‘zeal’ to metal in a state 
of fusion, and not to dissolving ice. — ^Malone: The allusion, I apprehend, is to 
dissolving ice; and if this passage be compared with others in our author’s plays, 
it will not, I think, appear liable to Dr Johnson’s objection. The sense, I con- 
ceive, is, ‘Lest the now zealous and to you well-aflected heart of Philip, which but 
lately was cold and hard as ice, and has newly been melted and softened, should 
by the breath of supplications of Constance, and pity for Arthur, again become 
congealed and frozen.’ I once thought that ‘the windy breath of soft petitions,’ 
&c., should be coupled with the preceding words, and related to the proposal 
made by the Citizen of Angiers; but now I believe that they were intended to be 
connected, in construction, with the following line. In a subsequent scene we 
find a similar thought couched in nearly the same expressions: ‘This act, so evilly 
bom, shall cool the hearts Of all his people, and freeze up their zeal.’ — [HI, iii, 
154]. Here Shakespeare does not say that *zeal’ when ‘congealed exerts its ut- 
most power,’ but, on the contrary, that when it is congealed or frozen it ceases to 
exert itself at all; it is no longer zeal. We again meet with the same allusion in 


ACT II, SC, i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


145 


[Soi'“503. Least zeale . . . Coole and congeale] 

Henry VlII: ‘ — cold hearts freeze Allegiance in them/ — [I, ii, 61]. Both zeal and 
allegiance, therefore, we see, in the language of Shakespeare, are in their highest 
state of exertion when melted; and repressed or diminished when frozen. The 
word Treeze,^ in the passages just quoted, shows that the allusion is not, as has 
been suggested, to metals ^ but to ice. The obscurity of the present passage arises 
from our Author’s use of the word ‘zeal,’ which is, as it were, personified. Zeal, 
if it be understood strictly, cannot ‘cool and congeal to what it was' (for when it 
cools it ceases to be zeal), though a person who has become warm and zealous in 
a cause may afterwards become cool and indifferent, as he was before he was 
warmed. ‘To what it was,’ however, in our Author’s licentious language may 
mean to what it was before it was zeal. — [The first part of this note, down through 
the quotation from Henry VIII, appears first in the Variorum of 1785, receiving 
neither comment nor objection from the editor, Steevens, but his friendly feeling 
had evidently cooled and congealed from what it was, when, eight years later, he 
compiled the notes for his own edition, having in the meanwhile read and incor- 
porated the latter part of this note by Malone. He there says: “‘The windy 
breath” that will cool metals in a state of fusion produces not the effects oi frost. 
1 am, therefore, yet to learn how “the soft petitions of Constance and pity for 
Arthur” (two gentle agents) were competent to the act of freezing. There is 
surely somewhat of impropriety in employing Favonius to do the work of Boreas.’ 
— Ed.] — KLnight: There is great confusion in what the commentators say on this 
image. All this discordance appears to us to be produced by not limiting the 
image by the Poet’s own words. The ‘zeal’ of the King of France and of Lewis 
is ‘now melted’ — whether that melting represent metal in a state of fusion or dis- 
solving ice; it has lost its compactness, its cohesion; but ‘the windy breath of soft 
petitions’ — the pleading of Constance and Arthur — the pity and remorse of 
Philip for their lot-may ‘cool and congeal’ it ‘again to what it was’; may make it 
again solid and entire. — [The fatal malady — confusion — which Knight diagnoses 
as the cause of the errors of his predecessors seems here to have been infectious. 
When Knight speaks of ‘the Poet’s own words’ he means, of course, the text of 
the Folio; but he has inadvertently failed to take note of the fact that his explana- 
tion is dependent not on the punctuation of the Folio, but on that of Hanmer. 
It also may be noticed that Knight’s elucidation does not differ materially from 
Malone’s; in fact, it is but little more than a paraphrase. — Ed.] — Delius, adopting 
Hanmer’s punctuation, accepts Malone’s explanation that ‘zeal’ here refers to 
the friendly feelings of Philip, which may, by the prayers of Constance, be rendered 
cold as they were before.— R. G. White: This passage has hitherto been under- 
stood and punctuated as if zeal were spoken of as melted by soft petitions, pity, and 
remorse; which has made much work for the commentators; and inevitably. 
For what had pity and remorse to do with the disposition of France to abandon 
the cause of Constance? Queen Elinor says, ‘Lest zeal now melted by the windy 
breath of soft petitions on the part of Louis and Blanch, pity and remorse for 
Constance, cool and congeal to what it was before this marriage was proposed.’ — 
Vaughan (i, 29): I understand this passage to mean: Lest the favourable and 
melting condition, w^hich as such is now zeal for us, but which has been produced 
by the artificial influence of petitions, pity and remorse, blowing on the congealed 
surface of an icy and adverse feeling, return again to that cold, hard, and hostile 
feeling which it was before it was zeal [At this point Vaughan, having Hanmer’s 
10 



146 


TEE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act II, sc. i. 


505 


Huh, Why anfwer not the double Maiefties, 

This friendly treatie of our threatned Towne. 

Fra. Speake England fir ft, that hath bin forward firft 
To fpeake vnto this Cittie : what fay you? 

lohn.li that the Dolphin there thy Princely fonne, 

Can in this booke of beautie read, I loue : 


504. Hub.] Cit. Rowe, Pope,+, Coll. 
I. C. CapelL i Cit. Malone et seq. 

the] ye Lettsom (ap. Dyce ii.). 

505. threatned] Ff, Rowe, Fie. Neils. 
threatened Wh. i. threatened Pope et 
cet. 

Towne^ Towne? Ff. 

506. Speake England] Speak, Eng- 
land, Theob. Warb. Johns. Var. ’73, 
Hal. 


509 

506. hath] have Anon. ap. Cam. 

507. Cittie:] city; — Cap. Huds. ii. 
city. Ktly, Sta. Fie. Neils. 

508. Dolphin] Ff, yjh. i, Rtly. Dau- 
phin Rowe et cet. 

there] there, F4. 

509. I loue:] “j love,e' Dyce, Wh. i, 
Ktly, Cam.-f, Rife, Words. Craig. 
— I love, — Hal. 


reading before him, stumbles into that same quagmire as did Knight, and after ac- 
cusing all his predecessors of a complete misunderstanding of the passage, offers as 
his solution of all difficulties that the lines be punctuated as in the Folio. — Ed.] — 
Page, accepting Malone’s interpretation that ‘zeal’ is here used to denote friendly 
feeling, quotes in illustration, ‘My zeal to Valentine is cold.’— Gentlemen, II, 
iv, 203; ‘Intend a kind of zeal both to the Prince* and Claudio.’ — Much Ado, II, ii, 
36. — ^IvoR John: Lest the desire which the French king now has to faU in with the 
suggestion, a desire melted by the windy breath, etc., should cool and freeze into 
its previous form if advantage be not now taken. — [Ivor John is here, I think, 
quite right in taking ‘zeal’ as referring to the desire of the French king for the 
proposed alliance, and not to the friendly feelings of Philip towards John. It 
is not in accord with Elinor’s argument that John urge the king of France, lest this 
friendship, which is now melted, should cool and congeal; quite the contrary, in 
fact. Her words are a direct sequence to her observation on the yielding which 
she notices in the looks of King Philip. She goes on to say that this desire is 
melted or destroyed in part by the windy breath of soft petitions—a character- 
istically contemptuous description of any petitions made by Constance in Arthur’s 
behalf. In brief, Elinor’s words may be paraphrased: Strike while the iron is 
hot. — ^E d.] 

tt 504. the] Ivor John objects to Lettsom’s suggestion (see Text. Notes) on the 
ground that ‘Shakespeare’s usage would then require two ye’s — ^“Why answer 
ye not, ye double majesties.” — ffn point of grammatical accuracy John is quite 
correct; but Shakespearean usage in such a case is, I fear, an unsafe guide.. 
Bartlett’s Concordance shows how purely arbitrary is Shakespeare’s use of ‘ye’ 
and ‘you’; take, as one example among many: ‘Therein, ye gods, you make the 
weak most strong.'— Jul. Cces., I, iii, 91.-— Ed.] 

509. booke of beautie] Steevens compares: ‘Her face the book of praises.’ — 
Pericles, I, i, 1$; and Malone adds: ‘Your face, my thane, is as a book where 
men May read strange matters. I, v, 63. — [Likewise compare, perhaps, 
‘Yea, this man’s brow, like to a title leaf Foretells the nature of a tragic volume.’ 
— 2 Henry IV: I, i, 61. — Ed.] — Whiter, whose volume deals with the association. 




ACT II, SC. 1 ] 


OF KING 10 BN 


147 


Her Dowrie fhall weigh equall with a Queene: 510 

¥ ox Angiers^ dind faire Toraine Maine, P oy Slier s, 

And all that we vpon this fide the Sea, 

(Except this Cittie now by vs befiedg’d) 

Finde liable to our Crowne and Dignitie, 

ghall gild her bridall bed and make her rich 515 

In titles, honors, and promotions, 

As fhe in beautie, education, blood, 

Holdes hand with any Princeffe of the world. 

Fra, What fai^ft thou boy.? looke in the Ladies face# 

DoL I do my Lord, and in her eie I find 520 

A wonder, or a wondrous miracle, 

The fliadow of my felfe formM in her eye, 522 


510. a Queene:] the Queene: F3F., 
Rowe i. a Queen. Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Johns, a queen’s Ktly. 

51 1. Angiers] Ff, Rowe, Pope i. An- 
jowe Ktly. Anjou Pope ii. et cet. 

Toraine] Ff, Ktly. Tpurain 
Rowe. Touraine Pope et cet. 

515. bed] Ff, Rowe, Cam. i,H-, Craig. 
bed, Han. Coll. Wh. Huds. i, Del. Fie. 
Cam. ii, Neils, bed; Theob. et cet. 


516. promotions] promotions Fie. 

517. As] And Rowe, Pope. 
blood] hloud F*. 

518. handi\ hands Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Han. Dono. 

519. Jai’Jl thou] fay’Jl thou, F4. 

520. Doi.] Lewis. Rowe et seq. 
522-524. In margin Pope, Han. Om. 

Dono. 

522. her eye] that orb Words. 


of ideas and the train of thoughts flowing therefrom, quotes (p. 114) the present 
line and also II. 519 and 520 below as convincing evidence that ^the book and the 
eye of beauty (whatever might be the cause of so strange an association) were 
deeply engrafted on the imagination of our Poet.’ 

511. Angiersl The obvious misprint of ‘Angiers’ for was corrected by 

Theobald in his Shakespeare Restored (p. 160), a work printed in 1726, and 
designed to show the many errors, both of omission and commission, whereof Pope, 
in his edition, was guilty. Theobald (ed. i.) says: ‘King John, consenting to match 
the Lady Blanch with the Dauphin, agrees, in part of her Dowry, to give up ail 
he held in France except the City of Angiers, which he now besieged and laid 
claim to. But could it be thought that he should at one and the same time give 
up all except Angiers, and give up that too? . . . Awjow was one of the provinces 
which the English held in France; and which the French king by Chatilion claimed 
of King John in right of Duke Arthur at the very beginning of the Play, ‘ ‘ A ngiers ” 
instead of A has been falsely printed in several other passages of this History.’ 
[See 1 . 162, above.]— -Stee YENS; Theobald found, or might have found, the reading, 
which he would introduce as an emendation of his own, in the old Quarto. — [True; 
so also might Rowe and Pope, but they did not. — Ed.] • 

514. liable] Weight: That is, subject. So in Jul. Ccbs,: ‘And reason to my 
love is liable.’ — ii, 104. 

522. The shadow ... in her eye] Maeshaix: Allusions to the miniature re» 
flection of one’s face, as seen in the pupil of another’s eye, are very numerous in 



148 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act II, sc. i. 


Which being but the lhadow of your fonne, 523 

Becomes a fonne and makes your fonne a fhadow: 

I do protefl I neuer lou’d my felfe 525 

Till now, infixed I beheld my felfe, 

Drawne in the flattering table of her eie. 

Whifpers with Blanch. 528 

Till now, infixed, Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Var. ’73. Till now infixed Pope et cet. 

526. infixed] infixM Dyce, Huds. ii, 
Fie. Words. 

beheld] behold Han. 

527. 529. flattering flattering Pope,-!-* 

528. WMfpers...! Whispering... Rowe 
ii, Pope,+. Courts in dumb show. 
Capell. 


523. 524. Om. Words. 

524. a fonne] a Sun Rowe ii. et seq. 
a fhadow:] a shadow, Del. Rife, 

Neils. 

525. protefl.. .my felfe] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Cam.+, Neils, protest,.. .myself Theob. 

i. protest.. .myself, Dyce, Wh. i, Huds. 

ii, Words, protest, ...myself, Theob. ii. 
et cet. 

526. Till now, infixed] Ff, Rowe. 


the poets of Shakespeare’s time. Compare with this passage the following one 
from Beaumont’s Salmacis and Hermaphroditus: 


*How should I love thee, when I do espy 
A far more beauteous nymph hid in thy eye? 

When thou dost love let not that n3nnph be nigh thee, 

Nor, when thou woo’st, let that same nymph be by thee; 

Or quite obscure her from thy lover’s face, 

Or hide her beauty in a darker place. 

By this the nymph perceived he did espy 

None but himself reflected in her eye.’ — [ed. Dyce, vol. xi, p. 465]. 


524. sonne . . . sonne a shadow] Rowe’s change of the first ‘sonne’ to sun seems 
necessary not only for the sake of the quibble but also for the sense. Compare: 
'And turnes the Sun to shade: alas, alas, Witnesse my Sonne, now in the shade of 
death .’ — Richard III: I, iii (Folio, p. 179, col. a). — E d. 

1 525-527. I do protest . . . of her eie] Capell (vol. i, pt ii, p. 125): The high- 
flown nonsense of this speech is the very perfection of French courtship from a 
lover of no feeling; and well deserves the ludicrous comment that follows upon 
one of its lines, and on the commenter’s supplement; which line and its supplement 
are so dreadfully pointed in former copies that if the sense and mode of pronouncing 
are discovered in them, the person discovering owes it to his sagacity. — [The 
Text. Notes show that Capell’s changes in the 'dreadful pointing’ of his predeces- 
sors are actually only changes in the form of punctuation marks. By 'the com- 
menter’s supplement’ he means the Bastard's additional comment; but if any person 
can discover wherein a dash and a comma are superior to an exclamation point 
in elucidating this passage the person discovering owes it to his own sagacity. 
Mine is, I fear, sadly at fault. — E d.] 

527. Drawne . . . table of her eie] Steevens: So in All's Well: ' — to sit and 
draw His arched brows, his hawking eye, his curls, In our heart’s table.’ — [I, i, 106]. 
'Table’ is picture, or rather, the board or canvas on which any object is painted. 
-“-[Compare also: 'Mine eye hath play’d the painter, and hath stall’d Thy beauty’s 
form in table of my heart .’ — Sonnet xxiv, 1 , i,—Ed.] 



ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


149 


Bajl, Drawne in the flattering table of her eie, 

Hanged in the frowning wrinkle of her brow, 53^ 

And quartered in her heart, hee doth efpie 
Himfelfe loues tray tor, this is pittie now; 

That hanged, and drawne, and quartered there fhould be 
In fuch a ioue, fo vile a Lout as he* 

Blan, My vnckles will in this refpe6l is mine, 535 

If he fee ought in you that makes him like, 


529. [Aside] Dyce, Hal. Ktly, Sta. 
Huds. ii. 

529-53 1. eiey,hroWi.,.heari^ eye!... 
hrow! ...heart! Pope,-f , Var. ’85, Cam. 
4- , Huds. ii, Neils. Craig. eye , — ... 
hrow, — ...heart; — Cap. eye! — ...hrow! 
— ...heart! — Var. ’78. Mai. Rarm. 
Steev. Varr. Knt, Dyce, Sta. Words. 
eye ! — . . . brow ! — , . . heart ? — Sing. eye,... 
hrow,... heart ! — Wh. i. eye;... brow;.,, 
heart; Fie. 


532, frayiory..now;] traitor;.. .now,. 
Rowe et seq. 

535* will] will, [to Lew.] Capell. 

mine,] F3. mine. F3F4, Rowe, 
Pope,-]-, Del. Fie. Neils, mine: Cap. 
et cet. 

536, 537. yoii...lihe,...Jee^s] Ff, Rowe.. 
you. ..like;... sees, Pope. you.. .like,.., 
sees, Dyce, Cam.+j Wh. Neils, you,... 
like, ...sees, Theob. 


534, so vile a Lout as he] Rose (p. 76): One does not quite know why Faulcon- 
bridge should be so much annoyed at the betrothal of Blanch to the Dauphin; 
nor why Blanch should have backed up Faulconbridge in his apparently unjusti- 
fiable attack upon Austria. In the original [The Troublesome Raigne] we find 
that Elinor had half promised Blanch’s hand to the Bastard, whom the Lady gave 
up for Lewis with some reluctance. 

536-538. If he see - . . my will] Vaughan (i, 30): I understand the construction 
here differently from all other critics and editors, and would therefore punctuate 
differently— in this way: [omitting the comma at end of 1. 536, and also after 
‘sees,’ 1 . 537; see Text. Notes]. That which causes liking is naturally the object 
of liking. We thus too are rid of the double accusative ‘that anything’ and ‘it,’ 
or the slightly awkward nominative absolute ‘that anything.’ ‘Translate it to 
my wiir means ‘transfer from John’s will, on which it is now acting, to my will, 
with the same effect on my will as on his.’ This sense of ‘translating,’ as trans- 
ferring from one place to another, is rare in Shakespeare. — [Schmidt (Lex.) does 
not record a single example of ‘translate’ used in the sense of transfer; under (3) 
to interpret, to explain, he quotes the present passage. He is, however, alone in 
this explanation. Fleay and Deighton, more naturally, take ‘translate’ in the 
sense transform or render, as in ‘He hath studied her will, and translated her will out 
of honesty into English ’^ — Merry Wives I, xii, 54 — a passage nearly parallel. The 
latter thus paraphrases the present lines: That thing, whatever it may be that 
inclines him to like you, I can easily bring myself to hold in similar regard, making 
his liking my own. I will force it upon my love (though I shall not have much 
difficulty in doing so), compel my heart to give it entrance. ‘Of course,’ adds 
Deighton, ‘the distinction which she pretends to draw is merely a playful one.’ 
—Hunter, Moberly, and Ivor John limit their explanations to the words ‘That 
anything,’ i. e., That thing which he sees, whatever it may be. — ^E d.] 




ISO 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act ii, sc. i. 


That any thing he fee^s which moues his liking, 537 

I can with eafe tranflate it to my will: 

Or if you will, to fpeake more properly, 

I will enforce it eaflie to my loue. 54^ 

Further I will not flatter you, my Lord, 

That all I fee in you is worthie loue, 

Then this, that nothing do I fee in you, 

Though churlifli thoughts themfelues Ihould bee your 
fudge. 

That I can finde, fhould merit any hate. 545 

lohn. What faie thefe yong-ones? What fay you my 
Neece? 

Blan, That fhe is bound in honor flill to do 
What you in wifedome ftill vouchfafe to fay. 

lohn. Speake then Prince Dolphin, can you loue this 
Ladie ? 

Dol. Nay aske me if I can refraine from loue, 550 

For I doe loue her moft vnfainedly* 
lohn, Thm do 1 gine Volquejfen, Tor aine, Maine f 552 

544. Though..Judge] In parentheses 
Pope,+, Cap. Varr. Mai. Raim, Steev. 
Varr. Sing. Hal. Ktly. 

546. yong-ones] young ones Rowe et 
seq. 

547. JiiU] shall Cap. conj. 

$4S. flill] will Pope, Han. shall Var. 

’85, Steev. Varr. Sing. Rtly. 

549. Dolphin] Ff, Wh. Ktly,. Fie, 
Rowe et cet. 

551. mfainedly] unfeinedly F3. un- 
feignedly 

552. Toraine] Tourain Rowe i. 
Touraine Rowe ii. et seq. 

537, That , . . which] For this marked change of relative, compare 1 . 116; and 
'See, if needful, Abbott, § 267. 

546. What say you my Neece] Moberly: Blanch’s speech, just ended, had 
heen addressed aside to the Dauphin. 

547, 548. still . . . still] KInight: The change of ‘still’ [ 1 . 548] to shall is cer- 
tainly not called for. — [The TexL Notes will show how general is the agreement 
with Knight. Possibly both Pope and Steevens overlooked the fact that ‘still’ 
bears a signification which frequently varies with the context. The first ‘still’ 
means here, as in many instances, constantly^ always^ e. g., ‘Thou still hast been 
the father of good news.’ — Hamlet^ II, ii, 42, The second ‘still’ is equivalent 
to in future j no less than formerly, e. g., ‘That still I lay upon my mother’s head.’ 
—I, i, 84.'— En.] 

552-554. Then do I giue . . , more] Courtenay (i, ii): This representation 


S3 7. any thing] any thing, Han. any- 
thing 

538. it to] into Anon. ap. Cam. 

539. Or] Ff, Rowe, Pope,”{-, Coll. 
Dyce, Cam,+. Or, Cap. et cet. 

to properly^ In parentheses 
Cap, Varr, Mai. Rann, Steev, Varr. 
Sing. Hal. Rtly. 

$40. eaflie] eafilyFfF^. 

541. Further] Farther Coll. Wh. i. 
543. Then] Than Ff. 

this^ Ff, Rowe, Huds. ii, Neils. 
this; Pope,-!-, Cam,+, Fie. Craig. 
this , — Cap. et cet. 



ACT 11 , SC. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


ISI 


Poy Slier SjdXid AnioWj thefe fiue Prouinces 553 

With her to thee, and this addition more, 

Full thirty thoufand Markes of Englifh coyne: 555 

Phillip of France, if thou be pleafd withall,' 

Command thy fonne and daughtet to ioyne hands. 

Fra, It likes vs well young Princes : clofe your hands 

Auji . And your lippes too, for I am well allur'd, 559 


553. Aniow] F2F3. Anjowe Ktly. 
Anjou F4 et cet. (Note xi. Cam.). 

555- coyne:] coin, Rowe et seq. 

557. daughtet] Fi, 

558. vs well] Ff, Huds. i, Cam.+« 
us well; Rowe, Pope,+, Cap. Varr. 
Mai. Rann. Steev. Varr, Sing, us well. 


Knt et cet. 

559, 560. Aufl. And.,.ajfur^d] In 
margin Pope, Han. 

559. toOf for] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
too; foTy Theob.-f j Varr. Mai. Rann, 
Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Coll, too; for 
Cap. et cet. 


of the marriage settlements is not borne out by history; John did not give up 
the five provinces, but only Hhe city of Evreux, and some other towns, being those 
(according to Holinshed) which the King of France had taken from him in the war. 
The King of England likewise did homage to the French King for Brittany, and 
again received homage for the same country, and for the country of Richmond, 
of his nephew Arthur.’ — [Malone points out that this passage is taken almost 
verbatim from the older play. The anonymous author, therefore, and not Shake- 
speare must bear the blame for this wanton disregard of historical accuracy. — ^E d.] — 
Marshall: Shakespeare has — ^perhaps in order to condense the scene somewhat, 
it being very long in the old play — ^made an alteration in the details of this scene, 
the effect of which is to set John’s character in a more unfavourable light. In 
The Troublesome Raigne John offers, in addition to ^her dowrie out of Spaine,’ 
thirty thousand marks; but King Philip demands the provinces as well. John 
hesitates at first, but Queen Eleanor advises him to yield. 

552. Volquessen] Steevens: This is the ancient name for the country now 
called the Vexin; in Latin, Pagus Velocassinus. That part of it called the Norman 
Fmw was in dispute between Philip and John- 
555, thirty thousand Markes] Murray (N. E. D,, s. v. Mark, sb®. i) : A denom- 
ination of weight* formerly employed (chiefly for gold and silver) throughout 
w’estem Europe; its actual weight varied considerably, but it was usually regarded 
as equivalent to S ounces. In England, after the conquest, the ratio of 20 sterling 
pennies to an ounce was the basis of computation; hence the value of the mark 
became fixed at 160 pence = 13^. 4d. or two-thirds of a pound sterling. [Blanch’s 
dowry was, therefore, about £20,000. — Ej>.] 

55S, 559. close your hands . . . And your Kppes] Malone (Note on WinL TaUy 
I, ii, 104); This was a regular part of the ceremony of troth-pHghting, to which 
Shakespeare often alludes. So in Meas. for Meas.: ‘This is the hand, which with 
a vow’d contract Was fast belocked in mine. ’—V, i, 209. So also in No Wit Like 
a Woman^Sj Middleton, 1657: ‘There these young lovers shall clap hands together,’ 
[IV, i. — Rolee, as a further illustration, quotes: ‘A contract of eternal bond of 
love. Confirm’d by mutual joinder of your hands, Attested by the holy close of 
lips, Strengthen’d by interchangement of your tiags.’-— Twelfth Nighty V, i, 159. — 
For a description of the ceremony of betrothaLor troth-plight, see note by Douce, 
Twelfth Nighty p. 290, this edition. — E d.] 



152 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act ii, sc. i. 
560 


That I did fo when I was firfl affur’d. 

Fra. Now Cittizens of Angires ope your gates, 

Let in that amitie which you haue made, 

For at Saint Maries Chappell prefently. 

The rights of marriage fhallbe folemniz’d. 

Is not the Ladie Conjiance in this troopep 5^5 

I know fhe is not for this match made vp. 

Her prefence would haue interrupted much. 

Where is fhe and her fonne, tell me, who knowes? 

Dol. She is fad and pafsionate at your highnes Tent. 569 


560. fo] SO, Rowe et seq. 

afur^d] Walker, affied Huds. ii, 

Bono. 

561. Angires] Angiers Ff. 

563. Saint] Saints Fa. 

564. rights] rites F4. 

566 . 1 know] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Dyce, 
Hal. Sta. Huds. Cam.+, Coll, iii, Fie. 
1 know, Theob. et cet. 

is not] Fa. is not, F3F4, Rowe, 
Cam.“h, Neils, is not; Pope et cet. 

match] Ff, Rowe, Pope,+ , Knt, 
Cam.-f > Craig, match. Cap. et cet. 


566. vp,] up Theob. Han. Warb. 
Johns. Dyce, Ktly, Cam.-f , Words. 

567. much.] muck : — Cap. Varr. Mai. 
Rann. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Dyce, 
Hal. Cam.+, Words. Craig. 

568. Jonne,..^htowes?] son;. ..knows? 
Cap. Varr. Mai. Rann. son?... knows. 
Steev. et seq. 

569. She is] She^s Pope, 4 “ , Dyce ii, 
iii. 

highnes] Highnejfe Ff. highness^ 
Pope et seq. 


SS9> 560. assured . . . assur’d] Steevens: ‘Assur’d’ is here used both in its 
common sense and in an uncommon one, where it signifies affianced, contracted. 
So in Com. of Err., ‘called me Dromio, swore I was assur’d to her.’ — III, ii, 145. — 
Wai,k:er {Crit., i, 273): It is impossible that this repetition of the same word in a 
different sense — there being no quibble intended or anything else to justify it — 
can have proceeded from Shakespeare. Read: ‘when I was first affiedf i. e., 
betrothed. Tam., of Shr., ‘Where then do you know best, We be affied.’ — IV, iv, 
49.— “[Hereupon Walker furnishes many examples in corroboration of the fact 
that affiy was used in the sense of betroth; but so equally was ‘assur’d.’ The altera- 
tion of a word in the text when it yields an intelligible meaning, merely because it 
does not seem to the emender what Shakespeare would have used, is hardly a 
sound method of criticism. Such repetitions are, on the contrary, eminently 
characteristic. All that may be said in justification of Walker’s change is that 
the letters wr’d and ied in the hand-writing of the time might easily be confused; 
but why then in only one case and not in both?— Ed.] 

563. Saint Maries Chappell] Rolfe: This is said to be the so-called Church of 
Ronceray, dedicated to St Mary the Virgin in 1028 and re-dedicated in 1119 by 
Pope Calixtus II. It is now used as a chapel for the students of the School of Arts. 

569. passionate] Miteeay { N . E . D ., s. v. 5) : Moved with sorrow; grieved, sad, 
sorrowful— [The present line quoted. Ivor John compares also: ‘How now, 
Ales? what sad and v 3 .s€i 0 TiQX&:--Arden of Feiwsham, III, v, 45. Steevens 
quotes in illustration ‘Thou art passionate, Hast thou been brought up with girls?’ 
— Without Money, 11 , iv; but, as Dyce says, ‘passionate’ is there ‘used iron- 
ically and is equivalent to pathetic.^ — Ed.] 



ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


^53 


Fra^ And by my faith, this league that we haue made 570 
Will giue her fadneffe very little cure; 

Brother of England, how may we content 
This widdow Lady ? In her right we came, 

Which we God knowes, haue turn d another way, 

To our owne vantage. 575 

lohn. We will heale vp all, 

For wee’l create yong Arthur Duke of Britaine 

And Earle ofRichmond, and this rich faire Towne 

We make him Lord of. Call the Lady ConJlancej 

Some fpeedy Meffenger bid her repaire 580 

To our folemnity : I trufl we fhall, 


571. cure:] cure. Pope et seq. 

573. widdow] widowed Coll. ii. (MS.), 
Wh. i, Huds. ii. 

came,] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Del. came; Theob. et cet, 

574. we God] we, God F4. 


574. turn d] turned Ff. 

577. Britaine] Ff, Rowe, PopCj+t 
Ktly, Fie. Bretagne Han. et cet. 

581. folemnity:] solemnity . — Coll. 
Wh. i, Rtly, Del. Rife, Dono. Neils. 


573. widdow Lady] Collier (ed. ii.) considers the reading of his MS. Corrector 
{widowed) an undoubted improvement on that of the Folio, since the latter is ‘as 
if Constance were merely some respectable dowager. The epithet “ widow’d ’’ 
gives dignity to this reference to Constance, who was not historically a widow.’ 
(See note by Malone on 1 . 35, ante. — ^En.) — R. G. White: The Folio has ‘widow 
lady’; by accident I think, because the poor terms ‘widow woman’ and ‘widow 
lady’ were unknown in Shakespeare’s time. [White therefore adopted the reading 
of Collier’s MS. Corrector in his first ed. In his Supplementary Notes (vol. i, p. 
xlix.) he says, however, ‘When I wrote the note upon this passage I forgot the story 
of the“widow woman” and her cruse of oil, told in the seventeenth chapter of 
the first book of Kings. The old reading must stand.’— With White’s acceptance 
of the Folio reading I am quite in accord; at the same time it is, perhaps, worth 
noting that the words ‘widow woman’ appear first in the Authorised Version, 
1611; in both the Geneva Bible, 1560, and the Bishop’s Bible, 1568, the word 
‘widowe’ is alone given in the passage to which White refers. Furthermore, as 
regards White’s objecflon to the phrase ‘widow lady,’ the reverse of this, ‘Lady 
widow,’ is of common occurrence; see, for example, the pseudo-Shakespearean 
play, The Puritan Widow, passim; and Rom. isr Jul., I, ii, 69: ‘The Lady widow 
of Vitruvio.’ Constance is frequently spoken of as the ‘Lady Constance,’ and in 
the present passage the word ‘Lady,’ in the Folio text, is printed with a capital, 
as it is also in the line from Rom. ^ Jul.; and though but small reliance can be 
placed on the capitalized words in the Folio, yet I think we may reasonably say 
that the two phrases were practically synonymous, — Ed.] 

578. Earle of Richmond] W'righx: Arthur’s grandfather, Conan le Petit, Duke 
of Brittany, and father of Constance, was the first who styled himself Earl of 
Richmond, although the lordship of the Honour of Richmond had been originally 
granted to his ancestor, Alan Fergaunt, Count of Brittany, by the Conqueror. 
(See Nicholas, Historic Peerage of England, ed. Courthope.) 

5S1. solemnity] That is, marriage c&remony. 



154 life and death [act II, sc. L 

(If not fill vp the meafure of her will) 5^2 

Yet in fome meafure fatisfie her fo, 

That we fhall flop her exclamation, 

Go we as well as haft will fuffer vs, 5^5 

To this vnlookM for vnprepared pompe. Exeunt, 

Baft, Mad world, mad kings, mad compofition: 5^7 


584. exclamation^] Var. ’85. exclama' 
Hon, Ff. et cet. {exclamation. Fie.). 

585. Go we\ Go we, Rowe et seq. 

586. vnlook^d for] unlock'd for, Rowe, 
Pope, 4 *, Coll. Wh. i, Ktly, Cam.-]-, 
Neils. unlook'd-for Cap. Knt, Del. 
Dono. Craig, unlook' d-f or, Dyce, Hal. 
Sta. Huds. 

vnprepared] tmprepared Dyce, 
Fie. Huds. ii. Words. 

Exeunt.] Ff. Ex. all but Bast. 
Rowe, Pope, Han. Cam.+, Dono. 
Neils. Ex. all but Faulconbr. Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Varr. Rann. Citizens 


come from the Walls; and exeunt, to 
the Town, the two Kings, and their 
Powers, Lewis, Austria, Elinor, Blanch 
&c. Capell. Exeunt into the town all 
but the Bastard. The Citizens retire 
from the walls. White i. Exeunt all but 
the Bastard. The Citizens retire from 
the Walls. Malone et cet. 

587. Scene vi. Pope, Han. Warb. 
Johns. 

world , ... kings,] world ! ... kings! 
Cap. et seq. 

compofition:] composition! Pope 
et seq. {composition! Fie.). 


587. Bast. Mad world, mad kings, etc.] Mrs Griffith (p. 178): This speech, 
though delivered with an air of levity and expressed in humourous words and 
images, supplies occasion for three very just reflections. The first. That self- 
interest, in the mere worldly sense of the term, is the ruling principle of mankind. 
Secondly, That men are too apt to inveigh against corruption, more from the being 
void of temptation themselves, than their being free from this vice; and, lastly, 
That bad examples in the superior ranks of life have a dangerous tendency to injure 
the morals of the inferior classes of a people. — Francois Victor Hugo (iii, 459) : 
This soliloquy, superb and eternally true, wherein the Poet jeers at the inconstancy 
of France, dominated by that maker of false vows, self-interest, was singularly ap- 
propriate at the close of the sixteenth century, whether it were uttered at the time 
when a French prince of the blood, the Due d’ Anjou, proposed marriage to Queen 
Elizabeth, the jailer of his sister-in-law Mary Stuart, whether it were said after 
the conversion of Henri IV, abjuring Ms faith and declaring, Taris vaut Men une 
messe,^ whether it were said after the conclusion of peace between the court 
of France and Philip II. — ^Matthews {Sh. as Playwright, p. 97): The opening 
scenes cheat us with the belief that Faulconbridge is to take a prominent place 
in the plot, and we are disappointed when we find that tMs is impossible, since he 
is only an outsider, involved in no, important situation and useful at best only to 
give color to certain scenes and to comment upon the events like a chorus. Faul- 
conbridge is a largely conceived character with Shakespeare’s unfailing apprecia- 
tion of a free and unconventional nature; and Shakespeare lends hiTn wit, shrewd- 
ness, and even eloquence; yet his best bravura passages have but little dramatic 
value, since he is not firmly tied into the action. He exists for Ms own sake— 
for the sake of the \dvacity and the variety his presence imparts to the scenes in 
which he appears. He is a pleasant fellow of an easy and contagious mirth; he 
has a captivating humour of his own, forecasting that of Mercutio; but his part 
is so loosely related to the action that he cannot be forced into prominence. 



ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 155 

lohn to flop Arthurs Title in the whole, 588 

Hath willingly departed with a part, 

And France, whofe armour Confcience buckled on, 590 

Whom zeale and charitie brought to the field, 

As Gods owne fouldier, rounded in the eare, 

With that fame purpof e-changer, that flye diuel, 

That Broker, that ftill breakes the pate of faith, 

That dayly breake-vow, he that winnes of all, 595 

Of kings, of beggers, old men, yong men, maids, 

Who hauing no externall thing to loofe, 597 


590-592, whofe. ..fouldier,] In paren- 
theses Cap. Varr. Mai. Rann, Steev. 
Van. Sing. Dyce, Hal. Wh. i, Ktly. 

592. eare,] ear F3F4. 

593. diuel] Devil F4. 

596. maids,] maids; — Mai. Steev. 
Van. Sing. Knt, Coll. Dyce, Wh. i, 


Huds. Del. 

597-599. Who...commodiiie] Om. 
Words. Dono. 

597, 598. Who. ..that.] In parentheses 
Cap. Van. Rann, Fie. 

597. hauing] as they have Han. 


587. composition] That is, compact, agreement. Compare: ‘Sweno, the Norway’s 
king, craves composition.^ — Macbeth, I, ii, 59. 

589. departed] Steevens: To part and to ‘depart’ were formerly synonymous. 
So in Every Man in his Humour, ‘Faith, sir, I can hardly depart with ready 
money.’ — [S tee van’s quotation is correct, but the line is from Every Man out of 
his Humour, IV, vii. (ed. Gifford, p. 159). Wright compares also: ‘I may depart 
with little, while I live.’ — Two Noble Kinsmen, II, i. — Ed.] 

592. rounded] Craigie (N.E. D., s. v, vb.^ i.): To whisper, to speak in a whisper; 
to converse or talk privately. (From Anglo-Saxon rwmaw. The normal modern 
form would have been -Wright compares: ‘She will not stick to round 
me i’ the ear.’— Pilgrim, !, See also Wint. Tale, l, ii, 217. 

593. With] For other examples wherein ‘with’ is equivalent to see Abbott, 

§ I93- 

594. That Broker, etc.] Miss Porter: Shakespeare has developed this shrewd 
and pregnant speech from four embryonic lines spoken by Constance at the same 
point in the action in the older Play: ‘What kings, why Stand you gazing in a 
trance? Why how now Lords? accursed Citizens To fill and tickle their am- 
bicious eares With hope of gaine.’ 

597, 598. Who hauing ... of that] Malone: The construction here appears very 
harsh to our ears, yet I do not believe there is any corruption; for I have observed 
a similar phraseology in other places in these plays. The construction is — Com- 
modity, he that wins of all — ^he that cheats the poor maid of that only external 
thing she has to lose, namely, the word maid, i. e., her chastity. ‘Vlio ha\dng’ 
is used as the absolute case, in the sense of they hamtg; and the words ‘ who having 
BO external thing to lose but the word maid’ are in some measure parenthetical; 
yet they cannot with propriety be included in a parenthesis, because then there 
would remain nothing to which the relative ‘that’ at the end of L 598 could be 
referred. In Wint. Tale we find a similar phraseology: ‘This your son-in-law, 
And son unto the king (whom heavens directing), Is troth-plight to your daughter.’ 
— [V, iii, 150]. Here the pronoun ‘whom’ is used for him, as ‘who,’ in the passage 



THE LIFE AND DEATH 


156 


[act II, sc. i. 


But the word Maid, cheats the poore Malde of that. 598 

That fmooth-fac’d Gentleman, tickling commoditie, 

Commoditie, the byas of the world, 600 

The world, who of it felfe is peyfed well, 

Made to run euen, vpon euen ground; 

Till this aduantage, this vile drawing byas, 

This fway of motion, this commoditie, 604 


598. Maid^ ... Ma%de[ maids,„'maids 
Han. — maidf.^maid Cap. maidj — ... 
maid Mai. Steev. Van*. Sing. Coll. Wh. 
i, Huds. i. *^maidj*\*-'tnaid Dyce ii, iii, 
Cam.+j Coll. iii. maid,,..inaidHMds.n, 
601-606. Mnemonic Warb. 

601. who] which Pope, 4 “» 

peyfed] F2F3. poyjed F4. poised 


Rowe, Pope, 4 " > Coll. MS. {poisM Fie.). 
pdzed Wh. i. Rife, Craig, peised Cap. 
et cet. {peisH Dyce, Huds. ii, Words.). 

602. euen,] even; Knt. even Dyce, 
CoU. ii, Hal. Wh. i, Cam.+, Huds. ii, 
Words. Neils. 

603. vile drawing] vile-drawmg Pope, 
-f, Walker (Crit., i, 34), Cam.-f, Del. 


before us, is used for they. [See Abbott, § 399.] — ^Vaughan (i, 32): I prefer to 
consider ‘who’ as the relative to ‘break-yow’ and the subject of ‘cheats,’ and 
‘having’ as the participle in the accusative agreeing with the ‘poor maid.’ The 
whole construction is this: ‘who cheats the poor maid, having no external thing 
to lose but the word maid, of that word.’ 

599. commoditie] Mxjrray {N. E. D,, s. v. 2. c) : Advantage, benefit, profit, in- 
terest; often in the sense of private or selfish interest. ‘I will use his friendship 
to mine own commodity’ — Damon Pythias, IV, 41. 

600. Commoditie . . . the world] Henderson {Var., 1785): So in Cupid^s Whirli- 

gig, 1607 : ‘O the world is like a byas bowle, and it runs all on the rich men’s 
sides.’ — [ed. 1630; Sig. F3 recto ]. — ^P. Simpson {N. Q., 1901, IX, vii, 345) com- 

pares Bacon, Of Wisdom for Man’s Self: (Bad servants) ‘set a bias upon the bowl 
of their own petty ends and envies, to the overthrow of their master’s great and 
important affairs.’ [See next note.] 

600. byas] Wright: The weight of lead introduced into one side of a bowl in 
order to make it turn towards the side on which the weight is. A perfectly uniform 
spherical bowl on a perfectly level and smooth ground would run in a perfectly 
straight line. The word ‘bias’ is derived from the French bi(iis, and this again is 
said by Bracket to be from the Latin hifacem, which is applied to a person whose 
vision is crooked.— [Strutt (Sports d* Pastimes, ed. Hone, p. 266) says: ‘Bowling, 
whether practised upon open greens or in bowling-alleys, was probably an inven- 
tion of the Middle Ages, I cannot by any means ascertain the time of its intro- 
duction; but I have traced it back to the thirteenth century.’ — Bartlett’s Concord- 
ance records eight other passages besides the present wherein Shakespeare makes 
use of this simile of the bias and bowl. Does this not present to the inward eye an 
attractive picture of the stretch of smooth green turf, and Shakespeare himself 
either as an interested onlooker or keen participant in the game? — Ed.] 

6oi-“6o 4. The world . . . this commoditie] Compare: ‘’Tis the general! humour 
of the world; commodity steers our affections throughout; we love those that are 
fortunate and rich, that thrive, or by whom we may receive mutuall kindness, 
hope for like curtesies, get any good, gain or profit; hate those, and abhor, on the 
other side, which are poor and miserable, or by whom we may sustain loss or in- 



ACT 11, SC. ij 


OF KING JOHN 


157 

605 


Makes it take head from all indifferency, 

From all dire6lion, purpofe, courfe, intent* 

And this fame byas, this Commoditie, 

This Bawd, this Broker, this all-changing-word, 

Clap^d on the outward eye of fickle France, 609 


606. intent.] Ff, Pope, Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Knt. intent; Rowe, Hal. intent: 
Han. et cet. 

608. this alhchanging~word\ that all- 


changing-world F2F3. that all changing- 
world Rowe, this all-changing wooer 
Herr, this all-changing word Pope et 
seq. 


convenience.^ — Burton: Anatomic of Melancholy, Part II, Sec. i, Mem, 2, Subs. i. 
— Ed. 


605. take head] Not, as in the common meaning of the phrase, to start running 
(the earliest use of this is given by Murray as 1674), but in the sense of take all 
life or power from indifferency. — Ed. 

605. indifferency] Murray (iV. E. D., s. v. I, i) : Absence of bias, prejudice, 
or favour for one side rather than another; impartiality, equity, fairness. — Wright, 
in illustration, says: ‘One of the clauses in the Prayer for the Church Militant 
is that those in authority “may truly and indifferently minister justice.” * 

608. Broker] That is, a procurer, a pander. Compare Two Gentlemen, I, ii, 41. 

608. all-changing- word] Vaughan (i, 34): The dissatisfaction which prompted 
such an emendation [as that of the Folios. See Text. Notes] is better than the 
emendation. How can either a ‘world’ or a ‘word’ be ‘clapped on the outward 
eye’? Certainly we should read the passage with such a change as this: ‘all- 
changing wandl The wand, being the accredited instrument by which all the 
transformations of the magician and enchanter are ostensibly effected, is the very 
object to which the epithet ‘all-changing’ is appropriate, and it is most naturally 
imagined to exercise supernatural powers or vision by the actual application of 
it to ‘the outward eye.’ [Vaughan here inserts two passages from Ovid: Meta- 
morphoses, xiv, Fab. v, vi, to show whence Shakespeare may have derived his 
knowledge of the conjuror’s rod or wand, ‘It is possible,’ continues Vaughan, 
‘ that rod and not wand is the right word; for the translators of the Bible use rod 
for the wand that transforms, . . .and rod, like wand, resembles “word” closely. 
But I decidedly prefer wand.^ — Vaughan’s emendation wand for ‘word’ is, to my 
mind, open to very grave objection. In the first place, toand in the sense of the 
conjuror’s magical instrument was apparently unknown to Shakespeare. Pros- 
pero would not have spoken of his ‘staff’ had wand been the proper term; and 
Shy lock would not have used the word ‘wands’ in recounting the thrift of Jacob 
if the word had any hint of magical charms. Milton’s Comus is, I think, the first 
to employ the word as it is now generally accepted in the peculiar sense of a con- 
juror’s implement. But the objections to any change in the text lie deeper than 
this. Vaughan has, I fear, quite misunderstood the whole passage. It is not 
‘this all-changing word’ any more than. it is ‘this bawd’ or ‘this broker’ that is 
clapped on the outward eye of France; Faulconbridge, still using the metaphor 
taken from the game of bowling, pauses to add again three other epithets to the 
word ‘commodity.’ France’s eye is thus compared to the ball; and the bias is 
commodity, or self-interest, which, as he goes on to say, has drawn the king (who 
is now himself the ball) out of his proper course. — Ed.] 

609. on the . . * eye] Staunton: 'The aperture on one side which contains the 



THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act II, sc, i. 

6io 


158 

Hath drawne him from his owne determine ayd, 

610. owne determin’d] own-deiermin’ d Coll, ii, iii. (MS.), Wh. Ktly, Dyce ii, iii, 

Cap. Mai. Ran. Fie. Huds. ii, Neils, deed Bubier ap. 

ayd] aim M. Mason, Sing, ii. Cam. 

bias was sometimes called the eye. — ^Moberly: [Commodity] is the transforming 
spell which makes the eye see all things amiss. The metaphor can hardly be, as 
Staunton supposes, from the lead run into the eye of the bowl. — ^Moore Smith: 
That is, suddenly presented to the eye. Compare: ‘ — a penny worth of sugar 
clapped into my hand.’ — i Henry IV: II, iv, 25; and III, i, 170 below. I cannot 
accept Mr Worrall’s suggestions that Commodity is thought of here as having 
the effect of ‘spectacles’ of a distorting kind. — [This refers to a suggestion by Mr 
Walter Worrall of Worcester College, Oxford, to whom Moore Smith acknowledges, 
in his Preface, his indebtedness for many valuable hints in the preparation of his 
notes to this play. — Ed.] 

609. the outward eye] W. L. Ritshton (iV. Sr Q., IV, x, 291, 1872) : Shakespeare 
speaks of the outward eye [in the present passage] and the eye of reason: ‘The eye 
of reason may pry in upon us.’ — i Henry IV: IV, i, 72. This eye of reason, of 
which Spenser also speaks, is the inward eye: ‘The eie of reason was with rage 
yblent.’ — Faerie Queene, I, ii, v. Shakespeare’s use of the outward eye and the 
eye of reason may be well illustrated by an extract from an author who wrote 
long before his time: ‘When the first man Adam was create, he received of God a 
double eye, that is to say, an outward eye, whereby he might see visible things, and 
know his bodily enemies, and eschew them, and an inward eye, that is the eye 
of reason, whereby he might see his spiritual enemies that fight against his soul, 
and beware of them.’ — Doctor and Student. — [Dialogue I; cap. xiv; ed. 1554, sig. 
Ci, recto. (See Did. of Nat. Biog., article Christopher St German, for an account 
of this legal compendium.) The comparison might, I think, be carried even further; 
Faulconbridge says in the beginning that ‘conscience,’ inward eye, caused 
France to ‘buckle on’ his armour — ^E d.] 

610, owne determin’d] Capeix (I, ii, 125) accuses his predecessors of a lack of 
judgment in omitting the hyphen between these words; ‘for a want of junction in 
that place tends to mislead, the more obvious sense of the words without junction 
being a sense that is false; the compound wants no interpreting.’ 

610. ayd] M- Mason: The word ‘eye’ in the line preceding, and the word 
‘own,’ which can ill agree with ‘aid,’ induces me to think that we ought to read 
‘ own determined aim ’ instead of ‘ aid.’ His own aid is little better than nonsense — 
Collier (Notes, etc., p. 202) : Mason was right, as appears by a correction in the 
Folio, 1632, but the necessity for the change is not very evident. — Singer (Sk 
Vind., p. 84): The confirmation of Mason’s correction is another coincidence, 
and the confirmation of Collier’s view of the correction required in the Bastard’s 
speech is equally remarkable.— R. G. White: ‘Aid’ seems clearly a misprint. 
It can only refer to the aid which France had promised Arthur; and that could not 
by any proper use of language be called ‘his own determin’d aid.’ Besides, com- 
modity is ‘dapped on the outward eye of fickle France’; and the outward eye is 
used for taking aim.— [In reference to Collier’s comment on the change aim for 
‘aid,’ White (Sh. Scholar, p. 299) says: ‘If a tithe of the changes in that volume 
were as imperatively demanded as this is, Mr Collier’s discovery would have done 
ten times the service that it has done.’— Ed,]— C. & M. Cowden Clarke: Though 



ACT II, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


159 

6ii 


From a refoIuM and honourable warre, 

To a moft bafe and vile-concluded peace. 

And why rayle I on this Commoditie ? 

But for becaufe he hath not wooed me yet: 

Not that I haue the power to clutch my hand, 615 

When his faire Angels would falute my palme, 


612. vile-concluded] vile concluded Ff, 
Rowe et seq. 

613. on this] thus on Anon. ap. Cam. 

614. for becaufe] for the cause Vaugiian 


conj. (withdrawn). 

615. Not that., .the] Nor that.. .the Han. 
Not hut. ..the or Not that.. .not Coll. conj. 
Not that.. .no Coll. MS. 


there is plausibility in Mason’s argument, yet aim does not so well agree with the 
context that follows as ‘aid.’ ‘His own determin’d aid’ means that aid which 
he himself had determined to lend. 

614. for because] Eastwood & Wright (Bible Word-Book, s. v.) : A redundant 
expression in which the two words are equivalent in meaning; the combination of 
the two being employed to make the whole more forcible. Compare: ‘an if,’ 
‘or ere.’ [Genesis, xxii, 16 cited, and the present line quoted in illustration. See 
also Rich. 11 : V, v, 3. — Ed.] 

615. Not that I haue the power] Collier (ed. i.): The sense would perhaps 
be clearer if we read: ‘Not but I have’; or, with as slight a change, ‘Not that I 
have wni’; though the meaning of the Poet is sufficiently explained by what follows 
in the sentence: the Bastard says that he has the power to clutch or close his hand, 
but that he has yet had no temptation to do so. — ^Anon. (Blackwood^ s^Maga., 
Sept., 1853, p. 304) : The meaning of these lines is certainly sufficiently obvious. 
Yet Mr Collier’s Corrector is not satisfied with them. He reads: ‘Not that I 
have no power,’ &c. But unless Mr Collier can prove — what will be difficult — 
that ‘power’ here means inclination, it is e\ddent that this reading directly re- 
verses Shakespeare’s meaning. If ‘power’ means inclination, the sense would be 
this: I rail on this commodity, not because I have no inclination to clutch my hand 
on the fair angels that would salute my palm, but because I have not yet been 
tempted; when temptation comes I shall doubtless yield like my neighbors. But 
‘power’ never means, and cannot mean, inclination; and Mr Collier has not at- 
tempted to show that it does; and therefore the new reading must be to this effect: 
‘I rail on this commodity, not because I am unable,^ &c. But Faulconbridge 
says the very reverse. He says: ‘I rail on this commodity not because I have 
the power to resist temptation, or am able to shut my hand against the fair angels 
that would' salute my palm; for I have no such power; in this respect I am just 
like other people, and am as easily bribed as they are.’ The new reading must 
therefore be dismissed as a wanton reversal of the plain meaning of Shakespeare.— 
[Collier (ed. ii.) accepts the dictum of his Anon3nnous critic, though with no 
mention of him, and likewise omits both of his former conjectural emendations. 
;--ED.]: ■ 

615. clutch] Miirray (N. E. D., s. v. vh 2) quotes the present line as the earliest 
example of ‘clutch ’ in the sense To close or clench the hand. 

616. Angels] Wright: The Angel was a gold coin worth ten shillings, and was 
so called from having on one side a figure of Michael and the dragon. See Mer. 
of Ven.: ‘They have in England A coin that bears the figure of an angel Stamp’d 




THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act II. sc. i. 


i6o 


But for my hand, as vnattempted yet, 

Like a poore begger, raileth on the rich. 
Well, whiles I am a begger, I will raile, 

And fay there is no fm but to be rich : 

And being rich, my vertue then ftiall be, 

To fay there is no vice, but beggerie: 

Since Kings breake faith vpon commoditie, 
Gaine be my Lord, for I will worfliip thee. 


617 


620 


Exit. 624 


617. But for] But that Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. Joims. 

617. 618. as... Like] is.. .Like as Herr. 
is...Like Vaughan. 

619. Well,] Weill Han. 
whiles] while Pope, 4 ‘* 

620, 622. And fay. ..To fay] Ff, Rowe, 
Pope, Han. Huds. Cam.4~, Fie. Neils. 
Craig. A 7 id say, ...To say, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Var. ’73, Coll, Dyce, Wh. 


i, Ktly, Del. Huds. ii. Words. And say, 
— ...To say, — Cap. et cet. 

622. beggerie:] beggary. Pope,+, Wh, 
i, Ktly. 

624. Gaine...Lord,] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Han. Gain,... lord! Var. ’21, Sing. 
Ehit, Ktly, Sta. Huds. i. Gain,...lord, 
Coll. Cam. 4 *, Del. Fie. Neils. Craig. 
Gain,. ..lord, — Dyce, Hal. Huds. ii, 
Words. Gain, ...lord; Theob. et cet. 


in gold.’ — ^II, vii, 55. — ^Belden {Tudor Sh.): Of the innumerable exercises of wit 
suggested by the two meanings of this word (see also HI, ii, 28), the most famous 
is Donne’s The Bracelet, which Ben Jonson told Drummond he had ‘by heart.’ 
[The Elegy to which Belden refers may be found in Donne’s Works, ed. Grosart, 
vol. i, p. 192. It is there entitled, Upon the Losse of his Mistresses Chaine . — ^En.] 

616. salute] Rushton {Sh. lUust. by Old Authors, p. 15): ‘Our gold is either 
old or new. The old is that which hath remained since the time of King Edward 
the Third or beene coined by such other princes as have reigned since his decease, 
and without anie abasing or diminution of that mettall. Thereof also we have 
yet remaining, the riall, the George noble, the Henry riall, the salut, the angell, 
and their small peeces as halfes, or quarters, though these in my time are not so 
common to be scene.’ — Harrison, Description of England, Bk ii, cap. xxv, [ed. 
Fumivall, p. 362]. ‘Salute, salus, was a coyn of gold stamped by King Henry 
the Fifth in France, after his conquests there: whereon the arms of England and 
France were stamped quarterly.’ — Stowe, Chronicles, p. 589. I think that Shake- 
speare plays upon the word ‘salute’ in this passage, using it in a double sense in 
connection with the word ‘angel,’ and I am able to quote a passage from Beau- 
mont & Fletcher, in which the word ‘salute’ is also played upon in a similar way: 
‘Pr’ythee, old angel-gold, salute my family. I’ll do as much for yoms.*— Scornful 
Lady, II, iii. Although the word ‘rail’ is used immediately after the words ‘salute’ 
and ‘angel,’ it may be considered very doubtful whether Shakespeare there plays 
upon that word, although he often uses in a double sense words which do not differ 
more from each other in sound and meaning than the words ‘rail’ and riall. 

6i 9”624. Well, whiles . . . worship thee] Corson {Intro, to Sh., p. 172): All 
this is pure seif-slander, as his subsequent disinterested and magnanimous words 
show. 

624. Gaine . . . thee] F. Gentleman (ap, Bell, p. 25) : The second Act consists 
of altercation, martial noise, and bustle; great sound, little matter; for, save a 
few speeches, the whole rather drags— -the concluding soliloquy has great, but 
obscure, merit. 



ACT III, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


l6l 


A6ius Secundus 
\Act III. Scene /.] 


Enter Conftance, Arthur, and Salisbury. 

Con. Gone to be married? Gone to fweare a peace? 3 [i] 

I. Adus Secundus] Act II, scene i. scene n. Wli. i, Fie. Done. Act III, 

Rowe i. Scene continued Rowe ii. scene i. Theob. et cet. 

Act I, SCENE vii. Pope. Act II, Scene. The French King’s Pavil- 
ion. Theob. et seq. (subs.). 

1. Actus Secundus] Theobald’s rearrangement whereby this scene is made the 
first scene of Act III. is adopted by the majority of editors, and is here followed 
in order to facilitate references to modem editions. See 1 . 75 and notes below. — ^E d. 

2. Constance] F. Gentleman (ap. Bell, p. 25): Our Author, who took very 
little pains in general with female characters, there being no performers of that 
sex upon the stage in his time, has, however, roused his genius in favour of Con- 
stance; he has entered into and expressed her complaints in a most masterly man- 
ner; the ideas through the whole of this scene are happily pathetic; they appeal 
so successfully to the heart that even common feelings must submit to their force. 
[Reed’s opinion on Gentleman’s qualification as an editor seems justified by this 
evidence of a lack of critical acumen. See note on Dram. Persona, 1 . 2. — Ed.] 

3. Gone to be married] Campbell (Life of Mrs Siddons, i, 215), among other 
memoranda furnished him by the actress, gives the following: ‘Whenever I was 
called upon to personate the Character of Constance, I never, from the beginning 
of the play to the end of my part in it, once suffered my dressing-room door to be 
closed, in order that my attention might be constantly fixed on those distressing 
events which, by this means I could plainly hear going on upon the stage, the 
terrible effects of which progress were to be represented by me. Moreover, I 

^ never omitted to place myself, with Arthur in my hand, to hear the march, when, 

upon the reconciliation of England and France, they enter the gates of Anglers to 
ratify the contract of marriage between the Dauphin and the Lady Blanche; 
because the sickening sounds of that march would usually cause the bitter tears 
of rage, disappointment, betrayed confidence, baffled ambition, and, above all, the 
agonizing feelings of maternal affection to gush into my eyes. In short, the 
spirit of the whole drama took possession of my mind and frame by my attention 
being riveted to the passing scenes.’ — J. Knight (Ear per * s Maga., May, 1903, 
p. 834) : Among the sillinesses that have been uttered concerning Shakespeare, 
one of the best known and most futile is the assertion that he killed Mercutio for 
fear that Mercutio might otherwise kill him. With slightly less absurdity it might 
be maintained that he killed Constance because the white heat of passion which 
she reaches in her early scenes and the agonies of suffering to which she is sub- 
sequently a prey, could neither be enhanced nor sustained. Such passion as she 
exposes does indeed kill. Not at all the kind of ‘grief that will not speak’ is that 
of Constance. Her woes are clamorous as her sorrow is ‘proud.’ All the same, 
they whisper the o’erfraught heart and bid it break. Her opening -words in the 


II 





THE LIFE AND DEA TH [act m, sc. i. 


163 


Falfe blood to falfe blood ioyn’d. Gone to be freinds? [2] 

Shall Lmis haue Blaunch, and Blaunch thofe Prouinces? 5 

It is not fo, thou haft mifpoke, miflieard, 

Be well aduif’d, tell ore thy tale againe. [5] 

It cannot be, thou do’ft but fay ’tis fo. 

I truft I may not truft thee, for thy word 

Is but the vaine breath of a common man: 10 

Beleeue me, I doe not beleeue thee man, 

I haue a Kings oath to the contrarie. [10] 

Thou fhalt be punifh’d for thus frighting me, 

For I am licke, and capeable of feares, 14 


4. ioyn'd] joined! Rowe et seq. 
freinds] Fi. 

5. Lewis] Louis Dyce, Hal. Wh. i. 

8, 9. hcy.dheej] Ff, Rowe. be;. ..thee. 
Pope, Han. Coll. Hel. Dono. Graig. 
be;...thee; Theob. et cet. 

S.fo] so; Cap. Varr. MaL Rann, 
Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Dyce, HaL 


Sta. Cam.-F, Huds. ii. 

9. 1 truft] I think Pope, Han. 

10. man:] man. Ktly, Rife, Neils. 

11. Beleeue. ..man] Om. Pope, Han. 
thee man] thee^ man Theob. et seq. 

14. /earn,] feares. Fa. Fears. F4, 
Rowe i. Sing, fears; Coll. Dyce, Hal. 
Wh. i, Ktly, Huds. Craig. 


Third Act surpass in emotional vigor and intensity almost any others assigned to 
a woman in Shakespeare, and seem to defy the utmost power of the actress. No 
artist has accordingly risen to the height of them, though almost all the greatest 
have essayed the part. — [Knight quotes but a part of the foregoing memoranda 
by Mrs Siddons, with this comment: ‘Words were not the medium in which Mrs 
Siddons worked, otherwise this very declaration, designed to show how thor- 
oughly she entered into the part, might be taken to prove only how incompetent 
she was to grasp it.’ Though it is hardly germane to the discussion of a passage 
in King John^ yet, as Knight has introduced the subject, it may be of interest 
to note in passing that the ‘silliness’ in regard to Mercutio was perpetrated by 
Dryden in his Defence of the Epilogue, appended to the Conquest of Grenada, pt ii. 
It merits, I think, even a harsher term; Dryden gives it as a remark of Shakespeare 
himself.—ED.] 

14-17. For I am sicke . . . to feares] Rttshton {Sh. 6* Arte of Poesie, p. 127) ; 
In this passage Shakespeare uses the sort of repetition called Antistrophe or the 
Countertum, which Puttenham thus describes: ‘Ye have another sort of repetition 
quite contrary to the former’ [where one word is made to begin many verses in 
sute] ‘when ye make one word iSnish many verses in sute, and that which is harder, 
to finish many clauses in the middest of your verses or dittie,’ [ed. Arber, p. 208. 
Compare, for a similar series of lines, Mer. of Ven,, V, i, 193-197. — En.j 

14. I am sicke] Bucknill (Mad Folke, etc., p. 276): There is one word in this 
passage which must not pass without comment. Constance avows herself in ill 
health: ‘For I am sick.’ This point of physical disturbance is rarely omitted 
by Shakespeare in the development of insanity. It may be referred to in this 
instance in the most casual and careless manner, for the drama can take little 
cognizance of the physical imperfections of our nature. Still, however skilfully 
and imperceptible, the point is made. In a sick frame, passion like that of Con- 
stance would have fuller sway. The irritable nerves and the irritated mind would 



ACT III, SC. i.] OF KING 10 HN 1 63 

Oppreft with wrongs, and therefore full of feares, I 5 [13I 

A widdow, husbandles, fubiedl to feares, 

A woman naturally borne to feares; [15] 

And though thou now confeffe thou didft but left 
With my vext fpirits, I cannot take a Truce, 

But they will quake and tremble all this day. 20 

What dofl thou meane by fhaking of thy head ? 

Why dofl thou looke fo fadly on my fonne? [20]: 

What meanes that hand vpon that breafl of thine? 

Why holdes thine eie that lamentable rhewme, 

Like a proud riuer peering ore his bounds? 25 [23I 


i6,Jubiei^] subject Fie. 19. vext] vex’d Mai. et seq. 

1.^, feares;] fears. Pope, Han. Ktly. fpirits] sprites Fie. 

18, 19. ieft..JpiritSi] Ff, Knt, Coll. i. 24. rhew-me] rheume F3F4. 
jesty„spirits Rowe et cet. 

act and react on each other. Emotion would obtain more complete and disastrous 
empire. 

14. capeable] Compare II, i, 500. 

16. A widdow, husbandles] In a modem text these words should, perhaps, be 
separated by a dash, thus making the adjective apply to Constance herself em- 
phatically. xA husbandless widow is, to say the least, tautological. See II, i,. 
573 and notes.“ED. 

16. subiect] Wright: 'Subject’ is here accented on the second syllable. — Daw- 
son Shakespeare) opines that 'the unusual recurrence of the same’ 

word at the end of four consecutive lines makes it probable that the second syllable 
of "subject” is to be accented here.’— [Sir Andrew when taxed for an exquisite? 
reason said he had ' no exquisite reason, but reason good enough.’ — Ed.] 

18, 19. iest ... vext spirits,] Dyce {Remarks j etc., p. 89) : So the passage is 

pointed in the old editions, and, I believe, by all the modem editors, directly against 
the sense. [Dyce then shows that the proper punctuation is the placing of a comma 
after 'jest,’ 1. 18, and its removal after 'spirits,’ 1 . 19. Had he but consulted any 
edition preceding Knight’s or Collier’s, against whom his remarks were directed, 
he might have found strong groxmds for a change in his belief as regards 'all the 
modem editors.’ See Text Ed.]— Verplancx: The sense is, obviously, 

that in spite of the confession that the bad news just communicated was but in 
jest, yet she cannot gain any interval of repose for her disturbed mind. The 
ordinary punctuation [the Ff .] gives a different and erroneous sense. 

19. take a Truce] Dyce (Remarks^ p. 89): To 'take a tmce with’ is a common 
expression: 'Could not take trace with the unruly spleen Of Tybalt,’ Rom, Jul.^ 

III, i, 162. 'Take truce awhile with these immoderate mournings,’ The Coxcomb ^ 

IV, iv. [Also, 6* Crm., II, ii, 75.] 

21-26. What dost thou meane . . . thy words] Ivor John: This may be com- 
pared with Northumberland’s speech on hearing of Hotspur’s death, I Henry IV: 
I, i, 94-103. 

23. breast of thine] For this redundant possessive compare: 'Death of thy 
soul 1 Those linen cheeks of thine Are counsellors to fear.’ — M acbeth, V, iii, 1 6. — Ed. 
25. Like a proud riuer . . . bounds] Malone: This seems to have been imi- 



164 


THE LIFE AND DEATH [act hi, sc. i. 


Be thefe fad fignes confirmers of thy words? 26 

Then fpeake againe, not all thy former tale, [25] 

But this one word, whether thy tale be true. 

SaL As true as I beleeue you thinke them falfe, 

That giue you caufe to proue my faying true. 30 

Con, Oh if thou teach me to beleeue this forrow, 

Teach thou this forrow, how to make me dye, [30] 

And let beleefe, and life encounter fo, 

As doth the furie of two defperate men. 

Which in the very meeting fall, and dye. 35 

Lewes ms^rry Blaunch? O boy, then where art thou? 

France friend with England, what becomes of me ? [35] 

Fellow be gone : I cannot brooke thy fight, 

This newes hath made thee a mofl vgly man. 39 [37] 


2C, fignes] sighs Warb. Theob. ii, 
Johns. 

27. againe,] Ff, Theob. a gain Var. 
'73. again , — Dyce, Hal. Words, again; 
Rowe et cet. 

28. word^ word , — Sta. 

29. As true as I beleeue] Ff, Dyce, 
Cam.+, Huds. ii, Words. Dono, Neils. 
Craig. As true, as I believe Rowe, Pope, 
Han. Fie. . 4 ^ true as, I believe, Var. ’73, 
Sing, ii, Hal. Ktly, Sta. Del. Coil. iii. 
.4.5 true, as, I believe, Theob. et cet. 

you] youHl ICtly. 

falfe,] false Rowe ii, Dyce, Cam, 
-p, Huds. ii, Words. Dono. Neils, Craig. 

31. Oh] 01 CoU. Sing, ii, Wh, i, Huds. 
Oh! Ktly. 

34. defperate] desperate Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. Johns. 


35. Which, „meeiing fall,] Ff, Coll. 
Del. W hick.., nieeting fall Rowe, Dyce, 
Wh. i, Cam.-H, Huds. ii. Which,... 
meeting, fall Pope, Theob. Han. Which 
...meeting, fall Warb. Johns. Which,... 
meeting, fall, Cap. et cet. 

dye] die, Warb. die ! — Dyce, 
Hal. Huds. ii, Rife. 

36. Lewes] Lewis Ff. 

marry] wed Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Johns. 

Blaunch.^] F2F3. Blanch? F4. 
Blanch! Rowe et seq. 

37. England,] Ff, Rowe i, Cam.+, 
Fie. Rife, Dono. Neils. England! Rowe 
ii. et cet. 

38. he gone:] be gone! Neils. Craig. 

39. This] The Cap. 


tated by Marston, Insatiate Countess, 1603: ‘Then how much more in me, whose 
youthful veins, Like a proud river, overflow their bounds?’ — ^Act III, [ed. Halliwell, 
p. 156]. — ^W^RIGHT compares: ‘The ocean overpeering of his list.’ — Hamlet, IV, 
V, 99; and Ivor John, ‘Have every pelting [paltry] river made so proud That 
they have overborne their continents.’ — Mid. N. Dream, II, i, 92. 

25. proud] Murray (iV. E. D., s. v. II, 7. c.): Of the sea or a stream: Swelling, 
swollen, high, strong, in flood. Coverdale, Job, xxxviii, ii; ‘Here shalt thou laye 
downe thy proude and hye wanes.’ 

29. them] C. & M. Cowden Clarke: ‘Them’ refers to those who occasion 
her grief; in Shakespeare’s mode of sometimes employing a relatively used pro- 
noun in reference to an implied particular. The way in which Salisbury’s char- 
acter is drawn, refined in speech, gentle in manner, has fitness as well as beauty. 
[See Dram. Person., s. v. Notice Salisbury’s use of the deferential ‘you,’ while 
Constance uniformly addresses him with ‘thou’ and ‘thee.’ — ^E d.] 


ACT III, SC. i.] OF KING 10 NN .165 

Sal. What other harme h-aue I good Lady done, 40 [38] 
But {poke the harme, that is by others done? 

Con. Which harme within it felfe fo heynous is, [40] 

As it makes harmefull all that fpeake of it. 

At. I do befeech you Madam be content. 

Con. If thou that bidfl me be content, wert grim 45 

Vgly, and flandrous to thy Mothers wombe, 

Full of vnpleafmg blots, and fightleffe ftaines, [45] 

Lame, foolifh, crooked, fwart, prodigious, 48 


40--43. In margin Pope, Han. 

40 . 1 good Lady] /, good Lady, F4. 

42. Which] What Fie. (misprint). 
heynous] hainous F3F4. heinous 

Pope. 

44. you Madam] you, Madam, F4. 
you, mother. Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
Johns. 


45-56. If thotu..Rofe,] Mnemonic, 
Warb. 

45. grim] grim, F4. 

flandrous] slanderous Coll. Dyce, 
Sta. Huds, Cam.+) Hel. Words. Craig. 

47. fightleffe] unsightly Coll. MS. 

48. prodigious] prodigious Fie. 


42. Which harme] For this use of ^ which’ with repeated antecedent, compare 
I, i, 126, 127; and see, if needful, Abbott, § 269. 

44. 1 do beseech you] C. & M. Cowden Claeke: The boy’s artless appeals 
to his mother amidst her vehement indignation and passionate lamentation, a 
compound of maternal ambition and maternal love, should have sufficed to teach 
her heart the lesson so subtly inculcated by the Poet, that ambitious projects 
indulged for the sake of a being beloved, until they merge affection in violence and 
absorbing purpose, gradually undermine love in the bosom of the one beloved. It 
is curious to observe how little of tenderness there is in Arthur towards his mother, 
as response to all the passionate (but vehemently and violently passionate) love 
she lavishes upon him. Thus acutely and truly does Shakespeare inculcate his 
moral lessons. — ^Marshall: I do not think that on the strength of this line one 
can, as Clarke does, build any theory that Arthur was lacking in affection towards 
Ms mother. The boy was naturally alarmed at her vehemence; gently, and re- 
spectfully, he seeks to calm her agitation. Dramatic exigencies forbid any long 
speech on Ms part. For a similar use of the word * content,’ compare Rich, II: 
V, ii, 80-82: ^Yorh, Peace, foolish woman. Duck I will not peace, &c. Aum. 
Good mother, be content,’ 

44. be content] Murray (iV. F. Z?., s. v. content, I. b.) : Be content, be satisfied 
in mind; be calm, quiet, not uneasy. 

46. Vgly, and slandrous] Compare Rick III: I, iii, 231. 

47. blots] Malone compares: ‘ Worse than a slavish wipe or birth-hour’s blot,’ 

Lucrece, !. 537. ■ ■ 

47. sightlesse] Craigie (iY. F. D., s. v. I. 3): Unsightly, [The present line 
and a passage from Lithgow’s Travels, 1632, quoted as the only examples of the 
word in this sense. — ^E d.] 

48. prodigious] Johnson: That h, portentous, so deformed as to be a fore- 
token of evil. [Compare Rick III: I, ii, 21, 22: Tf ever he have cMld abortive 
be it, Prodigious and untimely brought to light.’] 



i66 


THE LIFE AND DEA TH [act hi, sc. i. 


Patch’d with foule Moles, and eye-offending markes, [47] 

I would not care, I then would be content, 50 

For then I ftiould not loue thee : no, nor thou 
Become thy great birth, nor deferue a Crowne. I50] 

But thou art faire, and at thy birth (deere boy) 

Nature and Fortune ioyn’d to make thee great. 

Of Natures guifts, thou mayft with Lillies boaft, 55 [53] 


%i,Jkould] would Rowe i. 

thee:] thee ; — Ktly. 

53. birth {deere hoy)] Ff. hirthf dear 
hoy, Rowe, Cap. Knt, Coll. Dyce, Hal. 
Wh. i, Sta. Huds. Cam.+, Del. Fie. 


Rife, birth, dear hoy! Pope et cet. 

54. great.] Ff, Rowe, Pope,4-> Ktly, 
Neils, great; Sta. Fie. l^fe. great: 
Cap. et cet. 

55- g'^ips] gifts Ff. 


SO. I would not care] Bucknill {Mad-Folk, etc., p. 274): The attack on Salis- 
bury, the innocent messenger, so unworthy of a lady and a princess, can only be 
excused on the supposition that she is beside herself with fruitless rage, and vents 
it on any one within reach. It wants but little that she should turn her tongue 
or her hands even upon Arthur. When, alarmed by her fury, he interposes, 
do beseech you, madam, be content,’ she replies with a strange sophistry which 
a true mother’s heart would never employ. When was true mother’s love ever 
measured by the beauty of her child? When did it not rather increase with the 
child’s imperfections? Sacred miracle of nature, a mother’s love hangs not on 
such casual gifts as form and beauty. The cretin idiot, hideous and half human, 
receives more than its share. . . , But the love of Constance is alloyed with pride, 
and ambition, and selfishness. Not simply because Arthur is her son is he dear 
to her, but also because he is rightful heir to a crown, and because his beauty 
flatters her pride. With the true selfishness of intense pride she attributes the 
sufferance of all Arthur’s injuries to herself. She alone feels and must underbear 
the woes of disappointed ambition. 

55, 56. Lillies . . , Rose] Miss Porter: The fairness of skin and ruddiness of 
cheek is not alone suggested by these flowers. The lilies of France and the Rose 
of England are fitly blended in the boy born of both races and heir in both lands to 
dominance over them. 'Nature’ and 'fortune’ are joined here in their gifts. — 
[This possible reference to the national flowers of France and England has been also 
suggested by an anonymous editor of a selection of the Plays, published by Ed- 
ward Lumley, London, no date, unrecorded by Jaggard. Attractive as it un- 
doubtedly is, it will, I fear, prove untenable; the comparison of the fresh complexion 
of youth to the lily and rose Is far too common among ancient writers to make it 
necessary to suppose that it here means anything but a compliment to Arthur’s 
youthful beauty. Here are but a few examples of this comparison: 'There did I 
behold them [the Ladies of England] of pure complexion, exceeding the lillie, & 
the rose, of favour (wherein y® chiefest beautie consisteth) surpassing the pictures 
that were feyned,’ Lyly, Euphues and his England, ed. Bond, ii, p. 200; 'In my 
beloved’s face the Rose and lily strive; Among ten thousand men not one is found 
so fair alive,’ Drayton, 1591, Barmonie of the Church, ch. v, 1. 25, ed. Hooper, iii, 
p. 254. These next following are quoted by Burton, Anatomy of Melancholy, in 
his Chapter on Low Melancholy: Symptomes of Love: 'lac, et lilium Albamque 
simul rosam et mbicundam, Et expoUtum ebur Indicum.’ (These lines are of un- 



ACT III, SC. i.] OF KING JOHN 


167 


And with the halfe-blowne Rofe. But Fortune, oh, 56 

She is corrupted, changed, and wonne from thee, [55] 

Sh’adulterates hourely with thine Vnckle lohrtj 

And with her golden hand hath pluckt on France 

To tread downe faire refpedl of Soueraigntie, 60 

And made his Maieflie the bawd to theirs. 

France is a Bawd to Fortune, and king lohUf [60] 

That ftrumpet Fortune, that vfurping lohn: 

Tell me thou fellow, is not France forfworne? 

Euvenom him with words, or get thee gone, 65 

And leaue thofe woes alone, which I alone [64] 


56. Roje] Ff, Rowe, Pope,-l-,^CoU. i, 
iii, Sing, ii, Wh. Cam.+, Del. Fie. 
Bono. Neils. Craig, rose: Cap. et cet. 

oh^ Ff, Rowe, Fie. oh! PopCj+y 
Cap. Var. ’78, ^85, Rann, Ktly. O, 
Cam.+j Bono. Neils. 0 ! Mai. et cet. 

57-63. She is...vjurping lohn:] Om. 
Bono. 

58. 5 A’] Om. Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Johns. She Cap. et seq. 


58. thine] thy F4, Rowe i. 

61. theirs] them Vaughan. 

62. king lohn] to John Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. Johns. 

63. lohn;] John! Pope,-]-, Coll. Byce, 
Hal. Wh. Ktly, Huds. Cam.+, Del. 

64. me thou] me, thou F4. 

65. Euvenom] Fi. 

66. thoje] theje F4, Rowe, Pope,+« 


certain origin, but usually assigned to Cornelius Callus, a contemporary of Virgil. 
Burton assigns them to Petronius, which is certainly an error.) Burton thus trans- 
lates: ‘The milk, the lily do not come thee near; the rose so white, the rose so red 
to see, and Indian ivory comes short of thee.^ And this from Chaucer: ‘That 
Emelye, that fairer was to sene Than is the lilie upon his stalke grene And fressher 
than the May with flowres newe For with the rose colour stroof hir hewe,* The 
Knightes Tale (ed. Skeat, 11 . 1035-1038). Perhaps, bIso, Mid, jSf. Dream, III, i, 
96, 97. Again, Spenser: ‘And in her cheekes the vermeil red did shew Like roses 
in a bed of lillies Faerie Queene, Bk II, can. iii, st. 22. For those who still 
prefer Miss Porter’s interpretation, there is one other objection, though, it must 
be admitted, a very slight one, viz.: that for Constance to refer to the rose as typical 
of England would be an anachronism; the rose was not adopted as the national 
emblem until after the Wars of the Roses, when Henry VII. made it his cognizance; 
the lily of France, or the fleur de lys, was, of course, much older.— Ed.] 

55. boast] Vaughan (i, 38) interprets ‘boast with/ as here used, in the sense 
vie with, quoting in confirmation: ‘Nor should that nation boast it so with us,’ 
2 Eenry VI: III, iii, 23; but Murray {N. E. D., s, v. boast, II. 3) quotes his same 
line in illustration of, To speak vaingloriously, extol oneself ; and among the several 
meanings of this word that suggested by Vaughan does not appear. The simpler 
meaning is, therefore, to be preferred, as thus: Thou mayst, as well as the lily 
and rose, praise thyself for having nature’s gifts. — Ed. 

59. pluckt on] That is, incited, instigaied; compare: ‘I am in So far in blood that 
sin will pluck on sin .’ — Richard III: IV, ii, 65. 

65. Euvenom] Bradley (iV. E, D., s. v. envenom, x.): To venom (a person, an 
animal); to poison by contact, bite, inoculation, etc., c 1400. Maimdeville, v 
(iBsq), 54: ‘The serpentes byten hem & envenyme hem.’ [Compare: ‘Oh what 



l68 


THE LIFE AND DEATH [act in, sc. i. 


Am bound to vnder-beare. 67 [65] 

Sal. Pardon me Madam, 

I may not goe without you to the kings. 

Con. Thou maift, thou fhalt, I will not go with thee, 70 
I will inftrudl my forrowes to bee proud. 

For greefe is proud, and makes his owner ftoope, 72 

68. we] we, F4. 72. anS\ anH Anon. ap. Cam. 

70, maifil mayeft F4. may^st Rowe. his] its Var. ^21. 

thee,] F2. thee. F3F4, Rowe, Pope, his owner fioope] Ff, Rowe, his 

-f , Coll, thee: Cap. et cet. owner stout. Han. Warb. Johns. Varr. 

^i.Jorrowes] sorrow Rowe ii, Pope, Rann, Steev. Var. '03, ’13, Sing. Dyce, 

Han. Sta. Huds. ii. dishonour stoop. Bul- 

72. proud] poor H. A. C. (Athenseum, loch, his owner too Cartwright, his 

29 June, 1867). owner stoop. Pope et cet. 

a world is this, when what is comely Envenoms him that bears it.’ — As You 
Like It, II, iii, 15.] 

67. vnder-beare] That is, endure. Compare: ‘Wooing poor craftsmen with 
the craft of smiles And patient underbearing of his fortune.’ — Rickard II: I, iv, 28. 

70. I will not go with thee] Boaden {Life of Kemble, i, 134): I am clearly of 
opinion that among :,the finest things . Mrs Siddons ever did are to be numbered 
the majestic sorrows — the look — the mode of taking the earth as a throne — the 
pride of soul, with which she prepared, deserted, and devoted as she found herself, 
to shame the assembled sovereigns, who had so basely abandoned her cause. 
The lines of Shakespeare, it is true, suggest it all; but never did the grand con- 
ceptions of a poet find more congenial imagination, never perhaps equal powders 
to embody the creation of his fancy. 

72. greefe is proud . . . stoope] Johnson: In Much Ado, the father of Hero, 
depressed by her disgrace, declares himself so subdued by grief that a thread may 
lead him, [IV, i, 250 et seq.]. How is it that grief in Leonato and Lady Constance 
produces effects directly opposite, and yet both agreeable to nature? [It is to be 
borne in mind that Johnson adopted Hanmer’s reading Sorrow 

softens the mind while it is yet warmed by hope, but hardens it when it is con- 
gealed by despair. Distress, while there remains any prospect of relief, is weak 
and flexible, but when no succour remains, is fearless and stubborn; angry alike 
at those that injure and at those that do not help; careless to please where nothing 
can be gained, and fearless to offend when there is nothing further to be dreaded. 
Such was this writer’s knowledge of the passions.'—SiEEVENS (Far;, 1778), in 
corroboration of the justice of Hanmer’s change, quotes: ‘Full, with stout grief, 
and with disdainful woe.’ — ^Daniel: Civil Wats, [bk vii, stanza 44. Beyond the 
fact that the words ‘stout’ and ‘grief’ appear close together, there is no similarity 
whatever. Hanmer’s change refers to the sufferer from grief who is made stout or 
resolute thereby; but the line from Daniel merely gives a descriptive epithet to 
grief. It is to be regretted that Hanmer has not furnished us with any note as 
to the exact shade of meaning he attached to ‘stout’ in this connection. Schmidt 
{Lex.) gives examples of the word used in various senses, as, strong, proud, over- 
hearing, resolute, brave, etc. — ^En.]— Malone : Our Author has rendered this passage 
obscure by indulging himself in one of those conceits in which he too much delights, 



ACT III, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


169 


[72. For greefe is proud, and makes his owner stoope] 
and by bounding rapidly, with his usual license, from one idea to another. [The 
reading stout for 'stoop’] has been too hastily adopted in the subsequent editions. 
The confusion arises from the Poet’s having personified grief in the first part of 
the passage, and supposing the afflicted person to be lowed to the earth by that 
pride or haughtiness which Grief, which he personifies, is said to possess; and by 
making the afflicted person, in the latter part of the passage, actuated by this very 
pride, and exacting the same'iind of obeisance from others that Grief has exacted 
from her. 'I will not go (says Constance) to these kings; I will teach my sorrows 
to be proud: For Grief is proud, and makes the afflicted stoop; therefore here I 
throw myself, and let them come to me.’ Here, had she stopped, and thrown her- 
self on the ground, and had nothing more been added, however we might have 
disapproved of the conceit, we should have had no temptation to disturb the text. 
But the idea of throwing herself on the ground suggests a new image; and because 
her stately grief is so great that nothing but the huge earth can support it, .she 
considers the ground as her throne; and having thus invested herself with regal 
dignity, she, as queen in misery, as possessing (like Imogen) ‘ the supreme crown of 
grief,’ calls on the princes of the world to bow down before her, as she herself has 
been bowed down by afiiiction. Such, I think, was the process that passed in the 
Poet’s mind; which appears to me so clearly to explain the text that I see no reason 
for departing from it. — M. Mason {Additional Comments, p. 35): Hanmer’s read- 
ing, stout, is an admirable amendment w^hich renders this noble passage agreeable 
to the feelings of human nature, and consistent with the rest of the speech, which 
is perhaps the proudest and stoutest that ever was uttered: ‘To the state of my 
great grief Let kings assemble.’ Is it in such terms as those that a grief would 
be expressed which made the owner stoop? I am really surprised that Mr Malone 
should endeavor, by one elaborate argument, to support the old debasing reading 
[of the Folio]; a pride which makes the owner stoop is a kind of pride I have never 
heard of; and though grief in a weaker degree, and working in weaker minds, may 
depress the spirits, despair such as the haughty Constance felt at this time must 
naturally rouse them. This distinction is accurately pointed out by Johnson in 
his observation on this passage. — Capei.1. (I, pt 2, p. 126): ^Stout^ is no easy word, 
nor of much fitness for the mouth of a lady; whose sentence is very perfect with 
‘stoop,’ and her word necessary to introduce with propriety her own stooping and 
the stooping she insists on from ‘kings’; the emphatical word in it is the word 
before ‘stoop.’ — Qf. H. Voss, one of the early German translators of Shakespeare, 
and whose work was issued in 1822, provided for his readers a select number of notes 
elucidating the English idioms which he was unable to give directly in his own 
language. For the most part the notes are short translations of the earlier English 
commentators; but at other times Voss waxes bold and fearlessly ventures into the 
dangerous domain of conjectural emendation, doubly perilous for a foreigner 
dealing with Elizabethan English. Voss’s attempt for the present passage is a 
notable example; he says: ‘We might here read “grief is proud and makes his 
aowner stoop.” The tw’o kings haye laid pressing grief upon Constance (have 
downed Constance); but the pride in grief shall cast under foot these downers 
themselves. If only the existence of a substantive “downer” might be proved,’ 
— ^Voss’s implied wish has not yet been fulfilled; even examples of the verbal form 
of ‘down’ in the sense to put down are not common until much later than the six- 
teenth century. — Ed.] — Kntght: The meaning of the passage ^appears to us, 



170 


THE LIFE AND DEA TH [act iii, sc. i. 


[72. For greefe is proud, and makes his owner stoope] 
briefly, thus: Constance refuses to go with Salisbury to the kings— she will in- 
struct her sorrows to be proud; for grief is proud in spirit, even while it bows down 
the body of its owner. The commentators substituted the ridiculous word stout 
because they received ‘stoop’ in the sense of submission. Constance continues 
the fine image throughout her speech: ‘To me and to the state of my great grief 
Let kings assemble’; here grief is ‘proud.’ ‘Here I and sorrows sit’; here grief 
‘makes his owner stoop,’ and leaves the physical power ‘no supporter but the huge 
firm earth.’ A valued friend, for whose opinion we have the highest regard, has 
no doubt that ‘stoop’ is the word, but that the meaning is, makes its owner stoop 
to it — to grief. He thinks that the ‘and’ joins and assimilates the two clauses of 
the sentence, instead of contrasting them. At any rate, we cannot but choose 
to abide by the restoration [of the Folio text].— J. Mitpord {Gentleman's Maga., 
Aug., 1844) : Stout is an emendation of Sir T. Hanmer’s, approved by Johnson and 
Monck Mason, and received into the text, which in the old copy is, ‘and makes 
its owner stoop.’ Why ‘its’ should be altered to Ms we cannot see; we also doubt 
Hanmer’s alteration, which is too distant from the original to be at once admitted. 
We would read, ‘For grief is proud, and makes its owners loo'\ only leaving one 
redundant letter, p; owners too was easily corrupted into ‘owner stoop,’ or it might 
be owners so. — [On the authority of Dyce (ed. ii.) I assign this and other notes on 
the text of King John in this number of the Gentleman's Magazine to John Mit- 
ford; the article QntitltdL Conjectural Emendations of the Text of Shakespeare is 
unsigned; but Dyce was Mitford’s literary executor and doubtless had some sub- 
stantial evidence whereon to base his assertion. The Cambridge Edd., without 
locating these notes, also assign ail of the conjectural readings to John Mitford. — 
Ed.] — Collier: The old and sufficiently intelligible reading has been misunder- 
stood by most modem editors [see Text. Notes], The meaning seems to be that 
grief (which the Poet personifies) is proud even while he compels his owner to stoop, 
as Constance did to the earth, to receive the homage of monarchs. [In his second 
ed. Collier adds to this:] She stooped to the earth in her pride, and was, in fact, 
the more proud by this act of seeming condescension. — Delius: Grief is per- 
sonified as overbearing and forcing those who own it to submit; it presses her in 
its pride to the ground so that she also can do nothing but obey its commands. 
Constance thus furnishes the motive for her refusal to listen to the behest of kings, 
who should more fittingly come to her. — Staunton, who adopts Hanmer’s read- 
ing, says: ‘I must confess, despite the elaborate defence of the ancient reading by 
Malone, and its adoption by Messers Collier and Knight, that ‘stoop’ appears to 
me entirely inconsistent both with the context and with the subsequent language 
and demeanour of Lady Constance before the Kings of France and England. 
Shakespeare, I conceive, intended to express the very natural sentiment that^ grief 
is proud, and renders its possessor proud also; but wishing to avoid the repetition 
of proud, which had been introduced twice immediately before, he adopted a word, 
stout, which was commonly used in the same sense. — ^Hudson: The meaning seems 
to be that grief is so proud that even in receiving the homage of kings its owner 
stoops or condescends. — G. White: Those who have concluded that the passage 
is corrupt must surely have done so without sufficient examination of the con- 
text. Constance has just said, ‘And leave those woes alone, which I alone Am 
bound to under-bear.’ And two lines below she says: ‘My grief’s so great That 
no supporter but the huge firm Earth Can hold it up.’ She means to represent her- 



ACT III, SC. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


171 


[72. For greefe is proud, and makes his owner stoope] 
self as bowed to the earth by her great sorrow; and she uses ‘proud’ in the double 
sense of haughty, which it still preserves, and of great, swollen, which it had in 
Shakespeare’s time. The following passages afford almost needless illustration 
and support of this interpretation. ‘When Octavia by the imploiment of An- 
tonie . . . throws her selfe great with child, & as big with sorrowe, into the travaile 
of a most laboursome reconciliation.’ — Daniel’s Letter from Octavia, &c., The 
Argument, 1599. ‘Wherein I may say they are a greate deale more fmiteful 
than Hares, for they are reported to conceiue, to goe prowde, and to litter their 
leverets at one instaunt. But these were great with fearing before they conceiue 
it.’ — Gosson’s Ephemerides of Phialo, 1579, foL 27; finally, in 1 . 25 ante, ‘Like a 
proud river peering o’er his bounds.’ ‘His owner’ is not a personification; nor 
should we read ‘Us owner.’ ‘His’ is used for its. — Keightley {Exp., 222): I spe 
no need of Hanmer’s change. We talk of a person being bowed to the earth with 
grief, and this is what the Poet meant. ‘Owner’ was used of one who simply 
had, as ‘But like the owner of a foul disease.’ — Hamlet, IV, i, 24. — Elze (ap. 
Ulrici, Sh., vol. i, p. 237): While ‘stouV is quite unobjectionable to the sense 
of the passage, at the same time it not only forms a disagreeable harmony with 
the foregoing word ‘proud,’ but is also feebly tautological. I think we should 
more Hkely read: ‘jione makes his owner stoop.’ Kings alone, says Constance, 
are in the position to make me stoop; I am royal as they are, and my grief is my 
throne. [To this note the editor, Ulrici, added: ‘I should rather think that Sh. 
simply wrote, “makes his owner stop,” to stop in the sense make immoveable. Con- 
stance means, she cannot go with Salisbury because her grief is too proud and her 
weariness so heavy that she cannot move.’ — ^Ep.] — C. & M. Cowden Clarke : We 
think that the mere word ‘instruct’ sufi&ces to show that ‘stoop’ is the right word 
here. Constance, ‘sick,’ ‘oppress’d wdth wrongs,’ ‘full of fears,’ in ‘vex’d spirits’ 
that ‘quake and tremble,’ feels herself bowed down by grief, beat to the earth, 
sinking beneath the load of her sorrows and injuries, and may well say that she 
will teach them to be proud, to resist the pride of grief which makes her ‘stoop’ 
to its overpowering weight. She feels herself physically giving way under the load 
of the burden laid upon her; and with her rich imagination converts the earth to 
which she is compelled to ‘stoop’ into a ‘supporter’ and ‘throne.’ — ^Rev. John 
Hunter: We prefer the old reading, because we apprehend that ‘his owner’ 
denotes not the individual that is proud, but the king, lord, or master of that 
individual. Constance will not go to the kings, but will have the kings come to 
her. She immediately adds: ‘To me and to the state of my great grief let kings 
assemble’; and in concluding her speech she says: ‘Here (that is, on the ground) 
is my throne, let kings come bow to it.’— [It will be noticed that Voss, though 
rather indirectly, arrived at somewhat the same conclusion in his interpretation. — 
Ed.| — Fleay: That is, stoop to grief. I bow to my grief, let others (kings or 
otherwise) also bow to grief, who is embodied in me. Hanmer’s reading is not 
required. — Herr, in answer to the foregoing laconic note by Fleay, says (p. 24): 
‘Constance does not say — ^nor is it implied — that “she bows to her grief,” but 
summons kings to do so, as before a throne; nor does she say that she will, or that 
she intends to “stoop to her grief”; on the contrary, she invokes the aid of pride 
to sustain and instruct her how to combat the weaknesses of grief, — “to suffer 
and be strong ,” — Rnd to enable her to rise in proud and rebellious resistance to 
the depressing effects of grief or sorrow. She desires her grief to become proud 



1/2 


THE LIFE AND DEA TH [act in, sc. L 


[72. For greefe is proud, and makes his owner stoope] 
in order that both may be firm, resistive, and unyielding. “Thou shall ^ I will 
not go with thee.’^ Here she is uncomplying, aggressive, and rebellious in a ma- 
terial sense, and she is determined that her grief shall likewise rise proud and 
hostile in a moral sense to oppose the ills of fortune or the machinations of her 
enemies. So far from her “stooping to grief” or aught else, a striking manifesta- 
tion of her being proud is evinced in her haughty charge, “bid kings come bow.”’ 
Herr then suggests that the most likely word selected by Shakespeare to express 
the conditions indicated is stiS. and quotes several passages from the Bible in 
illustration of the use of stif in connection with pride as corroboration of his 
emendation. — Mobehly: That is, Grief is a proud and stern master, who bows 
down every one who has to submit to him. — Weight: The Authorized Version 
of Promrhs^ xii, 25, is: ^Heaviness in the heart of man maketh it stoop,’ and 
it naight be thought that Shakespeare had this in his mind; but King John was 
written long before the Authorised Version appeared, and the earlier English 
versions have not the expression 'maketh it stoop.’ While, however, the passage 
cannot be quoted as having suggested the expression, it contains the same idea 
and shows that Hanmer’s alteration arose from a misconception, — ^Vaughan 
(i, 39): I believe that 'stoop’ is an error, but am not fully satisfied with stout. 
I propose for consideration: 'makes his own so tooJ The speaker is giving a reason 
for instructing 'her sorrows to be proud.’ And as her sorrows are 'her own sor- 
rows,’ it is reasonable to show that Grief, being proud, makes what is its own proud 
too. 'Owne so too’ easily became 'owner stoop.’— Page: This passage has never 
been satisfactorily explained. Perhaps it means: I have to bow down to my grief; 
let others bend to it also. It subdues all who come under its influence. In the 
preceding line 'instruct’ signifies command^ direct^ order , as in ‘If thou dost as 
this instructs thee.’ — Lear, V, iii, 29, The line then signifies: I will direct my grief 
to act according to its proud natinre. — ^IvoE John: There is evidently some corrup- 
tion of the text here, and the context leads one to suspect 'stoop’ and perhaps 
'his owner.’ All the suggested emendations wrest some meaning out of the pass- 
age, but not one of them carries conviction with it. Perhaps ‘proud’ is the cor- 
rupt word, which ought to be poor (as suggested by H. A. C., [Text. Noies\) or some 
such equivalent. This would make Constance say in effect: I will~in spite of 
my grief which is apt to bow me down and make me humble~be proud in my 
sorrow and make kings come to me.*— Marshall: The meaning of this passage 
is tolerably plain in spite of the various efforts that have been made to amend it. 
Constance says she will instruct her sorrows to he proud; md adds that grief or 
sorrow is proud, and makes his owner, i. e., the person who owns the grief or sor- 
row, stoop beneath its weight. . . . The metaphor and the various ideas expressed 
are alike rather confused; but this is not unnatural, considering the agitation of 
the speaker, and is quite in keeping with the style of Shakespeare’s earlier plays. — 
Deighton: I think the text is sound. In strict logic, if grief is naturally proud, 
there would be no need to instruct her sorrows to be so; but the sense seems to be, 
that as grief is proud and makes those subject to it bow their heads, so here she 
will teach her sorrows to show themselves so proud that, in their magnitude, others, 
even kings, shall be compelled to pay homage to them. If there be corruption 
I should suppose it to be not in ‘stoop,’ but in ‘proud,’ which, caught from the line 
above, may have ousted some such word as meek. — ^Miss Porter: It is, of course, 
King Grief that makes Constance ‘stoop,’ and she, being his subject, is his owner, 



ACT III, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


173 
73 [70] 


To me and to the Hate of my great greefe, 

Let kings affemble : for my greefe^s fo great, 

That no fupporter but the huge firme earth 75 

Can hold it vp : here I and forrowes fit, [73] 


73. To me] Ff. To me. Pope, Rowe, 
Cam.+ et cet. 

75. earth] earth [throwing herself 
upon it. Cap. 


76. vp:] up. Wh. i, Ktly, Rife, Neils. 
forrowes] sorrow Pope,-]-) Rann, 
Steev. Var. ’03, ’13, Sing. Dyce ii, iii, 
Huds. CoU. iii, Wh. i, Words. Neils. 


the one who owns the sway, within her, of the mastery of Grief. Therefore she 
stoops, and Grief is proud, as she will instruct her ^sorrows’ also to be. The 
point of the difference made by Shakespeare between the older Constance and the 
Constance of this play consists, in fact, in bowing her beneath the stroke of her 
grief first, and later rousing her against it. Here begins the first stir of her con- 
sciousness against submission to this blow of fate. She stoops, but refuses to obey 
the summons, and thus begins to instruct her ' sorrows’ to assume the dignity of 
‘grief.’ — [The simplest explanation of a passage as involved as this is ever the 
best, therefore let us accept that one which makes Constance, however illogically, 
say That she will not humble herself so far as to go to the kings, but will teach 
her sorrow to show more pride, because grief makes the one suffering from it humble, 
therefore the two kings must come to her. Such seems to be the consensus of 
opinion. I have but a very slight suggestion to offer — ^and with much diffidence 
— ^possibly the word ‘owner’ here is to be taken not in its usual sense of possessor, 
but one who acknowledges or recognizes, as in ‘Two of these fellows you must know 
and own; this thing of darkness I acknowledge mine.’ — Tempest, V, i, 275. With 
this meaning Constance says: The kings must acknowledge her grief, for Grief is 
proud and makes him who recognises it as grief, stoop or bow down before it. — 
Ed.] 

72. his] Cambridge Edd. (Note XV.): In Boswell’s edition (Variorum, 1821) 
the reading ‘its owner’ is derived from a misprint of Johnson, who quotes it as the 
reading of the old editions. Collier incorrectly attributes it to Malone. 

73. State] That is, throne, chair of state. Compare: ‘Our hostess keeps her 
state; but in best time We will require her welcome.’— III, iv, 5. 

75. no supporter but the . . . earth] Malone: Perhaps our Author here 
remembered the description of Elizabeth, widow of Edward IV, given in an old 
book that, I believe, he had read: ‘The quen; sat alone belowe on the russhes, 
aff desolate and dysmaied, whom the Archbisshop comforted in the best maner 
that he coaXdt. ‘^'—Continuation of Eardyng^s Chronicle, [Fol. xlii; ed. Ellis, 
p. 480]. So also in a book already quoted [see note on II, i, 400] that Shakespeare 
appears to have read: ‘All those things when I Joseph heard tydings of, I tare 
my head with my hand, and cast ashes upon my beard, sitting in great sorrow 
upon the ground.’ — H istory of the Latter Times of the Jewes Cofnmonweale. [Is not 
the custom of even greater antiquity than either of these citations? Compare: 
‘So they sate by him upon the grounde seuen dayes, and seuen nightes, and none 
spake a worde vnto him: for they sawe that the griefe was very great.’ — Job, 
ii, 13 (Geneva Vers.). — ^Ed.] 

76. sorrowes] Capell (I, pt ii, p. 126): [As] for the change of ‘sorrows,’ who 
perceives not in that a greater energy than in its singular — sorrow? and it is besides 




THE LIFE AND DEATH [act ill, sc. i. 


174 

Heere is my Throne, bid kings come bow to it. 77 [74I 

77. it] it. Ff, Rowe, Pope. it. [sits down on the floor. Theob. Han. Warb. 
Johns. Var. ’73. Coll. Dyce, Hal. Fie. it. [She sits on the ground. Exit Salis- 
bury. Wh. i. it. [Throws herself on the ground, Var, ’78 et cet. 

a repeating of what the speaker throws out in 1. 71; the change's classical air 
should be no argument for it in an author who made not classics his model. — 
M. Mason {Comments, etc., p. 156): A slight corruption has here destroyed a very 
beautiful image. There is no poetical reader that will not join with me in read- 
ing: 'Here I and sorrow's sit.' — [I am loath to be excluded from such goodly com- 
pany as Mason indicates; but I fear I must exclaim with Touchstone, changing 
but the pronoun, 'Truly, I would the gods had made me poetical’; I do not under- 
stand his 'beautiful image.' — Ed.] — Malone {Var., '85): I believe the author 
meant to personify sorrow, and wrote, 'here I and Sorrow sit’; which gives a more 
poetical image. The transcriber's ear might easily have deceived him, the tw-o 
readings, when spoken, sounding exactly alike. Marlowe had before our Author 
introduced the same personage in his Edward II: 'While I am lodg'd within this 
cave of Care, Where Sorrow at my elbow still attends,' [ed. Dyce, vol. ii, p. 258. — 
In his own edition, five years later, Malone appended to the foregoing note: ‘In 
this conjecture I had once great confidence; but a preceding line, "I will instruct 
my sorrows to be proud,” now appears to me to render it somewhat disputable.^ 
—Had Malone also, perhaps, not discovered that in this reading he had been 
anticipated by Pope? (see Text. Notes). — ^In regard to the personification of sorrow, 
suggested by Malone, Vaughan pertinently remarks (i, p. 39): Tf sorrow were 
a personality, surely the throne to be bowed to would not be that of Constance 
exclusively, but rather that of Sorrow alone, or with her.' — Ed.] — Walker {Crit.^ 
i, 234) : The interpolation of an x at the end of a word — ^generally, but not always, 
a noun substantive — is remarkably frequent in the Folio. Those who are con- 
versant with the MSS of the Elizabethan age may perhaps be able to explain its 
origin. Were it not for the different degree of frequency with which it occurs in 
different parts of the Folio — being comparatively rare in the Comedies (except, 
perhaps, in Winter^s Tale), appearing more frequently in the Histories, and be- 
coming quite common in the Tragedies — ^I should be inclined to think it originated 
in some peculiarity of Shakespeare's handwriting. [Among others Walker quotes 
the present line as an example of this interpolation.] 

77. Heere ... to it] Gildon (p. 340): There is a considerable Part of the sec- 
ond Act lost of this Piece, it containing only two pages, which are so well adorn'd 
with the w^ell-drawn passion oi Constance^ih2± we are obliged to fortune that it 
is not lost with the rest. Her passion in the first Scene of the Third Act is like- 
wise just and masterly, and well worthy our perusing with Care. — Shortly after 
the appearance of Pope's edition Theobald published his volume Shakespeare 
Restored, wherein he showed the many faults both of omission and commission 
in the work of his predecessor. In the Appendix (p, 159) Theobald says: 'The 
Editor (who tells us that in the oldest Folio Edition, where the Acts and Scenes 
are first distinguish'd, they were divided according as they play'd them, often 
where there was no pause in the action, or where they thought fit to make a breach 
in it) has sometimes taken care to regulate the Shufflings and Transpositions of 
the Scenes, and rectify the injudicious Divisions of the Acts. But this part of 
Criticism does not display itself thro' the whole Work. I shall subjoin one Passage 



ACT III, SC. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


m 


[77. Heere is my Throne, bid kings come bow to it] 
for example, in which he seems to have employed none of this skill in marking the 
division of an Act^ viz., the end of the Second Act of King John. ’Tis true he errs 
here in following the old Copies ... by contradicting them.^ [Here follows a 
description of the situation at this point; and the quotation of 11. 73-77.] Tt is 
evident, I think, beyond contradiction, that Constaniia [sic] here, in her despair, 
seats herself upon the Floor of the Stage. And can she be supposed immediately 
to rise again, only to go of and end the Act decently? And if she does not, how 
can the Act end here? There is but one other method for it; and that is, of the 
foremost flat-scene shutting her in from the sight of the audience, an Absurdity 
never once practised by Shakespeare. In the very next scene which follows, and 
stands as the first Scene of the Third Act, the Kings are introduc’d, and Con- 
stancia is likewise upon the stage, and speaks within eight lines of the Scene’s 
beginning. We must therefore either suppose an Uiiity of the two scenes, and that 
they come in to her so soon as she sits down on the Floor; or rather (which I think 
has been an Opinion of long standing) that an intermediate Scene or two have 
been lost, whereby we cannot now be certain how the Act ended; and that an 
Hiatus in Manuscripto ought to be mark’d to signify the imperfection.’ — ^Pope 
(ed. ii.) appended to his last volume a list of Various Readings^ Guesses, Ssrc., which 
was in reality an attempt to answer many of the accusations of carelessness made 
by Theobald. The sarcastic sneer is evident in nearly all of Pope’s comments, 
particularly so in that dealing with the foregoing, where he says: ‘He thinks this 
Act ends wrong, and that some Scene follow’d which is lost. ... It seems to be so, 
and it were to be wish’d the Restorer could supply it.’ — ^To this challenge Theo- 
bald, in his edition, thus replied: 'To deserve this great man’s thanks I’ll venture 
at the task; and hope to convince my readers that nothing is lost; but that I have 
supplied the suspected chasm only by rectifying the division of the Acts. Upon 
looking a little more narrowly into the constitution of the play, I am satisfied 
that the third Act ought to begin with that scene which has hitherto been accounted 
the last of the second Act; and my reasons for it are these: The match being con- 
cluded, in the scene before that, betwixt the Dauphin and Blanch, a messenger is 
sent for Lady Constance to King Philip’s tent, for her to come to Saint Mary’s 
church to the solemnity. The princes all go out as to the marriage; and the Bastard 
staying a little behind, to descant on interest and commodity, very properly ends 
the Act. The next scene then, in the French king’s tent, brings us Salisbury de- 
livering Ms message to Constance, who, refusing to go to the solemnity, sets herself 
down on the floor. The whole train returning from the church to the French king’s 
pavilion, Philip expresses such satisfaction on occasion of the happy solemnity 
of that day that Constance rises from the floor, and joins in the scene by entering 
her protest against their joy, and cursing the business of the day. Thus, I conceive, 
the scenes are fully continued and there is no chasm in the action, but a proper 
interval made both for Salisbury’s coming to Lady Constance, and for the solemni- 
zation of the marriage. Besides, as Faulconbridge is evidently the Poet’s favourite 
character, it was very well judged to close the Act with Ms soliloquy.’ — ‘This 
whole note,’ says Johnson, ‘seems judicious enough; but Mr Theobald forgets 
that there were, in Shakespeare’s rime, no moveable scenes in common play- 
houses.’ — Did Johnson forget, however, that this was an expedient which Theo- 
bald particularly declared absurd and one of which he did not accuse Shakespeare? 
— Steeven’s love of mischief, I think, prompted him to ask: If there were no scenes 



1/6 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act III, sc. i. 


[77. Heere is my Throne, bid kings come bow to it] 
capable of being shifted, why did Shakespeare himself mention shifting scenes, 
as in Eenry V: Chorus^ Act II: ‘ Unto Southampton do we shift our scene.’ Steev- 
ens must have known that Johnson was quite correct; but the subject of moveable 
scenery is one which concerns the general history of the Stage, and is not in any 
way germane to the present discussion. — Malone declares Theobald’s division 
and rearrangement 'is certainly right.’—R. G. White strongly condemns Theo- 
bald’s change, and makes this scene the second of Act II. In explanation he says: 
‘Theobald’s notion, that to end the Act decently Constance must rise and go off 
the stage, is as little worth attention as his remark about the "flat scene.” In 
Shakespeare’s day there were no flat scenes; and that the curtain should fall upon 
Constance as, drawing her boy to her breast, she seats herself upon the ground, 
will certainly be considered by stage-managers and dramatic critics not only a 
“decent,” but a very impressive manner of using the situation and closing the 
Scene. In the phraseology of the modern stage it presents a very fine tableau.’ 
‘With regard to the “chasm in the action,” and the “proper interval” for Salis- 
bury’s “coming to Lady Constance,” Theobald and his followers seem to have 
forgotten, first, the relative situation of places and personages, and next, when 
a King sends an Earl to bid a Princess to a royal marriage, at least time enough is 
to be allowed for the messenger to perform his office and return. The Kings, 
just at the gate of Anglers, are about to go, in such “unprepared pomp” “as haste 
win suffer” to St Mary’s chapel, to celebrate the marriage; a “speedy messenger” 
is required to summon Constance to the ceremony, and the Earl of Salisbury 
undertakes the office. He has only to go to the French King’s tent, just outside 
the walls of the town; and he leaves the gates at the same time that the royal 
parties enter them. The Bastard’s soliloquy gives him time to reach the French 
King’s tent, and there, at the opening of the next scene, we find him, having, as 
we learn from Constance’s exclamations, just delivered his message. She refuses 
to be present at the marriage and sits enthroned in sorrow upon the ground. Salis- 
bury returns with her answer; the preparation for the marriage and the ceremony 
itself take place between the Acts, without her presence; and the third Act opens 
with the entrance of the newly allied Kings and the newly married pair, — 
Philip naturally being host in his own land, and introducing his daughter-in-law 
to his pavilion, where, of course, the moody Constance is found with Arthur. 
But, according to Theobald’s disarrangement of the order of the original copy, 
at the very time when Salisbury delivers his message to Constance, summoning 
her to the solemnization of the marriage, the ceremony has already taken place; 
and she has hardly refused to be present at it when the royal trains enter the 
tent, which Salisbury has little more than reached, although since he left them 
they have made some hasty preparation for the marriage, gone to Saint Mary’s 
Chapel in the town, had the ceremony performed, and come thence to the very 
place whither their “hasty messenger” was sent! Theobald might know no better 
than this, but Salisbury did; for his last speech, when Constance tells him to return 
without her, and before she sits upon the ground, is, “Pardon me, madam, I may 
not go without you to the Kings”; which shows his consciousness that the cere- 
mony awaited his return, and which is made ridiculous by the immediate entrance 
of Philip with Blanch as his daughter-in-law. The interval between the Acts 
is necessary, as Theobald remarks, for the solemnkation of the marriage, but 
clearly not for Salisbury’s coming to Constance; and the marriage takes place 



ACT III, SC. i.] 


OF KING lOHN 


177 


[77. Heere is my Throne, bid kings come bow to it] 
between the Acts according to either arrangement. It is noteworthy that although 
the exits at the ends of Acts and scenes are marked with particular care in the 
Folio, none is directed after Constance’s last speech in this scene; which supports 
the belief that on Shakespeare’s stage the curtain fell as she sat upon the ground. 
With the third Act, too, according to the original division, comes in a new ele- 
ment of dramatic interest: the power of Rome in the person of Pandulph appears 
upon the scene, which hitherto has been entirely occupied by the conflicting inter- 
ests of France and England, John and Arthur. A break in the action is therefore 
required by that unity of dramatic interest, which seems to have been the great 
principle upon which Shakespeare constructed his dramas. Neither history nor 
the old King John aids us in determining this question. For no such events as those 
which occupy the second Act of this play and the first scene of the third Act took 
place; Blanch having been espoused in England and brought solemnly over to 
France to be married, and Pandulph not having been appointed legate until five 
years after the espousals. In the old play Constance and Arthur are present when 
the Citizen of Angiers proposes the marriage; and they remain on the stage during 
its solemnization. This noble scene, unsurpassed in Dramatic literature, is in 
its action no less than its poetry entirely Shakespeare’s.’ — [White’s ‘falling curtain’ 
is, I think, quite as open to serious objection as the ‘flat-scene’ of Theobald; and 
a detailed discussion of the one quite as inappropriate as the other at the present 
time. The following short extract from Lawrence’s excellent volume. The Eliza- 
hethan Playhouse, p. 121, is, however, to the point: ‘At what period the normal 
ascending curtain of today first came into use in the English theater it would be 
diflScult to say. Before one has examined ail the pros and cons one is inclined 
to jump to the conclusion that the period synchronised with the introduction and 
regular employment of scenery, say somewhere about 1664. But the cautious 
investigator, confronted by disturbing data, will hesitate to advance an opinion. 
There is some reason to believe that the double curtains, pulling up on either side, 
were the first employed in the English scenic theater and that the principle obtained 
until at least the second decade of the eighteenth century.’ — Ed.] — Fleay (Introd., 
p. 12): This play is one of those in which the Folio gives us the division in use at 
that date. One heading has, however, dropped, out (Actus Secundus: Scena 
Prima), and hence Act II, scene ii. is headed only Actus Secundus, That the 
second Act should consist only of seventy-four lines is palpably absurd. The 
probability is that the second Act has been greatly abridged for stage purposes; 
and hence arose a confusion in the manuscript as to where the new second Act 
should begin. Various methods have been proposed to set this right. My own 
differs from any other. I have Grant While’s authority for not admitting Theo- 
bald’s unjustifiable interference with the Folio text as to the commencement of 
Act III, but he follows the multitude in reducing Act I. to 270 lines, and crowding 
the French scenes into the second Act. This is not like Shakespeare: he cared 
nothing for change of place during an act; the unity of subject is the only one to 
guide us. The division as I have given the Acts falls thus: I. The Embassy of 
Chatiliion. II. War and Peace. III. The Rupture through Pandulph. IV. The 
Rebeilion of the Barons (on account of Arthur). V. The invasion; French treach- 
ery (revealed by Melun), and John’s death. [Fleay thus makes the Folio’s Act I, 
scene ii. into I, ii. and II, i. The Act II. of the Folio, the present scene, is thus 
with Fleay Act II, scene ii.— ED.|-~Miss Poeter regards Theobald’s division 
12 



178 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act III, sc. i. 


A^lus Ter tins , Sccena prima. 


Enter King lohn, France^ Dolphin ^ Blanch^ Elianor, Philip, 
Aujlria, Conjiance, 

Fran, Tis true (faire daughter) and this bleffed day, [75] 
Euer in France fhall be kept feftiuall : 5 

To folemnize this day the glorious funne 

Stayes in his courfe, and playes the Alchymifl, 7 [78] 


1, A( 5 liis...prima.] Ff. Act III, 
SCENE I. Rowe, Pope, Wh. i, Fie. Act 
III, SCENE n. Han. Warb. Johns. 
Scene continued, Theob. et cet. 

2, Enter...] The Same. Constance 
and Arthur. Enter, from the mar- 
riage,... Wh.i. 

France, ...Philip,,..] Ff.King Philip, 
Lewis, Blanch, Elinor, Faulconbridge, 
and,... Theob. Warb. Varr. Rann. Flour- 
ish. Enter the two kings, and their 
Train; Blanch, Lewis, Elinor, Bastard, 
and... Cap. Ring Philip, Lewis, Blanch, 


Elinor, Philip the Bastard... Rowe et 
cet. 

3. Conflance] Om. Theob. Han. 
Warb. Johns. Var. ’73, ’78, ’8$. and 
attendants. Mai. et seq. 

4. Fran.] K. Philip. Rowe (through- 
out). 

(faire daughter)} fair daughter; 
Rowe et seq. 

7. Alchymifl] alchemist Steev. Var. 
hs, Sing. Knt, Dyce, Hal. Ktly, 
Huds. Cam.-p, Words. Neils. Craig. 


as questionable and suggests the following scenic arrangement to obviate a change 
of scene: ^Constance’s tent may be placed on the ground of the battle-field in 
front of an exit, at the rear of the fore-stage. For this scene it is thrown wide 
open and placed on the slanting rise at the rear, so that the audience may see her 
withdraw within when she dismisses Salisbury; and see her ‘stoop” to the earth 
and sit there prone, crouching on her haunches, in the dignity of her sorrows, 
disobeying the royal summons. Only Arthur, with a double fitness, is with her, 
to draw down the foreflap of the tent upon her woe, and thus Shakespeare has 
cleared his stage while bowing, himself, before the imperious sorrows of the royal 
mother. This arrangement demands the striking out of the present Act division, 
and the transposition of the preceding Sccma Secunda and the present Actus 
Secundum, The righting of a mere misprint of transposition is all that is neces- 
sary to give us the arrangement obviously intended by the FoHo division.’ 

I. Actus Tertius, Scsena prima] The majority of editors have followed Theo- 
bald’s arrangement and made this but a continuation of the preceding scene; 
therefore to facilitate reference the line numbers as given in the Glohe Edition 
are here placed in brackets in addition to the number as in the Folio; in ail cases, 
however, the latter are used both in the Commentary and the Text. Notes. — Ed. 

3. Constance] Fleay (Chrcn. of Eng. Drama, ii, 199): [In the Folio stage 
direction] Salisbury and Arthur are not on the stage, as the modern editors, with 
one exception, have them. I am the exception, and deserve praise for my courage, 
or blame for my rashness, in adhering to the version of Shakespeare’s fellows. 

6, 7. the . . . sunne Stayes in his course] Miss E. Phitson (Sh. Soc. Trans., 
i 8S7-“92, p, 352): To men accustomed to think that this earth was the centre of 
the universe, and that the planets rolled in their spheres for no other purpose 





ACT III, SC. i.] OF KING lOHN 


179 


Turning with fplendor of his precious eye 8 

The meager cloddy earth to glittering gold : [80] 

The yearely courfe that brings this day about, 10 

Shall neuer fee it, but a holy day. 

Confix, A wicked day, and not a holy day. 

What hath this day deferu’d? what hath it done. 

That it in golden letters Ihould be fet 14 [85] 


9. glittering gliWring Rowe ii, Pope, 
4 -.' ’ 

11, 12, holy day] Holy-day F. holi- 
day Cam.-f, Bel. Words. Neils. Craig. 

12. A, .day.] Om. Pope. 

wicked day,] wicked day, [rising] 


Cap. 

12. a holy] an holy Theob. Warb. 
Johns. 

day.] Ff, Rowe, day: — Cap. 
day. — [Rising] Theob. et cet. 

14. letters] letter Warb. Johns. 


than to give light and beauty to this aU-important orb, there was no difficulty in 
supposing that the lives and fortunes of the dwellers on this planet were a subject 
of interest to the heavenly bodies. It was a beautiful, if unscientific, theory 
that in important crises of human ajffairs the sun or moon should stand still for a 
while to watch or aid the progress of events. If this theory somewhat diminished 
the dignity of the heavens it certainly had the effect of adding to the glory of man; 
moreover, it served Shakespeare’s purpose in this way to connect the outer world 
with the physical and mental condition of his characters. [Miss Phipson, in sup- 
port of this, quotes the present passage, and also: ^ — the air, which but for vacancy 
Had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too. And made a gap in nature.’ — Ant. 6* Cleo., 
II, ii, 221; likewise from Rom. &• Jul.: *A glooming peace this morning with it 
brings; The sun for sorrow will not show his head.’ — ^V, iii, 305. Compare, V, 
V, 3”6 below. — ^E d.] — ^T. Carter {Sh. d* Holy Scrip., p. 207) compares for this 
idea : * So the sunne abode in the middes of the heaven, and hasted not to goe downe 
for a whole day. And there was no day like that before it, nor after it, that the 
Lord heard the voyce of a man: for the Lord fought for Israel.’— 13 
(German Vers.). 

7. playes the Alchymist] Steevens: Milton has borrowed this thought: 
* — ^Rivers run Potable gold, when with one virtuous touch Th’ Arch-chemic sun 
so far from us remote Produces with terrestrial humor mixt Here in the dark so 
many precious things.’— Parodwe Lost, Bk iii, [ 1 . 609]. — ^Malone: So in our Au- 
thor’s xxxiii. Sonnet; ‘Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchymy.’ — ^Marshall, 
in reference to this last comparison by Malone, sa5’'s: ‘It is always interesting 
to mark any similarity of expression between the Sonnets and the earlier plays, 
in view of the theory that the Sonnets were written by Shakespeare when young; 
this is, certainly, a remarkable one.’ 

9. meager] Beighton: In Mer. of Ven., HI, ii, 104, ‘meagre lead,’ the colour 
of which is much the same as that of earth, is mentioned in connection with ‘gaudy 
gold’; but the meaning of ‘meagre’ is scanty, barren, and both there and here the 
contrast is rather between poverty and richness, than bet'ween the dulness and 
brightness of colour. 

14. golden letters] Ivor John: Probably a reference to the ‘golden number’ 
used in calculating the feast days of the Church.— [Brighton queries, also, whether 
there be not here an allusion to the Bominical Letter and the Golden Number. 



l8o the life and death [act hi, sc. i. 

Among the high tides in the Kalender.a 15 [ 86 ] 

Nay, rather turne this day out of the weeke, 

This day of fhame, oppreffion, periury. 

Or if it muft ftand ftill, let wiues with childe 
Pray that their burthens may not fall this day, [90] 

Left that their hopes prodigioufly be croft; 20 

But ( on this day) let Sea-men feare no wracke, [92] 


16. raiher\ Ff, Rowe, Pope,+, Dyce, 20. crojl] crossed: Mai. et seq. {cross'd, 
Cam.+, Fie. Craig, rather^ Cap. et cet. Ktly). 

17-24. This day, ..change.] Om. Dono. 21. But (on this day)] F3F4. {But on 

18, 19. Or. ..Pray] Ff, Rowe, Pope, this day) Fa. But, on this day, Rowe i, 

Han. Coll, ii, iii, Wh. i. Or,...Pray, Theob. Hal. But on this day, Rowe ii, 

Theob. Warb. Johns. Cap. Varr. Mai. Warb. Johns. Cap. Varr. Mai. Rann, 

Rann, Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt. Or.., Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Coll, i, ii, Huds. 

Pray, Coll, i, Del. Or, ...Pray Dyce, i, Wh. i. Except on this day, Popt,PL2LTL, 

Hal. Ktly, Sta. Huds. Cam.-f, Fie. But on this day Dyce, Ktly, Sta. Cam. 

Words. Neils. Craig. 4 *, Del. Coll, iii, Fie. Huds. ii, Words. 

19. burthens] burdens Steev. Van. Neils. Craig. 

Sing. Knt, Coll. Dyce, Hal. 

I think it is, however, more likely that this refers to the old custom of printing, 
in the Church calendar, the Saint’s days and Holidays in red letters; the terms 
red and gold were nearly synonymous, many examples of which might be furnished, 
as one which seems peculiarly applicable compare: ‘My red dominical, my golden 
letter.’ — Love's Labor's Lost, V, ii, 44. See also note on I, ii, 342 above. — E d.] 

1$. high tides] Steevens: That is, solemn seasons, times to be observed above 
others. — ^IMalone {Supplemental Ohs., i, 168): I do not suppose that the Poet 
used ‘high tides’ as synon3mious to solemn seasons. The meaning, I apprehend, 
is, Why should this day be set down in the calendar, in golden letters, among the 
high tides and other remarkable occurrences, which are distinguished by a special 
mark? The ‘high tides’ are marked in every almanac. — Davies {Dram. MiscelL, 
i, 37): Mr Malone did not reflect that ‘high tides’ bear a very different meaning 
from his intention. They are marks of ruin and desolation, not of prosperity 
and festivity; and, I believe, are oftener found in chronological tables than in the 
rubric of a calendar. [As Malone did not repeat the foregoing note in any sub- 
sequent edition, it may be presumed that he felt the force of this rebuke by Davies 
and accepted Steevens’s explanation. — -E d.] 

16. tume this day . , . weeke] Upton (Crit. Ohs., ed. ii, p. 224): In allusion 
to Job, iii, 3: ‘Let the day perish,’ &c. And v. 6: ‘Let it not be joined unto 
the days of the year, let it not come into the number of the months.’— [Other 
later commentators, notably, Wordsworth, Carter, Eaton, and Wright, have caUed 
attention to the similarity in thought contained in these two passages.— Ed.]— 
Malone: Compare Macbeth: ‘Let this pernicious hour Stand aye accursed in the 
calendar!’ — VJ, i, 133. 

20. prodigiously be crost] SxEEVENS: That is, be disappointed by the pro- 
duction of a prodigy, a monster. So, in Mid. N. Dream, ‘Nor mark prodigious 
such as are Despised in nativity.’ — [V, i, 419. Compare also 1 . 48, preceding scene.] 

21. But (on this day)] Johnson: That is, except on this day. [For other ex- 
amples see, if needful, Abbott, § 128.] 




ACT in, sc.L] OF KING lOHN i8l 

No bargaines breake that are not this day made; 22 [93I 

This day all things begun, come to ill end, 

Yea, faith it felfe to hollow falfhood change. [95I 

Fra, By heauen Lady, you fliall haue no caufe 25 

To curfe the faire proceedings of this day: 

Haue I not pawn’d to you my Maiefty? 

Conjt, You haue beguil’d me with a counterfeit 
Refembiing Maiefty, which being touch’d and tride, [100] 

Proues valueleffe : you are forfworne, forfworne, 30 

You came in Armes to fpill mine enemies bloud, [102] 


23. Thh day] This day, Theob. et seq. 
come] came Pope, 

24. it felfe] it felf, F3F4, Rowe, itsdf 
Warb. et seq. 

change.] changed. Pope, change! 
Theob. et seq. 

25. heauen] Heaven Rowe. 

2g. Maiejly, which] Ff, Rowe, Pope. 
majesty, which, Theob. Han. Warb. 
Johns. Coll. Cam.+, Del. Neils, ma- 
jesty; which Var. ’85. majesty; which, 
Cap. et cet. 

heing\ Om. Pope,+. 


29. touched and] Om. Done. 
tride] try'd F3F4. tried Steev. 

30. valueleffe:] valueless. Coll. Wh. i,. 
Ktly, Sta. Del. Fie. Dono. Neils. 

forfworne,] Ff, Rowe i, Warb. 
Johns, forsworn. Rowe ii, Pope, Theob. 
Han. forsworn! Var. ’73, Neils, for- 
sworn; Cap. et cet. 

31. mine] my F4, Rowe. 

enemies] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 4 “ • 
enemy’s Var. ’85. enemies’ Cap. et cet. 
bloud] blood FsF4. 


22. No bargaines breake] Steevens: In the ancient almanacs (several of which 
I have in my possession) the days supposed to be favorable or unfavorable to 
bargains are distinguished among a number of other particulars of the like im- 
portance. — [Steevens then gives several examples from later plays wherein allusion 
is made to this custom of the ancient almanac makers. This feature was con- 
tinued even down to the eighteenth century, notably in those almanacs issued 
by Coley, entitled The Starry Messenger. See an interesting article on this subject 
by Thomas Wright in Macmillan’s Magazine, Jan., 1863, p. 161. — ^En.] 

28. a counterfeit] Malone: That is, a false coin, A 'counterfeit’ formerly 
signified also portrait. A representation of the king being usually impressed on 
his coin, the word seems to be here used equivocally. 

29. touch'd and tride] Steevens: ‘Being touch’d’ signifies, having touch- 
stone applied to it. The two last words, ‘and tried,’ which create a redundancy 
of measure, should, as Mr Ritson observes, be omitted. — [For this observation 
of Ritson I regret that I am unable to give any reference other than Steevens, 
in whose ed. 1793 it appears for the first time. — ^W alker (Fers., 174), with the 
same end in view — mending the irregularity of the metre — declares that ‘majesty’ 
is here to be pronounced as a dissyllable — -that is, maj 4 y or mashiy. — Ed,] 

30. forswome, forswome] C. & M. Cowden Clarke (Sk Key, p. 629) call 
attention to the ‘remarkable abundance of passages with repeated similar words 
in this play.’ See 11 . 36, 41, and 43 below. I think we might go even further in 
saying that such repetitions are peculiarly characteristic of Constance; of the 
nine passages quoted by the Cowden-Clarkes, seven are from speeches by Con- 
stance. See III, hi, 24, 29, 63 , — ^Ed. 



THE LIFE AND DEATH 


182 


[act III, sc. i. 


But now in Armes, you ftrengthen it with yours. 32 [103] 

The grapling vigor, and rough frowne of Warre 

Is cold in amitie, and painted peace, 34 [105] 


32. yozirs.] Ff, Rowe, Pope,+, Ktly, 
Sta. Fie. Rife, Neils, yours; Cap. et cet. 

34. cold] cool’d Han. clad Cap. 
Rann. 


34. in amitie] inanity J. Beale (N. & 
Q., 4 Nov., 1871, p. 384). inamity Crow- 
down (Ib.j p. 504). 

fainted] faint in Coll. iii. (MS.). 


31, 32. in Armes ... in Armes] Johnson: I am afraid here is a clinch intended: 
^You came in war to destroy my enemies, but now you strengthen them in em- 
braces W. Lloyd (Athenceum, Aug. 24, 1878, p. 240): Johnson^s note is, 
at least, an admission of a certain hesitation about the line as expressive of a con- 
tinued warlike attitude, and thus contradictory to the antithesis between peace 
and war in the next two lines. It is the conviction that the antithesis of the last 
two lines is intended to strengthen that of the two preceding, which suggests to 
me this correction; 'But now unarm’d you strengthen it,^ etc. This correction 
implies that the kings and their attendants, who, in the previous scene, at the 
end of the second Act, were in the warlike equipment befitting an impending con- 
flict in the field, make their appearance in the present scene, on their return from 
the marriage ceremony, which reconciled them, not merely in the meeds of peace, 
but even in something of the appropriate bedizenment of the festive occasion. 
The value of such a contrast to the previous scene even theatrically, and still more 
to the misery of Constance, who has thrown herself on the ground in a rage of 
pride and grief and obstinacy just as the wedding train comes in, is manifest, 
and that it was not neglected by the Author is quite borne out by the general con- 
text. . . . We have to assume that the transliteration by the reader or compositor 
involved a substitution of 'in arms^ for unarmed ^ as the word is spelt elsewhere in 
the Folio. But such an error is moderate enough for printers of any time; it is 
too famihar to many how the occurrence of unarm’d exactly below so similar a 
combination as 'in arms^ in the previous line would be likely to invite confusion. 
Be it frankly admitted that in this case the received reading does not make non- 
sense, especially if care be taken not to throw emphatic stress upon 'arms ^ in either 
line. But assuredly we help ourselves so to a halting antithesis: 'You ctoe in 
arms to spill mine enemies blood; But n6w in arms you strengthen it with yours.^ 
As against this, the contention is that Shakespeare wrote: 'You came in arms to 
spill mine enemies bl6od; But now unarmed you strengthen it with yofirs.* And 
so I leave the case, and so it stands for judgment. 

34. cold in amitie . . . paiinted peace] Gapell (I, pt ii, p. 126): 'Cold,' the 
former reading for clad^ cannot be predicated of either the 'vigour' or 'frown' of 
war without the greatest absurdity; nor is the absurdity lessen'd by the Oxford 
editor's [Hanmer's] — cool’d. It is apparently the speaker's intention to contrast 
the war she had seen with what she sees now; and she could not more efliectually 
do it than by attiring (poetically) the late frowning and vigorous war in the soft 
habits of peace and friendship; 'painted' is peculiarly happy, as including the 
idea of gawdiness and hypocrisy jointly; it is therefore emphatical. — Collier 
{Notes, etc., p. 203) : Why should the epithet 'painted' be applied to peace? What 
propriety is there in it, unless we can suppose it used to indicate hollowness and 
falsehood? The correction in the margin of the Folio, 1632, shows that the ear 
of the scribe misled him: Constance is referring to the friendship just established 



ACT III, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


183 

And our oppreffion hath made vp this league: 35 [106] 

35. hatlii had Fa. Dyce, Hal. Wh. Ktly, Cam.-f, Del. 

league:] league. Pope, Han. Coll. • Words. Neils. Craig. 

between France and England, to the ruin of her hopes, and remarks: ‘The grap- 
pling vigour, and rough frown of war. Is cold in amity, and faint in peace.^ — 
Singer (Sh. Vindicated, p. 85) : Now it appears to me that there is no reason to 
doubt the integrity of the old text, nor has it ever before been doubted. Con- 
stance upbraids Philip with having ‘beguil’d her with a counterfeit.’ He came in 
arms to spill her enemies’ blood, but now his warlilce help against John is cooled 
down into a league with him, — the rough collision of war to the smooth or ‘painted’ 
courtesies of peace. But if any change should be thought advisable it would not 
be the substitution of the Corrector — ‘faint in peace’ — ^but ‘feigns a peace.’ The 
old reading, being perfectly intelligible, should not, however, be disturbed. — 
Staunton: The ingenious annotator of Mr Collier’s Folio would read: ‘faint in 
peace’; but if any alteration be required, of which I am by no means certain, it 
should be simply to read coiVd for ‘cold.’ The meaning seems to be: The vigor- 
ous arms are coil’d in amity, and grim-visaged war become a smooth-faced peace. — 
C. & M. Cowden Clarke: This line appears to us to be a continuation of the 
figurative allusion to a portrait or picture; and that the whole phrase means, ‘the 
contentious vigour of appearance, and threatening warlike visage with which 
you came here on our behalf is now turned into a lifeless pretence of amity and 
simulated peace.’ — C. M. Charnock (1871, N, d* Q., IV, viii, 220): Mr Collier 
says: ‘Why should the epithet ‘‘painted” be applied to peace?’ ... I take it that 
‘painted’ is here used figuratively. Compare Hamlet: ‘Is not more ugly to the 
thing that helps it. Than is my deed to my most painted word.’ — III, i, 53. — 
Elze {Notes, etc., 2n<i Series, p. 58): Mr Collier’s MS. Corrector, whoever he may 
have been, has rightly felt the want of symmetrical agreement between the two 
clauses of the second line, but the remedy by which he has meant to restore it 
seems to be wrong. I rather incline to the belief that Shakespeare wrote: ‘Is 
scolding amity and painted peace.’ Constance reproaches King Philip with per- 
jury, and denounces his warlike preparations as a sham; they are, she says, not 
more dreadful than amity, which scolds a friend, or peace which is painted to look 
like war. The required harmony of the sentence is thus very naturally recovered; 
and I need not dwell on the easy misapprehension by which the words Is scolding, 
fJarticularly when spoken, can be transmuted into ‘Is cold in.’ — [The foregoing 
note, with a few slight verbal changes, appeared first in a communication by Elze 
to the Athenceum, June 22, 1867, and was later included by him among his notes 
contributed to the German Shakespeare Society’s ed. of the Schlegel-Tieck trans- 
lation, under the editorship of Ulrici, in that same year. As this volume of Notes, 
2nd Series, appeared in 1S80, it may therefore, I think, be taken as the final form 
in which he wished it to appear, — Ed.] — ^Vaughan (i, 40): Capell alters ‘cold’ 
to clad; but this does not imply change in the essence of the matter which is changed, 
and ‘fro vms and grapples’ are not objects which require clothing or allow of it. 
I propose with confidence: ‘Is clos’d in amity,’ etc. ‘Closed’ is ended, and there is 
therein a strong tinge, too, of the same sense which is predominant in a passage 
in Jul. Cm., ‘To close In terms of friendship with thine enemies,’ III, i, 202, where 
it seems to be applied to circumstances very like those w^hich the Poet now de- 
scribes. . . . The loss of a single letter and the transposition of a single letter effected 
the corruption of into ‘cold.’ 




184 life and death [act hi. sc. i. 

Arme, arme, you heauens, againft thefe periur^d 
A widdow cries, be husband to me ( heauens ) 

Let not the howres of this vngodiy day 
Weare out the daies in Peace; but ere Sun-fet, 

Set armed difcord ’twixt thefe periurM Kings, 

36. you heauens] you Heavens Rowe. 
ye heavens Pope,-!-* {ye heavens Var. 

’ 73 ). 

Kings^] kings! Cap. et seq. 

37, cries cries; Cap. et seq. 

me (heauens)] Ff. we, Heav'nSy 

Rowe, me, heaven! Pope,+ ipte, heaven! 

Var. ’73). me, heavens, Fie. me, heav- 

' 36. Arme, arme, you heauens] Matthews (p. 98): [Constance’s] later out- 
breaks are hysteric, even if they are the result of maternal devotion. She is 
superb in mother-love and eloquent in high-sounding words; but her temper is 
painfully shrewish and she revels in her opportunities for vehement protest. Her 
violence therefore detracts not a little from the pathos of her plight, and even from 
the appeal of her heartfelt plaints. Overdone as they seem to us now, her swell- 
ing invectives, excited by a natural emotion, must have been grateful to the boy- 
actor entrusted with the part (possibly the same youthful performer who was soon 
to be entrusted with Katherine in the Taming of the Shrew), — [Pleasant as this 
last conjecture may be in contemplation, I fear that the cold, hard facts of dates 
make it very unlikely. There was an interval of at least ten years between the 
first performance of King John at the Theatre in Shoreditch and Tam, of Shr, at 
the Globe; the company had likewise undergone many changes in personnel dur- 
ing that period — Ed.] 

37. A widdow cries] Grey (i, 283): An allusion to Psalm Ixviii, 5: ‘He is father 
of the fatherless, and defendeth the cause of the widows.’ — ^Watson (p. 136): 
Compare: ‘Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child; if thou afflict them 
in anywise, and they cry at all unto Me, I will surely hear their cry.’ — Exodus, 
xxii, 22. — Carter (p. 208) also quotes this passage from Exodus, and likewise the 
following from the Apocryphal book Judith: ‘O God, O my God, heare me also 
a widow.’ — ^xiv, 4. [Carter’s design is to show that the many scriptural parallels 
throughout the plays prove a familiarity, on the part of Shakespeare, with the 
Genevan Version of 1560, rather than the Bishop’s Bible of 1568 . — ^Ed.] 

39. Sun-set] Fee AY reads ‘sun set’ on the ground that Shakespeare pronounces 
sunset always for the noun. 3 Henry VI: II, ii, 116, not by Shakespeare, has 
sunset (noun). So has Chettle, Death of Robert, Earl of Huntington, [ed. Haz.- 
Dods., viii,] p. 294. — ^Rolfe: Perhaps Fleay is right. The only other passages 
in which the noun occurs are Sonnet Ixxiii, 6, and Rom, b* JuL, III, v, 127. — 
Marshaxl: I had altered ‘sun-set’ to sun set before I saw that Mr Fleay had 
made the same suggestion. In Rom, JuL, III, v, 127, 128: ‘When the sun 
sets, the air doth drizzle dew; But for the sunset of my brother’s son,’ &c. There 
we have sun sets and the noun sunset coming close together, the accent being in the 
first case on sets, and in the second on sun, [Marshall also quotes the line from 
Sonnet ixxiii, already cited by Rolfe.] 

40. Set armed discord] Johnson: Shakespeare makes this bitter curse effectual. 


ens! Cap. et cet. 

39. daies] day Theob. et seq. 

Sun-fet] sun set Fleay, Anon. ap. 

Cam. ii. 

40. armed] armM Dyce, Huds. ii, 
Fie. Words. 

Kings,] kings! Cap. et seq. 


Kings, 36 [107] 

[no] 

40 



ACT m, sc. i.] 


OJ^ KING JOHN 


185 

41 [II2I 


Heare me, Oh, heare me. 

Aujl, Lady Conftance^ peace. 

Conjl. War, war, no peace, peace is to me a warre: 

O LymogeSj O Aujlria, thou doft fhame 
That bloudy fpoyle: thou flaue, thou wretch, y coward, 45 [115] 


41. Heare me,] Hear me! Coll. Sing, 
ii, Wh. i, Ktly, Huds. Craig. 

Oh, heare me.] Ff, Rowe i, Fie. 
O, hear me! Cap. Oh hear me! Rowe ii. 
et cet, 

42. peace.] peace! Coll. Sing, ii, Dyce, 
Hal. WF. Ktly, Sta. Cam.-|-, Del. 
Craig. 

43. War, war, no peace,] Ff, Rowe, 


Pope, 4 *, Fie. War! war! no peace! 
Var. ’73 et cet. 

44. Lymoges,] Lymoges! Var. ’73 et 
seq. 

Aullria,] F2F3, Cap. Anftria, F4. 
Austria! Pope et cet. 

45, coward,] coward! Dyce, Hal. Cam. 
-4, Words. Neils. Craig. 


43. War, war, no peace] Bucknill {Mad-Polh, etc., p. 276): When Constance, 
unobserved before, rises from the ground amidst the congratulating court, with 
the dignified and solemn denunciation of kingly treachery, one of the finest pos- 
sible dramatic effects is produced with the simplest means. Her eloquence through- 
out this scene is magnificent. The interests even of kingdoms seem below its 
lofty aim. The truth of kings, and, as a minor term, the truth of all other men, 
is counterfeit. The invocation to the Heavens, that they should arm for her 
and be husband to her, and set discord betwixt these perjured kings, is the climax 
of eloquence. To Austria’s entreaty, ‘Lady Constance, peace,’ she replies in 
utter forgetfulness of all miseries except her own: ‘War! War! no peace!’ No 
idea of the Pythoness, or of any woman inspired by good or evil influences, ever 
represented a more ecstatic state of eloquent emotion. The Poet’s own repre- 
sentation of inspired insanity, Cassandra in Troilus b‘ Cressida, is tame and indis- 
tinct in comparison: ‘Cry Trojans cry! Lend me ten thousand eyes And I will 
fill them with prophetic tears, — [II, ii, loi]. 

43. O Lymoges, O Austria] See note II, i, 8 . — ^F. Victor-Hugo (iii, 460): 
This confusion of two historic characters, which is found also in the older play, 
was without doubt a tradition of the English stage, a popular tradition which, in 
attributing an odious rdle to a member of the house of Austria, authorized a num- 
ber of hostile allusions to that perfidious enemy of England. 

45. thou slaue, thou wretch] Davies {Dram. Miscell., i, 37): This vehement 
charge of perfidy, cowardice, perjury, and every species of villainy, which is con- 
cluded with the most stinging reproach and contemptuous raillery, requires the 
utmost skill of the speaker. Mrs [Theophilus] Cibber’s voice was so happily 
modulated by a most accurate ear that every maternal word in this uncommon 
burst of indignation was impressed so judiciously and harmoniously upon the 
audience that they could not refrain a loud and repeated testimony of their ap- 
probation. But part of the pleasure to be obtained from this scene must be owing 
to the corresponding behaviour of Austria; if he does not contribute to the general 
deception by feeling the reproaches of Constance, the vigour of the sentiments 
will be w^eakened, and the intention of the author disappointed. The character 
of Austria is very unamiable; and Mrs Cibber, when the play was first in rehearsal, 
could not easily prevail on Winstone to make Austria appear as odious to an audi- 
ence as he ought. Winstone was an actor of singular skill in two or three parts: 




THE LIFE AND DEA TH [act in, sc. i. 


1 86 


Thou little valiant, great in villanie, 46 [ii6] 

Thou euer ftrong vpon the ftronger fide; 

Thou Fortunes Champion, that do^ft neuer fight 
But when her humourous Ladifliip is by 

To teach thee fafety : thou art periurM too, 50 [120] 

And footh’ft vp greatneffe. What a foole art thou, 

A ramping foole, to brag, and (lamp, and fweare, 

Vpon my partie : thou cold blooded flaue. 

Haft thou not (poke like thunder on my fide? 

Beene fworne my Souldier, bidding me depend 55 [125I 


46. little valiant] little-valiant Del. 
villanie,] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 

Fie. villany! Theob. et cet. 

47. fide;] side! Var. ’73 et seq. 

48. Fortunes] Fortune's Rowe. 

50. f^ply'] Rowe, Pope, Han, 

Fie. safety! Theob. et cet. 

51. art] wert Lettsom. Huds. ii. 

52. foole,] fool, — Hal. 


52. and fiamp] to fiamp F4, Rowe, 
Pope,+ (--Var. '73). 

53. partie:] party! Cap. et seq. 

cold blooded] cold-blooded Rowe et 

seq. 

54. fid^^] side, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Cam.“f“* 

55. Souldier^ Ff, Rowe, Pope, 4 ", 
Cam. 4 ” j Fie. Neils, soldier? Cap. et cet. 


he was as honest and awkward a country booby in John Moody, in the Provoked 
Husband, as the author designed him; and, in Ben Jonson^s Downright, [Every 
Man in his Humour,] he made an excellent grotesque picture of abrupt plain-dealing 
and unfashionable simplicity. ... It was impossible for any man long to resist 
the persuasive manner of Mrs Cibber; Winstone fully answered her idea of Aus- 
tria’s character. 

51. sooth^st vp] Wright: That is, flaiterest. Compare: ‘You soothed not, 
therefore hurt not.’ — CorioL, II, ii, 77. ‘Up’ is emphatic, as in IV, iii, 142. See 
Holland’s Plutarch, Morals, p. 86: ‘These parasites (I say) whose toong (as one 
said verie well) will be walking so soone as men have washed their hands, and be 
readie to sit downe to meate, cogging and soothing up their good masters at everie 
word.’— -[Collier quotes in illustration Lodge, Fig for Momus, 1595, ‘To wink at 
follies and to sooth up sins.’ — Satire i.; but this is not a parallel at all; ‘sooth up’ 
there means to smooth or gloss over, which it could not possibly mean here. (See 
Craigie, N. E. D,, s. V. soothe, vb. 6 b.) — ^IvoR John compares Greene, Friar 
Bacon, 1594*. 'This is a fairing, gentle sir, indeed To soothe me up with such 
smooth fiatterie.’ — I, iii, 21, 22. A somewhat better illustration than that from 
Holland’s Plutarch, as it is nearer the date of the present play. — Ed,] 

52. ramping] Wright: ‘Ramping’ is suggested by the lion’s skin which Austria 
wears, and is a proper epithet of the lion, in the sense of tearing, pawing. So in 
5 Henry VI: V, ii, 13: ‘Under whose shade the ramping lion slept.’ — ^IvoR John: 
T!hatis, wildly gesticulating, Cotgrave gives: ^Grimpement: a climbing, crawling, 
creeping, ramping, running upwards’; and, 'Crimper: to ramp.’ ‘Lion rampant’ 
in heraldry ought therefore to mean a lion climbing, and this is just the attitude 
of the lion’s ‘rampant’ given in Woodward and Burnett’s Heraldry, i, plate xxi. 
It would require little imagination, however, to deem this the representation of 
a lion seeking whom he might devour, and there is no doubt that in this speech of 
Constance ‘ramping’ bears the meaning of rushing wildly about. 



ACT III, SC. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


187 
56 [126] 


Vpon thy ftarres, thy fortune, and thy llrength, 

And doft thou now fall ouer to my foes? 

Thou weare a Lyons hide, doff it for fhame, 

And hang a Calues skin on thofe recreant limbes. 

AuJ^ O that a man fliould fpeake thofe words to me. 60 [130] 
FMl, And hang a Calues-skin on thofe recreant limbs 


$6. ftrengthj] Lf, Cam.-}-, Fie. Neils. 
strength? Rowe et cet. 

S7‘ foes] foe Fs. 

58. weare] ivears F4. wear^st Rowe. 
wear Pope et seq. 

Mdej] F4. hide? F2F3, Rowe, 
Pope, hide; Fie. hide! Theob. et cet. 

59. Calues skin] Calves-skin F4, Rowe, 
Pope,+. calfs-skin Cap. et seq. 


60. Jhould] would Fope,-^, Var. ’78, 

’8s. 

we.] me! Theob. et seq. 

61, 62. Phil. And. ..thy life!\ Om. 
Dono. 

61, 63. Calues-skin] F3F4, Rowe, 
Pope,-}-. Calves skin Fj, Fie. calfs- 
skin Cap. Var. ’73 et seq. 


59. Calues skin] Sir John Hawkins: When fools were kept for diversion in 
great families, they were distinguished by a calf’s-skin coat, which had the but- 
tons down the back; and this they wore that they might be known for fools, and 
escape the resentment of those whom they provoked with their waggeries. In a 
little penny book, entitled The Birthy Lifcy and Death of John Franks^ with the 
Pranks he played though a meer Fooly mention is made in several places of a calf’s- 
skin. In ch. x. of this book Jack is said to have made his appearance at his 
lord’s table having then a new calf-skin red and white spotted. This fact will 
explain the sarcasm of Constance and Faulconbridge, who mean to call Austria 
^fool. — Steevens: I may add that the custom is still preserved in Ireland; and 
the fool, in any of the legends which the mummers act at Christmas, always appears 
in a calf’s or cow’s skin. [Steevens quotes four passages from the old play 
Beguiled, wherein reference is made to a ‘calf’s skin’ as the garb of the fool or 
jester.—ED.J—RixsoN {Remarks, etc., p. 81): It does not appear that Constance 
means to call Austria' a as Sir John Hawkins would have it; but she certainly 
means to call him a coward, and to teh him that coif s skin would suit his ‘recreant 
limbs’ better than a lion’s. They still say of a dastardly person that he is a 
calf hearted fellow; and a run-away schoolboy is usually called a great — 
Maxone: The speaker in the play [WfZy Beguiled] is Robin Goodfellow. Per- 
haps, as has been suggested, Constance, by clothing Austria in a ‘calf’s-skin,’ 
means only to insinuate .that he is a coward. The word ‘ recreant ’ seems to favour 
such a supposition. — [Ritson is, I think, undoubtedly right; it is the cowardice of 
Austria to which Constance refers, not his qualification for a fool or jester.— En.] 

60. O that a man ... to me] Dyce: I am rather surprised that the commen- 
tators, in their rage for discovering parallel passages, should have overlooked the 
following one in Sydjiey’s Arcadia: ‘O God (cried out Pyrocles), that thou wert 
a man that vsest these words vnto mel’^ — lib. hi, p. 315, ed. 1598. — Gervinus 
(p. 369): The old play makes Faulconbridge in this scene in love with Blanche; 
Shakespeare judiciously omitted this trait, that the Bastard’s judgment, which 
should guide us in all these matters, might not in any way be injured by personal 
interest; his fierce attack upon Austria, in the spirit of the enemy Constance, is 
thus the wholly pure expression of honorable disgust at unnatural alliances, aye, 
of joy at their interruption, and of design in their dissolution. 



i88 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act m, sc. i. 


AuS* Thou dar’fl not fay fo villaine for thy life. 62 

Phil. And hang a Calues-skin on thofe recreant limbs. [132I 

62. dar’fi] darest Cam. Glo. Cla. 62. Jo villaine] fo. Villain jF 4. 

Huds. ii. 

63. And hang . . . limbs.] After this line Pope inserts the following twelve 
lines from the Troublesome Raigne: 

Aust. Me thinks that Richard’s pride and Richard’s fall 
Should be a precedent to fright you, Sir. 

Bast. What words are these? how do my sinews shake? 

My father’s foe clad in my father’s spoil! 

How doth Alecto whisper in my ear; 5 

Delay not Richard, kill the villain strait, 

Disrobe him of the matchless monument, 

Thy father’s triumph o’er the savages — 

Now by his soul I swear, my father’s soul, 

Twice will I not review the morning’s rise, 10 

Till I have tom that trophy from thy back, 

And split thy heart, for wearing it so long.’ 12 

In justification of his interpolation Pope says: *What was the ground of this 
quarrel of the Bastard to Austria is nowhere specify ’d in the present play; nor is 
there in this place or the scene where it is first hinted at (namely, the second of 
Act II.) the least mention of any reason for it. But the story is, that Austria^ 
who kill’d K. Richard Cmur-de 4 ion, wore as the spoil of that Prince a Lion’s 
hide which had belong’d to him. This circumstance renders the anger of the 
Bastard very natural, and ought not to have been omitted. In the first sketch 
of this play (which Shakespeare is said to have had a hand in jointly with WUliam 
Rowley) we accordingly find this insisted upon, and I have ventured to place a few 
of those verses here.’ — [On the question of Shakespeare’s joint authorship of the 
Troublesome Raigne^ see note I, i, i.] — ^Theobald (who also inserted these lines) 
says: *As the verses are not bad, I have not casheer’d them; tho’ I do not con- 
ceive them so absolutely essential to clearing up any circumstance of the action, 
as Mr Pope seems to imagine, . , , ^‘The ground of this quarrel is nowhere specified- 
in the present play.” This is the Editor’s assertion; but let us examine how well 
it is grounded. In the very beginning of the 2nd Act, the Dauphin, speaking of 
Austria to young Arthur, says: '^Richard, that robb’d the lion of his heart. . . . 
By this brave Duke came early to his grave.” To which Arthur replies: **God 
shall forgive you Coeur-de-lion’s death, The rather that you give his offspring 
life.” Is not this a sufificient ground for Faulconbridge’s quarrel to Austria? It 
may be objected, Faulconbridge is not present to hear this. But, what if he be 
not? So the audience be informed duly of the circumstance, the fact was too- 
notorious to suppose Faulconbridge did not know of it. The ground of his quarrel 
is fairly implied in that knowledge; and the Poet’s art, perhaps, better shown 
(if we were to contend the point) to let tlie information come from any other 
mouth than that of Faulconbridge. But then to a second material point.’ [Here 
follows the last part of Pope’s note objecting to the omission of the fact that Aus- 
tria was wearing Coeur-de-lion’s robe of a lion’s skin.] ‘But is it omitted? Or, 
else, ’tis but begging the question. In the 3d Act, when Lady Constance per- 



ACT IIIj SC. i.] 


Ojr KING 10 BN 


189 


[63. And hang a Calues-skin on those recreant limbs] 
ceives that Austria has abandon’d her interest, she says to him: “0 LymogesI 

0 Austria! thou dost shame That bloody spoil. Thou wear a lion’s hide! doff it, 
for shame.” Now Faulconbridge is present here, and sees Austria thus habited. 
But before, in the 2nd Act, where Faulconbridge begins to quarrel with Austria, 
let us attend to their dialogue: ^^AusU What the devil art thou? Faulc. One 
that will play the devil, sir, with you. An’ he may catch your hide and you alone.” 
But may it not here again be objected that though Faulconbridge saw Austria 
clad in a lion’s hide, yet he might not know it to be the very hide which was 
worn by K. Richard, Tiis Father? But to put that point out of all doubt, let us 
only hear what Lady Blanch immediately replies: “O well did he become that 
lion’s hide, That did disrobe the lion of that robe.” I submit it, therefore, whether 
these lines have not been inserted rather arbitrarily than necessarily. Upon the 
whole, as Mr Pope has generally been unfortunate in his criticisms, so he is no 
less unhappy in his diligence, when he would aim at giving a reason for what he 
does.’ [In his second ed. Theobald retains the inserted lines, and omits entire 
any mention of Pope’s note or his own objections to it. Hanmer, Warburton, 
and Johnson follow Pope’s text. — Ed.] — ^Johnson: To the insertion of these lines 

1 have nothing to object. There are many other passages in the old play of great 
value. The omission of this incident, in the second draught, was natural. Shake- 
speare, having familiarised the story to his own imagination, forgot that it was 
obscure to his audience; or, what is equally probable, the story was then so popular 
that a hint was sufficient at that time to bring it to mind, and these plays were 
written with very little care for the approbation of posterity. — Capell (voL i, 
pt ii, p. 126) : After the arch rejoinder of Richard to a sort of challenge of Austria’s 
( 1 . 62), they who look into any of the four latter moderns [Pope, Theob., Han., 
Warb.] will find Richard and Austria both in a different vein; that of the former, 
one they have never seen him in yet, nor ever will do; but in the lines that follow, 
which the second modem pick’d up in the Quarto, or pick’d out of it rather; for 
a speech of twenty-four lines is reduc’d to ten, changes made in those ten, and 
another place found for them, the speech from which they are taken coming in 
before the summons to Angiers, [I, ii, 216]. We shall give the reader the speech, 
and a speech before it, as the inserter has given them (marking briefly their changes, 
and the garblings of one of them) and then leave him to his reflections. [Here 
follow the lines as given by Pope]. Between ‘spoil’ [ 1 . 4] and ‘How’ [L 5] come in 
three foolish lines, nine after ‘savages’ [1, 8] foolisher than the former, nor does 
the speech end at ‘long’; and ‘all,’ ‘Philip’ and ‘For’ are the Quarto’s expres- 
sions in place of those [in 11 . 2, 6, 9, Sir; Richmd; Now], The cause alleged for 
inserting is as curious as the insertion itself; it were idle to mention it, because 
a step of this sort is to be justified by no reasons whatever; certainly not by those 
that are given; which the most indiligent reader may overturn of himself; which 
are overturn’d by the third modem [Theobald], who (notwithstanding) is one of 
the followers of what himself proves unnecessary, and of what is here prov’d 
absurd.— Steevens objects to the insertion of these lines on the ground that the 
older play was printed in 1591, ‘before Shakespeare appears to have commenced 
a writer.’ — ^Tyewhitt: I cannot, by any means, approve of the insertion of these 
lines from the other play. If they were necessary to ‘explain the ground of the 
Bastard’s quarrel to Austria,’ as Mr Pope supposes, they should rather be inserted 
in the first scene of the second Act, at the time of the first altercation between the 



190 


THE LIFE AND DEA TH [act in, sc. i. 


Iohn,We like not this, thou doft forget thy felfe. [134] 

Enter Pandulph, 65 

64. felfe.] self. Scene ii. Pope. self. Pandulph, attended. Cap. Huds. ii, 

Scene in. Han. Warb. Johns. Words. (After 1, 66 Dyce, Hal. Huds. 

65. Pandulph.] Pandulpho. Johns. ii, Words.) 

Bastard and Austria. But indeed the ground of their quarrel seems to be as clearly 
expressed in the first scene as in these lines; so that they are unnecessary in either 
place; and therefore, I think, should be thrown out of the text, as well as the three 
other lines which have been inserted, with as little reason in Act III, scene ii: 
‘Thus hath King Pichardos/ etc. — ^PvE (p. 141): The insertion of these spirited 
lines by Pope do as much honor to the taste of Pope as the rejection of them are 
disgraceful to the taste of Tyrwhitt. They are so much in the spirit of Shakespeare 
that it is a shame they should be rejected on the chronological authority by Steevens. 
Garrick, whose judgment with regard to Shakespeare is worth that of a million 
such critics as Steevens, always spoke them, and with an energy that always met 
with loud applause.—HALLiWELL: There is great spirit in this addition [from the 
older play], which would no doubt be spoken effectively on the stage by a competent 
actor, but it is impossible to sanction its incorporation into the text, were it only 
that the sentiment is not in consonance with the intention of the dialogue, where 
the Bastard is treating Austria with the greatest contempt quite irreconcilable 
here with an outburst of angry passion; and, moreover, these two speeches do 
not occur in that part of the old play corresponding with the present scene. — 
[BelFs edition, 1773, which purports to give the text of King John as acted at 
Drury Lane, contains these interpolated lines; that they were spoken by Garrick 
we have on the testimony of Pye. J. P. Kemble, whose acting copy was published 
in 1804, wisely omits them; and they do not, therefore, appear in any of the subse- 
quent acting editions, viz.: Inchbald, Oxberry, and Cumberland. — E d.] 

64. We like not this] A notable line, as the only instance where King John 
rebukes that bluntness in Philip which was one of the traits which first attracted 
him.—En. 

65. Pandulph] Oechelhauser {Einfilhrungeny i, 21): The most important 
part among the opponents of John is that of Pandulph, who, moreover, was not 
historically Cardinal of Milan, but archdeacon. It is a finely delineated r61e of 
an intriguer, which is become the typical model for a whole tribe of spiritual 
diplomats. Pride, cleverness, casuistical sharpness, jesuitical cunning, lack of regard 
in the choice even of immoral means, as long only as they lead to the one fixed 
goal, the strengthening and widening the power of Rome, all these fix a stamp 
upon the r61e, while the mantle of religious hypocrisy covers all. The character 
appears in its most unpleasant phase in that passage, Act III, sc. i, where Pan- 
dulph demonstrates to King Philip the lack of guilt in his broken pledge~a com- 
panion picture to Richard^s casuistry in Henry VI. The cold, unfeeling Italian 
foresees that John will do away with Arthur; this inhumanity shah further his 
own plots; beyond this for him it is of no import. Action, bearing, and speech, 
wherein at times the linguistic sharpness of the diplomat and intriguer predominate 
over the pathetic softness of the pritest, must give individual life and complete 
the figure typical of a man who overrides all things in his life’s task. Pandulph 
should be represented as a man of ripe years and must always be accompanied 
with a follondng of a Prince of the Church. It must also be noted here that the 



ACT m, sc. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


19I 
66 [135] 


70 

[140] 


75 

[145] 

78 [147] 

66. of] from Var. ’85. 73. and,..perforce] Ff, Rowe, Pope,-|-, 

67. Haile] Ff. Hail! Huds. i. Hail, Cam.4-, Dono. Neils. and,.„perforce, 

Rowe et cet. Cap. et cet. 

heauen;] Ff. Heav’n; Rowe, heaven. 74. Arjkbijhop] FiFa. Arckhijhop 

Pope, heav’n! Theob. Han. Warb. F3F4. 

Johns, heaven: — Sing, heaven. GoU. 75. F2F3. See: F4, Cam. ii, 

Wh. i, Huds. heaven! Cap. et cet. Dono. see? Rowe et cet. 

68. is:] is. Cap. et seq. 76. This] This, Cap. et seq. 

69. Millane] Ff, Ktly. Milain Rowe, forefaid] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 

Pope,+. Milan Cap. et cet. Dyce, Hal. Cam.+, Fie. Words. Neils. 

71. Doe. ..name] Do, ...name, Cap. Craig. Aforesaid Theob. et cet. 

Varr. Mai. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, Hal. 78. earthie] Ff. earthy Rowe, Coll, i, 
Ktly, Sta. Fie. Rife, Cam. Glo.Cla. Neils. Pope et cet. 

•;i 2. Church, ...Mother,] chufch...moiher to Interrogatories] to Interrogaro- ’ 

Pope, Han. ties T 4. to interrogatories, M.^. 

73. F3F4, Rowe, Varr. Sing. Knt, Ktly. f interrogh- 

Pope,-]-. toriesFh. 

Cardinals of that period did not wear red hats, these were first given them by Pope 
Innocent V. in 1243. 

69. Millane Cardmall] Rolfe: Mrs Clarke’s Concordance has the curious 
misprint 'fair Milan cathedral’ in the reference to this passage under ‘Milan.’ 

74. Stephen Langton] Wright: On the death of Hubert Fitzwalter, archbishop 
of Canterbury, 13 July, 1205, the monks elected Reginald the sub-prior, and sent 
to Rome to have the election confirmed by the Pope. The Pope, however, refused 
to confirm it in the absence of letters recommendatory from the King. The 
monks then, fearing the King’s displeasure, begged him to nominate one whom 
they might elect, and he ordered them to vote for John Gray, Bishop of Norwich, 
who was accordingly chosen. But the Pope quashed this election also, ‘and 
procured by his papall authoritie the monks of Canterburie ... to choose one 
Stephan Langton, the Cardinal! of S, Ghrysogon, an Englishman borne’ (Holinshed, 
iii, X71), whom John refused to acknowledge.— [For the corresponding passage, 
in prose, which Shakespeare has turned into such stirring verse, see The Trouble- 
some Raigne, pt i, 11 . 71-78, in AppendiXyp. 4g$.--ED.] 

78. lohn. What, etc.] Johnson: This must have been at the time when it was 
written, in our struggles with popery, a very captivating scene. So many pass- 


Fra. Heere comes the holy Legat of the Pope. 
Pan. Haile you annointed deputies of heauen; 
To thee King lohn my holy errand is: 

I Pandulph, of faire Millane Cardinall , 

And from Pope Innocent the Legate heere, 

Doe in his name religioufly demand 
Why thou againfl the Church, our holy Mother, 
So wilfully doll fpurne : and force perforce 
Keepe Stephen Langton chofen Arflibifhop 
Oi Canterbury from that holy Sea: 

This in our forefaid holy Fathers name 
Pope Innocent, I doe demand of thee. 

lohn. What earthie name to Interrogatories 



192 


THE LIFE AND DEATH [act hi, sc. i. 


[78. lohn. What earthie name to Interrogatories] 
ages remain in which Shakespeare evidently takes his advantage of the facts then 
recent and of the passions then in motion, that I cannot but suspect that time has 
obscured much of his art, and that many allusions remain yet undiscovered, which 
perhaps may be gradually retrieved by succeeding commentators.— -Birch (p. 254): 
The answer of John to the Legate shows Shakespeare no Roman Catholic, and would 
be applauded to the echo by the audience of the theater and the occupants of the 
throne of England. Though in character and in the mouth of a villain, we must 
allow that Shakespeare spoke here in his own person, and that he uttered the senti^ 
ments of England. [In reading the various passages from Birch’s Enquiry into 
the Religiof^ and Philosophy of Shakespeare, it should ever be borne in mind that 
the author, -while declaring in his preface that his Enquiry was strictly impartial, 
nevertheless), seems at times actually to endeavor to twist some phrase or speech 
into an evikent example of a lack of religious belief on the part of Shakespeare 
himself, although it be one of his creations who utters words quite consistent to 
character.— -Ed.] — Oechelhauser (Einfiihrungen, i, 9): The behaviour of John 
reaches its Highest point of interest for the audience in his unsurpassable dismissal 
of the Papall Legate. Shakespeare has here given one of those immortal examples 
of his genius, which recognised, indeed, divinely foresaw, equivocation as the 
governing principle, the evident end and aim. Almost three centuries have elapsed 
since he hurled these annihilating words against Rome, and yet today it is hardly 
possible to describe or stigmatize the way and purpose of Papal politics more clearly 
or sharply than has Shakespeare in these undying words.— Gold win Smith {Mac- 
millan’s Maga., Jan., 1889, p. 234): Where the scene of his play is in Roman 
Catholic times or countries Shakespeare takes the religious environments and 
costume with the rest, and introduces friars as ministers of good. This is hardly 
more significant than his introduction of the gods of Rome in Jul. Cces., or of weird 
heathenism in King Lear, where it harmonizes with the character of the piece. 
That he had any latent hankering after Roman Catholicism, or that his heart was 
on the Papal side of the great quarrel between the nation and the Pope, it is impos- 
sible to believe in face of such lines as these — [ 11 . 78-91]. Much with what the 
author does not agree may be written dramatically; but there are things which 
even dramatically he who does not agree with them will not write. Any one who 
had the slightest leaning to the Papal side would have manifestly outraged his 
own feelings by penning these lines. The passage on Indulgences [11. 96-98] has 
a sting in it if anything in Shakespeare has. The exposure of the false miracles 
of healing at St Albans (2 Henry VI: II, i.) may be cited in the same connection, 
if the passage is by Shakespeare, as we believe it is. — Bowden (p. iiS): These 
lines have indeed furnished quotation for anti-Catholic declamations of Prime 
Ministers, Lord Chancellors, and Archbishops in our own time. Their value as 
representing Shakespeare’s opinions, however, assumes a different complexion if 
we apply one of Aristotle’s canons of criticism, and inquire not what the speech 
is in itself, but who spoke it, and with what end it was spoken. The language 
and action of a hero may be supposed to represent the Poet’s type of what is good 
and noble, and therefore what he would wish his own language and action to be. 
The sentiments of a scoundrel, on the other hand, are intentionally drawn as false, 
base, and treacherous, and therefore presumably not those of the Poet’s ideal self. 
Now we are quite content that Shakespeare should be judged by this rule through- 
out his plays, but this rule must be uniformly applied. According to some critics, 


ACT in, sc. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


193 


[78. lohn. What earthie name to Interrogatories] 
if Henry V. speaks as a Catholic, this is only from dramatic necessity, or because 
the Poet is following Holinshed^s Chronicles^ and such speeches therefore give us 
no clue as to his own judgment. Does John, however, rant in true Exeter Hall 
fashion, or Duke Humphrey malign Cardinal Beaufort, or an added scene by 
Fletcher in Henry VIII. extol Elizabeth, there we have the Poet himself. With 
such a method of argument Shakespeare can be proved as rabid a bigot as these 
writers desire. But if the canon be impartially applied, an opposite result is, we 
believe, attained. In this particular instance is John a hero or villain? . . . His 
bold defiance proves mere bombast; he ends by eating his words. He humbles 
himself to the dust before the Legate, and as a penitent receives the crown again 
at his hands, and his kingdom in fief from the Pope. John’s antbCatholic speeches, 
then, no more prove Shakespeare a Protestant than the fool’s saying in his heart 
* There is no God’ makes David a sceptic. — [Although the following extract from 
Carter {Sh. Puritan and Recusant, P- 175) does not refer specifically to the present 
passage in King John, yet, as it bears upon the question of Shakespeare’s attitude 
towards Roman Catholicism, it may fittingly follow the foregoing remarks. — Ed.] 
Hn 1597 Shakespeare bought the house in New Place, and engaged in numesous 
business transactions in the neighborhood of Stratford, and at the request of a 
number of his friends invested some £440 in the purchase of the tithe leases of 
Stratford, Bishopton, and Welcombe. In view of the oft-asserted Roman Cathol- 
icism of the Shakespeares, this purchase of the tithe leases is noteworthy. Would 
a Papist have been allowed to invest his money in this way? And if allowed by the 
Prelatist and Puritan opponents, would the Roman Catholic Church have held 
him guiltless in thus trafiScking in sacred things? For in the eyes of devoted Papists 
this was spoliation with a vengeance. William Shakespeare may, no doubt, be 
a great gain to their Church in Roman Catholic eyes, but surely the heroism of 
Papists during the long dark years of Elizabeth is something far better and nobler. 
The Romish church records are full of splendid examples of heroism for con- 
science’ sake during these truly awful times; hedges, byeways, secret chambers, 
dungeons, and martyrdoms bore witness to the devoted constancy of the old Faith. 
But what can be said of the claimed Roman Catholicism of the Shakespeares? 
It was a disgrace to the annals of the church of Rome, and it is a very wide charity 
indeed which, after a knowledge of the undeniable acts which they committed in 
antagonism to Papistry, stEl claims to number them among the Faithful. If 
John Shakespeare was a Roman Catholic, he was a dishonest hypocrite of the 
worst t3rpe, and one whom it is exceedingly difficult to believe could have continued 
so long in the affections of the Stratford people. In the face of his official and 
private acts and undoubted leadership among his fellow townsmen, it is incom- 
prehensible how anyone could dub him Papist. It is only on the lines of Puritan- 
ism that his career becomes intelligible and inspiring, and all the facts of his life 
seem to marshal themselves in proper order, and show him to be a man of sterling 
honesty and integrity, a sufferer for conscience’ sake, and one who would dare 
every risk of imprisonment and death rather than be coerced into what he con- 
sidered ceremoniaHsm and dishonesty.’— Bulthadpt {Dramaiurgie, p. 76): It 
may be said that he knows but little of Shakespeare’s Historical plays who would 
take perjury, false-swearing, and the bottomless villainy of low self-seeking as 
characteristic of this scene, of this play, and also as due to Papal influence. Just 
as Philip of France and the blustering Austria break their words, so likewise does 
13 



THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act III, sc. i. 
79 [148] 


194 

Can tail the free breath of a f acred King? 

79. tafi] ¥2. tafte F3F4, Rowe i, tash Theob. et cet. 

Vaughan, tax Rowe ii, Pope, Han. free'breath]free-hreath¥^¥^^¥.o'wt. 

the Dauphin Louis in this same play from quite different motives; so too does 
York, Warwick, and Clarence in the other Histories whenever it seemed good and 
if interest so urged them. Finally, let us accept the fact that John proves himself 
as the most impossible personality for the exploiting of an anti-Romanist idea, 
since he, for all his bravado and loud-sounding words, completely humbles himself 
to the Church, just as Henry did at Canossa, and so of this ‘historical’ or ‘poHticaF 
idea nothing remains. Assuredly these speeches and attacks are neither ‘historic’ 
nor are they dramatic; they have only a tendency that way. — Belden (Tudor 
Sh., p. 119) : Here is voiced for the first time in this play the feeling of patriotism 
which animates all Shakespeare’s Histories. That it should come from the mouth of 
John, who is, after all, a weakling and a villain, is unfortunate for dramatic effective- 
ness, but was imposed by the conception of the character in the original play, and 
indeed by the historic material itself. Later Salisbury and the Bastard become 
the exponents of this sentiment. 

78. What . . . Interrogatories] Malone: That is, what earthly name sub- 
joined to interrogatories can force a king to speak and answer them? — ^H. C. C. 
(Notes Queries^ 1864, III, vi, 323): The true or do verhorum of this sentence is 
this: ‘What earthly name can task the free breath of a sacred king to interroga- 
tories?’ . . . The interrogatories which the Cardinal threatens are those which 
were, and are, familiar to the Canon Law. To those interrogatories the name of 
the ecclesiastical ordinary, by whose authority they were to be administered, 
never was subjoined, but was always prefixed; and the same practice is adhered 
to in this country whenever the ecclesiastical jurisdiction is curially exercised. 
When the necessity for this exercise arises the Ecclesiastical Court cites the 
delinquent to answer to ‘articles, heads, positions, or interrogatories, touching and 
concerning his soul’s health and the lawful correction and reformation of his 
manners and excesses’; and to these interrogatories the name of the ordinary is 
prefixed, though they cannot, under 13 Car. II, c. 12, 3, 4, be actually adminis- 
tered now to the defendant; and are therefore only pleadings in the suit. 

78. earthie] Collier: Modern editors, since the time of Pope, have substituted 
earthly for ‘earthy,’ an alteration not required. [‘Not required!’ remarks 
Dyce, p. 90 — ‘In Richard II: I, iii, vol. iv, p. 125, Mr Collier gives: “ 0 ! thou, 
the earthly author of my blood”; and observes in a note, “The Folio pf 1623 reads 
earthlyT It happens that in the latter passage only one old copy has the mis- 
print, which in the former passage all the old copies exhibit. In Massinger’s 
Duhe of Milatij Act v, sc. ii, Sforza says to the Doctors, according to the old eds., 
“0 you earthy gods, You second natures,” &c.; but in a copy quarto, 1623 (now 
in my possession), Massinger has crossed out with a pen, and written 

earthly on the margin.’] 

78. Interrogatories] Fleay: The word is ‘ inter ’gatories’ in Mer. of Few., V, 
i, 298-300, and in AlVs Welly IV, iii, 207; ‘interrogatories’ here and in Cymh, V, 
V, 392. Some editors explain it wrongly; it means questions asked on oath. [For 
the pronunciation as in Mer^ of Van. and .4/^5 Welly compare: ‘You were best 
sweare me on the intergatories .’— of Fevershamy III, 6. — Ed.] 

79. tast] SxEEVENS: The emendation [task; see Text. Notes] may be justified 



ACT m, sc. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


19s 


Thou canfl not (Cardinall) deuife a name 80 

So flight, vnworthy,and ridiculous [150I 

To charge me to an anfwere, as the Pope: 

Tell him this tale, and from the mouth of England j 

Adde thus much more, that no Italian Priefl: 84 [153} 

82. Pope:\ Ff, Rowe* PopPs» Ktly. 84. morcj] Ff, Rowe, Pope,-f > Cam. 

Pope, Pope et cet. Glo. Cla. Neils, more: Fie. Craig. 

83. England,] England Pope, 4 “- more ^ — Cap. et cet. 


by the following passage: *How show’d his tasking? seemed it in contempt?’ — 
1 Benry /F; V, ii, 51. Again, in Henry V: That task our thoughts concerning 
us and France.’ — I, ii, 6. [The words ‘task’ and tax appear to have been once 
almost identical; compare the once common vulgarism ax for ask, Cotgrave has 
s. V. ^Taille: A taske or tax, a tallage, tribute.’ Here, I think, ‘task’ {tast is 
manifestly a misprint) is used in the sense assigned by Murray {N, E, D., s* 
V. task, 2.), to force, put, or set (a person) to a task; to impose a task on; to assign 
a definite amount of work to. Thus John asks of the Cardinal, what earthly power 
can assign a task to the free speech of an anointed deputy of heaven. — Ed.] 

83. England,] Capell (I, pt i, p. 127) substitutes for the comma a colon, which 
in his system of punctuation has almost the force of the full stop, and, comment- 
ing upon his change, says: ‘If the editor is not deceived in his feelings, this passage’s 
spirit is improved by its pointing: “England” has but a comma in some copies, 
in others no stop at ail; the latter making only two sentences where three were 
design’d (for the comma is of ancient editions), but not sufficiently noted for want 
of a fuller stop.’ 

84-86. no Italian Priest * . . supreame head] Lord Campbell (p. 77) : Shake- 
speare clearly shows that whatever his opinion might have been on speculative 
dogmas in controversy between the Reformers and the Romanists, he spurned the 
ultramontane pretensions of the Pope, which some of our Roman Catholic fellow 
subjects are now [1845] too much disposed to countenance, although they were 
stoutly resisted before the Reformation by our ancestors, who were good Catholics. 
At the same time it is clear, from Shakespeare’s portraiture of Friar Lawrence 
and other Roman Catholic ecclesiastics who do honor to their church, that he was 
no bigot, and that he regarded with veneration all who seek to imitate the meek 
example of the divine founder of the Christian religion. — Boswell-Stone (p. 56, 
foot-note) : Perhaps the parallel speech in The Troublesome Raigne was an anachro- 
nistic development of an opinion held by a contemporary of John, a theologian 
named Alexander the Mason, who asserted ‘that it apperteined not to the pope 
to have to doo concerning the temporall possessions of any kings or other poten- 
tates touching the rule and government of their subjects.’ — ^Holinshed, vol. iii, 
p. 174, col. i, 1 . 7. — Rushton {Sh. and Lex Scripia, p. 60) quotes from a statute, 
24 Henry VITI, cap. 12: ^ Where by divers sundry old authentick histories and 
chronicles, it is manifestly declared and expressed, that this realm of England is 
an Empire, and so hath been accepted in the world, governed by one supreme head 
and king, having the dignity and royal estate of the imperial cro^^m of the same.’ — 
R. Simpson (Sk. Soc, Trans, ^ 1874-75, p; 439): feelings of Shakespeare about 

the Church perhaps come out in his representation of Churchmen. There is 
none good among them from Pandulph to Cranmer, except the Bishop of Carlisle 



196 


THE LIFE AND DEATH [act hi, sc. i. 


Shall tythe or toll in our dominions: 

But as we, vnder heauen, are fupreame head, 
So vnder him that great fupremacy 


85. dominions] dominions Fie. 

86. heamn\ Heaven Rowe,+* 
fupreame] supreme Fie. Words. 

87. So..Mm..Jupremacy] Ff,+. So 


85 
I155] 
87 

supremacy^ Cam.+. So^..Mm^ 
^..supremacy, Theob. et cet. 

87. him] it Rowe ii, Pope, Han. 
heaven Coll, ii, iii. (MS.). 


in Richard II. and Rutland’s tutor in $ Henry VI. All the prelates are Mac- 
chiavellians; all the inferior clergy are conjurors or impostors. . . . Did Shakespeare 
colour these pictures, and (as in Beaufort’s case) alter and exaggerate history for 
the condemnation of the historical church which was established in the times he 
represented, or of the Church which was present to his experience? . . . One thing 
is certain, that the only reproach which he allows himself to make against the 
old religion is connected with the political pretensions of the Papacy. All the 
libellous satire against monks and nuns with which the old King John is filled 
was cleared away by him. He gives us quite natural and touching pictures of the 
piety (superstitious in the eyes of his generation) of Richard II. and Henry V. In 
fact, he is careful not to outrage any one’s religious conscience, however severe 
he may be on religious politicians. This abstinence on his part places him in 
the strongest possible contrast to all Ms brother playwrights, who all spent their 
deepest-sought wit in ridiculing and outraging the religion which they did not like, 
whether that was Popery or Puritanism. In this characteristic we may trace 
not the influence of Essex, for in Shakespeare it was natural and independent of 
any political views; but a frame of mind wMch would naturally incline him to take 
the part of the unlucky Earl. — Snider (ii, 303): TMs is a most emphatic state- 
ment of the political significance of the Reformation, wMch brought about the 
subordination of Church to State. Pandulph, on the contrary, asserts ecclesias- 
tical supremacy, absolves the nation from its allegiance, takes away kingship; in 
fine, he seeks to destroy utterly the civil relation between monarch and subject. 
[This speech and the next by King John, with Pandulph’s denunciation, have been 
taken as arguments both for and against Shakespeare’s adherence to Roman 
Catholicism; for the views of various writers on this point, see AppendixySh. and 
Roman Cat}u)licism.---'E;Di] 

87. him] Collier {Notes, etc., p. 203): For heaven [the MS. correction] the 
invariable reading has been ^him.’ Nevertheless, satisfactory as this emendation 
may appear, it is possible that the original reading (before the passing of James I, 
against the use of the name of the Creator on the stage) was God, for ‘heaven’ 
in 1 . 86, and then ^him,’ in this line, might be proper enough. When heaven was 
substituted for God the repetition of heaven in the next line became necessary. — 
Singer {Sh. Vind., p, 86): The substitution of heaven for ‘him’ is a piece of super- 
erogation entirely unwarranted and uncalled for. — R. G. White (Sk. Scholar, p. 
300): Evidently ‘heaven’ in 1 . 86 should be God, as is shown by the pronoun in 
tMs line. The correction is made in Mr Collier’s folio. The original word was 
evidently changed to ‘heaven’ on account of the statute of James I, while the cor- 
responding change in the pronoun was neglected. ... Mr Collier’s folio gives 
heaven for ‘Mm’; but needlessly and, indeed, injuriously, as it destroys the parallel 
between the king’s tenure of power and Ms exercise of it. TMs is another marked 



ACT III, SC. i.] OF KING JOHN 


Where we doe reigne, we will alone vphold 88 [157] 

Without th’affiflance of a mortall hand: 

So tell the Pope, all reuerence fet apart 90 

To him and his vfurp^d authoritie. I160] 

Fra* Brother of England^ you blafpheme in this. 
lohn. Though you, and all the Kings of Chriftendom 
Are led fo groffely by this medling Prieft, 

Dreading the curfe that money may buy out, 95 

And by the merit ofvilde gold, droffe, duft, [165] 

Purchafe corrupted pardon of a man, 

Who in that fale fels pardon from himfelfe: 98 [167] 


89. hand:] hand, Popej+. 

90. Pope^ Ff, Rowe, Pope, 4 *, Cam. 
H-, Fie. pope; Cap. et cet. 

reuerence] revWence Pope,-]-. 
95-100. Dreading,.,cherijh,] Om. 
Dono. 


96. And] And^ F4, Rowe et seq. 
buy Warb. 

lilde] F2F3. mid Fie. vile F4 et 
cet. 

()%, from] for Var. ’85 (misprint). 


evidence of the conjectural nature of the corrections in that folio. The corrector 
having made the necessary change of ‘heaven’ [1. 86] to God^ either from the sight 
of an actor’s copy of his part, from memory, or from conjecture, went on to im- 
prove the text by guesswork, and struck from it the very word which gave force 
to the passage. [It is never a pleasant task to call attention to the errors of others; 
but in justice to Collier, it must be pointed out that the major part of White’s 
objection is founded on a misreading of Collier’s note. Collier says, as does White, 
that the word ‘heaven’ in 1. 86 was evidently Godj but does not give this as one of 
the MS. corrections as White asserts, and as he repeats in the note in his edition. 
White follows Theobald’s punctuation of this line; not that of the Folio. — En.] 

90. all reuerence set apart] Hudson (ed. ii.) That is, ‘All reverence to Mm and 
his usurp’d authority being set apart,’ 

91. vsurp’d authoritie] Warner (p. 36): These words were like sweet honey to 
the Virgin Queen, Elizabeth, to whom undoubtedly Shakespeare paid his court 
in writing them. For she had been through exactly such a papal struggle as was 
now to follow in the case of John. She felt the ‘supreme headship’ of the Church 
as keenly as any who preceded or followed her. Largely through her personality, 
which was a sort of concretion of the English thought and English feeling of the 
day, England was an armed camp of religious and patriotic soldiers. It was an 
intense age, and the ideal England of Elizabeth, of her nobles, of her commoners 
was just that exploited in Shakespeare’s line: ‘That no Italian priest Shall tithe 
or toll in our dominions.’ 

93. Though ... Christendom] Collier: This line shows how Shakespeare 
sometimes altered merely a word in order to render a prose passage verse; in the 
old King John it stands: ‘Though thou and all the princes of Christendom,’ etc. 

98. Who . . . sels ... . from himselfe] Belius: The Pope while selling a pardon 
granted for a bribe, brings upon himself, by this sale, the need for his own Absolu- 
tion. — [Deighton likewise so interprets this; but such a meaning seems, I think, 
inconsistent with the preceding lines; John says, You are afraid of a curse which 



198 the life and death [act III, sc. i. 

Though you, and al the reft fo groffely led, ’ [168] 

This iugling witchcraft with reuennue cherifti, 100 

Yet I alone, alone doe me oppofe [170] 

Againft the Pope, and count his friends my foes. 

Pand, Then by the lawfull power that I haue, 

Thou fhalt ftand curft,and excommunicate, 

And bleffed ftiall he be that doth reuolt 105 [174] 


99. al] Fi, 

100. witchcraft] witch-craft Ff, Rowe, 

reuennue] revemie Sta. Fie. 

101. Yeti] Ff, Rowe,+, Cain.+, Fie. 
Dono. Neils, Craig. Yet /, Cap. et cet. 


loi. alone do^ F2. Cam.+j Del. 
dloney do F3F4 et cet. 

104. curji] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Varr. Rann. cursed 
Cam.+. cursed Han. et cet. 


can be bought off with gold, and so purchase pardon from a mere man who sells 
you a pardon which he himself grants; that is, anyone can buy a pardon /row the 
Pope. — Ed.] 

103. the lawfull power] Hnnocent III. grounded his temporal pretensions on 
the right which he possessed of judging of sin, and of the obligations of oaths. . . • 
At first, indeed, the popes contented themselves with spiritual censures; but in 
an age when all were remodelled after the feudal jurisprudence, it was soon ad- 
mitted that princes by their disobedience became traitors to God; that as traitors 
they ought to forfeit their kingdoms, the fees which they held of God; and that to 
pronounce such sentence belonged to the pontiff, the vice-gerent of Christ upon 
earth. By these means the servant of the servants of God became the sovereign 
of the sovereigns, and assumed the right of judging them in his court, and of trans- 
ferring their crowns as he thought just.’ — Lingard {Hist, of Englandy vol. ii, p. 326, 
foot-note). 

104. Thou shalt . . , excommunicate] Watson (p. 7): The original of this 
denunciation led to the establishment of Magna Charta; for the Barons, fearful 
that the King would be intimidated by the threat, forced him to sign the great 
charter of the land, the first words of which are: ^The Church of England shall 
be free, and shall have her whole rights and liberties inviolable.’ — [For a graphic 
account of the effects of this interdict on the people and realm, see Hume’s History ^ 
vol. i, ch. xi, p. 489 . — ^Ed.] 

105-110. And blessed . . . Thy hateful! life] Johnson: This may allude to the 
bull published against Queen Elizabeth. Or we may suppose, since we have 
no proof that this play appeared in its present state before the reign of King 
James, that it was exhibited soon after the popish plot. I have seen a Spanish 
book in which Garnet, Faux, and their accomplices are registered as saints. — 
Malone: Hr Johnson is incorrect in supposing that there is no proof that 
this play appeared before the reign of King James. It is mentioned by Meres 
in the year 1598; 'but if any allusion to his own times was intended by the 
author of the old play (for this speech is formed on one in King John, 1591) 
it must have been to the bull of Pope Pius V, 1569. [See Troublesome Raigne, 
in Appendix, p. 493* Both Froude (vol. vi, p. 59) and Haydn {Dictionary of Dates) 
. give the date of Pius’s bull of Excommunication as 1570; so likewise does Meyer 
<p. 77), who says (p. 85): 'No event in Ej^Iish history, not even the Gunpowder 



ACT III, SC. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


199 


From his Allegeance to an heretique, [175] 

And meritorious lhall that hand be call'd, 107 

io7“iio. And. ..life.] Om. Dono. 

Plot, produced so deep and enduring an effect on England’s attitude to the Catholic 
church as the bull of Pius V. Englishmen never forgot their queen’s excom- 
munication. Whenever in later ages men’s minds were stirred up against the 
Roman church, the remembrance of 1570 was enough to justify their implacable 
hatred. When more than a century after the days of the excommunication, the 
excitement roused by the Popish Plot spread throughout the country and fanned 
men’s passions into a blaze, it seemed as though the times of Elizabeth had re- 
turned to warn men against all charity and conciliation. The story of the excom- 
munication, and of the pope who freed men from their oaths, and subjects from 
their allegiance, was a weapon that kept its edge for centuries and effectively put 
a stop to every thought of toleration for the papists.’ — Ed.] — Staunton (Introd., 
p. 392) : Such hypotheses as these [Johnson’s and Malone’s], however, if they do 
little towards establishing the chronology of Shakespeare’s writings, are forcible 
confirmations of the fact that he wrote ^not for an age, but for all time.’ His 
representations are so truthful and life-like that it is the easiest of undertakings 
to find a model whence he may be presumed to have drawn them. He describes 
the ruinous extravagance into which noblemen and gentlemen are seduced in 
equipping themselves for a foreign enterprise, and the arrogant pretensions of the 
Catholic Church in dealing with a rebellious monarch, with such fidelity that 
we seem to be reading a particular relation of whichever individual occurrence of 
the kind our memory first brings to notice. — ^Joseph Hunter (ii, 14) : [This pass- 
age] must forever decide the question whether the Poet, when he wrote it, was a 
member of the Roman Church, or favourable to any scheme for its regaining its 
supremacy in England. Shakespeare, it may be said, is only writing in the char- 
acter of the speaker, as a dramatist ought to do. But if he had been a favourer of 
the system which many in his day would gladly have seen restored, he would not 
have put into the mouth of the representative of the Church a doctrine which the 
enemies of the Church attributed to its, authorities, charged them with encourag- 
ing, while it is a doctrine which strikes at the root of all personal security, and is 
shocking to the common sense of right and wrong. If he had been at all solicitous 
for the honor of the Church, he would have qualified and screened such a sentiment 
as this or, rather, he would have suppressed it altogether; and that he has done 
neither the one nor the other is a plain proof that he did not scruple to expose to 
the execration of the people the darkest parts of the system, and do his part to 
keep in mind that such extreme opinions might be cherished in the Church. If he 
himself secretly approved of them, which we cannot believe, he still would not 
have cared to expose them in all their native deformity. It should be remembered 
that something like encouragement was actually held out to take the life of Queen 
Elizabeth, or, at least, her ministers chose to have it thought so.— Brooee (p. 231) : 
Imagine what Shakespeare’s audience felt when they heard this anathema of death. 
It went home to the heart of the audience. There was not a man in the pit who 
had not heard that Rome had treacherously played for the assassination of Eliza- 
beth, had openly attacked her legitimacy, and urged the Roman Catholics of 
England to throw off their allegiance. I should like to have been in the theatre 
and heard the roar which saluted this dialogue of John and Randulph. 



200 


THE LIFE AND DEATH [act III, SC. i. 


Canonized and worfliip’d as a Saint, io8 [177] 

That takes away by any fecret courfe 

Thy hatefull life. no 

Con, O lawfull let it be 

That I haue roome with Eome to curfe a while, 112 [180] 

108. Canonized] CanonizH Dyce, Fie. Huds. ii. Words. Neils. OA, Ktly. 
Huds. ii, Words. 112. roome] have Pope, Han. Kemble. 

Ill, 112. 0 lawfull. ..a whiUj] Om. a while,] Ff, Rowe, Pope,-{-. 

Dono. awhile. Coll. Wh. i, Del. Fie. Craig. 

III. 0] 0.' Coll. Wb. i, Huds. i, Del. awhile! Dyce, Cam.+, Huds. ii, Words. 
Craig. 0, Dyce, Hal. Cam.+, Fie. Neils, a while! Cap. et cet. 

108. Canoni2red ... as a Saint] These words are an addition by Shakespeare 
to the text of the older play; they seem to be almost an echo of those of Anthony 
TyrrelFs report of the answer of Gregory XIII. on being asked Whether any one, 
who for the benefit of the Church and the delivery of the Catholics from their 
afl 9 [ictions, attempted to destroy the Queen of England, should have for the fact 
his pardon.^ The Pope thus replied: ‘As touching the taking away of that impious 
Jezebel, whose life God has permitted thus long for our scourge, I would be loath 
you should attempt anything unto your own destruction, and we know not how 
our censure on that point amongst her subjects which profess themselves our 
children would be taken; but if you can wisely give such counsel as may be with- 
out scandal to the party or to us, know you we do not only approve the act, but 
think the doer if he suffer death simply for that to be worthy of canonisation.^ 
This was in 1581, and such words must have produced a strong impression upon 
the minds of all men of that time. For the full account of Tyrrell’s mission, see 
Froude, Reign of Elizabethy v, pp. 303-305 . — ^Ed. 

111. O lawfull let it be] Moore Smith: When Constance joins her curses with 
those of Pandulph, she is acting a part unsympathetic to the audience, although 
at the outset of the play she was the injured woman, and John the villain. The 
issues of the play are now confused. 

1 1 2. roome with Rome] Theobald: Mr Pope, in the nicety of his Ear, has, 
against the Authority of all the copies, displaced a jingle here [see Text. Notes]; 
tho’ it is obvious to every knowing reader how customary it is with our Poet, in 
a thousand instances, to play on words similar in sound and differing in significa- 
tion. He repeats the very same conundrum on the two words now before us 
in Jul. Cess., [I, ii, 165]: ‘Now is it Rome, indeed, and room enough.’ — [I have 
given this note by Theobald as a proof that even as late as his time (1733) there 
was no distinction made between the sound of these two words. — Earle (ed. iii, 
p. 165) says: ‘The fashion has not yet quite passed away of pronouncing Rome 
as the word room is pronounced. This is an ancient pronunciation, as is well known 
from puns in Shakespeare. No doubt it is the phantom of an old French pro- 
nunciation, and it bears about the same relation to the French utterance of Rome 
(pron. Rom) that boon does to the French bon. But it is remarkable that in Shake- 
speare’s day the modern pronunciation (like roam) was already heard and recog- 
nised, and the two pronunciations have gone on side by side till now, and it has 
taken so long a time to establish the mastery of the latter. The fact probably is, 
that the room pronunciation has been kept alive in the aristocratic region, which 
is almost above the level of orthographic infiuences; while the rest of the world 



ACT III, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


201 


Good Father Cardinali, cry thou Amen 113 [181] 

To my keene curfes; for without my wrong 
There is no tongue hath power to curfe him right. 115 

Pan, There’s Law and Warrant (Lady) for my curfe. 

ConJ. And for mine too, when Law can do no right. [185] 
Let it be lawfull,that Law barre no wrong: 

Law cannot giue my childe his kingdome heere; 

For he that holds his Kingdome, holds the Law: 120 

Therefore fince Law it feife is perfedl wrong, 

How can the Law forbid my tongue to curfep [190] 

Pand, Philip of France, on perill of a curfe, 

Let goe the hand of that Arch-heretique, 

And raife the power of France vpon his head, 125 

Vnleffe he doe fubmit himfelfe to Rome, 

-Efea.Look’ft thou pale Francelio not let go thy hand. [195] 


1 13. cry ihoti Amen] Ff, Coll. Dyce, 
Huds. Cam.-4-, Neils. Craig, cry thou 
**Amen'^ Hal. Wh. i. cry thou, Amen, 
Theob. et cet. 

11$. power] pow^r FopefA', 

1 17, too,.„ri^ht.] Ff, Rowe i. ioo..,. 
right, Sta. Neils, too;.. .right, Rowe ii. 


et cet. 

1 18. wrong:] wrong. Coll. Wh. i, 
Ktly, Huds. i, Del. Rife, Neils, curse 
Herr. 

12$. power] powW Pope,-}-. 

127-129. Elea. Look^ ft. ..Joule.] Om. 
Words. 


has been saying the name according to the value of the letters. Room is said to 
have been the habitual pronunciation of the late Lord Lansdowne and the late 
Lord Russell. The Shakespearean evidence is from the following passages.* [The 
present line in King John, and that quoted by Theobald]. ‘But in j Henry VI: 
^^Winck. Rome shall remedie this, Warw. Roame thither then.*’ — III, i, 51.’ — 
Wright adds to these the two following passages from Lucrece: ‘So fares it with 
this faithful lord of Rome. . . . For now against himself he sounds this doom,’ 
1 . 715; and, ‘And never be forgot in mighty Rome The adulterate death of Lucrece 
and her groom,’ 1 , 1644. — For further discussion on this point, see Julius CcBsar, 
this ed., p. 41.— En.] 

1 1 7-1 2 2. And for mine . . . to curse] Ivor John: That is, When the law can- 
not see people righted then let no wrongdoing at all be hindered. Law cannot 
give Arthur his kingdom, for John is master of the law; therefore since the law is 
‘perfect wrong,’ how can I be rightfully restrained from cursing. This mixture 
of quibbling with passionate argument is characteristic of this play.— Deighton: 
Here again Constance seems to be using wrong in a double sense: (i) when it is 
out of the power of the law to enforce Justice, let it be considered most truly in 
accordance with the spirit of law that it hinder no wrong (injury) from redressing 
itself; (2) that it hinder no wrong (ill-doing), if it can be called a wrong for me to 
curse. . . . Since law in this instance is in itself the highest injustice (wrong), 
it cannot have the right to forbid my doing what is wrong (cursing John), it cannot 
be so illogical as to forbid my following its own example. 



202 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act in, sc. i. 


Co?^.Looke to that De.uill, left that France repent, 128 [196] 
And by difioyning hands hell lofe a foule 

Auft. King Philips liflen to the Cardinal!. 130 

Baft. And hang a Calues-skin on his recreant limbs. 

Aujl. Well ruffian, I muft pocket vp thefe wrongs, [200] 
Becaufe, 

Baft. Your breeches befl may carry them. 

lohn. Philip, what faifl thou to the Cardinall? 135 

Con^ What fhould he fay, but as the Cardinall? 

Dolph. Bethinkeyou father, for the difference 137 [204] 


128. that Deuill\ Ff, Rowe, ihatj 
devil; Cap. Dyce, Hal. Cam. 4 -, Coll, 
iii, Fie. Huds. ii. that^ devil, Var. ’21, 
Coll, i, ii, Wh. i, Huds. i, Del. Neils. 
Craig, that, Devil! Pope et cet. 

129. And... hands] Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Han. Coll. Wh. i, Huds. i. And...hands, 
Dyce, Cam.-h, Huds. ii, Neils. Craig. 
And, ...hands, Theob. et cet. 

130-134. Aufl. King... them.] Om. 
Dono. 


131-134. Baft. And. ..them.] Om. 

Words. 

13 1. Calms-skin] Ff, Rowe,-!-, Fie. 
calfskin Var. ’85. cdfs-skin Cap. et 
cet. 

limbs.] Limbs, F3. 

133. Becaufe,] Ff, Fie. Because — 
Rowe et cet. 

134. Your] — your Hal. 
father,] father; Pope et seq. 


128, 129. Looke to that . . . soule] Deighton: That is your business, Satan; 
it is for you to take care that France does not repent; for, if he does, you will lose 
a soul which evidently ought to be yours. 

127-148. Wordsworth omits these lines, giving as his justification that: ^They 
add nothing of importance to the dialogue, which is spun out more than enough 
without them; and between quibbling and coarseness, they provoke an exclusion 
which no reader can regret.’ 

132. ruffian I must pocket] Davies {Dram. Miscell., i, 45): The person who 
acted Austria, on the revival of King John at Covent-Garden in 1737, was one 
Boman, a dyer. This actor, in answering Faulconbridge’s repeated insult, whether 
through ignorance, haste, or chance, instead of uttering the reply to Faulconbridge 
as he ought, with a loud vulgar tone pronounced it thus: Well, ruffiun, I must 
pockut up these wrongs.’ The auchence did not observe the impropriety, but 
Walker, in the Bastard, by changing the word ^breeches’ to pockut, imitated 
Roman’s manner, look, action, and tone of voice so archly and humourously that 
he threw the audience into as merry a fit as ever Quick, or Parsons, or any actor 
ever did, in the most comic situation; they were absolutely convulsed with laughter 
for a minute or two, and gave such loud applause to Walker that poor Boman was 
thunderstruck. 

133. Because,] P. Simpson (p. 32) notes this as an example where a comma is 
used, in the Folio, to mark an interrupted speech. 

134. Your breeches . . . them] Steevens: Perhaps there is something pro- 
verbial in this sarcasm. So, in the old play 6 i King Leir, 1605: ‘Mum. Well I 
have a payre of slops for the nonce Will hold, all your mocks.’ — Old Plays, 

voL ii, p. 437]- 



203 

138 [205] 


Act m, sc. i.] OF KING lOHN 

Is purchafe of a heauy curfe from Rome^ 

Or the light Ioffe ol England^lor a friend: 
Forgoe the eafier. 

Bla, That s the curfe of Rome. 

Con. O Lewis, ftand faff, the deuill tempts 
In likeneffe of a new vntrimmed Bride. 


138. /5] Ff, Rowe,+, Coll. Wh. i, 
Huds. i, Cam. 4-, Dono. Neils. Craig. 
Is, Cap. et cet. 

139- friend:] friend. Ktly, Neils. 

141. That j?] Fi. That is Ff, Rowe i. 
Thafs Rowe ii. et seq. 

142-155. Con. 0 Lewis...^zf/.] Om. 
Words. 


140 

thee heere 

143 [209] 

142. O Lewis] Lewis Pope, 4-. 0 

Louis Dyce, Hal. Wh. i, Huds. ii. 

, ■ Jland fafl] stand fast! Coll. Hal. 
Wh. i, Huds. Cam. 4-, Del. Neils. Craig. 

143. new vntrtmmed] new and trimmed 
Theob. Warb. Han. Johns, new up- 
trimmed Sing. ii. (Dyce), Coll, ii, iii. 
(MS.). new-uptrimmM Dyce, Del. 
Huds. ii, Dono. new untrimmhd Fie. 


138. Is purchase . . . Rome] Johnson: It is a political maxim, that kingdoms 
are never married. Lewis, upon the wedding, is for making war upon his new 
relations. 

143. new vntrimmed Bride] Theobald {Sh. Restored, p. 120) : I cannot conceive 
what the Poet is supposed to mean here by ‘untrimmed,’ unless its opposite, as 
I take it, in sense, trim; i. e. , neat, spruce, fine. But I cannot admit it, without 
some proof for conviction, to carry that signification. Again, there is no room 
surely to imagine that the Poet intends to compare the Lady Blanch, as unmarried, 
to a vessel wanting either the proportion of her ballast or rigging, or not being 
eomplete in her trim, bb the sea-phrase is; and therefore calls her ‘untrimmed.’ 
This would be a remote Allusion with a vengeance; and, especially, when it is put 
in the mouth of a woman too. As I profess myself to have suspected the passage, 
so I endeavor’d, as far as an unsupported conjecture or two would go, to reconcile 
it to an intelligible meaning. I say, a conjecture or two, for which I have no war- 
rant or assistance from the copies; and therefore I shall urge them barely as such, 
and leave them to be embraced, or renounced, at pleasure. If it did not depart 
too widely from the present text, to make such a correction reasonable, it is not 
impossible but the Poet might have wrote, ‘a new untamed bride,’ i. e., a Virgin- 
bride. I cannot, indeed, recollect any instance in which the Poet has ever taken 
the liberty of using this epithet in that metaphorical sense; but it is a sense in 
which I am sure he may be borne out, and justified, by the usage of other lan- 
guages. An untamed bride exactly amounts to what the Latins call’d Ffrga 
htdomita; which. I believe they took from the dSdjaatxros of the 

Greeks; that is, a bride tmtasted, urienjoyed. And it will be no new doctrine to 
say that temptation and desire are generally heightened in men by that cir- 
cumstance. But I observe that inw is used by our Author to signify not only 
neat, spruce, &c,, but suhsiantively too, for a peculiar quaintness and elegance of 
Habit. So in x Henry IV: Xame there a certain lord, neat, trimly drest; Fresh as 
a bridegroom,’ [I, iii, 33]. So in Cymbeline: 'Your laboursome and dainty trims,’ 
[III, iv, 167]. And he employs it besides to signify personal beauty, and the hue 
and brightness of colours. So in Venus dr* Adonis: ‘The flow’rs are sweet, their 
colours fresh and trim, But true sweet beauty liv’d and dy’d in him,’ [11. 1079, 
1080]. It is not improbable, therefore, that the passage before us ought to be re- 



204 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act m, sc. i. 


[143. In likenesse of a new vntrimmed Bride] 
stored thus: ‘In likeness of a new betrimmed bride,’ i. e., adorn'd and deck'd with 
charms. It is familiar with our Poet to use the word hetrim in these senses; and it 
is certainly of Saxon derivation; among whom getrymmed signified neat^ fine, 
finished, &c. . . . But if heirimmed may seem to depart too far from the traces of 
the text as it now stands, I’ll propose another correction, that requires but a very 
minute change, and comes up to the sense of the former; As, ‘a new and trimmed 
bride,’ i.*e., of a new bride, and one, as I said before, deck’d with all the charms of 
personal beauty. — [In his edition, which appeared six years later, Theobald adopts 
his third and last conjecture in his text, omitting completely the first, untamed, 
with its signification, and merely mentions as a possible reading the second, be- 
trimmed, offering as an interpretation of the original text that ‘It might indeed 
admit of this explanation: undress'd, ready to go to bed,' and rejects it on the ground 
that ‘it is giving in to an allusion too gross for Lady Constance.’ In his ed. ii. 
even the conjecture ‘betrimmed' is omitted, and the reading ‘new and trimmed’ 
alone admitted as in any way satisfactory. — ^Warburton, in answer to Theobald’s 
objection to ‘untrimmed,’ says: ‘It squares very well with the sense, and signifies 
unsteady. The term is taken from navigation. We say too, in a similar way of 
speaking, not well manned' It is hardly likely, I think, that Warburton was 
acquainted with the remarks on this passage in Theobald’s Shakespeare Restored; 
had he been so, he would doubtless have referred to the fact that Theobald’s re- 
jection of the word trim as a term in navigation here was erroneous. This passage 
is not among those to which reference is made in their correspondence. — Ed.] — 
Johnson: I think Mr Theobald’s correction more plausible than Dr Warburton’s 
explanation. A commentator should be grave, and therefore I can read these 
notes with proper severity of attention; but the idea of trimming a lady to keep her 
steady would be too risible for any common power of face. — [Kenrick, in his 
review of Johnson’s Shakespeare, selects this note as an excuse for a personal attack 
on Johnson, who in his Rreface had found fault with Pope for speaking of the ‘dull 
duty of an editor.’ Kenrick in the same manner takes Johnson to task for speak- 
ing of the necessary ‘gravity of a commentator’; but as the reviewer’s remarks 
in no way help us to a better understanding of the present line their transcribing 
seems hardly necessary. — Ed.] — Grey (i, 284): Shakespeare probably alludes to 
the old legend of the devil’s tempting Saint Dunstan; of whom the monkish writers 
observe that he was tempted by the devil to lewdness, in the shape of"a fine lady. 
— [Grey has, I think, confused St Dunstan with St Anthony. The legends attaching 
to both are, perhaps, more widely known than any others in hagiology. — Ed.] — 
Edwards (p. 150): I am afraid Mr Warburton, with all his gravity here, will be 
found to have made more haste than good speed. Unsteady, which is no great 
recommendation of a bride, cannot square well with the sense; where the speaker 
designs to express a strong and irresistible temptation; but Mr Warburton is 
perpetually out in his philosophy upon this subject. Nor, though the term should 
be taken from navigation (which I see no reason for in this place), does the trim 
of a ship signify its ballast; but its sails, colors, and pendants. . . . Trim here, and 
in many other places, means finery; as in i Henry IV: ‘A certain lord, neat, 
trimly dress’d, Fresh as a bridegroom,’ [I, iii, 33]. The very same image as here, 
‘a new and trimmed bride.’ And from this common signification, it is applied to 
a ship, when she has all her bravery on. And now let Mr Warburton judge whether 
Lady Blanch appeared before such an assembly with or without her trim. — ^Heath 



ACT III, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


20 $ 


[143. In likenesse of a new vntrimmed Bride] 

(p. 226) declares that the reasons given by Edwards in support of Theobald’s 
emendation, ‘new and trimmed bride,’ have convinced him that that is ‘the true 
and genuine reading.’ — Capell (vol. i, pt ii, p. 127): We need only reflect upon 
the situation of the lady that’s spoke of — a bride fresh come from church, and 
upon the influence such a bride may be expected to have upon the person she’s 
join’d to, to be satisfied that the sense put on ‘un trimmed’ (vide Glossary) is a 
true sense, and fitted most to the speaker’s intention; namely, to express a temp- 
tation of the greatest strength possible; as her thought is indelicate, it is convey’d 
in a term of great decency; and yet sufficiently open when its source is discovered. 
[The elucidation in Capell’s Glossary, to which he refers, is as follows: ^unirimmed, 
unman’d: When a ship has her complement of men, and her rigging complete, she 
is said to be in her trim.’ — ^This is practically the same as Warbur ton’s explana- 
tion; it is not after Capell’s usual procedure thus to take a predecessor’s interpreta- 
tion without comment, and although there is evidence throughout his Notes that 
he had seen Warburton’s edition which appeared in 1747, it is not so easy to ascer- 
tain when Capell’s Glossary was prepared; it was published after his death by 
Collins as a part of the first volume of the Notes in 1779. Neither Johnson nor 
Edwards, I think, wholly comprehended the innuendo contained in the last sen- 
tence of Warburton’s note. — E d.] — Steevens: Trim is dress. An untrimmed 
bride is a bride undrest. Could the tempter of mankind assume a semblance in 
which he was more likely to be successful? By Shakespeare’s epithet, ‘ untrimmed,’ 
I do not mean absolutely naked, but: ‘Nuda pedem, discincta sinum, spoliata 
lacertos,’ [Mantuanus, Eclogue i.]; in short, whatever is comprised in Lothario’s 
idea of unaitired [ste Rowe’s Fair Penitent, I, i; works, i, p. 162], ‘Non mihi sancta 
Diana placet, nec nuda Cythera; Ilia voluptatis nil habet, haec nimium.’ [An- 
sonius, Epigram xxxix, 11 5, 6. — ^These classical quotations Steevens obtained, I 
think, from Burton, Anatomy of Melancholy, Part III, sec. ii, memb. iii, subsec. 
iv, where the author treats of Beauty as a Cause of Love Melancholy. Steevens 
adds to these, four other passages from later writers wherein trimmed is used in 
the sense of dressed; such might easily be multiplied, and as both Theobald and 
Edwards have already called attention to this meaning of the word, they need not 
be repeated. Steevens thus continues:] The devil (says Constance) raises to your 
imagination your bride disencumbered of the forbidding forms of dress, and the 
memory of my wrongs is lost in the anticipation of future enjoyment. Mr Collins 
inclines to a colder inteipretation, and is willing to suppose that by an ‘untrimmed 
bride’ is meant ‘a bride unadorned with the usual pomp and formality of a nuptial 
habit.’ The propriety of this epithet he infers from the haste in which the match 
was made, and further justifies it from King John’s preceding words: ‘Go we 
as well as haste will suffer us, To this unlook’d for, unprepared pomp,’ Mr Toilet 
is of the same opinion, and ofliers two instances in which ‘untrimmed’ indicates a 
deshabille or a frugal vesture. In Minsheu’s Dictionary it signifies one not finely 
dressed or attired. Again in Vives’s Instruction of a Christian Woman, 1592, 
pp. 98, 99: ‘Let her (the.mistress of the house) bee content with a maide not faire 
and wanton, that can sing a ballad with a clere voice, but sad, pale, and untrimmed.’ 
— Monck Mason {Comments, etc., p. 156): Warburton’s explanation of this pass- 
age is truly ridiculous, and that of Steevens dso is somewhat ludicrous; I mean 
that part of his note in which he seems to insinuate that by ‘ untrimmed’ Constance 
means naked. To trim means to drm-otd, but it does not signify to clothe; and 



206 


THE LIFE AND DEATH [act iii, sc. i. 


[143. In likenesse of a new vntrimmed Bride] 

‘untrimmed’ may mean unadorned, but it cannot mean unclad; perhaps we should 
read untried, or untrained, or adopt Theobald’s amendment. — ^Malone: I incline 
to think that the transcriber’s ear deceived him, and that we should read as Mr 
Theobald has proposed. [Malone here quotes, in illustration of trim signifying 
spruceness of attire, the three passages given by Theobald in Sh Restored to this 
same purpose, those, namely, from i Henry IV; from Cymbeline and Venus 
Adonis, to these Malone adds: 'Go, waken Juliet; go, and trim her up; Make 
haste; the bridegroom he is come already.’ — Rom, & JuL, IV, iv, 24. Malone 
thus continues:] The freshness which our Author has connected with the word tri?n 
in the first and last of these passages ['trimly dress’d’; 'colours fresh and trim’], 
and the 'dainty trims that made great Juno angry,’ which surely a bride may be 
supposed most likely to indulge in (however scantily Blanch’s toilet may have 
been furnished in a camp), prove either that this emendation [by Theobald] is 
right or that Mr Collins’s interpretation of the word ‘untrimmed’ is the true one. 
Minsheu’s definition of untrimmed, 'qui n’est point orne, — inornatus, incuUus,* 
as well as his explanation of the verb to trim, which according to him means the 
same as 'to prank up,’ may also be adduced to the same point. — Singer (ed. i.): 
Trim is dress. Comptus virgineus is explained by the dictionaries, 'The attyre of 
maydens, or maidenly trimming.’ An 'untrimmed’ bride may therefore mean a 
bride undressed or disencumbered of the forbidding forms of dress. It is, however, 
probable that this term may have been used for a virgin bride, [For this last 
suggestion Singer acknowledges his indebtedness to a note on a line in Chapman’s 
May Day, Act IV, sc. i, as given in vol. iv. of the Ancient Drama, This is the 
title as given by Singer; but the note to which he undoubtedly refers is to be found 
on p. 95, vol. iv. of the supplement to Dodsley’s Collection, which was edited by 
Charles Wentworth Bilke and published in 6 volumes, 1816, with the simple title 
Old Flays, The passage in Chapman’s licentious play, wherein this word occurs, 
need not here be quoted, as Dilke says: 'the indelicate sense in which it is used 
is too" plain to need comment;’ he excuses his having called attention to it on the 
ground that the commentators are not agreed as to the meaning of the word in 
the present passage in King John, He characterises Steevens as the ablest com- 
mentator, but finds his interpretation 'rather forced, and as Constance describes 
Blanch as she then stood before him,- Dilke believes Constance’s meaning to be ‘a 
new and virgin bride.’ He then quotes three other passages wherein this word is 
used, and manifestly can have but one meaning. These are as foUows: Titus 
Andronicus, V, i, Beaumont & Fletcher, The False One, II, iii. (ed. Dyce, 

p. 253); Ibid., The Loyal Suhject, 11 , P« 32); although Dilke quotes 

these passages in full, the last of these only shall be transcribed — ^Theodore is 
describing the ravages of the Tartars and says to Boroskie: 'They would not 
only have abused your buildings, Your goodly buildings, sir, and have drunk dry 
your butteries, Purloined your lordships plate, the duke bestowed on you For 
turning handsomely o’ th’ toe, and trimmed your virgins, Trimm’d ’em of a new 
cut, an’t like your lordship, ’Tis ten to one, your wife too.’ — ^Dyce (Remarks, 
etc., p. 91), after a short summary of the notes in the Variorum of 1821, says in con- 
clusion: 'Let the next editor of Shakespeare merely state that 'untrimmed’ means 
virgin, without any comment, though I now think it right to adduce the follow- 
ing passage, among many others which might be cited. (Here follows the passage 
from The Loyal Subject quoted above.}— -Barron Field, in an article on Some 



ACT in, sc. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


207 


[143. In likenesse of a new vntrimmed Bride] 

Obscure Passages in Shakespeare contributed to the Old Shakespeare Society’s 
Papers, 1847, vol. iii, p. 137, calls attention to a remark by Richardson in his 
‘excellent Dictionary’ to the eSect that ^ untrimmed, in this passage, is only a cor- 
ruption of entrimmed, as unrip is of enrip,^ (Which is, however, rather of phiiologic 
interest than Shakespearean.) . Speaking of Dyce’s interpretation Field says: 
‘There is no doubt, from the passage cited by Mr Dyce, and from another loose 
song in Heywood’s Rape of Lucrece, Act I, sc. iii, that the verb to trim was used 
in such a sense; but I must think it was then always a canting word, just as we 
employ the word to dress in the sense of to chastise. It cannot be supposed that 
the Lady Constance would use the word in a w^anton sense; and in any other 
*Wtrimmed” would bear the same meaning that it does in the following passage 
from the Poet’s Sonnet xviii, namely, undecorated, whereas the argument here would 
require decorated: “And ev’ry fair from fair sometimes declines, By chance, or 
nature’s changing course, un trimmed.” ’ — Field therefore declares that there is 
no doubt that Theobald’s reading is correct. The advice contained in Dyce’s 
Remark was at once accepted by Hudson, one of Dyce's firm adherents; in his ed. i. 
he has merely: ‘An “untrimmed bride” is, no doubt, a virgin bride.’ — Not so, 
Dyce himself, however; in a communication to Notes dr Queries for July 3, 1852, 
Singer says that Dyce proposes for the original reading the emendation uptrimmed, 
with wLich new reading Singer expresses great satisfaction, and Dyce himself, in 
his Few Notes, published in 1857, thus retracts his former views: ‘On the word 
“untrimmed” how have the commentators written! how have I myself written! 
how foolishly all of us! I now see (and with wonder at my former blindness) 
that nothing more is required than the change of a single letter — that, beyond 
the possibility of Shakespeare wrote: “In likeness of a new u^^- trimmed 

bride.” Compare what he elsewhere says of a bride: “Go, waken Juliet; go, and 
trim her upP-^Rom. dr JuL, IV, iv, 24. [Theobald anticipated Malone, and Malone 
anticipated Dyce in this illustration. — ^E d.] So too Marlowe: “But by her glass 
disdainful pride she learns. Nor she herself, but first trimmed up, discerns.”— 
Ovid^s Elegies: iii, 174, ed. Dyce.’ — Singer makes no verbal recantation be- 

yond saying at the end of his communication to Notes dr Queries: ‘It is satisfac* 
tory, by such a simple and undoubted correction, to get rid of heaps of idle babble 
and verbiage about a word that the Poet certainly never wrote, and certainly never 
conceived, with the meaning that some of the commentators would give to it.’ 
In support of this he quotes the lines from the eighteenth Sonnet given above by 
Field.— Singer therefore adopts Dyce’s emendation in the text of his ed. ii, as, of 
course, did likewise Hudson, with no mention in either case of a virgin bride. — 
Collier (ed. i.) accepts the reading of the Folio, although ‘a misprint may be 
suspected here.’ — Verplanck: That is, a virgin bride, for which sense there is 
abundant authority in the old dramatists. — ^Staunton (ed. i.): As ‘untrimmed’ 
is usually conceived to mean unadorned, and the sense appears to require a word 
implying the reverse, we have adopted the happy and unforced emendation of 
Mr Dyce. — ^I bld, (Addenda and Corrigenda, vol. i, p. Ixvi.): I am not at present so 
satisfied of the propriety of Dyce’s ingenious emendation, uptrimmed, as I was 
formerly. In old times it was a custom for the bride at her wedding to 'wear her 
hair unbraided, and hanging loose over her shoulders. May not Constance refer 
to this custom? Peacham, in describing the marriage of the Princess Elizabeth 
with the Palsgrave, says that ‘the bride came into the chapel! with a coronet of 



2o8 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act III, sc. i. 


[143. In likenesse of a new vntrimmed Bride] 
pearle on her head, and her haire dischevelled and hanging down over her shoulders.’ 
Compare, too, Tancrei and Gismunda: ‘So let thy tresses flaring in the wind 
Untrimmed hang about thy bared neck.’ — ^Act V, sc. i. — R. G. White: ‘Trimmed’ 
meant, in Shakespeare’s day, gayly, finely, or, as we even now say, trimly dressed. 
An ‘untrimmed bride’ is, therefore, a bride in deshabille; and in some such condi- 
tion was Blanch on account of her unexpected nuptials, and the haste in which 
they were performed; a consideration which, by the way, disposes of the cor- 
rections ^and trimmed’ by Theobald, and ^up trimmed’ in Collier’s Folio. The 
latter expression needs neither explanation nor justification in itself; but there 
was no time to trim Blanch up. The obvious allusion, too, to the temptation of 
St Anthony makes it clear that the old text is correct. It is, of course, not inti- 
mated that Blanch was then and there in a condition approaching that in which the 
temptress of St Anthony is generally supposed to have won the victory for the Devil. 
Constance’s epithet has at once a slight taint of womanish spite, and a forward 
look for Louis. — Collier (ed. ii.) : The proper change is made by the MS. Corrector 
[see Text> Notes], viz.: uptrimmed. The conjecture of Rev. Mr Dyce was thus long 
anticipated, and there could be no reasonable doubt about it. — ^J. O. Halliwell: 
The ordinary meaning of ‘untrimmed,’ unadorned or undressed, hardly makes 
sense, Constance meaning to speak of the bride as an attraction; unless indeed 
the refined criticism, that the term means loosely apparelled, be adopted with the 
idea that a beautiful woman so clothed is more fascinating than when attired in 
all the elegancies of fashion, ^Acosmus, one that is undecked or untrimmed, a 
slooven.’ — ^Eliote’s Dictionarie, ed. Cooper, ed. 1559. . . . Mr Dyce ingeniously 
suggests up-trimmed; but the rapidity with which the match has been made and 
the King’s allusion to ‘ this unlook’d for, unprepared pomp,’ appear to show that 
Constance would not refer especially to the splendor of the bride’s dress. Allu- 
sions to brides and bridegrooms being trimmed or trimmed up, in other words, 
sprucely dressed on the occasion of their marriages, are not uncommon; but they 
by no means prove that Constance speaks of a lady so adorned, and the context 
shows that such is probably not the case. Without the necessity of considering 
a wanton allusion is intended, which it clearly cannot be, ‘untrimmed’ may merely 
mean virgin, used as innocently as we might ‘a new maiden bride,’ in allusion to 
her absolute freshness, a meaning far more forcible than the very prosaic one of a 
new well-dressed wife. The verb, to trim, is used with a double meaning in Titus 
Andronicus. [Halliwell quotes as examples of this double meaning the passages 
from Chapman’s May Day; from The False One; and The Loyal Subject, and cites 
the song in Heyivood’s Rape of Lucrece, to which reference has already been 
made in the preceding notes.] — Cartwright (p, 15) objects to Dyce’s emenda- 
tion on the ground that ‘We say dressed up, but never updressed. ... A word, 
of which there is no example in the language, cannot be admitted as an emenda- 
tion.’ [While I am not favorably inclined to Dyce’s proposal, I think that Cart- 
wright’s reasoning is unsound: we say upstand for stand up; upstart for start up, 
and many other compounds of the same kind. An example of uptrim may yet be 
forthcoming. — ^En.] — Keightley {Expositor, p. 222): ‘TJntrimmed’ would seem to 
express the indecent haste of the wedding, the bride having, as it were, no trous- 
seau, but being married in her ordinary clothes. — ^Benj. Easy {Notes 6* Queries, 
1S63, III, iv, $66) offers the same explanation as did Staunton several years before, 
viz.: that ‘untrimmed’ here refers to the loose-flowing hair of the bride as was cus- 



ACT III, SC. i.] 


OF KING lOHN 


209 


[143. In Hkenesse of a new vntrimmed Bride] 
tomary at the time, and in illustration quotes: ‘Come, come, my lord, untie your 
folded thoughts And let them dangle loose as a bride’s hair.’ — Vittoria Corombona 
(ed. Dyce, vol. i, p. 83). ‘It is curious,’ says Easy, ‘that Steevens, in a note on 
this last passage, states that brides (and among them Anna Boleyn) formerly walked 
to church with their hair hanging loose behind, and yet missed the meaning of 
^‘untrimmed bride” so far as to give a ludicrous explanation of it.’ — ^A. Schmidt 
(Jahrbuckf iii, 1S68, p. 356): That is, in likeness of a bride who has removed her 
ornaments, or rather a wife who has laid aside her bridal finery. ‘Untrimmed’ 
would have had this same meaning if it occurred only here and in no other place 
in Shakespeare. The verb is, however, to be found in this same sense in Sonnet 
xviii, [see note by B. Field, ante; it is quite unlikely that Schmidt had any cog- 
nisance of this note. — ^E d.]. Only the lues emendatoriay which at last catches 
even such editors as Dyce, could have led him to read uptrimmed bride, since it is 
as clear as daylight that we should only speak of a ^new up-trimmed bride^ before 
the marriage, not, as in the present case, after the ceremony. [In his Lexicon 
Schmidt explains ‘untrimmed’ in the present passage as ‘a bride recently divested 
of her wedding gown.’ — E d.] — B r. Nicholson (Aihe^iceum, 7th Sept., 1878): I con- 
fess my astonishment that an editor so learned and well read, and reputed of ex- 
cellent judgment [as Dyce], should have substituted uptrimmed in this line. Did 
Mr Dyce not know the custom of the time? Doubtless a bride was uptrimmed 
then as now and in every age. Doubtless, also, her hair was so far trimmed by 
art as to look more naturally and more beautifully flowing.* But in Shakespeare’s 
day a virgin bride had by custom the sole right of appearing at the altar with her 
hair flowing and loose, and, so to speak, untrimmed or dishevelled, not tied in the 
matron’s knot, and she wore it thus in token of her virginity. As the devil could 
appear as an angel of light, so, says Constance, he tempts you now in the guise of 
a pure and innocent maiden. Thus, too, we obtain and see the full meaning of 
the explanatory and intensitive adjective ‘new,’ — that is, a new or untouched 
bride, [Compare] Jonson’s Eymenaei, the description of the celebrating presenta- 
tion: ‘Betwixt these a personated bride, supported, her hair flowing loose, sprink- 
led with gray/ [ed. Gifford, vii, 52], . . .Thus this so-called emendation of Mr 
Dyce’s alters the sense of the passage, -weakens immeasurably its force, and de- 
stroys the meaning of ‘new.’ — Fleay (p. 114): I note that Shakespaere never 
uses the verb trim except of dress; and though my plan is not to alter the text 
where any probable meaning can be got from it as it stands, I yet believe that Dyce’s 
reading is correct. Compare in support of Staunton, Tancred ^ Gismunda: ‘0 
let me dress up those untrimmed locks.’ — V, iii. Trim is used in a different sense 
in Hey wood’s Rape of Lmrece, sc. iv, and elsewhere; but there is no need for us 
to discuss interpretations (although they have been seriously advanced by some 
editors) which are not of a character to allow of their having been put in Com 
stance’s mouth by Shakespeare. — Herr (p. 26) says that it is altogether improbable 
that Constance should refer to Blanche’s personal appearance, but that it is her 
position as one interposed between the two kings. Hence ‘is it not likely that 
the author wrote: “In likeness of a new intervened hiide”^ Which may be inter- 
preted to mean: “the devil tempts you here in the shape of a bride newly brought 
forward as an intermediary.’” If intervened be not acceptable, Herr offers as 
alternatives upsprung or upsummonedt either of which, he says, ‘would be in- 
finitely better than to retain the senseless one, “untrimmed,” in the text.’ — [The 
i 4 , 



210 


THE LIFE AND DEA TH [act in, sc. i. 


143. [In likenesse of a new vntrimmed Bride] 
word intervened in the modern sense was unknown until the beginning of the seven- 
teenth century. Herr’s explanation of the passage is, besides, open to objec- 
tion. — Ed.] — Dyer {Folk-Lore of Sh., p. 53) opines that there may be here an allu- 
sion to the custom of the bride wearing her hair loose and dishevelled. — Moberly: 
That is, a new bride not yet enjoyed. It is strange that editors should wish to 
change the word (see Titus Andronicus, V, i, 93). — ^Wright is unusually non- 
commital; he considers the suggestion that ‘untrimmed’ means divested of her 
bridal attire is not probable, and questions whether Staunton’s interpretation may 
not be the true meaning. — ^Vaughan (i, 42) : Shakespeare uses trim, both as noun 
and verb, to signify elaborate attire; and therefore I should fully incline to Theo- 
bald’s emendation as most probable, and to Collier’s MS. Corrector’s as not im- 
probable, were it not for the words, ‘The devil tempts thee here in likeness,’ and 
she was not present in the likeness of a trimmed bride. But ‘trimmed’ and 
'uptrimmed’ are very light matters as elements of a sensual temptation by the devil. 
Although, then ‘untrimmed’ enhances the effect of ‘new,’ denoting the absence 
of all artificial decorations, and therefore may be Shakespeare’s ‘word’; yet I 
think it not improbable that the Poet wrote: ‘a new untamed bride.’ [See note 
by Theobald {Sh. Restored), ante.] No classical scholar could fail to see in this 
expression the equivalent to ‘a new and virgin bride,’ even if Shakespeare had not 
himself defined it virtually, and indicated its value as a spur to love and desire, 
by a passage in Tro, Cress., where Diomede, rebuking the eagerness shown by 
Paris and Menelaus for the possession of Helen, speaks of the latter as ‘a flat 
tamed piece’—the absolute opposite of the ‘new untamed bride’ here, Trimmed 
or ‘untrimmed.’ Blanche was the new and virgin bride—a real temptation. It 
may be observed, too, that Shakespeare in the quoted passage makes a whole 
syllable of the last three letters of ‘tamed,’ as would be the case with untamed 
here. — Marshall: There is no doubt that to trim meant ‘to dress more or less 
finely’ and not simply ‘to clothe’; so that those commentators who maintain that 
the meaning of ‘untrimmed’ is undrest have gone, probably, a little too far. At 
the most it would mean only in deshabille; but the epithet here might refer to the 
fact that Blanche was not fully dressed as a bride should be. I cannot see any 
reason for Grant White’s statement that here is an allusion to the temptation of 
St Anthony. [Marshall mentions also the ‘plausibility’ of Staunton’s interpreta- 
tion.] — ^Hertford takes ‘untrimmed’ to mean ^disarrayed, i. e., either divested of 
her wedding robe, or with her hair hanging loose.’ — ^Moore Smith: I incline to 
think that we should interpret these words as ‘a bride newly divested of her mar- 
riage clothes.’ Though tresses may be ‘un trimmed,’ it does not follow that ‘an 
untrimmed bride’ should naturally mean ‘a bride with untrimmed tresses,’ and if 
‘new’ is left to stand alone, it is quite otiose. — Ivor John: Taking the passage 
as it stands, we may explain it by supposing Constance to mean that Blanch 
was a new-made bride having just laid aside the trimmings in which she had been 
married. — Deighton: The strongest objection to ‘^i«-trimmed’ is, I think, to be 
found in the word ‘new,’ which seems here to be used as an adverb, ‘newly decked 
out.’ The allusion to the temptation of St Anthony seems to me as apt whether 
Blanch was ‘j^wtrimmed’ or ‘t^/»trimmed,’ and the objection that ‘there was no 
time to trim Blanch up* is almost puerile. — [In the face of so great an array of 
discussion and explanation of the meaning of a word, will it be considered presump- 
tuous to say, that throughout one important fact seems to have been disregarded. 



ACT in, sc. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


211 


Bla. The Lady Conjlance fpeakes not from her faith, [210] 
But from her need. 145 

Con, Oh, if thou grant my need, 

Which onely Hues but by the death of faith, 

That need, muft needs inferre this principle, 

That faith would Hue againe by death of need : 

O then tread downe my need, and faith mounts vp, 150 [215] 
Keepe my need vp,and faith is trodden downe. 

144-155. Bla. The Lady. ..lout.] In 0 / then Del. Craig, 
margin Pope, Han. Om. Done. 151. downe.] down! Cam. 4 *> Neils. 

150. 0 then] Oh, then! Ktiy, Huds. 

viz.: the circumstance under which the word is used. From first to last the inter^ 
pretation of the whole line has been that Blanche is used by the devil as a lure 
to swerve Lewis from his allegiance. For this I think Steevens is responsible. 
It w^as, I admit, with some hesitation that I transcribed the whole of his 
salacious note; only the facts that his remarks have been referred to by several 
later commentators, and to show how one early idea may give a bias to future 
interpretations, are my excuse for giving them in full. But is this the only con- 
struction that can be put upon the words of Constance? Consider what has led 
up to her bitter speech. Lewis says to his father, * Bethink you, you have two 
alternatives to choose, the consequence of the heavy curse of Rome, or the con- 
sequence of the loss of England’s friendship, I advise you to forego the easier’; 
and, of course, he means the friendship of King John. Blanch hastily inteiposes 
that the easier to forego is the consequence of Rome’s curse. With the loss of 
England’s friendship she will lose her new-made husband. It is this remark that 
calls forth from Constance the appeal to Lewis to stand fast in his decision, from 
which he is being tempted to swerve by the words of the devil issuing from the mouth 
of his newly acquired bride. Friendship between Philip and John means the 
overthrow of all of Constance’s hopes. Whether we take ^ untrimmed’ here to 
mean a mrgin bride, with Dyce’s first interpretation; or with hair unbound, as 
Staunton decides; or in deshabiUe, undresty sus Steevens and others have done, there 
can, I think, be very little reason to regard the speech of Constance as referring to 
Blanch herself as the temptation. She is already won by Lewis and married to 
him; she is not presented as a bribe to make him forswear his oath, but it is her 
soft, insinuating words that are tempting him from his allegiance. As to the 
particular meaning of the word * untrimmed’ here, but little need be said by the 
present editor; after the patient reader has examined the many opinions he is 
quite as competent to select that view which is held by the major number as to 
have it pointed out to him. Let it be said, however, that of all possible inter- 
pretations, that by Steevens is, in my opinion, the least possible; that, if a single 
example of the opposite of trim in the sense first quoted by Diike, and accepted 
by Dyce, were produced it might be acceptable; that, as several examples of 
‘untrimmed,’ in the sense given by Staunton, are well known, his explanation is 
deserving of high respect; that, the meaning in disarray or in deshabille is almost 
as bad as Steevens’s. Why should Blanch be in this condition any more than 
Constance or Elinor? Personally I incline to Staunton’s interpretation. — ^En.] 

146-151. Oh, if . . , trodden downe] Marshall: This speech of Constance 



212 


THE LIFE AISTD DEATH [act in, sc. i. 


lohn. The king is moud, and anfwers not to this. 152 [217] 
Con, 0 be remould from him, and anfwere well* 

Aufl, Doe fo king Philipp hang no more in doubt. 
jBd/J.Hang nothing but a Calues skin moft fweet lout. 155 [220] 
Fra, I am perplext,and know not what to fay. 

Pan, What canfl thou fay, but wil perplex thee more? 

If thou Hand excommunicate, and curfl? 15 ^ [223] 


152. hin^ hind F2F3. 

moud] moved Ff, Cam,+, Huds. 
ii. mov’d Rowe et cet. 

IS3- 0 ] Of Coll. Wh. i, Huds. i, Del. 
Craig. Oh! Ktly. 

remou’d] removed Cam. Glo. Cla. 
Fie. Huds. ii. 

well] well: Ff, Rowe, well! 
Dyce, Hal. Cam.+j Huds. ii, Neils. 
154. /o king]fo, King F4. 

155* Calues skin] Calues-skin Ff, 


Rowe, Fie. calve’ s-shin Pope,+. 
calfs-shin Cap. et cet: 

156. perplext] Ff, Rowe,+, Fie. 
perplex’d Cap. et cet. 

157. wi/] Fi. 

more?] more, Rowe et seq. 

158. excommunicate] excommunicate’ 

Fie. 

curjl] Ff, Rowe, 4 "y Var. ’78, ’8$, 
Cap. cursed Cam. Glo. Cla. Wh. ii. 


is very characteristic of Shakespeare’s earlier style; in its elaborate antithesis and 
play upon words it rivals some of the most affected speeches in Richard II. Com- 
pare Gaunt’s speeches in II, i. of that play. [See also II, i, 449'“4S3) iiote by 
Rushton, ante] — ^Deighton: That is, O, if you admit my need, which need would 
have no existence if faith had been kept with me, that need necessarily infers this 
consequence, that if my need were put an end to, faith would once more be a livmg 
one. O, then if you tread my need under foot (i. e., take away the causes of it), 
faith necessarily mounts up, while if you maintain my need (i. e., the causes of it), 
you are, by doing so, treading faith under foot. ^Only’ and ‘but’ in 1. 147 


tautological. 

156. I am perplext] Snider (ii, 303) calls attention here to the careful differentia- 
tion of the characters of father and son acting in accordance with their diffeient 
principles. ‘The son is without conscience. He sees in the present turn of affairs 
an opportunity for personal advantage greater than those which the fulfillment 
of the marriage contract offered — ^he uses the church as a means. At once he 
becomes very pious, and insists upon obedience to Randolph’s order. To be sure, 
he violates good faith, and endangers the new-born family to which he has pledged 
his sacred fealty; but these are moral considerations, which have not the weight 
of a feather against Hs self-interest. Ras^g to the father, we observe one of the 
most profound collisions to be met with in the works of Shakespeare. Philip 
possesses a powerful — ^mdeed, controlling — ^principle in conscience- Good faith, 
amity, oaths are spiritual elements which he cannot disregard. But here is the 
Church, which commands him to break them; and the Church, too, is a principle 
which he acknowledges most devoutly. What is he to do? Philip hesitates to 
obey the mandate of Pandulph, and maintains the right of moral obligation as 
revealed in the human heart. It is the great function of the Church to foster and 
enforce the moral conscience of man; but the Church now has a political end, to 
which it subordinates its religious end. It is thus in contradiction with itself, and 
is really destroying the purpose of its existence. The Fling of France, therefore, 
asserts the internal spirit of the Church against its formal authority.’ 


ACT III, SC. i.] 


OF KING lOHN 


213 


Fra. Good reuerend father, make my perfon yours, 
And tell me how you would beftow your felfe 7 
Thisroyail hand and mine are newly knit. 

And the coniundlion of our inward foules 
Married in league, coupled, and linkM together 
With all religous ftrength of facred vowes. 

The latefl breath that gaue the found of words 
Was deepe-fworne faith, peace, amity, true loue 
Betweene our kingdomes and our royall felues. 

And euen before this truce, but new before, 

No longer then we well could wafli our hands, 

To clap this royall bargaine vp of peace, 


160 [225] 


165 [23o[ 


170 [235] 


159. reuerend] reverend Pope,H-. 

160. your Jelfe}] Ff, Rowe, Pope. 
your self: Han, your self. Theob. et cet. 

162-173. Aftd... kings:] Om. Dono. 
164. religous] Fx. 

Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Warb. vows. Johns. Var. ’73, Knt, 
Coll, ii, Sta. Fie. Rife, Neils, vows; 
Var. ’78 et cet. 


166. deepe-fworne] deep fworn F4, 
Rowe. 

itj. felues,] Ff, Rowe i. Cam. GIo. 
Cla. Wh. ii. Rowe ii,-h. selves: 

Cap. Var. ’73 et cet. 

168. euen] ev^n, Pope,-!-* 

169. then] than F3F4. 

170. of peace] in peace F4, Rowe i. 


159. make my person yours] Moberly: Nothing can be finer than Philipps 
vain appeal to Nature and Nature’s law, which had little weight indeed at a period 
when even truth and right would have been considered as wickedness in disguise, 
unless they moved in the pathways of the Church, as Bean Milman has shown in 
his sketch of the Emperor Frederick II. (Lat. Christ., iv, 370). 

160. bestow your selfe] That is, hehave, act. Compare; ^How and which way 
I may bestow myself To be regarded in her sun-bright eye.^-—Two Gentlemen, 

111,1,87. 

162. And the coniunction] Ivor John: There is a looseness of construction in 
this sentence, for, although * conjunction’ is the subject of ‘(is) married,’ ‘(is) 
coupled,’ and *(is) linked,’ these participles agree in meaning with ‘inward souls.’ — 
Deighton: It seems doubtful whether the construction here is ‘the conjunction 
of our souls is married in league,’ the words ‘coupled . . . vows’ being an ampli- 
fication of ‘married in league’; or, ‘the conjunction of our souls being married in 
league’ is ‘coupled,’ etc. In either case there is tautology; for the meaning is 
nothing more than ‘the inward union of our souls is outwardly ratified by the 
solemn compact we have made with formal exchange of vows.’ 

163. coupled, and link’d together] T. Carter (p. 209) compares: ‘Let no man 
therefore put asunder that which God hath coupled together.’— xix, 6 
(Genevan: Vers.). 

168-171. And euen before ... ouer-staind] The lines preceding this make 
us apt to lose sight of the fact that what follows refers to the words ‘this royal hand 
and mine.’ The simple statement is thus: Our hands are but lately joined in 
friendship; only just before this truce Heaven knows how smeared they were 
with blood, the making of this league has barely given us time to cleanse them. — ^E d. 

170. To clap . , . vp] Wright: The figure is taken from the joining of hands 


I 


214 


THE LIFE AND DEA TH [act m, sc. i. 


Heauen knowes they were befmear^d and ouer-ftaind 171 [236] 
With flaughters pencil ; where reuenge did paint 
The fearefull difference of incenfed kings : 

And fhall thefe hands fo lately purg'd ofbloud? 

So newly ioyn'd in loue ? fo flrong in both, 175 [240] 

Vnyoke this feyfure, and this kinde regreete? 

Play fall and loofe with faith ? fo iefl with heauen, 

Make fuch vnconftant children of onr felues 

As now againe to f natch our palme from palme: 179 [244] 


171, 177, 201. Heauen] Heaven 

Ilowe,4-- 

173. difference] diffWance] Pope. 4-. 
incenjed] incensed Dyce, Fie. 

Words. 


173. kings:] kings. Warb. Johns. Var. 

'73. 

175. loue?] love, Rowe et seq. 

177. heauen,] heaven? Theob. ii, Warb. 
Johns. Fie. 

179. palme:] Palm? F4 et seq. 


at the time the bargain was made. Compare Tam. of Shr., ‘ Was ever match clapped 
up so suddenly.’ — II, i, 327. 

172. slaughters pencil] The earliest meaning of ‘pencil,’ as given by Murray 
{N. E. D.), is a broad brush used by painters to cover a large surface with varnish 
or paint, in illustration whereof he quotes among other passages: ‘We shoulde 
with a bundel of humility, as it were with a paynters pensell, dypped in the redde 
bloude of Christe, marke cure selfe on euerye syde.’ — 1534, More, Treat. Pass., 
Works, 1297/2.— Ed. 

175. so strong in both] Johnson: I believe the meaning is, love so strong in 
both parties. — ^Henley: Rather, in hatred and in love; in deeds of amity or Uood . — 
Capeel (I, pt ii, p. 129): ‘Both’ refers to ‘love,’ and to ‘blood’ in 1. 174; but as 
‘blood’ is not very intelligible in conjunction with ‘strong,’ we must understand 
hy it enmity (an idea included in it), and the whole sentence thus: the strengh 
too of this love and this enmity being seen, — Delius suggests as the likeliest con- 
struction that ‘strong’ relates to ‘hands’; ‘both’ to ‘blood’ and ‘love.’— Moberly: 
That is, both in quarrel and in love.— Weight: That is, in fighting and in friend- 
ship.— Deighton: IHenley’s] explanation seems to me the better one, as com- 
pleting a climax, the degrees of which are ‘so lately purged,’ ‘so newly joined,’ 
‘so strong,’ etc. [Is not ‘strong’ merely intensive here? that is, so strongly, or 
completely, purged of blood; and so strongly because newly joined in love. — ^En,] 

176. regreete] Ceaigie (iV. E. D., s. v.): A (return of a) salutation or greeting. 
[The present line quoted.] 

177. Play fast and loose] Naees (Gloss., s.y.): A cheating game, whereby gipsies 
and other vagrants beguiled the common people of their money. It is said to be 
still used by low sharpers, and is called pricking at the belt, ox girdle. It is thus 
described: ‘A leathern belt is made up into a number of intricate folds, and placed 
edgewise upon a table. One of the folds is made to resemble the middle of the 
girdle, so that whosoever should thrust a skewer into it would think he held it fast 
to the table; whereas, when he has so done, the person with whom he plays may 
take hold of both ends and draw it away.’— Sir J. Hawkins, [note on ‘Like a right 
gipsey, hath, at fast and loose, Beguil’d me to the very heart of loss.’— 6?* 
Cleo., IV, xii, 28]. 



ACT III, SC. ij 


OF KING JOHN 


215 
180 [245] 


Vn-fweare faith fworne, and on the marriage bed 
Of fmiling peace to march a bloody hoaft, 

And make a ryot on the gentle brow 
Of true fincerity ? O holy Sir 
My reuerend father, let it not be fo; 

Out of your grace, deuife, ordaine, impofe 185 [250] 

Some gentle order, and then we fliall be bleil 
To doe your pleafure, and continue friends. 

Pand, All forme is formeleffe. Order orderleffe, 

Saue what is oppofite to Englands loue. 

Therefore to Armes, be Champion of our Church, 190 [255] 
Or let the Church our mother breathe her curfe, 

A mothers curfe, on her reuolting fonne: 

France, thou maift hold a ferpent by the tongue, 193 [258] 


183. 0 holy 5 iV] 0/ holy sir, Coll. 
Huds. i, Del. Craig. 0 , holy sir, Dyce, 
Hal. wi. i, Sta. Cam.-h, Fie. Huds. ii, 
Words. Dono. Neils. 

184. /(?;] so! Dyce, Flal. Wii. i, Ktly, 
Cam.-f, Huds. ii, Words. Dono. Neils. 
Craig, so. Del. Fie. 

186. and then] and Pope,+* then 
Lettsom, Huds. ii, Words. 

hleji] blessed Steev. et seq. 


190. to Armes,] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Knt 
i, Fie. to arms! Theob. et cet. 

Church,] Ff, Rowe, Coll. Huds. 
i, Cam.+, Del. Fie. Neils. Craig. 
church. Pope, church! Theob. et cet. 

19 1. Church our mother] chirch, our 
mother, Cap. et seq. 

191, 192. curfe,. ..curfe,] curse , — ... 
curse, — Dyce, Hal. Huds. ii, Words. 

igi. fonne:] fonne. or fon. Ff, Rowe 
et seq. 


180, 1 81. on the marriage bed ... to march] Moberly: It Is easy to find 
fault with such metaphors as these; but the inward meaning should be considered: 
To make our armies trample down the peace which a marriage has so lately sanc- 
tioned; and (in the next iine) to make a riot where true Sincerity, with her candid 
brow, should be mistress of all. The metaphors are not, therefore, incongruous, 
though the compression makes them appear so. 

182. make a ryot] This is a somewhat unusual expression; the more common 
one is, to raise or commit a riot. Grant White in his Memoirs of Sh. (Wks, i, 
p. xlii.), in speaking of the quarrels between Sir Thomas Lucy and the Corporation 
of Stratford, says: * Records of one about common of pasture in tlenry VIII. ’s 
time are still preserved in the Chapter House at London; and among the papers 
at the RoUs^ House is one containing “the names of them that made the ryot 
uppon Master Thomas Lucy, esquier.” ' — ^This is, of course, long before W. Shake- 
speare’s time, but it is possible that this legal use of the phrase suggested a like 
use in the present passage. — E d. 

186. and] Lettsom (ap. Dyce ii.): ‘And’ seems to have intruded from the line 
next below. 

193. a serpent by the tongue] Moberly: The tongue was supposed to be the 
sting; as by Bunyan, w^ho thought it a miracle that in his rash youth he had forced 
open a viper’s mouth with a stick, and pulled out its tongue unharmed. [This 
ignorance of a fact in natural history wsb possibly peculiar to Bunyan. It can 
hardly be said to be general. Pliny , Naiufal Misiory (trans. Holland), says: ‘Some 



2I6 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act hi, sc. i. 

194 [259] 


A cafed Lion by the mortall paw, 

194. caS&I\ Ff, Rowe, Varr. Mai. Rann, Steev. Varr. Sing, i, Coll. i. chasei 
Pope, Knt- caged Coll, ii, iii, Ktly Hraged Id. conj.). chafed Theob. et cet. 

say, that a serpent hath but one venomous tooth; which because it is crooked,’ 
therefore, ^he turneth and bendeth it upright when he would sting or bite with- 
all.’ — Bk xi. (ed. 1635, p. 337); and Topsell in that part of his volume devoted to 
Serpents tells us: * — in their teeth they carrie poyson of defense and annoyance. . . . 
In the upper chap they have two longer then all the residue, on either side one, 
bored through with a little hole, like the sting of a Scorpion, by which they utter 
their poyson.’ — (ed. 1608, p. ii). There are many proofs that Shakespeare’s 
main sources of information on points in Natural History were these two authors; 
and if he here speak of the dangerous quality of the serpent’s tongue, it is, I think, 
rather on account of its proximity to the death-dealing teeth.-r-En.] 

194. A cased Lion] Steevens: The modern editors read ^a chafed lion.’ I see 
little reason for change. ‘A cased lion’ is a lion irritated by confinement. So 
in 3 Henry VI: 'So looks the pent up lion o’er the wretch That trembles under 
his devouring paws.’ — ^I, iii, 12. —^Malone: Again in Rowley’s When\You See 
Me You Know Me, 1621: 'The lyon in his cage is not so sterne As royal Henry 
in his wrathful spleene.’ Our Author was probably thinking on the lions, which 
in his time, as at present, were kept in the Tower, in dens so small as fully to justify 
the epithet he has used.— [Malone is imfortunate in his quotation; as the sig- 
nificant word cage is evidently a misreading of the line as it appears in the other 
quartos, where the words are, 'The lion in his ragef ed. Elze, p. 64. In his careful 
reprint of this play Elze does not record cage as the reading of any text. — ^Marshall 
says that in his copy of the Qto, 1632, ‘the word is very indistinct and seems intended 
for rage more than cagel The first quarto is dated 1605. This would hardly be 
worth the noting were it not that Collier has used this quotation, as given by 
Malone, in support of the MS. Corrector’s change, caged. — Ed.] — Knight, who fol- 
lows Pope in reading chased, says: 'We have ventured here upon a slight change. 
The original is supposed to mean a lion in a cage. The image is, strictly taken, 
weakened, if not destroyed, by this epithet; for the paw of a confined lion is often 
held with impunity. And yet “cased” may mean irritated by confinement.’ — 
Byce {Remarks, p. 92) : With a full recollection of the passages cited by Steevens 
and Malone to support this reading (‘cas’d’), I think it decidedly wrong. Shake- 
speare would not have used ‘cased’ in the forced sense of caged, because in his time 
'a cased lion’ meant properly 'a lion stript of his skin, flayed.’ So in AlVs Well: 
'We’ll make you some sport with the fox, ere we case him,’ III, vi, iii; and in Beau- 
mont and Fletcher’s Scornful Lady: 'then with my tiller Bring down your gibship, 
and then have you cas’d, And hung up in the warren.’ — ^V, i. Knight prints ^chased 
lioni But the right reading is undoubtedly chafd; in the following passage of 
Beaumont and Fletcher’s Philaster, where the quarto of 1620 has ‘chafd/ the other 
eds. have chast, and Qet it be particularly observed) 'cast’: 'And what there is of 
vengeance in a lion Chaf’d among'^ dogs or robb’d of his dear young.’ — ^V, iii. I may 
add, that in Shakespeare’s Henry VJII. we find: ‘ — so looks the chafed lion Upon the 
daring huntsman that has gall’d him,’ HI, ii, 206; and in Fletcher’s Loyal Subject: 
'He frets like a chaf’d lion,’ V, iii. — Singer in his ed. i, accepted the explanation of 
the Folio reading given by Steevens; in his ed. ii. he, however, discards this and 
'unhesitatingly accepts the reading chafed/ which, through inadvertence, he as- 



ACT III, SC. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


217 


[194. A cased Lion by the mortall paw] 
cribes to Dyce. — ^White decides that caged, although doing the least violence to the 
text, cannot be received for much the same reasons as given by Knight, that a caged 
lion is less dangerous than one at liberty. In support of Theobald’s reading he 
quotes the passage from Henry VIII, given above by Dyce, and also: ^As a chaft 
Lion, which now meets, now turns, From an untamed Bulls well brandished horns.’ — 
II Pastor Fido, IV, ii, trans. Fanshawe; ed. 1647, p. 130. — Walker (Crit., ii, 295, 
reading chafed) : Carew seems to have had this passage in King John present to 
his mind when he wrote his Ixivth Poem (Separation of Lovers, ed. Clarke, p. 84), 
and to have read chased; for chafed, as in Clarke’s Carew, contradicts the context: 

‘Stop the chafed boar, or play 
With the lion’s paw, yet fear 
From the lover’s side to tear 

Th’ idol of his soul away’; 

and that Carew should have read chased was natural; for the language of Shake- 
speare’s time was then, of course, perfectly well understood, so that no one could 
possibly take ‘cased’ for anything but nonsense, and an error of the press; and, 
this being taken for granted, chased was the most obvious correction; while, on the 
other hand, to complete the emendation by substituting chafed for chased was 
what would have occurred to none but a critic. In other parts of this poem 
Shakespeare is equally visible; compare St. ii. with Sonnet cxvi. and St. v. with 
Sonnet ivi. (Poem xci. (The Companion), iniU Sonnet cxxx.?) By the way, 
Two Noble Kinsmen, IV, ii, Moxon’s Beaumont & Fletcher, ii, 573, col. i, ‘And 
as a heated [hunted] lion so he looks’; Heywood, Woman KilVd with Kindness: 
< — as void of pity As chased [chafed] bears.’ — Dodsley, vii, 262 . — Fleay: ‘Lions 
always take their prey by springing on it from some concealed station.’ W. S. 
Dallas on F elide. Hence ‘cased’ (concealed) is equivalent to watching for prey, 
hungry. [Fleay cites passages from Two Gentlemen, Mid. N. Dream, and As 
You Like It, wherein the adjective hungry is applied to the lion, which seem 
hardly relevant.] The ^chafed lion ’ in Henry VIII: III, ii, 206, which some editors 
rely on for their unnecessary alterations in this passage, is Fletcher’s, not Shake- 
speare’s, who does not apply this epithet to animals. [Fleay cites passages from 
Tam. of Shrew, 5 Henry VI, and Timon of Athens (which last, by the way, should 
be Titus Andronicus) wherein chafed is applied to the boar and bull; all these pass- 
ages Fleay asserts are not of Shakespeare’s writing. In supoprt of the Folio 
reading he cites I, v, 61 of this play, ‘What shall they seek the lion in his denne,’ 
— Ed.]— -Schmidt (Lex.), possibly under the influence of the foregoing note by 
Fleay, interprets ‘cased lion’: a lion hid in his cave; and indicates his surprise at 
Theobald’s reading by pnntmg chafed in parentheses and with an exclamation 
mark.— Wright accepts Theobald's reading, since Steevens has not produced 
any instance wherein ‘cased’ has such a meaning as ‘irritated by confinement; 
and chafed agrees better with the epithet “fasting” applied to the tiger in the 
next line.’ — ^Marshall: We have adopted chafed as being, on the whole, the most 
probable reading. — ^Moore Smith: That is, shut in a box (or cage? or cave?). 
The point of the epithet would seem to be that if the lion were shut in, the man 
would be shut in also, and so much more courage would be required. — ^Ivor John: 
None of the suggested meanings for the Folio reading seems satisfactory. I 
fail to see why the man should be supposed to be shut in [as Moore Smith takes it]. 
There is something to be said for Pope’s reading [see Text. Notes] which would also 



2I8 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act m, sc. i. 


A falling Tyger fafer by the tooth, 

Then keepe in peace that hand which thou doll hold. 

Fra . I may dif-ioyne my hand, but not my faith. 

Pand, So mak’ll thou faith an enemy to faith. 

And like a ciuill warre fetll oath to oath, 

Thy tongue againll thy tongue. O let thy vow 
Firll made to heauen, firll be to heauen performed, 
That is, to be the Champion of our Church , 

What fince thou fworll, is fworne againll thy felfe, 
And may not be performed by thy felfe, 

For that which thou haft fworne to doe amiffe, 

Is not amiffe when it is truely done: 

And being not done, where doing tends to ill, 

The truth is then moll done not doing it; 


195 [260] 


200 [265] 


205 [270] 


208 [273] 


197. dipioyne] dijioyne Fa. disjoin 
Cap. et seq. 

200. 0 let] 0 ! let Coll. Wh. i, Huds. i, 
Del. Craig. Oh let Ktly. 

201. performed,] performedi Ktly. 

202. Church,] Ff, Rowe i. church 
Rowe Wh. i, Ktly, Huds. i, Cam. 
Glo. Cla. Del. Fie. Dono. Craig, church! 
Cap. et cet. 

204. performed] performed Dyce, Fie. 
Huds. ii, Words. 

thy felfe,] Ff, Rowe, thy self,. 
Pope, Theob. Han. thyself. Warb. 


Johns. Var. ’73. thyself, Cam. 4 *, 
Words. Neils, thyself: Cap. et cet. 

205. For that] For that, Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Varr. Mai. Steev. Varr. Sing. 
CoU. Hal. 

206. Is not] Is most Han. Huds. ii, 
Words. Neils. Is yet Warb. Cap. IsH 
not Johns. Var. ^73, ’78. Is hut Coll, 
ii, iii. (MS.), Wh. i. Is done Spedding. 

done:] done? Johns. Var. ^73, *78, 

’85. 

208. it:] it. PopCj+j Ktly, Neils. 
Craig. 


hold in the Eenry VIII. passage. A lion that had been hunted and, so to speak, 
driven to bay would not be a pleasant creature to take by the paw. 

202. Champion of our Church] Wright: The King of France was styled the 
Eldest Son of the Church and the Most Christian King. 

206-208. Is not amisse . . . not doing it] Warburton: This is a conclusion 
de trovers. We should read, ^Is yet amiss — — Johnson: I rather read, ^IsH 
not amiss — as the alteration is less, and the sense which Dr Warburton first 
discovered is preserved. — Ritson {Remarks, p. 32): All these objections to, 
and proposed alterations of, the old reading arise entirely from its not being 
understood. If the reader will consider the passage a moment, he will per- 
ceive that it has sense and meaning, — ^is quite in the spirit of the Cardinal’s 
quibbling logic, — ^and infinitely superior to any of these pretended emendations. 
Pandulph having conjured the king to perform his first vow to heaven, — to be 
champion of the Church, — tells him that what he has since sworn is sworn against 
his-self, and therefore may not be performed by him: for that, says he, which you 
have sworn to do amiss, is not amiss (j. e., becomes right) when it is done truly 
(that is, as he explains it, not done at all); and being not done, where it would be 
sin to do it, the truth is most done when you do it not. So, in Lovers Labours, ‘It 
is religion to be thus forsworn.’ — pV, iii, 363]. — M. Mason (Comments, etc., p. 
156): The old reading cannot be right. Some amendment, therefore, was neces- 



ACT III, SC. i.] 


OF KING lOHN 


219 


[206-208. Is not amisse . . , not doing it] 
sary, and all of those proposed will make sense of the passage; but I should prefer 
that of Hanmer to that of Johnson, because all the rest of Pandulph’s argument 
is in the way of assertion, not of question; and it agrees with what he says in the 
next line but one: ^The truth is then most done, not doing it.^ And also with 
what he says afterwards in 11 . 221, 222. — ^Maxone accepts approvingly Ritson’s 
interpretation of Hruly done,’ i. e., not done; since ‘the licentiousness of the expres- 
sion is certainly sufficiently suitable to the other riddling terms used by the legate.’ 
Malone adds that ‘by placing the second couplet of this sentence before the first, 
the passage will be perfectly clear. Where doing tends to ill, where an intended 
act is criminal, the truth is most done, by not doing the act. The criminal act 
therefore which thou hast sworn to do, is not amiss, will not be imputed to you 
as a crime, if it be done truly, in the sense I have now affixed to truth; that is, 
if you do not do it.’ — [Singer prints the latter part of Malone’s note, dealing with 
the paraphrase of the passage, without comment or (it is to regretted) without 
acknowledgement; it may therefore be presumed that he prefers this to Rit- 
son’s. — Ed.] — ^Hudson (ed. i.): That is, not amiss when done according to truth, 
because it is then left undone: in the sense of ‘truly,’ as here used, a crime is done 
truly, when it is not done. Where an intended act is criminal, the truth is most 
done by not doing the act. [In his ed. ii. Hudson adopts Hanmer’s reading ‘ inasmuch 
as it just makes a balance between the two branches of the sentence: “On the one 
hand, the wrong which you have sworn to do, is most wrong when your oath is 
truly performed; bn the other hand, when a proposed act tends to ill, the truth 
is most done by leaving the act undone.’” — ^Arrowsmith {Ed, of N, & Q. and 
Singer, p. 6) : Heming and Condell contrast advantageously with their blundering 
successors; for the corruptions of the text introduced by Hanmer, Warburton, 
and Johnson absolutely invert their author’s meaning, and stultify his whole 
argument, if Shakespeare may be his own interpreter. The adverb ‘^miss,’ 
1 . 205, expresses Pandulph’s construction of the deed which King Philip had s^Nrn 
to do, but no part of King Philip’s purpose in swearing to do it: the deed the 
latter had sworn to do was, in his estimation, at the time of swearing, just and 
right; and 11 . 207, 2oS are Shakespeare’s own exposition of the meaning attached by 
himself to the words ‘truly done,’ when applied to a deed, which, according to 
Pandulph’s construction, it was amiss to do: so that Hanmer, Warburton, and 
Johnson make Shakespeare say that a wrong is done amiss when it is not done 
at all!! How truly might'^akespeare describe his own lot by the words which 
he has put into the mouth of one of his characters — of one of his clowns: ‘When 
a man’s verses cannot be understood, nor a man’s good wit seconded with the for- 
ward child, understanding, it strikes a man more dead than a great reckoning in 
a little room.’ In swearing, so reasons Shakespeare, the particular act is subordi- 
nate to the main purpose: the bond of an oath is from its righteous intendment: 
no self-imposed obligation can tye a man to violate the paramount moral obliga- 
tion not to do evil. The text uncorrupted is both good logic and sound morality; 
adulterated by the logicians Hanmer and Warburton, and by the great moralist 
and lexicographer Johnson, it is sheer nonsense.' — Delius: That, which you have 
wrongly sworn to do, is no longer wrong, if it be accomplished by means which 
are correct — ^namely, in contrary fashion. That the Legate joins this hidden 
meaning with words apparently contradictory is brought out in the following 
sentence. — Collier {Notes ^ Emend,, etc., ed. ii.); For ‘not amiss’ it is evident 



220 


THE LIFE AND DEATH [act in, sc. L 


[206-208. Is not amisse . . . not doing it] 
that we ought to read ^hui amiss,’ ^not’ for hut, and vice versa ^ being one of the 
commonest errors. [This note is unfortunate in its ambiguity; at first sight it 
appears to be an original conjecture by Collier. Staunton suggests this same 
alteration as necessary beyond question for the success of the argument, and does 
not so much as hint that it is not original with him, although Collier’s volume 
antedates Staunton’s edition by at least four years. In the note on these lines 
in his ed. ii. of this play, five years later, Collier leaves us in no doubt as to this 
being a reading in his corrected Folio: *Here a great difficulty is entirely swept 
away by the simple change of ^^not” to but, as we find it in the corr. fo, 1632: 
what a person swears to do amiss “is but amiss,” or is still amiss “when it is truly 
done.” Nothing more can be required to clear the whole passage, and it would 
be mere waste of time and space to advert to what has been written by all editors 
on the original and absurd line. The whole passage is struck out in corr. fo. 1632, 
but the emendation of hut for “not” is nevertheless inserted in the margin. No 
misprint could well be more common, and we have already had several instances 
of it.’ — Collier makes no reference to Staunton’s conjecture agreeing with the MS. 
correction; but the latter’s edition did not appear until after Collier’s, although, 
as Staunton says in his Preface, the greater number of the notes were written be- 
tween 1857 and i860. — ^En.] — C. & M. Cowden Clarke: It has been proposed 
to alter ‘not’ here to hut; which we think would destroy the intention of the pass- 
age. As it stands it seems to us to give precisely the kind of sophistical argument 
characteristic in the mouth of its speaker; for Pandulph goes on to explain his 
own meaning of the words he uses in this line by what he says in the next two. He 
interprets ‘truly done’ to mean left undone, or being not done; which he asserts 
then most affects truth by non-fulfilment. This he would naturally preface by 
the sophistry, ‘That which thou hast sworn to do amiss is not amiss when it is 
truly done* The very involvement and obscurity of the casuistry makes it the 
more dramatically and characteristically accurate; and the whole speech forms a 
fine specimen of a series of plausible fallacies, strung together with Tartuffian 
adroitness in confounding right with wrong, and making wrong appear to be right. 
— ^Wordsworth {Sh*s Knowledge 6" Use of Bible, p. 74) : We may conjecture that 
Shakespeare had heard read in church the Homily ‘against swearing and perjury,’ 
the second part of which contains what follows: ‘Therefore, whosoever maketh 
any promise, binding himself thereunto by an oath, let him foresee that the thing 
which he promiseth be good and honest and not against the commandment of God; 
and that it be in his own power to perform it justly; and such good promise must all 
men keep evermore assuredly. But if a man at any time shall, either of ignorance 
or of malice, swear to do anything which is either against the law of Almighty God,^ 
or not in his power to perform, let him take it for an unlawful and ungodly oath,’ 
[ed. 16S3, p. 4$]. Godly and wholesome doctrine, which Shakespeare has taken 
occasion to insist upon in several passages: s Henry VI: ‘Perhaps thou wilt object 
my holy oath: To keep that oath were more impiety Than Jephthah’s, when he 
sacrificed his daughter.’ — ^V, i, 89-91; a Henry VI: ‘It is great sin to swear unto 
a sin, But greater sin to keep a sinful oath.’ — Y, i, 182, 183. [In his quotation of 
the passage in the present play Wordsworth reads ‘Is more amiss,’ etc., which he 
says is his proposed reading for the ‘not’ of the Folio; in his own edition of King 
John he has, however, passed from the comparative to the superlative, and reads 
^most* with Hanmer.— Ed.]— Rev. John Hunter: Here Shakespeare’s habit of 



ACT in, sc. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


221 


The better A6l of purpofes miftooke, 

Is to miftake again, though indire6l, 210 [275] 

210. Is.^again,] Is^...again; Cap. Var. ^78, ^85, Mai. Steev. Van. Sing. Knt, Hal. 
Del. Fie. ; 

inverting arrangement has, as in many other instances, puzzled his commentators. 
I believe he meant: ‘For to do amiss that which thou hast sworn,’ &c.; that is, to 
act against what thou hast sworn, when such acting is done according to the 
truth, is not really amiss. — F leay: For to fail in doing that which thoii hast sworn 
to do is no wrong action if done with good intention. The construction is: to do 
amiss (incompletely) that which thou hast sworn (to do) is not amiss when it 
(your course of proceeding) is truly (honestly) done. Some commentators have 
been anxious to show ingenuity in emendations, but have missed the sense. All 
this speech of Pandulph’s is intentionally confused by Shakespeare as a specimen 
of Jesuitical casuistry. The Jesuits were specially hated by the English at the 
time of this play’s production and revival. — ^M oberly: If the Folio reading Ts 
not amiss’ be correct, the emphasis is on ‘truly,’ and the meaning, ‘is not amiss 
when it is done truly ^ (that is, in the very opposite way to what was proposed). 
But Hanmer’s emendation gives a clearer sense. — W right: That is, as explained 
in the next two lines, when it is not done at all. It is therefore unnecessary to 
read [according to any of the proposed emendations]. — ^H err (p. 27): In 1 . 208 
that ‘done’ and ‘doing’ are used in the sense oi fulfil &n.d fulfilling is conclusively 
shown by their association with the word ‘performed,’ 1. 204, w^hich is likewise a 
s>monymous term referring to the carrying out, the fulfilling of the truce or vow 
entered into by Philip with John. ‘To do amiss’ does not mean to act wickedly, but 
to fulfil wrongly. — Vaughan: ‘Amiss’ in 205 ought, in construction of the pass- 
age, to adhere closely to ‘do’ and not to ‘sworn,’ as Warburton, Johnson, and 
Delius make it. The same word in 1 . 206 ought also to precede ‘done’ immediately 
in our construction of it — ^just as ‘truly’ also should precede ‘done.’ The quibble 
of the Cardinal’s argument lies in identifying dmng the truth with truly doing what 
one has sworn. The reading of the old copies is not only right, but it constitutes 
the sole conclusion which can possibly be deduced from the argument which fol- 
lows it. — R aich (p. 158): This is no sophism, but the very foundation of the Shake- 
spearean theory of vows. In God’s sight there is no validity in vowed promises 
which from the start tend towards evil, or which later will be misused for e\il, 
as was Herod’s vow to his daughter. God cannot be bound to sin. Such a vow, 
whether sworn to or not, is void. But if two oaths stand against one another, 
the last one made must perforce weaken the earlier; since the later can be accom- 
plished only insofar as the observation of the earlier oath shall not be thereby 
prejudiced, as the Papal Legate rightly explains: ‘Therefore thy later vows against 
thy first Is in thyself rebellion to thyself, ’ U. 223, 224 .~Moore Smith: An act 
which you have sworn to commit unrighteously is not unrighteous if, after all, 
you perform it as truth requires; and in the case of an act which tends to evil, 
what truth requires is that it should not be performed at all. — B elden {Tudor 
Sk., reading, with Hanmer, most): The Folio reading, ‘not amiss,’ may be right, 
with a quibble upon the word ‘truly.’ ‘The evil you have sworn to do is not evil 
when it is truly done; for the true (i. e., right) way to do an evil thing is not to do it 
at all.* — ^D eighton’s paraphrase is substantially the same as Ritson’s. 

210, 21 1, indirect , ♦ . indirectionj Weight; That is, unjust. Compare I, ii, 



222 


THE LIFE AND DEA TH [act m, sc. i. 


Yet indire6lion thereby growes direct, 21 1 [276] 

And falfhood, falfliood cures, as fire codes fire 
Within the fcorched veines of one new burn’d; 

It is religion that doth make vowes kept, 214 [279] 

213. /core W] F3F4, Rowe i. 212,* nm burned:] nm-hurrCd, Pope, 

scorched Dyce, Fie. Huds. ii, Words. -{-> F^eL Rife, Neils. 


52 above, and Richard HI: I, iv, 224: 'He needs no indirect or lawless course 
To cut off those that have offended him.’ [For 'indirection’ in sense of injustice^ 
Wright compares: 'To wring From the hard hands of peasants their vile trash 
By any indirection.’ — JuL Cces.j IV, hi, 75.] 

212. as fire codes fire] Bucknill {Med, Knowledge, etc., p. 65): This notion of 
one heat driving out another . . . appears to be formed upon an old-fashioned 
custom of approaching a burnt part to the fire, to drive out the fire, as it is said; 
a practice certainly not without benefit, acting on the same principle as the applica- 
tion of turpentine and other stimulants to recent burns. [Bucknill compares with 
the present passage: 'Even as one heat another heat e35>els, Or as one nail by 
strength drives out another.’ — Two Gentlemen, II, iv, 192.] — ^Wright: Compare 
Coriol., IV, vii, 54: 'One fire drives out one fire; one nail, one nail.’ And JuU 
Cces,: 'As fire drives out fire, so pity pity,’ — III, i, 171. Again, Romeo Juliet: 
' Tut, man, one fire burns out another’s burning.’^ — ^I, h, 46. 

214-220, It is religion ... to sweare] Warbueton: In this long speech the 
Legate is made to show his skill in casuistry; and the strange heap of quibble and 
nonsense of which it consists was intended to ridicule that of the schools. For 
when he assumes the politician, at the conclusion of the third Act, the Author 
makes him talk at another rate. I mean in that beautiful passage where he speaks 
of the mischiefs following the King’s loss of his subjects’ hearts. This conduct is 
remarkable, and was intended, I suppose, to show us how much better politicians 
the Roman courtiers are than divines. — Capell (I, pt ii, p. 128) seems mainly 
concerned with the shortcomings of his predecessors’ efforts to amend the present 
lines; and with commendation of his own changes [sqq Text. Notes, 11 , 216, 218], 
whereby 'the speaker’s reasoning is broke into two distinct arguments, one ending 
at 1. 218, the other at a second full stop, 1. 222; and that his ensuing conclusion 
is proper to both of them. The only harshness remaining is in the finishing words 
of the last argument; a harshness which the Poet is drawn into by his then pre- 
dominant passion — a playing on words; else he had not been led to express with 
so much over-conciseness — “when the only truth prov’d by it, is — that thou art 
unsureJ ^^ — ^Johnson: The propositions, that 'the voice of the church is the voice 
of heaven,’ and that 'the Pope utters the voice of the church,’ neither of which 
Pandulph’s auditors would deny, being once granted, the argument here used is 
irresistible; nor is it easy, notwithstanding the jingle, to enforce it with greater 
brevity or propriety [than as given in 11 . 215-220]. I think 'By what,’ 1 . 216, 
should be rather 'By whic¥ [than as Hanmer reads]. That is, ‘thou swear’st 
against the thing by which thou swear’st’; that is, * against religion,^ Warburton’s 
[pointing of L 218] leaves the passage, to me, as obscure as before. I know' not 
whether there is any corruption beyond the omission of a point. The sense, after 
I had considered it, appeared to me only this: ‘In swearing by religion against 
religion, to which thou hast already sworn, thou makest an oath the security for 



ACT III, SC. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


223 


[214-220. It is religion ... to sweare] 

thy faith against an oath already taken.^ I will give, says he, a rule for con- 
science in these cases. Thou mayst be in doubt about the matter of an oath; 
‘when thou swearest, thou may’st not be always sure to swear rightly’; but let 
this be thy settled principle, ‘swear only not to be forsworn’: let not the latter 
oaths be at variance with the former. Truth, through this whole speech, means 
rectitude of conduct. — [Heath (p. 226) also proposes the same pointing, viz.: a 
period after ‘oath,’ 1. 218, as the only means of rendering these lines intelligible, 
and his interpretation naturally is substantially the same as Johnson’s. Since 
Heath’s Revisal and Johnson’s ed. were practically contemporaneous, each may 
be said to have arrived at this solution independently of the other. — En.] — Malone: 
I believe the old reading of 1 . 216 is right; and that ‘By whai,^ &c., is put in apposi- 
tion with that which precedes it: ‘But thou hast sworn against religion; thou hast 
sworn, by what thou swearest, i. e., in that which thou hast sworn, against the thing 
thou swearest by, i. e., religion. Our Author has many such elliptical expressions. 
[For examples of omission of prepositions in certain cases, see Abbott, §§ 200-202.] 
The old copy in 1 . 219 reads ‘sweares,’ which, in my apprehension, shows that two 
half lines have been lost, in which the person supposed to swear was mentioned. 
When the same word is repeated in two succeeding lines the eye of the compositor 
often glances from the first to the second, and in consequence the intermediate 
words are omitted. For what has been lost, it is now in vain to seek; I have there- 
fore adopted the emendation made by Mr Pope, which makes some kind of sense. 
[The change swear for ‘swears’ was made by Rowe in his ed, ii, not Pope. — Ed.] — 
Staxjnton: There are critics who profess to understand this and similar textual 
imbroglios of the First Folio, which is more than the Author himself would do. I 
venture to suggest the following as a probable reading of the passage in its original 
form. [Staunton makes these conjectural emendations: ‘By ihat,^ 1 . 216, wherein, 
except the added comma, he is anticipated by Hanmer; ^ proof for ‘truth,’ 1 . 218, 
which is original; a period after ‘unsure,’ 1 . 218, wherein Capell anticipated him; 
and ‘ Who swears^ for ‘To sweare,’ 1 . 219, wherein Capell also anticipated him; 
finally, querying whether ‘thou swear’st,’ 1. 216, should not be ‘thou swearest by/ 
which is again Capell’s reading. Is it ungenerous to observe that Staunton might , 
have saved time and labour had he but consulted the w^'ork of some of his prede- 
cessors? Even the Variorum of 1821 might have been sufficient. — Ed.] — ^Hudson 
(ed. i.) : Shakespeare doubtless had a purpose in putting such a string of verbal and 
logical subtleties and evasions into the mouth of Pandulph: at all events, it very 
weH illustrates the casuistical art which can easily turn all moral obligations WTong- 
side out. The meaning of the text appears to be: the oath (truth) in swearing 
which you are unsafe, defeats your own security,— that oath was taken only that 
you might not be forsworn; and therefore cannot stand against the former oath 
wherein you swore to what was right and binding in itself: there you swore to that 
truth from wffiich all other oaths derive their obligation. [For the changes adopted 
by Hudson in the text of his ed. ii, see 11 . 216-219. Of Staunton’s 

change of proof for ‘truth,’ i. 218, he says: ‘This would be a rather bold change; 
and I prefer test, as a word more likely to be misprinted truth I see no possibility 
of making any sense out of the passage without some such change; and test is re- 
peatedly used by Shakespeare as an equivalent for proof. Perhaps we ought also 
to read untrue instead of ^‘unsure”; but “unsure’’ may well be taken in much the 
same sense as untrue — not to be relied on, or untrustworthy. Some of the strain- 



224 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act Hi. sc. i. 


[214-220. It is religion ... to sweare] 

ings and writhings of exegetical ingenuity that have been resorted to in support 
of the old text are ludicrous enough.’ — Whether this last be intended by Hudson 
as a recantation of his own interpretation, is not quite manifest, — Ed.] — R. G 
White characterises the Folio reading ‘By what,’ L 216, as ‘a manifest misprint,' 
and although he follows Capell in reading ‘By which,’ considers the emendation 
‘By thaV very plausible, and possibly the Author’s word. He credits this last 
to Staunton, however. In regard to the last three lines White says: ‘The words 
being taken in their ordinary and obvious signification, the passage has the very 
meaning and all the clearness which the casuistical churchman intended it should 
have.’ Of Malone’s elucidation White says: ‘Who shall explain the explanation?’ 
— Snider (ii, 304) : The form of Pandulph’s argument is most happy; the bald, 
logical utterances of scholastic divinity echo from every line; the vein of fine-spun 
casuistry, confusing the head and misleading the heart, gives a suspicious subtlety 
to the whole speech. But it is far from being a mere sophistical jumble of words; 
on the contrary, it is a genuine statement of the right of religious authority against 
the right of individual opinion. There is, however, a most important suppression 
in the argument of the Legate. It is that the prime duty of religion is to quicken 
the conscience of man; and when the organization of religion— the Church — for 
its own purposes seeks to deaden that conscience, its right of existence has ceased. 
Philip is manifestly not convinced, but withdraws his opposition, and hencefor- 
ward drops out of the play. — ^P eering (p. 193) : That is to say, by swearing two 
things which are irreconcilable with each other, the one being fidelity to the King 
of England, the other fidelity to the Church; and so thou art making an oath a 
surety for thy truth against an oath. Surety for thy truth indeed! The truths 
as to which thou art so unsure — for how canst thou with aU thy vacillation and 
equivocation give any suretyship for it? — the truth, the tongue of truth, the man 
of truth, swears only not to be forsworn; truth’s sole object is truth, but thy object 
is falsehood — thou dost swear only to be forsworn. — Marshall (reading 1 . 216, 
‘By that . . . thou swear’st &y’) thus paraphrases: ‘By that (i. e., swearing against 
religion) you swear against that by which you swear, and make your second oath 
the guarantee of your truth in not keeping your first one. The truth (i. e., the 
loyalty to the Church) to which you are unsure (i. e., hesitating) to swear, takes an 
oath only with the object of not breaking it, and Pandulph adds: But you take 
an oath only with the object of breaking it; that is, by taking an oath of fidelity 
to John, who was the declared enemy of the Church to which he had already sworn 
‘allegiance, Philip was deliberately forswearing himself. The change of “swears,” 
1 . 219, to swear (imperative) is not necessary. All attempts, however, to render 
this passage clear must be only partially successful, the obscurity being intentional.’ 
— ^Page: With the pointing as in the Folio the meaning might be: It is only re- 
ligion which gives a binding sanctity to oaths; but you have sworn against religion 
itself, by the fact that you have sworn against the very thing you swear to (as a 
matter of universal obligation); and you make your oath a security for your truth 
against a previous and absolutely binding oath. When yourself about an uncer- 
tain matter (not a religious vow), you swear a reaUy binding oath only in case 
you are not forsworn (by breaking the former absolutely binding oath); if this 
were not so, swearing itself would be a mockery; but you actually swear only to 
break your oath. These lines have never been satisfactorily explained. They 
are probably intended as a specimen of mediasvalxasuistry, purposely obscure. — 



ACT III, SC. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


225 

215 [280] 


But thou hafl fworne againfl religion: 

By what thou fwear^ft againft the thing thou fwear^ft, 


216. what] that Han, Marsh, which. 
Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Wh. i, Dyce ii, iii, 
Rife. 

thing... Jwear^Jl] Ff, Rowe, Han. 


Knt. thing... swear’ si by; Cap. Marsh. 
tking...swear’st, Pope et cet. thing... 
swor’st Ktly conj. 


Mooke Smith follows the Folio in coupling lines 214 and 215, and connecting 
1 . 216 with what follows; he also inserts a stop after ‘oath/ 1 . 218. He interprets 
these lines: ‘Of course Pandulph is arguing that Philip’s oath to John is perjury, 
because it is a violation of his primary vow to heaven’; and continues his para- 
phrase from 1 , 216 on thus: ‘In so far as thou takest an oath contrary to an oath 
already taken, and makest the new oath a surety of thy truth as against the old 
one, thy second oath which thou art unstable enough to swear, is only taken as a 
pledge that thou wilt not forswear thyself: without such a pledge the oath would 
be a mere mockery: but in thy case thou art actually swearing to forswear thyself, 
and accordingly art most deeply forsw''oni by keeping the oath,’ Moore Smith 
adds: ‘In U. 218, 219 a difficulty arises from the fact that “the truth” is made 
the grammatical subject of “swears,” whereas logic requires (instead of “swears”) 
“thou swearest.”’ — Ivor Jom: These lines can be taken to mean: You have 
sworn against religion by calling in religion to witness an oath which will do her 
harm. ‘The truth . , . forswome’ is the phrase that offers most difficulty. It 
yields sense by supposing it to be a slight digression from the main argument, 
meaning: ‘and when you are asked to take an oath of which you are not sure of 
the consequences (such as, Pandulph would imply, the oath you took with John) 
you only swear, i. e., on condition that it is not contrary to some greater oath.’ — 
Beuden (Tidor Sh.) : Philip is under vow, presumably from the time of his corona- 
tion, ‘to be the champion of our Church’; it is the Church,!, e., religion, that makes 
an oath binding; his recent oath to John can be kept only against the church and 
religion, and is therefore null and void. ‘The truth thou art unsure to swear, 
swears only not to be forsworn’ must apparently mean: ‘The pledge there is so 
little confidence of your ability to keep that you have to confirm it with an oath, 
is confirmed with an oath only in order that it may be kept a rather empty propo- 
sition. — Wright: That is, by the oath thou hast taken thou hast sworn against 
religion, which is the thing thou swearest by. Compare: ‘This has no holding 
To swear by him whom I protest to love, That I will work against him.’ — All’s 
Well, IV, ii, 27-29. The great difficulty of the passage lies in the words, ‘ the truth, 
thou art unsure To swear, swears only not to be forsw’orn.’ Pandulph’s argument 
is that no oath is binding which is opposed to the higher obligations of religion. 
The vow to God must be kept before and above all others. Other pledges of faith 
are of less certain obligation, and only bind the person who gives them not to 
commit perjury; but if by keeping them he breaks his vow to God he commits per- 
jury in the highest degree, and to avoid this must break that pledge which is less 
binding than his religious obligation. The language is made intentionally obscure. 
[Commenting on the changes made by Staunton and Hudson, Wright says that 
‘thereby they have given the passage a meaning which is sufficiently clear, but 
may not be what Shakespeare intended/] 

^5 



226 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act III, sc. L 

And maWfl an oath the furetie for thy truth, 217 [282] 

Againft an oath the truth, thou art vnfure 


217-222. And mak^Ji..,fweare^] Om. 
Words. Dono. 

217. oath . . . truth] oath — , . . truth — 
Huds. ii. 

218. oath] oath. Johns. Var. '73, Ktly, 
Neils. Moore Smith, oath: Var. ’78, 
’85, Mai. Steev. Van*. Sing. Knt, Coll. 
Hal. Wh. Sta. Cam.-f* oath, — Huds. ii. 

the truth,] the truth; Rowe ii. 


the truth Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. 
that truth Han. the proof Sta. conj, 
//fe Huds. ii. the truth Itlexx, the oath 
Kinnear. 

218. thou art] thou he’ si Herr, then 
most Orson. 

vnfure] untrue Han. unsure — 
Warb. unsure. Cap. Fie. Huds. ii, 
Orson. 


218, 219. the truth . . . forswome] Knight: That is, the troth, for which you 
have made an oath the surety, against thy former oath to heaven — this troth 
which it was unsure to swear — which you violate your surety in swearing — has 
only been sworn — swears only — not to be forsworn; but it is sworn against a former 
oath, which is more binding, because it was an oath to religion — to the principle 
upon which all oaths are made. — Collier’s explanation of these lines is substan- 
tially that of Knight; taking Hruth’ as the nominative to 'swears,’ since Rowe’s 
change swear leaves the verb without any word to govern it. [Rowe intended, 
I think, that 'swear’ should here be taken as the categorical imperative. — Ed.] — 
Cambridge Edd. (Note XVIII.): In 1 . 218 Mr Halliwell appears to adopt swear’ st 
in his note, though he leaves 'swears’ in the text. — C. & M. Cowden Clarke: 
This appears to mean, 'The truth thou art hesitating to abide by, swears itself 
not to be forsworn.’ The difficulty and obscurity in this speech chiefly arise from 
the expression 'swear’ and 'swear’st,’ being equally used for what has been sworn 
at different times; or in other words, 'thy later vows’ and 'thy first’; but the 
very confusion thus produced in the line of argument has characteristic effect. — 
Moberly: This line, 218, is the most difficult in the speech. As the meaning at 
the bottom of it plainly is, that swearing would be to no purpose unless oaths 
were taken with an intention of keeping them, we may render it by, 'The truth 
according to which you cannot be trusted to swear, swears only not to be for- 
sworn’; that is, 'with a view of keeping its oath. But your oath is in itseff a per- 
jury (11. 2 21, 2 2 2) , and most a perjury if you keep what you have sworn.’ [Vaughan 
(i, 46) paraphrases substantially as the foregoing. — ^Ed.] — Bulloch (p. 129) some- 
what rashly asserts that 'unsure’ is here a misprint for adjured, and this it is which 
makes Pandulph’s meaning ‘not quite clear’; although, as Bulloch says, this 
word does not occur in Shakespeare, yet it 'was in common use in his day, occurring 
several times in the common English Bible.’ [By this last reference it may be pre- 
sumed that Bulloch means the Authorised Version of 1611, He is quite correct 
in saying that adjure or adjured occurs therein; in fact, the words may be found in 
seven passages, but in the corresponding sentences in both the Genevan Version, 
1560, and the Bishops’ Bible, 1568, the Hebrew word is translated either sware 
or charged, and the word adjured is found but once common to both translations 
of the Greek word opd^oji^v in Acts, fax, 13: ‘We adjure you,’ etc. The word 
can, therefore, hardly be said to have been in 'common use’ at the date of 
composition of the present play. — ^E d.]— W. W, Lloyd (N. S* Q., 1889; VII, 
viii, *302); The mischief here evidently lies in the negative term 'unsure.’ The 
argument, which has to be accommodated by whatever change is made, runs to 



ACT III, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


227 


To (weare, fweares onely not to be forfworne, 

Elfe what a mockerie fhouid it be to fweare? 220 [285] 

But thou doft fweare, onely to be forfworne, 

And moft forfworne, to keepe what thou dofl fweare, 

Therefore thy later vowes, againfl thy firft, 223 [288]; 


219. To fweare] Who swears Cap. 
Huds. ii. In swearing Herr. 

fweares] swear Rowe 11 , 4 “ • 
fwears F3F4 et cet. 

219, 220. to be. ..fhouid] to seem...will 
Herr. 

220. fweare?] swear! Dyce, Hal. Ktly, 


Sta. Cam. 4 -, Huds. ii, Neils. Craig. 

222. And] Art Vaughan. , 
fweare,] swear. Pope et seq. 

223. later] latter F3F4, Rowe,+, Capv 
Varr. Mai. Steev. Varr. Sing. 

vowes] vow Dyce ii, iii. Coll, iii, 
Huds. ii, Words. Dono. Kinnear. 


the effect, 'What a mockery should it be to swear, unless the proper tenor of the 
oath — such an oath as thou art alone authorized to swear — is not to be forsworn.’ 
To read ‘the truth thou art assured to swear,’ using assured, as Shylock does, in 
the sense of having sufficient security, would suit the argument; and the general 
parallelism with the phrase ‘surety for thy truth,’ in the preceding line, is quite in 
the style of his eminence’s inversions and repetitions throughout the speech. 
Another suggestion would be ^secure to swear,’ but more risky. — ^H erford: Pan- 
dulph argues that Philip’s oath to John is perjury as a violation of his primary 
vow to heaven; that perjured oath he takes as a surety of his good faith. But 
to take an oath of good faith (otherwise insecure) is a mere mockery, unless it 
implies that he who takes it is not thereby forsworn, whereas Philip is forsworn in 
the very act of swearing. — ^hliss Porter: Both [Johnson’s period after ‘oath’ 
and the modern colon] seem less clear and strong than the ellipsis of the entire 
original line unbroken, followed by the next line which adds a clause: Against 
an oath (strong emphasis on Against) is that truth which thou art unsure to swear 
without that oath! (which needs your Christian fealty as the oath to ensure it) — 
that truth which the oath swears, only not to be (itself) forsworn (i. e,, solely on 
condition it is not forsworn itself), is itself a sound security, held inviolate. [There 
could, I think, hardly be produced a proof of the success of Pandulph’s casuistry 
more conclusive than the foregoing array of paraphrases and suggestions; and, 
on the other hand, the silence of Philip, baffled and bewildered, is quite as strong 
an evidence that the result which the Legate intended is accomplished. — E d.] 

223, 224. Therefore thy . . . vowes . . . Is] Moberly: That is. Therefore to 
put thy later vows, etc., whence the singular verb. Pandulph’s support of inward 
truth and right as against conventional honour and faithfulness (and against the 
reasoning of those who say, like Lady Macbeth, ‘You have sworn to do this thing, 
and therefore must do it’) is an admirable specimen of the way in which an argu- 
ment, true in itself, even though employed for a sophistical purpose, may be 
thrown into the most varied lights; perhaps also the most striking instance known 
to literature of close and compressed antithesis, such, it might have been supposed 
(how vain a supposition wffien Shakespeare is its object), that no one could have 
been capable of writing without a thorough training in scholastic logic. [Dawson 
in like manner accounts for this use of the singular verb.] — ^V’ right: The verb 
is singular on account of ‘rebellion,’ which follows. Exactly the opposite is found 
in Richard II: ‘ Now, sir, the sound that tells what hour it is, Are clamorous groans,’ 
V, V, 56. [This explanation is, I think, preferable to that of Moberly and Dawson* 



228 


THE LIFE AND DEATH [act hi, sc. i. 


Is in thy felfe rebellion to thy felfe: 

And better conquefl neuer canft thou make, 225 [290] 

Then arme thy conftant and thy nobler parts 
Againll thefe giddy loofe fuggeflions: 

Vpon which better part, our prayrs come in, 

If thou vouchfafe them. But if not, then know 

The perill of our curfes light on thee 230 [295] 

So heauy, as thou {halt not fliake them off 

But in defpaire, dye vnder their blacke weight. 

Auji. Rebellion, flat rebellion* 

Bafi. Wirt not be? ^ 234 

224. thy felfe:] thyself, Johns. Var. ’73. Words. Dono. Craig. 

227. thefe] those Huds. i. 229. then know] theUy knoWy Cap. 

giddy loofe] giddyloose Walker, then, known^ Var. ’73. then knoiv, Sing. 

Dyce ii, iii, Huds. ii, Words. Knt, Coll. Hal. Wh. i, Sta. Huds. i, 

fuggeflions] suggestions Fie. Del. Fie. Dono. 

228. prayrs] prairs Fa. prayers 230. light] lights Hal. Ktly. 

Rowe, Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. Wh. 233-235. Rebellion... thine?] Om. 

i. prayers Han. et cet. Dono. 

22<^,them,] Ff, Rowe,-|-, Cam.+, 2^$, fiat rebellion.] flat rebellion! Ven. 
Neils, them: Cap, Varr. Mai. Rann, ’78 et cet. 

Steev. Varr. Sing, Kht. them; Coll. 234. WiVi] F2F3. Wilt Cap. WilVt 
Dyce, Hal. Wh. i, Rtly, Sta. Dei. Fie. F4 et cet. 


For this construction we may compare the familiar words: ‘The wages of sin is 
death.’ — Ed.] 

226. Then arme, etc.] Moore Smith: ‘Mr Worrall sends me an excellent parallel 
from Shirley’s Doubtful Heir, IV, ii: “I cannot Now right you more than mourn 
and give belief to you.” ’ 

227. suggestions] That is, temptations, promptings to evil. 

229. If thou vouchsafe them] C. & M, Cowdek Clarke {Sh. Key, p. 322): 
That is, if you vouchsafe to accept them on the conditions stated. 

230. curses light] W^'kight: Here ‘light’ is plural on account of the nearer 
substantive ‘curses,’ Compare: ‘The posture of your blows are yet unknown.’ 
— JuL Cces., V, i, 33. 

233. Rebellion, flat rebellion] Moberly: That is, flat rebellion of John against 
the Church. — ^Deighton, with more likelihood, I think, says, ‘this seems to refer 
to Pandulph’s words, 1 . 224: ‘Ts in thyself rebellion to thyself.”’ — Ed, 

234. Wirt not be] It is somewhat strange that Capell’s sagacious omission 
of the second I and the apostrophe has received such scant attention. With his 
reading the phrase at once becomes, Wilt (thou) not be (quiet) ; but the words as 
usually printed can only mean ‘Will it not be flat rebellion,’ a rather tame phrase 
for Faulconbridge to utter in corroboration of a speech by Austria, and having 
no connection with the next line. Moberly interprets: ‘Win nothing settle you?’ 
but just how such a meaning can be wrested from the words ‘WTl’t not be?’ is 
not quite clear, Deighton says: ‘That is, that you will hold your tongue’; by 
which, if I understand him, he means: Will it not be flat rebellion when you will 




ACT III, SC. i.] OF KING JOHN 229 

Will not a Calues-skin flop that mouth of thine? 235 [298] 

Daul. Father, to Armes. 

Blanch, Vpon thy wedding day ? [300] 

Againfl the blood that thou haft married? 

Whatjfhall our feafl be kept with flaughtered men? 

Shall braying trumpets, and loud churlifh drums 240 

Clamors of hell, be meafures to our pomp? 

0 husband heare me : aye, alacke, how new [305] 

Is husband in my mouth ? euen for that name 

Which till this time my tongue did nere pronounce; 

Vpon my knee I beg,goe not to Armes 245 

Againfl mine Vncle. 

Conjl, O, vpon my knee made hard with kneeling, 

1 doe pray to thee, thou vertuous Daulphiuj 248 [310] 


235. Calues-skin] Ff, Rowe, Fie. 
calve^s-skin Theob.-{-. calfs-skin Cap. 
et cet. 

236. DauL] Lewis. Rowe et seq. 

to Armes] to arms! Han. Johns. 

et seq. 

237. 238. day^ ...married?] day!. ..mar- 
ried! Ktly. 

238. married] marrihd Fie. Words. 
Bono. 

239. What] What! Coll, iii, Craig. 

240. 241. drums...hell] drums , — ... 
hell , — Cap. Var. ’78, Mai. Steev. Varr. 
Sing. Dyce, Hal. Hnds. Words. 

242. heare me:] hear me! Cap. et seq. 
242, 24s. aye, ...mouth?] In paren- 
theses Theob.-b, Varr. Mai. Steev. 


Varr. Knt, Coll. Dyce, Hal. Sta. Huds. 
Del. Rife, Words, Dono. 

242. aye, alackc,] ah! alack, Theob ii, 
Warb. Johns. Var. ’73. ah, alack, 
Steev. Varr. Dono. ah, alack! Sing. 
Coll, ii, iii, Wh. i, Ktly, Huds. Del. 
ay, alack! Craig. 

243. my mouth?] thy mouth! Han. 
my mouth; Craig. 

euen] e'ln Pope,-}- ( — Van ’73). 

244. ner^ neWe F4. ne'er Rowe. 
247-249. 0 , vpon...heauen] Lines end: 

knee, .. .thee,.. doome...heauen. Pope et 
seq. 

247. 0 ,] 0 / Coll. Sing, ii, Huds. Del. 
Craig. Oh! Ktb^ 

248. Daulphin] Ff, Fie. Dauphin 
Rowe et cet. 


hold your tongue. He also adds as an alternative interpretation that we read here 
Wilt, apparently unaware that therein he is anticipated by Capell. — Ed. 

235. of thine] For other examples of this construction see, if needful, Abbott, 
§239. Compare III, ii. Si : Hhis foot of mine.’ 

240, 241. Shall . . , to our pomp] Malone: This is formed on the following 
lines in Troublesome Raigne: ^ Blanch. And will your grace upon your wedding 
day Forsake your bride, and follow dreadful drums. . . . PUL Drums shall be 
music to this wedding day.’ [See Appendix, Troublesome Raigne, pt i, p. 494.] 
240. braying trumpets] FIolx White, quite needlessly, I think, quotes seven 
passages from various writers in support of his statement that ^ “Bray” appears 
to have been particularly applied to express the harsh grating sound of the trumpet.’ 
It might, on the other hand, be said that such was but a transferred meaning, and 
that the word was particularly applied originally to the characteristic cry of the 
donkey. — E d. 



230 


THE LIFE AND DEATH [act m, sc. L 


250 


Alter not the doome fore-thought by heauen. 

Blan. Now fhall I fee thy loue, what motiue may 
Be ftronger with thee, then the name of wife.^ 

Con, That which vpholdeth him, that thee vpholds, 
His Honor, Oh thine Honor, Lewis thine Honor. 


249. he(xueyi\ Heaven Rowe,-!-. 
heaven! Dyce, Hal. Wh. i, Cam.-f-, Dei. 
Huds. ii, Words. Dono. Neils. 

250. loue,] Ff, Rowe, Pope. love . — 
Var. ^73, Knt, Coll. Wh. i, Ktly, Sta. 
Bel. Fie. Dono. Neils, love; Theob. et 
cet. 

251. then] than F4. 

253. Honor, Oh] honour. Oh F3F4, 
Rowe.-f, Wh. i, Ktly, Bono. Neils. 


[315] 

253 

honour; — 0, Cap. Byce, Hal. honour: 
Oh, Var. ^78, ^85, Mai. Steev. Varr. 
Sing. Knt, Sta. Huds. Cam.-h, Words. 
honour 01 Coll. Sing, ii, Bel. Craig. 

253. Lewis] Louis Byce, Hal. Wh. i, 
Huds. ii. Words. 

I-ewis thine Honor.] F2F3. Lewis, 
thine Honor. F4, Rowe, Coll. Del. Fie. 
Bono. LewiSi thine honour ! — Theob. 
et cet. 


252, 253. That which . . . thine Honor] Beighton: These words recall 
Lovelace’s lines to Lucasta, on going to the wars: ‘I could not love thee, dear, so 
much Lov’d I not honour more.’ 

253. Lewis thine Honor] Campbell (Life of Mrs Siddons, i, 210): When she 
patted Lewis on the breast, with the words, ‘Thine honour — oh, thine honour!’ 
there was a sublimity in the laugh of her sarcasm. — Fletchee, whose knowledge 
of Mrs Siddons’s acting of the part of Constance is derived from Campbell’s and 
her own account, objects to this conception of these words on the following grounds 
(p. 24) : ‘We must affirm that anything like sarcastic expression of this passage is 
quite inconsistent with the essential character of Constance, and most inappropriate 
to the occasion upon which it is delivered. . . . She is now encouraged to strain 
every nerve of her intellect and her eloquence in enforcing the Cardinal’s denuncia- 
tion against her principal oppressor, and his menace to the most potent of her 
treacherous friends. The Dauphin, whose sense of honour throughout the piece 
is represented as more susceptible than his father’s, is the first to show signs of their 
late political engagements. Upon this relenting emotion she eagerly lays hold; 
and in opposition to the entreaty of his bride, who kneels to beg that he will not 
turn his arms against her uncle, makes the fervent religious adjuration, ‘Thou vir- 
tuous dauphin, alter not the doom Forethought by heaven!’ And to Blanch’s 
last appeal she rejoins by urging triumphantly the noble moral sentiment [con- 
tained in 11. 252 and 253], And on Philip’s consenting to break the treaty, she 
concludes with the grateful exclamation: ‘Oh, fair return of banish’d majesty!’ 
Where, we would ask, is the tone of sarcasm in all this? The slightest touch of 
it might have defeated the very object, dearest to her on earth, for which she 
was pleading, by checking and offending those ‘compunctious visitings’ the first 
symptoms of which she was alert to observe and to nourish in the breasts of her 
unfaithful friends. Sarcasm from her lips at such a moment! No, indeed — Con- 
stance, and Shakespeare, know too well what they are about, ffn another article, 
written a few years later, Fletcher deals with the acting of the part of Constance 
by Helena Faucit, later Lady Martin. In speaking of her action at this present 
passasre he says: ‘Most affectingly and impressively beautiful, to our mind, is the 
expression of the noble nature of the heroine, which her representation gives to 
the kneeling appeals which Constance makes to the virtuous dauphin. Already, 



ACT ni, sc. i.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


231 


Dolph. I mufe your Maiefty doth feeme fo cold, [317] 

When fuch profound refpe6ls doe pull you onP 255 

Pand* I will denounce a curfe vpon his head. 

Fra. Thou fhalt not need. England ^ I will fall fro thee. [320] 
Conjl. 0 faire returne of banifh^d Maieftie. 

Elea. O foule reuolt of French inconftancy. 

Eng . France, y lhalt rue this houre within, this houre* 260 
BaJi.Old Time the clocke fetter, y bald fexton Time: 

Is it as he will? well then, France fhall rue. 262 [325] 


254. Dolph,] Ff. Lou. Dyce, Hal. 
Wh. i, Huds. ii, Words. Lewis. Rowe 
et cet. 

255. on 7 ] on. Han. Cap. et seq. 

257. need.] need F4. 

I will] Ff, Rowe, Knt, Dyce i, 
Wh. Hal. Sta. Cam.+, Dono. Fll 
Pope et cet. 


258, 259. Maiejiie... .inconftancy.] 

Majesty! ...inconstancy! Pope et seq. 

260. Eng.] K. John. Rowe et seq. 
y] thou Ff. 

261, 262. Raft. 0 !d...rue] Om. Dono. 

261. bald] hauld F3. 

262. Is it] Is it, Pope, 4 “* 


in speaking of Mrs Siddons’s acting of the part, we have fully expressed our opinion 
as to the true reading of this important passage. We have here only to add that 
Miss Faucit gives that reading, as it seems to us, with admirable affect, delivering 
especially, with all that noble and generous fervour which we conceive belongs 
to it, the unanswerable answer to Blanch contained in h. 252 and 253.’] 

255. respects] Craigie (N. E. D., s. v. sb. 14.) : A consideration; a fact or motive 
which assists in, or leads to, the formation of a decision; an end or aim. [The 
present line quoted. Compare V, ii, 47; V, iv, 45.] 

256. denounce] MxnuiAy (N. E. D., s. v.vb. i.): To give formal, authoritative, 
or official information of; to proclaim, announce, declare. 

257. fall fro] Wright: That is, desert. Compare Heywood: Tf he will re- 
cant And fall from Lewis again. ^ — 2 Edward IV: lyvi. 

261, 262. Old Time . . . shall rue] Vischer {Vortrage, iv, 34): A charming 
id^; thoroughly Shakespearean, with its train of images. It was not to be 
a cause, only Time, that old bald Sexton, the clock-setter, a lean gray mannikin 
who goes in and out of a tower in order to strike upon a bell. A capital example, 
if one were to speak on the subject of the value of metaphor. — ^Vaughan (i, 99) : 
The order of thought here is indistinctly and elliptically expressed. It is as fol- 
lows: Old Time sets the clock, and as he does this duty of the parish sexton, 
also probably does his other duty of digging graves. By his calling therefore he 
is bound to wish for as many deaths as possible. If Time, therefore, is to do what 
he likes, he will make the French rue.—MooRE Smith: Is the remorse of France 
to be, as John says, contingent merely on the course of Time? Well then, it is a 
certainty .“^Deighton’s intexpi^^tation is substantially the same as Moore Smithes; 
he adds: ^Of course there is no logical connection between the two things [i. e., 
Time's decision and France's repentence]; in fact, the humour consists in their 
irrelevancy.' — ^Ivor John thinks this comment of the Bastard lacks the ‘usual 
salt of his remarks.^ [But is it not just such a sarcastic speech as we should 
expect from him? In effect he says: Whatl Is France's punishment to depend 
upon the action of an old bald sexton? Well, if that is all; France will indeed be 



232 


THE LIFE AND DEATH [act hi, sc. i. 


Bla. The Sun’s orecaft with bloud : faire day adieu, 263 [326] 


Which is the fide that I muft goe withall? 

I am with both, each Army hath a hand, 265 

And in their rage, I hauing hold of both. 

They whurle a-funder, and difmember mee. [330] 

Husband, I cannot pray that thou maift winner 
Vncle, I needs muft pray that thou maift lofe: 

Father, I may not wilh the fortune thine: 270 

Grandam, I will not wifh thy wifties thriue: 

Who-euer wins,on that fide fhall I lofe: [3351 

Affured Ioffe, before the match be plaid. 273 


263. day] pay F4. 

adieu,] adieu! Theob. et seq. 

267. a-Junder] ajfunder F3F4. asunder 
Rowe. 

268, 269. maijl] may’Ji F4 et seq. 


271. Grandam] Grandame Cap. Knt, 
Sta. Fie. 

27$. AJfured] Assured Dyce, Fie, 
Hiids. ii, Words. Dono. 

plaid] played Pope et seq. 


well punished. Faulconbridge has previously shown his utter scorn of anything 
less than vigorous action for the settlement of a quarrel. — Ed.] 

264. withall] Rev. John Hunter: When SvithaP is, as here, a preposition 
equivalent to mih, it always follows its object, which is often a relative pronoun, 
as in the present instance. It will, of course, be without an object when it belongs 
to the passive participle of a preposition-verb, as in: *He^s within, sir, but not to 
be spoken withal.’ — Tam. of Shr., V, i, 22. Frequently its object, when that is a 
relative pronoun, has to be supplied in parsing; as in: ^The adversary (whom) 
I come to cope withal.’ — King Lear, V, iii, 123. Wlien ‘withal’ is an adverb, it 
signifies therewith; as in: ‘I must have liberty withal.’ — As You Like It, II, vii, 
48. But we sometimes meet with the redundant form, ‘therewithal, as in: ‘And 
therewithal came to this vault to ditl—Rom. ^ JuL, V, iii, 289. [See Abbott, 
§ 196; or Maetzner, ii, p. 146.] 

267. They . . . dismember mee] Steevens : Alluding to a well-known Roman 
punishment: ‘ — ^l^Ietium in diversa quadrigas Distulerant.’—JS';2ewf, viii, 642. 
[On this note Malone remarks that ‘Shakespeare was much more likely to have 
alluded in cases of this sort to events which had happened in his own time than 
to the Roman history’; and refers to a note of his on ‘Death on the wheel, or at 
wild horses heels,’ Coriol., Ill, ii, 2, wherein he says: ‘Shakespeare had probably 
read or heard that Balthazar de Gerrard, who assassinated William, Prince of 
Orange, in 1584, was torn to pieces by wild horses,’ and so likewise was John 
Chaste! in 1594 for attempting to assassinate Henry IV. of France. Since this 
last date is near to that of the composition of the present play it may be that 
Shakespeare here alludes to that mode of punishment reserved for the most heinous 
crimes. — Ed.] 

272* Who-euer wins] Rev. John Hunter: Similarly, in Ant. y- Cleo., Ill, 
iv, 12, Octavia, perplexed about the hostility between her brother Caesar and her 
husband Antony, says: ‘A more unhappy lady, If this division chance, ne’er stood 
between, Praying for both parts. . . . Husband win, win brother, Prays, and de- 
stroys the prayer.* ^ 


THE UNIVERSITY 

RECEiV ! 




ACT III, SC. i.] 


OF KING JOHN 


233 


Dolph. Lady, with me, with me thy fortune lies* [337] 

Bla. There where my fortune Hues, there my life dies. 275 
lohn, Co fen, goe draw our puifance together, 

France,! am burned vp with inflaming wrath, [340] 

A rage, whofe heat hath this condition; 

That nothing can allay, nothing but blood, 

The blood and deereft valued bloud of France, 280 

Fra, Thy rage fliall burne thee vp, & thou fhalt turne 
To aflies, ere our blood fhall quench that fire: [345] 

Looke to thy felfe,thou art in ieopardie. 283 


274. Lady, with me,] Lady, with me; 
Cap. et seq. 

lies] lives Cap. Words. 

275. Hues] li’es Fleay. 

276. puifance] puijfance F3F4. 
together,] together, [Ex. Bast. 

Pope et seq. 

278. condition;] Ff, Rowe, Pope. 
condition Theob.-F* condition. Cap. 
et cet, 

279. allay] allay' t Cap. conj. Dyce 


ii, iii, Huds. ii, Words. 

280. The blood] Ff, Rowe. The best, 
Walker, Huds. ii, Words. The blood, 
Pope et cet. 

and] the Huds. ii. (conj.). 
deereft valued] dearest valu'd 
Rowe, Pope, Var. 'S5, Sing. Ktly, 
Huds. i. dearest-valued Theob. et cet. 
bloud] blue Bulloch. 

2^1, fhalt] fhall F4, Rowe i. 


274. thy fortune lies] Capell (I, pt ii, 129): This [reading lives for ‘lies’] may 
be pronounc’d with great certainty — o. genuine reading, and ‘lies’ its corruption 
by one enamour’d of rhyme; for the reply is created by it, and depends on it wholly, 
and inattention or blindness must have been the cause of its appearing in no modern. 

275. Hues] Fleay: ‘Lives’ was often pronounced lees, as here [see Text, Notes]', 
so that lie and live had the same sound. The letter v could be omitted between 
any two vowels. Thus in Tancred and Gismunda, III, chorus, lo'e (love) rhymes to 
ovtxthrow, and in Edward III, gi'e (give) rhymes to buy; London Frodigal, II, 
i, mo'e (move) rh3mies to too. Chapman is distinguished from all other dramatists 
by his frequent adoption of this pronunciation. 

280. The blood] Moberly: Walker must surely be right in proposing, ‘The 
best, and dearest-valued.’ [Moberly does not, however, adopt this in his text, — 
Ed.] — ^IvoR John: The repetition of the word ‘blood’ has led to emendation. 
The text is, however, defensible. John says, nothing can allay his rage but blood; 
he is going to state that it must be French blood, and when half-way through the 
sentence he sees a method of heightening the effect and interjects ‘and (that the) 
dearest valued blood.’ — [So far from agreeing with Moberly or those who have 
adopted Walker’s change, I think that any substitution here appreciably weakens 
the effect produced by this explosive repetition. John is fairly stammering with 
rage; the reiterated ‘nothing’ in the preceding line has the same force. — Ed.] 

2S3. ieopardie] Wright: The origin of this word seems to be the French 
parti, a game in which the risk is evenly dirided. In Du Cange (Gloss., s. v. locus) 
locus parlitus is.^‘an alternative.' ‘The risk involved in accepting an alternative 
is taken as the n oresentative of any risk whatever, and hence jeopardy has the 
general meaning di ‘‘hazard’” (Wright, s. v. Jeopard). — [Mooeh 

Smtth notes that the word does not occur elsewhere in Shakespeare.] 



^34 


THE LIFE AND DEA TH [act hi, sc. ii. 


Jofcw.No more then he that threats. To Arms leTs hie. [347] 

Exeunt. 285 


Scana Sectmda* 


AllarumSy Excurjions : Enter Bajiard with Aujlrid^s 2 

head. 


Baft. Now by my life, this day grows wondrous hot, 

Some ayery Deuill houers in the skie, 5 


284. then] than F4. 

To Arms] To Arms! Var. ’73, 
Sta. To arms, Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Mai. 
leHs] Fx. 

hie?i Ff, Rowe, 4 ~, Sta. Fie. 
hid Cap. et cet. 

285. Exeunt.] Exeunt, severally the 
English and French Kings, &c. Dyce, 
Hal. Words. 

I. Scoena Secunda] Scene in. 
Pope. Scene iv. Warb. Johns. Act 
m, sc. i. Bono. 


A Field of Battle. Pope,+, Cap. 
Var. ^78, ’85, Rann. In Castle of An- 
glers. Bono. Plains near Angiers Mai, 
et cet. 

1-15. Om. Bono. 

2. Allarums] Allarms F4. Alarms, 
Rowe. Alarums, as of a Battle joined; 
Cap, 

Baflard] Faulconbridge Theob.+j 
Var. ^78, '85, Rann. 

Auflria’s] a Capell. 

$. ayery] fiery Warb. Theob. Han. 
Coll. iii. (MS.), Huds. ii. 


284. To Arms] Malone {Supplement. Ohs., i, 168): I would point thus, ^To 
arms let’s hie.’ — ^The proposition is, I believe, single. Let us begone to arms! 
[Malone was apparently unaware that he thus restored the reading of the Folio; 
although in his own text he returns to the pointing of his predecessors. — Ed.] 

2, 3. Enter . . . head] Oechelhauser, in his stage arrangement, here makes a 
wide divergence from the original. The scene is still before Angiers; sounds of 
battle are heard; the Bastard pursues Austria across the stage, and then enters 
carrying the lion’s skin, which he casts down, with the words: ‘Lie thou there, 
the ass that wore thee’s fledl’ This line is, of course, Oechelhaiiser’s own con- 
tribution, but the substitution of the lion’s skin for Austria’s head he obtained, I 
think, from J. P. Kemble. In the latter’s arrangement Faulconbridge enters, and 
after the words ‘mischiefe,’ 1. 6, encounters Austria, attacks him, and drives him 
off; then re-enters with the lion’s-skin, which he apostrophises as ‘Austria’s head.’ 
Charles Kean also adopted this arrangement.^ — Ed. 

4. Bast.] F. Gentleman {Dram. Cens., ii, 160): We think the lion’s-skin, as a 
trophy of honor worn by his father, should be worn by the Bastard through the 
remainder of the play. 

5. ayery] Warburton: We must read 'Some fiery devil? if we wiU have the 

eause equal to the Theobald, in support of Warburton’s change, says: 

‘It is a very inconclusive inference, sure, that because it growls wond’rous hot, 
some airy devil hover’d in the sky. It is a sort of reasoning that carries an air of 
ridicule; unless we could determine that the Poet meant no more by the epithet 
than to express the sacred text, in which the Devil is stiled the Frince of the Air.— 
Johnson: Br Warburton will have the devil fiery because he makes the day hot; 
the Author makes him ‘airy* because ‘he hovers in the sky,’ and the heat and 
mischief are natural consequences of Ms malignity, — E dwajrds (Canons, etc., 





ACT III, SC. ii.] OF KING JOHN 235 

And pour's downe miichiti^Auftrias head lye there, 6 

Enter lohnjArthur , Hubert. 

6 . pour’s] pours F4. 7. lohn... Hubert.] King John, witb 

7. Enter.. .Hubert.] After 1 . 8 Cap. et Arthur prisoner; Hubert following, 

seq. Cap. 

p. 53): ‘Airy devil’ seems an allusion to the Prince of the power of the air; but the 
effect described is pouring down mischief, which would suit a watery devil better 
than SL fiery one. — Percy: Shakespeare here probably alludes to the distinctions 
and divisions of some of the demonologists, so much regarded in his time. They 
distributed the devils into different tribes and classes, each of which had its peculiar 
qfualities, attributes, etc. These are described at length in Burton’s Anatomy of 
Melancholy^ Part I, sect, ii, p. 45, ed, 1632: ‘Of these sublunary devils — Psellus 
makes six kinds; fiery, aeriall, terrestrial!, watery, and subterranean devils, besides 
those faieries, satyres, nymphes, &c. Fiery spirits or divells are such as com- 
monly worke by blazing starres, fire-drakes, and counterfeit sunnes and moones, 
and sit on ships’ masts, etc., etc. Aeriall divells are such as keep quarter most 
part in the aire, cause many tempests, thunder lightnings, teare oakes, fire steeples, 
houses, strike men and beasts, make it raine stones,’ etc. — Henderson: There is 
a minute description of devils or spirits, and their different functions, iff Pierce 
Fennilesse his Supplication^ 1592. With respect to the passage in question, take 
the following: ‘ — the spirits of the aire will mixe themselves with thunder and 
lightning, and so infect the clyme where they raise any tempest, that sodainely 
great mortalitie shall ensue to the inhabitants. The spirits of fire have their 
mansions under the regions of the moone,’ [ed. Grosart, p. 115 et seq.]. — F leay^ 
{after quoting the foregoing passages from Burton and Nash, adds]: ‘But when 
proud Lucifer fell from the heavens, . . . They which offended less hung in the 
fire, And second faults did rest within the air; But Lucifer and his proud-hearted 
fiends Were thrown into the centre of the earth.’ — Greene, Friar Bacon, sc. ix. 
This last quotation explains the origin of the belief in airy devils. — C oiuer 
{Notes, etc., p. 204): The MS, Corrector has changed the word ‘ayery’ to/y^y, 
which, we may feel confident, was that of the Poet, and which is so consistent with 
the context. [In his ed. ii. Collier adds: ‘An “airy devil” was not likely to be the 
Bastard’s word, in the midst of the heat and fury of the conflict.’ — Ed.] — Knight 
(Stratford Sh.) : We may venture to think that Collier carries his advocacy too 
far when he quotes [but a part of] what Burton says of ‘fiery devils,’ and there 
stops, although Percy continues the quotation. . . . We turn to Burton, and find 
in another place, where he says of this class who pours down mischief: ‘Paul, to 
the Ephesians, calls them forms of the air.’ Shakespeare knew" this curious learn- 
ing from the Schoolmen; but the Corrector knew nothing about it. —Singer 
(Sh. Vind., p. 86) likewise finds fault mth Collier for quoting but a part of the 
passage from Burton, and entirely omitting that from Nash, given by Henderson. 
In conclusion Singer observes that ‘Nash and Shakespeare most probably drew 
their pneumatology from the same source. The evidence is therefore decisive in 
favour of the old reading.’ [It is, at times, painfully evident that Collier, for his 
knowledge of the w"ork of his predecessors, relies upon the notes contained in the 
Variorum of 1821 alone. In the present instance Warburton’s, Theobald’s, and 
Johnson’s notes on this word are conspicuously absent; and Collier makes no men- 
tion of the coincidence of Warburton’s reading with that of his MS. Corrector. — ^E d.] 



236 


THE LIFE AND DEATH [act m, sc. ii. 


While Philip breathes. 

John. Hubert, keepe this boy: Philip make vp, 


8. While.. Meathes,] Om. Pope,+. 

9. Hubert] There^ Hubert Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. Jolins. Cap. Here^ 
Hubert Ktly, Good Hubert Fie. 

keepe] keep thou Tyrwbitt, Rann, 


8 


Dyce ii, iii, Coll, iii, Huds. ii, Words. 

9. boy:] boy. — ColL Dyce, Hal. Wb. i, 
Ktly, Huds. Del. Neils. Craig. 

Philip] Cousin Han. Words. Rich'^ 
ard Theob. Warb. Johns. 


8. While Philip breathes] Pope omits these words, and in their stead substitutes 
from The Troublesome Raigne the following lines: 

‘Thus hath king Richard’s son perform’d his vow, 

And ojffer’d Austria’s blood for sacrifice 
Unto his father’s ever-living soul.’ 

In this substitution he is followed by Theobald, Hanmer, Warburton, Johnson, 
and the Variorum of 1773. 

8, 9. Philip . . . Philip] Capell (I, pt 2, p. 129): ‘Philip’ is either a slip of the 
Poet’s, caus’d by his remembrance of what had passed in the Quarto, or we may 
ascribe it to haste in both the persons it comes from; in either case it ought not to 
be alter’d. [See Text. Notes y 1 . 9.]— Steevens also calls attention to this very 
natural forgetfulness on the part of the King who had given PhiHp the name of 
Richard on knighting him. — Deighton, while admitting that the words ‘while 
Philip breathes’ may possibly be rightly explained as referring to Philip himself, 
taking breath with a view to renewing the combat, prefers to think that the Bastard 
here means ‘until I have slain Philip,’ adding that ‘it seems more in the char- 
acter of the Bastard to determine upon Philip’s death as well as that of Austria.’ 
—It may be said, however, that Deighton has failed to notice how utterly out of 
character it would be for the Bastard to speak of the King of France without any 
title; even his brother King speaks of him and to him as ‘France.’ — Pepiong is 
also of the opinion that the Bastard does not here refer to himself; he says (p. 194) 
in regard to the name ‘Philip’ in 1 . 9: ‘It may be said that Shakespeare probably 
made the slip [of Philip for Richard]. I think it much more likely that a copyist 
did. His eye caught and his ear yet tingled with the name of Philip, King of 
France j who is mentiomd in the preceding line. If we could but peep into the 
Author’s MS. I believe we should find: “Richard, make up.”’ — pad Perring but 
peeped into Theobald’s ed. he would have found that herein he was antici- 
pated. — ^En.] 

9. Hubert, keepe . . . make vp] Dyce (ed, ii.): In Guest’s Hist, of English 
RhythmSy vol. i, p, 238, this line is cited from the old copy as right, and as resembling 
in metre certain lines of Anglo-Saxon poetry! [The italics and exclamation point 
are Byce’s.—ED.]— Br. Nicholson (N. fir Q., 1887, VII, iii, 264): An ordinary 
eye can see that the dramatist made John make this lapse that he might the more 
contrast the brother and son of Coeur-de-Lion. The battle is, according even 
to the son, ‘wondrous hot.’ . . . The king shows himself weak in resolution and 
fearful, gives .j^rthur into other keeping . . . and fears that his camp is assailed 
and his mother taken. The deed-doing and resolute son of King Richard has, 
unknown! to the nominal leader of the army, rescued her and warded off the danger. 
The king, in his flurry and fear, recurs to Ihe name under which he first knew the 
supposed son of Sir Robert Faulconbridge, Like new-made honour, fear forgets 
the new names of men. 



ACT III, SC. iii.] 


OF KING JOHN 


237 


My Mother is affayled in our Tent, 10 

And tane I feare. 

Bajl. My Lord I ref cued her, 

Her Highnefle is in fafety, feare you not: 

But on my Liege, for very little paines 

Will bring this labor to an happy end. Exit 15 

[Scene III] 

Alarums y excursions ^ Retreat, Enter lohn^ Eleanor ^ Arthur 1 
Bajlardj Hubert, Lords. 


John. So fhall it be : your Grace fhall flay behinde 
So flrongly guarded : Cofen, looke not fad, 4 


10. ajjayled] assailhd Dyce, Fie. Huds. 
ii, Words. 

11. tane] td’en Rowe. 

12. her] her. Ff. 

13. not:] not. Rope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Johns. Fitly, Neils. 

14. on my Liege] on my Leige, Fj. 
on, my Liege, F4. 

15. an] a Cap. Knt, Sing, ii, Hal. 
Coll. iii. 

Exit.] Exeunt. Rowe. 


Scene IV. Pope. Scene v. Han. 
Warb. Johns. Scene iii. Var. ’73 et 
seq. 

I. Alarums] Alarms F4. 

Enter...] Re-enter... Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. 

3. hehinde] behind [To Elinor. Han. 
et seq. (after be: Capell). 

4. So] More Lettsom, Huds. ii. 
guarded:] guarded. C&p. et seq. 
fad] sad, [to Arthur. Pope et seq. 


10, II. My Mother . . . tane I feare] Malone: The Author has not attended 
closely to the history. The Queen-Mother, whom King John had made Regent 
in Anjou, was in possession of the town of Mirabeau, in that province. On the 
approach of the French army with Arthur at their head, she sent letters to King 
John to come to her relief; which he did immediately. As he advanced to the 
town, he encountered the army w^Mch lay before it, routed them, and took Arthur 
prisoner. The Queen in the meanwMe remained in perfect security in the castle 
of Mirabeau. Such is the best authenticated account. Other historians, however, 
say that Arthur took Elinor prisoner. The author of the old play has followed 
them. In that piece Eleanor is taken by Arthur and rescued by her son. 

16. Fleay (Chron. Eng. Drama, ii, 200): The omission Tertia] in the Folio 
arose from the common mistake of printing Exit for Exeunt at the end of III, ii. 
The MS. had probably Ex. The new scene is proved by ^ Enter John, Arthur, 
'Hubert^ in III, iii. It should be edited as III, ii& to preserve the old notation 
through the Act. 

4. So] Masshall objects to Lettsom^s change *^more^ on the ground that Queen 
Elinor had asked for some specified number of forces, see 1 . 94 below. “‘So,** 
therefore, although it looks very much like an accidental repetition by mistake of 
the word in the line above, may be the right reading, the meaning being, *‘so 
strongly guarded as you have asked to be.”^ 

4. Cosen, looke not sad] Knig33T {Studies, p. 204): Up to the concluding scene 
of the third Act we have not leamt from Shakespeare to hate John. We may 
think him an usurperl Our best sympathies may be with Arthur and his mother. 



238 


THE LIFE AND DEA TH [act m, SC. iii. 


Thy Grandame loues thee, and thy Vnkle will 5 

As deere be to thee, as thy father was. 

Arth. O this will make my mother die with griefe. 

Idhn. Cofen away for England, hafle before, 

And ere our comming fee thou fhake the bags 

Of hoarding Abbots, imprifoned angells 10 

Set at libertie : the fat ribs of peace 

Mufl by the hungry now be fed vpon: 12 


5. Grandame] Grandam Rowe et seq. 

7. griefe.] grief I Cam. 4 -. 

S. before,] before, [to tlie Baft. Pope, 
“f , Var. ’78, ’85. (after Cofen) MaL 
et seq. 

10. hoarding] hoarding F3F4. 

10, II. imprifoned angells Set at lib- 
ertie] their imprisoned angels Set at 
liberty Pope, Var. ’73, Coll. ii. (MS.). 
their imprisoned angels Set thou at liberty 
Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. Cap. Steev. 
angels imprison’d Set thou at liberty 


Var. '03, ’13, ’21, Sing. i. imprison’d 
angels Set thou at liberty Knt. set at 
liberty Imprisoned angels Walker (Crit., 
hi, 1 19), Wh. i, Ktly, Dyce ii, hi, Huds. 
h, Rife, Words. Dono. Craig, im- 
prisoned angels Set all at liberty Anon- 
ap. Cam. imprisoned angels Set at good 
liberty Vaughan. 

12. now] war Warb. Theob. maw 
Han. 

vpon:] upon. Pope. 


But he is bold and confident, and some remnant of the indomitable spirit of the 
Plantaganets gives him a lofty and gallant bearing. We are not even sure, from 
the first, that he had not something of justice in his quarrel, even though his 
mother confidentially repudiates ‘his right.’ In the scene with Pandulph we com- 
pletely go with him. We have yet to know that he would one day crouch at the 
feet of the power that he now defies. . . . But the expression of one thought that 
had long been lurking in the breast of John sweeps away every feeling but that of 
hatred, and worse than hatred; and we see nothing hereafter in the king but the 
creeping, cowardly assassin, prompting the deed which he is afraid almost to name 
to himself, with the lowrest flattery of his instrument, and showing us, as it were, 
the sting which wounds, and the slaver which pollutes, of the venomous and loath- 
some reptile. . . . The warrior and the king vanish. 

9, 10. see thou shake . . . Abbots] H. Colekidge: In the old play Faulcon- 
bridge’s execution of this order is exhibited on the stage, and he finds a young- 
skinned nun in a chest where the Abbot’s treasures were supposed to be deposited. 
It showed the good taste and boldness of Shakespeare that he did not retain this 
incident, so well calculated to make vulgar spectators laugh. He makes no reflec- 
tion on the doctrine or discipline of Rome, far less does he calumniate the purity 
of her devoted virgins. He makes a king speak the sentiments of every king 
who did not need the Pope’s countenance. John, when he found this need, crouched 
as vilely to the Pope as the most grovelling of Papists, and Shakespeare does not 
conceal the circumstance. How different from the absurdity of Bishop Bale, who 
makes the murderous, lastfui, impious infidel John a Protestant hero. 

10, imprisoned angells] Miss Pouter: This is, perhaps, a quip on imprisoned 
nuns quite as much as on the coins called ‘angels,’ The first pun would be under- 
stood by those who knew the older play. 

12. Must . . . now be fed vpon] WARBtfRTON: This word ‘now’ seems a very 
idle term here, and conveys no satjsfactoiy idea. An antithesis, and opposition 



ACT III, SC. iii.] 


OF KING JOHN 


239 


Vfe our Commiffion in his vtmofl force. 13 

Baji. Bell, Booke,& Candle, fhall not driue me back, 

13. his] its Rowe,-!-- 

of terms, so perpetual with our Author, requires: ‘by the hungry warJ War 
demanding a large expense, is very poetically said to be ‘hungry,’ and to prey 
on the wealth and ‘fat’ of ‘peace.’ — Johnson: This emendation is better than the 
former word, but yet not necessary. Hanmer reads maw, with less deviation 
from the common reading, but not with so much force or elegance as war. — Capell 
(I, pt ii, p. 129): The word that follows ‘hungry’ is so far from ‘an idle term’ 
that ’tis strongly emphatical, carrying with it the idea of that very word — war — 
which [has been put] in its place; for the time that calls upon John to make this 
; fat-ribbed peace feed the hungry-, is — a time of war. For opposition — we have 

I now as much as is commendable, and in the best way, that is — indirect; for it lies 

i between leanness, which is comprehended in ‘hungry,’ and the above-described 

peace. This image is doubtless excited by the idea we commonly have of such 
I churchmen as fall within the Bastard’s ‘commission.’ Which commission the 

Quarto makes him execute openly; much to the diversion of that play’s auditors, 
f who had papists and papistry fresh in hatred by reason of the Spanish invasion.—* 

Steevens: Either emendation may be unnecessary. Perhaps ‘the hungry now’ 
I is this hungry instant. Shakespeare uses the word ‘now’ as a substantive in 

I Meas.for Meas., ‘ — till this very now, When men were fond, I smil’d and wonder’d 

how,’ II, ii, 186. — [To this Marshall pertinently replies: ‘Unfortunately “till 
‘ this very now” is only the conjectural reading of Pope. The Ff. have “ever till 

I now.”’ — ^E d.] — ^Malone: The meaning, I think, is, the fat ribs of peace must now 

be fed upon by the hungry troops, — to whom some share of this ecclesiastical spoil 
would naturally fall. The expression, like many other of our Author’s, is taken 
from the sacred writings : ‘And there he maketh the hungry to dwell, that they may 
; prepare a city for habitation.’—P^o/w cvii. Again: ‘He hath filled the hungry 

with good things,’ &c. — Luke, i, 53. This interpretation is supported by the 
passage in the old play, which is here imitated: ‘Ransack their abbeys, cloysters, 
priories, Convert their coin unto my soldiers’ use.’ — [Pt i, sc. k, 11 . 19, 20. On 
the strength of this Malone conjectured that in the present line the word ‘soldiers’ 
I had dropped out after the word ‘hungry’; but later decided that his foregoing 

: interpretation rendered any alteration unnecessary.— Ed.] — ^Vaughan (i, 48): 

Although Warburton is often as wrong as he is peremptoiy, I cannot forbear 
pointing out that his emendation is almost proved to be correct by two considera- 
tions combined — by the contrast afforded through the two portraits, ‘fat ribs of 
peace’ and ‘hungry war,’ and by the fact of the same epithet being applied to war 
in Henry V: ■ — the poor souls for whom this hungry war Opens his vasty jaws.’— 
n, iv, 105. And by a like epithet in 3 Henry VI: ‘With need of soldiers for this 
needy war.’ — ^11,1,147. 

14. Bell, Booke, 85 Candle] Grey (i, 285), in reference to the present line, 
gives a detailed account of a cursing, wherein at certain points candles were ex- 
tinguished, but there is no mention of either bell or book. The following extract 
from Grafton is, I think, sufficient to illustrate the method; as will be seen it deals 
with an important episode in the time of King John: ‘In the same yere, Guaio 
the Popes Legate renued his great cursse \q>on Lewes the French kinges soone, 
for vsurping vpon King John. Likewise V'pon S3mion Langton and Geruys Ho- 




240 


THE LIFE AND DEATH [act ill, SC. iii. 


When gold and filuer becks me to come on. 15 

I leaue your highneffe : Grandame, I will pray 
(If euer I remember to be holy) 

For your faire fafety : fo I kilfe your hand. 

£/e. Farewell gentle Cofen. 

lohn. Coz, farewell. 20 

Ele. Come hether little kinfman,harke,a worde. 
lohn.Come hether Hubert, O my gentle Hubert, 22 


15. becks] heck Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Hal. 

16. Grandame] Grandam Rowe et seq. 

19. Farewell] Farewell Ktly. Fare 
you well Fie. 

gentle] my gentle Pope,-}- ( — ^Var. 
'73), Cap. Steev. Varr. Sing. i. 

20, farewell.] farewell. [Exit Faulc. 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Var. ’78, ’85. 
farewell. [Exit Bast. Pope et cet. 


21, 22. hether] hither F3F4. 

21. kinfman^] kinsman , — Pope,-b. 
worde.] word, [Taking him to one 

side of the stage. Pope,-}-, Var. ’78, ’85, 
Rann. word. [To Arthur, drawing him 
aside. Cap. word. [She takes Arthur 
aside. Mai. et seq. 

22. lohn.] K. John. [To Hubert on 
the other side.] Pope,-f . 

0 ] Oh! Ktly. 


bruge, for provoking him to the same, and that with a wonderfull solempnitie. 
For in that doing, he made all the Belles to be rong, the Candels to be light, the 
dores to be opened and the booke of excommunications and interdictions pub- 
liquely to be reade, committing them wholy to the Deuill for their contumacie 
and contempt. He also commaunded the Bishops and Curates to publishe it 
abroad ouer all the whole reahne, to the terror of all subiects’ (ed. Ellis, ii, p. 244). 
— ^Ed. 

22. Come hether Hubert, etc.] Steevens: This is one of the scenes to which 
may be promised a lasting commendation. Art could add little to its perfection; 
no change in dramatic taste can injure it; and time itself can subtract nothing 
from its beauties. — [The following extract is from an Essay on the Writings of 
Massinger, by Dr Jobont Fereiar, prefixed to Gifford's Massinger, vol. i.: *In The 
Duke of Milan, Act I, sc. ult., where Sforza enjoins Francisco to dispatch Marcelia, 
in case of the emperor's proceeding to extremities against him, the Poet has given 
him a strong expression of horror at Ms own purpose. After disposing Francisco 
to obey his commands without reserve, by recapitulating the favours conferred 
on Mm, Sforza proceeds to impress Mm with the blackest view of the intended 
deed. ... If we compare this scene with the celebrated scene between King John 
and Hubert, we shall perceive this remarkable difference, that Sforza, wMle he 
proposes to Ms brother-in-law and favorite, the eventual murder of Ms wife, whom 
he idolizes, is consistent and determined; Ms mind is filled with the horror of the 
deed, but borne to the execution of it by the impulse of an extravagant and fantastic 
delicacy: John, who is actuated solely by the desire of removing Ms rival in the 
crown, not only fears to communicate Ms purpose to Hubert, though he perceives 
Mm to be A fellow by the hand of nature mark’d, Quoted, and sign'd to do a deed 
of shame"; but after he has sounded him, and found him ready to execute what- 
ever he can propose, he only hints at the deed. Sforza enlarges on the cruelty 
and atrocity of his design; John is afraid to utter his, in the view of the sun: nay 
the sangumar>’' Richard hesitates in proposing the murder of Ms nephews to Buck- 
ingham- In this instance then Massinger may seem to deviate from nature, for 



ACT III, SC. iii.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


241 


[22. lohn. Come hether, Hubert. O my gentle Hubert] 
ambition is stronger than love, yet Sforza decides with more promptness and 
confidence than either of Shakespeare’s characters. We must consider, however, 
that timidity and irresolution are characteristics of John, and that Richard’s 
hesitation appears to be assumed, only in order to transfer the guilt and odium of 
the action to Buckingham.’ — (pp. xcviii, xcix.). — J. Monck Mason, in his edition 
of Massinger, 1779, is, I think, the first to call attention to the similarity of situa- 
tion in King John and in The Duke of Milan; he leaves, however, the comparison 
to the judgment of the reader. It is more than likely that Ferriar acted on this 
hint — ^his Essay did not appear until six years later. The following remarks by 
Davies {Dram, MiscelL, i, 51) refer to this note by Mason; and not to Ferriar’s 
analysis. Davies’s work and Ferriar’s are dated the same year, 17S5. — Ed.]: 
^The scene in Massinger’s Duke of Milan is well conceived and highly finished; but 
the lightning itself is not brighter or quicker in its flash, nor more astonishing 
in its effects, than the sublime and penetrating strokes of Shakespeare. In Mas- 
singer, eloquent language and unbroken periods give easy assistance to the speaker, 
and calm and undisturbed pleasure to the hearer. In Shakespeare, the abrupt 
hints, half-spoken meanings, hesitating pauses, passionate interruptions, and 
guilty looks require the utmost skill of the actor, while they alarm and terrify the 
spectator. From Colley Cibber’s long experience and perfect knowledge of the 
stage, we might have expected that he would have considered this scene as a 
sacred thing, and have given consequence to his Papal Tyranny by transcribing it 
whole and untouched. But Colley’s confidence in his abilities was extreme; and 
he has not only mixed his cold crudities and prosaic offals with the rich food of 
Shakespeare, but has presumed to alter the oeconomy of the scene by superfluous 
incident: for John desires Hubert to draw the curtain, that he may unfold his 
meaning to him in the dark; and Hubert exacts an exculpatory warrant from him 
to put Arthur to death. In this latter management he has borrowed from Mas- 
singer. Francisco demands from Sforza a ’writing, signed by him, to warrant the 
putting Marcelia to death.~[In this last addition Cibber is, to some extent, justified 
by the fact that Hubert shows such an instrument to Arthur; and later confronts 
John with this warrant under John’s hand and seal.^ — ^Ed.]~~Giffoiid, in his 
edition of Jonson, vol. i, p. 81, compares this scene also with Every Man in Ms 
Eumour, Act III, sc. i, where the jealous Kitely, by hints and insinuations, per- 
suades Cash to spy upon Mrs Kitely, but tells him that all his doings must be 
^Lock’d up in silence, midnight, buried here.’ — [To me the resemblance is not so 
striking, as the objects to be attained are quite dissimilar. Gifford’s vaulting 
ambition to enthrone Jonson by the side of Shakespeare at times o’erleaps itself; 
this is a case in point. — Ed.| — Corson {Introduction to Sk, p. 173): John is now 
forced, by circumstances resulting from the capture of Arthur, to play a losing 
game within his own kingdom. His fears as to the young and interesting captive, 
whose misfortune wins the sympathies of the courtiers and the people, drive him 
to measures for his own safety, which deprive him of all chance of safety. He 
passes, irresistibly, into the power of an avenging fate. The dramatic situation 
at this stage of the play is in Shakespeare’s best tragic manner. The moral base- 
ness of John, which seals his doom, may be said to be gathered up, and exhibited 
in its extreme intensity in the scene widi Hubert, in which he intimates to Hubert 
his wish to have the little Prince put out of the wmy; and in IV, ii, where he accuses 
the aptness of the instrument as the cause of the suggestion. I would call special 
16 



242 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act III, sq. iii. 


We owe thee much : within this wall of flefh 23 

There is a foule counts thee her Creditor, 

And with aduantage meanes to pay thy loue: 25 

And my good friend, thy voluntary oath 
Liues in this bofome, deerely cherilhed. 

Giue me thy hand, I had a thing to fay, 

But I will fit it with fome better tune. 29 


23. rmtch] much! Dyce, Hal. Cam.+? 
Huds. ii, Words. Neils. 

26. And] And, F4 et seq. 

27. cherijhed] cherished Dyce, Fie. 
Huds. ii, Words. Dono. 


2S. hand,] hand. — Cap. et seq. 

Jay,] say — Rowe ii. et seq. 

29. iune] Ffy Rowe, Knt, Sta. Del 
iime Pope et cet. 


attention to the last nineteen verses of John’s long speech, III, ii, beginning ‘If 
the midnight bell The thought keeps on the wing through all these nineteen verses. 
There is a moral significance in the suspended construction of the language. The 
mind of the dastard king hovers over the subject of the ungodly act and dares not 
alight upon it; and the verse, in its uncadenced movement, admirably registers the 
speaker’s state of mind. 

28. I had a thing to say] Davies {Dram. Miscell, i, 53): The several actors 
of John in this scene had their different and appropriate shares of merit. Quin’s 
voice and manner of acting were well adapted to the situation and business of it. 
His solemn and articulate whisperings were like soft notes in music, which summon 
our deepest attention; but, whether the action did not correspond with the words, 
or the look did not assist the speech and action, the effect was not perfectly pro- 
duced. If ever Garrick’s quick intelligence of eye and varied action failed him, 
it was here. Through the whole scene his art was too visible and glaring; his 
inclination and fear were not equally suspended; the hesitations of a man big with 
murder and death were not happily and sublimely expressed. Of Mossop, Justice 
requires me to say, that he was nearer, in feeling the throes of a guilty mind, and 
in conveying them to his auditors, than either Quin or Garrick. . . . [Thomas] 
Sheridan in tliis scene bore away the palm from all competitors. 

29. better tune] Malone, accepting Pope’s reading as a legitimate correction, 
says; ‘The same mistake has happened in Twelfth Night, II, iii, 122: “Out o’ 
time, sir: ye lie.’” [This was corrected by Theobald to read tune; but has not 
been unanimously accepted as an assured correction.] Malone also instances the 
line in Macbeth, IV, iii, 235, where the reverse mistake occurs in the Folio: ‘This 
time goes manly,’ corrected by Rowe to ‘this tune,’ and almost universally fol- 
lowed. — Rnight: We are by no means sure that Pope’s change was called for. 
The ‘tune’ with which John expresses his willingness ‘to fit’ the thing he had to 
say is a bribe — he now only gives flattery and a promise. ‘The time’ for saying 
‘the thing’ is discussed in the subsequent portion of John’s speech. — Collier: 
As the improvement is manifest, we may reasonably infer that tune was Shake- 
speare’s word. — Staunton; Pope’s alteration is perhaps not necessary, for these 
words w^ere often used, of old, as synonymes. — R. G. White, in reply to the fore- 
going note by Staunton, exclaims: ‘No, never; except by those who had the ears 
of Midas, as is shown by numberless passages, among them the following from 
Lyly’s comedy of that name (IV, i.), in which the two words are carefully distin- 



ACT m, sc. iii.] 


OF KING lOHN ' 


H 5 


By heauen Hubert, I am almoft afham’d 30 

To fay what good refpe6l I haue of thee. 

Hub, I am much bounden to your Maiefty. 
lohn. Good friend, thou hafl no caufe to fay fo yet, 

But thou fhalt haue rand creepe time nere fo flow, 

Yet it fhall come, for me to doe thee good. 35 

I had a thing to fay, but let it goer 

The Sunne is in the heauen, and the proud day, 

Attended with the pleafures of the world, 

Is all too wanton, and too full ofgawdes 

To giue me audience : If the mid-night bell 40 

Did with his yron tongue,and brazen mouth 


30. heauen] Heav’n Rowe. 

I am] Pm Pope, 4 - ( — ^Var. ’73), 
Dyce ii, iii, Fie. Huds. ii, Words. 

33* Jo yet,] so — yet — Pope, so yet — 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Var, ’73. so yet. 
Rife. 

34. haue:] have — Pope,4. 

36-57. Mnemonic Pope, Warb. 

36. Jay,] say — Rowe et seq. 


37. heauen] Beav'n Rowe,+ ( — Var. 

’73)- 

38. pleajiircs] pleasure F4, Rowe i. 

39. gawdes] gawdes. F2F3. gawds, F 4 > 
Rowe, Theob. Warb. Johns. Cap. Varr. 
Mai. Rann, Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, 
Coll. Fie. 

40. audience:] audience. Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. Johns. Wh. i, Ktiy, Sta. 
Fie. Rife. 


guished: “We all say that Apollo hath shewn himselfe both a god & of musicke 
the god: Pan himselfe a rude satyre, neither keeping measure, nor time; his piping 
as farre out of tune, as his body out of forme.” The music of Shakespeare's dajJ- 
sounds antiquated to our ears; but the art was much more thoroughly cultivated 
then than now; and in matters of time and tune and counterpoint our Elizabethan 
forefathers were in need of no lesson that we could give.’ 

33. lohn. Good friend, etc.] F. Genxlemant (ap. Bell): It is impossible for 
words to express, or imagination to paint, a finer representation of dubious cruelty, 
fearful to express itself, than this address of John’s to Flubert exhibits; the hesi- 
tative circumlocution, with which he winds about Ms gloomy purpose, is highly 
natural and the imagery exquisite. To do this scene justice requires more judg- 
ment than powers: a jealous eye, deep tone of voice, and cautious delivery are the 
outlines of what should be. 

34. creepe time nere so slow] Abbott (§ 52) : There is probably here a con- 
fusion of two constructions: (i) *And though time creep so slow, as it never crept 
before,’ and (2) ^And though time never crept so slow, as in the case I am sup- 
posing.’ These two are combined into, ‘And though time creep — (how shall I 
describe it? though it crept) never so slow.’ Construction (2) is illustrated by: 
‘Never , so weary, never so in woe.’ — Mid, N, Dream, III, H, 442. 

39. gawdes] Wright: That is, trifling ornaments, toys. See Mid. N. Dream, 
IV, i, 172: ‘As the remembrance of ^ idle gawd, Which in my childhood I did 
dote upon.’ And compare: ‘The gaudy blabbing and remorseful day .’ — 2 Henry 



THE LIFE AND DEA TH [act m, sc. iii. 


244 


Sound on into the drowzie race of night: 


42 


42. Sound on into] Sound one unto 
Theob* Han. Warb. Johns. Cap. Mai. 
Steev. Var. ’03, ’13, Bono. Neils. 
Sound on unto Var. '73, ’78, ’85, Rann. 
Sounden unto Rann conj. Sound one 
into Var. ^21, Dyce, Sta. Huds. ii, 
Words. Craig. Sound: On! unto Del. 
conj. Sound not into Wetbereli (N. & 


Q., 18 Aug., 1866). Sound on to mark 
Moberly conj. sound dong into. Bul- 
loch. Sound only to Vaughan. 

42. race] ear Dyce, Sta. Wh. Hunter, 
Clarke, John, M. Smith, Huds. ii, 
Cam. ii, Words. Bono. Neils, maze 
M. Wheeler (Ath., 25 Oct., 1873)* 
Bulloch, vast Page conj. 


42. Sound on into . • . race of night] Theobald: I do not think that ‘sound 
on’ gives here that idea of solenmity and horror which, ’tis plain, our Poet intended 
to impress by this fine description; and which my emendation [‘Sound one unto^] 
conveys, i. e., If it were the still part of the night, or One of the clock in the morn- 
ing, when the sound of the bell strikes upon the ear with the most awe and terror. 
And it is very usual with our Shakespeare in other passages to express the horror 
of the midnight bell. So in Othello: ‘Silence that dreadful bell, it frights the isle.’ 
—II, iii, 175; Macbeth: ‘—what’s the business, That such an hideous trumpet 
calls to parley The sleepers of the house.’— II, iii, 86. And sometimes, for the 
solemnity, he is used to add the circumstance of the particular hour: ‘The iron 
tongue of midnight hath toll’d twelue.’ — V, i, 370; ‘The bell then beating one.’ — 
Hamlet, I, i, 39.— Capell (I, pt ii, p. 130): The readings ‘on’ and ‘into’ are mis- 
takes certainly either of a printer or copyist, for in that reading is neither English 
nor sense: ‘on’ was never us’d for repeatedly, nor ‘into’ for unto; which is the sense 
they must have if the place’s sense be contended for; nor, admitting that they 
might be so taken, does the sense they present express the speaker’s intention, 
which confessedly is — to paint the dead time of night; but ‘on’ or repeatedly may . 
as well be seven as twelve, implying no certain number. But besides expressing 
the night’s deadest season, Shakespeare had a further intention; namely, to affect 
the ear by some word that should give it sensation of awe and solemnity: now one 
(the excellent emendation of the third modern) acts upon it remarkably in the way 
he intended; and so the sound of it does in the clock’s striking, greatly beyond a 
sound that’s repeated; every stroke beyond 07 ie lessening more and more the effect 
of it, till at twelve we feel nothing. Of ‘unto ’ no defending is requisite. — Malone : 
The instances that are found in the original editions of our Author’s plays in 
which ‘on’ is printed instead of one zie so numerous that there cannot, in my 
apprehension, be the smallest doubt that is the true reading in this line. — 
[Malone, in corroboration of this note, quotes six passages as printed in the Folio 
wherein one is printed ‘on’; the most striking of these is that from the Two Gentle- 
menf to which he refers, but does not quote in full: ‘Sir, your glove. . . . Not mine; 
my gloves are on. . Why, then, this may be yours, for this is but one.’ — II, 
i, I, 2. — 111 reference to Theobald’s second change, unto for ‘into,’ hlalone con- 
siders it to have been too hastily adopted, and produces two other examples in 
Shakespeare wherein these words are apparently used in the same sense: ‘Which 
to reduce into our former favour .’ — Henry V: V, ii, 63; ‘ — ^gleaning all the land’s 
wealth into one .’ — Henry VIH: HI, ii, 284. ‘Here,’ says Malone, ‘we should 
now certainly write *Hinto one.” Independently of w’hat has now been stated, 
“into” ought to be restored. So Marlowe, Edward II, 1598, “I’ll thunder such a 
peal into his ears,” [ed. Dyce, ii, p. 206J. So also Bishop HaU, in his Heaven 
upon Earth: “These courses are not incident into an almighty power,” etc.’ — 



ACT m, sc. iii.] 


OF KING lOHN 


245 


[42. Sound on into the drowzie race of night] 

Steevens: I should suppose the meaning of ^ Sound on’ to be this: ‘If the mid- 
night bell, by repeated strokes, was to hasten away the race of beings who are busy 
at that hour, or quicken night itself in its progress’; the morning bell (that is, the 
bell that strikes one) could not, with strict propriety, be made the agent; for the 
bell has ceased to be in the service of night when it proclaims the arrival of day. 
‘Sound on’ may also have a peculiar propriety, because, by the repetition of the 
strokes at twelve^ it gives a much more forcible warning than when it only strikes 
one. Such was once my opinion concerning the old reading; but, on reconsidera- 
tion, its propriety cannot appear more doubtful to anyone than to myself. It 
is too late to talk of hastening the night when the arrival of the morning is an- 
nounced; and I am afraid that the repeated strokes have less of solemnity than the 
single notice, as they take from the horror and awful silence here described as so 
propitious to the dreadful purposes of the king. Though the hour of one be not 
the natural midnight, it is yet the most solemn moment of the poetical one; and 
Shakespeare himself has chosen to introduce his Ghost in Hamlet: ‘The bell then 
beating one.’ Shakespeare may be restored into obscurity. I retain Theobald’s 
correction; for though ‘thundering a peal into a man’s ears^ is good English, I do 
not perceive that such an expression as ‘sounding one into a drowsy race’ is 
countenanced by any example hitherto produced. — Knight: Shakespeare, it ap- 
pears to us, has made the idea of time precise enough by the ‘midnight bell’; and 
the addition of ‘one’ is a contradiction or a pleonasm, to which form of words he 
was not given. ‘The midnight bell’ sounding on, into (or unto) the drowsy march, 
race, of night, seems to us far more poetical than precisely determining the hour, 
which was already determined by the word ‘midnight.’ But was the ‘midnight 
belT the bell of a clock? Was it not rather the bell which called the monks to their 
‘morning lauds,’ and which, according to the regulations of Dunstan, was to be 
rung before every office. In Bunstan’s Concord of Rules , quoted by Fosbrooke,. 
the hours for the first services of the day are thus stated: ‘Mat tins and Lauds, 
midnight. Prime, 6 A. m.’ It is added, ‘if the office of Lauds be finished by day- 
break, as is fit, let them begin Prime without ringing; if not, let them wait for 
day-light, and, ringing the bell, assemble for Prime.’— -[Knight also calls attention 
to the fact that in Eamlejt,m the line already quoted by Theobald, the spehing is 
^one (not on) both in the early Quartos and in the Folio of 1623.’— Ed.] — Colliee: 
We prefer the old reading on all accounts. Many of the commentators would 
read one instead of ‘on,’ which is contradicted by the ‘midnight bell’ in a line 
just preceding. There is more plausibility for reading ear instead of ‘race, ’ recol- 
lecting that of old ear was spelt eare^ and the words might possibly be mistaken by 
the printer; but still ‘race,’ in the sense of cotirse or passage, conveys a finer mean- 
ing: the midnight bell, with its twelve times repeated strokes, may be very poet- 
ically said to ‘sound on into the drowsy race of night’; one sound produced 
by the ‘iron tongue’ dri\dng the other ‘on,’ ox forward^ until the whole number was 
complete, and the prolonged \dbration of the last blow on the bell only left to fill 
the empty space of darkness. — [Collier’s MS. Corrector changes ‘race’ to ecfe, 
on which Byce {Notes, etc., p. 87) says: ‘Whether the emendation ear originated 
with the MS. Corrector, or whether he derived it from some prompter’s copy, 
I feel assured that it is the Poet’s word. The same correction occurred, long ago, 
to myself; it occurred also to Mr Collier, while he -was editing the pla^q and (as 
appears from his note) he would have inserted it in the text had not liis better 



246 


THE LIFE AND DEA TH [act m, sc. iii. 


[42. Sound on into the drowzie race of night] 
judgment been overpowered by a superstitious reverence for the Folio. But, if 
the MS. Corrector considered “on’' to be an adverb (and we are uncertain how he 
understood it-~-“on” and one being so often spelt alike), my conviction would still 
remain unshaken, that the recent editors, by printing “on” have greatly impaired 
the grandeur and poetry of the passage. As to the contradiction” which the 
recent editors object to in “the midnight bell sounding one” I can only say that . . . 
even prose writers occasionally employ very inaccurate language in speaking of 
the hours of darkness; e. g., “It happened that betweene twelve and one a clocke 
at midnight, there blew a mighty storme of winde against the house,” &c. — The 
Famous History of Doctor Faustus, sig. R 3, ed. 1648. “We marched slowly on 
because of the carriages we had with us, and came to Freynstat about one a clocke 
in the night perfectty undiscover’d.” — ^Defoe, Memoirs of a Cavalier^ First ed. 
p. irg.’ — C ollier refused to accept such testimony in favour of one as synony- 
mous with midnight, and concludes his note on this line in his ed. ii. with this 
answer to Dyce: *When Defoe speaks of “one o’clock in the night” he is not so 
simple as to call it midnight^ but merely “night,” as in truth it was.’ — Dyce, in 
his ed. ii, replies in a note unworthy of any editor, accusing Collier of again being 
at Ms *old trick of misrepresentation and concealment’ in that he had given but 
one of the quotations, and that one not that germane to the subject; therewith re- 
peating the passage from Doctor Faustus, Another melancholy example of two 
eminent editors descending to petty recriminations, the details of wMch the reader 
may with ease be spared. — Joseph Hunter (ii, ii) [with the reading, ‘Sound 
one into the drowsy race of night’]: We have the incongruity (i) of the midnight 
bell striking the hour of one in the morning; (2) of the hammer of a clock striking 
on the outside of a bell, being presented to the mind by the ‘iron tongue and 
brazen mouth,’ in which on a little reflection we cannot but perceive that it was the 
pendulous clapper, not the hammer striking on the outside of the bell, that must 
have been in the Poet’s mind; and (3) of men steeped in sleep being described by 
such a poet as Shakespeare by the phrase ‘ the drowsy race of night.’ Any of these, 
if due attention were given to the passage, would have been sufficient to show 
that there was something rotten in the state of Denmark. . . . Now the Poet 
certainly had not in his thoughts the striking of a clock at all; and the intervention 
of this idea has the eflect of marring in a very extraordinary degree the beauty and 
grandeur of the conception. . . , ‘TMs is not a fit scene,’ says King John, ‘for 
audience of the thing I was about to say: “the sun is in the heavens.” Transfer 
yourself to a scene of the night and darkness, a place where you hear the great 
bell of a church tolling in the depth of midnight, and imagine that you are pacing 
the churchyard in the dark midnight amidst the graves of the many dead, and ' 
where spirits are sometimes said to wander. Think of yourself as a man much 
injured by the world, and as given up to an habitual melancholy.’ The mere 
striking of the church clock, whether once, or with twelve times repeated strokes, 
is a weak, puerile, incongruous conception; but the continuous tolling of the bell 
at midnight, which was what Shakespeare meant, adds greatly to the impressive- 
ness of a night scene; and this especially when we recollect on what occasions it 
was that the church-bell would be heard ‘sounding on’ in the darkness of midnight. 
It might be as a passing-bell, a soul just then taking its flight; but it is more prob- 
able that the Poet had in his mind the tolling at a midnight funeral and that the 
full conception of the passage is this: That Hubert is to be transported in thought 



ACT III, SC. iii.] 


OF KING JOHN 


247 


[42. Sound on into the drowzie race of night] 
to the grave-ground at the foot of some lonely tower, from which is heard the 
heavy tones of the bell tolling through the darkness of night. ... In such a scene 
there was everything to feed melancholy, and put the mind of Hubert into a frame 
favourable to the King’s purposes; — everything to stir up in his mind thoughts 
which the sun should not look upon. This then, I conceive, to be the true explana- 
tion of the passage. ^ Sound on’ is the common phrase in Shakespeare for con- 
tinuous or repeated blasts of a trumpet, just as here it is for the continuous or 
repeated strokes of the bell-clapper. ‘Into the drowsy race of night,’ if it required 
any justification, as meaning the step or course of night, would receive it by com- 
parison with the two following passages: ‘And chide the cripple tardy-gaited night, 
Wdio, like a foul and ugly witch, doth limp So tediously away.’ — Henry V: IV, 
Chorus^ 1 . 20; ‘This palpable gross play hath well beguiled The heavy gait of night.’ 
— Mid. N. Dreamy V, i, 374. Shakespeare also, it may be observed, has shown 
elsewhere that he was sensible to the use which might be made of the deep tones of 
the funeral bell. Thus, in 2 Henry IV: ‘And his tongue Sounds ever after as a 
sullen bell Remembered tolling a departed friend,' [I, i, 102]; and in Sonnet Ixxi: 
‘No longer mourn for me when I am dead Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell 
Give warning to the world.’ — Staunton: What is meant by ‘the drowsy race’? 
I at one time conjectured that ‘race’ was a misprint, by transposition of the letters, 
for carr, or carre, and that the ‘Soimd on’ might be applicable to ‘Night’s black 
chariot’: ‘All drowsy night who in a car of jet By steeds of iron grey . . . drawn 
through the sky.’ — Browne’s Britannia^ s Pastorals, Bk ii, song i. lam now, how- 
ever, firmly assured that it is a corruption of care, a word which occurred to me 
many years ago, as it did to Dyce, Collier, and no doubt to a hundred people 
besides.~R. G. White {Sh. Scholar, p. 301) : As this line has been frittered away 
by the editors into ‘ Sound one unto the drowsy race of night,’ it seems plausible 
to read with Collier’s MS. Corrector ‘ear of night.’ But all the changes are alike 
uncalled for. Let anyone who has listened to a church clock striking twelve at 
midnight, and seeming as if it would never complete its solemn task, say whether 
‘Sound on into the drowsy race of night’ does not bring up his sensations more 
vividly than ‘ Sound one into the drowsy race of night ’ or ‘ Sound one imto the 
drowsy race of night.’ The line as it stands in the original is one of tlie most 
suggestive in all Shakespeare’s works.— [White, in his edition which appeared five 
years later, in his note on this line says, however, ‘As “race,” even in its sense of 
course or passage, has but the remotest possible connection with the context, and 
as “the lion tongue and brazen mouth” suggest, if they do not require “the ear of 
night” to receive their sounds, it seems that this reading which occurred indepen- 
dently to Collier and Dyce, and was found in the former’s corrected Folio, should 
be received. “On” of the Folio may be either on the adverb, or one, ... I think 
the former much to be prefeired.’—EB.]— W atkeh (Cf?/., ii, 6): ‘Race’ is un- 
doubtedly wTong. I believe that Shakespeare wrote, ‘ Sound one into the drowsy 
eare of night’; but that eare in Ms MS. was by a slip of the pen written care, or— 
which is more probable — was so read by the printer, who, seeing this was nonsense, 
corrected it to race which seemed to offer something like a meaning. (The words 
‘strike one’ [Qu. sound one?], by the way, remind me of i Henry VI: I, ii, 41: 
T think , . . Their arms are set like clocks, still to strike on’; read one. I am 
not sure w^hether this is my own emendation, or a ‘periwig’; I do not, however, 
find any note on this point in the Variorum [of 1821]. — [To the lovers of Elia— 



248 


THE LIFE AND DEATH [act hi, sc. iii. 


[42. Sound on into the drowzie race of night] 
and who does not belong to that happy band— Walker’s playful allusion to a 
‘periwig’ needs no explanation. — Ed.] — Keightley {Exp,^ p 223): As Shakespeare 
had read in the Faerie Queene^ of Night: ‘To run her timely race^ (I, v, 45), the 
attempted corrections of ‘race’ are all superfluous. So also is Warburton’s [Theo- 
bald’s?] reading of one for ‘on’; ‘Sound on’ is keep sounding. — W. L. R. Cates 
{AthencBum, 12 July, 1873); Among the meanings of the word ‘race’ I find ‘swift 
current,’ ‘rapid tideway,’ examples of which we have in the local designations, 
‘Pentland Race’ and ‘Race of Alderney.’ I have found no hint in any edition of 
Shakespeare, nor in any glossary to his plays of this meaning. . . . The question 
then is, Has Shakespeare in this single instance made use of the word in this sense? 
The passage in which the phrase ‘race of night’ occurs is one of the most powerful 
delineations which Shakespeare has given us of the workings of conscience in a 
guilty man. . . . John, fuU of his dark desire and intent, sees about him ‘the proud 
day attended with the pleasures of the world, and feels that this is no fitting en- 
vironment or audience for such word as he has to say. Awed and silent for very 
shame in the presence of the sun, he fancies he should be brave in the dark. In 
instantaneous contrast to daylight and the populous world, imagination depicts 
the night, the vast environing dark, still and dread, but also full of life and move- 
ment; not enfolding the earth like a cloak, but sweeping on and around it like a 
mighty current. The sense of solitude and security from unwelcome listeners is 
immeasurably intensified by the one tone of the midnight bell, which goes pealing 
forth, far-penetrating, into the dull inattentive night-stream flowing over him. 
Such significance I find in this famous line. So magnificent the imaginative con- 
ception which it seems to me Shakespeare, with his omnipotence of wit, his unique 
mastery of phrase, has condensed for us into so tiny a point, so brief an expression, 
‘the drowsy race of night.’ ... In illustration of the epithet ‘drowsy’, as applied 
to the celestial movement, it is, perhaps, worth while to cite a couplet from the 
Earl of Stirling, a contemporary of Shakespeare, who in his Domesday writes: 
‘The heavenly as growne now less strong Hoe seeme more slacke as weary of their 
race.’— [There is here, I think, a slight slip; Cates meant this couplet as an illus- 
tration of the word ‘race’ as applied to ‘the celestial movement.’ The word 
‘ drowsy ’ only appears by implication. Fine as is this interpretation ^vith its image 
of the onward sweep of night and darkness, there is, to me at least, an insuperable 
objection, inasmuch as the adjective ‘drowsy’ conveys but one idea, that of slow 
or sluggish movement, while ‘race,’ as Cates takes it, can but mean a swift onward 
rush. The adjective and noun neutralise each other.— Ed.]— -C. & M. Cowden 
Clarke . The old spelling of eare may very easily have been mistaken by the Folio 
printer for race.’ There is something so contradictory in the w’ords ‘drowsy 
race that we cannot believe them to be right; whereas Shakespeare further on has 
the very expression— ‘vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man,’ [HI, iii, 114]; in which 
passage, moreover, the Folio prints ‘ear’ with a final c.-Bailey (ii, 245/ may also 
be placed in the number of those commentators who propose to read ear for ‘race’; 
he admits that when ^Tiling his note he was unaware that he had been anticipated 
by Dyce; he also rejects the change me for ‘on,’ since ‘To sound into the drowsy 
ear of night’ implies continuous action, which is needed if the mind is to be brought 
into the proper tone desired by Ring John; while ‘for a clock to strike seems 
utterly insufficient to produce the required mood.’— Rev. John Hunter: One is 
the poetical midnight hour. ‘The bell then beating one’ are the words in which 



ACT in, sc. iii.] 


OF KING lOHN 


249 


If this fame were a Church-yard where we Hand , 43 

And thou poffeffed with a thoufand wrongs ; 

44. pojjfejed] possesshd Dyce, Fie. Huds. ii, Words. Dono. 


Bernardo tells the moment of the appearance of Hamlet’s ghost. ‘On’ was often 
written for one; but ‘race’ is ob\dously a corruption, and it seems almost certain 
that Shakespeare wrote eare. — Fleay: Ear [for ‘race’] is very plausible, but the 
old reading being intelligible, I do not disturb it. With either reading ‘drowsy’ 
logically, though not grammatically, belongs to ‘night,’ by the usual Shakespearean 
inversion; and surely the clock striking twelve may be said to strike on into the 
course or current of the slow night. Compare ‘ The clocks do toll, And the third 
hour of drowsy morning name,’ Henry F, Prologue, 16; also 2 Henry VI: IV, i, 5 
(by Marlowe), where the jades drag the night with drowsy wings; and Much 
Ado, V, iii, 27: ‘The drowsy east.’ On the other hand, see III, iii, 114. — Weight: 
It is not improbable that ‘ race ’ is a misprint for ear, as Walker suggested, and this 
would be in keeping with ‘tongue’ and ‘mouth’ just before. — Marshall: It is 
beside the question to show that, because one w^as often printed ‘on,’ and even 
pronounced so, therefore it is, necessarily, so misprinted in this case. Nor does 
it follow that because care, as the Folio prints ear, might easily be mistaken for 
‘ race,’ that it was so mistaken here. If the sense absolutely required ear, we should 
not hesitate to adopt it; but is not the sense weakened by such a change? On 
the other hand, it must be granted that no exactly similar use of ‘race’ can be found 
in Shakespeare. In Sonnet li, 11 . 10, ii we have: ‘Therefore desire, of perfect’s! 
love being made, Shall neigh — no dull flesh—in his fiery race.’ But that is the 
only passage I can find in which ‘race’ is used at all in the sense of course, and that 
is not very satisfactor\% as one wants the same use of the word as in ‘mill-race,’ 
where it signifies a swift stream; and here being qualified by the epithet ‘drowsy/ 
the very paradoxical use of the ^vord would of itself be forcible. But it may be 
that ‘race’ here mesxis disposition, nature, as in ‘But thy \dle race, Though thou 
didst leam, had that in ’t which good natures Could not abide to be mth.’— 

I, ii, 358-360. And in ‘And now I give my sensual race the rein.’ — Meas.for M eas., 

II, iv, 160. Or by ‘drowsy race of night’ Shakespeare might have meant the 
sleeping people and animals. The first meaning of the word given above, viz,: 
course (as of a stream), is decidedly the one to be preferred; in 'which case we need 
not take ‘into’ to mean unto, as most of the commentators do; nor, indeed, if ear 
be adopted, would any other than the ordinar}^ sense of the preposition be required. 
— Moore Smith: Nothing satisfactory can be made [of the Folio reading]. It 
seems best to consider, with Walker, that ‘race’ was a misprint for eare. — 
Deighton: Though ‘drowsy’ belongs more properly to ‘night’ than to ‘race,’ 
if that reading be retained, it seems to me unlikely that Shakespeare should have 
closely coupled two words so antagonistic in sense.— Miss Porter: This line is a 
mar\^el of impressionistic feeling. Lend yourself to it and you hear, half deaf with 
slumber while you hear, the midnight bell sound on and fall into the drowsy vast, 
and streaming course of night. You hate to be disturbed from it to note that 
recent modem editors, as well as old eighteenth centuiy^ ones, have been so dull 
to its fine suggestion as to change ‘on’ into one, and then been led by their own 
crazy meddling to wonder if ‘into’ should be unto, and finally to put out ‘race’ — 
the master touch— for ear. 



THE LIFE AND DEA TH [act ni, sc. lii. 


250 

Or if that furly fpirit melancholy 
Had bak’d thy blond, and made it heauy,t ic ce,^ 
Which elfe runnes tickling vp and downe the veines, 
Making that idiot laughter keepe metis eyes, 

And ftraine their cheekes to idle merriment, 

A paffion hatefull to my purpofes; 

Or if that thou coulda fee me without eyes, 

Heare me without thine eares, and make rep.y 
Without a tongue, vfing conceit alone. 

Without eyes, eares, and harmefull found of words: 
Then, in defpight of brooded watchfull day, 


45 


50 


55 

48 . hupe] steap Long MS. ap. Cam. 
peep Mason conj. Sta. conj (with- 
drawn), Bullocli. 

< 0 . A pajjion.^.ptirposes:] In paren- 
theses Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. 

re. Irooded watchfull] broad-eyd 
waUhful Pope,+, Cap. Var. ’ 78 , ’ 8 S, 
Rann, CoU. ii, iii, Wh. u, Craig, the 
yoad watchful CoU. MS. brooded- 
waUhful Mason conj. Del. Dono. yoad 
and watchful Mitford. conj. Del. conj. 
proud and wasteful BnUoch. J-rond, 
watchful Herr, bruited watchful Vaugn- 
an (withdrawn). 


fpirit melancholy] Spirit, Melan- 
cholly, F4, Rowe et seq. 

46. heauy, thicket heavy-thick Pope, 

Theob. Han. Warb. Walker, heavy, 
thick; Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Mai. Raim, 

Steev. Varr. Ktly. 

47-50. Which,,. purpofes:] Ff, Rowe, 

4 -, Cam.4', Byce ii, iii, Fie. Neils. 

In parentheses Cap. et cet. 

47. tickling] trickling Rowe i. tingling 
Coil. iii. (MS.). 

48. idiot laughter] idiot, laughter, Cap. 
et seq. 

45. surly spirit melancholy] MoBEnLY: Here, as ^ r^ult of a 

spire with singularly graphic touches. It is physical, he ^ 

duU circulation of the blood, as unlike as possible to ^ J 

that which marks cheery youth.-[Nashe {Terrors of the » 

these spirits of the ay re or the fire hane so much predoi^anc ^ rnplanchoHv 

spirits of the earth and water; for they » on foggie-hrmnd 

engender thereof many uncouth terrible monsters. This muc ^ snleene 

that the grossest part of our blood is the melancholy humour, w ic ^ ^ 

congealed whose omce is to disperse it, with his 

eth a mist ouer the spirit, and cleane bemasketh the phantasie. And jen as slm^ 

and durt in a standing puddle, engender toads and frogs, an ""engendreth 

ures, so this slimie melancholy humor still thickning as it stands stil^ eng 
many mishapen obiects in our imaginations.'— ed. Grosart, p. 232. n. 

46. bak'd thy bloud] F. GeiOTEMAN (Dram, Cens., 11, 161): To u . 

that melancholy is a cold chilling disposition of mind; ‘bak’d’ fuimshes an idea 
heat, therefore we would substitute caked, as more consonant to 

47 . tickling . . . veinesj Neither Rowe’s chan^ nor that of Colher s MS. Cor- 
rector seem necessary here; compare Spenser, o, se o > 

with secret ioy therefore Did tickle inwardly in euerie vaine. -U. 393, 394- 

48. keepe mens eyes] Mobesiy: That is, inhaMt mm s eyes; as a keying 
room’ means a room to line in. fOr, in the old-fashioned phrase, to keep one 

SS. brooded watchfull day] StEEVENS: Mr Pope’s alteration [see Text. Notes], 



ACT III, SC. iii.] 


OF KING JOHN 


251 


[55. Then, in despight of brooded watchful! day] 
however elegant, may be unnecessary. All animals while * brooded/ i. e,, 'with a 
brood of young ones under their protection,’ are remarkably \dgilant. The King 
says of Hamlet: ' — there’s something in his soul O’er which his melancholy sits 
on brood.’ — [III, i, 173]. In Holland’s translation of Pliny’s Natural History, a 
bfoodie hen is the term for a hen that sits on eggs (ed. 1601, p. 301). Milton also, 
U Allegro, desires Melancholy to 'Find out some uncouth cell Where brooding 
darkness spreads his jealous wings,’ plainly alluding to the watchfulness of fowls 
while they are sitting,— Malone: ‘Brooded,’ I apprehend, is here used, with our 
Author’s usual license, for brooding; i. e., day, who is as vigilant, as ready with open 
eye to mark what is done in his presence, as an animal at brood. Shakespeare 
appears to have been so fond of domestic and familiar images that one cannot 
help being surprised that Mr Pope, in revising these plays, should have gained so 
little knowledge of his manner as to suppose any corruption here in the text. — 
[Boswell quotes as parallel usages of the word ‘brood’: ‘See how he broods the 
boy.’ — Bonduca, IV, ii- (p. 66, ed. Dyce); and: ‘This fellow broods his master.’ 
— Woman* s Prize, I, i. (p. 104, ed. Dyce), but in both of these passages ‘brood’ 
clearly means cherishes, guards, and not, as Steevens and Malone interpret, 
watchful or vigilanL — ^Eo.] — Collier (ed. ii.): We cannot resist Pope’s altera- 
tion, broad-eyed — the epithet is so happy and so like Shakespeare. The MS. 
corrector saw that ‘brooded’ must be wrong, and perhaps gives us the custom 
in his day, converting ‘brooded’ into the brood. ‘Brooded’ has surely nothing 
to do with brooding chickens. — ^J. Mitford {Gentleman's Maga., Aug., 1844): 
This is acknowledged not to be a very satisfactory reading. We have thought 
that the Poet wrote ‘crowded,’ with the same meaning as in the former part of 
the speech — ‘The proud day ... Is all too wanton and too full of gauds.’ Pope’s 
emendation of ‘broad-eyed’ is elegant, and in the same play we have ‘wall-eyed* 
and ‘eyeless night,’ yet we should prefer reading, ‘Then in despite of broad and 
watchful day.’ — ^Halliwell quotes Cotgrave: Accomi: Brooded, set close on, 
[crowded over; also, covered, hidden, overshadowed]. He also notes that broody 
is the MS correction ‘of one of the old annotated Folios.’ — Kev. John Htostter: 
‘Brooded’ means having a brood, or brooding; day being regarded as having a 
watchful eye, like that of a brooding bird. — ^Moberly considers that to change a 
word so palpably in Shakespeare’s manner as ‘brooded’ is ‘quite unallowable.’ 
He compares, for this construction, ‘the ravined salt-sea shark’; ‘the jeering and 
disdained contempt,’ wherein ‘ravined’ means ‘full of ravin/ and ‘disdained/ 
‘ful of disdain,’ so ‘brooded’ must be ‘full of brooding.’— Wright: ‘Brooded’ 
is an instance of an adjective formed from a substantive by means of the par- 
ticipial suiBox -ed. It is derived from the substantive ‘brood’ and not from the 
verb, and signifies having a broad to watch over; and it is, therefore, almost equiva- 
lent to brooding or sUting m hrood.^ , , ‘Thus ornament is but the 

guiled shore To a most dangerous sea,’ Mer. of Yen., Ill, ii, 97, ‘guiled’ signifying 
full of guile, decdifid. So also: ‘Unto the weaiy and all- watched night. — Henry 
V: IV, prol., 1 . 38. [Wright also quotes the passage containing the words ‘dis- 
dained contempt,’ x Henry IV: I, iii, 183, given by Moberly.— For other examples 
see, if needful, Abbott, § 374.— En.]— Moore Smith: Day (i. e., the sun) is 
thought of as looking down on the world with the watchfulness of a brooding 
parent-bird. The word ‘brooded’ is not part of a verb, but an adjective formed 
by adding the suffix -ed to the noun ‘brood.* So ‘brooded’ is equivalent to pos- 



252 


THE LIFE AND DEATH [act hi, sc, iii. 


I would into thy bofome poure my thoughts: 5^ 

But (ah) I will not, yet I loue thee well , 

And by my troth I thinke thou lou’ft me well. 

Huh. So well, that what you bid me vndertake, 

Though that my death were adiunfl to my Aft, 6a 

By heauen I would doe it. 

lohn. Doe not I know thou wouldft? 

Good Hubert, Hubert, Hubert throw thine eye 

On yon young boy : He tell thee what my friend, 64 

60. Though] Tho’ Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Var. ’73. 

61, heauen] Heav'n Rowe,+ ( — Var. 
’73)* 

I would doe it] Pd do Pope. P 
do H Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. Steev. 
Varr. Sing. Dyce ii, iii, Fie. Huds. 
Words. 

64. yon] yond'" Coll. Sing, ii, Huds. 
boy:] boy. Ktly, Del. Done. Neils. 
what] what, F4. 

sessed of a brood, as landed gentry are: gentry possessed of land. — Ivor John: 
Even though ^ brooded^ be equivalent to brooding, as Wright points out, it does 
not seem an apt epithet for ‘day’ in this connection. Cotgrave’s [definition of 
Accoiwe, brooded, etc., see foregoing note by Halliwell], vouching for the form of 
the word in -ed, but proving the inapplicability of the meaning. The day cannot 
be proud, wanton and full of gawds, attended with the pleasures of the world, 
watchful and at the same time brooded. Perhaps the Mason-Delius reading is 
the least objectionable, taking ‘brooded’ to be an epithet applied to ‘watchful,’ 
the day being as watchful as a sitting bird; but even this is far from satisfactory. 

63. Hubert, Hubert, Hubert] Moberly: Passionately; John pretending that 
Hubert’s loyal profession had wrung from Mm a secret wMch he had been firmly 
resolved against disclosing, but could hold in no longer.— [Moberly is, perhaps, 
right; but dramatically would it not be more effective to make a slight hesitating 
pause, accompanied by a furtive glance at Arthur, between each repetition of the 
name? Moore Smith notes {Introd., p. xliii.) that H. Beerbohm Tree, when he 
produced the play in iSp9, introduced a good deal of new ‘business’ in this scene; 
and just before this line, ‘Arthur innocently picked up the crown from the ground 
and put it on his head.’— En.J 

64. lie tell thee what, ete.] Boaden {Life of Kemble, i, 133): In King John the 
critics said Kemble was too artificial and too cold. In the great scene with Hubert 
they found Mm too solenm and monotonous. The most cold-blooded, hesitating, 
creeping \iliainy that ever abused the gift of speech found in Mr Kemble the only 
powers competent to give it utterance. And if I were to select a scene, in the whole 
compass of the drama, more appropriated to him than any other, I should, I think, 
fix upon this noiseless horror, tMs muttered suggestion of slaughterous thought, 
on which the midnight bell alone was fitted to break, by one solitary undulating 
sound, that added to the gloom. 


56. thoughts:] thoughts. Coll. Wh. i, 
Ktly, Huds. Dono. Neils, 

57. But (ah)] But, ah, Rowe, Cap. 
Var, ’78, 85, Mai. Rann, Steev. Varr, 
Sing, Knt, Dyce ii, Cam.-f , Huds. ii, 
Words. Neils. But ah, Pope,-]-, Sta. 
Fie. But ah! CoU. Wh. i, Ktly, Huds. 
Del. Craig. 

not, yet] Ff, Rowe i. not! yet 
Dyce, Hal. Cam.-f-, Huds. ii, Words. 
Neils, not. Yet Ktly. not — yet Rowe 
ii. et cet. 



ACT in, sc. iii.] 


OF KING JOHN 


2S3 

65 


He is a very ferpent in my way, 

And wherefoere this foot of mine doth tread, 

He lies before me : doft thou vnderftand mep 
Thou art his keeper. 

Huh, And lie keepe him fo, 

That he fhali not offend your Maiefly. 70 

lohn. Death. 

Huh, My Lord. 
lohn, A Graue. 

Huh, He fhali not Hue. 

lohft. Enough. 75 

I could be merry now, Hubert, I loue thee. 

Well, He not fay what I intend for thee: 

Remember : Madam, Fare you well, 

He fend thofe powers oVe to your Maiefly. 79 


66. wherefoere] wherejoe^re F4. 

67. me:] me. Pope,-!-, Coll. Wh. i, 
Ktly, Huds. Del. Rife, Dono. Neils. 

69. Ik] I will Var. ’03, ^13, ’21, Sing. 
Ktly, Huds. 

70. 71. That lie. ..Death] As one line 
Walker, Dyce ii, iii, Cam.-h, Huds. ii, 
Words. Neils. 

71-75. Death...Enough] One line 
Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, ColL Dyce i, 
Hal. Wh. i, Ktly, Sta. Huds. i, Del. 
Craig. 

71. Death] Death! Var. ’73. 

72. My Lord] Ff, Dei. My Lord? 
Rowe et cet. 


73. Graiic] grave! Var. ’73. 

75. Enough] Enough! Coll. ii. 

76. flow] Ff. now: Cap. Varr. Mai. 
Rann, Steev. Varr. Sing, i, Knt, Sta. 
Fie. now. Rowe et cet. 

78, 79. Remember. ..lie fend] One line 
Fie. 

78. Remember:] Ff, Rowe i. Remem- 
ber : — Rowe ii,H- ( — Var. ’73). Re- 
member . — Cap. et cet. 

well] well. [Returning to the 
Queen. Pope,+. 

79. powers] pow'rs Pope.+ ( — Var, 

’ 73 )- 

o're] over Fie, 


65. serpent in my way] Carter (p. 210) compares: ^Dan shall be a serpent 
by the way, an adder by the path, by ting the horse heeles, so that his rider shall 
fall backward.’ — Genesis, xlix, 17 {Genevan Vers.). 

66. this foot of mine] Compare, for this construction, III, i, 235; or see Abbott, 

S239- 

77. He not say] Moberly: he intended vras doubtless, in reality, to make 

Hubert do the crime, and then bear the blame when the act was questioned. 

78. Remember] Vischer {VortrSgey iv, 37): This is a scene wherein we recog- 
nize Shakespeare completely. If at times a doubt of the genuineness of this play 
arises, here it must be silenced. Here, for the first time, Shakespeare develops 
that secret power, peculiar to him alone, the faculty of giving the spirit of murder 
with its whisper and veiled words, the instigation to murder, whose fearful char- 
acter becomes the more fearfpl through this very quietness. Moreover, the sym- 
bolism, Tf this were a churchyard/ and calling laughter ‘an idiot/ is thoroughly 
Shakespearean.^ 



254 


THE LIFE AND DEATH 


[act m, sc. iv. 

8o 


Ele. My bleffmg goe with thee. 
lohn. For E^tgland Cofen, goe. 

Hubert fhall be your man, attend on you 
Withal true duetie: On toward Callice 

Exeunt, 84 

\Scene //^] 

SccBna Tertia. 



Enter France j Dolphin, Pandulpho, Attendants, 2 

Fra, So by a roaring Tempeft on the flood, 

A whole Armado of conui6led faile 4 


80. thee,] thee! Theob. et seq. 

81. goe.] Om. Steev. Var. ^03, ’13, 
Sing, i, Words. 

82. attend] to attend FsF,, Rowe. 
f attend Pope,-f ( — ^Var. ’73), Dyce ii, 
iii, Hnds. ii. Words, to tend Coil, iii. 

83. at] Fx. 

duetie:] duty . — Cap, et seq. 
Callice] Ff, Rowe i, Ktly. Calais 
Rowe ii. et cet. 

hoa.] ho! Theob. et seq, 

I. Scsena Tertia]’ Ff, Scene m. 
Rowe. Scene v. Pope. Scene vi. 
Han. Warb. Johns. Scene ii. Dono. 
Scene rv. Cap. et cet. 

The French Court. Theob. -p, 
Cap. Var. ’78, ’85, Rann. The French 


King’s Tent. Mai. et seq. 

2. France, Dolphin,] King Philip, 
Lewis, Rowe et seq. 

Pandulpho,] Pandupho, Ff. Pan- 
dulph, Cap. et seq. 

3-5. Fra. So...fellowJhip,] Om. Dono, 
4. Armado] Armada Johns. Var. ’73. 
conuiCtcd] collected Pope,+, Cap. 
Var. ’78, ’85, Rann. convented Mason, 
Sing, ii, Coll, ii, iii. (MS.), Dyce ii, iii, 
Huds. ii, Words, cofiflicted Ktly. con- 
sorted Id- conj. connected Mai. conj. 
(withdrawn), Del. convected Dyce 
conj. Fie. R. M. Spence (N, & Q., April, 
1894). convoyed Cartwright. con- 
vexed Bulloch, compacted Vaughan. 
combined Spedding. conjoinied Orger. 


81. For England] Malone: King John, after he had taken Arthur prisoner, 
sent him to the town of Falaise, in Normandy, under the care of Hubert, his' 
Chamberlain; from whence he was removed to Rouen, and delivered to the custody 
of Robert de Veypont. Here he was secretly put to death. 

3. a roaring Tempest] Grey (i, 289): Shakespeare does not allude to any tem- 
pest that then happened, but to the defeat of the French fleet (prepared to invade 
the dominions of the Earl of Flanders) in the Scheld, by the Earl of Salisbury, 
brother to King John, in the year 1213. In which 300 ships, laden with provisions, 
arms, and other valuable things, were taken; and above 100 more sunk, and burnt; 
and the rest destroyed by their own hands for fear of being taken by the enemy. 
Which put an end to King Philip’s purpose of invading England. 

4, A whole Armado] Warburton: This similitude, as little as it makes for 
the purpose in hand, was, I do not question, a very taking one when the play 
was first represented; which was a winter or two at most after the Spanish invasion 
in 1588. It was in reference likewise to that glorious period that Shakespeare 
concludes his play in that triumphant manner: ^This England never did, nor never 
shall Lie at the proud foot of a conqueror.’ But the whole play abounds with 
touches relative to the then posture of affairs.*— Johnson: This play, as far as I 




ACT III, SC. iv.] 


OF KING 10 HN 


255 


Is fcattered and dif-ioyn’d from fellowfliip. 5 

Fani. Courage and comfort, all fhall yet goe well. 

Fra, What can goe well, when we haue runne fo ill? 

Are we not beaten? Is not Angiers loft? 8 

5. dif-ioyned] difioyned Ff. disjoin’d 6 . comfort,] comfort! Cap. et seq. 
Rowe et seq. 

can discover, was not played till a long time after the defeat of the armado. The 
old play, I think, wants this simile. The commentator should not have affirmed 
what he can only guess. — Pye (p. 145): As a common observer of wffiat passes 
every day, Johnson should have known that after eight years (for Malone gives 
this play as written in 1596) that event could not have become uninteresting, which 
is now highly interesting after the lapse of more than tw^o centuries. — S teevens: 
‘Armado’ is a Spanish word signifying a fleet of war. The armado in 158S was 
called so by way of distinction. [Compare Burton, Anal, of Melon,, ‘Better a 
metropolitan city were sackt, a royal army overcome, an invincible armado sunk, 
. . . then her little finger should ake.’ — Pt, 3, Sec. 2, Mem. 4, Subsec. i. — En.j 

4. conuicted] Malone: That is, over powered, baffled, destroyed. To ‘con\dct’ 
and to convince were in our Author’s time synonymous. See Minsheu’s Dictionary, 
1617: ‘To con\dct, or convince, d Lot. convictus, overcome.’ Also Florin’s World 
of Words, 159S: Convitto, Vanquished, convicted, convinced.’ [Murray {N, 
E. D., s. v. vb. 7) quotes the present line as the earliest example of this use of 
‘convicted.’ — Ed.] — J. Monck Mason {Comments, ed. 1807, p. 553) proposes 
comented in preference to the Folio reading, since, although ‘convicted’ may mean 
vanquished, that was not the fate of this particular armado. [To Dyce (ed. ii.) 
I am indebted for calling attention to this note which does not appear in any 
other edition of Mason’s Comnienis, Neither Collier, whose MS. Corrector reads 
comented, nor Singer, who so reads in his ed. ii, refer to Mason. Collier, after 
lauding the reading, says: ‘There is no need, therefore, to strain after a mean- 
ing for “convicted,” if, as we are assured, it was not the Avord of the Poet.’— 
Singer, without referring to Collier’s MS, Corrector, rejects the Folio reading on 
the ground that, ‘convicted,’ signifying vanquished, overcome, ‘is a very unusual 
meaning, even would it serve the purpose.’ Of Dyce’s conjecture, convecled, he 
remarks, ‘it is doubtful if such a word existed,’ wherein he is quite borne out by the 
N, E. D. In support of the reading comented, Singer quotes Coriol.: ‘We are 
convented upon a pleasing treaty.’ — ii, 59. — Ed.] — R, G. White: See Cooper’s 
Thesaurus, 1573, vanquished; overcome; convicted.’ The manifest 
allusion to the fate of the Spanish Armada, wffiich w^as convicted or conquered 
quite as much by tempest as by its English enemy, sustains the old text. The 
reading of Collier’s Folio is appropriate and plausible, but nothing more. [In 
his earlier work, Shakespeare’s Scholar, p, 302, White characterises Collier’s MS. 
correction as ‘doubtless the right word.’ — ^E d.] — ^I^yce' (ed. ii.) characterises the 
Folio reading, ‘though it formerly meant vanquished, overpowered,’ as here ‘utterly 
improper.’— C. & M. Cowden Clarke: We have an impression that convicted 
may be used here by Shakespeare to express condemned, doomed to perdition, — 
Wright: That is, beaten, discomfited. The reference is probably to the great Span- 
ish Armada, which after being harassed and beaten by the English fleet was dis- 
persed by. a violent storm. 



2s6 


THE LIFE AND DEATH [act hi, sc. iv. 


Arthur tane prifoner? diuers deere friends flaine? 

And bloudy England into England gone, lo 

Ore-bearing interruption fpight of France} 

DoL What he hath won, that hath he fortified : 


20 


So hot a fpeed, with fuch aduice difposM, 

Such temperate order in fo fierce a caufe, 

Doth want example: who hath read, or heard 15 

Of any kindred-adlion like to this? 

Fra. Well could I beare that Englandh.a.d this praife, 

So we could finde fome patterne of our fliame : 

Enter Gonjlance. 

Looke who comes heere? a graue vnto a foule, 

Holding th’eternall fpirit againfl her will , 

In the vilde priton of afflidled breath: 22 


9. prifoner] Pope,-l-( — Var. 

’73)* 

12--18. Dol. What...Jhame:] Om. 
Dono. 

14. temper aie] template Pope,+ 

{— Var. ^73)* 

caufe] course Warb. Han. Johns. 
Cap. Var. ^73, Sta. Dyce ii, iii, Huds. 
ii, Words. 

15. example:] example. Coll. Wh. i, 
Sta. Del. Fie. Neils. 

16. kindred-aCtion] kindred action 
Theob. et seq. 

18. fkame:] shame. Rowe et seq. 


19. Enter Conftance.] Enter Lady 
Constance, her Hair dishevePd. Cap. 
After 1. 22 Dyce, Huds. ii, Words. 
After 1 . 21 Sta. 

20. Looke] Look! Sing, ii, Huds. 

21. tk’eternall] Ff, Rowe,-{-, Coil, ii, 
Wh. Fie. the eternal Cap. et cet. 

fpirit] sprite Fie. 

againfl] Against Pope,-j- ( — Var. 

’73)* 

22. vilde] vild Fie. vile Ff. et cet. 
breath:] breath. Var. ’73 , Coll. Hal. 

Wh. i, Ktly, Huds. Cam.-p, Del. Dono. 
Neils. Craig. 


14. cause] Waiiburton in maldng his change interprets course as here meaning 
march . — Gapell, while accepting as self-evident the change, takes exception to 
this interpretation since the ^obvdous sense of it is— a course in lists, a knighPs 
course, putting it figuratively. We had the same metaphor higher in a line of 
King Philip’s, 1 . 7.’- — Steevens: [Warburton’s] change is needless. A 'fierce 
cause’ is a cause conducted with precipitation. 'Fierce wretchedness,’ in 
IV, ii, 30, is hasty f sudden misery . — -Delius also considers Warburton’s change 
unnecessary, since it is the ver>" temperateness of the order and the matter in 
hand which carry all before them in their fierce onrush. 

18. So we . . . our shame] Mobeely: That is, If there could be found any 
precedent for shame like ours; if it were not far worse than anything in our fathers’ 
days. , > 

20-22. a graue vnto a soule . . * afflicted breath] Faemek: I think we should 
read 'afiiicted earth.^ The passage seems to have been copied from Sir Thomas 
More: 'If the body be to the soule a prison, how strait a prison maketh he the 
body, that stuffeth it with riff-raff, that the soule can have no room to stirre itself 
— but is, as it were, enclosed not in a prison, but in a grave.’ — ^IMalone: There 
is surely no need of change. ‘The vile prison of afflicted breath’ is the body, 
the prison in which the distressed soul is confined. We have the same image in 



ACT in, sc. iv.] 


OF KING lOHN 


257 


I prethee Lady goe away with me. 

Con, Lo; now: now fee the ilTue of your peace. 


23 


24. Lo; now:] Ff. Loy now; Rowe. 
Lo now; Pope, Han. Lo, now, Theob. 
Warb. Joiins. Var. '73, Huds. i. Lo 
now, Coll. Del. Done. Lo, now! Cap. 


et cet. 

24. now fee] I see Mrs Siddons 
(Campbell i, 221). you see Mar- 
shall conj. 


5 Henry VI: ‘Now my souFs palace is become her prison.^ — [II, i, 74]. Again, 
more appositely, in Lucrece: ‘That blow did bail it [the soul] from the deep unrest 
Of that polluted prison where it breath’d.’ — [ 1 . 1726]. Again, in Sir John Davies, 
Nosce Teipstm: ‘Yet in the body’s prison so she lies, As through the body’s win- 
dows she must look.’ — [ed. Arber, p. 151]. — Steevens: Perhaps the old reading is 
justifiable. So, in Meas. for Meas,: ‘To be imprison’d in the viewless winds.’ — 
[HI, i, 124]. — J. Monck Mason: It appears from the amendment proposed by 
Farmer, and by the quotation adduced by Steevens in support of the old read- 
ing, that they both consider this passage in the same light, and suppose that King 
Philip intended to say ‘that breath was the prison of the soul’; but I think they 
have mistaken the sense of it; and that by ‘the vile prison of afflicted breath’ he 
means the same vile prison in which the breath is confined; that is, the body. 
King John says to Hubert, speaking of what passed in his own mind, ‘Nay, in the 
body of this fleshly land, This kingdom, this confine of blood and breath,’ etc., 
IV, ii, 255. And Hubert says, in the following scene: ‘If I ... Be guilty of the 
stealing that sweet breath YTiich was embounded in this beauteous clay,’ IV, 
iii, 145, It is evident that in this last passage the breath is considered as em- 
hounded in the body; but I will not venture to assert that the same inference may, 
with equal certainty, be drawn from the former. — Anders (p. 274): Compare 
what Plato says, in his Cratylus, 400: ‘For some say that the body is the grave 
of the soul which may be thought to be buried in our present life; or agMn the 
index of the soul, because the soul gives indications to the body; probably the 
Orphic poets were the inventors of the name and they were under the impression 
that the soul is suffering the punishment of sin, and that tlie body is an enclosure 
or prison in which the soul is incarcerated, kept safe, as the name <3r%a implies, 
until the penalty is paid.’-— ’[‘The thought,’ adds Anders, ‘had no doubt become 
a commonplace.’— That it was at least common is clearly shown by Bayley, 
who, under the heading Classicisms, p. 181, has collected fourteen examples, in- 
cluding the present passage, wherein this thought in varying phrases occurs, and 
the number might doubtless be extended. In a foot-note Bayley remarks that 
‘These views were very contrary to the theology of the time, and even of current 
creeds.’ — ^As regards the ‘prison of afflicted breath,’ Mason’s interpretation is 
also that of the present Ed.}— Vaughan (i, 50) raises an objection to Malone’s 
and Mason’s explanation, since ‘ the prisoner here is not simply “ the soul,” but the 
spirit, and therefore that the breath of the mortal being might not inaptly be de- 
scribed as the prison of that “spirit.” As to “afflicted breath” it is best explained 
by “Absent thee from felicity awhile And in this harsh world draw thy breath in 
pain.” — Hamlet, V, ii, 358.’ — [Is not ‘eternal spirit’ merely a synon)nm for the 
soid? The next words, ‘against her will,’ seem to show this; ‘soul’ is always 
feminine. Compare the quotation from Davies, ante, — Ed.] 

24. the issue of your peace] Buckniel {Mad Folk, etc., p. 279): Constance 
taunts King Philip with his and her own calamities as the result of his peace, 


17 



THE LIFE AND DEA TH [act xci, sc. iv. 


258 


Fra. Patience good Lady, comfort gentle Conjlance. 25 

Con. No, I defie all Counfell, all redreffe. 

But that which ends all counfell, true Redreffe: 

Death, death, O amiable, louely death. 

Thou odoriferous flench ; found rottenneffe, 

Arife forth from the couch of lafling night, 30 

Thou hate and terror to profperitie. 

And I will kiffe thy deteilable bones, 3 * 


2$. Lady, comfort] Ff. Lady; comfort, 
Rowe,-}-, Coll. Wh. i, Done. IMyl 
comfort, Cap. et cet. 

26. all] and Warb. Johns. 

28. Death, death,] Death; death, Pope, 
Han. Death, death; Theob.-f, Cam. 
Glo. Cla. Wh. ii. Death, Death! Var. 
*73, Hal. Death, death: — Var. ^78, ^85, 
Mai. Rann, Steev. Varr. Sing. Dyce, 
Words. Death, death — Coll. Wh. i, 
Ktly, Huds. Del. Rife, Dono. Neils. 
Craig. 

louely death,] lovely death! Pope 
et seq. 

29. Tkou,^.rottenneJfe] Om. Pope, 


Han. 

2g, Jlench...rottenneJfe,] stench!,, JoU 
tenness! Cap. et seq. 

30. forth from] from forth Coll. MS. 
the] thy Pope,-f (—Var. '73). 
this Grey. 

32. detejlable bones,] detestable hones; 
Rowe, Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Cap. hones detestable; Han. detestable 
hones; Mai. Steev. Varr. Sing. Knt, 
Dyce, Fie. Huds. ii. Words, detestable 
bones Cam. Glo. Cla. Wh. ii, Neils. 

32-35. bones , ... hrowes , ... wormes , ... 
dufi,] bones,..brows.„wormes,„dust] Cam. 
-f , Neils. 


whereas they were, in reality, the issue of her war. This is the only point on 
which her quick intellect ever trips. She shows no signs of bending, though her 
spirit is wounded unto death. Her invincible pride rejects all comfort, all solace. 
The charnel-house ideas of her invocation to death is poetic delirium, the frenzy 
of imagination; Juliet’s imagination, embracing the same ideas, is feeble and pro- 
saic compared with this horror. 

26. defie] Murray {N, E, D., s. v. vb^ 5.) : To set at nought; to reject, renounce, 
despise, disdain, revolt at. [Schmidt (jLex,, s. v. vb. 2.) furnishes many examples 
of this use of the word.] 

28. O amiable, louely death] Rose {New Sh. Soc, Trans., 1880, p. 18) : One is 
apt to take Constance as a passionate, single-minded woman; and much of the 
expression of her grief might be held to be merely conventional. Such lines as 
28 and 29, of course, remind one at once of Juliet’s rhetoric. But if we Continue 
the scene, and examine particularly the famous lines, ^ Grief fills the room up of 
my absent child, Lies in his bed, walks up and down with me,’ we shall find that 
Constance’s intellect is keenly analysing herself; that, intense as her sorrow is, 
she thinks about it quite as much as she feels; and that there is little danger of its 
breaking the o’erfraught heart, as does the speechless grief of more massive char- 
acters. 

29. Thou . . . rottennesse] Ivor John: The man who could pen certain pass- 
ages in The Dunciad rejected this line! 

31. hate and terror to prosperitie] Carter (p. 210) quotes as a probable source 
of tliis: *0 death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that liveth at 
rest in his possessions, unto the man that hath nothing to vex him, and that hath 
prosperitie in ail things.’— i {Genevan Vers,), 



ACT in, sc. iv.] 


OF KING JOHN 


259 


And put my eye-balls in thy vaultie browes, 

And ring thefe fingers with thy houfhold wormes, 
And flop this gap of breath with fuifome dull, 
And be a Carrion Monfter like thy felfe; 

Come, grin on me, and I will thinke thou fmiFft, 
And buffe thee as thy wife : Miferies Loue, 

O come to me. 

Fra. O faire afflifUon, peace. 

Con* No, no, I will not, hauing breath to cry: 
O that my tongue were in the thunders mouth, 
Then with a paffion would I fhake the world , 

And rowze from fleepe that fell Anatomy 
Which cannot heare a Ladies feeble voyce, 


33 ’ 

35 


40 


45 


36. thy felfe;] ihy self. Rowe, NeOs. 

37. mel Ktly. 

fmiVfi] smilest Cam. Glo. Cla. 

38. buffe] kiss Pope,-f ( — Var. ^73). 
wife:] Ff, Rowe, Pope,- 4 -, Fie. 

wife. Coll, ii, Ktly, Cam. Glo. Cla. 
ii, Neils, wife! Var. ’73 et cet. 
Miferies Lomy] Misery^s love! 
Rowe ii. tJwu love of Misery! Pope. 

39. 0 ...me.] Ff, Rowe, Pope. 


Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. 

Craig. Oy...me! Cap. et cet. 

40. peace.] peace! Coll- et seq. 

41. cry:] cry. Ktly, Neils. 

42. 0 ] 0 / Coll. Huds. Craig. 
mouthy] Ff, Rowe, Pope,-f j Coll. 

mouth! Cap. et cet. 

43. a pajfion] what passion Coll. MS. 
wouid 1 ] I would Ff, Rowe,-h. 


35. fulsome] Bradley (A’". E. D., s. v. 5): Offensive to the senses generally? 
physically disgusting, foul, or loathsome. [The present line quoted.] 

38. busse] Capell (I, pt ii, p. 131), objecting to the ^delicacy’ of the former 
editors in changing ‘buss* to kissy says: ‘ “Buss** is a picked word, purposely chosen 
to suit the thing she would kiss, and to paint the greediness with which she would^ 
do it.*^ — Steetons, while not decrying the delicacy of the former editors in reject- 
ing this ‘vulgar* word, quotes, in proof of its fonner usage in no such sense, a pass- 
age from Drayton*s Barons^ Wars and from Faerie QueenOy also from Stanyhurst*s 
translation of Virgil. To this last Douce (i, 403), very properly, takes exception, 
since: ‘The singular vulgarity of Stanyhurst*s language cannot with propriety 
be used to exemplify the undegraded use of any word whatever.’-— Wright agrees 
with Capell that as ‘ *%uss** is used of coarse and wanton kissing,* it ‘is in keeping 
with the rest of Constance’s exaggerated and hysterical language’; as an excellent 
example of the difference between ‘buss* and kisSy Wright quotes: ‘Yond towers, 
whose wanton tops do buss the clouds, Must kiss their own feet.*— Tra. 6 * Cress,^ 
IV, V, 220. 

38. Miseries] Wright: The accent on this word is the same as in ‘From, 
which lingering penance Of such misery doth she cut me off.* — Mer. of Ven.^ 
■IV, d, •272./ ■ 

38. Miseries Loue] Malone: Thou, death, who art courted by misery 
to come to his relief, O come to me. So before: ‘Thou hate and terror to 
prosperity.* 



26o 


THE LIFE AND DEA TH [act in, sc. iv. 


Which fcornes a moderne Inuocation. 46 

Eani, Lady, you vtter madneffe,and not forrow. 

46. (-~Var.'73). Han. mother's Heath (Revisal), Knt, 

moderne] modest Rowe ii, Pope, Huds. ii. widows ColL ii. (MS.). 

46. Which . . . Inuocation] Cambridge Edd. {Note XX.) : Mr Lloyd writes 
to us with reference to this speech of Constance: H think the two last lines are a 
first and second draught, the latter intended to replace the former, and both 
printed together by mistake.^ 

46. moderne] Bradley {N. E. P., s. v. 4): Every-day, ordinary, commonplace. 
[The present line quoted; also: ^FuU of wise saws and modern instances.' — 
You Like It, II, vii, 156.] — Knight remarks that if ‘modern’ be retained in the 
text, its only meaning must be trite, common. ‘But,’ he adds, ‘the sentence is 
weak, and a slight change would make it powerful. We may read “a mother's 
invocation” with little violence to the text; moder's (the old spelling) might have 
been easily mistaken for “modem.”’— Hudson, in reference to Knight’s change, 
says: ‘It must be owned that “modem” seems very tame, and that mother's 
lifts the verse into poetry at once; nevertheless the change seems scarcely ad- 
missible.’ — [Hudson admits it, however, to the text of his ed. ii.] — Dyce {Remarks, 
p. 93) : Mr Knight’s alteration is one of the rashest ever attempted by an editor. 
He had apparently forgotten the following passage in Ro^neo 6* Juliet, ‘Why fol- 
low’d not, when she said— Tybalt’s dead, Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both. 
Which modern lamentation might have mov’d?’ — III, ii, 118. — [Heath should take 
his proper share; Byce’s condemnation is too much for one editor. See Text. Notes. 
Ed.] — Collier {Notes, etc., p. 206), in justification of the MS. Corrector’s read- 
ing, says: ‘When we bear in mind that m and w were often mistaken by the old 
compositors in this volume, the misprint [widow’s] udll not be thought so extra- 
ordinary. Such an emendation could hardly have had its source in the fancy, or 
even the ingenuity, of the old corrector.’ — R. G. White: Heath, who suggested 
‘a mother's invocation,’ and Collier’s MS, Corrector, who reads * widow's invoca- 
tion,’ forgot that Constance calls on impartial Death, who, although he might be 
represented as deaf to a feeble call or to gentle tones, would listen to a mother or 
a widow as quickly as to a maiden or a wife, and answer ^ aequo pede.’ — [Neither 
the Heath-Knight suggestion nor Collier’s MS. correction is, to me, quite satis- 
factory. Even Lloyd’s surmise as regards the whole line, plausible as it may at 
.first appear, does not quite carry conviction. In each case the verb ‘scorns’ is 
taken as referring to Death; but does it not refer to the ‘feeble voice’ to which it 
is directly joined by the relative? Constance has just before begged that her 
‘tongue were in the thunder’s mouth,’ and now refers to her voice as feeble and 
scorning anything commonplace or ordinary. It hardly seems Shakespearean to 
make Constance exclaim that the ‘fell Anatomy,’ Death, will not listen to, or be 
moved by, an ordinary invocation. — ^E d.] 

47. Lady, you vtter . . . sorrow] Brooke (p. 233) : Not a ray of pity for the 
fate of the child crosses the mind of the Churchman, There is nothing in his 
mind but the supremacy of Rome. ... He is just as dead to all human suffering 
when he hears Constance crying out her woe for her lost son. Philip is sorry for 
her. Pandulph is as hard as a stone. Not only public morality, but the tenderest 
ties of humanity, are thus represented as despised by the Church, when her inter- 
ests are endangered. Fancy how Englishmen followed all this — ^men who had 



ACT III, SC. iv.] 


OF KING JOHN 


261 


Con. Thou art holy to belye me fo, 48 

I am not mad : this haire I teare is mine, 

48. art holy] F2F3. art unholy Van 49. mad:] mad; — Var. ’85. mad. 
’73, ’78} ’85, Rann. Sta. Huds. ii, Dono. Neils. 
art not holy F4 et cet. 

heard of the pitiless massacre of St Bartholomew’s Day, of the cruelties of Spain 
in the Low Countries, of the blessing the Pope had given to the ravishing soldiery 
of the Armada, of the treacherous work in England. No play of Shakespeare 
appealed more strongly than this to the national heart and honour, and the na- 
tional wrath with Rome. As I read it, I seem to hear Shakespeare’s own passion 
beating in its verse. It may even be that it was owing to his sympathy with Eng- 
land’s vvu'ath with Roman pretension and treachery, that he chose in the case 
of this play not to foUow the Chronicles, but to adopt as his source a play in which 
the facts of history could be manipulated as he pleased. He had thus a free hand 
so to modify and change events that they should be used to exf^i^ess his opinions 
and those of his hearers on the questions of his own day. Some explanation at 
least resembling this must be given of his reckless, apparently unnecessary viola- 
tion of historical fact.— -Bowden (p. 127): The old play makes Pandulph a h>T>0“ 
crite and a Macchiavellian simply because he is a Catholic prelate. In Shake- 
speare he appears as an experienced, far-sighted statesman, but also as a ghostly 
father, full of sympathy for the afliicted. He grieves for Arthur’s capture and 
pities Constance, whose maternal, beautiful, and pathetic apj^eal proves that she 
saw in him a spiritual consoler, and not a mere cold-hearted, calculating politician: 
^ And, Father Cardinal, I have heard you say That we shall see and know our friends 
In Heaven.’ [This is not, at least avowedly, an answer to Brooke; but is an inde- 
pendent estimate of the character of Shakespeare’s Pandulph. — ^E dJ 
. 49, I am not mad] Woedswobth (Sk's Knowledge ^ Use of Bihky p. 321) ; 
The striking sublimity with vrhich Paul, when brought before Festus, replied to 
the Governor’s' exclamation ^ that' *he was_beside*‘'himself,’;'by' the: simple '.denial, 
'T am' not mad, ''O' .noble Festus,’ xxvi, 25, .was not ''likely to be lost' upon' our 
Poet’s imagination. ' .In' both'Ha?»/e/,'.III, iv, .lapjand' copied with 
'good' 'effect.-— B ucknill (Mad Folk, etc.f p. aSo): " [Pandulph’s "accusation] rouses 
that eloquent defence of her .'reason, 'in which she repeats the test of madness which 
Lear applies to himself, the recognition of personal identity, and in which she 
expresses the' .same idea of madness as a. refuge from sorrow, 'which. Gloucester does. 
.Angrily. as Constance rejects the idea of madness, j^et she is m.ad; the very t3rpe of 
acute reasoning mania. In real life the inteEect would scarcely be so consistent 
and consecutive in its operations; but in real life neither sane nor insane people 
talk blank v^erse, and express even their deepest emotions in the magnificent im- 
agery which great poet’s use. The raving of maniacal frenzy, in which the emo- 
tions are exclusively involved, would' be represented. by short and .broken;, sen- 
tences, in which every link in the idea-chain would not be expressed, and which 
would therefore represent, more or less, the features of incoherence. The Poet 
fills up these cliasms in the sense, and clothes the whole in the glowing language 
of excited intellectual powor; and thus we have in Constance the representation of 
a frenzied woman, speaking with more arrangement of ideas than frenzy really 
permits, — ^von Feiesen (ii, 202): In this passage antithesis is so frequent, and 
phantasy show^s in so high a strain the voluntary abandonment to grief, that it 



262 


THE LIFE AND DEA TH [act in, sc. iv. 


My name Is Constance, I was Geffreyes wife, 50 

Yong Arthur is my fonne, and he is lofl: 

I am not mad, I would to heauen I were, 

For then 'tis like I fliould forget my felfe: 

0, if I could, what grief e fhould I forget? 

Preach fome Philofophy to make me mad, 55 

And thou flialt be Canonized (Cardinal!.) 

For, being not mad, but fenfible of greefe, 

My reafonable part produces reafon 
How I may be deliuer^d of thefe woes, 

And teaches mee to kill or hang my felfe: 60 

If I were mad, I fhould forget my fonne. 

Or madly thinke a babe of clowts were he; 

I am not mad : too well, too well I feele 
The different plague of each calamitie. 

Fra- Binde vp thofe treffes: O what loue I note 65 

In the faire multitude of thofe her haires; 

50. Geffreyes] Geffrey's F4. Words. Neils. Craig, cardinal, Theob. 

51. lofi:] lost! Pope, 4*1 Wh. i, Huds. et cet. 

1, Del. Rife, Dono. Craig, lost, Sta. 60. wy/eZ/e:] wy Rowe,-h, Ktly. 

Fitly, Fie. Neils. 62. he;] he. Coll. Sta. Wh. i, Ktly, 

52. Cap. et seq. Huds. i, Del. Fie. Rife, Dono. Neils, 

were,] mre/ Theob. et seq. Craig. 

S3- wy felfe:] my self. Rowe,+ ( — 64. differ ent] diffrent Theob. Warb. 

¥ar. '73). Johns. 

55-62. In margin Pope, Han. 65-80. Binde vp...a prifoTter,] In mar- 

56. And thou...{CardinaU.)] And Car- gin Pope, Han. 

dinal tkoti Pope, Han, Dono. 65. treffes: 0 ] tresses. 0 / Coll. Ktly, 

Canonizd] canoniz’d Dyce, Fie. Cam. Glo. Cla. Wh. ii, Del. Huds. ii, 

Huds. ii, Words, canonized Dono. Dono. Neils. Craig, tresses.— 0 ^ Dyce, 

(Cardinall.)] Ff . cardinal; Rowe, Hal. Wh. i, Rife, Words. 

Cap. Hal. Wh, i, Huds. Cam.-!- , Del. 66. haires;] hairs! Cap. et seq. 

would hardly surprise me did certain critics bring upon it the charge of over- 
lading. Nevertheless, I think, that for the most part it may be justified, since it 
makes the most lifelike impression of that frenzy in which, we later learn, Con- 
stance dies. Above all, it is not in the placing together of contradictions in the 
most fantastic manner, but rather in her utter denial of the accusation that she 
is mad, wherein lie the most sharply marked symptoms of maniacal frenzy. I do 
not assert that the self-destroying passion of Constance has to serve as a motive 
through the necessity of a tragic fate for herself and her son. We can assuredly 
say: This woman must have compassed her own and Prince Arthur’s downfall in 
the maintainance of the rights of her son, if she had not been left faithless by France. 

65. Binde vp those tresses] Johnson: It was necessary that Constance should 
he interrupted, because a passion so violent cannot be borne long. I wish the 
other speeches had been equally happy; but they only serve to show how difficult 
it is to maintain the pathetic long. 




ACT m, sc. iv.] OF KING JOHN 263 

Where but by chance a filuer drop hath falne, 67 

Euen to that drop ten thoufand wiery fiends 
Doe glew themfelues in fociable griefe , 

Like true, infeparable, faithfull ioues, 70 

Sticking together in calamitie. 

Con. To England, if you will. 72 


67. hath] had Orger. 68. fiends] friends Rowe ii. et seq. 

falne] falVn Rowe, 4 “, Sta. Dyce 70. hues] lovers Coll. ii. (MS.). 

ii, iii, Huds. ii. fallen Cap. et cet. 72. will.]mll. — Theob.-j-. will. [Giv- 

68. Etien] Ev'n Pope,+ ( — ^Var. ’73), ing some of her hairs to the wind. 

Fie. Rann. 

68. wiery] Henley: In The Instructions to the Commissioners for the Choice of 
a Wife for Prime Arthur it is directed *to note the eye-browes^ of the young Queen 
of Naples (who, after the death of Arthur, was married to Henry VIII. and divorced 
by him for the sake of Anne BuUen), They answer: ‘Her browes are of a browne 
heare, very small, like a wyre of heare.^ Thus also Gascoigne: ‘First for hir head, 
the heeres were not of gold, But of some other metall farre more j&ne, Whereof 
cache crinet seemed to behold, Like glistring wiers against the sunne that shine.’ 
— [Dan Bartholomew of Bathe ^ ed, Cunlide, ii, p. 97. Compare also: ‘And round 
about the same her yellow heare, Having through stirring loosd their wonted band, 
Like to a golden border did appeare, Framed in goldsmithes forge with cunning 
hand: Yet goldsmithes cunning could not understand To frame such subtile wire, 
so shinie cleare; For it did glister like the golden sand.’ — Spenser, Faerie Queene, 
IV, vi, 20. Again, Ibid., Epithalamion: ‘Her long loose yellow locks lyke golden 
wyre,’ 1 . 154; and for several other examples see, if needful, Todd’s note on this 
last passage in his edition of Spenser, vol. viii, p. 195. — Ed.] — Pye (p. 145), in 
reference to the foregoing note by Henley, says: ‘This is the kind of note there is 
no reading with patience. First the fact is false : it was Catherine of Arragon and 
not the Queen of Naples to whom Arthur and Henry VIII. were successively 
married. Henry VII. wanted himself to marry the young Queen of Naples after 
Catherine was wedded to his son, as the very document quoted by the critic might 
have shown him, for it commences: “First aftre the presentation and delyverance 
of suche lettres as they shall have writh them to be delyvred to the said queues 
from the Ladie Catheryn, Princesse of Wales,” &c. To this must be added the 
gross blunder of confounding the single hair which was often compared by the 
poets of that age to a golden wire, with that wiry form of the eye-brow, which, 
together with red locks and high forehead, was esteemed beautiful by our barbarian 
ancestors.’ 

68. fiends] Miss Portee: The writhing of hair that is dishevelled, its respon- 
siveness to the wearer’s woful gestures, and the association with the snake-locks 
that coiled in anguish around the heads of the Furies are behind the picture here 
of these ‘wiery fiends.’ They were thickened together, tear-glued, making the 
disarray of grief more noticeable. The change to friends has long held the text, 
it but it lays too much stress on the sticking together part of the imagery. Fiends 

can stick together as well as ‘friends,’ and much more appropriately in this case. 

72. To England, if you wUl] Capell (I, pt ii, p. 13 1): This is spoken tearing 
some of her hair, and giving it to the winds. But why bear it to England? that 
John might seize on it, as he had on her son, and wreak his spite upon both. The 



264 


THE LIFE AND DEATH [act hi, sc. iv. 


[72. Con. To England, if you will] 

‘tearing’ and the ‘liberty,’ too, that she talks of soon after, preceded her entry; 
as may be gathered from 1 . 65. [That. Constance here apostrophizes her hair, 
which she madly tears from its bonds, is likewise the view of both Staunton 
and Moberly.] — ^Malone: Neither the French king nor Pandulph has said a 
word of England since the entry of Constance. Perhaps, therefore, in despair, 
she means to address the absent King John: ‘Take my son to England, if you will; 
now that he is in your power, I have no prospect of seeing him again. It is, there- 
fore, of no consequence to me where he is.’ — D elius: Her thoughts direct them- 
selves whither her son has been taken, and in the summons to put her hair in 
order she recognises a summons to hold herself ready for a journey. — C. &. M. 
CowDEN Clarke: To our minds this is one of those incoherent but wanderingly- 
connected speeches which persons in Constance’s condition of mind (and even 
people who are only absent of mind) will frequently make. To our thinking, 
these words of hers are, in fact, a reply to what King Philip says on her entrance 
— ‘I pry thee, lady, go away with me.’ At the time of their utterance her thoughts 
are too much engrossed to notice them; but afterwards — with that curious opera- 
tion of the memory’s ear which gives the echo of a speech addressed to an absent- 
minded person many minutes subsequent to its sound — they recur to her, and she 
answers them with apparent irrelevancy. This seems to be indicated by King 
Philip’s repeating his former words by way of rejoinder— Bind up your hairs’; 
as if he would recall her to the point now at issue. It appears to us that this inter- 
pretation of her speech adds another point of characteristic delineation to the 
many admirable touches with which the Poet has drawn a mind bordering on 
frenzy in this powerfully affecting scene. [That these words are in answer to 
Philip’s first greeting is likewise Marshall’s interpretation. — E d.] — R ev. John 
Hunter: I take the sense to be — ^I will to England, if you will allow me. — F leay: 
An answer to Philip’s speech: ‘Say this fine speech about faithful love, etc., to 
England, that is, to John.’ Compare Rich. II: II, iii, 70: ‘My answer is to Lan- 
caster’ (is only given to the name of Lancaster). — W right: Constance here replies 
to Philip’s invitation in 1 . 23. Possibly 11 . 24-72 may have been added to the 
‘original draft of the play, or Constance, after the first outburst of her distraction, 
relapses into apathy and gives herself up to Philip’s guidance. — W. W. Lloyd 
{N. d* Q., 1886; Vn, ii, 84) takes exception to the foregoing interpretation by 
Wright; and in particular to the tentative suggestion that 11 . 24-72 are an addi- 
tion, since these ‘include reference to the action, “this hair I tear is mine,” which 
is indispensable to explain both Philip’s injunction and her reply.’ ‘In any case,’ 
continues Lloyd, ‘Constance was not so distracted that she could construe the 
French king’s words as an invitation to “go away with” him “to England.” As 
Shakespeare did not write nonsense, the text must be corrupt, whether vre are able 
to restore it or not. The case does not appear to me to be desperate. In the 
response of Constance, “Yes, that I will,” I recognise an echo to the words “if 
you will,” now wrongly assigned to herself, and which consequently and naturally 
are to be given to King Philip. The problem, then, is narrowed to dmning the 
phrase which reader or typographer was guilty of transforming into “To England.” 
Several plausible readings occur to me, but I give to this the palm of highest proba- 
bility: “Like true, inseparable, faithful loves, Sticking together in calamity, [to 
Constance]. To end — an if you wiU bind up your hairs. Const. Yes, that I 
will; and wherefore will I do it,’”— J. S, Haly (N. 6" Q,, 1886; VH, ii, 305): 



ACT III, SC. iv.] 


OF KING JOHN 


26$ 

73 


Fra, Binde vp your haires. 

Con, Yes that I will : and wherefore will I do it ? 

I tore them from their bonds, and cride aloud, 75 

Q, that thefe hands could fo redeeme my fonne, 

As they haue giuen thefe hayres their libertie: 

But now I enuie at their libertie, 

And will againe commit them to their bonds, 

Becaufe my poore childe is a prifoner. So 

And Father Cardinall, I haue heard you fay 

74. will:] will. Sta. Fie. Knt, Sta. Cam.“f , Neils. Craig, pris^ 

76. O,] 01 Huds. oner, Theob. Warb. Johns, prisoner . — 

77. giimi] Pope,-f-, Fie. Cap. et cet. 

libertie:] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Huds. 81. And] Oh Pope, Han. Ah! Anon. 
liberty. Fie. liberty! Theob. et cet. ap. Cam. 

80. prifoner.] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 

Is it not natural that Constance, who thus apostrophizes her son, *My boy, my 
Arthur, my fair son! My life, my joy, my food, my all the world!’ should exclaim 
in her anguish: ‘To England, if you will!’ knowing him to be a prisoner in his 
uncle’s power in that country? The exclamation needs no explanation by any 
commentator. — Br. Nicholson {F. & Q., 1887; VII, hi, 511): This exclama- 
tion has been more than boldly changed. Indeed, one might say that never has 
a passage so subtilely and yet so naturally introduced been so utterly spoilt by 
tr>nng to amend it instead of thinking over the circumstances and the context. . . . 
The widowed mother and her only child had been inseparable. Arthur has been 
her idol, the more so that she has indulged in all but certain day-dreams, and in 
loving thoughts of his future happy and glorious career. . . . Her sole thought, 
her sole talk, is now of him and his fate, her curses and her prayers for revenge. 
‘She dies in a’ despairing frenzj^ This scene is an example of it; and Philip 
shows that he knows what is coming by his words on her approach. After one 
futile attempt, he at last says, ‘Lady, you utter madness,’ but her only reply is 
a raving outburst of grief. Then he goes on another tack, and, as he thinks, a 
sure one. He praises the beauty of the hair she is destroying. She at first only 
hears sounds without sense. Suddenly, however, these meaningless sounds seem 
to her to refer to her one abiding thought. Placing her own construction on them, 
she catches at — ‘Like true, inseparable, faithful loves, Sticking together in ca- 
lamity.’ ‘Yes,’ she says — if I may add her unexpressed thoughts to her spoken 
words — ‘Yes, to England if you will; be the consequences or prison or death, we 
will still be “inseparable and faithful in our loves, clinging together in our ca- 
lamities ” and in our death. My Arthur, let us see one another, let us live together 
once more, till together we seek the mercy of God-’ — Belden {Tudor Sh.) agrees 
in part with Clarke that these words are given in answer to Philip’s invitation; 
but, so far from being an abstracted reply, are an exhortation to Philip ‘to take 
her with him to England in a further campaign for the rights of Arthur, who has 
been carried thither.’ 

78. enuie at] Weight compares: ‘Against this man, whose honesty the de\nl 
And his disciples only envy at .’ — Bmry VIII: V, iii, 112. 

81. And . . . heard, you say] F. Gentleman (ap. Bell): Though Constance’s 



