





A NEW VARIORUM* EDITION 


OF 


S H A K E S P E A R E 


EDITED BY 

HORACE HOWARD FURNESS, M.A. (Harv.) 

HON. PH. D. (hALLB), HON. L H. D. (COLUMB.), HON LL.D (PBNN. BT HARV.) 
HON. LITT. D. (CANTAB.) 


VOL. XII 


Much a non about Norm no 


SECOND EDITION 


PHILADELPHIA 
J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY 
LONDON: 36 SOUTHAMPTON STREET, COVENT GARDEN 
1900 



Copyright, 1899, by H. H. Furnkss. 


WisTcoTT & Thomson, 
Elniroiypers^ Phila. 


Press of J. B, Lippincott Company, 
Phila, 






PREFACE 


The Text, here reprinted, is that of the First Folio ; which is not, 
however, the earliest. Much Ado About Nothing had already appeared, 
in a, Quarto form, in the year 1600, twenty- three years before it was 
printed in the First Folio. Nevertheless, there is in reality but one 
text, inasmuch as' it is from this Quarto that the Folio itself was printed, 
a fact which any one can discern for himself by an examination of the 
Textual Notes in the following pages. Wherever the Folio differs 
from the Quarto, it is * mostly,* Dyce says, ^for the worse;* this 
‘worse,* however, consists chiefly of trivial typographical errors. Oc- 
casionally, the variations in the Folio are improvements, as, for instance, 
where, in the Quarto, Dogberry says ‘ any man that knowes the stat- 
‘ utes,* the Folio, with a nearer approach to Dogberry* s language, has 
‘ anie man that knowes the Statues;* again, where the Qijarto regardless 
of rhyme says: — 


‘ Hang thou there vpon the toomb 
‘ Praising hir when I am dead,* 

the Folio has: — 

‘ Hang thou there vpon the tombe 
‘ Praising her when I am dombe.* 

Where Leonato, full of amazed horror at the sight of Borachio, 
recoils and asks (according to the Quarto) : 

‘Art thou the slaue that with thy breath hast killd 

‘ Mine innocent child ?* ^ 

the Folio, with heightened dramatic effect, repeats the ‘thou*, ‘Art 
‘thou thou the slaue that with thy breath hast kild mine innocent 
‘childe?* 

Furthermore, the stage directions are rather more exact, even to the 
specifying of names of actors, in the Folio than in the Quarto ; where 
the Quarto has ‘Enter prince, Leonato, Claudio, Musicke,* the Folio 
has ‘ Enter Prince, Leonato, Claudio, and lacke Wilson.* 

The most noteworthy difference between the two texts is the omis- 
sion in several places in the Folio of lines and portions of lines which 



VI 


PREFACE 


are in the Quarto. This of itself proves that the Folio was not printed 
from an independent text. Were it otherwise, there would be lines in 
the text of the Folio not to be found in the Quarto, and of such there 
is not a single one. All the noteworthy changes lie in words, in omis- 
•ons, and in stage directions. The inference, therefore, may be fairly 
drawn not only that Heminge and Condell used a copy of the Quarto 
as the text for their Folio, but that it was a copy which had been used 
on the stage as a prompt-book, wherein for the benefit of the prompter, 
fuller stage-directions had been inserted, even, as we have seen, to the 
very names of the actors, such as Jack Wilson, who were to be sum- 
moned, and wherein, possibly, some passages had been stricken out. 
We all know that these two friends of Shakespeare assert in their 
Preface to the Folio that they had used the author’s manuscripts, and 
in the same breath denounce the Quartos as stolen and surreptitious. 
When we now find them using as ‘ copy * one of these very Quartos, 
we need not impute to them a wilful falsehood if we suppose that, in 
using what they knew had been printed from the original text, 
howsoever obtained, they held it to be the same as the manuscript 
itself, — most especially if the copy had been a prompter’s book during 
the very years when Shakespeare himself was on the stage, and,/^?j- 
siblyy used by the great Master himself at some of the many performances 
of a play, whereof the extreme popularity we learn from Leonard 
Digges, who says; — 

‘ let but Beatrice 

^ And Benedicke be scene, loe in a trice 

'The Cockpit, Galleries, Boxes all are full.* 

To set forth in detail, or to tabulate, all the variations of the Folio, 
its additions of words or syllables, its omissions of lines or phrases, its 
reproduction of unusual spellings, or of misspellings, in the Quarto, 
its prose where the Quarto has verse, etc., etc., is superfluous in a 
volume, like the present, where all the material for such a summary is 
presented in the Textual Notes on every page. If the student be so 
happily, or unhappily, constituted as to find refreshment or intellectual 
growth in such work, it is better for him to make the tables for himself. 
If he find no interest therein, (and in a stage aside, let me whisper 
that he has my cordial sympathy,) it would be a sheer waste of time to 
make it for him ; let him, therefore, tranquilly accept the assurance 
drawn from a laborious collation, which I gladly spare him, that the 
Text of the Folio, as I started with saying, is taken from a copy of the 
Quarto, which probably contained some manuscript changes, and that 
variations between it and the Folio are mainly accidental ; where they 



PREFACE 


vu 


are notewbrthy, and apparently not accidental, they will be discussed, 
in due course, as they occur in the following pages. 

As I have had occasion, more than once, to say, if this printed text 
of the Folio, over which we pore so earnestly, had been ever scanned 
by Shakespeare’s eyes, then we might accept it as a legacy whm 
every comma becomes respectable ; but since we know that, when the 
Folio was printed, Shakespeare had been in his grave seven years, 
we discover that we are herein dealing merely with the skill, intel- 
ligent or otherwise, of an ordinary compositor ; and that in our minute 
collation we are devoting our closest scrutiny to the vagaries of a 
printer. 

Thus we have the source of the Text of the Folio, but when we 
seek to discover that of the Quarto, i^e are met by the mystery 
which seems inseparable from all things connected with Shakespeare’s 
outward life (I marvel that in the four thousand ways, devised by Mr 
Wise, of spelling Shakespeare’s name no place is found for spelling 
it * m-y-S’t-e-r-y ’), and yet, in the present instance, I doubt that mys- 
tery is the exactest term. It is merely our ignorance which creates 
the mystery. To Shakespeare’s friends and daily companions there 
was nothing mysterious in his life ; on the contrary, it possibly ap- 
peared to them as unusually dull and commonplace. It certainly 
had no incidents so far out of the common that they thought it worth 
while to record them. Shakespeare never killed a man as Jonson did ; 
his voice was never heard, like Marlow’s, in tavern brawls ; nor was 
he ever, like Marston and Chapman, threatened with the penalty of 
having his ears lopped and his nose slit ; but his life was so gentle and 
so clear in the sight of man and of Heaven that no record of it has 
come down to us; for which failure, I am fervently grateful, and 
as fervently hope that no future year will ever reveal even the faintest 
peep through the divinity which doth hedge this king. 

We are quite ignorant of the way in which any of the Shakespearian 
Quartos came to be published. Were it not that Heminge and Con- 
dell pronounced them all to be ‘ stolne and surreptitious * we might 
have possibly supposed that Shakespeare yielded to temptation and 
sold his Plays to the press, — z. dishonest practice indulged in by 
some dramatists, as we learn from Heywood’s Preface to his Rape of 
Lvcrece where he says : ^some have used a double sale of their labours, 
‘first to the Stage, and after to the Presse.’ But not thus dishonestly ^ 
would the sturdy English soul of Shakespeare act, — a trait not suffi- 
cientiy consiiSred by those^ho impute to him an indifference to the 



viil 


PREFACE 


offsprings of his brain. His Plays once sold to the Theatre passed 
^or eVer from his possession, and to all allurements of subsequent 
money-getting from them he gave an honest kersey no. 

This vexed question of origin, the Quarto of Much Ado about 
Nothing shares in common with all the other Quartos, and, in addi- 
tion, has a tidy little mystery of its own, which it shares with only 
three ©r four other Plays. The earliest mention of it appears in the 
Stationers^ Registers as follows : — * 


4- atlgU0tl 

As you like yt I sl booke 
Henry the Ffift / a booke 
Euery man in his humour / a booke - 
The commedie of muche Adoo about 
nothing a booke / 


to be staled. 


This item does not stand in the body of the volume of the Sta- 
tioners^ Registers^ but is on one of a couple of fly-leaves at the begin- 
ning, whereon are thirteen or fourteen other entries, all of which 
contain a caveat, such as : ‘ This to be entred to hym yf he can gett 
^Aucthority for yt* or ^yf he can get yt aucthorised.* The year is 
not given. With one exception, all the other entries on this and the 
opposite page, nine in number, are dated 1603. The exception, im- 
mediately preceding the Much Ado entry, is dated in the margin: 
* 27 May 1600.* It is quite possible to suppose, with Malone, that 
the clerk seeing this date, 1600, in the preceding item, did not think 
it worth while to repeat it in the present. It is also quite possible to 
suppose, that the date being of less importance than the fact that the 
plays were ‘ to be staled,* the clerk believed that his memory would be 
sufficiently jogged by the heading, at the top of the page : * my lord 
^chaimberlens menus plaies Entred.* But after all, here the date is 
of small importance j a subsequent entry gives us a date beyond gain- 
saying. The real mystery lies in the three words: ‘to be staled.* 
Why they should be stayed, or at whose instigation, must for ever 
remain a problem. It is reasonable tq suppose that, inasmuch as the 
pla}^ were the property of ‘my lord chamberlens menn,* the remon- 
strance against their printing, came from these proprietors. And yet 
if this remonstrance was effective in the first week in August, why did 
its efficacy fail in the last week of August, when the Quarto actually 
appeared ? It never did fail in the case oi As You Like It^ whereof 
the appearance was stayed until it was issued in the Folio, in 1623. 

* ArBEr’S Transcript ^ vol. iii, p. 37. 



PREFACE ^ 

Dr William Aldis Wright, our highest living Shakespearian author- 
ity, suggests, in regard to this latter play, As You I^ike It^ that the ^ 
staying was due to the fact that the announcement was * premature and 
*that the play may not have been ready,* and he adduces certain signs 
of haste in the naming of the Dramatis PersoncBy such as two Jaques, 
etc** But the staying in the case of Much Ado about Nothing was not 
permanent, as it was in the case oi^s Vou Like and veFi^^ha^ 
in It a possible sign nf hasste rather more empha tic than any in As 
You Zihe It, in the introduction of a character. In nogeiL who never 
speaks throughout the entire play. Moreover, to ‘stay* the play 
because it was not ready, implies, I am afraid a certain complicity ^pn 
the part of Shakespeare in the publication of the Quartos which I, 
for one, should be loath to accept. 

Mr Fleay suggested at one timg 4 ^that all these four plays were or- 
dered to be staled, because ‘ tfiey were probably suspected of being 
‘ libellous,’ and were therefore ‘reserved for further examination. Since 
‘the “war of the theatres’* was at its height, they may have been 
‘ restrained as not having obtained the consent of the Chamberlain, on 
‘behalf of the company, to their publication.* Inasmuch as Henry 
the Fifth, Every Man in his Humour, and Much Ado about Nothing, 
when they finally did appear, were issued by different publishers, Mr 
Fleay afterward J said : ‘ it seems clear that the delay, of which so 
‘ many hypothetical interpretations have been offered, was simply to 
‘enable Millington and Busby, who probably [Italics mine] had the 
‘ copyrights of all four plays, to complete the sales thereof to the other 
‘ publishers, ’ It seems equally clear, it must be acknowledged, that 
an explanation which rests on a probability is not far removed from 
all others of a hypothetical nature ; and when once hypothesis has sway, 
what is to hinder us from supposing that in this, as in other cases, the 
cause of the ‘ staying * was James Roberts ? It has been assumed by 
all editors, I think without exception, since the days of Malone, that 
the entry in the Stationers^ Registers of August the fourth belongs to 
the year 1600, because the entry immediately preceding bears that 
date, and the clerk thought it needless to repeat it. But the preced- 
ing entry couples, with the date 1600, the name ‘James Roberts,* 
as the stationer who wished to enter two plays. Now, if the clerk 
thought it needless to repeat the 1600, why is it not equally likely that 
he thought it needless to repeat the name, James Roberts, if to him 
both entries belonged? What may be assumed of a date, surely may 

* See As You Like It, p. 295, of this edition. 

t Life and JVark, 1886, p. 40. 

X Chronicle of the Engtish Drama, 189X, vol. ii, p* 184. 




X 


PREFACE 


be assumed of a name, especially since all six plays belonged to the 
Chamberlain’s company. Thus stand the entries on the page of 
the Register : — 


my lord chamberlens menns plaies Entred 
viz 

27 May 1600 A moral of clothe brechcs and velvet hose 
To master 
Robertas 


27 May 
To hym 


Allarum to London / 


4- auflusti 

As you like yt / a booke 
Henry the Ffift / a booke 
Euery ma 7 t in his humour / a booke 
The commedie of muche A doo about 
nothing a booke / 


to be staled 


Is it straining the plain facts before us too far, to assume that all 
these plays were entered by James Roberts, and that the caveat was 
due to his shifty character? It will be merely cra 7 nbe repetita to 
rehearse what I have heretofore assumed* as to the character of 
James Roberts, and his influence in connection with Shakespeare’s 
company, — an influence, whereof the origin and extent must remain to 
us unknown, merely because we do not know and never shall know 
what was once the common gossip of the day. Nor, in reality, is 
the ^ staying ’ of these Shakespearian Quartos of any real importance ; 
it is worth mentioning only as another happy instance of our utter 
ignorance of Shakespeare’s mortal life. 

But little more remains to be said about the Quarto. In the Sta- 
tioners' Registers ^ under the running title; ‘42 Regi 7 T{a\e^' that is, 
1600, we find as follows: — 

23 augugti 

Andrewe Wyse Entred for their copies vnder the handes of the 
William Aspley wardens Two bookes. the one called Muche a 
Doo about 7 iothinge. Th other the second parte of 
the history of kinge Henry the iiif^ with the hu- 
mours of Sir John Ffallstaff: Wrytten by master 
Shakespere xij<^ 

* As You Like Ity p. 296, Merchant of Venicey p. 271, Midsummer Nighfs Dream 
p. xvi, of this edition. t Arber’s Reprint iii, 170. 



PREFACE 


xi 


Here, then, we have the exact, final date of the publication of the 
Quarto. 

Arber remarks, in parenthesis, after the foregoing entry, that this is 
* the first time our great poet’s name appears in these Registers. * It is 
perhaps worth while to remark in reference to the spelling of the name, 
as there given, that both Collier and Dyce in reproducing the entry 
spell it Shakespeare i so uncertain is the reading of old chirography, — 
especially if it be Court-hand or Chancery-hand, which Shakb:speare 
used when he subscribed to his Will, and to the Blackfriars Deed and 
in which, like other laymen, he was but little skilled. Halliwell-Phil- 
LIPPS * reproduces the same entry from the Stationers' Registers ^ and 
yet his copy varies from Arber’ s in ten or twelve minute particulars, 
such as twoo where the latter has ‘Two,’ adoo for ‘a Doo,’ Kinge for 
‘kinge,’ humors for ‘humours,’ Mr. for ^master', &c. — quite insignif- 
icant all of them, it may be readily acknowledged, but, nevertheless, 
they are variations, and full of sad warning when we approach the 
awful problem of the spelling of the Poet’s name as deduced from his 
written signature. For myself, I at once acknowledge that I prefer to 
accept the spelling, Shakespeare, adopted by the Poet himself, and so 
printed by his fellow-townsman, Richard Field, in both Venus and 
Adonis and in Lvcrece. This alone is for me quite sufficient, and evi- 
dently his contemporaries shared the same opinion. Out of all the 
twenty-eight editions of the Quartos bearing the author’s name on 
the title-page, and published during the Poet’s lifetime, fifteen spell 
the name Shakespeare, twelve spell it Shake-speare, and one spells 
it Shak-speare. To this unanimity (the hyphen is merely a guide 
to the pronunciation) we may add the Poet’s personal friends. Hem- 
INGE and Condell, who thus print it, Shakespeare, in the First 
Folio. 

There is one other item, in reference to the Text, which I think 
worthy of note. When it is asserted that the Folio follows the text 
of the Quarto, we assume that the compositors of the Folio had 
before them, as ‘copy,’ the pages of the Quarto, either printed or in 
manuscript. If this assumption be correct, there will remain an 
unexplained problem. At the present day, when compositors set 
up from printed copy, they follow that copy slavishly, almost me- 
chanically. Surely, the same must have been true of the less intel- 
ligent compositors of Shakespeare’s time, and we might justly 
expect that the printed page of the Quarto which had served as 
copy would be exactly reproduced in the Folio, in spelling, in 


* Outlines of the Life of Shakespeare^ 1882, p. 528. 




xii 


PREFACE 


punctuation, in the use of capitals, and of Italics. Yet, this is far, 
very far from being the case ; ‘ don Peter of Arragon ^ in the Quarto 
of the present play, becomes ^ Don Peter of Arragon'^ in the 
Folio, in Italics, and with a capital with ‘happy' before him in 
print, it is almost unaccountable that the compositor of the P'olio 
should take the trouble of adding another type and spell the word 
‘happie;* or that he should change ‘4 of his fiue wits’ into ‘ foure 
‘ of his fiue wits ' or change ‘ lamb ' into ^ Lambe ’ with a needless 
capital and a needless e j and so we might go on in almost every line 
throughout the play. And yet it is incontestable that the Folio was 
printed from the Quarto, — the very errors of the Quarto are repeated 
in the Folio, such as giving the names of the actors, Kemp and Cow- 
ley, instead of the names of the characters they impersonated. 

The solution of the problem is to be found, I think, in the practice 
of the old printing offices, where compositors set up the types not from 
copy before them, which they themselves read, but by hearing the copy 
read aloud to them. We now know that in the printing offices of afore- 
time, it was customary to have a reader whose duty it was to read aloud 
the copy to the compositors.* This will explain not only all these trivial 
differences of spelling, punctuation, and of Italics, which I have just 
mentioned, but also the cause of that more important class of errors 
which Shakespearian Editors have hitherto attributed either to the 
hearing of the text delivered by actors, in public, on the stage, or to 
the mental ear of the compositor while carrying a sentence in his 
memory. The voice believed to be that of the actor is in reality the 
voice of the compositors’ reader. Be it understood that I here refer 
mainly to the instances where the Folio was printed from a Quarto, 
That plays were sometimes stolen by taking them down from the 
actors’ lips on the stage, we know, — Heywood denounces the prac- 
tice in that same address ‘To the Reader’ prefixed to his Rape of 
Lucrece, 

The happy days, the Golden Age, when Much Ado about Nothing 
was seen, enjoyed, and read by men, unvexed by questions of its Date of 
Composition, came to an end with Malone, of whom, in this regard, I 
am afraid Grattan’s description is true, when he spoke of that worthy 
commentator as ‘ going about looking through strongly magnifying spec- 
‘tacles for pieces of straw and bits of broken glass.’ Since the days 
of Malone the study of the Chronology of Shakespeare’s plays has 
been deemed of prime importance, and it is become needful that our 
accumulated evidence in that regard should be duly marshalled ; we 

* The Invention of Printings &c., by T. L. De Vinne, New York, 1876, p. 524. 



PREFACE 


Xlll 


must have External Evidence, which is indisputable, and, forsooth, Inter- 
nal Evidence, which is of imagination all compact ; and, owing to the vo- 
luminous detection of this internal evidence, the heap of bits of broken 
glass assumes portentous proportions, under which^the plays themselves 
are like to be hid ; reminding us of the venerable cemetery at Prague, 
where the records of departed worth are hidden under the pious peb- 
bles deposited by admiring friends. 

Happily for us, in the present play the External Evidence of the Date 
of Composition is concise, and the Internal Evidence meagre. To the 
former belong merely two facts : the entry in the Stationers' Registers 
(which has been given above) and the title-page itself of the Quarto, 
which is as follows : — 

* Much adoe about | Nothing. | As it hath been fundrie times pub- 
‘ likely I adled by the right honourable, the Lord | Chamberlaine his 
‘ feruants. | Written by William Shakespeare. | [Vignette] | London | 

*• Printed by V. S. for Andrew Wife, and | William Afpley. | 1600.^ 

This title-page, (where, by the way, ‘V. S. ^ stands for Valentine 
Simmes,) and the entries in the Stationers' Registers are all that we 
know of the Date of Composition. How long before August, 1600, 
Shakespeare wrote the play, we can merely guess. The title-page 
says that the play had been sundry times acted; even without this 
assertion we might have been reasonably certain of the fact. Unless 
a play were many times acted, it is not likely to have been popular ; 
unless it were popular, no stationer would care to publish it, as a 
Quarto, especially if, in addition, there would have to be some trouble 
in procuring the Manuscript. 

It has been assumed by a majority of editors that an early limit has 
been found in the fact that Meres, in 1598, does not mention this play, 
by name, among the other plays of Shakespeare which he enumerates. 
Meres nowhere professes to give complete lists of all the works of the 
authors whom he mentions. Mr Fleay, however, believes that, in 
the case of Shakespeare, Meres’s list of twelve, includes every one 
of Shakespeare’s plays which had been ^either newly written or 
‘revived between June 1594 and June 1598.’* Nay, as a fact, 
Meres does more; he gives the title of one play: Love labours 
wonne whereof no trace is known elsewhere. The late Mr A. E. 
Brae maintained, and Mr Fleay agrees with him, that under this 
title the present play is designated. When Meres wrote : ‘so Shake- 
* speare among the English is the most excellent in both kinds for 


* Life and Work of Shakespeare ^ 1 886, p. 135. 




XIV 


PREFACE 


^the stage; for Comedy, witnesse his Gentlemen of Verona^ his 
Errors y his la bnrs lost hi s Loue labours wonne^ his Mid- 

* summers night dreamcy and his Merchmt of Venice : for Tragedy his 
‘ Richard the secondy Richard the thirdy Henry the fourthy King lohny 
‘ Titus Andronicus and his Romeo and Juliet y^ he must have written 
from memory, and, under Love labours wonncy I suppose he may have 
had in mind any one of several Comedies, wherein the labours of love 
were successful, as they generally are in all Comedies. 

But Brae is not of this opinion, and the whole question is germane 
to the present subject only in so far as that, if Brae be correct, the Date 
of Composition may be placed at any indefinite time before 1598. His 
argument, that the present play is Love's Labours Won will be found 
in full in the Appendix ; in brief, it is that because Much Ado about 
Nothing was printed in 1600, it does not follow that it was not 
known several years before that date, especially since the title-page 
says that Mt hath been sundrie times pubjikely acted.* Brae further 
contends that in its plot Much Ado about Nothing affords the needed 
contrast to Love' s Labour' s Losty and quotes certain passages which 
show an assumed similitude or parallelism between the two plays. 
Lastly, he maintains that in Love' s Labours it is the labours of the 
little god of love that are intended and not the love manifested by the 
characters in the play. 

Brae’s strong point is that Much Ado about Nothing actually ap- 
peared in Quarto form in 1600, within only two years of Meres’s enu- 
meration in 1598; he might have made it stronger, had he noticed that 
in this Much Ado about Nothing in the same relation, 

to Meres, as far as the date is concerned, as stand A Midsummer 
Night's Dream and The Merchant of Venice, both of which are in 
Meres *s list, and both appeared in 1600. The appearance of these two 
Comedies proves unquestionably that there were plays which, although 
written before 1598, were not printed till 1600; and what is true of 
these two might be easily true of a thir&. 

Brae’s weak point is in claiming for Much Ado about Nothmg a 
date of composition several years before publication, and at the same 
time denying it to other Comedies. Neither The Two Gentlemen of 
Verona nor The Comedy of Errors appeared in print until 1623, and yet 
both were written twenty-five years before this date ; Meres mentions 
them. Mr Fleav believes f that Meres enumerates all of Shake- 
speare’s Comedies, which had appeared; but until this can be con- 
clusively proved, it is possible that thire were others, already then 

* Wits Common Wealth, The Second Part, by F. M, 1598, p. 623. 

f Life and Work, p. 135. 



PREFACE 


XV 


written, which had to wait, like The Two Genflemen of Verona and 
The Comedy of Errors^ for the publication of the Folio ; it is, there- 
fore, uncritical, I think, to exclude wholly from a competition for the 
place of Lovers Labour's Won all the Comedies which appeared only in 
the Folio. 

Brae's weakest point lies in the 'similitude and contrast,' of which 
he endeavours to prove the existence, between Much Ado about Noth- 
ing and Love' s Labour^ s Lost If a companion to Love's Labour^ s 
Lost is to be sought for, which in 'similitude and contrast' shall 
prove Love's Labours Won, it would not be hard to find it in As 
You Like Ity or in Twelfth Night. Dr Farmer and a majority of 
editors believe that AH' s Well that Ends Well is the missing Comedy. 
Hunter thought that he had found it in The Tempest; and Craik 
and Hertzberg urge the claims of The Taming of the Shrew. But it is 
all guess-work, from which the guessers alone retire with intellectual 
benefit. However, 'the fox is worth nothing when caught,' says 
Sydney Smith, 'it is the catching alone that is the sport.' 

In conclusion, all that to us simple folk is given, and we must get 
from it what comfort we can, is the fact that Love's Labours Won is 
not come down to us, and to know that Much Ado about Nothing 
was published in the year 1600. "‘I hope," cried the Squire, "that 

'"you’ll not deny that whatever is, is." — "Why," returned Moses, 
'"I think I may grant that, and make the best of it." ^ 

Thus far External Evidence, 

It is a subject of congratulation that the severe scrutiny, to which 
all of these plays have been subjected, has been able to discover in the 
present play only four items of Internal Evidence of the Date of Com- 
position ; three of them harmonize, within a year, with the External 
Evidence. 

The first item, which is thought to indicate the Date of Composi- 
tion, was detected by Chalmers, who, in the wars from which Don 
Pedro is returned, where, as Beatrice says, there were ' musty victuals,* 
finds an undoubted reference to the Irish campaign of 1599. 'The 
'fact is,* says Chalmers,* 'as we may learn from Camden, and from 
' Moryson, that there were complaints of the badness of the provisions, 
* which the contractors furnished the English army in Ireland. And 
' such a sarcasm, from a woman of rank, and fashion, and smartness, 
' must have cut to the quick ; and must have been loudly applauded 
' by the audience ; who, being! disappointed by the events of the cam- 
' paign, would be apt enough to listen to a lampoon on the Contractor, 


* Supplemental Apulogy , 1 799, p. 380. 



XVI 


PREFACE 


^ rather than on the General ; who, by his great pretensions and small 
^performances, had disappointed the expectations of the Queen and 
* the hopes of the nation. From all those intimations, it appears to be 
^more than probable, that Much Ado about Nothing was originally 
‘written in the autumn of 1599/ 

First, as for the wars, which Chalmers thinks refer to the Irish cam- 
paign, they are in Bandello’s Novell from which Shakespeare is sup- 
posed to have drawn his plot, whereof the scene is laid in Messina, 
whither Don Pedro of Arragon repaired after defeating in battle Charles 
the Second of Naples. 

Secondly, Chalmers cites Camden and Moryson for his authorities 
in regard to ‘ musty victuals, * but does not name chapter or page ; he 
evidently trusted to his memory. A careful reading of the account of 
Essex’s expedition to Ireland given by Fynes Moryson fails to reveal 
a single complaint as to the provisions. The soldiers were disheartened 
by the defeats inflicted on them by the Earl of Tyrone, but I can find 
no word against either the sufficiency or the quality of their food. An 
equally careful reading of Camden has been alike fruitless. To be 
sure, Camden wrote several volumes, but I examined that one where, 
if anywhere, the complaints referred to by Chalmers would be most 
likely to be found. I do not say that these special complaints about 
musty victuals in Essex’s campaigns are not mentioned by Camden. 
All I am sure of is that there is no word about them in his Annates 
Rerum Anglicarvm et Hibernicarvm, Regnante Elizabethay etc., ed. 
1625. The soldiers in the year 1599 are mentioned only twice, as ^r 
as I can find. Once their numbers are given, and again (p. 736), in 
speaking of Essex, Camden says, ‘ Nec ante mensem lulium jam di- 
‘vergentem rediit, militibus lassatis afflictis, numerisque supra fidem 
‘accisis.’ I am thus urgent about a trifle, because Chalmers’s 
assertion has been accepted without questioning, down to this day. 

The second item, which is supposed to have a bearing on the 
Date of Composition, lies in the reference by the Watch to ‘ one De- 
‘ formed, a vile thief this seven year.* This is said to be an allusion to 
‘ Amorphus, or the Deformed,’ a character in Ben Jonson’s Cynthia^ $ 
Revels, Apart from the somewhat refractory fact that Cynthid s Revels 
and Much Ado about Nothing both appeared in the same year (accord- 
ing to Gifford Much Ado abotit Nothing preceded Cynthia's Rev^s) 
there is no intimation that Jonson’s ‘Amorphus * had been a thief within 
or without seven years. In reality, there is not the smallest trait soever 
in common, in the two men ; and, if Gifford be right, an allusion by 
Shakespeare to Jonson’s ‘Amorphus’ is an absolute impossibility. 



PREFACE 


xvii 


That there may be a topical allusion in ^ Deformed * is not impossible ; 
but it is not needed, and, if it exist, is probably now for ever lost. 

This * Deformed,* however, is not to be whistled down the wind thus 
easily ; his yield of allusions is not exhausted. Mr Fleay thrills us 
with a solution of the mystery which makes the bedded hair start up 
and stand on end. The Deformed in Muck Ado about Nothing is ^of 
‘course,* he says,* ‘an allusion to Shakespeare himself. “A vile 
‘ “ thief these seven year,** indicates the time that he had been steal- 
‘ing instead of inventing his plots.* We pause in doubt with which 
emotion to dilate: the effrontery of the thief, or the magnanimous, 
and uncalled for, confession of the Poet. Had this remark been 
made about Shakespeare by a luckless foreigner, it is painful to 
imagine the character of the chorus, led, I fear, by Mr Fleay, with 
which it would have been received. 

Dr FuRNiVALLf discovered a contemporary, political allusion, (the 
third item) in the following *lines : — 


‘ like fauourites 

‘ Made proud by Princes, that aduance their pride, 

‘Against that power that bred it.* — III, i, 11-13. 

Here, we are supposed to have a reference to the petted and insolent 
favourite, Essex, who, disgraced by his fatal campaign in Ireland, had 
begn put in confinement, only to issue therefrom on the twenty-sixth 
of August, 1600, and plot against the Queen, who had so bred his 
advancement. To be sure, the date is unlucky ; it is later than either 
the fourth or the twenty-third of August, the dates when Much Ado 
about Nothings already written, was presented for registration at 
Stationers* Hall. This obstruction, however, Dr Furnivall smoothes 
away by ‘noticing that the evident “political allusion** is in just 
‘ two lines, removable from the text, and that it may, therefore, have 
‘ been inserted after the play was first written, and after the outbreak 
‘of Essex*s conspiracy.* Dr Furnivall accepts ‘favourite* in the 
special sense of minion. 

This acceptation, Mr Richard Simpson J denies, and asserts that 
‘fayourite* means merely ‘the confidential agent or minister of a 
^prince.* Thus interpreted, the allusion is to ‘Cecil, or the Lord 
^Admiral, or to Raleigh, who were accused of monopolising all her [the 
^ Queen*s] favours.* A difficulty here, not undetected in the discussion 


* Introduction to Shakespearian Study ^ 1877, p. 23. 

t The Academy^ 18 Sept. 1875. % Ibid., 25 Sept. 1875. 




xviii 


PREFACE 


by Dr Furnivall, is that nowhere do we find the Cecils or Raleigh 
advancing their pride against Elizabeth. 

The fourth and last item which furnishes Internal Evidence of the 
Date of Composition, has been detected by Mr Fleay ; it induces 
him to place this date far earlier than any other critic has placed it, 
whereby the striking and unusual unanimity of editors and critics in 
this regard is broken. Mr Fleay puts the date at 1597-98, and he 
would have, probably, put it much earlier were it not that he draws a 
distinction between the original play and the play as we have it. The 
Almanacs are invoked to help us to the date of A Midsummer Night's 
Dream^ and Mr Fleay invokes them here. ‘ It is very frequent,^ says 
this author,* ‘ in old plays, to find days of the week and month men- 
‘ tioned ; and when this is the case, they nearly always correspond to 
*the almanac of the year in which the play was written.* [Qu. per- 
formed ? It is to be regretted that examples are not furnished.] ‘ Now, in 
* this play alone in Shakespeare is there such a mark of time ; com- 
^ paring I, i, 274 ^'The sixth of July, your loving friend, Benedick** 
^and II, i, 341 : Not till Monday, my dear son, which is hence a just 

seven night,** we find that the sixth of July came on a Monday; 
‘this suits the years 1590 and 1601, but none between ; an indication 
‘that the original play was written in 1590, Unlike Love's Labour's 
‘ Losiy it was almost recomposed at its reproduction, and this day-of- 
‘ the- week mention is, I think, a relic of the original plot, and probably 
‘due, not to Shakespeare, but to some coadjutor.* 

It is so very satisfactory to know not merely the year of composi- 
tion, but the exact day, that we are filled with regret that the resources 
of knowledge, in this drama, are, possibly, still unexplored and unex- 
hausted. One fact, hitherto unnoticed, may yet cheer and elevate us. 
From what Beatrice says, in the first Scene of the Second Act, that a 
‘ Partridge wing will be saved * at supper in consequence of Benedick*s 
melancholy, it is reasonable to suppose that Shakespeare was particu- 
larly fond of ‘ partridge wings * and contemplated with keen zest that 
one would be saved for his luncheon on Tuesday noon, the seventh of 
July, on the day after the supper on Monday evening, the sixth of July. 

Finally, Mr Fleay, in corroboration of his date of 1557-8, for 
this play, observes f that ‘ Cowley and Kempe play the Constables ; 
‘but Kempe had left the company by the summer of 1599.* This is, I 
think, a mere inference on Mr Fleay’s part. Kempe acted in Romeo 
and Juliet in 1599, and is introduced in The Return from Parnassus^ 
1601, IV, iii, where he speaks of Shakespeare as his fellow-actor. 


* Life and Work of Shakespeare^ p. 204. 


t Op, at., p, 205. 



PREFACE 


XIX 


That the name of an actor of a part should be entered on the 
prompter’s book in place of the name of the character he impersonated 
is likely enough, but that his name should be there retained after he 
had left the company and when another actor was supplying his place, 
is not so easy of belief. The fact that Kempe’s name appears in the 
Qto of 1600 is a proof so decided that he had not then left the com- 
pany that it would compel Mr Fleay, I should think, to be extremely 
cautious, and certainly to lay before the reader all proofs, within his 
power, of his assertion, A temporary trip to the Continent does not 
prove a retirement from a company. 

To Shakespeare the plots of his dramas were of trifling impor- 
tance, be it that they are as involved as the plot of the Comedy of 
Errors^ or be it that the imaginary characters are as few as they are 
in his Sonnets ; he took plots wherever he found them made to his 
hand. Any situation that would evoke characteristic traits in any 
Dramatis Persona was all that was needed. Dr Johnson, as we 
all know, went so far as to say that Shakespeare ‘ has not only shown 
/human nature as it acts in real exigencies, but as it would be found in 
* trials, to which it cannot be exposed.’ What need then had Shake- 
speare to invent plots? Under his hand all stories were available, but, 
apparently, those especially with which his audience was familiar, who, 
possibly, found a certain pleasure in recognizing old friends under new 
faces, and who could, assuredly, bestow on the characters themselves 
an attention, which need not be distracted by the need of unravelling 
an unfamiliar plot. Has a comedy ever been written which gives 
more pleasure than As You Like It I Well may it be called flawless. 
And yet it contains absurdities in its construction so gross, that their 
readiest explanation is the supposition that the original common- 
place thing, on which the play is founded, has been allowed, by 
Shakespeare’s careless indifference, here and there to obtnide : there 
are two characters bearing the same name, — it is unthinkable that a 
dramatist in devising a new play should have committed such an 
oversight ; in one scene Celia is taller than Rosalind, and in another 
Rosalind is taller than Celia ; the Touchstone of the First Act is not 
the same Touchstone as in succeeding Acts, and, though he has been 
the clownish Fool about the old court all his days, neither Jaques, 
nor the Exiled Duke, has ever before seen him when they meet in the 
Forest where the Duke has been in exile only a few months. And can 
there be any device to end a story, more preposterous than that a head- 
strong, violent tyrant at the head of ^ a mighty power ’ should, merely 
after * some question with ’ * an old religious man,’ be ^ converted ’ and 



XX 


PREFACE 


instantly relinquish his campaign and retire from the world ? But what 
did Shakespeare, or what do«we, care for all such things ? They are 
no part of the play. It is Rosalind who enthralls our hearts, and love 
is blind. Were there oversights ten times as gross the play would still 
have power to charm. They are worth mentioning solely as indications 
that Shakespeare’s play is a superstructure. And thus it is, also, with 
this present Much Ado about Nothing. We may read, as I have tried to 
gather them in the Appendix y every story in literature, wherein parallels 
to this play may be traced, and yet the fons et origo will not be there. The 
old insignificant play (had it been other than insignificant, it would have 
survived), whereof the dramatic possibilities Shakespeare detected, and 
moulded into living forms, — this old, insubstantial play, discarded as 
soon as its brighter offspring appeared, has long since faded and left 
not a wrack behind, except where here and there its cloth of frieze 
may be detected beneath Shakespeare’s seams of the cloth of gold. 
At the very first entrance of the players on the stage, for instance, 
there is what I regard as an unmistakable trace of the original play : 
^ l^O jren.’ thg wife of Leonato and the another of Hero, is set down as 
entering with the others, and yet she utters no single word throughout 
the play, not even at that supreme moment when her daughter is belied 
before the altar, and when every fibre of a mother’s heart would have 
been stirred. That her name is here no chance misprint is clear ; she 
reappears in the stage direction at the beginning of the Second Act. 
Her recorded presence merely shows that for one of the characters 
with which the original play started, Shakespeare found no use, and 
through carelessness the name was allowed to remain in the MS prompt- 
book where nobody was likely to see it but the prompter, who knew 
well enough that no such character was to be summoned to the stage. 
Then again, it is likely, or, rather, possible, that in the old play the 
paternity of Beatrice was distinctly given. In the present play, there 
is no hint of it ; indeed, it is not unreasonable to ask of a dramatist 
that in developing his action he should give some account of his heroine, 
a line will be sufficient, and perhaps save some confusion, which in the 
present play has really arisen. An eminent critic speaks of Beatrice 
as the ' worthy daughter of the gallant old Antonio;’* undoubtedly 
Brother Anthony was both gallant and old, but in neither attribute 
so advanced, as to be obliged to commit his daughter to the care 
of a * guardian.’ We see clearly why, dramatically, Beatrice must 
be not a daughter, but a niece, and an orphan ; a father or a mother 
would have checked that brave and saucy tongue. All I urge is that 
a dramatist in writing a new play, and not rewriting an old one, would 


^ Introduction to ‘ The Leopold Shakspere,^ p. Ivi. 



PREFACE 


xxi 


hardly have failed to refer to the parents of his heroine. Furthermore, 
many a critic has somewhat plumed himself on what he considers his 
singular shrewdness in detecting that Beatrice and Benedick are in love 
with each other at the opening of the play. But the assertion of Beatrice, 
in the First Scene of the Second Act, is always overlooked that " once 
‘ before * she had possessed Benedick’s heart and he had won hers ; which 
ii only one of many unexplained allusions to events which occurred 
before the opening of the play; when, for instance, Beatrice had promised 
to eat all the victims of Benedick’s sword ; and when Benedick had set 
up his bills in Messina and challenged Cupid at the flight. In all these 
allusions, I think we may discover traces of the original groundwork 
of Shakespeare’s plot. It is possible that in the old play of Benedicte 
and Betteris we have this original, and in it the hero and heroine 
are acknowledged lovers, but become separated by a lover’s quarrel, 
in the course of which Beatrice earns the name of ‘ Lady Disdain,* 
and the quarrel is smoothed away by the device which Shakespeare 
afterward adopted. This, of course, is pure conjecture, — but does it 
herein differ from the majority of Shakespearian assertions ? 

This same play of Benedicte and Betteris demands a word of refer- 
ence, I wish I could say, of explanation. In the Lord-Treasurer Stan- 
hope’s Accounts* * for all such Somes of money as hath beine receaved 
‘and paied by him within his office from the feaste of St. Michael 
‘ Tharchangell, Anno Regni Regis Jacobi Decimo [1612], vntill the 
‘feaste of St. Michaell, Anno Regni Regis Jacobi vndecimo [1613], 
‘conteyning one whole yeare,’ there' occur the following two 
items : — 

‘ Item paid to John Hcminges vppon the cowncells warrant dated 
‘att Whitehall XX° die Maij 1613, for presentinge before the Princes 
‘ Highnes the La^ Elizabeth and the Prince Pallatyne Elector fower- 
‘ teene severall playes, viz : one playe called ffilaster, one other called 
‘the knott of ffboles, One other Much adoe abowte nothinge;’ etc. 
(The titles of the remaining eleven do not concern us here.) 

Again: ‘Item paid to the said John Heminges vppon the lyke 
^warrant, dated att Whitehall XX® die Maij, 1613, for presentynge 
‘ sixe severall playes, viz : one playe called a badd beginininge [sic'] 
‘ makes a good endinge, . . . And one other called Benedicte and 
‘Betteris.’ 

It is extremely easy to assume, with Ingleby and The New Shaks- 

* Rawl. MS. A. 239, leaf 47 {in the Bodleian'), Reprinted in Shakespeare Soe, 
Papers, ii, 123; New Skakspere Soc, Trans., 1875-6, p. 419; Ingleby’s Centurie of 
Praysey p. 103. 



XXll 


PREFACE 


pere Society y that these two titles refer to the same play ; but the fact 
that no other of the plays was acted twice, and after the title, as it has 
come down to us, had been distinctly given in one warrant, that a 
different title should be given, in a second warrant, issued on the same 
day, to the same play, must give us pause. It seems to me that where 
two titles are given the logical assumption is that two plays are referred 
to. At the same time, it is possible that Much Ado about Nothing xcay 
have had, originally, a second alternative title, like Twelfth Night; or, 
What you Will, and that this alternative title bore the names of the two 
principal characters. Halliwell * says that Charles the First, in his 
copy of the Second Folio, preserved in Windsor Castle, has added the 
names * Benedick and Beatrice,* as a second title. Could it be proved 
conclusively that Benedicte and Betteris is not Much Ado about Nothing 
but an entirely distinct play, it would much simplify the question of 
the Source of a portion of the Plot. ^ 

In the present play, as in others of Shakespeare, there are two sep- 
arate actions: here, there is the false personation of Hero, and the deceit 
practised on Beatrice and Benedick. Unless we suppose that there 
existed a preceding play combining both actions, Shakespeare must 
have drawn from two separate sources. For the dual deception of Beat- 
rice and Benedick, no parallel has been found ; we may therefore con- 
cede thus much to Shakespeare’s originality, but we must do so on tip- 
toe lest we waken the commentators, who will not listen to Shakes- 
peare’s originality in any direction ; but for the former action, the false 
personation of Hero, it is said that he had but to go to Ariosto, or 
to Ariosto’s translator Harington, where he might find this false 
personation of a heroine by one of her ladies-in-waiting. He would 
find this there, it is true, but he would find nothing more ; there is no 
feigned death and burial to bring repentance to the lover, but instead 
a grand tournament whereat the false contriver of the harm is slain by 
the renowned Rinaldo. When, therefore. Pope repeated that the plot of 
the present play was taken from Ariosto, he was only partially correct, 
which is, after all, about as exact as Pope is generally in his notes on 
Shakespeare, so that really no great harm is done. And when we 
come to look still further into details, we find the discrepancy between 
Ariosto and Shakespeare becomes still greater. The scene in Ariosto 
is laid in Scotland ; in Shakespeare the scene is in Messina; Genevra 
in Ariosto becomes Hero in Shakespeare; Ariodante, Claudio; 
Dalinda, Margaret; Polynesso, Don John ; Polynesso is prompted to 
his wicked stratagem by love of Genevra, Don John by innate deprav- 


* Outlines , etc. p. 262, 



PREFACE 


xxiu 


ity; Polynesso attempts to kill Dalinda, his mistress and the decoy, 
Don John has no acquaintance with Margaret, who is supposed to have 
been an unwitting and innocent accomplice \ when Ariodante becomes 
convinced of Genevra’s falseness, he attempts to drown himself, but, 
changes his mind in the water, unromantically though not unnaturally, 
and swims ashore ; how very far Claudio’s thoughts were from suicide, 
we all know, together with his treatment of Hero. Without continuing 
this comparison further, it is evident, I think, that Ariosto could not 
have been among the direct sources whence Shakespeare drew this 
portion of his plot. The sole incident common to both Ariosto and 
Much Ado about Nothing is a woman dressed in her mistress’s gar- 
ments, at a midnight window, and for this incident Shakespeare 
might have been indebted to common gossip concerning an actual 
occurrence, — an explanation which I do not remember to have seen 
noted. Harington, in a note at the end of his translation of the 
Fifth Book of the Orlando^ wherein is set forth the story of Ariodante 
and Genevra, remarks : ‘ Some others affirme, that this very matter, 
‘though set downe here by other names, happened in Ferrara to a 
‘ kinsewoman of the Dukes, which is here figured vnder the name of 
‘ Geneuray and that indeed such a practise was used against her by a 
‘great Lord, and discovered by a damsell as is here set downe. 

‘ Howsoever it was, ’ he goes on to say, ‘ sure the tale is a prettie 
‘ comicall matter, and hath beene written in English verse some few 
‘ yeares past (learnedly and with good grace) though in verse of 
‘another kind, by M, Geo?'ge TurberiiiL'* | 

Here we have the story stated as a fact, and mention of a translation 
of Ariosto into English ; the commentators can now resume their 
secure nap, which we had like to have disturbed by suggesting that 
Shakespeare could have originated anything. Turbervil’s version, 
however, is not come down to us, according to Collier, who, 
therefore, casts some doubt on its existence, and suggests that 
Harington’ s memory played him false. But this need not daunt 
us ; in the same breath Collier tells us of a version whereof the title 
is given by Warton * as ‘ The tragecall and pleasaunte history of 
Ariodanto and jeneura daughter vnto the kynge of Scots y by Peter 
Beverley. This evidently points to Ariosto ; which is really more than 
can be affirmed of the title as it appears in the Stationers Registers' y 
under date of 22 July, 1565 : ‘ Recevyd of henry Wekes for his lycense 
'for pryntinge of a boke intituled tragegall and pleasaunte history 
‘Ariounder Jeneuor the Dougther vnto the kynge of [?] by Peter 
‘ Beverlay. ’ f 

* History of English Poetry y iii, 479, ed. 1 781 . f Arber’s IramcHpty i, 3 1 2. 



XXIV 


PREFACE 


This ^history/ written in verse by Beverley, maybe the founda- 
tion of the play to which we find a reference in the Extracts from the 
Accounts of the Revels at Courts edited by Peter Cunningham for The 
Shakespeare Society^ 1842, where (p. 177), under date of 1582, is the 
following entry: — *A Historic of Ariodante and Geneuora shewed 
‘before her Matie on Shrovetuesdaie at night enacted by M' Mul- 
‘ casters children. For w*"^ was newe prepared and Imployed, one 
‘ Citty, one battlem* of Canvas vij Ells of sarcenet and ij dozen gloves. 
‘The whole furniture for the reste was of the store of this office, 
‘whereof sundrey garments for fytting of the Children were altered 
‘and translated.’ Possibly^ this play, founded on Ariosto, may have 
given Shakespeare the idea of having Hero personated by Margaret ; 
but it is not probable, inasmuch as there are many circumstances, such 
as the feigned death, the burial, the epitaph and the second marriage, 
whereof there is no trace in Ariosto ; the one solitary incident of a 
maid’s appearance in her mistress’s robes does not form an adequate 
connection, when that incident might have been well known as a fact 
within the common knowledge of Italians,, or of Italian actors, then in 
London. 

It is to Capell, the learned, intelligent, and infinitely uninteresting 
editor, that we are indebted for the discovery that a story, similar in 
many respects to that of Hero, is to be found in a novel by Bandello, 
the same source to which we owe a version of the story of Romeo and 
Juliet and of Twelfth Night. We have not, it is true, in this novel by 
Bandello, a maid personating her mistress, but to offset this we have 
several springs of action common to both novel and play, and springs 
of action are more potent in revealing paternity than identity of the 
names or even the repetition of certain words or phrases ; these may 
have occurred by hap-hazard, but those are of the very fibre of the 
plot. Bandello and Ariosto were contemporaries and it is extremely 
unlikely that the Orlando Furioso was unknown to the Bishop of 
Agen, and as the latter was fond in his stories of imparting to them 
an air of truth by fixing dates, and giving well-known scenes and 
names, he may have changed this personation of a lady by her 
maid, for the very purpose of taking it out of that domain of allegory 
in which the Orlando is written. Be this as it may, we have in Ban- 
dello the ascent of a man at night by means of a ladder to the 
chamber of the heroine, the despair and fury of the lover, his rejec- 
tion of his mistress, her death, her secret revival, her seclusion, her 
pretended funeral, with an epitaph on her tomb. At this point, there 
is a divergence in the two stories ; in Bandello the repentance and 
confession of the villain, whose motive had been jealousy, are brovy^^ 



PREFACE 


XXV 


about by remorse, and, at .the tomb of his victim, he proffers his 
sword to the heart-broken lover, and entreats the lover to kill him, 
but the lover forgives, and the two disconsolate men mingle their tears 
over the past, — a situation of such dramatic power and pathos, that I 
cannot but believe that had Shakespeare ever read it, we should 
have received Much Ado about Nothings from his hands, in a shape 
different from that it now bears. There is one character who figures 
prominently in Bandello, to wit: the heroine’s mother; she appears 
by mistake, as I have just noted, in the stage directions of Shake- 
speare’s play, under the name ^ Innogen/ As far as any inference 
is to be drawn from the similarity of names Bandeli.o is only very 
slightly better than Ariosto. The scene, however, is laid in Messina, 
both with Bandello and Shakespeare; we have Don Pedro and 
Leonato common to both, and there an end. Hero is Fenecia ; Claudio 
is Don Thnbreo di Cardona ; Don John, Signor Girondo Olerio Valen- 
tiano ; and Brother Anthony is Messer Girolamo. The conclusions of 
the story and the play run parallel, and the end in Bandello is reached 
amid the gayest of festivities,^ wherein, perhaps^ we may see the Dance 
at the end of Much Ado about Nothings a jocund ending used nowhere 
else by Shakespeare. 

Here, then, we have what is unquestionably a source of a Much 
Ado about Nothing, whether or not it be Shakespeare’s source, and 
Shakespeare’s Much Ado about Nothing, who can tell? Bandello’ s 
novels have never been translated into English until within recent 
years. 

For those, however, who would deny Shakespeare any knowledge 
of Italian, there is a version of Bandello, it cannot be called a transla- 
tion, by Belle-Forest. But this version is in French, and, there- 
fore, to those who would deny any learning whatsoever to Shake- 
speare, almost as unpalatable as the Italian of the original. But there 
is no help for it. Shakespeare read it either in French or not at all. 
I incline to the latter belief, not by any means because I think Shake- 
speare could not read French, but because he needed to read nothing 
s ave the old p la y which he remodelled. Belle-Forest I would eliminate 
entirely from consideration. I do not believe Shakespeare made use 
of him, nor do I believe that the elder dramatist made use of him. 
There are dramatic elements in the ‘French version, such as the dis- 
honourable wooing of the heroine, accompanied by languishing love- 
songs, and high moral sentiments expressed in return, of which a dra- 
matist wijh the story before him would be likely to retain some trace. 
Minor details common to both story and play I leave to the reader to 
discover for himself in the Appendix to the present volume. 



XXVI 


PREFACE 


In brief, the remote Source of the Plot of Much Ado about Nothing 
is, I think, Bandello^s novel. The immediate source, I believe to be 
some feeble play modelled on Bandello and containing Dalinda’s per- 
sonation of Generva, which vanished from sight and sound on the Eng- 
lish stage, the day that Shakespeare's play, with its added plot of 
Benedick and Beatrice, was first seen and heard. 

There still remains another question which deserves consideration 
in any investigation of the Source of the Plot. We meet with it in 
dealing with The Tempest^ 7 he Merchant of Venice, The Two Gentle- 
men of Verona, and of others of Shakespeare's plays. To enter into 
all the details of this question, which concern the history of the Ger- 
man stage more deeply than that of the English, would exceed the 
limits of this present volume. It must be sufficient to give general 
conclusions merely, and, for authorities, refer the reader to the 
Appendix, 

In i8ii, Tieck* called attention to the remarkable fact that, at the 
beginning of the seventeenth century, there was travelling through 
Germany a troupe of English comedians, who performed plays, mainly 
at court, in their own language, before German audiences. 

From that day to the present, German scholars have been busy ran- 
sacking Archives and Court fournals until now, thanks to Hagen, 
Koberstein, Cohn, Gen^e, Trautmann, Meissner, Tittmann, and 
many others, we know not only the routes travelled by these strolling 
English players, and the companies into which they were divided, but 
even their names, and, occasionally, the titles and subjects of their per- 
formances. It is these last two : who the actors were, and what were 
their plays, which mainly concern us here. 

That the visits of English actors to Germany were well known in 
England and that they were actors of repute, although some of 
them were mere clowns and posturemasters, we learn from an unex- 
pected English source. HEYW00D,t Shakespeare's fellow-actor and 
dramatist, informs us that: ^At the entertainement of the Cardinall 
^Alphonsus and the infant of Spaine in the Low-Countreyes, they 
^were presented at Antwerpe with sundry pageants and playes: the 
‘ King of Denmarke, father to him that now reigneth, entertained into 
* his service a company of English comedians, commended unto him 
‘ by the honourable the Earle of Leicester : the Duke of Brunswicke 
‘ and the Landgrave of Hessen retaine in their courts certaine of ours 
‘of the same quality.* Elsewhere (p. 58) Heywood refers incidentally 

* Alt'Engluches Theater, p. xii. 
t Apology for Actors, pk 40, ed. Shakespeare Society. 




PREFACE 


xxvii 


to these, his strolling countrymen, and to their fair reputation :i — * A 
‘company of our English comedians {well knowne) [Italics mine] 
‘ travelling those countryes [Holland], as they were before the burghers 
‘ and other chiefe inhabitants, acting the last part of the Four Sons of 
‘Aymon,* etc. The company commended to the King of Denmark 
by the Earl of Leicester touches us more nearly than would be at first 
supposed. It is not unlikely (this unfortunate refrain, which is fated to 
accompany, as a ground tone, every assertion connected with Shake- 
speare) it is not unlikely, that, at one time, Will Kempe was a member 
of this same troupe, which Leicester took with him on his ill-fated expe- 
dition to the Netherlands. Sir Philip Sydney accompanied Leicester 
and a few months before his own honourable and pathetic death wrote, 
under date of 24 March, 1586, to his father-in-law, Mr Secretary 
Walsingham : ‘ I wrote yow a letter by Will, my lord of Lester’s 
‘jesting plaier, enclosed in a letter to my wife,’ etc. Mr Bruce* 
shows, by a process of exclusion, that this ‘Will’ can be none other 
than William Kempe named, in the First Folio, as the actor of Dog- 
berry. 

The list of names which the records in Germany reveal is scanty ; 
naturally, the names, not of every individual in a troupe, but only 
of the leaders are recorded. Among these we find George Bryan 
and Thomas Pope, all-sufficient to bring us close to Shakespeare; 
these two are familiar to us in the list of twenty-six actors given in 
the First Folio. Thus we learn, that actors from Shakespeare’s own 
troupe travelled in Germany, and went even further south into Italy 
(we know that Kempe, for instance, went to Venice), just as Italian 
companies came to London, where in 1577-8 there was an Italian 
Cominediante^ named Drousiano with his players, — a fact, by the way, 
disclosing an intimate relationship at that early day between the Eng- 
lish and the Italian stage of which too little account is made by 
those who wish to explain Shakespeare’s knowledge of Italian man- 
ners and names. That these foreign trips of English actors to Germany 
were profitable, may be inferred from the comfortable fortune of which 
Thomas Pope died possessed, as shown by his Will.f 

With his fellow-actors thus combining pleasure and profit on the 
Continent, can it be that Shakespeare remained at home? Of 
course, there are not wanting those who maintain that Shakespeare 
actually did travel professionally. Mr Fleay,! for instance, says that 
inasmuch as Shakespeare’s company, Lord Strange’s, ‘ visited Denmark 


* Shakespeare Society* s PaperSy 1844, i, 88. 
t Collier’s Memoirs of Actors y etc., 1846, p. 125. 
J Trans, of the Royal Hist, Soc, 1881, vol. ix. 



xxviii 


PREFACE 


‘ and Saxony, he [Shakespeare] in all probability accompanied them ; 
‘ we are not told which way they came home, but if Kempe took the 
‘same route as he did in i6oi, he came through Italy. This would 
‘account for such local knowledge of Italy as Shakespeare shows.’ 

This ‘ probable ’ transportation of Shakespeare into Germany and 
Italy incites me to say that profound as are my veneration and gratitude 
to Shakespeare as a poet, they are deeper to him as a man. With that 
prophetic glance, vouchsafed only to the heaven-descended, he foresaw 
the inexhaustible flood of imaginings which would be set abroach to 
account for any prolonged obscurity enveloping his life. Clearly, 
with this end in view, he evaded all public notice for seven long years. 
From 1585, when his twin children were baptised (common decency 
must assume that he was present at that ceremony,) until 1592, we 
know absolutely nothing of him. For one momentary flash, in 1587 
when the terms of a mortgage given by his father, had to be adjusted, 
we may possibly catch a glimpse of him ; but for all the rest a Cimme- 
rian midnight holds him. And what a priceless boon ! What an 
unobstructed field wherein to prove that he so devoted himself to 
the study of every trade, profession, pursuit, and accomplishment that 
he became that master of them all, which his plays clearly show him 
to have been. It was during these seven silent years, while holding 
horses at the doors of theatres for his daily bread, that he became, if we 
are to believe each critic and commentator, a thorough master of law 
and practice down to the minutest quillet ; a thorough master of medi- 
cine, with the most searching knowledge of the virtue of every herb, 
mineral, or medicament, including treatment of the insane and an an- 
ticipation of Harvey’s circulation of the blood ; he became skilled in 
veterinary medicine and was familiar with every disease that can afflict 
a horse ; he learned the art of war, and served a campaign in the field ; 
he became such an adept in music that long afterward he indicated 
prodigies and eclipses by solmisation ; he went to sea and acquired an 
absolute mastery of a ship in a furious tempest, and made only one 
slight mistake, long years afterward, in the number of a ship’s glasses ; 
he studied botany and knew every flower by name ; horticulture, and 
knew every fruit ; arboriculture, and knew the quality and value of all 
timber ; that he practised archery daily, who can doubt ? and when not 
hawking, or fishing, he was fencing ; he became familiar with astronomy 
and at home in astrology; he learned ornithology through and through, 
from young scamels on the rock to the wren of little quill ; a passionate 
huntsman, he was also a pigeon-fancier, and from long observation dis- 
covered that doves would defend their nest, and that pigeons lacked 
gall ; he was a printer and not only set up books, but bound them 



PREFACE 


XXIX 


afterward ; as we have just seen he was a strolling actor in Germany, 
and travelled in Italy, noting the tide at Venice and the evening mass 
at Verona ; he got his Bible by heart, including the Apocrypha ; he 
read every translation of every classic author then published, and every 
original in Greek, Latin, Italian, and French (of course he learned 
German while strolling) and, finally, he read through the whole of 
English literature, from Chaucer down to every play or poem written 
by his contemporaries, and as he read he took voluminous notes (sly 
dog !) of every unusual word, phrase, or idea to palm it off afterward 
as his own ! 

My own private conviction is that he mastered cuneiform ; visited 
America; and remained some time in Boston, — greatly to his intel- 
lectual advantage. 

Having discovered who some of these English comedians are, it 
behpoves us next to learn something of the plays they acted. Here a 
curious fact is revealed. Although nowhere are the plays of these English 
comedians professedly printed, there yet exist certain German plays, 
written during the years that these English players were strolling in 
Germany, whereof the titles and the plots impressively remind us, not 
only of plays then on the English stage, but even of certain plays by 
Shakespeare himself. Among the earliest of these German plays are 
those written by a certain Duke Heinrich Julius of Wolfenbiittel, 
who, in 1590, went to Denmark to marry the sister of that King to 
whom, four years before, Leicester had handed over his company of 
actors. It is highly probable (pardon the stereotyped phrase !) that the 
Duke brought away with him some of these former players of Leices- 
ter. Be this as it may, certain it is, that from this date Duke Heinrich 
Julius, during eleven years, wrote about as many Comedies, Tragedies, 
and Tragi-comedies, which remained for a long time, unrivalled, I 
think, in the German drama, such as it was ; they bear unmistakable 
signs of English influence. The only one which concerns us here 
is the Comesdia von Vincentio Ladiszlao wherein Herman Grimm,, 
whose opinions are worthy of all respect, finds the prototype of 
Benedick. The subject will be found more fully treated in the 
Appendix, 

As certain critics, mostly German, detected the plot of The Tempest 
in Jacob Ayrer’s Die schoene Sidea, so here in the same old ponderous 
folio of Ayrer, printed at ‘Nurmberg Anno M DC XVIIT.,' it is 
suggested that the plot of Much Ado about Nothing is to be found, 
that is, as much of the plot as relates to Hero and Claudio. It is 
hardly worth while to enter into a discussion of the date when Ayrer 



XXX 


PREFACE 


wrote his comedies. He died in 1605, and Cohn* thinks that it is 
^ beyond a shadow of doubt that he wrote nearly all his pieces after 1 593.* 

Keeping in mind that Shakespeare’s indirect source was Bandello, 
it is only requisite to show that Ayrer’s source was not Bandello, 
but Belle-Forest, in order to prove that no connection exists between 
Shakespeare and Ayrer. 

I'he full title of Ayrer’s play from which Shakespeare is sup- 
posed to have drawn his inspiration is: Mirror of Womanly 

Wirtue and Honour. The Comedy of the Fair Phcenicia and Count 
lymbri of Golison from Arragon, How it fared with them in their 
^honourable love until they were united in marriage' In this title 
alone there is almost sufficient evidence of the source of Ayrer’ s plot. 
It can hardly be Bandello. In Bandello Don Timbreo is never once 
styled a ' Count’ and far less * Count of Colisano that he had received 
the ‘ County of Colisano ’ is mentioned only once at the beginning of 
Bandello’ s story. It is Belle-Forest, who speaks habitually of the 
* Comte de Colisan.’ 

Moreover, Belle-Forest, within the first few lines of his story, 
speaks of the conspiracy of Giovanni di Procida, which led to the ‘ Sicil- 
ian Vespers,’ and styles the conspirator ^ Jean Prochite' Bandello 
refers to the ‘Sicilian Vespers,’ but never mentions Procida. In 
Ayrer, at the very beginning when Venus enters and complains of 
the coldness in love affairs of ‘Tymborus Graf von Golison,* she 
acknowledges that he fought most bravely ‘When, in Sicily, that 
‘great slaughter was made by P?'ochyte.' The presence alone of this 
name and in its French form, is sufficient, I think, to show that 
Ayrer’s source was Belle-Forest. For many other similar paral- 
lelisms, such as love-letters and love-songs, etc., the reader is referred 
to the Appendix. Were it not for these parallelisms, there might be 
a faint possibility that Ayrer was indebted to a play of which we find 
a notice in the Revels Accounts, for the ‘ i8th of Decembre,’ 1574, as 
follows :f — ‘ The expence and charge wheare my L. of Leicesters men 
/ showed theier matter of panecia. * If under this disguise ‘ panecia * 
we detect Fenicia, then the date which is too early for Belle- Forest 
indicates Bandello, whose Novels were issued in 1554. In view, 
however, of the many proofs that it was Belle-Forest and not Ban- 
dello to whom Ayrer was indebted, ‘ my L. of Leicesters* ‘ panecia * 
need not disturb our conclusions. 

My present purpose is attained in the statement that while Ayrer* s 

* Shakespeare in Germany ^ 1865, p. Ixiii. 

I Revels at Court in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, etc., Shakespeare Society, 
1842, p. 87. 




PREFACE 


XXXI 


direct source was Belle-Forest, Shakespeare’s indirect source was 
Bandello ; and that Shakespeare was not indebted to Ayrer ; a 
conclusion not without its gain if it set at rest the supposition that in 
Ayrer we have the original plays which Shakespeare afterward re- 
modelled. I think it was shown in the New Variorum Tempest, that 
there is no connection whatever between that play and Ayrer’ s Schoene 
Sidca. Nevertheless, Mr Fleay* in speaking of these plays of Ayrer, 
together with those contained in another collection first printed in 
1620, four years after Shakespeare’s death, says: ^A close exami- 
^ nation of these German versions convinces me that they were rough 
‘ drafts by juvenile hands in which great license was left to the actors to 
‘ fill up, or alter extemporaneously at their option. [There is no indi- 
‘ cation of this ' option ’ in Ayrer that I can detect.] Successive changes 
‘ made in this way have greatly defaced them ; but enough of the orig- 
‘ inals remains to show that they were certainly in some cases, probably 
‘ in others, the earliest forms of our great dramatist’s plays. I have no 
‘doubt he drew up the plots for them while in Germany.’ 

If this last assertion be correct, it is pleasing to reflect how thor- 
oughly and utterly in after years Shakespeare discarded these juvenile 
drafts. That these first feeble bantlings of the German drama were, on 
the contrary, the offspring of the plays acted by Elnglish comedians I have 
no doubt ; at times we feel the very whiff and wind of the early London 
stage; than this, there is, I think, nothing more substantial. Nay, 
does not the very Preface of Ayrer’s folio (p. iii) acknowledge that 
his plays were written after the new English fashion — ‘ auff di neue 
‘ Englische tnanier vnnd art ’ ? and are not four of his Operettas, 
so to call his Singets Spil, sung ‘to the tune of the English 
‘ Roland ’ ? These early German dramas will always remain a curious 
and interesting field to English and German students. It would be 
pleasant to think that we might turn to Germany to find the plays, 
lost to England, which Shakespeare remodelled, but, I fear, it is not 
to be. Possibly, the connection between the present play. Much Ado 
about Nothing and The Fair Phoenicia is as close as any we shall ever 
find between the English and the German plays. 

In a note on the first line of the present play Coleridge is quoted 
as saying that ‘ Dogberry and his comrades are forced into the service, 
‘when any other less ingeniously absurd watchmen and night-con- 
‘ stables would have answered the mere necessities of the action.’ 
Aliquando bonus Homerus, etc. This remark by him who is, perhaps, 
our greatest critic on Shakespeare, has been, it is to be feared, the 


* Op, cit, p. 4. 



xxxu 


PREFACE 


cause of much misunderstanding not only of Shakespeare’s plays 
in general,- but of this present play in particular. An idea is thereby 
conveyed that Shakespeare worked, to a certain extent, at hap-hazard, 
or, at least, that at times he lost sight of the requirements of his story 
and was willing to vary the characters of his creation at the suggestion 
of caprice, to introduce a blundering constable here or a drunken 
porter there just to lighten his play or to raise a horse-laugh in the 
groundlings. It would be difficult to imagine a falser imputation on 
Shakespeare’s consummate art. Never did Shakespeare lose sight 
of the trending of his story ; not a scene, I had almost said not 
a phrase, did he write that does not reveal the true hard-working 
artist labouring, with undeviating gaze, to produce a certain effect. 
The opinion is abroad that Shakespeare produced his Dogberry and 
Verges out of the mere exuberance of his love of fun and that in 
this ‘ star y-pointed ’ comedy, they are the star of comicality, merely 
to give the audience a scene to laugh at. This inference is utterly 
wrong. I'hey do, indeed, supply endless mirth, but Shakespeare 
had to have them just as they are. He was forced to have char- 
acters like these and none other. The play hinges on them. Had 
they been sufficiently quick-witted to have recognised the villainy of 
the plot betrayed by Borachio to Conrade, the play would have ended 
at once. Therefore, they had to be stupid, most ingeniously stupid, 
and show ‘ matter and impertinency * so mixed that we can understand 
how they came to be invested with even such small authority as their 
office implies. Men less stupid would never have had their suspicions 
arou.sed by what they supposed to be an allusion to ‘ Deformed, a vile 
‘ thief even this allusion is not hap-hazard ; stupid by nature as these 
watchmen are, no chance must be given them to discern the importance 
of their prisoners, their attention must be diverted from the right direc- 
tion to something utterly irrelevant, which shall loom up as important 
in their muddled brains. Hence, this ‘ Deformed ’ is not a mere joke, 
but a stroke of art ; and does not, of necessity, involve a contemporary 
allusion, as is maintained. At no previous point in the play could Dog- 
berry and Verges have been introduced ; where they first appear is the 
exact point at which they are needed. Through the villainy of Don 
John and the weakness of Claudio the sunshine of this sparkling comedy 
is threatened with eclipse, and the atmosphere becomes charged with 
tragedy. Just at this point appear these infinitely stupid watchmen, all 
whose talk, preliminary to the arrest of Borachio and Conrade, is by 
no means merely to make us laugh, but to give us assurance that the 
play is still a comedy and that however ludicrous may be the entangle- 
ment in which these blundering fools will involve the story, the resolu- 



PREFACE 


xxxiii 


tion, the denouement, will be brought about by their means and that 
the plot against Hero, which we see is hatching, will by them be 
brought to nought. Had Dogberry been one whit less conceited, 
one whit less pompous, one whit less tedious, he could not have failed 
to have dropped at least one syllable that would have arrested Leonato’s 
attention just before the tragic treatment of Hero in the marriage 
scene, which would not have taken place and the whole story would 
have ended then and there. Dogberry had to be introduced just then 
to give us assurance that Don John's villainy would come to light 
eventually, and enable us to bear Hero's sad fate with such equani- 
mity that we can listen, immediately after, with delighted hearts to the 
wooing of Benedick and Beatrice. 

I do by no means say that Shakespeare could have dramatised this 
story in no other way, his resources were infinite, but I do say that, 
having started as he did start, he was forced^ by the necessities of 
the action, to have stupidity rule supreme at those points where he 
has given us the immortal Dogberry. 

Knight among editors, and Boas among critics, are the only ones 
that I can recall, who have had even an inkling of the true position 
which Dogberry holds. 

One pleasure yet remains to me whereby to enliven the dulness of a 
Preface : to thank my sister, Mrs Annis Lee Wister, for translating 
the extracts, in the Appendix^ from German Critics. In regard to 
one portion, therefore, of this volume I can be shut up in measureless 
content. 

H. H. F. 

November f 1899. 
c 




MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 




Dramatis Perfonze, 


Don Pedro, Prince of Arragon. 

Leonato, Governor of Messina. 

Don John, Baftard- Brother to Do7i Pedro. 

Claudio, a young Lo}'d of P^lorence, Favourite to 5 
Don Pedro. 

Benedick, a young Lord of VdidwTi, favour^ d likewife 
by Don Pedro. 

Balthafar, Servant to Don Pedro. 

Antonio, Brother to Leonato. 10 

Borachio, Confident to Do7i John. 

I. Dramatis Persona.'] Rowe. 

1. First given by Rowe, whose List is here reprinted. 

2. Don Pedro] It is frequently said that this name was taken from Bandello’s 
Novely whereon, it is maintained, Shakespeare founded the present play. The 
name may have been so taken, but it does not appear in the Noi>cl in its present 
Spanish form; it is there: ‘il Re Piero d’Aragona.’ Nor is it ‘Don Pedro* in 
Belle-Forest’s version of Bandcllo’s novel, where it is, Me Roy Pierre d* Ara- 
gon.’ Twice in the first ten lines of the first scene it occurs as ‘ Don Peter.’ — E d. 

3. Leonato] In Bandello’s A<:w/, ‘ Lionato.’ 

J5. Claudio] In Bandello, this character is named ‘Timbreo di Cardona.’ 

7, 17. Benedick, Beatrice] Fletcher (p. 281) after discussing the improba- 
bility of any discord in the married life of Benedick and Beatrice, concludes as 
follows : — ‘ We recommend to all who arc disposed to think that Shakespeare him- 
self, in winding up his drama, seriously contemplated the “predestinate scratched 
face,” to consider that it would be extremely unlike his own instinctive and unvary- 
ing logical consistency, that he should have chosen to give the reverend name of 
Benedictusy or the blcssedy to the hero upon whom the scratching was to be inflicted, — 
and that of Beatriccy — the great poetic name of Bcatriccy or the blcsscry — to the 
heroine who was destined to inflict it.’ 

9. Balthasar] Burney : This character was perhaps thus named from the cele- 
brated Baltazarini, called De Beaujoyeux, an Italian performer on the violin, who 
was in the highest fame and favour at the court of Henry II. of France, 1577. — W. 
A. Wright : But Shakespeare probably never heard of Baltazarini, and he uses the 
name Balthasar in some form in three other plays : The Com. of Err.y 2 'he Mer. of 
Ven.y and Rom. Jut. 

II. Borachio] * Bottrrachon : m. A tipler, quaflfer, tossepot, whip-canne ; also, 
a little Bourrachoe.’ — Cotgrave. *Oitdre. A Borrachoe ; a great leatherne bottle, 
or budget like a bottle, made commonly of a Goats skinne, and vsed for the conuey- 


X 



2 


DRAMATIS PERSONAE 


Conrade, Friend to Borachio, I2 

f<^oliJh Officers. 

Innogen, Wife to I.eonato. 15 

Hero, Daughter to Leonato and Innogen. 

Beatrice, Neicc to Leonato. 


13. Dogberry] Dogberry, a foolish 
Constable. Cap. 

14. Verges] Verges, his Partner. 
Cap. 

15. Innogen...] Om. Theob. el seq. 


16. and Innogen.] Om. Theob. et 
seq. 

17. Neice\ Niece Rowe ii, Johns, et 
seq. 


ing of wine, oyle &c ; through places which cannot bee passed by carts.’ — Tb. ‘I 
shoulde doe like the good wiues henne, which beeing fedde .so fat, coulde laic no 
more egges. And mcruaile not 1 praie you, for it is th(‘ propertie of a Boracho not 
to sounde or speake at all, wdien hee is full.’ — The citiile Conuersation of GttazzOy 
1586, p. 202. — Ed. — Tli. Elze {Jahrbm h^ xv, 255) : Whether or not it be derived 
from bora, a kind of snake, ox borra^ loquacity, or borama, a canteen, it bears a 
bad sense, as its termination (ucio indicates ; and Shakesj^eare uses it with a full 
knowledge of that meaning, ju.st as he uses ‘'rrinculo’ in The Tempest. 

13. Dogberry] Steevens: The first of lhe.se worthies had his name from the 
Dog-hcr}y^ i. c., the female cornel, a shrub that grows in the hedges in every county 
in England. ‘Verges’ is only the provincial pronunciation of I'erjuice. — IIalli- 
WELL : I find that Dogberry occurs as a .surname as early as the time of Richard the 
Second in a charter preserved in the British Museum (/A/;7. 76, c. 13). 

14. Verges] Halliweli. : In MS A.shmol. 38 is a couplet, ‘ Ui)pon old Father 
Varges, a misserable usurer, — Here lyes father Varges, who died to save charges.’ 
An allusion in Shirley’s Constant Maid, 1640, ‘my most cxcjuisite Varges,’ seems to 
aim at Shakespeare’s officer, but the particular application of the name in that place 
is not very apparent. [The quotation is useful, however, as showing the late date 
of the pronunciation, which may still survive in England, for aught I know, and 
should be retained on the stage. Dr A. Schmidt, with German fidelity, includes 
even this name in his translation, and gives it as S(hlce%vcin. It is doubtful if Le 
Tourneur’s ‘Vergy’ be not preferable. — Ei).] 

15. Innogen] Hallivyell {^Memoranda, p. 53) : It may be worth notice that the 
name was perhaps taken from that of the wnfe of Brule in legendary British history, — 
‘Brute and his wife Innogen arrive in Lcogitia.’ — llolinshed, ed. 1586. 

16. Hero] In Bandello, ‘ Fenicia.’ Plad Shakespeare taken his play directly 
from the Italian, or even from Belle-Fore.st’s version, it is not easy to see why he 
did not retain this pretty name, e.specially when its derivation from Tcnicc, a pheenix, 
could not have been unknown to him, and its applicability to the character apparent. 
But I have expressed elsewhere my belief that Shakespeare did not go directly for 
his plot either to the Italian or to the French. — E d. 

17. Beatrice] Walker (iii, 30) : Bettris, the beloved of George-a-Green, in 
Greene’s play, is undoubtedly an English form of Beatrice. Hence I conjecture that 
where [in th^ present play] Beatrice is a dissyllable, the name is to be pronounced 



DRAMATIS PERSONAS 


3 


Margaret, 1 Ge 7 itlewomen attendino on Hero. 

Urfula, / 

A Frier ^ Mejfenger^ Watch, and other Attenda^its, 20 
Scene MeJJina. 

20. A Frier...] a Friar, an Attendant, 20. A Frier] Friar Francis. Coll, 

a Boy, a Sexton, two Watchmen, and Dyce, Wli. Cam. 

three Messengers. Cap. 21. Pope adds : The Story from Ari- 

osto, Orl. Fur. /. 5 . 

Bettris; where a trisyllable, Betteris . — Florio {A Worlde of Wordcs) : Donna 
Beatrice y Dame Bettrice, it is taken in mockerie, and ironically, for an idle hus- 
wife . — New S/i. Soc. Trans, 1880-6, p. 646. [‘ And many times those which at 

the first sight cannot fancy or affect each other, but are harsh and ready to disagree, 
offended at each others carriage, like Benedict and Betteris in the * Comedy 
[* Shakespeare] ... by this living together in a house, conference, kissing, colling, 
and such like allurements, begin at last to dote insensibly one upon another.’ — 
Burton, Anat. Part. 3, Sect. 2. Mcmb. 3. Subs. 4. p. 480. ed. 1651. This allu.sion 
is valuable, but it does not follow therefrom that Burton had ever seen or even read 
the play. It was not by the arts he mentions that Benedick and Beatrice were won. 

Reference has been made above to Schmidt’s translation of the name Verges. 
This is quite insignificant be.side the sweeping changes of RArr, who thus improves 
Shakespeare (Beatrice, be it observed, he does not change because the name exactly 
hits the character of a gay and .sprightly girl who always receives this name in the 
old Italian Masks, and later in Goldoni’s comedies): — ‘On the other hand, the 
gentle, demure and blonde maiden bears the name Hero, but this Greek name does 
not chime in well with the Italian, and, indeed, cannot be readily translated into 
this language ; I have therefore taken the liberty of giving her the name, correspond- 
ing to her character in Italian Masks and in Cioldoni, Rosaura, On Ursula and Mar- 
garet, I have bestowed the thoroughly Italian names, Lisettay and Coralltna. . . . 
To the Con.stables, Shakespeare has given downright English names ; we believe 
that it is due to the scene of the play to nationalize them, and have, therefore, called 
Dogberry Sueeianespolcy and his comrade Brighellay and the Sexton CavoUcrespi.* 
In this connection it may be pcihap.s worth while to mention that CtErvinus, 
Ulrici, Schmidt (but not Delius) and the whole world of German commentators, 
almost without exception, change ‘ Benedick ’ to Bencdiciy — a venial error, into which 
the First Folio itself, and many an English wiiter has inadvertently fallen ; see the 
foregoing quotation from Burton and the quotation on I, i, i, from Coleridge, and 
a certain Preface to one of the volumes in this Fariortwi edition. Possibly the differ 
ence was but very little marked in Shakespeare’s time. This is certainly implied in 
Margaret’s punning allusion to Cardans Benediitus. It is its universality and per- 
sistency, like ^Borneo and Julia,’ in German literature, which is noteworthy. — E d.] 




Much adoe about Nothing 


A 6ius primus, Scena prima. 


Enter Leonato Gouernour of MeJJinay Innogen his wife ^He- 
ro his daughter^ and Beatrice his Neece^ with a meffenger^ 


Leonato. 



Learne in this Letter, that Do7i Peter of Arra^ 
gon, comes this night to Mejfina, 

Meff He is very neere by this : he was not 
three Leagues off when I left him. 


5 


9 


1. adoc\ ado (and throughout). 

2. Om. Q. 

Scena] Sccena F^. 

[A Court before Leonato’ s House. 
Pope. Before L.’s House. Cap. 


3. Innogen his wife] Om. Theob. et 
seq. 

6, 14. Don Peter] don Peter Q. Don 
Pedro Rowe et seq. 

8. this /] thisy Q. 


I. Coleridge (i, 75 ) • seems to me that [Shakespeare’s] plays are distin- 
guished from those of other dramatic poets by the following characteristics : . . . 

4. Independence of the dramatic interest on the plot. The interest in the plot is 
always, in fact, on account of the characters, not vice versoy as in almost all other 
writers ; the plot is a mere canvass and no more. Hence arises the true justification 
of the same strategem being used in regard to Benedict [.rzV] and Beatrice, — tlie 
vanity in each being alike. Take away from the [present play] all that which is 
not indispensable to the plot, either as having little to do w'ith it, or, at best, like 
Dogberry and his comrades, forced into the service, when any other less ingeniously 
absurd watchmen and night-constables would have answered the mere necessities of 
the action ; — take away Benedict, Beatrice, Dogberry, and the reaction of the former 
on the character of Hero, — and what will remain? In other writers the main agent 
of the plot is always the prominent character ; in Shakespeare it is so, or is not so, as 
the character is in itself calculated, or not calculated, to form the plot. Don John is 
the main-spring of the plot of this play ; but he is merely shown and then with- 
drawn. — Fletcher (p. 242) ; A little more attention to [Coleridge’s] view of the 
matter might have saved more than one critic from pronouncing some notable mis- 
judgements upon this piece, and especially as regards the character of Beatrice. . . . 
.j^The first critical oversight, which has commonly been committed in examining this 
play, has been the not perceiving that the complete unfolding of the characters of 
Beatrice and her lover forms the capital business of the piece. The second error, 

5 


6 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act i, sc. i. 

Leon. How many Gentlemen haue you loft in this lO 
aftion ? 

lo, 13. Leon.] Leona. Q. 


involving such strange misconceptions respecting the heroine in particular, has been 
the overlooking or disregarding that close affinity which the dramatist has established 
between the two characters, rendering them, as far as the difference of sex will 
permit, so nearly each other’s counterpart, that any argument that shall jirove odious- 
ness in the one [CamI'HKLI. declared Beatrice an *• odious woman.’ — Ed.] must of inev- 
itable necessity demonstrate it in the other. Consequent on these, is the third and 
most important error of all in estimating the predominant spirit of this drama. Its 
critics have overlooked entirely the art with which the dramatist has contrived and 
used the incidents of the piece in such a manner as to bring out, by distinct and 
natural gradations, the profound seriousness which lies beneath all the .superficial 
levity seen, at first, in the true hero and heroine, — ^until the very pair, who have 
given the most decidedly comic character to the outset of the play, arc found on the 
point of giving it the most tragic turn towards its clo.se. — T>lc)YD (ap. Singer, ed. ii): 
The characteristic incident of the jilay is much ado, arising from misconcejition of an 
overheard conference, and ending in nothing at all. This theme, with the fonns of 
incident, and of mental tendency that give it effect, is varied in the play with end- 
less, or, rather, with exhaustive diversity. — Halliwell-Philupps {^Memoranday 
59): Charles the Eir.st, in his copy of the Second Folio preserved at Windsor ('astle, 
writes against the title of [the present play], ‘ Bcnedik and Betrice,’ not perhaps 
meaning a new title, but merely that these were the leading, and probably his 
favourite characters. — Ulrici (ii, 105) : The much ado about )w 1 hing\^ obviously 
not conceived merely in an external .sen.se ; it rather denotes the internal contra- 
diction into which all human exi.stence falls, when wdiolly engrossed with individual, 
special, and accidental interests and relations ; in other words, when man, — treating 
important matters with playful levity, — rreckles.sly follows his momentary impul.scs, 
feelings, and caprices, without asking whether they arc justifiable, and whether his 
resolves are based upon .safe foundations. This serious ethical maxim Shakespeare 
has carefully concealed under the ina.sk of comedy, under the gay picture wdiich 
represents human life itself as a ‘much ado about nothing.’ — Oechkijiauser (ii, 
337) = ^hle of this play can be brought into logical connection with its contents 
only by forced ca.suistry. As in the case of Twelfth Nighty Vou Like If, etc., 
the title of the present play is merely one of those humourous devices faintly tinged 
with the icflex irony with which Shakespeare was wont to bring his lighter wares to 
market. Lessing’s view that the title should disclose as little as possible of the con- 
tents, has been here even exceeded. — R. G. White (cd. i, p. 226) : We call this 
play Much Ado about Nothing ; but it .seems clear to me that Shakespeare and his 
contemporaries called it Much Ado about Noting ; a pun being intended between 
‘nothing’ and ‘noting,’ which were then pronounced alike, and upon which pun 
depends by far the more important significance of the title. [The orthoepical dis- 
cussion, which follows, with Eleks’s review of it, wdll be found more apjiropriately 
in the Commentary on IT, iii, 60. White’s conclusion, here given from his second 
edition, is as follows : — ] The play is made up of much ado about noting, that is, 
watching, observing. All the pensonages are constantly engaged in noting or watch- 
ing each other. Hero’s sufferings come from noting, — ^by her uncle’s servant, by 



7 


ACT I, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 

Mcff. But few of any fort, and none of name. 12 

Claudio, and by Don Pedro ; her release and her happiness by the noting of the 
watch ; and Benedick and Beatrice are brought togctlier by secretly noting what 
their friends plot that they should note ; and yet the principal serious incident, the 
accusation of Hero, about which there is so much ado, rests upon notlting. 

3. Innogen] Theobald : I have ventured to expunge [this name] ; there being 
no mention of her through the play, no one speech addressed to her, nor one syllable 
spoken to her. Neither is there any one passage, from which we have any reason to 
determine that Hero’s mother was living. It seem.s as if the poet had in his first 
plan designed such a character ; which, on a survey of it, he found would be super- 
fluous, and therefore he left it out. [Dyce and White acquiesce in this explanation 
of Theobald’s, wherefrom I beg leave to dissent. We must remember that we cannot 
see a group on the stage as dearly as Shakespeare saw it in his mind’s eye. And in 
the Elizabethan theatres, where there were no play-bills with their list of actors, 
every member of a group, especially of an introductory group, must be accounted 
for, and give a reason for his or her appearance. A far easier explanation than 
Theobald’s is, I think, to suppose that Shakespeare, in remodelling an old play, 
perhaps even retaining the first manuscript page of it, carelessly suffered the old 
stage-direction to remain and merely omitted to erase the name of a character which 
did not enter his plan. A sin of omission is here more conceivable than a sin of 
commission. Collier, however, thinks Ht is clear that the mother of Hero made 
her appearance before the audience,’ But how was the audience to know that .she was 
* the mother of Hero ’ or her aunt, or her grandmother, if .she neither spoke one word 
henself nor a single remark was made to her by others? In his Second Edition, 
Collier notes that in his copy of a corrected folio of 1632 (hereafter, as heretofore, 
indicated in this present edition by ‘Collier’s MS’ or in the 7 ex/. Azotes by ‘Qoll. 
MS ’) the words ‘ Irinogen hi.s wife’ are erased, and, therefore, concludes that ‘ there 
is little doubt that [Innogen] neither made her appearance here, nor elsewhere.’ 
Dyce [Notes, p. 37) thus states the case; ‘One thing I hold for certain, viz. that, 
if [Innogen] ever did figure among the dramatis personre, it was not as a mere 
dummy ; there are scenes in which the mother of Hero must have spoken ; — she 
could not have stood on the stage without a word to say about the disgrace of her 
daughter, etc.’ — E d.] 

4. messenger] Collier [Notes, etc., p. 66) ; The MS converts this word into 
Gentleman, and the manner in which he joins in the conversation .shows that he 
must have been a person superior in rank to what we now understand by a messenger. 
In other dramas, Shakespeare gives important parts to persons whom he calls only 
Messengers ; and it requires no proof that in llie reign of Elizabeth the Messengers 
who conveyed news to the court from abroad were frequently officers whose services 
were in part rewarded by this distinction. It was in this capacity that Raleigh seems 
first to have attracted the favour of the Queen. 

6 , 14. Don Peter] It is only in the.se two lines that this name is thus given — 
perhaps, another instance of the same oversight which allowed ‘ Innogen ’ to remain 
on what was, possibly, the first MS page of the play which Shakc.spcare icmoulded, 
and to which, as merely introductory, he gave little heed. It is eKewliero Don 
Pedro, to which Rowe changed it here ; he has been herein properly followed ever 
since. — Ed. 

12. sort] A needless controversy has arisen over this word. — S teevens, at first, 



8 MUCH A DOE ABOUT NOTHING [act i. sc. i, 

Leo7t, A vi6lorie is twice it fclfe, when the atchieuer 1 3 
brings home full numbers : I finde heere, that Don Pe- 
ter hath beftowed much honor on a yong FlorentmCyCKl- 15 
led Claudio. 

MeJfMuch. deferu’d on his part, and equally remem- 
bred by Don Pedro^ he hath borne himfclfe beyond the 
promife of his age, doing in the figure of a Lambe, the 
feats of a Lion, he hath indeede better bettred expedla- 20 
tion, then you muft expeft of me to tell you how. 

13. aichicuer\ ntchmer 20. bettred^ bettered Y ^ 

14. 7 tttmbcrs\ number Rowe i. 

asserted that it meant rank^ distinction^ but afterward inclined to Monck Mason’s 
easier explanation. The latter says (p. 49) that * sort’ (in line 36) is certainly used 
in the sense Steevens gives to the same word here, but that in the present line it is 
used in *a more general sense ; and “of any sort” means of any kind whatsoever: 
— There were but few killed of any kind, and none of rank.’ But Dyck i^Noies^ 38) 
adheres to Steevens’ s first interpretation, and pronounces Ma.son’s *• manifestly wrong.’ 
* The reply of the messenger,’ he says, ‘ is equivalent to — But few gentlemen of any 
rank, and none of celebrity. So, presently, [he uses the word in line 36] .so, too, in 
Mid. N'. Dream., Ill, ii : “none of noble sort Would so offend a virgin and in 
Jonson’s Every Man in his Humour., — IVorks, 24, ed. Gifford: K gentleman of 
your sort, parts and in A IVarning for Faire IVomefty 1599 : “The Queene . . . 
Allowes this bountie to all commers. much more To gentlemen of your sortD ’ — 
Staunton thinks that the meaning is * questionable,’ ‘ but every one acquainted 
with our early literature is aware that “sort’’ was commonly used — [as in line 36] 
to imply stamp, degree, quality, etc. lhu.s, in Jonson’s Every Man ozit of his 
Humour, IT, vi ; “ Look you, sir, you presume to be a gentleman of sort.'*' Again 
in Ram Alley, IV, i ; “ Her husband is a gentleman of sort. Serjeant. A gentleman 
of sort I why, what care I ?” ’ — R. G. White (ed. i) denies that ‘ sort ’ ‘ unle.ss used 
absolutely, without qualification of degree or merit, as we sometimes use “ character’’ 
to mean good charatier, can be thus arbitrarily rai.sed from its inferior and general 
sense to one higher and particular and he further asserts that ‘ no instance of such 
use has been (pioted’ and that ‘throughout Shakespeare’s w^orks and those of his 
contemporaries it is irsed to mean class and condition, of all sorts.’ 

This assertion of White is certainly dogmatic and possibly hasty. lie forgot one 
in.stance in Shakespeare where ‘ sort ’ means rank, which he himself quoted in his 
Shakespeare'' s Scholar (p. 179) ; in Meas. for Meas. (IV, iv, 19) Angelo, in speak- 
ing of the noblemen who are to meet the Duke, says to Escalus, ‘ give notice to such 
men of .sort and suit as are to meet him.’ It is almost equally evident, I think, that 
here, and in line 36, ‘ sort ’ means I'ank. The fact is, that this word, like many 
others, has various shades of meaning, ranging from class \.o rank; the particular 
shade must be determined by the context according to the insight of the reader. 
—Ed. 

20. better bettred] That is, * he hath bettered expectation better than you must 
expect,’ etc. — E d. 



ACT I, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


9 

22 


Leo. He hath an Vnckle heere in MeJJina^^'A be very 
much glad of it. 

Mejf. I haue alreadie deliuered him letters, and there 
appeares much ioy in him, euen fo much, that ioy could 25 
not fliew it felfe modeft enough, without a badg of bit- 
terncffe. 

Leo. Did he breake out into tcares ? 

Mcff. In great meafure. 

Leo. A kinde overflow of kindneffe, there are no fa- 30 
ces truer, then thofc that are fo wafh’d, how much bet- 
ter is it to weepe at ioy, then to ioy at weeping? 32 

26. FjF^. 30. kindncJJ'e kindness kind- 

ness, Warb. 

22. wil] At present, instead of slurring the relative, we slur the verb, and say 
‘who ’ll.’— Ei). 

23. much glad] For other examples of ‘ much ’ used adverbially, sec Abbott, 

§51- 

26. modest] Warbiirton : Of all the transj)orts of joy, that which is attended 
with tears is least offensive ; because, carrying with it this mark of pain, it allays the 
envy that usually attends another’s happiness. This he finely calls a modest joy,* 
such a one as did not insult the observer, by an indication of happiness unmixed with 
pain. — Edwards (p. 160) ; Our honest hearted old Poet, who had nothing of the 
atrabilaire in his make (nay, I (jiiestion whether he had ever heard the word^ never 
dreamed of such stuff as that it w'as fine to think one’s .self insttltcdhy the indication 
of happiness in another. How different are the reflections he puls in the mouth of 
good Leonato on this occasion in lines 30-32. — Capell (p. 119) : Joy wore the 
modestest garb that joy can do, i, e. silence and tears. 

26. badg] Douce (i, 334) : In the reign of Edward the Fourth the terms livery 
and badge appear to have been synonymous, the fonner having, no doubt, been bor- 
rowed from the French and signifying a thing delivered. I'he badge con.sisted of the 
master’s device, crest, or arms on a separate piece of cloth, or sometimes silver, in 
the form of a shield, fastened to the left sleeve. — W. A. Wright ; A badge was a 
mark of service ; hence appropriately used for a mark of inferiority, and as such an 
expression of modesty. 

29. measure] Steevens; That i.s, in abundance. — W. A. Wright: The Author- 
ised version of Psalm, Ixxx, 5, is ‘ and givest them tears to drink in great measure,’ 
where the Prayer-Book Version has ‘ and givest them plenteousness of tears to drink.’ 

30. kinde] That is, natural. Dyce {Gloss.') gives what may well be the mne- 
monic line for this meaning ; it is in the description of the painting which Lucrece 
recalls, of Priam’s Troy in which, although there was much that was imaginary, yet 
it was all so natural as to seem to be reality ; it was ‘ Conceit deceitful, so compact, 
so kind,’ line 1423 . — Ed. 

31. truer] Johnson : That is, none honester, none more sincere, 

32. weeping] Rann : As some profligate heirs are supposed to do ; whence the 
proverb : ‘ The merriest faces in mourning coaches.’ 



10 


MUCIi ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act i, sc. i. 

Bea. I pray you, is Signior Mountanto returnM from 33 
the warres, or no ? 

Mejf. I know none of that name, Lady, there was 35 
none fuch in the armie of any fort. 

Leon. What is he that you aske for Neece ? 

Hero. My coufin meanes Signior Benedick of Padua 
Meff. O he’s return’d, and as pleafant as euer he was. 

Beat. He fet vp his bils here in McJfmUyh challeng’d 40 

33. Mountanto] Ff Q, Cam. Glo. Wh. 40. bits] Fj. bills Q. 
ii. Mont ant 0 Fope et cet. 40, 42, challeng'd] chalenrde Q. 

37. for, 

. 33 * Mountanto] Capell [NbteSf iii, 471) was the first to call attention to the 

use of this word, as one of the terms c)f the fcncing-school, in Jonson’s Every man 
in his Humour^ where Bobadil says, * I would teach [them] the special rules, as 
your punto, your reverse, your stoccata, your imbroccato, your pas.sada, your mon- 
tanto* (IV, V, p. 1 21, cd. Gifford) ; Vincentio Saviola docs not mention it in his 
Practise, but Cotgrave, among other definitions of Montant, gives ‘ an vpright blow, 
or thrust.’ This ‘montant’ occurs in Mer. Whes, II, iii, 27. — En. — Fi.etciier 
(p. 249) ; It is the prior interest which Benedick has in Beatrice’s heart that makes 
her, in the opening scene, so eagerly inquire of the Messenger concerning J^encdick’s 
present reputation and fortune. How plainly we see her, under the ironical guise 
which her questionings assume, delighting to draw from her informant one com- 
mendation after another of the gentleman’s valour and other eminent qualifications. 

36. sort] See Notes on line 12. 

40. set vp his bils] Steevens : In Nashe’s Ilaue with yon to Saffron- Walden, 
*596, [vol. iii, p. 179, ed. Grosart,] we find : ‘ — ^hcc braucs it indefinently [.v?V] in her 
behalfe, setting vp bills, like a Bear-ward or Fencer, what fights we shall haue, and 
what weapons she will meete me at.’ The following account of one of these 
challenges is taken from an ancient MS : ‘Item a challenge playde before the King’s 
majestic [Edward VI,] at Westminster, by three rnaisters, Willyam Pascall, Robert 
Greene, and W. Browne, at seven kynde of weapons. That is to say, the axe, the 
pike, the rapier and target, the rapier and cloke, and with two swords, agaynst all 
alyens and strangers being borne without the King’s dominions, of what countrie so 
ever he or they were, geving them warninge by theyr bills set up by the three mais- 
ters, the space of eight weeks before the sayd challenge was playde ; and it was 
holdcn four sevcrall Sundayes one after another.’ It appears from the same work 
that all challenges * to any maistcr within the realme of Englande being an Englishe 
man ’ were against the statutes of the ‘ Noble Science of Defence' Beatrice means 
that Benedick published a general challenge, like a prize-fighter. — Douce (i, 162) : 
The practice to which [this phrase] refers was calculated to advertise the public of 
any matters which concerned itself or the party whose bills were set up ; and it is 
the more necessary to state this, because the passages which have been used in 
explanation might induce the reader to suppose that challenges and prize-fightings 
were the exclusive objects of these bills. This, however, was not the ca.se. In 
Nortlibrooke’s Treatise against dicing, dauncing, vain plaies, etc., 1579, we are 



ACT 1, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


II 


Cupid at the Flight ; and my Vnckles foole reading the 41 

Challenge, fubferibM for Cupid, and challcngM him at 

the Burbolt. I pray you, how many hath hee kiPd and 43 


43. Burbolt. ’\ QFf, Rowe, Pope i. 43 ~ 45 ‘ I‘»’kilHn^.’\ Mnemonic lines, 
bird-bolt Pope ii et seq. Warb. 

fnany\ nany F^. 

.told that they used * to set up their billis upon postes certain dayes before, to admon- 
ish the people to make resort unto their theatres J In Ilistriofnastix, a man is intro- 
duced setting up text billes for playes ; and William Rankins, in his Mirrour of 
monsters, 1587, p. 6, says, that ‘players by sticking of their bils in Ivondon, defile 
the streetes with their infectious filthines.’ Mountebankes likewise set up their bills. 
‘ Vppon this Scaffold, also might be mounted a number of Quack-saluing Empericks, 
who arming in some Country towne, clappe vp their Terrible Billes, in the Market- 
place, and filling the Paper with such horrible names of diseases, as if eucry disease 
were a Diuell.’ — Dekker’s Lanthorne and Candle-light, etc., 1609 [vol. iii, p. 293, 
ed. Grosart]. Again, in 7 \iles and quick ansiocres, printed by Berthelette, bl. let. 
n. d., a man having lost his purse in London, ^ setfe vp bylies in diuers places that if 
any man of the cyte had found the purse and woulde brynge it agayn to him he 
shulde haue welle for his laboure. A gentyllman of the Temple wrote vnder one of 
the byls ho we the man shulde come to his chambers and told where.’ It appears 
from a very rare little piece intitled Questions of profitable and pleasant roneernings 
talked of by tivo olde seniors, etc., 1594, that Saint Paul’s was a place in which these 
bills, or advertisements, were posted up. Nashe, in his Pierce Pennilessc, etc., 
1595 [vol. ii, p. 63, ed. Grosart,] speaks of the ‘Masterlesse men, that .set vp their 
bills in Paules for services, and such as paste vp their papers on eucry post, for Arith- 
metique and writing Schooles we may, therefore, suppose that several of the walks 
about Saint Paul’s cathedral then resembled the present Royal Exchange, with 
respect to the business that was there transacted. [Possibly, our familiarity with 
modern methods of advertising, whereof this ‘setting up of bills’ appears to be the 
germ, veils our appreciation of the bitterness of the sneer wherein Beatrice places 
Benedick on a level with trades-folk and prize-fighters.’ — E d.] 

41. Flight] Farmer ; The flight was an arrow of a particular kind. The title- 
page of an old pamphlet [reads] : ‘ A new post — a marke exceeding necessary for 
all men’s arrows : whether the great man’s flight, the gallant’s rover, the wise man’s 
pricke-shaft, the poor-man’s but-shaft, or the fool’s bird-bolt.’ Gifford [Cynthia’s 
Revels, p, 370) asserts that ‘ flights were long and light-feathered arrows, which went 
level to the mark,’ and Dyce ( Gloss,') follows him, but neither gives any authority. 
I cannot find that Ascham anywhere refers to ‘ flights ’ as a particular kind of arrow. 
Cotgrave, however, among other meanings of Volet, gives : “also, a flight, or light 
shaft,’ where, possibly, * flight ’ is a misprint for slight, 'fhe shooting with flights is 
clearly in strong contrast with the shooting with bird-bolts, and as we know what the 
latter were, we can certainly infer somewhat of the former. — Ed. 

43. Burbolt] Theobald [Sh. Restored, p. 175) somewhat needlessly changed 
this to Birdbolt, and also conjectured that it might be ‘ But-bolt.’ It is found else- 
where thus .spelled, ‘ Burbolt,’ and probably gives us phonetically the pronunciation 
then in use, and, certainly, that of the printers; just as we have ‘Berrord’ for Bear- 



12 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act i, sc. i. 

eaten in thefe warres? But how many hath he kilM ? for 
indeed, I promis’d to eate all of his killing. 45 

Leon, ’Faith Neece, you taxe Signior Benedicke too 
much, but hee’l be meet with you, I doubt it not. 47 

45. promised] promifed Q. promife 47. hcdlbe\ Rowe i. 

F^, Rowe, Pope. be nieet\ be met Cap. 

46. ^ Faitti] Faith Q. 

ward, Steevens quotes the following from the Induction to Marston’s What You 
Willy 1607 ; ‘ Some boundlesse ignorance should on sudden shoote His grosse 
knob’d buri)olt,’ where not only is the same spelling found, but the bird-bolt itself 
is adequately described as ‘ gross-knobb’d.' Steevens further bird- bolt as a 

* short, thick arrow without a point, and spreading at the extremity, so much as to 
leave a flat surface, about the breadth of a shilling. Such are to this day in use to 
kill rooks with, and are shot from a cross-bow.’ Douce (i, 164) gives a pictorial 
illustration of several varieties. The meaning of the whole passage, however, is to 
me extremely obscure. 1 know of but two attempts at an explanation, and neither 
is satisfactory, Capkll’s whole note is as follows: ‘‘‘flight” is, as the word 
expresses, — an arrow* ; sharp, and of greatest speed, sent from cross-bows ; the 
“bird-bolt,” the reverse of the other arrow; blunt, and sent from ord’ nary bows 
against rooks etc : Hence the wit of this passage ; Benedick’s challenge intimates — 
that he had shari^ness and wit to fly from Cupid; and the fool’s — that his wit was 
as dull as his, and he in the same danger : If this be not the passage’s tendency, the 
editor gives it up as inexplicable, that is — to him.’ Surely, this is obscurus per 
obscurius, D()Uc:e says, ‘ the meaning of the whole is — Benedick, from a vain con- 
ceit of his influence over women, challenged Cupid at roving (a particular kind of 
archery, in which flight-zxxc^'^’s, are used). In other words, he challenged him to 
shoot at hearts. The fool, to ridicule this piece of vanity, in his turn challenged 
Benedick to shoot at crows with the cross-bow and bird-bolt ; an inferior kind of 
archery used by fools, who, for obvious reasons, were not permitted to shoot with 
pointed arrows : Whence the proverb — “ A fool’s bolt is soon shot.” ’ Both of these 
explanations seem to be founded on the assumption that Beatrice refers to a fact, 
that Benedick actually set up bills and actually challenged Cupid, and that the 
challenge was actually accepted by the Court Fool. This is, of course, absurd. 
Nothing of this kind* really happened. The question then arises what could have 
been llie circumstances which Beatrice’s wit thus distorted. W^ithout a foundation of 
truth, which her hearers would recognise, the allusion would have been pointless ; and 
Beatrice was not the girl to indulge in pointless sneers. Could it have been the time 
when Benedick so aired his assurance that he was loved of all women and was treated 
therefor by Beatrice with such scornful mirth that she gained the title of ‘Lady 
Disdain’? But this does not account for the ‘Court Fool.’ — E d. 

43, kil’d and eaten] Stp:evens : So, in He 7 t V: III, vii, 99 ; ‘ Fambures, He 
longs to eat the English. Constable, I think he will eat all he kills.’ — W. A. 
Wright : Cotgrave has ; ‘ Mangeur de charrettes ferries. A notable kill-cow, 
monstrous huff-snuff, terrible swaggerer ; one that will kill all he meets, and eat 
all he kills.’ 

47. Meet with you] Steevens : A very common expression, and signifies, * he’ll 
be your match,’ ^ he’ll be even with you.’ — ^G rey (i, 121 ): Used in tlie same manner 



ACT I, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 1 3 

MeJf.YLe hath done good feruice Lady in thefe wars. 48 

Beat. You had mufty viftuall, and he hath holpe to 
ease it ; he’s a very valiant Trencher-man, hec hath an 50 
excellent ftomacke. 

Mejf. And a good fouldicr too Lady. 

Beat. And a good fouldicr to a Lady. But what is he 
to a Lord ? 

MeJf. A Lord to a Lord, a man to a man, ftuft with 55 
all honourable vertucs. 

Beaty It is fo indeed, he is no leffe then a ftuft man : 
but for the ftuffing well, we are all mortall. 58 


48. thc/e\ fhofe Ff, Rowe. 

49-51. Mnemonic lines, Warb. 

49. Heat.] Mef. F^. 

vidluair^ vittaile Q. visuals F^, 
Rowe, 4 - . 

50. eafe\ eate QF,. eat F^F^. 
h€*s\ he is Q, Steev. ’93, Van 

Knt, Coll. Sing. Wh. Cam. Sta. Kily. 


50. valiant’] valiaunt Q. 

Trencher-man] trencher man Q. 
52. too Lady] toOy lady QF^. 

58. Jiuffing welly] Ff, Rowe ii. Pope. 
Jlujffing wely Q. stuffing well ; Rowe i. 
stuffngy well I I Ian. stuffing! — welly 
Cap. stuffngy — welly Theob. et cet 
(subs. ) 


by Bartcn Holiday, Marriage of the Arts, 1618, I, i : ‘ Astronomia . Will he prevent 
her, and go meet her, or else she wdll be meet with me.’ 

49. musty] h'or Chalmers’s use of this phrase, in determining the date of this 
play, see the Preface to the present volume. 

49. victuall] W. A. Wright : Shakespeare elsewhere u.ses the plural form, 

55. stuft] Steevens : ‘ Stuffed,’ in this instance, has no ridiculous meaning. 
Mr Edwards observes that Mede, in his Discourses on Scripture y speaking of Adam, 
says, * he whom God had stuffed with so many excellent qualities.’ — Edwards's MS. 
— Halliwkll : Cotgrave gives a phrase nearly parallel with that in the text [s. v. 
Estoffe] : * Che^>aliers de bonne estoffc. Knights well armed, and well managing 
their arms.’ [Cf. Rom. ^ Jul. Ill, v, 183 : ‘ Stuff d, as they say, with honourable 
parts.’ Be it kindly noted, that when parallel passages from Shakespeare are 
quoted, it is merely to save readers the trouble of looking them out in a Concord- 
ance where, of course, many more examples may generally be found ; and not for 
the sake of showing any superior erudition. — Ed.] 

58. stuffing well,] Theobald was the first to amend the punctuation and thereby 
retrieve the meaning. It is true, as Farmer states, that he might have found it in 
Davenant’s Law against Lovers y where this speech of Beatrice occurs, as here, in 
the opening scene. But Theobald was not the man to accept aid without an 
acknowledgement. He concludes his note with : ** Our Poet seems to use the word 
‘stuffing’ here much as Plautus does in his Mostellaria, I, iii, [line 13]: ‘Non 
vestem amator mulieris amat, sed vestis fartum.’ Farmer says that the rea.son for 
this ‘abruption’ of Beatrice is that she ‘starts an idea at the words “stuff’d man,” 
and prudently checks herself in the pursuit of it. A “ stuffed man ” was one of the 
many cant phrases for a cuckold' W, A. Wright vindicates Beatrice from this ill- 
mannered suggestion of Farmer. ‘ Beatrice, ' he says, ‘ is still thinking of Benedick’s 



H 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act i, sc. i. 


Leon. You muft not (fir) miflake my Neece, there is 
a kind of merry war betwixt Signior Benedick, & her ; 6o 
they neuer meet, but there’s a skirmifti of wit between 
them. 

Bea. Alas, he gets nothing by that. In our laft con- 
fli6l, foure of his fiue wits went halting off, and now is 
the whole man gouernM with one : fo that if hee haue 65 
wit enough to keepe himfelfe warme, let him beare it 

61. there' s\ there is Rowe i, simile. 

Steev. Var. Knt, Sta. Ktly. 63. that In] thatf in Q. 

betwe€n\ bctwccne Prxtorius Fac- 64. fottre'\ 4 Q. 


prowess as a valiant trencher-man. She is free-spoken, but there is no necessity to 
attribute to her the coarse reference suggested by Farmer ... for the sufficient 
reason that if it were so it would have no point in being applied to Benedick, who 
was unmarried. Nor is there any ground for supposing that Beatrice checks herself 
for fear of being mi sinterji reted.* Pace Dr Wright, whose word in the interj^retation 
of Shakespeare carries utmost weight, I doubt that Beatrice has in mind Benedick’s 
capacity for stuffing^ at the table, but that Theobald has hit upon her meaning in his 
quotation from Plautus ; * ’Tis not the woman’s garment that a lover loves, but what 
that garment holds,’ that is, simply the woman herself. — Ed. 

58. we are all mortall] Staunton prints this, like a proverb, in italics. 

60, 61. betwixt . . . between] Note the two synonyms in almost the same sentence. 
Possibly, the ear instinctively avoided the use of ‘ betwixt ’ before ‘ them.’ Dr Mur- 
ray (//'. E. D. ) says that ^betwixt is now archaic, between is the living word.’ — E d. 

61. skirmish of wit] *Wit’ is used, as here, in its modern sense, more fre- 
quently, I think, in this play than in any other of Shakespeare’s ; see the first Scene 
of the last Act. — P! d. 

64. fiue wits] Johnson: The ‘wits’ seem to have been reckoned five, by 
analogy to the five senses, or the five inlets of ideas. — Knight : In his 141st 
Sonnet, Shakespeare distinguishes between the five wits and the five senses: ‘But 
my five wits nor my five senses can Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee.’ 
By the early writers, the ‘ five wits ; were used synonymously with the five senses ; 
as in Chaucer ( The Pcrsoncs Tate) : ‘ certis delices ben the appetites of thy fyve 
wittes, as sight, hieryng, smellyng, savoring, and touching.’ [p. 275, ed. Morris.] 

66. warme] Capri j. (p. 120) : This phrase is proverbial, and spoke of — keeping 
from harm, out of harm’s way. It occurs in Tam. of the Shr, II, i, 268 : ‘ Pet. Am 
I not wise? Kath. Yes ; keep you warm.’ — ^Steevens : Thus, in Cynthia' s Revels, 
II, i : ‘ Madam, your whole self cannot but be perfectly wise ; for your hands have 
wit eqpugh to keep themselves warm.’ — ^W. A. Wright : It is still a common saying 
in Ireland. See Blackwood's Maga,. September, 1893, p. 367. 

66, 67. bear it for a difference] An heraldic phrase. Clark [Introd. to 
Heraldry, p. 1 15) defines a ‘difference’ as ‘certain figures added to coats of arm.?, 
to distinguish one branch of a family from another, and how distant younger branches 
are from the elder.’ — Steevens : So, in Hamlet, Ophelia says [IV, v, 182] : ‘O, you 
must wear your rue with a difference.’ 



ACT I, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


for a difference betweene himfelfc and his horfc ; For it 67 
is all the wealth that he hath left, to be knowne a reafo- 
nable creature. Who is his companion now ? He hath 
euery month a new fworne brother. 70 

Mejtf, Fst poffible ? 

Beat. Very eafily poffible : he wears his faith but as 
the fafhion of his hat, it euer changes with ^ next block. 73 


69. creature creature y ei. 7** Tst"] IJi Q.> Js'tY^, A jV F^, 

70. month'\ monethY^, Rowe, + , Mai. Ran. Steev. Van Knt, 

fworne brother^ sworn-brother Sta. Ktly. 

Cap. 73 - j ] y,- 

67. horse] Warburton, who changed the preceding line into ‘keep himself 
from harm ’ asks, of the original text, how would keeping himself warm ‘ make a 
difference between him and his horse?’ — H eath (p. loi) pertinently remarks that 
Warburton’ s question ‘ deserves only to be answered by another : Did he ever know 
a horse that had wit enough to keep himself warm ?’ 

68. wealth] Hanmer needlessly changed this to weartk, ‘ an old English word 
signifying to 7 oear or 7 vearing of anything.’ — Ed. 

69. companion] Weiss (p. 288) : Beatrice, for all her cleverness, shows that 
she loves Benedick in the first words she utters in the play. For she asks if he is 
returned from the wars, and gives him a fencingderm for a nickname, to pretend a 
profound unconcern ; then disparages him in a most lively way, and asks whom he 
has now for a companion, seeming to allude to men, but expecting to know by the 
answer if his affections have become involved with any woman. [See line 77.] 

70. sworne brother] Hunter (i, 244) : This is one of the popular phrases of 
England to denote strict alliances and amities, and has survived the recollection of 
the circumstances in which the term arose. The fratres conjurati were persons 
linked together in small fellowships, perhaps not more than two, who undertook to 
defend and assist each other in a military expedition under the sanction of some 
stricter tie than that which binds the individuals composing a whole army to each 
other. They are found in genuine history as well as in the romances of chivalry. — 
Steevens ; Thus, ‘ we’ll be all three sworn brothers to France.’ — Hen, V: II, i, 13. 
[I think Capell is unquestionably right in joining these two words with a hyphen ; 
‘ sworn-brother. ’ — Ed. ] 

72. faith] Capell ; This means, fidelity, constancy ; constancy in friendships, 
companionships. 

73. block] Steevens : A ‘block’ is the mould on which a hat is formed, some- 
times used for the hat itself. — Staunton : As the mutability of fashion was shown 
in nothing so much as in the head-dresses of both sexes, these blocks must have 
been perpetually changing their forms. — Rushton (..VZ/.’j Euphttismy p. 52) quotes 
the following from Lyly’s Euphues [p. 323, ed. Arber] : Thy friendship Philautus 
is lyke a new fashion, which being vsed in the morning, is accompted olde before 
noone, which varietie of chaunging, being oftentimes noted of a graue Gentleman in 
NapleSy who hauing bought a Hat of the newest fashion, and best block in all Italy, 
and wearing but one daye, it was tolde him yat it was stale, he hung it vp in his 
studie, and viewing al sorts, al shapes, perceiued at ye last, his olde Hat againe to 



i6 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act i, sc. i. 


Mejf. I fee (Lady) the Gentleman is not in your 
bookes. 75 

come into the new fashion, where- with smiling to himselfe he sayde, I haue now 
lined compasse, for Adam's olde Apron, must make Eue a new kirtle. ... I 
speake to this ende PhilautuSy yat I see thee as often chaunge thy head as other do 
their Hats . . . but when thou shalt see that chaunge of friendships shal make thee 
a fat Calfe and a leane Cofer, that there is no more hold in a new friend then a new 
fashion, yat Hats alter as fast as the Turner can turne his block,’ etc. [In the fore- 
going extract, it is evident, that in order to make a jingle with * cofer,’ Lyly ‘ clepeth 
calf, caufy a pronunciation denounced by Holofernes, in Love's Lab. Lost. — Ed.] 
75. not in your bookes] As Halliwell says, the origin of this phrase is 
very doubtful ; whatever its special meaning may be, it is clear that Beatrice perverts 
it to the ordinary meaning of books in a library. *■ This phrase,’ observes Johnson, 
‘is used, I believe, by more than understand it. “To be in one’s books” is to be in 
one’s codicilsy or willy to be among friends set down for legacies' — Kenktck, in his 
Review oi Dr Johnson’s edition, made merry over this definition, and asserted that 
the phrase referred to albums, wherein the owner’s friends subscribed their names 
together with some compliment or device. ‘ It was very natural, therefore,’ he con- 
tinues, for [the owners of the albums] to say, in speaking of their favourites or 
friends that they were in their books ; and of their enemies, that they w’ere not in 
their books.’ Furthermore, Kcnrick observes with pertinency: ‘ It is a thousand 
to one if the Last Will and Testament of the buxom Beatrice was written ; and a 
much greater chance if it had codicils annexed to it.’ — Barclay, who feebly 
defended Dr Johnson, says (p. 76) that in Beatrice’s reply there is a plain allu- 
sion ‘ to the custom, prevalent among lovers, of writing their names in the books 
belonging to each other.’ — Steevens, fertile in explanations, supposes that the 
‘ books ’ are ‘ memorandum-books, like the visiting books of the present age ; or, 
perhaps, the allusion is to matriculation at the university. So, in Aristippus, or the 
Jervial Philosopher, 1630 ; “You must be matriculated and have your name recorded 
in Albo Academiae.” '[Album was originally used as a professedly Latin word, and 
so inflected. — H. E. Dict.'\ Again, in Palsgrave’s Acolastiis, 1540: “We weyl 
haunse thee, or set thy name into our fclow.ship boke, with clappynge of handes,” 
etc. I know not exactly to what custom this last quoted passage refers, unless to the 
album; for just after the same expression occurs again: that “ — from henceforthe 
thou may’ St have a place worthy for thee in our whyte ; from hence thou may’st have 
thy name written in our boke.” It should seem from the following passage in 
Taming of the Shreiu, that the phrase might have originated in the Herald’s Office ; 
“A herald, Kate! oh, put me in thy books!” [II, i, 225].’ — Farmer : The phrase 
originally meant to be in the list of retainers. Sir John Mandeville tells us, ‘ alle 
the mynstrelles that comen before the great Chan ben . . . entred in his bookes, as 
for his own men.’ — Malone; A servant and a lover were in Cupid’s Vocabulary 
synonymous. Hence, perhaps, this phrase was applied equally to the lover and the 
menial attendant. [But, as W. A. Wright remarks, this suggestion of Malone * does 
not suit the relationship between Benedick and Beatrice.’ Dr Wright himself pre- 
fers, as ‘ perhaps the most probable,’ the derivation of the phrase ‘ from the memoran- 
dum or visiting books which contained a list of personal friends and acquaintances.’ 
But to this derivation, and to one or two others, 1 think an objection lies in the 
use of the plural books. It is this same plural which, I imagine, led Dr Johnson 



ACT I, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 17 

Bea. No, and he were, I would burne my ftudy. But 76 
I pray you, who is his companion ? Is there no young 
fquarer now, that will make a voyage with him to the 
diuell ? 

Mcjf. He is moft in the company of the right noble 80 
Claudio, 

Beat, O Lord, he will hang vpon him like a difeafe : 
he is fooner draught then the peftilcnce, and the taker 
runs prefently mad. God helpe the noble Claudio^ if hee 84 

76-79. Mnemonic, Warb. Theob. et seq. 

76. and he\if an he 79. dtueW] Devil 


to suggest a corresponding plural, codicils; be apparently felt the incongruity of 
explaining, at first hand, the plural books by the singular Willy he therefore put 
‘codicils’ first and let ‘Will’ follow it. So, too, in regard to an ‘album’ and a 
‘ visiting list,’ had either of these been meant, would not the phrase have been in 
the singular, ‘ he is not in your book ’ ? This objection, however, does not lie 
against the books or the records of a corporation or of a College, which, where there 
is not a distinctive name, such as the ‘ Black Book of the Exchequer,’ are always in 
the plural. Hence I accept one of Steevens’s suggestions and am inclined to think 
that in early times (Dr Murray in the H. E. D. gives an example as early as 1509) 
the phrase may have originated in the books or records of a corporation. In Greene’s 
Quippe for an Vpstart Cotirliery we find ; ‘ the churlish illiberality of their mindes, 
bewraide their fathers were not aboue three poundes in the kinges bookes at a 
subsidie.’ p. 215, ed. Grosart. — Ed.] 

76. and he were] It is well enough to explain that ‘and’ is here used for any 
equivalent to ify but for the sake of euphony it would be well to retain ‘ and ’ in the 
text. — E d. 

77. his companion] Again Beatrice’s eager solicitude to discover in this round* 
about way whether or not Benedick were still heart-free. See Weiss’s note on line 69. 

78. squarer] Johnson : This I take to be a choleric, quarrelsome fellow, for in 
this sense Shakespeare uses the word to square. — Staun'I ON : It may, perhaps, mean 
quarrello'y as to square or to dispute. — R. G. White (ed. ii) : Boys now about to 
fight square off at each other; but, perhaps, Shakespeare wrote ‘young squire."^ 
[Cotgrave has : ‘ Se quarrer. To strout or square it, looke big on’t, carrie his armes 
a kemboll braggadochio-like. ’ And see Notes in this ed. on Afid. N. /All, i, 29. — Ed.] 

78. that will] Allen (MS) : That is, who is resolved, is determined. 

84. God] Lady Martin (p. 302) : In some recent reproductions of Shake- 
speare’s plays, the frequent repetition of the name of the Deity has struck mo.st 
painfully upon my ear. I supi^osc, when Shakespeare wrote, the familiar use of this 
sacred name, like many other things repugnant to modern taste, was not generally 
condemned. In this play, the name of ‘God’ occurs continually, and upon the 
most trivial occasions. It so happens that it rises to Beatrice’s lips moie often than 
to any other’s. In the books from which I studied, ‘ Heaven’ was everywhere sub- 
stituted for it ; and I confess the word sounds pleasanter and softer to my car, besides 
being less irreverent. I cannot help the feeling, though it may be considered fastid- 



MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act i, sc. i. 


ig 


haue caught the Benedift, it will coft him a thoufand 85 
pound ere he be cur’d. 

Mejf, I will hold friends with you Lady. 

Bea, Do good friend. 

Leo. You’l ne’re run mad Neece. 

Bea. No, not till a hot January. 90 

Mejf, Do 71 Pedro is approach’d. 

Enter don Pedro yClandiOyBcnedickCyBaltha/arj 
and lohn the bajlard. 

Pedro. Good Signior Leonato, you are come to meet 
your trouble : the fafhion of the world is to auoid coft, 95 
and you encounter it. 

Leon. Neuer came trouble to my houfe in the likenes 
of your Grace : for trouble being gone, comfort fliould 
remaine : but when you depart from me,forrow abides, 
and happineffe takes his leaue. ICX) 

Pedro. You embrace your charge too willingly; I 
thinke this is your daughter. 

Lconato. Her mother hath many times told me fo. 103 


85. Benedirf] Q. Benedicke Fo. Ben- 
edick F^F^. 

86, he l)e’\ a be Q. it be Ff, Rowe, 
Pope, Han. a’ be Cam. 

89. You' I ne’re] You will neuer Q, 
Cap. Steev. Var. Coll. Sing. Dyce, Sta. 
Ktly, Cam. Wh. ii. 


92. Enter don Pedro,] Enter Don 
Pedro, attended ; Cap. 

Scene II. Pope, Han. 

94. you a?r] are you Q, Coll. 

95. trouble:'] trouble? Coll. 

96. eficountcr] incounter Q. 

1 01. too willingly] more willingly Yi. 
most willingly Rowe, Pope, Han. 


ions. The name of the Deity, I think, should never rise lightly to the lips, or be 
used upon slight cause. There are, of course, occasions when, even upon the stage, 
it is the right word to use. But these are rare, and only where the prevailing strain 
of thought or emotion is high and solemn. 

84. presently] That is, immediately. See Shakespeare, passim, 

87. I will] That is, I wish to, I prefer to ; ‘ will ’ is here used as in line 78. 

89. run mad] Referring to what Beatrice has just said that the taker [of the 
Benedick] runs presently mad. Of course, the emphasis in the line falls on ‘You.’ 

93. lohn the bastard] W. A. Wright: [This distinguishing appellation] 
probably accounts for his moody, discontented character. Bacon (Essay of Envy, 
p. 30) says : ‘ Deformed Persons, Eunuches, and Old Men, and Bastards, are 
Envious : For he that cannot possibly mend his owne case, will doe what he can to 
impaire anothers.’ 

loi. charge] Johnson : That is, your burden, your incumbrance. — W. A. 
Wright: Hence responsibility, expense, and so equivalent to ‘cost’ in line 95. 



ACT I, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


19 


Betted^ Were you in doubt that you askt her ? 

Leonato. Signior Benedicke, no, for then were you a 105 
childe, 

Pedro. You haue it full Benedicke, we may gheffe by 
this, what you are, being a man, truly the Lady fathers 
her felfe ; be happic Lady, for you are like an honorable 
father. no 

Ben. If Signior Leonato be her father, flie would not 
haue his head on her flioulders for al MelTina, as like him 
as fhc is. 

Beat. I wonder that you will ffill be talking, fignior 
Benedicke, no body markes you. 1 1 5 

104. doubt\ doubt fir Q, Thcob. 107. we may\ you may Rowe ii, 

Warb. Johns. Cap. Mai. Ran. Stcev. Pope. 

Var. Coll. Sing. Dyce, Sta. Glo. Wh. ii. 

104. Were you in doubt, etc.] Fletcher (p. 250) : In all [the conversation 
with the Messenger] the lady’s part of the dialogue seems inspired quite as much by 
the desire to hear good news of Ilenedick as by the love of turning him into ridicule ; 
it is of his ‘ good parts ’ that she is chiefly thinking. But he no sooner makes his 
appearance, than he re-awakens all her resentment by indulging, in the first words 
that he utters, his habit of satirical reflection upon her .sex. And accordingly, in the 
altercation that follows, we find the whole ardour and ingenuity of [Beatrice] exert- 
ing themselves to humble and silence, if possible, the satirical loquacity of this 
vivacious cavalier. [The adoption of the ‘ sir ’ of the Qto somewhat softens the 
rudeness of the speech. — K d.] 

107. full] That is, completely, thoroughly ; examples of the use of ‘ full ’ in this 
sense may be found in the II. E. D. s. v. 4. In Sporting language of to-day, Don 
Pedro would have said : * You have a facer ^ Benedick.’ — Ed. 

108, 109. fathers her selfe] Steevens : This phrase is common in Dorsetshire : 
* Jack fathers himself is like his father — Staunton : There was a French saying 
to the same effect, older than Shakespeare’s time : * II pourtrait fort bien ^ son pfere.* 

1 14, 1 15. I wonder, etc.] Schlegel (ii, 166) : The exclusive direction of the 
raillery of Beatrice and Benedick against each other is in itself a proof of their grow- 
ing inclination. — Mrs Jameson (i, 131) : This assertion of Schlegel is not unlikely; 
and the same inference would lead us to suppose that this mutual inclination had 
commenced before the opening of the play. In the unprovoked hostility with which 
.she falls upon him in his absence, in the pertinacity and bitterness of her satire, 
there is certainly great argument that he occupies much more of her thoughts than 
she would have been willing to confess, even to herself. — Anon. [B/achaood^s 
Maga. April, 1833, p. 542): They are not in love; but Beatrice thinks him a 
proper man, and he is never an hour out of her head. — Lady Martin (p. 303) : 
The others turn away to converse together, but Beatrice, indignant at what she con- 
siders Benedick’s impertinent speech to her uncle, addresses him tauntingly. 

X 14. still] That is, always ; as in Shakespeare, passim. 



20 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act I, sc, i, 

Ben. What my deere Ladie Difdaine ! are you yet Ii6 
liuing ? 

Beat. Is it polTible Difdaine fhould die, while fhee 
hath fuch meete foode to feede it, as Signior Benedicke? 

Curtefic it felfe muft conuert to Difdaine, if you come in 120 
her prefence. 

Bene. Then is curtefie a turne-coate, but it is cer- 
taine I am loued of all Ladies, onely you excepted : and 
I would I could finde in my heart that I had not a hard 
heart,for truely I loue none. 125 

Beat. A deere happineffe to women, they would elfe 
haue beene troubled with a pernitious Suter, I thanke 
God and my cold blood, I am of your humour for that, I 
had rather heare my Dog barke at a Crow, than a man 
fweare he loues me. 130 

Be^te. God keepe your Ladifhip ftill in that minde, 
fo fome Gentleman or other fhall fcape a predeftinate 
fcratcht face. 133 

1 19. to feede it"] to feed on Ktly conj. 1 24. a Jiard] an hard Rowe. 

Huds. to feed her Ktly conj. Huds. 127. pernitious“\ pertinacious Grey 

conj. Wagner conj. 122.) 

133. fcratcht^ fcracht F^. 

1 16. Disdaine] Lloyd (p. 198) : Again at the masked ball it is his charge 
against her that she is ‘ disdainful,’ and disdain is a complaint that scarcely occurs 
but to a lover ; hence it is Hero’s charge, ‘ No, truly, Ursula, she is too disdainful, I 
know her spirits are as coy and wild,’ etc. [See Note on II, i, 267. — Ed.] 

120. conuert] W. A. Wright ; Here used intransitively, as in Rich, II: V, i, 
66 : *The love of wicked men converts to fear.’ The Geneva Version (1560) of i 
Kings, xiii, 33, is ‘Howbeit after this, leroboam conuerted not from his wicked 
way.’ 

123. you excepted] Abbott (§ 118) ; We find ‘excepted’ placed after a noun 
or pronoun, apparently as a passive participle, as in the present case, and, secondly, 
before, as a preposition, as in ‘ Always excepted my dear Claudio.’ — III, i, 98. The 
same is true of ‘ except ’ ; where the absence of inflections leaves it uncertain, in 
many instances, whether it be a preposition or a participle. 

126. A deere happinesse] W. A. Wright; That is, a precious piece of good luck. 

132. predestinate] For many other examples of verbs ending in -te, »/, and -</, 
which ‘ on account of their already resembling participles in their terminations, do 
do not add -ed in the participle,’ see Abbott, § 342. — W, A. Wright ; It might 
be maintained that these forms are derived from the I.atin form of the participle in 
-atus [see Earle’s Philology of the Eng, Tongue, § 309. — Ed.], but there is no evi- 
dence of this, and there are many instances of verbs ending in or / the participles 
of which drop the d of the termination. See * consummate,’ III, ii, 2. 



ACT I, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


21 


Beat. Scratching could not make it worfe,and 'twere 
fuch a face as yours were. 135 

Bene. Well, you are a rare Parrat teacher. 

Beat. A bird of my tongue, is better than a bead of 
your. 

Ben. I would my horfe had the fpeed of your tongue, 
and so good a continuer, but keepe your way a Gods 140 
name, I haue done. 

Beat. You alwaies end with a lades tricke, I know 
you of old. 143 

134. andUwere\if''twereVci^^yl^2XL. F^F^, Rowe, parrotdeacher 
an 'twere Rowe, Theob. Warb. et seq. seq. 

134. 135. As mnemonic lines, Warb. 138. yourl^ yours. QFf. 

135. yours were"} yours Coll. MS, 140. a Gods'] QFf, Rowe, Pope, Han. 

Huds. e God's Cap. Cam. Glo. Wh. ii. o' God's 

136. Parrat tear her] Parrat-teacher Theob. et cet. 

135. yours were] Collier (ed. ii) : In the MS ‘were’ is erased; . . . though 
it was certainly the language of Shakespeare’ s day ; therefore we preserve it. 

■ — Dyce (ed. iii) quotes this note of Collier, and then adds ; ‘The old text may be 
right ; but, I confess, I am not quite satisfied with it.’ — See Abbott (§ 301) where 
examples are given of the use of an obsolete subjunctive which is often used ‘ where 
any other verb would not be so used, and indeed where the subjunctive is unneces- 
sary or wrong, after though y etc., and in dependent clauses.’ — ^W. A. Wright : 
Cf. ‘ He were an excellent man that were made,’ etc., — II, i, 9. In Latin also the 
subjunctive is used for the indicative, and its presence is accounted for by the assimi- 
lating power of a neighbouring clause. [In A^. Qu. Ser. 5th, vol. xii, p. 244, ‘ F.’ 
suggests the plausible emendation : ‘ such a face as you wear' This, however, 
might imply that Beatrice refers merely to a passing expression, — the face that 
Benedick wore at that minute and not to his natural face. Dr Wright’s view is 
clearly correct, that ‘were’ here is attracted by ‘’twere’ in the preceding line. Dr 
Wright cites Latin usage ; the same assimilation or attraction takes place in Greek. 
See Goodwin’s Greek Moods and Tenses, §64. I am, therefore, not sure that the 
foregoing note from Abbott is strictly applicable to this second ‘were.’ — Ed.] 

140. continuer] Madden (p. 55): Now can the happy possessor of a good 
continuer (as a stayer was then called by horsemen) realise the force of the ditty, 
‘ As true as truest horse, that yet would never tire.’ 

142. lades tricke] Twice elsewhere {^AlVs Welt, IV, v, 64, and Tro. (Sr» Cres. 
II, i, 21) Shake.speare refers to a ‘jade’s trick,’ but in no instance can it be inferred 
what the particular trick is, if there be one. Perhaps the resources of a worn-out, 
old horse in the way of biting, stumbling, bucking, kicking are unsearchable ; and in 
literature the trick must be inferred from the context. Here, I think, Ben Jonson 
helps us ; W. A. Wright quotes from Every Man in his Humour, III, ii, p. 82, ed. 
Gifford, where Cob says : ‘ An you offer to ride me with your collar, or halter either, 
I may hap shew you a jade’s trick, sir.’ In Cash’s questioning reply, which seems 
to have escaped Dr Wright’s attention, we find the meaning we look for in Beatrice’s 
retort. ‘ O,’ says Cash, ‘ you’ll slip your head out of the collar ?’ As soon as Beatrice 



22 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act i, sc. i. 


' Pedro. This is the fumme of all: LeonatOyligmor C^au-- 
dio, ^nd fignior Benedzcke; my deere friend Leonato^ hath 145 
inuited you all, I tell him we (hall ftay here, at the leaft 


144. This is"] That is Q, Coll. Cam. 
Wh. ii. 

all: LeonatoI\ QFf, Rowe, Pope. 
all: Don John^ Ilan. Ran. alL — Leo- 
natOf — Coll, i, iii. all, Leonato, — Coll, 
ii. Cam. Rife, Wh. ii, Dtn. all: Leo- 


nato, — ^Theob. et cet. 

145. Benedicke Benediche, Q,Co\h 
ii, Cam. Wh. ii. Benedick, — Theob. 
et cet. 

146. tell hint] tell you 
Rowe i. 


has fairly collared Benedick he says ‘he is done,’ and by this jade’s trick, slips his 
head out of the collar, and Beatrice may talk to the empty air. Tieck, followed by 
Dr A. Schmidt, translates the phrase : ‘ mit lahmen Pferdegeschichten WiL- 
BRANDT translates it by: ‘mit lahmen Gaulswitzen Simrock by: ‘mit einem 
Stallknechtswitz Fran^ois-Victor Hugo by : ‘ une malice de haridellc MoNTfe- 
GUT by : ‘ une made de haridelle and Le Tourneur by : ‘ une epigramme k quatre 
jambes,’ which he explains in a footnote, as ‘ une comparison de bete, grossiere, 
bmtale.’ We have, therefore, no aid from foreign sources. — Ed. 

142. Fletcher (p. 251) : Here it must be admitted the lady’s object is evidently 
to talk the gentleman down, by dint not only of perseverance, but of poignant wit 
and merciless retort. She has no opportunity for argument, .were she ever so much 
inclined to use it ; for it is by anything but argument that Benedick himself carries 
on his verbal warfare against her sex ; in this matter, as Claudio says, he ‘ never 
could maintain his part, but in the force of his will.’ And this pertinacity of asser- 
tion in him is rendered more annoying by his rather obtrusive loquacity ; for this 
over-talkativeness, let us observe, is not merely attributed to him by Beatrice under 
the excitement of their ‘ skirmishes of wit ;’ we find it, in the opening of the second 
Act, coolly descanted on by herself and her uncle, and deliberately jilaced in con- 
trast with the taciturnity of Don Pedro’s brother. Beatrice, then, we repeat, if she 
will maintain the honour of her sex at all, has no choice but to fight Benedick with 
his own weapons of unsparing raillery ; and in the use of these, possessing, with 
superior exuberance of invention, the great advantage of ‘ having her quarrel just,’ 
she constantly proves herself an over-match for him. This is the kind of defeat 
most mortifying of all to a man of his character, — the more humiliating that he 
receives it from a woman, — the most irritating of all from the woman for whom he 
really entertains the like personal preference that she cherishes for him. Flence it is, 
that this ‘ merry -hearted, pleasant-spirited’ lady, as everybody else finds her to be, 
seems to him an incarnate fury, — as we find him declaring just after this first skirmish, 
in reply to Claudio’s commendations of Hero’s personal charms. 

144-146. This . . . all] The correct punctuation of these puzzling lines seems 
to have been given by Collier (ed. ii) who, after beginning with That of the Qto 
instead of ‘This,’ reads as follows: ‘That is the sum of all, Leonato. — Signior 
Claudio, and signior Benedick, my dear friend I.eonato hath invited you all.’ His 
note thereon is : ‘ Don Pedro, we must suppose, has been talking apart with Leonato ; ' 
and, ending with this sentence, turns to Claudio and Benedick to tell them the sub- 
ject and result of his conversation.’ This punctuation the Cambridge Editors 
adopted first in their own ed., and afterward in jthe Olofie ed., and this in turn has been 
followed by Rolfe, White, ii, Deighton, and, naturally, by W, A, Wright in 



Act I, SC. 1] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 23 

a moneth, and he heartily praies fome occafion may de- 147 
taine vs longer : I dare fweare hee is no hypocrite, but 
praies from his heart. 

Leon. If you fweare, my Lord, you ftiall not be for- 150 
fworne, let mce bid you welcome, my Lord, being re- 
conciled to the Prince your brother: I owe you all 
duetie. 

lohn. I thanke you, I am not of many words, but I 
thanke you. 155 

Leon. Pleafe it your grace leade on ? 


150, 15 1, f orfworne^... Lord y.,, broth- 
er r\ QFf (subs.), forsworn ; ...Lord y 
...brother; Rowe, forsworn. ...lordy... 
brother; Pope, forsworn. — ...lord,... 
brother ; Theob. ii, Warb. Johns, for- 


sworn. ...Lord ; ...brother y Han. Cap. et 
cet (subs.). 

1 51-153. let... duetie."] To Don John. 
Let... duty. Han. Cam. Wh. ii. 

158. Exeunt. Manet...] Exeunt all 
but... Rowe. 


the Clarendon ed. In a note the Cambridge Editors say ; We must suppose that 
during the “skirmish of wit” between Benedick and Beatrice, from line in to line 
143, Don Pedro and Leonato have been talking apart and making arrangements for 
the visit of the Prince and his friends, the one pressing his hospitable offers, and 
the other, according to the manners of the time, making a show of reluctance to 
accept them.’ I suppose that the majority of Editors, who follow Theobald, 
assume that Don Pedro is about to tell Claudio and Benedick of Leonato’ s proffered 
hospitality, and begins : ‘ Leonato — he then pauses, conscious that so much kind- 
ness deserves some recognition choicer than the bald, bare name, and so repeats the 
name prefixed with ‘ my dear friend.’ Hanmer changed the former ‘ Leonato’ into 
Don Johfty because, I suppose, he thought that Don Pedro would hardly have said 
that Leonato had invited them ‘all’ when only two, Claudio and Benedick, are 
mentioned. Collier, in his ed. iii, deserted the excellent punctuation of his ed. ii. 
—Ed. 

1 50-1 5 3. If . . . duetie] The modem punctuation is the result of a gradual evo- 
lution. Pope saw the need of a full stop after ‘ forsworne ’ ; Theobald indicated 
that the words following ‘forsworne’ were addressed to Don John by placing a dash 
before them, — a mode of indicating a change of address which has obtained in every 
critical edition of Shakespeare from the days of Theobald down to, but not including, 
the Cam. Ed. Hanmer, finally, gave the punctuation (see Text. Notes) which has 
been substantially adopted by all editors since Capell. — Ed. 

154. I thanke you] Sir J. Hawkins : The gloominess of Don John’s character 
is judiciously marked by making him averse to the common forms of civility. — W. A. 
Wright : It might be added that bluntness of manner does not of necessity indicate 
honesty of purpose. 

156. Please it] Abbott (§ 361); ‘Please’ is often found in the subjunctive, 
even interrogatively; ‘Please it you that I call.’ — Tam. of the Sh. IV, iv, i; 
‘ Please it your majesty Command me any service to her thither?’ — Lewis Lab. Lost, 
V, ii, 311. It then represents our modem ‘may it please,’ and expresses a modest 



24 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act i, sc. i. 


Pedro, Your hand LeonatOyVfQ will goe together. 157 

Exeunt, Manet Benedicke and Claudio, 

Clau, BenedickeydidH thou note the daughter of fig- 
nior Leonato? 160 

Bene, I noted her not, but I lookt on her, 

Clau, Is fhe not a modcft yong Ladie ? 

Bene, Doe you queftion me as an honcfl: man fliould 
doe, for my fimple true iudgcment ? or would you haue 
me fpeakc after my cuftome, as being a profeffed tyrant 165 
to their fexe ? 

Clau, No,I pray thee fpeake in fober iudgemcnt. 

Bene\ Why yfaith me thinks dice’s too low for a hie 
praifc,too browne for a fairc praife, and too little for a 
great praise, onely this commendation I can affoord her, 170 
that were dice other then die is, die were vnhandfome, 
and being no other, but as die is, I doc not like her. 1 72 

158. Manet] Manent Q. Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. 

Scene III. Pope, Han. i68. yfaith^ Ifaith F^. V faith 

166. thcir\ her Cap. conj. et seq. 

167. pray thec\ prethec Ff. prithee a hie'] QF2. an high F^F^, 

Rowe. Pope, Theob. i. pr*ythee Rowe, + . a high Cw^. et seq. 

doubt. [For the common omission of to before the infinitive ‘ lead,’ see Abbott, 
§ 349, if necessary.] 

163-166. A very noteworthy confession by Benedick that his raillery against 
‘their sexe,’ and, by inuendo, against marriage, is not genuine, but assumed; the 
subject was merely a fertile one, whereon to expend his exuberant wit. This seems 
to have been quite overlooked by all critics. I cannot recall any who have noticed 
this phase of Benedick’s complex character. — ^E d. 

164. simple] That is, frank, honest, sincere ; its classical meaning. 

165. tyrant] An extremely unusual use of the word, wherein there cannot be 
involved the idea of dominion, usurped or otherwise. The hatred felt for a tyrant 
is transferred to the objects of his tyranny. — El). 

168. me thinks] If needful, see Walker, Vers. p. 280; Abbott, § 297, ad fin,, 
or the notes on Ham. V, ii, 63, in this ed. It is to be borne in mind that ‘ thinks* 
here, comes from the Anglo-Saxon ihincan, to seem, to appear, and not from thencan, 
to think. 

168. hie praise, etc.] Aixen : That is, to be prai.sed as high, too brown to be 
praised as fair, and too little to be praised as tall (‘great * =grandis, French grande), 

172. like her] Thomas White (p. 29) : Signior Benedick reminds us of the 
man in the epigram: ‘ Non amo te, Sabidi, nec possum dicere quare,’etc. [Martial, 
i, 32. — the well-known epigram, which was imitated in the seventeenth century to fit 
Dr Fell, Bishop of Oxford, who died in 1686 : * I do not love thee. Doctor Fell,* 
etc. — ^E d.] 



ACT I, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


25 

173 


Clau. Thou think’ft I am in fport, I pray thee tell me 
truely how thou lik’ft her. 

Bene. Would you buie her, that you enquicr after 175 
her.? 

Clau. Can the world buie fuch a iewell ? 

Ben. Yea, and a cafe to put it into, but fpeake you this 
with a fad brow ? Or doe you play the flowting iackc,to 179 

173. think' JT^ thinkest Steev. Var. Cam. Sta. Ktly. 

Knt, Coll. Dyce, Cam. Sta. Ktly, Wh. ii. 175. buie'] buy Ff. 

174. hk'Ji] likest Steev. Knt, Dyce, 178. into] in too Han. 

178. Yea] Marsh (p. 578) : Our affirmative particles, and nay?e(i 6 .no 
were formerly distinguished in use. The distinction was that yea and nay were 
answers to questions framed in the affirmative ; as. Will he go? "Vea or Nay. But 
if the question was framed in the negative^ Will he not go ? the answer was Yes or 
No. . . . The etymological ground of this subtlety has not been satisfactorily made 
out. ... It may be doubted whether modern scholars would have detected the 
former existence of this obsolete nicely if it had not been revealed to us by Sir 
Thomas More’s criticism upon Tyndale, for neglecting it in his translation of the 
New Testament. That it was, in truth, too subtle a distinction for practice is shown 
by Sir Thomas More himself, for he misstates the rule when condemning Tyndale for 
the violation of it, and what is not less remarkable is the fact that Horne Tooke, 
Latham {Eng. Lang. cd. ii, p. 528), and Trench {Study of fVords, 156), have all 
referred to or quoted More’s observations, without appearing to have noticed the dis- 
crepancy between the rule, as he states it, and his exemplification of it. The passage 
will be found in The Confutacyon of Tyndales Aunswere made amto 1532, by Syr 
Thomas More, p. 448 of the collected edition of More’s works, 1357. [The passage 
will be found in the Century Diet. s. v. YcUy — with the error noted by Marsh of 
' No ' for Nay corrected in brackets. In the present line. Benedick answers correctly, 
but, as W. A. Wright remarks, ‘Shakespeare does not always observe this nile, 
and even in the earliest time.s, the usage appears not to have been consistent.’ For 
instance, in Mid N. D. IV, i, 213 (of this ed.) Demetrius asks ‘ Do not you thinke. 
The Duke was heere, and bid vs follow him?’ To which Hermia should have 
replied Yes, but instead, she says ‘Yea.’ — Ed.] 

179. sad] That is, serious, grave. 

179. flowting iacke] ‘Jack’ is a common term of contempt and reproach, of 
which a Concordance will furnish at least fifteen or sixteen examples. It is perhaps 
worth while to notice that the word had so completely lost all connection with a 
proper name that in the Folio, as well as in the Qto, it is spelled without a capital, 
while ‘Cupid’ and ‘Vulcan,’ ‘Hare-finder’ and ‘Carjjenter’ all have capitals, in 
both editions. Whatever difficulty there is in the whole passage lies in the word 
‘ flowting,’ which was first adequately explained by Staunton, who adduced a 
passage in Puttenham’s Arte of English Poesie, 1589, where an illustration is given 
of *Antiphrasis or the Broad floute,’ as follows ; ‘ Or when we deride by plaine and 
flat contradiction, as he that saw a dwarfe go in the streete said to his companion 
that walked with him : See yonder gyant : and to a Negro or woman blackemoore, 
in good sooth ye are a faire one, we may call it the broad floute.’ [p. 201, ed. Arber.] 



26 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act i, sc. i. 


tell vs Cupid is a good Hare-finder, and Vulcan a rare i8o 

Carpenter : Come, in what key fliall aman take you to 

goe in the fong ? 182 

181. aman\ Fj. 

The ‘ broad floute ’ in the present sentence is thus set forth by Tollet : * Do you 
scoff and mock in telling us that Cupid, who is blind, is a good hare-finder, which 
requires a quick eye-sight; and that Vulcan, a blacksmith, is a rare carpenter?’ Or as 
R. G. White tersely expresses it : ‘do you mean to tell us that the blind boy has 
the eyes of a greyhound, and that Vulcan’s forge and anvil are used to work wood?’ 
— ^W. A. Wrkjht : Etymologically, ‘floute’ is the same as ‘flute,’ used as a verb, 
to play the flute; and hence, metaphorically, to cajole , to wheedle. Kilian, in his 
Etymologicum 7 'eutonicae Linguae (1777), has ‘ Fluyten. Fistula canere, tibiis canere, 
dr* metaph. Mentiri, blande dicere.’ 

180. Hare-finder] W. A. Wright ; In ‘The Lawes of the Leash or Coursing’ 
as given in Markham’s Country Contentments^ 1^75, p. 42, we find ‘That he which 
was chosen Fewterer, or letter-loose of the Grey-hounds, should receive the Grey- 
hounds match [t] to mn together into his Leash, as soon as he came into the field, 
and to follow next to the Ilarc-fiiidcr till he came unto the Form.’ And in Ilarsnet’s 
Declaration of Popish Impostures y 1603, p. 64: ‘They that delight in hunting, . . . 
doe vse to haue an 11 are-finder, who setting the Hare before, doth bring them 
speedily to their game.’ — Madden (p. 172) : First comes the hare-finder, most 
venerable of institutions. For Arrian, writing some fourteen centuries before our 
diarist, tells us that in his day it was the custom to send out hare-findcis (rof'f /caroTT- 
T€{j(Tovrac) early in the moniing of the coursing days. To detect a hare in brown 
fallow or ru.ssct bracken needs sharp and practised eyes. — Schmidt {Azotes to Trans. 
p. 248) : All the explanations hitherto given of this passage are to me perfectly 
unintelligible, not tilone in themselves, but even more in reference to the circum- 
stances under which Benedict’s [jfr] speech is delivered. It is clear, that up to this 
point, Benedict has not supposed that Claudio has conceived a serious affection for 
Hero, and has answered Claudio’s remarks in his cu.stomary antagonistic style ; but, 
when Claudio terms the lady a jewel, then Benedict is puzzled. The train of 
thought in his reply may be, perhaps, as follows ; ‘ Art thou in earnest or art thou 
joking in thus speaking of indifferent things, nay, of stuff and nonsense which is 
neither here nor there ? Thou mighte.st just as well tell me that Cupid is a good 
hare-finder, and Vulcan a good carpenter. What have I to do with the god of Love 
or the god of Labour?’ — Ulrici {Photnote to the foregoing) : Benedict [sic] says 
in effect : Dost thou speak in earnest? Art thou really wounded by Cupid’s arrow? 
Or, as hitherto, is Cupid, as far as thou art concerned, only a Ilare-finder, who is 
dangerous only to wanton hares, and Vulcan a good carpenter who will provide 
Cupid not with brazen, mortal arrow-heads, but only with wooden buttshafts? 
That is, Is thy love an earnest passion or mere sensuousness and superficial incli- 
nation? [Later, in his Lexicon, Dr ScHMiDT suggests that the word .should be 
hair finder, one who finds fault easily (Cf. the German ein Haar finden) ; the 
excellent Lexicographer overlooked the fact, I fear, that Shakespeare was not 
German by birth, and that his idioms are not purely Teutonic ; hair finder demands, 
in this connection, a commentary more profound than, possibly, English research 
can supply. Dr Murray knows it not. — E d.] 



ACT I, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 27 

Clau. In mine eie, flic is the fweeteft Ladie that euer 183 
I lookt on. 

Bene, I can fee yet without fpeftacles, and I fee no 185 
fuch matter : there’s her cofin, and flie were not poffcft 
with a furic, exceedcs her as much in bcautie, as the firft 
of Maie doth the laft of December : but I hope you haue 
no intent to turne husband, haue you ? 

Clati, I would fcarce truft my felfe, though I had 190 
fwornc the contrarie, if Hero would be my wife. 

Beiie, I ft come to this? in faith hath not the world one 
man but he will weare his cap with fufpition ? Ihall I ne- 
ucr fee a batchellcr of three fcorc againc ? goe to yfaith, 
and thou wilt needes thruft thy necke into a yoke, weare 195 


183. etier /] / ever Pope, + . 

186. QFf, Rowe ii. //Pope, + . 
an Rowe i. et cet. 

187. with with such a Rowe ii, + . 
189. haue'] ^ have 

192. Jjf] Nt FjF^. Is ii Steev. 


192. this ? in faitii] QFf. this ? In 
faith Rowe i. this ; In faith Rowe ii. 
thisy in faith ? Pope, I- . this i* faith ? 
Cap. et seq. 

194. yfaith~\ P faith F^, Rowe et seq. 
195- and thoii\ if thou Pope, -I- . an 
thou Cap. et seq. 


1 81, 182. to goe in the song] Steevens : That i.s, to join with you in your 
song. 

184. I lookt on] To the ear, this is the .«iame as * ever eye lool^cd on just as in 
Hamlet : ‘He was a man, take him for all in all, Eye shall not look upon his like 
again,’ — an interpretation of both passages, which I prefer. — K d, 

185, 186. no such matter] That is, nothing of the kind: as in II, iii, 208; 
V, iv, 89 (Qto text). 

192. to this ? in faith] Clearly, Pope here supplied the proper punctuation by 
placing the interiogation after ‘faith’ ; and he was also wise in retaining the full 
form ‘ in faith,’ instead of the abbreviated /’ faith of Capell and of all subsequent 
editions. When both Qto and Folio agree in an unusual form of a common expletive 
we should be wary of changing it. Here, Benedick is speaking with that slow 
deliberative manner, dwelling on each syllable, indicative of unbounded astonish- 
ment, — a form of expression common enough in every-day life, in ‘ Up — on — my — 
word!’ ‘Well — I — de — dare I’ Thus here, we can see Benedick’s handsome, 
upturned eyes, as he slowly utters, with a serio-comic expression, as though appeal- 
ing to heaven : ‘ Is’t come — to — this — in — faith ?’ — Ed. 

193. his cap] Johnson : That is, subject his head to the disquiet of jealousy. — 
Henderson gives the following quotation from Painter’s Palace of Pleasure^ which, 
with Dr Johnson’s note, quite adequately explains the unsavoury allusion : * — all 
they that weare homes be pardoned to weare their capps vpon their heads.’ — p. 233 
(vol. i, fol. 229, ed. 1569, — ap. Wright. — The fifty-first Nouell, p. 384, ed. llasle- 
wood. ) 



28 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act i, Sc. i. 


the print of it, and figh away fundaies :looke, don Pedro 196 
is returned to feeke you. 

Enter don Pedro John the bajiard, 

Pedi\ What fecret hath held you here, that you fol- 
lowed not to Leonatoes ? 200 

Bened. I would your Grace would conftraine mee to 
tell. 

Pedro, I charge thee on thy allegeance. 

Ben, You hcarc, Count Clatidioj I can be fecret as a 
dumbe man, I would haue you thinke fo (but on my al- 205 
legiance, marke you this, on my allegiance) hee is in 


198. Scene IV. Pope, + . 

Enter... baflard.] Enter... Don 
John. Rowe. Re-enter... Don John. 
Pope. Re-enter Don Pedro. Han. 

200. Leonatoes] Leonato Rowe 
i. Leonato’ s house. Pope, L. Leonato’ s 
Rowe ii, Cap. et seq. 


204. can be] cannot be F^, Rowe, 
Pope. 

206. allegiance^ hee] QFf, Rowe i. 
allegiancCy he Rowe ii. allegiance: — he 
Theob. 4 , Cap. Mai. Steev. Var. Knt, 
Sta. allegiance. — He Johns. Ran. Coll, 
Dyce, Wh. Cam. Ktly. 


196. sigh away sundaies] Warburton ; A proverbial expression to signify 
that a man has no rest at all ; when Sunday, a day formerly of ease and diversion, 
was passed. so uncomfortably. — Steevens ; I cannot find this proverbial expression 
in any ancient book whatever. ... It most probably alludes to the strict manner in 
which the Sabbath was observed by the Puritans, who usually spent that day in sighs 
and gruntingSy and other hypocritical marks of devotion. — Halliwell : On the 
suspicion that a person who was sad on the only holyday of the week, would be 
always in low spirits, ‘ sigh away Sundays ’ may be equivalent to sigh always . — 
Wordsworth (p. 273) : Neither Warburton’ s nor Steevens’ s explanation appears 
satisfactory. It would be simpler to suggest that Sunday is the day of the week 
which is generally spent most domestically. — W. A. Wright : That is, when you 
will have most leisure to reflect on your captive condition. [And when, owing to the 
domesticity of the day, you cannot escape from your yokefellow. — Ed.] 

198. lohn the bastard] Again we have, po.ssibly, a reminiscence of the original 
play. Like ‘ Innogen ’ at the opening, this character has, in the present scene, noth- 
ing to do or say. Moreover, the substance of the conference between Claudio and 
Don Pedro was afterward reported to Don John by Borachio. Don John has been, 
therefore, properly omitted in the stage direction here, since the days of Capell. — E d. 

204. secret as] For other examples where the first as is omitted, see, if needful, 
Abbott, § 276. 

205, 206. (but , . . allegiance)] I cannot say that the changes here in the 
punctuation, adopted by the various editors (see Text. Notes') have been great 
improvements on the old text. There may well be a full stop after ‘ Count Claudio.’ 
But as to the words enclosed in this parenthesis, whatever the punctuation, they are 
merely the comic iteration by Benedick that he is forced to violate confidence ; it is 
like Falstaff’s reiterated ‘upon compulsion.’ — E d. 



ACT I, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 29 

loue, With who ? now that is your Graces part : marke 207 
how fhort his anfwere is, with Hero^ Leonatoes fhort 
daughter. 

Clau. If this were fo,fo were it vttred. 210 

Bened, Like the old tale, my Lord,it is not fo,nor ’twas 
not fo : but indeede,God forbid it (hould be fo. 212 

207. who?'\ whom? Ff, Rowe, +, 210. Clau.] Don Pedro. Huds. 

Coll. were it vttred J it were uttered 

208. his] the Coll. MS (‘injuriously,* Rowe i. 
says Coll.). 


207. With who ?] For examples of this frequent neglect of inflection, see AniiOTT, 
§ 274. ‘ Who ’ for whom again occurs in V, i, 233. 

210. If . . . vttred.] Johnson : This and the three next speeches, I do not well 
understand; there seems something omitted relating to Hero’s consent, or to 
Claudio’s marriage, else I know not what Claudio can wish ‘not to be otherwise.’ 
Perhaps it may be better thus : ‘ Claud, If this were so, so were it. Bene, Uttered 
like the old tale, etc.’ Claudio gives a sullen answer, ‘if it is so, so it i.s.* Still 
there seems something omitted which Claudio and Pedro concur in wishing. — 
Steevens : Claudio, evading at first a confession of his passion, says, if I had 
really confided such a secret to him, yet he would have blabbed it in this manner. 
[Steevens is right in his interpretation of the first half of Claudio’s speech, but he 
fails, I think, in interpreting the second half. ‘If it be that I am in love,’ says 
Claudio in effect, ‘my answer to your question of “with whom,” must be even just 
as short as Benedick has given it.’ — E d.] 

21 1 , old tale] Blakeway [whose ‘integrity,’ says Halliwell, ‘is unimpeach- 
able.’] ; This ‘old tale’ maybe, perhaps, still extant in some collections of such 
things, or Shakespeare may have heard it, (as I have, related by a great aunt,) in his 
childhood ; ‘Once upon a time, there was a young lady (called Lady Mary in the 
story), who had two brothers. One summer they all three went to a country-seat of 
theirs, which they had not before visited. Among the other gentry in the neighbour- 
hood, who came to sec them, was a Mr Fox, a bachelor, with whom they, particu- 
larly the young lady, were much pleased. He used often to dine with them, and 
frequently invited Lady Mary to come and see his house. One day that her brothers 
were absent elsewhere, and she had nothing better to do, she determined to go 
thither, and accordingly set out unattended. When she arrived at the house and 
knocked at the door, no one answered. At length she opened it, and went in. 
Over the portal of the hall was written, “ Be bold, be bold, but not too bold.” She 
advanced ; over the staircase, the same inscription. She went up ; over the entrance 
of a gallery, the same. She proceeded ; over the door of a chamber, ‘ Be bold, be 
bold, but not too bold, lest that your heart’s blood should run cold.” She opened 
it ; it was full of skeletons, tubs full of blood, etc. She retreated in haste ; coming 
down stairs, she saw, out of a windo\v, Mr Fox advancing towards the house, with 
a drawn sword in one hand, while with the other he dragged along a young lady by 
her hair. I^ady Mary had just time to slip down and hide herself under the stairs, 
before Mr Fox and his victim arrived at the foot of them. As he pulled the young 
lady up stairs, she caught hold of one of the bannisters with her hand, on which 



30 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act I, sc. i. 


[21 1 . old tale ... it is not so, etc.] 

was a rich bracelet. Mr Fox cut it oiF with his sword : the hand and bracelet fell 
into Lady Mary’s lap, who then contrived to escape unobserved, and got home safe 
to her brothers’ house. After a few days Mr Fox came to dine with them as usual 
(whether by invitation, or of his own accord, this deponent saith not). After dinner, 
when the guests began to amuse each other with extraordinary anecdotes, Lady Mary 
at length said she would relate to them a remarkable dream she had lately had. I 
dreamed,” said she, *‘that as you, Mr Fox, had often invited me to your house, I 
would go there one morning. When I came to the house, I knocked, etc., but no 
one answered. When I opened the door, over the hall was written, ‘ Be bold, be 
bold, but not too bold.’ But,” said she, turning to Mr Fox and smiling, “it is not 
so, nor it was not so ;” then she pursues the rest of the story, concluding at every turn 
with, “ It is not so, nor it was not so,” till she comes to the room full of dead bodies, 
when Mr Fox took up the burden of the tale, and said, “ It is not so, nor it was not 
so, and God forbid it should be so which hfe continues to repeat at every subse- 
quent turn of the dreadful story, till she comes to the circumstance of his cutting off 
the young lady’s hand, when, upon his saying, as u.sual, “It is not so, nor it was 
not so, and God forbid it should be so,” Lady Mary retorts, “ But it is so, and it was 
so, and here the hand I have to show,” at the same time producing the hand and 
bracelet from her lap : whereupon, the guests drew their swords, and instantly cut 
Mr Fox into a thousand pieces.’ — Collier, Dyce, and Halliwkll refer to The 
Faerie Queene, Bk III, Canto II. But there is nothing in Spenser corresponding to 
Blakeway’ s story, except the inscriptions: ‘Be boldc, be bolde,’ and ‘Be not too 
bold,’ which ‘faire Britomart’ sees over the doors in certain rooms in Busirane’s 
castle. Halliwell further observes that ‘ other traditional tales of a like description 
[to Blakeway’ s] have been printed, but there are reasons for suspecting the authen- 
ticity of one purporting to relate to the Baker family, and which is very similar to 
the above narrative, and the others are not sufficiently illustrative to deserve inser- 
tion.’ In his Memoranda^ 1879 (p. 47), he prints an unpublished letter, written by 
Blakeway, giving an interesting account of the source whence he derived his tradi- 
tional story. ‘This letter, dated from Shrewsbury, December the 29th, 1807, has no 
superscription to indicate to whom it was addressed. It commences as follows : 
“ Your letter found me at Kinlet in the very act of removing into winter quarters 
here, the bustle attending which has prevented me from answering it till now. I am 
glad my old story amused you, and I dare .say what you mention is very tine, that it 
has received several modern sophistications in the course of its traditional descent, each 
narratrix accommodating it to the manners of her age. You are the be.st judge 
whether it is likely to have been of Italian origin, but you are perfectly right in your 
remark that the relater has inserted familiar names of the county, for the family of 
Fox, not the least akin, I believe, to the deceased orator of that name, was formerly 
a very opulent and widely extended one in Shropshire. In answer to your enquiry 
when my great aunt, from whom I had the story, died, I have the pleasure to inform 
you that that truly venerable old lady is still living, and at the advanced age of 92, 
for she was baptized, as appears by a copy of the register now before me, July 26th, 
1715, in the full enjoyment of her mental faculties. From the history of our family 
I think it likely that she may have received the tale from persons born in Charles the 
Second’s time, but when I see her next I will ask her if she can recollect.” ’ 

214. otherwise] Steevens : When Benedick says, * God forbid it*should be so,* 



ACT I, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


31 


Qlau, If my paflion change not ftiortly,God forbid it 213 
fhould be otherwife. 

Pedro, Amen, if you loue her, for the Ladie is verie 215 
well worthie. 

Clau, You fpeake this to fetch me in, my Lord. 

Pedr. By my troth I fpeake my thought. 

Clan. And in faith, my Lord, I fpoke mine. 

Bened, And by my two faiths and troths, my Lord, I 220 
fpeake mine. 

Clau, That I loue her, I feele. 

Pedr. That flic is worthie,! know. 

Bened, That I neither feele how fliee fhould be lo- 
ued , nor know how flice^fliould be worthie, is the 225 
opinion that fire cannot melt out of me, I will die in it at 
the flake. 

PcdrIYhou ivaft euer an obflinate heretique in the de- 
fpight of Beautie. 

Clan, And neuer could maintaine his part, but in the 230 
force of his will. 

221. fpeake] /peak F^F^. /poke Q, Dyce, Cam. Sta, Ktly, Wli. ii. 

Cap. Steev. Var. Knt, Coll. Coll. MS, 228. heretique] Ileretick F^F^. 

i. e. God forbid he should even wish to marry her, — Claudio replies, God forbid I 
should not wish it. 

217. to fetch me in] Bradley (//. E. D, s. v.) gives two examples of the use 
of this phrase in the sense of to ckcafy viz : * they were all fethered of one winge to 
fetch in young Gentlemen by commodities vnder the colour of lending of mony.* — 
Greene’s Quippe for an Vpstart Courtier, 1592 [p. 276, ed. Grosart] ; and ‘Who 
will be drawne at Dice and Cards to play. . . . And be fetch’d in for all that’s in 
his purse.’ — RowLand’s More Knaues Yet? [p. 33, ed. Hunterian Club]. This is 
rather too uncivil a meaning for the phrase to bear in the present connection ; but it 
suggests to beguile, to overreach, or, as W. A. Wright has it : to entrap, — Ed, 

221. speake] I see no urgent need of changing this to spoke of the Qto. Collier. 
says that spoke is preferable because ‘ Benedick is referring to what he has already 
said so does Don Pedro when he says ‘ I speak my thought,’ and yet no one has 
proposed to change Don Pedro’s ‘speak’ to the past tense. By using the present 
tense, Benedick makes his assertion a general truth, as regards the expression of his 
own feelings, which, as every one about him knew, was a comical untruth, especially 
when it needed the asseveration of faiths and troths.’ — ^E d. 

228, 229. heretique . . . Beautie] Don Pedro does not mean that in the doc- 
trine of despising beauty Benedick was a heretic, on the contrary he was therein 
extremely orthodox, but that by showing liis contempt and scorn for beauty he was a 
heretic to the predominant faith, which worships beauty. — Ed. 

.231. force of bis will] Warburton ; Alluding to the definition of a heretic, in 



32 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [ACT I, sc. i. 


BenJThat a woman conceiued me, I thanke her : that 232 
fhe brought mee vp, I likewife giue her moft humble 
thcinkes : but that I will haue a rechate winded in my 234 

234. reckate\ recheate Rowe ii. 

the schools. — R. G. White; Warburton’s professional eye detected the allusion 
here to heresy, as defined in scholastic divinity ; according to which it was not 
merely heterodox opinion, but a wilful adherence to such opinion. The subject was 
a familiar one in Shakespeare’s day. — W. A. Wright : That is, by wilful obstinacy ; 
not by argument, or because he believed what he said. [Wright’s interpretation of 
‘wilful obstinacy’ is consistent with Warburton’s explanation. The Will is an essen- 
tial element of heresy. Thus Milton says ; ‘ Heresie is in the Will and choice 
profestly against Scripture ; error is against the Will, in misunderstanding the 
Scripture after all sincere endeavours to understand it rightly ; Hence it was said 
well by one of the Ancients, “Err I may, but a Heretick I will not be.” ’ — Of 
True Religion^ p. 409, ed. Mitford. — ^E d.] 

234. rechate] Hanmer i^Gloss.') : This is a particular lesson upon the horn to 
call dogs back from the scent ; from the old French word Rccet^ which was used in 
the sarae^ sense as Retraite, — Johnson : That is, I will wear a horn on my forehead 
which the huntsman may blow. — Steevens ; So, in The Returne from Parnassus : 
* Amoretto* ...when you blow the death of your Fox in the field or couert, then you 
must sound 3. notes, with 3. windes, and recheat ; marke you sir, vpon the same 
with 3. windes. Academico, I pray you sir — Amorcito, Now sir, when you come 
to your stately gate, as you sounded recheat before, so now you must sound the 
releefe three times.’ — [II, v, 848, ed. Macray.] Again, in The Book of Huntynge^ 
etc, bl. 1 . n. d. : ‘ Blow the whole rechate with three wyndes, the first wynde one 
longe and six shorte. The second wynde two shorte and one longc. The thred 
wynde one longe and two shorte.’ — Nares gives an instance of its use as a verb 
from Drayton : ‘ Rechating with his home, which then the Hunter cheeres,’ etc. — 
Polyolbton^ xiii [p. 305, ed. 1748]. — ^W. A. Wright; In the Qto and Folio it is 
spelt as it was no doubt pronounced. ... It is impossible to say precisely what the 
word means, and its etymology is only guessed at. Blount, in his Glossographiay 
suggests that it is from the Fr. rechcrcher, ‘because oftentimes, when they wind this 
lesson, the Hounds have lost their game, or hunt a game unknown.’ Skinner 
{^Etym. Ling. Anglic.) derives it from the Fr. racket, redemptio, rachetcr, redimere. 
. . . One of the forms given by Godefroy i^Dict. de V ancienne Lang. Fran.) for 
the old verb receter is rechaiier, and for recet he gives rechet and rechief, so that 
Hanmer may be on the right track ; but there is no evidence that receter and recet 
were hunting terms. Among the ‘ Antient Hunting Notes’ given in The Gentle- 
fnah‘s Recreation, we find ‘ A Recheat when the Hounds Hunt a right Game,’ ‘ The 
Double Recheat,’ ‘The Treble or Hewets Recheat,’ ‘A New Warbling Recheat 
for any Chace,’ ‘ The Royal Recheat,’ ‘ A Running Recheat with very quick time,’ 
and ‘A Recheat or Farewell at parting.’ In fact a recheat appears to be almost 
anything but what the books describe it as being. . . . See also the old English 
poem Sir Gawayne and the Green Knight, 1 . 1 91 1. [Halliwell gives the notes for 
‘The Rechate, with three winds’ from the Appendix to Turbervile’s Book of Hunt- 
ing, ed. 1611; and also an account of the recheats from Holme’s Academy of 
Armory, 1638, as follows ; * A Recheat, when they hunt a right game,— ton-ton- 



ACT I, SC. i.]' MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 33 

forehead, or hang my bugle in an inuifible baldricke,all 235 
women ftiall pardon me: becaufe I will not do them the 
wrong to miftruft any, I will doe my felfe the right to 
truft none : and the fine is, (for the which I may goe the 
finer) I will liue a Batchellor. 

Pedro. I fliall fee thee ere I die, looke pale with loue. 240 
Bene. With anger, with fickneffe, or with hunger, 
my Lord, not with loue ; proue that euer I loofe more 
blood with loue, then I will get againe with drinking, 243 

24I~246. As mnemonic lines, Warb, i, 165. luvenes dissoluti vires suas, lux- 

242. that euer /] that I Rowe i. uriosis moribus enervatas, bibendo renov- 

243. loue'\ In sens. obsc. ut ait Douce ariputabant; ut idem insuper addit. — Ed. 

tavern tone, ton-ton-tavern ton-ton-tavern ton-ton-tavem tavern tavern tavern,’ and 
so on, ‘dizzying the arithmetic* in nearly nine more lines on Halliwell’s broad, folio 
page of continuous tote s and tavern^ 5 which those who list may look out and read, — 
to their edification and further comprehension, let us hope, of Benedick’s meaning. 
—Ed.] 

235* inuisible baldricke] Staunton : Benedick’s meaning appears to be, I will 
neither be a wittol, glorying in my shame, nor a poor cuckold who must endure and 
conceal it. — Murray (H. E. D.)i ‘Baldric’ is identical in sense with MHG. 
balderich^ palderich (Schade) ; also with OP\ baldreiy baudrei (in later Fr. baudroy)^ 
and with med. Lat. baldringus. The origin and history of the word are alike 
obscure. . . . Its meanings are: i. A belt or girdle, usually of leather and richly 
ornamented, worn pendant from one shoulder across the breast and under the oppo- 
site arm, and used to support the wearer’s sword, bugle, etc.; 2. The zodiac, viewed 
as a gem-studded belt ; 3. A chain for the neck, necklace, etc. 

238. the fine] That is, the conclusion. 

239. Batchellor] Anon. (^Blackwood^ s Maga. April, 1833, p. 543) : When you 
hear a man perpetually dinning it into your ears that he is determined to die a 
bachelor, you set him down at once as a liar. You then begin, if he be not simply 
a blockhead, to ask yourself what he means by forcing on you such unprovoked 
falsehood, and you are ready with an answer — ‘ He is in love.* He sees his danger. 
A wild beast, not far off, is opening its jaws to devour him. Why must Benedick 
be ever philosophizing against marriage ? The bare, the naked idea of it haunts him 
like a ghost. In spite of all his bravado he knows he is a doomed man. 

240. I shall , . . loue] Walker {^Crit. i, 2 and Vers, 237) : The expression 
seems poetical ; I suspect that we have here a line of verse, and that we ought to 
read ^ Shall or perhaps Til, [This appears to be one of several instances which are 
to be found in Walker where he fails to appreciate, to the full, that Shakespeare, who 
must have almost thought in verse, frequently falls into rhythmic prose. In this 
scene of continuous prose, and properly prose from the very nature and style of the 
conversation, a solitary line of verse would be, not merely out of place, but genu- 
inely discordant. There is another striking instance of this oversight on Walker’s 
part in the third scene of this Act, line 18, where Walker would convert a long prose 
speech of Conrade into verse. — Ed.] 

244. loue . . , penne] Sighs due to any cause, from a lover’s melancholy 
3 



34 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act i, sc. i. 


picke out mine eyes with a Ballet-makers penne, and 
hang me vp at the doore of a brothel-houfe for the figne 245 
of blinde Cupid. 

Pedro, Well, if euer thou dooft fall from this faith, 
thou wilt proue a notable argument. 

Bene. If I do, hang me in a bottle like a Cat,& fhoot 249 

244. Ballet-^ Bqllad- Q. 247. dooJf\ doji Q. dd Ji 

up to heavy grief, were supposed to consume, or drink, the blood. There is evidently, 
in this sentence, both in its loss of blood and in its ballad-making, a parallelism to the 
typical lover in Jaques’s * Seven Ages’: ‘And then the lover, Sighing like furnace, 
with a woful ballad Made to his mistress’ eyebrow.’ The ‘Ballet-maker’ is the 
lover, and the loss of blood is due to his sighs. — E d. 

244. Ballet-makers penne] Halliwell : In extreme contempt at such a 
worthless instrument, not, as Warburton says, because ‘ the bluntness of it would 
make the execution extremely painful.’ Edwards well observes that ‘the humour 
lies, not in the painfulness of the execution, but the ignominy of the instrument and 
the use he was to be made of after the operation.’ 

247. this faith] Here ‘ this ’ is the emphatic word. Don Pedro has just pro- 
nounced Benedick an obstinate heretic in reference to the worship of beauty, and he 
now taunts him with a possible fall from his professed faith in regard to love. — E d. 

248. notable argument] Johnson ; An eminent subject for satire. [Not neces- 
sarily ‘for satire,’ though in the present case very probable. See II, iii, ii : ‘the 
argument of his owne scorn.’ — E d.] 

249. bottle] W. A. Wright: Probably a twiggen bottle i^Oth. II, iii, 152), or 
wicker basket. 

249. bottle like a Cat] Steevens : In some counties in England, a cat was 
formerly closed up with a quantity of soot in a wooden bottle (such as that in which 
shepherds carry their liquor,) and was su.spended on a line. He who beat out the 
bottom as he ran under it, and was nimble enough to escape the contents, was 
regarded as the hero of this inhuman diversion. In WarreSy or the Peace is bi'oken^ 
bl. 1., we find: ‘ — arrowes flew faster than they did at a catte in a basket, when 
Prince Arthur, or the Duke of Shoreditch, strucke up the drumme in the field.’ 
In a Poem, however, called Cornv-copuSy PasquiVs Night-cap : or^ Antidot for the 
Head-achcy 1612, the following passage occurs: ‘Which in a cart (as theeues to 
hanging ride) Are thither brought by Archers in great pride. Guarded with gunners, 
bil men, and a rout Of Bow men bold, which at a cat doe .shoot’ [p. 52, Grosart’s 
Reprint]. Again : ‘ Nor on the top a Cat- Amount was framed. Or som wilde beast 
which nere before was tamed,’ etc. [Ib.] These quotations prove that it was the 
custom to shoot at factitious as well as real cats. — Douce : This practice is still kept 
up [anno 1807] at Kelso, in Scotland, where it is called : Cat-in- barrel. See a 
description of the ceremony in an account of Kelso, 1789, by one Ebenezer Lazarus, 
who has interlarded his book with scraps of puns and other poetry. Speaking of this 
sport, he says : ‘ The cat in the barrel exhibits such a farce, That he who can relish 
it is worse than an ass.’ [This description by Lazarus is given in full in Brand’s 
Popular Antiquities, iii, 39 (Bohn’s ed.). It is needless here to repeat the details 
of the brutal sport wherein the cat was not shot, but beaten to death. It is enough 



ACT I. SC. L] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 35 

at me, and he that hit’s me, let him be clapt on the flioul- 250 
der, and cal’d Adam. 

251. Adam] a dab (i. e. ‘dabster^) Bishop, ap. Nichols lUust. ii, 298. 


to know that Benedick refers to a genuine custom, of which the details were suf- 
ficiently familiar. Tikck says that in 1793, he saw ‘in Ntimberg, at the corner of 
a street a bucket of blood suspended from a rope, under which two boys dragged a 
third boy on a sled, who struck at the bucket as he passed under it.’ Schmidt 
( Trans, p. 250) suggests that the game is, perhaps, connected with the worship of 
Trees of Blood and SacriBcc (cf. Mone, Geschichte des Heidenthums^ ii, 199, and 
Grimm’s Mythologie, 48) whereof Leo {^Geschichte Italiensy i, 62) reports a survival 
in the Dukedom of Benevento. — Ed.] 

251, Adam] Theobald is the earliest to suggest that the reference here is to 
Adam Bell, a famous archer. Percy (i, 129): Adam Bell, Clym of the Clough, 
and William of Cloudesly '""re three noted outlaws, whose skill in archery rendered 
them formerly as famous in the North of England, as Robin Hood and his fellows 
were in the middle counties. Their place of residence was in the forest of Engle- 
wood, not far from Carlisle. . . . Our northern archers were not unknown to their 
southern countrymen. [Bishop Percy then goes on to say that ‘ Theobald rightly 
observes’ that ‘Adam’ (in the present passage) means Adam Bell ; and in this view 
all subsequent commentators, except Collier, have either agreed, or been non-com- 
mittal. Collier expresses a doubt ; in his ed. i, he says the allusion may be to 
Adam Bell, or * perhaps the meaning only is that the person who hit the bottle was 
to be called, by way of distinction, the first many i. e. Adam.’ In his ed. ii, he 
adopted in his text, from his Corrected Folio, ‘he that first hits me.’ Hunter 
(i, 245) asserts that Adam Bell was ‘a genuine personage of history ;’ and believes 
that he has had ‘ the good fortune to recover from a very authentic source of infor- 
mation some particulars of this hero of our popular minstrelsy, which shew distinctly 
the time at which he lived.’ Hunter’s particulars are as follows : King Henry the 
P'ourth, by letters, enrolled in the Exchequer, in Trinity Term, in the seventh year 
of his reign, and bearing date the 14th day of April, granted to one Adam Bell 
an annuity of 4/. loj., issuing out of the fee-farm of Clipston, in the forest of Sher- 
wood, together with the profits and advantages of the vesture and herbage of the 
garden called the Halgarth, in which the manor-house of Clipston is situated. Now, 
as Sherwood is noted for its connection with archery and may be regarded also as the 
patria of much of the ballad-poetry of England, and the name Adam Bell is a 
peculiar one, this might be almost of itself sufficient to shew that the ballad had a 
foundation in veritable history. But we further find that this Adam Bell violated his 
allegiance, by adhering to the Scots, the king’s enemies ; whereupon this grant was 
virtually resumed, and the sheriff of Nottinghamshire accounted for the rents which 
would have been his. . . . The mention of his adhesion to the Scots leads us to the 
Scottish border, and will not leave a doubt in the mind of the most sceptical that we 
have here one of the persons, some of whose deeds (with some poetical licence per- 
haps) are come down to us in the words of one of our popular ballads. ’ Child 
(Pt. V, p. 21 ) thus disposes of the bearing on the ballad of Hunter’s authentic 
sources of information : ‘ Hunter’s points are, that an Adam Bell had a grant from 
the proceeds of a farm in the forest of Sherwood, that Adam Bell is a peculiar name, 
and that his Adam Bell adhered to the king’s enemies. To be sure, Adam Bell’s 



36 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act i, sc. i. 

Pedro. Well, as time fliall trie : In time the fauage 252 
Bull doth beare tne yoake. 

252. as iime\ as the time Rowe. Cap. 

252, 253. In time.,.yoake\ As verse, 253. tne’\ F^. 

retreat in the ballad is not Sherwood, in Nottinghamshire, but Englishwood or 
Inglewood in Cumberland. . . . But it would be captious to insist upon this. . . . 
The historical Adam Bell was granted an annuity, and forfeited it for adhering to the 
king’s enemies, the Scots; the Adam Bell of the ballad was outlawed for breaking 
the game-laws, and in consequence came into conflict with the king’s officers, but 
never adhered to the king’s enemies, first or last ; received the king’s pardon ; was 
made yeoman of the queen’s chamber ; dwelt with the king ; and died a good man. 
Neither is there anything peculiar in the name Adam Bell. Bell was as well known 
a name on the borders as Armstrong or Graham. There is record of an Adam Arm- 
strong and an Adam Graham ; there is a Yorkshire Adam Bell mentioned in the 
Parliamentary Writs (II, 508, 8 and 17 Edward II.) a hundred years before 
Hunter’s annuitant ; a contemporary Adam Bell, of Dunbar, is named in the 
Exchequer Rolls of Scotland under the years 1414, 1420 (IV, 198, 325) ; and the 
name occurs repeatedly at a later date in the Registers of the Great Seal of Scotland.’ 
Halliwell has gathered from nine different sources extracts wherein Adam Bell in 
connection with archery is mentioned, and doubtless the number can be increased, but 
in every instance the full name, Adam Bell, is given, never the Christian name alone, 
as is given by Benedick. This fact, together with the fact stated by Child that there 
were others of that name who were not archers, constrains me to believe that in 
Benedick’s * Adam ’ we have not yet discovered the true allusion. It is barely pos- 
sible that * Adam ’ might be a generic term for an unrivalled archer, but of this there 
is no evidence. Moreover, it is not of Adam Bell’s skill that the greatest feats of 
archery are tpld ; he was not even the most skillful of his three fellow-outlaws. It 
was William of Cloudesly, who cleft the hazel rods at twenty score paces ; it was 
William of Cloudesly who shot the apple on his son’s head. It may, after all, turn 
out that Collier’s face was set in the right direction. — Ed.] 

252. time shall trie] Cf. As You Like IV, i, 190 : ‘Time is the olde lustice 
that examines all such offenders, and let time try.’ 

252, 253. In time . . . yoake] This is the first line, somewhat altered, of the 
Forty-seventh ‘ Loue Passion’ of Watson in his Ecatompathia^ 15^2, p. 83, Arber’s 
Reprint. The original reads: ‘In time the Bull is brought to weare the yoake.* 
Steevens notes that the line occurs also in Kyd’s Spanish Tragedy ^ II, i, p. 36, ed. 
Hazlitt-Dodsley, again somewhat varied, ‘In time the savage bull sustains the 
yoke.’ From the fact, that Shakespeare’s line varies from both, it is clear that he 
quoted from memory, and from the use of the word ‘ savage ’ I am afraid that he 
recalled Kyd’s line and not the exquisite original Love Passion^ which is almo.st beau- 
tiful enough to have been his own composition. In the Remarks (probably by Watson 
himself, although written in the third person) prefixed to this Forty-seventh Love 
Passion, it is said that ‘ the two first lines are an imitation of Seraphine, Sonnetto, 103, 
“Col tempo el Villanello al giogo mena El Tor si fiero, e si crudo animale,” ’ etc. 
Halliwell quotes Ovid, Tristia, IV, vi, i : ‘ Tempore ruricolae patiens fit taurus 
aratri,’ (it is not easy to see why Halliwell did not add the next line : ‘ Praebet et 
incurvo colla premenda iugo.’) and Ovid, Ars Amat, I, 471 : ‘Tempore difficiles 
* 



ACT I. SC. 1] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


37 


Bene. The fauage%ull may, but if euer the fenfible 
Benedkke beare it, plucke off the bulles homes, and fet 255 
them in my forehead, and let me be vildely painted, and 
in fuch great Letters as they write, heere is good horfe 
to hire ; let them fignifie vnder my figne, here you may 
fee Benedicke the married man. 

Clau. If this ftiould euer happen, thou wouldft bee 260 
home mad. 

Pedro. Nay, if Cupid haue not fpent all his Quiuer in 
Venice, thou wilt quake for this fliortly. 

Behe. I looke for an earthquake too then. 264 

254. wrtEj,] Ashbee Facsimile. 257,258. heere here] Here Here 

256. vildely] vildly QF^, Rowe i. 

vilely Rowe ii. 257. is good] is a good \. 

veniunt ad aratra iuvenci,’ in which passages, the origin of Seraphino’s lines maybe 
possibly found. — E d. 

261. home mad] Halliwell: ‘So th’ horn-mad bull must keep the golden 
fleeces,’ Optick Glasse of Humors^ 1639. ‘And then for horne-mad citizens, he 
cures them by the dozens, and we live as gently with our wives as rammes with 
ewes,’ Brome’s Anlipodesy.164.0. One of the tracts of Taylor the Water-Poet is 
entitled, Grand Fluids Remonstrance^ or the Devil Hom-mady 1642. ‘Nay, faith, 
’twould make a man horne-mad,’ Homer h la Mode^ 1665. ‘Some are horn-mad, 
and some are Bible-mad,’ Epilogue to Neglected Virtucy 1696. The phrase con- 
tinued long in use, an instance of it occurring in Poor Robin's Almanack for 1741. — 
W. A. Wright : That is, raving mad j mad as a mad bull, according to the common 
explanation. But ‘ horn ’ may be a corruption of the Scottish and North-country 
word ‘ hams ’ for brains, akin to the German Hirny whence Hirnwuthy frenzy. 
Another form is ‘ horn-wood.’ Whatever the etymology, there is no doubt the word 
was always understood in the sense given above. Cf. Merry Wives y III, v, 155 ; 
‘ If I have horns to make one mad, let the proverb go with me : I’ll be horn -mad.* 
And Com. of Err. II, i, 57 ; Dro, E. Why, mistress, sure my master is horn-mad. 
Adr. Horn-mad, tljou villain ! Dro. E, I mean not cuckold-mad ; But, sure, he is 
stark mad.’ 

262. 263. Quiuer , . . quake] Possibly, by the association of sound and sense, 
the former word suggested the latter. — Ed. 

263. Venice] Warburton : All modem writers agree in representing Venice in 
the same light as the ancients did Cypras. — ^Capell : Venice was in Shakespeare’s 
time, and is now, of such celebrity for its dissolute gallantries, that there is small 
occasion for extracts from any writer to prove the fitness of making that city the 
exhauster of all Cupid’s ‘quiver.’ [See Coryat’s Crudities y i, 38, ed. 1776.] 

264. I looke] I have but little doubt that there is here a case of absorption, and 
that Benedick really says ‘I’// look.’ Grey (i, 132) calls attention to the local 
colouring imparted by this reference to earthquakes, to which Sicily is subject. But 
this is doubtful ; it is not their frequency, but their infrequency which is the point. 

‘ Then,’ the last word in the line, is emphatic, at that same time, — ^Ed. 



38 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act i, sc. i. 


Pedro. Well, you will temporize with tiie houres, in 265 
the meane time, good Signior Benedicke^ repaire to Leo- 
natoesy commend me to him, and tell him I will not faile 
him at fupper, for indeede he hath made great prepara- 
tion. 

Bene. I haue almoft matter enough in me for fuch an 270 
Embaffage, and fo I commit you. 

Clau. To the tuition of God. From my houfe, if I 
had it. 273 

265, 266. houres y in the'] hours in 27 1, you.] you — Theob. et seq. 

the F^, Rowei. hours; in the Rowe ii, 273. had it.] had it^ — Theobt had 

Pope, + . hours. Cap. et seq. eV,) Cap. 

Fletcher (p. 248) : It i.s plain that a man who not only professed such vehement 
hostility to marriage, but habitually grounded it upon the gravest of all imputations 
that can be brought against womankind in general, must bring upon him the assaults 
of such a spirit as Beatrice, so ardent and so intelligent. She must attack him in 
sheer defence of her own sex ; and we see that he is the only individual of the piece 
whom she does attack. But it is a cause of quite an opposite nature that gives double 
keenness to the shafts of her sarcasm. Benedick’ s talkatively pertinacious heresy * in de- 
spite of beauty ’ irritates and tantalizes her the more by continually obtruding itself upon 
her from the lips of a man who otherwise attracts her personal preference as one who 
‘For shape, for bearing, argument, and valour. Goes foremost in report through Italy. 

265. temporize with the houres] Rann : That is, you are for putting off the 
evil day. — ScHMiDT ^Lex.') ; You will come to terms, compromise, with the hours. 
— Rolfe : You will come to terms in the course of time. — Deighton : You will 
come to terms with, accommodate yourself to, the hours ; not, as it has been 
explained, you will come to terms in the course of time. — W. A. Wright : You 
will come to terms as time goes on. [Is it possible to suppose that Shake.speare here 
coins a word, and the verb should be spelled temperize that is, you wdll become 
attempered by the hours, your temper will change and become more pliant and 
yielding. None of the explanations hitherto given is to me wholly satisfactory. I 
offer this interpretation with all the more confidence, in that I find that it occurred 
independently to the late Professor Allen, in whose marginal notes I find the follow- 
ing : ‘ Delius understands ; to act with the time, so as to suit the time. Perhaps so ; 
and yet in all the three places, iu which “temporize” occurs, “with” may\iQ. the 
instrument ox cause: King Johuy V, ii, 125 ; “ [He] will not temporize, with my 
entreaties”; Tro. and Cress. IV, iv, 6: “If I could temporize, with [Now, I see, 
perhaps, tUy considering] my affection ;” and, lastly, in this place : “You will tem- 
porize, with the hours” (in process of time). At all events, Shakespeare appears 
to have the idea of one’s becoming temperedy softened (like wax tempered with the 
fingers) ; and this meaning the word will bear in all of the passages cited.’ It is 
just this meaning which it occurred to me the word would gain by spelling it as I 
have suggested, temperize . — Ed. 

270, 271. I . . . you] I am almost clever enough to undertake such a mighty 
embassage. 

271, 272. commit . • • tuition] Reed : Barnaby Googe thus ends his Dedica- 



ACT I, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


39 


Pedro. The fixt of luly.Your louing intnAy Benedick. 

Bene. Nay mocke not, mocke not ; the body of your 275 
difcourfe is fometime guarded with fragments, and the 
guardes are but (lightly bafted on neither, ere you flout 
old ends any further, examine your confcience, and fo I 
leaue you. Exit. 

Clau. My Liege, your Highneffc now may doe mee 280 
good. 

275* fftocke not mock not. Coll. Cap. 

276, fometime\ sometimes Mai. Scen^ V. Pope, +. 

277. neithery']neither:Y^^^KoyfQy-\-, 280. Liege‘\ Leige Y 

tion to the first edition of Palingenius, 1560 : ‘And thus committyng your Ladiship 
with all yours to the tuicion of the moste mercifull God, I ende. From Staple Inne 
at London, the eighte and twenty of March.’ — Malone : Michael Drayton concludes 
one of his letters to Drummond of liawthornden, in 1619, thus: ‘And so wishing 
you all happiness, I commend you to God’s tuition, and rest your assured friend.’ — 
Halliwell : Thus, in a Letter in the Loseley Manuscripts^ p. 267; ‘Thus leving 
youe to the tuicion of the lyving God, I byd youe hartely farwell : From Burton, 
this x.th of Julye, 1577 *’ Again, Alleyn Papers^ p. 35 : ‘And thus . . . wee comitt 
you to Codes tuition : From Douglas, in the Isle of Manne, this first of June in Anno 
Domini, 1608.’ 

272, 273. if I had it] Dyce {Notes, p. 40): There is the same sort of joke in the 
translation of the Menacchmi, 1 595, by W. W. (William Warner?) : Men. What mine 
owne Peniculus? Pen. Yours (ifaith), bodie and goods, if I had any.’ — Sig. B. 

274. The sixt of luly] W. A. Wright : Old Midsummer Day, an appropriate 
date for such Midsummer madness. Flray has used this reference as an indication 
of the very day and the month when Shakespeare wrote this play. It is to be 
regretted that he failed to note that it was probably in the afternoon before ‘ sup- 
per.’ It is also unfortunate that Shakespeare has given us no comforting clew as to 
the state of the weather, or even the direction of the wind, as he does when he tells 
us that Hamlet was mad north- north -west. — Ed. 

276. 277. guarded . . . guardes] That is, trimmed or faced, as in Mer. of Vcn. 
II, ii, 164 : ‘ Give him a livery More guarded than his fellows;’ and Love's Lab. L. 
IV, iii, 58 : ‘ rhymes are guards on wanton Cupid’s hose.’ 

277. neither] Deighton : An old colloquial* idiom, still to be heard among the 
lower classes. 

278. old ends] Capell (p. 120) : These ‘old ends* are the old and formal con- 
clusions of ancient letters. — Halliwell : The expression is exceedingly common. 
— Johnson ; ‘ Before you endeavour to distinguish yourself any more by antiquated 
allusions, examine whether you can fairly claim them for your own.’ This, I think, 
is the meaning ; or it may be understood in another sense, ‘ examine, if your sar- 
casms do not touch yourself.’ [The latter paraphrase is the better, or, as it is given by 
W. A. Wright : ‘see whether they do not apply to yourself.’ Deighton thinks 
that there is no such ‘recondite meaning’ here, and that Benedick ‘merely says 
with mock solemnity ; “Be careful how you ridicule things so venerable and sacred 
as these old ends.” ’—Ed.] 



40 


Much ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act i, sc. i. 

Pedro. My loue is thine to teach, teach it but how, 282 
And thou lhalt fee how apt it is to learne 
Any hard Leffon that may do thee good. 

Clau. Hath Leojiato any fonne my Lord ? 285 

Pedro. No childe but Hero^ ftie^s his onely heire. 

Doft thou affeft her Claudio ? 287 

282. teach; Cap. 

282. to teach] Walker (CnV. i, 295) conjectured that ‘perhaps* this should 
read ‘ to use ’ ; so many are^the cases in the Folio where a word has been substituted, 
by the printers, for another which stands near it. Here, the presence of two feac/es 
in succession awakened Walker’s suspicion. As far as grammar is concerned, 
examples are not infrequent of the use of the present infinitive where we should 
now use the past. Thus in As You Like //, I, ii, no : ‘ for the best is yet to do ;* 
Ham. IV, iv, 44: ‘I do not know why yet I live to say “This thing’s to do.” * 
—Ed. 

285. any sonne] Lloyd (p. 195) ^ When Claudio opens the subject to Don 
Pedro, he does .so with the economical inquiry : ‘ Hath Leonato any son, my Lord ?* 
and Don Pedro, with full intelligence of the purport of such an inquiry, on such an 
occasion, replies that ‘Hero is his only heir.* The attachment is one of that class 
that comprehends the greatest number of. convenient and comfortable matches ; the 
greatest proportion of all matches, therefore, that arrange themselves in an agreeable 
and not over-excitable zone of society. Thus, it is the most natural thing in life for 
Leonato, when he proposes the substitution of his brother’s daughter, to mention 
incidentally that she is * heir to both of them,’ as, at the previous contract, he had 
said, ‘ Count, take of me my daughter, and with her my fortunes.’ Such people do 
not fall in love for the sake of money ; the .state of the case is simply that, with all 
ingenuousness, it does not occur to them, when no property is in the case, to enter- 
tain the notion of falling in love. So the world goes on and becomes peopled, 
and each rank of social distribution keeps in its groove with no coercion, and the 
problems of prudence and tenderness settle themselves, and harmonize with each 
other, with no disstasteful aid from avowed selfishness and sordidness. — C. C. Clark 
(p. 306) : Claudio had an eye to the cash first and then the girl, and the circum- 
stance of her being an only child confirms him in his suit. Claudio is a fellow of no 
nobleness of character, for instead of being the last, he is the first to believe his 
mistress guilty of infidelity towardsTiim, and he then adopts the basest and the most 
brutal mode of punishment by casting her off at the very altar. Genuine love is 
incapable of revenge of any sort, — that I as.sume to be a truism ; still less of a con- 
cocted and refined revenge. Claudio is a scoundrel in grain. — Allen (MS): I can’t 
think that Claudio had in mind the question of Hero’s being Leonato’ s sole heir, 
although Don Pedro (not being in love) so understood him. Claudio may have 
been thinking of using the intercession of the brother, or he may have intended to 
speak of a brother (in the awkwardness of a lover’s delivery) as a step toward 
speaking about the sister, 

287. Dost thou affeift her] Theobald {Nichols^ p. 299) ; How comes Pedro 
to ask this question, when the affair had been so amply talked of before. [Claudio’s 
former avowal of his love had been forced from him by the light-hearted banter of 



ACT I, SC. ij MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


41 

288 


Clau. * O my Lord, 

When you went onward on this ended a6lion, 

I lookM vpon her with a fouldiers eie, 290 

That likM, but had a rougher taske in hand, 

Than to driue liking to the name of loue: 

But now I am return’d, and that warre-thoughts 
Haue left their places vacant : in their roomes, 

Come thronging foft and delicate defires, 295 

All prompting mee how faire yong Hero is. 

Saying I lik’d her ere I went to warres. 

Pedro. Thou wilt be like a louer prefently. 

And tire the hearer with a booke of words: 

If thou doft loue faire Hero, chcrifli it, 300 

And I will breake with her : *and with her father, 

294. vacant:^ vacant ^ Cap. her father ^ And thou Jhalt haue her: 

295. thronging] thronged Rowe i. waft Q, Theob. Warb. et seq. 

297. warres.] wars — Coll. Sta. 301. I will] Til Pope, Han. 

301, 302, her :,,.wajl] her^ and with 

Benedick, whose very presence was an obstacle to seriousness. Here the two are 
alone, and Claudio must speak heart-free and in all sincerity. — Ed.] 

292. liking . . . loue] W. A. Wright ; The same gradation occurs in As You 
Like Jt^ V, ii, 2 ; * Is ’t possible . . . you should like her? that but seeing her you 
should love her ? and loving woo ?’ 

293. now 1 am] For other examples of the omission of that^ — ‘ now (that) I 
am,* — see, if needful, Abbott, § 284. 

297. to warres.] Collier thus punctuates : ' to wars — with the remark that 
‘ it is obvious that Claudio is interrupted by Don Pedro just as he is beginning to 
“ twist so fine a story.*’ * For many examples of the omission of the definite article, 
see, if needful, Abbott, § 90. 

298, 299. louer . . . booke] Whiter, whose observations are always entitled 
to respect, has gathered (p. 107, etc.) a number of instances in Shakespeare where 

* the idea of a Lover, as described by his mistress, or as represented with respect to 
her, is associated either by metaphor, or comparison with a book and the binding of 
it. This,’ he goes on to say, ‘ is not merely accidental ; though I know not by what 
intermediate idea so strange a combination has been formed.* [See line 315, below. 
—Ed.] 

298. presently] That is, at once, immediately. See Shakespeare, passim. 

301. breake with her] Craik (Note on Jul. Ccbs. II, i, 150, p. 139) : That is, 
I will open the matter to her. This is the sense in which the idiom to break with is 
most frequently found in Shakespeare. See also line 318 of this scene. But when 
in Merry IVives^ III, ii. Slender says to Ford, in answer to his invitation to dinner, 

* We have appointed to dine with Mistress Anne, and I would not break with her 
for more money than I’ll speak of,* he means he would not break his engagement 
with her. The phrase is nowhere, I believe, used by Shakespeare in the only sense 



42 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act I, sc. i. 


* And thou (halt haue her waft not to this end, 302 

That thou beganft to twift fo fine a ftory ? 

C/au» How fweetly doe you minifter to loue, 

That know loues gricfe by his complexion ! 305 

But left my liking might too fodaine feeme, 

I would haue falu’d it with a longer treatife. 

Fed, What need y bridge much broder then the flood? 

The fairest graunt is the neceffitie : 309 

302. wajl'\ wasU Rowe et seq. plea is the Han. ground is the Coll, ii, 

304. doe you'\ you do Q, Cam. Glo. iii (MS), warrant is and garanf s the 

Wh. ii. Anon. ap. Cam. current' s the Bulloch. 

306. fodaine\ fuddain F^. argument is Bailey (ii, 189). 

309. graunt is the'\ graunt in the F^F^. 

which it now bears, namely, to quarrel with. [See Abbott, § 194 and line 318, 
below.] — Lloyd (p. 197) J It is Claudio’s wooing by proxy, in the first scenes, that 
makes his later conduct less grating to the feelings, than if we had seen the mutual 
melting of the pair in love’s own confidence. 

301, 302. *and , . . her*] The line here marked with asterisks is found only in 
the Qto. The compositor of F,, or his reader, mistook the second * her ’ for the first. 

303. a story] Walker (O7V. iii, 29): Surely ‘story’ is wrong. [Lettsom, 
Walker’s editor, hereupon queries string}"] 

305. his complexion] Had its come into use, possibly, Shakespeare would have 
said ‘ its complexion. ’ ‘ Complexion ’ often means external appearance y and by several 
editors, it is so interpreted here ; except ‘love’s grief’ be manifested externally by a 
woe-begone, lackadaisical expression, — ^not a pleasing conception, — it can be detected 
only by blushing, in which case ‘ complexion’ may refer, as in many another instance, 
to the tint of the face. Note, that while ‘ action,’ in line 289, is pronounced as two 
syllables, ‘ complexion ’ is here pronounced, as the grammarians say, dissoluUy that 
is, as four syllables : com-plex-i-on. — Ed. 

307. salu’d] W. A. Wright : Literally, anointed ; hence, softened down, palli- 
ated. See Cor, III, ii, 70 : ‘ Speak fair ; you may salve so. Not what is dangerous 
present, but the loss Of what is past.’ 

307. treatise] That is, discourse, story ; as in Macb. V, v, 12 : ‘ My fell of hair 
Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir,’ etc 

308. What need] Abbott (§ 297) ; The impersonal needs (which must be dis- 
tinguished from the adverbial needs) often drops the j ; partly, perhaps, because of the 
constant use of the noun need. It is often found with ‘ what,’ where it is sometimes 
hard to say whether * what ’ is an adverb and need a verb, or ‘ what ’ is an adjective 
and need a noun. Thus here, it may be either, ‘ Why need the bridge (be) broader?’ 
or ^ what need' is there (that) the bridge (be) broader?’ 

309. The . . . necessitie] Warburton: That is, no one can have a better 
reason for granting a request than the necessity of its being granted. — Steevens : 
Mr Hayley, with great acuteness, proposes to read : ‘ The fairest grant is to necessity 

i, e, necessitas quod cogit defendit. [Hudson adopted Hayley’ s conjecture. ] — Capell 
(ii, 120) : ‘ Grant’ is equivalent to cause of granting; the fairest argument you can 
urge to prevail on me to be your advocate, is the necessity you stand-in of one to do 



ACT I, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


43 


Looke what will ferue,is fit : ^tis once, thou loueft, 310 

And I will fit thee with the remedie, 

I know we fhall haue reuelling to night, 312 

31 1. remediel\ remedy. Rowe. 

you that service. [Rann follows Capell substantially.] — M. Mason : If we suppose 
that ‘ grant ’ means concession, the sense is obvious ; and it is no uncommon accepta- 
tion of the word. Collier (ed. ii) adopted ground from his MS, and explains that 
Don Pedro was referring to the ground of the sudden love of Claudio for Hero. 
[This, I am afraid, I do not understand. Can it mean that the fairest ground for 
Claudio’s love was his necessitous circumstances? It is to be hoped not. — Ei),] — 
Staunton : The sense is : the best boon is that which answers the necessities of the 
case; or, as Don Pedro pithily explains it, ‘what will serve, is fit.’ — IIalliwell : 
To use the words of Mr Smibert, ‘ if one receives a grant to the full of his necessity, 
he is served in the fairest way, and needs no more.' — Keightley (A^. < 2 ^* Qu, 
3d, xii, 61 ; and Exp. 384 b) : The meaning is this : the fairest, most gracious grant 
of your suit by Hero is the necessity, the thing needed, what we want. It is not 
improbable that the poet wrote ‘ is thy necessity,’ which would make the passage less 
enigmatical. [Wagner makes the same conjecture. Staunton’s paraphrase, which 
is accepted by both Roi.fe and W. A. Wright, appears to me the simplest and 
the clearest. The best thing you can do for a man is to do that which his necessity 
demands. — E d. ] 

310. once] Upton (p. 317) : That is, once for all; as in Cor. II, iii, i : ‘Once, 
if he do require our voices, we ought not to do deny him. So the Greeks use 
certOy omninoy plane et vere. So in Psalm Ixxxix, 35 : ‘ Once have I sworn,’ etc. . . , 
Seme! is used sometimes in this sense by the purest Latin authors. Milton has, ‘ He 
her aid Can never seek, once dead in sins, and lost.’ — Par. Lost, III, 233. — 
Staunton (Note on ‘Once this,’ Com. of Err. Ill, i, 89) : The truth is, ‘once’ or 
ones was very commonly u.scd by the old writers in place of nonce, or nones, imply- 
ing the occasion, the purpose in hand, the time being [Staunton gives here six or 
seven examples from various Elizabethan authors in proof of his assertion ; and in 
his Illustrative Comments at the end of the play, he quotes, as helping to confirm 
his opinion, Gifford’s note on Ben Jonson’s The Fox, vol. iii, p. 218, as follows; 
‘ For the nonce, is simply for the once, for the one thing in question, whatever it may 
be. This is invariably its meaning.’ Abbott (§ 57) gives the meaning here as once 
for all, and adds that, hence ‘ once’ is used for positively in V, i, 217 of this present 
play. — ScHMiD'r (Lex.): That is, it is a fact past help; German: du liebst nun 
einmal. — Hudson ; It is pretty clear that ‘ once ’ was occasionally used in the sense 
of enough ; and such is the aptest meaning here. — Deighton : Once for all is per- 
haps the nearest modern equivalent. Don Pedro briefly sums up the case, ‘ enough 
has been said ; you admit that you love her, and that being so, I will,’ etc. — W. A. 
AVright : That is, so much is certain, there can be no question about it. [Hudson’s 
paraphrase certainly excels in conciseness, and seems to include all that the sense 
requires. — E d.] 

312. I know we shall, etc.] Theobald (Nichols, ii, 299): Wliere is this 
spoken ? Antonio immediately comes in with Leonato, and tells him that a servant 
of his had overheard the Prince and Claudio concerting this business in an alley near 
Antonio’s orchard; and afterwards Borachio tells John the Bastard he had overheard 



44 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act I, sc. i. 


1 will alTume thy part in feme difguife, 313 

And tell faire Hero I am Claudio, 

And in her bofome He vnclafpe my heart, 315 

And take her hearing prifoner with the force 
And ftrong incounter of my amorous tale : 

Then after, to her father will I breake. 

And the conclufion is, fhee (hall be thine, 

In pra6life let vs put it prefently. Exeunt. 320 

316. the force\ a force F^, Rowe i. Staunton* s, and Praetorius’s Facsimile. 

318. Ashbee’s Facsimile. 320. Exeunt. Om. F^. 

tbem, from behind an arras in Leonato’s house, laying the same scheme. And yet 
it is plain from Pedro’s words [lines 199, 200 of this scene] that Claudio had not yet 
been in Leonato’s house. [Theobald did not, in his subsequent edition, refer to this 
inconsistency. Possibly, he found the knot * too intrinse to unloose.’] — H ai.liwkll 
says : * The only method of reconciling part of this inconsistency is to presume a 
lapse of time between the first and the second scene, which perhaps would be more 
naturally assumed were the Second Act to commence with the second scene of the 
First Act. [Wherein Halliwell is anticipated by Spedding.] ‘As the text now 
stands,’ Halliwell continues ‘ there is a discrepancy in the localities noted as the .scene 
of the conference between the Prince and Claudio, which seems inexplicable, except 
by the assumption that they had had more than one conversation on the subject.’ — 
Rolfe asks: Is it one of those instances of the poet’s carelessness in the minor 
parts of his plot similar to Hamlet’s knowledge of the scheme to send him to Eng- 
land, and to Philostrate’ s hearing a rehearsal of ‘Pyrarnus & Thi.sl)e’? — W. A. 
Wright says that ‘probably Shakespeare was careless about the matter, which is of 
no importance.’ [See Note on the first line of the next scene ; or Spedding, on the 
Division of the Acts, in the Appendix, — Ed.] 

315. vnclaspe] See Whiter’S note on lines 298, 299, above. ‘In her bo.som’ 
must be either, in meaning, on her bosom I’ll unclasp the book of my heart and by 
reading the contents take her reason prisoner, etc., or I’ll unclasp my heart and into 
her bosom pour the contents, so as to, etc. I prefer the former. — Ed. 

316. take . . . prisoner] Peck (p. 227) : This is borrowed from Judith^ xvi, 9 : 

‘ Her beautie tooke his minde prisoner.’ So also, Cym, I, vi, 103 : ‘ this object, 
which Takes prisoner the wild motion of my eye.’ 

318. breake] See line 301, above. • 



ACT I, SC. u.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


45 


[Scene //.] 

Enter Leonato and an old man jbrother to Leofiato. i 

Leo. How now brother, where is my cofen your fon : 
hath he prouided this muficke ? 3 

Scene II. Cap. Scene continued. i. Enter...] Enter Leonato and An- 

Pope. Act II. Spedding. tonio. Rowe. Re-enter... Pope. 

A Room in Leonato’ s House. Cap. 

I. Enter, etc.] Toward the close of the preceding .scene (line 312) Theobald 
called attention to the obscurity involving the locality of the conversation between 
Don Pedro and Claudio. Spedding suggested a solution by a new division of Acts, 
wherein the Second Act begins with the present scene. He recognises the needs of 
the scene-shifter, and therefore claims consideration for his division as only for an 
imaginary stage. The interested reader must turn to the Af^pendix for a full exposi- 
tion of Spedding’ s suggestion, which is too long for insertion here. To me it carries 
conviction. I do not see how it can be gainsaid. It adheres to the law of dramatic 
construction ; the denouement begins at the close of the Third Act, in the arrest of 
Conrade and Borachio. Spedding speaks of the needs of the scene-shifter which are 
undoubtedly real, and not to be overlooked ; but then these needs are supposed to 
have been far smaller in Shakespeare’s day than they are at present, I say ‘ supposed 
to have been ’ because I think there were more scenery and stage accessories in those 
days than is generally believed ; why, for in.stance, should the rough makeshifts by 
the rude mechanicals in A Midsummer NighCs Dream excite such mirth in Theseus 
and his court if they were not seen to be caricatures of the real stage-scenery to 
which that court was accustomed ? Be this, however, on the old stage as it may, on 
the modern the stage-setting must be always considered, and time allowed for it. 
Apart from this consideration, the chiefest objection to Spedding’ s division would be, 
I suppo.se, the shortness of the First Act. But this is hardly an objection, if the Act 
fulfil its dramatic requirements and be complete in itself. As a general rule, Shake- 
speare, like the careful and infinitely pains-taking workman that he was, makes his 
First Acts somewhat longer proportionately than the others. This is more noticeable 
in the five great tragedies, where the First Act is almost of prime importance, than 
in the Comedies. In Lear the First Act is nearly two hundred lines longer than any 
of the others ; in Othello also, it is the longest ; in Romeo and Juliet there is but one 
Act longer than the First ; in Hamlet the First Act has eight hundred and fifty lines, 
and is exceeded only by the Third, which has seventy-eight lines more ; MacbetfCs 
First Act of four hundred and seventy-seven lines is exceeded only by the Fourth, 
which has four lines more. According to Spedding’ s division of the present play, 
the number of lines in the Acts is as follows : First Act has 320 ; Second Act, 515 ; 
Third Act, 668; Fourth Act, 574; and the Fifth Act, 61 1. Thus the First Act is 
nearly two hundred lines shorter than any of the others. But this is of no real 
importance, I think. The ultimate test of Spedding’ s arrangement must be its effect 
upon an audience, which cannot but be salutary, if it obviate the confusion, observ- 
able to all, in the present arrangement. — Ed. 

I. an old man] Inasmuch as the name of this brother is Anthony (as we leam 
from V, i, 102, iii), that name, or rather Antonio, was given here, and through- 
out, by Rowe, who has been uniformly followed. I suppose that Rowe selected 



46 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [ACt i, sc. ii. 

Old. He is very bufie about it, but brother, I can tell 
you newes that you yet dreamt not of. 5 

Lo. Are they good ? 

Old. As the euents ftamps them, but they haue a good 7 

5. newest Jlrange naves Q, Cap. 5. dr earn f\ dream'' 

Steev. Mai. Var. ’21. Coll. Dyce, Cam. 7. clients'] event IT, Rowe et seq. 

Glo. Wh. ii. 

Antonio, not only because it is more Italian than Anthony, but because, in the 
masking scene in II, i, 106-118 Ursula banters a man named Signior Anthonio who 
is supposed to be an old man by the ‘ wagling of his head’ and the dryness of his 
hand — but there is no evidence that he was Leonato’s brother. — Ed. 

Horn (i, 263) ; The question may Srise: Is this brother, Antonio, really neces- 
sary to the play ? At the first blush the answ'er might be, no ; for the subordinate 
part which he plays in Leonato’s house, as w'dl as the ‘strange news’ which he 
brings to his elder brother might have been easily undertaken by another ; later on, 
however, his part becomes eventually much more important ; after Hero’s pretended 
death, and the establishment of her innocence, he must come forward as the father 
of a daughter as a new bride for Claudio. Wherefore, it is very necessary that an 
actual personality in the shape of the bride’s father, should give colour to the fiction 
of a daughter. And it seems to me that there is another, a tenderer reason for 
Antonio’s existence. In .such terrible trials as assail Lconato, he must (both poesy 
and the humane poet require it) not be left alone ; some one allied to him by kin- 
ship and friendship must be at hand, to whom he can pour out his woes. His 
lamentations must not be entirely withdrawn from our view, but the lonely grief of 
an old man would be too grievous a sight for even a tragedy. Lear has his Kent, 
and his Fool. How attractive is the presentment of these two old men, brothers in 
very deed, and how admirably Antonio recalls Leonato to the actual present, when 
in V, i, he is bewailing himself alone. It might well be said that Leonato’s heart- 
rending lamentations expose him to the danger of exceeding the bounds of a comedy, 
but his brother Antonio brings him within them at just the right moment. 

2 . cosen] Murray [H. E. D.) : The regular phonetic descendant of Lat. con- 
sobrinusy cousin by the mother’s side. ... In mediaeval use, the word seems to have 
been often taken to represent Lat. consanguineus. Formerly, very frequently applied 
to a nephew or niece. 

2. your son] See V, i, 299. 

5. you yet dreamt not of] For other examples of the simple past for the com- 
plete present, see Abbott, § 347, where it is said that * this is in accordance with 
the Greek use of the aorist, and is as logical as our more modern use. The differ- 
ence depends upon a difference of thought, the action being regarded simply as past 
without reference to the present or to completion. . . . On the other hand, the com- 
plete present is used remarkably in V, i, 252 : “ I have drunk poison whiles he 
utter’d it.” This can only be explained by a slight change of thought: “I have 
drunk poison (and drunk poison all the) while he spoke.” ’ 

6. they] A Concordance or Schmidt’s Lex, will give many instances where 
‘news’ is used as a plural. 

7. euents stamps] The compositor evidently composed by his ear, wherein 
‘euents’ followed by ‘stamps’ sounds the same whether it be singular or plural. 



ACT I, SC. ii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 47 

couer ; they Ihew well outward, the Prince and Count 8 
Claudio walking in a thick pleached alley in my orchard, 
were thus ouer-heard by a man of mine : the Prince dif- lO 
couercd to Claudio that hee loucd my niece your daugh- 
ter, and meant to acknowledge it this night in a dance, 
and if hee found her accordant, hee meant to take the 
prefent time by the top, and inftantly breake with you 
of it. IS 

Leo. Hath the fellow any wit that told you this ? 

Old. A good fharpe fellow, I will fend for him , and 
queftion him your felfc. ^ 

Leo. No, no ; wee will hold it as a dreamc, till it ap- 
peare it felfe : but I will acquaint my daughter withall, 20 


8. outu)ard'\ F^. 

9. thick plea(hed'\ thick peached 
Rowe ii. thick-pleached Theob. Warb. 
et seq. 

my\ mine Q, Cam. Glo. Wh. li. 

10. thus"] thus much Q, Cap. Mai, 
Steev, Var. Coll. Dyce, Sta. Cam. Glo. 


Wh. ii. 

13. and ?/] and F^F^. 

hee meant'\ meant F , Rowe, Pope, 

Ilan. 

20. withall] with all F^F^, Rowe, 
Pope, Han. 


9. thick pleached] Steevens : That is, thickly interwoven ; so afterward, in 
III, i, 9 : ‘the pleached bower. ’—Halli well : The term is still in use, applied to 
a method of lowering hedges, by partially cutting the principal stems, and inter- 
twining them with the rest. [In the present passage, it may be that it is the sides 
of the ‘ alley ’ that are ‘ pleached,’ but in III, i, 9, it would appear that the bower 
is pleached overhead by the honey-suckles. The overhead pleaching seems more in 
accordance with Italian practice, but thick pleached hedges are belter adapted to 
conceal listeners. — Ed.] 

9. orchard] Skeat ): A garden of fruit-trees. . . . The older form is 

ortgeard . . . signifying * wort-yard,’ i, e. yard of worts or ‘vegetables. ... It is 
singular that Lat. hortus is related to the latter syllable yard ; but of course not to 
the former. 

10. thus] The addition of the Qto ‘ thus mttch ’ is hardly necessary. But, if 
adopted, it should be printed, I think, wdth a hyphen ‘ thus-much.’— Ed. 

14. by the top] Compare All’s 7 vell, V, in, 39: ‘Let’s take the instant by the 
forward top. ’—Deighton: That is, to take time by the forelock; in reference to 
the old presentment of Time as having a lock of hair in front and being bald behind. 
Compare Bacon, Essay xxi : ‘For occasion (as it is in the Common verse) turneth 
a Bald Noddle, after she hath presented her locks in Front, and no hold taken.’ 

16. wit] Here used in its common meaning : sense, understanding ; unlike its 
meaning in the preceding scene. 

19, 20. appeare it selfe] Dyce (ed. ii) ; Qy. ‘approve’ ? i, e. prove. (In Cor. 

9 , the Folio has ‘appear’d,’ where the sense requires approv'd.) — Abbott 
(§ 296) ; ‘Appear’ is, perhaps, here used rePexivcly ; as also in Cym. Ill, iv, 148 : 
disguise That which to appear itself msxsX, not yet be.’ Though these passages 



48 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act i, sc. iii. 


that ftie may be the better prepared for an anfwer^if per- 2i 
aduenture this bee true : goe you and tell her of it : coo- 
fins, you know what you haue to doe, O I crie you mer- 
cie friend, goe you with mee and I will vfe your skill, 
good cofin haue a care this bufie time. Exeunt. 25 


I 


\Scene ///.] 

Enter Sir lohn the BaJlardyUnd Coftrade his companion. 

Con, What the good yeere my Lord, why are you 
thus out of meafure fad ? 


21. for an anfwer'\ for anfwer Ff, 
Rowe, -f . 

22. [Enter several Persons, bearing 
Things for the Banquet. Cap. Exit 
Antonio. — Several Persons cross the 
Stage. Dyce. Enter Attendants. Cam. 

22. 23. coofim^'\ cousifty Johns, Van 
*85, Ran. Dyce ii, iii, Iluds. 

23. io ciocy O] to do. [several cross the 
stage here] Oy Theob. 

24. skill"] shill Q. 

25. cofin] cousins Steev. Van '03, 


3 

Van ^13, Sta. Ktly. 

Scene VI. Pope, + . Scene III, 
Cap. et seq. 

Scene changes to an Ajipartment 
in Leonato’s House. Theob. TheStieet. 
Han. 

1. renter...] Enter Don John and 
Conrade. Rowe et seq. 

2. good yeen^Y goody cere good- 

Theob. Warb. Johns, gou feres Han. 

goujere Steev. good-year Mai. Dyce, 
Cam. Glo. WTi. ii. good year F^F^, 
Rowe et cet. 


might be perhaps explained without the reflexive use of ‘ appear,* yet this interpre- 
tation is made more probable by ‘ Your favour is well appeared.' — Cor, IV, iii, 9. 
[Note that this example from Cor. is the one which seemed to Dyce to justify his 
mistrust of the present word. It is the position in the sentence of ‘itself’ that 
causes the slight difficulty, and leads Abbott to .suggest a reflexive use. ‘Itself* 
qualifies ‘ it,* but the cacophony of ‘ it itself appear * (which is the true meaning, I 
think) caused ‘itself* to be placed after the verb, and so give to it a reflexive appear- 
ance. Of course, ‘appear’ here means, to come trucy to become reality. — El).] 

22, 23. coosins] Steevens : ‘ Cousins* were anciently enrolled among the depend- 
ants, if not the domesticks, of great families, such as that of Leonato. Petruchio, while 
intent on the subjection of Katharine, calls out, in terms imperative, for his Cousin 
Ferdinand. Walker {Crit. i, 247) includes this plural in his long list of instances 
where final s has been interpolated. — Dyce (ed. ii) : Here the old eds. have 
‘coosins,* and, two lines after, ‘cosin*; but Leonato is evidently addressing the 
same individual ; and his first speech in this .scene shows plainly who that individual 
is — ‘ Where is my cousiuy your son ? hath he provided the music ?’ The said ‘ cousin,* 
son to Antonio, now crosses the stage along with musicians, and, it may be, with 
others. [In a ca.se like this, it is impos.sible to affirm or to deny, and a conservative 
course which follows both Qto and Folio is certainly safe, h'or the derivation of 
‘cousin,* see line 2, above. — E d.] 

I. lohn the Bastard] Lamb (iii, 400) : It is praise of Shakespeare, with refer- 



ACT I. SC. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


49 


[i. lohn the Bastard] 

ence to the play-writers, his contemporaries, that he has so few revolting characters. 
Yet he has one that is singularly mean and disagreeable — the king in Hamlet. 
Neither has he characters of insignificance, unless the phantom that stalks over the 
stage as Julius Caesar, in the play of that name, may be accounted one. Neither has 
he envious characters, excepting the short part of Don John in Much Ado. Neither 
has he unentertaining characters, if we except Parolles, and the little that there is 
of the Clown, in AlP s well that Ends Well. — HARTLEY CoLERlDGE (ii, 134): 
There is, alas ! but too much nature in this sulky rascal. Men who are inly con- 
scious of being despicable take it for granted that all their fellow-creatures despise 
them, and hate the whole human race by anticipation. Such men there are who 
immerse their souls in wilfull gloom, and think that all joy insults their sullenness ; 
that beauty is only beautiful to make their deformity more hideous, and that virtue is 
virtue purely to spite them. — Kreyssk; (p. 214) : By a single fortunate touch, the 
Poet has attained his end. Compound of envy as he is, Don John amuses us more 
than he terrifies us, for Shakespeare has denied him the one characteristic that could 
produce the latter effect. He cannot possibly feign. Let him but be able to do this, 
and the repuKive but harmless reptile becomes the subtle venomous viper; as it is, 
we have a flattering honest majty a plain-dealing villain. It is in lago that Shake- 
speare gives us the frightful embodiment of human depravity. In vain does Don 
John’s companion admonish him that he cannot take true rooty but by the fait 
weather that he makes himself that he ?mc 5 t not make full show of his gloomy mood 
until he may do it without controlment . Beatrice cannot look at him without suffer- 
ing from heartburn for an hour. It better fits his blood to be disdained of all than to 
fashion a carriage to rob love from any. Sooner than put constraint upon himself, 
he prefers to be a canker in a hedge, rather than a rose in the prince^ s grace. Thus 
he arouses suspicion and mistrust in the audience, who feel befoiehand that his 
plotting cannot be successful. It is clear that the comedy gains by this. — D. J. 
Snider (i, 358) : There is a reason for Don John’s conduct and disposition, — there 
has been committed against him a wrong whose sting has injected its poison into his 
whole existence, and transformed his nature. The villain, pure and simple, is a 
horrible monstrosity without human lineaments, and is certainly not a Shakespearean 
creation. Don John, therefore, has some ground for his present character ; the Poet 
has indicated it plainly, — it is to be found in his illegitimacy. The Bastard is the 
natural villain ; he is punished for an offence which he never committed, and neces- 
sarily turns against institutions which make him an outcast and an outlaw. Above 
all, the Family disowns him, though it is the special function of the Family to love 
and cherish the child. He thus inhales the atmosphere of wrong from his birth ; 
law, — justice itself, — becomes, in his case, the instrument of injustice. With ven- 
geance he turns upon society, and especially upon the Family, which, however, 
cannot recognise him without its own destruction. The Bastard represents a per- 
petual conflict, which in a strong nature, must become tragical ; he has to obey that 
which destroys him, or, if he disobeys, he becomes the villain. Shakespeare has 
elsewhere made him the scourge of his kindred. In Lear it is the father, — the real 
author of the violation, — whom he hates and destroys ; here it is the brother, whom, 
as a member of his family, he must hate, but whom he must not destroy. It is also 
natural that he should detest marriage ; and his efforts to undermine the legitimate 
union of Claudio and Hero spring from his own position and character. 

4 



50 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act i, sc. iiL 

loh. There is no meafure in the occafion that breeds, 
therefore the fadneffe is without limit. 5 

Con. You fhould heare reafon. 

John. And when I haue heard it, what blefling brin- 
geth it ? 

Con. If not a prefent remedy, yet a patient fufferance. 
loh. I wonder that thou (being as thou faift thou art, lO 
boine vnder Saturne) goeft about to apply a morall me- 

4. breeds\ breeds it Theob.j-f, Cap. 9. yet’\ at leajl Q, Coll. Cam. Glo, 

Var. Ran. Mai. Steev. Var, Coll, ii, Wh. ii. 

iii, (MS), Dyce ii, iii, Wh. i, Ktly, 10. wonder'\ wonder not Theob. MS 
Rife, Huds. ap. Cam. 

7, 8. bringetK\ brings Q, Coll, i, ii, thoti] ikon F^. 

Cam. Glo. Wh. ii. as... art] In parenthesis, Cap. 

II. morall] morta/l 'RovfQ. 

2. good yeere] Blakeway : When Sir Thomas More was confined in the 
Tower, his wife ‘like a simple ignorant woman, and somewhat worldlie to, with 
this manner of salutation homelie saluted him. “ What a good yeer, Mr More, 
quoth she, I marvaile that yow that hetherto have binne taken for a wiseman will 
now soe plaie the foole to lie heere in this close filthie prison.’* '-r-Lifc of Sir 71 
More^ by Roper, ed. 1731, p. 88. [This extract is here quoted from W. A. Wright, 
who undoubtedly gives it more correctly than Blakeway.] — Farmer : Florio writes 
‘ With a good yeare to thee !’ and gives it in Italian, ‘ II mal anno che dio ti dia !’ — 
W. A. Wright ; This is an interjectional expression of frequent occurrence, but 
unknown origin. Hanmer invented a French equivalent for it, which has apparently 
no other existence than in his invention : gonfere, a disease contracted from a gouge 
or camp-follower. It may possibly be a corruption of quad yere, equivalent to bad 
year, which occurs in Chaucer, and would so be equivalent to the Italian imprecation 
maV anno ! Or it may be a euphemism for the latter. [It was evidently a good 
mouth-filling oath, which was not dangerous, in that it had lost all meaning. While 
it is become obsolete, its twin brother m obscurity : ‘What the dickens!’, also used 
by Shakespeare, has survived. In Lear, V, iii, 24, we find the phrase : ‘ The good 
yeares shall devour them, flesh and fell,’ which gives, phonetically, so much author- 
ity to Hanmer* s imaginary that a majority of Editors have there adopted 

the latter, — unwisely, I think. In Lear its meaning is still to seek. — Ed.] 

4. breeds] Excellent Editors have followed Theobald in making this verb 
transitive by adding //, but, I think, needlessly. Shakespeare elsewhere uses it 
intransitively, as in Meas. for Meas. II, ii, 142 ; ‘She speaks, and ’tis Such sense 
that my sense breeds with it.’ It is even more forcible, thus used absolutely. Don 
John says, in effect: ‘That which occasions my sadness is for ever breeding.’ — ^E d. 

9. sufferance] That is, endurance. In Y, i, 41, it means, suffering. 

II. Saturne] Inasmuch as saturnine is a word in every-day use, it is superfluous 
to give any note on the present passage. But the description in Batman vppon Bar- 
tholomew of the effect of the planet, is so quaint that I think I shall be pardoned for 
quoting it ; ‘ Satumus ... is an euill willed Planet, colde and drie, a night Planet 
and heauie. And therefore by fables he is painted as an old man, his circle is most 



ACT I, SC. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 5 1 

dicine, to a mortifying mifchiefe : I cannot hide what I 12 
am : I muft bee fad when I haue caufe, and fmile at no 
mans iefts, eat when I haue ftomacke, and wait for no 
mans leifure*: fleepe when I am drowfie, and tend on no 15 
mans bufineffe, laugh when I am merry, and claw no man 
in his humor. 

Con. Yea, but you muft not make the ful fliow of this, 18 

h, 

12. mif chief e\ mifcheife F^. 1 8. /«/] fulll F,. 

15. tend on\ tendto^2X. ^03/13, ^2l. 


farre from the earth, and neuerthelesse it is most noifull to the earth. And for that 
he is far from \ earth, he ful endeth not his course before 30. yeres. And greeueth 
more, when he goeth backwarde, then when he goeth forth right. And therefore by 
Fables it is feined, that hee hath a crooked hooke, and is pale in coulour or wanne as 
Lead, and hath two deadlye qualityes, coldncsse, and drynesse. And therefore a 
childe & other broodes, that be concerned & come forth vnder his I.ordship, dye, or 
haue full euill qualyties. For ... he rnaketh a man browne and fowle, misdoing 
slowe, and heauie, eleinge \ailin^?'\ and sorie, seldome gladde and merrye, or 
laughing, and therefore . . . they that be subiect to SaturnuSy haue ofte euill drye 
chinnes [crachsy in the hinder part of the foote, and be yeolow of coulour, and 
browne of hayre, and sharpe in all the body and unseemly, and be not skroymous 
[squeamish] of foule and stinking clothing, and he loueth stinking beastes and 
vncleane, sower things and sharpe : for of their complection melancholike humour 
hath masterie.’ — fol. 129, 7 yersc, ed. 1582 . — Ed. 

11, 12. morall medicine, etc.] Bucknill (p. 112) : Sadness dependent upon dis- 
position is [here] truly stated to be more radical and less curable than that which can 
be referred to a definite outward cause. The would-be physician recommends reason 
as an anodyne, but the patient repudiates the moral medicine. — W. A. Wright : 
Like patching grief with proverbs, V, i, 20, or giving preceptial medicine to rage. 
In Lyly’s EuphucSy p. 107 (ed. Arber), there is the same alliterative contrast between 
medicine and mischief, ‘ Be as earnest to seeke a medicine, as you were eager to run 
into a mischiefe.’ 

12. mortifying] Used causatively, in the present participle, and in its literal 
meaning of death-dealing, 

12, 13. I cannot ... I must] In both of these places, ‘I^ is emphatic. — Ed. 

12. 1 cannot hide, etc.] Johnson : This is one of our author’s natural touches. 
An envious and unsocial mind, too proud to give pleasure, and too sullen to receive 
it, always endeavours to hide its malignity from the world and from itself, under the 
plainness of simple honesty, or the dignity of haughty independence. 

16. claw] Murray (AT. E, Z>.) : So to claw the ears, humour, etc, : to tickle, 
flatter, gratify (the senses, etc.). Thence claw itself came to mean : To flatter, cajole, 
wheedle, fawn upon [as in the present passage]. 

18, etc. Yea, but, etc.] Walker {^Crit, i, 2) suspects that this whole speech of 
Conrade is verse, and thus divides the lines : 

* Yea, but you must not make full show of this, 

• Till you may do 't without controlement : 



52 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act i, sc. iu. 

till you may doe it without controllment, you haue of 

late flood out againfl your brother, and hee hath tane 20 


19, 20. of late] 'till of late Coll, ii, 20. tane] ta' en Pope, 
iii (MS), until of late Sing. (MS). 


You have, of late, stood out against your brother, 

And he hath ta’en you newly into ' s grace ; 

Where Uis impossible you should take root, 

But by th' fair weather that you make yourself : 

[ ] ’tis needful that you frame the season 

For your own harvest.* 

He adds : In the first line I have expunged ‘ the * before ‘full show ' as injurious 
even to the sense. ‘ Controlment * is also written controlcment in Kmg John, I, i, 
20. ... In line 5 » ike common editions have ‘ take true root,* which perhaps is 
right ; true may have been absorbed by ‘ take’; the Folio omits true. This metrical 
use of impossible, terrible, and the like, is (as is well known) very common in the 
Elizabethan poets. [It is found in V, i, 289, of the present play.] It occurs even 
in Chapman’s Iliad, where it is very remarkable. In the penultimate line, perhaps 
‘ Therefore ’tis needful,’ etc. [Walker, in the first place, fails, apparently, to appreciate 
the nice discrimination with which Shakespeare apportions verse and prose not only 
among his characters, but also according to the elevation of his theme. Throughout 
the play, neither Don John, nor Conrade, nor Dogberry and the Watch, nor Mar- 
garet, nor Ursula utters one line of verse, nor docs Borachio except in the first Scene 
of the Fifth Act, and there, in a high-pitched, almost tragic interview, where all the 
characters speak in verse, for five lines Borachio speaks in the same, at all other 
times he speaks, as befits his character, in prose. In the second place. Walker 
overlooks the tendency of all Shakespeare’ s prose, when any characters, above the 
lowest order, are speaking, to run into metric prose, that is, there is an harmonious, 
measured cadence which seems to need but a few trifling changes to convert it into 
regular blank verse. Take Orlando’s opening speech in As You Like It: ‘As I | 
remem | ber Adam | it was | upon | this fashion | bequea | th^d me | by will | but 
poor I a thou | sand crowns,’ and so on, throughout the whole speech ; the very 
inversion; ‘but poor a thousand crowns’ seems intentional for the sake of the rhythm. 
To have written it all in blank verse would have imparted too much dignity to what 
are really only the querulous complaints of a neglected boy, but he is the hero of the 
piece, and is destined to develop into a most attractive character ; insensibly, there- 
fore, our minds are prepared for his high position by this metric prose, which we find 
also, in this present speech of Conrade ; not because Conrade* s character was like 
Orlando’ s, but because the sentiments he utters are to be considered of a more ele- 
vated tone than the repulsive selfishness of Don John. There is a positive indica- 
tion, I think, that the rhythm was intentional, in line 20, where is the contraction 
‘ tane ’ for taken, and it is barely possible that it was this contraction which started 
Walker’s suspicion that the whole was blank verse. See I, i, 240 . — Ed.] 

19, 20. of late] Collier (ed. ii) ; ‘ ’Till of late’ is from the MS, and is clearly 
required by the sense. — Anon. {Blackwood' s Maga. Aug. 1853, p. 192) : This MS 
correction, as any one, looking at the context even with half an eye, may perceive 
both spoils the idiom and impairs the meaning of the passage. [The correction is, 




ACT I, SC. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


53 

21 


you newly into his grace, where it is impoflible you 
fhould take root, but by the faire weather that you make 
your felfe,it is needful that you frame the feafon for your 
owne harueft. 

lolm, I had rather be a canker in a hedge, then a rofe 25 
in his grace, and it better fits my bloud to be difdain’d of 
all, then to fafliion a carriage to rob louc from any : in this 
(though I cannot be faid to be a flattering honeft man ) * 

it muR not be denied but I am a plaine dealing villaine, I 29 

22. take roof^ take true root Q, Cap. ’13, ’21, Knt, Sta. 

Steev. Var. Coll. Dyce, Sta. Cam. Wh. ii. 29. plaine dealing] plain-dealing 

29. but I ani\ that I am Var, ’03, Rowe et seq. 

perhaps, superfluous, but it cannot be said greatly to impair the meaning. The 
brothers had undoubtedly quarrelled until very recently. — Ed.] 

22. take root] Inasmuch as the Folio was printed from the Qto, the omission of 
words in the former is in all likelihood due merely to the carelessness of the com- 
positors, and the reading of the Qto should be here restored. — Ed. 

25. canker] Johnson: A ‘canker’ is the canker-rose, dog-rose, cyanosbatusy ox 
hip. The sense is, I would rather live in obscurity the wild life of nature, than owe 
dignity or estimation to my brother. He still continues his wish of gloomy inde- 
pendence. But what is the meaning of the expression, ‘ a rose in his grace ’ ? If 
he was a rose of himself, his brother’s ‘grace ’ or favour could not degrade him. I 
once read thus : ‘ I had rather be a canker in a hedge, than a rose in his garden ;* 
that is, I had rather be what nature makes me, however mean, than owe any exalta- 
tion or improvement to my brother’ s kindness or cultivation. But a less change will 
be sufticient ; I think it should be read : ‘than a rose by his grace.’ — Steevens : I 
think no change is necessary. The sense is, — I had rather be a neglected dog-rose 
in a hedge, than a garden-flower of the same species, if it profited by his culture. 
See Sonn. liv, 5 — Ellacombe (p. 194) ; The Canker-Rose is the wild Dog Rose, 
and the name is sometimes applied to the common Red Poppy. [The fact that Shake- 
speare himself uses ‘ canker’ in two quite different senses led Ritson {/Remarks, p. 
30) to maintain that the word is here used as it is twice used in Mid, N, Dreamy 
for the envious worm that feeds on ‘ the muske rose buds,’ and that such ‘ a meta- 
morphosis suited to the malignancy of the speaker’s disposition.’ Had this been 
Shakespeare’ s reference it is not likely that he would have spoken of ‘ a canker in 
a hedge,"* Unquestionably, the ‘canker’ is here the Rosa canina, — Ed.] 

27. fashion a carriage] Boas (p. 306) : It would seem as if the dramatist in 
this most radiant of comedies had not wished to focus our attention upon the villain 
by investing him with the fascination which underlies evil-doing masquerading under 
the guise of good-humoured honesty. Moreover, we are not inclined to augur very 
disastrous results from the schemes of a mischief-maker who wears his heart upon 
his sleeve in so transparent a fashion, and who seems so ill-fitted for an intriguer’s 
part. 

27. carriage] Bearing, deportment. See Shakespeare, passim, 

29. denied but] Abbott (§ 122) : That is, ‘there must be no denial to prevent 
my being supposed a plain-dealing villain ;* where, however, ‘ but ’ is used transi- 



54 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act i, sc. iii. 


am trufted with a muffell, and enfranchifde with a clog, 30 
therefore I haue decreed, not to fing in my cage : if I had 
my mouth, I would bite ; if I had my liberty, I would do 
my liking : in the meane time, let me be that I am, and 
feeke not to alter me. 

Co 7 i, Can you make no vfe of your difcontent? 35 

lohn, I will make all vfe of it, for I vfe it onely. 

Who comes here ? what newes Borachio ? 

Efiter Borachio, 

Bor, I came yonder jfrom a great fupper, the Prince 
your brother is royally entertained by Lco 7 iato, 2 ind I can 40 
giue you intelligence of an intended marriage. 

30, mujfell~\ muzzel F^. Dyce, Sta. Cam. Wh. ii. 

36. 1 will make\ 1 make Q, Cap. 39. €ame'\ come Cap. conj. 

Var. Ran. Mai. Stcev. Var. Knt, Coll. 

tionally, almost as an adversative. Cf. ‘It cannot be but I am pigeon-liver’ d.’— 
Ham. II, ii, 605, which approximates to ‘ It cannot be (that I am otherwise than a 
coward),’ i. i%‘it cannot be that I am courageous ; on the contrary [but adversative), 
I am pigeon-liver’ d.’ — D eighton ; Possibly, there is a slight confusion due to the 
excessive negative in ‘denied.’ If Shakespeare had written, ‘It must not be said 
but I am,’ etc., the sense would have been plain. 

29, etc. I am trusted, etc. ] Deighton : ‘ They show perfect trust in me, — yes, 
by putting a muzzle on me like a dangerous dog ; they give me perfect freedom, — 
yes, by fettering me with a clog, like an animal they are afraid will run away ; so, 
like a caged bird, I am determined I will not sing to please them.’ 

32. mouth . . . liberty] Here, of course, ‘mouth’ refers to the ‘muzzle’ and 
‘liberty’ to the ‘clog.’ Let it not be hereafter said that Shakespeare never mixes 
his metaphors. A bird ‘ in a cage ’ with a ‘ clog ’ on its leg to keep it a prisoner, 
and a ‘ muzzle ’ on its beak to keep it from ‘ biting,’ would be a sight for gods and 
men. — E d. 

33. that I am] For examples of the omission of the relative, ‘ that which I am,’ 
see Abbott, § 244, if necessary. 

36. I will make] The present ‘ I make’ of the Qto is better than this future. 

36, I vse it onely] .Steevens : That is, I make nothing else my counsellor. 

39. I came] Deighton ; That is, the aorist for the perfect ; the action being 
regarded simply as past without reference to the present or to completion. — ^W. A. 
Wright : That is, I am come. The same tense is used in JuL Cces, V, v, 3 : 
‘Statilius show’d the torch-light, but, my lord. He came not back.’ And Rich, 
III: V, iii, 277 : ‘ Who saw the sun to-day ?’ In these cases we should now say 
‘He is not come back,’ and ‘Who has seen the sun to-day?’ Similarly in Genesis 
xliv, 28 : ‘ I said, Surely he is tom in pieces ; and I saw him not since.’ 

39. yonder] Were it not that Shakespeare allows himself great licence in the 
transposition of words I should think that this is a compositor’s mistake for ‘a 
great supper yonder.’ — E d. 



ACT I, SC. iii.] MUCH A DOE ABOUT NOTHING 


55 

42 


John. Will it ferue for any Modell to build mifchiefe 
on ? What is hee for a foole that betrothes himfelfe to 
vnquietneffc ? 

Bor, Mary it is your brothers right hand. 45 

lohn. Who, the moft exquifite Claudio ? 

Bor, Euen he. 

lohn, A proper fquier, and who, and who, which way 
Jookes he ? 49 

45. brothers\ bothers 48. and who ^wkicK\ and who? which 

Rowe ii, et seq. 

42. Modell] W. A. Wright : That is, ground plan. Compare 2 Hen. IV: I, 
iii, 42 : * When we mean to build, We first survey the plot, then draw the model.* 

43. for a foole] Dyce {^Remarks^ p. 32) : This is equivalent to — ‘ What manner of 
fool is he?’ See Gifford’s Jonson, iii, 397 [where Gifford, in a note on * What is he 
for a vicar ?’ remarks : * This is pure German in its idiom, and is very common in 
our old writers : was ist das fur ein. It is somewhat singular that E. K., the com- 
mentator on Spenser’s Pastorals ^ should think it necessary to explain the expression 
in his time. On the line, ‘*What is he for a Ladde you so lament?” [ — April"] 
he subjoins, “a strange manner of speaking, q. d. What manner of lad is he?” 
‘‘What is he for a creature” occurs in Every Man out of his Humour ^ Ilf, i.’] 
Dyce {Notes y p. 40) adds two more examples: Middleton’s A Mad IVbrld, my 
Masters: ‘What is she for a fool would marry thee?’ — IVorks, ii, 421, ed. Dyce. 
And Warner’ s Syrinx, etc. : ‘ And what art thou for a man that shouldest be fastidious?’ 
Sig. Q 4» ed, 1597. Staunton says that ‘this construction, though no longer per- 
missible, was trite enough in the poet’s time ;’ and adds fresh examples from Peek’s 
Edward f and Ram Alley, IV, ii. And Deiguton contributes three more from 
Middleton. Abbott (§ 148) says that the phrase is ‘more intelligible when the 
order is changed : “ For a fool, what is he,” i. e. “considered as a fool, — it being 
granted that he is a fool — what kind of a fool is he ?” ’ 

48. proper] Used with even more intense irony by Beatrice in IV, i, 316 : ‘a 
proper saying ?’ 

48. and who] Walker {Ont, iii, 29): Compare Shirley, Witty Fair One, IV, 
ii, vol. i, p. 333, ed. Gifford and Dycc : ‘ — and when, and when ?’ Ib. Wedding, 
III, ii, p. 406 : ‘ — And how, and how do you like it ?’ Ib. Gentleman of Venice, 
III, iv, vol. V, p. 50 : — ‘ And how, and how shew these things?’ Ib. Cardinal, V, 
ib P- 339 *• ‘ — And how, and how ?’ R. G. White, not having had the advantage 
of seeing these parallel examples collected by Walker, believed this iteration of ‘ and 
who’ to be a printer’s error, and proposed to omit the second. Allen (MS) pro- 
posed to punctuate ‘ and who . . . and who . , . which, etc.?’ with the following ingen- 
ious explanation ; ‘ Don John had it in mind to ask directly : Who is the lady that is 
to have him ? but, with the peculiar obliquity of his character, he shrinks from an 
inquiry so straight forward, and finally begins his question again in another form.’ 
This interpretation is so ingenious that even granting the applicability, to the present 
passage, of the examples from Shirley, it may serve to explain why Don John employed 
this form of expression. This same interpretation occurred to P'. A. Marshall, 
independently of course, for Allen’s, written thirty years ago, was never in print 



56 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act i, sc. iii. 

Bor. Mary on HerOy the daughter and Heire of Leo^ 50 
nato. 

lohn. A very forward March-chicke, how came you 
to this ? 

Bor. Being entertain’d for a perfumer, as I was fmoa- 
king a mufty roome, comes me the Prince and Claudio ^ 55 

hand in hand in fad conference : I whipt behind the Ar- 
ras, and there heard it agreed vpon, that the Prince ftiould 57 

50. on Hero] one Hero Q. 54, 55. fmoaking a"] smoaking in a 

52. came'\ come Ff, Rowe, + . Rowe ii, Pope. 

53. to this\ to know this Johns. Var. 56. whipf\ Ff, Rowe, -f , Knt, Wh. i. 

’ 73 > whipt me Q, Cap. et cet. 

till now ; Marshall’ s note reads : — ‘ As we have pointed the passage [And who — 
and who — ], the meaning would be that Don John is going to ask And who — and 
who is the Lady ? when he changes his mind and puts the question in another form. 
It may be that the phrase is a misprint for And how and how ? but even then there 
does not seem much sense in it.’ — ^E d. 

52. March-chicke] Of course, here used as a type of precocity. 

54. 55. smoaking a musty roome] Step:vkns : The neglect of cleanliness 
among our ancestors rendered such precautions too often necessary. In the direc- 
tions, drawn up by Sir John Puckering’ s Steward [Harleian MSSy No. 6850, fol. 90, 
Brit. Mus.) relative to Suffolk Place before Queen Elizabeth’s visit in 1594, the 15th 
article is — ‘The swetynynge of the house in all places by any means.’ Again, in 
Burton’s Anatomy of Melancholy y p. 251, ed. 1632 : ‘ — the smoake of juniper is in 
greate reque.st with us at Oxford, to sweeten our chambers.’ [In a note on 2 Hen, 
IV: V, iv, 21, Steevens adds several other quotations bearing somewhat on the 
question ; among them, one from a Letter from the Lords of the Council, in the reign 
of Edward VI. (Lodge’s Illust, i, 141) where we are told that Lord Paget’s house 
was so small that, ‘ after one month it would wax unsavery for hym to contynue in,’ 
etc.] Halliwfxl quotes from Miiffett (Health's Improvementy ed. 1655, p. 25) 
certain advice to persons, in localities infectei by the plague, with regard to * correct- 
ing the air about them with good fires,’ which cannot be said to apply to the present 
passage ; incidentally, however, Muffett mentions the estimation in which juniper 
was held for its purifying qualities, it ‘ retaineth,’ he says, ‘ his sent and substance a 
hundred years.’ [It has been noted (first, I think, by Thornbury ; but I speak 
under correction) that Shakespeare nowhere alludes to tobacco. It is clear that 
those who make this claim did not read their Shakespeare in either Rowe’s Second 
Edition or in Pope, where Borachio is made to say that he was ‘ smoking in a musty 
room. — E d.] 

55. comes me] The familiar ethical dative. 

56. sad] For ‘sad’ in the sense oi grave y Schmidt’s Lex, will give many an 
instance. 

56, 57. Arras] Drake (ii, 114) : Arras or tapestry, representing landscapes and 
figures, formed the almost universal hangings for rooms below and chambers above. 
When first introduced, it was attached to the bare walls ; but it was soon found 
necessary, in consequence of the damp arising from the brick-work to suspend it on 



ACT I. SC. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


57 

wooe Hero for himfelfe, and hauing obtainM her, giue 58 
her to Count Claudio. 

lohn. Come, come, let vs thither, this may proue food 60 
to my difpleafure, that young ftart-vp hath all the glorie 
of my ouerthrow : if I can croffe him any way, I bleffe 
my felfe euery way, you arc both fure, and will affift 
mee? 

Conr. To the death my Lord. 65 

John. Let vs to the great fupper, their cheere is the 
greater that I am fubdued, would the Cooke were of my 
minde :fliall we goe proue whats to be done ? 

Bor. Weevil wait vpon your Lordfhip. 

Exeunt. 70 

64. mee /*] me, Q, Theob. Warb. et cet. 

Johns. Ran. Mai. 67. of my\ a my Q. 

67. I am fubdued '\ I fubdued 68 , mmde:] mind! Theob. Warb. 

Rowe i. et seq. 

wouldl QFf, Rowe, Pope, Han. 70. Exeunt.] Exit. Q. 

Dyce, Cam. (subs.) ^ would Theob. ii, 

wooden frames, placed at such a distance from the sides of the room, as would easily 
admit of any person being introduced behind it, a facility which soon converted these 
vacancies into common hiding-places. Thus Shakespeare, during his scenic develop- 
ments, has very frequent recourse to this expedient. [The derivation of the word 
from the name of the town in France, w'here it was first made, is well known.] 

58, 59. hauing obtain’d her, giue her] When women were accustomed to be 
thus freely bandied about in marriage, is it to be wondered at that Hero so lightly 
condones Claudio’s insult? — Ed. 

61. displeasure] Deighton interprets this as referring to the malice which Don 
John bears to Claudio. It is possible ; but I incline to think that it refers to the hos- 
tility to all the world which Don John has just expressed. — Ed. 

61. start- vp] In the Ne^v Shakspere Society s Trans, 1877-9, p. 42,* another 
example of this word is given : ‘ It is reported that a new start-up fellow, whom 
they call Paracelsus, changeth & subverteth all the order of ancient, & so long time 
received rules.’ — 1603, Florio’s Montaigne^ p. 321, ed. 1632. And Deighton has 
found a third in Middleton’s Women beware Women, IV, i, ill : ‘A poor, base 
start-up.’ 

62. crosse . . . blesse] Deighton : Though * cross ’ here is, of course, primarily 
to thwart, to hinder, yet the use of the word ‘ bless ’ immediately afterwards suggests 
an allusion to the making of the sign of the cross, as by a priest when blessing, or by 
a layman when endeavouring to avert a danger, a curse, etc. 

63. sure] Steevens ; That is, to be depended on. 

68. proue] Cf. / Thessalonians, V, 21 ; ‘ Prove all things.’ 



58 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act il, sc. i. 


A6lus Secundus. 


Enter Leonato, his brother, his wife, Hero his daughter, and 
Beatrice his neece^and a kinfmafi. 

Leonato. Was not Count lohn here at fupper ? » 

Brother, I faw him not. 5 

Beatrice, How tartly that Gentleman lookes, I neuer 
can fee him, but I am heart-burn’d an howre after. 

Hero, He is of a very melancholy difpofition. 

Beatrice, Hee were an excellent man that were made 
iuft in the mid- way betweene him and Be7icdickc,th.t one lO 
is too like an image and faies nothing, and the other too 
like my Ladies eldeft fonne, euermore tailing. 

Leon, Then halfe fignior Benedicks tongue in Count 
lohns mouth, and halfe Count lolms melancholy in Sig- 
nior Benedicks face. 15 

Beat, With a good legge,and a good foot vnckle,and 


1. Om. Q. 

Leonato’ s House. Pope et seq. 
(subs.) 

2. Enter...] Enter Leonato, Antonio, 
Innogen, Hero, Beatrice, Margaret and 
Ursula. Rowe. 

3. and a] and F^F^. 


5. Brother.] Brot. Ff. Ant. Rowe et 
seq. 

8. very\ Om. F^F^, Rowe i. 

13, 15. Benedicks] BenodieVs Rowe 
ii. Pope. 

15. f<ice.'\ QF^. face — . Fj. face — , 
Fj. face — Rowe et seq. (subs.) 


f 

‘ Scene. A hall in Leonato’s house.’ — Cambridge Edition: It maybe doubted 
whether the author did not intend this scene to take place in the garden rather than 
within doors. The banquet, of which Don John speaks, line 164, would naturally 
occupy the hall or great chamber. Don Pedro at the close of the scene says, * Go 
in with me,’ etc. If the dance, at line 148, w'ere intended to be performed before 
the spectators, the stage might be supposed to represent a smooth lawn as well 
as the floor of a hall. On the other hand, the word ‘ entering,’ at line 78, rather 
points to the scene as being within doors. 

6. tartly] Shakespeare constantly uses adjectives as adverbs ; note that here he 
uses an adverb as an adjective. — Ed. 

7. heart-bum’d] Bucknill (p. 113): Heart-burn referred to acidity is good 
medical doctrine. 

9. were . . . were] See I, i, 135. 

12. Ladies eldest sonne] J. C. Moore {JV, Qu, Ser. 7, vol. iv, p. 474) ; 
That is, the spoiled brat of the family, and therefore pert and talkative. [See 
Fletcher, I, i, 142.] 



ACT ir, sc. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


59 

17 


money enough in his purfe, fuch a man would winne any 
woman in the world, if he could get her good will. 

Leon. By my troth Neece, thou wilt neuer get thee a 
husband, if thou be fo fhrewd of thy tongue. 20 

Brother. Infaith ftiee^s too curft. 

Beat. Too curft is more then curft, I fliall leffen Gods 
^fending that way: for it is faid, God fends a curft Cow 
Ihort homes, but to a Cow too curft he fends none. 24 

18. worlds //] worlds — if Cap. Var. l8. he\ a Q. cC Coll, i, Cam. 

Ran. Mai. Steev. Var. Knt, Coll. Dyce, 19. thee d] hee ta F^. 

Sta. 22. / fhall'\ and 1 shall Han. 

20, zx. shrewd . . . curst] Craik (p. 141) : It is a strong confirmation of the 
derivation of ‘ shrewd ’ from the verb to shrew that we find ‘ shrewd ’ and ‘ curst ^ 
applied to the disposition and temper by our old writers in almost, or rather, in pre- 
cisely, the same sense. [The present use of the two words is a case in point.] So 
in Mid> N. Dream^ HI, ii, Helena, declining to reply to a torrent of abuse from 
Hermia, says, * I was never curst ; I have no gift at all in shrewishness.’ And in 
Tam. of S/ir. I, ii, first we have Hortensio describing Katharine to his friend 
Petruchio as ^intolerable curst, and shrewd, and froward,’ and then we have 
Katharine, the shrew, repeatedly designated < Katharine the curst.’ At the end of 
the Play she is called * a curst shrew,’ that is, as we might otherwise express it, an 
ill-tempered shrew. ... As it is in words that ill-temper finds the readiest and 
most frequent vent, the terms curst and shrew., and shrewd and shrewish are often 
used with a special reference to the tongue. But sharpness of tongue, again, always 
implies some sharpness of understanding as well as of temper. The terms shreivd 
and shrewdly f accordingly, have come to convey usually something of both of these 
qualities, — at one time, perhaps, most of the one, at another of the other. The sort 
of ability that we call shrewdness never suggests the notion of anything very high ; 
the word has always a touch in it of the sarcastic or disparaging. But, on the other 
hand, the disparagement which it expresses is never without an admission of son|fe- 
thing al.so that is creditable or flattering. Hence it has come to pass that a person 
does not hesitate to use the terms in question even of himself and his own judge- 
ments or conjectures. We say, ‘ I shrewdly suspect or guess,’ or, ‘ I have a shrewd 
guess, or suspicion,’ taking the liberty of thus asserting or assuming our own intel- 
lectual acumen under cover of the modest confession at the ^ame time of some little 
ill-nature in the exercise of it. 

20. shrewd of thy tongue] Allen (MS) : Shreivd of tongue would not strike 
us as more singular than swift of foot ; it is the Pronominal Adjective ‘thy,’ that 
makes the singularity. 

23. sending that way] Allen (MS) : One must suspect that the original form 
must have been ‘ sending in that way ’ and that the in got dropt out in mere care- 
lessness of speech. But the gy in Participles in dng was, probably, no more pro- 
nounced in Shakespeare’s day than by the Scotch, North-English, and others now. 
I suspecty therefore, that the true solution is the absorption of the in by the ine of the 
Participle, i. e, in pronunciation, while it was felt to be there still. /, therefore, 
should write: ‘sending ’that way.’ 



6o 


MUCH A DOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. i. 


Leon. So, by being too curft, God will fend you no 25 
homes. 

£ea^. luft, if he fend me no husband, for the which 
blefTing, I am at him vpon my knees euery morning and 
eueriing : Lord, I could not endure a husband with a 
beard on his face, I had rather lie in the woollen. 30 

Leonato. You may light vpon a husband that hath no 
beard. 

Batricc. What fhould I doe with him ? dreffe him in 
my apparell,and make him my waiting gentlewomanPhe 
that hath a beard, is more then a youth rand he that hath 35 
no beard, is leffe then a man : and hec that is more then a 
youth, is not for mee rand he that is leffe then a man, I am 
not for him r therefore I will euen take fixepence in ear- 
neft of the Berrord,and leade his Apes into hell. 39 

25. you\ Om. FgF^, Rowe i. 38. fix€pence\sixpenceY ^ , 

30. inthewool/cn'lin'woollejiKoyfe^-^. 39. Bcrrord'\ dea f'zmre/ Knty Dyce, 

31. vpon\ on Q, Cull. Dyce, Cam. Sta. Cam. bdr-ard Wh. i. bear-ard 

34. waiting gcntlewomaft\ waiting- Wh. ii. Bear herd F^F^, Rowe, + , Cap. 

-gentlewoman UkovfQ. et cet. (subs.) 

23. God sends, etc.] Halliwell : This is a very common old English proverb. 
* Curst cowes have short horns, Dat Dens immiti cornua curta bold ; Providence so 
disposes that they who have will, want power or means to hurt.’ — Ray’s Proverbs^ 
ed. 1678, p. 118. . . . ‘But herein I have tolde hym my opinion, whiche is, that 
sithe he will leane so muche to his owne inclination, that God will sende a shrewde 
cowe shorte homes,’ — A Letter sent by F, A. touching the Proceedings in a private 
Quarell and Unkindnesse between Arthur Hall and Melchisedech Mallcricy 1576. 
[The same variation (in the substitution of shrewd for ‘curst’) is noted by W. A. 
Wright in Froude’s Hist, of England^ also (IV, 512) : ‘God sends a shrewd cow 
short horns,’ .says Lord Surrey to Blage.] 

27. lust] Exactly so. See V, i, 174, where it is again Beatrice’s word. 

30. in the woollen] Capell asserts that this means ‘in my shroud’; but 
Steevens supposes that it means ‘ blankets without sheets.’ As regards Capell’ s 
interpretation, W. A. Wright remarks that ‘ the custom of burying in woollen 
appears not to have come in till the Act of 18 & 19 Charles the Second for the pro- 
tection of the woollen trade, which made it compulsory for all to be buried in 
woollen.’ [The so-callcd ‘Woollen Act’ came into operation August ist, 1678, 
Halliwell says that ‘ the practice was, to some extent, in vogue previously [to the 
close of the seventeenth century] ; a woollen shroud being occasionally mentioned.’ 
Although I prefer Steevens’ s explanation, yet the use of the definite article, ‘in the 
woollen ’ seems as though Capell were right, and the phrase were euphemistic for 
‘being buried.’ Halliwell calls attention to the reading ‘in woollen,’ in Davenant’s 
Law against Lovers ; he might have noted that it is the reading, in the present 
passage, from Rowe to Johnson. We all remember Mrs Oldfield’s last words, 



ACT n, sc. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


6i 


Leon. Well then,goe you into hell. 40 

Beat. No, but to the gate, and there will the Deuill 

40. heU.'\ QFf, Rowe, + , Cap. Mai. hell , — Theob. hell? Ilan. et cet. 


immortalised by Pope: “‘Odious! in woollen! ’twould a Saint provoke!’* Were 
the last words that poor Narcissa spoke,’ etc. — E d.] 

38. not for him] Lady Martin (p. 306) : Who does not see what a pleasant 
♦person Beatrice must have been in her uncle’s home, with all this power of saying 

quaint and unexpected things which bubble up from an uncontrollable spirit of 
enjoyment? Her frankness must indeed have been a pleasant foil to the somewhat 
characterless and over-gentle Hero. See how fearlessly she presently tells Hero not 
to take a husband of her father’ s choosing, unless he pleases herself. ^ 

39. Berrord] Inasmuch as this word is spelled ‘ bear-herd ’ in Tam. Shr. Ind. 
ii, 21, and in 2 lien. IV: I, ii, 192, Schmidt i^Lex.') asserts, unwisely, that this is 
‘the Shakespearian form of the word’; he then gives the several .spellings as they 
occur in the Qto and Folios, and adds it is ‘ never’ there found, spelled ‘ bear-ward, 
as some modern Edd. choose to write.’ ‘On the other hand,’ says W. A. Wright, 
‘ in The 1 'h‘st Part of the Contention^ ^ h * 24, which is the original of 2 Hen. VI: 
V, i, 210, we find “ Despight the Beare-ward that protects him so,” while the First 
Folio of 2 Hen. VI. reads “Bearard.” “Bear-herd” is formed on the analogy of 
shepherd, and neat-herd, but as bears are not kept in flocks or herds it seems likely 
that “ bear- ward” is the more correct form.’ 

39. hell] Capell (p. 120) : The saying now apply’ d to the maiden, to frighten 
her into marriage, is — that, if she dies an old one, she goes to hell certainly ; and 
her office there will be leading of apes; ’tis of great antiquity, and it’s reason 
untraccable. — Stekvens (Note on Tam. Shr. II, i, 34) : That women who refused 
to bear children, should, after death, be condemned to the care of apes in leading- 
strings, might have been considered an act of posthumous retribution. — Malone 
(/<^.) ; ‘ To lead apes’ was in our author’s time, as at present, one of the employ- 
ments of a bear-ward, who often carries about one of those animals along with his 
bear ; but I know not how this phrase came to be applied to old maids. Halliwell 
remarks that old bachelors were doomed to be bear-leaders in the same place. 
Twenty-three references to old authorities arc supplied by Halliwell of the use of 
this phrase, and doubtless more could be added, but they do not advance our 
knowledge beyond the threat that those who led a virgin’s life on earth must lead 
apes in hell. Possibly, it is one of those phrases, like Hamlet’s ‘ hawk from a hand- 
saw,’ where words which had become obsolete and of no meaning were replaced by 
others which were familiar, but so inappropriate as to obscure wholly the original 
meaning of the proverb. What the word could have been, for which ‘ apes ’ was sub- 
stituted, it is difficult to conjecture. — E d. 

Lines 40-48 Warburton asserted to be ‘impious nonsense,’ written ‘by the 
players’ and ‘foisted in without rhyme or reason.’ Of course, .so believing, he 
could do nothing else than put them in the margin, — whereupon Dr Johnson 
suppressed them altogether, a little mistrustfully, however, inasmuch as he ex- 
pressed a fear that they were ‘ too much in the manner of our author, who is 
'Sometimes trying to purchase merriment at too dear a rate.’ To the excellent 
Heath, however, (p. loi) they appeared ‘no other than the harmless pleasantry 
of a lively girl.’ — E d. 



62 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. i. 


meete mee like an old Cuckold with homes on his head, 42 
and fay, get you to heauen Beatrice y get you to heauen, 
heere’s no place for you maids, fo deliucr I vp my Apes, 
and away to S. Peter : for the heauens, hee Ihewes mee 45 


42. with homes] with his horns 
Rowe, + . 

45. Peter : for the heauens,] QFf, 
Knt, Dyce, lluds. Feter, for the 


heav'ns; Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
Peter for the heavens ; Cap. Var. Mai. 
Steev. Var. Coll. Wh. Cam. Peter; for 
the heavens ! Sta. 


41. but] For otlier examples where ‘but’ means onfy, see Abbott, § 128, if 
necess^lfy. 

45, for the heauens] If these words are to be considered as a petty oath, the 
punctuation is of small moment ; Beatrice may say either: ‘ I’m off to Saint Peter; by 
the heavens, he shows me,’ etc. or, ‘ I’m off to Saint Peter, by the heavens ; he shows 
me,’ etc. But to those who deny that the phrase bears this meaning, the punctuation 
is important ; in this case, they adopt the punctuation of Capell, and interpret the 
words as connected with ‘away:’ I’m away for the heavens to Saint Peter; he 
shows me,’ etc. Gifford is emphatic that the words are a petty oath, and adduces 
many examples. In Every Man out of his Humour, II, i, Fungoso says: ‘some 
ten or eleven pounds will do it all, and suit me, for the heavens !’ On this, Gifford 
(p. 67) has substantially the following note: ‘This expression occurs in the Mer, of 
Ven.: “ Away ! says the fiend, for the heavens These words are merely a petty 
oath ; and wheresoever they occur, in this manner, and by whomsoever they are 
spoken, mean neither more nor less than — by heaven 1 That no future doubts may 
arise on the subject I will subjoin two or three of as many score examples which I 
could instantly produce ; the finst shall be from Jonson himself : “ Come on, sir 
Valentine, I’ll give you a health, for the heavens, you mad Capricio, hold hook or 
line!” — Case is Altered, I, i, ad fin. The second from his old enemy Dekker: 
“ A lady took a pipeful or two (of tobacco) at my hands, and praised it, for the 
heavens P* — Untrussing of a Ilmnourous Poet, p. lio, ed. Hawkins. And, to con- 
clude, Twedle, the drunken piper, in Pasquil and Katharine, exclaims, “ I must goe 
and clap my Tabers cheekes there, for the heavens.** * — IV, p. 182, cd. Simpson. 
In a note on the foregoing example in The Case is Altered, (vol. vi, p. 333) Gifford 
adds two more quotations : ‘ I was liquored soundly ; my guts were rinced, for the 
heavens!* — Marston’s What you Will, III, i, p. 256, ed. Halliwell. Again, ‘An’t 
please the gods now, . . , you shall see me tickle the measures, for the heavens P — 
/ Ant. and Mellida, II, p. 24, ed. Halliwell. ‘Assurance,’ Gifford concludes, ‘ is now 
“made doubly sure,” I trust.’ 

On the other hand, pace Gifford’s dogmatic assertion, it is possible that no thought 
of an oath, petty or otherwise, was in Beatrice’ s mind, — indeed, her merry speech 
needs no such garnishing, — ^but that, being freed from her apes, she intends to make 
all due haste ‘for the heavens.’ Allen (MS) suggests, as a bare possibility, that 
the text ought to read, ‘’fore the heavens,’ that is, in front of, at the gate of, the 
heavens; she goes from the “gate” of hell (line 41) to that of heaven.’ Halli- 
well quotes Cotgrave (s. v. Haut ) : *Faire haut le bois ... to quaffe, tipple, carouse 
for the heauens,’ which might be fairly and familiarly paraphrased by ‘ carouse for 
dear life,’ and from this, again, we might thus paraphrase Beatrice’s words: ‘and 



ACT II, SC. 1] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


63 

where the Batchellers fit, and there line wee as merry as 46 
the day is long. 

Brother^ Well neece, I truft you will be ruFd by your 
father. 

Beatrice. Yes faith, it is my cofens dutie to make curt- 50 
fie, and fay, as it pleafe you : but yet for all that cofin, let 
him be a handfome fellow, or elfe make an other curfie , 
and fay, father, as it pleafe me. 

Leonato. Well neece, I hope to fee you one day fitted 
with a husband. 55 

Beatrice. Not till God make men of fome other met- 
tall then earth, would it not grieue a woman to be ouer- 
maftred with a peece of valiant duft f to make account of 
her life to a clod of waiward marie ? no vncklc, ile none ; 

Adams fonnes are my brethren, and truly I hold it a finne 60 
to match in my kinred. 


48. [To Hero. Rowe.' 

50. curt’/ie\ Fj. cur/ie Q. curt/ie 
FgF^, Rowe, + . court' sy Cap. Mai. 
cursey Hal. curtsy Wright, courtesy 
Steev. et cet. (subs.) 

5 1 . fay^ as'\ fay^ fat her y as Q, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Cap. Var, Mai. Steev. 
Var. Coll. Dyce, Wh. Sta. Cam. 

pleafe^ pleases Theob. ii, Warb. 

Johns. 

52. curfie^ Q. curtfie F^F^, Rowe 


ii, + . curiiftey F^, Rowe i. curt' sy Cap. 
Mai. courtesy Steev. et cet. (subs.) 

53. pleafe'l pleafes Ff, Rowe, + , 

57. earthy"] earth; Rowe. 

58. make account] make an account 
Q, Cap. Steev. Var. Coll. Dyce, Wh. 
Cam. 

59. waiward] cold wayward F^F^, 

60. my] Om. F^F^, Rowe i. 

61. kinred] kindf'ed Rowe. 


away to Saint Peter, for dear life . ' When an expletive becomes very common, it will 
not do to restrict it to one sole meaning. — Ed. 

46. merry] W. A. Wright : In the sixteenth century this word was used in 
the sense of * joyful ’ and without the notion of levity which now attaches to it. For 
instance, in the Prayer-Book Version of Psalm xlvii, 5 : ‘God is gone up with a 
merry noise.’ And Sir Thomas More {Life by Roper, ed. 1731, p. 98) said to the 
Constable of the Tower, ‘Good Mr Kingstone, trouble not your selfe, but be of 
good cheere : For I will praie for you and my good Ladie your wife that wee maie 
meet in Heaven together, wheare we shall be merrie for ever and ever.’ 

50, 51, 52. curtsie . . . cursie] Custom appears to have now decided in favour 
of the spelling courtesy for a movement of obeisance generally, and curtsy or curtsey 
for an obeisance by a woman. 

51. say, as it] Unquestionably the Qto here supplies an omission in the Folio. 

58. with] Equivalent to by; see Abbott, § 193; it occurs again III, i, 84, 85 : 

V, i, 130; V, iii, 8. 

61. kinred] Anon, {Blackwood' s Maga, April, 1833, p. 542) : There is some- 
thing very kindly in all this contempt of marriage. Nor did * Lady Disdain ’ sup- 




64 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. i. 


Leon. Daughter, remember what I told you , if the 62 
Prince doe folicit you in that kinde, you know your an- 
fwere. 

Beatrice. The fault will be in the muficke cofin,if you 65 
be not woed in good time : if the Prince bee too impor- 
tant, tell him there is meafure in euery thing, & fo dance 67 

66 . woed"] wooed woodY^, wodd 66 ^ 6 *]. impor-tant]importunate'Rovft 

FjF^. ii, Pope, Han. 

pose that any rational person would credit her antinuptial asseverations. What 
superior young lady ever professes a rooted resolution to marry ? . . . Beatrice knew 
that she would have to be married at last, like the rest of her unfortunate sex, but 
'twas not even like a cloud her marriage day, but quite beyond the visible horizon. 
Of it, she had not even a dim idea ; therefore came her warm wit in jets and gushes 
from her untamed heart. It is sincere, and in ‘ measureless content ’ she enjoys her 
triumphs. Marry when she may, she will not be forsworn. She has but used her 
‘ pretty oath by yea and nay,* and Cupid in two words will justify the fair apostate 
in any court of Hymen. But ’tis different with Benedick. [See I, i, 239.] 

66. in good time) W. A, Wright : There is the same play upon words in 
Merry Wives ^ I, iii, 29 : ‘His filching was like an unskilful singer, he kept not 
time.* And in Twelfth Night, II, iii, 98 ; ‘ Mai. Is there no respect of place, 
persons, nor time in you? Sir To. We did keep time, sir,* in our catches.* 

66, 67. important] Johnson : ‘ Important ’ here, and in many other places, is 
importunate. [See Text. Notes. 

67. measure] This word means both moderation and a dance. — Reed (Note on 
Love' s L. L. V, ii, 184) : The measures were dances solemn and slow. They were 
performed at court, and at public entertainments of the Societies of I.aw and Equity, 
at their halls, on particular occasions. It was formerly not deemed inconsistent with 
propriety for even the gravest persons to join in them ; and, accordingly, at the revels 
which were celebrated at the Inns of Court, it has not been unusual for the first 
characters in the Law to become performers in treading the measures. See Dugdale’s 
Origines Juridiciaics. Sir John Davies, in his poem called Orchestra, 1622, describes 
them in this manner. ‘ But after these, as men more civil grew, He [f. e. Love] did 
moxe grave and solemm measures frame ; ... Yet all the feet whereon these measures 
go. Are only spondees, solemn, grave and slow.* Staunton quotes from Riche his 
Farewell to Militarie profession, 1581 ; ‘As firste for dauncyng, athough I like the 
measures verie well, yet I could never treade them aright, nor to use measure in any 
thyng that I went aboute, although I desired to performe all thynges by line and by 
leavell, what so ever I tooke in hande. Our galliardes are so curious, that thei are 
not for my daunsyng, for thei are so full of trickes and tournes, that he which hath 
no more but the plaine sinquepace, is no better accoumpted of then a verie bongler ; 
and for my part thei might assone teache me to make a capricornus, as a capre in the 
right kinde that it should bee. For a jeigge my heeles are too heavie ; and these 
braules are so busie, that I love not to beate my braines about them. A rounde is 
too giddie a daunce for my diet ; for let the dauncers runne about with as muche 
speede as thei maie, yet are thei never a whit the nier to the ende of their course, 
unlesse with often touming thei hap to catch a fall ; and so thei ende the daunce 




ACT II, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


65 

68 


out the anfwerc,for heare me wooing, wedding, & 

repenting, is as a Scotch ijgge, a meafure, and a cinque- 
pace : the firft fuite is hot and hafty like a Scotch ijgge 70 

68. keare me] here me Q. 69, 70. ijgge] F,. 

69. is is Rowe, Pope, Ilan. 

with shame, that was begonne but in sporte. These hornepipes I have hated from 
my verie youth ; and I knowe there are many other that love them as well as I. 
Thus you maie perceive that there is no daunce but either I like not of theim, or 
thei like not of me, so that I can daunce neither.’ [p. 4, — Reprint Shakespeare 
Society, ] 

69, 70. cinque-pace] Naylor (p. 137): This interesting book \_Arbeau^s Orchk- 
sographie] on the Art of Dancing was publi.shed at Magon, in 1588. The author 
was Jehan Tabourot, but his real name does not appear in the work, being ana- 
grammatised into Thoinot Arbeau. The treatise is written in the form of Dialogue 
between Master (Arbeau) and Pupil (Capriol) ; and gives a most clear description 
of all the fashionable dances of the time, as far as words can do it ; dance tunes in 
music type ; and, incidentally, many instructions as to the manners of good society. 
On p. 25, Capriol a.sks his Master to describe the steps of the ‘ basse ’ dance. This 
was the * danse par bas, ou sans sautcr,’ which was of the 15th century, was in triple 
time, and contained three parts : A, basse dance ; B, Retour de la basse dance ; C, 
Tordion. This 3rd part, or Tordion, ‘ n’est aultre chose qu’une gaillarde par terref 
i. €. the Tordion of a Basse dance was simply a Galliard par ierre^ without the leap- 
ing or ‘ Sault majeur.’ Before Arbeau answers his pupil, he gives him some pre- 
liminary instruction as to the etiquette of the ball-room. He says, ‘ In the first 
place . . . you should choose some virtuoifs damsell whose appearance pleases you, 
take off your hat or cap with your left hand, and tender her your right hand to lead 
her out to dance. She, being modest and well brought-up, will give you her left 
hand, and rise to follow you. Then conduct her to the end of the room, face each 
other, and tell the band to play a basse dance. For, if you do not, they may 
inadvertently play some other kind of dance. And when they begin to play, you 
begin to dance. Capriol. If the lady should refuse, I should feel dreadfully 
ashamed. Arbeau. A properly educated young lady never refuses one who does 
her the honour to lead her out to dance. If she does, she is accounted foolish 
(sotte), for if she doesn’t want to dance, what is she sitting there for, among the 
rest^’ . . . Arbeau then describes (p. 141) the Tordion, which is Part 3 of the basse 
dance. He says, it is still in triple time, but ‘plus legiere et concitde,’ and does not 
consist of ‘simples, doubles, reprises,’ etc., like the first and .second parts, but is 
danced almost exactly as a Galliard, except that it is par terrcy i. c. without any capers, 
and low on the ground, with a quick and light step ; whereas the Galliard i.s danced 
highy with a .slower and weightier ‘mesure.’ He gives the following tune, which 
will fit any of the innumerable diversities of Galliard. If played fast, it is a Tordion, 
if slower, a Galliard. (There are, of course, no bars in the original. ) 

Here are the steps of the Galliard, consisting of five movements of the feet, and 
the caper, or ‘ .sault majeur.’ The five steps give tlie Galliard the name of Cinque 
pas. I . Greve gaulche ( ‘ Greve ’ is explained as a ‘ coup de pied ’ ) ; 2. Greve 
droicte ; 3. Greve gaulche ; 4. Greve droicte ; 5. Sault majeur ; 6. Posture gaulche. 

If 2, 3, 4, 6 are the ‘ Cinq’ pas, and 5 is the characteristic leap or caper. 

5 



66 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOl'HING [act ii, sc. i. 


(and full as fantafticall) the wedding manerly modeft, 71 

71. manerly modejf^ mannerly-modest Theob. 


Tordion or Galliard (cinquepace). 



1 2 3 4 6 6 



The next six minims are danced to the Revers, which is just the same, except that 
the words droicte and gaulche change places all the way down. Then repeat till the 
tunc is finished. [Suiely, the curiosity is pardonable which would fain be enlightened 
as to the exact style of a ‘ saull majeur ’ especially since it appears that high-flung 
capers were the most admired steps of the dance. Witness the description by Orazio 
Busino, chaplain to the Venetian Ambassador, of a performance before James I, 
in 1617: ‘At last twelve cavaliers in masks, the central figure always being the 
prince, “chose their partners and danced every kind of dance, . . . and at length 
being well nigh tired, they began to flag, whereupon the king, who is naturally 
choleric, got impatient, and shouted aloud, ‘Why don’t they dance? What did 
you make me come here for? Devil take you all ! Dance !’ On hearing this, the 
Marquis of Buckingham, his majesty’s most favored minion, immediately sprang for- 
ward, cutting a score of lofty and very minute [qy. elaborate ?] capers with so much 
grace and agility, that he not only appeased the ire of his angry sovereign, but, 
moreover, rendered himself the admiration and delight of everybody. The other 
masquers, being thus encouraged, continued successively exhibiting their prowess 
with various ladies, finishing in like manner with capers. . . . The i)rince, how- 
ever, excelled them all in bowing, being very exact in making his obeisance both to 
the king and to his partner. . . . Owing to his youth, he has not much wind as 
yet, but he, nevertheless, cut a few capers very gracefully.” ’ — Quarterly Rev. Oct. 
1857, p. 424, also reprinted in New Shakspere Society's Harrison’s England^ Part 
II, p. 58 .*— Ed.] 

70. suite] That is, wooing, courtship. See line 333, below, where Leonato says 
that Beatrice ‘ mocks all her wooers out of suite.’ 

70. hot and hasty like a Scotch ijgge] Naylor (p. 124) : The name ‘ Jigg* 
(later Gigue and Jig) comes from Giga (Geige), a .sort of fiddle, in use during the 
1 2th and 13th centuries. The oldest jigs are Scottish, and were ‘round dances* 
for a large number of people. As for the Time of the Jig tunes, tho.se of the i8th 
century were certainly written in triple rhythm, like |, |, or The Jegge, given 
in Stainer and Barrett’s Diet, of Musical Terms, dated 1678, is in quick | time. 
But ‘The Cobbler’s Jig,’ 1622, is very decidedly in quick | time. Moreover, 
-Bull’s ‘The King’s Hunting Jigg’ is also in quick | time, and is probably earlier 
than 1600. 




ACT II, SC. ii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 6/ 

fas a meafurc) full of flate & aunchentry, and then comes 72 

repentance, and with his bad legs falls into the cinque- 
pace fafter and fafter, till he finkes into his graue. 

Leonata. Cofin you apprehend paffing fhrewdly. 75 

72. aunchentry] anchentry F^F^, 74. finkes] F^. finks F^F^, Rowe, + 

Rowe, -t. ancientry Cap. et seq. Var, ’21. fincke Q, Cap. et cet. 

into his] into the Rowe i. 


72. state & aunchentry] That is, full of stately formality and antique fashion. 
The phonetic spelling * auhehentry ’ accords with the similar spelling of * his Moore- 
ships Auntient’ in 0 /h. I, i, 35. — Ed. 

74. sinkes into] Capell {Notes^ ii, 121), in giving his reasons why *in the 
woollen ’ is to be preferred to in woollen^ says that the latter lacks the ^ numerous- 
ness ’ of the former, which means, I suppose, that it has not as many syllables. His 
note continues : ‘ which numerousness, together with some addition of humour, we 
may and ought to give to another word coming from this speaker [?. e, Beatrice] by 
giving that “ cinque-pacc a kind of Gallic pronouncing, approaching io-—sink-a- 
face.^ 1 cannot find, however, that Capell anywhere suggests that in the present 
line we should actually read, Uill he sink-apace into,’ etc.; his note refers only 
to the pronunciation of < cinque-pace.’ But in the margin of Collier’s Second 
Folio the word apace is added in manuscript after ‘sinkes.’ Collier does not tell 
us that the final s of ‘ sinkes ’ is erased, but it is to be presumed that it is so. 
This emendation, ‘till he sink apace into’ Collier adopted in his text, in both his 
Second and Third eds. wherein he has been followed by Hudson. Anon. [Black- 
wood's Ma^s^a. Aug. 1853, p. 192), in referring to this text of Collier, remarks; * we 
admit that Shakespeare might, — nay, ought, — to have written [“ sink apace into”] 
but we doubt whether he did,’ Halliwell speaks of the emendation as ‘an alter- 
ation of singular ingenuity,’ and then continue.s, ‘but, even if such a double play 
upon words is likely to belong to the time of Shakespeare, it is, I imagine, somewhat 
at variance with the author’ s intention, who is making Beatrice in this speech sarcastic 
rather than jocular. The nature of the pun seems to be modern.’ Dyce (cd. i) 
dryly observes that ‘there is no denying that, in this instance at least, Mr Collier’s 
MS Corrector has drawn on his invention with considerable .success.’ R. G. White 
is even less lenient ; he pronounces the pun ‘ a tolerable one for the old dabbler, 
but out of place. ... It occurs, where Mr Collier’s corrector may have found it, in 
Mar.ston’s Insatiate Countess^ Act II,’ [i : * Alendosa. For Heavens love, thinke of 
me as of the man Whose dancing dayes you .see arc not yet done. Lady Leniulus, 
Yet you sinke a pace, sir.’ The chiefest objection to Collier’s text, apart from its 
lack of authority, is to me, its obviousness ; the play upon words is amply evident 
without it. For those to whom it is not obvious it is quite sufficient to have the pun 
suggested in a note as Capell .suggests it. — Ed.] 

75. apprehend] ‘ Apprehend ’ and ‘ apprehension * .sometimes occur when the 
meaning is not as manife.st as it is here, where ‘ apprehend ’ means to see or perceive 
clearly. In III, iv, 64, where Beatrice asks Margaret, ‘ how long haue you profest 
apprehension ?’ there is clearly the idea of quickness of ivify or of repartee, with a 
slightly contemptuous tone. Note the distinction which Shakespeare draws in Mid. 
N B, V, i, 8, 9, between ‘ apprehend ’ and ‘ com2>rehend ’ ; ‘ Louers and madmen 



68 ^ MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. i. 

Beatrice. I haue a good eye vnckle, I can fee a Church 76 
by daylight. 

Leon. The reuellers are entring brother , make good 
roome. 

Enter Prince^ Pedro^ Claudio ^and Benedicke^and Balthafar^ 80 

or dumbe lohn. Maskers with a drum. 

Pedro. Lady, will you walke about with your friend? 

Hero. So you walke foftly,and looke fwectly,and fay 83 

79. [Leonato and his Company mask. Urs. and Others, mask’d. Cap. et seq. 

Cap. (subs. ) 

Scene II. Pope, + . 81. Maskers with a drum.] Om. Q. 

81. or... drum.] and others in Mas- 83. So you\ So^youC^, 
queradc. Rowe. Don John, Bor. Marg. 

haue such seething braines . . . that apprehend more Then coole reason euer com- 
prehends.’ — Ei). 

77. daylight] Lady Martin (p. 307) : Beatrice is now in the gayest .spirits, 
and in the very mood to encounter her old enemy. Benedick. ... In the dialogue 
that follows between them the actress has the most delightful scope for bringing out 
the address, the graceful movement, the abounding joyousness which makes Beatrice 
the paragon of her kind. 

80. 81. The insufficiency of this stage-direction was first supplied by Capell, 
and the action of the scene described in the following note (ii, 122) : Leonato (the 
house’s master), his niece, daughter, and brother enter before the rest [i. e, at the 
beginning of this scene], and they only arc privy to each other’s persons and dresses; 
they receive their visitors, masked; and the Prince, — having singled-out Hero, by 
chance or otherways, — after a few speeches open, engages her in a convcr.sation apart, 
his last words intimating its nature ; while this is passing between them. Benedick, 
who is in .search after Beatrice, lights upon Margaret ; a sharp one, her voice suiting 
her sharpness ; this voice which she raises at [line 99] betrays her to Benedick, who 
quits her smartly and hastily ; a manner resented slightly by Margaret, who ex- 
presses it in her prayer ; for her ‘ good dancer ’ means — one that could move as 
nimbly as the one who had just left her. 

81. dumbe lohn] Malone : Here is another proof that when the first copies of 
our author’s plays were prepared for the press, the transcript was made out by the 
ear. If the MS had lain before the transcriber, it is very unlikely that he should 
have mistaken Bon for ‘ dumb ’ ; but by an inarticulate .speaker, or inattentive hearer, 
they might easily be confounded. Reed actually deems * dumb ’ ‘ not improbable,’ 
on account of Don John’s ‘taciturnity.’ ‘Balthazar and John,’ says Collier, 
* were two distinct persons,’ and, therefore, ‘or’ is incorrect. To Collier’s assertion, 
wherein he follows Malone, that ‘dumb John’ was doubtless a mishearing for *JDon 
John,’ Dyce {Strictures^ p. 48) replies: ‘No; “dumb” was put by mistake for 
Dom, [I doubt. — E d.] So, there is a poem entitled The Loue of Dom Diego and 
Gyneura, appended to Diella, etc. , 1 596. 

82. friend] A common term for a lover^ applicable to both sexes. 



ACT n, sc. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


69 


nothing, I am yours for the walke, and efpccially when I 
walke away. 85 

Pedro. With me in your company. 

Hero. I may fay fo when I plcafe. 

Pedro. And when pleafe you to fay fo ? 

Hero. When I like your fauour , for God defend the 
Lute fliould be like the cafe. 90 

Pedro. My vifor is Philemons roofc , within the houfe 
is Loue. 

Hero. Why then your vifor fliould be thatcht. 

Pedro. Speake low if you fpeake Loue. 94 

86. company. company ? Rowe ii. speak^ Jiwe. Anon. ap. Cam. 

88. when pleaf e you to'\ when will you 94. Pedro] Marg. Heath, Ran. 

please to Rowe i. Speake... Loue} In Ital. as a quo- 

92. Loue} love Ff. loue Q, Theob. tation, Han. 

et seq. [Drawing her aside to whisper. 

93, 94. Hero. ... thatcht. Pedro, Han. 

...Loue} Hero. ...thatch'd. Speak... 

89. God defend] Halliwell : That is, forbid. * God diflende it, a Dieu ne 
plaise ^^ — Pal.sgrave, 1530. — W. A. Wright : In Rich. JII : III, vii, 81, where the 
Quartos read ‘ God forbid ’ the Folios have * God defend.’ 

90. case] Theobald : That is, that your face should be as homely and coarse as 
your mask. 

9 1-94, My visor . . . speake Loue] Blakeway : Perhaps, Shakespeare meant 
here to introduce two of the long fourteen- syllable verses so common among our early 
dramatists, and the measure of Golding’s Translation: ‘My visor is Philemon’s 
roof ; within the house is Jove. || Why then your visor should be thatch’d. Speak 
low, if you speak love.’ [This suggestion of Blakeway Dyce adopted in all three 
of his editions, and was followed by R. G. White, in his First, and by Staunton. 
After quoting Blakeway’ s query, Dyce replies {^Notes, 41) : ‘Nobody, I should .sup- 
pose, that has eyes and ears could doubt it. But are the lines Shakespeare’s own, 
or taken (at least partly) from some poem of the time which has perished? To me 
they read like a quotation.’ If the lines occur elsewhere, they must be in some 
drama, and they flow so smoothly, and the memory clings to them so readily that, at 
this late day, they could have hardly escaped detection did they actually exist. 
Hanmer, in part, anticipated Dyce, inasmuch as he suggests that line 94 is ‘quoted 
from a .song or .some verses commonly known at that time.’ — Ed.] 

92. Loue] Theobald was loo hone.st not to acknowledge his indebtedness, had 
he known of the Qto’s reading, llis note is as follows: — ‘’Tis plain, the poet 
alludes to the story of Baucis and Philemon from Ovid \_Met, viii, 630] ; and this old 
couple, as the Roman poet describes it, lived in a thatched cottage : “ Parva quidem, 
stipulis et canna tecta palustri.” Though this old pair lived in a cottage, this cottage 
received two straggling Gods, Jupiter and Mercury, under its roof. So, Don Pedro 
is a prince ; and though his visor be but ordinary, he would insinuate to Hero, 
that he has something godlike within ; alluding either to his dignity, or to the qualities 



70 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. i. 


Bene, Well, I would you did like me. 95 

Mar, So would not I for your owne fake, for I haue 
manie ill qualities. 

Bene, Which is one ? 

Mar, I fay my prayers alowd. 

Be 7 i, I loue you the better , the hearers may cry Amen. 100 

95, 98, icx). Bene.] QFf, Rowe, 

Pope, Cap. Var. Mai. Steev. Var. Knt, 

Coll, i, ii. Balth. Theob. et cet. 

96. Mar.] Mask. Mas. F^. 

of his mind or person. By these circumstances, I am sure, the thought is mended ; 
as, I think verily, the text is too, by the addition of a single letter — ** within the 
house is Jove.” Elsewhere our author plainly alludes to the same story, in As You 
Like It y III, iii, 8: “O Knowledge ill inhabited, worse then loue in a thatch’d 
house.” ’ The line in Ovid is thus translated by Golding , *• The roofe thereof was 
thatched all with straw and fennish reede.’ — p. io6, ed. 1567. 

94. Speake . . . Loue] Heath (p. loi ) : This speech is quite foreign to the 
conversation which immediately precedes between Pedro and Hero. It should 
therefore undoubtedly be given to Margaret, as the beginning of that which follows 
between her and Balthasar. [Don Pedro’s express purpose is to make love to Hero ; 
it seems appropriate, therefore, that he only of all the maskers, should be the one to 
refer to love. I do not think that ‘ you ’ here refers to Hero ; it is the impersonal 
*■ you.’ Love-making should be carried on in whispers ; here, therefore, it is hinted 
that Don Pedro takes Hero aside to fulfil his pledge to Claudio. — E d.] 

95. 98, 100. Bene.] Theobald : ’Tis clear that the dialogue here ought to be 

betwixt Balthasar and Margaret ; Benedick, a little lower, converses with Beatrice ; 
and .so every man talks with his woman once round. Dyce {^Notesy p. 42) y^crtinently 
asks, * is not the effect of the scene considerably weakened if Benedick enters into 
conversation with any other woman except Beatrice?’ He then continues, ‘Two 
prefixe.s, each beginning with the .same letter, are frequently confounded by transcribers 
and printers; in Love's Lab. Z. II, i, six speeches in succession which belong to Biron 
are assigned in the Folio to Boyct, Walker {Crit. ii, 177) devotes an Article (No. 
Ixxxv] of nearly twelve pages to ‘ Instances in which Speeches are assigned in the Folio 
to Wrong Characters.’ It is needless to remark that the present is among them (p. 
178), and, I think, justly. Collier, on the other hand, maintains that the Folio is 
right. ‘ The fact is,’ he asserts, ‘ that Margaret turns from Benedick with the words, 
“ God match me with a good dancer I” maliciously implying that Benedick is a bad 
one ; and then Balthasar takes up the dialogue with “Amen,” meaning that he is 
what Benedick is not.’ ^ 

96. Mar.] Cambridge Editors : Mr Halliwell mentions that Ma 7 \ is altered to 
Mask, in the Third Folio. This is not the case in Capell’s copy of it. [This is 
one of the very many instances where copies of the same edition vary. Halliwell 
undoubtedly is correct, according to his copy. Since the foregoing note was written 
by the Cambridge Editors, Trinity College Library has received, so Dr Wright 
kindly informs me, a second copy of F3, wherein, varying from Capell’s Copy, the 
word is Mask, The two copies also of F3 in my own library have Mask, — Ed.] 


99. Mar.] Mask. F^F^. 

100. [turning off in Quest of another. 
Cap. 



ACT II, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


71 

lOI 


Mar, God match me with a good dauncer. 

Balt, Amen. 

Mar, And God keepe him out of my fight when the 
daunce is done : anfwer Clarke. 

Balt, No more words, the Clarke is anfwered. 105 

Vrfula, I know you well enough, you are Signior An- 
thonio, 

Anth, At a word, I am not. 

Vrfula, I know you by the wagling of your head. 

Anth, To tell you true, I counterfet him. no 

Vrfu, You could neuer doc him fo ill well, vnlefle 
you were the very man : herc^s his dry hand vp & down, 
you arc he, you are he. 

Anth, At a word I am not. 

Vrfula, Come, come, doc you thinke I doe not know 1 15 
you by your excellent wit ? can vertue hide it fclfe ? goe 
to, mumme, you are he, graces will appeare, and there^s 
an end. 

Beat, Will you not tell me who told you fo ? 1 19 


loi, 103. Mar.] Mas. F^F^. 

104. done .*] done ! Theob. 

Clar/cc'] clerk Rowe. 

105. [parting different ways. Cap. 
HI. ill well,'] QFf, Cap. Sta. ill 

Will, Rowe, dl, well. Rope, Han. ill- 


-will, Var. ^85. ill-well, Theob. et. cet. 
HI. well, vnleffe] 7 vell unless F^. 

1 1 7. mumme] mum mummer 

Anon. ap. Cam. 

1 18. [mixing with the Company. Cap, 


108, 1 14. At a word] Halliwell ; ^ Ahsolvere uno verbo, to make an ende 
shortely, to tell at one woorde.’ — Eliote’s Dictionarie, I 559 - — W. A. WRKiirr : That 
is, in brief. Cf. Cor. I, iii, 122: Valeria. Prithee, Virgilia, turn thy solemness out 
o’ door, and go along with us. Vir. No, at a word, madam. Indeed I must not.* 
And Holland’s Pliny, xvii, 5 : ‘Well, to speake at a word, surely that ground is 
best of all other, which hath an aromaticall smell and tast with it.’ 

111. ill well] SrEr<:VENS : A .similar phrase occurs in the Mer. of J^en. I, ii, 57 ; 

‘ He hath a belter bad habit of frowning than the Count Palatine.’ [Where, possibly, 
Steevens slightly misunderstands the text. Portia does not mean ‘ a better-bad habit,* 
but ‘abetter bad-habit.’ Staunton’s paraphrase is: ‘You could never represent 
one, is so ill-qualified, to the life, unless you were the veiy man. W. A. 

Wright paraphrases ‘ so ill-well * by ‘ so successfully imitating a defect ;’ which is, 
I think, exact. — E d.] 

1 1 2. dry hand] As a sign of old age. 

1 1 2. vp & down] Staunton (Note on Two Gent. II, iii, 32) An expression of 
the time, implying exactly, as we say, ‘for all the world,’ or ‘all the world over.* 
Deighton quotes Middleton, A Chaste Wife, etc., Ill, ii, 13 J 'The mother’s 
mouth up and down, up and down.* 



72 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. i. 

Bene. No, you fhall pardon me, 120 

Beat. Nor will you not tell me who you are ? 

Bened. Not now. 

Beat. That I was difdainfull, and that I had my good 
wit out of the hundred merry tales : well, this was Signi- 
or Benedickc that said fo. 125 

Bene. What’s he? 

Beat. I am fure you know him well enough. 

Bette. Not I, beleeue me. 

Beat. Did he neuer make you laugh ? 

Bene. I pray you what is he ? 130 

Beat. Why he is the Princes ieafl:er,a very dull foole, 

1 21. not\ Om. Ff, Rowe. 127. Beat.] Om. F,,. 

124. the hundred merry tales\ In 1 31. he'\ Om. F^. 

Italics, as a title, Han. 

121. Nor will you not] For other instances of this common double negative, see, 
if necessary, Abbott, § 406. 

124. the hundred merry tales] The title of this book is frequently mentioned 
in old literature, and, since no copy was known to exist, a discussion arose as to its 
contents, and whether it were not in reality, a translation of J.es Cent Nonvelles 
NouvelleSy or of The Decameron, A fragment of it, however, was found by Pro- 
fessor Coneybeare, of Oxford, and printed by Singer in 1815. A perfect copy, and 
the only one known, printed in 1526 by John Rastcll, was at last discovered, about 
1864, in the Royal Library of the University in Gottingen, by the librarian, Dr 
Herman Oestcrlcy, and by him published in 1866. It is a coarse book, the natural 
product of coarse times, and its flavour is not unlike the atmosphere of the houses 
which demanded daily and prolonged fumigations. Well, indeed, may Beatrice have 
deeply resented the imputation that from it she drew her wit, — and yet, there is a 
tradition that this book and others like it, were the solace of Queen Elizabeth’s 
dying hours. In N. Qii. (I, hi, p. 15 1) ‘Spes’ gives the following extract from 
an ‘ intercepted letter, . . , preserved among the Venetian Correspondence in The 
State Paper Office’: * London, 9 Martii, 1603. About 10 dayes synce dyed the 
Countess of Notingham. The Queene loved the Countess very much, and hath 
seemed to take her death very heavelye, remayning euer synce in a deepe melan- 
cholye, w^*^ conceipte of her own death, and complayneth of many infirmyties, 
sodainlye to haue ouertaken her, as impostumecon [‘impostum, megrin’ ap. Ilalli- 
well] in her head, aches in her bones, and continuall cold in her Icgges, besides 
notable decay in judgem* and memory, insomuch as she cannot attend to any dis- 
cources of governm* and state, but delighteth to heare some of the 100 merry tales, 
and such like, and to such is very attentiue ; at other tymes uery impatient, and 
testye,’ etc. — Ed. 

13 1, the Princes ieaster] W. A. Wright : Mary Lamb in Tales from Shake- 
speare acutely remarks on this : ‘ This sarcasm sunk deeper into the mind of Bene- 
dick than all Beatrice had said before. The hint she gave him that he was a coward, 
by saying she would eat all he had killed, he did not regard, knowing himself to be 



ACT II, SC. i.] MUCH A DOE ABOUT NOTHING 


73 


onely his gift is, in deuifmg impofsible flanders , none 132 
but Libertines delight in him, and the commendation is 
not in his witte, but in his villanie, for hee both plcafeth 
men and angers them, and then they laugh at him, and 135 
beat him : I am fure he is in the Fleet , I would he had 
boorded me. 

Bcnc. When I know the Gentleman, He tell him what 
you fay. 

Beat. Do, do, hee'l but breake a comparifon or two 140 
on me, which peraduenture (not markt, or not laughM 

132. onely his only Ran. 136. the Flcet\ the Jleet F^, this Fleet. 

134. pleafetliX bleafcs O, Coll. Dyce, Rowe i. 

Wli. Sta. Cam. Huds. Rife. 

a brave man ; but there is nothing that great wits so much dread as the imputation 
of buffoonery, because the charge comes sometimjes a little too near the truth. — C. C. 
Clarke (p. 303) ; Benedick shows that it touches him to the quick, by reverting to 
it in soliloquy, and repeating it again to his friends when they come in. 

132. onely his gift] See ‘but with,’ line 230. Also ‘only wounds by hearsay,’ 
III, 1, 25 ; ‘only be bold,’ III, ii, 8. For other examples of the transposition of 
adverbs (‘most frequent in the case of adverbs of limitation, as bufy oniy^ eifcUy etc.) 
see Abuott, § 420. 

132. impossible] Warburton : We should read impassihlcy i. e. slanders so ill- 
invented, that they will pass upon nobody. — ^Johnson : ‘ Impossible ’ slanders arc, 
I .suppose, such .slanders as, from their absurdity and impo,s.sibility, bring their own 
confutation with them. — M. Mason: Ford says, Mer. IVtvcSy III, v, 151 : ‘I will 
search impossible places.’ [.Sec line 234, post,"] 

134. villanie] Warbur i'on : By this she means his malice and impiety. By his 
impious jests, she insinuates, he pleased libertines ; and by his dnnsin^ slanders of 
them, he angered them. — Cabell (ii, 122); ‘Villany’ has no .such harsh meaning 
as the fifth modern [/. e. Warburton] puts on it, but only — roguery, roguishness, 
hidden under a term that suited better the .speaker’s purpose. 

136. Fleet] IIalliwell : This seems to be used by Beatrice in the sen.se of, ‘ in 
the fleet, or company of sail ’ ; in other words, in the company here present. . . . 
If any reliance may be placed on the use of capital letters in the early editions, it 
may be mentioned that fleet is so distinguished in the Qto and first three Folios ; a 
reading which, if adopted, would lead to the impression that Beatrice intended to 
insinuate that Benedick was imprisoned for his slanders. [The use of the word 
‘boarded ’ which, in its primary meaning, carries out the simile of a .ship, precludes, 
I think, any implied reference to the Fleet prison ; to hoard is only figuratively u.sed 
by Shake.speare in the sense of accost. Corson (p. 184) refers to ‘the Fleet’ as 
‘ the prison for insolvent debtors,’ but the Fleet was not thus exclusively used until 
1640 — Ed.] 

137. me] The emphatic word. 

140, 141. breake ... on me] See abo II, iii, 225 ; in the present in.stance the 
figure is taken, as W. A. Wright says, from ‘ breaking a lance at tilting ’ ; in Bene- 



74 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. i. 


at) ftrikes him into melancholly, and then there’s a Par- 
tridge wing faucd, for the foolc will eate no fupper that 
night. We mufl follow the Leaders. 

Ben. In euery good thing. 

Bea. Nay, if they Icade to any ill, I will Icaue them 
at the next turning. Exeunt. 

Miificke for the dance. 

lolin. Sure my brother is amorous on Hero^ and hath 
withdrawne her father to breake with him about it: the 
Ladies follow her,and but one vifor remaines. 

Borachio. And that is Claudio ^ I know him by his bea- 
ring. 

lolm. Are not you fignior Bcncdicke7 

Clan. You know me well, I am hee. 

lohn. Signior, you are verie neere my Brother in his 

144. [Music within. Theob. Music 
begins : Dance forming. Cap. 

148. Mulicke...] Dance exeunt Q. 

Manent John, Borachio, and Claudio. 

dick’s soliloquy it is possible that somewhat rougher treatment is implied, as with 
sticks or cudgels. — Ei>. 

140. a comparison] W. A. Wright : That is, a jest or scoff, which took the 
form of a disadvantageous comparison, and may be illustrated from Falstaffs vocab- 
ulary in / Hen. IV: II, iv, 272; ‘O for breath to utter what is like thee! you 
tailor’s yard, you sheath, you bow-case, you vile standing-tuck, — Prince. Well 
breathe awhile, and then to it again ; and when thou hast tired thyself with base 
comparisons, hear me speak but this.’ See Love's Lab. Z. V, ii, 854 : ‘ The world’s 
large tongue Proclaims you for a man replete with mocks. Full of comparisons and 
wounding flouts.’ 

142, 143. Partridge wing] IIalliwell : The wing seems to have been formerly 
considered the delicate part of this bird. — D eigiiton : But the jest turns not upon 
the saving of the best part of the bird, but upon the effeminacy of Benedick’s appe- 
tite, for whose supper such a trifle was sufficient. [Deighton apparently overlooks 
what W. A. Wright recalls, namely : that Beatrice had described Benedick as ‘ a 
very valiant trencher- man ’ ; and the latter is not likely, therefore, as Wright goes on 
to say, ^ to have made his supper off a partridge wing. Beatrice means that he would 
eat what he would call no supper, because he had not finished up with a little game.* 
Nevertheless, I am inclined to doubt that there is any hidden meaning in her words, 
the jest would have been equally pungent had she specified any other delicacy, — ^the 
point is that Benedick’s appetite would be utterly gone. — E d.] 

144. the Leaders] That is, of the dance, to which ‘ turning,’ also in line 147, 
refers. 

150. breake] See I, i, 301. 

156. verie i^ere] Staunton : That is, you are in close confidence with my 


Theob. 

Scene III. Pope, + . 
149-153. As aside. Cap. 


142 

14s 

150 

155 



ACT 11, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


75 

157 


loue, he is enamoPd on Hero^ I pray you diffwadc him 
from her, Ihe is no equall for his birth : you may do the 
part of an honefl man in it. 

Claudio, How know you he loues her? 160 

John, I heard him fwcare his affeftion, 

Bor, So did I too, and he fwore he would marrie her 
to night. 

lohu. Come, let vs to the banquet. Ex,ma 7 iet Qlau, 

Clan, Thus anfwere I in name of Benedicke, 165 

But heare thefe ill newes with the eares of Claudio\ 

^Tis certaine fo, the Prince woes for himfelfe : 

Friendflup is conftant in all other things, 

Saue in the Office and affaires of louc : 

Therefore all hearts in loue vfe their owne tongues. 170 

160. yott\ ye Theob. Warb. Johns 

164. Ex.] Exeunt: Q. 

166. this Rowe, -f. 

167. WOOS Rowe, Pope. 

brother. This explains a passage in ^ lien, IV: V, i, 79 : ‘ If I had a suit to 
Master Shallow, I would humour his men with the imputation of being near their 
master.’ 

163. to night] W. A. Wright: This qualifies ‘swore’ not ‘marry.* [Is it not 
also possible that in the excess of his desire to curry favour with his master, Borachio 
grossly exaggerates, and means what his words imply, that the ceremony was to be 
performed at once? — Ed.] 

168. Friendship, etc.] Hudson (p. 13); Claudio’s being sprung into such an 
unreasonal)le fit of jealousy towards the Prince at the masquerade is another good 
instance of the Poet’ s skill and care in small matters. It makes an apt preparation 
for the far more serious blunder upon which the main part of the action turns. A 
piece of conduct which the circumstances do not cj?plain is at once explained by thus 
disclosing a certain irritable levity in the subject. 

170. all hearts . . . vse their owne] IIanmer interpreted ‘ vse,’ in this line, 
as an imperative, and changed ‘their owne’ into your 07 un. Edwards (p. 55 ) 
denied the need of any such interpretation or change ; ‘ Let ’ in the next line, he 
says, ‘ is understood here.’ And this suggestion that ‘let’ is understwxl, whether 
or not from the next line, is accepted by Deigiiton and by W. A. Wright. Heath 
asserts, and Capkll agrees with him, that the ‘ Engli.sh language easily admits the 
imperative in the third person, even without the assistance of the auxiliary A’/.’ But 
I see no need of an imperative here at all. Roi.fk, and Deigiiton also, refers to 
Abbott, §5 364, 365, where examples are given of ‘ the infinitive used optatively or 
imperatively.’ I cannot see that this is applicable here. All difficulty seems to 
be avoided by understanding the line as a simple statement of fact ; which may be 
paraphrased by ‘ even a friend’s tongue cannot be trusted in love affairs, and therefore 
it is, that all lovers use their own tongues.’ The full period of the Qto and of the 


1 70. /oue vfe their owne tongues. ] lave, 
use your own tongues! Han. Warb. 
Johns. 



MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. i. 


76 

Let euerie eye negotiate for it felfe, 17 1 

And truft no Agent : for beautie is a witch, 

Againft whofe charmes, faith meltcth into blood : 

This is an accident of hourcly proofe, 

Which I miflrufted not. Farewell therefore Hero. 175 

Enter Bcncdicke. 

Ben. Count Claudio. 

Clau. Yea, the fame. 

Ben. Come, will you go with me ? 

Clau. Whither? 180 

Ben. Euen to the next Willow, about your own bu- 

172. for\ Om. ropc,-f. 176. Enter] Re-enter Cap. 

175. therefore\ Rope, + , Coll, ii, 177. Claudio.] Claudio? Rowe ii et 

iii, (MS). Huds. seq. 


First Folio, at the end of the line, need not have been replaced, as it has been in 
every succeeding edition, by a comma or a semi-colon. — Ed. 

172, 173. beautie . . . blood] Capeli/s language is far from smooth, but his 
interpretation is true. ‘ The metaphor here,’ he says, * is from bodies of some 
solidity (a waxen image, for instance) expos’d to a ckarmW fire, and melting against 
it; a known practice of witches ^ to bring decay upon the person represented ; such a 
body is ** faith ” or fidelity in friendship, and such a fire is “beauty”; which, when 
faith is expos’d to it*, melts away into “blood,” 1. e. passion or appetite, a child of 
blood say philosophers.’ — H eath : That ‘blood’ signifies ‘warmth of constitution’ 
is evident from TI, iii, 160 : ‘ wisdom and blood combating in so tender a body, we 
have ten proofs to one that blood hath the victory.’ [See also II, iii, 160 ; IV, i, 61.] 

174. accident] We should now say, incident. 

175. Which . . . Hero] To avoid this Alexandrine, I’orE substituted then for 
‘therefore’, a substitution which was found in Collier’s MS, and by Cojjjer, on 
its authority, adopted in his text. Aubott (§ 472) believes that the -cd in ‘mis- 
trusted ’ was not pronounced, and therefore scans : ‘ Which V | mislrusUv/ | not ; 
fdre I well there | fore, Hero.’ ‘But,’ says Drighton, ‘the line read thus [f. e. 
by Abbott] is intolerably harsh, and there seems no reason why the accents should 
not be I “ Which I' j mistrfist | ed n< 5 t ; | farewell | therefore, | Hero,” i. e. either a 
genuine Alexandrine with the pause fully marked after the third foot, or what Abbott 
calls an apparent Alexandrine, but really a regular verse of live accents followed by 
an isolated foot (Hero) containing one accent.’ [It is useless to apply to broken 
lines, like the present, the same rhythmical rules that are applied to unbroken ones. 
It is common enough in Shakespeare to find proper names forming extra syllables, at 
the end of the line. — Ed.] 

176. Enter Benedicke] Of course, Claudio still remains masked and Benedick 
has to ask if it be he ; Benedick, however, must have divested himself of his 
masquerade dress ; both Claudio and Don Pedro know him at once. — Ed. 

181. Willow] Even if the ‘willow’ were not well known to be the emblem of 
a forsaken lover, Benedick’s speech here would show it. The illustrations, here 



ACT II, SC. L] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 77 

fineffe, Count. What fafhion will you weare the Gar- • 182 

land off? About your necke, like an Vfurers chaine? Or 
vndcr your arme, like a Lieutenants fcarfe ? You muft 
weare it one way, for the Prince hath got your Hero, 185 

Clam I wifli him ioy of her. 

Ben, Why thaPs fpoken like an honeft Drouicr, fo 
they fel Bullockes : but did you thinke the Prince wold 
haue ferued you thus ? 

Clau, I pray you leaue me. I90 

Ben, Ho now you ftrike like the blindman,^twas the 
boy that ftole your meate, and you’l beat the poll. 192 


182. Counf\ county Q. 

^^3- Q» Rowe et seq. 

an Vfurers\ a Ufurers F^, 

Rowe i. 

187. Drouia'\ QFf, Rowe i. Cam. 


Glo. Rife, Din, Wh. ii. Drover Rowe 
ii et cct. 

19 1. Ho now'] Ho no! F^^Fj. No 
no ! F^, Rowe. Ho ! now Pope et seq. 

blindntan] blind-fnan F^F^. 
blind man Rowe et seq. 


given by some editors, of the willow as an emblem of death, seem quite inapplicable. 
— PId. 

183. Vsurers chaine] Reed : Chains of gold of considerable value were then 
usually worn by wealthy citizens in the same manner as they now are, on public 
occasions, by the Aldermen of London. — Steevkns ; From various sources, in books 
printed before the year 1600, it appears that the merchants were the chief usurers of 
the age. 

187. Drouicr] This spelling should be retained, I think, in modern editions; I 
doubt, however, that it was pronounced as a trisyllable ; but rather, on the analogy 
of the -ier in lander, targetier, etc., as a disyllable, drov-yer. — Ed. 

192. post] It is difficult to imagine a complicated story told in fewer words. Its 
substance is here, but what it is in full has hitherto eluded research ; that there was 
a real story or jest is evident, because Benedick says ‘ t/te blindman,’ implying that it 
was the blindman in some familiar anecdote. A hundred and tvrenty years ago, Esch- 
enrurg, in a footnote to his translation of this play, said that he ‘ thought there was a 
story in Lazar illo de Tormes to which there was here, perhaps, an allusion.’ Wliat 
Eschenburg gave, with the caution of a true scholar, only as a surmise, I.eTourneur, 
in his French Translation three years later, announced as a fact; and he has been fol- 
lowed by one or two French translators ; but, as far as I am aware, no English Editor 
has noticed it, nor any German Editor since Voss, in 1818. The story to which Eschen- 
burg presumbly refers is to be found in the Tratado primero of La Tlda de I.azarillo 
de 7 onnes.‘ y de sus fortunas y aduersidades, 1554, and is as follows : — , 

“ Lazaro,” said the blindman to me, “let us return, betimes, to the inn.” But to 
get there, however, we had to cross a small stream which had become swollen with 
the rain ; so I said : “ Nuncle, the stream is very broad ; but, if you wish, I sec where 
we can cross it more easily, without getting wet, because it is so much narrower there, 
and by jumping we can get across with dry feet.” This seemed to him good advice, 
and said he ; “ Thou art discreet ; take me to the spot where the stream is narrow ; 



78 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act \i, sc. i. 


Clau. If it will not be, He leaue you. Exit, 193 

Ben, Alas poore hurt fowle, now will he creepe into 
fedges : But that my Ladie Beatrice fhould know me, & 195 

194. fowle\ fotde Q. Joule foul F3F4) Rowe. 

it’s winter, and water is bad, but wet feet are worse.” I saw that things were 
taking the , turn I wished, so I took him under the arcades and led him directly 
opposite to a pillar, or stone post, which stood in the market-place, upon which and 
upon others rested the jutties of the houses, and I said to him : “ Nuncle, this is the 
narrowest part of the stream, hereabouts;” since it was raining hard, and the wretch 
was getting wet, the need was pressing that we should escape from the water which 
was falling on us. But the chiefest reason was (for the Lord at that moment had 
blinded his understanding) that I might have my revenge. He trusted me, and said : 
“ Place me exactly right, and then leap thou over the stream.” I thereupon placed 
him directly opposite the post, and then gave a great jump, and dodged behind it like 
a man awaiting the onset of a bull, and cried to him : “ Whoop ! jump, for all you 
are worth ! so as to land on this side of the stream.” Hardly were the words out 
of my mouth, when the poor blind wretch .steadied himself like a he-goat, and 
having taken a step backward to make a longer leap, jumped with all his force, and 
and struck the post full butt with his head, which sounded as though it had been struck 
by a gourd and he fell back instantly from the blow, half dead, and with his head 
split. “ Aha ! how happens it that you could smell the sausage, but not the post? 
smell away ! smell away !” I cried to him. And I left him to the care of the people 
who had' gone to help him, and then, at a trot, passed through the City-gate.’ — ^pp. 
23-25, ed. Clarke, *conforme d la edicidn de 1554,’ Oxford, 1897. I do not vouch 
for the exact literalness of my translation. The Spanish of three hundred and fifty 
years ago is not the Spanish of to-day. But it is exact enough to show that 
it could not have been the story to which Benedick alludes. And although there 
might be some satisfaction in finding Benedick’s very story, it is, luckily, by no means 
needed to understand his meaning. It is possible, however, that this horrid practical 
joke of Lazarillo may be the material out of which Benedick’s story was made. 
There is no jest at all resembling either of them in The Hundred Merry Tales or in 
any of the numerous Jest-books, reprinted by W. C. Hazlitt. At the same time, 
we must remember that Lazarillo de Tormes was translated in 1586 by David Row- 
lands, and has been always a popular, well known book, as is proved by its very 
many editions. Possibly, the foregoing story may have been floating in Shake- 
speare’s memory and he * twisted so fine a story’ to suit the occasion. — Ed. 

193. If it will not be] Abbott (§ 321) : That is, if you will not leave me. A 
perplexing passage. The meaning seems to be ‘ if it is not to be otherwise,’ and 
in Elizabethan English we might expect ‘If ii shall not be.’ But probably ‘it’ 
represents fate, and, as in the phrase, ‘ come what wf//,’ the future is personified ; 
‘If fate will not be as I would have it.’ And this explains, IV, i, 218; ‘What 
shall htcomt of (as tlie result of) this? What wt 7 /this do?’ The indefinite unknown 
consequence is not personified, the definite project is personified ; ‘ What is destined 
to result from this project ? What does this project intend to do for us ?’ 

194, 195. into sedges] Harting (p. 236) : Naturalists have frequently observed 
that when any of the diving-ducks are winged or injured, they generally make for the 
open water, and endeavour to escape by diving or swimming away, while those which 



ACT II, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


79 

196 


not know me : the Princes foole! Hah? It may be I goe 
vnder that title, becaufe I am merrie : yea but fo I am 
apt to do my felfe wrong : I am not fo reputed, it is the 
bafe (though bitter) difpofition of Beatrice, that putt’s 
the world into her perfon, and fo giues me out: well, He 200 

be reuenged as I may. 

196. Ilah t] hah, Q. Ha? Ff. ha? 

Rowe. Ha ! Cap. 

197. yen’] you F^. yet F^F^. yea^ 

Pope, + , Dyce, Cam. Wh. ii. Yea; 

Cap. Ran. Mai. Steev. Var. Knt, Coll. 

Wh. i, wSta. 

197, 198. /o»., wrong] so; {I am,., 
wrong) Cap. and subs. Ran. Mai. Steev. 

Var. Knt, Sta. 

do not excel in diving, usually make for the shore, when wounded, and, as Shake- 
speare tell.s us, ‘creep into sedges.* 

196. Hah ?] This interrogation mark should be retained, I think ; albeit Dyce, 
Collier, Staunton, and some others prefer an exclamation. — Ed. 

197. so I am] Cap ell’s punctuation is ingenious andthas been adopted by some 
careful editors; he thus explains it (p. 123); ‘the words [‘Yea; but .so;’] appear 
retractions of what the .speaker had half assented to, — that “ fool ” might be his name 
abroad, upon the score that he mentions ; and his “ but so ” i.s — hold, soft, .stop there ; 
followed by an accusing his own proneness to indulge suspicions that hurt him.’ I prefer 
the Folio ; the emphasis .should fall, I think, on ‘ am’ ; it is a concession in Beatrice’s 
favour, that sometimes his merriment does injure him. Perhaps, it is this faint con- 
cession, coupled with a dim, unacknowledged sense of her personal charm, that 
startles him, by reaction, into the use of the harsh terms applied to her immediately 
afterward. — Ed . 

199. base (though bitter)] Johnson : That is, ‘ It is the di.sposition of Beatrice, 
who takes upon her to personate the world, and therefore represents the world as 
saying what .she only .says herself.’ In the phra.se ‘base though bitter,’ I do not 
understand how hase and hitter are inconsistent, or why what is bitter should not be 
base, I believe we may safely read, ‘ It is the base, the bitter disposition.’ Walker 
{Crit, iii, 30) ‘doubts’ this correction. Knight paraphrases: ‘The disposition of 
Beatrice is a grovelling di.sposition, although it is sharp and satirical,’ which does not 
help us ; a grovelling disposition is quite consistent with a sharp and bitter one. 
Staunton considers the present text ‘ not very intelligible ’ ; Dyce confesses outright 
that he does ‘not understand’ it. W. A. Wright, by softening the terms some- 
what, and by inverting the clauses gives an intelligible paraphrase, which is not so 
far from the exact letter of the text as not to be what Benedick meant to say : 
* Though it is the di.sposition of Beatrice to be sarcastic, it i.s moan of her to put her 
own sayings into the mouth of others.’ Wright then continues; ‘According to 
Bacon {^Essay xxii) this was called “The Turning of the cat in the pan.” ’ If any 
amendment of the phrase is to be tolerated, an anonymous conjecture, recorded in the 
Cambridge Edition, of through-bitter is to be preferred, as more genuinely Shake- 
spearian than the rest.— E d, 


199. bafe (though bitter)] base^ the 
Johns, conj. Var. ’73, Steev, Var. 

’03, ’13, ’21, barcy though bitter kieem, 
ap. Cam. faht\ though bitter Cartwright, 
base thought — the bitter Kinnear. base- 
tonguedy bitter Orson. 

200. world] word F^F^. 

Scene IV. Pope, + . 



8o 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. i. 


Enter the Prince, 202 

Pedro, Now Signior, whereas the Count, did you 
fee him ? 

Bene, Troth my Lord, I haue played the part of Lady 20$ 
Fame, I found him heere as melancholy as a Lodge in a 
Warren,! told him, and I thinke,told him true, that your 
grace had got the will of this young Lady, and I offered 
him my company to a willow tree, either to make him a 
garland, as being forfaken,or to binde him a rod, as be- 210 
ing worthy to be whipt. 


202. Prince] Prince, Hero, Leonato, 
John and Borachio, and Conrade. Q. 
Don Pedro. Rowe. Don Pedro, Hero, 
and Leonato. Cap. White i. 

207. told^ I told Q, Cap. Var. Ran. 
Mai. Steev. Var. Coll. Dyce, Wh. Sta. 
Cam. Ktly, Huds. 


208. the will"] the goodwil Q, Cap. 
Var. Ran. Mai. Stccv. Var. Coll. Dyce, 
Wh. Sta. Cam. Ktly, Huds. 

of this~\ of the Ran. of his 
Walker, Iluds. 

210. him «] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Knt. him « Q, et cet. 


202. Enter the Prindfc] This stage-direction is as deficient as that of the Qto is 
redundant ; the latter includes Don John and Borachio, who do not appear till the 
next scene, and Conrade who does not speak till the next Act. From what Benedick 
says, in line 208, ‘ that your grace had got the will of this young lady, Capei.l (p. 
123) considered that it was ‘a capital absurdity,’ to omit the entrance, with Don 
Pedro, of Hero and Leonato ; but Walker ( Crit. ii, 223) with plausibility proposed 
his instead of ‘ this’ because the latter <has nothing to refer to.’ (This emendation, 
be it noted, is in an Article where Walker has collected very many instances of the 
manifest confusion of this and Dyce (ed. ii) says that Walker ‘may be right ; 

but our early authors sometimes use “ this” rather loosely.’ Apart from all this, it is 
not easy to comprehend how Hero, demure and reticent though she be, could have 
stood silently by and heard Beatrice so ‘bethumped with words,’ as in Benedick’s 
long mock-tirade ; then add to this that she knew that Don Pedro did not woo for 
himself, as Benedick says he did, but for Claudio. Had she been present, she must 
have spoken. — E d. 

206, 207. Lodge in a Warren] W. A. Wright : Such a lodge is necessarily a 
lonely dwelling, and solitariness breeds melancholy. Steevens would have us 
suppose that as an image of desolation there is a parallelism of thought between 
this ‘lodge in a warren’ and the prophet Isaiah’s ‘lodge in a garden of cucumbers.’ 
Tiessen’s emendation (Englische Studien, 1878, II. bd, i. hft, p. 200) I will 
endeavour to translate literally, and will certainly give without comment further 
than to state that it is to be found in a reputable Journal : ‘ Delius thinks that the 
lonely situation of a lodge in a warren must make a melancholy impression. But 
the image befits neither Benedick’s style of expression, nor a languishing lover, 
hanging his head. I therefore conjecture that ‘ lodge ’ is a misprint for dog : a dog 
in a rabbit-warren may well have cause enough to hang his head when the rabbits 
escape underground ; and if, in addition, he goes yearningly snuffing about, he is 
assuredly a perfect image of melancholy.* — ^E d, 



ACT II, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


8l 


Pedro, To be whipt, what’s his fault? 212 

Bene, The flat tranfgreflion of a Schoole-boy, who 
being ouer-ioyed with finding a birds neft, fhewes it his 
companion, an^ he fteales it. 215 

Pedro, Wilt thou make a truft, a tranfgreflion ? the 
tranfgreflion is in the ftealer. 

Ben, Yet it had not beene amifle the rod had beene 
made, and the garland too, for the garland he might haue 
worne himfelfc, and the rod hee might haue beftowed on 220 
you, who (as I take it)haue ftolne his birds neft. 

Pedro, I will but teach them to fing, and reftore them 
to the owner. 

Bene, If their finging anfwer your faying, by my faith 
you fay honeftly. 225 

Pedro, The Lady Beatrice hath a quarrell to you , the 
Gentleman that daunft with her , told her fliee is much 
wrong’d by you. 

Bene, O flie mifufde me part the indurance of a block: 
an oake but with one greene leafe on it, would haue an- 230 
fwered her : my very vifor began to aflume life, and fcold 
with her : fliee told mee , not thinking I had beene my 
felfe, that I was the Princes lefter, and that I was duller 233 


212. whipt^ ivhipt ! Pope, et seq. 

214. birds neji'\ QFf, Rowe i, bird^ 
nest Cam, Wh. ii. bird's nest Rowe ii 
et cet. (subs. ) 

227. daunjf^ Q. danjl F,. danc'd 


228. wron^d'\ 7von^'d'F^, 

229-239. Mnemonic lines, Warb. 
230. but with'\ with but Cap. conj. 
233. and that"] that Q, Cap. Steev* 
Var. Coll. Sta. Cam. Ktly, Wh. ii. 


226. quarrell to you] See Abbott (§ 187) for examples of the various 
uses of tOy even without verbs of motion ; here it means motion against. In 
IV, i, 227, ‘That what we have, we prize not to the worth,’ it means up tOy in 
proportion to, 

228. wrong’d] W. A. Wright : That is, injured by being misrepresented, 
slandered. For this peculiar sense of the word, see V, i, 10, 59, 60, 71, and Bich, 
III: IV, iv, 21 1 ; ‘Wrong not her birth, she is of royal blood.’ Cf. Temp, I, ii, 
443 ; ‘ I fear you have done yourself some wrong ’ ; that is, in representing your- 
self as King of Naples. 

229. misusde] The meaning here is plain enough, but the same word is used in 
a different sense in II, ii, 26 ; ‘to misuse the Prince,’ where it evidently means to 
misleady to deceive, 

230. but with] One of Shakespeare’s very frequent transpositions; see line 132, 
above. 


6 



82 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT N07HING [act ii, sc. i. 


then a great thaw, hudling left vpon left , with fuch im- 
poffible conueiance vpon me, that I flood like a man at a 235 

234, 235. im-poffible] impaffable Johns, conj. Coll, ii, iii, (MS). 

Theob. Warb. Johns, impetuous llan. 235. at a'\ as a Klly conj. 

234. thaw] Halliwell : Dr Sherwin transforms ‘ thaw ’ into the Anglo-Saxon 
tAeoWf a born slave, a serf. The great thaw is unquestionably an allusion to the 
oppression of spirits experienced on the weather changing from a cheerful frost to a 
general thaw. 

234, 235. impossible conueiance] Theobald : I have ventured to substitute 
impassable. To make a pass {in Fencing) is to thrust, push ; and by impassable ^ I 
presume the poet meant that she pushed her jests upon him with such swiftness that 
it was impossible for him to pass them off, to parry them. [This is here given as it 
appears in both of Theobald’s editions. The Cam. Edd. have the following note : — 
* In the copy before us of Theobald’s first edition, which belonged to Warburton, the 
latter has written ** Mr Warburton ” after the note in which the reading “ impassable,” 
adopted by Theobald, is suggested and recommended, thus claiming it as his own. 
We have accepted this authority in this and in other instances.’ They then add in 
brackets : ‘ [But it is given in a MS letter from Theobald to Warburton.]’ It is dis- 
agreeable, under any circumstances, to impute unfairness, but, in this instance, if 
any one is to be considered unfair, it should not, I think, be Theobald whose treat- 
ment of Warburton was generosity itself, compared with Warburton’ s mean and con- 
temptible treatment of Theobald. With all deference to the Cambridge Editors. 
I incline to believe that the credit of this reading, whatsoever it may be, and it is 
not much, is due to Theobald, and that, possibly, Warburton was really honest when 
he intimated, by writing his name opposite to it, that it was his own. For the 
emendation of impassable for ‘impossible,’ in line 132, Warburton was solely 
responsible ; his note will be found above, at that line. With this emendation, 
wholly his own, in his memory, and perhaps confusing the two ‘ impossibles’ , Warbur- 
ton might have written his name opposite the same word in this present passage, quite 
forgetting that Theobald had proposed it to him in the letter to which the Cam- 
bridge Editors refer. — Ed.] — ^Johnson ; I know not what to propose. ‘ Impossible’ 
seems to have no meaning here, and for impassable I have not found any authority. 
Spenser uses the word importable in a sense very congruous to this passage, for 
insupportable^ or not to be sustained: ‘So both attonce him charge on either syde 
With hideous strokes and importable powre. Which forced him his ground to traverse 
wyde.’ — {^Faerie Queene, II, viii, 35.] ... It must, however, be confessed, that 
importable appears harsh to our ears, and I wish a happier critic may find a better 
word. — M, Mason (p. 51) : It is probable that ‘impossible’ is used in the sense of 
incredible or mconceivable, both here and in line 132 of this scene, where Beatrice 
speaks of ‘impossible slanders.’ Cf. Fletcher’s Fair Maid of the Inn: ‘Did you 
see How they prepar’ d themselves . . . you would look For some most impossible antic.’ 
[Ill, i.] — Malone; The meaning is ‘with a rapidity equal to that of jugglers^ who 
appear to perform impossibilities. Cf. Twelfth Nighty III, ii, 77 ; ‘ For there is no 
Christian . . . can ever believe such impossible passages of grossness.’ ‘Convey- 
ance ’ was the common term in Shakespeare’s time for sleight of hand. Halliwell 
paraphrases it by ‘ such extraordinary dexterity ’/ and Staunton by ‘ such incredible 
dexterity'; the last, W. A. Wright pronounces the proper explanation. 



ACT II, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 83 

marke, with a whole army fliooting at me : Ihee fpeakes 236 

poynyards, and euery word flabbes ; if her breath were 
as terrible as terminations , there were no lining neerc 
her, flie would infeft to the north ftarre : I would not 239 

236, me\ him Ktly. 238. terminations] her terminations 

237. Jiabbes] /tabs me Rowe i. Q, Theob. et s»eq. 

235, 236. man at a marke, etc.] Rushton [Shakespeare an Archer^ p. 93) ; 
The men who gave aim blood a bhort distance from the side of the mark. They had 
little to fear from the good archers ; . . . The dangerous shots came from the bad 
shooters whose arrows constantly fell wide of the mark. Therefore the good shot 
was dangerous to the enemy in the field of battle, and the bad shots were dangerous 
to the marker at the butts or clouts. Shakespeare was well aware of this. [The 
present passage, therefore, refers] to the dangerous position of the marker. [This 
explanation, which is evidently the true one, shows that Keigutlly (for whose 
emendation, see 7 'exi, Notes') failed to understand the allusion. — El).]. 

237. poynyards] Steevens ; So, in Hamlet^ III, ii, 414: ‘I will speake daggers 
to her, but use none. ’ 

238. as terminations] Dyce [Gloss.) \ That is, words, terms. — Walker [Crit, 
iii, 30) ; [The Folio is] palpably wrong ; possibly Shakespeare wrote * her mina- 
tions, — one of his many coinages from the Latin. The great objection to this is, that 
it .seems quite unlike comedy. [The still greater objection is, that Beatrice used no 
‘minations,’ or menaces, whatsoever. — Ed.] — Lettsom ( to Walker) : This 
is very ingenious, but, as the Qto reads ‘ her terminations,’ we have probably in the 
Folio merely one of the omissions so common in that edition. When these occur in 
verse, they, of course, produce those limping lines of nine syllables which some 
editors receive as part of Shakespeare’s metrical system. The word ‘termination,* 
however, never occurs elsewhere in Shakespeare ; nor, indeed, does mi nation . — 
Order (p. 30) : This passage, if it is not given over as past cure, requires at all 
events a violent remedy, . . . Benedick must be supposed to say that if Beatrice’s 
breath were as poisonous as her words were cruel, she would infect everywhere. 
‘ Breath ’ is constantly used for ‘ words.’ ... In this sense her breath was ‘ terrible,’ 
as she ‘ spoke poniards.’ But to ‘ infect’ it must be * contagious.’ No other quality 
can be applied. . . . According to this, the natural reading would be : * If her breath 
were as contagious as terrible^ there were,* etc. To arrive at this, we must suppose 
minations is a corruption of contagious^ and that the copier of the MS, after putting 
* terrible ’ in its wrong, began to put it in its right place by repeating the initial 
syllable ter^ and left a mixture of the two in the strange word ‘ tenninations.’ The 
Qto, it is true, makes this solution more problematical by its reading ‘ her tennina- 
tions,’ but the point to bear in mind is that * terrible ’ cannot be the quality of breath 
by which to ‘infect.’ The addition of ‘her* before ‘ter’ is perhaps only another 
proof of the ' displacement of the words and the faulty character of the MS. [No 
one found any difficulty in this word, before Walker, and no one has found any, 
since then, except the Critic just quoted. That it means (accepting ‘her’ of the 
Qto), termsy epithets^ is to me as clear as it is simple. — Ed.] 

239. to the north starre] Warburton’s text follows the Folio, but in his note, 
he quotes the words as ‘the North-Star,* without the ‘to,* and explains them accord- 
ingly I ‘ That is, there is nothing of so pure and keen a brightness, that her calum- 



84 


MUCH 4 D 0 E ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. i. 


marry her, though fhe were indowed with all that Adam 240 
had left him before he tranfgreft, Ihe would haue made 
Her cldcs haue turnd fpit, yea, and haue cleft his club to 
make the fire too: come, talke not of her, you fliall findc 
her the infernall Ate in good apparell. I would to God 244 

241. lcft\ lent Coll, ii, iii, (MS). 241. bcfore'\ after YJiXy covl), 

Ktly. about Ktly conj. 244. her the'\ her in the 

nious tongue would not sully,* — a wholly superfluous change ; it is the diffusion of 
the infection which is implied. — E d. 

239. 240. I would not marry her, though, etc.] I.loyd (p. 198) : It matters 
not wliat follows, for conditions were indifferent after the thought was once fairly 
entertained. It is comic and characteristic that the acute, the observant Benedick, 
never catches a glimpse of the true incitement of the persecution of Beatrice ; he 
supposes a base or bitter disposition, — anything rather than the truth that at heart 
she thoroughly admires him, and would be pleased and flattered to be admired and 
attended to in turn, and that it is pique and not contemptuousness that arms her 
tongue. 

240. marry her] Lady Martin (p. 309) ; Not marry her ! Are we to read in 
this, that Benedick had at some time nourished dreams about her, not wholly con- 
sistent with his creed of celibacy? Not unlikely, if we couple this remark with what 
he said to Claudio about her beauty as compared with Hero’s. 

241. had left him] Collier (ed. ii reading in his text ‘had lent him*) : That 
is, had bestowed upon him, when he was in his early .state of perfection ; the usual 
text, ‘ left,’ would be proper, if the poet were speaking of what Adam had left him, 
after he transgressed. Deigiiton thinks that the phrase means all that Adam ‘ still 
possessed’; while W. A. Wright defines it as ‘all that was beejueathed [to Adam], 
all to which he was heir, and that was dominion over the icst of creation,’ which is 
evidently the meaning, although the strict legal meaning of the phrase ‘left him* 
does not seem, at first sight, to bear it out. Inasmuch, however, as Shakespeare 
uses ‘bequeath* in the .sense oi give, hand over, etc., as in King John, I, i, 148, 
where Eleanor says to Faulconbridgc : ‘ wilt thou forsake thy fortune, Bequeath thy 
land to him, and follow me?’ it is possible that he here uses ‘leave’ with the same 
broad meaning. Hence, the plausible reading of Collier’s MS is needless. — E d. 

242. haue turnd] Abbott (§ 360) says that this infinitive ‘ seems used by attrac- 
tion* from the previous verb. [‘ Seems , — ^nay, it fj.* — Ed.] 

244. Ate in good apparell] Warburton : This is a pleasant allusion to the 
custom of ancient poets and painters, who represent the Furies in rags. — S'I'EEVENS : 
Ate was not one of the Furies, but the Goddess of Revenge or Discord. — Craik 
(p. 213, Note on Jul. Ofs. Ill, i, 271 : ‘With Ate by his side, come hot from hell ’) : 
This Homeric goddess had taken a .strong hold on Shakespeare’s imagination. In 
King John, II, i, 63, Elinor is described by Chatillon as ‘An Ate stirring him to 
blood and strife.* And in Lovd s Lab. L. V, ii, 694, Biron, at the representation of 
The Nine W’orthies, calls out, ‘ More Ates, more Ates, stir them on !* Where did 
Shakespeare get acquainted with this divinity, whose name does not occur, I believe, 
even in any Latin author? [It is impossible to say where Shakespeare heard of her, 
but he might have learned about her in Spenser. See next note.] — W. A. Wright: 



ACT II, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 85 

fome fcholler would coniure her, for certainely while flie 245 
is heere, a man may Hue as quiet in hell, as in a fanftuary, 
and people finne vpon purpofe, becaufe they would goe 
thither, fo indeed all difquiet, horror, and perturbation 
followcs her. 249 

249. follo 7 ves'] QFf, Cap. Steev. Dyce i, Cam. Wh. ii. follotv Pope et cet. 

[Warburton’s statement in regard to the ‘ rags ’ of the Furies] is, so far as 1 have been 
able to ascertain, entirely Avithout foundation. In Spenser’s elaborate description of 
Ate and her dwelling {Faerie Qneenc, IV, i, 19-30), nothing is said of her charac- 
teristic attire, although she comes upon the scene * in good apparel,’ with the false 
Duessa, in the guise of two fair ladies. ‘But Ladies none they were, albee in face 
And outward shew faire semblance they did beare ; For under maske of beautie and 
good grace Vile treason and fowle falshood hidden were.’ — Stanza 17. 

245. some scholler] M. Ma.sc)N : As Shakespeare always attributes to his exor- 
cists the power of raising spirits, he gives his conjurevy in this place, the power of 
laying them. [P2xorcisms were carried on only in I^atin, and therefore by scholars. 
Cf. Hamlety I, i, 42 : ‘Thou art a scholar; speak to it, Horatio.’] Dykr (p. 45) : 
The schoolmaster was often employed. Thus, in the Com, of Err. IV, iv, the 
schoolmaster, Pinch, is introduced in this capacity. Within, indeed, the last fifty 
years the pedagogue was still a reputed conjurer. 

246. as quiet . . . sanctuary] Staunton : This passage is very ambiguous. 
The obscurity may have arisen from the author’s having first written ‘in hell,’ and 
afterwards substituted ‘ in a sanctuary,’ without cancelling the former, so that as in 
many other cases, both got into the text. Or the compositor may have inserted the 
second * as ’ instead of or^ in which case we should read, — * as quiet in hell, or in a 
sanctuary,’ etc. — W. Sykes (A’", dr* Qu. VIII, ii, 202) : Benedick speaks of Beatrice 
as an evil spirit or devil. . . . While this devil is on earth people may live as quietly 
and happily in hell, her natural home, as in a sanctuary, because she is not there. — 
W. A. Wright : A sanctuary is no refuge from her tongue, and a man ma^ live as 
quiet in hell. — Marsh ALI. : The sentence would have been perfectly clear if the 
author had WTitten ‘ for certainly a man may live as ejuiet in hell as in a sanctuary 
where she is.^ Perhaps, if, instead of ‘here’ we were to read there, it would convey 
very much the same meaning ; but it may be that the poet advisedly wrote ‘ here,’ 
meaning here in this wof'ld. [Whatever of ambiguity there is in this passage is due, 
I think, to connecting ‘sanctuary’ with ‘live’, instead of restricting ‘live’ to ‘hell 
that is, while she is about a man may live as quiet in hell as if hell were a sanctu- 
ary, or, in freer phrase : hell itself becomes a sanctuary in quietness, in comparison 
with her presence. — Ed.] 

248. indeed] This is emphatic: in very deed. 

249. followcs] Note the singular number, after several nominatives, here used 
by Shakespeare’s compositors. — E d. 

249. her] Anon. {Blackwood, April, 1833, p. 543) : Poo — poo — poo — what is all 
this? ‘She had misused him past all endurance,’ not thinking that he had been 
himself ; yet really she was not so bitter bad upon him as he say^, — he is manifestly 
more mortified than any man would have been, if fairly out of love ; and believing 
(oh ! the simpleton, ) that she spoke her sincere sentiments, he has the folly to say 



86 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. i. 


Enter Claudio and Beatrice ^Leonato^ Hero, 250 

Pedro, Looke heere flie comes. 

Bene, Will your Grace command mee any feruice to 
the worlds end ? I will goe on the flighteft arrand now 
to the Antypodes that you can deuife to fend me on : I 
will fetch you a tooth-picker now from the furtheft inch 255 
of Afia : bring you the length of Prejlcr Johns foot: fetch 
you a hayre off the great Qhams beard : doe you any em- 257 

Scene V. Pope, + . 257. hayre off'\ hair of ’85, Coll. 

250. Leonato, Hero] Om. Q. Iluds. 

253. arrand\ errand F^F^. 

to Don Pedro, ‘I cannot endure my Lady Tongue.’ [Benedick is not serious, he 
says all this in a wild spirit of comic exaggeration. They were not his real senti- 
ments ; had they been, he would have been the last to confess that he was utterly 
routed and vanquished, and at the end of his resources in ‘jade’s tricks.’ — Ed.] 

250. Here we have a correct stage-direction, and, after the manner of play liouse 
copies, the presence of the characters is indicated a few lines before they actually 
appear. — El). 

255. tooth-picker] The use of a toothpick was apparently an indication of 
elegance, see Wint. Talc IV, iv, 840, and of having travelled, see King John II, 
i, 189 ; from which the inference is not extravagant that its material, in those days, 
was not the convenient quill, or the homely w’ood, but of some enduring material 
which served the use of many years, — ^perhaps a life time. — Ed. 

256, 257. of Prester . . . off] Cambridge Edition : Though ‘of’ and ‘off’ 
are frequently interchanged in the old copies, yet, as in this place both Qto and Ff 
are consistent in reading- ‘ of’ in the first clause and ‘off’ in the second, we follow 
them. 

256. Prester lohns] Halt.twell : See, for a most profound and learned disserta- 
tion on^the personage and history of Prester John, M. D’Avezac’s Introduction to 
his History of the Tartars, by John de Plan-de-Carpin, 1838, pj). 165-168. Early 
notices of this personage are all but innumerable, and he is also frequently mentioned 
by writers of the Elizabethan period. — W. A. Wright : Pre.ster John was a fabulous 
Christian King of vast wealth and power who was supposed to live in some inaccessi- 
ble region in the cast of Asia. Marco Polo identifies the original Prester John with 
Unc Khan, the chief of the Keraits, a Mongol tribe .said to have professed Chris- 
tianity, In the sixteenth century the name was applied to the King of Abyssinia, 
who.se title Prestegian, according to Purchas {Pilgrimage, p. 670, cd. 1614), was 
‘ easily deflected and altered to Priest Johne Benedick i.s not thinking so much of 
the danger of such an enterprise as of its remoteness, which would take him out 
of the reach of Beatrice. — [Syr John Maundeville {circa, A. D. 1322) ; I beleve 
y* we haue herd say why this Emperour is called Prester John but for those that 
know it not I wil declare. There was sometime an Emperour that was a noble 
prince, & doughty, & he had many christen Knights with him and y® Emperour 
thought hee woulde sec the service in Christen churches, and then was churches 
of christendome in Turkey, Surry and Tartary, Hierusalem, Palistinc, Araby and 
Alappy, and all the lordes of Egypte. And thys Emperour came with a Christen 



ACT II, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 87 

baffage to the Pigmies, rather then hould three words 258 
conference, with this Harpy : you haue no employment 
for me ? 260 

Pedro. None, but to defire your good company. 

Bcnc. O God fir,hccres a dilh I loue not, 1 cannot in- 
dure this Lady tongue. Exit. 263 

263. this Lady Theob. Warb. Ladie tonf^ue Q, Var. ’78, ct cet. 

Johns. Var. ’73, Wh. i. this Ladyes 263. Exit] Om. Theob. Warb. Johns. 
tofij^ue Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Cap. my Stcev. Vaj. Knt. 

Knight into a church of Egipt and it was on a saterday after Whit sonday when the 
byshop gaue orders, and he behelde the service and he asked of the Knight what 
folke those should be that stode before the Byshop, and the Knight sayd they should 
be prestes, & he sayde he wold no more be called Kinge ne Emperour but preest, 
and he would haue the name of him that came first out of the prestes and he was 
called John, and so haue all the Emperours sylheii be called Prester John.’ — p. 207, 
ed. Ashton. Batman vppon Bartholomc (l.ib. xviii, cap. 45, p. 364) : The P'^mpire 
of the Ahissinrs or of Ftesbiter John, whome the inhabitants of Europe doe call 
Presbifer /oh a, is surnamed of the Moores Atic/abassi, of his owne people, that is 
of the A bissifii’s^ he is tearmed Accqiie & Nry;tiz^ that is Emperour & king for the 
proper name (as among vs is giuen by the parents. ) . . . This Prcslntcr lo/in^ is 
without double to bee reckoned among the greatest Monarchies of our age, as he, 
whose dominions stretcheth betweene the Tropikes, from the red sea, almost to the 
Aethiopike Occean. — Ed.] 

257. Chams beard] W. A. Wright : The Great Cham or Kaan was the 
supreme sovereign of the Mongols. In Dekker’s Shocmakcf'' s Holiday^ V, v, we 
find, ‘ Tamar Chains beard was a rubbing brush toot.’ Speaking of what lovers will 
do for their mistress, Burton {Aftat, of Melancholy^ Part 3, Sect. 2, Mem. 4, subs. 
1) says, ‘If she bid them they will go barefoot to Jerusalem, to the great Chams 
Court, to the East Indies, to fetch her a bird to wear in her hat.’ In the travels 
which pass under the name of Sir John MaundeVile he is called the Efiiperor of 
Cathay. [One of the tasks which Charlemagne imposed on II non of Bordeaux 
was to go to the ‘ cyte of Babylone, to the admyrall Gaudys,’ and ‘ bringe me thy 
handfull of the here of hys berde, and .iiii. of hys grettest teth.’ It is barely possi- 
ble that this task may have crept into some play now forgotten, where the Great 
Cham was substituted for Admiral Gaudys. It has been conjectured that a play 
called Hiion of Bordeaux was in some way connected with the sources of the plot 
of Mid. N. D.j and it is merely possible ihai this substitution occurred in this lost 
play. — E d.] 

258. Pigmies] Batman vppon Bartholomc (Lib. xviii, cap. 86, p. 377 ) ^ Pignici 
be little men of a cubite long, and the Greekes call them Pigmeo^^ and they dwell in 
mountaines of Indc^ and the sea of occean is nigh to them, as Papias sayth. And 
Austen sayth in this wise, that Pigmeihee vnneth \J^ard/y\ a cuibite long, and bee 
perfect of age in the Ihirde ycare, and waxc old in the seauenth yere, & it is said, that 
they fight with Cranes. Lib. y, ca. j, PHniies speaketh of Pigmeis^ and sayth, that 
pigmei be armed in yron, and ouercome Cranes, and passe not theyr bounds, and 
dwell in temperate land vnder a merrye parte of heauen, in mountains in the North 



88 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act k, sc. i. 

Pedr, Come Lady, come, you haue loft the heart of 
Signior Bencdicke. 

Beatr, Indeed my Lord, hee lent it mee a while, and I 
gaue him vfe for it, a double heart for a fingle one, marry 
once before he wonne it of mee, with falfe dice, therefore 
your Grace may well fay I haue loft it. 

Pedro. You haue put him downe Lady,you haue put 
him downe. 

Beat. So I would not he ftiould do me, my Lord, left 
I fhould prooue the mother of fooles : I haue brought 
Count Claudio y'wh.om you fent me to feeke. 

266. lent'] sent Rowe i. Ktly, Huds. 

267. a yingle] his fingle Q, Cap. 267. one, marry] one marry: F^. 

Steev. Var. Coll, Dyce, Wh. Sta. Cam. one : marry, Rowe, et seq. 

side. — W. A. Wrkjht : According to Marco Polo, the Pygmies were manufactured 
out of the monkeys of Sumatra. 

263. this Lady tongue] Heath (p. 103) : As a dish has just been mentioned, 
I suppose [the reading of F.^] is right. — R. G. White (ed. i) : The reading of Fg is 
possibly right. [The agreement of the Qto and First Folio in reading ‘ Lady ’ prevents 
us from accepting * Ladyes ’ of the Second Folio, happy though it be, as other than 
a chance guess of the compositor. In a choice between ‘ this l^ady * and ‘ my 
Ladie,’ I prefer the former as more pointedly referring to ‘here’s a dish,’ and also 
for its tone of contempt. — E d.] 

263. tongue] Lady M.\rtin (p. 309) : All this time Benedick quite forgets that 
he was himself to blame, if Beatrice has dealt sharply with him ; for had he not 
given her the severest provocation by attacking her under the shelter of his mask? 
If volubility of speech were her sin, how much greater was his ! Rich as her inven- 
tion is, and fertile her vocabulary, Benedick excels her in both. But what great 
talker ever knew his own weakness? 

267. vse] Malone: This, in our author’s time, meant interest of money. — W. A. 
Wright : See Sonnet, vi, 5 : ‘ That use is not forbidden usury Which happies those 
that pay the willing loan ? [The usury here is, that, while the loan lasted, Beatrice 
gave her own heart by way of interest; ‘marry’ she repeats (for I think there 
should be a full stop after ‘single one,’) ‘Benedick’s heart that I thought was 
mine, Benedick reclaimed by unfair means.’ It is strange that into no discussion 
(that I can recall) is any weight given, or indeed any reference made, to this speech. 
Enough is here told to explain Benedick’s first greeting to Beatrice as ‘Lady 
Disdain.’ Between the lines, there can be almost discerned the plot of another 
play. — E d.] 

272, 273. Mrs Jameson (i, 149) : If the freedom of some of the expressions of 
Rosalind or Beatrice be objected to, let it be remembered that this was not the fault 
of Shakespeare or the women, but generally of the age. Portia, Beatrice, Rosalind, 
and the rest, lived in times when more importance was attached to things than to 
words ; now, we think more of words than of things ; and happy are we, in these 
later days of super-refinement, if we are to be saved by our verbal morality. [Shake- 


265 


270 

274 



ACT 11, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 89 

Pedro, Why how now Count, wherfore are you fad? 275 
Claud. Not fad my Lord, 

Pedro. How then ? ficke ? 

Claud. Neither, my Lord. 

Beaf. The Count is neither fad, nor ficke, nor merry, 
nor well : but ciuill Count, ciuill as an Orange, and fomc- 280 
thing of a iealous complexion. 

Pedro. Ifaith Lady, I thinke your blazon to be true, 282 

280. cketl/ Counf,~\ QFf, Rowe, Pope, et cet. 

Han. Sta. Cam. lluds. Wh. ii. mv 7 , 281. of a iealous\ Ff, Rowe, Pope, 

county Theob. Warb. Johns. Coll. Wli. i. Han. Wh. i. of as jealous a Coll. MS. 

civil ^ county — Dyce. chilly Count ; Cap. of that iealous Q et cet. 

speare’s plays were acted before his Queen. Is it not most unreasonable to demand 
that a dramatist’s refinement should exceed that of the highest standard of his time? 
—Ed.] 

273> 274. I haue . . , seeke] Wc have received no intimation that the Prince 
had sent Beatrice for Claudio ; but it is by these commonplace, natural touches, which 
we accept without (piestion, that Shakespeare not only interlaces the scenes of his 
plays, but also explains the presence of characters on the stage, and renders needless 
many stage directions, which after all are useful only to the prompter, or to a 
reader. — En. 

280. ciuill Count, ciuill as an Orange] Dycr {Notes ^ p. 43) : It may be 
noticed that a ^ civil (not a Seville) orange’ was the orthography of the time. See 
Cotgrave, in Aigre-douce [where the definition is : * A ciuile Orange ; or. Orange, 
that is between sweet and sower,’ — which is exactly what Claudio was, neither sad, 
nor sick, nor merry, nor well, but between sweet and sour. That the Folio’s 
spelling was exactly the spelling of Seville, in very early times, we learn from Arnold’s 
Chronicle, in a ‘Scrap’ in the Trans, of the Ninv. Sh. Soc., 1880-6, p. 578, con- 
tributed by W. W. SkeaT : ‘ ix tonne of good Ciuill oyle.’ — p. no; ‘They had 
freighted dyuers .shippis at Cyuill.’ — ^p. 130, ed. 1811. The phrase ‘civil as an 
Orange’ is, according to W. A. Wright, ‘of frequent occurrence.’ — Ed.] 

281. of a] Note the emphatically better reading of the Qto. 

282-287. Walker {Crit. iii, 31) ; Perhaps this whole speech is a kind of verse, — 
‘ I’ faith. Lady, I think your blazon to be true ; | Though I’ll be sworn, if he be so, 
his conceit is false. [ Here, Claudio, j I have wooed in thy name, and fair Hero is 
won ; I I have broke with thy father, and his good will obtain’d ; | Name the day of 
marriage, and God give thee joy.’ [See I, iii, 18. — Ed.] 

282. blazon] Murray {H. E. D.)'. Adopted from the French bla^ion ... of 
which the original meaning was not [as Diez and Littr6] assume, ‘ glory,’ or 
‘proclamation,’ or even ‘armorial shield,’ but simply ‘shield’ in the literal sense. 
This is proved by the earliest quotation in French and English, and by the derived 
old French sense of ‘ shoulder blade.’ From its proper senses of i. A shield used in 
war; 2. A shield in Heraldry, armorial bearings, etc.; 3. Description, according to 
the rules of Heraldry, of armorial bearings ; it came to have the transferred sense 
[as in the present passage] of a description or record of any kind ; especially, a record 
of virtues or excellencies. 



90 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. i. 


though He be fworne, if hee be fo, his conceit is falfe : 283 

heere Claudio^ I haue wooed in thy name , and faire Hero 
is won , I haue broke with her father, and his good will 285 
obtained, name the day of marriage, and God giue 
thee ioy. 

Leona, Count, take of me my daughter, and with her 
my fortunes : his grace hath made the match, & all grace 
fay. Amen to it. 290 

Beatr, Speake Count, tis your Qu. 

Claud, Silence is the perfefteft Herault of ioy, I were 292 

283. Coll. Dyce. and his. ..obtain' d ; 

284. Claudio] Claudio [leading him et cct. 

to Hero] Cap. 291. Cue. Rowe ii. 

285. 286. and his...obtaincd~\ QFf, 292. JIcraiilf\ QFj- Ilcralt F^. 

Rowe, Rope, Han. and^ his... obtained^ I Jerald F^. 

283. conceit] Craik (p. 125): ‘Conceit’ which survives with a limited mean- 
ing (the concej)tion of a man by himself, w'hich is so apt to be one of over-estima- 
tion) is also fiequent in Shakespeare with the sense, nearly, of what we now call 
conception^ in general. 

286. obtained,] The majority of Edd. substitute a semicolon in place of this 
comma. It might w'ell be a full slop. The punctuation of Collier and of Dyce 
dislocates the sentence. — Ed. 

286, 287. God giue thee ioy] This wish appears to be peculiar to a marriage ; 
see line 320. It is also Audrey’s exclamation when Touchstone promises to marry 
her. As You Like ft., Ill, iii, 43, where, in this ed., there is the following passage 
quoted from Lilly’s Mother Bombie (p. 138, ed. Fairliolt) : ^I.ucio. Faith there was a 
bargaine during life, and the clocke cried, God give them joy. J^risiits. Villaine ! they 
be married ! Ifalfepcme. Nay, I thinke not so. Speranliis. Yes, yes ! God give us 
joy is a binder,’ — Ed. 

288. take of me] For other examples of ‘of’ used for ‘from,’ with verbs signi- 
fying depriving, etc., see AimOTT, §166; also, V, i, 329, where ‘of’ is used in a 
somewhat different sense. 

289. his grace ... all grace] W. A. Wright ; That is, may he who is the 
fountain of all grace say, etc. There is a similar play upon words in Alls well, II, 
i, 163 : ‘ The great’s! grace lending grace.’ 

291. Qu.] Murray [II. E. D.) : Origin uncertain. It has been taken as 

equivalent to French queue, on the ground that it is tlie tail or ending of the pre- 
ceding speech ; but no such u.se of has ever obtained in French (where ‘cue’ 

is called rtplique'), and no literal sense of queue or cue leading up to this appears in 
l6th century Engli.sh. On the other hand, in the 16th and early 17th centuries it is 
found written Q, q, q., or qu, and it was explained by 17th century writers as a con- 
traction for some Latin word (sc. qualis, quando), said to have been used to mark in 
actors’ copies of plays, the points at which they were to begin. But no evidence con- 
firming this has been found. 

292. Silence, etc.] Lloyd (p. 197) : Considering the vicissitudes and mistakes 
through which the settlement [of the wooing], in the first instance, is suddenly 



300 


ACT II, sc. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 9 1 

but little happy if I could fay, how much ? Lady, as you 293 

are mine, I am yours, I giue away my felfe for you , and 
doat vpon the exchange. 295 

Beat, Speake cofin, or (if you cannot) flop his mouth 
with a kiffe, and let not him fpeake neither. 

Pedro. Infaith Lady you haiie a merry heart. 

Bcatr. Yea my Lord I thanke it,poore foolc it keepes 
on the windy fide of Care, my coofm tells him in his eare 
that he is in my heart. 

Clait. And fo fhe doth coofm. 

Beat, Good Lord for alliance : thus goes euciy one 


293. how mt(ch /*] hmo vinch. Rowe. 
299. it,poo)e foolc\ it : poor 

fooly Knt. ity poor fooly^^ et cct. 

301. my hcart'l Ff, Rowe, Pope, her 
heart Q ct cet. 


302. Clau.] Leon. I Ian. 

303. for atlianee'] our alHance Tlieob. 
coiij. MS. ap. Cam. 

alliance .'J QFf, Rowe, alliance 
Coll. i. alliance ! Pope et cet. 


arrived at, we cannot wonder at a certain want of spontaneousncbs in Claudio’s 
acknowledgements. In the sudden veering of feeling, there is naturally a moment 
of pause; and when Peatrice prompts him, — ‘Speak, C'ount ; ’tis your cue,’ — it is 
in plain prose, and somewhat of the coldest, that he takes it up. ‘ Silence is the per- 
fectest herald,’ and so forth ; till Beatrice, again impatient at the lagging dialogue, 
suggests a rejoinder to her cousin, and hints that a kiss on such an occasion would 
be quite in due place. Such prelude defines the nature of the engagement and of the 
lovers in a manner to soften the violence of the ensuing breach, and to reconcile us 
to the facility with which Claudio accepts a wife in .substitution and on blind con- 
ditions, and to the completeness of Hero’s satisfaction in regaining him, in a manner 
so perfectly independent of personal compliment to herself. 

292, 293. I were . . . how much ?] Cf. Ant. Cleop. I, i, 15 : ‘There’s beggary 
in the love that can be reckon’d.’ 

299. poore foole] Malone : This was formerly an expression of tenderness. 

300. windy side of Care] W. A. Wright : That is, so as to have the advantage 
of it. The figure is nautical. In naval actions in the old days of sailing-ships it 
was always an object to get the weather-gage of an enemy. Cf. Tro. and Cress. V, 
iii, 26 ; ‘ Mine honour keeps the weather of my fate.’ Schmidt explains it as a hunt- 
ing metaphor, and interprets ‘ keeps on the windy side of care ’ to mean ‘ so that care 
cannot scent and find it.’ But the .scent would be carried down by the wind, and 
this cannot be the explanation. Cf. Twelfth Nighty III, iv, 181 : ‘ Still you keep o’ 
the windy side of the law.’ 

303. for alliance] Capell (p. 124) : A .sprightly answer to Claudio, who, in his 
new flow of spirits, calls her ‘cousin’; its meaning — ‘Good lord, here have I got a 
new cousin !’ In line 320 she gives him joy by this title, in conjunction with Hero. 
— Steevens : I cannot understand these words, unless they imply a wish for the 
speaker’s with a husband. — Boswell; I explain them; ‘Cood I.ord, how 

many alliances are forming !’ Staunton follows Steevens, and interprets the 
exclamation as ec^uivalcnt to ‘ Heaven send me a husband !’ W. A. Wright justly 



92 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii. sc. i. 


to the world but I, and I am fun-burn’d, I may fit in a cor- 
ner, and cry, heigh ho for a husband. 305 

304. to the worldl to be wooed Wag- corner^ and cry heigh ho Pope, Han. 
ner conj. Dyce, Cam. Iluds. Wh. ii. corner^ 

fun-burn* d'] sundered \^from it] and cry heigh ho ! Thcob. Warb. Johns. 
Bailey ii, 190. coj'ner^ and cry, heigh ho! Cap. et cet. 

304, 305. corner and cry, heigh ho] 305. heigh ho for a husband] In 

corner, and cry, heigh ho Rowe, Sta. Italics, as a quotation, Sta. 

remarks that Staunton’s interpretation cannot be right ‘however ironically’ the 
exclamation ‘may be spoken ; for “alliance” does not express the relation of hus- 
band and wife to each other, so much as the relation into which they are brought by 
marriage with the members of the respective families.’ [The plurals of substantives 
ending with the sound of s are so often found without the addition of j or es (see 
Walker, Vers. 243), that I am not sure that the present ‘alliance’ is not a case in 
point, and that Boswell does not come the nearest to the true interpretation. It 
seems to me that the plural is more in harmony with Beatrice’s high spirits and 
characteristic exaggeration. — E d. ] 

304. to the world . . . sun-burn ’d] Johnson: What is it to ‘go to the world’? 
perhaps to enter by marriage into a settled state ; but why is the unmarried lady 
‘ sun-burnt ’ ? I believe we should read, ‘ Thus goes every one to the wood but I,’ 
etc. * Thus does every one but I find a shelter, and I am left exposed to wind and 
sun."* ‘ The nearest way to the wood,* is a phrase for the readiest means to any end. 
It is said of a woman, who accepts a worse match than those which she had refused, 
that ‘she has passed through the 7 vood, and at last taken a crooked stick.’ But 
conjectural criticism has always something to abate its confidence. Shake.speare in 
Ail’s Well, I, iii, 20, uses the phrase ‘to go to the world,’ for marriage. So that 
my emendation depends only on the opposition of wood to ‘ sun-burnt.’ — Steevens : 
‘ I am sun-burnt* may mean, ‘ I have lo.st my beauty, and am consequently no longer 
such an object as can tempt a man to marry? — Hunter (i, 248) : It is melancholy 
to see such a man as Dr Johnson proposing \wood for ‘ world ’], when there are few 
phrases more decidedly unsophisticated English than going to the world, tying oneself 
to the world, to express entering on the cares and duties of married life, just as the 
nun betaking herself to the cloister is said to forsake the world. But the phrase 
‘ I am sun -burned’ requires more explanation. It does not appear that Beatrice had 
at any period so mean an opinion of her personal merits as to utter such a sentiment, 
even to herself, [as Steevens attributes to her in the foregoing note], and it is certain 
that she is not accustomed to .speak in .so pointless a manner. ‘To be in the sun,’ 
‘ to be in the warm sun,’ ‘ to be sun-burned,’ were phrases not uncommon in the 
time of vShakespeare, and for a century later, to express the state of being without 
family connections, destitute of the comforts of domestic life. ‘To go to the world’ 
was to be settled in a family; ‘to be sun-burned* was to remain sole, or, as the 
lively Beatrice further pleases to express herself, ‘ to sit in a corner and cry heigh ho 
for a husband !’ . . . My conjecture is that at first [the phrase ‘ to be sun-burned ’] 
denoted the absence of family endearments in a more particular and confined appli- 
cation, and that in time it expanded so as to comprehend any and every kind of lone- 
liness in respect of kindred. The state I mean is that of being without children. It 
can hardly be supposed that in a northern latitude the being in the sun, or even the 
being in a warm or burning sun, would pass into current use among the people, 



ACT 11, SC. L] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


93 


[304. to the world but I, and I am sun-burn’d] 

associated with ideas of discomfort and destitution, unless there was some peculiar 
reason for it. . . . Whence, then, arose this phrase in which the connected ideas are 
inverted ? I explain it thus : the one hundred and twenty-first psalm, in which, in 
the Old English version, is found the passage, ‘ So that the sun shall not burn thee 
by day, nor the moon by night,’ is found in the earlier Rituals of the Church as part 
of the office for the Churching of Women, so that the matron surrounded by her hus- 
band and children was one who had received the benediction that the sun should not 
burn her ; while the unmarried woman, who had received no such benediction came 
to be spoken of, by those who allowed themselves such jocular expressions, as one 
‘ still left exposed to the burning of the sun,’ or as Beatrice says, ‘ sun-burned.’ . . . 
According to my view of it, [this phrase] in its first and original use denoted the 
state of being unmarried, or at least without children ; this is the sense in which 
Beatrice uses it. It then expanded so as to include the state of those who were 
without family connections of any kind ; in this sense it is used by Hamlet where he 
says, I, ii : ‘ I am too much i’ th’ sun.’ It expanded still wider, and included those 
who have no home ; in this sense it is used by Kent in Lea}\ II, ii : ‘ Thou out of 
heaven’s benedictions com’st To the warm sun.’ And it seems to have expanded 
wider still, and to have been sometimes used for any species of destitution, or dis- 
tress, or evil. Thus Wilson in his Arte of Rhetoric ^ 1585? p* 3 ^ : ‘So that he [the 
lawyer] gaineth always . . . whereas the other [laymen] get a xvarm sun oftentimes, 
and a flap with a fox-tail for all that ever they have spent.’ ... In brief, stripped of 
its popular phrase, what Beatrice says is tliis : * Thus every one finds her mate, and 
I am left in the world a solitary woman.’ [See notes on Ham. I, ii, 67, and Lear^ 
II, ii, 157 in this edition. In N. Qu. Ill, xi, p. 413, Dr Brinsley Nicholson 
contends that Hunter is wrong in his conclusions concerning the phrases in Hamlet 
and Lear ; these conclusions, it is true, have not been generally accepted, nor, in- 
deed, has Hunter’s explanation of ‘sun-burned.’ On the strength of what Hector is 
quoted by A£neas as .saying in Tro, Cress, I, iii, 282 : ‘ The Grecian dames are 
sunburnt and not worth The splinter of a lance,’ Halliwkll believes that Beatrice 
means, ironically, that .she is ‘ homely' ; Staunton adds ill-favoured ; and hence, as 
W. A. Wright says, ‘not likely to attract a husband.’ The irony which Halliwell 
detects is founded on his suppo.sition that Beatrice was, not a brunette like Hero who 
was ‘ too brown for a fair praise,’ but, a blonde. Any interpretation is better, it 
seems to me, than that of supposing that Beatrice was angling for a compliment, 
which the disparaging remark of a woman on her own good looks always is. I hold, 
therefore, to Hunter’s explanation. W. A. Wright, in support of Steevens’s inter- 
pretation, which he adopts, quotes Hen. V: V, ii, 154 : where Henry speaks of him- 
self as a follow “ whose face is not worth sunburning,” because he has no good looks 
to be spoiled by it.’ But the sunburning of a man is not unmanly, and is very dif- 
ferent fr^ni the sunburning of a woman. ‘There is, possibly,’ Dr Wright continues, 

‘ a reference to the Song of SongSy i, 6, and the expression may be intended to hint 
at the unsheltered condition of an unmarried woman who had no home of her own.’ 
—Ed.] 

305. heigh ho for a husband] Malone, in a note on III, iv, 51 (but more 
appropriately here), gives the title of an old ballad in the Pepysian Collection, in 
Magdalene College, Cambridge [vol. iv, p. 8. — ^W. A. Wright] ; ‘ Hey ho, for a 
Husband. Or, the willing Maids wants made known.’ — ^W. A. Wright : It is 



94 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act il. SC. i. 


Pedro. Lady Beatrice^ I will get you one. 306 

Beat, I would rather haue one of your fathers getting : 
hath your Grace neVe a brother like you ? your father 
got excellent husbands, if a maid could come by them. 

Prince. Will you haue me? Lady. 310 

Beat. No, my Lord, vnleffc I might haue another for 
working-daics, your Grace is too coftly to weare euerie 
day : but I befcech your Grace pardon nice, I was borne 
to fpeakc all mirth, and no matter. 

Prince. Your filence mofl offends me, and to be mer- 315 
ry, bell becomes you, for out of queftion,you were born 
in a merry howre. 

Beatr. No fure my Lord, my Mother cried, but then 
there was a ftarre daunfl, and vnder that wa3 I borne :co- 
fins God giuc you ioy. 320 

Leo 7 tato. Necce,will you lookc to thofe rhings I told 
you of? 

Beat. I cry you mercy Vncle,by your Graces pardon. , 

Exit Bcdtrice. 324 

307. / would'\ I had Cap. MS, ap. 319. was /] / was F^F^, Rowe, + . 
Cam. 321. rhings'] l\. 

316. ouf 0/] out a Q. out d Cam. 324. Scene VI. Pope, +. 

Edd. conj. 

referred to in Burton’s Anat. of Melon, (ed. 1651, p. 5^5 )> Fart 3, Sec. 2, Mem. 6, 

Subs. 3 : ^ Ilai-ho for an husband, cries she, a bad huslmnd, nay the worst that ever 

was is better then none.’ — C aimbridge P'.dition : The old copies here give us no 
help in detennining whether Beatrice is meant to cry * Heigh-ho for a husband,’ or 
merely ‘ Heigh-ho’ and wish for a husband. Most editors seem by their punctuation 
to adopt the latter view. We [take] the former. [STAUNTON is the only editor, 
however, who distinctly marks the whole phrase as a quotation. — Ei>.] 

305. husband] Fuetciier (p. 247) : Here we find this anti-matrimonial lady 
thinking much rather of getting a husband for herself, than of preventing her cousin 
from accepting one. But it is not only her habitual raillery against marriage in gen- 
eral, that amounts to mere pleasantry and nothing more ; her antipathy to the indi- 
vidual cavalier, upon whom she exercises her riotous wit, is not any more in earnest. 

314. no matter] That is, nothing serious, no sound sense. Jaques calls Touch- 
stone * a material fool.’ 

319. a starre daunst] W. A. Wright: As the sun was supposed to do on 
Easter Day. ‘We shall not, I hope,’ says Sir Thomas Browne in his Vulgar 
Errors, v, 22, § 1 6, * disparage the Resurrection of our Redeemer, if we say the Sun 
doth not dance on Easter-daye 

323. mercy Vncle] An apology to her uncle, for having neglected ‘ those things,’ 
with an instant request to the Prince to permit her to leave. — E d. 



ACT n, sc. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


95 

32s 


Prince. By my troth a pleafant fpirited Lady. 

Leon. There’s little of the melancholy element in ' her 
my Lord, flie i^ neuer fad, but when flie fleepcs, and not 
eucr fad thenrfor I haue heard my daughter fay,lhe hath 
often dreamt of vnhappineffe , and wakt her felfc with 
laughing. 330 

325. pleafant fpirited'\ pleasant-spir- 329. of vtihappineffe'] QFf. of an 

ited Theob. et seq. happiness Theob. of an unhappiness 

Warb. Johns. Var. ’73. 

325-330. pleasant spirited . . . laughing] Fleicher (p. 244) : Surely no 
terms can well be devised more expressive of a disposition to good-humoured gaiety 
and raillery, as opposed to everything ill-humouredly sarcastic and satirical. We 
have not only the lady h<;rself protesting that she speaks ^all mirth’; not only the 
testimony of her uncle and guardian, supported by that of his daughter, — with whom 
she has been V^rought up as a sister, — that her disposition is devoid of ‘ the melan- 
choly element but here is the Prince himself, after a full and varied experience of 
her deportment and conversation, declaring her to be ‘ a p]easant-sj)irited lady.’ On 
this consideration it is, that he so immediately determines, * She were an excellent 
wife for Benedick,’ — not in mere levity, as the critics seem commonly to have con- 
strued it, Wt ill serious q^re for the w'elfare of this other favoured follower of his, as 
he had already shown it in providing so advantageous a match for his prime favourite, 
Claudio. It should be observed, also, that the Prince’s declaration of her fitness to 
become the wife of Benedick is made by way of rejoinder to Leonato’s assurance 
that * she mocks all her wooers out of suit ;’ so that Don Pedro, when observing just 
before, ‘ She cannot endure to hear tell of a husband,’ had already satisfied himself 
that this non-endurance of hers, like all the rest of her raillery, had no serious inten- 
tion, but, according to her own definition, was ‘all mirth, and no matter.’ 

326. melancholy element] Batman vppon Bartholome (Lib. IV, chap, i, p. 
24) says that ‘ mans bodie is made of foure Elements, that is to wit, of Earth, 
Water, hire, & Aire and further (p. 29) that ‘ the humours be called the children 
of the Elementes. For euerye of the humours commeth of the qualitie of the Ele- 
ments. And ther be foure humours, Bloud, Fleame, Cholar, and Melancholy.* 
Wherefore, I doubt that ‘ melancholy element ’, as here used by Leonato, has any 
reference whatever to the Four Elements, or to their ‘children ’, but means simply 
that a melancholy constituent there is not, in Beatrice’s character. — Ed. 

328. euer] An anonymous conjecture of even for ‘ever’, recorded in the Cam- 
bridge Edition, I cannot but regard with favour, inasmuch as it occurred indepen- 
dently to the present Ed. 

329. vnhappinesse] Theobald’s acuteness here deserts him, and strangely 
enough he thus paraphrases the sentence : ‘ and not ever sad then ; for she hath 
often dream’ d of something merry y (an happiness y as the Poet phrases it,) and 
wak’d,’ etc. ; and thereto he conformed his text, and of course completely missed 
the point, which is that even in dreams she was not sad for long, but immediately 
woke herself with laughing. Warburton, almost as far afield as Theobald, whom 
he sneers at, says that ‘unhappiness’ here signified ‘a wild, wanton, unlucky trick’, 
which in the concrete it may signify, but then it requires an article before it, and this 



96 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. i. 


Pedro, Shce cannot indure to heare tell of a husband. 331 

Leonato, O, by no meanes, fhe mocks all her wooers 
out of fuite. 

Prmcc, She were an excellent wife for Benedick, 

Leonato, O Lord, my Lord, if they were but a weeke 335 
married, they would talke themfelucs madde. 

Prince, Counte Claudio^ when mcane you to goe to 
Church ? 

Clau, To morrow my Lord, Time goes on crutches, 
till Loue haue all his rites. 340 

Leonata, Not till monday, my dcare fonne, which is 
hence a iufl fcucn night,and a time too briefe too, to haue 
all things anfwer minde. 343 

335. O Lord^ my Lord'\ O Lord, 341, 352. Leonata] F,. 

my lord Q. 342. briefe too"] brief to, F^, Rowe i, 

337. Coufite'\ Counlie Q, Coll. Cam. 343. minde'] Ff. Knt. my mind Q 
Rife, Dtii, Wh. ii. Count Ff et cet. et cet. 

article Warburton did not hesitate to insert in his text, I'liercupon, Capell (p. 
124) approving of Warburton’ s definition to the extent that ‘unhappiness’ may 
mean unluckiness, proposed to read ‘dreamt an unhappiness’. — E d. 

331. heare tell] R, G. White (cd. i) : This form of speech, which Shakespeare 
constantly puts into the mouth of personages of the highest rank, but which is now 
never heard in Old England, except, perhaps, in the remotest rural districts, is in 
common use in New England. The idiom is pure English. W. A. Wright, after 
quoting the foregoing note, observes : ‘ So far from its being the fact that Shake- 
speare constantly puts this expression into the mouth of personages of the highe.st 
rank, I question whether it occurs in any of his w'ritings except in the present passage. 
And it is rather a colloquialism of common occunence than a rare provincialism in 
Old England.’ 

333. suite] See line 70, above. Deigiiton suggests that the word is here used 
‘ probably with a quibble on non-suiting a plea and putting anybody out of court, in 
the legal sense of that phrase.’ 

336. themselues] Used for each other. 

337. Counte] Inasmuch as this title has been hitherto spelled ‘ Count’ (see lines 
177, 182) it is not impossible that the jiresent spelling is an attempt to reproduce the 
‘Countie’ of the Qto. See ‘Princes and Counties,’ IV, i, 322. — Ed. 

340. rites] Deigiiton thinks that there is here, j^ossibly, a pun on ‘rites’ and 
rights. It may be so ; but it is to be borne in mind that the compositors, ‘ setting 
up ’ by ear, could by no means distingui.sh the words. In Mid. N. D. IV, i, 147 
we have in Fj : * No doubt they rose up early, to obserue The right of May,’ where 
manifestly ‘ the rite of May ’ is intended. — Ed. 

342. a iust] That is, exactly, precisely, as in Latin ; see Abbott, § 14. Cf. the 
well-known passage in Mer, of Ven, IV, i, 325 : ‘ nor cut thou less nor more But 
jtist a pound of flesh ; if thou cut’st more Or less than a just pound,’ etc. 



ACT II, SC. L] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


97 


Prmce, Come, you shake the head at fo long a brea- 
thing, but I warrant thee Claudio^ the time fliall not goe 345 
dully by vs, I will in the interim^ vndertakc one of Her- 
cules labors, which is, to bring Signior Ih^nedieke and the 
Lady Beatrice into a mountainc of affc6tion, th’one with 
th’other, I would faine hauc it a match , and I doubt not 
but to faihion it, if you three will but minifter fuch affi- 350 
fiance as I fliall giue you diredtion. 

346 , 347 . IIt'r-cnlcs\ Hercules^ 348 , 349 . M’] QFf, Wli. i. the 
4 . I/crcules' Caj). et seq. Rowe ct cet. 

348 . 7}nnintanic\}naintain{i,e.^\\iiA^y 348 . l/C onc^ the one^\\. \\. 

or held, a maintaining of ’) llerr. 349 . othc7’,'\ uthet' ; Rowe. 

349 , 350 . not b7U‘\ 7iot Rowe ii, + . 

348 . mountaine of affe<5Iion] Johnson : A strange expression, yet 1 know not 
well how to cliange it. Perhaps it was originally written, to bring Pcnedick and 
Beatrice into a 77ioolhii; of affection ; to bring them not to any more 77iooti7i^s of con- 
tention, but to a 77tooti7tg or conversation of love. I'his reading is coiihrined by the 
preposition ‘ with ’ ; ‘a mountain •^eiih each other,’ or ‘ affection with each other,’ 
cannot be used, but *a mooting with each other’ is pro])er and regular. [Dr 
Johnson in his Pi'cfacc reniaiks that ‘the laborious collator at some unlucky moment 
frolics in conjecture.’ To the many, veiy many admirabhj (pialilies in that Pirface^ 
arc we to add the gift of prophecy? — Ei>.] — Stkkvkns : All that I believe is meant 
is, a ^i^7rat dt'nl of affeJion. Thus also in Th'7i. f77/we find ‘ajdv/of glory.’ In 
II(i77ftcf, ‘a ViV? of troubles.’ In llowel’s /I/U, of Pc7iiiry ‘though they see 77ioun’ 
ta777s cd miseries heaped on one’s back.’ Again, in r>acon’s Jlisf, of Kin^^ I Ic7try 

Vjy ; ‘Perkin sought to corrupt the servants ... by 77ioti7itai7i^ of iiromiscs.’ 
Little can be inferred from the present offence against grammar ; [Steevens here 
refers to the last sentence of T)r Johnson’s note — Ku."] an offence which maybe 
imputed to the negligence or ignorance of the transcribers or ])rintcrs. — Malone : 
Shakespeare has many phrases equally harsh. Tie who would hazard such cxj)res- 
sions as a stoi‘f7i of fo}'(n7iCy a vale of yea/ ?, and a ie7/ipesf of provocatiofty would not 
scruple to write a 77iou77tai77 of affect io7i. 

, 348 , 349 . th’one with th’other] R, (I. White (cd. i) : The pronunciation of 

these words was f 07ie and fothc7'y — the later of which survives to us. [Before 
White printc<l his Second Edition, he prob.ably noticed that ‘t’one,’ as we should 
pronounce it, docs not correspond to the Elizabethan pronunciation. — E d.] 

349 . I would . . . match] Corson (j). 185 ) : There are some commentators 
wlu) go so far astray as to understand this stratagem as little more than a practical 
joke. . . . Shakespeare would certainly not have condescended to anything so small 
as that, whereby to excite mirth. If it were so, it would degrade the whole ])lay. . . . 
If Beatrice’s afifcctums were not already enlisted, the stratagem would be silly. Don 
Pedro is entirely serious when he says, ‘ I would fain have it a match,’ etc. Leonato 
. . . doesn’t understand what is about to be dtme, as a practical joke, to entrap his 
niece into an ill-assorted marriage. No. It is because he feels assured that Bene- 
dick and Beatrice have already a secret love for each other, and because he feels 
assured that their union would be one of happiness. . . . The speech of Don Pedro, 

7 



98 


MUCH A DOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. i. 


Leonata. My Lord, I am for you , though it coft mee 
ten nights watchings. 

Claud. And I my Lord. 

Prin. And you to gentle Hero ? 

Hero. I will doe any modeft office, my Lord, to hclpe 
my cofin to a good husband. 

Prin. And Benedick is not the vnhopefullcfl: husband 
that I know : thus farre can I praife him, hec is of a noble 
ftraine, of approued valour, and confirm^ honefty, I will 
teach you how to humour your cofin, that fliee fhall fall 
in loue with Benedicke, and I, with your two hclpcs,will 
fo praflife on Benedicke ^ that in defpight of his quickc 
wit, and his queafic flomackc,hee fhall fall in loue with 
Beatrice : if wee can doe this, Cupid is no longer an Ar- 
cher, his glory fhall be ours, for wee are the onely loue- 
gods, goe in with me, and I will tell you my drift. Exit. 

355. you you too QFf. 367. in'\ Om. F3F4, Rowe i, 

360. houijtyil honojiy. J'T. 

which closes the scene, testifies to Benedick’s noble lineage, his a])proved valour and 
confirmed honesty. 

351. direction] W. A. Wright : The sentence is incomplete unless for or about 
be supplied. 

353. watchings] This does not mean being on the watch, but, as W. A. Wright 
explains it, tying awake. ‘Cf. Mach. V, i, 12 : *‘To receive at once the benefit of 
sleep, and do the etfccts of watching.” Lady Macbeth was fast asleep, and yet with 
her eyes open had the appearance of being awake, and acted as if she were so.’ 

358. vnhopefullest husband] This expre.ssion does not quite accord with the 
seriousness of Don Pedro and with the lack of any thought of a practical joke which 
Fletcher and Corson have urged. It sounds as though Don lY'dro were trying to 
find arguments to justify himself in his own mind for putting in train his ‘ practise,’ 
and as though the result were not wholly satisfactory, for he adds, in effect, that in 
certain other regards, he is perfectly sure of his ground. Still, Corson and Fletcher 
are essentially right. — Ei>. 

360. approued valour] That is, tried, precised in war. See * approved wanton,’ 
IV, i, 47, and ‘ approved in the height a villain,’ IV, i, 309. 

361. humour] 'fliis docs not mean, 1 think, to cajole but to manage. 

363. pra( 5 lise] In the use of this word, there is almost always a subaudition of 
underhand dealing. 

364. queasie] Rushton {Shakespeard s Euphuism, p. 32) : Cf. \jj\f ^ Euphues : 
* I well perceiuc that . . . thy storaacke is as quesie as okle A^estors, vnto whome 
pappe was no better then poyson.’ — [p. 322, cd. Arbcr]. — W A, Wright : That 
is, squeamish. Lyly’s Euphues, p. 248 (cd. Arber) : *1 cannot tell Philautus 
whether the Sea make thee sicke, or .she that was borne of the Sea : if the first, 
thou hast a quesie stomacke : if the latter, a wanton desire.’ 


352 

355 

360 

365 

367 



ACT n. sc. ii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


99 


\Scene //.] 

Enter lohn andBorachio. 

loh. It is fo, the Count Claudio flial marry the daugh- 
ter of Lconato. 

Bora, Yea my Lord, but I can croffe it. 

lohn. Any barre, any croffe, any impediment, will be 5 

medicinable to me, I am fickc in difpleafure to him, and 
whatfoeuer comes athwart his affeftion, ranges eucnly 
with mine, how canfl thou croffe this marriage ? 

Bor, Not honeftly my Lord, but fo coucrtly, that no 
diflionefty fliall appeare in me. 10 

John, Shew me breefely how. 

Bor, I thinke I told your Lordfliip a yecre fince,how 
much I am in the fauour of Margaret waiting gentle- 
woman to Hero, 

John, I remember. IS 

Bor, I can at any vnfeafonabic inftant of the night, 
appoint her to look out at her Ladies chamber window. 

lohn. What life is in that, to be the death of this mar- 
riage? . 

Bor, The poyfon of that lies in you to temper , goe 20 

Scene VII. Pope, -f. Scene II. i. Enter lolin] Enter Don John 

Cap. et sc([. Rowe. 

Scene changes. Pope. Scene 2. fo,'\ so : Cap. et seq. 

changes to anoOicr Apartment in J.co- 3. Leonato.] l.eofiato? Anon, 

nato’h House. Theob. The same. 8. mine,'] mine ; F^. 

Cam. 14. Hero.] ifero : Cap. 

2. shal] That is, is to; frequent in Shakespeare, just as ‘will’ is equivalent to 
intend; as in Benedick’s declaration ‘ T will live a bachelor.’ — I, i, 239. 

6. sicke in displeasure] Ai.i.kn (MS) : Two equivalent propo.sitions : i.) I am 
sick ; — 2. ) T am in a state of displeasure (uncomfortable feeling) towards him. 

7. affection] W. A. Wrigut; That is, inclination^ dedre. In I, i, 287, the 

Prince asked : ‘ Dost thou affect her, Claudio ?’ — Allen (MS) : ‘ Affection ’ is here 
equivalent to the Creek that is, the way in which his and my mind are 

affected. 

12. since] For other examples of ‘since’ used adverbially for ago^ see, if neces- 
sary, AliHOTT, § 62. 

18. What life is in] For similar ellipses of thcrc^ .see HI, ii, 26 ; and for an 
ellipsis of 7/, see III, iii, 53. 

20. temper] In addition to its various meanings, .still common at present, this 
word was especially u.sed, as W. A. Wright points out, in reference to the mixing 
of poisons. Cf. Rom, 6^ Jtd, III, v, 98 ; Cymh. V, v, 250; HamL V, ii, 339. 



lOO MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. ii. 

you to the Prince your brother, fpare not to tell him, that 2 i 
hee hath wronged his Honor in marrying the renowned 
Claudio^ whofc cflimation do you mightily hold vp, to a 
contaminated ftalc, fuch a one as Hero, 

lohn. What proofc fliall I make of that ? 25 

Bor, Proofe enough, to mifufe the Prince , to vexe 
Claudio yio vndoe Hcro^^nd kill Leonato^ looke you for a- 
ny other iffuc ? 

loJui, Onely to despight them, I will endcauour any 
thing. 30 

Bor, Goc then,finde me a mcctc howre, to draw on 
Pedro and the Count Q! audio alone , tell them that you 
know that Hero loues me, intend a kinde of zcalc both 
to the Prince and Claudio ( as in a loue of your brothers 
honor who hath made this match ) and his friends repu- 35 
tation, who is thus like to be cofen ’d with the femblance 

27. Leonato,] Leonato ; et seq. match who is ... of a maidy Johns, 
(subs.) Leonato? as — ...match ; ...who ii...of a maidy-—- 

31, 32. on I'edro] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Cap. Var, Ran. Mai. Steev. Var. Knt, 
Han. don Pedro Q, Theob. ct seq. Sta. {as ... match ; ... who is ... of a 

33. know that \ know Rowe, \ , maid) Coll. Wh. i, Ktly, (subs.) aSy — 

34 -“37. {as ... match) ...who is. ..of a ...matchy...who is. ..of a maidy — Dyce, 

maidl\ as...mat( hy...who is...of a maidy Cam. Iluds. Rife, Dtn, Wh. ii. 

Rowe, Pope, Han. as., match ;... {who 34. in a louc'\ Ff, Rowe^-h, Cap. 
is. ..of a maidy) Theob. Warb. as... Knt. m tone Q, Mai. et cet. 

24. stale] A want(m of the lowest type. 

26. misuse] See II, i, 229. 

26. vexe] This word bore a harsher meaning than at present. Thus, Cotgrave : 
* Vext:m. te.-f. Vexed, afllicted, tormented, turboyled, extreamely gricued, or 
disquieted. ’ — Eu. 

29. despight] IIalltwell quotes Palsgrave, 1530 [p. 521, ed. 1852] : I dispyte 
a person, I set hym at naught, or provoke hym to anger. Jc despite. 

31. draw on] The Qto has here preserved the true reading. 

33. intend] That is, pretendy as often in Shakespeare. 

34. as] For other examples where ‘ as’ is equivalent to nafnety, for examplcy etc., 
see Abbott, §113. 

34. in a loue] The Qto text is, possibly, preferable here. — Ei). 

34-37. in a loue . . . maid,] It was Cai’KLL’s acuteness that first discerned that 
this is all parenthetical, and that the dependent clause (introduced by ‘as’) after 
‘ intend ’ is ‘ that you haue discouer’d.’ His punctuation has been essentially adopted 
by Collier, and by Dyce also, except that Dyce more properly substituted a comma 
for a semicolon after ‘match.’ — Ed. 

36. cosen’d] Cotgrave : Tromper. To cousen, deceiue, beguile, delude, circum- 
uent, cheat, ouerrcach.’ 



ACT II, SC. ii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING lOI 

of a maid, that you haue difcoucr’d thus:they will fcarcc- 37 
ly beleeuc this without triall: offer them inftances which 
fhall beare no leffe likelihood , than to fee nice at her 
chamber window, hearc me call Margaret , Hero] 40 

Margaret terme me Claudio ^ and bring them to fee this 


37, 38. Rowe, + . 41. Claudio] Bornchio Pope 

39. likdihoodI\ likelihood Pope, + , ii, Stcev. Coll, ii, iii, (MvSj, Kiri- 

Kni, Coll. near. 

41. Margaret] Marg. Q, 

38. instances] A word of various shades of meaning in Shakespeare. Here, it 
is clearly used for proofs^ examples^ as in You Like Ily II, vii, 164 : ‘ Full of wise 
sawes, and moderne instances.* 

41. Claudio] THhOBALi) : In the name of common .sense, could it displease 
Claudio to hear his mistress making use of his name tenderly? If he .saw^ another 
man with her, and heard her call him Claudio, he might reasonably think her 
betrayed, but he could not have the same reason to accuse her of disloyally, besides, 
how could her naming Claudio make the Prince and Claudio believe that she loved 
Borachio, as lie desires Don John to insinuate to them that she did? The circum- 
stances weighed, there is no doubt but the jiassage ought to be reformed ; — ‘ hear 
Margaret term me Boraehio%^ — Stkevens : Thougli I have followed Theobald’s 
direction, I am not convinced that the change is absolutely necessaiy. Claudio 
would naturally resent the circumstance of hearing another called by his own name ; 
because, in that case, baseness of treachery would appear to be aggravated by 
wantonness of insult; and, at the same time, he w'ould imagine the ]>erson so distin- 
gui.shcd to be Borachio, because Don John was previously to have informed both him 
and Don Pedro, that Borachio was the favoured lover. — M. Mason : We should 
surely read Boraihio instead of ‘ Claudio.* There could be no reason why Margaret 
should call him Claudio ; and it would ill agree with wdiat Borachio says in the last 
Act, where he declares that Margaret knew not what she did when she spoke to him. 
[Cai’KI.L dammed the tide that -was setting in favour of Borachio ; and no break 
occurred until Collier’s Second Edition appeared. In his f irst Edition, Collier 
adhered to the original text but said that ‘ “Claudio” can hardly be right, inasmuch 
as Claudio was him.self to be a spectator of the scene.' In his Second and Third 
Editions, he followed his annotated Folio, wherein Borachio was substituted for 
‘Claudio.* Capcll, who thought acutely and wrote bluntly, appears to have detected 
some elements of the case, which seem to have escaped the notice of his successors, 
llis note is as follows :] In all places where this villainy of Borachio is sjioke of, 
Claudio and the Pnnee are said to sec Hero; at [II, i, 243] to see the person 
impos’d on them wear ‘Hero’s garments’ [The innuendo that Capell would here 
convey is, I think, that it was not necessary that the Prince and Claudio should hear 
any name, but merely see an interview.] an artifice of Borachio’ s, who had persuaded 
her, — that, to cover their night-inter^dew, it wms necessary she should appear so, that 
she should be call’d Hero, and himself Claudio; the overhearers he knew would 
start out upon him when she was retir’d, and in [III, iii, 152] we find they did so; 
for there, he acknowledges confirming his master’s ‘slander’; which can only be 
understood of their seizing him to know who the Claudio was who had been talking 



102 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. ii. 


[41. Margaret terme me Claudio,] 

with that Hero, who when seiz’d had confirt}^ d them in their deception; see too 
what is said by the Prince at [IV, i, 97-99 : * Who hath indeed . . . Confest the vile 
encounters they have had,’ etc.] ; What Don John promises, that they should see 
the ^window enter’d’ is but a stroke of his villainy, to wound the deeper ; Margaret 
was light, not wanton, and upon no such terms with her wooer Borachio. — Malone : 
Claudio would naturally be enraged to find his mistress. Hero, (for such he would 
imagine Margaret to be,) address Borachio, or any other man, by his name, as he 
might suppose that she called him by the name of Claudio in consequence of a sfcret 
agreement between them, as a cover, in case she were overheard ; and he would 
know, without a possibility of error, that it was not Claudio with whom, in fact, she 
conversed. — Knight: The very expression Herm me’ shows that the sjj^eaker 
assumes that Margaret, by contrivance, would call him by the name of Claudio. 
[Dyce quotes this note, and calls it an ‘apt’ observation, and Hajj.iweli. also 
approves of it ; but W. A. Wright observes that ‘ no weight can be attached to it, 
for otherwise we ought to read in the previous line, “hear me term Margaret, 
Hero.’’ ’] — Halliwkll : The correctness here of the old text scarcely merits serious 
discussion. . . . The reader need scarcely be reminded that it is not necessary the 
plot should be carried out in the exact form described in Borachio’ s speech. In 
point of fact, the Prince and Claudio witnessed the occurrence at some distance off, 
and probably out of reach of hearing. — R. G. White (ed. i) : Theobald’s reading 
is plausible; as to those who were deceived, Hero’s e^*ror would have seemed of a 
very different kind if they had had reason to suppose she thought her visitant really 
Claudio, and as Claudio himself was to be a spectator of the scene. . . . The old 
text is right ; for, plainly, Borachio wheedled Margaret into playing with him at a 
scene between the other lovers. He himself declares in V, i, that she was innocent 
of any attem])t to injure her mistress ; and as for Claudio, it was enough for him to 
know (as he thought) that he heard Hero ‘term’ another than he, Claudio. — Dyce 
(ed. ii) [that vacillating but sturdily honest editor] : I am now (1863) less confident 
as to the correctness of the old reading ‘Claudio.’ — C amukihge Edition : The sub- 
stitution of Horaihio for ‘Claudio’ does not relieve the dijficulty here. Hero’s 
supposed offence would not be enhanced by calling one lover by the name of the 
other. ... It is not clearly explained how Margaret could, consistently with the 
‘ just and virtuous ’ character which Borachio claims for her in the f ifth Act, lend 
herself to the villain’s plot. Perhaps the author meant that Borachio should per- 
suade her to }day, as children say, at being Hero and Claudio, — Hudson : Both 
Claudio and the Prince might w'ell be jjcrsuaded that Hero received a clandestine 
lover, whom she called Claudio, in order to deceive her attendants, should any be 
within hearing ; and this they would natuially deem an aggravation of her offence. — 
W. A. Weight : The text must be right, for it was necessary to the plot to maktf it 
appear that Hero was endeavouring to conceal her intrigue with Borachio. It was 
also necessary to induce Margaret to take part in it innocently, and she would at once 
have suspected something if she had allowed Borachio in his own name to address 
her as Hero. That she was not an accomplice is evident, and yet it is difficult to 
explain how she could have been induced to help forward the conspiracy without 
knowing it, and at the same time should remain silent when a word from her would 
have explained the mystery. This is the defect in the plot. [Unquestionably, it is 
a defect ; but it is a defect which is noticed only in the closet, not on the stage. We 



ACT II, SC. ii.] MUCH A DOE ABOUT NOTHING 


103 


the very night before the intended wedding, for in the 42 
meanc time, I will fo fafhion the matter, that Hero fliall 
be abfent,and there fhall appeare fuch feeming truths of 
Heroes difloyaltie, that iealoufie flmll be caPd affurance, 45 
and all the preparation ouerthrowne. 

loJui, Grow this to what aduerse iffue it can, I will 
put it in praftife : be cunning in the working this, and 
thy fee is a thoufand ducates. 

Bor, Be thou conftant in the accufation, and my cun- 50 
ning fliall not fliame me. 

43. fo] Om. Rowe i. 45. Heroes] Hero's Rowe, ^<?rCap. 

44. truths] truth Q, Cap. et seq. Wh. i, Dyce ii, iii. 

proof Coll. MS. 50. thou] Ff, Rowe, + , Var. Ran. 

Mai. Kilt, Sta. you Q, Cap. et cet. 

know very little of Margaret thus far, having only seen and heard her in a bright, 
saucy dialogue with llallha'sar, and we do not know how powerful is the hold which 
Borachio has on her. For aught we know she may be none too good to enter fully 
into the plot, and as for her silence when a word would have saved her mistress, we 
must remember that that woid would also carry with it the ruin of her lover ; at this 
alternative she might well have paused, and during that pause the opportune minute 
passed and her chance was gone. It is only by what we afterward learn from 
Borachio that we must believe Margaret to be innocent ; then it is, with this know- 
ledge, that we look back and try to account for her conduct here. This is work for 
reflection at home, it cannot be done while the play is before us. It was only in the 
goodness of his benign heart that Shakespeaie rehabililatcs Margaret’s character. 
Don John’s case was hopeless ; so he was put to flight ; but Borachio and Margaret 
lemaincd and all stains must be removed, the man must receive our pardon, and the 
woman oiii respect, no blot or other foulness shall mar the joyous ending of the 
Play. I think Theobald’s emendation is needless. — Ki>.] 

43, 44. so fashion . . . absent] It is almost impossible here to disbelieve in 
Margaret’s intelligent, guilty connivance, — nor is it certain, by any means, that, at 
this time, as is intimated in the preceding note, Shakespeare at all designed that we 
should believe in her innocence. He knev his own power over us, and that, at a 
word from him, w'C should all be ready at any minute to swear that black is white. 

— p:i). 

45. Heroes] R. G. Wjiitk (ed. i) ; There can hardly be a doubt that this very 
needless and unpleasant repetition was the result of a mistaking of ‘her’ in the IMS 
for a customary abbreviation of the proper name. [In his Second Edition, White 
restored the original text, without comment.] 

45. iealousie . . . assurance] W. A. Wrkjut : Suspicion shall be called cer- 
tainty. 

48. the working this] For a discussion of verbal nouns, sec Auhott, § 93. 

50. Be thou] The preference, which is here given by the rnajcirity of Editors to 
you of the Qto, is probably due to the fact that hitherto Borachio has employed 
you in addressing his superior, Don John. But it is hardly over-refinement to infer 



104 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. iii. 


lohn. I will prefentlie goe learne their day of marri- 52 
age. Exit 

[Scene ///.] 

Enter Bencdicke alone, i 

Bene, Boy. 

Boy, Signior. 

Scene VI II. Pope, + . Act III. Rowe. 

Spedding. Scene III. Cap. et seq. 2. Boy.'\ Boy, — Theob. Boy / Coll. 

I. Enter...] Enter Beiied. and a Roy. 

that * thou ’ might have been here purpohely used after Don John had descended to 
Borachio’s level and become his fellow-consj)iralor. In y/.v you Like It, Adam 
addresses Orlando, his master, with an inferi(»r\s you until Orlando accepts Adam’s 
money, and forms, as it were, a fellowship with him, then Adam at once addresses 
Orlando as thou. — El). 

52. presentlie] That is, at once ; as in Shakespeare, passim, 

52, 53. their day of marriage] That is, of course, ‘ the day of their marriage,’ 
which seems almost too plain to re(|uire a note. But Shakespeare has many a similar 
transpo.sition (AimoTT, § 423, gives more than twenty examples) where the meaning 
is not at once obvious. For instance, Horatio is terrified at the thought that the 
Gliost might deprive Hamlet of ‘ your sovereignty of reason,’ that is, the soveieignty 
of your reason ; or where Macbeth says that Macduff’s announcement of his mode 
of birth ‘hath cow’d my better part of man,’ that is, the better j)art of my manhood. 
Again, in the j)resent play, IV, i, 234, we have ‘his stuclie of imagination,’ that is, 
the studie of nis imagination, or as W. A. Wright paraphrases it : ‘ his imaginative 
.study or contemplation,’ — El). 

Pope laid this scene in ‘Eeonato’s Garden.’ Theopald, mindful of what Bene- 
dick says in line 5, changed the phrase to ‘Leonato’s Orchard,’ and so it remained 
in all editions down to Malone’s in 1790; Mai.ONE held ‘ orchard ’ to be ina})pli- 
cable ; perhaps, because there is no proof that the plantation was devoted to fruit- 
trees, perhaps, because ‘orchard’ is not sufficiently high-sounding ; at any rate, he 
restored the more elegant ‘Garden’; .salving his conscience for deserting Shake- 
speare’s own word by the remark that, ‘orchard’ ‘in our author’s time’ signified a 
garden. And ‘ garden ’ the stage-direction remained till the Cambridge Edition 
had the moral courage to lestore the vulgar ‘orchard.’ — Ei). 

I. alone] Collier’s text (ed. i) Enter Benedick. Bene. Boy! Enter 

a Boy. Boy. Signior ;’ and his note theieon is ; In the old copies Benedick enters 
‘ alone ’ before the boy makes his appearanct' ; and the reason is obvious, for Bene- 
dick should niniinate, and pace to and fro, before he calls the boy. In all modern 
editions ‘ Benedick and a Boy ’ enter together ; a very injudicious arrangement. — 
Dyce i^Notes, p. 43) : But probably, when Mr Collier reprints his Shakespeare he 
will acquiesce in the modern arrangement, since the MS Corrector of the has 
added to the entrance of Benedick ; ‘ Boy foUozvingl The truth is, the entrances 
of ‘such small deer’ as Eages are frequently omitted in the old copies of plays. Cf. 
Dekker’s Match me in London, 1631, where a scene commences thus : Enter Don 
John, Joh. Boy I Pack, My lord?’ etc. — p. 54, — the entrance of the page Pacheco 



ACT II, SC. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


lOS 

Bate. In my chamber window lies a booke, bring it 
hither to me in the orchard. 5 

Boy. I am heerc already fir. Exit. 

Bcnc. I know that, but I would hauc thee hence, and 
hecrc againc. I doe much wonder, that one man feeing 
how much another man is a foole, when he dedicates his 
behauiours to loue, will after hcc hath laught at fuch 10 
fliallow follies in others, become the argument of his 
ownc fcorne, by falling in loue, & fuch a man is Claudio^ 

I haue known when there was no muficke with him but 
the drum and the fife, and now had hcc rather hcare the 
taber and the pipe : I haue knowne when he would hauc 1 5 

6. Exit.] After axoiiiCy line 8, Johns 
After thaty line 7, Coll. 

7. lhat : Cap. 

9. foole ^ 7 v/ien'] jool when Cap. el seq 

not being marked. [There is, however, a particularity in the present stage-direction 
of the Qto and Eolio : ‘ Enter Henedicke alont'y which is lacking in Dekker’s stage- 
direction. Dyce foretold correctly: in Collier’s next edition, the stage-direction, 
in conformity with the MS Corrector’s marginal note, ran ‘ Enter Benedick with a 
Boy folhnuing. ’ — E D . ] 

6. I am heere already] Ukkiiiton : What the point of the boy’s remark may 
be does not .seem plain, unless perha])s he took the woid ‘hither’ to mean ‘come 
here,’ [The jest, which is feeble enough, lies not in the boy’s remark, but in Bene- 
dick’s reply. The boy’s phrase mean.s simply lhat his alacrity will be such, that, in 
intention, he is gone and returned again ; somewhat like Puck’s answer to Oberon : 
‘ 1 go, I go ! look how J go !’ although Puck had not, at that instant, left the .spot. 
Benedick’s jest lies in taking the boy’ swords literally. — Ei).] 

6. Exit] Ei.oyi) (p. 199) : The boy who w'as .sent for a book, and docs not reap- 
pear, seems to have been the means of the conspirators learning his master’s where- 
about, and to have been kept away by their management. 

10. behauiours] W. A. Wright ; The plural indicates the details of his behaviour, 
the various ways in which he shows that he is in love. 

11. argument] That is, the subject. Sec I, i, 248. 

14, 15. drum and the fife . . . taber and the pipe] Nayior (p. 161) : The 
former 'were of a decided military ca.st (see 0 th. Ill, iii, 352) whereas, the latter 
were more associated with May-day entertainments, hull -baitings, and out door amuse- 
ments generally. (P. 80. ) The Tabor and Pipe were common popular instruments. 
The tabor, of course, was a .small dmm, used as an accompaniment tf) the i>ipe, a 
small whistle with three holes, but with a compass of eighteen notes. In its 
curiously disproportionate compa.ss, it may be compared to the modern ‘ Pjcco ’ pipe 
of the music shops. — Auukey (ii, 319) : When I was a boy, before the late civill 
warres, the tabor and pipe were commonly used, evSpecially Sundays and Moly- 
dayes, and at Christnings and Eeasts, in the Marches of Wales, Hereford, Gloce.ster- 


12. hme^ e^] lovcy and y love! 
and F^, Rowe, + . love; and Cap. et 
seq. 



I06 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. iii. 

walkt ten mile afoot, to fee a good armor, and now will i6 
he lie ten nights awake earning the falliion of a new dub- 
let: he was wont to fpeake plaine, & to the purpofe (like 
an honeft man & a fouldier) and now is he turnM ortho- 
graphy, his words are a very fantafticall banquet, iuft fo 20 

19, 20. ortho‘graphyi\ Ff, Rowe i, ihographist Cap. conj. orthographer 
Sta. Cam. Rife, Dtn. ortography Q. or- Rowe ii el cel. 

shire, and in all Wales. Now it is almost lost ; the driimme and trumpet have putte 
that peaceable musique to silence. 

16. a good armor] W. A. Wrkjht: That is, a good suit of armour. In the 
Authorised Version, in the Preface of the Translators to the Reader, we find : * It 
is not only an armour, but also a whole armoury of weapons, both offensive and 
defensive.’ 

17, 18. the fashion of a new dublet] Peck (p. 227) : There never was such a 
variety of fashions, so different & so whimsical, as in the days of Q. Elizabeth, The 
reason whereof, 1 conceive, was: Q. Elizabeth loved to see an handsome man, 
& that handsome man well dressed. ^^QX gentle mcn-pensioners therefore were always 
studying how to please & delight her in this particular. 'To this cud all the fashions 
of Spain, Italy, I'ranee, Germany, & every other part of the world, were severally 
introduced. . . . The ladies also took the hint, & studied as many fashions to 
catch the gentlemen-pensioners, as they did to please the queen. — S tkevkns : This 
folly, so conspicuous in the gallants of former ages, is laughed at by all our comic 
writers. So, in Greene’s Farewell to Folly, 1591 : ‘We are almost as fantasticke as 
the English gentleman that is painted naked, with a pair of shcercs in his hande, as 
not being resolved after what fashion to have his coat cut’ [p. 253, ed. Grosart]. — 
Reed: The English gentleman in the above extract alludes to a plate in Horde’s 
Introduction of Kn(nvledge,—yih\kmY . : The English gentleman is represented, by 
Borde, naked, with a pair of tailors shears in one hand, and a piece of cloth on his 
arm, with the following verses: ‘I am an Englishman, and naked 1 stand here. 
Musing in my mynde what rayment I shall were, For now I will w^are this, and now 
I will were that, Now^ I will were 1 cannot tell what,’ etc. See Camden’s Remaines, 
1614, p. 17 .— Ruskin : Care for dress is always considered by Shakespeare as con- 
temptible.— vol. iv, p. 391, ed. New York. [What then are we to think of Rosa- 
lind’s admiration of Orlando’s ‘point device’ dress?— El).] 

19, 20. orthography] Drake (i, 472) believes that there may be here a satirical 
allusion to the innovating pedantry of the times. Bullokar, in An Amendment of 
Orthographic for English Speech, 1580, proposed ‘ not only an entire change in the 
established mode of spelling, but a total revolution also in the practice of printing. 
To level a sarcasm at the head of this daring innovator may have been the aim of the 
poet ’ in the pre.sent passage. — Staunton : If the Qto and Folios read correctly, as 
we believe, then the change of ‘ sonnet ’ to sonnets or sonneteer in Loz'e^s Lab. L. I, ii, 
190 : ‘Assist me some extemporal god of rhyme, for I am sure 1 shall turn sonnet,’ — 
was uncalled for and injurious.— Dyce (ed. ii) ; The reading in Lcnfc' s Lab. L. : 
‘ I shall turn sonnet,’ I believe to be a stark error. — W. A. Wrigiit : If the text is 
right it must be explained as an instance of the abstract used for the concrete ; a^, 
in support of this, reference is generally made to ‘ turn sonnet ’ in Lovers Lab, Z. / 



ACT n, sc iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


107 


many ftrange diflies : may I be fo conuertcd, & fee with 21 
thefe eyes ? I cannot tell , I thinke not : I will not bee 
fworne, but loue may transforme me to an oyfter,but lie 
take my oath on it, till he haue made an oyller of me, he 
{hall neuer make me fuch a foolc: one woman is faire,yet 25 
I am well : another is wife, yet I am well: another vcrtu- 
ous, yet I am well : but till all graces be in one woman, 
one woman fliall not come in my grace : rich {hee lhall 
be, that’s ccrtaine : wife, or He none : vertuous,or He ne- 
uer cheapen her : faire, or He neuer lookc on her : milde, 30 
or come not neere me : Noble, or not for an Angell : of 
good difeourfe : an excellent Mufitian,and her haire lhal 32 

22. not:'] not? F^. 31. not for] Ff, Rowe, Pope, not I 

24. an oyjler] and oyfter Q. for Q, Theob. et seq. not me for 

27. be] come Daniel. Quincy MS. 

where * sonnet’ is taken to mean sonneteer. But I am not satisfied that this is the 
meaning, and understand the phrase ‘turn sonnet’ diffeicntly. [Irrespective of any 
phrase in any play, 1 believe that ‘ orthography ’ is right, — the abstract for the con- 
crete, and that any change of this word would be a ‘stark error.’ Benedick does 
not mean that Claudio is one who is proficient in orthography, but that he is ‘orthog- 
raphy’ itself. — Ei).] 

21. may I] That is, can 1 . See III, ii, 105. 

30. cheapen] Baynes (p. 279) : To cheapen at present means to reduce in value, 
to make cheap. But in .Shakespeare’s day, and indeed down to a recent period, it 
meant, as it still does provincially, to look at or examine a thing with a view to 
buying it; to inquire the jnice, think of purchasing, attempt to purchase or bargain 
for. This is the sense in which it is used by Benedick ; and his meaning, of course, 
is that the lady must be virtuous, or he will not think of her, — will not make any 
inquiries about her, become a .suitor for her hand, or attempt in any way to try hi.s 
chances of success as a lover. The word was used in the same sense down at least 
to the middle of the last century, as the following extract from a letter in The 
Rambler, on the changes produced by loss of fortune, will show : ‘ .She that has 
once demanded a settlement has allowed the importance of fortune ; and when she 
cannot .show pecuniary merit, why should she think her cheapener obliged to pur- 
chase ?’ 

31. Noble . . . Angell] One of the innumerable puns, which, to the early dra- 
matists (Shakesj)care included), were irresistible whenever the.se coins were men- 
tioned. Here, the joke lies in the inferior value of the noble, which was 6y. %d., 
while the angel was worth los. If she were not noble in character he would not 
give 10.?. for her, and if she were worth only 6 s. 8 d. he would not have her though 
she were an angel. 

The Qto reading ‘ not I for an angel ’ has been preferred by a large majority of 
editors. But I doubt its necessity. The ellipsis as it stands in the Folio is by no 
H means unwarrantable, and brevity is all-important. I think there should be a dash 
after ‘ or ’ : ‘ Noble, or — not for an angel.’ — E d. 



io8 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. iii. 


be of what colour it pleafc God, hah/ the Prince and 33 
Monficur Loue, I will hide me in the Arbor. 

33. God^'\ Ff. Gody Q (Staunton.) 34. [withdraws, Theob. et seq. 

God Q (Ashbee. ) God. Q (Prcetorius.) (subs.) 

33. of what colour] Steevens : Perhaps Benedick alludes to a fa.shion, very 
common in the time of Shakespeare, that of dying the hair. In Stu])bes, Anatomie 
of Abusesy I595» we find : ‘ if any haue heyre of her owne naturall growyng, which 
is not faire inough, than will they dye it in dyuerse colors’ [p. 68, New Sh. Soc. 
Reprint], Hai.liwele gives .several receipts for ‘ waters ft)r the dying of heares of 
the heed and other’ which are more curious than valuable; and he quotes from 
Gerard’s Jlcrbaly I 597 > P- 1^45 • ‘ rootes of the (barbery) tree steepled for cer- 

taine daics togither in strong lie made of ashes of the ash tree, and the haire often 
moistned therewith, maketh it yellow.’ [The ‘barberie planle’ is again the chief 
ingredient in Lyte’s Herbal y 1 578, p. 684, where we find that ‘ the roote thereof 

stieped in lye, maketh the heare yellow, if it be often waslicd there wilhall.’ 
Coryat’s CritdilieSy i6ii (vol. ii, p. 37, ed. 1776) there is the following account of 
the process of dyeing the hair jiracti.sed in Venice : * All the women of Venice every 
Saturday in the afternoone doe use to annoint their haire with oylc, or some other 
drugs, to the end to make it looke faire, that is whiti.sh. For that colour is most 
aflected of the Venetian Dames and Lasses. And in this manner they do it : first 
they put on a readen hat, without any crowne at all, but bninines of exceeding 
breadth and largeness ; then they sit in some sun-shining place in a chamber or 
some other secret roome, where bailing a looking-glass before them they sojihisticate 
and dye their haire with the foresaid drugs, and after cast it backe round vpon the 
brimme.s of the hat, till it be thoroughly dried with the heat of the sunne ; and last 
of all they curie it vp in curious locks with a frisling or cri.sping pinne of iron, which 
we cal in Latin CdlamiArttviy the toppe whereof on both side aboiie their forehead 
is acuminated in two peakes. That this is true, I know by my owne experience. 
For it was my chaunce one day when I was in V^enicc, to stand by an Englishman’s 
wife, who was a Venetian woman borne, while she was thus trimming of her haire : 
a fauour not affoorded to euery stranger.’ — ^I^i).] 

33. it please God] For the personal and impersonal use of ‘please,’ see 
Walker (i, 205). While not wishing altogether to deny the correctness of the 
interjjretation commonly given to this phrase, namely, that the colour of the hair 
shall be natural, and that Benedick is really indifferent to it, there is another inter- 
pretation, which, it .seems to me, is not impos.sible. Benedick lia.s been, quite uncon- 
sciously, describing Beatrice. The very phrase ‘mild or come not ncerc me’ ought 
to have revealed to him that the mental picture he was drawing, if only by contra- 
ries, was the reflex of her who was ujipemiost in his thoughts and who exceeded 
her cousin as much in beauty as the first of May doth the last of December ; but 
the vision, as he inventoried its several charms, was loo alluring to be discontin- 
ued until he came to the colour of the hair, then, of a sudden, he became aware 
that he was about to name the very tint of Beatrice’s, and the dangerous tendency 
of his heart flashed upon him. There was a long pause, almost of alann, after 
‘ her hair .shall be,’ then he adds with a sigh of relief ‘ — of what colour it please 
God. ’—E d. 



ACT II, SC. iii.] MI 7 CH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 109 

Enter Prince ^LeonaiOy Claudio y and lackc Wilfon . 3 5 

►Scene IX. Pope, + . Leon. Claud, and Balt, Rowe. Enter 

35. Enter...] Enter jirince, I.eonato, Don Pedro, Claud, and Leon. Cap. 
Claudio, Muficke. Q. Enter Don Pedro, 

35. lacke Wilson] Instead of this proper name the Qto says ‘ Musicke,’ which 
probably means, says Colli kr, that it ‘was heard off the stage.’ As to who Jacke 
Wilson was, there has been much conjecture. Lhere are two Wilsons, either of 
whom might be the man ; to these may be added a third, and possibly a fourth. In 
Collier’s Mcinoirs of Edward Alhyn^ the Actor, {Sh. Soc. 1841, p. 153,) there is a 
memorandum, dated Oct. 22 [1620] written by Alleyn, as follows : ‘This daye was 
our weding tlaye, and thcr dind with us Mr Knight, Mr Maund, and his wife, Mr 
Mylyor, Mr Jeffes, and 2 frendes with them, a precher and his frend, Mr Wilson the 
singer, with others.’ Hereupon, Collier remarks that ‘ it seems highly probable that 
this “ Mr Wilson, the singer” was no other than Jacke Wilson in Much AdoC 
Some years later Collier found one or two facts about a John Wilson whom he 
assumed to be this same Jacke Wilson. ‘ Hitherto,’ he says, ( 5 //. Soc. Papers^ 1845, 
vol. ii, p. 33,) ‘it does not seem to have been known that John Wilson was not 
merely a singer, but a composer, and in all probability the composer of “ Sigh no 
more, ladies, sigh no more,” as sung by him in the character of Balthasar. He 
certainly was the composer of the song in Meas. for Mens. IV, i, “ Take, C) ! take 
those lips away,” etc., as is proved by a book of manuscript music, as old in some 
parts as the time of the Civil Wars, although in others it seems to have been written 
in the reign of Charles TI. That song is there found with Wilson’s name at the end 
of it, as the author of the music ; unluckily the manuscript says nothing regarding 
the authorship of the words. ... As it is, the case stands precisely thus : one stanza 
is found in Shakespeare’s A/cas. for A/cas. , w’hile both are inserted in Beaumont & 
Fletcher’s Bloody Brolher^ V, ii ; but, on the other hand, both are imputed to 
Shakespeare in the edition of his Poems, 1640. There is no doubt, however, that 
John Wilson was the composer of the song ; and, as he certainly belonged to the 
company of jilayers to which Shakespeare was attached, it may slightly strengthen 
the belief that one member of the association wrote the words of a song, to which 
another member wrote the music, especially when, as far as we know, it was not 
Shakespeare’s practice (though it was that of some dramatists of his time) to ado])t 
into his plays songs which had been written by others for other performances. We 
are without the same proof that Jack \Vilson was the composer of “Sigh no more, 
ladies, sigh no more ’ ’ ; but as he was the singer of it, it may not be too much to 
presume that he wrote the music which he sang.’ Dr Rimrault ( Who was Jack 
Wilson? etc., Ixindon, 1846) goes further than Collier, and endeavours to prove that 
the ‘Jacke Wilson ’ who took the part of Balthazar was no other than ‘ Doctor John 
Wilson, Professor of Mtisick in the University of Oxford,’ in 1644. ‘John Wilson 
“the Composer,” ’ says Rimbault, ‘was a native of Feversham, in Ktuit, and born 
in the year 1594.’ This date is fatal to the supposition that he could have been 
either the composer or the singer of Balthazar’s song when Mudi Ado was first 
acted, in 1599 or 1600. But between the Qto and the Folio He twenty-three years, — 
ample time for the little Jack to grow up and be of exactly the right ngc to sing, at 
least, if not to compose, the song during the decade before the k'olio was printed from 
k play-house copy where the name ‘Jack Wilson’ creeps into the stage-direction, 
and ample time for him to become known as ‘ Mr Wilson, the Singer ’ at Edward 



no 


MUC/f ADOE ABOUT NOTIJING [act ii, sc. iii. 


Prin. Come, fhall we hcare this muficke ? 36 

Claud. Yea my good Lord : how ftill the euening is, 

As hufht on purpofe to grace harmonic. 

Prin. See you where Bcncdickc hath hid himfelfe ? 

Clan. O very well my Lord:the muficke ended, 40 

Weevil fit the kid-foxc with a penny worth. 

36. hearc fhis~^ hear his this Fg. Cap. 

39-41. As an aside, Cap. 41. kid-foxe~\ hid-fox Warb. Cap. 

41. Enter Ilalthafcr with muficke. Q, Coll, ii, iii (MS), Dyce ii, iii, lluds. 

Alleyn’s wedding dinner in 1620, when he was twenty-six years old. Rimbault 
says that * nothing is known of [John Wilson] until the year 1626,’ when he was 
‘constituted’ a Hientlcman of the Royal Chapel.’ Apparently, Rimbault did not 
know of the Avcdding dinner, or, perhaps, he did not consider tlie list of Alleyn’s 
guests as an adequate historical /locum ent. At all events, unless Alleyn’s ‘Mr 
Wilson’ and Rimbault’ s ‘John Wilson’ arc the same man, there must have been 
two Wilsons who were singers. The connection which Rimbault hnds between Dr 
John Wilson, the composer, and Shakespeare’s stage lies in the fact that when, in 
1660, Dr Wikson printed his Cheerful Ayresy he gives, as his own composition, the 
notes to the song of Autolycus: ‘Lawn as white,’ etc. (see I Vinters Tale, p. 388, 
of this cd. ), and, furthermore, shows not only that he knew the songs in The Tern- 
pesfy but akso who was the comiroscr of them (see The Tempest y p. 352, of this ed.). 
‘In my own mind,’ observes Rimbault, p. 8, ‘the circumstances connected with the 
Shakespearian lyrics in this book, are almost conclusive of the identity of John 
Wilson the composer, with John W'ilson the singer. Unless the composer had been 
intimately acquainted with the theatre of Shakespeare’s day, it is not likely that he 
would have remembered, so long after, the name of one of its composers [Johnson]. 

. . . (r. 15.)! cannot but consider that my position is clearly established. The 
Doctor’s settings of the Shakespearian Lyrics, — his knowledge of the oiiginal com- 
poser of the music in 'J'he Tempest y — ^his companionship with the great dramatic 
composers, the two Lawes’s, — his familiar appellation of “jack Wdson,” — and, 
above all, the thirty-two years gap in the early history of his life, all these circum- 
stances combined are evidences not to l)e slighted, and, until these evidences can be 
set aside by .something more conclu.sive, I shall rest satisfied in my own mind, that 
“Jack Wilson,” the .singer of Shakc.speare's stage, and Dr John Wilson, the learned 
Professor of the University of Oxford were one and the .same person.’ 

The claims of the third WiLson are indeed meagre ; but as IIai.i.twf.i.l brings 
him forward, it is proper to add Halliwell’s note that ‘in a list of inhabitants of 
Southwark, near the Bear-garden, in 1596 (a MS preserved at Dulwich College) there 
is mention made of “ Wilsone the pyper,” who may be the individual in question.’ 
The Wilson who was a gue.st at Alleyn’s wedding dinner, might be, so llalliwell 
thinks, ‘the John W'ilson, musician, who is so named in the register of St. Giles’s, 
Cripplegate, in 1624, the son of Nicholas Wilson, minstrel , and who was born in 
1585.’ [This is, possibly, a fourth W'ilson. It seems to me that Dr Rimbault’ s 
supposition is the most plau.sible, and, also, that Edward Alleyn’s friend, ‘the 
singer,’ and Dr John W’ilson were the same person. As for the others, their claim 
seems to rest on but little more than identity of name. — El).] 

41, kid-foxe] Hanmer changed this to cade-fox, because, as he says in his 



ACT II, SC. iii.] MUCH A DOE ABOUT NOTHING 


III 


Prince. Come Balthafar^w^UW heare that fong again, 42 
Balth, O good my Lord, taxe not fo bad a voycc, 

42. Balthafar] Balthafcr Q. 43. task Cap. conj. 

Glossary^ cade^ when * joined to the name of any beast, signifies tai}u\ brought up by 
hand this implies a knowledge, on the part of Hanrner, of Benedick’s infancy 
which he could only with difficulty have extracted from the text. Grey referred to 
the Chaucerian word kidy meaning made knenvn, discovered : but WARiiUU'i'ON 
changed it to h id-fox, that is, as he explains, ‘ the fox who had hid himself.’ Capell, 
in adopting Warburton’s text, explained (ii, 125) that he did not do so ‘ with opin- 
ion that this “ fox” was an animal, but that fox among boys which Hamlet speaks 
of’ in IV, ii, 33 : * Hide, fox, and all after.’ Ritson (p. 31) thinks that it means 
no more than a young fox, or cub. — Dyck i^Remarks, p. 32) : * Kid-fox’ means a 
young fox. Richardson in his valuable Dictionary cites the present passage under 
the substantive kid. Collier (ed. ii) adopts hid, because it so stands in his MS, 
and justifies it in the following note : ‘ Benedick has already said, in the hearing of 
Claudio, “ I will hide me in the arbour,” and Don Pedro has just stated that “ Bene- 
dick hath hid himself.” It is true, as Mr Dyce says, that Richardson cites this 
passage under “kid,” but he dues not show that a “kid-fox” means a young fox, 
and he would find it difficult to adduce any instance to that effect. Neither could 
Benedick be considered a young fox ; he was much more of an old fox, and for this 
reason it was the better joke to entrap him.’ — IIalliwell : A young fox is what is 
probably meant, but the term kid is certainly erroneously applied, the young of foxes 
being projicrly cubs, the male-fox being called a dog-fox. The tf‘rm kid was used to 
designate a roebuck or roe in the first year. [This unparalleled instance of ‘ kid- 
fox,’ coupled with its singularly inappropriate application to Benedick, is a strong 
argument against retaining it in the text. Hid fox, for the reason given by Capell, 
seems the true phrase ; Hamlet virtually u.ses it. — Ed.] 

41. penny worth] Hali-IWKLL : Claudio’s meaning is obvious, but no other 
example of the jffirase has been p<)inted out. 7 o ft a person, in the sense to be 
even with him, is sufficiently common, and there is a pas.sage in the })lay of English- 
men for my Money, which is somewhat parallel to the line in the text : — ‘ Well, crafty 
f?x, you that work by wit, It may be, I may live to fit you yet.’ ‘ I care not for the 
loss of him, but if I fit him not, hang mce.’ — Heywood and Broome’s Late Lan- 
cashire Witches, 1634. The nearest apjiroach to Shakespeare’s phrase T have met 
with, occurs in the English trans. of I'crencc by R. Bernard, ed. 1614 : * Dc te 
sumam suppUcium, I will take my penie-worths of thee ; I will punish thee,’ — 
W, A. Wrkjiit ; That is, a bargain. Cf. Wint. Tale, IV, iv, 650: ‘Though the 
pennyworth on his side be the worst.’ To fit one with a pennyworth is therefore to 
sell him a bargain in which he will get the worst. [In the Wint. 7 ale there is a 
regular exchange of commodities bet^^cen Flori/.el and Autolyciis, with, as Camillo 
says, * the penny-worth,’ that is, the margin of profit or the balance of trade, against 
Florizel. Assuming this to be the moaning of ‘penny worth,’ ‘ to fit a man with a 
penny-worth’ can hardly mean to give him the worst of a l^argain ; is it not rather 
to give him the best of the bargain? in fact, when used as a Ihicat, to give him 
rather more than he w'ants ? I think, in effect, Claudio says, to use a slang jdirase, 
‘ we’ll give him hi.s money’s worth.’ — E il] 

43. taxe] Skeat [Diet.) gives task as a doublet of ‘tax.’ — ^W. A. Wright: In 



112 


M[/C// ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ll, SC. iii. 


To (lander muficke any more then once. 

Prin. It is the witneffe (till of excellency, 45 

To flander Muficke any more then once. 

Prince. It is the witneffe ftill of exccllencie, 

To put a ftrange face on his owne perfe6lion, 

I pray thee fing,and let me woe no more. 

Balth. Bccaufc you talke of wooing, I will fing, 5^ 

Since many a w^oocr doth commence his fuit, 

To her he thinkes not worthy, yet he wooes, 

Yet will he fweare he loues. 

Prince. IMay pray thee come. 

Or if thou wait hold longer argument, 55 

44. oncc'\ oncY^. 51. />/?/] suit f/ius 

46, 47. Thus repeated from preceding 52. QFf, Coll. Dyce, Cam. 

page, Fj. wooes ; I'hcob. et cet. 

49. 7cw] 7 aoo(' QFf. 

Lear, IV, i, 16, where the Quartos have, ‘I task not you, you elements, with 
unkindness,’ the Folios read ‘ tax.* 

48. a strange face] Dkkjiiton; That is, to pretend to be ignorant, possibly with 
a reference to the pretended ignorance of unwilling witnesses in a court of law. — 
Wordsworth (]>. 250) : We know the prominence which the New Testament gives 
to the grace and duty of humility. And surely these lines, 47 and 48, could only 
have occurred to one who had deeply reflected u)>oti and desired to i^ractise that 
Christian teaching. [T find it difficult to accept the interpretation that would impute 
to these fine lines any element of pretence or of affected ignorance. Excellency 
ceases to be excellency if there be in it any trace of affectation or of pretence. 
‘ Strange ’ does not here mean singular or foreign^ but ratlier nn const ions, mikno 7 v- 
ingf yierhaps even hostile : the whole ydirase is an instance of that tran.spo.sition of 
which Shakesjieare is .so fond ; relieved of this transposition we should lead: ‘put 
on a face strange to its own perfection.’ And the lines might be paraphrased : ‘ It 
is always (‘still’) a yjroof of excellence that, in demeanour, it is unconscious, or 
unknowing, of its own perfection. — Ed.] 

49, 50. I pray thee . . . Because you talke] Note the use of ‘thee’ and ‘you’ 
in this dialogue between the Prince and his .servant. — Ed. 

50-64. Because . . . done] Pope, followed by Hanmer, removed these lines to 
the margin, but gave no reason for it. Capki.l surmises that it was Benedick’s 
speech, beginning with line 61 : ‘ Now divine aire,’ which was the cause of offence ; 
this he removed, as he believed, by inserting liefore it a .stage- direction [^/V.] 
‘teaching us,’ as he says (p. 125), ‘that a musick jireceeds the “Song,” and that 
Benedick’s wit turns upon that musick.’ 

51. Since] Deichton : ‘Since’ here does not refer to his promise to sing, but 
rather to a suy^yiressed clause such as ; ‘ And you may well talk of wooing,’ since 
you act very like many a wooer who begins and continues to woo one whom he 
nevertheless does nut think more worthy of being loved than you in reality think me 
worthy of being asked to sing. 



ACT II, SC. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


II3 

S6 


Doe it in notes. 

Balth. Note this before my notes, 

Theres not a note of mine that^s worth the noting. 

Prince. Why thefc are very crotchets that he fpeaks, 

Note notes forsooth, and nothing. 60 

60. Note noiei\ Note notes. Coll. Dyce, ii, iii, Wh. Cara. Huds. Rife, Dtn. 

Wh. i, Huds. Note, notes, Theob. et cet. noting Theob. et cet. 

nothing'] QFf, Rowe, Coll. Dyce 6o. [Air. Cap. Music. Mai. 

60. Note . . . nothing] The orthoepical discussion to which reference is made 
at I, i, I is substantially as follows: — R. G. White, a pioneer in the investigation 
of English pronunciation in Elizabethan times, in the last volume of his First Edition 
discusses the pronunciation of the vowels and of many consonants. His remarks on 
th are here condensed : The sound, or rather the mode of utterance, indicated by i is 
so invariable, and has been associated with it for so many ages, in so many languages, 
that its presence in a word leaves no doubt as to the purpose of the author ; it is 
unraistakeable. But there is not the same certainty as to the sound of th. It may 
have the sound either of th in thee or of th in thin; and in some words we, at this 
day, give it the sound of /.* Thames, and thyme, for instance. And J. Jones, M. D., 
in his Practical Phonography, London, 1701, says, (p. 106) that ‘the sound of / is 
written as th in antheme, Anthony, apothecary, asthma, author, authority, authorize, 
Catharine, Cantharides, Esther, isthmus, Lithuania, Thames, Thannet, thea, Thomas, 
Thuscany, thyme, which are commonly sounded as without the h' When, therefore, 
we find certain words spelled indifferently, at the same period by the same authors, 
with t or th, the sound of the former being fixed and universal, what must be our 
conclusion? Instances in point are nosetrills, nosethrills ; th’one, Vone ; th’ other, 
t'other; swarthy, swarty ; fifth, sixth, sixt ; eighth, eight; Satan, Sathan ; 

quoth, (juot, quote, or quod. Very noteworthy evidence upon this question is con- 
tained in The Interpreter of the Academic for Porrain Languages, etc., London, 
1648, by Sir Balthazar Gerbier, a Flemish miniature painter, an inferior artist, but a 
successful courtier. His associations were with the highest-bred English people of 
his day. This book is in French and English, printed on opposite pages ; by whom- 
soever the English versions were made, the maker intended to express with great 
particularity the English pronunciation of the day. In this book we find words spelled 
with th in which we know there was only the sound of t, and, what is of equal 
importance, words written with t which were then, as now, spelled with th. For 
instance ; ‘ we doe celebrate the remembrance on the With Sundayes,’ p. 25 ; ‘ that 
my lips may seth forth thy prayse,’ p. 58 ; ‘ which the Academy will theach in par- 
ticulars,’ p. 66; * g\\QS him strcncht to resist,’ p. 78; ‘who entertaine the y ought,' 
p. 82 ; ‘I have passed my y ought in combats,’ p. 121 ; ‘to bend under the strenckt 
of my arm,’ p. 122 ; ‘nor is there any dept but it descends in it,’ p. 141 ; ‘but a 
good braught (un bon potage) good meate and foulle is put on the table,’ p. 182. 
‘I do not see,’ continues White, ‘how we can avoid accepting these spellings as 
evidence of the pronunciation of th at the time when they were written, and that the 
h was then silent at least in youth, strength, depth, and broth, as well as in those 
words in which, according to the testimony of Dr Jones, it was not heard half a 
century later.’ Upon the theory that th was pronounced like t. White explains, for 
the first time, the pun of Moth (who, by the way, is proved conclusively by White 
8 



II4 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc:*lii. 


[6o. Note notes forsooth, and nothing.] 

to have been called Mote) in Lov^s Lab, L. T, ii, 94, where in reply to Armado’s 
reference to Delilah that ‘ Samson . . . affected her for her wit,’ Moth replies * It 
was so, sir, for she had a green wit.’ Here ‘ wit* is ^uiihe and alludes to the green 
withes with which Delilah bound Samson. Furthermore, White calls attention to the 
fact that th and <3^ appear to be used interchangeably in such words as murdery /mother ^ 
fathoniy hundredy tetheVy quoth ,* and quotes a line from the P'irst Folio in Tit. And. 
V, ii, * Good Murder stab him, he’s a MurihererJ* He then goes on : ‘ did William 
Shakespeare pronounce murder and murthcr in one breath ? I cannot believe it ; 
but I do believe that in the Elizabethan era, and, measurably down to the middle of 
the seventeenth century, dy thy and t were indiscriminately used to express a hardened 
and perhaps not uniform modification of the \th as in breathe'\ ; a sound . . . w'hich 
has survived with other pronunciations of the same period, in the Irish pronunciations 
of ** murder,” “further,” “after,” “water,” etc., in all of which the sound is 
neither dy thy nor /.’ 

Before turning to Ellis’s criticism of these remarks it is advisable to note their 
application to the present play, as set forth hi White’s Introduction ; ‘ W’e call this 
play Ado about Noihingy says White (p. 226) — a remark which I have already 

quoted at I, i, l — ‘but it seems clear to me that Shakespeare and his contemporaries 
called it Much Ado about Noting; a pun being intended between ‘nothing’ and 
notingy which were then pronounced alike and upon which pun depends by far the 
more important significance of the title. . . . (P. 227.) The play is Muck Ado about 
Nothing only in a very vague and general sense, but Much Ado about Noting in one 
especially apt and descriptive ; for the much ado is produced entirely by noting. It 
begins with the noting of the Prince and Claudio, first by Antonio’s man, and then 
by Borachio, who reveals their conference to John ; it goes on with Benedick noting 
the Prince, Leonato, and Claudio in the garden, and again with Beatrice noting 
Margaret and Ursula in the .same place ; the incident upon which its action turns is 
the noting of Borachio’s interview with Margaret by the Prince and Claudio ; and 
finally, the incident which unravels the plot is the noting of Borachio and Comrade 
by the Watch. That this sense, “to observe,” “to watch,” was one in which 
“ note” was commonly u.sed, it is quite needless to show by reference to the literature 
and the lexicographers of Shakespeare’s day ; it is hardly obsolete.’ 

Ellis (p. 971) thus comments on 'V^Tiilc : In the pre.sent passage in Much Ado : 
‘ Notes, notes, forsooth, and nothing,’ Theobald propo.sed noting for the ‘ nothing * 
of the Qto and Folios, a correction which seems indubitable. . . . Acting u})on (his 
presumed pun noting, nothing, Mr White inquires whether the title of the play may 
not have been really ‘ Much Ado about noting, and seeks to establish this by a 
wonderfully prosaic summary of instances, all the while forgetting the antithesis of 
much and nothing, on which the title is founded, with an allusion to the great con- 
fusion occasioned by a slight mistake — of Ursula [«V] for Hero, — which was a mere 
nothing in itself. The (Germans in translating it : Viel Larm um Nichts certainly 
never felt Mr White’s difficulty. [A remark so weak that it is well nigh incredible 
that Ellis should have seriously meant it ; it would be no unfair reply to say that 
still less have they felt Mr White’s difficulty who have never read the play at all. — 
Ed.] It seems more reasonable to conclude that [in the present passage and in 
Wint. Tale, IV, iv, 625] nothing was originally a misprint for noting, which was 
followed by subsequent editors. It is the only word which makes sense. . . . The joke 



aA II, sc. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


II5 


[60. Note notes forsooth, and nothing.] 

on noting and nothingy supposing the jingle to answer, is inappreciable in both cases. 
[All this, however, does not touch the ground of White’s remarks, lie does not at 
any time say that noting is the only word which makes sense here. He asks why, 
both here and elsewhere it is spelled nothingy if the ih were not sounded like /? To 
this Ellis gives no reply that I can discover except that it is a misprint, which in view 
of White’s long catalogue of identical misprints, seems hardly sulticient; White’s 
plea is founded not on one instance but on many, and to disprove one is no answer to 
all. — El).] But dismissing all reference to nothing and noting as perfectly untenable, 
there is no doubt that Mr White has proved Moth in Lovers Lab. L. to mean Mote 
or Atomy, and in all modernized editions the name should be so spelled, as well as 
in the other passages where ‘nioth^ means mote. Again, in Love'' s Lab. L. there 
can be no doubt that ‘ green wit ’ alludes to Delilah’ s green withe. . . . The 
usages of the Fleming, Gcrbier, are not entitled to much weight. He probably could 
not pronounce thy and identifying it with his own / followed by an aspirate, which 
was also his pronunciation of ty became hopelessly confused. In his own Flemish, th 
and t had the single sound of t followed by an aspirate. His -Sunday may be a 
mere printer’s transposition of letters for 1 17/ it -Sm\c\ay. There does not appear to 
be any reason for concluding that the genuine English th ever had the sound of /, 
although some final t's have fallen into th. As regards the alternate use of t/and ih 
in such words as murthevy fitrthery fatheVy etc., there seems reason to suppose that 
both sounds existed, as they still exist, dialectically, vulgarly, and obsolescently. 
But we must remember that by dygy between vowels have a great tendency in different 
languages to run into bhy dh, gh. . . . The upshot of Mr While’s researches seems, 
therefore, to be that writers of the xvr th and xvii th centuries wore very loose in 
using t, thy in non-Saxon words. That this looseness of writing sometimes affected 
pronunciation, we know by the familiar example author and its derivatives.’ [It 
seems to me, that White having discovered what he believed to be a i)rominciation 
of thy hitherto unsuspected, was led by pardonable zeal into giving to this pronuncia- 
tion too wide a range. His argument that the title of the present play must have 
been pronounced Much Ado about Noting because the noting of each other by the 
characters therein is peculiarly emphatic, is, I fear, unsound. There is not more 
not'mg'vix this play than in many another. In Rom. ^ JuL in the very first Scene, 
the servants of the Capulets and Montagues note each other ; the Prince takes note 
of the fray, so also does Romeo; Romeo notes Juliet at the ball, and Juliet notes 
Romeo, and they both note each other again in the Balcony scene wdth very much 
closer scrutiny than the Prince and Claudio noted Margaret. Not to multiply 
examples, the parallelism between the two plays is rendered even more exact 
by a pun on ‘ note ’ which is quite as emphatic in Rom. Jnl. as in Much Ado. 
In IV, v, 1 12 of the former play Peter says : * I’ll re you, I’ll fa you ; do you note 
me?’ to which the First Musician replies; < An you re us and fa us, you note us.’ 
In one regard. White was certainly hasty in his conclusions ; he failed to detect 
the haphazard way in which the ih and f in Greek and Latin wouls were used, 
and to eliminate them from his list. But maturer years brought wisdom. In his 
I'irst Edition he printed, rather ostentatiously, murthery etc.; in his Second 
Edition this spelling was not uniformly maintained. Ellis’s criticism of White is 
not satisfactory; he whistles down the wind rather too summarily Gerbier’s testi- 
mony which is at least noteworthy, and ignores the probability that Gcrbier was 



ii6 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, SC. iu. 


Bene, Now diuine aire, now is his foule rauiftit, is it 6 1 
not ftrange that fticepes guts ftiould hale foulcs out of 
mens bodies ? well , a home for my money when alFs 
done. 

The Song, 65 

Sigh no more Ladies^ Jigk no more ^ 

Men were dcceiuers cuery 

One footc in SeUy and 07 ie on Jkore^ 

To one thing conjlant ncuery 69 

61-64. [Aside. Cap. Coll. Dyce, Sta. 65. Song] Son 2 Q (Sta. and Prae- 
In the arbour. Wh. torius. ) 

61. airey,„ramjhtl\ air ravish' t ! 66. Sigh, ^/c.] Bal. 5 /^^, etc. Cap. 

Rowe, air ! .,, 7 'avish' d ! 

assisted in his English by an Englishman, as would be reasonably the case with every 
foreigner. Neither White nor Ellis takes note of the Miltonic hightky which is neither 
Greek nor Latin, where the final t has not fallen by modern use into th^ but the 
th has uniformly, I believe, fallen into /, except in New England where the th is to 
this day not infrequently heard. In my own early education 1 was taught to say 
‘highM.’ Finally, the * upshot^ of the question seems to be that the list of words 
whereof the pronunciation was indifferently / or th (just as in these days the pro- 
nunciation may be either or eether) is not as large as White would have it, nor as 
small as Ellis would have it. — E d.] 

61. diuine aire] Capell printed these words in Italics, as though a quotation, 
and was therein followed by Malone and Steevens, and even Staunton. Knight 
adopted quotation marks, and Dyce did the same. As W. A. Wright justly 
observes, there is * no reason to suppose that this affected ejaculation is a quotation.* 

62, sheepes guts] IIalliwell quotes Topsell, Hist, of Fourefooted Beastes^ 
1607 [p. 621] : ‘ His [i. e. the sheep’s] flesh, blood, andmilke is profitable for meat, 
his skin and wooll both togither and assunder for garments, his guts and intrals for 
Musicke, his homes and hooues for perfuming and driuing away of Serpentes.’ 

62. hale] Murray (//. R. D.')\ In the sense of to dragy to /«//, it is now super- 
seded in ordinary .speech by haul. 

65. The Song] Lloyd (p. 199) ; The song of Balthazar is interposed not with- 
out purpose ; . . . the burden of his .song, encouraging ladies to sigh no more, is that 
of the ensuing conversation on the desirableness of Beatrice suppressing her passion. 
Benedick’s preference for wind music is also a point of nature, and his sudden 
change of attitude, from that of a wearied overhearer of sentiment that bores him, 
to an anxious listener, when his proper affections are in question, is laughable 
enough ; but the introduction of the music has also the effect of supplying an 
intermediate tone of association, that softens the transition that we witness from 
one declared condition of feelings to another. In the correisponding scene of the 
deception of Beatrice, the effect is obtained by another artifice, by the tone of romance 
communicated to our impressions by the sweetness and flow of the versification in 
which Hero and Ursula hold their discourse. 

[See the Appendix for sundry translations of this Song.] 



ACT II, SC. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 1 17 

Then Jigh not fo, but let them goe, 70 

And be you blithe and bonnie^ 

Conucrting all your founds of woe^ 

Into hey nony nony. 

Sing no more ditties^ feng no moe^ 

Of dumps fo dull and heauy^ 75 

The fraud of men were euer fo^ 

Since fummer firfl was leauy^ 

Then figh not fOy &c. 

Prince, By my troth a good song. 

Balth, And an ill finger, my Lord. 80 


70. As two lines, Cap et seq. (except 
Wh. Cam. Rife.) 

72. your] yours Fj. 

73. nony nony] nonnyy nonnv Cap. 

74. fing no moe,] fmg no more, Ff, 
Rowe, Pope, Han. 


75. Of] Oc Coll. MS. 

76. fraud . . . were] frauds ,. . were Pope, 
+ , Var, Mai. Coll. MS. fraud,,,was 
Q, Cap. et cet. 

77. leauy] Pope, + . 


70. Then . . . goe] R. G. White (ed. i) objects to the division of this line into 
two lines, as in modern editions. Such divisions are, however, only for the eye, and 
are of small moment. 

74. moe] See note on As You Like Ity III, ii, 257, of this edition. — Kocii (4tes 
Buch, § 292) ; The difference seems to be firmly fixed that more is used with the 
singular, and mo with the plural ; whence it comes that the oldest grammarians like 
Gil and Wallis, set forth mo as the comparative of many^ and moi'e of much , — ^W. A. 
Wright ; The distinction seems to be that < moe * is used only with the plural, 
‘ more ’ both with singular and plural. [Wright subsequently added :] The state- 
ment that *• moe ’ is used only with the plural requires a slight modification. So far 
as I am aware, there is but one instance in Shakespeare where it is not immediately 
followed by a plural, and that is in The Temp, V, i, 234: ‘And mo diversitie of 
sounds.’ But in this case also the phrase ‘diversity of sounds’ contains the idea of 
plurality. [Skeat says, of the distinction between moe and more, that moe relates 
to number and more to size. Wherein he is followed by Franz (p. 59, § 68) the 
latest German grammarian in reference to Shakespeare. MXtzner says (2te Afl. 
s. 293 ; vol. i, p. 277, trans. Grece) that more ‘in relation to extent of space bears 
in Old ICnglish the meaning magnus. . . . But the meaning multus soon preponder- 
ates.’ — Ed.] 

75 * dumps] Murray (/T. A". /A) : 3. A mournful or plaintive melody or .song ; 
also, by extension, a tune in general ; sometimes apparently used for a kind of 
dance. Cf. Udall, Roister Doistery II, i (p. 32, ed. Arber) ; ‘ Then twang with our 
sonets, and twang with our dumps, And heyhough from our heart, as heauie as lead 
lumpes.’ Also Sidney, Sonn : ‘Some good old dump, that Chaucer’s mistress 
knew.’ — ^p. 180, ed. Arber’ s Gamer ^ vol. ii. 



1 18 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. iii. 

Prince. Ha, no, no faith, thou fingft well enough for a 8i 
fliift. 

Ben. And he had been a dog that fliould haue howld 
thus , they would haue* hang’d him, and I pray God his 
bad voyce bode no mifehiefe, I had as liefe haue heard 85 
the night-rauen, come what plague could haue come af- 
ter it. 87 

81. «<?, no faith no y no ^ faith y Fj. 83-85. As mnemonic lines, Warb. 

noy no 'faithy ncy no faithy F^. 83. And'\ If Pope, -f . An Cap. 

no; no faith; Rowe ii, + . No; noy et seq. 
faith ; Cap. nOy no; faithy Coll. nOy hpen\ bin Q. 

nOy faith ; Dyce, Wli. Sta. Cam. 85. liefe\ line Q. kife F,. lieve F^F^, 

83-87. [Aside. Johns. Cap. Rowe, lief Pope et cet. 

83. should haue howld] The subjunctive is here used in the subordinate clause 
to emphasise the fact that it is the bad singing that deserved death ; had the condition 
been expressed in the principal clause, and the indicative in the subordinate : ‘ An he 
should have been a dog that howled thus,’ etc., the sense would be perverted ; the 
dog would have deserved death not for his howling but because he was a dog. — Ei). 

86. night-rauen] Batman, in his ‘Addition’ to Bartholome’s chap. 27, ‘Of the 
night crowe,’ has the following : ‘ This kinde of Owle is dogge footed, and couered 
with haire, his eyes are as the glistering Ise, against death hee vseth a straunge whoup. 
There is another kinde of night rauen blacke, of the bignesse of a Doue, flat headed, 
out of the which groweth three long feathers like the coppe of a Lapwing, his bill 
gray, vsing a shaipe voice, whose vnaccustomed appearaunce, betokeneth mortal- 
itye : he prayeth on Mice, Weesells, and such like.’ — p. 186, ed. 1582. [Orni- 
thologically, this extract from Batman is worthless. It is given merely becau.se the 
‘night raven ’ is mentioned together with its boding ‘ whoup.’] Steeven.s says that 
the ‘“night raven” is an owl, vvKTtKopa^ 'y ‘which assertion, as far as “owl” is 
concerned, is,’ .says Dyce {(JkhS,)y ‘ at variance with .sundry pas.sages in our early 
writers, who make a distinction between it and the night -raven ; e. g. “ And after 
himowles and night-ravens flew .” — Faerie QncenCy Bk. ii, can. vii, st. 23. Cotgrave 
regards the “ nii;ht-c?'07id' and the ** night-raven^^ as synonymous ; “ A night-crow. 
Corhea n de “The night raven. Corbeatt du nuiit'f so did that eminent 

naturalist, the late Mr Yarrcli, who considered them as only diffeient names for the 
night-herofiy nycticoraXy and who, in consequence of some talk which 1 had with 
him on the .subject, wrote to me as follows, Sept. 21, 1854: “'Fhe older authors 
called it [the nij^ht-heron'] a ravaiy in reference probably to the word corax ; and by 
Shake.speare it was called a erow because corax is a corvusi'' ’ — Hartincj (p. 100): 
Even to this day there are many who believe that the raven’s croak predicts a death. 

. . . Willughby thought the so-called ‘ night-raven ’ was the bittern. Speaking of 
the curious noise produced by the latter bird, he says : ‘ This, I suppose, is the bird 
which the vulgar call the night-raven, and have a great dread of’ ( Ornithology y Bk 
i, p. 25, ed. 1678). The bittern was one of the very few birds which Goldsmith, in 
his Animated Nature y described from personal observation, and he, too, calls it the 
‘night-raven.’ Its hollow boom, he says, caused it to be held in detestation by the 
vulgar. ‘I remember, in the place where I was a boy, with what terror the bird’s 
note affected the whole village ; they considered it as a presage of some sad event. 



ACT 11, SC. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 

Prince. Yea marry, doll thou heare Balthafar} I pray 
thee get vs fome excellent mufick : for to morrow night 
we would hauc it at the Lady Heroes chamber window. 

88. Yea marryl] Yea, marry; [To 89. Rowe. 

Claudio] Mai. Steev. Var. Knt. nigkt\ Om. Pope. 

and generally found, or made one to succeed it. If any person in the neighbourhood 
died, they supposed it could not be otherwise, for the night-raven had foretold it ; 
but if nobody happened to die, the death of a cow or a sheep gave completion to the 
prophecy.’ [Doubtless it would be pleasing to a naturalist’s heart to identify this 
bird, (which is possibly more than Benedick himself could have done). But, amid 
the clash of opinion, it is enough for us to know that a bird is indicated whose cry 
boded harm. — E d.] 

88. Yea marry, etc.] The present is an example both of the need and of 
the needlessness of stage-directions. All of Benedick’s i)rcceding speech is, of 
course, spoken aside, from the arbor in which he hid himself, at line 34. Omit this 
speech, and the Prince’s two speeches then become continuous from line 82 to line 
88 ; but they do not join in sense. There is clearly a break, and this break shows 
us that we must read between the lines that while Benedick is speaking and has the 
ear of the audience, the Prince has been conversing with Claudio or Leonato, and 
Claudio with a lover’ s impatience has reminded the Prince of the serenade proposed 
for Hero. Whereupon the Piince turns at once to Balthasar and says in effect : ‘ Yea, 
well bethought, — dost thou hear?’ etc. Capell is the only editor who has noticed 
this point, but he thinks that ‘Yea, marry’ is addiessed to Claudio or Leonato. It 
may be so, but 1 prefer to consider the words of the Prince as spoken thoughtfully 
to himself although spoken aloud. In any event, they are not addressed directly to 
Balthasar, — E d. 

90. we would haue it] What becomes of this serenade on which such emphasis 
is here laid, and of which we hear no more? It may have taken place early in the 
evening before the midnight interview of Margaret and Borachio. But then where 
was Hero that she was not for the first time in a twelvemonth Beatrice’s bed-fellow? 
Borachio said to Don John that he could ‘.so fashion the matter’ that Hero should 
not be ill her bed-chamber that night. Could it have been that under the plea of 
listening to this serenade stationed by Borachio’ s cunning under a distant window of 
the palace, Hero had deserted her bed-chamber that night and occupied a room whence 
she could listen with entranced soul to her lover’s mu.sic? Then, when she was 
accused in the Church, the thought of the serenade might have flashed into her mind 
as part of a plot and scaled her tongue from confes.sing her weakness in having 
changed her room. I offer this merely as a suggestion to help unravel some of the 
intricacies of this defective plot, — defective only to too curious and too prying eyes 
when poring over the printed page, but perfect from beginning to end when seen on 
the stage. Lady Martin gives a far more delicate and exquisite reason for the 
separation that night of Hero and Beatrice (see IV, i, 156), but she docs not explain 
(and iff she does not, I think no one can) how Borachio could make the promise 
which he did that Hero should not be in her accustomed bed-chamber that evening. 
Furthermore, it is clear that Margaret never appeared at Hero’s bed-chamber window. 
Hero’s bed-chamber and Beatrice’s were the same. Margaret could not have appeared 
at one of the windows in it without the knowledge of Beatrice. That Claudio should 


II9 

88 

90 



120 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING' [act ii, sc. iii. 


Balth. The beft I can, my Lord. Exit Balthafar, 91 
Prince. Do fo, farewell. Come hither Leonato^ what 
was it you told me of to day, that your Niece Beatrice 
was in loue with fignior Bencdickc ? 

Cla. O I, ftalke on, ftalke on, the foule fits. I did ne- 95 
uer thinke that Lady would haue loued any man. 

Leon. No, nor I neither, but moft wonderful, that flie 
fhould fo dote on Signior Bcncdickcy whom fhee hath in 
all outward behauiours feemed euer to abhorre. 99 


91. Exit...] Exeunt Bal. and Mu- 
sick. Cap. (After farewell line 92) 
Steev. 

95. O II] O ayy Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Oy ay ; — ^I'heob. Warb. 


95. Jlalke..,fits\ [Aside, Johns, et 
seq. (except Cam.) 
foulc\ foul 

97- neither y'\ neither ; Rowe. 


have accepted the window, where Margaret appeared, as that of Hero’s bed-chamber, 
merely on the word of Don John, only adds another proof of Claudio’s shallowness. 
— Ed. 

91. Exit Balthasar] Camiirtdge Edition : We have adhered to the old stage- 
direction, because it is not certain that any musicians accompanied Balthasar. The 
direction of the Qto at line 41 : ‘ Enter Balthaser with musicke,’ may only mean that 
the singer had a lute with him. In the direction of the Ff, at line 35, only ‘ Jacke 
Wilson ’ is mentioned. 

95. stalke on] Steevf:ns : This is an allusion to the sfalkin^^-horsc ; a horse, 
either real or fictitious, by which the fowler anciently .sheltered himself from the 
sight of the game. So, in Drayton’s Poly-olbioHy Twenty fifth Song: ‘One under- 
neath his horse, to get a shoot doth stalk.’ — Staunton : ‘ But sometime it so 
happeneth, that the Fowl are so shie, there is no getting a shoot at them without a 
Stalking-horse, which must be some old Jade trained up for that purpose, who will 
gently, and as you will have him, walk up and down in the water which way you 
please, flodding and eating on the gra.s.s that grows therein. You must .shelter your- 
self and Gun behind his fore-shoulder, bending your Body down low by his .side, 
and keeping his Body .still full between you and the Fowl ; Being within shot, take 
your I.evel from before the forepart of the Horse, shooting as it were between the 
Horse’s Neck and the Water. . . . Now to supply the want of a Stalking-horse, 
which will take up a great deal of Time to instruct and make fit for tbi.s Exercise ; 
you may make one of any Pieces of old Canvas, which you must .shape into the Form 
of an Horse, with the Head bending downwards as if he grazed. You may stuff it 
with any light matter ; and do not forget to paint it of the Colour of an Horse, of 
which the Brown is the best. ... It mu.st be made so portable, that you may bear it with 
ease in one Hand, moving it so as it may .seem to Graze as you go. Sometimes the 
Stalking-horse was made in shape of an Ox ; sometimes in the form of a Stag — and 
sometimes to represent a tree, shrub, or bush. In every case the Stalking-horse had 
a .spike at the bottom to stick into the ground while the fowler took his level.’ — The 
Gentleman* s Recreation, [See As You Like //, V, iv, 107 of this ed., if necessary.] 

95. sits] Keightley added yo 7 ider ; ‘for the sake of metre,’ he says (p. 165) ; 
but as the scene is in prose, it is not easy to see the necessity. 



ACT II, SC. iii.] ‘ MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


I 2 I 


Bene. Is’t poffible ? fits the winde in that corner ? ICX) 

Leo. By my troth my Lord, I cannot tell what to 
thinke of it, but that flie loues him with an in raged affc- 
ftion, it is part the infinite of thought. 

Prince. May be flic doth but counterfeit. 

Claud. Faith like enough. 105 

Lco 7 i. O God ! counterfeit ? there was neuer counter- 
feit of paflion, came fo neere the life of paflion as flie dif- 
couers it. 

Prince. Why what effefts of paflion fhewes flie ? 

Claud. Baite the liooke well, this fifli will bite. no 

Leon. What effefts my Lord ? fliee will fit you, you 
heard my daughter tell you how. 1 12 

100. [Aside. Theob. et seq. (except 
Cam.) 

102, 103. of of it;... 

affection^ I’ope, + . of it ;... (iff< 'c tiofty — 

Warb. Cap. Mai. Steev. Var. Knt. of 
ity. .. affection : — Var. ’85, Coll. Wh. et 

102, 103. inraged affection] That is, frenzied affection. 

103. past the infinite of thought] Warburton : It is impossible to make 
sense and grammar of this speech. And the reason is, that the two beginnings of 
two different sentences are jumbled together and made one. . . . Those broken dis- 
jointed .sentences are usual in conversation. However, there is one word wrong, 
and that is ‘ infinite.’ Human thought cannot .sure be called infinite with any kind 
of figurative propriety. I suppose the true reading was definite. This makes the 
passage intelligible. ‘It is past the definite of thought,’ — i. e. it cannot he jdefined 
or conceived how great that affection is. — ^J ohnson : Here are difficulties raised only 
to show how easily they can be removed. The plain sense is, ‘ I know not what to 
think ot/ienuiu’, but that she loves him with an enraged affection : It {this affection) 
is past the infinite of thought.’ Here are no abrupt stops, or imperfect sentences. 
‘Infinite’ may well enough stand; it is used by more careful writers for indefinite; 
and the speaker only means, that thought y though in itself unboundedy cannot reach 
or estimate the degree of her passion. — Mat.one : The meaning, I think, is : ‘ but 
with what an enraged affection she loves him, it is beyond the power of thought to 
conceive.’ 

1 10. the hooke . . . this fish] One is tempted to suppose that there has been 
here a transposition, and that it .should read: ‘ Bait this hook well, the fish will bite,’ 
that is, heap high the description of the effects of passion, these are what no self- 
complacent man can withstand. But transposition or not, the task of baiting the 
hook well, or at all, is almost too much fiir Leonato’s old brains, and he simply 
follows a lead until line 130, when his invention at last gets fairly to work. — Ed. 

111. shee will sit you] Here ‘ you’ is an ethical dative, which is defined by Brad- 
ley {^H. E. D.) as used ‘ to imply that a person, other than the subject or object, has 
an indirect interest in the fact stated ;* or, as W. A. Wright defines it, when the ethical 


seq. (subs.) 

103. it /V] in shorty it is Cap. conj. 
no. [Aside. Theob. et seq. (except 
Cam. Rife, Dtn). Speaking low. Han. 

this fifit] the fish IT, Rowe, 
Pope, Han. 



122 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. iii. 


Clau. She did indeed. 113 

Prin. How, how I pray you ? you amaze me, I would 
hauc thought her fpirit had becne inuinciblc againfl all 1 1 5 

affaults of affe6lion. 

Leo. I would haue fworne it had, my Lord, efpccially 
againft Bcnedicke. 

Bene. I fliould thinkc this a gull, but that the white- 
bearded fellow fpeakes it : knauery cannot fure hide 120 
himfclfe in fuch reuerencc. 

Claud. He hath tanc th’infc( 5 lion,hold it vp. 122 

1 19-122. [Speaking low. T I an. Aside. I2l. himfdfe\ itself Var. *03, ’13, 

Theob. et serp (except Cam. Rife, i)tn. ) ’21. Knt. 


dative is, not which is, perhaps, the commoner form, but m/, as here: ‘the 
speaker take.s the audience into hi.s confidence and makes them peisonally interested. 
So, in Mid. A', i). I, ii, 84: “T will roar you as gently as any sucking dove.” ’ 
Haml. V, i, 157 : * a’ will last you eight yeai or nine year.’ See Matzner, ii, p. 21 1 
(trans. Grece) ; Abbott, § 220 ; Franz, § 160. — El). 

1 1 2. tell you how] Here Capell .says (ii, 126) ‘common sense directed to an 
exclusion’ of the ‘you’: and he accordingly omitted it in his text, to the detriment 
of the colloquial character of the dialogue, however much common .sense may have 
been benefited. — Ei). 

1 14, 1 15. I would haue thought] Aubott (§ 331) : In this pas.sage ‘would’ 
seems on a superficial view to be used lor should. Rut it is explained by the follow- 
ing reply: ‘1 would have sworn it had,’ i.e. ‘I was ready and willing to .swear.' 
So, ‘ I was walling and prepared to think her spirit invincible.’ [lint this explana- 
tion do^s not .sati.sfy W. A. Wkicut, who .says that it will not explain Merry 1 Fives, 
II, i, 192 : ‘ I w'ould be loath to turn them together’; or Twelfth Night, III, i, 44: 
‘ I would be sorry, sir, but the fool should be as oft with your master as with my 
mistre.ss.’ He, therefore, declares that ‘would’ is ‘here used as the condilhinal for 
should d It is .safer, I think, at times, to acce])t an occa.sional over.sight on the part 
of Shakespeare’ .s compositors, than to refine too nicely or too positively, in cxj)lana- 
tion of the })uzzling use of would and should. — Ed.] 

1 17, etc. Fi.fitciier (p. 256): In this piece of acting, be it observed, Eeonato 
him.self, Ilcatrice’s uncle and guardian, .sustains the principal part ; he it is wdio most 
particularly describes her pretended suffcring.s, which, he .says, are rejiorted to him 
by her bosom-friend and companion, his daughter, Hero. Benedick, then, may well 
be excused for exclaiming as he does [lines 119— 121] in his concealment. While on 
the other hand, those critics are less excusable, who have regarded the venerable 
governor as a personage so devoid of serious care for his niece’s welfare, as to carry 
on a plot like this for idle and even mischievous diversion. 

1 19. gull] Cotgrave : *• Baliverne : i. A lye, fib, gull: also, a babling, or idle 
discourse.’ Again, * Buye : f. A lye, fib, foist, gull, rapper; a cosening tricke, 
or tale.’ 

122. hold it vp] That is, keep it going. See Mid. N. D. Ill, ii, 246: ‘hold 



ACT II, SC. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


123 


Prince. Hath fliee made her affeflion known to Bene- 123 
dicke ? 

Lconato. No, and fweares fhe neuer will, that\s her 125 
torment. 

Claud. ’Tis true indeed, fo your daughter faies : fliall 
I, faies file, that haue fo oft cncountred him with fcorne, 
write to him that I loue him ? 

Leo. This faies fhee now when fhee is beginning to 130 
write to him, for fhcc’ll be vp twenty times a night, and 
there will fhe fit in her fmocke, till fhe haue writ a fheet 
of paper : my daughter tells vs all. 

Clan. Now you talke of a fheet of paper, I remember 
a pretty ieft your daughter told vs of. 135 

Leon. O when fhe had writ it, & was reading it ouer, 
fhe found Bcncdicke and Beatrice bctwcenc the fheete. 

Clan. That. 

Leon. O fhe tore the letter into a thoufand halfpence, 
raild at her fclf, that flie fliould be fo immodeft to write, 140 
to one that fliee knew would flout her : I meafure him, 
faies fhe, by my owne fpirit, for I fliould flout him if lice 
writ to mce, yea though I louc him, I fliould. 143* 

129. thai'\ Om. Rowe. 136. ot4er\ et4er 

1 31. a nii^ht'\ Pope, Han. 137. Jlieefe.'\ sheet? Cap. et seq. 

135* prctiy F^,. 138. ThatJ\ That — Theob. Warb. 

vs of] of vs Q. Johns. 

136. and F3F^, Rowe. 142. for] Om. Rowe. 

the sweete icst vp.’ Merry Hives, V, v, 109 : ‘ I pray you, come, hold up the jest 
no higher.’ 

133. paper] In his Second Edition, Collier adopted the reading of his MS : ‘a 
sheet of paper full,' 011 the score that it added force. But in his Third Edition, he 
abandoned it. 

138. That.] This is almost unintelligible, unless the interrogation which Calell 
placed at the end of Leonato’s speech, be adopted. Then it is clear, that it is the 
answer to Leonato’s query if this be the pretty jest Claudio asked for. * Yes, that is 
the one’ is what ‘That ’ expresses. ‘Similarly’ observes W. A. Weight, ‘in Jul. 
Cces.ll, i, 15 : “Crown him? — that : — 1. e. that is the danger.’ 

139. halfpence] Inasmuch as these coins were of silver, they were necessarily 
small. Halliwell gives a wood cut of one ; it is exactly half an inch in tliametcr, 
hence it was the size of our half-dime. Steevens refers to Chaucer’s description of 
the Prioress : ‘ That in hire cuppe ther was no ferthiiig sene Of grees, when sche 
dronken hadde hire draught.’ — Prologue, line 134. 

140. so immodest to write] For other examples of the omission of as after ‘ so,’ 
see Abbott, § 281. 



124 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act il, SC. iiL 

Clau. Then downe vpon her knees (he falls, weepes, 
fobs, beates her heart, teares her hayre, praies, curfes, O 14S 
fweet Bencdickc^ God giue me patience. 

Leon. She doth indeed, my daughter faics fo, and the 
extafie hath fo much oucrborne her, that my daughter is 
fomtime afeard the will doe a defperate out-rage to her 
felfe, it is very true. 1 50 

Princ. It were good that Bcnedicke knew of it by fome 
other, if fhe will not difcouer it. 

Clau. To what end ? he would but make a fport of it, 
and torment the poore Lady worfe. 

Prm. And he fliould, it were an almes to hang him, 155 
fhee’s an excellent fweet Lady, and(out of all fufpition,) 
fhe is vertuous. 157 

* 45 ‘ curfeSy'] prays, curfes ; 1 53. hut make"] make but Q, Cam. 

F^, Rowe, Cap. Var. Ran. Mai. Dtn, \Vh. ii. 

Steev. Var. Knt, Coll, i, Dyce, Cam. 155. And'\ QFf, Rowe. ^Pope, + . 
prays, cries. Coll, ii, iii, Sing. Ktly, An Cap. et seq. 

Huds. Wh, ii. prays ; — crie^, Wh. i. atmes^ alms-deed Coll, ii, iii, 

149. fomtime^ sometimes Coll, i, ii, (MS), Sing. Wh. i, Huds. 
iii, Wh. i. 156. excellent /weef] excellent-sweet 

afeard"] afraid Rowe, + , Ran. Walker (O7/. i, 24), Dyce ii, iii. 

Steev. Var. 

145. praies, curses] Collier (ed. ii) : Cries [instead of ‘curses'] must have 
been the poet’s word, and it is obtained from the corrected Folio of 1632. — TIalli- 
WELL : If any alteration be reciuisite, the transposition [‘curses, prays’] which I 
have adopted is more probably right than the violent alteration [of Collier’s MS]. 
Claudio is endeavouring to impress an opinion of Beatrice’s being frantic with love, 
and this is well imagined by her alternately cursing and praying. — Whitic (ed. i) : 
Cries might easily be misprinted ‘ cunses,’ and is, there can be no doubt, the correct 
word; for why should Beatrice curse? But the needful correction was but partly 
made ; for Claudio having already .said that Beatrice ‘ weeps, sobs,’ it is plain that 
cries means that she cries out, ‘ O sweet Benedick !’ Hitherto the text predicated 
nothing of her exclamation. — Deighton : It is hardly likely that if cries had been 
in the original it would have been changed to ‘ curses,’ nor is it perhaps necessary 
that we should take ‘ curses’ with the words immediately following. Even if taken 
with them, it may mean nothing more than utters adjurations, [It is Claudio who 
speaks, and his words are less temperate than those of the white-bearded Leonato. 
— Ed.] 

148. extasie] That is, madne.ss. Cf. Haml, II, i, 102 : ‘ This is the very ecstasy 
of love, Whose violent property fordoes itself And leads the will to desperate under- 
takings.’ 

155. an almes] Collier (ed. ii, reading alms-deed) ; Deed is from the MS, and 
though not absolutely necessary, is a most plausible addition. — R. G. White (ed. i) : 
There can scarcely be a doubt that Collier’s MS is correct. ‘ An alms ’ meant only 



ACT 11, SC. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


125 

158 


Claudio. And flie is exceeding wife. 

Prince. In euery thing, but in louing Benedicke. 

Leon. O my Lord, wifedome and bloud combating in 160 
fo tender a body, we haue ten proofes to one, that bloud 
hath the viflory, I am forry for her, as I haue iust caufe , 
being her Vncle,and her Guardian. 

Prince, I would ftiee had bellowed this dotage on 
mee, I would haue daft all other refpefts, and made her 165 
halfe my felfe : I pray you tell Bcttcdickc of it , and heare 
what he will fay. 

Leon. Were it good thinke you ? 

Clan. Hero thinkes furely fhe wil die, for (he faies Ihe 
will die, if hee loue her not, and Ihee will die ere Ihee 170 
make her loue knowne, and fhc will die if hee wooe her, 
rather than fliee will bate one breath of her accullomed 
croffeneffe. 

Prin. She doth well, if fhe fhould make tender of her 
loue, ^tis very poffible hee^l fcorne it, for the manias you 175 
know all) hath a contemptible fpirit. 

165. daff\ QFf, Rowe, dofft Pope, 167. he\ a Q. d Coll, i, ii, Cam. 
Han. dafft Theob. Warb. Johns. Cap. Dtn. 

daffed Dyce, Sta. Cam. daff^d Var. 176. contcmptible\ contemptuous Han. 
^73 et cet. 

a charitable gift ; but ‘an alms-deed* was a recognised phrase, almost a word, sig- 
nifying not only such an act, but any equally worthy. Thus Queen Margaret says to 
Gloster, j Heu, VI : V, v, 79 : ‘ murder is thy alms-deed.* 

160. bloud] See II, i, 173. 

164. dotage] See line 98, above ; and line 203, below. 

165. daft] See V, i, 88: ‘Canst thou so daffe me?’ — Murray (//. E. 2 ).): 
Daffy a variant of Doffy to do off, put off. ... 2. To put or turn aside ; especially in 
the Shakespearian phrase ‘ to daff the world aside * ( — to bid or make it get out of 
one’s way), and imitations of this (sometimes vaguely or erroneously applied) j lien. 
IV: IV, i, 96 : ‘ The . . . Mad-Cap, Prince of Wales, And his Comrades, that daft 
the World aside. And bid it passe.* 

1 7 1, die] A comma, which Capell was the first to supply, is needed after ‘die,* 
to show that the phrase ‘if hee wooe her’ is parenthetical. — E d. 

172. bate] Although this is, in fact, an aphetic form of abate y according to the 
H. E. D.y it is not necessary to spell it *bate as it is often spelled in modern editions. 
It may be fairly considered an independent word. — Ed. 

176. contennptible] Johnson : That is, a temper inclined to scorn and contempt. 
— Steevens : In the Argument Xq DariuSy a tragedy, by Lord Sterline, 1603, it is 
said that Darius wrote to Alexander ‘in a proud and contemptible manner.* In this 
place ‘ contemptible ’ certainly means contemptuous. Capell says that Don Pedro 



126 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act il. sc. iii. 


Clou. He is a very proper man. 177 

Prm, He hath indeed a good outward happines. 

Clan. ’Fore Gk)d, and in my mindc veiy wife. 

Prin, He doth indeed fhew fome fparkes that are like 180 
wit. 

Leon, And I take him to be valiant. 

Prin, As Hector^ I affure you, and in the managing of 
quarrels you may fee hee is wife, for either hee auoydes 
them w^ith great diferetion, or vndertakes them with a 185 
Chriftian-like feare. 

178. happines\ appeai'ance Long MS, 
ap. Cam. (iould. 

179. ^To/rJi Before Q, Coll. Cam, 

182. I^eon.] Claudio. Q, Cap. Mai. 

Cam. Wh. ii. 

184. may fee\ Ff, Rowe, Pope, I Ian. 

uses it in both senses. For many examples of adjectives in ful^ lessy ble^ and ive 
which have both an active and a pas.sive meaning, see Walker (OvV. Articles 
xxviii and xxix ; or Abhott, §3). 

177. proper] Steevens ; That is, a very handsome one j see V, i, 182 : ‘ thou 
wast the proprest man in Italic.^ — W. A. Wright : In the Authorised Version of 
HebretoSy xi, 23 : ‘ By faith Moses, when he was born, was hid three months of his 
parents, because they saw he was a proper child.’ Lyly, in his Euphttes (p. 352, 
ed. Arber), says of Adam and Eve, *Yet then was she the fairest woman in the 
worlde, and he the propercst man.’ 

178. outward happines] That is, in effect, he is tolerably good looking; the 
Prince is continuing his part of damning with faint praise. — Ed. 

181. wit] Staunton here says; ‘it must be remembered that and wit 

were synonymous,’ This assertion is, possibly, too broad. They are not always 
synonymous. Where Leonato, in the Fir.st Scene speaks of the ‘ skirmishes of wit ’ 
betwixt Benedick and Beatrice, wzV is not there synonymous with ivisdoni. Thus 
here, when Claudio in exaggerated phrase asserts that Benedick is ‘ very wise,’ the 
Prince does not reply that Benedick does indeed show some sparks that are like 
wisdonty which would be a natural rejoinder, in so far as a repetition of the same 
word is concerned, but he is more restrained in his praise, and will grant to Bene- 
dick merely some .sparks that resemble wity which is inferior in dignity to wisdom. 
— Ed. 

182. Leon.] The Qto gives this speech to Claudio. It does, indeed, seem more 
natural that Claudio should be the speaker, inasmuch as the speech begins with 
‘ And,’ as though in continuation of s6me preceding remark, rather than Leonato, 
who had been silent for some time. On the other hand, there should be no doubt as 
to Benedick’s valour in the estimation of Claudio, who has been Benedick’s com- 
panion in arms. — Ed. 

183. As Hector] Walker {Crit, iii, 31) ; Possibly with an under-allusion to 
the incident of Hector’s running away from Achilles. (Too far-fetched, 1 fear, yet 
see context. ) 


Var. ’85, Knt, Wh. i. may fay Q, 
Theob. et cet. 

185. 7 iiit/i a'] 7 vifh a mojl Q, Cap. 
Mai. Steev. Var. Coll. Dyce, Sta. Cam. 
Ktly, Wh. ii. 



ACT 11, SC. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


127 

187 


Leon. If hee doe feare God, a muft ncceffarilie keepe # 
peace, if hee breake the peace, hee ought to enter into a 
quarrell with feare and trembling. 

Prin. And fo will he doe, for the man doth fear God, 190 
howfoeuer it feemes not in him, by fomc large ieafts hee 
will make : well, I am forry for your niece, fhall we goe 
fee Bcncdickcy and tell him of her loue. 

Claud. Neuer tell him, my Lord, let her weare it out 
with good counfcll. 195 

Leon. Nay that’s impoffible, flie may weare her heart 
out firft. 

Pnn. Well, we will heare further of it by your daugh- 
ter, let it coolc the while, I loue Bcncdicke well, and I 
could with he would modeftly examine himfelfe, to fee 200 
how much he is vnworthy to hauc fo good a Lady. 

Leon. My Lord, will you walkc? dinner is ready. 

Clau. If he do not doat on her vpon this, I wil neuer 
trull: my expe 61 :ation. 204 


187. a mi/Ji'] QFf. Cam. Huds. 
mitsf Rowe et cet. 

187, 188. keepe pcacc\ keep the peace 
Dyce ii, iii, Huds. 

187-192. Leon. P/...make 
gin, as spurious, Pope, Han. 

190-192. for... make'] As mnemonic 
lines, Warb. 

193. fee] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Var. 
*03, ’13, ’21, Knt. feeke Q, Theob. 


et cet. 

194. 7 aeafr’] ivait Rowe i. 

198. further] farther Co][. Wh. i. 

200. to fee] to she 7 ct Rowt‘ i. 

201. to hauc] Om. Q, Steev. Var.’ 03, 
’13, Coll. Dyce, Sta. Cam. Ktly, Huds. 
m. ii. 

203-210. [Aside, Theob. Warb. et 
seq. (except Cam.) 


191. large leasts] Halijwell: ‘Large’ is liberal, free, licentious, as again in 
IV, i, 54. It is not every one who uses profane jests, who is necessarily an infidel ; 
and the remark, here applied to Benedick, is one of the poet’s happy moral senti- 
ments. — ^W. A. Wright : We use broad in the same sense, and ‘liberal’ is so used 
by Shakespeare in this play, IV, i, 97, and in the phrase ‘liberal shepheids’ in 
Hamlet^ IV, vii, 171. [Possibly, frecy in modern usnage, will also express the 
meaning of ‘large’ both here and in IV, i, 54. — Ft).] 

195. counsell] That is, reflection. Schmidt i^Lex.') will supply numerous 
examples. See IV, i, 107; ‘ counsailes of thy heart,’ 

202. walke ?] That is, withdraw, retire. Thus, Lear^ HI, iv, ill : ‘Flibberti- 
gibbet ; he begins at curfew and walks at first cock.’ KEuai'iLEY conjectured 
‘walk inf which is needless. — En. 

203. vpon this] That is, in consequence of this. See also, IV, i, 232 ; IV, ii, 
63; V, i, 247, 256; V, iv, 4; or Abbott, § 191. In all these cases it is difficult to 
decide whether or not mere sequence in time, without any idea of causality, would 
not explain the use of ‘ upon,’ — and after the decision is made, it would be of little 



128 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. iii- 


Prki. Let there be the fame Net fpread for her, and 205 
that muft your daughter and her gentlewoman carry: 
the Iport will be, when they hold one an opinion of ano- 
thers dotage, and no fuch matter, that^s the Scene that I 
would fee, which will be meerely a dumbe fhcw : let vs 
fend her to call him into dinner. Exeunt, 210 


206. gmtiervoman\ Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Han. Knt, Wh. i, Sta. genileivomen Q, 
Theob. et cet. 

207, 208. one an opinion of ano- 
-ikersji an opinion of one another's 
Pope, + , Cap. 

210. into'] F^Fg, Sta. to Rowe i. 


Theob. Warb. Johns. Var. Ran. Mai. 
in to Q,F^, Rowe ii et cet. 

210. Exeunt] Om. Q. 

Scene X. Pope, + , 

Benedick advances from the Ar- 
bour. Theob. 


consequence. The question is of less interest to an English grammarian than 
to a foreigner, who in translating is obliged to select the appropriate preposi- 
tion. — Ei). 

207. 208. one an opinion of anothers] Abbott (§ 88 ; note on ‘ Who loues an- 
other best,* — IVint, 7 \ IV, iv, which see) : Our common idiom : ‘they love one an- 
other ^ ought strictly to be either, ‘ they love, the one the other,* or ‘ they love, one 
other.* The latter form is still retained in ‘ they love each other * ; but as in ‘ one other* 
there is great ambiguity, it was avoided by the insertion of a second ‘one* or ‘an,* thus, 
‘they love one an-other.* This is illustrated by Matt, xxiv, lo (Tyndale) : ‘And 
shall betraye one ano\X\tr and shall hate one the oihtt whereas Wickliffe has, ‘ech 
other.* So, / Cor. xii, 25 : Wickliffe, ‘ech for other*; the rest ‘for one another.* 
‘ One another * is now treated almost like a single noun in prepositional phrases, such 
as ‘ We speak to one another.* But Shakespeare retains a trace of the original idiom 
in ‘ What we speak one to an others — AW s Well IV, i, 20. — W. A. Wright : In 
Shakespeare’s time ‘another* was used in such expressions where we should now 
say ‘the other.* So, in the Authorised Version of the Apocrypha^ Susanna^ 10 ; 
‘ And albeit they both were wounded with her love, yet durst not one shew another 
his grief.* [Both of these notes explain the use of ‘another,’ but neither touches 
what seems to me the real difficulty in the present passage : ‘ one an opinion,* where 
‘ one * is apparently an ellipsis of ‘ each one * ; to this I can find no parallel. From 
Pope to Capell, the editors boldly overleaped the difficulty. In the almost needless 
hermeneutical ‘ torture,’ to which such phrases are subjected, it has occurred to me 
that possibly is here a compositor’s transposition, and that we should read: 
‘ when they hold an one opinion,* that is, the same opinion. There is authority for 
the phonetic use of ‘an * before ‘ one,* in Macb. IV, iii, 66 : ‘ better Macbeth Than 
such an one to reign.’ This is the only explanation I can offer; it is to be feared 
that it is like the proverbial straw at which a drowning man clutches, not that there 
is any value in the straw, but it is the only thing there. For ‘ dotage * see 11 . 98 and 
164 of this Scene. — E d. 

208. no such matter] See I, i, 184. 

209. dumbe shew] Because embarrassment will tie their tongues. 

209, etc.] Anon. {Blackwood^ April, 1833, p. 545): We laugh at Benedick 
< advancing from the arbour,* gulled, by what he has there overheard, into the con- 
viction that Beatrice is dying for him ; but at Beatrice, who ran ‘ like a lapwing close 



ACT II, SC. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


129 

Bene. This can be no tricke, the conference was fadly , 211 
borne, they haue the truth of this from Hero^ they fecme 
to pittie the Lady : it feemes her affeflions haue the full 
bent ; loue me ? why it muft be requited : I heare how I 
am cenfurM, they fay I will beare my felfe proudly, if I 215 
perceiue the loue come from her : they fay too, that fhe 
will rather die than giue any figne of affe6Hon: I did ne- 
uer thinke to marry, I muft not feeme proud, happy are 
they that heare their detractions , and can put them to 
mending : they fay the Lady is faire, ftis a truth, I can 220 
beare them witneffe : and vertuous, tis fo , I cannot re- 
prooue it, and wife, but for louing me, by my troth it is 222 

21 1-224. mnemonic lines, Warb. 

212, 220. truth'] tructh Q. 

213. the full] their full Q, Cap 
Steev. Var. ’21, Coll. Dyce, Wh. Sta 

by the ground, to hear the conference ’ that deceived her with a corresponding belief, 
coming out of the ‘ pleached bower,’ with her face on fire we do not laugh ; we con- 
dole, we congratulate, we love her, — ^for that fire flashes from a generous and ardent 
heart. Why laugh we at Benedick ? Chiefly for these few words, ‘ they seem to 
pity the poor lady.’ lie sees her in his mind’s eye ‘tearing the letter into thousand 
half-pence ;’ he hears her in his mind’s ear, ‘ railling at herself that she should be so 
immodest to write to one she knew would flout her.’ . . . Vain as we once were of 
our personal charms, — to say nothing of our mental, — (the rare union used to be 
irresistible) not, in our most cock-a-hoop exultation, in the unconsciousness of our 
transcendant powers of cold-blooded feminicide, could we have given implicit cred- 
ence to such a stark-staring incredibility (we do not say impossibility) as is involved 
in the narrative which by Benedick, in one wide gulp of faith, was swallowed like 
gospel. — Lloyd (p. 200) ; To Benedick the possibility does just occur that all may 
be a gull, but his penetration gains small glory by this, for he rejects the notion forth- 
with, and the fiction which he gives in to, was set forth with an exaggeration and 
extravagance that argue in him a credulousness not moderately exalted. The ten- 
dency to the not slight self-appreciation which betrays him, is the same that had 
prompted his original error of insulting the majesty of the sex by professed non- 
allegiance, — we have a hint of it in his avowal that he was loved of all ladies but 
Beatrice, yet in hardness of heart, loved none. 

21 1, 212. sadly borne] Steevens: That is, was seriously carried on. 

213. 214. the full bent] Rushton {^Shakespeare an Archer^ p. 44): A bow is 
bent when it is strung. It is full bent when the archer draws the string until the 
head of the arrow touches the bow. [See IV, i, 194.] 

214. loue me?] Lady Martin (p. 312) : Benedick’s first thought is not of his 
own shortcomings. In this, he is very different from Beatrice. 

215. censur’d] That is merely, what judgement is passed upon me, — not neces- 
sarily adverse. 

221, 222. reprooue] That is, disprove. — W. A. Wright : In the Authorised 
9 


Cam. 

221, 222. re-prooue] disprove Ktly 
conj. 



130 


MUCH A DOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ii, sc. iii. 


no addition to her witte, nor no great argument of her 223 
folly; for I wil be horribly in loue with her, I may chance 
haue fome odde quirkes and remnants of witte broken 225 
on mee, becaufe I haue railM fo long againft marriage ; 
but doth not the appetite alter f a man loues the meat in 
his youth, that he cannot indure in his age. Shall quips 
and fentences, and thefe paper bullets of the braine awe 
a man from the careere of his humour ? No, the world 230 
muft be peopled. When I faid I would die a batcheler, I 
did not think I ftiould hue till I were maried, here comes 
Beatrice ; by this day, fhee’s a faire Lady, I doe fpie fome 
markes of loue in her. 

Enter Beatrice. 235 

Beat. Againft my wil I am fent to bid you come in to 
dinner. 237 

225. haue\ to have Rowe, + . 228. youth ... a^o] age ... youth Coll. 

remnants'] remaines F,. remains MS. 

FjF^, Rowe. 236. in to] into F^. 

Version of Job^ vi, 25 : ‘ How forcible are right words ! but what doth your arguing 
reprove?’ [It seems to be used as in French. Cotgrave : ‘ Reprouver, To reproue, 
chide, checke, blame, condemne, find fault with, disallow.’ — Ed.] 

223. nor no] For double negatives, see Abbott, § 406. 

225, 226. broken on mee] See II, i, 140. 

225. odde quirkes] W. A. Wright : Irrelevant conceits or turns of expression. 

‘ Odd ’ is applied to anything which is taken away from that to which it belongs, such 
as a phrase out of its context. [Hence ill-assorted, fantastic y or absurd. ‘Odd’ 
qualifies ‘remnants’ also, making the phrase strongly contemptuous. — Ed.] 

229. sentences . . . paper bullets of the braine] ‘ Sentences ’ are sententious 
saws, gathered from books ; hence becoming ‘ paper bullets,’ not bullets made of 
paper, as it has been interpreted. In Webster’s Dutchess of Malfiy Ferdinand says ; 
‘One of Pasquil’s paper-bullets, court-calumny,’ III, i, p. 228, ed. Dyce. The 
Dutchess of Malfi was written about 1616. — Ed. 

230. careere] See V, i, 148. 

236, 237. Against . . . dinner] Rann : I should otherwise have done it volun- 
tarily. 

237. dinner] Halliwell ; There is a slight oversight here, the scene being in 
the evening, as appears from a speech of Claudio’s [‘how still the euening is,’ line 
37, above]. Late dinners were then unknown; and, to make the action C9nsistent, 
supper should be substituted both here and in Benedick’s subsequent speech [and in 
Kne 210 also. — Ed.] — Cambridge Edition ; Such inaccuracies are characteristic of 
Shakespeare, and this cannot well have been due to the printer or copier. [Rather 
than acknowledge such an inaccuracy in Shakespeare, we ought not to hesitate, boldly 
and loyally, to change the dinner-hour. What do we know of Leonato’s domestic 



ACT II, SC. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


Bene, Faire Beatrice^ I thanke you for your paines. 238 
Beat I tooke no more paines for thofe thankes,then 
you take paines to thanke me, if it had been painefull, I 240 
would not haue come. 

Bene. You take pleafure then in the meffage. 

Beat Yea iuft fo much as you may take vpon a kniues 
point, and choakc a daw withall ; you haue no ftomacke 
fignior, fare you well. Exit 245 

Bene. Ha, againft my will I am fent to bid you come 
into dinner : there’s a double meaning in that ; I tooke 
no more paines for thofe thankcs then you tooke paines 
to thanke me, that’s as much as to fay, any paines that I 
take for you is as cafie as thankes : if I do not take pitty 250 
of her I am a villaine, if I doe not loue her I am a lew, I 
will goe get her pi6lure. Exit. 252 

243. kniues\ knife^s Pope et seq. 247. into\ in to QFf. to Var. ^ 03, 

244. and choake\ and not choke Coll. *13, ’21. 

MS, Huds. 250. is oj] are as Han. 

arrangements, or how much they were disordered by the advent of so many and royal 
guests ? We must remember that it was Lear’s turbulent haste to advance the dinner- 
hour that led to the outbreak between him and Goneril. Let us not, therefore, for our 
lives, interfere with Leonalo’s. — Ei).] 

244. choake] Collier (ed. ii) : The MS has choke’; which seems to add 
some force to the speech, implying that Beatrice did not take so much pleasure as 
would lie upon a knife’s point, and was insufficient to choke a daw. Still, the 
emendation is by no means necessary. — Rolfe : As the difference between the maxi- 
mum that would not choke and the minimum that would is practically nil^ the emen- 
datioh [of Collier’s MS] seems a most superfluous one. 

247. double meaning] IIalliwkll : The second meaning he alludes to, would 
be probably, — she was unnecessarily desired to bid him to dinner, for she was per- 
fectly willing to go of her own accord. There is, however, more humour in con- 
sidering Benedick to be completely under the power of imagination in the supposed 
discovery of a double meaning in the words of Beatrice. 

252. Exit.] Lloyd (p. 200) : Certainly Shakespeare, with manly gallantry, 
makes Beatrice fair amends, for the balance of mirth is beyond computation directed 
upon Benedick. His conviction is no whit more positive than hers, but the working 
of it differs. Benedick shaves, dresses, perfumes, is forward, eager, complaisant, 
and expectant, and were it not that we know that his conceit is not without some 
grounds to justify it, not even his high mental qualifications would save him from the 
ridiculousness that fastens on Malvolio, betrayed by a like pitfall. Malvolio, cross-, 
gartered in the presence of Olivia is a companion picture, — ^how admirably discrimi- 
nated, — to Benedick, after he has donned lovers’ livery of trimness, and in his mis- 
takes of demeanour he only completes that one important step which Benedick 
commences when he interprets the saucy message to come in to dinner into covert 




132 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act hi, sc. i. 


A6ius Tertius. 


Enter Hero and two Gentlcme^iy Margaret ^ andVrfula. 
Hero. Good Margaret runne thee to the parlour, 


1. Actus Tertius.] Om. Q. 

[Continues in the Garden. Pope. 

Leonato’s Orchard. Cam. 

2. Enter...] Enter Hero, Margaret 
and Ursula. Rowe. 


3 

2. Gentlemen ...Vrfula.] Gentlewo- 
men... Vrfley. Q. 

3. to the\ into the Pope, 4- , Cap. Var. 
Ran. Mai. Steev. Var. ’03, ’13. in to 
the Ktly. 


tendernes.s. Here again he is on the brink of the absurdity that engulphs Slender 
when greeting a like .summons from Anne Page, and yet he must be dangerously 
self-confident who is not rc.strained by a certain awe from laughing at him outright. 
Apart from Beatrice he is mute, abstracted, has the toothache, and Beatrice, it is true, 
becomes .sympathetically exceeding ill, stuffed, .sick, no longer professes apprehension, 
can attend to nothing, and has positively to be waked and bid to rise by Ursula on 
her cousin’ s wedding morning. 

2. Vrsula] It is probable that the Qto here, and in line 6, gives the familiar pro- 
nunciation. 

3. Good . . . parlour] To tho.se who would fain believe that every dramatic line 
in Shakespeare must have five feet, this line presents a difficulty. Walker ( PWs . 
7) quotes it in an Article whereof the heading is : * Words such as Juggler^ Tick- 
lings Kindlings Englands Angrys Childrens and the like, are, — as is w'ell known, — 
frequently pronounced by the Elizabethan poets as though a vowel w^ere interposed 
between the liquid and the preceding mute.’ [Again quoted at line 85 of this scene.] 
He would therefore scan this line thus ; — ‘ Good M2lr | gar^t, | rim thee | to the | 
par^l I our.’ His comment i.s, that ‘ (others read, run thee into the parlour.) I sus- 
pect there is something wrong. (This would belong to the same class as pearls 
fornts adorned^ etc.)’ Prose seems to me preferable to pa relour, Abbott (§ 507) 
thinks to .solve the difficulty by a pause after ‘ Margaret’ which supplies the thesis, so 
that the ictus or arsis falls on * run’: ‘Good Mar | gar^t. | Rhn | thee to | the p^- 
lour.’ This is probably the best that can be done rhythmically with the line. — En. 

3. runne thee] Abbott (§212): Verbs followed by thee in.stead of thou have been 
called reflexive. But though ‘ haste thee, and some other phrases with verbs of 
motion, may be thus explained, and verbs were often thus used in Early English, it 
is probable that ‘look theCs ‘hark thee' are to be explained by euphonic rea.sons. 
Thecs thus u.sed, follows imperatives, which, being themselves emphatic, require an 
unemphatic pronoun. The Elizabethans reduced thou to thee. We have gone further, 
and rejected it altogether. — W. A. Wright : * Thee ’ is here used redundantly, as 
in III, iii, 102, IV, i, 25 : ‘ Stand thee.’ Schmidt (Tex.) gives this as an instance 
of thee for thou ; but in all the cases he quotes thee is either redundant, representing 
what Latin grammarians call the dativus commodis or reflexive. [That ‘ thee ’ here is 
redundant is unquestionable, just as in .some cases, we now treat thou as redundant. 
But that it stands for thou and has been changed for euphonic reasons, as Abbott 
suggests, is uncomfortably apparent to all who are wont to hear the so-called ‘ plain 




133 


ACT III, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 

There flialt thou finde my Cofin Beatrice ^ 

Propofing with the Prince and Claudioy 5 

Whifper her eare, and tell her I and Vr/ula^ 

Walke in the Orchard, and our whole difcourfe 
Is all of her, fay that thou ouer-hcardft vs. 

And bid her fteale into the pleached bower. 

Where hony-fucklcs ripened by the funne, 10 

6. Whifper\ Whisper in Ktly conj. lo. ripened'] ripened Rowe et seq. 

Vrfula] Vrfley Q. IO-13. As mnemonic lines, Warb. 

language ’ of Friends or Quakers, where such phrases as * How dost thee I* * How 
art thee?' are constantly heard. — El).] 

5. Proposing] Steevens : That is, conversing. From the French ; propos . — 
W. A, Wrkjht ; The word does not occur again in Shakespeare in exactly this 
sense. For instance, in 0 /h. I, i, 25 : ‘ The bookish theoric. Wherein the toged 
consuls can propose As masterly as he,’ ‘ propose ’ has rather the sense of laying 
down propositions, submitting points for formal discussion. And in Hamlet H, ii, 
297, a ‘ proposer ’ is one who puts forward formal statements for consideration, not 
merely a speaker. [See ‘propose’ of the Qto, line 14.] 

6. Whisper her eare] For many examples of the omission of prepositions, see 
Abbott, § 200. 

7. Orchard] Again the locality is distinctly given, which all those editors, who 
give the scene as in ‘ Leonato’s Garden,’ have disregarded. 

9. pleached] Sec I, ii, p. 

10. hony-suckles] Prior (p. 117) : Anglo-Saxon hunig-suclc^ a name that is 
now applied to the woodbine, but of which it is very doubtful to what plant it 
properly belongs. In the A, S. vocabularies it is translated Ligustnim^ which in 
other places means the cowslip and primrose. Neither is it clear what sticle means. 
The instrumental termination le would imply that with which one sucks. The name 
seems to have been transferred to the woodbine on account of the honey-dew so 
plentifully deposited on its leaves by aphides. In Culpeper and Parkinson and other 
herbalists it is assigned to the meadow clover, which in our Western Counties is still 
called so. [Prior evidently considers the Honeysuckle and Woodbine as identical ; 
his name for the latter (p. 244) i.s Lonicera periclymenitm^ which is the name of one 
of the native British .species of Honeysuckle; see next note.] — Ellacombe (p. 95) : 
There can be little doubt that in Shakespeare’s time the two names [the Woodbine 
and the Honeysuckle] belonged to the same plant, and that the Woodbine, where 
the names were at all discriminated, as in Mid. N. B.lYyi: * So doth the woodbine, 
the sweet Honeysuckle Gently entwist,’ w'as applied to the plant generally, and 
Honeysuckle to the flower. This seems very clear by comparing [the ‘ hony-suckle ’ 
of the present line with ‘the wood-bine couerture’ of line 33]. In earlier writings 
[Woodbine] was applied very loosely to almost any creeping or climbing plant. [It 
has been variously applied to the Wild Clematis; to the Common or the Ground Ivy ; 
and to the Capparis or Caper-plant.] Milton does not seem to have been very clear in 
the matter. In Paradise Lost he makes our first parents ‘ wind the Woodbine round 
this arbour’ (perhaps he had Shakespeare's arbour in mind) ; and in Comus he tells 
of the ‘flaunting Honeysuckle.’ While in Lycidas he speaks of ‘the well -attired 



134 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [ACT III, SC. i. 


Forbid the funne to enter : like fauourites, 1 1 

Made proud by Princes, that aduance their pride, 

Againft that power that bred it, there will Ihc hide her, 

To liften our purpofe, this is thy office, 14 

II. like] like to Pope, + , Cap. Dyce pose Ff, Rowe, + . our propofe Q, 
ii, iii. Theob. et cet. 

our purpofe'\ Knt. to our pur- 


Woodbine.* We can scarcely suppose that he would apply two such contrary 
epithets as ‘ flaunting ’ and ‘ well-attired ’ to the same plant. And now the name, 
as of old, is used with great uncertainty, and I have heard it applied to many plants, 
and especially to the small .sweet-scented Clematis (C.^ammula). But with the 
Honeysuckle there is no such difliculty. The name is an old one, and in its earliest 
use was no doubt indifferently applied to many .sweet-.scented flowers (the Primrose 
amongst them) ; but it was soon attached exclusively to our own sweet Honeysuckle 
of the woods and hedges. We have two native species [Lonicera periclymenutn, 
and L, xylosteum) and there are about eighty exotic species. [It is clear that the 
Woodbine and the Honeysuckle are so intimately entwisted that the knot is quite too 
intrinse t’ unloose, for us in America where, according to Gray, they are one and the 
same plant. When Shakespeare wrote A Mid. N. D. he thought that they were two 
different plants, when a year or two later he wrote Much Ado about Nothings he 
thought they were one, and, of cour.se, he was right in both cases. — Kd.] 

11-13. like . . . bred it] F'urnivall (Introd. to The Leopold Sh, p. Ivii, foot- 
note) ; These lines are so unexpectedly and incongruously brought into [this speech] 
that I suspect they were an insertion after Es.sex’s rebellion in i6oi. They will lift 
out of the scene, and leave the speech more natural when they are removed. Shake- 
spere must have aimed the lines at some contemporary favourite, I’m sure. [See 
Preface to the present volume.] 

II. fauourites] Simpson {Academyy 25 Sept. 1875): In Shakespeare, ‘favour- 
ite* does not mean minion, but the confidential agent or mini.ster of a prince. In 
Pich. II : III, ii, 88, ‘the King’s favourites’ are Salisbury, Aumerle, and the Bishop 
of Carlisle. In / Hen. IV: IV, iii, 86, they are the King’s ‘ deputies,’ Bushy, Bagot, 
Greene, and the Earl of Wiltshire. In those unconstitutional days, the counsellors 
most li.stened to by the prince were his ‘ favourites.’ Then, ‘ made proud by princes ’ 
does not mean ‘ tempted to the vice of pride by the prince’s favour,’ but invested by 
the prince with ‘ proud titles ’ of honour, and places of power. So ‘ pride ’ means 
preci.sely these titles of honour, this dignity of power. Cf. Sonn. 25 : ‘ I^et others 
Of public honour and proud titles boast. . . . Great princes’ favourites their fair 
leaves .spread But as the marigold at the sun’s eye. And in themselves their pride lies 
buried.’ ‘Pride’ used of flowers means their luxuriance and over-growth ; applied 
to courtiers it means their titles, glory, and power. [See Preface to the present 
volume. ] 

14. listen] See Abbott (§ 199) for the omission of the preposition after verbs 
of hearing. The present line is thus scanned by Abbott (§ 480) : ‘ To list | en <7^ | r 
pur I po.se. This is | thy bffice.’ (‘This is’ is a quasi-mono.syllable. ) 

14. purpose] Steevkns : Propose is right. — Reed : ‘ Purpose,’ however, may 
be equally right. It depends only on the accenting of the word, which, in Shake- 
speare’s time, was often used in the same sense as propose. Thus, in Knox’s Hist, 



I3S 

15 


ACT III, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 

Beare thee well in it, and leaue vs alone. 

Marg. He make her come I warrant you prefently. 

Hero. Now Vrfula^ when Beatrice doth come, 

As we do trace this alley vp and downe, 

Our talke muft onely be of ^enedicke^ 

When I doe name him, let it be thy part, 20 

To praife him more then euer man did merit, 

My talke to thee muft be how Tienedicke 
Is ficke in loue with Beatrice ; of this matter , 

Is little Cupids crafty arrow made. 

That onely wounds by hcare-fay : now begin, 25 

Enter Beatrice. 

For looke where Beatrice like a Lapwing runs 27 

16. warrant y(yu\ warrant Ff, 25-36. As aside, Cap. 

Rowe, +. 26. Enter...] After line 28, Q. Enter 

prefently. ] Q. prefently. Exit. Ff. Beat, running towards the Arbour. Theob. 


of the Reformation in Scotland, p. 72 : * — ^with him six persons ; and getting entrie, 
held purpose with the porter.’ Again, p. 54: ‘After supper he held comfortable 
purpose of God’s chosen children.’ Knight, who follows the Folio, quotes, in 
justification, the use by Spenser of ‘ purpose ’ in the sense of conversation : * the 
wanton Damzell found New merth, her passenger to entertaine : For she in pleasant 
purpose did abound And greatly joyed merry tales to faine.’ — [Bk ii, cant, vi, line 
51]. — ^W. A. Wright; Though ‘purpose’ is used in Shakespeare in the sense of 
proposal, purport, it does not appear to signify merely talk or conversation, as it does 
in Spenser ; even in Spenser, although ‘ purpose ’ is used for discourse or conversa- 
tion, the accent is not changed. For instance, in Faerie Queene, I, ii, 30: ‘Faire 
semely pleasaunce each to other makes, With goodly purposes, there as they sit.* 
In I, xii, 13 : ‘On which they lowly sitt, and fitting purpose frame.’ But after all it 
must be remembered that Spenser, because of his affected archaisms, is a doubtful 
authority in questions of language. [The Qto has here the better reading, especially 
since the same word has ju.st been used in line 5 * It is possible that there is also a 
reference to this preceding word ; Beatrice has been proposing with the Prince and 
Claudio, now she will hide her to listen our propose ; the rhythm gives emphasis to 
‘our.’ — Ed.] 

18. trace] Had Shakespeare here meant merely to pace (as Schmidt defines it) 
the supposition is not violent that he would have used that word ; but in ‘ trace ’ 
there is involved the idea of following the windings of the alley, or of following the 
path whether it be winding or not. Pace is merely a gait, ‘ trace ’ is a gait determined 
in a certain direction. — Ed. 

25. onely wounds] See II, i, 132. 

.27. like a Lapwing] Hazlitt (p. 301) : There is something delightfully pictur- 
esque in the manner in which Beatrice is described as coming to hear the plot. — 
Anon. (Shakespeare\^ Garden of Girls, p. 196) : Hero has used her eyes when she 
has gone abroad, and not, as many of our present-day young ladies do, devoted her 



136 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act ill, sc. i. 

Clofe by the ground, to heare our conference. 28 

Vrf. The pleafant’ft angling is to fee the filh 
Cut with her golden ores the filuer ftreame, 30 

And greedily deuoure the treacherous baite : 

So angle we for Beatrice^ who euen now, 

Is couched in the wood-bine couerture, 

Feare you not my part of the Dialogue. 

Her.ThQn go we neare her that her care loofe nothing, 35 
Of the falfe fweete baite that we lay for it : 

No truely F?yw/ci,lhe is too difdainfull, 

I know her fpirits are as coy and wilde, 

As Haggerds of the rocke. 

Vrfula, But are you fure, 40 

That Be 7 icdicke loues Beatrice fo intircly ? 

Her. So faies the Prince, and my new trothed Lord. 

Vrf. And did they bid you tell her of it, Madam ? 

Her. They did intreatc me to acquaint her of it, 

But I perfwaded them, if they lou’d Bejiedicke, 45 


32. euen now] ^en now Pope, + . 

33. wood-bine couerture] woodbine- 
-coverture Thcob. Warb. Johns. 

35. loofe] lofe Ff, Rowe et seq. 

36. falfe fweete] false-sweet Walker, 
Dyce ii, iii, Iluds. 

37. [They advance to the bower. 


Var. *78. 

37. No] [loud] No Coll. MS. 

fie is] ske^s Pope, + , Dyce ii, 

Huds. 

39. Haggerds] haggards Han. 

43. bid you tell her] bid her tell you 
Var. ’21 (misprint). Coll. i. 


sole attention to gossip, or the peculiarities of her neighbour’s dress. So, in describ- 
ing Beatrice’s running [she accurately describes the lapwing’s flight.] — Harting 
(p. 220) : Immense numbers of Lapwings ( Vanellus cristatus), or Green Plovers, as 
they are called, find their w'ay into the l^ondon Markets. . . . Like the partridge and 
some other birds, it has a curious habit of trying to draw intruders away from its nest 
or young by fluttering along the ground in an opposite direction, or by feigning lame- 
ness, or uttering melancholy cries at a distance. 

33. wood-bine couerture] See line lo. 

39. Haggerds] Steevens: Turberville, Falconry^ ^ 575 > tells us that, ‘the haggard 
doth come from foreign parts and a passenger and Latham, who wrote after him, 
[1658,] says that ‘ such is the greatness of her spirit, that she will not admit of any 
society, until such time as nature worketh,’ etc. — Dyce (Gloss.) quotes Cotgrave: 
‘ Faulcon hagard. A Hagard ; a Faulcon that preyed for herselfe long before she was 
taken.’ — Harting (pp. 57, 58) : By ‘haggard’ is meant a wild-caught and unre- 
claimed mature hawk, as distinguished from an ‘ eyess ’ or nestling, that is, a young 
hawk taken from the ‘ eyrie ’ or nest. By some falconers ‘ haggards ’ were also called 
‘ passage-hawks ’ from being always caught at the time of their periodical passage or 
migration. 



ACT III, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


137 

46 


To wifh him wraftle with affeflion , 

And neuer to let Beatrice know of it. 

Vrfiila, Why did you fo, doth not the Gentleman 
Deferue as full as fortunate a bed, 

As euer Beatrice fhall couch vpon ? 50 

Hero, O God of loue! I know he doth deferue, 

As much as may be ycclded to a man : 

But Nature neuer fram’d a womans heart, 

46. wrajlle\ wrestle Johns, et seq. Cam. a full as Gould, as fully as 

49. as full d!j] Qb\, Rowe, Sta. Wray, ap. Cam. as fully as Rowe 

Cam. Wh. ii. at fully as Long MS, ap. ii, et cet. 

46. wish him wrastle] For other examples of the omission of to before the 
infinitive, see Aubott, § 349. 

46. with affe< 5 tion] An instance of the absorption of the definite article : ‘ wi/^’ 
affection.’ — E d. 

47. know of it] Fletcher (p. 260) : The brevity with which Hero and Ursula 
speak of Benedick’s alleged passion, and the ready credence which it nevertheless 
obtains in the mind of Beatrice, as contra.sted with the more hesitating admittance 
which Benedick yields to the story of Beatrice’s ‘enraged affection’ for himself, 
results with perfect nature and propriety from the very different character of the 
source from which the pretended information comes. Benedick might well, in the 
first in.stance, have .suspected that the talk which he heard going on upon this matter 
between the Prince and Claudio, — so accustomed to pass their jests upon him, espe- 
cially on that very point, — ^might be, as he says, ‘ a gull,’ in which it was just possible 
they might have induced the old gentleman to take part, for the sake of humouring 
their momentary diversion. But when we consider the quiet, modest, .simple char- 
acter of Hero, and the relation of sisterly intimacy and affection so long established 
between her and Beatrice, we sec it to be utterly impossible that the idea should once 
enter the apprehension of the latter, that her cousin might be engaged in a plot of 
this nature, however innocent, upon herself. — Mrs Jameson (i, 138) : The imme- 
diate success of the trick is a most natural consequence of the self-assurance and 
magnanimity of Beatrice’s character; she is so accustomed to as.sert dominion over 
the spirits of others, that she cannot suspect the possibility of a plot against herself. 

48-50. doth . . . vpon ?] M. Mason (p. 52) : What Ursula means to say is, 
‘that he is as deserving of happiness in the marriage state as Beatrice herself.’ — 
Deigiiton : Whether or not a comma should be placed after ‘ full,’ whether, that is, 
we are to take ‘ full ’ in an adjective or in an adverbial sense, it seems certain that 
‘ As ever . . . vpon ’ means ‘ as complete happiness as to marry a wife in every way 
equal to Beatrice.’ The two next lines show this. — W. A. Wright : Ursula asks, 
‘ Does he not deserve as much happiness in marriage as if he were to marry Beatrice ?’ 

53, etc. But Nature, etc.] Mrs Jameson (i, 136): The character of Hero is 
well contrasted with that of Beatrice, and their mutual attachment is very beautiful 
and natural. When they are both on the scene together. Hero has but little to say 
for herself ; Beatrice asserts the nile of a master spirit, eclipses her by her mental 
superiority, aba.shes her by her raillery, dictates to her, answers for her, and would 
fain inspire her gentle-hearted cousin with some of her own assurance. But Shake- 



138 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act hi, sc. i. 

Of prowder ftuffe then that of Beatrice : 

Difdaine and Scorne ride fparkling in her eyes, 55 

Mif-prizing what they looke on, and her wit 

Values it felfe fo highly, that to her 

All matter clfe feemes weakc : fhe cannot loue, 

Nor take no Ihape nor proieft of affeftion, 

Shee is fo felfe indeared. 60 

Vrfula. Sure I thinke fo. 

And therefore certainely it were not good 
She knew his loue, left flie make fport at it. 

Hero, Why you fpeake truth, I neuer yet faw man, 

How wife, how noble, yong, how rarely featur’d. 65 

But fhe would fpcll him backward: if fairc fac’d, 

55. eyesi eye Ff, Rowe. Row’e. 

60. felfe indeared~\ QFf, Mai. self 66-72. As mnemonic lines. Warb, 

-indeared Rowe et cet. 66. faire fac'd'\ faire faced Q. fair- 

63. file make~\ flteele make Q. f<^dd F'^. fair fac'd F^. 

65. feaiur' d.l featured. Q, featur'd, 

speare knew well how to make one character subordinate to another, without sacri- 
ficing the slightest portion of its effect ; and Hero, added to her grace and softness, 
and all the interest which attaches to her as the sentimental heroine of the play, 
possesses an intellectual beauty of her own. When she has Beatrice at an advan- 
tage, she repays her with interest, in the severe, but most animated and elegant 
picture she draws of her cousin’s imperious character and unbridled levity of tongue. 
The portrait is a little over-charged, because administered as a corrective, and intended 
to be overheard. 

56. Mis-prizing] Johnson : That is, despising, contemning. [Cotgrave has : 
*Mespriser. To disesteeme, contemne, disdainc, dispise, neglect, make light of, set 
nought by.’] 

' 59* proiect] W. A. Wright: That is, imaginary conception, idea; something 

much less definite than sha])c or form with which it is contrasted. 

65. How] See Aiiuor r, § 46, for examples of ‘ how ’ used for hown>er. 

66. backward] Si'kevens : An allusion to the practice of witches in uttering 
prayers. [I’hat is, turn his good qualities into defects, or as Hero .says, in line 73, 
‘turn him wrong side out.’] For a similar train of thought, see Lyly’s Euphues [p. 
46, ed. Arber.] : ‘if one be hard in conceiuing, they pronounce him a dowlte, if 
giuen to studie, they proclaime him a dunce : if merry, a iester ; if sad, a Saint ; if 
full of words, a sot ; if without spcach, a Cipher. If one argue with them boldly, 
Aen he is impudent; if coldly, an innocent.’ [P. 115] ‘doe you not know the 
nature of women which is grounded onely vpon extremities ? ... If he be cleanelye, 
then terme they him proude, if meane in apparell, a slouen, if talle a lungis [f. e. 
booby], if .short, a dwarfe, if bold, blunt; if shamefast, a cowarde ; Insomuch as 
they have neither meane in their frumps, nor measure in their folly. ... If shee be 
well sette, then call hir a Bosse, if slender, a Hasill twygge, if Nutbrowne, as blacke 
as a coale, if well couloured, a paynted wall, if shee bee pleasaunt, then is shee a 



ACT in, sc i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


IS9 

She would fweare the gentleman fhould be her filler : 67 

If blacke, why Nature drawing of an anticke, 

Made a foule blot: if tall, a launce ill headed : 

If low, an agot very vildlie cut : 70 

Iffpeakingjwhy a vane blowne with all windes; 

67. She would'\ QFf, Rowe, Cap. 70. agof^ QFf. agat Rowe, Pope, 

Knt, Dyce i, Wh. Cam. Shdd Pope Cap. aglet Theob. Han. Warb. Johns, 
et cet. Var. ’73. agate Mai. 

68. anticke'] antique Q. antick F^F^. vildlie'] Fj. vildly QF^P'^, Rowe. 

69. ill headed] ill- headed Ff. vilely Pope. 

wanton, if sullenne, a clowne, if honest, then is shee coye, if impudent, a harlot.’ 
[Striking as are these parallels, there need be no thought of borrowing. A hun- 
dred and seventy years ago, Theobald {NUholsy ii, 301] recalled the well-known 
lines in Lucretius where there is a similar perversion, only that it is a softening, 
by a lover, of his mistress’s defects into beauties : ‘ Nigra melichrus est, immunda et 
fetida acosmos, Caesia Palladium, nervosa et lignea dorcas, Parvula, pumilio, chariton 
mia, tota merum sal, . . . Baiba loqui non quit, traulizi, muta pudens est,’ etc. — 
IIII, 1160, ed, Lachmann. — E d.] 

68 . blacke] Malone : This only means, as I conceive, swarthy ^ or dark brown, 
— Douce ; A black man means a man with a dark or thick beard, not a swarthy or 
dark-brown complexioned man. — Steevens: When Hero says, ‘that nature drawing 
of an antick y made a foul bloty she only alludes to a drop of ink that may casually 
fall out of a pen, and spoil a grotesque drawing. 

68. anticke] Hunter (i, 253) : ‘Antic’ was used in a variety of senses, but 
here it means a giotcs([ue and distorted figure, such as were sometimes drawn in 
black on the white walls of country churches. 

70. agot very vildlie cut] Warburton’s emendation would deserve no notice 
here but be relegated to the Text. Notes merely, were it not that its speciousness 
beguiled three editors to give it a place in the text. It is as follows : — But why 
an ‘agate,’ if low? For what likeness between a little man and an agate} The 
ancients, indeed, used this stone to cut upon ; but very exquisitely. I make no 
question but the poet wrote : ‘ an aglet very vilely cut ;’ an aglet was a tag of those 
points, formerly so much in fashion. These tags were either of gold, silver, or brass, 
according to the quality of the wearer ; and were commonly in the shape of little 
images ; or at least had a little head cut at the extremity. The French call them 
aiguille ties. Mezeray, speaking of Henry the Third’s sorrow for the death of the 
princess of Conti, says, ‘ — portant meme sur ses aiguillettes de petites tetes de Mort.’ 
And as a ‘tall’ man is before compared to a ‘lance ill-headed’; so, by the same 
figure, a little man is very aptly liken’d to an ‘aglet ill-cut.’ Steevens rejected 
Warburton’s emendation, but ascribed the ill-cutting of an agate to the natural 
‘grotesque’ veinings in the .stone. Capell discerned, as often, the true meaning; 
* agate is confirm’d by the word “cut”; and by 2 Hen, IV: I, ii, 19; “I was 
never so manned with an agate till now” [where Falstaff compares his diminutive 
Page with his own bulk] the Poet’s aglets were form’d in molds, and not cut,* 
[Mercutio’s description of Queen Mab should have revealed ficro’s meaning : ‘she 
comes In shape no bigger than ’ [in] an agate-stone. — Ed.] 

71. vane . . . windes] Deighton ; Perhaps, also, with a reference to the 



140 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act hi, sc. i. 

If filent, why a blocke moued with none. 

So turnes fhe euery man the wrong fide out, 

And neuer giues to Truth and Vertue, that 
Which fimpleneffe and merit purchafeth. 

Vrfu. Sure, fure, fuch carping is not commendable. 

Hero, No, not to be fo odde,and from all fafhions, 

As Beatrice is, cannot be commendable. 

But who dare tell her fo ? if I fliould fpeake. 

She would mocke me into ayre, O fhe would laugh me 
Out of my felfe, preffe me to death with wit, 

77 * for Rowe, + , nor Cap. Ran. Mai. Steev. Var. Dyce ii, iii, Huds. 
Dyce ii, iii, Huds. no ; Wagner. 8o. ayre\ an air Rowe i. 

80. She would She'd Pope,-)-, Var. 

constant creaking of the weather-cock, as it is blown about from one point of the 
compass to another. Cf. Borachio’s question, III, iii, 125. 

75 - purchaseth] As a legal term, purchase^ in its enlarged sense, refers to any 
acquisition of lands other than by inheritance, but it is frequently used by Shake- 
speare freed from its limitation to land, and as applying to any method of acquisition. 
—Ed. 

76. commendable] W. A. Wright : ‘ Commendable ’ has the accent on the 
last syllable but one, as in all but one instance in Shakespeare, Schmidt marks the 
accent on the first syllable, but even so there must be a secondary accent on the 
penultimate. Cf. i Henry VI: IV, vi, 57: ‘And, commendable proved, lei’s die 
in pride.* And Cor, IV, vii, 51 : ‘And power, unto itself most commendable.’ 
In Spenser adjectives in -able have the accent on the penultimate. See Faerie Queene, 
II, vi, § 44 : ‘ O how I burne with implacable fyre !’ 

' 77 * to be] Staunton : The word ‘ not ’ is here redundant, and reverses the 
sense. [Capell’s emendation gives partial relief. — Ed.] 

77 * from] For other instances where ‘from’ means diff credit froniy contrary to, 
see Abbott, § 158. 

81. presse me to death] Heard (p. Ji) : Peine forte et dure was a punish- 
ment by which a prisoner indicted for felony was compelled to put himself upon his 
trial. If, when arraigned, he stood mute, he was remanded to prison, and placed in 
a low dark chamber, and there laid on his back on the bare floor naked, unless when 
decency forbade ; upon his body was placed as great a weight of iron as he could 
bear ; on the first day he received no sustenance, save three morsels of the worst 
bread, and on the second day three draughts of standing water that should be nearest 
the prison-door, and such was alternately his daily diet till he pleaded or died. This 
punishment was vulgarly called ‘ pressing to death.’ — Malone (1790): This pun- 
ishment the good sense and humanity of the legislature have within these few years 
abolished. [It has never been entered on any of the Statute books of the United 
States. A defendant who, in this country, stands mute, is presumed to plead guilty, 
and his trial proceeds. — Ed.] W. A. Wright reads between the lines that ‘Bea- 
trice would first reduce Hero to silence by her mockery and then punish her for not 
speaking.’ 


;s 


80 



ACT III, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


14I 

82 


Therefore let Benedicke like couered fire , 

Confume away in fighes, wafte inwardly : 

It were a better death, to die with mockes , 

Which is as bad as die with tickling. 85 


82. conerc<l'\ couerd Q. 

84. better deaths td\ bitter deaths to Ff. 
bitter death to Rowe, Pope, Han. Ran. 
Wh. i. better death y then better death 


than Theob. et cet. 

85. as bad as"] as bad a death as Ties- 
sen (^Eng. Stud, ii, 201). 

as die'\ as Uis to die Pope, + . 


84. better death, to] R. G. White (ed. i) mistakenly conceived that Hero here 
referred to her own * danger of being pressed to death with wit, if she reveal Bene- 
dick' s passion, and therefore y^ she says, “let Benedick consume.” He is threatened 
with no other danger from Beatrice than that in which he is already represented to be 
from her charms.’ In his Second Edition, he yielded without comment to Theobald’s 
reading of the Qto. — Dyce : The Second Folio gives a meaning to the passage, but 
a meaning which the construction of the speech shows to be wrong (I say so, though 
aware that Mr Grant White has adopted the reading of the Second Folio). [The 
Qto must be followed here. Unquestionably Hero refers to Benedick's death, not to 
her own. — Ed.] 

Through an oversight, Collier, in both his First and Second Editions, says that 
the First Polio here reads ^ than to die.' 

84. death, to die] Having adopted the reading of the Qto : ‘ than die,' W. A. 
Wright observes that ‘ the omission of to before the infinitive is not uncommon after 
“better” when it stands by itself, and this construction is here imitated. See, for 
instance, 7 wo Gent, II, vii, 14; “Better forbear till Proteus make return,” where 
the verb is in the infinitive. Compare also Twelfth Nighty II, ii, 27 : “ Poor lady, 
she were better love a dream.” ' — Abbott (§ 351) : It is often impossible, without 
the context, to tell whether the verb is in the infinitive or imperative. Thus in 
Macb, III, ii, 20 : ‘Better be with the dead,' it is only the following line, ‘Whom 
we to gain our peace, have sent to peace,' that shows that ‘ be ' is infinitive. 

84, 85. with] P'quivalent to by ; see II, i, 58. 

85. tickling] Walker ( Vers, p. 7) : Words such as jugglery tickling y kindlin^y 
Englandy angfy, childrefty and the like are, — as is well-known, — ^frequently pro- 
nounced by the Elizabethan poets as though a vowel were interposed between the 
liquid and the preceding mute. [See line 3, of this scene. I prefer to believe 
that when these words had to be pronounced as trisyllables, the pronunciation 
slurred, as much as possible, the added syllable, and that the real pronunciation 
would be better expressed by juggle-er, tickle-ing, kindle-ing, Engl-and, etc., 
wherein no more emphasis is given to the le than would be given to it in the 
ordinary pronunciation of the infinitive, and in the case of such words as Eng- 
landy childreuy etc,, a slight, very slight pause takes the place of the needed 
syllable. I think that a nice ear will detect a difference betw’een juggeler and 
juggle-er, tickeling and tickle-ing. This distinction will hold only partially good 
with certain words which have to be lengthened by an additional syllable, such 
as rememberance, commandement, etc., even here, however, the added syllable 
should be slurred as much as possible, or, better still, indicated by a very slight 
pause. — E d,] 



142 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act in, sc. i. 

Vrfu. Yet tell her of it,heare what ftiee will fay. 86 

Hero, No, rather I will goe to Benedicke^ 

And counfaile him to fight againft his pafiion, 

And truly He deuife fome honeft flanders , 

To ftaine my cofin with, one doth not know, 90 

How much an ill word may impoifon liking. 

Vrfu, O doe not doe your cofin fuch a wrong. 

She cannot be fo much without true iudgement, 93 


91. How mucK\ How such so quoted, Mrs. Griffith. 


89. honest slanders] Slanders which shall be true and yet no disgrace. It 
is not easy to grasp what such slanders can be, but perhaps we can perceive some- 
what of their innocence, if we suppose that Hero had said ‘ some dishonest slan- 
ders’; what these may be, we who are familiar with the plot, know only too well 
from Hero’s own sad experience. That these Hionest slanders’ were merely 
*ill words’ we learn from the next line, and yet even these were to leave a 
< stain.’ Whatever the meaning, it must be remembered that Hero had no inten- 
tion whatever of carrying out her professed purpose, but that she was merely talking 
at Beatrice. — E d. 

91. liking] Lady Martin (p. 313) : Now it is Beatrice’s turn to fall into a 
similar snare ; and in the very exuberance of a power that runs without effort into 
the channel of melodious ver.se, Shakespeare passes from the terse, vivid prose of the 
previous scene into rhythmical lines, steeped in music and illumined by fancy. . . . 
It is, of course, an overwhelming .surprise to Beatrice to hear that ‘ Benedick loves 
her so entirely.’ She is at first incredulous. Still, her attention is fairly arrested. 
She listens with eager curiosity ; but begins to feel a tightening at the heart when 
her cousin says, ‘But nature never framed a woman’s heart,’ etc. [lines 53 ~^]* 
Hero with a power of witty and somewhat merciless sarcasm, new to Beatrice in her 
gentle cousin, drives .still further home the charge of pride and scornfulness, when 
she says: ‘Why you speak truth,’ etc. [lines 64-72]. All this somewhat surprises 
and yet amuses Beatrice, for it reminds her of her own thoughts about ‘ some of her 
unsuccessful wooers. But what follows sends the blood in upon her own heart : ‘ So 
turns she every man the wrong side out. And never gives to truth and virtue that 
Which simpleness and merit purchaseth.’ Why, why, if this be so, has not Hero 
let her hear of it from herself? The feeling of shame and bitter self-reproach 
deepens as Hero goes on : ‘To be .so odd, and from all fashions As Beatrice is,’ etc. 
[lines 77-84]. We know that all this is overstated for a purpose. But Beatrice 
has no such suspicion. She is wounded to the quick, and Hero’s words strike 
deeper, because Beatrice up to this time has seen no signs of her cousin’s having 
entertained this harsh view of her character. The cup of self-reproach is full, as 
Hero proceeds : ‘No, rather I will go to Benedick,’ etc. [lines 87-91]. This was 
too much, and it seemed to me, as I listened, as if I could endure no more, but must 
break from my concealment and stop their cruel words. Ursula’s more kindly 
rejoinder is some balm to Beatrice [lines 92-96]. What follows is not unwelcome to 
her ears, for it is all in praise of Benedick. 



ACT III, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


143 


Hauing fo fwift and excellent a wit 

As fhe is prifde to haue, as to refufe 95 

So rare a Gentleman as fignior Bcnedicke. 

Hero. He is the onely man of Italy, 

Alwaies excepted, my deare Claudio. 

Vrfu. I pray you be not angry with me, Madame, 

Speaking my fancy: Signior Bcncdickc^ 100 

For fhape, for bearing argument and valour. 

Goes formoft in report through Italy. 

Hero. Indeed he hath an excellent good name. 

Vrfu, His excellence did came it ere he had it: 

When are you married Madame ? 105 

Hero. Why euerie day to morrow, come goe in, 

94. fwift\ sweet Rowe, Pope, Han. 106. euerie day to morrow QFf 

96. Cm. Pope, \ . (euery QFf), Sta. Dyce ii, iii. every 

97. Given to Ursula, Long MS ap. dayy tomorrow; Rowe, Pope, Han. 

Cam. every day — tomorrow — Johns. every 

loi. bearing argument'] bearings ar- day, to-morrow. Cam. Wh. ii. every 

gument F^ et seq. day ; to-morrenv; Theob. et cet. 

94. swift] The Duke says of Touchstone, in As You Like Ity V, iv, 67 : * he is 

very swift and sententious,’ where the meaning is not quite so evident as it is here ; 
the Duke means, I think, off-handy and Ursula means ready. — Ed. 

95. prisde] That is, of course, estimatedy rated; as in IV, i, 227 : * we prize not 
to their worth.’ 

98. excepted] See I, i, 123. 

loi. bearing argument] The comma which is lacking here is supplied by F^. — 
Capell (p. 127) : ‘Bearing,’ the greater part of readers will know, is — carriage, 
carriage of the person, address ; but many may stop at ‘ argument,’ which must be — 
reason, reasoning, excellence in that faculty ; for without insertion of that, the 
speaker has said nothing. — W. A. \Vri(;iit ; Ursula describes Benedick’s qualities 
in what she regards as an ascending scale ; his personal appearance, demeanour, 
intellectual qualities, and, to crown all, his courage. 

106. euerie day to morrow] Capell (p. 127) : This reply is a levity, indicating 
her rais’d spirits; they are quickly to have a tumble; Divers of these ominous 
speeches occur in Shakespeare, — as from Hotspur, Ca*sar, Antony, Desdemona, etc., 
’twas a doctrine of the ancients, — that the Genius suggested them, and he has given 
it full credit. — Collip:r (ed. ii) : The MS has ‘ /// a day,’ and it seems a reasonable 
emendation : perhaps ‘ every day’ is to be taken for any day. In Middleton’s Your 
Five GallanfSy IV, v, [p. 289, ed. Dyce] : ‘ when shall I see thee at my chamber, 
when? Fitzgrave. Every day shortly.’ — R. G. White (ed. i) : Hero uses a form 
of expression which has survived in America, although it is not in common use. It 
appears, for instance, in business announcements', sometimes seen in the newspapers, 
that certain goods will be ready ‘ in all next month.’ — Staunton : Hero plays on 
the form of Ursula’s interrogatory; ‘When are you married?’ ‘I am a married 



144 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act hi, sc. i. 


He fhcw thee feme attires, and haue thy counfell, 107 

Which is the beft to furnifh me to morrow. 

Vrfu, Sheets tane I warrant you, 

We haue caught her Madame? IIO 

Hero. If it proue fo, then louing goes by haps, 

Some Cupid kills with arrowes, fomc with traps. Exit. 

Beat. What fire is in mine cares? can this be true? 

Stand I condemn’d for pride and fcorne fo much? 1 14 

108. me to morrow~\ mcy — to-morrow! no. We haue'\ We've Dyce ii, iii, 

Anon, ap Cam. Pluds. 

109-112. [Aside, Cap. Madame ?'\ madamc, Q. 

109, no. One line, Pope i et seq. 1 12. Cupid /(v 7 /.r] QKj. Cupiids kills 

(subs. ) l*rose, Pope ii, 'I'lieob. Warb. F^. Cupids kill F^, Rowe, 4 . 

Johns. Exit.] Otn. Q. 

iane~\ Ff. ta'en Rowe, Pope, 113. l^eat.] Beat, [advancing] Theob. 

Han. Cap. Knt, Wh. i. limed Q et cet. miue^ Rowc, + , Var. ’73. 

woman every day, after to-morrow.’ — D aniel {^A^ew Sli. Soc, Trans, ^ i^ 77 “‘ 9 » P* 
145); I cannot consider either the emendation [of Collier’s MS] or [Staunton’s] 
explanation as .satisfactory ; I fancy that ‘ every day ’ is here used in the sense of 
immediately y withozit delay, as the French inu^saznenf. I have met with one other 
in.5tance of the use of the phrase and I quote it as evidence in favour of the integrity 
of the text of Much Ado, [Hereupon Daniel gives Collier’s quotation from Your Five 
Callazth, as above. It is not difficult to fancy, in our eagerness, that a phrase yields 
the very meaning we desire. If Hero had said : * Why every minute, every hour ; to- 
morrow !’ her meaning would have been, I think, unmi.stakcablc ; and that, instead 
thereof, she uses ‘ day,’ shtndd not, I think, obscure her meaning. This, too, is 
apparently the interpretation of W. A. Wrtcjiit, when he .says that ‘Hero thinks of 
nothing ehse.’ I prefer some mark of punctuation after ‘ day,’ more decided than a 
comma. Dr Johnson’s dash is good. — E d.] 

109. tane] Limed of the Qto, that i.s, taken with bird-lime, is a noteworthy 
improvement ; it is by far the better word to apply to Beatrice, who came like a lap- 
wing. — E d. 

1 13. What fire . . . eares ?] Warrurton: Alluding to a proverbial saying of 
the common people that their ears burn when others are talking of them — Reed : 
Cf. Pliny : ‘ Moreover, is not this an opinion generally received. That when our ears 
do glow and tingle, .some there be that in our absence doe talke of us?’ — Holland’s 
Trans, b. xxviii, p. 297 ; and Brown’s Vulyar Errors. [Rare is it, indeed, that a 
more unworthy interpretation is given to any line or thought in Shakespeare. In the 
first place, the burning of the ears to which Pliny refers i.s a glow and a tingling in 
the external ear, the auricle, and has no application whatever to a fire which Beatrice 
says: Hs in mine ears.’ In the next place, to suppose that Beatrice, after over- 
hearing words, de.stined to wrench her very frame of nature, should express a 
mild surprise that her ears burn, would be ludicrous were it not so feeble. If 
there be any reader who does not apprehend what that fire of purification is, lit up 
by Flcro, by whose quickening light Beatrice sees a new world with a new heaven 
and a new earth, he had better close his Shakespeare and read no more. — Ed,] 



ACT III, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


145 

IIS 


Contempt, farewell, and maiden pride adew. 

No glory lines behinde the backe of fuch. 

And Bcncdicke ^\oM^ on, I will requite thee, 

Taming my wilde heart to thy louing hand : 1 

1 1 6 . behinde the backe] Collier (ed. ii) : Here we have a singular instance 
of mishearing, whether on the part of the old transcriber or printer, we cannot deter- 
mine. Behind whose back? To what does ‘such^ relate? Assuredly to ‘con- 
tempt ’ and ‘ pride ’ in which Beatrice had hitherto indulged, and begins to find that 
she had indulged so much, that it had destroyed her matrimonial prospects. She 
therefore resolves to abandon them, and to requite Benedick for his love ; she 
declares that ‘ no glory lives but in the lack of such ’ qualities as contempt and 
pride ; she had long tried them, and they had done nothing but secure for her defeat 
and disappointment. The words but in the lack were imperfectly heard, or read, 
and ‘ behind the back ’ inserted instead of them. [Collier adopted this reading in 
his Second Edition but abandoned it in his Third.] — Anon. {^Blackwood j August, 
1853, p. 192) : Beatrice means to say that contempt and maiden pride are never the 
screen to any true nobleness of character. This is well expressed in the present line 
which Collier’s MS Corrector recommends us to exchange for the frivolous feebleness 
of ‘ but in the lack of such.’ This substitution, we ought to say, is worse than feeble 
and frivolous. It is a perversion of Beatrice’s sentiments. She never meant to say 
that a maiden should lack maiden pride, but only that it .should not occupy a 
prominent position in the front of her character. Let her have as much of it as she 
pleases, and the more the better, only let it be drawn up as a reserve in the back- 
ground and kept for defensive rather than for offensive operations. This is all that 
Beatrice can seriously mean when she says, ‘maiden pride, adieu.’ — Singer {^Sh. 
Vindicated^ p. l8) : That is, ‘ Behind the back of such as are condemned for pride, 
scorn, and contempt, their reputation suffers, their glory dies.’ — Staunton : The 
proud and contemptuous are never extolled in their absence, — a sense so obvious, and 
so pertinent, considering the part of listener Beatrice has just been playing, that it is 
with more than surprise that we [learn of Collier’s MS substitution]. — Singer : 
They who would be well spoken of in their absence mu.st renounce contempt and 
maiden pride. — Deigiiton : No good repute is to be won by those who are con- 
temptuous and scornful of others. — W. A. Wright : When their backs are turned no 
one speaks well of them. [Glory cannot precede a hero ; it mu.st follow him, it is 
always behind his back. In the self-illumination which Beatrice is now experiencing, 
her past life flashes before her, and she sees that for the ‘ pride and scorn,’ in which, 
as a girl, she had gloried, she now stands condemned ; no glory waits on them or is 
behind their back ; therefore she abjures them. ‘ Maiden pride ’ is not, I think, 
maidenly pride, a virtue eminently fair, but rather girlish pride, which can be, on 
occa.sion, eminently cruel, as Beatrice had been more than once to Benedick. To 
this and to ‘ contempt,’ intellectual contempt, springing from the pride of intellect, 
she bids adieu. — Ed.] 

1 1 8. louing hand] Johnson : This image is taken from falconry. She had been 
charged with being as wild as ‘ haggards of the rock ’ ; she, therefore, says, that 7 vild 
as her heart is, .she will tame it to the hand. — Madden (p. 150) : All the masters of 
falconry, ancient and modern, would bid Benedick be of good cheer. Mark their 
testimony : ‘ onely I say and so conclude,* says Bert [ Treatise of Hawks and Hawk- 
10 



146 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act hi, sc. L 


If thou doft loue, my kindenefle fliall incite thee 

To binde our loues vp in a holy hand. 120 

For others fay thou doft deferue, and I 

Beleeue it better then reportingly. Exit. 122 

1 19. my\ M^Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. 

ing^ 1619] ‘ that your haggard is very loving and kinde to her keeper, after he hath 
brought her by his sweet and kind familiarity to understand him.’ ‘Moreover,’ says 
Mr Lascelles, \^Falconry, Badminton Series,] ‘though we cannot definitely account 
for this, the temper of the wild-caught hawk is, as a rule, far gentler and more 
aimiable when once she is tamed than is that of a hawk taken from the nest.’ 

122. reportingly] Fletcher (p. 264) : It is neither .simplicity nor vanity that 
makes both the hero and the heroine so readily admit the sugge.stion artfully addressed 
to them by their respective friends. It is, that the heart of each whispers them how 
very possible it is, after all, that the other may be inclined to love, in spite of all 
appearances to the contrary, — and that it is not possible for them to .suspect the 
nearest and most attached of their common friends, of combining to trifle with them 
in such a matter. Moreover, the impulse on either part, which so rapidly brings 
about a mutual declaration, is not of a selfish, but a generous nature. Neither does 
it, when considered with reference to the previously habitual language of both 
parties respecting marriage, imply any real inconsistency of character. Neither 
man nor woman ever railed again.st marriage who had once experienced true love ; — 
but persons of the bold and ready wit attributed to Benedick and Beatrice, and there- 
fore the more incapable of any merely commonplace attachment, not only might very 
naturally .sport their humour on matrimony, but would of nece.ssity do so, until their 
own turn came to find an object capable of engaging their affections. . . . The primary 
solicitude of each is, to remove the uneasiness of the other, by acquainting them that 
their love is requited ; for generosity predominates in both characters, but in that of 
the heroine especially ; whereas, had vanity been ascendant, the first desire, on either 
side, would have been to enjoy and to parade so signal a triumph. But Benedick 
concerns himself little about the jests that are likely to be retorted upon him by his 
friends after his candid avowal of his passion ; and as for Beatrice herself, the like 
consideration .seems not once to have occurred to her. — Corson (p. 187) ; There is 
no transformation wrought, — only a barrier has been removed which the two have 
co-operated to place between themselves by their sharj^-wit skirmishes. Their 
mutual raisnoting, along with their mutual love, is what essentially constitutes the 
comedy of the situation. If it be understood, as it is understood, more or less dis- 
tinctly by some critics and readers, that a transformation has been wrought in each 
by the similar stratagem practised upon each, the comedy of the situation is quite 
destroyed. At any rate, it is of a very much inferior quality, and, I would add, it is 
not of a Shakespearian quality. — Lady Martin (p. 315) : When they are gone, 
and Beatrice comes from her hiding-place, she has become to herself another woman. 
It is not so much that her nature is changed, as that it has been suddenly developed. 
She is dazed, astounded at what she has overheard. Am I such a self-assured, scornful, 
disdainful, vainglorious creature? Is it thus I appear to those who know me best, 
and whom I love the best? Do I look down contemptuously on others from the height 
of my own deserts? Am I so ‘ self-endcarcd ’ that I see worth and cleverness only 



ACT III, SC. u.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


H7 


{Scene //.] 

Euter Prince^ Claudio ^ Benedicke^ and Leonato. 

Prince, I doe but ftay till your marriage be confum- 
mate, and then go I toward Arragon. 

Clau, He bring you thither my Lord, if you^l vouch- 
fafe me. 5 

Prin, Nay, that would be as great a foyle in the new 
gloffe of your marriage, as to fhew a childe his new coat 7 

[Scene II. Pope. i. Prince,] Don Pedro, Rowe et seq. 

Leonato’s House. Theob. 3. go /] I go Rowe, Pope, Han. 

1. Euter] F,. Var. ’03, H3, ^21, Knt. 

in myself? Do I carry myself thus proudly? Have I been living in a delusion? 
Have my foolish tongue and giddy humour presented me in a light so untrue to my 
real self? What an awakening ! She does not blame others. She feels no shade 
of bitterness against Hero, her reproaches are all against herself. After this com- 
plete self-abasement comes fresh wonder, in the remembrance of what Hero and 
Ursula have said of Benedick’s infatuation for her. That he likes her she has prob- 
ably suspected more than once ; and now she learns that it is her wicked, mocking 
spirit which has alone prevented him from making an open avowal of his devo- 
tion. All this .shall be changed. If, despite the past, he indeed loves her, he 
must be rewarded. No one knows bis good qualities better than she does. She 
will accept his shortcomings, — for what grave faults of her own has she not to 
correct? — and for the future touch them so gently, that in time they will either 
vanish, or she will hardly wish them away. It is now that for the first time we see 
the underlying nobleness and generosity of Beatrice leap into view. If she were 
indeed what Hero described, — still more, if this were, as Hero had said, the general 
impression, — she might well be excused, had she asked why Hero, her bosom friend, 
her * bed-fellow,’ as we are subsequently told, had never hinted at faults so serious? 
But Beatrice neither reproaches her cousin, nor seeks to extenuate the defects laid to 
her charge. She trusts Hero’s report implicitly, and being herself incapable of 
deceit or misrepresentation, she regards Hero’s heavy indictment as a thing not to be 
impugned. This is the turning-point in Beatrice’s life, and in the representation, it 
should be shown by her whole demeanour, and especially by the way these lines are 
spoken, that a marked change has come over her, since, ‘ like a lapwing,’ she stole 
into the bower of honeysuckles. Thus the audience will be prepared for the devel- 
opement of the high qualities which she soon afterwards displays. 

2. consummate] For the form of the participle without the final see I, i, 132. 
— W. A. Wright : As in Meas. for Meas. V, i, 383, the Duke orders the Friar to 
marry Angelo and Mariana : ‘ Do you the office, friar ; which consummate. Return 
him here again.’ In both these cases the word is used of the completion of the 
marriage ceremony. 

7. shew a childe, etc.] Steevens : So, in Rom. <2r» JuL III, ii, 28 : ‘so tedious 
is this day As is the night before some festival To an impatient child that hath new 
robes And may not wear them.’ 



148 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act hi, sc. u. 


and forbid him to weare it, I will onely bee bold with 
Benedicke for his companie, for from the crowne of his 
head, to the foie of his foot, he is all mirth, he hath twice 
or thrice cut Cupids bow-firing, and the little hang-man 
dare not flioot at him, he hath a heart as found as a bell, 

8. weare it wear it, H li. hang-jnan'] hangman 

henchman Upton. 

8. onely] For the transposition of only^ see II, i, 132. 

9. from the crowne, etc.] Wordsworth (p. 81) : The description of Absa- 
lom’s personal beauty is in these words : ‘ From the sole of his foot even to the crown 
of his head there was no blemish in him .’ — 2 Sam, xiv, 25. 

11. hang-man] P'armkr : This character of Cupid came from Sidney’s 

where Jove gives Cupid the office : ‘In this our world a hang-man for to be Of all 
those fooles that will have all they see.’ — Lib. ii, p. 156, ed. 1598. [In i Edward 
IV: V, iii, Sellinger quotes Hobs as saying: ‘“How doth Ned?” quoth he; 
“That honest, merry hangman, how doth he ?” ’ Whereon Barron P'ield, who 
edited the play for The Shakespeare Society y has this note : ‘ Hangman was a term 
of endearment, and this explains the passage in Much Ado, without having recourse 
to Dr Fanner’s exquisite reason. So in Lim’^s Lab, L. V, ii, 12 ; where to Rosaline’s 
remark that “ Cupid hath been five thousand years a boy,” Katharine replies : Ay, 
and a shrewd unhappy gallows too.” ’ I'his passage from / Edward I\\ which is 
also cited by Nares, adequately explains the use of ‘hangman’ in the present 
passage. — Ed.] Dyce i^Notes, p. 44, where P'anner’s note is quoted ; Dyce adds:) 
Perhaps so. But I suspect that ‘ hangman ’ is here equivalent to — rascal, rogue, 
(In Johnson’s Diet, sub ‘Hangman,’ the present passage is cited to exemplify the 
word employed as a term of reproach.) It is at least certain that hangman, having 
come to .signify an excutioner in general — (so in Fletcher’s J*rophetess, III, i, 
Diocletian, who had stabbed Aper, is called ‘ the hangfnan of Volusius Aper ’ ; and 
in Jacke Drum'' s Entertainement , Brabant Junior, being, prevented by Sir Edward 
from stabbing himself, declares that he is too wicked to live — ‘ And therefore, gentle 
Knight, let mine owne hand Be mine own hangman.' — Sig. H 3, cd. 1616) — was 
afterwards used as a general tenn of reproach (so in Guy Earl of IVanmck, a 
Tragedy, printed in 1661, but acted much earlier: ‘ P'aith, I doubt you are some 
lying hangman,' i. e. ra.scal). — Collier (ed. ii) : ‘Idttle hangman’ is here equiva- 
lent to little rogue; so, in Two Gent. IV, iv, 60; ‘hangman boys’ is used for 
rascally boys, and does not mean hangman’s boys, the boys of the executioner. — 
W. A. Wright : Schmidt gravely remarks that ‘ Cupid is called .so in jest as the 
executioner of human hearts.’ In the .same literal manner he interprets ‘ the hang- 
man boys’ of the Two Gent,, as ‘probably the servants of the public executioner.’ 

12. as sound as a bell] Hali.iwell : An old proverbial expression. [And 
still common.] — Steevens : A covert allusion to the old proverb: ‘As the fool 
thinketh, So the bell clinketh.’ — ^W. A. Wright : The allusion is so covert as to be 
very doubtful ; for the proverb apparently means that the fool gives his own inter- 
pretation to what he hears, not that he speaks all that he thinks. Burton [Anat. of 
Melan, Part I, sec. iii, mem. 3) says: ‘The hearing is as frequently deluded as the 
sight, from the .same causes almost, as he that hears bells, will make them sound 
what he list. As the fool thinketh, so the bell clinketh' 


8 

10 

12 

Rowe. 



ACT III, SC. ii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


149 


and his tongue is the clapper, for what his heart thinkes, 13 
his tongue fpeakes. 

Bene, Gallants, I am not as I haue bin. 1 5 

Leo. So fay I, methinkes you are fadder. ^ 

Claud. I hope he be in louc. 

Prin. Hang him truant, there’s no true drop of bloud 
in him to be truly toucht with loue, if he be fad, he wants 
money. 20 

Bene. I haue the tooth-ach. 

Prin. Draw it. 

Bene. Hang it. 

Claud. You muft hang it firft,and draw it afterwards. 

Prin. What ? figh for the tooth-ach. 25 

Leon. Where is but a humour or a worme. 

15. bin\ been F^. 23. Bene.] Leon. Anon, ap Cam. 

17. /le bc^ be zs VopCf '{■ , 26. IV/iere'] H'Viic/i Rowe, . 

21 . tooth-ach] Boswell: So, in Beaumont and Fletcher’s The False One: 

‘ You had best be troubled with the tooth-ache too, For lovers ever are.’ — II, iii, p. 
254, ed. Dyce. 

23, 24. Tjeck omitted these two lines (a note, for which I am indebted to the Text, 
Notes of the Cambridge Edition) and the omission I supposed was due to an over- 
sight, or else, perhaps, that Tieck had found the punning allusion too unmanageable. 
But on collating Tieck’ s first edition of 1830 with his edition of 1869, very carefully 
edited by Dr Schmidt, I found the omission repeated, and no note of explanation, 
nor comment anywhere. I was completely puzzled, until, on turning to Dr 
Schmidt’s own Lexicon^ I found, s. v. ‘hang,’ these very lines quoted, followed by 
the grave remark : ‘ with an obscene (juibble.’ This then explains the omission ; and 
proves that it was intentional. The lines are too obscene to be translated ! Every 
reader of old literature, in any language, must, I suppose, undergo an education in 
mud and be graduated in slime ; but I am very confident that no English reader ever 
scented the faintest trace of either in this perfectly innocent allusion of Claudio to 
the public execution of a criminal. T>et Orlando’s sigh : ‘ How bitter a thing it is to 
look into happiness through another man’s eyes,’ be changed into: ‘how marvellous 
a thing it is to look into Shakespeare through a foreigner’s eyes !’ — Ed. 

24. hang it . . . draw it] Deighton : An allusion to hanging, drawing, and 
quartering, a punishment which Middleton applies in the same way : The IVidow, 
IV, i, 108: * A/artino. I pray, what’s good, sir, for a wicked tooth? Ricardo. 
Hang’d, drawn, and quartering.’ \^l'he Widow was written about 1616. — Ed.] 

26. Where is] For a similar ellipsis of therCj see II, ii, 18. 

26, worm] This cause of toothache appears to have been unknown to Lanfranc, 
who in his Chirnrgic (circa 1380, possibly the most ancient of our treatises on sur- 
gery ; printed by the E. E. T. Soc.^ enumerates four or five causes, but this is not 
one of them. Nor does he specify ‘humours,’ by name, as a cause. But both 
‘ humours ’ and ‘ worms ’ are given in Batman vppon Bartholome ; in Lib. Quintus^ 



ISO MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act hi, sc. ii. 

Bene. WeII,euery one cannot mafter a griefe,but hee 27 
that has it. 

Clan. Yet fay I, he is in loue. 

Prin. There is no appearence of fancie in him,vnleffe 30 
it be a fancy that he hath to ftrange difguifcs,as to bee a 

27. €annot\ can Pope et seq. 


cap. 20 ; Of the Teethy we find : ‘ The cause of such aking is humors that come 
downe from the head, eyther vp from the stomacke, by meane of fumositie, either els 
by sharp humours, and beating in the gums. . . . Also sometime teeth be pearced 
with holes & sometime by worms they be changed into yelow colour, greene, or 
black.’ Again in the Chapter of tooth ache: * Wormes brcede in the chceke teeth 
of rotted humours that be in the holownesse thereof, . . . Wormes of the teeth be 
slaine with Mirre and Opmm' — ed. 1582. Inasmuch as decay in the teeth is now 
known to be of microbic origin, the wheel is come full circle, and between Bar- 
tholome’s worm and the modern microbe there is merely a question of size. — En. 

27. cannot] I’ope’s emendation is probably the most certain that he ever made. 
—Ed. 

31. a fancy] Johnson: Here is a play upon the word ‘fancy,’ which Shake- 
speare uses for loi'Cy as well as for humoury capriccy or affectation. — Knight : 
‘Fancy’ is here used in a different sense from the same word which immediately 
precedes it, — although fancy in the sense of Icme is the same as fancy in the sense 
of the indulgence of humour. The fancy which makes a lover, and the fancy which 
produces a bird-fancier, each expresses the same subjection of the will to the imagi- 
nation. [Again, at the close of this speech there is a play upon this word, where the 
Prince says that if Benedick has a taste for this foolery he is no fool for love. See 
As You Like It, II, iv, 32 (of this ed.) for Arber’s four changes in the meaning of 
fa 7 icy. — Ed.] 

31. strange disguises, etc.] Steevens : So, in Dekker’s The Seuen Deadly 
Sinnes of Londony 1606 ; ‘ For, an English-mans suite is like a traitors bodie that 
hath bcene hanged, drawne, and quartered, and is set vp in seuerall places : the 
coller of his Duble and the belly in France : the wing and narrow sleeuc in Italy : 
the short waste hangs ouer a Dutch Botchers stall in Vtriih : his huge sloppes speakes 
Spanish : Polonia giucs him the Bootes : the blocke for his heade alters faster than 
the Feltmaker can fitte him, and thereupon we are called in scorne Blockheadcs. 
And thus we that mocke euerie Nation, for keeping one fashion, yet stcale patches 
from euerie one of them, to peece out our pride, are now laughing stocks to them, 
because their cut so scuruily becomes vs’, [p. 60, ed. Grosart. For the curious 
reader, Halliwell supplies a folio page and a half of extracts, all ridiculing or 
describing the English love of variety in dress ; none, however, is better than the 
foregoing extract from Dekker, except, perhaps, the following from Lodge’s Wifs 
MiseriCy 1 596 : ‘ Who is this with the Spanish hat, the Italian ruffe, the French 
doublet, the Muffes cloak, the Toledo rapier, the Germane hose, the English stock- 
ing, and the Flemish shoe?’ (p. 35, ed. Hunterian Club,) albeit this is a description 
of a ‘sonne of Mammons that hath of long time ben a trauailer.’ At all times, 
however, the fashions in dress have been a cheap source of satire and denunciation. 
In Fynes Moryson’s Itinerary (Part HI, Booke 4, Chap. 2, p. 178) there is a 



ACT III, SC. ii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


ISI 

Dutchman to day, a Frenchman to morrow: [*or in the 32 

* lhape of two countries at once, as a Germaine from the 

* wafte downward, all flops, and a Spaniard from the hip 

* vpward, no dublct :*] vnlcffe hee haue a fancy to this 35 

32, Dutchman'] Dutch man Rowe, + . of two countries at onccy as a Germaine 

32. Frenchman] French-man Q. from the waste downward^ all flopSy and 

French man Rowe, -F . a Spaniard from the hip vpward y no 

32—35. to morrow : ..,vnlejfc] Ff,Rowe, dublct: vnlejfe Q, Pope ii, Theob, Warb. 

Pope i, Han. to morroWy or in the Jhape et seq. 

passage relating to the fashions in dress, not so denunciatory as calmly descrip- 
tive, which is valuable for the side light it throws on English life in Shakespeare’s 
day, especially in the last sentence which shows the catalogue in which Shake- 
speare and his fellow -players were put, and the estimate in which they were held, 
.socially, by well-born gentlemen like Fynes Moryson : ‘ The Engli.sh I say are 
more sumptuous than the Persians, becau.se despising the golden meane, they affect 
all extreamities. For either they will be attired in plaine cloth and light stuffes, 
(alwayes prouided that euery day without difference their hats be of Beuer, their 
shirts and bands of the finest linnen, their daggers and swords guilded, their garters 
and shooe roses of silke, with gold or siluer lace, their stockings of silke wrought in 
the seames with silke or gold, and their cloakcs in Summer of silke, in Winter at 
least all lined with veluet), or else they daily weare sumptuous doublets and breeches 
of silke or veluet, or cloth of gold or siluer, so laid ouer with lace of gold or silke, 
as the stuffes (though of them.selues rich) can hardly be .scene. The Engli.sh and 
French haue one peculiar fashion, which I ncuer obserued in any other part, namely 
to weare scabbards and sheaths of veluet vpon their rapiers and daggers. ... In the 
time of Queene Elizabeth the Courtiers delighted much in darke colours, both simple 
and mixt, and did often weare plaine blackc stuffes ; yet that being a braue time of 
warre, they, together with our Commanders, many times wore light colours, richly 
laced and embroidered, but the better sort of Gentlemen then esteemed simple light 
colours to be lesse comely, as red and yellow, onely white excepted, which was then 
much worne in Court. Now in this time of King lames his Reigne, those simple 
light colours haue beene much vsed. If I should begin to set downe the variety of 
fashions and forraign stuffes brought into England in these times, I might seeme 
to number the starres of Ileaucn and sands of the Sea. ... In the generall 
pride of England there is no fit difference made of degrees ; for very Bankrouts, 
Players, and Cutpurscs, goe apparrelled like Gentlemen.’ — El).] 

32. to morrow:] The lines enclosed in brackets are from the Qto. Possibly, 
their omission in the P^dio was not accidental. CArEi.L accounts for the omission by 
suggesting that when the Folio ‘ was printing the Spanish match was on foot, and 
Spain govern’d.’ To this IIalliwell replies that there is no doubt the First Folio 
was in type before 1623. Malone, following Capell’s clew, but avoiding the chance 
of error in specifying 1623, says that the omission was ‘ prol)ably to avoid giving any 
offence to the Spaniards, with whom James became a friend in 1604.’ W. A. Wright 
thinks ‘ it was rather to avoid offending the King himself.’ Collier conjectures that 
it was ‘perhaps, on account of the change of fa.shion in dress between 1600 and 
1623.’ ‘Some alteration,’ he goes on to say, ‘had taken place even between the 
date when this play was written and 1606, when Dekker published his Seven Deadly 



152 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act hi, sc. ii. 


foolery, as it appeares hee hath,hee is no foole for fancy, 
as you would haue it to appeare he is. 37 

Clau. If he be not in loue with fome woman, there 
is no bcleeuing old fignes,a brufhes his hat a mornings. 

What fliould that bode? 40 

Prin. Hath any man feene him at the Barbers ? 

Clan. No, but the Barbers man hath beene feen with 
him, and the olde ornament of his cheeke hath alreadie 
ftuft tennis balls. 44 


36. foole] food Ktly conj. 

37. to appea 7 'e\ PT, Rowe, + , Mai. 
Knt. appeare Q et cet. 

he w] he his Fg. 

39. a brujhes‘\ QP'f. brushes Coll. 


i, ii. Cam. he brushes Rowe et cet. 

39. a mornings'\ QFf, Rowe, a-morn- 
iftgs Pope, Han. o' mo 7 'nings Theob. et 
cet. 

42. beene'] bin Q. 


Sins of London y for there he says that “ huge slops speak Spanish,’’ and not German, 
as Shakespeare has it.* In the Mer, of Pen, I, ii, 73, when Nerissa is over-naming 
Portia’s suitors, only, apparently, that Portia may turn th(5m to ridicule, the word 
‘Scottish’ in the Qtos is changed to ‘the other’ in the Folio, possibly to avoid, as 
Capell elegantly expresses it, ‘Portia’s gentle wipe upon Scotland,’ James’s native 
country ; if such were the true cause, that change and the present omission become 
parallel, and W. A. Wright thinks that they are so. — Ei). 

34 *. slops] Steevens ; Large loose breeches or trowsers, worn only by sailors at 
present [f. <?.*I793 ]. — Halliwell : Slop-hose, afterwards called s/ops, were the large 
loose breeches so fashionable during the second half of the sixteenth century. The 
‘ cutted sloppes,’ mentioned by Chaucer, appear to have been hose of a different kind, 
in fact, tightly fitting breeches ; and the tenpa was used for other parts of dress. The 
slops, however, which are alluded to in the text, appear to have first come in much 
use under that name in the reign of Henry VJII. ‘Payre of sloppe hoses, braiettes 
a marinier,' Palsgrave, 1530. ‘Sloppes hosyn, brayes a niarmmf ibid. John 
Heywood, in his Epigrammes, ed. 1577, relates a curious story ‘of a number of 
rattes mistaken for develles in a mans sloppes,’ in which it is staled that a man 
stowed a large cheese in his sloppes, and when he put them on again, enclosed 
within them some rats who had taken up their quarters there. Wright, in his 
Passions of the A/inde, i6oi, speaks of slops as ‘almost capable of a bushel of 
wheate, and if they bee of sackcloth, they would serve to carry mawlt to the mill.’ 
The slops of the Germans are frequently mentioned, though by no means were they 
peculiar to the Continent. 

34*. no dublet] M. Mason (p. 53) asserted that we should read * all doublet,’ 
inasmuch as ‘ no doublet ’ is ‘ a negative description, which is, in truth, no descrip- 
tion at all ’ ; Rann adopted the emendation. But MaloN|: correctly interpreted the 
phrase : ‘in other words, all cloak.’ 

44. tennis balls] Steevens: So, in Nashe’s A Wonderfull Strafige and miracu- 
lous Astrologicall Prognostication, etc., 1591 : ‘this Eclipse . . . sheweth that some 
shall , . . sell their haire by the pound to stuffe Tennice balles’ [p. 149, ed. 
Grosart]. — Henderson ; Again, in Ram Alley, 1611 : ‘Thy beard shall serve to 



ACT HI, sc. ii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 153 

Leon. Indeed he lookes yonger than hee did, by the 45 
Ioffe of a beard. 

Prin. Nay a rubs himfelfe with Ciuit,canyou fmell 
him out by that ? 

Clau. That’s as much as to fay, the fweet youth’s in 
loue. 50 

Prin. The greateft note of it is his melancholy. 

Clau. And when was he wont to wafli his face ? 

Prin. Yea, or to paint himfelfe? for the which I heare 
what they fay of him. 

Clau. Nay, but his iefting fpirit, which is now crept 55 
into a lute-ftring, and now gouem’d by flops. 

47. a rubs\ QFf. a' rubs Coll, i, ii. Walker, Dyce ii, iii, Huds. governed 
Cam. he rubs Rowe et cet. Anon. ap. Cam. 

47. eon] cannot Allen MS. 5 ^* Q^2^3* ^4* ^^^P ^ — 

51. Prin.] Bene. Q. Rowe, +, Var. ’73. 

56. now goucni\i] new-governed 

stuff those balls, by which I get me heat at tennis* [HI, i, p. 3 *^ 5 » HazlitPs 
Dodshy]. 

51. Prin.] Here the Qto is manifestly wrong. 

52. wash his face] R. G. White (cd. i) : In Shakespeare’s time our race had 
not abandoned itself to that reckless use of water, either for ablution or potation, 
which has more recently bt'come one of its characteristic traits. [The unfair innu- 
endo is here conveyed that Benedick neglected his daily ablutions, whereas, as 
W. A. Wright observes, Claudio’s question refers to the use of cosmetics; which 
is in keeping with the reference to ‘ painting’ in the next line. ‘ Benedick was not 
a sloven,’ Wright indignantly adds. Claudio’s question is not only in keeping 
with ‘painting,’ but it follows naturally after the reference to the ‘barber’s man.’ 
Greene {A Quippe for an Vpstart Courtier ^ Works ^ xi, p. 247, ed. Grosart) in a 
passage describing the officious performances of the barber, confirms the interpreta- 
tion that Claudio refers to the use of cosmetics : — * His head being once drest [by the 
barber] which requires in combing and rubbing some two bowers, hee comes to the 
bason : then beeing curiously wa.sht with no woorse then a camphire bal, he descends 
as low as his herd and a.sketh whether he please to be shauen or no,’ etc. — Ed.] 

56. lute-string] Catell (p. 128) : Love and the melancholy passions are sooth’d 
by and the fiute^ the .serenade is perfonn’d with them; hence the picking-out 
these by Claudio as indications of what he and the Prince find in Benedick. 

56. now gouern’d] Walker (Crit. ii, 214) enumerates this ‘now’ among many 
others as an example of t^|e confusion of no 7 v and nciu. I think he is riglit. The 
proximity of the ‘ now’ in the preceding line induced the erroneous repetition. — Ed. 

56. stops] Dyce ( Gloss, s. v. frets) : ‘ Small lengths of wire on which the fingers 
press the strings in playing the guitar.’ — Busby’s Diet, of Musical lermSf third ed. 
— Naylor (p. 25) : In Shakespeare’s days, the viol, the lute, and cittern all had 
frets on the fingerboard, but they were then simply bits of string tied round at the 



154 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iii, sc. ii. 

Prin, Indeed that tcls a heauy tale for him: conclude, 57 
he is in louc. 

Qlau. Nay, but I know who loues him. 

Prince. That would I know too , I warrant one that 6o 
knowes him not. 

Cla. Yes, and his ill conditions, and in defpight of all, 
dies for him. 

Prin. Shee fhall be buried with her face vpwards. 64 

57. Ff, Rowe, -f , Knt, Wh. 64. her face"] her heels Thcob. Han. 

i. conclude^ conclude^ Q, Cap. et cet. Cap. 

60. warranf\ wafrant F^. 

right places for the fingers and made fast with glue. They were used to ‘ tune’ the 
strings, c, to *■ stop ’ the string accurately at cacli semitone. 

57. conclude] Of course, if we accept the Qto as the editie prineepSy we must 
follow it here ; otherwise I see no great force in the repetition. — Ei). 

64. face vpwards] Theobald : What is there any way particular in this? Are 
not all men and women buried so ? Sure, the poet means, in opposition to the gen- 
eral rule, and by way of distinction, with her heeh upwards, or, face dowmvards. I 
have chosen the first reading, because I find the expression in vogue in our author’s 
time. So, Beaumont & Fletcher’s Wild Goose Chase i ‘ — love cannot starve me; 
For, if T die o’ the first fit, 1 am unhappy, And worthy to be buried with my heels 
upward’ [I, iii, p. 127, cd. Dyce]. Again, in The Uowaff^s Prize y by Fletcher : 

‘ some few, For those are rarest, tlicy are said to kill With kindness and fair usage ; 
but what they arc My catalogue discovers not, only ’tis thought They are buried in 
old walls, with their heels upward’ [HI, iv, ad fin. Theobald found, among editors, 
only two adherents : IIan’MER and Capeli. ; among commentators, M. Mason and 
Mr J. CnURTON Collins, the latter says (p. 307): ‘Of tlie many certain correc- 
tions which his [Theobald’s] knowledge of the Elizabethan dramatist enabled liim 
to make, we have [the present passage] where he shows conclusively, by pertinent 
references to passages in Beaumont & Fletcher, that the word face upw.ard” must 
be altered into heels' M. Mason (p. 53) prefers feet to heelsy ‘merely because it is 
nearer to the old reading.’ llanmer resorted to that convenient refuge of the early 
editors ; ‘ a proverbial saying,’ an assertion which soothes without satisfying the in- 
quiring mind, and is to be accepted solely on the word of the editor. ‘This phrase 
[‘buried with their heels upwards’] was a proverbial .saying,’ says llanmer, ‘hereto- 
fore in use and applied to those who had met with any piece of fortune very surprizing 
and very rare.’ Capell, whose gnarled almost unwedgeable English I prefer to trans- 
mit unchanged to the reader, observes as follows : ‘ no pronouncer of the passage, with 
faccy can convey to us any image of the humour conceited, or of any other humour, 
in this editor’s [/. c. Capell’ s own] mind: for which reason, he has acceded to a 
change of the third modern’s [/. e, Theobald’s] that is fertile enough of it, if he has 
conceiv’d the phrase rightly ; which it’s corrector has not, nor the one who has fol- 
low’d him — the Oxford editor [f. e, Hanmer] : The corrector proves it a phrase in 
use by some quotations from Fletcher, but goes no further ; nor do his quotations 
come up to wdiat we think was it’s sense, but without power of proving it from any 
other quotations: — let us suppose, for once, that this mode of burying was us’d 



ACT III, SC. ii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


155 


[64. buried with her face vp wards.] 

anciently for the felo de se ; there is something in it significant of the churches sen- 
tence upon the guilty of such a crime, — ^that they were not to look for mercy, or cast 
an eye towards heaven ; Will not the Prince’s phrase, thus interpreted, be both a 
proper and a witty reply to what Claudio has said of Beatrice ? Phrases not under- 
stood are subject to these corruptions.’ Thus far Theobald’s followers. Heath 
( p. 106) believes that Shakespeare prepares the reader to expect somewhat uncom- 
mon and extraordinary, and that the humour consists in the disappointment of that 
expectation, like lago’ s : ‘ She was a wight, (if ever such wights were) — To suckle fools 
and chronicle small beer.’ JOHNSON thought Theobald’s emendation very specious, 
and that the meaning seemed to be that ‘ she who acted upon principles contrary to 
others, should be buried with the same contrariety,’ but he did not adopt it. 
Steevens repeated Theobald’s quotation from The Wild Goose Chase ^ without credit 
to Theobald, and added another from A Mcrye Jest of a Man that was called 
Howle^las^^ etc. ‘flow Iloivleglas was buried’ which happened to be upright, 
owing to the snapping of the cords as the coffin was lowered into the grave — a 
quotation so utterly foreign to the present passage that it would not have been even 
alluded to here, were it not that it led Karl Simrock astray, who, in 1868, trans- 
lated the present passage : ^ Die muss aufrccht begraben werden ;’ and in a note says 
that the meaning is ‘ she is a fool.' He refers to Eulenspiegel’ s burial, but gives no 
credit to Steevens. Steevens added : * The passage indeed may mean only — She 
shall be buried in her lover’s arms.” So, in Wint. Talcy Perdita says to Florizel 
‘Not like a corse ; — or if, not to be buried, But quick and in my arms.’ Steevens 
thought but little of tliis explanation and said that on the whole he preferred Theo- 
bald’s conjecture. It led Malonk, however, to an interpretation (which, W. A. 
Wrkhit says, is so ‘ obvious ’ that it is not easy to understand how it can have escaped 
any one) : — ‘ Don Pedro is evidently playing on the word dies in Claudio’s speech, and 
alludes to that consummation which he supposes Beatrice was dying for.’ [It is quite 
possible, however, that it is not the most obvious that would occur to an auditor in 
Shakespeare’s day. It would be hardly safe to say that the phrase ‘ to be buried with 
the face downward ’ always betokened suicide ; and yet we have evidence that the 
phrase was at one time, and not far removed from Shakespeare’s time, understood as 
referring to the custom of thus burying a suicide. An Anonymous Tragi-comedy 
entitled Ihe Female Rebellion, in MS in the Hunterian Museum of the University of 
Glasgow, has been edited and printed privately by Alexander Smith, esq. ; where- 
of the date is about 1681 or 1682. In II, ii, p. 23, one of the characters says: 
* they politickly starve themselves to save charges, and deserve to be buried with 
their Faces downward, for their Life is but a lingering self murther.’ Attention is 
called by Mr Smith to the bearing of these words, on the present passage. I sup- 
pose the train of thought in the Prince’s mind is, that a woman who loves Benedick 
cannot possibly know him ; and when Claudio replies that the woman does know him, 
and yet dies for him, the Prince reflects that though her death be thus apparently 
self-inflicted she cannot be strictly termed a suicide ; it is the love of Benedick 
which really kills her, and she shall be therefore buried with her face upwards. If, 
in addition to this familiar interpretation of the phrase, the audience can catch the 
somewhat more remote meaning implied in Perdita’ s exclamation, — so much the 
better. There is no meaning in any phrase which we can see that Shakespeare could 
not ; we have the liberty to interpret his words to the full. — E d.] 




156 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act hi, sc. ii. 

"B^cne, Yet is this no charme for the tooth-ake, old fig- 65 
nior, walke afide with mee, I haue ftudied eight or nine 
wife words to fpeake to you, which thefe hobby-horfes 
mull not heare. 

Prin. For my life to breake with him about Beatrice. 

Clau. ^Tis euen fo, Hero and Margaret haue by this 70 
played their parts with Beatrice ^ and then the two Bearcs 
will not bite one another when they meete. 

65. Yef\ 68. [ExeuntBened. and Leon. Theob. 

Rowe. 


65. charme] Hali.twell quotes from Aubrey’s ATiscellanies : ‘To cure the 
tooth-ach : Out of Mr Ashrnole’s manuscript writ with his own hand : — “ Mars, hur, 
abursa, aburse : — ^Jesu Christ for Mary’s sake, — Take away this Tooth- Ach.” Write 
the words three times ; and as you say the words, let the party burn one paper, then 
another, and then the last. He says, he saw it experimented, and the party imme- 
diately cured,’ p. 141. [Halliwell quotes several others, but ex uno, etc. Bene- 
dick, possibly, t^efers to the nonsensical terms of these charms by comparing with 
them what the Prince and Claudio have just been saying, and covertly contrasts 
their talk with the eight or nine wise words which he is about to speak to Leonato. 
—Ed.] 

67, hobby-horses] Douce (ii, 465) gives an extract from Beaumont & Fletcher’s 
Women Pleased ^ IV, i [p. 63, ed, Dyce], to show the disfavour into which the 
hobby-horse had fallen under Puritan influence, and where Hope-on-high Bomby, a 
cobbler turned Puritan, throws off his hobby-horse and will no more engage in the 
Morris-dance. Douce then continues : The hobby-hor.se was represented by a man 
equipped with as much pasteboard as was sufficient to form the head and hinder-parts 
of a horse, the quadrupedal defects being concealed by a long mantle or footcloth 
that nearly touched the ground. The performer on this occasion exerted all his 
skill in burlesque horsemanship. In Sampson’s play of The Vo%v~brcakery 1636, a 
miller personates the hobby-hor.se ; and being angry that the mayor of the city is put 
in competition with him, exclaims, ‘ Let the mayor play the hobby-horse among his 
brethren, and he will, I hope our towne-lads cannot want a hobby-horse. Have I 
practised my reines, my careeres, my pranckers, my ambles, my false trots, my 
smooth ambles and Canterbury paces, and .shall master mayor put me besides the 
hobby-horse? Have I borrowed the forchorse bells, his plumes and braveries, nay, 
had his mane new shome and frizl’d, and shall the mayor put me besides the hobby- 
horse?’ Whoever happens to recollect the manner in which Mr Bayes’s troops in 
The Rehearsal are exhibited on the stage, will have a tolerably correct notion of a 
morris hobby-horse. — D yce i^Gloss.^i Many readers will probably recollect the 
spirited description of the Hobby-horse in Scott’s Monastery. [For once, Dyce 
did not ‘verify his quotations.’ It is not in The Monastery , that the description of 
the hobby-horse is to be found, but in The Abbot, Chap, xiv ; where, also, Scott 
quotes in a footnote the foregoing extract from Douce, which really renders super- 
fluous the later deflnition of ‘ hobby-horse,’ by Nares, — the definition usually given. 
—Ed.] 



ACT III, SC. ii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


157 

Enter John the Bajlard, 73 

Bajl. My Lord and brother, God faue you. 

Prin. Good den brother. 75 

Bajl. If your leifure feruM, I would fpeake with you. 

Prince. In priuate ? 

Bajl. If it pleafe you, yet Count Claudio may heare, 
for what I would fpeake of, concernes him. 

Prm. What’s the matter ? 80 

Bajla. Meanes your Lordfhip to be married to mor- 
row? 

Prin. You know he does. 

Bajl. I know not that when he knowes what I know. 

Clau. If there be any impediment, I pray you difco- 85 

uer it. 

Bajl. You may thinke I loue you not, let that appeare 
hereafter, and ayme better at me by that I now will ma- 
nifeft, for my brother (I thinke, he holds you well, and in 
deareneffe of heart) hath holpe to effeft your enfuing 90 
marriage : furely fute ill fpent, and labour ill bellowed. 

Prin. Why, what’s the matter ? 

Bajlard. I came hither to tell you, and circumftances 93 


73. Scene III. Tope, 

Enter...] Enter Don John. Rowe. 
76. lci/iire\ lefiive F^. 

80. Prin.] Claudio. Cap. conj. 

81. [To Claudio. Rowe. 

88. ayme\ aim F^F^, Rowe. 


89, 90. Noparen- 

the.si.s, Rowe et seq. 

89. well,-] QFf, Rowe, + . Coll. Wh. 
Cam, well; Cap. et cet. (subs.) 

93. and circumstances'l and^ circum- 
stances Cap. et seq. (subs.) 


75. Good den] Nares (s. v. Den) : A mere corruption of good e^en, for good 
evening. This salutation was used by our ancestors as soon as noon was past, after 
which time, good morrow, or good day, was e.steemed proper. Dyce ( Gloss.) gives 
the following forms which occur in Shakespeare ; God dig~you~den (God give you 
good e’en) ; God gp god-den ; God ye (give ye) god-den, 

80. Prin. What’s the matter ?] Capell’s conjecture that these words are 
spoken by Claudio is highly probable, not alone because of the surprise which 
Claudio would naturally feel that the private matter should concern him, but also by the 
personal address to him by the Bastard which immediately follows. Moreover, when 
the Bastard’ s speech touches the Prince in line 89, the latter says in turn * Why, 
what’ s the matter ?’ and it is, perhaps, unlikely that he would thus repeat himself. 
—Ed. 

88. ayme better at me] That iS) gauge my character more accurately. 

89. (I , . . heart)] By discarding the parenthesis, Rowe properly makes ‘in dear- 
ness of heart’ a dependent clause after ‘hath holpe.’ 



158 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act hi, sc. ii. 

fhortned, (for fhe hath beene too long a talking of) the 
Lady is difloyall, 95 

Clau, Who Hero ? 

Baft. Euen fhee, Leonatocs Hcro^ your Hero, euery 
mans Hero. 

Clan. Difloyall ? 

Bajl. The word is too good to paint out her wicked- 100 
neffe, I could fay flic were worfe, thinke you of a worfe 
title, and I will fit her to it : wonder not till further war- 
rant : goe but with mee to night, you fhal fee her cham- 
ber window entred, euen the night before her wedding 
day, if you loue her, then to morrow wed her : But it 105 
would better fit your honour to change your minde, 

Claud. May this be fo ? 

Prmc. I will not thinke it. 

Baji. If you dare not truft that you fee, confeffe not 
that you know : if you will follow mee, I will fliew you no 
enough, and when you hauc feene more, & heard more, 
proceed accordingly. 

Clan. If I fee any thing to night, why I fhould not 113 


94. hath becne\ has bin Q, Coll. Wh. 
Cam. 

96. Who Hero Who! Hero? F,F3. 
Who ? Hero ? F^, Rowe. W/iOy Hero ? 
Dyce. 

100. painf] point Gould. 


1 00, I o I . ivickcdneff :% . . . worf ?, ] wick- 
cdjtefs worfe ; F^ ct seq. 
et seq. 

103. to m\(;kty you"] to night you Q. 
105. hery tken~\ her thoiy Han. Cap. 
et seq. 


93. 94. circumstances shortened] W. A. Wright : That is, cutting short the 
details. Schmidt [Lex.') puts this passage with others in which ‘circumstance’ 
means ceremony. Rut the plural is not so used by Shakespeare. 

94. a talking] For the grammatical form, see Abbott, § 140. 

95. disloyall] W. A. Wright ; Unfaithful, especially in love. See II, ii, 45. 
Othello says of Desdemona, ‘ (iive me a living reason she’s disloyal,’ III, iii, 409. 

96. Who Hero?] Dyce (ed. ii) : Mr W. N. Lettsom writes to me; ‘Some 
very necessary words seem to have been omitted here. Qu. ‘Who, Hero? my 
Hero ? Leonato' s Hero ?' [Does not this verge on improving Shakespeare ? — Ed.] 

97. 98. euery mans Hero.] Langbaine (p. 152) : Dryden has liere nearly imi- 
tated Shakespear, in his All for Love: ‘Your Cleopatra; Dollabella’s Cleopatra; 
every man’s Cleopatra.’ 

100. paint out] Deighton ; ‘Out’ here, as in many words, intensifies the 
meaning. [Cf. ‘ smother up,’ IV, i, 117.] 

105. loue her, then] Hanmer discerned the correct punctuation here. 

107. May] That is, caUy as in II, iii, 21, 



ACT III, SC. ii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


159 


marry her to morrow in the congregation, where I fliold 
wedde, there will I fhamc her. 115 

Prin, And as I wooed for thee to obtaine her, I will 
ioyne with thee to difgrace her. 

Bajl. I will difparage her no farther, till you are my 
witneffes, beare it coldly but till night, and let the iffuc 
fhew it felfe. I20 

Prin, O day vntowardly turned/ 

Claud. O mifehiefe ftrangelie thwarting ! 

Bajlard. O plague right well preuented ! fo will you 
fay, when you haue feene the fcquelc. 124 


1 1 4. her tomorrow in'] QFf. her; 
tomorrow^ in Cap. Var. Mai. her tomor- 
row ; in Theob. II an. Warb. Johns. 
Steev. Sta. her iomorroWy in Rowe, 
Rope, Knt, Coll, et seq. 

119. night] Ff, Rowe, + , Knt. mid- 


night Q, Cap. et seq. 

123, 124. fo,.Jequele] One line, as 
verse, Rowe, -I- , Cap. Var. Steev. Knt, 
Dyce, Ktly. 

124. j^'on] Om. F^. 

Exit.] Om. Q. Exeunt. Ff. 


1 14. marry her to morrow in the] Between Rowe’s punctuation and Theo- 
bald’s, there is little diihculty in deciding in favour of Rowe. But between Rowe’s 
and Capell’s, a decision is not so easy. W. A. WRKiliT pronounces in favour of 
Rowe’s ‘because of the contrast between “to-night” and “to-morrow.”’ But 
might not Capcll reply that wlierever ‘to-night’ and ‘to-morrow’ appear in the same 
sentence, they are necessarily contrasted? Moreover, by coupling ‘to-morrow’ with 
his marriage, Claudio is not made to .say when he would disgiace Hero, and we miss 
the swiftness of his vengeance ; he might po.stpone his marriage for days and weeks 
and yet .still .shame Hero in a congregation w'hich had been invited to witness his 
marriage. What Don John professed to be able to show was to be sufficient to keep 
Claudio from marrying Hero not only to-morrow but for ever ; and the headlong 
swiftness of Claudio’s vengeance is indicated by his vow to brooke no delay, but to 
disgrace her to-morro7Vy he will .seize the very earlic.st minute. On the whole, Capell’s 
punctuation seems to me the better of the two. — E d. 

1 19. coldly] We still .say, in cold blood. 

1 21. turned] Walker ( Vei-s. 44) says that some editors have turn^dy but that 
‘turned’ seems better, 'fhe inference is, that Walker supposed this .scene should 
have a lyric ending, to which the exclamations of the Prince, of Claudio, and of the 
Bastard lend some colour. But 1 doubt. Many and good editors have followed 
Rowe in printing the last line as verse ; but 1 can find no edition wherein turned is 
given. — E d. 




i6o 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [ACT in. sc. iu. 


\Scene IIL\ 

Enter Dogbery and his compariner with the watch. 

Dog, Are you good men and true ? 

Verg, Yea, or elfe it were pitty but they fliould fuffer 
faluation body and foule. 

Scene IV. Pope, + . Scene III. i. and his compartner] and Verges, 

Cap. et seq. Rowe. 

The Street. Theob. 


I. Gifford (Jonson’s Bartholomew Fair^ Ind. p. 365) : The guardians of the 
night, for what reason it is not easy to say, had been proverbial for their blundering 
simplicity, before Shakespeare was born ; and it is scarcely possible to look into an 
old play without seeing how deeply this opinion was rooted in the minds of the 
people. Till Glaptliornc’s excellent comedy, no one supposed it possible that wit 
could be found in the watch, or in the constable who headed them ; and they are 
never introduced on the stage without the ‘mistaking of words,’ mentioned by 
Jonson. It would be too much to require us to believe that Shakespeare was the 
first who noticed this fertile source of amusement, especially as he seems rather to 
content himself with improving and dignifying what was already on the stage than 
to have laboured after the introduction of novelties. — Coleridge i^N^otes^ etc. p. 77): 
As in Homer all the deities are in armour, even Venus, so in Shakespeare all the 
characters are strong. Hence real folly and dulness are made by him the vehicles of 
wisdom. There is no difficulty for one being a fool to imitate a fool ; but to be, 
remain, and speak like a wise man and a great wit, and yet so as to give a vivid 
representation of a veritable fool , — hie labor y hoc opus est. A drunken constable is 
not uncommon, nor hard to draw ; but see and examine what goes to make up a 
Dogberry. — Collier (Shahespeare Soc. Papersy 1844, i, i) : Theie is an original 
letter, discovered by Mr Lemon in the State Paper Office, entirely in the handwriting 
of Lord Burghley, dated from Theobald’s on the loth of August, 1586, only two 
months and a day before the meeting of the Commissioners at Fotheringay for the 
trial of Mary Queen of Scots. The letter, which is addressed to Secretary Wal sing- 
ham, relates to some circumstances preparatory to that event, when a watch was set, 
and the ‘ ways laid,’ according to the ordinary expression of that day, for the capture 
of conspirators. It gives us a curious account of the proceedings of the Dogberrys of 
that day for the arrest of suspected persons, and shows how much to the life our great 
dramatist drew the characters he introduced. Lord Burghley observed at Enfield 
such inefficient and Dogberry-like arrangements for the seizure of the parties impli- 
cated, that, on his arrival at home, he dispatched the letter in question to Sir Francis 
Walsingham. The extreme speed with which he was anxious that his communica- 
tion to the Secretary should be conveyed may be judged from the superscription, in 
the following singular form ; 

‘ To the R. Plonorable my verie loving frend Sir Francis Walsingham, Knight, 
Hir Ma*" Principall Secretary, at London. hast I 


hast 

hast 


Post. 



W. Burghley.’ 



ACT in. sc. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING l6l 

Dogb. Nay, that were a punifhment too good for 5 
them, if they fhould haue any allegiance in them, being 
chofen for the Princes watch. 

Verges. Well, giue them their charge, neighbour 
Dogbcry. 9 

8. charge\ charg F^. 


In order to render its contents perfectly intelligible, we must premise, that by the 
loth of August, 1586, the ministers of Elizabeth were in full possession of the details 
of a plot by Antony Babington, in concert with the Queen of Scots, to murder the 
Queen of England ; and they had just arrived at that point, when the arrest or escape 
of any of the conspirators would have been of the utmost importance. Ballard, one 
of the principal conspirators, had been taken up on the 4th of August, which in- 
stantly alarmed the rest, who therefore fled in all directions. These were the parties 
who, according to Ixjrd Burghley were ‘ missing,* and to arrest whom the Dogberrys 
of Enfield were upon the watch, all the means of identification they apparently 
possessed being that one of the accused individuals had ‘a hooked nose.’ It is 
worthy of note also that Babington and some of his co-conspirators were arrested on 
the very day that Lord Burghley’ s letter bears date ; and hence we may infer, per- 
haps, that the description, however defective, was sufficient. 

* Sir — As I cam from London horn ward, in my coche, I sawe at every townes end 
the iiombre of x. or xij. standyng, with long staves, and untill I cam to Enfield I 
thought no other of them, but that they had stayd for avoyding of the rayne, or to 
drynk at some alehouses, for so they did stand under pentyces [penthouses] at ale- 
houses, But at Enfeld fynding a dosen in a plump, whan ther was no rayne, I 
bethought myself that they war apoynted as watchmen, for the apprehendyng of such 
as ar missyng ; and thereuppon I called some of them to me apart, and asked them 
wherfor they stood ther? and on of them answered, — ^To tak 3 yong men. And 
demandyng how they shuld know the persons, on answered with these words : — 
Mary, my I>ord, by intelligence of ther favor. What meane you by that ? quoth I. 
Marry, sayd they, on of the partyeshath a hooked nose. — And have you, quoth I, no 
other mark? — No, sayth they. And then I asked who apoynted them; and they 
answered on Bankes, a Head Constable, whom I willed to be sent to me. — Suerly, 
sir, who so ever had the chardg from yow hath used the matter negligently, for these 
watchmen stand so oj^penly in plumps, as no suspected person will come neare them ; 
and if they be no better instructed but to fynd 3 persons by on of them havyng a 
hooked nose, they may miss therof. And thus I thought good to advertise yow, that 
the Justyces that had the chardg, as I thynk, may use the matter more circumspectly.’ 
Halliwell gives in full the scene of the Constable and Watch, at the end of the 
Fourth Act of May’s The Heir (p. 569, ed. Ilazlitt-Dodsley), acted in 1620, and 
evidently written in imitation of the present scene. 

8, charge] Malone : To * charge’ his fellows seems to have been a regular part 
of the duty of the Constable of the watch. So, in A New Truk to Cheat the Devil^ 
1639: ‘My watch is set — charge given — and all at peace.’ Again, in Marslon’s 
Insatiate Countess y 1613 : ‘ Come on, my hearts ; we are the cities securilie — He give 
you your charge, and then, like courtiers, every man spye out ’ — [III, p. 145, ed. 
Halliwell.] Lord Cami’Bell (p. 53) must have overlooked this note of Malone 
- 11 



i 62 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act hi, sc. iii. 


Dog. Firft, who thinke you the moft defartleffe man lO 
to be Conftable ? 

Watch. I. Hugh Ote-cake fir, or George Sea-coale ^ for 
they can write and reade. 

Dogb. Come hither neighbour Sea-coale, God hath 
bleft you with a good name : to be a wel-fauoured man, 15 
is the gift of Fortune, but to write and reade, comes by 
Nature. 

Watch 2. Both which Mafter Conftable 

Dogb. You haue : I knew it would be your anfwere : 
well, for your fauour fir, why giue God thankes, & make 20 
no boaft of it, and for your writing and reading, let that 
appeare when there is no need of fuch vanity, you are 
thought heere to be the moft fenfleffe and fit man for the 
Conftable of the watch : therefore beare you the lan- 
thorne : this is your charge ; You fhall comprehend all 25 


10. defartlcjfe\ dis/artle/s F^, Rowe, 
Pope, Han. 

12. Ote-cake... Sea-coale] Otecake... 
Seacole F^, Rowe. 

Sea-coale] Sea-cole Ashbee and 
Pnetorius (Facsimile). Sea cole Sta. 
(Facsimile). 

15. to be’\ and to he Theob. Warb.' 


Johns. 

18, Conjlahle"] Conjlable. Q. Consta- 
ble — Rowe et seq. 

22. no need] more need Warb. (with- 
drawn, — N. Qu. VIII, iii, 142.) 

24. lanfkorne] QF^. lanthorn FjF^. 
lantemt Steev. et seq. 


when he said : ‘ There never has been a law or a custom in England to ‘ give a 
charge^ to constables.’ 

12. George Sea-coale] Halliwell changed ‘George’ to Francis^ because in 
III, V, 54, Dogberry so calls him, and ‘mentions his pen and inkhorn.’ ‘ But,* says 
W. A. Wright, ‘ Francis Seacole there mentioned is not necessarily the same person. 
If it is a slip of Shakespeare’ s it is one easily made. In the Merry Wives^ Page is 
called Thomas in I, i, 46, and George in II, i, 153.’ 

16. gift of Fortune] Halliwell : This may be partly an adaptation of an old 
proverb, an instance of which occurs in Lyly’s Euphues and his England: — ‘My 
good .sonne, thou art to receive by my death wealth, and by my counsel wisdom, and 
I would thou wert as willing to imprint the one in thy hart, as thou wilt be ready 
to beare the other in thy purse ; to bee rich is the gift of Fortune, to bee wise the 
grace of God.’ [p. 228, ed. Arber.] 

22. No need] Warburton : Dogberry is only absurd, not absolutely out of his 
senses. We should read, therefore, ‘ more need.’ [Change places, and, handy-dandy, 
which is Dogberry, which is Warburton. In fairness, however, see Text. Notes. — E d.] 

24, 25. lanthorne] Miss Grace Latham {Sh. Jahrbuch^ xxxii, 140) : The 
constable’s efficiency must have often depended on his activity and sccresy, and he 
could scarcely have been provided with a less practical costume ; a long clinging 
black gown, which must have wofully impeded his movements in a fray ; in one 



ACT m, sc. iil] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 163 

vagrom men, you are to bid any man Hand in the Prin- 26 
ces name. 

Watch 2. How if a will not ftand ? 

Dogb. Why then take no note of him, but let him go, 
and prefently call the reft of the Watch together, and 30 
thanke God you are ridde of a knaue. 

Verges. If he will not ftand when he is bidden, hee is 
none of the Princes fubiefls. 

Dogb. True, and they are to meddle with none but 
the Princes fubiefts : you fliall alfo make no noife in the 35 
flreetes : for, for the Watch to babble and talke, is moft 
tollcrable, and not to be indured. 

Watch. We will rather fleepe than talke, wee know 
what belongs to a Watch. 

Dog. Why you fpcake like an ancient and moft quiet 40 

28. a wi/I] he will Rowe, + , Cap. 38-44. Mnemonic lines, Warb. 

Var. Mai. Steev. Var. 38, 45, 49, 54, 65, 86. Watch.] QFf, 

36. ialkc'\ to talke Q, Cap. Mai. Steev. Cam. Rife. Watch 2. Rowe et cet. 

Cam. (subs. ) 

hand he held a bell, as theJugh to give evil-doers notice of his approach, and in the 
other a lanthorn, the flickering light of which was absolutely necessary to guide his steps 
through the ill-kept streets, while on his shoulder he bore a cumbersome brown bill, 
which could, however, inflict very severe wounds. Dogberry reminds Oatcake and 
Seacole not to let thfcir bills be stolen, showing that they were often laid aside, while 
their owners rested, and lost. 

30. presently] It is not to be forgotten, whether used by Dogberry or by any one 
else, that this means immediately. 

36. most tolerable and not to be endured] In Heywood’s Fair Maid of the 
Exchange, 1607, III, iii, the Clown, Fiddle, uses this phrase. ‘This echo,* says 
Barron Field, the editor of the play for the Shakespeare Society, ‘ proves the long 
popularity of Much Ado about Nothing. “ I am horribly in love with her,** Rowd- 
ier* s speech just before, is the same as Benedick’s.* — E d. 

40. watchman] IIalliwell : ‘ This watch is to be kept yearly from the feast 
of the Ascention until Michaelmas, in every towne, and shall continue all the night, 
sc. from the sunne setting to the sunne rising. All such strangers, or persons sus- 
pected, as shall in the night time passe by the watchmen (appointed thereto by the 
towne constable, or other officer), may be examined by the said watchmen, whence 
thejy come, and what they be, and of their businesse, etc. And if they find cause 
of suspition, they shall stay them ; and if such persons will not obey the arrest of the 
watchmen, the said watchmen shall levie hue and crie, that the offendors may be 
taken : or else they may justifie to beate them (for that they resist the peace and 
Justice of the Realme), and may also set them in the stockes (for the same) untill 
the morning ; and then, if no suspition be found, the said persons shall be let go 
and quit : But if they find cause of suspition, they shall forthwith deliver the said 



MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act in, sc. iu. 


164 

watchman, for I cannot fee how fleeping fliould offend : 41 

only haue a care that your bills be not ftolne : well, you 
are to call at all the Alchoufes, and bid them that are 
drunke get them to bed. 

Watch. How if they will not ? 45 

Dogb. Why then let them alone till they are fober, if 
they make you not then the better anfwcre, you may fay, 
they are not the men you tooke them for. 

Watch. Well fir. 

Dogb. If you meet a theefe, you may fufpeft him, by 50 
vertue of your office, to be no true man : and for fuch 
kinde of men, the leffe you meddle or make with them, 
why the more is for your honefty. 53 

43. bid them'\ 52. office] qflice¥y 

Var. Coll. Dyce, Wh. Sta. Cam. Huds. 


persons to the sherife, who shall keepe them in prison untill they bee duely deliv- 
ered; or else the watchmen may deliver such person to the constable, and so to 
convey them to the Justice of peace, by him to be examined, and to be bound over, 
or committed, untill the offendours be acquitted in due manner.^ — Dalton's Countrey 
Justice^ 1620. 

41. sleeping] Haltjwell {Afemoranda, etc. p. 52) : Compare the following 
curious passage in Parkes’s Curtaine- Drawer of the World, 1612 : ‘not many nights 
since, when we had walked all our stations, from the first bounds of our Wardes to 
the last step it contained, and had not met any incounler worthy the examination, 
or the Counter, from whence wee might extract or derive our customary fees, till at 
the last we accosted one, that by his attire and behaviour seemed to be some great 
personage whom we thought it not our parts to call in question, but very dutifully 
making our obaysance unto him, gave him the time of the night, for the which he 
not only gave us lhankes, but also began to commend our diligence and care and 
good attendance, when before his face sate halfe of our company asleep, leaning 
their heads against their bils, and their billes against the wan.'[ — p. 52, Grosart’s 
Reprint. Dyce in his Recollections of the Table-Talk of Samuel Rogers (p. 53 ) 
relates the following : ‘ A friend of mine,' said Erskine, ‘ was suffering from a con- 
tinual wakefulness ; and various methods were tried to send him to sleep, but in 
vain. At last his physicians resorted to an experiment which succeeded perfectly : 
they dressed him in a watchman's coat, put a lantern in his hand, placed him in a 
sentry-box, and — he was asleep in ten minutes.' — Ei).] 

42. bills] Johnson: A ‘bill' is still carried [1765] by the watchmen in Lich- 
field. It was the old weapon of English infantry, which, says Temple, ‘ gave the 
most ghastly and deplorable wounds.' It may be called securis falcata, 

50-59. Lord Campbell (p. 55) ; If the different parts of Dogberry's charge are 
strictly examined, it will be found that the author of it had a very respectable 
acquaintance with crown law. The problem was to save the constables from all 
trouble, danger, and responsibility, without any regard to the public safety. Now 



ACT III, SC. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


165 

Watch. If wee know him to be a thiefe,fliall wee not 
lay hands on him. 55 

Dogb. Truly by your office you may, but I think they 
that touch pitch will be defil’d : the moft peaceable way 
for you, if you doe take a theefe, is, to let him fliew him- 
felfe what he is, and fteale out of your company. 

Ver. You haue bin alwaies cal’d a merciful m2 partner. 60 

Dog. Truely I would not hang a dog by my will, much 
more a man who hath anie honeftic in him. 

Verges. If you heare a child crie in the night you muft 
call to the nurfe, and bid her ftill it. 

Watch. How if the nurse be afleepe and will not 6$ 
heare vs? 

59. his F^F^, Rowe i. 61. by my'\ for my Rowe. 

60. bin\ beene QF^. 

there can be no doubt that Lord Coke himself could not have defined more accu- 
rately, than in these lines, the power of a peace-officer. 

52. meddle or make] W. A, Wright : A common alliterative expression, of 
the kind which has a great charm for those who cannot invent phrases for them- 
selves. 

53. the more is] For the ellipsis of //, see II, ii, 18. 

57. defil’d] ‘ He that toucheth pitch shall be defiled therewith .* — Ecdesiasticusy 
xiii, 1. 

63, 64. If , . . still it] Capkll (p. 128) : The interference of Verges in his 
learned brother’s department, perplexed the editor something; but looking forward 
a little, he saw the cause of it : This fine ‘ charge * was a standing piece of wit of 
good Dogberry’s, known to Verges as having often been treated with it ; he retails 
an article in a fear his partner should miss it, and himself and company lose the rich 
conceit it is follow’ d by, 

63. a child crie] Steevens : It is not impossible but that a part of this scene 
was intended as a burlesque on The Statutes of the Streets, imprinted by Wolfe, in 
1595. Among these I find the following : ‘22. No man shall blowe any home in 
the night, within this citie, or whistle after the houre of nyne of the clock in the 
night, under paine of impri.sonment. — 23. No man shall use to go with visoures, or 
disguised by night, under like paine of imprisonment. — 24. Made that night-walkers, 
and evisdroppers, have like punishment. — 25. No hammer-man, as a smith, a pew- 
terer, a founder, and all artificers making great sound, shall not worke after the 
houre of nyne at night, etc. — 30. No man shall, after the houre of nyne at night, 
keepe any rule, whereby any such suddaine outcry be made in the still of the night, 
as making any affray, or beating his wyfe, or servant, or singing, or revyling in his 
house, to the disturbaunce of his neighbours, under payne of iii s. iiii d.* etc. etc. 

65. How if, etc.] Jacox (ii, 7) : There are people who delight in mooting points 
after this sort, whether or not there be a Dogberry at hand to determine them. [Here- 
upon, from this as a text, there follow in this entertaining volume illustration after 
illustration, drawn from literature, old and new. — Ed.] 



i66 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act hi, sc. iii. 


Dog. Why then depart in pcacef and let the childe 67 
wake her with crying, for the ewe that will not heare 
her Lambe when it bacs,will neuer anfwerc a calfc when 
he blcates. * 70 

Verges. ^Tis verie true. 

Dog. This is the end of the charge : you conftable 
are to prefent the Princes ownc perfon, if you meete the 
Prince in the night, you may ftaie him. 

Verges, Nay birladie that I thinke a cannot. 75 

Dog. Fiue fliillings to one onT with anic man that 
knowes the Statues, he may ftaie him, marrie not with- 
out the prince be willing, for hide ed the watch ought to 
offend no man, and it is an offence to ftay a man againft 
his will. 80 

Verges, Birladie I thinke it be fo. 

Dog. Ha, ah ha, well mafters good night, and there be 
anie matter of weight chances, call vp me, keepc your 83 


70. he bleates] it bleats Rowe i, 
Var. *21. 

72. you conJlable'\ you, constable. 
Pope. 

75. a cannot'\ QF^jF^, Knt, Coll. 
Dyce, Wh. Sta. Cam. / cannot F^, 
Rowe i. he cannot Rowe ii. et cet. 
77. Statues'] Jiatutes QFf, Rowe, Cap. 


Coll. 

81. Birladie] By^r^lady Cap. 

82. Ha, ah ha,] F^F^, Wh. ii. Ha 
ah ha, Q. Ha, ah, ha, F^, Cam. Ha, 
ah-ha ! Dyce, Iluds. JIa, ha, ha ! 
Rowe et cet. 

82, 86, 105. majlers] maijiers V^, 

82. and there] an there Pope et seq. 


70. he bleates] Boswell ( V"ar, 1821) unwisely followed the Third Folio in 
changing * he ’ to it. It is dangerous to meddle with any word of Dogberry. The 
sequence of ‘ ii baes* and ‘ he bleates * is in character. — Ed. 

74. you may staie him] Miss Grace Latham {^Sh, Jahrbuch, xxxii, 143) ; 
The authorities in that age of conspiracy were very jealous of all unexplained 
travelling, mysterious conferring, and moving about after dark, 

77. Statues] Unquestionably, Dogberry’s own word, let the reading of the Qto, 
or of innumerable Quartos, be what it may. — Ed. 

77, 78. without] For this use, where we should now use unless, see Abbott, 
§ 120 . 

82. Ha, ah ha,] I doubt that this is meant to express laughter. An element of 
humour in Dogberry’s character strikes me as discordant ; the heavy cares of office 
are too serious to permit, from his lips, any cackling laughter. It is the aha / of 
triumph over Verges, with the intonation of / told you so . — Ed. 

83. call vp me] W. A. Wright : For this transposition of the pronoun for the 
sake of emphasis, see Jul. Qes. I, iii, 134; * Cass, Cinna, where haste you so? 
Cinna. To find out you.’ 

83, 84. keepe . . . your owne] Malone ; This is part of the oath of a grand- 
juryman ; and is one of many proofs of Shakespeare’s having been very conversant. 



ACT III, SC. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


167 

fellowes counsailes, and your owne, and good night, 
come neighbour. 85 

Watch, Well mafters, we heare our charge, let vs go 
fit here vpon the Church bench till two, and then all to 
bed. 

Dog, One word more, honeft neighbors. I pray you 
watch about fignior Leonatoes doore,for the wedding be- 90 
ing there to morrow, there is a great coyle to night, 
adiew,be vigitant I befeech you. Exeunt, 

Enter Borachio and Qonrade, 

Bor, What, Conrade ? 

Watch, Peace, ftir not. 95 

Bor, Conrade I fay. 

Con, Here man, I am at thy elbow. 

Bor, Mas and my elbow itcht, I thought there w<?uld 
a fcabbe follow. 

Con, I will owe thee an anfwere for that, and now lOO 
forward with thy tale. 

Bor, Stand thee clofe then vnder this penthoufe,for it 102 


84. fdlowcs\ fellows FjF^. fellemts 
Pope, + . fellorvs' Han. et cet, 

counfailes'] QFj,. counfel F^, 
Rowe, Pope, ilan. counfells Theob. 
et cet. 

91. coyle‘\ coile F^. coil F^F^ et seq, 

92. lugitant^ vigilant Ff, Rowe, -t, 
Var. Ran. Knt. 


92. Exeunt] Eeunt F^. Exeunt 
Dogb. and Verg. Pope. 

93. Scene V. Pope, + . 

Borachio] borachio F,. 

95 » ^^05. Watch] 2. W. Cap. 

[Aside. Rowe. 

98. Mas~\ Mafs F^F^. 
loi. witK\ Om. Rowe i. 


at some period of his life, with legal proceedings and courts of justice. — ^W. A. 
Wrujiit : The exact words of the oath at present are : ‘The Queen’s counsel your 
Fellows and your own you shall observe and keep secret.’ 

91. coyle] Dyce {Gloss.) : Bustle, stir, tumult, turmoil. 

98. Mas] That is, fy the mass. 

98. elbow itcht] Halliwell : It is just possible that there may be here an 
allusion to some provincial proverbial saying that something will follow if the elbow 
itches. * From the itching of the nose and elbow, and severall affectings of sevcrall 
parts, they make severall predictions too silly to be mentioned, though regarded by 
them.’ — Demonologie^ 1650, ap. Brand. [In Macbeth it is the thumb of one of the 
Witches which itches. — I^i).] 

99. scabbe] A term of gross contempt, still in current use in this country, applied 
to those who refuse to join their fellow-workmen in a strike. Of course, it is used 
with a double meaning, in the present passage. — El). 

102. Stand thee] See ‘run thee,’ ill, i, 3. 

102. penthouse] Halliwell : This is an open shed or projection over a door 



I68 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act hi, sc, iii. 

driffels raine, and I will, like a true drunkard, vtter all to 103 
thee. 

Watch. Some treafon mafters,yet ftand clofe. 105 

Bor. Therefore know, I haue earned of Don lohn a 
thoufand Ducates, 

Con\^ it polTible that anie villanie fhould be fo dcare? 

Bor. Thou fhould’ft rather aske if it were pofTible a- 
nie villanie fhould be fo richffor when rich villains haue 1 10 
neede of poore ones, poore ones may make what price 
they will. 

Con. I wonder at it. 

Bor. That fhewes thou art vnconfirm’d,thou knoweft 
that the fafhion of a doublet, or a hat, or a cloake, is no- 1 1 5 
thing to a man. 

Con. Yes, it is apparell. 

Bor. I meane the fafliion. 118 

103. drijfels] drizles F^F^. 106. Don] Dun Q. 

rain€\ QF^. no. villanie\ villain Warb. Walker 

105. [Aside. Johns. (O7V. ii, 46), Dyce, ii, iii» Iluds. 

or shop, forming a protection against the weather. The house in which Shakespeare 
was bom had a penthouse along a portion of it, [Its pronunciation may be gathered 
from Lord Burghley’s letter quoted above at the first line of this Scene; and also 
from Ilollyband’s Dictionaries 1593, where we find ; ‘ Auvent, an arbour, a shadow- 
ing place : m. Se pourmener soubs les AuvenSy to walke vnder pentices.’ — Ed.] 

103. true drunkard] Steevens supposes that ‘it was on this account that 
Shakespeare called’ this character, Borachio, from the Spanish word for drunkard : 
and Steevens evidently inferred that Borachio really was a drunkard. He may have 
been ; but this passage does not prove it. That there is an allusion to the meaning 
of his own name, is possible, but it is certain, I think, that the chief allusion is to 
the fact, expressed in the familiar in vino veritasy that a ‘ true dmnkard will utter 
all.’— Ed. 

105, yet stand close] There is humour in this ‘yet.’ — ^E d. 

1 10. villanie] Wartjurton ; The sense absolutely requires us to read, villain, 
Steevens : The old reading may stand. [Warburton’s dogmatic assertion prevailed 
with both Walker and Dyce, who failed to note that Borachio is merely repeating 
Conrade’s identical words, except the last one ‘dear,’ which he changes to ‘rich.’ 
Theobald (Nichols, lllust, ii, 302) proposed to read ‘ any villainy should be so 
cheap' But this was in Theobald’s salad-days ; he did not repeat it in his 
edition. — ^E d.] 

1 14. vneonfirm’d] Capell (p. 129) : That is, a noviciate in roguery, one not 
confirm'd in it. R. G. White: Though ‘unconfirmed’ may mean ‘not fixed in 
the ways of the world,’ it seems to me more than probable that Shakespeare wrote 
unconformed — to the world, of course. 



act III. sc. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 169 

Con. Yes the fafhion is the fafhion. 

Bor. Tufh,I may as well fay the foolers the foole,but 120 
feeft thou not what a deformed theefe this fafhion is ? 

Watch. I know that deformed, a has bin a vile theefe, 
this vii. yeares,a goes vp and downe like a gentle man : 

I remember his name. 

Bor. Did’ft thou not heare fome bodie? 125 

Con. No,^twas the vainc on the houfe. 


122, 123. a has. ..a goes'] QFf, Knt, 
Coll. Dyce, Wh. Sta. Cam. he has. ..he 
goes Rowe et cet, 

123. this vii. yeares] this seven yeares 
Rowe, Pope, Theob. i, Han. Wh. 

ii. these seven years Theob. ii, Warb. 


Johns, these seven year Var. ’78, *85, 
Ran. this vii. yeere Q. this seven year 
Cap. et cet. 

123 gentle man] Q. gentle-man F^. 
gentleman F^F^. 

126. vaine] vane QFf. 


122. Watch] Inasmuch as, in line 162, it is the First Watchman who refers to 
‘ one deformed,’ Capell inferred that is the same who now speaks, and according 
printed * i Watch’ ; and also marked it as an ‘aside.’ 

122. that deformed] Fleay (Introcl. to Sh.^n Study y p. 23) : The Deformed 
mentioned here, and in V, i, 318, is of course an allusion to Shakespeare himself. 
[This remark I am at a loss to understand, otherwise than on the supposition that 
it is based on the monstrous idea, drawn from a perverted interj^retation of the 
Thirty-seventh Sonnety that Shakespeare was lame. No explanation is given us of 
the * lock ’ which Shakespeare ‘ of course ’ wears, nor of the remarkable ‘ key in his 
ear.’ But P'leay goes on to tell us that ‘ a vile thief these seven year’ ‘indicates 
the time that [Shakespeare] had been .stealing, instead of inventing his plots.’ At 
least, it is a comfort to know ‘ he goes up and down like a gentleman.’ — Ed.] 

123. this vii. yeares] A number used merely to designate an indefinite term, — 
familiar enough to the readers of Scottish ballads. 

123. a goes vp and downe] Deighton ; Instead of being locked up, as he 
ought to be, in jail. 

126. vaine] Walker {Crit. iii, 31) : Read raine. See above, ‘it drizzles rain.’ 
I know not whether the spelling vaine for itane was uncommon ; if it was, this would 
be another argument in addition to internal evidence. Minshieu (ed. 2, 1627, the 
edition I have consulted) has both vaine and vaney each in its place according to 
the order of the letters ; and in the only other two passages of Shakespeare beside 
the present, in which the indices mention it as occurring, it is spelt in the Folio 
vane [III, i, 71, above] and vcine {Lovds Lab. L. IV, i, 97; ‘What veine?’ 
This part of Lovds Lab. L. is most corruptly printed in the Folio.) I do not 
remember noticing the spelling vainc in other old books. — Dyce (ed. ii) : But 
Walker was not aware of the very strong objection to his ingenious reading which 
is furnished by the Qto [.see Text. JVbtes, line 103, and the pre.sent line.] Now 
properly speaking, there is only one old text of this play, — that of the Qto ; from 
which, beyond all doubt, that of the Folio was printed (with a few omissions, and 
a few slight changes, mostly for the worse). [But neither Walker nor Dyce was 
aware that Halliwell mentions a copy of the First Folio ‘which reads f'aine, a 



I/O MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act hi, sc. iu. 

Bor. Seeft thou not (I fay) what a deformed thiefe IZ 7 
this fafhion is, how giddily a tumes about all the Hot- 
blouds, betweene foureteene & flue & thirtie, fometimes 
fafliioning them like Pharaoes fouldiours in the rechie 130 
painting, fometime like god Bels priefts in the old 
Church window, fometime like the fliauen Hercules in 132 


128. w,] is? Theob. et seq. 
giddily^ giddy Rowe i. 
a turn^s] QFf, Coll. Dyce, Wh. 
Cam. he turns Rowe et cet. 

128. 129. Uot-blouds\ hot bloods 0 . 2 .^, 
et seq. 

129. fometimes'] QFf, Rowe, + , Cap. 
Dyce i, Sta. Cam. sotnetime Var. '78 
et cet. 

130. rechie] QFf. rechy Rowe, Pope. 


reachy Theob. Warb. reeky Cam. i. 
reechy Ilan. et cet. 

1 31. fometime] sometimes 
Rowe, + . 

like] lik F,. 

god] the God Pope, + . 

god Bels] god-Beir s F^F^, Rowe. 

132. fometime] fomtime Fj. some- 
times Rowe, -f . 


curious variation,* Halliwell continues, ‘just worth noticing.* It would be not 
uninteresting to trace this copy. It is not mine. — Ed.] 

129. foureteene] It must be acknowledged that this seems an early age at which 
to figure as a ‘ Ilot-blood,* be it as a soldier of Pharaoh, a priest of Bel, or a shaven 
Hercules. But, then, we must remember the old shepherd in The Wintef^s Tale 
(III, iii, 66) started the career four years earlier, which is so extremely precocious in 
reference to the pranks he specifies that some of the commentators were forced to 
interfere, and twist his ten years into thirteen, sixteen, and nineteen years respect- 
ively. No one, however, has thought it worth while for propriety’s sake to inter- 
fere here. — Ed. 

129. sometimes] Dyce (ed. ii.) : The old eds. have ‘sometimes;* but see 
what follows. 

130. rechie] Pope*s notes are rare ; there are but seven which can be fairly so 
considered in this play ; one of them is on the present word, which he defines as 
‘valuable,* on what ground no one has been able to discover. Hanmer {^Gloss.] 
rightly defined it as ‘ smoaky or soiled with smoak.* 

131. god] Staunton reads good\ evidently a misprint, else there would have 
been a note on it. — E d. 

131. Bels priests] Steevens : Alluding to some awkward representation of 
the story of Bel and the Dragon, in the Apocrypha. 

132. shauen Hercules] Warburton : This means Sampson, the usual subject 
of old tapestry. . . . What authorised the poet to give this name to Sampson was the 
folly of certain Christian mythologists, who pretend that the Grecian Hercules was 
the Jewish Sampson. — Edwards (p. 161) ; However barbarous the workmen of the 
common Tapestry may have been, I fancy, they were hardly so bad ‘ Christian myth- 
ologists,* as to draw Sampson (not with the jaw-bone of an ass, but) with a massy 
club. — Heath (p. 107) ; This same ‘shaven Hercules* is most certainly no other 
than the Grecian Hercules himself, when he was shaven, and dressed like a woman, 
and set to work at the distaff by his Lydian mistress, Omphale, — Halliwell : The 
story of Hercules was represented [as well as that of Sampson], for in an inventory 



ACT III, SC. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


I/I 

the fmircht worm eaten tapeftrie, where his cod-peece 133 
feemes as maflie as his club. 

Con, All this I fee, and fee that the fafliion weares out 135 
more apparrcll then the man;but art not thou thy felfe 
giddie with the fafhion too that thou haft ftiifted out of 
thy tale into telling me of the fafhion ? 

Bor, Not fo neither, but know that I haue to night 
wooed Margaret the Lady Heroes gentle-woman, by the 140 


133. fmirchi’\ smirch Warb. smirtcht 
Cap. 

worm eaten\ worm-eaten QFf 
{worm-eatan F^). 

134. club,"] club ? lloxi. 


135. and fee'\ and IseeQ^ Coll. Dyce, 
Wh. Sta. Cam. 

137. too] Om. Rowe, Pope, Han. 
140. gentle-woman] gentlewoman Fj. 


of the ‘hangings’ at Kenilworth Castle, 1588, the original MS of which is preserved 
at Penshurst, there is mentioned : ‘ six peeces of the historic of Hercules, being all 
in depth v. Flemishe ells 3. quarters,’ etc. It is worthy of remark that Sir Philip 
Sydney speaks of a representation of Hercules, when spinning for Omphale, in 
which the ‘ great beard ’ is retained : ‘ So in Hercules painted with his great beard 
and furious countenance in a womans attire, spinning at Ontphales commandement, it 
breedes both delight and laughter ’[ — Defence of Poesie^ p. 515* ^ 59 ^*] — Brae 

(p. 146) ; The real allusion is evidently to the Hercules Callus, about which there 
is a long description in one of Lucian’s minor treatises. This, the French Hercules, 
was an emblem of eloquence, and was represented as a bald old man with a huge 
club ! And although Lucian does not exactly say that he saw it in old tapestry, yet 
he does describe it from having seen it in a picture, [A bald old man is not a 
‘ shaven ’ one. Had the tapestry picture been really intended for the Gallic Her- 
cules, it is far, very far from likely that Borachio, or any one else, would have recog- 
nized it. Lucian thus describes him : ‘ The Gauls call Hercules, in their own tongue, 
Ogmius ; his appearance they describe as monstrous, — ^in their eyes, he is an extremely 
old man, with a bald forehead, and his remaining hair white, his skin wrinkled, and 
tanned to the very blackest hue (thaKeKavfiivog eg rb /^e/ldvrorov), like men who have 
grown old in a seafaring life. You would suppose that he was Charon, or lapetus 
from lower Tartarus, or anything rather than Hercules ; but, while he is thus repre- 
sented, they give him the equipment of Hercules, the lion’s skin, and the club in 
his right hand,’ etc. — Opera^ iii, 129, ed. Jacobitz, 1881. It is to be feared that 
Brae had not before him the original Greek. — Ed.] 

135. and see] I prefer Uie Folio here, to the Qto. 

137. shifted out of] Deigiiton ; In this phrase, the play upon words is still 
kept up, as though he had shifted out of a garment, 

139-142. Franz Horn (i, 270) : It is well that the action of this plot is not car- 
ried on upon the stage, but is only narrated by Borachio to his companion. If the 
deception were carried on before our eyes, we should be far less ready to forgive Don 
Pedro and his favourite for allowing themselves to be so beguiled ; as it is, our fancy 
comes into play as we listen, and we are ready to believe it possible that they should 
be deceived. 



1/2 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act hi, sc. iu. 


name of Hcro^ ftie leanes me out at her miftris chamber- 14 1 

window, bids me a thoufand times good night : I tell 
this tale vildly. I fhould first tell thee how the Prince 
Claudio and my Mafter planted, and placed, and poffcffcd 
by my Mafter Don lohuy faw a far off in the Orchard this 145 
amiable incounter. 

Cojt, And thought thy Margaret was Hero ? 

Bor. Two of them did, the Prince and Claudio, hut the 
diuell my Mafter knew flic was Margaret and partly by 
his oathes, which first poffeft them, partly by the darke 150 
night which did deceiue them, but chiefely, by my villa- 
nie, which did confirme any flander that Don lohn had 
made, away went Claudio enraged, fwore hee would 
meete her as he was apointed next morning at the Tern- 1 54 

141. mijlris'\ Mistresses Rowe, + , Johns, a far re Q. far Pope, Han. 
Var. Ran. mistress' Cap. Mai. et seq. afar F^, Rowe et cet. 

143. vildly. '\ vildly Q. vildly — 147. ////] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 

Rowe, + . vilely — Han. Johns, vilely : Knt. Wh. i. they Q, Theob. ct cet. 

Cap. 149. diueir] devil F^F^. 

144. 145, etc. Mafter\ MaiflerY^. 154. apointed appointed ¥ ^ 

145. a far'\ F^F^, Theob. Warb. 

141. leanes me] The familiar ethical dative, for which, if necessary, see Abbott, 
§220. 

142. a thousand times good night] This is not exactly in accordance with Don 
John’s promise, which was that Don Pedro and Claudio should see Hero’s ‘chamber- 
window entered.’ Here, the interview is represented as over. Nor does (Haudio at 
any time say that he saw more than Hero talking with a man out at her chamber- 
window ; it was this sight which prepared his mind to accept as true iJorachio’s sub- 
sequent false statements, whereof we are happily .spared the hearing, but we should 
be willing to concede their influence in mitigating our condemnation of Claudio’s 
conduct. — Ed. 

144. possessed] That is, informed^ instructed. Antonio, referring to Shylock, 
asks Bassanio : ‘ Is he yet possessed How much we would.’ It is quite possible 
that there may be also here the .sense of demoniac possession, inasmuch as Borachio 
refers in his next sentence to ‘ the devil, my master.’ — Ed. 

146. incounter.] Marshall : Borachio is a long time telling his story, and it is 
evident that Conrade is naturally impatient ; .so that it is very likely that, if Borachio 
paused at this point, he would interpo.se a sugge.stion rather than a question, espe- 
cially as the point of the story must have been clear to him. On this account 1 
should prefer to put a break at the end of Borachio’ s speech, and to adopt ‘thy’ of 
F, without tlie note of interrogation. 

147. thought thy Margaret] The majority of the editors have here preferred the 
Qto : ‘ thought they, Margaret.’ A choice between the two readings is not ea.sy ; the 
preponderating weight, however, in favour of ‘ thy ’ is, with me, the possibility of a 
contemptuous tone ; ‘ And thought thy Margaret, forsooth, was Hero !’ — Ed. 



ACT III, SC. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 173 

pie, and there, before the whole congregation fhame her 155 
with what he faw o’re night, and send her home againe 
without a husbaud. 

Watch A, We charge you in the Princes name ftand. 

Watch, 2 , Call vp the right maftcr Conftable, we haue 
here recouered the moft dangerouspeece of lechery, that 160 
euer was knownc in the Common-wealth. 

Watch, I. And one Deformed is one of them, I know 
him, a weares a locke. 163 

156. he faw\ he had seen Cap. 161. in the'\ in a Rowe i. 

157. husbaud."] 163. a wears] QFf, Knt, Coll. Dyce, 

158. [Starting out upon them. Cap. Wh. Sta. Cam. he wears Rowe et cet. 

159. right master] DEianTON : * Right’ seems to be used here as an adverb, as 
in such phrases as ‘right honourable,’ ‘right worshipful.’ 

163. locke] Cai'ELL (p. 134) : Writers, prosemen, and versemen, banter the men 
of dress of that time, for a lock of hair, hanging below the rest, which they cherish’d 
and curl’d nicely, and call’d — a love-lock. — Malone: Fynes Moryson, in a very 
particular account of the [personal appearance] of Lord Mountjoy, says that his hair 
wa.s * thin lie on his head, where he wore it short, except a locke vnder his left eare, 
which he nourished the time of this warre [the Irish War, 1599], and being wouen 
vp, hid it in his nccke vnder his ruffe.’ — Itinerary^ Part II, p. 45. The portrait of 
Sir Edward Sackville, Earl of Dorset, painted by Vandyck, (now at Knowle,) ex- 
hibits this lock with a large knotted ribband at the end of it. It hangs under the 
ear on the left side, and reaches as low as where the star is now worn by Knights of 
the Garter. — Narks : Charles the First, and many of his courtiers, wore these love- 
locks ; nor did he cut his off till the year 1646. Against this fashion Prynne wrote 
a treatise, called The Unlovelyncss of Love-locks ^ in which he considered them as 
very ungodly. He speaks of them ahso in his Histrio-niastix, with detestation : ‘And 
more especially in long, unshorne, womanish, frizled, love-provoking haire, and love- 
lockes, growne too much in fashion with comly pages, youthes, and lewd, effemi- 
nate, ruffianly persons.’ Halliwell remarks that this passage ‘ deserves quoting, 
because Prynne there assigns the habit of wearing these love-locks to I'ujfianly per- 
sons^ a testimony which affords a valuable illustration of Dogberry’ s reason for pro- 
ducing it again.st the prisoner.’ Halliwell further notes the statement of an anony- 
mous critic, that it appears from Manzoni’s I promessi Sposi ‘that in the sixteenth 
century, in Lombardy, the wearing of a lock of hair was made highly criminal, 
merely because it was considered the testimony of lawless life led by the young 
men of the day.’ Staunton quotes the passage from Manzoni, from which it 
appears that these locks were by no means braided love-locks, but a mass of 
hair sufficient to draw over the face like a vizor. Marshall remarks : ‘ It is 
curious that the only survival of this custom of love-locks, apparently, should 
be among the so-called dangerous classes. It was the practice of thieves, in 
our own time, to wear the hair very short with the exception of one lock, called 
a “Newgate Knocker,” which curled round the ear.’ Nares further remarks 
that it was originally a French custom i ‘ will you bee Frencliefied with a loue- 



174 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act hi, sc. iii. 


Conr, Mafters,mafters. 

Watch. 2 . Youle be made bring deformed forth I war- 165 
rant you, 

Conr, Mafters, neuer fpeake,vve charge you, let vs o- 
bey you to goe with vs. 

Bor, We are like to proue a goodly commoditie, be- 
ing taken vp of thefe mens bils. 1 70 


164. majiers.'l masters^ — ^Theob. et 
seq. 

167. Majlersl\ Masters ^ — ^Theob. et 


seq. 

167, 168. neuer fpeake,..vs'\ i Watch. 
Nether speak... us. Thcob. et seq. 


lock downe to your shoulders, wherein you may weare your mistresse fauour?’ — 
Greene’s Quippe for an Vpstart Courtier [p. 247, ed. Grosart. Greene further 
refers with such particularity to love locks in connection with a certain .set of men in 
London, that it almost seems as though the allusion ‘to one Deformed’ might bear a 
significance now lost to us, but known to Shakespeare’s audience. ‘Is there not 
heere resident about London^ a crew of terryble Ilacksters in the hahite of Gentle- 
meity wel apparcld [Italics mine], and yet some weare bootes for want of stockings, 
with a locke worne at theyr lefte eare for their mistresse favour, his Rapyer Alla 
reuoltOy his Poynado pendent ready for the stab, and cauilevarst like a warlike mag- 
niJicoJ * — Defence of Conny-Catchingy 1592 p. 76, ed. Grosart. Schmidt, in his edi- 
tion of Tieck’s Translation (p. 252), says that ‘fops were wont to wear roses, rib- 
bons, locks of their mistress’s hair, and occasionally their shoe-strings, passed 
through holes bored in their ears j’ he grew in knowledge before he published his 
Lexicon. 

I have nowhere seen any cause given for this custom. Its origin seems, however, 
to be distinctly intimated in Sir Philip Sidney’s Astrophel and StcUay where in Sonnet 
liVy vre find : ‘ Because I breathe not love to every one, Nor doe not vse set colours 
for to wear, Nor nourish special locks of vowdd hair,’ etc. (Arber’s English Garnery 
i, p. 530). If the locks were thus ‘ vowdd’ we have the explanation of the mistress’s 
favour wherewith they were decorated ; and the fashion is changed from something 
fantastic and ridiculous into what is, in its inception, sentimental and chivalric, and 
by no means devoid of a certain charm. — Ed.] 

167, 168. neuer speake . . . with vs] To Theobald belongs the credit of 
giving these words to one of the Watchmen, to whom they clearly belong. ‘ It is 
evident,’ he says, ‘ that Conrade is attempting his own justification, but is inter- 
rupted in it by the impertinence of the men in office.’ 

167. obey] Whiter (p. 121) ; Is ‘obey’ meant to allude by way of mistake to 
the legal phrase abeyance ? In Jonson’s Bartholomew Fairy Mistress Overdo says : 
‘I am content to be in abeyance, sir, and governed by you.’ [I, p. 390, ed. Gif- 
ford.] 

169, 170. commoditie . . . taken vp . . . bils] Malone: Here is a cluster of 
conceits. ‘Commodity’ was formerly, as now, the usual term for an article of 
merchandise. To ‘take up,’ besides its common meaning, — to apprehendy — was 
the phrase for obtaining goods on credit. ‘ If a man is thorough with them in honest 
taking up,’ says Falstaff, ‘ then they must .stand upon security,’ 2 Hen. IV: I, ii, 45. 
We have the same conceit in 2 Hen, VI: IV, vii, 135 : ‘ My lord, when shall we go 



ACT III, SC. iv.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 17S 

Conr^ A commoditie in question I warrant you, come 171 
week obey you. Exeunt. 


{Scene IK] 

Enter Hero^and Margaret^andVr/ula. 

Hero. Good Vrfula wake my cofin Beatrice y and de- 
fire her to rife.. 

Vrfu. I will Lady. 

Her. And bid her come hither. 5 

Vrf. Well. 

Mar. Troth I thinke your other rebato were better. 7 

Scene VI. Pope, + . Act IV. 6. [Exit. Han. 

Spedding. Scene IV. Cap. et seq. 7. rehaio] QFf, Rowe, Pope, Theob. 

Leonato^s House. Pope. Hero’s Warb. Cap. Sta. Han. et cet. 

Appartment in Leonato’s House. Theob. 

to Cheapside, and take up commodities upon our bills ?’ [but with a very different 
meaning. — E d.] 

17 1, in question] Steevens : That is, a commodity subject to judicial trial or 
examination. [The present phrase has not precisely the same meaning as, ‘who 
now Has these poore men in question.’ — Wint. Tale^ V, i, 242; although it is so 
classified by Schmidt {^LexI), — Ed.] 

172. Exeunt] Miss Grace T.atiiam (p. 148) : The constables were butts for 
the wit of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries ; but London remained under 
their care down to the establishment in 1829 of the ‘New Police.’ There .still 
remains [1896], behind St Sepulchre’s Church, opposite the new buildings of St 
Bartholomew’s Ho.spital, Smithfield, the quaint little octagon watch-house, where 
the constable of the last century locked up his prisoners till he could take them 
before the magistrate. 

I. Margaret and Vrsula] C. C. Clarke (p. 313) : These two may come 
under the denomination of ‘pattern waiting- women,’ — that is, the patterns some- 
what surpassing the order of the women. Margaret has, perhaps, too accomplished 
a tongue for one of her class ; she, however, evidently apes the manner of Beatrice, 
and, like all imitators of inferior mind, with a coarse and exaggerated character. 
She forms an excellent foil to her mistress from this very circumstance ; and both 
domestics are samples of that menial equality that exists between mistress and 
dependent still common in Italy, 

7. your other] Macdonald (p. 151) : When we find Margaret objecting to her 
mistress’s wearing a certain rebato, on the morning of her wedding, may not this 
be intended to relate to the fact that Margaret had dressed in her mistress’s clothes 
the night before ? She might have rumpled or .soiled it, and so feared discovery. 

7. rebato] Hawkins : An ornament for the neck, a collar-band, or kind of ruff. 
Fr. Rabat, Menage saith it comes from rabattre^ to ptit bach^ because it was at first 
nothing but the collar of the shirt or shift turn’d back towards the shoulders. — 
Steevens; Thus, in Dekker’s Guts Hornbook, 1609; ‘Your stiffenecked rebatoes 



MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act in, sc. iv. 


176 

Bero, No pray thee good vvcare this. 8 

Marg^By my troth^s not fo good, and I warrant your 
cofin will fay fo. 10 

Bcro. My cofin’s a foole, and thou art another, ile 
wearc none but this. 

Mar. I like the new tire within excellently, if the 
haire were a thought browner : and your gown’s a moft 14 

8, II, 17. liero.] F,. Mai. Stcev. Var. Knt, Coll, troths 

9. troth's'] troth it's Rowe Var. Cap. et seq. 

II. Ue] Ple¥^. 

(that haiie more arches for pride to row vnder, then can .stand vnder hue London 
Bridge.s),’ p. 21 1, ed. Grosart. — H alijwkm. : It was kept in shape by wire, and 
appears from some notices to have been properly a kind of short falling ruff, which 
was frequently u.sed as a supporter for a larger rufi' ; and, if 1 mistake not, was an 
improvement of the device called by Stubbes ‘ a suj^portasse or undcrprojiper.’ ‘ Da 
rivoltOy turning downe, as a falling band, or a womans rabato.’ — Florio’s IVorlde 
of WordeSy 159S, p. 96. * Rabat ^ a rebatoe for a womans rulfe,’ — Cotgrave. ‘A 
rabato for a woman’s band, G. rahat^ a rabhtrr^ id est, to fall or draw backe, because 
the band doth fall backe on the rabato.’ — Minsheu. ^ Araadthy rebatoes, supporters 
for womens ruffes.’ — I’ercivale’s Spanish Diet, 1599. ‘Give me my rebate of cut- 
worke edged ; is not the wyer after the same .sort as the other?’ — Erondelle’s Dia- 
logues, ‘ I pray you, sir, what say you to these great ruffes, which are borne up with 
supporters and rebatoes, as it were with poste and raile.’ — Dent’s Pathway to 
JIcavcHy p. 42. Moryson {Itineraiy, 1617,) [Part III, Booke 4, Chaj). I, p. 165] 
mentions that in Prussia, the men ‘ wearc long ruffes, with rebatoes of wire to beare 
them vp, such as our women vse, which seemed to me lesse comely, because they 
were seldome made of fine cloth, as cambricke or lawme,’ a passage which in itself 
is nearly sufficient to confirm the notion above mentioned. [It is difficult to decide 
whether the rebato i.s the collar itself or its wire support. Originally, it was prob- 
ably a collar, and in the course of time was confounded with its peculiar feature, the 
wire support. — Ei>.] 

9, 18, troth’s] Capell (p. 129) : The movements of this most rapid of all dis- 
coursers, Margaret, the four latter modems [f. e. Pope, Theobald, Hanmer, War- 
burton] have thought fit to retard a little, by reading — it's noty it's but. Clap usy 
[line 42] and with thinking [line 79], here and in other parts of this scene ; her 
o' thinking [line 79] is — on thinking ; and the party’s wind must be good, who can 
follow her as she ought in that speech’s delivery. Of like rapidness is her descrip- 
tion of the dutchess of Milan’s gown. [Praise is certainly due to Capell for his 
keenness in attributing to a characteristic rapidity of speech in Margaret, the omis- 
sion of it both here and in line 18. The Camhridge Editors observe, ‘ the recur- 
rence of this phrase, “ By my troth’s ” makes it almost certain that the omission of 
it is not a printers’ error, but an authentic instance of the omission of the third per- 
sonal pronoun.’ Walker (Cr/V. i, 79) refers to the omission of the first or second 
person in ‘ What means the fool, trow ?’ line 55 J Abbott, \ \ 400, 401, has 
gathered many examples of similar omissions. — E d. ] 

13, 14. the haire] Steevens : That is, the false hair attached to the cap. [Stee- 



ACT HI. SC. iv.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


177 

IS 


rare fafliion yfaith, I faw the Dutcheffe of MiUaines 
gowne that they praife fo. 

Bero, O that exceedes they fay. 

Mar. By my troth’s but a night-gowne in refpeft of 
yours, cloth a gold and cuts, and lac’d with filuer,fet with 19 

15. yfaith^'\ faith. Pope. i8. m] zV Q. 

18. troth' s\ troths //’jPope, -f, Var. 19. a gold^ of gold Pope, + , Var. 

Mai. Steev. Var. Knt, Coll, troths 's Mai. Steev. Var. 0* gold Cap, et 
Cap. et cet. cet. 

vens quotes from Stubbes’s Anatomic of Abuses to prove that women wore false hair, 
but he need have gone no further than Shakespeare himself, who refers to the custom 
in the Mcr. of Ven. Ill, ii, loi ; Sonn. 68 ; Timon^ IV, iii, 144, where Steevens 
himself has collected many references in point.] Malone quotes from Fynes 
Morison, Part III, Book 4, Chap. 2, p. 179 : ‘Gentlewomen virgins [he is speaking 
of England] weare gownes close to the body, and aprons of fine linnen, and goe 
bareheaded, with their haire curiously knotted and raised at the forehead, but many 
against the cold (as they say) weare caps of haire that is not their owne.* [The 
same fashion prevailed also in France ; on the page preceding the one just noted, 
this observant traveller tells us that the French ‘ Gentlewomen beare vp their haire 
on the fore-heades with a wier, and vpon the back part of the head weare a cap of 
other haire then their own, oner their cawle, and aboue that they weare a coyfe of 
silke, lined with Veluet, and hauing a peake downe the forehead.’ I suppose the 
‘ tire within ’ refers to this inner trinuning of hair on the headdress, but Deighton 
supposes that ‘ within ’ means * in an inner room.’ — E d.] 

17. that exceedes] As in the French of to-day : ‘ ccla surpasse I’ — Ed. 

18. night-gowne] This is not what we now understand by this term. * Dressing- 
gown,^ which is usually given as its equivalent, belongs more to men than to women, 
and strikes a .singularly discordant note if substituted for * night-gown ’ where the 
latter word occurs. The Ghost of Hamlet’s father, according to the First Qto, in 
III, iv, 102, enters in his ‘night gowne’ — a costume, which, from its very vague- 
ness and suggestion of frills and airiness, and with Hamlet’s ‘shreds and patches* 
still in our ears, I should much prefer, for downright ghostliness, to ‘ dressing- 
gown,’ or even at a pinch to ‘ pyjamas,’ and we know that neither can be appro- 
priate, for Hamlet says that his father appears ‘in his habit as he lived.’ So that 
in Ha?nlet we know that ‘ night-gown ’ must mean merely the garment which the 
King of Denmark wore when he was divested of his armour or of his royal robes of 
day-time wear. So too, ‘ night-gown ’ must have this same meaning when Lady 
Macbeth tells her husband, after the murder of Duncan, to get on his ‘ night-gown 
lest occasion show us to be watchers.’ But when we come to feminine attire the 
same explanation will hardly apply. We are told that Lady Macbeth rises from her 
bed and throws her night-gown upon her, which is evidently the same article of 
clothing that Margaret here refers to, and for which the best modern equivalent that 
occurs to me, is wrapper. I .speak under correction in so weighty a question. — E d. 

19. cuts] Deighton : This probably refers to the slashed sleeves of the period, 
which had their counterpart in the ‘ razed shoes ’ mentioned in Hamlet, III, ii, 288. — 
W. A. Wright ; Apparently slashed openings in the gown which were filled in with 
some other material. 

12 



i;8 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act m, sc. iv. 


pearles, downe fleeues,fide fleeues,and skirts, round vn- 20 
derborn with a blewifh tinfel,but for a fine queint grace- 
full and excellent faftiion, yours is worth ten on’t. 

20. pearlesy downe Jleeues^'] pearls Warb. Johns. Knt, Cam, skirts^ rounds 
down-JleeveSy ^3^^ 4> ^owe, + . pearls t? ^owe, Pope, skirts round Dyce. 

d(mn sleeves^ Dyce. skirts round, Han. et cet. 

skirts, routid~\ QF,, Theob. 

20. pearles, downe sleeues, side sleeues,] Steevens : To remove an appear- 
ance of tautology, as ‘ down sleeves * may seem synonymous with ‘ side-sleeves ’ a 
comma must be taken out, and the passage printed thus : ‘ Set with pearls down 
sleeves, or, down th? sleeves.’ [Knight and Dyce followed Steevens in this omis- 
sion of the comma after ‘pearls,’ and both explain that the pearls are to be set down 
the sleeves. Halliwell says that ‘set with pearls’ refers to the gown.] * Side- 
sleeves’ mean lon^ ones. So, in Oieene^s Farewell to Follie, 1591 : ‘as great selfe 
loue lurketh in a side gowne, as in a short armour.’ [vol. ix. p. 250, ed. Grosart.] 
Again, in Laneham’s Account of Queen Elizabeths Entertainment at Kenilworth- 
Castle, I 575 » minstrels ‘gooun had syde slcevez dooun to midlegge’ [p. 50, 
Reprint 1 784 ; on p. 49, this same minstrel is mentioned as having ‘ a side gooun 
of Kendal green ;’ again, on p. 16, a Poet is described as clad in a ‘ long ceruleoous 
garment, with a side and wide sleeves Venecian wize drawen up to his clboz, his 
dooblett sleevez under that, Crimzen.* — Ei).] Side or syde in the North of England, 
and in Scotland, is used for long when applied to the garment. — Reed : .SY^/d’-sleeves 
were certainly long sleeves, as will appear from the following from Stowe’s Chronicle 
[p. 530, ed. 1600, 3rd year of Henry IV, A. D. 1401] : ‘This time was vsed exceed- 
ing pride in garments, gownes with deepe and broad sleeues, commonly called poke 
sleeues, the seruants ware the as wel as their masters, which might wel haue bin 
called receptacles of ^ deuil, for what they stole, they hid in their sleeues, whereof 
some hung downe to the feete, and at least to the knees, full of cuts & iagges, where- 
upon were made these verses [Tho. Hoccliue (in margin)]. Now hath this lord 
[‘ land ’ ap. Stowe] but litil neede of broomes | To swepe a- way the filthe out of the 
Street, ] Syn syde sleues of pen^lees gromes j Wile it vp likke, be it drye or weet.’ 
[p. 20, ed Fumivall, E. E. Text Soc, Elsewhere in this Regement of Princes, there 
is an instance where side means long: ‘What help schal he, Wos sleeues encom- 
brous so syde traille. Do to his lord?’ p. 18. — Ed.] — R. G. White (ed. i) : The 
dress was made after a fashion which is illustrated in many old portraits. Beside 
a sleeve which fitted more or less closely to the arm and extended to the wrist 
[the down sleeve], there was another for ornament, which hung from the shoulder, 
wide and open [the side sleeve ; this explanation is quoted, without dissent, by 
Rolfe, Deighton, and W, A. Wright, and it may be, therefore, accepted as cor- 
rect. — E d.] 

20, 21. vnderbom] Capell (p. 129) : This is meant of the ‘pearls,’ that they 
had under them strips of ‘ a blueish tinsel ;* and not of the gown’ s lining, as has 
been thought. — Halliwell ; It clearly relates to the skirts, Margaret meaning to 
say that the skirts were trimmed with tinsel. — ^W. A. Wright : Schmidt [Tex . ) 
interprets ‘underbear* in this passage ‘to guard, to face, to trim,’ It seems very 
improbable that a gown which was made of cloth of gold should be merely trimmed 
with ‘ a bluish tinsel,’ and it is more likely that this was the material either of the 



ACT III, SC. iv.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


179 

n 


Hero. God giue mee ioy to weare it, for my heart is 
exceeding heauy. 

Marga. ^Twill be heauier foone , by the waight of a 25 
man. 

Hero. Fie vpon thee, art not afliamM ? 

Marg. Of what Lady? of fpeaking honourably? is 
not marriage honourable in a beggar ? is not your Lord 
honourable without marriage ? I thinke you would haue 30 
me fay, fauing your reuerence a husband : and bad thin- 

31, f ay y fauing. ..a husband QFf, your reverence) *a husband'**. Pope 
Rowe, say ^ saving... a husband Cam. et cet. 

Ktly, Rife, Wh. ii. say (saving your 31. and’^ Ff, Rowe. Q. If 

reverence) a husband : or say (saving Pope, + . an Cap. et seq. 

lining of the skirt or of a petticoat worn under it so as to set it out. [Capell evi- 
dently supposed that pearls were set everywhere, on the down sleeves, on the side 
sleeves, on the skirts ; and that they were everywhere sewn over tinsel 1 — a profusion 
not unlikely, to judge from the costumes of the ladies in Virtues print, engraved in 
Stubbes’s Anatomy of Abuses, published by The New Shakspere Soc.; on the whole, 
I think his explanation of * uuderborn * the least objectionable. — E d.] 

21. tinsel] Thus, Cotgrave : ^ Brocatel : m. Tinsell ; or thin cloth of gold or 
siluer and again ‘ Pourfileure : f. Purfling ; a purfling lace or worke ; baudkin- 
worke ; tinselling. ’ 

21. queint] Thus, Cotgrave: * Coint : m. cointe : f. Quaint, compt, neat, fine, 
spruce, briske, smirke, smug, daintie, trim, tricked vp.' 

29. honourable in a beggar] Deighton : Probably a reference to Hebrews, 
xiii, 4: ‘Marriage is honourable in all,’ etc., a passage which forms part of the 
marriage service in the English Church. 

31. husband] Cambridge Editors [reading ‘say, “saving your reverence, a 
husband.” ’] : Modern editions have ‘say, saving your reverence, “a husband.” * 
But surely Margaret means that Hero was so prudish as to think that the mere men- 
tion of the word ‘ husband ’ required an apology. — Deighton : This note of the 
Cambridge Editors seems quite to miss the point. Margaret, in effect, says, I see 
what it is that shocks your modesty ; instead of saying * by the weight of a man^ I 
should for the sake of propriety (saving your reverence) have said ‘by the weight 
of a husband p for unless immodest thoughts put a bad construction upon honest 
words, you cannot at all events find anything objectionable in my amended version, 
‘the heavier for a husband.'* [I cannot quite agree with Deighton in thinking that 
‘ saving your reverence ’ can qualify any other word in the sentence but ‘ husband.’ 
It is the apologetic phrase when an improper word is used ; Margaret implies that 
Hero would insist upon its use before the word ‘ husband * ; as she uttered it she laid, 
I think, a strong satirical emphasis on it, reserving, however, the stronger emphasis 
for ‘husband.’ In Jonson’s Tale of a Tub, I, iv, we find : ‘ Lady Tub. . . . Who, 
when I heard his name first, Martin Polecat, A stinking name, and not to be pro- 
nounced In any lady’s presence without a reverence ;’ with the following note by 
Gifford : ‘ An allusion to the good old custom of apologizing for the introduction of 



i8o 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act hi, sc. iv. 


king doe not wreft true fpeaking, He offend no body, is 32 
there any harme in the heauier for a husband ? none I 
thinke, and it be the right husband, and the right wife, 
otherwife ^tis light and not heauy,aske my Lady Beatrice 35 
elfe,here flie comes. 

Enter Beatrice. 

Hero. Good morrow Coze. 

Beat. Good morrow fweet Hero. 

Hero. Why how now? do you fpeake in the fick tune? 40 

Beat. I am out of all other tune, me thinkes. 

Mar. Claps into Light a loue , (that goes without a 
burden,) do you fing it and He dance it. 43 

33. the,„hnsbatid?'\ As a quotation, 38,92. Coze\ C^aRowe. Ox Dtn. 

Cap. et seq. 42. Claps\ Clap's Q, Rowe i, Cap. 

heauier for‘\ heauier y for Q. Ran. Dyce, Wh. Cam. Rife. Clap us 

34. and il] if it Pope, + . an it Cap. Rowe ii et cet. 

et seq. Light «] Light o' Rowe ii. 

36. Scene VII. Pope, + . 43. He dance'\ He daunce Cl. 

a free expression, by bowing to the principal person in company, and saying, — Sir, 
with reverence P or, **Sft:, reverence.'" * — Eu.] 

34. right husband . . . wife] That is the right husband’ s right wife. 

35. light and not heauy] Great is the number of times that Shakespeare plays 
on the double meaning of the adjective ‘ light,’ which, in his day, to the ordinary 
meanings it now bears, added that of wanton. I suppose he did so, not from any 
love of punning in general or of puns on this word in particular, but from necessity ; 
because the class of characters, into whose mouth he generally puts this pun, is one 
that is especially fond of cheap and obvious plays upon words, — a class, unfortu- 
nately, not yet extinct. — ^E d. 

42. Light a loue] Steevens : This tune is mentioned in Two Gent. I, ii, 83 
[and with the same play upon words as here]. — Sir J. Hawkins : This is the name 
of an old dance tune. I have lately recovered it from an ancient MS [Hawkins 
gives merely the melody. Knight added a bass and a few notes of accompani- 
ment, but to me the arrangement is not as pleasing as that by Chappell, given below ; 
of course the melody is the same in both. — E d.] 

Chappell (pp. 221-224) The words of the original song are still undiscovered. 
When played slowly and with expression the air is beautiful. In the collection of 
Mr George Daniel is A very proper dittie : to the tune of Lightie loue; which was 
printed in 1570 [see below]. The original may not have been quite so ‘proper,’ if 
Light d Love was used in a sense in which it was occasionally employed, instead of 
its more poetical meaning. . . . Inasmuch as Margaret says, ‘do you sing it and I’ll 
dance it,’ it appears that Light <?’ Love was strictly a ballet y to be sung and danced. 

. . . Besides the air found by Sir J. Hawkins, the air is also contained in William 
Ballet’s MS Lute Booky and in MusicBs Delight on the Cithreny 1666. Halliwell ; 
The earliest notice of the tune yet discovered is in A Gorgious Gallery of Gallant 



ACT HI. SC. iv.] MUCH A DOE ABOUT NOTHING 


i8l 


Beau Ye Light aloue with your heeles, then if your 44 

44. Ve] QFf, Hal. Cam. Dtn, Wh. ii. Rowe i. 0* love Rowe ii. d loves Mar- 
Yes Rowe, + , Cap. Var. ’73. Yea Cap. shall conj. 
conj. Var. ’78 et cet. 44. heelesl] heels I Cap. et seq. 

aloue'] Q. alove, Ff. a love , 


Inventions^ 1578, where ‘the lover exhorteth his lady to be constant to the tune 
of — ^Attend thee, go play thee — not Li^ht of Love, lady.* The ballad, ‘ The Ban- 
ishment of Lord Maltravers and Sir Thomas Gurney,* in Deloney’s Strange His- 
tories ^ etc., 1607, and of ‘A song of the wooing of Queen Catharine by Owen 
Tudor, a young gentleman of Wales* are also to the tune of Light d L<we, 
[Chappell gives the words and the music of the ballad, whereof the copy was in 
Daniel’s Collection and is referred to, above. H alii well gives a facsimile of the 
ballad which is signed : ‘ By Leonardo Gybson * and is undated : Chappell states, as 
above, that it was printed in 1570, but how this date was determined he does not 
state. Moreover, this date will not accord with Halliwell’s assertion that the earliest 
mention of Light d Love is in 1578, if the phrase ‘Lightie Love* used in Gybson’ s 
ballad be merely a corruption of Light d Love^ which I suppose it is. On the 
whole, the question is enveloped with so much vagueness that all that is left us is 
to take what is given, without further curiosity, and with gratitude that the question 
is of no importance. The following is from Chappell, p. 224 ; 


A VERY PROPER DITTIE : TO THE TUNE OF LIGHTIE LOVE. 


Very Sloiv and Smoothly, 




Hereupon follows the rest of the ballad of more than a hundred lines, all quite as 
uninteresting and commonplace as the foregoing. — Ei>.] 

43. burden] Chappell (p. 222) : The burden of a song, in the old acceptation 
of the word, was the base, foot, or under-song. It is derived from bourdoun^ a drone 




i82 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act m, sc. iv. 


husband haue ftables enough, you’ll looke he fliall lackc 45 
no barnes. 

Mar. O illegitimate conftru6lion ! I fcorne that with 
my heeles. 

Beat. ’Tis almoft fiue a clocke cofin, ’tis time you 
were ready, by my troth I am exceeding ill, hey ho, 50 

Mar. For a hauke,a horfc,or a husband ? 

Beat. For the letter that begins them all,H. 52 

45 - you'll looke\ Ff, Rowe, -f-, Var. Cap. et cet. 

Ran. Mai. Knt, Wh. i, yoi/^le fee Q, 49. a clocke'] o' clock Theob. 

base (French, bourdon'). Thus, in Chaucer, ‘This sompnour bar to him a stif bur- 
doun, Was nevere trompc of half so grel a soun.’ — \_Prologuv, 673.] Margaret says 
that the song goes without a burden because there was no man or men present to 
sing one. — Naylor (p. 23); The earliest ‘burden’ known is that in the ancient 
Round ‘Sumer is icumen in,’ of the 13th century. Here four voices sang the real 
music in canon to these words; ‘Sumer is icumen in, Lhudb sing Cuccii,’ etc., 
while all the time two other voices of lower pitch sing a monotonous refrain, ‘ Sing 
cuccu nu, Sing cuccu,’ which they repeat ad infinitum till the four who sing the 
Round are tired. [Cotgrave gives, ‘ Bourdon .* m. A Drone, or Dorre-bee ; also, 
the humming or buzzing of bees ; also, the drone of a Bagpipe,’ etc. Again, ‘ Faux- 
bourdon. The drone of a Bagpipe.’] 

44. Ye Light aloue] Capell’s conjecture Yea is plausible, but inasmuch as 
Beatrice addresses Margaret throughout, except in line 86, with youy there seems to 
be no need of change in view of the uniformity of Qto and Folios. Possibly^ there 
is here an absorption : ‘Ye [’ll] “ Light o’ love” with your heels.’ I.et those who 
do not understand the double meaning in Beatrice’s words and in Margaret’s reply, 
deem themselves blest in the protection afforded by their ignorance. They are per- 
fectly innocent, maidenly remarks for the times of that Queen, who in her dying hours 
could find a pleasing distraction in listening to the very coarse stories of the ‘ ffun- 
dred Mery Tales.’ — E d. 

46. barnes] Johnson : A quibble between barns, repositories of com, and 
bairns, the old word for children. — Murray (//. E, D.) : This is the obsolete 
form of Bairn, a child ; it still survives in northern English ; bairn is the Scotch 
form, occasionally used in literary English since 1700. 

47, 48. scorne . . . heeles] Steevens (Note on Mcr, of Ven. II, ii, 9) : That 
is, I recalcitrate, kick up contemptuously at the idea, as animals, throw up their hind 
legs. [Walker {Crit. iii, 347) detects in Ven. Ad., 312, an allusion to this 
phrase wherein, possibly, the origin of the phrase may be found, although he does 
not suggest it. The lines are ; ‘ She [the mare] puts on outward strangeness, seems 
unkind, Spurns at his love, and scorns the heat he feels, Beating his kind embrace- 
ments with her heels.’ — ^E d.] 

50. hey ho] Pronounced hay ho, 

51, 52. For] For other examples of ‘for’ used in the sense of for the sake of 

because of, see Abbott, §§ i 5 o> necessary. 

51. husband] See II, i, 305. 

52. letter . , . H.] Johnson : This is a poor jest, somewhat obscured, and not 



ACT III, SC. iv.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


183 


[52. letter that begins them all, H.] 

worth the trouble of elucidation. Margaret asks Beatrice for what she cries ‘ hey 
ho ’ ; Beatrice answers, for an II, that is, for an ache or pain, — Steevens : Hey- 
wood among his Epigrams, 1566, has one on the letter II : *• H is worst amongst 
letters in the crosserow, For if thou finde him in thine elbow. In thyne arme, or 
leg, in any degree. In thy hed, or teeth, in thy toe, or knee, Into what place so euer 
/T may pyke him, Wher euer thou finde ache ihoM shalt not like him.’ — Barron 
Field {^Shakespeare Soc. Papers^ iii, 132) : The following has hitherto escaped the 
commentators : * Nor hawk, nor hound, nor horse, those letters hhh^ But ach itself, 
His Brutus’ bones attaches.’ — Wit's Recreations y 1640. Although this collection of 
epigrams was not published till 1640, yet its contents are both old and new. Many 
of them doubtless had been in vogue before the date of this play. [The verb was uni- 
formly pronounced ake. The noun alone was pronounced aitchy or, possibly, at times 
atch ; see Walker, Vers. p. 117. — Ed.] Hunter (i, 228-244) believes that under 
this //there is a veiled allusion to young William Herbert to whom the Sonnets are 
supposed to be dedicated ; he finds, from The Letters and Memorials of the Family 
of Sidney published in 1746, that toward the close of 1599 and during the year i6cx) 
(the date of the publication of Much Ado About Nothing) there were notable en- 
deavours on the part of young Herbert’s uncle, Sir Robert Sidney, to bring about, 
for political reasons, a match between his young nephew, then in his twentieth year, 
and a niece of the Lord Admiral, Charles Howard, Earl of Nottingham. But the 
match came to nought. The young ‘ Mr W. II ’ was wild and intractable, ‘ came 
not to court,’ as one of the Sidney letters states, under date of October, I 599 » ‘ but 
passed away the time in London merely in going to plays every day.’ ‘ In writing 
thus, as it were,’ says Hunter, ‘ for two descriptions of persons at once, a dramatist 
has a difficult task. It was necessary that Shakespeare, in this case, should steer a 
middle course between leaving his hero absolutely without marks of individuality by 
which he might be recognized, and so clearly exhibiting him that an ordinary spec- 
tator would be able to refer the character to its original. This singular introduction 
of the letter H, here representing ache to the many, and Herbert to the few, is one 
of those marks of individuality.’ Between the character of Benedick and of young 
Herbert, Hunter finds a parallel : both were averse to matrimony, both attempted 
verse, both sung and both danced, and if Lord Herbert was not a downright soldier, 
as Benedick was, it is recorded that ‘ he hath been away from court these seven days 
in London, swaggering it among the men of war, and viewing the manner of the 
musters.’ [Inasmuch as Benedick is portrayed by Shakespeare as an accomplished 
young gallant, I suppose it would not be very difficult to draw a parallel between 
him and dozens of the young springalds of that day, if we knew their lives inti- 
mately enough. — Ed.] Hunter sums up as follows : ‘ what I contend for is this : 
that the poet was cognizant of the design to bring about the union of his noble friend 
with a certain noble lady, and that out of this design arose the second plot of this 
play, those characters and incidents which arc added by the English poet to the story 
of Hero as he found it in Bandello. Shakespeare, however, makes the scheme suc- 
cessful, which is the opposite of the result of any such scheming in the real story. 
This is as if Shakespeare had said : Some ingenious devices have been tried and 
failed, I will show you how such a design might have been carried out to a success- 
ful issue ; and this he has done so skilfully that the whole has an air of being per- 
fectly in nature.’ [See Appendix, Identification of the Characters, — Ed.] 



i 84 much ADOE about NOTHING [act iii, sc. iv. 

Mar. Well, and you lie not turn’d Turke, there’s no 53 
more fayling by the ftarre. 

Beat. What meanes the foole trow ? 55 

Mar. Nothing I, but God fend euery one rheir harts 
defire. 

Hero. Thefe gloues the Count fent mee , they are an 
excellent perfume. 

Beat. I am ftuft cofin, I cannot fmell. , 60 

Mar. A maid and ftuft ! there’s goodly catching of 
colde. 

Beat. O God helpe me, God help me, how long haue 
you profeft apprehenfion f 

Mar. Euer fince you left it, doth not my wit become 65 
me rarely ? 

53. ^Pope, + . Cap. et seq. 6i. goodly'] a goodly Rowe, 

56. rheir] F,. Pope, Han. 

65. left it,] left it ; Rowe. 

53. turn’d Turke] Steevens ; Hamlet uses the same expression, III, ii, 264 : 
*If the rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me.’ And in Cook’s Green's Tu qnoque : 
‘ This it is to turn Turk ; from a most absolute, complete gentleman to a most absurd, 
ridiculous, and fond lover’ — [p. 226, ed. Hazlitt-Dodsley. Margaret here refers to 
the success of the trick that has been played on Beatrice, who, if she be not utterly 
changed in her nature, and therefore, in love, there’s no sure guide on earth or in 
the heavens. — E d.] 

55. trow] Lettsom {^Footnote to Walker, Crit, i, 79) ; The phrase here has the 
same meaning, and apparently answers to the modern, / wonder. — W. A. Wrkjht : 
‘Trow’ is used in questions either for ‘ I trow,’ which is nearly equivalent to / won- 
der, or for ‘ trow you ?’ equivalent to do you think ? can you tell? The former occurs 
in Merry Wives, 1 , iv, 140 : ‘ Who’s there I trow?’ With the present passage com- 
pare Cym. I, vi, 47 : ‘ What is the matter, trow ?’ IIalliwell gives numerous 
examples from old plays. 

56, 57. their harts desire] Compare Psalms xxi, 2. For the change from the 
singular ‘everyone’ to the plural ‘their,’ see IV, i, 327 ; V, i, 40. 

59 * excellent perfume] Some preposition seems to be here lacking, 
either of or o' ; but, perhaps, for ‘ an ’ we should read in, misheard by the com- 
positors. — E d. 

W. A. Wright : Among the attributes of a lover, according to Burton {Anat. of 
Mel. part 3, sect. 2, memb. 4, subs, i, p. 535, ed. 1651), were ‘a long love-lock, a 
flower in his ear, perfumed gloves, rings, scarfs, feathers, points, etc.’ 

64. apprehension] See II, i, 75. 

65. you left it] This ‘it’ does not refer to ‘apprehension’ with the meaning of 
quickness of wit, as Beatrice uses it, but to apprehension in its more usual meaning of 
seeing clearly. Thus understood, this speech of Margaret is an allusion to the decep- 
tion practised on Beatrice which the latter failed to ‘ apprehend ’ or see through. I 



ACT III, SC. iv.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 18 $ 

Beat, It is not feene enough, you fhould weare it in 6/ 
your cap, by my troth I am ficke. 

Mar. Get you fome of this diftillM carduus beuediHus 
and lay it to your heart, it is the onely thing for a qualm. 70 
Hero. There thou prickft her with a thiffcll. 

Beat. Be 7 iedi 6 lus^ why bcnedidlus? you haue some mo- 
rall in this benediclus. 

Mar. Morall ? no by my troth, I haue no morall mea- 
ning, I meant plaine holy thiffell , you may thinke per- 75 

69. of //iw] of the Cap. conj. 75. kdiy thiffcll^ holy -thistle ; Rowe. 

69. beuedictus] F,. holy thistle. Cap. 

71. There'\ Thcere F^,. 

think Margaret replies slowly and archly : ‘ Ever — since — ^you — ^left it,* and then 
gaily and rapidly, * doth not my wit,* etc. — ^E d. 

68. I am sicke] We who have heard Beatrice’s soliloquy, ‘What fire is in my 
ears,* etc., know that she was thoroughly ‘limed,* but Hero and Margaret can know 
it only through these confessions of Beatrice that she is sick, betraying as they do her 
sleepless, restless night. — E d. 

69. carduus beuedidtus] Steevens : Thus Coghan [‘or Cogan* according to 
W. A. Wright, whose text in the following extract is followed, as more correct than 
Steevens* s] in his Haven of Healthy 1584, in which there is a chapter (46) ‘Of 
Blessed thistill.* ‘ Carduus benedictusy or blessed Thistell so worthily named for 
the singular vertues that it hath. . . . Howsoeuer it be vsed it strcngtheneth all the 
principall partes of the bodie, it sharpeneth both the wit and the memoric, quicken- 
eth all the senses, comforteth the stomacke, procureth appetite, and hath a spcciall 
vertue against poyson, and preserueth from the pestilence, and is excellent good 
against any kinde of feuer. . . . For which notable effects this herbe may worthily be 
called Benedict us or Omnimorbiay that is a salue for euery sore.’ — Collier ; It is 
material to give the date of the earliest edition of Cogan’ s work, because he tells us 
that the use of the carduus benedictus had only lately been recognized, [llerbals 
and medical books published during the sixteenth century and down to the middle 
of the seventeenth are garrulous in praise of the vertue of this plant in healing every 
human ailment ; it would needlessly encumber these pages, to give even half of those 
which Halliwell cites. It was evidently one of the great medicines and lotions of 
the age. Margaret by the use of ‘this* evidently means ‘ this well-known cure.* 
Hunter (i, 253), from certain quotations, which he gives, deduces the theory that 
the herb was, as Margaret urges, especially efficacious in heart-troubles : ‘ About the 
beginning of the year 1527 Luther fell suddenly sick of a congealing of blood about 
his heart [Italics Hunter’s], which almost killed him; but by the drinking of the 
water of Carduus Benedictus, whose virtues then were not so commonly known, he 
was perfectly helped.* — Abel Redivivus, 1651, p. 44. — Ei).] 

73 > 74 * morall] Johnson : That is, some secret meaning, like the moral of a 
fable. — Malone: In the R. of L.y 104, the verb ‘moralise’ is used in the same 
manner ; ‘Nor could she moralise his wanton sight,* that is, investigate the latent 
meaning of his looks. Again, in Tam. of Shr. IV, iv, 78 : ‘ but has left me here 
behind to expound the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens.* 



i86 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iii, sc. iv. 


chance that I thinke you are in loue, nay birlady I am not 76 
fuch a foole to thinke what I lift, nor I lift not to thinke 
what I can, nor indeed I cannot thinke, if I would thinke 
my hart out of thinking, that you are in loue, or that you 
will be in loue, or that you can be in loue : yet Benedicke 80 
was fuch another, and now is he become a man, he fwore 
hee would neuer marry, and yet now in defpight of his 
heart he eates his meat without grudging, and how you 
may be conuerted I know not, but me thinkesyou looke 
with your eies as other women doe. 85 

79. of thinking] with thinking 8l. a man^] a man; Rowe. 

+ . o' thinking Cap. Var. Ran. Mai. 

74-80. When Beatrice accuses Margaret of having some meaning hidden under 
this allusion to Benedictus, Margaret sees instantly that she is gone too perilously 
near to betraying the plot, and she tries to throw Beatrice off the scent by a voluble 
gabbling on what she thinks, or might think if she chose, or might choose to think 
if she could, or indeed could not think at all, even if she should think her heart out 
with thinking, until she has succeeded in leaving Beatrice utterly bewildered, with 
the current of her thoughts completely diverted from herself to Benedick, so that she 
can only gasp out ‘ What pace is this thy tongue keeps T and Margaret can with per- 
fect truthfulness say that the gallop was a very genuine one. — Ei). 

83. eates . . . grudging] Johnson ; I do not see how this is a proof of Bene- 
dick’s change of mind. It would afford more proof of amorousness to say, *he eats 
not his meat without grudging but it is impossible to fix the meaning of proverbial 
expressions ; perhaps, * to eat meat without grudging ’ was the same as, to do as 
others do, and the meaning is, ‘ he is content to live by eating like other mortals, and 
will be content, notwithstanding his boasts, like other mortals, to have a wife.’ — 
M. Mason : The meaning is, that Benedick is in love^ and takes kindly to it, — 
Malone : The meaning, I think, is, ‘ and yet now, in spite of his resolution to the 
contrary, he feeds on love, and likes his food.’ — Deigiiton ; It seems doubtful 
whether anything more is meant than that Benedick, in spite of his heart being 
touched with love, does not find himself any the worse for it. — ^W. A. Wright : 
Though he is in love, he has not lost the appetite for which he was famous. I doubt 
Malone’s interpretation. [In this extremely skilful speech of Margaret, it would 
have been rash and headlong, I think, to have openly asserted that Benedick was in 
love. There is just enough of a passing touch to create a faint impression that such 
is the fact, and also enough to make his case parallel to Beatrice’s. It is merely the 
three little words: ‘and yet now’ that gives this impression in Benedick’s case, and 
merely ‘but methinks’ in Beatrice’s. In what follows there is no hidden meaning, 
but merely the statement of a commonplace fact. In spite of his heart, and of his 
oath never to marry, he eats his meat like all other men, and Beatrice, in the same 
way, looks with her eyes as all other women look, for a husband or for anything 
else. Both are mortal and, in ordinary life, will do as all mortals do. lago, in his 
talk with Roderigo, brings Desdemona down to the level of common humanity, in 
the same way, by exclaiming: ‘the wine she drinks is made of grapes.’ — E d.] 



ACT III, SC. V.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


187 

86 


Beat. What pace is this that thy tongue keepes. 

Mar. Not a falfe gallop. 

Enter Vrfula. 

Vrfula. Madam, withdraw, the Prince, the Count, fig- 
nior Benedicke, Don lohn, and all the gallants of the 90 
towne are come to fetch you to Church. 

Hero. Helpe to dreffe mee good coze, ^ooAMeg, 
good Vrfula. 93 

\Scene K] 

Enter LeonatOy and the Conjlabley and the Headborough. 

Leonato, What would you with mee , honeft neigh- 
bour? 

ConJl.Dog. Mary fir I would haue fome confidence 4 

86. that thy^ thy F^, Rowe i. House. Theob. 

88. Enter] Re-enter. Cap. I. Enter...] Enter Leon, with Dog- 

93. [Exeunt. Rowe. Om. QFf. berry and Verges. Rowe. 

Scene VIII. Pope, + . Scene V. 4 , etc. Conft. Dog.] Dogb. Rowe. 
Cap. et seq. Mary'] Marry Rowe. 

Another Apartment in Leonato^s 

87. false gallop] Madden (p. 296) : Although the horse in a state of nature 
will walk, trot, and gallop, yet he must needs be ‘ paced * if he is to acquit himself 
well under artificial conditions, while the amble and the ‘ false gallop * are purely 
artificial movements. . . . The false gallop, or artificial canter, was denoted by the 
Latin term succussatura, and the idea of jolting would be naturally associated with 
that pace in the case of the straight-pasterned, thickset horse of [Shakespeare^ s] day. 
With this knowledge we understand why Touchstone calls doggerel rhymes * the 
very false gallop of verses.’ Sadler, in his work De procreandisy etc* equis (1587) 
gives the following account of the false gallop : * my meaning is that your horse 
knows thorowly from his trot to rise to his false gallope, from his false gallope get to 
a swifter, and then from this swifter to descend again to his false gallope, and trot 
againe by turnes when and as oft as the rider shall thinke good, before you teach him 
to turne.’ [Many quotations will be found in Murray’s //. E* D* s. v, ‘gallop,* 
from Lord Berners in 1533 to Quarles in 1635.] 

1. Headborough] Halliwell : The subsequent directions show that Verges 
was the Headborough. ‘ Headborow signifies him that is chief of the frankpledge, 
and that had the principal government of them within his own pledge. And, as he 
was called headborow, so was he also called Burrowhead, Bursholder, Thirdborow, 
Tithingman, Chief-pledge, or Borowelder, according to the diversitie of speech in 
several places. Of this see Lambert in his Explication, etc., verbo, Centuria; 
Smyth de Rep* Angl* lib. 2. cap, 22. The same officer is now called a constable,’— 
Blount’s Law Dict*y 1691. 

4. confidence] Walker {Crit* iii, 226): In Rom, b* Jul* II, iv, 114, the 
Nurse says, ‘ I desire some confidence with you she means, I imagine, to say con^ 



i88 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act hi. sc. v. 


with, you, that decernes you nearely. 5 

Leon. Briefe I pray you , for you fee it is a bufie time 
with me. 

QonJl.Dog. Mary this it is fir. 

Headb. Yes in truth it is fir. 

Leon. What is it my good friends ? lO 

Con. Do. Goodman Verges fir fpcakes a little of the 
matter, an old man fir, and his wits are not fo blunt , as 
God helpe I would defire they were , but infaith honeft 
as the skin betweene his browes. 

Head. Yes I thank God, I am as honeft as any man li- 1 5 
uing, that is an old man, and no honefter then I. 

Con. Dog. Comparifons are odorous, palabras, neigh- 
bour Verges. 18 

6. it w] QFjjFj, Cap. Coll. Dyce, Var. Ran. Mai. little off Cap^. conj. 
Wh. Sta. Cam. Uis F^, Rowe et cet. Steev. et seq. 

8. stTy — Dyce ii, lii. 1 3. infaitli] in faith Rowe. 

9 , I 5 » etc. Headb.] Verg. Rowe. honeJi'\ as honest Rowe ii, + . 

II. little of'\ QFf, Rowe, + , Cap. 15, 16. Mnemonic lines, Warb. 

ference. So Mistress Quickly in Merry Wives, I, iv, 171, says, ‘I will tell your 
worship more of the wart the next time we have confidence.’ Vice versd, in Shirley, 
Love Tricks, V, iii, p. 96, ed. Dyce, Jenkin, the Welshman, says, * well, Jenkin 
were even best make shurneys back into her own countreys, and never put credits or 
conferences in any womans in the whole urld,’ ^ 

5. decernes] Dogberry might possibly have known that there is such a word 
as ‘ decern,’ although Shakespeare uses it nowhere else, but, in a modern text, dis- 
cern, I think, would more nearly reproduce the word which Dogberry uttered. — Ed. 

14. skin . . . browes] Reed: So, in Gammer Gurton^s Needle, 1551, Dame 
Chat says : * I am as true, I wold thou knew, as skin betwene thy browes.’ — Hawkins, 
Origin of the English Drama, p. 230. [May it be possible that this phrase arose 
from the fact that it was on the forehead that the brand of shameful conduct was 
set? — Ed.] 

15, 16. Yes . . . then I.] Warburton : There is much humour, and extreme 
good sense under the covering of this blundering expression. It is a sly insinuation, 
that length of years, and the being much ‘hacknied in the ways of men,* as Shake- 
speare expresses it, take off the gloss of virtue, and bring much defilement on the 
manners. For, as a great wit [Swift] says : ‘ Youth is the season of virtue ; corrup- 
tions grow with years, and I believe the oldest rogue in England is the greatest.* — 
Johnson : Much of this is true ; but I believe Shakespeare did not intend to bestow 
all this reflection on the speaker. — ^W. A. Wright : No one will doubt about the 
humour ; but for the good sense there is just as little as Shakespeare thought appro- 
priate to Goodman Verges. Sir Andrew Aguecheek spoke even more modestly of 
himself. See Twelfth Night, I, iii, 122 : ‘ Sir Toby. Art thou good at these kick- 
shaws, knight ? Sir Andrew. As any man in Illyria, whatsoever he be, under the 
degree of my betters ; and yet I will not compare with an old man.’ 



ACT III, SC. V.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 189 

Leon, Neighbours, you are tedious. 

Con, Dog, It pleafes your worlhip to fay fo,but we are 20 
the poore Dukes officers, but truely for mine owne part, 
if I were as tedious as a King I could finde in my heart to 
beftow it all of your worfhip. 

Leon, All thy tedioufneffe on me, ah ? 

ConJl,Dog, Yea, and ^twere a thoufand times more 25 
than ^tis, for I heare as good exclamation on your Wor- 
fliip as of any man in the Citie, and though I bee but a 
poore man, I am glad to heare it. 

Head, And fo am I. 

Leon, I would faine know what you haue to fay. 30 

Head, Marry fir our watch to night, excepting your 
worffiips prefence, haue tane a couple of as arrant 
knaues as any in Meffina. 


22. finde in‘\ find it in GIo. Rife, 
Huds. Dtn, Wh. ii, Cla. 

24. me^ ah me ! ah — Rowe L me, 
ha ? Rowe ii, + . me I ah ! Cap. me P 
ha! Coll. 

25. and Uwere... times] and U were... 


pound Q; [reading an] Cap. Coll. 
Dyce, Sta. Cam. Ktly, Huds. Rife. 
and twice a thousand times Pope, 
Han. 

32. haue] ha Q. ha^ Cam. Rife, 
Wh. ii. hath Pope, + . 


17. palabras] Steevens; So, in the Tam. of Shr.f Ind. I, 5, the Tinker says 
pocas pallabris, that is, few words, — a scrap of Spanish which might once have been 
current among the vulgar, and had appeared, as Mr Henley observes, in The Spanish 
Tragedy : * Pocas palabras^ mild as the lamb/ IV, p. 139, ed. Hazlitt-Dodsley. — 
W. A. Wright: ‘Palabras’ maybe Dogberry’s blunder for pocas palabras^ but it 
may not. 

19. tedious] Jacox (ii, 13) : Some experts in the art of writing fiction appar- 
ently fail to understand that the tiresomeness of a bore ought to annoy only the other 
persons of the .story, not the reader of it. Dogberry and Shallow, for example, as a 
shrewd critic has remarked, impress us with a strong conviction that, if we were 
doomed to live with them, life would be a dreary burden ; but as readers or spectators 
we find them infinitely amusing, 

21. the poore Duke's] Steevens ; This stroke of pleasantry (arising from a 
transposition of the epithet ‘poor,’) occurs in Meas. for Meas. II, i, 47, where 
Elbow says: ‘I am the poor duke’s constable.’ 

22. find in] See Text, Notes for a reading which, by an oversight, crept into the 
Globe Ed. and remained undetected by the Editors who printed therefrom. 

23. all of your] W. A. Wright : This is not one of Dogberry’s blunders. See 
Twelfth Nighty III, iv, 2: ‘How shall I feast him? what bestow of him?’ And 
Alls Welly III, V, 103 : ‘I will bestow some precepts of this virgin.* [See Abbott 
(§ 175) for examples of of and on used almost interchangeably.] 

25, times] Unquestionably, pound of the Qto is the better word. — ^E d, 



MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act hi, sc. v. 


190 

Con.Dog. A good old man fir, hee will be talking as 
they fay, when the age is in the wit is out, God helpe vs, 35 
it is a world to fee ; well faid yfaith neighbour Verges , 
well, God^s a good man , and two men ride of a horfe, 
one muft ride behinde, an honeft foule yfaith fir, by my 
troth he is, as euer broke bread, but God is to bee wor- 
fliipt, all men are not alike, alas good neighbour. 40 

Leo 7 i. Indeed neighbour he comes too fliort of you. 

Con,Do, Gifts that God giues. 

Leon, I muft leaue you. 

Con, Dog, One word fir , our watch fir haue indeede 44 

34-40. Mnemonic lines, Warb. Ashbee. 

34> 35* talking,,. f ay talking... say ; 37. and 1 w 6 \ an two 

Pope, Han. talking^ ... say ; Theob. ride of a horfe'] 7 'ide of horfe Fg, 

Warb. Johns, talking ; ...say rides an horfe F^F^, Rowe i. ride an 

35. is in the] is in^ the QF^, Rowe et horse Rowe ii, + . 
seq. 44. watch fir] Watch F^, Rowe, -fj 

37. God^s] he's Rowe ii,-f. Gods Var. Ran. 

35. age . . . out] Halliwell : The old proverb, ‘when wine is in, wit is out* 
(Ray’s English Proverbs y 1678) occurs at an earlier period, and in a form more nearly 
allied to Dogberry’ s version, in Yityytoodl s Efigrammes vppon Proverbesy 1577, — 
‘ When ale is in, wit is out,’ etc. 

35. is in the] After ‘in’ there is a comma in Booth’s Reprint of F,. There is 
none in Vemor and Hood’s Reprint of 1807, nor in Staunton’s Photolithograph, nor 
in my original. — E d. 

36. a world to see] Steevens : That is, it is wonderful to see. — Holt White ; 
Rather, it is worth seeing. Barret, Alvearuy 1580, explains, ‘ It is a world to heare,’ 
by ‘it is a thing worthie the hearing. Audire est operae pretium. — Horat.' — 
Dyce (G^te.) ; This expression was in use as early as the time of Skelton, who has 
in his Bo 7 vge of Courtcy ‘ It is a worlde, 1 saye, to here of some.’ Works y i, 47, ed. 
Dyce ; and it is found even in the second volume of Strype’s Annals of the Rcfortn.y 
first published in 1725, and which must have been written only a few years earlier : 
‘But it was a world to consider what unjust oppressions,’ etc., p. 209. [It is a 
common phrase, and occurs in Tam. of Shr. II, i, 313.] 

37. God’s a good man] Steevens : Thus, in the old Morality, or Interlude, of 
Lusty Juventus : ‘ He will say that God is a good man. He can make him no better, 
and say the best he can.’ [p. 73, ed. Hazlitt-Dodsley.] Again, in Burton’s Anat. 
of Melan. : ‘ there are a certain kind of people called Coordes . . . who worship the 
Divel, and alledge this reason in so doing : God is a good man and will do no harm, 
but the divel is bad and must be pleased, lest he hurt them.’ [Pt. 3, sect. 4, memb. 
i, subs. 3, p. 668, ed. 1651 .] — Halliwell: In Shakespeare’s time, the term man 
was applied, with great latitude, to any allegorical or spiritual being. 

37. a horse] The familiar use of ‘ a ’ for one; see a second use of it by Dogberry 
in IV, ii, 32. 

38. behinde] Johnson: This is not out of place or without meaning. Dog- 
berry, in his vanity of superior parts, apologizing for his neighbour, observes that 
‘ of two men on a horse, one must ride behind.’ The first place of rank or under- 
standing can belong but to one, and that happy one ought not to despise his inferior. 



ACT III, SC. V.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


19I 

45 


comprehended two afpitious perfons, & we would haue 
them this morning examined before your worfliip. 

Leon. Take their examination your felfe, and bring it 
me, I am now in great hafte,as may appeare vnto you. 

Conjl. It fliall be fuffigance. [Exit. 

Leon. Drinkc fomc wine ere you goe : fare you well. 50 

Mcffcngcr. My Lord, they ftay for you to giue your 
daughter to her husband. 

Lco 7 i. He wait vpon them, I am ready. 

Dogb. Goe good partner, goe get you to Francis Sea-- 
coalcy bid him bring his pen and inkehorne to the Gaole : 55 

we are now to examine thofe men. 

45. a/pidous'] auspicious Roweii, + , 54. Sea-] See- Ff. 

Dyce ii, iii, Huds. 55. Gaole\ Goa/e F , GoalF . jail 

48. as may\ as it may Q, Steev. Var. Pope. 

Coll. Dyce, Sta. Cam. Jvtly. 56. examine] PT, Rowe, Wh. Rife, 

49. (ICxit] Om. Rowe. Dtn. examination Q, Cap. et cet. 

50. [l£nter a Messenger. Rowe. tho/e] the/e Q, Cap. Var. Ran. 

53. tAem, /] tArm. I F^P^^, Rowe. Mai. Steev. Var. Knt, Cam. Ktly, 
[Ex. Leon. Rowe. Exeunt Le- Wh. ii. 

onato. Johns. 

54. Francis Seacole] See III, iii, 12, where, possibly, this same Francis is 
called George ; in both places his qualifications as a writer are referred to. 

56. examine] R. G. White (ed. i) : The blunder in the Qto is entirely out of 
place in Dogberry’s mouth ; it is not of the sort which Shakespeare has made char- 
acteristic of his mind. iJogberry mistakes the significance of words, but never errs 
in the forms of speech ; he is not able to discriminate between sounds that are like 
without being the same ; but he is never at fault in grammar ; and this putting of a 
substantive into his mouth for a verb is entirely at variance with his habit of thought. 
His blunders are those of pretending ignorance and conceited folly. If he would 
but use a vocabulary suited to his capacity, and talk only about what he understands, 
his speech might be without ideas, but it would also be without faults. Often as 
there was occasion for him to utter a falsely constructed sentence or misuse the parts 
of speech, Shakespeare never makes him do so; unless we are to believe the evidence 
of the unauthentic against that of the authentic copy, that this is a solitary instance 
of such incongruity. — Roi.fe : It may be added in support of the folio that Dog- 
berry has just used the verb correctly in line 46. — W. A. Wright : As to White’s 
remark that Dogberry * never errs in the forms of speech,’ it may be noted that he 
has just used * suffigance ’ for sufficient^ and though a nonsense word it is substantive 
in form. It is urged also in support of the Folio, that in line 46 he uses ‘ examined * 
correctly. But Dogberry is not consistent in his blunders, for in III, iii, 50, he uses 
‘suspect* in its proper sense, while in IV, ii, 72 it stands for respect. [I see no 
reason why Dogberry should be exempt from the common lot. We all agree that 
the rule : durior lectio praeferenda est^ is of general application, why, then, should it 
not be applied when Dogberry speaks? Of all others, his is the very case for it. 
Therefore, I prefer examination of the Qto. — Ed.] 



192 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv. sc. i. 

Verges, And we muft doe it wifely. 57 

Dogb. Wee will fpare for no witte I warrant you : 
heere^s that fhall driue fome of them to a non-come, on- 
ly get the learned writer to fet downe our cxcommuni- 60 
cation, and meet me at the laile. Exeunt. 


Aeius Quartus. 


Enter Prince^ Bajiard^ Leonato^ Frier ^ Claudio ^ Benedickey 
Hero y andBeatrice, 

Leonato. Come Frier FranciSy be briefc, oncly to the 
plaine forme of marriage, and you flial recount their par- 5 
ticular duties afterwards. 

Fran, You come hither, my Lord, to marry this Lady. 

Clau, No. 

Leo, To be married to her : Frier, you come to mar- 
rie her. lO 

Frier, Lady, you come hither to be married to this 
Count. 

Hero, I doe. 

Frier, If either of you know any inward impediment 14 


58. yoiC\ Om. Pope, + . 

59. heere' 5 thaf\ here's That [touch- 
ing his forehead.] Johns. 

to a non-come'] Ff, Rowe, + . to 
a noncome Q, Cara, to non-come Pope. 
to a non-com Cap. Var. ’73 — ’21, Knt. 

61. Iailc'\ Jaile F^. Goal F^, Rowe i. 

Exeunt.] Om. Q. 

Scene I. Pope. 

A Church. Pope. The inside of a 
Church. Coll. 


2. Leonato,] I^eonata, F^. 

3. Beatrice] Beatrice and others. 
Dyce. 

7. Fran.] Frier. Rowe. 

Lady,'\ QFf, Rowe i, Cam. Wh. 
ii. Lady? Rowe et cet. 

9. her : Frier ^'\ Q, Knt, Coll. Dyce, 
Wh. Cam. her. Frier, Ff. Rowe i. 
her. Friar ; Rowe ii et cet. 

11. to tins’] to the Rowe. 

12 . Count.] QFf, Rowe i. Cam. Wh. 
ii. Count? Rowe ii et cet. 


59. non-come] Capell (p. 129) : This form is significant, as we know, of — 
nm compos ; a pleasant quid pro quo of the speaker, who means — non plus, 

2. Franz Horn (i, 274) : Shakespeare’s stage-setting is worthy of note, when 
misfortune is to befal. Jest and the dance prevail in cheerful rooms and pleasant 
gardens, but the tragic element of life is presented in a church, — the most fitting 
place, for here we must first seek consolation for earthly woes. 

14. If either, etc.] Douce: This is from our Marriage Ceremony, which (with 
a few slight changes in phraseology) is the same as was used in the time of 
Shakespeare. 




ACT IV, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


Jt93 

15 


why you fhould not be conioyned, I charge you on your 
foules to vttcr it. 

Claud. Know you anie, Hero? 

Hero. None my Lord. 

Frier. Know you anie, Count ? 

Leon. I dare make his anfwer, None. 20 

Clau. O what men dare do / what men may do ! what 
men daily do ! * , not knowing what they do ! * 

Bene. How now ! interie6lions ? why then, fome be 
of laughing, as ha, ha, he. 

Clau. Stand thee by Frier, father, by your leaue, 25 

Will you with free and vnconftrained foule 
Giue me this maid your daughter ? 

Leon. As freely fonne as God did giue her me. 

Cla. And what haue I to giue you back,whofe worth 
May counterpoife this rich and precious gift ? 30 

Prin. Nothing, vnlcffe you render her againe. 

Clau. Sweet Prince, you learn me noble thankfulnes ; 

There Leonato^ take her backe againe, 

Giue not this rotten Orenge to your friend. 

Sheets but the figne and femblance of her honour : 35 


22. daily do /] daily doy not knowing 
what they do ! Q, Theob. Warb. et seq. 

23. interiedlions\ intericdlions Sta. 
Facsimile. 

24. huy hay Ff, Rowe, + , Mai. 
Var. ahy hay he, Q, Cam. Wh. ii. ha 
ha, ha ! Cap. 


25. by Finery"] by Frier: F^F^. byy 
Frier: Rowe. 

26. with free] with this free F^. 

28. Leon.] Leonata Q. 

33. Leonato] Leonata F^. 

34. Orenge] Orange F^F^. 


22 . * not knowing . . . do *] These words are in the Qto. There are so many 
exclamations ending in ‘ do,* that this last might have been easily lost to the ear of 
the compositor and forgotten, or overlooked by the eye. 

24. ha, ha, he] Hunter (i, 254) : Shakespeare had been anticipated in this 
ludicrous mode of applying the language of the grammar. It occurs in Lyly’s 
Endymion, where Sir Tophas says, * An interjection, whereof some are of mourn- 
ing : as ehoy vah P [HI, iii, p. 43, ed. Baker.] — W. A. Wright ; Ben Jonson, in 
his English Grammary gives as examples of interjections ‘ah, alas, woe, fie, tush, 
ha, ha, he.* 

25. Stand thee] See HI, i, 3. 

32. you learn me] This use of ‘ learn * instead of teach may be still heard in this 
country. In Temp, I, ii, 425 (of this ed.), Caliban uses both words, wil^hin three 
lines ; ‘ You taught me Language, and my profit on’t Is I know how to curse; the 
red plague rid you For learning me your language.* — Ed. 

13 



194 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv, sc. i. 

Behold how like a maid ftie bluflies heere ! 36 

O what authoritie and fliew of truth 
Can cunning finne couer it fclfe withall ! 

Comes not that bloud, as modeft euidence, 

To witneffe fimple Vertue ? would you not fweare 40 

All you that fee her, that the were a maide, 

By thefe exterior fliewes ? But fhe is none : 

She knowes the heat of a luxurious bed : 

Her blufh is guiltineffe, not modeftie. 

L^onato. What doe you meane, my Lord ? 45 

Clau. Not to be married, 

Not to knit my foule to an approued wanton. 

Leon^ Deere my Lord, if you in your owne proofe, 48 

46^48. Three lines, ending foule... Steev. conj. 

Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. Walker 48. Deere^ Dear^ dear Dearest 
( Vers. 137). Wagner conj. 

46, 47. N'ot to be. ..foule'] One line, Lord^] lord — [He pauses from 

Dyce, Walker (^Crit. iii, 21) Huds. emotion] Marshall. 

47. JVbt to bnit] Not knit ¥{, Rowe, Theob, + . person 

•f , Cap. Var, Ran. Steev. Nor knit Gould. 

37. authoritie] Deighton : That is, warranty ^ guarantee ; rather than dignity^ 
noblenessy as Schmidt explains it. 

38. Can] This affirmative form of question is not uncommon in Shakespeare. 
We should now say Cannot. See also line 270 below : ‘ Ah, how much might the 
man deserve,* etc. — E d. 

39. modest evidence] That is, evidence of modesty. 

41. that she were] Allen (MS) ‘Were’ is here in the subjunctive by attrac- 
tion by ‘would* in the preceding line. [The only satisfactory way, I think, of 
accounting for this subjunctive. See Abbott, § 368, where this present passage is 
quoted, and apparently the subjunctive explained as implying futurity. — Ed.] 

43. luxurious] Johnson : Luxury is the confessor’s term for unlawful pleasures. 
[In Roman Catholic Moral Theology the definition, to this day, of ‘ luxury * is 
‘inordinatus appetitus rei venereaj.* — Ed.] 

46-48. See Text. Notes for a metrical arrangement of these lines proposed by 
Walker, not knowing that he had been anticipated by the Variorum of 1778. Dyce 
in his First Edition proposed the arrangement of lines 46, 47 (wherein he, too, had 
been anticipated by the same Variorum,) which he afterward adopted. But all these 
divisions of lines, on which Walker lays so much stress, are merely for the eye. No 
ear could or should detect them. — Ed. 

47, approued] See II, i, 360, if necessary, 

48. Dear] By many examples, Malone, Walker ( Vers. 136), and Abbott 
(J 480) prove that dear, fear, your, our, etc. were disyllables. With ‘dear* thus 
pronounced, the metre in this line is faultless, with the emphasis falling where it 
should on ‘you.* But neither Theobald nor Capell, nor, in our own days, 
Wagner, noted this pronunciation ; Theobald, therefore, proposed to correct the 



ACT IV, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


195 


Haue vanquiflit the refiftance of her youth, 

And made defeat of her virginitie. (her, 50 

Clan. I know what you would fay: if I haue knowne 
You will fay, fhe did imbrace me as a husband. 

And fo extenuate the forehand finne : No LeonatOy 
I neuer tempted her with word too large. 

But as a brother to his filler, fliewed 55 

Balhfull finceritie and comely loue. 

Hero. And fecmM I cucr otherwife to you ? 

Out on thee feeming,! will write againft it, 58 

49, of her\ of your F^F^. et seq. (except Sta.) 

50. virginitie,‘\ virginity — Rowe et 55. fJiezved'] shelv'd Rowe, 

seq. 57. feem'd'\ fern' d Fj. 

52. W//] QFf, Cap. Dyce i, Cam. 58. thee feeniingyl QFf, Rowe, the 

Wh. ii. Pope et cet. seeming! Knt. thee^ seeming! Coll. 

53. And /<?] And to F^F^. thee! seeming! Seymour, Wh. Sta. Cam. 

forehand'^ 'forehand 1790. thy seeming ! Pope et cet. 

No Leonato] Separate line, Pope 

metre at the end of the line by reading approof for * proof’ whereby the emphasis 
is wrongly laid on ‘if’ and ‘ in.’ The Text. Notes show Capell’s text and Wagner’s 
conjecture. — E d. 

48. proofe] Tyrwhitt : This may signify, ‘ in your own trial of her.’ — H alli- 
WELL: The word ‘proof’ may also be interpreted example^ with every probability 
of that being the meaning intended. ‘ A proofe : an example, a saie, a token, a 
paterne, a shew.’ — Baret’s Alvearie^ 1580. 

52. You will] Howsoever these two words are written, they must be pronounced 
you'll in reading. 

52. husband] Dktgiiton ; Betrothal in Shakespeare’s day was looked upon as 
a contract much more binding than the ‘ engagement ’ of modern limes, and was 
accompanied by certain ceremonies, such as the joining of hands before witnesses, 
see Wint. Tale^ IV, iv, 400 ; the exchange of kisses, see King JohUy II, i, 532 ; 
the interchange of rings, see Twelfth Nighty V, i, 1 59, Rich. Ill: I, ii, 202, Two 
Gent. II, ii, 5. 

54. large] Johnson: So he uses ‘large jests’ [II, iii, 191, which see] in this 
play, for licentiousy not restrained within due bounds. [I think we should now say, 
either broad, as W. A. Wright suggests, or free . — Ed.] 

58. thee seeming] Knight : We believe that the poet used ‘ Out on the seem- 
ing,’ — the specious resemblance, — ‘ I will write against it ' — ^that is, against this false 
representation, along with this deceiving portrait, ‘ You seem to me,’ etc. The com- 
mentators separate ‘ I will write against it ’ from what follows, as if Claudio were 
about to compose a treatise upon the subject of woman’s deceitfulncss. — Collier ; 
There is no reason for Pope’s change. Claudio addresses Hero as the personification 
of ‘ seeming,’ or hypocrisy. The MS has ‘ thee ’ needlessly altered to ////. — Dyce 
{^Strictures, p. 49) ; Collier’s lection is proved to be wrong by the second part of the 
line: if Claudio, ‘ addressing Hero as the personification of “seeming” or hypoc- 
risy,’ had said, “out on thee, seeming!’’ the words must have been followed by 



196 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv, sc. i. 

You feeme to me as Diane in her Orbe, 

As chafte as is the budde ere it be blowne : 60 

But you are more intemperate in your blood, 

Than Venus^ or thofe pampred animalls, 62 

59. feeme /<?] seem'd to Han. MaL 59. Diane] Diana F^F^. />w«Rowe. 
conj. Walker, Dyce ii, iii, Huds. Ktly. 

will write against tiike.’* * [For once, Seymour, (see Text. whose 

witless notes together with Jackson’s, Becket’s, and Lord Cuedworth’s, are 
banned in general from these pages, seems to have hit upon a happy reading and 
the best. Kind Nature never utterly deserts her offspring. — Ei>.] 

58. 1 will write] Warburton : What ? a libel ? nonsense. We should read, 
‘I will rate against it,’ i. e. rail or revile. — Edwards (p. 52) : Does Mr Warburton 
then find it impossible to write unless he writes a libel ? However that be, his emen- 
dation makes the matter worse ; for we cannot say, 1 will rate against a thing, or 
revile against it, tho’ rail we may ; but that is not much better fhan libelling. — Heath 
(p. 107) : I take the meaning to be this : In opposition to thy seeming innocence, I 
will testify and avouch under my hand the truth expressed in the five lines which 
immediately follow. — Capell (p. 130) : This editor [/. c. Capell] sees no reason 
why * write ’ should not be accepted in its common and ordinary sense, and Claudio’s 
intention in it, — that were he a poet, he would take the pen up, and play the satirist 
upon such a ‘ seeming ’ as that he exclaims against ; which, upon these words, he 
proceeds to set forth in the very colours of satire. — Steevens : So, in Cym. II, v, 
32, where Posthumus, speaking of women, says: ‘I’ll write against them. Detest 
them, curse them.’ — IIalliwell ; The verb ‘write’ is sometimes used metaphori- 
cally in the sense of, to pronounce confidently in words fit to be written, or generally, 
to pronounce or proclaim. So in Lear^ V, iii, 35 : ‘ About it, and write happy, 
when thou hast done.’ Posthumus scarcely means to use the phrase literally, but 
rather in the sense that he will inveigh strongly against the sex. It is by no means 
impossible that ‘ against is used in the sense of over-against, and that Claudio will 
write and publish his sentence in the front of her apparent innocence. [In which 
case, the two succeeding lines are, I suppose, that which Claudio would write. This 
would involve the objectionable change of ‘.seem’ to seemed. — Ed.] 

59. seeme] Hanmkr’s reading (with an excellent array of followers,) destroys 
one of those pictures which Shakespeare gives us by indirection. When old Capulet, 
in hurling epithets at Juliet, calls her, ‘ tallow-face !’ the coarse words betray the 
looks of agony on Juliet’s face, so blanched with terror that it catches the attention 
even of her father in the midst of his vituperative wrath. When Bassanio, pleading 
for forgiveness from Portia for parting with her ring, swears by her ‘ fair eyes,’ we 
see those eyes so sparkling with merriment over the success of the trick, and with 
love for its victim, that there was nothing else for Bassanio to swear by, they rivetted 
his gaze and became his world. Thus here, before the very eyes of Claudio, Hero 
stands, ncast in the past but in the present, as pure as moon- light, and the very type 
of chastity, and, in the rosy tint which catches his eye, we see the deepening blush 
of indignation on her cheek. — E d. 

60. budde . . . blowne] Before it can be even kissed by the wind, that ‘ char- 
tered libertine,’ ‘that kisses all he meets.’ — Ed, 

61. blood] See II, i, 172, if necessary. 



ACT IV. SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING I97 

That rage in fauage fcnfualitie. 63 

Hero. Is my Lord well, that he doth fpeake fo wide? 

Leon. Sweete Prince, why fpeake not you ? 65 

Prin. What fliould I fpeake ? 

I (land dilhonouPd that haue gone about, 

To linkc my deare friend to a common ftale. 

Leon. Are thefe things fpoken, or doe I but dreamc ? 

Bajl. Sir, they are fpoken, and thefe things are true. 70 
Bene. This lookes not like a nuptiall. 

Hero. True, O God / 72 


63. rage\ range Coll. MS. 

64. wide'\ wilde Coll. MS. 

65. Leon.] Claudio* Tieck, Dyce ii, 
iii, Delius, Huds. 


71. [Aside. Ed. conj. 

72. True! Rowe, + » 

Mai, Dyce, Cam. Wh. ii, Ktly. True ? 
Coll. Sta. Wh. i. 


64. so wide] Steevens : That is, so remotely from the present business. So, in 
Tro. <Sr» Cress. Ill, i, 97 : ‘No, no ; no such matter ; you are wide.* [See also Lear^ 

IV, vii, 50, where the old king is recovering his untuned and jarring senses and 
imagines Cordelia to be a soul in bliss, Cordelia says aside ‘Still, still far wide I*] 

65. Leon.] Tikck (p. 357) : In my opinion this speech belongs to Claudio, who 
looks about him, and is astonished that the Prince does not confirm his words, as he 
had promised that he would. Leonato is too horror-stricken to have any thought of 
the Prince at that moment, or to address him as ‘Sweet Prince.* — Knight (ed. ii) 
called attention to Tieck’ s reading ; and Dyce quoted Knight, adding : ‘ To Claudio, 
as I saw long ago, [this speech] assuredly belongs ; — and Claudio has, only a few 
speeches before, addressed Don Pedro in the same terms, — ‘ Sweet prince^ you learn 
me noble thankfulness.* — Halliwell: The speech is scarcely suited to [Claudio] 
who has but just been involved in the utmost extremity of anger ; and it is more 
appropriate in the mouth of Leonato, who is overwhelmed with astonishment at 
Claudio’s language and now appeals earnestly to Don Pedro in his daughter’s 
behalf. — Deighton regards Tieck’ s change as ‘probable.* — W. A. Wright: After 
what Hero says of Claudio’s words it seems natural that her father should appeal 
to the prince. [Should Claudio appeal to the Prince, would it not imply that he felt 
the need of corroboration ? whereas he would have died for the truth of what he had 
seen. — Ed.] 

68. stale] See, if necessary, II, ii, 24. 

71. This . . . nuptiall] Surely this is spoken aside ; if for no other reason, than 
to avoid the supposition that Hero’ s exclamation, in the next line, is in response to 
it. — Ed. — W. A. Wright : Shakespeare uses the plural ‘ nuptials ’ only in Pericles 

V, iii, 80, and in 0 th. II, ii, 8, where the Qq have the plural and the Ff the singu- 
lar. In The Tempest y V, i, 308, and A Mid. N. D. I, i, 125, V, i, 75, the plural is 
introduced in the later Ff. 

72. True,] It makes but little difference whether this be followed by a mark of 
interrogation or of exclamation, as long as it is understood to be a rej)etition of Don 
John's last word. In a modern text, I think it would be well to print it with quota- 
tion marks. — ^E d. 



MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv, sc. i. 


198 

Clau. Leonato, ftand I here ? 73 

Is this the Prince ? is this the Princes brother ? 

Is this face Heroes} are our eies our owne? 75 

Leon, All this is fo, but what of this my Lord ? 

Clau, Let me but moue one queftion to your daugh- 
And by that fatherly and kindly power, (ter, 

That you hauc in her, bid her anfwer truly. 

Leo. I charge thee doe, as thou art my childe. 80 

Hero. O God defend me how am I befet, 

What kinde of catechizing call you this ? 

Clau. To make you anfwer truly to your name. 

Hero. Is it not Hero ? who can blot that name 
With any iuft reproach ? 85 

Claud. Marry that can HerOy 
Hero it felfe can blot out Heroes vertue. 

What man was he,talkt with you yefternight. 

Out at your window betwixt twelue and one ? 

Now if you are a maid, anfwer to this. 90 

Hero. I talkt with no man at that howre my Lord. 

Prince. Why then you are no maiden. Leonato, 92 

80. doe'] Knt. to do F^F^. do fo 83. Clau.] Leo. or Leon. Ff, Rowe, 

QFg, Rowe et cet. Pope, Han. 

81. 0 God defend me] Q. O God de- 87. it felfe] herself Rowe, +. 

fend me, Ff, Rowe, + , O God defend 89. betwixt] betwitxt Fj. 

me I Cap. Sta. O God, defend me! 92. rtrr/*] Ff, Rowe, -f-, Var. Ran. 

Var. '21, Coll. Wh. i. d, God defend are you Q, Cap. et cet. 

me! Dyce, Cam. Wh. ii. Leonato,] Leonata, F^. 

78. kindly] Johnson : That is, natural power. Kind is nature. 

80. doe] Knight adopts the reading of the Folio, and defends it with the remark 
that * the pause which is required after the “ do,*^ by the omission of so [of the Qto], 
gives force to the command.’ [Why, then, should we retain * do ’ ? it is not essential 
to the sense. If force be gained by the omission of one word, would not more force 
be gained by the omission of two words? I prefer the Qto. — E d.] 

83. answer . . . name] Deighton : This refers to the answering by a man to 
his name when called upon to give evidence in court, or on similar occasions ; but 
Hero, bewildered by the strange turn which the proceedings have taken, answers 
literally. [Possibly, Claudio’s answer was prompted by the word ‘ catechizing’ in 
Hero’s question. The first question in the Catechism is: ‘What is your name?’ 
Deighton also has this suggestion. — ^E d.] 

87. Hero it selfe] The very name, by becoming a byword and a reproach, can 
blot out virtue. — E d. 

90. if ... a maid] If you are innocent you can explain this fact. 

92. Why ... no maiden] By denying what we know to be a fact, you confess 
your guilt. 



ACT rv, sc. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


199 

93 


I am forry you mull heare : vpon mine honor , 

My felfe, my brother, and this grieued Count 
Did fee her, heare her, at that howre laft night, 95 

Talke with a ruffian at her chamber window. 

Who hath indeed moll like a liberall villaine, 

Confell the vile encounters they haue had 
A thoufand times in fecret. 

lohn. Fie, fie, they are not to be named my Lord, lOO 

Not to be fpoken of, 

There is not challitie enough in language, 

Without offence to vtter them: thus pretty Lady 
I am forry for thy much mifgouernment. 104 


93. I am] Pm Dyce ii, iii, Iluds. 
97 - mojl like a liberall] like an illib- 
eral Han. Warb. like a most liberal 
Anon. ap. Cam. 

100. Ficyficy] Pie, Ilan. 

100, loi. not to be named fpoken 
of] One line, Han. Cap. Var. Ran. Mai. 
Steev. Var. Knt, Dyce i. 


100, loi. they are,.fpoken of] One 
line (reading fpoke)^ Sta. 

100, loi. to be,, fpoken of] 

Ktly. 

101. fpoken] fpoke Q, Cap. Van 
Ran. Mai. Steev. Var. Coll. Dyce, Sta. 
Cam. Wh. ii. 

104. I am] Pm Dyce ii, iii, Huds, 


97. liberall] Johnson : < Liberal here, as in many places in these plays, means 
frank beyond honesty, or decency. Free of tongue, — Steevens : So, in The Fair 
Maid of Bristow, 1605 ; * But Vallinger, most like a liberal villain, Did give her 
scandalous ignoble terms.’ [See also the note on Marge,* II, iii, 191. May not 
‘ liberal ’ be also used here in the sense of lavish, free-handed anticipating (prolep- 
tically, the grammarians call it) the ‘thousand times* ? — Ed.] 

103. Without , . . Lady] Fleay (Ingleby’s Shakespeare the Man, etc. ii, 
80) : There are few Alexandrines in this play, and of these few some are dubious. 
In the present line, I would pronounce ‘utter ’em’ as two syllables. [Except on 
the principle that ‘ when giddy be holp by backward turning,’ it is not easy to see 
how one blemish is to be obliterated by the substitution of another and a greater one. 
Vile as Don John is, and worthy of racking torture, I do not hate him enough to 
condemn him to say uttrem for ‘ utter them.’ — Ed.] 

103. thus] Collier (ed. ii) : Thou is evidently more proper, with reference 
both to what follows and what precedes ; it is the emendation of the MS of an easy 
and common misprint. [Collier adopted thou in his Second Edition, but deserted 
it in his Third.] 

104. much] For ‘much* thus used, see Abbott, § 51. 

104. misgouemment] W. A. Wright: Thy grievous misconduct. Shake- 
speare does not again use ‘ misgovernment * for disorderly, indecorous conduct, but 
he has ‘ misgoverning * in the same sense in Lucrece, 654 : ‘ Black lust, dishonour, 
shame, misgoverning. Who seek to stain the ocean of thy blood.* On the con- 
trary, Katharine in Henry VIII: II, iv, 138, is praised by the king for her ‘ wife- 
like government.* 



200 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv, sc. i. 


Claud. O Hero ! what a Hero hadft thou beene 105 

If halfe thy outward graces had beene placed 
About thy thoughts and counfailes of thy heart ? 

But fare thee well,moft foule,moft faire, farewell 
Thou pure impiety, and impious puritie, 

For thee He locke vp all the gates of Loue, 1 10 

And on my eie-lids fhall Conie6lure hang, 

To turne all beauty into thoughts of harme, 1 12 

105, 106. beene\ bin Q. Var. Knt, Coll. Dyce i, Wh. Sta. Cam, 

107. thy thoughts'] QFf, Cap, Steev. the thoughts Rowe et cet. 


105. O Hero !] Lady Martin (p. 318) : Hero is at first so stunned, so bewil- 
dered, so unable to realise what is meant by the accusation, that she cannot speak. 
When Claudio, assuming conscious guilt from her silence, went on with his charge, 
1 [as Beatrice] could hardly keep still. My feet tingled, my eyes flashed lightning 
upon the princes and Claudio. Oh that I had been her brother, her male cousin, 
and not a powerless woman ! How I looked round in quest of help, and gladly 
saw Benedick withdrawn from the rest ! And how shame seemed piled on shame 
when the hateful Prince John [.spoke so in.sultingly] to the victim of his villainy. 
Oh for a flight of deadly arrows to send after him ! Then Claudio’s parting speech, 
with its flowery sentimcntali.sm, so out of place in one who had played so merciless 
a part, sickened me with contempt. 

105. what a Hero] Johnson : I am afraid here is intended a poor conceit upon 
the word Hero. — Hau.IWELL : Dr Johmson’s supposition is unnecessary, and at 
variance with the tenor of the .speech. She is called, in the next Act, ‘ virgin 
knight,* but most probably in neither instance is there any allusion to Hero’s mar- 
tial name. [What Halliwell says is eminently just. We do not associate mere 
physical beauty, ‘outward graces,’ and ‘counsels of the heart’ with a hero. — Ed.] 
107. thy thoughts] Rowe’s change to *^the thoughts’ is extremely tempting. 
Dyce (ed. ii) boldly pronounces ‘thy’ a ‘mistake, ari.sing from the occurrence of 
“ thy ” both in the preceding and in the present line.’ 

107. counsailes] See II, iii, 195. 

109. puritie] Walker ( Vers. 201) : The i in -ity is almost uniformly dropt in 
pronunciation. [This remark must pass without comment further than that I do not 
believe it. That the i was slurred, and reduced to a mere ripple after the liquid r 
is most likely, but that it was ‘ dropt,’ and the word pronounced pure-tyy oxen and 
wain ropes cannot hale me to the belief. — E d.] 

109. Thou . . . puritie] Deighton quotes Tennyson, Lancelot and Elaine^ 
lines 871-2 : ‘His honour rooted in dishonour stood, And faith unfaithful kept him 
falsely true.* [Compare Juliet’s frantic raving, in the fir.st moments after learning 
that Romeo’s hand had shed Tybalt’s blood. — Ed.] 

III. Coniec5ture] Malone: That is, suspicion. [Schmidt gives two other 
instances of this use of ‘conjecture’ : Wint. Tale, II, i, 176: ‘Their familiarity 
Which was as gross as ever touch’d conjecture’ ; and Hamlet ^ IV, v, 15 : ‘ she may 
strew Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.’ But it is quite possible to give 
‘conjecture’ its ordinary meaning in both passages. — Ed.] 



ACT IV, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 201 

And neuer fliall it more be gracious. 113 

Leon. Hath no mans dagger here a point for me? 

Beat. Why how now cofin, wherforc fink you down? 115 
Bajl. Come, let vs go : thefe things come thus to light, 

Smother her fpirits vp. 

Bene. How doth the Lady? 

Beat. Dead I thinke, helpe vncle, 

HerOy why HerOy Vncle, Signor Benedickey Frier. 120 


1 14. [Hero swoons. Han. et seq. 120. Hero ... jFnVr.] Hero! wky^ 

1 1 7. [Exe. D. Pedro, D. John and Hero! Uncle! Signior Benedick! 

Claud. Rowe. Friar! Rowe et seq. (subs.) 

Scene II. Pope, + . 


1 14. Hath ... for me?] Lady Martin (p. 316): When Claudio brings 
forward his accusation against his bride, Ih‘atrice is struck dumb with amazement. 
Indignation at the falsehood of the charge, and at the unmanliness that could wait 
for such a moment to make it, is mingled with the keenest sympathy for Leonato as 
well as Hero. I never knew exactly for which of the two my .sympathy should be 
most shown, and I found myself by the side now of the one, now of the other. 
Hero had her friends, her attendants round her ; but the kind uncle and guardian 
stands alone. Strangely enough, his brother Antonio, who plays a prominent part 
afterwards, is not at the wedding. [Antonio’s explosion of wrath had to be reserved 
for a later scene. Had he been jjresent, his outburst would have befallen at the 
very altar, and have interfered with the plot. It seems like an attempt to gild 
refined gold to add a word to these inimitable revelations of I^ady Martin. — Ei>.] 

1 14. ‘ Oh, how one ugly trick will spoil, The sweetest and the best ! ’ I'hus 
begins one of Jane Taylor’s Original Poems, familiar to us all in our nursery. The 
words constantly recur to me when I .see admirable, nay, most excellent editors 
follow the lead, in stage-directions, of commonplace mediocrity. No dramatist 
needs stage-directions, in the text, less than Shakespeare ; he leaves nothing to 
conjecture, he tells us everything. When Beatrice exclaims in terror, ‘ Why, how 
now. Cousin ! wherefore sink you down ! ’ whosoever needs to be told, in a stage- 
direction, that ‘Hero swoons’ ought to have the word ‘ says’ inserted in the text, 
for his better comprehension, before every speech. — Ei). 

1 1 7. Smother . . . vp] Here ‘up’ is not redundant, but intensive. Compare 
‘paint out,’ III, ii, 100 ; and also see note on ‘kill them vp,’ As You Like It, II, 
i, 66 (of this ed. ) where references will be found to many similar phrases. On this 
present passage W. A. WRir.HT quotes ‘stifle up,’ — King John, IV, iii, 133 ; poisons 
up, — Lovers Lab. L. IV, iii, 305. 

1 18. Bene.] Fi.etchkr (p. 267) : Since Benedick is not at all in the confidence 
of his friend the Count, and his princely patron, as to their alleged observations 
re.specting the conduct of Hero, we see him, when her accusers have retired from the 
scene, remaining with perfect propriety, except the officiating ecclesiastic, the only 
impartial advi.ser and consoler of the afflicted family. [But was it for no other reason 
that he lingered where Beatrice was? — ^Ei).] 

120 . Vncle] To reduce this line to a semblance of decorous rhythm with only 



202 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv. sc. i. 

Leonato. O Fate ! take not away thy heauy hand, I2i 

Death is the faireft couer for her fliame 
That may be wifht for. 

Beatr. How now cofin Hero ? 

Fru Haue comfort Ladie. 125 

Leon. Doft thou looke vp ? 

123-126. As two lines, ending 126. looke vp\ still look up Steev, 
..,vpF Steev. Var. ’03, ’13. conj. 


twelve syllables instead of fourteen, Fleay (Ingleby’s Shakespeare the Man, etc., 
ii, 81) omits this repetition of ‘uncle.’ It is quite sufficient, for Beatrice, though 
Fleay does not allude to it, to have summoned her uncle oner, and, no matter what 
were her alarm and terror, nothing should have induced her to call upon him trvice, 
at the risk, I tremble while I write, of uttering fourteen syllables in one line ! — Ed. 

120. Signor Benedicke] Lady Martin (p. 317) : Beatrice’s blood is all on 
fire at the disgrace thus brought upon her family and herself. When she hears the 
vile slander supported by Don Pedro ; and when Don John, that sour-visaged hypo- 
crite whom she dislikes by instinct, with insolent cruelty throws fresh reproaches upon 
the fainting Hero, her eye falls on Benedick, who stands apart bewildered, looking 
on the scene with an air of manifest distress. In that moment, as I think, Beatrice 
makes up her mind that he shall be her cousin’s champion. Were she not a woman, 
she would herself enter the lists to avenge the wrong ; since she cannot do this 
directly, she will do it indirectly by enlisting this new-found lover in her cause. 
How happy a coincidence it is, that Hero has so lately brought the fact of Benedick’s 
devotion to her knowledge ! All remembrance of the harsh, the unkind accusations 
against herself, with which the information was mixed up, has vanished from her 
mind. It was Hero who revealed to her the unsuspected love of Benedick, — at least 
its earnestness and depth, — and Hero shall be the first to benefit by it. Benedick is 
so present to her thoughts, that when Hero faints in her arms, she calls to him, as 
well as to Lconato, and the Friar, to come to her assistance. 3 Mor is he unmoved by 
what he has noted in Beatrice. 

125. Fri.] C. C. Clarke (p. 310) : Shakespeare has, I think, never introduced 
a Friar in any of his plays but he has made him an agent to administer consolation 
and provide means for securing domestic peace. All his Friars are characters im- 
plicitly commanding love and respect. Now, living as he did, in the early period of 
our rupture with the Church of Rome ; and v'hen, to lend a helping hand toward 
pulling down and bringing into disrepute that hierarchy, was considered an act of 
duty in every proselyte to the Reformed Church, it is not a little remarkable that he 
should have uniformly abstained from identifying himself with the image-breakers. 
To this may be retorted, that in the plays where he has introduced the Friar, the 
scene was laid in Catholic countries, and where that religion was paramount ; that 
he was a painter of nature and character, not a sectarian, civil or ecclesiastical ; and 
lastly, that it was not his cue to be controversial, either actively or implied. But as 
the mental bias in every writer will casually betray itself ; so we find, that when 
Shakespeare has introduced a member of the Zc»TC/-Church party, — such as the Oliver 
Martexts, the Sir Hughs, the Sir Nathaniels, and the Sir Topazes, — he has usually 
thrown them into a ludicrous position ; for like his brother poet, Spenser, and other 



ACT IV, SC. i.] MUCH AD OR ABOUT NOTHING 203 

Frier. Yea, wherefore fliould fhe not? 127 

Leon. Wherfore ? Why doth not eucry earthly thing 
Cry lliame vpon her? Could (he hccre denie 
The ftoric that is printed in her blood ? 1 30 

Do not Hue Hero ^ do not ope thine eyes ; 

For did I thinke thou wouldft not quickly die, 

Thought I thy fpirits were ftrongcr then thy fhames, 

My felfe would on the reward of reproaches 134 


128. Why do/ Wky^ do/h Theoh. et 134. reward^ Coll. ii. rereward Q, 

seq. Rowe, + . reareward F,. rearward 

133. JIiamcs\ Jhame's F^F^. 

master-intellect's of the day, he was disgusted with the unimaginative interfering 
spirit, and gross intolerance of Puritanism, which had then come in, and, indeed, 
was prevailing. In the play of Hittg John he has, it is true, with sufficient explicit- 
ness denounced the intolerance of the Papal dominion ; but there (like the majority 
of his countrymen) he was but testifying to a long-existing opprobrium. — RusKiN 
(Modern Painters^ iv, Chap, xx, § 36) : The Friar of Shakespeare’s plays is almost 
the only stage-convcntualism which he admitted ; generally nothing more than a weak 
old man who lives in a cell, and has a rope about his waist. 

130. in her blood] Johnson: That is, the story which her blushes discover to 
be true. — Seymour : This explanation is more elegant than correct ; for Hero had 
just then fainted, and consequently could not be blushing ; the story that is printed 
in her blood is the pollution with which she is supposed to be stained, pollution so 
indelible that it permeates the vital principle of her being. — Halliwell : To print 
is constantly used metaphorically in the sense of, to impress, in the generic meaning 
of that verb. Dr Johnson’s interpretation, however, is supported by the Friar’s sub- 
sequent notice of the ‘ thousand blushing apparitions,’ unless we suppose that Leonato 
is now alluding to Hero’s present condition. — W. A. Wright : Johnson’s explana- 
tion is more natural than that given by Schmidt (s. v. Print), the story ‘with the 
stain of which her blood is polluted.’ [For which Schmidt was, possibly, indebted 
to Seymour. — PIi).] 

133. spirits] This word, where the metre does not require us to pronounce it 
disyllabically, is monosyllabic; pronounced sprit, or sprite, or, possibly, sprete. 
See Walker, Crit. i, 197. 

134. reward] Evidently a misprint for ‘rearward.’ — Collier (ed. ii, reading 
‘ reward ’ ) : The meaning is, that Leonato was willing to run the risk of being 
rewarded with reproaches. The MS substitutes hazard for ‘reward.’ [Collier reads 
‘rearward’ in his ed. iii.] — Halliwell : So, in some old versions of the Bible, in 
Isaiah, Iviii, 8 : ‘ the glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward,* where the last word 
has sometimes been misinterpreted reward. The meaning of the text is clearly either 
a threat to take his daughter’ s life, after heaping reproaches on her, or that he will 
follow the heavy reproaches that have been lavished upon her, by ‘ striking at her 
life.’ Compare Sonnet xc. [Collier’s MS] reads hazard, but Leonato is in too 
great a fury to pass a thought as to what might be said of his determination. — Brae 
(Collier, Coleridge, and Shakespeare, p. 145) : The true word lies within a hair’s- 
breadth of the original : for ‘ reward ’ read re-word, ‘ Re- word ’ was a favourite with 



204 


MUCH ABOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv, sc. i 


Strike at thy life. GrieuM I, I had but one ? i3Jj^ 

Chid I, for that at frugal Natures frame ? 

0 one too much by thee ; why had I one f 
Why euer was^t thou loulie in my eies ? 

Why had I not with charitable hand 

Tooke vp a beggars iffue at my gates, l 4 o 

Who fmeered thus, and mir’d with infamie, 

1 might haue faid, no part of it is mine : 

This fhame deriues it felfe from vnknowne loines, 

But mine, and mine I lou’d, and mine I prais’d, 144 


frame\hand¥LsiTi. frown CoW. 
ii, iii (MS). 

137. 0 ] Om. Ff. 7 ’?^^ Rowe, -f. 

139. / not'] not I Rowe, Pope, I Ian. 


140. gates] gate^s F^F^. 

141. fmeered] fmeer' fmircked 
Q, Steev. Var. Knt, Coll. Dyce, Wh. ii, 
Sta. Cam. Rife, Huds. 


Shakespeare. [He uses it exactly twice. — E d.] . . . Leonato means, that if he 
thought Hero would survive this open shame, he would, upon the re-word, or repe- 
tition of the reproaches she had been subjected to, himself strike at her life. 

136. frugal Nature's frame] It is enough to record merely that Warburton’s 
text reads ‘frugal Nature's fraine^ i. e. refraine, ‘or keeping back her further 
favours, etc.' ; without giving his long note. — ^Johnson : ‘ Frame ’ may easily signify 
the system of things, or universal scheme. — Steevkns : ‘Frame' is contrivance^ 
order f disposition of things. So, in line 197 of this scene : ‘ Whose spirits toil in 
frame of villanies.’ — M. Mason (p. 54): ‘Frame’ here means framings as in line 
197. — Collier (ed. ii) : The MS corrects ‘frame' to frown^ meaning the frown 
which forbad him to have more children. — R, G. White (ed. i) ; It is not impos- 
sible that Collier’s MS is correct. The misprint would be very easy, and the word 
is highly appropriate. — Halliwell : ‘ Frame’ is framing, contrivance ; or, order, as 
in Love's Lab. L., Ill, i, 193: ‘like a German clock . . . ever out of frame.* 
‘Frugal nature’s frame' is equivalent to ‘nature's frugal frame.’ — Staunton : May 
it not mean limits restriction ? [‘ Frame' is here equivalent to framings as Mason 

and Halliwell observe. Allen (MS) refers, for its form, to Sonnet, xix, 8: ‘Or 
say ... By oft predict that I in heaven find,' where ‘predict’ is equivalent to 
predicting. Its grammatical form having been thus accounted for, its meaning may 
well be left to the intelligence of the reader, or to a selection from the meanings 
furnished in the foregoing notes. Compare Rom. Jul. Ill, v, 164 where Old 
Capulet utters a similar complaint : ‘ we scarce thought us blest That God had lent 
us but this only child. But now I see this one is one ^00 much.' — E d.] 

141. Who smeered thus] Smirched of the Qto is the stronger word. For 
another example of a participle thus used with a nominative absolute, see Mer. of 
Ven. IV, i, 142, of this ed. : ‘who hang'd for humane slaughter, Euen from (he 
gallowes did his fell soule fleet ’ ; or see Abbott, g 376. 

144, 145. and mine] Warburton, not perceiving that, in each case, ‘mije* 
U the nominative in apposition to ‘ she ’ in line 147, reads ‘ as mine ' wherever ‘ and 
mine ** occurs, a reading which was deservedly condemned by Edwards (p. 56) 



ACT IV, SC L] 'MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING - 20$ 


And mine lhat I was proud on mine fo much, 
Thatl my felfe, was to my felfe not mine: 


\RaIewing of her, why flie, O (he is falne 
Into a pit of Inke, that the wide fea 
Hath drops too few to wafti her cleane againe. 
And fait too little, which may feafon giue 
To her foule tainted flefh. 


145 


ISO 


145, on mine] on, mine Ff, Rowe, + . 
on ; mine Cap. et seq. 

146, 147, mine: Valewin^ mine. 
Valuing Rowe. 

* 147. why Jhe, 0 ] why, she — 0 Theob. 


148. Inke,] ink! Cap. Var. Ran. 
Mai. Steev. Var. Knt, Sta. 

15 1, foule tainted] soul-tainted Coll, 
ii, iii (MS), foul-tainted Dyce, Walker, 
Cam. Wh. ii, Rife, Huds. 


Heath (p. 108) Capell and Johnson. For other examples of the omission of 
the Illative, as here, ‘mine whom I loved,* etc., see Abbott, § 244. 

^145. proud on] For other examples of the use of ‘ on ’ where we now use of, see 
Abbott, § 181. 

^ 146. not mine] W. A. Wright : That is, I set no value upon myself in com- 

parison with her, and did not reckon myself as part of my own possessions. 

148. Inke] Capell’ s unfortunate exclamation mark after this word had a longer 
life than it deserved. It obliterates the connection of the sentence, wherein ‘ that ’ 
is the relative referring to ‘ such,’ omitted before ‘ pit of ink’ : ‘ She is fallen into 
such a pit of ink, that,’ etc. See Walker (CnV. iii, 32). Possibly ‘that’ is 
equivalent to ‘ so that ’ ; instances where ‘ that ’ may be thus explained are fre- 
quent. See Abbott, § 283. — ^Ed. 

149. cleane againe] Steevens : Compare Mach, II, ii, 60 : ‘ Will all great 
hfeptune’s ocean wash this blood Clean from my hand?’ 

1 50. too little, which] Abbott (§ 278) : ‘ Which ’ is here irregularly used after 
‘too.’ Allen (MS): This is certainly a reminiscence of the Stratford Grammar- 
School ; the idiom is un-english, and exists only as the regular school-boy translation 
bf the relative with the subjunctive. 

150. aeason] This refers of course to the preservative quality of salt. Shake- 
' speare plays on the word in Mer, of Ven, V, i, 1 18 : ‘ How many things by season, 

season’d are To their right praise,’ etc. Steevens calls attention to the same idea 
in Twelfth Night, I, i, 30 1 ‘ eye-offending brine ; all this to season A brother’s dead 
love.’ And W. A. Wright refers to Mach, III, iv, 141, where sleep is called ‘the 
season of all natures ’ as that which preserves them from decay. 

15 1, foule tainted] Collier {Notes, etc., p. 73) : The MS shows that Shake- 
speare, instead of using such commonplace epithets as ‘ foul ’ and ‘ tainted,’ employed 
one of his noblest compoimds: soul-tainted. — Dyce (ed. ii) : This substitution of Mr 
Collier’s MS (like his substitution of ‘r^w/pure* for ‘sole pure’ in Tro, Cress. 
I, iii) tan only be regarded as an ingenious attempt to improve the language of 
Shakespeare, — or, in other words, as a piece of mere impertinence. Be it observed 
tlmt Leonato, who now uses the expression, ‘ her foul-tainted flesh,’ presently goes 
on ta say, ‘ Claudio . , . speaking of her foulness,' etc. With ‘ foul-tainted ’ we 
may compare ‘foul -defiled’ in the R, of L. : ‘The remedy ... Is to let forth my 
foul-defiUd blood.’ — line 1028. Dyce also says {Strictures, p. 50) that there should 



2o6 much ADOE about nothing [act IV, sc. L 

Ben. Sir, fir, be patient : for my part, J am fo attired 152 
in wonder, I know not what to fay. 

Bea. O on my foule my cofin is belied. 

Ben. Ladie, were you her bedfellow laft night? 155 

Bea. No truly : not although vntill laft night, 

152, 153. As verse, ending lines; not^ F^. truly: not; F^. truly ^ not; 
patient.,. wonder^... fay Pope et seq. Rowe et seq. 

156, truly: not"] truly, not Q, truly: 

be a hyphen between * foul ’ and ‘ tainted ;* herein anticipating Wat-ker ( Crit, i, 
36). [I mistrust the propriety of a hyphen, both here and in JR. of L. If ‘foul* 
be an adverb, the expression is tautological ; it is impossible for anything to be 
sweetly tainted. If ‘ foul * be an adjective, as I think it is, all that is needed is a 
comma. — E d.] 

it52. attired] In addition to the present passage, Schmidt gives, as another 
example of this figurative use : ‘ Why art thou thus attired in discontent ?’ — R. of Z., 
1601 ; and also refers to a similar use of wrap and emvrap; for instance; ‘I am 
wrapped in dismal thinkings,* — AlPs Well, V, iii, 128 ; ‘my often rumination wraps 
me in a most humourous sadness,* — As You Like It, IV, i, 19 ; ‘ though ’tis wonder 
that enwraps me thus.* — Twelfth N. IV, iii, 3. And W. A. Wright adds appo- 
sitely a corresponding figure in Macb. I, vii, 36 : ‘Was the hope drunk Wherein you 
dress’d yourself.* It occurs many times in the Old Testament, especially in the 
Psalms: ‘Let them be clothed with shame and dishonour that magnify themselves 
against me.* — xxxv, 26. All these instances are needed in weighing the plausibility 
of an ingenious emendation of Allen (MS), who proposes to read atierYd, that is, 
overwhelmed, cast to the ground ; from the French atterrer, which Cotgrave defines 
as; ‘Couered with, ouerwhelmed, ouerthrowne to the earth; ruined; oppressed.* 
Nares quotes from Sylvester’s Du Bartas, II, Ded. p. 74, ed. 1632: ‘Your 
renowne alone . . . Atterrs the stubborn and attracts the prone.’ Murray (//. E. D.) 
adds ; Bethulian, iv, 2, ‘ Judith the while, trils Rivers from her eyes, Atterrs her 
knees.’ — 1614. It would be eminently befitting that Benedick should say: ‘I am 
so prostrate with wonder that’ etc., but in view of the many times that Shake- 
speare uses the simile drawn from clothing, dressing, etc., I am afraid this happy 
emendation must be discarded. — Ed. 

156. No truly] Corson (p. 188) : This frank reply, which gives strong circum- 
stantial support to the charge against Hero, Beatrice makes fearlessly, evidently feel- 
ing that the case can bear to have the whole truth told without the least reservation, 
and that Hero must be innocent, and will finally be proved so, all testimony, direct 
and circumstantial to the contrary, notwithstanding. The dramatist has, with great 
skill and by the simplest means, made the nobleness and perfect genuineness of 
Beatrice* s character stand out here in the strongest light. 

156. vntill last night] Lady Martin (p. 319) ; I felt with what chagrin Bea- 
trice, when asked, was obliged to confess, that last night she was not by the side of 
Hero. And yet how simple to myself was the explanation ! Each had to commune 
with herself, — Hero on the serious step she was taking on the morrow, — a step re- 
quiring ‘ many orisons to move the heavens to smile upon her state ;’ and Beatrice, 
to think on what had been revealed to her of her own short-comings, as well as of 
Benedick’s undreamed-of attachment to herself. At such a time, hours of perfect 



ACT IV, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 20/ 

I haue this tweluemonth bin her bedfellow. ' 157 

Leon. Confirm’d, confirm’d, O that is ftronger made 
Which was before barr’d vp with ribs of iron. 

Would the Princes lie, and Claudio lie, 160 

Who lou’d her fo, that fpeaking of her foulneffe, 

Wafh’d it with teafes ? Hence from her, let her die. 

Fri. Heare me a little, for I haue onely bene filent fo 163 


157. bin\ been F^F^. 

160. the Princes lie, Claudio /le,] 
the Prince iicy and Claudio would he lie 
Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. the two princes 
liCi and Claudio lie^ Q, Cam. the two 
princes lie ? and Claudio lie ? Theob. et 
seq. (subs.) 

162. Hence from herl\ Hence! from 
her; Coll. i. 


163, 165. As three lines of verse, 
ending : long . . . Fortune . . . marP d Rowe 
ii. As four lines, ending : little.., long... 
Fortune y... mar P d Pope et seq. (except 
Glo. Cla., which end lines : been. ..into... 
fortune — . . . marPd). 

163. bene"] bin Q. been F^F^. 

bene filent] silent been Wh. Dyce 
ii, iii. Rife, Huds. 


rest and solitary meditation would be welcome and needful to them both. [See II, 
iii, 90.] 

160. the Princes] The Qto undoubtedly here supplies the syllable which is lack- 
ing to make the line rhythmical. 

162. Wash'd it] Abbott (§ 399) : Where there can be no doubt what is the 
nominative, it is sometimes omitted. Allen (MS) suggests the possibility that in 
rapid pronunciation He might have been uttered and ‘ it ’ absorbed in the d of 
‘wash’d': ‘He wash’d ’with tears,’ etc., but ‘it’ is too important a word, I think, 
to be here absorbed and merely suggested to the ear. — Ed. 

163. Fri.] Mrs Griffith (p. 156) : The good Friar, with that charity and 
humanity which so well become the sacred office of Priesthood, and from that obser- 
vation which his long experience in the business of auricular confession had enabled 
him to form, stands forth an advocate of Hero’s innocence. [Inasmuch as the Friar’s 
conviction was founded on what he saw, it is not easy to perceive how his ‘ business ’ 
could have helped him much ; a Father Confessor does not, as a rule, see his penitent. 
—Ed.] 

163. onely bene silent] R. G. White (reading both in his ed. i, and in his ed. 
ii : ‘ only silent been ’ ) : The line, as it has been always hitherto printed, is just such 
a sort of verse as : * Lay your knife and your fork across your plate.’ The reason 
of the corruption is that in the Qto and Folio the lines are printed as prose. Can 
there be a doubt, that after the passage was put in type in the Qto it broke down ? 
and that, not being easily divided, on account of the hemistich, it was arranged as 
well as possible in the form of prose, the transposition in question being then acci- 
dentally made ? The Qto having been used as a stage copy, and the Folio printed 
from it, this arrangement of the passage was perpetuated ; for the error was not of a 
sort which demanded correction in a prompter’s book. [White’s reading, ‘silent 
been,’ was anticipated by Warburton, according to a MS note in his copy of Shake- 
speare. — See Notes < 2 r* Qu. 8th Series, vol, iii, p. 142.] — Cambridge Editors; 
This commencement of the Friar’s speech comes at the bottom of page, sig G, recto 
of the Qto. The type appears to have been accidentally dislocated, and the passage 



208 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv. sc. i. 


long, and giuen way vnto this courfe of fortune, by no- 
ting of the Ladie, I haue markt. 165 

164. courfe\ cross CoW, ii, iii (MS). 165. marktS^ markt^ Q. mark’tF^. 

fortune yl fortune^ better to ob~ marked et seq. 
serve it Wagner conj. 


was then set up as prose. . . . Some words were probably lost in the operation, giving 
the Friar’s reason for remaining silent, viz. that he might find out the truth. [Ac- 
cordingly, in the Globe and Clarendon (W. A. Wright’s) edition, there is the sign 
of an omission after ‘fortune.’ — Ed.] The usual punctuation [with merely a comma 
after ‘ fortune ’ ] makes but indifferent sense. ‘ I have only been silent ’ may mean 
‘I alone have been silent.* — Daniel (/ntrod. to Praetorius’s Facs. p. viii ; refer- 
ring to the foregoing note) : I do not perceive that any words are wanting for the 
sense, and my examination of the page inclines me to believe that there was nothing 
accidental in the printing of a portion of it as prose. The page is abnormally long, 
and consists of 39 lines ; whereas the regular full page, including line for signature 
and catch- word, has 38 only ; but if this page had been printed metrically through- 
out it would have required 42 lines ; of which three would have been occupied by 
Benedick’s speech, 11 . 152, 153, and four by the commencement of the Friar’s speech, 
11 . 163-5* Now it is not to be supposed that the whole play was set up by one man, 
and it is therefore allowable to imagine that the portion assigned to, — let us say, — 
Compositor A. may have ended with the last line of this page ; the following por- 
tion, given out to Compositor B., may have been made up into pages before A. had 
finished his stint. Were B.’s pages to be pulled to pieces to make room for the fag 
end of A.’s work? I imagine not; it was less trouble to compress a few lines of 
verse into prose and, with the help of an extra line, to get all A.’s work into his last 
page, as we now see it in the Qto. It is worth noting that this same page of the 
Qto has received some slight corrections in its passage through the press ; in line 131, 
‘ Do not liue Hero, do not ope thine eies ;’, the British Museum copy, C. 12. g. 29, 
has a comma in lieu of a colon at the end of the line [as in Staunton, Ashbee, and 
Praetorius. — Ed.] ; in line 155, ‘ Lady, were you her bed-fellow last night?’ the same 
copy has no comma after * Lady ’ and has a full stop in place of the note of interro- 
gation at the end of the line [herein varying from Staunton, Ashbee, and Praetorius, 
— Ed.] ; the last words also of the page, ‘haue markt,’ do not in this copy range with 
the line above, but are the breadth of one letter within the line. 

164, 165. by noting of the Ladie] Deighton : ‘ By noting’ seems to be equiv- 
alent to * being engaged in,’ ‘ occupied by,’ ‘ marking,’ etc. — W. A. Wright ; 
Possibly, some words may have been omitted after ‘fortune.’ ‘By noting’ is inter- 
preted ‘ because I have been engaged in noting,’ a sense which I do not think the 
words will bear. [In the manifold divisions and subdivisions into which Maetzner 
distributes the meanings of ‘ by,’ there is one which, I think, will include the pres- 
ent instance. It is where the instrumental meaning and the causal closely approach 
each other, and the latter predominates. ‘ In these cases ’ says Maetzner, (vol. ii, 
p. 397, trans. Grece) ‘ by corresponds to the Highdutch durck and voHy and touches 
the English through y withy and of as it has taken the place of the Anglosaxon franiy 
thurhy and of* Abbott (J 146) gives examples wherein he thinks that ‘by’ is 
equivalent to in consequence of; an interpretation which will suit the present passage, 
perhaps as closely as Maetzner’ s. The Friar says that he has been silent and allowed 



ACT IV, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


209 

166 


A thoufand blufhing apparitions, 

To ftart into her face, a thoufand innocent fhames, 

In Angel whiteneffe beare away thofe blufties, 

And in her eie there hath appeared a fire 
To burne the errors that thefe Princes hold 170 

Againft her maiden truth. Call me a foole, 

Truft not my reading, nor my obferuations. 

Which with experimental feale .doth warrant 

The tenure of my booke : truft not my age, 174 

166, 167. apparitions To Jlart into'\ 
apparitions To Jlart in F^. apparitions 
start Into Steev. Var. Knt, Dyce, Huds. 

167. J/tames'] Jftam^s F^F^. 

l6k beare\ bear F^F^. beate Q, Coll. 

Dyce, Wh. ii, Sta. Cam. Huds. 

172. obferuations‘\ observation Ilan. 

Cap. Var. Ran. Coll, ii, iii, Dyce, Huds. 

events to take their course through noting, or, in consequence of, noting the lady. — 
Ed.] 

165. markt.] Peering (p. 88) : The only change which I have made, the only 
one which is required, is the obliteration of the Qto’s comma after ‘mark't.* No 
such reason [as that given for the Friar’s silence by the Cam. Edd.] was wanted; 
he himself tells us how his silent time had been employed ; while others had been 
listening, believing, condemning, he had been observing. No lines, nor line, nor 
fragment of a line do we miss here. [Perring was, probably, not aware that in his 
‘ obliteration of the comma ’ he is anticipated by the Second Folio, and by every 
edition thereafter.] 

167. To start] Thus in Temp. Ill, i, 75 (this ed.) : * and would no more endure 
This wodden slauerie then to .suffer,’ etc. ; where W. A. Wright quotes from the 
Prayer-book Version of Psalm Ixxviii, 4, ‘ That we should not hide, . . . but to 
shew,’ etc. That they might put their trust in God, and not to forget,’ etc. For 
other examples of the insertion and of the omission of to, see Abbott, § 350. 

170. To burne the errors] Steevens : The same idea occurs in Rom. <Sr* Jul. 

ii» 93 J ‘Transparent heretics be burnt for liars.’ [It is by no means the same 
idea. In Rom. 6 s* Jul. it is the eyes themselves which are to be burnt for liars. 
Here it is the eyes which are to start the fire. — ^Ed.] — W. A. Wright : The stake 
was the recognized punishment for a religious opponent who would not be con- 
vinced. It was so much easier to bum a heretic than to convince him of his error. 

173. Which . . . doth] See Abbott (§ 247) for other examples of the singular 
following a relative which refers to plural antecedents. W. A. Wright says that 
the * singular is due here to the intervention of a singular noun, “ seal ” between the 
verb and its subject.’ 

173. experimental seale] W. A. Wright : That is, setting the stamp of 
experience upon the results of liis reading. 

174. the tenure of my book] Because we can imagine no special ‘ book,’ Heath 
(p. 108) conjectured that it should be in the plural. Walker {Crit. i, 263) made 

14 


173. doth‘\ ^(tiTheob. ii, Warb. Johns. 
Mai. 

174. tenure'\ tenour Theob. 

tenure of my booke'\ tenure of my 
cloak Wagner conj. 

booke'\ books Heath, Walker, 

Huds. 



210 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv, sc. i. 


My reuerence, calling, nor diuinitie, 175 

If this fweet Ladie lye not guiltleffe heere, 

Vnder fome biting error. 

Leo. Friar, it cannot be : 

Thou feeft that all the Grace that fhe hath left, 

Is, that fhe wil not adde to her damnation, 1 80 

A finne of periury, fhe not denies it : 

Why feek’ll thou then to couer with excufe. 

That which appcares in proper nakedneffe ? 

Fri. Ladie, what man is he you are accusM of? 184 

175. reuerence^ calling!] reverend 177. biting] blighting Coll, ii, iii 

calling Coll, ii, iii (MS), Dyce ii, iii, (MS), Dyce ii, iii, Huds. 

Huds. 178. Friar!] Om. Han. 

diuinitie] dignity F^F^. 

the same conjecture, on the ground that s is so often omitted in the P'olio. Capkll 
properly explained * book * as equivalent to reading ; of its use in this sense Schmidt 
(Lex.) will supply many examples. 

175. reuerence] Collier (ed. ii) : The Friar’s ‘reverence’ is his calling, hut 
his * reverend calling ’ [the reading of the MS] is his profession as a churchman. 
‘Biting error* [line 177] is poverty and feebleness itself, compared with ‘blighting 
error,* [again the reading of the MS]. — R. G. White (ed. i) : The correctness of 
[Collier’s M8] is so probable, and the mi.sprint which it involves so easy, that, were 
it not for the great danger it would involve to the whole text, thus to set aside an 
intelligible authentic reading, there could be no hesitation in accepting it; this is 
almost equally true of bitting, (i. e. blighting), for ‘biting.’ W. A. Wright pro- 
nounces ‘reverend calling’ an unnecessary change ; and of ‘biting,’ used by Shake- 
speare elsewhere, he quotes the following examples: ‘biting affliction’ — Merry 
Wives, V, v, 178; ‘biting laws,’ — Meas. for Meas., I, iii, 19; ‘biting statutes,’ — 
2 Hen, VI: IV, vii, 19; and ‘a biting jest,’ — Rich, III: II, iv, 30. 

181. she not denies it] For this transposition of ‘not’ see many examples in 
Abbott, § 305. 

184. what man, etc.] Warburton : The Friar had just before boasted his great 
skill in fishing out the truth. And, indeed, he appears by this question to be no 
fool. He was by, all the while at the accusation, and heard no name mentioned. 
Why then should he ask her what man she was accused of? But in this lay the 
subtilty of his examination. For had Hero been guilty, it was very probable that 
in that hurry and confusion of spirits, into which the terrible insult of her lover had 
thrown her, she would never have observed that the man’s name was not mentioned ; 
and so, on this question, have betrayed herself by naming the person she was 
conscious of an affair with. The Friar observed this, and so concluded, that jjj^ere 
she guilty, she would probably fall into the trap he laid for her. — Halliwell : It 
is inconsistent with the tenor of the Friar’ s previous speech to assume, with War- 
burton, that the enquiry was made with any view of ensnaring Hero. — W. A. 
Wright: The Friar, who stoutly maintained Hero’s innocence, would never have 
asked such a question if the point of it had been that he suspected her to be guilty ; 
and if Hero had been guilty, the question would at once have put her on her guard. 



ACT IV, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


211 


Hero. They know that do accufe me, I know none ; 185 

If I know more of any man aliue 
Then that which maiden modeftie doth warrant, 

Let all my finnes lacke mercy. O my Father, 

Proue you that any man with me conuerft. 

At houres vnmeetc, or that I yeflcrnight 190 

Maintain’d the change of words with any creature, 

Refufe me, liate me, torture me to death. 

Fri. There is fome ftrange mifprifion in the Princes. 

Be 7 t. Two of them haue the verie bent of honor, 

And if their wifedomes be milled in this : 195 

The praflife of it hues in lohn the baftard, 

190. houres\ houres 

193. Princes'] Prince Ff, Rowe. 

195 - this .*] this^ Q, Rowe et seq 

There is therefore no probability that the Friar had any such motive for his question 
as Warburton attributes to him, and if he had there is little subtlety in the question 
itself, for it would have defeated its purpose. 

189. Proue you] That is, if you prove. 

193. misprision] Dyce i^Gloss,) : Mistake, [Cotgrave : Mesprison : f. Misprision, 
error ; offence ; a thing done, or taken, amisse. ] 

194. Two of them] There were three Princes. Benedick pointedly excludes 
Don John. 

194. the verie bent] Johnson: ‘Bent^ is used by our author for the utmost 
degree of any passion, or mental quality. — ^W. A. Wright : That is, the aim and 
purpose of their lives, the direction of their thoughts, is truly honourable. Compare 
Rom. <5r» Jul. II, ii, 143 : ‘If that thy bent of love be honourable’; that is, if the 
aim and object of this love be honourable. To ‘ bend,’ originally a term of archery, 
signifies to aim, to point, and is used of a cannon or a sword. See King John, II, 

37 : ‘Our cannon shall be bent Against the brows of this resisting town.’ Hence 
‘ bent ’ signifies direction ; and so, inclination, disposition. As in JuL Cces. II, i, 
210 : ‘ For I can give his humour the true bent.’ — Murray (//. E. D. s. v. Bent, 
9) : Extent to which a bow may be bent or a spring wound up, degree of ten- 
sion ; hence degree of endurance, capacity for taking in or receiving ; limit of 
capacity, etc. [See II, iii, 214.] 

196. pradtise] In a bad sense, — ^the underhand contrivance. See Schmidt {Lex. ) 
for many examples. 

1^. Hues] Walker {Crit, ii, 209) devotes a chapter (not, however, a long one) 
to the confusion of lie and /zw, which, he says, are repeatedly confounded. In the 
present passage, lies seems to me more Shakespearian than ‘ lives. ’ But Deighton 
thinks otherwise and prefers ‘ lives ’ which means, he says, ‘ has its vitality from,* 
etc. W. A. Wright quotes / Hen. IV: I, ii, 213 : ‘In the reproof of this lies the 
jest,* where the First Qto has ‘lives.* ‘ On the other hand, in / Hen. IV: IV, i, 
56, we find “ A comfort of retirement lives in this.” * 


196. Hues] lies Walker, Dyce ii, iii, 
Iluds. 



212 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv, sc. i. 


Whofe fpirits toile in frame of villanies. 197 

Leo. I know not ; if they fpeake but truth of her, 

Thefe hands fhall tearc her ; If they wrong her honour, 

The proudeft of them fhall wel heare of it. 200 

Time hath not yet fo dried this bloud of mine, 

Nor age fo eate vp my inuention. 

Nor Fortune made fuch hauocke of my meanes. 

Nor my bad life reft me fo much of friends. 

But they fhall finde, awak’d in fuch a kinde, 205 


197. frame of'\ fraud and Coll. MS. 
200. of it\ it FjF^. 

202. inueniionl intention Coll. MS. 
ap. Cam. 


204. reft\ Weft Han. 

205. awak^dl awakte Q. 

kinde\ cause Cap. conj. Coll, 
MS, Walker, Dyce ii, iii. 


197. in frame of villanies] That is, in framing villainies. See line 136, above. 

198. 1 know not] Leonato is too much absorbed with the facts of the case, to 
care to speculate as to their origin. 

200. wel heare] Here, * well ' is intensive and emphatic. 

202. eate] For a list of participles where the two forms eat and eaten^ spoke and 
spoken^ wrote and written^ etc., are used indifferently, see, if necessary, Abbott, 
§ 343 - 

202. invention] The connection shows that ‘ invention ’ here refers to mental 
activity. See ‘policie of minde,’ line 206. 

205. kinde] Capell (p. 130) begins the following note, awkwardly expressed, 
but sensible, with a protest against imposing on editors too great restrictions in 
emending phrases, simply because, as the passages stand, a certain sense can be 
tortured out of them. Thus ‘Princesse,’ inline 210, can be plausibly justified on 
the ground that Hero’s future husband has been called a prince ; and yet a change is 
necessary. He then continues ; * In the same predicament are “kind” in the present 
line and “ life ” [in line 233] ; both perfectly intelligible, and disagreeing with noth- 
ing round them in sense ; ’tis sound that creates suspicion in both, the latter strength- 
ened by repetitions ; For where is that contemner of Shakespeare, who will attribute 
to him such a poverty of sense and expression as that passage exhibits, retaining 
** life ” ? whose over-frequent occurrence in it hurts another way ; disgusting the ear 
as much, or nearly as much, as do the jingle of kind^ and mindy* in the 

lines referred to in this page ; Upon these grounds chiefly (but others are not want- 
ing), the editor [i, e. Capell, himself] sees his fault and his fearfulness, in putting 
into the class of things specious, readings to which the text is intitl’d; namely — 
cause for “kind,” in the present line; and love for “life” in the other from the 
second and fourth modems’ \i. e. Pope and Hanmer]. — C ollier (ed. ii) : ^use 
[for ‘kinde’] says the MS ; but ‘kind’ may be right, although it reads badly, with 
‘ find ’ and ‘ mind ’ so near at hand. Cacophony is no adequate reason for alteration. 
— ^Walker (CnV. ii, 166) : This [rhyme of ‘kinde’ and ‘minde’] in the midst of 
blank verse, is inadmissible ; to say nothing of the sense. Perhaps Shakespeare 
wrote, — ‘in such a cause,' — Dyce (ed. ii) ; The occurrence of ^find' and ^mind* 
in this passage probably occasioned the corruption of ‘kind.’ — ^W. A. Wright; 



ACT IV, SC. 1] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 213 

Both ilrength of limbe, and policie of minde, 206 

Ability in meanes, and choife of friends, 

To quit me of them throughly. 

Fri. Paufe a while : 

And let my counfell fway you in this cafe, 210 

Your daughter heere the Princeffe (left for dead) 

Let her awhile be fecretly kept in, 

And publifh it, that fhe is dead indeed : 

Maintaine a mourning oftentation, 

And on your Families old monument, 215 

Hang mournfull Epitaphes, and do all rites, 

208. throughly\ thoroughly F^, Rowe left for dead Theob, et seq. {Princes* 
i, Johns. Warb. ) 

21 1. Princeffe {left for dead)"] Princes 


Cause has no point. In lines 224, 225, there is another instance of rh3rme, where no 
one proposes to change the reading. 

206. policie of minde] This corresponds, in the series, to * invention * in line 
202, above ; the one explains the other. 

21 1, the Princesse] Theobald: But how comes Hero to start up a Princess 
here? We have no intimation of her Father being a Prince; and this is the first 
and only time that she is complimented with this dignity. The remotion of a single 
letter, and of the parenthesis, will bring her to her own rank, and the place to its 
true meaning: Uhe Princes left for dcad.^ — IIalliwell : Theobald’s correction is 
most probably necessary. In the first Scene of the third Act, Hero makes a dis- 
tinction of rank, when she observes, — ‘so says the princcy and my new-trothed 
lord;* but in the fifth Act, Leonato, addressing Don Pedro and Claudio, says, ‘I 
thank you, princes^ for my daughter’s death.’ [Theobald’s emendation has been 
adopted by all subsequent editors. There could hardly be a more conclusive proof 
than this word affords that the composers set up their tjq^es by hearing the copy read 
aloud to them. — Ed.] 

214. ostentation] Johnson : Show, appearance. [In a good, not a bad, 
sense.] 

215. Families old monument] Hunter (i, 254) : It appears that the great 
families in Italy had each its monument, not as in England, each principal individual 
of a family having a monument to himself. Thus, there is the Scaliger monument at 
Verona ; and the tomb of the Capulets in Rom. JuL seems to be a vault and 
monument for the whole race. 

216. Hang . . . Epitaphes] Gifford {Jonson*s Works, ix, p. 58) : In many 
part^ of the continent, it is customary, upon the decease of an eminent person, for 
his friends to compose short, laudatory poems, epitaphs, etc., and affix them to the 
herse, or grave, with pins, wax, paste, etc. ... In the Bishop of Chichester’s verses 
to the memory of Dr Donne, is this couplet : ‘ Each quill can drop his tributary 
verse. And pin it, like a hatchment, to his herse.* Eliot’s lines are these: ‘Let 
others, then, sad epitaphs invent, And paste them up about thy monument,* etc. — 
Poems, p. 39. It is very probable that the beautiful Epitaph on the Countess of Pem- 



214 


MUCH ALOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv, sc. i. 


That appertaine vnto a buriall. 217 

Leofu What fhall become of this ? What wil this do ? 

Fru Marry this wel carried, fhall on her behalfe, 

Change flander to remorfe, that is fome good, 220 

But not for that dreame I on this ftrange courfe, 

But on this trauailc looke for greater birth : 

She dying, as it muft be fo maintain’d, 

Vpon the inftant that flie was accus’d, 

Shal be lamented, pitticd, and excus’d 225 

Of euery hearer : for it fo fals out. 

That what we haue, we prize not to the worth, 227 

222. trauaile\ travel Rowe, Pope, 226. it /o] fo it F^, Rowe i. 

Han. Tlieob. Warb. 

broke was attached, with many others, to her herse [see Jonson’s Works, vol. viii, p. 
337]. We know that she had no monument ; and the verses seem to intimate that 
they were so applied : ‘ Underneath this sable herse Lies the subject of all verse,’ etc. 
— W, A. Wright : The custom which Gifford described was last practised in Cam- 
bridge on the occasion of Porson’s funeral. — Staunton : Many fine and interesting 
examples of this custom existed in the old cathedral of St. Paul’s and other churches 
of London, down to the time of the Great Fire, in the form of pensile-tables of wood 
and metal, painted or engraved with poetical memorials, suspended against the 
columns and walls. Among these may be particularised the well-known verses on 
Queen Elizabeth, beginning : * Spaines Rod, Romes Ruin, Netherlands Reliefe 
which appear to have been very generally displayed in the churches of the realm. 
[Compare Wint, Tale, HI, ii, 255 : ‘One grave shall be for both, upon them shall 
The causes of their death appear although this might have been only the record 
usually engraved on monuments. — Ed.] 

218. shall . . . wil] See note on II, i, 193. 

218. of this] Abbott (§ 168) : That is, ‘what will be the consequence of this?’ 

219. carried] See II, iii, 206. We still use the word in such phrases as ‘ carry- 
ing the jest too far,’ and as applied to practical jokes, we generally add off or out. 

220. remorse] That is, pity. See Lear, IV, ii, 73 : ‘ A servant that he bred, 
thrill’d with remorse. Opposed against the act.’ 

223. as] That is, ‘as regards which’ or ‘for*; see Abbott, § iii. 

227. prize] See III, i, 95. 

227. to] See II, i, 226. 

227, 229. That . . . value] Theobald refers to Horace, Od. HI, xxiv, 31 : ‘ Vir- 
tutem incolumem odimus, Sublatam ex oculis quaerimus, invidi.’ Wii alley (p. 56) 
compares Plautujs, Captivi, I, ii, 33: ‘Turn denique homines nostra intelligimus 
bona, Quum, quae in pote.state habuimu.s, ca amisimus.’ IlALLlWEi.L adds from 
Sir Phillip Arcadia : ‘But .such we are with inwarde tempest blowne Of 

windes quite contrarie in waues of will : We mone that lost, which had we did 
bemone.’ — Lib, II, p. 148, ed. 1598. W. A. Wright refers to Ant. Cleop. I, 
iv, 43 ; ‘ And the ebb’d man, ne’er loved till ne’er worth love, Comes dear by being 
lack’d.’ And Coriol. IV, i, 15 : ‘I shall be loved when I am lack’d,’ — Rushton 



ACT IV, sa i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 21$ 

Whiles we cnioy it ; but being lack’d and loft, 228 

Why then we racke the value, then we finde 
The vertue that poffcfsion would not ftiew vs 230 

Whiles it was ours, fo will it fare with Claudio : 

When he fhal heare Ihe dyed vpon his words, 232 


229. racke\ reck Cap. conj. Johns. 232-239. Mnemonic lines, Pope, 

231. IV/ii/es'] IVki/st Kov/e, (IVkisi Warb. 

Warb. misprint). 

(iV. dr* Qu. IV, xi, 360) : For the sentiment, compare Ascham, Toxophilus : ‘Whiche 
thing howe profitable it was for all sortes of men, those knewe not so wel than whiche 
had it most, as they do nowe whiche lacke it moste. And therefore it is true that 
Teiicer sayeth in Sophocles, “Seldome at all good thinges be knowen how good to be 
Before a man suche thinges do misse out of his handes.” ’ [ — p. 41, ed. Arber. Ex- 
cellent Ascham erred in attributing the speech to Teucer. It is Tekmessa who says : 
01 yap KaKoi yvofiaiai rayaOdv ;(;epolv ’’Exovreg ovk icaac^ irptv Tig eK^aXy , — 
AiaSf 908, 909. — Ed.] 

228. lack'd and lost] Coluer (ed. ii) : The words ‘lack'd' and Most' are 
made to change places in the MS, with some apparent fitness, but the old reading 
may very well stand. — II alliwell: In .strict accordance with modern usage these 
words should be transposed [as Collier’s MS indicates], but it was an ordinary usage 
in Shakespeare's time to disregard exact nicety [in such matters]. Puttenham, Ar(e 
of Ku^lish Poesie^ *589, gives the following quaint description of the practice : ‘ Ye 
have another manner of disordered speech, when ye misplace your words or clauses 
and set that before which should be behind, et ^ converse, we call it in English 
proveihe, the cart before the horse, the Greeks call it ITistcron proteron, we name it 
the Preposterous, and if it be not too much used is tollerable inough, and many times 
scarce perceiveable, unlesse the sence be thereby made very absurd ; as he that de- 
scribed his manner of departure from his mistresse, said thus not much to be mis- 
liked. I kist her cherry Up and tooke my leave : For I tooke my leave and kist her : 
And yet I cannot well say whether a man use to kisse before hee take his leave, or 
take his leave before he kisse, or that it be all one busines. It seemes the taking 
leave is by using some speach, intreating licence of departure ; the kisse a knitting 
up of the farewell, and as it were a testimonial! of the licence without which here in 
England one may not presume of courtesie to depart, let yong Courtiers decide this 
controversie. One describing his landing upon a strange coast, sayd thus prepos- 
terously. When we had climbde ihe cUfs, and were a shore, Whereas he should have 
said by good order. When 7w z'vere come a shore and clynicd had the cliffs. For one 
must be on land ere he can clime. '[ — p. 181, ed. Arber.] 

229. racke] Capell (p. 131) : In the class above mentioned [see Capell's note 
on ‘ find,' line 205] is enter’d, properly, an emendation of a word [see Text. Notcs'\ ; 
for if ‘ rack ' be interpreted, as it may be, — over-stretch, over-rate, — there is .seem- 
ingly an anticlimax ; but this is left to opinion. — S teevens : That is, we exaggerate 
the value. The allu.sion is to rack-rents. — R. G. White : The use of ‘ rack’ in the 
sense of violently increase the value is certainly three hundred years old, if not more. 
It frequently occurs in the Conceipt of English Pollicie, 1589. 

232. vpon] See II, iii, 202. 



2I6 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv, sc. i. 


Th^Idea of her life fhal fweetly creepe 233 

Into his ftudy of imagination. 

And euery lonely Organ of her life, 235 

Shall come apparePd in more precious habite : 

More mouing delicate, and ful of life, 237 

233. Tk' Idea] Thldcea^ (Ashbee, 237. mouing delicate,] moouing deli- 

Praetorius) Th! Idcea Q (Sta.) The cate,<^. moving^ delicate, , 

Idea Cap. et seq. (except Dyce ii, iii, Van Coll. Wh. i. mcnnng-delicate. Cap. 

Wh. i). Mai. Steev. Van Knt, Dyce, Sta. Cam. 

life] love Pope, Han. Ran. Wh. ii. 

233. Th’Idea] As a possible instance of a trifling, an exceedingly trifling, vari- 
ation in old copies of the same edition, the apostrophe after this Th’ may be noted. 
It is not present in either Ashbee’ s or Praetorius’s Facsimile of the Qto, presumably, 
therefore, it is lacking in the originals, from which these Facsimiles were made. It 
appears, however, in Staunton’s Photolithograph of the Earl of Ellesmere’s Qto. A 
copy of this Photolithograph was presented to me many years ago by my valued 
friend, Halliwell, wherein he had recorded minute collations with the Charlemont 
copy. In this copy he had at first struck out the apostrophe, but he has afterward 
added in the margin : * On a closer inspection 1 think the faintest possible trace of 
the ’ can be seen. None in the Daniel copy.’ That variations occur in Elizabethan 
books in copies of the same edition is well known. Wherefore all that can be safely 
predicated of any collation is that it applies only to certain specified originals. — Ed. 

233. life] Haixtwell : The several repetitions of the word ‘ life ’ are in Shake- 
speare’s manner, and may be intentionally introduced in contrast with the subject of 
the assumed death of Hero. Pope’s reading, however, of love is, at least, worthy 
of attention. [That Capell, whose opinions are always to be respected, preferred 
love, we learn (if we can) from his note on ‘kinde’ in line 205. But W. A. Wright, 
whose opinions are also always to be respected, condemns it : ‘ the whole point of 
the passage,’ says the latter, * is the contrast between the living Hero and Hero sup- 
posed to be dead, and this is emphasized by the threefold repetition of “life;” ’ 
wherewith I agree, and beg to add that, jarring to the ear, as the threefold repetition 
of ‘ life ’ may possibly be, it is not, I think, so jarring to sound or sense as would be 
‘The idea of her love shall sweetly creep. . . . And every lovely organ of her life,’ 
etc. — E d. 

234. his study of imagination] See II, ii, 52* Claudio would fall into a 
‘study’ ‘when to the .sessions of [sad] silent thought, [He] summoned up remem- 
brance of things past.’ — Son. xxx. 

237. mouing delicate,] Capell (p. 131) : The comma that moderns put after 
‘moving’ they had from the Second Folio ; there is none in copies before it, and 
none should be ; ’tis a compound of great beauty, expressive of female movements 
in gait and otherways, as ‘life’ is of the sprightliness that often goes with their 
delicacy. — Deighton : It seems doubtful whether Capell’ s hyphen is a gain. ‘ Mov- 
ing-delicate ’ would mean ‘ impressively graceful.’ — Marshall: I cannot tell why 
all the editors hyphen these adjectives ; they seem to be much more expressive when 
used as separate and independent epithets. [If we adopt the hyphen, ‘ moving ’ 
qualifies ‘ delicate ’ ; without the hyphen it qualifies ‘ every lovely organ of her life ’ ; 
our choice lies between the two. I think the hyphen gives a rather more refined 



ACT IV, SC. L] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


217 

238 


Into the eye and profpeft of his foule 
Then when flie liuM indeed : then fhal he mourne, 

If euer Loue had intcreft in his Liner, 240 

And wifh he had not fo accufed her : 

No, though he thought his accufation true : 

Let this be fo, and doubt not but fucceffe 
Wil fafhion the eu^nt in better fliape. 

Then I can lay it downe in likelihood. 245 

But if all ayme but this be leuelld falfe. 

The fuppofition of the Ladies death, 247 

238. and’\ aud F^. Pope, Han. 

240. In parenthesis. Cap. et seq. (ex- 246. but this\ in this Ktly conj. at 

cept Cam. Wh. ii. ) this Huds. 

242, 254. thou^h'\ tho F^, Rowe, 

sense than the comma; ‘ every lovely feature shall come more touchingly delicate ’ 
is to me more expressive than ‘every lovely feature shall come more touching, 
delicate.’ — E d.] 

238. eye and prospe<fl] This is not a mere redujdicative phrase, as Deighton 
suggests; each noun has its distinct meaning; Hero’s image shall rise before his 
eyes, take possession there, and thence irradiate every memory of her life. — El>. 

240. his Liuer] That the liver was deemed of old to be the seat sIL love is 
familiar enough 10 every student who remembers his Anacreon and his Horace, if 
he forget all else. The present passage and others sufficiently prove that sentimental 
qualities were still attributed, in Shakespeare’s days, to the liver, as well as to the 
heart. — Ed. 

242. though . . . true] C. C. Clarke (p. 313) : A line instinct with touching 
knowledge of human charity.* Pity attends the faults of the dead ; and survivors 
visit even sin with regret rather than reproach. 

243. successe] Hunter (i, 255) : ‘Success’ is here used in a very unusual 
sense, that 7 vhich is to come after, without regard to its character, whether fortunate 
or the contrary. — W. A. Wright : ‘ Success’ was formerly a colourless word, which 
required to be defined by a qualifying adjective. So, in Joshua, i, 8 : ‘ Then thou 
shalt have good success.* 

246. but this] Keightley (p. 166) : I would read in; for ‘but,’ suggested 
by ‘But,’ makes nonsense. I have, however, made no change in my Edit- 
ion. — Hudson: ‘This’ evidently refers to what precedes ; and the meaning of the 
passage appears to be : ‘ But if all expectation of, or all planning for, this result 
be falsely, that is, wrongly directed^* Deighton thus paraphrases : ‘but if (though 
I hope for better things) we should not in any other respect hit the mark at which 
we aim, i, e, if we altogether fail to re-establish Hero’s character, the supposition of 
her death will, at all events, stop the tongues of those who would otherwise always 
be exclaiming at her guilt.’ — W. A. Wright: ‘But this’ refers not to what pre- 
cedes, but to what follows. [If ‘but this’ were transposed to the end of the line, 
we should see at once that Deighton’ s interpretation is correct. It is placed where it 
is, I think, for greater emphasis. — E d.] 



2I8 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv. sc. i. 

Will quench the wonder of her infamie. 248 

And if it fort not well, you may conceale her, 

As bcft befits her wounded reputation, 250 

In fome reclufiue and religious life , 

Out of all eyes, tongnes, mindcs and iniuries. 

Bcnc, Signior Lcona^o, let the Frier adiiifc you, 

And though you know my inwardneffe and loue 

Is veiy much vnto the Prince and Claudio. 255 

Yet, by mine honor, I will dealc in this. 

As fecretly and iuftlic, as your foule 
Should with your bodie. 

Leon. Being that I flow in greefe, 

The fmallest twine may lead me. 260 

Frier. ^Tis well confented, prefcntly away, 

For to Arrange fores, ftrangely they ftraine the cure, 262 


250. In parenthesis, Cajj. ot seq. (ex- 
cept Coll. \Vh. Cam. ) 

259, 260. / Jlo 7 v ... mc.'\ One line, 
Mai. 

259. IJlowingrecfc^ Tfow in griefs 


alas! TIan. (reading In grief. ..me. as 
one line), alas! J flow in grief Cap. 
(reading I flow... me. as one line). 

261-264. As a quatrain, Pope et seq, 
(except Hal. \Vh. ii, Dtn). 


249. sort] Rann : That is, turn out in the event. — Skeat (Diet. s. v. ) : All the 
fonns of ‘sort’ are ultimately due to Lat. soriem^ accusative of lot, destiny, 
chance, condition, state. [See I, i, 12 ; V, iv, 8.] 

252. iniuries] Dekjiiton ; ‘Injuries’ .seems in a way to qualify the whole line, 
making it by a kind of hendiadys equivalent to ‘ injurious looks, remarks, thoughts, 
and actions.’ 

253. aduise] Staunton : ‘ Advise ’ here, and in many other instances, implies 
persuade. 

254. inw-ardnesse] Steevens : That is, intimacy. Thus I.ucio, in Meas. for 
Meas. HI, ii, 138, says : ‘Sir, 1 was an inward of his.’ Again, in Kick. JIJ : III, 
iv, 8 : ‘ Who is most inward with the royal duke ?’ 

259. I flow] Daniel (p. 24) ; The sense of the passage surely requires that we 
should change ‘ flow ’ to float. In of Rom. « 2 r* Jul. HI, v, we have : ‘ For this 
thy bodie which I tearrae a barke. Still floating in thy euer-falling teares,’ etc. 
[This plausible conjecture receives corroboration from the fact that it occurred inde- 
pendently to Allen ; I find it written in the margin of his copy of the play, in 
1867.— Ei).] 

260. may lead me] Johnson : This is one of our author’s observations upon 
life. Men oveq)owered by distress, eagerly listen to the first ofiers of relief, close 
with every scheme, and believe every promise. He that has no longer any con- 
fidence in himself is glad to repose his trust in any other that will undertake to 
guide him. 

261. presently] That is, immediately. See Shakespeare, 

262. to strange . . . cure] Bucknill (p. 116); This is evidently copied from 



219 

263 


ACT IV, sc. i.] MUCH A DOE ABOUT NOTHING 

Come Lady, die to Hue, this wedding day 
Perhaps is but prolong’d, haue patience & endure. Exit. 

264. Exit.] Exeunt. Rowe. 264. [Manent Bened. and Beat. 

Scene 111. Pope, 4-. Rowe. 

the Sixth Aphorism of Hippocrates, sec. 2 : ‘ For extreme diseases, extreme methods 
of cure as to restriction are most suitable.’ Galen and other commentators, .says Dr 
Adams, understood theSe extreme methods to apjdy to regimen only, but Heurnius 
understands them to mean that in any dangerous diseases the pliysician is warranted 
in using ‘ diaeta rpiam tenuissima, pharmacia exquisita, et crudeli chirurgia.’ Cicero 
adopts the maxim, though without referring to the authority. * In adeundis pcriculis 
coiisuetudo imitaiida medicorum est, qui leviter aegrotantes Icniter curant ; gravioribus 
autem morbis pcriculosas curationes ct ancipites adhibere coguntur.’ — De OfficiiSy i, 
24. Dr Adams says, that our earlier modern authorities in surgery also adopted this 
interpretation!^ — llippocratesy Syd. ). 1 have not, however, met with the doctrine 

in the works of the contemporaries of Shakespeare, and therefore am inclined to 
think that he derived it from some work in the original. [For the sentiment, see 
Korn. 6^ JuL IV, i, 68 : ‘I do .spy a kind of hope. Which craves as de.sperate an 
execution As that is desperate which we would prevent’; and Haml. IV, iii, 9; 
‘Disea.ses de.sjicrate grown By desperate appliance are relieved.’ And in Euphuesy 
p. 67 (ed. Arber) ; ‘ But seeing a desperate disease is to be committed to a desperate 
Doctor, T wil follow thy counsel,’ etc.]. 

264. prolong’d] W. A. Wright : That is, po.stponed. See Ezekicly xii, 25 : 
<The word that I shall speak shall come to pass ; it shall no longer be prolonged.’ 

* Perhaps ’ might be omitted. 

264. Exit] l.ADY Martin (p. 319) : Beatrice is no dreamer. The Friar’s plan 
of giving out that Hero is dead, and so awakening Claudio’s remor.se, will not wipe 
out the wrong done to her cousin, or the indignity offered to her kin. Therefore she 
lets her friemls retire, lingering behind, to the surprise, possibly, of some who might 
expect that she would go with them to comfort Hero. She is bent on finding for iier 
a better comfort than lies in words. Benedick, she feels sure, will remain if she 
does. And he, how could he do otherwise? This beautiful woman, whom he has 
hitherto known all joyousness, and seeming indifference to the feelings of others, has 
revealed herself under a new aspect, and one that has drawn him towards her more 
than he has ever been drawn before towards woman. Pie has noted how all through 
this tenible scene .she has been the only one to stand by, to defend, to try to cheer 
the .slandered Hero. Her courage and her tenderness have roused the chivalry of 
his nature. So deeply is he moved, that I believe, even if he had not been pre- 
viously influenced by what he had heard of Beatrice’s love, he would from that time 
have been her devoted lover and servant. [The foregoing sentence deserves to be 
printed in Italics. — P'l).] There should be tenderness in his voice as he acco.sts her, 

* Lady Beatrice, have you wept all this while ?’ But it is only when she hears him 
say, ‘ Surely, I do believe your fair cou.sin is wronged,* that she dashes her tears 
aside, and can give voice to the thought that has for some time been iip])ermost in 
her mind : * Ah, how much might the man,’ etc. — Fl.KTCirER (p. 270) : The injury 
done to Piero, however distressing in itself, affords a relief to both lovers on the pres- 
ent occasion ; since, by presenting to them an unfore.seen object of common and 
pathetic interest, it wonderfully facilitates that reciprocal avowal at which each of 



220 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv, sc. i. 

Bene. Lady Beatrice y haue you wept all this while ? 265 

Beat. Yea, and I will weepe a while longer. 

Bene. I will not defire that. 

Beat. You haue no rcafon, I doe it freely. 

Bene. Surelie I do beleeue your fair cofin is wrongM. 

Beat. Ah, how much might the man deferue of mee 270 
that would right her ! 

Befie. Is there any way to fhew fuch friendfhip f 
Beat. A verie euen way, but no fuch friend. 

Bene. May a man doe it f 

Beat. It is a mans office, but not yours. 275 

Bene. I doe louc nothing in the world fo well as you, 
is not that ftrange f 

Beat. As ftrange as the thing I know not, it were as 278 


them is anxious to arrive, but the approach to which, after the terms on which they 
have hitherto encountered one another, each may well find embarrassing. 

270. how much might,] We should now say, how much might not, etc. See 
line 38, above. 

273. cuen] Plain, smooth, easy. 

275. It . . . not yours] Fletcher (p. 270) : That is, *it is a man’s office but 
not the office of a man standing in the friendly relation that you do to the offending 
parties.’ [This cannot be right. If Beatrice asserts that it is Benedick’s relation to 
Claudio which properly bars his way to righting Hero, slie is inconsistent when she 
afterward tells Benedick to kill Claudio. Lady Martin, with far truer insight, exactly 
interprets Beatrice’s words. — Ed.] — Lady Martin (p. 320) : These words are not to 
be regarded, as by some they have been, as spoken in Beatrice’s usually sarcastic vein. 
She only means that, being neither a kinsman, nor in any way connected with Hero’s 
family, he cannot step forward to do her right. In this sense the words are under- 
stood by Benedick, who takes the most direct way of removing the difficulty by the 
avowal of his love. [I think the words are uttered almost plaintively. The thought 
that at this tender moment Beatrice would cast a slur on Benedick’s manliness, — an 
interpretation occasionally suggested, — is degrading not only to Beatrice but to 
Benedick, who would have been a craven indeed had he not resented it. That such 
a thought never entered Benedick’s mind is clear, from the fact that his very next 
words are a declaration of his love, which such a pointed insult would have been 
sure to chill. — Ed.] 

277. strange?] T.ady Martin (p. 320) : After what she has overheard, this 
makes Beatrice smile, but it causes her no surpri.se. With the thought of Hero’s 
vindication uppermost in her heart, what can she do but answer Benedick’s avowal 
by her own ? And yet to make it is by no means easy, as we see by her words, 
somewhat in the old vein. 

278. as strange as, etc.] Allen (MS) : Beatrice begins with the intention of 
saying : As strange as that / love you ; but she checks herself, and goes on with a 
disappointing je ne sais quoi. [Allen would therefore punctuate : ‘ as strange as — 



ACT IV, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


221 


poflible for me to fay, I loued nothing fo well as you, but 
beleeue me not, and yet I lie not, I confeffe nothing, nor 280 
I deny nothing, I am forry for my coufin. 

Bc 7 ie. By my fword Beatrice thou lou’ft me. 

Beat, Doe not fweare by it and eat it. 

Bene. I will fweare by it that you loue mee,and I will 
make him eat it that fayes I loue not you. *285 

Beat. Will you not eat your word ? 

Bene. With no fawce that can be deuifed to it, I pro- 
teft I loue thee. 

Beat. Why then God forgiue me. 

Be^ie. What offence fweet Beatrice ? 290 

Beat. You haue ftayed me in a happy howre, I was a- 
bout to proteft I loued you. 292 

283. fweare by it\ fweare Q, Glo. Cam. Wh. ii, Dtn. 

the thing I know not an interpretation which carries conviction, at least to the 
present. Ed.] 

279. so well as you] Lady Martin (p. 320) : (Half confessing^ and then 
withdrawing') * but believe me not, and yet I lie not ’ (again yielding, and again 
falling back). To extricate herself from her embarrassment, she turns away from 
the subject with the words, spoken with tremulous emotion ; * I am sorry for my 
cousin.’ 

282. sword] Corson (p. 191) : There seems to be implied in ‘by my sword,' 
that Benedick, who is characterized by great quickness of perception, already antici- 
pates what will be required of him, as soon as the confession of love is mutual. Bea- 
trice replies, ‘ Do not swear and eat it ’ ; in which there is evidently implied her sense 
of the severe task it will necessarily be for Benedick to challenge either of his friends, 
in support of the honour of Hero. Benedick again is quick to understand, and 
replies : ‘ I will swear by it,’ etc. Beatrice tests him still further, though with the 
kindest and most honourable feeling, by saying : ‘ Will you not eat your word ?’ 
After Benedick’s reply thereto, Beatrice then feels that the final word, with all that 
is involved in it, can be uttered, and says, ‘ Why, then, God forgive me,* etc. [After 
Beatrice has said that there is ‘ none of her heart left to protest*] Benedick at o]^ce 
feels that they are now all the world to each other, and that there are no outside con- 
siderations in the way of Beatrice’s making any demands upon him, and abruptly 
says, ‘ Come bid me do anything for thee ;’ upon which Beatrice makes the unex- 
pected and startling demand, ‘Kill Claudio.’ [If Benedick in his oath: ‘by his 
sword’ ‘anticipated what would be required of him,’ as Corson says, Beatrice’s 
demand to kill Claudio, could have been neither ‘unexpected * nor ‘ startling.’ He 
could have anticipated no other use for his sword but in the defence of Hero, and if 
in her defence, upon no other persons but Claudio and the Prince. — Ed.] 

283. Doe not sweare by it, etc.] In the omission of ‘by it,’ the Qto gives the 
better reading. Beatrice refers merely to the oath. 

291, in a happy howre] This is good French. Thus, Cotgrave: ^Ala bonne 
heure. Happily, luckily, fortunately, in good time, in a good houre. — E d. 



222 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv, sc. L 

Bene, And doe it with all thy heart. 293 

Beat, I loue you with fo much of my heart, that none 
is left to proteft. 295 

Bened, Come, bid me doe any thing for thee. 

Beat, Kill Claudio, 297 

295. protest] At the close of this speech, OECHELHi«:usER inserts the stage- 
directiop : ‘ She falls into his arms ; then suddenly wrenches herself free, and covers 
her face with her hands.’ This stage-direction, Oechelh&user thus explains [Einfuhr- 
ungen in Shakespeare' s Buhnen-Dramen^ etc. 2te Afl. ii, 345) : After Bassanio’s 
choice of the casket has been made there is a scene wherein Portia’ s deep emotion 
breaks through all play of wit ; and so it is here, with Benedick and Beatrice. The 
present situation, I think, justifies the stage-direction which I have added, whereby, 
after Beatrice has responded to Benedick’s declaration of love, they both fall into 
each others’ arms ; no such direction would be allowed were the scene to be consid- 
ered as humourous ; whereas it seemed to me to be one that is required by the gravity 
of the situation and the earnest nature of the lovers’ emotion. When once this has 
had its due, humour may resume its sway. — Mrs Jameson (i, 136) : Here again [in 
the dialogue which precedes,] the dominion rests with Beatrice, and she appears in 
a less amiable light than her lover. Benedick surrenders his whole heart to her and 
to his new passion. The revulsion of feeling even causes it to overflow in an excess 
of fondness ; but with Beatrice temper has still the mastery. The affection of Bene- 
dick induces him to challenge his intimate friend for her sake, but the affection of 
Beatrice does not prevent her from risking the life of her lover. [It savours almost 
of disloyalty to quote this extract from one whom we all admire as much as we do 
Mrs Jameson, so utterly has she failed, not only here but throughout almost all that 
she says about the present play, to appreciate fully the character of Beatrice. — Ed.] 
297. Kill Claudio] Fletcher (p. 271) : Benedick is hereby called upon to 
choose at once between his friendship and his love ; for Beatrice’s intellect, no less 
than her heart, dictates to her that this, under the peculiar circumstances of the case, 
is the proper test of his affection ; and she therefore proceeds unflinchingly to apply 
it. , , . Heartbroken at her ‘sweet Hero’s’ wTong and affliction, she argues most 
logically and truly, that if her lover’s protestation be sincere, he musty were it at the 
cost of all other friendship in the world, show himself that champion of her own 
peace, her cousin’s fame, and her family’s reputation, which he has constituted him- 
self by that very avowal. So that the interests of her love, no less than of her friend- 
ship, are concerned in pressing upon him this test of the seriousness of his attach- 
ment. — Anton Count SzfecsEN (German Trans, from the Hungarian, p. 51) : It is 
an extremely happy device which makes the innocent practical joke, played by Clau- 
dio and the Duke on Benedick, culminate in a demand by Beatrice on Benedick to 
kill Claudio. Corson (p. 191) : Beatrice utters these words the moment all obsta- 
cles are removed from her making demands upon Benedick, just as the gentlest and 
kindest person might use a strong expression when under the influence of deep feel- 
ing. It exhibits the intense moral indignation she has felt and still feels, by reason 
of her cousin’ s wrongs, [Marshall says that these two words ‘ ought to be spoken 
with the utmost passion, in fact almost hissed into Benedick’s ears,’ regardless, I 
fear, of the phonetic difficulty of ‘ hissing ’ words which contain no sibilant. 
Fletcher’s interpretation of these words, which are so generally misunderstood 



ACT IV, SC. 

i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 

223 

Bene. 

Ha, not for the wide world. 

298 

Beat. 

You kill me to denie, farewell. 

Bene. 

Tarrie fweet Beatrice. 

300 

Beat. 

I am gone, though I am heere, there is no loue 


in you, nay I pray you let me goc. 

Bene. Beatrice. 

Beat. Infaith I will goe. 

Bene. Wee’ll be friends firft. 305 

Beat. You dare eafier be friends with mee, than fight 
with mine enemy. 307 

299. denie\ Ff, Rowe, H-, Knt, Wh. self ) w Marshall. 

i. deny it Q, Cap. et cet. 303. Beatrice.] Beatrice — ^Theob. et 

300. [He seizes her. Hal. seq. (subs.) 

301. there />] (Struggling to free her- 

as an outburst of vindictiveness, cannot be too strongly commended. Not even in 
Imogen, not even in Cleopatra has Shakespeare entered more deeply, it seems to me, 
into a woman’s heart than here, in this demand of Beatrice. With a swiftness stimu- 
lated by love, she sees that the moment is supreme, — herein is the only sure and 
absolutely infallible test of Benedick’s devotion. If he fail here and now, though she 
cannot control her heart, which would be always his, her hand never can be given 
to him ; as she says afterward, she would be here, yet she would be gone. So far 
from any display of intense passion or of melodramatic hissing, the words arc more 
powerful if said almost quietly with a piercing and unflinching gaze into Benedick’s 
eyes. — Ed.] 

299. me] This is the emphatic word. — Ed. 

301. I am gone, though I am heere] Steevens : That is, I am out of your 
mind already, though I remain here in person before you. — M. Mason (p. 54) : I 
believe Beatrice means to say : * I am gone,’ that is, ‘ I am lost to you, though I am 
here.* In this .sense Benedick takes them and desires to be friends with her. — 
Douce (i, 175) : Beatrice may intend to say that notwithstanding she is detained by 
force, she is in reality absent ; her heart is no longer Benedick’s. 

306. than fight, etc.] I.ady Martin (p. 322) : It has been, I know, considered 
by some critics [see Mrs Jameson, line 295, above] a blemish in Beatrice, that at 
such a moment she should desire to risk her lover’s life. How little can such critics 
enter into her position, or understand the feelings by which a noble woman would in 
such circumstances be actuated ! What she would have done herself, had she been 
a man, in order to punish the traducer of her kinswoman and her bosom friend, and 
to vindicate the family honour, she has a right to expect her engaged lover will do 
for her. Her own honour, as one of the family, is at stake ; and what woman of 
spirit would think so meanly of her lover as to doubt his readiness to risk his life in 
such a cause? The days of chivalry were not gone in Shakespeare’s time ; neither, 
I trust and believe, are they gone now. I am confident that all women who are 
worthy of a brave man’s love will understand and sympathise with the feeling that 
animates Beatrice. Think of the wrong done to Hero, — the unnecessary aggrava- 
tion of it by choosing such a moment for publishing what Beatrice knows to be a vile 
slander 1 Benedick adopts her conviction, and, having adopted it, the course she 



224 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv, sc. i. 

Bene. Is Claudio thine enemie ? 308 

Beat. Is a not approued in the height a villaine, that 

309. Is €l\ Is he Rowe et seq. 

urges is the one he himself must have taken. Could he leave it to the only male 
members of his adopted family, Leonato and Antonio, two elderly men, to champion 
the kinswoman of the lady of his love? — ^h'LETCliER (p. 276) : It is not ‘temper,* 
as Mrs Jameson phrases it, but just principle and generous feeling combined, that 
actuate the heroine to place her lover in this hostile position towards her cousin’s 
traducer, whom he can no longer, consistently with his protestations to herself, con- 
sider as his friend. The moment before he made these solemn professions, she had 
told him respecting the righting of her cousin’s wrong, ‘It is a man’s office, but 
not yours.’ The moment after he has made them, she tells him what is equivalent 
to saying, ‘ It is now your office, beyond all other men,’ . . . This drama, let us 
observe, is laid in the time when, however it may be now-a-days, a woman of spirit 
as well as tenderness would have shrunk from the remotest idea of requiting her lover 
in so mean a sense, as to risk his honour for fear of risking his life. The more dearly 
she loved him, the more she loved his honour, as the dearest part of him to a woman 
worthy of his affection. 

» 309-314- Is . . . market-place] Mrs Griffith (p. 159) ; There is a generous 
warmth of indignation in this speech which must certainly impress a female reader 
with the same sentiments upon such an occasion. I am not so disingenuous to take 
advantage of this passage as an historical fact, but am willing to rest it upon the sole 
authority of the Poet’s assumption, as this will sufficiently answer the design of my 
introducing it ; which is, to vindicate my sex from the general, but unjust charge of 
being prone to slander ; for were this the case, were not the resentment of Beatrice, 
in this instance, natural, how could it move our sympathy? which it actually does 
here, even though we acknowledge the circumstance to have been merely imaginary. 
I believe that there is nothing which a woman of virtue feels herself more offended 
at, than defamation or scandal ; first, against her own character, and proportionably 
when others are the victims. There are women, indeed, who may be fond of slander, 
as having an interest in depreciating an idea of chastity ; but this is owing to their 
frailty, not their sex, — ^Vice is neither masculine nor feminine ; 'tis the common of 
two, — Mrs Jameson (i, 139) : A haughty, excitable, and violent temper is another 
of fje characteristics of Beatrice ; but there is more of impulse than of passion in 
her vehemence. In the marriage scene, where she beheld her gentle-spirited cousin, — 
whom she loves the more for those very qualities which are most unlike her own, — 
slandered, deserted, and devoted to public shame, her indignation, and the eagerness 
with which she hungers and thirsts after revenge, are, like the rest of her character, 
open, ardent, impetuous, but not deep or implacable. When she burst into that out- 
rageous speech [the present lines, 309-314], and when she commends her lover, 
as the first proof of his affection, to ‘ kill Claudio,’ the very consciousness of the 
exaggeration, — of the contrast between the real good-nature of Beatrice and the 
fierce tenour of her language, keeps alive the comic effect, mingling the ludicrous 
with the serious. [Alas ! alas ! — Ed.] — ^Anon. i^Blachwood, April, 1833, p. 546) : 
This is one of the very few views in which we cannot go along with our guide [Mrs 
Jameson]. We do not think it an ‘ outrageous speech.* Never in this world before 
or since had a woman been so used as Hero. A governor’s daughter accused of 
incontinence not with one varlet, but with mankii^d, by her lover at the altar I 



ACT IV, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


225 


[309--314. Is he not approued ... a villaine, etc.] 

Sweetest Hero, she who was once so ‘ lovely in his eyes,* by her own father called 
‘ smirched and mired with infamy !* Why, Hero had ‘ this twelvemonth been her 
bed-fellow,’ and Beatrice knew she was as chaste as herself — as they lay bosom to 
bosom. Her pride of sex, as well as her sisterly love, was up in arms at the base 
and brutal barbarity ; she felt herself insulted, her own maidenhood subjected to 
suspicion, since soot might thus be scattered on the unsunned snow of a virgin’s 
virtue. And who was Claudio? She had heard his praises from the messenger ere 
she had seen his face. And this paragon led her Hero into the church to break 
her heart, and * mire her name with infamy !’ * Oh, God ! that I were a man ! I 

could eat his heart in the market-place,’ is a proper prayer and a just sentiment. We 
repeat, it is not ‘ outrageous.’ Did he not deserve to have his heart eaten in the 
market-place? And if Beatrice could have changed her sex, and into a man’s 
indignant heart carried too the outraged feelings of a woman’s, the man of the 
Corinthian, or rather Composite order, of whom the world would then have had 
assurance, would have hungered and thirsted after Claudio’s heart, and eaten it in 
the market-place, which we presume is only a figurative style of speaking, and 
means stabbed, and stabbed, and stabbed it, piercing it through, and through, and 
through, till the blood bolted from breast and back, and Claudio fell down a clod on 
the pavement-stone of sacrifice. In Beatrice commanding Benedick to ‘ kill Claudio,’ 
we cannot bring ourselves to think that there can be any consciousness of exaggera- 
tion in the mind of any auditor, and least of all in that of such a high-minded lady 
as she who has happened to say so, or that the effect is particularly comic. Doubt 
there can be none, that it was a duty incumbent on Benedick, not only as a gentle- 
man and a soldier, but as a Christian, to challenge Claudio to .single, and, unless 
that crudest of calumniators (however deluded) licked the dust and drenched it with 
tears, to mortal combat. Was not Benedick the lover, the betrothed of Beatrice, and 
was not Claudio the betrothed and the worse than murderer of her dearest and near- 
est (female) friend? She knew Hero’s innocence, and so must Benedick ; for dared 
he to doubt the word of his Beatrice as to the honour bright, the .stainless purity of 
her whose head had so long lain beside hers on the .same pillow ? If he did, then 
was he not worthy to lay on the down his rough chin close to the smoothest that ever 
hid or disclosed a dimple in balmy sleep. We cannot help feeling painful surprise 
that ‘Signior Montanto’ had not put his finger to his lip with an eye-look ^hat 
Claudio could not misinterpret, before that redoubted warrior left the church. It 
is not ‘ temper ’ [as Mrs Jameson terms it] that has the mastery with Beatrice. She 
was a high-bom, high-spirited, high-honoured, high-principled, pure, chaste, and 
affectionate lady, and therefore she sai^, and could say no less : * Kill Claudio.’ 
Benedick was bound to challenge Claudio for his own sake, and that of the profession 
of arms. And what was the life of her lover to Beatrice in comparison with his 
honour? She, God wot, was no love-sick girl, but a woman in her golden prime, — 
and had Claudio killed Benedick, — why, she needed not to have broken her heart, 
nor would she, though verily we believe she might have worn widow’s weeds for a 
year and a day. But she had no thought of its being within the chances of fortune 
that her beloved could be vanquished in such a cause. That would have occurred to 
her, had they gone out ; but in her indignant scorn of the insulter, she saw him 
beaten on his knees, and her own knight’s sword at his throat, that had so foully 
lied. \Aut Christopher North, aut diabolus. — Ed.] 

15 



226 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv, sc. L 


hath flandered, fcorned, diflionoured my kinfwoman? O 310 
that I were a man ! what, beare her in hand vntill they 
come to take hands, and then with publike accufation 
vncouercd flander, vnmittigated rancour ? O God that I 
were a man ! I would eat his heart in the market-place. 

Be 7 tc. Heare me Beatrice. 315 

Beat. Talke with a man out at a window, a proper 
faying. 

Bene. Nay but Beatrice. 

Beat. Sweet Heroy flie is wronged, fliee is flandered, 

(he is vndone. 320 

Bene. Beat ? 

Beat. Princes and Counties ! furclie a Princely tefti- 
monie, a goodly Count, Comfeft, a fweet Gallant fure- 323 

313- rancour ?‘\ rancour — Rowe et 322. Counties\ Counts Rowe ii, + , 
seq. (subs.) Cap. 

3 ^S» 3 ^^* Beatrice.] Beatrice ; Cap. 323. County Comfe(fl^'\ Counter Counte 
BeatHce-- Coll, et seq. (subs.) Comfect Q, Cam. Rife, Wh. ii, Dtn. 

316. window, window^ — Pope, + . count- Comfect Ff. Rowe, + , Var. Ran. 
window — Rowe et seq. (subs.) Mai. count-confect Cap. Steev. Var. 

321. Beat Q. Beit ? F^F^. But ? Knt. count, count confect Coll. Dyce 

F^. But — Rowe, Pope, Han. But ii, iii, count, count-confcifT>yQ,^\,Y%.'(\y. 

Beatrice — Ran. Beat — Theob, et count — confect Wh. i. Count! Count 

cet. Confect Sta. 

309. approued] See II, i, 360. 

31 1, were a man] Boas (p. 312): This speech springs from ‘a noble and 
righteous fury, the fury of kindled strength ’ ; but in the very measure of her strength 
the woman is made, with the finest truth, to find the measure of her weakness, and 
Beatrice, in this hour of her self-revelation, cries aloud for the powers of the sex that 
has hitherto been the butt of her scorn. 

31 1, beare her in hand] That is, sustain by false promises. — Elwin {Note on 
Macb. Ill, i, 80) : In the 14th of Eliz., 1572, an Act was passed against ‘ such as 
practise abused sciences, whereby they bear the people in hand tliat they can tell 
their destinies, deaths,’ etc. 

313. vneouered] That is, slander that had not been uncovered, revealed, detected 
as it might have been, or, perhaps, it is slander unveiled, unabashed without any 
pretence of a disguise. — ^E d. 

316. proper] See I, iii, 48. 

322. Counties] See II, i, 337. 

323. Count, ComfecSt] Capfxl (p. 131) : That is, ‘sugar-plum Count.’ — ^R. G. 
White (ed. i) : Beatrice’s wit and her anger working together, she at once calls 
Claudio’s accusation ‘a goodly conte confect,’ L e. a story made up, and him a 
‘ count confect,’ /. e. a nobleman of sugar candy ; and then she clenches the nail 
she has driven home, by adding ‘a sweet gallant, surely.’ This sense of the pass- 
age (which seems to have escaped all apprehension hitherto, the consequence being 



ACT IV, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


227 


[323. Count, Comfedt,] 

an almost universal corruption of the text) is further evident from the inter-depend- 
ence of the whole exclamation, ‘Surely a princely testimony ^ a goodly county — the 
first part of which would be strangely out of place, if there were no pun in the 
second. In Shakespeare’s time the French title ‘Count’ was pronounced like 
‘ conte ’ or ‘ compte,’ meaning a fictitious story, a word which was then in common 
use. For instance, ‘ to let you heare Prouerbes, which very Artifficers haue in their 
mouth, and comptes, which are vsed to be told by the fire side.’ — Guazzo, The 
Ciuile conuersation, 1586, fol. 6, b. Again, ‘Sentences, pleasant Jestes, Fables, 
Allegories, Similitudes, Prouerbes, Comptes, and other delightfull speach.’ — ^fol. 62, 
b. Comfects, confects, comfets, or comfits (for the four orthographies were indiffer- 
ently used) were so called because they were made up, as the etymology shows. 

‘ Conte ’ suggested not only ‘ count ’ but * confect,’ the first vowel sound being the 
same in all. The Qto has been generally adopted with the explanation that ‘ Beat- 
rice first calls Claudio “Count” and then gives him his title, “count confect!”’ 
But surely this acceptation, which has been hitherto universal, loses the point of 
Beatrice’s innuendo, deprives what is left of its proper connection, and is inconsis- 
tent with the quickness and concentration of her wit and the state of mmd in which 
she is. We can easily imagine the bitter sneer with which Beatrice flings out 
‘ Count — confect,’ lingering a perceptible moment on the first syllable of the latter 
word ; but that her stopping ‘ in the tempest and whirlwind of her passion,’ to repeat 
‘ a goodly Count, Count confect,’ would be unnatural in any one, and particularly 
unlike her, we do not need the evidence of the authentic edition [FJ to tell us. It 
has taken many lines, as it almost always must, to describe and explain what would 
flash instantaneously upon the mind of an auditor in Shakespeare’s day, or of a 
reader prepared to receive it in this. The text should be ‘ a good conte — confect,’ 
were it not that ‘ conte,’ ‘ compte,’ and ‘ count’ were used interchangeably when the 
play was written. [The text of White’s ed. ii reads : ‘ a goodly count, Count Com- 
fect.’ — Ed.] — Staunton: A title of derision, as my Lord Lollipop, — W. A. 
Wright; In ‘a goodly Count’ there is possibly a pun between ‘Count,’ a title, 
and ‘ count,’ the declaration of complaint in an indictment. The occurrence of the 
word ‘testimony ’ favours this. Grant White’s suggestion is very probable that there 
is again a play upon the meaning of ‘ confect.’ He interprets the phrase ‘ count 
comfect ’ as a fictitious story ; but I prefer to think that the legal meaning of ‘ count ’ 
is rather pointed to, and that it means a fictitious charge. [I distrust all interpre- 
tations as fine-spun as Grant White’s ; while it is impossible to deny them, it is hard 
to assent to them ; I cannot but believe that an auditor in Shakespeare’ s day, on 
hearing the word Count, and especially in the present passage, would think instantly 
of the title, and not at all, unless the connection were very pronounced, on conte, a 
story. If there be any pun here, which I doubt, the train of thought which led to it 
was the use, at the outset, of the word ‘ testimony.’ This led to the legal use of the 
word ‘ count ’ as W. A. Wright suggests. But how ‘ count ’ led to ‘ comfect ’ I do 
not see by any logical connection ; it can hardly be that at the word ‘ comfect ’ every 
auditor thought that a ‘ comfect ’ was either a composite or a ‘ fictitious ’ article ; its 
chief meaning is a sweet-meat, as Beatrice at once proves. That Beatrice paused 
before ‘ Comfect ’ I can well imagine ; she was searching for a term of supreme con- 
tempt, — that she was tolerably successful, I think we may infer, if a ‘ comfect ’ was 
popularly held to be what Cotgrave gives as a translation of ^ Dragie^ , , . any 



228 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv, sc. i. 


lie, O. that I were a man for his fake ! or that I had any 
friend would be a man for my fake/But manhood is mel- 
ted into curfies, valour into complement, and men are 
onelie turned into tongue, and trim ones too : he is now 
as valiant as Hercules ythsX. only tells a lie, and fweares it : 

I cannot be a man with wifhing,thcrfore I will die a wo- 

326. curfies\ Q. curt/ies Fj,. curte- sies Han. et cet. 
fees FjF^, Rowe, + . court' sies Cap. 327. tongue'] tongues 
Wh. courtesy Coll, ii (MS), courte- 

ionkets, comfets, or sweet-meats, served in at the last course, (or otherwise) for 
stomach-closers.* It is possible tliat Webster had this passage in mind when he 
wrote The Dutchess of Malfi^ and if he did, he took neither ‘ count ’ nor ‘ confect * 
in any recondite sense; Ferdinand proposes as a husband to the Dutchess ‘the 
great Count Malateste * whereupon the Dutchess exclaims : ‘ Fie upon him ; A 
count! he’s a mere stick of sugar-candy,* Til, i, p. 227, ed. Dyce. — Ed.] 

325, 326. melted into cursies] Steevkns : That is, into ceremonious obeisance, 
like the courtesies dropped by women. Collier (ed. ii) adopts the change of the 
plural ‘ cursies * into the singular ‘ courtesy,* as it stands in his MS, because ‘ man- 
hood,* ‘ valour,* and ‘ compliment* are all in the singular. [And yet the plural is used 
after ‘ tongue ’ in the very next line, — Ed.] — R. G. White : It is possible that we 
should read curses^ — Beatrice meaning that there was nothing left of men but words 
-—curses and compliments. — Halliwell ; Steevens is probably right. The spelling 
‘ cursies,* I believe usually (though not always) implies courtesies in the sense of 
obeisances. Thus in the next act, the Qto reads ‘ courtisies,* where the word is used 
in the ordinary sense. Baret, Atvearie, 1580, has, however, ‘ Make a legge, or cur- 
itsitfflectegenu' The fact is, that cursey^ or courtesy, was applied in Shakespeare’s 
time, to the obeisance both of men and women ; so that the application of the word 
in the passage in the text is perfectly appropriate. It may be just worth notice, 
without assigning too much importance to the circumstance, for the early editions 
differ in orthography, that in the Second Act of Othello, where the word occurs 
four limes, in the three cases where it it> intended in its usual signification, it is, in 
the Folio, spelt court esie and curtesie, whereas, in the other instance, where it means 
obeisance, it is, in the same e'dition, printed in the abbreviated form, curtsie, — ^W. A. 
Wright : Beatrice is still playing on the confectionery metaphor. Compare i Hen, 
IV : I, iii, 251;* Why, what a candy deal of courtesy This fawning greyhound then 
did proffer me !* In Haml. Ill, ii, 65, * the candied tongue * was the tongue of 
courtesy and compliment, as .sweet and unsubstantial as comfits and sugar-candy. 

327. trim ones] Steevens : The construction is, — not only men but trim ones 
are turned into tongue, that is, not only common but clever men, etc. Malone, 
who apparently shares Steevens* s error of supposing that ‘ trim ones* refers to men, 
observes that ‘ “trim” does not mean clever, but spruce, fair-spoken. “ Tongue” 
in the singular, and “ trim ones” in the plural is a mode of construction not uncom- 
mon in Shakespeare.* [See III, iv, 56 ; V, i, 40.] — W. A. Wright : They are so 
smooth-spoken that their tongues have lost their roughness. [Wherein the trim- 
ness consists is not, I think, in smoothness of speech, but, as Beatrice intimates in 
the next line, in readiness to tell a lie. Of course, ‘ trim ’ is strongly ironical, as it 
is in many another place in Shakespeare. — ^£ d.] 


32s 

329 



ACT IV, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


229 

man with grieuing. 3 30 

Bene. Tarry good Beatrice ^hy this hand I lone thee. 

Beat. Vfe it for my louc fome other way then fwea- 
ring by it. 

Bened. Thinke you in your foule the Count Claudio 
hath wrongM Hero'^ 335 

Beat. Yea, as fure as I haue a thought, or a foule. 

Bene. Enough,! am engagdc,! will challenge him, I 
will kiffe your hand, and fo leaue you ; by this hand Clau- 
dio fhall render me a dccre account : as you hearc of me, 
fo thinke of me : goe comfort your coofin, I mufl fay flie 340 
is dead, and fo farewell. 

338. fo leaue\ fo I leaue Q, Coll, i, ^3^4* Rowe, Pope, Han. 

ii, Wh. Cam. Dtn. 341. [Exeunt. Ff. 

339. a deere'\ Q. deere F^, dear 


337. I am engagde, etc.] In Oxberry’s edition of this play, as * performed at 
the London Theatres Royal,’ there is the following ending to this Scene : — 

* Bene. Enough, I am engaged, [puts on his hat.'\ I will challenge him. 

Beat. Will you ? 

Bene. Upon my soul I will. I’ll kiss your hand, and so leave you. — By this 
hand, Claudio shall render me a dear account. 

Beat, You ’ll be sure to challenge him. 

Bene. By those bright eyes, I will. 

Beat, My dear friend, — kiss my hand again. 

Bene, As you hear of me, so think of me. Go, comfort your cousin ; I must say 
she’s dead, and so farewell, [both going\ 

Beat, Benedick, kill him, kill him, if you can I 

Bene. As sure as he ’s alive I will. [ExeuntI 

The date of this edition is 1823. I find the same ending, with some trifling verbal 
changes, repeated in Lopez and IVemyss* Acting American Theatre of 1826. I do 
not know who is responsible for the impertinence, and lime would be misspent in 
any prolonged search. I hope it was not Garrick, whose Acting copy was never, I 
believe, printed. It is not in Kemble’s edition, nor in Mrs Inchbald’s. — El), 

338. by this hand] ‘ This ’ is the emphatic word ; it is not his own hand that 
Benedick now swears by, he had just sworn by it, but by Beatrice’s fair hand that 
he is holding. — E d. 



230 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv. sc. iL 


\Scene //.] 

Enter the Conjlablesy Borachioy and the Towne Clerke I 

in gownes. 

Keeper, Is our whole diffcmbly appeard ? 

Cowley. O a ftoole and a cufliion for the Sexton. 4 


Scene IV. Pope, + . Scene II. 

Cap. et scq. 

Changes to a Prison. Theob. A 
Jail. Cap. 

I. Enter.,.] Enter Dogb. Virg. Bor. 
Conr. the Town Clerk and Sexton in 
gowns. Rowe, + . Enter Dogb., Verg., 


and Sexton, in Gowns ; and Watch, with 
Conr. and Bor. Cap. 

3. Keeper.] To. Cl. Rowe,-f. Dog. 
Cap. et seq. 

4, 7. Cowley.] Dog. Rowe, + . Ver. 
Cap, et seq. 

and //] and Ff, Rowe, Pope, llan. 


1. Towne Clerke] This is evidently the same man as the Sexton, who speaks at 
line 5, and is throughout the scene the only man of intelligence except the Prisoners. 
Nevertheless, Rowe, followed by all editors down to Capell, retained ‘ Town Clerk* 
and added * Sexton ’ in the present stage-direction. Capell was the first to perceive 
that they were one and the same character. ‘In Shakespeare’s time,’ says Halli- 
WELL, ‘ in small towns, different offices were held by one person. The Sexton here 
introduced should be Francis Seacoal, if the poet had not forgotten the arrangement 
named at the end of the third act.’ In this scene, the substitution of tlie actors’ own 
names for the names of the characters they impersonated reveals, in a clear and satis- 
factory manner, that the Qto was printed from a play-house copy. The reader need 
find but little difficulty, if he will bear in mind that William Kempe acted ‘ Dog- 
berry,* and Richard Cowley acted ‘Verges.’ Wherever, in the text, Am/., Am., 
or Kee. , appears, let ‘ Dogberry ’ be substituted. Keeper in the very first line is evi- 
dently, as Capell says, a ‘press-corruption of Kempe’; so also ^ Andreev in line 6, 
which is, again as Capell says, ‘ suppos’d a nickname of Kemp’s,’ ‘from his playing 
the part of Merry Andrew,’ adds W. A. Wright. ‘We know of no actor,’ says 
Collier, ‘of the Christian, or surname of Andrew in the company of the Lord 
Chamberlain’s players. Andrew Cane, or Kane, was a popular comic performer 
anterior to the publication of the F^ ; but he could not have had the part of Dog- 
berry so early, even if he filled it afterwards.’ Fleay (Actor Lists, p. 14) makes 
the statement, without comment, that ‘Andrew performed in Much Ado about 
Noth in I 599 >’ but, as I can find no reference whatever that he makes elsewhere to 
this actor, I incline to think that it is an oversight, which is indeed venial, when the 
immense mass of material is considered, which Fleay has garnered. For a Life of 
Kemp, see Collier’s Memoirs of Actors in the Plays of Shakespeare, Sh. Soc., 1846, 
p. 89. 

Wherever Cowley or Couley appears, be it remembered that it is Verges who 
speaks. Of Cowley very little is known, and for that little the student is re- 
ferred to the volume of Collier, just mentioned, p. 159. 

2. in gownes] Maix)Ne: It appears from The Black Book, 1604, that this was 
the dress of a constable in our author’ s time : ‘ when they mist their constable, and 
saw the black gowne of his office lye full in the puddle,’ etc. 

4. stoole and a cushion] Malone : Perhaps a ridicule was here aimed at The 



ACT IV, SC. ii.] MUCH A DOE ABOUT NOTHING 


231 

Sexton. Which be the malefaftors ? 5 

Andrew. Marry that am I, and my partner. 

Cowley. Nay that’s certaine, wee haue the exhibition 
to examine. 

Sexton. But which are the offenders that are to be ex- 
amined, let them come before maftcr Conftable. lO 

Kemp. Yea marry, let them come before mee,what is 
your name, friend ? 

Bor. Borachio. 

Kem. Pray write downe Borachio. Yours firra. 

Con. I am a Gentleman fir, and my name is Conrade. 15 
Kee. Write downe Mafter gentleman ConradeV. mai- 
fters, doe you ferue God : 

Both Yea fir we hope. 

* Kem. Write downe, that they hope they ferue God : 

* and write God firft, for God defend but God fhoulde goe 20 

* before fuch villaines : * maifters, it is proued alrcadie 


6. Andrew.] Verg. Rowe, +. Dog. 
Cap. et seq. 

10. majler'\ maijler Q. 

11, 14, etc. Kemp, or Kee.] To. Cl. 
Rowe, + . Dog. Cap. et .seq. 

16. genilemayi CoHrade\ gentleman, 
Conrade, Rowe i. 


17, 21. God : mailers] God? Both 
Yea fir we hope. Kem. Write down, that 
they hope they ferue God: and write 
God firjl, for God defend but God 
fhoulde goe before fuch villaines : maif- 
ters, Q, Theob. et seq. 


Spanish Tragedy : *• Hieronimo, What, are you ready, Balthazar ? Bring a chair and 
cushion for the king.’ — [Act V, p. 157, ed. Hazlitt-Dodsley.] — II alliwell : It may 
be worth observing that the allusion.s to these [articles] are too common to warrant 
any certain deduction of the kind. Moveable cushions for the seats of single stools 
and chairs, although now nearly out of fashion, were most common in the sixteenth 
and seventeenth centuries. 

7, 8. exhibition to examine] Steevens : Blunder for ‘ examination to exhibit.’ 
See III, V, 47 : ^ Leonafo. Take their examination yourself, and bring it to me.’ — 
Halliwell : ‘Exhibition’ is probably the speaker’s blunder for injunction, per- 
mission, or some word of similar import. Th6y are now proceeding to obey Leonato’s 
direction and Dogberry and Verges are extremely anxious to take the first opportunity 
of asserting their right to examine Conrade and Borachio. Steevens is perhaps right, 
although the previous explanation seems more in accordance with the tenor of the 
context, and with the class of blunders usually perpetrated by the worthies who are 
now speaking. 

17-21. *Both Yea . . . villaines*] Theobald was the first to restore to the 
text these lines from the Qto ; without them, as he says, Dogberry ‘ asks a question 
of the prisoners, and goes on without staying for any answer to it.’ — Blackstone : 
The omission of this passage may be accounted for from the stat. 3 Jac. l., c., 21, 



232 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv, sc. ii. 


that you are little better than falfe knaues, and it will goe 22 
neere to be thought fo fhortly,how anfwer you for your 
felues ? 

Con, Marry fir, we fay we are none. 25 

Kemp, A maruellous witty fellow I affure you, but I 
will goe about with him : come you hither firra, a word 
in your eare fir , I fay to you , it is thought you are falfe 
knaues. 

Bor, Sir, I fay to you, we are none. 30 

Kemp, Well, ftand afide, Tore God they are both in 
a tale ; haue you writ downe that they are none ? 

Sext, Matter Conftable, you goe not the way to ex- 
amine, you muft call forth the watch that are their ac- 
cufers. 35 

Kemp, Yea marry, that’s the efteft way, let the watch 
come forth : matters, I charge you in the Princes name, 
accufe thcfc men. 


22. will goe\ will grow Rowe ii. 
26-32. Mnemonic lines, Warb. 

28. eare /] ear fir; /F^. ear: 
sir, I Cam. Glo, Rife, Wh. ii, Dtn. 
ear^ sir ; I Rowe et cet. 

32. dmvne'\ drowne Fj, 
tha{\ Om, F^, Rowe i. 


33, 43. ConJlable'\ Tcnvn-clerk Rowe, 

+. 

34. forth'] Om. Rowe, + . 

36. efteft] easiest Rowe, Pope, deft- 
est Theob. -f . 

watch] Watch F^. 

38. [Enter Watchman. Pope, + . 


the sacred name being jestingly used four times in one line. — Collier : Possibly, 
it was a player’s interpolation. — R. G. White (ed. i) ; It probably was interpolated 
by a player of the company, — one William Shakespeare ; there were hardly two in 
one theatre who could do that. 

32. a tale] ‘ A ’ is here, as very often in Shakespeare, equivalent to one ; see III, 
V, 37. The meaning is, that they both tell one story ; or, possibly, Dogberry may 
use the old law term, ‘ tale,’ for which, in modern pleading, we have substituted 
* declaration.* If so, the lawyers in Shakespeare’s audience would appreciate the 
absurdity of representing the prisoners, the defendants, as both joined in what is 
always a ‘declaration’ of the cause of action by the plaintiffs. — Ed. 

36. eftest] Theobald : A letter happened to slip out at press in the 6rst edition ; 
and *twas too hard a task for the subsequent editors to put it in, or guess at the word 
under this accidental depravation. There is no doubt but the author wrote, as I have 
restored the text ; deftest^ i, <?. the readiest, most commodious way. — Steevens : 
Shakespeare, I suppose, designed Dogberry to corrupt this word as well as many 
others. — Boswell : Dogberry has here been guilty of no corruption. The eftest 
way is the quickest way. See Eft in Johnson’s DicL — Halliwell ; Eft is solely 
used as an adverb. [To attempt to correct Dogberry is merely to range oneself by 
his side. — ^E d.] 



ACT IV, SC. ii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 




Watch I. This man faid fir, that Don loJtn the Princes 
brother was a villaine. 40 

Kemp. Write down, Prince lohn a villaine: why this 
is flat periurie,to call a Princes brother villaine. 

Bora. Mafter Conftable. 

Kemp. Pray thee fellow peace, I do not like thy looke 
I promife thee. ‘ 45 

Sexton. What heard you him fay elfe ? 

Watch 2. Mary that he had receiued a thoufand Du- 
kates of Don lohn^ for accufmg the Lady Hero wrong- 
fully. 

Kemp. Flat Burglarie as euer was committed. 50 

Co 7 iJl. Yea by th^mafle that it is. 

Sexton. What elfe fellow ? 

Watch I. And that Count Claudio did meane vpon his 
words, to difgracc Hero before the whole affembly, and 
not marry her. 55 

Kemp. O villaine! thou wilt be condemn^ into euer- 
lafting redemption for this. 

Sexton. What elfe ? 

Watch. This is all. 

Sexton. And this is more matters then you can deny, 60 
Prince lohn is this morning fecretly ttolne away ; Hero 
was in this manner accusM, in this very manner refus’d, 
and vpon the griefe of this fodainely died : Matter Con- 
ttable, let thefe men be bound, and brought to Leonato^ 

I will goe before, and fliew him their examination. 65 

Conjl. Come, let them be opinion’d. 


43. ConpabIe.'\ Town-clerk — Theob. 
+ . Constable — Cap. et seq. 

48. for accufmg\ for the accufmg F^, 

Rowe, 

51. thlmajfe'] Ff, Rowe, + , Cap. Wh. 
i. majfe Q, Cam. Wh. ii. the mass 
Var *73 et cet. 


59. Watch.] 2 Watch. Rowe. 

64. Leonato] Leonafoes Q, Cap. Var. 
Mai. Steev. Var. Coll. Dyce, Cam. 
Wh. ii. 

65. [Exit. Theob. 

66. Conft.] Dog. Rowe. 


51. by th’masse] Halliwfjx: This oath was gradually becoming out of 
fashion, and is therefore suitably placed in the mouth of Verges, — ‘a good old 
man, sir.^ — ^W. A. Wright ; But Borachio is not a good old man, and yet he 
uses it. 

63. vpon] See II, Hi, 202. 



234 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv, sc. ii. 


Sex. Let them be in the hands of Coxcombe. 67 

Kent. Gods my life, where’s the SextonPlet him write 
downe the Princes Officer Coxcojnbe : come,binde them 69 


67. [Exit. Rowe. 

Sex, Let them,, » Coxcombe. Ff 
(^Coxombe F^), Rowe, Pope. Couley. 
Let them,., Coxcombe. Q. Sexton. Let 
them be in hand. [Exit.] Conr. Offy 
coxcomb ! Warb. Johns, Var. *73. Ver. 
Let them be in bands. Con. cox- 
comb ! Cap. Ver. Let them be in hand. 
Con. Offy coxcomb ! Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. 
Ver. Let them be in band. Con. Offy 
coxcomb, Steev. ’93, Var. ’03, *13. 
Ver. Let them be in the bands — Con. 
Offy coxcomb ! Sing, i, Hal. Jervis. 
Sexton. Let them be bound, Borachio. 
Hands offy coxcomb. Coll. MS. Verj. 


Let them be in the — Con. Hands off! 
coxcomb! Kinnear, Lloyd. Verg. Let 
them. Bind their hands . — Con. Offy 
coxcomb! Anon. ap. Halliwell. Verg. 
Let them be in the hands of— Con. 
Coxcomb! Sta. Ver. Let them be in 
the hands — Conr. Offy coxcomb ! Mai. 
Var. ^21, Knt, Coll. Sing, ii, Dyce, Cam. 
Ktly, C}lo. Rife, Huds. Dtn, Wh. ii, 
Marshall. 

68, 72. Kem.] Dog. Rowe. 

69. Officer\ Officers F^F^. 

69, 70. binde them ihou~\ F^. bind 
theruy thou Q, Rowe, + . bind them; 
thou F^F^, Han. et cet. (subs.) 


67. Sex. Let . . . Coxcombe.] Theobald’s wonted insight here deserted him. 
All that he saw was, that it is hardly becoming in the Sexton to call the Constable a 
Coxcomb, and that this epithet * ought to come from one of the prisoners.’ Accord- 
ingly, he concluded that ‘Couley’ (of the Qto) was a misprint for Conradcy and to 
Conrade he gave the speech without further change, wherein he was exactly followed 
by R. G. White (ed. i), except in placing a comma after * be.’ Hanmer also fol- 
lowed Theobald in giving the speech to Conrade, except in changing more appro- 
priately, ‘Let them’ into Let us. Here Theobald’s influence ceases and we are 
indebted to Warburton for the happy solution which has been essentially adopted 
with some variations by almost every subsequent editor. Warburton saw that the 
whole line did not belong to the Sexton, and that Conrade spoke only a part of it ; 
he reads accordingly, and explains thus : ‘ “ Sexton. Let them be in hand. [Exit.] 
Con. Off, coxcomb !” Dogberry would have them pinioned. The Sexton says, it 
was sufficient if they were kept in .safe custody, and then goes out. When one of 
the watchmen comes up to bind them, Conrade says “Off, coxcomb!’’ as he says 
afterwards to the Constable “ Away ! you are an ass !’’ ’ Capell next changed the 
‘ Sexton ’ into VergeSy herein following the Qto, which has ‘ Couley,* the name, as 
it will be remembered, of the actor of Verges ; and instead of ‘ in the hands,* 
Capell reads in bands ; wherefrom Steevens’s in band is only a slight change; as 
is also in the bands of Singer (ed. i). Tyrwhitt says that he once conjectured 
that Verges should say : ‘ Let them bind their hands,’ but withdrew it in favour of 
Steevens’s reading. — Malone; Perhaps we should read and regulate the passage 
thus : * Ver, Let them be in the hands of — (the lawy he might have intended to say). 
Con, Coxcomb I’ — Brae (p. 148) : Verges, to assert his sliare of authority, repeats 
Dogberry’s order ; and that he may originate something from himself, he tacks to it 
the superfluous addition : ‘ Let them be — in the hands."* — ^Cam. Editors : The first 
words may be a corruption of a stage-direction [Zf/ them bind theni\ or [Let them 
bind their hands'], — R. G. White (ed. ii) : This passage seems to be hopelessly 
corrupted. [The only words, it would appear, of which we are quite sure, are Con- 
rade’ s ‘OfiF, coxcomb.* — E d.] 



ACT IV, SC. ii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


235 

70 


thou naughty varlet. 

Coulcy, Away, you are an affe, you are an afle. 

Kemp. Doft thou not fufpedl my place? doft thou not 
fufpeft my yeeres ? O that hee were heere to write mee 
downe an affe ! but matters, remember that I am an affe : 
though it be not written down, yet forget not I am an 75 
affe:No thou villaine,y art full of piety as fliall be prou’d 
vpon thee by good witneffe , I am a wife fellow , and 
which is more, an officer, and which is more, a houfhoul- 
der , and which is more, as pretty a peece of flefh as any in 
Meflina, and one that knowes the Law,goc to, & a rich 80 
fellow enough, goe to, and a fellow that hath had Ioffes, 

71. Couley.] Conr. Rowe. 

73, yecres\ years F3F4. 

76. j^] thou F3F4. 

77-84. Mnemonic lines, Warb. 

78. a houJhoulder'\ an houu'holder 

70. naughty^ This word was formerly, as we all know, a much stronger term 
than at present, when it is chiefly restricted to children. But, possibly, in the mouth 
of Dogberry, and coupled with ‘varlet,’ it may have had to Shakespeare’s auditors 
almost as weak and comic a sound as it has to us. See V, i, 307. — Ei>. 

81. hath had losses] Scott {Quentin Dunvard, Introd. p. ii, ed. 1853) : I 
have always observed your children of prosperity, whether by way of hiding their 
full glow of splendour from those whom fortune has treated more harshly, or whether 
that to have risen in spite of calamity is as honourable to their fortune as it is to a 
fortress to have undergone a siege, — ^liowever this be, I have observed that such 
persons never fail to entertain you with an account of the damage they sustain by 
the hardness of the times. You seldom dine at a welTsupplied table, but the inter- 
vals between the champagne, the burgundy, and the hock, are filled, if your enter- 
tainer be a moneyed man, with the fall of interest and the difficulty of finding invest- 
ments for cash, which is therefore lying idle on his hands ; or, if he be a lauded 
proprietor, with a wofull detail of arrears and diminished rents. ... I therefore put 
in my proud claim to share in the distresses which affect only the wealthy ; and write 
myself down, with Dogberry, ‘a fellow rich enough,’ but still ‘one who hath had 
losses.’ — CoLLiKR (ed. ii) : It is not very evident how Dogberry was to prove that 
he was a ‘ rich fellow enough ’ by having had losses, unless he meant that he had 
been able to sustain them. The MS has teases or teasses, for ‘losses’ ; but we are 
unwilling to disturb the old, and almost proverbial, text by substituting what is 
questionable. — Herman Merivale {Bdin, Rev,, April, 1856, p. 374) : Before we 
condemn [Collier’ s MS] let us think again. We enter very unwillingly into the 
domain of aesthetic criticism, but, after all, does the received reading appear free 
from objection in its place ? The ostentation of past losses would seem rather more 
appropriate in one who is seeking to varnish his present decay by the lustre of 
times gone by, than in one, like Dogberry, who is making a vulgar boast of present 
prosperity. And ‘ one who has had leases * was a pointed description of a wealthy 


Rowe, + , Var. Ran. 

79. any in] anie is in Q, Cap. Var. 
Ran. Mai. Steev. Var. Knt, Coll. Cam. 
Ktly, Wh. ii. 



236 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act iv, sc. ii. 


and one that hath two gownes, and euery thing hand- 82 
fome about him: bring him away :0 that I had been writ 
downe an affe ! Exit. 84 

churl, which would have been fully appreciated by an audience in Queen Elizabeth’s 
reign. For many a fortune had been made by people in Dogberry’s class, out of 
the common abuse of beneficial lease'^ of church and corporation property ; while, — 
if such very minute criticism may be allowed, — the words ‘ who has had leases * 
seem to point to the circumstance that, just about the time of .Shakespeare’s first 
familiarity with theatres (in 1586) the last ‘disabling statute’ had rendered the 
farther perpetration of such unprofitable jobs impossible. — Rev. John Hunter : Dog- 
berry here magnifies himself as having been so rich, that in spite of losses he is ‘ a 
rich fellow enough* still. — Ingleby {^Shakespeare Hermeneutics, etc., 1875, p. 35) : 
Dogberry’s ‘losses’ may have been intended for law^suits. [See also N, 6^ Qu, 
I, vii, p. 524, 1853, where “John Doe” makes the same suggestion. The reader 
will find an entertaining chapter, with Dogberry’s phrase for its motto, in Jacox’s 
Shakespeare Diversiom, (ii, 21) wherein many and many an example is recorded, 
gathered from the whole field of English literature, where past losses and ‘ better days ’ 
minister great consolation. — Ed.] R. G. White (ed. ii) Incomprehensible; and 
probably corrupt. Query?#— that hath had horses. — Bailey (i, 193) : To .substitute 
leasB would be adopting an alteration quite destitute of appropriateness. 1 have 
two rival suggestions to offer ; ( i ) that the true reading is horses, or bosses, — a per- 
version of horses now, at least, widely prevailing both in town and country amongst 
persons of Dogberry’s rank. ... I venture, therefore, if my first suggestion be 
rejected, — in which I am disposed to concur, — (2) to propose trossers in its place, 
Trossers or trowses is a word, we are told, very frequently met with in our old dra- 
matic writers, and it occurs once in Shakespeare, coupled with the epithet strait, to 
denote tight breeches. ‘Had losses’ may possibly have been converted from strait 
trossers. [Happy indeed is it, for decency’s sake, that Bailey, in regard to cloth- 
ing the nether limbs hy trowses, could convert ‘hath had’ into ‘hath,’ be the gar- 
ment never so tight ! As for comment on bosses, I can only say that I knew the 
soul of Dogberry to be immortal, but that until I had read this, I did not know that 
his spirit still walked. — Ed.] 

84. writ downe an asse] Collier (Actors in Shakespeare's Plays, Robert 
Armin. Shakespeare Society, p. 198) : Armin preserved the same designation of 
‘servant to the King’s most excellent Majesty,’ when he published his next tract, 
The Italian Tailor and his Boy, which came out in 1609. . . . The most remark- 
able passage in the preliminary matter to [this tract] is contained in the epi.stle to 
Lord and Lady Haddington, where Armin refers to his poverty, and makes such a 
reference to Dogl)erry as seems to render it certain that he succeeded to the character 
after Kemp resigned it, on retiring from the Lord Chamberlain’s players, and joining 
those of the Lord Admiral : Annin’s words are, ‘ Pardon, I pray you, the boldness 
of a beggar, who hath been writ down an ass in his time, and pleads under 
form& pauperis in it still, notwithstanding his constableship and office.’ Kemp 
was certainly dead when this was written, and Xrmin may possibly not have per- 
formed Dogberry until after that event ; but our notion is, that the character devolved 
into Armin’ s hands when Kemp abandoned the Globe and went to act at the For- 
tune. 




ACT V, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


237 


A6ius Quintus. 


Enter Leonato andhis brother. 


Brother, If you goe on thus, you will kill your felfe, 

And ^tis not wifedome thus to fecond griefc, 

Againft your felfe, 5 

Leon, I pray thee ceafe thy counfaile, 

Which falls into mine eares as profitleffe, 

As water in a fiue : giue not me counfaile, 

Nor let no comfort delight mine care. 

But fuch a one whofe wrongs doth fute with mine. lO 

Bring me a father that fo louM his childe, 

Whofe ioy of her is ouer-whelmed like mine, 

And bid him fpeake of patience, 13 


Scene I. Rowe. 

Before Leonato’ s House. Pope. 

2. his brother] Antonio. Rowe. 

3. Brother.] Ant. Rowe. 

8 . fiue\ fieve 

9. comfort\ comfort els F,. comfort 
elfe F^F^, Rowe, Pope, comforter Q, 


Theob. et seq. 

10. doth'\ Ff, Rowe, Pope, doe Q, 
Theob. et seq. 

13. fpeakc'\ speak to me Han. Coll, ii, 
iii (MS), Dyce ii, iii. 

paticnce'\ patience to me Ktly. 


3. Brother] Li.oyd : Leonato at the beginning of this Act is immersed in grief 
for the disgrace of his child, but the spectator already knows that this grief will be 
speedily allayed by the publication of her innocence, and the additional knowledge 
that he is bound to exaggerate consciously the expression of his grief by the pre* 
tence of her death, still further checks the spontaneousness of our compassion. 
Sympathy is balked and puzzled, and would rebel in affront, but that the poet fur- 
nishes a fair excuse for the laugh which incongruity invites, by the grotesque comi- 
cality of the indignation of Antonio. With like humanity, in the scene where the 
sleeping Juliet is mourned by her parents as dead, a vent for our importunate sense 
of absurdity is supplied in the ludicrously exaggerated wailings of the nurse. 

8. water in a siue] W. A. Wright : Compare Plautus Pseudulus^ I, i, 102 : 
‘Non pluris refert ejuam si imbrem in cribrum ingeras.’ 

10. wrongs] See II, i, 228. 

13. speake] Hanmtcr, for the sake of the metre, added to me^ reading ‘patience,* 
as three syllables. Collier’s MS also added them ; and Walker {Crit, ii, 256) 
suggested, independently, the same. Barron Field also proposed the addition, 
which, he says Soc. Papers^ ii, 54), ‘would set off well with “And I of him 
will gather patience,’* ’ line 22. On the other hand, Anon. {^Blackwood, Aug., 
*^ 53 > P* 193) says ; ‘ Let any reader, who has an ear, read the opening speech of 
Leonato, and he will perceive at once how greviously its effect is damaged by the 
insertion of the words “ to me ” in this line.’ [It is the very readers, who believed 





238 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v, sc. i. 

Meafure his woe the length and bredth of mine, 

And let it aniwere euery ftraine for ftraine , 1 5 

As thus for thus, and fuch a griefe for fuch, 

In euery lineament, branch, fliape, and forme : 

If fuch a one will fmile and ftroke his beard. 

And forrow, wagge, crie hem, when he fliould grone, 19 


19. And,,. hem,'] QF^. And hallcnv, 
wag, cry hem, F^, Rowe ii, Pope. And 
hollow, wag, cry hem, F^, Rowe i. And 
sorrow tvaive, cry hem, Han. Warb. 
And sorrcnving cry hem ! Heath, vVarton, 
Hal. And, Sorrow wag! cry; hem, 
Johns. Var ’73, ’78, ’85, Ran. Bid 
sorroiv, wag ; cry, hem ! Cap. Sta. In 
sorrow wag; cry hem, Mai. Cry — 
sorrow, wag! and hem, Johns, conj. 
Steev. Var. ’03, ’13, ’21, Sing. And 
^sorrow wag^ cry; hem, Knt. And 
sorrow, wag! cry hem. Coll. i. Call 
sorrow joy ; cry hem. Coll, ii, iii (MS). 
And — sorrow, 7 vag ! — cry hem, Dyce i. 


And, sorrow's wag, cry hem, Wh. i. 
And sorrow sway; cry Hem! Ktly, 
At sorrow wink, cry hem Anon. ap. Cam. 
At sorrow wag, cry hem Beke ap. Cam. 
And sorroiv swagge or szvage Ingleby 
(AthenjEum 6. Feb. 1864) withdrawn. 
And so forth ; wag, cry ‘ hc 77 t P Bulloch. 
Atid sorrow-wrnng, cry ^ hem P Herr. 
And son'ow weigh, cry he 7 n, Wagner. 
(Sh. Jhrbch. xiv, 289) Call so 7 -ro 7 vwag 
or At sorrow' s rage crie ^ he 7 n.' Leo. 
Hem sorrow away, a fid si^h Orger. Bid 
sorro 7 v wag, ciy ‘ he 7 n P Dyce ii, iii. 
Cam. Glo. Huds. Rife, Dtn, Wh. ii, 
Kinncar. 


that they had ears, that demanded the extra syllables. Hitherto, in quoting in these vol- 
umes the Notes of this Anonymous critic, I have attributed them to Lettsom, on the 
authority of Ingleby in N, Qu. 5th. vii, 224, and I think that I once found a ref- 
erence in Dyce which corroborated Ingleby, but I cannot now recall where. I have 
come to the conclusion, however, that it is safer to quote them as they appear in the 
magazine : Anonymous ; esi)ccially since Lettsom himself in his Preface (p. liv) to 
Walker’s Text of Shakespeare holds this Anonymous reviewer up to ridicule. — Ei).] 

15. strain©] Dei gh ton : Schmidt interprets ‘ strain’ as feeling. But in the large 
majority of the passages cited by him under that head, there is the notion of stretch- 
ing (inherent in the verb), and that notion seems to be present here, and to be indi- 
cated by the next two lines. — ^W. A. Wright : That is, every emotion by which it 
finds expression. Compare Son., xc, 13: ‘And other strains of woe, which now 
seem woe, Compared with loss of thee will not seem so.’ There may be also a ref- 
erence to the musical sense of the word as is suggested by the use of ‘answer,’ which 
might mean re-echo. See Lucrece, 1131 ; ‘ So I at each sad strain will strain a tear.’ 
[Wright’s expression ‘every emotion,* will, of course, include the lightest emotion 
as well as the deepest, but here, I think, every light emotion is excluded, and only 
those that are the heaviest are meant, those ‘ strains ’ which in common phrase, we 
say still carrying out the simile, ‘rack the very soul.’ The suggestion of a possible 
allusion to a musical strain is good. — ^E d.] 

17. lineament] R. G. White (ed. ii) ; Pronounced properly in three syllables: 
line-ament, 

19. And sorrow . . . grone] Theobald How are we to expound Rowe’s 
reading ? ‘ If a man will halloo, and whoop, and fidget, and wriggle about, to shew 

a pleasure when he should groan,’ etc. This does not give much decorum to the 
sentiment. I flatter myself that a slight alteration of the Qto, and F^F^j has led me 



ACT V, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


239 


[19. And sorrow, wagge, crie hern] 

to the true reading i ‘And sorrow wage ; cry hem 1 when,’ etc., t. <?. if such a one 
will combat withy strive against sorrow, etc. — Heath (p. 109) : 1 am inclined to 
think it not improbable our poet wrote : ‘ And sorrowing cry hem I when,* etc. The 
participle sorroxving signifies ‘ while he is actually under the influence of his sorrow,’ 
as in the next line. Warton, independently of Heath, proposes the same emenda- 
tion, and adds ; ‘ Sorrowing was here, perhaps, originally written soj'roxvinge [see 
Halliweli., />ost'\y according to the old manner of spelling ; which brings the cor- 
rection I have proposed still nearer to the letters of the text in the early editions.’ — 
Capell (ii, 133) : The method taken at present [see Text. Notes'] gives sense to the 
member quoted [the present line,] and withal the strictest conformity in manner and 
cast of language with every other part of the speaker’s argument, and the change 
that gives them is of the minutest. [Although Dyce and others say that they have 
adopted Capell’ s reading, the semi-colon in Capell’ s text has been overlooked; 
this semi-colon is of minor importance, but I have nevertheless deemed it best to 
be strictly correct and separate Capell’s reading from Dyce’s. — Ei).] — ^Johnson ; I 
cannot but think the true reading nearer than it is imagined. 1 point thus : ‘ And, 
sorrow wag ! cry ; hem, when,’ etc. That is, ‘ If he will smile, and cry sorrow be 
gone, and hem instead of groaning.’ The order in which ‘and’ and ‘cry’ are 
placed is harsh, and this harshness made the sense mistaken. Range the words in 
the common order, and my reading will be free from all difficulty : ‘ If such an one 
will . . . stroke his beard, Cry, sorrow, wag ! and hem when,’ etc. — Steevens : In 
my opinion Dr Johnson has left succeeding critics nothing to do respecting the passage 
before us. — Tyrwiiitt (p. 30) : I think we might read: ‘And sorrow gagge; cry 
hem, when,’ etc. — Ritson {Remarks y p. 33) ; Every editor and commentator has 
offered his proper lection, and therefore here ’s a new one to increase the number : 
‘And, sorrow waggery, hem when,’ etc., i. e. ‘sorrow becoming waggery’; or, 
‘converting sorrow into waggery, hem,’ etc. — ^Steevens (1778) : We might read: 
‘And, sorry xuag f cry hem I when,’ etc., i. e. unfeeling humourist I to employ a 
note of festivity, when his sighs ought to express concern. [Steevens afterward said 
that he had ‘inadvertently offered’ this reading. It was, adopted, however, by 
Marshall, who says that ‘ the expression seems very applicable to the type of char- 
acter that Lconato is describing.’] — Malone (1790) : For the emendation now made 
I am answerable: ‘In sorrow wag; cry hem, when,’ etc.. And and In, hastily or 
indistinctly pronounced, might have been easily confounded, supposing (what there 
is great reason to believe) that these plays were copied for the press by the ear ; and 
by this slight change a clear sense is given, the latter part of the line being a para- 
phrase on the foregoing. — Steevens (1793) : To cry — Care away ! was once an 
expression of triumph. So, in Acolasttis, 1540: ‘ — I may now say, Care axvayeP 
Again, ibidem : ‘ — Now grievous sorrowe and care away P Again, at the con- 
clusion of Barnaby Googe’s Third Eglog : ‘Som chestnuts have I there in store. 
With cheese and pleasaunt whaye ; God sends me vittayles for my nede, And I 
synge Care away P Again, as Dr Farmer observes to me, in George Withers’s 
Philarete, 1622 : ‘ Why should we grieve or pine at that ? Ila^ig sorrow ! ca^-e will 
kill a cat.’ Sorrow go by ! is also (as I am assured) a common exclamation of 
hilarity even at this time, in Scotland. Sorrow wag! might have been just such 
another. The verb to wag is several times used by our author in the sense of to go 
or pack off. — Barron Field {Sh. Soc. Papers, ii, 54) : I prefer Knight’s reading. 



240 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v, sc. i. 


[19. And sorrow, wagge, crie hem] 

It appears from the following two passages in Love' s Lab. L. that ‘ Set thee down. 
Sorrow which very much resembles ‘ Sorrow wag was a byword : ‘ Affliction may 
one day smile again, and till then, sit thee down, Sorrow.’ — 1 , i, 316 ; ‘Well, set 
thee down, sorrow ! for so they say the fool said, and so say I.’ — IV, iii, 4. — 
Collier (ed. i) ; The meaning is clear, though not clearly expressed. ‘ And, 
sorrow, wag !* is and sorrow away ! (for which indeed it may have been misprinted) 
similar to the exclamation, ‘care away !’ . . . Heath’s suggestion is the most plausi- 
ble emendation. — Collier (ed. ii) : The words in the MS are, ‘ Call sorrow joy ; 
cry hem, when,’ etc. and we give them place in the text more willingly, because not 
only are they in ekact accordance with the rest of the sentence, but because no body 
(with the exception perhaps of Heath,) has offered even a plausible solution of the 
difficulty. The old reading, ‘ And sorrow, wag V cannot be what Shakespeare wrote. — 
Anon. {^Blackwood, Aug., 1853, p. 193) : Collier’s MS gives us a gloss not a rep- 
aration of the text. We believe ‘ wag ’ to be the German word iveg — away — off 
with you. — Halliwell (adopting Heath’s reading) : The plausibility of this correc- 
tion becomes more apparent, if it be supposed that, in the original MS the second 
word was spelt sorrowynge^ and that the letter^ was written short and widely. It 
should also be observed that great stress is laid, throughout the dialogue, on the 
individual personally feeling the effects of sorrow ; so that the insertion of the word 
sorrowhtg in this line cannot fairly be considered pleonastic. Another suggestion is 
readily imagined from the notes of Steevens on this line although it has not, I believe, 
been offered amongst the numerous conjectural readings, ‘And, sorrow away ! cry 
hem,’ etc. The expression, sorrow away, was most likely proverbial. To cry — 
Care away ! was once an expression of triumph. . . . An instance of re-writing, 
similar to Collier’s MS, occurs in an, early MS Commonplace-book, where the line is 
thus curiously given : ‘ Bid sorrow go, cry hem,’ etc. Dr Sherwen, in opposition to 
all other critics, adheres to the original text. ‘It is,’ he observes, ‘one of those 
Latinised transpositions of words frequently observed both previous and posterior to 
the age of Shakespeare ; a species of affectation which, if properly attended to, will 
enable us to clear up many other obscurities in the progress of this work. “And, 
sorrow wag ! cry hem,” has the same meaning as if the natural order had been 
observed, viz : “And cry hem ! sorrow wag (or begone) when,” etc.’ — R. G. White 
(ed. i) ; All the attempts at emendation have rested on the assumption that ‘wag’ 
is a verb, or represents one, except Steevens’ s, who read ‘ And sorry wag ;’ but is it 
not plain that Leonato calls the man who in his affliction smiles and strokes his 
beard, hems, patches grief with proverbs, and drowns it in midnight revelry, 
‘ sorrow’s wag’ ? [W’^hite decided that it was not plain before he printed his second 
edition, wherein without comment, he followed Dyce. — ^E d.] — Staunton ; We 
adopt a suggestion by Capell, which deviates little from the original, and affords a 
plausible meaning, but have not much confidence in its integrity. — Walker (Crit. i, 
307) : Qu.j ‘Say, sorrow, wag;’ etc. There are three lines in the neighbourhood 
beginning with Dyce (ed. ii) ; I adopt Capell’ s emendation, which is incom- 

parably the best yet proposed, and, I think, not to be objected to because the word 
‘ bid ’ occurs in the seventh line above. . . . That the words ‘ sorrow wag ’ are uncor- 
rupted, and equivalent to ‘ sorrow be gone,’ I feel quite confident. — Keightley 
{^Exp. 167) : For ‘wag’ which gives no sense, I would read sway^ which gives 
most excellent sense. [Here Keightley gives examples of the use of sway^ which any 




ACT V. SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


241 

20 


Patch griefe with prouerbs, make misfortune drunke, 

With candle- waiters : bring him yet to me, 

20-35. Mnemonic lines, Pope, Warb. dle~wajlers F^. With-candlewqfters F^. 

21. With candle-wajlers\ With-can- 21. yet\ you(Zo\\,yiS. 

Concordance will supply.] It seems evident that the initial s of sway was effaced, a 
thing not unusual. [It is to me far preferable to consider this line as irredeemably 
corrupt than to accept any emendation, or any punctuation, that has been hitherto 
proposed. I Jyce’ s authority is august, and Dyce is ‘ quite confident ’ that ‘ sorrow 
wag ’ is uncorrupted, but not even his authority, nor, indeed, any other, can ever 
persuade me that Shakespeare put such words, at this passionate moment, into 
Leonato’ s mouth. There is a smack of comicality about ‘ wag ’ which is inefface- 
able ; it would be hardly worse had Leonato bid * sorrow toddle T Let us unflinch- 
ingly consign this line to any limbo that will receive it, and, beyond a peradveut- 
ure, our enjoyment of this delightful play will not be by one hair’s breadth dimin- 
ished. — El).] 

21 . candle- wasters] Steevens : This may mean, wash away his sorrow among 
those who sit up all night to drink, and in that sense may be styled wasters of can- 
dles. — Whalley : This is a term of contempt for scholars ; thus, Jonson in Cynthia's 
Revels^ III, ii : ‘unluckily perverted and spoiled by a whoreson book-worm, a can- 
dle-waster ’[ — p. 277, ed. Gifford]. In The Antiquary, III, is a like term of ridi- 
cule ; ‘He should more catch your delicate court-ear than all you head-scratchers, 
thumb-biters, lamp-wasters of them all ’[ — 469, ed. Hazlitt-Dodsley]. The sense, 
then, is : ‘ stupify misfortune by the conversation or lucubrations of scholars, the pro- 
duction of the lamp, but not fitted to human nature.’ [This interj)retation receives 
the approval of Giftbrd in a note ad loc. in Cynthia's Rezwls. Malonk, however, 
had ‘ no doubt that “ candle- wasters ” here means drunkards. The word “ drunk ” 
strongly supports this interjiretation,’ which was also adopted by Dyce and STAUN- 
TON, both of whom defined the word by revellers.'^ — Knight : That is, stupify mis- 
fortune with learned discourses on patience, that the preachers did not practise. 
Inglkhy, in The Still Lion, p. 119, and Shakespeare Hermeneutics, p. 129, agrees 
with Whalley. Herr (p. 104) diverts the current into a new channel by ‘inclining 
to the belief that the interpretation should be, — inasmuch as it is known Shakespeare 
was familiar with the Irish custom indicated, — rather in this wise : “those who sit 
up with the dead, as at an Irish wake, where everybody forgets his grief in drunk- 
enness.” ’ — W. A. Wright: Whalley gave the tme interpretation, which is in 
keeping with the rest of Leonato’ s speech and wfith his reference to the philosopher 
in line 38. [The word ‘ candle-waster ’ indicates so clearly one who wastes candles 
in any way, whether by revelry or by study, that the testimony of Ben Jonson or 
of Shakerley Marmion is hardly sufficient to limit it to a ‘ book-worm.’ The context 
must determine its limitation. Here, from the use of the word ‘drunk’ we should 
be inclined at once to decide that ‘candle-waster’ referred to revelry, were it not 
that Leonato goes on to say that ‘ there is no such man ;’ it cannot be, there- 
fore, that Leonato means that no one ever by (drinking lulled misfortune in 
sleep, — ‘ to drown sorrow in the bowl ’ is a hackneyed expression ; — this, therefore, 
cannot be his meaning, and we are, accordingly, compelled as an alternative to 
accept with Whalley, ‘ candle- wasters * as meaning ‘ philosophers. ’ Of those who 
have successfully assuaged misfortune by philosophy, or, as Leonato afterward calls 
it, by ‘preceptial medicine,’ none is to be found. — E d.] 

16 



242 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v, sc. i. 

And I of him will gather patience : 22 

But there is no fuch man, for brother, men 
Can counfaile, and fpeake comfort to that griefe, 

Which they themfelues not feele, but tailing it, 25 

Their counfaile turncs to paflion, which before, 

Would giue preceptiall medicine to rage. 

Fetter ftrong madneffe in a filken thred, 

Charme ache with ayre, and agony with words, 

No,no,^tis all mens office, to fpeake patience 30 

To thofe that wring vnder the load of forrow : 

But no mans vertue nor fufficiencie 
To be fo morall, when he lhall endure 

The like himfelfe : therefore giue me no counfaile, 34 

24. fpeake\ give F^F^, Rowe, + . 30. Noy noy'\ Separate line. Field 

Soc, Papersy ii, 54). 

21. yet] I suppose the train of thought in Leonato’s mind is * it will be very hard 
to find such a man yet if you do, bring him to me and then his thoughts growing 
clearer, he asserts outright ‘ there is no such man.’ — Ed. 

23-25. men . . . not feele] Tiieobalj) : I have observed [several classical] 
passages, which seem a very reasonable foundation for these sentiments : ‘ P'acile 
omnes, quum valemus, recta consilia aegrotis damns’ — Terence [Aptdriay II, i, 9 
— ^W. A. Wright] ; iXa<ppov, 'Krip.aTi^v Ifw Trcida napatveiVj vovOerelv 

re rbv KaKwg UpdaaovT .* — Aischylus [^Prometheusy 263] ; p^ov napaivelv fj rraOdvra 
KapTepelv. Euripides [Alcestis, 1078.] 

25. not feel] For examples of the omission of do before noty see Abbott, § 305. 

25. tasting it, Their] Abbott (§ 379) : Sometimes a pronoun on which a par- 
ticiple depends can be easily understood from a pronominal adjective. [It seems 
hardly necessary here to resort to the pronominal adjective ‘ their ’ when an antece- 
dent ‘ men ’ and a pronoun ‘ they ’ are in such close proximity. — Ed. ] 

27. preceptiall medicine, etc.] Bucknill (p. 117) : These lines are remark- 
able in these days when the moral treatment of mental affections is supposed to be a 
great novelty ; although ‘ preceptial medicine ’ may still be as inefficient as ever to 
influence frenzy, we do not now use even silken threads to restrain strong madness, 
any more than we use *a dark house and a whip,’ according to Rosalind’s recipe, 
for the treatment of lunatics. 

29. Charme, etc. ] Compare : ‘ And sorrow ebbs, being blown with wind of 
words.’ — Lucrecly 1330. — Ed. 

31. wring] Were it not that Schmidt has found two other examples of this 
intransitive use {Hen. V: IV, i, 253, and Cym. Ill, vi, 79) I should incline to 
doubt the word, here, as a misprint. — ^E d. 

32. sufficiencie] That is, adequate ability. Compare Wint. Talcy II, i, 221. 

33. morall] That is, to be so ready with moral sentences about patience. Com- 
pare * When I did hear The motley fool thus moral on the time .’ — As You Like It^ 
II, vii, 31. 



ACT V, SC. l] much ADOE about NOTHING 


243 

35 


My griefs cry lowder then aduertifement. 

Broth. Therein do men from children nothing differ. 

Leonato. I pray thee peace, I will be flefh and bloud, 

For there was neuer yet Philofopher, 

That could endure the tooth-ake patiently, 

How euer they haue writ the ftile of gods, 40 

And made a pufli at chance and fufferance. 

Brother. Yet bend not all the harme vpon your felfe, 

Make thofe that doe offend you, fuffer too. 

Leon. There thou fpeak’ft reafon, nay I will doe fo, 

My foule doth tell me. Hero is belied, 45 

And that fhall Claudio know, fo ftiall the Prince, 

And all of them that thus difhonour her. 

Enter Prince and Claudio. 

Brot. Here comes the Prince and Claudio haftily. 49 

39. tooth-ake] tooth-ack F^F^. 48. Scene IT. Pope, + . 

41. Rowe ii, + , Cap. Mai. Enter...] Enter Don Pedro, 

Steev. push / Coll, ii, Ktly. Rowe. After line 49, Cap. Dyce, Sta. 

42. your felfe your self. Rowe Cam. 

35. aduertisement] Johnson : That is, than admonition, than moral instruc- 
tion. — ^W. A. Wright : Shakespeare had, no doubt, in his mind the other and now 
more usual sense of ‘advertisement,’ and this suggested the expression ‘cry louder.* 
Cotgrave gives the following meanings of Advertissement : ‘ An aduertisement, signi- 
fication, information, intelligence, notice ; a warning aduise, monition, admonishment.* 

40. they] See III, iv, 56. 

40. of gods] War BURTON : This alludes to the extravagant titles the Stoics gave 
their wise men. [This is nonsense. — ^W. A. Wright.] — Steevens : Shakespeare 
meant an exalted language ; such as we may suppose would be written by beings supe- 
rior to human calamities, and therefore regarding them with neglect and coldness. 

41. push] Boswell: I think ‘push’ [and not pish] is right. To make a push 
at anything is to contend against it, or defy it. [‘But,’ says W. A. Wright, ‘in 
the case of accident and suffering this is what ordinary mortals have to do, whereas 
philosophers professed to treat them with indifference or contempt.’] — Collier 
(ed. ii) : This interjection, ‘ push !’ was constantly so spelt. Many instances in 
proof of it might be collected from our old dramatists. It is used in Beaumont & 
Fletcher’s Maids'* Tragedy, III, i, p. 363 (ed. Dyce) ; in Chapman’s Gentleman 
Usher ; and repeatedly in Middleton’s plays, see Works, i, 29 ; ii, 24; iv, 259, and 
V, 4 (ed. Dyce). — Dyce (Notes, etc., p. 45) : This pa.ssage was misunderstood, till 
Mr Collier explained ‘ push’ to be an interjection (a form of pish). 

41. sufferance] That is, suffering. See Meas. for Meas. Ill, i, 80: ‘the poor 
beetle, that we tread upon. In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great as when a 
giant dies.’ See I, iii, 9, where it means endurance, as in Mer. of Fen.: ‘For 
sufferance is the badge of all our tribe.* 

49. comes] For singular verbs preceding plural subjects, see Abboit*, § 335. 



244 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v, sc. i. 


Prin. Good den, good den. 50 

Clau^ Good day to both of you. 

Leon, Heare you my Lords ? 

Prin, We haue fome hafte Leonato, 

Leo, Some hafte my Lord!wel,fareyouwel my Lord, 

Are you fo hafty now ? well, all is one. 55 

Prifi, Nay,do not quarrell with vs,good old man. 

Brot, If he could rite himfelfe with quarrelling. 

Some of vs would lie low. ^ 

Claud, Who wrongs him ? 

Leon, Marry y doft wrong me, thou diffembler,thou: 60 

Nay, neuer lay thy hand vpon thy fword, 

I feare thee not. 

Claud, Marry befhrew my hand, 

If it fhould giue your age fuch caufe of feare. 

Infaith my hand meant nothing to my fword. 65 

Leonato, Tufli,tufh, man, neuer fleere and ieft at me. 


52. Lords lords ! Rowe i. lords ^ — 
Cap. et seq. 

57. rite\ right QFf. 

59. wrongs him\ wrongeih him Han. 
wrongs him^ sir Cap. wrongs him? 
Leon. Who ! Walker ( Crit, ii, 143), 
Dyce ii, iii, Huds. is it wrongs him 


Ktly. wrongs him then Wagner conj. 

60. Marry\ As closing line 59, Mai. 
Steev. 

y\ thou QFf. 

doJf\ ThoUf thou dost SteevJ 
Var. ^03, ’13. Uis thou dost Wag- 
ner. 


55. Are . . . now ?] Deighton : That is, you were not always so anxious 
to escape from our society. [Of course, much of the meaning of these re- 
plies of Leonato depends on the gestures with which they were accompanied. 
—Ed.] 

59. him ?] Inasmuch as this line lacks a syllable. Walker in his Article on the 
Omission of repeated words {Crit. ii, 143), suggested that the missing syllable was 
‘Who?’ uttered by Leonato, — ^which possibly gives animation, where none was 
needed, and certainly completes the metre. Hudson adopted the suggestion, and 
reads ‘Wlio? Marry, thou wrong’ st me,* etc. See Text. Notes. 

63. beshrew] Murray {II. E. D.) i Now only in imprecatory expressions: 
‘ Evil befall, mischief take, devil take, curse, hang !’ ; also, with weakened force, 
‘plague on,* and often humourous or playful. (Perhaps not imperative, but an 
elliptical form, like ( 1 ) thank you I (I) pray I (I) prithee !) [Hereupon the present 
passage is quoted.] 

65. my hand . . . sword] The construction and the sense are : ‘ my hand to my 
sword meant nothing.’ 

66. fleere] Halliwell : To fleer was, properly speaking, to sneer in the peculiar 
manner thus described by Palsgrave, 1580, ‘I fleere, I make an yvell countenaunce 
with the mouthe by uncoveiyng of the tethe*[ — p. 551, ed. 1852]. 



ACT V. SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 245 

I fpeake not like a dotard, nor a foole, 67 

As vnder priuiledge of age to bragge , 

What I haue done being yong,or what would doe, 

Were I not old, know Claudio to thy head, 70 

Thou haft fo wrongM my innocent childe and me. 

That I am forced to lay my reuerence by, 

And with grey haires and bruife of many daies, 

Doe challenge thee to triall of a man, 

I fay thou hafl; belied mine innocent childe. 75 


Thy flandcr hath gone through and through her heart. 

And Ihe lies buried with her anceftors : 

O in a tombe where neuer fcandall flept, 

Saue this of hers, framM by thy villanie. 

Claud. My villany ? 80 

Leonato. Thine Claudio^ thine I fay. 

Prin. You fay not right old man. 

Leon. My Lord, my Lord, 

He proue it on his body if he dare, 

Defpight his nice fence, and his affiue praftife, 85 

His Maie of youth, and bloome of luftihood. 

Claud. Away, I will not haue to do with you. 

Leo. Canft thou fo daffe mePthou haft kild my child. 

If thou kilft me, boy, thou (halt kill a man. 89 


68. age to bragge ^'\ QFf {bragy 
age to brag Rowe ii. agCy to brag Theob. 
et seq. 

70. otdy’\ old : F^F^, 

71. w}'] mine Q, Cap. Steev. Var. 
Coll. Dyce, Sta. Cam. 


72. ford d'\ forft Q. 

73. brnife'\ weight Gould. 

75. mine'\ my Rowe ii, Pope, Han. 
78. O] Oy Theob. < 9 /Cap. 

88. dafe] doffe Warb. 


70. to thy head] Halliwell : Forby, Vocabulary of East Angliay observes, 
‘We say, “ I told him so to his heady” not to his face, which is the usual phrase. 
Ours is as old as Shakespeare : “Know, Claudio to thy head.’* * [Compare Mid. 
N. £>. I, iy 1 1 5 : * Demetrius, He auouch it to his head ’ ; and Meas. for Meas. IV, 
iii, 147 ; ‘he shall bring you . . . and to the head of Angelo Accuse him home.’] 

71. Thou] Leonato shows his respect for the title and person of the Prince by his 
address of ‘you.’ But after the excessive contempt of the ‘thou,’ addressed to 
Claudio, he retains throughout that form of address to the latter. — Er>. 

73. bruise of many daies] W. A. Wright : Compare Rom. Jul. II, iii, 37 : 
‘Unbruised youth.’ 

86. Maie of youth] W. A. Wright : This passage supports the conjectural 
alteration of ‘ way of life ’ to ‘ May of life,* in Macb. V, iii, 22. 

88. daffe] See II, iii, 165. 



246 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v, sc. i. 


Bro. He fliall kill two of vs, and men indeed, go 

But thaf s no matter, let him kill one firft : 

Win me and weare me, let him anfwere me, 

Come follow me boy, come fir boy, come follow me 
Sir boy, ile whip you from your foyning fence. 

Nay, as I am a gentleman, I will. 95 

Leon. Brother. 

Brot. Content your felf, God knows I louM my neece. 

And fhe is dead,flander’d to death by villaines. 

That dare as well anfwer a man indeede, 99 

93. Come follow me^ ^oj'] Come, fol- Dyce ii, iii, Huds. 
low, hoy, Iluds. 96. Brother. Brother I Han. Bro- 

come fir hoy, come follow ther — Thcob. Warb. et seq, 

come fir boy; come follow me FgF^, 99. QFf, Rowe, Pope, 

Rowe, come, boy, follow me Pope, 4 - , Cap. man indeed Cam. Dyce ii, iii. 

Steev. come, sir boy, follow me Cap. man, indeed, Theob. et cet. (.subs.) 

90, He shall, etc.] Warijurton : This Brother Antony is the truest picture 
in^ginable of human nature. He had assumed the character of a sage to comfort 
his brother, overwhelmed with grief for his only daughter’ s affront and dishonour ; 
and had severely reproved him for not commanding his passion better on so trying 
an occasion. Yet, immediately after this, no sooner does he begin to suspect that his 
age and valour are slighted, but he falls into the most intemperate fit of rage himself ; 
and all he can do or say is not of power to pacify him. 

92, Win me and weare me] Halliwell : * Win it and wear it,’ Ray’s Prov^ 
erbs, 1678, p, 277. It occurs also in He3rwood’s Fay re Mayde of the Exchange, 
first printed in 1607. — Rushton {Shakespeard 5 Euphuism, p. 83) : ‘If thou fall in 
loue with one that is beautifull, . . . hearing of hir lightnesse, and if then shee looke 
as fayre as before, wooe hir, win hir, and weare hir’ [p. 307, ed. Arber], 

93, The Textual Notes di.splay the praiseworthy efforts of the editors to make the 
irascible Anthony express his rage in a respectable pentameter and not, as in the 
text, in a humiliating Alexandrine. Fleay, however, is more indulgent, and accedes 
to Antony the comfort of the good mouth-filling line, here given, (see Ingleby’s 
Man, etc. ii, 81). Again, in line 95, ‘gentleman’ adds too many syllables to the 
line. Of course. Walker (Vers. 189) would ruthlessly pronounce it genP man. I 
preftT gent, myself. — Ed. 

94, foyning] Douce : A term in fencing, and means thrusting. Dyce ( Gloss. ) 
Cotgrave: ^ Estoquer. To thrust, or foyne at.’ — IIalliwell : It sometimes sig- 
nifies to thrust so as to make a slight wound. This meaning is recognised in 

Ahcedarium, 1 55 2, — ^Yoync, punctus ; foynen, or gyve a {oyn^, punctum 
dare ; foynyng, or with a toynt, punctum.* . . . There can be little doubt but that, 
in Shakespeare’s time, there was a particular kind of thrust called the foin. 

99. man indeede] Theobald injudiciously inserted a comma after ‘ man ’ ; and 
although Capell removed it, and restored the punctuation of the Folio, it remained 
even down to the first Cambridge Edition, In the meantime. Walker (Crit. iii, 
32) had observed : ‘ Point — “ answer a man indeed,” i. e. one who is indeed a man. 
See the whole context. And so understand Hamlet, III, iv, — “A combi- 



ACT V, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 

I 

As I d are take a ferpent by the tongue. 

Boyes’apes, braggarts, lackes, milke-fops. 

Leon. Brother Anthony. 

Brot. Hold you content, what manfl know them, yea 
And what they weigh, euen to the vtmoft fcruple, 

Scambling, out-facing, fafliion-monging boyes, 

101. braggarts, Iackes'\ jacks, brag- 103. man'i'\ man! Q. 

garts Han, 104. weigh^ wey F3. 

102. Anthony. '\ Anthony — Theob. 105, Q, Johns. Knt ii, Hal. 

et seq, Sta. Cam, Dyce hi. mongring or 

103-110. Mnemonic lines, Warb. manuring or mongering Ff et cet. 

nation and a form indeed,” etc.^ It is a little strange that the impropriety of the 
comma here was not noticed, when the very same phrase occurs in line 90, where no 
comma is, and where no editor ever supposed that a comma was required. — E d. 

loi. lackes] See I, i, 179. 

101. braggarts] Neither Hanmer nor Dyce will permit Brother Anthony*s 
wrath to explode otherwise than metrically. Hanmer transposes his words, and 
Dyce, by a careful accent, makes him call the Prince and Claudio * braggarts. ^ — 
Ed. * 

105. Scambling] Percy (Note on lien. V: I, i, 4) : In the household book 
of the Sth Earl of Northumberland there is a particular section, appointing the 
order of service for the scambling days in Lent, that is, days on which no regular 
meals were provided, but every one scambled, i. e. scrambled and shifted for himself 
as well as he could. So, in the old noted book entitled Leicester’s Commonwealth, 
one of the marginal heads is, ‘ Scrambling between Leicester and Huntington at the 
upshot.’ Where in the text, the author says, ‘ Hastings, for ought I see, when hee 
cometh to the scambling, is like to have no better luck by the beare [Leicester] then 
his ancestour had once by the boare [Richard HI.].’ — [Cotgrave : ‘ Griffe graffe. 
By hooke or by crooke, squimble, squamble, scamblingly, catch that catch may.’] 

105. fashion-monging] Dyce {Feiv Notes, etc., 1853, p. 46) : Here Knight, 
alone of the modern editors, prints ‘fashion-monging,’ — and rightly, for instances 
of that form are not wanting in our early authors; so, in Wilson’s Coblers Proph- 
ecie, 15941 ‘Where the Courtier with his brauerie, And the money-monging 
mate with all his knauerie.’ — Sig. B 3. [Dyce refers to Knight’s second edition, 
1842, where the words are printed as in the Folio, with this foot-note : ‘ So in the 
original copies; but always altered to fashion-mong* ring. The participle of the 
Anglo-Saxon verb, meaning to trade, would give us monging ; as the verb gives us 
the noun, signifying a trader, a monger. ^'\ — Collier (ed. ii, 1858) : Dyce would 
have this word spelt * monging^ merely because he so finds it in Wilson’s Cobler^s 
Prophccie. This is to desert the etymology of the word ; and the same reason would 
require adherence to every old and exploded form in any other word. In Wilson’s 
comedy we may be pretty sure that the letter r, in ‘mong’ring,’ was accidentally 
omitted. Dyce (ed. i) after quoting his own words in his Few Notes, adds ‘but 
now, on considering the inconsistency in spelling which those old copies exhibit, I 
think the other modern editors have done more wisely [than Knight.]’ — Arrow- 
smith {Shakespeare* s Editors, etc., p. 33) : It is not a matter of any importance 
which mode of spelling may be adopted, so far as the sense is concerned, but Shake- 


247 

100 


los 



248 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v, sc. i. 

That lye, and cog, and flout, depraue, and flander, io6 

Goe antiquely, andfhow outward hidioufneffe, 

107. antiqu€ly\ antickly F^F , Rowe 107. outward'\ an outward Rowe, + , 
et seq. Coll ii. (MS). 

and'\ Om. Dyce ii, iii, lluds. 


speare being in the hands and on the lips of all, upon his writings, next to our ver- 
sion of the Bible and to the book of Common Prayer, depend the perpetuation of 
old, and the defence of calumniated English. What avails that ‘ monging * is found 
in the Funeralles of King Edward the Syxt, 1560: ‘Your monging of vitayles, 
come, butter, and cheese.’ [Dyce’s line for the Coblers Prophicie quoted, as above,] 
In Lord Brooke’s Treatise of Religion ^ composed many years before, but first printed 
in 1670: ‘Book learning, arts, yea school divinity New types of old law-monging 
Pharisees.’ — Stanza 67. In Gee’s Shreds of the Old Snare, 1624; ‘But the 
Pope’s benediction, or any the least touch of sainting, miracle-monging fiction is able 
to infuse the highest worth into the basest baggagely new-nothing to hang upon the 
sleeve of admiring, adoring, ghostly children of the Jesuites.’ — ^pp. 49-50. What 
avail these, or any number of like instances, buried in writers that are never read ? 
Banish the true and genuine form ‘ monging ’ from Shakespeare, it becomes an out- 
cast from our language, and leaves a gap in the eldest branch of a most useful family 
of words. ‘ Monging ’ is the present participle regularly inflected from the Anglo- 
Saxon verb mangian to traffick ; whence we get monger, now used only in compo- 
sition, but in Shakespeare’s time occurring as a simple noun, e. g. in Ben Jonson’s 
Tale of a Tub : ‘ This canon has a . . . shaven pate, and a right monger, y’vaith.’— 
II, i, [p. 164, ed. Gifford.] In Philemon Holland’s translation of Plinies Naturall 
History^ 1600: ‘it falleth out that sometime one rich munger or other {praevalens 
manceps') buying up a commoditie,’ etc. — Bk. 33, p. 485. The learned but crotchety 
master of St Paul’s School, Alexander Gil, 1619, says, ‘munger inseparabile est & 
ilium denotat qui rem venal em habet ut fishmunger, cetarius.’ As to mongering, 
that form also is quite legitimate, being the present participle of mangheren, termed 
by Kilian an old Dutch word ; but why should an inflection from the more element- 
ary and indigenous root be shouldered out by one which is in all liklihood but an 
offshoot from it. 

106. depraue] To villify, to traduce. 

107. antiquely] That is, like an antic, as a buffoon was called. 

107. hidiousnesse] Steevens : That is what in Hen, V: III, vi, 81, is called 
horrid suit of the camp.’ [I cannot discover the smallest relevancy In Steevens’ s 
quotation, and no Editor or critic has furnished a second. The ‘ horrid suit of the 
camp ’ was such a suit as Henry refers to when he tells Montjoy that their ‘ gay- 
ness and their gilt were all besmirched,’ and ‘ time had worn them into slovenry,’ 
— just such a suit, in fact, as Pistol would be likely to wear ostentatiously on his 
return to London. Surely this is not applicable to the point-device Claudio. Brother 
Anthony in his foaming rage has exhausted the list of Claudio’s mental and moral 
defects, and then, for lack of more material, resorts to Claudio’ s deportment and to 
his clothes, which, as both were beyond reproach, his fury, in wantonness of insult, 
transmutes to their opposite ; Claudio’s deportment is that of a merry Andrew, and 
his gay apparel becomes ‘outward hideousness.’ — E d.] 



ACT V, SC i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 

And fpeake of halfe a dozen dangerous words, 

How they might hurt their enemies, if they durft. 

And this is all. 

Leon. But brother Anthofiie. 

Ant. Come,^tis no matter. 

Do not you meddle, let me deale in this. 

Gentlemen both, we will not wake your patience 
My heart is forry for your daughters death : 1 1 5 


249 

108 

110 


108, /peak of'\ speak off Theob. 
Warb. et seq. 

dan^rous'\ dangerous Rowe et 
seq. 

III. Anthonie. ] A nihonie Praetorius. 


Anthony: Rowe i. Anthony! Han. 
Anthony y — Theob. Warb. et seq. 

1 14. v}ake'\rack\\.?.Vi, waste T&lhot 
task Ktly conj. 


108. speake of] Theobald: These editors are persons of unmatchable indo* 
lence, that can’t afford to add a single letter to retrieve common sense. To ‘ speak 
off,’ as I have reform’d the Text, is to speak out boldly, with an ostentation of 
bravery, etc. So, in Twelfth Nighty III, iv, 198 : ‘A terrible oath, with a swagger- 
ing accent sharply twanged off.’ 

109. enemies, if] Deighton : To mark the sarcasm, it would be better, it seems 
to me, to point * enemies — if they,’ etc. 

1 14. wake] Warburton : This implies a sentiment that the speaker would by 
no means have implied, — that the patience of the two old men was not exercised, 
but asleep, which upbraids them for insensibility under their wrong. Shakespeare 
must have wrote : wracky i. e. destroy your patience by tantalizing you. — ^Johnson ; 
This emendation is very specious, and perhaps is right ; yet the present reading may 
admit a congruous meaning with less difficulty than many other of Shakespeare’ s 
expressions. The old men have been both very angry and outrageous ; the Prince 
tells them that he and Claudio ‘ will not wake their patience,’ will not longer force 
them to endure the presence of those whom, though they look on them as enemies, 
they cannot resist. — Heath (p. no) ; That is, we will not on our parts awaken 
your patience into anger by further provocation. — Capell (p. 133) : Brother Antony’s 
patience has been so exemplary, and Leonato’s likewise, that their replier could do 
no less than remind them of it in this ironical complement ; where ‘ patience ’ is its 
reverse ; and they are told that that reverse is asleep, and should not be wak’d by 
them by angry speeches on their part ; all remembrance of irony is wiped clean out 
of editors. — Halliwell : That is, ironically, we will not keep your patience awake 
by any further discussion. — Dyce (ed. ii) : ‘ Wake ’ is a most suspicious lection, 
though defended by several commentators. — ^Schmidt {Lex,') : Compare Rick, II: 
I, iii, 132: ‘To wake our peace.’ — ^A llen (MS): I suspect that the Persons are 
here interchanged ; that is, you will not so wake our present state of patience into 
one of anger, that we will fight with you. (Don Pedro says this while making a 
motion to withdraw. ) There could be a sense in : * we will not wake our patience.’ 
[The Camb. Ed. records an Anonymous conjecture of passions for ‘patience,’ which 
is noteworthy. In dictating copy to the compositors, ‘ patience ’ would be almost, as 
lawyers say, idem sonans with passions^ and passions leaves nothing to be desired 
in the way of sense. — Ed.] 



250 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v, sc. i. 


But on my honour fhe was chargM with nothing 1 16 

But what was true, and very full of proofe. 

Leon. My Lord, my Lord. 

Prin. I will not heare you. 

Enter Benedickc. 120 

Leo. No come brother, away, I will be heard. 

Exeunt ambo. 

Bro. And fhall, or fome of vs will fmart for it. 

Prin. See, fee, here comes the man we went to feeke. 

Clau. Now fignior, what newes? 125 

Ben. Good day my Lord. 

Prin. Welcome fignior, you are almoft come to part 
almoft a fray. 128 


1 1 7. Bui what was"] But was 'Fi. But 
was most Coll. MS, ap. Cam. 

ii8~I2I. As two lines, ending Not 
...heard Coll. 

ii8~124. As three lines, ending No! 
...shall., At Han. Steev. Var. ^21, Knt, 
Dyce, Sta. As three lines, ending No ? 
.. .shall... see Ran. Mai, 

1 18. my Lord.~\ my lord — Pope et 
seq. 

120. Enter..,] Enter Ben. (after line 
123) Q. (after line 124) Cap. 


1 21. No'\ No! Ff. No? Cap. et 
seq. 

conie’\ Om. Steev. Var. ’03, ’13. 

122. Exeunt ambo] After line 1 23, 
Rowe ii. 

Scene III. Pope, + . 

123. for it\ forU Walker, Dyce ii. 
124-128. here comes ... fray'] Three 

lines, ending signior ... signior ...fray. 
Cap. 

124. we] he FgF^. 

128. almojl] Om. Rowe ii. 


123. for it] Walker {Vers. 273) : Single lines of four or five, or six or seven 
syllables, interspersed amidst ordinary blank verse of ten, are not to be considered as 
irregularities ; they belong to Shakespeare’s system of metre. On the other hand, 
lines of eight or nine syllables, as they are at variance with the general rhythm of 
his poetry (at least, if my ears do not deceive me, this is the case), so they scarcely 
ever occur in his plays, — it were hardly too much to say, not at all. [More than 
once I have found that Walker seems to regard as the accepted text, the division of 
lines in the edition before him, which, I think, was one of the Variorums. This was 
most probably the case, in the present instance ; in all of these editions, since that of 
Steevens, in 1793, the words ‘Or some of us will smart for it’ form a single line of 
eight syllables; to this line Walker’s rule, as above, applies, and he therefore 
instructs us to read ‘for ’t,’ whereby the line is brought into ‘Shakespeare’s system 
of metre.’ Had Walker gone to the Folio, or marked Hanmer’s division, he would 
have seen his error. Capell’s division, also, would have enlightened him, — which, 
however, I think is wrong, inasmuch as it involves a portion of the speech of Don 
Pedro, who speaks in prose throughout the rest of the scene. — Ed.] 

127, 128. almost] This word, in line 128, Rowe, in his Second Edition, 
omitted, and Steeve?^s expressed a wish that the omission had been licensed by 
the ancient copies, ‘as the sense is complete without it.’ Marshall cannot ‘help 
thinking’ that it is the ‘almost’ in line 127, that ‘is redundant.’ A second argu- 



ACT V, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


2Sf 


Clau. Wee had likt to haue had our two nofes fnapt 
off with two old men without teeth. 

Prin. Leonato and his brother, what think’ft thou?had 
wee fought, I doubt we fhould haue beene too yong for 
them. 

Ben, In a falfe quarrell there is no true valour, I came 
to feeke you both. 

Clau- We haue beene vp and downc to feeke thee, for 
we are high proofe melancholly,and would faine haue it 
beaten away, wilt tbou vfe thy wit? 

129. likf\ Q. Walker. 

13 1, brother^ what\ brother what Q. 134. In a] In FgF^, 

brother; whatV^j Rowe. 137. high proof e'\ QFf, Knt. high-^ 

134,135. As verse, lines ending: Theob. et cet. 

valour.,. bothy Var. ’78, ’85, Ran. Mai. 

ment against the repetition, he finds in the fact that the sentence thereby * makes 
a blank verse, which, as it occurs in prose, is objectionable.’ But, on the other 
hand, Halijwei.l correctly states that the repetition is exactly in Shakespeare’s 
manner and in proof quotes. Love's Lab. L. I, i, 161 : am the last that will last 

keep his oath’; King Johny III, i, 9: ‘Believe me, I do not believe thee, man’; 
Hen. VIII : II, i, 74 : ‘ whom to leave Is only bitter to him, only dying.* To these, 
may be added, among almost innumerable instances, / Hen. IV: I, iii, 20 : ‘You have 
good leave to leave us Love's Lab. L. I, i, 49 : ‘ Your oath is passed to pass away 
from there ’; Mach. Ill, ii, 20 : ‘Whom we to gain our peace have sent to peace’; 
again Ib. V, iii, 44 : ‘ Cleanse the stuff’d bosom of the perilous stuff,’ etc. ; again 
in the present jjlay, V, iv, no : ‘ since I do purpose to marry, I will think nothing 
to any purpose that the world can say against it,’ Moreover, is there not, in the 
very next line to the present, another example of this same love of repetition : ‘ two 
noses ’ and ‘ two old men ’ ; Steevens might have urged, with equal propriety, that 
the ‘ sense is complete ’ without the former ‘ two.^ — Ed. 

130. with] See II, i, 58. 

132. too yong] Walker (CnV, ii, 169) thinks that there is here some current 
phrase or proverb, and that ‘ the joke is pointless, except on such a supposition. 
The same proverb seems to be alluded to in Tam. of Shr. II, i, 236 : “ Kath. 
Well aim’d of such a young one. Petr. Now, by St George, I am too young for 
you !” i. e. I am too much for you, I am an overmatch for you.’ [It is not likely 
that Don Pedro would have to resort to proverbs in order to express what was so 
manifest; nor, as far as I can see, is there any ‘joke’ intended. — Ed.] 

134. In a . . . valour] Walker (CW/. i, 4) suggested that this is a line of 
verse, not knowing that Steevens had so printed it, nearly a hundred years before. 

137 ' high proofe] Deighton : A weapon is said to be ‘of proof* when it has 
been tested after manufacture ; spirits are under or over proof according as they have 
been refined above or below a fixed standard ; and the metaphor in the text may have 
its origin in either of these processes. In the Mer. of Ven. II, ii, 38, Launcelot 
jestingly speaks of his father as being ‘ more than sand>blind, high-gravel blind.’ 


130 

13s 

138 



252 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v. sc. i. 


Ben. It is in my fcabberd,fhall I draw it? 

Prin. Doeft thou weare thy wit by thy fide ? 140 

Clau. Neuer any did fo, though verie many haue been 
befide their wit, I will bid thee drawe,as we do the min- 
ftrels,draw to pleafure vs. 

Prin, As I am an honeft man he lookes pale, art thou 
ficke, or angrie ? 145 

Clau. What, courage man : what though care kiPd a 
cat, thou haft mettle enough in thee to kill care. 

Ben.^xXy I fliall meete your wit in the carecre, and 
you charge it againft me, I pray you chufe another fub- 
ie6l. 150 

Clau. Nay then giue him another ftaffe, this laft was 
broke croffe. 152 

142. ininjlrelsy'\ minstrels ; Rowe. 148. careere"] carere V career 

146. Whaty'] What I ¥{. ^/Pope, + . Cap. Mai. 

147. in thee'l Om. F^F^. Rowe. et seq. 


W. A. Wright defines ‘high-proof* as ‘in the highest degree, capable of enduring 
the severest tests,* and then adds with dry humour : ‘ applied now to other than low 
spirits.* — ^Tiessen (Englische Studien, II, Bd, i. hft. p. 202, 1878) : ‘High-proof* 
is, perhaps, here used because of the suggestion in sound of alcohol in the word 
melancholy. [I can merely repeat the comment which I have already had occasion 
tp make in regard to those random interpretations of Tiessen : that they appear in a 
reputable literary Journal which is supposed to represent the rij^e scholarship of Ger- 
many in the study of English. — E d.] 

142. bid thee draw] Douce sees here ‘ an allusion, perhaps, to the itinerant 
sword-dancers' \ [Dyce once said that ‘ except for those explanatory of customs, dress, 
etc., the notes of Douce are nearly worthless.* — Remarks, p. 96.] — Malone : The 
meaning is this : ‘ I will bid thee draw thy sword, as we bid the minstrels draw the 
bows of their fiddles merely to please or amuse us. Schmidt ) mistakenly 
defines ‘ draw* in the present line by ‘draw the bow of thy fiddle.* [Neither Don 
Pedro nor Claudio could have had any idea that Benedick had approached them 
with any hostile intent, and they therefore met him with the customary banter, 
which they supposed Benedick had encouraged when he said that his wit was in 
his scabbard ; they could not possibly imagine that he really referred to his sword. 
Therefore, Claudio says to him in effect ; ‘ just as we bid minstrels draw their instru- 
ments from the cases to give us pleasure, so I bid you draw your wit from the scab- 
bard for the same purpose* ; he had just said they were ‘high-proof melancholy.* — 
Ed.] 

147. cat] Reed ; In Jonson*s Every Man in his Humour, I, iii, ad fin. Cob 
says: ‘Helter skelter, hang sorrow, care *11 kill a cat.* 

148, 149, 152. careere . . . charge . . . crosse] Metaphors taken from the 
tournament. To meete his ‘ wit in the careere * might mean to meet it in the lists ; 
‘career* was sometimes applied to the space between the barriers ; or it may mean, 



ACT V, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


253 

^53 


this light, he changes more and more, I thinke 
he be angrie indeede. 

Clau. If he be, he knowes how to turne his girdle, 155 

153. he changes\ he charges Han. ii (misprint). 

in full charge, somewhat as Benedick uses the word in II, iii, 230 : ‘ shall these 
paper bullets of the braine awe a man from the careere of his humour.* ' ‘ Charge it * 
explains itself. For ‘broke crosse* there is a full explanation in As You Like It, 
III, iv, 41 ; ‘ breaks [oaths] bravely, quite traverse, athwart the heart of his lover ; 
as a puisny tilter, that spurs his horse but on one side, breakes his staff like a noble 
goose,’ that is, instead of splintering the staff, snapped it off. Scorr has used this mis- 
adventure in IvanhoCy Chap, viii : ‘ The antagonist of Grantmesnil, instead of bearing 
his lance-point fair against the crest or shield of his enemy, swerved so much from 
the direct line as to break the weapon athwart the person of his opponent, a circum- 
stance which was accounted more disgraceful than that of being actually unhorsed ; 
because the latter might happen from accident, whereas the former evinced awkward- 
ness and want of management of the weapon and the horse.’ 

155. turne his girdle] Gray (i, 129): A proverbial phrase. ‘If you be 
angry, you may turn the buckle of your girdle behind you.’ — Ray’s Proverbs y ed, 
ii. p. 226. — Capell (p. 134) : Possibly, turning the girdle’s buckle behind was of 
old the signal of one preparing for combat, a boxing-match ; which if it went not 
forward, the girdle went back again to its place. — ^Johnson : Of this proverbial 
speech, I do not know its original or meaning. — Stkeven.s ; A corresponding expres- 
sion is to this day used in Ireland — ‘ If he be angry, let him tie up his brogues.* 
Neither proverb, I believe, has any other meaning than this : ‘ If he is in a bad 
humour, let him employ himself till he is in a better.’ Dr Farmer furnishes me 
•with an instance of this expression from Winwood’s Memorials y i, 453 : where Win- 
wood gives an account from Paris, in Dec. 1602, to ‘Mr Secretary Cecyll’ of an 
affront which he had received from an Englishman [whom he had rebuked for 
laughing at the singing of a Psalm on Sunday at the English Ambassadors, when 
the choir began ‘ in so ill a tune that after a verse or two they had to give over to 
sing.’ — El).]. ‘ I said,’ continues Winwood, ‘ that what I spake was not to make him 
angry. He replycd, if I were angry I might turn the buckle of my girdle behinde 
me.’ [The affront to which this led was that the Englishman, Sigismond Alexander, 
after the sermon, ‘ cometh to me with these words, What an Ass are you to bid me 
leave my laughing, you are an Asse and a very Asse,’ etc.] So likewise Cowley 
On the Go 7 >ernment of Oliver Cromwell [p. 74, ed. 1680. — W. A. Wright]: ‘The 
next Month he swears by the Living God, that he will turn them out of doors, and 
he does so, in his Princely way of threatning, bidding them, Turn the buckles of 
their Girdles behind them.’ — Holt White : Large belts were worn with the buckle 
before, but for wrestling the buckle was turned behind, to give the adversary a fairer 
grasp at the girdle. To turn the buckle behind, therefore, was a challenge. [Knight 
and Collier adopt this interpretation of Holt White; Dyce {Gloss,) quotes it, 
without comment, and also the following :] — Halliwell : This proverbial phrase 
means, you may change your temper or humor, alter it to the opposite side; it 
seems to have no connexion with either challenging or wrestling ; it not unfre- 
quently occurs in the form : ‘ you may turn your buckle,’ without any mention of 
the girdle. ‘Fortune will turn her back, if twice deny’d. Why, she may turn 



2S4 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v, sc. i. 


Ben. Shall I fpeake a word in your eare? 156 

Clau. God bleffe me from a challenge. 

Ben. You are a villaine,! ieft not, I will make it good 
how you dare, with what you dare, and when you dare : 
do me right, or I will proteft your cowardife : you haue i6o 
kilFd a fAyeete Ladie,and her death (hall fall heauie on 
you, let me heare from you. 

Clau. Well, I will meete you, fo I may haue good 
cheare. * 

Prin. What, a feaft, a feaft ? 165 

Qlau. I faith I thanke him, he hath bid me to a calues 
head and a Capon, the which if I doe not carue moft cu- 167 

159. how you\ how yow"^ i66. a calues head'\ calves heads 

165. a feaft Om. Ff, Rowe, +. acalfts-head Mai. et seq. 

166. I faith'] r faith Rowe ii. 167. and] ahd F^. 

hintf he] him he Q. 

her girdle too on t’other side.’ — Dryden’s Wild G allant y p. 61. ‘Mr Neverout, if 
Miss will be angry for nothing, take my counsel, and bid her turn the buckle of her 
girdle behind her,^ — Swift’s Polite Conversation \^Dial. i, ed. 1784, vol. viii, p. 318. 
— Walker.] — Staunton : The sword was formerly worn much at the back, and, to 
bring it within reach, the buckle of the belt or girdle had to be turned behind.— 
W. A. Wright : It is more probable that the explanation given by Steevcns is the 
true one. [There seems to be an abundance of examples of the use of the phrase, 
but none of them really affords any unmistakeable clue to its interpretation. — Ed.] 

157. blesse me from] Compare Leary III, iv, 57 : ‘ Bless thee from whirlwinds, 
star-blasting, and taking !’ 

158. You are, etc.] The Cambridge Editors mark this speech as an Aside to 
Claudio, ‘because it appears from what Don Pedro says, line 165, “ What, a feast, a 
feast?” and, from the tone of his banter through the rest of the dialogue, that he had 
not overheard more than Claudio’s reply about “ good cheer.” ' 

160. do me right] Halliwell : This was a common phrase, the meaning of 
which is obvious, — ‘ give me my due,’ ‘ do justice to me.’ So, Ben Jonson, The 
New Inn : ‘but do him right ; He meant to please you* [^Epilogue], * I do ryght 
to one, I gyve hym that he shulde have, je fais la raison.'^ — Palsgrave. 

166. I faith] Capell conjectured : ‘ Ayy faith,* which is certainly plausible. — 
£d. 

167. and a Capon] Collier (ed. ii) : The MS has it ‘and capers,"* In Peele’s 
Edward 7 . w,e read of an invitation to ‘a calf’s head and bacon,^ There seems to 
be no particular appropriateness in ‘capon,* which may have been misheard for 
capers or bacon. Capell, in a note on Cymb, II, i, 251 ‘You are a cock and 
capon too ; and you crow, cock, with your comb on,’ says that * our perception of 
the conundrum here depends upon a quaint pronunciation of “capon,” a kind of 
semi-division of 'it, — Cap-on* He evidently believed that the same ‘quaint pro- 
nunciation ’ was needed here ; he reads ‘ cap-on ’ in his text, but has no note on it, 
that 1 can discover. Schmidt (Lex.) has adopted Capell’ s ‘perception of the 



ACT V, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 2 SS 

rioufly, fay my knife’s naught, fhall I not finde a wood- i68 
cocke too ? 

Ben. Sir, your wit ambles well, it goes eafily. 170 

Prin, He tell thee how Beatrice prais’d thy wit the o- 
ther day; I faid thou hadft a fine wit:true faies flie,a fine 
little one : no faid I, a great wit : right faies ftice, a great 
groffe one : nay faid I, a good wit : iuft faid flie,it hurts 
no body ; nay faid I, the gentleman is wife : certain faid 175 
flie, a wife gentleman : nay faid I, he hath the tongues : 
that I beleeue faid fliee, for he fwore a thing to me on 
munday night, which he forfwofe on tuefday morning: 
there’s a double tongue, there’s two tongues ; thus did 
fliee an howre together tranf-fliape thy particular ver- 180 


168. knife\{\ kniff^ s Q. 

naught naught : F^. naught, 
Rowe et seq. 

170. it goes] goes F^F^. 

172. true] Hght Rowe ii,-f . 

fates] faid Q, Coll. Wh. Sta. 

Cam. 


173. right] y«5/Rowe, + , Var. ’73. 
faies Jhee] said she Rowe ii, + , 

Var. Ran. Mai. 

174. faid fhe] says she Var. *78, ^85, 
Ran. 

178. munday] Monday F^. 

179. therds two] theirs two Q. 


conundrum,* and with the approval of more than one editor. I beg leave to doubt 
the * conundrum ’ in both passages : first, proof is needed that the a in cap and capon 
was pronounced the same. 1 think the former was short, and the latter of the 
broadest, almost cawfon; secondly, ‘Capon* as an epithet, betokened (not unnatu- 
rally) abject pusillanimity ; as a slur, it was as much more insulting than coxcomb^ 
as the imputation of cowardice is graver than the accusation of buffoonery. Having 
called Benedick, by imputation, a calf’s-head and a capon, Claudio, true to his igno- 
ble character, proceeds to add the synonym of a simpleton, — a woodcock. It is 
proof enough of Benedick’s loyal love for Beatrice, that he stands imperturbably 
calm under this pelting of cheap abuse. — ^E d. 

168, 169. woodcocke] Willughby (p. 290) : Among us in England this Bird is 
infamous for its simplicity or folly ; so that a Woodcock is Proverbially used for a 
simple, foolish person. — Douce : A woodcock means one caught in a springe ; 
alluding to the plot against Benedick. [Very doubtful. — Ed.] 

170. ambles] Used, of course, contemptuously; it was the pace of a woman’s 
palfrey. 

171. thy wit] The emphasis is on ‘thy.* ‘Wit* is here used in its modem 
signification. 

174. just] See II, i, 27. 

176. wise gentleman] Johnson : This jest depending on the colloquial use of 
words is now obscure : perhaps we should read, — a wise gentle many or, a man wise 
enough to be a coward. Perhaps ‘ wise gentleman * was in that age used ironically, 
and always stood for silly fellow, — Mason (p. 55) ; The words are used ironically; 
as boys at Eton call a stupid fellow a genius. 




256 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v, sc. i. 

tues,yet at laft fhe concluded with a figh, thou waft the i8i 
propreft man in Italic. 

Claud. For the which (he wept heartily, and faid fliee 
car^d not. 

Prin. Yea that fhe did, but yet for all that, and if fhee 185 
did not hate him deadlic, ftiee would loue him dearely, 
the old mans daughter told vs all. 

Clau. All, all, and moreouer, God faw him when he 
was hid in the garden. 

Prin. But when ftiall we fet the fauage Bulls homes 190 
on the fenfible Henedicks head ? 

Clau. Yea and text vndcr-neath, heere dwells T^ene-^ 
dicke the married man. 

Ben. Fare you well, Boy, you know my minde, I will 
leaue you now to your goffcp-like humor, you breake 195 
iefts as braggards do their blades, which God be thank- 
ed hurt not : my Lord, for your manie courtefies I thank 
you, I muft difcontinue your companie, your brother 
the Baftard is fled from MeJJina : you haue among you, 
killM a fweet and innocent Ladie ; for my Lord Lacke- 200 
beard there, he and I fliall meete, and till then peace be 
with him. 

Prin. He is in earneft. 

Clau. In moft profound earneft, and He warrant you, 
for the loue of Beatrice. 205 


181. yet af] yer at F^. 

182. propreJt\ F^F^, Wh. properfi 
Q. properejl F^, Rowe et cet. 

183. and faid Jhe'\ and said — she 
' CoU. ii. 

, 185. and ?f] an ifHzxi. Cap. et seq. 
188. God-\ Who Coll. MS. 

190, fauage\ falvage Rowe,+ 
(except Johns. ) 

191. on] one Q. 


* 95 - goffep-like] QFf. 

196. braggards] braggarts Theob, 
2CX>. Ladie : for] QF^^F^. Lady ^ for 
F^. lady for Rowe. lady. For Pope 
et cet. 

200, 201. Lacke^beard there f] Lacke- 
-beard^ there Q. Lack-beard there; 
Rowe. 

202. [Exit Bened. Rowe. 


182. proprest] See II, iii, 177. 

185, 186. if shee . . . dearely] Rushton {Shakespeare ^ s Euphuism^ p. 42) 
calls attention to the following in Lyly^s Euphues : ‘In deede (said Euphues) to 
know the cause of your alteracion would boote me lyttle, seeing the effect taketh 
such foice. 1 haue heard that women either loue entirely or hate deadly, and seeing 
that you,' etc, [p. 95 > ed. Arber], 

188, 189. Qod . • . garden] Haluwell : A reference to Genesis ^ iii, 8. 



ACT V, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


257 

206 


Prin. And hath challeng’d thee. 

Clau. Moll fincerely. 

/Vzw.What a prettie thing man is, when he goes in his 
doublet and hofe,and leaves off his wit. 


Enter Conjlable^ Conrade^andBorachio. 2 10 

Clau. He is then a Giant to an Ape, but then is an Ape 
a Doflor to fuch a man. 212 


206. theeJ\ QFf, Rowe i, Cam. Wh. 
ii. thee ? Rowe ii et cet. 

207. Jincerely] /mceerly F^. 

209. Scene IV. Pope, Warb. Johns. 

210. Enter Conftable, Conrade...] 


Enter Conftables, Conrade... Q. Enter 
Conftable, Conftable... F^F^. Enter 
Dogb. Verg. Conr. and Bor. guarded, 
Rowe. After line 214, Han. Knt, Coll. 
Dyce, Cam. Ktly. 


208, 209. What . . . wit] Capell (p. 134) : This speech is significant of man 
turning youths here, — ^lover, the sober cloak was the man’ s dress, to which * wit * 
answers ; the lover bereft of wit, and the man uncloaked, were both equally 
ridiculous. — Malone : I believe that these words refer to what Don Pedro had said 
just before*—* And hath challenged thee ?* — ^and the meaning is, * What a pretty 
thing a man is, when he is silly enough to throw off his cloak, and go in his doublet 
and hose, to fight for a woman !’ In the Merry PFives, when Sir Hugh is going to 
engage with Dr Caius, he walks about in his doublet and hose : * Page, And youth- 
ful still in your doublet and hoscy this raw rheumatic day !’ * There is reasons and 

causes for it,’ says Sir Hugh, alluding to the duel he was going to fight. So, in 
The Roaring Girly when Moll Cutpurse, in man’s apparel, is going to fight, the 
stage-directions are, ‘ Puts off her cloak,’ * Draws her sword ’ [p. 479, ed. Dyce]. 
I am aware that there was a species of single combat called * rapier and cloak ’ ; but 
I suppose that when the small sword came into common use, the cloak was gener- 
ally laid aside. — Steevens ; Perhaps the whole meaning is : ‘ What an inconsistent 
fool is man, when he covers his body with clothes, and at the same time dive.sts him- 
self of his understanding.’ — Boswell : These words are probably meant to express 
what Rosalind, in As You Like It [III, ii, 366], terms the * careless desolation’ of 
a lover. [I accept Steevens’ s interpretation as the most evident. To suppose, with 
Malone, that the omission of the cloak implied an engagement at single combat, 
involves the idea that Benedick had appeared only in his doublet and hose. However 
necessary it may have been for a man to divest himself of his cloak before engaging 
in a duel, it was hardly necessary, in the present case, thus to prepare for the fight 
so long beforehand, especially when it was uncertain whether or not he should fight 
at all.— Ed.] 

210. Enter, etc.] Another proof of a stage copy, wherein the entrances of actors 
are set down, some lines before they actually enter, in order that the prompter may 
warn them to be in readiness. — E d. 

21 1, 212. Giant . . . man] Capell (p. 134) : The repliers comparisons bear a 
little hard upon the ladies ; and upon men too, whom they hold in their chains ; the 
man a * giant,’ in such a case, led about by an * ape,’ and, in wisdom, the ape’s 
inferior. 


ir 



2S8 much ADOE about nothing [act V. sc. i. 

Prin, But foft you, let me be,plucke vp my heart, and 213 
be fad, did he not fay my brother was fled ? 

Conjl. Come you fir, if iuflice cannot tame you, fhee 215 
(hall nere weigh more reafons in her ballance, nay, and 
you be a curfmg hypocrite once, you muft be lookt to. 217 

213. let me he'\ Q, Coll. Dyce, Wh. 

Sta. Cam. let me fee Ff, Rowe, + . 
let me Mai. in Var. ’85, conj. (with- 
drawn), Huds. let be Cap, et cet. 

plucke vp my heart'} pluck up^ 
my hearty Steev. et seq. (except Sta. 

213. let me be] Malone : ‘ Let be * were without doubt the poet’s words. The 
same expression occurs again in Ant. and Cleop, IV, iv, 6: * Cleop, What’s this for? 
Ant. Ah, let be, let be I thou art the armourer of my heart.’ — Reed : So, in Hen. 
VIII: I, i, 171 : ‘and they were ratified As he cried, Thus let be.’ Again, IVtnt. 
Tahy V, iii, 76 ; Leontes says, ‘Let be, let be.’ [Capell, who made the change 
to let hcy says that it is ‘ of known import, and frequent usage with Shakespeare.’ 
The only instances of its use, according lo Bartlett’ s Concordancey are those above 
given ; none of them is parallel to the present passage ; each is a case of the absorp- 
tion of it (‘ Let [it] be’) and refers to a specific object ; Anthony refers to a piece 
of armour which Cleopatra had in her hand ; Buckingham refers to a treaty ; and 
Leontes to the curtain which Paulina was about to draw. Staunton, not know- 
ing that he had been anticipated by Malone (see Text. Notes), ‘suspected that the 
poet wrote, “let me pluck up my heart,” ’ etc., and he thereupon gives examples 
of the use of ‘ pluck up,’ as applied to the heart, which are not germane to the 
phrase ‘ let me be.’ Dyce (ed. ii) observes that ‘ let me be ’ ‘ can hardly be right ; 
nor is the alteration, let bey much more satisfactory.’ 1 can see no insurmountable 
objection to ‘let me be’; it is not a command addressed to Claudio, or to any 
one in particular. Don Pedro is communing with himself. Benedick’ s announce- 
ment of Don John’s flight has just entered his mind; he is ‘orienting’ himself 
to the new situation and searching for Don John’s motive. The reading of the Ff : 
‘let me see,’ expresses the same idea. — ^E d.] 

213, 214. and be sad] Steevens : That is, rouse thyself, my heart, and be pre- 
pared for serious consequences. 

216. weigh more] Walker {Crit. ii, 248) : Would not the natural way of 
expressing the thought be, ‘ she shall ne’er more weigh reasons ’ ? [Unquestionably. 
And therefore it is that Dogberry says ‘ weigh more.’ — Ed.] 

216. reasons] Ritson : A quibble between and raisins. — Dyce {Notes, 

p, 46) ; This quibble is found again in Tro. and Cress. II, ii, 33. Indeed, it is as 
old as the time of Skelton, who says in his Speke, Parrot : ‘ Crete reysons with 
resons be now reprobitante. For reysons ar no resons, but resons currant.’ — Works, 
ii, 22, ed. Dyce. See also Dekker’s Chvles Almanacke, 1618, sig. F. 2. [There is 
also the well known line of Falstaff : ‘ If reasons were as plentiful as blackberries,’ 
etc.—/ Hen. IV: II, iv, 264. Staunton thinks that the qufbble is repeated in 
As You Like It, II, vii, 105 : ‘And you will not be answered with reason,’ etc., but 
this is doubtful. ] 

217. once] See I, i, 310. 


Ktly, Huds.) 

214. fad} glad Gould. 

Scene IV. Han. 

216, 217. andyou\if youVop^ylAz.VL. 
an you Theob. Warb. et seq. 



ACT V, SC. i.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


259 

Prin. How now, two of my brothers men bound ? 218 

rachio one. 

Clau. Harken after their offence my Lord. 220 

Prin^ Officers, what offence haue thefe men done.^ 

Conjl^ Marrie fir, they haue committed falfe report, 
moreouer they haue fpoken vntruths, fecondarily they 
are flanders, fixt and laftly, they haue belyed a Ladie, 
thirdly, they haue verified vniuft things, and to conclude 225 
they are lying knaues. 

Prin. Firft I aske thee what they haue done, thirdlie 
I aske thee vvhat^s their offence, fixt and laftlie why they 
are committed, and to conclude, what you lay to their 
charge. 230 

Clau. Rightlie reafoned, and in his owne diuifion, and 
by my troth there^s one meaning well futed. 

Prin, Who haue you offended mafters, that you are 
thus bound to your anfwer ? this learned Conftable is too 
cunning to be vnderfl:ood,vvhafs your offence? 235 

Bor. Sweete Prince, let me go no farther to mine an- 
fwere : do you heare me, and let this Count kill mee : I 
haue deceiucd euen your verie eies : what your wife- 
domes could not difcouer, thefe fhallow fooles haue 
brought to light, who in the night ouerheard me con- 240 

224, 228. fixf\ fixth F4. 236. farther] QFf, Rowe i, Cap. 

229, you iay] lay you F^, Rowe i. Mai. Coll. Wh. Sta. Cam. further 

2 * 33 * Who] Q, Cap. Steev. Var. ^21, Rowe ii et cet. 

Dyce, Sta. Cam, Rife, Huds. Wh. ii, 240. ouerheard] heard F^, Rowe i. 
whom Ff, Rowe et cet. 

220. Harken] Staunton : This appears to be used here in the peculiar sense 
which it bears in i Hen, IV: V, iv, 52 ; ‘ they did me too much injury That ever 
said I hearken'd for your death.' [This remark I do not comprehend. Prince Hal 
means to deny that he ever listened for the announcement of his father's death ; here, 
Claudio wishes the Prince to attend and listen magisterially to the men’s offence. — 
Ed.] 

224. slanders] Walker ( Crit, ii, 199) adduces many examples from the Folio, 
where final er and erer are confounded. Thus here, he conjectures slanderers. 
It is likely that he paid no special regard to the speaker, else, let us hope, he would 
have held his hand. And yet Hudson was beguiled. lie took slanderers into his 
text, and thinks ‘slanders' was not intended as a blunder of Dogberry’s, as this 
would be rather overloading the speech in that kind.' 

232. suted] Johnson : That is, one meaning is put into many different dresses ; 
the Prince having asked the same question in four modes of speech. 

233, Who] See I, i, 207. 



26o 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v, sc. L 


fefling to this man, how Don lohn your brother incenfed 241 
me to flander the Ladie Hero, how you were brought 
into the Orchard, and faw me court Margaret in Heroes 
garments, how you difgracM her when you fhould 
marrie her ; my villanie they haue vpon record, which 245 

I had rather feale with my death, then repeate ouer to 
my fhame : the Ladie is dead vpon mine and my mailers 
falfe accufation : and briefelie, I defire nothing but the 
reward of a villaine. 

Prin. Runs not this fpeech like yron through your 250 
bloud ? 

Clan. I haue drunke poifon whiles he vtter^d it. 

Prm. But did my Brother fet thee on to this ? 

Bor. Yea, and paid me richly for the pra6tife of it. 

Prin. He is compos’d and fram’d of treacherie, 255 

And fled he is vpon this villanie. 

Clau. Sweet Hero, now thy image doth appeare 
In the rare femblance that I lou’d it firft. 

Conjl. Come, bring away the plaintiffes,by this time 
our Sexton hath reformed Signior Leonato of the matter : 260 

and mailers, do not forget to fpecifie when time & place 
fhall fcrue,that I am an Affe. 

Con. 2. Here, here comes mafter Signior Leonato, and 
the Sexton too. 264 

244, 245. her\ hir Q, 254. and paid’\ paid Pope, Han. 

250, 251. Buns... bloud"] One line, richly] rich Ff, Rowe. 

Pope. As verse, Theob. et seq. 255. Om. F^F^, Rowei. 

252. drunke] dronke Q. 260. reformed] wformedY ^ Rowe. 

whiles] while Rowe, + . 263. Con. 2] Verg. Rowe. 


241. incensed] Malone: That is, instigated. Thus, in many other passages. 

247, 256. vpon] See II, iii, 202. 

250. your] How gracefully and adroitly the Prince evades all responsibility by 
the use of this ‘your’ instead of our ! — Ed. 

252. 1 haue drunk] See I, ii, 5. 

254. Yea] VV^ALKER (CnV. i, 4) proposes to make this a separate line, and to 
read onW for ‘ of it ’ at the end of Rorachio’s speech. Possibly he is right, inasmuch 
as it would be, otherwise, a line of prose in the midst of verse, 

258. that] Abbott (§ 284) : ‘ That ’ is here equivalent to in which. [But it 
is simpler, perhaps, to explain the construction as one of the many instances where 
in relative sentences the preposition is omitted : that I loved it first in. See line 45 
of the next scene*] 



ACT V, SC. l] much ADOE about NOTHING 


261 


Enter Leonato. 265 

Leon. Which is the villaine ? let me fee his eies, 

That when I note another man like him, 

I may auoide him : which of thefe is he ? 

Bor.\{ you would know your wronger, looke on me. 

Leon. Art thou thou the flaue that with thy breath 270 
haft kild mine innocent childe ? 

Bor. Yea,euen I alone. 

Leo. No, not fo villaine, thou belieft thy felfe, 

Here ftand a paire of honourable men, 

A third is fled that had a hand in it : 275 

I thanke you Princes for my daughters death. 

Record it with your high and worthic deedes, 

^Twas brauely done, if you bethinke you of it. 

Qlau. I know not how to pray your patience. 

Yet I muft fpeake, choofe your reuenge your felfe, 280 

Impofe me to what penance your inuention 


265. Scene V. Pope, + . 

Enter...] Re-enter Leon., and 
Ant., Sexton attending. Cap. 

267, 268. Mnemonic lines, Warb. 

269. would~\ woulY^, 

270. Art thou thou'\ Art thou — thou 
— Knt, Hal. Art thou art thou F,. 
Art thou^ art thou F^F^, Rowe, -f-. Art 


thou Q, Cap. et cet, 

270,271. Art kilT] Prose F^Fj. 
Art. ..breath one line F^, Rowe, -h . One 
line, Q, Cap. et cet. 

272. Yea\ Om. Han. 

281. Impofe'\ Expose Han. 

me to'\ to me Cap. conj. on me 
Cap. conj. Ran. conj. 


270. thou thou] No exigencies of metre, were it violated far more greviously 
in this line than it is, could force me to forego the astonishment and utmost horror 
expressed by this repetition of ‘ thou.’ — Ed. 

279, etc. Hudson (p. 13) : Even if Claudio’s faults and blunders were greater 
than they are, still his behaviour at the last were enough to prove a real and sound 
basis of manhood in him. The clean taking-down of his vanity and self-love, by 
the exposure of the poor cheats which had .so easily caught him, brings out the true 
staple of his character. When he is made to feel that on himself alone falls the 
blame and the guilt which he had been so eager to revenge on others, then his sense 
of honour acts in a right noble style, prompting him to avenge sternly on himself 
the wrong and the injury he has done to the gentle Hero and her kindred. 

281. Impose me to] Capkdl (p. 134) : Certainly an inaccuracy, but not mended 
by the Oxford’s copy [i. e. Hanmer’s] Expose; nor otherwise reducible to modern 
exactness but by reading, ‘ Impose on me ’ ; this, though not the greatest of licences, 
the editor has not ventured on ; in a belief that * Impose’ might mean — task (Task 
me to what penance, etc.) and be so hazarded by the poet for the avoiding of ont% 
concurrence with ‘upon.’ — Malone: That is, ‘command me to undergo whatever 
penance,’ etc. A task or exercise prescribed by way of punishment at the Univer- 
sities is yet called an imposition. 



262 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [ACT v. sc. i. 


Can lay vpon my finne,yet finnM I not, 

But in miftaking. 

Pn7t, By my foule nor I, 

And yet to fatisfie this good old man, 

I would bend vnder anie heauie vvaight. 

That heele enioyne me to. 

Leon. I cannot bid you bid my daughter liue. 
That were impoffible,but I praie you both, 
Poffeffe the people in MeJJina here. 

How innocent fhe died, and if your loue 
Can labour aught in fad inuerttion, 

Hang her an epitaph vpon her toomb, 

And fing it to her bones, fing it to night : 

To morrow morning come you to my houfe, 

And fince you could not be my fonne in law. 

Be yet my Nephew : my brother hath a daughter, 
Almoft the copie of my childe thaPs dead. 

And ftie alone is heire to both of vs. 


282 

285 

290 

295 

299 


286. anie\ my F^. 

287. /t?.] too. FjF^, Rowe. 

288. / cannot... Hue] Q. I cannot 
but you daughter liue Fj. I cannot bid 
your daughter live F^. You cannot hid 
my daughter live F^. You cannot bid 


my daughter live again Rowe, + , Var, 
’ 73 - 

288. you bid] you cause Coll. MS. 
you make Ktly. 

292. aught] ought Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Cap. Cam. i. Glo. Wh. ii. 


288. bid you bid] Allen (MS) ; Both bid^^ may surely stand. Shakespeare 
may have been thinking of Ezekiel^ xxxvii, 5, where the dry bones are made to live, 
or of our Saviour bringing to life the daughter of Jairus. 

290. Possesse] Steevens : That is, inform, make acquainted with. 

292. inuention] Deighton ; Here specially of poetic skill, imagination, as in 
Hen. V. Prol. 2. 

294. bones] Gould, (p. 14) : I believe this is ‘ manes * as a monosyllable. 
[May it be permitted to surmise that any one who could believe this, would believe 
anything? — ^E d.] 

299. she alone is heire] Anonymous ( Variorum of 1773 ) • Shakespeare seems 
to have forgot what he had made Leonato say in the second Scene of the first Act 
to Antonio : * How now, brother ; where is my cousin your son ? hath he provided 
the music?* — Halliwell: Perhaps the present statement is purposely overdrawn. 
Claudio is not to be supposed sufficiently acquainted with the families to render the 
deception improbable of being believed by him. He had even asked Don Pedro 
whether Leonato had a son. — Franz Horn (i, 264) : Shakespeare has forgotten 
nothing ; that son who was to provide the music is probably living and well, but the 
daughter of whom we hear is a mere phantom with no real existence, evoked to 
deceive Claudio. It would be well if people who seem to delight in making remarks 



ACT V, SC. i.] MUCH A DOE ABOUT NOTHING 


263 

300 


Giue Iier the right you fhould haue giu’n her cofin, 

And fo dies my reuenge. 

Clau. O noble fir ! 

Your ouerkindneffe doth wring teares from me, 

I do embrace your offer, and difpofe 
For henceforth of poore Claudio. 305 

Leon, To morrow then I will expeft your comming, 

To night I take my leaue,this naughtie man 
Shall face to face be brought to Margaret^ 

Who I beleeue was packt in all this wrong, 309 

300. right\ rite Gould. 305. For‘\ From Cap. MS and Coll. 

304. offer y and'\ Ff, Rowe, Pope, MS (partly expunged) ap. Cam. 

Han. Coll, offer and Q. offer ; and 309. packt'\ QFf, Rowe, pact Coll. 

Theob. et cet. Sing. Ktly. pacFd Pope et cet. 

to Shakespeare’s disparagement would first consider whether they understand him, 
save, as in this instance, in the most superficial manner. 

301. so dies my reuenge] R. G. White (ed. ii) : In the strange conduct of 
Leonato and Claudio, by which the end of the play is huddled up, Shakespeare 
probably followed some predecessor. 

304. and dispose] Deighton : For the construction, compare V, iii, 29 : < Thanks 

to you all, and leave us.’ — Allen (MS) : One might punctuate, ‘ and dispose 

For henceforth,’ etc. That is, Claudio was about to make some other profession in 
the first person ; but, his emotions prevent him from going on as he had intended, 
and he abruptly changes to an Imperative ; equivalent to, all I can say w, do with me 
henceforth what you please. 

305. Claudio] Keightley (p. 168) : It would seem that something had been 
lost at the end, the speech terminates so abruptly. We might supply at your 
pleasure. 

307. naughtie] See IV, ii, 70. 

309. packt] Malone ; That is, combined ; an accomplice. Collier unaccount- 
ably mistook this past participle of the verb to pack for a noun, and adhered to the 
belief in all his editions. In his First Edition he remarks that ^ pact is properly 
bargain or contract ^ which is true, and that * Margaret, one party to the pact, is 
spoken of as the contract itself,’ which is doubtful. His friend, Barron Field, in 
his Notes to the Second Part of King Edward IV. corrected him gently ; his friend, 
Dyce, emphatically. * The spelling in the old eds. packt,’ ^ ’ says Dyce {Remarks, 
p. 33), ‘might alone have shewn Mr Collier that the word was a participle — pack'd, 
even if we suppose that, when he made this rash alteration, he had entirely for- 
gotten the following passages of Shakespeare : “ The goldsmith there, were he not 
pack’d with her. Could witness it.” — Com. Err. V, i, 219 ; “Here’s packing, with a 
witness, to deceive us all.” — Tam. Shr. V, i, 121 : “ Go pack with him, and give the 
mother gold.”-— 7 V/, And. IV, ii, 155; Compare Massinger : “Our packing being 
laid open.” — Great Duke of Florence, III, i, “1. says Gifford, “our insidious 
contrivance, our iniquitous collusion to deceive the duke ; so the word is used by 
Shakespeare, and others.” — Works, ii, 485. Many examples of the word might be 



264 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [ACT v, sc, i. 


Hired to it by your brother. 310 

Bor. No by my foule (he was not, 

Nor knew not what the did when (he fpoke to me, 

But alwaies hath bin iuft and vertuous, 

In anie thing that I do know by her. 

Conjl. Moreouer fir, which indeede is not vnder white 315 
and black, this plaintiffe here, the offendour did call mee 
affe, I befeech you let it be remembred in his punifh- 
ment, and alfo the watch heard them talke of one Defor- 
med, they fay he wearcs a keyin his eare and a lock hang- 
ing by it, and borrowes monie in Gods name, the which 320 
he hath vsM fo long, and neuer paied, that now men grow 

313. Q. 318-323. Mnemonic lines, Warb. 

adduced from earlier writers ; Skelton has ‘‘ But ther was fals packing, or els I am 
begylde/* Upm the dethe of the Erie of Nofthumberlande, — Works ^ i, 9, ed. 
Dyce.* 

314. by her] For other instances where *by^ means about ^ concerning^ see 
Abbott, § 145. 

318, Deformed] Capell (p. 134) : This humour about a Mock’ and a ‘key,’ 
of personizing ‘Deform’d,’ and of making him the extraordinary borrower that 
follows after those words, should (in likelihood) be founded upon something par- 
ticular that was the public talk at that time ; otherwise, the wit is but poor ; 
and we, to whom the knowledge of this particular has not descended, can scarce 
laugh at it. 

319. key] Warburton asserts that this refers to ‘the men’s wearing rings in 
their ears’; and Rann goes so far as to say that ‘the ear-ring was vulgarly called 
the key.’ But Malone conceives that there is ‘ no allusion to the fashion of wear- 
ing rings in the ears (a fashion which our author himself followed).* ‘The pleas- 
antry,’ he continues, ‘seems to consist in Dogberry’s supposing that the ‘lock,’ 
which ‘ Deformed ’ wore, must have a ‘ key ’ to it. 

319. lock] See III, iii, 163. 

320. borrowes . . . Gods name] Steevens : That is, is a common beggar. It 
alludes to Pro^fcrbs, xix, 17 : ‘ lie that giveth to the poor, lendeth to tlie Lord.’ — 
Halliwell : This scriptural phrase was used in the counterfeit passports of the 
beggars, as appears from the curious passage here cited from Decker : ‘ these coun- 
terfeit jarkes (or scales) are graven with the point of a knife, upon a sticks end, . . . 
for the most part bearing the ilfavoured shape of a Buffars Nab, or a Prancers Nab 
(a dogs head or a horses) and sometimes an unicorns, and such like. . . . Besides, 
in the passe-port you shall lightly find these words, viz. For Salomon saith, Who 
giveth the poore, lendeth the Lord, etc. And that constables shall helpe them to 
lodgings : And that curats shall perswade their parishioners,’ etc. — English Fillanies, 
1632. — W, A. Wright : I doubt the allusion. [There is an entire lack of parallel* 
ism. In the Proverb, money is given to the poor and lent to the Lord ; in Dogberry’s 
case, money is borrowed by Deformed, &nd given to nobody. — ^E d.] 



ACT V. SC. L] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 265 

hard-harted and will lend nothing for Gods fake ; praie 322 
you examine him vpon that point. 

I thanke thee for thy care and honeft paines. 

Your vvorfliip fpeakes like a moft thankeftill 325 
and reuerend youth, and I praife God for you. 

There’s for thy paines. 

Conjl. God faue the foundation. 

Leon, Goc, I difeharge thee of thy prifoner, and I 
thanke thee. 330 


Conjl, I Icaue an arrant knaue with your vvorfliip, 
which I befeech your worfhip to correft your fclfe, for 
the example of others : God keepe your vvorfliip, I 
wifli your worfliip well, God reftore you to health, 

I humblie giue you leaue to depart, and if a mcr- 335 
rie meeting may be wiflit, God prohibite it : come 
neighbour. 337 

326. reucrend'\ reuerent Q. Var. Ran. Mai. Sing. Ktly. 

331. arrant'\ errant F^, Rowe, + , you to healtfi^ your health I^qwqi, 

322. lend . . . Gods sake] Halliwell: These were the usual terms of a 
beggar’s supplication. In Perci vale’s Dut ed. 1599, p. 193, we have ‘ Pordiosiros^ 
men that aske for God’s sake, beggers.’ 

328. God . . . foundation] Steevens : Such was the customary phrase em- 
ployed by those who received alms at the gates of religious houses. Dogberry, how- 
ever, in the present instance, might have designed to say : ‘ God save the founder P 
Deighton : So, Middleton, More Dissemblers besides WomeHy V, i, 100 : ‘ Marry, 
pray for the founder, here he stands.’ 

329. of] AfUJOTT (§ 166) places this ‘of’ in the list of examples where ‘of’ means 
from; but, it is possible, that there is here a confusion of two ideas: (tf) I will 
discharge the prisoner, and (<^) I will relieve thee of all responsibility. It is also 
possible that Leonato intentionally speaks in Dogberry’s style, and that there is dry 
humour in his remark ; just as Jaques says to the Duke, in the concluding lines oi As 
You Like It : ‘You to your former honour I bequeathe.’ — Ed. 

332. which] I am afraid it is only too clear that Dogberry here uses ‘which’ for 
whom ; but if I could recall, which I cannot, another instance in Shakespeare of the 
modern, vulgar use of which as an introductory connective particle, nothing could 
persuade me that it is not so used here, and that Dogberry would thus be made to 
advise Leonato to correct himself for the example of others. — Ed. 

33 ^f 337 * come neighbour.] Aubrey (ii, 226) : The humour of . . . the con- 
stable, in MidsomernighP s Dreame^ he [Shakespear] happened to take at Grendon 
in Bucks — I thinke it was Midsomer night that he happened to lye there — which is 
the roade from London to Stratford, and there was living that constable about 1642, 
when I first came to Oxon ; Mr Josias Howe is of that parish, and knew him. — 
Malone (Var. ’21, ii, 491) : It must be acknowledged that there is here a slight 
mistake, there being no such character as a constable in A Midsummer NighPs 



266 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v, sc. ii. 

Leon. Vntill to morrow morning, Lords, farewell. 338 

Exeunt. 

Brot. Farewell my Lords, we looke for you to mor- 340 
row. 

Prin. We will not faile. 

Clau. To night ile mourne with Hero : 

Leon. Bring you thefe fellowes on, weel talke with 
MargaretyYiovj her acquaintance grew with this lewd 345 
fellow. Exeunt. 


\Scene //.] 

Enter Bcnedicke and Margaret. 

Ben. Praie thee fweete Miftris Margaret^ deferue 
well at my hands, by helping mee to the fpcech of Bea- 
trice. 

Mar. Will you then write me a Sonnet in praife of 5 
my beautie ? 

Bene. In fo high a ftile Margaret^ that no man lining 7 


339. Exeunt. Rowe. Exeunt Dogb. 
and Verg. and Watch. Cap. Exeunt 
Dogb. and Verg. Cam. 

343. Hero :] F,. 

Exeunt D. Pedro, and Claudio. 

Cap. 

344. Leon.] Leon. [To the Watch.] 
Cam. Edd. 

344~346. Two lines, ending Marga^ 
ret.. .fellow. Pope et seq. 


346. Exeunt.] Exeunt severally, 
Theob. 

Scene VI. Pope, + . Scene II. 
Cap. et seq. 

Leonato’s House. Pope. Leona- 
to*s Garden. Steev. ’93, Cam. 

1. Margaret.] Margaret, meeting. 

Cap. 

5. •write'\ writte F^. 


Dream. The person in contemplation probably was Dogberry in Much Ado about 
Nothing. 

340. vve looke] Possibly, we have here a case of absorption ; ‘ we [’ll] look.* 
—Ed. 

345. lewd] Steevens : Here, and in several other instances, this merely signifies 
ignorant . — Collier: *Lewd* had of old three meanings, lustful, ignorant, and 
wicked. The last is the sense in this place, and not ignorant, as Steevens contended, 
[Cotgrave has ‘ Forfan : m. A knaue, rogue, rascall, rakehell, varlet, villaine, vaga- 
bond, base fellow, filthie slaue, naughtie packe, lend companion.*] 

I. ‘Scene, Leonato’s Garden,* thus, the Cambridge Editors, who remark as 
follows: It is clear from line 91, where Ursula says, ‘Yonder’s old coil at home,* 
that the scene is not supposed to take place in Leonato’s house, but out of doors. 
We have, therefore, in this case, deserted our usual authorities, Pope ^nd Capell. 

7. stile] Delius : There is here a pun on style and stile; and again a play on the 
words ‘ come over it,* which may mean surpass^ and cross over it. 



ACT V, SC. n.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 267 

lhall come ouer it, for in moft comely truth thou defer- 8 
ueft it. 

Mar. To haue no man come ouer me, why, lhall I al- 10 
waies keepe below ftaires ? 

10, II. mcy why^ Jhall...hel(yiv\ F^F^. Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. me ^ why^ 
me,whyJIial...below(ifCQ\\. i, iii (read- shall,,. below Rowe ii et cet. 

ing me?), me; why^ Jhall,., below F^, lO. shall I ‘\ shall a' Kinnear. 

Rowe i. me ? lahy, shall ... above 


10, II. shall . . . staires] Theobald: Any man might come over her, liter- 
ally speaking, if she always kept below stairs. By the correction I have ventured to 
make, Margaret, as 1 presume, must mean. What I shall I always keep above stairs ? 
i, e. Shall I for ever continue a Chambermaid? — Steevens : Above and below were 
not likely to be confounded either by the transcriber or the compositor. The sense, 
for which Theobald contends, may be restored by supposing that our author wrote — 
‘shall I always keep wenhe\ow stairs?* — Singer (ed. ii) : Perhaps we should read: 
‘ shall I always keep Ihem below stairs ?* [In the Transactions of the New Shah- 
spere Society y 1877-9, p. 47 1, H. C. Hart has gathered several instances of the 
phrase beloto stairs or below the stairs : — ‘ But these are petty engagements, and as 
I said below the stairs ; marry above here, perpetuity of beauty (do you hear, 
ladies?) health,’ etc. — Ben Jonson, Mercury Vindicated [p. 251, ed. Gifford]. 

‘ Wellbred, Y es, sir, let me pray you for this gentleman, he belongs to my sister, 
the bride. Clement. In what place, sir? Wei, Of her delight, sir, below the 
stairs, and in public ; her poet, sir. — Every Man in his Humour y V, i. (‘This is 
a puzzle,’ says Mr Hart, ‘still it is connected with matrimony’). ‘Yet for the 
honour of our sex boast not this your easy conquest ; another might perhaps have 
stayed longer below stairs, it was but your confidence that surprised her love.’ — 
Chapman, Widow's Tears, Act I. [p. 19, ed. 1878.] It is clear, 1 think, from 
these examples that ‘ below stairs ’ meant as it means to this day, ‘ in the servants 
quarters,’ ‘in the kitchen,’ etc. There can be no question about its meaning in 
Jonson’ s Mercury Vindicated, The passage quoted by*Mr Hart is not the only 
place where the words occur in that Masque. On p. 249, Mercury complains that 
the alchemists trade their secrets off to the servants for food, ‘ they shark for a hungry 
diet below stairs,’ cheating ‘poor pages of the larder,’ and ‘children of the scullery’ 
with promises of ‘ a corner of the philosopher’s stone,’ and ‘ firkins of aurum pota- 
bile' are to be ‘delivered at the buttery,’ etc. Then, after continuing in this strain 
for some time. Mercury says ‘ but these are all petty engagements, and, as I said, 
below the stairs;’ but ‘above here,’ (that is, as we might say ‘in the parlor,’) ‘I 
have to promise the ladies health, riches, honour,’ etc. Keeping in mind that 
‘below stairs’ means in the servants quarters, the ‘puzzle’ in Mr Hart’s quotation 
from * Every Alan in his Humour' disappears. ‘This gentleman,’ to whom Well- 
bred refers as his sister’s ‘delight’ ‘below the stairs’ is Matthew, the lover of 
Mistress Bridget, whom Mistress Bridget constantly addresses, after the fashion of 
the time, as ‘servant.’ Hence, Wellbred’s playing on this word ‘servant* makes 
plain his allusion to his sister’s delight ‘below stairs.’ In the present passage 
Margaret says, in effect, ‘ Why, shall I always be a servant and never a mistress?’ 
-Ed.] 



268 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v, sc. ii. 


Benellhy wit is as quicke as the grey-hounds mouth, 12 
it catches. 

Mar »And yours, as blunt as the Fencers foiles, which 
hit, but hurt not. 15 

Bene, A moft manly wit Margaret^ it will not hurt a 
woman : and Co I pray thee call Beatrice^ I giue thee the 
bucklers. 

Mar, Giue vs the fwords, wee haue bucklers of our 
owne. 20 

Bene, If you vfe them Margaret ^ you muft put in the 
pikes with a vice, and they are dangerous weapons for 
Maides. 

Mar, Well, I will call Beatrice to you, who I thinke 
hath legges. Exit Margarite, 25 

13. catches\ ketches seq. (subs.) 

17. Beatrice, /] Beatrice; / et 25. Margarite.] QFj. Margaret. F^F^. 


17, 18. I . . . bucklers] Johnson: I suppose that *to give the bucklers^ is 
< to yield,’ or ‘ to lay by all thoughts of defence,’ so clypeum abjicere. The rest 
deserves no comment, Steevens gives six references to well-known old authors of 
the use of the phrase, alw’ays with the meaning given by Dr Johnson j Barron 
Field {^Notc on 11 ey wood’s Fair Maid of the Exchange ^ p. 98, ed. Sk, Soc,) adds 
a seventh, from Ben Jonson’s Case is AlterUi^ II, iv, where ‘bear away the buck- 
lers’ means ‘to conquer.’ Dyce i^Notes^ etc., p. 47) gives one which is all-suf- 
ficient, from Cotgrave (sub Gaignf) x * le te le donne gaignL I grant it, I yield it 
thee ; I confesse thy action ; I giue thee the bucklers.’ 

22. pikes with a vice] Thoms (p. 128) : I am indebted to Mr Albert Way for 
the following explanation j The circular bucklers of the sixteenth century, now called 
more commonly ‘targets,’ had frequently a central spike, or ‘pike,’ usually affixed 
by a screw. It was probably found convenient to detach this spike occasionally ; 
for instance, in cleaning the buckler, or in case of that piece of defensive armour 
being carried about on any occasion when not actually in use. A sharp projecting 
Spike, four or five inches long would obviously be inconvenient. ... * Vice ’ is the 
French visy a screw, a word still in common use, the female .screw being called 
icrou, Cotgrave give.s, ^vis^ the vice or spindle of a presse;’ namely, a strong 
wooden screw, such as we see in a cheese-press, and the like. Palsgrave gives 
only, *Vyce of a cuppe, visp namely, a screw in the bottom or stem, fixing its 
various parts or ornaments together. From resemblance to a screw, a winding or 
turret staircase was call a vice^ as in the Prompt, Parv,y — ‘ Vyce, rownde grece or 
steyer, coclea,"* The term is not uncommon in the Wicliffite Version, etc. It may 
suffice to cite Chaucer’s Dream^ v. 1312, where he relates how, suddenly awaking 
in the stillness of the night, — ‘ I rise and wallet sought pace and pace. Till I a wind- 
ing staire found ; And held the vice aye in my bond, And upward softly so gan 
creepe.* 



ACT V, SC. ii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


269 

26 


Ben. And therefore will come. The God of loue that 
fits aboue,and knowes me, and knowes me, how pitti- 
full I deferue. I meane in fmging, but in louing, Lean- 
der the good fwimmer, Troilous the firft imploier of 
pandars, and a whole booke full of thefe quondam car- 30 
pet-mongers, whofe name yet runne fmoothly in the e- 
uen rode of a blanke verfe, why they were neuer fo true- 
ly turned oucr and ouer as my poore felfe in loue : mar- 
rie I cannot fhew it rime, I haue tried, I can finde out no 
rime to Ladie but babie, an innocent rime : for fcorne, 35 
home, a hard time : for fchoole foole, a babling time : 


26. The GoeT\ [Sings.] The God 
Pope et seq. (subs.) 

26-28. The God...de/erue'\ In Ital- 
ics, Rowe, + . In four lines. Cap, et 
seq. 

28. de/eriie.~\ QF^. deferve; F^. 
deferve^ Rowe et seq. (subs.) 

JinSiK?,'] finging ; F^, 

Rowe et seq. (subs.) 
buf\ not Gould. 

29. Troilous\ Troilus Q. 

30. pandars:'] panders F^F^. 


31. name] F^,. names QF^F^, Rowe 
et cet. 

33. and ouer] Om. Ff, Rowe. 

34. Jhew it] Fj,. JJiew it in QF^F^, 
Rowe et seq. 

35. babie] badie FgF^. bady F^, Rowe 
ii, Pope, Cap. baudy Rowe i. 

innocent] innocents Ff, Rowe, 
Pope. innocenP 5 Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Cap. 

36. hard time,. dime] F,. 


26-28. The God . . . deserue] Ritson: This was the beginning of an old 
song by ■W[illiam]. E[lderton]. a puritanical parody of which, by one W. Birch, 
under the title of The Complaint of a Sinner^ etc. Imprinted at London, etc. is still 
extant. The words in this moralised copy are as follows : * The God of love, that 
sits above. Doth know us, doth know us. How sinful that we be.* [In Hey wood’s 
Fair Maid of the Exchange^ II, iii, p. 34, ed. Sh. Soc., Frank enters, singing: 
‘ Ye gods of Love, that sit above,* which is, probably, a reminiscence of the present 
passage (Heywood’s play was not published until 1607) ; Collier notes that there 
is *a song to this tune in The Handefull of pleasant delitesy 1584; there we find 
(p. 36, ed. Arber) : ‘ The ioy of Virginitie : to^ The Gods of loue' \ the tune and the 
song were, therefore, familiar to Shakespeare’s audience. — Ed.] 

30, 31. carpet-mongers] Dyce i^Gloss,] : Equivalent to carpet-knights y effemi- 
nate persons, who were dubbed at court by mere favour, — not on the field of battle 
for their military exploits ; our early writers constantly speak of them witli great 
contempt. 

33. ouer ... in loue] ‘In* is here equivalent, as in many instances (see 
Abbott § 159), to into; or else, in a modem text, there should be, I think, commas 
before and after *as my poor self.* — E d. 

35. innocent] Walker ( Crit, iii, 33) : * Innocent ’ here means silly, 

36. babling] Collier (ed. ii) in his text reads baublingy and explains that 
Benedick means ‘ a rhyme reminding of a fool’ s baublcy which was usually spelt 
“ babie ” in the old copies.’ In his Third Edition he wisely and silently abandoned 
this bauble. 



270 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v, sc. ii. 


verie ominous endings , no, I was not borne vnder a ri- 37 
ming Plannet, for I cannot wooe in feftiuall tearmes : 

Enter Beatrice. 

fweete Beatrice would^ft thou come when I caFd 40 
thee? 

Beat. Yea Signior,and depart when you bid me. 

Bene. O ftay but till then. 

Beat. Then, is fpoken : fare you well now, and yet ere 
I goe,let me goe with that I came, which is, with know- 45 
ing what hath part betweene you and Claudio. 

Bene. Onely foule words, and thereupon I will kiffe 
thee. 

Beat. Foule words is but foule wind, and foule wind 
is but foule breath, and foule breath is noifome, there- 50 
fore I will depart vnkift. 

Bene. Thou haft frighted the word out of his right 
fence, fo forcible is thy wit, but I muft tell thee plaincly, 

Claudio my challenge, and either I muft fhort- 54 

38. for /] Ff, Rowe, + , Wh. i. nor Cam. came for Rowe ii et cet. 

/ Q, Cap. et cet. 49. words is buf^ words and F^F^, 

Scene VII. Pope, + . words are Rowe i. words are but Rowe 

39. Enter...] After line 41, Q. Var. Ran. Mai. 

40. card'] call Rowe, + . 52. his ri^ht] f/j Rowe, + , Var. 

42. you hid] thou bid Johns. Ran. 

45. came] QFf, Rowe i. Hal. Sta. 

38. festiual tearmes] Steevens : That is, in splendid phraseology, such as 
differs from common language, as holidays from common days. Thus, in i Hen. 
IV: I, iii, 46, Hotspur says of ‘a certain lord* that he used ‘many holiday and lady 
terms.* 

40. wouldst thou] That is, ‘ wouldst thou wish to come ?* or, as Guizot and 
MONTfeGUT translate it : vous voulez done bien venir. — E d. 

45. with that 1 came] The addition of for^ made by Rowe (and also by 
Collier* s MS) is not absolutely necessary; the omission of the preposition in 
relative sentences is common; they are supplied almost instinctively, see Claudio* s 
‘ In the rare semblance that I loved at first,* in the preceding scene ; or see Abbott, 
§ 394, for many other examples. In the First Cam. Ed. there is a note on this 
passage, wherein a line from Marston*s Fawne (I, ii, p. 24, ed. Halliwell) is 
quoted : ‘ With the same stratagem we still are caught ’ ; but the note is omitted in 
the Second Edition, probably because the two passages are not precisely paral- 
lel.—ED. 

54. vndergoes] Steevens : That is, is subject to it.-— Halliwell : We may 
rather consider the word quaintly used in the more ordinary sense, sustains. Clau- 
dio, though in a jesting manner, accepted Benedicts challenge, and fully understood 
that the latter was in earnest. 



ACT V, SC. ii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 271 

ly heare from him, or I will fubfcribe him a coward, and 55 
I pray thee now tell me, for which of my bad parts didft 
thou firfl fall in loue with me ? 

Bcat> For them all together, which maintain’d fo 
politique a ftate of euill, that they will not admit any 
good part to intermingle with them : but for which of 60 
my good parts did you firft fuffer loue for me ? 

Bene. Suffer loue ! a good epithite, I do fuffer loue in- 
deede,for I loue thee againft my will. 

Beat. In fpight of your heart I think, alas poore heart, 
if you fpight it for my fake, I will fpight it for yours, for 65 
I will neuer loue that which my friend hates. 

Bened. Thou and I are too wife to wooe peacea- 
blie. 

Bea. It appeares not in this confefTion, there’s not one 
wife man among twentie that will praife himfelfe. 70 

Bene. An old, an old inftance BeatricCy that liu’d in 
the time of good neighbours, if a man doe not eredl in 
this age his owne tombe ere he dies, hee fliall liue no 
longer in monuments, then the Bels ring,& the Widdow 
weepes. 75 


55 * coward cenvard ; F^, Rowe et 
seq. (subs.) 

58. all together'] altogether Han. 

maintaiie d~\ maintain Cap. conj. 

Hal. 

61. firjl’\ Om. Rowe i. 


64. thinl\'\ think ; F^, Rowe et seq. 
(subs. ) 

69. in this\ in that Han. 

74. monuments^ monument Q, Cap. 
et seq. 

Bels ring] Ff, Knt. hell rings 
Cap. et seq. 


55. subscribe] Referring to the ‘protest' with which Benedick threatens Clau* 
dio, line 160 of the preceding scene. 

58. maintain'd] Capell (p. 135) : Here is a plain impropriety: ‘will,' in the 
line that follows, accords ill with ‘maintain’d,' a verb present were better; unless 
you will solve it this way, — that her falling in love was at a time when his ‘ bad 
parts maintain’d so politick a state of evil, that they will not even now admit any 
good part to intermingle with them.’ [Haluwei.l says that it is ‘maintain’ in 
*ftie ed, 1600’ which may, I think, be possibly an oversight. It is ‘maintaind’ in 
the facsimile of Ashbee, of Staunton, and of Praetorius ; and the Cam. Ed. records 
no variation.] 

72. good neighbours] Warburton ; That is, when men were not envious, but 
every one gave another his due. — W. A. Wright ; When a man had no need to 
praise himself. 

74. monuments] Halliwell : It is just possible that there is here an oblique 
allusion to the rage for costly monuments which prevailed in Shakespeare’s time. 



2/2 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v, sc. ii. 

Beat. And how long is that thinkc you ? 76 

Ben. Queftion,why an hower in clamour and a quar- 
ter in rhewme, therforc is it moft expedient for the wife, 
if Don worme (his confcience) finde no impediment to 
the contrarie, to be the trumpet of his owne vertues, as 80 
I am to my felfe fo much for praifing my felfe, who I my 
felfe will beare witneffe is praife worthic, and now tell 
me, how doth your cofin ? 

Beat. Verie ill. 84 

77 - Question; Rowe i, Steev. Var. Knt. 

Rowe ii,+ (Om. llan.), Cap. 81,82. who...worthie'\ In parenthe- 
Ran. Mai. vSteev. Var. Knt. Question: — sis, Cap. 

Coll. iJyce. Wh. Cam. Question! — 81. my felfe fo'\ myself; so Rowe et 

Sta. Ktly. seq. (subs.) 

78. r/ie7vmc'] tkeivme thcivmY^. 82. 7vorthief\ worthy; F^, Rowe et 

is //] it is F^, Rowe, + , Var. Mai. seq. (subs. ) 

To this Hall alludes in hi.s Satires^ III, 2: — ‘Great Osmond knows not how he 
shall be known, When once great Osmond shall be dead and gone ; Unless he rear 
up some rich monument, Ten furlongs nearer to the firmament.’ 

74, 75. Bels . . . weepes] W. A. Wright: In the Hundred Merry TaleSy 
already referred to, are two stories ; one, of the woman who had buried her fourth 
husband and made great lamentation because on all previous occasions she was sure 
of a successor before the corpse of her late husband left the house, and now, said 
she, ‘I am .sure of no nother husband.’ The other is, of the widow who while 
kneeling at the requiem mass at her hu.sband’s funeral was addressed by a suitor, 
who came too late because she was already made sure to another man. [In the 
Memoir of Arthur Hugh by his Wife (London, 1888), a .story is told of 

Sir Richard Clough, who married Katharine Tudor, a relation and ward of Queen 
Elizabeth, to the effect that ‘he, as well as Morris Wynn of Gwydir accompanied her 
[Katharine Tudor] to her first husband’s funeral, and that Morris Wynn, when lead- 
ing her out of church requested the favour of her hand in marriage, to which she 
lanswered that .she had already promised it as she went in to Sir Richard Clough ; 
but added that should there be any other occasion she would remember him. Accord- 
ingly, after the death of Sir Richard, .she did marry him.* — ^p. 2, — Ed.] 

77. Question,] Warburton ; That is. What a question’s there, or what a foolish 
question do you ask? — Ritson (p. 34) : The learned prelate [Warburton], one may 
easily suppose, would not have he.sitated to call a fine lady fool to her face ; Bene- 
dick, it is to be hoped, had rather more politeness. The phrase occurs frequently 
in Shake.speare, and means no more than, — ‘ you ask a question,* or ‘ that is Che 
question.* 

77. clamour] W. A. Wright ; This refers to the sound of the bell. 

79. Don worme] Halliwell : The conscience was formerly represented under 
the symbol af a worm or serpent. In the entries of payments for expenses incurred 
in representing the Coventry Mysteries, is the following for dresses, — ‘ Item, payd to 
ij. wormes of conscience, xvj. df — ^W. A. Wright : The reference is to Mark, ix, 
48! ‘ Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.* 



ACT V, SC. ii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


273 

85 


Bene. And how doe you ? 

Beat, Verie ill too. 

Enter Vrfula, 

BettcSoxw^ God,loue me, and mend, there will I leaue 
you toOy for here comes one in hafte. 

Vrf, Madam, you muft come to your Vnclc, yon- 90 
ders old coile at home, it is prooucd my Ladie He- 
ro hath bin falfelie accufde, the Prince and Clattdio 
mightilie abufdc, and Don lohn is the author of all, who 
is fled and gone : will you come prefentlie ? 

Beat, Will you go hcare this newes Signior ? 95 

Bene, I will Hue in thy heart, die in thy lap, and be bu- 
ried in thy eies : and moreoucr, I will goe with thee to 
thy Vncles. Exeunt, 98 

87. Enter...] After line 89, Q, Theob. 97. etes i"] arms Kinneax, 

Warb. et se(i. 98. Vne/es'] QFf, Marshall. uncta 

88. mend; F^, Rowe et seq. Rowe, + , Cap, Var. Dyce ii, iii. unclds 

(subs. ) Mai. ’90 et cet. 

96, 97. heart ... eies"] eyes ... heart Exeunt.] Exit. Q. 

Theob. Warb. Johns. Barry. Daniel. 

91, old coile] Dyck {^N'otesy p. 47) ; Cotgrave (s.v. Viable) ; ^ Vairr le diable de 
Vaicvert, To keepe an old coyle, horrible bustling, terrible swaggering, to play 
monstrous rcakes, or raks-iakes.' I know not if it lias been observed that the Ital- 
ians use (or at least formerly used) ‘ vecchio’ in the same sense. [Dyce gives some 
examples, and adds, * it is rather remarkable that Florio in his Diet, has not given 
this meaning of vecchio.” ’] — WlSK (p. lo6) ; Wherever there has been an unus- 
ual disturbance or ado, — I prefer using plain country words to explain others, — the 
lower orders round Stratford-on-Avon invariably characterise it by the phrase, ‘ there 
has been old work to-day ’ ; to this day, round Stratford, is this use of ‘ old * still 
kept up by the lower classes. [This inten.sive use of ‘ old ’ is not confined to any 
locality, nor is it out of date. In Shakespeare, the Concordance will supply many 
instances of its use. — Ed.] 

93. mightilie abusde] Who can forget Lear’s, ‘Fair daylight? I am mightily 
abused ’ ? 

96. in thy lap] Brae (p. 147) : This impossible abomination is still suffered to 
disgrace Shakespeare’s text! Unquestionably it is a misprint; read: ‘die on thy 
lip. ’ [ Brae forgot what Hamlet says to Ophelia before the Dumb-show enters. — Ed. ] 

98. Vncles] Marsiiai.l : That is to Lconato and Anthony. Benedick would be 
very likely to know that the two brothers were together. At any rate that fact was 
present in the dramatist’s mind, .and would account for his writing ‘uncles^ instead 
of uncle. [It is somewhat rash to claim a knowledge under any circumstances of 
what was in Shakespeare’s mind; most especially when that know'ledge can be 
derived solely from a printed page which Shakespeare never saw. Ursula had said 
‘come to your Uncle.’ — ^E d.] 

18 



274 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v. sc. iii. 


[Scene III.] 

Enter Claudio ^ Prince ^and three or foure with Tapers. 

Clau. Is this the monument of Leonaio ? 

Lord. It is my Lord. Epitaph. 

Done to death by Jlanderous tongues^ 

Was the Hero that here lies : 5 

Death in guerdon of her wrongs^ 
dues her fame which neuer dies : 

So the life that dyed with JhamCy 
Lines in death with glorious fame. 

Hang thou there vpon the tombCy lO 

Praifing her when / am dombe. 

Qlau. Now mufick found & fing your folemn hymne 

Song. 

Pardon goddejfe of the nighty 14 

Scene VIII. Pope, + . Scene III. 4. Done] Claud, [reading out of a 
Cap. et seq. Scrowl] Done Cap. 

A Church. Pope. A Church. A flanderous] Jlauderous Q. 

Stately Monument in the Front. Cap. by] with Cap. (corrected in Er- 

I , Enter.., ] Enter Don Pedro, Claud. , rata) . 
and Attendants with Tapers. Rowe. En- 10-12. Hang ... Given to 

ter, with Attendants, and Mu.sic,... Cap. Claudio, with direction [affixing it] 

3. Lord.] Atten. Rowe et seq. Cap. Given to Claudio, Var. Ran. 

Epitaph.] Om. Cap. Claudio Mai. Sta. Dyce ii, iii, Cam. 
read.s. Var. *73. ii. dombe] Q. dumb F^. 

3. Epitaph] Capell’s arrangement, whereby Claudio reads this Epitaph ‘ from a 
scrowl,* has been followed by all editors. It is probably, in all respects, correct, 
except in giving lines 10 and 1 1 : * Hang thou there,* etc. to Claudio while he is 
affixing the scroll. There seems to be no ‘ most excellent reason ’ why these lines 
should not be also a part of the Epitaph ; they will then be an abiding proof to I^eo- 
nato and to the world that Claudio had himself fulfilled his promise. Why should 
Claudio in his own person speak two lines of rhyme, when immediately afterward he 
speaks in prose? I cannot but think that these lines are a part of the Epitaph. — E d. 

4. Done to death] Steevens : To ‘ do to death ’ is merely an old translation of 
the French phrase — Faire mourir, 

6 . guerdon] That is, reward, remuneration. 

8. with shame] W. A. Wright ; Shame was the cause, not the accompaniment 
of Hero*s death. For ‘with* equivalent to fy, see II, i, 58. 

13. Song.] Capell (p. 135) : The Song*s different measures denote intention 
of difference in the music it was to go to : perform’d in a church, it’s first part was 
(probably) design’d a sort of church-chanting ; the rest, a full air of the utmost 
solemnity, which it has in it’s very words ; a solemnity destroy’d in the Oxford copy 
[Hanmei^s], by turning all it’s dactyls to trochees through means of such ridiculous 
botdiings as are frequent in that edition. 



ACT V, SC. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


275 

15 


Thofe that Jlew thy virgin knight^ 

For the which with fongs of woe y 
Round about her tombe they goe : 

Midnight afjiji our moneyhelpe vs to figh and gr one ^ 

Heauily yheauily, 

Graues yawne and yeelde your deady 20 

Till death be vttcredy 

15. thy virgin] the virgin Rowe, 

Pope. 

knight] bright Coll. MS. 

17. they goe] we go Coll. MS. 

18. Midnight ... grone] Two lines 
FjF^, Rowe et seq. 

afiift] thou assist Han. 

15. virgin knight] Johnson : Helena, in Alls fVeUuses ‘knight* in the same 
signification : * Dian no queen of virgins, that would sufter her poor knight surprised, 
without rescue,’ etc. I, iii, 119. Steevens erroneously supposed that there is here 
a reference to those knights who had as yet achieved no adventure, and were there- 
fore called ‘virgin knights.* ‘ Hero,* he .said, ‘ had as yet achieved no matrimonial 
one.* Dr Johnson’s quotation from Ails Well together with the following from The 
Two Noble Kinsmen^ quoted by Malone : ‘O sacred, .shadowy, cold, and constant 
queen, . . . who to thy female knights Allow’st no more blood,* etc. V, i, 126. — is 
all sufficient. Dyce calls attention to the rhyming of night and knight in Merry 
Wives f II, i, 14, 15. 

21. Till . . . vttered] Boswell : That is, ‘till death be spoken of.* — Knight : 
To ‘utter* is here to put out, — to expel. Death is expelled heavenly ^ — by the 
power of heaven. The passage has evidently reference to the sublime verse of 
Corinthians. — Collier: The meaning is obscure ; the verb ‘uttered’ is perhaps to 
be taken as meaning put forth ^ put out, or put away^ and then the sense may be : 
until death be destroyed. — Halliwell ; The slayers of the virgin knight are per- 
forming a solemn requiem on the body of Hero, and they invoke Midnight and the 
shades of the dead to assist, until her death be uttered^ that is proclaimed, published, 
or commemorated, sorrowfully, sorrowfully, ‘To utter, to put foorth, to publish, 
or set abroade.* — Baret, 1580. — R. G. White (ed* i) ; That is, death is to be 
expelled, outer-ed, by the power of Heaven. [Second Edition] : An obscure allu.sion 
to the resurrection. — Walker ( Crit. iii, 34) : With regard to the words, ‘ Graves, 
yawn,* etc., I know not why we should consider them as anything more than an 
invocation, — ^after the usual manner of funeral dirges in that age, in which mourners 
of some description or other are summoned to the funeral, — a call, I say, upon the 
surrounding dead to come forth from their graves, as auditors or sharers in the 
solemn lamentation. Uttered^ expressed, commemorated in song. Compare the 
dirge in Beaumont and Fletcher’s Knight of the Burning Pestle^ IV, iv, ‘Come, 
you whose loves are dead,* etc. [p. 208, ed. Dyce] ; the ‘ Threnos * which concludes 
Shakespeare’s verses at the end of \^The Phoenix and the Turtle'] ; also, I think, 
that in the play of Fuimus TroeSy III, vii, Dodsley, vii, p. 424 ; and the summoning 
together of the birds in Skelton’s Philip Sparrotv [p. 63, ed. Dyce]. The expla^ 
nation of ‘ uttered,* as signifying oustedy is one of the many unfortunate exhibitions 


18. vs to] us thou to Han. 

20. yawne] ohy ya'wn Han, 

21. Till] Until Han. 

death] songs of death Steev. conj. 
vttered] interred Herr. con- 
quered Gould. 



2/6 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v, sc. iu. 


Heauenly ^auenly. 22 

(this right. 

Z(>.Now vnto thy bones good night, yeerely will I do 24 

22. Heauenly, heauenly.] Ff, Rowe, 24. Lo.] Le. F^F^. Claud. Rowe et 
Pope, Knt, Wh. i, Sta. Heauily^ seq. 

heauily. Q, Theob. et cet Two lines, Rowe ii et seq. 

23. righf\ rite Pope, et seq. 

of half-learning to which our poet has given occasion. — Rev. John Hunter ; That 
is, let these words be uttered in a heavenly spirit until death, that is, so long as I 
live. Claudio presently says, ‘Yearly will I do this rite.’ Schmidt {Lex.^ That 
is, the cry ‘Graves, yawn,’ etc. .shall be raised till death. — W. A. Wright: Mid- 
night and the grave are appealed to not to join in any .song commemorating Death 
but to assist Claudio in giving expression to his remorse and sorrow, which in exag- 
gerated language he indicates would continue till there should be no more death. 
Although, therefore, Sidney Walker speaks rather contcmptuou.sly of those who 
take ‘ uttered ’ as signifying ‘ ousted,’ it appears to me to give a better meaning to 
the passage than his own explanation, which misses the point. [I confess that 
Walker’s paraphrase: ‘Till death is expressed, commemorated in .song’ conveys no 
meaning to me here. The song is short, it could have taken hardly more than a 
minute or two to sing it, and if the dead are to arise from their graves, come forth 
to hear it, and then go back again when it is over, the question may well be raised 
whether or not it were quite worth the trouble. There is, moreover, no point in any 
commemoration by Claudio of death in the abstract ; it was his very present moan for 
the dead Hero to which he summoned midnight for help to sigh and groan. He was 
not present to bewail death in general, but to express a grief for Hero which was to 
outlast mortality. Of Walker’s long note there is but one sentence that is really ger- 
mane to the meaning of ‘ uttered ;’ all the rest is devoted to proving that which no 
one misunderstands, namely, that the presence of Midnight and the Dead is invoked. 
And it is in this general summons to be present, that the point lies of his references, 
which could be doubtless multiplied. Joshua Sylvester was extremely fond of this 
cheerful species of composition, and an examination of his Poems might prove fruitful. 
In view, therefore, of what seems to me to be the meaning of the whole stanza, I 
cannot but agree with those critics who believe that ‘ Till death be uttered ’ means : 
till death be overcome, vanquished to the utterance. — Ed.] 

22. Heauenly, heauenly] Dyce [Remarks^ P* 35 ) : A. speech of Hamlet, II, 
ii, 290, stands thus in the Folio : ‘ and indeed it goes so heauenly with my disposi- 
tion,’ etc. Now, in [the present passage] ‘Heauenly’ is as certainly a misprint 
for ‘Heavily’ as it is in [Hamlet]. [It is hardly worth while to perpetuate the 
earnest plea in favour of ‘ Heavenly,* urged by R. G. White in his First Edition, 
because it was withdrawn in his Second.] Walker (CViV. iii, 33) ‘Heavenly’ is 
a most absurd error, generated ( ut saepe') by the corruption of an uncommon word 
to a common one. So in Peele, King Edward /., Dyce, 2nd ed., vol. i, p. 173, — 
‘Sweet lady, abate not thy looks so heavenly to the earth,’ — we should read heavily; 
and also abase for abate. [Among modern editors, Knight and Staunton are the 
only ones who adhere to the Folio, — mistakenly, I think. — E d.] 

24. Lo.Now, etc.] It is hardly worth while to call attention to the obvious error 
of giving this speech, which so clearly belongs to Claudio, to one of the Lords in 
waiting. 



ACT V, SC. iii.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


25 


Prin. Good morrow mafters, put your Torches out, 

The wolues haue preied,and looke,the gentle day 
Before the whceles of Phoebus, round about 
Dapples the drowfie Eaft with fpots of grey : 

Thanks to you all, and leaue vs, fare you well. 

Clc^u. Good morrow mafters, each his feuerall way. 30 

Prm, Come let vs hence, and put on other weedes, 

And then to Lconatoes we will goe. 

Clati. And Hymen now with luckier ifliie fpeeds, 33 

26. QF,. preyed prey'^d Coll. Wh. i, Sta. /peed Ff, Rowe. 
F^, Rowe et seq. speed^s Thirlby, Theob. llan. Warb. 

31. weedes] weedeQoW. MS. ap. Cam. Johns. Var. Ran. Mai. Steev. Dyce, 

Marshall. Cam. Wh. ii. speed! Cap. 

33. fpeeds] Q, Pope, Var. ’21, Knt, 

26-28. gentle day . , . grey] Compare Rom. Jul. II, iii, i ; ‘ The grey-eyed 
mom smiles on the frowning night, Chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of 
light ; And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels From forth day’s path and Titan’s 
fiery wheels.’ 

28. grey] Dyce ( Gloss . ) defines this colour as ‘ blue, azure ’ ; when applied to the 
sky, or to the eyes. In the passage now before us, however, the question of colour is 
really a matter of indifference : a blue sky may be dappled with spots of grey, or a 
grey sky may be dappled with spots of blue. That * grey,’ when not applied to the 
eyes or sky, does not mean blue, we are perfectly sure when Leonato, in V, i, 73, 
refers to his ‘ grey hairs.’ — Ed. 

30. his seuerall way] Collier (ed. ii) ; This is the only line that here does not 
rhyme. We feel confident that the emendation in the MS, viz. : ‘ each his way can 
tell,’ was what the poet wrote, and what the old actor of Claudio repeated. It pre- 
serves the meaning, the measure, and the jingle, making a six-line stanza conclude 
with its couplet. [Collier adopted the emendation in his text. It would have been 
more correct to say that the preceding line was the only one that does not rhyme ; in 
the present line, ‘each his several way’ rhymes with ‘day’ and ‘grey’j I do not 
think it was so intended, but it so happens. It was hardly appropriate to put into 
rhyme either the Prince’s ‘ fare you well ’ or Claudio’s ‘ good morrow.’ — ^E d.] 

33. speeds] Thirlby : Claudio could not know, without being a prophet, that 
this new proposed match could have any luckier event than that designed with Hero. 
Certainly, therefore, this should be a wish in Claudio ; and, to this end, the poet 
might have wrote speed' s^ i. e. speed us ; and so it becomes a prayer to heaven. — 
Malone : The contraction proposed is so extremely harsh, that I cannot believe it 
was intended by the author. — Capell (p. 135) : Men are often prophets in hope ; 
and instead of addressing ‘ Hymen ’ to speed him (prosper him) in the match that 
was coming, Claudio’s warmth of youth might, suggest to him, — ^that there was a 
Hymen (a match) speeding towards him, of ‘ luckier issue than this {this late Hymen) 
for whom we render up this woe.’ — Dyce (ed. ii) : Unless we change ‘weeds’ to 
weed and ‘ speeds ’ to speedy there seems to be no other course than to follow the 
advice of Thirlby. In reference to Malone’s objection to the contraction, compare 
* Therefore ids seemeth it a needful course,’ etc , — Lffvds Lab, L, II, i. 25. [Capell 



2/8 MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v, sc. iv. 

Then this for whom we rendred vp this woe. Exeunt. 34 

\Scene IV?^ 

Enter LeonatOyBene. Marg. Vrfulct^old man^Frier ^Hero. 

Frier. Did I not tell you the was innocent ? 

Leo. So are the Prince and Clandio who accusM her, 

Vpon the errour that you heard debated : 

But Margaret was in fome fault for this, S 

Although againft her will as it appeares, 

In the true courfe of all the queftion. 

Old. Well, I am glad that all things fort fo well. 

Bene. And fo am I, being elfc by faith enforcM 
To call young Claudio to a reckoning for it. lO 

Leo. Well daughter, and you gentlewomen all. 

Withdraw into a chamber by your felues. 

And when I fend for you, come hither mask’d : 

The Prince and Claudio promis’d by this howre 

To vifit me, you know your office Brother, 15 


34. Then tkis'\ Than hers Marshall 
conj. 

for whom\ for which Han. 

Scene IX. Pope, + . Scene IV. 
Cap. et seq 

Leonato’s House. Pope. 

I. Marg.] Om. Steev. Var. Knt, Coll, 
Sta. 

old man,] Antonio, Rowe. 

6. will . . . appeares, ] QFf, Rowe, Pope, 


Han. will,... appears, Theob. Warb. 
Johns, ivill,... appears Cap. et cet. 

8. etc. Old.] Ant, Rowe. 
fort\ forts Q. 

11. y oil] yongY^. young 

Rowe et seq. 

13. mask'd] masked Q. 

>5 me, you] me; you F^, Rowe et 
seq. (subs.) 


is ‘right, I think, in supposing that * Hymen* may mean a marriage or match, and right 
also, in his paraphrase, except that < Than this ’ means, and, in fact, really is * Than 
in this,’ where the in is absorbed in the final n of ‘Than ’ : ‘ Than’ this.’ ‘ A mar- 
riage,’ he says in effect, ‘ is now speeding toward me luckier in its issue than it was 
in this for (here his thoughts turn to Hero herself, and he says) whom we,’ etc. 
—Ed.] 

1. Marg.] Dvce : Some of the modern editors (more unforgiving than Leonato) 
exclude Margaret from the present assembly, though the old copies mark both her 
entrance here and at her re-entrance afterwards with the other ladies. (In what is 
said of her at the commencement of the scene there is nothing which would lead us 
to suppose that the poet intended her to be absent.) 

4. Vpon] See II, iii, 202. 

8. things sort so well] As far as the ear is concerned, it is indifferent whether or 
not these words are printed : ‘ thing sorts so well.’ It is probably due to the ear that 
the Qto prints sorts. For ‘ sort,’ see IV, i, 249. 




ACT SC. iv.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


m 


You muft be father to your brothers daughter, i6 

And giue her to young Claudio. Exeunt Ladies. 

Old. Which I will doe with confirmM countenance. 

Bene. Frier, I muft intreat your paines,! thinkei 

Frier. To doe what Signior ? 20 

Bene. To binde me, or vndoe me, one of them: 

Signior Leonato yXxwXh it is good Signior, 

Your neece regards me with an eye of fauour. 

Leo. That eye my daughter lent her, ^tis moft true. 

Bene. And I doe with an eye of loue requite her. 25 

Leo. The fight whereof I thinke you had from me, 

From Claudio y and the Prince yh\x\. what^s your will? 

Bencd. Your anfwer fir is Enigmaticall, 

But for my will, my will is, your good will 

May ftand with ours, this day to be conioynM, 30 

In the ftate of honourable marriage. 

In which (good Frier) I fhall defire your helpe. 

Leon. My heart is with your liking. 

Frier. And my helpe. 

^ Heere comes the Prince and Claudio.* 35 

Enter Prince and Claudio^ with attendants. 

Prin. Good morrow to this faire affembly. 

Leo. Good morrow Prince^ good morrow Claudio : 

We heere attend you, are you yet determine. 

To day to marry with my brothers daughter ? 40 

Claud. He hold my minde were ftie an Ethiope. 

Leo. Call her forth brother, heres the Frier ready. 

Prin. Good morrow Benedike^ why what’s the matter? 43 


17. Exeunt...] After line 18, Cap. 
After line 1 5, Dyce. After line 13, Cam. 

24. Leo.] Q. Old. Ff. Ant. Rowe, 
Pope. 

31. In the\ Ptk Ff, Rowe,-f, 
Walker. P the Cap. Dyce ii, iii. 

Jtate’\ estate Var. ’73, ^78, *85, 
Mai. Var. Knt, Sta. 

32. {good FrierY\ good 

34. my helpe. Ff, Rowe,-f. my 


helpe. Heere comes the Prince and 
Claudio. Q, Cap. et seq. 

36. Scene X. Pope, + . 

with attendants] and two or three 
other. Q. 

39. youy are you'\ you; are you F^, 
Rowe et seq. (subs.) 

42. [Exit Antonio. Theob. 

43. Prin.] P. Q. 

Benedike] Bened. Q. 


* 18. confirm’d] That is, unmoved. 

34. This line was omitted, evidently by accident, in the Folio. 

43 -“ 45 - why , . . clowdinesse] Lady Martin (p. 324) : Although well pleased 
that he is no longer required to call his old friend to account, Benedick takes care to 



28o 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v. iv. 


That you haue fuch a Februarie face, 

So full of froft, of ftorme,and clowdineffe. 45 

Qlaud. I thinke he thinkes vpon the fauage bull : 

Tufh, feare not man, weevil tip thy homes with gold, 

And all Europa fliall reioyce at thee. 

As once Europa did at lufty loucy 

When he would play the noble beaft in loue. 50 

Ben. Bull loue fir, had an amiable low. 

And fome fuch ftrange bull leapt your fathers Cow, 

A got a Calfe in that fame noble feat, 

Much like to you, for you haue iuft his bleat. 

Enter brother ylierOy BcatricCy Margaret y Vrfula. S 5 

Cla. For this I owe you: here comes other recknings. 

47. thy homes\ the hortis Rowe ii. 5$. Enter brother...] Enter... Rowe, 

48. all Europa"] fo all Europe Pope. Enter Antonio... mask’d. Theob. 

Rowe, + , Var. ’73. Re-enter Antonio... Cap. (after line 55). 

53 - A got] Fj. And got QFjF^, ' 56. eomes] QFf, Cap. Cam. Rife, Wh. 

Rowe et seq. ii. eome Rowe et cet. 

54. Scene XI. Pope, + . 

show, by his coldness and reserve, that he considers their behaviour to have been 
unjustifiable, even had the story been true which Don John had beguiled them into 
believing. When the Prince rallies him about his * February face,’ he makes no 
rejoinder. But when Claudio, with infinite bad taste, at a moment when his mind 
should have been full of the gravest thoughts, attacks him in the same spirit, Bene- 
dick turns upon him with caustic severity. The entrance of Hero, with her ladies, 
masked, arrests what might have gro-vvn into hot words. 

46. bull] See I, i, 253, 

48. all Europa] Steevens ; I have no doubt that our author wrote : ‘ And all 
our Europe^^ etc. — Dyce : Steevens was perhaps not aware of the earlier alteration, 
‘And so all Europe.’ [Dyce was perhaps not aware that the reading ‘ And so all 
Europe ’ had appeared in the text of an edition bearing, on its title page, the names 
Samuel Johnson and George Steevens. — Ed.] 

53. same] Staunton notes that this is some in the First Folio. It is not so 
recorded in the Cambridge Edition; it is ‘same’ in Booth’s Reprint; in Staun- 
ton’s own Photolithograph, and in my copy of the First Folio ; but it is some in 
Vemor and Hood’s Reprint ^ 1807; it is not marked as a typographical error in 
Upcott’S ms list, now before me, of the misprints in this last edition ; it is there- 
fore possible that it might have been some in the original copy which Upcott collated, 
as well as in the copy from which Staunton quoted. — Ed. 

56. recknings] See above, in line 10. Claudio’s conduct when he cast Hero off 
before the altar Is hardly less repulsive than his present flippancy. I cannot believe 
that this is pure Shakespeare. The very phrase ‘ seize upon,’ although not as eni- 
phatic as in modem use, and signifies merely to take in possession, by no means 
befits the occasion, — a criticism which would not be expressed, if I thought that 
Shakespeare had written the phrase* — E d* 



ACT V, SC. iv.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


281 


Which is the Lady I muft feize vpon ? 57 

Leo. This fame is Ihe, and I doe giue you her. 

Cla. Why then flie’s mine, fweet let me fee your face. 

Leon. No that you fhal not, till you take her hand, 60 

Before this Frier, and fweare to marry her. 

ClcLU. Giue me your hand before this holy Frier, 

I am your husband if you like of me. 

Hero. And when I liuM I was your other wife. 

And when you lou’d, you were my other husband. 65 

Clati. Another Hero ? 

Hero. Nothing certainer. 

One Hero died, but I doe hue, 68 

58. Leo.] QFf, Rowe, Pope, Han. bef ore... Friar ; Rowe et cet. 

Coll. Wh. i. Anlo. Theob. et cet. 64. [unmasking. Rowe. 

60. Leon.] Ant. Hal. 68. died'\ Ff, Rowe, Pope, died be- 

62. hand before... Frier y'\ hand ; be- lied CoU. ii (MS), died revil'd Coll. 

Pope, + , Cam. Rife, hand iii. died dejilde Q, Theob. et cet. 

58. Leo.] Theobald (Nichols, Illust. ii, 304) ; It is evident that this must be 
spoken by Antonio ; see lines 15-1 7. — Collier : Though Antonio was formally to give 
away, the lady at the altar, as her pretended father, Leonato may very properly inter* 
pose this observation ; it is the more probably his from what follows, and there is no 
sufficient reason for altering the arrangement of the Qto and Folios. — R. G. White 
(ed. i) : Since I^eonato had already, in the first Scene of this Act, offered and prom- 
ised the hand of his pretended niece to Claudio, there can be surely nothing improper 
in his giving it to him. [In his Second Edition, White gives the .speech to Antonio.] 
— Dyck (ed. ii, replying to Collier) : But the line must be characterised as some- 
thing more than an ‘observation’; nor does the ceremony at the altar form any 
portion of the play, 

63. if you like of me] For other examples of ‘ like ’ followed by ‘ of,’ see 
Abbott, § 177. 

64. etc. Lady Martin (p. 325) ; Hero accepts Claudio with a ready forgiveness, 
which, I feel very sure, Beatrice’s self-respect, under similar circumstances, would 
not have permitted her to grant. Such treatment as Claudio’s would have chilled all 
love within her. She would never have trusted as her husband the man who had 
allowed himself to be so easily deceived, and who had openly shamed her before the 
world. Hero, altogether a feebler nature, neither looks so far into the future, nor 
feels so intensely what has happened in the past. 

67. certainer] For exiunples of other comparative inflections in -er when the 
positive ends in -ing^ ed, -id, -ain, -st, and -ect, see Abbott, § 7. 

68. died,] Collier (ed. ii) : There can be ‘nothing certainer* than that the 
word defil'd, in the Qto [see Text. Notes] must be wrong. To make Hero say that 
she had died defil'd, is to make her admit her own guilt ; she maintains that she had 
died guiltless ; and the word found in the MS \belied^ has occurred several times in 
this comedy, and is precisely that which Hero would have used, and which might 
easily have been misheard and misprinted. It seems as clear that belied is the true 



282 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act V, SC. iv. 


And furely as I line, I am a maid. 

Prin. The former Hero^ Hero that is dead. 70 

Leon. Shee died my Lord, but whiles her flander liuM. 

Fner. All this amazement can I qualifie, 

When after that the holy rites are ended, 

He tell you largely of faire Heroes death : 

Meane time let wonder feeme familiar , 75 

And to the chappell let vs prcfcntly. 

Be 7 i. Soft and faire Frier, which is Beatrice^ 77 

70. lltro, deaci,'\ Hero dead ! you\ thee F^F^, Rowe, Pope, 

Pope et seq. Theob. Warb. Johns. 


word, as that defiVd is the very word, of all others. Hero would not have employed. 
The printer of the Folio, seeing that defiVd must be wrong, and, not knowing what 
was right, cast it out. — Dyce {^Strictures, p. 53) : The truth of the matter, 1 have 
no doubt, is this : the printer of the Folio (a most careless printer) omitted the word 
defiVd by a mere oversight ; it was omitted in the Second Folio also ; and [Collier’s 
MS], aware that a word was wanting, 'and not possessing the Qto, inserted < belied’ 
from conjecture. According to Mr Collier, ‘ to make Hero say that she had died 
defiVd, is to make her admit her own guilt,’ — a most forced objection to the reading 
of the Qto ; for Hero knows that not only Claudio whom she is addressing, but the 
whole party present, are nenv perfectly convinced of her innocence. — Halliwell : 
The term dcfiVd is evidently placed intentionally in opposition with viaid in the next 
line. Nothing, she observes, is more certain than that I am another Hero ; for one 
Hero died, and died defiled ; but I live, and, surely, as I live, 1 am a maid. The 
verb defile was formerly expres.sly applied to the violation of chastity. ‘ Viole, cor- 
rupted, defiled, deflowred.’ — Cotgrave, [R. G. White has a note to the same effect, 
which Dyce quotes with approval.] — Dyce (cd. ii) : The word belied is objection- 
able because it makes the gentle Hero indirectly reproach the repentant Claudio. — 
Collier (ed. hi) ; The MS has belied which is much preferable to ‘defil’d,’ but 
still on some accounts objectionable ; our word is reviVd, which, we think, must be 
welcomed by everybody. Hero had been unjustly reviV d at the time of her supposed 
death, and so she here asserts. [I am by no means certain that the omission of 
defiVd a defect in the Folio ; albeit Walker says that lines of eight syllables are 
un-Shakespearian. The few words in the next line are an adequate reference to 
the past. And as for the metre, — ^let the line be supposed to be broken by emotion 
into two short lines of four syllables each ; the eye, and, possibly. Walker, will be 
satisfied, while the ear has never been disturbed. — Ed.] 

72. qualifie] That is, moderate, soften, abate. 

73. after that] For other examples of ‘ that ’ as a conjunctional affix, see Abbott, 
§287. 

75. familiar] That is, of every day occurrence. 

77. which is Beatrice ?] Lady Martin (p. 325) : Beatrice, to tease Benedick, 
has been holding back among the other ladies, when he expects that she would be 
ready to go with him to the altar ; and when at last, fairly puzzled, he asks ‘ Which 
is Beatrice ?’ and she unmasks, with the words, < What is your will ?’ he inquires, 



ACT V, SC, iv.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 283 

Beat. I anfwer to that name, what is your will ? 78 

Bene. Doe not you loue me ? 

Beat. Why no,no more then reafon. 80 

Bene. Why then your Vncle,and the Prince, & Clau- 
dio^ haue beene deceiued, they fwore you did. 

Beat. Doe not you loue mee ? 

Bene. Troth no, no more then reafon. 

Beat. Why then my Cofin Margaret and Vrfula 85 

Are much deceiu’d,for they did fweare you did. 

Bene. They fwore you were almoft ficke for me. 

Beat. They fwore you were wel-nye dead for me. 

Bene. ^Tis no matter, then you doe not loue me? 

Beat. No truly, but in friendly recompence. 90 

Leon. Come Cofin, I am fure you loue the gentlemS. 


78. Beat.] Beat, [unmasking] Cap. 
et seq. 

80. Why «f>,] Why^ i. 

No Steev. Var. ’03, ’13. 

82. haue... did One line of verse, 
Q, Rowe ii, Han. Cap. et seq. 

hatie beene dcceiued'\ Have greatly 
been deceiv* d Wagner conj. 

they /wore'] for they did /wear 
Han. for they s 7 uore Cap. Coll, ii (MS), 
Dyce, Wli. i, Ktly, lluds. they all 
swore Coll. iii. 


84. Troth nof] Troths no; Han. No 
Steev. Var. ’03, ^13. 

85. Cofin] coustHy Rowe. 

86. Are much] Have been Theob. 
Warb. Johns. 

87. 88. fwore you] fwore that you Q, 
Cap. et. seq. 

89. » 77 ^] It is Coll. MS. 

no matter] no fuch matter Q, 
Cap. et .seq. 

me 1 ] me. Q. 

91. Leon.] Hero. Cap. Ran. 


with an air of surprise, ‘ Do you not love me ?’ What follows gives us once more the 
bright, joyous, brilliant Beatrice of the early scenes. 

78, etc. Capell (p. 136) : What passes between these wits was never read by the 
editor [f. e. Capell himself] without exciting ideas of the famous ode between Horace 
and Lydia [the immortal Ninth of the Third Book. — Ed.] ; Beatrice rises there upon 
him, as the other docs upon her spark. 

82. they swore] R. G. White (ed. i) : There can hardly be a doubt that Han- 
mer’ s insertion of for was proper, especially as ‘ deceived,* which is contracted in the 
corresponding line below, is not contracted in this, thereby rendering one syllable 
necessary to the rhythm. — Dyce : Even with the addition of for^ I do not believe 
that we have the line as it came from Shakespeare's pen ; the probability is, that he 
wrote (what Hanmer printed) ; * Have been deceiv'd ; for they did swear you did 
which corresponds with what presently follows, < Are much deceiv'd ; for they did 
swear you did,' 

89. no matter] See I, i, 186. The Qto gives the true text, both in sense and 
rhythm. 

90. friendly recompence] Deighton : Such a return as one friend might make 
to another. 

91. Cosin] Halliwell: ‘Cousin' was frequently applied to several kinds of 



284 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v. sc. iv. 


Qclu. And He be fworne vpon^t, that he loues her, 92 

For heres a paper written in his hand, 

A halting fonnet of his owne pure braine, 

Fafliioned to Beatrice. 95 

Hero. And heeres another, 

Writ in my cofins hand, ftolne from her pocket, 

Containing her affeflion vnto Benedicke. 

Bene. A miracle, here^s our owne hands againft our 
hearts : come I will haue thee, but by this light I take lOO 
thee for pittie. 

Beat. I would not denie you, but by this good day, I 
yeeld vpon great perfwafion, & partly to faue your life, 
for I was told, you were in a confumption. 

Leon. Peace I will flop your mouth. 105 


95. FaJkioned‘\ Fashion'd Rowe et 
seq. 

99. our owne\ our Rowe i. 

102. Iwould'\ /z£/? 7 / Mason, Ran. 
not\ yet Theob. now Han. Om. 

Gould. 


104. I was told'\ as I told F^F^. as 
/ was told Rowe, + . 

105. Leon.] Bene. Theob. et seq. 
(except Coll. i). 

[Kissing her. Theob. et seq. 
(except Coll. i). 


relationship. Thus Leonato, in I, ii, 2, expressly calls , his nephew ‘cousin.* 
[Capell, on account of this word, ‘cousin,* gives the speech to Hero. — Ed.] 

102. I , . . you] Theobald ; Is not this strange mock-reasoning in Beatrice ? 
She would not deny him, but that she )rields upon great persuasion. By changing 
the negative [into yef^ I make no doubt but I have retrieved the Poet’s humour. — 
Heath (p. l lo) : This expression is the exact counterpart to that of Benedick just 
preceding, ‘ Come, I will have thee * ; which establishes the truth of the original text. 
— ^M. Mason (p. 55) : Theobald’s objection to the passage is just, though his 
amendment is not ; — there is no reasoning in it as it stands ; it appears to me that 
we should read, ‘I will not deny you,* etc. ; which agrees with Benedick’s manner 
of accepting her, ‘I will have you.* — Halliwell : Beatrice tells Benedick she 
, does not refuse him, but nevertheless takes him only ‘ upon great persuasion.* The 
will is there ; the speech is merely the bashfulness of words. [Heath and Halliwell 
adequately explain the meaning. — Ed.] 

104. consumption] Bucknill (p. 117) : This is the only place where Shake- 
speare uses this word apparently in its modem sense. Timon*s use of it, ‘Con- 
sumptions sow in hollow bones of men,* is less appropriate, and Lear’s ‘Consump- 
tion catch thee !* is less definite. Beatrice, it appears, thought ‘ consumption * 
curable* FalstafF, however, speaks of a consumption of the purse as an incurable, 
though lingering, disease. 

105. Leon.] TheobaIpD : The ingenious Dr Thirlby agreed with me, that this 
ought to be given to Benedick, who, upon saying it, kisses Beatrice ; and this being 
done before the whole company, how natural is the reply which the Prince makes 
upon it ? — ‘ How dost thou. Benedick, the married man ?* Besides, this mode of 
^ech, preparatory to a salute, is familiar to our Poet in common with other stage- 




ACT V, SC. iv.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 2S$ 

Prin. How doft thou Benedicke the married man ? lo6 

Bene. He tell thee what Prince : a Colledge of witte- 
crackers cannot flout mee out of my humour, doft thou 
think I care for a Satyre or an Epigram ? no, if a man will 
be beaten with braines, a ftiall weare nothing handfome i lO 
about him : in briefe, fmce I do purpofe to marry, I will 
thinke nothing to any purpofe that the world can fay a- 
gainft it, and therefore neuer flout at me, for I haue faid 
againft it : for man is a giddy thing, and this is my con- 
clufion: for thy part Claudio^ I did thinke to haue beaten 115 
thee, but in that thou art like to be my kinfman,liue vn- 
bruis’d, and loue my coufin. 

Cla. I had well hop’d y wouldft haue denied Beatrice, f 
I might haue cudgel’d thee out of thy Angle life, to make 119 

107, 108. witte-crackcrs\ wiUy-crack- he shall Rowe et cet. 

ers Rowe i. wi it -crackers Rowe ill. purpo/e'\ propose Rowe ii, Var. 

ii, Pope. 7 uit-cr ackers Theob. ’03, ^13, ’21, Dyce i. 

108. humour, dq/l'] humotir ; doJl 113. /QF^F^, Rowe 

F^, Rowe. et seq. 

no. a Jhal{\ QFf, Coll. Cam. Ktly. 

writers. See Beatrice’s speech to Hero, II, i, 296. Compare Tro. (5r» Cress., Ill, 
ii, 141, where Cressida says ‘stop ray mouth,’ and afterward ‘pardon me; ’Twas 
not my purpose, thus to beg a kiss.’ Again, in Beaumont and Fletcher’s Scornful 
Lady, III, ii, [p. 66, ed. Dyce,] where the Widow says, ‘But I shall blush to say 
more ’ and the Elder Loveless tells the Younger Loveless, ‘ Stop her mouth,’ where- 
upon the Younger Loveless kisses her. Again, in Webster’s Dutchess of Malfi, 
III, ii [p. 231, ed. Dyce] the Dutchess says to Antonio, ‘I’ll stop your mouth,* 
and Antonio replies, ‘Nay, that’s but one ; Venus had two soft doves To draw her 
chariot; 1 must have another.’ Collier, in his First Edition, retained ‘Leon.* 
and urged that there was no warrant in any old stage-direction to make Benedick 
kiss Beatrice. In his Second Edition he yields to his MS and changes ‘ Leon.’ to 
‘Bene.’ Dyce (Remarks, p. 35) disputes the comment in Collier’s First Edition 
and asks, ‘ why should Leonato wish to put Beatrice suddenly to silence ? She has 
said nothing which concerns him p and then quotes from Tro. Cress., and from 
The Scornful Lady the same passages quoted by Theobald. 

110. wear nothing handsome] Deighton ; That is, he will do well not to 
put on a handsome dress, lest it should be spoilt. [If a man is to live in fear of an 
epigram he will not dare to put on even a handsome suit of clothes, — how much 
more, to marry a beautiful woman. — E d.] 

m, 1 1 2. purpose] See ‘almost,* V, i, 127. 

1 13. for 1 haue] The Qto supplies the omission. 

1 14. giddy] That is, inconstant, fickle. 

1 14. this] That is, what precedes. 

116. in that] For other examples where ‘in that* is equivalent to see 

Abbott, § 284. 



286 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v, sc. iv. 


thee a double dealer, which out of queftio thou wilt be, 120 
if my Coufin do not looke exceeding narrowly to thee. 

Bene, Come, come, we are friends, let’s haue a dance 
ere we are married, that we may lighten our own hearts, 
and our wiues heeles. 

Leon, Wee’ll haue dancing afterward. 125 

Bene, Firft,of my word, therfore play mufick.Pr/;/^:^, 
thou art fad, get thee a wife, get thee a wife, there is no 
ftaff more reuerend then one tipt with horn. Enter , Me f, 128 

120. thou wili] thou will Y 126. of my word^ d my word; 

121. do /tot] /to /lot Rowe ii, -t , Cap. Var. Ran. Mai. Steev. 

125. afterward] afterwards Ff, Var. Knt, Sta. Ktly. 

Rowe, H-, Var. Ran. Steev. Var. Knt, pl<^y] Pl^y* Theob. 

Sta. Ktly. 128. reuereud] reuerent 

120. double dealer] Staunton; To appreciate the equivoque, it must be under- 
stood that double dealer was a term jocosely applied to any one notoriously unfaithful 
in love or wedlock. 

120. thou wilt be] It needed but this last innuendo, drawn from the promptings 
of his own nature, to complete the unplea.sant character of Claudio. — Ed. 

121. do not] Two of my three copies of F^ here read clearly * no not the third 
copy has an imperfect d in place of the n in ‘ no,’ but I cannot be sure that the 
suspicious looking d is not the work of some officious reader, although I can find no 
traces whatever of his pen elsewhere. It would not be at all worth noting, were it 
not proper constantly to keep in mind the frequent variations in copies of the same 
edition, — a fact which restricts all collation to that of particular Folios. — Ed. 

126. of my word] See III, v, 23. 

127. 128. there is . . . horn] Walker (^Crit, iii, 35) : One would almost sus- 
pect that ‘ there is ’ was a corruption, and that Shakespeare intended a gnomic line, 
— ‘No staff more rev’ rend than one tipt with horn,’ 

128. tipt with horn] Steevens, Mai.one, and Reed all believed that the ref- 
erence here is to the ancient trial by wager of battel^ where the staves of the com- 
batants are ‘tipt with home’ or ‘homed at each ende.’ But Douce (i, 176) very 
properly criticised this reference on the score that such staves ‘ seem to have but 
small claim to be intitled reverend. On the contrary,’ he continues, * as the com- 
batants were of the meaner class of people, who were not allowed to make use of 
edged weapons, the higher ranks usually deciding the business by hired champions, 
it cannot well be maintained that much, if any, reverence belongs to such a staff. 
It is possible, therefore, that Shakespeare, whose allusions to archery are frequent, 
might refer to the bow-staff, which was usually tipped with a piece of horn at each 
end. . . . It is equally possible that the walking-sticks or staves used by elderly 
people might be intended, which were often headed or tipped with a cross piece of 
horn, or sometimes amber. They seemed to have been imitated from the crutched 
sticks, or potences, as they were called, used by the friars, and by them borrowed 
from the celebrated tau of Saint Anthony. Thus, in the Canterbury Tales, the 
Sompnour describes one of his friars as having a “ scrippe and tipped staff,” and he 
adds that “His felaw had a staf tipped with horn.” In these instances, the epF 



ACT V, SC. iv.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 

Meffen. My Lord, your brother lohn is tane in flight, 

And brought with armed men back to MeJJina. * 

Bene. Thinke not on him till to morrow, ile deuife 
thee braue punilhments for him: ftrike vp Yx^xs. Dance. 

FINIS. 

132. thee\ the F^, Rowe i. 132. [Exeunt Omnes. Rowe. 

Jlrike'\ Come strike Ktly. 

thet “reverend” is much more appropriate than in the others/ — Knight : Surely 
the reverend staff is the old man’ s walking-stick. — IIalliwelt. : The double mean- 
ing is obvious, — the Prince, when he marries^ as Benedick jocularly implies, will be 
tipped with horn, and no staff is more reverend than one so fashioned. The tipped 
staff was one of the usual accompaniments of old age. Thus in the Overbury Char- 
actersy 1626, old men are said to * take a pride in halting and going stiffely, and 
therefore their staves are carved and tipped.* The phrase ‘tipped with horn’ was 
applied to any staff headed or tipped with a cross or projecting piece of horn. ‘ I 
typpe a thyng with home, je encorne; they beare lytell roddes typped with home 
byfore the judges.* — Palsgrave, 1530* ... In a black-letter ballad on the Cries of 
Londofty the chimney-sweeper is de.scribed with a ‘ tmsse of poles tipped all with 
horns.* — Dyce {Gloss, s. v. staff) : Douce [in suggesting a reference to walking- 
sticks] was the first who made an approach towards the true interpretation of the 
passage. — W. A. Wright: Becket’s ‘mde pastoral staif of pearwood^ with its 
crook of black horn,’ was one of the relics shown 19 pilgrims at Canterbury (Stan- 
ley, Historical Memorials of Canterbury y 4th eck, p. 225). — Rushton {Sh, as an 
Archery p. 57) : I think Shakespeare here uses a bowyer’s phrase. When the horns 
are fitted to the ends of the bow-stave they are said to be tipped. 1 once thought 
that Shakespeare in this passage ihay refer to Cupid’s bow stave. [Halliwell’s 
quotations prove that mefcly a horn tip is no sufficient designation of a staff. Our 
choice must be, therefore, determined by the amount of reverence with which a 
horn-tipped staff may be regarded, and, unquestionably, it seems to me, only a staff 
which accompanies old age can be, in general, regarded with reverence. It seems 
somewhat premature to recommend such a staff to a young man in the prime of life ; 
but Benedick’s thoughts fly forward, in his present blissful mood, through many, 
many years of happy married life, which he is sure to have. — Eh.] 

132. Dance] This is the only play of Shakespeare thus ending with a ‘ Dance,* 
and I cannot but regret that the rule is here broken. Although the atmosphere 
now is all gaiety and happiness, we cannot forget how heavily charged it was, only 
a few hours before, with tragedy ; moreover, when we recall the style of Elizabethan 
galliards, we can hardly contemplate with delight the picture of Benedick’s lofty 
capers or of Beatrice’s inevitably red face. In Bandello’s Novel from which Shake- 
speare is supposed to have obtained the present plot, unusual festivities mark the 
dose. May not these have supplied the motive of this Dance? — Ed. 

133. Finis.] Steevens : In the conduct of the fable, there is an imperfection similar 
to that which Dr Johnson has pointed out in The Merry Wives : — the second contriv- 
ance is less ingenious than the first ; — or, to speak more plainly, the same incident 
is become stale by repetition. I wissh some other method had been found to entrap 
Beatrice than the very one which before had been successfully practised on Bene- 
dick. [Contraiy to his custom, Dr Johnson here, at the close of the play, gives us^ 


287 

130 

133 



288 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v, sc. iv. 


[133. Finis.] 

no didactic remarks on its general scope. I cannot but think that Steevens endeav-' 
cured to supply the omission in a style thoroughly Johnsonian, and chuckled to 
himself over his success. The very first words : * In the conduct of the fable/ are 
Johnsonese to the letter. — E d.] — Schlegel (ii, 166) ; Some one, without any 
great share of penetration, objected to the making twice use of th^J same artifice in 
entrapping them ; — the drollery, however, lies in the very symmetry of the decep- 
tion. — Anon. [Blackwood^ Ai^rW^ 1833, p. 544) : A foolish wish [of Steevens.] 
The success of the same contrivance with both parties is infinitely amusing, and as 
natural as can be ; their characters are in much similar, their real sentiments towards 
each other equally so, and their affected scorn of wedlock ; and nothing could have 
satisfied the schemers short of seeing the one after the other fall into the same trap. 
The second contrivance is not less ingenious than the first ; and as for the same 
incident becoming stale by repetition, Mr Steevens might as well have said that a 
kiss becomes stale by repetition. — Simpson (ii, 393) : The identity of effect [in 
Faire Eni\ produced first upon Mounteney, and then upon Valingford, by the 
feigned blindness and deafness of Em, in Scene vii, which raises in each, independ- 
ently of the other, the same suspicions, and the same determination, has its exact 
counterpart in Much Ado, where Benedick and Beatrice are imposed on by the same 
device. ... It is interesting to observe how the repetition of similar situations was 
one of Shakespeare’s principles of art, to be used, not always, but in proper place 
and time. The same remark applies to the two enamoured men overhearing each 
^ hers soliloquies, in Scene iv, and thereby finding each other out, — an incident 
similar to that in Lovds Lab. Lost, IV, iii. (The same thing occurs in Richard 
the Third.') 

Mrs Jameson (i, 141) : On the whole, we dismi.ss Benedick and Beatrice to their 
matrimonial bonds, rather with a sense of amusement, than a feeling of congratula- 
tion or sympathy ; rather with an acknowledgement that they are well matched, and 
worthy of each other, than with any well-founded expectation of their dome.stic tran- 
quillity. If, as Benedick asserts, they are both ‘ too wise to woo peaceably,’ it may 
be added, that both are too wise, too witty, and too wilful, to live peaceably together. 
We have some misgivings about Beatrice, — some apprehensions, that poor Benedick 
will not escape the * predestinate scratched face,’ which he had foretold to him who 
should win and wear this quick-witted and pleasant-spirited lady ; yet when we 
recollect that to the wit and imperious temper of Beatrice is united a magnanimity 
of spirit which would naturally place her far above all selfishness, and all paltry 
struggles for power, — when we perceive in the midst of her sarcastic levity and volu- 
bility of tongue, so much of generous affection, and such a high sense of female 
virtue and honour, we are inclined to hope for the best. We think it possible that 
though the gentleman may now and then swear, and the lady scold, the native good- 
humour of the one, the really fine understanding of the other, and the value they so 
evidently attach to each other’s esteem, will ensure them a tolerable portion of 
domestic felicity, — ^and in this hope, we leave them. — Anon. {^Blackwood, April, 
1833, p. 545) : There is not the slightest doubt that Beatrice will make one of the 
best wives in the world. Never will she sit with her arms folded, and her feet on 
the fender, half asleep before the fire, nodding her head like a tnawsey, and ever and 
anon threatening to break out into a snore. Never will Beatrice sit broad awake, 
her elbow resting on a table misnamed of * work,’ her vacant eyes fixed, heaven 




ACT V, SC. iv.] MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING 


289 


[How dost thou Benedicke the married man ?] 

knows not why, on yours, and her mouth that once you thought small, opening into 
a yawn, first with a compressed whine, like that of a puppy-dog shut up accidentally 
in a closet, and afraid fairly to bark, lest on being let out he be whipped to death, 
and finally into a dismal and intenninable sound, like ‘The wolf’s long howl from 
Oonalaska’s shore.’ Never will Beatrice, after moping for days or weeks in the 
hum-drums or the sulks, fall out of them into ‘ outrageous spirits,’ winch usually 
follow in that order, just as the whooping-cough crows from the fag-end of the 
measles. From all such domestic diseases, from the'lftoundness of her constitution, 
we prophesy, — nay, promise Benedick immunity all his life long. She has had her 
swing, — she has sown all her wild words, — and has none left even for a curtain-lec- 
ture. Nay, — her voice will often be ‘ gentle and low, an excellent thing in woman,* 
as on flaky feet she comes steathily behind her husband reading in his easy-chair, 
(for he goes no more to the wars,) and lays on his shoulder lier hand of light, or, 
as she drops a kiss on his cheek, insinuates into his ear a wicked whisper. Then 
what a mother ! She will whip the little Spartans nowhere but upstairs in the Attic 
nursery, — and on no account or excuse whatever will permit a single squall. Bene- 
dick shall not know that there is such a thing in the house as a child, yet there are 
half-a-dozen, and the two last were twins. For nature in wedlock goes by contraries. 
Your sly, your silent, inexpressive She, as sure as a gun, turns into a termagant » 
and Ranting Moll, the madcap, grows ‘ still and patient as the brooding dove ere yet 
her golden couplets are disclosed.’ So will it be with Beatrice. . . . So, Beatrice, 
(good-by. Benedick,) heaven bless thee, — farewell. — Thomas Campbell (p. xlvi) : 
Mrs Jameson concludes with hoping that Beatrice will live happy with Benedick ; 
but I have no such hope ; and my final anticipation in reading the play is the cer- 
tainty that Beatrice will provoke her Benedick to give her much and just conjugal 
castigation. She is an odious woman. I once knew such a pair ; the lady was a 
perfect Beatrice ; she railed hypocritically at wedlock before marriage, and with bitter 
sincerity after it. She and her Benedick now live apart, but with entire reciprocity 
of sentiments, each devoutly wishing that the other may soon pass into a better 
world. — Fletcher (p. 279) : Shakespeare knew both mankind and womankind too 
well, not to know how much more precious, to a man of lively intelligence, is the 
tenderness of a woman who possesses vivacious intellect besides, than that of a 
woman all tenderness. To such a pair, the ‘wooing peaceably,’ in the sense in 
which Benedick really uses the word, — that is, sentimentally, in the languishing 
sense, — would have been mere wearisome insipidity. And for them to live together, 
in the like sense, ‘peaceably’ after marriage would assuredly be more wearisome 
still. Possessing each that warm, sound, and generous heart which we have seen 
them so freely exhibit and exchange, this .same sportive encounter of their wits which 
must ever continue between them, is precisely the thing that will keep them in good 
humour with each other. — C. Cowden-Ci.ARKE (p. 316) : The union of two such 
beings as Beatrice and Benedick, although an amiably fraudulent one, in which there 
exists no more than a mutual esteem, offers an infinitely happier prospect to the 
woman, than the cold-blooded, hard conduct of Claudio can ever promise to lier 
whom he so cruelly punished. — Weiss (p. 299) [‘Taming my wild heart to thy 
loving hand*] ; So the keen swooping falcon settles at last composedly upon his 
wrist ; love draws a hood over the bright, fearless eye, and claps the jesses upon her 
spirits. But at the very moment of capture, her strong wings fillip him : ‘ I yield 
19 




290 


MUCH ADOE ABOUT NOTHING [act v, SC- iv. 


[How dost thou Benedicke the married man?] 

upon great persuasion ; and, partly, to save your life, for I was told you were in a 
consumption.’ That tone has in it the promise of lively times for Benedick. He 
will never be able to train the delight of liberty out of this falcon, who will slip her 
jesses still, and circle overhead, but not forget to return. He told her once that, as 
long as she had no mind to love, * some gentleman or other shall scape a predistinate 
scratched face.’ But, though love has pared her talons. Benedick will not find 
matrimony to be dull. — Lady Martin (p. 325) ; To my thinking. Hero’s prospect 
of lasting happiness with the cnedulous and vacillating Claudio is somewhat doubtful. 
1 have no misgivings about the future happiness of Benedick and Beatrice, even 
although they learn how they have been misled into thinking that each was dying for 
the other, and up to the moment of going to the altar keep up their witty struggles 
to turn the tables on each other. ... In this last encounter, Beatrice, as usual, has 
the best of it, but Benedick is too happy to care for such defeat. He knows that he 
has won her licart, and that it is a heart of gold. He can therefore well afford to 
smile at the ej)igrams of ‘ a college of wit-crackers,’ and the quotation against him- 
self of his former smart sayings about lovers and married men. His home, I doubt 
not, will be a happy one, — all the happier because Beatrice and he have each a 
strong individuality, with fine spirits and busy brains, which will keep life from 
.stagnating. They will always be finding out something new and interesting in each 
other’s character. As for Beatrice, at least, one feels sure that Benedick will have a 
great deal to discover and to admire in her as he grows to know her better. She 
will prove the fitness of her name as Beatrice (the giver of happiness), and he will 
be glad to confess himself blest indeed (Benedictus), in having won her. 




APPENDIX 




APPENDIX 


THE TEXT 

Although the Text has been discussed in the Preface to the present play, it may 
interest students to have before them the remarks of sundry editors which here 
follow : — 

Capell (p. 1 1 9): The quarto’s fai^fulness to its copy [that is, the author’s 
manuscript] appears in [the insertion of the names, Innogen, Cowley, Kemp, and 
John Wilson] ; and the copy’s carefulness, generally, is visible in the fewness of its 
corrections ; the greatest, and greatest number of which, are matters related [to the 
names just given]. What the player editors say in their preface, of the mind and 
hand of this Poet’s going together, and of his making no blots, if we can give it 
credit of any play, it must be of this ; its fluency is prodigious ; and the hasty cur- 
rent of it has (possibly) betray’d its writer at times into expressions we may con- 
demn, such as ‘sort’ in I, i, 12. 

Collier : The Quarto . . is a well-printed work for the time, and the type is 
unusually good. . . . The text of the 4to is to be preferred in nearly all instances 
of variation. 

R. G. White (ed. i, p. 224) : The text of the Folio is printed with comparatively 
few and trifling errors, most of which are easy of correction, either by conjecture or 
by the aid of the quarto, which is also remarkably well printed for a dramatic publi- 
cation of the period. Each copy contains a few words and brief sentences omitted 
from the other. It is plain from the repetition of certain somewhat striking errors 
of the press, that the folio was printed from a copy of the quarto edition ; and this 
fact has caused most editors to adhere to the text of the latter, as ‘ the more ancient 
‘authority.’ As to its being the earlier printed edition, this fact has, evidently, no 
weight in deciding between the authority of an edition which is authenticated and 
that of one which is not ; and not only is this truth applicable in the present instance, 
but we know that the copy of the quarto from which the authenticated folio was 
printed had been used in Shakespeare’s theatre as the prompter’s book, and there 
subjected to several alterations and corrections ; and thus its essential differences 
from the quarto have a special and peculiar demand upon our deference. The 
important errors (to a reader) of the quarto which the folio leaves uncorrected are 
of such a nature that they might remain without inconvenience upon a prompter’s 
book. ... As to preference between the readings of the two editions, that is mere 
matter of opinion ; and fortunately the cases in which such preference may be exer- 
cised, — not by any means admitting that it should be, — are of comparatively little 
moment. . . . The readings of the folio, in all important variations, seem to me 
much preferable to those of the quarto . . . because the folio was printed, — and 
carefully printed for the day, even as to punctuation, contracted syllables, and capi- 
tal letters, — from a copy which had evidently had the benefit of at least a partial 

s93 



294 APPENDIX 

correction, and because it has the authority of Heminge and Condell, Shakespeare’s 
fellow-actors. 

Dyce : Properly speaking, there is only one old text of this play, — that of the 
quarto ; from which, beyond all doubt, that of the folio was printed (with a few 
omissions, and a few slight changes, mostly for the worse). 

Halliwell-Phillipps ( Outlines^ p. 261 ) : That [this play] was reprinted from 
[the quarto] in the folio of 1623, clearly appears from the occurrence of peculiar- 
ities in each that could not possibly have appeared accidentally in both places ; 
but the folio has a singular reading, not found in the quarto, in which Jack Wilson 
is mentioned, which leads to the supposition that the text of the former was taken 
from a play-house copy of the edition of 1600, an exemplar of it, with a few manu- 
script directions and notes, having probably taken the place of the author’s holo- 
graph drama. It seems impossible, on any other grounds, to account for all the 
curious differences, as well as for the important coincidences, which are to be traced 
between the two copies. , 

P. A. Daniel [Jnfrod. to Praetorius’s Facs. p. v) : It may be stated briefly and 
with confidence that in 1623 the only authority Messrs Heminge and Condell had 
for their Folio edition was a copy of the quarto containing a few MS alterations 
and corrections made probably years before, and not specially for this purpose. By 
far the greater number of the variations of the Fo. must, however, be attributed to 
carelessness on the part of the printer, not to MS alterations made by the corrector 
of the Qo. ; indeed the fewness and small importance of those which can be attrib- 
uted to deliberate alteration and correction forbid the notion that any independent 
MS of the Play could have been consulted for the purpose, or that any sustained 
effort was made to supply the deficiencies of the Qo. and correct its errors. 


DATE OF COMPOSITION 

The Dates assigned by Editors and Commentators are here set forth, in brief. 
The subject has been discussed in the Preface to the present volume : — 

Malone believes that this play ‘ was written early in the year 1600 because of 
its entry in the Stationer^ Registers, and because it is not mentioned by Meres. 

Chalmer’s date : the autumn of 1599, with a possible extension into 1600, has 
been adopted, but not always on Chalmers’s grounds, by the following : — 

Drake, Collier, Dyce, R. G. White, Bodenstedt, Rolfe, Stokes, Deigh- 
TON, and Corson. 

Knight and Halliwell content themselves with the date of the Qto. Ward 
also (i, 402) finds ‘ no evidence to cause its composition to be much ante-dated to its 
< publication ’ in 1600. 

Collier (ed. i, Introd* p. 184) remarks that as it is not included in Meres’ s list 
in 1598, nor any quotation from it to be found in England's Parnassus in 1600, ‘ it 
* might be that it was written subsequent to the appearance of one work and prior to 
‘the publication of the other.’ 

Staunton places the date * not earlier than 1598.’ 

Brae and Fleay, believing this play to be the lost Loue labours wonne of Meres, 
set the date at 1597-8. 

Delius between 1598 and 1600. 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT 29S 

W. A. Wright says that it ‘was probably written in 1599 or i6oo, not long 
‘before the Qto was published.* 

A. Schmidt, in his edition and revision of Tieck’s translation, nowhere expresses 
a decided opinion as to the exact date, but finds a difficulty in harmonising the treat- 
ment of the characters with that ot other plays which are attributed to the latter half 
of 1599. ‘We do not find,’ he says (In/roL p. 131), ‘reproduced to the full, in 
‘ Benedick and Beatrice that graceful wit, nor in Don Pedro and Claudio that delicacy 
‘ in dealing with ethical questions which characterises so conspicuously the plays of 
‘ that period, such as Henry /F, Julius Casar, The Merchant of Venice ^ Twelfth 
‘ Nighty etc. liverywhere else, Shakespeare has refined and ennobled his borrowed 
‘ material ; in the present play we have the solitary instance where it is questionable 
‘ if he have not fallen into the opposite.’ 

In Professor Ingram’s 'Fable, wherein the several Plays are set down according to 
their Number of Light and Weak Endings, Much Ado about Nothing, with one Light 
and one Weak Ending, is found between Henry V, and As You Like It. 

In Dr Furnivall’s Order of Shakspere' s Plays, Much Ado about Nothing is 
placed in ‘The Life-Plea Group’ of the ‘Second Period,’ in the sub-division of 
‘The 3 Sunny- or Sweet-Time Comedies Muck Ado (1599-1600) ; As You Like It 
‘ (1600) : 'Twelfth Night (1601).’ 

In Dr Dowden’s Order, the three plays just named form, iif ‘Later Comedy,’ a 
group of ‘Musical Sadness.’ 


SOURCE OF THE PLOT 

Gerard Langbaine in his Account of the English Dramatick Poets (Oxford, 
1691, p. 460) says : ‘The contrivance of Borachio in behalf of John the Bastard to 
‘ make Claudio jealous of Hero, by the assistance of her Waiting-Woman Margaret, 
‘is borrowed from Ariosto's Orlando Ftirioso : see Book the fifth in the Story of 
‘ Lurcanio, and Geneuza [.sic] ; the like Story is in Spencer^ s Fairy Queen, Book 2. 
‘ Canto 4.’ 

Ariosto’s Orlando was translated in 1591 by SiR John Hartngton, who, in his 
remarks at the end of the Fifth Book, says that the story of Genevra ‘ hath beene 
‘written in English verse some few yeares past (learnedly and with good grace) 
‘though in verse of another kind, by M. George TurberuiU This version by Tur- 
bervil is not extant. 

Fully to understand Ariosto’s story it is necessary to know that Rinaldo, having been 
sent by Charlemagne to obtain aid from the King of England, is driven by a storm to 
Berwick on the coast of Scotland. Then, in quest of adventure, he plunges into the 
Caledonian forest where he finds some monks who tell him that he can find no nobler 
adventure than to fight for Ginevra, the daughter of the Scottish King, whp had been 
accused of a lawless passion, and would be put to death unless within a month a 
champion be found to defend her innocence, in which all the people believed. The 
next morning, Rinaldo mounted Bayard, and in hot haste set forth, with a guide, for 
Saint Andrew’s town where Ginevra’ s month of waiting for a champion had but a 
day or two more to run. On his way, in taking a short cut through the forest, he 
heard a piteous cry and beheld a damsell in the clutch of two murderers, who at the 



APPENDIX 


296 

sight of Rinaldo fled. Time was too precious to permit Rinaldo to wait to hear the 
poor maid’ s story, so, making his guide take her up behind him, he bade the dam- 
sell tell her story as they rode along. This story and the vindication of Ginevra by 
Rinaldo make up the Fifth Book, which opens with a denunciation by Ariosto of all 
men who would ill-treat a woman, concluding with the vigorous words : — 

* No man, nor made of flesh and blood I deeme him, 

But sure some hound of hell 1 do esteeme him.’ 

The damsel then begins her story : — * 


THE FIFT BOOKE OF ORLANDO FVRIOSO 

7 

For entring first into my tender spring, 

Of youthfull yeares, unto the court I came. 

And served there the daughter of our King, 

And kept a place of honour with good fame, 

Till love (alas that love such care should bring) 
Envide my state, and sought to do me shame. 
Love made the Duke of Aldan seem to me. 

The fairest wight that erst mine eye did see. 

8 

And (for I thought he lov’d me all above) 

I bent myself to hold and love him best, 

But now I find that hard it is to prove. 

By sight or speech what bides in secret brest. 
While I (poore I) did thus beleeve and love. 

He gets my body, bed and all the rest. 

Nor thinking this might breed my mistres wrong 
Ev’n in her chamber this I practis’d long. 

9 

Where all the things of greatest value lay. 

And where Geneura sleepes herself sometime. 
There at a window we did finde a way. 

In secret sort to cover this our crime : 

Here when my love and I were bent to play, 

I taught him by a scale of cord to clime. 

And at the window I my selfe would stand, 

And let the ladder downe into his hand. 


*I here give the text of the third edition of Harington’s Translation printed in 
1634; it contains Harington’s latest revision. 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT-^ORLANDO FVRIOSO 

10 

So oft we meete together at this sport, 

As faire Geneuras absence gives us leave, 

Who us’ d to other chambers to resort 
In summer time, and this for heat to leave : 

And this we carried in so secret sort. 

As none there was our doings did perceave. 

For why, this window standeth out of sight. 

Where none do come by day nor yet by night. 

11 

Twixt us this use continu’d many dayes, 

Yea many months we us’d this privie traine 
Love set my heart on fire so many wayes. 

That still my liking lasted to my paine, 

I might have found by certaine strange delayes. 

That he but little lov’d and much did faine, 

For all his sleights were not so closely covered. 

But that they might full easly be discovered. 

12 

At last my Duke did seeme enflamed sore. 

On faire Geneura : neither can I tell. 

If now this love began or was before. 

That I to court did come with her to dwell. 

But looke if 1 were subject to his love, 

And looke if he my love requited well. 

He askt my aid herein no whit ashamed. 

To tell me how of her he was enflamed. 

13 

Not all of love, but partly of ambition, 

He beares in hand his minde is onely bent. 

Because of her great state and hie condition. 

To have her for his wife is his intent : 

He nothing doubteth of the Kings permission, 

Had he obtain’d Geneuras free assent. 

Ne was it hard for him to take in hand, 

That was the second person in the land. 

14 

He sware to me, if I would be so kind 
His hie attempt to further and assist. 

That at his hands I should great favour finde, 

And of the King procure me what me list : 

How he would ever keepe it in his mind, 

And in his former love to me persist, 

And notwithstanding wife and all the rest, 

I should be sure that he would love me best 


297 



298 


APPENDIX 


»S 

I straight consented to his fond request, 

As readie his commandment to obay, 

And thinking still my time emploied best, 

When I had pleas’d his fancy any way : 

And when I found a time then was I prest, 

To talke of him, and good of him to say. 

I used all my art, my wit, and paine, 

Geneuras love and liking to obtaine. 

16 

God knoweth how glad I was to worke his will, 

I low diligent I follow’d his direction, 

I spar’d no time, no travell nor no skill, 

To this my Duke to kindle her affection : 

But alwayes this attempt succeeded ill. 

Love had her heart already in subjection, 

A comely Knight did fair Gcneura please. 

Come to this countrie from beyond the seas. 

17 

From Italy for service (as I hear) 

Vnto this court he and his brother came. 

In tourneys and in tills he had no peere. 

All Brittaine soone was filled with his fame. 

Our King did love him well and hold him deere. 
And did by princely gifts confirme the same. 

Faire castels, townes, and lordships him he gave. 
And made him great, such power great princes have. 

0 

18 

Our Soveraigne much, his daughter likt him more, 

And Ariodani this worthy Knight is named. 

So brave in deeds of armes himselfe he bore. 

No Ladie of his love need be ashamed : 

The hill of Sicil bumeth not so sore, 

Nor is the mount Vesuvio so inflamed. 

As Ariodantes heart was set on fire, 

Geneuras beautie kindling his desire. 

19 

His certaine love by signes most certaine found, 

Cause that my sute unwillingly was hard, 

She well perceiv’d his love sincere and sound, 
Enclining to his sute with great regard. 

In vaine I seeke my Dukes love to expound. 

The more I seeke to make the more I mard. 

For while with words I seek to praise and grace him 
No lesse with workes she striveth to deface him. 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT^ORLANDO FVRIOSO 


299 


20 

Thus being of repulst (so ill sped I,) 

To my too much beloved Duke 1 went, 

And told him how her heart was fixt alreadie, 

How on the stranger all her mind was bent. 

And praid him now sith there was no remedie 
That to surcease his sute he would consent, 

For Ariodant so lov’d the princely maid. 

That by no meancs his flames could be alaid. 

21 

When Polynesso (so the Duke we call) 

This tale unpleasant oftentime had hard. 

And of himselfe had found his hopes were small. 
When with my words her deeds he had compar’d, 
G reev’d with repulse, and vexed therewithal!. 

To see this stranger thus to be prefar’d. 

The love that late his heart so sore had burned. 
Was cooled all, and into hatred turned. 

22 

Intending by .some vile and subtill traine. 

To part Gcnettra from her faithfull lover. 

And plant so great mislike betweenc them twaine. 
Yet with so cunning shew the same to cover. 

That her good name he will so foule distaine. 

Alive nor dead she never shall recover. 

But lest he might in this attempt be thwarted 
To none at all his secret he imparted. 

23 

Now thus resolv’d {Dalinda faire) quoth he, 

(I so am cald) you know though trees be topt. 
And shrowded low, yet sprout yong shoots we see, 
And issue from that head so lately lopt ; 

So in my love it fareth now with me. 

Though by repulse cut short and shrewdly cropt. 
The pared tops such buds of love do render. 

That still I prove new passions there engender. 

24 

Ne do I deeme so deare the great delight 
As I disdaine I should be so reject. 

And lest this griefe should overcome me quight. 
Because I faile to bring it to effect. 

To please my fond conceit this very night, 

I pray thee deare to do as I direct : 

When faire Geneura to her bed is gone. 

Take thou the clothes she ware and put them on. 



300 


APPENDIX 


25 

As she is wont her golden haire to dresse, 

In stately sort to wind it on her wire. 

So you her poyson [person] lively to expresse, 

May dresse your owne and weare her head attire. 
Her gorgets and her jewels rich no lesse, 

You may put on t* accomplish my desire. 

And when unto the window I ascend, 

I will my comming there you do attend. 

26 

Thus I may passe my fancies foolish lit. 

And thus (quoth he) my selfe 1 would deceive. 
And that I had no reason nor no wit, 

His shamcfull drift (though open) to perceive : 

Did weare my mistresse robes that serv’ d me fit. 
And stood at window, there him to rccive. 

And of the fraud I was no whit aware. 

Till that fell out that caused all my care. 

27 

Of late twixt him and Ariodant had past. 

About Geneura faire these w^ords or such, 

(For why there was good friendship in times past 
Betweene them tw'o, till love their hearts did tuch) 
The Duke such kind of speeches out did cast. 

He said to Ariodant^ he marvel’ d much. 

That seeing he did alwaies well regard him, 

He should againe so thanklessly reward him, 

28 

I know you see (for needs it must be seene) 

The good consent and matrimoniall love. 

That long betweene Geneur^ and me hath bcene. 
For whom I meane ere long the King to move. 
Why should you fondly thrust your selfe betweene ? 
Why should you rove your reach so farre above ? 
For if my case were yours I would forbeare. 

Or if I knew that you so loved were. 

29 

And I much more (the other straight replies) 

Do marvell you sir Duke are so unkind, 

That know our love, and see it with your eyes, 
(Except that wilfulnesse have made you blind) 

That no man can more sured knots devise, 

Then her to me, and me to her do bind. 

Into this sute so rashly are intruded, 

Still finding from all hope you are excluded. 



SOURCE OE THE PLOT— ORLANDO EVRIOSO 


301 


30 

Why beare you not to me the like respect. 

As my good will requireth at your hand ? 

Since that our love is growne to this effect. 

We meane to knit our selves in weddings band ; 

Which to fulfill ere long I do expect, 

For know 1 am (though not in rents or land) 

Yet in my Princes grace no whit inferiour. 

And in his daughters, greatly your superiour. 

3 * 

Well (said the Duke) errors are hardly moved. 

That love doth breed in unadvised brest. 

Each thinkes himselfe to be the best beloved. 

And yet but one of us is loved best. 

Wherefore to have the matter plainly proved. 

Which should proceed in love ; and which should rest, 
Let us agree that victor he remaine, 

That of her liking sheweth signes most plaine. 

3 ^ 

I will be bound to you by solemne oth, 

Your secrets all and counsell to conceal e. 

So you likewise will plight to me your troth. 

The thing 1 shew you never to reveale. 

To trie the matter thus they greed both. 

And from this doome hereafter not repeale : 

But on the Bible first they were deposed. 

That this their speech should never be disclosed. 

33 

And first the stranger doth his state reveale, 

And tell the truth in hope to end the strife. 

How she had proraist him in wo and weale. 

To live with him, and love him all her life : 

And how with writing with her hand and seale. 

She had confirmed she would be his wife. 

Except she were forbidden by her father. 

For then to live unmarride she had rather. 

34 

And furthermore he nothing doubts (he said) 

Of his good service so plaine proofe to show. 

As that the King shall nothing be afraid. 

On such a Knight his daughter to bestow : 

And how in this he needeth little aid. 

As finding still his favour greater grow. 

He doubts not he will grant his liking after 
That he shall know it pleaseth so his daughter. 



302 


APPENDIX 


35 

And thus you see so sound stands mine estate, 

That I my selfe in thought can wish no more. 

Who seekes her now is sure to come too late. 

For that he seekes is granted me before ; 

Now onely rests in marriage holy state. 

To knit the knot that must dure evermore. 

And for her praise, I need not to declare it. 

As knowing none with whom I may compare it. 

36 

Thus Ariodant a tale most true declared. 

And what reward he hoped for his paine, 

But my false Duke that had him fouly snared. 

And found by my great folly such a traine. 

Doth swear all this might no way be compared 
With his, no though himselfe did judge remaine, 

For I (quoth he) can shew sigiies so expresse. 

As you yourself inferiour shall confesse. 

37 

Alas (quoth he) I see you do not know 

How cunningly these women can dissemble, 

They least do love where they make greatest show. 

And not to be the thing they most resemble. 

But other favours I receive I trow, 

Whenas we two do secretly assemble 

As I will tell you (though I should conceale it) 

Because you promise never to reveal e it. 

38 

The truth is this, that I full oft have scene 

Her ivory corpes, and bene with her all night. 

And naked laine her naked armes betweene. 

And full enjoyde the fruites of loves delight : 

Now judge who hath in greatest favour beene. 

To which of us she doth pertaine in right, 

And then give place, and yeeld to me mine owne, 

Sith by just proofes 1 now have made it known. 

39 

lust proofes? (quoth Ariodanf) nay shamefull lies. 

Nor will I credit give to any word : 

Is this the finest tale you can devise ? 

What, hop'd you that with this I could be dord? [dared] 
No, no, but sith a slander foule doth rise 
By thee to her, maintaine it with thy sword, 

I call thee lying traitor to thy face. 

And meane to prove it in this present place. 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT— ORLANDO FVRIOSO 303 


40 

Tush (quoth the Duke) -it were a foolish part. 

For you to fight with me that am your friend, 

Sith plaine to shew without deceit or art. 

As much as I have said I do intend. 

These works did gripe jxjore A riodantes hart, 

Downe all his lirnbes a shivering doth descend. 

And still he stood with eyes cast downe on ground. 
Like one would fall into a deadly sound. [swoonQ 

41 

With wofull mind, with pale and chearlesse face. 

With trembling voice that came from bitter thought 
He said he much desired to see this place. 

Where such strange feats and miracles were wrought. 
Hath faire Genetira granted you this grace, 

That I (quoth he) so oft in vaine have sought? 

Now sure except I see it in my view, 

I never will beleeve it can be trew. 

42 

The Duke did say he would with all his hart 

Both shew him where and how the thing was done. 
And straight from him to me he doth depart, 

Whom to his purpose wholly he had wonne : 

With both of us he playth so well his part. 

That both of us thereby were quite undone. 

First he tels him that he would have him placed 
Among some houses falne and quite defaced. 

43 

Some ruinM houses stood oppos’d direct 
Against the window where he doth ascend. 

But Ariodant discreetly doth suspect 

That this false Duke some mischicfe did intend, 

And thought that all did tend to this effect. 

By trechery to bring him to his end. 

That sure he had devised this pretence, 

With mind to kill him ere he parted thence. 

44 

Thus though to see this sight he thought it long. 

Yet tooke he care all mischiefe to prevent. 

And if perhap they offer force or wrong. 

By force the same for to resist he ment. 

He had a brother valiant and strong, 

Lurcanio cal* d, and straight for him he sent. 

Not doubting but alone with his assistance 
Against twice twentie men to make resistance. 



304 


APPENDIX 


45 

He bids his brother take his sword in hand^ 

And go into a place that he would guide. 

And in a corner closely there to stand 
Aloofe from tother threescore paces wide. 

The cause he would not let him understand. 

But prayes him there in secret sort to bide, 

Vntill such time he hapt to heare him call. 

Else (if he lovM him) not to stirre at all. 

46 

His brother would not his request denie, 

And so went Ariodant into his place. 

And undiscovered closely there did lie. 

Till having looked there a little space. 

The craftie Duke to come he might descrie. 

That meant the chast Gt'ncu7'a to deface. 

Who having made to me his wonted signes, 

I let him down the ladder made of lines. 

47 

The gown I ware was white, and richly set 

With aglets, pearle, and lace of gold well garnished. 

My stately tresses covered with a net 

Of beaten gold most pure and brightly varnished. 

Not thus content, the vaile aloft I set. 

Which onely Princes weare ; thus stately harnished. 
And under Cupids banner bent to fight 
All unawares I stood in all their sight. 

48 

For why JLurcanio either taking care, 

I^est Aidodant should in some danger go, 

Or that he sought (as all desirous are) 

The counsels of his dearest friend to know,' 

Close out of sight by secret steps and ware. 

Hard at his heeles his brother follow’d so. 

Till he was nearer come by fiftie paces 
And there againe himselfe he newly places. 

49 

But I that thought no ill, securely came 
Vnto the open window as I said. 

For once or twice before I did the same, 

And had no hurt, which made me lesse afraid : 

I cannot boast (except I boast of shame) 

When in her robes I had my selfe arraid, 

Me thought before I was not much unlike her. 

But certaine now I seemed very like her. 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT-^ORLANDO FVRIOSO 


305 


50 

But Ariodant that stood so farre aloofe, 

Was more deceiv’d by distance of the place. 

And straight beleev’d against his owne behoofe, 

Seeing her clothes that he had scene her face. 

Now let those judge that partly know by proofe, 

The wofull plight of Ariodantes case, 

When Polynesso came my faithlesse frend. 

In both their sights the ladder to ascend. 

5 * 

I that his comming willingly did wait, 

And he once come thought nothing went amisse, 

Erabrac’ d him kindly at the first receit, 

Ilis lips, his cheeks, and all his face did kisse, 

And he the more to colour his deceit, 

Did use me kinder then he had ere this. 

This sight much care to Ariodanfe brought. 

Thinking Gencura with the Duke was nought. 

52 

The griefe and sorrow sinketh so profound 
Into his heart, he straight resolves to die, 

He puts the pummcll of his sword on ground, 

And ineanes hiinselfe upon the point to lie : 

Which when Lttreanio saw and plainly found, 

That all this while was closely standing by, 

And Polynessos comming did discerne, 

Though who it was he never yet could leame. 

Lurcanio withheld Ariodante from suicide ; but the wound was cureless, and the 
next day the heart-broken lover quietly withdrew from the court, and went no one 
knew whither. On the eighth day after his disappearance, word was brought to 
Genevra by a {Peasant that he had drowned himself, and had charged the peasant 
to take to Genevra the message : 

‘ Had he been blind, he had full happie beene, 

His death should shew that he too much had scene.* 

Of course, Genevra’ s despair was abysmal. Even * By I>ords and Ladies many 
‘teares were spilled.’ laircanio, brooding over his brother’s cruel end, at last 
before the King and Court openly accused Genevra of causing his brother’s death by 
her immodesty, and declared that he 

‘ had scene Geneura stand. 

And at a window as they had devised, 

Let downe a ladder to her lovers hand. 

But in such sort he had himselfe disguised, 

That who it was he could not understand, 

And for due proofe of this his accusation, 

He bids the combat straight by proclamation.* 


20 



APPENDIX 


306 

The King was sore grieved, but there was no help for it. Genevra must die, such 
was the Scottish law, unless within a month a champion could be found who could 
prove her innocence by slaying her accuser. 

70 

The King that meanes to make a certaine triall, 

If faire Genmra guilty be or no, 

(For still she stiffly stood in the deniall, 

Of this that wrought her undeserved wo) 

Examines all her maids, but they reply all. 

That of the matter nothing they did know. 

Which made me seek for to prevent the danger. 

The Duke and I might have about the stranger, 

71 

And thus for him more then my self afraid, 

(So faithfull love to this false Duke I bare) 

I gave him notice of these things, and said, 

That he had need for both of us beware. 

He prais’d my constant love, and farther praid. 

That I would credit him, and take no care. 

He points two men (but both to me unknowne) 

To bring me to a castle of his owne. 

« « « 

73 

* This wicked Duke ungratefull and perjured, 

Beginncth now of me to have mistrust. 

His guilty conscience could not be assured. 

How to conceale his wicked acts unjust. 

Except my death (though causelesse) be procured. 

So hard his heart, so lawlesse was his lust. 

He said he would me to his castle send, ^ 

But that same castle should have beene mine end. 

74 

‘ He wild my guides when they were past that hill, 

And to the thicket a little way descended. 

That there (to quite my love) they should me kill. 

Which as you saw, they to have done intended. 

Had not your happy comming stopt their will. 

That (God and you be thankt) I was defended. 

This tale Dalinda to Renaldo told. 

And all the while their journey on they hold.* 

The rest of the story, how Rinaldo arrived at Saint Andrews in time to stop a 
fierce combat between Lurcanio and an unknown knight, how he denounced Poly- 
nesso as the guilty contriver of the plot against Genevra and Ariodante, and slew 
Polynesso, and how the unknown knight proved to be Ariodante, who had hon- 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT-^FAERIE QUEENE 307 

estly intended to drown himself but had changed his mind as soon as he was in the 
water, (a delightful touch of nature !) and swam ashore, — of how Genevra became 
Ariodanle’s bride, and of how l>alinda lost no time in entering a nunnery, — all this 
does not concern us here, but must remain locked up in Ariosto’s beguiling pages, 
as far as these present pages are concerned. No item of it all had any influence in 
the remotest degree on Muck Ado about Nothing. 

Nor had The Fairie Queene ; nevertheless the portion to which Langbaine and 
subsequent critics refer is here given :* — 


THE FAERIE QUEENE 
BOOK II. CANTO IIII. 

Guyon delivers a * handsome stripling ’ who is being frightfully ill treated by a 
mad man, named Furor ^ and by the mad man’s mother, a wicked hag, named 
Occasion. 

Thus whenas Guyon Furor had captiu’d, 

Turning about he saw that wretched Squire, 

Whom that mad man of life nigh late depriu’d. 

Lying on ground, all soild with blond and mire : 

Whom whenas he perceiued to respire. 

He gan to comfort, and his wounds to dresse. 

Heing at last recurcd, he gan inquire, 

What hard mishap him brought to such distresse, 

And made that caitiucs thral, the thral of wretchednesse. 

With hart then throbbing, and with watry eyes, 

Faire Sir (quoth he) what man can shun the hap. 

That hidden lyes unwares him to suq)ryse 
Misfortune waites aduantage to entrap 
The man most warie in her whelming lap. 

So me weake wretch, of many weakest one, 

Vnweeting, and vnware of such mishap, 

She brought to mischiefe through occasion, 

Where this same wicked villein did me light vpon. 

It was a faithless Squire, that was the sourse 
Of all my sorrow, and of these sad teares. 

With whom from tender dug of commune nourse, 

Attonce I was vpbrought, and eft when yeares 
More rype vs reason lent to chose our Peares, 

Our selues in league of vowed loue we knit ; 

In which we long time without gealous feares. 

Or faultie thoughts continewed, as was fit ; 

And for my part I vow, dissembled not a whit. 


* The text is that of the ed. of 1596, — reprinted by Grosart. 



308 


APPENDIX 


It was my fortune commune to that age. 

To loue a Ladie faire of great degree, 

The which was borne of noble parentage 
And set in highest seat of dignitee, 

Yet seemd no lesse to loue, then loued to bee ; 

Long I her seru*d, and found her faithfull still, 

Ne euer thing could cause vs disagree ; 

Loue that two harts makes one ; makes eke one will : 

Lach stroue to please, and others pleasure to fulfill. 

My friend, hight Philemon^ I did partake. 

Of all my loue and all my priuitie ; 

Who greatly ioyous seemed for my sake, 

And gratious to that Ladie, as to met, 

Ne euer wight, that mote so welcome bee. 

As he to her, withouten blot or blame, 

Ne euer thing, that she could thinke or see, 
liut vnto him she would impart the same ; 

O wretched man, that would abuse so gentle Dame. 

At last such grace I found, and meanes I wrought. 

That I that l^adie to my spouse had wonne ; 

Accord of friends, consent of parents sought. 

Affiance made, my happinesse begonne. 

There wanted nought but few rites to be donne, 

Which mariage make ; that day too farre did seeme : 
Most ioyous man, on whom the shining Sunne, 

Did shew his face, my selfe I did esteeme, 

And that my falser friend did no lesse ioyous deeme. 

But ere that wished day his bearae disclosd, 

He either enuying my toward good. 

Or of himselfe to treason ill disposd 
One day vnto me came in friendly mood. 

And told for secret how he vnderstood 
That I.adie whom I had to me affynd. 

Had both distaind her honorable blood. 

And eke the faith, which she to me did bynd ; 

And therfore wisht me stay, till I more truth should fynd. 

The gnawing anguish, and sharpe gelosy. 

Which his sad speach infixed in my brest, 

Ranckled so sore, and festred inwardly, 

That my engreeued mind could find no rest. 

Till that the truth thereof I did outwrest, 

And him besought by that same sacred band 
Betwixt vs both, to counsell me the best. 

He then with solemne oath and plighted hand 

Assur’d, ere long the truth to let me vnderstand. 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT— FAERIE QUEENE 


309 


Ere long with like againe he boorded mee. 

Saying, he now had boulted all the floure, 

And that it was a groome of base degree. 

Which of my loue was partner Paramoure : 

Who vsed in a darksome inner bowre 
Her oft to meet : which better to approue. 

He promised to bring me at that howre, 

When I should see, that would me nearer moue. 

And driue me to withdraw my blind abused loue. 

This gracelesse man for furtherance of his guile, 

Did court the handmayd of my Lady deare. 

Who glad t’ embosome his affection vile. 

Did all she might, more pleasing to appeare. 

One day to worke her to his will more neare. 

He woo’d her thus : Pryene (so she hight) 

What great despight doth fortune to thee beare. 

Thus lowly to abase thy beautie bright. 

That it should not deface all others lesser light ? 

But if she had her least helpe to thee lent, 

T’adorne thy forme according thy desart. 

Their blazing pride thou wouldest soone haue blent. 

And staynd their prayses with thy least good part ; 

Ne should faire Claribell with all her art, 

Though she thy T^ady be, approch thee neare ; 

For proofe thereof, this euening, as thou art, 

Aray thy selfe in her most gorgeous geare, 

That I may more delight in thy embracement deare. 

The Maide proud through praysc, and mad through loue 
Him hearkned to, and soone her selfe arayd. 

The whiles to me the treachour did remoue 
His craftie engin, and as he had sayd. 

Me leading, in a secret corner layd, 

The sad spectatour of my Tragedie ; 

Where left, he went, and his owne false part playd. 
Disguised like that groome of base degree. 

Whom he had feignd th* abuser of my loue to bee. 

Eftsoones he came vnto th' appointed place. 

And with him brought Priency rich arayd. 

In Claribellaes clothes. Her proper face 
I not descemed in that darkesome shade. 

But weend it was my loue, with whom he playd. 

Ah God, what horrour and tormenting griefe 
My hart, my hands, mine eyes, and all assayd ? 

Me liefer were ten thousand deathes priefe 
Then wound of gealous worme, and shame of such repriefe» 



310 


APPENDIX 


I borne returning, fraught with fowle despight, 

And chawing vengeance all the way I went 
Soone as my loathed loue appeard in sight. 

With wratlifull hand I slew her innocent ; 

That after soone I dearely did lament : 

For when the cause of that outrageous deede 
Demaunded, I made plaine and euident. 

Her faultie Handmayd, which that bale did breede, 
Confest, how Philemon her wrought to chaunge her weede. 

Which when I heard, with horrible affright 
And hellish fury all enragd, I sought 
Vpon my selfe that vengeable despight 
To punish ; yet it better first 1 thought, 

To wreake my wrath on him, that first it wrought. 

To Philemon, false faytour Philemon 
I cast to pay, that I so dearely bought ; 

Of deadly drugs I gaue him drinke anon. 

And washt away his guilt with guiltie potion. 

Thus heaping crime on crime, and griefe on griefe. 

To losse of loue adioyning losse of frend, 

I meant to purge both with a third mischiefe. 

And in my woes beginner it to end : 

That was Pryene ; she did first offend. 

She last should smart : with which cruell intent, 

When I at her my murdrous blade did bend. 

She fled away with ghastly dreriment, 

And I pursewing my fell purpose, after went. 

Feare gaue her wings, and rage enforst my flight ; 

Through woods and plaines so long I did her chace. 

Till this mad man, whom your victorious might 
Hath now fast bound, me met in middle space. 

As I her, so he me purse wd apace. 

And shortly ouertooke : I breathing yre, 

Sore chauffed at my stay in such a cace. 

And with my heat kindled his cruell fyre ; 

Which kindled once, his mother did more rage inspyre. 

Betwixt them both, they ha«e me doen to dye, 

, Through wounds, & strokes, & stubborne handeling. 
That death were better, then such agony. 

As griefe and furie vnto me did bring ; 

Of which in me yet stickes the mortall sting. 

That during life will neuer be appeasd. 

When thus he ended had his sorrowing. 

Said Guyon, Squire, sore haue ye beene diseasd ; 

But all your hurts may soone through teperance be easd. 



SOURCE OF THE FLOT-^BANDELLO 3II 

To Capell belongs the credit of being the first to call attention (vol. i, p. 65) to 
Bandello asr a possible source of the Plot of this play. He gives the title of a 
Story in Belle-Forest, and adds: ‘it is taken from one of Bandello’ s, which you 
‘may see in his first tome, at p. 150, of the London edition in quarto, a copy from 
‘that of Lucca in 1 554. This French novel comes the nearest to the fable of Aluch 
* Ado about Nothings of anything that has yet been discover’d, and is (perhaps) 
‘the foundation of it.’ Capell erred, I think, in supposing that it was to the French 
Version rather than to the Italian original that Shakkspkark was indebted. But that 
the reader may judge for himself, as much, both of Bandello and of Belle-Forest, 
will be here given as can be supposed by any possibility to have been the material 
used by Shakespeare. 


BANDELLO 

The Newels of Matteo Bandello Bishop of Agen now first done into English 
Prose and Verse by John Payne, London, 1890, (For 71te Villon Society) vol. i, 
p. 302.* The Twentieth Story. Signor Scipione Attellano telleth how Signor 
Timbreo di Cardona, being with King Pedro of Arragon in Messina, became en- 
amoured of P'cnicia lAonata and of the various and unlookedfor chances which 
befell, before he took her to 7 vife. In the course of the year one thousand two hun- 
dred fourscore and three f of our salvation, the Sicilians, themseeming they might 
no longer brook the domination of the French, one day, at the hour of vespers, with 
unheard-of cruelty massacred all who were in the island, for so it was treacherously 
concerted throughout all Sicily ; nor did they slay men and women only of French 
extraction, but every Sicilian woman, who might be conceived to be with child by any 
Frenchman, they butchered that same day ; nay, there-afterward, if any were proved 
to have been gotten with child by a Frenchman, she was put to death without mercy, 
whence arose the infamous renown of the Sicilian Vespers. King Pedro of Arragon, 
having advice of this, came straightway thither with his power and seized the sov- 
ranty of the island, for that Pope Nicholas the Third urged him thereto, telling him 
that the island belonged unto him, as husband of Costanza, daughter of King Man- 
fred. The said King Pedro held his court many days in Palermo on right royal and 
magnificent wise and made high festival for the acquisition of the island. Presently, 
hearing that King Charles the Second, son of King Charles the First, who held the 
kingdom of Naples, came by sea with a great armament to expel him from Sicily, he 
went out against him with such ships and galleys as he had and joined battle with 
him, whereupon sore was the mellay and cruel the slaughter. In the end King 
Pedro defeated King Charles his fleet and took himself prisoner ; after which, the 
better to prosecute the war, he removed with his whole court to Messina, as to that 
city which is next overagainst Italy and whence one may speedily pass into Calabria. 

There, what while he held a right royal court and all was joy and gladness for the 
gotten victory, joustings being made and balls holden daily, one of his knights, a 
baron of high repute, by name Don Timbreo di Cardona, whom King Pedro supremely 
loved, for that he was doughty of his person and had still borne himself valiantly in 

. * Here reprinted by the kind permission of the Translator, to whom we are all 
under lasting obligations for his masterly Translations, notably The Book of the 
Thousand Nights and One Night, and of The Decameron of Boccaccio, etc. — E d. 

t March 30, 1282 is the generally accepted date of the Sicilian Vespers. — Note by 
Translator, 



312 


APPENDIX 


the past wars, fell passionately in love with a young lady hight Fenicia, the daughter 
pf Messer Lionato de* Lionati, a gentleman of Messina, lovesome, debonair, and 
fair over every other of the country, and little by little became so inflamed for her 
tliat he knew not nor wished to live without her sweet sight. Now the baron afore- 
said, having from his childhood still served King l^edro by land and by sea, had been 
mighty richly guerdoned of him, for that, besides gifts without number, which he 
had gotten, the King had then late bestowed on him the county of Colisano, together 
with other lands, so that his revenues, over and above the entertainment which he 
had of the crown, were more than twelve thousand ducats. Don Timbreo, then, 
fell to passing daily before the young lady’s house, accounting himself happy what 
day he saw her, and Fenicia, who, though but a girl, was quick-witted and well- 
advised, speedily perceived the cause of the gentleman’s continual passings to and 
fro. It was notorious that Don Timbreo was one of the King’s favourites and that 
there were few of such avail as he at court ; wherefore he was honoured of all. 
Accordingly, Fenicia, seeing him, over and above that which she had heard tell of 
him, apparelled on very lordly wise and with a worshipful following, and noting, to 
boot, that he was a very handsome young man and seemed mighty well bred, began 
in her turn to look graciously upon him and to do him honourable reverence. The 
gentleman waxed daily more enkindled and the more he looked upon her, the more 
he felt his flame increase and this new fire being grown to such a height in his heart 
that he felt himself all consumed with love of the fair damsel, he determined to have 
her by every possible means. But all was in vain, for that unto all the letters and 
messages he sent her, .she never answered otherwhat than that .she meant to keep her 
maidenhood inviolate for him who should be given her to husband ; wherefore the 
poor lover abode sore disconsolate, more by token that he had never been able to 
prevail wuth her to receive or letters or gifts. Algatcs, being resolved to h.ave her 
and seeing her constancy to be such that, an he w'ould possess her, needs must he 
take her to wife, he concluded, after long debatement of the matter in himself, to 
demand her of her father to wife. And albeit himscemed he greatly abased himself 
in seeking such an alliance, yet, knowing her to be of ancient and very noble blood, 
he determined, such was the love he bore the girl, to use no more delay about the 
matter. 

Having come to this decision, he sought out a gentleman of Messina, with whom 
he was very familiar, and to him opened his mind, possessing him of that which he 
would have him do with Messer Lionato. The Messinese accordingly betook him- 
self to the latter and did his errand to him even as it had been committed unto him 
by his friend. Messer Lionato, hearing such good news and knowing Don Timbreo’ s 
rank and consideration, tarried not to take counsel with kinsfolk or friends, but by a 
most gracious reply discovered how agreeable it was to him that the gentleman should 
deign to ally himself with him, and going home acquainted his wife and Fenicia with 
the promise he had made of the latter’s hand. The thing was extremely pleasing 
to Fenicia, who thanked God with a devout heart that He had vouchsafed her so 
glorious an issue to her chaste love, and showed her gladness by her countenance. 
But fortune, which ceaseth never to cross folk’s weal, found an extraordinary means 
of hindering nuptials so desired of both parties ; and hear how. 

It was published abroad in Messina how Don Timbreo di Cardona was in a few 
days to espouse Fenicia dei Lionati, which news was generally plea.sing to all the Messi- 
nese, for that Messer Lionato was a gentleman who made himself loved of all, as one 
who sought to do hurt to none and succoured all as most he might, so that all showed 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT-^BANDELLO 


313 


great satisfaction at such an alliance. Now there was in Messina another cavalier, 
young and nobly bom, by name Signor Girondo Olerio Valentiano, who had ap- 
proved himself exceeding doughty of his person in the late wars and was moreover 
one of the most magnificent and liberal gentlemen of the Court, lie, hearing this 
news, abode beyond measure chagrined, for that he had a little before fallen enam- 
oured of Fcnicia’s charms and so sore was he stricken of love’s shafts that he 
thought for certain to die, except he had her to wife. Accordingly, he had resolved 
to ask her in marriage of her father, and hearing the promise made to Don Fimbreo, 
thought to swoon for dolour ; then, finding no remedy for that his pain, he fell into 
such a frenzy that, overmastered with amourous passion and having no regard unto 
any manner of reason, he suffered himself to be carried away into doing a thing 
blameworthy in any one and much more so in a knight and a gentleman such as he 
was. He had in all their warlike enterprises been well-nigh always Don Timbreo’s 
comrade and there was a brotherly friendship between them, but of this love, what- 
ever might have been the cause thereof, they had still forborne to discover themselves 
to each other. 

Signor Girondo, then, bethought himself to sow such discord between Don Tim- 
breo and his mistress that the match .should be broken off, in which case, demanding 
her of her father to wife, he hoped to have her ; nor did he tarry to give effect to this 
mad conceit and having found a man apt unto the service of his blind and unbridled 
appetite, he diligently acquainted him with his mind. This man, whom Signor 
Girondo had taken unto himself for confidant and minister of his wickedness, was a 
young courtier, a man of little account, to whom evil was more pleasing than good 
and who, being fully instructed of that which he was to do, went next morning to 
visit Don Timbreo, who had not ye( left the house, but went walking all alone for 
his pleasure in a garden of his hostelry. The young man entered the garden and 
Don Timbreo, seeing him make for himself, received him courteou.sly ; then, after 
the wonted salutations, the new-comer bespoke Don Timbreo, .saying, ‘ My lord, I 
come at this hour to speak with thee of matters of the utmost importance, which 
concern thine honour and well-being, and for that I may chance to say .somewhat 
which will peradventure offend thee, 1 prithee pardon it to me ; nay, let my friendly 
devotion excuse me in thine eyes and believe that I have bestirred myself to a good 
end. Algates, this 1 know, that this which I shall presently tell thee will, an thou 
be still that noble gentleman which thou hast ever been, be of very great .service to 
thee ; and to come to the fact, 1 must tell thee 1 heard yesterday that thou hast 
agreed with Messer Lionato de’ Lionati to espouse Fenicia his daughter to wife. 
Look now, my lord, what thou dost and have regard unto thine honour. This I say 
to thee for that a gentleman, a friend of mine, goeth well-nigh twice or thrice a 
week to lie with her and hath enjoyment of her love ; nay, this very evening he is 
to go thither, as of wont, and I shall accompany him, as I used to do on such occa- 
sions. Now, an thou wilt pledge me thy word and swear to me not to molest me 
nor my friend, I will cause tliee to see the place and all ; and that thou mayst know 
[the whole], my friend hath enjoyed her these many months past. The regard I 
have for thee and the many pleasures which thou of thy favour hast done me induce 
me to discover this to thee ; so now thou wilt do that which shall seem to thee most 
to thy profit. It sufficeth me to have done thee that office in the matter which per- 
taineth unto my duty towards thee.^ 

At these words Signor Timbreo was all confounded and was like to take leave of 
his senses ; then, after he had abidden awhile, revolving a thousand things in him- 



314 


APPENDIX 


self, the bitter and (to his seeming) just despite which possessed him availing more 
with him than the fervent and loyal love he bore the fair Fenicia, he with a sigh 
answered the young man on this wise, saying, * My friend, I cannot nor should but 
abide eternally obliged to thee, seeing how lovingly thou concerncst thyself for me 
and for mine honour, and I will one day give thee to know effectually how much I 
am beholden to thee. Algates, for this present I render thee, as most I know and 
may, the heartiest thanks in my power, and since thou freely profferest thyself to 
cause me to see that which I should never have imagined for myself, 1 beseech thee, 
by that loving-kindness which hath moved thee to advertise me of this matter, that 
thou stint not to bear thy friend company, and I pledge thee my faith, as a true 
knight, that 1 will offer neither thee nor him any manner of hurt or hindrance and 
will still keep the matter secret, so he may enjoy this his love in peace, for that I 
should from the first have been better advised and should, with well-opened eyes, 
have made diligent and curious enquiry of the whole.’ Whereupon quoth the young 
man to him, * Do you, then, my lord, betake yourself this niglit at the third hour to 
the neighborhood of Messer Lionato’s house and ambush yourself in the ruins over- 
against the garden.’ 

Now there abutted upon these ruins a face of Messer Lionato’s house, wherein 
there was an old saloon, whose windows stood open day and night, and there Fenicia 
was bytimes used to show herself, for that from that quarter the beauty of the garden 
was better to be enjoyed ; but Messer Lionato and his family abode in the other part 
of the palace, which was ancient and very great and might have sufficed for a prince’ s 
court, not to say a gentleman’s household. This settled, the deceitful youth took his 
leave and returned to his patron, to whom he reported that which he had appointed 
with Don Timbreo ; whereat the perfidious Girondo was mightily rejoiced, him- 
seeming his device succeeded to Ids wish. Accordingly, the hour come, he clad one 
of his serving-men on worshipful wise and perfumed him with the sweetest essences, 
having lessoned him beforehand of that which he was to do ; and the disguised ser- 
vant set out in company with the youth, who had bespoken Don Timbreo, followed 
by another, with a step-ladder on his shoulder. Now, what was Don Timbreo’ s 
state of mind and what and how many were tlie thoughts which passed through his 
mind all that day, who might avail to recount at full ? I for my part know that I 
should weary myself in vain ; suffice it to say that the over-credulous and ill-fortuned 
gentleman, blinded with the veil of jealousy, ate little or nothing that day and whoso 
looked him in the face accounted him more dead than alive. Half an hour before 
the appointed time he went to hide himself in that ruined place, on such wise 
that he might very well see whoso passed there, himseeming yet impossible that 
Fenicia should have yielded herself unto another. However, he said to himself 
that girls are fickle, light, unstable, humoursome, and greedy of new things, and 
on this wise, now condemning and now excusing her, he abode intent upon every 
movement. 

The night was not very dark but exceeding still, and presently he heard the noise 
of coming feet and eke some broken word or two. By and by he saw the three pass 
and recognized the youth who had that morning advertised him, but could not recall 
the faces of the other twain. As they passed before him, he heard the perfumed one, 
him who played the lover, say to him who bore the ladder, ‘ Look thou set the ladder 
featly to the window, so it make no noise, for, when we were last here, my lady 
Fenicia told me that thou lettest it fall over-heavily. Do all adroitly and quietly.’ 
Don Timbreo plainly heard these words, which were to his heart as so many sharp 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT^^-BANDELLO 


3XS 

spears, and albeit he was alone and had none other arms than his sword, whilst those 
who passed had two partisans and most likfe were armoured to boot, nevertheless such 
and so poignant was the jealousy which gnawed at his heart and so sore the despite 
which enflamed him that he was like to issue forth of his ambush and falling fiercely 
on the three conspirators, to slaughter him whom he judged to be Fenicia’ s or else, 
abiding dead himself, at one stroke to end the anguish and misery he suffered for 
excess of dolour. However, remembering him of his plighted faith, and esteeming 
it overgreat baseness and wickedness to assail those who had the assurance of his 
word, he awaited the issue of the matter, all full of choler and despite and gnawing 
his heart for rage and fury. 

The three, then, coming under Messer Lionato’s windows, on the side aforesaid, set 
the ladder very softly against the balcony, and he who played the lover climbed up by 
it and entered the house, as if he had intelligence within. The which when the dis- 
consolate Don Timbreo saw, firmly believing that he who climbed up went to lie 
with Fenicia, he was overcome with the cruellest anguish and felt himself all 
aswoon. However, just despite (as he deemed it) availed so much in him that, 
doing away all jealousy, it not only altogether quenched the sincere and ardent love 
which he bore Fenicia, but converted it into cruel hatred ; wherefore, caring not to 
await his rival’s coming forth, he departed the place where he was ambushed and 
returned to his lodging. The youth saw him depart and recognising him, deemed 
that of him which was in effect the case ; whereupon not long after he made a cer- 
tain signal and the servant who had gone up coming down, they all repaired in com- 
pany to the house of Signor (jirondo, to whom they related all that had passed ; 
whereat he was marvellously rejoiced, and himseemed he was already possessed of 
the fair Fenicia. 

On the morrow Don Timbreo, who had slept very little that night, arose betimes 
in the morning, and sending for the townsman, by whom he had demanded Fenicia 
in marriage of her father, acquainted him with that which he would have him do. 
The Messinese, fully informed of his mind and will, betook himself, at his instance, 
towards dinner-time, to the house of Messer Lionato, whom he found walking in 
the saloon, against dinner should be ready, and there likewise was the innocent 
Fenicia, who wrought certain broideries of hers in silk, in company of her mother 
and of two sisters of hers, younger than herself. The citizen was graciously 
received by Messer Lionato, to whom said he, ‘Messer Lionato, I have a message 
to deliver to you, to your lady, and to Fenicia on the part of Don Timbreo.* ‘You 
are welcome,’ replied he; ‘ what is to do? Wife and thou, Fenicia, come and hear 
with me that which Don Timbreo giveth us to understand.* Quoth the messenger, 
‘It is commonly said that an ambassador, in delivering that wherewithal he is 
charged, should not incur any penalty. I come to you, sent by another, and it 
grieveth me infinitely to bring you news which may afflict you. Don Timbreo di 
Cardona sendeth unto you, Messer Lionato, and unto your lady, bidding you pro- 
vide yourselves with another son-in-law, inasmuch as he purposeth not to have you 
to parents-in-law, not indeed for any default of yourselves, whom he holdeth and 
believeth to be loyal and worthy, but for that he hath with his own eyes seen a thing 
in Fenicia which he could never have believed, and therefore he leaveth it unto you 
to provide for your occasions. To thee, Fenicia, he saith that the love he bore thee 
merited not the requital which thou hast made him therefor, and biddeth thee provide 
thyself with another husband, even as thou hast provided thyself with another lover, 
or, better, take him to whom thou hast given thy virginity, for that he puri>oseth not 



APPENDIX 


316 

to have any manner of dealing with thee, since thou hast before marriage made him 
a burgess of Corneto.’* 

Fenicia, hearing this bitter and shameful message, abode as she were dead, and on 
like wise did Messer Lionato and his lady. Nevertheless, taking heart and breath, 
which had well-nigh failed him for amazement, Messer Lionato thus replied to the 
messenger saying, ‘ Brother, I still misdoubted, from the first moment when thou 
bespokest me of this marriage, that Don Timbreo would not abide constant to his 
demand, well knowing myself, as I did and do, to be but a poor gentleman and 
none of his peer. Algates, meseemeth that, an he repented him of taking my 
daughter to wife, it should have sufficed him to say that he would none of her* and 
not (as he doth) cast upon her so shameful an impeachment as that of harlotry. 
True it is that all things are possible, but I know how she hath been reared and 
what her usances are. God the Just Judge will one day, I trust, make known the 
truth.’ With this reply the gentleman texjk his leave and Messer IJonato abode 
persuaded that Don Timbreo had repented him of the proposed alliance, himseeming 
it were overmuch condescension and derogation on his part. Now Messer Lionato’ s 
family was one of the oldest in Messina and both noble and of high repute ; but his 
wealth was only that of a private gentleman, albeit it was matter of record that his 
forefathers had anciently owned many lands and castles, with a most ample jurisdic- 
tion ; but, through the various revolutions of the island and the civil wars which had 
betided, they had (as is seen in many other families) been dispossessed of their 
seignories ; wherefore, the good old man, having never seen aught in his daughter 
other than most honourable, concluded that Don Timbreo had taken their poverty 
and present ill -fortune in disdain. 

On the other hand, Fenicia, hearing herself thus wrongfully impeached, was sore 
disordered for excess of dolour and heart-sickness, and abandoning herself to despair, 
like a tender and delicate maid as she was and unused to the blows of perverse for- 
tune, had tendered death dearer than life ; wherefore, overtaken with grievous and 
poignant anguish, she let herself fall as one dead, and of a sudden losing her natural 
colour, resembled a marble statue rather than a live woman. She was taken up and 
laid upon a bed, where with hot cloths and other remedies her strayed spirits were 
presently recalled to her, and the doctors being sent for, the report spread throughout 
Messina that Messer Lionato’ s daughter, Fenicia, was fallen so sick that she abode 
in peril of her life. At this news there came many ladies, kinswomen, and friends, 
to visit the disconsolate damsel and learning the cause of her sickness, studied, as 
best they knew, to console her ; wherefore, as it wont to betide among a multitude 
of women, they said various things concerning so piteous a case, and all of one 
accord severely blamed Don Timbreo. They were for the most part about the bed 
of the sick girl, who presently, having plainly apprehended that which was said, 
collected all her strength, and seeing that well-nigh all wept for pity of her, besought 
them with a feeble voice to forbear ; then [silence being made] she spoke thus on 
languid wise, saying, ‘ My honoured mother and sisters, I pray you dry these tears, 


♦The names of several towns, such as Corneto (in the Roman Maremma), Cor- 
nazzano and Cornigliano (in the Milanese), of which the word como (signifying a 
horn^ the traditional emblem of cuckoldry) forms part, are used by Bandello and 
other Italian writers with a play on the word.— (substantially,) by the Trans- 
lator, See Belle Forest. 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT^BANDELLO 


317 


for that they avail you not, while to me they are an occasion of fresh dolour, and 
profit nothing for the case betided. Thus hath it pleased our Lord God, and it 
behoveth us have patience. The bitterest of the dolour which I sufi'er and which 
goeth little by little wearing away the thread of life in me, is not that I am repudi- 
ated, albeit that is a source of infinite grief to me, but the manner of this repudia- 
tion it is that cutteth me even to the quick and afflicteth my heart beyond remedy. 
Don Timbreo might have said that I pleased him not to wife and all had been well ; 
but, through the fashion of his rejection of me, I know that 1 incur everlasting 
reproach in the eyes of all the Messinese and shall still pass for guilty of that which 
not only I never did, but which assuredly 1 never yet thought to do ; nay, I shall 
Still be pointed at with the finger of scorn for. a strumpet. 1 have ever confessed and 
do anew confess myself no match for such a knight and lord as Don Timbreo ; for 
that my parents’ little means sought not to marry me in such high place. But, in 
the matter of nobility and antiquity of blood, the Lionati are known as the most 
ancient and noble of all this island, we being descended from a most noble Roman 
house which flourished before our Lord Jesus Christ took flesh, as is testified by very 
.ancient writings. Now, even as for lack of wealth I confess myself unworthy of so 
great'll gentleman, so on like wise I .say that I am most unworthily repudiated, seeing 
it is a very manifest thing that I have never thought to give any man that of myself 
which right willcth should be reserved unto my husband. God (whose holy name 
be still praiseS and revered) knoweth that I say sooth ; and who knoweth but the 
Divine Majesty would save me by this means? For that, belike, being so nobly 
married, I had been swollen up with pride and waxed arrogant, contemning this one 
and that, and had peradventure been less mindful of God’ s goodness towards me. 
Now may He do with me that which most pleaseth Him and vouchsafe me that this 
my tribulation may enure to the welfare of my soul. Moreover, with all my heart 
I do most devoutly be.secch Him to open Don Timbreo his eyes, not that he may take 
me again to bride, — for I feel my.self dying little by little, — but that he, to whom my 
faith hath been of little price, may, together with all the world, know that 1 never 
committed that mad and shameful default, whereof, against all reason, I am im- 
peached ; so that, if I die in this infamy, I may ere long abide justified. Let him 
enjoy another lady unto whom God hath destined him and live long with her in 
peace ; for me, in a few hours six feet of earth will suffice me. I^et my father and 
my mother and all our friends and kinsfolk have at least this scantling of comfort in 
this so great affiiction that 1 am altogether innocent of the infamy which is laid to my 
charge and take to witness my faith, which 1 here plight them, as behoveth an obe- 
dient daughter ; for that weightier pledge or testimony I cannot presently ^ive. 
Suffice it me to be before Christ’s just tribunal acknowledged innocent of su'Ci* 
wickedness ; and so unto H im who gave it me I commit my soul, the which, 
desirous of quitting this earthly prison, taketh flight towards Him.’ 

This said, such was the greatness of the anguish which beset her heart and so 
sorely did it straiten it that, offering to say I know not what more, she began to lose 
power of speech and to falter out broken words, which were understood of none, 
and all at once there spread an ice-cold sweat over her every limb, on such wise that, 
crossing her hands upon her breast, .she let herself go for dead. The physicians, 
who were yet there, unable to find any remedy for .so grievous a case, gave her up for 
lost, saying that the fierceness of the pain had burst her heart in sunder, and so they 
went their ways ; nor had Fenicia long abidden, all cold and pulseless, in the arms 
of those her friends and kinswomen than she was of all accounted dead, and one of 



3i8 appendix 

the physicians, being called back and finding no pulse in her, declared her to have 
given up the ghost. What cruel lamentations were made over her, what tears were 
shed and what piteous sighs heaved, I leave it to you, compassionate ladies, to con- 
ceive. The wretched tearful father and the dishevelled and woebegone mother would 
have made stones weep, whilst the other ladies and all who were there kept up a 
piteous lamentation. From five to six hours were now past and the burial was 
appointed for the ensuing day ; wherefore the mother, more dead than alive, after 
the multitude of women had departed, kept with her a kinswoman of hers, the 
brother’s wife of Messer Lionato, and the twain, letting set water on the fire, shut 
themselves up in a chamber, without other person ; then, stripping Fenicia naked, 
they fell to washing her with warm water. 

Fenicia’ s strayed spirits had now been near seven hours abroad, whenas, what 
while the cold limbs were in bathing, they returned to their accustomed office and 
the damsel, giving manifest signs of life, began to open her eyes. Her mother and 
kinswoman were like to cry out ; however, plucking up courage, they laid their 
hands on her heart and felt it make some movement ; wherefore they were certified 
that the damsel was alive and accordingly, without making any stir, they plied her 
on such w’ise with hot cloths and other remedies that she returned well-nigh altogether 
to herself, and, opening wide her eyes, said with a heavy sigh, ‘ Alack, where am I?’ 
Quoth her mother, ‘Seest thou not that thou art here with me and with thine aunt? 
There had so sore a swoon overcome thee we deemed thee dead, but (praised be 
God) thou art e’en alive.’ Whereupon, ‘Alas,’ replied P'enicia, ‘how much better 
were it that I were dead and quit of such sore afflictions !’ ‘ Daughter mine,* 

rejoined her mother and aunt, ‘ it behoveth thee to live, since God so willeth it, and 
all shall yet be set right.’ Then the mother, concealing the joy she felt, opened the 
chamber-door a little and let call Messer Lionato, who came incontinent. W’hen 
he saw his daughter restored to hensclf, it booteth not to ask if he were glad, and 
many things having been debated between them, he willed, in the first place, that 
none should know aught of the fact, purposing to send Fenicia forth of Messina to 
the country-house of his brother, whose wife was there present. Then, the damsel 
being recruited Nvith delicate viands and wines of price and restored to her former 
beauty and strength, he sent for his brother and fully instructed him of that which 
he purposed to do. Accordingly, in pursuance of the ordinance concerted between 
them, Messer Girolamo (for so was Messer Lionato’s brother named) carried P'enicia 
that same night to his own house [in Messina] and there kept her very secretly in 
his wife’s company. Then, having made the nece.ssary provision at his country- 
house, he one morning betimes despatched his wife thither with Fenicia (who was 
now sixteen years old), a sister of hers of from thirteen to fourteen, and a daughter 
of his own ; this he did to the intent that, Fenicia growing and changing looks, as 
one doth with age, they might in two or three years’ time marry her under another 
name. 

The day after [the falling ill of Fenicia], it being reported throughout all Messina 
that F'enicia was dead, Messer Lionato let order her obsequies according to her rank 
and caused make a coffin, wherein, unperceived of any, her mother, willing not that 
any should meddle therewith, laid 1 know not what ; then, shutting the lid, she 
nailed it and luted it with pitch, on such wise that all held it for certain that the 
damsel’s body was therewithin. At eventide Messer Lionato and his wife and kins- 
folk, clad all in black, escorted the coffin to the church, making such a show of 
extreme grief as if they had in very deed followed their daughter’s body to the 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT^BANDELLO 


319 

tomb ; the which moved every one to pity, for that, the occasion of Fenicia’s sup- 
posed death having gotten wind, all the Messinese held it for certain that Don Tim- 
breo had forged the story aforesaid for his own ends. The coffin was accordingly 
interred, with general mourning of the whole city, and thereover was set a monu- 
ment of stone, emblazoned with the ensigns of the Lionati, whereon Messer Lionato 
let grave this epitaph : — 

Fenicia bight I. As ill-fortune bade, 

I was affianced to a cruel knight, 

Who, soon repenting him of nuptial plight, 

Unto my charge a foul transgression laid. 

I, as an innocent and tender maid, 

Seeing myself impeach’d with such unright. 

Chose rather die than live in all men’s sight 
Shown for a strumpet. Sword or dagger’ s blade 

There needed none, alack, to me to die ; 

Sharp grief was deadlier than steel, forsooth, 

Whenas I heard me slandered causelessly. 

With my last breath I pray’d God of his ruth 
To show the world their error by and by, 

Since my vow’d bridegroom reck’d not of my truth. 

The tearful obsequies made, and it being freely spoken everywhere of the cause 
of Fenicia’ s death and various things discoursed thereupon, and all showing com- 
passion of so piteous a case, as of a thing which had been feigned, Don Timbreo 
began to suffer exceeding great chagrin, together with a certain oppression of the 
heart, for that he knew not what to believe. Himseemed indeed he should not be 
blamed, having himself seen a man go up by the ladder to enter the house ; but, 
presently, better considering that which he had seen, (more by token that his 
despite was now in great jiart cooled and reason began to open his eyes,) he be- 
thought himself that he who bad entered the house might belike have climbed up 
thither, either for some other woman or to steal. Moreover, he called to mind that 
Messer Lionato’ s house was very great and that none abode whereas the man had 
gone up ; nay, that Fenicia, sleeping with her sister in a chamber within that of her 
father and mother, might not have availed to come to that side, it behoving her pass 
through her father’ s chamber ; and so, assailed and tormented by conflicting thoughts, 
he could find no repose. 

On like wise. Signor Girondo, hearing the manner of Fejiicia’s death and know- 
ing himself to have been her murderer, felt his heart like to burst for excess 
of dolour, as well because he was passionately enamoured of her as also for that he 
had been the true cause of so great a scandal, and was like twice or thrice for despair 
to have plunged a poniard into his own breast. Unable either to eat or to drink, he 
abode as he were an idiot, nay, rather, a man possessed, and could take neither rest 
nor repose. Ultimately, it being the seventh day after Fenicia’ s funeral and him- 
seeming he might live no longer, an he discovered not to Don Timbreo the wicked- 
ness he had done, he betook himself to the palace, at the hour when all went home 
to dine, and encountering the knight on his way to liis hostelry, said to him, * Signor 



320 


APPENDIX 


Timbreo, let it not irk you to come with me hard by on an occasion of mine.* Tim- 
breo, who had loved him as a comrade, went with him, discoursing of various matters, 
and a few steps brought them to the church where Fenicia’s monument stood. There 
come, Girondo bade his serving-men await him without, and besought Don Timbreo 
to lay the like commandment on his ; the which he straightway did. The two gentle- 
men, then, alone entered the church, where they found no one, and Girondo carried 
Timbreo to the chapel where was the pretended tomb. There he fell on his knees 
before the tomb and unsheathing a poniard which he had by his side, gave it naked 
into the hand of Don Timbreo, who waited, all full of wonderment, to know what 
this might mean, more by token that he had not yet observed whose tomb it was 
before which liis friend knelt. Then, in a voice broken with sobs and tears, Girondo 
thus bespoke him, saying, ‘Magnanimous and noble knight, having, as I judge, 
done thee infinite wrong, 1 arn not come hither to crave thee of pardon, for that my 
fault is such as meriteth it not. Wherefore, an ever thou look to do aught worthy 
of thy valour, an thou think to act knightly, an thou desire to do a deed to (5od 
acceptable and grateful to the world, plant that steel which thou hast in hand in this 
wicked and traitorous breast and make of my vicious and abominable blood a befitting 
sacrifice unto these most sacred ashes of the innocent and ill-starred Fenicia, who was 
late entombed in this sepulchre ; for that of her unmerited and untimely death, I of 
my malice was the sole cause. Nay, if thou, more compassionate of me than I of 
myself, deny me this, 1 will with mine own hands wreak that uttermost vengeance 
on myself which .shall be possible unto me. But, an thou be that true and loyal 
knight thou hast been till now% who w'ould never brook the least shadow of a 
stain, thou wilt forthright take due vengeance both for thyself and for the ill-fated 
Fenicia,’ 

Don Timbreo, seeing himself before the resting-place of the fair Fenicia’s body 
and hearing that which Girondo said to him, was well-nigh beside himself and could 
nowise conceive what this might be. Flowcver, moved by I know not what, he fell 
to weeping bitterly and besought Girondo to rise to his feet and more plainly to dis- 
cover the matter. Therewith he cast the poniard far from him and after did and 
said to such purpose that Girondo arose, weeping the while, and thus replied to him, 
saying, ‘ Know, then, my lord, that Fenicia was most ardently beloved of me and 
on such wise that, should I live an hundred lives, I might nevermore hoj)e to find 
comfort or consolation, since my love was to the hapless maid the occasion of a most 
bitter death ; for that, seeing I might never have of her a kind look nor a least token 
conformable unto iny desires, and hearing she was promised to thee for wife, I, being 
blinded by my unbridled appetite, conceived that, so but I found a means of pre- 
venting her from becoming thy wife, I might after, demanding her in marriage of 
her father, have espoused her. Wherefore, unable to devise another remedy for my 
most fervent love, without farther consideration I hatched the blackest treason was ever 
plotted and caused thee by practice see one go up by night into her house, who was 
none other than one of my servants ; moreover, he who came to speak with thee and 
who gave thee to understand that Fenicia had bestowed her love upon another was 
lessoned and set on by me to the errand which he did thee. Accordingly, Fenicia 
was on the ensuing day repudiated by thee and through that repudiation the ill- 
fortuned maid died and is here buried. Wherefore, I having been the butcher, the 
hangman, and the barbarous assa.ssin who hath so cruelly wronged both thee and 
her, I beseech thee with clasped hands,’ and here he fell on his knees anew, * that 
thou wilt e’en take due vengeance for the wickedness committed of me ; for that, 



SOURCE^ OF THE PLOT--BANDELLO 


321 

when I think of the dire calamity whereof I have been the cause, I hold life in 
horror.* 

Don Timbreo, hearing these things, wept passing bitterly, and knowing that the 
error, once committed, was irreparable, and that Fenicia, being dead, might no more 
return to life, determined not to seek to avenge himself upon Girondo, but, by par- 
doning him his every default, to procure Fenicia’ s fair fame to be vindicated and that 
honour restored to her, whereof she had without cause been so shamefully bereaved. 
Accordingly, he bade Girondo rise to his feet and after many heavy sighs, mingled 
with most bitter tears, bespoke him on this wise, saying, * How far better were it for 
me, brother mine, that I had never been born or that, an I must needs come into the 
world, I had been born deaf, so I might never have heard a thing so hurtful and so 
grievous to me, and by reason whereof I shall never again live happy, considering 
that I, of my over- credulity, have slain her, whose love and the singular and sur- 
passing virtues and qualities wherewith the King of Heaven had endowed her 
merited of me anothergates guerdon than so shameful a defainement and so untimely 
a death ! But, since God hath so permitted it, against whose will there stirreth not 
a leaf upon a tree, and since things past may eathcr be blamed than amended, I 
purpose not to take of thee any manner of vengeance, for that to lose friend upon 
friend were to add dolour unto dolour; nor withal would Fenicia’ s blessed soul 
return to her most chaste body, which hath accomplished its course. Of one thing 
I will e’en rebuke thee, so thou mayst never more fall into a like error, and that is 
that thou discoveredst not to me thy love, knowing that I was enamoured of her and 
knew nothing of thy passion ; for that, ere I caused demand her of her father, I 
would in this amorous emprise have yielded place unto thee and overcoming myself, 
as magnanimous and generous spirits use to do, would have preferred our friendship 
before my appetite ; nay, maybe thou, hearing my reasonings, wouldst have desisted 
from this thine undertaking, and so this scandal had not ensued. However, the 
thing is done and there is no means of procuring it to be undone ; but in one thing 
I would fain have thee complease me and do that which I shall bid thee.’ Quoth 
Girondo, ‘ Command me, my lord, for that I will do all without exception.* *I wish 
then,’ rejoined Don Timbreo, ‘that, Fenicia having been of us twain wrongfully 
impeached for a wanton, we, in so far as we may, restore her her fair fame and 
render her due honour, first in the eyes of her disconsolate parents, and after of all the 
Messinese ; for, that which I let say to her having gotten wind, th^ whole city might 
lightly believe that she was a harlot. Else meseemeth I should without cease have 
her angry shade before mine eyes, still crying sore to God for vengeance against me.’ 

To this, still weeping, Girondo straightway answered, ‘ To thee, sir, it pertaineth 
to command and to me to obey. I was before boiinden unto thee by friendship and 
now, through the wrong which I have done thee and which thou, like an over-pitiful 
and loyal knight, so generously pardonest unto me, base and perfidious wretch that 
I am, I am forever become thy servant and thy slave.’ These words said, both, 
weeping bitterly, fell on their knees before the sepulchre and with clasped hands 
humbly besought pardon of Fenicia and of (iod, the one of the wickedness com- 
mitted and the other of his own credulousness ; then, their eyes dried, Timbreo 
would have Girondo go with him to Messer Idonato’s house. Accordingly, they 
repaired thither and found Messer Lionato, who had dined in company with sundry 
of his kinsfolk, in act to rise from the table. When he heard that the two gentlemen 
would fain speak with him, he came to meet them, all full of wonderment, and bade 
them welcome ; whilst they, seeing him and his wife clad in black, fell a-weeping for 
21 



322 


APPENDIX 


the cruel remembrance of Fenicia's death and could scarce speak. Then, two stools 
being brought and all having seated themselves, Don Timbreo, with many sighs and 
sobs, recounted, in the presence of as many as were there, the woefull story of the 
cause of Fenicia’s (as he believed) most cruel and untimely death and cast himself, 
he and Signor Girondo, on the ground, craving her father and mother pardon of the 
wickedness committed. Messer Lionato, weeping for joy and tenderness, lovingly 
embraced them both and pardoned them their every wrong, thanking God that his 
daughter was acknowledged innocent. 

Then Don Timbreo, after much talk, turning to Messer Lionato, said to him, ‘ Sir 
and father, since ill-fortune hath willed that I should not become your son-in-law, as 
was my supreme desire, I pray you, nay, as most I may, I require you that you will 
still avail yourself of me and mine, as if the intended alliance had indeed ensued 
between us, for that I will still have you in such reverence and obedience as a loving 
and obedient son should have for his father. And if you will deign to command me, 
you shall find my deeds comformable to my words, for that certes I know nothing in 
the world, how difficult soever it may be, but I would do it for you.* For this the 
good old man lovingly thanked him and finally said to him, ‘ Since you have so 
freely made me such courteous proffers and since adverse fortune hath deemed me 
unworthy of your alliance, 1 will make bold to crave you of one thing, the which 
will be eath for you to do ; to wit, I pray you, by that loyalty which reigneth in you 
and by what love soever you bore the unfortunate Fenicia, that, whenas you have a 
mind to marry, you will vouchsafe to give me to know thereof and that, if I proffer 
you a lady who shall please you, you will take her to wife.* Don Timbreo, him- 
seeming the disconsolate old man asked a little thing in requital of such a loss as 
that which he had suffered, proffered him his hand and kissing him on the mouth, 
replied to him thus, * Sir father, since you ask so slight a thing of me, I being 
bounden to you for a far greater and wishing to show you how much I desire to do 
you a pleasure, not only will 1 take no wife without your knowledge, but her alone 
will I marry whom you shall counsel me and give me ; and this I promise you upon 
my faith, in the presence of all these noble gentlemen.* Signor Girondo on like 
wise bespoke Messer Lionato with fair and goodly words, avouching himself still 
most apt unto his pleasures ; which done, the two gentlemen went to dinner. The 
thing was presently bruited abroad in Messina, so that it was manifest unto all that 
Fenicia had been unjustly impeached, and on like wise she herself was that same 
day advised by her father, through an especial messenger, of that which had betided ; 
whereat she was mightily rejoiced and returned thanks to God for her recovered 
honour. 

Fenicia had now abidden about a year*s space in the country, where all went so 
well that none knew her to be alive, and meantime Don Timbreo held strait inter- 
course with Messer lionato, who, having advised his daughter of that which he 
thought to do, applied himself to the ordinance of the things which pertained unto 
his purpose. Now in this space of time the damsel was waxen fair beyond belief 
and, having accomplished her seventeenth year, was grown on such wise that whoso 
saw her had never known her for Fenicia, especially as they held the latter to be 
dead. Her sister, Belfiore by name, who abode with her, and was some fifteen 
years old, appeared in very truth a most fair flower^ and showed little less beauty 
than her elder sister ; which Messer Lionato, who went often to visit them, seeing, 
he determined to tarry no longer of carrying his design into effect. Wherefore, being 
one day in company with the two gentlemen, he said, smiling, to Don Timbreo, * It 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT^BANDELLO 


323 


is time, my lord, that I should acquit you of the obligation which you, of your 
favour, have undertaken towards me. Methinketh I have found you a very fair and 
charming young lady to wife, with whom, when you have seen her, you will, to my 
thinking, be content. And if belike she be not taken of you with so much love as 
that wherewith you were to espouse Fenicia, of this I can e’en certify you that you 
will have in her no less beauty, no less nobility, and no less gentilesse. With most 
engaging manners and other womanly charms, she is, Godamercy, abundantly pro- 
vided and adorned ; but you shall see her and it shall after be in your discretion to 
do that which shall seem to you most to your advantage. On Sunday morning I will 
come to your lodging, with a chosen company of kinsfolk and friends, and do you 
and Signor Girondo be in readiness, for that it behoveth us to go some three miles 
without Messina to a village where we shall hear mass, after which you shall see the 
damsel of whom I have bespoken you and we will dine in company.’ 

Timbreo accepted the invitation and the ordinance appointed and on Sunday made 
ready betimes to take horse with Signor Girondo. Presently Messer Lionato arrived 
with a troop of gentlemen, having let make honourable provision at his country- 
house of everything necessary, and Don Timbreo, being advised of his coming, 
mounted to horse with Signor Girondo and their servants. Then, good day given 
and taken, they all in company rode forth of Messina and devising, as it happeneth 
on such occasions, of various things, they came presently, without perceiving it, to 
the house, where they were honourably received. They heard mass at a neighbour- 
ing church ; which ended, they all betook themselves into a saloon, magnificently 
arrayed with Alexandrian arras and carpets. All being assembled, there came many 
gentlewoman out of a chamber and amongst them Belfiore and Fenicia, which latter 
showed as she were the very moon, whenas she most shineth in the serene heavens 
among the stars. The two knights and the other gentlemen received them with a 
respectful greeting, as every gentleman should still do with ladies ; then Messer 
Lionato, taking Don Timbreo by the hand and carrying him to Fenicia, who had 
still, since her bringing into the country, been called Lucilla, ‘ Here, Sir Knight,* 
said he, ‘ is Signora Lucilla, whom I have chosen to give you to wife, an it so please 
you. If you will be ruled by me, you will make her your spouse ; nevertheless, you 
are at liberty to take her or leave her,’ 

Don Timbreo, seeing the damsel, who was in truth most fair, was at first sight 
marvellously pleased with her and being already determined to content Messer 
Lionato, bethought himself a little and answered, ‘ Sir father, not only do I accept 
this damsel, whom you now present to me, and who seemeth to me a right noble 
young lady, nay, but I would on like wise have accepted any other who had been 
proffered me of you. And so you may see how desirous I am to content you, and 
may know that the promise I made you is no vain one, this damsel and none 
other do I take to my lawful spouse, so but her will be conformable unto mine.* 
Whereupon the damsel made answer and said, * Sir Knight, I am ready to do all 
that which shall be bidden me of Mes.ser Lionato.’ * And I, fair damsel,’ rejoined 
Messer Lionato, * exhort you to take Don Timbreo to husband ;’ wherefore, to make 
no further delay with the matter, sign was made to an ecclesiastic, who was there 
present, that he should pronounce the accustomed words, according to the use of 
Holy Church ; the which he discreetly doing, Don Timbreo by word of mouth then 
and there espoused his Fenicia, thinking to espouse one Lucilla. Now, whenas he 
first saw the damsel come forth of the chamber, he felt at heart a certain I know not 
what, himseeming he discovered in her countenance features of his Fenicia, and 



324 


APPENDIX 


could not take his fill of looking upon her : nay, all the love which he had borne 
Fenicia he felt turn to this new damsel. 

The espousals made, water was forthright given to the hands and the company sat 
down to table, at the head whereof was set the bride, with Don Timbreo on her 
right hand ; overagainst whom sat Belfiore and next after her Signor Girondo, and 
and so in turn a gentleman and a lady side by side. Then came the viands, delicate 
and in the goodliest ordinance, and all the bancjuct was sumptuous and fair and 
softly served ; * nor lacked there of discourse and witty sallies and a thousand other 
diversions. Ultimately, fruits being set on such as the season afforded, Fenicia’ s 
aunt, who had abidden with her the greater part of the year in the country and who 
was .seated at table beside Don Timbreo, seeing the dinner draw to an end, said 
merrily to the latter, as if she had heard nothing of the things occurred, ‘ Sir bride- 
groom, had you never a wife ?’ At this question, he felt his eyes fill with tears, 
which fell before he could reply ; however, overcoming natural emotion, he replied 
to her on this wise, saying, ‘ Mistress aunt, your most affable enquiry bringeth me 
back to mind a thing which I have ever at heart and through which methinketh I 
shall early end my days ; for that, albeit I am most content with Signora Lucilla 
here, nevertheless, for another lady, whom I loved and whom, dead as she is, I love 
more than myself, I feel a worm of dolour at my heart, which still goeth fretting me 
little by little and tormenteth me sore without cease, more by token that I, against 
all right, was the sole occasion of her most cruel death.’ Signor Girondo would fain 
have replied to these words, but was hindered with a thousand sobs and with the 
abundance of the tears which fell in streams from his eyes ; however, at last, with 
half-broken speech, ‘Nay, sir,’ said he, ‘it was I ; I, disloyal traitor that I was, was 
e’en the butcher and mini.ster of the death of that most hapless damsel, who was 
worthy, for her rare qualities, to live longer than she did, and thou wast nowise to 
blame therefor, seeing all the fault was mine.* 

At this discourse the bride’s eyes also began to fill with tearful rain, for the cruel 
remembrance of the past heartbreak which she had so bitterly suffered ; what while 
her aunt followed on and said to her new-made nephew, ‘ Prithee, Sir Knight, of 
your courtjsy, now there is nought else whereof to discourse, tell me how this cir- 
cumstance befell, whereat you and this other gentleman yet weep so piteously.’ 
‘ Alack, madam aunt,’ replied he, ‘ you would have me renew the cruelle.st and most 
despairful dolour was ever suffered of me, the thought whereof alone unmanneth 
and consumeth me ; but, to pleasure you, I will tell you all, to my eternal affliction 
and little honour ; for that I was over-credulous.’ Accordingly, he began and not 
without burning tears and to the exceeding pity and wonderment of the listeners, 
recounted all the piteous story from beginning to end ; whereupon quoth the matron, 
‘ Sir Knight, you tell me a strange and cruel case, whereof perchance the like never 
befell in this world. But tell me, so God aid you : if, before this damsel here had 
been given you to wife, you might have availed to recall your beloved to life, what 
would you have done to have her alive again?’ Don Timbreo, still weeping, 
answered, ‘ I swear to God, mistress mine, that I am right well pleased wdth this my 
bride and I hope daily for yet better content from her ; but, might I before have availed 
to buy back the dead, I would have given the half of my years to have her again, over 
and above the treasure I would have expended to that end ; for that in truth I loved 

* The old Italians seem to have attached as much importance as do the modem 
English to this matter of quiet and silent service. Note by the Translator, 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT-SANDELLO 325 

her as much as woman can be loved of man, and were I to live thousands and thou- 
sands of years, dead as she is, I should still love her and for love of her should still 
have as many as are here of her kinsfolk in reverence.’ Whereupon, Fenicia’s 
rejoiced father, unable longer to conceal the gladness which poshcssed him, turned 
to his son-in-law, weeping for excess of contentment and tenderness of heart, and 
said to him, ‘ Marry, sir son and son-in-law, for so must I call you, you do ill 
approve with your acts that which you say with your moutli, inasmucli as, having 
espoused your much-loved Fenicia and abidden all the morning beside her, you have 
not yet recognised her. Whither is this your so fervent love gone? Hath she so 
changed favour, are her fashions so altered that, having her by your side, you 
know her not?’ 

These words suddenly opened the eyes of the enamoured knight and he cast himself 
on his Fenicia’ s neck, kissing her a thousand times and viewing her with fixed eyes, 
fulfilled with joy without end. And still the while he wept softly, without availing 
to utter a word, inwardly calling himself blind ; and it being presently recounted of 
Messer Lionato how the case had betided, they all abode full of extreme wonder- 
ment and to boot exceeding rejoiced. Signor Girondo, then, rising from table, cast 
himself, weeping sore, at P'eilicia’s feet and humbly besought licr of pardon. She 
received him kindly and with affectionate speech remitted unto him the wrongs he 
had done her ; then, turning to her husband, who still accused himself of the default 
committed, .she prayed him with sweetest words nevermore to bespeak her of the 
matter, for that, he not having erred, it nowise behoved him crave pardon of her ; 
and so, kissing and weeping for joy, they drank each other’s hot tears, all full of 
extreme contentment. 

Then, what while all abode in the utmost gladness and it was preparing to dance 
and make merry, Girondo, accosting Messer Lionato, who was .so full of joyance that 
himseemed he touched the sky with his fingers, besought him to vouchsafe him a 
very great favour, which would [he said] be to him a cause of marvellous content- 
ment. Messer Lionato bade him ask what he would, for that, were it a thing unto 
which he might avail, he would very gladly and willingly do it. ‘Then,’ said 
Girondo, ‘ I ask you, Signor Lionato, to father-in-law and father. Signora Fenicia 
and Signor Timbreo to sister and brother-in-law and Signora lJelfiorc#here to my 
lawful and loving consort.’ Tlie good father, seeing new joyance heaped on him 
and well-nigh beside himself for such an unhoped happiness, knew not if he 
dreamed or if that were indeed true which he heard and .saw ; but, himseeming he 
slept not, he thanked God with all his heart, who guerdoned him so magnificently, 
past his desert, and turning to Signor Girondo, courteously avouched himself content 
with that which pleased him. Then, calling Belfiore to him, ‘ Thou scest, daughter,’ 
quoth he, ‘ how the thing gocth. This knightly gentleman seeketh thee to wife ; an 
thou wilt have him to husband, it will greatly content me and thou liast every reason 
to do it ; so tell us freely thy mind thereof.’ The fair maid, all trembling, in a low 
voice shamefastly replied to her father that she was ready to do whatsoever he 
wished ; and so, to make no delay about the matter. Signor Girondo, with the con- 
sent of all their kinsfolk, gave the fair Belfiore the ring with due ceremony of accus- 
tomed words ; whereat infinite was the cimtentment of Messer Lionato and all his 
family. Moreover, for that Don Timbreo had espoused his dear Fenicia under the 
name of Lucilla, he then and there espoused her anew under her true name ; and so 
all the day was spent in dancing and delight. 



APPENDIX 


326 

To tlie rest of the story, which extends over six or seven pages more, delightful 
and satisfactory as it all is, space cannot be accorded here. Signor Scipione Atellano 
dwells with keen delight on every lovely feature of Fenicia, her mouth, her eyes, her 
hair, her neck, her breast, her arms, her hands, — ‘ her every sign and movement was 
full of infinite grace and it seemed she needs must ravish the hearts of all beholders 
by main force. Wherefore who named her Fenicia nowise departed from the truth, 
for that she was indeed a phoenix who far excelled all other damsels in beauty.’ (If 
Bandello accepted this name from some older story, he failed to appreciate, I think, 
its full significance when applied to one who arose, with renewed beauty, as it were 
from the tomb. If he devised it himself, he ‘builded better than he knew.’ ) A mes- 
senger was sent to the King to tell him the happy story, so that when the joyous com- 
pany returned from the country house to Messina to celebrate the nuptials, they were 
met in the way by all the gentleman and gentlewomen of the city, the barons of the 
realm and an innumerable company of knights and gentlemen led by the King’s 
son ; at the entrance to the city the King himself with the Queen met them and rode 
to the royal palace, the King between Messer Lionato and Don Timbreo, the Queen 
between Fenicia and Belfiore. * There they dined sumptuously and after dinner, Don 
Timbreo, by commandment of the King, recounted, in the presence of all the company, 
the whole history of his loves ; which done, they fell to dancing and the King kept 
open court all that week.’ Honours were bestowed by the King on Lionato, and to 
Fenicia and Belfiore he gave dowers almost as lavish as though they were his own 
daughters. 

After having given Bandello’ s Novel at such length, space and patience exclaim 
against giving in full Belle-Forest’s version of it. I shall here translate only such 
extracts as seem to me to have any bearing on either Die schoene Phaenicia of Jacob 
Ayrer, or Much Ado about Nothing. 


BELLE-FOREST 

The story of Timbr^e de Cardone is to be found in Le Troisiesme Tome des His- 
toires Tragiques, extraittes des ocuures lialiennes de Bandel, Contenant dix-huit His- 
toiresy traduites <Sr* enrichies outre Vinuention de V Auteur : Par Franfois de Belle- 
-Forest Covtingeois. Paris, 1582, page 475 (misnumbered 450). It thus begins : — 

The chronicles not only of P'rance and Spain but also of Naples and Sicily are 
adequately full of accounts of that memorable and cruel butchery of the French 
which took place in Sicily A. D. 1283.* 

The author of the conspiracy, a man named Jean Prochite, was thereto instigated 
by Peter, King of Arragon, who wished to take possession of the island. The mas- 
sacre received the name, Sicilian Vespers, because it was on Easter eve when the PTench 
were at the vesper service that this abominable treachery and brutal cruelty was car- 
ried out. . . . The King of Arragon, having halted in this city, Messina, there held 
his court with much gaiety in honour of his victory, giving many feasts to the gentle- 
men who had followed him, and they in turn devised a thousand trials of skill in 
arms, not only to give pleasure to the King but also to exercise themselves in an 
occupation so noble and becoming to high-born gentlemen. In this grand troupe of 
Seigneurs and followers of the King there was one who was held in high esteem for 
his valour, and for his proofs of gallantry in all the wars against the P'rench and else- 


* See note, in Bandello. 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT^BELLE^FOREST 


327 


where, and was greatly beloved and favoured by the King ; this gentleman was called 
Timbr^e de Cardone ; it is with him that this story chiefly deals because of the love 
he bore to a young girl of Messina, whose father, named Lionato de I-.ionati, belonged 
to an ancient Sicilian house. This damsel, Fenicie, was fair among the fairest, lovely 
and courteous, and in gentle grace and sweet deportment excelled all who in those 
days were in the royal city of Messina. Well, this Timbrfie was very rich, and had, 
in addition to his royal fee, an income of more than twelve thousand ducats ; but in 
spite of his wealth and the royal favour, Love ceased not to attack him, and having 
gotten the advantage, made him his slave by means of the perfect beauty of Fenicie, 
who was still very young, and, although hardly more than fourteen or fifteen years 
old, was ever refined, demure, quick-witted, and for her modesty greatly commended. 
No sooner had the poison of love entered Timbr^e’s veins through his eyes by looking 
on Fenicia, just as formerly Dido received it by kissing Cupid who had assumed the 
face and form of the little Trojan Ascanius, than Timbrde ceased not from passing 
and re-passing before Lionato’ s house merely to catch a glimpse of her he adored, so 
unbounded is the passion of love that the eye once struck by the arrow of Cupid, 
transmits the wound and the conceit to the heart. . . . Fenicie seeing this gentleman 
thus walking to and fro before her house, and casting sheeps’ eyes at her with signs 
which urged her to listen to his prayer, suspected very soon the cause, and noting 
that he was richly clad, besides being handsome, young and gallant and gracious, 
she turned a favourable eye on him, and when he saluted her, she returned it with 
respectful politeness. . . . The Count de Colisan determined to try every means to 
gain the young girl and to bend her to his wishes, for at this time he thought not of 
marriage, inasmuch as she was no even match with him. He managed it so well that 
he induced an old woman of the household of Lionato to carry a letter to Fenicie 
which would prepare the way to the attainment of his designs. This is the letter 
which the crone gave to her young mistress, when neither her mother nor any mem- 
ber of the family was present. [The letter is couched in terms of high-flown com- 
pliment and admiration, and ends with the entreaty to ‘ be allowed to say at nearer 
‘ hand and to her alone that which he would neither dare nor wish to say by any 
‘messenger, but to her, his sole hope, alone.’ Fenicie as she read, blushed at the 
compliments, but at once told the old woman to say to the Count de Colisan that she 
was greatly offended at his wish to speak to her in secret.] * You will tell him that 
‘ I obey two chief masters (see Ayrcr,) : duty and honour, the first, forbids such practices 
‘ without the consent of my parents, and the second would not suffer them until my 
‘ eyes are veiled to the maidenly shame of all young girls like myself. As for loving 
‘ him, I see nothing strange in that ; nor has the Count any cause to hate me by 
‘ seeking to deprive me of that reputation which I hope in God will make me proud 
‘both before him and before all the world.’ Having been thus foiled in his first 
attempt, the Count de Colisan proceeded to pour out his soul in a ‘ Chanson,’ (which 
fills five pages of the text), and entrusted it to the old woman. Fenicie read this 
song, and although she acknowledged that it was the best written thing {la chose la 
mieux faite) that she had seen for a long time (see Ayrer) she still remained firm, 
and would say nought to any man whom her father did not think fit to marry her. 
After this second repulse, Timbree retired to his chamber, and there, with profuse 
tears and profound sighs, resolves to win Fenicie as his wife — (It may be curious to 
note, that in his searching self-analysis, Timbree discovers a noteworthy physiological 
difference in sighs : ‘ These breezes,’ he says, ‘ which arise from my stomach, and 
‘ indicate the depth of my woe, are not sighs ; a sigh brings relief ; but these exhala- 



APPENDIX 


328 

* tions from my entrails only increase the flame which consumes me.* Clearly, here 
we have one of the passages with which Belle-Forest, as he says in his title, has 
‘ enriched * the story of Bandello. ) Accordingly Timbr^e sends by a friend a formal 
demand for the hand of Fenicie in marriage. Messer Lionato accedes with alacrity, 
and then hastens to tell his wife of the honour proffered to them by the Count of 
Coclisan (thus, in the original, — ^but the old gentleman, in his trembling joy, may not 
have got the name quite right), Fenicie, too, acquiesced, with gratitude to Heaven 
for this reward of chastity. But fortune was preparing a cross for them in the person 
of Gironde Olerie Valerian, a valiant gentleman, and one of the most liberal and 
magnificent of all the courtiers. This nobleman was deeply in love with Fenicie, 
and accordingly resolved to break off by stratagem the proposed match, and then 
when Fenicie was discarded to marry her himself. To carry out his design Gironde 
had recourse to a courtier, of perfect manners, but at heart disloyal, false, treacher- 
ous, and ready for any evil deed as long as profit in purse might accrue. This per- 
fidious man (name not given) in an interview with Timbr^e, defames Fenicie and 
offers proof, if TimbriSe will conceal himself, at eleven o’clock that evening in some 
old ruins opposite Lionato’ s garden ; the spot indicated was opposite to a quarter of 
the house never used by the family. At the appointed hour Gironde, his accomplice, 
and one of his servants, most richly dressed and perfumed, repair thither with a 
ladder. While awaiting them in his hiding-place, TimbrOe has time to indulge in 
three pages of moralising on the fickleness of woman, — another of Belle-Forest’s 
‘ enrichments otherwise, Bandello is here followed closely in the main line of the 
story, even to the play on the word * Cometo,’ which Belle-Forest translates, ‘ Corn- 
wall,* (CornoUaille), In describing Timbr^c’s state as he leaves the hiding place, the 
French translator represents him as ‘marmonnant la patenostre du singe auec bourdon- 
nement* (Cotgrave translates patenostre du sin^e, * a diddering, or chattering with the 
teeth ;* this picture of our hero may be true, but it cannot be called attractive). Where 
Bandello says that Timbreo * slept very little for the rest of the night,’ Belle-Forest 
enriched the remark with the addition, ‘as though he had a flea in his ear.’ Ban- 
dello is closely followed in representing, on the part of the many friends who gath- 
ered about Fenicie, a firm, unanimous belief in her innocence. (The thrifty Ayrer 
is alone in his message from Tymborus that Phaenicia could keep all the presents he 
had sent her.) Belle-Forest’s Epitaph is a free translation of Bandello, but still it is 
an Epitaph of the same number of lines. In this portion of the story, until it comes 
to the re-union of Timbreo and Fenicia, any discrepancies between Bandello and 
his translator are unimportant ; they have no influence whatever on Shakespeare’s 
comedy. Fenicia’ s sister is called ‘ Belfiore* in Bandello ; the name in Belle-Forest 
is translated ‘ Bellefleur,* wherein he is followod by Ayrer, who gives it ‘ Be]|eflura.* 
Belle-Forest cannot refrain from improving his original ; when Fenicia’ s aunt, at the 
closing banquet, asks her ‘ merry question * w'hether Timbreo had ever before been 
married, — in Bandello the responsive tears are shed by Timbreo alone ; this is not 
enough for Belle-Forest, according to whom the company join in and the weeping 
becomes general, but, he is careful to add, the bridegroom wept the most. In answer 
to the Aunt’ s question as to what he would do to see his former bride again, Timbr^e 
replies that like a second Orpheus he would descend to hell, — a simile not in Ban- 
dello, but which so pleased Ayrer that he adopted it. Belle-Forest omits Bandello* s 
description of Fenicia* s beauty, and the royal procession which escorts to the palace 
the happy grooms, their brides and Lionato* s family, and all mention of the king’s 
bounty, etc. Thrice he refers to Fenicia and her sister as ‘mirrors of modesty,* 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT-^AYRER 


329 

which may have, possibly, suggested Ayrefs title : TAe Mirror of Womanly Virtue^ 
or his song of The Maiden's Mirror, 


DIE schop:ne phaenicia 

We may safely concede that in one respect there is a strong likeness between 
Jacob Ayrer and William Shakespeare, namely : all that we really know of 
their lives may be told in a few lines. It is supposed that Ayrer came as a poor lad 
to Niirmbcrg ; toiled as an ironmonger ; went to Bamberg, rose to be Court-proctor ; 
left Bamberg on account of Protestantism ; returned to Nurmberg where in 1593 he 
became a citizen, again became Court-proctor and Imperial Notary, and died in 
March 1605. Toward the close of his life, by way of relaxation from official cares, 
he composed thirty Tragedies and Comedies, and thirty-six Shrovetide plays or Farces, 
all of which were published after his cfcath in a Folio, (a volume more scarce than 
the First Folio of Shakespeare,) wherein the Preface states that he had written forty 
more pieces, — such as they were. Only seventy pieces, however, have come down 
to us.* Many of them show a marked English influence not alone in the theatrical 
arrangements but in the introduction of a Clown. Moreover, in the Preface^ it is 
expressly stated that they were composed after the English fashion, and to many of 
the songs are given the names of English tunes. CoiiN concludes that there is 
‘nothing improbable in the supposition that all Ayrer’ s pieces were composed between 
‘the years 1593 and 1605.’ f 

Of Ayrer’ s plays Die Schoene Phaenicia has been brought into close connection 
with Much Ado about Nothing, Extracts from this play, admirably translated into 
English verse by Professor Thomas Solly, will be found in Cohn’s excellent 
volume. J For the sake of greater freedom the following passages are given in 
prose, — only those passages, moreover, wherein I can detect any relationship whatso- 
ever between Ayrer’ s play and Shakespeare’s. The translation is made from my copy 
of the Folio. 

Its title is : — 

A Mirror of Womanly Virtue and Honour. The Comedy of the fair phaenicia 
and COUNT tymrorus of gouson from Arragon, haw they fared in their honour- 
able lave until they were united in marriage. 

Dramatis Person — given at the end of the comedy. 

Peter, King of Arragon. 

Tymborus, Count of Golison^ his War- Counsellor, 

♦Reinhart 'i 

Dieterich 

Lionato of Tonete, an old nobleman, [Incorrectly given ; Lionito'] 

Veracundia, his wife. 

Phaenicia, his daughter. 

Belleflura, sister to Phaenicia. 

Venus, the Goddess of Lave. 

*Godeke, Grundriss zur Geschichte der deutschen Dichtung^ 2te Aflge, 1886, 

8. SS»- 

f Shakespeare in Germany^ 1865, p. Ixiv. 

t Shakespeare in Germany , p. 76. 



330 


APPENDIX 


Cupid, her son with his bow and arrows, 

Phyllis, attendant on Phaenicia. 

Lionitus, an old nobleman of Messina. [Incorrectly i Leonatus’l 
Gerando, a Knighty named Olerius Valerian. 

Anna Maria, a lady* s-maid. 

Jahn, a clown, 

Malchus, a braggart y or trickster, 

Gerwalt, a tricky nobleman. 

[Enter VenuSy attired like a goddessy in a flowing robe with bare neck and armsy and 
angrily says .*] I must here proclaim my chagrin, because Tymborius, the Count of 
Golison, of the royal Court of Arragon, makes a jest of me and my son ; he bears him- 
self like a man, and is strong and firm ; he was the bravest in the last war, when 
Prochyte began that great massacre in Sicily which is called ‘ the Sicilian Vespers.* 
But because there are so many people here present who might hear me and thwart my 
plans, I’ll keep silent. [She bethinks herself and then goes on to say that her heart 
is ready to burst with rage because in times past she has conquered so many redoubt- 
able warriors and turned them by love for women into fops and weaklings, but this 
Count is her bitter foe and treats her abominably. ] Cupid has shot many a bolt at 
him but they have all flown wide, so that Vulcan is angry with Cupid and will forge 
no more arrows for him, and he is horribly angry with me too ; wherefore I must 
devise a way whereby I can beguile this knight into falling in love. The King has 
proclaimed a tournament, here in Messina ; and I will do my utmost that the knight 
shall there fall in love with Phaenicia, a young girl sixteen years old, and the fairest 
creature on earth, and the warrior* s heart shall swim about in the boundless sea of 
love ; so that all will confess my power. 

[Enter Cupid with eyes blindfoldy as he is picturedy and with an arrow set in his 
b(nv.'\ 

Cupid. Frau Mother, be no longer vexed. My father, angry Vulcan, has forged 
some arrows for me, wherewith, he says, I cannot fail, but will surely hit whatever 
I aim at. 

Venus is delighted and says that they must now subdue Tymborus ; and if Cupid is 
successful, she will, inasmuch as he has not had a stitch of clothing on since he was 
bom, buy him a beautiful suit of clothes such as the gods wear. [Exeunt. 

Enter Jahn, with an arrow dishonourably lodged, and, holding his hands over the 
spot, alternately bewails his pain and proclaims his love for Anna Maria. His out- 
cries bring his master, Gerando, who promises that he will urge his suit with Anna 
Maria, and that he himself will even woo the girl for him. [Exeunt. 

Enter King Peter of Arragon, his two Counsellors and Tymborus ; to them the King 
recalls that he has proclaimed a tournament in honour of his late victory over the 
French wherein * Prochyte had lent his aid, and started that massacre in Sicily, which 
‘has been long known in history as the Sicilian Vespers.* Hereupon ‘ all the ladies 
* ascend the battlements and gaze down from them.* * In the tournament which fol- 
lows, Tymborus vanquishes all opponents ; among them, Gerando, who when all 
have departed, tells, in a soliloquy, of his bitter hatred for Tymborus, and, inasmuch 
as it is impossible to do him any harm in a fair fight, he will bring him to shame and 
ignominy through false practices, and so be revenged on him. [Exit in anger, 

* Cohn {Shakespeare in Germany y p. 83) calls attention to this stage-direction as 
an indication that the stage was set after the English fashion, with a balcony. 




SOURCE OF THE PLOT-^AYRER 


331 


Enter Venus and Cupid. Venus orders Cupid to conceal himself and during the 
festivities which follow to shoot Tymborus at the right minute so that he will burn 
with love for Phaenicia. The Court enters. During the dance, Cupid’s arrow is 
shot, and with such instant effect that Tymborus turns to the audience and says that 
he will die if he does not obtain the love of the fair Phaenicia. After the Court is 
gone Venus praises Cupid for his good aim, and expresses her determination to make 
Tymborus woo Phaenicia dishonourably. (There is no trace of this in Bandello. It 
is found in Belle- Forest. ) But make him finally fail, and win her only to lawful wed- 
lock. Cupid reminds his mother of his suit of clothes. \^Exeunt, 

Enter Gerando, solus^ and while he is saying how he will spread the net for 
Tymborus, Anna Maria enters ; to her he discloses the ardent love which she has 
inspired, but when she learns that her lover is his servant, Jahii, she becomes indig- 
nant, and refuses to hear any more of the suit. Gerando then plots with her to 
summon Jahn to her house, and, when the lad is directly under her window, to cool 
his ardour with a pail of water. Anna Maria agrees and exit. Jahn enters ; to him 
his master explains that Anna Maria is deeply in love with him, and requests him to 
come to her house on the next evening at eight o’clock. The Clown joyfully prom- 
ises to be punctual. 

Enter Tymborus, solus, and contrasts his former proud estate with his present sub- 
jection to Phaenicia, and asserts that he will die unless he possess her love. He 
remembers that though noble by birth she is poor, and he knows that she is virtuous ; 
his friends will laugh at him ; he might have chosen a princess but would not ; he 
will write her a letter and beg her not to let him die for love but to grant his prayer 
and he will give her what she will ; no, he will walk before her house in hope of 
seeing her or of speaking to her ; should this fail he will serenade her this evening 
and sing a little song rehearsing his longings, and he will continue to do this, until he 
receives a favourable answer. \^Exit, 

Enter Jahn, on his way to keep his appointment with Anna Maria, and as he 
approaches the house smacks his lips over his anticipated joys. Gerando answers 
him from the window in a feigned voice, and at an opportune moment pours a pail 
of water on his head. Jahn departs in a rage, shaking off the water and forswearing 
all attempts at future wooing. 

Enter Tymborus with his musicians to serenade Phaenicia, and sings a song 
beginning : — 

O Venus, goddess fair and mild 
How hast thou now enslaved me, ay enslaved me I 

The arrows of thy blindfold child 
Have utterly out-braved me, ay, out-braved me ! 

Whereby deep woe has filled my heart, 

List to my love’ s sad moaning, ay moaning ! 

For shouldst thou now not take my part 
My days will end in groaning, ay groaning I 

Five more stanzas of similar doggerel follow. (No one has ever ventured to 
assert that Shakespeare imitated Ayrer in his love-songs. ) But there is no response 
from the window, and Tjnnborus and his band depart. 

The curiosity, however, of Lionato, the old nobleman, and of Veracundia, his 
wife, Phaenicia’ s parents, is excited, and when the young girl is questioned by her 
mother, she replies that she supposes the serenader to be Tymborus who had danced 



332 


APPENDIX 


witli her Qiiid pressed her hsiiidy &t the hd.ll. IXer mother wdms her to be very cir- 
cumspect in her behaviour toward such a rich and powerful nobleman, and, should 
he make any proposal to her, to refer him to her parents. Phaenicia promises to keep 
the Fourth Commandment, and shortly after when leaving the house with her maid to 
purchase some groceries, she meets Tymborus who offers her money and gifts in pro- 
fusion in return for her love, but she modestly refers him to her parents and leaves him. 

The Second Act opens with some foolery by the Clown, Jahn, who displays a bag 
of money which he has just inherited from his mother but of which he is robbed by 
Malchus, who, dressed up in a sheet, pretends to be the ghost of the old Mother just 
from Purgatory. Jahn has his suspicions that something is wrong when the Ghost says 
that her name is Anima when in reality it was Ursula ; he is nevertheless robbed. 

In the next scene Phaenicia returns indignantly to Philis a letter from Tymborus 
which the maid had brought and bids her tell the Count that she will receive no more 
letters ; that from her youth up, she has known two good masters [Pelle-Forest] : the 
fear of God, and Modesty, and that if his intentions are honourable he must speak 
to her father. This answer is carried to Tymborus, who bribes Philis to take to 
Phaenicia one more song in which he has poured out all his heart. After the maid’ s 
departure Tymborus comes to the sensible conclusion that he had better woo Phaenicia 
honourably, every other avenue of approach was hopeless ; so he calls to his aid old 
Lionitus who gladly consents to lay before Lionato, Phaenicia’ s father, the Count’s 
proposal for her hand. And the Act ends with an interview between parent and 
child, in which it is settled that Phaenicia shall accept the suit of I'ymborus. The 
Song, by the way, was sung to Phaenicia by Philis, and the former declared that she 
had never listened to one more sweet (see Belle-Forest). 

The Third Act begins with the recovery of his money by Jahn; he catches Mal- 
chus and beats it out of him. Gerando appears richly clad and bewails his .sad loss 
of Phaenicia with whom, it appears, he was deeply in love, and of whom Tymborus 
has now robbed him. He sends Jahn to fetch Gcrwalt, ‘ The nobleman,’ asks Jahn, 
• who is so full of evil practices ?’ When Gerwalt appears Gerando discloses to him 
how wretched he is over losing Phaenicia. Gerwalt promises that he will prevent 
her marriage to Tymborus ; that he will go to the Count, and traduce Phaenicia ; 
tell him that people say scandalous things of her conduct with young men in her 
garden ; that he shall be made to lie in wait there, at night, by moonlight ; that 
Gerando must be there, with his servant dressed up as a woman, with whom he, 
Gerwalt, would converse in a friendly manner as though he were Phaenicia, that he 
would walk up and down with the servant, and at last conceal themselves so that 
the Count cannot see them, then the Count will believe in her downfall, and refuse 
to be married to her. ' \^Exeunt^ 

Enter Tymborus, saying : * To day is the very happiest of days, because it is per- 
mitted me to call Phaenicia mine. Vanished are all pain and sorrow ; all my vexa- 
tion is over, all my desire is to her ; for I have chosen the better part, in that I have 
preferred her virtue and modesty to worldly goods. Now I am joyous and happy. 
God guard us both and let us long live together I [ 7'he Count walks to and fro 
waving his hands. To him enters Gerwalt, 

Gerwalt. Pardon, gracious Sir, what ails your grace that you are so melancholy? 

Tymborus, Nay, marry, I am walking here, lost in loving, sweet thoughts. Until 
now, I had as much pain as a sick man, but, thank God ! the pains are all vanished 
and 1 am as jocund as a man in sound health. I have put away every thing gloomy 
because"! have now gained Phaenicia, the fairest of maidens. 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT^AYRER 


333 

Gerwalt, Gracious Sir, be on your guard that you are not deceived in her. I 
would not begrudge your grace, but you do not rightly know Phaenicia. 

Tymborits. No defamation of my bride 1 if you wish to remain my friend. 

Gerwalt, Gracious Sir, I do not defame her. But merely say that your grace 
should look to it, and you will not ascribe to her as much virtue as you are inclined 
to impute to her. 

Tymborus, Is not this defamation? You do not leave me until you say what you 
know of her. Or else we ’ll have it out together on the spot. 

Gct'tualt. Gracious Sir, I say nothing. But this very night you may see what takes 
place in her garden by moonlight. 

Tymborus. How shall I get there, forsooth? The gate is bolted. 

GenvaU. There is a good ladder there ; creep into the hazel-bushes, and stay there 
without moving or panting, and then you can both see and hear what I will compass 
with her. And after, put what trust in her you may. 

lymborus, I cannot believe it of the maiden. But what the eye sees the heart 
cannot deny. Hence ; night is coming on. I’ll soon be in the garden. 

l^Exii Tymborus, 

Genvalt, Now for Jahn, and to deceive the Count. \^ExU, 

Here follows a very short scene between Veracundia and her daughter, Phaenicia, 
which gives new proofs of the latter’s piety, morality, and respect for her parents. 

\^Exeunt, 

A ladder is seen leaning against the entrance. Tymborus descends as though he 
had climbed over the wall. 

Tymborus. Here am I in the garden, ready for the adventure, whereby Gerwalt 
promised to reveal to me the truth. \^Hiding himsdf in a corner.'] The moon will 
now show me everything that goes on. [Genvait descends, followed by Jahn in 
female apparel. Gerwalt takes Jahn by the handy Jahn pranks ity like a woman,] 

Genvalt. Ah, Phaenicia, dearest sweetheart mine, at last we are alone and can 
complete our wooing. 

Jahn. Hush ! lest my father hear. 

[ They walk tip and down and sit down together, 

Tymborus. Soho ! and is it really true ! I must say I never would have believed 
it had I not heard it and partly seen it. The devil take thee, thou wanton, shame- 
less piece ! I thought thou wert the modestest creature upon earth, and thou art 
the most abandoned light o’ love. To the gallows with thee ! I will to Lionato and 
break off the marriage. \^Exit in a rage. 

Gerwalt [/<? Jahn], Come, let us go home. 

Jahn, What have we done here ? Nothing. I’ve not seen a soul. 

Gerufalt. You’ll soon 6nd out what’s been done. [They ascend the ladder, 

A short family scene here follows in Phaenicia’ s home. The wedding preparations 
are discussed, together with the bride’s trousseau^ no special dresses are mentioned. 
It is evidently very early in the morning; when Lionito, Tymborus’ s messenger, 
knocks at the door, Veracundia asks, ‘\Vho knocks so early?’ When Lionito 
enters he begs pardon in advance for what he is about to say and then proceeds ; — ^The 
Count has sent me hither to decline the marriage which, in his name, I lately 
arranged with you, and further states that your daughter is devoid of honour ; it 
therefore does not befit his rank to lead such a v^ench to the altar. His presents to 
her, she may keep. 

Phaenicia [advancing]. Assuredly, God for ever reigns 1 Who has told the Count 



334 


APPENDIX 


that I liave acted unchastely ; it does me gross wrong. No luxury have I practised 
and never in my life have I done what you have now imputed to me. God be my 
witness I To maintain my innocence I’ll submit to the ordeal of hot iron. O God, 
could I exchange Thy worship for impure love ? and allow foul desires to seduce me ? 
Be such things far from me for ever ! To Thee, Lord God ! I commend myself. I 
die of agony I [She sinks down^ the others sustain her, 

Lionatus, Must my daughter die before her innocence is proved ? 1 will prove it, 
when she is gone. For well I know that she is wrongly treated. 

Lionito, Herr Father, be not vexed with me. For my part, I cannot say who has 
stirred up the Count. But perhaps we may be able to find out. [Exit, 

Veracundia, Philis, there is precious aqua vitae in my small coffer, — and fetch other 
restoratives. [ To Phaenicia'] Darling daughter, be appeased. Give me some sign 
to let me know you live. 

Lionatus, What can she give ? She is dead. God have mercy on her ! Her limbs 
are all relaxed. [Philis returns with water and restoratives^ which are applied, 

Veracundia, Her strength is coming back, a little. She has just fetched a 
breath. 

lionatus. Bear her away at once. Should her strength return, we must see what 
her case demands. [ They walk her up and down. At last she speaks, 

Phcunicia, Oh, Gk)d, alas, what has happened to me! What lovely visions 
I have had. I am sure I must have been in heaven. My strength is gone, take 
me away. [Exeunt the women with Phaenicia, 

Lionatus, We will put on mourning garments, so that people may still for awhile 
believe that Phaenicia is dead. We will bear a coffin to church, and bury it instead 
of her. Perhaps, the Count might then repent of his treatment of her, and might 
learn from some better account that she had never acted unchastely, and then again 
receive her to himself. Well I know that some wrong has been done her. God will 
not let the truth be suppressed. Perhaps the Count will change his mind, and long 
anew for his bride. [Exit, 

The Fourth Act opens with a procession of servants, in mourning, bearing a coffin 
covered with a pall ; they set down the coffin, whereon is written, ‘ To the Memory 
Of the Noble, Innocent, Virtuous Phaenicia, daughter of the l^netas then all 
retire. Jahn enters, reads the inscription, and then hurries away to tell his master. 
Tymborus enters clad in mourning and speaks sorrowfully : — O woe ! O woe, wretched 
man that I am ! O woe, O woe, what have I done, thus to believe Gerwalt. He 
robbed me of my senses, and fooled me like a fool. And I have just as much mur- 
dered Phaenicia as if I had stabbed her heart. O woe, it cannot stay unavenged. 
Would that the vengeance might fall speedily, and take my life ! Must I be guilty 
of thy death, thou who wast as chaste and pure as an angel I How can I expiate this 
evil deed ! Despair is mine ! [He^ walks to and fro. 

Enter Gerando, also in mournings followed by Jahn weeping, 

Gerandq [moumfully,"] Woe, for the sorrowful story ! Would I had never been 
bom ! I have done a heavy wrong, which smites me the heaviest. Could I bnt 
meet the Count and secure from him the punishment I deserve. I am guilty and will 
suffer every thing. 

Tymhorous [approaching Gerandd\, Gerando, what may it mean that you are thus 
mourning? 

Gerando, Gracious Sir, I will show you the cause of my sorrow, if you will enter 
the church with me. 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT^AYRER 


335 

As they are entering the church Gerando sends John to fetch Gerwalt. They 
approach the coffin. 

Tymborus, O Phaenicia, thou supreme crown of all ! Mirror of maidens, com- 
pact of all virtue I How shamefully didst thou here die in thy bloom. Behold me, 
ye matrons and maidens, bowed down with sorrow. My misery moves me to take 
my own life for the sake of my dearly loved darling. 

[Gerando restrains him, draws his sword, throws himself on one knee before him, 

Gerando, Ah, gracious Sir, I alone am guilty of this deed, which Gerwalt insti- 
gated. Take the sword I offer and in my bosom drive it home ; else I myself will 
do it. Let all men here behold me, the man who has been the ruin of such fair 
young years, the crown and ornament of every virtue. My life too is lost, through 
Gerwalt’ s guile who tempted me with falsehood. 

Tymborus [raising Gerando.] This is all so strange to me. Tell me, I pray, what 
it all means. 

Gerando [humbly. \ Gracious Sir, I will tell all truly. Phaenicia was so dear to 
me that I desired to marry her, and when your grace had won her, I almost died for 
grief ; driven by my great love I sought to hinder your marriage but knew no means. 
Then Gerwalt devised a way to do it, and I followed it. But how the game began 
and how he carried it out, your grace knows much better than I. Yet I implore you 
to pardon me or to punish me as I deserve. I will endure everything with patience. 

Tymborus. O woe ! O sorrow 1 for this great disgrace I My prophetic soul mis- 
trusted Gerwalt. Your words have shown me how I have killed my dearest. And 
yet I cannot be your foe. But will take it for what amends you can make, if you 
will beg forgiveness, first, of this dead maiden, and then of her two parents whose 
misery is great. But as for Gerwalt, — I swear an oath that if ever I meet that varlet 
he shall receive a reward which he will remember all his life long. 

Gerando. Let us go to the maiden lying there in her grave, and I will implore her 
forgiveness. [ They draw near the coffin and Gerando, prostrating himself. Ah, 
Phaenicia, image of loveliness, by all thy virtues mild, by the love I bore thee but 
which brought this shame upon thee, I entreat that thou wilt forgive my fault. A 
wicked wrong have I done to thee, of whom nought else was known but virtue and 
honour. Thou wert a fountain of all honesty and a mirror for all maidens. By my 
honour and faith all this I say, and otherwise could I not speak of thee. 

Tymborus [prostrating himself It is my fault, too, that I put trust in that wicked 
villain, who deceived me concerning thee, and that I broke off my marriage. Pardon 
the fault, I pray, that I should have allowed suspicion there to lodge, where I should 
have known there was only innocence. [They arise and clasp hands."] Ah, could 
I but awaken her from death, life, glory, wealth, and every thing the world holds 
dear, I would put into the hazard. 

Jahn returns and reports that Gerwalt is fled. Tymborus swears vengeance on 
him. 

Jahn. Indeed, upon my word, he was a rogue. He dressed me up in women’s 
clothes and made me walk round the garden with him, and called me Phaenicia and 
pretended he was in love with me. 

Tymborus. Had I known who you two were I would have made it sweet for you. 

Jahn. That would have made me split with laughter. I never could have run in 
those clothes. [The only stroke of real humour in the play.] [Exeunt. 

The Scene changes to Lionatus’s house, where Lionatus is telling Veracundia the 
reports of the penitence of Tymborus, who now enters* 



APPENDIX 


336 

Tymborus, It grieves me, father-in-law, to see your sorrow. It could not grieve 
me more were it my own. 

Lionatus, Woe to those who are to blame for the loss of my dear child ! But since 
God has taken her out of this wretched life, to Himself, He can restore her, if it be 
the Divine will, 

Tymborus [^kneeling]. Oh heavens, I am much guilty therefor. Would God, I 
could bring her back. 

Gerando [also kneeling], I am the chiefest cause of all this misery, but in God’s 
name, I beg for pardon, which if you will not grant me, thrust me through with my 
rapier. 1 have well deserved it. 

Tymborus, Ah Heavens, I am the chiefest cause ; I broke off the marriage. The 
great sin I committed cannot be forgiven me. ’Twas I who thereby killed her. Ah, 
if it be possible, take me, father-in-law, again into your favour. Full well I know 
that I was wrong, and spoke evilly of your innocent daughter, and that I believed 
too hastily. I resign myself to you, do with me as you please. 

Lionatus, ’Tis true, my gracious Lord, you did believe too hastily and robbed of 
life my pious daughter, whom I had brought up in virtue, and on me, too, you have 
brought wretchedness. 

Tymborus, ’Tis I who bear the greatest pain and wretchedness. First, because I 
believed too quickly, and next because I have thereby lost her. Wretched man that 
I am ! No one but God can help me and lighten my sorrow. Pray, father, be gra- 
cious to me ; let me be your son, and as long as I live I will in all things obey you. 

Lionatus, Consider yourself as forgiven, my gracious Lord, and so far comply with 
me that when you contemplate marriage, you will marry according to my counsel. 
God grant that no harm come of it ; I will give you only good counsel. 

Jymborus, This offer is far too much. I should not have dared to expect it. I 
accept it, therefore, in good faith, and be assured that I will do nothing hereafter 
without your knowledge. Age always gives good counsel. 

Gerando, To me, also, grant forgiveness; I acted very foolishly. As I have 
begged pardon of Phaenicia, so now 1 beg some love from you. 

Lionatus, Unhappily, what is done is done. It is a deep grief that you followed 
the counsels of a fool, and so heedlessly injured me and all my family. You, too, 
shall have nothing from me to atone for, — ^but do not again refer to the way in which 
you killed my daughter ; let not my woe break out afresh. Come, enter and sup 
with me. [Exeunt, 

The Fifth Act opens with a soliloquy from Jahn, who concludes that he will not 
serve Gerando any longer. He has not forgotten the pail of water from Anna Maria’s 
window, nor the share in Phaenicia’ s death which his master obliged him to take ; 
he therefore gives notice to Gerando that he must provide himself with another ser- 
vant. Tymborus and Gerando meet and renew the expressions of their remorse. 
Tymborus says that he never will marry but mourn Phaenicia to the end of his days. 
They decide to pay a visit to Lionatus, who in the next scene unfolds to his wife his 
plan to call Phaenicia Lucilia, and under that name to present her to Tymborus ; his 
second daughter, Belleflura, he will give to Gerando. Tymborus and Gerando enter, 
both still in deep grief. Lionatus bids them disregard the irremediable past, etc, etc. , 
and finally tells Tymborus that he has a bride for him, the counterpart of Phaenicia, 
but she is not here, she is in his castle outside the city, and her name is Lucilia ; 
* thither,’ Lionatus ends with saying, < we will invite ourselves as guests, and 1 hope 
all will go well.’ 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT-STARTER 


337 


The scene evidently changes to Lionatus’ s castle, where Phaenicia is holding a 
short conversation with her sister, Belleflura, and moralising on the superior advan- 
tage resulting from being modest and from obeying one’s parents. The two depart, 
and Lionatus enters leading Tymboms by the hand, followed by Gerando, Veracun- 
dia and maid. All seat themselves, after mutual salutations, and Veracundia and 
the maid hand round refreshments. Lionatus refers to the young bride he has 
chosen for Tymborus, and tells Gerando that he has one also for him. While they 
are drinking, Phaenicia and Belleflura enter, beautifully and modestly attired ; they 
give their hands first to the strangers and then to their parents ; and serve round the 
refreshments. Tymborus looks at Phaenicia ; then takes Gerando aside and tells 
him that he believes Phaenicia’ s soul animates Lucilia’ s body, which seems Phaeni- 
cia’ s very own. Lionatus asks Lucilia if she could accept the Count ; her only 
demur is that she is not his equal in rank, but Tymborus gallantly replies that the 
wife takes rank from her husband, and that he will marry none but her. Lionatus 
gives the couple his blessing and Tymborus and Gerando say ‘ Amen 1’ Phae- 
nicia asks the Count if he had never been married before. This re-awakens all 
T^rmborus’ s remorse and he bewails his lost Phaenicia for whose sake he would, like 
Orpheus, descend to hell. [Belle- Forest.] Lionatus interferes and says the jest has 
now been carried long enough and that Lucilia is Phaenicia, whom they bewailed as 
dead but God had restored her to life to be T)nnborus’s bride. ‘Ah, Phaenicia,’ cried 
Tymborus, ‘ art thou still alive I Then art thou dearer to me than ever V Both unite in 
praising God for his goodness. Lionatus leads Belleflura to Gerando, and gives her 
to him as a bride ; Gerando’ s abysmal despair is turned into exuberant joy. Praise 
to God is given by all for this abounding bliss ; Veracundia announces that she was 
never so happy before in all her life ; Lionatus bids them prepare the house for the 
nuptials, to which his majesty shall be invited, and promises sports and dancing and 
merrymaking for eight whole days. He calls for a song in conclusion, which is then 
given in eleven stanzas, whereof one, I think, will be adequately soul-satisfying. It 
is called ‘ The Maiden’s Mirror ’ 

Ihr zarten Jungfraun hOrt mir zu 
Von aller Jungfrau Spiegel 
Vnd merckt was ich euch singen thu 
Von der zucht wahren Spiegel 
Gottes forcht wist 
Der anfang ist 
Vnd weg zu der Weissheite 
Wer den Weg geht 
Gar wol besteht, ja wol besteht 
Vnd liebt auch Gott allzeite. 


List, tender maidens, now give ear. 
About all maidens’ mirror. 

And what I sing, be sure you hear. 

Of modesty’ s true mirror ; 

God’ s fear, y wis, 

The first thing is. 

And leads to Wisdom’s ways, 

Who that way go 

Stand firm, I know, yes, firm, I know, 
And love God all their days. 


STARTER 

Cohn {Shakespeare in Germany^ p. Ixxv) gives the following title of a Dutch 
playi published within two years aiter Shakespeare’s death: — */. /. Starters | Sty* 
^ eyndich- Truyrspely \ van | Timbre de Car done | ende | Fenicie van Messine^ [ Mei 
*een Vermaecklijck Sotte-Cluchtvan een | Advocaet ende een Boer of t plat Friesck. | 

* Tot Leevwarden^ | Voor Jan Jansen Starter^ Boeekvercooper by de Brol^ | in d*En* 
22 



APPENDIX 


338 

^gelsche ByheL Anno, i6i8»* * The Argument, Inhout des Spels,** appears to be,* 
says Cohn, ‘ a condensed narrative of Bandello*s novel. There [are in it] no traces 
‘ either of MucA Ado about Nothing, or of The Beautiful Phaenicia; there is every 

* indication of [Starter’s] having taken his subject directly from Bandello’s tale or an 

* early imitation of it. It is true, he also introduces comic personages who speak in 

* the Frisian dialect, but they have nothing in common with the humourous episodes, 
‘either in Shakespeare or Ayrer.* 

Edmund W. Gosse {Athenaum, 10 Nov., 1877,) says that the title-page of this 
rare play by Starter, whereof only three copies are known, has an engraving of 
Gironde and Timbre at Fenicie’s tomb. This engraving Halliwell-Philupps 
considered sufficiently curious, to reproduce it in his Memoranda on the present play, 
p. 58. Gosse gives us a synopsis of the plot : — The scene is laid in Messina. Don 
Timbre de Cardone, a prince of Arragon, enters red with conquest of the French. 
He soliloquizes and then leaves the stage to his faithful subject, Gironde, who makes 
love to Fenicie, the incomparable daughter of Leonato, a gentleman of Messina. All 
this has been in Latin letter and rhymed verse of twelve syllables, the usual Dutch 
heroic measure ; but the First Act closes with a farcical interlude between Doctor 
Roemer Warner and a Frisian boor, Siouck Sipkes, in black letter, and in alternate 
prose and doggerel. The body of the tragi-comedy is in pure Dutch, but all this 
farcical portion is in Frisian. . . . The Second Act opens with Timbre’s marching 
up and down in front of the window where Fenicie sits spinning. He has fallen 
violently in love with her, but he does not know Jbiow to gain access to her. In the 
next Scene we are inside the house, where Fenecie and the old woman Faustina sit 
talking over their needle- work, and Fenicie sends the crone away to a neighbour’s 
house to borrow some special embroideries. Timbre and his servant Alberigo catch 
the old woman as she enters the street, and bribe her to help them. This is a most 
clever and brilliant Scene, conceived in the best manner of Heywood, realistic and 
yet delicate. The end is that Faustina brings a letter from Timbre to Fenicie [This 
proves, I think, that Starter’s source was Belle-Forest. — Ed.], whose maidenly sus- 
ceptibility is so shocked that she tears it up and sends back the fragments to the 
writer. Timbre rages, but by degrees, through the father Leonato, the shy Fenicie 
is induced to admit the courtesies of Timbre, and, finally, to be betrothed to him. 
Starter has succeeded in creating a most virginal and innocent girl-character in 
Fenicie, her modesty being dwelt on with real dramatic skill. At last Gironde, the 
old lover, returns, to find himself forgotten, and he vows revenge. He instructs 
a parasite of his, Balacco, to play the part of Don John in Shakespeare’s play, and 
poisons the mind of Timbre in a scene exactly resembling, almost to the point of 
translation. Act III, sc. ii, of Much Ado about Nothing. The result is that Timbre 
comes to Leonato’ s house at night and sees Balacco, as he imagines, with Fenicie. 
A fragment of his soliloquy will give an idea of the form of the piece 

* O misery, O rage, what see I with mine eyes ? 

The stars are falling fast out of the blotted skies I 
Diana hides her face, and can no longer view 
The inhuman villainy these twain before me do. 

Ha I knaves, but ye shall die, and in this very place 
Receive the due reward of villainy apace ! 

Alas 1 what do I say, and has my tongue not sworn 
Balacco should not bleed for wrongs that I have borne? 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT^DUKE HEINRICH JULIUS 339 

And shall 1 slay myself for a fair woman’s sake, 

Who honour, virtue, yea ! and chastity can break ?’ 

Timbre will not see Fenicie again ; he sends his friend Rodrigo to announce his 
intention to Leonato. Fenicie, overhearing it, rushes in, and, learning of what she 
is accused, swoons as though she were dead. In a series of tableaux, like those in 
Webster’s White Devi/, we see the friends gathering round, the death of Fenicie 
acknowledged, the agony of the parents left alone with her, and finally her awaken- 
ing out of her trance. They determine to keep her in secret, and to perform in 
public an ostentatious funeral. An empty coffin is consequently buried in the 
Church with much parade, and a monument raised to Fenicie. The funeral scene 
is exceedingly Elizabethan, and the mourners sing a dirge which is not wholly 
unworthy of Ben Jonson. It begins thus: — 

* Should any ask who here lies buried, say 
’Tis a fair maid, the wonder of her day ; 

She was the phoenix of this land of ours. 

This picture shows her in her living hours ; 

A Count of fame and might 
Took sometime his delight 
In wooing her to be his lady may, 

But ah I one bitter night 
Fell Envy in despite 

Withered this bud of love, that pined away, 

For by a false lie was this Count deceived,’ etc. 

Timbre’s love and regret increase with time, and remorse springs up in the breast 
of Gironde. At last, taking Timbre into the church, he confesses his guilt before the 
supposed tomb of Fenicie. Timbre bewails his misfortune and acknowledges the 
purity of Fenicie to Leonato, who produces her alive, to his infinite surprise and 
satisfaction ; they are married with somewhat less of perplexity on the bridegroom’s 
part than in Much Ado about Nothings and the curtain falls. 


VmCENTIUS LADISZLAUS 

Now that the travels throughout Germany of troupes of English players, during 
the end of the sixteenth century and the beginning of the seventeenth have become 
so well-known, the temptation to a German scholar is undeniably great to discern 
in the very earliest of his nation’s dramas, those plays, which, if not the genuine 
originals which Shakespeare afterward remodelled, were the rude materials from 
which the English poet drew his plots or his characters. Hence it is that the plays of 
Jacob Ayrer have been so diligently studied ; and, as has been said above, there are 
not wanting students, both German and English, who believe that Shakespeare was 
directly indebted to his Nuremberg contemporary. With Ayrer’ s name we are familiar 
in connection with other plays of Shakespeare besides the present. But with Duke 
Heinrich Julius, of Braunschweig, we meet for the first, and only, time, in con- 
nection with the present play of Much Ado about Nothing. This Duke, bom in 
the same year with Shakespeare, was one of the earliest German noblemen who 



340 


APPENDIX 


maintained a company of professional players, possibly English, and the only noble- 
man, as far as I know, who wrote plays for the stage, — splays, too, whereof the plots 
were not drawn solely from the Bible. Whether from modesty, or because he con- 
sidered the writing of plays as beneath his dignity, liis comedies were printed as the 
composition of Hibaldeha, or else variants of this mysterious word, which modern 
ingenuity has deciphered as standing for /fenricus yiilius j^runsvicensis Ac. Zunae- 
burgensis j 9 ux Zpiscopus ZT^lberstadensis. Ilis plays are on a higher level than 
Ayrer’s, which are constantly disfigured by disgusting coarseness. But with only 
one of his plays are we here concerned, namely Vincentius Ladiszlaus^ wherein 
Herman Grimm discerns {FUn/zehn Essays^ 1875, p. 142, first published in 1856), 
in the character of the hero, certain traits or certain accidents which Shakespeare 
afterwards adopted or modified in Benedick. With the question of priority we need 
not deal. We cannot tell when either of the two plays was written. We know 
only that Vincentius Ladiszlaus was printed in 1599, and Much Ado about Nothing 
in 1600. 

It would demand too much space to give here a synopsis of the whole play. Scene 
by Scene, or even Act by Act ; all that can be presented is a very brief digest, which I 
have made from Dr Holland’s admirably edited edition, Stuttgart, 1855, p. 507 : — 

The comedy opens with a speech by the servant of Vincentius Ladiszlaus, who has 
been sent by his master to engage lodgings for him in the town, and has been 
strictly ordered to post on the door a bill setting forth the name and quality of his 
lord, namely, * Vincentius Ladiszlaus, Satrap of Mantua, Challenger on foot or on 
‘ horseback, aforetime the legitimate, posthumous son of the noble and honourable, 
* also mighty and valiant, Barbarossa Bellicosus of Mantua, Knight of Malta, with a 
Urain of his servants and horses.’ The servant expresses his conviction that his 
master is a fool and a braggart, — a conviction we are evidently intended to share 
when his master appears in a coat trimmed with fur and an enormous hat with 
feathers. Vincentius affects a most lofty mien, demands unheard of dishes and 
wines from the host, tries to lead a priest into a theological discussion, and talks 
villainous dog-latin. When he visits the Duke, by invitation, he entertains his 
host, the Duchess and her ladies with marvellous stories of his prowess ; and here, 
by the way, we find where Raspe, or BCrger, or both, found some of the material 
which centuries afterward delighted the world as the Adventures of Baron Mun- 
chausen, Vincentius related that he was once pursuing an enemy through the gate 
of a beleagured city when the portcullis fell on his horse and cut the animal in two 
just behind the saddle, but the steed still continued his career, and the rider never 
discovered the mishap until the horse, in endeavouring to turn, fell over ; again, 
that Vincentius once noticed a blind old boar led through the forest by holding in 
his mouth the tail of a young boar which acted as his guide ; the skilful hunter at 
one shot severed the tail close to the guide’s body, and then seizing the end led his 
blind victim to the slaughter house; again, he told of a wolf into whose mouth 
he thrust his arm so far that he reached the beast’s tail, and seizing it, with a vigor- 
ous pull, turned the creature completely inside out ; furthermore, he told of an 
acquaintance who ate a pomegranate, seeds and all, whereupon the seeds sprouted 
and grew from the man’s eyes, ears, nose, and mouth; and many more marvels 
besides. He imposed, however, upon none of his company, and in essaying his 
boasted accomplishments, music, dancing, and fencing, he came to ignominious grief. 
Finally, to get rid of him, the Duke persuaded him that one of the young maids of 
honour, whom Vincentius had ogled, was really in love with him, and a young boy 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT-^DUKE HEINRICH JULIUS 341 

dressed in women’ s clothes being used as a decoy, Vincentius sprang into a bed under 
which there was a large tub of water, whereinto he plunged, and was then, as the 
play ends, driven from court and town amid the jeers of courtiers and populace. 

Such is the material out of which Dr Herman Grimm supposes Shakespeare to 
have modelled Benedick. His remarks are as follows : — 

{Funfzehn Essays ^ p. 170) : Benedick and Beatrice are not to be found in the 
Novel. But Ayrer has them I The point of the secondary plot in Shakespeare’s 
play consists in making Benedick believe that Beatrice is in love with him, while 
she is tricked into thinking the same of him. Now recall Jahn’s first adventure; 
he is in love with Anna Maria, and when his master deceives him into the belief 
that she returns his affection, it is all up with him. True, there is but a very remote 
similarity in the circumstances of the two couples, but we must bear in mind that 
neither of them in the two comedies originally belongs to the story, but that in each 
they are brought in as an outside appendage. Now, how could two authors, in 
making use of the same novel, hit upon an addition so similar ? It may be that 
this similarity can be discerned only by those determined to find and emphasize it. 
How then is it that the situations on the stage in both plays so often coincide ? Did 
Ayrer imitate Shakespeare, and coarsen his charming material, did he travesty h^ 
characters so ruthlessly, and so alter all their talk, or did he make use of some play 
that had appeared upon the English stage before Shakespeare, and of which the 
poet also availed himself? We do not know the date of either play, and the ques- 
tion would remain unanswered, did not the Duke Heinrich Julius’s Vincentius 
Ladiszlaus here make his appearance, and help us to solve the riddle. 

Before I enter upon this, however, I must speak once more of the actors in 
Italian comedy. Among them is found the lover doomed to be always rejected. 
Upon this poor fellow is heaped every conceivable characteristic which could justify 
the obdurate Fair One, not only in rejecting him, but in playing him any possible ill 
turn, and when this part was combined with that of the old miles gloriosuSy the 
cowardly braggart of the Plautinian farce, the result was the CapitanOy a personi- 
fication of all that seems to Italians most reprehensible in man, — a national scape- 
goat, so to speak, for the weaknesses of the male sex. 

The Capitano appears upon the stage quite in the style, and with the bombastic 
speech of his antique predecessor. His servant listens to him with admiration ; at 
times, however, indulging in innocent irony, which his master magnanimously con- 
dones. The Capitano confronts every one in the most insolent fashion, and ruth- 
lessly picks a quarrel ; but the moment that his opponent shows signs of taking things 
seriously, he begins to draw in his horns, and can dextrously avoid an encounter 
which would place him in the unpleasant predicament of being forced to display his 
boasted might. I call to mind one excellent scene in which his opponent tries to 
compel him to fight by heaping him with insults, each of which the Capitano con- 
trives so to twist and turn, that the grossest abuse is made to seem flattery ; he pre-^ 
serves his dignity, and proudly leaves his sword in the scabbard. Should he be 
forced to draw it, he is of course defeated, and this he ascribes to all sorts of acci- 
dents, for which he threatens to take a terrible revenge. Beaten, ridiculed, alad 
tricked out of his sweetheart, he yet manages to leave the battlefield, maintaining 
his^ir of dignity to the last, either magnanimously forgiving every one for what has 
been done, after the fashion of a lion forgiving a mouse, or threatening that at some 
future day, when there is need of his strong right arm, he will refuse all aid, and 
calmly contemplate the universal ruin. 



342 


APPENDIX 


Quarrels between Italy and Spain endowed the Capitano with all the evil qualities 
of the Spaniard; he became acclimatized in France; he made his appearance in 
England, and Shakespeare modelled after him his incomparable Falstaff as his 
national counterpart, Parolles, in AIV s Well that Ends Well is the genuine Italian 
Capitano ; Sir Toby Belch, and Sir Andrew Aguecheek are his near of kin. Finally, 
Armado, in Lovds Labour Lost is the Spanish Capitano y especially when he appears 
at last in Hector* s armour, and thunders forth to his opponent By the North Pole 
I challenge thee / Ridicule of the Spaniards had been popular in England since 
Queen Mary’ s time when the Spanish Catholic Philip came to England. Even 
during her reign Spaniards were put upon the stage to be laughed at. (Prescott. 
PhUip IL) 

In the year 1577 Henry III. of France hired some comedians from Venice. The 
troop was called Git comici gelosu They appeared first in Blois, and in 1588 acted 
in Paris, in the Hotel de Bourbon, and stayed there until the year 1600, in spite of 
the prohibition of the Parliament, which espoused the cause of native players. In 
accordance with universal custom, their plays were mere bare plots, in which every 
actor retained the part allotted to him, and improvised all that he said. The part of 
the Capitano was sustained by Francisco AndrianL He appeared under the name 
of 11 Capitano Spavento delV vail* inferno. His wife was quite famous, under the 
name of Isabella, After the dissolution of the troop, Andriani withdrew to Pistoja, 
and there edited the Bravoure del Cap. SpaventOy a book which contains only dialogues 
between the Capitano and his servant Trapparola ; it is a mass of the maddest bom- 
bast that has ever been put together. I have examined the third edition (1615, 
Venice). In 1617 a second part appeared, rather feebler, to be sure, but still afford- 
ing material for wonder that after the absolutely monstrous nonsense of the first part 
the author should have had sufficient fancy left to bring to market a fresh crop. 

The book is divided into raggimamenti, * On your way,* the Capitano says, in 
the first of these, to his servant, ‘ to fulfil my orders, remember to keep your eyes 

* and ears wide open for it may be you will meet some hero, or demigod, who is on 

* fire, consuming with a frantic desire to know something about me. Tell him that I 

* am the Capitano Spavento of the Infernal valley, called the Demoniac, Prince of 
‘the chivalric order of Trismegistus, which signifies great and powerful adventurer, 
‘ mighty destroyer, strong annihilator, subduer, and conqueror of the universe, son of 
‘ the earthquake and the hurricane, father of Death, and sworn comrade of the Devil 
‘in Hell.* 

He boasts himself the owner of hundred-league boots ; he once swung a lion by 
the tail, and with him killed a knight, who held a lady in durance ; he had married 
the daughter of the Grand Turk ; had had for his light o* loves all the celebrated 
beauties of all lands and times; he sprang with a leap from his mother’s womb, 
proclaiming in tones of thunder, to sono il Capitano Spavento, so that the women 
present fled in terror ; he bought the daughter of a sorceress from her mother [etc, 
etc.]. 

(P. 176) : The Duke Heinrich Julius’s Vincentius Ladiszlaus is merely a copy 
of^jthe Capitano, [After quoting the placard, bearing his name and titles which 
Vincentius orders his servant to post upon his door, Grimm continues r] Now 
compare this with Beatrice’s words in the first Scene of Much Ado about Nothing, 
where she calls Benedick ‘ Signor Montanto,* and says that he once ‘ set up his 
‘ bills ’ in Messina, and that she had promised to eat all he killed, and we shall see 
that she therein characterises Benedick as a genuine Capitano, We now see what 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT-^DUKE HEINRICH JULIUS 343 

Shakespeake meant by the bills which Benedick set up. Ayrer’s comedy has shown 
us the significance of Cupid’s bolt. Thus we find the same jests in the same places 
in the two plays. 

[In reference to the last Scene of Vincentius^ Grimm continues, p. 180] : Here 
we find as the kernel of the plot, a trick played upon a man with an overweening 
estimate of himself, who is made to believe that a girl is in love with him. But here 
we have it as an interlude only. Some play must therefore have existed, based upon 
Bandello’s novel, with an interlude, in which the Capitano appeared. In this play 
the names were taken from Bandello. Ayrer used it, and altered the part of the 
Capitano which he gave to the Fool ; Duke Heinrich Julius, on the other hand, took 
out the Capitano’ s part, and from it framed as well as he could an original comedy. 
But Shakespeare used all this material as mere shapeless clay, from which he modelled 
the magnificent figures of his comedy. It is a joy to come to him at last, — to him, 
whose work stands so far above stereotyped, mechanical, theatric jobbery, and yet 
is so admirably adapted to the stage. How delicately he has evolved the attractive 
Benedick from the clumsy Capitano, — ^how perfectly consistent with the bearing of a 
gentleman is his rhodomontade, — ^how exactly do Beatrice’s sallies hit him and yet 
how little do they cleave to him. Merry and rollicking as he may be in behaviour 
and conversation, he is never ridiculous, so perfectly is the laughter on his side, and 
although mated with Beatrice by a trick, the heart alone has the last word. Shake- 
speare was a poet, the worthy Duke Heinrich Julius was an excellent and capable 
ruler, but the dramatic work that he has bequeathed to us is feeble and worthless, 
although it must be confessed that his dramas take first rank compared with so many 
others of this century that are infinitely worse. 

We really gain nothing by reading and rummaging among the material of which 
Shakespeare made use for his plays. It makes the poet no whit better or worse, or 
more comprehensible. The most it can do is to throw light upon certain obscure 
passages, and, moreover, the greater number of these are only partially obscure. 
The spiritual essence of Shakespeare’s work will be revealed only to him who 
receives it pure and unmixed, and will be hidden from him who does not so receive 
it, however bulky may be the historical material at his command. One thing we may 
gain from it — appreciation. We begin to perceive with increasing distinctness that 
Shakespeare modelled the material at hand with intention, and knew as perfectly 
how to put asunder as to bind together the single portions of his plays. Look at 
the first scene of the [present play] ; how artistically does an apparently careless 
conversation introduce us to the whole ; how perfectly are the characters of Beatrice 
and Benedick, and their relation to each other revealed in a few words. How 
exquisitely is the contrast drawn between this relation, and that between Hero and 
Claudio ; how charmingly has Shakespeare transported to a loftier sphere the suc- 
cessful trick played upon a tipsy fool, and, without divesting it of its comic element, 
converted it into a delicate plot. How fine it is that the scene wherein Claudio’s 
false suspicion is apparently confirmed is not enacted upon the stage, but only related 
there. And lastly how touching is the final explanation of every thing. 

It is verily true that the comprehension of a poet depends upon the depth of feel- 
ing brought to his apprehension, and through comparative study this comprehension 
so grows and increases in the mind of the student, that he is ever prompted to fresh 
and more thorough research. 

[Criticism of Grimm, I leave to his countryman, as follows] : — 

l^ltTMANN {^Schauspieh a, </. idten Jahrhundert^ 2te Th. s. 147) s The attempt 



344 


APPENDIX 


to trace any connection between Jabn’s love for Anna Maria and Benedick’s charm- 
ing relationship with Beatrice is downright tasteless. But when this connection is 
extended to single phrases and turns of the dialogue, such * criticism ’ verges on the 
ridiculous. When Ayrer, for instance, makes Venus say, * Vulcan is angry and 
hot-tempered, and will not forge any more arrows for Cupid,’ and, later on, Cupid 
says ; ‘ My father, the angry Vulcan, has forged me some arrows,’ and with these 
expressions is compared Benedick’s remark that ‘Cupid is a good hare-6nder and 
Vulcan a rare carpenter ’ there must be found, forsooth, a confirmation of this won- 
derful connection. That Vulcan forges Cupid’s arrows is not an uncommon refer- 
ence elsewhere in German poetry. In an ‘ Association-song ’ by Joachim Brechtel 
(NUmberg, I 594 ) we find: ‘Ah, Cupid, thou hast warmed my heart, With thy 
‘father’s golden dart. Which he has made o* the sharpest.’ Moreover, the dis- 
covery is not new ; in the Notes to his Translation, Ludwig Tieck refers to these 
supposititious identities, but considers it merely possible that ‘ Bandello’s novel may 
‘have been adapted to the English stage even before the time of Shakespeare, and 
‘that therein a similar joke or expression may have appeared.’ Nay, more ; when 
Beatrice says that Benedick ‘set up his bills here in Messina and challenged'Cupid 
‘at the flight ; and my uncle’s fool subscribed for Cupid and challenged him at the 
‘ bird-bolt,’ — this reference must be allied, forsooth, to that arrow which had struck 
Jahn [not in the heart, but in a locality considerably removed] ! 

More important parallels it is quite possible to detect ; for instance, Lionato’s de- 
cision to give out that his daughter is dead, in the hope (herein departing from 
Bandello) that her bridegroom might return ; which finds its parallel in Shakespeare 
from the mouth of the Friar. On the other hand, the discrepancies between Ban- 
dello’s novel and Ayrer’ s comedy are so numerous that separate details common to 
both add no weight. Shakespeare moulded his materi&l with all the freedom of 
poetical creation *, Ayrer honestly and faithfully appropriated it, as he found it. 


CHAEREAS AND CALLIRRHOE 

Konrad Weichberger contributes to a Jahrhuchy issued by the admirable 
Deutsche Shakespeare Gesellschaft (vol. xxxiv, p. 339, 1898), an article on The Orig~ 
inal Sources of Much Ado about Nothings wherein he suggests that the source, pos- 
sibly the direct source, of Bandello’s novel is the late-Grecian romance by Chariton 
of Chaereas and Callirrhoe. Of course, there is no suggestion that Shakespeare had 
any knowledge of this old romance, all that is claimed is that in certain points the 
resemblance between Chariton and Bandello is too striking to have been accidental. 

In briefest words, the story of Chaereas and Callirrhoe is as follows : — ^The scene 
is laid in Syracuse, in Sicily, where the marriage, after befitting obstructions, is cele- 
brated between a miracle of maidenly beauty, Callirrhoe, and a miracle of manly 
, prowess, Chaereas. The discomfited lovers of the bride hereupon plot to ruin the 
happiness of the wedded pair. To this end, Chaereas is induced, by stories of his 
wife’s infidelity, to lie in wait, one evening, before his own door. In the dusk, he 
sees a man (one of the conspirators) elegantly attired, pass and repass, and by fur- 
tire glances at the house, evidently responding to an appointment. At last, a maid 
caudouriy opens the door, and the lover enters. Transported with fury, Chaereas 
rushes in after him to slay him on the spot. But the villain had slipped behind the 
door, and as Chaereas storms in, the villain glides softly out. Callirrhoe alarmed 



SOURCE OF THE PLOT^TIRANTE EL BLANCO 345 

by the noise, comes, without a light, to meet her husband, who, in the dark, mis- 
takes her for the lover, and in his blind rage gives her so powerful a kick that she 
falls dead on the spot. Under torture, the maid divulges the plot, and Chaereas is 
acquitted of the murder. With much pomp, Callirrhoe is buried, but awakens from 
her trance just as pirates break into the vault to steal the rich jewels with which her 
corpse had been adorned ; these they carry off together with Callirrhoe herself. The 
robbery is discovered the next day when Chaereas, overwhelmed with remorse, visits 
the tomb ; he is prevented from suicide by his friend, Polycharmos. 

Hereupon, the adventures of husband and wife, by land and by sea, fill seven 
books, until at last the pair are united and return to Syracuse, where a bride also is 
conveniently found for Polycharmos.* 

Of this story, but one MS is known ; it is in a monastery at Florence and was first 
printed in 1750 at Amsterdam, by D’Orville.f Weichberger doubts that Ariosto 
had ever read this MS, because Ariosto could not read Greek, which was not the case 
with Bandello, who, in his wanderings, before he settled down in Agen, may well 
have examined it, * at least the first and last books.* He also traces a connection be- 
tween Chaereas and Callirrhoe^ and Tirante el Blanco^ and, most filmy of all, with the 
Ninth story in the Introduction to Giraldi Cinthio’s Hecatomithiy where the only con- 
nection which I can trace is in the rich clothes which the fictitious lover purchases 
from the Jews ; in brief, a waiting maid is there in love with her master, and persuad- 
ing him to watch her mistress* s actions, introduces a villain into the house in sight of the 
concealed husband whose actions, after the adroit escape of the villain, are so violent 
in flourishing a drawn sword that the innocent wife flies in terror, — ^but it all ends 
happily, virtue is vindicated and vice is condemned to prison for life. One is almost 
inclined to doubt that Herr Weichberger could have read the story. Still, adepts in 
Comparative Literature can trace a filament of connection as attenuated as the virtue 
of a drug in a Homoeopathic potentisation. 

The searching analysis of the variations between Chariton and Bandello which 
Herr Weichberger has given, is hardly germane to the purposes of the present 
volume, albeit by no means devoid of interest. 

To the list of stories wherein the bridegroom is deceived by a false personation, 
Tittmann X adds El FatraHuelo, in the Collection of Novels by Juan Timoneda, 
Alcala, 1576. This I have not seen. 


TIRANTE EL BLANCO 

Dunlop, in his History, of Fictiony 1814, gives a sketch of the early Spanish novel, 
Tirante el BlancOy written by Johan Martorell, ‘ probably, about the year 1400 the 
last edition in Spanish was published at Valladolid in 1511; it was translated into 
Italian by Manfredi in 1538 ; it has never appeared in English, and the only copy 
in my possession is a French translation by the Comte de Caylus, published 
in London, undated, but about 1737. This novel should have some interest for ^ 
English readers, because of its long account of that eccentric character, William, 
Earl of Warwick. 

In the course of his sketch, Dunlop (p. 169, ed. 1845) narrates that, ‘the good 

*See also Dunlop, History of FUtioHy 1814; 3rd. ed., 1845, p. 33. 
t Dunlop, op. cit, p. 426. 

X Sehemspiete am dem sechzehntm Jahrhundert^ i 863 , 2te Th. p. 146. 



APPENDIX 


346 

^ understanding which subsisted between Tiran and the princess is at length inter* 

‘ rupted by the plots of the Vedova Reposada, another attendant, who, having fallen 

* in love with Tiran, contrives to make him jealous of her mistress, by a stratagem 

* resembling that which deceives Claudio in Much Ado about Nothings and also the 
‘lover of Geneura in the fifth canto of the Orlando FuriosoJ 

This remark of Dunlop is probably the foundation of all subsequent allusions by 
Skottowe, and others, both English and German, to the connection between Tirante 
el Blanco and the plot of the present play. If the unvarnished fact that a lover is 
deceived by a fictitious impersonation is to be the connecting link, then the story of 
Tirante certainly becomes part of the chain. But beyond this fact, there is in every 
detail of Tirante’ s experience a wide divergence from Claudio’s. 

I will give very briefly the outlines of the Spanish story, and then close this sub- 
ject of the Source of the Plot, 

Tirante el Blanco (whose name is derived from his father’s lordship of Tirranie 
(qy. Turraine?) and his mother’s name Blanche, a daughter of the Duke of Britany) 
is madly in love with Cremesina, the daughter of the Emperor of Constantinople, 
who returns his love with equal ardour. The Princess’s governness, the Widow 
Reposada, is secretly in love with Tirante and determines by stratagem to divert to 
herself his attachment to the Princess. To this end, she asserts to Tirante that she 
can give him ocular proof of the Princess’s low debauchery. Tirante is accordingly 
stationed at a very high window where by means of two mirrors he can observe the 
royal garden down below him, whereof the gardener was a repulsive negro. In 
anticipation of this hour, the Widow Reposada had caused a skilfull artist to model 
out of black leather a life-like mask of this hideous negro. Tirante, being ensconced, 
and his mirrors at the right angles, the Widow induces Cremesina and her attendants 
to walk in the garden, and when they were within range of Tirante’ s mirrrors she 
persuades one of the Princess’s attendants (who, by the way, bears the pretty name, 
Plazirdemavida) to put on, by way of frolic, the mask of the negro and his gabardine, 
and to emerge from the shrubbery and make love to Cremesina, who, entering into 
the joke, with unfeigned glee, merrily returned the exaggerated devotion of the dis- 
guised Plazirdemavida. 

The sight was enough for Tirante, and small blame to him, considering the di.stance 
and the black leather. Of course his despair and grief were profound, and from 
time to time he emitted piercing cries. Although it has no bearing on our present 
object, I think we ought to drop a tear over the reaction of the joke on the poor 
negro. On his way home, Tirante saw the faithful gardener peacefully mending the 
roof of his hut ; whereupon the heart-broken knight as a relief to his over-wrought 
feelings dragged the blackamoor into his hut and there cut off his head. The next 
day Tirante departed on an expedition against the Turks without taking leave of his 
Princess. Just as his ship was weighing anchor, Plazirdemavida, who had been sent 
by the Princess to learn the cause of his coldness, revealed the trick. It was too 
late to return, a storm was rising and Tirante was forced to depart. In a year oI„two 
he returned with innumerable kings, potentates, and wamors as prisoners, inc^- 
culable wealth, and his marriage to the Princess was about to be celebrated i^ith 
indescribable pomp when he was seized with a mortal illness and expired before his 
bride could reach him. The news of his death proved fatal to the Emperor, who 
immediately succumbed, and the Princess, his bride, died within a few hours ; at the 
moment of her death there was a sudden brilliant illumination in her chamber, ‘ it 
‘was,’ says the chronicler, ‘the angels who carried her soul and Tirante’ s to para- 



ENGLISH CRITICrSMS^GILDON 


347 


* disc.* They were all three buried on three successive days ; and everybody cried so 
much, that, as the chronicler says, * no one wanted to cry again for a whole year/ 
Tirante el Blanco deserves a place in our memory as one of the three romances 
which were saved by the priest out of Don Quixote’s library, — ‘in its way,’ said the 
priest, ‘ it is the best book in he world.* 


ENGLISH CRITICISMS 

Langbaine (p. io8), in his list of plays by D’ Avenant, thus speaks of The Law 
against Lovers : — A Tragi-Comedy made up of two Plays written by Mr Shakespear^ 
viz. Measure for Measure^ and Muck Ado about Nothing. Tho’ not only the char- 
acters, but the language of the whole Play almost, he borrow’d from Shakespear ; 
yet where the language is rough or obsolete, our Author [D’ Avenant j has taken care 
to polish it. 

In Hey wood’s Faire Mayde of the Exchange^ 1607, there are many ‘echoes,’ 
(as the Editor, Barron Field, of the old Shakespeare Society happily terms them) 
of Muck Ado about Nothings which prove its early popularity. 

Charles Gildon i^Rowe' s Edition ^ 1709, vol. vii, Remarks^ etc. p. 304) : This 
play we must call a Comedy, tho’ some of the incidents and discourses are more in 
a tragic strain ; and that of the accusation of Hero is too shocking for either Tragedy 
or Comedy ; nor cou’ d it have come off in nature, if we regard the country, without 
the death of more than Hero. The imposition on the Prince and Claudio seems very 
lame, and Claudio’s conduct to the woman he lov’d, highly contrary to the very 
nature of love, to expose her in so barbarous a manner and with so little concern 
and struggle, and on such weak grounds without a farther examination into the 
matter ; yet the passions this produces in the old father make a wonderful amends 
for the fault. Besides which there is such a pleasing variety of characters in the 
play, and those perfectly maintain’d, as well as distinguish’d, that you lose the 
absurdities of the conduct in the excellence of the manners, sentiments, diction, and 
topics. Benedick and Beatrice are two sprightly, witty, talkative characters, and tho* 
of the same nature, yet perfectly distinguish’d, and you have no need to read the 
names to know who speaks. As they differ from each other, tho’ so near a kin, so 
do they from that of Lucio in Meas. for Meas., who is likewise a very talkative 
person ; but there is a gross abusiveness, calumny, lying, and lewdness in Lucio, 
which Benedick is free from. One is a rake’s mirth and tattle ; the other is that of 
a gentleman, and a man of spirit and wit. The stratagem of the Prince on Bene- 
dick and Beatrice is manag’d with that nicety and address that we are very well 
pleas’d with the success, and think it very reasonable and just. ... To quote all the 
comic excellences of this play would be to transcribe three parts of it. For all that 
passes betwixt Benedick and Beatrice is admirable. . . . The aversion that the poet gives 
[them] for each other in their discourse heightens the jest of making them in love 
with one another. Nay, the variety and natural distinction of the vulgar humours 
of this play are remarkable. The scenes are something obscure, for you can scarce 
tell where the place is in the first two Acts, tho’ the scenes in them seem pretty 
entire, and unbroken. But those are things that we ought not to look much for in 
Shakespeare. But whilst he is out in the dramatic imitation of the fable, he always 



348 


APPENDIX 


draws men and women so perfectly, that when we read, we can scarce persuade our- 
selves but that the discourse is real and no fiction. 

[These remarks are interesting in view of their date. I know of no earlier com- 
mentary on this play, and it is pleasant to note its recognition of Shakespeare’s 
supremacy in delineating character. The observation that the characters bear their 
stamp of individuality so marked that we do not need to read the names before the 
speeches, here, as we see, anticipates Pope, to whom it i^ generally credited. — Ed.] 

William Hazlitt (p. 303) ; Perhaps that middle point of comedy was never 
more nicely hit in which the ludicrous blends with the tender, and our follies, turn- 
ing round against themselves in support of our affections, retain nothing but their 
humanity. 

Dogberry and Verges in this play are inimitable specimens of quaint blundering 
and misprisions of meaning ; and are a standing record of that formal gravity of 
pretension and total want of common understanding, which Shakespeare no doubt 
copied from real life, and which in the course of two hundred years appear to have 
ascended from the lowest to the highest offices in the state, 

Mrs Inchbald [British Theatre ) ; Those persons, for whom the hearts of the 
audience are most engaged, have scarce one event to aid their personal interest ; 
every occurrence which befalls them depends solely on the pitiful act of private listen- 
ing. If Benedick and Beatrice had possessed perfect good manners, or just notions 
of honour and delicacy, so as to have refused to become eaves-droppers, the action 
of the play must have stood still, or some better method have been contrived,— -a., 
worse hardly could, — to have imposed on their mutual credulity. But this willing- 
ness to overhear conversations, the reader will find to be the reigning fashion with 
the dramatis personcs of this play ; for there are nearly as many unwarrantable 
listeners, as there are characters in it. But, in whatever failings the ill-bred custom 
of Messina may have involved Benedick and Beatrice, they are both highly enter- 
taining and most respectable personages. They are so witty, so jocund, so free from 
care, and yet so sensible of care in others, that the best possible reward is conferred 
on their merit, — ^marriage with each other. . . . Shakespeare has given such an odious 
character of the bastard, John, in this play, and of the bastard, Edmund, in King 
Lear^ that, had these dramas been written in the time of Charles the Second, the 
author must have been suspected of disaffection to half the court. 

Augustine Skottowe (i, 354) : Shakespeare has been deservedly praised for his 
skill in overcoming the difficulties that still interposed between the union of Benedick 
and Beatrice. Delay was impossible; the story of Benedick’s love being arable, 
great care was necessary to prevent Beatrice from di.scovering the deception practised 
on her ; a discovery which would have altogether defeated the design of bringing her 
and Benedick together, for Beatrice never could have condescended to own a passion 
she had been tricked into. Shakespeare, therefore, combines in her mind, a desire 
of revenge on Claudio with her new feelings for Benedick. In the most natural way 
possible, she engages her lover to call Claudio to account for the injury done her 
cousin ; and she is thus at once compelled to drop her capricious humour, and treat 
Benedick with the confidence and candour his services merited. Benedick and 
Beatrice are the pure and beautiful productions of Shakespeare’s imagination. He 
first conceived and gave a faint sketch of their characters in Lavds Labours Lost, 



ENGLISH CRITICISMSr^MRS JAMESON 


349 


In Much Ado about Nothings they are expanded into finished portraits, and launched 
into a new scene of action of which he himself was the entire inventor. It is not 
often that Shakespeare appears as the constructor of his dramatic incidents. The 
.plot on the two marriage-haters is ingeniously conceived and executed; and the 
characters of the parties being as similar as is consistent with the difference of sex, 
the practice of the same mode of deception on each of them is highly natural and 
humourous. 

Mrs Jameson (2nd ed,, i, 128) ; Shakespeare has exhibted in Beatrice a spir- 
ited and faithful portrait of the fine lady of his own time. The deportment, lan- 
guage, manners, and allusions are those of a particular class in a particular age ; 
but the individual and dramatic character which forms the groundwork is strongly 
discriminated, and being taken from general nature, belongs to every age. In 
Beatrice, high intellect and high animal spirits meet, and excite each other like fire 
and air. In her wit, (which is brilliant without being imaginative,) there is a touch 
of insolence, not unfrequent in women when the wit predominates over reflection 
and imagination. In her temper, too, there is a slight infusion of the termagant ; 
and her satirical humour plays with such an unrespective levity over all subjects alike, 
that it required a profound knowledge of women to bring such a character within the 
pale of our sympathy. But Beatrice, though wilful, is not wayward ; she is volatile, 
not unfeeling. She has not only an exuberance of wit and gayety, but of heart, and 
soul, and energy of spirit ; and is no more like the fine ladies of modern comedy, — 
whose wit consists in a temporary allusion, or a play upon words, and whose petu- 
lance is displayed in a toss of the head, a flirt of the fan, or a flourish of the pocket- 
handkerchief, — than one of our modern dandies is like Sir Philip Sidney. 

In Beatrice, Shakespeare has contrived that the poetry of the character shall not 
only soften, but heighten its comic effect. We are not only inclined to forgive 
Beatrice all her scornful airs, all her biting jests, all her assumption of superiority ; 
but they amuse and delight us the more, when we find her, with all the headlong 
simplicity of a child, falling at once into the snare laid for her affections ; when we 
see her, who thought a man of God’s making not good enough for her, who disdained 
to be o’ermastered by ‘apiece of valiant dust,’ .stooping like the rest of her sex, 
vailing her proud spirit, and taming her wild heart to the loving hand of him whom 
she had scorned, flouted, and misused ‘ past the endurance of a block.’ And we are 
yet more completely won by her generous enthusiastic attachment to her cousin. 
When the father of Hero believes the tale of her guilt ; when Claudio, her lover, 
without remorse or a lingering doubt, consigns her to shame ; when the Friar remains 
silent, and the generous Benedick himself knows not what to say, Beatrice, confident 
in her.affections, and guided only by the impulses of her own feminine heart, .sees 
through the inconsistency, the impossibility, of the charge, and exclaims, without a 
moment’s hesitation, ‘O, on my soul, my cousin is belied!’ . . . 

Infinite skill, as well as humour, is shown in making this pair of airy beings the 
exact counterpart of each other ; but of the two portraits that of Benedick is by far 
the most pleasing, because the independence and gay indifference of temper, the 
laughing defiance of love and marriage, the satirical freedom of expression common 
to both, are more becoming to the masculine than to the feminine character. Any 
woman might love such a cavalier as Benedick, and be proud of his affection ; his 
valour, his wit, and his gaiety sit so gracefully upon him ! and his light scoffs against 
the power of love are but just sufficient to render more piquant the conquest of this 



APPENDIX 


350 

‘ heretic in despite of beauty.’ But a man might well be pardoned who should 
shrink from encountering such a spirit as that of Beatrice, unless, indeed, he had 

* served an apprenticeship to the taming-school.’ The wit of Beatrice is less good- 
humoured than that of Benedick ; or, from the difference of sex, appears so. It is 
observable that the power is throughout on her side, and the sympathy and interest 
on his : which, by reversing the usual order of things, seems to excite us against the 
graifiy if I may use such an expression. In all their encounters she constantly gets 
the better of him, and the gentleman’s wits go off halting, if he is not himself fairly 
hors de combat* Beatrice, woman-like, generally has the first word, and will have the 
last. . . . 

It is remarkable that, notwithstanding the point and vivacity of the dialogue, few 
of the speeches of Beatrice are capable of a general application, or engrave them- 
selves distinctly on the memory ; they contain more mirth than matter ; and though 
wit be the predominant feature in the dramatic portrait, Beatrice more charms and 
dazzles us by what she is than by what she says* It is not merely her sparkling 
repartees and saucy jests, it is the soul of wit, and the spirit of gayety informing the 
whole character, — looking out from her brilliant eyes, and laughing on the full lips 
that pout with scorn, — which we have before us, moving and full of life. 

Thomas Campbell (p. xlv) ; I fully agree with the admirers of this play in their 
opinion as to the most of its striking merits. The scene of the young and guiltless hero- 
ine struck speechless by the accusation of her lover, and swooning at the foot of the 
nuptial altar, is deeply touching. There is eloquence in her speechlessness, and we 
may apply the words. Ipsa silentia terrenty amidst the silence of those who had not 
the ready courage to defend her, whilst her father’s harsh and hasty belief of her 
guilt crowns the pathos of her desolation. At this crisis, the exclamation of Beatrice, 
the sole believer in her innocence, *0, on my soul, my cousin is belied,’ is a reliev- 
ing and glad voice in the wilderness, which almost reconciles me to Beatrice’s other- 
wise disagreeable character. I agree also that Shakespeare has, all the while, afforded 
the means of softening our dismayed compassion for Hero, by our previous knowledge 
of her innocence, and we are sure that she shall be exculpated. Yet who, but 
Shakespeare, could dry our tears of interest for Hero, by so laughable an agent as 
the immortal Dogberry? I beg pardon for having allowed that Fal staff makes us 
forget all the other comic creations of our Poet. How could I have overlooked you, 
my Launce, and my Launce’s dog, and my Dogberry? To say that Fal staff makes 
us forget Dogberry is, as Dogberry himself would say, ‘ most tolerable and not to be 

* endured.’ And yet Shakespeare, after pouncing this ridiculous prey, springs up, 
forthwith, to high dramatic effect in making Claudio, who had mistakenly accused 
Hero, so repentant as to consentingly marry another woman, her supposed cousin, 
under a veil, which, when it is lifted, displays his own vindicated bride. 

At the same time, if Shakespeare were looking over my shoulder, I could not 
disguise some objections to this comedy, which involuntarily strikes me as debarring 
it from ranking among our Poet’s most enchanting dramas. I am on the whole, I 
trust, a liberal on the score of dramatic probability. Our fancy and its faith are no 
niggards in believing whatsoever they may be delighted withal ; but, if I may use a 
vulgar .saying, * a willing horse should not be ridden too hard.’ Our fanciful faith 
is misused, when it is spurred and impelled to believe that Don John, without one 
particle of love for Hero, but out of mere personal spite to Claudio, should contrive 
the infernal treachery which made the latter assuredly jealous. Moreover, during 



ENGLISH CRITICISMS— H. COLERIDGE 


351 


one-half of the play, we have a disagreeable female character in that of Beatrice, 
Her portrait, I may be told, is deeply drawn, and minutely finished. It is ; and so 
is that of Benedick, who is entirely her counterpart, except that he is less disagree- 
able. But the best-drawn portraits by the finest masters may be admirable in execu- 
tion, though unpleasant to contemplate, and Beatrice’s portrait is in this category. 
She is a tartar, by Shakespeare’s own showing, and, if a natural woman, is not a 
pleasing representative of the sex. In befriending Hero, she almost reconciles us to 
her, but not entirely ; for a good heart, that shows itself only on extraordinary occa- 
sions, is no sufficient atonement for a bad temper, which Beatrice evidently shows. 
The marriage of the marriage-hating Benedick and the furious anti-nuptial Beatrice 
is brought about by a trick. Their friends contrive to deceive them into a belief that 
they love each other, and partly by vanity, — ^partly by mutual affection, which has 
been disguised under the bickerings of their wit, — they have their hands joined, and 
the consolations of religion are administered, by the priest who marries them, to the 
unhappy sufferers. [For the conclusion of Campbell’s remarks, wherein he calls 
Beatrice an ‘odious woman,’ see V, iv, 133, p. 289 . — Ed.] 

Anon. {^Edinburgh Revieiv, July, 1840, p. 483) : It is interesting to trace how that 
great rule of the poet, wffiich Coleridge has set down as characteristic of him, — his 
general avoidance of surprises, — is [in Much Ado about Nothing'\^ as elsewhere, 
made subservient to the immediate purj)ose. In the Merchant of Venice^ which has 
a higher aim, we are left to be swayed in uncertainty by the currents of the action ; — 
here, where the framework is slighter, and the prevailing tone of thought more airy 
and sportive, we are always admitted behind the curtain, throughout the whole series 
of deceits or mistakes which constitute the story of the play. Before every lie is 
uttered we know that it is a lie, and we cannot doubt but it will be detected. In the 
story of the treachery practised towards Hero, the incidents are in their external 
aspect deeply tragic, and the characters treat them as such ; but we, who are in the 
secret, know that the whole rests within that sphere where comedy finds its nurture. 
We have helped to dress the puppets, and we help to pull the strings. We have 
listened to the conversation of Don John with Borachio ; we know that Hero is inno- 
cent ; we know, when she leaves the chapel, that her death is to be but a pretence ; at 
the wedding we have looked behind the veil which covers the face of Antonio’s sup- 
posed daughter. Here, the catastrophe comes to us after gradual preparation. No 
sudden convulsion attends it, and no softening close is necessary like that which car- 
ried us from Shylock’s judgement-hall to the lady’s villa. Here also we have been 
throughout in that mood of interest .slightly excited for the incidents, which enabled 
us to watch with delight some of the most felicitous of all representations of char- 
acter, in a type which Shakespeare, again and again fondly returning to it, here 
developed in its utmost possible perfection. 

Hartley Coleridge (ii, 135) : This play is one of Shakespeare’s few essays at 
what may be called genteel comedy, and proves that neither genius, wit, humour, nor 
gentility will serve to produce excellence in that kind. It wants that truth of ideal 
nature which was Shakespeare’s forte ^ and does not present enough of the truth of 
real life and manners to compensate for the deficiency. The more impassioned 
scenes are scarcely in place. Tragi-comedy is one thing, comi-tragedy is another. 
Where pathos is predominant, it often may derive an increase of power from lighter 
scenes ; but where the ground- work is comic, it is vain to work in flowers of sombre 



APPENDIX 


3S^ 

hue* The tale, too, is improbable, without being romantic. Still it is Shakespeare,— 
delightful in each part, but unsatisfactory in the effect of the whole. 

P. S. I never censure Shakespeare without finding reason to eat my words. 

Chakles Bathurst (p. 6o) : This comedy is in the second style, chiefly flow- 
ing ; with some breaks, and even weak endings ; alternate rhymes ; one instance of 
the long verse. 

As to the general character of the play, as I have no concern with prose scenes, I 
must not dwell upon the incomparable comedy, and the sprightly dialogues, amidst 
which the very high character of Beatrice breaks out ; one of the most interesting of 
his female characters, and connected with two others, probably of near the same 
period : Portia and Rosalind. This part is a fine specimen of the knowledge of 
Shakespeare; how much that is serious and steady, especially in young women, 
lurks under a character which, in ordinary circumstances, seems to be remarkable 
only for a quick and almost sharp cleverness in conversation ; the strength of char- 
acter, when wanted, being rendered only the more useful, the feeling showing itself 
only the more hearty, for that very quickness. Her simple honesty is also remark- 
able. When asked whether she had slept with her cousin, she answers at once, and 
even adds to the question, though she must know the consequence that will be drawn 
from it. The manner in which Hero takes the accusation against her is beautiful, 
suited to a very young and simple girl, though of high education. In different parts, 
Shakespeare has shown his usual great talent in distinguishing between one character 
and another, in respect of the manner in which women conduct themselves under 
such circumstances. Compare Desdemona, Hermione, Imogen, with this part, and 
observe that they differ, not for the sake of variety, but as they ought to differ, from 
what we know of their different natures and situations. 

Henry Giles (p. 189): There is a character which we laugh To such order 
of character the wit belongs ; and Beatrice is a leader of the class. Others have wit, 
Beatrice is the wit. Viola has wit ; but it is only as the sparkling sword with which a 
maiden plays, — a maiden who would faint at the sight of blood, and in whose hand it 
cannot wound. Rosalind also has wit ; it dazzles in her words ; but it is only the dew 
that bathes the flowers which it brightens. The Katherine of Lov^s Labour* s Lost 
resembles Beatrice ; but it is only as the phosphoric gleam which dances along the 
wave resembles the lightning which cuts the cloud. Beatrice is the wit in the com- 
pleteness of character. She is resistless in the sphere of the ridiculous ; and there 
is nothing which she cannot place within that sphere. Once engaged in the play of 
her faculty, like every acknowledged wit, she gives it unbridled liberty. She is 
untroubled as to whither it may run ; it may overturn the solemn pomposity of one, 
it mRy scatter mire on the dainty vanity of another ; it is all the same to her. Her 
intellect is severed from sentiment ; her fancy has little union with S3rmpathy ; she 
has a fierce consciousness of power, and she has no sense of fear. In conversation 
with Benedick, she loses the ease, the coldness, the indifference which belong to the 
perfect wit ; rivalry with him excites her pride ; and the quiet of contempt is heated 
into the passion of antagonism. But Benedick is no match for Beatrice. No blame 
to him. No man is a match for a witty woman. No man has her quickness, her 
pungency, her correct fluency of utterance, or her glistening weapons of imagery. 
A man, therefore, is never more a fool than when he enters into a wit-duel with a 
brilliant woman. The wit of Beatrice is bitter, but it is seldom without fun. . , • A 



ENGLISH CRITICISMS--FURNIVALL 


3S3 

most formidable woman, Beatrice ; a most courageous man, Benedick. Poor fellow I 
he had an awful dread of her at one time. * Will your grace,’ he says to Don Pedro, 

‘ command me any service to the world’s end,’ etc. And after all, he married her I 

(P. 184). Dogberry is, I am persuaded, of an ample size, — no small man 
speaks with his sedate gravity. There is a steadiness of bearing in him which 
you never observe in men of deficient length, breadth, or rotundity. Men so 
deficient may be irritable, vain, and passionate, but they have no solidly poised im- 
portance. They are well-nigh imponderable. No man of the lean and dwarfish 
species can assume the tranquil self-consequence of a Dogberry. Dow could a 
thinly-covered soul speak with the unction of a soul so comfortably clad as Dog- 
berry’ s evidently is ? or how could a shivering, uneasy mortal have that calm interior 
glow, that warm sense, too, of outward security, which so firmly speak in Dogberry’s 
content and confidence ? 

F. J. Furnivall ( The Leopold Skahspere, Introd. 1877, p. Iv) : This central 
comedy of Shakspere’s middle happiest time (the Merchant y Shrew y Merry Wives 
went before. As You Like //, Twelfth Nighty AlVs Well followed after) is full of 
interest, as, on the one side, gathering into itself and developing so much of his work 
lying near it, and, on the other side, stretching one hand to his earliest genuine work, 
another to his latest complete one. First. Of the links with the other plays near it, 
we may note Benedick’s and Beatrice’s loving one another *no more than reason,’ 
with Slender’s so loving Anne Page, ‘ I will do as it shall become one that would do 
‘ reason.’ Second. Dogberry, Verges, and the Watch, miscalling names, with Slender’s 
‘decrease’ and ‘dissolutely,’ etc., in The Merry Wives. Third. As to The Shrew y 
isn’t Much Ado in a certain sense a double taming of the shrew, only here each 
tames himself and herself by the answer of his and her richer, nobler nature, to an 
overheard appeal to its better feelings, an unseen showing of where its poor, narrow, 
shrewishness was leading it? Dogberry’s conceit, and Verges’s belief in him, are 
like Bottom’s in the Midsummer Nighfs Dream, and his companions’ belief in him ; 
while 7 Vte Merchant's scene between Launcelot Gobbo and his father and Bassanio 
is developed in that of Dogberry and Verges with Leonato in Much Ado. Leonato’s 
lament over Hero here, ‘grieved I, I had but one,’ etc., must be compared with 
Capulet’s complaint about Juliet. Benedick’s dress in Much Ado, III, ii, is to be 
compared with the young English baron’s in The Merchant. Friar Francis’s advice 
that Hero shall be supposed dead for awhile, is like Friar Laurence’s advising that 
Juliet should counterfeit death for forty- two hours. Leonato’s refusing to be com- 
forted by any who hadn’t suffered equal loss with him is to be compared, on the one 
hand, with Constance’s * He talks to me that never had a son,’ in King John, and, 
on the other, with Macduff’s ‘ He has no children* in Macbeth. Hero’s caving in 
under the unjust accusation brought against her is like Ophelia’s silence in her inter- 
views with Hamlet, and to be compared with Desdemona’s ill-starred speeches that 
brought about her death, and the pathetic appeal of Imogen that she was true, and 
the noble indignation of Hermione against her accusers. Such comparisons as these 
bring out with irresistible force the growth of Shakspere in spirit and temper as well 
as words. 

Of the reach backward and fotward of this play, remember that Benedick and 
Beatrice are but the development of Berowne and Rosalind in Shakspere’s first 
genuine play, Lovds Labours Lost, while Hero is the prototype of Hermione in 
Winters Tale, Shakspere’s last complete drama. Hermione, — ‘queen, matron. 



354 


APPENDIX 


* mother/ who, like Hero, unjustly suspected and accused, is declared innocent, and 
y^t for sixteen years suffers seclusion as one dead, with that noble magnanimity and 
fortitude that distinguish her, and then without a word of reproach to her base and 
cruel husband, throws herself, — ^but late a statue of stone, now warm and living, — into 
his arms. Look at the * solemn and profound’ pathos of that situation, and contrast 
it with the Hero and Claudio one here, and see how Shakspere has grown from man- 
hood to fuller age, just as when you set the at-onement of iEgeon and his family in The 
Comedy of Errors beside the reunion of Pericles, his daughter, and wife, in Pericles^ 
you'll see the difference between youth and age, between the First and Fourth 
Periods of Shakspere' s work and art. The many likenesses between Benedick and 
Beatrice and Berowne and Rosalind in Love's Labour^ s Lostoxe caught at once. We 
need only dwell on the moral of the earlier play, as Rosalind preaches it at Berowne, 
the utter worthlessness of wit, the mocking spirit, and the need that the gibing spirit 
should be choked, thrown away, and remember that the moral is repeated here, in 
Beatrice’s wise and generous words (she, woman-like, instinctively goes to the heart 
of the matter) : — * Stand I condemn'd for pride and scorn so much,' etc. 

A. C. Swinburne (p. 152) i Even in the much more nearly spotless work which we 
have next to glance at, some readers have perhaps not unreasonably found a similar 
objection to the final good fortune of such a pitiful fellow as Count Claudio. It 
will be observed that in each case the sacrifice is made to comedy. The actual 
or hypothetical necessity of pairing off all the couples after such a fashion as 
to secure a nominally happy and undeniably matrimonial ending is the theatrical 
idol whose tyranny exacts this holocaust of higher and better feelings than the mere 
liquorish desire to leave the board of fancy with a palatable morsel of cheap sugar on 
the tongue. 

If it is proverbially impossible to determine by selection the greatest work of 
Shakespeare, it is easy enough to decide on the date and name of his most perfect 
comic masterpiece. For absolute power of composition, for faultless balance and 
blameless rectitude of design, there is unquestionably no creation of his hand that 
will bear comparison with Much Ado about Nothing, The ultimate marriage of Hero 
and Claudio, on which I have already remarked as in itself a doubtfully desirable 
consummation, makes no flaw in the dramatic perfection of a piece which could not 
otherwise have been wound up at all. This was its one inevitable conclusion, if the 
action were not to come to a tragic end ; and a tragic end would here have been as 
painfully and grossly out of place as is any but a tragic end to the action of Measure 
for Measure, As for Beatrice, she is as perfect a lady, though of a far different age 
and breeding, as C^lim^ne or Millamant ; and a decidedly more perfect woman than 
could properly or permissibly have trod the stage of Congreve or Molifere. She 
would have disarranged all the dramatic proprieties and harmonies of the one great 
school of pure comedy. The good fierce outbreak of her high true heart in two swift 
words , — * kill Claudio,' — ^would have fluttered the dove-cotes of fashionable drama 
to some purpose. But Alceste would have taken her to his own. 

lady Martin (p. 290) : Of Beatrice I cannot write with the same full heart, or 
with the same glow of sympathy, with which I wrote of Rosalind. Her character 
Is not to me $0 engaging. We might hope to meet in life something to remind us of 
Beatrice ; but in our dreams of fair women Rosalind stands out alone* 

Neither are the drcumstances under whidi Beatrice comes before us of a kind to 



ENGLISH CRITICISMS— LADY MARTIN 


355 

draw us so closely to her. Unlike Rosalind, her life has been and is, while we see 
her, one of pure sunshine. Sorrow and wrong have not softened her nature, nor 
taken off the keen edge of her wit. When we are introduced to her, she is the 
great lady, bright, brilliant, beautiful, enforcing admiration as she moves < in maiden 
‘ meditation fancy free,V among the fine ladies and accomplished gallants of her circle. 
Up to this time there has been no call upon the deeper and finer qualities of her 
nature. The sacred fountain of tears has never been stirred within her. To pain 
of heart she has been a stranger. She has not learned tenderness or toleration under 
the discipline of suffering or disappointment, of unsatisfied yearning or failure. Her 
life has been 

* A summer mood, 

* To which all pleasant things have come unsought,* 

and across which the shadows of care or sorrow have never passed. She has a quick 
eye to see what is weak or ludicrous in man or woman. The impulse to speak out 
the smart and poignant things, that rise readily and swiftly to her lips, is irresistible. 
She does not mean to inflict pain, though others besides Benedick must at times have 
felt that * every word stabs.* She simply rejoices in the keen sword-play of her wit, 
as she would in any other exercise of her intellect, or sport of her fancy. In very 
gaiety of heart she flashes around her the playful lightning of sarcasm and repartee, 
thinking of them only as something to make the time pass brightly by. * I was bom,* 
she says of herself, * to speak all mirth and no matter.’ . . . 

Wooers she has had, of course, not a few ; but she has * mocked them all out of 
* suit.* Very dear to her is the independence of her maidenhood, -~for the moment 
has not come when to surrender that independence into a lover’s hand is more 
delightful than to maintain it. But though in the early scenes of the play she makes 
a mock of wooers and of marriage, with obvious zest and with a brilliancy of fancy 
and pungency of sarcasm that might well appal any ordinary wooer, it is my con- 
viction that, although her heart has not yet been touched, she has at any rate begun 
to see in * Signor Benedick of Padua * qualities which have caught her fancy. She 
has noted him closely, and his image recurs unbidden to her mind with a frequency 
which suggests that he is at least more to her than any other man. The train is laid, 
and only requires a spark to kindle it into flame. How this is done, and with what 
exquisite skill, will be more and more felt the more closely the structure of the play 
and the distinctive qualities of the actors in it are studied. 

Indeed, I think this play should rank, in point of dramatic construction and devel- 
opment of character, with the best of Shakespeare’s works. It has the further dis- 
tinction, that whatever is most valuable in the plot is due solely to his own invention. 
. . . How happy was the introduction of such men as Dogberry, — dear, delightful 
Dogberry !~^nd his band, ‘ the shallow fools who brought to light ’ the flimsy villainy 
by which Don Pedro and Claudio had allowed themselves to be egregiously befooled 1 
How true to the irony of life was the accident, due also to Shakespeare’s invention, 
that Leonato was so much bored by their tedious prate, and so busy with the thought 
of his daughter’s approaching marriage, that he did not listen to them, and thus did 
not hear what would have prevented the all but tragic scene in which that marriage is 
broken off I And how much happier than all is the way in which the wrong done to 
Hero is the means of bringing into view the fine and generous elements of Beatrice’s 
nature, of^ showing Benedick how much more there was in her than he had imagined, 
and at the same time proving to her, what she was previously prepared to ‘ believe 



APPENDIX 


3S6 

* better than reportingly/ that he was of a truly ^ noble strain/ and that she might 
safely trust her happiness in his hands ! Viewed in this light the play seems to me 
to be a masterpiece of construction, developed with consummate skill, and held 
together by the unflagging interest which we feel in Beatrice and Benedick, and in 
the progress of the amusing plot by which they arrive at a knowledge of their own 
hearts. 

I was called upon very early in my career to impersonate Beatrice ; but I must 
frankly admit that, while, as I have said, I could not but admire her, she had not 
taken hold of my heart as my other heroines had done. Indeed, there is nothing of 
the heroine about her, nothing of romance or poetic suggestion in the circumstances 
of her life, — nothing, in short, to captivate the imagination of a very young girl, 
such as I then was. It caused me great disquietude, when Mr Charles Kemble, 
who was playing a series of farewell performances at Covent Garden, where I had 
made my dkbut on the stage but a few months before, singled me out to play Beatrice 
to his Benedick on the night when he bade adieu to his profession. That I who had 
hitherto acted only the young tragic heroines was to be thus transported out of my 
natural sphere into the strange world of high comedy, was a surprise indeed. To 
consent seemed to me nothing short of presumption. I urged upon Mr Kemble how 
utterly unqualified I was for such a venture. His answer was, ‘ I have watched you 

* in the second act of Julia in The Hunchback ^ and I know that you will by-and-by 
*be able to act Shakespeare’s comedy. I do not mean now, because more years, 
‘ greater practice, greater confidence in yourself, must come before you will have suf- 
‘ ficient ease. But do not be afraid. I am too much your friend to ask you to do 
*• anything that would be likely to prove a failure.* This he followed up by offering 
to teach me the ‘business* of the scene. What could I do? He had, from my 
earliest rehearsals, been uniformly kind, helpful, and encouraging, — how could I say 
him * Nay ’ ? My friends, too, who of course acted for me, as I was under age, con- 
sidered that I must consent. I was amazed at some of the odd things I had to say, — 
not at all from knowing their meaning, but simply because I did not even surmise it. 
My dear home instructor, of whom I have often spoken in these letters, said, ‘ My 
‘ child, have no fear, you will do this very well. Only give way to natural joyous- 
‘ness. Let yourself go free ; you cannot be vulgar, if you tried ever so hard.* 

And so the performance came, and went off more easily than I had imagined, as 
so many events of our lives do pass away without any of the terrible consequences 
which we have tormented ourselves by anticipating. The night was one not readily 
to be forgotten. The excitement of having to act a character so different from any I 
had hitherto attempted, and the anxiety natural to the effort, filled my mind entirely. 
I had no idea of the scene which was to follow the close of the comedy, so that it 
came upon me quite unexpectedly. 

The ‘ farewell * of a great actor to his admiring friends in the arena of his triumphs 
was something my imagination had never pictured, and all at once it was brought 
most impressively before me, touching a deep sad minor chord in my young life. It 
moved me deeply. As I write, the exciting scene comes vividly before me, — ^the 
crowded stage, the pressing forward of all who had been Mr Kemble’s comrades 
and contemporaries, — the good wishes, the farewells given, the tearful voices, the 
wet eyes, the curtain raised again and again. Ah, how can any one support such a 
trial 1 I determined in that moment that, when my time came to leave the stage, X 
would not leave it in this way. My heart could never have borne such a strain. I 
need not say that this resolve has remained unchanged. I could not have expected 



ENGLISH CRITICISMS---LADY MARTIN 


357 

such a demonstrative farewell ; but, whatever it might have been, I think it is well 
the knowledge that we are doing anything for the last time is kept from us. I see 
now those who had acted in the play asking for a memento of the night, — ornaments, 
gloves, handkerchiefs, feathers one by one taken from the hat, then the hat itself, — 
all, in short, that could be detached from the dress. I, whose claim was as nothing 
compared with that of others, stood aside, greatly moved and sorrowful, weeping on 
my mother’s shoulder, when, as the exciting scene was at last drawing to a close, Mr 
Kemble saw me, and exclaimed, * What ! My I>ady baby * Beatrice all in tears ! 

* What shall I do to comfort her ? What can I give her in remembrance of her first 

* Benedick?* I sobbed out, ‘ Give me the book from which you studied Benedick.* 
He answered, * You shall have it, my dear, and many others !* He kept his word, 
and I have still two small volumes in which are collected some of the plays in which 
he acted, and also some in which his daughter, Fanny Kemble, who was then mar- 
ried and living in America, had acted. These came, with a charming letter, on the 
title-page addressed to his ^dear little friend.* f 

He also told my mother to bring me to him, if at any time she thought his advice 
might be valuable ; and on several occasions afterwards he took the trouble of read- 
ing over new parts with me, and giving me his advice and help. One thing which 
he impressed upon me I never forgot. It was, on no account to give prominence to 
the merely physical aspect of any painful emotion. Let the expression be genuine, 
earnest, but not ugly. He pointed out to me how easy it was to simulate distor- 
tions, — for example, to writhe from the supposed effect of poison, to gasp, to roll the 
eyes, etc. These were melodramatic effects. But if pain or death had to be repre- 
sented, or any sudden or violent shock, let them be shown in their mental rather 
than in their physical signs. The picture presented might be as sombre as the dark- 
est Rembrandt, but it must be noble in its outlines ; truthful, picturesque, but never 
repulsive, mean, or commonplace. It must suggest the heroic, the divine, in human 
nature, and not the mere everyday struggles or tortures of this life, whether in joy 
or sorrow, despair or hopeless grief. Under every circumstance the ideal, the noble, 
the beautiful should be given side by side with the real. . . , 

(P. 297). Mr Kemble was before everything pre-eminently a gentleman ; and this 
told, as it always must tell, when he enacted ideal characters. There was a natural 
grace and dignity in his bearing, a courtesy and unstudied deference of manner in 
approaching and addressing women, whether in private society or on the stage, which 
I have scarcely seen equalled. Perhaps it was not quite so rare in his day as it is 


* I must explain that ‘ baby * was the pet name by which Mr Kemble always called 
me. I cannot tell why, unless it were because of the contrast he found between his 
own wide knowledge of the world and of art, and my innocent ignorance and youth. 
Delicate health had kept me in a quiet home, which I left only at intervals for a 
quieter life by the seaside, so that I knew, perhaps, far less of the world and its ways 
than even most girls of my age. 
t The letter was in these terms : — 

* II Park Piace, St James’s. 

‘My dear little Friend, — To you alone do these parts, which were once 
‘Fanny Kemble* s, of right belong; for from you alone can we now expect the 
‘ most efficient representation of them. Pray oblige' me by giving them a place in 
* your study ; and believe me ever your true friend and servant, 


‘C. Kemble.’ 



APPENDIX 


358 


now. What a lover he must have made ! What a Romeo ! What an Orlando I 
I got glimpses of what these must have been in the readings which Mr Kemble gave 
after he left the stage, and which I attended diligently, with heart and brain awake 
to profit by what I heard. How fine was his Mercutio ! What brilliancy, what ease, 
what spontaneous flow of fancy in the Queen Mab speech ! The very start of it was 
suggestive, — * O, then, I see Queen Mab ’ (with a slight emphasis on * Mab * ) * hath 
* been with you 1’ How exquisite the play of it all, image rising up after image, one 
crowding upon another, each new one more fanciful than the last ! ‘ Thou talk’st of 

‘ nothing,’ says Romeo ; but oh, what nothings I As picture after picture was 
brought before you by Mr Kemble’s skill, with the just emphasis thrown on every 
word, yet all spoken * trippingly on the tongue,’ what objects that one might see or 
touch could be more real ? I was disappointed in his reading of Juliet, Desdemona, 
etc. His heroines were spiritless, tearful, — creatures too merely tender, without dis- 
tinction or individuality, all except Lady Macbeth, into whom I could not help 
thinking some of the spirit of his great sister, Mrs Siddons, was transfused. But, 
in truth, 1 cannot think it possible for any man’s nature to simulate a woman’s, or 
vice versd. Therefore it is that I have never cared very much to listen to ‘ readings ’ 
of entire plays by any single person. I have sometimes given parts of them myself ; 
but very rarely, and only, like Beatrice, ‘upon great persuasion,’ 

, Pardon this digression. It was so much my way to live with the characters I 
represented, that, when I sit down to write, my mind naturally wanders off into 
things which happened to me in connection with the representation of them. It was 
some little while before I again performed Beatrice, and then I had for my Benedick, 
Mr James Wallack. He was by that time past the meridian of his life ; but he 
threw a spirit and grace into the part, which, added to his fine figure and gallant 
bearing, made him, next to Mr Charles Kemble, although far beneath him, the best 
Benedick whom I have ever seen. Oh, for something of the fervency, the fire, the 
undying youthfulness of spirit, the fine courtesy of bearing, now so rare, which made 
the acting with actors of this type so delightful ! 

By this time, I had made a greater study of the play ; moved more freely in my 
art, and was therefore more able to throw myself into the character of Beatrice than 
in the days of my novitiate. The oftener I played the character, the more it grew 
upon me. The view I had taken of it seemed also to find favour with my audiences. 
I well remember the pleasure I felt, when some chance critic of my Beatrice wrote 
that she was ‘ a creature, overflowing with joyousness, — ^raillery itself being in her 
‘ nothing more than an excess of animal spirits, tempered by passing through a soul 
‘of goodness.’ That she had a soul, brave and generous as well as |ood, it was 
always my aim to show. All this was easy work to me on the stage. To do it with 
my pen is a far harder task ; but I must try. 

It may be mere fancy, yet I cannot help thinking that Shakespeare found peculiar 
pleasure in the delineation of Beatrice, and more especially in devising the encoun- 
ters between her and Benedick. You remember what old Fuller says of the wit- 
combats between Ben Jonson and Shakespeare, in which he likens Jonson to a 
Spanish galleon, ‘built high, solid, but slow;’ and Shakespeare to an English 
man-of-war, ‘lesser in bulk, but lighter in sailing, tacking about and taking 
‘advantage of all winds by the quickness of his wit and invention.’ It is just 
this quickness of wit and invention which is the special characteristic of both 
Benedick and Beatrice. In their skirmishes, each vies with eatih in trying to out- 
flank the other by jest and repartee ; and, as is fitting, the victory is generally with 



ENGLISH CR/TICISMS^LADV MAE TIN 


359 


the lady, whose adroitness in * tacking about, and taking advantage of alt winds,’ 
gives her the advantage even against an adversary as formidable as Benedick. 

That Beatrice is beautiful, Shakespeare is at pains to indicate. If what Words- 
worth says was ever true of any one, assuredly it was true of her, that 

‘ Vital feelings of delight 
Had reared her form to stately height.’ 

Accordingly, we picture her as tall, and with the lithe elastic grace of motion 
which should come of a fine figure and high health. We are made to see very early 
that she is the sunshine of her uncle Leonato’s house. He delights in her quaint, 
daring way of looking at things ; he is proud of her, too, for with all her sportive 
and somewhat domineering ways, she is every inch the noble lady, bearing herself 
in a manner worthy of her high blood and courtly breeding. He knows how good 
and sound she is in heart no less than in head, — one of those strong natures which 
can be counted on to rise up in answer to a call upon their courage and fertility of 
resource in any time of difficulty or trouble. Her shrewd sharp sayings have only 
a pleasant piquancy for him. Indeed, however much weak colourless natures might 
stand in awe of eyes so quick to detect a flaw, and a wit so prompt to cover it with 
ridicule, there must have been a charm for him and for all manly natures in the very 
peril of coming under the fire of her raillery. A young, beautiful, graceful woman, 
flashing out brilliant sayings, charged with no real malice, but with just enough of a 
sting in them to pique the self-esteem of those at whom they are aimed, must always, 
I fancy, have a peculiar fascination for men of spirit. And so we see, at the very 
outset, it was with Beatrice. Not only her uncle, but Don Pedro and the Count 
Claudio also, have the highest admiration of her. That she was either a vixen or a 
shrew was the last idea that could have entered their minds. ‘ By my troth, a pleas- 

* ant-spirited lady !’ says Don Pedro ; and the words express what was obviously the 
general impression of all who knew her best. 

How long Benedick and Beatrice have known each other before the play begins is 
not indicated. I think we may fairly infer that their acquaintance is of some stand- 
ing, It certainly did not begin when Don Pedro, in passing through Messina, . . . 
picked Benedick up, and attached him to his suite. They were obviously intimate 
before this. At all events there had been time for an antagonism to spring up 
between them, which was natural, where both were witty, and both accustomed to 
lord it somewhat, as witty people are apt to do, over their respective circles. Bene- 
dick could hardly have failed to draw the fire of Beatrice by his avowed and con- 
temptuous indifference to her sex, if by nothing else. To be evermore proclaiming, 
as we may be sure he did, just as much before he went to the wars as he did after 
his return, that he rated all women cheaply, was an offence which Beatrice, ready 
enough although she might be herself to make epigrams on the failings of her sex, 
was certain to resent. Was it to be borne, that* he should set himself up as ‘ a pro- 

* fessed tyrant to her whole sex,’ and boast his freedom from the vassalage to * love, 

* the lord of all ?’ And this, too, when he had the effrontery to tell herself, ‘ It is 
^certain I am loved of all ladies, only you excepted.* 

It is true that Beatrice, when she is pressed upon the point, has much the same 
pronounced notions about the male sex, and the bondage of marriage. But she does 
not, like Benedick, go about proclaiming them to all comers;' neither does she 
denounce the whole male sex for the faults or vices of the few. Besides, there has 



APPENDIX 


360 

clearly been about Benedick, in these early days, an air of confident self-assertion, a 
tendency to talk people down, which has irritated Beatrice. The name, * Signor 
‘ Montanto,’ borrowed from the language of the fencing school, by which she asks 
after him in the first sentence she utters, and the announcement that she had * prom> 
‘ised to eat all of his killing,* seem to point to the first of these faults. And may 
we not take, as an indication of the other, her first remark to himself ‘ I wonder you 
‘ will still be talking, Signor Benedick ; nobody marks you and also the sarcasm 
in her description of him to her uncle, as ‘too like my lady’s eldest son, evermore 
‘ tattling * ? 

What piques Beatrice, also, is the undeniable fact that this contemptuous Benedick 
is a handsome, gallant young soldier, a general favourite, who makes his points with 
trenchant effect in the give and take of their wit-combats, and, in short, has more 
of the qualities to win the heart of a woman of spirit than any of the gallants who 
have come about her. She, on the other hand, has the attraction for him of being 
as clever as she is handsome, the person of all his circle who puts him most upon his 
mettle, and who pays him the compliment of replying upon his sharp sayings with 
repartees, the brilliancy of which he cannot but acknowledge, even while he smarts 
under them. We can tell he is far from insensible to her beauty by what he says of 
her to Claudio when contrasting her with Hero. ‘ There is her cousin, an she were 
‘ not possessed with a fury, exceeds her as much in beauty as the first of May doth 
‘the last ot December.’ No wonder, therefore, that, as we see, they have often 
come into conflict, creating no small amusement to their friends, and to none more 
than to Leonato. When Beatrice, in the opening scene of the play, says so many 
biting things about Benedick, I.eonato, anxious that the Messenger shall not carry 
away a false notion of their opinion of him, says, ‘ You must not, sir, mistake my 
‘ niece ; there is a kind of merry war between Signor Benedick and her ; they never 
‘ meet but there’s a skirmish of wit between them.’ Life, perhaps, has not been so 
amusing to Leonato since Signor Benedick went away. It is conceivable that Bea- 
trice herself may have missed him, if for nothing else than for the gibes and sarcasm 
which had called her own exuberance of wit into play. 

I believe we shall not do Beatrice justice unless we form some idea, such as I have 
suggested, of the relations that have subsisted between her and Benedick before the 
play opens. It would be impossible otherwise to understand why he should be 
uppermost in her thoughts, when she hears of the .successful issue of Don Pedro’s 
expedition, so that her first question to the Messenger who brings the tidings is 
whether Benedick has come back with the rest. . . 

(P. 327). I have told you of my first performance of Beatrice. Before I conclude, 
let me say a word as to my last. It was at Stratford-upon-Avon, on the opening, on 
the 23d of April, 1879 (Shake.speare’s birthday), of The Shakespeare Memorial 
Theatre. I had watched with much interest the completion of this most appropriate 
tribute to the memory of our supreme poet. The local enthusiasm, which would not 
rest until it had placed upon the banks of his native stream a building in which his 
best plays might be from time to time presented, commanded my warm sympathy. 
It is a beautiful building ; and when, standing beside it, I looked upon the church 
wherein all that was mortal of the poet is laid, and, on the other hand, my eyes 
rested on the site of New Place, where he died, a feeling more earnest, more rever- 
ential, came over me than I have experienced even in Westminster Abbey, in Santa 
Croce, or in any other resting-place of the mighty dead. It was a deep delight to 
me to be the first to interpret on that spot one of my great master’s brightest crea- 



ENGLISH CRITICISMS-LANG 


361 

tions. Everything conspired to make the occasion happy. From every side of 
Shakespeare’s county, from London, from remote provinces, came people to witness 
that performance. The characters were well supported, and the fact that we were 
acting in Shakespeare’s birthplace, and to inaugurate his Memorial Theatre, seemed 
to inspire us all. I found my own delight doubled by the sensitive sympathy of my 
audience. Every turn of playful humour, every flash of wit, every burst of strong 
feeling told ; and it is a great pleasure to me to think that on that spot and 
on that occasion I made my last essay to present a living portraiture of the Lady 
Beatrice. 

The success of this performance was aided by the very judicious care which had 
been bestowed upon all the accessories of the scene. The stage, being of moderate 
size, admitted of no elaborate display. But the scenes were appropriate and well 
painted, the dresses were well chosen, and the general effect was harmonious, — 
satisfying the eye, without distracting the spectator’s mind from the dialogue and the 
play of character. It was thus possible for the actors to engage the close attention 
of the audience, and keep it. This consideration seems to me now to be too fre- 
quently overlooked. 

The moment the bounds of what is sufficient for scenic illustration are overleaped, 
a serious wrong is, in my opinion, done to the actor, and, as a necessary consequence, 
to the spectator also. With all good plays this must, in some measure, be the case ; 
but where Shakespeare is concerned, it is so in a far greater degree. How can actor 
or actress hope to gain that hold upon the attention of an audience by which it shall 
be led to watch, step by step, from the first scene to the last, the developement of a 
complex yet harmonious character, or the links of a finely adjusted plot, if the eye 
and ear are being overfed with gorgeous scenery, with dresses extravagant in cost, 
and not unfrequently quaint even to grotesqueness in style, or by the bustle and din 
of crowds of people, whose movements unsettle the mind and disturb that mood of 
continuous observation of dialogue and expression, without which the poet’ s purpose 
can neither be developed by the performer nor appreciated by his audience ? 

For myself, I can truly say I would rather the mise-en-setne should fall short of 
being sufficient, than that it should be overloaded. However great the strain, — 
and I have too often felt it, — of so engaging the minds of my audience, as to make 
them forget the poverty of the scenic illustration, I would rather at all times have 
encountered it, than have had to contend against the influences which withdraw the 
spectator’s mind from the essentials of a great drama to dwell upon its mere adjuncts. 
When Juliet is on the balcony, it is on her the eye should be riveted. It should not 
be wandering away to the moonlight, or to the pomegranate trees of Capulet’s garden, 
however skilfully counterfeited by the scene-painter’s and machinist’s skill. The 
actress who is worthy to interpret that scene requires the undivided attention of her 
audience. I cite this merely as one of a host of illustrations that have occurred to 
my mind in seeing the lavish waste of merely material accessories upon the stage in 
recent years. 

Andrew Lang {Harper * s Magazine^ September, 1891, p. 492) : Beatrice’s wit, 
let it be frankly avowed, is uncommonly Elizabethan. It would have been called 
‘chaff’ if our rude forefathers had known the word in that sense. She utters 
‘large jests,’ ponderable persiflage. If she did not steal it from the Hundred 
Merry Tales, as was said, she had been a scholar in that school of coquettes. We 
cannot be angry with the French for failing to see the point or edge of this 



APPENDIX 


362 

lady’s wit. It has occasionally no more point or edge than a bludgeon. For 
example : — 

* Benedick. God keep your ladyship still In that mind I so some gentleman or other shall ’scape a 
predestinate scratched face. 

Beatrice. Scratching could not make it worse, an 'twere such a face as yours.* 

This kind of merry combat would be thought blunt by a groom and a scullion. 
There is no possibility of avoiding this distressing truth. Beatrice, while she has 
not yet acknowledged her love to herself, nor been stirred by the wrong done to 
Hero, is not a mistress of polished and glittering repartee ; but it were absurd, 
indeed idiotic, to call her ‘ odious.’ Other times, other manners. Wit is a very 
volatile affair. Look, for example, at Mr Paley’s collection of rudenesses and inep- 
titudes called The Wit of the Greeks, It is humor that lives, — the humor of Falstaff, 
of Benedick when he is not engaged in a wit-combat. . . . 

Though Hero forgave Claudio, we may be happily certain that Beatrice never did. 
Our friends’ wrongs are infinitely more difficult to pardon than our own, and Beatrice 
was not a lady of general and feeble good-nature. It is difficult not to regret that 
Benedick let Claudio off so easily, with contempt and a challenge, but so the fortune 
of the play must needs determine it. Claudio throughout behaves like the most 
hateful young cub. He is, perhaps, more absolutely intolerable when he fleers and 
jests at the anger of Leonato than even when he denounces Hero, making her a 
sacrifice to the vanity of his jealousy. It is his self-love, not his love, that suffers 
from the alleged conduct of Hero. . • . 

Perhaps nobody will carry heresy so far as to say that this piece is better to read 
than to see on the stage ; on the other hand, it lives for the stage, and on the stage. 
It is a master-work for the theatre, glittering with points and changes, merry or 
hushed with laughter and surprises. It is said that Benedick was Garrick’s favorite 
Shakespearian part ; it requires such humor, dignity, and gallantfy as will try the 
greatest actor’s powers to the highest. A Benedick who makes faces and * clowns’ 
the part, for example, where he listens to the whispered discourse on Beatrice’s love, 
leaves a distinct and horrible stain on the memory. And she who acts Beatrice, 
again, like her who acts Rosalind, must above all things be a lady, and act like a 
lady. . . . 

The wit combats must be judged historically. The two-handed sword of Signior 
Montanto was just going out in the duel ; the delicate sword was just coming in. 
Even court wit was clumsy in Shakespeare’s time, and trammelled by euphuistic 
flourishes, as fencing was encumbered by a ponderous weapon, and perplexing secret 
boitesy and needless, laborious manoeuvres. The wit of Beatrice is of her own time ; 
her gallant and loyal nature is of all times. The drama in which she lives is * a 
‘mellow glory of the British stage,’ rather than, like the Midsummer Nighf s Dream 
or As You Like It, the poetic charm for solitary hours in the life contemplative. 
Played first, probably, in 1599 or 1600, the comedy is of Shakespeare’s happiest age 
and kindliest humor. Nobody is melancholy here ; not one of the poet’s favorite 
melancholies holds the stage ; for we cannot number the morose and envious Don 
John with Jaques or with Hamlet. He is not a deeply studied character, like lago, 
and is a villain only because a villain is needed by the play. In fact, Claudio is the 
real villain as well as the jeune premier of the piece. It is pretty plain that Shake- 
speare loved not the gay rufflers of his age, though, after all, in opposition to the 
sullen and suspicious vanity, the heartless raillery, of Claudio, he has given us the 
immortal Mercutio as a representative of the gallants of his time. 



DIVISION OF ACTS-SPEDDING 


363 


DIVISION OF ACTS 

James Spedding {Gentleman's Magazine^ June, 1850; New Shakspere Society^ 
Transactions, 1877-9, p. n) : Every one who has studied the art of composition in 
any department, knows how much depends upon the skilful distribution of those 
stages or halting-places which, whether indicated by books, cantos, chapters, or 
paragraphs, do in effect mark the completion of one period and the commencement 
of another, and warn the reader at what point he should pause to recover an entire 
impression of what has gone before and to prepare his expectation for what is coming. 
It is this which enables him to see the parts in their due subordination to the whole, 
and to watch the developement of the piece from the point of view at which the 
writer intended him to stand. Now, in an acted play, the intervals between the Acts 
form such decided interruptions to the progress of the story, and divide it into periods 
so very strongly marked, that a writer who has any feeling for his art will of course 
use them for the purpose of regulating the developement of his plot and guiding the 
imagination of the spectator ; and if he does so use them, it is manifest that these 
intervals cannot be shifted from one place to another without materially altering the 
effect of the piece. 

That Shakespeare was too much of an artist to neglect this source of artistic effect, 
will hardly be disputed now-a-days. Easy as he seems to have been as to the fate 
of his works after he had cast them on the waters, it is certain that while he had 
them in hand he treated them as works of art, and was by no means indifferent to 
their merits in that kind. Far from being satisfied with elaborating his great scenes 
and striking situations, he was curiously careful and skilful in the arts of preparation 
and transition, and everything which conduces to the harmonious developement of the 
whole piece. If any one doubts this, let him only mark the passages which are 
usually omitted in the acting, and ask himself why those passages were introduced. 
He will always find that there was some good reason for it. And if the proper dis- 
tribution of the pauses between the Acts forms no unimportant part of the design of 
a play, it is no unimportant part of an editor’s duty to recover, if he can, the dis- 
tribution originally designed by the writer. 

It will be thought, perhaps, — indeed it will be everybody’s first thought, — that 
the editors of the Folio have in this respect left their successors nothing to do. Them- 
selves Shakespeare’s fellow-players, familiar with all the practices and traditions of 
the theatre, and in possession of the original copies, they have set forth all the 
divisions of Act and Scene in the most conspicuous manner ; and what more, it will 
be asked, can any editor want ? My answer is, that we want to know whether these 
are the divisions designed by Shakespeare in his ideal theatre, — ^for though he wrote 
his plays for the stage, we are not to suppose that he confined his imagination within 
the material limits of the Globe on the Bankside, — or only those which were adopted 
in the actual representation. Audiences are not critics ; and it is with a view to their 
entertainment, together with the capacities and convenience of the actors, that stage- 
managers have to make their arrangements. We see that in our own times, not 
only old plays when revived undergo many alterations, but a new play written for 
the modem stage is seldom brought out altogether in the shape its author designed 
it, — nor often, probably, without changes which do not appear to him to be for the 
better. We may easily suppose, therefore, that Shakespeare’s plays, even when first 
produced, had to sacrifice something of their ideal perfection to necessities of the 
stage, tastes of the million, or considerations of business. But this is not all. How 
far the old Folio gives them as they were when first produced, is a question which 



APPENDIX 


364 

I suppose nobody can answer. Many of them had been acted many times to many 
different audiences. Now in these days we hnd that when a play is once well 
known, and its reputation established, people commonly go to see the famous scenes, 
and care little in what order they are presented, or how much is left out of what 
must have been necessary at first to explain them to the understanding, or to prepare 
the imagination for them. They treat the play as we treat a familiar book ; where 
we turn at once to our favourite passages, omitting the explanatory and introductory 
parts, the effect of which we already know. I see no reason for suspecting that it 
was otherwise in the time of Shakespeare ; and if it was not, a popular play would 
soon come to be presented in the shape in which it was found to be easiest for the 
actors or most attractive to the audience, without much consideration for the integrity 
of the poet’ s idea. In this manner the original divisions of the Acts may easily have 
been forgotten before 1623 ; and those which we find in the first Folio may represent 
nothing more than the current practice of the theatre or the judgement of the editors ; 
for neither of which it has been usual to hold Shakespeare responsible. The critics 
of the 1 8th century used to account for every passage which they thought unworthy 
of him as an interpolation by the players ; and in this latter half of the 19th, we 
have gone much further in the same direction ; handing over entire Acts and half 
plays to other dramatists of the time, with a boldness which makes the suggestion 
of a misplaced inter- Act seem a very small matter, and the authority of the editors 
of the Folio an objection hardly worth considering. 

But if the evidence of the Folio on this point is not to be regarded as conclusive, 
we must fall back upon the marginal directions, which, supposing them to be Shake* 
speare’s own (as they probably are, for the original manuscript must have contained 
such directions, the action being unintelligible without them, and who else could 
have supplied them?), contain all the information with regard to the stage arrange- 
ments which he has himself left us. These marginal directions, as we find them in 
the earliest copies, are generally clear and careful, — better, I think, in most cases, 
than those which later editors have substituted for them, — ^but, unfortunately, they 
tell us nothing at all as to the point now in question. That every play was to be in 
five Acts appears to have been taken as a matter of course, but there is no indication 
of them in the earliest copies. Among Shakespeare’s plays that were panted during 
his life, there is not one, I believe, in which the Acts are divided. Even among 
those printed in 1623, — in which the divisions were introduced, and the first page 
always begins with actus primus, scccna prime , — ^there are still four in which they 
are not marked at all, and a fifth in which they are not carried beyond the second 
Scene of the second Act. And as it seems very unlikely that either printers or 
transcribers would omit such divisions if they appeared on the face of the manu- 
script, I conclude that it was not Shakespeare’s habit to mark the end of each Act 
as he went on, but to leave the distribution for final settlement when arrangements 
were making for the performance, and when, having the whole composition before 
him, he could better see what there was to divide. In that case, the end of each Act 
would be entered in the prompter’s copy, the original MS remaining as it was, and so 
finding its way by legitimate or illegitimate channels to the printer. By the dialogue 
and marginal directions together, as exhibited in the printed copy, we can follow the 
developement of the action and determine for ourselves where the periods and rest- 
ing-places should naturally come in ; and when these are palpably incompatible with 
the division of the Acts in the Folio, we may reasonably conclude that it represents, 
not the original design, but the last edition of the prompter’s, copy. . • • 



DIVISION OF ACTS-SPEDDING 


365 

(P, 20), In Much Ado about Nothings as it stands in the Folio and in modem 
editions, 1 find two faults, which I do not think Shakespeare was likely to commit 

At the end of the first Scene of the first Act, the Prince and Claudio leave the 
stage (which represents the open space before Leonato’s house,) the Prince having 
that moment conceived and disclosed his project of making love to Hero in Claudio’s 
name. Then the scene shifts to a room in Leonato’s house, where the first thing we 
hear is that, in a thick pleached alley in Antonio’s orchard, the Prince has been 
overheard telling Claudio that he loved Hero and meant to acknowledge it that night 
in a dance, etc. All this is told to us, while the Prince’s last words are still ringing 
in our ears ; and it is told, not by the person who overheard the conversation, but by 
Antonio, to whom he has reported it. We are called on, therefore, to imagine that, 
while the scene was merely shifting, the Prince and Claudio have had time for a 
second conversation in Antonio’s orchard, and that one of Antonio’s men, overhear* 
ing it, has had time to tell him of it. Now this is one of the things which it is 
impossible to imagine. I do not mean merely that the thing is physically impossible, 
for art is not tied to physical impossibilities. I mean that the impossibility is pre- 
sented so strongly to the imagination that it cannot be overlooked or forgotten. The 
imagination refuses to be so imposed upon. 

The other fault is of an opposite kind, and not so glaring, because it does not 
involve any positive shock to the sense of probability. Nevertheless, it completely 
counteracts and neutralises an effect which Shakespeare has evidently taken pains to 
produce, and which, if rightly considered, is of no small consequence. The fourth 
Scene of the third Act represents the morning of the wedding. The ceremony is to 
take place the first thing. The Prince, the Count, and all the gallants of the town 
are already waiting to fetch Hero to church j she must make haste to go with them. 
‘Help to dress me, good coz, good Meg, good Ursula.’ Leonato, intercepted by 
Dogberry on his way to join them, is in too great a hurry to listen to him. They 
stay for hini to give away his daughter ; ‘ he will wait upon them ; he is ready and 
so exit abruptly with the messenger who has been sent to hasten him ; leaving Dog- 
berry and Verges to take the examination themselves. The idea that the ceremony 
is to take place immediately is carefully impressed, and there was good reason it 
should. In a story involving so many improbabilities it was necessary to hurry it on 
to the issue before the spectator has had time to consider them. The. deception prac- 
tised on Claudio and the Prince took place between twelve and one at night ; the 
discovery of it by the Watch followed immediately after. If the wedding do not 
come on the first thing in the morning, before Claudio has had time to reflect, or Dog- 
berry to explain, or rumour to get abroad, it cannot be but the secret will transpire 
and the catastrophe be prevented. Yet precisely at this juncture it is, when Dog- 
berry is about to take the examinations, and the wedding party are on their way to 
church, that the pause between the Acts takes place, — that indefinite interval during 
which the only thing almost which one can not imagine is that nothing has happened 
and no time passed. When the curtain rises again, the least we expect to hear is that 
some considerable event has occurred since it fell. Yet we find everything exactly 
where it was. The party have but just arrived at the church, and are still in a hurry. 
‘ Come, Friar Francis, be brief ; only to the plain form of marriage, and you shall 
* recount their particular duties afterwards.’ The action has not advanced a step. 
To me, I confess, this is a disappointment. Why all that huriy if there was leisure 
for the drop-scene to fall ? or, if there was any object in representing that hurry, why 
should the drop-scene fall to interrupt it? 



APPENDIX 


366 

I do not believe that either of these points can be defended ; but both may be 
removed, easily and completely, and without altering a word of the text. Let us 
only take the Qto, in which the Acts are not divided (but of which the edition of 
1623 is in other respects a mere reprint), and consider into what divisions the action 
most naturally falls. 

First, then, read on to the end of the first Scene, * In practice let us put it pres- 

* ently.* Now shut the book. Let ‘ the curtain fall upon the fancied stage con- 
sider what is past, and wonder what is coming. We have been introduced to all the 
principal persons ; the wars are over ; the time is of peace, leisure, and festivity. 
The characters of Benedick and Beatrice, and their relation to each other, — a rela- 
tion of attractive opposition, — are clearly defined ; both are fancy-free as yet ; but 
both boast of their freedom with a careless confidence that marks them as victims of 
Nemesis. Claudio has conceived a passion for Hero ; but it is only an infection of 
the eye and fancy ; and the foolish device, which in his bashfulness he catches at, 
serves the double purpose of reminding us that his passion is not grounded in any 
real knowledge of the woman, and of pointing him out as the fit victim of some 
foolish mistake. 

Begin the next scene as a new Act. Claudio and the Prince, we find, have been 
walking about, since we last saw them, in orchards and galleries, still talking upon the 
one subject which Claudio can talk upon with interest. Read on without stopping till 
you come to the end of the scene between Don John and Borachio, which stands in 
the modem editions as the second Scene of the second Act, ‘ I will presently go 

* leam the day of their marriage.* Then suppose the curtain to fall again, and pro- 
ceed as before. We have now seen a threefold plot laid, the development of which 
will afford plenty of business for the following Act. Benedick and Beatrice are each 
to be tricked into an affection for the other, and though Claudio's marriage, after 
some foretaste of mistakings, is for the present arranged, a design is on foot for 
crossing it. 

The third Act will open with Benedick in the garden. Read on again till you 
have seen the three plots played out. Benedick caught, Beatrice caught, Claudio 
caught, and finally Don John caught ; for the curtain must not fall until Borachio 
and Conrad have been taken into custody. At this point a pause is forced upon us, 
for it is now the dead of night, and we must wait for the morning before anything 
more can be done. 

The fourth Act opens in Hero's dressing-room ; all is bustle and preparation for 
the marriage. The ceremony is to take place immediately. Dogberry arrives to 
report the discovery which had been made in the night, and anybody but Dogberry, — 
even Verges, if he had been allowed to speak, — would have got it reported, and so 
have intercepted the impending catastrophe. But we are made to feel that the wed- 
ding-party cannot possibly wait till he has discharged himself of his message, and 
that the catastrophe, which can only be prevented by a word to the purpose from 
him, is inevitable. Accordingly, while he is gathering his wits to * bring some of 

* them to a non com,' and sending for ' the learned man with his ink-hom to set 
*down their excommunication,' the marriage-scene is acted and over; Hero is 
accused, renounced, disgraced, and given out for dead; Benedick and Beatrice 
are betrayed, by help of the passion and confusion, into an understanding of each 
others’ feelings, and Don John disappears. Finally, the learned man with his ink- 
hom, coming to the relief of Dogberry, sees in a moment what the matter is, and 
hastens to I«eonato’s house with the intelligence. Thus everjr thing is ripe for 



LOUE LABOURS WONNE 367 

explanation, and we may pause once more in easy expectation of the issue. The 
business of the next Act, which opens at the right place, is only to unravel the con- 
fusion, ta restore the empire of gaiety, and conclude the marriages. 

According to this scheme, it seems to me not only that the specific defects which 
I have noticed are effectually removed, but that the general action of the piece de- 
velopes itself more naturally and gracefully. And I have the less hesitation in pro- 
posing a new division between the first and second and between the third and fourth 
Acts because the motive of the existing division is easily explained. Between the 
first and second, the stage had to be prepared for the great supper and mask in 
Leonato^s house; between the third and fourth, for the marriage ceremony in the 
church. My .suggestion will hardly find favour, I fear, with the scene-shifters. But 
it is with the imaginary theatre only that I have to deal, in which the * interior of a 
* church* requires no more preparation than a ' room in a house.’ 


LOUE LABOURS WONNE. 

A. E. Brae {^Collier ^ Coleridge^ and Shakespeare^ i860, p. 131) : It is admitted 
on all hands that some play, now known by another name, must, in 1598, have borne 
the title Lovds Labours IVon, when alluded to by Meres in his mention of the plays 
then known as Shakespeare’s. . . . The question is, to which of the comedies now 
extant, but not included in Meres’ s list could that title have been applied, either in 
lieu of, or in addition to, the name it may now bear ? 

A/^s Well that Ends Well was singled out about a century since by Dr Farmer, 
and since then almost universally adopted as the probable representative of Meres’ s 
title. But in 1844 that opinion met an able dissentient in the Rev, Joseph Hunter, 
who espoused the cause of The Tempest^ and endeavoured to prove that it alone 
ought to be recognised as the true original. But while most persons will concur in 
the justness of the objections urged by Mr Hunter against the probability of AlVs 
Well that Ends Well being the representative of the extinct title, few will be con- 
vinced by his reasoning that The Tempest has any better claim to it, , . , 

But if neither AlVs Well that Ends Well, nor The Tempest, can be considered 
with any likelihood to be the original of Meres’ s title, is there any other of Shake- 
speare’s known Comedies to which it seems more applicable? 

Certainly there is, — one in favour of which so many probabilities, external and 
internal, concur, that it seems the strangest thing possible that it should have been 
so long and so unaccountably overlooked, and that it should be reserved to the latter 
half of the nineteenth century to suggest Mtu:h Ado about Nothing as the true repre- 
sentative of Lovds Labour's Won, 

First, as to date of production ; — 

Much Ado about Nothing is usually stated to have been written in 1599, and the 
reason assigned for that year is, that while on the one hand there is extant a copy of 
the play printed in 1600, on the other hand it is not mentioned by Meres in 1598 ; 
and within these narrow limits, of a year on either side, the middle is fixed upon as 
the date of the play. 

But it must be observed that while one limit is fixed and certain, namely, the 
printed copy of 1600, the other is based upon^a pure assumption of the very question 
at issue ; and that question being yet to try, the limit dependent upon it of course 
ceases to exist. 



APPENDIX 


368 

Whence it follows, that while there is direct proof that Much Ado ahotit Nothing 
was certainly in existence within two years after Meres’ s publication, there is nothing 
whatever to bar it in the other direction ; so that its existence may be assumed at 
any indefinite time previous to the date of the printed copy. There is even pre- 
sumptive evidence, on the title-page of that copy [in the announcement that it * hath 
*beene sundrie times publikely acted*], that the play had been previously some con- 
siderable time before the public. 

Now when it is recollected that almost all the plays of Shakespeare were many 
years on the stage before their publication in a printed form, it is surely not too much 
to assume that * sundrie times publikely acted * implies a previous existence of at 
least two or three years. There are more early printed copies of Hamlet extant than 
any other of Shakespeare’s plays; the earliest is dated in 1603, and' bears on its 
title-page nearly the same words, — ‘ as it hath been diverse times acted ’ ; and yet 
Hamlet is supposed to have been in existence ten or a dozen years before the date of 
this, the earliest copy known. Even supposing, therefore, that the 1600 copy of 
Much Ado about Nothing is the first that was printed of that play, to believe that it 
was produced by Shakespeare only the same, or the previous year, is to ignore the 
analogy of almost all his other plays. 

Another external probability arises from the fact, reported by Malone, on the 
authority of [the Lord Treasurer Stanhope’s Accounts*], that Much Ado about 
Nothing formerly passed under the title of ‘ Benedick and Beatrix.* Every reader 
of the play must feel that these two are the principal characters, and that Hero and 
Claudio, like Bianca and Lucentio in The Taming of the Shrew, are of only subor- 
dinate interest. But Much Ado about Nothing is a title that can have reference only 
to the acoisation of Hero, and therefore there is a strong probability, — directly con- 
firmed by the above quotation from Malone, — that the present title of the play was 
not always adhered to. 

So much for the external possibilities. 

Of the internal, the first and most prominent is the similarity of the two principal 
characters in Much Ado about Nothing, to Biron and Rosaline in Lovers Labour^ s 
Lost, So striking is the resemblance of design and treatment in both pairs, that 
without any view to the present question, they have long been spoken of as first 
sketch and finished portrait. But by the present hypothesis, which assumes that 
these two plays were designed for companion pictures, under titles differing only 
in denouement, the judgement is at once relieved from the necessity of regarding 
them as repetitions, or of supposing that the inexhaustible Shakespeare would recur 
to his old materials for re-working in another form. 

But there is also apparent design in the contrasts, as well as in the similitudes pre- 
sented by these two plays. In one the prevailing feature is rhyme, in the other 
prose ; in one the phraseology is obscure and euphuistic, in the other remarkably 
plain and colloquial. Even the same sentiments are repeated in both in such a beau^ 
tiful variation of expression and application, that the contrast cannot have been other 
than intentional. One example of this is as follows ; — ‘ — laughter so profound, That 
‘in this spleen ridiculous appears, To check their folly, passion’s solemn tears.’— 
Lovds Labours Lost, Y, ii. ‘ — there appears much joy in him, even so much that 
joy could not show itself modest enough without a badge of bitterness .* — Much Ado 
ahoui Nothing, I, i. 


* See Preface to the present volume. — E d. 




LOUE LABOURS WONNE 369 

The following are for the purpose of showing that the two plays were probably 
written about the same time, when the same ideas were afloat in the author’s 
mind : — 

‘ Welcome, pure wit 1 thou partest a fair fray.* — Love's Lab, V, ii. 

* Welcome, Signior ; you are almost come to part almost a fray.* — Much Ado, V, i. 

* I remember the style * — 

‘ Else your memory is bad going o*er it erewhile.* — Lovds Lab, IV, i. 

* Write a sonnet.* — 

‘ In so high a style that no man living shall come over it.* — Much Ado, V, ii. 

* Costard, There an *t shall please you ; a foolish mild man ; an honest man, look 
'you, and soon dash’d ! He is a marvellous good neighbour.* — Lovds Lab. V, ii. 

' Dogberry, A good old man, sir ; he will be talking ; — an honest soul, i* faith, sir ; 
‘all men are not alike ; alas, good neighbour.* — Much Ado, III, v. 

The next feature of internal probability depends upon the interpretation of Lovds 
Labour in the title. In both the plays first mentioned as supposed originals of 
Meres’ s title, — namely, All's Well that Ends Well and The Tempest^ — the inter- 
pretation given to Lovds Labour is the same, viz., labour of love. That is, it is 
referred to some acts or conduct on the part of the persons of the Drama. In the 
first, it is the pursuit by Helena of her revolted husband, until at length she wins 
him, — not by gaining his love, but by overreaching him in stratagem. And in The 
Tempest^ the love labour is interpreted by Mr Hunter to be the literal labour of 
log-piling imposed upon Ferdinand by Prospero. 

But it seems to have escaped notice on all hands that the mythological sense of 
Love' s Labour would be much more consonant with the age in which Shakespeare 
wrote, than the sentimental sense. That is, that Love's Labours in the dramatic 
writing of that time, would be much more likely to be understood as the gests or 
exploits of the deity Love, in the same sense as the fabled Labours of Hercules, 

That such is really the intention of the title in the case of Lovds Labour's Lost^ 
must become apparent to any one who will attentively read the play with that pre- 
vious notion. He will then perceive abundant evidence, all through, that it is the 
mythical exploits of the blind god that are alluded to : — in overcoming the appar- 
ently insurmountable difficulties opposed to him ; in setting at nought the vows of 
the king and his courtiers ; and in bringing to the feet of the princess and her ladies 
the very men who had forsworn all women. After scattering human resolves to the 
winds, and reducing to subjection the hearts that had presumed to set him at defiance. 
Love at length succumbs to a still more absolute deity than himself. Death steps in 
to frustrate his designs, at the very instant of fruition, and so his labour becomes 
Labour Lost. 

The mythological allusions are unmistakeable. Biron exclaims, when the King 
enters love-stricken, * Proceed^ sweet Cupid ; thou hast thump'd him with thy bird- 
^ bolt under the left pap,' In another place, Love is ‘ a Hercules still climbing trees 
^in the Hesperides' a direct reference to the mythological labours of Hercules! 
And when the whole ‘mess of fools* yield themselves, rescue or no rescue, the 
King personifies Love and invokes him as his patron, — ‘ Saint Cupid^ then ! and 
* soldiers to the field P 

Now, according to the interpretation the title of this play has hitherto received at 
24 



APPENDIX 


370 

the hands of Shakespeare’s editors, the mythological sense is ignored. The love’s 
labour which, according to them, is lost, is not Love's labour, but that of the King 
and his fellows, ‘ in their endeavours^ as Mr Knight explains, ‘ to ingratiate them- 
^selves with their mistresses,' But surely such an explanation excludes the most 
prominent labour of all, the conquest of the men themselves ! They, so far from 
being partakers in the labour, are unwilling victims, — each ashamed to acknowledge 
his defeat to his fellows. This was the triumph, this was the exploit, — and, being 
attributable to Love alone, it is of itself almost sufficient to establish the true mean- 
ing of the title. . . . 

In mythological language, a labour was an achievement of great and supernatural 
difficulty, to be undertaken only by the Gods and Heroes ; from the analogy, then, 
of the assumed meaning of that word in Lome's Labour^ s Lost, something of the 
same character must naturally be looked for in whatever play may have borne the 
companion title of Love's Labour's Won; and it is now to be shown that in no 
other available play is there so much of that character as in Much Ado about 
Nothing, 

In it, the same difficulty is encountered in bringing together sworn enemies to 
Love, who profess to set him at defiance ; the same forced subjection of unwilling 
victims who are confidently boasting of their freedom. 

So completely is this recognised as a labour^ that Don Pedro, the match maker, 
who must meddle with everybody’s love affairs, and fancy them his own doing,' 
exclaims ; — * I will undertake one of Hercules’ labours, which is to bring Signior 
* Benedick and the Lady Beatrice into a mountain of affection, the one with the 
‘other.’ Here, then, in Love's Labours Won (/), is the same literal reference to 
the Labours of Hercules as that before noted in Love's Labour^ s Lost! 

But it is in the numerous allusions to the deity Love, and to his exploits, that the 
most conclusive similitude exists ; — * Nay, if Cupid have not .spent all his quiver in 
‘Venice thou wilt quake for this shortly.’ Beatrice, in the very opening, says of 
Benedick: — ‘He set up his bills here in Messina, and challenged Cupid at the 
‘ ffight ; and my uncle’s fool, reading the challenge, subscribed for Cupid, and chal- 
‘lenged him at the bird-bolt.’ s bird-bolt ! see the parallel phrase quoted 

above. Then, again, where Don Pedro is pluming himself upon his clever stratagem 
to lime Benedick, he exclaims : — ‘ If we can do this, Cupid is no longer an archer ; 
‘ his glory shall be ours, for we are the only love-gods.’ 

But, as if in contrast to this foolish assumption. Hero, who plays off the same 
trick upon Beatrice, takes no part of the credit to herself : — she is one of the ini- 
tiated ; she has herself felt the power of the bird-bolt and knows well who sent 
it : — ‘Of this matter is little Cupid’s crafty arrow made that only wounds by hear- 
‘say.’ And again: — ‘Some Cupid kills with arrows; some with traps.’ 

One more of these allusions need only be added, and that principally for the sake 
of explaining an expression which has been much misunderstood. In the opening 
Scene of the third Act, Don Pedro says of Benedick : — * He hath twice or thrice cut 
‘Cupid’s bow-string, and the little hangman dare not shoot at him.’ Here ‘hang- 
man,’ notwithstanding the infinite deal of nonsense that has been written about it 
by Fanner, Douce, and others, who cannot for their lives separate hangman from 
the gallows at Tyburn, plainly means slaughterer! a very appropriate epithet for 
Cupid. 

There is no metonymy more common with the old writers than hangman for execu- 
tioner in any form; the headsman was often so called. From hangman, in this 



D UR A TION OF A CTION 


37t 


general sense, to slaughterer, the transition is easy, and there is a remarkable exam- 
ple in Sylvester’s Du Bartas, where the term hangman is applied to A beast of 
PREY ! — ‘ The huge thick forests have nor bush nor brake But hides som Hangman 
our loath’d lives to take.’ — The Furies, v. 136. . . . 

Thus the epithet ‘ little hangman ’ designating, as it does when properly explained. 
Love as the slaughterer of hearts, directly conoborates the general hypothesis, that 
‘Love’s I.abour,’ in the titles of these two plays, has mythological reference to the 
exploits of the god. 

The arguments, then, in favour of Much Ado about Nothing being the true repre- 
sentative of Meres’ s title may be recapitulated as follows ; — 

1 . There is extant a printed copy of that play which proves its existence within 

two years, at most, of Meres’ s publication ; whereas no printed copy of either 
of the other proposed plays is within a quarter of a century. 

2. So far from there being anything to disprove its existence at the time of, or 

before Meres’ s publication, inference and analogy are directly favourable to 
that presumption. 

3. There is no other play which in similitude and contrast forms so apt a compan- 

ion to Love* s Labour's I^ost ; while in its happy denouement it exactly fulfils 
the idea of Love’s Labour’s Won. 

4. If ‘Love’s Labour,’ of the title be supposed to mean the achievement of the 

god of love, there is no other available play which in every respect is so 
favourable to that interpretation. 


DURATION OF ACTION 

The computation of the time taken up in the action of the present play need give 
but little trouble. The limit of one week is given, at the outset, with unusual precis- 
ion, and is exceeded by only one day over that term. In the opening scene Don 
Pedro tells Leonato, perhaps in jest, that he intends to claim hospitality for a 
whole month ; we might, hence, expect the action to last during that period ; but 
Leonato, in the evening of that very day, appoints, for Claudio’s marriage, ‘ Monday 
‘ which is hence a just seven-night ;’ and, after the marriage, there is small necessity 
greatly to protract the action. The interim of seven days we may dispose of as we 
please. 

Shakespeare here had little need to use * two clocks,’ and yet he does use them, 
more than once ; on the dial of one clock the hands go swiftly round and the marriage 
mom comes on apace ; on the dial of the other they lag until days become weeks, — 
as where Benedick, soliloquising on the effects of love, says of Claudio (who has 
been in love only twenty-four hours), ‘ I have known when he would have walked 
* ten mile a-foot to see a good armour ; and noxv will he lie ten nights awake carving 
‘ the fashion of a new doublet. He xvas wont to speak plain and to the purpose, like 
‘an honest man and a soldier, and now is he turned orthography.’ 

Again, in the conspiracy against Benedick, which immediately follows the soliloquy 
just quoted, Leonato reports Hero as saying that ‘ Beatrice will be up twenty times a 
‘ flight ^ — there has been only one night, or at the utmost two nights, since the open- 
ing of the play. Leonato further says that his ‘ daughter is sometimes afeard that 
‘ Beatrice will do a desperate outrage to herself.’ 



372 


APPENDIX 


Again^ in Benedick's soliloquy, after the conspirators have retired, his change of 
heart is only a few minutes old, and yet he imparts to this change the semblance of 
half a life-time : — ‘ doth not the appetite alter ? a man loves the meat in his ymth 

* that he cannot endure in his age» 

All these are trifles light as air, and yet, as we listen to the play, their sum so blurs 
our judgement that we placidly watch the effects*of weeks take place in as many min- 
utes, and thoughts of incongruity are lulled. This is Shakespeare’s spell, and it is nec- 
essary that he should weave it lightly round the conversion of Benedick and Beatrice. 
This conversion, to be thorough, should be gradual, and, because no chance is to be 
given for possible detection of the cheat, it must be fully effected and complete only 
at the moment when Hero is wronged before the altar. As far as Claudio is con- 
cerned, his marriage might take place, dramatically, within twenty-four hours after 
Leonato had given his consent ; there needs but one night before it, wherein Don 
John could perpetrate his villainy ; no protracted time was here required ; after 
Leonato had postponed the marriage for * a just seven-night ’ we subside into con- 
tent. But all is different in dealing with two such temperaments as Benedick and 
Beatrice ; to change these radically in twenty-four hours might be almost too unnat- 
ural ; hence, Shakespeare artfully throws out, in reference to these two, these fleeting 
impressions of the flight of time ; and, as though to soften still more the sharp out- 
lines of too sudden a change, he adroitly adds hints at a previous love affair between 
them, whereof the fair essence still survived beneath the outward show of merry 
warfare. 

P. A. Daniel Sk, Soc, Trans, 1877-9, p. 144) thus summarises his ‘time- 
< analysis ' of the present play : — 

In the endeavour to make the action of the Play agree as far as possible with 
Leonato’ s determination in II, i, that Claudio’s marriage shall take place on ‘Mon- 

* day . . . which is hence a just seven-night,’ I have supposed the following days to 
be represented on the stage : 

Day I. Monday. Act I and Act II, i. 

2. Tuesday. Act II, ii. 

“ 3. Wednesday. Act II, iii. 

Thursday, •v 
Friday. I Blank. 

Saturday. J 

‘‘ 4. Sunday. Act III, i-iii. ^ 

“ 5. Monday. Act III, iv, v ; IV, i, ii ; V, i, ii, and part of iii. 

** 6. Tuesday. Act V, iii (in part) and iv. 

The first Tuesday even in this scheme might very well be left a blank, and II, ii, 
be included in the opening Monday. 

I believe, however, that just as the Prince forgets his determination to stay * at the 
‘ least a month’ at Messina, so the ‘just seven-night ’ to the wedding was also either 
forgotten or intentionally set aside, and that only four consecutive days are actually 
included in the action of the drama. 

Day 1. Act I. ; II, i and ii. 

“ 2. Act II, iii ; III, i-iii. 

“ 3. Act III, iv, V ; IV. ; V, 1, ii, and iii (in part). 

“ 4. Act V, iii (in part) and iv. 

There is also a computation of the time by Henry A. Clapp, in The Atlantic 



GERMAN CRITICISMS-^ l/LR/CR^GERV/NUS 


373 

Montklyy March, 1885, p. 397, which hardly differs from the foregoing by Daniel. 
The only period of doubtful distribution lies in Act II., Scenes ii and iii. 


GERMAN CRITICISMS 

Hermann Ulrici {Shakespeare s Dramatic Art^ 1839, vol. ii, p. loi. Tians. 
by L. Dora Schmitz. Bohn’s ed.) : Most delightful is the contradiction between 
appearance and reality, between subjective conception and objective reality, as we 
have it exhibited in the Clown of the piece, the dutiful constable Dogberry, who 
considers his position so very important and maintains it so zealously, but who is 
always uttering contradictory maxims and precepts ; who is so presumptuous and yet 
so modest ; who looks at things with so correct an eye and yet pronounces such 
foolish judgements ; talks so much and yet says so little, in fact, perpetually contra- 
dicts himself, giving orders for what he advises to be left undone, entreating to be 
registered an ass, and yet is the very one to discover the nothing which is the cause 
of the much ado. He is the chief representative of that view of life upon which the 
whole is based, inasmuch as its comic power is exhibited most strongly and most 
directly in him. For this contrast, which, in accordance with its nature, usually 
appears divided between its two poles, is, so to say, individualised in him, that is, 
united in the one individual and fully reflected in his inconsistent and ever contra- 
dictory doings and resolves, thoughts, and sayings. Dogberry personifies, if we may 
say so, the spirit and meaning of the whole, and, therefore, plays essentially the 
same part as the Fool in Twelfth Nighty Touchstone in As You Like //, Launce in 
The Tkvo Gentlemen of Verona, and the majority of the clowns in Shakespeare’s 
comedies. 

G. G. Gervinus {Shakespeare, 1849, 3te Aufl. iter Bd. s. 531) ; Mrs Jameson 
has but little hope for the domestic felicity of the pair, whose wooing has been so 
stormy ; Campbell goes so far as to call Beatrice an odious woman. We will not 
take occasion here to enlarge upon the significance of these expressions, we will 
merely make two general remarks which seem in place with regard to the actual 
excellence of Shakespeare’s humourous characters; we must not be misled by the 
versatility and quickness of their wit, or by their intellectual equipment to draw 
any conclusion as to their nloral and general human value in the eyes of the Poet 
himself. We have too often had occasion to mention this to think it necessary to 
dwell upon it here. As for the characters in his comedies, we must remember, once 
for all, that we are introduced to a social circle in which Shakespeare never illustrated 
profound natures or violent passions. This is not the soil for grand and lofty virtues 
or for depths of crime ; they are to be found in the plays which we have designated 
as dramas rather than comedies, in The Merchant of Venice, in Cymheline, in Meas- 
ure for Measure. Here, in Much Ado, only minor faults and minor virtues disfigure 
or distinguish the characters, and the greatest distinction achieved by the most promi- 
nent among them must always be understood as comparative. Here are no tragic 
struggles with intense passions, no encounters with the dark powers that rule the 
destiny of mankind, no deeds of unusual self-sacrifice and force of will ; — they would 
injure the character of the comedy, which is developed from the weaknesses of 



374 


APPENDIX 


human nature along the smooth pathways of social intercourse, among men of the 
commoner sort. If, thus considered, we find Beatrice and Benedick not to be com- 
pared with Katharine and Fetruchio, and moreover lacking in the ideal grace of 
Rosalind and Orlando, we are right. Yet, taken in Shakespeare’s sense, we must 
not under-rate these blunt, practical natures, nor must we, taking them in his sense 
over-estimate them. If we would discover the Poet’ s own actual estimate of Bea- 
trice, and of women of her stamp, a close examination will show us that it was 
probably different at different periods of his life. We have elsewhere called atten- 
tion to the fact that there is a striking number of disagreeable women in the Plays 
of the first period ; the Poet’s own experience seems to have impressed him with an 
unfavourable view of the feminine character. Another type of woman prevails in 
the second period. There is doubtless a certain family resemblance in Silvia in The 
Two Genilemen of Verona^ in Rosaline and her companions, in Portia and Nerissa, Ro- 
salind, and Beatrice. All show in different degrees a vein of wit, which makes them 
mistresses of the art of conversation, and which, however true they may be at heart, 
sometimes makes the tongue speak falsely ; they nearly all possess a preponderating 
culture of the understanding, and are gifted to such a degree with intellectual and 
mental force that at times it seems to transcend the bounds of feminine capacity. 
They all have more or less of something unfemininely forward in their composition, 
something domineering and arrogant, and consequently the men associated with 
them either play a subordinate part, or are obliged to take pains to keep pace with 
the ladies of their choice. Shakespeare must have learned to know in London, in 
the higher circles to which he was there introduced, ladies who transformed into 
enthusiastic admiration his previous estimate of women. In Portia he has given us 
a fhminine ideal that borders on perfection ; she yields to no man in force of will 
and self-control, in wit, and scope of intellect. In his later plays Shakespeare 
rather dropped this style of woman. A closer intimacy with feminine nature led 
him to take more pleasure in its emotional side, and he then painted with but few 
strokes those sensitive creatures whose sphere is that of instinct, so peculiarly woman’s 
own, who avoid license of speech as well as license of action, and who in the purity 
of their emotions wield a far greater power than belonged to Shakespeare’s earlier 
and wittier darlings. In that earlier period Shake.speare never would have declared 
with such emphasis as he did in Lear that a low voice is an excellent thing in 
woman» He did indeed then create modestly retiring women, the gentle figures 
of a Bianca, a Hero, a Julia, but he kept them in the background. His Juliet 
stands on middle ground, between the two classes of which we speak. Afterwards 
Viola, Desdemona, Perdita, Ophelia, Cordelia, Mirai^a advance to the front, and 
Imogen, loveliest of all, who in her sphere contests the palm with Portia in hers. 
Thus Shakespeare advanced, clarifying his knowledge of the sex, and his feminine 
creations gain in spiritual beauty and moral worth in proportion as they lose in super- 
ficial brilliancy and keenness of intellect. Which class of women Shakespeare pre- 
ferred is learned from the fact that the earlier type appears only in his comedies, 
while the latter class is brought forward in his tragedies, wherein we find revealed 
the most profound emotions of either sex. 

F. Kreyssio ( Vorlesungen ueber Shakespeare^ 1862, 3ter Bd. s. 217) : The 
repulsive traits in Claudio’s character have been frequently indicated. Arrogant, 
faint-hearted, liable to hasty change of mood, and in anger capable of heartless 
cruelty, he repeatedly brings into question his qualification to be the hero of the 



GERMAN CRITICISMS^KREYSSIG 


375 

Play, the fortunate lover. His reply to Benedick, when he first tells of his love for 
Hero is ominous : ‘ If my passion change not shortly, God forbid it should be other- 
*wise.* How poorly this spoiled favourite of fortune is endowed with energy, en- 
durance, and strength of character is evident all too soon. 1 refer to the interlude 
of the masked ball, which is introduced to prepare us in some measure for the 
catastrophe. Don Pedro has but just discussed Claudio^ s suit with Claudio, in whose 
breast there has been no suspicion of treachery on the part of Don Pedro, and yet a 
clumsy slander by a villain suffices to fill his proudly-swelling little heart with vacillat- 
ing doubt, to change gratitude and confiding devotion to his generous patron into des- 
perate distrust. And look what depth of worldly wisdom the first shadow of disap- 
pointment extorts from this petted darling of fortune [II, i, 168-175,]. Such is 
the result of this profound wisdom. Without an attempt to see for himself, without 
an effort to recover what seems lost, his love and his friend are instantly given up. 
And the equally clumsy slanderers find him equally fickle. Verily the commonest 
regard for a blameless lady, — let alone the love of a happy bridegroom for so dainty 
a presentment of the charm and freshness of maidenhood as the Poet gives us in 
Hero, — should have prompted him to receive with the greatest caution any accusation 
on the part of the sullen malcontent, who has but just become reconciled with the 

prince A silly farce enacted in the darkness of night by a low villain and a 

waiting maid, is sufficient proof in the blinded eyes of this hot-head to condemn 
the first lidy in Messina, a model of propriety, and his own betrothed. . . . 
And the way in which he shows his regained composure, and his subsequent repent- 
ance is scarcely more to his credit. What in the world are we to think of a man, 
who after such terrible experiences, feels the need of amusement, and incites a friend 
to jest to drive away his high-proof melancholy ? What sort of a sense of honour is 
that which permits a man in the very height of his grief for the death, — not to say 
murder, — of his falsely- slandered bride, to declare himself ready for another marriage 
to be arranged by the outraged father? 

All these, to speak mildly, unattractive features, — certainly not qualified to com- 
mand esteem, — are part of Claudio’s character ; indeed the Poet was obliged thus to 
endow him if the plot in its developement was to be probable, or even conceivable. 
All the more admirable is the art with which Shakespeare has contrived, without in 
the least falsifying or weakening the effect of these disagreeable traits in detail, es- 
sentially to modify the painful impression of the whole play. It is precisely the 
complete personality of the fickle Count with its affluence of vitality, which neces- 
sarily creates an extenuating perspective for his conduct as a whole. The worst 
aberrations become tolerable a^soon as the observer can detect, in their source, the 
soil favourable for their developement. Here it is youth, endowed with unusual vi- 
tality, but totally inexperienced, and spoiled by fortune, that pleads lor forbearance, 
and where could a better advocate for transgression be found ? Claudio is first pre- 
sented to us as a young hero, ‘doing the feats of a lion in the figure of a lamb,* 
The rays of princely favour, and of the future favour of women, each in itself strong 
enough to melt much harder stuff, are the fiercest tests for the ductile metal of his 
yet unformed character. If flaws appear, — very ugly flaws, — the better, honester 
metal beneath cannot but be perceived. Above all, this youth with his lack of ex- 
perience of good, is equally a stranger in the school of vice. Claudio is vain, arro- 
gant, inconsiderate, and fickle, but he is never vulgar ; the canker of debauchery has 
not eaten away his bloom. How admirable is his reception of Benedick’s banter 
when he is brooding over the suspected treachery of his princely friend. Not a 



APPENDIX 


3;6 

word of remonstrance does his provoking comrade extort from him. I cannot under- 
stand how commentators, otherwise sensible enough, can attach to the bitter, preg- 
nant words : * 1 wish him joy of her ’ the same significance in all seriousness lent 
them by Benedick in jest : * So they sell bullocks.* One must certainly be long past 
all experience of the grande passion not to perceive the intense bitterness that manly 
pride, and love betrayed, can express in such a congratulation. That the extrava- 
gance of youthful arrogance and of a passionate temperament has unhinged for a 
time an essentially noble nature is shown in Claudio’s behaviour toward the angry 
old Leonato. . . . This delicate sense of honour, with the conscious vitality of youth, 
has given a certain license to the Count’s errors and follies before the tribunal of 
poetic justice, which has not been without result, if we attach any weight to the 
public verdict of three centuries. 

E. W. SiEVERS ( William Shakespeare, 1 866, iter Bd. s. 304) : Four or five years 
have elapsed since Shakespeare wrote his Midsummer Night* s Dream, and, in 
addition to his greatest comedy of this period, The Merchant of Venice, he had 
completed his first two tragedies, Romeo and Juliet, and Hamlet ; we find him now 
again at odds with human nature, and this time it is our temperament which he makes 
his target, the vital foundation of our being, upon which the inner world of the spirit 
rests. The ancient complaint that man, to whatever heights he may attain, must still 
be vulnerable, — the complaint to which the two most intellectual races of the world, 
the Greek, and the Indo-Germanic, have given such marvellously accordant expression 
in Achilles and Siegfried, we now hear from Shakespeare in Much Ado about Noth^ 
ing, wherein he attacks human temperament In it he recognizes the Achilles-heel 
of mankind, that which, by whatever name it may be called, makes all vulnerable, 
drag^ng down to the sphere of chance, and to finite warfare those who by rights, 
should soar to divine heights, and partake of divine delights. No human being, — 
he says in effect, — exists, who cannot be thrown off of his balance if assailed through 
his temperament, as there has never been a philosopher, *That could endure the 

• toothache patiently, However they have writ the style of gods And made a push at 

* chance and sufferance.* This' is the point of view from which Shakespeare com- 
posed his comedy. Much Ado about Nothing, . . . 

Thus it is with Benedick and immediately afterward with Beatrice. Both fall into 
the trap set for them, or to quote Hero, [sic] * devour greedily the treacherous bait.* 
But where lies the reason for this rapid and total rout of these two persons, who are, 
to all appearance, so steadfast and invulnerable? Shakespeare tells us plainly 
enough : it lies in every human being’s temperament, that no self-poise, no stead- 
fastness, can save from vulnerability in some one spot. If his temperament be 
normal, and not degenerate, man must always be susceptible to the joy of being beloved, 
Beatrice and Benedick make shipwreck upon this characteristic of human personality ; 
it is the corner-stone of Don Pedro’s treacherous scheme which causes them to belie 
their former selves, a scheme devised with extreme subtlety and knowledge of man- 
kind. It is most interesting to note the lever which Don Pedro employs to put in 
motion this characteristic. We here meet with a profound psychological conception, 
one which can be traced in subtle windings throughout the play, making it a remark- 
able contrast to the Midsummer Night* s Dream, in which Shakespeare influences his 
characters through the eye; in Much Ado about Nothing he does it through the ear. 
When we speak of possessing a man’s ear it is equivalent to saying that we have 
him, himself, that we control him, and modem psychology recognizes the profound 



GERMAN CRITICISMS-^BENEDIX 


377 

mental significance of the ear. It is this significance that Shakespeare illustrates 
here for the first time in Benedick and Beatrice. 

Let us study Don Pedro^s tactics more closely still. How does he contrive to 
influence the antagonistic personalities of the twain^ and, although their attitude 
hitherto has been almost hostile, to make lovers of them ? He contrives it by forcing 
them to overhear. By this one stroke of Art, at the very outset, he robs them of all 
their peculiar advantages. Their wit, their readiness of tongue, all their mental dex- 
terity, and volubility, in short every offensive and defensive weapon of which they 
have hitherto made use to ward off the danger of any deep impression, is useless to 
them ; they are condemned to complete, absolute passivity ^ forced, contrary to all their 
use and wont, to play the part of silent listeners. . . . 

As the result of our study, the view of mankind which Shakespeare illustrates in 
this play may be summed up thus : Man, in spite of all his boast of freedom and 
independence, is but the impotent creature of his temperament, — this is the force 
that controls his personality, and its developement ; in accord with this view, while 
on one hand there must be no more talk of freedom of will, and self-mastery, on the 
other there needs only a certain temperament to force us to succumb to evil. . . , 

Of course Dogberry is somewhat vain ; in fact he is tenderly in love with himself* 
and hitherto no one has ventured to disturb his self-complacency. But on a sudden 
he hears a rascal call him an ass, and in an instant he is as if metaimorphosed, his 
calm self-satisfaction is overthrown, and he, who until now has been entirely peace- 
able, invokes the majesty of the law to bear witness that he is an ass ; — now what is 
it that makes him so sensitive to this insult, if it be not his unassailable conviction 
of the inviolability of human individuality which he represents so solemnly, and 
whence he derives pathos^ in the fullest sense of the word? 

Roderick Benedix {Die Shakespearomanie^ 1873, s. 319) : Here is no stuff 
for a comedy. A girl slandered and ill-treated to an unutterable extent is not an 
object to awaken merriment. And it is degrading that she should finally, without 
hesitation, marry her slanderer. 

Consider the persons concerned. Here is Claudio, a vain coxcomb, with no will 
of his own. What can poor Hero expect from a marriage with such a wretch? 
Here is the prince, pervading the entire play, gossipping interminably, and never 
arousing in us the faintest sympathy. He neither attempts nor achieves anything. 
Here is the governor, of whom the same may be said. To swell the crowd of bores 
he has a brother, Antonio, so old that he ' waggles his head’ and has < dry hands.’ 
Here is the rascally slanderer, a rascal only because the poet chooses him to be one ; 
he himself has no reason for it. Here are his two accomplices, rascals also, but who, 
when they are caught and questioned, confess everything with amiable frankness. 
And there are several waiting maids running about through the play. All these per- 
sons are poetically worthless, for they are uninteresting, nay, well-nigh tiresome. 
We cannot characterize them, unless their having no character at all will serve our 
turn. They are all insipid. 

Essentially different are the two leading characters ; they alone. Benedick and 
Beatrice, make it possible to sit through the play ; they alone excite interest and 
give pleasure. Beatrice is Hero’s cousin, a rather strong, audacious, girlish creature, 
who delights In inveighing against matrimony. Thus she pleases us intellectually, 
and she appeals to our hearts because she is the only person who takes her cousin’s 
part, and enters the lists in her defence. Therefore she ranks far above all the other 



• APPENDIX 


378 

personages of the play ; she is an admirable creation. Benedick is her companion 
part. He too abuses love and matrimony, but is, nevertheless, a fine, honest fellow. 

. . . Undeniably the perpetual pyrotechnic display of sneering and jeering wit that 
goes on between these two is somewhat spun out j puns, quibbles, plays upon words 
are very richly profuse, nevertheless some of the conceits are good, and the whole is 
fresh and vivid. This play upon words, be it noted, is characteristic of all the per- 
sonages in the play, and at times becomes insufferable. The piece could never be 
put upon our stage unabbreviated. There is a third group in the play formed by 
the foolish Watch, whose stupidity unmasks the slander. Those belonging to this 
group are caricatures, and, like all caricatures, are really amusing. But there is 
rather too much of them, for they appear in four scenes. The Poet has, perhaps, 
provided too much for even the tough nerves of the English public. As regards the 
structure of the play, the combination of incidents does not lead to any fitting result. 
The principal event is, if not tragic, at least grave, and agitating. It should have a 
natural result. There should have been serious atonement tor the malicious and 
wanton insult offered to Hero by Don Pedro and Claudio. But the play must be a 
comedy, and consequently there is universal reconciliation in the twinkling of an eye. 
It is inexcusable that a deep-laid dramatic plot should come to nothing ; that a dra- 
matic cause should produce no dramatic effect. The scandalous interruption of the 
marriage in the fourth Act results only in its postponement to the fifth Act. 

Heinrich Bulthaupt {^Dramaturgic der Classikcr^ 1884, 2te Afl. 2ter Bd. s. 
359) : Among those of Shakespeare’s comedies, which are enacted solely upon 
earthly soil. Muck Ado about A^otking-wovXd have been one of the finest, the richest, 
the most charged with colour, had the plot of the play centred only round the two 
persons from whom it took its original title, Benedick and Beatrice. Unfortunately, 
the gloomy shadow of the grave events tlxat form the secondary action of the play 
falls upon these two incomparable figures and well-nigh obliterates them. Shake- 
speare has never more thoroughly dimmed the fresh, sunny impression of a comedy, 
than in this specimen of his persistent method of blending, in a romantic whole, two 
plots, one cheerful, and one sad. A worse selection from his fund of old Italian 
tales he has hardly ever made. If Ariosto’s story of Aidodante and Ginevra pro- 
duces a painful impression, enacted as it is in a fanciful world, swarming with mon- 
ster fish, winged steeds, ogres, fairies, and sorcerers, how much more distressing is 
the effect of the slander, and its positively flippant, poetic treatment, in the drama, 
where we see before us the people of whom Ariosto only tells, and with every fanciful 
accessory lacking. 

If we can conceive that Claudio should give credence to the slander against his 
love, — if we can think possible the conversation between Borachio and the guileless 
Margaret, which, wisely enough, is not carried on upon the stage, it is inconceivable, 
and altogether too base for belief that the ardent lover should defame his betrothed 
in public, at the very altar, thereby producing a most harrowing scene. Had he really 
loved Hero he would have charged her with her infidelity alone or perhaps in pres- 
ence of her father only, and would have shown himself overwhelmed with grief, not 
thirsting for revenge. Instead of which his vile conduct is .such as no girl, not even 
one as gentle as Hero, could forgive. And how she forgives ! She henself and her 
old father, but just now fire and flame, come to the front, and drag again into pub- 
licity what, were it even possible, should not be discussed save in the quiet seclusion 
of home. Silly Claudio, after a little talk, is persuaded to marry Leonato’s niece, and 



GERMAN CRITICISMS— Blf/LTHAUPT 


379 

in his new bride discovers the rejected Hero. It all begins flippantly ; it all ends 
flippantly. If we were only not required to sympathize with this Claudio, and with 
this Hero, who was so charming and attractive in the first part of the play ! Here 
we have the vulnerable Achilles-heel of the piece ; its other half is pure grace and 
delicacy. Benedick and Beatrice ensure it an immortality, to which the admirable 
Wajch contributes its share. Never has Shakespeare’s art achieved a greater triumph 
in repartee than in the skirmish of words between the two converted misogamists. 
An4 not only Benedick and Beatrice, the others also, the governor, the elegant and 
easy-going prince, the gloomy bastard, are all portrayed with the clearest distinct- 
ness. We take the keenest satisfaction in the charming dialogue, which is never 
halting, in the fine tone of earnestness which the character of each of the glib- 
tongued lovers assumes after the scene in the church, the result of which, as revealed 
afterward in Beatrice and Benedick, goes far to reconcile us to that scene. But alas I 
this feeling is false. 

Of course, so much has been done in the way of explanation and extenuation of 
the evident neglect and carelessness of Shakespeare’s treatment of this part of the 
play, that our judgement may well be warped, even to the mistrusting of our first 
distinct and true impression. But no Critic has ventured to defend the outrage 
before the altar. And although it may be maintained that the whole play leaves us 
in a merry mood, and that we, * Philistines,’ laugh with the lovers and their friends at 
such an Ado about Nothings — I, for my part, declare that the enumeration of Claudio’s 
heroic deeds always arouses my deep disgust, and that I should have left the theatre, 
but for the presence of Benedick, Beatrice, and the Watch, whom I always regard 
distinctly apart from the Count. What Shakespeare docs for Claudio barely suffices 
to allow Claudio to impose himself for an hour or two upon respectable society ; no one 
could endure the empty braggart any longer, and had he dared to appear in aesthetic 
circles in a sixth act he would have been sent to Coventry. Without his military laurels, 
the prince’s favour, and the recommendation of good looks, and an amiable disposi- 
tion, he would be absolutely insufferable. He is not without noble traits, else how 
could he appear as a gentleman? When, in an interview with Hero’s father, he 
thoughtlessly lays his hand upon his sword-hilt, and the old man in his excitement 
suspects him of meditating a personal attack, he repels the suspicion with dignity. 
Possibly he is not a bad man, certainly his hot-headed outbursts, his rashness in both 
love and hate do not indicate the worn-out worldling with his knowledge of man- 
kind, and of womankind in particular. His youthful impetuosity, the spoiling he 
has had at the hands of fortune, may suffice, perhaps, to explain the frivolous credu- 
lity with which he accepts Don John’s calumnies, but not the malicious revenge 
which he takes upon his betrothed, and, indirectly, upon her father, who is the Gov- 
ernor of Messina, and his host. This makes Claudio jcsthetically impossible ,* only a 
deeply tragic turn to the drama could rehabilitate him. Instead of which, Shakespeare 
makes him cap the climax of his insolence by the heartless way in which he jeers at 
Benedick and his challenge, thus revealing the utter degradation of his character. It 
is not worth the test of psychological criticism. Its moral impossibility is patent. 
The pity is that such a man as this Claudio should drag down with him into aesthetic 
ruin Hero, Leonato, Antonio, and even Benedick and Beatrice. A man who thinks 
he can expiate a piece of villainy , — his villainy ^ — ^by hiring some musicians to sing 
an elegy, who complacently shifts a crime from himself to ‘ slanderous tongues ’ : 
‘Done to death by slanderous tongues Was the Hero that here lies,’ who, in place 
of his dead bride,— the bride whom he has killed,— takes up with her cousin, and yet, 



APPENDIX 


380 

in the end, declares to the former his previous love for her, — such a man must be 
classed among aesthetic and psychological abortions, and so must the injured girl, 
who, in spite of her bitter experience of him, accepts such a husband, and the 
father, who is weak enough to consent to the device of a * cousin,’ and afterwards to 
nis daughter’s marriage. And could a Beatrice, a Benedick be friends with such a 
man? It has been maintained that what shocks us in Claudio’s conduct is softened, 
excused by the tone of frank gayety, of easy living that pervades the entire play, and 
I should be the last to deny that Shakespeare, with this intangible something in tone, 
has done all that is possible. The whole play, as Kreyssig expresses it, fairly reeks 
with roast meat and pastry. But if the love of pleasure, the easy morality of the 
Prince of Arragon and his train, as well as of the dwellers in Messina, both low and 
lofty, really illustrates and palliates in some degree the relation of these persons to 
the plot, it is none the more excusable. I cannot estimate highly any means by 
which our judgement is muddled, not clarified. Besides it all does not avail much, 
for Shakespeare allows no lack of antidotes. Beatrice herself brands Claudio’s con- 
duct as unmitigated rancour. She wishes that she were a man that she ‘ might eat 
‘ his heart in the market-place.* Thus Shakespeare himself points out to us the view 
which he unfortunately relinquishes so soon, but which ought to be taken of the 
young Count and his fellows. 

A still more powerful antidote for the joy, which we would so fain allow to conquer 
all distressing scruples, is to be found in the slanderers themselves. I should like to 
see the man who could take any satisfaction in a creature like Don John. It is the 
dismal veracity with which this character is drawn that makes it so impressive. A 
thoroughly ill-natured, bitter, revengeful scoundrel, whose passions are too sordid for 
any heroic crime, — ^a gloomy, isolated egotist. His schemes are concocted in the 
darkest secrecy. He is afraid to carry them out, and escapes responsibility for them 
by flight The mere sight of him is gall and wormwood. Even the merry Beatrice 
cannot look at him without suffering from heart-bum for an hour. One single para- 
doxical stroke of the pen would have overdrawn him, and have made him ridiculous. 
But Shakespeare, with his easy command of such a means, scorns it here. He draws 
upon his vast knowledge of hufnan nature to create this figure; he employs all 
his art in modelling it, that it may intensify the gravity of the situation ; and to this 
scoundrel, stamped by nature as such, this fellow who deceives no one, to this Don 
John who is at variance with the Prince, Claudio surrenders the honour and welfare 
of«Leonato and his daughter I Without hesitation he credits the calumny, and with 
what inconceivable clumsiness is the slander devised ! The vulgar Borachio Hero’s 
favoured lover ! Verily our indignation against Claudio grows with every circumstance 
that shows the absurdity of his suspicion. The pure delicate Hero, just before her 
marriage, prefers Borachio to Claudio ! as is made to appear by a notorious back-biter I 
and a simpleton falls into the trap thus set ! Although, even before the scene in the 
church, 'Claudio, vacillating and effeminate, does not capture our hearts, he may per- 
haps please as a poetic creation, upon whom we are not yet called upon to pass 
moral judgement ; upon whom, indeed, the poet himself has as yet passed no judge- 
ment Thus it is with the other characters of the play, who are implicated in the 
catastrophe. Before this tragic turn spoils them, they ar^ drawn with the greatest 
poetic truth and delicacy. The young travelled idler of a prince is a classic model 
of an elegant trifier, polished, amiable, but lacking in mind and character, a genuine 
universally poptUar heir to the throne, quite ready to be affable and * hail-fellow- 
* wdl-met’ with all, and who, when he comes into his inheritance, will waver for a 



GERMAN CRITICISMS— SULTHAUPT 381 

while between kindly condescension and great dignity, until he developes into the full- 
blown despot. The budding loveliness of Hero gains an added charm from the 
merry readiness which she shows to join in the plot to entrap Benedick and Beatrice. 
Margaret and Ursula are the sauciest and most winning of waiting maids. All ar|t 
gay, happy people. Even old Leonato, in spite of his high rank, does not think it 
beneath him to share in their merry schemes. He loves a joke, and the mildness of 
his sway reveals itself in his cordial treatment of his neighbours, the Watch. Under 
his rule one can easily understand the lax performance of duty on the part of the 
Watch, how the evil-doer who will not ‘stand* is to be ‘let go,’ because ‘they that 
‘touch pitch will be defiled.’ He who could invest with office a Dogberry, and a 
Verges, who could listen so composedly to their arrant nonsense, and have nothing 
to say in reply save : ‘ Neighbours, you are tedious,’ must indeed be a kindly soul. 
All these pleasant, innocent people, who are sometimes angered, but ever ready to 
wink at the faults of others, would have been an admirable foil for Don John 
and his dark designs, — were it not for the catastrophe 1 One hesitates to remon- 
strate with such a poet as Shakespeare, but we may be permitted to ask if it would 
not have been possible to make Claudio’ s love so noble and profound, that his miser- 
able revenge would have been impossible? He might have credited the slander, 
might have even repudiated Hero, could we but have been made to feel the pain 
it cost him. Then Hero’s love might well have endured. The truth might have 
come to light, either by mere accident, which would have been perfectly admissible 
in a comedy, or through the agency of the stupid Watch, to whom Shakespeare’s 
magnanimity has dealt the best cards for the purpose. The silly device of Leonato’ s 
‘ niece ’ would, of course, have been omitted. The circle of good fellowjihip, concord, 
and love would have been again complete. The clouds, veiling the clear Italian 
skies would disperse ; jest and merriment would once more reign in the sunlit gar- 
dens. And the characters of the two principal personages, who carry on their war- 
fare with such witty weapons, such gay arrogance, until the treaty of peace ends it 
so brilliantly, would scarce have suffered under such or similar modifications. They 
are amusing from first to last. The course that their skirmishing takes is the most 
natural in the world. In Beatrice’s quarrelsome wit, in Benedick’s exaggerated 
repudiation of the idea that he could ever bend his neck beneath the matrimonial 
yoke we plainly see the interest each takes in the other. Beneath the thorns slumbers 
the rose of love. What the poet lost in Catharine and Petruchio, because of coarse- 
ness of material, and still coarser workmanship, is brought forward here with the 
noblest effect. We have the frank, maidenly girl, with her scorn of all sentimentality, 
we have the frank, manly man hiding his merits beneath a blunt exterior ; they must 
quarrel, but they are made for each other. The cunning of the matchmaker suc- 
ceeds instantly. It needed but to strike the spark to produce a clear flame. Beatrice 
learns to sigh, and Benedick to trim his beard, and to study the fashion of^his dress. 
The sterling quality of each nature is always evident. When Claudio’s revenge 
bewilders the others, they alone find the right words in which to stigmatize the slan- 
derers. Then first the genuine moral essence of their natures is revealed ; it is the 
salt that preserves them* from the insipidity resulting from the honeyed life led by the 
others. Hitherto they have merely amused us and made us laugh ; now we take 
them to our hearts. In this part of the play the truest genius is shown in that the 
two characters are never false to their natures. When Beatrice bursts out indignantly 
at the Count’s contemptible conduct, when Benedick, grave and manly, challenges 
Claudio, shaming him and his fellows, it needs but a word from the poet to reveal to 



APPENDIX 


382 

US that behind the clouds the sun of their gay dispositions is always shining. But 
could not the pure gold in the heart of each have been brought to light without the 
odious scene in the church ? This must always remain a question with us. For 
Henedick and Beatrice would surely gain by Claudio’s being made more possible 
as a friend. But this is all that mars the perfection of the incomparable pair. 

W, Oechelhauser {^EinfUhrungen in Shakespeare s BUhnen’Dranienf 1885^ 
2ter Bd, s. 335) : The changes which Shakespeare has made in the material of 
Bandello’s novel have rendered the attempted performance of an impossible task 
absolutely repulsive. I perfectly agree with A. Schmidt, when he points to Muck 
Ado about Nothing as the only one of Shakespeare’ s plays in which * he has not 
‘ elevated and ennobled the material he has chosen to use ; it is even a question 
* whether in this instance the contrary be not the case.’ 

Twice only do we recognise the ennobling of the material furnished by the novel, 
due to the usual delicate tact of the Poet. The first is with regard to the social rank of 
Claudio. In the novel it is far superior to that of Leonato, Timbreo must condescend 
to Leonato’ s family ; in Shakespeare the contrary is the case, so that Claudio’s rejec- 
tion of the wealthy heiress is more to the advantage of his sense of honour. The 
other case is where the grievous tension of the scene in the church is greatly miti- 
gated by the previous capture of Borachio, which assures the audience that Hero’s 
innocence must soon be established, that the struggle cannot have a tragic ending. 
But these two improvements, unfortunately, go side by side with other, more im- 
portant, changes for the worse ; as, for example, the transformation of the lofty-minded 
Timbreo of the novel into the rather insignificant, superficial, uncertain Claudio, 
whose determination to shame Hero publicly, in the very church, framed before he 
has the confirmation of her infidelity, is unworthy, to say the least ; in the novel the 
rejection is made through a third person. On the other hand, the stage effect gains 
indirectly, since the interrupted marriage scene forms the most "effective theatric 
climax to the tragic part of the play, an effect which closer adherence to the plan of 
the novel would make impossible. 1 Shakespeare has also been most unfortunate in the 
substitution of his improvised villain, Don John, for the jealous suitor of the novel. 
Jealousy is psychologically a thoroughly legitimate motive for slandering Hero that 
Claudio may be frightened into rejecting the alliance. Don John’s unadulterated 
malice lacks all motive, and his personality brings into far more irreconcilable con- 
trast the cqlouring of the crisis with the humourous tendency of the play, than 
appears in the novel. The psychological portrayal of the plain-dealing villain is 
quite as unsatisfactory, and so is Borachio’s sudden and unaccountable fit of remorse, 
leading him to a voluntary and thorough confession of his guilt. But perhaps the 
most unfortunate departure aesthetically from the scheme of the novel is found in 
Claudio’s consent to another marriage upon the very day after Hero’s public dis- 
grace, when her innocence is made plain. In the novel an entire year elapses, while 
in the play, without even a decent pause, Leonato throws his niece, and double 
heiress, into the arms of the faithless bridegroom. It really would seem as if our 
poet in several of his dramas and comedies, notably in Measure for Measure, Two 
Gentlemen of Verona, and AWs Well that Ends Well, had lost, for the time being, 
that ethical sensitiveness which is so peculiarly his own. The unsatisfactory final 
scene in Much Ado about Nothing is the inevitable consequence of the faulty method 
of construction which attempts, not only to reconcile what is irreconcilable, but to 
weld it together. 



GERMAN CRITICISMS^ IVETZ 383 

This criticism makes it impossible for me to agree with the favourable judgement 
of some critics. The entire play is a slight piece of work, reminding us in some 
respects, of the equally slight Merry Wives of Windsor^ which was, according to 
tradition, composed by the Poet in fourteen days. In both plays the preponderance# 
of prose over blank verse is characteristic. In the Merry Wives nine-tenths, and in 
Muck Ado three-fourths of the Play are written in prose. 

W. Wetz (^Shakespeare vom Standpunkte der vergleichenden Liter atur^ 1890, 
Iter Bd, s. 156) ; No greater mistake can be made than to judge Shakespeare’s 
lovers by our modern standard. Their love, as well as their jealousy, is infinitely 
more ardent and glowing than that which we see now-a-days, whether in life or in 
literature. Therefore, it ought not to surprise us that the expression of their feel- 
ings is much more vigorous and intense, or that the Poet should make free use of 
this expression without attaching to it, as our public is often tempted to do, the 
reproach of harshness and brutality. Moreover, as concerns Claudio, we cannot 
believe that any one save Bulthaupt has utterly condemned him. The majority 
of readers and spectators may blame his conduct, but they judge him much more 
leniently. The pain that quivers in Claudio’s every word in the church, as well as 
the intensity of his remorse afterwards, shown in his readiness to undergo any 
penance that may be imposed upon him to atone for his misconduct, prove that he 
was no low scoundrel, but a man of noble mind whose temperament, vehement and 
prone to suspicion, leads him astray. Moreover, from their own words we can per- 
fectly understand how Don Pedro and Claudio are driven to slander Hero publicly, 
thereby insulting her father also. They believe that Leonato was aware of his daugh- 
ter’s vile character, and had meant to take advantage of their ignorant confidence. 
They credit him with betrayal of friendship. Claudio says to the father : ‘ Give not 
* this rotten orange to your friend ’ ; and the Prince feels himself dishonoured in his 
part of advocate : — * I stand dishonoured that have gone about To link my dear 
‘friend to a common stale.’ If the two friends thought themselves thus falsely 
betrayed, was the revenge that they took in publicly branding a low woman and her 
accomplices, morally wrong or merely unbecoming ? It seems certainly surprising 
that, while Hero, even if guilty, is to be treated with distinguished courtesy, so harsh 
a sentence .should be passed upon two men who, if they erred, did so from a noble 
motive, — an outraged sense of honour. As for the jesting at Benedick, for which 
Claudio is so blamed, at such a time, we must remember that characters as inapulsive, 
as those of Shakespeare, need but the smallest occasion, in the midst of the gravest 
circumstances, to be converted to extreme gayety. In 2 Hen. IV: II, ii and iv. 
Prince Hal feels profound grief at hearing of his father’s illness, and yet cannot 
help jesting with Poins over Falstaff’s letter, and on that very evening, disguised as 
a Drawer, he looks on at the gluttonous, wanton Sir John, passing the last hours 
before joining the army, in the company of Doll Tearsheet and Mrs Quickly. 

And after all, Claudio is not so merry as his detractors would have it appear. 
Neither he nor Don Pedro is easy in mind when he sees the consequences of his 
conduct, and the sufferings of the two old men. Yet, since they believe themselves 
to have acted rightly, they do not yield to their uneasiness, but try to laugh it off. 
Their jests do not come from their hearts, as is hinted in the words with which Clau- 
dio greets Benedick ; ‘ We have been up and down to seek thee ; for we are high- 
^ proof melancholy and would fain have it beaten away. Wilt thou not use thy 
‘wit?’. . . 



APPENDIX 


384 

(P. 160). Equal readiness has been shown in giving an unfavourable character to 
Don Pedro ; and with just as little reason, as far as the Poet is concerned, as in the 
case of Claudio. Bulthaupt says : ‘ The young travelled idler [why travelled idler? 
‘ Spanish princes had often visited Sicily for serious purposes — Don Pedro himself 
‘ came hither first upon some military business.] is a classic model of the elegant 

* triiler, polished, amiable, but lacking in mind and character, a genuine universally 
‘ popular heir to the throne, quite ready to be affable and hail-fellow-well-met with 
‘ all ; and when he comes into his inheritance he will waver for a while between 

* kindly condescension and great dignity, until he developes into the full-blown 
‘ despot.^ Now there is no reason to suppose that Shakespeare intended Don Pedro 
to be anything more than an amiable, good, young fellow. It is improper to draw 
any conclusions as to his future political career, since the Poet wishes us to see in 
him, as in the Duke of Illyria in Twelfth Nighty in spite of his lofty rank, only the 
private gentleman upon a perfect equality with his friends. 

To complete the adverse criticism, — the two old men, Leonato and Antonio, are 
accused, because of their indignant impetuosity, of most unseemly behaviour. Of 
much that Gervinus has to say of their intemperance, we give but one sample ; Leo- 
nato, ‘ when misfortune assails him is utterly helpless, and unhinged. He wishes 

* Hero were dead, he wishes to stab her, to tear her to pieces, and this without mak- 
‘ ing any investigation, without even, like Father Francis, observing. He rejects all 
‘consolation, and all exhortation to be patient.* It does seem verily a great deal,— 
to require of a father such cold-blooded self-control at such a moment. We should 
like to see a father capable of calmly investigating, not to mention observing, like 
an unconcerned priest, the signs of guilt or innocence in his daughter’s face, just 
when he was agonized with grief and shame, and beside himself with the affront to 
his pride, and to the honour of his family ; the testimony of two honourable gentle- 
men, one of them the bridegroom who accused his betrothed with tears, having left 
no doubt as to the girl’ s criminality. And we need not remind our readers how 
violent and passionate Shakespeare’s fathers* are, when they are angry with their 
daughters. According to Gervinus, to bear his trials should have been easy for 
Leonato ; according to Leonato, Gervinus is one of those who * speak patience to 
‘those that wring under the load of sorrow.’ 

We have expatiated upon all this, because it seems to us that the frequent miscon- 
ceptions of the Poet are due to the fact that the critics hasten to pass judgement upon 
Shakespeare’s characters, when they should first make it their aim to understand 
them. Instead of being sure beforehand of the Poet’s point of view, and making it 
a criterion, each critic has used his own view as such. The consequence is that 
there is often the greatest diversity of opinion as to the same point, although we 
surely ought to expect that with a Poet whose work is so distinguished for unity, it 
should be possible to agree as to facts, in regard to what he himself meant. Our 
greatest mistake seems to have been that we suspect some deep moral significance in 
every subordinate character, and have thus considered ourselves justified in inflicting 
either moral praise or censure. And it must be also confessed that our German 
critics have not been sufficiently earful to steer clear of this rock, and that Gervinus 
in especial has not shown sufficient caution and circumspection in the solution of 
problems thus presenting themselves. 

H. A. Taine (ii, 215) : A mechanical imagination produces Shakespeare’s heavy, 


* See Old Capulet, Lear, Cymbeline. 



FRENCH CRITICISM-TAINE 385 

stupid cliaracters ; a quick, venturesome, dazzling, unquiet imagination produces his 
men of wit. Of wit there are many kinds. One, thoroughly French, which is 
merely reason itself, a foe to paradox, railing against vulgarity, a sort of incisive 
common sense, with nothing else to do but to render truth amusing and manifest, the 
most effective of weapons among a people intelligent and absurdly vain. Such is the 
wit of Voltaire and of the salons. The other, that of improvisators and artists, is a 
mere inventive sprightliness, paradoxical, unbridled, exuberant, a kind of self-enter- 
tainment, a phantasmagoria of images, of witticisms, of bizarre ideas, which dazzle 
and intoxicate like the movements and the illumination of a ball. Such is the wit 
of Mercutio, of the Clowns, of Beatrice, of Rosalind, and of Benedick. They 
laugh, not from a sense of the ridiculous, but from the desire to laugh. Seek else- 
where for the assaults which aggressive reason makes on human folly. Here is folly 
in full bloom. Our folk think of amusement, — nothing more. They are good-hu- 
moured, they let their wit caracole over the possible and the impossible. They play 
upon words, they torture the sense, they draw from them absurd and laughable 
inferences, they toss them back and forth like shuttlecocks, without stopping, emu- 
lating each other in singularity and in invention. They dress out all their ideas in 
strange or sparkling metaphors. The taste of the time tended to masquerades ; their 
conversation is a masquerade of ideas. Nothing is said by them with simplicity ; 
they seek only to heap up subtleties, far-fetched and hard to invent and understand ; 
their every expression is sharp, unexpected, extraordinary ; they strain their thought 
and change it to caricature. ‘ Alas, poor Romeo I’ says Mercutio, * he is already 
‘dead ; stabbed with a white wenches black eye ; shot through the ear with a love- 
‘song; the very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy’s butt-shaft.’ Bene- 
dick relates a conversation he had just had with his mistress r ‘ O, she misused me 
‘ past the endurance of a block !’ etc. These gay and perennial extravagances show 
the bearing of the speakers. They do not remain quietly seated in their chairs like 
the Marquis in The Misanthrope ; they pirouette, they bound, they bepaint their 
faces, they boldly enact the pantomime of their ideas ; their coruscations of wit end 
in songs. Young fellows, soldiers, and artists, — they touch off their verbal fireworks 
and gamble up and down. ‘ There was a star danced, and under that I was born.* 
This expression of Beatrice befits this kind of wit, poetic, scintillating, unreasoning, 
charming, more akin to music than to literature, a dream which one dreams aloud 
and awake, like that of Mercutio’ s when he describes Queen Mab. 


ACTORS 

Francis Gentleman (ii, 318) : General suffrage has for many years authorised 
the warmest encomiums upon this great man [Garrick] in Benedick ; it has been set 
down by many leading critics as his best comic character, but this opinion we cannot 
implicitly admit, notwithstanding we are willing to allow the pre-eminence of his 
significant features, the distinct volubility of his expression, and his stage manoeuv- 
res ; in the scenes of repartee with Beatrice, his distinct vivacity gives uncommon 
satisfaction. 

(P. 321). Mrs Pritchard was so excellent [as Beatrice], and struck out such 
unison merit with Mr Garrick, that her uncharacteristic corpulence was always 
overlooked. Mrs Woffington we have heard receive considerable applause, which 
25 



APPENDIX 


386 

she well deserved. Much Ado about Nothingy supported by capable performers^ 
will always please in representation, and does not cast any damp upon the great 
fame of its immortal author ; at the same time, we do not consider it as making any 
addition thereto. It is undoubtedly an agreeable, spirited composition for the stage, 
but can never be of any great importance in the study. 

George Fletcher (p. 282) : The stage may be fairly held responsible for much 
of the prevailing misconception [of the character of Beatrice], The modern theat- 
rical Beatrice has commonly exhibited herself either as a hoyden, or a vixen, or that 
still more repulsive personage, a compound of the two. But the Beatrice of Shake- 
speare is the high-bred, high-spirited, and generous-hearted lady of the later chiv- 
alric time. How, then, shall she be most adequately embodied on the stage ? 

Such, let us here observe, is the thorough individuality of all Shakespeare* s 
heroines, — notwithstanding all the essential womanhood which forms the basis of 
character in each, — that were it possible to have, for each new character, a particular 
performer with special individual qualifications for that part above all others, — such 
multiplicity of actresses, no doubt, would most completely realise a perfect ideal of fem- 
inine Shakespearian personation. But seeing that histrionic resources, such as here im- 
agined, are hardly conceivable in even the most prosperous state that any stage can 
ever attain, — ^and are peculiarly in contrast with the poverty of the British theatre at 
present [1847], — ^we are left to choose between having the character of Beatrice, 
amongst others, assumed by a comic actress in the commonplace acceptation, or by 
an artist capable of embodying the still higher ideals of Shakespearian womanhood. 

Now, in the appreciation of character, any more than in mathematics, the lesser 
cannot comprehend the greater. While, therefore, it is quite impossible for the 
merely comic actress to reach the conception, and much more the expression, of any 
one of Shakespeare’s peculiarly ideal women, — it is hardly more practicable for her 
to rise to the nobility of spirit, as well as refinement of manner, which should not 
only appear in the generously impassioned passages of a character like Beatrice, but 
should lend grace and delicacy tp her most exuberant effusions of humourous or sar- 
castic merriment. On the contrary it is possible for the artist capable of embodying 
the more ideal conception, to descend (for it is descending even in Shakespeare) to 
the personation of a real-life character, though still of the noblest order. The 
actress really capable of a Rosalind, can conceive of a Beatrice, and can express 
her truly as well as adequately. . . . Respecting the personation of Beatrice during 
the latter nights of the London season of 1846, we must point out the fine illustra- 
tion which it afforded of the general position we have stated above, — that the high 
ideal artist can successfully adapt herself to a character like this, although the 
commonplace performer can never rise to its elevation. As for details in this 
instance, we prefer citing a passage or two from critical notices of a later date, 
which, though provincial, are highly intelligent ; and while they corroborate our 
own general testimony, serve to place in a striking light the importance of histrionic 
aid like this, in restoring the full and true intelligence, enjoyment, and appreciation 
of Shakespeare. Only a familiarity with the living embodiment of the elegant and 
heroic as well as pleasant-spirited ^Beatrice can thoroughly banish from the public 
mind that medley of associations which has so long possessed it, — made up, as we 
have said, from the vixen on the one hand, and the hoyden on the other, which, 
though in varying proportions, the modern stage has constantly set before it. The 
Manchester Courier of May 9th, 1846, speaking of Miss Helen Faucit’s persona- 



A CrORS-^HALLIWELL 


387 

tion of Beatrice, says : — ‘ It was a perfonnance of rare beauty, though differing 

* entirely both in conception and developement from any Beatrice we have seen for 

* some years back. It is less buoyant, less boisterous, if the terms may be applied 

* to the exuberance of feeling which is generally thrown into the part by modem 
‘ actresses ; it has not the hearty laugh of Mrs Jordan, that made the listener doubt 
‘ if such a woman could be ever unhappy ; nor the biting sarcasm and fire-eating of 
‘others we could name, who stand high in the list of the approved. Yet to those 
‘ who have read Shakespeare and made him a study, it must have been delightful to 

* perceive how beautifully she made Beatrice accord with the almost universal senti- 
‘ment of woman’s character as portrayed by the great writer. In all her mirth, 

* there was still refinement and rare delicacy,* etc. But if this lady’s Beatrice has not 
the laugh of Mrs Jordan, it wants not the more refined though exuberant joyousness 
of Shakespeare’ s heroine. On this head, the testimony of 2 'Ae Liverpool Journal^ 
dated but a week earlier, is remarkable. After opening his notice by saying : ‘ It 
‘ was with much misgiving we heard the play announced : we doubted Miss Faucit’s 

* versatility, and from what we had seen were apprehensive that she was deficient in 

* that elastic and buoyant .spirit which the character demands,* — the writer continues ; — 

* We were, however, never more agreeably disappointed. Miss Faucit’s Beatrice 

* is a creature overflowing with joyousness, — raillery itself being in her nothing more 
‘than an excess of animal spirits, tempered by passing through a soul of goodness.* 
As, again, yet more recently. The Newcastle Courant, of April 30th, 1847, speaking 
of this lady’s performance, tells us: ‘The playfulness and sarcastic humour of 
‘ Beatnce were given with lady -like grace and girlish buoyancy.’ It is, indeed, one 
of the things most marvellous to any fresh student of this actress’s personations, to 
discover that the very being, who at one moment had seemed bom to breathe the 
deepest soul of mournful or heroic tragedy, could at the next become a seemingly 
exhaustless fountain of spontaneous and delicious cheerfulness, — that not only do we 
find a plaintive Imogen thus magically transmuted into a buoyant Rosalind in all the 
dewy-fragrant sunshine of her spirit, — ^but even the most awfully thrilling Lady Mac- 
beth herself, into the most genuinely laughing Beatrice. Yet all this only argues, — 
but argues incontrovertibly, — the existence in the artist herself, — rare in any time, and 
precious in the present, — of that whole rich essence of poetic womanhood of which 
Shakespeare had such perfect and peculiar intuition. 

Halliwell (p. 90) : The following short contemporary note on Macready’s 
personification of Benedick, although his exact interpretation of the character is 
liable to objection, may be worth adding as the opinion of his conversion by a great 
actor : — ‘ His great peculiarity consists in the ludicrous manner in which he seizes on 
‘ the distress of Benedick on finding the theory of a whole life knocked down by one 

* slight blow. His chief scene is the soliloquy after he has heard Don Pedro and 
‘ his companions narrate the story of Beatrice’s love. The blank amazement depicted 
‘ in his countenance and expressive of a thorough change in his internal condition, is 
‘ surpassingly droll. The man is evidently in a state of puzzle, and a series of the. 
‘ quaintest attitudes of reflection evince his perplexity. Then, when he throws him- 
‘ self into love-making in real earnest, when he follows about the angered Beatrice, 

* distressfully endeavouring to make himself heard, his manner is completely that 

* of the unbeliever turned fanatic, who thinks he cannot go too far in his state of 
‘faith. He has resolved to be in love “most horribly,” and he sets about it heart 
‘ and soul.* 



388 


APPENDIX 


Manchester Courier (April ntb, 1866): Pleasant, too, is it to note the artistic 
care bestowed even upon those trifles which go to sum up the whole concep- 
tion, but would be unheeded by a less consummate mistress of art [than Miss 
Faucit], But far more gratifying is it to listen to the beautifully modulated voice, 
and observe even critically each studied gesture, and see the felicitous manner in 
which both combine to express each varying thought. Whether in the satirical vein, 
in wlilch the deflant damsel * talks poniards^ and * turns all men the wrong side out,* 
in the half repentant manner in which she resolves to requite the love of Benedick 
in the scene of unmerited wrong and the sympathetic grief which follows, or in the 
half-appealing, half-commanding mandate to her lover to * kill Claudio,* or in the 
girlish waywardness and mirth of the last scene, where Beatrice hides from Benedick 
secure in the confident knowledge that he will pursue and seek out his promised 
bride. Miss Faucit was equally successful ; and throughout there was exhibited a 
degree of culture and refinement of manner such as one might naturally look for in 
a lady so circumstanced, but which, nevertheless, adds an indefinable grace and 
charm to this delightful creation. 

Manchester Guardian (April llth, 1 866) : In the opening scene Miss Faucit made 
a beautiful display of that delicate irony which runs throughout the part; that 
display, however, was only the prelude to still more vivacious acting. The lines 
which draw comparison between the marriage tie and a dance were rendered in 
that sarcastic manner, and with that graceful action which would come so naturally 
from a highly bred woman who scorned all advances from a courtier. In the scene 
where she and Benedick are masked and he talks to her unconscious of her identity, 
she turned the tables on him in an intensely humourous manner and fairly won the 
applause which greeted the rapid delivery of those telling retorts which produce so 
much discomfiture to Benedick and which provoked so much laughter from the audi- 
ence. In the garden scene. Miss Faucit presented a pained appearance, when the 
dialogue turned upon her merciless treatment of his protestations ; but coming for- 
ward on the disappearance of Hero and Ursula, her whole conduct changed, and 
thenceforth she assumed an encouraging manner towards the equally altered Bene- 
dick. When Beatrice was left in the Chapel with Benedick, Miss Faucit rose to 
the greatest height of her acting ; her alternations of grief for Hero, of indignation at 
the treatment which her cousin had received, her eagerness to have Claudio killed, 
and her wish that she were a man to execute the immediate vengeance she desired, 
were rendered with great force, but did not exceed the display of a true womanly 
spirit 

Manchester Examiner and Times (Nov. 2d, 1869) : We defy the most aged votary 
of the glories of the past to persuade us into the belief that there has ever been a 
better Beatrice than Miss Helen Faucit’s, — save and except Mrs Pritchard* s, 
whose glories being purely historical, are neither here nor there. And as Miss 
Faucit is in our opinion the first of modern Beatrice’s, so, on the other hand, Bea- 
trice is, to our mind, by far the most congenial part in Miss Faucit’s present reper- 
tory. It has been often said, and said with much plausibility, that as Shakespeare 
could never have been, in real life. Intimately conversant with the character typified 
in Beatrice, — ^the high-spirited girl who is at th^ same time a lady of fashion and 
refinement, — so there must remain in this character as drawn by him, many little 
defects and unevennesses which are likely to be exaggerated rather than softened 



ACTORSSIR EDWARD R. RUSSELL 389 

on the stage. It is in such a case that a really great actress helps the poet^s own 
creation ; thus she, as it were, rounds off its angles and fills up its voids and makes 
the character more fully what Shakespeare intended it, than what it was when it 
left the Poet’s hands. If it were not so, who would care to exchange his own con- 
ception of the character for any actual embodiment of it ? A second-rate Beatrice 
is a misfortune which must be borne with a Christian spirit, but a Beatrice such as 
Miss Helen Faucit’s is an enjoyment which Shakespeare himself might envy us. 
High spirits which run away with the tongue but not with the manners, this is the 
key-note struck by Miss Faucit. From the moment that she steps on the stage, we 
see that she, like all high-spirited women, has constituted herself the critic of every- 
thing that goes on around her. Nothing escapes her eye, though her back be 
turned ; and nothing her ear, though it is impossible to listen to everything at once. 
She is amused with Benedick before he is on the stage, and unable to control her 
sense of fun from the moment he appears ; the music sets her dancing ; the senti- 
ment between her cousin and Claudio makes her half inclined to cry ; she is moved 
and stirred by everything around her, and nothing controls her but the grace which 
is her second nature. 

Sir Edward R. Russell {Liverpool Daily Fosi, 16 Dec., 1870): Miss Helen 
Faucit’s greatest part has always been supposed to be Rosalind, but it must go hard 
with the heroine of As You Like It to excel the jocund Beatrice of Much Ado about 
Nothing as played by this great actress on Thursday night. ... As Beatrice, Miss 
Faucit distances all competitors . . . the perfect harmony, the varied yet continuous 
grace, and the vivid elocution, are all Miss Faucit’s own, and incommunicable. 
The dialogue was never more exquisitely delivered. Beatrice is on the stage from 
the very first, and hardly is she seen before she is heard at her quips upon the 
absent * Signor Montanto.’ With what a grace all the sly hits were delivered, and 
how the grace bounded into buoyancy when ‘ Lady Disdain ’ got her opportunity, 
and Benedick himself was in her presence to sustain the rapier thrusts of her keen 
wit. Miss Faucit is the very Beatrice of Shakespeare ; too full of mischief and 
gaiety to spare her butt a single arrow, but too bewitching and too truly a lady ever 
to seem too bold or too reckless an archer. The fun is at its height in the scene of 
the masked ball, and here the Beatrice of the night, whom the profane Benedick 
might well in his whimsical agony call ‘ harpy,’ agonized her poor victim to the last 
degree. The vigour, the sprightliness, the mercilessness of Miss Faucit’s onslaught 
gave the scene splendid effect, and led up well to the humourously-devised garden 
episodes in which Benedick and his merry destiny are linked for life by the pranks 
of their friends. But first there was to come the exquisite little scene when Claudio 
and Hero plight their troth ; and Beatrice, in an ecstasy which belies her pretence 
of a chill heart, luxuriates in their happiness, and exchanges lively sallies about 
marriage with the dazzled Don Pedro. In this brief but delicious passage. Miss 
Faucit wound herself round all hearts, as a Shakespearian heroine must if she is 
to justify her parentage and fulfil the happy end of her creation. 

The garden scene, in which Beatrice hears of Benedick’s supposed passion for 
her, is greatly inferior in elaborate effect to that in which Benedick listens to corre- 
sponding intelligence about Beatrice. Shakespeare rarely repeats his effects, and 
having given Benedick a great deal to say about his new-found love, Beatrice, he 
gives Beatrice very little to say about her newly-discovered lover. Benedick ; but 
Miss Faucit showed delicate judgement in her blank reception of the suddenly 



390 


APPENDIX 


revealed idea, as well as skilful variety of attitudes in listening to her friends* con* 
fidences respecting herself. The greatest scene, however, is that in which Beatrice 
accepts Benedick’ s proposals, and swears him to challenge Claudio. Looked at in 
Shakespeare, the dialogue seems short, but, with an eifect in every line, it assumes 
great proportions, and lives in the memory as unapproachable in fulness of comedy, 
in vividness of fire, and in actual dramatic importance. Miss Faucit’s treatment 
of particular lines was perfectly marvellous. A pause was a point, full of exquisite 

humour, in the line, ‘ It is a man’s office but not yours.’ Take again, as an 

example, the passage, * It were as possible for me to say I loved nothing so well as 
< you ; but believe me not ; and yet I lie not ; I confess nothing ; nor I deny nothing.* 
Some earnest Shakespearians think they can appreciate their author better at home 
than on the stage. We should like all such to hear Miss Faucit deliver this single 
speech, which, by her art, becomes a series of little speeches, each like a pretty 
bon-bon, with a dramatic surprise ready to leap out with the detonation. Any 
candid student of Shakespeare in the library would admit that in this, as in a hun- 
dred passages, he had never thoroughly appreciated its dramatic value before he 
heard Miss Faucit render it. But there was more to be done than mere brilliant 
reading of Shakespeare’s text. There was a great tragic effect to be suddenly made 
in the midst of comedy. * Come, bid me do anything for thee,’ says Benedick in 
his light-hearted ardour. Kill Claudio^' cries Beatrice in a wonderful voice, ear- 
nest and thrilling, startling to the depths every one within hearing, and yet not a 
whit more fierce than the voice of Beatrice so moved might be, nor in any way, in 
spite of its tremendous bitterness and force, inconsistent with her character. This 
was the finest triumph of the night. It is as distinctly original as any conception 
that ever was embodied by art. , . , There is a single exit speech of five lines in the 
play, which by the most natural division and elaboration yields, in the hands of 
such an actress as Miss Faucit, almost as many fine effects as a brilliant operatic 
finale. It was wrought up to perfection. So delighted were the audiences with 
this scene that the theatre resounded with long-continued applause, and the play 
could not go on till Miss Faucit had reappeared to accept the enthusiastic homage 
which was due to her art and the lovely natural sprightliness with which it was 
combined. 

Frederick Wedmore {The Academy, 21 Oct, 1882) : Mr Irving has never 
done anything more complete than his Benedick. He plays it with the keenest 
sense of enjoyment and appreciation, and with that authority of interpretation which 
comes most readily when a man possesses the agreeable consciousness that the 
authority will be recognized and accepted. The element of satire in the part, — 
the conception of a robust humanity boasting its own strength, and swayed, even 
while it boasts, by the lightest of feminine charms, — is much in his own humour. 
The chivalry of the character suits him, and so does the graciousness of the charac- 
ter, and so does its quiet and self-analytical wit. He is excellent in speech, and as 
excellent in by-play. If Beatrice * speaks poniards,* this newest Benedick can 
look them. In a word, Mr Irving was made for Benedick, or Benedick for Mr 
Irving. It is seldom that a success is so unmistakeable, though, in this case, we 
cannot consider it to be surprising. When the public has grown familiar with Mr 
Irving’s Benedick, it is not likely that, during the present generation, any other 
Benedick will go down. . . . Nearly all that Miss £]LLEN Terry can do quite per* 
fectly she can do in Beatnce. . . . Beatrice’s seriousness is permitted to be half a jest 



ACTORS^SATURDAY REVIEW 


391 

The sorrows she deals with are the sorrows of comedy, and she is beset by no per> 
plexities which may not be easily removed. Hero’s character she requires to have 
vindicated, and a vindication is promptly forthcoming. At other times due leisure 
is allowed her to form a whimsical attachment, and to say defiant things brilliantly, 
and with the utmost good>nature. So it is that Mr Irving and Miss Terry succeed 
in their parts entirely. Not one point of importance is lost by either of them, and 
in both the transitions of mood are rapid and strongly marked. It is this that helps 
give vivacity to Comedy, — the action of comedy is often mental action, taking the 
place of a drama’s developement of intrigue. A criticism of detail on their perform- . 
ance would seem to us superfluous. Having tried to carefully indicate that, except 
within certain limits, the characters are not exacting, there is nothing too tremen- 
dous in our praise when we say that in the interpretation of these characters it would 
be difficult to put our hand on a weak spot. 

The ‘Saturday Review (21 October, 1882) : In the acting of these two parts 
[Benedick and Beatrice] he who would break a lance with Mr Mowbray Morris 
over a certain passage in his Essays in Theatrical Criticism might find a weapon of 
some service ; * Reduced to the material compass of the theatre, the most ethereal 
‘ visions, the most delicate graces of his [Shakespeare’s] fancy, cannot but lose 
‘ something of their radiancy, cannot but acquire a certain touch of grossness, of 
* human substance and human infirmity.* Now this, as it seems to us, is precisely what 
does not happen as regards the present perfonnance of Beatrice and Benedick at the 
Lyceum. The play is, as we all know, charged with wit and beauty for the reader 
who has a spark of wit or of poetical imagining in his composition ; and such a 
reader, all thoughtless of the stage, for which the play was originally designed, may 
get out of it what seems to him full satisfaction. But can he, even if he be an actor 
by disposition if not by training, get out of it quite all that players with fine percep- 
tions, and with fine and full experience of the stage to back them, put into it ? Is it 
likely, for instance, that as he reads that strange and charming scene of courtship in 
the Cathedral scene, there will rise to his mind’s eye the delicate action with which 
Benedick’s hand approaches and touches Beatrice’s as it hangs idle by her side, or 
the charming picture of awtikening and chivalrous love given to illustrate the follow- 
ing lines, * I do love nothing in the world so well as you ; is not that strange ?’ Is 
it possible that he should picture to himself just how this thing should be done by 
the two players concerned in it, so as to preserve at once its deep meaning and its 
fine point of comedy? Or again, is it likely that it should strike him how much 
meaning can be given to the whole scene and its whole bearing by so seemingly 
trivial an incident as Beatrice’s kissing the Friar’s hand after he has expressed his 
belief in Hero’s complete innocence? The person who could study Shakespeare in 
his own room, and see all such touches as these given to the scene in his mind’s eye, 
and given with a perfection beyond the reach of any mortal actor, would no doubt be 
enviable. But, on the other hand, such touches as these are, one naturally imagines, 
just the touches which cannot be devised by any but one who is at once an expe- 
rienced player and a loving student of Shakespeare, — one who will know when to 
put them in so as to help, and not to hinder and overlay, the poet’s meaning, which 
is the first thing to be grasped before the particular means of conveying it from the 
Stage to the public are considered. Here, it may be said that we are begging the 
question in assuming that the poet’s meaning should be conveyed to the public from 
the stage. It is simple enough to reply to this, that ‘your stage play’ should, like 



392 


APPENDIX 


* your bonnet/ be put ‘ to its right use / it was written for the stage, and therefore 
let it be seen on the stage. In too many cases, perhaps, the upholder of ‘ the closet 
theory ’ might rejoin that if the stage only marred the finest dramatic work that the 
world has produced the stage had better leave it alone. In this particular case, how- 
ever, as in various others which might be cited, such a rejoinder would have nothing 
on which to rest. The case is, it may be said, exceptional ; and no doubt it is. It 
is not every day that one can hope to get an ideal Beatrice and Benedick, an excel- 
lent company, and a thorough appreciation of how scenic illustration may be brought 
to bear upon a beautiful work without in the least interfering with or overloading its 
intrinsic beauty. But, with all this, such a case is not so exceptional as to be the 
exception which proves the rule. The fact remains indisputable that Shakespeare’s 
plays were written for the stage ; there is a strong presumption that Shakespeare 
knew what he was about ; and it is hardly to be supposed that the great bulk of 
the audience who show their appreciation of Shakespeare in the theatre would be 
likely to get as much enjoyment or education from reading him at home. I'his no 
doubt sounds, and is, platitudinous ; but there are certain platitudes which it is worth 
while occasionally to repeat. As for the artistic value of stage representations to any 
one who is a student, either as an amateur or as a professional, of stage art, one need 
only refer to the well-known case of the great singer and actress who always wanted 
to see a new part which she undertook done, and done no matter how badly or how 
W'ell, by some one else before she herself formed her conception of its meaning and 
her ideas as to its fitting execution. 

All this, however, has taken us far enough away from the detailed consideration 
of the particular performance by the striking merits of which the divergence was sug- 
gested. The scenic arrangement and the dressing of the play are arranged not only 
with magnificence, which in it.self is not much, but also with the art which tempers 
magnificence to the right sense of proportion ; and, wdiat is more impc»rtant, this 
same sense of artistic proportion is present, as though instilled by a master hand, 
throughout the representation, in every way, of the play. The loves of Hero and 
Claudio, with their terrible calamity and their subsequent reconciliation, resume their 
proper place in the foreground. Don Pedro takes his right position as the gay, care- 
less prince, whose courtly whim is the instrument upon which the epis<jde of Beatrice 
and Benedick, — an episode which, as episodes sometimes do, gives to the play its chief 
charm, — depends ; while Don John, a character heretofore almost entirely neglected 
in the stage versions of the play, on his side takes his pioper place as one of Shake- 
speare’s truest and least obvious villains. His motives are complex, and do not loudly 
assert themselves. He is plausible and he is sinister. . , . Miss Eli.kn Tkrry’s 
Beatrice is, in the earlier scenes, the incarnation of light-hearted mirth, which is never 
heartle.ss, and of gay coquetry, which never loses the charm of spontaneity. In the 
Cathedral scene she arrives at a pitch of emotion which is both tender and deep, 
and in the delivery of the .speech beginning, ‘ Is he not approved in the height a 

* villain ?’ she attained a force that was perhaps not expected by some of her hearers. 
In the concluding scenes of the play, we have the same early touch of coquetry, 
relieved by the true love sprung from half- assumed aversion. Mr Irving’s Bene- 
dick is, as has been hinted above, a singularly harmonious combination of the mixed 
qualities which go to make up the part. He is, before all things, well-bred and chiv- 
alrous ; he is gay, with a fund of poetry beneath the gaiety ; he is on the surface a 
man who, like Gratiano, talks an infinite deal of nothing ; but his character is really 
full of a determination which asserts itself finely in the Cathedral scene, and in the 



ACTORS-L. CLARKE DAVIS 


393 


challenge of Claudio. His scenes of pure Comedy are given with infinite grace, 
and, in the scenes just referred to, the expression of his acting is by force of contrast 
doubly telling, even as the truth and tenderness of his love scenes gain by their 
opposition to the light nature which he wears as a glove. 

L. Clarke Davis {^Philadelphia Inquirer , 19 March, 1884) : In the church 
scene, Mr Irving made one of the happiest displays of his art. When Beatrice told 
him she loved him, his change from the mocking, railing Benedick to the jubilant, 
conquering lover, his quick, fervent seizing and clasping her in his arms, his ringing 
answer, ‘ Come, bid me do anything for thee and then his refusal to ‘ kill Claudio,’ 
were all most admirably done. Something of him as a subtle interpreter of doubtful 
situations was shown in the early part of this fine scene, by his suspicion of Don 
John, felt by him alone, and expressed only by a quick, covert look, but a look so 
full of intelligence as to proclaim him a sharer of the secret with his audience. 
Another scene of notable excellence, — ^most notable of all for the gentle bearing and 
courtly dignity displayed, — was that in which he challenges Claudio. From the 
opening to the close of it, he showed a consummate art, through which there shone 
the strong light of a noble intellectuality. In the speech beginning, ‘Fare you 
‘well, boy,’ there was a wondrous courtesy and gentleness of voice and manner, 
from which all levity had gone out. It was the other side of the character of Bene- 
dick, the manly, graver, sweeter side, most excellently portrayed. . . . 

As Beatrice, Miss Terry was dazzling in the fascination of her manner, enchanting 
in her tenderness, full of an admirable vivacity, never once playing the shrew, and 
though her words were sharp as steel, they seemed always sheathed in velvet and to 
convey the idea that she loved Benedick ; she .softened the wordy blow she struck 
him and turned it to nought by the tender light of her eyes, or by a manner deli- 
ciously arch and winsome, which in itself was ever half-caressing. Her eyes, full 
of all changing expressions, as the heart of Beatrice was full of varying emotions, 
never rose higher than Benedick’s, her tone w'as ever sweet and low in all her ban- 
terings, even in the mask scene, where she pursues Benedick w’ith all the lashes of 
her keen wit. Only he who is blind ctmld fail to perceive the half-veiled presence 
of her love. The entire impersonation was perfect in its grasp of the character, in 
its faultless execution, in its sweet and tender grace, and in its noble dignity, for 
though she was jocund in her flow of spirits, she was never hoydenish. She might 
be the Bady of Disdain, but she was a superb lady always. There were parts of 
this exquisite jiresontation which should stand for ever as stage traditions, always to be 
admired, though never to be revived by any of less genius than Miss Terry. Such, 
for instance, wms her rejfly to Don Pedro’s remark that she must have been born in 
a merry hour. ‘ No, sure,’ .she said, ‘ my lor<l, my mother cried ; but then there was 
‘ a star danced^ and under that I was bornd Miss Terry’s delivery of this line was 
so generous of meaning as to be made to express all that Beatrice was ; there was a 
tip-toe elevation of gladness in her look, a jubilant ring in her voice, and happiness 
itself in the soft ripple of laughter, accompanied by a gesture so exultant, beautiful, 
and lightsome as to command, for itself alone, unbounded admiration and spontaneous 
applau.se. Again, throughout the church .scene, and especially when she and Bene- 
dick are left alone, and she defends Hero, denounces Claudio, or w’hen later she 
confesses her love for Benedick and throws herself into his arms with love’s rash 
abandon, or urges him to right Hero’s wrongs, — nothing could be finer than her act- 
ing. Her moods were changeable as April weather. She paced the stage one 



$ MPENDJX 


tnomeot in her rage egauurt: 4^ eso^r, dung m love to Benedict «od in 

ffU most notable was the noble and freedom of her gestures^ expressive of a 

great, free nature* Thert was 4 magmfioent and startling display of her art m her 
sttdden> ^ager^ dmoat savage fttrning upon Benedick, when he tells her he will do 
anything for her* The Instant before she was all womanly tenderness, but her swift 
demahdt In answer to his promise, * kill Claudio,’ fell upon the stilled house like a 
blow in fkn fiteoi so Ihll of coneentrated energy was it 

Tlbf jl^etdew (iB June, 1887) ; The whole of Miss Terhy’s by-play, 

fiom the moment at which Claudio denounces her cousin before the altar, until Hero 
is borne insenside from the scene, was of the finest order of mute acting , and its 
one culmmating toudi where, on the Iriiur’s avowing his belief in Hero’s innocence, 
Beatnee fitngs hoi'seif as by a sudden impulse on her knees before him to kiss his 
hand, was one of those sudden and commanding appeals to the emotioiis which 
sometimes throw the coldest of spectators off hm guard. 

Tke Saturday Rmrw (10 January, 1891) ; How full of thought and apprecia- 
tion all Mr Irving’s productions are» we see by companng them with what is dcme 
at tdhtt houses Where else should we have seen such a charming little episode as 
that of Beatnce catching sight of the pretty child m the masked dance scene, kissing 
him, and catching him up playfully in her aims ? It is done unobtrusively, -^^lasually, 
on the impulse the moment, as it appears, — and yet it is a touch that enables us 
better to understand the womanliness of the girl’s disposition. 


COSTUME 

I KNOW of no Illustrations of Shakespeare’s Plays earlier than those in Rows’ s 
Edition of 1709 For the sake of the Costume and Stage setting, the Frontispiece to 
Muctt Ado about Nothing in that edition is here reproduced, on the opposite page. 


W OkberRY i^Asthi Play ts ^>trformed at the Theatres Roy all, 1823) S— • 

Scarlet doublet, white vest, and pantaloons* 


Don Pedro 


Leonato 

. . 

Don John 

• « 

Claddip 

• • 

Benedick 


Antonio 

, . 

Balthazar 

, . 

Dogberry 

• • 

BoracHio 

(• • 

COW4piR 


v*vw ,► 

• k 

ilMlA 


Saxtotr t . 


Oatc»k»> 

Beatrice 

e e 

amko 1 




BRslRi^i Mhits 

Di # • 


Black velvet clress, embroi 
Buff and scarlet dress. 
Scarlet and white 


idered with gold* 






Black velvet 
Blue and scarlet 
Brab serge 
Buff and scarlet 
Blue and white 
Btowii imi dmb seige diess. 

®fey Fitor’s gown, 
leige dress* 

" « CiM coats 

wifli 

Ihnk ^leengid 

«*% *eiL 

dnwni bladt 9au!«t% 

White dieiaea. 






COSTOMM— KNIGHT 


395 


Knight : The comedy of Muck Ado ahoui Nothing oommtncts with the return of 
certain Italian and Spanish noblemen to Sicily after the wars. Now the la$t war in 
which the Italian^ under Spanish dominion were concerned previous to the proditc- 
tion of this comedy was terminated by the peace at Cambra>% called ‘ La Paix des 
‘ Dames/ because it had been signed (August 3rd, 1529) by Margaret of Austria in 
the name of the emperor Charles V., and the Duchesse d’Angouleme in that of her 
son FraficiStl. This peace secured to Chailes the crown of Naples and Sicily ; and 
he made triumphal entries into Palermo and Messina in the autumn^of 1535. The 
costume of this period is flhe .same as that of 7 'he Two Gentlemen of Verona^' iox 
which we have the following authorities : — ] 

Cesare Vecellio, the brother of Titian, in his curious work, Hahiti Antiche e 
Modenft di tutio il mwi do ^ completed in 1589, presents us with the general costume 
of the noblemen and gentlemen of Italy at the i^eriod we have mentioned, which has 
been made familiar to us by the well-known portraits of the contemporary monarchs, 
Francis I. and our own Henry VIII. He tells us they wore a soit of diadem sur- 
mounted by a tiirban-like cap of gold tissue, or embroidered silk, a plaited shirt low 
in the neck wnth a small band or ruff, a coat or cassock of the Herman fashion, short 
in the waist and reaching to the knee, having sleeves down to the elbow, and from 
thence showing the arm covered only by the shirt with wristbands or ruffles. The 
cassock was ornamented with stripes or borders of cloth, silk or velvet of different 
colours, or of gold lace or embroidery, accoiding to the u calth or taste of the wearer. 
Mhth this dress tliey sometimes wore doublets and stomachers, or placcardsy as they 
were called, of different colour.s, their shoes being of velvet, like those of the Ger- 
nlan.s, that is, very broad at the toes. Over these cassocks again were occasidiially 
worn cloaks or mantles of silk, velvet, or cloth of gold, with ample turn-over collars 
of fur or velvet, having large aouiholes through which the full puffed sleeves of the 
cassock ‘passed, •and sometimes Ipose hanging sleeves of their own, which could be 
worn either over the otlicrs or thrown behind at pleasure. • 

Ni<.ltt)las Hoghei^betg, in his curious 'series of prints exhibiting the triumphal pro- 
cession and otlier ceremonies attending the entry t)f Charles V. into Bologna, 1530, 
affords us some line specimens of the costume at this period, worn by the German 
and Italian iu)ldes in the train of the Emperor. .Smue are in the cassocks described 
by Vecellio, others in doublets with slashed hose, contined both above and below the 
knee by gartcis of silk or gold. The turban head-dress i.s worn by the principal 
herald ; but the nobles generally have caps or bonnets of cloth or velvet placed on 
the .side of the head, .sometimes over a caul of gold, and ornamented with feathers, 
in some instances profusely. 'Fhese aie mo.st probably the Milan caps or bonnets of 
which we hear so much in wardrobe accounts and other records of the time. They 
were .Siimetimes slashed and jniffed round the edges, and adorned with ‘p^^kits’ or 
‘agletts,’ i, e. tags or aiguilletlcs. The feathers in them, al>o, were occasionally 
ornamented with drops or .spangles of gold, jewelled up to the quills. 

Milan was likewise celebrated for its silk hose. In the invemtory of the wardrobe 
of Henry VHL, Harleian MS.S, Nos. 1419 and 1420, mention is made of a ‘pair 
‘ of hose of purple .silk and Venice gold, woven like unto a caul, lined with blue 
^silver .sarcenet, edged with a passemaiii of puq)lc silk and gold, wrought at Milan, 
‘and4)ne pair of hose of white .silk and gold knits.’ By * ho.se’ at this period is 
invariably meant breeches or upper stocks, the stockingSy or nether storks, beginning 
now to form a separate portion of the male attire. 

The ladies, we learn from Vecellio, wore the same sort of turbaned head-dress as 



APPENDIX 


396 

the men, resplendent' with various colours, and enqibroldered with gold and silk in 
te form of rose-leaves, and other devices. Their neck-chains and girdles were of 
gold, and of great value. To the latter were attached fans of feathers with richly 
ornamented gold handles. Instead of a veil, they wore a sort of collar or necker- 
chief (Bavaro) of lawn or cambric, pinched or plaited. The skirts of their gowns 
were usually of damask, either crimson or purple, with a border lace or trimming 
round the bottom, a quarter of a yard in depth. The sleeves were of velvet or 
other stuff, large and .sla.shcd, so as to show the lining or under garment, terminat- 
ing with a small band or ruflle like tlmt round the edge of the collar. I'he body 
of the dress was of gold stuff or embroidery. Some of the dresses were made with 
trains, which were either held up by the hand when walking, or attached to the 
girdle. The head-dress of gold brocade, given in one of the plates of Vecellio, is 
not unlike the beretta of the Doge of Venice ; and caps very similar in form and 
material are still worn in the neighbourhood of Linz in Upper Austria. The Milan 
bonnet was also worn by ladies as well as men at this period. Hall, the chronicler, 
speaks of some who wore ‘ Myllain bonnets of crymosyne sattin drawn through (f. e, 
* slashed and puffed) with cloth of gold.* 

Edward W. Godwin ( 7 '^e Architect, 24 April, 1875) : The scenes in this com- 
edy, though numbering seventeen, may with care be reduced to four arranged in six 
Acts. The arrangement I propose would be as follows : — 

Act I. The garden, including — i. The garden, orchard, arbour, and por- 
tion of the house or palace of Leonato ; 2. The street outside 
the garden ; 3. At the back, the exterior of the church. 

Act II. A hall in Leonato’ s house. 

Act III. The garden (in two scenes). 

{ Act IV. The inside of a church. 

Act IVa. The prison. 

Act V. The garden (eliminating the third scene). 

[For a ground-plan of the garden scene so as to include, besides the alleys and the 
arbours, the street for the Watch and the penthouse for Conrade and Borachio, I 
must refer the student to the diagram, given, with due explanations, in the No. of 
The Architect, just cited. — E d.] 

To understand the architecture of Messina, it may be as well to turn for a moment 
to the somewhat singular architectural history of Sicily. . . . Now Messina is on the 
northern coast, and its mediaeval architecture is, therefore, more Romanesque and 
less Greek in its spirit than what it would have been on the other two coasts. Mes- 
sina, we must not forget, is a cathedral-towm as well as a sea-port ; its mother church 
is built upon the basilican type, and, at the time of which I am writing, was not far 
from being a fairly accurate Romanesque edition of its southern neighbour. The 
buildings were con.structed of white stone, whether they dated from an early or late 
time, but they looked much whiter than they really were from the powerful contrast 
afforded by the dark woods which formed the background to the city on one side, 
and the deep colour of the Mediterranean, which relieved it, on the other. 

Leonato’ s house may, then, be Romanesque, or Gothic, or Renaissance. The 
last style is that which seems to me to be the most probable. 

The inside of the church need not trouble us ; there are so many careful and meas- 
ured drawings published of the churches in Sicily, that the true portrait is almost as 
easy to be attained on the stage as the caricature we have hitherto seen. 



COSTUME— OECHELHA USER 


397 


The prison scene may very well be the means of illustrating the early Romanesque 
architecture in its fortified aspect ; and about this, too, there is not a shadow of 
difficulty. . . . 

Hero wears gloves ‘ of excellent perfume,* which were, no doubt, made of chevril 
or soft kid, excellently stitched, and embroidered with gold or silver thread ; in fact, 
a rather important sort of gift. But rich gifts, — soft kid, pearls, gold, and the rest, 
— wax poor indeed when actors and actresses, absorbed in the finery of their situa- 
tion, sink to the level of little more than lay figures for the exhibition of fashions. 
In ordinary every-day life, the people who represent on the stage the fine dame, the 
noble duke, or the foreign potentate, are so little accustomed to art, or to anything 
like good style in living, that it is with difficulty they can appear unconscious of 
their stage surroundings. Every movement of their bodies says plainly ‘ this is a 
‘ very telling sort of dress, and no doubt it must arrest attention ; but I never wore 
‘ anything like it before.’ Even in modern comedies we see the weak actress domi- 
nated by the sheer material force of millinery, and in the revival of old plays, when 
fairly genuine costume and scenery approaching reality are produced, the mass of 
actors and actresses look simply imbecile. We give them the benefit of the doubt, 
and assume that they are inside the clothes, but they certainly do not wear them. 
The human form becomes at last a mere peg, with four moveable peglets fixed in it, 
and costume is thus too frequently brought into ridicule by the ignorant, and made 
the scapegoat for the incapable player. Scenery and costume we want to see prog- 
ress until both shall be so natural as to be unobtrusive ; but .still more do we desire 
to see .some signs of progress in those who stand between us and the past, as the 
living illustrators of the manners of that past, and the interpreters of its mighty 
dramatist. 

W. Oeciieliiauser {^Einfuhrungen in Shakespeare's Bithnen-Dramen^ 1885, 
2ter Band, s. 354) : The stage-setting of the play is very simple. Its first 
half is acted in the .same place. In Acts III, IV, and V there should be a 
change of scene, and in Act III it consists merely in the hanging up of a veiling 
curtain. 

Tlie garden. Act I, to Act III, i, must be very magnificent, plentifully provided 
with arbours, shrubbery, vases, statues, etc. The depth of the stage must be fenced 
off in tiie background by a richly wrought grating, through the door in which the 
Prince makes his first entrance. Through the grating we see the harbour, and the 
straits of Messina, with the mountains of Calabria in the distance. On one side is 
the governor’s palace with a jutting portico or veranda, through which the inmates 
of the palace enter or leave the garden. This scene is admirably adapted for the 
masquerade in Act II, much better than a ballroom. It i.s an Italian night, illumi- 
nated a giorno. The masks saunter about in the lantern-hung shrubbery ; from the 
adjacent veranda are heard the strains of music while the full moon is mirrored in 
the distant straits.* 

The scene with the Watch is given best in the courtyard of the palace ; on one 

* Holtei [ lit ! Ldrm um Nichts^ fur die deutsche Biihne bearbeitet, Halle a. S. 
1878] compresses into one the first two Acts, and so cuts out the scenery for a 
masquerade, but to me, as to the poet, such a festival seems so fitting a field for the 
merriment, which depends partly upon mistakes as to the identity of the masks, that 
1 should regret its omission. 



398 


APPENDIX 


side should be the entrance to their quarters, flanked by a wall, behind which the 
Watch could easily overhear the drunken Borachio. 

The two marriage scenes, IV, i, and V, iii, are best enacted in an apartment of 
state in Leonato’s palace, rather than in a chapel. The hall may be divided by 
pillars and hangings, and the back portion must be gorgeously arranged for the 
marriage, the altar being prominent. The curtains dividing it from the front of the 
stage must be closed until the arrival of the bridal train. Thus an additional hall 
may be omitted. 

The audience chamber, TV, i, and the room in the palace, V, i, reejuire only a 
shallow stage and simple furniture. The latter scene may be replaced by a corridor 
or gallery, which needs no furniture. 

The scenes in which the stage is full of people are easily arranged. There must 
be a constant passing and repassing during the masquerade, Act II, which greatly 
simplifies matters. Special attention must be given to the rehearsal of the marriage 
scene f IV, i. In my stage direction I arrange that after Claudio’s emphatic, a 
painful pause ensues, during which the guests exchange looks of surprise and dis- 
may ; Leonato then tries by a quibble to smooth matters. When the accusation and 
rejection are clearly understood, all present show by look and gesture amazement, 
dismay, commiseration, and continue to do so, until after Hero has fainted, when 
they leave in groups, whispering together. The same care must be bestowed upon 
the final scene, the repetition of that of the marriage, save that now looks and 
gestures of joyful instead of painful surprise, must arouse the sympathy of the 
audience, who must be made to take the liveliest interest in the union of the two 
scorners of matrimony, Benedick and Beatrice. The play must end in jest and mer- 
riment shared by the most insignificant assistant. 

Costumes, decorations, the fashion of the garden, etc., had best be after the older 
style of the Italian renaissance which, as far as the architecture is concerned, may be 
mingled with Moorish -Gothic elements, for which the arbours and kiosks in the 
garden are specially adapted. Don Pedro and his followers must appear in Spanish 
costume. According to Bandello’ s novel, the events here depicted took place towards 
the close of the thirteenth century, but the poet has so neglected all historic reference 
that the play may be easily referred to a later date. 


IDENTIFICATION OF CHARACTERS 

Joseph Hunter {New Illustrations^ etc,, 1845, h 227) contends that the char- 
acter of a young nobleman of Shakespeare’s day is partially reflected in the character 
of Benedick, and that this young nobleman is William Lord Herbert, who, on the 
death of his father in 1 600-1, became the third Earl of Pembroke. The verification 
of this contention is to be found, as Hunter believes, in the Letters and Memorials 
of the Family of Sidney ^ published in 1746. The Beatrice of history is a niece of 
the Lord Admiral, Charles Howard, Earl of Nottingham ; strenuous exertions were 
made to bring about a match between this young lady and William Herbert. By the 
fact that the scheme failed, Hunter is in no wise daunted. See III, iv, 52. 

Hunter’s view is adopted by Henry Brown {Sonnets of Shakespeare Solved^ etc., 



TRANSLATIONS OF * SIGH NO MORE, LADIES: ETC. 399 

p. 23) ; and also by Robert Cartwright (Shakspere and Jonson, p. 26), who, in 
addition, ‘suspects* that Don Pedro is Sir Walter Raleigh, Claudio, the Earl of 
Southampton, and ‘ Don John might be Lord Thomas Howard, Vicount Bindon, 
‘with whom Sir Walter had a violent quarrel about this period.* 

G. Sarrazin (Jahrbuck d. deutschen Shakespeare- Gesellschaft, 1899, vol. xxxv, 
p. 130) argues at length that Claudio is the Earl of Southampton ; Hero is Elizabeth 
Vernon ; Don Pedro is the Earl of Essex ; and Don John is Ambrose Willoughby. 


TRANSLATIONS OF 

‘ Si^h no more. Ladies, sigh no more: etc. — iii, 65. 

J. J. Eschenburg (Strassburg, 1778) : — 

Seiifzt, Madchen, seufzt doch nicht so sehr, 

Dass Manner treulos handeln, 

Halb auf dem Land’, halb auf dem Meer, 

Stets Sinn und Neigung wandeln. 

Ildrt auf zu flehn, und lasst sie gehn, 

I. asst cure Lust nichts storen ; 

Seyd keck und froh, lasst, Ach und O I 
In Heysa ! sich verkehren. 

Singt keine Lieder, singt nicht mehr, 

Um euer Leid zu klagen ; 

Nie waren Manner ehrlicher, 

Seit Baume Blatter tragen. 

Ilort auf, etc. 

Heinrich Voss (Leipzig, 1818) : — 

Seufzt nicht mehr, Magdlein, seufzt nicht mehTy 
Der Manner Treu halt nimmer ; 

Ein Fuss im Land*, ein Fuss im Meer ; 

Das Idebchen wechselt immer. 

Drum seufzt nicht so ; 

Vergniigt und froh 
Lasst ziehn die Heuchelei da 1 

Verkehret all eur Ach und Oh 
In Heida und Juchheida ! 

Singt nicht mehr Liedlein, singt nicht mehr 
Voll dumpfer Schmerzcrmattung ; 

Der Manner Wort war immer leer, 

Seit Friihlingslaub gab Schattung. 

Drum, etc. 



400 


ATPENDIX 


J. G. Regis (contributed by Juuus Elias to Studien zur LittercUurgeschichU^ 
Hamburg, 1893, p. 270) : — 

Weint, gute FrSulein, weint nicbt mehr, 

Die Manner sind nur Diebe. 

Ein Bein am Ufer, eins im Meer, 

Verschmah’n sie treue Liebe. 

Drum kein Gcstohn, 

Und lasst sie gehn ; 

Seyd froh und guter Dinge, 

Kehrt alle Liebesklag’ und Welin 
In lleissa he ! und SpiUnge. 

Singt nicht mehr Lieder, singt nicht mehr 
Von Gram so dumpf und traurig. 

Der Manner Arglist siindigt schwer, 

Seitdem der Sommer schaurig. 

Drum, etc. 

Ludwig Tieck (Berlin, 1830) : — 

Klagt, Madchen, klagt nicht Ach und Web, 

Kein Mann bewahrt die Treue. 

Am Ufer halb, halb schon zur See 
Reizt, lockt sie nur das Ncue. 

Weint keine Thran’ und lasst sie gehn, 

Seyd froh und guter Dinge, 

Dass statt der Klag’ und dem Gestohn 
Juchheisasa erklinge. 

Singt nicht Balladen triib und bleich. 

In Trauennelodieen ': 

Der Manner Trug war immer gleich 
Seitdem die Schwalben zichen. 

Weint keine Thran* u. s. w. 

Dr A. Schmidt ( Tieck’ s Tramlaiion revised, and edited for The German Shake' 
speare Society j 1869) : — 

Klagt, schone Kinder, klagt nicht mehr, 

So falsch .sind Manner immer, 

Ein Fuss an Land, ein Fuss im Meer, 

Und halten Treue nimmer. 

Drum keine Thran’, und lasst sie gehn, 

Seid froh und guter Dinge, 

Auf dass statt Seufzen und Gestohn 
Juchheisasa erklinge. 

Genug der Lieder, o genug 
Der Trauennelodieen ; 

Die Manner kannten nichts als Trug, 

Seitdem die Schwalben ziehen. 

Druizu 



TRANSLATIONS OF * SIGH NO MORE, LADIES: ETC. 40I 


Karl Simrock (Hildburghausen, 1868) : — 

Was seufzt ihr, Madchen? seufzt nicht mehr : 

Die Manner alle triigen ; 

Ein Fuss am Strand, ein Fuss im Meer, 
Nichts kann sie lang vergniigen. 

Drum lasst sie gehn, 

Und wenns geschehn 
Blickt Wohlgemuth und heiter, 

Und siiiget froh 

Statt Ach und Oh 

Juchhei, das ist gescheidter, 

Juchheisa und so weiter. 

Was singt ihr Lieder triib und bleich, 

Was dumpfe Liebesklagcn ? 

Der Manner Trug war immer gleich 
Seit Baume Blatter tragcn. 

Drum, etc. 

L. VON Kobell {^Deutsche Revue, June, 1892, p. 338) 
Madchen, schreit nicht Ach und Weh, 
Treulos ist der Mann ; 

II alb zu land und halb zur See, 

Zieht ihn neues an. 

Der Gram fahr bin, 

Lasst gehen ihn ; 

Dass statt der Klag*, Juheisa, 

Nur Freud’ erfull’ den Sinn, 

Ja Freud und Lust, Juheisa, 

Verstummen lasst den Trauerleich^ 

Der Euch die Lust vergcillt, 

Der Trug des Mannes bleibt sich gleich, 

So lang’ sich dreht die Welt. 

Der Gram, u. .s. w. 


M. Le Tourneur (Paris, 1781) : — 

Belles, cessez : ah I ne soupirez plus : 

Dans tons les terns, I’homme naquit volage ; 
Un pied sur mer, 1’ autre sur le rivage ; 
Jamais un coeur n^eut ses voeux assidus. 

Sans nul regret, sans pousser un soupir, 
Laissez partir ces Amans infiddles. 

Quittez, quittez ces plaintes dtemelles, 
Oubliez-les et chantez le plaisir. 

* * Leich,* an old word for son^. 

26 



402 


APPENDIX 


Consolez-vous de vos vaines douleurs, 

Jeunes Beautds, que 1 ’ Amour a trahies, 

Le premier jour qui vit roses fleuries, 

Vit les Amans volages et trompeurs, 

M. Guizot (Paris, 1821. Septi^me Edition, 1868) : — 

Ne soupirez plus, mesdames, ne soupirez plus, 

Les hommes furent toujours des trompeurs, 

Un pied dans la mer, T autre sur le rivage, 

Jamais constants a une seule chose. 

Ne soupirez done plus ; 

Laissez-les aller ; 

Soyez heureuses et belles ; 

Convertissez tous vos chants de tristesse 
En eh nonny ! eh nonny ! 

Ne chantez plus de complaintes, ne chantez plus 
Ces peines si ennuyeuses et si pesantes ; 

La perfidie des hommes fut toujours la mdme 
Depuis que T^te eut des feuilles pour la premiere fois; 
Ne soupirez, etc. 

FRANgois Victor Hugo (Paris, 1868) : — 

Assez de soupirs, belles, assez de soupirs 1 
I^es hommes furent trompeurs toujours ; 

TJn pied a la mer, un pied sur la rive, 

Jamais fid^es a la mfime chose ! 

Done ne soupirez plus, 

Et laissez-les aller. 

Soyez pimpantes et gaies, 

Finissez tous vos airs lugubres 
En tra la la ! 

Ne chantex plus, non, ne chantez plus 
D’ elegies si tristes, si p^nibles. 

La fraude des hommes fut toujours la m^me. 

Depuis la feuille du premier 6t6. 

Done. etc. 

Jaime Clark (Madrid, 1873) = — 

No gimas, nifia, el triste labio cierra : 

El hombre, siempre infiel, 

Un pi6 tuvo en la mar y el otro en tierra, 

Que no hay firmeza en 61 , 

No llores, pues, mas deja que se vaya, 

Y alegra el corazon, 

Trocando el llanto y cl dolor ; mal haya I 
En alegre cancion. 



• THE UNIVERSAL PASSION 


403 


En miseras endechas no llores 
Tu pena y sencillez : 

Primero faltaran en Mayo flores 
Que en el hombre doblez. 

No llores, etc. 

C, PasquALIGO (Venezia, 1872) 

Non sospirate piti, donne mie care, 

Chd gli uomini fur sempre ingannatori ; 
Planno un pi6 sulla riva ed un sul mare ; 
Nfe son costanti mai nei loro amori. 

Non sospirate piu ; venuta 6 I’ora 
Di lasciarli che vadano in malora. 
Statevi dunque, or via, 

In festa e in allegria : 

Ogni canto di duol mutato va 
In trallerirera, trallerira. 

No, non cantate piCi le ariette meste 
Che alPudirle ci fan piangere in core, 
Dacch6 di fronde Maggio si riveste 
L*uom, vido, fu sempre ingannatore. 

Non sospirate piii ; etc. 


‘THE UNIVERSAL PASSION’ 

In 1736, a Comedy was acted at the Theatre-Royal in Drury Lane ‘with great 
‘applause’ (so says the advertisement) called The Universal Passion. It was pub- 
lished anonymously, but Gknest (iii, 493) gives the name of the author in his 
remark that ‘this Comedy consists of Shakespeare’s Much Ado about Nothing and 
‘ Moli6re’s Princess of Elis, badly jumbled together by James Miller.’ 

In the Dedication, the author claims, as its principal merit, ‘the strict regard he has 
‘ had to decency and good manners,* — a claim which might be with difficulty allowed 
after reading the exclamation of Joculo when he kisses Delia (the character who corre- 
spond.s to Margaret) in the following passage : — ‘ [You have] lips as red as a rose, — 
‘ but lets try if they are as sweet too [A/wj her"] Hah, delicious slut ! no primrose 
‘comes up to ’em.’ Shakespeare’s names are all changed ; Benedick becomes Pro- 
theusy Claudio Bellarioy Don John Byron, Dogberry Porco, Hero Liicilia, Beatrice 
Liberia, etc. Don John, who is the uncle of Hero, attempts to have his brother. 
Hero’s father, assassinated. The royal victim is rescued by Claudio, to whom Hero, 
out of gratitude, gives her hand. All that is not Shakespeare’s and Moli^re’s is 
wearisome and utterly vapid. 

The curious reader is referred to Genest where he will find an abstract of every 
Act. The incurious reader will be quite satisfied, I am confident, with the following 
quotation, not given by Genest, from which as a fair specimen he may estimate the 
rest, and wish to read no more. It is the version of Beatrice’s speech, after she is 
‘ limed ’ by Hero and Ursula, ‘ What fire is in mine ears,’ etc. : — 



404 


APPENDIX 


* Liberia [i. e. Beatrice^ ’Slife ! what a Fire is in mine Ears ! Can this possibly 
be true ? Is Lord Protheus really so desperately in Love with me ? He certainly 
‘ is, 1 recollect a thousand Circumstances now that convince me of it. Psha I how 
‘blind was I not to see it before 1 And do I stand condemn’d so much for Pride and 
‘Ill-nature then? If so, Contempt farewel, I’ve tortur’d the poor Creature long 
‘enough in Conscience. — There’s one thing I am glad of ; they all allow him to have 
‘ a great deal of Merit. — ^Why truly, now 1 consider the thing, I’m o’ the same Mind; 
‘ I have been a little too cruel ; he must have been in a world of Anguish, poor 
‘ Wretch !' 


Dr Mary Augusta Scott’s Fourth Paper on Elizabethan Translations from the 
Italian has just appeared as these last pages are going through the press. It con- 
tains (p. 338) a suggestion which should find a place in the present volume. In 
speaking of The Courtyer of Cou 7 it Baldcssar Castillo^ 1561, Dr Scott says: — As 
the Courtyer was far and away the most popular Elizabethan translation from the 
Italian, it is more than likely that Shakespeare w'as familiar with it. Among other 
suggestions which might be made to strengthen this supposition, it may be pointed 
out that the Countess Emilia Pia [one of the high personages whose discussions form 
the subject of the book — E d.] is the tyi>e of witty, sprightly lady that Boccaccio first 
made known in Pampinea, and who is, in English, our fascinating Beatrice. 


PLAN OF THE WORK, Etc. 

In this Edition the attempt is made to give, in the shape of Textual Notes, on 
the same page with the Text, all the Various Readings of Much Ado about Nothings 
from the Second Folio, down to the latest critical Edition of the play ; then, as Com- 
mentary, follow the Notes whidi the Editor has thought worthy of insertion, not 
only for the purpose of elucidating the text, but at times as illustrations of the 
History of Shakespearian criticism. In the Appendix will be found discussions 
of subjects, which on the score of length could not be conveniently included in the 
Commentary. 


LIST OF EDITIONS COLLATED IN THE TEXTUAL NOTES 


Much Ado about Nothing (Staunton’s Photo-litho- ' 
graph from the Earl of Ellesmere’s copy, 1864) 
Much Ado about Nothing (Ashbee’s Facsimile, « 
186s). 

Much Ado about Nothing (Praetorius’s Facsimile,^ 
1886). 

The Second Folio 

The Third Folio 

The Fourth Folio 

N. Rowe (First Edition) 

N. Rowe (Second Edition) 

A. Pope (First Edition) 


[Q].. .. 

. . 1600 

[F,].. .. 

. . 1632 

[F,].. .. 

. . 1664 

[F,];. .. 

. . 1685 

[Rowe i] . . 

. . 1709 

[Rowe ii] . . 

• • 1714 

[Pope i] . . 

•• *723 



PLAN OF THE WORK 


405 


A. Pope (Second Edition) 

. [Pope ii] . • 

, , 

M 

00 

L. Theobald (First Edition) 

. [Theob. i] , . 


1733 

L. Theobald (Second Edition) 

. . [Theob. ii] . . 


1740 

Sir T. Hanmer 

. . [Han.] 


1744 

W. Warburton 

. . [Warb.] . . 


>747 

Dr Johnson 

. . [Johns.] 


176s 

E. Capell 

. . [Cap.] . . 

(?) 1765 

Johnson and Steevens 

. . [Var. -73] . . 

. . 

>793 

Johnson and Steevens 

. . [Var. ’78] . . 


1778 

Johnson and Steevens 

. . [Var. ’85] . . 


1785 

J. Rann 

. . [Ran.] 


1787 

E. Malone 

. . [Mai.] 


1790 

Geo. Steevens 

. . [Steev.] 


>793 

Reed’s Steevens 

. . [Var. ’03] . . 


1803 

Reed’s Steevens 

. . [Var. ’13] . . 


1813 

Boswell’s Malone 

. . [Var. ’21] . . 


1821 

C. Knight 

. , [Knt.] 

(?) 1840 

J. P. Collier (First Edition) 

. . [Coll, i] . . 


1842 

J. 0. Halliwell (Folio Edition) . . 

. . [Hal.] . . 


1856 

S. W. Singer (Second Edition) 

. . [Sing, ii] . . 


1856 

A. Dyce (First Edition) 

, , [Dyce i] 


00 

H. Staunton 

. a [Sta.] 


1857 

J. P. Collier (Second Edition) 

. . [Coll, ii] . . 


1858 

R. G. White (First Edition) 

Cambridge Edition (W. G. Clark and W. 

. . [Wh. i] . . 

A. 


1858 

Weight) 

. . [Cam.] 


1863 

T. Keightley 

. . [Ktly] . . 


1864 

A. Dyce (Second Edition) 

, , [Dyce ii] , . 


1866 

A. Dyce (Third Edition) 

. . [Dyce iii] . . 


187s 

J. P. Collier (Third Edition) 

. . [Coll, iii] . . 


1877 

H. N. Hudson 

. . [Huds.] . . 


1880 

W. J. Rolfe 

. . [Rife.] . . 


1880 

R. G. White (Second Edition) 

. . [Wh. ii] . . 


1883 

K. Deighton 

. . [Dtn.] . . 


1888 

Cambridge (Second Edition, W. A. Wright) 

. . [Cam.] 


1891 

W. Harness 



1830 

Globe Editon (Clark and Wright) 

[Glo.] . . 


1864 

N. Delius 

. . [Del.] . . 


1869 

Rev. John Hunter (Longman’s Series) . . 

. . 


1872 

W. Wagner 

. . 


1881 

F, A. Marshall {Henry Irving Edition) . . 

. . 


1899 

W. A. Wright (Clarendon Press Series) . . 

. . [Cla.] . . 


1894 


The last seven editions I have not collated beyond referring to them in disputed 
passages. The text of Shakespeare is become, within the last twenty-five years, so 
settled that to collate, word for word, editions which have appeared within these 



4o6 


APPENDIX 


years, would be a work of supererogation. The case is different where an editor 
in a second or a third edition revises his text and notes ; it is then interesting to mark 
the effect of maturer judgement. 

The Text is that of the First Folio of 1623. Every word, I mi^ht say almost 
every letter, has been collated with the original. 

In the Textual Notes the s)rmbol Ff indicates the agreement of the Second^ 
Thirds and Fourth Folios. 

I have not called attention to every little misprint in the Folio. The Textual 
Notes will show, if need be, that they are misprints by the agreement of all the 
Editors in their corrections. 

Nor is notice taken of the first Editor who adopted the modem spelling, or sub- 
stituted commas for parentheses, or changed ? to !. 

The sign + indicates the agreement of Rowe, Pope, Theobald, Hanmer, War- 
BURTON, and Johnson. 

When Warburton precedes Hanmer in the Textual NoteSy it indicates that 
a suggestion of Warburton has been followed by Hanmer. 

The words et cet. after any reading indicate that it is the reading of all other 
collated editions. 

The words et seq. indicate the agreement of all subsequent collated editions. 

The abbreviation [subs. ) indicates that the reading is substantially given, and that 
immaterial variations in spelling, punctuation, ^or stage-directions are disregarded. 

Wlien Var. precedes Steev. or MaL it includes the Variorums of 1773, 1778, and 
1785 ; when it follows Steev. or MaL it includes the Variorums of 1803, 1813, and 
1821. 

An Emendation or Correction given in the Commentary is not repeated in the 
Textual NoteSy unless it has been adopted by an Editor in his Text ; nor is conj\ 
added in the Textual Notes to the name of the proposer of the conjecture unless the 
conjecture happens to be that of an Editor, in which case its omission would lead to 
the inference that such was the reading of his text. 

Coll. (MS) refers to Collier’s copy of the Second Folio bearing in its margin 
manuscript annotations. 

In citations from plays, other than Much Ado about Nothingy the Acts, Scenes, and 
Lines of The Globe Edition are followed, unless otherwise noted. 


LIST OF BOOKS. 

To economise space in the foregoing pages, as a general rule merely the name of 
an author has been given, followed, in parenthesis, by the number of volume and 
page. 

In the following List, arranged alphabetically, enough of the full titles is set forth 
to serve the purposes of either identification or reference. 

Be it understood that this List contains only those books wherefrom quotations 
have been taken at first hand. It does not include those which have been consulted 
or used in verifying references ; were these included the List would be many times 
longer. 



LIST OF BOOKS 


407 

London, 1870 


E. A. Abbott ; Shakespearian Grammar 

George Allen : MS Annotated copy of Much Ado about 


Nothing Philadelphia, 1867 

Anonymous ; Shakespeare' s Garden of Girls . . . . . . London, 1885 

Ariosto : Orlando Fvrioso, in English Ileroical Verse. By 

Sir John Harington . . . . . , . . . . . . London, 1634 

W. R. Arrowsmith ; Shakespeare^ s Editors and Commentators London, 1865 

John Aubrey : Brief Lives, etc. 1669 (ed. A. Clark) . . Oxford, 1898 

Jacob Ayrer : Opus Theatricum, etc Niirmberg, 1618 

S. Bailey : Received Text of Shakespeare London, 1862 

Matteo Bandello, translated by John Payne (Villon 

Society) London, 1890 

C. Bathurst : Differences of Shakespeare' s Versification, etc. London, 1857 

Batman vppon Bartholome, De Proprietatibus Rerum . . . . London, 1582 

T. S. Baynes : Shakespeare Studies London, 1896 

S. Beisly : Shakspere' s Garden London, 1864 

F. DE Beli.E'Forest : Ilistoires Tragiques, etc. .. .. Pari.s, 1582 

R. Benedix : Die Shakespearomanie . . . . . . . . Stuttgart, 1873 

F. S. Boas : Shakspere and his Predecessors London, 1896 

F. Bodenstedt ; Shakespeare's Dramatische Werke . . . . Leipzig, 1867 

A. E. Brae : Collier, Coleridge, and Shakespeare . . . . London, i860 

H. Brown ; Sonnets of Shakespeare Solved London, 1870 

J. C. Bucknill ; The Medical Knowledge of Shakespeare . . London, i860 
J, Bulloch : Studies of the Text of Shakespeare . . . . London, 1878 

H. Bulthaupt: Dramaturgic der Classiker (2te Aufl.) . . Oldenburg, 1884 
Burton : The Anatomy of Melancholy (sixt edition) . . . . Oxford, 1651 

T. Campbell : Dramatic IVorks of Shakespeare . . . . London, 1838 

Lord Campbell: Shakespeare ' s Legal Acquirements (Reprint.) New York, 1859 

E. Capell : A'otes, etc I^ondon, 1779 

R. Cartwright : New Readings in Shakspere London, 1866 

Compte de Caylus : Histoire du vaillant Chevalier Tiran le 

Blanc , Londres, n. d. 

G. Chalmers : Supplemental Apology for the Believers in the 

Shakespeare Papers, etc. . . . . . . . . . . London, 1799 

W. Chappell : Popular Music of the Olden Time , . . . London, n. d. 

F. J. Child : English and Scottish Ballads Boston, 1882 

H. Clark : Introduction to Heraldry London, 1845 

J, C1.ARK : Mucho Ruido para Nada Madrid, 1873 

C. C. Clarke : Shakespeare Characters I^ondon, 1863 

A. Cohn : Shakespeare in Germany London, 1865 

Hartley Coleridge i Essays and Marginalia . . . . London, 1851 

S. T. Coleridge : Notes and Lectures London, 1849 

J. P. Collier : Memoirs of Actors (Shakespeare Society) . . London, 1846 

“ Notes and Emendations, etc. . . . . • • London, 1853 

J. C. Collins : Essays and Studies . . London, 1895 

H Corson : Introduction to Study of Shakespeare . . . . Boston, 1889 

T. Cor VAT: Crudities, etc. 1611 . . • • London, 1776 

G. L. Craik : English of Shakespeare London, 1857 

J. Croft : Annotations on Shakespeare York, 1 810 



4o8 


APPENDIX 


P. A. Daniel : Notes and Emendations London, 1870 

** Introduction to VY?LQionviS^ s 'F acsusxtXq , ^ .. London, 1886 

Sir W. D’avenant : The Works of London, 1673 

N. Delius : Skakspere^s Werkcy erkldrt . . Elberfeld, 1869 

F. Douce : Illustrations of Shakespeare y etc, . . . . . . London, 1807 

E. Dowden : ShaksperCy His Mind and Art London, 1875 

N. Drake : Shakespeare and his Times y etc, , , . . . . London, 1817 

J. Dunlop; History of Fiction (Third Edition) . . . . London, 1845 

A, Dyce : Remarks on Collier^ s and KnighPs Editions . . London, 1844 

“ Few NoteSy etc London, 1853 

“ Strictures on Collier^ s New Edition London, 1859 

T. F. T. Dyer : Folk-lore of Shakespeare (Reprint) . . . . New York, 1884 

J. Earle : Philology of the English Tongue Oxford, 1879 

J. Eastwood and W. A. Wright : The Bible Word-Book . , London, 1866 

T. Edwards : Canons of Criticism . . London, 1765 

H. N. Ellacombe : Plant Lore and Garden Craft of Shake- 
speare London, 1878 

A. J. Ellis : Early English Pronunciation (E. E. T. Soc.) . . London, 1869 

H, Elwin : Shakespeare Restored Norwich, 1853 

J. J, Eschenburg ; Viel Ldrmens urn Nichts Strassburg, 1778 

R. Farmer : On the Learning of Shakespeare London, 1767 

B. Field: Heyivood ^ s Edward IV, (Shakespeare Society) . . London, 1842 

“ Heywood^s Fayre Mayde of the Exchange (Shake- 
speare Society) . , London, 1846 

F. J. Fleay : Introduction to Shakespearian Study . . . . London, 1877 

“ Actor Listsy 1578-1642 (Privately Printed) . . I^ndon, 1881 

Life and Work of Shakespeare . . . . . . London, 1886 

** History of the Stage, 1 559-1642 London, 1890 

** Biographical Chronicle of the English Drama . , London, 1891 

G. Fletcher : Studies of Shakespeare London, 1847 

W. Franz : Shakespeare- Grammatik Halle a. S., 1898 

F. J. Furnivall: Introduction to The Leopold Shakspere . . London, 1877 

P. OenesT; The English Stage, 1660-1830 . . » . . . . Bath, 1832 

F. Gentleman r Dramatick Censor London, 1770 

J. Gerarde : The Herball, etc London, 1633 

G. G. Gervinus ; Shakespeare (3te Aufl.) Leipzig, 1862 

C. GildoN: Remarks, etc, (vol. vii, Rowe’s ed.) . . . . London, 1710 

H. Giles : Human Life in Shakespeare Boston, 1868 

K. Godeke : Grundriss zur Geschichte d, deutschen Literatur Dresden, 1884 

G. Gould : Corrigenda, etc, . . . . London, 1 884 

A. Gray : Lessons in Botany New York, 1868 

Z. Grey ; Critical, Historical, and Explanatory Notes . . London, 1 754 

Mrs Griffiths; Morality of Shakespeare's Dramas, etc, , , I>ondon, 1775 

H. Grimm : Funfzehn Essays (Neue Folge) Berlin, 1875 

S. Guazzo ; The Ciuile Conuersation, etc. (trans. by G. pettie, 

and Barth. Young) London, 1586 

M. Guizot; (Euvres CompTltes de Shakespeare Paris, 1868 

J. W. Hales : Notes and Essays on Shakespeare . . , . London, 1884 

H. Hallam : Literature of Europe London, 1839 



LIST OF BOOKS 


409 


W. Harness : Shakespeare s Dramatic Works . • 

J. E. Harting : Ornithology of Shakespeare 

W. Hazlitt : Characters of Shakespeare's Plays . , 

F, F. Heard : Shakespeare as a Lawyer » . 

B. Heath ; Revisal of Shakespeare s Text 

J. G. Herr : Notes on the Text of Shakespeare 

T. Heywood ; Rape of Lvcrece . , 

P. Holland ; Plinie s Natural History 

F. Horn : Shakespeare' s Schauspiele erldutert . . 

Francois- Victor Hugo ; CEuvres Completes de Shakespeare . . 

The Hundred Merry Tales (Reprint) 

Joseph Hunter : New Illustrations of the Ltfe^ Studies, and 
Writings of Shakespeare 

Mrs Inchbald : British Theatre 

C. M. Ingleby : The Still Lion 

“ Shakespeare Hermeneutics 

“ Shakespeare, The Alan and the Book 

F. Jacox : Shakespeare Diversions (Second Series) 

Mrs Jameson : Characterisics of Women, etc, 

Duke Heinrich Julius : Schauspiele (ed. Dr W. N. Hol- 
land) 

T. Keightley : The Shakespeare Expositor 
W. Kenrick : Review of Johnson's Shakespeare 

B. G. Kinnear : Cruces Shake spearianii: . , 

C. F. Koch : Historische Grammatik der Englischen Sprache . . 

F. Kreyssig : Vorlesungen ueber Shakespeare 

C. Lamb : Works 

G. Langbaine : Account of English Dramatick Poets . , 

Miss Grace Latham : The Petty Constable (Shakespeare 

Jahrbuch, vol. xxxii) . . 

Lazarillo de Tormes: La Vidade, y sus f or tunas y aduersidades, 

1554 (ed. H. B. Clarke)^ 

Mrs Lennox : Shakespear Illustrated 

W. W. Lloyd ; Critical Essays (Singer’s Second Edition) . . 

H. Lyte ; A Niewe Herball 

M. Le Tourneur ; Shakespeare traduit de P Anglais . . 

G. MacDonald : Orts, London, 1882 (Reprinted as The Im- 
agination, ) 

D. H. Madden ; Diary of Master William Silence 

E. Maetzner : Englische Grammatik (Trans. Dr C. J.Grece) . . 
G. P, Marsh ; Lectures on the English Language 

Lady Martin ; On Some of Shakespeare' s Female Characters . . 
J. M. Mason : Comments on the last Edition [Var. 1 77 ^] 

Shakespeare' s Plays 

J. Miller : The Universal Passion 

E. Mont^gut : CEuvres Computes de Shakespeare 

Fynes Moryson : An Itinerary, etc 

Sir John Maundeville: Voiage and Travayle (ed. J. Ash- 
ton) 


London, 1830 
London, 1871 
London, 1817 
Boston, 1883 
London, 1765 
Philadelphia, 1879 
London, 1638 
London, 1635 
Leipzig, 1823 
Paris, 1868 
London, 1866 

London, 1845 
London, 1822 
London, 1874 
London, 1875 
London, 1877 
London, 1877 
London, 1833 

Stuttgart, 1855 
London, 1867 
London, 1765 
London, 1883 
Weimar, 1863 
Berlin, 1862 
London, 1870 
Oxford, 1691 

Weimar, 1896 

Oxford, 1897 
London, 1753 
London, 1856 
London, 1578 
Paris, 1781 

Boston, 1883 
London, 1897 

New York, i860 
Edinburgh, 1891 

London, 1785 
London, 1737 
Paris, 1867 
London, 1617 

London, 1887 



APPENDIX 


4x0 


R. Nares : Glossary (ed. Halliwell and Wright) . . , . London, 1867 

E. W, Naylor : Shakespeart and Music London, 1896 

J. Nichols : Literary Illustrations^ etc, London, 1817 

W. Oechelhauser ; Einfukrungen in Shakespeare's Dr amen 

(2te Aufl.) ^ . . Minden, 1885 

J. G. Orger : Critical Notes on Shakespeards Comedies . . London, n. d. 

C. Pasqualigo : Gran Chiasso per Nulla Venezia, 1872 

F. Peck : New Memoirs of Milton London, 1740 

T. Percy: Reliques of Ancient English Poetry London, 1765 

Sir Philip Peering ; Hard Knots in Shakespeare (ed. ii) . . London, 1886 

J. O. Halliwell-Phillipps ; Outlines of the Life of Shake- 

speare London, 1885 

J. O. Halliwell-Phillipps : Memoranda Brighton, 1879 

R. C. A. Prior : Popular Names of British Plants^ etc, . , London, 1863 

J. P. Quincy : MS Corrections from a Copy of the Fourth Folio . , Boston, 1854 

M. Rapp: Viel Lermen um Nichts Stuttgart, 1843 

E. F. Rimbault : Who was Jack Wilson ? . . . , , , London, 1846 

J. Ritson : Cursory Criticism London, 1792 

Remarks^ Critical and Illustrative London, 1783 

W. L. Rushton : Shakespeare a Lawyer London, 1858 

**• Shakespeards Euphuism Ix>ndon, 1871 

** Shakespeare an Archer Liverpool, 1897 

J. Ruskin : Modem Painters New York, n. d. 

W. B, Rye : England as seen by Foreigners ^ etc, . . . . London, 1865 

A. W. ScHLEGEL: Lectures (trans. J. Black) London, 1815 

SCHLEGEL UND TiECK : Shakspead s dramatische Werke . . Berlin, 1833 

A. Schmidt : Viel Ldrmen um Nichts^ uebersetzl von L. Tieck. 

Bearbeitet und erldutert Berlin, 1869 

E. H. Seymour : Remarks^ Criticaly Cmjecturaly and Explan- 
atory y etc, lAjndon, 1805 

E. W. SiEVERS : William Shakespeare . . . . . . . • Gotha, 1866 

R. Simpson : The School of Shakespeare London, 1878 

K. SiMROCK : Viel Larmen um Nichts . . . . . . Hildburghausen, i868 

S. W. Singer : Shakespeare Vindicatedy etc, , , , , . . London, 1853 

A. Skottowe : Life of Shakespeare y etc London, 1824 

A. Smith : The Female Rebelliony x68i ? (Privately Printed) . . Glasgow, 1872 

D. J, Snider : System of Shakespeard s Dramas . , . . St. Louis, 1877 

H. P. Stokes: Chronological Order of Shakespeard s Plays , , London, 1878 

J. Strutt : Sports and Pastimes London, 1841 

A. C. Swinburne ; A Study of Shakespeare London, 1880 

Count SzicsEN ; Acht Essays aus d, Ungarischen uebersetzl , , Wien, 1879 

H. A. Taine : Histoire de la Littirature Anglaise (trans. H. 

Van Laun) Paris, 1866 

L. Theobald; Shakespeare Restoredy etc, . . . . , , London, 1726 

W. J. Thoms : Three Notelets on Shakespeare London, 1865 

L. Tieck : Deutsches Theater Berlin, 1817 

J. Tittmann : Schauspiele a, d, sechzehnten Jahrhundert . . Leipzig, 1 868 

E. Topsell; HistorU of Foure Footed Beasts London, 1608 

T. Tvilwhitt : Observations and Conjectures y etc, . , • . London, 1766 



LIST OF BOOKS 

H, Ulrici ; Shakespeare i Dramatic Art 

J, Upton : Critical Observations on Shakespeare , . • . 

H. Voss : Viel Ldrmen urn Nichts 

W. Wagner : Works of Shakespeare 

W. S. Walker : Shakespeare^ s Versification 

“ Critical Examination of the Text of Shake- 

speare . . . 

A. W. Ward : History of English Dramatic Literature 

T. Warton : History of English Poetry 

A. Way : Promptorium Parvulorum 

K. Weigh BERGER : Ur quelle von Much Ado about Nothing 

(Shakespeare Jahrbuch) 

J. Weiss : Wit^ Humor y and Shakespeare 

W. Wetz : Shakespeare vom Standpunkte der vergleichenden 

Literatur 

P. Whalley : Enquiry into the Learning of Shakespeare 

R. G. White : Shakespeare's Scholar 

Thomas White : Fennell’s Shakespearian Repository 
W. Whiter ; Specimen of a Commentary on Shakespeare 

A. Wilbrandt : Viel L&rmen tm Nichts 

F. WiLLUGHBY : Ornithology 

Sir R. Win wood: Memorials of Affairs of State in the Reigns 

of Elizabeth and James / 

J. R. Wise : Shakespeare: His Birthplace, etc 

C. Wordsworth ; Shakespearis Knowledge of the Bible, etc . . • 


41 1 

Leipzig, 1839 
London, 1746 
Leipzig, 1818 
Hamburg, 1881 
London, 1854 

London, 1859 
London, 1785 
London, 1775 
London, 1865 

Weimar, 1898 
Boston, 1876 

Worms, 1890 
London, 1748 
New York, 1854 
London, 1853 
London, 1794 
Leipzig, 1867 
London, 1678 

London, 1725 
London, i86x 
London, 1864 




INDEX 


* 


Absorption 37, 137, 

PAGB 

207, 266 

Abused 

. . 273 

Acci&eni^ incident . . . . • 

. . 76 

Adam 

• . 35 

Adverb ~ adjective , . . , , 

. . S8 

Advertisement 

• . 243 

Advise =» persuade 

. . 218 

Affection 

. . 99 

Affirmative question 

194, 220 

Agate vilely cut . 

• • 139 

Aim better at me 

. . 157 

Alexandrine 

199, 246 

Alliance 

. . 91 

Alms, an 

. . 124 

Ambles 

. . 255 

And who, and who ..... 

• . 55 

Angel, a pun . 

. . 107 

Anon, in Blachwood^s Maga. . 

. . 238 

Anothers, one an opinion of . 

. . 128 

Antic 

• • 139 

Antiquely 

. . 248 

Antonio, hU place in the Play . 

. . 45 

A =* one 

. . 190 

Aorist, used for perfect .... 

• • 54 

Apes, leading in hell .... 

. . 61 

Appear, apparently reflexive . 

. . 47 

Apprehend 

67, 184 

Approved 

98, 226 

Argument subject 

34. 105 

Armour, a good 

. . 106 

Arras 

. . 56 

As as regards which .... 

. . 214 

As » namely 

. . 100 

A^talking 

• . 158 

At a word . 

. . 71 

Ate in good apparel . . • • • 

. . 84 

Attired 

. . 206 

Attraction, a case of 

. . 21 

Attraction of subjunctive . . . 

• • *94 

Aunchentry 

. . 67 


PAGB 

Axiihcmiy ^warranty 194 

Ayrer 329 

Badge 9 

Baldrick .... * 33 

Ballad-maker’s pen ....... 34 

Balthasar, whence the name .... i 

Bandello 31 1 

Bam, a quibble 

Base though bitter 79 

Bate 125 

Bathurst, on the Play 352 

Baucis and Philemon 69 

Bear in hand 226 

Beatrice, meaning of 1 

“ pronunciation of , 2 

Behaviours . . . 105 

Behind the back of such 145 

Bell, sound as a . 148 

Belle-Forest 326 

Bel’s priests 170 

Benedick, meaning of l 

Benedix, on the Play 377 

Bent 129,211 

Berrord 61 

Beshrew 244 

Betrothal . . . 195 

Better death ..141 

Betwixt and between 14 

Bid you bid 262 

Bills 164 

Bills, commercial paper 174 

Bills, set up his 10 

Black « swarthy 1 39 

Blazon ^9 

Bless me from . • 254 

Block 15 

Blood “ warmth of constitution^ 


76, 196, 203 

Book, in connection with love . . 41 , 44 

413 



414 


INDEX 


fAGIt 

Books, not in your i6 

Borachio, meaning of 1, 1 68 

Bottle, like a cat 34 

Boy stole your meat 77 

Brae, on Loves Labours Won . . • 367 

Braggarts 247 

Break a comparison 73 

Break with 4i>44 

Break with 74 

Breed, intransitive $0 

Brother, sworn 15 

Brown, Identification of Characters . 398 

Bruise 245 

Bucklers, give thee the 268 

Bull doth bear the yoke 36 

Bullets, paper 130 

Bulthaupt, on the Play 378 

Burbolt II 

Burden of a song 181 

Buried face upward 154 

Burton’s reference to present Play . 3 

But, transitionally ....... 53 

But « only 62 

'By ^ about 264 

By, instrumental and causal . . . 20S 

Campbell, on the Play 350 

Candle- wasters 2411 

Can instead of cannot * . 194 * 

^ Rosa Canina 53 

Capers 66 

Capon 254 

Cap with suspicion 27 

Carduus Benedictus 185 

Career . . . . 130, 252 

carpet-knights . . 269 

Qos:nz%^^ deportment 53 

Carried . 214 

Cat in a bottle 34 

Censure 189 

Certainer 281 1 

Chain, a usurer’s 77 | 

Cham’s beard 87 

Chareas and Callirrhoe 344 

Charge 

Charge, a tilting term 252 

Chaig^e to the Watch ....... 161 

Charles the First’s copy ..... 6 


PAGB 


Charm for toothache 156 

Cheapen 107 

Choke a daw 131 

Cinque-pace 65 

Circumstances shortened ..... 158 

Civil as an orange 89 

Clapp, Time analysis 372 

Cisiyf = /latter 51 

Coil — turmoil 167,273 

Coleridge, Hartley, on the Play . . 351 

Come over, a quibble 266 

Commendable, accent 140 

Commit, ending an epistle .... 38 

Commodity 174 

Comparison, in a derogatory sense . 74 

Com^oJLXoo — colotir of the face . . 42 

Composition, Date of 294 

Conceit «= conception ....... 90 

Coo^^ooto — conference 187 

Confirmed 279 

Confusion of prefixes 70 

Conytcinto suspicion 200 

Constables 275 

Consumption, a disease 284 

Contemptible contemptuous ... 125 

Continuer 21 

Convert, intransitively 20 

Conveyance, impossible 82 

Corsseyzxx.e — dexterity 82 

Cosen 100 

Cosmetics for the face 153 

Costume 394 

Co\m%€i — reflection 127 

Count Comfect 226 

County 226 

Cousin 2^3 

Cross, a tilting term 252 

Cross, double meaning 57 

Cue 90 

Curst 59 

Curst cows have short horns .... 60 

Curtsie and cursie 63 

Cuts, in sleeves ......... 177 

Cutting capers in dancing .... 66 

Daff 245 

Daft 125 

Dance 287 



INDEX 


4IS 


PAG8 

Daniel, Time analysis 372 

Date of Composition 294 

Dativus Commodi 132 

Davis, on Irving and Miss Terry . 393 

Dear, a disyllable 194 

Dear happiness 20 

Death be uttered 275 

Decern 188 

Defiled, or belied, or reviled ... 281 

Deformed 169 

Deprave = vilify 248 

Difference, to bear it for a .... 14 

Dinner hour 130 

Disdain, Lady 20 

T>\s\oy2X=^ unfaithful in love ... 158 

Distribution of speeches 197 

Division of Acts 363 

Dogberry, meaning of 2 

Do me right 254 

Done to death 275 

Don Pedro, whence the name ... 1 

Do, omitted before not ...... 242 

Don Worm 272 

Dotage 125 

Double dealer 286 

Double negative 72,130! 

Down sleeves 178 

Dress, fashions in 150 

Drum and fife 105 

Dry hand 71 

Dumb John 68 

Dumps 117 

Duration of Action 371 

Eats his meat without grudging . . i86 

Ecstasy 124 

-ed final, omitted X47 

Edinburgh Review, on the Play . . 351 

Eftest 232 

Eight or nine syllabled line, not 
Shakespearian ........ 250 

Elbow, itching 167 

Ellipsis of there 99 > *49 

it 99,165 

Epitaph 274 

Epitaphs on hearses 213 

Etskine’s anecdote . .* 164 


Ethical dative 56, *21, 172 


PAGS 

Europa 280 

'^v^xs—easy 220 

Every day tomorrow I43 

examination 191 

Exceeds 1 77 

Excepted, after a noun ... 20, 143 

Exorcisms 85 

Face upwards, buried 154 

Fairy Queen 307 

Faith 15 

False gallop 187 

Familiar 282 

Fancy 150 

Fashion-monging 247 

Fashions in dress ........ 1 50, 

Fathers her self . 19 

Favourites 134 

Festival terms 270 

Fetch in — to cheat 3I 

Fine = conclusion 33 

Fire in mine ears 144 

Five wits 14 

Fleer 244 

Fleet 73 

Fletcher, on the Play 353 

Flight, an arrow II 

Flowting Jack 25 

Foining 246 

Fool 9 * 

For a Fool, what is he 5 S 

For == for the sake of 182 

Foul tainted 205 

Foundation 265 

Fourteen and five and thirty ... 170 

Fox, old tale of Mr 29 

Frame • 204, 212 

Francis Seacole 19* 

Friars, Shakesfeards reference to 

them 202 

Friend = lover 68 

F rom «= different from 140 

TmW^ completely *9 

Furnivall, on the Play 353 

Galliard 65 

Gallop, false *^7 

Gentleman, on Actors 385 



INDEX 


416 


PAGB 

George or Francis Seacole .... 162 

Gervinus, on the Play 373 

Giddy 285 

Gil don, on the Play 347 

Giles, on the Play 352 

Girdle, turn his *253 

God defend == God forbid 69 

God give thee joy 90 

God’s a good man 190 

Godwin, on Costume and Stage-set- 

396 

Good den 137 

Good time, in ... 64 

Good yeere . * 50 

Gosse, on Starter^ s Truyrsjbel ... 338 

Go to the world 92 

Grey, the colour . . . 277 

Grudging 186 

Guarded ^ trimmed 39 

Guerdon 274 

Gull 122 

H^ache 182 

Haggards 136 

Ha, ha, he 193 

Hair dye, and hair dyeing .... 108 

Hair to stuff tennis balls 152 

Hair, trimming in caps 176 

Hale, a vet b n6| 

Half pence 123 

H alii well, on Macready* s acting . . 397 

Yiirngmoxi — executioner , . . 148,370 

Happiness, outward 126 

Happy hour, in 22 1 

Hare-finder 26 

Hazlitt, on the Play 348 

Headborough 187 

Head, say it to thy ....... 245 

Hearken 259 

Hear tell 96 

Heavenly, misprint for Heavily . . 276 

Heavens, for the 62 

Heels, scorn with the 182 

Heinrich Julius, Duke 339 

Herbert, veiled allusion 183 

Hercules, the shaven ...... 170 

Heretic 31 

Hey, pronunciation 182 


PACB 

Hideousness 248 

lligh=:>great 24 

High-proof 251 

His, misprinted this 80 

Hobby horse 156 

Hold it up 122 

Honest as the skin between the 

brows i88 

Honest slanders I42 

Honeysuckle 133 

Horn mad 37 

Horn, tipt with 286 

breeches ox tipper stocks , . 395 

Wovi ~ hoivever 138 

Humour 98 

Hundred Merry Tales 72 

Hunter, Identification of Characters. 398 

I — eye 27 

Identification of Characters .... 398 

III well 71 

\xss^oT\sxs\=^ importunate 64 

Impose me to 261 

i Impossible conveyance 82 

Incensed — 260 

Mrs Inchbald, on the Play .... 348 

Infinite of thought ....... 121 

In happy hour ......... 221 

In =* into 269 

Innocent = silly 269 

Innogen 7 

Inserted lines 134 

Instance loi 

Intend — pretend lOO 

In that = because ........ 285 

mental activity . , 212,292 

Inwardness fw/'/warj/ 218 

Itching of the elbow 167 

It = Pate 78 

Jack, a term of reproach . . . 25, 247 

Jack Wilson 109 

Jade’s trick 2 1 

Mrs Jameson, on the Play .... 349 

Jests, large 127 

Jig, Scotch 66 

John the Bastard, his character . , 48 

exactly 60,96,255 



INDEX 


417 


PAGB 

Keep below stairs 267 

Kid-fox 1 10 

Kill Claudio . 222 

Kind 9 

Kindly - natural power 198 

Knight, on Costume 395 

Knight, virgin 275 

Kreyssig, on the Play 374 

Lacked and lost 215 

Lady Tongue 88 

Lang, on the Play ........ 361 

Langbaine 347 

Lanthorn . • 162 

Lap 273 

Lapwing 135 

^ broad y free 127,195 

Lazarillo de Tonnes 77 

Leading apes in hell 61 

Learn — 193 

Left (Collier’s emendation) .... 84 

Let me be 258 

Lewd — wicked 266 

free of tongue ..... 199 

Light o’ love, music 181 

Light, puns thereon 1 80 

Like of me 281 

Liking . . . love 41 

Limed 144 

Lineament, pronunciation .... 238 

Listen, with an accusative .... 134 

Iavq and Wei confounded 2II 

Liver, scat of the passions , » , . 21 "J 

Lock, a wears a 1 73 

Lodge in a warren 80 

Lord Burghley’s letter 160 

Love’s labours won 367 

Loving hand 145 

Lute 153 

Luxury 194 

Man indeed 246 

Marry her tomorrow I59 

Lady Martin, on the Play 354 

Mass, by the 167 » 233 

Matter 27, 94 

May = crtw . . i$S 

May of youth 245 

27 


PAGB 

Meaning of the Title 6 

Measure = moderation^ also a dance^ 

9, 64 

Meddle or make 165 

Meet with you 12 

Melancholy element 95 

Merry =- joyful 63 

Methinks 24 

Metric prose 52 

Misgovernment 199 

Misprising 138 

Mis\msion ~ mistake 21 1 

Misuse 81, 100 

MoWe\ ^ ground-plan 55 

Moe more 117 

Monging 247 

Montanto 10 

Moral 185, 242 

Moral Medicine 51 

Mortifying, used causatively .... 51 

Mountain of affection 97 

Moving delicate 216 

Much, used adverbially 9 

Naughty 263 

Nay and No 25 

familiar 74 

Need - needs 42 

Negative, double 72 

Neither, colloquial use 39 

News, //wrrtf 46 

Night-gow'n 177 

Night-raven 118 

Nine-syllabled lines, not Shake- 
spearian 250 

I Noble, a coin 107 

Nominative absolute 204 

Not, omitted 220 

Note, notes forsooth and nothing . 113 
Nuptiall 197 

Obey *'74 

Odd quirks *3^ 

Oechelhauser, on the Play .... 382 
“ on Stage-setting . . . 397 

Of^from 90, 265 

Old ends 39 

Omission of a line by Tieck . . . I49 



4i8 


INDEX 


PAGE 

Omission of or . • 28 

tiiviXittso 123 

** definite article .... 41 

that 41 

“ the preposition .... 270 

** the relative 54 

“ to before the infinitive 

24, 137, 209 

Otaat^enough ........ 43, 258 

One an opinion of anothers ...» 128 

Otk^of 205 

Orange, civil as an 89 

Orchard 47 

Orlando Furioso 296 

Orthography . 106 

Ostentation 214 

Out, intensive use of 158 

Outward happiness 126 

Packt . 263 

Palabras 189 

Paper bullets Z30 

Parlour, lengthening in scansion . . X32 

Partridge wing 74 

Past used for complete present . . 46 

Pennyworth, fit him with a . . . , III 

Penthouse 167 

Perfume . . . ^ 184 

Pigmies 87 

Plan of the Work ........ i|j04 

Pleached 47 » *33 

Please, in the subjunctive 23 

Pli^ral antecedent with singular verb. 209 

Policy of mind 213 j 

Fossessed^ informed .... 172,262 

Practise 98, 2x1 

Prays, curses X24 

Predestinate . 20 

Prefixes of characters, confusion of . 70 

^immediately, x8, 163, 218, 273 

Press to death . 140 

Prester John 86 

Fns^*» estimated . X43 

Ftf^ect^idea 138 

Prolonged 219 

Proof * 95 » 25 * 

Proper 55 , *26, 226, 230 

Ftc^osiog^f^ conversing 132 


FAGS 

Prove 57 

Purchase 140 

Purity, with i slurred 200 

Purpose or propose 134 

Q« 90 

Quaint 179 

Qualifie 282 

Quarto, additions in the ... 193, 231 

Queasie 98 

Question 175, 272 

Quirks 1 30 

Rack . 215 

Rapp, names of Dramatis Persona . 3 

Reasons^ 258 

Rebato 175 

Recheat 32 

Rechie 170 

Remorse 214 

Repetition of words 216 

disprove 129 

Reverence, saving your 179 

Rhyme, inadmissible in prose ... 2X2 

Right, as an adverb Z73 

Rite 96 

Run, possible reflexive use . . . . I32 
Russell, Lady Martin's Beatrice . 389 

Sad^^rnz'^ 56, X29 

Salved 42 

Same or some 280 

Sanctuary . 85 

Sarrazin, Identification of Characters, 399 
Saturday Review, on the Play . . 39X 

Saturn, bom under 50 

Scab 167 

Scumbling 247 

Scorn with my heels 182 

Scotch jig 66 

Miss Scott, developement of Bea- 
trice 404 

Seacole, George or Francis .... 162 

Season . 205 

Set up his bills . . • « . 4 . . . 10 

Seven, an indefinite number ... 169 

Shall and will 214 

Sh 9 ll>» simple futurity 99 



INDEX 


419 


PAGE 

Shaven Hercules 170 

Shifted out 117 

Shrewd 59 

Sievers, m the Play ....... 376 

Since 99 

Sigh away Sundays 28 

Simple == sincere 24 

Singular verb following several nom- 
inatives 85 

Singular verb with a plural antece- 
dent 209, 244 

Skottowe, on the Play 348 

Sleeves, side and down 178 

Slops ~ 152 

Smoking a musty room 56 

Smother up 201 

Sorrow, wagge 238 

Sort 7, 218, 278 

Sound as a bell 148 

Spedding, on Division of Acts * . . 363 

Speeches, distribution of 197 

Speeds 277 

Spell him backward 138 

Spirit, monosyllabic 203 

Squarrer 17 

Stairs, keep below . 267 

Stale ^ . . 100, 197 

Stalking-horse . . . • . 120 

Stand thee 167 

Star danced 94 

Starter’s Version 337 

Start-up 57 

State and aunchentry 67 

Statutes of the streets 165 

Still ^always 19 

Stops 153 

Strain 238 

Strange face 112 

Study of imagination 216 

Stuffing and stuft 13 

Style, a quibble 266 

Subjunctive in subordinate clause . 118 

Subscribe 271 

Success, a colourless word .... 217 

Sufferance 50 

Sufficiency 242 

Suite courtship 66 

Sun-bumed 9 ^ 


PAGB 

Sure 57 

Swinburne, on the Play 354 

Sworn brother 15 

Tabor and pipe 105 

HoXe^ declaration 232 

Tax Ill 

Tedious 189 

Temper = mixing of poisons .... 99 

Temporize = 38 

Tennis ball, hair to stuff 152 

Terminations 83 

That 123 

That, conjunctional affix 282 

That *= in which 260 

That. See in that 285 

Thee and you 112 

Th’one with th’ other 97 

Tickling, lengthened in scansion . . 141 

Tieck, his omission of a line . . . 149 

Time, to take 47 

Time, in good 64 

Tinsel 179 

Tipt with horn 286 

Tirante el Blanco 345 

Tolerable and not to be endured . . 163 

'To — motion against 8 1 

To, omitted before infinitive, 24, 1 37, 209 

Toothache, charm for 156 

Toothache caused by a worm . . . 149 

Tooth-picker 86 

Top, to take time by the 47 

Town clerk 230 

Trace 13S 

Transposition of words, 


54, 8i, 104, 112, 148, 207 
of adverbs ... 73, 210 

for emphasis . . 166, 217 


Treatise 4 * 

Trim 228 

Troth’s 176 

Trow 1^4 

Tuition of God, ending an epistle . 38 

Turn the girdle 253 

Turn Turk 184 

Tyrant, an unusual use 24 

Ulrici, on the Play , • 373 



INDEX 


(4550 

^ PACB 


tT!iio»Q6rmed 168 

Vnderborne 178 

Oftde^o *» subject 270 

Universal Passion, The ...... 403 

Up and down =* exactly 71 

Upi intensive 201 

Upon this in consequence of this 

127, 253* 

Ursula, pronunciation of 132 

V^^interest 88 

Use, obscurity of construction • . . 75 

Usurer’s chain 77 

Uttered, death be ........ . 275 

Vane ^ vain .......... 169 

Variation of copies of same edition . 70 

Variety of fashions 106 

Veibid nbuns 103 

Verges, meaning of *«.... . 2 

Ve» 100 

Vice«*rrrrw 268 

Victual, in the singular 13 

Villainy 168 

Vincentius Ladiszlaus 339 

Vhgin Knight 275 

Wagge 238 

Wake your patience . 249 

Walk»twVjWrtfw 127 

Wann, to keep himself 14 

Wash his face 153 

Wktchings 98 

duties 163 

Wedhiore, on Acthrs 390 

“^etZy on the Play ; • • 3^3 

" irregular use of 205 


PAGB 

Which 265 

Whisper her ear 133 

Who, neglected inflection ... 29, 259 

Who. See and who . 55 

Who will, slurred in pronuncia- 
tion . 9 

Wide 197 

Will and shall 214 

VliW ^ resolved ..17,18 

VliW ms intend . 99 

Will, the element of heresy .... 31 

Willow . 7 ^ 

Wilson, Jack 109 

Windy side of care 91 

Win me and wear me 246 

Wise gentleman ^255 

Wit, in modern sense . . . ; 14, 255 

Vl\t ms understanding 47> 257 

wisdom 126 

With-^y 63,141,251 

Without 166 

Wits, the five . 14 

Woodbine 133 

Woodcock 255 

Woollen, in the . 60 

Word, at a 71 

World, go to the . 92 

World to see 190 

Worm, the cause of toothache . , . 149 

Would *» should 122 

Wring, intransitive 242 

Wronged 8x 

Yea and yes 25 

You excepted 20 


Yours were, a case of attraction . Zl. 






