: lpn ee 
5 om 
- ry ea 
eat ewnrt or eer 
pays <“ - 
rareeer ’ . 
rm 


nog sthares Ope np ee} 


Se miptho eter io. 
ro 


woaee 
sae 
tated 


W get 
tye ta nate? 44 8, 
uses peeve ha iste ee 


Bars he de 6 


Se ea ag em 9 
ep an eeeiee a Fayae ee 
chi ee bo rele ee 


+ 
rei Mone ry Procter 


Fas nee 
nals Pacer 5 
Oh cdaahies aa nN oa ie 
: an ee Sle ine hme bet 

eR ras oe 4 aie een esti 

1 prety3 <> dae! 
eget pot 


Cate) cogivan ay 287) 


+) mee 


wae 
i pt) gue argre 


rm 


tm 


Rina re 


+ oD eee 
sree 
“ s ¥ 


bRrne ires ersten errr ars 


Feta ree 
rs som * i 9 iF th ee oye 
. ‘ deer ianerat 


© bopyagena tere. 4 
Hbye apt pera pe atye ne 
+ agortiere 2095 


pe cfg ohaboge Hr aA 4 
ste dcguapetlbeks pread Saye 
efter el 4 ales 


aay 

te O° RET Oberg aged Bree o 
, ha Py Mbt Me dc mpe, ors 

py Nek ote Pisatbes meet tee 


S o(h ohm ners 


an aig 


os anbet 


Sie Geie 


a . 
FY RAE Ne Beier ay rin ee nde 
ot eealn tees eetepe beens > 


‘ore oh fae abies age a 


pain 
i, 


Scar He PTH 
VPP pi be eh te 


Be ine es “es 


Se mae 


yan sicnnt 
sthee. 


reed rob aA fet Sogn 
Lester Ee 
oa ea Eaten 


are) 1S 088, 


fede pe 
eae ee ; 
ates 


Pah or Hen Salad. bt A 8 
ase acs Baroni ee stead 
ie ate 
aane 


aren “4 agri 
ron 
adelante patent 


eh 
capes 


ar 


Mitr oping’ Gi 


et 
™ a 
, eo 
. 
+ 
; 
a 
' 
P 


‘DEUTSCHE SHAKESPEARE-GESELLSCHAFT’ OF WEIMAR 


= 
* 
VOR. VV wri, 
SING LEAR 


PHILADELPHIA — 


J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY 
LONDON: 10 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN 


ee : ’ 1s 


| Copyright, 1880, by J. 


‘i 

= 

& a 

~ oa 

es 

—- 

: aa 

3 

oe r 

Nets ~*~ . 

eter ; 
bad ee 3 
~~ a 
ay a 
ee LNA 
we .¥E Nie & 4 
et +o. : ~ d 
, "4 ~! 
‘ aS 
Kia 
ae es = 


Westcorr & THomson, 


Lreprncott’s Press, 
Stereotypers and Electrotypers, Philada, 


Philada. 


VY SHAKSPERE SOCIETY? =a 
‘THIS VOLUME 
a ef 
RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED 


BY “ 


LUE EvITOR 


vee 


‘ 
ivy 225 


‘ 
ke 
a 
fies “ 
ol “ 
5 Pt be 
’ _ 
4 = 
» 
) 
~ g 
a 
re 
4 ¢ 
~ i 
oe 
; 
~ a 


mh, ty 
fe 
t ’ 
=~.) ir 
< » 
~ _ a 
— 
q 
yeh 
’ 


PREFACE 


: Since these volumes, containing separate plays, are independent 


Of each other, it seems necessary that a statement of the plan on 


an 


which they are edited should accompany each issue. This state- 
.- “ment, however, in the present instance shall be as concise as pos- 
e sible; it is to be presumed that those who are interested in this 
i Sate are, by this time, tolerably familiar with its scope. 
ae The attempt is here made to present, on the same page with the 


text, all the various readings of the different editions of Kzmg Lear, 


from the earliest Quarto to the latest critical edition of the play, 
hem together with all the notes and comments thereon which the Edi- 
it tor has thought worthy of preservation, not only for the purpose of 
saree elucidating the text, but at times as illustrations of the history of 
: Shakespearian criticism. 

= In the APPENDIX will be found essays on THE TExT, THE DATE 
_—— oF ComposiTiIon, THE SoURCE OF THE PLOT, DURATION OF THE 
A _ Action, Insanity, Actors, CostuME, TATE’s VERSION, selections 
"ab from EncusH and GERMAN Criticisms, a list of THe EpIrions 
COLLATED, with the abbreviations used to denote them, the Brs.i- 
OGRAPHY of the Play, and an INDEx. 


We have two sources for the text of Zear, the Quartos and the 
Folios, both from independent manuscripts. Although we may not 
have in the Folio the very text, ‘absolute in its numbers,’ as Shake- 
speare ‘conceived it,’ yet with all its defects it is much better than 
that of the Quarto, which is evidently one of those ‘stolne and sur- 
piepitions’ copies denounced by Heminge and Condell. Wherefore, 


in this edition the text of the First Foro has been virtually fol- 
Vv 


a aT % . 


Pace contain dines, ae even a whole scene, , which ae 


in the Folio, but are nevertheless Shakespeare’ °s, it has not ae e 


deemed fitting to omit these; they have been retained in the text 


. 


and their presence indicated by asterisks, a modification pi the — “ 


Italic of the old editors, which is due to Dr ScHMipt’s admirable — 

edition. “rte ta => 
Happily, the day is fast declining when it is thought necessary 

to modernise Shakespeare’s text. Why should it be modernised ?- a 

We do not so treat SPENSER. Is SHAKESPEARE’S text less sacred? es 

A step was made when ‘it’ was boldly retained instead of modern- 4 

ising the possessive case to zfs. In the present edition such words == — 

as ‘moe,’ ‘and’ (when it is equivalent to zf), ‘vilde,’ ‘strook,’ a 

and others, have been retained when found in the Folio. The ab- 

breviated ‘th’ has also been copied from the same edition. It is : 

a source of regret that it did not occur to the Editor, until too 

late, that the modern substitution of ‘than,’ for ken of the Folio, 

is equally uncalled for, a substitution which shall not occur in 

future volumes of this edition. 


My thanks are gladly given to Mr Norris for the BrsLioGRAPHY 
of English works; to my father, the Rev. Dr Furness, for his 
translations of GERMAN CriTIcIsMs; and to one other, without 
whose constant encouragement even this much of my long and 
at times most weary task would not have been accomplished; to 


her I indebted f 
am indebted for the InpEx. HF: 
e 


March, 1880. 


Wee LEAR 


s ’ 
a 3 ve. * s > 
a Se ee Pee 


EA 
ie 


| LEARL OF GuoucesTer. | 
- . Epear, son to Gloucester. 
EDMUND, bastard son to Gloucester. 


‘CURAN, a courtier. 

Old Man, tenant to Gloucester. = 
Doctor. 
OSWALD, steward to Goneril. ‘ 
A captain employed by Edmund, 15 
Gentleman attendant on Cordelia. - 
Herald. 

Servants to Cornwall. 


GONERIL, ~ 
REGAN, daughters to Lear. ean a 
CORDELIA, > 


wht 


Knights of Lear’s train, Captains, Messengers, Soldiers, and — 
Attendants. 


SCENE: Britain. 


* DRAMATIS PERSON] Substantially by Malone, First given by Rowe. 


7. GLOUCESTER.] Thus spelled by Staunton; all before him, GLOSTER, or 
GLO’STER. 


14, 18. OsWALD...Cornwall.] Omitted by Rowe +. 


18, Capell reads thus: Servants to Cornwall, three. Officers in the Troop of 
Albany, four. Messengers, two. 
2 


Kine LEAR 


= ee ACE LE” 


ae . ‘Scene l. King Lear's palace. 
an , c Enter Kent, GLOUCESTER, and EDMUND. 


; bar Rent. 4 thounht the king had more affected the Duke 
_ of Albany than Cornwall. 
; Glou. It did always seem so to us; but now, in the 


Act 1] Actus Primus. Ff. cefter Q,F,. Gloufter F,. 
__ SCENE I.] Sccena Prima. F,. Sczena Edmund.] Edmond. F,F,F,. Baftard, 
Prima. F,.- Scena Prima. EF,. Qq. 
‘King Beas s palace.} A Palace. Rowe. 2. Albany] Albeney Q,. . 
- The King’s Palace. Theob. A State- Cornwall) Cornwell Q..  Corne- 
___room in King Lear’s Palace. Cap. Ec. wall Q,. Cornew all ¥,. 
Gloucester] F,. Glofter QF. Glo- 3. so] Om. F,FLF. 


The Tragedy, &c.] ‘Of all Shakespeare’s plays,’ says COLERIDGE, ‘ Macbeth 
is the most rapid, Hamlet the slowest, in movement. Zear combines length with 
rapidity,—like the hurricane and the whirlpool, absorbing while it advances. It 
begins as a stormy day in summer, with brightness, but that brightness is lurid, 
and anticipates the tempest.’ 

1-6, WALKER (Cvit. i, 13) would read these as seven lines of verse, ending 
th? duke... always... division... 0 th’ dukes... pois'd [sic]... choice 
... moiety, ‘After mozety, he adds, ‘there is a short pause in the conversation, 
which is resumed in prose. Yet 4’ duke, in this place, seems very unlike Sh.; and 
equalities is perhaps more in place than “ qualities.””’ 

2. Albany] Wricut: Holinshed (Chron. i, fol. 39 4, ed. 1577) gives the fol- 
lowing account of the origin of this name: ‘The third and last part of the Island 
he allotted vnto Albanacte hys youngest sonne. . .. This later parcel at the first, 
toke the name of Albanactus, who called it Albania. But now a small portion 
onely of the Region (beyng vnder the regiment of a Duke) reteyneth the sayd 

3 


Z 


4 _. KING LEAR . [AcT I, SC. i. 


division of the kingdom, it appears not which of the dukes 4 
i 


4. kingdom] kingdomes Qq, Coll. 1. 


denomination, the reast beyng called Scotlande, of certayne Scottes that came ouer 
from Ireland to inhabite in those quarters. It is deuided from Loegres also by the 
Humber, so that Albania as Brute left it, conteyned all the north part of the Island 
that is to be found beyond the aforesayd streame, vnto the point of Cathenesse.’ 

4. division] JoHNson: There is something of obscurity or inaccuracy in this 
preparatory scene. The king has already divided his kingdom, and yet when he 
enters he examines his daughters, to discover in what proportion he should divide it. 
Perhaps Kent and Gloster only were privy to his design, which he still kept in his 
own hands, to be changed or performed as subsequent reasons should determine 
him. CoLERIDGE: It was not without forethought, nor is it without its due signifi- 
cance, that the division of Lear’s kingdom is in the first six lines of the play stated 
as a thing already determined in all its particulars, previously to the trial of profes- 
sions, as to the relative rewards of which the daughters were to be made to consider 
their several portions. ‘The strange, yet by no means unnatural, mixture of selfish- 
ness, sensibility, and habit of feeling derived from, and fostered by, the particular 
rank and usages of the individual ;—the intense desire of being intensely beloved,— 
selfish, and yet characteristic of the selfishness of a loving and kindly nature alone ;— 
the self-supportless leaning for all pleasure on another’s breast ;—the craving after 
sympathy with a prodigal disinterestedness, frustrated by its own ostentation, and the 
mode and nature of its claims;—the anxiety, the distrust, the jealousy, which more 
or less accompany all selfish affections, and are amongst the surest contradistinctions 
of mere fondness from true love, and which originate Lear’s eager wish to enjoy his 
daughters’ violent professions, whilst the inveterate habits of sovereignty convert 
the wish into claim and positive right, and an incompliance with it into crime and 
treason ;—these facts, these passions, these moral verities, on which the whole 
tragedy is founded, are all prepared for, and will to the retrospect be found implied, 
in these first four or five lines of the play. They let us know that the trial is but a 
trick, and that the grossness of the old king’s rage is in part the natural result of a 
silly trick suddenly and most unexpectedly baffled and disappointed. It may here 
be worthy of notice that Zear is the only serious performance of Shakespeare, the 
interest and situations of which are derived from the assumption of a gross improba- 
bility; whereas Beaumont and Fletcher's tragedies are, almost all of them, founded 
on some out-of-the-way accident or exception to the general experience of mankind. 
But observe the matchless judgement of our Shakespeare. First, improbable as the 
conduct of Lear is in the first scene, yet it was an old story rooted in the popular 
faith,—a thing taken for granted already, and consequently without any of the effects 
of improbability. Secondly, it is merely the canvas for the characters and passions,— 
a mere occasion for,—and not, in the manner of Beaumont and Fletcher, perpetually 
recurring as the cause and size gua mon of,—the incidents and emotions. Let the 
first scene of this play have been lost, and let it only be understood that a fond 
father had been duped by hypocritical professions of love and duty on the part of 
two daughters to disinherit the third, previously, and deservedly, more dear to him; 
-—and all the rest of the tragedy would retain its interest undiminished, and be per- 
fectly intelligible. The accidental is nowhere the groundwork of the passions, but 
that which is catholic, which in all ages has been, and ever will be, close and native 


| ties are so weighed that curiosity 
‘make choice of either’s ed ‘ 
Is not this your son, my lord? 
His breeding, sir, hath been at my charge; I have ie 
ushed to acknowledge him that now I am brazed = 


10 
=f _ I cannot conceive you. 
ee S Glou. Sir, this young fellow’s mother could; whereupon 
pe bh she grew round-wombed, and had indeed, sir, a son for her 
«4. qualities] Ff+, Knt, White, Sch. 10, fo’t] F,F,+, Ec. Knt, Dyce, Sta. 
 —- eguatities Q,Q, et cet. too’t FF. zo it Qq et cet. 
6. neither] nature Q;: 13. round-wombed | round womb’ d Ff. n 


to the heart of man,—parental anguish from filial ingratitude, the genuineness of 
oe worth, though coffined in bluntness, and the execrable vileness of a smooth iniquity. 
Perhaps I ought to have added the Merchant of Venice; but here too the same 
remarks apply. It was an old tale; and substitute any other danger than that of the 
pound of flesh (the circumstance in which the improbability lies), yet all the situa- 
tions and the emotions appertaining to them remain equally excellent and appropriate. 
Whereas take away from the A/ad Lover of Beaumont and Fletcher the fantastic 

s hypothesis of his engagement to cut out his own heart, and have it presented to his 
mistress, and all the main scenes must go with it. Hupson: The opening thus 
Gt: ¢ forecasts Lear’s madness by indicating that dotage has already got the better of his 
= _ reason and judgment, ANON (cited by HALIIWELL) thinks Johnson’s note is need- 
less, because ‘it is clear that Lear’s two councillors, Kent and Gloucester, are talking 
of the division he has proposed in the secrecy of the council-board, and afterwards 

“he opens his hidden (“ darker’) meaning to those whom it concerned (his sons and 

daughters), before ignorant of it.’ 

5. qualities] CAPELL (JVotes, &c., vol. i, part ii, p. 140): ‘ Qualities’ appears to 

be a printer’s corruption; both as suiting less with the context and as taking some- 

thing from the passage’s numerousness. - [ What this ‘ numerousness’ exactly means 

I do not know. Capell does not print the passage as verse.] Scumipr (Zur Text- 

hritik, p.12): Equalities cannot be right here; at best it can but be eguadity. Equal- 

ity cannot be predicated of a part by itself, but only of the relationship of parts to 
each other; it is therefore essentially a singular idea, We cannot say: ‘the equal- 

ities of the three parts are perfect,’ but only: ‘the equality,’ &c, 

‘ 5. curiosity] WARBURTON: ‘Curiosity’ for exactest scrutiny. STEEVENS: That 
is, scrupulousness or captiousness. [For the pronunciation, see I, ii, 4.] 

-6, moiety] STEEVENS: The strict sense of this is half, one of two equal parts, 
but Sh. commonly uses it for any part or division, Thus,1 Hen, 1V: II, i, 96:— 
‘Methinks my moiety north from Burton here In quantity equals not one of yours,’ 
and here the division was into three parts. WRIGHT: It may be in the present pas- 
sage the word is used in its literal sense, for it is not clear that Gloucester knew any- 
thing of Lear’s intention to include Cordelia in the distribution of the kingdom. 

7. your son] For CoLeriper’s fine remarks on Edmund, see Appendix, p. 419. 

g. brazed] Compare Ham. Til, iv, 37. 

pe ; 


4 
Ss 


6 KING LEAR [AcT 1, Sc. i. 
cradle ere she had a husband for her bed. Do you smell 
a fault? 15 
Kent. JU cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it 
being so proper. 
Glou. But I have ason, sir, by order of law, some year 
elder than this, who yet is no dearer in my account; though 
’ this knave came something saucily into the world before he 20 
was sent for, yet was his mother fair; there was good sport 
at his making, and the whoreson must be acknowledged.— 


Do you know this.noble gentleman, Edmund ? 


Edm. No, my lord. 
Glou. My lord of Kent. 
my honourable friend. 


Remember him hereafter as 25 


He hath been out nine years, and away he shall 30 


Edi. My services to your lordship. 
Kent. I must love you, and sue to know you better. 
Edm, Sir, I shall study deserving. 
Glou, 
again. [Sennet within.| The king is coming. 


18. @ son, sir] Ff+, Knt, Coll. Del. 
Sing. Dyce, Ktly, Sch. /ira fonneQ,Q.. 
Sir, @ som Jen, et cet. 

year] yeares Q,, Han. 
19. this] this zs Jen. 
this,...account;| Theob. ¢hts,... 
account, Qq,Cap.Ec. this ;...account, Ff, 
Rowe, Pope. ¢h7s,...account. Johns, Jen. 

20. something] fomewhat ¥ F +, Jen. 

Steev. Ec. Var. Knt, Coll. Del. Wh. 
into] Q,Q, vo Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Knt, Sch. iz Q,. 

21. for,...fair] Jen. for,... faire, Qq, 

Han. Warb, Johns, /for-...faire, Ff, 


Rowe, Pope, Theob, Warb. or;... 
fair; Cap. Ec. Wh. 

22, whoreson| horfon F,. 

23. noble gentleman | Nobleman pe 
E+. 

24. Edm.] Baft. Qq (and through- 
out). 

25,26. MWy...friend.| Two lines, the 
first ending Kent: in Ff +. 

29. deserving] your deserving Pope 
+. 
31. [Sennet within] Dyce ii, Huds. ii. 
Trumpets sound, within. Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Jen. Om. QqFf. 


17. proper] MALONE: Comely, handsome. 
18. some year] WaRBuRTON: Edmund afterwards [I, ii, 5] speaks of ‘some 


twelve or fourteen moonshines,’ 


Eccies: About a year. [For other instances of 


the use of some before singular substantives of time, see Scumipt, Zev. s. v.] 

20. something] For instances of something, used adverbially, like ‘somewhat,’ 
see ABBOTT, § 68, 

30. out] Eccies: This circumstance serves to account for Edmund’s being un- 
acquainted with so distinguished a man at Lear’s court as Kent; indeed, for their 
mutual ignorance of each other. Gloucester appears to introduce Edmund to Kent 
for the first time, and that, probably, immediately after his return, either from travel 
or serving in the army. [See also CoLeripGE’s note on Edmund in Appendix, 


a the lords of France and Burgundy, Glou- 32 
cester. 


a toe Ishall, my lord. [Exeunt Gloucester and Edmund. 


ey _ Lear. Meantime we shall express our darker purpose.— 


Give me the map there-—Know that we have divided 35 
In three our kingdom; and ’tis our fast intent 
Sennet.] Ff. Sound a Sennet, Q, PExeunt..c] Cap. Exit. Ff. Om. 
_ Q,. Sunday a Cornet, Q,. ae ; 

Enter one bearing a coronet, 34. shall] will Qq, Jen. 
King...Attendants.] Enter King...At- purpose| purpofes Qq, Jen. 
tendants. Ff. Enter one bearing a Cor- 35- Give...there.| The map there ; Qa, 
onet, then Lear, then the Dukes of Cap. Mal. Ec. Give...here. FF ,+. 
Albany and Cornwell, next Gonorill, Know that| Know Qq, Pope+, 

__ Regan, Cordelia, with followers. Qq. Jen. Cam. Wr. 
~ +32. ScENE 1. Pope +, Jen. we have| we've Dyce ii, Huds. ii. 
the lords| my Lords Qa, Jen. 36. Zn] Into F,, Rowe. 

Gloucester| Om. Pope, Han. JSast| first Qq, Warb. Om. Pope, 


33. my lord| Ff, Rowe, Sch. Leige Han. 
Q,. lege Q, et cet. 


p. 420.] WricHr: Edmund has been seeking his fortune abroad, there being no 
career for him at home in consequence of his illegitimate birth. 

32: Burgundy] WALKER (Vers. p. 240) says that the pronunciation Rurgogne 
(as it is spelled in the last scene, in F,, in Hen. V) would restore harmony to this 


line. But Dyce, ina note on 2 Hen. VJ; I, i, 7, says that Sh., like other early dram- 


atists, considered himself at liberty occasionally to disregard the laws of metre in 
the case of proper names; e¢. g. a blank-verse speech in Fick. 77. II, i, 284, con- 
tains the following formidable line: ‘Sir John Norberry, Sir Robert Waterton, and 


~ Francis Quoint.’ [It is spelled Borgoyen in Paston Letters, iii, 79, ed. Arber.] 


32. Gloucester] WALKER (Vers. 236): In the Folio this name is printed G/ou- 
cester, or Glocester, in the stage-directions and titles of speeches; G/Jos¢er, sometimes 
Glouster, in the text; in either case, with very few exceptions. I speak of all the 
plays in which the name occurs; the distinction is least observed, perhaps, in Lear. 

33. shall] For instances of the use of ‘shall’ in the sense of 7 am bound to 
and Zam sure to, and hence often used in the replies of inferiors to superiors, see 
ABBOTT, § 315. 

darker] WARBURTON: That is, more secret; not indirect, obligue. JOHNSON: 
That is, we have already made known in some measure our desire of parting the 
kingdom; we will now discover what has not been told before, the reasons by 
which we shall regulate the partition. This interpretation will justify or palliate 


_ the exordial dialogue. 


36. fast] Epwarps (Can. of Crit. p. 91, ed. 1765): That is, determined resolu- 
tion ; first of the Qq must here signify ‘ chief? STAUNTON: ‘ Fast intent,’ signify- 
ing fixed, settled intent, is, like ‘darker purpose’ and ‘ constant will,’ peculiarly in 
Shakespeare’s manner. 


8 KING LEAR [act 1, sc. i. 


To shake all cares and business from our age, : 37 

Conferring them on younger strengths, while we 

Unburthen’d crawl toward death—Our son of Cornwall,— 

And you, our no less loving son of Albany, 40 

We have this hour a constant will to publish 

Our daughters’ several dowers, that future strife 

May be prevented now. The princes, France and Bur- 
gundy, 

Great rivals in our youngest daughter’s love, 

Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn,  UAS 

And here are to be answer’d.—Tell me, my daughters, 

Since now we will divest us both of rule, 

Interest of territory, cares of state, 

Which of you shall we say doth love us most? 

That we our largest bounty may extend 50 

Where nature doth with merit challenge-—Goneril, 


37. from our age| of our ftate Qq. 44. youngest | yongeft F,. yonger F,. 
38. Conferring| Confirming Qq. younger BF +. 
strengths, | yeares, Qq. 46. Tell me, my] TelimyF,F,. Tell 
38-43. while we...now] Om. Qq. me, Pope+. 
42, daughters'| Cap. Daughiers F, 47, 48. Since...state,| Om. Qq. 
F,, Rowe+. Daughter's FF. 48. cares] and cares Han, 
43. zow] Om, Han. 51. Where...challenge.| Where merit 
May...now.| One line, Coll. ii. doth moft challenge it: Qq, Cap. Steev. . 


The princes| The two great Var. 
Princes Qq, Coll. ii. The Prince ¥F,. 51,52. Gonerii..jirst.] One line, Qq. 


40. Albany] For instances of polysyllabic names receiving but one accent at 
the end of lines, see ABBOTT, § 469; and see also ‘ Goneril,’ line 51, and ‘Cordelia’ 
III, i, 46, and elsewhere, 

41. constant will] JoHNson: Seems a confirmation of ¢ fas¢ intent. 

43. France and Burgundy] Moserty: King Lear lived, as the chronicle says, 
‘in the times of Joash, king of Judah.’ In III, ii, 95, Sh. himself jokes at this ex- 
travagant antiquity ; and here he appears to imagine Lear as king in the rough times 
following Charlemagne, when France and Burgundy had become separate nations. 

47. both] See Scuipt’s Zex. s. vy. for other instances of ¢ both’ being used with 
more than two nouns, 

51. nature] STEEVENS: That is, where the claim of merit is superadded to that 
of nature; or where a superior degree of natural filial affection is joined to the 
claim of other merits. Crossy (Zpitome of Literature, 15 May, 1879): ‘ With 
merit’ I take to be an adverbial phrase equivalent to ¢ deservedly ;? and the verb zo 
challenge, in addition to its sense of ¢o contend, or ute with, has an older and less 
common meaning—viz., fo make title to, or claim as due. Chaucer thus uses it,in The 
Frankeleyne’s Tale (488, ed. Morris]: ‘Nat that I chalenge eny thing of right Of yow, 
my soverayn lady, but youre grace;’ and Joye, Exposicion of Daniel, c. 3 (quoted by 


S “i a line by itself, Johns. you Far more... matter love you Cap. 

Dyce ii, Wh. Huds. ii. Beginning line 54. L love] I do love Qaq, Jen. Cap. 

4s | es et cet. Erased in Coll.(MS.) — Steev. Ec. Var. 

3, 54. Sir, Z] As closing line 53, word | Ff, Rowe, Knt, Del. i, Sch. 
Mal. Ec. words Qq et cet. 

Sir, L...matter,| I love you sir, wield | weild Q,F FF ,. yield Cap. 

Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Sir, Zdo love —_conj. (Var. Read, p. 20). 


Fochacdsen), * God oftentymes by ie ePaper and, bodely delyuerances chalengeth 
to himself the glorye of his owne name.’ In our own poet, too, cf. 3 Hen. VI: 
III, iii, 86: ‘all her perfections challenge sovereignty ;’ IV, vi, 6: ‘Subjects may 
challenge nothing of their sovereigns ;’ IV, viii, 48: ‘ These graces challenge grace;’ 
and Ozh. I, iii, 188: ‘So much I challenge that I may profess due to the Moor, 
Z my lord *—z. e. claim as my right. Giving then this meaning to ‘challenge,’ the 
_ passage may be properly paraphrased, ‘ where your natural relation to, and love for, 
{ me claim my bounty, dy deserving it; or, in other words, ‘that I may extend my 
= z largest bounty where your natural affection deservedly claims it as due.’ There is no 
4 ae contention or challenge between ‘nature’ and ‘ merit,’ in which the king’s bounty is 
4 - to be tke prize; he offers it solely to ‘nature,’ claiming or demanding it on its own 
a deserts. ULRICI (p. 443): These words cannot possibly have been meant seriously ; 
4 for apart from the circumstance that they contradict the facts adduced, Lear himself 
7 does not act in accordance with them, but does the very opposite. . . . Obviously, 
4 therefore, the whole demand was but a freak of the imagination, which Lear did not 
od mean to take into serious consideration, but which it occurred to him to make mere- 
ly to fill up the time till the return of Gloucester, who had been despatched to fetch 
the duke of Burgundy and the king of France. The concealed motive of this freak, 
— and its execution, was probably Lear’s wish,—by an open and public assurance of 
Rae his daughters’ love and piety,—to convince himself that his abdication could be 
of no danger to himself, and that doubts about its propriety were unfounded. 
BUCKNILL (p. 174): That the trial is a mere trick is unquestionable; but is not 

B the significance of this fact greater than Coleridge suspected? Does it not lead 
us to conclude that from the first the king’s mind is off its balance; that the parti- 
tion of his kingdom, involving inevitable feuds and wars, is the first act of his devel- 
oping insanity; and that the manner of its partition, the mock-trial of his daughters’ 
affections, and its tragical dénouement is the second, and but the second, act of his 


madness. 

51. Goneril] Moperty: This name seems to be derived from ‘ Gwenar,’ the 
British form of Vener (Venus). Regan is probably of the same origin as ‘ Rience,’ 
in the Moly Grail; ‘reian’ meaning in the Cornish ‘to give bounteously.’ 

53. Sir] CoLiirr (ores, &c., p. 449): This is clearly redundant, and Regan 
soon afterwards commences her speech without it. It is erased in the (MS.). 

- WaLxer (Crit. iii, 275) suggests, but thinks it sounds very harsh as one line: ‘Our 
eldest-born, speak first. Sir, I do love you more,’ &c. Moserty, who follows the 
QqFf in arrangement, says that ‘Sir’ is hypermetric, and represents the time taken 
on the stage for a deep reverence. ScumiptT (Zur Textkritik) thinks that exple- 


Aa eae as 2 a e’er 6 : 
A love that makes breath poor oP speech naanes My oF 
Beyond all manner of so much I love you. bx 
Cor. [Aside] What shall Cordelia apne Love , and b 
silent. 
Lear, Of all these bounds, even from this line se this, 


55. and] or Qq. 58. found] friend Qq. xy 
58. much as| much a Qq. 61. [Aside] Pope. Om. QqFf. 
eer] Rowe. eve FF. ereQqF, speak ?| Ff, Rowe, Knt, Coll, Del. 
ie “~ do, Qq. do? Pope et cet. 


tives like this are in a large measure interpolations of the actors. Even at this 
day, he says, Englishmen are fond of introducing what they are about to say with 
such little words, which, like tuning-forks, give the key in which they intend to 
speak. 

54. word] KnicuT and DELIUs (ed. 1) adopt word of Ff, and the latter justi- 
fies it by reference to III, ii, 81, ‘more in word than matter;’ the note, however, is 
omitted in his second edition. Dyce in both of his eds. ascribes word to Collier’s 
first ed. It is not so in my copy of that ed. The repetition of the same phrase in 
the same play ought to be a sufficient authority, I should think, for adhering to ‘ word 
of the Ff, although, to be sure, a taint of spuriousness attaches to the lines in III, 
ii, 80. Under any circumstances, ‘word’ is, to me, more truly Shakespearian than 
words. ED. 

55. space] WRIGHT: The limits within which motion is possible. Compare Anz, 
and Cleop. I, i. 34. ‘ Rather,’ says SCHMIDT (ad Joc.), ‘is “space,” space m gen- 
eral, the realm of external appearances, the world; “eyesight” is the capacity to 
comprehend it; “liberty”? the freedom to enjoy it. The lack of natural filial affec- 


tion could not be more clearly manifested than in such exaggerations, Regan’s 


“square of sense,” line 73, affords a commentary on these words of Goneml.? 

60, so much] JoHNsON: Beyond all assignable quantity ; I love you beyond limits, 
and cannot say it is so such, for how much soever I should name, it would yet be 
more. WRIGHT: Beyond all these comparisons by which Goneril sought to measure 
her love. ScHMrpT (ad /oc.) thinks the phrase would have been clear at once had 
the old editions only used quotation-marks: ‘beyond all manner of “so much” I 
love you.’ 

61. speak] Apart from authority, the choice of readings here seems to me to 
depend on whether we take ‘Love’ and ‘be silent’ as infinitives or imperatives, 
If they are infinitives; we should read ‘do’ with the Qq, but if imperatives, we 
should follow the Ff. I think they are imperatives, and I am supported by SCHMIDT 
(Zur Texthritik, p. 12). Moreover, KNIGHT pronounces do of the Qq feeble, be- 
cause it destroys the force of the answer: ‘Love, and de silent? Wuirer and Dyce, 


on the other hand, assert that the answer plainly shows that the Qq are right and the 
Ff wrong. 


; * 
is 


63. shadowy] shady Qq. 
63, 64. and with...rivers] Om. Qq. 

63. champains] Champions FFF, 
_ Rowe+. 

64. wide-skirted | white-skirted Stock- 
dale. 

65. thee lady} the Lady F,. 
‘ Albany’s| AltainesQ,. Albanies 
QF F,. AlbaenidsQ,. Albanie’s F,. 

‘ssue] Ufues Ff, Knt, Sch. 


va 


* 
i" 


4 * 67. wife of] Ff +, Knt, Coll. Dyce ii, 
Wh. Sch. wife fo Q,Q, et cet. 

4 oe Cornwall ?| Ff, Rowe, Knt, Dyce 
“€ i, Sch. Cornwell, [peake? Q,. Corn- 
_ ~~ wall, fpeake. Q,. Cornwall? Speak. 


> Pope et cet. 
a 68. Jam] Sir I am Qq, Jen. Wh. 
I’m Pope+. Sir, [’'m Dyce ii (with 


Str in a separate line). 


= 63. champains] WRIGHT: Plains. 


orests and with champains rich’d, 
ple us rivers and wide-skirted meads, 
ee lady. To thine and Albany’s issue 65 
etual.—What says our second daughter, 

dearest Regan, wife of Cornwall ? 
_ Iam made of that self metal as my sister, 
ak prize me at her worth. In my true heart 
pa I find she names my very deed of love ; 70 
Only she comes too short: that I ae 


68. that self metal] that felfe-mettle 
FF, that felf-metal FF ,. the feife 


Same mettall Q,. the felfe-fame mettall 


Jen. 
69. worth. In...heart| worth. In 


«heart, Ff. worth in...heart, Qq. 
worth, in...heart. Theob, +. worth, in 
...Aeart Tyrwhitt, 
70-72. I jind...joys| Two lines, the 
first ending short, Qq. 
71. comes too short] came hort Qq. 
short:] Theob. hort, QqFf, 
Rowe, Pope, Han. Coll. Del. Wh. Mob. 
Sch. short,—Steev, Ec. Var. Knt, Sing. 
Dyce, Sta. 
that] in that Ktly. 


as my sister] that my fifter is Qq, 


Compare Deut. xi. 30 (ed. 1611): ‘the 


Canaanites, which dwell in the champion ouer against Gilgal.’?’ In Ezekiel xxxvii. 
2, the marginal note to ‘valley’ is ‘or, champian.’? See Twelfth Might, I, v, 174, 
ay where it is spelt ‘ champian’ in the Ff: ‘ Daylight and champian discovers not more.’ 

; In Florio we find, ¢ Campagna, a field or a champaine.’ 
67. Dyce: F, omits ‘Speak ;’ but Lear has concluded his address to Goneril with 


‘ speak first ;’ and he afterwards finishes that to Cordelia with ‘speak,’ 


68. self] Compare ‘self mate and mate,’ IV, iii, 34; and for many other in- 
stances of the use of this word, meaning same, see ScHMIDT’s Lex. 

69. worth] THEOBALD: Mr. Bishop prescribed the pointing of this passage as 
I have regulated it in the text. .[See Text-notes.] Regan would say that in the 
truth of her heart and affection she equals the worth of her sister. Without this 
change in the pointing, she makes a boast of herself without any cause assigned, 


TYRWHITT paraphrases his punctuation : 


‘And so may you prize me at her worth, as 


in my true heart I find, zat she names,’ &c. MASON (p. 338): I believe we should 
read: ‘prize you at her worth;’ 2. ¢, set the same high value on you that she does. 

70. deed of love] Eccirs: Describes that kind of agency by which my own 
love operates,—the same effects of which it is productive. Drxius: The formal, 
legal definition of love. Wricut: That is, exactly describes my love. 


Myself an enemy to all other joys 
Which the most precious square of sense professes, 


73. square| spirit Han. Pu is professes] Ff, Rowe, Sch. ff 
square of sense] quintessence Bul- —_feffes Qq et cet. 
loch. 


71. too short] Moser ty [see Text-notes]: This Se simply skort. Compare 
Homer’s ¢ 7d pv Gao récov goimé Fv,—where Técor is in the same way superfluous. 

71. that] For zz that or for that, see ABBort, § 284; Ham. I, ii, 2; I, ii, 1535 
Macé. III, ii, 32. See also WuIT®E’s note on I, i, 167. 

73. square of sense] Warsurron thinks this refers to the’four nobler senses, 
sight, hearing, taste, and smell, but JOHNSON thinks it may mean only compass, com- 
prehension. EDWARDS (Canons of Crit. p. 170): The full complement of all the 
senses. Hoxr (An Attempte, &c., 1749; Preface, p. v): Sh. evidently intends to 
describe the utmost perfection of sense (alluding to the Pythagorean Tenet, which 
held a square to be the most perfect figure). CAPELL: ‘ Not only the extravagance 
of these sisters’ professions, but the words they are dress’d in paint their hearts to 
perfection. In Regan’s we have “ felicitate,’”’ an affected expression, and before it a 
line that’s all affectation; the governing phrase in it is borrow’d (as thinks the edi- 
tor) from some fantastical position of the rosycrucians or cabalists, who use it in the 
sense the “ Canons’? have put on it, for—‘*the complement of all the Senses.’”’’ 
Mr. SmirTH (ap. Grey’s Wotes, &c., 1754, ii, 102) thinks that ‘sense’ should be sezse’, 
because there were two squares referred to by Goneril; ‘ the first was eye-sight, space, 
liberty, and what could be valued rich and rare;’ ‘ the second square is grace, health, 
beauty, honour.’ ‘ But then Goneril says she loves the king no less than these, and 
consequently she loves these as much as she does the king. And this is the point 
in which Regan says she falls short of her. The second square is of the superla- 
tive kind of joys, and Regan professes herself an enemy to three of the joys, viz. 
health, beauty, and honour; which are, of all the other joys, the most precious square 
of sense (2. e, sense’s joys) possesses; and declares that his dear Highness’ love is 
the only joy of the sgzave which she values. In this it is plain that she outdoes her 
sister Goneril,’ [I think that is worth transcribing as a curiosity——Ep.] COLLIER 
(Notes, &c., p. 449): The (MS.) gives ‘ sphere of sense,’ which exactly conveys the 
meaning of Edward’s explanation. Regan loved her father beyond all other joys in 
the round, or sphere, of sense. SINGER reads sphere, and prefixes Spacious instead 
of ‘precious.’ Of both these emendations, Blackwooa’s Maga. (Oct, 1853) says that 
they are good as modernizations of Sh., but that the old text is quite intelligible; 
‘square’ means compass, area [by which definition the present editor cannot see 
that any progress is gained]. WHITE (Sh. Scholar, p. 423), while discarding sphere 
for ‘square,’ thinks Singer’s ssacéows is more plausible, and proposes, if change be 
made, ‘ spacious square,’ but finds ‘the original text comprehensible, with a smack 
of Sh. in it’ But by the time Wuire published his ed. in 186r, the original text 
had become ‘very obscure’ to him, although he was ‘by no means confident that it 
is corrupt,’ adding that ‘it seems to mean the entire domain of sensation.’ As he 
does not in his ed. repeat his emendation, ¢ Spacious square,’ it is to be presumed he 
withdrew it. K&rIGHTLEY estimated it more highly; he adopted it. BArLey (ii, 
88) has ‘not much doubt’ that Sh. wrote ¢ precious ¢veasure of sense,’ because ‘ pre- 
cious treasure’ occurs in Rom. and Ful., I, i, 239. Objections to this emendation 


[Aside] Then poor Cordelia! 
, Since I am sure my love’s | 
‘ous than my tongue. © 


lnd...dove] One line, Qq. 76. love's] Q.FF. loues Q.. 
alone} all one Q,. _ 77. ponderous] F£+, Jen, Ec. Kut, 
[Aside] Pope. Om. QqFf. Del. Cam. Sch. richer Qq et cet. plen- ees 
77. Then...tongue.| Twolines,the —_zeous Coll. (MS.). ae 
ing /ure, in Qq. my tongue] their tongue Warb. = 


a ae Ae 75. Cordelia] Cord. fa e8 : 
34 ; : on the score of metre there can be none, says Bailey, because ¢reasure is «on occa- 
te sion condensable into a monosyllable.’ Hupson: That is, fulness or wealth of sen- 
7 ‘sibility or capacity of joy ; so that the meaning seems to be: Which the finest sus- 
_-—sceptibility, or the highest capacity of happiness, can grasp or take in. WRIGHT: 
Tkat is, which the most delicately sensitive part of my nature is capable of enjoy- 

_ ing. Moseriy: ‘The choicest estimate of sense,’ as in Zyo. and Cres. V, ii, 132, 
_*to square the general sex By Cressid’s rule.’ This definition by Moberly, ScuMIDT 
(Zur Texthritik, p. 12) thinks is the only one that approaches the truth. He himself 


t ~ 


fl _ Says, the phrase in question means the ‘ choicest symmetry of reason, the most nor- 
mal and intelligent mode of thinking.’ Regan’s love is so great that she will know 
; oN. _ nothing of all joys, which even a pattern of reason professes to be joys, such as, 
Pal *eye-sight, space, liberty, life, grace, health, beauty, and honour,’ which had just 

_ been extolled by her pattern sister. 

= 28 73. professes] Scumipt (Zur Texthkritik, p. 13): To object to a word because 
& : _ it occurs twice within two lines, appears to be, in the interpretation of Sh., a custom ‘ 
7) as ill-grounded as it is widespread, but from which, at all events, the poet himself 
a was free. [Whatever meaning or no-meaning we may attach to ‘square of sense,’ it 
a ; 


seems clear to me that Regan refers to the joys which that ‘square’ ‘professes’ to . 

bestow; I therefore follow the Ff.—Eb.] 

74, felicitate] WricuT: That is, made happy. For instances of participles 
formed on the model of the Latin participles in -a¢ws, compare ‘ consecrate’ (77%. 
A Ana. I, i, 14), ‘articulate’ (1 Hen. JV: V, i, 72), ‘suffocate’ (Zyro. and Cres. I, iii, 
: 125), ‘create’ (Mid. NV. D.V, i, 412). AxBotT (§ 342) calls attention to the fact 

that this class of words, being derived directly from the Latin, stands on a different 

footing to those verbs ending in -¢e, -t, and -ed, which hecause of their already re- 
; sembling participles in their terminations, do not add -ed in the participle. See 
9 WALKER (Crit. ii, 324) ; Aact. III, vi, 38; Ham. I, ii, 20. 

77. ponderous] WuiITE: ‘ More ponderous’ of the Ff may possibly be a mis- 
print for ‘more precious.’ WRIGHT thinks it ‘has the appearance of being a player's 
correction to avoid a piece of imaginary bad grammar ;’ but I do not think we should 
desert a durior Jectio but for a reason ‘more ponderous’ than this. SCHMIDT (ad 
Joc.) says, with shrewdness, ‘ Light was the usual term applied to a wanton, friv- 
olous, and fickle love; “light 0’ love” was a proverbial expression. But the oppo- 
site of this, Aeavy, could not be here employed, because that means uniformly, in a 
moral sense, melancholy, sad; nor is weiyhty any better; therefore Sh. chose “pon 


derous.”’ 


2 


PMeiead To hee. nd | 
_ Remain this ample third of o 
on No less in sacs altel, and plea 


Although our last a a os nha ie 


81. bene pearl Qq, Steev. Ktly, _— Coll. iii, “the lap net Oa py 
Var. Det cet. P 
Now] but now Qq. 82. least,...love] leaf? ;...love, Ff. Leaf 4 
: 82. our last and] Ff, Rowe, Knt, in our deere love, Qq, Cap. least; : in 
Coll. i, Del.i, Sing, Wh. Sch. our dast, whose young Jove Han. 
not Pope +, Jen. Dyce ii, Sta. Del. ii, to] in Quincy (MS.). 


Li oh aT pe A A ata once ESO Oe 
80. validity] For instances of ‘validity,’ meaning va/we, see SCHMIDT'S Lex. 

s. v3 see also Ham. III, ii. 179. 42 . 
82. last and least] In his.Life of Shakespeare (Var. ’21, vol. ii, pp. 276-278), Re 

MALONE gives many instances to prove that /ast not least was a formula common in 

Shakespeare's time, and is always applied to a person highly valued by the speaker. — y 

STEEVENS refers to King Leir’s reply to Mumford in the old ante-Shakespearian 

play. [See Appendix, p. 401.] MALONE adds from The Spanish Tragedy, written ‘ 

before 1593: ‘ The third and last, not least, in our account.’ DyYcE pronounces the 

reading of Ff, ‘last avd least,’ a flagrant error; and STAUNTON says it can scarcely 

be doubted that it is a misprint, and to the examples already given and referred to, are 

adds the following: ‘The last, not least, of these brave brethren’—Peele’s Poly- 

hymnia, ‘Though I speak last, my lord, I am not least’—Middleton’s Mayor of 

Queenborough I, iii. And ‘my last is, and not least,’—Beau. & Fl., Monsieur 

Thomas III, i. Wuire [see Text-notes]: Plainly this passage was rewritten before 

the Folio was printed. The last part of line 82, as it appears in the Qq, shows that 

the figurative allusion to the king of France and the duke of Burgundy could have 

formed no part of the passage when that text was printed. And in the rewriting 

there was a happy change made from the commonplace of ‘last not least,’ to an 

allusion to the personal traits and family position of Cordelia, The impression pro- 

duced by all the passages in which she appears or is referred to is, that she was her 

father’s little pet, while her sisters were big, bold, brazen beauties. Afterwards, in 

this very scene, Lear says of her to Burgundy: ‘If aught within that /##/e seeming” 

substance, or all of it, wth our displeasure pieced, &c. When she is dead, too, her 

father, although an infirm old man, ‘ fourscore and upward,’ carries her body in his 

arms. Cordelia was evidently the least, as well as the youngest and best beloved, 

of the old king’s daughters; and therefore he says to her, ‘ Now our joy, what can 

you say to justify my intention of giving you the richest third of the kingdom, 

although you are the youngest born and the least royal in your presence?’ The 

poet’s every touch upon the figure of Cordelia paints her as, with all her firmness of 

character, a creature to nestle in a man’s bosom,—her father’s or her husband’s,— 

and to be cherished almost like a little child; and this happy afterthought brings the 

picture into perfect keeping, and at the very commencement of the drama impresses 

upon the mind a characteristic trait of a personage who plays an important part in 

it, although she is little seen. Hupson: I find it not easy to stand out against 

White’s argument in favour of the Ff; still, the phrase ‘though last, zo¢ least,’ ap- 

pears to have been so much a favorite with the poet, and withal so good in itself, 


7 ’ “— E 
_ KING LEAR 


France and mille of Burgundy _ 83 


84, 85. What...opulent] One line, Qq, 


a Cap. 
akties Jen. intereft Ff, Sch. 84. can you say] say you Pope+. 

‘rest Pope. Inf’ ress’d Theob.+. draw] win Qq, Cap. Jen. - 
I feel constrained to read with the majority of the editors, Scumipr (Zur 
Texthritik des King Lear, p. 13), in following out his theory that in the Qq we 
have merely a corrupt text taken down from the stage representation, repudiates the 
‘last, not least,’ here, and shrewdly suggests that since the same phrase occurs in Fed. 
Cas. III, i, 189, the actor who took the part of Antony in that play also acted Lear, 
and the phrase once learned by heart was repeated by him in Zear, where it does not 
belong. ‘ But let one put himself in the place of Lear, and there will be felt in this 
“last and least”? a tender touch of Nature. Our unser Letztes und Kleinstes gives the 
meaning certainly, but not quite wholly; “least”? means the youngest child, because 
there had been less of formal ado made over her, because in many a féte and state 
occasion, in which the elder sisters took part, she had not had any share, and yet 
was the joy and “ object” of her father, as the youngest child is always the favorite 


» 

: of the father, the eldest of the mother.’ [If Hudson finds it not easy to stand out 
a against White’s argument, I find it impossible. White is at his happiest in detecting 

! = subtle, delicate touches, and when, as in this instance, he is in accord with the Folio, 
3 I yield at once, and will merely add that if Malone and Staunton can prove that . 
4 ‘last, not least,’ was a hackneyed phrase in Shakespeare’s time, it is all the more 


reason why it should not be used here. Its very opposition to the common use 
and wont makes it emphatic.—ED.] 

: 83. milk] Eccies: The pastures of Burgundy, the effect for the cause. MOBER- 
a Ly: In ascribing vines to France, and not to Burgundy, Sh. may have thought of 
J the pastoral countries of Southern Belgium as forming part of Burgundy (as they 

did till the death of Charles the Bold, 1477), otherwise we should not understand 

the distinction; as in the French Burgundy wine-growing was of very old standing; 

the arms of Dijon and Beaune have a vine upon them, and a great insurrection of 
.--_ yine-dressers took place there in 1630.—Michelet, “ist. de France, ii, 303. 

84. interess’d] STEEVENS: So in the Preface of Drayton’s Polyo/bion » ‘—there 
is scarce any of the nobilitie or gentry of this land, but he is in some way or other 
by his blood interessed therein.? Again in Jonson’s Sejanus III, i: ‘The dear re- 
public, our sacred laws, and just authority are interess’d therein.’ WRIGHT: For 
the form of the word, see Cotgrave (Fr. Dict.) : ‘ Interessé.. . Interessed, or touched 
in; dishonoured, hurt, or hindered by,’ &c. See also Massinger, The Duke of Milan, 
I, i: ‘The wars so long continued between The emperor Charles, and Francis the 

' French king, Have interess’d in either’s cause the most Of the Italian princes.’ And 
Florio (Ital. Dict.) ; ‘Interessare, to interesse, to touch or concerne a mans maine 
state or fee-simple, to concerne a mans reputation ;’ and ‘Interessato, interessed, 
touched in state, in honour or reputation.’ Again in Minsheu (Span. Dict.): ‘In- 
teressado, m. interessed, hauing right in.’ For other instances of verbs of which 
the participial form has become a new verb, compare graff,’ ‘ hoise,’ which appear 
in modern speech as ‘ graft,’ <hoist.’ SCHMIDT maintains that ‘interest’ of the Ff ' 
is the contracted past participle interested, formed on the analogy of ‘ felicitate,’ line 
73, &c., and that there is no such verb as z/eresse or interest in Sh, 


San A third ier Bie 


Cor. Nothing, my Ic 
Lear. Nothing? — 
Cor. Nothing. 
Lear. Nothing will come nothing. | 
Cor. Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave 


My heart into my mouth. I love your majesty = 
According to my bond; no more nor less. ko i= 
‘ 4 cee Sa 
85. opulent] opilent F.. 89. Nothing will] How, nothing cam 
your| your two Cap. Qq. Nothing can Cap. Jen. 
Speak| Om. Qq, Cap. 90-92. Unhappy...less.] Prose, fae 
87, 88. Lear. Mothing ? Cor. Wo- 90. heave] have Q.F.F,. : 
thing.| Om. Qq. Lear. sje Cor, 92. xo more] Ff£+, Knt, Sch, Sch. _ nor 
Nothing. Cap. more Qq et cet. : js 
86. Nothing] CotrripcE: There is something of toges at the ruthless hypoc- aoe ft oe 


risy of her sisters, and some little faulty admixture of pride and sullenness in Cor- = 
delia’s ‘ Nothing;’? and her tone is well contrived, indeed, to lessen the glaring Z . 
absurdity of Lear’s conduct, but answers the yet more important purpose of forcing a 
away the attention from the nursery-tale the moment it has served its end, that of _ 
supplying the canvas for the picture. This is also,materially furthered by Kent’s +r 
opposition, which displays Lear’s moral incapability of resigning the sovereign power =e 
in the very act of disposing of it. Kent is, perhaps, the nearest to perfect goodness — 
in all Shakespeare’s characters, and yet the most individualized. ‘There is an extra- — 
ordinary charm in his bluntness, which is that only of a nobleman, arising from a 
contempt of overstrained courtesy, and combined with easy placability where good- 
ness of heart is apparent. His passionate affection for, and fidelity to, Lear act on 
our feelings in Lear’s own favour; virtue seems to be in company with him. 

gI. majesty] Adissyllable. See Aacd. III, iv, 2; WALKER, Vers. 174; ABBOTT, 
§ 468. 

92. W. W. Lioyp: The crudity of manners expressed in Lear’s solicitation of 
flattery has its natural counterpart in the almost sullen and repulsive tone of the 
virtue which preserves Cordelia from the degradation he would tempt her to. The 
progress of the story required a reply that should provoke the indignation of her 
father, and yet not cause her to forfeit our esteem. . . . , Moreover, Sh., it appears 
to me, designed to convey, by thé very terms and rhythm of the speeches of Cor- 
delia, an impression that her speech was usually reserved and low and laconic, and 
thus that the very faculty was foreign to her that might have enabled her to effect 
the same result for her own dignity with milder method. Certain it is, and it is suf- 
ficiently declared in the sequel of the scene, that she took too little thought for the 
fact that her disinheriting was a greater misfortune to her father than to herself, and 
that to prevent it for his sake were worth incurring some misconstruction; this 
thought necessarily arises from the terms in which she commends her father, whose 
weakness she had not had the skill to humour honorably, to the sisters, whose natures 
she knows too well not to foresee their course, even without the irritation which 
the same weakness was sure to give occasion and welcome pretext for. This, then, 
is the incongruity of the social state on which the tragic action of the play depends; 


lia? mend your speech a little, 
- your - fortunes. 
Good my lord, 


eee, ion, Cordelia ?| Goe to,go0e . Ktly, Sch. 2 Qq et cet. 

Cap. Go too, go too, Q,. 95, 96. Z...fit,] One line in QaqFf, a 
mend’) mend me Cap. Rowe. eed 

fe Saal 2%) Ff +, Knt, Coll. Del. Dycei, 96. fit] fr Q,. x 


Pind ea et Lear enters mad in the last scene, with Cordelia dead in his arms, we have 
_ but the fulfilment for either of the fate they equally provoked; we behold the com- 
mon catastrophe of affection too much qualified by unreasonable anger on one side, 

_ and unaccommodating rigour on the other. Rapp (Zinieitung zur Usebersetzung, 


a Stuttgart, 1843): The elder sisters are vulgar, selfish natures; Cordelia is not so 
a vulgar, although possessed of a pride and obstinacy not unusual. When Diogenes 

- marched up and down in the brilliant rooms of Plato, saying: ‘I tread upon the 
o pride of Plato,’ «Yes, replied Plato, ‘with greater pride.’ That is just the case 


_ with Cordelia. She is proud of being in the right, in contrast with her vulgar sis- 
ters, and this feeling she opposes to her sisters and to her old father. The weak 
Po old father has a right to a few flattering expressions from a loving child, because 
: an he needs them. She offers him, on the contrary, what he cannot bear, the truth. A 
E woman, whose nature is love, and who is straitlaced for truth, is a doubly perverted 
creature. Truth and Love are completely antipodal; what else is love for an indi- 
vidual but the taking of a finite object for an infinite, and worshipping it as such? 
Thus, love is essentially a lie, not a truth, and Cordelia misbehaves like her sisters, 


. only in a different way, by egoism and lovelessness. One for whom she cannot tell 
4 a little lie, she does not love as she should. On this fine ground, which the poet has 
a laid very close to us, now rests the whole piece. 

a 92. bond] Eccres: What I am bound to by duty. 

a ae 94, e¢ seg. Moperty: Sh., with wonderful naturalness, makes the shy and re- 
2 served Cordelia speak, when her false position is forced upon her, with a passion that 
men” will not stop to choose conciliatory expressions, and which makes up by vehemence, 
oe and what sounds like petulance, for the weakness of the argument which she is 


driven to use, as she cannot reveal the truth which she knows. 
95. begot] Wricut: Sh. (see Mer. of Ven. IIL, ii, 65; II, ii, 37) uses both 
forms of the participle ‘begot’ and ‘begotten.’ In the Authorized Version the lat- 


ter only occurs. 
a 96. those ...as] ABBOTT, § 384, cites this line as containing an ellipsis, simi- 
x lar tothat in MZacd. III, iv, 138: ‘ Returning were as tedious as (to) go o’er,’ and 
| gives it thus, in full: ‘ Return those duties back as (they) are right fit (to be returned),’ 
adding, ‘4s can scarcely be [here] taken for which.’ It appears to me, neverthe- 
less, that it may be here readily taken for whtch, and so become an apposite instance 
under Abbott’s § 280, and parallel with Lear I, iv, 56: ‘ with ¢ha¢ ceremonious affec- 
tion as you were wont.’ Thus: ‘Return ¢hose duties back [which] are right fit— 
: viz: Obey,’ &c. WRIGHT is also, apparently, of this opinion; but MoBERLY says 
4 : that the plural ‘are’ is used by attraction to the word ‘ duties,’ as in Hen. V-: V, ii, 
| 2% B 


Half 1 my love . with t ae iit my care aia) ues 


Sure, I shall never marry like my sisters, Pose as 


* To love my father all. * i of, ‘tig e 
Lear. But goes thy heart with this ? 
Cor. Ay, my good ne 


* Lear. So young, and so untender? — 
Cor. So young, my lord, and true. 


105 “ 


Lear. Let it be so; thy truth then be thy dower; me cog 

For, by the sacred radiance of the sun, nae = 
Oy a 

98,99. Why...all?] One line, Qq. Hereafter, lines thus included between : 
98-102. Why......never] Four lines,’ asterisks are found only in the Qq. a 
ending @l/,...hand...him,...neuer Qq. 104. thy heart with this ?] this with : oe 
99. Haply] Happely Q,. Happily Ft. thy heart ? Qq, Mal. Steev. Bos. Coll. : 
wed,| wed. FF. Ay, my good I my good Fit, = 

102. marry] Mary Q.. . Cap. Jen. Knt, Coll. Del. Wh. Ktly, Sch. Sie 
102, 103. marry.....all.| Pope. One L good my Qq. Ay, good my Mal. et cet. _ 
line, Qq. ' 107. Let] Well let Qq. - ‘ 
103. Zo...al.] Om. Ff, Rowe, Sch. thy truth the truth FF, Rowe. : 
18; and that the phrase should be ‘as is right fit,’ as, indeed, KEIGHTLEY had already a: 


so printed it in his text. 

104, e¢ seg. SEYMOUR here and in many other places amends the rhythm, which 
he finds harsh. I do not record his suggestions, which are put forth with assurance, 
and consist mainly in a free excision of Shakespeare’s words and in a free insertion 
of his own. Some commentators seem to think that Shakespeare could write neither 
poetry nor sense.—Ep. . 

107. BUCKNILL (p. 176): [This curse] is madness, or it is nothing. Not indeed 
raving, incoherent, formed mania, as it subsequently displays itself, but exaggerated 
passion, perverted affection, enfeebled judgment, combining to form a state of men- 
tal disease—incipient, indeed, but still disease—in which man, though he may be 
paying for past errors, is during the present irresponsible. 

108. sun] CAPELL: The oaths given to Lear are admirable for their solemnity, 
and are taken from out the creed of his times as fables have given it; he is made 
the builder of Leicester (Leir Cestre, Saxonicé), and a temple of his erection is 
talk’d of to Fanus Bifrons ; so that as well his ‘Hecate’ here, as his Apollo and 
Fupiter afterwards, are consonant to his imputed religion, whatever comes of his 
true; to which, in likelihood, his address before ‘ Hecate’ has a nearer affinity. Mo- 
BERLY: The Druidical gods are, according to Czsar (Bell. Gall. vi, 17), Apollo, — 
Mars, Jove, and Minerva. Lear’s two oaths, by Apollo and Jupiter, are therefore 
historically accurate; so is his Swearing by Night, as (c. 18) ‘Galli se omnes ab 
Dite patre prognatos predicant,’ and by Hecate, as a temple of Diana once occu- 
pied the place of the present St. Paul's in London. (Palgrave’s Anglo-Saxons, p. 51.) 


Owe 


eae his Eman shall to my bosom 
as well neighbour’d, pitied, and relieved, 
As thou.my sometime daughter. 


* Kent. Good my liege,— 
_ Lear. Peace, Kent! 120 
109. mysteries| miftreffeQq. miferies 116, 117. Or.....appetite,| Two lines, 
hs Ppa the first ending generation, Qq. 

= flecate| Heccat QqF,. HecatF, = 117, 118. shall to my bosom Be] Shall 
eo night] might Qq. — bee Qq. 
SS Ilo. operation] operations FFF .+, 119. Lege,—] liege—Rowe. Liege. 
Cap. Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. Huds. QqFf. ° 
a 115. Hold] Hould Q.. 120, 121. Peace...wrath.| One line, 
$ c ever. The] ever, the Qq. Qq. 
- 109. Hecate] WricuT: This word is a dissyllable in AZid. M. D. V,.i, 391; 


z — Macb. Il, i, 52; III, ii, 41; Ill, v, 13 and Ham. III, ii, 246. It is a trisyllable 
, only in 1 Hen. VI; III, ii, 64, a significant fact as regards Shakespeare’s share in 


4 that play. 
Ee: IIo. operation] DeELtus: The effect upon the life or death of mortals. WRIGHT: 
ce. _ This belief in planetary influence is in keeping with the speech of Edmund in the- 
next scene. 
ae 113. property] Detius: A stronger expression of the idea contained in ¢ propin- 
in quity.’ WRIGHT: Rising, as it were, to identity of blood. ScHMIpT calls attention 
eee Fs to this solitary instance in Sh. of this word in the sense of ownership and also of 
4 ¢ propinquity.’ 

AS 115. from this] STEEVENS: That is, from this time. 


115. barbarous] See AxnoTt, § 468, for the contraction of this and similar 
words in pronunciation; likewise ‘nursery,’ in line 122. 
115. Scythian] WricHT: Purchas, in his Pilgrimage (ed. 1614, p. 396), says, 
-_—_._ after describing the cruelties of the Scythians: ‘ These customes were generall to the 
Scythians in Europe and Asia (for which cause Scytharum facinora patrare, grew 
into a prouerbe of immane crueltie, and their Land was iustly called Barbarous) ; 
others were more speciall and peculiar to particular Nations Scythian.’ 

116. generation] CaPELL: His children, what he has generated. WRIGHT: 
The ees in this sense of offspring is familiar from Matthew, iii. 7: ‘O generation 


of vipers.’ 
119. sometime] For instances of the use of this in the sense of ‘formerly,’ see 


ScHMIDT, Zex. Ss. Vv. 


ae I ech sve most, ae thougt 
On her kind nursery.—Hence, a 


So be my grave my peace, as here ‘s give ¥ - 


123. and] Om. Pope +. 
[To Cor. Rowe +, Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. Kat, W Wh. I Ta 


121. dragon] Moserty: A natural trope for Lear to use, as, | 
would wear a helmet (Jdylls of the King, p. 256): ‘On which for crest the golden 
dragon clung For Britain.’ [See Gopwin on helmets, Appendix, p. sc 

121. wrath] CAPELL: His wrath’s object. 

122, set my rest] WRIGHT: A phrase from the game of cards called primero, ‘ _ 
used in a double sense. Metaphorically, ‘to set one’s rest’ is to stake one’s all” 
Literally in the game of primero it signifies ‘to stand upon the cards in one’s hand.” “a 
For an example of the metaphorical sense, see Bacon’s Z£ssay xxix, p. 128 (ed. a 
Wright): ‘There be many Examples, where Sea-Fights have beene Finall to the __ % 
warre; But this is, when Princes or States, have set up their Rest, vpon Battailes.’ Vee 
[See the notes, in this edition, on Rom. & Ful. 1V,v,6. Elsewhere in Sh. the oa kins 
phrase is uniformly, I think, ‘to set up’—Ep.] Zs 

123. Hence, etc.] Hearu: These words are undoubtedly addressed to Kent; it, 
for in the next words Lear sends for France and Burgundy, in order to tender to 
them his youngest daughter. At such a time, therefore, to drive her out of his pres- 
ence would be a contradiction to his declared intention. JENNENS ably. maintains : 
that this is addressed to Cordelia, in so far as she had just raised her father’s anger 


to the highest pitch, while Kent, the extent of whose opposition was thus far quite — q 
unknown, had been simply warned not to come between the dragon and his wrath. 7 
When Kent interposed a second time, Lear warned him a second time to make from d 
the shaft. Kent emboldened, then uses rougher language; Lear passionately ad- * 


jures him, ‘on thy life, no more ;’ Kent persists, and Lear bids him for the first time 
‘out of my sight.’ Kent further entreats, Lear swears; Kent returns the oath,and 
then Lear banishes him, This natural gradation in Lear's anger towards Kent, thus 
contrasted with his instant rage against Cordelia, whom he loved so deeply and who 

had wounded him so bitterly, Jennens thinks is one of the most beautiful in all 
Shakespeare. MALONE thinks that the inconsistency noted by Heath is perfectly — ei 
suited to Lear’s character, and therefore that this sentence is addressed to Cordelia. 

De.ius adopts Heath’s reasons for believing these words were addressed to Kent, 

and adds that Cordelia, both before and after them, is spoken of in the third person, 

WuiTE: These words most probably are addressed to Cordelia; yet it may be rea- 

sonably urged that Cordelia does not go out, as she would be likely to do upon such 

a command ; and that although Kent has merely broken in with ‘ Good, my liege,— 

Lear is choleric and unreasonable enough to hound him from his presence upon 

such slight provocation. Hupson: Perhaps the true explanation is, that Lear an- 

ticipates remonstrance from Kent, and, in his excited mood, flares up at any offer of 

that kind. Wricur: After the king, in reply to Kent’s interruption, had justified his 

conduct, he could scarcely order him from his sight. [If any critic of less weight 


than Heath had started this question, I doubt if it would have been ever discussed.— S 
Ep.] Ve 


her! Call France. Who stirs? 


aati Hieber ate the third. 
which she calls plainness, marry her. 


invest you jointly with my power, 


*. 


125. her Call France.| Coll. her; 
call France, Q.Ff+. her, call France 
Q,. 4er. Call France; Cap. 
 . 126, Burgundy.—|Theob. Burgun- 
a dy—Rowe, Pope. Burgundy, QqFf. 

Ae [Exitan Att. Cap. Exit Edmund. 
Cap. conj. (MS.).* 


eminence and all the large effects 
oo with TE: Ourself, by monthly course, 


130 


; ae to be custard shall our Stas 
Make with you by due turn. Only we shall retain 
- The name and all th’ addition toa king ; ; 135. 


nence QqFf +, Cap. Steev. Ec. 
134. turn] Ls yr Rowe, Knt, Del. Sch. 
turne FF. turnes Qq et cet. 
we shall| Ff, Rowe, Steev. Ec. 
Knt, Del. Sch. Om. Pope+. we Cap. 
we fiell Qq et cet. 
135, 136. The name...rest, | The first 


ig 127. daughters’ dowers] Warb. _line ends /way, Ff, Rowe, Cap. 

“a Daughters Dowres FFF ,. daughters 135. mame and...king;...of the rest | 

— dower Qq. Daughters, Dowres F,. name; but...king, office, Theob. (Nich- 
ms daughters dowers Rowe, Pope, Theob. ols’s Lit. Hist. ii, 369) conj. (with- 

3 Han. drawn). 

ae the] Ff +, Bos. Knt, Coll. Del. and all Om. Cap. 

z Dycei, Wh. Sch. ¢his Qq et cet. addition | Ff +, Cap. Steev. Sing. 

ay _ 129. with] in Qq. Ktly, Sch. additions Qq et cet. 

4 130. Pre-eminence] Jen. Prehemt- 

‘ a 


ne 125. Who stirs ?] DELIus interprets this as a threat, to terrify into silence any 
_-—-_ chance opposition on the part of the bystanders. Moprrty: The courtiers seem 


= _ unwilling to obey a command so reckless... [May it not be that the circle of cour- 
aie tiers are so horror-struck at Lear’s outburst of fury, and at Cordelia’s sudden and 
= impending doom, that they stand motionles ey and forget to move? This is one of 
: : Shakespeare’s touches, like old Capulet’s/calling Juliet ‘you tallow-face,’ to be in- 
a0 


noes terpreted by reading between the lines/—Ep.] 
a" 128. marry] De.ivs: That is, proyide a husband for her. 
129, 138. W. W. Lioyp: It is apparent,that Lear must long have put the sin- 
A cerest affection to the sorest trials, And tasked the endurance even of sordid self- 
interest, and now he manifests undiminished appetite for the coarser luxury of sway 
at the very moment he releases unwilling purveyors fromi their bondage. The re- 
served train of one hundred knights, and the alternate visits he proposes, prove that 
in a most important respect he contemplates no abdication at all, but expects tu ob- 
tain still, on the strength of obligation, more than all he had exacted so gallingly by 
the force of his regal power and dignity. 

130. effects] WricuT: Used, apparently, of the outward attributes of royalty, 
everything that follows in its train. See II, iv, 176. 


This coronet part Betireen m4 ha 
Kent. ~~ Royal Leary, 
Whom I have ever honour’d asmy king, s 
Loved as my father, as my master follow’d, Tee 
As my great patron thought on in my prayers,— _ 
Lear, The bow is bent and drawn; make from the shaft. 
Kent. Let it fall rather, though the fork invade a 


+ 


The region of my heart! Be Kent unmannerly, 


When Lear is mad. What wouldst thou do, old man? 145, ae ; 


De 
ij ’ 

7 . 136. The sway] Separate Tine, Steev. 141. As my great] As my FF, F,. b= 
te Bos. Knt, Dyce. And as my Rowe, Pope, Theob. ee a 
Ee: of the rest] Om. Pope, Theob, —_ Warb. Coll. (MS.). ei 


Han. and the rest Cap. [offers it. (a 
stage direction) Anon.* 
138. between] betwixt Qq, Glo.+, 
Mob. ~ 
[Giving the crown. Pope +. 
{in Action of preventing him. 
Cap. Ec. 
139. my king] a king ¥,, Rowe, ore: 
140. master| maifter Q.. 


prayers,—]| prayers—Rowe +. 
prayers. Q,FF,. praiers. Q.F,F,. 
142. drawn] drawen Q,. 
143-153. Let zt.....hollowness] Lines 
end vather,...heart,...mad,...duty.:.bowes, 


© folD rere CONfiAer ation. ivi fey... LA fey... 


Sound....hollownes Qq. 
145. mad | man Q.. 
qwouldst| woulde/t F, FF, wilt 


follow’ d | followed Qq. Qq. : 


133. shall] WricuT: Here used in the ordinary future sense, as if it had been 
preceded by ‘ we,’ with perhaps something of the idea of fixed intention. es: 

135. addition] External observance. See II, ii, 22; AZacé. I, ii, 106; IIT, i, 99; 
Ham. I, iv, 20. ; 

136, of the rest] WARBURTON reads ‘of th’ Hest,’ because Hest is an old word 
for regal command. HearH proposed to substitute z#¢erest, which will signify the 
legal right and property. JENNENS: It is most likely Sh. wrote a// the rest. JOHN- 
son: The phrase means, I suppose, the execution of all the other business. 

138. coronet] Dr.ius thinks that this does not refer to Lear’s own crown, that 
is among the things which he retains, but he delivers to his sons-in-law, who remain 
dukes after as well as before this transaction, a smaller ducal crown, Elsewhere 
Sh. accurately distinguishes between a crown and a coronet, see Temp. I, ii, 114; 
ffen, V; II, Chor. 10. Wricurt thinks that there can be no such distinction bere; 
while ScHMIDT agrees with Delius. 

143. fork] WricuT: Ascham says, in his Zoxophilus (p. 135, ed. Arber), that 
Pollux describes two kinds of arrow-heads: ‘ The one he calleth dyxevoc, deserybynge 
it thus, hauyng two poyntes or barbes, lookyng backewarde to the stele and the 
fethers, which surely we call in Englishe a brode arrowe head or a swalowe tayle. 
The other he calleth yAwyic, hauyng .ii. poyntes stretchyng forwarde, and this Eng- 
lysh men do call a forkehead.’ 


145. What] CaPELL: This is spoke on seeing his master put his hand to his 
sword, , 


> . lines, ey , Rowe. When.. shear one _ 


tha duty shall have dread to speak, 
er to flattery pes To plainness egos 
et bound, 
1 majesty falls to folly. Reenve thy state, 


- 


‘ 


Johns. Jen. Knt, Del. Dyce, Sch. #0 
folly falls Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 


line, Pope, ‘Theob. Han, Warb. . Stoops to folly Qq et cet. 
honours) honours Qq. honour 148. folly.] Johns. folly; Rowe. 
Zs Pope, Theob, Han. Warb, folly, QqFf. 
147-149. Lines end honour...falls... Reserve thy state] Ff+, Knt, 
check Pope, Theob, Han. Warb. Del. Sing. Dyce i, Sch. Reuerfe thy 


148. fails to folly] Ff. (fall F,) Rowe, — doome Qq et cet. 


147. A trimeter couplet, see ABBOTT, § 501. 

148. majesty] A dissyllable. See I, i, go. 
148. Reserve thy state] JoHNsoNn: I am inclined to think that Reverse thy doom 
~ was Shakespeare’s first reading, as more apposite to the present occasion, and that he 
changed it aflerwards to ‘ Reserve thy state,’ which conduces more to the progress of 
the action. Derxius defends the Ff, because Lear’s surrender of his royalty proved 
subsequently more fatal to him than the unjust doom pronounced on Cordelia. 
‘Wuire cannot regard the text of the Ff as other than ‘an accidental variation, be- 
cause Kent makes no attempt to induce Lear to abandon his design of dividing his 
kingdom and abdicating his throne; he simply pleads for Cordelia. Between re- 
verse and “ reserve,” the difference is only the transposition of two letters; and that 
change once made by accident, the other would naturally follow by design.’ In WV. 
& Qu. 5th Ser. v, 444, W. A. B. CooLipcE argues against interpreting ‘doom’ by 
destiny [which I think no one but the critic himself ever did so interpret. Kent is 
‘such a noble fellow, that we who know Cordelia’s truthfulness and honesty, and 
have heard her words spoken aside, cannot but think that he is here pleading her 
cause. But I am afraid we are too hasty. Kent is pleading not for Cordelia, but 
for Lear himself; he has not as yet made the slightest allusion to Cordelia. When 
Lear denounces her, Kent, who sees that Lear is crushing the only chance of future 
happiness, starts forward with ‘Good my liege ;’ but before he can utter another word 
Lear interrupts him, and interprets his exclamation as an intercession for Cordelia ; 
and we fall into the same error, so that when Kent speaks again we keep up the 
same illusion, whereas all that he now says breathes devotion to the king, and to no 
one else. The folly to which majesty falls is not the casting off of a daughter,—that 
is no more foolish in a king than in a subject,—but it is the surrendering of revenue, 
of sway, and of the crown itself,—this is hideous rashness, this is power bowing to 
flattery. Hence, Kent entreats Lear ‘to reserve his state.’ And to show still more 
conclusively that Lear, and not Cordelia, is chiefly i in his thoughts, in his very next 
speech he says that the motive for which he now risks his life is the safety of the 
king. Furthermore, when Lear has been turned out of doors and his daughters 
have usurped all his powers, Gloucester (III, iv, 156) says, ‘ Ah that good Kent! He 
said it would be thus,’ which cannot well refer to any other passage than the present. 
Moreover, had Kent been so devoted to Cordelia as to suffer banishment for her 
sake, would he not have followed her to France rather than followed as a servant 


: ae maeous ee 


ae Per ey a 


« (2 


cans 
eae 


Thy youngest daughter does not jose i I 
Nor are those empty-hearted whose low sound 
Reverbs no hollowness. 
Lear. = Kent, on rie life, no moreh iar 
Kent. My life I never held but as a pawn mee > 


an 
ser 


2 ‘yp 
To wage against thine enemies, nor fear to lose it, : 
Thy safety being the motive. _ 


Lear. Out of my sight! 
Kent. See better, Lear, and let me still remain ‘ 
The true blank of thine eye. 
Lear, Now, by Apollo,— ' 2. j 
Kent. Now, by Eoatla king, 7 hw a 


149. And...consideration] with better | Warb. 


judgment Pope, Theob, Han, Warb. 
150. answer....judgement | with my life 
I answer Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
152, 153. sound Reverbs] founds Re- 
nerbe Ff, Rowe, Knt, Sing. Ktly, Sch. 
153. thy life] my life FF 
154. as a] as F,. 
155. chine] thy Qq, Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Cap. Cam. Wr. 


155. mor] nere FF, ne're¥,. ne'er 

F,, Rowe, Knt, Del. Sta. Sch. S 
Jear to| feard to Ed. conj. 

156. the motive] motive Ff, Rowe, Knt, 
Sch. 

159, 160. Kent. 
line, Qq. 

159. Apollo,—] Appollo,Q,. Apollo— 


Now....vain.] One 


Q,. Apollo, F,. Apollo. FFE. 
enemies | foes Pope, Theob. Han. 


his great patron whom he had thought on in his prayers? It need scarcely be added 
that ‘reserve thy state’ means ‘retain thy royal dignity and power.’—Eb. ] 

150. Answer] JOHNSON: That is, Let my life be answerable for my judgement, 
or I will stake my life on my opinion. [For other instances of the subjunctive used 
optatively or imperatively, see ABBOTT, § 364; also see AZacéd. V, vi, 7.] 

153. Reverbs] StEEVENS: Perhaps a word of Shakespeare’s own making, mean- 
ing the same as veverderates. ¢ 

154. pawn] STEEVENS: That is, a pledge. CAPELL, followed by HENLEY, 
strangely thinks that this refers to the pawn in a game of chess. : 

155. wage] Dyce (G/oss.): That is, to stake in wager. 

158. blank] JOHNSON: The ‘blank’ is the qw/zfe or exact mark at which tne 
arrow is shot. ‘See better,’ says Kent, ‘and keep me always in your view.’ 

159. Apollo] MALonr: Bladud, Lear’s father, according to Geoffrey of Mon- 
mouth, attempting to fly, fell on the temple of Apollo, and was killed. This cir- 
cumstance our author must have noticed, both in Holinshed’s Chronicle and The 
Mirrour for Magistrates. STEEVENS: Are we to understand, from this circum- 
stance, that the so swears by Apollo, because the father broke his neck on the 
temple of that deity? MALONE: We are to'understand that Sh. learned from hence 
that Apollo was worshipped by our British ancestors, which will obviate Dr. John- 


ACT I, SC. i.] KING LEAR 25 
Thou swear’st aug gods in vain. 


Lear. O vassal! miscreant! 160 
Alb, \ ; 

Dear sir, forbear. 
Corn. 


Kent. Kill thy physician, and thy fee bestow 
Upon the foul disease. Revoke thy gift; 
Or, whilst I can vent clamour from my throat, 
I'll tell thee thou dost evil. 
Lear. Hear me, recreant! 165 
On thine allegiance, hear me! 
That thou hast sought to make us break our vow, 


160. swear’st] swearef? Q.. 
O vassal! miscreant!| Vaffall, 
recreant. Qq. O, vassal! recreant! Coll. 


[Laying his hand on his sword. 


Rowe. In Action of drawing his Sword. 
Cap. 

161. Alb. Corn. Dear sir, forbear.] 
Om. Qgq. 

[interposing, Cap. 

162. Az//] Ff£+, Knut, Sta. Sch. Doe, 
Rill Qq et cet. Reading Do as a sepa- 
rate line, Steev. 793. Bos. Coll. Del. 
Sing. Dyce, Wh. Ktly, Glo.+. 

162-165. A7//......evil.| Lines end, 
phy/ficion,...difeafe,...clamour...euill Qq. 


162. thy fee] Ff +, Jen. Ec, Knt, Sch. 
the fee Qgq et cet. 

163. Upon the| Upon thy Cap. 

thy gift| F,. thy guift ¥,. the 
git FF, Rowe. “thy doome Qq, Pope 
+, Glo.+, Mob. 

165, 166. Hear....me/] As in Cap. 
One line, QqFf, Rowe, Jen. Del. Sing. 
Ktly, Sch. 

165. recreant| Om, Qq. 

166. Ox thy...me!| Om. Pope +. 

thine| thy Qq, Cam. 

167. Zhat] Ff, Rowe, Knt, Wh. Sch. 
Stce Qq et cet. 

vow | vowes Ff, Rowe, Knt, Sch. 


son’s objection, in a subsequent note, to Shakespeare’s making Lear too much a 
mythologist. 

160. swear’st] AppoTT ($200): The preposition is omitted after some verbs 
which can easily be regarded as transitive. See also ‘smile you my speeches,’ II, 
ii, 77. Wricut: Sh. frequently uses the verb in a transitive sense when it has a 
person for its object, as in Ful. Ces. II, i, 129; but in the sense of appealing to a 
deity by an oath, it is not common. 

160. miscreant] DELtus says that Kent is a ‘ miscreant’ in regard to Apollo and 
the gods, whom he has contemptuously termed ‘thy gods;’ and that recreant, of the 
Qq, he is in regard to Lear. But, as SCHMIDT says, Sh. uses ‘ miscreant’ very fre- 
quently in the sense of moral worthlessness. 

164. clamour] WALKER has a section (C7i#. i, 156) devoted to the meaning of 
this word, which he seems to think expresses an idea of wailing or lamentation. 
The present passage can with difficulty be said to support this theory. 

167. That] To Wuite, ‘That’ of the Ff seems more in keeping with the style 
of this play. ‘Of old ¢#at had, as it still has among our best writers, the sense of 
for that, seeing that, assuming,’ So, ScHMIDT also says, that the causative since of 
the Qq is less in the tone of suppressed passion which characterizes the speech, oe 
leads, grammatically, less directly than ‘that’ to the main point: ‘take thy reward.’ 
See I, i, 7o. 


2 


2 


| Which we durst never yet, and with 


To come betwixt our sentence and our p 

_ Which nor our nature nor our place can bear, — 
Our potency made good, take thy reward. 

Five days we do allot thee, for provision 

To shield thee from diseases of the world, 

And on the sixth to turn thy hated back, 


- 168, seated | fraied Qq. Or...make Johns, conj. 


— 169. betwixt] fre Qq, Cap. Jen. 171. made| make Q,, Pope, Warb. Bos. 
_Ec. Glo.+, Mob. 172. Five] Foure Qq, Jen. 
sentence] fentences F,, Knt i, 173. diseases] difafters F£ +, Cap. Ec. 
Delete Knt, Del. Dyce i, Wh. 
171. Our...made]| Nor...make Heath. 174. sixth] fixt FFF. fift Qa. 


169. power] Epwarps: That is, our power to execute it. 

170. WriGHT: This line gives the key to Lear’s hasty and impetuous character. 
170, nor...nor] WRIGHT: For neither ... ‘nor,’ compare Ozh. III, iv, 116, 117. 
171. made good,] JoHNsoN: ‘As thou hast come with unreasonable pride be- 


tween the seszexce which I had passed, and the gower by which I shall execute it, 


take thy reward in another sentence which shall make good, shall establish, shall 
maintain, ‘hat power.’ Mr. Davies thinks, that ‘ our potency made good,’ relates only 
to our place. Which our nature cannot bear, nor our f/ace, without departure from 
the potency of that place. This is easy and clear. Lear, who is characterized 
as hot, heady, and violent, is, with very just observation of life, made to entangle 
himself with vows, upon any sudden provocation to vow revenge, and then to plead 
the obligation of a vow in defence of implacability. STEEVENS: In my opinion, 
‘made’ is right. Lear had just delegated his power to Albany and Cornwall, con- 
tenting himself with only the name and all the additions of a king. He could, there- 
fore, have no fower to inflict on Kent the punishment which he thought he deserved. 
‘Our potency made good’ seems to me only this: They to whom I have yielded my 
power and authority, yielding me the ability to dispense it in this instance, take thy 
reward, MALONE: The meaning, I think is: As a proof that I am not a mere 
threatener, that I have power as well as will to punish, take the due reward of thy 
demerits; hear thy sentence, The words ‘our potency made good’ are in the ab- 
solute case. WRIGHT: Lear still speaks as king, although he had announced his 
intention of abdicating. It is difficult, therefore, to understand why Steevens should 
have stumbled at this passage. The reading of Q, can only mean ‘make good or 
establish our power by taking thy punishment as an acknowledgement of it? Mo- 
BERLY: Sh, ingeniously makes Lear forget that he is giving up his power on that 
very day, and pronounce a sentence on Kent to take effect in ten days. 

173. diseases] MALonr: The alteration of the Ff was made by the printer in 
consequence of his not knowing the meaning of the original word. ‘ Diseases,’ in 
old language, meant the slighter inconveniences, troubles, or distresses of the world. 
The provision that Kent could make in five days might, in some measure, guard him 


against the ‘diseases’ of the world, but could not shield him from its désasters. [See 
note in Macd, V, iii, 21.—Ep.] 
® 


. 


is ae 


a gdom. If on the tenth day following TAS 
yanish’d trunk be found in our dominions, 

moment i is thy death. Away! By Jupiter, 

‘is shall not be revoked. 

Kent. Fare thee well, king; sith thus thou wilt appear, 


Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.— 180 
_ The gods to their dear shelter take thee, maid, 


That justly think’st and hast most rightly said !— 
And your large speeches may your deeds approve, 
That good effeéts may spring from words of love.— 


Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu; 185 
He'll shape his old course in a country new. [Exit 
175. on] Om. FF F,+. 181. [To Cordelia, Han. 
177. death. Away! By] Johns. dear shelter protection Qq. 
death: away. By Pope. death, away, thee, maid] thee maid ¥¥¥,. 
by Qq. death, away. By Ff. the maide Q,. the maid Q. 
177,178. By....revoked| One line, Q.. 182. justly....rightly| righily...juftly 
179. fare] ey fare Qq, Jen: Ec. Qgq, Jen. 
Var. think’ st\ thinksQ,F,, thinkesQ,. 
sith thus) Jfince thus Q,, Jen. Ec. hast] hath Q,. 
- Steev. Var. Coll. i, Del. Sing. Wh. Ktly. 183. [To Gon. and Regan. Han. 
Since Q,. your large speeches| you, large 


180. freedom] Friendship Qq, Jen. speechers, Cap. 


175. tenth] CoL.ier (ed. 2) adopts the (MS.) emendation of seventh, but returns 
to the old text in his ed. 3, presumably for metrical reasons, DANIEL (/Vo‘es, &c., 
p. 76): Read se’nth ; the sense of the passage requires this alteration, If we may 
contract ‘sevennights’ to se’znights, why not ‘seventh’ to se’nth ? 

177. Jupiter] Jounson: Sh. makes his Lear too much a mythologist; he had 
‘Hecate’ and ‘ Apollo’ before. 

BUCKNIEL (p. 176): Lear’s treatment of Kent; his ready threat in reply to Kent’s 
deferential address; his passionate interruptions and reproaches; his attempted vio- 
lence, checked by Albany and Cornwall; and, finally, the cruel sentence of banish- 
ment, cruelly expressed,—all these are the acts of a man in whom passion has be- 
come disease. 

179. Fare thee] For instances of the use, for euphonic reasons, probably, of 
‘thee’ for ¢hou, see ABBOTT, § 212. 

179. sith] Here, as in Ham. II, ii, 6, the Ff and Qq differ in the use of ‘sith’ and 
since,’ showing, as CLARENDON points out, that Sh. did not uniformly observe the 
distinction laid down by MarsH. See notes on the passage in Ham. 

180. Freedom JENNENS: ‘Friendship,’ of the Qq, seems more properly opposed 
to ‘banishment;’ for what is ‘banishment’ but the being driven away from our 
friends and countrymen? 

183. CAPELL affirms that his ‘emendation will not appear an unfit one to such as 
mark the ill-construction of the line, and it’s ill connection with the line that comes 


after, in their old reading.’ 


; e a ao os 
_ Re-enter ( a ANCE, 


sae Here’s France and Burgundy, 1 
Lear. My lord of Burgundy, 
We first address toward you, who with this oe 
Hath rivall’d for our daughter; what, in the le a “—) 


Will you require in present dower with her, ca See aie 
2 Or cease your quest of love? are ee 
Bur. Most royal majesty, 


I crave no more than hath your highness offer’d, 
Nor will you tender less. 


s Lear. Right noble Burgundy, ps 
ead @ - > ~ 
_ “Hoch: Om. QaF,F,F,- towards Qq et cet. ; : 
+ » Re-enter...] Cap. Enter France and 189. this] @ Qq. ; 
Burgundie with Glofter. Qq (Burgundy 190. Hath] Have Pope +, Jen. Ec. +f 
; — —-Q, ~Glocester Q,). Enter Glofter with in the least] at least Pope, s 
France, and Burgundy Attendants. Ff +. Theob. Han. Warb. o 
| 187. SCENEIII, Pope, Han. Johns. Jen. 192, Most] Om. Qq. a 
ay Glou.] Glo. or Gloft. Qq. Cor. 192-194. royal...less.| Two lines, the = 
Ff, Rowe, Pope. first ending what, Qq. ca * 
188-192. Mdy...Jove ?] Four lines, end- 193. Aath] what QqF,F, +, Jen. Ktly, 4 
ng you,...daughter,...prefent...loue ? Qq. Cam, 
188. lord] L. Q,. offer d | offered Qq. 
of | or Q,. 194. dess.] leffe? Qq¥,F,. de/s? F,. 
189. toward] Ff+, Jen. Knt, Coll. 194-198. Right... pieced,]| Four lines, 


Del. Dyce i, Sta. Wh. Ktly, Sch. ending vs,...fallen ;...little...peec’ ft, Qq. 


186. JoHNSON: He will follow his old maxims; he will continue to act upon the 
same principles. STEEVENS quotes: ‘St. George for England! and Ireland now 
adieu, For here Tom Stukely shapes his course anew.’—Peele’s Battle of Alcazar, ~=5 
1594, p. 117; ed. Dyce. As You Like It (Gent. Maga., 1x, p. 402) conjectures 
corse for ‘course,’ and explains that Kent means that ‘he’ll conform his old body, 
approaching towards a corse, to the customs of a new country.’ WRIGHT so far — . 
agrees with this anonymous critic as to think that there is ‘ evidently a play intended 
upon the words “ course” and “ corse.”’’? [The antithesis is so marked between ‘old? 
and ‘new’ that, to me, the simpler the interpretation the better: Kent’s old age must 
be finished in a new country. The jingle between ‘ course’ and ‘ corse’ is certainly 
Shakespearian, but I cannot see that it is called for here; the situation is not so 
tragic that it needs the relief of a smile, and, moreover, ‘to shape a corse’ is well- _ 
nigh unintelligible.-—Ep. ] 

187, Here’s] See III, iii, 17; Ham. III, iv, 202; IV, v, 5; Aacb. II, iii, 137; 
and ABBOTT, § 335. 

190, Hath] For instances of the relative followed by a singular verb, though the 
antecedent be plural, see ABBort, § 247. 

190. rivall’d] Scumipr: The only instance in Sh, of its use as a verb. 


190. in the least] WRIGHT: At least. - So ‘in the best? for ‘at best? in Ham. I, 
v,27. SCHMIDT: Here alone in Sh. thus used, 


f with ¢ our ee. oe 
‘more, may fitly like your grace, 
>, and she is yours. 


I know no answer. 200 
‘ Will you, with those infirmities she owes, 
Unfriended, new-adopted to our hate, - 


p, ower'd with our curse and stranger’d with our oath, 
el ‘ake her, or leave her? i 


bop ol MER, Pardon me, royal sir; 
195. did hold] held FFF, +, Jen. 201. Will] Sir will Q,. Sir, will Q, 
196. price] prife Q Cap. Steev. Mal, Ec. Var. Sing. (Sir, 
 falln] fallen "OqF.F in a separate line, Steev. Bos. Sing.) 
197. little-seeming] Coll. ili, Pater 202. new-adopted| Hyphen by Pope. 
5 Uittle, seeming, Cap. little, seeming Steev. 203. Dowerd| Dow rd F,. Dowrd 
_ «778; Ec. Var. Knt, Sing. “ittle feeming FFF, Couered Q,Q,. 
me OQEE et cet. - 204. Tuke her,| Take leave, FF, 
_ «108. pieced] pie’d FF. fpeecif Qa. her ?| Rowe. her. QqFf. 
Soe pierc'd Pope. 204, 205. Pardon...conditions.| The 
“ia 199. more] elfe Qa. first line ends at vf, Qq. 
oo 200. she is] Om. Voss. 204. me] Om. Pope+. 
a - 195. so] CAPELL: Speaking ss enamle as one unwilling to say how much she 
7M was. dear to him ; and giving ‘so’ the force of —so and so, or at such and such price, 
q 2 as men sometimes express themselves. EccLEs, MALONE, and MoBERLY think that 
a __ it means ‘ worthy of that high dowry,’ in which opinion the present Editor agrees, 
rg ss but WRIGHT thinks that it means simply dear. 
— 197. seeming] JOHNSON: Beautiful. STEEVENS: Specious. WricuT: That 
; substance which is but little in appearance. MosrerLy: Her nature that seems so 
4 slight and shallow. Lear speaks in the next line of her ‘infirmities,’ her want of 
“G established principle as compared with her decided and outspoken sisters. SCHMIDT 
4 thinks that all these definitions fail to take into account Shakespeare’s use of the word 


‘substance,’ whereby he commonly expresses vea/ity in opposition to shadow , ‘seem- 
ing substance’ means, therefore, something which pretends to be that which it is not, 
Perhaps, he adds, ‘seeming’ is to be taken as a gerund, and ‘seeming substance’ 
may then mean a creature whose reality is mere show or seeming. 

198. pieced] WRIGHT: See III, vi, 2 

199. like] See Ham. II, ii, 80. 

201, owes] Owns. 

203. stranger’d] See Apport, § 294, for a list of over thirty passive verbs, 
4 formed from adjectives and nouns, found mostly in the participle; in Zear are the 
following: ‘ faith’d,’ II, i, 70; ‘window’d,’ III, iv, 31; ‘He childed as I father’d,’ 

III, vi, 108; ‘nighted,’ IV, v, 13; ‘the death-practised duke,’ IV, vi, 275. 
3% 


me, = 
I tell you all her wealth. 11 France| ae Sees king, 
. I would not from your love make such a stray, ee: { : 

. To match you where I hate; therefore beseech you: 
T’ avert your liking a more aren iies way 
Than on a wretch whom nature is ashamed 
Almost t’ acknowledge hers, 


210. worthier| worthy Pope +. 


France. — This is most strange, 
J ; 205. up in] Ff, Rowe, Knt, Sch. 212-218, This......degree|] Six lines, 5, 
we on Qq et cet.. ending now....prai/e,....deerg fy» thingyoue 4 
207. [To France] Pope. Om. QaqFf. favour,...degree, Qq. 


205. makes not up] JOHNSON: To make up, in familiar language, is neutrally, 
to come forward, to make advances, which I think is meant here. MAPONE? Elec- 
tion comes not to a decision. KnicHT: The choice of Burgundy refuses to come to 
a decision, 2 such circumstances, or o7# such terms. MAsoN thinks that‘up’ and 
‘on’ should be read as one word, in order to make the sense evident. But WRIGHT’S 
note is conclusive: ‘ Election makes not its choice, comes to no decision, resolves 
not. We still say ‘to make up one’s mind,” and the phrase is here used elliptically 
in the same sense,’ 

205. in such conditions] ScumipT (Zur Textkritik, &c., p. 14): If ‘ condi- 
tions’ be here taken in its ordinary sense, it requires, even according to Shake- 
speare’s own mode of speaking, o# before it, instead of ‘in;’ but it is not * condi- 
tions’ that are spoken of in what precedes:-* Will you, with those infirmities she 
owes, Unfriended, new-adopted to our hate, Dower’d with our curse, and stranger’d 
with our oath,’ &c. It is qualities that are here enumerated, and it is in just this 
sense of gwality that Shakespeare very often uses ‘condition.’ J/eas. for Meas. I, i, 
54: ‘our haste from hence is of so quick condition that it prefers itself, &e. A/er. 
of Ven. V,i, 74: ‘unhandled colts, fetching mad bounds .. . which is the hot con- 
dition of their blood’ Hen. V: IV, i, 108: ‘all his senses have but human condi- 
tions.’ Much Ado, III, ii, 68: ‘one that knows him, and his ill conditions,’ &c. 
That the word in this sense may also have the preposition zz before it can be shown 
by abundant examples. As You Like it, I, i, 47 : ‘I know you are my eldest brother, 
and in the gentle condition of blood you should soknow me.’ Rich. J7: LE, ai,.107% 
‘in conditions of the worst degree, in gross rebellion,’ &c. 

208, 209. such... To] For instances of the omission of as after such, so, ste 
AbpBorT, § 281, and line 216, 

209. beseech] For instances of the omission of the nominative, see ABBOTT, 
§ 401. 
210. avert] ScHmIpT: Not elsewhere in Sh. as a verb. : 


210, 215. more worthier ... Most best] For instances of double comparatives 
and superlatives, see ABBOTT, § 11, 


213. she, who] /he whom F,, Sing. 


_ Ste, that Q,, Mal. Steev. Var. Coll. Glo. 


+, Mob. /he that Q.. 
best] Om. F,. dlest Coll. (MS.). 
214. The. praise| Your praise’s ar- 
gument Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
215. The best, the| Ff, Rowe, Johns. 
Cap. Steev. Ec. Knt, Sing. Wh. Sch. 


Moft beft, moft Qq et cet. 
Most...dearest| Dearest and best 


even but now was your best object, 
t of your praise, balm of your age, 
t, the dearest, should in this trice of time 215 
-a thing so monstrous, to dismantle 
sem of reaVOUEs: Sure, her offence 


best Quincy (MS.). 
217. folds] fouls Q,. 
her offence] th’ offence Pope, Han. 
219. That monsters tt] As monstrous 
zs Rowe, Pope. As monsters it Han. 
or] ere Theob. conj. (with- 
drawn). : 
your fore-vouch’d| your fore- 


-voucht Ff. you for voucht Qq, Jen. 


affection] affections Qq, Jen. 


i’ : ieee Theob. Han. Warb. And dearest, 


213. best] CoLLier (ed. 3): The compositor [instead of d/est] caught ‘best’ 
from the next line but one. 

213. object] Scumipt (Zur Textkritik, &c., p. 14): Sh. uses this word, without 
an adjective, in an expanded sense, equivalent to that which one has always in his 
: eye, or seeks out with his eye, the delight of his eye. Thus, % and A., 255: 

— The time is spent, her object will away,’ &c.; Jb., 822: ‘So did the merciless and 
pitchy night Fold in the object that did feed her sight;’ Afd. WV. D. IV, i, 174: 
“the object and the pleasure of mine eye is only Helena;’ Cymd. V, iv, 55: ¢ fruit- 
_ ful object be In eye of Imogen.’ Where Timon, IV, iii, 122, tells Alcibiades to 
“swear against objects,’ he means ‘pour out curses, when whatever touches the heart 
_ of man presents itself to the eye.’ The interpolated ‘best,’ in the present passage, 
3 while it makes the phrase more generally understood, weakens insteads of strengthens 
= the passage. [The omission of the adjective throws the accent on the last syllable of 
‘ object,’ which may be correct, but I can find no other similar accentuation of this 
noun in Sh.—Eb.] 

219. monsters it] WRIGHT: That is, makes it monstrous. 

‘ 219, 220. or... taint] JOHNSON interprets thus: ‘her offence must be prodig- 
ious, or yoz must fall into reproach for having vouch'd affection which you did not 
feel.? By changing ‘ Fall,’ of the Ff, into 7a//s, he says the same sense is produced, 
and adds‘another possible sense. ‘‘Or” signifies defore; the meaning of the Ff 
may therefore be: “Sure her crime must be monstrous defore your affection can be 
affected with hatred.”’ JENNENS, the sturdy champion of the Qq, enclosing the 
whole phrase in parentheses, thus defends and interprets their text: The best way 
to make sense [of the Qq text] will be to consider what was the real cause of the 
estrangement of Lear’s love from Cordelia; it was the vouch’d affections of his three 
daughters; the two eldest vouch’d such affection to him as was beyond all nature 
and possibility to a father; but Cordelia youched only such an affection as was natural 
and reasonable for a daughter to feel for her father. Now, Lear was fallen into 


: ri 


’n into ae aces to 
~ Must be a faith that ‘reason, without miracle, 
Should never plantinme, 
Cor. I yet beseech your : 
(If for I want that glib and oily art, 
To speak and purpose not, since what I well intend, 
T’ll do’t before I speak,) that you make known 


220. Falln] Falne Q,Q,. Fall Ff, 222. majesty,| Maiefy. F,. = 
Steev. Ec. Knt, Del. Sing. Dyce i, Sta. 222, 223. I yet...(Jf for] One oa ag 
Ktly, Sch. Could not fm, Rowe, Pope, Han. : 


Han. 223. (Zf for] Theob. Jf ( for Pope, r.- 
220, 221. of her...without| One line, _ Johns, Jen. Noparenthesis,QqFf (f = 
; Han. | = so Han. : ; ie 
oy 221. faith that....miracle| faith....A Tf for| Seeing Cap. conj. a, 
ip miracle, Han. 223, 224. J...speak| One line, Han. Ma 
, 222. Should] Ff+, Ec. Knt, Dyce, 224. well] will Ff, Rowe, Del. i, Sch. ; 
Sta. Wh. Sch. Could Qq et cet. 225. make known] may know Qgq, Jen. 
plant] plaint Q,. [To France. Jen. : - 


taint, i. e. his judgement was corrupted, in preferring the extravagant and lying 
protestations of his eldest daughters to the sincere and just ones of his youngest. 
And if we ruminate a little, this is the only second reason for Lear’s rejecting Corde- 
lia that can with any probability be supposed to be guessed at by France; for it would 
be rude in France to charge Lear with vouching the dearest affections to one he did 
not really love; and it is absurd to suppose that so great a love should change to 
hate, without she had committed some very great crime, and which France could 
not be brought to believe; therefore, this second guess becomes the only one, and the 
true one, viz: that Regan and Goneril had, by their superior art in coaxing, won all 
Lear’s love from Cordelia. MALONE held to this interpretation until he ‘ recollected 
that France had not heard the extravagant professions made by Regan and Goneril.’ 
Then he gives what seems to me the true construction of the passage: ‘ Either her ee 
offence must be monstrous, or, if she has not committed any such offence, the affection 
which you always professed to have for her must de tainted and decayed’ [that, 
is, ‘must be’ is to be understood before ‘ Fall’n.’ It is easy to see how the text 
of the Ff arose. The last syllable of Fallen was absorbed by the first syllable of 
‘into,’ so that even were Fa// of the Ff to be adopted, I think it should be printed 
Fall’ —Ep.] 

222. majesty] A dissyllable, 


223. If for] Apzorr, § 387, supposes an ellipsis after ‘If? of #¢ zs, and takes ¢ for’ 
as equivalent to decause. JENNENS and ECCLES suppose that it is a broken speech, 
expressing the modest fear and bashful diffidence of Cordelia, heightened by her 
concern under her pitiable circumstances. For instances of ‘for,’ meaning decause, 
see SCHMIDT, Zex. s. v. 

225-227. that ...step] JENNENS, true to the Qq, and adopting their text here, 


believes that this is yadidireseed to France; then, without making a period, Cordelia 
turns again to the king, 


Is blot, nor other foulness, 226 


| Coll. (MS), Sing. ii, = Sch. murder, or Q, et cet. mo slur, or 
me Qe seritether, or Ff, Wh. — Cartwright. coe ; 


nor ee CoLLieR (Notes, &c., p. 451): Murder or murther, of the Ff, 
entirely out of place; Cordelia could never contemplate that anybody would 
pect her of murder as the ground of her father’s displeasure; she is referring to 
vicious blots’ and ‘foulness’ in respect to virtue. The copyist or the compositor 
__ miswrote or misread nor ofher ‘murther.’ Blackwood’s Maga. (Oct. 1853, p. 464): 

_ France has just before said: ‘Sure her offence must be of such xnnatural degree 
_ That monsters it’—that is, it can be nothing short of some crime of the deepest dye, 
and therefore ‘murder’ does not seem to be so much out of place in the mouth of 
Cordelia. WHITE pronounces this emendation ‘ only specious; for “ vicious blot” 
is altogether too general a term to be put in the alternative with “ foulness,” almost 
as general, and of like meaning. I do not doubt that Sh. wrote “murther.”’ [In 
his Shakespeare's Scholar, WHITE gave in his adherence to Collier’s emendation, 
saying that ‘murzker is an easy and undeniable mistake for zor other,’ and that 
‘murder’ has no proper place in the category of blemishes enumerated by Cor- 
-  — delia.] “WALKER (Crit. iii, 275): What has murder to do here? Read umber. 
‘MALONE on ‘umber'd face, Hen. V: IV, Chorus: ‘ Umber is a dark yellow earth 


E- __ brought from Umbria in Italy, which, being mixed with water, produces such a dusky 
__ yellow colour as the gleam of fire by night gives to the countenance. Our author’s 
-___ profession probably furnished him with this epithet; for, from an old MS play, en- 
_ titled The Telltale, it appears that zmdber was used in the stage exhibitions of his 


time. In that piece, one of the marginal directions is: “ He wmbers her face.’’’ 
Dyce (ed. 2): Undoubtedly the original reading is a very suspicious one. Har- 
LIWELL: Most readers will agree with Dyce. Battery (ii, 89) proposes burden, 
because [Heaven save the mark!] the ‘burden of guilt, the burden of dishonour, 
the burden of sorrow, are all Shakespearian expressions.’ STAUNTON: Collier’s (MS) 
emendation is certainly a very plausible substitution. KrIGHTLEY: How could the 
3 pure and gentle Cordelia suppose herself to be suspected of murder? which, more- 
over, accords not with the other charges she enumerates. I feel strongly persuaded that 
Sh.’s word was misdeed, which, if a little effaced, might easily be taken for ‘ murder.’ 
/ Hupson: Murder seems a strange word to be used here, and Collier’s reading has 
- some claims to preference; but I suspect Cordelia purposely uses murder out of place, 
. as a glance at the hyperbolical absurdity of denouncing her as ‘a wretch whom Na- 
; ture is ashamed to acknowledge.’ Moseriy: There seems good reason for adopting 
. Collier’s reading: the gradation ‘ vicious blot, murder, foulness’ would not be happy. 
Moreover, from the parallel expression, ‘ vicious mole of nature,’ in_Ham. I, iv,-24, 
we may conclude that in this line Cordelia refers to natural defects, which Lear might 
be supposed to have just discovered; but in the next line: * No unchaste action,’ &c, 
to evil actions, from all suspicions of which she wishes te be cleared.’ [If ever 
emendation be necessary, here seems to be the occasion. Rather than suppose that 
Cordelia could be accused of mzrder, I would adopt Walker's far-fetched ‘umber’ 
or Keightley’s prosaic ‘misdeed.’? Instead, we have what is to me an emendatio 
certissima, restoring the rhythm, according with the ductus literarum, and offering 
no violence to the consistency of Cordelia’s character. To White’s objection, which 
seems to me the only serious one, that there is not enough of an alternative between 


ec 


cy 


tawe | 
v 


; 
\ 


Nfl " 


cee 


. 


f 
ta 
“ 
a] i fi 
4 To ; 
—_ “7 - I 
- Z 
“= a ? 
Fe ALS 
f Z 
ae 


A still-soliciting eye, on ne tongue 
That I am glad I have not, though not to. hraveit a mo ae 
Hath lost me in your liking. 

Lear. Better thou — 


227. unchaste| uncleane Qq. 


dishonour'd]dishonord Q,. dis- Glo.+, Dyce ii, Mob. Huds. 


honored F,. difhonoured QF FF ,. I have not] I’ve not Pope +. — 
step] stoop Coll. iii. (MS). 232. Better] Goe to, goe tayshesee SBS <= 
228. [To Lear. Jen. (subs.), Jen. = 
grace and | grace’s Anon.* 232, 233. Better...better. =f nie The 
229. for want] the want Han. Cap. first line ends borne, Qq, Cap. Jen. Ath 
Ec. Huds. hadfi, Ff, Rowe. ‘ 
Lam] I’m Pope +, Jen. Dyceii. 233- @ have| thaveF,. to haue Qq. 
richer] rich Qq. have Pope +. 


230. still-solictting| Hyphen, Theob. ’ 
a 


‘blot’ and ‘foulness,’ may there not be opposed that Cordelia’s distress might make © 


her verge on incoherence? As Moberly truly says, ‘ the gradation from a vicious blot 
to murder, and then to foulness, is not happy.’ This alone is so un-Shakespearian that 
of itself it would taint the line. Murder may have been a much less heinous crime 


~ in Shakespeare’s days than at present, and Lady Capulet may have thought to cheer 


Juliet’s drooping spirits with the contemplation of Romeo’s assassination, but that it 
could ever have been of less degree than foulness demands a faith that reason with- 
out miracle can never plant in me. Can a parallel instance of anticlimax be found 
in Sh.? And mark how admirably the lines are balanced: ‘vicious blot or foul- 
ness, unchaste action or dishonour’d step.’—ED. ] 

229. But...richer] WricHT: The construction is imperfect, though the sense 
is clear. We should have expected ‘even the want,’ as Hanmer reads, but Sh. was 
probably guided by what he had written in the line preceding, and mentally supplied 
‘I am deprived.’ There is an obscurity about ‘for which.’ It would naturally mean 
‘for having which,’ but here it must signify ‘ for wanting which.’ 

230. still] Constantly. Seé Ham. I, i, 122. 

231. I have] Moserty: Pronounce I’ve not. 

232. in your liking] WRIGHT: The ‘in’ denotes the amount of the loss,—as in 
the phrases, ‘ they shall amerce him in an hundred shekels of silyer’—Deut. xxii, 19; 
“condemned the land in an hundred talents of silver,’ &c.—2 Chron. xxxvi, 3; and 
the common expression ‘to stand one in,’ for ‘to cost.’ ~The phrase may also be ex- 
plained, ‘hath caused me loss in respect of your love.’ 

232. Better, &c.] BuCKNILL (p. 177): All this is exaggerated passion, perverted 
affection, weakened judgement; all the elements, in fact, of madness, except inco- 


herence and delusion, These are added later, but they are not essential to mad- ° 


ness; and, as we read the play, the mind of Lear is, from the first, in a state of 
actual unsoundness, or, to speak more precisely, of disease. 


231. That] As Qq, Cap. Jen. Coll. ii, be 


leav 4 hi 1 Ispo’ ' 
fb'dote -My oid of pate 
to the eas -Love’s not love 
mingled with regards that stands 


from th’ entire point. peel you have ees 
: a) a dowry. Sik . 
Royal Lear, 240 = 
ive bet that portion which yourself proposed, : 
d here I take Cordelia by the hand, , 

Duchess of Burgundy. 

a _ Lear. Nothing. I have sworn; I am firm. 

is _ Bur. 1am sorry then you have. so lost a father 245 


- That you must lose a husband. 
_- Cor. oe Peace be with Burgundy! 
"Since that respects of fortune are his love, 


234. but this ?] no more but this, Qq, 
=~ = Jen, Var. 

eae 2A Which] That Qq, Jen. 

leaves | loves Q.. 


240. a@ dowry] and dowreQ,. and 
dower Q,, Jen. 

240-243. Royal...Burgundy.| Three 
lines, ending fortion...Cordelia...Bur- 


235-238. Which...stands| Three lines, 
ending do,...Lady ?...ftands, Qq. 

237. Love’s| Love is Qq, Jen. Steev. 
Ec. Var. Coll. Sing. Ktly. 

238. regards that stands] Sch. re- 
eards, that stands Ff, Rowe. re/pects 
that flands Qq. respects that stand Mal. 
Steev. Bos. Coll. Sing. Sta. Ktly. ve- 


gundie, Q,; ending fortion...take...Bur- 
gundy, Q. 

240, Lear|Q,. LerQ,. King FE+, 
Knt, Dyce i, Wh. Sch. 

241. yourself | you yourself Bos. (mis- 
print ?) 

244. I have sworn; I am firm.| I 
haue fworn, Iam firm. Ff. I haue 


r. gards, and stands Cap. regards; that fworne. Qq, Jen. L’ve sworn. Pope+. 
~ stands Jen. regards that stand Pope et cet. 245. Lam] I’m Pope+, Dyceii, Huds, 
“i 239. th’] Ff, Rowe+, Sing. Wh.-Sch. 246-248. Peace....wife.| Two lines, 
the Qq et cet. the first ending re/pects, Qq. 

be- point. Will] Steev. point wil 246. Burgundy] Burguny F,,. 

Q,. point, will Q,Ff, Rowe. point. Say 247. respects of fortune] refpect and 
4 will Pope +, Cap. Jen. fortunes Ff, Rowe, Pope, Sch. 

4 235. history] Scumrmpr: Frequently used for what passes in the inner life of 
- 


man. Cf. Sov. xciii; Meas, for Meas. 1, i, 29; Rich. 7/7; III, v, 28. 
235. unspoke] WricHT: Sh, uses both forms of the participle of the verb sfea, 
See Zemp. IV, i, 31. Inthe A. V. of the Bible the form ‘spoken’ alone occurs. 
“ 237. Love’s not love] Compare Son. xcvi. 
s 237. regards] KnicHT: Considerations. 


, 238. entire] JOHNSON: Single, unmixed with other considerations, MOBERLY: 
The main point of affection. 

4 247. Since that] See Macb. IV, iii, 106, or ABnor, § 287. 

; 247. respects of fortune] If we adopt this reading, ‘respects’ is used like ‘ re- 


oo. 


~ Tshall not be his wife. ras 
France. Fairest Cordelia, ‘eube art most ri 
Most choice forsaken, and most loved despis a 
Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon. 
Be it lawful I take up what’s cast away. 
Gods, gods! ’tis strange that from their cold’st neglest 
My love should kindle to inflamed respect— __ 4 
Thy dowerless daughter, king, thrown to my chance, 205 3 : 
Is queen of us, of ours, and our fair France. 
Not all the dukes of waterish Burgundy 


Can buy this unprized precious maid of me.— ae 
Bid them farewell, Cordelia, though unkind : ‘ oa 
Thou losest here, a better where to find. 260 5 xe 
249. that] thou Han. 258. Can] Shall Qq, Jen. Steev. Ec. 
251. seize] ceaze Q,. Var. Coll. Sing. Sta. Del. Ktly, Huds. 
252. Be it] Be’t Pope+, Dyce ii. 259, 260. unkind; Thou] Theob. un- Be 
253. cold’st] couldf Q,. kinde, Thou Ff, Rowe, Popes. vxkind 
255. my chance] thy chance Qq. Thou Qq- 


257. of | 7m Qq, Jen. 260. better where] “better-where Sta. 


gards,’ in line 238, or in am. II, ii, 79, and, of course, with the same meaning as 
in Ham. III, i, 68, But it is doubtful if the reading of the Ff be not better; it 
means the same, and the turn of the phrase is certainly Shakespearian. SCHMIDT 
(Zur Textkritik, p. 15), in reference to this passage, has given several instances 
of hendiadys in this very play, ¢. g. I, ii, 45: ‘This policy and reverence of age,’ 
equivalent to ‘this policy of revering age;’ I, ii, 165: ‘nothing like the image and — 
horror of it,’ equivalent to ‘the horrible image of it;’ I, iv, 336: ‘This milky gen- 
tleness and course of yours,’ equivalent to ‘ gentle course;’ II, ii, 74: * With every 
gale and vary of their masters,’ equivalent to ‘every varying gale.’ 

257. waterish] WRIGHT: Used with a notion of contempt. See O¢h. III, iii, 15. 
Burgundy was the best watered district of France. See Heylyn (4 Little Descrip- 
tion of the Great World, ed. 1633, p. 22): ‘That which Queene Katharine was wont 
to say, that France had more rivers than all Europe beside; may in like manner be 
said of this Province in respect of France.’ 

258. unprized] Apport, §375: This may mean ‘unprized by others, but pre- 
cious tome,’ WRIGHT: Or it may mean Jréce/ess, as ‘ unvalued,’ in Rich. LIT: ie 
iv, 27, signifies zzvaluadble. 

259. unkind] SraunTon: It here signifies «natural, unless France is intended 
to mean, though unkinn’d, i. e. though forsaken by your kindred. 

260, here... where] JoHNsoN: These have the power of nouns, WRIGHT: 
Compare the Preface of the Translators to the Reader prefixed to the Authorized 
Version of the Bible: ¢ As for example, if we translate the Hebrew or Greek word 
once by Purpose, neuer to call it Intent; if one where Tourneying, neuer Traueil- 
ing; if one where Thinke, neuer Suppose; if one where Paine, neuer Ache,’ &c. 


fae 


<ste ~ 


iy 
hast Siac France. 


Let her be thine, for we 261 


i hers Pee be gone 

t our grace, our love, our benison.— 

“noble Burgundy. 265 
oo [Flourish. Exeunt all but France, Goneril, ; 
: Regan, and Cordelia. 


France. Bid farewell to your sisters. “ae 

ie Cor. Ye jewels of our father, with wash’d eyes = 

_ Cordelia leaves you. I know you what you are ; : 

= And, like a sister, am most loath to call . 
Your faults as they are named. Love well our father. 270 


__ To your professed bosoms I commit him; 
But yet, alas, stood I within his grace, 


as 261, 262. for we...see] One line, Qq. 
263, 264. Therefore.....benison| Cap. 


266. SCENE Iv. Pope +, Jen. 
sisters.]| sisters ? Q,. 


_-——s was the first to indicate, by dashes, that 


this is addressed to Cordelia. 
264, 265. Without...Burgundy.| One 


line, Qq. 
264. our love| without our love Johns. 
(misprint ?) 


265. [Flourish.] Om. Qq. 

Exeunt...] Exit Lear and Bur- 
gundy. Qq. Exeunt. Ff. Exeunt Lear, 
Burgundy, Cornwal, Albany, Gloster, 
and Attendants. Cap. 


267. Ye jewels| Rowe ii+, Quincy 
(MS), Cap. Dyce ii, Wh. Hal. Huds. 
Coll. iii. The jewels QqFf et cet. 

267-270. The...father :| Four lines, 
ending father,....are,....faults.... father, 
Qa. 

268. you what| what Rowe ii +, Cap. 

270. Love] Ff+, Jen. Knt, Coll. Del. 
Dyce, Wh. Huds. Sch. Ue Qq et cet. 

271. professed) professing Pope'+, 
Quincy (MS), Cap. Ec. 


Other instances of adverbs used as nouns are ‘ upward,’ V, ili, 137; ‘inward,’ Son. 
 — exxviii, 6: ‘outward,’ Sou. lxix, 5; and ‘backward,’ Zemf. I, ii, 50. 
; 267. Ye jewels] STEEVENS: It is frequently impossible in ancient MS to distin- 
guish Zhe from its customary abbreviation. WALKER (C77v. iii, 276) supports the Zhe 


>: of the QqFf by quotations from Browne and Spenser, but, as Dyce says, they are 
= not parallel to the present passage. MoBeRLY: ‘ You who are naturally dear and 
‘ precious to him.’ HALLIwELL: The old reading makes sense, but Zhe and Ye 


being constantly written the same in MSS, there can be little hesitation in adopting 
the latter reading, which seems to improve the sentence. SCHMIDT gives several in- 
stances of the use of Zhe before the vocative: Cor. I, vi, 6; Ful. Cas. V, ili, 99; 
Per. Il, i, 1; but of these the first alone is parallel, and the last is generally printed 
‘Thou’ instead of The. 

267. wash’d] For instances of the use of this word as applied to tears, see 

_Scumipt, Lex. s. v. 
268. know you] For instances of the redundant object, see WALKER, C7iz. i, 68; 

or ABBOTT, § 414. 

271. professed] Dertius: Cordelia commits her father to the love which her 
sisters had professed, not to that which they really feel, 


4 


be eh ae , ay erent 
ae would prefer him to a better place. | 


Tae * 


x 


So farewell to you both. a. 
Reg. Prescribe not’ us our duty. 7 


Gon. 


se 


Let your stu dy 


Be to content your lord, who hath received you ~ 


At fortune’s alms. You have obedience scanted, — 
And well are worth the want that you have wanted. . 
Cor, Time shall unfold what plighted cunning hides ; 


273. prefer| perfer F,. 
274. both.| both ? Q,. 
275. Reg....Gon.] Gonorill....Regan. 
Qq. 
not? | Ed. not QqFf et cet. 
duty.| Ff (dutie F,) +, Coll. Del. 
Dyce i, Wh. Sch. duties? Q,. duties. 
QO. et-cet: ; 


ending Lord,...almes,...fcanted, Qq. 
2747: Af\ As‘ Cap. Be Bale. = 4 
278. worth...wanted | worth the worth 
that you haue wanted Qq. worthy to 
want that you have wanted Han. ‘ 
279. plighted| pleated Q,Q,. pleeted 
Q,- platted Pope ii +, Cap. Jen. Steev. 
Ec. Var. Glo.+, Mob, 


275-277. Let...scanted,| Three lines, 


273. prefer] ScHmIDT: That is, address, direct, or, better, recommend. 
275. not’ us] In the belief that the Zo, in the full phrase ‘ prescribe not-Zo us,’ is a4 
absorbed in the final ¢ of ‘not’ I have printed the text as above. See II, ii, 116.—Ep. 

278. worth ... wanted] THEOBALD: ‘ You well deserve to meet with that want 
of love from your husband, which you have profess’d to wad for our Father.’ WarR- 
BURTON: This nonsense must be corrected thus: ‘worth... . vaunted,’ 7. e. that 
disherison, which you so much glory in, you deserve. HEATH: Sh. might have 
written: ‘the want that you have wasted, z, e. you will deserve to want that which 
you have yourself so wastefully and unnecessarily thrown away. TOLLET: ‘ You are 
well deserving of the want of dower that you are without.? JENNENS: The old 
reading is not elegant, indeed, but it is intelligible,—it is like ‘seeding seed ’—Gen. 
i, 29. CAPELL: The Qq reading, with this addition, viz: ‘are worth fo want the 
worth that you have wanted’ has a plain sense, and one worthy the utterer, and gives 
a roundness to the jingle. Eccirs: It might be read: ‘ worth Zo want that you have 
wanted,’—‘ that’ taken demonstratively, and not relatively,—or else, ‘the want of 
that you've wanted.’ Wricut: Dr. Badham combined the texts of Ff and Qq thus: 
‘And well are worthy want that worth have wanted.’ The difficulty seems to arise 
from the imperfect connection of the relative with its antecedent. The use of the 
word ‘want’ has, apparently, the effect of always making Shakespeare’s construc- 
tions obscure, See line 229. Goneril says, ‘you have come short in your obedience, 
and well deserve the want of that affection in which you yourself have been want- 
ing. Otherwise [with Jennens], we must regard ‘the want that you have wanted’ 
as an instance of the combination of a verb with its cognate accusative [which is 
the view ScHMIDT takes]. Moser.y: The text of the Qq might be emended thus: 
‘Which well were worth the word that you have wanted,’ 7. e. yet obedience might 
have claimed from you the one word which you would not say. 

279. plighted] THEOBALD (52, Res¢., p. 171) suggested pleached, 7. e. twisted, 
entangled, but preferred platted, 7. e. wrapt in folds, which Pope adopted in his ed, 2, 
MALONE once thought it should be gered, as in IV, vi, 169, but was afterwards con- 


Come, my fair Cordelia. 
[Exeunt France and Condae 

. Sister, it is not little I have to say of what most 

hy appertains to us both. I think our father will hence 

1 night. - 


“A 


280. cover] Jen. couers QqFf +, Ee. 282-284. Sister........to-night.] Cap. 
_ Kat, Del.i,Ktly,Sch. cover’*dHan.Cap. _‘ Three lines, ending Say,...both,..to-night, 
shame them derides| with fhame QqFf +,,Jen. 
 derides Ff +, Cap. Ec. Knt, Del. i, Sing. . 282. little I have] a little I have Qq, 
i, Sch, cheir shame derides Anon.* Cap. Jen. Steev. Ec. War. Sing, Ktly, 
281. my] Om. Qq. Glo.+, Huds. Mob. Zittle I’ve Pope +. 
[Exeunt...] Exit...QqF_F.. 283. hence] go hence Rowe +. 


282. SCENE v. Pope +, Jen. 


-vinced, by the word ‘ unfold,’ that p/aited of the Qq was the true reading. KNIGHT: 
To ‘plight’ and to J/ait equally mean ‘to*fold.’ In Milton’s Hist. of England, 
Boadicea wears ‘a plighted garment of divers colours.’ In the exquisite passage in 
Comus: ‘1 took it for a fairy vision Of some gay creatures of the element, That in 
the colours of the rainbow live, And play i’ th’ plighted clouds’—the epithet has 


the same meaning. STAUNTON: ‘ Plighted’ means ivolved, complicated. WRIGHT: 
g g 


For the Folio spelling, see Spenser, Faery Queene, ii, 3, § 26: ‘All in a silken Camus 
lilly whight, Purfled upon with many a folded plight.’ Cotgrave gives, ‘Pli: m. A 
plait, fould, lay; bought; wrinkle, crumple.’ 

280, cover] Mason: The Ff are right, with the change of a single letter: covert 
instead of ‘covers.’ Thus, ‘ Who covert faults at last with shame derides,’ * Who’ 
referring to ‘time.’ [This reading was followed by Rann.] HENLEY: Cordelia 


” alludes to Proy. xxviii, 13: ‘He that covereth his sins shall not prosper,’ &c. SINGER 


(ed. 2): I have no doubt we should read cover-faults, 7. e. dissemblers, and that the 
meaning is: * ime shall unfold what cunning duplicity hides, who (Time) at last 
derides such dissemblers with shame, by unmasking them.’ [And this compound 
Singer adopted into the text of Sh., for whose purity, as against Collier’s (MS) 
emendations, he had contended so vehemently, and, it should be added, so intem- 
perately.—Ep.] Dyce: I adhere to the Qq, because I feel convinced that ‘ Who’ 
refers to people in general,—‘ Those who,’ &c. As to the wth of the Folio (which, 
by the by, Mr. Collier’s (MS) changes to ¢hem), I can no more account for it, than 
for hundreds of other strange things which the Folio exhibits. ScuHmupr refers 
* Who’ to ‘time,’ and says that ‘faults’ is the object of both ‘covers’ and ‘ derides.’ 
[I cannot but agree with Dyce’s interpretation.—ED. ] 

282. most] CAPELL thinks that this ‘word is crept into Goneril’s speech out of 
her sister’s that follows, which makes a part of it verse: ** most,” therefore, should be 
discarded.’ z 

- 283. hence] Ecctes: There is not, I think, throughout the play, the least hint 
given as to the particular part of the realm in which any scene lies, till we are intro- 
duced towards the conclusion into the neighborhood of Dover; nor are we informed 
whether it be intended that either of the sisters should make the palace of Lear her 


Reg. That's most certain, an 
wit 1s : s 
Gon. You see how ae of changes his 5 


hath now cast her off appears too scien 29 
Reg. ’Tis the infirmity of his age; yet he hath ever bat =o 
Li Se slenderly known himself. <n 
Ex Gon. The best and soundest of his time hath been but 
rash; then must we look from his age to receive, not alone 


" eit: qapefiecrions of long-ingraffed condition, but therewithal 295 ‘A 
“an the unruly waywardness that infirm and choleric years bring oe 
: 2 with them. ~ + 
—_— Reg. Such unconstant starts are we like to have from - 


him as this of Kent’s banishment. ‘ 
Gon. There is further compliment of leave-taking be- 300 


285. most] Om. Pope+. 295. long-ingraffed | Hypheén, Pope. 

287. 2s, the] is the Q,. ingraffed | engraffed ¥,F,.Knt,  — 

288. hath not been| hath beene Ff, Dyce, Sta. Glo. Mob. imgrafted Qa, 
Rowe, Knt, Del. i, Sch. Cap. Jen. Cam. Wr. engrafted Pope+, 

290. t00] too too FFF, Rowe. Steev. Var. Coll. Sing. Wh, 

grossly | groffe Qq. 296. the] Om. Qq. 

294. from his age to receive| Ff+, 298. starts] stars Q.. 
Jen. Knt, Wh. Sch. 40 receive from his 300. There is] Then his Anon.* ae 
age Qq et cet. compliment] Johns. complement 


295. imperfections | imperfection Qq. ~ QgqFf. 


future residence. All we know is, that he was to abide alternately with them in” 
whatsoever part they held their court. | 

For ellipsis of the verb of motion after w7// and zs, see ABBOTT, § 405. 

288. hath not been] Dyce says that the reading of the Ff defies common sense. 
ScHMIDT, while acknowledging that the ‘not? may have dropped by mischance | 
from the line of the Ff, thinks that a good sense may yet be extracted from that 
line by making ‘have’ emphatic. Thus: All our observation in the past is little in 
comparison with what we may expect in the future, to judge from Lear’s treatment 
of Cordelia. 

291. age] MoBERLY: These women come of themselves, and at once, to the feel- 
ing which it requires all Iago’s art to instil into Othello; on whom it is at length 
urged that Desdemona must be irregular in mind, or she would not have preferred 
him to the ‘curled darlings’ of Venice. 

293. time] WricHT: That is, his best and soundest years. See I, ii, 46. 

295. ingraffed] WricHT: This spelling, and that in the Qgq, are both used by 
Sh., though the former is the more correct, the word being derived from the Fr. 
erefer. In Lucrece, 1062, we find the substantive « graff.’ 

295. condition] MALONE: Thatis, the qualities of mind, confirmed by long habit, 


i 


ee] Burgundy Han. sitar: 
ray you] pray Qgq. 302. disposition] Ff+, Sch. di/poft- 
Mob 2 Theob. Pi hit Qq, Zions Qq et cet. 
let us fit Ff, Rowe, Pope, 304. of it] on’t Qq, Cap. Glo. +. 
1. Cap. Ec. Knt, Sch, 305. 2” ch’) i?’ Qq. 
eather with| authority, with : 


_ gor. hit] SrEevens: That is, let us agree. Hupson: The meaning of what 
"follows probably is, if the king continue in the same rash, headstrong, and incon- 


stant temper, as he has just shown, in snatching back his authority the moment his 


; will i is crossed, we shall be the worse off for his surrender of the kingdom to us. 


Pe _ Scum (Zur Texthkrittk, p. 15) earnestly contends, but I am afraid in vain, for 


‘sit’ of the Ff. ‘To strike together,’ he says, ‘ or to act in harmony, as it is expressed 
by “to hit together,” is not a matter of free will, but proceeds directly from the nature 
_ of things, and is not something to which one can be invited. . . . Whereas, the phrase 
‘sit together,’”’ has the plain and manifest meaning—to hold a session, to take counsel 


together. Goneril would forthwith see a common plan agreed upon, and to Regan’s 


_ dilatory answer: “ We shall think further of it,” replies: ‘‘“ We must do something, 


and i’ th’ heat,’ and for this an agreement is of course essential, and an agreement 
she demands in the words “let us sit togethe:.’’ Schmidt then adduces the fol- 


_ lowing instances in proof: Twelfth Night, I, v, 143; Ham. V,i,4; Hen. V- V, ii. 


S05) Lick, 77> 111, 4, 173; Cor. V, ii, 74; 6. V, iii, 131; Per. 11, ti, 92. But in 
all these instances, except, perhaps, the last, there is reference to a judicial assembly 
or a session more or less formal and solemn, and a meaning is conveyed which I 
~ cannot but think strained when applied to an agreement between two sisters.—ED. 
302. disposition] Dycr: As to ‘dispositions’ or disposition,—either reading may 
stand; we have afterwards both forms fromthe mouth of the present speaker. See 
I, iv, 215 and 286. 
305. heat] STEEVENS: That is, we must strike while the iron is hot. 


4% 


| aa 


of Gloucester's 


> &. 
i 
i 


a Scene Il. Zhe Ear! 
Enter EDMUND, with a letter. 


a. Edm, Thou, Nature, art my goddess; to thy law & 
' My services are bound. Wherefore shouldI 


ra a 


_ ScENE 1.] Om. Rowe. SCENE VI. Enter...letter. ] Rowe (subs.).. Enter 
Pope +, Jen. Baftard “folus. Qq (felas Q,-) Enter 
* The...castle.] A Castle belongingto — Baftard. Ff. VPay 


the Earl of Glo’ster. Pope. A Hall in 1-26. Thou...news ?] Prose, Qq. 
the Earl of Gloster’s Castle. Cap. 7 


Ecc.es disapproves of this order of the scenes; in his judgement the accusation 


; of Edgar by Edmund labours under a weight of improbability, which is increased 7 
om the longer that Edgar remains concealed without taking any steps to vindicate him- 
es self; that he should lie thus*quiet, during all the time that passes from the opening @ 


day of the tragedy to Lear’s stormy departure for Gloster’s castle, is ‘an outrage 
upon common sense too gross to be admitted,’ thinks Eccles, who, therefore, trans- A 
poses this scene to the beginning of Act II, bringing it immediately before the scene . 5 
where Edmund persuades Edgar to fly, and pretends that he has been wounded. 
Thus, the two scenes are ‘brought within the compass of the same day, and a few 
hours only, or less, may be conceived to intervene between them.’ This consum- 
mation, however, is not attained without loss; for Sh. clearly intended that this scene 
should be where he put it, as the second of the tragedy: Gloster enters sadly, mut- 
tering: ‘Kent banished thus, And France in choler parted? And the king gone to- 
night? subscribed his power? Confined to exhibition? All this done upon the gad!’ 
(lines 23-26). But Eccles says that Sh. was liable to ‘unhappy oversights’ of dra- 
matic probability, and this must be one; ‘these obnoxious lines,’ therefore, he cuts 
out and ‘degrades’ to the bottom of the page, begging forgiveness for the act, on 
the ground that he is ‘in pursuit of a favorite object which is essential to the rea- 
sonableness and consistency of this admirable drama; more especially as the lines 

in themselves are of small importance, and the only ones so treated’ by him. 

I, Nature] WARBURTON: Sh. makes this bastard an atheist. Italian atheism had 
much infected the English court. STEEVENs: Edmund speaks of ‘nature’ in oppo- 
sition to ‘ custom,’ and not to the existence of a God. Edmund means only, that as” 
he came not into the world as ‘custom’ or law had prescribed, so he had nothing to 
do but to follow ‘ nature’ and her laws, which make no difference between legitimacy 
and illegitimacy, between the eldest and the youngest. To contradict Warburton’s 
assertion yet more strongly, Edmund concludes this very speech by an invocation to 
heaven. Mason: Edmund calls ‘nature’ his ‘goddess’ for the same reason that 
we call a bastard a zatwral son,—one who, according to the law of nature, is the - 
child of his father, but according to that of civil society is madlius Jilius. COLE- 
RIDGE: In this speech of Edmund you see as soon as a man cannot reconcile him- 
self to reason, how his conscience flies off by way of appeal to Nature, who is sure 
upon such occasions never to find fault, and also how shame sharpens a predisposi- 
tion in the heart to evil. For it is a profound moral, that shame will naturally gene- 
rate guilt; the oppressed will be vindictive, like Shylock, and in the anguish of 
undeserved ignominy the delusion secretly springs up, of getting over the moral 
quality of an action by fixing the mind on the mere physical act alone. 


we 


i: 


a 


4 
x 
j 
iE 
¥ 


a ee 


¥ 


\ 
\ 


ay 
as 


ad in the plague of custom, and permit 
Curiosity of nations to deprive me, 


* or that I am some twelve or fourteen moonshines ; 5 
Lag of a brother? Why bastard? wherefore base? 


. 3. in] toHan. on Quincy (MS). Cap. Jen. 
es Plague] plage Warb. place Simp- 4. deprive] despise Quincy (MS). 
> son, tyranny Mrs. Griffiths. me,| me? Ff, aN 
4. curtosity| nicety Pope. curtesie 6. Why...base?| and why bastard? 


Theob. Warb. courtesy Han. Johns. base? Han. 


3- plague] WARBURTON: An absurd expression, Read Alage, i. e. the place, the 
country, the boundary of custom. Plage is in common use amongst the old English 
writers. CAPELL: The speaker calls ‘custom’ a‘ plague’ or vexation, and asks why 
he should ‘stand in it,’ meaning de exfosed to it. JOHNSON: I can scarcely think 
‘plague’ right. SraunToN: ‘ Plague’ may here possibly signify place, or boundary 
from Jlaga ; but it is a very suspicious word. WricHT: I cannot help thinking 
that Sh. had in his mind a passage in the Prayer-book Version of Psalm xxxviii, 17,. 
* And I truly am set in the plague;’ where ‘plague’ is used in a sense for which I 
have found no parallel. The version evidently follows the Latin of Jerome’s transla- 
tion, ‘ Quia ego ad plagam paratus sum.’ HALLIWELL: Edmund cites for a reason of 
the contempt of the world not merely his illegitimacy, but his juniority, so that the 
plague is here also the infectious rule of custom, that bids the younger yield to the 
elder, a decree he determines wickedly to evade by becoming the only son. 

4. curiosity] THEOBALD: This should be czrtesze, as in As You Like It, I, i, 49. 
Nor must we forget that tenure in our laws, whereby some lands are held by the 


 ‘curtesie of England.’ And I ought to take notice that I had the concurrence of 


the ingenious Dr. Thirlby, who hinted to me this very emendation before he knew I 
made it. HEATH: It is not suitable to Edmund’s character to term that a curtesy 
which he endeavors to expose as a folly, and in virtue of which he was to be him- 
self so great a sufferer. Mason: By ‘curiosity’ Edmund means the zzcety, the 
strictness, of civil institutions. WHITE: ‘Curiosity’ is what Johnson would have 
called scrupulosity. WALKER (Vers. 201): The 7 in -2ty is almost uniformly dropt 
in pronunciation. I believe that Sh. pronounced curious’ty ; for, according to 
our common pronunciation, this verse is a verse only inname. THE BIBLE WorD- 
BOOK cites, ‘The Scripture then being acknowledged to bee so full and so perfect, 
how can wee excuse our selues of negligence, if we doe not studie them, of curiositie, 
if we be not content with them.’— 7%e Translators to the Reader. Also: ‘ Now, as 
concerning the funerals and enterring of her, I pray you, let the same be performed 
without all curiositie and superstition.’—Holland’s Plutarch, Morals, p. 533. [Cot- 
grave: Curiosité: daintinesse, nicenesse ; affectation. See I, i, 5, and I, iv, 66.—Ep.] 

4. deprive] STEEVENS: Synonymous in Shakespeare’s time with désinherit. 
Wricut: Compare Baret’s Alvearie [s. v. to deprive]: ‘To cast his sonne out 
of his house, to depriue or put him from the hope of succession, or inheritance, 


for some misdeede: to abastardize him.’ 


6. Lag] In BEw’s Shakespeare's Puck, iii, 94, there is a suggestion, founded on a 
misapprehension of the passage, that this word may have been originally the same 
as the word Zaw as found in the hunting phrase of ‘ giving a stag so much law before 


the dogs are let loose.’ 


a 
> 


ori 


Om 
_ 


. When my dimensions are as well comg pe 
My mind as generous and my shape as true, 
As honest madam’s issue? Why brand they us 
With base ? with baseness? bastardy? base, pasa 
Who in the lusty stealth of nature take a hn 
More composition and fierce quality 
Than doth, within a dull, stale, tired bed; 
Go to th’ creating a whole tribe of fops, 


Got ’tween asleep and wake? Well then, : ie 
Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land. - 
Our father’s love is to the bastard Edmund Re 
As to the legitimate ; fine word, ‘ legitimate! : Saar 
Well, my legitimate, ifthis letter speed ae 
And my invention thrive, Edmund the base 1 a te ie 
7. dimensions| dementions Qq. Jen. Mal. creating Pope+, Ec. . 
9. As...tssue| One line, Jen. 15. asleep| Cap. a-sleep Pope+. @ ave 


10. With...base?| With Bafe? With  fleepe Q.F,F,. a fleep F,F,, Rowe. . 
bafenes Barftadie? Bafe, Bafe? F, fleepe Q,. 


(same punctuation F,F,F,). with ba/e, then] theQq. then, good brother, 
bafe baftardie ? Qa, Jen. Han. : 
13. dull, stale] fale dull Qq. 18. fine word, ‘ legitimate ? | Om. Qq. 
tired| tyred Ff. lyedQ.. hed Q,. 20. the base] thee base Ktly (mis- 
14. Goto] Go FF. print ?). “ 


th’ creating] the creating of Qq, 


6. bastard] HANMER: Edmund inveighs against the tyranny of custom, both in 
respect to younger brothers and to bastards. But he must not be understood, in the 
former, to mean himself; the argument becomes general by implying more than is 
said: ‘ Wherefore should I or any man,’ &c. BoswrLtL: Why should he not mean 
himself in both instances? He was a younger brother. MoBerty: The word is 
from the Celtic ‘bas-tardh’ (low birth), The Welsh, however, only learned very 
unwillingly in Edward I’s time to adopt the English ‘ curiosity’ as regards illegiti- 
mate children. [Can we not infer from this line and line ro that the pronunciation 
in Shakespeare’s time was dase-/ard ?] 

9. madam’s] Detius: As is frequently the case in Sh. it is here used ironically. 

14. the creating] Apsort, § 93. Although this is a noun, and therefore pre- 
ceded by ‘the,’ yet it is so far confused with the gerund as to be allowed the privilege . 
of governing a direct object. See Aacé. I, iv, 8. 

14. fops] According to ScHmipT this does not mean fools or dandies, as it does 
now, but dwpes,—that is, men who are destined to be duped or deceived by men of 
‘more composition and fierce quality.’ Furthermore, this original meaning of the 
word is found in all the instances of its use by Sh. Compare ‘ This is the excellent 
foppery of the world,’ line 112; that is, dupery. 

15. *tween] Dopp: I think the passage originally stood ‘a¢ween sleep and wake,’ 
The @ might very easily have been so transposed, 


- 
_* — 


_ the Mason. ‘¢éo the Del. Ktly. 


er ar I grow; I prosper ; 
stand up for bastards ! 


Price GLOUCESTER, 


Kent banish’d ue ? and suaee in choler parted ? 


24. subscribed| Jubfcribd Q.. fub- 


=e ar, top a Cap. tooth’ Qq (4004 Q,). 21. Lerow, [prosper] Ay, grow ; a a 
fo th FF, to th’ F,F,, Rowe, Pope i i, prosper Sch. conj. : i Fr 
be th? Pope i ii+. toe t# Han, Mal. foe 23. SCENE VII. Pope+, Jen. : 

- 


legitimate.| Johns. legitimate: Serib'd Q.- Prefcrib'd Ff, Rowe, Knt, 
 QqFf, Han. J“egitimate— Rowe, Pope, Sch. 
Del. Ktly. 


# 


21. top] HANMER: As ‘the treading upon another’s heels’ is an expression used 
to signify the being not far behind him, so to ¢oe another means to come up to and 
be on even ground with him. WarsurTon: Here the Oxford editor would show 
us that he is as good at coining phrases as his author, and so alters the text thus: 
* Shall Ze the legitimate,’ z. e. says he, ‘stand on even ground with him;’ as he would 


ha do with his author. Epwarps (Camous of Crit., p. 221, ed. 7): Poor Sir Thomas! 
E ; Woe be to you, if you invade Mr. Warburton’s prerogative of coining words for Sh.! 
Ss _ One may fairly say here that ‘the toe of the peasant comes so near the heel of our 
A ___ courtier that it galls his kibe.”’ But Mr. Warburton ought to have taken notice that 
‘= the old reading is ‘shall To th’ legitimate,’ which, though it misled Sir Thomas, may 
i perhaps direct to the right word: ‘Shall fof the,’ &c., which he would do if he got 
- the inheritance from him, though that could not make him de the legitimate. [These 
s notes are given as instances of the amenities that help to make the early comments 
ie on Sh. so full of ‘sweetness and light. Ep.] CAPELL, referring to this emendation 


of Edwards, says, that ‘it appear’d in the Canons, into which it was receiv’d from 
this editor (together with other communications concerning readings of copies) by 
that ingenious work’s writer: This emendation will have no impugners or doubters, 


_--_‘ $f that corruption be look’d upon out of which it arose ; if it’s opposition to ‘‘ base”’ be 
; consider’d, and (which is yet a stronger matter than either) it’s connection with 
_ “ grow,” which has no natural introduction unless preceded by “top.””? JENNENS: If 


conjecture be made without any regard to the traces of the letters, ow? or vou? are 

? better than de. MaLtone: In Devonshire, as Sir Joshua Reynolds informs me, ‘to 

f toe a thing up is to tear it up by the roots; in which sense the word is perhaps used 
here, for Edmund immediately adds “I grow, I prosper.””’ DELtus thus vindicates 
Rowe’s reading, which he follows: ‘The Bastard, if his plan succeed, will to the 
legitimate— What he will inflict upon him he does not say; he is interrupted by the 
entrance of his father, at the mere sight of whom he exclaims, in tones of assured 
victory, “I grow, I prosper.’”’’ [For other instances of the use of this word in the 
same sense see SCHMIDT’s Lex.] NicHoxs (Wotes, &c., No. 2, p. 9) follows the FY, 
and interprets: ‘Shall advance to, or take the place of, the legitimate.’ 

24. subscribed] JoHNson: To ‘subscribe’ is to éransfer by signing or subscrib- 
ing a writing of testimony. MALONE; In Sh. it means to yield, or surrender. So 
afterwards III, ii, 18; also Zvo. and Cres. 1V,v, 105. WHITE: That is, yielded. 
This seems to be a perversion of the figurative use of ‘subscribe’ in the sense of 


Citon Ae if Sie how now! what news? 
Edm. So please your lordship, none. _ 
Glou. Why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter ? 
Edm. 1 know no news, my lord. 


Glou. What paper were you reading? a. aun 30, . 
Edm. Nothing, my lord. eg ra 


Glou. No? What needed then that terrible eects of 


25. this done] thisdonneQ,. this gone cet. Om. QqFf. 


F,F,F,, Rowe. is gone Pope, Theob. 28. Why] Whe F,. 
Han. Warb. 32. needed | needes Q.. Scag Qe. 
ai [Putting up the letter—Rowe et terrible) terribe Q,. 


submit, to which yield is a synonyms, though not in a transitive sense; 8: Ti Gm. 
Shr. 1, i, 81. Prescribe of the Folio might be accepted in the sense of Limited, cir- 
cumscril’d his power, were it not that the king is manifestly the nominative under- 
stood. ScumipT (Zur Textkritik, &c., p. 16) prefers prescribed, which he says 
means ‘ his power is restricted, limited, confined in its exercise. The expression is 
not exactly what might have been expected from Gloucester; we might wish for a 
word a little less tame when applied to an event which so greatly excites him, but 
it is perfectly intelligible.’ From the expression ‘ Prescribe not us our duties,’ I, i, 
275, SCHMIDT infers that ‘ prescribe’ need not of necessity be followed by ‘to,’ and 
thus Sh. might have used the passive form ‘ we are prescribed our duties.’~ If this 
be so, then he conjectures that we might punctuate these lines differently: ‘ And the 
king gone to-night? prescribed? his power Confined to exhibition?’ [Dr. Schmidt 
failed to note that the ‘to’ is not really absent in ‘ Prescribe not us our duties,’ but 
is simply absorbed in the preceding ‘not.’ In his edition of this play he goes even 
further, and says that we are nowhere justified (not even in III, vii, 64) in inter- 
preting ‘to subscribe’ by fo yield, to surrender, or to submit. To me Dr. Johnson’s 
interpretation is satisfactory. Sh, may have intended, by this one word, to convey 
the idea that there had been a formal abdication.—Ep. ] 

25. exhibition] JoHNson: That is, e//owance. The term is yet used in the uni- 
versities. STEEVENS: So in 7wo Gent. I, iii, 69. NaRes: Also Jonson, Silent 
Woman, III,i, ‘Behave yourself distinctly and with good morality; or, I protest 
Tl take away your exhibition.’ Mosrrty: Restricted to a mere maintenance; as 
in Roman law, ‘si liberi ali desiderent, ut a parente exhibeantur. So we have 
‘exhibere viam’ for ‘to keep up a road.’ 

26, gad] JouNson: Upon the sudden stimulation of caprice, as cattle run mad- 
ding when they are stung by the gadfly. Rrrson: Done suddenly, or as before, 
while ‘the iron is hot? A ‘gad’ is an'iron bar. The Statute of 2 and 3 Eliza. 6, 
c. 27, is a ‘Bill against false forging of iron gadds, instead of gadds of steel.’ 
CoLLIER: Upon the spur; in 7%, And. IV, 103 3, the hero wishes to engrave on 
brass with ‘a gad of steel,’ z, 2. a point of steel. MOBERLY strangely defines it as 
‘at haphazard.’ 


32. terrible] Wnire: This is not the mere meaningless expletive so often used 


by uncultivated people. Edmund hides the letter away in haste and terror. SCHMIDT 


calls attention to the active meaning which adjectives in -d/e had in Shakespeare’s 


=. that I eee avalon ane and for so. Sr 
as I have perused, I find it not fit for your o’er-looking. 
Som  Glou, Give me the letter, sir. 
Zdm. 1 shall offend, either to detain or give it. Thecon- 40 

_ tents, as in part I understand them, are to blame. 
_ Glou,- Let’s see, let’s see. 

Edm. 1 hope, for my brother’s justification, he wrote this 
but as an essay or taste of my virtue. 

Glou. [Reads] ‘This policy and reverence of age makes 45 


k the world bitter to the best of our times; keeps our fortunes 
~ 36. Edm.] Baft. Q,FF. Ba. Q,. 44. taste] test Coll. iii. 

. 37. and] Om. Qq. 45. [Reads] A Letter. Qq. 
4 . 38. oer-looking] liking Qq. overlook- and reverence] Om. Qq. in rev-- 
4 ing Warb. Johns. Jen. Steev. Ec. Yar. erence Han. 
Ps AOn ATS f.. lame] Three lines, ending age| ages Pope il, Theob. Warb. 
o  it:...them...blame, in Ff. 46. to the best] to bet ¥ FF. 
4 41. to blame] too blame Q,Q.F,F,. times ;| times F,. 
wg time. Thus, ‘audible’ in Coriolanus means hearing well ; ‘contemptible’ means 
_—..._-—scontemptuous ; ‘unmeritable,’ undeserving, &c. 
Bs ‘q 41. to blame] For instances of the infinitive active for the infinitive passive, see 


: ABBOTT, § 359 and § 405, also Ham. IV, iv, 44 
cae” 44. essay or taste] JOHNSON: Though ‘taste’ may stand here, yet I believe we 
E should read, ‘assay or ¢es¢,’ they are both metallurgical terms and properly joined. 
_ STEEVENS: Both are terms from royal tables. See V, iii, 144. SINGER: Thus Baret, 
Alvearie : ‘to Assay or rather Essay of the French woorde £ssayer,’ and afterwards : 
—- ©To tast or assay before. Prelibo.’ WRriGHT: Proof or trial. The two words 
‘essay’ and ‘assay’ are etymologically the same. In 1 Samuel, xvii, 39, it is said 
of David in Saul’s armour that he ‘ assayed to go,’ that is, tried or attempted to go. 
‘Taste’ occurs both as a noun and verb as synonymous with ‘test.? Compare I 


Hen, IV: IV,i, 119. Cotgrave has, ‘Essay: m. An essay, proofe .. . also, the ° 


tast, or Essay taken of Princes meat, or drinke.’ [See Ham. II, ii, 411: ‘a taste 
of your quality.’] 

45. policy] CapELL: The beginning of Edgar’s letter is darken’d by a remov’d 
sense of ‘ policy,’ and our imagin’d connection of it with ‘age’ or o/d age; ‘policy’ 
has here the sense of—fo/ice, political regiment, the world’s evil [? civil] ordering ; 
and it is of this ‘ policy,’ and the reverence establish’d by it, that he is made to com- 
plain. ScHmipr considers ‘policy and reverence’ as a hendiadys for ‘policy of 
holding in reverence,’ ‘like respect and fortunes’ in I, i, 247. 

46. the best of our times] Wxicur: The best periods of our lives. See I, 


i, 293. 


from us till our oldness cannot relish t 
an idle and fond bondage in the oppression 
who sways, not as it hath power, but as it ts suffere 
to me, that of this I may speak more. If our father we 
sleep till I waked him, you should enjoy half his revenue oS 
ever, and live the beloved of your brother, Evean? ~~ : 
Hum! Conspiracy ?—Sveep till I waked him, you should ve 
enjoy half his revenue !—My son Edgar! Had hea hand 
to write this? a heart and brain to breed it in ?—When Ee. 
came this to you? who brought it? 
Edm. Jt was not brought me, my lord; there’s the cun- 


ning of it; I found it thrown in at the casement of my closet. bey 

Glou, You know the charaéter to be your brother’s ? 
Edm. If the matter were good, my lord, I durst swear 60 
it were his; but, in respect of that, I would fain think it 
were not. 

Glou. It is his. 

Edm, Mt is his hand, my lord; but I hope his heart “is 
not in the contents. 65 

Glou. Has he never before sounded you in ae busi- 
ness P 

Edm. Never, my lord; but I have heard him oft main- 

49. who] which Rowe +, Cap. of Q,. 

51,54, 71. revenue] reuenewQq. Reu- ~ 63. It is his.] Itis his? Q,. Ls tt his ? 
ennew FF. ke 

52. brother,| Steev. brother Qq, 64. but] Om, FF LF.+. 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Cap. Jen. brother. 66. Has] Ff+, Knt. i, Dyce, Del. ii, 
Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han, Sch. Hath Qq et cet. 

53. Sleep] flept Qq. before| F£+, Knt i, Sing. Dyce, 

waked | wakt Qq. wake Fi+, Del. ii, Ktly, Huds. Sch. eretofore 

Sch. Qgq et cet. 

55. brain] a brain Rowe. : 68. heard him off] Ff +, Cap. Knt, 

56. this to you] you to this F,F,, Sch. Dyce, Sta. Glo.+, Sch. often heard 

61. his...respect of | his but in respect, him Qq et cet. 

47. oldness] ScHmipr: Not elsewhere used in Sh. 

48. idle and fond] JoHNson: Weak and foolish. 

49. who] WRIGHT: For which, the antecedent really being the persons implied 
in ‘tyranny.’ See Ausorr, § 264. 

58. closet] Private apartment. See III, iii, 10, and also Ham. TE iyi 

59. character] It is almost needless to remark that this word is always used by 
Sh, in the sense of writing or handwriting. See Ham. I, iii, 59. 


His very opinion in the letter! 
api detested, brutish villain! 
aie ears !—Go, sirrah, seek him; Pu apprehend 
m abominable villain! Where is he? 


: 73 
: | Baim I do not well know, my lord. If it shall please 
yee to suspend your indignation against my brother till you 
can derive from him better testimony of his intent, you 
By should run a certain course ; ; where, if you violently proceed 
against him, mistaking his purpose, it would make a great 80 
p gap in your own honour and shake in pieces the heart of 
his obedience. I dare pawn down my life for him that he 
hath writ this to feel my affection to your honour and to no 
____ other pretence of danger. 
j Glou. Think you so? 85 
; £dm. Wf your honour judge it meet, I will place you 
, where you shall hear us confer of this, and by an auricular 
*) 
; 4 69. at] being at Han. Tom lond | 2, POE. 
a perfect] perfit 1 78. his] this Qq. 
E- declined| F,¥,F,, Rowe, Knt, 79. should] Q,Ff (/hold F,)+, Cap. 
; Coll. Del. Wh. Sch.” declind F,. de- Jen. Ec. Knt, Cam. Sch. fLalQ.. /hall 
us clining Qq et cet. Q, et cet. 
¥ 70. the father] his father Qq. 81. own] Om. F,FF,, Rowe, Pope, 
as ward | asa Ward Q,, Pope +. Han. 
r 9%. his) the Qq. 82. that] Om. Qq. 
«93, Abhorred| Abhorrid Q,. 83. writ] wrote Qq, Glo.+, Mob. 
73, 74. Srutish| bruiti{fh QFE, 84. other] further Qq, Glo.+, Mob. 
Rowe, Pope. 87. confer of this] confer this ¥F ,, 
74. sirrah| fir Qq. Rowe. 
P| Rowe. J ¥ ¥... [le ¥,F,. auricular] aurigular Qq. 


Orel, Onn ay,,coam., Wr. 


69. sons at perfect age] For instances of the participle being implied, in the 


case of a simple word, such as deimg, see ABBOTT, § 381. 


79. where] For instances of the use of ‘where’ for whereas, see ABBOTT, § . 34. 
83. your honour] MALoneE: The usual address to a lord in Shakespeare's time. 
84. pretence] JOHNSON: That is, design, purpose. So afterwards, I, iv, 67. 
STEEVENS: I can venture to assert, with some degree of confidence, that Sh. never 
uses this word in any other sense. ScumipT (Zex.) gives five instances (of which 
one, viz: Cymé. III, iv, 106, is, I think, doubtful) where it means prefext, Dyce, 
in his Gloss., gives no other definition than Johnson’s, and cites none of these five 


instances given by Schmidt. 
5 D 


assurance have your Euisiok and that wit 


ther delay than this very evening. +m 
Glou. He cannot be such a monster— te 
* Edm. Nor is not, sure. : . 
* Glou. To his father, that so tenderly and ane loves 
*him. Heaven and earth!* Edmund, seek him out; wind : 
me into him, I pray you; frame the business after your own - 
wisdom. I would unstate myself, to be ina due resolution. 95 


go. monster—]| Dyce, Del. ii, Huds. 94. him, I pray you: frame] him, I , t 
Glo.+, Mob. monster. QqFf et cet. pray you frame Qgq. ; 
91-93. Edm. Wor...earth /] Qq. Om. the| your Qq.. 


Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Sch. 


91, 93. Nor... earth] Scumipt (Zur Textkritik, &c., p. 18) makes a strong 
point in favour of omitting these words, as is done in the Ff. ‘Were there any 
reproach,’ he says, ‘against which it would be hard to defend Sh., it would be 
the relation between Gloster and Edgar. , A father “that so tenderly and entirely 
loves”? his son, but, like Gloucester, condemns him unheard, and drives him forth 
to misery, is a miscreant in the drama as well as in real life... . If there be any sin- 
gle trait which is characteristic of this scene, as well as of the similar first scene of 
the second Act, it is that not a word of sympathy and warmth for his sons falls from 
the lips of Gloucester. His levity, when talking with Kent in the very first scene 
of the play, sufficiently betrays the superficial sense of his marital and parental 
duties. Only when Edgar is as though dead to him, and the fate of Lear begins to 
cast its dark shadow over himself (III, vi), does something of fatherly feeling 
awaken at the thought of his son, hunted through the land. Hitherto, he is indif- 
ferent and heartless. Evidently his sons have never stood near to his heart; he 4 
knows them not,—nor what might be expected from either the one or the other. 
That Edmund, before the time when the action of the play begins, has been *‘ out” 
nine years in foreign parts is expressly mentioned, and in one way or another Edgar 
has been equally a stranger... . and is no more to him than Edmund,—“ no dearer 
in my account,” 2. e. is of as little account. He has sons and they must be acknow- — : 
ledged, and therein he has done his part. Such and no other is the idea that Sh. 
would have us form of Gloucester, and therefore he could never have written the 
words: “To his father that so tenderly and entirely loves him.” They stand in 
contradiction to all that precedes and follows. They are doubtless an addition made 
by some sensational actor, and they crept into the Qq through some copyist or re- 
porter.’ 

93. wind me] JoHNson: I once thought it should be read: ‘wind you ; "but, - ; 
perhaps, it is a familiar phrase, like ‘do me this.’ [For other instances of this eth- 
ical dative, see ABBorT, § 220, or Mucéd. III, vi, 41.] 

95. unstate] HEATH: That is, I would give even my rank and fortune to be 
resolved on this point. CAPELL: The state that Gloster would lay aside, if he could, 
on this occasion is, his parental state, the state of father, which endangered his 
judging rightly, two ways—by acting upon his affections as a kind father, or on his 
resentments as an injured one. JOHNSON thus paraphrases: * Do you frame the bus- 


é 


Poe a « ive Delete 2 oe 


=) CS 


ef will seek him, sir, presently, convey the business 96 
find means, and acquaint you withal. 

ao These late eclipses in the sun and moon portend. 

no good to us; though the wisdom of nature can reason it 

- thus and thus, yet nature finds itself scourged by the se- 100 


eaee in res niitinies St in countries, sieteas in ance 


96. will] frail Qa. 99. zt] Om. Qq. 

97- find] fee Qaq, Jen. 100. seguent| freguent Theob. i. 
98, 134. eclipses] Elip/fes F, 102. discord] difcords Qq, Jen. 
98. moon] the moon Cap. ar in palaces| Pallaces Q,Q.,. 


99. nature| mankind Han. 


iness who can act with less emotion; I would unstate myself; it would be in me a 
departure from the paternal character, to be in a due resolution, to be settled and com- 
posed on such an occasion.’ TyRWHITT: It means simply: ‘I would give my estate’ 
(including rank as well as fortune). [There can be no doubt that Heath and Tyr- 
whitt give the correct interpretation. ] } 

95- resolution] Dyce (G/oss.): Conviction, assurance. 

96. convey] JOHNSON: To manage artfully. [See Aacé. IV, iii, 71.] 

98. These late eclipses] CAPELL: This descant upon’ what were then esteemed 
natural prodigies is a weakness which serves admirably to give a requisite degree of 
the probable to Gloucester’s incredulity. MoBerLy: As to current belief in astrology, 
we may remember that, at the time when this play was written, Dr Dee, the cele- 
brated adept, was grieving for his lost patroness, Queen Elizabeth; that the profligate 
court of James I. was in 1618 frightened by the appearance of a comet into a tem- 
porary fit of gravity; and that even Charles I. sent £500 as a fee to William Lilly 
for consulting the stars as to his flight from Hampton Court in 1647. [See Appendix, 
* Date of the Composition,’ p. 379.] 

99. wisdom of nature] JoHNsoN: Though natural philosophy can give account 
of eclipses, yet we feel their consequences. WALKER (C77z. i, 287) marked ‘nature’ 
as ‘ possibly wrong.’ LETTSOM (ina foot-note to Walker): I think maz would be 
better [than »zankind of Hanmer]; but perhaps ‘nature’ crept in from below with- 
out displacing any word; she or y® was a mistake for y”, and of was purposely in- 
serted to make some sense of ‘the wisdom nature.’ Sh. perhaps wrote merely 
‘your wisdom,” as ‘your excellent sherris.’ KEIGHTLEY reads ‘wisdom of man’ 
in his text. [‘ Wisdom of nature’ means: wisdom concerning nature, the know- 
ledge of natural laws.—Ep.] Moserty: This curious view is repeated, with re- 
markable force of language, by Sir T. Browne, even in the less credulous times 
(Buckle, i i, p. 336) when he wrote his Treatise on Vulvar Errors: * That two suns 
cor moons should appear, is not worth the wonder. But that the same should fall out 
at the point of some decisive action, that these two should make but one line in the 
book of fate, and stand together in the great Ephemerides of God, besides the phil- 
osophical assignment of the cause, it may admit a Christian apprehension in the sig- 
nality’ (i, 2). We learn also from Bishop Burnet that Lord Shaftesbury believed in 
astrology, and thought that the souls of men live in the stars. 


See and the bond cracked ‘twixt son 


ef 


villain of mine comes under the prediétion; there 
against father; the king falls from bias of nature; there’s 1 
father against child. ‘We have seen the best of our timé; 
machinations, hollowness, treachery and all ruinous dis- 
orders follow us disquietly to our graves. Find out ‘this | 
villain, Edmund; it shall lose thee nothing; do it carefully 
And the noble and true-hearted Kent banished! his offence, 110 _ 


honesty! ’Tis strange. 2 : 
Edm. This is the excellent foppery of the world, that — : 
103. and the bond | the bond Qq. 111. honesty] honeft Qq. : 
*twixt| betweene Qq, Cap. Mal. ' Tis strange.| firange firange! : 
Steev. Bos. Coll. Sing. Wh. Ktly. Q,. ftrange, firange! Q,, Cap. Steev. 
103-108, This villain...graves.] Om. Ec. Var. Sing. 
q. [Exit.] Om. Qq. 
105. dias] byas ¥F,. byas¥,. bia/s 112. SCENE VIII. Pope+, Jen. 
By 
108. disquietly] Detius: This is used causatively. x 


10g. lose thee] Note the change to the more affectionate ‘ thee.’ See also IV, 
vi, 30.—Ep. 

112. WARBURTON: In Shakespeare’s best plays, besides the vices that arise from 
the subject, there is generally some peculiar prevailing folly, principally ridiculed, 
that runs through the whole piece. Thus, in Zhe Tempest, the lying disposition of 
travellers, and in As You Like Jt, the fantastick humour of courtiers are exposed and 
satirized with infinite pleasantry. In like manner, in this play of Zeav, the dotages 
of judicial astrology are severely ridiculed. I fancy, was the date of its first per- 
formance well considered, it would be found that something or other happened at 
that time which gave a more than ordinary run to this deceit, as these words seem to 
intimate: ‘I am thinking, brother, of a prediction I read this other day, what should 
follow these eclipses.’ However this be, an impious cheat, which had so little foun- 
dation in nature or reason, so detestable an original, and such fatal consequences on 
the manners of the people, who were at that time strangely besotted with it, cer- 
tainly deserved the severest lash of satire, It was a fundamental in this noble science, 
that whatever seeds of good dispositions the infant unborn might be endowed’ with, 
either from nature, or traductively from its parents, yet if, at the time of its birth, 
the delivery was by any casualty so accelerated or retarded as to fall in with the 
predominancy of a malignant constellation, that momentary influence would entirely 
change its nature, and bias it to all the contrary ill qualities. So wretched and mon: 
strous an opinion did it set out with. But the Italians, to whom we owe this, as 
well as most other unnatural crimes and follies of these latter ages, fomented its 
original impiety to the most detestable height of extravagance. Petrus Aponensis, 
an Italian physician of the 13th century, assures us that those prayers which are 
made to God when the moon is in conjunction with Jupiter in the Dragon’s tail, are 
infallibly heard. ... The great Milton, with a just indignation of this impiety, hath, in 
his Paradise Regained (Book IV, 383), satirized it in a very beautiful manner, by 


Tee = 


A “Se Se, oe 


x 


? te sees F,, Rowe+, Sch. 


ol r—we ae Salty is our eiiates the sun, the 
, and stars ; as if we were villains on necessity, fools 115 


Toes 5 


Cae. surfeit] Q,. furfetQ,. furfets. the stars Qq et cet. Starres FF, F,. 
115. on] Ff+, Cap. Knt, Sch, “by Qq 
ai 5- op ee » Rowe+, Knt, Sch. et cet. 


Naktis sso reveries into the mouth of the devil... Nor could the licentious Rabelais 


himself forbear to ridicule this impious dotage. which he does with exquisite address 
and humour, where in the fable which he so agreeably tells from sop of the man 
who applied to Jupiter for the loss of his hatchet, he makes those who, on the poor 
man’s good success, had projected to trick Jupiter by the same petition, a kind of 
astrologic atheists, who ascribed this good fortune that they imagined they were now 
all going to partake of, to the influence of some rare conjunction and configuration 
of the stars. ‘Hen, hen, dirent ilz—Et doncques telle est au temps present la 
revolution des Cieulx, la constellation des Astres, et aspect des Planetes, que qui- 
conques coingnée perdra soubdain deuiendra ainsi riche??—MNou. Prol. du IV 
-Livre.—But to return to Sh. So blasphemous a delusion, therefore, it became the 
honesty of our poet to expose. But it was a tender point, and required managing. 
For this impious juggle had in his time a kind of religious reverence paid to it. It 
was therefore to be done obliquely; and the circumstances of the scene furnished 
him as good an opportunity as he could wish. The persons in the drama are all 


_ Pagans, so that as, in compliance to custom, his good characters were not to speak 


ill of judicial astrology, they could on account of their religion give no reputation 
to it. But in order to expose it the more, he with great judgement makes these 
Pagans fatalists, as appears by these words of Lear, ‘ By all the operations of the 


orbs, From whom we do exist and cease to be.’ For the doctrine of fate is the true 


foundation of judicial astrology. Having thus discredited it by the. very commen- 
dations given to it, he was in no danger of having his direct satire against it mis- 
taken, by its being put (as he was obliged, both in paying regard to custom and in 
following nature) into the mouth of the villain and atheist, especially when he has 


added such force of reason to his ridicule, in the words referred to in the beginning 


of the note. COLERIDGE: Thus scorn and misanthropy are often the anticipations 
and mouthpieces of wisdom in the detection of superstitions. Both individuals and 
nations may be free from such prejudices by being below them, as well as by rising 
above them. 

112. foppery] See note on ‘fops,’ line 14. 

113. surfeit] Cottier: Is there not room to suspect that Sh. may have written 
forfeit—i, e. the penalty of our own misconduct. SCHMIDT (Zur Textkritik, &c., 
p- 19) follows the plural of the Ff, and thinks that only a blind prejudice in favour 
of the Qq can give preference to the singular. In his ed. ScHMIDT, tefers to the 
similar passage in Rich. Z7- I, ii, 84, ‘ Now comes the sick hour that his surfeit 


made.’ 
115. stars] I prefer the reading of the Ff, because particular stars are referred 


to, not ‘the stars’ in general.—Ep. 

115. on necessity] Scumipt (Zur Textkritik, &c., p. 19): Usage is in favour 
of Sy, but ‘on’ is Shakespearian, ‘ On es Be ee occurs twice in close succession 
in Love's Lab. L. I, i, 149, 155; ‘dy necessity* is found nowhere else in Sh. He 


5* 


~~ 


by arent PES os knaves See and 
spherical predominance, drunkards, liars, and a 
an enforced obedience of planetary influence ; 
we are evil in, by a divine thrusting on. An bl 
evasion of whoremaster man, to lay his” goatish | oe I 20 ey 


sition to the charge of a star! My father compounded ~ 
with my mother under the dragon’s tail, and my nativity 


was under Ursa major; so that it follows I am rough and 


lecherous. Tut, I should have been that I am, had the 
maidenliest star in the firmament twinkled on my bastard- 125 


izing. Edgar— 


116. treachers] trecherers Qq. treach- 
erous Pope+. ¢trechers Cap. 
117. spherical] Spherical ¥,. Spheri- 
call F,. fpirituall Qq. 
120, 121. day...star] lry his gotish dif- 
pofion to the charg of hars Q,. 
disposition to] difpofition on FE +, 
Knt, Del. Sta. Sch. 
121, charge] change Warb. 
astar| ftars Q,, Cap. Jen. Coll. i. 
Starres Q,. 
124. lecherous| treacherous Theob. 
conj. (withdrawn). 
Tut] Jen. Fut Qq. Om. Ff+, 
Cap. Knt, Sch. 
that| what Pope+. 


125. maideniiest| maidenlefi QgF F,, 
in] of Qa. 
bastardizing | baftardy Qq. 

126, 127. Edgar—...And pat| Jen. 
(subs.) £dgar, Enter Edgar. & out 
Q,. Ldgar; and out (Enter Edgar, in 
margin) Q,. Enter Edgar. fat: Ff+, 
Knt, Del. Dyce i. Sch. Enter Edgar, 
Ldgar! Pat; Cap. Edgar— Enter Ed- 
gar. Pat/— Steev. ’73. Edgar! pat 
Dyce ii. 

: Enter...] After Bedlam, line 129, 
Dyce ii, Sta. Huds. 

126-129. Edgar—...divisions!] As 
* Aside’ by Cap. 

126. SCENE Ix. Pope+. 


a: 


has an unmistakable preference for the prepositions ‘on’ and ‘ upon’ to express that 
which gives the motive or impulse to anything. Thus, in the following examples, 
where in popular speech other prepositions would be used: &. of Z., 186, ‘he doth 
debate What following sorrow may on this arise.’ JZeas. for Meas. IV,i, 72: “hus- 
band on a pre-contract.’ King Fohn, V, i, 28: ‘it should be on constraint.? Rich. 
JZ: 1,i, 9: ‘If he appeal the duke on ancient malice, or. . . on some known ground 
of treachery.” ich. 7: 1V,i,4; Ham. V, ii, 406 [Glo. ed.]; Ant. &* Cleop. III, 
xi, 68; Mer. of Ven. IV, i, 104: 1 Hen. JV: Il, iv, 331. 

116, treachers] Dyce (G/oss.): Traitors. 

118, influence] ScumipT: Used by Sh. only in the sense of planetary influence. 

121, to the charge] ScumipT adheres to the Ff, although, as he confesses, ‘on 
the charge’ is contrary not only to present usage, but also to Shakespearian. ‘But 
this is no reason why we should prefer “to” of the Qq. ‘To lay something on one”? 
is a very common expression in Sh., and we have in the present passage a confusion 
of construction which is not unusual. In Mer. of Ven. III, iv, 66: “ll speak be- 
tween the change of man and boy”—#, e, as if I were between man and boy.’ 


124. Tut] Dyce: /ut of the Qq seems to be a misprint for ‘Tut,’ rather than 
intended for Food or * Sfoot. 


> 
i 
a 


7 
ea 


‘comes ike the esi of the old eee 127 
is -villanous melancholy, with a sigh like Tom o’ 
Oh these eclipses do portend these divisions! fa, 


: 130 
- How, now, brother Edmund! what serious con- | 
ation are you in? 

. Tam thinking, brother, of a een I read this 

her day, what should follow these eclipses. — 


128. we mine Qq. 129, 130. fa,...mt.] Fa,—Sol, La, Me : —_ 
sigh] fighe F,. ith Qu Ff. Om. Qq. 
Tom 0°) them of Qa. 130. [Humming. Han, : 


129. do portend | portend Pope+. 


127. catastrophe] HEATH: That is, just as the circumstance which decides the 
catastrophe of a play intervenes on the very nick of time, when the action is wound 
up to its crisis, and the audience are impatiently expecting it. 
_ 128. cue] BoLTon Corney (4. & Qu. 5 Aug. 1865) cites the following defini- 

tion of this word from Butler’s Zuglish Grammar, 1634: ‘Q. A note of entrance 
___ for actors, because it is the first letter of gwando = when, shewing when to enter and 
speak.’ WEDGWooD adopts this definition, but also cites Minsheu: ‘A gz, a term 
: used among stage-players, 4 Lat. gwalis 7. ¢. at what manner of word the actors are 
;- _ to begin to speak, one after another has done his speech.’ The Fr. term is repligue. 


WRIGHT apparently derives it from Fr. gucue, a tail. 
3 ‘« ae 129. fa, sol, la, mi] DR BurNry: Sh. shows by the context that he was well 
_ acquainted with the property of these syllables in solmization, which imply a series 
Recs of sounds so unnatural that ancient musicians prohibited their use. The monkish 
writers on music say: md contra fa est diabolus: the interval fa md, including a 
tS tritonus, or sharp 4th, consisting of three tones without the intervention of a semi- 
oni tone, expressed in the modern scale by the letters ¥ G A B, would form a musical 


phrase extremely disagreeable to the ear. Edmund, speaking of eclipses as portents 
J and prodigies, compares the dislocation of events, the times being out of joint, to 
< » the unnatural and offensive sounds, ‘ fa sol la mi,” Wuitre; According to modern 
Italian solmization, fa sol la sz; 7. ¢. a progression through the interval of a fourth, 
ending upon the seventh or leading note of the scale; which, unless followed by the 
_ tonic, or used for some very special effect, is a most distracting figure, based upon 
the most poignant of discords. In Shakespeare’s time, and until a comparatively 
recent date, the syllables for solmization, instead of do re mi fa sol la st, were fa sul 
. la fa sol la mi. Sh, often shows that he was a musician as well as a lover of music. 
i Wricut: For Dr Burney’s note, Mr Chappell assures me, there is not the slightest 
foundation. Edmund is merely singing to himself in order not to seem to observe 
Edgar’s approach. [Just as Mistress Quickly sings ‘ And down, down, adown-a’ in 
Merry Wives, I, iii, 44, when Doctor Caius is approaching.—Ep.] Mosrrry: The 
true explanation probably is that the sequence ‘ fa sol la mi’ (with ‘ mi’ descending) 
is like a deep sigh, as may be easily heard by trial. 


ae. Do you busy yourself with that? — 
_ Edm. I promise you, the effects he writes oe ee 
unhappily * as of unnaturalness between the child and the 
* parent; death, dearth, dissolutions of ancient amities ; di- 
* visions in state, menaces and malediétions against king and 
* nobles; needless diffidences, banishment of friends, dissi- 140 
* pation of cohorts, nuptial breaches, and.I know not what. 
* Edg. How long have you beena seétary astronomical ? — 2 
* Edi. Come, come,* when saw you my father last? - 
Edg. The night gone by. 
Edm. Spake you with him? ; 145 
Edg. Ay, two hours together. 
Edm, Parted you in good terms? Found you no dis- . 
pleasure in him by word nor countenance ? 
fidg. None at all. 
Edm, Bethink yourself wherein you may have offended 150 
oes and at my entreaty forbear his presence until some 


135. with] about Qq, Jen.Glo+, Mob. Sta. Wh. Huds. Sch. Why Be O- 
136. you] Om. F.FF,. . Why, the Q, et cet. 


writes] writ Qq, Jen. Cam. Wr. 
137-143. as of...Come, come;| Om. 
Ff+, Cap. 
138. amities] Q,. armies Q.. 
141. cohorts| courts Johns. Steey. 773, 
Coll. ili. comforts Jen. 


146. Ay, Z FE Om, Og. 

148. zor] Ff, Rowe, Dyce, Sta. Sch. 
or Qq et cet. 

150. may] Om. F,F,+. 

151. until] F£+, Jen. Ec. Sta. Sch. 
27d Qq et cet. 


144. The] Ff+, Cap. Knt, Coll. Dyce, 


136, JoHNsoN: In this speech Edmund, with the common craft of fortune-tellers, 
mingles the past and future, and tells of the future only what he already foreknows 
by confederacy, or can attain by probable conjecture. 

136, succeed] Wricut: In Elizabethan English the ‘success’ of an action was 
the issue or consequence, good or bad. Hence the word was used with a qualifying 
adjective. See Joshua, i, 8: ‘Then thou shalt have good success.’ 

137-143. As an additional proof of the spuriousness of these lines SCHMIDT says 
that there are found in them no less than six hapax legomena, that is, words nowhere 
else to be found in Sh.—e. ». § unnaturalness,’ ‘menace’ (as a noun), ‘ malediction,’ 
‘dissipation,’ ‘ cohort,’ and ‘ + ane : 

140. diffidences] WRIGHT: This now means distrust of one’s self. Here it sig- 
nifies distrust of others, Compare King Yohn, I, i, 65. 

141. cohorts] JOHNSON, by a misprint in his foot-note, says, that the Quarto reads 
courts. MOBERLY: As neither of these words, ‘ dissipation of cohorts,’ are [szc, 
the effect of a constant study of Sh.?—Ep.] elsewhere used by Sh., we may sus- 
pect corruption, Perhaps the original may have been disproportion of thoughts, 
that is, ‘unnatural thoughts,’ as in O¢h. III, iii, Scumipr: This cannot be ex- 
plained by anything in Sh, 


[] ee 


_ 


“That's | my fear. I pray you, rn a continent 
for pearance till the speed of his rage goes slower and, as I 
. say, retire with me to my lodging, from whence I will fitly 
bring you to hear my lord speak; pray ye, £0; there’s my 
_key; if you do stir abroad, go armed. 160 
_ £dg. Armed, brother ? 

Edm, Brother, I advise you to the best; go armed; I 
am no honest man if there be any good meaning eee 
you. I have told you what I have seen and heard; but 
faintly, nothing like the image and horror of it; pray you, 165 


- away. 
| Edg. Shall I hear from you anon? 
a L£dm. Ido serve you in this business—  [£xit Edgar. 
a A credulous father, and a brother noble, 
a Whose nature is so far from doing harms Toye 
4 _ That he suspeéts none; on whose foolish honesty 
fa My practices ride easy. JI see the business. 
cc ~ 153. with| without Han. Cap. 163. zoward| Ff+, Jen. Knt, Dyce, 
a ‘154. person| parfon Q,. Sta. Coll. iii, Sch. ¢owards Qq. et cet. 
"4 scarcely| fearce Q,. fcarfe Q,. 164, 165. heard ; but faintly, | Glo.+, 
156-162. fear...Brothker,| feare broth- Mob. heard, but faintly, Qq. heard but 
er, Qq. faintly, Dyce. heard: But faintly. Ff. 
a 156, 162. 7...Edm.] Om. Qq. heard; but faintly ; Rowe. heard, but 
“a 159. pray ye] Ff, Dyce ii, Sta. Glo.+, faintly ; Pope et cet. 
Mob. Huds. Sch. gray you Rowe et 165. 2¢,1] 22, Ff. 
cet. : 168. SCENE X. Pope, Han. Warb. 
160, 161. armed | arm'd F£+, Cap. Johns. Jen. 
Jen. Steev. Mal. Ec. Sing. Wh. Ktly, LZ do| Z Pope Han. 
4 _. Huds. [Exit Edgar.] After line 167, 


162. go armed | Om. Ff+, Knt, Coll. Q.Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
Del. Dyce, Wh. Ktly, Sch. 


‘ 


; 153. with the mischief] Capert (reading w¢¢hout): For what has Edgar to 
a apprehend beyond a ‘ harm of his person’ ?—yet ‘ with’ implies a harm beyond that, 
; which is not of easy conception. JOHNSON: I believe the phrase should be ‘that 
bué with the,’ &c. 

168. Ido] HeatH: If we read 7’/, it will be an answer to the question Edgar 
asks just before his leaving the stage. 

172. practices] Dyce (Géoss.): Contrivance, artifice, stratagem, treachery, con- 


spiracy. 


a: tee if not by birth, ose ees 
by me’s meet that I can fashion fit. + 


Scenz III. The Duke of Pre lace, be 


Gon. Did my father strike my Soudan for ee of 
his Fool? 


Osw. Ay, madam. 
Gon. 


| Enter GoNERIL and oe her ward tae i 


a 
sae 


By day and night he wrongs me; every hour 


He flashes into one gross crime or other, ; 5 


That sets us all at odds. 


Tl not endure it. - 


His knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us 


On every trifle. 


When he returns from hunting, 


I will not speak with him; say I am sick. 
If you come slack of former services, 10 
You shall do well; the fault of it I’ll answer. ae 

Osw. He’s coming, madam; I hear him. = 


Gon, Put on what weary negligence you please, 


174° All with me’s| All’s with me 
Cap. conj. 

SCENE I11.] Scena Tertia. Ff (Scaena 
F,). ScENE 1. Rowe, Ec. SCENE x1. 
Pope +, Jen. 

The...] Rowe, A room in the... 
Cap. 

Oswald, her Steward] Coll. Gentle- 
man, Q,. aGentleman. Q,. Steward. Ff. 

3, &c. Osw.] Coll. Gent. Qq. Ste. 
or Stew. Ff, 


3. Ay] Rowe. JFF.° Yes Qq, Jen. 


Glo.+, Mob. 

4. night| night, Ff, ieaaes Theob. 
Warb, Johns. Dyce. zigft / Cap. Steev. 
Var. 

me ;| me, QgF,F.. 

4, 5. every...other,| One line, Qq. 

7. upbraids) obraydsQ,. uprabids Q,. 

8. trifle. When] trifle when a (tri- 
fell Q,). 

12. [Horns within. Cap. 

13-16. Put on...one,] Prose, Qq. 


I, of ] For instances of ‘ of’ following verbal nouns, see ABBorT, § 178. 


3. Oswald] CoLreripcE: The steward should be placed in exact antithesis to 
Kent, as the only character of utter irredeemable baseness in Sh. Even in this, the 
judgement and invention of the poet are very observable ;—for what else could the 
willing tool of a Goneril be? Not a vice but this of baseness was left open to him, 

4. By day and night] MAtone cites Ham. I, v, 164: ‘O day and night, but 
this is wondrous strange!’ in support of the exclamation-mark introduced by Capell; 
but WHALLEY and STEEVENSs rightly interpret these words in their ordinary sense, 
signifying always, every way, as appears, says WRIGHT, from ‘every hour’ which 
follows, 

13. weary] As You LIKE Ir (Gent. Mag. |x, p 


p. 402): It is extremely probable 
that Sh. wrote ‘wary negligence.’ : 


our fellows; I’d om it come to question. 
ppisiasts it; Jet him to my sister, 


= -* Not to zi ee a Idle oe man, 

a * That still would manage those authorities 
_ *That he hath given away! Now, by my life, ; ha 
_* Old fools are babes again, and must be used 20 a 


* With checks as flatteries, when they are seen abused.* 


14. fellows] fellow feruantsQ,. fel- 
low-feruants Q,. - 
Fe, @) fadet FE. PdeQ... Ide Q., 
to] iz Qgq. 
15. distaste] diflike Qq, Cap. Steev. 
Ec. Var. Glo. Mob. 
my] our Qq, Glo. +, Mob. 
17-21. LVot to be...abused.| Verse first 


teries when they are seen abus'd Cap. 
checks, by flatteries when theyre seen 
abused Jen. checks, as flatteries,—when 
they are seen abused Mal. Steev. Bos. 
Knt, Del. Sing. checks; as flatteries, 
when they are seen, abused Coll. Wh. 
checks as flatteries,— when they are 
[they're Dyce ii, Huds.] seen abused 


by Theob. Om. Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
20. fools] folks Warb. Jen. 
21. checks...abused | Qq. checks, like 
flat? rers when theyre seen f abuse us 
Theob. checks, as flatteries when they’ re 


Dyce, Sta. Glo. Huds. checks; as flat- 
teries, when they are seen, are abus'd 
Ktly. checks, when flatteries are seen 
abused Sch. conj. checks of flatteries 
when theyre seen abused Badham.* 


ye ba, a 
5 


™ 


ey = seen abus’'d Johns. Ec. checks, not flat- 

2 

a 15. let him to] For instances of the omission of the verb of motion see ABBOTT, 
a= §§ 30, 405, and I, i, 283; also Ham. I, i. 26 and III, iii, 4 

es. 17-21. That these lines, which are printed as prose in the Qq, may be easily 


arranged metrically is a warrant, says SCHMIDT, of their correctness. 

17. Idle] ScumipT (Zex.): Wanting becoming seriousness and gravity, thought- 

less, silly, absurd, foolish. 

20, 21. Old... abused] THEOBALD (Nichols’s Zit. Hist. ii, 371) suggests abuses, 
~ ‘but did not repeat the suggestion in his ed. WARBURTON: Common sense tells 
; us Sh, must have wrote: ‘Old Fo/ks are... With checks, sof flaté’vies when... 

abus’d’—7. ¢.,,0ld folks being grown children again, they should be used as we 
use children, with ‘checks’ when we find the little ‘flatteries’ we employ to quiet 
them are ‘abus’d’ by their becoming more peevish by indulgence. JOHNSON: 
Old men must be treated with checks, whez as they are seen to be deceived with 
flatteries; or, when they are once weak enough to be seex abused by flatieries, they 
are then weak enough to be used with checks, There is a play of the words ased and 
abused. To abuse is, in our author, very frequently the same as to deceive. This 
construction is harsh and ungrammatical; Sh. perhaps thought it vicious, and chose 
to throw away the lines rather than correct them, nor would now thank the officious- 
ness of his editors, who restore what they do not understand. TyRwuitr: Old 
- fools—must be used with checks, as we// as flatteries, when they (2. e. flatteries) are 
seen fo be abused. Dyce (Remarks, &c., p. 222): ‘As’ meaning as well as. HAL- 
LIWELL: The rest of the line, after the word ‘checks,’ loses its reference to the child, 
and merely alludes to the old man as king used to be flattered, which flatteries, being 
felt by him, are abused, I have very little doubt, however, but that here there is 


* Ve 


i oy he 
A "Remember what I have : 


One. 
base: 


* That I may ae si “TI write peter ie my ee . 
To hold my very course. Prepare for dinner. — [Beeunt. 


= 


Scene 1V. A hall in the same. 


Enter KENT, disguised. 


ao Kent. Vf but as well I other accents borrow, . iv. Ap. 
. That can my speech defuse, my good intent : 
a 22. have said tell you Qq, Jen. Glo.+, 27. dinner] dinner now Ktly. ~ 
7 Mob. have said to you Ktly. [Exeunt.] Exit. Qq. 
Weill] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Knt, Coll. SCENE Iv.] Scena Quarta. Ff (Scaena % 
Del. Sing. Dyce i, Sta. Wh. Ktly, Glo. F,). Om.Qq, Rowe. SCENE XII. Pope, 
Mob. Sch. Very well Qq et cet. Han. ScENE It. Ec. — 
23, 24. And let....so.| As in Cap. A hall in the same.] Mal. An i. 
Verse first by Han. Prose, QqFf+, outer Hall in the same. Cap. An open 
Jen. Knt. Place before the Palace. Theob. 
24. advise| and advise Han., ending Enter Kent, disguised.] Rowe. Enter 
the line with advise. Kent. QqFf. 
25, 26. L would...speak.| As in Cap. 1-7. Prose, Qq. 
Prose, Qq. Om. Ff+, Jen. Knt. 1. well] will F,. 


4 


26, 27. J’Ul...dimner.] As in Han. 2. That...defuse| QqFf, Glo. +, Mob. 
Prose, QqFf. Sch. And...disuse Rowe, Pope, Johns. 
27. very| Qq. Om. Ff +, Knt, Coll. i, And...diffuse Theob. Han. Warb. That 
Del. Sing. Dyce i, Sta. Wh. Ktly, Sch. ..deface Cap. That...diffuse Jen. et cet, 


Prepare| goe prepare Qq, Jen. That...disguise Jen, conj. That...defeat 
Go and prepare Han. Anon.* 


either an omission or a gross corruption. MoBERLY: ‘When they are seen abused’ 
= when they are so plainly misguided. _ If ‘checks as flatteries’ is the right reading, 
the meaning must be ‘checks as qwed/ as flatteries.’ But may not Sh. have written 
‘with checks as flatly’ ?—i.e, ‘as decidedly as we restrain children.’ This would 
easily corrupt into ‘ flattery.’ 

23-27. KnicuT: This speech has been arranged metrically; but so regulated, it 
reads very harshly. 

24. MOBERLY: The vixenish tone of Goneril makes the line defy scanning. 

25, 26, SCHMIDT says these lines were struck out in the Ff because they merely 
repeat the idea contained in line 14; but that they are Shakespeare’s is clear from 
the metre, notwithstanding that the Qq print them as prose. 

2. defuse] THEOBALD was the first to restore ‘defuse,’ but he spelled it diffuse, 
and it is not clear from his note that he had a correct notion of its meaning. He ~ 


or 


« tke 
EAR 


razed my likeness. Now, banish’d Kent, 
thor t serve where thou dost stand condemn’d, 5 
‘may it come, thy master, whom thou lovest, 


ll find thee full of labours. 


: _ Horns within. Enter LEAR, Knights, and Attendants. 


Lear. Let me not stay a jot for dinner; go get it ready. — 


[Exit an Aitendant.| How now! what art thou? os 
~~ Kent, A. man, sir. | 10 ia . 
4. razed|raz'dQ,. raizd Q,. raivd Horns within.] Om. Qq. 
BY rais'd FF. Knights, and Attendants.] Rowe. = 
Now] Om. Pope, Han. and Attendants. Ff. Om.Qq. Gentle- ’ 
6. So...come,| Om. Qq. man, Knights, and Attendants. Cap. - 
come, thy| come. ThyJohns. come! g. Exit an Attendant.] Mal. To an 
: thy Cap. Steev. Ec. Var. Coll. Del. Wh. Attendant, who goes out. Cap. Om. 
: Ktly, Huds. come thy Knt. QgqFf. 
= 7. thee full) the full Qq. [To Kent. Theob, Warb. Johns. 
a! labours| labour Qq. 
apparently thinks that Kent will disguise his speech by diffusing—i. e. by spreading 
ae it out. HANMER adopted Theobald’s spelling, and gives the true definition: ‘to 
a disguise.’ This interpretation and spelling make CAPELL indignant, and he urges 
~~ his emendation deface, thus: ‘If I can but deface my speech by a strange accent as 


effectually as I have defac’d my person by a strange attire, then my good intent may 
do so and so: now for this deface and defac’d substitute diffuse and diffus’'d, and see 
how you like it; and if dffse would have suited in this respect, it had not been 
given to Kent, whose language is more natural.’ STEEVENS: We must suppose that 
; Kent advances looking on his disguise. To diffuse speech signifies to disorder it, 
and so to disguise it. It may, however, mean to sfeak broad with a clownish accent. 
Dyce (Rem. 223) cites ‘Dyffuse harde to be vnderstande, diffuse.’—Palsgrave's 
Lesclar. de ia Lang. Fr., 1530. ‘But oft by it [logick] a thing playne, bright and 
pure, Is made diffuse, vaknowen, harde, and obscure.’—Barclay’s Ship of Fooles, ed. 
1570. ‘Kent does not wish to render his speech difficult to be understood, but merely 
to disorder it, to disguise it, as he had disguised his person.’ WRIGHT cites instances 
of the use of ‘defuse’ from Lyly’s Zuphues (ed. Arber), p. 64; and Armin’s (Vest of 
Ninnies, p. 6 (Shaksp. Soc. ed.). For other instances from Sh., see Concordance 
or Schmidt's Zex. 

6. So... come,] To CAPELL this appeared to be a wish and parenthetical. 

7. labours] CAPELL: His master wili find him ready for any hard services, and 
any number of them. WALKER (C777. i, 255): Perhaps Zedour of the Qq is right. 

7. Lear] CoLeripcE: In Lear old age is itself a character,—its natural imper- 
fections being increased by lifelong habits of receiving a prompt obedience, Any 
addition of individuality would have been unnecessary and painful ; for the relations 
of others to him, of wondrous fidelity and of frightful ingratitude, alone sufficiently 
distinguish him. Thus Lear becomes the open and ample play-room of nature’s 


passions. 


6 


judgement; to fight when I cannot choose; and to eat no fish. —_ 

— Lear. What art thou? he . 
Kent.. A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the “ 

king. < 


eee Re 
_ Lear. What dost thou profess? What 
with us? : a 
Kent, 1 do profess to be no less than I seem ; fo serve 
him truly that will put me in trust; to love him that is hon- _ x 
est; to converse with him that is wise and says little; to fear 


Lear. If thou be’st as poor for a subjeét as he’s fora 20 


king, thou art poor enough. What ‘wouldst thou? a 
Kent. Service. P 
Lear. Who wouldst thou serve ? 

Kent. You. 

Lear. Dost thou know me, fellow? . 25 

15. and says] tosay Warb. Han, and 20. he’s] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Kut, Dyce z 
say Steev. 85. i, Sch. he zs Qq et cet. 

17. ard] are ¥.. 21. thou art] thar’tQ,. 

20. be’st] Ff (de F,)+, Knt, Dycei, 23. Who| Whom FFF ,+, Cap. Jen. 
Sta. Sch. de Qq et cet. Ec. Coll. Del. Wh. - 


II, 13. profess] Dexius: Lear uses this in the sense of ¢rade or calling. Kent 
replies in the sense of assertion. 

15. converse] JOHNSON: This signifies immediately and properly to seep com- 
pany, not to discourse or talk. 

16, judgement] CAPELL thinks this refers simply to coming before a judge; 
Eccies and MoBERLY that it refers to the last Judgement. 

16, eat no fish.] WARBURTON: In Queen Elizabeth’s time the Papists were 
esteemed, and with good reason, enemies to the government. Hence the proverbial 
phrase of, ‘He’s an honest man, and eats no fish,’ to signify he’s a friend to the 
government and a Protestant. The eating fish, on a religious account, being then 
esteemed such a badge of popery, that when it was enjoined for a season by act of 
parliament, for the encouragement of the fish-towns, it was thought necessary to 
declare the reason; hence it was called ‘Cecil’s fast.’ To this disgraceful badge 
of popery Fletcher iludes in his Woman-Hater [1V, ii], who makes the courtezan 
say, when Lazarillo, in search of the umbrana’s head, was seized at her house by the 
intelligencers for a traitor: ‘Gentlemen, I am glad you have discovered him; he 
should not have eaten under my roof for twenty pounds; and surely I did not like 
him when he called for fish.’ And Marston’s Dutch Courtesan [I, ii]: ‘I trust I 
am none of the wicked that eate fish a Fridaies.’ [Dvycr, in his ed. of the Woman- 
ffater, cites this note by Warburton, and adds: ‘ Perhaps Warburton is right. | 
Care. thinks that this means simply that Kent was a jolly fellow, and no lover 
of such meagre diet as fish. 


23. Who] For other instances of ‘ who’ for whom, see ABBOTT, § 274. 


ia 
Drie 
#4 


eons 


_Ican keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a curi- 


. tale in telling it, and deliver a plain message bluntly; 
_ that which ordinary men are fit for, 1 am eck in, and 
_ the best of me is diligence. 
x Lear. How old art thou? 35 


Kent. Not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing, 
nor so old to dote on her for any thing; I have years on my 
back forty-eight. 

Lear. Follow me; thou shalt serve me; if I like thee no 
worse after dinner, I will not part from thee yet—Dinner, 40 
ho, dinner! Where’s my knave? my Fool?—Go you, and 
call my Fool hither.— [Exit an Attendant. 


Enter OSWALD. 


You, you, sirrah, where’s my daughter ? 


Osw. So please you,— [ Exit, 
30. thou] Om. Q.. 42. hither] hether Qq. 
31. counsel] counfaile QqF,. coun- [To an Attendant. Cap. 
failes F,. counfels FF ,+. [Exit...] Dyce. 
34. ts diligence] is,—diligence Sta. Enter Oswald] As in Cap. En- 
36. six] Om. Qgq. ter Steward (after daughter ?) QqFf+. 
singing | sighing Anon.* Enter Steward (after Aoo/?) Johns. Jen. 
39. thou] that F,,. 43. You, you,| You you FF. you 
39, 40. me; if..dinner, I] me, if... Qq. 
dinner, J QqFf. me, if...dinner. I Jen. 44. Osw.] Coll. Steward. Qq. Ste. 
Ec. Sta. me, tf...dinner ; Sing. or Stew. Ff. 
40, 61. from...dinner!] from thee. you,—] you—Q_FF. you, Q,. 
Vet no dinner ho? dinner—Han. [Exit.] Om. Qq. 


31. curious] ScumIpT: Elegant, nice. WRIGHT: Elaborate. 

34. diligence] Particularly, says SCHMIDT, applied to menial services. Compare 
Tam. of Sh., Ind. i, 70. Prospero calls Ariel ‘my diligence’ because he has so 
zealously eatiied out his commands, Bee : 

36. so... to] See II, iv, 11, 12; a7. U, 105) Meco. 11,10, 47; II, 1, 87; 
and ABBOTT, § 281. 

42. Davies (Dram. Mise. ii, 176) gives what was the stage business in his time: 
Ere [Oswald] generally enters the stage in a careless, disengaged manner, hum- 
ming a tune, as if on purpose to give umbrage to the king by his neglect of him.’ 


. What services canst thou do? | 30 


that mongrel ? 


Knight. He says, my lord, your daughter is not fall; 
Lear. Why came not the slave back to me when I called 
him? 
Knight. Sir, he answered me in the roundest manner, 
he would not. 


Lear. We would not! 


iS 
. re 3 esi a Knight) “Where's my Fool, ho? | 
the world’s asleep —[ Re-enter Knight. ] How now! 


- ue i 


PS “a . 


Knight. My lord, I know not what the matter is; but, 55 
to my judgement, your highness is not entertained with that 
ceremonious affection as you were wont; there’s a great 


‘abatement of kindness appears as well in the general de- 


pendants as in the duke himself also and your daughter. 


Lear. Ha! sayest thou so? 


Knight. I beseech you, pardon me, my lord, if I be 
mistaken; for my duty cannot be silent when I think your 


highness ees 


~ 


Lear. Thou but rememberest me of mine own concep- 
tion. I have perceived a most faint neglect of late; which 65 


45. clotpoll | Steev. ClotpoleFf+, Cap. 
Jen. Mal. Ec. clat-pole Qq. clodpoll 
Johns. Dyce. 

46. [Exita Knight.] Dyce. Om. QqFf. 

fool, ho?) foole, ho Q,. foole ? ho, 
Q,. fovle? Ho, Ff, Cap. fool? Ho! 
Rowe, Jen. fool? Ho? Pope, Han. 

47. [Re-enter Knight.] Dyce. Om. 
QaqFf. 

49. Knight.] Knigh, F\F,F,. Kent. 
Q4: . 


49. daughter] Daughters FF. 

52, 55, 61. Knight.] Seruant. Qq. 

52. me] Om. Ps Rowe, Pope, Han, 

54. He] 4 Q,. 

58. of kindness] Om. Qq. 

dependants| dependance Walker 

(Crit. iii, 277). 

63. wronged] is wrong’d Q.F.F,+, 
Cap. Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. Sing. Ktly. 

64. mine] my FF +, Jen. 


56. that... 


. as] See I, i, 95, and ApporT, § 280. 


58, appears] For the omission of the relative, see ABBOTT, § 244. 
64. conception] Always used by Sh., says SCHMIDT, in a bad sense, especially 


of suspicious or jealous thoughts, 


65. faint] ScHMIpT says this does not mean ‘slight,’ as WRIGHT interprets it, but 
‘dull,’ ‘languid,’ ‘cold,’ ‘ without zeal,’ and refers to Mid. V. D.: «A barren sister, 
chanting faint. hymns to the cold fruitless moon;’ and to ‘faint deeds’ in Zimo 


which means indifferent, mechanical actions, devoid of thought. [Despite 
thority, almost without a rival, which Schmidt wields in a question c 
Shakespeare’s use of words, I cannot but think that he is in error here, 


t u- 


cerning” 
and es , 


er lamed as mine own jealous curiosity than as 
retence and purpose of unkindness. I will look 


ae © Knight Since my young lady’s going into France, sir, 
= a Fool hath much pined away. 
_ Lear. No more of that; I have noted it well—Go you, 
Bea tell my daughter I monld speak with her.—Go you, call 
- hither my Fool —[Re-enter Oswatp.] O, you sir, you, come 
you hither, sir. Who am I, sir? ; 78 
Osw. My lady’s father. 
Lear. ‘My lady’s father?’ my lord’s knave. You whore- 
~ son dog! you slave! you cur! 


4 66. mine own] my own F,+, Jen. 74. Re-enter Oswald.] As in Johns. 
 - 67. purpose| purport Qq. (subs.) Re-enter Steward, brought back 
= 68. znto’t'] into it Q,. intoo’t F,. by an Attendant. [after O, line 74] Cap, 
“a my] this Qq. Enter Steward. [after s¢v ? line 75] Ff, 
69. zhis] these Pope+, Jen. Ec. Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Om, 

70. Knight.] Servant. Qq. Qq. 

72. well] Om. Qq, Cap. 74, 75+ you, come...sir| you fir, cone 
_ [To one Attendant. Cap. Ec. you hither Qq, Cap. Jen. Steev. Ec. 

73. [Exit an Attendant. Dyce. Var. Coll. Del. Sing. Wh. Ktly. come 

74. [to Another. Cap. -str ELF +, 


[Exit an attendant. Dyce. 


‘Lear say the very opposite to what Sh. intended. At this stage of the play Lear 
4 is not the man to stand ‘most cold neglect.’ as we see by his instantaneous wrath 
at Oswald a few lines further on.—ED. ] 
66. jealous curiosity] SrEEVENS: A punctilious jealousy, resulting from a scru- 
pulous, watchfulness of his own dignity. 
67. pretence] STEEVENS: Design. See I, ii, 84. Hupson: The passage is rather 
curious, as discovering a sort of double consciousness in the old king. 
_ 69. this two days] WricuT: In such cases Sh. uses indifferently ‘this’ and 
oa ‘these.’ See Wint. Tale, V, ii, 147, Per. V, i, 24. 

70. into] ScumipT: Very commonly used by Sh. before the names of countries: 
‘to go into England,’ ‘into Flanders,’ ‘into Mauritania,’ 

71. Hupson: This aptly touches the key-note of the Fool’s character. CoLE- 
RIDGE: The Fool is no comic buffoon to make the groundlings laugh,—no forced 
condescension of Shakespeare’s genius to the taste of his audience. Accordingly, 
the poet prepares for his introduction, which he never does with any of his common 
clowns and fools, by bringing him into living connection with the pathos of the play. 
He is as wonderful a creation as Caliban ;—his wild babblings and inspired idiocy 
articulate and gauge the horrors of the scene. 

73. Go you, call} SCHMIDT follows the QqFf in omitting the comma here, be- 
cause the infinitive very commonly omits /o in construction with go. 

6* E 


“4 


a> 
we 
oe: z 


cs 
- 


pardon. 


I am none of f these, 1 
= % ; 

Lear, Do you bandy looks with me, you 

Osw. Il not be strucken, my lord. 

Kent. Nor tripped neither, you base foot-ball a oa : 

Lear, 1 thank thee, fellow; thou servest me, and I'll love . 


thee. Se 8: r 


Kent. Come, sir, arise, away! I'll teach you differences: 
away,away! If you will measure your lubber’s length again, 
tarry; but away! go to; have you wisdom? so. 

Lear, Now, my friendly knave,I thank thee. There’s” 
earnest of thy service. 90 


Enter FOou, 


Fool, Let me hire him too.—Here’s my coxcomb. : 
79, 80. Jam...pardon.| Two lines, Ff. 
79. these| this Qq, Cap. Mal. Steev. 

Bos. Sing. Ktly. : 

79, 80. your pardon] you pardon me 

Qq, Cap. Steev. Ec. Var. Sing. 

81. [Striking him. Rowe. 
82. strucken| Ff, Rowe, Knt, Wh. 

Sch. /rucke Q,. j/eruck Q, et cet. 89. my] Om. Qq. 

{in Posture of defending himself. there's} their's Q,. 

Cap. 90, [Giving money. Johns. 

83. player /] player ? Han. gI. SCENE XII. Pope, Han. Warb.. 
[Tripping up his heels. Rowe. Johns, Jen. 

84, 85. J...chee.] Two lines, Ff, Rowe. [Giving his cap. Rowe. 

86. arise, away] Om. Qq. 


88. tarry] tarry again Theob. ii, 
Warb. Johns. 
go to| Om Qgq. > 
have you wisdom? so.| Theob. 


Sch. you haue wifedome. Qq. 
[Pushes the Steward out, Theob. 


81. bandy] Srrrvens: A metaphor from tennis. [Cotgrave: Jouér @ bander 
& 4 racler contre. To bandy against, at Tennis ; and (by metaphor) to pursue with 
all insolencie, rigour, extremitie. ] 

. 88. have you wisdom ?] Scurpr plausibly urges that this is not a question, 
but an imperative. The superfluous you or ¢iow after an imperative is almost too 
common in Sh, to be noted. Scumuipr refers to lines 138 (which is scarcely par- 
allel) and 331 of this scene, and also tol, v, 13 FL, iv; 3543 DIL, Gy 7-89 DD ii, 
6; IV, vi, 137 of this play. 

go. earnest] SCHMIDT cites 7wo Gent. II, i, 163, and Com. of Err. II, ii, 24, as 
instances of quibbles, where this word is used in both of its meanings: kandsel and 
Serious. 

gt. Enter Fool.] C. A. Brown (Shakespeare's Autobiographical Poems, p. 292, 
1838): ‘ Now, our joy, though last, not least,’ my dearest of all Fools, Lear’s Fool! 
Ah, what a noble heart, a gentle and a loving one, lies beneath that parti-coloured 
jerkin! Thou hast been cruelly treated. - Regan and Goneril could but hang thee, 
while the unfeeling players did worse; for they tainted thy character, and at last 


haue you wifedome, fo. Ff, Rowe, Pope, 


a 
cING LEAR 


7 ar — [or. Enter Fool.] : 
thee from the stage, as one unfit to appear in their worshipful company. Re- 
of that warning voice forbidding them to ‘speak more than is set down for ; 
»’ they have put into thy mouth words so foreign to thy nature, that they might, | t< 
> with as much propriety, be given to Cardinal Wolsey. But let me take thee, with- ; 
_ out addition or diminution, from the hands of Sh., and then art thou one of his 
m perfect creations. Look at him! It may be your eyes see him not as mine do, but he 
Pe appears to me of a light delicate frame, every feature expressive of sensibility even 
_ to pain, with eyes lustrously intelligent, a mouth blandly beautiful, and withal a 
hectic flush upon his cheek. Oh that I were a painter! Oh that'I could describe him ni 
as I knew him in my boyhood, when the Fool made me shed tears, while Lear did 
but terrify me! ... When the Fool enters, throwirig his coxcomb at Kent, and 
instantly follows it up with allusions to the miserable rashness of Lear, we ought | “ 
to understand him from that moment to the last. Throughout this scene his wit, 
a however varied, still aims at the same point, and in spite of threats, and regardless 
: how his words may be construed by Goneril’s creatures, with the eagerness of a 
filial love he prompts the old king to ‘resume the shape which he had cast off.’ 
‘This is not altogether fool, my lord.’ But, alas! it is too late; and when driven 
from the scene by Goneril, he turns upon her with an indignation that knows no fear 
of the ‘halter’ for himself: ‘A fox when one has caught her, And such a daughter, 
_ Should sure to the slaughter, If my cap would buy a halter.’ That such a character 
should be distorted by players, printers, and commentators! Observe every word 
Za ____he speaks; his meaning, one would imagine, could not be misinterpreted; and when 
“ ‘at length, finding his covert reproaches can avail nothing, he changes his discourse 
s 
Y 
ea 


ie to simple mirth, in order to distract the sorrows of his master. When Lear is in 

the storm, who is with him? None—not even Kent—‘ None but the Fool; who 

. labours to outjest His heart-struck injuries.’ The tremendous agony of Lear’s 

Bet mind would be too painful, and even deficient in pathos, without this poor faithful 

servant at his side. It is he that touches our hearts with pity, while Lear fills the 

iz imagination to aching. . . . But it is acted otherwise,—no, it is Tate that is acted. 

a Let them, if they choose, bring this tragedy on the stage; but, by all means, let us 

not be without the Fool. I can imagine an actor in this part, with despair in his 

face, and a tongue for ever struggling with a jest, who should thrill every bosom. 

What! banish him from the tragedy, when Lear says, ‘I have one part in my heart 

that’s sorry yet for thee ;? and when he so feelingly addresses him with, ‘Come on, my 

boy ; how dost, my boy? Art cold? Iam cold myself.’ At that pitch of rage, ‘Off! 

off, you lendings! Come, unbutton here!’ could we but see the Fool throw himself 

into his master’s arms, to stay their fury, looking up in his countenance with eyes that 

would fain appear as if they wept not, and hear his pathetic entreaty, ‘ Pr’ythee, 
nuncle, be contented ;/—pshaw! these players know nothing of their trade. 

In Macreapy’s Diary is the following: 4th [January, 1838].—Went to the the- 
atre, where I went on a first rehearsal of Avg Lear. My opinion of the introduc- 
tion of the Fool is that, like many such terrible contrasts in poetry and painting, 
in acting-representation it will fail of effect; it will either weary and annoy or dis- 
tract the spectator. I have no hope of it, and think that at the last we shall be 
obliged to dispense with it. 5th.—Speaking to Willmott and Bartley about the part 
of the Fool in Zear, and mentioning my apprehensions that, with Meadows, we 
should be obliged to omit the part, I described the sort of fragile, hectic, beautiful- 


bs Enter Fool] 
faced boy that he should be, and stated my belief that it never Ga 
ley observed that a woman should play it. . caught at the idea, 
claimed, « Miss P. Horton is the very person.’ I was delighted at the thoug + 
C. CowpEn CLARKE (Gent. Mag. No. LVIII, p. 397): Lear’s Fool is a yout uth, 
not a grown man; a petted lad, to whom his royal master looks for quaint say- 
ings and whimsical sentences when vexed and irritable; a favoured fellow, whose 
wayward speeches are tolerated, and even liked, when graver cares press hard on © 
the old monarch, and to whose playful sallies he turns when desiring to fill a vacant has 
half hour or beguile a leisure interval. . . . The personal and affectionate interest __ 
taken by Lear in the lad is denoted at the very outset. He not only asks eagerly 
and repeatedly for him, but when told that since Cordelia’s going into France ‘the 
Fool hath much pined away,’ Lear answers hurriedly: ‘No more of that; Z have 
noted it well; and when the Fool himself appears on the scene, his old master 
accosts him with: ‘ How now, my pretty knave, how dost thou?” ‘The very expres- 


sion, ‘My pretty knave,’ serves to paint the Fool’s boyish years, and to depict the ' 
fondling regard of Lear for him... . This kind of gentle feeling is shown by others 
as well as the king towards the stripling fool-jester; for Kent—who, disguised as xy 
Caius, affects much bluntness of speech—on more than one occasion speaks fayour- : 

ingly of and to the lad. When the Fool is sportively and keenly rebuking Lear for ro 
having so unwisely cast all power into his unworthy daughter’s hands, Kent‘ebserves : £ 


«This is not altogether fool, my lord.’ Afterwards, also, in the storm, when the boy, 
scared at finding the Bedlam beggar in the hovel, runs out again, exclaiming: ‘Come 
not in here, nuncle; here’s a spirit. Help me, help me!’ Kent encouragingly says: 
‘Give me thy hand. Who’s there?’ And still further on, at the close of that wild 
night-scene, when the poor old king, worn out, has fallen into weary slumber, Kent, 
preparing to bear him away to safer quarters, says to the faithful Fool: ‘Come, help 
to bear thy master; ¢ou must not stay behind." This tenderness with which the boy 
is treated partly arises from his delicacy of frame, which is indicated by some slight 
but significant side-touches in the course of the play. First, there is his pining 
away’ on his young mistress’s departure from England, above alluded to. Then, 
there is his sensitiveness to churlish weather and sharp night air, betokened by his 
words during the storm: ‘O nuncle, court holy water,’ &c. Again: * This cold 
night will turn us all to fools and madmen.’ Lastly, there is his withdrawal from 
the play. It is silently effected, the dramatist giving no express mention of the Fool 
after his assisting to bear his old master away to the'litter prepared for conveying the 
king to Dover; but, to my mind, Sh, evidently meant to infer that the fragile lad— 
weakly in frame, susceptible in temperament, and rendered doubly so by the delicacy © 
of his nurture in the court household as the petted boy-jester of his royal employer— 
never recovered from the rigours and terrors of that tempestuous night; that he sick- 
ened and died soon after, fulfilling actually, as well as poetically, his own last uttered 
words: ‘And I'll go to bed at noon.’ In this noontide of his youth and fidelity, Lear’s 
Fool goes to his deathbed, when his old master no longer needs him by his side. 

W. W. Lioyp: It is indicated that tHe Fool is a boy, a pretty knave, young 
that is, and of pleasant aspect, and the boundaries of his intelligence lie somewhere 
between innocence and acuteness, but whereabouts is undefinable; it is only when 
the king is conscious of the full extent of his injustice and his misery, that the Fool 
desists from probing the wounds, and torturing by truth told jestingly,—and now 


d. iceah, Areas were “best tale - ee a 
- - Why, Fool? 

ES _ Why? for taking one’s part that’s out of favour. 95 

d thou canst not smile as the wind sits, thou’lt catch 


Why] Qq. Lear. Why Dyce et cet. 
a Kant, Coll. i, Del. i, Sch. 95. one’s] ons Q.. 


_ fool) my Boy Ff+, Knt, Coll. that’s] that is ¥,+, Steev. Ec, 
Del. Sch. Var. 
«95. Why ? for] Ff +, Cap. Jen. Steev. 96. and] QqF FF shy Rowe, Sch. & 
7 ae Var. Knt, Coll. Del. Sing. Wh. F,. as Warb. az Pope et cet. 
Ktly, Sch. Why for Qq. Why, for thow It] thow t Qq. 


‘labours to outjest his heart-struck injuries.’ [After these long and good notes by 
my betters, I wish merely to record humbly but firmly my conviction that the Fool, 
one of Shakespeare’s most wonderful characters, is not a boy, but a man—one of the 
shrewdest, tenderest of men, whom long life had made shrewd, and whom afflictions 
had made tender; his wisdom is too deep for any boy, and could be found only in a 
man, removed by not more than a score of years from the king’s own age; he had 


_____ been Lear’s companion from the days of Lear’s early manhood. See also White’s 
_ ‘note on line 123.—Ep.] 

Joh 93. you were best] AxBszotT, § 230: The old ‘(¢o) me (2¢) were better,’ being 
-___ misunderstood, was sometimes replaced by ‘I were better.’ When the old idiom is 
a ___ retained, it is generally in instances like the present, where ‘you’ may represent 
a= either nominative or dative, but was almost certainly used by Sh. as a nominative. 
_ See III, iv, 99. 
oS. 93. coxcomb] MINSHEU (s. v. cockes-combe, ed. 1617): Englishmen use to call 
= vaine and proud braggers, and men of meane discretion and judgement Coxcombes. 


Because naturall Idiots and Fooles haue, and still doe accustome themselues to weare 

in their Cappes, cock’s feathers, or a hat with a necke and head of a cocke on the 

top and a bell thereon, &c., and thinke themselues finely fitted and proudly attired 

therewith, so we compare a presumptuous bragging fellow, and wanting all true 

P- Iudgement and discretion, to such an Idiote foole, and call him also Coxecombe. 
[Cited in part by STEEVENS. ] : 

94. Why, Fool] Knicur: The text of the Folio [see Textual Notes] clearly 
shows that the speech was intended for Lear, and that, however it might have been 
: written originally, Sh. in his amended copy would not permit Kent, in his character 
of serving-man, so soon to begin bandying questions with Lear’s favorite. WHITE: 
The Folio is clearly wrong, as the Fool’s reply shows. Lear had taken ‘no one’s part 
’ that’s out of favour,’ but Kent had. The mistake seems to be due to the fact that 

both Lear and Kent reply interrogatively to the Fool’s remark about his coxcomb. 

Dyce: The eye of the transcriber or compositor most probably caught the next 
speech but one. It is plain that the Fool addresses the king for the first time when 
he says: ‘ How now, nuncle,’ &c. Scumrpt silently follows F,F,, which are to me 
unquestionably wrong. 
95. one’s] Aszsort, § 81: We never use the possessive inflection of the unem- 
phatic ove as an antecedent. 
96. and] Assort, § 101: Equivalent to 7 This particle has been derived 


cold shortly. There, take my c coxce 


has banished two on’s daughters, and did the th 


“ ing against his will; if thou follow him, thou must ne 
wear my coxcomb.—How now, nuncle? Would I had two 
coxcombs and two daughters ! 

Lear. Why, my boy? 
Fool, If 1 gave them all my living,I’ld keep my cox-_ 
combs myself. There’s mine; beg another of thy daughters. 


= 


Lear. Take heed, sirrah; the whip. 105 
98. has] hath Qq, Cam. ha’s Fy. 103. gave] give FF +. 
on’s| of his Q,, Pope+, Steev. all my] any Qq. 
Mal, Ec. Knt, Sing. Ktly. LPld\ Lu i, 
did done Qq, Cam. ~~ _ coxcombs| Coxcombes F,. 
Iol. and two] an’ two (i. e. if two) coxcombe QF. Ci bind Py Rowe, 
Farmer. Pope, Theob. Han, Warb. 


from az, the imperative of wznan, to grant. This plausible but false derivation 
was originated by Horne Tooke, and has been adopted by the edd. of the Cam. Sh. 
But the word is often written ‘and’ in Early English (Stratmann), as well as in 
Elizabethan authors. So almost always in the Folio. 

96. catch cold] FARMER: That is, be turned out of doors aS exposed to the 
inclemency of the weather. a 

98. banished] CapeLL: This means that he had lost them as daughters, lost 
their love and obedience, and by an act of his own. Eccies thinks that these 
words are spoken in the wanton levity of the character, as being the contrary of 
those favours Lear had conferred upon them. MosBerLy: Lear has, by blessing 
them, made Goneril and Regan no longer his daughters, and also made Cordelia 
queen of France by cursing her. 

98. on’s] ABBoTT, § 182: ‘On’ was frequently used for the possessive of, par- 
ticularly, in rapid speech, before a contracted pronoun. The explanation of this 
change of of to ‘on’ appears to be as follows: Of when rapidly pronounced before 
a consonant became o’; but when o’ came before a vowel it was forced to assume a 
euphonic 2. See I, v, 19. 

98. did] For instances of the transitive use of this word, see ABBOTT, § 303. 

too. nuncle] Nags: A familiar contraction of mine uncle. It seems to have 
been the customary appellation of the licensed fool to his superiors. In the same 
style the fools called each other cousiéz. In Beaumont and Fletcher's Pilerim, when 
Alinda assumes the character of a fool, she uses the same language. She meets 
Alphonso, and calls him zzcle ; to which he replies by calling her zaunt. WRIGHT: 
So in Whetstone’s Promos and Cassandra, iv, 7, we find § my nown good harte roote.’ 
In Littré’s Dic?., under the word « Tante,’ it is stated that ‘nante’ is a form of the 
word in Picardy, and in justification of the derivation of ¢amfe from za ante, refer- 
ence is made to the Wallon dialect, in which mononk, matante, and similar forms 
are used, the possessive pronoun having no force whatever, If the origin of ‘nuncle’ 
is not analogous, it must be referred to the principle by which Noll, Ned, Nan, Nell, 
Numps are formed from Oliver, Edward, Anne, Ellen and Humphrey. 


ie to kennel; he must be hie 106 is: a 
eae brach, may stand by th’ fire and = 


i 
_ Fool. “Mark it, nuncle: ; 
= Have more than thou showest, 
Speak less than thou knowest, | 

Lend less than thou owest, II5 
Ride more than thou goest, . : 
Learn more than thou trowest, ; as 
Set less than thou throwest; 


wF _ 106. Truth’s a] TruthisaQ,. Truth 107. byth’ fire] F,F,+, Jen. Wh. Sch. 
eB ~ is, a Q,. by th fire FF. 
a must to| that muf? to Qq, Jen. 109. gall] gull Qq. 
_ ss Steev. Mal. Ec. Bos. Sing. Ktly. - 110. [To Kent. Rowe+, Jen. Ec. 
a 107. Lady, the brach,| Steev. Mal. Stirrah| Sirha ¥,F.,. 
=e Glo.+, Mob. JLadie oth’e brach Qq. 111. Lear.] Ken. Cap. 
ag (Lady Q,.) the Lady Brach Ff+, Cap. 112. nuncle] uncle Q,. Vuckle Q,. 
ee Jen. Ec. Knt, Coli. Del. Dyce, Sta. Wh. — Vuchle, Q,. 
ee Huds. Sch. _ 113-122. Have...score.]| Prose, Qq. 
my 107. brach] STEEVENS: A bitch of the hunting kind. Dr Letherland, on the 
Z ; margin of Warburton’s ed., proposed § /ady’s brach,’ z. e. favoured animal. ‘ Lady’ 
Be is still a common name for a hound. So Hotspur, in 1 Hen. 7V-: III, i, 240. To- 


LET [Note in III, vi, 67]: The females of all dogs were once called draches. Uli- 
_—-- tius upon Gratius observes: ‘ Racha Saxonibus canem significabat unde Scoti hodie 
Rache pro cane foemina habent, quod Anglis est Brache.’ A[RCHIBALD] S[MITH] 
(NM. and Qu. 2 Ser., vol. v, p. 202, 1858): Here is a curious opposition between 
‘truth’ and ‘lady,’ where one would have expected the opposition to be between 
bod ‘truth’? and Ze. May it not be that Sh. wrote ‘lye the brach,’ and that the printers 
* thought ‘lye’ a contraction for ‘lady,’ instead of the whole of the opposite of ¢rath ? 
WricHT: Florio has, ‘ Bracca, a brache, or a bitch, a beagle;’ Cotgrave: ‘ Braque: 
; m. A kind of short-tayled setting dog; ordinarily spotted, or partie-coloured.’ Baret 
Se gives ‘a Brache or biche. Canicula.’ The word is found in German Bracke, and 
in Dutch Brak. 
109. pestilent gall] Moserty: A passionate remembrance of Oswald’s inso- 
lence. [This does not satisfy me, but I can offer nothing better.—Ep.] 
115. owest] For ‘owe,’ meaning to possess, see Sh. passim. 

117. trowest] WARBURTON gives to this the meaning of to delieve, to think, to 
conceive, and he has been followed by all other editors since his time except CAPELL, 
who says it means to £zow, and cites in confirmation, I, iv, 207, where the Qq have 
trow instead of ‘know’ of the Ff. Capell’s interpretation seems the better of the 


Leave ae drink and thy whe re, ; 


And keep in-a-door, 
And thou shalt have more 
Than two tens to a score. 
Kent. This is nothing, Fool. 
Fool. Then ’tis like the breath of an unfee’d lawyer, y you 
gave me nothing for’t—Can you make_no use > of nothing, 125 
nuncle ? 


~~ 


120. 7#-a-door| Cap. in a doore Qq. 124) tis] Om. Qq. zis F,, Rowe+, 
in adore FF, in dore¥,. in Door Ec. 
F,, Rowe. within door Pope+. 125. gave] give F,F,, Rowe, Pope. 
“123. Kent.] Lear. Qq, Mal. Steev. Sort) for it Q: 
Bos. Coll. Sta. 126. nuncle| Vucle Qaq. 


two in this passage, despite the fact that Warburton pronounces the line, as he inter- 
prets it, ‘an admirable precept.’ : 

118. Set] Mrs GrirriTHs: That is, never set equal to the stake you throw for. 
ScuHMIDT: The sense varies according to the way in which we understand ‘less,’ 
whether as an adjective or as an adverb. If it is an adjective, then the meaning is: 
‘Set a less sum than thou hast won by thy last throw;’ if an adverb:.‘ Keep on 
throwing, but set nothing.’ ; 

123. Kent] Knicut: The Ff properly gives this speech to Kent, in reply to the 
Fool’s address to him, ‘ Sirrah, I’ll teach thee a speech.’ WHITE also upholds the 
Ff, because: ‘it should be observed, that in addressing this poor, faithful follower, 
the king never calls him Fool. In speaking of him, he gives him his official title; 
but in speaking ¢o him, he always uses some term of familiar and pitiful endear- 
ment,—generally, ‘‘ my boy,’’—although the poor fellow had plainly had many years’ 
sad experience of the world. It seems a deteriorating misapprehension of this phrase 
that has led an eminent actor [Macready] to represent the Fool as a boy in years! 
I cannot believe that on this solitary occasion Sh, was indifferent to the touching 
nature of the relations which he had established between Lear and his humble coun- 
sellor; and I accept the evidence of the Folio that this speech is one of Kent’s many 
Ciecesictistic interruptions.’ 

124. unfee’d lawyer] Lorp CAMPBELL (Shakespeare's Legal Acquirements, p. 
97, Am. ed.): This seems to show that Sh. had frequently been present at trials in 
courts of justice, and now speaks from his own recollection. There is no trace of 
such a proverbial saying as ‘like the breath of an unfee’d lawyer,’ while all the world 
knows the proverb: ¢ Whosoever is his own counsel has a fool for his client. How 
unfee’d lawyers may have comported themselves in Shakespeare’s time I know not; 
but I am bound to say, in vindication of ‘my order,’ that in my time there has been 
no ground for the Fool’s sarcasm upon the bar, The two occasions when ‘the breath 
of an unfee’d lawyer’ attracts notice in this generation, are when he pleads for a 
party suing im forma pauperis, or when he defends a person prosecuted by the Crown 
for high treason, Itis contrary to etiquette to take a fee in the one case as in the 
other; and on all such occasions counsel, from a regard to their own credit, as well 


as from conscientious motives, uniformly exert themselves with extraordinary zeal, 
and put forth all their learning and eloquence. 


«Lear. ba fe Boalt” 
Fool, ‘Dost thou know the difference, my ook between a 
ities fool anda sweet one? 


_ Lear. No, lad; teach me. 
Fool. < That lord that counsell’d We 135 
Lt 
es To give away thy land, — 
~ Come place him here by me; 
z Do thou for him stand: my. 
* : , 
: The sweet and bitter fool =a E 
= Will presently appear ; 140 5 
eg The one in motley here, 
b The other found out there. 
* —— 
— * Lear. Dost thou call me fool, boy? 
_  * Fool, All thy other titles thou hast given away; that 
*thou wast born with. 145 
: 127,128. zothing...nothing| Separate 135-150. That lord...snatching.| Om. 
a line, Ff, Rowe. Ff, Rowe. 
— 129. [To Kent] Rowe. Om. QgqFf. 135-142. Om. Pope. In the margin, 
z 131-134. In the margin, Pope. Han. 
ot 131-142. In the margin, Han. That lord...there.| As in Cap, 
4a 132. Dost thou] Doo'ft Q,. Four lines, Qq, Theob.+, Jen. Knt, 
oi, my boy| nuncle Cap. Sch. 
“Sig 133. sweet one] Ff+, Knt, Coll. Del. 138. Do] Or do Han. Cap. Jen. Steev. 
__ ‘Dyce i, Sta. Wh. Huds. Sch. /weete fool = Mal. Ec. Bos. Sta. Huds. Sch. 
é Qq et cet.» 142. [Pointing to Lear. Coll. iii. 
Ss 135. [Sings. Anon.* : 143. doy] Om. Pope, Han. 


135-150. JOHNSON: These lines were omitted in the Ff, perhaps for political 
ak reasons, as they seemed to censure the monopolies. 

138. Do] JENNENSs adopts Hanmer’s change ‘Or do,’ and asserts that the measure 
points out that a word is lost here [which is true], and that the sense shows it to be 
Or [which is doubtful]. Wuiure is equally sure that the missing word is 4nd, his 
text reads ‘ Axd do thou,’ and in his note he says that this Azd the rhythm so imper- 
atively demands that ‘it could not possibly have been omitted in a rhyme like this, 
even if it were as superfluous as it is appropriate to the sense. It was doubtless 
omitted by accident.? The CamBripce EpitTors suggest an emendation which is, 
perhaps, the happiest of any yet offered: ‘ Do thou ¢here for him stand.’ The an- 
tithesis with the preceding line is emphasized, and the similarity of the ‘thou’ and 
the here in MS might well have been the cause, through oversight, of the omission 
| of the latter word by the compositor. 

‘ : 142. there] Dexius: Pointing to the king. 


ie 


Kent, This is not Neeeeaest, ae 
= Foal Mo, faith, lords and ooo men’ 


ee * they'll Be sechioge urate give me an egg, | and Tl 150 
* give thee two crowns. a 

Lear, What two crowns shall they be? 

Fool. Why, after I have cut the egg i’ th’ middle ead 
eat up the meat, the two crowns of the egg. When thou 
clovest thy crown i’ th’ middle and gavest away both parts, 155 
thou borest thine ass on thy back o’er the dirt; thou hadst 
little wit in thy bald crown when thou gavest thy golden 
one away. If I speak like myself in this, let him be whipped ei 
‘sa that first finds it so. 


148. out] on’t Pope+. Nuncle Qq et cet. 
148, 149. on’t; and ladies too,| an’t, 153. 2’ th’] ith’ F,. inthe Qq, Cam, "1 
and Ladies too, Q,, Jen. ont, and lodes 155- sree] crownes F,. 
too, Q,. ont; nay the ladies too, Pope 2? th’) ith’ F.. it h Qe. in the 
+. ont; and the ladies too, Steev.’73. Q., Cap. - 
ont, and loads too; Coll. i, ii, Del. i, 156. dorest] boar’ ft r ELF ,. dorif ¥,. 
Dyce i, Wh. Ktly. thine ass] thy affe Q4 Glo. Wr. 
149. they will] they Pope +, Cap. Mob. : 
all the fool] Q,, Jen. Cam. Wr. on thy] a?h Q.. 
Sch. aff foole Q, et cet. o'er] over Cap. Steev. Ec, Var. , 
to myself | myself Pope, Han. 158. one] crown Johns. 


150. uncle, give me an ege| Ff, ~ 159. so] sooth Warb. 
Rowe, Knt, Dyce i, Sch. Give. 0225 


146. altogether fool] The concrete for the abstract. For other instances, see 
ScHMIDT, Lex., p. 1423, § 12; see also II, iv, 145, where we have the abstract for 
the concrete. 

148. out] JENNENS: That is, a patent out of court for being sole fool. War- 
BURTON : A satire on the gross abuses of monopolies at that time, and the corrup- 
tion and avarice of the courtiers, who commonly went shares with the patentee. 
STEEVENS: Monopolies in Shakespeare’s time were common objects of satire. 

149. ladies] CoLLizr, in his ed. i and ii, justifies his adoption of odes of the Qq, 
saying that all the fool means is that, if he had a monopoly of folly, great men would 
have part of it, and a large part, too. Dyck, in his ed. ii, after quoting Collier’s note, 
adds: ‘But mark the ridiculous inconsistency of expression in the passage, if the 
Fool be speaking of /ords only,—* they would have gav¢ on’t””—* and /oads too”? — 
“they'll be swatching.”’ Dyce gives no intimation that in his ed.i, he adopted Col- 
lier’s reading with silent approval. In his ed. iii, Collier reads as in the text. 

158, 159. If... so] EccLes: Possibly he means to say that Ae will deserve to be 
whipped who does not, or cannot, discover that in this instance, at least, he speaks 
good sense. Perhaps, better thus: The Fool was accustomed to speak bitter and 


have Sided it, laicle- eer Mate thou Medea: ee 165 
thy mothers ; for when thou gavest them the rod 
tedst down thine own breeches, 


Then they for sudden joy did weep, 
And I for sorrow sung, 
| That such a king should play bo-peep, 170 
: And £0 the fools among. 


Nenihes. nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach thy 
_ Fool to lie. I would fain learn to lie. 


160 and 168. Singing a ; 
_ -————« 60, had ne'er] ze’erv had Pope+, Ec. 
=a grace] wit Qq, Glo. +, Mob. 
-.-~—s«: 162. And] They Qq, Glo. Wr. Mob. 
ae: know not how] well may fear 
Coll. (MS). 

to] doeQ.. doQ,. 

164. When] Since when Han. 

165. eer] Rowe +, Jen. Knt, Dyce, 


Bos. Sing, Ktly, Cam, Wr. 

167. puttedst] Dyce ii, Coll. iii, put’? 
or putt or puttest QqFf et cet. 

thine| thy Theob. ii, Warb. 

Johns. Jen. . 

168. Then they] As part of the song, 
Theob. Prose, Ff. 

168-171. for.....among] Verse, Ff. 
Prose, Qq. 


Sch. eve FF, ere FF, ewer Qq 
et cet. 
166. mothers] mother Qq, Mal. Steev. 


171. fools] Foole Aa e Cap. Knt. 
172. Prithee] pretheQ,. prethee Q,. 
Pry thy F,. Prethy ¥,. Prythee ¥¥ ,. 


unpalatable truths, and had sometimes been chastised for so doing. ‘/f then,’ he 
says, ‘/ speak on this occasion Uke. myself’ —z. e. like a fool, foolishly—‘let not me be 
whipped, but him who first finds it to be as I have said’—z. ¢. the king himself, who 
was likely to be soonest sensible of the truth and justness of the sarcasm, and who, 
he insinuates, deserved whipping for the silly part he had acted. 

160, Fools ... year;] JoHNSON: There never was a time when fools were less 
in favour; and the reason is, that they were never so little wanted, for wise men now 
supply their place. CAPELL discovered that this line, somewhat changed, is to be 
found in Lyly’s Mother Bombie, 1594: ‘1 thinke Gentlemen had never lesse wit in 
ayeere.’ See Capell’s School of Sh., p. 24. 

161, 163. foppish . . . apish] See, for the rhyme, II, iii, 20. 

168, 169. Then... sung] STrEvens: Compare Heywood’s Rage of Lucrece, 
1608: ‘When Tarquin first in court began, And was approved king, Some men for 
sudden joy gan weep, But I for sorrow sing.’ 

171. among] For other instances of the transposition of prepositions, see ABBOTT, 


§ 203. 


Lear. And you lie, sirrah, we'll have ye 
Fool. 1 marvel what kin thou and thy 
they’ll have me whipped for speaking true, thou’lt have n z 
whipped for lying, and sometimes I am whipped | for dine . 
my peace. I had rather be any kind o’ thing than a Fool; © 
and et I would not be thee, nuncle; thou hast pared thy — 
wit o’ both sides and left nothing i’ th’ middle. Here comes L 
one o’ the parings. at: 


Enter GONERIL. 


Lear. How now, daughter? what makes that frontlet on? a 
Methinks you are too much of late i’ th’ frown. 


174. And] Q,, Ff, Rowe;Sch. Jf 180, Here] heare F,. 


Q,, Pope +, Cap. Jen. Steev. Mal. Ec. 181. 0’ the] of the Qq, Cap. r 
Bos. Az Knt et cet. 182. SCENE xIv. Pope +, Jen. 
sirrah] Om. Qq. 182, 183. How....frown] Prose, Ff. 
176. thow lt] thou wilt Qq, Jen. Two lines, Qq, Coll. i, Sing. Wh. Sta. 
177. sometimes| fometime Qq. Ktly, Sch. 
_ 178. 0] of Qq, Cap. Jen. Steev. Mal. 182. daughter] our daughter Ktly. 
Ec. Bos, Knt, Sing. Ktly. on ?] on, Qq. ‘ 
180. 0” both] a both Qq. 183. Methinks] Om: Ff, Rowe+, Jen. 
2’ th’) tn the Qq, Cap. Steev. Mal. of late] alate Qq. 


Ec. Bos. Knt, Sing. Ktly. 


179. thee] Aspotr, §213: ‘Thee’ for chow is found after the verb Zo de not 
merely here in the Fool’s mouth, but also in 7%. IV, iii, 277, and in 2 Hen. V7: 
IV,i, 117. In these cases ‘ thee’ represents a person not regarded as acting, but 
about whom something is predicated, ~ 

181. Goneril] CoLrErRIpGE: The monster Goneril prepares what is necessary, 
while the character of Albany renders a still more maddening grievance possible— 
namely, Regan and Cornwall in perfect sympathy of monstrosity. Not a sentiment, 
not an image, which can give pleasure on its own account, is admitted. "Whenever 
these creatures are introduced, and they are brought forward as little as possible, 


_ pure horror reigns throughout. In this scene, and in all the early speeches of Lear, 


the one general sentiment of filial ingratitude prevails as the main-spring of the 
feelings ;—in this early stage the outward object causing the pressure on the mind, 
which is not yet sufficiently familiarized with the anguish for the imagination to work 
upon it, 

182, frontlet] Srrevens: Compare the following in Zhe Four P’s, 1569 [vol.i, — 
p- 70, ed. Dodsley; the Pardoner has asked why women are so long dressing after 
they get up in the morning, and the Pedler replies, with a play upon the word Zed, 
meaning hindrance]; ‘ Forsoth, women have many lettes, And they be masked in 
many nettes: As frontlettes, fyllettes, partlettes, and bracelettes; And then theyr 
bonettes, and theyr poynettes. By these lettes and nettes, the lette is suche, That 
spede is small, whan haste is muche.’ And more appositely, in Zepheria, a collec- 
tion of Sonnets, 1594 [Canzon, 27.—WrIGHY]: § But now my sunne it fits thou take 
thy set, And vayle thy face with frownes as with a frontlet.’ MALONE: A ‘ frontlet? 


Sie 


retty coe when thou eae no 


1 a tay el ane art now; ea ama | 
‘—Yes, forsooth, I will hold my tongue; 
ids me, though you say nothing. Mum, 


Fe that keeps nor crust nor crumb, 
~ Weary of all, shall want some-— 


190. nor crumb] ot crumb FF,. 
18), ree Gon. Pope. 192. [Pointingto Lear. Johns. Speak- 
188. Mum, mum,;] Separate line, ing to Lear. Warb. To Kent, shewing 
Cam. Lear. Cap. 
[Singing. Rowe +, Coll. That’s| Thou art Warb. 
188, 190. M/um...crumb] Cap. One shealed | shell’ d Cap. Wh. Coll. iii. 


- line, QqFf +, Jen. Sch. peascod| Popeii. Pe/cod QqFf. 


a 


- 190. nor crust] either cruf? Qq, Jen. 


was a forehead cloth, used formerly by ladies at night to render that part smooth. So 


_ in Lyly’s Zuphues [p. 286, ed. Arber]: ‘The next daye I comming to the gallery 
where she was solitaryly walking, with her frowning cloth, as sick lately of the 
_ solens,’ &c, STAUNTON: The very remarkable effect of this band, in the contrac- 


tion of the brows, may be observed in some of the monumental effigies of the four- 
teenth century, and especially in those small figures usually called ‘ Weepers’ which 
are found standing in tabernacles, on the sides of rich altar-tombs of the same period. 
Lear, however, may be supposed to speak metaphorically. WriGHT: Compare 


1 Hen. IV: I, iii, 19: ‘And majesty might never yet endure The moody frontier 


_of a servant brow,’ where ‘frontier’ is apparently used with some reference to “re 


or head-dress. 
188. bids me] MoBERLY gathers from this ‘ that the Fool is really mad, so far that 


he cannot control his gibes; for he goes on again directly in spite of his manifest 


dread of Goneril’s wrath.’ [To the present editor this inference is incomprehen- 
sible, unless ‘really mad’ be taken in the Yankee sense of ‘real mad.’] 

190, 191. He... some] Dyce agrees with CoLLisr in thinking that these and 
lines 208, 209 are fragments of some satirical ballad. 

192. That’s ... peascod] WarBuRTON was the first to insert a stage-direction 
here, directly referring this sentence to Lear, and he has been followed, I think, by 
all edd. except Dettus. As though the point were not made thereby sufficiently 
clear, Warburton changed ‘ That’s’ to Zou art. 1 cannot help thinking that stage- 
directions like these are in general needless, not to say obtrusive. If the action is 
so clear that the humblest intellect can perceive it, surely a stage-direction is super- 
fluous; for instance, when the Fool says to Kent, ‘ Here’s my coxcomb,’ does any 
one require to be told that he here offers Kent his cap? When Lear says ‘ There’s 
earnest of thy service,’ may not an editor assume that a reader has some intelligence, 
and needs not to be told that Lear here ‘gives Kent money’? In the present in- 
stance the application is sufficiently clear without any indication with the finger.— 


Ep. 
7 #% 


But other of your insolent retinue aaa 
Do hourly carp and quarrel, breaking forth = 


To have found a safe redress; but now grow fearful, —s 


NA —_ 


$ Gon, Not only, sir, this your all-lic ensed 


In rank and not to be endured riots. Sirs ; : ae 
I had thought, by making this well known unto you, a 


By what yourself too late have spoke and done, 
That you protect this course and put it on ; + » 2on se 
By your allowance; which if you should, the fault , —— 
Would not ’scape censure, nor the redresses sleep, 


193-206] Prose, Qq. Separate line, Wh. Dyce ii, Huds. 
193. this] thus Johns. 197. had] Om. Pope+. 
194. other] others Johns.” ~ known] know F,,. ae 
196. not...riots. Sir,] Pointed as by unto| zo Quincy (MS). 
Cap. (sot...indured riots,) Sir Q,. (not 200. put it on] put on Qaq. 
..rtots) Sir, Q,.  (not...endur'd) riots 201. which] Om. Pope+, Jen. 
Sir. Ff (subs.), Sch. zot...riots, Sir 202. redresses| redreffe,Q,. redreffé a 
Rowe, Pope, Han. Jen. 5 
Sir] Om, Theob. Warb. Johns. mm 


Cotgrave has, ‘Goussepillé : ... vnhusked, shaled, vncased, stripped.’ _JoHNSON 
explains the phrase (if explanation be needed), ‘ The outside of a king remains, but 


_ all the intrinsic parts of royalty are gone.’ 


ToLLeT (who has been followed by many an editor without credit accorded to 
him), on the authority of Camden’s Remains, states that Richard II's effigy in West- 
minster Abbey is wrought with Jeascods open and the peas out; ‘ perhaps,’ adds 
Tollet, ‘an allusion to his being once in full possession of sovereignty, but soon 
reduced to an empty title. But Tollet*s interpretation of this monumental symbolism 
is itself converted to a ‘shealed peascod’ by WRIGHT’s discovery that the peascods 
in question ‘are the pods of the A/anta genista, or broom plant, the badge of the 
Plantagenets. Moreover, although the pods are open, the seeds are indicated.’ 

194. other] For other instances of the use of this word as a plural pronoun, see 
ABBOTT, § 12, p. 24. 

196. Sir] WALKER (Vers. 269): Perhaps, metri gratia, this word should be 
placed by itself, in a separate line. [See Textual Notes.] 

198. To have found] See Ham. V, i, 233, or ABBOTT, § 360. 

200, put it on] STEEVENS: Promote it. So Macé. IV, iii, 239. 

201. allowance] MALONE: Approbation. MoBERLY: The rest of the sentence 
labours under a plethora of relatives. The meaning, however, is simple: ‘If you 
instigate your men to riot I will check it, even though it offends you; as that offence, 
wnich would otherwise be a shame, would be proved by the necessity to be a discreet. 
proceeding.’ ‘Yes,’ replies the Fool, ‘and so the young cuckoo, wanting the nest 
to itself, was under the regrettable necessity of biting off the head of its foster-mother 
the sparrow; which, under the circumstances, was not a shame, but an act of dis- 
cretion.’ 


1eir working do you that offence, 
se were shame, that then necessity hE TBO 
all discreet proceeding. 
_ Fool. For, you know, nuncle, Wz 
‘The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long, ‘ od 

oe. That it's had tt head bit off by it young. 


So out went the candle, and we were left darkling. 210 
205. Which] that Qq. 209. it’s had it head] F,, Sta. Glo. 
206. Will] muft Qa. Sch. it hed it head Qq, Wh. Ktly, Cam. 
proceeding proceedings Qq. Del. ii, Wr. it had it’s head FF, 
207. know] trow Qq, Cap. Steev. Mal. Pope, Cap. 22’s had its head Mob. zt 

Ec. Bos. Coll. Del. Sing. Dyce i, Sta. had its head F,, et cet. 
Ktly, Glo. Mob. by it] F,F,, Sta. Wh. Ktly, Glo+, 
208, [Singing. Coll. (MS). Del. ii, Mob. Sch. dit Qq. by i's 


203-209. The...young.] Verse, Pope. F,F,, Pope, Cap. dy z¢s Rowe et cet. 
poe: Les 


203. fender eee weal] WricHT: That is, in caring for a sound or healthily or- 
ganized commonwealth. For ‘tender’ as a verb in this sense compare Hen. 7; II, 
ii, 175. And for a play upon its other senses see Ham. I, iii, 106-109. For ‘ whole- 
some’ in the sense of ‘healthy’ compare Ham. III, iv, 65. ‘ Weal’ for ‘ common- 
wealth’ occurs in Macd. IIT, iv, 76. 

j 209. it head] See notes on Ham. I, ii, 216. WHITE thinks that ‘2¢’s had’ of 


WRIGHT, and the present Editor think that it is an abbreviation. So also does 

ScHmipT. TIEssENn (Archiv. f. d. n. Spr. \viii, pt. ii, p. 160) suggests that ‘it’ here 
is baby talk, like ‘it grandam’ in King Fohn. See also IV, ii, 32. 

“a 210, So... darkling] STEEVENs: Farmer concurs with me in supposing that this is 

a a fragment of some oldsong. MALONE: Ina very old comedy called Zhe Longer Thou 

ie Livest the more Foole Thou Arte, about 1580, we find the following stage-direction : 

4 ¢Entreth Moros, counterfaiting a vaine gesture and a foolish countenance, synging 

> the foote of many songs, as fools were wont.’ SiR JOSHUA REYNOLDS: Shakespeare’s 

fools are certainly copied from the life. The originals whom he copied were no 

doubt men of quick parts; lively and sarcastic. Though they were licensed to say 

any thing, it was still necessary, to prevent giving offence, that everything they said 

should have a playful air; we may suppose, therefore, that they had a custom of 

. taking off the edge of too sharp a speech by covering it hastily with the end of an 

ie old song, or any glib nonsense that came into the mind. I know no other way of 

_ accounting for the incoherent words with which Sh. often finishes this Fool’s speeches. 

Knicur [after quoting this note by Sir Joshua Reynolds, continues]: But the words 

before us are not incoherent words. The expression ‘so out went the candle,’ &c., 

may have been proverbial to signify the desertion of a man by his mercenary friends 

when he is become a ‘sheal’d peascod.’ But Sh. found the almost identical image 

applied to the story of Lear as related by Spenser: ‘ But true it is, that, when the ott 

is spent, The light goes out and wick is thrown away; So when he had resign’d his 

regiment, His daughter ’gan despise his drooping day.’ 


. the Folio is a mere misprint, and not an abbreviation of ‘it Aas had ;’ but STAUNTON, . 
: 
z= 


Gon, Come, sir, 


I would you would make use of that eats wisdom 
Whereof I know you are fraught, and put away 
These dispositions which of late transport you © 


From what you rightly are. 


Lear. Are you our daughter ? 


oa 


Fool. May not an ass know when ane) cart draws the 


a 
—— Ta 
% 


212. Come, sir,| Om. Ff +, Knt, Coll. 
Del. Dyce i, Sta. Wh. Ktly, Sch. 

213-216. Prose, Qq, Mal. Steev. Bos. 

213. that] your Ff+, Knut, Coll. Del. 
Dyce i, Wh. Sch. 


horse? Whoop, Fug, I love thee. oe ~ F 


..transform Jen. Steev. Mal. Ec. Bos. 
Coll. Sing. Wh. Ktly. shat...transforme 
Qq et cet. 

218. Whoop..thee] Italics, Ed. Sepa- 
rate line, Ff. 


(214. Whereof | Wherewith ten. conj. 
215. which......cransport| Ff+, Cap. 
Knt, Del. Dyce i, Sta. Sch. which 


- Jug,] Iug Qq. Jugge FF, 
Jug FF ' 


210. darkling] STAUNTON: This word which, like the Scotch darklins, implied 
in the dark, is found in the ancient comedy of Roister Doister, III, iii. [p. 41, ed. 
Sh. Soc.]: ‘He will go darklyng to his grave.’ See also Mid. V. D. U, ii, 86. 
Wricut: For the adverbial termination ‘-ling,’ or ‘-long,’ see Morris, English 
Accidence, p. 194, and compare‘ flatlong,’ Ze. II, i, 181. <¢ Hedlynge’ and ‘ hed- 
lynges’ are found in the Glossary to the Wicliffite versions. - ; 

214. fraught] ScumipT: Equivalent to freighied; usually followed by with; only 
in this passage by § of.’ 

215. dispositions] Compare ‘antic disposition,’ Ham. I, v, 172, and A/acé. III, 
IVE ose 

215. transport] In support of the Ff,ScHMIDT cites ‘ Being transported by my 
jealousies to bloody thoughts.’— Wint. Tale, III, ii, 159. ‘You are transported by 
calamity.’—Cor. I, i, 77. 

218. Whoop ...thee] STEEVENS: This is, as I am informed, a quotation from 
the burthen of an old song. HALLIWELL: ‘Jug’ was the old nickname for Joan, 
and it was also a term of endearment. Edward Alleyn, the player, writing to his 
wife in 1593, says: ‘And, Jug, I pray you Jett my orayng-tawny stokins of wolen be 
dyed a newe good blak against I com hom, to wear in winter.’ So also, ‘If I be I, 
and thou be’st one, Tell me, sweet Jugge, how spell’st thou Jone.’—Cotgrave’s Wits 
Interpreter, 1671, p. 116. MOoBerLy: He seems to mean, ‘As things have got the 
wrong way forward, I know what fair lady I must pay my court to now.’ ‘Jug’ is 
a vulgar form of ‘Jane,’ and he expresses the idea present to his mind in the first 
grotesquely similar form which his memory suggests. [At the end of the edition 
of Heywood’s Rape of Lucrece, printed in 1638, a song is given which begins: 
‘Arise, arise, my Juggie, my Puggie,’ and Juggie replies in the next verse, ‘ Begon, 
begon, my Willie, my Billie.’ In a note on the present passage, in his translation of 
Lear, JORDAN says that ‘Whoop’ may mean either a shout or a bird, the hoopoo; 
and that ‘Jug’ may mean, first, the nickname for Joan; secondly, a pool or puddle 
[where did he find this meaning?]; and thirdly, it may be an imperative of a verb 
to jug, which he informs us means to entice like a bird, especially to imitate the note — 


me 


ee 219-224. Does...shadow.] Prose, Qq, 
_ Mal. Steev. Bos. Coll. Sing. 
_-  -219,-220. Does| Do's bet Be > Dos 
_ ~ F,. Doth Qq, Glo. +, Dyce ii. 
~— 219. Does... Lear :] Rowe. Twolines, 
ee 
This] why this Qq, Jen. Steev. 
Mal. Ec. Bos. Coll. Sing. Dyce ii, Ktly. 
_ 221. notion weakens] notion, weaknes 
Q,. notion, weakneffe, Q.. 
his discernings| Ff +, Cap. Knt, 
Del. Dyce i, Sta. Glo. +, Mob. Sch. or 
his difcernings Qq et cet. 


a 


Joes any here know me? This is not Lear. | 
Lear walk thus? speak thus? Where are his eyes? 220 
notion weakens, his discernings 
| gied—Ha! waking? ’tis not so. 

is it that can tell me who I am? 


ending Ha /...me...am ? Ktly (adopting 
the Qq). 

222. lethargied—] Rowe. Lethar- 
gied. Ff, Knt, Del. - dethergie,Q,. leth- 
ergy, Q.. 

fla! waking ?| fleeping or wak- 
ing; ha! fure Qq, Mal. Steev.- Bos. 
Coll. Sing. Ktly. 

*tis| sure tis Wh. (adopting the 


Ff), 
223-227. Who...daughters] Fourlines, 
ending shadow ?.....MAQrRS..+..7CQSOM. 00 


daughters. Steev. 78, 85. 


222-223. Are....am?]| Three lines, 

ae a a ae I a 
_ of anightingale. These three meanings yield three interpretations: first, the usual 
one, as the refrain of a ballad; second, as the answer to the foregoing question: 
“May not an ass know when the cart draws the horse?’ and to be paraphrased: 

_ *Gee-up, puddle! I love thee!’ and supposed to be addressed by the cart to the 
-mud-hole into which it rolls back, thus drawing the horse after it; and lastly, we 


____ have the interpretation adopted by the translator himself, with this explanation: 
{ 
5 
3 
a 


=f changes her tone when she next speaks to him, and cloaks her reproaches under the 
garb of filial love; but the Fool detects her, and, designating her as a hoopoo, which 
is supposed to be a filthy bird, says to her: Sing, hoopoo, like a nightingale, the 
words «I love thee,’ or, as in the translation: ‘ Sing, Dreckhahn, wie ’ne Nachtigall : 
Ich liebe dich.’—Ep.] 

219-228. Does... father] Whether it be due to the incoherence of Lear’s 
co? passion or to the sophistications of the compositor, these lines have given rise to 
¢ much discussion among the early commentators. The later editors have been con- 

cerned chiefly with the metrical arrangement, and have little or nothing to say about 

____ the meaning of the passage. RopeRICK (Caw. of Crit., p. 267, 1765, ed. vii) holds 
Lear’s first speech (lines 219-223) to be ironical. Goneril has told him that he is 
transported beyond himself, and he ironically assents to it. To support this view, 
Roderick changes ‘Ha! waking?’ into ‘ov waking;’ that is, ‘This is not Lear,— 
whether in lethargy or waking—it is not Lear.’ He would also change * Who is it 
that can tell me?’ into ‘ Who is it shez can tell me?’ Here the irony ceases and 
serious resentment begins. ‘If I were to be persuaded by the marks of (z.¢. the 
& distinction and respect due to) my sovereignty (as king), my knowledge (as an old 
g man, of long experience) or my reason (as a man, one of the superior sex) that I 
had daughters, it would appear that I was falsely so persuaded. You are therefore 
a stranger, and I demand your name.’ This interpretation of Roderick’s needs no 
refutation. HEATH denounces it as unnatural to a person in Lear’s situation, just 

; F 


4 
;. _ Goneril having shown in. her first speech to her father how fow/ her thoughts are, 


AG 


aed 
[219-228. Does...father] == 
‘then transported to the highest pitch of astonishment, and not yet sufficiently familia 
ised to his misfortunes, nor cool enough, to treat the author of them ironically. He a 
himself interprets lines 221, 222: ‘ Either his apprehension is decayed, his facultyof - 
discernment is buried under a lethargic sleep, or —here he was about to goontothe = 
other alternative-—viz: he is in his sober senses and broad awake, when the sudden a5 
whirl of passion on the bare imagination that what had passed is real, so overwhelms" 
him that he breaks off: ‘Ha! what! that it should be possible that I am now 
awake? It cannot be, ’tis impossible.” WARBURTON aroused the critics by his dog- 
matic assertion that we should read ‘sovereignty of knowledge’—7. e. the under- 
standing, like ‘sovereignty of reason’ in Ham., because his sovereignty or kingship 
would not enable Lear to judge whether or not these were his daughters. HEATH 
as usual flouts and routs Warburton, but without giving a much better interpretation 
of the phrase. He defines ‘sovereignty’ as that self-command which distinguishes 
the man in his senses from a lunatic or idiot: ‘If I should give credit tothose ; 
marks I perceive in myself of being in my right senses, and endued with knowledge 
and reason, I should be persuaded I had daughters,’ &c. TyRWHITT says that the 4 
difficulty is ‘to conceive how “the marks of sovereignty, of knowledge, and of \» 
reason” should be of any use to persuade Lear that he had or had not daughters. 
No logic could draw such a conclusion from such premises. This difficulty may be 
entirely removed by only pointing the passage thus: “ for by the marks of sovereignty, 
knowledge, and reason, I should be false persuaded.—I had daughters.—Your name, 
fair gentlewoman?”? The chain of Lear’s speech being thus untangled, we can 
clearly trace the succession and connection of his ideas. The undutiful behaviour . 
of his daughter so disconcerts him that he doubts by turns whether she is Goneril 
and whether he himself is Lear, Upon her first speech, he only exclaims, “Are you 
our daughter?” Upon her going on in the same style, he begins to question his 
own sanity, and even his personal identity. He appeals to the bystanders, ** Who is 
it that can tell me who I am?” T should be glad to be told. or (if I was to judge 
myself) dy the marks of sovereignty, of knowledge, and of reason (which once dis- 
tinguished Lear, but which I have now lost), 7 should be false (against my own 
consciousness) Zersaded (that I am not Lear), He then slides to the examina- 
tion of another distinguishing mark of Lear: “I had daughters.” But not able, 
as it should seem, to dwell upon so tender a subject, he hastily recurs to his first ~ ; 
doubt concerning Goneril: ‘Your name, fair gentlewoman?”’ Of this note by 
Tyrwhitt, JoHNsON says that it is ‘written with confidence disproportionate to the 
conviction which it can bring. Lear might as well know by the marks and tokens 
arising from sovereignty, knowledge, and reason, that he had or had not daughters, , 
as he could know by anything else. But, says he, if I judge by these tokens, I find } 
the persuasion false by which I long thought myself the father of daughters.’ MAson a 
says that by the marks of sovereignty Lear means those tokens of royalty which his 
daughters then enjoyed as derived from him. But MALonz replies: ‘Lear had not 
parted with all the marks of sovereignty. In the midst of his prodigality to his 


children, he reserved to himself the name and all the additions to a king.’ STAuN- 
TON says that this passage is ‘certainly obscure. 


Possibly the meaning may be 
restored by simply omitting the comma after « sovereignty,” ‘“*—by the marks of 


sovereignty knowledge and reason”—z. ¢, of supreme or sovereign knowledge, &c.’ 
KNiGHT puts dashes, to indicate continued speech, after Lear’s question, ‘ Who is it 


& -d I had oe 
* —* Fool. Which they will make an obedient father.* 


Bos. Coll. i. 


Lear. cicied name, fair eS ewoman ? 


i 


224-227. Lear’s......daughters] Con- 
tinued to Lear, Qq, Pope, Theob. Han. 

Warb. Jen. Steev. ’78, ’85, ’93, Mal. Ec. 
Three lines, ending marks 
...reason...daughters Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. Jen. Ec. Prose, Qq et cet. 

224. shadow.| /hadow ? Qq, Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. Jen. Steev. Mal. 
Ec. Bos. Coll. i. shadow,— Sing. 

Fool. Lear's shadow.] Thus in 
Ff, Om. Rann. 

aoe a8. Lear. Z would......father.] 
Steev. 73 (subs.) J would...father. Qq. 
Om. Ff, Rowe, Johns. Cap. Sch. 

225-227. L...daughters| Three lines, 


ters Dycei. Ending dy...reason...daugh- 
_ters Ktly. Ending sovereignty......per= 


suaded...daughters Dyce ii. 

225. that] Om. Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb, Ec. 

sovereignty | substantiality Jen. 

225-226. sovereignty,.....reason,] Of 
sovereignty, of knowledge, and of reason, 
Pope, Theob. Han. Ec. Of sovereignty 
of knowledge, and of reason, Warb. 

226. false] fast Jen. 

227. daughters.| daughters— Knt. 

228-229. Fool. Which...father. Lear. ] 
Om. Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Ec. 

228. Which they will] Q, Which 


a" ending marks...reason...daughters Steev. they, will Q.Q,. Which of thee will Jen. 
 _-~- 73. Ending sovereignty...reason...daugh- 

& F that can tell me who I am ?—’; after the Fool’s answer, ‘ Lear’s shadow.—’ ; and 
3 after ‘I should be false persuaded I had daughters—’, and defends his punctuation 
er, on the ground that the Fool interrupts Lear with the answer, ‘ Lear’s shadow,’ and 
* that Lear continues to speak without reference to the Fool’s interposition, and that 
J the Fool in the same way continues the thread of his comment: ‘Wich they will 


3 make an obedient father.’ Here ‘which’ refers to ‘shadow.’ In this interpretation 
Knight follows Douce (ii, 147). A passage of such defective metre as this could 
~~ not escape WALKER; accordingly (Crit. i, 4) he gives, line 221, ‘Either his motion 
[sic. Probably a misprint.] weakens, or ’s discernings ;’ and, following the Qq in 
lines 222-227, he thus arranges, and changes: ‘—Sleeping or waking ?—Ha! || Sure 
tis not so. || Who is’t [omitting sia¢] can tell me who I am ?—Lear’s shadow ?— || 
I would learn that; for by the marks of sov’reignty, || Knowledge and reason, I 
should be false persuaded || [That] I had daughters.’ Lerrsom, Walker’s admirable 
editor, referring to Walker’s adoption of the text of the Qq, says: ‘It appears to me 
that just here the Qq give an unsophisticated text, though one disfigured by some 
palpable blunders, while in the Folio we have a text derived from a good original, 
but sophisticated in a blundering way for the sake of the metre.” ScHmipT: Per- 
haps there is here a real gap in the Ff, but the lines which the Qq offer in its place 
are too questionable to be adopted in the text. 

228. Which] SrerveNns: This is used with two deviations from present language: 
® it is referred to the pronoun J, and it is employed for whom, Douce, as we have 
seen in the preceding note, followed by KnicHt, SINGER, and Hupson, refers 
¢which’ to ‘shadow.’ MOBERLY, with more probability, explains it as an instance 

q of the relative as the commonest connective used improperly. 


be 
84 


Of « ae ee se Ea 


Gon. This admiration, sir, is. uel re) ) 
a do. ae 


As you are old and ioteu? you ee be wise. 

Here do you keep a hundred knights and squires ; — 
Men so disorder’d, so debosh’d, and bold, Ss 
hat this our court, infeéted with their manners, 

Shows like a riotous inn; epicurism and lust 

* Makes it more like a tavern or a brothel - 


o~ 


Than a graced palace. The shame itself doth speak 


230-248. Prose, Qq. 

230. This admiration, sir,| Come fir, 
this admiration Qq. Come, sir; This 
admiration Jen, Steev. Mal. Bos. 

o th’ | of the Qq, Jen. 

savour] favour Q,, Cap. Steev. 
Mal. Ec. Bos. Coll. i, ii, Dyce i, Del. i, 
Sta. Wh. Glo. Mob. 

232. Zo] Om. Qq. 

233. As...you should| Q,. As you 
are old and reuerend, fhould Q,. As you 
are Old, and Reuerend, fhould ¥f, Knt, 


Pope+. 

233. you should | as Steev. conj. 

234. a hundred] a100.Q,. one hun- 
dred Q.. 

235. debosh’d | deboyft Qq. debauch'd 
Pope+, Cap. Steev. Mal. Ec. Bos. Coll. 
Del. i, Dyce ii, Huds. 

237. riotous] Om. Steev. conj. 

238. Makes it more| Ff, Sch. make 
more Qq. Make it more Rowe et cet. 

@ brothel | brothell Qq. 


239. graced gracd Ff. great Qq. 


q 
: 
j 
L 
7 


Coll. Del. Dyce, Wh. Sch. You, as you 
are old and reverend, should Rowe, Cap. Warb. 
You, as you've old and rev'rend, should 


The] Om. Pope, Theob, Han. ; 


230. admiration] Astonishment. See Ham. I, ii, 192: ‘Season your admiration 
for a while.’ ~ 

230. savour] CAPELL: ‘ Whether the word of some old editions be favour or 
favour is hard pronouncing; nor is there much choice between them in this place.’ 
If favour be adopted, STEEVENS rightly explains it as complexion. ScHMIDT deserts 
the Ff and follows Jane Bell’s Quarto! Because, as he says, savour bears no other 
meaning in Sh, than sme/7, But this is an assertion which I am afraid it would be 
hard to prove, so great is the confusion arising between the long fand f£ In all 
the passages where the word is used, there is, as Capell says of the present, not 
much choice between favour and favour, and probably a master of fence, like 
Schmidt, could successfully uphold either. 

233. you should] The omission of ‘you’ in the Ff cannot ie justified, says 
ScHMIDT, by other examples in Sh., but its insertion lames the metre. 

235. debosh’d] The old speliing of debauched, of which word, WEDGWOOD says 
that the radical idea seems to be to throw out of course, from dauche, a row, rank, 
or course of stones, or bricks, in building, 

237-238. epicurism ... lust, ... tavern... brothel] An instance of what 
Corson calls a respective construction. The first word refers to the third and the ® 
second to the fourth. See Ham. IV, vii, 82. 

239. graced] WARBURTON: A palace graced by the presence of a sovereign, 
But ScuMipr (ZLex.) interprets it better as ‘full of grace, dignified, honourable.’ 


hat else will take the thing she begs, 
e to disquantity your train, 

d the remainder, that shall still depend, 
To be such men as may besort your age, zs 


_ Which know themselves and you. ae 
7, ; + 
a fLear. Darkness and devils!— 245 = 
wv i bs 
240. then] thou Qq. Del. Dyce, Sta. Wh. Cam. Huds. Sch. yO" 
242. A little] Of fifty Pope+, Jen. that Q,. and Q, et cet. : i 
«243. remainder] remainders Ff+, 245. devils] DeuilsQ,. Diuels QF, - 
~~ Sch. — Divels F ‘ 


245. Which] Ff, Rowe, Knt, Coll. 


:. 242. A little] Pope changed this to Of fifty, on the ground that Lear shortly 

afterwards specifies this as the number that was to be cut of, and yet Goneril had no- 
where specified it. STEEVENS explains the difficulty that Pope finds (of course, not 
without a sneer at Pope) by assuming that some one tells Lear how many of his 

3 followers he is to lose, in the few minutes that Lear is absent from the scene between 
lines 283 and 287. ‘Goneril,’ adds Steevens, ‘ with great art, is made to avoid men- 
: ea tioning the limited number, and leaves her father to be informed of it by accident, 
___ which she knew would be the case as soon as he left her presence.’ [Surely, a sim. 
F a ple oversight on Shakespeare’s part, or a trick his memory played him. In the old 
play of King Leir, Gonorill says she has ‘restrained halfe his portion.’ See Ap- 
, __ pendix.—Ep.] 
242. disquantity] DELIus: Compare ‘disnatured,’ in line 277 of this scene. 
_ [And other instances of similar words in Apgorr, § 439.] 
+ 243-244. the remainder... to be] For similar instances, where the noun and 

infinitive are used as subject or object, see ABBoTT, § 354. SCHMIDT supports the 
— Folio text by citing Gym. 1, i, 129: ‘ The gods protect you! And bless the good 
E remainders of the court.’ 

~~ 243. depend] WAkBuRTON interprets ‘continue in service ;’ or, as WRIGHT says, 
Z ‘that shall still remain dependents,’ but ScHMipT denies this meaning, and maintains 
with DE.ius that the phrase signifies: ‘this shall still be one of the conditions, that 
they are men as may besort your age,’ &c. ‘ Even if defendant means a retainer, a 
servant, the verb defend, used absolutely, never means Zo serve, to be a in a person's 
ee, service, but it indicates the opposite of personal freedom, the position of a subject 
5 and bondman. “A life so stinkingly depending,” in Mas. for Meas. III, ii, 28, 
means, a life which is the slave of disgusting coarseness. The remark “ you depend 
upon Lord Paris,” in Zvo. and Cres., which, of course, means you are one of the 
servants of Lord Paris,—a simple menial perverts by the reply, ‘I depend upon the 
lord.” If “that,” in the present passage, be a relative, the phrase can only mean: 
that shall continue to remain servants, not their own masters.’ [Which is exactly 
what WRIGHT says it means; and is not only the simpler explanation of the two, 
but wholly avoids any grammatical difficulty. According to Schmidt’s interpreta- 
tion the sentence is an anacoluthon,—there is no verb for ‘remainder,’ and he has 
to suggest that, grammatically, ‘To be such men,’ should be ‘On their being such 


men,’—ED. | 
8 


Saddle my ey call my train ec 


- Degenerate bastard! I’ll not trouble thee. tees 
Yet have I left a daughter. ‘ le 
Gon. You strike my people, and pane dorderd rabble wee 


Make servants of their betters. 


Enter ALBANY. >. 


ae Lear. Woe, that too late repents,—O, sir, are youcome? x 
Is it your will? Speak, sir—Prepare my horses.— ~* 
37 ' Ingratitude, thou marble-hearted fiend, 
sa More hideous when thou show’st thee in a child | 
é‘ Than the sea-monster! 
a Alb. “Pray, sir, be patient. 


255 BS 
Lear. Detested kite! thou liest. 


My train are men of choice and rarest parts, 


249-250. You...betters.| Verse, Rowe 
ii. Prose, QqFf. 

250. Enter Albany. ] Enter Duke. Qq. 

251. SCENE Xv. Pope+, Jen. The 
rest of the Scene, except lines 340, 341, 
is prose in Qq. 

Woe,...repents,—]| Cap. Woe!... 
repents— Rowe+. Woe,...repents: Ff. 
We that too late repent’s,Q,. We that 
too late repent’s us; Q,. ool! that too 


late repent’st— Jen, Woe's him that too ~ 


late repents— Ktly. 


251. O, sir...come?] Om. Ff, Rowe, 
Pope, Sch. ~. 

252. will?...Prepare my] Johns. wil, 
Speak, Sir? Prepare my Fi+. will 
that wee prepare any Qq. 

255-256. Alb. Pray, sir, E patient. 
Lear.] Om. Qq. 

255. sir] you, sir Han. 

256. [To Gon. Rowe. 

256-257. liest. My train are] lift my 
traine, and Q,. leffen my traine and 


dee 


[To Alb. Rowe. 


254. thee] For other instances of the use of ‘thee’ for ¢hyse/f, see ABBOTT, § 223. 

255. sea-monster] Upron (Cvi¢. Ods., p. 203, ed. ii) observes that this is the 
hippopotamus, the hieroglyphical symbol of impiety and ingratitude; and suggests: 
‘Than 7?’ ¢#’ sea-monster.? Hupson: But that beast never lives in the sea; it is a 
river-monster. If the poet had any particular animal in view, I suspect it was the one 
that behaved so ungently at old Troy,—alluded to in Aer. of Ven. III, ii, 57. WRIGHT 
[who gives a fuller quotation than Upton from Sandys]: Sandys (7ravels, p. 108, 
ed. 1637). gives a picture said to be portrayed in the porch of the temple of Minerva 
at Sais, in which is the figure of a river-horse, denoting ‘murder, impudence, vio- 
lence, and injustice; for they say that he killeth his Sire, and ravisheth his owne 
dam.’ His account is evidently taken from Plutarch’s Jsis and Osiris, and Sh. may 
have read it in Holland’s translation, p, 1300; but why he should call the river-horse 
a ‘sea-monster’ is not clear. It is more likely that by the sea-monster he meant the 
whale. See IV, ii, 49, 50; Al/’s Well, IV, iii, 249; Tro. and Cres. V, v, 23. 

257. choice and rarest] WricHr thinks that the superlative termination belongs 
to both adjectives, and refers to ABBort, § 398. 


particulars of duty know, ; 
the most exaét regard support ah 
_ The worships of their name——O most small fault, 260 
= How ugly didst thou ‘in Cordelia show! 
_. Which, like an engine, wrench’d my frame of nature 
From the fix’d place; drew from my heart all love 
_ And added to the gall. O Lear, Lear, Lear! . 
Beat at this gate, that let thy folly in ; 265 
And thy dear judgement out!—Go, go, my people. 
_ Alb. My lord, I am guiltless, as I am ignorant 
Of what hath moved you. | 


<i — 
fos 
. 


Lear. It may be so, my lord.— . 
260. The] Their FF. my people! Mal. conj. 
name] names Rowe+. 267. Lam...l am] I’m...I’m Popet+, 
262. Which] that Qq, Glo.+, Mob. Dyce ii, Huds. 
264. Lear, Lear, Lear!| Lear, Lear! 268. Of what...you.| Om. Qq. 
Qq, Han. Jen. lord.| Lord, Qq, FFF. lord— 
265. [Striking his head. Pope. Rowe+, Jen. Knt. 
Fr 2 266. dear] clear Anon.* ; 268-271. S¢...fruitful:] Three lines, 
BR i Go...people.| goe, goe, my people ? ending ature, hear,...if.. fruitful / Mal. 
Qq. Go, go; my people! Q,. Go, go :— Steev. Bos. Coll. iii. 


260. worships] Dyce: (Qy) ‘ The worships of their zames,’ or ‘The worship of 
; their name.’? Hupson: Worship [which is Hudson’s reading and an emendation 
ae of Collier’s (MS)] was often used in much the same sense as honour. One of the 
commonest misprints in the old copies is that of the plural for the singular. [I can- 
not think that the plural is a misprint here. See ‘ As needful in our loves,’ Ham. I, 
i, 173, and Clarendon’s note there cited.—ED. | 

262. engine] Epwarps (Caz. of Crit., p. 202, ed. vii): Alluding to the rack. 
STEEVENS: Compare Beau. and Fl., Tze Might Walker, 1V,v: ‘ Their souls shot 
through with adders, torn on engines.’ WRIGHT: Chaucer has ‘ engined’ for ‘ rack- 


hent the carter, and so sore him pyned, And eek the hostiller so sore engyned.’ In 
Temp. V1, i, 161, the word is used of a warlike machine. 

266. dear] This word, which here means choice, precious, is used by Sh. to sig- 
nify qualities the very opposite of dear, beloved, heartsome, such as ‘dearest foe,’ 
Ham. I, ii. 182; ‘my father hated his [Orlando's] father dearly,’ 4s You Like It, 
I, iii, 34; ‘in terms so bloody and so dear,’ 7wel. WV. V, i, 74; ‘dearest groans of a 
mother,’ 4//’s Well, IV, v, 11; ‘dear guiltiness,’ Love’s Lad. V, ii, 801, &c. &c. 
CRAIK (in a note on ‘ dearer than thy death,’ F/. Ces. III, i, 196) supposes that the 
notion of love properly involved in ‘dear,’ having become geueralized into that of 
a strong affection of any kind, then passed into that of such an emotion the very 
reverse of love. In such phrases as ‘dearest foe’ and ‘hating dearly* the word 
need not be understood as implying more than strong or passionate emotion. This 
explanation of Craik’s led the way to the concise definition given in the Clarendon 

- edition of Ham. that ‘dear’ is used of whatever touches us nearly in love or hate, 


ed,’ Nonne Prestes Tale, 16546: ‘And right anoon the mynistres of that toun Han - 


8 


Hear, Nature, hear; dear goddess, hear! 
Suspend thy purpose, if thou didst intend 


269. Hear] Heare FF, harke Qq. Rowe, Pope, Han. Sch. 


Nature,...goddess| Nature! hear, 269. hear /]Om.Qq. hear a father! 
dear goddess Cap. Wh. Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. Ec. 
hear ; dear| Theob, heare deere 269, 275. Lines end Suspend...make 


QqF,F,. 4ear dear F,. hear, dear F ,, «-.CONUEY...07ZQNS...never...teem, Ktly. 


joy or sorrow. To which, I think, may be added SiNGER’s observation that it 


. imports in general the excess, the utmost, the superlative of that, whatever it may 


be, to which it is applied.—Eb., 
269. Davixs (Dram. Misc. ii, 180) : I have heard certain critics complain that, in 
pronouncing this denunciation, Garrick was too deliberate, and not so quick in the 


~ emission of his words as he ought to have been; that he did not yield to that im- 


petuosity which the situation required. . . . Garrick rendered the curse so terribly 
affecting to the audience, that, during his utterance of it, they seemed to shrink 
from it as from a blast of lightning. His preparation for it was extremely affecting ; 
his throwing away his crutch, kneeling on one knee, clasping his hands together, and 
lifting his eyes toward heaven, presented a picture worthy the pencil of Raphael. 
. . . Dr Franklin [the translator of Sophocles] thinks nothing can exceed the bit- 
terness of Cidipus’s execration of his two sons, except perhaps this curse of Lear. 
BoaDEN (Life of Kemble, i, 378): In January [1788] Kemble acted Lear [in Tate’s 
version, to the Cordelia of Mrs. Siddons]. I have seen him since in the character, 
but he never again achieved the excellence of that night. Subsequently he was too 
elaborately aged, and quenched with infirmity the insane fire of the injured father. 
The curse, as he then uttered it, harrowed up the soul; the gathering himself together, 
with hands convulsively clasped, the increasing fervour and rapidity, and the suffoca- 
tion of the concluding words, all evinced consummate skill and original invention. 
The countenance, too, was finely made up, and in grandeur approached the zzosz 
awful impersonation of Michael Angelo. Scotr (Ox Boaden’s Life of Kemble, 
Quarterly Review, April, 1826): There was visible in Kemble’s manner, at times, 
a sacrifice of energy of action to grace. We remember this observation being 
made by Mrs Siddons herself, who admired her brother in general as much as she 
loved him. Nor shall we easily forget the mode in which she illustrated her mean- 
ing, She arose and placed herself in the attitude of one of the old Egyptian 
statues; the knees joined together, and the feet turned a little inwards. She placed 
her elbows close to her sides, folded her hands, and held them upright, with the palms 
pressed to each other. Having made us observe that she had assumed one of the 
most constrained, and, therefore, most ungraceful positions possible, she proceeded to 
recite the curse of King Lear on his undutiful offspring in a manner which made 
hair rise and flesh creep, and then called on us to remark the additional effect which 
was gained by the concentrated energy which the unusual and ungraceful position 
in itself implied. T. R. GouLp (Zhe Tragedian, an Essay on the Histrionic Genius 
of Funius Brutus Booth, p. 142, New York, 1868): It is customary to call this im- 
precation on Goneril ‘the curse.’ This word roughens the sense of it unnecessarily. 
It is in substance a pagan prayer that she may be childless; but ‘if she must teem,’ 
that her child may be a ‘thwart disnatured torment to her;’ that she may suffer the 
same kind and quality of anguish which she is now inflicting on her father. The 


‘Let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth; 


womb c pouveys sterility : : 
in her the organs of increase, 

id from her derogate body never spring 

ries babe to honour her! If she must teem, 275 
Create her child of spleen, that it may live 

And be a thwart disnatured torment to her. 


277. thwart] thourt Qq. 
disnatured | difnatur'd Ff. difuetur’d Qq. difventur'd Q,- 


principle of the prayer is ‘an eye for an eye.’ Putting ‘ Jehovah’ instead of ‘ Nature,’ 
a Jew might have uttered it. Booth began it as a solemn adjuration to the unseen 
power of Nature. The indignant bitterness in the terms of imprecation seemed as 
if it was converted out of sweetest images of what a child should be, that lay in the 
core of his fatherly heart. This double action of his mind, in the agony which it 
mvolved, swayed and shook the kneeling figure, and lent his voice a wild vibration 
that drew involuntary sympathy and awe. The heart followed him as he arose and 
ran out with extended arms. . . . [When he re-enters, on the word ‘resume,’ line 303] 
he cast the whole energy of his royal will, with a volumed, prolonged, and ringing 
intonation. His very figure seemed to dilate with majesty. 

269. Nature ... goddess] WHITE thinks that the arrangement in the present 
text, in comparison with his (see Textual Notes), loses in freedom, force, and 
rhythm. 

274. derogate] WARBURTON: Unnatural. HratTH: Here, it means whatever 
deviates from the course of nature. EDWARDS (apud Eccles): Degenerate, JOHN- 
son: Rather, degraded [Thus, Dyce, Gloss.|, blasted. MALONE: Shrunk, wasted. 
See Bullokar’s Eng. Expositor, 1621, ‘ Derogate. To empaire, diminish, or take 
away.’ Detius: Dishonored, in opposition to the following ‘honour her.’ Like 
many adjectives in -a¢e it stands for derogated. ScuMmIDT (Lex.): Depraved, cor- 
rupt. WricuT: Dishonoured, degraded. Todd, in his edition of Johnson’s Dic- 
tionary, quotes from Sir Thomas Elyot’s Governor (1565), fol. 102: ‘ That he shoulde 
obteyne, yf he mought, of the kyng his father his gracious pardon, whereby no lawe 
or iustice should be derogate.’ [Bullokar’s definition applies to this use of ‘ derogate’ 
in Elyot’s Governor. | . 

277. thwart] HENDERSON: This word is found, as an adjective, in Promos and 
Cassandra, 1578: ‘ Sith fortune thwart doth crosse my joys with care.’ Ecctus refers 
to Milton, Par. Lost, viii, 132, and x, 1075, as instances of its use as an adjective. 
ScHMIDT: As an adj. nowhere else in Sh. 

277. disnatured] STEEVENsS: Wanting in natural affection. So Daniel, Hymen’s 
Triumph [1I, iv, p. 291, ed. 1623—W RIGHT]: ‘I am not so disnatured a man, or so 
ill borne to disesteeme her loue.’ HENDERSON, from the text of Q,Q,, conjectured 
disfealur'd. 

278. brow of youth] WriIcHT: Youthful brow. Compare ‘mind of love’ for 
“loving mind’ in Aer. of Ven. II, viii, 42. Similarly ‘ brow of justice,’ 1 fen. IV: 
IV, iii, 83; ‘ Mind of honour,’ AZzas. for Meas. Il, iv, 179; ‘thieves of mercy,’ Ham. 


8 * 


With cadent tears fet eee acne ae 
Turn all her mother’s pains and benefits 
To laughter and contempt; that she may feel 
How sharper than a serpent’s tooth it is a 
To have a thankless child!—Away, away! _ [Exi. ef 

Alb. Now, gods that we adore, whereof comes this ? 


Gon, Never affli&t yourself to know the cause, 285 
But let his disposition have that scope - im 
That dotage gives it. =a 
Re-enter LEAR. 
Lear.. What, fifty of my followers at a Clap ? 7 : ‘ 
Within a fortnight ? ; : 
Alb. What’s the matter, sir? 289 é 
279. tadent) accent a: candent 285. the cause] more of it F,, Johns. d a 
Theob. Warb. acrid or ardent Anon.* _—‘ Knt. Del. Dyce. i, Sch. of zt “EEF ’ - 


281. feel] feele, that /he may feele, Q,. Rowe+. of what Han. 


283. Away, away!) goe, goe, my peo- 
ple? Qq, Pope+. 
[ Exit.] Om. Qq. 
284. WMVow...this?] Two lines, Ff, 


287. 7) hat] As Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
Kant, Coll. i, Del. Dyce i, Sch. 
Re-enter Lear.] Jen. Enter 
Lear. Pf (Om: Og. 7 


Rowe. 289. What's] What ts Qa. 
whereof | wherefore Johns. 


IV, vi, 19; ‘time of scorn,’ O¢k. IV, ii, 54; ‘mole of nature,’ Ham. I, iv, 24; 
‘spirit of health,’ Ham. 1, iv, 40. [And many other instances in ABBOTT, § 423.] 

279. cadent] STEEVENS: Falling. MosBrerty: The effect of an unusual word 
formed from the Latin or Greek is often very great in poetry. Thus, Milton speaks 
of the ‘ glassy, cool, translucent wave,’ and Wordsworth of the river, ‘ diaphanous 
because it travels slowly,’ both words being far more effective than the common 
word ‘transparent.’ 

280. her mother’s pains and benefits] RoDERICK (Caz. of Crit. p. 268, ed. vii) 
interprets this as referring to the pains of childbirth, and to the benefits both of 
nursing and instruction; and believes that ‘a most exquisite stroke of nature’ is lost 
unless we perceive, by the use of ‘one little syllable,—HeER,’ that Sh. talks of the 
supposed child as a Daughter, not a son. MALONE very properly says that ¢ mother’s 
pains’ refer to maternal cares, and that ‘ benefits’ means good offices, her kind and 
beneficent attention to the education of her offspring, and that ‘her’ refers to Goneril 
herself. 

282. How sharper, &c.] MALONE: So Psadms, cxl, 3: ‘They have sharpened 
their tongues like a serpent; adders’ poison is under their lips. MosBerty: We 
should have to go to the book of Deuter onomy to find a parallel for the concentrated 
force of this curse. Can it be Lear who so sternly and simply stabs to the very 
inward heart of woman’s blessedness, leaving his wicked daughter blasted and 
scathed for ever by his withering words? 


289. Within a fortnight] Eccixs conjectures that this may refer to that portion 


WSLet it he so. 


po ower S aie my echoed ae : 
ee ‘wis which Lesa from me perforce, 


erce every ‘sense Cabsuy thee!’ Old fond eyes, 


| ep this cause again, I'll pluck ye out 
‘Sly cast you with the waters that you lose, 


To temper clay. Ha! *is it come to this ?* 


gay 
290. /'U....ashamed| Rowe. Two 
lines, Ff. ‘ 
[To Gon. Theob. 
292. which] that Qq. 
293. Should......chee!| Rowe. Two 
lines, Ff. 
thee worth them. Blasts] Cap. 
thee worth them, Blastes Ff. the worft 
blafés Qq. — 
293, 294. upon thee! Th’ untented | 
Theob. upon thee: Th’ untented Ff. upon 


I have another daughter, 


once Rowe, Pope, Han. 
296. ye] you Qa, Cap. Steev. Mal. Ec. 
Bos, Coll. Del. i, Dyce i, Wh. Ktly. 
297. cast you| you caf? Qq. 
lose] loofe FF ,, Sta. make Qq, Jen. 
298. To temper clay] Separate line, 
Sing. Ktly, Sch. 
Ha!......chis| Pope. Ha? Ff, 
Rowe, Knt, Coll. i, Del. i, Dyce i, Wh. 
Sing. Ktly, Sch. yea, 7/2 come to this ?Q,. 
yea, ts it come to this ? Q,, Glo.+, Mob. 


= the untented Q,. upon the untender Q.. 298, 299. Zo...50| Pope. One line, 
ze 294. untented | untender Pope. Ff, Rowe, Knt. 
aa 295. Pierce] perufe Q,. 299. Let it be so.| Om. Qq. 
et “sense| fence Warb. L have another| yet haue I left w 
é thee! Old] Theob. thee. Old Qq, Mal. Stéev. Bos. Glo.+, Mob. Del. 
2 Ff. the old Q.. the olde Q,. ii, Coll. iii. yet 1 have left a Steev. 78, 
; ‘ 296. this cause] thee once¥ FF. her 85, Ec. 
3 = _only of the current month in which Lear has been staying with Albany and Goneril, 
es and that he may have already taken up his abode many times alternately with both 
s of his daughters; or else, these words might have reference to a future period, at 
2 Y the end of which such a number of his knights were to be dismissed. Some such 


explanations as these Eccles deems necessary in order to avoid the absurdity of sup- 
posing that the news of Lear’s brutal treatment could have reached Cordelia, and 
that she could have invaded England with a large army within a fortnight after her 
dismissal from her father’s presence. [See Appendix, Daniel’s Ztme- Analysis, p. 410. ] 

294. untented] THEOBALD: A wounding of such a sharp, inveterate nature that 
nothing shall be able to tent it—z. e. search the bottom, and help in the cure of it. 
STEEVENS: It may possibly signify here such wounds as will not admit of having a 

"tent put into them. [For ‘tent,’ see Ham. TT, 31, S738 

296. beweep] For instances when the prefix ée is used to give a transitive signifi- 
cation to verbs that, without this prefix, must require prepositions, see ABBOTT; § 438. 

297. lose] STAUNTON justifies doose of F, as meaning to discharge, and I am by 
no means sure that this reading is not to be preferred. 

299. WALKER (C7it. ii, 284) interprets yet of the Qq as meaning as yer, and cites 


similar instances. 


af 4 


Who, I am sure, is kind and comforts e 
When she shall hear this of thee, with he 
She'll flay thy wolvish visage. Thou shaltfind = = 
- That I'll resume the shape which thou dost think = 
J have cast off for ever. * Thou shalt, I warrant thee.* 

<< [Exeunt Lear, Kent, and rd couraa 
Gon. Do you mark that, my lord? 305 7 
Alb. I cannot be so partial, Goneril, = 
To the great love I bear you,— 
Gon. Pray you, content—What, Oswald, ho !— 
You, sir, more knave than fool, after your master. 
Fool. Nuncle Lear, nuncle Lear, tarry; take the Fool 310 


with thee.— = im 
A fox, when one has caught her, : 7 


And such a daughter, 


300. Who] whom Qa. 
302. flay] Jen. flea Q Ff. fley Q,. 
304. Thou....chee.| Om. Ff+, Knt, 
Coll. Sing. Dyce i, Del. Wh. 
[Exeunt...] Exeunt Lear, Kent, 
Gen. and Att. Capell. Om. Q,. Exit. 
Q,Ff. Exit Lear and attendants. Rowe. 
305. SCENE XVI. Pope +, Jen. 
my lord | Om. Ff +, Knt, Sing. 
Dyce i, Del. ii, Ktly, Sch. 
307-309. Zo the...master.| As in Ff. 
The lines end conéent....ho!....master. 
Cap. content.—...fool,...master. Walker. 


307. you,—] Theob. you, Q,. you. 


308, 309. Pray...more| Come fir no 
more, you, more Q,. Come fir,no more; 
you, more Q,. ~~ 

What.. master] One line, Ktly. 

308. content] be content Rowe +, Jen. 
Ktly. 

309. [To the Fool. Johns. 

310. Muncle.....Lear| Separate line, 
Ff, Rowe. 

take] and take Qgq, Jen. Steev, 

Mal. Ec. Bos. Coll. Del. Sing. Dyce i, 

Sta. Wh. Glo. Ktly, Wr. 
3II, 312. with thee. 


fox Qq. 


A fox] with a 


Q,FF. 


300. comfortable] WALKER (Cyi#. i, 98): This word, and in like manner zscom- 
Sortable and discomfortable, are uniformly applied to a person, or to a thing per- 
sonified, the idea of will and purpose being always implied in them, [See also 
WALKER (Crit. i, 183); ABBoTT, §3; Aam. I, i, 573 Macb. Tl, i, 36; Rom. & 
Ful. V, iii, 148.]  Wricutr: Compare also the expression in the Communion 
Service: «The most comfortable sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. 

304. warrant] WALKER (Vers. 65): This is usually a monosyllable. 
Ham. I, ii, 242. [See also ABBort, § 463.] 

305. COLERIDGE: Observe the baffled endeavor of Goneril to act on the fears of 
Albany, and yet his passiveness, his zzer¢ia; he is not convinced, and yet he is afraid 
of looking into the thing. Such characters always yield to those who will take the 
trouble of governing them, or for them, Perhaps the influence of a princess, whose 


choice of him had royalized his state, may be some little excuse for Albany’s 
weakness. 


Compare 


312-316. In reference to the rhymes in this jingle of the Fool, ELiis (p. 963) 


Ths tinche’ se ie om wee 

ld sure to the slaughter, 
_ If my cap would buy a halter. 
So the Fool follows after. [ Exit. 


‘This man hath had good counsel! A hundred 
_ knights! 


. pol c and safe to let him keep a “tia 
2s At point a hundred knights! Yes, that on every dream, 
4 Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike, 320 


__ He may enguard his dotage with their powers ~<a 
And hold our lives in mercy.—Oswald, I say! 
Alb. Well, you may fear too far. 


mi Gon. Safer than trust too far. 
vy Let me still take away the harms I fear, 
Not fear still to be taken. I know his heart. 325 


_ What he hath utter’d I have writ my sister; 
] If she sustain him and his hundred knights, 


315. buy] dy F,,. Jen. Be: 

316. [Exit.] Om. Qq. 323. fear too far.| fear too far; FF ,. 

as 317-328. This...unjitness] Om. Qq. Sear too far ;— Rowe + (fear too fear 
317. This...knights!| Rowe. Two  Rowei). 

. , lines, ii trust too far] trust; Steev. 93. 
os 318. ’ Zis] Zs’¢ Han. 325. taken| harm’d Pope, Theob. 
ee , 319. At point] Om. Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. Sing. ii. 

a: Han. Warb. 327. she] she'll FF ,+. 
oo 322. 2% mercy] at mercy Pope +, 


; says that the last three are very remarkable, especially the last, including the word 
i ‘halter.’ When this rhyme occurs in modern ludicrous verse it is usual to say arvter, 

$- darter. {I cannot reproduce these words in Glossic, and therefore roughly indicate 

a=. the sounds.—Ep.] Whether any such ludicrous pronunciation then prevailed is not 
5 clear, but aafer would save every case, as ‘halter’ might well sink to Aaa¢er. [In 
Eee , two other instances: Zam. the Shr. I, i, 245,246; and Wint. Tale, IV,i, Chorus, 27, 
28, Sh., according to Ellis, rhymes daughter and after. In the former of these two, 
the rhyme, as here in Zeav, may be meant to be ludicrous. See also I, v, 48, 49. ] 
a 319. At point] Scumipt (Zex.): Completely, in full preparation for any emer: - 
em gency. [See III, i, 33, and Macé. IV, ili, 135, and notes. ] 

: 320. buzz] Compare ‘ buzzers,’ Ham. IV, v, 86. 

E ; 321. enguard] Apporr, §440: This is here used in its proper sense of ev- 
closing. : 

322. in mercy] Matone: Jz misericordid is the legal phrase. 

325. taken] CAPELL: This imports—taken with harm, 7. ¢. o’er-taken. MOBERLY: 
‘Not have constantly to fear being overtaken myself.” SINGER (ed. ii): It is evident 
that the context requires Aarm’d. The compositor’s eye glancing on the preceding 
line, he has put ‘taken’ for the proper word. 


—_— 


& 


a ce» as 

When I have show’d th’ unfitness,—[Re-enter Oswald.]- 
; How now, Oswald! 
What, have you writ that letter to my sister? 

Osw. Ay, madam. 330 

Gon. Take you some company, and away to horse; 
Inform her full of my particular fear, ms 
And thereto add such reasons of your own 
As may compa it more. Get you gone; 
And hasten your return —[£xit Oswald.] No, no, my lord, 335 
This milky gentleness and course of yours ' 
Though I condemn not, yet, under pardon, c 


we a 
fe 
4 


328. unfitness,—]| unfitness~- Rowe. 
unfitneffe. Ff. 

[Re-enter Oswald.] Coll. Enter 
Steward. Ff. Om. Qq. ; 

328, 329. How now, Oswald! What) 
Gon. What Ofwald, ho. Ofwald. Heere 
Madam. Gon. What Qq. 

329. that] this Qq. Rowe. Om. QqFf. 

330. Ay] J Ff. Yes Qa, Jen. Glo+, * 336. milky] milkieQ,. mildie Q.,. 
Mob. gentleness and | gentle, easy Jen. 


Go, get Jen. 

335. And hasten...cord| And haften 
your returne: no,no, my Lord Fi & - 
haften your returne now my Lord Q,. - 
and after your returne—now my Lord 


[Exit Oswald.] Exit Steward. 


. 331. and] Om. Pope, Han. 


332. fear] feares Qq. fears Q,, Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb, Jen. 


337- condemn not] difike not Qq. 
condemn it not Pope+, Cap. Steev. Ec. 
Bos. Knti, Coll. ii, Del. i, Ktly, Dyce ii. 


334. Get] So get Pope +, Cap. Ec. pardon] your pardon Jen. 


332. particular] CAPELL interprets this as referring to ‘the business threaten’d 
by Lear ;’ but DELIus and MoBERLY (less correctly, I think) suppose that it means 
the ‘particulars of my fear.’ SCHMIDT says that it is equivalent to personal, indi- 
vidual, private, and refers to II, iv, 289, and V, i, 30. 

334. compact] JoHNsSON: Unite one circumstance with another so as to make a 
consistent account. WricHt: Elsewhere used by Sh.’only as a substantive or 
participle. 

334. more] MAtonr: A dissyllable. So also Anporr, §480. To avoid this 
dissyllabic pronunciation of ‘more,’ JENNENS inserted Go before ‘ Get you gone’—an 
emendation which was afterwards proposed by both STEEVENS and WALKER. Dycr 
thinks most probably a word has dropped out of the line, ‘ though our old poets seem 
occasionally to have used ‘more’ as a dissyllable. [See V, iii, 169. ] 

336. milky gentleness and course] ScumIpT: That is, this milky gentleness 
of your course. See I, i, 247. 

337. yet] Axnort, § 483: A conjunction like ‘yet’ or « but,’ implying hesitation, 
may naturally require a pause immediately after it; and this pause may excuse the 
absence of an unaccented syllable, additional stress being laid on the monosyllable, 
[Would it not be better courageously to insert an ‘it? in this line, as so many editors 
have done, including the conservative Dyce ?—Ep.] 


cry 


oF 


i | 


ARIS IOD Se ae 


€ 


> nl a : > aw c 
1ore at task for want of wisdom 
ed for harmful mildness. 
How far your eyes may pierce I cannot tell; 340 
Strivi ‘to better, oft we mar what’s well. 
_ Gon, Nay, then— 


Alb. Well, well; th’ event. [Exeunt. 
8. You are] Your are¥,. yare Qq. 341. better, oft] better ought, Qq. 
at task for] FFF ,+, Cap. Jen. 342. then—] then. Q.. 
_ Ec. Sch. at taske for F,. attasht for 343. well;]Steev. well, QqFf, Rowe 
Q,. alaptQ,. attask’d for Mal. et cet. +, Cap. Jen. 
339. praised] praife Qq. : th? event.| the euent, Q,. the 
harmful] harmless Rowe ii, *vent. Ff, Rowe i. 
Pope, Han. Jen. [Exeunt.] Exit. Q.. 


340, 341. How...well.] Prose in Q,. 


338. at task] JoHNsoNn: It is a common phrase now with parents and gover- 
nesses: ‘I'll take you to task,’ z. e. I will reprehend and correct you. To be ‘at 
task,’ therefore, is to be liable to reprehension and correction. Mason: Frequently 
used by Sh. in the sense of ¢ex. COLLIER (ed. ii): May we not speculate that after 
all the poet’s word was attack'd? ALLIWELL: My copies of Q, and Q, both 
read alapt. Attask’d, that is, taxed. If the word alagt be correct, it probably 
agrees with the context if explained in the same way as affask’d; and the term 
alapat, in the following passage, seems used in a similar sense: ‘ And because the 
secret and privy boosome vices of nature are most offensive, and though least seene, 
yet most undermining enemies, you must redouble your endeavor, not with a wand 
to alapat and strike them, onely as lovers, loath to hurt, so as like a snake they may 
growe together, and gette greater strength againe.’—Melton’s Sixe-fold Politician, 
p. 125. [Collier (Poet. Decameron, ii, 305) thinks that this Sixe-fold Politician 
was written not by Melton, but by John Milton, the poet’s father.—Ep.] ABBort, 
§ 437: Aé¢- perhaps represents the Old English intensive prefix ‘of,’ which is some- 
times changed into ‘an-,’ ‘on-,’ or ‘a-.’? But the word [‘attask’d’ of Q.] is more 
probably a sort of imitation of the similar words, ‘attach’ and ‘attack.’ MOBERLY: 
Both ‘task? and ‘tax’ are really the same, as we may see from Wedgwood’s quota- 
tion: ‘Every ploughland was tasked at three shillings.’ CAMBRIDGE EpiTors: In 
the imperfect copy of Q, [2. e. Q,—Ep.] in the British Museum, ‘attaskt for’ was 
the original reading, but the first two letters of the word have been erased. In 
Il, i, 123, ‘lest,’ the original reading, has been altered to ‘best.’ [As SCHMID1 
says, there is no reason why attask’d of Q, should be preferred to the Folio. Dr 
Johnson’s explanation, if any be needed, is ample. ] 


341. MALONE: Compare Som. cili, lines 9, 10. 
343. event] Hupson: Albany shrinks from a word-storm with his helpmate, 


and so tells her, in effect: ‘ Well, let us not quarrel about it, but wait and see how 


your course works.’ 


Scene V. Court before the same. — 
Enter LEAR, KENT, and FOOL, | 


Lear. Go you before to Gloucester with these letters. 
Acquaint my daughter no further with any thing you know 
than comes from her demand out of the letter. If your dili- 
gence be not speedy, I shall be there afore you. 

Kent. I will not ec my lord, till I have delivers: your 5 
letter. 

Fool. If a man’s brains were in’s s heels, were't not in 


‘ danger of kibes? 


Lear. Ay, boy. 
Fool. Then, I prithee, be merry; thy wit shall not go 10 


slip-skod. 


Scene v.] Scena Quinta Ff (Scena 
F,). ScEnE xvil. Pope+, Jen. SCENE 
Iv. Ec. 

Court...] Cap. A court-yard be- 
longing to the Duke of Albany’s Palace. 
Theob. 

Enter Lear, Kent, and Fool.] Enter 
Lear.Q,. Enter Lear, Kent, Gentleman, 


Ec. Bos, Coll. Del. Ktly. 
7. brains] brain Pope+- 
were| where Q,. > 
in’s| F,, Cap. Coll. Dyce, Wh, 
Glo.+, Sch. ims F,. in his QqF¥.F, 
et cet. 
were’t| Rowe. wert QqFf. 
10. prithee| Knt. pretheQ,. prethee 


+ 


and Foole. Ff. QF. prythee FFF, 
4. afore| before Qq, Jen. Steev. Mal. not] nereQq. ne'er Glo.+. 


I. Go you] JENNENS holds that this is addressed to the Gentleman whose en- 
trance with Lear is marked inthe Ff. ‘It is plain,’ he argues, ‘that the letter to ; - 
Regan was sent by Kent; those to Glo’ster by another; the order to Kent was left . 
out,’—his text accordingly reads: ‘ Lear. [to a Gentleman] Go you before to Glo’ster 
with these letters.—You with this to my daughter Regan. [¢o Kent] Acquaint,’ &c. 
1. Gloucester] CAPELL, followed by the subsequent editors, has removed this > 
difficulty, expressed by Jennens in the preceding note, by supposing that this name 
refers to the city of Gloucester, ‘as is evident from the “there” [in line 4]; it is 
made the residence of Regan and Cornwall to give likelihood’ to their evening visit : 
to Gloucester, II, iv, whose castle is in the neighborhood; ‘earls, in old time, had 
some dominion in the counties that gave them their titles, and resided there usually.’ 
7. brains] WALKER (Cr?¢. i, 256): Brain, surely. WriGHT: Sh. uses both 
‘brains’ and ‘brain’ indiscriminately, except in such phrases as ‘to beat out the 
brains.’ Here it is a singular, of which there is another, though doubtful, instance 
in Ham. III, i, 174, and a more certain one in A//’s Well, III, ii, 16: - The brains 
of my Cupid’s knocked out.’ Moserty: The fool laughs at Kent’s promise of 
rapidity, and says, first, ‘that when men’s brains are in their heels’ (that is, when 
they have no more wit than is needed to go fast) ‘they may get Seine ee 
and seconilly, ‘that as Lear has no brains, he is in no such danger.’ 
11, slip-shod] EccLes: The customary resource of those who are afflicted with 


ae 


i z 


2 Ga 
m= Lear. 


_ She 


I did her wrong— 


other daughter will use thee kindly; 
like this as a crab’s like an apple, yet I 


rat canst tell, boy ? 
ool. will taste as like this as a crab does to a 
». Thou canst tell why one’s nose stands i’ th’ middle 


_ fool. Canst tell how an oyster makes his shell? 


14. she’s] fheesQ.. fhets Q,. shes F;. 


19. on’s] of hts Qq, Mal. Steev. Bos. 


‘<i erab’s| crab is Q., Cap. Steev. Sing. of one’s Pope+, Cap. Jen. Ec. 
Mal. Ec. Bos. Coll. Del. cradde is Q.. Knt. on his Ktly. 
ae 15. can tell what] con, what Qq. 21. one’s] ones Ff. his Qq, Mal. Steev. 
ca 16. Whatcanst| Why, what canft thou Bos. Sing. Ktly. 
a Qq, Jen. Steev. Var. Sing. Ktly, Glo.+, of | on Qq, Cap. Steey. Ec. Var. 
fe Mob, Sing. Ktly. ae 
— boy] my boy Qaq, Jen. Steev. Var. side’s| fide his Q,, Mal. Steev. 
ies Sing. Ktly, Glo. Wr. Mob. Bos. Sing. Ktly. séde one’s Rowe+, 
. ‘ 17. She will] SheelQ,. Shee'l Q,. Cap. Jen. Ec. Knt. 
= : does| do's Ff. doth Qq. 22. he] aQ.. 
i” 18. Thou canst] Thou canft not Qq, 23. wrong—] Theob. wrong. Q.Ff. 
7 Jen. Sing. canft thou FF +. wrong! Q.. 
a stands] stande Q,. 24. shell ?] fhell. Qq. 
ae 2 th’ | in the Qq. 
——_ kibes. SINGER paraphrases: For you show you have no wit in undertaking your 
i: present journey. 
a ” 13. kindly] Mason: Here it means both affectionately and like the rest of her 
Fy kind. 


14. crab] WricHT: Compare Lyly, Zuphues, p. 120 (ed. Arber): ‘The sower 
Crabbe hath the shew of an Apple as well as the sweet Pippin.’ 
15. can] CoLuizr suggests that con of the Qq (2. ¢. know) may be the right reading. 


1g. on’s] See I, iv, 98. 


eS 21. of } ApBotT, § 175: ‘Of,’ signifying proximity of any kind, is sometimes 

er used Jocally in the sense of on. 

g 23. I did her wrong] Weiss (p. 281): The beautiful soul of Cordelia, that is 
little talked of by herself, and is but stingily set forth by circumstance, engrosses our 
feeling in scenes from whose threshold her filial piety is banished. We know what 

~ Lear is so pathetically remembering ; the sisters tell us in their cruellest moments ; it 

’ mingles with the midnight storm a sigh of the daughterhood that was repulsed. In 

the pining of the Fool we detect it. Through every wail or gust of this awful sym- 
phony of madness, ingratitude, and irony, we feel a woman’s breath. 


9 G 


Fool, Nor I neither; but 
house. oe 


- Lear. Why? ita ex }2 


Fool, Why, to put’s head in; not to give it away to his 


= Lear. Iwill forget my nature. So kind a father!—Be 
; my horses ready ? 
"Fool: ‘Thy asses are gone about ’em. The reason why 
the seven stars are no moe than seven is a pretty reason. 
Lear. Because they are not eight? 35 
Fool. Yes, indeed ; thou wouldst make a good Fool. 
Lear. To take ’t again perforce! Monster ingratitude! 


me! | Fool, If thou wert my Fool, nuncle, I’ld have thee beaten 
for being old before thy time. 
> Lear. How’s that? 40 
Bar's Fool. Thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst 
been wise. 
29. puts] F£+, Jen. Wh. Cam. Sch. 35. eight ?] Cap. eight. QqFf+, Jen. 
put his Qq et cet. Sch. 
to his| unto his Q,. 36. indeed| Om. Qq. 
30. daughters] daughter Qq. — 37. take’t] take it Cap. Steev. Ec. Var. 
31. father !] Rowe. father; Qq. Fa- Knt, Coll. Del. 
ther ? Ff, Sch. Monster] Monfter, Qq. 
33. ’en | them Qq, Jen. 38. thou wert] you wert F,. you were 
34. moe] F,. mo FF, Sch. more FF ,+. chou were Han. 
QagF, et cet. 41. dill] before Qq, Jen. 


31. Be] Asport, § 299: As a rule, it will be found that ‘be’ is used with some 


notion of doubt, question, thought, &c.; for instance, in questions [as here], and | 


after verbs of thinking. 


34. seven stars] Both DrLius and Wricut refer this phrase to the Pleiades, a 


constellation which assuredly is known by the name of The Seven Stars; may it not, 
however, refer to the Great Bear, whose seven stars are the most conspicuous group 
in the circle of perpetual apparition in the Northern Hemisphere ?—so conspicuous, 
indeed, that the Latin word for ‘North’ was derived from them. We call this con- 
stellation ‘The Dipper,’ from its fancied resemblance to the utensil of that name 3 a 
name, I believe, scarcely known in England.—Ep. 

37. perforce] JouNSoN: He is meditating on his resumption of royalty. STEEVENS: 
Rather he is meditating on his daughter’s having in so violent a manner deprived 
him of those privileges which before she had agreed to grant him, DE.ius thinks that 
Johnson’s interpretation is the more plausible, although ‘ Monster ingratitude’ is more 
in the train of thought suggested by Steevens. WnricHt also agrees with Johnson’s 


interpretation, as more in keeping with what Lear says in line 31: ‘I will forget my 
nature.’ 


daughters, and leave his horns without a case. bab 


let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven! 
smper; I would not be mad !—[Evter Gentle- 
ow now! are the horses ready? __ We 45 
Ready, my lord. 
Come, boy. : 
fool. She that’s a maid now and laughs at my departure 

all not be a maid long, unless things be cut shorter. 


a 


; . [ Exeunt, 
= 
4 43, 44. Oh, /et...mad!] Pope. Prose, 45. How now /] Om. Qq. q = 
ee QaFf, Rowe, Wh. Ktly. 46. Gent.] Seruant. Qq. v ae 
43. not mad] Om. Qq. 47. [Exit. Qq. Exeunt Lear, and Gen- ny 
Ls mad, sweet heaven !| mad. Sweet  tleman. Cap, j 25 . 
heaven, Johns. 48. that’s a] that zs Qq, Mal. Steev. 2 
¢ heaven!) heauen! IT would not be Bos. Sing. Ktly. that is a Cap. “an 
mad, Qq (dee Q,). 49. unless] except Qq. ; 8 
44. [Enter Gentleman.] Theob. Om. [Exeunt.] Exit. Qq. To the Au- 77 
pa QaFf. F -  dience, as he goes out. Cap. : 


43. COLERIDGE: The deepest tragic notes are often struck by a half sense of an 
impending blow. ; 

43. mad] BucKNILL (p. 183): This self-consciousness of gathering madness is 
Common in various forms of the disease. . .. A most remarkable instance of this was 
presented in the case of a patient, whose passionate, but generous, temper became 
morbidly exaggerated after a blow upon the head. His constantly expressed fear 
was that of impending madness; and when the calamity he so much dreaded had 
-actually arrived, and he raved incessantly and incoherently, one frequently heard the 
very words of Lear proceeding from his lips: ‘ Oh, let me not be mad!’ 


+ 

a - 48, 49. Eccies: This concluding rhyme seems to intimate that the Fool expects 
% to return soon, because of the ill treatment which he will probably receive where he 
2 is going. STEEVENS: This idle couplet is apparently addressed to the females present 
Ss at the performance of the play; and, not improbably, crept into the playhouse copy 
es _ from the mouth of some buffoon actor, who ‘spoke more than was set down for hin.’ 
fe It should seem, from Shakespeare’s speaking in this strong manner, that he suffered 
the injury he describes. Indecent jokes, which the applause of the groundlings 
i _ might occasion to be repeated, would at last find their way into the prompters’ books, 


&c. Iam aware that such liberties were exercised by the authors of Locrine, &c., 
but can such another offensive and extraneous address to the audience be pointed out 
among all the dramas of Shakespeare? CorrrmpGE: The Fool’s conclusion of this 
Act, by a grotesque prattling, seems to indicate the dislocation of feeling that has 
begun and is to be continued. C. A. BROWN (p. 292): There are three passages, 
foisted in by the players, and adopted by the printers, which ought to be for ever 
expunged from the text: The couplet at the end of Act I; the whole of Merlin’s 
prophecy, ITT, ii, 79-95,.as the Fool should go out with Lear, and those brutal words : 
“ And I’ll go to bed at noon,’ III, vi, 83, when the old king sinks into sleep. Such 
contradictions puzzled me for a long time, till looking among the Annotations, a 
profitable task once in a hundred times, I discovered that none of these tires pas- 
sages are in the Qq, printed eight years before Shakespeare’s death, but are intro- 


——— 


- Scena Prima Ff (Sceena F,). Om. Qq. 


ACT it 


Seqo < 7 Ms = 
Scene I. Zhe Earl of Gloucester’s Castle, 


Enter EDMUND and CURAN, meeting. 


Edm. Save thee, Curan. : 

Cur. And you, sir. I have been with your father, and 
given him notice that the Duke of Cornwall and Regan, his 
duchess, will be here with him this night. 

Edm. UHow comes that? | 5 

Cur. Nay, I know not. You have heard of the news 
abroad, I mean the whispered ones, for they are yet but 
ear-kissing arguments ? 

Acr 1. SCENE 1.] Actus Secundus. 1,5, &c. Edm.] Baft. QqFf. 
2-4. And...night.| Prose, Qq. Four 


Act Il. SCENE II. Ec. lines, ending 427....2o¢ice....Ducheffé.... 


The...castle.] A Castle belonging 
to the Earl of Gloster. Rowe. A Room 
in Gloster’s Castle. Cap. A court within 
the castle of the earl of Gloster. Mal. 

Enter.....meeting.] Enter Baft. and 
Curan meeting. Q,. Enter Baftard, and 
Curan meetes him. Q,. Enter Baftard, 
and Curan, feverally. Ff. 


night. Ff. 

2. you] your F.. 

3. Regan] Om. Qq. 

4. this night] to night Qq, Cap. Stecy. 
Ec. Var. Coll. Del. Sing. Ktly. 

7. they] there Qq. 

8. ear-kissing] eare-buffing Qq, Coll. 
iii. 


> 


duced into the F,, printed seven years after it. This, together with their absurdity, 
makes it plain that they are not Shakespeare’s. [The present passage is not omitted 
in the Qq.] SinGER: She who thinks that this journey we are now starting on will 
better us, and bring us mirth, is such a simpleton that, if she is a maid now, she will 
be cheated before long of her claim to that title. WwHITE: Steevens’s opinion that 
this is an interpolation appears to be well founded. The indecency is entirely gra- 
tuitous; it is ‘dragged in by the head and shoulders,’ which is not in Shakespeare’s 
manner. The jest, if we must call it such, is of the most miserable sort, and one 
which Sh, would hardly suffer in the mouth of this, the most thoughtful and subtly 
whimsical of all his thoughtful and subtle Fools. [See also note on the Merlin 
prophecy, III, ii, 81.] ELLs (p, 200) refers to lists of words given by Cooper, 
1685, shewing that Cooper pronounced the final -fure in lecture, nature, picture, 
scripture, &c, as -ter ; the present rhyme shows that ‘ departure’ was so pronounced 
in Shakespeare’s day. WHITE (vol. xii, p. 437) says that -zve final was generally, if 
not universally, pronounced -ey among even the most polite and literate of our Eliza- 
bethan ancestors, EL.is, after quoting this observation by White, says (p. 973), 
that this usage was not general or confirmed till the XVIIth century. [For the 
rhyme, see also II, iii, 20.] 

8. ear-kissing] Srrrvens: That is, they are yet in reality only whispered ones. 


COLLIER (ed. ii.) suggests that a play is probable upon dussing of the Qq and buz- 
gine. 


Ss 


¢ 


: you heard of no likely ae toward, “twist 
Cornwall and Albany ? 


ou may do then in time. 


Fare you sie: 
[ Exit. 
‘The duke be here to- See ? The better! best! © 


‘And I Bee one Shs of a queasy oe 


# / Which I must act. Briefness and fortune, work !— 


= Brother, a word; descend! Brother, I say! 


Enter EDGAR. 


~ My father watches! O sir, fly this place! 20 
Intelligence is given where you are hid! 

You have now the good advantage of the night. 

Have you not spoken ’gainst the Duke of Cornwall ? 


9. Not £1. Pray] Not, I pray Qq- 
10-12. Cur. Have...word.] Om. Q,. 


10. Have...toward, | Separate line, Ff, 


Rowe. 
toward] towards Q,. 


rt, the] the two Q,, Jen. 


13. Two lines, Ff. 
do| Om. Qq, Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. 
Dyce i. 
[Exit.] Om. Q,. 
14. SCENE Il. Pope, Han. Warb. 
14-97. Verse, Ff. Prose, Qq. 
14. better! best!| Pope. better beft, 
QqFf. better, best, Rowe, Ktly. 
17. queasy| quefie Qq. queazie F,F,. 


-He’s coming hither, now, i’ th’ night, i’ th’ haste, 


18. Which...work| Which muft afke 
breefnes and fortune helpe Qq (breefe- 
neff Qu). 

I9. Enter Edgar.] To him, enter 
Edgar. Pope. After which, line 18, in 
Q,- In margin opposite z¢se/f in line 15 
in Q,; after line 18, in Ff, Rowe, Pope. 

20. sir] Om. Qq. 

22. Youhave| You've Pope+, Dyceilt. 

23. ’sainst] gainfiQ,.. againft Q,. 

Cornwall ?| Cornwall ought, Qq. 
Cornwall aught Jen. 
24. hither] hether Qq. 
? th’ night] in the night Qq. 
? th’ haste| haste Pope. im haste 
Han. 


gueazy FF. 


10, toward] At hand. See LLL, iityia7 3 LV) vipe0oseane 1 i577; Vi, ii, 352: 

17. queasy] STEEVENS: Delicate, unsettled, requiring to be handled nicely. 
[Steevens called attention to the use of this word in The Paston Letters, where it is 
spelled ‘ ana (iii, 98, ed. Gairdner), and WRIGHT to another passage where it is 


‘spelled ‘ coysy’ (i,,497, ib.). In both instances it is applied to ‘the world’ in the sense 
- of unsettled, troublous.] KwnicuT: Zickdish perhaps gives the meaning more clearly. 


24. th’ haste] For instances of the use of the definite article in adverbial phrases, 
see ABBOTT, $91. 
; = 


. 
i 


"OF my more fer endeavour. T have seen d 


ee amass) eguseh Gq. » oc) oe 
27. yourself] your— Qa. heere, Q,- aa 
Zam] I’m Pope+t, Jen. Dyce ii. 32. brother] brether fie Qa. rok, 
28, 29. me: In cunning] mein cran- 1. Torches, torches] Torches FF, 
+. mes 
Baad Om. Qq. *' [Exit Edgar] Om.Qq 
Draw...well.] Cap. Two lines, 33- [Wounds his arm. Rowe. ~ 4 
the first ending your seife, Ff +, Jen. 34. J have] Wve Popet, Dyce ii. on 
quit] ’guit Wh. , 


26. Upon his party] Dettus was the first to interpret rightly these two ques- 
tions of Edmund’s. In order to confuse his brother and urge him to a more speedy 
flight, by giving him the idea that he is surrounded by perils, Edmund asks Edgar first, 
whether he has not spoken *gainst the Duke of Cornwall, and then, reversing the 
question, asks whether he has not said something on the side of Cornwall ’gainst the 
Duke of Albany. SCHMIDT gives seven instances, besides the present, where ‘ upon 
the party’ means ‘upon the side of.’ Before Delius, HANMER’s interpretation ob- 
tained, by which line 26 was regarded as only another way of putting the same 
question as that in line 23; thus: Have you said nothing upon the party formed 
by him against the Duke of Albany? CaPELL added that we must supply the word 
‘reflecting’ before ‘upon.’ The passage so puzzled JOHNSON that he believed it to 
be corrupt, and proposed the reading: Against his party, for the Duke of Albany ? 
Eccxes noted how Edmund grasped at every motive, however trivial or insignificant, 
that would enforce Edgar's departure. MOBERLY gives an ingenious interpretation 
of this second question of Edmund's: the war being only ‘ toward,’ and having not 
yet broken out, ‘Albany would be in a position to demand the punishment of any one 
who spoke against him, and Cornwall not unlikely to concede it, as Elizabeth might 
have done, if his warlike preparations were not sufficiently advanced to make it safe 
to throw down the gauntlet’ 

27. Advise] STEEVENS: Consider, recollect yourself. WricnT: See 1 Chron. 


xxi, 12: ‘Now, therefore, advise thyself what word I shall bring again to him that 
sent me.’ 


- 


31. Yield... father] Detius: Edmund-speaks these words loud so as to be 
heard outside. 


_ Look, sir, I bleed! 


_ Glou. 
Glou. Pursue him, ho! 
what? 
Edm. 


35. Father, father| Why, father, 
father Cap. Father, father, Sather 
Kitlys= 

36. and...torches.] Om. Qq. 

37- SCENE II. Pope, Han. Warb. Jen. 

where’s| where ts Q,. 

39. Mumbling| warbling Qq. 

40. stand] ftand’s Q,, Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Cam. Wr. fland his Q,¥ Fy 


But where is he ? 


| . Where is the villain, Edmund? | 
Fled this way, sir, when by no means he could— 
Go after.—‘By no means’ 


Persuade me to the murder of your lordship; 


Glo. Mob. Sch. 
41. villain, Edmund] villaine Ed- 
mund Q.. 
42. sir, when| QqFf+, Jen. sir. 
When Cap. et cet. 
could—] could. F,. 
43. ho] Om. Qq. 
after —‘ By] after. By Ff. after, 
by QQ. . 


could F.,. 


_ Rowe, Pope, Cap. Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. [Exeunt some Servants. Dyce. 
- Kat, Sing. Ktly. Exit Servant. Cap. 
mustress.| mistress :— Cap. Steev. 44. to the] to F Fy. 
Ec. Var. Knt, Sing. mzistress,— Dyce, 
as: sport] STEEVENS: So in Marston's Dutch Courtezan (iv, i): ‘—if I have 


not as religiously vowd my hart to you,—been drunke to your health, swalowd flap- 
dragons, eate glasses, drunke urine, stabd armes, and don all the offices of protested 
gallantrie for your sake.’ HALLIWELL, in his note on this passage in Marston, gives 
other instances of this same practice from Greene’s 7% Quogue and Dekkar’s Honest 
Whore. As COLLIER says, many passages might be produced to show that young 
gallants sometimes stabbed their arms in order to be able to drink the healths of 
their mistresses in blood. 

39. Mumbling of] Aszort, §178: We should be inclined to treat the verbal as 


a present participle, because there is no preposition before it: ‘@-mumbling of.’ The 


verbal here means “in the act of.’ See Ham. I, v, 175, and II, i, 92. 
39. charms] Warsurton: This was a proper circumstance to urge to Glou- 
cester, who appears by a previous scene to be superstitious with regard to this 


matter, ; 
42. this way] CAPELL: A wrong way should be pointed to. 


thunders Qq et cet. , 


- 
- 
5 


a 


The child was bound to th’ father; sir, in fine, 
Seeing how loathly opposite I stood 

To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion 

With his prepared sword he charges home- 
My unprovided body, lanced mine arm ; 

But whe’r he saw my best alarum’d spirits 


45. revenging| reuengiue Qq. 52. danced] Theob. lanchtQ,. launcht 
46. the thunder| Ff+,Knt,Del.Wh.  Q,,Rowe. Jatch’d Ff. Jlaunch’d Pope, 
Sch. their thunder Johns. Heath. heir Han. Knt. lanched Sch. 
mine] my Theob. Warb. Johns. 


47. manifold| many fould Qq. 53. Butwhe'r] Sta.conj. But whether 
48. to th’] to’ th’ FF, toth F, to Coll. ii (MS). And when Ff +, Knt, 
the Qq. Sch. dat when Qq et cet. 
in fine] in a fine Qq. alarum d\ alarumd Qq. alarm’d 
50. 22] with Qq. F,. alarmed Rowe+. 


oe  .].}aROOOO SS 0 

45. that] This, after ‘When,’ in line 41, completes the conjunction ‘ When that.’ 
See CLARENDON’s note on Ham. IV, vii, 160. 

45. revenging] WRIGHT: With the Qq reading, compare ‘ responsive,’ equiv- 
alent to corresponding, in Ham. V, ii, 146. 

46. the] Dyce calls this reading of the Ff ‘a vile reading.’ [‘ All the thunder’ 
appears to be a stronger and more comprehensive expression than the thunder of 
the revenging gods alone.—ED. | 

50. motion] ScumipT (Zex.): An attack in fencing opposed to guard, or parry- 
ing. See 7wel. NV. III, iv, 304; Ham. IV, vii, 102and 158. [See Vincentio Saviolo, 
his Practise, 1595: ‘hold your dagger firm, marking (as it were) with one eye the 
motion of your aduersarie,’—sig. ***, p. 1, line 4.—Ep.] - 

52. lanced] KnicuT prefers /awzch, and cites instances from Spenser, Fairy 
Queen, i, 4, and Dryden, Georgics, iii. Undoubtedly Jawnch would be preferable 
if there were any difference in signification between it. and Jace, and if elsewhere 
Isaac Jaggard and the printers of the Qq had not used the words indifferently. 
WricHT: Compare Hollyband (77. Dict. 1593): ‘Poindre, to pricke, to sticke, to 
lanch.’ SCHMIDT pronounces ‘latch’d’ a misprint. 

53. whe’r] This suggestion of SraunTon’s of ‘whe’r’ (7. e. whether) for when 
of the QqFf seems to me an emendatio certissima. It restores the construction, which 
with w/em is irregular, and to be explained only on the ground of Edmund’s per- 
turbation. For many illustrations of the monosyllabic pronunciation of whether, 
from Chaucer downwards, see WALKER, Vers. 103, or AspotT, § 466, or Macd. I, 
ili, 111, or Ham. II, ii, 17; III, ii, 193. ScHMIDT prefers And when of the Ff, 
because ‘but’ of the Qq would indicate that the result of the scene was something 
unexpected, 

53- best alarum’d spirits] Drxtus interprets this: ‘my best spirits alarum’d? ; 
but SCHMIDT says that ‘ best’ is used adverbially, and here means zz the dest way. 


irre] ’s right, roused to th’ encounter, 

gasted by the noise I made, 

$e Let him fly far; 
_ Not in this land shall he remain uncaught; 

+ And found—dispatch. The noble duke my master, 

ma *, ; " 7 


~~ 4 . ; | = 

_ 54. guarrel’s right] quarrels, rights  dispatch— Pope, Theob. uncaught ; =a 
And for dispatch Han. uncaught; And Zs 
i 

~< 


ee 


55- gasted|’gastedCap. ’ghastedjJen. _found.— Dispatch. Johns. uncaught ; 
ghasted Knt, Del. Sch. And, found, dispatch’d. Cap. Coll. iii. 
56. Full | dt Qq, Cap. uncaught ; And found—Dispatch— Jen. 
58, 59. uncaught;...—dispatch.|Steev. uncaught, And found—dispatch Sing. 
uncaught and found; difpatch, QqFf _— K tly, Sch. © 
(found, Q,), Rowe. uncaught and found; a 


55- gasted] WRIGHT: Frightened. Steevens quotes from Beau. and Fl. Wit at 
Several Weapons, II, iii, but the word there in the original copies is ‘ gaster’d’: 
_ Either the sight of the Lady has gaster’d him, or else he’s drunk.’ This is still an 
i Essex word. ‘Gast’ as a participle occurs in Cursor Mundi (MS Trin. Coll. Cam- 
. % bridge, fol. 31, quoted in Halliwell’s Dict.), p. 291 (E. E. Text Soc., ed. Morris) : 
an * His wille was but to make hem gast.’ The other three printed texts of the poem 
ee have ‘ agast,’ ‘ agaste,’ and ‘a-gast.’ Sh, uses ‘ gastness’ in the sense of terror-stricken 
“a ‘ look in O¢h. V, i, 106: ‘Do you perceive the gastness of her eye?’ And Spenser 
a has ‘ gastfull’ in the sense of ‘awful’ in Shepherd’s Calendar, August, 170: ‘ Here 
will I dwell apart In gastfull grove therefore.’ Both these last-mentioned words 
appear to have been used as if they were etymologically connected with ‘ghost,’ 
’ For this derivation there is no foundation. Cotgrave gives, ‘Espoventable: com. 
Dreadfull, frightfull, fearefull; horrible, gastfull, horride.’ The form ‘gaster’ is 
found in Harsnet’s Declaraticn of Popish Iniposture (1603), p. 73: * Did euer the God- 
gastring Giants, whom Jupiter overwhelmed with e/ion and Ossa, so complaine 
a of theyr loade?? Mr Skeat has pointed out to me an excellent example of ‘gast’ in 
- The Vision of Piers Plowman, Text A, Passus vii, 1, 129: - Bobe to sowen and to 
4 setten - and saued his tilbe, Gaste Crowen from his Corn - and kepen his Beestes.’ 
= 58. dispatch] WARBURTON: This nonsense should be read and pointed thus: : 
3 And found, dispatch’d.’—z. ¢. as soon as he is found he shall be dispatch’d or 
i executed. JOHNSON: The sense is interrupted. He shall be caught—and found, 
i he shall be punished. Despatch. SINGER (WV. & Qu. Ist Ser. vol. vi, p. 6, 1852): 
The context plainly shows that we should read, preserving the punctuation of the 
7 Folio: ‘Uzfound; dispatch.’ [This conjecture Singer afterwards withdrew in his 
Text of Sh. Vindicated, &c., p. 270.] A. E. B[RAE] [V. & Qu. ist Ser. vol. vi, p. 
82, 1852): There is an expressive pause after ‘fourd,’ as though the punishment 
consequent upon Edgar’s capture were too terrible and indeterminate for immediate 
utterance. ‘ Dispatch ’ is addressed to Edmund, and simply means, ‘Get on with 
your story,’ which in fact he does at the conclusion of Gloucester’s speech. COLLIER 
(ed. ii.) : ‘ Despatch’d’ is the correction in the (MS), and the context, where Glou- 
cester adds that ‘the murderous coward’ shall be brought ‘tc the stake,’ entirely 
confirms it. STAUNTON: The old text [that is, as Staunton gives it: ‘And found— 


My worthy arch and ¢ tron s to 
By his authority I will proclaim it, 
That he which finds him shall deserve our thank 


Bringing the murderous coward to the stake; +s 
He that conceals him, death. a ‘ 
Edm. When I dissuaded him from his intent = 
= And found him pight to do it with curst speech, wk 
I threaten’d to discover him; he replied: 5 oe ee 
“Thou unpossessing Paced dost thou think, ae 
a If I would stand against thee, would the reposal = 
Of any trust, virtue, or worth, in thee _ 
oA Make thy words faith’d? No; what I should deny,— 70 
<j As this I would; ay, though thou didst produce ak 
\ ; 
a My very character,—I'ld turn it all ‘ 
3 59. worthy] worth F. 68-70. would the reposal...Make| the = 
arch and patron and arch-patron reposal... Would make Han. 
Theob. Han. 70. what I should | what fhould I FF. 7; 
61. which] who Theob. ii, Warb. by what I should Rowe, Pope. what 
Johns. Ld Han. when I should Wazb, Johns. , 
62. coward] caytifeQ,. caytiffe Q, what, should I Sch. 
cattiff Jen, Cam. Wr. 71. ay, though] [though Qq. though 
68. would the reposal| could the re- Ff. although Rowe ii+. 
pofure Qq, Cap. Jen. Cam. Wr. 72. Pid) Pll ¥,. would Han. Cap. 


dispatch !’] is right. Thus in B/urt, Master Constable, v,i: ‘There to find Fonti- 
nelle: found, to kill him.’ Dyce: I cannot see that Staunton’s quotation supports 
the old reading. 

59. arch] SrEEVENS: Chief. So in Heywood’s Jf you Know not Me you Know 
Nobody (p. 48, ed. Sh. Soc.) : ‘Poole, that arch, for truth and honesty.’ WRIGHT 
cites Steevens’s quotation, and adds, ‘but it is not a good instance of the word.’ 
Wuite: That is, chief;—to Odd Fellows and Masons a superfluous explanation. 

65. pight . . . curst] JoHNSON: ‘Pight’ is Aitched, fixed, settled. ‘Curst? is 

‘ severe, harsh, vehemently angry. MosBErLy: ‘ Pight’ comes from itched, as aight 
comes from deck, or right ftom reach. 

67. unpossessing] Mosrr.y: Incapable of inheriting. ‘For,’ says Blackstone, 
‘ [a bastard] is looked upon as “ nullius filius,” and therefore of kin to nobody, and 
he has no ancestor from whom any inheritable blood can be derived’ CoLERIDGE: 
Thus the secret poison of Edmund’s own heart steals forth; and then observe poor 
Gloucester’s ‘ Loyal and zatural boy!’ as if praising the crime of Edmund’s birth, 

68. I would] For instances where ‘ would’ is not used for shold, see Abbott, § 331. 

68, 69. reposal... thee] De.ius says that ‘virtue or worth in thee’ does not, 
like ‘trust,’ depend on ‘reposal,’ but is co-ordinate with it, and any is to be under- 


stood before it; or, as WRIGHT states it, ‘the reposure of any trust, (or the belief in 
any) virtue or worth, in thee,’ 


70. faith’d] That is, believed. See I, i, 203. 
72. character] See I, ii, 59. 


+e 


z ee. 
« a! 
ear 


hs = 


<. —- ea a ; 3 

estion, plot, and damned practice; 
ist make a dullard of the world, — 
ought the profits of my death 


Rowe, Del. i, Sch. ‘ 


"a eee eo i a a. 

_-—s:*73. Suggestion] Nares: Temptation, seduction. HUNTER (Note on Aacé. I, 
iii, 134): ‘Suggestion’ is a theological word, one of the three ‘ procurators or tempters’ 

of sin. Delight and Consent being the others. 


73. practice] CoLLier (ed. ii.): The accent seems to show that pretence of the 
Qq is not the right word, unless we read ‘damn'd pretence.’ WRIGHT: ‘Practice’ 
is more in keeping with ‘ plot’ and ‘suggestion.’ : 

_ 75. not thought] For instances of the omission of the auxiliary.in negative sen- 
tences, or for the transposition of the negative, see ABBOTT, § 305. 

75. death] Mosrrty; This skilful suggestion, that Edmund should be put into 
Edgar’s place, is acted upon at once by Gloucester; yet it is so indirect that Glou- 


' cester imagines the thought to have come from himself. Lord Bacon, in his essay 


on Cunning, speaks of the trick of ‘turning cat in pan;’ that is, making a suggestion 
in such a way that the hearer supposes it to be his own, This may be done either 
coarsely—‘ as you said, and wisely was it said,’ was Polonius’s way of impressing his 
own thoughts on the king—or, in a more skilful way, as here.’ 

76. pregnant] In Alas. for Meas. I, i, 12, JOHNSON first defined this word by 
‘ready,’ and this definition has been adopted as its general meaning in Sh. down to 


' the present day; certainly it is generally thus interpreted in the present passage. 


WRIGHT goes so far as to say that it ‘is used by Sh., without any reference to its 
literal meaning, in the sense of “‘ready;”’’ he afterwards defines it as ‘manifest, 
obvious,’ in certain passages which he cites. SCHMIDT gives no intimation that it is 
used in its ‘literal meaning ;’ the fourteen instances of its use that he cites he divides 
under three heads: 1st, expert, clever, ingenious, artful; 2d, disposed, ready, prompt 
(under this head the present passage is cited); 3d, probable in the highest degree, 
clear, evident. Now, on the other hand, I cannot but think that NAREs came nearer 
the truth when he said that the ruling sense of this word is that of ‘being full or, pro- 
ductive of something.’ Out of Schmidt’s fourteen instances eleven appear to me tc 
come under Nares’s definition. Three instances (Lear IV, vi, 222; Wint. Tale, V, 
ii, 34; and Anz. and Cleop. II, i, 45) are used in so metaphorical a sense that one 
may give to them almost any meaning that his mother wit suggests as applicable to 
the passage. My interpretation of the ‘ pregnant hinges of the knee’ in Ham. III, 
ii, 56, is there recorded; the present passage seems to me exactly parallel, and may 
be paraphrased thus: ‘So great are the profits of my death that the spurs to make 
thee seek it are most powerful, and ¢eem with incitements thereto.? SCHMIDT in 
his edition repeats his definitions of ‘ pregnant,’ and doubts if, thus defined, Sh. even 
could have applied it to ‘spurs,’ and, while faithful to the Folio, confesses that spirits 
form but a poor predicate to ‘ profits,’ yet in the sense of evil spirits that it is at least 
as probable a reading as ‘spurs.’ Tn my opinion the reading of the Folio is a mis- 
print for ‘spurs’ of the Quarto, ‘ Pregnant’ is quite as appropriate to ‘spurs’ as to 
ED. 


‘hinges.’ 


76. spurs] fpurres Qq. Spirits Ff, 


’ 


~ To make thee seek it’ 


Hark, the duke’s trumpets! I know not why he comes. 


Glou. O strange and fasten’d llain | 
Would he deny his letter? *I never got him.* 


[Tucket within. 


All ports I’ll bar; the villain shall not ’scape; 80 
The duke must grant me that. Besides, his picture : 

I will send far and near, that all the kingdom 

May have due note of him; and of my land, 

Loyal and natural boy, I’ll work the means 


To make thee capable. 


77. Ostrange and fasten’d | Ff, Rowe, 
Knt, Del. i, Sch. Strong and fafined 
Q,. Strong and fafiened Q,. O strange, 
fasten’d Pope+, Ec. Strange, and 
fastewd Cap. (MS).* O strong and 
jastewd Dyce i, Ktly. Strong and 
fastewd Cap. et cet. 

villain] Viliaine ¥,. 
78. I never got him.| said he? Ff, 


85 
hark! Han. Sch. said he? I never got 
him, Cap. Knt. ‘ 

78. [Tucket within.] Ff (after seek z#, 
line 77). After wlain Cap. After him 
Mal. Om. Qq. Trumpets within. Rowe. 
Trumpets without. Sta. 

79. why| wher F, 
wher Knt. 

83. due] Om. Qq. 


where FF 


Rowe, Pope, Theob. Sch. satd he? 85. [Flourish. Cap. 

77. strange] As SCHMIDT says, Sh. uses this sometimes in the sense of enormous, ~ 
unheard of: ‘this most foul, strange, and unnatural [murder]’—AHam. I, v, 28; 
‘ All strange and terrible events are welcome ’—Axnz. and Cleop. IV, xv, 3. 

78. This line in the Ff is manifestly imperfect; I have followed the majority of 
editors in adopting a sentence from the Qq which seems in keeping with Glou- 
cester’s agitation.—Eb. 

78. Tucket] Nares: A particular set of notes on the trumpet, used as a signal 
for a march.. From ¢occata, which Florio defines: ‘A preeludium that cunning mu- ~ 
sitions use to play, as it were, voluntary before any set lesson.’ 

81. picture] Lorp CAMPBELL: One would suppose that photography, by which 
this mode of catching criminals is now practised, had been invented in the reign of 
King Lear. [We have merely called in photography to our aid in continuing a 
practice common in Shakespeare’s time, as this present passage shows, and of which 
we have a corroboration in the old play of Modody and Somebody, 1606 (Privately 
reprinted by Mr ALEXANDER SMITH of Glasgow, 1877): ‘Let him be straight im- 
printed to the life: His picture shall be set on euery stall, And proclamation made, 
that he that takes him, Shall haue a hundred pounds of Somebody.’ Sig. D,. For 
this reference I am indebted to the Preface of the Reprint.—Ep. ] 

84. natural] Hupson: This word is here used with great art, in the double sense 
of i/legitimate and as opposed to unnatural, which latter epithet is implied upon Edgar, 

8 5. capable] Lorp CamppeLt: In forensic discussions respecting legitimacy, the 
question is put, whether the individual whose s¢a/us is to be determined is § capable,’ 
t. é. capable of inheriting; but it is only a lawyer who would express the idea of legiti- 
mising a natural son by simply saying, «I’ll work the means To make him capable,’ 


Ww now, my noble friend! since I came hither, 86 
‘call but now, I have heard strange news. 
Af it be true, all vengeance comes too short 
i ich can pursue the offender. How dost, my lord? _ 
an. Oh, madam ,my old heart is crack’d,—it’s crack’d! rere) 
om 7a What, did my father’s godson seek your life ? 

ns aa whom my father named? your Edgar? 

p> i Oh, lady, lady, shame would have it hid! 


es, 
ir. Pek ‘ 4 
| a 


86. ScENE Iv. Pope+, Jen. go. 2¢’s] 2s Qq, Cap. Steev. Ec. Var. 
Enter...] Enter the Duke of Corn- = Cam, Wr. 
wall. Qq. 92. named? your Edgar ?| nam'd, : 
_ 87. strange news] ftrange newesQq. your Edgar? Ff. named your Edgar? 7 
JSrangenefe FF, ftrangene/s FF. Qq. amd, your Edgar? He? Han. - 
88. zoo shore] to fhort F a nama? your heir, your Edgar? Coll. ’ 
89. dost] does F,F,F,+, Cap. Jen. Ec. iii (MS). 
doest Sch. : 93. Ok] J Qq. Ay Anon.* io 


90. Oh] Om. Qq. 


A 89. dost] The fact that Regan at no other time addresses Gloucester in the second 
ig _--——s person makes me think that we should here read: ‘ How does my lord?’ For the 

Ms omission of the nominative after ‘ dost,’ see ABBOTT, §§ 241, 399, 400.—ED. 

We _ QI. COLERIDGE: Compare Regan’s ‘did my father’s godson seek your life? He 
= whom my father named?’ with the unfeminine violence of her ‘All vengeance 
wy comes too short,’ &c., and yet no reference to the guilt, but only to the accident, 
. _which she uses as an occasion for sneering at her father. Regan is not, in fact, a 
a . greater monster than Goneril, but she has the power of casting more venom. 

Pee 92. This line ABpott, § 478, scans in two ways: First, by pronouncing the last 
, oa syllable in it ‘with a kind of “burr,” which produced the effect of an additional 
— ‘ syllable ;’ and as he cites ‘sirrah’ as an instance of this ‘burr,’ the best way, prob- 
[- ; ably, of conveying his idea in spelling would be ‘ Ed-garrah.’ Or, secondly, ABBOTT 
.. queries whether it might not be scanned by pronouncing ‘your’ assoludé, thus: 
- . ‘najmed? you|r Edgar?’ Of these two methods, the latter seems preferable. 
3 WALKER (C7iz. ii, 145) suggests, in his chapter on the omission of repeated words, > 
e that Gloucester says : ‘O! O lady,’ and that the first ‘O!’ which closed this line had 
; been omitted, Lxrrsom, in a foot-note, queries ‘“ your Edgar, Gloster ?”’ Gloster 


may have been left out at the end of the line in consequence of Glo. occurring at 
the beginning of the next.’ For COLLIER’S (MS) emendation, see Textual Notes; 
MoBERLY, referring to this emendation, says: ‘ Probably the intense tone of astonish- 
ment would give a prolonging accentuation to several of the syllables as the line 
stands, and make it in reality long enough without the addition. If the reading, 
however, was invented, its inventor had a good notion of the way in which conso- 
~ nants fall out of the body of a word. There would be the same kind of identity 
¢ between ‘heir’ and ‘ Edgar’ as between ‘Audrey’ and ‘ Ethelreda,’ ‘ Maude’ and 
‘Matilda;’ and his theory would be that, from the similarity of the two words, one 


had got dropped.’ 
Io 


Reg. as marvel on oes ie were i aff Ee 
’Tis they have put him on the old man’s death, 


To have th’ expense and waste of his revenues. =a 100 
I have this present evening from my sister uo hed oft 
Been well inform’d of them, and with such cautions ‘i 
That if they come to sojourn at my house, eh 
Tl not be there. a 
Corn. Nor I, assure thee, Regan.— * ' 
—~ ’ “ an bina 


94. 2ot] Om. Coll. (MS). 

95. tend upon] Theob. tends upon 
Qq. dcended upon Ff, Rowe, Pope, Knt, 
Ktly. ended on Han, 

95-97. That...was| Two lines, ending 
madam...was, and omitting of that con- 
sort. Cap. Steev. ’93, Bos. 

96. ’ Zits too bad, too bad.| Separate 
line, Steev. ’85, Mal. Ec. 

"Tits aé as Cap. Steev. 285,93; 
Var. Ec. 
97. madant| madam, yes Coll. ii(MS). 


97. of that consort] Om. Qa ‘Cap. 
Steev. ’93, Bos. one of that consort 
Dyce conj. 

100. #2 expense and waste of his] the 
waft and fpoyle of his Q,, Jen. Mal. 
Steev. Bos. Sta. Cam. Wr. the/e——and 
wa/fte of this his Q,. th’ expence and 
waft of F¥,F,. 

103, 104. That...there.| One line, Qq. 

104-106. WVor...office.] Prose, Qq. 

104. assure] J assure Theob, ii, Warb, 
Johns. 


95. tend] Ansort, § 472, gives this word, in the Ff, as an instance of the fact 
that -ed, when following d@ or 4, is often noi written, and, even when written, is often 
not pronounced. 

97. madam] WALKER ( Vers, 173): This is usually a monosyllable. 

97. consort] Dyce (G/oss.): A fellowship, a fraternity. See ABBorr, § 490, for 
a list of words in Sh. where the accent is nearer the end than with us. [As this 
word thus accented meant also a company of musicians (see Rom. & Ful. III, i, 41, 
where Mercutio conceives himself insulted by being classed among minstrels), it is 
probably here used as a strongly contemptuous term.—ED. ] 

98. were] Apnort, § 301: The meaning is: ‘It is no wonder, then, that he was 
a traitor,’ and no doubt or future meaning is implied. 

99. ’Tis they] CLARKE: Regan seeks to associate the accused man, Edgar, with 
the knights of her father’s train, upon whom she is determined to fasten blame as an 
excuse for her refusal to receive and entertain them. 

99. put him on] See I, iv, 200. 

100, expense and waste] MALONE supposed that ¢hese of Q, was a misprint for 
the use. WRIGHT thinks that the reading of the Ff is apparently a conjectural emen- 
dation of the reading of the incorrect Qq. [It seems probable that the dash in 
Q, indicates the haste and carelessness with which these editions were printed. 
Either the stenographer misheard the word and put a dash, which he afterwards 
hoped to fill up, but did not, and the compositor repeated it in type, or the com- 


N. h be taken, ie Shall never more PLO. 
| ene harm. Make your own purpose, 

strength you please—For you, Edmund, 
and obedience doth this instant 

So? anadiidermend itself, you shall be ours.: 


_ Natures of such deep trust we shall much need ; [Ts 

- You we first seize on. 

_. Edm. I shall serve you, sir, 

Truly, however else. 

ee ap For him I thank your grace. — 

“ros. ‘ap heard Qq. Heath, Jen. 

106. ’ Twas] Twas Qq. Jt was F,F., 114. commend] conimends arb. 
Knt. J/¢ zs FF,, Rowe. /t’s Pope, Johns. 

Elan. *s Be tr itself | themselves Ec. conj. 
107. bewray] betray Qq. 115, 116. need; You we] need you, 
109. lord] lord, he ts Han. weQ,. need, you we Q,. 

110-116. Jf he...seize on.] Prose, Qq. 116, 117. J shall...else.| As by Pope. 
112. For] as for FFF, +, Jen. One line, QqFf. 
Edmund] good Edmund Ktly.  —116. sev] Om, Qgq, Jen. 
. 113. doth this instant] in this instance 117. Zyuly] At end of 116, Jen. Sta, 
Warb. Johns. doth, in this instance For him] Om. Pope+. 


positor was baffled by the text of his copy, and left a dash to be filled up by the 
proof-reader, which was not done. See Appendix, p. 362.] 

107. bewray] WriGHT: From A.S. wrégan, or wreian, to accuse. See Matthew, 
xxv, 74: ‘thy speech bewrayeth thee!’ ‘Bewray’ and ‘betray’ are used almost 
interchangeably, but in the former there is no notion of treachery inherent. 

107. practice] STEEVENS: Always used by Sh. for insidious. mischief. See 


line 73. ct 
111. fear’d of ] For a long list of instances where of means ‘ concerning,’ ¢ about,’ 


see ABBOTT, § 174, or Ham. II, ii, 27. . 
112. For you] AxBsort, § 483, for the sake of metre prolongs ‘you’ into a dis- 


syllable. 

113. virtue... doth] CaPreLi: ‘ Virtue and obedience’ is put figuratively for 
virtuous ied and hence it is that ‘itself’ is predicated of ‘it, and ‘doth’ fol- 
lows it; and did a follow ‘doth,’ the next expression were neater, but it may do 


without. [For instances of a verb in the singular after two nominatives, see Ham, 


III, ii, 157, and Sh. pass7m. ] 


Reg. Thus out of season, threading dark-eyed mee ; 
Occasions, noble Gloucester, of some poise, : 
Wherein we must have use of your advice. 

Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister, 

Of differences, which I best thought it fit 


ns 


118. came] come a conj. 

you ?) Qq¥,F,, Sch. you. F,F,, 
A Coll. i, Del. Wh. you (continuing the 
fo i next line to ‘Corn.’), Rowe ii, Pope, Han. 
sal Ktly. you— or you,— Rowe i et cet. 
: 119. threading | thredding Ff. threat- 
: ning Qq. 

night ;| night, QqFf. night ? 

Rowe, Pope. ight! Sch. 


Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. Johns. Ec. 
Sch. price Johns. conj. Cap. 
121. advice.| advice— Rowe, Pope. 
aduife,Q,. aduice,Q,. advices: Cap. 
123. differences| diferences Q,. de- 
Jences Q,. 
best] lef Q,. least Cam. Wr. 
thought it] though it F,. thought 
Sch. 


120. porse] poyfe Q.. prize QFf, 


119. Regan] JENNENS: Regan may be here supposed officiously to complete 
Cornwall’s sentence. Hupson: Regan’s snatching the speech out of her husband’s 
mouth is rightly in character. These two strong-minded ladies think nobody else 
can do anything so well as they. [Although Regan does certainly take up and con- 
tinue her husband’s speech, yet it should be remembered that the comma and dash at 
the end of Cornwall’s speech, line 118, are due only to Rowe.—ED. | 

119. threading] THEOBALD: I have great suspicion that it should be ¢veading, 
i.e. travelling. The text as it stands carries too obscure and mean an allusion. It 
must either be borrowed from the cant phrase of threading of alleys, z. e. going 
through by-passages; or to threading a needle in the dark. UMEATH: That is, 
slipping through the night, as if afraid of being discovered. STEEVENS: The same 
phrase is used in Cor. III, i, 124. WricHT: Compare for the figure of speech. 
King Fohn, V, iv, 11. 

120, poise] MALONE: Weight or moment. HENLEY: Sh. having elsewhere 
used to Zeize for to balance or weigh, and the letter 7 in his own autograph being 
made more like an e, I conclude that gedze was the original word, and signified 
deliberation, SCHMIDT upholds the Ff, to whose reading he gives the meaning: ‘ of 
some account;’ thus, in Cym. III, vi, 77, Imogen, when wishing that Guiderius and 
Arviragus had been her brothers, says, ‘then had my prize Been less, and so more 
equal ballasting To thee, Posthumus ;’ and in Anz. & Cleof. V, ii, 183, Czesar says to 
Cleopatra: ‘ Czesar’s no merchant, to make prize with you Of things that merchants 
sold.’ [I should agree with Schmidt in preferring the Folio, did not Sh. elsewhere 
use ‘poise’ in phrases similar to the present. Even on Schmidt’s own theory, in 
which I agree with him, that the Qq are surreptitious copies taken down from stage- 
representation, it is likely that ‘ poise’ was Shakespeare’s own word when the play 
was first acted ; it is a less likely word to occur to an actor than prize.—ED. | 

121, advice] KriGuTLey: There is evidently a line lost after this. We might 
read: ‘Have been the cause of this our sudden visit.’ 

123. which] Derius: This does not refer to ¢ differences,’ but to ¢ writ.’ 

123. thought it fit] Scumipr thinks that the misprint of the Folio is more likely 


Race. ae Br ae 


t you bosom and bestow 
-ounsel to our businesses, 


che instant use, 


I serve you, madam.— 


ur graces are right welcome. 


’ 


[Flourish Exeunt. 


Scene II. Before Gloucester’s castle. 


Enter KENT and Oswap, severally. 


Osw. Good dawning to thee, friend; art of this house? 


— Kent, Ay. 


124. home] hand Q.. 

126-128. Lay...use.| Two lines, the 
first ending counsell, Qq. 

127. businesses] Ff +, Ec. Knt, Del. 
Dycei, Sch. dzsineffe Qq et cet. 

128. craves] crave Rowe+, Ec. Knt, 
Del. Dyce i. 

[Exeunt.Q. Exit. Q. 
128,129. Jserve...welcome.| One line, 


q- 
129. [Flourish. Exeunt.] Exeunt. 


< Flourith. F,. Exeunt. F,F,F,. Om. Qq. 


SCENE 1] Scena Bence Ff (Sczena 


F,). ScENE v. Pope+, Jen. The Scene 
continued by Rowe, Theob. ScENE m1, 
Ec, 
Before... ] Before the Castle. Cap, 
Enter......] Coll. Enter Kent, and 
Steward feverally. Ff, Sch. Enter Kent, 
and Steward. Qq. 
I, 3, &c. Osw.] Coll. Steward. or 
Stew. QqFf, Sch. 
I. dawning| euen Qq, Cap. Jen. Ec 
evening Pope, Theob. 
this| the Qq, Cap. Jen. Mal. Steev. 
Bos. Sing. Ktly. 


ms stand for thought fit than for ‘thought it fit.’ [The space is suspiciously large be- 
tween ‘though’ and ‘it,’ and looks to me as though a letter had dropped out. The 
presence or absence of ‘it’ need not affect the scansion.—ED. ] 

124. from our home] JoHNsoN: Not at home, but at some other place. [Com- 
pare ‘From thence,’ A/acd. III, iv, 36, or see ABBOTT, $41. This meaning the 
phrase does not bear if WRIGHT’s reading of /east from Q, be adopted.—Ep. ] 


124. messengers] WALKER (Vers. 200) : 


See also AsBorr, § 468. 


This is frequently a quasi-dissyllable. 


127. businesses] If dzsiness of the Qq be adopted, it must be pronounced as a 
trisyllable, for which authority will be found in WALKER (Vers. 171) or ABBOTT, 


2 479. 


1. dawning] WARBURTON: The time is apparently night. We should read, 


Good downing, 2. e. good rest, the common eyening salutation of that time. 

CapELL: And here [line 28] we see the time of this scene—that ’tis night; but late 

in it, and drawing towards morning. Mason: Lines 129 and 130 of this scene 

show that the time was very early in the morning. MALone: It is clear that the 

morning is just beginning to dawn, though the moon is still up, and though Kent, 
- 10* H 


i oe 


Vien On dees ats 
KING LEAR 


Where may we set our horses ? 
I’ th’ mire. 


Osw. Prithee, if thou lovest me, tell me. — te 


Kent. love thee not. oe 
Osw. Why then I care not for thee. ee 


Kent. Tf I had thee in Lipsbury pase I oat make 
thee care for me. y 

Osw. Why dost thou use me thus? e know thee not. 10 

Kent. Fellow, I know thee. 

Osw. What dost thou know me for? 

Kent.” A knave; a rascal;.an eater of broken meats; 


4.2). i724. fF OEE EF. 8. Lipsbury] Lipfburie Q,. Ledbury 
In the Q. Jen. conj. Finsbury Coll. iii (MS). 
5. Prithee| Prythee¥ FF, Prethee J would | Corrected to 7’ by Cap. 
QaF,. (Wotes, i, 230.) 
lovest| lov'ft Ff. lowe Qq, Cap. g. [Striking him. Coll. iii. 


Steev. Mal. Ec. Bos. Coll, 


; ; 5 
early in the scene, calls it still night. Towards the close of it he wishes Gloucester 
good morrow, and immediately after calls on the saz to shine that he may read a 
letter. DrLius: It is night, and as, in Sh., that time of day which is approaching 
is given by way of greeting, and not that which is then present, Oswald wishes 
Kent, whom he does not recognize in the dark, a good dawning. 

5. if thou lovest me] DrLius: A conventional phrase before a question or re- 
quest, but which Kent here takes literally. 

8. Lipsbury pinfold] What Cape. said a hundred years ago is still true: ‘It 
is not come to knowledge, where that Lipsbury is,’ but what he adds is question- 
able: ‘ This we may know, and with certainty, that it was some village or other, 
fam’d for boxing; that the boxers fought in a ring or enclos’d circle, and that this 
ring was call’d— Lipsbury pinfold.”’ FARMER suggests that it may be a cant 
phrase with some corruption, taken from a place where the fines were arbitrary. 
STEEVENS surmised that it might import the same as Zod’s Pound ; with which it 
seems to have no more connection than that ‘ pinfold’ means ‘ Pound’ and ‘ Lob’ 
and ‘ Lipsbury’ begin with the same letter. ‘ Lob’s Pound,’ as is well known, means 
a place of confinement, whether a prison or the stocks. NAREs’s guess is perhaps 
as happy as any: ‘It may be,’ he says, ‘a coined name, and it is just possible that it 
might mean the teeth, as being the pinfold within the Zs.’ CoLtier’s MS gives Fims- 
bury, where, says that editor, there must have been a pinfold, well known to Shake- 
speare’s audiences; and this word, through mishearing or misprinting, was corrupted 
to ‘Lipsbury.’ HALLIWELL simply cites Nares; and Dyce says merely: ‘ A pinfold 
is a pound; but what the commentators have written about the name Lifsbury is too 
unsatisfactory to be cited.’ Wricur thinks Nares’s explanation the most probable 
which has yet been given, and adds: Similar names of places, which may or may 


not have any local existence, occur in proverbial phrases, such, for instance, as 
‘Needham’s Shore,’ ‘ Weeping Cross.’ 


proud, shallow, beggarly, three-suited, hundred- : 14 


14. three-suited| thread-suited Anon.* —fuited-hundred pound F  three-fuited, 
three - suited, hundred - pound | hundred pound Le 8 (thre F.). 
three fhewted hundred pound Qq. three- j : 
- = = — = : 
14. three-suited] FARMER: This should be shird-saited, wearing clothes at 


third hand. STEEvENs: This might mean, one who had no greater change of rai- 


ment than three suits would furnish him with. So in Jonson’s Szlent Woman [1V, ii, 


_ -—p. 447, ed. Gifford] : ‘thou wert a pitiful poor fellow, . .. and hadst nothing but three 


suits of apparel ;’ or it may signify a fellow s¢hrice-swed at law, who has ¢hree suits 
for debt standing out against him. Der.ius: This cannot refer to his poverty, but, 
rather, like ‘ glass-gazing,’ signifies foppishness, changing his suits that many times, 
or else wearing them all at the same time. When Edgar describes his former 
wealthy state, he says of himself [IIJ, iv, 129], ‘who hath had three suits to his 
back.’ WRrRiGHT: If the terms of agreement between master and servant in 
Shakespeare’s time were known, they would probably throw light upon the phrase. 
It is probable that three suits of clothes a year were part of a servant’s allowance. 


In Jonson’s Si/ent Woman, III, i, Mrs Otter, scolding her husband, whom she treats 


as a dependant, says, ‘ Who gives you your maintenance, I pray you? Who allows 
you your horse-meat and man’s-meat, your three suits of apparel a year? your four 
pair of stockings, one silk, three worsted?’ [According to the CAMBRIDGE EDITORS, 
*Q,, Bodl. 1,’ has the misprint smy¢ed, which is corrected in the other Qq to shewted. 
From this circumstance, WRIGHT inferred not only that the enumeration of the Qq in 
the Cam. ed. was wrong, and that what he and his fellow-editor had there called Q, 
was in reality the earliest impression of all, but that ‘suit’ in Shakespeare’s day was 
pronounced soot. He supposes that while the ‘ edition was in course of printing the 
error, szyted, was discovered, and the correction communicated verbally to the com- 
positor, who inserted it according to his own notions of spelling.’—Ellis’s 2. 2. Pro- 
nunciation, p.217. This hypothesis (which is certainly as old as Steevens), in regard 
to the pronunciation of szz¢, Wright thinks is strengthened by the puns on sz¢or and 
shooter in Love’s Lab. Lost, IV, i, 109, &c., and also in Rowley’s Match in the Dark 
(1633), II, i; but Exits (p. 217) doubts whether these instances are enough to decide 
the point with certainty. ‘ Hurried corrections, whether of print or manuscript, fre- 
quently introduce additional errors, and hence there is no guarantee that the compositor 
who substituted skewed for smyted did not himself put sew?¢ed when he meant to have 
inserted sewted, «which would be a legitimate orthography for s¢ed,’ ‘In the present 
day we have a joke of an Irish shopman telling his customer to shoot himself, meaning 
suit himself. The Irish pronunciation, however, only shows an English pronuncia- 
tion of the XVIIth century. In England at the present day, shoot for suit would be 


vulgar, but the joke would be readily understood, though few persons use, or have 


even heard, the pronunciation. Might not this have been the case in Shakespeare’s 


At any rate, there is no authority for supposing that such a pronunciation 


time ? 
In his essay on Lnglish Pronun- 


could have been used seriously by Sh. himself.’ 
ciation in the Elizabethan Era (Sh. Works, xii, p. 430), WHITE says: ‘S before a 
vowel had often the sound of sf, as it now has in sugar and sure. Such was its 
sound in swe, seit, and its compounds, and I believe in seper and its compounds, and 
in supine and supreme... . S was also sometimes aspirated before o and z,; of which, 


and of the o sound of ew, see phonographic evidence in the pronunciation of sezwe7, 


pound, filthy, worsted-stocking knave; a iy 7) : 
taking, whoreson, glass-gazing, nce pauta 
rogue; one-trunk-inheriting slave; one that wouldst be a 
bawd in way of good service, and a nothing but the com- 


position of a knave, beggar, coward, pants and the son 


15. worsted-stocking| worfted-ftocken 
Qq. wooftedftocking ¥,FF,. woofed 
flocking Ba Rowe, Pope, Han. 

lily-livered, action-taking| No 
hyphens, Qq. ¢ 

15, 16. action-taking, whoreson| Ff, 


action taking knave, a whorfon Qq et 
cet. a s 

16. superserviceable, finical]| fuper- 
Jinicall Qq.- 

17. one-trunk-inheriting | one Trunke- 
inheriting FF, No hyphen, Qq. 


Rowe, Pope, Han. Knt, Dyce, Sta. Sch. . 


which was pronounced shore in the Elizabethan era, and thence down to the begin- 
ning of the present century. . . «Hence, too, sheke/s was spelled stckels. Both spell- 
ings expressed the same sound,’ | 

14. hundred-pound] STEEVENs: A term of reproach; see Middleton’s Phenix 
[1V, iii, p. 393, ed. Dyce]: ‘ How’s this? am I used like a hundred-pound gentle- 
man?’ DELIvs suggests that it may mean one who weighs only a hundred pounds, 
and is therefore tolerably light; but the quotation from Middleton, cited ake by 
Delius, seems conclusive. 

15. worsted-stocking] STEEVENS: The stockings in England in the reign of 
Queen Elizabeth were remarkably expensive, and scarce any other kind than silk 
were worn, even, as says Stubbes in his Anatomie of Abuses [p. 57, ed. Furnivall], 
by those who had not above forty shillings a year wages. Soin Tailor’s The Hog hath 
Lost his Pearl [1.i]: ‘Good parts, without habiliments of gallantry, are no more set 
by in these times than a good leg in a woollen stocking.’ Again in Beau. and Fl.’s 
The Captain (111, iii]: ‘serving-men with woollen stockings.’ MALONE: See 
also Middleton’s Phenix [IV, ii, p. 389, ed. Dyce]: * Metreza Auriola keeps her 
love with half the cost I am at: her friend can go a’ foot like a good husband, walk 
in worsted stockings, and inquire for the six-penny ordinary.’ 

15. lily-livered] See AZacd. V, iii, 15. WrichtT: Compare 2 Hen. JV: IV, 
iii, 111: ‘The second property of your excellent sherris is, the warming of the blood; 
which, before cold and settled, left the liver white and pale, which is the badge of 
pusillanimity and cowardice.’ 

15. action-taking] Mason: A fellow who, if you beat him, would bring an 
action for the assault, instead of resenting it like a man of courage. 

16. glass-gazing] EccLes: One who wastes his time in gazing at his own person 
in a looking-glass. 

16. superserviceable] JoHNSON: Over-officious. WRIGHT: It must also sig- 
nify one who was above his work. See Oswald's character as drawn by Edgar, 
NV aut e 5 Ue 

17. one-trunk-inheriting] JoHNSON, supposing that ‘trunk’ here refers to 
trunk-hose, explains this as a ‘wearer of old cast-off clothes, an inheritor of torn 
breeches,’ STEEVENS defines it as a fellow the whole of whose possessions are 
confined to one coffer, and that too inherited from his father. SCHMIDT sustains 
Steevens’s definition, but ghar it by showing that ‘inherit’ also means simple 
possession, as in IV, vi, 125: ‘ But to the girdle do the gods inherit. 3 


“. 


Kent. \ ae a Reet iced: varlet art thou, to ioe 


es thou -knowest me! Is it two days since.I tripped up thy 

ae and beat thee before the king? Draw, you rogue! 
= “aka f , though it be night, yet the moon shines; I’ll make a 
t sop o’ th’ moonshine of you, you whoreson See bar- 


= 


ie ber monger, draw. 30 


20. oné] Om. Qq. 
21. clamorous| clamours F_¥,, Rowe. 


Bos. Sing. Ktly. 
29. sop] jfop Theob. conj. (with- 


- deniest| deny ft Ff. " denie (Ole drawn). 
_ deny Q.. o th’) oth FF. of the Qa. 
ane thy] the Qq of you] a’ you Qq. 


23. Why] Om. Qq. 
24. on” one] against one Cap. MS.* 
that is| that’s Qq. 
26. days] days ago Qq, Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. Ktly, Glo.+, 


- Mob. 


by 3 26, 27. tripped...thee| beat thee and 
tript up thy heeles Qq. 


oa ; 28. yet] Om. Qq, Cap. Mal. Steev. 


you whoreson| Ff+, Knt, Sch. 
draw, you whorfon Qq et cet. 

cullionly] cullyonly Qq. Cullyenly 
FF. cully only Q, Culleinly FF ,, 
Rowe, Pope. 

barber-] Barbar- FFF. 

30. [Drawing his sword. Rowe. 
barber-monger| barber-munger 


Qa. 


a ; 22. addition] Title; see A/acd. I, iii, 106; Ham. I, iv, 20; II, i, 47. 
A _ 29. sop 0’ th’ moonshine] CaPELL: A ludicrous phrase, importing that he 
ae would lay [Oswald] upon his back on the earth, like a ‘sop’ in a dripping-pan, for 
Be the moonbeams to baste him. FARMER: Perhaps here an equivoque was intended. 
E: In The Old Shepherd’s Kalendar, among the dishes recommended for Prymetyne, 
«One is egges in moneshine.’. Nares: This probably alludes to some dish so called, 
There was a way of dressing eggs, called ‘eggs in moonshine.’ [Nares here 
gives a receipt from May’s Accomp/. Cook, p. 437, to which I refer the enthusiastic 
“ei student. It is sufficient to say that the eggs are fried in ‘ oyl or butter,’ covered with 
—- slices of onions and seasoned with verjuice, nutmeg and salt; to be eaten with 
‘ what appetite you may. A simpler receipt is given in V. & Qu, 4th S., xii, 19 July, 
1873; and, in the same volume, on p. 84, RoyLE ENTWISLE says that Nares’s 
F explanation is ‘as constrained and shallow as his resort to a cookery-book’ ‘is 
ridiculous and unnecessary; and it was evidently arrived at without a thought being 
expended on Shakespeare’s ideal knowledge of the orb of night, as revealed in his 
other allusions to it, notably in AZacé. III, v, 23, 24.’ ‘ Plainly, Kent’s intention is 
ie to make a “sop” of him in the sense of steeping him, in his own blood, by the con- 

. ~ senting light of the moon.’ ] 
29. cullionly] WricHT: Florio gives, ‘ Coglione, a cuglion, a gull, a meacocke 
and in his Worlde of Wordes, ‘ Coglione, a noddie, a foole, a patch, a dolt, a Paaesek 

30. barber-monger] FARMER: This may mean a dealer in the lower tradesmen; 


Novas Away! I fave nothi g to do : re 
Kent. Draw, you rascal. You come with letters : nei 


the king, and take vanity the puppet’s part against the 
royalty of her father. Draw, you rogue, or I'll so carbonado | 
your shanks! Draw, you rascal; come your ways. 


Osw. Help, ho! murder! Bete! 

Kent. Strike, you slave! stand, rogue, stand; you neat 
slave, strike! 

Osw. Help, ho! murder! murder! 


32. come with] bring Qa. Pope+, Sch. vogue; stand, you Cap. 
34. royalty of her] royalty, her Cap. Knt, Cam. Wr. 
35. shanks!| Sta. /hankes, QqgFf. 37. slave,| slave; Knt. 
shanks— Rowe+. shanks: Cap. et cet. 38. [Beating him. Rowe. 
37. rogue, stand; you] Jen. rogue, 39. murder! murder !\ murther, mur- 


Jfrand you Qq¥ f, Rowe. rogue, stand, you ther. Ff. murther, helpe. Qq. 


- a slur upon the steward, as taking fees for a recommendation to the business of the 


family. Mason: A fop who deals much with barbers, to adjust his hair and beard. 
Moserty: A contemptuous extension of the word ‘ barber.’ 

33. vanity] JoHNson: Alluding to the old Moralities or allegorical plays, in 
which Vanity, Iniquity, and other vices were personified. 

33. puppet] SINGER: A mere term of contempt for a female. 

34. carbonado] Dyce (G/oss.): To cut cross-wise for broiling. 

37. neat] JOHNSON, who defines this by ‘you mere slave, you very slave,’ comes 
nearer to the true meaning, I think, than STEEVENS, although the latter has been fol- 
lowed by Dyce, ScumiIpDT, WRIGHT, and MOBERLY. STEEVENS thinks that ‘it means 
no more than you finical rascal, you are an assemblage of foppery and poverty.’ 
Then, by way of proof, Steevens cites Jonson in 7he Poetaster [IV, i]: ‘By thy 
leave, my neat scoundrel.’ But we must remember that this is spoken by Tucca, a 
blustering captain, whose speech is full of absurd epithets, and that it is addressed 
to Gallus, who, we know, is not a ‘scoundrel,’ and are not led to suppose that he is 
‘neat’ in the sense of finical. On the contrary, it is more likely that Tucca uses 
‘neat’ in the sense which WALKER (C77z. ii, 352) ascribes to it here, viz: that of 
pure, unmixed ; still used in the phrase meat wine, &c. SINGER suggests that it may 
mean ‘you base cowherd.’ SraunTon has the following note: ‘The sting in this 
epithet has been quite misunderstood by the commentators, who suppose it to 
mean mere or finical. For the real allusion, see Wint. Tale, I, ii, 123: “We 
must be neat; not neat, but cleanly, captain, And yet the steer, the heifer, and the calf, 
Are all call’d neat.” See also Taylor the Water Poet’s Epigram on the Husband of 
Mrs Parnell ; *« Neate can he talke, and feede, and neatly tread, Neate are his feete, but 
most neate is his head.”’ But, as WRIGHT says, this play on the word ‘neat? would 
have no especial point as addressed to Oswald. Walker’s interpretation is, I think, 
the true one, RusHTON (Sh. Zilust. by Old Authors, p. 63): ‘Because Leontes in 
Wint. Tale uses the word ‘neat’ in a sense implying the uncleanliness which is 
common to cattle, or those who tend them, therefore I have thought it probable that 


°@ 


Boe his Rapier drawne, Glocefter, the Duke 


s 
his rapier drawn. 


now! What's the matter? [Parting them. 40 
: you, goodman boy, if you please; come, I'll 
ome on, young master. 


_ Enter CORNWALL, REGAN, GLOUCESTER, and Servants. 


OH | 45 
ae eg. The messengers from our sister and the king? 


42. flesh] flea Qa. 
ye] Ff+, Glo. Dyce ii, Wr. Sch, 
you Qq et cet. 
Enter Cornwall,...]Sta. Del. En- 
ter Gloster. Dyce ii. 


7 Enter...JEd, Enter Edmund with 
and Dutcheffe. Qq, Cap. (subs.), Glo.+. 
Enter Baftard, Comewall, Regan, Glo- 

_ fer, Servants. Ff (Servant. F,F,F,). 


_ 40. SCENE VI. Pope+, Jen. 

40, &c. Edm.] Bait. QqFf. 

40. [Parting them.] Dyce conj. Wh. 
(subs.), Glo.+. Part— Rowe+, Jen. 
Coll. ii. Part. Ff et cet. Om. Qq, Del. 

41. if] and Qq. an Sta. Glo.+, Mob. 

please; come|Theob. pleafe come, 


- Enter Edmund. Dyce i, conj. Sta. Dyce 43- Weapons ? arms ?| Weapons, armes, 
ii, Del. Qq. Weapons! arms! Cap. 


Enter Cornwall, Regan, and Ser- 
vants. Dyce ii. 
44, 45. Keep...matter ?| Cap. Prose, 
QqFf +. Jen. 
45. What ts| what's Qq, Popet,.Jen. 
46. messengers| messenger Wh. 
king ?| King. Qq. 


Qq. please, come, Ff, Rowe, Pope. 


Kent may mean that Oswald was like a tenant of neat land (¢erra villanorum) ; that 
is, a base, dirty fellow.’ ; 
40. Parting them] Dyce (Remarks, &c. p. 225): Part of the Ff is undoubtedly 
a Stage-direction. This is clear from its interfering with the dialogue: Edmund 
asks ‘ What’s the matter?’ and Kent immediately replies, ‘ With you [7. e. ‘the matter 
is with you, I will deal with you’], goodman boy,’ &c, That such a stage-direction 
is common in old plays, hardly perhaps requires to be shown; one instance, however, 
may be given: ‘ Rich. Art thou content to breath? [Hight & part once or twise.’— 
A Pleasant Commodie, called Looke about you, 1600. SCHMIDT maintains that ‘ With 
you’ in Kent’s reply does not refer to ‘ What’s the matter,’ but to Par of the Folio, 
which is legitimately a portion of the text and no stage-direction. ‘ Partin Sh, means 
not only to separate, but also to go away, to depart. Edmund means it in the former 
sense, and Kent understands in the latter, and asks “* With you?” That Sh., in spite 
of a possible misapprehension, uses ¢o part with in the sense of 0 go away with some- 
thing, a passage in Com. of Err. III, i, 66, proves: “Ang. Here is neither cheer, sir, 
nor welcome: we would fain have either. Ba/. In debating which was best we shall 
part with neither.”’ [This is very ingenious, but, I fear, not convincing.—Eb. ] 
42. flesh] Scumipt (Lex.): To feed with flesh for the first time, to initiate. [See 


line 118.]_ 
46. messengers] Dyce: Oswald is the messenger ‘ from our sister,’ Kent the 


messenger from ‘ the king.’ 


You cowardly rascal, nature disclaims in thee ; a tailor made 50 


thee. 


What is your difference? speak. 
Osw. Iam scarce in breath, my lord. ’ ane 
Kent. No marvel, you have so bestirred your valour, 


Corn. Thou art a strange fellow; a tailor make a man? © 
Kent. Ay, a tailor, sir; a stone-cutter or a painter 
could not have made him so ill, though they had been but 


two hours o’ th’ trade. 


ae 


Corn. Speak yet, how grew your quarrel? 
Osw. This ancient ruffian, sir, whose life I have spared 


at suit of his gray beard,— 


Kent. Thou whoreson zed! thou unnecessary letter !— 


47. What is] Whats Q,. What's Q,. 
difference? speak.| Rowe. dif- 
Serence, [peake ? QqFf. 

49-52. WVo...man ?| Prose, QqFf. Four 
lines, ending valour,...in thee -...fellow ; 
..man ? Cap. Ec, 

50. 22] all share in Rowe+, Jen. 

52. man ?| man. Qq. 

53. Ay,] Z, Qq, Theob. Warb. Om, 


55. hours] houres Qq. yeares ¥,FF,. 
years De Rowe, Cap. Sch. 

0’ th’| F,F,+, Cap, Dyce, Wh. 
Sch. off’ FF. at the Qq et cet. 

56. yet] you Pope, Han. Jen. 

57. Lhis...spared | Prose, QqFf. One 
line of verse, Cap. Steev. Ec. Var. Knt, 
Coll. Del. Sing. Sta. Wh. Ktly, Sch. 

This] The FF ,, Rowe. 


Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Knt, Sch. 
sir | fir, QF. sir ? Rowe, Pope, 
Han. sar. Sch. 
54. they] hee Q,. he Q,, Glot+. 


rufian] ruffen Q,. 
58. gray beard,—] gray-beard. QqF, 
F,. gray beard. FF. 
59. zed !] Zedd Q,.. C/ Johns conj. 


50. disclaims in] In a note on Jonson’s Vo/pone, III, vi (p. 264, ed. Gifford, 
1816), where this same phrase occurs, GIFFORD says that this expression is very com- 
mon in our old writers [it occurs again on p. 284 of the same play]; it seems, how- 
ever, to have been wearing out about this time, since it is found far less frequently 
in the second than in the first impression of Jonson’s plays; two instances of 
disclaim in occur in the Qto ed. of Avery Man in his Humour, both of which in 
the Folio are simplified into disclaim. ScHMIDT: This is the only instance in Sh, 
of ‘disclaim 72.’ 

50. a tailor made thee] ScumipT: Because the best of you is your clothes. 
Compare Cym. IV, ii, 81: ‘thy tailor, Who is thy grandfather; he made those 
clothes, Which, as it seems, made thee.’ Thus also in the same play, III, iv, 51; 
‘Some jay of Italy Whose mother was her painting.’ 

55. two hours] Scumipr prefers the ‘two years’ of the Ff, which is assuredly, 
he says, a term of apprenticeship all too short for a sculptor or a painter. ‘ But the 
Editors appear to have had a different experience, and prefer the “ two hours” of 
the Qq. An exaggeration of wit will sometimes ruin it.’ 

56. yet] There is plausibility in Pope’s emendation yow.—ED. 

59. zed] STEEVENS: Baret in his 4/vearie omits this letter, as the author affirms 


cs ek A 
‘ . 


‘between parents and children. 


| y lord, if you will give me leave, I will tread this un- 60 


Corn. Peace, sirrah !|— 


bolted villain into mortar, and daub the wall of a jakes 
with him.—Spare my gray beard, you wagtail ? 


_ You beastly knave, know you no reverence? 


Kent. Yes, sir; but anger hath a privilege. 65 


Corn. 


Why art thou angry ? 


Kent. That such a slave as this should wear a sword, 
Who wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues as these, 
Like rats, oft bite the holy cords a-twain 
Which are too intrinse t’ unloose; smooth every passion 70 


60. you will] youl Q.. 
J will] Corrected to 7’7/ in Capell’s 
Errata. 
61. wall] waillesQ,. wals Q,. walls 
Cam. Wr. 
of a jakes] of aiagues Q,. of a 
Taques Q,. ofalakes¥F,. of a Fakes 
FEAF, 
62. gray beard | gray-beard Q,Ff. 
63, 64. Peace...reverence 7] One line, 
Qa- 
63. strrah] fir Qq. 
[To Osw. Ed. conj. 
64. know you no reverence ?| you haue 
no reuerence. Qq. 
~ 65. hath] has Qq,Cap. Mal. Steev. Bos. 
68. Who] That Qq. 


68, 69, as...a-¢wain]| One line, Pope. 

68. as these] Om. Han, 

69. the holy] thofe Qq, Pope. those 
holy Jen. 

a-twain| atwaineF F. im twaine 
Qq, Pope+, Jen. Steev. Mal. Ec. 

70. Which are too intrinse| Mal. 
Which are ¢’ intrince, F,. Which art 
2’ intrince, F ghar as Rowe. Which are 
to intrench, Qq. Too intricate Pope, 
Jen. Yoo ’intrinsicate Theob. Warb. 
Johns. Ec. Yoo intrinsick Han. Which 
are too intrince Cap. Too intresse or 
Too intrigue Sing. conj. 

? unloose ;| to inloofe Qq. to un- 
loose » Cap. Cam. 
smooth| sooth Pope+, Cap. 


it to be rather a syllable than a letter. 
tion there. 


[I have searched in vain for any such affirma- 
We are led to infer that Baret has omitted it because it is, like 4, a com- 


pound letter, and therefore unnecessary.—Ep.] FARMER: This is taken from the 


grammarians of the time. 


seen :—S is become its Heutenant-general. 


in foren enfranchisements.’ 


Mulcaster says, ‘ Z is much harder amongst us, and seldom 
It is lightlie expressed in English, saving 
WricHT: Ben Jonson in his Zxglish Grammar says: 


‘Z is a letter often heard among us, but seldom seen.’ 


61. unbolted] WarsuRToN: Unrefined by education. 


ToLueT: ‘ Unbolted mor- 


tar’? is mortar made of unsifted lime, and to break the lumps it is necessary to tread 


it by men in wooden shoes. 
62. Spare, &c.] STAUNTON: 


¢ Unbolted,’ therefore, here means coarse. 
An acute stroke of nature: Kent in his rage forgets 


it was his life, not his beard, which the fellow pretended to have spared. 
69. holy cords] WarsurTON: By these ‘ holy cords’ Sh. means the natural union 


The metaphor is taken from the cords of the sanc- 


tuary ; and the fomenters of family differences are compared to those sacrilegious rats. 
69. a-twain] For instances of adverbs with the preffx a-, see ABBOTT, § 24. 
7c, intrinse] THEOBALD, having found the word éutrinsecate in Ant. and Cleop. 


II 


122, ‘KING LEAR 
That in the natures of their lords rebel; a ee 


Being oil to fire, snow to the colder moods ; 
Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks 


aay 
71. natures| nature Pope+, Cap. Ec. 72. fire) fiir Qq. , 
rebel] QgqFf, Rowe, Jen. Dyce, the] Ff, Cap. Sta. Sch. their Qq 
Ktly, Glo.+, Sch. vebels Pope et cet. et cet. . . 
72. Being] Ff, Rowe, Sch. Bring 73. Renege] F,F,F,. Reneag Qq, Wh. 
Qgq et cet. P Reuenge F,. 


V, ii, 307, and in Jonson’s Cynthia's Revels, V, ii (p. 327, ed. Gifford, 1816), adopted 
it here, and, deriving it from the Latin iu¢rinsecus, ingeniously paraphrased it by 
‘inward, hidden, perplext, as a knot hard to be unravelled.’ Upron (p. 363) 


-was the first to discover the modern reading under the disguise of the Ff, and, 


believing it to be a shorter form of intrinsecate, cited, as a parallel elision, ‘reverbs’ 
for reverberate in I, i, 145. MALONE added ‘attent’ for attentive in Ham. I, ii, 193, 
and proposed to read, metrically, ‘Like rats, oft bite those cords in twain, which 
are Too,’ &c. ‘The word ‘zztrinsicate,’ he adds, ‘was but newly introduced into 
our language when this play was written. See Marston’s Scourge of Villanze [vol. 
iii, p. 245, ed, Halliwell] : « new-minted epithets (as reall, intrinsecate Delphicke).”’’ 
WRIGHT says it is ‘ difficult to say how intrinsecate is formed. It seems to be a com- 
pound of zztrinsic and intricate,’ which latter word is the definition Dyce (G/oss.) 
gives of ‘intrinse.’ WRIGHT says ‘too intrinse’ means ‘ too tightly drawn.’ 

70. smooth] Flatier; see Rom. & Ful. III, ii, 98, and notes. 

71. rebel] This may be either the plural by attraction (by the word ‘ lords’), as 
WRIGHT says; or it may be that ‘every’ is used as a plural, according to ABBOTT, 
§12. For the plural by attraction, see Ham. I, ii, 38, and notes. 

73. Renege] Nares: Deny, renounce; venmego, Lat. [whence renegudo.— 
WricHT]. The g is pronounced hard. See Anz. S Cleop. 1, i, 8, and Sylvester’s 
Du Bartas The Battal of Yury [p. 551, ed. 1633]: ‘All Europe nigh (all sorts of 
Rights reneg’d) Against the Zruth and Thee, un-holy Leagu’d. [As an additional 
proof that the g is pronounced hard, Dycx calls attention to the spelling in the Qq. 
The word (with g hard) is still common enough among whist-players, in the sense 
of revoke.—Ep. | 

73. halcyon] STEEVENS: This is the king-fisher. The vulgar opinion was that 
this bird, if hung up, would vary with the wind, and by that means show from what 
point it blew. So, in Marlowe’s Few of Malta, 1, i: ‘But how now stands the 
wind? Into what corner peers my halcyon’s bill?’ Again, in Storer’s Life and 
Death of Thomas Wolsey, Cardinall, a poem, 1599: ‘Or as a halcyon with her 
turning breast, Demonstrates wind from wind, and east from west,’ Again, in Zhe 
Tenth Booke of Notable Things, by Thomas Lupton, ‘A lytle byrde called the 
Kings Fysher, being hanged up in the ayre by the neck, his nebbe or byll wyll be 
alwayes dyrect or strayght against ye winde.’ [In Peck’s New Memoirs of Milton, 
1740, p. 251, an extract is given from Sir Thomas Browne, in which the truth of this 
‘conceit’ is disproved by ‘reason’ and ‘ experience.’ By reason, because ‘ it seemeth 
very repugnant that a carcase or body disanimated should be so affected with every 
wind as to carne conformable respect and constant habitude thereto.’ By experience, 
because ‘if a single kings-fisher be hanged up with untwisted silk in an open roome, 


eo your Sac visage! 3 


: le you my speeches, as I were a fool ? 
ice if I had you upon Sarum plain, 
id drive ye cackling home to Camelot. 


45. gale] gall F,. 75. nought] naught F,FF,, Dyce, 
_ vary] varry F,, veering Allen Wh. ; 2 
conj. MS. dogs| dayesQ,. daies Q,. 
75-77. Knowing...fool ?] Two lines, 77: Smile you] /moyle you Q,. Smoile 
the first ending efe/iptick, in Or you QF EF.. 
75. Knowing| As knowing Pope+, 78. if] and Q,. 
Cap. Steev. Ec. Bos. Sing. Ktly. And 79. drive ye| fend you Qq. drive you 


knowing Coll. iii (MS). Knowing of Cap. 


Anon.* Camelot] Camulet Qq. 


- & where the aire is free, it observes not a constant respect unto the mouth of the 


wind; but, variously converting, doth seldom breast it right. If two be suspended 
in the same roome, they will not regularly conform their breasts; but oft-times 
respect the opposite points of heaven.’] Dyce ( Goss.) cites from Charlotte Smith’s 
Natural Hist. of Birds, p. 88, in proof that the belief in a connection between the 
Halcyon and the wind still lingered in the cottages of England in 1807. 

74. vary] For instances of substantives of similar formation, see Ham. I, i, 57, or 
ABBOTT, § 451. DELIUS says, that it is connected in thought with ‘gale,’ and is 
equivalent to ‘ varying gale;’? wherein SCHMIDT agrees with him, and notes that 
‘vary’ as a noun in Sh. is found only here. 

76. epileptic] JoHNson: The frighted countenance of a man ready to fall in a 
fit. CAPELL: This epithet is given to ‘ visage,’ as if smiles had as much distorted it 
as such a fit would have done. Dyce (G/oss.): The context shows that it means 
a ‘visage distorted by grinning.’ 

77. smile] The reading of all the Qq and Ff (except F,) is so uniform, that 
it is hard not to believe that there is some corruption here, especially since, as 
WRricurT says, ‘Sh. uses “smile”? more than once with a direct object, but never in 
this sense.’ If the word here be really ‘smile,’ it is difficult to understand why so 
plain a word should have been persistently misspelled, It is spelled correctly in all 
the Qq and Ff in the last line of this very scene. CoLLIER’s (MS) corrects to 
«smile a@/, and KrIGHTLEY reads ‘smile you a¢.’ If the present text be right it 
comes under ABROTT’s § 200, where instances are given of the omission of prepo- 
sitions after some verbs which can be regarded as transitive, as in ‘ Thou swear’st 
thy gods,’ I, i, 163.—Eb. 

77. as] Equivalent to as 7 For similar instances, see Ham. I, ii, 217; HU, i, 


gt; III, iv, 135; IV, v, 99. 
79. cackling] Oswald’s forced laughter suggests to Kent the cackling of a 


goose.—ED, 

79. Camelot] Hanmer: In Somersetshire, near Camelot, there are many large 
moors, upon which great numbers of geese are bred, so that many other places in 
England are from thence supplied with quills and feathers, WARBURTON: This was 


Corn, What, art thou mad, old fellow? 


Glou. How fell you out? say that. 

Kent. No contraries hold more antipathy 
Than I and such a knave. 

Corn. Why dost thou call him knave? 


_ fault? a “ 
Kent. His countenance likes me not. ~ 85 
80, 81. What,....out?] As one line, 84. Two lines, Ff. 
Steev. Bos. Knt, Sing. What is his fault] Ff+, Cap. 
81. out? say that.| Pope. out, fay Knt, Sing. Dyce i, Ktly, Cam. Sch. 
that? QqFf, Rowe. What's his offence Qq et cet. 


the place where the romances say King Arthur kept his court; so this alludes to 
some proverbial speech in those romances. STEEVENS: Thus in Drayton’s Polyol- 
bion, The Third Song [p. 252, ed. 1748]: ‘ Like Camelot, what place was ever yet 
renown’d? Where, as at Caerleon oft, he kept the table round? [Besides these 
two places mentioned in this extract from Drayton, Camelot and Caerleon, there was 
a third place, Winchester, ‘ where,’ as SELDEN says in his ///ustrations to Drayton’s 
Fourth Song, p. 259, ‘Arthur’s table is yet suppos’d to be, but that seems of later 
date,’ CAPELL apparently confounded these three, and maintained that Camelot 
was Winchester, and thence he inferred that the allusion in the text is to a ‘ Win- 
chester goose,’ a cant name for a disgraceful ailment, mentioned in 1 Hen, VI: 
I, iii, 53 and Zro. & Cres. V, x, 55. According to Selden, in another note on 
p. 254: ‘By South-cadbury is that Camelot; a hill of a mile compass at the top, 
four trenches circling it,’ &c. . .. Antique report makes this one of Arthur’s 
places of his Round Table.’ SrauNnToN explains the confusion concerning the 
different localities of Arthur’s Round Table by showing that ‘ The Hiéstory of King 
Arthur was so long in the completion that, while in one chapter (xxvi) Camelot is 
located in the west of England (Somerse¢shire), in another (xliv) it is stated that 
«*—Camelot is, in English, Winchester.” At a still later period, when Caxton 
finished the printing of the Mort d’ Arthur in 1485, he says of the hero: “ And 
yet of record remain, in witness of him in Wales, in the town of Camelot, the great 
stones,’’’ &c. Staunton thinks it unnecessary to imagine with Warburton that there 
is any allusion to a proverbial saying in the old romances, but concludes with the 
following explanation of the present passage: ‘In chapter xlix of Arthur’s History 
the Quest of the White Hart is undertaken by three knights, at the wedding-feast of 
the king with the princess Guenever, which was held at Camelot. This adventure 
was encountered by Sir Gawayne, Sir Tor, and King Pellinore, and, whenever they 
had overcome the knights whom they engaged, the vanquished combatants were always 
sent “unto King Arthur, and yielded them unto his grace.””? Dycr ( Gloss.) thinks 
that there is here perhaps a double allusion, to the geese of Somersetshire, and to 
vanquished knights; thus both Hanmer and Staunton are right. HALLIWELL does 
not believe that there is in the text ‘the slightest allusion to the birds called geese, 
excepting of course a metaphorical one.’ It is doubtful whether a knowledge of the 


exact location of Camelot, upon which Staunton and others lay stress, would throw 
much light on this obscure passage.—Ep.] 


perchance does mine, nor his, nor hers. 86 : 

s my occupation to be plain. = 
-n better faces in my time i ‘ Ya 

ands on any shoulder that I see 


: me at this instant. 
n This is some fellow, 90 
a having been praised for bluntness, doth affect . 
_A saucy roughness, and constrains the garb 
ne ; Quite from his nature; he cannot flatter, he,— 
__ An honest mind and plain,—he must speak truth! 

And they will take it, so; if not, he’s plain. 95 

These kind of knaves I know, which in this plainness 

Harbour more craft and more corrupter ends 

Than twenty silly-ducking observants 


86. does] do's Ff. doth Q, 94. An....plain| he muft be plaine 
nor...nor| or...or Qq, Jen. Steev. Qq. 


se. Var. Knt, Sing. Ktly. 

iz ee 89. Than] That Q.. 

r a stands| stand Pope+, Ec. 

Ss shoulder| shoulders Han. Ec. 


< 90-99. This...nicely.] Nine lines, end- 
ing prai/d...ruffines,...nature,...plaine,... 


Jo,...kn0W,...Craft,...ducking., nicely,Qq. 


95. And] Ff. Sch. and Qq. An 
Pope et cet. 
take it, so] Rowe. take it fo Q, 

Ff. tak’t fo Q,. 

96. plainness] plainne/s. FFF. 

97. more corrupter| far corrupter 
Pope, Han. 

98. stlly-] stdky Warb. Han. Jen. 


et 90. some| a Qq. silly-ducking| Ff, Dyce ii, Huds. 
4 92. roughness] ruffines Qq. filly ducking Qq et cet. 

a 93. cannot] can’t Pope+. 

. = 92. garb] JoHNson: Forces his ovtside, or his appearance, to something totally 
= different from his natural disposition, STAUNTON, by supposing that ‘ #zs nature’ in 
re ; the next line means ‘7s nature,’ gives a different meaning to this sentence, a mean- 
2 ing which the CLARKEs also see in it, and thus interpret: ‘ Cornwall implies, in what 
e ; ~ he says of Kent, that he distorts the style of straightforward speaking quite from its 


nature, which is sincerity ; whereas he makes it a cloak for craft.’ WRIGHT: ‘ Garb’ > 

denotes the outward address and manner, especially of speech. Compare Hen. V- 

V, i, 80; Cor. IV, vii, 44; Ham. I, ii, 354. And Jonson, Avery Man out of his 

Humour, VV, iv: ‘And there, his seniors give him good slight looks, After their 

garb, smile, and salute in French,’ &e, 

96. These kind of knaves] AsBorr, § 412: The two nouns together connected 

by ‘of’ seem regarded as a compound noun with plural Sea atIOn. 
67. more corrupter] For instances of double comparatives, pee tains, EK a, TEs 
Pad note, See also below, line 143; UJ, iii, 7; Il, iv, 106; ILI, ii, 64; Apsort, 
§ 11, or Shakespeare passim. 

98. silly-ducking ] WALKER (C7r?z. i, 26) gives this eciee instance where a com- 
pound epithet has been resolved, by the majority of edd., into two simple epithets. 


r1* 


oe Oe 


That stretch their duties nicely. 2 = 
Kent. Sir, in good faith, in sincere verity, ee 
Under th’ allowance of your great aspect, : 
Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire 
On flickering Phoebus’ front,— ee ws 
Corn. =e What mean’st by this ? 
Kent. To go out of my diale&t, which you discommend 
so much. I know, sir, I am no flatterer; he that beguiled 105 >. 
you in a plain accent was a plain knave; which, for my Naar 
part, I will not be, though I should win your displeasure to ; ; 
entreat me to’t. : 


100. faith, in] footh, or in Qq, Jen. QqFf. 


Mal. Ec. sooth, i Steev.’93, Bos. Coll. 103. dy] thou by Qq, Jen. Mal. Ec. 
Del. Sing. Sta. Wh. Ktly, Glo. Wr. 104. dialect | dialogue Qq. 
Iol. great] grand Q,, Pope+, Cap. 105. he] but he Han. 
Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. Coll. Sta. graund beguiled | beguil’d ¥{F,. beguild 
We QaF, F. 
103. Ox] Jn Qq. Or Rowe, Pope. “107, 108. to entreat| that entreat Bad- © 
flickering] Pope. flitkeringQq.  ham.* 
tucking Ff. 108. zo’t] toot Q.F F... fo it Q., Cap. 


Sront,—] front— Rowe. front. Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. Knt, Sing. Ktly. 


98. observants] WALKER (C7iz. ii, 348): Zo observe is used in the strict sense of 
observare ; whence observance. SCHMIDT (Lex.) gives, among the meanings of 
‘ observe,’ to reverence, to show respect to, to do homage; see 2 Hen. JV: IV, iv, 30; 
Timon, IV, iii, 2x2. WRIGHT: In Ham. III, i, 162, ‘ The observed of all observers’ 
means he to whom all courtiers pay court. Hence‘ observance’ is used for ceremony, 
as in Mer. of Ven. II, ii, 204. 

99. nicely] MALONE: With the utmost exactness. COLERIDGE: In thus placing 
these profound truths in the mouths of such men as Cornwall, Edmund, Iago, &c., 
Sh. at once gives them utterance, and yet shows how indefinite their application is. 
Hupson: I may add that an inferior dramatist, instead of making his villains use 
any such vein of original and profound remark, would probably fill their mouths 
with something either shocking or absurd, which is just what real villains, if they 
have any wit, never do, 

lol. great] KNicHT: The change from the Qq to the Ff was not made without 
reason. Although Kent meant to go out of his dialect, the word grand sounded 
ironically, and was calculated to offend more than was needful. 

ror. aspect] NArgs: Always accented on the last syllable in Sh. Driius: Here 
used in a secondary astrological sense, like ‘influence’ in the following line. 

106, accent] ScumipT: Not seldom, as here, equivalent to speech, language. 

107, 108. though . . . to’t] JouNnson: Though I should win you, displeased as 
you now are, to like me so well as to entreat me to be a knave. DELIUs suggests 
that ‘win your displeasure’ is Kent’s stilted phraseology for ‘win you in your dis- 
pleasure.’ WRIGHT compares it to the somewhat similar phrase ‘some discretion,’ 


e at me, upon Ma ena Glan ; 
e, compact, and flattering his Siplesenss 
»p’'d me behind; being down, insulted, rail’d, 


?. 


And put upon him such a deal of man, EL 
p Aba’ worthied him, got praises of the king 

_ For him attempting who was self-subdued ; 

_ And in the fleshment of this dread exploit 


Drew on me here again. 


Kent. None of these rogues and cowards 120 


109. What was] What's Qq. 

110. Z...any] Never any Han. Steev. 
93. 

110-112. L...misconstruction ;| Two 
lines, the first ending master, Qq. 

111. late] lately Rowe,+ 

113. compact| Ff, Rowe, Knt, Coll. 


II5, 116. man, That’] Ed. man, that 
That Q,, Theob. Warb. Johns. Jen. Mal. 
man, that, ThatQ.. man, That Ff et cet. 
man That't Anon.* 

118. fleshment] flechuent Qq. 

dread | dead Ff, Rowe. 
Ilg. again] Om. Steev. ’93. 


Del. Sing. Dyce i, Wh. Ktly, Sch. con- 
tunc?, Qq et cet. 


120, 121. JVone...fool | One line, Qq. 


II, iv, 145. SCHMIDT considers ‘ your displeasure’ as the opposite to the usual style 
of address, ‘ your grace.’ 

II3. compact] CoLLIFR: Whether ‘compact’ or ‘ conjunct,’ it means in concert 
with. ScumipT: Perhaps the word fac, a troop, a band, was not without its in- 
fluence in the use of this word; ‘ compact’ might suggest compacked, 

114, down, insulted] For the omission of the noun before a participle—z, ¢. ¢ I 
being down,’ see AxsportT, § 378, and for the omission of the nominative—z. e, he 
insulted,’ see § 400. [In this latter instance, we might perhaps explain the absence 
of the nominative he by its absorption in the first syllable of ‘insulted.’—Ep. ] 

115, 116. such... That] For similar instances, see ABBOTT, § 279, or Macd. 
DY, ui, 222, 

116. That’ worthied] This is an instance of that absorption of 7¢ in the final ¢ 
of ‘That,’ first pointed out by ALLEN in this edition of Rom. and Ful, p. 429, and 
virtually suggested in this line by ANON., whose conjecture is recorded in the Cam- 
bridge edition. To the instances there given, add: ‘at’ height,’ Ham. I, iv, 21; 
‘with’ blood,’ 7. I, v, 65; see also ‘ Prescribe not’ us,’ Zear, I, i, 275. For a long 
list of transitive verbs formed from nouns and adjectives, such as ‘ worthied,’ see 
ABBOTT, § 290.—ED. 

117. him attempting] DELtus: That is, ‘ For attempting him who,’ &c. 

118. fleshment] HENLEY: A young soldier is said to flesk his sword the first 
tine he draws blood with it. ‘Fleshment,’ therefore, is here metaphorically applied 
to the first act of service, which Kent, in his new capacity, had performed for his 
master; and, at the same time, in a sarcastic sense, as though he had esteemed it an 
heroic exploit to trip a man behind that was actually falling. 


But Ajax is their fool._ 
Corn. 


‘Fetch forth the stocks!— 


You stubborn, ancient knave, you reverend braggart, * 


We'll teach you— 
Kent. 
Call not your stocks for me. 


Sir, I am too old to learn; 
T serve the king, 


On whose employment I was sent to you. 125 
You shall do small respects, show too bold malice 
Against the grace and person of my master, 


Stocking his messenger. 


Corn. Fetch forth the stocks! 


- 


121. Ajax] A’lax Qq. 
their | there F,. 
a foil Warb. Han. 
ch...stocks !| Fetch... Stocks ? 
Ff (Stockes ? F,). Bring... ftockes ho? 
Qq. Jen. Fetch...stocks, ho! Steev. Ec. 
Var. Sing. Sta. Ktly. 
122. stubborn, ancient] stubborn-an- 
cient, Walker (Crit. i, 27). 
ancient| mifcreant Qq. 
reverend | rev’rend Pope. rever- 
ent Q.Ff, Rowe, Knt. wnreuerent Q., 
Cap. 
123. you—] Theob. you. QqFf, Del. 
Sch. 


Aiax F. 


Sir] Om. Qq. 


As I have life and honour, 


123-125. Sir, [ am...you] Two lines, 
the first ending me, Qq. 

125. employment | PIE. Ff 
Rowe +, Jen. zmployments Q,. implot- 
ments Q,. 

126. shall] should Qq. 

respects| Ff, Ln Knt, Sch. 
refpect Qq et cet. 

128, Stocking] apdaiee Qq. 

129, 130. Fetch.....20on.| As in Qq, 
Dyce, Glo.+. Two lines, the first end- 
ing frocks ; in Ff et cet. 

129. stocks !] ftockes? Q.. cate 
QF, Stocks; FLF,F,. 

As I have] 4s Pve Sing. 
and honour| Om. Han. 


121, Ajax] HEATH: Such a plain, blunt, brave fellow as Ajax was, is the per- 
son these rascals always choose to make their butt, and put their tricks upon. Ca- 


PELL: Ajax is a fool to them, wde/icet in bragging. 
pretation, although ScuMmIpT queries if Heath be not right. 


pronounced long, 


[I much prefer Capell’s inter- 
The @ in * Ajax,’ was 


Sir John Harington in the Prologue to his Metamorphosis of 


Ajax says, that ‘it agrees fully in pronunciation’ with ‘age akes’—7. e, aches, and 
Ben Jonson (vol. viii, p. 248, ed. Gifford) makes it rhyme with ‘ sakes.’—Ep.] 

123. Sir] For instances of what ABBOTT calls ‘a kind of * burr,” which produced 
the effect of an additional syllable,’ see § 478, and also II, i, 92. 

126, shall] For instances of ‘shall’ for w//, see ABBOTT, § 315, Macd. III, iv, 


Beatin lait, 120s L,"iv, 95: 


Also Lear I, i, 34. 


126. respects] If the text of the Qq was written down during a stage perform- 
ance, the ear probably confounded the final s in ‘ respects,’ with the following s in 


‘show,’ although ¢o do resect is quite as Shakespearian as fo do respects. 


The best 


reason for adopting the Qq text here, would be the omission of an sin a line which 


is quite full of them,—Ep. 


128. Stocking] Compare ‘ worthied,’ line 116, 


hy, aaa: if I were Eaoer Bie s den 
d not use me so. 


ae Sir, being his knave, I will. 
Ey, : This i is a fellow of the self-same colour a 
“ — Our sister speaks of—Come, bring away the stocks! 1; 7 
i [ Stocks brought out. 


Glou. Let me beseech your grace not to do so; 
x His fault is much, and the good king his master 
 * Will check him for’t. Your purposed low correCction 
*Ts such as basest and contemned’st wretches 
* For pilferings and most common trespasses 
* Are punish’d with; * the king must take it ill, 
~ That he, so slightly valued in his messenger, 


140 


131. moon !] noone? Ff. noone, Qq. 
132, 133. Why,...so.] Prose, Qq. 
; 133. should | could Qq, Pope +, Jen. 
—— 134. self-same colour] fame nature 
aS Q.. felfe fame nature Q,, Pope +, Jen. 
y Be == 135. speaks of | /peake of Q,. /peakes 
fee of Q.. 

Come| Om. Pope, Han. 

[Stocks brought out.] As in 

Dyce, Wh. Glo.+. After line 132 in 

, Ff etcet. Om. Qq. 
* 137-141, His...with ;| Om. Ff, Rowe. 


138. purposed | purpoft Q.. 

139. contemned’st] Cap. cemnef? Qq. 
the meanest Pope +. 

139-141. Js...with] Two lines, the 
first ending g2lfrings. Qq. 

141. the king must] The King his 
Mafier, needs muft Ff, Rowe. 

142, 143. he, 50....Should] he fo... 
Should ¥ ¥,. hee’s fo... fhould Qq. he’s 
So... Should as Cap. Steev. Var. Sta. 
Glo. he’s so...To Rowe, Pope, Han. 


131. COowDEN CLARKE: Very artfully is this speech thrown in. Not only does 
it serve to paint the vindictive disposition of Regan, it also serves to regulate dra- 
matic time by making the subsequent scene where Lear arrives before Gloucester’s 
castle and finds his faithful messenger in the stocks, appear sufficiently advanced in 
the morning to allow of that same scene closing with the actual approach of ‘ night,’ 
without disturbing the sense of probability. Sh. makes a whole day pass before our 
eyes during a single scene and dialogue, yet all seems consistent and natural in the 
course of progression. 

135. bring-away] SCHMIDT: 
away’ as equivalent to ‘ bring here’ and ‘ come here? 
‘Come away, come away, death.’ 

135. Stocks brought out] Dyce: In the Folio this stage-direction is placed 
Ze two lines earlier, and it no doubt stood so in the prompter’s book, that the stocks 
Bs. might be in readiness. FARMER: Formerly in great houses, as still in some col- 
leges, there were moveable stocks for the correction of servants. 

137. much] For instances of this as (oth ical see SCHMIDT (Lex. 1.) 


Sh. frequently uses ‘bring away’ and ‘come 
As in the well-known song, 


Should have him thus restrain ‘d. 


Tll answer that, 
Reg. My sister may receive it much more worse, 


To have her gentleman abused, assaulted, 145 
* For following her affairs.—Put in his legs.* 


Corn. Come, my lord, away. 


[Exeunt all but Gloucester 
ie and Kent. 


Glou. Tam vo for thee, friend; ’tis the duke’s pleasure, 
Whose disposition, all the world well knows, 


Will not be rubb’d nor stopp’d. Tl entreat for thee. ~ 150 


Kent. Pray, do not, sir. I have watch’d and travell’d 


hard; 


Some time I shall sleep out, the rest I'll whistle. 
A good man’s fortune may grow out at heels; 


Give you good morrow! 


144. much more| yet much Han, 
145. gentleman] Gentlemen Q,. 
146. For...degs] Om. Ff, Rowe. 

Put in his legs.| A stage-direc- 


148. SCENE vI. Pope, Han. ScENE 
vit. Warb, Johns. Jen. : 
I am] I’m Pope+, Dyce ii, 
Huds. 


tion. Seymour, 
[ Kent is put in the stocks. Pope. 

After line 142, Rowe. 

147. Corn. Come] Ff, Rowe, Sch. 151. Pray] Pray you Qq. 

Continued to Reg. Qq et cet. L have| [’ve Pope+, Jen. Dyce 
lord good lord Q,, Jen. Steev. _ ii, Huds. 

Ec, Var. Sta. Glo.+, Dyce ii. Jord, let’s traveil’d| travel’d FF, tra- 

Cap. conj. MS.* uaild Qq. trauail’d FF,. ? 
[Exeunt...] Dyce. Exit. Q.Ff. 152. Some time] Sometime Qu Jen. 

Om. Q.. out] ont Q,. 


duke's| Duke F,. ~ 
150. rubi'd] rubd Qq. rub’d F,. 
ruled Anon.* 


143. Should] Axzorr, § 399, following the text of F,F, in the preceding line, 
supposes that there is here an ellipsis of the nominative: ‘( 7aé he or you) should,’ 

144. more worse] See line 97. 

150, rubb’d] WarsurtTon: A metaphor from bowling. [See AZacé. III, i, 133, 
and note. | 

153. at heels] Eccies: Perhaps he intends to say that to a good man may arise 
prosperity and advantage from circumstances seemingly ignominious; or ‘at heels’ 
may relate to the disgraceful punishment which he is undergoing. Hupson: I am 
not certain as to the meaning of this. A man set in the stocks was said to be « pun- 
ished by the heels ;’ and Kent probably alludes to this. But what I am in doubt 
about is, whether he means that a good man may build his fortune on such an event, 
or that the fortune even of a good man may have holes in the heel of its shoes; as 
we say ‘out at the toes,’ or ‘out at the elbows.’ [Is it not likely that Kent ‘jocosely 
means that what is usually but a metaphor is with him a reality ?—Ep, ] 

154. Give you] Scumipt: A greeting used only by common people. 


et oo 
- [Aside] The duke’s to blame in this; ‘twill be ill 
_ taken. F [Bae 1s 
_ Good king, that must approve the common saw, 
u out of heaven’s benedi&tion comest s 

e warm sun! 


~ 


5. [Aside.] Sta. Om. QqFf, et be ill taken. Cap. conj. MS. (with- 


drawn).* 
The...taken.| Two lines, Ff. 155. taken] tooke Qq. 
to blame] too blame QF F.,. [Exit.] Om. Q,. 
= *twill...taken.] [to Edm.] *twil/ 157. Zhou] That Johns. 


156. common saw, &c.] HANMER: An old proverbial saying applied to those 

who are turned out of house and home, deprived of all the comforts of life excepting F 

the common benefits of the air and sun. JOHNSON: It was perhaps used of men 
dismissed from an hospital, or house of charity, such as was erected formerly in many 
i _ places for travellers. Those houses had names properly enough alluded to by heaven’s 

o benediction. CAPELL: This saw occurs in one capital passage of Holinshed, and is ' 
there applied to such persons as, going about to make matters better, make them worse, 
* and that is Kent’s application of it:—Lear, says that speaker, who thinks to mend 
his condition by leaving his eldest daughter and coming to Regan, will find himself 
in that person’s error who foregoes the benediction of heaven for the common and 
weak blessing of the warm sun; such opinion had he now entertained of Regan’s 
superiority in badness. [This ‘ capital passage’ from Holinshed Capell gives in his 
Notes, vol. iii, p. 40: ‘This Augustine after his arrivall converted the Saxons indeede 
from Paganisme, but as the Proverb sayth, bringing them out of Goddes blessing into 
the warme sunne, he also imbued them wyth no lesse hurtfull supersticion then they 


s did knowe before.’] TyRWHITT: This ‘saw’ is in Heywood’s Dialogues on Prov- 
: erbs, Book ii, chap. v: ‘In your rennying from hym to me, ye runne Out of gods 
ee blessing into the warme sunne.’ [This quotation from,Heywood is given by Capell 
3 4 also (Votes, vol. iii, p. 493), whose text I have followed.Ep.] MALonrE: See 
also Howell’s Collection of English Proverbs, in his Dictionary, 1660: ‘ He goes out 
- % of God’s blessing to the warm sun, viz. from good to worse.’ WRIGHT: Compare 
‘ also Lyly’s Zuphues and his England (ed. Arber, p. 320): ‘Thou forsakest Gods 


blessing to sit in a warm Sunne.’ The proverb is reversed in the Letters of Huphues 
(ibid. p. 196): ‘ Therefore if thou wilt follow my aduice, and prosecute thine owne 
determination, thou shalt come out of a warme Sunne into Gods blessing.’ Both 
WALKER (Cri¢. iii, 277) and Dyce (G/oss.) note the use of the proverb as late as 
Swift. [See Ham. I, ii, 67, where some notes in reference to this ‘saw’ will be 
4 found. I think Hunrer’s zeal carries him too far when he proposes the same 
origin to this proverb and to Beatrice’s ‘sunburnt’ in Auch Ado, II, i, 331. His 
theory is that ‘the first and original use of this phrase [‘sunburnt’] denoted the state 
of being unmarried; thus Beatrice uses it. It then expanded so as to include the 
state of those who were without family connections of any kind; thus Hamlet uses 
it. It expanded still wider and included the state of those who have no home, and 
thus it is used in Zear.’ But this is mere theory, ingenious, but unsupported by 
proof; no attempt is made to explain, by examples, the change of application from 
unchurched women to homeless men. Moreover, Lear is not yet homeless.--ED. ] 


2% 


2132. 


tld .. 


eA ef Ne 
KING LEAR 


Approach, thou beacon to this under globe, 

That by thy comfortable beams I may 

Peruse this letter! Nothing almost sees miracles 
But misery. I know ’tis from Cordelia, 


4; 

159-166. Approach.....remedies.] In 162. misery. I know] miferie. I ; 
the margin, Han. know Ff, Rowe+, Ktly, Sch. miserie, = 

159. under globe] under gloabe Q,. I know Qq. misery, I know.— Jen. —. 
onder-globe Q,, Theob. Warb. Johns. misery :—I know or misery;—I know = > 

[Looking up to the moon. Cap. ct cet ; : 

Pope+, Jen. [Reading the letter. Johns. 

161. miracles] my wracke Qq. Opening the letter. Jen. 


161, 162. Nothing... misery] CAPELL: Kent breaks out into a reflection, 
rising from his condition,—that~people born to ill-fortune, like himself, and living 
under her frown, are the only persons almost who can be said to see mzracles, so 
wonderful are the situations, sometimes, which she is pleased to reduce them to. 
Hupson: I am very much in the dark as to what the text means. Of course the 
literal sense is, ‘hardly anything but misery sees miracles ;’ but the question is, what 
are the particulars referred to, or what are the miraculous things to be seen in this 
case? and wy is misery said to see them? I suspect that ‘see’ is used in the sense 
of experience; a sense it often bears. In that case the meaning may be, ‘ miracles 
are hardly ever wrought but in behalf of the wretched.’ And upon this thought 
Kent seems to be building a hope of better times, both for himself and the old king; 
while, on the other hand, nothing short of a miraculous providence seems able to 
turn their course of misfortune. DrELIus: That Cordelia should have thought of 
him, or that her letter should have reached him, seems to him such a miracle as only 
those in misery experience. 

162-166. Cordelia... remedies] JoHNsoN: The passage is very obscure, if not 
corrupt. Perhaps it may be read thus: 

« —— Cordelia —— has been — informed 
Of my obscured course, and shall find time —— 
From this enormous state-seeking, to give 
Losses their remedies.’ 
Cordelia is informed of our affairs, and when the enormous care of seeking her for 
zune will allow her time, she will employ it in remedying losses. JENNENS was the 
first to suggest that Kent reads fragments of Cordelia’s letter. His text reads thus: 


‘——’Tis from Cordelia, [Opening the letter. 
Who has most fortunately been inform’d 
Of my obscure course and shall find time [Reading parts of the letter. 
From this enormous state —— seeking to give 
Losses their remedies, All weary and o’er-watched,’ &c, 


CAPELL: Kent expatiates upon his letter; tells you e knows it is from Cordelia by 
some circumstances of it's delivery ; and it’s coming from her is to him a plain proof 
that she has (as he words it) deen fortunately informed of his obscured course: And 
here a shorter pause follows; and after it, a sentence not perfected, of which ‘who’ 
is the substantive, and Zo raise us (viz. the king and himself ) words wanting to 
it’s completion: words that may be collected, and put in after ‘time,’ though drop’d 
by one in search of conciseness, and bury’d in ruminating. STEEVENs thus adopts 


Pa 


me 
Le ee 


Ee 
9 


__, 


» 


roe? 3” Ye 
~~ i 


164. course ; and] course. And Ff, 


_ Wh. Sch, cour/e, and Qq, Johns. Jen. - 
course. I Rowe+. 
164-166. and...time From...state,seek- 


ing....remedies.| QqFf (remedies, Qq), 
Johns. Cap. Glo.+, Dyce ii, Mob. JZ... 
time For....State, and seek....remedies, 
Rowe. J..étme From...state, and seek... 


remedies. Pope, Theob. Warb. avd... 


time From...state—seeking...remedies.— 
Jen. (in italics with the stage-direction 
[Reading parts of the letter). Steev. 78, 


ii] «RING LEAR - ee 


ha ‘h most fortunately been inform’ "163 
obscured course; and shall find time 


instead of italics), Huds. (subs. follow- 
ing Wh.). and....cime From....state— 
seeking...remedies: Mal. Steev. ’93, Ec. 
Bos. Knt, Coll. Del. Dyce i (remedies. 
Coll. vemedies— Del. Dyce i). and... 


time From....state,—seehing,—....0eme- 


dies. Sing. and she'll find time From... 
sState-seehing,....remedies. Sta. and.... 
cime,—From...state,—seeking...remedies. 
Ktly.. And...time—From...state—seek- 
ing...remedies . Sch. 

164, 165. shall....From] sheUl....For 


85 (but without the stage-direction), Daniel. 
White (subs. but with quotation-marks. 


_ and amplifies Jennens’s suggestion (without, however, any acknowledgement of in- 
-debtedness): I confess I do not understand this passage, unless it may be consid- 


ered as divided parts of Cordelia’s letter, which he is reading to himself by moon- 
light: it certainly conveys the sense of what she would have said. In reading a 
letter, it is natural enough to dwell on those circumstances in it that promise the 
change in our affairs which we most wish for; and Kent, having read Cordelia’s 
assurances that she will find a time to free the injured from the enormous misrule of 
Regan, is willing to go to sleep with that pleasing reflection uppermost in his mind. 
But this is mere conjecture. MALONE does not think that any part of Cordelia’s 
letter is, or can be, read by Kent. ‘ He wishes,’ so Malone continues, ‘ for the rising 
of the sun that he may read it.’ I suspect that two half lines have been lost between 
the words ‘state’ and ‘seeking.’ This ‘enormous state’ means, I think, the confu- 
sion subsisting in the state in consequence of the discord which had arisen between 
the Dukes of Albany and Cornwall; of which Kent hopes Cordelia will avail her- 
self. Mason thus paraphrases it: ‘I know that the letter is from Cordelia, (who 
hath been informed of my obscured course.) and shall gain time, by this strange 
disguise and situation, which I shall employ in seeking to remedy our present losses.’ 
TIECK (vol. ix, p. 366) thinks that the poet wishes here only to call Cordelia to 
mind, and give us a hint that wholly new events are about to happen. When 
Kent says only misery sees miracles, he means that he, disguised as a common man, 
has already witnessed the wickedness of Goneril, the unhappy condition of the king, 
he himself, a nobleman, has been stocked like a low, common rogue, and yet it is 
possible for him to exchange letters with Cordelia. At the word ‘remedies,’ sleep 
overpowers him, and the sentence is not completed. COLLIER: We are to recollect 
that Kent, having a letter from Cordelia in his hand, is endeavoring to make out its 
contents by the imperfect light; he is unable to see distinctly, and hence, perhaps, 
part of the obscurity of the passage. He can only make out some words, and those 
not decisively, but sufficiently to enable the audience to judge of the general tenor 
of what he is trying to read. SINGER says that Kent finds he cannot follow his train 
of thought for weariness, and so breaks off and settles himself to sleep. WHITE 
follows Jennens in thinking that Kent here drowsily reads disjointed fragments of 
Coxdelia’s letter. White also follows the Ff in putting a period after course, line 164. 


12 


any ne 


From this enormous state, seeking to give 

Losses their remedies. All weary and o’er-watch’d, 

Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold 

This shameful lodging. 

Fortune, good migbts smile once more; turn thy wheel! — 
; [Sleeps 


165. enormous| enormious Qq. Ff, Rowe, Coll. i, Wh. : 
166. o’er-watch'd| o're-watch'd Ff. 169. smile...turn] Johns. Smileonce = 
ouerwatch Q.. ouer-watcht Q. ver- more, turn Ff, Rowe+, Cap. Smile, : oe 
watch’d! Walker. once more turne Qq. Smile; oncemore =~ 
168. This....lodging] Separate line, ¢urn Coll. ii. 
Pope. [Sleeps.] fleepes.Q.. He fleepes. 


168, 169. Zhis...wzight] One line, Qq Ore mie aie 


DELIUs suggests that ‘to deliver'us,’ or some similar phrase, is to be supplied after 
‘state’ STAUNTON thinks that no part of the letter is read, but amends the text thus: 


© Of my obscured course, and she’ll find time 
From this enormous state-seeking, to give,’ &c. 


‘The slight change of ske’// for “shall” appears to remove much of the difficulty ; 
that occasioned by the corrupt words ‘ enormous state-seeking ” will some day prob- 
ably find an equally facile remedy.’ CowWDEN CLARKE thinks that.the speech is 
made purposely confused to indicate the situation of Kent, that ‘who,’ having been 
once expressed before ‘hath,’ is understood before ‘shall,’ and that this portion of 
the speech is a series of disjointed sentences imperfectly uttered by the speaker, the 
breaks in them indicating that he is dropping off to sleep. Dycr: Of this obscure 
and, it may be, corrupted passage, no satisfactory explanation or emendation has yet 
been given. 

164. time] Banee (ii, 90) proposes to read ‘shall find de/m For this enormous 
state,’ and offers instances to show ‘ Shakespeare's familiarity’ with the word balm 
at the time he was writing this tragedy. It is but just to add, that Bailey does not 
consider this emendation as ‘ more than fairly probable.’ 

165. enormous] JOHNSON: Unwonted, out of rule, out of the ordinary course 
of things. BULLOCH (p. 242) suggests endormoused. 

169. smile] CoLLiER (ed. 2): Kent does not mean to ask Fortune to smile once 
more; but to smile, and when smiling, to turn her wheel once more. 

169. DOWDEN (p. 271): Kent possesses no vision, like that which gladdens Ed- 
gar, of a divine providence, His loyalty to right has something in it of a desperate 
instinct, which persists in spite of the appearances presented by the world. Sh. 
would have us know that there is not any devotion to truth, to justice, to charity 
more intense and real than that of the man who is faithful to them, out of the sheer 
spirit of loyalty, unstimulated and unsupported by any faith which can be called 
theological. Kent, who has seen the vicissitude of things, knows of no higher 
power presiding over the events of the world than fortune. Therefore, all the 
more, Kent clings to the passionate instinct of right- -doing, and to the hardy temper, 
the fortitude which makes evil, when it happens to come, endurable. The ‘ mira- 
cle’ that Kent sees in his distress is the approaching succour from France, and the 
loyalty of Cordelia’s spirit. ...It is Kent who, characteristically making the best of an 


peers 7 3 
The same. . 


"Enter: Epear, 


ard 4 ye proclaim’d ; 
happy hollow of a tree 
(the hunt. No port is free; no place, 
_ Tha at guard and most unusual hice’ 


ia not attend my taking. Whiles I may ’scape 


bs 


will preserve myself; and am bethought - 
ag take the basest and most poorest shape 


— 


Been ut.] Steev. ScENEViI. Pope, tance. Cap. 


Han. ScENE vill. Johns. ScENE Iv. 1. f heard] I heare Qa. I have 
_ Ec. The scene continued, QqFf, Rowe, heard F,,Rowe. I’ve heard Pope+, Ec. 


Warb, Cap. 4. unusual] unufall QF F,. 
’ The same.] Sch. A part of a 5. Does] Do's Ff. Doft Qq. 
_ Heath. Theob. A part of the neigh- taking.| taking Qq. 
bouring country. Ec. The open country. Whiles| While Qq, Cap. Steev. Ec. 
Dyce. A wood. Sta. Var. Coll. Del. Sing. Dyce, Wh. Ktly. | 
Enter Edgar.] Enter Edgar, at a Dis- 7. most| the Pope+. 


unlucky chance, exclaims, as he settles himself to sleep in the stocks: ‘ Fortune, 
good-night; smile once more, turn thy wheel.’ 
' 156-169. Of this soliloquy BircH (p. 414) whose volume, written to prove that 


_ Sh. was an atheist, is a rare tissue of perverted ingenuity, says that, though it is 


rather unintelligible when taken in an ordinary sense, it is comprehensible enough 
taken as a medium for Sh. to express his impiety. Instead of those religious senti- 


_ ments so commonly recurred to, at the coming of night, and in the midst of mis- 


fortune, Kent shows a neglect of Providence. [Birch forgets that Kent couldn't 
say, ‘ Now I lay me’ when he was in the stocks. See Prov. xxvi, 5.—Ep.] 

Scene III.] Scumipr follows this division of scenes, which dates merely from 
Pope, under protest; it is only on account of the confusion that would ensue in 
references to scenes and lines were his edition different from all other modern edi- 
tions. In the Ff, Scenes ii, iii, and iv of this act form but one: Scene ii; and this 
indicates the ancient usage. Only with the departure of all the characters did the 
scenes change. Therefore, continues Schmidt, since Kent remains asleep on the 
stage, the monologue which now follows was preceded merely by ‘ Enter Edgar,’ 
and there can be no doubt that Edgar, contemplating flight, entered in the twilight 
on the same scene where Kent was lying in the stocks—namely, before Gloucester’s 


castle. 


4. That] WricHT: Loosely used for ‘ Where,’ the preposition ‘in’ being omitted 
at the end of the sentence. Compare 1 Hex. VI; III, ii, 25: * No way to that, for 
weakness, which she enter’d’; that is, by which she entered. SCHMIDT says that it 


stands for dwt that, or simply dzed. 
6. am bethought] ScumrpT: Only here, in Sh.; elsewhere, ave bethought, 


7. most poorest] See II, ii, 97. 


. 


KING LEAR 


That ever penury in contempt of man 

Brought near to beast; my face I'll grime with filth, 
Blanket my loins, elf all my hair in knots, 
And with presented nakedness out-face 
The winds and persecutions of the sky. 
The country gives me proof and precedent 
Of Bedlam beggars, who with roaring voices 


8. ever] every Rowe, Han. Bos. 12. winds] windes FF, wind Q,. 


10. elf] elfeF,. edfeQqF,. put ¥F,. winde Q.. 
hair| haire Qq. haires FF). persecutions | perfecution Qq. 
hairs F 13. precedent] Johns. prefident QqFf, 


in| with Qq, Cap. 


8. in contempt] Moser.y: ‘ Wishing to degrade a man.’ So Milton’s ‘ in spite 
of sorrow’ means ‘ in order to spite sorrow.’ 

10, elf] Matted or tangled hair was supposed to be the work of fairies in the 
night. See Rom. & Ful. 1, iv, 90. 

14, Bedlam beggars] Many passages from old authors are cited by modern 
editors to show what these ‘ Bedlam beggars’ were, and many more might be cited; 
and yet, after all, none of them contain so good a description of Bedlantites as 
that given in these few lines of Edgar’s speech. That ‘poor Tom’ was their uni- 
versal name is shown in the first paragraph of Awdeley’s Fraternitye of Vaca- 
bondes, 1565: ‘An Abraham man is he that walketh bare armed, and bare legged, 
and fayneth hym selfe mad, and caryeth a packe of wool, or a stycke with baken 
on it, or such lyke toy, and nameth himselfe poore Tom.’—ed. Early Eng. Text 
Soc. p. 3. The great authority in regard to ‘ Vagabones’ is Harman’s ‘Caueat or 
Warening for Commen Coursetors, ed. ii, 1567, also reprinted by the E. E. Text Soc. 
Dekker in his Belman of London ‘conveyed’ largely from Harman; one passage, 
cited by STEEVENS, so strongly corroborates Shakespeare’s description that it may 
perhaps be worth the while to reprint it here (three editions of this Be/wan appeared 
in 1608, the year in which Zear was first printed): ‘Of all the mad rascalls (that 
are of this wing) the Abraham-man is the most phantastick: The fellow (quoth the 
old Lady of the Lake vnto me) that sat halfe naked (at table to-day) from the 
girdle vpward, is the best Abraham-man that euer came to my house, the notablest 
villaine: he sweares he hath bin in Bedlam, and will talke frantickly of purpose: 
you see pinnes stuck in sundry plaees of his native flesh, especially in his armes, 
which paine hee gladly puts himselfe to (beeing indeede no torment at all, his skin 
is either so.dead with some fowle disease, or so hardned with weather) onely to 
make you beleeue he is out of his wits: he calls himselfe by the name of Poore 
Tom, and comming neere any body, cryes out, Poore Tom is a cold, Of these Abra- 
ham-men some be exceeding mery, and doe nothing but sing songs, fashioned out 
of their owne braines; some will dance, other will do nothing but laugh or weepe ; 
others are dogged and so sullen both in looke and speech, that spying but small 
company in a house, they boldly and bluntly enter, compelling the seruants through 
feare to giue them what they demaund, which is commonly bacon, or something that 


will yeelde ready mony. The Vpright-man and the Rogue are not terribler ene- 
mies to poultry ware than Poore Jom is. 


a? 


' i ie 
anid and mortified bare arms ee 
en pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary ; 

with this horrible objeét, from low farms, 


Poor pelting villages, sheep-cotes and mills, 


3 a ES »metimes with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers, 
as = Enforce their charity. Poor Turlygod! poor Tom! 20 
fs That's something yet; Edgar I nothing am. [ Exit. 


@ wl ) eae ee 


15. Stick] Walker. Strike QqFf et 19. Sometimes] Ff+,Jen. Sch. Some- 
>. Jeet. time Qq et cet. 
bare] Om. Ff, Rowe, Sch. sometime| fometimes PFU ts 
16. wooden] wodden Q.F.F,. Jen. : 
17. farms] feruice Qq. 20. their reer Warb. conj. ; 
18. sheep-cotes| /heep-coates Qq. Sheeps- Turlygod| Turlygood Theob, 
* Coates ¥,. Sheepes-Coates F,. Sheep’s- Warb. Johns. Cap. Steev. Ec. Var. Coll. 
Coats F,. Sheeps-Coats F . Del. Sta. Dyce ii, Huds. YerZurd Han. ‘ 


15. Stick] Dyce, who, with all other editors, reads Strike im, says that it is 


ie fequivalent to Strike into; but WALKER (C77z. ii, 36) proposes, with great proba- 
ie bility, “Stick in.’ The probability is so great that I have adopted it.—Ep. 
ee 15. mortified] Deadened, hardened. See the quotation above from Dekker’s 
* _ Belman. 
‘ 16. pricks] Mason: The Zuonxymous, of which the best skewers are made, is 


A called prick-wood. 

18. pelting] Nares: A very common epithet, with our old writers, to signify 
paltry or contemptible. 
. 19. bans] WricHT: In Med. Latin daznum was used to denote, first, an edict or 
proclamation, hence, a summons, or an interdict. The original sense in English 
only remains in the publication of the ‘ banns of marriage,’ and the word has most 
commonly the secondary meaning of the curse pronounced against the violation of 


¥ 


ay ee ae” Pe 
\ 
\ 


an interdict, 

20. Turlygod] WarpurTon: We should read 7ur/upin. In the fourteenth cen- 
tury there was a new species of gipsies, called Turlupins, a fraternity of naked beg- 
gars, which ran up and down Europe. However, the Church of Rome hath dignified 
‘ them with the name of Hereticks, and actually burned some of them at Paris, [In 
2 - - regard to their religion Lirrré says: ils soutenaient qu’on ne doit avoir honte de 
rien de ce qui est naturel.] Plainly, says Warburton, nothing but a band of Tom- 
o’-bedlams. Douce: There is a better reason for rejecting Warburton’s 7urlupin 
and Hanmer’s 7ur/urz than for preferring either, viz: that ‘ Turlygood’ is the cor- 
rupted word in our language. The Turlupins were first known by the names Beg- 
hards, or Beghins, and brothers and sisters of the free spirit. The common people 
alone called them Zurlupins, a name which seems obviously to be connected with 
the wolvish howlinys which these people, in all probability, would make is their re- 
ligious ravings. ‘Their subsequent name of the fraternity of poor men might have 
been the cause why the wandering rogues, called Bedlam beggars, assumed or ob- 
tained the title of 7urlupins or Turlygoods, especially if their mode of asking alms 
was accompanied by the gesticulations of madmen, Turlupino and Turluru are old 

jie 


+ \ 


Re Te 


Sceve IV. Zhe same. 


Enter Lear, Foot, and Gentleman. 


Lear. ’Tis strange that they should so depart from home, 1 ar 
And not send back my messenger. 


Gent. 


As I learn’d, 


The night before there was no Bebor in them 


Of this remove. 


Kent. Hail to thee, noble master! 


Lear. Ha? 


SCENE Iv.] Steev. ScENE VIII. Pope, 
Han. ScENE 1x. Warb. Johns. Jen. 
ScENE v. Ec. The Scene continued in 
QqFf, Rowe, Cap. 

' The same.] Sch. Changes again 


ut 


2. messenger Meffengers FF. 

2-4. As...remove.| Two lines, the first 
ending was, Qq. 

3. in them] Om. Qq. 

4. this] his Qq. 


to the Earl of Glo’ster’s Castle. Pope. 
Before Gloucester’s castle. Mal. Dyce 
adds Kent in the stocks. 

Enter...] Enter King, and a a Knight. 
Q,. Enter King Q,. 

1. home| hence Qq. 


Kent.] Kent. [Waking.] Sta. 
5. Ha?] Ha, F,, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
How, Qq, Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. 
5,6. Ha ?...pastime ?] Steev.*93. One 
line, QqFf, Sta. > 


Italian terms for a fool or madman; and the Flemings had a proverb, ‘4s unfortunate 


as Turlupin and his children. NARES: Seemingly a name for a sort of beggar de- 
scribed in the preceding lines. I cannot persuade myself that this word, however 
similar in meaning, has any real connection with ¢wr/pin, notwithstanding the au- 
thority of Warburton and Douce. It seems to be an original English term, being 
too remote in form from the other to be a corruption from it. COLLIER (ed. 1): 
Perhaps ‘ Turlygood’ is a corruption of Zhoroughlygood. We know nothing of any 
Turlupins (at least by that name) in England. 

20, 21. Tom! ... am.] WALKER (C7iz. iii, 277): So Rick. [+ V, i, 92, 93, 
‘short’—‘heart.? What extent of license did Sh. allow himself in his rhymes? 
[This question has been answered by ELLis (Zarly Eng. Pronunciation, iii, 953) 
in a list of Shakespeare’s rhymes and assonances. In this list there are eleven in- 
stances (of which four are in this play) of short ¢ rhyming with short o, viz: the present 
instance, and foppish, apish, I, iv, 161, 163; corn, harm, III, vi, 41, 43; departure, 
shorter, I, v, 48, 49; dally, folly, R. of Z, 554; man, on, AZid, NV. D. I, i, 263, also 
IIT, ii, 348; crab, bob, 26. II, i, 48; pap, hop, Zé. V, i, 303; cough, laugh, 7d. II, i, 
543; heart, short, part, Zove’s Lad. V, ii, 55-] 

21. am] Ritson: In assuming this character, I may preserve myself; as Edgar 
I am inevitably gone. 

The same.] See Scumipt’s note, II, iii, and CAPELL’s note on DYE 

3. night before] CowpENn CLARKE calls attention to the effect of advancing day 
which is given by this allusion, thereby allowing ‘the progress of dramatic time to 
take place with sufficient rapidity for the spectators to be beguiled into easy cre- 
dence, when, at the close of the present long scene, Gloucester says, “The night 
comes on,’’ and Cornwall soon after observes, “Tis a wild night.”’’ 


a. 
= 


4 


To set thee here? 


pear pastime? .. er 2) aa 
. No, my lord. 6c: 
ol, ‘a, ha! he wears cruel garters. — ; 
S0 eads, dogs and bears by th’ neck, monkeys by th’ 
and men by th’ legs; when a man’s over-lusty at’ 

| then he wears wooden nether-stocks, 10 
¥ _ Lear. What’s he that hath so much thy place mistook 


Horses are tied 


Kent. It is both he a she: 


Your son and daughter. 
Lear. No. 
Kent. Yes. 
Lear. No, I say. 


6. this] Om. Pope, Han. shy Theob. 
_Warb. Johns. 
thy] ahy F,. 
Kent. Wo, my lord.] Om. Qq. 
7-10. Ha,...nether-stocks.] Five lines, 
ending garters,....b€A7e5....MCM s+. LES yrs 
JStockes. Qq. 
7. Ha, ha!)| Hah, ha, F,. 
he| F£+, Knt, Dyce, Sta. Glo.+, 


Sch. Jook, he Qq et cet. 


cruel| Cruell F,F,. 

crewel FF, Rowe, Cap. 
tied | tide tide F 

8. heads| heeles Qq. head Bos. Coll. 


crewell Qq. 


15 


Del. Dyce, Wh. 
8,9. dy t’] F,F,+, Jen. Wh. Sch. 
by? h Q,. by th EF. F.. by the Q, et cet. 


9. man’s] Q., Jen. Dyce; “Gloi-a 


mans Q,. man ¥,. man is FFF, et 
cet 
at’| Ed. at QqFf et cet. 
10. wooden] wodden FF, 
nether-stocks| neatherftockes Q,. 
neather-ftockes Q,. nether socks Heath. 
11,12, What's...here ?| Rowe. Prose, 
Qq. Three lines, ending e,...mi/took 
-. Aeerer Ff, 
12, 13. f...daughter.| One line, Qq., 


7. cruel] The similarity in sound between this word and crewed is, as COLLIER 
says, a fruitful theme for jokes in the old dramatists. Would it not be better to print 
crewel in the text? NHALLIWELL: This. word was obvious to the punster, and is un- 


mercifully used by the older dramatists. 


A pun similar to that in the text is in one 


of L’Estrange’s anecdotes :—A greate zelote for the Cause would not allow the Par- 
liament’s army to be Jeazen in a certaine fight, but confest he did beleeve they might 
be worsted. To which linsy-wolsey expression, a merry cavaleere reply’d, ‘ Take 
heede of that, for worsted is a crwel/ peece of stuffe.’ 

8. by the heads] Both in the Ff and in Q, the ‘the’ before ‘heads’ and heeles 
is not contracted, while it is contracted in every other instance in this speech. Can 
any inference be drawn from this that the # was not aspirated ?—Ep. 

g. at’ legs] An absorption of the definite article; see II, ii, 116. 

10. nether-stocks] SrrEvENs: The old word for stockings. Breeches were called 
overstockes, according to Baret’s A/vearie [s. v. Breeches; also called upper stockes, 
as in the following quotation]. Heywood, among his Zfigrams [p. 204, ed. Spen- 
ser Soc.—WRIGHT], has these lines: ‘ Thy vpper stocks be they stufte with sylke or 
flocks, Neuer become the lyke a nether payre of stocks.’ 


II, 12. SO... To] See I, iv, 36. 


ey yl ee 


vi. +. > 


Kent. Psayy you oe ee 


a < 
aaa erick 
i ae) 


etic tr 

*Iear, No, no, they would not, 

* Kent, Yes, they have* 

Lear. By Jupiter, I swear, no! ; 

Kent. By Juno, I swear, ay! _ ele a fe 

Lar : They durst not do’t; — 
They could not, would not do’t; ’tis worse than murder, 
To do upon respect such violent outrage ; 1 
Resolve me with all modest haste which way 
Thou mightst deserve, or they impose, this usage, 25 
Coming from us. coi 

Kent. My lord, when at their home 
I did commend your highness’ letters to them, 
Ere I was risen from the place that show’d 
My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post, =p 
Stew’d in his haste, half breathless, panting forth 30 
From Goneril his mistress salutations ; 
Deliver’d letters, spite of intermission, 


ee 


17. J say, yea.| But I say, yea. 25. impose] purpofe Qq. 

Han. Cap. 28. show'd]| shew'd Pope. /hewed 
18, 19. Lear. WVo...have.] Om. Ff +, QqFf, Rowe. skowed Coll. iii, Sch. 
Cap. 29. came there] came Pope +. there 

21. Kent. By...ay. Lear.] Om. Qq. came Jen. (a misprint ?) 

21, 22. do’t...do’t] do it...do it Q,. 30. panting] painting F,. 
' 22. could...would | would...could Qq, a 31. salutations] falutation FFF, +, 
en. ap. 

25. mightst] may fiQ,. maif Q.. 32. Deliver'd] Deliuered Qq. 


23. upon respect] SINGER was the first to give the true explanation of this 
phrase: ‘ deliberately or upon consideration.” EDWARDS, HEATH, and JOHNSON all % 
interpreted it as referring it to the ‘respect’ or reverence due to the king’s mes- 
senger. MALONE supposed that ‘respect’ was personified. SINGER referred to 
Ham. lil, i, 68. Wricut agrees with Singer, and cites a convincing passage from 
King Fohn, IV, ii, 214: ‘To know the meaning Of dangerous majesty, when per- 
chance it frowns More upon humour than advised respect.’ ‘ That is, rather capri- 
ciously than deliberately. Bacon frequently uses “ upon” in similar phrases. See 
Glossary to the Essays, ed. Wright.’ 

24. modest] Scumipt (Zex.): Filling up the measure, neither going beyond, 
nor falling short of what is required, satisfactory, becoming. As much haste as may 
consist with telling the full truth. See also IV, vii, 5. ; 

25, 26. Thou... Coming] Anzort, § 377: That is, ‘since thou comest.’ The 
participle is sometimes so separated from the verb that it seems to be used absolutely. 
25. usage] According to ScHMipr, only used by Sh. in the sense of zveatment. 

32. intermission] CAPELL: Message intermediate. Though he saw me then 


y they read; on whose contents 
ion’d up ial ny straight took horse; 


Whose ae I perceived, had paseard mine— 
Being the very fellow which of late. 


Display’d so saucily against your highness— 40 
Having more man than wit about me, drew; 
He raised the house with loud and coward cries, 
Your son and daughter found this trespass worth 
The shame which here it suffers. 
Fool. Winter's not gone yet, if the wild geese fly that way. 45 
Fathers that wear rags 


33. whose] thofe Ff, Rowe, Pope, 41. drew] I drew Rowe +, Cap. Ec. 
Han. Knt. 44. The shame| This /hame Qaq. 
34. meiny| meiney FF. men Qq, Jen. 45-53. Om. Qq. 
37. And] Z, Jen. 45. Winter’s| Winters FF,. 
39. which] that Qq, Cap. Mal. Steey. wild | wild F,. 
Bos. Sing. Ktly, Glo.+. 46-51. Three lines, Ff, Rowe, Knt. 


in the action of presenting a prior letter. STrEEVENS: Without pause, without suffer- 


ing time to intervene; so in A/acé. IV, iii, 232. COWDEN CLARKE: ‘In defiance of 
pause required,’ for him to take breath or for me to rise from my knee and receive my 
answer. We think this interpretation is borne out by the only three other passages 
in which Sh. uses this word. Mer. of Ven. III, ii, 201, As You Like U2, Il, vii, 32, 
and Mach. ScumMIpT: Though my business was thus interrupted and the answer 
delayed which I was to receive. [In colloquial phrase, ‘in spite of first come, first 
served,”’ ’—Ep.] 

33- presently] Immediately. See Sh. satin: 

34. meiny] PopE: People. Mason: The word menia/, which is derived from 
it, is still in use. KnicHT: In the old translation of the Bible we find: ‘And 
Abraham saddled his ass, and took two of his meyny with him, and Isaac his son.’ 
In our present translation, we have young’ men in place of ‘meyny.’ WRIGHT: 
Cotgrave gives: ‘Mesnie: f. A meynie, familie, household, household companie, or 
seruants.’ Moperty: Nares quotes the French proverb, ‘de tel seigneur telle 
mesnie.’ It is supposed to occur in the late Latin forms ‘mainada,’ ‘mainata’ 
(familize piratarum que mainate dicuntur), and this may be true if, as Diez sup- 
poses, it is connected with the low Latin ‘ mansionata.’ It should however be re- 
marked that Se means ‘within’ in old Cornish; whence ‘mayn,’ a friend, 
plural ‘mayny.’ [For its use in Chaucer and Spenser see Corson’s note on line 
1057 in his ed. of The Legende of Goode Women. 

41. drew] ABzort, § 399: Where there can be no doubt what the nominative is, 
it is sometimes omitted. But (§ 401) a nominative in the second person plural, or 
first person (as here, ‘(T) drew’), is less commonly omitted. See also II, ii, 114. 


KING LEAR 


Do make their children blind. 
But fathers that bear bags 
Shall see their children kind. 

Fortune, that arrant whore, 50° 
Ne’er turns the key to th’ poor.— 
But, for all this, thou shalt have as many dolours for thy 
daughters as thou canst tell in a year. ~ 

Lear. O, how this mother swells up toward my heart ! 
Hysterica passio, down, thou climbing sorrow, a 
Thy element’s below !—Where is this daughter ? 

Kent. With the earl, sir, here within. 


52, 53. this,...daughters| this, it fol- 54. up toward | up to Jen. 
lows......daughters dear Coll. ii (MS), 55. Aysterica] Hiftorica Qq, F,F,. 
reading 52, 53 as four lines of rhyme. Hyftorica F,. 

52. dolours| Dolors F¥,F,. 57, 58. With...not ;] One line, Steev. 


52. for thy] for thy deare ¥,. for 93, Bos. Knt, Coll. Del. Sing. Dyce, 
thy dear FF ,, Rowe, Pope. from thy Wh. Ktly, Glo. 
dear Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. Jen. Ec. 57. here] Om. Qa. 
Srom thy Sing. Ktly. 


‘ 


52. dolours] STEEVENS: The same quibble on ‘dolours’ and dod/ars occurs in 
Temp. Il, i, 18, and Meas. for Meas. I, ii, 50. 

52. for] For other instances of ‘for’ equivalent to ‘on account of,’ see AZacé. 
III, i, 120, or ABBoTt, § 150. 

53. tell] Wricur: Count or recount, according to the sense in rites dolours’ 
is understood. 

54. mother] Percy: Lear here affects to pass off the swelling of his heart, ready 
to burst with grief and indignation, for the disease called the Mother, or Hysterica 
Passio, which, in our author’s time, was not thought peculiar to women only. In 
Harsnet’s Declaration of Popish Impostures, Richard Mainy, Gent, one of the pre- 
tended demoniacs, deposes, p. 263, that the first night that he came to Denham, the 
seat of Mr, Peckham, where these impostures were managed, he was somewhat evill 
at ease, and he grew worse and worse with an old disease that he had, and which 
the priests persuaded him was from the possession of the Devil, viz. ‘The disease 
I spake of was a spice of the AZother, wherewith I had bene troubled . . . before my 
going into Fraunce: whether I doe rightly term it the A/o¢her or no, I hace NAGE « 
When I was sicke of this disease in Fraunce, a Scottish doctor of physick then in 
Paris, called it, as I remember, Vertiginem Capitis. It riseth ... of a winde in the 
bottome of the belly, and proceeding with a great swelling, causeth a very painful 
collicke in the stomack, and an extraordinary giddines in the head.’ It is at least 
very probable, that Sh. would not have thought of making Lear affect to have the 
Liysterick Passion, or Mother, if this passage in Harsnet’s pamphlet had not suggested 
it to him, when he was selecting the other particulars from it, in order to furnish out his 
character of Tom of Bedlam, to whom this demoniacal gibberish is admirably adapted, 
Ritson: In p. 25 of the above pamphlet it is said, ‘Ma: Maynie had a spice of the 
Hysterica passto, as seems, from his youth, he himselfe termes it the A/oother,’ 


ent. None.— 


Kent. Why, Fool? 


e not; stay here, [Exit. 58 
. Tiade ; you no more offence but what you speak of? 


How chance the king comes with so small a number ? 
Fool... And thou hadst been set i’ th’ stocks for that 
question, thou’dst well deserved it. ; 


- Fool. We'll set thee to Se ci to an ant, to teach thee 65 
there’s no labouring i’ th’ winter. All that follow their 


58. here.] there? Q,. there. Q. 
_ [Exit.] Om. Qq: 
59. Made...of ?] Twolines, Ff, Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 
but] then Qq. 
60, 61. Wone...number ?| None: How 


-sanumber 2 FE +, Knt, Sing. Dyce i, 


Ktly, Sch. Wo, how...traine ? Qq et cet. 


t 

62. And] Q,Ff, Rowe, Sch. Jf Q. 
An Pope et cet. 

62, 66, 83. 2 th} ELE Lote, Be Wh. 
Sch, 7th’ F.. in the ia. 2’ the Cap. 
eb cet: 

63. thou’dst| Ff+, Jen. Sing. Wh. 
Ktly, Sch. thou had/t Qq et cet. 

deserved | deserve Pope. 


a 2 61. chance the| chanceth the Anon. 


; 61. chance] The conclusion that ABBOTT, § 37, draws from many instances is 
*- that, perhaps, Sh. used ‘chance’ as an adverb, but unconsaiously retained the order 


of words, which shows that, strictly speaking, it is to be considered as a verb. 

« 65. We'll set, &c.] MALONE: ‘Go to the ant, thou sluggard,’ says Solomon, 
- ‘consider her ways, and be wise; which having no guide, overseer, or ruler, pro- 
a 


a videth her meat in the summer, and gathereth her food in the harvest.’ [ Proverbs, vi, . 
6-8.] If, says the Fool, you had been schooled by the ant, you would have known 
that the king’s train, like that sagacious animal, prefer the summer of prosperity to 
the colder season of adversity, from which no profit can be derived. ScHMIDT: 

- Elsewhere Sh. uses ‘to set to school’ in the sense of Zo deach. 

66. All that follow, &c.] JoHNsoN: There is in this sentence no clear series 
of thought. If he that follows his nose is led or guided by his eyes, he wants no 
information from his nose. I persuade myself, but know not whether I can persuade 
others, that Sh. wrote; ‘All men are led by their eyes but blind men, and they follow 
their noses, and there’s not a nose among twenty but can smell him that’s stinking.’ 
Here is a succession of reasoning. You ask why the king has no more train? Why, 
because men who are led by their eyes see that he is ruined, and if there were any 
blind among them, who, for want of eyes, followed their noses, they might by their 
noses discover that it was no longer fit to follow the king. STEEVENS: ‘Twenty’ 
refers to the ‘noses’ of the ‘ blind men,’ and not tothe men in general. The passage, 
thus considered, bears clearly the very sense which the above note endeavors to 
establish by alteration. For ‘stinking,’ Mason maintained that we should read 
sinking, because ‘it would be nothing extraordinary that a nose should smell out a 
person that was “‘stinking.”” What the Fool wants to describe is the sagacity of 
mankind in finding out the man whose fortunes are declining.’ MALong, however, 
vindicated the present text by showing that the same simile is applied to fallen for- 
tunes in Al/’s Well, V, ii, 5: Mankind, says the Fool, may be divided into those 


we ge ee a et 


noses are led by their eyes but blind men; ant aes not 67 


a nose among twenty but can smell him that’s stinking. Let 
go thy hold when a great wheel runs down a hill, lest it 
break thy neck with following it. But the great one that 70 
goes upward, let him draw thee after. When a wise man 
gives thee better counsel, give me mine again; I would have 
none but knaves follow it, since a Fool gives it. 
That sir which serves and seeks for gain, 
And follows but for form, 75 
Will pack when it begins to rain, 
And leave thee in the storm. 
But I will tarry; the Fool will stay, 
And let the wise man fly ; 
The knave turns fool that runs away ; 80 
The Fool no knave, perdy. 


68. twenty] a 100Q,. ahundred Q,. 74. and seeks| Om. Qq, Pope+, Cap. 
70. following it. | following. Ff, Rowe, 74-81. That....perdy.] Italics | imo) 
Pope, Han. Knt, Sch. Roman in Q,Ff. 
71. upward] Ff+, Cap. Knt, Wh. 76. begins] begin Q. ~. 
Sch. w# she hill Qq et cet. begins to rain] *gins rain Cap. 
him] i¢ Han. 77. the storm] a form F,, Rowe, 
72. thee| Om. Jen. Pope, Han. 
have] hau/fe F,. 78. But] And F,F,, Rowe, Pope, 
74. That sir] That, Sir, F,, Rowe, Han. 
Johns. Jen. Steev. Ec. ay Knt, Sing. 79. wise man] wifeman FFF, Sch. 
Wh, TZhat Si7, FLEE 3? Theob. Sin 81. [Enter Lear, and Gloster. Ff. 


Coll. Del. Ktly. “(Glower. F,,.) 
which | that Qq. 


who can see and those who are blind. All men, but blind men, though they follow 
their noses, are led by their eyes; and this class of mankind, seezzg the king ruined, 
have all deserted him. With respect to the other class, the blind, who have nothing 
but their noses to guide them, they also fly equally from a king whose fortunes are 
declining ; for, of the noses of twenty blind men, there is not one but can smell him 
who, ‘being muddied in fortune’s mood, smells somewhat strong of her strong dis- 
pleasure.’ HALLIWELL: The word ‘twenty’ does not, I think, refer solely to the 
noses of the blind men. The Fool says Kent deserves to be put in the stocks for his 
silly question, for not looking which way the wind blows, for being too simple. He 
says that all men who follow their noses are led by their eyes, blind men excepted. 
Kent, according to his notion, has not used his eyes, and therefore he deserved the 
stocks. Not a nose of any kind but smells him that’s stinking; and he infers that 
Kent had neither used his eyes to see, nor his nose to smell; in ad, had not made 
use of his senses, 


74. sir] For many other instances of the use of ‘sir’ as a substantive, see 
ScHMIDT (Lex.). 


80,81. The... perdy] JoHnson: The sense will be mended if we read: ‘ The 


4 


here ores you 1 this, Fool ? 
“Not? th’ stocks, fool! 


_ Re-enter LEAR, with GLOUCESTER. 


- 


hae Deny to speak with me? They are sick? they 


are weary? 
83. fool] Om. Qq. 84. They are....they are| th are... 
Re-enter...] Cap. Enter Lear and ¢h’ are Qq. they’ re...they’'re Popet, 
Glofter. Qq. -— Jen. Dyce ii, Huds. 
SCENEIX. Pope, Han. ScENE x. Sick ?...weary?] Johns. /ickhe,... 
Warb. Johns. Jen. weary, QqFf+, Cap. 


84. Deny...weary ?] Two lines, Ff. 


_ fool turns knave, that runs away The knave no fool . That I stay with the 


King is a proof that I am a fool, the wise men are deserting him. There is knavery 
in this desertion, but there is no folly. CoLLterR (ed. ii) adopted this change by 
Johnson (which is also found in his Folio MS), and upholds it thus: ‘In the old 
editions the very contrary of what Sh, intended is expressed. The reasoning in the 
earlier part of the rhyme is that, when it begins to rain, wise men fly to shelter, but 
fools stay; and it ought to be followed up by the statement that, if the fool runs 
away, he turns knave, and that the knave, being no fool, will not be so silly as ta 
remain in the wet.’ But Collier, in his Third edition, returns to the old read. 
ing. Both HEATH and CAPELL adopted Johnson’s change in the first of these 
two lines; and in the second, Heath suggested ‘The /ool’s no knave, perdy.’ 
Wuite: No transposition is necessary, if, as I believe, ‘knave’ in line 80 is used in 
the sense of servant, in line 81 of rogue, while ‘ fool,’ in line 80, has the reproachful 
sense it has in the Bible, and in line 81 is but the official title. Hupson: The Fool 
seems here to be using the trick of suggesting a thing by saying the opposite. 
CLARKE: Sh., in his own noble philosophy, here affirms that the cunning rogue who 
deserts his benefactor in the time of reverse, from motives of prudence, shows him- 
self fool as well as knave, moral miscalculator as well as moral coward, MOBERLY: 
The touching faith of the Fool to his master is one of the most beautiful points of the 
play. The history of court-fools does not offer anything quite like it. It, however, 
took six strong men to drag away Patch, Cardinal Wolsey’s Fool, from his disgraced 
master, who wished to send him asa propitiatory offering to Henry VIII. Wricur: 
The text requires no alteration, The Fool points out who the real fools in the world 
are, Coleridge said a knave is a fool with a circumbendibus, [I think the meaning 
is made clearer by showing the difference, by means of capital letters, as WHITE 
does, between the generic fool and the specific Fool.—Ep. | 

81. perdy] The corruption of par Dieu. See Ham. III, ii, 282. 

83. Not i’ th’ stocks, fool] SCHMIDT thinks that this ¢ fool’ is not a mere retort, 
but is really meant, according to the song, as a title of respect, which Kent has 
earned by his fidelity to the king. 

84. Deny] Scumipt (Zex.): To refuse. Compare Rom. & Ful. 1, v, 16: ‘which 
of you all Will now deny to dance?’ 

13 K 


KING LEAR 


They have travell’d all the night? Mere fetches, 
The images of revolt and flying off. 
Fetch me a better answer. 
Glou. a My dear lord, 
You know the fiery quality of the duke; x 
Iiow unremoveable and fix’d he is ; 
In his own course. <a 9U 
Lear. Vengeance! plague! death! confusion! 
‘Fiery?’ what ‘ quality?’ Why, Gloucester, Gloucester, 
I'ld speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife. 
Glou. Well, my good lord, I have inform’d them so. 
Lear. ‘Inform’d’ them? Dost thou understand me, man? 95 
Glou. Ay, my good ford. 
Lear. The king would speak with Cornwall. The dear 
. father 
Would with his daughter speak, ee her service. 


_ 85. have travell’d| haue trauail’d FF. death, ree Og. = 
FF, have travel’d ¥,. traueled Q,. 92. ‘ Fiery?’ what ‘ quality ?’| what 


traueld Q,. fiery quality; Qq. Jen. Ec. Feery ? 
all the| hard to Qq, Steev. Ec. what fiery quality? Pope+. 
Var. Coll. Sing. Gloucester, Gloucester] Glofter, 
85, 86. fetches, The| Ff+, Jen. Coll. Glofter QqFf. Glo'ster Pope+. 
Wh. Sch. Juftice, L the Qq. fetches ; 94,95. Om. Qq. 
ay, The Cap. conj. (Notes, i, Var. 97. the dear father | Separate line, Ff. 


Read, p. 29.) fetches all—The Steev.  . 98. commands her service] Qq. com 
conj. fetches these; The Ktly. fetches ; mands, tends, fervice Ff, Knt. com- 
The Cap. et cet. mands tends service Rowe i. commands, 
87. Fetch| Fet F,F,. Bring Popet+. tends service Rowe li. commands,’ tends 
87-93. Aly dear...wife.| Prose, Qq. service Sch. 
gl. plague! death !| Plague, Death, 


85. fetches] WricHT: Devices, cunning contrivances, pretexts. See Ham. II, 
i, 38. Compare 2 Samael, xiv, 20, where the verb ‘ fetch about’ occurs in the sense 
of bringing about by artifice: ‘To fetch about this form of speech hath thy servant 
Joab done this thing.’ 

86. images] WALKER (Vers. 255), on the score of metre, suggests that this is 
the singular, and would print it zwage’. For similar instances, see ‘horses,’ AZacd. 
II, iv, 14; ‘sense is,’ 76. V, i, 22; ‘message,” Ham~I, ii, 22; Apporr, § 471. 

88. quality] WricuT: Nature, character. See below, line 133. MOoBERLY: 
For a man so passionate as Lear to be asked to humour the vehement temper of one 
whom he still considers his inferior, is the most stinging request that can possibly 
be made. 

98. SCHMIDT thus justifies his reading, which is virtually that of the Ff: The 
majority of the Qq read ‘commands her service,’ and this convenient reading has 
been adopted, without more ado, by the modern editors. But they failed to note 


Are they ‘inform’d’ of this? My breath and blood! 
‘Fiery?’ ‘the fiery duke?’ Tell the hot duke that— 100 


No, but not yet; may be he is not well; 


‘Infirmity doth still neglect all office 


Whereto our health is bound; we are not ourselves 

When nature being oppress’d commands the mind 

To suffer with the body. I'll forbear; 105 
And am fall’n out with my more headier will, 

To take the indisposed and sickly fit 


99. Om. Qq- 
100. ‘ Fiery ?’...that—] Fierie duke, 
tell the hot duke that Lear, Qq. 
that—] that—[Glocester offers 
to go. Johns. 
102-105. lufirmity...forbear;| Three 


lines, the first two ending health...op- 


breft Qa. 


Dyce ii, Huds, ; 

104. commands] Comand Q,. 

106. fall’n] fallen Qq, F,F,. Cap. 
(changed to fad? in Errata), Jen. Steev. 
Ec, Var. Knt, Coll. Del. Sing. Wh. Ktly, 
Sch. 

headier| hedier Q,. heady Pope, 
Han. 


107-110. Zo,,.ker] Three lines, the 
first two ending maz,...here ? Qq. 


103. Whereto| where to Qq. 
we are| were Pope +, Jen. 
Ad 


that one Quarto, and probably the oldest [see Q, (Bodl. 1) in Appendix, p. 374], 
reads come and tends service, of course, nonsense, but yet containing nearly the same 
letters as the Folio; also that Lear demands service not only from Regan, but also 
from Cornwall, and that the circumstances, at least, would require: command's them 
service, which would come nearer to the ductus literarum of the true reading. As 
concerns this latter, it must be granted that ted, which is elsewhere so often 
identical with a¢femd, is used by Sh. nowhere in the sense of azwaz?t, in which sense 
he frequently uses attend (see II, i, 125). But this is.of no material weight. Just 
as the prefix @ is found before numberless verbs without changing their essential 
meaning (abate, abide, accursed, advantage, adventure, affright, affront, apper- 
tain, &c.), so, on the other hand, in the older language the prefix @ (whatever may 
be its origin) is often omitted at will. In II, i, 30, we have had ‘ quit thyself’ as a 
hapax legomenon for acgwit thyself. So also in IV, i, 49, ‘ parel’ for agparel. Other 
hapax legomena are ‘lege’ for allege, ‘noyance’ for annoyance, ‘paritor’ for 
apparitor, ‘rest’ (only in Com. of Err.) for arrest, ‘say’ for assay, ‘stonish’ for 
astonish, ‘void’ (Cor. IV, v, 88) for avoid. The occurrence of the shortened form 
is not therefore conclusive against the use of zezd in a sense with which a/tend does 
not seem hitherto to have had anything in common, especially since the meanings 
of the two words in other passages coincide in the majority of cases, and also since 
tendance is equivalent in Sh, to attendance. 

ror. well] CoLeripcE: The strong interest now felt by Lear, to try to find ex- 
cuses for his daughter, is most pathetic. 

102. still] Constantly. See Rom. & Ful. V, iii, 106; Macb. V, viii, 14; Ham. 
I, i, 122; IV, vii, 117; Apport, § 69; and Sh. passim. 

106. more headier] See II, ii, 97. ScHmipT: Aeady is not headstrong, but 
headlong, impetuous. * Will’ occurs frequently in Sh., as the blind impulse in oppo- 


sition to wet or reason. 


For the sound man.—Death on my state! wherefore 
Should he sit here? This a¢ét persuades me 


KING LEAR 


That this remotion of the duke and her 110 
Is practice only. Give me my servant forth. 

Go tell the duke and’s wife I’ld speak with them, | 

Now, presently ; bid them come forth and hear me, 

Or at their chamber-door I’ll beat the drum 


Till it cry sleep to death. 


115 


Glou. 1 would have all well betwixt you. [ Exit. 
Lear. Ome, my heart, my rising heart! But down! 
Fool, Cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels 


ro8. [Looking on Kent. Johns. 
on my| Changed to o my by 
Cap. in Errata. 
wherefore | but wherefore Pope+. 
- 108, 109. wherefore....me| One line, 
Jen. 
109. ac?] very act Ktly. | 
persuades| persuadeth Han. al- 
most persuades Steev. conj. 

Ill. practice only. Give] practise 
only. GiueF,. practife, onely giue Qq. 
practife onely, Give ¥,. practice onely, 
Give F,. practice only, give F,. 


112. Go fell] Tell Qq. 
and ’s| and his Cap. Steev. Ec. 
Var. Knt, Del. Ktly. 
Pld) F, Wd ¥¥¥, Me Qa. 
115. sleep to death] In Italics, Johns. 
Cap. Steev. Ec. Var. Coll. (with quo- 
tation-marks), Del. death to sleep Mason. 
116. Z would] J’d Cap.-Steev. Bos. 
Ktly. ~ 
[Exit.] Om. Qq. 
117. O....down!| O my heart, my 
heart. Q,. O my heart! my heart Q.. 
118. cockney] Cokney Q,. 


108. wherefore] WALKER ( Vers. 111) cites this passage among many others of the 
stronger accent falling on the last syllable. Axsort, § 490, would make ‘ Death on 
my state!’ a separate line, and begin the next line with ‘ Wherefore,’ thus retaining 
its usual accent, 

109. persuades] ScumiprT: Perhaps persuadeth, unless it is to be assumed that 
the s of the third person prolongs the word by a syllable. 

110. remotion] MALONE: From their own house to Gloucester’s castle. SCHMIDT 
in his Zex. adopted this interpretation by Malone, but in his edition he revokes it, and 
says that the word here means holding one’s self at a distance, non-appearance; and that 
it bears the same meaning in the only other passage where Sh. uses it: 7émz. IV, iii, 346. 

IrI. practice] See I, ii, 172. 

115. Till...death] SreEvens: That is, till it cries out, ‘Let them awake no 
more;’ ‘Let their present sleep be their last? KnicuT: Tieck suggested the true 
explanation: till the noise of the drum has been the death of sleep,—has destroyed 
sleep,—has forced them to awaken. STAUNTON adopts Tieck’s explanation, but ad- 
mits that Steevens’s is ‘very possibly the poet’s idea.’ As WRIGHT says, it is diffi- 
cult to see how such an interpretation as that of Steevens could be appropriate. 

118, cockney] TyRWHITT (in a note on Chaucer’s Reve’s Tale, 4205: ‘And 
whan this jape is tald another day, I shal be halden a daffe or a cokenay’): That 
this is a term of contempt, borrowed from the kitchen, is very probable: A Cook, 
in the base Latinity, was called Coguinator and Coguinarius, from either of which 
Cokenay might be easily derived. In Piers the Plowman, ‘And yut ich sey, by my 


149 
i’ th’ paste alive; she knapped ’em o’ th’ 119 


=" 119. en en <a he Le Rowe, 119. she] he Rowe, Pope, Han. 


: Pope, Han. = knapped’ em] knapt’em¥Ff. rapt 
o, putem? th’) FFF, Sch. put um Qq. rapt ’em Pope +, Jen. Steey. ab 
ns them ? th F,, Rowe +, Jen. Wh. put Ec. Var. Coll. Sing. Wh. Ktly. wragt a 
> um it*h Q: pe them up i’ thQ,. put em Han. 2a 
them? the Steev. put’em i’ the Dyce. o th’) Ff +, Cap. Jen. Wh. Sch. 7" 


— paste] — Q,. pasty Pope +. ath Qq. 0’ the Steev. et cet. 


saule ich haue no salt bacon : Nouht a cokeney, by cryst, colhoppes to make’ [Pass. : 

IX, 309, C. Text, ed. Skeat]. It seems to signify a Cook. |And so, perhaps, in ; 
«  . Lhe Turnament of Tottenham [Percy’s Reliques, ii, p. 24, ed. 1765]. ‘At that ; é 

feast were they served in rich aray; Every five and five had a cokeney.’ That is, I 

suppose, a cook or sczllion, to attend them. In those rhymes ascribed to Hugh 

Bigot, which Camden has published: ‘Were I in my castle of Bungey upon the 

river of Waveney, I would ne care for the King of Cockeney.’ The author, in 

calling London Cockeney, might possibly allude to that imaginary country of idle- 

ness and luxury which was anciently known by the name of Cokaigne. NARES also 


believes that it is derived from cookery, and that here in ear it means a cook, be- 
: cause she is ‘making a pie.’ In the passages cited by Tyrwhitt, WHALLEY and 
cE. - MALOonE think that it refers to some dish, while Douce maintains that it signifies a 
a" little cock. “HALLIWELL, in his Archaic Dict., says that he can find no certain au- 
- thority for any such interpretation as Tyrwhitt gives it, but in his Folio edition of 
2 Sh. he says that the word ‘ cockney is used in various senses, amongst others in that 
4 of a cook, which may be its meaning here, although I rather incline to the belief that 
wa the reference is to some absurd tale of a London cockney well known in Shake- 
b> - speare’s time.’ In which belief Dycr agrees with him. Way (note on Coknay in 


Prompt. Parv.): The term coknay appears in the Promptorium to imply simply a 
child spoiled by too much indulgence; thus likewise in the Medulla: ‘ Mammo- 
trophus, qui diu sugit. Mammotrophus mammam longo qui tempore servat Kokenay 
dicatur, noster sic sermo notatur.” There can be little doubt that the word is to be 
: traced to the imaginary region ‘ihote Cokaygne,’ described in the curious poem 
“i given by Hickes, Gramm. A Sax., p. 231, and apparently translated from the French. 
Compare ‘ le Habiiaus de Coguaigne.’ Fabl. Barbazan et Méon. iv, 175. Palsgrave 
gives the verb ‘To bring up lyke a cocknaye, mignotter ,’ and Elyot renders ‘ delicias 
facere, to play the cockney.’ ‘ Dodeliner, to bring vp wantonly as a cockney.’—Hol- 
lyband’s Zreasurie. See also Baret’s Alvearte. Chaucer uses the word as a term 
of contempt, and it occasionally signifies a little cook, coguénator, See Brand’s Pop. 
Ant., notes on Shrove Tuesday. COTGRAVE gives Coguine: A beggar-woman; also 
a cockney, simperdecockit, nice thing. WepGwoop: The original meaning of 
‘cockney’ is a child too tenderly or delicately nurtured, one kept in the house and 
not hardened by out-of-doors life; hence applied to citizens, as opposed to the hard- 
jer inhabitants of the country, and in modern times confined to the citizens of 
London. [Does not this definition lack an allusion to the meaning in which Sh. 
here uses it, which is undoubtedly that of acook? Minsheu’s derivation trom the 
neigh of a cock, is too familiar to be more than referred to.—Ep.] BADHAM (Caz. 
Essays, 1856, p. 284): ‘Cockney’ is perfectly out of place here in Zeav, and must 
have supplanted either covk-maid or a similar word. ‘ 
119. knapped] STEEVENS maintained that rapp'd of the Qq was the true reading, 


13% 


ae with a stick, and cried ‘Down, wantons, dewial ! 
’Twas her brother that, in pure kindness to his horse, but- 


tered his hay. 


Re-enter GLOUCESTER, witk CORNWALL, REGAN, and Servants. - 


Lear, Good morrow to you both. 


Corn. Hailto your grace! 

[ Kent ts set at liberty. 
Reg. Iam glad to see your highness. 
Lear. Regan, I think you are; I know what reason _ 125 


I have to think so; if thou shouldst not be glad, 

I would divorce me from thy mother’s tomb, 

Sepulchring an adultress.—Oh, are you free ? 

Some other time for that—Beloved Regan, 

Thy sister’s naught. O Regan, she hath tied 130 
Sharp-tooth’d unkindness, like a vulture, here © 


120. cried ae cryed dewn Q,. 126. shouldst not be] wert not Pope +. 

121. her] his FF ,, Rowe, Pope, Han. 127. mother’s| Mother F.. 

122. hay] Hey ¥F,. 128. [To Kent. Rowe. 

Re-enter....] Cap. Enter Duke O] yea Qq. 

and Regan, Qq. Enter Cornewall, Re- 130. sister's] fifters FF. A ifter is 
gan, Glofter, Seruants. Ff. Qq. 

123. SCENE X. Pope, Han. SCENE 131. here!) Sta. heere. Q., Coll. Del. 
x1, Warb. Johns. Jen. Wh. Ktly. eave, Q.. heere, or here, 


[Kent is set....] Rowe. Kent Ff, Cap. Steev. Ec. Var. Knt, Sing. 
here fet at liberty. Ff. (libery F,). Om. ~ Dyce. ere; or here: Rowe et cet. 
Qq. [Points to his heart. Pope. 

125. you] your F,. 


because the only sense of the verb to ‘knap’ is to snap, or break asunder. WRIGHT 
(who defines ‘knapped’ by cracked, and cites Mer. of Ven. III, i, 10; and the 
Prayer-Book version of Psa/m xlvi, 9: ‘He knappeth the spear in sunder’) replies 
to Steevens by saying: ‘We use crack in both senses [i.e. rap and snap], and 
‘knap” and crack are both imitative words, representing the sound which is made 
either by a blow or by breaking anything in halves.’ : 

128, Sepulchring] Srrrvens: This word is accented in the same manner [on 
the penult] by Milton, Ode on Shakespeare; 15: ‘And so sepulcher’d in such pomp 
dost lie;’ and by Fairfax [as a substantive]: ‘As if his work should his sepulcher 
be.’—c, i, st. 25. ScHMiIpr (Zex.) gives the two following additional instances of 
this verb with this same accent: Lucr. 805; Two Gent. IV, ii, 118; and Rich. J7: 
I, iii, 196, of the substantive also thus accented, 

130. tied] HraTH quotes with approval the change of ‘ tied’ to ¢ir’d suggested by 
SyMpson, in a note on Beau. and Fl. Love's Pilgrimage [III, ii]: an _eagle or hawk 
is said to ¢ive on its prey when it pulled at and tore it to pieces. (¢ ‘Tt seems most) 
probable that ‘ sharp-tooth’d unkindness”’ is the vulture which Goneril} has tin ed on 


ences a Eline) mo 

Ty pray you, sir, take patience. I have hope 
he wou tess know how to value her desert 
My Than she to scant her duty. 


Say, how is that? 


132. thow'lt] thoutQ.. thowt Q,. 134. you] Om. Qq. 
133. With how depraved] Of how de- 136. scant] flacke Qq. scan Han. 
priued Qq. Of how deprav’d Johns. Jen. : 
Cap. Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. Sing. Dyce ii, I 36-141. Lear. Say,...d/ame.] Om. 
Ktly, Huds, — Qq. 
quality—] Rowe. igwese Qq. 136. Say, how ts| How zs Pope, Han. 
quality. Ff. Cap. Ha! how's Cap. conj. 


the heart of Lear.’ RopERIcK (Canons of Crit. p. 270, ed. vii) also adopted ¢red, 
and would read: ‘She hath tired (sharp-tooth’d unkindness !) like a vulture—here.’ 
135, 136. You . . . duty] This passage, as WRIGHT truly remarks, ‘is one of 


"many passages in Sh. of which the sense is clear, but which it is almost impossible 


to paraphrase.’ JOHNSON, on the ground that ‘scant’ is directly contrary to the 
sense intended, advocated Hanmer’s change to scaz in the sense of measure or pro- 


portion. STEEVENS says, ‘ Surely no alteration is necessary,’ and then gives what he 


says is ‘the zztended meaning of the passage’: ‘‘ You less know how to value her 
desert, than she (knows) to scant her duty,” z. e, than she can be capable of being 
wanting in her duty.” CAPELL: Had [line 135] been conceiv’d in these words, ¢ You 


' more know how to /essez her desert,’ then had those expressions been proper that suc- 


ceed in the next line; as it is, ‘scant’ cannot have been the word in that place; and 
scan... bids fair to be the Poet’s intended term in it’s room, spoil’d by printers. 
MALONE: The inaccuracy of the expression will clearly appear from inverting the 
sentence without changing a word: ‘I have hope, says Regan, that she knows more 
(or detter) how to scant her duty than you know how to value her desert;’ 2. e. I have 
hope that she is more perfect in the non-performance of her duty than you are perfect, 
or accurate, in the estimation of her merit. If Lear is /ess knowing in the valuation 
of Goneril’s desert than she is in scanting her duty, then she knows detter how to scant 
or be deficient in her duty, than he knows how to appreciate her desert. If Sh. had 
written ‘I have hope that you rather know how to make her desert less than it is, (to 
underrate it in your estimation) than that she knows how to scant her duty,’ all would 
have been clear, but by placing ‘less’ before ‘know’ this meaning is destroyed. In 
Wint. Tale, 111, ii, 55, we meet with a similar inaccuracy: ‘—I ne’er heard yet That 
any of these bolder vices wanted Less impudence to gainsay what they did Than to 
Reo! it first,’ where, as Johnson justly observed, ‘ wanted should be had or /ess should 
be more” Again in Macd. III, vi,8. Scumipt (Lex, p. 1420, 9) gives many similar 
instances of what he calls the ‘duplication of negative words,’ as here ‘less know’ 

and ‘scant’; ¢. g. Mer. of Ven. IV, i, 162: ‘ Let his lack of years be no impediment 
to let him lack a reverend estimation,’ equivalent to either: no motive to let him 
lack, or, no impediment to let him have. Again, Tro. and Cres. 1,1, 28; Cor. I, iv, 
14, &c. ‘All such irregularities,’ * adds SCHMIDT, ‘ may be easily accounted for, The 
idea of negation was so strong in the poet’s mind, that he expressed it in more than 


152 


Reg. 1 cannot think my sister in the least 
Would fail her obligation. If, sir, perchance 
_ She have restrain’d the riots of your followers, 
’Tis on such ground and to such wholesome end 140 
As clears her from all blame. oe 
Lear. My curses on her! 
Reg. Oh, sir, you are old; 
Nature in you stands on the very verge % 
Of her confine. You should be ruled and led 
a By some discretion that discerns your state 145 
Better than you yourself. Therefore I pray you 
- That to our sister you do make return; 
a Say you have wrong’d her, sir. = 
Lear. : Ask her forgiveness ? 
Do you but mark how this becomes the house: 


138. siv,] Om. Pope+. Q.. her. Ff, Rowe, Knt, Ktly, Sen. 
143-147. Wature,......return,; | Four 148. Ask her| Ask of her Ktly. 

lines, the first three ending con/ine,... 149. dut] Om. Qq. 

difcretion,...your felfe, Qq. becomes the house :\ becometh us + 
143. 7” you] on you Qq. Han. decometh—thus. Johns. conj. 
144. her] his F,. the house: the houfe,Q,. thé 
146. yor] Om. Qq. houfe ?Q,Ff. the Use? Theob. menow-: 


148. her, sir.] her Sir? Q.. her fir. Jen. 
one place, unmindful of his canon that ‘your four negatives make your two affirma- 
tives.’ Had he taken the pains to revise and prepare his plays for the press, he 
would perhaps have corrected all these passages. But he did not write them to be 
read and dwelt on by the eye, but to be heard by a sympathetic audience. [Is the 
levity ill-timed that suggests that perhaps Regan’s speech puzzles poor old Lear him- 
self, quite as much as his commentators, and he has to ask her to explain: ‘Say, 
how is that ??)—Ep.] 
136. Say... that?] CoLrRipcE: Nothing is so heart-cutting as a cold, unex- 
pected defence or palliation of a cruelty passionately complained of, or so expressive 
of thorough hard-heartedness, And feel the excessive horror of Regan’s ‘Oh, Sir, 
you are old !’—and then her drawing from that universal object of reverence and in- 
dulgence the very reason for her frightful conclusion— Say you have wrone’d her,’ 
All Lear's faults increase our pity for him, We refuse to know them otherwise than 
as means of his sufferings and aggravations of his daughters’ ingratitude, 
144. confine] Add this instance to those noted in Aw. I, i, 155. 
145. discretion] The abstract for the concrete, like ‘ you houseless poverty,’ III, 
tv, 26, or ‘speculations,’ III, i, 24. See I, iv, 146, 
149. house] THEOBALD suggested and adopted wse, 2. e. the established rule and 
custom of nature. WARBURTON interpreted it as meaning the order of famili 
duties of relation; and SrEEVENs cites ae Chapman’s ee ae 


ihe var of Alexandria, 
1598: ‘Come up to supper; it will become the house wonderfull well.’ But CAPELL 


imnecessary. On my knees I beg 
you'll vouchsafe me raiment, bed and food.’ 


~ ee Good sir, no more; these are unsightly tricks, ; = 

_ Return you to my sister. . 

_ Lear. Never, Regan. : es 

‘a 

- She hath abated me of half my train; 155 7 

Look’d black upon me; strook me oa her tongue, : 

Most serpent-like, upon the very heart. . 

All the stored vengeances of heaven fall : 

150. [The King kneeling. Han. 156. stvook| Cap. Knt, Sch. /trooke 
Kneeling. Johns., after line 151. Q.FF. firoke Q,. struck Rowe et cet. 
154. [Rising. Coll. (MS). 158-160. A//...lameness.| Two lines, 
Lever] No Qa. the first ending ¢op / Qq. 


156. black] backe Q,. blank Theob. 


takes it in a more restricted sense: ‘fathers are not the heads only of a house ora 
family, but it’s representatives; they are zhe howse, what affects them affects the rest 
of it’s body; Regan, therefore, is call’d upon to observe an action in which she is 
concern’d, and then say her opinion of it; and she does accordingly shew herself 


-—-sihurt ‘by it, and declares it “unsightly,” unbecoming her and her father, 7. ¢. the 
e house.’ Whereupon Dyce (G/oss.) remarks: I suspect that Lear is now thinking 
much more of himself as head of the house than of Regan as a member of it, and 
a that, though she chides him for such ‘ unsightly tricks,’ she is not of a nature to be 


Ss ‘hurt? by them. COLLIER: The (MS) tells us to read mouth, 7. e. the mouth of 
E ; Lear. We feel reluctant to adopt the emendation, inasmuch as, according to War- 
; burton, the sense is pretty clear; but still it is extremely probable that the copyist, or 

the compositor, misheard the word, and that Lear intends to call attention to the 


i manner in which such terms of abject submission to a child misbeseem a father’s 
4 mouth. SCHMIDT: Compare Coriolanus’s horror when his mother kneels to him, 
a Wl, 50s 

‘ : 150. Knicur doubts the propriety of the stage-direction which is usually inserted 
: < here. ‘ Lear is not addressing these words to Regan, but is repeating what he would 
d say to Goneril if he should ask her forgiveness, COLLIER: Both ‘ Kneeling’ here 


and ‘ Rising’ below are inserted in the (MS), so that there can be no dispute as to 

what was the practice of the ancient stage in this respect. These are what Regan 
means by ‘unsightly tricks.’ Davies (Dram. Misc. ii, 190): Garrick threw him- 
f self on both knees, with his hands clasped, and in a supplicating tone repeated this 
touching, though ironical, petition. 

I5I1. unnecessary] JoHNsoN: Old age has few wants. STEEVENS: It seems 
unnecessary to children that the lives of their parents should be prolonged. The 
phrase may mean, old people are useless. So in Massinger’s O/d Law [II, i]: 
«Your laws extend not to desert But to unnecessary years.’ TyRw#iTr: In want 
of necessaries, unable to procure them. WricHT: Lear is merely apologizing ironi- 
cally for his useless existence. [For the scansion of this line, see WALKER (Vers. 
275) and AgsgorT, § 458, where it is held that the last two syllables of this word are 
extra syllables, and that the line has but five accents. ] 


154 


On her ingrateful top! Strike her young bones, — 
You taking airs, with lameness! va 
Corn. Fie, sir, fie! 160 
Lear. You nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames 
Into her scornful eyes! Infect her beauty, zB 
You fen-suck’d fogs, drawn by the powerful sun, 


To fall and blast her pride! = 
t. a 
159. top] head Pope, Han. ~ Cam. ’ 
160. You taking] Infecting Pope. 164. Zo fall] Do, fall Johns. con). 
Lie, sir, fie| Fie, fie fir Q,. Hie | O, fall Cap. 
fesirQ, Fye: fye, fye Steev.’93, Bos. and blast her pride.| Qq. and 
161. Lear.] Om Q,. _ blifter. Ff, Rowe, Knt. and blast her. 
163,164. sun, To] Sunne To 1 oa oe Walker. 


159. young bones] JourDAIN (Trans. Philological Soc. 1860-1, p. 141): That 
is, infants just born, which fairies then had power over, but not afterwards. By 
‘young bones’ the following quotations will, I think, prove the meaning: ‘—poore 
soule, she breeds yong bones, And that is it makes her so tutchy sure. Gon. What, 
breeds young bones already !’ —/ist. of King Leir [See Appendix, p. 397]... ‘ These 
dead men’s bones lie heere of purpose to Inuite vs to supply the number of The 
lining. Come; we’l get young bones.’—Tzhe Atheist’s Tragedy, Act IV, by Cyril 
Tourneur, 1612. For ‘you taking a@zrs’ read ‘ you taking /azr’es,’ that is, fairies. 
I am not sure whether the elision would be the two letters ze; if only z the omission 
is simply the # JoHN ADDIS, jun. (Vv. & Qu. 1867, 3d Ser. vol. xi, 251) suggests, 
what is undoubtedly correct, that ‘ young bones’ means, not ‘infants just born,’ but 
infants ‘unborn,’ and cites Ford’s Broken Heart, I1,i: ‘ What think you, If your 
fresh lady breed young bones, my lord? Would not a chopping boy do you good 
at heart?’ [The phrase also occurs with the same meaning in Brome’s Yovial Crew, 
III, i, vol. x, p. 326, Dodsley’s Old Plays, 1826.—ED.] 

160. taking] Malignant, bewitching. See III, iv, 58, and Ham. I, i, 163. 

164. To fall] MALONE says that this verb is here used actively, meaning to humble 
or pull down, ‘Infect her beauty so as to fall and blast (¢. e. humble and destroy) 
her pride.’ Mason, on the other hand, thinks that it is intransitive; ‘You fen- 
sucked fogs, drawn up by the sun in order to fall down again and blast her pride.’ 
[The majority of editors incline to Malone’s view that it is here transitive (Dycr 
enumerates fourteen instances in Sh. of the use of ‘fall’ as a transitive verb; this, 
however, is not among them), but one of the latest and best, WRIGHT, says that, 
although in either case it would yield a good sense to this passage, yet it seems pre- 
ferable, on the whole, to regard it as intransitive, ‘as more in keeping with “drawn,” 
which precedes, and “blast,” which follows.’ ScHMIDT suggests that ‘ pride’ has 
accidentally been omitted at the end of the line in the Ff, and that the true reading 
is ‘To fall and blister pride.’ «To fall’ would be intransitive, and ¢ pride’ used as 
frequently in Sh, in the sense of ‘braggart beauty,’ Compare ‘a southwest blow 
on ye And blister ye all o'er.’ Zemp. I, ii, 324; ‘Takes off the rose From the fair 
forehead of an innocent love, And sets a blister there.’ Ham. III, iv, 42.] 

164. and blast her] Nicuoxs (Motes, &c., No. 2, p- I) upholds the Ff, because 


slest adsl s so will you, wish on me, 


rash mood is on. 
; No, Regan, thou shalt never have my curse; 
Ly tender-hefted nature shall not give 
o’er to harshness. Heer eyes are fierce, but thine 
Do. comfort and not burn. ’Tis not in thee 170 
To grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train, 


165, 166, O...02] As in Qq, Del. Dyce, tender hefted Q,. tender-hearted Rowe ii, 
Sing. ii, Glo.+. The first line ends Pope, Coll. (MS), Sing. Ktly. 


Gods / Ff et cet. 2 168-171. Thy.....train,| Three lines, 
166. mood is on] mood— Qq. mood’s the first two ending ore...durn. Qq. 
on. Steev.’93, Knt. : 169. Thee] the Q.. 


_-168. Thy] The Qaq- _ harshness] rashness Johns. 
tender-hefted| téder hefted Q,. 


_ the foggy state of the atmosphere in England is extremely productive of erysipelas, 
which attacks the face, ‘ “infecting its beauty,” and covering it over with extensive 
vesications or ‘ blisters.” ’ 

_ 168. tender-hefted] STrEvENs: /e/fed seems to mean the same as heaved. 
* Tender-hefted,’ z. ¢. whose bosom is agitated by tender passions, Sh, uses ‘hefts’ 
for heavings in Wint. Tale, Il, i, 45. The Qq, however, read, ‘tender-hested 
nature,’ which may mean a nature which is governed by gentle dispositions, ‘Hest’ 
is an old word, signifying command. Davies: I suppose the expression was in- 
tended to signify sooth, or soft-handled, consequently put here for gentleness of dis- 
position. KNIGHT: We doubt Steevens’s explanation. Heft,—haft,—is that which 
is haved,—held, and thus, ‘thy tender-hefted nature’ may be thy nature which may 
be held by tenderness. Wauuitrr: Although I fail to see the appropriateness of any 
sense that may be extracted from either text of the Ff or Qgq, I shrink from adopting 
the very specious reading of the earlier editors: tender-hearted. EDINBURGH RE- 
view (July, 1869, p. 106): ‘ Heft’ is a well-known older English word for handle, 
that which holds or contains, and ‘ tender-hefted’ is simply delicately-housed, dain- 
tily-bodied, finely-sheathed. ‘ Heft’ was in this way applied proverbially to the body, 
and Howel has a phrase quoted by Halliwell: Joose iz the heft, to designate an ill 
habit of body, a person of dissipated ways. ScHMIDT (Lex.) quotes this extract, 
and adds: But is Zaf# or heft, z. e. handle, indeed that which holds or contains, or 
not rather that by which a thing is held? Loose in the handle, applied to a person, 
could not possibly mean any thing else than what loose in the heft is said to have 
designated. Perhaps ‘tender-hefted,’ z. e. tender-handled, is equivalent to tender, 
gentle, to touch or to approach ; of an easy and winning address, affable. WRIGHT: 
A heft or haft is a handle, and a nature tender-hefted is one which is set in a tender 
handle or delicate bodily frame. Regan was less masculine than Goneril. Cotgrave 
has, ‘ Emmanché: m. ée: f. Helued; set into a haft, or handle. Lasche emmanché. 
Lazie, idle, slothfull, weake, feeble, loose ioynted, faint-hearted.’” Prompt. Parv. 


‘ Heftyde, manubriatus.’ 
170, burn] Maone: So in Zimon, V, i, 134: ‘Thou sun, that comfort’st, 


burn !’ 


To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes, 
And-in conclusion to oppose the bolt 


Against my coming in; thou better know’st 


The offices of nature, bond of childhood, 175 


Effeéts of courtesy, dues of gratitude ; 


Thy half o’ th’ kingdom hast thou not forgot, 


Wherein I thee endow’d. 


ie 


Reg. Good sir, to th’ purpose. 


Lear. Who put my man i’ th’ stocks? 


Corn. 


Reg. I know’t,—my sister's. 


[ Tucket within. 
What trumpet’s that ? 


‘This approves her letter, 180 


That she would soon be here. = Oswald.| Is your 


lady come? —~ 


Lear. This is a slave whose eee pride 
Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows.— 


174. know’st | knoweft Qq. 

176. dues| and dues Rowe, Pope, 
Han. 

177. hast thou] thou hast Rowe ii+, 
Jen. Ec. 

178. endow'd | indow'd Q,. endowed 

Ir 

to th’ too’ thQ,. totheQ,. to’ 

th ¥ FF. 

179. [Tucket within.] Coll. After 
line 178, Ff. Trumpets within. Rowe. 

180, know't,—my] Dyce. know’t my 
QqF,F,, Sta. know't; my Cam. Wr. 


know't, my FF, et cet. 

180. Jetter] ‘letters Qq. 

181. [Enter Oswald.] Dyce. ~ Enter 
Steward. (after zat? line 179), Qq. 
(after stocks ? line 179), Ff. Enter Os- 
wald. (after line 179), Coll. 

182. easy-borrow’d]| Cap. cafe bor- 
rowed QqFf. easy-borrowed Theob.+, 
Sch. : 
183. fickle] fickly FF. fickly FF 


. Rowe. 


her he] her, a Q,. 


172. sizes] JOHNSON: To contract my allowances. DeELius: The same as 
‘exhibition,’ I, ii, 25. Wricur: The words ‘sizar’ and ‘sizing’ are still well 
known in Cambridge; the former originally denoting a poor student, so called from 
the ‘sizes’ or allowances made to him by the college to which he belonged. 


179. Tucket] See II, i, 78. 


180. I know’t] STrrEEvENs: Thus in Ozh. II, i, 179: ‘The Moor! I know his 


trumpet.’ It should seem, from both these passages, and others that might be quoted, 
that the approach of great personages was announced by some distinguishing note or 
tune appropriately used by their own trumpeters. Cornwall knows not the present 
sound; but to Regan, who had often heard her sister’s trumpet, the first flourish of 
it was as familiar as was that of the Moor to the ears of Iago. Der.ius considers 
Steevens’s supposition as unlikely, because it was through the letter that Regan 
knew of Goneril’s approach. Delius evidently takes ‘ this’ as the object of ‘ approves.’ 

182. easy-borrow’d] Eccies: Pride that requires no cause of importance to 
produce it, derived from an insignificant source, depends upon uncertain favour, 
MosERLY: Borrowed without the trouble of doing anything to justify it. 


~~ 
# 


ee y 


ares, 
ee 


pine 
What means your grace? 
Stouk'd my servant ?>—Regan, I have good 


DU didst not know on’t—Who comes here? 


Enter Goneaye 


O heavens, 


If you do love old men, if your sweet sway — 
P Allow obedience, if yourselves are old, 


_ Make it your cause; send down, and take my part !— 


_ Art not ashamed to look upon this beard ?— 

~ O Regan, will you take her by the hand ? 
: Why not by th’ hand, sir? How have I offended ? 
_ All’s not offence that indiscretion finds 


Gon. | 


And dotage terms so. 
Lear. 


190 


O sides, you are too tough ; 
~ Will you yet hold ?—How came my man i’ th’ stocks? 


195 


Corn. I set him there, sir; but his own disorders 
Deserved much less advancement. 


Lear. 


You! did you? 


Reg. I pray you, father, being weak, seem so. 


185. SCENE XI. ied Han. SCENE 
‘x1. Warb. Jen. 
Lear.] Gon. Qq. 
stock’d| firuck Q,. firucke Q,. 
L have| I’ve Pope+. 
186. Thou....heavens,| Pope. 
lines, the first ending av or on’t, QqFf. 
on’t] ant Qq. of’t Mal. Steev. 


Who] Lear. Who Qq. 
SCENE XII. Johns. (after here ?). 
Enter Goneril] Johns. After 


Bos. 


‘Two. 


188, Allow] alow Q,. Hallow Warb, 
Theob. Han. 
af | if you Ff, Rowe, Knt, Sing, 
Ktly, Sch. 
190. [To Gon. Johns. 
- 191. will you] Ff+, Sta. Sch. 
thou Qq et cet. 
193. finds] fines Warb, conj. 
194,195. O...hold ?] Oneline, Rowe. 
195. Will...stocks ?| Two lines, Ff. 
yet hold ?| hold yet ? Cap. con}. 
196. szv] Om. Q,. 


qwult 


grace ? (line 184) in QqFf. 197. much less| no less Han. muuch 
187-189. Zf...part/] Three lines, the more Johns. conj. 

first two ending a@/ow...cau/fe, Qq. 198. weak] ’wake Han. Jen. 
187. your] you Qq. seer so] deem’t so Warb. 
188. Allow] Upton (Pref. ix): To be well pleased with, approve of. Com- 


pare Psalm xi, 6: The Lord alloweth the righteous. 


STEEVENS: Warburton might 


have found his emendation [see Textual Notes] in Tate’s version. 


‘197. less advancement] Prrcy: A still worse, or more disgraceful, situation ; 
a situation not so reputable. ScHmipT: An undisguised sneer. 


158 (KING LEAR 


You will return and sojourn with my sister, 


No, rather I abjure all roofs, and choose > 205 ' 


a a » 
a 


Tf, till the expiration of your month, | 


Dismissing half your train, come then to me; 

I am now from home and out of that provision 

Which shall be needful for your entertainment. : 
Lear. Return to her? and fifty men dismiss’d ? 


To wage against the enmity o’ th’ air, . 
To be a comrade with the wolf, and howl 
Necessity’s sharp pinch! Return with her? 


1q9. month] moneth Qq¥ FF. Ktly. ¥ 
202. Lam] I’m Pope+, Dyceii, Huds. 207. comrade] Comerade F ,. 
204. her ?| Ff, Rowe, Pope; Theob. howl | Coll. ii, iii, (MS). ow/, or 

Han. Coll. Del. Wh. Sch. 4er/ Sing. Owle, QqFf. owl; Theob. Johns. ovw/, 

Ktly. her, Qq et cet. or ow/,— Rowe et cet. 


206. 0’ th’) oth’ FF. of the Qq. Cap. 


206, 207. To wage... howl] THEOBALD (followed by HANMER) transposed 
these lines so as to make ‘Necessity’s sharp pinch,’ the object of ‘wage This 
JENNENS pronounces nonsense, because ‘it is that “pinch” which forces a man to 
“‘wage;” war is understood, or perhaps it is the very word instead of ‘ wage.” 
“ Necessity’s sharp pinch” is in apposition to “ To be a comrade,”’ &c. CAPELL: 
‘To wage,’ is to wage combat or battle. STEEVENS says, that wage is often used 
thus, intransitively, but the only instance that he cites is in I, i, 154, where ‘ wage’ 
means to wager. According to SCHMIDT (Zex.), this is the only instance of its use 
in Sh. KEIGHTLY inserts zvav in the text. 

207. howl] This change from ozw/ of the QqFf to ‘howl’ is due to CoLLrEr’s 
(MS), and, to. my mind, carries conviction, In the old reading, which renders 
‘Necessity’s sharp pinch’ parenthetical, there is a tameness out of place at the close 
of Lear’s wild outburst, which is, it seems to me, thoroughly un-Shakespearian. In 
the present text there is a climax, terrible in its wildness: roofs are to be abjured, 
storms braved, and famine howled forth among wolves. What companionship is 
there between wolves and owls, beyond the fact that they are both nocturnal? Yet 
what grates me in the old reading is, not so much the association of the wolf and 
owl, but the un-Shakespearian feebleness of bringing in ‘ Necessity’s sharp pinch’ as 
an explanation of what it is to abjure roofs and to be a comrade with wolves. As if 
Lear would stop to explain that people did not usually prefer such houseless poverty 
or such companionship, but that it was only the sharp pinch of necessity that drove 
them toit. In the old text there is no crest to the wave of Lear’s rece it surges 
up wild and threatening, and then when it should ‘thunder on the beach’ it subsides 
into a gentle apologetic ripple. Theobald’s transposition of the lines, or any change 
that will avoid putting ‘ Necessity’s sharp pinch’ in apposition with the rest of the 
sentence, is better than the old text. ScHMIDT must have felt this, although he does 
not say so; he puts a full stop after * owl,’ and makes ¢ Necessity’s sharp pinch’ an 
anacoluthon, Furthermore, ScHMIDT says the circumstances enumerated in lines 
205, 206, and 207 are those under which the sharp pinch of necessity is felt, but they 


= 


“7 2 


—_ - ——) 


\ , 


\ 


Why, the hot-blooded France, that dowerless took 


4 rar 


KING LEAR 


Our youngest born, I could as well be brought 210 
To knee his throne, and, squire-like, pension beg 
To keep base life afoot. Return with her? 
Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter 
To this detested groom. 

Gon. At your choice, sir. 


209. Why, the] Why the QqF.F.. 209, 210. ‘ook.....brought] One line, 


Why ? the FF, Rowe, Pope. _ Qq. 
; hot-blooded | Pope. hot-bloodied 2zi. beg] bag Q,. 

Ff. (dloudied F,). hot blood in Qq. 214. [Looking onthe Steward. Johns. 
(dloud Q,) : : ‘ 


are not the sharp pinch itself. If it be objected that to howl a pinch is a violent 
metaphor, I reply that it is not more violent than to take up arms against asea. As 
far as concerns the addition or the omission of % in Shakespeare’s day, I can only 
urge the exceeding difficulty, if not impossibility, of deciding what words were as- 
pirated and what were not; in the old MSS, especially of the XIIIth century, the use 
of the Z is very ‘uncertain and confused’ (—Ellis, p. 598). In process of time the 
number of words in which it was customary to drop the % diminished, until now, as 
Ellis says (p. 221), there are but five: heir, honest, honour, hostler, and hour [qy. 
herb ?|, which it is ‘social suicide to aspirate.’ Wherefore the absence of the 4, in 
the present passage, is not fatal to the emendation; the only instance in the Folio 
where ‘ owlet’ is used, it is spelled How/et. Note too, as a slight corroboration of the 
present reading, that in ILI, i, 13 occurs the phrase ‘the belly-pimched wolf’ ; and 
the howling of the wo/f is again referred to in III, vii, 62. But whether or not the 
old pronunciation was ow/ or how/, and whether or not all the old texts have ozw/, I 
adhere to the maxim of the great Bentley: sana ratio vel centum codicibus potior. 
Dyce’s opinion (Strictures, &c., p. 6) should:be recorded here, so emphatic is his 
condemnation of the present text: ‘the glaring absurdity of “the old corrector’s 
aspirate’? . . . will inevitably be treated by every future editor with the intense con- 
tempt it deserves.’ MOoBERLY, although he does not adopt it, pronounces ‘howl’ 
‘another instance of improvement in the text, suggested’ by Collier’s (MS), and 
adds that, when thus read, the lines become ‘ convincingly forcible.’—Ep. 

209. hot-blooded France] For instances of nouns which express the subject ol 
the thought without any grammatical connection with a verb, see IV, vi, 77: ‘ That 
thing you speak of, I took it fora man;’ Ham. I, v, 533 and ABBOTT, § 417. 

211. knee] From the only other use of this word in Sh. as a verb (Cor. V, i, 5), 
Schmidt infers, very erroneously I think, that this does not here mean to kneel down 
before France’s throne, but to travel thither on the knees. The passage in Cor. is 
not parallel. 

213. sumpter] COTGRAVE, cited by WRIGHT, sufficiently defines this: ‘ Sommier: 
m. A Sumpter-horse; (and generally any toyling, and load carrying, drudge, or 


groome).’ 
214. groom] For the sake of scansion ABBOTT, § 484, would pronounce this as a 


dissyllable. 
& 


Lear. I prithee, daughter, do not make me mad. 
I will not trouble thee, my child; farewell. 

We'll no more meet, no more see one another. 

But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter ; 
Or rather a disease that’s in my flesh, f 
Which I must needs call mine; thou art a boil, 220 
A plague-sore, an embossed carbuncle, ~ ; 

In my corrupted blood. But I’ll not chide thee; 

Let shame come when it will, I do not call it; 

I do not bid the thunder-bearer shoot, | 

Nor tell tales of thee to high-judging Jove. 225 
Mend when thou canst; be better at thy leisure. 

I can be patient; I can*stay with Regan, 

I and my hundred knights. 


Reg. Not altogether so; 
I look’d not for you yet, nor am provided © 
For your fit welcome. Give ear, sir, to my sister ; _ 230 


For those that mingle reason with your passion 


215. Z| Mow 7 Qq, Jen. Mal. Ec. 

216, thee, my] thee. My Johns. 

219. that’s in| that hes within Qq. 

220, doit | Mal. Bile Q.F{F,+, Cap. 
Jen. Del. Sch. Bylo Q_E.F.. 

221, 222. A.../m my] One line, Qq. 

221. plague-sore| Hyphens, F,F,. 

an] or Ff +, Knt, Sch. 


225. tales] tailes Q.. 
high-judging| Hyphen, F,F,F,. 
228. 7] Ay Anon. 
228-231. LVot...passion] Four lines, 
ending yet,....welcome,....tho/e....paffion, 


q: 
228. altogether so| altogether fo fir 
Qq, Cap. Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. adi Zo- 


op. Se ie, 


embossed | Cap. imboffed Qq 
Ff +, Jen. 
224. thunder-bearer| thunder-beater 


gether Pope, Han. 
229. look’d] looke Qq. 
230. sir] Om. Q., Pope+. 


Warb. (misprint, corrected in Errata). 231. your] you F,. 


220. boil] MALonz first changed the spelling of this word, of which the spelling 
in the Prompt. Parv., Cotgrave, QqFf, &c. betokens a uniform pronunciation. Cot- 
grave (s. v. Bosse) gives it as a synonym of ¢ plague-sore.’ 

221. embossed] This word is used by Sh. in two different senses, and has conse- 
quently given rise to some discussion, chiefly carried on in the pages of Motes & 
Queries ; (references to all the communications will be found in the Bibliography.) 
FURNIVALL (JV. G Qu. 4th Ser. xi, 507) at last showed that there was here a con- 
fusion of two different words. One is from the French emdosser, defined by Cot- 
grave: ‘To swell, or arise in bunches, hulches, knobs; to grow knottie, or knurrie.’ 
In this sense itis used here, The other is from the Old French : ‘ emzboser, emboiter, 
enchasser une chose dans une autre.—Ducange, v. zmdotare.’—Hippeau. This is 
Cotgrave’s ‘ Emboister : To imbox, inclose, insert, fasten, put, or shut vp, as within 
a box,’ and is Shakespeare’s word in A//’s Well, III, vi, 107. 


Ts this well spoken? 
What, fifty followers ? 
tot vl ? What should you need of more? 


ce many people cade two commands 
Id amity? ’Tis hard; almost impossible. 
EB Gon. Why might not you, my lord, receive attendance 240 
ay From those that she calls servants or from mine? 
“4 ? Es, _ Reg. Why not, my lord? If then they chanced to 
x slack ye, 
- We could control them. If you will come to me, 
For now I spy a danger, I entreat you 
_ To bring but five and twenty ; to no more 245 
Will I give place or notice. 
_- ~~ Lear. Y gave you all— 
=a Reg. And in good time you gave it. 
. Lear. —Made you my guardians, my depositaries ; 
E But kept a reservation to be follow’d 


232. you old| you are old Qq. Q,- chance Q,. 
¥ so—] Rowe. /o, QqFf. 242. ye| Ffi+, Jen. Sta. Sch. you 
a 233. spoken| /poken now Qgq, Jen. Qgq et cet. 
Be Steev. Ec. Var. 243. you will] you'll Pope+. 
; 234. What, fifty] Rowe. what fifty 244. For....danger,| In parenthesis, 
se QqFf. QUE 
= _ 236. sith that] since Pope+. — 245. dut] Om. FF,. 
as 237. Speak] Speakes Qq. 247. all—] Rowe. all. QqFf. 
one house| a houfe Qq. 249. kept] keep F,F,, Rowe. 
242. Why...ye,| Two lines, Ff. followd] Pope. followed Qq 


chanced | chanc’d Ff. chancfi Ff, Rowe, Sch. 


pe 236. sith] See I, i, 179. 

- 246, give... notice] WRIGHT: Recognize. 

ee, 247. And... it] Hupson: Observe what a compact wolfishness of heart is ex 
aa pressed in these few cold words! It is chiefly in this readiness of envenomed sar 
_ casm that Regan is discriminated from Goneril; otherwise they seem almost too 
--——s much like mere repetitions of each other to come fairly within the circle of Nature, 
4 who never repeats herself. 

- 248. guardians] Moserty: The guardians under me of my realms. So in the 
A ; Bible ‘ Jeroboam’s nursing father,’ means he to whom Jeroboain gives his children 
_ Re to nurse. 

“ 14 * L 

; ——< 

; <a 


oe T62. ’ 7 
With such a number. What, must I come to you | 
With five and twenty? Regan, said youso? 

Reg. And speak’t again, my lord; no more with me. =~ 

Lear, Those wicked creatures yet do look well-favour’d, — x 
When others are more wicked; not being the worst re ae 
Stands in some rank of praise.—[ Zo Gon.] I'll go with thee. 255 _ 
Thy fifty yet doth double five and twenty, ; . 
And thou art twice her love. eae 

Gon. Hear me, my lord: 
What need you five and twenty, ten, or five, 
To follow, in a house where twice so many 
Have a command to tend you? 


ra Reg. >. What need one? 260 

Lear. Oh, reason not the need; our basest beggars : a 
. z a 
i Are in the poorest thing superfluous. . 3s 


Allow not nature more than nature needs, 


250. number.| number ? Ff. 
What] Om. Pope+. 

251. twenty? Regan,| twenty, Re- 
gan, Q.. ‘wentie, Regan Q,. ‘twenty, 
Regan ? Cap. Steev. Ec. Var. Knt, Dyce, 
Glo.+, Mob. Huds. 

252. speak’t| speak t¢ Cap. Steev. Ec. 
Var. 

253,254. favour'd,...wicked »| Theob. 
JAUOF Aecscs: wicked, Qq¥f ( favor'd, F,) 


Johns. Jen. favoured...wicked > Sch. 

253, 254. wicked...wicked | wrinkled 
... wrinkled Warb. 

253. look] feem Q,, Jen. /eeme Q.. 

254. the] Om. Pope+. 

255. [To Gon.] Han. 

257. art] hast Pope, Han. 

260. need] needs Q,, Pope+,- Jen. 
needes Q.. 

261. need | deed Qq. 


Rowe. favour'd.....wicked. Pope. Han. 


253,255. Those... praise.] CAPELL, whose punctuation is substantially followed 
by KNIGHT, DELIus, and MoBERLY, puts a stop after * well-favour’d,’ and a comma 
after ‘wicked,’ thus preserving, as he claims, ‘a’ natural and just thought full of 
dramatic beauty.’ The objection to the present text he finds in ‘ Those,’ which, he 
says, makes the sentence ‘ particular, confining it to some persons then present, which 
are Regan and Goneril.’ His interpretation of line 253 is that ‘it is expressive of 
the speaker’s astonishment that the judgement of heaven is not fallen upon his 
daughters for their wickedness; that they are still * well-favour’d,” and their beauty 
not blasted, as he had particularly imprecated upon one of them a few pages before. 
The line should be spoken with bitterness, a contracted brow, and surveying them 
from head to foot, and a great pause made between that and the next line.’ SrEEVENS: 
A similar thought appears in Cym. V, v, 215-217, ‘It is I that all the abhorred things 
of the earth amend By being worse than they.’ i 

261. Oh, reason, &c.] CoLERIDGE: Observe that the tranquillity which follows 
the first stunning of the blow permits Lear to reason, 


262. superfluous] Moserty: Have in their deepest poverty some very poor 
thing which may be called superfluous. 


Bee aecds not on thou Suie aes wear’ st, 


z Which scarcely keeps thee warm. But for true need,— 


You heavens, give me that patience, patience I need! 
You see me here, you gods, a poor old man, 
As full of grief as age; wretched in both. : 270 


If it be you that stirs these daughters’ hearts 


Against their father; fool me not so much 
To bear it tamely ; touch me with noble anger, 


264. life is] lifeasQ.. LifesasQ, 268. that patience, patience] that pa- 
Jen. Glo.+, Mob. tience which Popet+. that: patience, 
beast’s] Cap. beafes QaF.F,. patience Jen. Sch. but patience, pa- 
Beaftes FF. beasts’ Han. Sch. tience Coll. iii. your patience that Nich- 
266. wear’st] wearef? Qq. — olson.* 
. 267. warm. But......need,—|] Steev. 269. man] fellow Qq. 
warme, but.....meed, Qq¥f (need: F,). 271. stirs] F,, Ktly, Cam. Wr. Sch. 
warn; but...need, Rowe+, Jen. warn. Surres QqF,FF,. stir Rowe et cet. 
But...need ! Johns. warm.—But...need, 272. so] 0Q,. too Q,. 
Cap. 273. tamely| lamely Qq. 


265. gorgeous] WALKER (Vers. 178) doubts if this word be the correct one. 
* Note “ gorgeous” in the next line, and see Shakespeare as to such repetitions.’ 

267. need,—] Moperty: To imagine how Shakespeare would have ended this 
sentence, one must be a Shakespeare. The poor king stops short in his definition ; 
it-is too plain that his true need is patience. 

268. that ...mneed!] CaPeLL: The repetition of ‘patience’ is energetical, and 
‘that? a word of great force; importing—that patience which is seen in you, 
‘heavens,’ that patience which none but you can bestow on one in my situation, 
MAson: The passage should run thus: ‘but for true need, You heavens! give me 
patience :—patience I need.’ Nature needs not the gorgeous habits you wear, but 
to supply a real need, you heavens! give me patience—patience I need indeed, 
Hupson follows Mason’s reading of this line. JERVIS gives what is essentially the 
same reading. MALONE: I believe the word ‘patience’ was repeated inadvertently 
by the compositor. WuiTe and KreIcHTLry adopted this conjecture of Malone’s. 
Ritson: The compositor has repeated the wrong word. Read: ‘give me that pa- 
tience shat I need.’ Or, still better, perhaps: ‘give me patience !—that I need.’ 
CoLuieErR (ed. ii): Instead of ‘that patience’ the (MS) has ‘ dz patience.’ We may 
doubt whether the line did not originally run: ‘give me but patience that I need.’ 
Dyce: I would not assert, with Capell, that the old text is uncorrupted. WALKER 
(Crit. iti, 278) prefers either Malone’s conj. or Ritson’s secund suggestion. WRIGHT: 
If any change be made Mason’s seems best. ABBOTT, § 476, would make ‘give 
. need’ a separate line, pronouncing the second ‘ patience’ as a trisyllable. 

271. that stirs] For instances of the relative with a plural antecedent followed 


by a singular verb, see ABBOTT, § 247. 
272, 273. so... To] See I, iv, 36. 


ee 


- And let not women’s weapons, water-drops, oie” 
Stain my man’s cheeks !—No, you unnatural hags, 

I will have such revenges on you both 

That all the world shall—I will do such things,— 


What they are, yet I know not; but they shall be 
The terrors of the earth. You think I'll weep; 


No, I'll not weep. 


[Storm and tempest. 280 


I have full cause of weeping; but this heart 
Shall break into a hundred thousand flaws, 
Or ere I’ll weep.—O Fool, I shall go mad! 
[Exeunt Lear, Gloucester, Kent, and Fool. 
Corn. Let us withdraw; ’twill be a storm. 
Reg. This house is little; the old man and’s ee a nes 


Cannot be well bestow’d. 


Gon. ’Tis his own blame;.’ hath put himself from rest, 


274. And let] Ff, Knt, Dyce, Sta. 
Glo.+, Sch. O Ze¢ Qq et cet. ; 

277. shall—] fhall, Q,. 

things,—]| Han. things, QqFf+. 

279. earth.| Johns. earth, Q,F,. 
earth; Q,F,. earth ? F,F,. 

[Storm and tempest.] Ff, after 
weeping, line 281. After storm, line 284, 
Pope. Om. Qq. Storm heard at a Dis- 
tance. (after Aeart, line 281), Coll. 

280-282. JVo..,flaws,| Jen. Two lines, 
the first ending weeping, QqFf +, Cap. 

281. [have] Though I have Han. 

but this| This Pope+. 

282. into a hundred thousand | in a 
100 thoufand Q,. in a thoufand Q,. 
into a thousand Pope+, Cap. 

Jlaws| flowes Qq. 

283. Or ere] EreQ,. Or eer EF, 
Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han. Dyce ii. 

LPI) tle Qq. He ¥,. F¥ FF, +, 
en. 


234 


[Exeunt...Fool.] Q, (subs). Ex- 
eunt ee Leifter, Kent... Q,. Exeunt. 
1 eee 

',, SCENE XII. Pope, Han. SCENE 
xi. Warb. Johns. Jen. 
284. Corn.] Duke Qq. 

withdraw ; ’twill| withdraw us : 

itwill Ktly. 


end eee .cannot.. put. fue in Gap. 
Steev.’93, Ec. Lines end Aozse...can- 
not...bestow'd...rest,...folly. Bos.“ Lines 
end storm...people...blame ;...folly. Ktly. 

285. little) small as Han, * 

and’s| FFF, Rowe, Coll. Sing. 

Wh. Sch, ands F,. and his Qq et cet. 

286. destow'd ] bestowed Qq, Sch. 

287. blame; ’ hath| Dyce ii, Huds. 
blame hath QqFf+, Coll. Sta. Wh. 
blame, heath Han. Jen. blame; he 
hath Cap. Steev. Mal. Ec. Ktly. dame; 
hath Bos. et cet. 


282. flaws] MALonE: A ‘flaw’ signifies a crack, but is here used for a small 


broken particle. 


SINGER: This word, as Bailey observes, was ‘ especially applied to 


the breaking off of shivers or thin pieces from precious stones.’ 

283. Or ere] See Ham. I, ii, 147. Hazuitr: If there is anything or any author 
like the yearning of the heart [in this scene], these throes of tenderness, this pro- 
found expression of all that can be thought and felt in the most heart-rending situa- 
tions that it exhibits, we are glad of it; but it is in some author we have not read. 

287. blame ;.’hath] Corurer, following the QqFf, says that ‘blame’ is the 


| 


A 


‘For his particular, I'll receive him ely 
1ot one follower. 
ar So am I purposed.— 
——— 
—_ Where i is my lord of Gloucester ? 
Follow’d the old man forth; he is return’d. 


so Re-enter GLOUCESTER. 


Glou. The king is in high rage. 


Corn. Whither is he going? 
Glow. ¥ié calls to horse; but will I know not whither. 
Corn. ’Tis best to ie Wi way ; he leads himself. 295 


Gon. My lord, entreat him by no means to stay. 
Glou. Alack! the night comes on, and the high winds 


_ Do sorely ruffle; for many miles about 


There’s scarce a bush. 
Reg. Oh, sir, to wilful men 


_ The injuries that they themselves procure 300 


Must be their schoolmasters.. Shut up your doors. 
He is attended with a desperate train ; 


will Qq, Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. 


288. And | He Coll. (MS). 
293. Whither] Whether FF. 


~ 290. Gon.] Duke. Qq. 


purposed | pufpos'd Q,. 294. whither] whether Qaq, F,F,. 
290, 291. oz. - Gloucester ?] One line, 295. Com, Re.Or Res: OF 
Qgq.. best | good Qq. 


207. Jagd ict Cape kent, Colle 


292. Corn. ] Reg. Qq. 
Dyce i, Sch. d/eak Qq et cet. 


‘Follow'd|-Pope. followed Qq 


Ff, Sch. 
Re-enter... ] Asin Dyce. | Bator 
(after line 291), QqFf. Re-enter... (after 
line 291), Cap. 


298, 299. Do...bush.| One line, Qq. 


298. ruffie| rufel Q,. ruffell Q,. 
russle Pope, Han. Jen. rzstle Cap. Ec. 
299. scarce| not Qgq, Jen. 


293, 204. rage...but will] rage, and 


nominative to ‘hath put.’ Dyce (ed. ii) marks the absorption of 4e in ‘hath’ by an 
apostrophe. See II, ii, 114. 

289. particular] WricHT: For himself, for his own sake. Compare Ant. and 
Cleop. IV, ix, 20; where ‘in thine own particular’ means as far as you yourself are 
concerned. See, also, 4//’s Well, II, v, 66. 

296. stay] HaLLIwe Lt: ‘Storme begins’ is here a MS stage-direction in a copy 
of the first edition of 1608, in the handwriting of one contemporary, or nearly so, 
with Sh. 

302. train] Eccies: We are led to imagine, from a passage in Act III, that 
Lear’s attendant knights had not yet arrived. CLARKE: Regan’s barefaced pre- 
tence,—insisting on speaking of her old father as still attended by a large train of 


ina of they may Peewee as 

‘To-have his ear abused, wisdom bids mes 
Corn, Shut up your doors, my lord; ’tis a eh nigiit * ss 

My Regan counsels ‘well. Come out o’ th’ storm. 


~ 


ACT III 
ScenE I. A heath. 


Storm still, Enter KENT and a Gentleman, severally. 


Kent. Whao’s there, besides foul weather ? I 
Gent. One minded like the weather, most unquietly. 
Kent. I know you. Where's the king? 
Gent. Contending with the fretful elements ; 
Bids the wind blow the earth into the sea, 5 
Or swell the curled waters ’bove the main, 


303. to] too Q,F,. severally] Ff. at teupalh doores. Qq. 
305. weld | wil’d ¥,F,. meeting. Cap. 
306. Regan] Reg Q.. 1. Who's there] Whats here Q,. 
0 th’) oth’ FF. at’hQ.. ath What's heere Q,. What's here Cap. 
OF : Jen. Who's here Mal. Steev. Bos. Coll. 
[Exeunt.] Exeunt omnes. Q.. Sing. Wh. Ktly. 
A heath.] Rowe. ¢ besides] befide Qq, Cap. Jen. Steev. 
Storm still.] Om. Qq. A Storm is Ec. Var. Coll. Sing. Ktly. 
heard, with Thunder and Lightning. 4. elements] element Qq, Cap. Steev. 
Rowe. Var. 


followers, both in this speech and the one a little before, where she talks of there not 
being room for ‘the old man and his people,’ while in reality he has with him only 
his faithful Kent and Fool,—is thoroughly in character with her brassy nature. 


4. elements] “/ement of the Qq is, as Capell says, the air alone. That the 
if fare right, see IIT, 1) 1G) : 


5. Bids} See IT,.iv, 287. 

6. main] CAPELL: This is put, as every one sees, for—¢he Jand ; it is still a sea- 
term for it, and often us’d in that sense by old voyage-writers, from whom Sh, had it; 
the sound pleas’d him; and he made- no scruple of. using it, well knowing it could 


. not be mistaken. WRIGHT: Steevens quotes from Bacon’s Considerations touching a 


War with Spain (Life and Letters, ed. Spedding, vii, 490): ‘In the year that fol- 
lowed, of 1589, we gave the Spaniards no rest, but turned challengers, and invaded 
the main of Spain;’ where the context shows that he is not speaking of what was 
technically known as ‘the Spanish main,’ but of the landing an army on the coast 
of Spain itself. In the very next page Bacon says; ‘In the year 1596 was the second 
invasion that we made upon the main territories of Spain” which shows clearly what 


eee. i 


eo 


— 
* 


hich the i Patton: blasts, pith: eyeless rage, 
tch in their fury, and make nothing of; 


* Strives in his little world of man to out-scorn 10 


The to-and-fro-conflicting wind and rain. 
* This night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch, 


. 


_ 7-15. tears...all.] Om, Ff, Rowe. Cap. 
10, 11. Om. Pope, Han. 12. wherein] in which Pope, Han. 
It. fo-and fro-conflicting] Hyphens, : 


v ‘ 
was meant by ‘the main’ in the former passage. DEL1us doubts that this means the 
land; the sense being rather that the curled waters swell above their own especial 
domain, the sea, and overflow the land. JENNENs: Though all the editions have 
‘main,’ it is very likely Sh. wrote moo, which is much better, because it more 
strongly expresses (according to Shakespeare's custom) the confusion which Lear in 
his rage would have introduced into nature; besides, ‘main’ is ambiguous, appli- 


cable to sea or land. The effect of overflowing the land is not so great nor so certain 


confusion; the sea often does that and returns to its usual bounds; whereas the 
swelling of the waters above the moon is entirely preternatural, and best answers the 
madness of bidding the wind blow the earth into the sea. According to SCHMIDT 
(Zex.), Sh. uses ‘main’ more frequently for the sea than for the land, but here clearly 
for the latter. 

8,9. Which ... of ] HeatH: Which the impetuous blasts, with undiscerning 


rage, catch in their fury, and scatter or disperse to nothing as fast as he tears it off, 


DELivs, more correctly, interprets ‘make nothing of? as meaning to treat with 
irreverence; as SCHMIDT says, it is the opposite to ‘make much of.’ 
10. little world of man] There may be a reference here to the phraseology of 


thé early astrologers, who were wont to call Man the microcosm, or ‘the little world,’ 


as containing in miniature the elements of the macrocosm, which is the universe, 


terrestrial and heavenly. See Cornelius Agrippa Magische Werke, ii, cap. 27; or 


Paracelsus Sagacis Philosophiz, 1658, Lib. i, p. 532, a. In vol. ix of Dodsley’s Old 
Plays there is A Morall Maske by Thomas Nabbes, called Microcosmus, 1637; in 
the commendatory verses both by Rich. Broome and Will. Cufaude, ‘man’ is spoken 
of as ‘the little world.’ I am not sure that the macrocosm is not referred to by 
Gloucester in IV, vi, 133: ‘O ruin’d piece of nature! This great world shall so wear 
out to nought,’ perhaps alluding to the bond which, as astrologers maintain, exists 
between the little world and the great world. In reference to the macrocosm, see 
notes on Faust, either in Hayward’s or Taylor’s translation.—ED. 

10, out-scorn] STEEVENS: I suspect we should read ‘out-storm.’ Compare 
Lovers’ Complaint, 7: ‘Storming her world with sorrow’s wind and rain,’ 

12, cub-drawn] Pore: A bear drawn by nature to its young. UPTON (p. 311, 
ed. i): That is, having her cubs drawn from her, being robbed of her cubs, WaArR- 
BURTON: That is, a bear whose dugs have been drawn dry by its young. Even 


: hunger and the support of its young, would not force the bear to leave her den on 


such a night. STEEVENS notes the recurrence of the same idea in As You Like tt, 
TV, ii, 115 and 127. 


* The lion and the belly-pinched wolf 
* Keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs, 
* And bids what will take all.* 


Kent. But who is with him? 15 

Gent. None but the Fool; who labours to ae a 
His heart-strook injuries. < 

Kent. . Sir, I do know you; 


And dare, upon the warrant of my note, 

Commend a dear thing to you. There is division, 

Although as yet the face of it is cover’d 20 
a With mutual cunning, ’twixt Albany and Cornwall ; 
: Who have—as who have not, that their great stars 

Throned and set high ?—servants, who seem no less, 

Which are to France the spies and speculations 


13. delly-pinched | Hyphen, Pope. 


17. heart-strook| ¥F,, Cap. Knt, Sch, 
heart-/ftrooke F¥,. heart firooke Qq. 


heari-struck Rowe et cet. 


18. note] Arte or art Qq, Cap. Mal. 


Steev. Bos. 


19. Thereis| There's Pope+, Dyceii. 
20. w| F£+,Cap. Sch. de Qq et cet. 


21. cunning| craft Pope, Han. 


22-29. Who have....... furnishings ;| 
Om. Qq. In the margin, Pope, Han. 
22. that] whom Rowe ii+. 
stars| Stars have Ktly. ~ 
23. Throned| Thron’d Ff. Throne 
Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. Cap. Ec. Dyceii, 
Huds. Coll. iii. 
high ?—] high? Roweii. high; 
Ff. high, Rowe i. 


15. take all] Scumipr: An exclamation of despair, like ‘ Lucifer take all’; ‘a 
shame take all,’ &c.; also, apparently, by players when staking all on a single card. 
‘Wouldst thou fight well?’ asks Anthony of Enobarbus, and Se latter replies ¢ T’1l 
strike, and cry Take all.’ French Va tout / 

18. my note] JOHNSON: My observation. CAPELL (who here followed the Qq) 
explains a@v¢ as the ‘art of manners and face-judging, skill in knowledge of men.’ 
MALONE quotes as in favour of the Qq, Jacd. I, iv, 11, 12. Hupson: But it ap- 
pears Kent ‘knows’ his man, and therefore has no occasion to use the a7¢ or skill 
in question, 

19. dear] See I, iv, 266. 

23. who seem no less] CAPELL supposes that this means servants that seem 
us great as themselves, servants in high place. DEx1us, however, interprets it as 
servants who seem to be no less, or no other, than what they are—namely, servants. 

24. speculations] JOHNSON (Déct.): Examiner, spy. The word is found no- 
where else, and is probably here misprinted for speculators. [This conj. was 
adopted by SINGER (ed. ii), and Hupson.] CoLLier (ed. ii): Spectators is the 
word substituted by the (MS). <‘ Speculations’ cannot well on any account be right, 
while spectators completes both meaning and metre; of course, the emphasis in spec- 
ators must not here be placed on the second eylabie! See ScHMIDT (Zex.), p. 1421, 


for a list of over sixty instances in Sh, of the use of the abstract for the concrete, to 
which ‘discretion,’ II, iv, 145, may be added, 


"Te 


* 


a ae 


eS @n a 
id 


Ar Ca Ne. tee 


“x 


Or the hard rein which both of them have borne 


KING LEAR 


igent of our state. What hath been seen, 
_ Either in snuffs and packings of the dukes, 


Against the old kind king, or something deeper, 

Whereof perchance these are but furnishings ; 

* But true it is, from France there comes a power 30 
*Tnto this scatter'd kingdom; who already, 

* Wise in our negligence, have secret feet 4 

* In some of our best ports, and are at point 


25. state.|-Ff+,Sch. state; Steev. 31-35. Lnto... far| Asin Pope. Four 


~~ 


et cet. 
hath| have Pope ii. ~ 
27. have] hath ¥,. 
29. furnishings ;| Cap. furnishings— 
Rowe+. furnifhings. Ff, p phases: Jiour- 


_ ishings. Coll. (MS). 


30-42. But...you.| Om. Ff, Rowe. 


lines, ending negligence... Ports,...banner 
... farre in Qq. 

31. scatter’d] /catiered Q,. fcatterd 
Q.. shatter'd Han. scathed Warb. 

32. have] hath Jen. 

feet] fee Q,, Johns. Jen. see Q,. 

sea Pope, Theob. Han. sezze Warb. fue 
Cap. Ec. 


30. But] And Han. 


25. Intelligent] JoHNson (Dic¢.): Giving information. STEEVENS: What fol- 
lows are the circumstances in the state of the kingdom, of which he supposes the 
spies gave France the intelligence. ScuMmiIpT cites also III, v, 9, and III, 
vii, II. 

25-29. What hath ... furnishings] ScumipT: Whether these qucnmelete sen- 
tences are due to the poet, or to the style in which the scene has been transmitted to 
us, cannot be decided; lines 22-29 are lacking in the Qq, and from 30-42 in the 
Ff, and it is easily conceivable that between 29 and 30 there were other lines which 
have been omitted in both texts. : 

26. snuffs] WRIGHT: Quarrels. Nares: To take in snuff is to be angry, to 


take offence. 


26. packings] STEEVENS: Underhand contrivances. [See Ham. III, iv, 211.] 

29. furnishings] JoHNSoN: What we now call colours, external pretenses. 
STEEVENS: A furnish anciently signified a sample. So in the Epistle before 
Greene’s Groats-worth of Witte : «For to lend the world a furnish of witte she layes 
her owne to pawne.’ STAUNTON: Steevens’s illustration from Greene is not con- 
clusive. Hvupson: That is, whereof these things are but the trimmings or append- 
ages, not the thing itself, but only the circumstances or Jurniture of the thing. 
Wricut: In Scotland the trimmings of a lady’s dress are called ‘ furnishings.’ 

31. scatter’d] JoHNnson: Divided, unsettled, disunited. ScumipT: Sh. does not 
elsewhere use the word in this sense. Perhaps Hanmer’s shattered is right. 

BZ: feet] UPTon (p. 195, ed. ii) suggests sea¢—that is, secretly situated, or lodged, 
or perhaps see for the Latin sedes, which is used by Douglas in his version of Virgil, 
and by Chaucer, and which still survives in ‘a Bishop’s see.’ SCHMIDT: This ex- 
pression is akin to the language of the time, when footed meant the same as 


landed. 
33. at point] See I, iv, 319. 
sia 


-* The king hath cause to plain. = 


% If on my aes you hres nie! so far a ees: 
*To make your speed to Dover, you shall find — 
* Some that will thank you, making just report 
* Of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow vical ara 


*I ama gentleman of blood and breeding,  AOr as 
* And from some knowledge and assurance offer 
* This office to you.* 

Gent. 1 will talk sicher with you. 

Kent. No, do not. # 
For confirmation that I am much more 
Than my out-wall, open t this purse and take =? 45 
What it contains. If you shall see Cordelia,— 
As fear not but you shall,—show her this ring, 
And she will tell you who that fellow is + 
That yet you do not know., Fie on this storm! : 
I will go seek the King. ~\ 

Gent. Give me your hand; =< bos 
Have you no more to say? 

Kent. Few words, but, to effeét, more than all yet; 


35. credit] credite Q,. 43. further| farther Qq. 

38. bemadding| madding Pope,Han. 44. Lam] 7 Qgq. 

39-42. The...you.] Lines end genéle- 47. fear] doubt Q.. 
man,...knowledge and...you. Cap. this] that Rowe+. 

41, 42. And...you.| Asin Jen. The 48. that] Ff, Jen. Knt, Coll. Del. Wh. 
first line ends afurance Qq. Ktly,Sch. ¢kis Rowe+. your Qq et cet. 

assurance,....jou.| assurance of 50, 51. Give...say ?] One line, Qq. 

you, Offer this office. Pope+. Assur- 52-55. Four lines, ending #0... found 


ance of you, offer this office to you. Cap. _...this—...other. Sch. 
43. Lwill] J’l Pope+. 


re my 


35, 36. so... To] See I, iv, 363 II, iv, 11. 

43. 1... you] Dettus: This implies a courteous postponement or dismissal of 
a request; this explains Kent’s reply. 

48. fellow] Scumipr: That is, companion. It is only by its use in this sense 
that we can understand Malvolio’s blunder: ‘let this fellow be looked to: fellow! 
not Malvolio, nor after my degree, but fellow.’ As a general rule this word is found 
in this sense joined to a possessive pronoun, and therefore many editors prefer ‘ yozzs 
fellow’ of the Qq. 

52. to effect] Anport, § 186: The use of zo meaning ‘ with a view to,’ ‘for an 


end,’ &c., is of course still common before verbs, but the Elizabethans used /o in 
this sense before nouns, 


see a 


fa 


bier amd the king,—in which your pain 


y, I'll this,—he that first lights on him 
Co) 


[Exeunt Secale 55 


‘Scene Il. Another part of the heath. Storm still 


\. £inter LEAR and Fool. 


- Lear. Blow, winds, and crack your heard oa blow! 
Bie cataracts and hurricanoes, spout 
Till you have drench’d our steeples, drown’d the cocks! 
You sulphurous and thought-executing fires, 4 


53-55. Three lines, ending K7ng.,... 
lights...other. Qq. 
53, 54. i...this,| Ff. Le this way, 


' you that Qq, Jen. in which you take 


That -way, I this Pope, Theob. Warb. 
for which you take That way I this 
Han. Johns. 
54. way,| way; Steev. Ec. Var. Knt. 
55- Holla| hollow Qq¥,. Halloo 
Warb. Johns. 
[Exeunt severally.] Theob, Ex- 
eunt. QqFf. 
SCENE II. ] Scena Secunda. Ff. (Sczena 
F,). Scene continued by Rowe, Theob. 
Another part...] Cap. 
Storm still.] Om. Qq. 


1. winds| windes FF,. wind Qq, 


- Jen. Mal. Steev. Bos, Sing. 


rage! blow!| blow! rage! and 


‘Vaunt-couriers of oak-cleaving thunderbolts, 5 


blow ! Cap. conj. (in Corrigenda, vol. x). 
2-9. Eight lines, ending arenchi... 


and.,.to...head,.. flat....Watures....MQhe ... 
man. Qq. 

2. cataracts | caterickesQ,. carterickes 
Oe 


hurricanoes| Hyrricano’s¥,. Hur- 
ricano’s FFF. Lircanios Qq. 
3. our| Ff. The Qq, Jen. 
drown'd| drownd Q,. drown F, 
Loe Rowe. drowne F,. 
4. sulphurous| Cap. Sulpherous Qq- 
Sulph’rous Ff£+, Sch. 
thought-executing | No hyphen, Qq. 
5: Wawel rons Pope. vaunt- 
currers Qq. Vaunt-curriors Ff. Vant- 
couriers Cap. 
of |. ¥f+, Cap. Dyce i, Sch. 0 


Qgq et cet. 


53, 54. in... this] WricuT: In which your pain (lies) That way, I'll (go) this. 
Scene II] This scene is quoted at length, with comments of admiration, in 


Smitu’s Longinus, p. 108. 


2. cataracts] MoBerty: Probably in the sense in which we have xarappaxro¢ 


6uBpo¢ in Greek. 


2. hurricanoes] Dyce: Water-spouts. 
Doing execution with rapidity equal to 


4. thought-executing] JOHNSON: 


See Zro. and Cres. V, ii, 172. 


thought. Moserty: This idea seems rather to be involved in the compound than 
expressed by it; as ‘ thought-executing’ must mean ‘ executing the thought of Him 


who casts you.’ 


5. Vaunt-couriers] STeEvENs: It originally meant the foremost scouts of an 
army. In Jarvis Markham’s Zzglish Arcadia, 1607: ‘As soon as the first vancurrer 
encountered him face to face.? MALONE: Compare ‘ Jove’s lightnings, the precursors 
o’ the dreadful thunder-claps.’— 7m. I, ii, 201. HUNTER (ii, 270) calls attention 


7 
. 


Singe my white head! And thou, all-shaking thunder, 


Strike flat the thick rotundity 0’ th’ world! 
Crack nature’s moulds, all germens spill at once * 


That make ingrateful man ! 


Fool. O nuncle, court holy-water in a dry house is 
better than this rain-water out o’ doon, Good nuncle, in; 
ask thy daughters’ blessing; here’s a night pities neither — 


wise men nor fools. 


6. Singe] fing Q,. Sindge Ff. 
all-shaking| No hyphen, Qq. 
7. Strike] /mite Qq, Glo+, Mob. 
o th] of the Qq. 
8. moulds] Mold Qq, Pope+, Jen. Ec. 
germens| Cap.  Germains Qq, 
Rowe, Pope. germaines FF. ger- 
manes FF. germins Theob.+, Coll. 
Wh. Cam. é 
9. make| makes Ff, Rowe, Ktly, Sch. 
10-13. Four lines, ending Aoz/e.... 
door...bleffing...foole. in Qq. 
10. court holy-water | court-holy-water 


10, 11. holy-water....rain-water| No 
hyphens, Qq. 

Il. this rain-water] the Rain-water 
F,F,, Rowe, Pope i, Han. che rain- 
waters Pope ii+. 

@ door) a doore Qg. 

12. ask] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han, Cap. 
Knt, Dyce i, Sch. and aske Qq et cet. 
daughters’ Daughier’ F,. 
pities| that pities Pope+. ' 
neither] nether Q,. neyther Q,. 

13. men nor fools| man nor foole Qq, 
Jen. Glo.+, Mob. 


Rowe+. 


to the use of this ‘ very rare word’ in Harsnet, where one of the Peckhams is called 


‘the harbinger, the host, the steward, the vaunt-courier, the sacrist, and the pander’ — 


to the priests. WRIGHT: Cotgrave gives, ‘Avant-coureur: m. A forerunner, Auant 
curror.? - 

7. rotundity] Dexius: This, in connection with what follows, suggests not only 
the sphere of the globe, but the roundness of gestation. 

8. Crack... once] THEOBALD: Crack nature’s mould and spill all the seeds of 
matter that are hoarded within it. See the same thought in Wind. Tale, IV, iv, 489. 
For ‘ germens,’ 2. e. seeds, see Macéd. IV, i, 59. 

8. spill] Srrrvens: To destroy. [See Ham, IV, v, 20.] 

Io. court holy-water] STEEVENS: Ray, among his proverbial phrases, p. 184, 
mentions ‘ court holy-water’ to mean fair words. The French have the same phrase: 
Lau benite de cour. MALONE: Cotgrave has ‘Eau beniste de Cour. Court holy 
water; complements, faire words, flattering speeches, glosing, soothing, palpable 
cogging.’ Florio gives ‘ Mantellizzare, to flatter, to faune, to claw, to sooth yp, to 
cog and foist with, to giue one court holie water.? SINGER cites Florio: ¢ Gonjiare 
alcuno, to soothe or flatter one, to set one a gogge or with faire words bring him into 
a fooles Paradise, to fill one with hopes, or Court-holy-water.” [WricHT follows 
SINGER in giving this definition from Florio, but neither of them mentions the date 
of the edition. In the edition of 1598 the definition does not give ‘court holy- 
water;’ instead it reads ‘to perswade one that the moone is made of greene 
cheese;’ Dare /’allodo/a is there defined ‘to giue one court-hollie water, to giue a 
gudgeon.’—Ep. ] 

12, pities] Although the omission of the relative is common enough (see ABBOTT, 


never ae you ore ‘call’ you Stine 
You. owe me no subscription 3 Athen let fall 


- Your horrible pleasure; here I stand, your slave, 
cle poor, infirm, weak and despised old man. 20 
But yet I call you servile ministers, 
That will with two pernicious daughters join 
Your high-engender’d battles ’gainst a head 
So old and white as this. Oh! Oh! ’tis foul! 
Fool. He that has a house to put’s head in has a good 25 


head-piece. 


The cod-fiece that will house 


Before the head has any, 
The head and he shall louse ; 


14. bellyful] Mal. belly full QqFf. 

Spit, fire! spout, rain !] Cap. 

Spit fire, fpout raine, QqFf (/powt 
F 


aN 

"16. tax| tafke Qq. 

17. kingdom] kingdoms Johns. 

18-24. Lines end horrible...and...fer- 
uile...toin d...white...foule, in Qq. 

18. subscription] submission Pope, 
Han. 

then| why then Qq, Jen. Steev. 

Ec, Var. 

22. will..join]| Ff, Rowe, Cap. Knt, 
Coll. i, Del. Sing. Dyce i, Wh. Ktly, 


Sch. haue...ioin’d Qq et cet. 
23. high-engender'd | high engendered 


battles] Battailes F,¥,. Battels 
F,. dattel Q,. battell Q,,. 

24. Oh! Oh/!| Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Jen. Ktly. O, ko! Ff, Rowe, Pope, 
Han? sch, "0 Og. (0,0; Cap.eticet, 

25. put’s| put his Qq, Mal. Steev. Bos. 
Knt, Del. Sing. Ktly. 

26, [Sings. Cap. 

27-34. Asin Johns. Four lines, Ff. 
Prose, Qq. 

28. head has any,| head, has any Qq. 


§ 244), in dignified speech, yet here in the Fool’s speeches this and many other col- 


loquialisms are to be expected. 


16. MOBERLY calls attention to the similarity of thought in the song, ‘ Blow, blow, 


thou winter wind,’ in As You Like Jt. 


18. subscription] Urron (p. 292): 


ScumipT: Used nowhere else in Sh. 


Allegiance, submission. See I, ii, 24. 
On the other hand, the verb is frequently 


found meaning to yield, to pay respect, to submit to something. 

19. slave] WARBURTON, insensible to the drift of these lines, changed this to 
‘Brave.’ ‘That is, I defy your worst rage, as he had said just before.’ HraTu, in 
exposing the folly of this change, thus paraphrases: ‘Here I stand, submitting to 
every indignity you can put upon me, os with me what you please. For I am “a 


poor, infirm, weak and despised old man.’ 


But yet, notwithstanding my submission 


to your power, I have a right to expostulate and to call you servile ministers.’ 
27. cod-piece] Dyce (Gioss.): An ostentatiously indelicate part of the male 


re 


The man that makes his toe : 

What he his heart should son 4 
Shall of a corn cry woe, 

And turn his sleep to wake. : 

For there was never yet fair woman but she made mcrutlis 205 

in a glass. se = 

Lear. No, I will be the pattern of all patience. an. a 

I will say nothing. ~ : 

Enter KENT. 


Kent. Who's there ? 


“31. The man] That man FF +. Sta. Glo.+, Coll. iii, Sch. After pa-— 
33- Shall of ] /rall haue Qq;.Jen. tience, line 37, Q,. After gla/s, line 36, = 
37. pattern] patience FF. Ff et cet. > 


SCENE Il. Pope+, Jen. : 39. Who's] Whofe Q,. 
Enter Kent.] As in Q,, Dyce, aN 


dress, which was put to several uses,—to stick pins in, to carry the purse in, &c. &c. 
[See line 40. ] ~ 

30. many] JOHNSON: That is, a beggar marries a wife and lice. MASON: Rather, 
so many beggars marry. 

31, 32. The... make] CAPELL: By making a ‘toe’ of oné’s ‘heart’ is signify’d— 
the making that our last object which should be our first, and under it is shadow’d the 
king’s folly in surrend’ring his power; and this folly he pins upon him still faster by 
observing—that he surrender’d it to qomzex. EccLes thinks that these lines are but 
a repetition of the same ‘immodest allusion’ as is contained in the first quatrain, 
‘which turns upon the idea of housing.’ . But he thinks ‘a greater consistency of 
meaning’ will be attained by reading Aead instead of ‘heart.’ WHITE: Unless the 
Fool means that the man who keeps his toe as close as he should keep his counsel 
or the thoughts of his heart, I do not know what he means. [The meaning, if it be 
worth a search, seems to be this: A man who prefers or cherishes a mean member 
in place of a vital one shall suffer enduring pain where others would suffer merely a 
twinge. Lear had preferred Regan and Goneril to Cordelia.—Ep.] 

35. Eccies hazards the remarkable conjecture that this line is ¢ descriptive of that 
sort of treachery which the power of beauty enables a woman more readily to prac- 
tise, and which is shewn by her first addressing a man with kind speeches and 
expressions of regard, and then turning suddenly round and making mouths at his 
figure represented in a looking-glass.—Possibly an allusion might be designed to an 
affected disrelish of the liquor contained in a drinking -glass, while inwardly, and in 
reality, to use a common expression, she fakes it to heart, supposing falsehood and 
deceit to be the general concomitant of beauty.’ MoBERLY: For women, daughters 
included, are apt to have little faulty ways. [This is the Fool’s way of diverting 
attention after he has said something a little too pointed; the idea of a very pretty 
woman making faces in a looking-glass raises a smile, For the expression ‘ making 
mouths,’ see Hav. II, ii, 347; IV, iv, 50.—Ep.] 

37, 38. STEEVENS: So Perillus, in the old play, speaking of Leir: ‘But he, the 


/ arry, eats grace and a Syagogs! ; that’s a 40 
vise and a fool. — 
7 Ke mt. Alas, sir, are you here? Things that love night 
ig - Love not such nights as these; the wrathful skies 
, a -Gallow the very wanderers of the dark, 
Z _ And make them keep their caves; since I was man, 45 
Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder, 
Such groans of roaring wind and rain, I never 


my: Remember to have heard. Man’s nature cannot carry ’ 
‘Th’ affli€tion nor the fear. a 
‘bear = ' Let the great gods, 4 
: . y' 
ae 40. cod-piece| codpis Qq 42. are you) fit you Qa, Jen. 
he 41. wise man] wifeman QgF,F,, Sch. 44. Gallow the] gallow, the Qq. Gally P 
: Wife-man FF. ; the Jen. a 
4 _ 42-60. Alas.....sinning.] Lines end wanderers| wanderer Qq. 
a - _heere ?....thefe »...0f the...CAUes,... fires... 45. make| makes Qq. 
a _ grones Of....remember....CATY.... fOr Ce... 47. never] ne'reQ,. nere Q.. 
ie dreadfull....now,...thee...Lustice,...and.... 49. fear| force Qq, Pope, Theob. 0 
eae IMCE/PIOUS 2 -COUCKE. 0 Life yes.e CNL S you0ee Han. Warb, 
“ EVaCE,.. .fnning. ‘S? Qq- 
ie. myrrour of wuld patience, Puts up all wrongs, and never gives reply.’ [See Ap- 
x pendix, p. 396.] 
 <—— _ 40. grace] STEEVENS: In Shakespeare’s time, ‘the king’s grace’ was the seal 
= expression, 
a. 40. cod-piece] Douce: Sh. has with some humour applied this name to the 


. Fool, who, for obvious reasons, was usually provided with this unseemly part of 
dress in a more remarkable manner than other persons, 

42. are you here] JENNENS, following the Qq, says that the reading of the Ff 
seems to be ‘an alteration made for the ease of the actors, that he who acted Lear 
might not have the trouble of sitting down on the ground, and rising again; but if 
propriety of action take place, what can be more proper than Lear’s seating himself, 
after his last speech ?? Jennens inserts a stage-direction to that effect. 

44. Gallow] WricHT: That is, terrify. ‘Gally’ in the same sense is still used 
as a provincialism. See Jennings on the Dialects in the West of England. In the 
Glossary to Palmer’s Devonshire Dialogue, ‘Galled’ is explained as ‘frightened.’ 
In the Encyclopzedia Britannica (eighth ed.), art. Mammalia, p. 232, col. 2, we read 
of the sperm whale that ‘ when frightened it is said by the sailors to be “ gallied,” 
By probably galled.’ But this is an error. Huntley (Glossary of the Cotswold Dialect), 

gives ‘Gallow. To alarm; to frighten.’ There is an Anglo-Saxon word gelan, to 
terrify, from which it is probably derived. HERBERT COLERIDGE (Philological Soc. 
Trans., 1858, p. 123) gives a derivation, proposed by M. Metivier of Guernsey, from 
the dialect of that island—viz. Zga/uair, signifying to dazzle, =éd/ouzr, a meaning 
which , as Coleridge says, hardly applies to the present passage. VENABLES (A¢heneum, 

13 Nov. ’75) says this word is still used in the Isle of Wight. 
49. affliction... fear] Hupson: ‘ Affliction’ for zz/liction ; the two being then 


eee Big ts 


That keep this dreadful pudder o’er our er ms 
Find out their enemies now. Tremble, thou wretch; 
That hast within thee undivulged crimes, . 
Unwhipp’d of justice. Hide thee, thou bloody hand; 
Thou perjured, and thou simular of virtue 

That art incestuous, Caitiff, to pieces shake, 

That under covert and convenient seeming 

Has praétised on man’s life. Close pent-up guilts, 

Rive your concealing continents and cry 

These dreadful summoners grace. I am aman 


50. pudder| Ef, Rowe, Theob. Warb. 
Knt, Del. Sing. Ktly. Powther Q,. 
Thundring Q,, Pope, Han. Cap. fo- 
ther Johns. et cet. 

54. perjured | perjure Theob. Han. 
Warb. Johns. Coll. iii. 

and thou| thou Warb. 
simular| fimular man Qq, Pope, 
Cap. Glo.+, Mob. 


55. Zo pieces shake| in peeces fhake 
Qq. shake to pieces Popet+. 

56. covert and convenient| cover of 
convivial Warb. conj. ' 

57. Has] Ff (Ha’s F,), Rowe, Sch. 
Haft Qq et cet. 

58. concealing continents| concealed 
centers Qq. 

cry| ask Pope+. > 


55. tcestuous| inceftious Qq. 


equivalent. Man’s nature cannot endure the infliction, nor even the fear of it. So, 
in the Prayer-Book, ‘ Defend us from all dangers and mischiefs, and from the fear 
of them,’ 

50. pudder] STEEVENS: So in Beau. and Fl.’s Scornful Lady [II, ii, p. 35, ed. 
Dyce]: ‘Some fellows would have cried now, and have curs’d thee, And faln out 
with their meat, and kept a pudder.’ [It is to me a sufficient reason for preferring 
‘pudder’ to fothker, that Charles Lamb preferred it; in his remarks on this play it is 
the word he uses.—ED. | 

54. perjured] THEOBALD, with much probability, amended this to perjure on the 
analogy of its use in Love’s Lab. Lost, IV, iii, 47: ‘he comes in like a perjure wear- 
ing papers,’ and also in The Troublesome Reign of King Yohn : ‘ But, now black- 
spotted Perjure as he is.’ It is also the reading of CoLLieR’s (MS). Where the 
QqFf all agree, and the sense is clear, change seems needless, although gerjure with 
‘simular’ gives greater symmetry to the line. 

54. simular] Cottier: A ‘simular’ is a simulator ; possibly we ought to spell 
it szmeler. 

56. convenient seeming] JoHNsON: That is, appearance such as may promote his 
purpose to destroy, DeExtus dissents, and thinks it means rather befitting hypocrisy. 

57. practised] Dyce: To use arts or strategems, to plot. 

58. continents] JoHNson: That which contains or encloses, [See Ham. IV, 
iv, 64.] 

59. summoners] STEEVENS: The officers that summon offenders before a tribunal. 

59, 60. 1... sinning] Tyrwuirr: CEdipus, in Sophocles, represents himself in 


the same light : ‘ra y épya pov Terovbdr’ éort HaAdov 7 dedpaxéra.’—Colon., [line 
266, ed, Dindorf.] 


se 2 ay 


2 


< 


7 > tight ey. 


(KING LEAR 


1d against than Pais 
Alack, bare-headed ? 60 
Gacions my ret hard by here is a hovel; 
_ Some friendship will it lend you ’gainst ie tempest ; 
_ Repose you there; while I to this hard house— 
More harder than the stones whereof ’tis raised ; 
Which even but now, demanding after you, 65 ' 
Denied me to come in—return, and force 
| _ Their scanted courtesy. 
er Lear. My wits begin to turn.— ' 
_ Come on, my boy; how dost, my boy? art cold? Pl 
I am cold myself—Where is this straw, my fellow ?— 
The art of our necessities is strange, 70 : 


? 60. sinn’d] find Qq. hard then is the feone Qq et cet. 
than] their Qq. 65. you] me Qq. 
60-67. Alack...courtesy.| Prose, Qq. 67. wits begin] wit begins Qq. 
63. while] whil? Qq. 69. Zam] 7’m Pope+t, Jen. Dyce ii 
64-66. More...in] Parenthesis, Ff. this] the Theob. Warb. Johns. 
3 _ 64. harder...stones| Fi, Rowe, Knt, 70-72. Lines end caz...poore,...heart, 
=< Del. Dyce, Sta. Ktly, Glo.+, Mob. Sch. Qq. ‘ 


= 61. Gracious my lord] See Assorr, § 13. 

= 65. even but now] Aszort, § 38: Zven now with us is applied to an action that 
Z . has been going on for some long time and s¢7// continues, the emphasis being laid on 
~ ‘now.’ In Sh. the emphasis is often to be laid on ‘even,’ and ‘ even now’ means 


65. demanding] WricHT: ‘ Demand’ and ‘require’ are both used formerly in 
the simple sense of ‘ask,’ without the further idea which the words have now ac- 

4 : quired of asking with authority. See Zemf. I, ii, 139; Cym. III, vi, 92. 
— 67-73. BUCKNILL (p. 195): The import of this must be weighed with IV, vi, 
. _ 100-104, when Lear is incoherent and full-of delusion. Insanity arising from mental 
and moral causes often continues in a certain state of imperfect developement; ...a 
state of exaggerated and perverted emotion, accompanied by violent and irregular 
a conduct, but unconnected with intellectual aberration; until some physical shock is 
incurred,—bodily illness, or accident, or exposure to physical suffering; and then 
the imperfect type of mental disease is converted into perfect lunacy, characterised 
by more or less profound affection of the intellect, by delusion or incoherence. This 
is evidently the case in Lear, and although we have never seen the point referred to 
, by any writer, and have again and again read the play without perceiving it, we 
cannot doubt from these passages, and especially from the second, in which the poor 
madman’s imperfect memory refers to his suffering in the storm, that Sh. contem- 
plated this exposure and physical suffering as the cause of the first crisis in the mal- 
ady. Our wonder at his profound knowledge of mental disease increases, the more 
carefully we study his works; here and elsewhere he displays with prolific careless- 
ness a knowledge of principles, half of which would make the reputation of a mod- 


= ‘ exactly or only now.’ 
. 


hologist. 
ern psycholog 


178 


- And can make vilde things precious —Come, yc your ] aes 
Poor Fool and knave, I have one part in my heart = 


That’s sorry yet for thee. 


Fool. He that has and a little tiny wit, 


With heigh-ho, the wind and the rain, 75 
Must make content with his fortunes fit, — 
Though the rain it raineth every day. 
Lear. True, boy.—Come, bring us to this hovel. 


_ Fol, This is a brave night to cool a courtezan. 


2 prophecy ere I go: 


[Exeunt Lear and Kent. 
Liispesi: & 
80 


When priests are more in word than matter ; 


vilde| Q.F,F., Jen. vild QF 
Rowe, Sch. wile Pope et cet. 

71,72. your hovel. Poor Fool| your 
houwel; Poore Foole, ¥f. you houell poore, 
foole Qq. 

72. J have one part in| I haue one 
part of Qq. ve one thing in Pope. 
I’ve one string in Han. Warb. J’ve 
one part in Theob, Johns. Jen. Dyce ii. 

73. That's sorry| That forrowes Qq. 

74. [Sings. Cap. 

74-77. Prose in Qq. 

74. and] Om. Qq, Cap. Jen. Steev. 
Ec. Var. Coll. Del. Wh. az Theob. 
Warb. Johns. 


LFF, 


little tiny] little tynte Pope. Little 
tine Qq. “ittle-tyne Ff. little tyne Rowe. 


aa _ When brewers mar their malt with water ; 

ig } 

: Fi. a Ff, Rowe, Knt, Sta. Sch. 75. heigh-ho| hey ho Qq. height-ho 
¥ That Qq et cet. FLY F, @ heigh, ho, Cap. conj. MS.* 
: 


rain] rain in his way Johns. conj. 
77. Though] Ffi+, Jen. Knt, Del. 
Sing. Dyce, Sta. Ktly, Sch. ~ for Qq 
et cet. 
78. doy] Ff, Rowe, Knt, Dyce i, Sta. 
Sch. my good boy Qq et cet. 
hovel.| houell? Q,. 
[Exeunt...] Cap. Exit. Ff. Om. 
Qa: 
79-95. Om. Qq. 
79, 80. This...go+] Mal. Two lines, 
Ff +, Cap. 
79. This is|’ Tis Pope+. 
courtezan]| Curtizan Ff. 
80. ere] or ere Pope, Theob. Han. 
or two ere Warb. 
81. word] words FF ,+. 


73. sorry] WHITE: The reading of the Qq is certainly not inferior. 


74. STEEVENS: See the song in Twelfth Night, V,i, 398. [This may have been 
the same song, but changed by the Fool to suit the occasion; the music of the 
Twelfth Night song will be found in Chappell i, 225. Will it be believed that Gif- 
ford (Jonson’s Works, vi, 266) called this 7iwel/th Night song ‘silly trash’ ?—Ep. | 

74. and] According to ABBOTT, §§ 95, 96, this is used emphatically, with and 
without participles, for a/so, even, and that too. ‘Westill use and that to give em- 
phasis and call attention to an additional circumstance—e. ¢. He was condemned, 
ana that wnheard.”’ Here it means “a little and at a very little” ’ 

81, e¢ seg.] Wut: I believe this is an interpolation. This loving, faithful crea- 
ture would not let his old master go off half-crazed in that storm, that he might stop 
and utter such pointless and uncalled-for imitation of Chaucer, The absence of this 
prophecy from the edition of 1608, is corroborative evidence that it is an interpolation ; 


When nobles are their tailors’ tutors ; 
No heretics burn’d, but wenches’ auitanss ; 
When every case in law is right ; 


for the passage is one which, if it had been spoken at the time when the copy for that 


edition was obtained, whether surreptitiously or not, would hardly have been omitted. 
COWDEN CLARKE: This prophecy is clearly a scrap of ribaldry tacked on, by the actor 
who played the Fool, to please ‘the barren spectators’; just one of those instances 
of irrelevant and extemporaneous jesting to which Sh. himself, through his character 
of Hamlet, so strongly objects. The fact of the Fool’s present speech occurring 
after Lear has left the stage alone serves to condemn it as spurious. KoppEL (p- 79), 
on the other hand, thinks that this speech was added by Sh. after the text which we 
have in the Qq was written; ‘the poet was generous to this, the most amiable of all 
his Fools, and even added somewhat to his part.’ WaRBURTON discerned not one, 
but two, prophecies here: * the first, a satyrical description of the present manners as 
future ; and the second, a satyrical description of future manners, which the corrup- 
tion of the present would prevent from ever happening. Each of these prophecies 
has its proper inference or deduction; yet by an unaccountable stupidity, the first 


‘editors took the whole to be one prophecy, and so jumbled the two contrary in- 


ferences together.’ Accordingly, Warburton transposed lines 93, 94 to follow line 
84; that concludes the first prophecy, and Warburton points the allusion to the pres- 
ent time by adding parenthetically after them, ‘z. e. Now.’ The remaining lines 
compose the second prophecy, and at the end of the last line Warburton adds, ¢7. e, 
Never.’ Warburton’s change was followed in the text by HANMER, JOHNSON, JEN- 
NENS, and EccLes. CAPpELL grants Warburton’s conclusions, but denounces the 


transposition of the lines as ‘destructive of humour, and of the speaker’s wild cha- 


racter which disclaims regularity.’ Capell's explanation is that Sh. wrote two speeches 


' for the Fool, ‘one comprising the whole of that prophecy which relates to things 


present; it’s conclusion a waggery [2. ¢., I suppose, the line: ‘ No heretics burn’d, 
&c.], at which the speaker might face about and be going, but return to speak the 
lines about Merlin, which lines belong with equal propriety to the prophecy about 
things that cil not be. . . it is conceiv’d, further, that these seperate [szc] prophecies 
were at first spoken seperately, or on seperate nights; or one drop’d for the other, and 
we judge the drop’d one the first; that both were found in his manuscripts, standing 
irregularly; and took their form from the players, who might even present them so 
after their author’s death’ STEEVENS refers to Puttenham’s Arte of Poesie, 1589, as 
containing these lines. [See p. 232, ed. Arber. ‘Sir Geffrey Chaucer, father of our 
English Poets, hath these verses following the distributor [a rhetorical term] : When 
faith failes in Priestes sawes, And Lords hestes are holden for lawes, And robberie 
1s tane for purchase, And lechery for solace, Then shall the Realme of Albion Be 
brought to great confusion.’ The original, which is called Chaucer's Prophecy, may 
be found in vol. vi, p. 307, ed. Morris. See Brown’s note, I, iv, 91.—Ep.] 

83. tutors] WARBURTON: That is, invent fashions for them. Dettius queries if 
it should not be taken in the larger meaning of taking care of their tailors, and not 
ruining them by failing to pay their bills. ScHMmIpT says it merely means: When 
nobles are the teachers of their tailors, and better understand the handicraft. 

84. No... suitors] JoHNsoN: The disease to which wenches’ suitors are par- 
ticularly exposed was called, in Shakespeare’s time, the brenning or burning. 


No squire in debt, no poor knight; 
When slanders do not live in tongues, 
Nor cutpurses come not to ees : 
When usurers tell their gold i’ th’ field, 


And bawds and whores do churches build, oo 


Then shall the realm of Albion . > 
Come to great confusion. ~ 
Then comes the time, who lives to see , 
That going shall be used with feet. 
This prophecy Merlin shall make ; for I live before his time. 95 
es [ Exit. 


Scene III. A Room in Gloucester’s Castle. 


Enter Guoudeernk and EDMOND. 


Glou. Alack, alack, Edmund, I like: not this unnatural 
dealing. When I desired their leave that I might pity him, 
they took from me the use of mine own house; charged. 
me, on pain of perpetual displeasure, neither to speak of 
him, entreat for him, or any way sustain him. 5 

Edm. Most savage and unnatural! 

Glou. Go to; say you nothing. There is division be- 
tween the dukes, and a worse matter than that: I have re- 
ceived a letter this night; ’tis dangerous to be spoken; I 
have locked the letter in my closet; these injuries the king 10 


86. nor no| and mo Warb. Johns. 

87. not live| nor live F.,. 

88. Wor] And Pope+. 

91, 92. Asin Pope. One line, Ff. 

93, 94. Then......feet.| Transferred to 
follow line 84, by Warb, Han. Johns, 
Jen. Ec. ; 

93. see ’t] see 7¢ Mal. 

95. L live] J do live (reading line 95 
as two lines) F,F.+, Cap. 

SCENE Ill.] Sczena Tertia Ff (Scena 
F,F,). Scene 11. Rowe. SCENE Iv. 
Pope+, Jen. 


A Room...] Cap. An Apartment 
in Gloster’s Castle. Rowe. 
Enter... ] Enter Glofter, and the Baftard 
with lights, Qq (Glocefter Q.). 
1-18. Prose, Ff. Twenty lines, Qq. 
3. took| took me Q.. 
4. perpetual | Ff +, Cap. Knt, Dyce i, 


~ Del. ii, Sch. zheir Qq. their perpetual 


Jen. et cet. ’ 
5. or] F£+, Knt, Sch. zor Qq et cet 
6. and] Om. Rowe ii. 
7. There is] there's a Qq, Jen. Glo.+. 
between | betwixt Qq, Glo.+. 


95. before his time] Mosrrty: As, according to the legend, King Lear was 
contemporary with Joash, King of Judah, [See Holinshed, in Appendix, p. 384. | 

5. or] ScumipT: Compare AZeas. for Meas. IV, ii, 108 : ‘neither in time, matter, or 
other circumstance ;’ 1 Hen. VJ; I, iii, 78: ‘not to wear, handle, or use any sword.’ 


ow bears will be panes home; there is part of a power II 
already footed; we must incline - the king. I will look 
him, and Pealy relieve him; go you, and maintain talk 
with the duke, that my elecity be not of him perceived; if 
he ask for me, I am ill and gone to bed. If I die for it, 15 
as no less is threatened me, the king, my old master, must 


be relieved. There is strange things toward, Edmund; pray 


you, be careful. 

£dm. This courtesy, forbid thee, shall the duke 
Instantly know, and of that letter too. 20 
This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me 
That which my father loses; no less than all. 
The younger rises when the old doth fall. 


(Exit 


[Zvit, 


ty. there us| thers F.. There's Q,, et cet. 


Glo. Wr. Mob. Ther’s Q.. 


12. footed | landed Qq, Pope. 
look] Ff, Knt, Dyce i, Del. ii 


' Sch. look for Pope+. /eeke Qq et cet. 


15. ded, Jf | Johns. ded, if Ff, Rowei. 


19-23. Lines end £now,...de/eruing, 
...leffé... fall, in Qq. 
19. courtesy, forbid thee, | Theob. cur- 
tefie forbid thee, QqFf. courtesie forbid 
thee Pope, Han. courtesy, forbid thee! 


Huds. 
21. draw me| draw to me Q,. 
22. loses| loofes Q,F FF. 


23. The] then Qq. 
doth| doe Q,. do Q,. 


bed ; if Rowe ii+, Cap. bed, though Qq. 

bed. Though Glo. +, Dyceii, Huds. Mob, 
Sor i] Sor t Q 

17. zs strange things| ¥f, Rowe, Knt, 

Dyce i, Sta. Sch. are strange things 

Pope+,Jen. zs fome firange thing Qq 


12. footed] ScHmipT: Equivalent to /anded, as the Qq read; compare III, vii, 
44; unless it mean o# foot, as other editors explain it. 

12. look] ScHmipr: Compare Mer. Wives, IV, ii, 83: ‘1 will look some linen 
for your head’; As You Like Zt, II, v, 34: ‘He hath been all this day to look you.’ 

17. toward] See II, i, 10. 

19. forbid] This is, as WRIGHT says, ‘forbidden ;’ the sentence means: This 
courtesy or charity which you are going to show the king, and which has been for- 
bidden to you, the duke shall instantly know. Hupson finds great difficulty in 
understanding the meaning of the phrase ‘forbid thee,’ which he interprets (using 
‘forbid’ in the sense of ‘ He shall live a man forbid’ in Aacée¢h, I, iii, 21) as equiv- 
alent to a curse upon thee! [Since the foregoing was written Hudson’s separate edi- 
tion of Zear has appeared, in which, while adhering to his earlier interpretation and 
text, he concedes the possibility of the correctness of the present interpretation, but 
asks, ‘ does not this make the sense too tame ?’—ED. ] 

16 


SCENE INP he. heath. Baues a ee 


A Er nter LEAR, pone and Foou. 


Kent. Here is the place, my lord; good my lord, enter; 


The tyranny of the open il too rough an, 

For nature to endure. © = [Storm still, 
Lear, Let: me sone ; 
Kent. Good my lord, enter here. 
Lear. Wilt break my heart ? 


Kent. \Uhad rather break mineown. Goodmy lord,enter. 5 
Lear, Thou think’st ’tis much that this contentious storm 
Invades us to the skin; so ’tis to thee; 

But where the greater malady is fix’d 
The lesser is scarce felt. Thou’dst shun a bear, 


. 


SCENE Iv.] Scena Quarta Ff (Sczena 
F,). Scene wr. Rowe. ScENE V. 
Pope+, Jen. SCENE vi. Ec, (misprint). 

The heath...] Glo. Part of the 
Heath with a Hovel. Rowe. 
1-3. Here...endure.| Prose, Qq. 
2. of the] of Pope. 
night’s| nights Q.. 

3. [Storm still.] Om.Qq. At the be- 
ginning of the Scene, Cap. Dyce, Wh. 

3,4. Lear. Let...here.] Repeated by 


4. here| Om. Qq. 
Wilt] Wilt’t Theob. ii, Warb. 
Jehns. 
5. Two lines in Ff. 
L had] QqFf, Cap. Dyce, Wh. Sta. 
Glo.+. Huds. Sch. J’d@ Pope et cet. 
6. contentious| tempeftious Q.. eru- 
lentious Q,. 
7. skin; so’tis| Rowe ii. skin, fo 
tis Qq. skin, fo; tis Ff (skinfo F,). 
9. Thou'dst| thoud’fié Q.. thou 


Johns. Steev. ’73 (misprint). would? Q.. 


Scene IV.] CoLeriDcE: O, what a world’s convention of agonies is here! All 
external nature in a storm, all moral nature convulsed,—the real madness of Lear, 
the feigned madness of Edgar, the babbling of the Fool, the desperate fidelity of 
Kent,—surely such a scene was never conceived, before or since! Take it but asa 
picture for the eye only, it is more terrific than any which a Michael Angelo, inspired 
by a Dante, could have conceived, and which none but a Michael Angelo could have 
executed, Or let it have been uttered to the blind, the howlings of nature would 
seem converted into the voice of conscious humanity. This scene ends with the first 
symptoms of positive derangement; and the intervention of the fifth scene is particu- 
larly judicious,—the interruption allowing an interval for Lear to appear in full mad- 
ness in the sixth scene, : 

a. he open] WALKER (Vers. 75) suggests that the e in ‘the’ be omitted before 
open.’ 

4. heart ?] STEEVENS: I believe that Lear does not ache this question to Kent, 
but to his own bosom. Perhaps, therefore, we should point the passage thus: ¢ Wilt 
break, my heart?’ The tenderness of Kent, indeed, induces him to reply, as to an 
interrogation that seemed to reflect on his own humanity, 


mind’s free 


y’s Sie a Raitt i in ae mind 
th from my senses take all feeling else 


~ 


Save what beats there. Filial ingratitude! 


Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand 15 
- For lifting food to’t? But I will punish home. 

me will weep no more. In such a night 

To shut me out? Pour on; I will endure. 

In such a night as this? O Regan, Goneril! 

Your old kind father, whose frank heart gave all,— 20 


- Oh, that way madness lies; let me shun that; 
- No more of that! 


Kent. Good my lord, enter here. 
Lear. Prithee, go in thyself; seek thine own ease; 
This tempest will not give me leave to ponder 


On things would hurt me more. 


* 


10. thy] they F,. 
lay] light F,, Rowe, Pope. 
roaring| roring Q,. raging Q., 
Cap. Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. Sing. Ktly, 
Glo.+, Mob. 
11. Thou'dst| Thoudft Qa. 
mind’s| minds FF. 
12. body's| Rowe. bodies QqFf. 
the] this Q,. 


But ll go in— 25 


15. this hand | his hand ¥ ¥,, Rowe. 
16. Zo’f] fo 2# Q. 

IL will) I’ Pope+. 

home| fure Qq. 

17,18. fn such...endure:| Om. Qaq, 
ending the lines /ure ,...thts /...father... 
lies,...that. 

18,19. out ?...this ?] out !...this! Cap. 

20. gave] gaue you Qq, Jen. Mal. Bos. 


Cam. Wr. 
all,—] all— Rowe. all, QqFf. 
22. that!| that,— Sing. ii. 


14. beats| beares Q,. 
there. Filial ingratitude !| Rowe. 
there. Filial ingratitude, ¥,F,. their. 
Jfiliall ingratitude, Qq. there, Filiall enter here.| enter. Qq. 
ingratitude, ¥,F,. there: filial ingratt- 23. thine own| thy one Q,. thy owne 
tude. Del. Sch, ‘there,—filial ingrati- _Q,. 
tude! Sing. ii. 


12. delicate] ABBorT, § 468: Any unaccented syllable of a polysyllable (whether 
containing z or any other vowel) may sometimes be softened and almost ignored, 
Compare I, i, 90, 114, 122; or II, i, 124, &c. &e. 

14. Filial ingratitude] DrLius: In apposition to ‘ what beats there.’ 

15. as] As if. See V, iii, 202, a and Ham. I, ii, 217, with the instances there 
cited. But ABBort, § 107, says that ‘as’ is equivalent to as zf only in appearance, 


- that the ¢f is implied in the subjunctive. See also Matzner, ii, 128, where it is said 


that, although the abridged sentence may be explained by the complete form, as if, 
Lat. guasz, yet we must not assume that a primitive zf has been lost. 
25. would] As another instance of the omission of the relative, see I, iv, 58. 


Poor naked wretches, wheresoe’er you are, 


Tn, ae go first—You houseless ees a 
Nay, get thee in. I'll pray, and then I'll sleep.— 


[Fool goes in. 


That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm, 
How shall your houseless heads and unfed sides, 30 
Your loop’d and window’d raggedness, defend you 
From seasons such as these? Oh, I have ta’en — 


Too little care of this! 


Take physic, pomp ; 


Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel, 
_ That thou mayst shake the superflux to them 35 


And show the heavens more just. 


Edg. (Within.| Fathom and half, fathom and half! 


Poor Tom! 


26. [To the Fool Johns. 

26,27. Om. Qq. 

26. poverty,—] poverty— Rowe. foz- 

ertie, F,. poverty, aA: F 
27. [Fool goes in.] Johns, Exit. 

(after line 26), Ff. Om. Qq. Exit 


Se he Fool runs out from the hovel. 


32. fa’en] tane QqFf. 

36. [Enter Edgar, and Foole. Ff. 
Enter Edgar disguised like a Madman 
and Fool. Rowe+. ~ 

37. SCENE VI. Pope. 


37, 38. Om. Qq. 


Fool. (after line 26), Rowe. Exit Fool. 37. Edg. [Within] Theob. Edg. Ff. 
(after zz, line 27), Cap. Fathom] Ff. fadom Wh. 
29. storm] night Qgq. Jen. 38. The Fool...hovel.] Theob. after 
31. loop’'d] Pope. Jloopt Qq. lop'd line 40. ‘Transferred by Cap. Om. 
Ff, Rowe. looped Sch. QaqFf. 


windowd | windowed Qq. 


26. first] JoHNsoNn: This injunction represents that humility, or tenderness, or 
neglect of forms, which affliction forces on the mind. 

31. loop’d] ScHmiIpT: ‘Loop’ in Sh, does not mean a loop-hole, but simply a 
hole, an opening. 

32, 33. O... this!] VEHSE (i, 292) finds in these words the key to the tragedy. 

33- Take, &c.] JAcox (Colburn’s Mew Monthly Mag., t July, 1867) has gathered an 
entertaining collection of passages, parallel to this, from English and French literature. 

34. WALKER (C7?¢, i, 292) cites this line with a ‘ Qu.’ because of the repetition 
of the word ‘feel.’ But Dycr sees no reason for supposing it to be corrupt. 

35. superflux] Scumipr: A hapax legomenon in Sk. : 

37- COLERIDGE: Edgar’s assumed madness serves the great purpose of taking off 
part of the shock which would otherwise be caused by the true madness of Lear, 
and further displays the profound difference between the two. In every attempt at 
representing madness throughout the whole range of dramatic literature, with the 
single exception of Lear, it is mere lightheadedness, as especjally in Otway. In 
Edgar’s ravings, Sh. all the while lets you see a fixed purpose, a practical end in 
view ;—in Lear’s there is only the brooding of the one anguish, an eddy without 
progression. 

37. fathom and half] CareL_i: These words allude to his being bury’d in straw. 


e. 


_ #0. Come not in here, nuncle, here’s a spirit. Help 
me, help me! 


Kent. Give me thy hand—Who’s there ? 


_ fool. A spirit, a spirit; he says his name’s poor Tom. 
Kent. What art thou that dost grumble there i’ th’ straw ? 


Come forth. 


‘ _Linter EDGAR disguised as a madman. 


Zdg. Away! the foul fiend follows me! Through the 45 


sharp hawthorn blow the winds. 
-and warm thee. 


39,40. Prose, QqFf. Verse, the first 
line ending sfivit, Johns. Mal. Knt. 
_ 41. Who's there ?| whofe there. Q.. 
42. A spirit, a spirit,| A /pirit Qq. 
name's| nam’s Q,. name is Q,. 
43,44. Prose, QqFf. Verse, dividing 
at straw ? Johns. Cap. Steev. Ec. Bos. 
Knut, Coll. Del. Sing. Wh. Ktly, Sch. 
43. 2’ th’ in the Qq. 


Hum! go to thy bed 


t 


Ec. Var. Coll. Del. Sing. Dyce i, Wh. 


'Ktly, Glo. Huds, Wr. 


45. Through] chorough Q.. 
45,46. Through...wind.] As a quota- 
tion, Sta. Dyce ii, Cam. 
46. hawthorn] hathorne Qq. Hau- 
thorne FF. Hauthorn ¥,. 
blow the winds] Ff, Rowe, Knt, 
Del, Sch. dlowes the cold wind Qq et 


44. forth.| forth? Q,. cet. 
* Enter...madman.] Theob. Om. 
QqFf. ; 


45. SCENE VI. Han. Warb. Johns. Jen. 
45-47. Prose, QqFf. Verse, ending 
me!l...wind...thee. Johns. Cap. Steev. 


Hum!) Dyce, Sta. Glo.+, Mob. 
Sch. Aumh, Ff. Om. Qq. Humph, 
’ Rowe et cet. 

bed | Ff+, Knt, Del. Sch. cold 
bed Qq et cet. 


STEEVENS: He gives the sign used by those who are sounding the depth at sea. 
COLLIER doubts if Steevens’s explanation be correct. 

45,46. Through ae a winds] CAPELL: This has the air of a quotation from 
some lost poem. ScHmipr: The majority of editors prefer the reading of the Qq 
because it is more like line 95, and like a line in Zhe Friar of Orders Gray: «See 
through the hawthorn blows the cold wind, and drizzly rain doth fall.’ For a similar 
reason they adopt ‘go to thy cold bed and warm thee.’ 

' 47. thee] This phrase occurs again in the /vd. to Zam. the Shr., and in a note 
on it there THEOBALD thinks that, because there is just before it a clear allusion to 
a phrase in Kyd’s Spanish Tragedy, this must also be ‘a Banter upon another verse 
in that play,’ viz: ‘What outcries pluck me from my naked bed?’ But CAPELL is 
probably right in thinking this latter allusion more than doubtful, for, as STAUNTON 
says, ‘to an audience of Shakespeare’s age there was nothing risible’ either in this 
phrase in Zear or in The Spanish Tragedy. ‘The phrase,’ continues Staunton, ‘ “to 
go to a cold bed”’ meant only to go cold to bed; ‘to tise from a naked bed” sig- 
nified to get up naked frombed, and to say one “ lay on a sick bed” (a form of 
expression far from uncommon even now) implied merely that he was lying sick 
a-bed. DELIus in his first edition conjectured that the omission of ‘cold’ in the Ff 
was due to Shakespeare’s having struck it out in order to avoid the comic effect which 
it produced, This conjecture was not repeated in his second edition, But Dyce, 
commenting on it, says that Sh. ‘has studiously made the assumed madness of Edgar 


16* 


KING LEAR fer 


Lear. Didst thou give all to thy daughters? and art — 
thou come to this? = 
Ede. Who gives any thing to poor Tom? whom the 50 
foul fiend hath led through fire and through flame, through 
ford and whirlpool, o’er bog and quagmire; that hath laid 
knives under his pillow and halters in his pew; set rats- 


48, 49. Prose, QqFf. Verse, Steev.’78, 52. ford] foord Qq. *Sword Ft, 
Coll. Del. Ktly. Rowe. swamp Coll. (MS). swara 
48. Didst...thy| Ff+, Cap. Ec. Knt, | Anon.* flood Anon.* 
Del. Dyce, Sch. Didst thou give all to whirlpool| whirli- poole Qq. 
thy two Sing. Wh, Coll. iii. Haft thou Whirle Poole ¥,¥F,. whirlepoole ¥ ,. 
giuen all to thy two Qq et cet. through whirlpool johns. whirlipool 
thou] thou too Ktly. Glo. Wr. Mob. 
daughters] Daughters F ,. ‘ hath| has Qq. 
51. through fire| though Fire F,. 53. pew] Popeii. pue QqFf. 
through flame,| Om. Qq. ratsbane| Rate-bane F,. 


through ford | throgh feord Q.. 


somewhat akin to the comic, that it might contrast the better with the real insanity 
of Lear.’ CowbEN CLARKE thinks that the marked frequency of the word ‘ cold’ 
during this scene was probably intentional, in order to sustain the impression of the 
inclemency of the season. ‘ 

53. knives under his pillow] To THEOBALD is due the credit of discovering 
that here, and throughout Edgar’s feigned madness, allusions are made to Harsnet’s 
Declaration, &c. Thus: ‘ While the Spaniards were preparing their Armado against 
England, the Jesuits were here busily at work to promote the success by making con- 
verts. One method they used, to do this, was to dispossess pretended demoniacks of 
their own church; by which artifice they made several hundred converts among the 
common people, and grew so elate upon their success as to publish an account of 
their exploits in this wonderful talent of exercising. A main scene of their business, 
in this seeming-holy discipline, lay in the family of one Mr. Edmund Peckham; 
where Marwood, a servant of Antony Babington’s, Trayford, an attendant upon Mr. 
Peckham, and Sarah and Friswood Williams, and Anne Smith (three chambermaids 
in that family), were supposed to be possessed by devils, and came under the hands 
of the priests for their cure. The parties either so little liked the discipline, or the 
Jesuits behaved with such ill address, that the consequence was, the imposture was 
discovered ; the demoniacs were examined; and their confessions taken upon oath 
before the Privy Council. The whole matter being blown up, the criminals brought 
to the stake, and the trick of Devz/-hunting brought into ridicule, Dr. Harsnet (who 
was chaplain to Archbishop Bancroft, and himself afterwards Archbishop of York) 
wrote a smart narrative of this whole proceeding under the following title: «A 
Declaration of egregious Popish Impostures, to withdraw the harts of her Majesties 
Subjects from their allegeance, and from the truth of Christian Religion professed in 
England, under the pretence of casting out devils. Practised by Edmunds, alias 
Weston a Jesuit, and divers Romish priests his wicked associates. Whereunto are 
annexed the Copies of the Confessions, and Examinations of the parties themselves, 
which were pretended to be possessed, and dispossessed, taken upon oath before her 
Majesties Commissioners for causes Ecclesiasticall, At London Printed by James 


bane by his porridge; made him proud of heart, to ride on 


KING LEAR 


a bay trotting-horse over four-inched bridges, to course his 55 
own shadow for a traitor. Bless thy five wits! Tom’s 
a-cold. QO, do, de, do, de, do, de. Bless thee from whirl- 


54. porridge] Porredge Ff. pottage FF ,, Rowe. 


Qq. 56,57. Bless] blefe Qq. Blife ¥F, 
55. trotting-horse] Steev. trotting FF, Bli/s F & 
horfe QaFf. 57- O do,...de.] Ff+, Cap. Jen. Om. 


_ four-inched| Cap. foure incht Qq. O, do de, do de, do ae. Johns, et 
QqF,. foure archt F,. four arch'd cet. : 


Roberts, dwelling in Barbican 1603.” ... The greatest part of Edgar’s dissembled 
lunacy, the names of his devils, and the descriptive circumstances he alludes to in 
his own case, are all drawn from this pamphlet, and the confessions of the poor 
deluded wretches.’ In this mention of ‘knives’ and ‘halters’ there seems to be an 
allusion to the following passage from Harsnet (which is here given as printed by 
STAUNTON): ‘This examinant further saith, that one Alexander an apothecarie, 
having brought with him from London to Denham on a time a new halter, and two 
blades of knives, did leave the same upon the gallerie floare in her Maister’s house. 
The next morning he tooke occasion to goe with this examinant into the said gal- 
lerie, where she espying the said halter and blades, asked Ma: Alexander what 
they did there: Hee making the matter strange, aunswered, that he saw them not, 
though hee looked fully upon them: she her selfe pointing to them with her finger, 
where they lay within a yard of them, where they stoode both together. Now (quoth 
this examinant) doe you not see them ? and so taking them up, said, looke you heere: 
Ah (quoth hee) now I see them indeed, but before I could not see them: And there- 
fore saith he, I perceave that the devil hath layd them heere, to worke some mischiefe 
upon you, that are possessed. Hereupon ...a great search was made in the house, 
to know how the said halter and knife blades came thether: but it could not in any 
wise be found out, as it was pretended, till Ma: Mainy in his next fit said, as it was 
reported, that the dévil layd them in the Gallery, that some of those who were pos- 
sessed, might either hang themselves with the halter, or kil themselves with the 
blades..—Zaxamination of Friswood Willianis, p. 219. 

53. pew] DeEttus suggests that this is to indicate that not even the most sacred 
places were exempt from the temptation to commit suicide. 

56. five wits] JoHNSON (note on Much Ado, I, i, 66): ‘The wits seem to have 
been reckoned five, by analogy of the five senses, or the five inlets of ideas.’ Ina 
note on Jwelfth Night, IV, ii, 92, MALONE quotes from Stephen Hawes’s poem 
called Graunde Amoure, 1554, to show that the ‘five wits’ were: ‘common wit, 
imagination, fantasy, estimation, and memory,’ That the five wits were confounded 
with the five senses, COLLIER shows by a quotation from ‘the interlude of 7he Woride 
and the Chylde, printed by Wynkyn de Worde in 1522, and introduced into vol. xii, 
p- 334, of Dodsley’s Old Plays: “ Age. Of the .v. wittes I wolde have knowynge. 
Perseuerance. Forsoth, syr, herynge, seynge, and smellynge, The remenaunte 
tastynge, and felynge: These ben the .v. wittes bodely.”? MALONE: Sh., however, 
in his 141st Soumet, considered the ‘ five wits’ as distinct from hs five Senses. 

57. a-cold] ABBOTT, § 24: That is, ‘a-kale,’ E. E. ‘ina chill’ [See II, ii, 69.] 

57. do, de] EccLrs: This seems intended to express the sound uttered by per- 


+ Sent 

188 

ie star-blasting, and taking! — ‘si me 

charity, whom the foul fiend vexes. There ceteh : have him 

now, and there, and there again, and there. [Storm still, a 
Lear. What, have his daughters brought him to this 


pass ?-— oa 


Couldst thou save nothing? Wouldst thou give ’em all? 

Fool. Nay, he reserved a blanket, else we had been all 
shamed. 

Lear. Now, all the plagues that j in the pendulous air 65 
Hang fated o’er men’s faults light on thy daughters! 

Kent. He hath no daughters, sir. 

Lear. Death, traitor! nothing could have subdued nature 
To such a lowness but his unkind daughters. 
Is it the fashion that discarded fathers 70 
Should have thus little mercy on their flesh ? 
Judicious punishment! ’twas this flesh begot 


58. star-blasting| frarre-blufting Qq. 62. Wouldst...em] Ff, Rowe, Wh. 
60. there again] here again F +. Sch. Didst.....em Pope+, Jen. Sta. 
and there.| Om. Qq. Dyce ii. Wouldst...chem Knut. Didf... 
[Storm still.] Om. Qq. them Qq et cet. 
61. What, have his] Theob. What, 64. shamed] ashamed Ktly. E 
his Qq. Ha’s his F,. Has his FF, 66. fight] fall Qq. 
Ktly. Have his F,, Rowe, Pope, Knt. 72, 73- begot.....daughters.| One line, 
pass] affe F ,. Qa. | 


sons who shiver with extreme cold, [Cotgrave gives: ‘ F7i//er. To shiuer, chatter, 
ur didder for cold.’—Ep. ] 

58. taking] See II, iv, 160. 

65, 66. BoswELL: Compare Z7mon, IV, iii, 108-110: ‘ Be as a planetary plague, 
when Jove Will o’er some high-viced city hang his poison In the sick air.’ ScHMIDT: 
In Zhe Birth of Merlin, which has been attributed to Sh., we find: ‘knowest thou 
what pendulous mischief roofs thy head ?’ = 

69. unkind] WALKER (C7%z. i, 87) calls attention to the accent ‘ ankind.’ 


71. flesh] Detius refers this to the sticking of pins in the mortified bare arms, 


CLARKE to the exposure of poor Tom’s body to the storm. In Epwin Boorn’s 
Prompt Book there is the following stage-direction: ‘Draws a thorn, or wooden 
spike, from Edgar’s arm, and tries to thrust it into his own.’ After line 73: ¢ Edgar 
seizes Lear’s hand and takes away the thorn,’ 

72. Judicious] WALKER (Crit. i, 64) cites this word, which he says is here used 
for judicial, among other instances of an ‘inaccurate use of words in Sh., some of 
them owing to his imperfect scholarship (imperfect, I say, for he was not an ignorant 
man even on this point), and others common to him with his contemporaries.’ See 
‘eternal,’ Ham. I, v, 21. 


72. punishment] WALKER ( Vers. 66) and ABBorT, § 467, cite this as a dissylla- 
ble here. 


ican daughters, “a 


+ 
<< 
— = 


‘Pillicock sat on am 


, loo, loo! 


om eit 
_ Edg. Take heed o’ th’ foul fiend; obey oe parents ; 
keep thy word justly ; swear not; Conia not with man’s 
sworn spouse; set not thy sweet heart on proud array. 80 
: Tom’s a-cold. 


73. daughters| Daughter F 

74, 75. Pillicock...loo!] As in Johns. 
One line, QqFf. 

74. Pillicock-hill] Hyphen, Rowe. 
pelicocks hill Qq. fpelicacks hill Q,. 
Pillicocks-hill Mal. Steev. Bos. Sing. 
Ktly. 

“75. Alow...loo!] a@ lo lo lo. Qq. Haloo, 
loo, loo. Cap. Halloo, halloo, loo, loo! 


at’hQ,. of 


79. word justly] Pope. words iu/fély 
Qgq. words Luftice F,. word, juftice 
ELF,F,. word, do justice Rowe. word's 
justice Knt, Del. i. words’ justice Sch. 

80. set not] fet on FF, 

sweet heart] /weet-heart Ff, Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. i. sweetheart Sing. 


78. 0 th’) oth’ FFF. 
the Q., Cap. 


Theob ii. 


73. pelican] See Ham. IV, v, 142. WRIGHT: See Batman uppon Bartholome 
(ed. 1582), fol. 186 4: ‘The Pellican loueth too much her children. For when the 
children bee haught, and begin to waxe hoare, they smite the father and the mother 
in the face, wherfore the mother smiteth them againe and slaieth them. And the 
thirde daye the mother smiteth her selfe in her side that the bloud runneth out, and 
sheddeth that hot bloud vppon the bodies of her children. And by virtue of the 
bloud the birdes that were before dead, quicken againe.’ 

74. Pillicock] CAPELL: This was suggested by the word ‘pelican.’ CoLLigR: It 
is thus mentioned in Ritson’s Gammer Gurton’s Garland :—‘ Pillycock, Pillycock 
sat on a hill; If he’s not gone, he sits there still.’ Dyce (G/oss.): Frequently used 
as a term of endearment. Florio gives: ‘P%zchino, a prime-cocke, a pillicocke, a 
darlin, a beloued lad.? Cotgrave has: ‘ Turelureau. Mon tur. My pillicocke, my 
prettie knaue.’ But it had another meaning; see Florio in Pizzolo, or Puga. [It is 
not unlikely that the next line was meant to imitate the crowing of a cock. Isee no 
reason why in nondescript words we should desert the spelling of the original texts, 
and change ‘alow’ into Hal/oo. In such words it is more likely than not that the 
compositors ‘ followed copy.’—ED. ] 

79. word justly] SCHMIDT sugg 
deeds as in words.’ 

79. commit] MALONE (Note on O¢h. IV, ii, 72): This word in Shakespeare’s 
time, besides its general signification, seems to have been applied particularly to un- 
lawful acts of love. 

80. set] SCHMIDT: 
desirous of anything. 

81. a-cold] GrorceE Ross, M. D. (Studies, &c., p. 37): Lear, the genuine lunatic. 
is insensible to cold, and complains of it only when reason returns; on the othe: 


ests, as the meaning of the Ff, ‘be as just in 


‘ Set,’ when followed by ‘on,’ is equivalent to incite, to make 


Lear, ‘Wiabhast laa been? 


Edg. A serving-man, proud in heart and mind; the 
curled my hair; wore gloves in my cap; served the lust of 
my mistress’s heart and did the aét of darkness with hon i. 
Swore as many oaths as I spake words and broke them in 
the sweet face of heaven. One that slept in the contriving of 
lust and waked to do it. Wine loved'I deeply, dice dearly ; 


83. serving-man, | Seruingman? FF,. on the contriving Han. on the contriv- ~ 
85. ‘wistress’s] Roweii. miftris QqFf. ing of Cap. _ ; x 
mustress’ Jen. Dyce, Sta. Ktly, Glo. Cam, 88. deeply] deepelyQ,. deerely FF, _ 


87. 22...0f | i the contriving Pope+. dearly FF, Rowe, Knt. 


hand, the mock madman makes his sensitiveness to external influences the constant 


burden of his lamentations. ‘[“Tom’s a-cold’ appears to have been the peculiar cry 
of Bedlam beggars at all seasons. See II, iii, 14.—EDp.] 

83. serving-man] KNIGHT: This is not a menial, but a servant in the sense in 
which it is used in Zzwo Gen. II, iv, 106. ScHMrpT denies this, and affirms that, in 
jocose style, where the meaning can be clearly gathered from the context, a cavaliere 
servente is undoubtedly called a servanz, but never a ‘serving-man,’ which here bears 
its ordinary meaning. 

84. curled my hair] MALONE cites from Harsnet: ‘Then Ma. Mainy, by the in- 
stigation of the first of the seaven [spirits], began to set his hands unto his side, 
curled his hair, and used such gestures as Ma. Edmunds [the exorcist] presently 
affirmed that that spirit was Pride. Herewith he began to curse and banne, saying, 
What a poxe do I here? I will stay no longer amongst a company of rascal priests, 
but goe to the court, and brave it amongst my fellows, the noblemen there assem- 
bled. . . . Shortly after they [the seven spirits] were all cast forth, and in such man- 
ner as Ma, Edmunds directed them, which was, that every devil should depart in 
some certaine forme representing either a beast or some other creature, that had the 
resemblance of that sinne whereof he was the chief author: whereupon the spirit 
of pride departed in the form of a peacock » the spirit of s/o¢k in the likeness of an 
asse; the spirit of eve in the similitude of a dog; the spirit of gluttony in the 
forme of a wo/fe, and the other devils had also in their departure their particular 
likenesses agreeable to their natures.’ RusHTon (Zuphuism, p. 47) cites from 
fuphues, «Be not curious to curle thy haire,’ &c. [This may, perhaps, refer to 
the ‘love-locks’ that were worn by gallants in Shakespeare’s day.—Ep.] 

84. gloves] THEOBALD thinks it but justice to mention an emendation which a 
learned gentleman suggested to him, viz. that we should read ‘wore cloves in my 
cap,’ alluding to the fashion then in vogue of quilting spices and perfumes into the 
linings of hats. Theobald, of course, dissents, and adds that it was ‘the custom to 
wear gloves in the hat upon three different motives: as the favour of a mistress; in 
honour of some other respected friend; or as a mark to be challeng’d by an adver- 
sary where a duel was impending.’ STEEVENS: Portia, in her assumed character, 
asks Bassanio for his gloves, which she says she will wear for his sake; and Henry 


V gives the pretended glove of Alengon to Fluellen, which afterwards occasions his 
quarrel with the English soldier. 


KING LEAR 


ne and in woman out-paramoured the Turk. False of heart, 
light of ear, bloody of hand; hog in sloth, fox in stealth, go 

wolf in greediness, dog in aes, lion in prey. Let not . 
the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of silks betray thy 
poor heart to woman. Keep thy foot out of brothels, thy 
hand out of plackets, thy pen from lenders’ books, and defy 


89. out-paramoured| out paromord rustlings Jen. 


: 93. woman| women Qq, Jen. Steev. ’ 
90. offhand |hand¥,, handed FF, Var. Sing. Ktly, Huds. 
Rowe. brothels | brothell Qq, Jen. 
Ql. prey] pray Q,. 94. plackets| placket Qq, Jen. 
92. rustling] rufingsQ,. ruflings Q,. b00ks| booke Qq, Jen. 


90. ear] JoHNSON: Credulous of evil, ready to receive malicious reports. 

go-91. hog... prey] WRIGHT: Mr Skeat has pointed out to me that in the 
Ancren Riwile, p. 198, the seven deadly sins are typified by seven wild animals; the 
lion being the type of pride, the serpent of envy, the unicorn of wrath, the bear of 

sloth, the fox of covetousness, the swine of greediness, and the scorpion of lust. 

94. plackets] When STEEVENS wished to treat an indelicate subject in an in- 
delicate way, yet with a show of learning, he not infrequently signed his notes Am- 
NER, the name of a guileless, dissenting clergyman settled not far from Steevens’s 


ys home at Hampstead. There is such a note so signed on this word. Nares defines 
‘placket’ as ‘a petticoat, generally an underpetticoat. . . . Bailey says it was the fore- 
as part of the shift or petticoat, but it was neither. It is sometimes used for a female, 


the wearer of a placket, as petticoat now is.’ FLORIO gives: ‘ Zorace,... also av 
placket or a stomacher, a brestplate or corselet for the body.’ This led SINGER and 
others to define it simply as ‘a stomacher.’ Dyce (G/oss.) has the following note: 
‘ Whether or not “ placket ” had originally an indelicate meaning is more than I can 
determine. It has been very variously explained: a petticoat, an underpetticoat, a 
pocket attached to a petticoat, the slit or opening in a petticoat, and a stomacher; 
and it certainly was occasionally used to signify a female as petticoat is now. The 
term glacket is still in use in England and America for a petticoat, and, in some of 
the provinces for a shift, a slit in the petticoat, a pocket, &c.””—Halhwell. “ As to the 
word placket, in * An exact Chronologie of memorable things’ in Wit’s Interpreter, 34 
ed. 1671, it is said to be ‘sixty-six years since maids began to wear plackets.’ Ac- 
cording to Middleton, the placket is ‘the open part’ of a petticoat; and the word is 
not altogether obsolete, since the opening in the petticoats of the present day is ‘still 
called ‘the placket hole,’ in contradistinction to the pocket hole.’””—Chapell’s Pof- 
ular Music of the Olden Time, ii, 518.’ The student who wishes to pursue the 
subject further will find a note on it by WHITE on the present passage, and also 
on Love's Lab. Ill, i, 186. Scumipt (ZLex.) gives the other instances of its use in 
Sh., and in addition see Marston’s What Vou Will, II, i, p. 267, ed. Halliwell: 
‘apple squiers, basket bearers, or pages of the placket.’ Middleton’s Roaring Girl, 
IL, iii, p. 497, ed. Dyce. Middleton’s Any Thing for a Quiet Life, Il, ii, p. 447, 
ed. Dyce: ‘—the open part [of a petticoat] which is now called the placket. 
Franklin, jun. Why, was it ever called otherwise? Geo. Yes; while the word re- 
mained pure in his original, the Latin tongue, who have no K’s, it was called the 


192 


let him trot by. 

95-97. Still...by] Asin QqFf. Three 
lines, Glo.+, Dyce ii. 

95. Still...nonny.] In Italics, Sta. 
the hawthorn] shy Hawthorn F, 
: hawthorn] athorne Qq. Hau- 
thorne ¥F,F.. 

96. Says...nonny] Ff+, Jen. Knt, 
Dyce. Sch. hay no on ny Qg. Ha! 
nenni; Cap. Hey xo nonny,—Ec. says 


the foul fiend. Still through the hawthorn blows the cold 
wind, Says suum, mun, nonny. Dolphin my boy, boy, sessa! 


- 


[Storm still, 


phin my Boy, Boy Sefley: let him trot 
by. Ff (Sefey F,, Knt), Rowe+, Jen. 
Knt. Dolphin my boy, my boy, ceafe let 
him trot by. Qq (cae/e Q,), also Ec. Ktly 
(both in Italics, and in two lines; Ktly 
reads cessé). dolphin, my boy, my boy. 
sesse; let him trot by. Cap. 

96. my boy, boy] Ff+, Sch. my doy, 


my boy Qq et cet. 
trot by] trot my ¥,F,. 


suum, mun, ha no nonny Steev. et cet. 


[Storm still.] Om. Qq. | a 
Dolphin...by] Mal. (subs.) Dod- ' 


placet; a placendo, a thing or~place to please.’ Middleton’s 7he Honest Whore, a 
Part 2, V, ii, p: 241, ed. Dyce. Beau. and FI.’s Love's Cure, I, ii, p. 116, ed. Dyce. 
Beau. and Fl.’s Humourous Lieutenant, IV, iv, p. 508, ed. Dyce. WHITE well ; 
sums up the discussion: ‘It is clear at least that the placket, in Shakespeare’s time 
and after, was an article of female apparel so secret as not to admit description, and 
so common as not to require it; and that, consequently, the thing having passed out 
of use, the word stat nominis umbra.’ ; 
94. lenders’ books] STEEVENS: So in Chapman’s AZ Fools, 1605: ‘If I but 
write my name in mercers’ books, I am as sure to have at six months end A rascal 
at my elbow with his mace,’ &c. 
96. suum, mun] STEEVENS: These words were probably added by the players, 
who, together with the compositors, were likely enough to corrupt what they did not 
understand, or to add more of their own to what they already concluded to be non- 
sense, [See KNIGHT’s interpretation, in the next note. For ‘nonny,’ see Ham. 
IV, v, 161.] 
96, 97. Dolphin... by] CAPELL supposes that Edgar ‘feigns himself one who 
is surveying his horses, and marking their paces; that his ‘boy’ whom he calls 
‘dolphin’ (or dauphin) is about to stop one of them, and cries out to that boy in 
wild language: ‘ Ha/ no, leave to do it; det him trot by. if any one, upon the 
score of this dolphin, will say—he feigns himself Neptune, he shall not be oppos’d 


_ init.’ JoHNsoN: Of interpreting this there is not much hope or much need. But 


anything may be tried. The madman, now counterfeiting a proud fit, supposes him- 
self met on the road by some one that disputes the way, and cries ‘ Hey !—No—’ 
but altering his mind condescends to let him pass, and calls to his boy Dolphin 
(Rodolph) not to contend with him. ‘*On—Dolphin, my boy, cease. Let him 
trot by.’ STEEVENS gives the following stanza: ‘Dolphin, my boy, my boy, Cease, 
let him trot by; It seemeth not that such a foe From me or you would fly,’ and adds 
that it is from ‘a very old ballad written on some battle fought in France, during 
which the King, unwilling to put the suspected valour of his son the Dauphin—i, e. 
Dolphin (so called and spelt at those times) to the trial, is represented as desirous to 
restrain him from any attempt to establish an opinion of his courage on an adversary 
who wears the least appearance of strength ; and at last assists in propping up a dead 
body against a tree for him to try his manhood upon. Therefore, as different cham- 


fe 


cat no perfume. 


KING LEAR 


bean, Thou wert better in thy grave than to answer «98 
. thy uncovered body this extremity of the skies. Is 
P > ee no more than this? Consider him well. Thou owest 100 
_ the worm no silk, the beast no hide, the sheep no wool, the 
Ha? here’s three on’s are sophisticated. 


Thou art the thing itself; unaccommodated man is no more 


_ but such a poor, bare, forked animal as thou art. Off off, 


you lendings! come, unbutton here. 105 


98. Thou] Ff+, Cap. Sch. Why, 
thou Qq et cet. 
wert] were Sing. Sta. 
thy grave| a Graue Ff, Rowe, 
Pope, Han. Knt, Sch. : 
98-105. Thou...here.| Nine lines, end- 
ing answer...skies...well>...hide,...Ha!... 
art...ts,...animal...here. Ktly. 


100. than] but Qa, Jen. 


more...Consider| more, but this 


cofider Q,. 


102. Ha?] Om. Qq. 
, here's] hersQ.. hers Q,. 
on’s| ons QF. onesQ,. ofus 
Pope+, Steev. Ec. Var. Knt, Del. 
sophisticated fo phifticated Q.. 
105. dendings| leadings Q.. 
come, unbutton here.| come on 
Q,. come on be true. Q,. 
[ Tearing off his clothes. Rowe. 
Tearing...; Kent and the Fool strive to 
hinder him. Cap. 


By pions are supposed to cross the field, the King always discovers some objection to 
4 his attacking each of them, and repeats these two lines as every fresh personage is 
z introduced. The song I have never seen, but had this account from an old gentle- 
b> man, who was only able to repeat part of it, and died before I could have supposed 
7 : the discovery would have been of the least importance to me.’ [It may perhaps be 
a well to remember that Steevens’s ‘ black-letter volumes’ of unknown titles and dates, 
it together with his ‘ballads’ rehearsed from memory, are to be received with cau- 


tion.—Ep.] FARMER cites: ‘Od’s my life! I am not allied to the sculler yet; he 
shall be Dauphin my boy.’—Jonson’s Bartholomew Fair [V, iii, p. 522, ed. Gifford, 
where Gifford says, ‘ Dauphin my boy, is the burden of a ridiculous old song, of 
which mention is made by Steevens in King Lear.’ Note that Gifford was too cau- 
tious to allude to the interesting little history that Steevens gives of the ballad.— 
Ep.] KwyicuT: We are inclined to think, if there be any meaning, some of the 
words are meant as an imitation of the sound of the rushing wind, and that ‘let him 
go by’ has the same reference. 

96. sessa!] MALONE: I have printed ‘Sessa,’ because the same cant word oc- 
curs in the Induction to Zam. the Sh. JOHNSON (note on III, yi, 72): This I take 
to be the French word cessez, pronounced cessey, which was, I suppose, like some 
other of common use among us. It is an interjection enforcing cessation of any 

3 action, like, be guiet, have done. COLLIER: It may be doubted whether it be not a 

4 mere interjection. 
} 98. thou wert] See I, iv, 93. 

102. cat] That is, the civet-cat. 

102, sophisticated] Scumipr: Not elsewhere in Sh, 

103. unaccommodated] WricuT: That is, unfurnished with what is necessary, 
especially with dress. Compare IV, vi, 81, where Edgar says, after seeing Lear 
‘ fantastically dressed with wild flowers,’ ‘ The safer sense will ne’er accommodate 


17 


Fool. ‘Prithee, nuncle, be | 
to swim in. Now a little fi 


Look, here comes a walking fire. 


curfew and walks at first cock; he gives the web and 


an 
106. Prithee] PritheQ,. PrytheeF,. et cet. ' ix 
Prethee FLY F ,. 110, Flibbertigibber] fliberdegibek Q,. 
contented | content Qq, Jen. Sirberdegibit Q.. 
107. wide] Jen.Walker. wilde Q,F,F,. 11t. af] Ff, Rowe, Sch. “// the Qq 
wild Q,F,F, et cet. et cet. : 
108. a//] and all Q,, Rowe+. gives) gins Q.. 
on’s| in Qq. of’s Cap. of his III,112. and the pin, squints| Ff. 


Steev. Ec. Var. Knt. =~ & the pin, fquemes Q,. the pingueuer 
110. foul] Ff+, Sch. fol fiend Qq Q,. the pinquever Q,. 


His master thus.’ In Shakespeare’s time the word ‘accommodate’ had begun to be 
abused. See 2 Hen. JV. III, ii, 72, &c. From the word ‘ lendings,’ which occurs 
here, it would seem that ‘ accommodate’ had even then acquired the modern sense 
of ‘to furnish with money.’ 

105. unbutton here] It has been suggested to me by an eminent novelist and 
dramatist in London, that these words are properly a stage-direction.—ED. 

107. wide] JENNENS first suggested this change, on the ground that ‘“ wide”’ is 
better opposed to “little; ”?’ it was confirmed, as I think, by WALKER (C77z. ili, 279), 
who says that ‘z2/d is in the manner of modern, not Elizabethan poetry,’ and he gives 
instances, not alone from Sh., but from contemporary authors, where the same mis- 
print of w7/d for ‘wide’ occurs. é 

Io9. here comes] Although this evidently refers to Gloucester with his torch, 
yet I think it somewhat premature to mark Gloucester’s entrance here as the Cam. 
editors, following the Qq, have done. In the Qaq, if they were printed from an acting 
copy, the stage-directions are rather directions to the actors to he ready to go on 
than indications of their actual entrance. It is not easy to conceive, in the restricted 
space of the Shakespearian stage, how Gloucester could have remained unnoticed 
by Lear throughout Edgar’s speech from line 109 to 119.—Ep. 

110, Flibbertigibbet] STervens; This fiend is mentioned by Latimer in his 
sermons [‘And when these flatterers, and flybbergybes an other daye shall come and 
clawe you by the backe and say.’—Second Sermon, 1549, p. 60, ed. Arber.—Ep.], 
and Heywood, in his Proverbs and Epigrams, has the following: * Thou Flebergibet, 
Flebergibet, thou wretch!’ Percy: ‘Frateretto, Fleberdigibet, Hoberdidance, 
Tocobatto, were four deuils of the round, or Morrice, whom Sara in her fits, tuned 
together, in measure and sweet cadence.’—Harsnet, p. 49. COTGRAVE: Coguette + 
f. A pratling, or proud gossip; a fisking, or fliperous minx, a cocket, or tatling hous- 
wife; a titifill, a flebergebit. BrLt (Sk. Puck, &c. iii, 104) gives a fanciful deriva- 
tion of this word, which, he says, is Galgenmdnnchen personified. 

Itt. walks at first cock] Scnmipr: Not unfrequently in Sh. ‘to walk? 1s 
equivalent ¢o go away. Thus in Cym. I, i, 176: « Queen. Pray, walk awhile. Jm- 
oge. About some half-hour hence, I pray you, speak with me ... for this time 


Edg. This is the foul Flibbertigibbet; he begins at 110° 


ah. oo a — 


oe 


— el 7 

pin, squints the eye, and makes the hare-lip; mildews 112 
the white wheat and hurts the poor creature of earth. 
Swithold footed thrice the old; 


112. hare-lip] Hare-lippe FF. Hair- _ 114. Swithold] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Knt, 

_ kip F, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns, Del. Dyce, Sch. /withald Qq. St. 

— jen. hare lip Q,. hart lip Q,. Withold Theob.i. S. Withold Glo. Wr. 
113. creature] creatures Han. Saint Withold Theob. ii et cet. 

< earth the earth FE + Jens Ec. ' old] Q,, Ff, Rowe, Pope, Knt, 


114-118. Swithold...aroint thee !] As Dyce, Glo. Wr. Sch. olde Q,. old 


: by Cap. Four lines, Ff. Prose, Qq. Cam. wold Theob. et cet. 


t 
8 8 


leave me.’ That fo walk is used technically of spirits does not interfere with the 
‘present modified meaning. See IV, vii, 83. [For the effect of the cock-crow upon 
‘extravagant and erring spirits,’ see Hamz. I, i, 150.] 

112. web and pin] MALone: See Florio, who gives ‘Ca/eratfa. Also a disease in 
the eies called a pin and aweb,’ [Thus, in the edition of 1598.] WRIGHT gives as 
Florio’s definition, ‘ A purculleis. ... Also a dimnesse of sight occasioned by humores 
hardned in the eies called a Cataract or a pin and a web.’ 

114-118. Swithold ...thee!] WARBURTON: We should read it thus: Saint 
Withold footed thrice the wold, He met the night-mare, and her zame told, Bid her 
alight, and her troth plight, And aroynt thee, witch, aroynt thee vigh¢; i.e. Saint 
Withold, traversing the wo/d or downs, met the night-mare; who, having told her 
name, he obliged her to a/igit from those persons whom she rides, and plight her 
troth to do no more mischief. This is taken from a story of him in his legend. 
Hence he was invoked as the patron saint against that distemper. And these verses 
were no other than a popular charm, or mighd-sfe// against the Zpzaltes. ‘The last 
line is the formal execration, or apostrophe of the speaker, of the charm to the witch, 
aroynt thee right, i.e. depart forthwith. Bedlams, gipsies, and such-like vagabonds, 
used to sell these kinds of spells or charms to the people. They were of various 
kinds for various disorders, and addressed to various saints. We have another of 
them in B. and FI.’s Monsieur Thomas, IV, vi, which is expressly called a night-spell, 
as follows: ‘St. George, St. George, our Lady’s knight, He walks by day, so does he 
by night; And when he had her found, He her beat, and her bound, Until to him 
her troth she plight, She would not stir from him that night.’ This, says SrEEVENS, 
is likewise one of the ‘magical cures’ for the zzcubus, quoted, with little variation, 
by Reginald Scott in his Discovery of Witchcraft, 1584. THEOBALD: My ingenious 
friend Mr Bishop saw that ‘old’ must be wo/d, which signifies a down, or champion 
ground, hilly and void of wood. And as to St. Withold, we find him again men- 
tioned in our author’s 7youblesome Raigne of King Fohn [p. 256, ed. Nichols]: 
‘Sweet S. Withold of thy lenitie, defend us from extremitie.’” TyRwuitT: I cannot 
find this adventure in the common legends of St. Vitalis, who, I suppose, is here 
called «St. Withold.? FARMER: Olds is the same word as wo/ds. Spelman writes, 


Burton upon olds ; the provincial pronunciation is still the o/es, and that, being the 


vulgar orthography, may be the correct one here. In a book called The Actor, 
ascribed to Dr Hill, it is quoted ‘the co/d’ [the reading of Tate’s version.’— 
Sreevens]. Mr Colman has it, in his alteration of Lear, ‘the world.’ [To this 
note COLMAN replied that wordd in his edition was an error of the press. ] 


He met the night-mare and her nine-fold ;, 
Bid her alight, Mg 
And her troth plight, 

And aroint thee, witch, aroint thee! 


How fares your grace? 


. ig 
Enter GLOUCESTER, with a torch. 


Lear. What’s he? 


120 


Kent. Who’s there? What is’t you seek? 
Glou, What are you there? Your names? 
Edg. Poor Tom, that eats the swimming frog, the toad, 


~ 


115. He met the night-mare| he met 
the night mare Q,. anelthu night Moore 


Q,. anelthunight Moor Q,. 


nine-fold | ninefold ¥ FF ,. nine 
Sold Qq. name told Warb. Johns. Jen. 
116. her alight | her a-light Ff. her, 
O light Qq. E 
117. troth plight] troth-plight Ff. 
118. arotnt...aroint| aroynt....aroynt 
Ff. arint...arint Qq. 


118. thee, witch,| thee, witch Q,- 
thee Witch F ,¥,. the witch, ¥ ly thee, 
with Q.. 

thee !| thee right. Warb. 

Enter...torch.] Ff, after line 105. 
Transferred by Pope. Enter Glofter. 
Qq (Glocefter. Q,), after line 109. Af- 
ter line 109, Cap. Glo.+. 

120. SCENE VII. Pope+, Jen. 

121. Who's] Whofe Qq. 


115. nine-fold] CAPELL: That is, her nine imps, or familiars. TyRWHITT: Put, 
for the sake of rhyme, instead of mine foals. 

118. aroint] See Macé. I, iii, 6, and notes. Since those derivations, all of them 
unsatisfactory, were there collected, another, which unfortunately must be placed in 
the same category, has been contributed by F. J. V. in Notes and Qu., 15 March, 
1873. He proposes the French érezzfe-¢oz ; that is, ‘break thy back or reins, used 
as an imprecation.’? In the notes on Afacd. credit is not given, as it should have 
been, to CAPELL for the derivation in his Glossary: ‘Avaunt! Hell take thee! 
Lat. Dii te averruncent!’ NarREs cites it, without giving its author, and to Nares 
it has been frequently attributed. The following derivation, which seems highly 
probable, appeared in Zhe Academy, 28 Dec. 1878: Mr F. D. MATTHEW, of the 
New Shakespeare Society's Committee, who is editing the unprinted English Works 
of Wiclif for the Early English Text Soc., has come across two instances of what 
must surely be Shakespeare’s avoiné—the verb arunte, avoid—in a Wycliffite tract 
in the MS C. v. 6, Trinity Coll., Dublin, lately lent to him by the College: “ And 
here sculd mez aruxt feynt penytauzsers, cowfessours and oper prestis pat assoylen 
for money’? (Leaf 157, back). ‘And here schul men arunte pe feend pat stirib 
mew to last iz pis erroure” (Leaf 159, back), “I think,” says Mr Matthew, 
“there is no doubt that ‘arunte,’ which here evidently means ‘avoid or shun,’ is 
the ‘aroint’ of JZacd, I, iii, 6, and Lear, III, iv, 118, which has hitherto not been 


met with out of Sh.” The change from % to of is not easy, but has surely taken 
place here.’ 


2. 
‘an 


pole, the GE and the water; that in the fury 


_ of his heart, when the foul fiend rages, eats cow-dung for 125 


pan. sallets; swallows the old rat and the ditch-dog; drinks the 
green mantle of the standing pool; who is whipped from 
_- __ tithing to tithing, and stocked, punished, and imprisoned; 

jis = who hath three suits to his back, six shirts to his body; 


Horse to ride and weapon to wear; 130 
But mice and rats and such small deer . 
Have been Tom’s food for seven long year. 


124. fadgole} Johns. fod pole Q.. 
toade pold Q,. Tod-pole F,¥,,.Pope+, 
Sch. Tod-fool F,F,. tod-pol Rowe. 

wall-newt | Q 
wall-wort Q.. 


water] water-neut Rowe +, Cap. 
Jen, Ec. 


fury] fruite Q,. 
126. seus) sallads Jen. 
conj. 


sallet Cap. 


wall-Neut Ff. 


id Ff. ftock-punifht Qq, Pope+, Cap. 
Jen. Glo.+, Dyce ii. 

129. hath] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Sch. 
hath had Qq et cet. 

130. Horse...wear ;| Verse, Ff, Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. Johns. Jen. Sch. Prose, 
Qq et cet. 

131. deer] Deare FF, Dear ¥,F,. 
geer Han. Warb. cheer Grey. 

132. Have| Hath Qq. 


128. stocked, punished| ftockt, pun- 


7a 124. tadpole] WricHT: The modern spelling was in use in Shakespeare's time, 


A 
B Cotgrave gives: ‘Gyrine: the frog tearmed, a Tadpole.’ 
4 a 124. wall-newt}] WricHT: That is, lizard. ‘Newt’ is from A.S, efete, Early 
x : English exefe, and then éf¢, the initial ‘n’ having been acquired from the final letter 
ee, of the article, so that ‘an evet’ or ‘an eft’ became ‘a newt.’ 

124. water] That is, the water-newt. For many similar constructions, see 


ScHMIDT (Lezx.), p. 1419. 
126. sallets] WricHT: Cotgrave: ‘Slade. f. A salade, Helmet, Head-peece; 
a also a Sallet of hearbes.’ It is still used in Sussex. See Ham. II, ii, 420. 

126. ditch-dog] DrEtius: The dead dogs thrown into ditches, 

128. tithing] STEEVENS: A district; the same in the country as a ward in the 
city. In the Stat. 39 Eliz. ch. 4, it is enacted that every vagabond, &c. shall be 
publickly whipped and sent from parish to parish. [For a description of the treat- 
ment of ‘roges,’ and of how they must be ‘ greeuouslie whipped and burned through 
the gristle of the right eare, with an hot iron of the compasse of an inch about,’ see 
Harrison’s Description of England, Bk. ii, chap. x, p. 219, ed. Mew Sh. Soc.] 

129. hath three suits] ScumipT: The ‘hath had three suits’ of the Qq prob- 
ably accords with the fact, but what have facts to do with madness? Tom hath three 
suits and six shirts ;—where are they? who has taken them from him? 

131, 132. CAPELL: These are two lines of quotation (but not exact) from an old 
metrical romance of the Lzfe of Sir Bevis: ‘Rattes and myse and suche smal dere 
Was his meate that seven yere.’ ‘ Dere,’ says MALONE, was used for animals in 


general. So Barclay in his Ee/ogues, 1570: * Everie sorte of dere Shrunk under 
shadowes abating all their chere.’ ScHMIDT: Not exactly animals in general, but 
game. 


17.* 


i afl 


Beware my 7 follower Bevee: Smulkin! peace, thou fiend! 1 

o 
Glou. What, hath your grace no better company? = = 
Edg. The prince of darkness is a aoe ; Modo 135 _ 
he’s call’d, and Mahu. _- 
133. Smuikin] faulbug Qq. Smol- cet. Asa quotation, Dyce ii. ec, > 
kin Theob, Warb. Johns. Cap. Steev. Ec. 135. Medo] Mohu Johns. "aa 
Var. Knt. 136. he’s] Changed to he as by Cap <4 
‘ 135, 136. Zhe....Mahu.] Prose, Qq in Errata. SF 

Ff+, Jen. Glo.+, Sch. Verse, Cap. et Mahu)| Ff. ma hu— Qgq. 


“a 133, 135, 136. Smulkin.... Modo... Mahu] Staunton: If the subjoined ' 
a _ extracts from Harsnet’s Declaration do not prove undisputably that Sh. was indebted a" 
>> to that popular book for the titles of Tom o’ Bedlam’s infernal spirits, we may infer ; 
me that these fantastic names were quite familiar to an auditory of his time: ‘ It seemes 
ae not incongruent that I relate unto you the names of the devils whom in this glorious 

pageant they did dispossesse. ... First, then, to marshall them in as good order as 


such disorderly cattell will be brought into, you are to understand, that there were in 
our possessed 5 Captaines, or Commaunders above the rest: Captaine Pippin, Mar- 
A wood’s devil, Captaine Philpot, Trayfords devil, Captaine Maho, Saras devil, Cap- 
taine Modu, Maynies devil, and Captaine Soforce, Anne Smiths devil. | These were 
not all of equall authoritie, and place, but some had more, some fewer under theyr 
commaund.... The names of the punie spirits cast out of Trayford were these, 
Hilco, Smolkin, Hillio, Hiaclito, and Lustie huffe-cap: this last seemes some swag- 
gering punie devill, dropt out of a Tinkers budget. . . . Modo, Master Maynies devill, 
was a graund Commaunder, Muster-maister over the Captaines of the seaven deadly 
sinnes: Cliton, Bernon, Hilo, Motubizanto, and the rest, himselfe a Generall of a 
kind and curteous disposition : so saith Sara Williams, touching this devils acquaint- 
ance with Mistres Plater, and her sister Fid. Sara Williams had in her at a bare 
word, all the devils in hell, The Exorcist asks Maho, Saras devil, what company 
he had with him, and the devil makes no bones, but tels him in flat termes, a/7 the 
devils in hell... . And if I misse not my markes, this Dictator Modu saith, hee had 
beene in Sara by the space of two yeeres, then so long hell was cleere, and had not 
a devill to cast at a mad dogge. And sooth I cannot much blame the devils for 
staying so long abroade, they had taken up an Inne, much sweeter then hell; and an 
hostesse that wanted neither wit, nor mirth, to give them kind welcome. Heere, if 
you please, you may take a survay of the whole regiment of hell: at least the chiefe 
Leaders, and officers as we finde them enrolled by theyr names. First, Killico, Hob 
and a third anonymos, are booked downe for three graund Commaunders, every one 
having under him 300 attendants. . .. Maho was generall Dictator of hell; and yet 
for good manners sake, hee was comerea of his good nature to make eee that 
himselfe was under the check of Modu, the graund devil in Master Maynie. These 
were all in poor Sara at a chop, with these the poore soule travailed up and downe 
full two yeeres together; so as during these two yeeres, it had beene all one to say, 
one is gone to hell, or hee is gone to Sara Williams; for shee poore wench had all 
‘ hell in her belly.’—Cap. x, pp. 45, 50. 

135,136. The... Mahu] Reen: In The Goddins, by Sir John Suckling, a catch 

is introduced which concludes with these two lines: ‘The prince of darkness is a 


Hk get 


ee blood, my me. is arava so vilde 
hate sie “a it 


ae in all your se ie Rea hard Seianties 
ail | Though their injunction be to bar my doors 
n.* is And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you, 
ee: Yet have I ventured to come seek you out 
za And bring you where both fire and food is ready. 145 
x Lear. First let me talk with this philosopher.— es 


= 
° What is the cause of thunder ? ' i 
+ Kent. Good my lord, take his offer; go into th’ house.. . 


7? 
= 

calls 

e. 


137, 138. Our...gets it.] Verse, Pope. 140-145. Prose, Qq. 
Prose, QqFf, Rowe. 142. Though] Though all F, Pi. 
: 137. my lord....vilde] is growne fo 144. ventured | venter’d Qq. 
_vild my Lord Qq (wilde Q,), Glo.+, 145. fire and food | food and fire Qq. 

f Mob. zs| ave Han. Coll. iii. 
sig 138. gets it] it gets F,F,, Rowe. 148. Good...house.] Two lines, Ff. 7 
wee 139. Poor] Om. Pope+. Good my] My good Qq, Pope+, ' 
139, 165. @-cold| Hyphen, Rowe. Jen. Mal. Ec. 


gentleman, Mahu, Mahu is his name.’ I am inclined to think this catch not to be 
the production of Suckling, but the original referred to by Edgar’s speech. WRIGHT: 
— But as Suckling in other parts of his play is constantly alluding to Sh., it is more 
- likely that in this he is only quoting from Zear. STEEVENS: Edgar says this in 
y resentment at what Gloucester had just asked: ‘ Hath your grace no better com- 
pany ?’ 

137, 138. CowDEN CLARKE: One of Shakespeare’s subtle touches. Some tone 
or inflection in Edgar’s voice has reached the father’s heart, and bitterly recalls the 
supposed unfilial conduct of his elder son, and he links it with that of Lear’s daugh- 
ters. Edgar, instinctively feeling this, perseveres with his Bedlam cry, to drown 
: the betrayed sound of his own voice, and maintain the impression of his assumed 
character. 

141. T’ obey] Mason: That is, ‘ my duty will not suffer me to obey,’ &c. WRIGHT: 
But it is not certain whether the sense is not, ‘ My duty to you must not suffer by my 
obeying your daughters’ commands,’ For this use of the infinitive, see ABBOTT, 
§ 356 [or III, v, 8; Alacd. IV, ii, 69; Alam. III, iii, 85; IV, ii, 12]. 

141. T’ obey in] WricuT: The construction would be familiar if it were ‘to 
obey your daughters in all their hard commands.’ 

145. fire and food is] See II, Te gee 

147. thunder] MozerLy: Being so ‘ unsophisticated’—having so completely re- 
duced mankind to their elements, surely this man must have a spontaneous insight 
into the nature of things, such as would at least tell him what is the cause of thunder, 
Like the celebrated German poet and physicist, he will have ‘a pure sense of nature, 
rebelling against the barbarism of reflection.’ 


: te 


‘Lear. I'll talk a word with this same ie eat 
What is your study? 
dg. How to prevent the fiend and to kill vermin. 
Lear. Let me ask you one word in private. 
Kent. Importune him once more to go, my lord; 


‘ned Theban. 


, His wits begin t’ unsettle. i ; 
aY Glou, Canst thou blame him? [Storm still, 
. His daughters seek his death. Ah, that good Kent! oe © 
He said it would be thus, poor banish’d man! 
e Thou say’st the king grows mad; I'll tell thee, friend, 
I am almost mad myself. I had a son, } 
Now outlaw’d from my blood; he aaa my life, 
But lately, very late ; I loved him, friend, 160 ¥ 


No father his son Bere true to tell thee, 
The grief hath crazed my wits. What a night’s this !— 


Knt, Sing. Dyce, Sta. Ktly. To line 


* . 149, 150. Prose, Qq. 


149. talk] take FF. 
same] moft Qq, Jen. 
150. What...study| Given to Kent by 
Ktly. 
152. me] us FF +. 
private] private, friend. Ktly. 
153, 154. Laportune....unsettle.| One 
line, Qq. 
153. once more] Om. Qq, Pope, Han. 
Jen. 


162, Coll. Del. Wh. 
155. Ahk] O Qgq. 
157. say’st] faiiQ,. faye QFE. 
158. 7am] /’m Pope+, Dyce ii. 
159. outlaw'd | out-lawed Qq. 
he sought] a fought Q,. 
161. true] truth Q,, Glo.+, Mob. 
162. hath] has Q,. 
nights) nights Q,F,F,. 
162, 163. The.. ora Two lines, the 


154. [Storm still.] Om. Qq, Cap. 


first ending wets. Qq. 
Transferred to line 161, Mal. Steev. Bos. 


I5i. prevent] WRIGHT: Here used with something of its original sense of an- 
ticipating, being beforehand with, as well as the more common meaning which now 
belongs to the word. [See Ham. II, ii, 286: ‘My anticipations prevent your dis- 
covery.’ ] 

{54. STEEVENS cites a note by Horace Walpole, in the postscript to his Mysterious 
Mother, where he observes that when ‘ Belvidera talks of ‘Lutes, laurels, seas of 
milk, and ships of amber,” she is not mad, but light-headed. When madness has 
taken possession of a person, such character ceases to be fit for the stage, or, at least, 
should appear there but for a short time; it being the business of the theatre to ex- 
hibit passions, not distempers. The finest picture ever drawn, of a head discomposed 
by misfortune, is that of King Lear. His thoughts dwell on the ingratitude of his 
daughters, and every sentence that falls from his wildness excites reflection and pity. 
Had frenzy entirely seized him, our compassion would abate: we should conclude 


that he no longer felt unhappiness. Shakespeare wrote as a philosopher, Otway asa - 
poet.’ 


a. 


me. “Lear. 


Aves 


ba 
your g henge a 


» 


opher, your company. 


Ir , fellow, there, into th’ hovel; keep thee w warm. 
- Come, let’s in all. 
This way, my lord. 

With him; 


_ Iwill keep still with my philosopher. 
_ Kent. Good my lord, soothe him; let him take the fellow. 
Glou. Take him you on. 170 
Kent. Sirrah, come on; go along with us. 
Lear. Come, good Athenian. 
Glou. No words, no words! Hush. 
Edg. Child Rowland to the dark tower came. 
fis word was still ‘ Fie, foh, and fum, 175 
I smell the blood of a British man’ [Exeunt. 


= Oh, cry you mercy, sir— 163" 


’s a-cold, 165 


163. grace,—] Cap. grace. QqFf+. 

grace, Warb. 
sir] Om. Qq, Cap. Mal. Steev. 

Bos. Sing. Ktly. 

163, 164. O...company.| One line, Qq. 

165. a-cold| Rowe. a cold QqFf. 

166. there, into th’ | there,in’tQ,. into 
th’ Pope+. there, to the Cap. Steev. Ec, 
Bos. ‘there, in, to the Mal. 


167, 168. With......philosopher.| One 
line, Qq. 
,- 168. him; I] him I Qq. 


169. Good... fellow.| Two lines, Ff. 
171. Sivrah...us.| Sirrah, come on; 
along with us. Pope+. On, sirrah ; go 
with us. Cap. 
173. Hush] Separate line, Steey. Bos. 
Knt, Coll, Del. Sing, Dyce i, Wh. Ktly. 
174. tower] Ff. sowne QQ. 
came] Ff. come Qq, Cap. 
175. Fie...fum] Ff. (fumme F,). fy 
fo and fum Q,. fye, fo, and fum Q, 
176. British] Bratti/h FE. 
[Exeunt.] Om. Qq. 


163. your grace,—] CowDEN CLARKi: Here Gloucester attempts to lead Lear 
towards the shelter he has provided in the farm-house adjoining the castle; but the 
king will not hear of quitting his ‘philosopher.’ Gloucester then induces the Bed- 
lam-fellow to go into the hovel, that-he may be out of Lear’s sight; but Lear pro- 
poses to follow him thither, saying ¢ Let’s in all.’ Kent endeavours to draw Lear 
away, but, finding him resolved to ‘ keep still with’ his ‘ philosopher,’ begs Gloucester 
to humour the king, and ‘let him take the fellow’ with him. Gloucester accedes, 
and bids Kent himself take the fellow with them in the direction they desire to go; 
and this is done. We point out these details, because, if it be not specially observed, 
the distinction between the ‘hovel’ and the ‘ farm-house’ would hardly be under- 
stood. The mention of ‘cushions’ and a ‘joint-stool’ in Scene vi shows it to be 
some place of better accommodation than the ‘hovel;’ and probably some cottage 
or farm-house belonging to one of Gloucester’s tenants. 

174. Child Rowland] Care.i: Every observing reader of Spenser, and of the 
writers of his class, knows that ‘ Child’ is a common appellative of the knight in 
romances; deriv’d from the first gross importers of them into our language from out 


eo 


; [174. Child Rowland.] 


the Spanish and French, in which he is call’d enfant, and infante; and all know 3 


that ‘Rowland’ is only Roland pronounc’d rustically, and Roland a contraction of 
Orlando, so that ‘ Child Rowland’ is the knight Sir Orlando. Prrcy (note on Child 
Waters, vol. iii, p. 58, 1765) cites with approval WARBURTON’s note on this passage, 
to the effect that ‘in the old times of chivalry the noble youth who were candidates 
for knighthood, during the time of their probation, were called Jnfans, Varlets, Da- 
moysels, Bacheliers. The most noble of the youth were particularly called /zfans.’ 
STEEVENS: Beau. and Fl. in Zhe Woman’s Prize [II, i] refer to this: ‘a mere 


“hobby-horse She made Child Rowland.’ Nares: Childe Harold has lately made 


the term very familiar. 

174, 176. CAPELL, despite the fact that it is an assumed madman who speaks 
these lines, maintained that we should not only make sense of them, but show ‘their 
particular propriety.’ He was convinced that ‘never any Orlando’ said ‘ Fie, foh, 
fum.’ Therefore a line must have been omitted, and in that line ‘the smeller-out’ 
of Child Rowland must have been mentioned., Accordingly, he ‘perfected’ the 
stanza, and, although he thought it presumptuous to insert his own line in Shake- 
speare’s text, yet ‘the world may not be displeas’d to see it done in a note, and that 
in sense and rime too, as follows: [it should be premised that he adopted, instead 
of ‘came’ of the Ff, come of the Qq, z. e. being come] “ Child Rowland to the dark 
tower come, The giant roar’d, and out he ran; His word was,’”’’ &c. Having thus 
settled the ‘sense’ of the passage, Capell reveals ‘its propriety,’ by explaining that 
‘« Child Rowland” is Edgar himself; the “ dark tower,” his hovel; and the fre-fo- 
fum giant, his father Gloster; who, he fears, might have the giant’s sagacity, and accost 
him in no less dreadful a manner.’ KEIGHTLEY proposed, ‘ The Giant saw him, and 
out he ran.’ RITSON thought that the first line was a translation of some French or 
Spanish ballad, but that the last two lines belonged to a different subject. Dyce, 
however, in his Few Votes, p. 146, speaks of all three lines as one ballad, of which 
‘(probably with some variations from the original) fragments of a Scottish version 
have been preserved by Jamieson in ///ustr. of Northern Antiquities, &c. 1814. He 
gives (p. 402): “ With fi, fi, fo, and fum! I smell the blood of a Christian man! 
Be he dead, be he living, wi’ my brand I'll clash his harns frae his harn-pan’*”? (7. e. 
I'll knock his brains out of his skull).’ HALLIWELL believes [with Ritson] that 
‘Edgar quotes from two different compositions, the first line from a ballad on Rowland, 
the second from Yack and the Giants ; the original source of the popular words Fie, 
foh, and fum is unknown, They are alluded to in Peele’s O/d Wives Tale, 1595,— 
“ Fee, fa, fum,—Here is the Englishman,—Conquer him that can,” Again, in Nash's 
Have With You to Saffron Walden, 1596,—* O, ’tis a precious apothegmaticall pedant, 
who will finde matter inough to dilate a whole daye of the first invention of Ay, fa, 
Jum, 1 smell the bloud of an Englishman.” The probability is that the distich quoted 
by Nash and Sh. belongs to some early version of the tale of Hack and the Giants. 
[Halliwell thinks that the earliest known edition of this story is 1771, or possibly 
1741. Halliwell also gives the story of Child Rowland from Jamieson’s ///ustr. of 
North. Antiquities, p. 397; it is also given in CHILD’s admirable Eng. and Scottish 
Ballads, i, 416.) | Wricut: The substitution of ‘Britishman’ for Zxgdishman points 
to the time when, under James I, the name of England was merged in the more 
general title of Great Britain. See IV, vi, 249 [where Ff have ‘English’ and the 
Qq have British. See also Appendix, p. 377.] 


TY all 
‘4 


Sceve V. Gloucester's castle. 


oe CORNWALL and nie) 


vd pee I will have my revenge ere I depart his house. 
Edm, _How, my lord, I may be censured, that nature 
Se gives way to loyalty, something fears me to think of. 

Corn. I now perceive, it was not altogether your brother's 
eet disposition made him seek his death, but a provoking 
merit, set a-work by a reproveable badness in himself. 


We 


a SCENE v.] Scena Quinta Ff (Scena I, my] Om. FF, +. ; 
_ FF). Scene Iv. Rowe. ScENE Vill. — his] the Qq. “this Han. 
Pope+, Jen. 5,6. provoking merit] provoked Spirit 
_ Gloucester’s castle.] Rowe. A Han. Jen. . 4 
Room in Gloster’s Castle. Cap. 6. a-work| a worke QaF,. a@ work ’ 
: _ Enter....Edmund.]_ Enter.... Baftard. LB - 
a3 ~ Qgq. Om. Johns. _— himself| him Han, 
es 
a 2. censured] For ‘censure’ meaning opinion, see Ham. I, iii, 69; I, iv, 35; III, a" 


B ii, 25; III, ii, 82. Wricut: See the Dedication to V. and A., ‘I know not how I 
shall offend in dedicating my unpolished lines to your lordship, nor how the world 


2 will censure me for chosing so strong a prop to support so weak a burden.’ 
= 3. fears] For instances of this verb meaning to terrify, to frighten, see 
SCHMIDT, s. v. 

es 5. provoking merit] WARBURTON: That is, a merit which, being neglected by 
4 the father, was provoked to an extravagant act. Mason: Provoking here means 
q stimulating ; a merit he felt in himself, which irritated him against a father that had 
ig none, MAaALoNne: Cornwall, I suppose, means the merit of Edmund, which, being 
7. " noticed by Gloucester, provoked or instigated Edgar to seek his father’s death. 
——— Warburton conceived that the merit spoken of was that of Edgar. But how is this 
r consistent with the rest of the sentence? Hupson: Cornwall means, apparently, a 
a ? virtue apt to be provoked or stirred into act ; which virtue was set to work by some 


flagrant evil in Gloucester himself. ‘Provoking’ for provocable; the active form 
with the passive sense. COWDEN CLARKE: ‘An inciting desert,’ This probably 
refers to what the speaker considers the discovered turpitude of Gloucester, which 
deserves punishment, and incites Edgar to seek his death, putting into activity the 
latter’s blameable badness of character. The difficulty here arises from the uncer- 
pee tainty as to whom the pronouns ‘him,’ ‘his,’ and ‘himself’ refer. WriGHT: A 
consciousness of his own worth which urged him on. Moperty: Probably ‘an 
anticipative merit;’ that is, a meritorious forestalling of crime by its punishment. 
Nicuots (Votes, &c., No. 2,p. 12) paraphrases: ‘It was not altogether your brother’s 
evil disposition that made him seek his death—the old man deserved it. There was 
a merit, a deserving on his part, “set a-work by a reproveable badness in himself,” 
that provoked your brother to the act. “ The provoking merit’ was in Gloucester 


himself.’ 
6. a-work] See II, ii, 69; III, iv, 57; Ham. II, ii, 466; I, v, 19, or ABBOTT, § 24. 


to be viet This is a letter he is of, which approves 
him an intelligent party to the advantages of France. O 
heavens! that this treason were not, or not I the detector! 1 

Corn. Go with me to the duchess. “ 

Edm, Wf the matter of this paper be certain, you have 
mighty business in hand. a, 

Corn. True or false, it hath made thee earl of Bis 
Seek out where thy father is, that he may be ready for our 15 
apprehension. 

Edm, [Aside] If I find him comforting the king, it will 
stuff his suspicion more fully.—I will persever in my course 
of loyalty, though the confli€t be sore between that and my 


blood. 20 
Corn, Iwill lay trust upon thee, and thou shalt find a 
dearer father in my love. [Exeunt. 
8. letter] letter which Ff+, Jen. Ec. 18. persever] F,F, F,, Del. Dyce, Sta. 
Knt, Coll. Del. Wh. Sch. Cam. Wr. Sch. perfeuere QaF,, et cet. 
9. advantages| advances Anon.* 22. dearer] Qq. deere F, F. dear 
10. this treason were not| his treafon F,F,, Rowe, Sch. 
were Qq. [Exeunt.] Exit. Qq. 


17. [Aside] Theob. Om. QqFf. 


8. to be just] See III, iv, 141; or ABBOTT, § 356. 

g. intelligent party] For the position of the adjective, compare IV, i, 3; or . 
‘our suffering country Under a hand accurst.’—JZacé. III, vi, 48. Scumrpt, how- 
ever, Says that ‘to’ does not depend on ‘ intelligent,’ but on ‘ party.’ 

17. comforting] JoHNsON: This word is used in the juridical sense for sxpport- 
ing, helping. LORD CAMPBELL: The indictment against an accessory after the fact, 
for treason, charges that the accessory ‘ comforted’ the principal traitor after know- 
ledge of the treason. 

18. persever] WRIGHT: This represents the older pronunciation of the word, 
which in Sh, has uniformly the accent on the second syllable. [See Ham. I, ii, 92.] 

20, blood] WricuT: Natural temperament. See Ham. III, ii, 64. [Also Lear, 
IV, ii, 64.] 


_ Enter KENT and GLOUCESTER, 


ou. Here is better than the open air; take it thank- 

ame | will piece out the comfort with What addition I 

san; I will not be long from you. 

Kent. All the power of his wits have given way to his 

P _ impatience. The gods reward your kindness! 5 
a [Exit Gloucester, 


thes Enter LEAR, EDGAR, and ‘Foon. 


_£dg. Frateretto calls me, and tells me Nero is an 
angler in the lake of darkness.—Pray, innocent, and beware 
the foul fiend. | 
_ ool. Prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a 


r gentleman or a yeoman. 10 
,. Lear. A king, a king! 
ae Fool. No, he’s a yeoman that has a gentleman to his 

; SCENE vVI.] Scena Sexta Ff (Sczena 5. reward) deferue Qq. preserve 

F,). ScENE v. Rowe. SCENE Ix. Cap. conj. 
Pope. [Exit Gloucester.] As inCap. Af- 
- ; A chamber.....castle.] Mal. A ter line 3, Ff+, Jen. Sch. Om. Qq. 
-, Chamber. Rowe. A Chamber, in a [Enter...Fool.] Ff+, Jen. Sch. 
a Farm-house. Theob. A Room in some 6. Frateretto| Fretereto Qq. Frater- 
‘4 _ of the out-buildings of the Castle. Cap. retto Ff (Fraterreto F,). 
S Enter...] Ff. Enter...and Lear, Foole, 7. and] Om. Qq. 
; Z and Tom. Qq. 9. be may bee Q,. 
ae 4. have] QqFf, Jen. Dyce, Sta. Glo+, 10. gentleman] Gentlemen F¥.,,. 
Sch. ath Cap. has Pope et cet. 12-15. Fool. Wo....4im. Lear.] Om, 
to his] to Qq. Qq. : 


4. power ... have] A plural by attraction, or, as ABBOTT, § 412, terms it, by 
proximity. See Ham. I, ii, 38. 

6. Frateretto] See Percy’s note, III, iv, 111. 

6. Nero] Upron (Crit. Obs. p. 235, ed. ii) : Nero was a fiddler [or rather, played 
on a hurdy-gurdy: ‘Neron estoyt vielleux.’—Ep.] in hell, as Rabelais tells us, 
ii, xxx. And Trajan was an angler [for frogs]... But players and editors, not 
willing that so good a prince as Trajan should have such a vile employment, substi- 
tuted Nero in his room, without any sense or allusion at all. From Rabelais, there- 
fore, the passage should be thus corrected: ‘ Zrajam is an angler,’ &c. RITSON: 
The History of Gargantua had appeared in English before 1575. 

7. innocent] STEEVENS: He is here addressing the Fool. Fools were anciently 
called innocents. See Ail’s Well, IV, iii, 13. CAPELL, however, supposed it to 
mean: ‘ Be innocent when you pray.’ 

18 


son, for he’s a mad yeoman that sees his 


before him. 


Lear. To have a thousand with red burning spits 
Come hizzing in upon’em,— 
* Edg. The foul fiend bites my back. 

* Fool. He's mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf, 
*a horse’s health, a boy’s love, or a whore’s oath. 

* Lear. It shall be done; I will arraign them cna aga 201 
* Come, sit thou here, most learned justicer.— 


13. mad] Om. Pee 
Han. 

15,16. Zo have...’ent,—] Prose, Qq, 
Jen. 

16. hizzing] Ff. ‘uate om hifiing 
Q,, Jen. Knt, Del. Sing. Dyce, Sta. 
Glo.+, Sch. whizzing Mal. conj. Bos. 
Coll. Wh. Ktly. 

’em,—] ’em— Theob. ’em. FF. 
them. Qq, Cap. Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. Knt, 
Coll, Del. 

17-54. Om. Ff, Rowe. 


Rowe, Pope, 


19. a horse’s health| the heels of a 
horse Warb. a horse’s heels Sing ii, 
Ktly. 

@ horse’s....oath| the health of a 
horse, the love of a boy, or the oath of a 
whore. Pope, Theob. Han. , 

20. them] ‘em Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. 

21. [To the Fool. Han. To Edgar. 
Cap. 

justicer| Theob. iz/tice'Qq, Pope, 
Jen. - 


13,14. he’s... him] CoLLIeR: This seems to have been a proverbial expres- 
sion. Hupson: A rather curious commentary on some of the Poet’s own doings; 
who obtained from the Herald’s College a coat-of-arms in his father’s name; thus 
getting his yeoman father dubbed a gentleman, in order, no doubt, that he himself | 
might inherit his rank. ScHMIDT also alludes to this grant of arms to Shakespeare’s 
father, which took place not long before the composition of Zear, and asks: Does 
the present passage refer to this incident? If it do, might there not be a play upon 
words concealed in ‘a mad yegman,’ that is ‘a made yeoman,’ a yeoman whose luck 
is made, or, since it is not necessary to be too precise in dealing with the Fool’s wit, 
a complete, thorough yeoman ? \ 

18, 19. SCHMIDT asks why the Fool says this? ‘ Does he wish merely to distract 
Lear, or to say that, in fact, the whole world is mad ?’ 


19. horse’s health] WARBURTON: Read, ‘horse’s eels, 7. e. to stand behind - 


him. JouNson: Sh, is here speaking not of things maliciously treacherous, but of 
things uncertain and not durable. A horse is above all other animals subject to 
diseases. Ritson: /ee/s is certainly right. ‘Trust not a horse’s heel nor a dog’s 
tooth’ is a proverb in Ray’s Collection ; as ancient, at least, as the time of Edward 
II; Et ideo Babio in comcediis insinuat, dicens : ‘In fide, dente, pede, mulieris, equ, 
canis, est fraus.’ Hoc sic vulgariter est dici: ‘Till horsis foote thou never traist, 
Till hondis toth, no woman’s faith.’—Forduni Scotichronicon, |. xiv, c. xxxii. That 
in the text is probably from the Italian. 

21, justicer] BosweLL: Thus Lambard’s Zirenarcha + * And of this it commeth 
that M, Fitzherbert (in his treatise of the Justices of Peace) calleth them jzsticers 


(contractly for justiciars), and not justices, as we commonly, and not altogether un- 
properly, doe name them.’ 


Ss ee ee 


a). = Te 


Bos, Coll. Del. Sing. Wh. Ktly. 


— Ea oa as Sana — are Wantest 
10U eyes § at firial, madam ? 

Come o'er the bourn, Bessy, to me. 
fTer boat hath a leak, 


-. 


PP ee a 
Fi ‘ 22, [To Edgar. Han. To the Fool. 23. glares] glars Qq. 


Cap. Wantest| Theob. wanfiQ,. want 
here. — Now, you] here, noyouQ,.  Q,. wanton’st Seward, Jen. wantonest 
Knot, Sing. 


heere, now youQ,. here. Now ye Pope+,- 


. Jen. Knt. 24. trial, madam ?] tral madam Q.. 
Soxes!) foxes. Pope. Foxes— Qq. triall, madam, Q.. 
23-28. Om. Pope, Han. 25. [Sings. Sta. conj. 
23-25. Lcok...me.] Cap. Prose, Qq. bourn] doornme Cap. broome Qa, 


Verse, the first line ending eyes, Theob. Theob. Warb. Johns. d700% Johns. conj. 
Warb. Johns. Cap, (—Corrigenda, vol. Jen. 

x), Jen. Ec. First line ending glares / 26. [Sings. Cam. Edd. conj. 

26, 27. Her...speak] Cap. One line, 
_ 23. he] she Theob, Warb. Johns. Jen. Qq. 

Knt, Sing. 


22. sapient] Scumipr: Not elsewhere used by Sh. 

23. Wantest] STEEVENs: This appears to be a question addressed to the vision- 
ary Goneril, or some other abandon’d female, and may signify, ‘Do you want to 
attract admiration, even while you stand at the bar of justice?’ Seward proposes 
to read wanzon’st instead of ‘wantest.’ TrEcK: Possibly, Kent covers his face for 
‘a moment to conceal his anguish or his tears, or the Fool does so. STAUNTON 
(Library ed.), in place of Seward’s ‘plausible’ conjecture, prefers ‘Wantonizeth 
thou,’ ete. Hupson: It is addressed to some visionary person who is supposed, 

apparently, to be on trial, but does not see the spectre. COWDEN CLARKE: This 
signifies: ‘Look where the fiend stands and glares! Do you want eyes to gaze at 
and admire you during trial, madam? ‘The fiends are there to serve your purpose.’ 

24. eyes] BELL (Sh. Puck, iii, 111) says this is the crier’s proclamation at the 
opening of court: Oyez, commonly pronounced O Yes. 

24. at trial] JoHNsON: It may be observed that Edgar, being supposed to be 
found by chance, and therefore to have no knowledge of the rest, connects not his 
ideas with those of Lear, but pursues his own train of delirious or fantastick thought. 
To these words, ‘ At trial, madam?’ I think the name of Lear should be put. The 
process of the dialogue will support this conjecture. [RANN adopted this emenda- 
tion.] EccLEs suggests that the whole speech be given to Lear, after changing ‘he’ 
to she, according to Theobald’s text. 

25. CAPELL was the first to change droome of the Qq to ‘boorne;’ this he did on 
the authority of the original song, which he printed, in his Schoo/, &c., p. 73, from 
a black letter Qto, n. d., by W. Wager, called 7he longer thou liv’st, the more Fool 
thou art, thus: ‘Here entreth Moros, counterfaiting a vaine gesture, and a foolish 
countenance, Synging the foote [7. ¢. the burden] of many Songes, as fooles were wont. 
... Com’ over the Boorne Besse, My little pretie Besse Com over the Boorne besse 
to me.’ STEEVENS says this song was entered on the Stationers’ Registers in 1564. 
But an earlier instance of this song was discovered by CoLiigr: This and what follows 


w™ 


ee A ; 
KING LEAR | 


And she must not speak 
Why she dares not come over to thee. 
Edg. The foul fiend haunts poor Tom in the voice of a 
* nightingale. Hoppedance cries in Tom’s belly fortwo white 30 
* herring. Croak not, black angel; I have no food for thee. 


* 


30. Hoppedance|Qq. Hop-dance Cap. Ec. Knto~ ; 
Hopdance Pope et cet. 31. Croak...thee] Separate line, Qq. 
31. herring] herrings Pope+, Jen. 


from the Fool are certainly parts of an old song, which was imitated by W. Birch in 
his ‘ Dialogue between Elizabeth and England’ (printed by W. Pickering without 
date), which thus commences: ‘ Come over the bourn, Bessy, come over the bourn, 
Bessy, Sweet Bessy, come over to me; And I shall thee take, And my dear lady make 
Before all that ever I see.’ It is in the same measure as the addition by the Fool. 
See also Old Ballads, &c., Percy Society, 1840. WRIGHT says the date of Birch’s 
song is 1558, and that it is printed in full in the Harletan Misc. x, 260. WHITE 
refers to the curious fact that in the M/erry Wives Master Brook’s name is invariably 
spelled Broome in the Folio, which CoLLIER’s (MS) revealed to be a misprint for 
Bourne. MAtone: There is a peculiar propriety in this address, that has not, I be- 
lieve, been hitherto observed. ‘ Bessy’ and ‘ poor Tom,’ it seems, usually travelled 
together. The author of the Zhe Court of Conscience, or Dick Whipper’s Sessions, 
1607, describing deggars, idle rogues, and counterfeit madmen, thus speaks of these 
associates: ‘Another sort there is among you; they Do rage with furie as if they 
were so frantique They knew not what they did, but every day Make sport with stick 
and flowers like an antique; Stowt roge and harlot counterfeited gomme; One calls 
herself poor Besse the other Zom.? HALLIWELL gives the music of this song from 
a sixteenth-century MS in the Brit. Mus. This music seems to have escaped CHAP- 
PELL, although he refers to the song on p. 505 of his Popular Music. 

27, 28. Scumipr: Perhaps we should read: ¢ And she must not speak ; Why, she 
dares,’ &c, \ : 

30. nightingale] WricHT: Apparently suggested by the Fool’s singing. Prrcy 
refers to a passage in Harsnet’s Declaration, which seems to have no further con- 
nection with this than that a ¢gh¢ingale is mentioned in both places. 

30. Hoppedance] This spelling may indicate the pronunciation; see IV, i, 58. 
At all events, there is no reason why we should not follow our sole text in these 
monstrous names, See PERcy’s note on III, iv, 111.—Ep. 

31. white herring] STEEVENS: Thatis, pickled herring. As You Like Ir (Gent. 
Mag. 1x, 402): There is no occasion to pickle the herring, whilst ¢ white herring’ is 
provincial for fresh herring. 

31. Croak] STEEVENS: In Harsnet’s book, p. 194, 195, Sarah Williams (one of 
the pretended demoniacks) deposeth, ‘ —that if at any time she . . . was troubled - 
with a wind in her stomacke, the priests would say at such times, that then the spirit 
began to rise in her. And ‘as she saith, if they heard any croaking in her belly 
... then they would make a wonderful matter of that.’ MAaLoneE;: «One time shee 
remembereth, that shee having the said croaking in her belly, they said it was the 
devil that was about the bed, that spake with the voice of a toad.’—Jvid. 


Zs 


“TL see étheit trial first sian in their evidence.— 


u robed man of justice take thy place.— 
d thou, his yoke-fellow of pay, 
_—* Bench by his side.—You are o’ th’ commission 


* Sit you too. 
# _ ag. Let us deal justly. 


sal Sleepest or wakest thou, jolly shepherd ? 
oe Thy sheep be in the corn ; 
sec And for one blast of thy minikin mouth, 


32, 33- Kent. How...cushions?] Theob. 


; Prose, Qq. Om. Pope, Han. 


33. cushions] cushings Q,. 

34-38. L'U/...t00] Pope. Prose, Qq. 

34. trial first. Bring] Cap. (subs.) 
triall first, bring Qq. trial, bring me 
Pope, Han. /rial first, bring me Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Jen. 

35. [To Edgar. Cap. 


36. [To the Fool. Cap. 
37- [To Kent. Cap. 
Bench...side| Separate line, Del. 
Sch. 
o th’| of the Han. Cap. Steev. 
Var. : 
39-45. Edg. Let...gray. Lear.] Om. 
Pope, Han. 
40-43. Sleepest...harm.] Theob. Prose, 


robed | Pope. robbed Qq. Qq.- 


34. trial] LorD CAMPBELL: This imaginary trial is conducted in a manner showing 
perfect familiarity with criminal procedure. Lear places the two judges on the bench, 
Mad Tom and the Fool. He properly addresses the former as ‘the robed man of 
justice,’ but, although both were ‘of the commission,’ I do not quite understand 
why the latter is called his ‘ yoke-fellow of equity,’ unless this might be supposed to 
be a special commission, like that which sat on Mary, Queen of Scots, including 
Lord Chancellor Audley. 

34. their evidence] Thus in the Qq, which Pops, followed by all editors, except 
ScHMIDT, needlessly changed to ‘¢he evidence.’ As WRIGHT suggests, ‘their evi- 
dence’ means the evidence of witnesses against them. 

40. Sleepest, &c.] JOHNSON: This seems to be a stanza of some pastoral song. 
Dyce: No doubt it is. STEEVENS: In The Lnterlude of the Four Elements, 1519, 
Ignorance sings a song composed of the scraps of several others; among them is 
the following: ‘ Sleepyst thou, wakyst thou, Geffery Coke.” HALLIWELL: Compare 
also the poem of King Arthur and the King of Cornwall, printed from the Percy MS 
by Sir F. Madden: [Percy's Folio MS, i, 70] ‘And when he came to the Kings 
chamber, he cold of his curtesie, says, ‘sleepe you, wake you, noble Kzwg Arthur ? 
& euer Jesus waken yee!’ SrauNToN: As ‘the foul fiend haunts poor Tom in the 
voice of a nightingale,’ the representative of Edgar was surely intended by Sh. to 
sing these fragments of old ballads, and not tamely recite them after the manner of 
the modern stage. 

Al, 43. corn, harm] See note on Shakespeare’s rhymes, IT, iii, 20, 21. 

42. blast] CoLLier (ed. 3): Probably ¢aste. 

42. minikin] a. Baret’s Alvearie has [s. v. Feat]: ‘ Proper, feat, meite 
18 * O 


— « 


2 7 a Thy sheep shall take no harm. 


* Pur! the cat is gray. 
* Lear. Arraign her first; ’tis Goneril. I here take my — 
¢ oath before this honourable assembly, she kicked the poor 
* king her father. 

* Fool, Come hither, mistress. Is your name Goneril? 


* Lear, She cannot deny it. 


* Fool, Cry you mercy, I took you fof a joint-stool. . | 50 


* Lear, And here’s another, whose warp’d looks proclaim 


* What store her heart is made on—Stop her there! 
* Arms, arms, sword, fire! Corruption in the place! 


_* False justicer, why hast thou let her ’scape ? * 


Edg. Bless thy five wits! ' 55 
Kent. O pity !—Sir, where is the patience now, 

That you so oft have boasted to retain ? 
Edg. My tears begin to take his part so much, 

They mar my counterfeiting. 


45-47. I... father.| Om. Pope, Han. 53. Corruption] corruption's Han. 


46. she] Om. Q,. place| palace Wh. 
49. cannot] can’t Han, 57. retain] remain BF y Rowe. 
50. jotnt-stool] Pope. zoyne ftoole Q.. 58. [Aside. Rowe et cet. 
toynt ftoole Q,. join'd stool Wh. 59. They] Ff+,Sch. ThetleQ.. They'l 
51, 52. And...there /] Om. Pope. Q,. They li Cap. et cet. 
52. made on] Cap. Ec. Coll, Sing. counterfeiting| counterfeting Q, 


Glo+, Sch. made an Qq. made of counterfetting FF, 
Theob. et cet. 


fashioned, minikin, handsome.’ WRIGHT cites from the same ‘ Z/egant + neate, fresh, 
feate, gorgeous, gay, pretie, fine, minikin, tricke and trimme.’ 

44. Pur] MALoNE: This may be only an imitation of a cat. Purre is, however, 
one of the devils mentioned by Harsnet, p. 50. 

50, joint-stool] STEEVENS: This proverbial expression occurs in Lilly’s Afother 
Bombie, 1594 [1V, ii; ed. Fairholt, vol. ii, p. 121: ‘I crie you mercy, I took you for 
a joynt stoole.,—WRIGHT]. HALLIWELL: A common old proverbial phrase, the 
exact meaning of which has not been satisfactorily explained, but which may per- 
haps be gathered from the following example: ‘ Ante hoc te cornua habere putabam, 
I cry you mercy, I tooke you for a joynd stoole.’—Withals’ Dictionary, ed. 1634, 
Pp. 553: 

52. store] THEOBALD (Nichols’s Z//usé. ii, 376) eee stone, which COLLIER 
and KEIGHTLEY adopted. JENNENS conjectured stuf, as did JeRvis. SCHMIDT 
thinks that ‘store’ is surely wrong, and that Jennens’s emendation is probable. 

54. ’scape] Mobperty: Probably in Lear’s delirium the ideas succeed one another 
so rapidly that he cannot long hold the thought that he has Regan before him; con- 


sequently the vanishing of the image seems to him like an actual escape of his 
daughter. 


- x y 
KING LEAR 


Se. The little dogs and all, 


_ Tray, Blanch, and Sweet-heart, see, they bark at me. 


£dg. Tom will throw his head at them.—Avaunt, you 
curs! 


Be thy mouth or black or ane 
Tooth that poisons if it bite; 65 
Mastiff, greyhound, mongrel grim, 
Hound or spaniel, brach or lym, 
Or bobtail tike or trundle-tail, 
Tom will make him weep and wail ; 
For, with throwing thus my head, "+70 
_ Dogs leaped the hatch, and all are fled. 


61. Tray] Trey QqF,F,F,. Flym FE+. 
62-71. Tom..jled | Rowe. Verse, the 68. Or bobtail tike| Bobtaile tike Qq. 


“first line ending you. Ff. Tom...curs,a Or Bobtaile tight F¥F, ie Hie) 


separate line, the rest prose, Qq. trundle-tail aie ee 
ep ig q 


66, 67. mongrel grim, Hound| Rowe tatle FF. Troudle tail FF, 


3 4° 
(subs.). Mongrill, Grim, Hound Ff 69. hint] Ff+, Jen. Ec. Knt, Wh. 
(Maungril F,). mungril, grim-hoid Q.. Sch. them Qq et cet. you Ec. conj. 
Mungrel, Grim-hound Q,. 71. ceaped | leapt Ff, Sch. Jleape Qq 


67. ym] Han. him Q,. Him Q. et cet. 


61. bark] MoBrerty: Not so much because they are set on me, as because they 
spontaneously catch the hard-hearted temper of their masters. 

67. brach] See I, iv, 107. 

67. lym] STEEVENS: In Jonson’s Bartholomew Fair (I, i]: ‘all the lime hounds 
o’ the city should have drawn after you by the scent.’ A “immer or leamer, a dog 
of the chase, was so called from the /eam or /eash in which he was held till he was 


Tet slip. I have this information from Caius de Canibus Britannicis. Soin the book 


of Antient Tenures by T. B., 1679, the words ‘canes domini regis lesos’ are trans- 
lated ‘ Leash hounds, such as draw after a hurt deer, in a /eash or iam,’ Again, in 
The Muses Elysium, by Drayton: ‘My dog-hook at my belt, to which my lyam’s 
ty’d.’ Again: ‘My hound then in my lyam,’ &c. CAPELL derives it from the 
French /imder, which CorGRAVE defines: ‘a Bloud hound, or Lime-hound.’ 
RITSON (p. 170): A ‘lym’ seems to have been a large dog of the spaniel kind. 
‘His cosin had a Lyme hound argent white.’—Harrington’s Orlando Furioso, xli, 
30. Again : ‘His Lyme laid on his back, he crouching down,’ The word, differ- 
ently spelled, occurs again, p. 349: ‘Oliuero whose deuise is the Spaniell, or lyam 
hound.’ 

68. tike] Nares: A northern word for a common sort of dog, and still a frequent 
term of reproach in Lancashire and Yorkshire [and in New England.—Ep. ]. 

68. trundle-tail] STEEVENS: See Heywood’s Woman Killed with Kindness 
[Works, ii, 99.—WRIcHT]: ‘1, and your Dogges are trindle-tailes and curs.’ 

7o. After this line in Epwin Bootn’s Prompt Book there is the stage-direction : 


¢ Throws straw crown to left.’ 


Do, de, de, de. Sessa! Come, march to wakes and fairs — 
and market-towns. Poor Tom, thy horn is dry. 


72,73. Do...dry.| Two lines, the first 72. Sessa! Come] Sessey, come Pope+, 


ending Fayres, in Ff+, Jen. Ec. Jen. Bessy, come Anon. ap. Rann conj. 
72. Do...Sessa!| Mal. Do, de, de, de: see, see! Come Coll. Wh. Ktly. = 

fefe: Ff, Rowe. loudla doodla, Qq.- 73. dry. dry, F,. dry. Exit. FF F,. 

Do, do, de, de, &c. [singing. Cap. — Merge As an Aside, Cap. 


72. Sessa!] See III, iv, 96. STEEVENS: It is difficult in this place to say what is 
7 meant by this word. It should be remembered, that just before, Edgar had been calling, ’ 
on Bessy to come to him; and he may now, with equal propriety, invite Sessy (per- ; 
- ; haps a female name corrupted from Cecilia) to attend him to ‘wakes and fairs.’ Nor ; 
is it impossible but that this may be a part of some old song, and originally stood 
thus: ‘Sissy, come march to wakes, And fairs, and market towns . [The jingle 
into which the words naturally fall adds probability to this conjecture.—Ep.] As 
You Lixz It (Gent. Mag. 1x, 402) conjectures that this is an address to an imagi- 
nary dog: ‘ Sessy, or cesse, is still used in some counties to encourage dogs to come 
out of kennel,’ &c., ‘so here it may mean to encourage a dog to follow him to 
wakes,’ &c., for the sake of the good provisions to be found there. MOBERLY: It is 
probably like ‘sa, sa’ below, a word used in following the hunt; being the name 
for a note played on the horn. > 
73. horn] STEEVENS: I suppose Edgar to speak these words aside. [See Text. 
Notes.] Being quite weary of his Tom o’ Bedlam’s part, and finding himself unable 
to support it any longer, he says, privately: ‘ I can no more; all my materials 
for sustaining the character of Poor Tom are now exhausted; my horn is dry ;’ i. e. 
has nothing more in it; and accordingly we have no more of his dissembled madness 
till he meets his father in the next act, when he resumes it for a speech or two, but 
not without expressing the same dislike of it that he expresses here: ‘I cannot daub 
it further.’ MALonE: A ‘horn’ was usually carried about by every Tom of Bedlam, 
to receive such drink as the charitable might afford him, with whatever scraps of food 
they might give him. When, therefore, Edgar says 47s horn 7s dry, or empty, I con- 
ceive he merely means, in the language of the character he assumes, to supplicate that 
it may be filled with drink. See a Pleasant Dispute between Coach and Sedan, 1636: 
‘Tom-a Bedlam may sooner eate Azs horn, than get it filled with small drinke; and 
for his old almes of bacon there is no hope in the world’ A horn so commonly 
meant a drinking-cup that Coles’s first explanation of it is in that sense: ‘A horn: 
Vas corneum.’ Douck: An opportunity here presents itself of suggesting a more 
correct mode of exhibiting the theatrical dress of Poor Tom than we usually see, on 
the authority of Randle Holme in 7he Academy of Armory, iii, 161, where he says 
that the Bedlam has ‘a long staff and a cow or ox-horn by his side; his cloathing 
fantastic and ridiculous; for, being a madman, he is madly decked and dressed all 
over with rubins, feathers, cuttings of cloth, and what not, to make him seem a mad- 
man or one distracted, when he is no other than a dissembling knave.’ Dyce (Gloss. 
s.v. Jom o Bedlam): The following account from Aubrey’s unpublished Vatural 
LTistory of Wiltshire was, 1 believe, first cited by D’Israeli in his Cyriosities of 
Literature. I now give it as quoted by Mr Halliwell from Royal Soc. Ms: ‘Till 
the breaking out of the Civill Warres, Zom 6 Bed/ams did trauell about the countery. 
They had been poore distracted men that had been putt into Bedlam, where recov- 


ether let Bon anatomize Regan; see esd 
= breeds about her heart, Is there any cause in nature 75 
_ that makes these hard hearts?—You, sir, I entertain ~ 
_ for one of my hundred; only I do not like the fashion 


of your garments. Vou will say they are Persian; but 


let them be changed. 


Kent. Now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile. 80 
Lear. Make no noise, make no noise; draw the cur- 
tains; so, so. We'll go to supper i’ th’ morning. 


74-79. Prose, Ff. Five lines, Qq. 
Six lines, Ktly. 

74- anatomize| anotomize Qq. 

75. her heart. Is| her Hart is Q,. 
her, Hart is Q.. 

76. makes| make Ff, Rowe, Sch. 

these hard hearts ?] Rowe. the/fe 

hard-hearts. F¥,. this hardnes, Q,. 
this hardnefe; Q.. 


78.: Persian] Ff+, Cap. Knt, Dyce i, 
Sta. Sch. Perfian attire Qgq et cet. 

79. [Enter Glofter. Ff. Re-enter... 
Pope+, Jen. 

80. and rest] Om. Qq. 

[pointing to a mean Couch. Cap. 

81, 82. Prose, QqFf. Verse (ending 
first line, curtains), Rowe+, Jen. Ec.; 
(ending first line so, so.) Ktly. 


[To Edgar. Cap. 82. so, so.] Ff+, Knt, Dyce i, Ktly, 
77. for| you for Qq, Cap. Steev. Ec. Sch. /o, fo, fo. Qq et cet. 
Var. Coll. Del. Sing. Wh. Ktly. z’ the] in the Q.. 
78. garments. You willsay| garments morning. | FE+, Knt, Dycei, Ktly, 
youle fay, Q,. garment; you'l fay Q,. Sch. morning, fo, fo. fo. Qq et cet. 


ering to some sobernesse, they were licentiated to goe a begging. &.G. they had on 
their left arm an armilla of tinn, printed in some workes, about four inches long; 
:! they could not get it off: they wore about their necks a great horn of an oxe in a 
: string or bawdric, which, when they came to an house for almes, they did wind; and 
; they did putt the drink given them into this horn, whereto they did putt a stopple”’ 
[See also II, iii, 14.] 
= 76, that makes] Scumipr upholds mae of the Ff, maintaining that in Shake- 
spearian language it is a not uncommon subjunctive, and cites from ABBorT, $ 367: 
‘in her youth There is a prone and speechless dialect Such as move men.’—Afeas. for 
Meas. I, ii, 188. Also,‘ No matter who see it.’—ich. /T- V, ii, 58; ‘I care not who 
know it.’—Hen. V; IV, vii, 117, &c. 

78. Persian attire] WricHT: The allusion is to the gorgeous robes of the East. 
So in Latin, ‘ Persicus’ was a synonym for splendid, as in the ¢ Persicos apparatus’ 
of Horace, and the‘ Ornatum Persicum’ of Cicero (De Senect. 59). MOBERLY: A 
Persian embassy had been sent to England early in James I. reign, and a tombstone 
still remains in the churchyard of St. Botolph’s, Bishopsgate Street, erected to the 
memory of the secretary of this embassy, with the following inscription: ‘If any 
Persian come here, let him read this and pray for his soul. The Lord receive his 
soul; for here lieth Maghmote (Mohammed) Shaughsware, who was born in the 
town Noroy in Persia.’ The joke on outlandish dress arises probably from the 
presence of these Persians in London. 

82. so, so] BUCKNILL (p. 207): Lear is comparatively tranquil in conduct and 
language during the whole period of Edgar’s mad companionship. It is only after 


And I'll go to bed at noon. 


—~ Re-enter GLOUCESTER. 
Glou. Come hither, friend; where is the king my master?- 
Kent. Here, sir; but trouble him not; his wits are gone. 85 
Glou. Good friend, I prithee, take him in thy arms ; 

I have o’erheard a plot of death upon him. 

There is a litter ready; lay him in’t, é, 

And drive toward Dover, friend, where thou dhalt meet 

Both welcome and protection. Take up thy master. go 

If thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life, 

With thine and all that offer to defend him, 

Stand in assured loss. Take up, take up, 

And follow me, that willto some provision 


83. Fool. And...noon.] Om. Qq. thine,...loffe,...prouifion, Qq. 
Re-enter...] Cap. EnterGlofter, 88. az’¢] in it Q.. 
Qq (Glocefter Q,). 89. coward] towards Qq. 
84. Two lines, Ff. gi. shouldst | should Johns. 
88-94. There...provision| As in Ff, 93. Take up, take up| Take up che 


Five lines, ending /riend,....ma/ter,... King Q,. Take up to keepe Q.. 


the Fool has disappeared, and Edgar has left to be the guide of his blind father, that 
the king becomes absolutely wild and incoherent. The singular and undoubted fact 
is, that few things tranquillize the insane more than the companionship of the insane. 
It is a fact not easily explicable, but it is one of which, either by the intuition of 
genius, or by the information of experience, Sh. appears to be aware. 

83. noon] CAPELL: This facetious speech of the Fool is meant as a preparation 
for losing him ; for ’tis towards ‘noon’ with the play (that is, towards the middle 
of it) when he takes his leave of us in that speech. COWDEN CLARKE: This speech 
1s greatly significant, though apparently so trivial. It seems but a playful rejoinder 
to his poor old royal master’s witless words of exhaustion, but it is, in fact, a dis- 
missal of himself from the scene of the tragedy and from his own short day of life. 
The dramatist indeed has added one slight passing touch of tender mention (Kent’s 
saying, ‘Come, help to bear thy master; thou must not stay behind’) ere he withdraws 
him from the drama altogether; but he seems by this last speech to let us know that 
the gentle-hearted fellow who ‘much pined away’ at Cordelia’s going into France, 
and who has since been subjected to still severer fret at his dear master’s miseries, 
has sunk beneath the accumulated burden, and has gone to his eternal rest even in 
the very ‘noon’ of his existence. MoBerRty: The poor creature’s fate was sure to 
be hard when he was separated from his master, under whose shelter he had offended 
so many powerful persons. [See C. A. Brown’s note, I, iv, 91.] 

87. upon] See AZacd. III, i, 16; V, iii, 7. 

93. assured loss] DrLius: Equivalent to ‘assurance of loss,’ a bold construc- 
tion, similar to that in Orh. II, i, 51: ‘my hopes . . . stand in bold cure;’ and again, 
as it is in line 98 of this scene, ‘stand in hard cure.’ 


auick conduét. 


— 


- Ok 


ar Thou must not stay behind. 
* Glou.* 


Oppress’d nature sleeps. 95 
is ee might yet have balm’d thy broken sinews, 

* Which, if convenience will not allow, 

Stand in hard cure-—Come, help to bear ed master ; 


Come, come, away. 


[Exeunt Kent, Gloucester, and the Fool, bearing off the King. 


* 


£dg. When we our betters see bearing our woes, 100 


* We scarcely think our miseries our foes. 


95-99. Kent. Ofpress'd.......behind, 
Glou.] Om. Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
95. Oppress'd | Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Cap. Steev. Bos. Coll. Dyce, Wh. Of- 


- preffed Qq et cet. 


- 96. balm’d] Theob. balmed Qq. 
stnews] Qq, Del. Dyce, Wh. Cam. 
Wr. Sch. senses Theob. et cet. 
97-99. Which...behind.| Theob. Two 
lines, the first ending cue, Qq. 


Warb. Johns. 

98. [To the Fool. Theob. 

99. Come, come,| Come, away, Pope. 

[Exeunt...] Cap. Exit.Qq. Ex- 

eunt. Ff. Exeunt, bearing off the King. 
Manet Edgar. Theob. Exeunt all but 
Edgar. Glo.+, Sch. 

100-113. Om. Ff. 

100, 101. When...... foes] As in Q,. 
Prose, Q,. 


Q7. convenience| conveniency Theob. 


95. Oppress’d nature sleeps] ScHmMIDT: What follows would be better intro- 
duced by ‘ oppressed nature, sleep!’ ‘Thy’ in the next line is more appropriate if 
we suppose it to be addressed to ‘nature’ rather than to Lear. 

96. sinews] THEOBALD (Nichols’s Z//ust. ii, 377) suggested sewses, and after- 
wards adopted it in his text. MALONE supported the emendation by a reference to 
‘innocent sleep... Balm of hurt minds’ in JZ/acé, II, ii, 39, and to ‘ Th’ untun’d and 
jarring senses’ in this play, IV, vii, 16. But Detius thinks the emendation need- 
less, because ‘sinews’ is used elsewhere by Sh. as equivalent to erves, and, more- 
over, in connection with this very verb ‘ break,’ as in Twelfth Night, II, v, 83: ‘we 
break the sinews of our plot.’ ScumipT (ZLex.) gives what is perhaps a more appo- 
site instance: ‘a second fear through all her sinews spread.’— Ven. and Ad. 903. 
HIALLIWELL (reading ‘sinews’) asks: But is the verb to balm, or soothe, likely to Pe 
applied to ‘sinews?’ Hupson, on the other hand, says that Theobald’s change ‘is 
most certainly right. Why, Lear has no broken simews; he is out of his senses; 
that is, his wz¢s are broken. Moreover, sleep does not heal broken sinews; but it 
has great healing efficacy upon such “ perturbations of the brain ie as the poor old 
king is racked with.” WRIGHT agrees with Delius that the change is not ‘ absolutely 
necessary, for Lear had received a great physical as weil as mental shock,’ 

100, 113. THEOBALD: This soliloquy is extremely fine, and the p peaents of it 
are drawn equally from nature and the subject.. JoHNSON: The omission of these 
lines in the Folio is certainly faulty; yet I believe the Folio is printed from Shake- 
speare’s last revision, carelessly and hastily performed, with more thought of short- 
ening the scenes than of continuing the action. CAmBripcr Epirors: Every editor 
from Theobald downwards, except Hanmer, has reprinted this speech from the Qq. 


_* When grief hath mates, and bearing, fellowship. 105 


216 


* Who alone suffers, suffers most i’ th’ mind, ; 
* Leaving free things and happy shows behind. . 
* But then the mind much sufferance doth o’erskip, 


* How light and portable my pain seems now, 
* When that which makes me bend makes the king bow, 


* He childed as I father’d! Tom, away!>- a 
* Mark the high noises, and thyself bewray é ten 
: 4 
102. suffers, suffers most| Theob. Satherd, Q.- 7 
Suffers fuffers, moft Q,. Suffers, mof Q,. tog. After dewray. Warb. marks an 
104. doth] does Theob, Warb. Johns. omission. 
108. father'd !| Theob. fathered, Q,. thyself | then thy felfe Q,. 


In deference to this consensus of authority we have retained it, though, as it seems : 
to us, internal evidence is conclusive against the supposition that the lines were 
written by Sh. DeEtius (Mew Sh. Soc. Trans. 1875-6, p. 143): If we oppose this 
view [of the Cam. Edd.], it is because we cannot comprehend how a spurious passage _ 
appeared in the Qq; for we can hardly ascribe the authorship of the supposed in- 
terpolation to the publisher, considering what we know of him and his method of 
work, Neither can we suppose that he would attempt to amplify and improve the 
MS before him of King Lear, as it was then performed. But even the internal 
evidence, from which the Cam. Edd. might be inclined to condemn Edgar’s mono- 
logue, fails to convince us of its spuriousness. We readily admit that the style is 
not that of the rest of the drama; but this difference may be explained in two ways, 
partly by the form, and partly by the matter. Sh. is fond of introducing such rhyming 
lines, formed of a number of pointed, epigrammatic, antithetical sentences. They 
stand out from the surrounding blank verse, and point the moral of the preceding 
situation, and the actions of the various characters. The second explanation is, that 
the poet lays great stress on the parallelism existing hetween the families of Lear and 
Gloucester, and takes this opportunity of impressing it again upon his audience. A 
mere interpolator would hardly have known of this peculiar tendency of the poet, or 
have carried it out so thoroughly, and in so pregnant a manner, as in the few but 
thoroughly Shaksperian words: ‘He childed as I father’d.’ For the same reason 
it is more than improbable that Sh. should have cut out this passage [Delius is 
arguing that the omissions in the Ff were not by Sh., but by the actors], thereby 
thwarting his own purpose. 

103. free things] HratH: Things free from suffering. 

105. bearing] Detius: A substantive. ScHMIpT: ‘ Bearing,’ used thus abso- 


_lutely for suffering, is very unusual ; we may, therefore, suppose that ‘ bearing fellow- 


ship’ is equivalent to companionship-in-suffering ; in this case ‘bearing’ refers to 
‘ grief.’ , ‘ 

108, childed, father’d] For similar instances of passive verbs, see I, i, 203. 

109. high noises] CAPELL: The present signal disturbances among the high and 
great. STEEVENS: The loud tumults of approaching war. JoHNsoN: Attend to the 
great events that are approaching, and make thyself known when that ¢ false opinion’ 


false Saizion, 


7. 


: ieee wrong thoughts defile thee, 110 
‘In thy just proof repeals and reconciles thee. 
* What will hap more to-night, safe ’ scape the king! 

eo lurk. * 


[Exit, 


SCENE VIL. Gloucester’s castle. 


Lnter CORNWALL, REGAN, GONERIL, EDMUND, and Servants. 


Corn. [Zo Goneril.| Post speedily: to my lord your hus- 
band; show him this letter; the army of France is landed. 
—Seek out the traitor Gloucester. [Exeunt some of the Servants. 


Reg. Hang him instantly. 
Gon. Pluck out his eyes. 


Corn. Leave him to my displeasure—Edmund, keep you 
our sister company. The revenges we are bound to take 
upon your traitorous father are not fit for your beholding. 


110. thoughts defile] Qq, Jen. Walker, 
Dyce ‘ii, Ktly, Sch. thought defiles 
Theob. et cet. 

112. What will hap| What will, hap 
Theob. Warb. Johns. Jen. 

What......to-night,| What......to- 
night ? Cap. 

113. [Exit.] Om. Qq. 

SCENE VII.] Scena Septima Ff (Sczena 


_ F,). SCENE VI. Rowe. SCENEX. Pope+, 


Jen. 
Gloucester’s castle.] Rowe. A 
Room in the Castle. Cap. 


Regan] and Regan, and Q,. Om. 
Ee. 

Edmund, and Servants.] Theob. 
Baftard, and Seruants. Ff. and Baftard. 


q- 
1. [ToGoneril] Ed. Om. QqFf et cet. 
I-3. Two lines, the first ending Letter, 

in Qq. 

3. traitor | villaine or vilaine Qq, Cap. 

Mal. Steev. Bos. Glo. Wr. 

[Exeunt...] Cap. Om. QqFf. 
6-10. Leave...like.| Four lines, Q.. 
7. revenges| reuenge Qq. 


now prevailing against thee shall, in consequence of ‘just proof’ of thy integrity, 
revoke its erroneous sentence, and recall thee to honour and reconciliation. 

110. thoughts defile] For the sake of rhyme THEOBALD changed this to ¢hought 
defiles ; but WALKER (C7iz. i, 143), in his Article on ¢ occasional licenses of rhyme 
in Sh. and his contemporaries,’ shows, by many instances, how common such an 


imperfect rhyme, as this, is. 


112, What] Axor, § 254: Equivalent to whatever. The construction may be 
‘Happen what will,’ a comma being placed after ‘will,’ or ‘ Whatever is about to 
happen.’ Probably the former is correct, and ‘ will’ is emphatic, ‘hap’ being optative. 
_ 2, letter] Detius: The letter that Edmund gave to Cornwall in IIT, v, 8. 

6. displeasure] CoLLier (ed. 2): The (MS) has aésposure; but, though it may 
have been the actor’s, or possibly the poet’s, word, we make no alteration, the mean 


ing being evident. - 
19 


KING LEAR 


Ridvice the duke, where you are going, to a most festinate - 
preparation; we are bound to the like. — 


Our posts shall 10 


be swift and intelligent betwixt.us.—Farewell, dear sister.— 
Farewell, my lord of Gloucester.—[Zxter OswaLp.] How 


now, where’s the king? — 


Osw. My lord of Gloucester hath convey’d him hence. 
Some five or six and thirty of his knights; 15 
Hot questrists after him, met him at’ gate; ; 

Who, with some other of the lord’s dependants, 


9. Advise] Aduice F,. 
where| when Steev.’78, 85. 
Jestinate| fefiuant Qq. feftiuate F,. 
10-12. Our... Gloucester. | Two ro lines, 
Qa. 
10. Zosts] post Q,. poste Q,. 
11. and intelligent| and intelligence 
Qa. in intelligence Cap. (withdrawn 
in MS*), 


ard. Ff.. After Aimg ? line 13, Qq. 
15-19. Some...friends.| Prose, Qq. 
16. guestrists| gueftrits Qq. gquesters 
Pope, Han. 
after him] after Han. (misprint ?). 
at’] Ed. at QaqFf et cet. 
17. lord’s| Pope. Lords QqFf, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Dyce, Sta. Glo.+, Huds. 
Sch. 


12. Enter Oswald.] Coll. Enter Stew- 


9. festinate] CAPELL: Speedy. DeEttus: Sh. uses ‘festinately’ as an affected 
word in Love's Zad. III, i, 6. Scumipr: Not elsewhere used by Sh. 

10, bound] De.ius: This does not mean oé/iged, but rather ready, prepared. 
Wricnt: As in Hem. I, v, 6: ‘Speak; I am bound to hear.’ 

Il. intelligent] See ITI, i, 25. 

12. Gloucester] JoHNson: Meaning Edmund, newly invested with his father’s 
titles. [See III, v,14.] Oswald, speaking immediately after, mentions the old ear] 
by the same title. 

16, questrists] CAPELL: An inquirer or quester; French, guesteur. HEATH: 
If we would read English, we must read gwestists. ECCLES calls attention to a Dublin 
edition of Sh, published by Ewing, wherein Heath’s conjecture is printed guerisé. 
Wricut: A word of Shakespeare’s coinage. 

16. at’ gate] The apostrophe indicates the absorption of the definite article. 
See II, ii, 116.—Ep. 

17. lord’s dependants] Hupson: Some other of the defendant lords, or, as we 
should say, the lords defendant ; meaning lords of the king’s retinue, and dependant 
on him. It is sometimes printed ‘/ord’s dependants,’ which gives a wrong sense, 
making the men in question G/oucester’s dependants. [I fear I must dissent. In my 
opinion it is precisely Gloucester’s dependants who are meant. We have heard ot 
no lords who were dependent on the king. He had certain knights, and of these 


.five or six and thirty had come to seek him, and, under the guidance of some of 


Gloucester’s followers, they had all hurried off to Dover. If it were Lear’s own 
knights and his own lords dependent who had him in charge, what do Cornwall 
and Regan mean by asking Gloucester to whom 4e had sent the lunatic king, and 
whither he had sent him? I cannot but think that these questions must refer to 
Gloucester’s agency in the matter implied by*his having dispatched the king under 
the escort of some of his own followers.—Ep.] ScHmipr says that they were 


ata 
him toward Dover; where they boast — 
v IL armed frie nds, 


Co Get horses for your mistress. 
igs Parewell sweet lord, and sister. 20 


sii ‘Edmund, farewell.— 
i. ae [Eveunt Goneril, Edmund, and Oswald 
ea Go seek the traitor Gloucester. 
Pinion him like a thief, bring him before us.— 


[Exeunt other Servants. 
Though well we may not pass upon his life 
Without the form of justice, yet our power 
Shall do a courtesy to our wrath, which men 25 
May blame but not control.—Who’s there? the traitor? 


L£nter GLOUCESTER, brought in by two or three. 


Reg. Ingrateful fox! ’tis he. 
ie... Corn, Bind fast his corky arms. 


: 18, toward] towards Qq, Cap. Steev. 

A Ec. Var. Coll. Del. Dyce ii, Wh. 

19. well-armed] Hyphen, Pope. 
[Exit Oswald. Sta. 

21. [Exeunt...Oswald.] Dyce. Exit 


23. well] Om. Qq. 

25,26. Shall...blame] One line, Qq. 

25. courtesy| curtefie Qq. curt’ fie 
Ff+, Wh. ; 

26. SCENE XI. Pope+, Jen. 


ea Gon. and Batt. (after line 20),Qq. Exit. Who’s| Whofe Q,. 
i (after line 20), Ff. Exeunt....Steward. Enter,..three.] Qq. Enter Glou- 
- _ (after line 20), Cap. cefter, and Seruants. Ff. (after comp- 
22. [Exeunt other Servants.] Cap. troll). 
Om. QqFf. 


vassals of Cornwall who had declared for Lear and betaken themselves to the 
French army. 

23. pass upon] JOHNSON: That is, pass a judicial sentence, STEEVENS: The 
origin of the phrase may be traced to Magna Charta: ‘nec super eum ibimus, nisi 
per legale judicium parium suorum.’ It is common to most of our early writers. In 
¥ Tf This be not a Good Play, the Devil is in tt, 1612, we have: ‘A jury of brokers, 
impanel’d, and deeply sworn to passe on all villains in hell.” Wricur: In Sped- 
ding’s Letters and Life of Bacon, ii, 283, there is a list of ‘The Names of the Peers 
that passed upon the trial of the two Earls’ of Essex and Southampton. _[It is still 
in every-day use at the Bar and among conveyancers.—Ep.] MOoBEeRLy: Magna 
Charta prevailed, it appears, in England even in the days of Joash, king of Judah. ; 

25. courtesy] JOHNSON: That is, to gratify, to comply with, STEEVENs: I 
believe it means simply, bend to our wrath, as a courtesy is made by bending the 
body. Scumipt (Zex.): That is, obey. Compare ‘ Bidding the law make court’sy 
to their will,’ Aas. for Meas. Il, iv, 175. WRriGHT: To yield, give way to. Com- 
pare Hen. Vs V, ii, 293: ‘nice customs curtsy to great kings.’ 

28. corky] JoHNsoN: Dry, withered, husky. Percy: It was probably suggested 


if 


estes 


a 


You are my guests; do me no foul play, ee 


Corn. Bind him, I say. 


Reg. Hard, hard.—O filthy traitor ! 
Glou. Unmerciful lady as you are, I’m none. 

Corn. To this chair bind him.—Villain, thou shalt find— 
Glou. By the kind gods, ’tis most ignobly done 


To pluck me by the beard. 


35 


Reg. So white, and such a traitor! 


Glou. 


Naughty lady, 


These hairs which thou dost ravish from my chin 


Will quicken and accuse thee. 


I am your host; 


With robbers’ hands my hospitable favours 


You should not ruffle thus. 


29, 30. What...friends.| Three lines, 
the first two ending Graces ?... Ghe/és, in 
Ff. 

29. means] F,,Sch. meanes QqF,F,. 
mean F , et cet. 

friends| friends [to the Ser. Cap. 
MS* (? after line 30). 

31. [They bind him. Rowe. 

32. L’m none] I’me none F,. Lime 
none F,, L am none Cap. Steev. Ec. 
Var. Coll. Del. Wh. J am true Qq. 


What will you do? 40 


33. find—] Qq. finde. FF, find. 


[Regan plucks his beard.] Johns. 

34, 35- Prose, Qq. - 

36,37. Maughty.. chin] One line, Qq. 

38. Lam] I’m Popet+, Dyce ii. 

39. robbers] Theob. ii. rodders QqFE. 
robber’s Pope. 

favours| favour Han, Warb. 

Johns. Ktly. 


40. ruffle] ruffell Qq. 


33. Two lines, Ff. do?] doe.Q,. doe F,, do ¥,. 


be 
by a passage in Harsnet’s Declaration: ‘It would (I feare me) pose all the cunning 
Exorcists, that are this day to be found, to teach an old corkie woman to writhe, 
tumble, curuet, & fetch her Morice gamboles, as A/artha Brossier did’ [p- 23, 
according to WRIGHT, from whom I have quoted it, as presumably more cotrect than 
Percy.—ED.]. 

29. means] As ApporT, $335, says, a singular verb (or, more correctly, an 
apparently singular verb), when it precedes the plural subject, may almost be regarded 
as the normal inflection, See A/acé. II. iii, 137 ; Ham. III, iv, 202, and the numerous 
examples collected by ABBorT, 


34. kind gods] WaARsuURTON, with superfluous refinement, supposed that the diz 


hospitales were here alluded to. CAPELL agrees with him, 

39. hospitable favours] Both JENNENs and CAPELL think that ¢ favours’ refers 
to Gloucester’s silver hairs. But SrEEVENS shows that it means the ‘ features. z. e. the 
different parts of which a face is composed. So in Drayton’s epistle from Matilda 
to King Fohn [p. 87, ed. 1748.]: “ Within the compass of man’s face we see, How 
many sorts of several favours be.”’? Scumipt (Lex.) gives from 1 Hen. JV: III, ii, 
136: ‘ And stain my favours in a bloody mask.’ 


in the oo e 


> whose hands iia you sent the lunatic king? 45 


WI ae came erat one ee of a oe) eat 


a | And not from one opposed. _ 


— Corn, 
eee | 


Glou. 


Cunning. 


And false. 
Corn. Where hast thou sent the king? 


To Dover. 50 


Reg. Wherefore to Dover? Wast thou not charged at 


peril— 


Corn. Wherefore to Dover?—Let him answer that. 
Glou. 1am tied to th’ stake, and I must stand the course. - 


Reg. Wherefore to Dover ? 


Glou. Because I would not see thy cruel nails 55 
Pluck out his poor old eyes, nor thy fierce sister 
In his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs. 
The sea, with such a storm as his bare head 


41. Come, sir,| Separate line, FY. 

42. simple-answer'd| Han. /imple 
anfwer'd Ff, Rowe, Sing. /imple an- 
Swerer Qq, Glo.+, Mob. 

43,44. And what...kingdom ?| Rowe. 
Prose, QqFf. 

44. Late] lately Q.. 

45,46. To...Speak.] Han. One line, Qq, 
Ktly. Two, the first ending Aands, Ff, Sch. 

45. have you sent] you haue fent Q,, 
Ff, Rowe, Sch. 

47. I have| I’ve Han. 

49. Cunning.| Cunning— Rowe+, 
enane 


- 50. Dover] Dover, sir Han. 


51. Two lines, Ff, Rowe, Cap. Jen. 
Sch. 
to Dover ?...pertl | One line, Steev. 
Bos, Coll. Wh. 
peril—] perill. FY F,. peril? 
F,, Rowe, Cap. shy peril Steev. 
52. answer] firft anfwer Qq. Theol) 
Warb. Johns. Cap. Jen. Sta. Glo.+. 
53. Two lines, Ff. 
54. Dover ?] Dover, fir Qq, Jen. 
Glo.+, Mob. 
57. anointed | aurynted Q,,. 
stick] raf/h Qq, Coll. Sing. Ktly. 
58. as his bare] on his lowd Q,. of 


his lowd Q.. 


53. course] See Macd. V, vii, 1, 2 


57. stick] STEEVENS: Rash of the Qq is the old hunting term for the stroke 
made by a wild boar with his tusks. It occurs in Spenser, Aaerie Queene, b. I Vv, 
c.ii: ‘And shields did share, and mailes did rash, and helmes did hew.’ Again in 
b. V, c. iii: ‘ Rashing off helmes, and ryving plates asunder.’ Dyce (Remarks, &e. 
p- 229) quotes the following note by GirrorD: ‘To rash (a verb which we have 


1o* 


a = 


_ KING LEAR 


In hell-black night endured, would have buoy’d up, 
And d quench’d the stelled fires ; 

Vet, poor old heart, he holp the heavens to rain. 

If wolves had at thy gate howl’d that stern time, 
Thou shouldst have said: ‘Good porter, turn the key, 
All cruels else subscribe.’ But I shall see 


59. hell-black night] Pope. Hell- 62. howl’d that stern) heard that 
blache-night Ff. hell blacke night Qq. dearne Qq. howl’d that dearn Cap. 
buoyd| bod Q,. laid Q,. boil’d Sing. Ktly. 
Warb. Coll. (MS), Quincy (MS). 63. ‘Good...key] As aquotation, Johns. 
60, 61. And...heart,| One line, Qq. and all edd. since. 
60. stelled | freeled ,Q,, Rowe, Pope. 63, 64. * Good...subscribe’] As a quo- 


stellar Han. Jen. Ec. tation, Ed. 
61. holp] holpt Qa, je Paipd 63. Good] go, Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. 
Pope+. os 64. subscribe] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
rain] rage Qq, Cap. Jen. Sch. /ud/crit’d Qq et cet. 


improvidently suffered to grow obsolete) is to strike obliquely with violence, as a 
wild boar does with his tusk. It is observable with what accuracy Sh. has corrected 
the old Quarto of Aing Lear, where, instead of vas, he has properly given ‘stick.’— 
Note on ‘Sir, I mist my purpose in his arm, rash’d his doublet sleeve,’ &c.—Jonson’s 
Every Man Out of his Humour, TV, iv. WALKER (Criz. iii, 280) cites from Chap- 
man’s Jad, V, p. 63 [old fol.]: ‘Then rush’d he out a lance at him,’ &c. Lretrsom 
in a foot-note says: ‘ Gifford speaks of Shakespeare’s correcting the Quarto, as if that 
were an ascertained fact, whereas it is only the doubtful supposition of certain editors. 
Chapman’s rusk seems only another form of vask. Both seem applied to the weapon 
inflicting the injury.’ 

59. hell-black] CapELL: This bold epithet is deriv’d probably from Hakluyt, 
who in his third volume, p. 849, has the compound ¢ hell-darke.’ [Is it not high 
time that we should desist from our groundless admiration of a plagiarist like Shake- 
speare ?—Ep. ] 

59. buoy’d up] HratH: Used here as the middle voice in Greek, signifying 
to buoy, or lift, itself up. WHITE considers ‘boil’d’ a very plausible reading. 
ScuMIpT: The verb is found in Sh. only here; the noun, in its ordinary significa- 
tion, only in IV, vi, 19. The verb is here transitive, and the phrase means: the 
sea would have lifted up the fixed fires and extinguished them. 

60, stelled] THrosaLp; An adjective coined from s¢e//a. In Latin we have 
both sée//ans and sted/atus. SCHMIDT: But Sh. uses a verb /o ste/l, i.e. to place, to 
fix: ‘Mine eye hath played the painter, and hath stell’d Thy beauty’s form in 
table of my heart.’—Son, xxiv. [So also ‘To this well-painted piece is Lucrece 
come, To find a face where all distress is stell’d.’—R. of Z. 1444.—Ep.] 

62. stern] STEEVENS: Dearne of the Qq means lonely, solitary, obscure, melan- 
choly, &c. See Per. IIT, i, 15. ‘Stern,’ however, is countenanced by a passage 
in Chapman’s Homer, /liad, xxiv: ‘In this so sterne a time Of night and danger.’ 
COLLIER suggests that dear was Shakespeare’s word, but was misheard ‘stern.’ 

64. cruels else subscribe] JouNnson: Yielded, submitted to the necessity of the 
occasion. Hkratu: That is, submitted their cruelty to the compassion they felt ar 


ING LEAR 


ap? tae - (64. All cruels else subscribe] : 
a _the sight of his wretchedness, CaPELL: That is, subscrib’d to pity, subscrib’d or i= 
__ assented to it’s being exercis’d here. Coxirer, Dyce, and SINGER adopt Johnson’s , 


interpretation, KnicHT, STAUNTON, and WHITE are silent, COWDEN CLARKE says "e : 
a 


-‘cruels’ is used for cruelties, as does also WRIGHT, who refers to ABgorr, $9, 
for adjectives used as nouns. ABBOTT, § 433,: That is, «All cruel acts to the con- 
trary being yielded up, forgiven.’ Compare for the meaning, IV, vii, 36, and For 
‘subscribe,’ Zro. and Cress. IV, v, 105. Another explanation is, ‘all other cruel > 
animals being allowed entrance.’ JERVIS (p. 23) conjectures guarrels. MOBERLY: 
All harshness otherwise natural being forborne or yielded from the necessity of the 


aa ; F 

= time. SCHMIDT: ‘All cruels’ can mean nothing else but aM cruel creatures. In 
es. turning adjectives into nouns, the old language went very far, but in no instance 
. farther than Sh. went in this phrase. In the singular, ‘cruel’ is found in Son. 


exlix: ‘ Canst thou, O cruel, say I love thee not?’ The examples adduced by Abbott 
refer also to the singular. At all events it is proved by them (as well as by the 
passages cited in the present writer’s Lexicon, p. 1415) that ¢he cruel, as a sub- 
. stantive, can only mean ¢he cruel person or thing, not cruelty; as little can the old 
_ mean old age, or ¢he young mean youth. All interpretations, therefore, which involve 
this abstract idea are inadmissible. Even those editors who interpret ‘cruels’ cor- 
rectly adopt szdbscribed of the Qq, and hold it to be the imperfect tense. ' It is far 
better to follow the Folio and to interpret the sentence thus: ‘ Everything, which is at 
other times cruel, shows feeling or regard; you alone have not done so.’ _ Sh. uses 
¥ the phrase to subscribe to something in the sense of declaring one’s self conquered 
4 by something, of yielding, complying. It is used exactly in the same sense as here, 
= in 7yo. and Cress. IV, v, 105: ‘For Hector in his blaze of wrath subscribes To 
J tender objects,’ that is, Hector yields if he is brought face to face with anything 
: touching or tender; he is sensible to tender impressions. [This is to me the most 
4 puzzling phrase in this play, more puzzling even than ‘runaways’ eyes’ or ‘the 
dram of eale’; the multitude of emendations proposed for these latter show how easily 
the idea of the phrase is grasped ; anybody, and everybody, is ready with an emenda- 
: tion there; here it is different. None of the interpretations are, to my mind, satis- 
4 factory. The latest, Mr JosepH Crossy’s (Epitome of Lit., 1 June, 1879), refers 
a, ‘cruels’ to feelings, (which is, to me, ‘ far wide,’) and emphasizes ‘else.’ He thus 
paraphrases: * All thy feedings, no matter how cruel or inhuman “ else,” 2. ¢. at any 

other time, or under any other circumstances, having “subscribed,” 7. e. succumbed, 

to the terrors of that storm, and yde/ded to the pity for the old king, thy father.’ In 

a case as puzzling as this, anything, as Dr Johnson says elsewhere, may be tried; my 

attempt is seen in the text. Not unnaturally, I think it is the true reading; it adheres 

to the venerable authority of the First Folio, making ‘subscribe’ an imperative like 

‘turn,’ The drift of the whole passage is the contrast between the treatment which 

Regan’s father had received and that which would have been dealt, in that stern time, 

to wolves and other animals, howsoever cruel. ‘Thou shouldst have said: Good 

porter, open the gates, acknowledge the claims of all creatures, however cruel they 

may be at other times;’ or, perhaps: ‘ open the gates; give up all cruel things else,’ 

2. e. forget that they are cruel. As in I, ii, 24, Lear ‘subscribed’ his powers, so here 

the porter should ‘subscribe all cruels,’ 2. ¢. he should surrender, yield, give up what- 

soever was cruel in the poor beasts, and see only their claim to his compassion, An 

exactly parallel use of ‘subscribe’ cannot perhaps be found in Sh.; and if this be 


Re 
KING LEAR | 


The. winged vengeance overtake such children. 
Corn. See’t shalt thou never !—Fellows, hold the chair !— 


Upon these eyes of thine I’ll set my foot. 


67. these] thofe Qa, Jens Gloster is held down in his Chair, while 
[Gloster is held down while Corn- Cornwal plucks out one his Eyes, and 
wall treads out one of his Eyes. Rowe. stamps on it. Cap. =~ 


deemed fatal to my interpretation, I can only express my regret, and meekly suggest 


that the present instance may be a hapax legomenon.—ED.] 


66. CAPELL: The barbarity exercis’d upon Gloucester is indeed a part of the story 
that was the source of this episode, for that ‘ Paphlagonian king’s’ eyes were put out 
by ason; but the putting-out of poor Gloucester’s seems to be more immediately 
copy’d from Selimus. STEEVENS: In Selimus, Emperor of the Turks, one of the 
sons of Bajazet pulls out the eyes of an Aga on the stage, and says: ‘ Yes thou shalt 
live, but never see that day, Wanting the tapers that should give thee light. [ Pzdis 
out his eyes. Immediately after, his hands are cut off. I have introduced this 
passage to show that Shakespeare’s drama was not more sanguinary than that of his 
contemporaries. MALONE: In Marston’s Antonio's Revenge, 1602, Piero’s tongue is 
torn out on the stage. Davies (Dram. Mise. ii, 197) : After all, Sh. might possibly 
contrive not to execute this horrible deed upon the stage, though it is so quoted in 
the book. ... At the present, the sufferer is forced into some adjoining room; and 
the ears of the audience are more hurt by his cries than their eyes‘can be when he 
is afterwards led on the stage. The gold-beaters’ skin, applied to the sockets, as if to 
staunch the bleeding, abates something perhaps of the hideousness of the spectacle. 
COLERIDGE: ‘ What can I say of this scene >—There is my reluctance to think Shake- 
speare wrong, and yet .” Elsewhere Coleridge says: ‘I will not disguise my 
conviction that in this one point the tragic in this play has been urged beyond the 
outermost mark and me plus ultra of the dramatic.’ Tieck (vol. ix, p. 368, ed. 
1833): This scene, which is manifestly too horrible, and shocks our very senses, is 
rendered still worse by the explanation and the scenery that are intruded. Almost 
always when, now-a-days, such a scenic representation is attempted, false methods 
are employed, because the architecture and arrangements of the old theatre’are not 
kept in mind, but confounded with our modern constructions. ... The chair, in which 
Gloster is bound, is the same from which, elevated in the centre of the scene, Lear 
first speaks. This lesser stage, in the centre, when not used was hidden by a cur- 
tain, that was drawn aside whenever it was necessary. Thus Sh., like all the dra- 
matists of the time, often had two scenes-at once. The nobles in Henry VIII are 
standing in the ante-chamber, the curtain is drawn, and we are directly in the chamber 
of the king. So also, when Cranmer has to wait in the ante-chamber, the council 
room opens. ‘Thus there was this advantage, that through the pillars, which sep- 
arated this little stage in the centre from the proscenium or stage proper, there could 
be represented not only a double action, but also at the same time it might be half or 
partly hidden, and so two scenes might be represented which were perfectly intelligible, 
although not everything on the lesser stage was visible. Thus Gloster sate, probably 
out of sight, while Cornwall, near him, was seen, Regan standing in the fore- “stage, 
lower than Cornwall, but close by him, with the attendants on the stage itself. Corn- 
wall, horribly enough, tears out Gloster’s eye, but the act is not positively seen; some 


£ 


[66. ‘The blinding of Gloucester.] ; 


of the servants, holding the chair, stand in the way, and the curtain on one side (for 
it was divided into two) was drawn before the spectator, The expression that Corn- 
wall uses, ‘ Upon these eyes of thine I’ll set my foot,’ is not to be taken literally; it 
certainly is not so intended. During the speech of Cornwall’s, one of the servants 
rushes up to the higher stage and wounds him; Regan, who is, below, snatches a sword 
_ from another attendant and stabs the servant from behind. The groups are all in 
motion, and, while attention is distracted, Gloster loses his other eye. His cry is 
heard, but he is not seen. He disappears, for there was egress from the lesser stage 
also. Cornwall and Regan come forward and retire by the side scene, and the scene 
ends with the talk of some of the attendants. It is in this way, which some- 
what lessens its horror, that the scene pictures itself to my mind. The Poet 
trusted, indeed, to the strong minds of his friends who were to be so much moved by 
the general horrors of the representation, as not to linger over the bloody particulars, 
Uxrict (p. 458): To have the scene where Cornwall puts out Gloster’s eyes repre- 
sented directly on the stage, can only arouse a feeling of disgust, which has nothing 
in common with the idea of beauty, nor with that of grandeur, power, or sublimity, 
and which, consequently, can only impair the effect of the tragedy. Whether or not 
the nerves of Shakespeare’s public may have been of a stronger fibre than those of 
the present generation,—it is not the business of art to consider strong or weak nerves, 
but to aim only at the strengthening, the refreshing, and elevating of the mind and 
feelings, and such scenes do not effect this even in the case of the strongest nerves, 
-Heraup (Juner Life of Sh. p. 304): In this scene Pity and Terror, the especial 
elements of the Tragic, are urged to their utmost limits. Of course there was danger 
of excess. But Sh. was on his guard. He might have justified the act by the sup. 
posed barbarity of the legendary age whose manners he was tracing, and urged 
that their familiarity with such acts prevented the actors in them from recognising 
the horrible. No such thing. By inserting in the group a servant who dd recognise 
its intrinsic horror, and compassionated the sufferer, he conyerted disgust into pity. 
The other servants also compassionate the blind old man, and lead him out to help 
him, to heal his wounds, and to place him in safe custody, The entire current of 
feeling is turned in the direction of pity by the force of sympathy. Thus the horror 
in the ‘horrid act’ is mitigated, and reduced to the level of terror, which feeling is 
enforced by ‘the fearful looking-for’ of a coming vengeance, of which an instalment 
is secured even in the moment of crime. And this sentiment, too, is expressed by 
the Servants who act as chorus to the scene. W. W. Lioyp: The horrors, like the 
indelicacies that are met with in Shakespeare’s plays, are never admitted for their 
own sakes, never but when absolutely indispensable for his great aim and purpose, 
the defining of character, and that complete exhibition of nature with which,— 
recognising in art the same rigour that is challenged by science,—he allowed nothing 
to interfere. The mere convenience of stage-management, it might be said, would 
dictate that Gloucester should sit in the chair with his back to the audience, and it 
is not even then very apparent why the deed of mutilation should be 80 much more 
shocking than the smothering and the death agonies of Mesdenaons 5 it is not worth 
denying, however, that if only by usage of theatrical associations it would be so, 
and if, as I believe, the painfulness and the horror would not be piety insupportable, 
it must be from a different cause. The cruel act is revolting to think of, and much 
more to behold, and yet is the revolting cruelty less heinous than the treatment of 


‘ — 


ii 


226 


Seog, «He that will Pinte to live tll he be ald 


KING LEAR 


Give me some help!—O cruel! O you gods! 

~ Reg. One side will mock another ; th’ other t 
Corn. If you see vengeance— ’ . 
First Serv, Hold your hand, my lord! 

I have served you ever since I was a child ; 

But better service have I never done you 

Than now to bid you hold. 


Reg. How now, you dog? 
First Serv. Jf you did wear a beard upon your chin, 75 
1’ld shake it on this quarrel. What do you mean? 
Corn, My villain? [They draw and fight. 
68. old,] old Q,. old—Q, F,. lord? ¥Y,F,. 
69. help!) help.—F¥,. help,— FFF. 72. I have| I’ve Pope+, Dyce ii, ’ 
help. Qq. Huds. . 
you Ff+, Dyce, Sta. Glo.+, Sch. you] Om. Q,. 
ge Qq et cet. 73, 74. But...hold.| One line, Qq. 
70. th’ other too| tother to Qq. ‘75, 76. Jf...mean ?]| Prose, Qq. 
71. vengeance—| vengeance. Ff. 76. on this| in this Cap. conj. 
First Serv.] 1.5. Cap. Seruant. “77. [They draw...].Draw and fight. 
Qq. Seru. Ff. Qq. Om. Ff. Fight, in the scuffle Corn- 


lord !| LordQ,. Lord,Q,. Lord: wall is wounded. Rowe+. 


Lear, though there the physical injury was comparatively slight,—the exposure of age 
and weakness to a pitiless storm,—and in itself, however well the storm might be 
imitated, less harrowing to the feelings. But Sh. evidently relied upon the response 
of the sympathies of his audience to the appeal of his art, and he had confidence in 
his power to depict the mental anguish, and sufferings, and injuries of the king with 
such force that no inferior infliction could supersede it in our interest. If the heart 
is touched as it should be by the great scene of the storm, and then by the pitiable 
spectacle of the wit-wrecked monarch in the indoors scene, mingling the fantastic 
freaks of lunacy with the majesty of sorrow, we shall be aware that the mere narra- 
tion of any physical suffering or cruelty whatever must have failed to rouse another 
start of indignation. To any other excitement the sensibilities might well seem 
lulled or seared, and the exhibition of the act was therefore necessary if it was to 
take place at all, and was therefore possible; and the poet daringly and successfully 
availed himself of the opportunity to cast the last disgrace upon filial ingratitude, by 
exposing its surpassing hatefulness in comparison with the direst crime, acted under 
our eyes with every detail of horror. 

76. quarrel] Drttus explains this as referring to Regan’s having called him a‘ dog.’ 

76. What... mean] Should not this be given to Cornwall? I doubt Delius’s 
explanation of ‘ quarrel,’“—Epb., 

77. villain] STEEVENS: Here used in its original sense of one in servitude, 
Moserty: As a villain could hold no property but by his master’s sufferance, had 
no legal rights as against his lord, and was (perhaps) incapable of bearing witness 
against freemen, that one should raise his sword against his master would be un- 


: KING LEAR 


as eee Nay, then, come on, and take the chance of 78 

a oo anger. 

: Reg. Give me thy sword—A peasant stand up thus? 
[Zakes a sword and runs at him behind. 
First Serv. Oh, I am slain !—My lord, you have one eye 

left 80 


To see some mischief on him. ——Oh! [ Dies. 


Corn. Lest it see more, prevent it—Out, ae jelly! 
Where is thy lustre now ? 

Glou. All dark and comfortless. Where’s my son Ed- 

‘mund ?— 

Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature, 85 
To quit this horrid a&t! 

Reg. Out, treacherous villain! 
Thou call’st on him that hates thee; it was he 
That made the overture of thy treasons to us; 


78. Nay| Why Qaq, Jen. 
79. Reg.] Reg. [to another servant. 


_ Johns. Jen. 


thus ?] thus. Qq. 

Takes...] She takes... Qq. Killes 
him. Ff. Snatches a Sword from an 
Att: and stabs him. Cap. 

80, 81. O%...O%/] Prose, Qq. 
80. slain! My lord,| flaines my 

Lord, Ff. flaine my Lord, Qq. 
you have| yet haue you Qaq, Jen. 


Mal. Ec. yet you have Steev.’85. 


81. him] them Dyce ii, Huds. ’em 
Dyce i, conj. 
[Dies.] He dies. Q,. Om. Q,Ff. 


82. vilde] QF F., Jen. Del. i. wild 
Q,FF,, Rowe, Sch. w/e Pope et cet. 

83. [ Treads out the other Eye. Rowe+, 
Dashing Gloster’s ciher Eye to the 
Ground. Cap. 

84. Two lines, in Ff. 

comfortless.| comfortles, Qq. com- 

Sortleffe ? Ff. comfortless— Rowe +, Jen. 

85, 86. Edmund...act.| Prose, Qq. 

85. enkindle| vnbridle Qq. 

86-89. Out...thee.| Prose, Qq. 

86. treacherous| Om. Qq. 

88. overture] o'erture Walker (Crit. 
i, 86). : 


heard-of presumption, for which any punishment would be admissible. The lord’s 


making war against his superior lord would entail no such consequences. SCHMIDT 
says the stress should be laid on ‘ AZ.’ 

79. Give... sword] CoLtier: This may have been addressed to the wounded 
Cornwall, 

Sr. on him] Dyce: The servant is evidently speaking of Cornwall axd Regan ; 
and them (and *en) [see Textual Notes] are often confounded with ‘him’ by tran- 
scribers and printers; so afterwards, V, iii, 278, the Folio has erroneously ‘I would 
have made Aim (the Qq rightly ‘them’) skip,’ &c. And compare what the other 
servants say at the close of the present scene, ‘If ¢#¢s man come to good’—‘If she 
live long,’ &c. [Iam afraid Dyce would have been severe on any editor who had ven- 
turedtomakesuchachange. What‘ mischief’ had the Servant done on Regan ?—ED. ] 


88. overture] MALONE: The opening or discovery. 


Who i is too good to pity thee. | ; os 

Glou. Oh, my follies! Then Edgar was s abused. eee: 
Kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him! : 

Reg. Go thrust him out at’ gates, and let him eel 
His way to Dover.—[Exit one with Gloucester.|_ How is’t 
u: _ my lord? how look yow? 

Corn. Ihave received a hurt; follow me, lady.— 
Turn out that eyeless villain; throw this slave 1 SOF 
Upon the dunghill_—Regan, I bleed apace; _ 
Untimely comes this hurt. Give me your arm. 

[Exit Cornwall, led by Regan. 
os iat lem oe, I’ll never care what wickedness I do, 
* If this man come to good. 
* Third Serv. If she live long, 
* And in the end meet the old course of death, 100 
* Women will all turn monsters. , 


“ 


89-93. Who...you ?] Five lines, end- 95-97. Lines end wfon...untimely... 


ing follies !...forgive...out...Dover...you ? 
Pope+, Jen. 


90. Then...abused. | Separate line, Cap. 
Steev. Ec. Var. Knt, Del. Sing. Dyce, ° 


arme. Qq. 

96. dunghill| dungell Q,. 

97. [Exit...] Theob, Exit. Qq. Ex- 
eunt. Ff. Exeunt Cornwal, and Regan. 


Ktly, Sch. Servants unbind Gloster, and lead him 
92, 93. Go...you ?] As in Cap. Three out. Cap. 

lines, ending /mell...Douer...you? Ff. 98-106. Om. Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 

Prose, Qq. 98. Sec. Serv.] 2. S. Cap. Seruant. 


92. at’ gates| Ed. At th’ gates Han. Qq. Ist Serv. Theob. 
at gates QqFf et cet. 99. Third Serv.] 3.S. Cap. 2. Seruant. 


93. [Exit...] Exit with Gloufter. Ff. q. 
Om. Qq. 99-101. /f...monsters.| As in Theob. 
look] do Jen. Prose, Qq. 


90. Oh] For instances of monosyllabic exclamations taking the place of a foot, see 
IV, ii, 26, or ABgort, § 482. WricHt: Gloucester’s last comfort fails him when his 
physical sufferings are greatest. [*‘ Sign-post criticism’ ?—Ep. ] 

93- look you] JeNNENs [see Textual Notes] : She could never ask how he look’d; 
she saw that. Eccies: * How look you’ is how you look. “ 

98, &c, THEOBALD: This short dialogue is full of nature. Servants, in any house, 
could hardly see such a barbarity committed on their master without reflections of 
pity. JOHNSON: It is not necessary to suppose them servants of Gloucester, for 
Cornwall was opposed to extremity by his own servant. 

100. old course] MALone: That is, die a natural death, WorDsworTH (Sh. 
Knowledge and Use of the Bible, p. 72, ed. ii): We find the same idea in the mouth 
of Moses with reference to the fate of the rebels Korah and his company: ‘If these 
men die the common death of all men,’ &c.—Mamd. xvi, 29. 


105 


oy to iis bleeding face Now, eee help him! 


oe [Eveunt severally, * 
Pd a 2 :* 
102. Sec. Sery.] 2.S: Cap. 1 Ser. in 106, Zo...his] 7” apply to’s Theob. 
ee Bedlam | bedlom Q,. _ Warb. Johns. Jens. Zo apply to’s Sta. 
103. roguish] Om. Q,. ZT” apply to his Dyce ii. 
105. Third Serv.] 3. S. Cap. 2 Ser. ‘ [Exeuntseverally.] Theob. Exit. 


Qgq. Qq.- 
» 105, 106. Asin Theob, Prose, Qq. 


102. Bedlam] Eccres doubts if this refer to Edgar, who had assumed his dis- 
guise but the preceding evening. He therefore supposes that it was some genuine 
_ Bedlam who frequented the neighborhood. Possibly, he thinks, it may after all be 

Edgar, who had been seen in Gloucester’s company. At any rate, he concludes, the 
servant does not succeed in his intention, since the meeting between Gloucester and 
his son afterwards, appears to be the result of accident. 

105. flax and whites of eggs] STEEVENS: This passage is ridiculed by Jonson 
in The Case is Altered, 1609, II, iv. MALONE: The Case is Altered was written 
before the end of the year 1599, but Jonson might have inserted this sneer at our 
author between the time of Zear’s appearance and the publication of his own play 
in 1609. [Of course this attack on Jonson aroused all GirForD’s bitterness, and in 
a note on the passage in Zhe Case is Altered, after quoting these notes by Steevens 
and Malone just given, he says: ‘ Malone exposes Steevens’s dishonesty with respect 
to the priority of the present drama, but, unwilling to lose a charge against Jonson, 
seeks to bolster up his crazy accusation by a supposition as full of malice as the 

_other is of falsehood. . . . And all this grovelling in baseness (for it is no better) is 
founded on a harmless allusion to a method of cure common, in Jonson’s time, to 
every barber-surgeon and old woman in the kingdom.’ Boswett, Malone’s cordial 
friend, says plaintively : «1 wish Gifford had not expressed his dissent in such strong 
language.’—ED. | 

20 


‘2 


md 


= 
= 


A 


ACT 1V 


Scene I. Zhe heath. 


Enter EDGAR. 


~ 
7 


Edg. Yet better thus, and known to be contemn’d, 
Than still contemn’d and flatter’d. To be worst, 
The lowest and most dejeéted thing of fortune, 
Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear. 
The lamentable change is from the best ; 5 
The worst returns to laughter. Welcome then, 
Thou unsubstantial air that I embrace! 


The heath.] Cap. An open Country. worfe : Ff, Rowe. 


Rowe. 3. and | Om. Pope+, Cap. 

Act IV Scene I.] Actus Quartus. dejected | dejec?t FFF ,, Rowe. 
Scena Prima. Ff (Scena F,). 4. esperance| experience Qq. 

2. flatter’'d. To be worst,| Pope. flat- 6. laughter.| laughter, Qq. 
tered to be worft, Qq. flatter'd, to be 6-9. Welcome...But] Om. Qq. 


1. Yet...and known] JoHNnson: The meaning is, ‘’Tis better zo de thus con- 
temned and kzown to yourself to be contemned.’ Or, perhaps, there is an error, 
which may be rectified thus: * Yet better thus wznown to be contemned.’ When 
a man divests himself of his real character he feels no pain from contempt, because 
he supposes it incurred only by a voluntary disguise which he can throw off at 
pleasure. Ido not think any correction necessary. SIR JosHUA REYNOLDS: The 
meaning seems to be this: ¢ Yet it is better to be thus in this fixed and acknowledged 
contemptible state, than, living in affluence, to be flattered and despised at the same 
time.’ He who is placed in the worst and lowest state has this advantage: he lives 
in hope, and not in fear, of a reverse of fortune. The lamentable change is from 
affluence to beggary. He laughs at the idea of changing for the worse who is 
already as low as possible. COLLIER: ‘Unknown,’ which is from the (MS), accords 
with Johnson’s suggestion, and is certainly right. ‘Yes’ for Yet may be doubted, 
but we feel authorized to insert it by the excellence of the ensuing, and more im- 
portant emendation. Edgar enters, giving his assent to some proposition he has 
stated to himself before he came upon the stage. SINGER (in VV. & Qu. 1 Ser. vi, 
6, 1852) expressed his approval of Johnson’s emendation, but afterwards, in his ed. 
2, withdrew it. ScHMmIpT: ‘ Known to be contemned’ means here conscious of, and 
familiar with, contempt. 

2. worst] TYRWHITT, adopting Johnson’s emendation, thought this line should 
read: ‘Than still contemned and flatter’d to be worse.’ 

3. dejected thing] WricnT: That is, thing dejected by fortune. For this posi 
tion of the participle, see ABBorT, § 419 a [or WALKER, Crit, i, 160]. 


- 


is 


mes nothing to ‘ae hacks Banat whe comes here ? 


oy 


bs Enter Grovessrsn, led by an Old Man. 


My Ether poorly led World, world, O world! fe) 
But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee, 


_ Life would not yield to age. 
Old Man, 


These fourscore years. 


9. thy] my | Rowe. 
who...here?| Who's here, Qq. 
9,10. But....world!| Divided as in 


Pope. Two lines, the first ending Jed ? © 


FF. One line, Qq. 
9g. Enter Gloucester, led by an Old 


S Man.] After age, line 12, Qq; after 


dlafes, line 9, F,F,. Enter Gloufter, and 
an Oldman. F, E, (after 4/a/s). 


: - O my good lord, 
I have been your tenant, and your father’s tenant, 


t 
led, Q,. 

12. Life would not| Life would ile 
or Loath should we or Life would not 
but reluctant Han. conj. MS.* 

12,14. O....years] As in Johns. Jen. 
Ec. Walker, Ktly, Dyce ii. Two lines, 
the first ending your Tenant, in Ff. 
Prose, Oq)eticet. 

14. these fourscore years] this fore- 


10. poorly ba ?] parti, eyd,Q,. poorely 


feore—Q,. this fourefcore— Q,. 


9g. Owes nothing] Hupson: They have done their worst upon him, and so 
absolved him from all obligations of gratitude. 

10,12. World ... age] THEOBALD (Sh. Rest. p. 172): My late ingenious friend, 
Dr SEWELL, gave me this conjecture, ‘make us daze thee,’ z. e. if the many changes 
in life did not induce us to abate from, and make allowances for, some of the bad 
casualties, we should never endure to live to old age. My explanation is: If the 
number of changes and vicissitudes which happen in life did not make us waz¢, and 
hope for some turn of fortune for the better, we could never support the thought of 
living to be old on any other terms. [He reads, therefore, ‘make us wazt thee.’] 
CAPELL [adopting Theobald’s wazt]: Life has often such evils, and man sees 
himself in such situations, that nothing but the hopes of their changing, that 
“esperance’ which Edgar talks of before, prevents his putting an end fo, it at any 
part of it's course, and before age; he would not stay to see age, age would not be 
his finisher. MALONE: O world! if reverses of fortune and changes such as I now 
see and feel, from ease and affluence to poverty and misery, did not show us the 
little value of life, we should never submit with any kind of resignation to the 
weight of years, and its necessary consequence, infirmity and death. 

11. hate] NicHois (Wotes, &c., No. 2, p. 6) finds here a confirmation of his 


belief that ‘ hatred is a conservative passion, and supplies us with powers of endur- 


ance little short of those supplied by piety itself,’ and announces that Shakespeare 
herein shows himself ‘to have been no mean psychologist.’ 

14. tenant] CowDEN CLARKE: We imagine the old man who here speaks to be 
the occupant of the farm-house in which Gloucester placed Lear for shelter, and that 
the servants who propose to ‘get the Bedlam to lead the old earl,’ not finding the 
supposed beggar, have left the blind nobleman in charge of his faithful tenant. 


oo) eee 


Glou. Away, get thee away; good friend, be gone; 
Thy comforts can do me no good at all; 
Thee they may hurt. 

Old Man. You cannot see your way. 

Glou. Ihave no way and therefore want no eyes; : = 
I stumbled when I saw. Full oft ’tis seen, a 
Our means secure us, and our mere defects mes! 


18. You] Alack fir, you Qq, Jen. fecure Qg¥F,F, Our mean secures 
Steev. Ec. Var. Coll. Wh. Ktly, Glo+. Pope+, Cap. Steev. Mal. Ec. Coll. Our 
20. Our means secure| Our meanes harms secure Jervis. : 


20. means secure us] WARBURTON: That is, our moderate, mediocre condition. 
JENNENS: ‘ Means’ may perhaps be understood to be mean things (using the adjec- 
tive substantively), i.e. adverse res. CAPELI: Jean is mean or middle condition; 
and the maxim seems to arise from this reflection in Gloucester,—that, had he been 
aman in that station, he had ’scap’d these calamities; his ‘defects’ (his want of 
fortune and title) had screen’d him from the machinations of wickedness, and so 
prov’d his commodities. Kwnicur [the first, I think, to give the true interpretation] : 
‘Means’ is here used only in the common sense of resources, powers, capacities. 
The means, such as we possess, are our securities, and further, our mere. defects 
prove advantages. RANKIN (PAzlosophhy of Sh., 1841, p. 178): Our abilities and 
powers make us rash and unwary. DELIus agrees substantially with Knight. F. W. J. 
(MY. & Qu., 1 Ser. viii, 4, 1853) [following Knight’s interpretation, paraphrases] : 
‘When I had eyes I walked carelessly; when I had the “ means” of seeing and 
avoiding stumbling-blocks, I stumbled and fell, because I walked without care and 
watchfulness, Our deficiencies, our weaknesses (the sense of them), make us use 
such care and exertions as to prove advantages to us.’ As parallel, the following 
passages in the Bible are cited: 1 Cor. x, 12; Ps. x, 63; 2 Cor. xii, 9,10, Also, 
‘Secure thy heart.’—7Z%mon II, ii, 184. [The following excellent illustration is 
given]: ‘The means of the hare (2. e. her swiftness) secured her; the defects of the 
tortoise (her slowness) proved her commodity.’ To the sanie effect WoRDSWORTH 
(Sh. Knowledge of the Bible, 248): ‘Means,’ in Gloucester’s case, is his sight. 
W. R. ARRowsMITH (VV. & Quwz., 1 Ser. xii, p. 1855) contends that ‘means’ here 
bears the same meaning that it does in common parlance. ‘If man’s power were 
equal to his will, into what excesses might he not be betrayed, ruinous to himself, as“ 
well as hurtful to others; but happily for him an over-ruling Providence so orders 
matters that man’s means, his circumscribed and limited means, become his security, 
keep him safe.’ Wutre: ‘Secure’ here means to render careless,—a radical 
sense,—as it does in Zimon, II, ii, 184. HALLIWELL: The term ‘means’ is here 
used for the want of means, the low state of our means, This usage is not unusual 
in writers of the time. WRIGHT: Things we think meanly of, our mean or moderate 
condition, are our security, Although as an adjective ‘secure’ often means ‘ care- 
less,’ I know of no instance of the verb meaning ‘to render careless.’ MOBERLY: 
‘Secure us’ means ‘make us over-secure,’ as we have ‘a secure fool,’ ¢ not jealous 
nor secure,’ &c, &c. The antithesis then becomes ‘ while we are made careless by 
the advantages on which we reckoned, we are saved by something which seemed a 
weak point,’ The allusion may be to the fable of the stag, endangered by the horns 


“The food of thy abused father’s wrath, 
Biche I but live to see thee in my touch, 


r commodities Oh, dear son Edgar, 


21. Oh] Ff+, Dyce, Sta. OSch. ah Qq et cet. 


which he admired, and saved by the legs which he despised. Scuupr gives two 


instances of the use of ‘secure’ as a verb meaning fo render careless; one is the 


passage in Zim. II, ii, 184, already cited by F. W. J. and WHITE; and the other is 
Oth. I, iii, 10: ‘1 do not so secure me in the error.’ Furthermore, SCHMIDT says 
that the signification of ‘ means’ as ‘moderate condition’ is unknown in Sh., and per- 
haps in the whole range of the English language. [The various emendations that have 
been = Sepia are as follows:] THEOBALD (Sh. Rest. p. 177) conjectured ‘ Our means 
ensnare us’; but did not afterwards repeat it in his edition, HANMER’s text reads: 
‘Meanness secures us.” JOHNSON: I do not remember that mean is ever used as a 
substantive for low fortune, which is the sense here required, nor for mediocrity, except 
in the phrase, the ‘ golden mean.’ I suspect the passage of corruption, and would read: 
*Our means seduce us,’ or ‘Our maims secure us.’ That hurt or deprivation which 
makes us defenceless proves our safeguard. This is very proper in Gloucester, newly 


“maimed by the evulsion of his eyes. HUNTER (JVew J//ust. ii, 272) proposed, without 


comment other than that the passage as it now stands cannot be right, ‘ Our meanness 
suc.surs us.’ ANON. (Gent. Mag., Aug. 1845, p. 117): Does the exact point of cor- 
ruption in the text lie in ‘means’ or ‘our?’ Can it be ‘ vor means secure us,’ &c,? 
A. E. B[RAE] (V. & Qu. 1 Ser. vii, 592, 1853): There are two verbs, one in every-day 
use, the other obsolete, which, although of nearly opposite significations, and of very 
dissimilar sound, nevertheless differ only in the mutual exchange of place in two 


‘letters: these verbs are secure and recuse; the first implying assurance ; the second, 


want of assurance, or refusal. Hence any sentence would receive an opposite 
meaning from one of these verbs to what it would from the other. In the present 
passage one would suppose that the obvious opposition between means and defects 
would have preserved these words from being tampered with; and that, on the other 
hand, the adsence of opposition between secure and commodious would have directed 
attention to the real error, But no: all the worritting has been about means. Read, 
therefore, ‘Our means recuse us,’ &c. SINGER (ed. 2): Meanes of the old copy is 
possibly a typographical error for zeedes ; the words being easily confounded in old 
MSS. The context shows that zeeds was probably what Sh. wrote. [‘ Needs’ is in 
Singer’s text.] COLLIFR (ed. 2): dZeanes is corrected to wants in the (MS), and so 
we print with confidence; the context shows that the emendation is required, how- 
ever much misplaced ingenuity may insist that the old text ought to be preserved. 
WALKER ((C7iz. iii, 281): There can be no doubt that Johnson’s maims is the right 
reading. One of the numberless passages which illustrate the old pronunciation of ea, 
Lettsom [Foot-note to the foregoing]: Hooker’s Zcclesiastical Polity, b.v, sect. lxv: 
«If men of so good experience and insight in the maims of our weak flesh, have 
thopght,’ ie b. v, sect. xxiv, 3: ‘In a minister, ignorance and disability to teach 
isamaim.’ Greene, Yemes the Fourth, Dyce, vol. ii, p. 145: ‘But, sir Divine to 
you; look on your maims, Divisions, sects, your simonies, and bribes,’ &c. HupsoN 
adopts maims. 

23. see thee in] KrIGHTLEY: The proper word of course is fee/, not ‘see’; but 
the text may be right. We might also read dy for ‘in.’ 


20 * 


ay 234 


I’ld say I had eyes. again! 
Old Man. How now! Who’s there? , 
Edg. [Aside] O gods! Who is’t can say ‘I am at the — 

worst’? 

I am worse than e’er I was. * . s 
Old Man. ’Tis poor mad Tom. 

Edg. [Aside] And worse I may be yet; the worst is not 

So long as we can say ‘ This is the worst. 


a ens ots 


: Old Man. Fellow, where goest ? = 
* Glou. Is ita ie =a 
a Old Man. Madman and beggar too. 30 eee 
er Glou. He has some reason, else he could not beg. 4 
“ I’ th’ last night’s storm I such a fellow saw, . 


Which made me think aman aworm; My son 
Came then into my mind, and yet my mind 
Was then scarce friends with him. I have heard more since. 35 
As flies to wanton boys, are we to th’ gods; 
They kill us for their sport. 

Edg. [ Aside] How should this be? 
Bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow, 


24. Who's| Whofe Q,. Huds. 

25, 27, 37,51, 53. [Aside] Johns. 36. 40 wanton] are toth’ wanton Q.. 

25. am at the] Lamat F, I'm are to'th wanton Q,. to th’ wanton FF, 
at the Pope+, Dyce ii, Huds. Rowe. 

26. Jam] J’m Pope+,Dyceii,Huds, ~ 37. &ill] bittQ.. bit Q.. 

eer] Rowe. ere QqFf. 37-39. How...master !] Prose, Qq 

28. So long| As long Qq. 37. this] their F,. 

Br) ae On 38. that must play fool to] that muft 

32. TL th’| In the Qq. play the foole to Qq, F,F,, Rowe, Jen. 

35. Two lines, Ff. Steev. Mal. that mu/t ie to foole ¥ 


I have| (I’ve Pope+, Dyce ii, must play the fool to Pope+, Ec. Bos. 


28. worst] Moserty: If we could truly say ‘this is the worst,’ our capacities 
for suffering would be finite; but this is not so, there is always ‘in lowest depth a 
lower deep’ of possible culterianes 

33. worm] Compare ¥0d, xxv, 6: ‘How much less man, that is a worm? and 
the son of man which is a worm ?’—Dr Krautna, JS. 

37. kill] Dexius: Sit of the Qq is probably a misprint for 47%. WorpsworTH 
(Sh. Knowledge of the Bible, &c. p..114]: I very much doubt whether Sh. would 
have allowed any but a Heathen character to utter this sentiment. 

37. How, &c.] Moperty: {Can this be the truth? It isa poor trade to draw 
out of sorrow aphorisms based, like those of fools; on the first aspect of things, and 


tending to recklessness and despair.’ [Does not Edgar’s exclamation, ‘ How should 
this be?’ refer to his father’s blindness ?—Ep.] 


Old Man. 


Is bat oo naked fellow ? 


Ay, my lord. 40 


Glou. Then, prithee, get thee gone. If for my sake 


Thou wilt o’ertake us hence a mile or twain 
T’ th’ way toward Dover, do it for ancient love; 
And bring some covering for this naked soul, 


Which I'll entreat to lead me. 

Old Man. 
Glou. 
__-blind. 


Alack, sir, he is mad. 45 
Tis the times’ plague, when madmen lead the 


t 


Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure ; 


Above the rest, be gone. 
Old Man. 

Come on’t what will. 
Glou. 


I'll bring him the best ’parel that I ‘have, 


[Evit, 


Sirrah, naked fellow. 50 


Edg. Poor Tom’s a-cold—l[Aside] I cannot daub it 


further. 


39. Angering itself| Anguishing’t 
self Han. Ang’ ishing itself Warb. 

41. Then...gone| Get thee away Ff+, 
Knt, Del. Sch. 

42. hence] here Qq. 

43. toward] to Q,, Steev. Ec. Var. 
Sing. Sta. Ktly. ‘¢owards Cap. 

44, this] his Rowe ii. 

45. Which] Ff, Rowe, Knt, Dyce, 
Coll. iii, Sch. Who Qq, Sta. Glo.+. 
Whom Pope et cet. 

46. Two lines, Ff. 

times’| Cap. times QqFf. time's 


Rowe+, Jen. Del. Sing. Ktly, Huds. Sch. 
47. thee] Om. Pope+. 
49. ’parel| ’Parrel Rowe. 
QaF FF, Parrel ¥F,. 
[Exit.] Om, Qq. 
50. Sirrah,| Sirrah, you Han, Sir- 
rah, thou Ktly. 
fellow.) fellow,— 
Glo.+, Mob. Sch. 
51. daub it | danceit Qq, Pope. dally 
Han. 
further| farther Qq, Coll. Del. 
Wh. 


parrell 


Cap. Dyce, Sta, 


39. Angering] HeaTH: He at the same time displeases himself and the person 


he endeavors to amuse. 


46. times’] Dyck shows by several examples [which Schmidt’s Zex. will supply] 


that this is the plural. 


Moxserty: When enthusiasts madden the ignorant. The ele- 


ments were already working in England which produced the Fifth Monarchy and the 
Blackfriars’ fanatics, Naylor, General Harrison, and the like. 
49. ’parel] For a long list of words in which the prefix is dropped, see ABBOTT, 


§ 460. 


We have ‘filed’ for defiled in Macd. III, i, 65, which is not in Abbott’s 


list. WricHr: No doubt ‘paraille’ was an earlier form of this word, but it was 


not used in Shakespeare’s time. 


50 on’t] See ‘two on’s daughters,’ I, iv, 98, 148; I, v, 19. 


51. daub it] WarBuRTON: Disguise. 
¢So smooth he daub’d his vice with show of virtue.’ 


STEEVENS: So in Rich, ///: III, v, 29: 


Again in the Paston Letters + 


Glou. Come hither, fellow. 


Edg. [Aside] And yet I must.—Bless thy sweet eyes, 


they bleed. 


Glou. Know’st thou the way to neers 

Edg. Both stile and gate, horse-way and foot-path. Poor 55 
Tom hath been scared out of his good wits. Bless thee, good 
man’s son, from the foul fiend! * Five fiends have been in poor 
* Tom atonce; of lust,as Obidicut ; Hobbididence, prince of 
“* dumbness; Mahu, of stealing; Modo, of murder; Stiber- 
* digebit, of mopping and mowing, who since possesses 60 
* chambermaids and waiting-women. So, bless thee, master !* 


53. And yet I must.| Om. Qq. 
And...bleed.| One line, Cap. Two 
lines, Ff. 

55-57- Both.. fiend !] Prose, Ff, Three 
lines, Qq. 

56. scared] fcard Qq. fcarr'd FF,. 
fear'd FF. scarred Sch. 

56, 57. thee, good man’s son,|the good 
man Qq, Mal. Steev. Bos. ‘chee, good 
man, Pope+, Jen. 

57-61. Five...master !| Prose, Pope. 
Five lines, Qq. Om. Ff, Rowe. 

58. at once] im once Cap. (corrected 
in Corrigenda, vol. x). 

of lust, as Obidicut ;| Om. Pope. 
Hobbididence| Hobbididen Pope+. 


‘her moder hath seyd to her. 


Hobbididdance Cap. 
«59. dumbness| darkness Cap. (cor- 
rected in Errata), 
Modo| Mohu Pope+. 
Stiberdigebit] Qq. and Flibber- 
tigibbet Theob. Warb. Johns. Steev. Ec. 
War. Coll. Del. Sta. Dyce ii, Wh. 4%0- 
bertigibbet Pope et cet. 

60. mopping and mowing,] Theob, 
(subs.). Jobing, & Mohing Q,. Mo- 
bing, and Mohing Q.. moping, and 
Mowing Pope (AZowzng in italics, as the 
name of the fifth fiend. See Textual 
Note, line 60). mobbing and mowing ; 
Jen. 

61. So...master [| Om. Pope+. 


.. that she hath no fantesy therinne, but that it shall 


com to a jape; and seyth to her that there is gode crafte in dawbyng’ [vol. i, 
p. 269, ed. Gairdner]. For the indefinite use of ‘it,’ see Ham. II, i, 12, or ABBOTT, 


§ 226. 
53. thy] See IV, vi, 30. 


58. of lust, as Obidicut] WALKER (C7riz. ii, 249): Qz., ‘as Obidicut, of lust; 
H. of dumbness,’ &c. ‘As’ in the Elizabethan sense of zamely, to wit. 

59. Stiberdigebit] I can see no reason for deserting the original text here.—Ep. 

60. mopping] CAPELL (G/oss.): To drop, duck, or dance oddly. Nares, Dyce, 
and ScHMIDT define it by ‘making grimaces.’ MALONE quotes from Harsnet’s 
Declaration : ‘—Make antike faces, grinne, mow and mop like an ape.’ 

60, mowing] MonerLy: Wedgwood compares the French ‘faire la moue,’ 
Italian ‘far la mocca,’ and the Swiss-German ‘miipfen’ and ‘miihelen’ for ‘to 
make faces.’ In all these cases the words are coined to express protrusion of the 


lips. 


61. chambermaids] This is generally supposed to have been suggested by the 
three chambermaids in the family of Mr Edmund Peckham, mentioned in Harsnet’s 
Declaration, but MOBERLY gives it a general reference to chambermaids ‘ who per- 
form these antics before their mistress’ dressing-glass.’ 


ae 
oy 


= Mix 


° 


Here, take this purse, thou whom the heavens’ 


A plagues . | 62 
Have humbled to all strokes; that I am wretched 
Makes thee the happier. Heavens, deal so still ! 


Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man, 65 
That slaves your ordinance, that will not see 


Because he does not feel, feel your power quickly ; 


So distribution should undo excess 


62. thou] QqFF,F,. y* F,. you Knt. 66. slaves] frands Qq. braves Warb. 


heavens’ | heaven's Han. ' Han: Jen. Sing. Coll. ii. (MS). 
plagues] plagues. Q,. 67. does} Q,, Johns. Jen. Knt, Sch. 
63,64. Have...thee] One line, Qq. do's Fi+. doth Q, et cet. 
65. and | and the Rowe. 68. undo] undoo F,. undoe F,. vn- 
lust-dieted | lust-dieting Cap. der Qq. 


63, 64. that... happier] WorpswokrH (p. 216): That is, because my wretch- 


edness now teaches me to compassionate those who are in distress. 


65. superfluous] JoHNson: Lear has before uttered the same sentiment, which 
indeed cannot be too strongly impressed, though it may be too often repeated, 
Eccies: Sentiments like these can no more be too often repeated than too strongly 
impressed, when recommended by such varied elegance and beauty of expression. 

66. slaves] WARBURTON: Gloucester is speaking of such who by an uninter, , 
rupted course of prosperity are grown wanton, and callous to the misfortunes of 
others; such as those who, fearing no reverse, slight and neglect, and therefore may 
be said to dvave, the ordinance of heaven. Which is certainly the right reading. 
HeatH: The meaning is, Who, instead of paying the deference and submission due 
to your ordinance, treats it as his slave, by making it subservient to his views of 
pleasure or interest. JOHNSON: To s/ave or bes/ave another is to treat him with 
indignity ; in a kindred sense, to ‘slave the ordinance’ may be to slight or ridicule 
it. [In support of Heath’s interpretation, which is, undoubtedly the true one,] 
STEEVENS cites Heywood’s Brazen Age: ‘none Could slave him like the Lydian 
Omphale.’ Massinger’s 4 Mew Way to Pay Old Debts, IV, iii: ‘the smooth brow 
Of a pleased sire, that slaves me to his will.’ MALONE: See Webster’s Madcon: 
tent, 1V,i: ‘O powerful blood! how dost thou slave their soul.’ WricHT: Com- 
pare B. and Fl. 7he False One, V, iv: ‘Nay, grant they had slay’d my body, my 
free mind, &c.; and Middleton, 7e Roaring Girl (Works, ii, 445, ed. Dyce): 
¢ Fortune, who slaves men, was my slave.’ 

66. ordinance] Moserty: The ordinance meant is probably what the parable 
of Dives and Lazarus expresses, that ignorance of the sufferings of those near us is 
itself a crime. ScumIpr: Here it must be taken in the sense of the established 
order of things, law of nature. BAILEy (ii, 96): ‘Read: “that slanders your ordi- 
nance,” 2. ¢. that disparages it, casts reproach or contumely upon it, discredits it.’ 
To meet the objection to s/ander on the score of metre, Bailey cites Walker’s Vers. 69, 
where this word is given among the dissyllables which Chaucer uses metrically as 
monosyllables, and thinks that ‘the objection is more than countervailed by the apt- 
ness of the term for the place.’ 


(J) s« KING LEAR ge 


And each man have enough. Dost thou know Dover? og 
fidg. Ay, master. 

Glou. There is a cliff whose Hick and bending head 

Looks fearfully in the confined deep ; ; 

Bring me but to the very brim of it, “ 3 

And I’ll repair the misery thou dost bear = 


With something rich about me; from that-place 75 -m 
I shall no leading need. a 
Edg. Give me thy arm; 
Poor Tom shall lead thee. [Exeunt. 
72. fearfully| firmely Qq. 76. [shall] fnall I Q.. 
7m] on Rowe+, Cap. Jen. Ec. leading | lending FF, Rowe. 
75,76. With...need.| First lite ends 76,77. Give...thee.| One line, Qq. 
me, QOq. 77. [Exeunt.] Om. Qgq. 


71, There is, &c.] MoBERLY: It is remarkable that Gloucester goes to Dover, 
not, as Regan laughingly says, that he may now do his worst in treason, but simply 
that he may throw himself from the cliff in utter despair. The fact is, that this 
interpolated part of the plot is one of the many instances of Shakespeare’s homage 
to Sir Philip Sidney; to pay which he does not hesitate to make a certain sacrifice 
of probability. In the Arcadia (p. 160) we have ‘a prince of Paphlagonia, who, 
being ill-treated by his son, goes to the top of a high rock to cast himself down.’ 
(But how slight is the hint in the romance compared with the magnificent use which 
Shakespeare makes of it!) So in Pericles, i, 1, We have taken from Sidney’s Arcadia 
(p. 149) the expression, ‘ The Senate-house of planets all did sit, To knit in her their “a2 
best perfections.’ And in 4s You Like Jt, the celebrated passage about ‘ tongues in 
trees,’ &c., is an adaptation from Sidney’s Astrophel. 
72. Looks fearfully] MoBerty: The beetling top of the cliff seems to be look- 
ing down with alarm over the sea which it hems in. This description seems as if 
no particular Dover cliff were meant, as the cliffs there are not really perpendicular, 
72. in] MALONE: Sh, considered the sea as a mirrour. To look z# a glass is yet 
our colloquial phraseology. WRIGHT says ‘in’ is here equivalent to zzZo, and cites 
Rich. (17; I, ii, 261: * But first I'll turn yon fellow in his grave.’ [For similar 
instances, see ABBOTT, §159.] SCHMIDT agrees with Malone. 
72. confined] CAPELL: Pent in straits. 


17 N 


NE II. Before the Duke of Albany's palace. 


es! Enter GONERIL and EDMUND. 


: + a aa Sieicomne) my lord; I marvel our mild husband 


Not met us on the way. ei Fisker OswaLp.] Now, where’s 


: your master ? 


Osw. Madam, within; but never man so changed. 
I told him of the army that was landed; 


He smiled at it. 


I told him you were coming; 5 


His answer was: ‘The worse;’ of Gloucester’s treachery 


And of the loyal service of his son 


When I inform’d him, then he call’d me ‘sot,’ 
And told me I had turn’d the wrong side out. 
What most he should dislike seems pleasant to him; 10 


What like, offensive. 
Gon. 


[ Zo Edm.| Then shall you go no further. 


It is the cowish terror of his spirit, 


That dares not undertake ; 
Which tie him to an answer. 


SCENE 11.] Scena Secunda Ff (Sczena 
F,). 

Before... ] Cap. (subs.) The Duke of 
Albany’s Palace. Rowe. A Courtyard 
of... Eccles conj. 

Enter...] Theob. Enter Gonorill and 
Baftard. Qq. Enter Gonerill, Baftard, 
and Steward. Ff. Enter Goneril, and 
Edmund; Steward meeting them. Cap. 

2. Enter Oswald]. Enter Steward. 


he’ll not feel wrongs, 
Our wishes on the way 


Qq (after master ?). 

3-11. Madam...offensive.| Prose, Qq. 

10. most...dislike| hee /hould moft de- 
fire Qa. 

11. [To Edm,] Han. 

shall you| thou shalt Jen. 

12. terror] terrer Q,. curreQ.. 

14, 15. answer... dmund, to| answer , 
that our wishes On th’ way may prove 
Gets, back, to Han. 


1. Welcome] Detius: She welcomes hn to her house after she has reached it 


in his company. 


1. mild] Jounson: It must be remembered that Albany, the husband of Goneril, 
disliked, at the end of the first Act, the scheme of oppression and ingratitude, 
2. Not met] For instances of the omission of the auxiliary ‘do’ before ‘not,’ see 


II, 1, 75, or ABBOTT, § 305. 


11. What like, offensive] Apnort, § 395: Antithetical sentences frequently do 


not repeat pronouns, verbs, &c. 


See IV, vi, 261; 


IV, vii, 4. 


- 12. cowish] WricuT: Not found elsewhere. Perhaps the true reading is ‘ currish 


terror.’ 


14. answer] MopERty: Which makes it necessary that he should reply to them 


as a man. 
14, 15. Our wishes... 


effects | STEEVENS: 


‘ What we wish, before our march 


is at an end, may be brought to happen,’ ¢. e. the murder or dispatch of her husband. 
«On the way,’ however, may be equivalent to the expression we now use: By the 


cae prove offeas Back, Edmund, to my brother ; ; 


Hasten his musters and conduét his powers. 
I must change arms at home and give the distaff 


Into my husband’s hands. This trusty servant 

Shall pass between us; ere long you are like to hear, 

If you dare venture in your own behalf, = 20 
A mistress’s command. Wear this; spare speech ; 

Decline your head. This kiss, if it durst speak, 

Would stretch thy spirits up into the air. 


Conceive, and fare thee well. 


Edm. Yours in the ranks of death. - 5 


Gon. 


My most dear Gloucester! 25 


[Exit Edmund 


‘ =~ 
Oh, the difference of man and man! 
To thee a woman’s services are due. 


My fool usurps my body. 


Osw. Madam, here comes my lord. [Z277. 


15. Edmund | Edgar Q,. 
17. arms | names Ff, Rowe, Knt, Del. 
i, Wh, Sch, 
19. ere...hear] you ere long shall hear 
Pope+. 
you are| youre yee ii, Huds. 
20. venture] venter Q.. 
21. command | coward Q.. 
this; spare] this, [pare Q,. this 
[pare Q.. 
[Giving a favour. Johns. Gives 
him a ring. Han. 
24. fare thee well] far you well Q.. 
Saryewell Q,. 
25,26. My...man /] One line, Ktly. 
25. [Exit Edmund.] Exit Bastard. 


Rowe. Exit. FF, (after death). Om 
QqF.F,. s 

25, 27. My...due] One line, Qq (omit- 
ting Ok...man/). 

26. Ok, | Separate line, Steev. Walker, 
Huds. Sut O, (transposing 26, 27) 
Anon.* 

difference| strange difference 
Pope+, Cap. 

26-28. Oh...ord.] Lines end thee...foof 
...dord. Steev. Walker, Dyce ii, Huds, 

27. a] Om. Q.. 

28. My fool...body.] A foole....bed.Q,. 
My foote...head. Q,. My fool....bed. Mal. 
Steev. Ec. Bos. Huds, 

Exit.] Exit Steward. Qq. Om. Ff 


way, or By the by, i.e. en passant. ~MASON and MALONE rightly interpret ‘on the 


way’ by ‘on our journey hither,’ 


22. Decline] STEEVENS thinks that Goneril bids Edmund decline his head that she 
might, while giving him a kiss, appear to Oswald merely to be whispering to him. 
But this, WRIGHT says, is giving Goneril ‘ credit for too much delicacy, and Oswald 
was “a serviceable villain.”’ DEtius suggests that perhaps she wishes to put a 


chain around his neck. 
22 OR we VOUL es 


thy] AnportT, § 235, suggests that it is the kiss which induces 


the change from the formal you to the endearing thou. 


26. Oh] For the rhythm, see ITT, vii, 90. 


28. body] WHITE inclines to accept Q, as.the true reading. WricuT: For the 
reading foot might be compared Zem#. I, ii, 469: ‘ My foot my tutor.’ 


1 


a An 


hier ALBANY, 


Sn I have been worth the whistle. 

Alb, O Goneril ! 
You are not worth the dust which the rude wind _ 30 
Blows in your face. *I fear your disposition; 

* That nature which contemns it origin 

* Cannot be border’d certain in itself; 


* She that herself will sliver and disbranch 


* From her material sap, perforce must wither 35 
* And come to deadly use. ) 


Enter Mee Enter the Duke et cet. 


of Albeney. (after whistle) Q,. Om. Q,. 33. Gorder’d | Pope. bordered Qq, Sch, 
29. whistle] whiftling Q,. 34. sliver] shiver Pope. silver Jen. 
29, 30. O...wind | One line, Qq. Knt, (misprints ?) 
30. rude] Om. Q.,. 35. material] maternal Theob. Han. 


31-50. J fear...deep.| Om. Ff, Rowe. Johns. Ec. 
- 32. #] Q,, Wh. Wr. 2h Q,. tts Q, 


oe ° > : ; 
29. I. . . whistle] JoHNSON strangely interprets this as an allusion to Edmund’s 


love: ‘though you disregard me thus, I have found one who thinks me worth calling.’ 
STEEVENS: This expression is in Heywood’s Proverbs: ‘A poore dogge that is not 
woorth the whystlyng.’ 

31. fear] Equivalent to fear for; see Hant. I, ili, 51. 

32, 33. That... itself] HeatuH: That nature which is arrived to such a pitch 


of unnatural degeneracy, as to contemn its origin, cannot from thenceforth be re- . 


strained within any certain bounds whatever, but is prepared to break out into the 
most monstrous excesses every way, as occasion or temptation may offer. COWDEN 
CLARKE: ‘Cannot be border’d certain in itself? means, cannot comprise reliable 
component substance in itself. ScHmipT: ‘Certain’ is equivalent to fixed, firm. 

Bev iti) sce. lv, 200. 

33. border’d] BAILey (ii, 97): Surely we ought to read here order’d in the sense 
of regulated. The blunder seems to have arisen from the preceding ‘ be.’ 

35. material sap] WARBURTON: That whereby a branch is nourished, and in- 
creases in bulk by fresh accession of matter. [After criticising Theobald’s suggestion 
of ‘ maternal sap,’ Warburton cites an instance in Theobald’s favour, where, in the 
title of an old book, ‘material’ is apparently equivalent to maternal: ‘Sir John 
Froissart’s Chronicle translated out of Frenche into our material English Tongue 
by John Bouchier, printed 1525.’] JENNENS: The force of Albany’s argument to 
prove that a branch torn from a tree must infallibly wither and die, lies in this, that it 
is separated from a communication with that which supplies it with the very identical 
matter by which it (the branch) lives, and of which it is composed. CoL.tmr (ed. 2) : 
Might not zatzra/, in spite of the irregularity of the rhythm, be the word of the poet? 
ScuMmipT: From Shakespeare’s use of ‘ material’ elsewhere, in the sense of /z// of 
matter, and hence of importance, it is not easy to explain it here. Theobald’s sug- 
gestion is appropriate and ingenious, but unfortunately Sh. knows not the word. 

36. deadly] WarscrTon: Alluding to the wse that witches and enchanters are 


21 Q 


Gon. 


* Filths savour but themselves. 


No more; the text is foolish. 
* Alb, Wisdom und goodness to the vilde seem vilde; ?- 
What have you done? 


* Tigers, not daughters, what have you perform’d? + nt 
* A father, and a gracious aged man, 

* Whose reverence e’en the head-lugg’d bear would lick, 

* Most barbarous, most degenerate! have you madded. 

* Could my good brother suffer you to do it? 

* A man, a prince, by him so benefited ! 45 
* If that the heavens do not their visible spirits 

* Send quickly down to tame these vilde offences, 


* It will come, 


37. the text is| tis Pope+. ~~ 
38, 47. vilde] Q,. vild Q,, Del. i, 
Sch. w/e Pope et cet. 
39. Om. Pope, Han. 
42. Om. Pope+. 
reverence.,.bear | reverend head the 
rugged bear Cap. 
een] Ed. 
Steev. Ec. Var. 
Wh. Ktly, Huds. 
45. benefited | benifited Q,. beneflicted 


euenQ,. Om. Q,, Cap. 
Coll. Sing. Del. Dyce, 


“47, 48. Send...come,| Asin Mal. Steev. 
Ec. Knt, Coll. i, Del. Sing. Dyce, Wh. 


said to make of wither’d branches in their charms. 


Glo.+, Huds. One line, Qq. 

47. these vildé| Ed. this vild Q,. the 
vilde Q,, Sch. the vile Pope+, Cap. 
these wild Coll.ii. these vile Heath et cet. 

48. Zt will come,| Om. Pope+, Cap. 
> Twill come, Jen. Steev.’93, Bos. Knt, 
Sta. Mob. . 

48, 49. Lt will.. on] ’ Feil. .on (one 
line) Jen. 

Tt will....on ttself| * Twill....on 
*tself (one line) Sta. 

Lt will come... perforce] One line, 
Coll. ii. Zt well come that...perforce (one 
line) Ktly. 


A fine insinuation in the speaker, 


that she was ready for the most unnatural mischief, and a preparative of the poet to 


her plotting with the bastard against her husband’s life. 
which belongs to a dead thing; burning, that is. 


craft is unnecessary. 
39. savour] EccLEs: 


MOoBERLY: To the use 
Warburton’s reference to witch- 


To have a proper taste or relish for. 
42. head-lugg’d] Wricut: Compare Harsnet, p. 107: 
hy the nose, or Jack an Apes on a-string.’ 


“As men leade Beares 


So a.‘ lugged bear,’ 1 Hen. JV; I, ii, 82. 


43. madded] WricuT: That is, maddened, which Sh. does not use. 
45. WARBURTON: After this line, I suspect a line or two to be wanting, which up- 


braids her for her sjstet’s cruelty to Gloucester. 


And my reason is, that in her an- 


swer we find: ‘Fools do these villains pity who are punished Ere they have done 


their mischief,’ which evidently alludes to Gloucester. 


Now, I cannot conceive that 


she should here apologise for what was not objected to her. 


47. tame] ScHmIpT: A suspicious word on account of its weakness. 
‘visible spirits’ we should expect rather 4o doom or to damn. 


to take the vild offenders, 
47. vilde] CoLtrer (ed. 2): 


After 
Perhaps Sh. wrote 


‘Tame’ and zz/d are opposed, and this seems one 


of the casés in which the old spelling vi/de has introduced confusion, 


eee 


Ct een 


_ *Humanity must perforce prey on itself, 
_ * Like monsters of the deep.* 
ko _ Milk-liver’d man! 50 
_ That bear’st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs; 
Who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning - 
Thine honour from thy suffering; * that not know’st 
_ *Fools do those villains pity who are punish’d 
* Ere they have done their mischief,—where’s thy drum ? 55 


. ; 49, 50. Humanity...deep.] Asin Pope. eruring Q,,. 
= One line, Qq. 53-59. ¢hat...so?] As by Theob. The 
j 49. Humanity] Humanly Q.. first three lines end pitty...mi/chiefe,... 
perforce] Om. Mob.,reading’ Twill land, in Q,. End pity....mifchiefe,.... 
...ttself as one line. noifeleffe, in Q,. Om. Ff. 


prey| pray Q,. 53. ot] now Wh. 
51. bear'st] beare/t Qq, Sch. 53,54. £now’ st Fools do| Han. know’ /t, 
Sor wrongs) of wrongs FF ,, Rowe. fools do Q,. know'ft fooles, do Q,. 
52, 53. Who...honour] One line, Qq. 54. those] thefe Q,, Theob. Warb. 
52. eye discerning] Rowe.  eye-di/- Johns. - 


cerning Ff, eye deferuing Q,. ete dif- 


54, 55. Fools . . . mischief] WARBURTON, as is noted above, refers this to 
Gloucester, but CAPELL contends that it could not apply to him, because ‘he had 
~ done the harm he was punish’d for, he had reliev’d Lear, and sent him away; but, 


a : Z : = Soret é : 5 

me horrid as it may seem, her father is the “ villain,’”’ who, according to this lady, is to 
4 : be pity'd of none but “ fools;” he, indeed, is “ punish’d” ere any mischief is done by 
a him.’ Eccies: Possibly, she means that persons who harbour evil intentions, but, 


through irresolution, or dread of consequences, delay the execution of them till dis- 
appointment or punishment overtake them, obtain pity from none but ‘ fools,’ as men 

of sense generally discern the disposition of their hearts, This also serves as an 
apology for her own precipitation, and a censure upon the pusillanimity in her hus- 

= band. It may indeed be objected to this interpretation that she appears thereby to 
stamp villainy upon her own conduct, but her words may imply: ‘ We have mischief 

, in hand, which it is expedient to effect; if so, the more speedily it is accomplished 
‘ the better; for, even if our proceeding merited your imputation, still it is to be con- 
sidered that only “ Fools do these villains pity,”’ &c. MALONE: It is not clear 

whether this fiend means her father or the King of France. If her words havea 

s retrospect to Albany’s speech, which the word ‘ pity’ might lead us to suppose, Lear 
r must be referred to; if they are considered as connected with what follows, ‘ Where's 
thy drum?’ &c., the other interpretation must be adopted. The latter appears to me 
the true one, and perhaps the punctuation of the Qq, in which there is only a comma 
after ‘ mischief,’ ought to have been preferred. SINGER: Surely there cannot be a 
doubt that she refers to her father, and to the ‘pity’ for his sufferings expressed by 
Albany, whom she means indirectly to call a ‘fool’ for expressing it. [She cannot 
refer to Gloucester, because Albany is ignorant of what had been done to him, and 
she herself had left Gloucester’s castle before the blinding was accomplished. It is 
difficult to believe that she refers to Lear; may it not be that she refers to Albany 
himself? She has told him that his preachment about her father was foolish, and 


| 
244 


* France spreads his banners in our noiseless land, 


_* With plumed helm thy state begins to threat, 


* Whilst thou, a moral fool, sit’st still and criest 
** Alack, why does he so?’* 


Alb. See thyself, devil! 
Proper deformity seems not in the fiend 
So horrid as in woman. me! 

Gon. O vain fool! 

57. thy state begins to threat] Jen. —° 58. Whilst] Whiles Q,, Dyce, Sta. 
Sta. Cam. Wr. Mob. Sch. “hy fate be-  Glo.+, Sch. While Cap. 
gins thereat Q.. thy slayer begins his 58. moral] mortall Q.. 
threats Theob. Warb. Johns. pa Ktly. SAE Sits criest] Coll. sif’st...cry’st 
the slayer begins his threats Han. Ec. Theob. /its...cries Qq. 
this Lear bepins threats Leo WwW Qu. 59-61. See...woman. | Prose, Qaq. 
5, Ser. vil, p. 3). chy flater begins threats 60. deformity] deformiry Q,. 
Q, et cet. seems] /hewes Q,, Wr. Sch. 


that he should drop the subject. Is it likely that she would resume it? On the con- 
trary, she wishes, as soon as possible, to turn the tables, and put him to his defence, 
therefore she launches into bitter railing against his supineness ; he is ‘ milk liver’d,’ 
with no sense of honour, &c, &c., and is ignorant that none but fools will have any 
pity for villains, like himself, who are punished before they have struck a blow. 
Thus interpreted, the taunting question, ‘ where’s thy drum ?’ follows keen, like the 
lash to a whip. I have not, therefore, put a period after ‘ mischief,’ as is done in 
every other edition since Hanmer’s, but have adhered to the Qq, which have merely 
a comma.—ED. ] 

57. thy... threat] This is JENNENS’s emendation and text, erroneously attributed 
in the Cam. ed, to EccLtrs. Through some oversight Jennens’s edition seems to have 
been somewhat slighted by the Cam. Edd.; many of the readings attributed in their 
textual notes to ‘Steevens 1778’ should be given to Jennens. In fact Jennens’s text, 
in this play, owing to a preference for the Qq, which he shares to a certain extent 
with the Cam. Edd., agrees, in disputed passages, as closely perhaps as any other, 
except Dyce’s, in his first edition, with that of the Cambridge edition.—Ep. 

58. a moral] Detius: That is, a moralizing. Compare Much Ado, V, i, 30. 
ScHMIpT (Lex.) adds, As You Like /t, Il, vii, 29. 

60. Proper deformity] WARBURTON: Diabolic qualities appear not so horrid mn 
the devil, to whom they belong, &c. WHITE: That is, deformity which, in the words 
of Albany’s next speech, be-monsters the ‘ feature’ or peculiar characteristic personal 
traits. DELtus: That is, a. deformity which conceals itself under a pleasing, fair 
outside, and which appears all the more horrid from its internal contrast. Compare 
Twelfth Night, I, ii, 30: ‘proper-false,’ 7: ¢. externally fair, internally false. 
[Although this explanation of Delius’s is ingenious, and one which none but a 
Shakespeare-scholar would have made, yet it is, I fear, somewhat too refined. As 
WRIGHT says in reference to it: ‘ This interpretation would require some such word 
as ‘specious’ instead of ‘horrid’ in the next line. —Ep.] WRricHt refers to 2 Hen. 
JEG fey bey 


wTV"s 


4 = 


_ 62-69. Thou...news ?] Om. Ff, Rowe, 62. self-cover'd | felfe-couerd Qq. self- 
Pope, Han. _ converted Theob. Warb. Cap. sex-cover'd 
62. changed | chang’d Q.. Crosby, Huds. iii. ; 


62. self-cover’d] Jounson: I cannot but think that this means, thou that hast 
disguised nature by wickedness; thou that hast 4z@ the woman under the fiend. 
HENLEY: Goneril, having thrown off the convenient seeming of female gentleness, 
now no longer played the hypocrite, but exhibited in her face the self-same passions 
she had covered in her heart. MALONE: Thou who hast put a covering on thyself 
which nature did not give thee. The covering which Albany means is, the semblance 
and appearance of a fiend. STEEVENS: Perhaps there is an allusion to the envelope 
which the maggots of some insects furnish to themselves. Voss (iii, 643, Leipzig, 
1819) suggests fe//-cover’d: ‘ Albany refers to the expression of satanic unwoman- 
liness which covers her face like a dark cloud... Hupson: An obscure expression, 
but probably meaning, thou who hast hid the woman in the fiend, or who hast 
changed from what thou rightly art, and covered or lost thy proper self under 
an usurped monstrosity. CARTWRIGHT: Read ‘chang’d and discover’d thing,’ &c. 
She has just openly exposed her character. DrELius: That is, a thing whose genuine 
self (in this case, therefore, whose fiendish self) is concealed, covered. CowDEN 
CLARKE: Thou perverted creature, who hast covered thyself with the hideousness 
only properto a fiend. SINGER (ed. 2): This is evidently a misprint for fad/e-couer’d. 
What follows clearly shows it : ‘ Howe’er thou art a fiend, 4 woman’s shape doth shield 
thee.’ COLLIER (ed. 2): The (MS) offers no emendation; but we may express our 
confidence that Shakespeare’s word was ‘self-govern’d, which was misheard by the 
scribe, or by the compositor, ‘ self-cover’d’—a compound out of which it is only just 
possible to extract a consistent meaning. Albany complains of the changed and self- 
willed disposition of Goneril. J. BEALE (ZV. & Quz. 5th Ser. vol. vi, p. 303, 1876) 
suggests ‘ devil-cover’d.’ JOHN BuULLocH (/ézd.): The proper reading is a term 
connected with the law of marriage: ‘self-covert.’ ScumipT (Lex.): Dressed in one’s 
native semblance. Goneril must be supposed to have, by changing countenance, be- 
trayed all her wickedness. WricHT: Who hast disguised thyself in this unnatural 
and fiendlike shape. MoBErLy [reading, ‘self-colowred’|: A creature whose vile 
appearance is self-assumed. It seems allowable to read coloured instead of ‘ cover'd,’ 
in which it is hard to see anysense. COLLIER (ed. 3): Possibly ‘self-dower'd thing.’ 
Crossy (Zit. World, 22 November, Boston, 1879) considers ‘ changed’ as equivalent 
to bewitched, as in Mid. N. D. TI, i, 117, and for ‘self-cover’d’ proposes sex-cover’d 
and urges in proof of its propriety: ‘ First, it furnishes the ground for Albany’s taunt 
of shame: Thou be-deyilled creature, covered as thou art with all the lineaments 
of a woman, and yet guilty of such monstrous, unwomanly cruelty, “for shame!” 
Secondly, the reason why he cannot obey the promptings of his passion, and put her 
to instant death, is to be found in the next sentence: “ Were’t,” &c., z. e. “ were it 
becoming me, as @ man, to lay violent hands upon a woman,” and in “A woman's 
shape doth shield thee,” which exactly paraphrases sex-covered. Lastly, it supplies 
the antithetic point in Goneril’s reply: ‘ Marry, your manhood, now!”’ Further- 
more, Crosby finds in the word ‘ feature’ another meaning besides its usual one (see 
the next note), viz: sex or womanhood. This, he says, is in ‘full unison with us 
etymology from the Lat. facere,’ and refers to that ‘ which distinguished Goneril’s 


21 * 


- * Be-monster not thy feature. Were’t my fitness’ 


* To let these hands obey my blood, 
* They are apt enough to dislocate and tear — te 2 
* Thy flesh and bones. Howe’er thou art a fiend, ea 
* A woman’s shape doth shield thee. ; 
* Gon. Marry, your manhood now—* = 
: é ~~ 7 
Enter a Messenger. : 
* Alb. What news?* ue ae 
Mess. Oh, my good lord, the Duke of Cornwall’s dead, 70 ee 
Slain by his servant, going to put out ; oe 
The other eye of Gloucester. 


Alb. -~. Gloucester’s eyes! 4 
¥ 
63. Be-monster.... feature| Separate 65. dislocate| diflecate Qq. Q a 
line, Ktly. ~ 66. howe’er| Theob. how ere Qq. a 
: Were’t| Were it Cap. Steev. Ec, 68. manhood now—] manhood mew— ; 
Var. Knt, Coll. Del. Wh. Ktly. Q,. manhood mew. Cam. Wr. man- . 
64. To] As man to Anon.* hood now ! Theob. Sch. 
hands| hands of mine Steev. con}. Enter a Messenger.] Ff {after z _ 
; blood | boiling blood Theob.Warb.  —_foole, line 61). Enter a Gentleman. : 
Cap. blood’s behest Anon.* Qq. (after zews ? Q.). 
65. They are] They’re Theob. Warb. 70, &c. Mess.] Mes. Ff. Gent. Qq. 
Johns. Dyce ii, Huds. 70-72. Ok... Gloucester.| Prose, Qq. 


—_——$——— ee. CONrNUwyYONM 
making from that of aman.’ ‘ Be-monster not thy feature’ therefore ‘ means ‘“‘ Make 
not a monster of thy sex,” “change not thy woman’s form into a devil. Albany 
having just said, “‘ Proper deformity seems not in the Fzezd So horrid as in WOMAN.” 

. As a woman Goneril’s ‘shape’ covers, z. e. protects, her from her husband’s im- 
mediate fury.’ [This emendation Crosby proposed in VV. G& Qz. 5th Ser. vi, 225, 
1876, and no one, I think, can fail to be struck with its ingenuity, ‘and yet—.’ Is it 
over-refinement to suppose that this revelation to Albany of his wife’s fiendlike cha- 
racter transforms, in his eyes, even her person? She is changed, her true self has — 
been covered; now that she stands revealed, her whole outward shape is be-mon- 
stered. No woman, least of all Goneril, could remain unmoved under such scathing 
words from her husband. Goneril’s ‘feature’ is quivering and her face distorted 
with passion. Then it is that Albany tells her not to let her evil self, hitherto cov- 
ered and concealed, betray itself in all its hideousness in her outward shape.—Ep. ] 

63. feature] See Scumipt’s Zex. for proof that this invariably means in Sh. the 
shape, exterior, the whole turn or cast of the body, - 

64. blood] Dyce (G/oss.): Disposition, inclination, temperament, impulse. [See 
III, v, 20.] This line Asnorr, § 508, does not consider defective in metre, but 
supposes that a foot may be omitted where there is any marked pause arishig from 
emotion, as here, at the end of the line. 

68. manhood now—] Detius: She had just before taunted him with being 


‘milk-liver’d.’ WriGHT explains his reading as ‘to keep in, to restrain’ your 
manhood. 


a: , his a master ; ae oie sae - 75 


Flew on him and amongst them fell’d him dead, 
But not. without that harmful stroke which since 


Hath pluck'd him after. 


Alb. : This shows you are above, 
You justicers, that these our nether crimes 
So speedily can venge.—But, O poor Gloucester! 80 
Lost he his other eye? — fot : 
Mess. —. Both, both, my lord.— 
This letter, madam, craves a speedy answer ; 
*Tis from your sister. 
Gon. [Aside] One way I like this well; 
But being widow, and my Gloucester with her, 


‘May all the building in my fancy pluck 85 


73. thrill’d| thrald Qq. Steev. 778. aboue you LIuftifers Q.. 
75. thereat enraged| threat-enrag'd aboue your Iuftices Q,. aboue You 
Ee Luftices Ff. above, you Fustices, Rowe+, 


76. and amongst] they amongst Han. 
fell’ d him] fell he Cap. conj. 
77. not| now Warb. (a misprint ?) 
77,78. which...after.| One line in Q,. 
78-81. This...eye ?| Three lines, end- 
ing Luftifers (or Luftices)...venge...eye ? 
in Qq. 


Cap. Jen. Sch. 

79. nether| neather Q,F,. : 

81-83. Both...sister.| Two lines, Qq, 
the first ending axzswer in Q,, and /peeay 
in Q.. 

83. [Aside] Johns. 

84. being | she being Ktly. 


78,79. above, You justicers | Cap.conj. 85. 22] on Qq, Wh. of Cap. conj. 


73. remorse] Dyce (G/oss.): Compassion, tenderness of heart. : 
74,75. bending ... master] EccLes: The sense would be improved by reading 
‘bending ze sword Of his great master,’ that is, turning it aside to prevent the exe- 


~ cution of the threatened mischief. Or suppose it were: ‘ bending aside the sword Of 


his,’ &c. Scumipt (Zex.): That is, directing, turning, his sword against his master. 

75, thereat enraged | Cottier: The reading of F, is not inappropriate, and 
might be right if the Qq did not contradict it and if the verse were not thereby 
injured. 

76. amongst them] MoserLty: The messenger does not mention that the blow 
came from Regan’s hard, : 

76. fell’d] ABBoTT, § 399: Where there can be no doubt what is the nominative, 
it is sometimes ‘omitted. See II, ii, 114; II, iv, 41; and Hem. II, ii, 67. 

‘79. justicers] See III, vi, 21. 

$3. well;] Mason: Goneril’s plan was to poison her sister,—to marry Edmund,— 
to murder Albany,—and to get possession of the whole kingdom. As the death of 
Cornwall facilitated the last part of her scheme, she was pleased at it; but disliked 
it, as it put it in the power of her sister to marry Edmund, 

85. building in my fancy] STEEVENS: Compare Cor. II, i, 216: ‘the buildings 


Mess. ~ 
Alb, “Hei is not here 
Mess, No, my Sean lord; I met him back again. — . 
Alb, Knows he the wickedness ? Ms 
Mess. Ay, my good lord; ’twas he inform’d against 
him, . 
And quit the house on purpose, that — puiceteneny 


_ Might have the freer course. 


Alb. Gloucester, I live 
To thank thee for the love thou show’dst the king, : 95 
And to revenge thine eyes——Come hither, friend ; 


Tell me what more thou know’st. [Exeunt.° 
86, 87. Upon...tart.| Vpon...tooke, Qq aon Gloucester...eyes.| As ¢ sisi 
(in one line). Johns. Jen. Ec. 
87. tart—TI' il] tart. [To him] 7’ 94-97. Gloucester.....know' st | “Three 
Coll. Del. Wh. lines in Qq, the first two ending King,... 
[Exit.] Om. Ff. Sriend, in Q., and Joue...eyes ; in Q.. 
88. Two lines in Ff. 95. show'dst] Steev. /hew'dft FFF. 
89. He is| He's Pope+,Cap. Dyceii. jhewdfi F,. /hewedft Qq. showedst Sch. 
Huds. 96. thine] thy Qq.- 
93. on purpose] of purpofe FF ,+. 97. know'st | knowft F,. knoweft Qq. 
their] there Q,. [Exeunt.] Exit. Qq. 


of my fancy.’ WHITE: The ‘in’ of the Ff isa mere misprint for o#, that is, the 
building of my fancy, a use of oz common enough. 

86. Another way] WricHT: In contrast with what she has just been saying. 
She really takes the same view of the position as in the first line of her speech. 

go. back again] WricuT: That is, on his way back. 


rs i Scene III. Zhe French camp near Dover. 


* Enter KENT and a Gentleman, 


* Kent. .Why the King of France is so gate gone I 


= back know you the reason? 


_ SCENE II.] Pope. This Scene is 
omitted in Ff, Rowe. For this scene 
Ec. substitutes SCENE V, and calls this, 
SCENE IV. _— 

The French...] Steev. Om. Pope. 
French Camp under Dover. Cap. Dover. 


Theob. 


1,2. Why...back] The King of France 
so suddenly gone back! Pope+, Cap. 
Why....reason ?| Two lines, the 
first ending dacke, in Q,, Pope+, Cap. 
Jen. 
1. France] Fraunce Q,. 
2. the] no Q,. 


Scene III] JoHNnson: This scene seems to have been left out of the Folio only 


 toshorten the play. [See Appendix, Zhe Text.] 


As will be seen by the Textual Notes, EccLEs again makes a transposition of 


scenes. Between the preceding scene and this present one, he inserts Scene V, call-_ 


ing it Scene III. Wherefore our Scenes III and IV are his Scenes IV and V. The 
object of this change is to bring closer together all those scenes which represent the 
transactions in the neighborhood of Dover, and io render unnecessary the supposi- 
tion that Lear passes a night in the open fields. Eccles says: The distance probably 
imagined between the place where Regan has that conference with the Steward, 


which makes the subject of the Scene now before us [Eccles’s Scene III, our Scene V], 


and the vicinity of Dover, seems to be such as requires the notion of a night inter- 
vening before he arrives at the latter, and, consequently, the same space of time 
must elapse between any scene which precedes that just mentioned and any other 
wherein he appears to have arrived near Dover, as he does in the sixth scene. It 
follows, then, that between the fourth and sixth, as hitherto numbered, a night must 
pass; but the solicitude to find the King, expressed by Cordelia in the former of 
these, makes it probable that her efforts were attended with success before the coming 
on of night. Let, therefore, scene the fifth of the ancient distribution stand as the 
third in this place, and suppose it to pass on the evening of the third day since that, 
inclusively taken, on the morning of which Lear, attended by certain of his knights, 
began to be conveyed from the castle of Gloucester on his route towards Dover, and 
that, in some former part of the same, Edmund had departed from Regan upon the 
business which she here mentions as the motive of his expedition. . . . It appears 
that the Steward, not finding Edmund as he expected, sets out towards Dover with- 
out loss of time in pursuit of him. I suppose the troops of Albany to have begun 
their march towards Dover, but in another direction, about the time of the Steward’s 

departure from home charged with the execution of Goneril’s commission, That 
might be either some part of the same day on which she had reached her own habi- 
tation accompanied by Edmund, or the morning of the succeeding one, so as to 
allow time for the Steward to arrive at his destination in the evening, as there is 
some reason for supposing he had done by Regan’s exhortation in this scene [our 
Scene V] to wait the safe conduct of her forces on the morrow, and her hint respect- 


* since he coming foutlis is Tae of, which nk is the 
* kingdom so much fear and danger that his personal return 
* was most required and necessary. 

* Kent. Who hath he left behind him General ? 

* Gent. The Marshal of France, Monsieur La Far. 


3-6. Something.....necessary| Four 
lines, ending state...which...danger,... 


 NECESSATY, Bone; Cap. Jen. Mal. Ec. 


Ktly. Ending state...which...danger... 
requir’d Steev. Bos. Coll. Wh. Ktly. 
4. to] Om. Pope+. 
5. personal | Om. Fope, Theob. Han. 
wat Cap. 
6. and necessary | Om. Voss. 


7. Who| Whom Warb, Johns, Ec. 
Coll. Wh. Ktly. 
8. Marshal] Qq, Dyce, Wh. Glo.+, 
Huds. Col. iii. dZareschal Pope et cet. 
Monsieur] Monfier Q, Moun- 
feur Q,. } 
La Far) \a Far Qq. le Far Pope+, 
Jen. Knt, Sta. le Fer. Cap. Steev. Ec. 
Var. Coll. Sing. Ktly. 


ing the insecurity of travelling. [See Appendix: Zhe Duration of the Action p. 409.] 
When Eccles comes to this present scene, which he calls Scene IV, he says: Let 
the period of this scene be supposed the fourth morning from that (both, however, 
inclusively) whereon Lear, with Kent and the rest of his attendants, began his prog- 
ress from Gloucester’s castle, Goneril and Edmund from the same set out for the 
palace of Albany, and, later in the day, the sightless Gloucester, conducted by the 
Old Man, began to go to Dover, The Gentleman who enters, conversing with Kent, 
is the same who was deputed by him as a messenger to Dover on the night of the 
storm. From their conversation we infer that this meeting has but a very little 
while before taken place. Kent appears to be but newly arrived. The Gentle- 
man, though he could not have set out many hours before the King and his party, 
yet, having travelled with more expedition, may reasonably be thought to have 
been long enough arrived to have had an opportunity for the conference with 
Cordelia. 

Gentleman] JoHNson: The same whom he had sent with letters to Cordelia. 

2. reason] STEEVENS: The King of France being no longer a necessary person- 
age, it was fit that some pretext for getting rid of him should be formed before the 
play was too near advanced towards a conclusion, Decency required that a monarch 
should not be silently shuffled into“the pack of insignificant characters; and there 
fore his dismission (which could be effected only by a sudden recall to his own 
dominions) was to be accounted for before the audience, For this purpose, among 
others, the present scene was introduced. It is difficult indeed to say what use could 
have been made of the king, had he appeared at the head of his own armament, and 
survived the murder of his queen. His conjugal concern on the occasion might have 
weakened the effect of Lear's parental sorrow; and, being an object of respect as 
well as pity, he would naturally have divided the spectators’ attention, and thereby 
diminished the consequence of Albany, Edgar, and Kent, whose exemplary virtues 
deserved to be ultimately placed in the most conspicuous point of view. 

7. Who] For instances of the neglect of the inflection of who, see V, iii, 249: 
Macb, III, i, 122; III, iv, 42; IV, iii, 171; Mam. Il, ii, 193, and Apgort, § 274. 


0 as 


das ; 
- a 2 your mn pierce the queen to any de- 
_ *mons' ition ororein yo ~*. 10 
ea Gent. Ay, sir; she took them, read them in my prescitg 

* And now and then an ample tear trill’d down 

, ma * * Her delicate cheek. It seem’d she was a queen 

___- * Over her passion, who most rebel-like 

Bin -* Sought to be king o’er her. 

i Kent. Oh, then it moved her. 15 
* Gent. Not to a rage; patience and sorrow strove - 
* Who should express her goodliest. You have seen 

* Sunshine and rain at once; her smiles and tears 

* Were like a better way; those happy smilets 


’ 


ry 
ah 
a? 


9. Did...any] Separate line, Ktly. 
9,10. Did....of grief?| Well; say, 


16. strove] Pope. /freme Qq. 
17. Who| Which Pope+. 


sty, did...of her grief ? Cap., as verse, 
the first line ending gueen. 
Il. Ay, sir ;] Johns. J, stv, Theob. +, 
L fay Qq, Pope. 
 them...them] ’em..em Popet+. 
13-15. Her...her.| As in Pope. Two 
lines, the first ending pa/fion, Qq. 
14. Over] ouer Q,. ore Q,. 
who| which Pope+. 
16-24. WVot......74] No punctuation 
throughout, but commas, in Qq, except 
dropt ; line 22 in Q,. 


18,19. her...way.| Om. Pope, Han. 
19. like a better way.| like a betier 
way Q,. like a better way, Q,. like a 
wetter May. arb. Theob. Johns. Cap. 
Jen. “ke a better day. Theob. Steev. 
Knt, Dyce, Sta. “ke a better May 
Tollet, Mal. Ec. Bos, Coll. Wh. @ 
chequer'd day Dodd. like a bitter May 
Lloyd.* ke’em ;—a better way Ktly. 
happy| happiest Pope ii, Theob, 
Warb. 
smilets | smiles Pope+ , Cap. Steev. 


16. Wot to a rage| But not to rage Ec. Var. 
Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 


12. trill’d] WALKER (C77z. iii, 282) gives other instances of the use of this word 
from Jonson’s Every Man out of his Humour, Il, ii; Browne’s Britannia’s Pas- 
torals, b. ii, song iv; and b. i, song v. WRIGHT: Cotgrave has,‘ Zranscouler, To 
glide, slide, slip, runne, trill, or trickle (also, to straine) through.’ 

14,17. who] For other instances of ‘ who’ personifying irrational antecedents, see 
ABBOTT, § 264. 

18. Sunshine and rain] Moser.y: It is the triumph of a poet thus to make 
two feelings work at once in one mind. Thus Homer makes the women’s tears for 
Patroclus turn to tears for their own bondage (IlatpdéxAov mpddaciy cddv 0 avrav 
«ge éxdotm); the dying Dido in Virgil struggles for the light, but hates it when 
found (quzesivit czelo lucem ingemuitque reperta). But no poet ever ventures, as Sh. 
does here, to imagine a grief, the most powerful of which human nature is capable, 
thus controlled by the tranquil graciousness of a calm nature, which cannot do other- 
wise than hold its own amid all disturbance, and is incapable of losing its balance; 
the inward perfection thus giving lovely mildness to the accidental and temporary 
emotion which still remains entire and undestroyed, 

19. like a better way] WARBURTON proposed ‘a wetter May, i.e. a spring 
season wetter than ordinary;’ and THEOBALD supported the conjecture by citing 


[19. like a better way.] 
Shakespeare’s ‘May of youth.’—AMuch Ado, V, i, 76; ‘sweet May.’—Rich. i 
V, i, 79; ‘rose of May.—Ham. IV,v, 153; &c. HEATH proposed ‘an April day 
because the ‘joint appearance of rain and sunshine’ was more characteristic of that 


month than of May. In THEOBALD’s second edition, although Warburton’s change — 


is still retained in the text, yet the phrase is cited in the note as ‘a better day.’ This 
emendation was adopted, without credit, by STEEVENs in his edition of 1773; in his 
edition of 1778 he says: A detfer day is the dest day, and the dest day is a day most 
favourable to the productions of the earth. Such are the days in which there is a 
due admixture of rain and sunshine. The comparative is used by Milton and others, 
instead of the positive and superlative, as well as by Sh. himself in the play before 
us: ‘The safer sense, &c. IV, vi, 81; ‘better part of man.’—JZacé. V, viii, 18. 
The thought is taken from Sidney’s Arcadia, p. 244: ‘Her tears came dropping 
down like rain in sunshine.’ Cordelia’s behaviour is apparently copied from Philo- 
clea’s. The same book, in another place, says: ‘her tears followed one another like 
a precious rope of pearl.’ In this same edition of Steevens in 1778 a note is given 
by ToLLer in which he suggests that ‘a better day’ or ‘a better May’ is better 
than Warburton’s alteration, because it implies that sunshine prevails over rain, 
whereas Warburton’s ‘wetter May’ implies that Cordelia’s sorrow excelled her 
patience. MALONE adopted Tollet’s emendation, without credit, in the following 
note: If a deéter day means either a good day, or the dest day, it cannot represent 
Cordelia’s smiles and tears; for neither the one nor the other necessarily implies vazz, 
without which there is nothing to correspond with her feavs; nor cana rainy day, 
occasionally brightened by sunshine, with any propriety be called a good or the dest 
day. We are compelled, therefore, to make some other change. A Jdetter May, on 
the other hand, whether we understand by it a good May, or a May better than ordi- 
nary, corresponds exactly with the preceding image; for in every May, rain may be 
expected, and in a good, or better May than ordinary, the sunshine, like Cordelia’s 
smiles, will predominate. Mr Steevens has quoted a passage from Sidney’s 47cadia. 
Perhaps the following passage in the same book, p. 163, ed. 1593, bears a still nearer 
resemblance to that before us: ‘And with that she prettily swz/ed, which mingled 
with her ¢ears, one could not tell whether it were a mourning pleasure or a delightful 
sorrow; but like when a few Afri/ drops are scattered by a gentle zephyrus among 
fine-coloured flowers,’ [To the citations which he had previously given] STEEVENS 
afterwards added the following: Again in A Courtlie Controversie of Cupid's Cautels, 
&c., translated from the French, &c. by H. W. [Henry Wotton], 1578, p. 289: 
‘Who hath wewed in the spring time, raine and sunne-shine in one moment, might 
beholde the troubled countenance of the gentlewoman, after she had read and over- 
read the letters of her Floradin with an eye now smyling, then bathed in teares.’ 
SINGER, in his first edition, gives «a note, with which he ‘had been favoured by Mr 
BOADEN ”; «Her smiles and tears Were Ze; a better way.”? That is, Cordelia’s 
smiles and tears were /ize the conjunction of sunshine and rain, in a better way or 
manner, Now, in what did this better way consist? Why, simply in the smiles 
=e unconscious of the tears; whereas the sunshine has a watery look through 
the falling drops of rain— Those happy smiles... seem’d o¢ to Anow What guests 
were in her eyes.” The passages cited by Steevens and Malone prove that the point 
of comparison was neither a “ better day” nor a wetter May.” I may just observe, 


i ites eek from ieee ac ine In brief, 
= Pe * Sorrow would be a rarity most beloved, 

_* Tf all could so become it. a, 
z os Kent. Made she no verbal question ? , 


~ Po 


a 
20. seem’d| Pope. /eeme Qaq. 22. In brief] In brief, sir, Cap. _— 


© 
A 


: a 22-24. As pearls...it.| Lines end sor- 24. guestion|] guests Han. guest = 
ra row...ail...tt. Cap. Steev. Ec. Var. Knt, Warb. ie 
— Coll. Sing. Dyce, Wh. Ktly. . 


a _ t 
ae as perhaps an illustration, that the dezter way of CHARITY is that the right hand should 
» ___- not know what the left hand giveth.’ Singer adopted this punctuation in both of his 7 
_ editions. WHITE: Here ‘better’ is used, not by way of comparing the May of Cor- 
delia’s smiles and tears in degree to another and inferior encounter of sunshine and 
showers, but as an epithet implying eminence (which in its very essence is compara- 
tive) to which, in kind, her emotional struggle is likened. This elegant use of the 
comparative form is not uncommon with our best writers. Hupson [reading ‘ Were 
like: a better way,—’]: The sense is clearly completed at ‘like,’ and should there 
: be cut off from what follows: *‘ You have seen sunshine and rain at once; her smiles 
= j and tears were like;’ that is, were like ‘sunshine and rain at once.’ Then begins 
another thought, or another mode of illustration: to speak it in a better way, to 
ay express it in a better form of words, ‘those happy smilets,’ &c. And I insist upon 
" _ it that the passage so read is better poetry, as well as better sense and better logic, 
gs than with ‘ way’ turned into ‘ May’ or ‘day,’ and made an adjunct or tag to ‘like.’ 
i wz, Dettus follows Boaden in taking the phrase adverbially, but does not follow Boaden’s 
Bx; punctuation. His text is the same as ours. COWDEN CLARKE: It means that her 
2 mingled ‘smiles and tears’ expressed her feelings in ‘a better way’ than either 
‘patience or sorrow’ could do separately; each of which ‘strove who should express 
her goodliest.’ The words ‘her smiles and tears were like a better way,’ ney lak 
include comparison ‘with the opening phrase of the speech, ‘ Not toa rage;’ showing 
that her emotion vented itself in nothing like rage, but (‘a better way r) in gentle 
‘smiles and tears,’ compounded of both ‘patience and sorrow.’ WRIGHT: It is not 
clear what sense can be made of it. The emendations which have been proposed 
are none of them perfectly satisfactory. The substitution of May for ‘way’ would 
be well enough but for the adjective ‘ better’ which accompanies it. MoBerLy: The 
meaning may be ‘a better course of nature,’ something better than nature knows. 
BuLLocu (p. 246) proposes ‘link’d in bright array.’ 

22. dropp’d] STEEVENs: For the sake of rhythm we might read dropping. This 
idea might have been taken from the ornaments of the ancient carcanet or necklace, 
which frequently consisted of table d#amonds with pearls appended to them, or, in 
the jeweler’s phrase, dropping from them, Pendants for the ear are still called 
drops. A similar thought occurs in Middleton’s A Game at Chess [1, i]: ‘The holy 
dew of prayer lies like pearl Dropt from the opening eye-lids of the morn Upon the 
bashful rose.’ Milton has translated this image into his Lycidas ; ‘ Under the open- 
ing eye-lids of the morn.’ 

24. question] STEEVENS: Did she enter into no conversation with you? In this 


22 


*y YT. 


5" ._™ yi ev 
* Gent. Faith, once or twice she heaved the name of | 


‘father’ 


* Pantingly forth, as if it press’d her heart ; 

* Cried ‘Sisters! sisters! Shame of ladies! sisters! 
*Kent! father! sisters! What, i’ th’ storm? 7 th’ night? 
* Let pity not be believed!’ There she shook 
* The holy water from her heavenly eyes, e365 
* And clamour moisten’d; then away she started 


25. seeped Om. Pope. Yes, Theob.+, 
Cap. 

25-32. Faith...alone] In Qq no punc- 
tuation throughout but commas, except 
Ladies fifters: in Q,, and Ladies fifters ; 
and. night? Q,. Kent is in italics, as 
though he were the speaker of what fol- 
lows, with a comma after it in Q,, and a 
full stop in Q,; but no indenture in either 
case, 

25. she...father| One line, Pope. 

27,28. Shame...father ! sisters [| Om. 


night Qq. storm of night Pope, Han. 

29. pity not be believed | pitie not be 
beleeft Q,. pitty not be beleew'd Q,. pity 
ne’ er believe it Pope+. it not be believed 
Cap. pity not believe it Jen. 

There| Then Pope. 

31. And clamour moisten’d;| Cap. 
And clamour moiftened her, Qq, Johns. 
Jen. Om. Pope, Han. And, clamour- 


motion’d, Theob. Warb. And clamour ‘ 


soften’d > Cartwright. 
31, 32. then away she started...alone] 


Pope, Han. And then retir'd...alone (reading And 
storm? w th’ night] ftorme ith ...adome as one line), Pope, Han. 


sense Sh. frequently uses this word, and not simply as the act of interrogation. Did 
she give you to understand her meaning éy words as well as by the foregoing external 
testimonies of sorrow ? 

28. Kent!] CApELL [led by the text of Q., supposed that Kent here interrupts 
with the exclamation, ‘ Father! sisters!’ and so printed his text, and was followed 
by EccLes]: Any mention of Kent, by ejaculation or otherwise, was not probable 
to come from Cordelia; and most unfit for this place,—to rank with ‘father’ and 
‘sisters’ (indeed, take the lead of them) in the sorrows of that lady; as repetitions, 
and in a tone of admiring approaching something to sarcasm, the words have pro- 
priety; for this is convey’d by them,—‘ Father indeed ; And what sisters !’ they are 
heard by the Gentleman, but don’t interrupt him; pass with him for an hemistich, 
and he goes on in another. 

29. believed!] Srrevens: Let not such a thing as pity be supposed to exist! 
ScHMIDT: Verse and sense are improved [by Capell’s reading of ] i for ¢ pity.’ 

31. clamour moisten’d] Warburton: Though ‘clamour’ may distort the 
mouth, it is not wont to moisten the eyes. Read ‘clamour-mofion’d.’ She bore her 
grief hitherto, says the relater, in silence; but being no longer able to contain it, she 
flies away, and retires to her closet to deal with it in private. This he finely calls 
‘clamour-motion’d,’ or provoked to a loud expression of her sorrow, which drives 
her from company. THEOBALD: It is not impossible, but Sh. may have form’d this 
fine picture of Cordelia’s agony from Holy Writ, in the conduct of Joseph, who, 
being no longer able to restrain the vehemence of his affection, commanded all his 
retinue from his presence, and then weft aloud, and discovered himself to his 


brethren. JOHNSON: The sense is good of the old reading, ‘ Clamour moistened 


; * To deal with grief alone. 
ee esh. - It is the stars, 30 


* The stars above us, govern our conditions; 
* Else one self mate and mate could not beget 


_* Such different issues. You spoke not with her since? 35 
32. ft ts the stars,| Om. Pope, Han. 34. and mate] and make Q.. 
_ 32, 33. it...conditions ;| Theob. One 35. You spoke not] Spoke you Popet+. 
line, Qq. since ?] fince. Q,. 


34. self mate] self-mate Pope+. 


her,’ that is, her outcries were accompanied with tears. HEATH: The hyphen should 


be omitted, and ‘clamour moisten’d’ pronounced and considered as two distinct words, _ 


Cordelia had at first broke out into exclamations; then followed the tears, with which, 
when she had moistened these exclamations (for the words under consideration are 
an ablative absolute), she retired to the farther indulgence of her grief in private. 
CAPELL: ‘Clamour’ may stand for the exclamations preceding, which Cordelia 
‘moistens’ with the tears which followed them instantly; or it may be put with more 
boldness for a grief ready to burst out into ‘clamour,’ taken strictly and properly; 
which she ‘moisten’d, allayed by moistening, with the tears that then broke from 
her, as winds are by rain. WHITE [reading ‘ And, clamour-moisten’d, then’]: That 
is, plainly enough, ‘ And with her cheeks wet with her outburst of sorrow, away she 
started,’ &c. So in this play, V, iii, 205: ‘This would have seem’d a period To such 
as love not sorrow. .. . Whilst I was big in clamour, came there a man.’ The 
reader will not wonder at a Note on this passage, when he sees it in all recent editions 
nitherto with this astounding punctuation: ‘And clamour moisten’d: then,’ and the 


explanation that ‘she’ is the nominative to ‘ moisten’d,’ and that Cordelia moistened - 


her clamour! Hupson [adopting White’s text]: I cannot say that the reading here 
given altogether satisfies me; but it seems, on the whole, the best both in sense and 
in language. The meaning of ‘clamour-moisten’d’ is, her voice being smothered with 
weeping, or her crying drenched with tears. WALKER (Cri¢. i,157): Write ‘— her 
heavenly eyes, And clamour-moisten’d.’ (actu madentes.) ‘Clamour’ here signifies 
wailing. Compare V, iii, 205. [Cited by White.] Dettus: ‘ Moisten’d’ is here 
used intransitively: clamour became moist. ScHMIpT (Zex.) gives examples of 
‘clamour’ bearing the following meanings: outcry, vociferation; loud wailing (the 
present passage cited); the sound of bells; of cannon; of the thunder; of trumpets 
and drums; of tempests; of the noise of a chase, a battle, &c. WricHtT: The 
objection to Walker’s interpretation is, that ‘clamour’ is the outcry, and not the tears 
by which it was accompanied, but perhaps the clamour is the indirect cause of the 
tears. [Assuredly.—Ep.] For the construction, compare Hen. V. II, Ul, 239)\' the 
full fraught man and best endued.’ There is probably some corruption. MOBERLY: 
Shed tears upon her cry of sorrow, [Of this corrupt phrase in this corrupt scene 
(perhaps the most corrupt throughout Shakespeare’s plays), I can see but two notes 
worthy explanations: Capell’s, viz: she moisten’d her clamour; and Walker’s, viz: 
her eyes that were heavenly and wet with wailing. Of the two I much prefer the 


latter.—ED. | 


33. conditions] MaLone: Disposition, temper, quality. 
34. self mate and mate] JOHNSON: The same husbahd and the same wife. 


[See ‘that self metal,’ I, i, 68. | 


Was this before the king return’d ? 

‘ No, since. 
* Kent. Well, sir, the poor distressed Lear’s i’ th’ town; 
* Who sometime in his better tune remembers 
* What we are come about, and by no means ™ 40 
* Will yield to see his daughter. 


* — Gent. Why, good sir? _ cee 
* Kent. A sovereign shame so elbows him; his own un- >: ae : 
# kindness oy a 
* That stripp’d her from his benedi¢tion, turn’d her 


* To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights 


* To his dog-hearted daughters; these things sting 45 : 
* His mind so venomously that burning shame = 
* Detains him from Cordelia. 4 


i Gare Alack, poor gentleman! 
* Kent. Of Albany’sand Cornwall’s powers you heard not? 
* Gent. ’Tis so they are afoot. 


38. Well, sir,| Om. Pope, Han. 
Lear’si’ th? Lear’sithQq. Lear’s 

in Pope+. Lear isin Han. Lear is 2?’ 
the Cap. Steev. Ec. Var. Knt, Del. Glo.+. 

39. sometime] fome time Q,. some- 
times Pope+, Jen. Ec, Knt. 

40, 41. What...daughter.| As by Pope. 
One line, Qq. 

42. so elbows him; his own] fo elbows 
him his own Q,. fo elbowes him, his own 


His Johns. so dows him: his own Cap. 

45-47. To...Cordelia.] Johns. Two 
lines, the first ending mind, Qq. Lines 
end him...him...Cordelia Pope+. 

45, 46. sting His mind] sting him 
Pope, Theob, Han. Warb. 

47. from | From his Pope, Theob. 


~ Han. Warb. 


48. not ?] not. Q. 
49. so] Qq, Johns, Coll. Dyce, Wh. 


Q,. so bows him, his Pope. so dows him ; said Warb. Ktly. so, Cap. Steev. Ec. 
his Theob. Han. Warb. so dows him. Var. Knt, Cam. so, Pope et cet. 


42. so elbows him] To BAILry (ii, 99) the best emendation appears to be ‘ sd/e 
dars him, 7. e. alone prevents him;’ and, furthermore, he thinks that it will be no- 
ticed that ‘the verbal change is not great: sole bars, so elbows.’ BADHAM (Cam. 
Essays, 1856, p. 282): A more incongruous figure of speech than this it would be 
difficult to imagine. Sovereigns ‘elbow’ no one, and such an expression as ‘sov- 
ereign shame’ is either beautiful or the reverse, as the epithet is borne out by the 
action or effect attributed to‘shame.’ There is also something careless in having two 
subjects to the verb ‘sting’; first unkindness, and then the conditions of which the 
unkindness was the cause, I therefore propose to read: ‘so emzdows his own unkind- 
ness.’ WRIGHT: So stands at his elbow and reminds him of the past. Compare 
2 Hen. JV; 1,ii,81. Moserty: A prevailing shame seems to buffet him. ScumipT: 
Perhaps it means so pushes him aside. 

49. "Tis so] JOHNSON: So it is that they are on foot. MALONE: That is, I have 
heard of them; they do not exist in report only; they are actually on foot. 


far 
-_ 


Well, sir, Vl bring you to our master Lear, 


ang 


1 leave you to attend him. Some dear cause 
* Will in concealment wrap me up awhile ; 
a Et When I am known aright, you shall not grieve 
_ *Lending me this acquaintance. I pray you, go 


* Along with me. [Exeunt.* 55 


; Scene IV. The same. A tent. - 7 
Enter, with drum and colours, CORDELIA, Doctor, aza Soldiers 


Cor. Alack, ’tis he. Why, he was met even now 
As mad as the vex’d sea; singing aloud; 
Crown’d with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds, 


a 


and Souldiours. Ff. 


° - 54, 55. Lending...me.| Jen. One line, 


Qq, Pope+, Cap. Two lines, the first 
ending acguaintance, Del. 

54. L...g0| Pray Pope+. 
Cap. 


Pray you, 


Enter Cordelia, 
Doctor, and others. Qq. Enter Cor- 
delia, Physician, and Soldiers. Pope. 
2. mad as| made BY Rowe. 
vex’d| vext Ff. vent Qq. 


3. fumiter| .femiter Qq. fumiterr 
Theob.+,Cap.Jen. enitar Ff, Rowe, 
Pope. fumitory Han. 

furrow-weeds| farrow weeds Bou 
cher. 


cee 55. [Exeunt.] Pope. Exit. Qq. 
AS SCENE Iv.] Pope. Scena Tertia. Ff 
(Sczena F,). Rowe. SCENE V. Ec. 
The same. A tent.) Cap. A 
Camp. Rowe. 
Enter... ] Enter...Cordelia, Gentlemen, 


¥ 


51. dear cause] See I, iv, 266. 
3, &c. FARREN (Zssays on Mania, 1833, p. 73) calls attention to the character of 
-all these plants, that they are of ‘bitter, biting, poisonous, pungent, lurid, and dis- 
_ tracting properties. Thus Lear’s crown is admirably descriptive or emblematic of 
the sources and variety of the disease under which he labours, The mixture of such 
flowers and plants could not be the effect of chance.’ ‘He justifies his assertion 
by showing that ‘the leaves of “ Fumitory”’ are of a dz¢er taste, and the juice was 
formerly employed for its d#¢¢ermess in hypochondrism and black jaundice by Hoff- 
= man and others.’ ‘ Har/ock, the wild mustard of our cornfields, is called indifferently 
charlock, garlock, warlock, and by Fitzherbert, and other old English writers, Zed/ock. 
The seeds of this plant form the pungent Durham mustard, as those of Sizapis alba 
* form the white mustard, and those of Stzapis nigra the common mustard. The 
plant rises with a stem of about nine inches, thickly set with Aazrs or bristles. Hence 
the proper name should be probably 4azr-lock, as in Danish they call the “ darnell” 
heyre and heyre-grass. As the ditter pungency is referred to in the former case, the 
biting pungency is referred to here. ‘ Hemlock” is generally known to be pozsonous. 
“Nettles,” called Urtica urens from its well-known irritating power of stinging and 


ee) ee ae ee ae 


Be Bi ach ie Ae 


burning. ‘ Cuckoo-flowers.” Cardamine pratensis, Linn, The flowers, the sysym- 
orium of Dioscorides, were employed among the Greeks and Romans for almost all 
22M R 
7 a 


oe ene 


are 


With burdocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo-flowers, 


4. burdocks| Han. Johns. Cap. Jen. Knt, Sing. oar-docks Coll.i, Del. Dyce 
Sta. Wh. Glo. Cam. Dyce ii, Coll. iii. i, Ktly, Huds. or-docks Wr. hediokes 
hor-docks Qq. Hardokes ¥,F, Har-  Nicholson.* 
docks FF ,, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Warb, 4. nettles | nettle Johns. eee 
Sch. harlocks Farmer, Steev. Ec. Var. cuckoo] cookow Q,, coockow Q,. = 


aa. 
s 


affections of the head, They hold at present a place in the Pharmacopoeia as a 
remedy for convulsions, epilepsy, and other diseases of the brain or intellect. 
“Darnel.” Lolium temulentum, Linn, Called temulentum from its intoxicating or 
narcotic powers, when taken alone, or mixed with malt. ‘ From this deleterious prop- 
erty it is termed by Virgil inzfelix Jolium, lurid lolium, and by the French 7zvraie, “a 
whence our own vulgar name for it of wray-grass, or drunkard-grass.’ 

3. fumiter] ELLAcoMBE (p. 75): Of Fumitories we have five species in England, 
all of them weeds in cultivated grounds and in hedge-rows. None of them can be 
considered garden plants, but they are closely allied to the Corydalis, of which there ; 
are several pretty species, and to the very handsome Déelytras, of which one species, 
D, spectabilis, ranks among the very handsomest of our hardy herbaceous plants. 
How the plant acquired its name of Fumitory, /emeterre, earth-smoke, is not very 
satisfactorily explained, though many explanations have been given; but that the 
name was an ancient one, we know from the interesting Stockholm manuscript of 
the eleventh century published by Mr J. Pettigrew, and of which a few lines are 
worth quoting: ‘ Fumiter is erbe, I say, Yt spryngyth i April et in May. In feld, in 
town, in yard, et gate, Yer ond is fat and good in state, Dun red is his flour Ye erbe 
smek lik in colowutr.’ 

4. burdocks] FARMER: Hardocks should be harlocks. Thus Drayton, in one of 
his Eclogues: ‘The honeysuckle, the harlocke, The lily, and the lady-smocke.’ 
STEEVENS: The Qq supply what is perhaps the true reading, though misspelt. The 
hoar-dock is the dock with whitish, woolly leaves. Larrres (Gent. Mag. lvi, 214): 
It is very probable that charlock was the word intended by Sh. It is called chariock 
by husbandmen, and grows in great quantity amongst the barley. Corn charlock 
(Raphanus Raphanistrum. Linn.). White, or yellow-flowered charlock (Raphanus 
syluestris).—Gerard, 1597, p. 240. WRIGHT: I find ‘hardhake’ is given as the 
equivalent of Yacea nigra (or knapweed) in a MS herbal in the library of Trinity 
College, Cambridge (R. 14, 32); and in John Russell’s Boke of Nurture (Early Eng- 
lish Text Society, 1868), p. 183, is mentioned ‘ yardehok,’ which is apparently a kind 
of hock or mallow. If the botanists could identify the plants mentioned under these 
names, either of them could easily be corrupted into ‘ Hardokes,’ or ‘ hor-docks.’ 
[It is unfortunate that both BrIsLy and ELLACOMBE suppose Farmer’s conjecture 
of harlocks to be the original word; they have, therefore, given us nothing new on 
the subject, and do not mention ‘ burdocks.’—Eb. ] 

4. hemlock] ELLAcomBE (91): One of the most poisonous of a suspicious family 
(the Umbellifere), «the great Hemlocke doubtlesse is not possessed of any one good 
facultie, as appeareth by his lothsome smell and other apparent signes,’ and with this 
evil character the Hemlocke was considered to be only fit for the ingredient of 
witches’ broth—‘I have been plucking, plants among, Hemlock, henbane, adder’s- 
tongue, Night-shade, moonwort, lippard’s-bane.’—Jonson [ Zhe Masque of Queens]. 

Yet the Hemlock adds largely to the beauty of our hedge-rows; its spotted tall stems 


7 
= 
“ 


a 


KING LEAR 


“ E [4. nettles, cuckoo-flowers] 


ee ne , 
and its finely cut leaves make it a handsome weed, and the dead stems and dried 


umbels are marked features in the winter appearance of the hedges. Asa poison 


* 


it has an evil notoriety, as being the poison by which Socrates was put to death, 
though this is not quite certain. It is not, however, altogether a useless plant. ‘It 
is a valuable medicinal plant, and in autumn the ripened stem is cut into pieces to 
make reels for worsted thread.’— Yohnstone. 

4. nettles] ELLAcoMBE: The Nettle needs no introduction; we are all too well 
acquainted with it, yet it is not altogether a weed to be despised. We have two 
native species (C7rtica urens and U. dioica), with sufficiently strong qualities, but we 
have a third (U. pilulifera), very curious in its manner of bearing its female flowers 
in clusters of compact little balls, which is far more virulent than either of our 
native species, and is said by Camden to have been introduced by the Romans to 
chafe their bodies when frozen by the cold of Britain. The story is probably apocryphal, 
but the plant is an alien, and only grows in a few places. Both the Latin and Eng- 
lish names of the plant record its qualities. Utica is from wro, to burn; and Nettle 
is etymologically the same word as needle, and the plant is so named, not for ‘its 


- stinging qualities, but because at one time the Nettle supplied the chief instrument 


of sewing; not the instrument which holds the thread, and to which we now confine 
the word needle, but the thread itself, and very good linen it made. The poet 
Campbell says in one of his letters: ‘I have slept in Nettle sheets, and dined off a 
Nettle table-cloth, and I have heard my mother say that she thought Nettle cloth 
more durable than any other linen.’ It has also been used for making paper, and, 
for both these purposes, as well as for rope-making, the Rhea fibre of the Himalaya, 
which is simply a gigantic Nettle (Utica or Béhmeria nivea), is very largely culti- 
vated. Nor is the Nettle to be despised as an article of food. In many parts of 
England the young shoots are boiled and much relished. In February, 1661, Pepys 
made the entry in his diary: ‘ We did eat some Nettle porridge which was made on 
purpose to-day for some of their coming, and was very good.’ Gipsies are said to 
cook it as an excellent vegetable, and M. Soyer tried hard, but almost in vain, to 
recommend it as a most dainty dish. Having so many uses, we are not surprised to 
find that it has at times been regularly cultivated as a garden crop, so that I have 
somewhere seen an account of tithe of Nettles being taken, and in the old church- 
wardens’ account of St. Michael’s, Bath, is the entry in the year 1400: ‘ Pro urticis 
venditis ad Lawrencium Bebbe, 2d.’ In other points the Nettle is a most interesting 
plant. Microscopists find in it most beautiful objects for the microscope; entomol- 
ogists value it, for it is such a favourite of butterflies and other insects that in Britain 
alone upwards of thirty insects feed solely on the Nettle plant, and it is one of those 
curious plants which mark the progress of civilization by following man wherever he 
goes. But as a garden-plant the only advice to be given is to keep it out of the gar- 
den by every means. In good cultivated ground it becomes a sad weed if once 
allowed a settlement. The Himalayan Béhmerias, however, are handsome, but only 
for their foliage, and though we cannot, perhaps, admit our roadside Dead Nettles, 
which, however, are much handsomer than many foreign flowers which we carefully 
tend and prize, yet the Austrian Dead Nettle (Lamium orvala, Bot. Mag. v, 172) 
may be well admitted as a handsome garden-plant. 

4. cuckoo-flowers] BEIsLy: The Lychnis flos-cucult, Ragged Robin, a well-known 
meadow and marsh plant, with rose-coloured flowers and deeply-cut narrow segments ; 


KING LEAR 


Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow - 

In our sustaining corn, —A century send forth ; 

Search every acre in the high-grown field, 

And bring him to our eye. [Zit an Officer.|—What can 


man’s wisdom 


In the restoring his bereaved sense ? : 
He that helps him take all my outward worth. me 52) 


6. sustaining corn. | fuftayning, corne, 
Q,. fuftaining, Corne, Q,. 

A... forth ;| Send forth a centry: 
Pope, Theob, Han. Warb. 

century | centurieQ,. Centery¥ F,. 
sent’ry Johns. 

send | is fent Qq. is fet Q,. 

8-10. And...worth.| Pope. End wi/- 
dome....helpe him.,...worth in Q,. The 
lines end wi/edome do... helpe him... 
worth,Q,. End wi/edome...helpes an 


worth, Ff. End eye.. be ee hit, * 
worth, Cap. 

8. [Exit...] Mal. To an Officer, who 
goes out. Cap. Om. QqFf. 

8,9. What...sense ?| Do, what man’s 
wisdom can, In...sense. Bos. conj. 

8. wisdom] wifedome do Q,, Cap. 

9. his] Of his Cap. 

sense?| fence, Q,. fence? Q,. 

Senfe: Ff. 

10. helps] can helpe Qaq. 


it blossoms at the time the cuckoo comes, hence one of its names. WRIGHT: Called 
also, according to Gerarde, ladies’ smocks and wild watercress (Cavdamine pratensis). 
They ‘flower for the most part in Aprill and Maie, when the Cuckowe doth begin to 
sing her pleasant notes without stammering.’—eréall, p. 203. 

5. Darnel] ELLAcomBE: Virgil, in his Fifth Eclogue, says : ‘ Grandia szepe quibus 
mandavimus hordea sulcis Infelix lolium et steriles nascuntur avene.’ Thus trans- 
lated by Thomas Newton, 1587: ‘Sometimes there sproutes abundant store Of bag- 
gage, noisome weeds, Burres, Brembles, Darnel, Cockle, Dawke, Wild Oates, and 
choaking seedes,’ And the same is repeated in the first Georgic, and in both places 
Jolium is always translated Darnel, and so by common consent Darnel is identified 
with the Lolium temulentum, or wild rye grass. But in Shakespeare’s time Darnel, 
like Cockle, was the general name for any hurtful weed. In the old translation of 
the Bible, the Zizania, which is now translated Tares, was sometimes translated 
Cockle, and Newton, writing in Shakespeare’s time, says: ‘Under the name of 
Cockle and Darnel is comprehended all vicious, noisom and unprofitable graine, en- 
combring and hindring good corne.’—Herball to the Bible. The Darnel is not only 
injurious from choking the corn, but its seeds become mixed with the true Wheat, and 
so in Dorsetshire, and perhaps in other parts, it has the name of ‘Cheat’ (Barnes’s 
Glossary), from its false likeness to Wheat. It was this false likeness that got for it 
its bad character. ‘Darnell, or Juray,’ says Lyte, Herba/, 1578, ‘is a vitious graine 
that combereth or anoyeth corne, especially Wheat, and in his knotten straw, blades, 
or leaves is like unto Wheate.’ 

5. idle] Unproductive, unprofitable, in opposition to ‘sustaining corn.’ See ‘idle 
pebble,’ IV, vi, 21.—Ep. 

8. can] Compare Ham. IV, vii, 85: ‘they can well on horseback.’ 

g. the restoring] For instances of the definite article preceding a verbal that is 
followed by an object, see ABBoTtT, § 93, or Aacd. I, iv, 8. 

10, helps] For other instances, meaning to cure, see ScumipT (Lez.). 


=e : The which he lacks; that to provoke in him, 
_ Are many simples dpttative: whose pomes 


a 


Our (eer arse ae aerate is ese 


wil close the eye of anguish. . : bs 
a ee All blest secrets, 15 rm as 
_ All you unpublish’d virtues of the earth, * 


Spring with my tears! be aidant and remediate ‘ ’ 
In the good man’s distress! Seek, seek for him; S 
Lest his ungovern’d rage dissolve the life a 
That wants the means to lead it. , | 


Lnter a Messenger. 


Mess. News, madam, 20 


The British powers are marching hitherward. 


Cor. ’Tis known before; our preparation stands 
In expectation of them.—O dear father, 


ir. Doét.] Gent. Ff. 18. good man’s) Goodmans F,F.. 
zs] are Rowe+, Jen. distress | defires ¥ FF. defire F, 
12. foster-nurse| Hyphen, Steev. Rowe. 
13. lacks; that| lackes that Q,. lackes, 20, 21. /Vews...hitherward.| One line, 
that Q,. Qq. 
15,16. AU...carth,] One line, Qq. 23,25. lu....france| Two lines, the 
17. remediate| remediant Johns. first ending z¢ zs, Ktly. 


11. Keiioce (Sh.’s Delineation of Insanity, p. 26): The reply of the Physician 
is significant, and worthy of careful attention, as embracing a brief summary of 
almost the only true principles recognized by modern science, and now carried out 
by the most eminent physicians in the treatment of the Insane. We find here no 
allusion to the scourgings, the charms, the invocation of saints, &c., employed by the 
most eminent physicians of the time of Sh.; neither have we any allusion to the 
rotary chairs, the vomitings, the purgings by hellebore, the showerings, the bleed- 
ings, scalp-shavings, and blisterings, which, even down to our own times, have been 
inflicted upon these unfortunates by ‘science falsely so called,’ and which stand 
recorded as imperishable monuments of medical folly; but in place of all this, Sh., 
speaking through the mouth of the Physician, gives us the principle, simple, truthful, 


‘and universally applicable. 


15. anguish] WricHT: Generally used in Sh. of physical pain, See IV, vi, 6. 

17. remediate] WricHT: A word of Shakespeare’s coinage, which he seems to 
have formed on the model of zwmediate. 

I9. ungoverned] Dettus: That is, ungovernable. Adjectives formed from par- 
ticiples, with the negative wz-, not unfrequently admit of this modification of their 
original meaning. [See'T, iv, 294; 1V, vi, 21; or ABBOTT, § 375. ] 

20. means] JOHNSON: The reason which should guide it. 


- “Iti is » thy business that I go about ; 2 


Therefore great France 
My mourning and important tears hath pitied, 
No blown ambition doth our arms incite, 
But love, dear love, and our aged father’s right ; 
Soon may I hear and see him! _ [Exeunt. 
K 
ScENE V. G/loucester’s castle. — 


Enter REGAN and OSWALD. 


: Reg. But are my brother’s powers set forth? —_ 
' Osw. Ay, madam. 
. Reg. plural in person there? — 
2 ; Osw, ’ Madam, with much ado. 
aS Your sister is the better soldier. a 
a Reg. Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home? * 
fe * 24,25. Jt...Prance| Johns. One line, Gloucester’s castle.] Cap. (subs.). ¥ 
QqFf. Regan’s Palace. Rowe. ~ 
26. mourning and | Om. Han. (read- Oswald.] Steward. QaqFf. 
| ing Therefore...pitied as one line). 1,2. But...Himself] One line, Cap. ™ 
important | importun'’d Ff,Rowe, ~ Steev. Bos. Knt, Sing. 
Sch. dmportunate Cap. 2. there| Om. Qgq. 
| 27. No] Now ¥.F,. Madam,| Om. Pope+. 
incite] in fight Q,. infiteQ,. ado.] ado, Qq. ado: F,. adoe 
28. right] Rite FF.. Ee 
29. [Exeunt.] Exit. Qq. Om. Jen. 2, 3. Madam...soldier.| One line, Qa. 
ScENE V.] Pope. Scena Quarta. Ff 3. sester is] fifter’s Q.. 
(Scena F,). ScENE m1. Ec. 4. lord] Lady Qq, Pope+. 


26. important] JoHNSON: For importunate. SCHMIDT (Lex.) gives the follow- 
ing parallel instances: Com. of Err. V, 138; Much Ado, I1,i,74; All’s Weil, III, 
vii, 21; to which perhaps might be added Ham. I, ii, 23. MoBERLY: So the Fron- 
deur party under the Duke of Beaufort was called by the court of Anne of Austria, 
‘Les Importans,’ ScHmipr: Undoubtedly Sh. uses ‘important’ for importunate, 
urgent, pressing, but 7mportuned can be justified quite as fully in the same meaning, 

28. aged] AppoTt, § 497: A monosyllable. 

4. lord] Ritson: The Ff are right. Goneril not only converses with Lord Ed- 
mund, in the Steward’s presence, but prevents him from speaking to, or even seeing, 
her husband. MALONE: In the MSS from which the Qq were printed an L only 
was probably set down, according to the mode of that time. It could be of no con- 
sequence to Regan whether Edmund spoke with Goneril a¢ home, as they had 
travelled together from the Earl of Gloucester’s castle to the Duke of Albany’s 
palace, and had on the road sufficient opportunities for laying those plans of which 
Regan was apprehensive. On the other hand, Edmund’s abrupt departure without 
even speaking to the Duke, to whom he was sent on a commission, could not but 
appear mysterious and excite her jealousy, [Essentially, CAPELL’s note.—Ep.] 


"A 


; | What might import my sister’s letter to him ? 
Osw. I know not, lady. 
oe Faith, he is posted hence on serious matter, 
lt was great ignorance, Gloucester’s eyes being out, 
To let him live; where he arrives he moves Ir 
* All. hearts against us; Edmund, I think, is gone, 
In pity of his misery, to dispatch 
His nighted life; moreover, to descry 
The strength o’ th’ enemy. 
Osw. I must needs after him, madam, with my letter. 15 
Reg. Our troops set forth to-morrow; stay with us. 
The ways are dangerous. 
Osw. I may not, madam. 
My lady charged my duty in this business. 

Reg. Why should she write to Edmund? Might not you 
Transport her purposes by word? Belike, 20 
Some things,—I know not what. I'll love thee much,— 

Let me unseal the letter. 


Osw. Madam, I had rather— 

6. letter] letters Q,. 17, 18. / may...business.| Prose, Qq. 
8. serious] a Serious QQ, 19, 20. Might...Belike,| As in Qgq. 
11. Edmund] and now Qq. One line, Ff. 

12-14. Twolines, the first ending “7, 20. by word ? Belike,| by word, belike 


q. Qq. by word ? Pope. by word of mouth ? 
14. 0° th’ enemy] oth’ Enemy ¥ FF. Han. 


ath army Q,. of the Army Q,. 21. Some things,| Ff, Rowe, Sch. 
15. madam] Om. Qq. Something Qq. Something— Pope et cet. 
letter| Letters Qq. 22) Lf had |i ae Onan On, 


46. ¢roops set] troope Sets Qq. 


22. rather] JouHNson: I know not well why Sh. gives to Oswald, who is a mere 
factor of wickedness, so much fidelity. He now refuses the letter; and afterwards, 
when he is dying, thinks only how it may be safely delivered. VERPLANCK: Sh. has 
here incidentally painted, without the formality of a regular moral lesson, one of the 
very strange and very common self-contradictions of our enigmatical nature. Zealous, 
honourable, even self-sacrificing fidelity,—sometimes to a chief or leader, sometimes 
to a party, a faction, or a gang,—appears to be so little dependent on any principle 
of virtuous duty, that it is often found strongest among those who have thrown off 
the common restraints of morality. It would seem that when man’s obligations to 
his God or his kind are rejected or forgotten, the most abandoned mind still craves 
something for the exercise of its natural social sympathies, and as it loses sight of 
nobler and truer duties becomes, like the Steward, more and more ‘duteous to the 
vices’ of its self-chosen masters. This is one of the moral phenomena of artiftcial 


=e I know your lady does not love her husband ; 
Iam sure of that; and at her late being here 


She-gave strange ceiliads and most speaking looks ay 


Osw. I, madam? 


To noble Edmund. I know you are of her bosom. 


Reg. I speak in understanding ; y’ are; I know’t. 
Therefore I do advise you, take this note: 


My lord is dead; Edmund and Ihave talk’'d; 30. 


And more convenient is he for my hand 

Than for your lady’s; you may gather more. 

If you do find him, pray you, give him this; 

And when your mistress hears thus much from you, 

I pray, desire her call her wisdom to her. 35 


~*~ 


24. Lam] I’m Pope+, Jen. Sta. Dyce 
ii, Huds. 

25. gave strange] gave Warb, (intext). 
gave him Warb. (in note). 

etliads| Rowe. aliadsQq. Eliads 

F,, Sch. Jiiads FF F,. oetliads Jen. 
oeillades Cap. eyeliads Dyce i. eyliads 
Del. @itllades Glo.+, Mob. a@illiads 
Dyce ii, 

26. you are] you're Pope+, Huds. 

27. madam ?| Madam, Qq. 


28. y’ are; I know’t] Ff (subs.), Jen. 
for I know t Qq. Yowre; I know? 
Rowe i. you are, J know it Cap. Steev. 
Ec. Var. Knt, Del. Sing. Ktly. y’ are, 
I know it Coll. Wh. you are, [ know't 
Dyce, Sta. y’ are, I know’t Sch.’ you 
are; I know't Rowe ii et cet. 

32. lady's] Rowe. Ladies QqFf. 

35, 36. One line, Qq, Pope, Theob. 
Warb, Johns. Jen. 


society, so much within the range of Johnson’s observation, as an acute observer of 
life, that it is strange that he should not have recognized its truth in Oswald’s cha- 


racter. 


25. ceiliads] WRIGHT: See Cotgrave: ‘ Oeillade: An amorous looke, affectionate 
winke, wanton aspect, lustfull iert, or passionate casi, of the eye; a Sheepes eye.’ 


26. bosom] WricHT: In her confidence. 
their bosoms.’ And Beau. and Fl]. 4 King and No King, 1, i: ‘should I chuse a 
. for honesty to interchange my bosom with, it should be you.’ 


companion . . 


Compare Ful. Ces. V,i, 7: ‘I am in 


29. note] JoHNsoN: This is not a /effer, but a remark. Therefore observe what 
Iam saying. DeEtius, however, maintains that it is a letter, the same which he 


thinks is referred to farther on, in line 33. 


note,’ V, iii, 28, 


In justification he cites, ‘take thou this 


33. this] CAPELL suggested that she here gives him a ring, but Grey (or ‘MR 
SMITH,’ apud Grey, ii, 114), reading in line 29 ‘take note of this,’ says that it 
means: ‘This answer by word of mouth,’ maintaining that it could not have been a 
letter, because when Oswald was afterwards killed by Edgar, and his pockets rifled, 
only one letter was found, and that was Goneril’s; see IV, vi, 248. WuHuitTr: That 
is, this information, but, possibly, some token, 

35. to her] Hupson: Regan’s cold, shrewd, penetrating virulence is well shown 
in this, ‘ Desire her call her wisdom to her” means, in plain English, ¢ Tell her to 


hance to hear of that blind traitor, 
nt falls on him that cuts him off 
Would I could meet him, madam! I should show 


aa party I do follow. 
cea Fare thee well. 


[Exeunt. 


Scene VI. Fields near Dover. 
Enter GLOUCESTER, and EDGAR dressed like a peasant. 


Glou. When shall I come to th’ top of that same hill? 
Edg. You do climb up it now. Look, how we labour. 
Glou. Methinks the ground is even. 
Edg. Horrible steep. 
- Hark, do you hear the sea? 
— Glou. No, truly. 
Ldg. Why then your other senses grow imperfect 5 


36. So, fare you well] fo farewell Qq, 
Pope+, Jen. Om. Han, 
39. Atm] Om. F,. 
should | Ff +, Dycei, Glo.+, Sch. 
would Qq et cet. 
40. party| lady Qq, Pope. 
[Exeunt.] Exit. Qq. 
SCENE VI.] ual Scena Quinta, Ff 
(Sczena F). 
Fields. .] Cap. The Country. 
Rowe. The Country, near Dover. 
Theob. 


Enter...] Theob, (subs.) Enter Glou- © 


cefter, and Edgar. Ff. Enter Glofter 


and Edmund. Qq. 
1. Z] we Qq, Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. 
Knt, Glo.+. 
2. up it| it up Qq. 
labour.| labour ? Qq. 
3. even] ceuen FF. 
Fforrible| Horribly Coll. (MS). 
3, 4. Horrible...sea ?| One line, Qq, 
Jen. Ktly. 
4. Hark, do you| Hark, hark; do you 
not Cap. 
No, truly.| No truly, not Han. 


help herself, if she can, and be hanged.’ 


Edmund. 


Moserty: And give up all thought of 


Scene VI.] JoHNson: This scene, and the stratagem by which Gloucester is cured 
of his desperation, are wholly borrowed from Sidney’s Arcadia. [See Hunrer’s 
note, IV, vi, 66, and Appendix, p. 386.] j 

1. hill] Detius: The cliff referred to by Gloucester at the end of IV, i.- 

2. climb up it] WRicHT: For the transposition of the preposition in the Qq, see 
North’s Plutarch, Pelopidas, p. 324 (ed. 1631): ‘ Notwithstanding, when they came to 
the hills, they sone forcibly to clime them vp.’ And /saiah, xv, 5, ‘ with weeping 


‘ shall they go it up.’ 


3. Horrible] CoLLier: The (MS) Sedeatioalty alters this to horribly. ABBOTT, 
§ 1, gives many instances of the use of adjectives as adverbs, See Ham. I, iii, 116, 
‘how pear the soul’; II, i, 3, ‘marvellous wisely.’ 

22 


a 


a your eyes’ anguish. 
_Glou. So may it be indeed; 


Methinks thy voice is alter’d, and thou speak’st 
In better phrase and matter than thou didst. 

Edg. Y’are much deceived. In nothing am I changed 
But in my garments. ~~ 


Glou. Methinks y’ are better spoken. ; 
Edg. Come on, sir; here’s the place. Stand still. ‘How 
fearful . 
6. eyes] eye’s Johns. 10. Methinks| Sure Pope+. 
7. alter’d] altered Qq, Sch. y are] QUFf, Coll. Sing. Wh. 
speak’st| speakeft Q,. Ktly, Sch. y'ar Q. you are Cap. 
8. In] With Qq. Steev. Ec. Var. Knt, Del. you're 
9. Y’ are] Q,Ff, Coll. Sing. Wh. Ktly, Rowe et cet. 
Sch. Y’ar Q.. You are Steev. Ec. 11. Two lines, the first ending /r, in 
Var. Knt, Del. Yoz’xe Rowe et cet. Ff, Rowe. 


7. alter’d] JOHNSON: Edgar alters his yoice in order to pass afterwards for a 
malignant spirit. \ 

11. How fearful, &c.] Jounson: This description has been much admired since 
the time of Addison, who has remarked, with a poor attempt at pleasantry, that «he 
who can read it without being giddy has a very good head, or a very bad one.’ The 
description is certainly not mean, but I am far from thinking it wrought to the utmost 
excellence of poetry. He that looks from a precipice finds himself assailed by one 
great and dreadful image of irresistible destruction. But this overwhelming idea is 
dissipated and enfeebled from the instant that the mind can restore itself to the obser- 
vation of particulars, and diffuse its attention to distinct objects. The enumeration 
of the choughs and crows, the samphire-mar and the fishers, counteracts the great 
effect of the prospect, as it peoples the desert of intermediate vacuity, and stops the 
mind in the rapidity of its descent through emptiness and horror, Mason: It is to 
be considered that Edgar is describing an imaginary precipice, and is not therefore 
supposed to be so strongly impressed with the dreadful prospect of inevitable destruc- 
tion as a person would be who really found himself on the brink of one. EcciEs: 
The purpose of Edgar was, by a minute and faithful detail of such circumstances, to 
give the highest possible air of probability to the imposition which he designed to 
practise on his father. KnicuHT: In Dr Johnson’s criticism we detect much of the 
peculiar character of his mind, as well as of the poetical taste of the age in which he 
lived. Wordsworth, in the preface to the second edition of his Poems, has shown 
clearly upon what false foundations that criticism is built which would prefer high- 
sounding words, conveying only indeterminate ideas, and call these the only proper 
language of poetry, in opposition to the simple and distinct language, ‘ however 
naturally arranged, and according to the strict laws of metre,’ which by such criti- 
cism is denominated prosaic. Johnson was thoroughly consistent in his dislike of 
the ‘ observation of particulars’ and the ‘attention to distinct objects.” In Boswell’s 
Life we have a more detailed account of his poetical creed, with reference to this 
very description of Dover Cliff: ‘Johnson said that the description of the temple, in 


| : 
KING LEAR 


[11. Dover Cliff. ] 


The ad Bride, was the finest poetical passage he had ever read; he recol- — 
_ lected none in Sh. equal to it,— 


“ How reverend is the face of this tall pile, 
Whose ancient pillars rear their marble heads, 
. To bear aloft its arch’d and pond’rous roof; 
By its own weight made steadfast and immoveable, 
Looking tranquillity! It strikes an awe 
And terror on my aching sight. The tombs 
And monumental caves of death look cold, 
And shoot a chilliness to my trembling heart !’”” 


“But,” said Garrick, all alarmed for the god of his idolatry, “we know not the _ 


extent and variety of his powers. We are to suppose there are such passages in his 
works; Sh. must not suffer for the badness of our memories.” Johnson, diverted by 
this enthusiastic jealousy, went on with great ardour—* No, sir; Congreve has ature” 
(smiling on the tragic eagerness of Garrick); but, composing himself, he added, 
“Sir, this is not comparing Congreve on the whole with Sh. on the whole, but only 
maintaining that Congreve has one finer passage than any that can be found in Sh. 
... What I mean is, that you can show me no passage where there is simply a 
description of material objects, without any intermixture of moral notions, which 
produces such an effect.” Mr Murphy mentioned Shakespeare’s description of the 
night before the battle of Agincourt; but it was observed it had men init. Mr 
Davies suggested the speech of Juliet, in which she figures herself awaking in the 
tomb of her ancestors. Some one mentioned the description of Dover Cliff. John- 
son—* No, sir; it should be all precipice,—all vacuum. The crows impede your 
fall, The diminished appearance of the boats, and other circumstances, are all very 
good description, but do not impress the mind at once with the horrible idea of 
immense height. The impression is divided; you pass on, by computation, from one 
stage of the tremendous space to another. Had the girl in 7%e Mourning Bride 
said she could not cast her shoe to the top of one of the pillars in the temple, it 
would not have aided the idea, but weakened it.”’’ Taken as pieces of pure descrip- 
tion, there is only one way of testing the different value of the passages in Sh. and 
Congreve—that is, by considering what ideas the mind receives from the different 
modes adopted to convey ideas. But the criticism of Johnson, even if it could have 
established that the passage of Congreve, taken apart, was ‘finer’ than that of Sh., 
utterly overlooks the dramatic propriety of each passage. The ‘girl’ in The Mourn- 
ing Bride is soliloquizing,—uttering a piece of versification, harmonious enough, 
indeed, but without any dramatic purpose. The mode in which Edgar describes the 
cliff is for the special information of the blind Gloucester,—one who could not look 
from a precipice. The crows and choughs, the samphire-gatherer, the fisherman, the 
bark, the surge that is seen but not heard,—each of these, incidental to the place, is 
selected as a standard by which Gloucester can measure the altitude of the cliff. 
Transpose the description into the generalities of Congreve’s description of the 
cathedral, and the dramatic propriety at least is utterly destroyed. The height of 
the cliff is then only presented as an image to Gloucester’s mind upon the vague 
assertion of his conductor. Let the description begin, for example, something after 
the fashion of Congreve: ‘ How fearful is the edge of this high cliff!’ and continue 
with a proper assortment of chalky crags and gulfs below. Of what worth then 
would be Edgar's concluding lines: ‘I’ll look no more,’ &c,? The mind of 


And dizzy ’tis to cast one’s eyes so low! 
The crows and choughs that wing the midway air 
Show scarce so gross as beetles. Half way down 


Hangs one that gathers sampire, dreadful trade! I5 
12. dizzy] dizi Q,. dizy Q.F.Q,. 15. sampire] QqFf, Cap. Sch. sam- 
dizie F,. , phire Rowe et cet. 


Gloucester might have thus received some ‘ idea of immense height,’ but not an idea 
that he could appreciate ‘by computation.’ The very defects which Johnson imputes 
to Shakespeare’s description constitute its dramatic merit. We have no hesitation in 
saying further, that they constitute its surpassing poetical beauty, apart from its 
dramatic propriety. [Knight quotes a correspondent’s assertion that the height of 
the Cliff is 313 feet above high-water mark.] LzussinG, in the Supplement to his 
Laocéon, compares this description of Dover Cliff with Milton’s description of the 
height whence the King of Glory beholds Chaos: ‘On heavenly ground they stood, 
and from the shore They view’d the vast immeasurable abyss Outrageous as a sea, 
dark, wasteful, wild, Up from the bottom turn’d by furious winds And surging waves, 
as mountains, to assault Heaven’s highth, and with the centre mix the pole.’—Para- 
dise Lost, vii, 210. ‘ This depth,’ says Lessing, ‘is far greater than Dover Cliff, and 
yet the description of it produces no effect, because there is nothing visible to make 
it real to us, whereas in Sh. this is so admirably managed by the gradual lessening 
of the various objects,’ 

15. sampire] ToLLET: ‘ Samphire grows in great plenty on most of the sea- 
cliffs in this country ; it is terrible to see how people gather it, hanging by a rope 
several fathom from the top of the impending rocks, as it were in the air.’-—-Smith’s 
History of Waterford, 1774, p.315. MALONE: This personage is not a mere crea- 
ture of Shakespeare’s imagination, for the gathering of samphire was literally a ¢rade 
or common occupation in his time, it being. carried and cried about the streets, and 
much used as a pickle. So, in a songin Heywood’s Rage of Lucrece, in which the 
cries of London are enumerated under the title of the cries of Rome: ‘I ha Rock- 
sampier, Rock-sampier; Thus go the cries in Rome faire towne,’ &c, Again, in 
Venner’s Via Recta, &c. 1622: ‘ Samphire is in like manner preserved in pickle, and 
eaten with meates. It is a very pleasant and familiar sauce, and agreeing with man’s 
body.’ Dover Cliff was particularly resorted to for this plant. See Drayton’s 
Polyolbion, The Eighteenth Song: ‘Rob Dover’s neighbouring cleeves of sampyre, 
to excite His dull and sickly taste, and stir up appetite.’ WRIGHT: Gerarde gives as 
one of its Italian names, ‘ Herba di San Pietro.’ He says (Herball, p. 428): * Rocke 
Sampier groweth on the rocky cliffes at Douer.’ Cotgrave has ‘ Herbe de S, Pierre. 
Sampire, Crestmarin.” Mosrerty: This samphire-gatherer is the realizing touch in 
the description; it seems a thing that could not be imagined. BrIsty: Crithmum 
maritimum, commonly called St. Peter’s Herb and Sea-fennel, is abundant on rocks 
by the sea, flowers dull yellow, with long, glaucous, fleshy leaflets. The plant is 
aromatic, and the young leaves are gathered, preserved in vinegar, and eaten as a 
pickle. It flowers in July, August, and September. Dr W. Turner says of it: ¢ That 
in Italian it is Santi Petri herba, from whence we have'the name sampere.’ Evelyn 
in his Acetaria has a receipt for pickling sampier, called the Dover receipt. The 
plants do not grow on any place which the sea covers; and Sh, noticed this fact in 


The Soe that walk upon the beach 


Appear like mice; and yond tall anchoring bark 
_ Diminish’d to Ter cock; her cock, a buoy 
_ Almost too small for steht The murmuring surge nerie. 


_ That on th’ unnumber'd idle pebble chafes 


Cannot be heard so high. I'll look no more, 
Lest my brain turn and the deficient sight 
Topple down headlong. 


Glou. Set me where you stand. 
17. walk] walk'd Ff. Ktly, Sch. feeble chaffes Q,. peebles 
beach] beake Q.. chafe Q,. pebbles chafes Pope et cet. 
18. yond] you Qq. yon’ Cap. Steev. 22. heard.....[’l1| heard...Ile ¥F,F,. 
Ec. Var. Knt. heard...J’le F,. heard, its fo hie ile Q,. 
19: @ buoy] a bout Q,. aboue Q.. heard; itis fo hie Ile Q.. 


- 21. pebble chafes| Ff, Rowe, Cap. 


describing it as growing Aalf way down the cliff. ELLACOMBE: Being found only on 
rocks, it was naturally associated with Saint Peter. In our time the quantity suf- 
ficient to supply the market can be gathered without much danger; it grows in places 
perfectly accessible; in some localities it grows away from the cliffs, so that ‘the 
fields about Porth Gwylan, in Carnarvonshire, are covered with it.’ It may be grown 
even in the garden, especially in gardens near the sea, and: makes a pretty plant for 
rock-work. [I think the old spelling should be retained; it shows the old pronun- 
ciation and the derivation; thus spelled, and pronounced samzpeer, all who are familiar 
with the sandy beaches of New Jersey will recognize in it an old friend.—Ep.] 

19. cock] JoHNson: Her cock-boat. STEEVENS: So in Chettle’s Tragedy of 
Floffman [I, ii]: ‘I caused my lord to leap into the cock. . . . “ Rouse,’’ quoth 
the ship against the rocks; “roomer,” cry I in the cock,’ &c, Hence the term 
* cockswain.’ 

21. unnumber’d] DeELius: That is, innumerable. Compare ‘ungovern’d’ for 
ungovernable, IV, iv, 19. WRIGHT: Compare ‘untented’ for that which cannot 
be tented, I, iv, 294. ABBOTT, § 375: The passive participle is often used to signify, 
not that which was and zs, but that which was, and therefore can be hereafter. In 
other words, -ed is used for -adle, 

21. idle] WARBURTON: Barren, uncultivated. EccLrs: Perhaps trifling, insignifi- 
cant; moved by a kind of continual and frivolous agitation to no purpose or effect. 
[See ‘idle weeds,’ BLN etn, a 

21. pebble chafes] Lerrsom (Walker's Vers. 268): Perhaps pebdles chafe is the 
true reading, and ‘surge,’ consequently, a plural, The ordinary reading, peddles 
chafes, which sounds awkward even to modern ears, would have been still more 
offensive to those of our ancestors. [Whether we follow the Qq or Ff, we are nearer 
to Sh. than when we follow Pope with his harsh sibilants in a line of exquisite 
beauty.—ED. ] 

23. deficient] DELIus: In the only other instance of Shakespeare’s use of this 
word, O¢h. I, iii, 63, it el aa as here, to a defect of the senses. 


23* 


Of th’ extreme verge. 
Would I not leap upright. 
Glou. 


iain Give me 2 your hand. You are now walkin: a foot 
For all beneath the moon 


Let go my anid 


Here, friend, ’s another purse; in it a jewel * 
Well worth a poor man’s taking. Fairies and gods. 


Prosper it with thee! 


Go thou further off; 330 


Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going. 


Edg. 
Glou. 


Now fare ye well, good sir. 


With all my heart. 


Edg. [Aside.| Why I do trifle thus with his despair 


Is done to cure it. 


25-27. Give...upright.| Three lines, 
ending hand -... Verge :...upright, Ff. 

25. You are| you’re Pope+, Dyce ii, 
Huds. 

26. beneath] below Popet+. 

27. upright] outright Warb. Han. 
Johns. Cap. 

28. friend,’s| friends, FFF. friend 
is Steev. Ec. Var. Knt, Coll. Del. Sing. 


Ktly. 


29. fairies] fatriegs Q,. 
29, 30. gods.....off | One line, Sch. 
reading prosper't. 


30. further] farther Qq, Cap. Coll. 
Del. Wh. Glo.+. 

32. ye] Ff, Rowe+,Sch. you Qq et 
cet. 

[Seems to go. Rowe+. 

33. [Aside.] Cap. Ktly, Dyce ii, Col. 
iii, Om. QqFf et cet. 

33,34. Why I do....despair By Why 
I do....difpaire, tis Q.. Why do Lin 
defpair,’ Tis FF ,. Why do I...despair ? 
*Tis Rowe, Pope, Theob. Warb. Johns. 
Cap. 

Why...it.| One line, Qq. 


27. upright] WARBURTON: But what danger in leaping ‘upright’ or zpwards ? 
He who leaps thus must needs fall again on his feet upon the place whence he rose. 
We should read outright, i.e. forward; and then, being on the verge of a precipice, 
he must needs fall headlong. HEATH: The spot is represented as so extremely 
near the edge of the precipice, even within a foot of it, that there was the utmost 
hazard in leaping even upright upon it. MAson: A man’s saying on the brink of a 
precipice that ‘he would not leap forward for all beneath the moon’ conveys no 
extraordinary idea of the danger itself, or of the apprehensions it occasioned; it is 
merely saying, in other words, that ‘he would not for all the world devote himself to 
certain destruction.’ But Edgar goes farther, and says he would not ‘leap upright,’ 
which did not necessarily imply his falling down the precipice. MALONE: If War- 
burton had tried such a leap within a foot of the edge of a precipice, before he 
undertook the revision of these plays, the world would, I fear, have been deprived 
of his labours. 

30, 32, 41. thee... ye... thee] ABBort, § 232, cites this passage as an illus- 
tration of the use of ¢how to servants and inferiors, and of the more respectful yoze 
to masters and superiors. ‘It may seem an exception that in 1V, i, Edgar uses ¢hoz 
to Gloucester, but this is only because he is in the height of his assumed madness, 
and cannot be supposed to distinguish persons, Afterwards in Scene vi, he invari-. 
ably uses you, a change which, together with other changes in his language, makes 


. 


, 


peaae bear it ee an not t fall. 
Pho quarrel with your great opposeless wills, 
My snuff and loathed part of nature should 


Burn itself out. If Edgar pie oh bless him !— 40 
Now, fellow, fare thee well. 

_ Edg. Gone, sir; farewell. 
[Aside] And yet I know not how conceit may rob 
The treasury of life, when life itself ° 
Yields to the theft. Had he been where he thought, 

By this had thought been past. Alive or dead >— 45 
Ho, you sir! friend! Hear you, sir! speak !— 


[He falls, 


ee [Kneeling] He kneeles. Qq.. Om. 


os snuff| snurff ic 


well Qq et cet. 
42-45. And yet....past.| As ‘ Aside,’ 
Cap. Dyce ii, Huds. 


40. him] Om. Qq. 

41-48. Gone.,.sir 7] Prose, Qq. 

41. Gone, sir;] Coll. Gon fir, Qq. 
Gone Sir, ¥,. Good Sir, ¥ FF ,+, Cap. 
Gone, sir ? jen. Steev. Ec. “Var. Gone, 
sir. Ente 

[He falls.] Qa. Om. Ff. He 
leaps and falls along. Rowe. After 
farewell Jackson, Knt, Sing. Dyce, 
Coll. ii, Sta. Wh. Ktly. After fare thee 


42. may] my Q,. 
43. treasury] treafure ¥ FF, Rowe. 
45. had thought] thought had Q,, Cap. 
46. Ho,...speak !| Hoa, you, hear you, 
friend! Sir! Sir! speak! Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Ho, you sir, you sir, 
friend! Hear you, sir? Speak: Cap. 
friend | Om. Qq. 
lear] here ¥ FF, Rowe, Pope. 
speak] speak, speak Ktly. 


Gloucester say : “‘ Thou speak’st In better phrase and manner than ¢hoz didst.” It 
may be partly this increased respect for Edgar, and partly euphony, which makes 
Gloucester use yoz in lines Io and 24.’ 

33, 34. Why... it] Asport, § 411: This sentence combines ‘Why I trifle is zo 
cure, and ‘ My trifling is done to cure.’ In itself it is illogical. Thus also V, i, 67. 

38. opposeless] ABBOTT, § 446: The suffix -/ess is used for ‘not able to be.’ 
Here it is ‘not able to be opposed,’ z. ¢. irresistible. It is commonly used with words 
of Latin or Greek origin. 

41. Gone, sir] KnicHT: This is ordinarily printed, ‘Gone, sir?’ as if Edgar 
asked Gloucester if he had gone; whereas Gloucester has previously told him, ‘ Go 
thou farther off;* and, when Gloucester again speaks to him, he says, ‘ Gone, sir.’ 
Dyce: Gloucester certainly does not ‘leap’ till after Edgar has said, ‘Gone, sir; 
farewell.’ WHITE: Perhaps we should read * Goczzg, sir,’ or ‘Good sir.’ 

44. theft] JoHNson: When life is willing to be destroyed. Hupson: I suspect 
that ‘how’ in line 42 has about the force of whether, or but that. ‘When one is 
thus longing to die, I do not: know but that even the imagination of such a leap, or 
such a fall, might not be the death of him, sure enough,’ This interpretation agrees 


[Aside] Thus might he pass indeed; yet he revives — 


What are you, sir? 


Glou. Away, and let me die. 


Edg. Wadst thou been aught but gossamer, feathers, air, 


So many fathom down precipitating, 50 
- Thou’dst shiver’d like an egg; but thou dost breathe ; 


Hast heavy substance; bleed’st not; speak’st ; art sound. 

Ten masts at each make not the altitude 

Which thou hast perpendicularly fell ; 

Thy life ’s a miracle. Speak yet again. 55 


47. As ‘ Aside,’ Cap. Dyce ii, Huds. 
49. Two lines, Ff. 
gossamer | Sree Qq. Gozemore 
Ff, Rowe. goss’mer Pope. gossemeer 
Cap. 
feathers,| feathers and FFF, 
Rowe. 
50. fathom] fathomeF FF. fadome 


q- 
51. Thou'dst] Thoud'fAF FF, Thou 


52. mot ;| not? Jen. : 
speak’ st fpeake? Q,. /peakft Q, 
Speak F,F,, Rowe, Pope, Theob. Han, 
Warb. Jen. 
sound.| found ? ¥,, Rowe, Pope, 
Theob. Han. Warb. Jen. 

53. at each] at least Rowe. attacht 
Pope, Han, Warb. Cap. Ec. aft length 
Jervis. 

54. fell] fallen Rowe+, Cap. Ec. 

55. Lhy] The F,. 


hadft Qq, Cap. Steev. Ec. Var, Knt. 


well with what Edgar says afterwards: ‘ Thus might he pass indeed.’ How is often 
used in a similar way; as when we say, I know not how such or such a thing may 
work; that is, I know not whether it may work well or ill; or I know not det that 
it may operate the reverse of what I propose. 

47. pass] JOHNsoNn: Thus might he de in reality. We still use the word ‘ dassing 
bell.’ 

49. gossamer] See Rom. & Ful. Il, vi, 18. 

53. at each] THEOBALD: ’Tis certain ’tis a bold phrase, but I dare warrant it was 
our author’s, and means, ten masts placed at the extremity of each other. War- 
BURTON: Mr Theobald restores the old nonsense. JOHNSON: We may say ‘ten 
masts o” end.’ JENNENS: We might offer another conjecture, a-stvefch » but the 
old reading is intelligible enough.. STEEVENS: Perhaps we should read, ‘at reach,’ 
z.e. extent, SINGER reads a¢ eche, which he derives from the Anglosaxon eacan, to add, 
and defines as ‘drawn out at length, or each added to the other.’ He also cites the 
other instances of the use of eche in Shakespeare, viz: ‘ech’ of Q, of Mer. of Ven. 
III, ii, 23; Per. III, Prol. 13; ‘eech’ of F, of Hen. V: III, Chor. 35. [The rhyme 
in Per, demands ¢ eche,’ but in the other cases it has been generally spelled e#e.—ED.] 
WHITE: Might we not read ‘at eke,’ z. e. added to each other? Dyce: I believe it 
means, ‘Ten masts joined each to the other.’ It has given rise to sundry bad con- 
jectural emendations. ScumipT: Compare the passage in Sov. viii, where the 
poet anticipates Helmholtz’s theory of the sympathetic vibration of cords: * Mark 
how one string, sweet husband to another, Strikes each in each by mutual ordering.’ 

$4. fell] For other irregular participial formations, see ABBOTT, § 344. 


=r oe | 


‘al at aaa 
ae have I fall’n, or no? 56 
. Ig. From the dread summit of this chalky bourn! 
Barc up a-height ; the shrill-gorged lark so far 
_ Cannot be seen or heard; do but look up. 
— Glou. Alack, I have no eyes. 60 
Is wretchedness deprived that benefit, 
_ To end itself by death? ’Twas yet some comfort, 
_ When misery could beguile the tyrant’s rage 
And frustrate his proud will. 


dg. Give me your arm. 


Glou. Too well, too well. 


. £dg. This is above all strangeness. 
. 56. no ?] nolQ.. frrill gorgd Qq. frrill-gord ¥F,. 
57. summit] Roweii. Summet ¥ FF. Shrill gor'd ¥ , Rowe. 
¥ Somnet F,. fommons Q,. fummons Q.. 59. wp.] up? Q,. 
L. bourn!| Pope. — Bourn F,F,. 62. death? * Twas] death twas Q,. 
i Bourne ¥F,. borne, Qq. 64. arm.| arme?Q.. 
58. a-height] Hyphen, Theob. ii. 65. How zs’t? Feel| how feele Qq. 


shrill-gorged] Jfhrill-gorg’d F,. 


57. bourn] KNicHT: In a previous passage, ‘ Come o’er the bourn, Bessy, to me,’ 
aa *bourn’ signifies a river; and so in the Faerie Queene (ii, Canto vi, Stanza 10): ‘My 
‘ little boat can safely pass this perilous bourne.’ In Milton’s Comes we have, ‘ And 
every bosky bourn from side to side.’ Here, as Warton well explains the word, 
‘bourn’ is a winding, deep, and narrow valley, with a rivulet at the bottom. Such 
¥ a spot is a bourn because it is a boundary, a natural division; and this is the sense 
in which a river is called a‘bourn.’? The ‘chalky bourn’ is, in the same way, ihe 

chalky boundary of England towards France. 

58. a-height] See ‘a-twain,’ II, ii, 69; ‘a-work,’ III, v, 6, or ABBorrT, § 24, who 
after this present example adds: ‘ perhaps.’ 

66. strangeness] HUNTER (ii, 273): The incident of the cliff is so extravagantly 
improbable that there is no defending it, and we tolerate it only as having given oc- 
casion to Shakespeare’s only great attempt at describing a particular piece of scenery. 
He had probably been at Dover, and sketched the scene upon the place. He evi- 
dently prepares the reader for the passage by several allusions to Dover in the earlier 
parts of the play, and, except for the sake of introducing these descriptive lines, one 
cannot see why Gloucester should be led so far as Dover, when he might so easily 
have executed his purpose elsewhere. There is an obscurity thrown (purposely, I 
think) over the topography of this play. Dr Johnson says, that this scene and the 
stratagem are wholly borrowed from Sidney’s Arcadia ; but this is a mistake. It is 
true we have a blind king, who seeks the brow of a rock with the intention of throw- 
ing himself headlong. He asks his son to conduct him thither. So far the stories 
are coincident, but the improbable part is not yet entered upon; and, so far from Sh, 
having here followed Sidney, or having any countenance from a more cautious writer 


S 


Up; so. How is’t? Feel you your legs? ‘You stand. | 65° 


Upon the crown o’ th’ cliff, what thing was that 


Which parted from you? 
Glou. _ A poor unfortunate shade 
Edg. As I stood here below, methought his eyes 
Were two full moons; he had a thousand noses, 
Horns whelk’d and waved like the enridged sea. 
It was some fiend; therefore, thou happy father, 
Think that the clearest gods, who make them honours 


67. 0° th’) oth’ FFF, of the Qaq. 71. whelk’d| Han. welkiQ, welki 
cliff, what] cli hiffe what Q,. «liffe, Q,. wealk'd FF, walk’d FF, Rowe. 
whatQ,. Cliffe. What Ff. welk'd Pope+, Cap. Jen. Mal. Ec. Sing. 
68. unfortunate| unfortune ¥.,. enridged | enraged Ff, Rowe, Sch. 
beggar] bagger Q,. 73. clearest] cleereft Qq¥F,. dearest 
69. methought| me thoughts Q,. me Pope. 
thought Ff. make them made their Qq. 


70. he had] a had Qq. 


of fiction, the son in the A7cadia even refuses to conduct his father to the spot. Sh., 
as far as our knowledge at present goes, must be answerable in his own proper per- 
son, and alone, for what is too improbable to give as an incident any degree of plea- 
sure. At the same time, he may have owed the conception of that particular mode 
of suicide to Sidney, since the passage occurs in that part of the Arcadia to which 
he owed, according to Steevens, the episodical incidents of Gloucester, Edmund, and 
Edgar. But there actually occurred in Shakespeare’s time the incident of a London 
merchant committing suicide by throwing himself headlong from the tower of one 
of the churches. [I cannot think that Hunter is at his happiest in this note. His 
illustrations generally are among the best that have been written.—ED. ] 

68. unfortunate] According to ABBOTT, § 468, the unaccented syllable in this 
word may be softened or almost ignored in scanning. Compare ‘ majesty,’ I, i, 91; 
‘messengers,’ II, i, 124; ‘delicate,’ III, iv, 12, &c. 

71. whelk’d] HANMER (G/oss.) : A whelk is such a rising tumour upon the skin as 
the lash of a switch or whip leaves behind it. SreevENs: So in Hex. V; III, vi, 108. 
Fluellen, speaking of Bardolph, says: ‘his face is all bubukles, and whelks, and 
knobs,’ &c. MALONE: Twisted, convolved. A welk, or whilk, is a small shell-fish. 
Wricut: In Sherwood’s English-French Dictionary, which forms the supplement te 
Cotgrave’s second edition, ‘whelke’ is given as synonymous with ‘ wheale,’ a blister 
or pustule. In Chaucer (Pardoneres Tale, 14153, ed. T. Wright), we have: ‘ For 
which ful pale and welkid is my face,’ where ‘ welkid’ is explained by Tyrwhitt as 
‘withered,’ but seems to mean swollen with weeping, as in the following passage from 
Sackville’s Induction, 80: ‘ Her wealked face with woful teares besprent.’ 

71. enridged] Axssort, § 440: This word and ‘the enchafed flood,’ O¢h. 11, i, 17. 
are, perhaps, preferred by Sh. merely because in participles he likes some kind of 
prefix as a substitute for the old participial prefix. [Between ‘enridged’ and enraged 
there is to me small hesitation on the score of pictorial beauty, however great may 
be the reluctance to desert the Ff.—Eb.] 

73. clearest] THeoBarD: That is, open and righteous in their dealing. So in 
Timon, 1V, iii, 27, ‘Ye clear Heavens.’ JouNson: The purest; the most free from 


ae 
ou. I do remember now. 


sibilities, have aso thee. 
( Henceforth I’ll bear 75 
li€tion till it do cry out itself 
‘Enough, enough,’ and die. That thing you speak of, 
I took it for a man; often ’twould say 


eg fiend, the Facies he led me to that place. 
_ Edg. Bear free ae patient thoughts.—But who comes 


<- here? 


80 


Enter LEAR, fantastically dressed with wild flowers. 


77. ‘ Enough...die.| Enough, enough, 
and die. Cap. Steev. Ec. Var. Sing. Del. 
ii. (dye. Cap.) In quotation-marks, 
Deli. 


* die. That] die that Q,. 


78. *twould| would itQ., Jen. would 
he Q,. 

79. ‘The fiend, the fiend ;’ he] Cap. 
The fiend, the fiend—he Rowe+. The 
fiend the fiend, heQ,. The fiend, the 
fiend, he QFE. 


_ The safer sense will ne’er accommodate' 


80. Two lines, Ff. 

Bear free| Bare freeQ,. Bare, 
Sree, Q,» 

Enter Lear...] Cap. (subs.) En- 
ter Lear mad. (after thus, line 82) Qq. 
Enter Lear. (after choughts) Ff+, Jen. 
Enter Lear, drest madly with Flowers. 
Theob. 

81. SCENE VII. Pope+, Jen. 
81, 82. The...thus.| One line, Qq. 
81. weli] would Han. 


evil. CAPELL: It may have the sense of clear-sigh¢ed, given with some reference to 
the imposition on Gloucester, his weak belief of his bastard. WHuiTre: The sense 
of the context, and the great similarity in manuscript between c/ and d, make it more 
than possible that the correct reading here is dearest. Yet, by such a change, we 
should lose the fine opposition of ‘clearest’ and ‘impossibilities.’ SCHMIDT says 
that bright, pure, glorious are ail contained in the word ‘ clear.’ 

74. impossibilities] CAPELL: Who derive to themselves honour and reverence 
from man, by doing things which he reckons impossible. [Compare Luke xviii, 27: 
‘ The things which are impossible with men are possible with God.’ ] 


77. That thing] See II, iv, 209. 


80. free] JoHNsON: To be melancholy is to have the mind chained down to one 


_ painful idea; there is, therefore, great propriety in exhorting Gloucester to free 


thoughts, to an emancipation of his soul from grief and despair. ScHmipT (Zex.): 
That is, not affected with any disease or distress of the body or mind; sound, happy, 
careless, unconcerned, as in III, iv, 11; III, vi, 103. 

80. Enter Lear, &c.] We must remember that these ‘flowers’ are an addition 
py Theobald, who was undoubtedly induced to add them from Cordelia’s descrip- 
tion in IV, iv, and also, as suggests SCHMIDT, from Edgar’s speech at the sight of 


Lear: ‘ The safer sense,’ &c.—Ep. 


81. safer] WARBURTON: Without doubt Sh. wrote soder, z. ¢. while the under- 
standing is in a right frame it will never thus accommodate its owner; alluding to 
Lear’s extravagant dress. Thence he concludes him to be mad. CaprLL: That 


is, sounder. JOHNSON: I read saner, 


JeNNENS: I read, with all the old copies, 


‘safer;’ ‘Nor do I think the man of sa/ discretion, That does affect’ to alter it.— 


find 


x 


His master thus. 


276 | KING LEAR 


Lear, No, they cannot touch me for coining. I am the 
king himself. = 

Edg. O thou side-piercing sight! 85 

Lear. Nature’s above art in that respe¢t.—There’s your 
press-money.—That fellow handles his bow like a crow- 
keeper.—Draw me a clothier’s yard—Look, look, a mouse! 
Peace, peace; this piece of toasted cheese will do ’t— 
There’s my gauntlet; I’ll prove it on a giant—Bring up 90 
the brown bills.—Oh, well flown, bird! i’ th’ clout, i’ th’ 
clout! hewgh!—Give the word. 


83. coining] coyning Qq. crying Ff. 90. do’t] do it Qaq. 


85. As ‘ Aside,’ by Cap. Ec. Dyce ii. QI, 92. bird !2? th’ clout,? th’ clout !] 

side-piercing| Hyphen, Ff: Bird: ? th? clout, ? th’ clout: Ff (ith 

86. Mature’s| Nature is Qq. Natures FLF,F,). bird in the ayre, Qq (dirde 

PLE; Q.). barb! ? th’ clout, ? th’ clout: 
87, 88. crow-keeper| cow-keeper Rowe Warb. Theob. Han. 

ii, Pope. 92. hewgh|] Hagh Qq. hewgh!— 
89. piece of | Om. Qq. [ Whistling] Coll. iii. 


Meas. for Meas. 1, i, 72. BLAKEWAY: The ‘safer sense’ seems to me to mean ¢he 
eye-sight, which, says Edgar, will never more serve the unfortunate Lear so well as 
those senses which Gloucester has remaining will serve him, who is now returned to 
his right mind. The eye-s¢gh¢ is probably the ‘safer sense,’ in allusion to our vulgar 
proverb: ‘ Seeing is believing.’ Horace terms the eyes ‘oculi fideles.’? Gloucester 
afterwards laments the ‘stiffness of his vile sense.’ 

81. accommodate] See ‘ unaccommodated,’ ITI, iv, 103. 

86, e¢ seg. CAPELL: Lear’s ravings rise chiefly from the exercises that he as king 
had been used to, namely, war, and war’s appendages then; in some he is listing, 
engag’d in battle in others, in others training his bowmen and seeing them exercise ; 
it was once thought that falconry (a kingly amusement) had a place in these ravings, 
and that ‘bird’ [line 91] was meant of the hawk; but ’tis better understood of the 
arrow, which he calls ‘ well-flown’ from its being lay’d in the ‘ clout.’ 

86, Nature’s above art, &c.] ScHmMIpT: That is, a born king can never lose his 
natural rights. 

87. press-money] Douce: The money paid to soldiers when they were retained 
in the king’s service. [See Ham. I, i, 75, ‘impress’ and notes. ] 

87. crow-keeper] One who keeps off crows from a field. [See Rom, & Ful. 1 
iv, 6, and notes.] Douce: The notes on this word serve only to identify the character 
of a ‘crow-keeper;’ the comparison remains to be explained. In speaking of awk- 
ward shooters Ascham [ Zoxophilus, p. 145, ed. Arber] says: ‘An other coureth 
downe, and layeth out his buttockes, as though he shoulde shoote at crowes.’ 

88. clothier’s yard] Many editors, from STEEVENS down, refer to the ‘arrow of 
a cloth yard long’ in Chevy-Chace. - 

gt. brown bills] A kind of halberd used by foot-soldiers ; see Rom. & Ful. I, i, 66. 
WRIGHT: They were browned like the old.Brown Bess to keep them from rust. 

gi. bird] Warsurron: Lear is raving of archery, and shooting at butts, as is 


& 


' 


Sweet marjoram. | 93 
Lear. ‘Pass. 
Glou. I know that voice. 95 


Lear. Ha! Goneril,—with a white beard!—They flat- 
tered me like a dog, and told me I had white hairs in my 
beard ere the black ones were there. To say ‘ay’ and ‘no’ 


to every thing that I said! ‘Ay’ and ‘no’ too was no good © 


96. with...They] Dyce. with a white 99. every thing that] euery thing Q.. 
beard? They Ff. ha Regan, theyQq. allQ,. : 
hah! Regan! they Pope, Theob. Han. said !...to0 was| faide, I and no 
Warb. Jenn toe, wasQ,. faide: I and no too was 
97. white] the white Ff, Sch. Q,. faid: L, and no too, was Ff. 


plain by the words ‘i’ the clout,’ so that we must read ‘O well-flown, Bard!” i. e. 
the barbed, or bearded arrow. HEATH and CaPELL (see above, line 83) think that 
‘bird’ metaphorically means the arrow. Eccies: ‘ Well-fown’ may be understood 


as a compound epithet of ‘bird.’ Douce: Lear certainly refers to falconry. In an 


old song on Hawking, set for four voices by Thomas Ravenscroft, ‘O well flown’ is 
a frequent address to the hawk. STEEVENS: ‘ Well-flown bird’ was the falconer’s 
expression when the hawk was successful in her flight, and is so used in 4 Woman 
Killed with Kindness [p. 103, ed. Sh. Soc.]. 

gt. clout] Narzes: The mark fixed in the centre of the butts, at which archers 
shot for practice. C/ouette, Fr. Literally, the nail, or pin. The best shot was that 
which clove or split the c/owf, or pin, itself. [See ‘pin,’ Rom. & Ful. I, iv, 15, and 
notes.—ED. | 

92. word] JoHNSON: Lear supposes himself in a garrison, and, before he lets 
Edgar pass, requires the watch-word. 

96. beard] HALLIWELL: It is hardly requisite to fill up the context of a dis- 
jointed raving. Ha! Goneril!—to be so unfilial to a father with a white beard, to 
an aged father, the age of the parent aggravating the crime of the daughter. Ina 
former part of the tragedy he says to Goneril: ‘art not ashamed to look upon this 
beard,’ meaning his venerable white beard. MoBERLY: I suppose you are Goneril, 
though your white beard seems against it. 

98. black ones] CAPELL: He was told he had the wisdom of age before he had 
reach’d to that of a youth. 

99. ‘Ay’ and‘no’ too] PYE (p. 295): It does not appear how it could be flattery 
to dissent from, as well as to assent to, every thing he said. The following reading 
was suggested to me by an ingenious friend, by only a change in the pointing and 
the omission of a single letter: ‘To say ay and xg to every thing I said ay 
and mo to, was no good divinity.’ [WHITE adopted this reading.] SINGER: It 
may, however, mean that they said ‘ay’ or ‘no’ as he said ‘ay’ or ‘no,’ but more 
probably that they had double thoughts, and said ‘ay’ to flatter him, when they said 
‘no’ to themselves, and vice versa. Dxtius: That is, in contradiction to the Biblical 
injunction to ‘let your speech be yea, yea and nay, nay.’ COWDEN CLARKE: Lear 
first exclaims indignantly: ‘To say “ay and “no” to every thing I said!” recollect- 
ing the facility with which his courtiers veered about in their answers to suit his 
varying moods, just as Osric does to Hamlet; and then he goes on to say that this 


24 


to nee me chasers ih ‘ie eames Sour not peace at 

my bidding; there 1 ound? em, there I smelt ’em out. Geuw> 

to, they are not men o’ their words; they told me I was 

everything; ’tis a lie, I am not ague-proof. 
Glou. The trick of that voice I do well remember. 

Is’t not the king. aa 
Lear. Ay, every inch a king. 

When I do stare, see how the subject quakes.— 

I pardon that man’s life—What was thy cause? 

Adultery ? 

Thou shalt not die; die for Sdultere ? No; 

The wren goes to’t, and the small gilded fly 

Does lecher in my sight. 

Let copulation thrive; for Gloucester’s bastard son 


IIO 


100. the wind | wind 1B Rowe, man’s life. Ec. con). 
Pope, Han. 108. ¢hy] the Theob. ii, Warb. Johns. 
102, ’em...’em] them...them Qq, Cap. Cap. ) 


Steev. Ec. Var. Knt, Sing. Ktly. 
103: men] women Upton. 
o their] of their Qq, Cap. 
104. ague-proof| argue-proofe Qq- 
Agu-proofe FF, Agu-proof ¥F,. 


105, 106. The...king ?] Prose, QqF,, 


109-116. Adultery ?...soldiers. | Johns. 
Six lines, ending for Adultery ?...Fily... 


thriue :...Father,...fheets...Souldiers. Ff, 
Rowe. 
109-130. Adultery ?......thee| Prose, 


Pope, Theob. Han. Warb. 


Rowe. 
106-116. Ay...so/diers] Prose, Qq. 
106. every] exer Q.. 
108, Log. / pardon...Aduliery ?] What 
was the cause? Adultery. I pardon that 


110. die. die for] die for Q,. 
~ Q.: 
112. Does] doeQ,. doQ.. 
112-115. Lines end ¢hrive...father... 
sheets. Cap. Mal. Ec. 


dye for 


kind of ‘ay’ and ‘no’ too is no good divinity. In proof that ‘ay’ and ‘no’ was 
used by Sh. with some degree of latitude, as a phrase signifying alternate reply, and 
not merely in strictness ‘yes and no,’ compare ds You Lzke Jt, III, ii, 231-240, where, 
if the questions Rosalind asks be examined, it will be perceived that neither ‘ay’ 
nor ‘no’ will do as answers to any of them, except to‘ Did he ask forme?’ MOBERLY: 
In ‘no good divinity’ the reference is to 2 Corinthians, i, 18: ‘Our word to you was 
not yea and nay.’ 

105, trick] HANMER (G/oss.): Frequently used for the air, or that peculiarity in a 
face, voice, or gesture which distinguishes it from others. [See Ham. IV, vii, 189.] 

107. subject quakes] WALKER (Cyit. i, 246): ‘If ‘quakes’ be right, ‘subject’ 
must refer to Gloucester alone. But I think Sh. wrote gwake. ‘Subject,’ more prisco, 
meaning not sudjectus, but saudjecti, as we say the elect, the reprobate. Old writers 
passim ; indeed the usage occurs as late as Burke. [There is great probability in 


this suggestion by Walker. Compare ‘’twas caviare to the general.’—Ham. II, ii, 
416.—Ep. | 


r to his Ether Bean x my pote 
een he lawful sheets. 


i Packet ee Sinrperiee aaahe 
- Whose face between her forks presages snow, 
_ That minces virtue and does shake the head 
_ To hear of pleasure’s name,— 120 
The fitchew, nor the soiled horse, goes to’t 
; With a more riotous appetite. 
. Down from the waist they are Centaurs, = 
: Though women all above ; 2 


But to the girdle do the gods inherit, | 125° 
_ 114. than] Than were Cap. 120. To hear] heare Qq. 
115. sheets.] sheets, were unto me. Ktly. 120-124. ‘Three lines, ending zor... 7 
116. lack] want Q.. appetite...above. Ktly (reading soil’). >. 
117-125. As in Johns, 120, 121. name,—The] name. The ; 
117-130. Prose, QqFf. Ff£+,Jen. xame to Qq. 
a 117. yond] yon QqgF,. yon’ Cap. 121. sowled] foyled QqFf. stalled Warb. 
—- Steev. Ec. Var. Knt. you F,. — spoiled Daniel. 
=< 118. detween] ’tween Pope, Theob. 123. waist] wafiQ,. wafte Q.Ff. 
_ Han. Warb. they are] tha’re Q,. they're 
‘camel presages| presageth Qq. Johns. 
a 11g. does] do Qq. 123-130. Prose, Knt. 
Ae ' 116. luxury] Lewdness. See Ham. I, v, 83. 
— 118. forks] Warsurvon: That is, her hand held before her face in sign of mod- 
z : esty, with the fingers spread out, forky. W. C. JouRDAIN (P&zlological Soc. Trans. 
4 p. 134, 1857) gives the same interpretation [which I think unwarranted, but have 
‘a no inclination to emphasize an unsavory question by discussing it. See III, iv, 
- 104.—Eb. ]. 
ee 118. snow] Epwarps: In construction the phrase ‘between her forks’ follows 
4 ‘snow.’ Soin Zim. IV, iii, 386: ‘the consecrated snow That lies on Dian’s lap.’ 
Sane 11g. minces] STAUNTON: That affects the coy timidity of virtue. SrnceR: Thus 


Cotgrave, ‘ Mineux : m . euse: f...also squeamish, quaint, coy, that minces it exceed- 
ingly,’ &c. Also ‘ Faire la sadinetfe. To mince it, nicefie it, make it daintie, be 
verie squeamish, backward, or coy.’ COLLIER: ‘ Minces’ cannot be right, since 
mincing means to cut anything into small pieces, and, figuratively, to take small 
steps; whereas to mimic [the reading of the (MS) and of Collier’s text] is to coun- 
terfeit, which is exactly what Lear intends to convey; the ‘simpering dame’ coun- 
terfeited or mimicked virtue, and shook her head at the mere name of pleasure. 
“121. fitchew] Dyce (G/oss.): A polecat, and here a cant term for a strumpet. 

121. soiled] HeatH: This is the term used for a horse that is turned out in 
the spring to take the first flush of grass. This at once cleanses the animal, and fills 
him with blood. 

125. But] Merely. See Ham. II, li, 272,451. Dr INGLEBy has sent me the fol- 
lowing: ‘Among the Heresies (August. de Heres.) that arose very early in the 
Church, there started out a Sect, called [the Paterniani], possibly the spawn of the 


Beneath i is all the fiends’ ; 
There’s hell, there’s tenes there’s the sulphurous pit, 
Burning, scalding, stench, consumption; fie, fie, fie! pah, 
pah!—Give me an ounce of civet; good apothecary, 
sweeten my imagination; there’s money for thee. + “2000 ae 
Glou, Oh, let me kiss that hand! : 
Lear. Let me wipe it first; it smells of f mortality. 
Glou. O ruin’d piece of narueel This § great world 
Shall so wear out to nought.—Dost thou know me? 
Lear. I remember thine eyes well enough. Dost thou 135 


126,127. Beneath...pit,| Asin Glo.+, 
Sch. “Prose in QqFf+, Mal. Knt, Coll. 
Del. Sing. Sta. Wh. 

Beneath.....darkness| One line, 
Johns. Cap. Jen. Steev. Bos. Dyce. 

126-130. Beneath...thee| Four lines, 
ending darkness....pah ;....apothecary.... 
thee. Johns. Jen. Five lines, ending 
darkness....stench...pah t....apothecary.... 
thee. Ec. Five and a half lines, ending 
LAPRNESS ..0.StENCH are. Mlrsee QPORCCALY »... 
There’s...thee. Ktly. 

126. 7s all] it ts all Warb. 

fiends’ |Cap. fiends QqFf. fiend’s 
Johns. 

127. there’s the sulphurous| Ktly, 
Cam. Dyce ii, Huds. Sch. sher’s the 
JSulphury Qq (theres Q,). there is the 


Sulphurous Ff et cet. 

128. consumption| confumation Q,. 
confummation Q.. 

129, 130. civet ;...sweeten | Rowe, Knt, 
Sch. Ciuet; good Apothecary /weeten 
Ff. Ciuet, good Apothecarie, to fweeten 
Qgq et cet. 

132. Let me...mortality.| Here...mor- 
talitie. Qq. Two lines, Ff. 

133,134. O...me ?] Rowe. Three lines, 
ending world...naught...me? Ff. Prose, 


Qa. 
134. Shall] fhould Q,. /hold Q,. 
nought| naught QgqFf, Rowe, 
Pope, Theob. 
Dost thou] do you Qq. Jen. 


135. thine] thy Qq. 


~ 


filthy Gzos¢icks ; whose opinion was that the upper Parts of a man’s Body were made 
indeed by God, but the lower Parts from the Girdle, they held was made by the 
devil; and very fond they grew of their fancy, which they thought gave them a 
Liberty to do with the devil’s part what they pleas’d, so long as they reserv’d the 
rest unto God.’—Znglana’s Vanity: or the Voice of God against ... Pride in Dress, 
&c., 1683, p. 59. 

126. MALONE and KNIGHT doubt whether any part of this speech were intended 
for metre. SINGER: It is too rhythmical to be left as mere prose, yet is rather 
lyric than heroic metre. WHITE: Not improbably the remainder of this speech is 
mutilated blank verse. With very slight alteration it might be presented in perfect 
lines of five accents. ABBoTT, §511: The highest passion of all expresses itself in 
prose, as here, and in the fearful frenzy of Oth. IV, i, 34-44. 

133. piece of nature] Scumipr: Sh, frequently uses pzece with of where we 
should expect some such word as model, or master-piece, especially a ¢ piece of virtue’ 
for a pattern of virtue. An expression in Anz. & Cleo. V, ii, 99, comes the nearest 
to the present phrase, where Cleopatra says, ‘to imagine An Antony, were nature’s 
piece ’gainst fancy.’ 

133. This great world] See note on ‘ little world of man,’ III, i, ro. 


at me? No, do thy none blind Cupid; I'll not oe 136 
: thou this challenge; mark but the penning of it. 
Glow, “Were all thy letters suns, I could not see. 
Edg. [Aside] 1 would not take this from report; it is, 


a And my heart breaks at it. 140 
- = Lear. Read. : 
> >. - ; 


Glou. What, with the case of eyes? 
Lear. Oh ho, are you there with me? No eyes in your 
4 head, nor no money in your purse? Your eyes are in a 
~ -—-—sCiheavy case, your purse in a light; yet you see how this 145 
. world goes.— 


; 136. sguiny] /quint Q,, Pope, Han. Prose, Qq. Two lines, the first ending 

a at me] on me Qq. report, Ff. As ‘Aside,’ Han. Cap. Ec. 

q 137. this] that Qq. Dyce ii, Huds. 
. but] Om. Qq. 142. the case] this case Rowe+, Cap. 

a : of it] oft Q,. on’t Q,, Jen, Cam. Ec. Wh. Ktly. 

ss Wr. 144. nor no] nor Q., ee Han. 

a 138. thy letters] Ff, Rowe, Knt, Sch. 144, 145. @ heavy] heavy FF, Rowe, 

a the letters ot i. cet. Pope, Han. 

j a see] FF, Knt, Sta. Sch. /ee 145. light] light one Ktly. 

a one QgF,F, et cet. } 146. goes.] goes ? QO 

: 139,140. J would.....at it.] Theob. 

n- 


136. squiny] MALONE: To look asquint. The word is used by Armin, Shake- 
e speare’s fellow-comedian, in his Mest of WMinnies [p. 6, ed. Sh. Soc.]: ‘The World, 
i queasie stomackt, . . . squinies at this, and lookes as one scorning.’ WRriGHT adds 
: ' that it is still used in Suffolk, [and an American can add that it is still used here]. 

139. report] STauNToN: There is some obscurity here. What is it Edgar would 
not take from report? He must have been aware of his father’s deprivation of sight ; 
because it is mentioned in the previous scene. We are, perhaps, to suppose that the 
poor king exhibits the proclamation for the killing of Gloucester. COWDEN CLARKE: 
y That which Edgar would not delieve without witnessing is the extremity of pathos in 
> the meeting between his blind father and the distracted king. Dettus thinks it 
refers to Lear’s condition. 

139. is] WRicHT: Emphatic; as in J/acb. I, iii, 141. 

a 142. the case] JENNENS: Having lost my eyes, would you have me read with 
the sockets. STEEVENS: That is, the socket of either eye. So in Wint. Tale, 
V, ii, 14: ‘tear the cases of their eyes.’ MALONE: Also in Per, V,i, 112: ‘her 
eyes as jewel-like and cased as richly,’ and 7. III, ii, 99: ‘her eyelids, cases to 
those heavenly jewels.’ ‘ 72s case of eyes’ could not have been Shakespeare’s 
phrase, because, in the language of that day, it would mean ‘this pair of eyes,’ a 
sense directly opposite to that intended to be conveyed. WuiTe: But still I must 
regard Rowe’s reading (z.é. with such a pair of eyes as this, z.¢. none at all) as 
being the true text. 

143. are you there with me ?] WricuT: That is, is that what you mean? So 
in As You Like It, V, ii, 32: ‘Oh, I know where you are;’ 7, ¢. what you mean. 
[Compare ‘take me with you,’ Rom. & Ful. III, v, 140.] 


Bas 


ts 
282 


. Glou. I see it feelingly. , 
Lear, What, art mad? A man may see hei this ee . 


goes with no eyes. Look with thine ears; see how yonc 
= justice rails upon yond simple thief. Hark, in thine ear; 1. 50 a 
: change places, and, handy-dandy, which is the justice, which 
7 is the thief? Thou hast seen a farmer’s dog bark at a —s 


a beggar? i 
eli Glou. Ay, sir. w 
—_ Lear. And the creature run from the cur? There thou 155 a 
mightst behold the Gre image of pales Sa. ; a dog’s obeyed “4 
in office.— rat 
~~ Thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand! : 
’ Why dost thou lash that whore? Strip thine own back ; 
Thou hotly lusts to use her in that kind 160 
148. ¢hzs] the Qq. 154. Ay,] J QqF,F,. Om. FF. 
149. thine] thy Qq: 155-172. Prose, QqFf. 
149,150. yond...yond]| yor....yon Qq. 156. dog” s obeyed| dogge, ve bade Q.. “ 
yon’ Cap. Steev. Ec. Var. Knt, Sing. dogge, fo bad Q.. ‘ 
150. chine] thy Qq. 158-161. As in Pope. 
151. change places, and| Om. Qq. 159. thine] thy Ff+. 
handy-dandy | handy, dandy, Q.. 160. Zhou hotly lusts] Ff,Sch. thy 
handy-dendy F ,. bloud hotly lufts Qq (blood Q,). Thou 
151,152. justice....thief | theefe...Jus- hotly lust’st Rowe et cet. 
tice Qq. 


147. feelingly] Moserty: In an inward and heartfelt way. Lear takes the 
word to mean ‘ only by feeling as I have-no eyes.’ ‘What do you want with eyes,’ 
he rejoins, ‘to know how the world goes ? 

151. handy-dandy] MALONE: This is a play among children, in which some- 
thing is shaken between the hands, and then a guess is made in which hand it is 
retained. See Florio: ‘ Bazzicchiare. To shake betweene two hands, to play handy- 
dandy.’ Coles (Latin Dict., 1679) renders ‘ to play handy-dandy,’ by digztis micare ; 

’ and he is followed by Ainsworth; but they appear to have been mistaken, as is Dr 
Johnson in his definition, in his Dictionary, which seems to have been formed on the 
passage before us, misunderstood, He says, Handy-dandy is ‘a play in which chil- 
dren change hands and places.’ Doucr: This explanation is confirmed by the fol- 
lowing extract from A free discourse touching the murmurers of the tymes, MS: 
‘They . . . play with your majestie as men play with little children at handye dandye, 
which hand will you have, when they are disposed to keep any thinge from them,’ 
HALLIWELL says this is one of the oldest games in existence, not only alluded to by 
Piers Plowman, but, according to Pope in his Memoirs of Martinus Scriblerus, by 
Plato. ‘Sometimes the game is played by a sort of sleight of hand, changing the 
article rapidly from one hand to another, . . . This is what Sh. alludes to by changing 
places,’ 

160, lusts] This is an instance cited by WALKER (Crit. ii, 128) of the substitu- 
tion in the Folio of s for s¢ in the second person singular of the verb. ‘ Quere, 


 — 
se: 


Ol wie st her.—The usurer hangs the cozener. 161 
ta ter'd clothes great vices do appear; 
d furr’d gowns hide all. Plate sin with gold, 


_ And the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks ; 
a Arm it in rags, a pigmy’s straw does pierce it. — 165 
i _ None does offend, none, I say, none; I’ll able ’em; 


_ Take that of me, my friend, who Tse the power 

To seal th’ accuser’s lips. Get thee glass eyes, 

And, like a scurvy politician, seem 

To see the things thou dost not. —Now, now, now, now. 170 
Pull off my boots; harder, harder, so. ' 


161. cozener] cofioner Q.. Han. Cap. Sch. 
_ 162-170. As in Rowe. 165. 72 vags| with rags Jen. (? mis- 
162. Through] Thorough Ff, Rowe. print). 
tatter’d|\ tottered Q,. tattered 
~ Q,, Sch. and tatter'd Px. 
clothes] raggs Q,. ragges Q.. 
great] Ff, Rowe, Sch. /mal Q.. 166. offend, none, | offend, Han. 
Small Q, et cet. able| absolve Han. 
163. furr'd gowns| furd-gownes Qaq. E70 L71.  o...soCapy. LVozon.co: 
hide| hides Qq. One line, Popeii+, Jen. Wr.; prose, Cam. 
163-168. Plate...lips.] Om. Qq. Now, now, now, now | no now Q,. 


a] and Rowe. 
does| do's ¥,. doth ¥,F.+, Jen. 
Steev. Var. Knt, Coll. Sing. 


163. Plate] Theob. ii. Place Ff. 


sin] Theob. ii. fines F,F,. 
Sins F,, fins F,, Rowe, Pope, Theob. i, 


Vo, now Q,. 


171. harder,’ harder| pull harder, © 


harder Ktly. 


asks WALKER, ‘in cases where s¢ would produce extreme harshness, and where at 
the same time the old copies have s, whether we ought not to write the latter. (In 
the north of England, and in Scotland (see, for example, Burns, passim), s for st 
in the second person seems to be the rule.)’ [To return to the usage of the QqFf in 
this instance is hardly more violent than to adopt z¢ in place of zs. Can harshness 
farther go than in ‘hotly lust’st to’? I regret that I did not soften a line correspond- 
ingly harsh in modern editions, and print in Ham. I, ii, 53: ‘ Revisiés thus the glimpses 
of the moon.’—ED. ] 

162. great vices] I cannot but think that the Ff are right here, and that the 
meaning is, ‘ When looked at through tattered clothes, all vices are great.’—Ep. 

163. hide all] MALone: In 2. of L., 93, ‘ Hiding base sin in plaits of majesty.’ 

163. Plate] CowprNn CLARKE: That is, clothe in plate armour. 

163. sin] Sizs of the Ff is to be preferred, were it not for the ‘it’ in line 
165.—Ep. 

166. I’ll able em] WarsuRTON: I'll qualify or uphold them. So Scogan, con- 
temporary with Chaucer: ‘Set all my life after thyne ordinaunce And able me to 
mercie or thou deme.’ Heatu: I will take off all legal disabilities which they may 
have incurred by their crimes. STEEVENS: Chapman’s Widow's Tears - ‘ Admitted! 
Ay, into her heart, and I’ll able ie ’ Again, in his version of the Jad, xxiii: ‘I’ll 


able this For five revolved years.” 


Edg. [Aside] Oh, matter and impertinency in om : 


Reason in madness! 


hae 


~ 


Lear. If thou wilt weep my fortunes, take my eyes. 
I know thee well enough; thy name is Gloucester. 175 
Thou must be patient; we came crying hither. 
Thou know’st, the first time that we smell the air, - 
We wawl and cry. I will preach to thee; mark. 


Glou. Alack, alack the day! 


Lear. When we are born, we cry that we are come 180 


To this great stage of fools. 


172, 173. Ok...madness !| One line, 
Qq. As ‘Aside,’ Cap. Dyce ii, Huds. 

172. impertinency mix'd !| _tmpertin- 
ency mixt, Ff. itmpertinencie mixt Q,. 
impertinency, mixt Q,. 

174-206. Prose, in Qq. 

174. fortunes] fortune Qq. 

177. know'st] knowe/é Q,, Sch. 

178. wawl] wawle Ff. wayl Q.. 
waile Q,, Cap. 


This’ a good block, 


178. mark.]| Ff, Knt, Dyce,Glo. +, Sch. 
mark— Rowe+. marke me. Qq et cet. 

181. This’ a good block. | Sing.ii, Dyce, 
Glo. Wr. (dock ? Sing ii). «his a good 
blocke. Qq. This a good blocke: F,F,. 
This a good block: F,F,,Sch. 7) his a 
good block !— Rowe-+, "Ec. Knt, Del. 
Sta. Ktly. 7hisa@ good block ? Cap. Jen. 
Steev.’78, Var. Coll. i. Zhis’s @ good 


block. Cam. This a good plot Coll. iii. 


172. impertinency] Douce: That is, something not belonging to the subject. 
Thus an old collection of domestic recipes, &c., entitled The treasurie of com- 
modious conceits, 1594, is said to be ‘not impertinent for every good huswife to use 
in her house amongst her own familie.’ This word does not seem to have been used 
in the sense of rade or unmannerly till the middle of the seventeenth century, nor 
in that of sazcy till a considerable time afterwards. 

178. wawl] WRIGHT: Cotgrave has: ‘ Hoiialler. To yawle, wawle, or cry out aloud.” 

181. This’] WALKER ( Vers. 80): This zs is not unfrequently,—like chaz zs, &c.— 
contracted into a monosyllable. See epee V, iii, 283; Zam. Shr. I, ii, 45, ‘ Why 
this’ a heavy chance ’twixt him and you.’ WRIGHT: See Meas. for Meas. V,i, 131, 
‘this’ a good Fryer belike.’ See ALBONT, § 461; also II, ii, 116, of this play. 

Ritson needlessly suggested ‘’Tis.’ 

181. block] JoHNSON would read ‘a good flock,’ that is, a flock of wool. ¢ Lear 
picks up a flock, and immediately-thinks to surprise his enemies by a troop of horse 
shod with flocks or felt. Yet ‘block’ may stand, if we suppose that the sight of a 
block put him in mind of mounting his horse. CAPELL: The mode of Lear’s mad- 
ness is chang’d; it is calm, and shews some sparks of reason; he knows Gloucester, 
and his condition; tells him he must be patient; .. . says he will ‘preach’ to him; 
upon this he puts himself in posture of one who would preach, and pulls off his hat: 
Scarce has he utter'd a few words when some fumes of a wilder nature fly up; the 
hat catches his eye, and sets fire to another train of ideas; the words * This a good 
block?’ are spoke looking upon the hat; and this is follow’d by a second conceit, 
whicl has it’s rise from the same circumstance, about felt,’ and the use it might 
be put to, STEEVENS: ‘Block’ anciently signified the head part of the hat, or the 
thing on which a hat is formed, and sometimes the hat itself. Thus Auch Ado, I, i, 


A troop of horse with felt. 


KING LEAR 


t were a Beicaté stratagem, to shoe 
I’ll put ’t in proof; 


182. shoe] jhco F,. fhooe FEF. ipa EP ae proofs] Om. Qq. 
Mhoot Qq. suit Anon.* put’t| put it Cap. Steev. Ec. 
183. felt] fell Qq. Var. Knt, Coll. Del. i, Sing. Wh. Ktly. 


75: ‘He wears his faith but as the fashion of his hat: it ever changes with the next 


_ block.’ Again,in Beau. and Fl. Wt at Several Weapons [1V, i]: ‘I am so haunted 


with this broad brim’d hat Of the last progress block, with the young hatband.’ 
Again, in The Two Merry Milkmaids, 1620: ‘—my haberdasher has a new 4d/ock, 
and will find me and all my generation in deavers,’ &c. Again, in Decker’s Gul’s 
Hornbook, 1609: ‘—that cannot observe the time of his hatband, nor know what 
fashioned dock is most kin to his head; for in my opinion, the braine that cannot 
chuse his felt well,” &c. Again,in Zhe Seven Deadly Sinnes of London, by Decker, 
1606: ‘—The d/ocke for his head alters faster than the felt-maker can fitte him.’ 
To the same effect RUSHTON (Zuphuism, p. 52) cites instances from Lily’s Zuphues. 
COLLIER : ‘Block’ implies that Lear is referring to the shape of his kat, when he 
probably had none upon his head, being, as we are told, ¢ fantastically dressed with 
straw and wild flowers.’ Few things can be clearer than that ‘block’ was mis- 
heard for A/of as it stands in the (MS), and that the ‘ good loz’ was to shoe, &c. 
[Capell’s explanation is, to me, scarcely satisfactory, although it is adopted by every 
editor but Collier, and is amply supported, as far as the peculiar use of the word 
‘block’ is concerned, by Steevens’s and Rushton’s citations. The image of that dis- 
traught head covered by a felt hat is not pleasing, to say the least. I can offer 
nothing better, unless it be that ‘ block’ is used in its ordinary sense, and that Lear 
mounts one to deliver his preachment from. Since writing this I have found the fol- 
lowing in TrEcK (iii, 241): ‘Brockmann at these words mounted the stump of a 
tree.’ For this Tieck finds fault with him; ‘the action was neither necessary nor 
did it impart any beauty to the passage. Schréder afterwards, on the same stage in 
Vienna, represented himself so weak and worn out that he could not raise his trem- 
bling foot high enough to mount upon the stump; this he did apparently to show that 
his predecessor had acted what was not true to nature.’ Tieck adds, that ‘ Schréder, 
with his keen intelligence, would probably confess in cooler moments that he was 
even more sophistical than Brockmann; an old man who was as weak as this 
could certainly not have stormed about the open fields, and made his pursuers run 
hard to catch him.’ In Epwin Bootu’s Prompt Book there is here the stage-direc- 
tion : ‘ Lear takes Curan’s hat.’ This is certainly better than to suppose that he took 
his own.—ED. ] 

183. felt] SrrEveNs: This stratagem might have been adopted from the following 
passage in Fenton’s 7ragicall Discourses, 1 567: ‘—he attyreth himselfe for the pur- 
pose in a night gowne girt to hym, with a paire of shoes of fe/¢, Leaste the noyse ot 
his feete shoulde discover his goinge.’ MaLone: This ‘delicate stratagem’ had ac- 
tually been put ia practice fifty years before Sh. was born, as we learn from Lord 
Herbert’s Life of Henry the Eivhth, p. 41: ‘the ladye Margaret, .. . caused there a 
juste to be held in an extraordinary manner ; the place being a eh room raised high 
from the ground by many steps, and paved with black square stones like marble; 
while the horses, to prevent sliding, were shod with felt or flocks (the Latin words 
are feltro sive tomento): after which the ladies danced all night.’ 


Your most dear daughter— 


And when I have stol’n upon these sons-in-law, — 
Then, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill! 


Enter a Gentleman, with Attendants. 


Gent. Oh, here he is; lay hand upon him.—Sir, 


_ Lear. No rescue? What, a prisoner? Iam even 

The natural fool of fortune. Use me well; . 

You shall have ransom. Let me have surgeons; 190 

I am cut to th’ brains. 
Gent. You shall have anything. 4 
Lear. No seconds? all myself? 


~ 


Huds. 

sto? | ftole Qq. 

sons-in-law| fonne in lawes Q.. 
fonnes in law Q,. Son in Lawes F,, 
Rowe, Cap. Sonnes in Lawes F,. Sons 
in Laws ¥,. Sons-in-Laws F,. 

185. Enter...Attendants.] Rowe. En- 
ter three Gentlemen. Qq. Enter a Gen- 
tleman. Ff. Enter Gentleman, and At- 
tendants of Cordelia; and Guard. Cap. 

186. Scene Vill. Pope+, Jen. 

hand | hands Qq, Jen. 


184. J have] J’ve Pope+, Dyce ii, 


186. kim. Sir,| Johns. him firs, Q,. 
him firs. Q,. him; sir, Rowe. him, 
Sir. Ff. 

187. Your...daughter—]Om.Q,. your 
most deere (reading O...deere as one line) 


188. even] eene Qq. 
190. ransom] a ranfom Q.,. 
surgeons| Ff£+, Knt, Dyce ., 
Sta. Glo. Wr. Sch. a@ churgion Q,. a 
Chirurgeon Q,. @ surgeon Cap. et cet. 
191. Zam] I’m Huds. : 
to th’) to the Q.. 


185. kill, kill] MALONE: This was formerly the word given in the English army 
when an onset was made. So in Ven. & Ad. 652: ‘in a peaceful hour doth cry 
“kill, kill.’’ Again, in 7he Afirrour for Magistrates, 1610, p. 315: ‘Our English- 
men came boldly forth at night, Crying Saint George, Salisbury, kill, kill.’ 

189. fool of fortune] STEEVENS: Compare ‘I am fortune’s fool,’ Rom. & Ful. 
III, i, 129. WALKER (C7riz. ii, 309): Here*‘ natural fool’ means one dorm to be the 
sport of fortune. Bacon speaks of ‘ za¢ural Spaniards,’ z. e. native. Massinger, in 
The Renegado, Il, iv, has ‘a natural Venetian.’ 

I19l. cut to th’ brains] CowDEN CLARKE: This, one of the most powerfully, yet 
briefly expressed, utterances of mingled bodily pain and consciousness of mental in- 
firmity ever penned, is not the only subtle indication in this scene that Lear not 
merely feels himself to be insane, but also feels acute physical suffering. ‘I am not 
ague-proof’ tells how severely shaken his poor old frame has been by exposure through- 
out that tempestuous night; ‘pull off my boots; harder, harder,’ gives evidence of a 
sensation of pressure and impeded circulation in the feet, so closely connected 
with injury to the brain; and ‘I am cut to the brains’ conveys the impression of 
wounded writhing within the head, that touches us with deepest sympathy. Yet, at 


the same time, there are the gay irrationality and the incoherency that mark this 
stage of mania. 


es 


estaba 
pb Cobt tia 1 


AZ 


ee AS 
\ . 


¥ x 


i ie De 
oN 


¥ Noe Y 


hae oe |) 
* C0 W 
\ 


er. “Then theres tile in ss 


es for garden water-pots, 


d laying autumn’s dust. 195 
t. Good sir,—* 
Lear. I will die bravely, like a asmug bridegroom. What! 
‘ll be jovial. Come, come; I am a king, 
ly masters, know you that ? 
Gent. You are a royal one, and we obey you. 200 


Come, and you get it, you 
shall get it by running. Sa, sa, sa, sa. 
[Exit running ; Attendants follow. 


Gent. A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch, 


Past speaking of ina king! Thou hast one daughter, 


Who redeems nature from the general curse 205 


Which twain have brought her to. 


_ £dg. Hail, gentle sir. 


Gent. Sir, speed you; what’s your will? 


193. @ mon aman] a man Qgq. 


194-199. TZo...that] Asin Jen. Three 


lines, ending drauely...louiall :....that ? 
Ff+, Cap. (Come, come separate line, 
Cap.) 

195, 196. Ay...sir] Om. Ff, Rowe. 

195. Ay,and | Land Qq. And Pope+, 
Cap. Ay, and for Steev. Bos. Knt, Coll. 

196. Gent. Good sir] Om Q,, Pope+, 
Cap. 

197-199. Z...that/| Two and a half 
lines, ending dravely...jovial...that ? Coll. 
Del. Wh. Ktly. 

197. smug] Om. Qq, Jen. Steev. Ec. 
Var. Sta. Glo. 

198, 199. king, My masters| King, 
Mafters ¥,. King. Mafters ae EF, 
Rowe. hing. My masters Pope, Theob. 


Han. Warb. fing; masters Sch. 

199. that ?] that. Q,, Dyce, Glo.+. 
that / Sta. Huds. 

201, 202. Then...sa.]| Two lines, the 
find ending ge¢ z¢, Ff+. 

Ol. Come, and| Ff, Rowe, Sch. 
Come, an Pope, ‘Vheob. Han. Warb. 
Knt, Sing. Come,an Johns. nay and 
Q,. nay if Q,. Nay, come, an Jen. Kc. 
Nay, if Glo.+. May, an Cap. et cet. 

202. by] with Qq, Cap. Jen. Glo. Wr. 
Sa, sa, sa, sa.| Om. Qq. 
[Exit...] Exit, running; Attend- 

ants and Guard follow. Cap. Exit King 
running Qq. Exit. Ff. 

204. one] @ Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 

Knt, Sch. 
206, have) hath Qq. had Anon.* 


193. salt] MALoNe: That is, a man of tears. WricHT: Compare Chapman, 
Widow's Tears, IV, i: *Ile/not turn Salt-peeter in this vault for neuer a mans com- 


panie liuing.’ 


201. life in’t] JoHNsoN: The case is not yet desperate. 

202. Sa, sa] Boswe1L: Does not this seem to prove that ‘ Sessa,’ III, iv, 96, 
means the very reverse of cessez? Hupson: It is probably meant to express Lear’s 
panting as he runs. STARK (Zine psychiatrische Sh.-Studie, p, 80) interprets this as 
singing, and says: ‘ Lear skips away carolling and dancing.’ 


Shp: Do you hear Paar sir, of a battle eee 
Gent. Most sure and vulgar; every one hears that, . 
Which can distinguish sound. ; oh ne toa 
Eadg. But, by your favour, 210 
How near’s the other army ? 
Gent. Near and on speedy foot; the main descry 
Stands on the hourly thought. — 


Edg. I thank you, sir; that’s all. , 
= Gent. Though that the queen on special cause is here, : z 
ia Her army is moved on. h 
Edg. _ I thank you, sir. [Exit Gent. 215 


Glou. You ever-gentle gods, take my breath from me; 
Let not my worser spirit: tempt me again 
To die before you please! 
: fdg. Well pray you, father. 


Glou. Now, good sir, what are you? 
Edg. A most poor man, made tame to fortune’s blows; 220 . 
208. aught] Theob. ii. ought QqFf. for’t Q,. 
str,| Om. Qq. 212. descry] defcryes Q,. defcries Q,. 
209, 210. Most....sound.|] As-in Q.. 213. Stands] Stand Q,. 
The first line ends heaves, Q,; at vulgar, thought] thoughts Qq. 
Ff, Rowe. ' that’s all] Om. Pope, Han. 
209. one] ones Q.,,. 215. Her] HirQ,. His Q.. 
hears that] here's that Q,. heares Edg. J...s?7.] Om. Pope, Han. 
That Q.. [Exit Gent.] Johns. Exit. Qq. 
210. Which...sound| That...fence Q,. ~ Exit. (after om), Ff. 
That... fenfe Q,. 216. ever-gentie| Hyphen, Cap. 
210, 211. But,..army ?]| One line, Qq. 218. Well pray] Well, pray Q.F,. 
212. speedy foot) [peed fort Q,. /peed 220. tame to| lame by Qaq, Mal. Bos. 


209. vulgar] Compare am. I, ii, 99: ‘any the most vulgar thing to sense.’ 

212, 213. main descry ... thought] JoHNsoN: The main body is expected to 
be descried every hour, The expression is harsh. SrTaunron: The expression is 
as harsh and disagreeable as the speaker’s ‘Most sure and vulgar’ just before. 
Moser1y: The substantive ‘descry’ is like ‘more impediments than twenty times 
your stop,’ O¢h. V, ii, 263. * 

213. that’s all] Both JENNENS and THE CAMBRIDGE EpirTors note these words as 
omitted in Q,, the ‘N. Butter’ Quarto. They are present in my copy, in STEEVENs’S 
Reprint, and in AsHBEr’s Facsimile. I note this simply as an indication of the dif- 
ferences in different copies of the same edition.—Ep. 

214. Though that] See acd, IV, iii, 106: ABBort, § 287. 

218. father] Hupson: As this was a customary address from the young to the 
old, Edgar keeps addressing Gloucester so without being recognized as his son. 

220. tame] MALONE adhered to the text of the Qq, because of the parallelism 
with Sow, xxxvil: ‘So I, made lame by fortune’s dearest spight.’ 


i 


Eas 


int to ee ae Woes me your tend 


ead } you to some biding. 
— Glou. = 


To boot, and boot! 


Re Hearty Phaiites ; 
_ The bounty and the benison of goatee 


? 


; Enter OSwALn. 
Osw. A proclaim’d prize! Most happy! 225 


That eyeless head of thine was first framed flesh 
To raise my fortunes.—Thou old unhappy traitor, 
Briefly thyself remember ; the sword is out 


That must destroy thee. 


Glou. ‘Now let thy ay hand 


Put strength enough to’t 


221. known] knowing Han. Ktly. 

223-225. Hearty...boot /] Prose, Qq. 

224,225. The bounty.....b00t/] One 
line, Pope, Jen. 

224. bounty] bornet Q,. 

the benison] beniz Q,. 

225. Zo boot, and boot] to faue thee 
Q,. 0 boot, to boot Q,. to boot Pope, 
Han. Jen. (70 d0ot Han., as a separate 
line.) 

Enter Oswald.] Coll. Enter 
Steward. QqFf. 
SCENE IX. Pope+, Jen. 


—~ Osw, Pirie rctore, bold peasant, : 230 


225, &c. Osw.] Stew. QqFf. 
225-233. A...arm.] Prose, Qq. 
225. Most] this is most Han. 
happy !) happy,Q,. happy; Q. 
happie ¥,, happy: FFF. 
226. first] Om. Q,. 
227. Thou] Om. Pope+. 
old | moft Qq. 
229. Now] Om. Pope+. 
230. ¢o’¢] QqF,F,, Jen. Glo.+, Sch. 
too’t FF. zo 7 Han. et cet. 
Edgar opposes.] Johns. Edgar 


interposes. Coll. 


221. known and feeling] WARBURTON: Sorrows past and present. MALONE: 


I doubt whether fee/ing is not used for felt. 


Sorrows known, not by relation, but 


by experience. Eccirs: ‘Feeling sorrows’ are such as, by awakening sympathy, 


make us feel for others. COWDEN CLARKE: 
of ‘personally felt’? and ‘deeply moving.’ 


‘Feeling’ is here used in both senses 
Compare Wint, Tale, IV, ii, 8: ‘To 


whose feeling sorrows I might be some allay.’ ApBoTT, § 372, seems to adopt 


Malone’s view; he explains ‘ Feeling’ as ‘known,’ passively, ‘known and realized 
sorrows.’. SCHMIDT: ‘Feeling’ is here not a participle but a gerund, and ‘feeling 
sorrows’ is equivalent to heartfelt sorrows. It is essentially the same gerund as in 
aying speech, writing book, washing tub, &c. 

222. pregnant] ScHMIDT: Disposed, prompt, ready. [See II, i, 76.] 

228. remember] WARBURTON: Recollect the past offences of thy life and recom- 
mend thyself to heaven. 

229, 230. Now... to’t] CowpEN CLARKE understands this as a call to Edgar 
to defend him. With all deference I cannot but think that it is addressed to Oswald, 
begging him to put strength enough to his destroying sword to make sure work 


with it—Ep. «+ 
25 T 


a OW ses 


Dar’st thou support a publish’d traitor? Hence ! 

Lest that th’ infection of his fortune take 

Like hold on thee. Let go his arm. 
Edg. Chill not let go, zir, without vurther ’casion. 


Osw. Let go, slave, or thou diest! aa" 


Edg. Good gentleman, go your gait, and let poor volk 
pass. And’ chud ha’ bin zwagger’d out of my life, ’twould 
not ha’ bin zo long as ’tis by a vortnight. Nay, come not 


2304 Lars aun, (On darn). Qq, Sch. an ch’ud Cap. Wh. an chud 


Darft ¥ FF. Dyce, Glo.+. and ch’ud Steev. et cet. 
232. that th’] that Knt. 237, 238. ha’ bin| FFF. haue beene 
that] Om. Qq, Cap. Qq. 4a’ been F 
233,234. Like...not] One line, Cap. 237. zwagger'd | swaggerd F,. /wag- 
234. Chill...’casion.| Two lines, Ff. garadQ,. swaggardQ,. swagged F, 
zir| fir Qq. EP. 
vurther| Om.Qq. further Jen. *twould |itwouldQ,. it wold Q.. 
varther Coll. 238. not ha’) ha’ FF. 
*caston | cagion Qq. 20] fo Q,. 
236. and] Om, Qq. as *tis| Om. Qq. 


volk| vokeQ,. volke Q.F,F,. vortnight] fortnight Qi. 
237. And’ chud|¥f+,Jen. and chud 


234. Chill, &c.] STEEVENs: When our ancient writers introduce a rustic they 
commonly allot him this Somersetshire dialect. Mercury, in the second book of 
Ovid’s Metamorphoses, assumes the appearance of a clown, and Golding has made 
him speak with the provinciality of Shakespeare’s Edgar [p. 26, ‘And I chill gethee 
vor thy paine an Hecfar an hir match.’ The pleonastic ‘I chill’ is probably an over- 
sight on Golding’s part; a line or two farther on there is no ‘I’ before ‘ Cham zure.’ 
Capell’s spelling ch’z/?, and ch’ud in line 237, is probably the most correct, but, in a 
matter so trifling and so vague, we might as well follow the Ff, even in their mis- 
spellings. I have, therefore, printed ‘bin’ and ‘ whither,’ which may be, in reality, 
indications of the pronunciation.—Ep,] ELuis (2. 2. Pronunciation, p. 293): 
The contractions cham, chas, chil (tsham, tshas, tshzl) for ich am, ich was, ich will, 
are mentioned by Gill (Logonomda, p. 17) as a Southern pronunciation, in Rev. W. 
Barnes’s edition of the Glossary.of the Dialect of Forth and Bargy, and in the 
Glossary to his Poems in the Dorset dialect, 1858, p. 150, The dialectic pronun- 
ciations /se,’ch are preserved [here in Lear]. About thirty years ago wéchy was 
in use for Z in the eastern border of Devonshire and in Dorset, and examples of 
cham, chould = 1 am, I would, occur in the Axmoor Scolding, which dates from 
the beginning of the last century. WRIGHT: I will, contracted from ‘ich will,’ just 
as ‘chud’ is for ‘ich would’ or ‘ich should.’ In Grose’s Provincial Glossary ¢ chell? 
is said to be used for ‘I shall’ in Somerset and Devon, and ‘cham? for ‘I am’ in 
Somerset. In Whetstone’s Promos and Cassandra we find ‘cham,’ ‘ chy,’ ‘ chaue,’ 
*chul.’ 

236. gait] STEEVENS: In the last rebellion, when the Scotch soldiers had finished 
their exercise, instead of our term of dismission, their phrase was ‘ gang your gaits.’ 


Id man; keep out, che vor’ ye, or idée-try eee 
costard or my pillow: be the harder; chill be plain 240 


Gen Out, dunghill! [They fight. 

_ £dg. Chill pick your teeth, zir; come; no matter vor 

_ your foins. . 
Osw. Slave, thou hast slain me. Villain, take my purse; 245 

If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body; 

And give the letters which thou find’st about me 


To Edmund earl of Gloucester; seek him out 


239. th’] the Qq. ; 240. chill] ile Q.. 
che vor ye| cheuore ye Qq. che 242. [They fight.] Qq. Om. Ff. 
*vore ye Cap. 243. Chill] Child F,. 
tce| Ff+, Jen. ze Qq. zz Cap. Chill...come| One line, Cap. 
Jse or ise Johns. et cet. zir| fir Q.. 
; whither| Ff. whether Qq et cet. vor] for Qq. 
240. costard | cofter Q.. 244. [Edgar knocks him down. Rowe, 


ballow] bat Q,, Pope+, Cap. Jen. Oswald falls. Cam. 
Steev. Ec. Var. J4attero Q,. é 248, 249. To...out Upon] Oneline, Qq. 


239. che vor’ ye] JOHNSON: I warn you. Wricur: Capell quotes from an old 
comedy called The Contention between Liberality and Prodigality (1602): ‘Yoo by 
gisse sir tis high time che vore ye Cham averd another will ha’te afore me.’ 

239. ice] ABBOTT, §§ 315, 461: Provincial for‘Ishall.? De.ius reads ‘ise,’ and 
considers it equivalent to e/se. WRIGHT: In Somersetshire west of the Parret, ‘ Ise’ 
is used still for ‘1,’ and pronounced like ‘ ice.’ 

240. costard] The name of an apple, and hence, according to GIrrorD (Note on 
the Alchemist, 1V, i), humourously applied to the head. Whence ‘ coster-monger.’ 

240. ballow] KnicuT: Grose (Provincial Gloss.) gives this as a North-country 
word for fole. CoLiIER: Balo means a deam in Norfolk. aftero of Q, is perhaps 
a corruption of the true word, as it is in the Folio. 

244. foins] DycE (G/oss.): Pushes, thrusts: Cotgrave: ‘Zstoguer. To thrust, or 
foyne at.’ 

247. letters] Here, and in ae 255, Mr SMITH thinks we should read /etter, be- 
cause only one letter is produced and read. ‘ Had there been one from Regan too, 
the audience no doubt should have heard it as well as Goneril’s.’? See IV, v, 33. 
[EccLes, MALONE, and THE CAMBRIDGE EDITORS attribute this note to ‘Mr Smith ;’ 
it is found in Grey’s Woées, &c., vol. ii, p. 114, and, although it is not always perfectly 
clear where Grey’s own notes end, and ‘ Mr Smith’s’ notes, that he quotes, begin, yet 
I think that they are correct in this instance. When I compiled the note on IV, v, 
33, I thought that to ‘Mr Smith’ belonged only the note on ‘undistinguish’d space 
of woman’s will,’ and that what I have quoted above was Grey’s. ‘Mr Smith of 
Harleston in Norfolk’ Grey pronounces ‘the most friendly and communicative man 
living,’ and adds, that he was ‘ greatly assistant to Sir Thomas Hanmer in his edition 
of Shakespeare.’—Ep.] MALONE shows that ‘letters’ was used like epéstol@, when 
only one was intended. In I, v, 1, Lear tells Kent to go before with these ‘letters,’ 
and Kent replies that he would deliver the ‘ letter.’ 


7 AB o” Lilfced 


KING LEAR 


Upon the English party. Oh, untimely death! 


Death ! 


Edg. 1 know thee well; a serviceable villain, 


As duteous to the vices of thy mistress. 


As badness would desire. 


Glou. What, is he dead ? 
_ Edg. Sit you down, father; rest you.— 
Let’s see these pockets; the letters that he speaks of 255 


May be my friends. He’s dead; I am only sorry 


He had no other deathsman. 


Let us see. 


Leave, gentle wax; and, manners, blame us not. 
To know our enemies’ minds, we rip their hearts ; 


Their papers, is more lawful. 


260 


[Reads | Let our reciprocal vows be remembered. You have 


249. Upon the English] Upon the 
Britifh Qq, Cap. Jen. Mal. Steev. Bos. 
Coll. Sing. Sta. Wh. Ktly, Glo.+. Ox 
th’ English Han. 

249, 250. Upon...death !| As two half- 
lines, Cap. 

death! Death !| Cam. Wr. 
death! death. Qq. death, death, Ff. 
death, death— Rowe. death,— Pope, 
Han. death!—death! Jen. death! 
Theob. et cet. 

250, [Dies.] He dies. Qq (subs.). 
Om. Ff. 

252, 253. As duteous...desire.| One 
line, Q;. 

254-258. Four lines, ending pockets, 
... friends,...death{/man...not, Qq, Jen. 

254, 255. you.—Let’s] you lets Q.. 
you, lets Q.. 


254. [seating him at a Distance. Cap. 
255. these...the| Ff +, Cap. Knt, Dyce 
i, Glo.+, Sch. Azs...thefe Qq et cet. 
256. Jam] J’m Pope+, Jen. Dyce ii, 
Huds. 
sorry| forrow Q.. 
258. Leave] By your leave Rowe+. 
manners, blame| manners blame 
Qq. manners: blame Ff. manners— 
blame Rowe. manners. Blame Johns. 
258,259. not. To] not To Q.FF. not, 
To Q,, Rowe. mot: To Pope et cet. 
259. we] Ff+, Coll. Del. Sta. Wh. 
weed Qq. weld Cap. et cet. 
260. is] are FFF ,+. 
261. [Reads] “Reads the Letter. Ff, 
A Letter. Q,. Om. Q.. 
261-267. Seven lines, in italics, Q.. 
261. our] your Qq. 


249. English] See III, iv, 176. Knicut: This slight difference between the Qq 


and Ff proves one of two things: Either that upon the publication of the Folio the 
distinction between British and English, which was meant as a mark of compliment 
to James, had ceased to be regarded; or that the passage, having been written before 
his accession, had not been changed in the copy from which the Folio was printed, 
as it was changed in the copy of the play acted before the king in 1606. WHITE: 
‘English’ is a sophistication doubtless. Sh. must have known well enough that in 
Lear’s time there were no more Englishmen in Britain than in America. [See Ap- 
pendix, p. 379.] 

252, duteous] ScumipT: Constantly in Sh, equivalent to obsequious, obedient. 

257. deathsman] ScumipT: Edgar is sorry that he anticipated the hangman. 

260, Their... lawful] MaLone: The construction is: Zo rip their papers is 
more lawful. [See Ansorr, §§ 337, 395, and IV, ii, 11.] : 


— —?—e 


many Daetieibies to cut him off ; if your will want not, time 262 
and place will be fruitfully offered. There is nothing done, if 


KING LEAR 


he return the conqueror; then am I the prisoner, and his bed 
my gaol; from the loathed warmth whereof deliver me, and 265 


supply the place for your labour. 


. Your—wife, so I would say—affectionate servant, 
GoneRtL. 


~ O indistinguish’d space of woman’s will! 


263. done, if | done, Tf Q,. done: If 


Q.. done. If Ff, Rowe. 


264. conqueror; then] conguerour, 
then QqgF¥f. congueror. Then Pope+, 
jen. 

265. gaol] Gaole F,. Goale F,,. Goal 
Fj. gayle Q.. Tayle oO- 

“266. Jor your| of our ¥_F,, Rowe. 


34 
267. —wife...say—] In parentheses, 


Ff. wife (/o...say) your Q,. wife (fo... 


say) & your Q., Cap. Mal. Steev. Ec. 
Bos. 
267.: servant, | seruant and for you her 
owne for Venter, Q,. 
269. O] OAF, Of FFF, 
indistinguish’d | e,, Rowe, Wr. 
Sch. Indiftinguifht Q,. undiftinguifht 
Q.. indinguifh'd FFF.  undistin- 
guish’d Pope et cet. 
well | wit Qq, Pope. 


263. fruitfully] WRIGHT: Fully, plentifully. See Ad/’s Well, II, ii, 73: ‘Count. 
You understand me? C7. Most fruitfully.’ But this, in the mouth of the Clown, 
may have been an intentional blunder. 

267. servant] WHITE: Are we to conclude from [the text of Q,] that Goneril 
makes an allusion to what AZ Weller would call her second wenter, or, still more 
prospectively, uses a technical term better suited to the lips of Sergeant Busfuz ? 

267. MitForD (Gent. Mag. p. 469, 1844) says that ‘and for you her owne for 
Venter’ of Q, is only a corruption of and youre owne for ever. 

269. space] THEOBALD in his correspondence with WARBURTON (Nichols’s ///us. 
ii, 382), asks: ‘ Does [‘space’] mean, What a scofe more than we can discover, do 
women give themselves in pursuits of vice!’ This conjecture was not repeated in 
his edition. SINGER (Sh. Vindicated, &c. p. 275) suggests ‘“ undisguised scope of 
woman's will.” If we adopt wit of the Qq, we might read “wndisyudsed scape of 
woman’s wit.’”?? Whereupon Dyce (ed. i) remarks: ‘ Mr Singer offers a brace of 
conjectures, which I must take the liberty of saying he ought to have suppressed.’ 
The ‘ brace’ failed to appear in Singer’s subsequent edition. Voss conjectures pace, 
that is, ‘ How trifling, insignificant, is the step between a woman’s different wills!’ 
BAaILey (i, 110) thinks ‘we have only to reflect on what a man in Edgar’s position 
would be likely to say in order to arrive at the right reading.’ This simple process 
leads Bailey to the belief that 7zaze is the true word here. 

269. THEOBALD: The reading [of the Ff: ‘will,’ instead of aw7t of the Qq] gives 
us, as Mr Warburton observes to me, a most elegant Expression and most satirical 
Thought; more delicate than the ‘ varium et mutabile semper femina’ of Virgil. eibis 


not the Extravagance, but the Mutability, of a Woman’s Will that is here satiriz’d. - 


The Change of which (our Author would be understood to say,) is so speedy, that 


‘there is no Space of time, no Distance, between the present Will and the next; but 


it is an undistinguish’d Space. This Sentiment may not be ill explain’d further from 
what honest Sancho, in Don Quixote, with infinite Humour says upon the subject, 


25 * 


A plot upon her virtuous husband's life ; 
And the exchange, my brother !—Here, in the sands, 
Thee I'll rake up, the post unsan¢tified 

Of murderous lechers; and in the mature time 


27t. in the | in rhe F.. 7 ¢# Pope+, 273. lechers] treachers Clarke. 
Jen. ~. the mature| mature Pope, Han. 
272. the post] thou post Ed. conj. 


~ . < 


Entre el Si y el No de la muger, no me atreveria yo & poner una punta d’Alfiler. i 
Betwixt a Woman’s Yea, and Ao, I would not undertake to thrust a Pin’s Point. : ss 
Davigs: A vicious woman sets no bounds to her appetites. STEEVENS: O undis- 
tinguishing licentiousness of a woman’s inclinations! CoLLieR: Here, according to 
the (MS), we have a remarkable proof of mishearing. . . . The fact is that ‘ undis- 
tinguish’d’ ought to be wnextinguish’d, and ‘space’ d/aze ; thus taking ‘ will’ for 
disposition, the clear intention of the poet is to make Edgar exclaim against the 
unextinguishable fire or blaze of the appetite of woman, as illustrated by the letter 
and conduct of Goneril. Dyce: ‘ Undistinguish’d space’ means space whose limits 
are not to be distinguished. WHITE: That is, O, unmarked, boundless reach of 
woman’s will! Hupson: ‘ Undistinguish’d’ for undéstinguishadble, like ‘ unnum- 
bered’ for zxznzmerable. Woman’s will has no distinguishable bounds or no assign- 
able limits; there is no telling what she will-do or where she will stop. STAUNTON: 
Whatever may have been the original lection, it was plainly an exclamation against 
the indiscriminate caprice of woman as exhibited by Goneril in plotting against a 
virtuous husband's life merely to gain a villain like Edmund. We should perhaps 
read: ‘ wndistinguishable sense of woman’s will.’ WRIGHT: So wide-reaching [is 
a woman’s will] that its workings cannot be discovered. . . . Without calling in ques- 
tion the absolute truth of Sancho’s profound observation [as quoted by Theobald], it 
is at least allowable to doubt the propriety of applying it in the present case. Edgar’s 
astonishment is not at the fickleness and Caprice of Goneril, but at the enormous 
wickedness of the plot which her letter revealed. MoBERLY: The passage may be 
a reminiscence of Horace’s: ‘Cum fas atque nefas exiguo fine libidinum Discernunt 
avidi’ (Odes, I, xviii), which Mr Wickham renders: ‘ While in their greedy haste they 
divide right and wrong by the slender line of their own appetite;’ z.¢. ‘when the 
only distinction which they place between right and wrong is, that they desire the 
thing or not.’ So here Shakespeare’s idea seems to be that a woman’s will knows 
no limits between good and evil. ScHmipr: That is, ‘Oh undistinguishable range 
of the female appetite!’ Edgar is astonished that a woman can be found to prefer 
Edmund to the noble Albany, 

272. rake up] JoHNson: I’ll cover thee. In Staffordshire to rae the fire is to 
cover it with fuel for the night. ‘So ’tis in New England.—Hupson. Wricur: 
See Heywood’s Proverbs (Spenser Soc. ed., p. 48): ‘We parted, and this within a 
daie or twayne, Was raakt vp in thashes, and couerd agayne.’ 

272. unsanctified] STEEvENS: Referring to his lack of burial in consecrated 
ground. SCHMIDT: As ‘sanctified’? means holy, so ‘ unsanctified’? means profane, 
wicked, 


273. mature] Apnort, § 492: Apparently the accent is ‘mature.’ ‘ This is like 
nature, but I know of no other instance of ‘mature.’?? 


[Drum afar off. 
: etn me your hand; 

at off methinks, I hear the beaten drum; 
Come, father, I'll bestow you with a friend. [ Exeunt. 


~~ 
ao 


——- 275. death-practised | Hyphen, Ff. 282. [Re-enter Edgar. Cap. = 
: 276. thy] his Q.. [Drum afar off.] A drum a farre : P: 
[Exit Edgar, dragging out the off. Qq (subs.) Drum afarre off. (after 7 
Body. Cap. Buries Oswald Wh. line 280), Ff+,Jen. After hand Dyce. ¢ 
277. Two lines, Ff. 282, 283. Give...drum ;| One line, Q,. 4 
vilde| Q_F FF, vild Q,, Del.i, 284. Come, father,| Come further. 

Sch. vile F, et cet. Johns. 
280. seoprd| Jenced Qq, Jen. [Exeunt.] Exit. Qq. 

281. imaginations |imagination Johns. : 


275. death-practised] JoHNsonN: The duke of Albany, whose death is machi- 
nated by practice. 
278. ingenious] WARBURTON: That is, a feeling from an understanding not 
disturbed or disordered, but which, representing things as they are, makes the sense 
of pain the more exquisite. SINGER: Builokar gives, ‘Ingenious. Witty: quicke 
conceited,’ z. ¢. acute. ScHMIDT: ‘Ingenious’ exactly corresponds to conscious. 
279. distract] The -ed is omitted. See Ham. IV, v, 2. 


asleep, soft music playing; Gentleman, and others at- 
tending. 


Enter CorvELIA, KENT, and Doctor. = 


Cor, © thou good Kent, how shall I live and work, 
To match thy goodness? My life will be too short, 
And every measure fail me. 
Kent. To be acknowledged, madam, is o’erpaid. 
All my reports go with the modest truth, 5 
Nor more nor clipp’d, but so. 
Cor. Be better suited ; 
These weeds are memories of those worser hours ; 


Scene VII. A went in the French camp. Lear on a bed 


ScENE vit. ] Sceena Septima Ff (Scena 
F,F,). SceNE vi. Rowe, SCENE X. 
Pope+. 

A tent...camp.] Steev., afte: Cap. 


tleman. Ff. Enter Cordelia and Kent, 
Cap. 

1-3. O.....me.]| As in Rowe. Two 
lines, the first ending goodnes,Q,. Three 


A Chamber. Rowe. lines, ending Kevz,....goodneffe,....mé, 
Lear...asleep,] Steev., after Cap. Q,, Cap. Five lines, ending Kezz,... 
soft music playing,] Cap. conj., worke...goodneffe ?...fhort,...me, Ff. 

Dyce, Sta. Glo+. ; 2. My life| Life Pope+. 
Gentleman,..] Glo. Physician, 6-8. Be....of.| Two lines, the first 

Gentleman,... Cap. ending ¢ho/e, in Q.. 

Enter,..and Doctor.] Enter.,.and Gen- 


Enter... Doctor] MALONE: In the Ff all the speeches are given to ‘the Gen- 


tleman’ which in the Qq are divided between ‘the Physician’ and‘Gentieman.’ I 
suppose from a penury of actors it was found convenient to unite the two characters, 
which were originally distinct. COLLIER: It is singular that at this earier date [of 
the Qq] the more expensive course [z.¢. of having two actors, one for the Doctor 
and the other for the Gentleman] should have been pursued. 

3. Measure] JOHNSON: All good which I shall allot thee, or measure out to thee, 
will be scanty. BrcKET (Concordance): It here means effort, endeavour. 

4. is o’erpaid] Eccies: Perhaps it should be read: ‘’¢%s o’erpaid,’ that is, ‘in 


being acknowledged, ¢¢ is overpaid,’ ABBOTT, § 395: That is, ‘is (to be) o’erpaid’ 


SSL Ny by 
5. modest] See II, iv, 24. 
6. suited] STEEVENS: That is, be better dressed. 


7. weeds] WricuT: This dress. A.S. wéd, clothing. [Peck (Memoirs of | 


Milton, p. 228): Sir James Melvil (‘Scots ambassador to Q. Elizabeth’) says of 
that Queen’s clothes: ‘One day she had the English weed, another the French,’ &c. ] 

7- memories] STEEVENS: Memorials. Compare ‘O you memory Of old Sir 
Rowland,’ As You Like Jt, II, iii, 3. MALONE: Thus in Stowe’s Survey, &c., 1618 : 
‘A printed memorie hanging up in a table at the entrance into the church door, 


» put them off. 


Pardon, dear madam; 3 5, 
to he known shortens my made intent; 
My boon I make it, that you know me not 10 


___ Till time and I think meet. 

Cor. Then be’t so, my good lord.—How does the king? 

_ Dog. Madam, sleeps still. 

Cor. O you kind gods, 

Cure this great breach in his abused nature! __ 15 


Th’ untuned and jarring senses, oh, wind up 
Of this child-changed father! 


Doéi. So please your majesty ‘Gea 
8. Pardon] Pardon me Qgq, Jen. Steev. Han. Warb. Cap. 
Ec. Var. Coll. Del. Sing. Wh. Ktly, 12. [To the Physician. Theob. 
Glo+. " [Going towards the Bed. Cap. 
_ 4¥I,12. Zill.....s0] One line, Pope, 13, 17. Doét.] Gent. Ff. 
Theob. Han. Warb. T7i/....lord. One 13. sleeps] he sleeps Ktly. 
line, Rowe, Johns. Cap. Jen. Mal. Ktly. 14. O you kind | Kind Cap. 
Two lines, Ff, 14, 15. One line, Q.. 
eau 12. bet] beet Q,. bett Q,, Popet, 16. and jarring| and hurrying Qq. 
a Cap. Steev. Ec. Var. Knt, Sing. Ktly. 17. child-changed | child changed Q.. 
£ is so, my good lord.—How] fo my So please| Please Pope+. 
a good Lord: How Ff. fo, my good majesty] Maiefty, F, Majefty. 
4 - Lord how Q, fo: my Lord how Q.,. Pye. 
4 so. My lord, how Popei. so My lord— 17, 18. So...4ing ?] One line, Qq. 
—_ how Pope ii. so, My lord.—How Theob. 


9. made intent] WARBURTON: There is a dissonancy in terms in ‘ made intent’ ; 
one implying the idea of a thing done; the other, undone. I suppose Sh. wrote 
‘Jaid intent,’ z.e. projected. [Thus Warburton’s text.] JOHNSON: An intent made 
is an intent formed. So we say, in common language, to make a design, and to make 
a resolution. COLLIER: This is altered to ‘azm intent’ in the (MS); that is, my 
. chief purpose. There can be no doubt of its fitness, since all that could be extracted 
from ‘made intent’ was, that it was an intent formed. Kent says that he cannot 
change his dress, since he must, in that case, be known, which would defeat his chief 
purpose. [Thus Collier’s text.] Staunron: Collier’s (MS) proposes a very 
plausible change. 

17. child-changed] STEEvENs: That is, changed to a child by his years and his 
wrongs; or, perhaps, reduced to this condition by his children, HENLEY: Lear is 
become insane, and this is the change referred to. Insapity is not the property of 
second childhood, but dotage. MALoNnEe: Changed by his children. So care-craz’d, 
wave-worn, &c. DEtius conjectures that it may mean that he has exchanged chil- 
dren; that is, that he has left Regan and Goneril and come to Cordelia. Hat- 
LIWELL: A father changed by the conduct of his children, Cordelia offers the kind- 
ness of another child, to make restoration to what he was before he was altered by 
her sisters. ABBOTT, § 430, adopts Steevens’s view; that is, ‘ changed to a child,’ 


That we may wake the king? he hath sleptlong. 
Cor. Be govern’d by your knowledge, and proceed 
I’ th’ sway of your own will.—Is he array’d? 


Gent. Ay, madam; in the heaviness of ’ sleep 


We put fresh garments on him. 


Doct, Be by, good madam, when we do awake him ; 


I doubt not of his temperance. 


18. That] Om. Q,. 
hing ? he...long.| Han. king, He 
...dong. Q,. King He...long. Q,. King, 
he...long ? Ff. 
20. arrayd ?| arayd, Q,. = 
[Soft. music, Wh. 
[Enter Lear in a chaire carried 
by Seruants. Ff, Del. Sch. Om, Qq. 
21. Gent.] Doct. Qq, Coll. Del. Sing. 


\ 4 


ig OC) 7 Very me ’ 7 
* Doct. Please you, draw near.—Louder the music there!* 25 — 


‘<u 


Cap. Ec. Knt, Del. Dyce, Sta. Sch. of 
his fleepe Qq et cet. 

23. Doct.] Cap. (subs.), Wh. Glo. +. 
Gent. Q,. Kent. Q,, Coll. Del. Sing. 
Ktly.. Continued to Gent. or Phys. or 
Doct. Ff+, Jen. Sch. 

Be by, good madam] Good Madam 
be by Qgq, Coll. Sing. 

24. not] Om. F,F,. 


Ktly, Sch. Phys. Pope+, Jen. 


24, 25. Cor....chere /] Om. Fi+. 
7 of ’sleep| Ed. of sleepe Ff, Rowe+, } , 


20. Is he array’d ?] From this question DELIUs infers that the stage-direction of 
the Ff is correct, and that Lear is not on the stage at the opening of the scene. [But, 
if Lear be represented on or in a bed, Cordelia’s question is not inappropriate, or, 
if he be asleep, in a chair, swathed round with robes, the question might still be 
asked,—ED. ] 

21. of ’sleep] I think this is, probably, an instance of the absorption of his—Eb. 

25. Louder, ..there!] CapeLi: A noble thought of the poet’s in this editor’s 
judgement [z. ¢. Capell’s]; what he gathers [from these words] is this: that a soft 
‘music’ should ’be heard at the scene’s opening, and behind the bed, which is dis- 
tant; that this music had been Lear’s composer, and (together with his composure) 
his cure; that it is now call’d-to by the Doctor for the purpose of waking him, by 
such strains as were proper, rising gradually ; which is not a noble thought only, but 
just, and of good effect on the scene. 

25. music] BUCKNILL (p. 222): This seems a bold experiment, and one not un- 
fraught with danger, The idea that the insane mind is beneficially influenced by 
music is, indeed, an ancient and general one; but that the medicated sleep of insanity 
should be interrupted by it, and that the first object presented to the consciousness 
should be the very person most likely to excite profound emotion, appear to be ex- 
pedients little calculated to promote that tranquillity of the mental functions which is, 
undoubtedly, the safest state to induce, after the excitement of mania. A suspicion | 
of this may have crossed Shakespeare’s mind, for he represents Lear in imminent 
danger of passing into a new form of delusion. The earliest note of the employ- 
ment of music in the treatment of the insane is in the Bible (1 Sam. xvi) where 
David calmed Saul. ... Modern physicians appear to have little faith in its effects 
when simply listened to. Esquirol says,.‘I have often employed music, but very 
rarely obtained any success thereby. It calms and composes the mind, but does not 


in Lay reverence made! 


those violent cae de my two sisters 


Kind and dear princess! 

wr. Had you not been their father, these white flakes 30 
ee 5 challenge pity of them. Was this a face 

ho be opposed against the warring winds ? 


3 Tor stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder? 
*In the most terrible and nimble stroke 
POF quick, cross lightning ? to watch, poor perdu! 35 


26-29. O...made /] Three lines, end- 
ing “ips,...fifters,...made. Q,. Four lines, 
Sather,...lippes,...harmes...made. Q.. 

26. father, restoration] Ff (reftaura- 


tian F,), Huds. Sch. father reftoratio 


Q,. father, Reftoration Q,. father! 
Restoration Pope et cet. 
restoration hang| Restauration, 
hang Theob. Warb. Johns. Cap. Jen. 
Steev. Ec. Var. Coll. Sing. Sta. Wh. 
Ktly. 
27. Thy| Her Han. Jts So quoted 
by Mrs Jameson. 
[Kisses him. Johns. 
29. dear| dearest Theob. Warb. Johns. 


ffad challengd Q,. Had challeng’d Q, 
et cet. 
31. a face] face ¥,F,, Rowe, Pope, 
Han. Jen. 
32. opposed | expofd Qq, Pope+, Jen. 
Steev. Ec. Var. Coll. i, Sing. Ktly. 
warring| iarring F,. jarring 
PE! 5 Rowe, Knt, Sch. 
33-36. Zo...helm ?] Om. Ff, Rowe, 
Pope, Han. 
33. dread-bolted | Hyphen, Theob. 
35. lightning ? to| Asin Theob. “ight- 
ning toQ,. lightning, to Q,. 
watch, poor perdu!| Warb. 
watch poore Per du, Qq. watch poor 


Perdue: Theob. 


31. Did challenge| Ff+, Cap. Sch. 


cure. I have seen insane persons whom music rendered furious; ...I believe the 
ancients exaggerated the effects of music, while the facts recorded by modern writers 
| are not sufficiently numerous to determine under what circumstances it possibly may 
=~ be of benefit. This means of treatment, however, is precious, especially in con- 
a valescence, and ought not to be neglected, however indeterminate may be the prin- 
ciples of its application, and however uncertain may be its efficacy.’ 

26, restoration, &c.] WARBURTON: This is fine. She invokes the goddess of 
health, Hygieia, under the name of ‘ Restoration,’ to make her the minister of her rites, 
in this holy office of recovering her father’s lost senses. STEEVENS: ‘ Restoration’ 
is no more than recovery personified. Dertius: The construction is ‘Zef restoration 
hang,’ &c. ‘Thy medicine’ is Lear’s medicine, the medicine which is to restore 
him. - [This is also Hupson’s explanation, and clearly the true one.—Ep. ] 

33. dread-bolted] CowpEN CLarkKE calls attention to the number of compound 
words in this play. 

35. lightning] WALKER (Vers. 17) : Is not lightning’ a trisyllable? Pronounce, 
I think, ‘ pérdu;’ the flow of the verse shows this; and the instances I have met 
with of the use of the word mostly agree with this supposition. [Here follow many 
instances of pérdue (among them the line from The Little French Lawyer quove 


a 


-* With this thin helm?* Mine enemy’s dog, 


_ 


KING LEAR 


Though he had bit me, should have stood that night 
Against my fire; and wast thou fain, poor father, 
To hovel thee with swine and rogues forlorn, 


36. helm? Mine] helme mine Q,. enemy's Theob. Warb. Johns. Mine in- 
36-38. Mine... father,] Three lines,  jurer’s Cap. ; 
ending me,...fire,...father), Ff, Ending 36. dog] dog, even Ktly. 
shou'd.. fire :... father, Pope. 36-42. Mine...him,] Lines end showd 


36. Mine enemy’s| Pope. Mine Ene- .. -Wast,..SwWINE...StVAW ?...Wits,...WUARES y+ 
mies Ff. mine iniurious Qq. My very him. Han. (reading Alack / only once). 


below) and of ‘lightning’ as a trisyllable. See also to the same effect ABBOTT, 
§ 477. KEIGHTLEY’s text reads ‘lightening.’ ] 

35. perdu] REED: In Polemon’s Colection of Battels, bl. 1. p. 98, an account of 
the battle of Marignano is translated from Jovius, in which is the following passage: 
‘They were very chosen fellowes taken out of all the Cantons, men in the prime of 
youth, and of singular forwardenesse: who by a very auntient order of that country, that 
by dooyng some deede of passyng prowesse they may obtaine rare honour of warrefare 
before they be growen in yeares, doe of themselves request all perillous and harde 
pieces of service, and often use with deadlye praise to runne unto proposed death. 
These men do they call, of their immoderate fortitude and stoutnesse, the desperats 
forlorne hopen, and the Frenchmen exfaus gerdus: and it is lawfull for them, by the 
prerogative of their prowesse, to beare an ensigne, to have conducte and double wages 
all their life long. Neyther are the forlorne knowen from the rest by anye other 
marke and cognisance than the plumes of white feathers, the which, after the manner 
of captaines, they doe tourn behinde, waveryng over theyr shoulder with a brave kynde 
of riot.” Again, in Bacon’s Apology touching the late Earl of Essex, 1651, p. 105: 
‘—you have put me like one of those that the Frenchmen call Zxfans perdus that 
serve on foot before horsemen.’ WHALLEY: Amongst other desperate services in 
which the forlorn hope, or ezfans perdus, were engaged, the night-watches seem to 
have been a common one. So in Beau. and Fl.; ‘ These are trim things. I am set 
here like a Zerdu, To watch a fellow that has wrong’d my mistress.’—Zittle French 
Lawyer, Il, iii. WriGHT: Cotgrave says, ‘Enfans perdus. Perdus; or the forlorne 
hope, of a campe (are commonly Gentlemen of Companies).? MoBERLY: The mean- 
ing may be simply ‘poor lost one,’ [The CAMBRIDGE EDITION records pour perdu 
as a conjecture by Pye, but I think it is merely a misprint in the latter’s volume.—ED.] 

36. dog] Cottier: The misprint ofthe Qq: zmjurious for ‘enemy’s’ is quite as 
extraordinary as that of ‘runaways’ for enemies in Rom. & Ful. MITFORD (Gent. 
Mag. p. 469, 1844) conjectures that the Qq lead to the word that will supply the 
line, ‘Mine enemy's furious dog.’ VERPLANCK: The late J. W. Jarvis, the artist, 
used often to quote these lines as accumulating in the shortest compass the greatest 
causes of dislike to be overcome by good-natured pity. It is not merely the personal 
enemy, for whom there might be human sympathy, that is admitted to the family 
fireside, but his dog, and that a dog who had himself inflicted his own share of 
personal injury, and that too upon a gentle being from whom it was not possible that 
he could have received any provocation. 

39. rogues] WALKER, in his article ‘On Slave’ (Crit. ii, 308), cites this in proof 


ae) v Si 


" aw ii 
fe and musty straw? Alack, alack! 
_ ’Tis wonder that thy life and wits at once 
_ Had not concluded all_—He wakes; speak to him. 
_—- Doc?. ~Madam, do you; ’tis fittest. 
a, Cor. How does my royal lord? How fares your ma- 
jesty ? © . ’ 
_ Lear. You do me wrong to take me out o’ th’ grave; 45 b 
Thou art a soul in bliss; but Iam bound 
Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears 
_ Do scald like molten lead. 
Cor. = Sir, do you know me? 


41. thy] my FF, ' 44. Two lines, Ff. 
42. concluded all_— He] concluded all, 45. 0 th’) athQ,. awthQ,. 
he Q,. concluded.—Ah ! he Warb. 48. scald] /cal’d F,. 
43- Dott.] Gen. F,, Gent. FF,F,. do you know me?| know me. Q,. 
do you ;| do you speak, Han. know ye me? Q.. 


that ‘ rogue,’ like slave and vi//ain, was not originally an opprobrious term, but sig- 
nified properly vagrant. 

yt 40. short] Mozerty: If the reading is correct, ‘short’ must mean zvsufficient. 
; But may not divf have been the original? [lt is difficult to attach any meaning to 
a * ‘short’ that seems appropriate here; the word must be a misprint. Moberly’s con- 
jecture occurred independently to the present Ep. ] 

41. wonder] WricuT: Used for wonderful, just as in Bacon frequently we 
find ‘reason’ for ‘reasonable.’ See, for instance, Zssay xi, p. 39: ‘Nay, retire 
Men cannot, when they would; neither will they, when it were Reason.’ It 
occurs in Chaucer, Sguyeres Tale (1. 10562, ed. T. Wright): ‘Tho speeken they 
of Canacees ryng, And seyden alle, that such a wonder thing Of craft of rynges 
herd they never noon.’ Again, in the Knightes Tale, 1. 2075 (ed. Tyrwhitt): 
Ther saw I many another wonder storie.’ Compare ‘it is danger,’ 1. 79, for ‘it 
is dangerous.’ , 

42. all] For other instances of this adverbial use, see SCHMIDT s. v. 

47. fire] MoBerty: It would almost seem as if Sh. had borrowed the description 
of Lear’s reviving senses from what he had seen or known of in some one recov- 
ered from drowning. At any rate, the feelings of one thus returning to life, as 
described by Sir F. Beaufort, have striking points of resemblance: ‘A helpless 
anxiety seemed to press on every sense, and to prevent the fermation of any dis- 
tinct thought; and it was with difficulty that I became convinced I was really 
alive. Again, instead of being free from bodily pain, as in my drowning state, I 
was now tortured with pain all over me; and though I have often been wounded, 
and had to submit to severe surgical discipline, yet my sufferings at that time were 
far greater, at least in general distress.’—MARTINEAU, Biog. Sketches, p. 221. [Does 
Lear refer to physical pain ?—ED. ] 

47. that] For ‘that’ equivalent to so that, see Ham. IV, vi, 211, and IV, 
vii, 148. ; 

26 


we 
Lear, You area spirit, I know; when did you 
Cor. Still, still, far wide! 
Doct, He’s scarce awake; let him alone awhile. 
Lear. Where have I been? Where am 1? Fair day- 
light ? - 
I am mightily abused. I should e’en die with se 
To see another thus. I know not what to say. 
I will not swear these are my hands. Let’s see; 55, 
I feel this pin prick. Would I were assured 
Of my condition ! 
Cor, Oh, look upon me, sir, 
And hold your hands in benedi¢tion o’er me. 
* No, sir,* you must not kneel. 


Lear, en Pray, do not mock me; 
I am a very foolish, fond, old man, 60 
49. You are] Yar Q,. Yare Q,. Wh. Ktly. 
when] where Q.F,F,, Coll. i, Sch. 54. what to say| what Han. 
51. Dodt.] Gen. or Gent. Ff. 56, 57. J feel....condition] One line, 
51,52. Four lines, Ff. Qq. 
53. J anc] J’m Pope+, Jen.. Sta. 57-59. Of&,...kneel. 7] Prose, Qe 
Dyce ii, Huds. 57. upon) on Han. 
mightily| much Han. 58. hands] hand Ff+, Knt, Sch. 
een] ene Qq. evn FLF,, Sch. 59. Vo, siv,] Om. Ff, Rowe. 
even FF, Rowe, Theob. Warb. Johns. me] Om. Q,. 
Cap. Steev. Ec. Var. Coll. Del. Sing. 60. old man] old-man Ktly. 


49. when] Dyce (Remarks, 231): Where is all but nonsense, CoLttEr: It may 
appear to others no greater nonsense to ask a spirit ‘Where did you die?’ than 
‘When did you die?’ It is, as Cordelia says, ‘ Still, still far wide.’ 

53. abused] Jounson: I am strangely imposed on by appearances; I am in a 
strange mist of uncertainty. [See Ham. II, ii, 579: ‘Abuses me to damn me.’] 

58. benediction] Hupson: A parent’s curse was a dreadful thing among our 
foolish ancestors; and so Cordelia longs first of all to have her father revoke the 
curse he pronounced upon her in the opening of the play. She had not learned to 
act as if ‘a man were author of himself, and knew no other kin.’ 

59. kneel] Srervens: This circumstance I find in the old play of Aig Leir. 
As it is always difficult to say whether such accidental resemblances proceed from 
imitation, or a similarity of thinking on the same occasion, I can only point out this 
to the reader, to whose determination I leave the question. [See Appendix, p. 400.] 

60-75. Ray (p. 500): A more faithful picture of the mind, at the moment when 
it is emerging from the darkness of disease into the clear atmosphere of health 
restored, was never executed than this of Lear’s recovery. Generally, recovery from 
acute mania is gradual, one delusion after another giving away, until, after a series 
of struggles, which may occupy weeks or.months, between the convictions of reason 
and the suggestions of disease, the patient comes out a sound, rational man. Ina 


Yet 4 am doubtful : for IT am mainly ignorant 
_ What place this is, and all the skill I have 


_Remembers not these garments, nor I know not ; oS . 
Where I did lodge last night. Do not laugh at me; ss 
For, as Iam a man, I think this lady a 2 
To be my child Cordelia. : = 
a Cor. And sol am: Iam. 70 +6 


Lear. Be your tears wet? yes, faith. I pray, weep not. 


F 61, 62. Fourscore...plainly] Asin Knt. 65. for I am] for I’m Popet, Jen. 
Z Three lines, Ff. Two lines, ending w- Dyce ii, Huds. 

4 _ward....plainly, Rowe, Cap. Del. Sing. 67. nor I] nay I Pope+. 

3 _ Sch. 68. not] no Q,. 

4 61. Fourscore| Fourscore years Ktly, 70. Lam: Tam.|¥,. Tam.Qq. Tam: 
SS reading the rest as Qq. l am, DOS L am; I am— Rowe, 
4 ‘i not....less;| Om. (reading Four- Pope, Han. J am, I am.— Theob. 
* fcore...piainly as one line), Qq, Pope+, Warb. Johns. Jen. Zam, I am. Cap. 
3 Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. Ktly. et cet. 

E oe 62. plainly| plainly with you Han. 71. Be,..wet] One line, Ff. 

a 63. in my perfect| perfect in my Q,. pray| pray you Rowe+, Jen. 


small proportion of cases, however, this change takes place very rapidly. Within 
a the space of a few hours or a day he recognizes his true condition, abandons his 
delusions, and contemplates all his relations in an entirely different light. 

61. not...less] STEEVENS: The authenticity of this passage Sir Joshua Rey- 
nolds justly suspects. It was probably the interpolation of some player, and is better 
omitted, both in regard to sense and versification. RITSON agrees with Steevens, and 
adds ‘foolish’ before ‘player.’ MALONE says that the Folio’s ‘absurd’ addition 
means ‘not an hour more or less than an indeterminate number, for such is fourscore 
and upward.’ KNIGHT denounces the omission of this phrase as a sacrilege not less 
than the breaking off of a limb from an ancient statue. ‘Why, who is speaking? 
One who speaks logically and connectedly? No! one who immediately after says, 
«JT fear J am not in my perfect mind.”’. It was the half-consciousness of the “ fool- 
ish, fond old man” which Sh. meant to express by the mixture of a determinate and 
an indeterminate idea.’ WALKER (Vers. 156): The words are nonsense, it is true, 
but are they out of place in the mouth of Lear? Hupson: The nonsense of them, 
indicating, as it does, some remains of Lear’s disorder, is the very reason why they 
should be retained, 

70. Iam: I am.] CowpEn CLARKE: Never surely was the passionate weeping 
of a reticent woman more perfectly expressed in brief written words than these and 
the ‘No cause, no cause’ that follow. They so admirably portray the suppressed 
weeping natural to such a character as Cordelia’s; concentrated and undemonstra- 
tive, yet intensely loving and earnest. 


304. KING 


_ Till further settling! 


If you have poison for me, I will drink it. 
I know you do not love me; for your sisters 
Have, as I do remember, done me wrong; 
You have some cause, they have not. 

Cor, aes 
Lear. Am I in France? _ 
ens. i In your own kingdom, sir. 

Lear. Do not abuse me. - 

Doct, Be comforted, good madam; the great rage, 
You see, is kill’d in him; * and yet ’tis danger 
* To make him even o’er the time he has lost.* 80 
Desire him to go in; trouble him no more 


No cause, no cause. 7G 2 


74. me] we F,. curd Han. cured in him Qqetcet. 
75. not] none Han. 79, 80. and...lost.| Om. Ff, Rowe, 
77. me.| me? Q,. _ Pope, Han. : 

78. Doct.] Gent. Ff, 79. ’tts] Jen. Ktly, Dyce ii, Huds. 


78-82. Be...settling.| Theob. Prose, Sch. ?¢were Theob, Warb. Johns. ¢ zs 
Qq. Three lines, ending vage...ga im,... Qq et cet. 


JSetling. Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 80. even] even go Ktly. 
79. kill’d in him] Ff, Rowe, Knt, he has| h’as Theob. Warb. Johns. 


Del. Dyce, Sta. Glo.+, Coll. iii, Sch. 81. trouble] And trouble Pope, Han. 


79. kill’d] CoLLieR: Que//’d was perhaps the poet’s word, and gze//’d and ‘ kill’d” 
in most systems of short-hand, would be spelt with the same letters. 

80. even o’er] WARBURTON: That is, to reconcile it to his apprehension, STEE- 
VENS: I believe Warburton’s explanation is just. The poor old king had nothing to 
tell, though he had much to hear. The speaker’s meaning, therefore, I conceive to 
be—it is dangerous to render all that passed during the interval of his insanity, even 
(z. e, plain or level) to his understanding, while it continues in its present state of 
uncertainty. COLLIER: We may suspect some corruption, but the meaning is evi- 
dent, and no alteration absolutely required. Hupson: This means, ¢ry ¢o account for 
the time, or to make the last day of his remembering tally or fit with the present. 
DELIus prefers to consider ‘even’.as an adjective rather than as a verb, ScHMIDT 
(Lex. s. v. even, adj. 7): That is, to give a full insight into, a clear perception of. 
WricuT: To smooth over, render what had passed unbroken in his recollection. 
The sense is the same [whether it be taken as an adj. or as a verb], but it seems pre- 
ferable to consider it as a verb. The danger consisted rather in allowing Lear’s 
mind to exert itself in recalling the past than in telling him what had happened. 
ScHMIDT: A verb fo even equivalent to ¢o smooth is not to be found in Sh. 

82. settling] BRIGHAM (Am. Four. of Insanity, July, 1844): We confess, almost 
with shame, that, although near two centuries and a half have passed since Sh. thus 
wrote, we have very little to add to his method of treating the insane as thus pointed 
out. To produce sleep, and to quiet the mind by medical and moral treatment, to 
avoid all unkindness, and, when patlenr begin to convalesce, to guard, as he directs, 


Cor. Will t please your highness walk ? 
Lear. You must bear with me. 


Pray you now, forget 


and forgive; I am old and foolish. 85 
| [Exeunt all but Kent and Gentleman. 
* Gent. Holds it true, sir, that the Duke of Cornwall 


* was so slain? 
* Kent. Most certain, sir. 


* Gent. Who is conduétor of his peGes ? 
* Kent. As ’tis said, the bastard son of Gloucester. go 
* Gent. They say Edgar, his banished son, is with the 


* Earl of Kent in Germany. 


_* Kent. Report is changeable. 


’Tis time to look about; 


*the powers of the kingdom approach apace. 
* Gent. The arbitrement is like to be bloody. Fare you 9s 


* well, sir. 


‘Exit. 


* Kent. My point and period will be throughly wrought, 
* Or well or ill, as this day’s battle’s fought. ©) bla 


83. Will’t] Rowe. Wilt QqFf, Cap. 

(corrected in Errata). 
your) you F,. 

84. Pray you] Pray Qa. 

84, 85. You...foolish.] Prose, Q., Cam. 
Wr. Three lines, ending me -...forgiue, 
.. foolifh, in Q,Ff+, Jen. Two lines, 
the first ending me. Cap. et cet. 

85. Lam] Z’m Dyce ii, Huds, 

[Exeunt...] Exeunt. Manet Kent 
and Gent. Qq (subs.) Exeunt. Ff. 

86-98. Om. Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 

86-96. Holds...sir.| Lines end sz7,... 


sir....said,...Edgar,...Kent,....changeable 


ass hingdom.....arbitrement.....sir. Cap. 
Panmesw ends S275.0.-S27.-SOUL ys20. LL ALQT yunay 


Kent,....changeable.....Ringdom....apacesn. 
bloody...sir. Steev. Bos. Knt, Sing. 


86. that] Om. Cap. 

90. As ’tis|’ Tis Cap. As it ds Mal, 
Ec. 

93-96. Lines end adout,...apace...fir. 


q. 
95. The] And the Cap. 
bloody | most bloody Cap. a bloods 
Steev. Bos. 
96. [Exit.] Exit Gent. Theob. Om, 


q- 
- 97. throughly] thoroughly Wh. 
98. battle’s| Theob. battels Qq. 
[Exit.] Exit Kent. Theob. Om. 


Q.: 


against anything likely to disturb their minds and to cause a relapse, is now consid- 
ered the best and nearly the only essential treatment. 

83. walk] ScHmipr: That is, go, withdraw. [See III, iv, Irt.] 

85. CoLERIDGE: How beautifully the affecting return of Lear to reason, and the 
mild pathos of his speeches, prepare the mind for the last sad, yet sweet, consolation 


of the aged sufferer’s death ! 


86-98. JoHNson: What is omitted in the Ff is at least proper, if not necessary ; 
and it was omitted by the author, I suppose, for no other reason than to shorten the 


representation. 


MALone: It is much more probable that it was omitted by the 


players, after the author’s departure from the stage, without consulting him. [See 


Appendix, Zhe Text.] 
26% 


Scene I. Zhe British camp near Dover. 
Enter, with drum and colours, EDMUND, REGAN, Gentlemen, and Soldiers. 


Edm. Know of the duke if his last purpose hold, Ms 
Or whether since he is advised by aught z 
To change the course. He’s full of alteration 


And self-reproving. Bring his constant pleasure. ; 
[To a Gentleman, who goes out. ce 
x Reg. Our sister’s man is certainly miscarried. The : 
G Edm. ’Tis to be doubted, madam. — 
nll Reg. Now, sweet lord, ‘ 


oe ee 


You know the goodness I intend upon you; 
Tell me,—but truly,—but then speak the truth, 


Do you not love my sister? 
Ldm., 


In honour’d love. a 


Reg. But have you never found my brother’s way 10 


To the forfended place ? 
fe dae: 


That thought abuses you. 
I am doubtful that you have been conjunét 


* And bosom’d with her, as far as we call hers.* 


Acr V. Scene 1.] Actus Quintus, 
Scena Prima Ff (Sczena F,). 

The British...] Cap. (subs.) A 
Camp. Rowe. 

Enter...] Ff. Enter Edmund, Regan, 
and their powers. Qq. Enter Bastard, 
Regan, Gentlemen, and Soldiers. Rowe. 
Enter Edmund, Regan, Gentleman and 
Soldiers. Warb. E 

2. aught} Theob. ought QqFf. 

3. course.| Coll. courfe, QqFf. course ? 
Pope+, Jen. 

ffe’s| he is Q.. 
alteration] abdication Q,. 
4. self-reproving| Hyphened in Q,. 


Selfereprouing F,. 


4. self-reproving. Bring] self-reprov- 

ing brings Pope. 
[To...] Glo, To an Officer; who 

bows, and goes out. Cap. Om. QqFf. 

8. me,—but truly,—] Johns. me but 
truly, Q.Ff+. me truly Q,. me, but 
truly, Cap. 

9. Zn] 7,Q,. LQ. Ay, in Anon.* 

10-14. Om. Johns. 

11. forfended | fore-fended Ff. 

11-13. Edm....zers.] Om. Ff+. 

12, 13. Lam.,.hers.] Prose, Q,. 

12-14. £...madam] Om, Cap. 


4. constant pleasure] JoHNsoN: His settled resolution. See ‘constarit will,’ 


I, 1,43, 


6. doubted] Scumipr (Zex.): That is, feared, suspected. [So also ‘ doubtful,: 


line 12. ] 


- 14. madam] Om. Pope, Han. 


No, by mine honour, madam. 


big Reg. never shall endure her. Dear my lord, 15 
Be not familiar with her. 


Edm. Fear me not— 


_ She and the duke her husband! 


_ Enter, with drum and colours, ALBANY, GONERIL, and Soldiers. 


Gon. [Aside] 1 had rather lose the battle than that sister 
= hae loosen him and me.* 
Alb. Our very loving sister, well ee 20 
Sir, this I hear: the king is come to his daughter, 


With others whom the rigour of our state 


Forced to cry out. * Where I could not be honest, 
*T never yet was valiant; for this business, 


in Q,. Om. Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. 
18. [Aside] First by Theob. 
L had| I’d Theob. Warb. Johns. 
lose] Theob. oofe Qq. 
sister] my sister Ktly. 


19. loosen] cofin Q,. 


15,16. / never...her,| Prose, Q,. Two 
lines, the first ending endure her in Q,. 

16, 17. Fear....husband| Cap. One 
line, QqFf+, Jen. 

16. me] Om. FF+. 


17. husband !| Del. Dyce, Glo.+, 
Huds. husband. QqFf, Sing. Sch. hus- 
band— Rowe et cet. 

Enter...and Soldiers.] Enter...Sol- 
diers. Ff. Enter Albany and Gonorill 
with troupes. Qq. 

18, 19. Gon. Z..me.] Theob. Prose, 
Q,- Two lines, the first ending da¢tell, 


20. be-met] be met QF, Rowe +, Cap. 
Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. Knt. 

21. Sir, this I heard| ¥f, Rowe, Pope, 
Han. Knt, Dyce i, Sch. for this I 
heare Qq. Sir, this I hear Theob. et 
cet. ’Fore this, I hear, Mal. conj. 

23-28. Where...nobly.| Om. Ff. 

24. for] ‘fore Theob. 


3 
z 
. 
> 
j 
2 
4 
F 


15. endure] Dettus: That is, I never shall suffer her to be so intimate with you. 

20. be-met] Axport, § 438: In participles, de-, like other prefixes, is often redun- 
dant, and seems to indicate an unconscious want of some substitute for the old 
participial prefix. WricutT: The prefix here has apparently no_ force whatever. 
ScHMIDT: Only found here, and perhaps cvined by Sh. 

24-27. for... oppose] THEOBALD (followed by WARBURTON and JOHNSON) 
represents this speech as broken off by Edmund’s interruption, and therefore has 
merely a comma and a dash after ‘oppose.’ He also supposes that ‘for’ is a con- 
traction of defore, and prints it ’fore, and thus paraphrases the whole sentence: 
‘Before We fight this Battle, Sir, it concerns me, (tho’ not the King, and the discon- 
tented Party;) to question about your Interest in our Sister, and the Event of the 
War. He adds: ‘And Regan and Gonerill, in their Replies, both seem apprehen- 
sive that this Subject was coming into Debate.’ WARBURTON pronounces it ‘a very 
plain speech,’ and gives the meaning thus: This quarrel is just in one sense and 
unjust in another. As France invades our land, I am concerned to repel him, but as 
he Aolds, entertains and supports the king, and others whom I fear many just and 


~ * Jt toucheth us, as France invades our land, 


¢ 


KING LEAR 


* Not bolds the king, with others, whom, I fear, 


*Most just and heavy causes make oppose. * ks 
* Edm. Sir, you speak nobly.* a: 
Reg. Why is this reason’d? 


Gon. Combine together ’gainst the enemy ; 


For these domestic and particular broils 30 


25. toucheth| touches Q,. 

26. Wot.....others| Not the old king 
with others, or Not holds with the king, 
and others or Upholds the king and 
others Mason. 

26, 27. JVot....oppose| In parenthesis, 


26,27. with...oppose| Om. Sing. Ktly. — 
27. oppose.| oppose,— Theob, Warb. 
Johns. 
28, Edm. Sir,....zobly.| Om. Pope, 
Han. 
nobly| odly or coldly Mason. 


Theob. 30. and particular broils| dore par- 
26. bolds| holds Pope+, Jen. holds ticulars Q,. doore particulars, Q.. 
to Han. holds for Cap. Ec. particular) particurlar Fy. 
king, | king ; Mal. Steev. Bos. Knt. 


‘ heavy causes make, or compel, as it were, to oppose us, I esteem it unjust to engage 


against them. CAPELL thus paraphrases: ‘As for this business,—it toucheth us as 
France invades our kingdom, not as ke holds for the king, 2 conjunction with the 
others whom,’ &c. STEEVENS: This business touches us as France invades our 
land, not as z# ‘ bolds the king,’ 2. e. emboldens him to assert his former title. Thus 
in the ancient interlude of Hycke Scorner: ‘ Alas, that I had not one to do/d me!’ 
Again, in Hall’s trans. of the Fourth Ziad, 1581: ‘ And Pallas bolds the Greeks,’ &c. 
[As WRIGHT observes, Steevens is wrong here; it is not ‘this business’ that ‘ bolds 
the king,’ but ‘ France,’ as Warburton and Capell have justly interpreted it. Fora 
long list of verbs like ‘bolds’ formed from nouns and adjectives, see ABBOTT, 
§ 290.—Ep.] CAMBRIDGE EpiTors: ‘ Not bolds the king’ is usually interpreted as 
an elliptical phrase for ‘Not as it emboldens the king.’ This is, however, a very 
harsh construction, and the word ‘bolds’ occurs nowhere else in Sh. with this 
meaning, though we have, according to the most probable reading, ‘dear’d’ for 
‘endear’d’ in Ant. & Cleop. I, iv, 44. Possibly these words are corrupt and a line 
has dropped out before them. Albany ought to say something of this kind: ‘I 
should be ready to resist any mere invader, but the presence in the invader’s camp 
of the king and other Britons, who have a just cause of enmity to us, dashes my 
courage,’ 

28. nobly] CAPELL: Edmund’s reply is irony, and his ‘nobly’ a trisyllable. 
WALKER ( Vers. 12) says that ‘nobly’ is not a fair instance of the expansion of a 
dissyllable into a trisyllable, like ‘angry, ‘children,’ &c., because ‘nobly’ is con- 
tracted from modlely. ABBOTT, 3 477, cites it under that head. 

30. particular] MALONE: Doore or dore of the Qq was probably a misprint for 
dear, i.e, important. STEEVENS: ‘Door particulars’ signify, I believe, particulars 
at our very doors, close to us, and consequently fitter to be settled at home, COLLIER: 
The text of the Qq is impossible to strain to a meaning unless we suppose door mis- 
printed for oor, MITFORD (Gen¢. Maga. p. 469, 1844): In ‘ doore particulars’ of 
the Qq the @ is only a Z reversed. Read then, ‘these domestic poore particulars.’ 


‘the auestion Fey 


Let’s then determine 31 
With th’ ancient of war on our proceeding. 


* Edm, J shall attend you presently at your tent.* 
Reg. Sister, you'll go with us? 


Gon. “No. 35 
meer. Tis most convenient; pray you, go with us. 
Gon, [Astde]| Oh, ho, I know the riddle.—I will go. 
As they are oa. out, enter EDGAR aed 
Edg. If e’er your grace had speech with man so poor, 
Hear me one word. 
Alb, T’ll overtake you.— 
[Exeunt all but Albany and Edgar. 
Speak. 
Ldg. Before you fight the battle, ope this letter. 40. 


If you have victory, let the trumpet sound 
For him that brought it; wretched though I seem, 
T can produce a champion that will prove 


31. the] to Qq, Cap. Steev. Var. Sing. 
Kily. 
Let’s| Let vs Qq, Steev. Var. Coll. 


‘Del. Wh. 


31, 32. Let’s...proceeding.| Prose, Q,. 
First line ends warre, Ff+, Knt. 

32. th’ ancient| Ff+. the auntient 
Q.. the Ancient Q,. th’ ancients Han. 
the ancient Cap. et cet. 

proceeding| Ff+, Cap. Knt, Del. 
Wh. Sch. proceedings Qq et cet. 

33. Edm. JZ shall.....cent.] Om. Ff, 
Rowe, Pope. Transferred to follow 
here, line 31, Theob, Warb. 

36. pray you] pray Ff, Rowe, Pope, 


Han, Sch. 

37. Oh...riddle] As ‘ Aside’ by Cap. 

The whole line as ‘ Aside,’ Han. Johns. 

As....disguised.] Theob. Enter 
Edgar. Q,. Exit. Enter Edgar. Q. 
Exeunt both the Armies. Enter Edgar, 
Ff. Exeunt. SCENE 11. Manet Albany, 
Enter Edgar. Pope+, Jen. As they are 
going out, and Albany last, Enter Ed- 
gar. Cap. 

38. man] one Q,. 

39. [Exeunt....] Exeunt Edm, Reg. 
Gon. and Attendants. Theob. Exeunt. 
(after word), Q,. Om. Q,FF. 

42. wretched] wretch FFF. 


32. ancient of war] Eccies: With such as are grown old in the practice of the 
military art. WALKER (Crit. iii, 283): Possibly ‘th’ ancient mem of war.’ [SCHMIDT 
suggests the same.] ABBOTT, § 479, thus scans: ‘ With th’ 4n|ciént|of war|on éur| 
procéedings.’ WRIGHT: The line is metrically defective and may be corrupt. Mo- 
BERLY: As we should say with the Adjutant-General. The word is derived from 
the Italian ‘anziano,’ but seems to have got confused in English with ‘ ensign,’ as a 
Yorkshireman speaks of ‘the ancient of yon vessel.’ 

37. riddle] MoperLty: You want me with you only that you may keep watch 


over all my dealings with Edmund. 


The 


~ What is avouched there. If you miscarry, 


y 


Your business of the world hath so an end, 
And machination ceases. Fortune love you! 

Alb. Stay till I have read the letter. 

it Ss I was forbid it. 
When time shall serve, let but the herald cry, ~ 
And I'll appear again. <a ; 

Alb, Why, fare thee well. I will o’erlook thy paper. 505 
[Exit Edgar. 
Ke-enter EDMUND. ; 


Edm. The enemy’s in view; draw up your powers. 
Here is the guess of their true strength and forces 
By diligent discovery ; but your haste ~ 7 
Is now urged on you. ; 
Alb. We will greet the time. | Ext. 
_ Edm. To both these sisters have I sworn my love ; 55 
Each jealous of the other, as the stung 


46. And...ceases.] Om. Qq. 
love lowes Ff, Rowe. 
47. have] I’ve Pope+, Jen. Sta. 
Dyce ii, Huds, 


52. Here] Hard Qq, Pope+. 
guess| queffe Q,. 
true] great Qaq, Jen. 

53, 54. By...you.] One line, Qq. 


47-49. J was...again.| Prose, Q.. 
50. L...paper| Separate line, Walker 
(Crit. iii, 283). 
oerlook| looke ore Q,. 
thy] the Qq. 
[Exit Edgar.] Dyce. Exit. (after 
again, line 49), QqFf. 
Re-enter..] Theob. Enter.. QqFf. 
51. enemy's] enemies Q,. LEnemy’es 


3° 


53. 4aste] haft QgFi. 
giving a paper. (after discovery), 
Jen. Showing a paper. Coll. iii. 
54. [Exit.] Om. Q.. 
55. SCENE 111. Pope+, Jen. 
sisters| fifter Q,. 
56-58. Each...enjoy’d,| Two lines, the 
first ending Adder, Q,. Three lines, end« 
ing Adder,...one...enioy’'d, Q.. 


56. stung] fling Qq. 


45. of ] For instances of ‘of’ in the sense of ‘as regards,’ see ABBOTT, § 173, or 
‘of our demands Most free in his reply,’ Ham. IIT, i, 13. 

46. machination] JoHNson: All designs against your life will have an end. 

53. discovery] Wricut: Reconnoitring. Compare JZacé. V, iv, 6, ‘make dis- 
covery Err in report of us,’ and Ant. & Cleop. IV, xii, 2. 

53, 54. but... you] Hearn: But the urgency of the present exigence will allow 
you but a short time for the perusal of it. CoLLieR: It appears from the (MS) that 
Edmund did not give, but showed, a paper to Albany. ScHMipT paraphrases: the? 
need, that you be not dilatory now falls to you. Hitherto you have let me do every- 
thing (witness the reconnoitring just finished), now you yourself must act. 

54. time] JoHNSON: We will be ready to greet the occasion. 

56. jealous] Drttus: Suspicious.. WRIGHT: Cotgrave gives ‘Ialoux: m. ouse; f, 
Jealous; mistrustful, suspicious.’ In Lowland Scotch ‘to jalouse’ is ‘to suspect.’ 


+ «= 
7 


ING LEAR 


° adder, _ Which of them shall T take ? 57 
one? or neither? Neither can be enjoy’d, 


ei ‘both remain alive. To take the widow 


_ Exasperates, ‘makes mad her sister Goneril ; 60 


And hardly shall I carry out my side, 


ae 


Her husband being alive. Now then we’ll use 

_ His countenance for the battle; which being done 
Let her who would be rid of tet devise 

His speedy taking off. As forthe mercy _ 65 
Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia,— 

The battle done, and they within our power, 

Shall never see his pardon; for my state 


’ 


58. Both? one ?] both one Qq. 66. intends] entends Q,. extends Q,. 
64. who] that Qq. 68. Shall never| They shall ne'er 
65. the] Ais Qq. Han. They shall never Ktly. 


61. side] Mason: ‘I shall scarcely be able to make out my game.’ The allusion 
is to a party at cards, and he is afraid that he shall not be able to make his side suc- 
cessful. Thus, in Massinger’s Unnatural Combat [11, i] Belgarde says, ‘if now, At 
this downright game, I may but hold your cards, I’ll not pull down the side.’ Again, 
in the Zhe Maid’s Tragedy [II,i]: ‘Zvad. Aspatia take her part. Dz/a. I will 
refuse it; she will pluck down a side; she does not use it.’ But the phrase is still 
more clearly explained in Massinger’s Great Duke of Florence [IV, ii]: ‘If I hold 


your cards, I shall pull down the side; I am not good at the game.’ GIFFORD, in a 


note on the passage in Zhe Unnatural Combat, says: The allusion is to a party at 
cards; to set up a side was to become partners in a game; to pull, or pluck down a 
side (for both these terms are found in our old plays), was to occasion its loss by 
ignorance or treachery. To this Dyce (Géoss.) adds: ‘and to carry out a side was 
to carry out the game with success.’ WHITE: The phrase should hardly need ex- 
planation as long as people take sides in games and in earnest. To WALKER (Crit. 


iii, 283) this phrase, strangely enough, seems to have been unfamiliar; he terms 


‘side’ nonsense, adding < szé/e, I suppose.’ LrrTsoM, in a foot-note, says: ‘If Walker 
is right, “ carry out’? is used almost in the new-fangled sense common of late years, 
It seems to have nearly the same meaning in the passage quoted by Steevens from 
The Honest Man's Fortune, \V, ii [Beau. and Fl. p. 424, ed. Dyce], ‘thy greatness 
may... carry out A world of evils with thy title.’ 

67. ABBOTT, § 411, thinks this a confusion of two constructions (like IV, vi, 33), 
viz: ‘Jet the battle de done, and they’ and ‘the battle (being) done, they.’ But 
WRIGHT gives a simpler explanation, that the nominative to ‘shall’ is omitted, as is 
frequently the case in sentences where the omission causes no obscurity. Of this 
omission there are numberless instances in Sh. See Lear II, ii, 114; II, iv, 41; 
Ham. Il, ii, 67; IIT, i, 8. 

68. for my state] Jonson: I do not think that ‘for’ stands here as a word of 
inference or causality. The meaning is rather: as for my state, it requires now, not 
deliberation, but defence and support, WRIGHT thinks ‘for’ can be taken in either 


sense. 


Scene II. A field between the two camps. 


Alarum within. aside with drum and colours, LEAR, CORDELIA, and Soldiers) 
over the stage; and exeunt. ae. 


Enter EDGAR and GLOUCESTER. 


Edg. Here, father, take the shadow of this tree 
For your good host; pray that the right may thrive; 
If ever I return to you again, 
I’ll bring you comfort. 
Glou. Grace go with you, sir! [ait Edgar. 


Alarum and retreat within, Re-enter EDGAR. 


Edg. Away, old man; give me thy hand; away! 5 


King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta’en. 
Give me thy hand; come on. 


SCENE 11.] Scena Secunda Ff (Scena 4. [f...comfort.| One line, Q.. 
F_). ScENE Iv. Pope+, Jen. 4. go| be FF .+. 

Av field...] Gap: (subs:)) A’ Field. [Exit Edgar.] Pope. Exit. QqFf 
Rowe. Another open Field. Theob. (after comfort Qq). 

Alarum within. Enter...] Alarum. Alarum...] Alarum and retreat. 


Enter the powers of France ouer the Qq. 
ftage, Cordelia with her father in her Re-enter...] Theob. Enter... Q, 
hand. Qq. Ff. Om. Q,. 

1. tree] buf/h Qq, Jen. ; 


69. defend] Rusuton (Lex Scripta, p. 77) thinks that this is used in the old 
sense of ‘to command.’ 

4. Exit Edgar] Spenpine (New Sh. Soc. Trans. Part I, p. 15, 1877-79): Sus- 
picious as I am of all criticisms which suppose a want of art in Shakespeare, I could 
not but think that there are faults in Azzge Lear, I could not but think that in the 
last two Acts the interest is not well sustained; that Lear’s passion rises to its full 
height too early, and his decay is too long drawn out. I saw that in Shakespeare’ s 
other tragedies we are never called on to sympathise long with fortunes which are 
desperate. As soon as all hope for the hero is over, the general end follows rapidly. 
The interest rises through the first four Acts towards some great crisis; in the fifth 
it pauses for a moment, crests, and breaks; then falls away in a few short, sad scenes, 
like the sigh of a spent wave. But it was not so in Lear. The passion seemed to 
be at its height, and hope to be over, in the third Act. After that, his prospects are 
too forlorn to sustain an interest sufficiently animating; the sympathy which attends 
him too dreary and depressing to occupy the mind properly for half the play. I felt 


: on 


a, 


a 


313 


[4. Spedding’s Division of Acts.] 
the want of some coming event, some crisis of expectation, the hope or dread of 
Some approaching catastrophe, on the turn of which his fortunes were yet to depend, 
There was plenty of action and incident, but nothing which seemed to connect itself 
sufficiently with 47m. The fate of Edgar or Edmund was not interesting enough; 
it seemed a separate thing, almost an intrusion upon the proper business of the play. 
I cared only about Lear. But, though this seemed to be a great defect, I was aware 
that the error might be in me; I might have caught the play in a wrong aspect, and 
I waited in the hope of finding some new point of view round which the action 
would revolve more harmoniously. In the mean time, there was another defect, of 
less moment, as I then thought, but so striking that I could not be mistaken in pro- 
nouncing it indefensible upon any just principle of criticism. This_was the battle in 
the fifth Act; a most momentous battle, yet so carelessly hurried over that it comes 
to nothing, leaves no impression on the imagination, shocks the sense of probability, 
and by its own unimpressiveness makes everything insignificant that has reference 
to it. It is a mere blank, and, though we are Zo/d that a battle has been fought and 
lost, the mind refuses to take in the idea. How peculiarly important it was to avoid 
such a defect in this particular instance, I had not then observed; I was struck only 
with the harshness, unexampled in Shakespeare, of the effect upon the eye of a spec- 
tator. In other cases a few skilful touches bring the whole battle before us—a few 
rapid shiftings from one part of the field to another, a few hurried greetings of friend 
or foe, a few short passages of struggle, pursuit, or escape, give us token of the 
conflict which is raging on all sides; and, when the hero falls, we feel that his army 
is defeated. A page or two does it, but it is done. As a contrast with all other 
battles in Shakespeare, observe that of which I am speaking. Here is the whole 
scene as it stands in the modern editions. [The first seven lines of this scene quoted, 
with all the stage-directions.] This is literally the whole battle. The army so long 
looked for, and on which everything depends, passes over the stage, and all our hopes 
and sympathies go with it. Four lines are spoken. The scene does not change; but 
*alarums’ are heard, and ‘afterwards a retreat,’ and on the same field over which 
that great army has this moment passed, fresh and full of hope, reappears, with 
tidings that all is lost, the same man who last left the stage to follow and fight in it. 
That Shakespeare meant the scene to stand thus, no one who has the true faith will 
believe. Still less will he believe that, as it stands, it can admit of any reasonable 
defence. When’ Mr Macready brought out the play at Covent Garden, in 1839, he 
endeavored to soften the harshness of the effect by two deviations from the text. 
The French army did not pass over the stage, and so some room was left for imag- 
ining the battle already begun; and, during the absence of Edgar, five or six lines, 
transferred from a former scene, were put in the mouth of Gloster, by which some 
little time was given for its disastrous issue. Both these alterations are improvements 
on the text as it now stands, so far as they go, but they certainly go a very little way ; 
and I think nobody can have seen the play, as then acted, without feeling that the 
effect of that scene was decidedly bad. When I saw it myself, the unaccountable 
awkwardness of this passage struck me so forcibly that I tried to persuade myself 
(all other appearances notwithstanding) that the play must have been left in an un- 
finished state. I had almost succeeded, when it suddenly occurred to me that, by a 
very simple change in the stage-arrangement, the whole difficulty might be made to 
disappear. Upon careful examination I found that every other difficulty disappeared 


27 


[4. Spedding’s Division of Acts.] : 4 


Shakespeare contemplated. My suggestion has this peculiar advantage and presump- 
tion in its favour, that it does not involve the change of a single letter in the original 
text. It is simply to alter the division of the Acts; to make the fourth Act close a 
scene and a half further on, with the exit of Edgar in the passage just quoted, and the 
fifth commence with his re-entrance. Thus the battle takes place between the Acts, 
and, the imagination having leisure to fill with anxiety for the issue, it rises into its 
proper importance as one of the great periods and passages of the story, and a final 
crisis in the fortunes of Lear. The first Act closes, as the first burst of Lear’s rage is 
over, with the final renunciation of Goneril. The second leaves him in utter desola- 
tion, turned forth into the night, the storm gathering, madness coming on apace, At 
the conclusion of the third, the double tempest of the mind and of the elements has 
spent its fury, and the curtain falls upon the doubtful rumour of a new hope, and 
distant promise of retribution. At the point where I think the fourth was meant to 
end, suspense has reached its highest pitch; the rumours have grown into certainties; 
the French forces have landed; Lear’s phrenzy has abated, and, if the battle be won, 
he may yet be restored; ‘the powers of the kingdom approach apace ;* the armies 
are now within sight of each other, and ‘the arbitrement is like to be bloody.’ Last 
of all, ‘Enter’ (to take the stage-direction as it stands in the old Quarto, iz which 
the divisions of the Acts are not marked ) ‘ Enter the powers of France over the stage; 
Cordelia with her father in her hand ;’ Gloster alone remains to ‘ pray that the right 
may thrive,’ and, as the curtain falls, we feel that the ‘ bloody arbitrement’ is even 
now begun, and that all our hopes hang on the event. Rising again, it discloses 
‘alarums and a retreat,’ The battle has been fought. ‘ King Lear hath lost; he and 
his daughter ta’en;’ and the business of the last Act is only to gather up the issues of 

those unnatural divisions, and to close the eyes of the victims, As there is nothing 
in Shakespeare so defective in point of art as the battle-scene under the present 
stage-arrangement, so, with the single change which I have suggested, there is not 
one of his dramas conducted from beginning to end with more complicated and in. 

evitable skill. Under the existing arrangement, the pause at the end of the fourth 
Act is doubly faulty, both as interrupting the march and hurry of preparation before 
it has gathered to a head, and as making, by the interposition of that needless delay, 
the weakness and disappointing effect of the result still more palpable. Under that 
which I propose, the pause falls precisely where it ought, and is big with anxiety and 
expectation, Let the march of the French army over the stage be presented with 
military pomp and circumstance, ‘Cordelia with her father in her hand’ following 
(for thus the dependence of Lear and his fortunes upon the issue is brought full 


along with it; and I am now quite satisfied that it was the true arrangement which ’ 


before the eye), and let the interval between the Acts be filled with some great battle- ~ 


piece of Handel, and nothing more, I think, could be hoped or wished. On.review- 
ing this paper, which was first written in 1839, I find nothing to add, except that the 
stage-direction in the Folio, which follows the exi¢ of Edgar, and which I had over- 
looked, seems to point at an arrangement much like that which I have suggested, 
After both the English armies have appeared on the scene with drums and colours, 
and gone out, Edmund returns to report to Albany that the < enemy is in view,’ and 
to hasten his preparations for battle. Then follows: ‘ Alarum within. Enter, with 
drum and colours, Lear, Cordelia, and Soldiers, over the stage and exeunt, Edgar, 
following, leaves Gloster behind the tree, and, promising to return if he survive, exit. 


10° 


a Conk on. 
tse And that’s true too. [Exeunt, 


€ 


further] farther Qq, Cap. Calls 11. all. Come] all; come Rowe ii. 
Del. W ae ee all, come FFF. all come QaF,. 
ae 9." Two lines, Ff, Glou, And...fo.] Om. Qq. 
: _ again? Men] againe men Q,. [Exeunt.] Om. Q,. Exit. Q.. 


_ 10. even] ev’n Pope+. 


. ricer we have: ‘Alarum and Retreat within, and then ‘enter Edgar’ with news 
of the battle lost, and the capture of Lear and Cordelia. These are no ‘ excursions,’ 
and, therefore, it is plain that, though all three armies appeared on the stage with 
drums and colours immediately before the battle, no part of the battle was exhibited 
even in dumb show. It was to be made known only by the noise ‘ within ;’ during 
which the stage was empty. Whether any curtain was to be drawn, I do not know 


x 


aa enough of the scenic arrangements of that time to say. But such an interval of sus- ’ 
? - pended action, so accompanied with noises of battle in the distance, would have the 
a = same effect as a modern inter-act, with an orchestra playing appropriate music; pro- 
‘a vided only that it were understood to represent a period of indefinite duration. Con- 
_-——s Sidering, however, that immediately after the exewn¢ of Cordelia, Kent, the Doctor, 
4 ES and servants carrying Lear out in his chair, the stage had to be ready for three armies 


to pass over with drums and colours, it is easy to believe that the stage-manager found 
it more convenient to make the next scene the beginning of a new Act, and to use 
the interval for drawing up his troops. 

11, Ripeness] STEEvENs: Compare Ham. V, ii, 210: ‘the readiness is all.’ 
WorpsworTH (p. 292): In order that it may be really ‘well’ with us when we 
come to die, Sh. will tell us, no man better, what is the one thing needful. And 
with what a lightning-flash of condensed thought aud language does he teach the 
-— lesson! BrrcH (p. 425) sees in this nothing but materialism, likening man to fruit 

which must fall. [Birch has been already quoted once before, and he might have 
been quoted much more frequently; he goes laboriously through the tragedy, find- 
ing throughout rank atheism and materialism. Two quotations are quite enough, f 
think; perhaps two too many.—ED. ] 


Scene III. The British camp near Dover, 
Enter, in conquest, with drum and colours, EDMUND; LEAR and CORDELIA, as 
i prisoners ; Captain, Soldiers. ie 
Edm. Some officers take them away; good guard, ees. 
Until their greater pleasures first be known - : 
That are to censure them. = 
Cor. Weare not the first > 
Who with best meaning have incurr’d the worst. 
For thee, oppressed: king, I am cast down; 5 
Myself could else out-frown false fortune’s frown. 
Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters ? as f 
Lear. No, no, no, no. Come, let’s away to prison; 
We two alone will sing like birds 1’ th’ cage. 
When thou dost ask me blessing, Ill kneel down fe) 
And ask of thee forgiveness. So we’lllive, 
And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh 
At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues 


SCENE I11.] Scena Tertia. Ff (Scena — ending zncurd, Q,. 


F,). ScENEV. Pope+. The Scene con- 3. We are| We're Pope+, Jen. Sta. 
tinued, Theob. Huds, 
The British...near...] Mal. The 5. Zam] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Sch. 
British...under... Cap. A Camp, Rowe. am I Qq et cet. 
Om. QqFf. 6. out-frown] outfrowne Q.. 
Enter...Captain, Soldiers.] Ff (subs.) 8. No, no, no, no] No, no Qq. 
Enter Edmund, with Lear and Cordelia 12. and sing] Om. Q.. 
prifoners. Qq. 13. hear poor rogues| heare (poore 
2. first) beft Qq. Rogues) F,. hear—poor rogues !— Sch. 


3-5. We...down ;]| Two lines, the first 


2, 3. their... That] For instances of ‘their’ standing as the antecedent to the 
relative, see ABBOTT, § 218. Compare lines 51, 52 of this Scene. 

2. greater] Hupson: That is, the greater persons. ay 

3. censure] STEEVENS: That is, pass sentence or judgement upon them. See 
UIT vy 2: 

6. out-frown] THE CAMBRIDGE EpiTors record an Anonymous conjecture of 
out-face for ‘ out-frown,’ which is happy.—Ep. 

7. sisters] CowDEN CLARKE: A bitter sarcasm in simplest words, thoroughly 
characteristic in the woman of quiet expression with intense feeling, 

8. No, no, no, no.] CAPELL’s learning at times so distorts his vision that he sees 
in these words the refrain of+a song by Sir Philip Sidney (vol. i, p. 79, ed. Grosart) 
which ‘should be deliver’d by Lear, not perhaps absolutely singing, but with a ieee 
something approaching towards it; as is evident from the line immediately after. 
which owes it’s birth to that circumstance.’ ‘ ES 


13. SCHMIDT thinks that the parenthetical ‘(poor rogues)’ of the Ff is more 


; ‘As if we were God’s spies. And we’ll wear out, 


a a aioe wins, rho? s in, who’s out; 
1 take upon ’s the mystery of things, 


_ Ina wall’d prison, packs and seéts of great ones 
That ebb and flow by th’ moon. 
_ Edm. Take them away. 
Lear. Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia, 20 
The gods themselves throw incense. Have I caught thee ? 
He that oat us shall bring a brand from heaven, 


_ 14. we'll talk] we'll talkd F,. 16, zfon’s] upon us Cap. Steev. Ec. 


too] zo Q,. Var. Knt, Del. Sing. a 
15. loses] loofes QqF,F,F,. 19. dy th’ | bith’ Q 
who’s....who's| whofe...whofe Qq. 21. Two lines, Se 
whos...whos F,. : 


characteristic. [But the ‘them’ in the next line shows, I think, the erroneous pune. 
tuation of the Ff.—Ep.] 

17. spies] WARBURTON interprets this as ‘spies placed over God Almighty, te 
watch his motions.” HeraTH [and everybody else] understands it as ‘spies com- 
missioned and enabled by God to pry into most hidden secrets.? JOHNSON: As if 
we were angels commissioned to survey and report the lives of men, and were con. 
sequently endowed with the power of prying into the original motives of action and 
the mysteries of conduct. 

18. packs and sects] JoHNSON: ‘Packs’ is used for combinations or collections, 
as ina pack of cards. For ‘sects,’ I think se¢s might be more commodiously read. 
So we say, ‘affairs are now managed by a new set.’ ‘Sects,’ however, may well 
stand. Moserty: Sh. had seen the fall and death of the Earl of Essex, which 
was probably in his mind here. 

20-25. BUCKNILL (p. 230): This is not mania, but neither is it sound mind. It 
is the emotional excitability often seen in extreme age, as it is depicted in the early 
scenes of the drama, and it is precisely true to the probabilities of the mind’s history, 
that this should be the phase of infirmity displaying itself at this moment. Any other 
dramatist than Sh. would have represented the poor old king quite restored to the 
balance and control of his faculties. The complete efficiency of filial love would 
have been made to triumph over the laws of mental function. But Sh. has repre- 
sented the exact degree of improvement which was probable under the circum- 
stances, namely, restoration from the intellectual mania which resulted from the 
combined influence of physical and moral shock, with persistence of the emotional 
excitement and disturbance which is the incurable and unalterable result of passion 
exaggerated by long habitude and by the malign influence of extreme age. 

21. incense] WarBuRTON: The thought is extremely noble, and expressed in a 
sublime of imagery that Seneca fell short of on a like occasion: ‘ Ecce spectaculum 
dignum ad quod yespiciat intentus operi suo deus; ecce par deo dignum, vir fortis 
cum mala fortuna compositus.’ 

Pop 


hs are afl 


And fire us hence like foxes. Wipe thine 


The good-years shall devour them, flesh and une es 
Ere they shall make us weep; we'll see em starv’d first. 
Come. [Bxeunt Lear and Cordelia, guarded, 


23. eyes] eye FFF, +. 25. weep 5 | Pipes weepe ? OaFt. 
24. good- yeare\GI6i om Mob. Sch. good weep, Rowe ii. 
yeares F,. good yeeres¥,. good years - tem] FF ,, Rowe, Pope, Theob. i, 


BF py Rowe, Pope, Knt. good Qq. good- Han, Jen. Sing. Dyce, Sta. Wh. Ktly, 


jers Theob. goujeres Han. Warb. Cap. Glo.+, Huds. Sch. vm Q,. em Q,. 


23. foxes] Upton (Crit. Ods. p. 218) imagined that there is here an allusion to 
Samson’s foxes, but I believe no one since Upton’s time has discovered the point of 
similarity. HkATH: An allusion to the practice of forcing foxes out of their holds 
by fire. CApELL: But why a‘ brand from heaven’ to force him and his daughter 
out of their holds? This implies, in the first place, that parting them should be a 
work of no mortal, and secondly, the expressions are ominous, like those that drop 
from poor Gloucester [III, vi, 3]; a brand of heaven’s ordaining does part them 
within a few minutes after. STEEVENS: Compare Harrington’s trans. of Ariosto, 
B. xxvii, st. 17: ‘Ev’n as a Foxe, whom smoke and fire doth fright, So as he dare 
not in the ground remaine, Bolts out, and through smoke and fires he flieth Into the 
Tarier’s mouth, and there he dieth.’ 

24. good-years] HANMER: The French disease, from the French word Gouje, 
which signifies a common camp-trull. The words Gowse and Goujer were used as 
common terms of reproach among the vulgar, and the name of the disease was the 
Goujeres. FARMER: Resolute John Florio has sadly mistaken these gowjeers. He 
writes, ‘With a good yeare to thee!’ and gives it in Italian, ‘11 mal anno che dio ti 
dia.’ STEEVENS: Golding in his Ovid, lib. iii, has fallen into the same error, or 
rather the same mis-spelling. ‘ Perfici quid enim toties per jurgia? dixit.? which is 
thus Anglicized : * And what a goodyeare haue I woon by scolding erst? (she sed) ’— 


p- 34. CROFT (p. 20) interprets-it as gougers, i. e. men who gouge out eyes. “B¥cE__ 


( Gloss.) : Cotgrave gives, ‘ Gouge . .. a Souldiors Pug or Punke; a Whore that fol- 
lowes the Camp.’ C. E. H. Morwenstow (4. & Quw. vol. v, p. 607, 1852): The 
usage of this word by Sh. is another proof that he took refuge in Cornwall, when he 
fled from the scene of his deer-stalking danger. The Goujere is the old Cornish 
name of the Fiend, or the Devil; and is still in use among the folk-words of the 
West. [See also to the same effect, JoHN DAvixs (4. & Quz., 11 Mar. 1876).] 
HALLIWELL: ‘Goodyears’ is an ignorant perversion, such as I do not think was 
penned by Sh. Wricur: With the corruption of spelling, the word early lost its 


real meaning, and it is consequently found in passages where a sense opposite to the 
true one is intended. 


Jen. goujeers Johns et cet. e’m FF, them Theob. ii et cet. ae 7 
them] em Qq. starv’d| Ff+,Sch. frarueQqet 
flesh fleach Qq. cet. ; 
25,26. Lre...Conze.| Pope. One line, 26. Come.| Om. Q,. ~ 
Q,- Two, the first ending se Pre oe [Exeunt.....] Theob. Om. Q- ‘ue 
_ Rowe. ’ Exit. Q.Ff. ; 7 =e 


ther, captain; hark. ; 27 
s note; go follow them to prison. 
ave advanced thee; if thou dost 
is instructs thee, thou dost make thy way 30 
i noble fortunes ; know thou this, that men 
_ Are as the time is; to be tender-minded . 
_ Does not become a sword ; thy great employment 
ce. Will not bear question ; either say thou’lt do ’t, 
Or thrive by other means. 
-- Capt. I'll do’t, my lord. 35 
Edm. About it; and write happy when th’ hast done. 
_ Mark,—I say, instantly; and carry it so 
_ As I have set it down. 


i 


4 * Capt. I cannot draw a cart, nor eat dried oats; 
: *Tf ’t be man’s work, I’ll do ’t.* [Eztt. 40 
- 27. Come hither| Come thou hither 36. th’ haft] FF, th’af FF, Wh. 
is Han. thou’ st Rowe+, Jen. Sing. Ktly, Huds. 
’ [ Whispering. Rowe. Sch. thou haf? Qq et cet. 
; - 28. [Giving a paper. Mal. 37. Mark,—I| Cap. Marh, JRowet+, 
s 29. One step I And ftep, I Q,. Jen, Glo, Sch. Marke J QqFf. Mark; 
a 29-35. One...means.] Six lines,end- _Z Cam. Wr. 
aa ing inftructs thee,....fOrtunes 2.2.08 frees 39, 40. Om. Ff +, Cap. 
4 Sword,...queftion,...meanes. in Q,. 40. Lf’t...man’s| But tf it be a man's 
a Z 32. tender-minded | Hyphen, Rowe ii. Ktly. 
iv 33. thy] my Theob. Han. Lf’t] Walker, Dyce ii, Huds. 7 
34. thou’lt] thout Qq. zt Qq et cet. 


36. About...th’| About; and write, 
when happy thou Voss conj. 
write happy| write hasty Eschen- 
burg conj. 


I’i| Qq, Dyce ii, Glo.+, Huds. 
Sch. J wil Steev. et cet. 

[ Exit.] Exit Captaine. (after down, 
line 38) Ff. Om. Qq. 


28. note] MALone: This was a warrant, signed by the Bastard and Goneril, for 
the execution of Lear and Cordelia. See lines 246, 247, and 253. 
34. question] WARBURTON: By ‘great employment’ was meant the commission 


given him for the murder; and this, the Bastard tells us afterwards, was signed by 
Goneril and himself. Which was sufficient to make this captain unaccountable for 
the execution. MALONE: The important business which is now entrusted to your 
management does not admit of dedafe; you must instantly resolve to do it, or not. 
‘Question’ here, as in many other places, signifies discourse, conversation, STEEVENS: 
So, in Mer. of Ven. IV, i, 73: ‘ You may as well use question with the wolf.’ 

36. write happy] Wricut: That is, describe yourself as fortunate. Compare 
2 Hen. IV: I, ii, 30, ‘Writ man’; and Als Well, II, iti, 67, ‘And writ as little 
beard.’ And in the same play, III, v, 69, F, reads, ‘I write good creature.’ 

38. down] Mozerty: That is, so that it may appear that Cordelia slew 


herself. 


Alb, Sir, you have heed Lara your Leen strain, 


May equally determine. 


And fortune led you well; you have the captives 
Who were the opposites of this day’s strife. 
I do require them of you, so to use them 

As we shall find their merits and our safety 


Ss 


Edm. Sir, I thought it fit 
To send the old and miserable king: 
To some retention * and appointed guard ; * 
Whose age had charms in it, whose title more, 
To pluck the common bosom on his side, 50 
And turn our impress’dlances in our eyes 
Which do command them. With him I sent the queen. 
My reason all the same; and they are ready 


Flourish.] Om. QqF,F,F,. 
Enter...] Enter Albany, Goneril, 
Regan, Soldiers. Ff. Enter Duke, the 


two Ladies, and others. Qq (Enter the , 


Duke Q,). 
41. SCENE vi. Pope+, Jen. 
show'd | Ff+, Jen. Dyce i, Wh. 
Ktly, Sch. jhewed Q,. jfhewne Q,. 
shown Cap. et cet. 
42. well; you) well you Q,. 
the] them Ktly. 
43. Who] That Qq, Glo.+. 
44. I] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Sch. 
We Qq et cet. 
require them| require then Qq, 
Pope. 
46. Sir... fit] I thought fit Pope, Han. 


Sir, I thought fit Cap. 

47, 48. To send...retention] One line 
in Q,. Ff, Rowe. > 

47. send| faueQ.. ~ 

48. and appointed guard] Om. Q.Ff, 
Rowe. 

49. had] Ff, Rowe, Sch. has Qq 
et cet. 

50. common bosom] common bofome 
FFF, coren boffom Q,. common 
bloffomes Q,. common bosoms Pope+. 

on] of Qa. 
his side] this fide ¥,F,, Rowe. 

52, 53. gueen. My reason all] queen 
My reafon, all Q,. 

53-55. My...session.] Lines end ¢o 
morrow,...hold, Qq. 


41. strain] WRIGHT: Race, descent; A. S. sirfnd, from strfnan, to beget. See 


Much Ado, Xl, i, 394. - 
43. opposites] See Ham. V, ii, 62. 


48. retention] Drttus: Confinement, custody; not elsewhere used by Sh. in this 


sense. 


50. bosom] CArELL: The affection of all men generally. 
51. impress’d lances] STEEvENS: That is, turn the lancemen whom we have 


hired by giving them press-money, 


51. in] For instances of ‘in’ with verbs of motion, see ‘come In evil,’ Ham. V, 


ii, 70; ABBOTT, § 159. 


51, 52. our eyes Which] For the construction, see lines 2, 3, of this Scene. 


you shall I hold your session. 


= And the best uarrel in the heat, are cursed 
} those that feel their sharpness. 
; 1e question of Cordelia and her father 
‘ _ * Requires a fitter place.* _ 
Alb. Sir, by your patience, 
_ LT hold you but a subje& of this war, 
Not as a brother. 
Reg. ~~ That’s as we list to grace him. 


‘Ere you had spoke so far. He led our powers, 
Bore the commission of my place and person; 
The which immediacy may well stand up 
_ And call itself your brother. 
Grom. 7: Not so hot; 
In his own grace he doth exalt himself 
More than in your addition. 
Reg. In my rights 
By me invested, he compeers the best. 


y 


% 


ae ea: ee ee id =" 


t 


‘eg * Tee 
- 


is y' * At this time 
e sweat and bleed; the friend hath lost his friend; 


Methinks our pleasure might have been demanded, 


Alo. That were the most, if he should husband you. 


60 


65 


70 


54. further] a further Q,, Jen. Mal. 
Ec. 
F 55. you...your| we...our Han. 
55, 56. sesston...cime We] Theob. 
————sSeffion at this time, mee Q,. Seffion at 
this times we Q,. 

55-60. Az... place.|] Theob, Lines end 
bleed,.....QUarr els oe JMATPOS..+. fathers.ee. 
place. Qq. (/harpenefe Q,). Om. Ff, 
Rewe, Pope, Han. 

58. sharpness] /harpes Q,. 

61, 62. Lhold...brother.| Oneline, Qq. 


63. might] /hould Qq. 

66. immediacy] tmmediacie F,. tm- 
mediate Qq, Pope, Han. 

67-69. Wol.....addition.| Prose, Q,. 
Two lines, the first ending hém/elfe, in 


69. addition | aduancementQq,Popet, 
Cap. Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. Sing. Ktly. 

69, 70. /n...dest.] One line, Qq. 

69. rights| right Qq, Pope+, Jen. 

71, Alb: || sf t--5) jenn Bc, Del.sch, 
Gon. Qgq et cet. 


64. so far] I cannot think that this is the same phrase as ‘You speak him far,’ 
#. ¢. you praise him much, in Cymd. I, i, 24, although beth DeELius and ScHMIDT 
seem to consider the two phrases as equivalent. 

66. immediacy] JouHNson: That is, supremacy in opposition to subordination, 
which has guéddam medium between itself and power. MALONE: Compare ‘most 


immediate to our throne,’ Ham. I, ii, 109. 


69. addition] Title. See II, ii, 22; Ham. II, i, 47; and Sh. passim. 


71. [See Textual Notes.] CAPELL: This speech suits Goneril, who might want to 
Vv 


ee nt es DA 
KING LEAR 


Reg. Jesters do oft prove prophets. ea 
Siro oe Holla, holla! j 
That eye that told you so look’d but a-squint. hae 
Reg. Lady, 1am not well; else I should answer a: 
From a full-flowing stomach.—General, ge 
Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony: S = aes : 
Dispose of them, of me; the walls are thine. hess til eA 
Witness the world, that I create thee here Sees 
My lord and master. : 
Gon. Mean you to enjoy him? : - 
Alb. The let-alone lies not in your good will. eee 
Edm. Nor in thine, lord. 
Alb. ..  Half-blooded fellow, yes. 
72. Holla, holla| Hola, hola QaF,, 77. Om. Qq. 


Cap. the walls are] the walls is F,. the 
72, 73. Holla...a-squint.| One line, whole ts Anon.* the laws are Anon.* 
Qq. 79. him] him then Qq. 
73. a-squint] Rowe. a@ /quint QqFf. 80. let-alone] Hyphen, Cap. 
75. full-flowing| Hyphen, Theob. S 


know the whole of her sister’s intention; and Albany’s standing by, and enjoying 
their wrangling, seems better than mixing with it. [I really cannot see any sufficient 
reason here for deserting the Folio. Eleven lines further on, no one but Pope has 
ever thought of adopting the text of the Qq.—Ep.] 

73. a-squint] STEEVENS: ‘ Love being jealous makes a good eye look a-squint.’ 
—Ray’s Eng. Prov. 

75. stomach] ScHMIDT: Wrath, passion. 

77. walls] THEOBALD (Nichols’s Zz#. His¢. ii, 384): The walls of what? Of her 
soldiers, her prisoners, and her patrimony? Besides Regan is here in an open camp;_ 
had she been in an [sic] house, and given the Bastard the keys of the fore and back 
gate, she might with some propriety have told him the wad/s were his. But as the 
case is otherwise, I suspect she would say: ‘¢hey a// are thine. [This reading 
HANMER adopted.] WarBurTON: A metaphorical phrase taken from the camp, 
and signifying to surrender at discretion, JENNENS: The reading most agreeable to 
the context, and to the traces of the letters in F,, seems to be this: chy wil/ is mine. 
Dyce quotes Lerrsom: ‘ Has not the editor of F, altered this improperly ? and may 
we not read “ Yea, al] is thine?”?’ Wricut: The words refer to Regan’s castle — 
mentioned below in line 246. ScHMrIpT: Assuredly this refers to Regan’s person, 
which surrenders itself like a vanquished fortress, a very common metaphor in Sh. 
‘Rude ram, to batter such an ivory wall.’.—2. of Z. 464. ‘The heavens hold firm 
The walls of thy dear honour.’—Cymé. II, i, 67.‘ Painting thy outward walls so 
costly gay.’—Soz. cxlvi. 

80. let-alone] JoHNson: Whether he shall not or shall, depends not on your 
choice. RITSON (p. 172) pronounces this paraphrase by Johnson ‘absolutely unin- 
telligible.’ ‘ Albany,’ he says, ‘means to.tell his wife, that, however she might want 
the power, she evidently did not want the inclination, to prevent the match.’ [Ritson 


ab Let the een Sibiice and prove my 


_ 


st; hear reasonEdmund, I arrest thee 
capital treason ; and in thy arrest, roe to Gon.| 
ilded serpent —For your claim, fair sister, 85 
ar it in the interest of my wife; 
_ 'Tis she is sub-contraéted to this herd 
_ And I, her husband, contradié& your bans, 
If you will marry, make your loves to me; 


| e My lady is bespoke. 


Gon. “= An interlude! 90 
‘ . _ 
-— _ 82, Reg.] Baft. Qq, Pope. — 87. this] her Q,. a 
er [To Edmund] Mal. Om. QqFf. 88. your bans] Mal. your Banes F{+, : 
“ To the Bast. They offer to go out. Han. Cap. Jen. Ec. the banes Qq. ‘a 
: thine] good Qq, Pope. 89. loves] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Theob. a 
; * 83. Stay yet; hear reason] Stays hear Han. Warb. Cap. Knt, Dyce, Glo.+, . 
ce . my reason; Han. Coll. iii, Sch. /oue Qq et cet. a 
aa 84. thy arrest] thine attaint Qa, Jen. 90,91. Gon. An interlude! Alb.] 
= Sing. Sta. Ktly, Glo.+. Om. Qq, reading My Jady...Glofter as . 
Bs 7. [pointing to Gon.] Johns, one line. 
, 7m 85. sister] Sifters FF. 90. interlude] Steey. enterlude Ff. 
- 86. bar] Rowe ii. bare QqFf. 
E - EEE cr 
a does not put a hyphen in ‘let-alone,’ and evidently takes ‘let’ in the sense of Azn- 
. drance.—ED.| DeELIius thinks that ‘ your’ in this line is emphatic; that not she, but 
“if he, will prevent Regan’s marriage. 
he 82. [See Textual Notes.] CaApELL: Edmund's passions are not rais’d so high, nor 


he so fix’d in his ‘ title,’ that he should want to ‘ prove’ it by arms; ’tis the enflam’d 
Regan, who is ignorant of her forces’ dismission, that is pushing him to it, and to an 
exit for that purpose, which is prevented by Albany. [It is doubtful whether ‘ Stay,’ 

ae in the next line, refers to Regan’s departure, as Hanmer and Capell evidently sup- 
pose; it may refer to Regan’s order to the drum to strike.—ED. ] 

84. thy arrest] As far as I know, WRIGHT is the only editor who has attempted 
to explain attaint of the Qq; his note is simply: ‘in convicting thee.’ But, I fear, 
this interpretation is doubtful; it seems to defer the checking of Goneril until after 
the result of the combat has proved Edmund’s treason; whereas Albany’s object 
was to unmask his wife on the spot. This passage is the only one cited by Scumipt 
(Zex.) under the head of ‘ conviction, impeachment ;’ there is, therefore, presuma- 
bly no parallel instance, to guide us, of its use in this sense. The chiefest objection 
that would be urged, to ‘arrest’ of the Ff, is, 1 suppose, its presence in the pre- 
ceding line. But the argument is wearisome that Sh, never could have used the 
same word twice within the compass of a few lines. If it be true, Sh. is unlike any 
eeter that ever lived in the tide of time (which in one sense is true, but not in the 
sense here meant). In arresting Edmund, Albany arrests Goneril, not ‘ on capital 
treason,’ but in her matrimonial plans. Even without the authority of the Ff, ‘arrest’ 
seems preferable to aé/aint. Since writing this, ScuMiIbT’s edition has reached me, 
and in it he says, ‘Sh. does not use the noun a//aint in the sense of accusation, and 


Alé. Thou art arm’d, Gloucester; let the trumpet ces i ol 
If none appear to prove upon thy person — 
Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons, 
There is my pledge. Ill prove it on thy heart, ' 
Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less 95. 
Than I have here proclaim’d thee. ~ 
Reg. Sick, oh, sick! 
Gon. [Aside] If not, I'll ne’er trust medicine. ee 
Edm. There’s my exchange. What in the world he is ae 
That names me traitor, villain-like he lies. 
Call by the trumpet; he that dares approach, = 100 
On him, on you,—who not ?—I will maintain © 
>. My truth and honour firmly. 
7 Al, A herald, ho! 
* Edm. A herald, ho, a herald! * 
Alb. Trust to thy single virtue; for thy soldiers, 
All levied in my name, have in my name 105 
Took their discharge. . 
Reg. My sickness grows upon me! 
Alb. She is not well—Convey her to my tent.— 
[Exit Regan, led. 


gi. One line, Rowe. Two in Ff. 
arm d| armed Ff, Rowe, Sch. 
Let...sound :| Om. Qq. 
92. person] head Qq, Jen. Sing. Ktly, 
Glo. Wr. 
94,98. [throwing downaglove.]| Mal. 
94. prove it] ma ke it ¥,. make it F, 
F,F,, Rowe, Knt, Del. Dycei, Sta. Sch. 
mark it Anon.* make good Coll. (MS). 
96. stick /]| sickh— Rowe+, Jen. 
97. [Aside] First by Rowe. 


98. he is] hes F,. 

100. the] Ff, Rowe, Pope, Han. Knt, 
Sch. ¢hy Qq et cet. 

1o1. who] whom Han. Ec. 

103. Edm. 4...4erald/] Om. Ff+. 

104. virtue] virtues FF, Rowe, Pope, 
Han. 

105, 106. All...discharge.| One line, 


q: 
106. My] This Qq, Theob. Warb, 
Johns. Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. Sing. Ktly. 


medicine] Ff, Johns. Knt, Del. 


107. [Exit Regan, led.] Theob. Om 
Dyce, Glo.+, Sch. oy/on Qq et cet. 


QqFf. Exit Reg. Rowe. 


the verb in his plays is equivalent to convict of high treason, not to accuse of it. There 
can be no reference to a conviction in the present passage.’—Ep. ] 

94. prove] De.ius upholds make by supposing that, according to a not uncom- 
mon construction in Sh., the noun, roof, is to be supplied from the preceding verb, 
‘prove;’ and ScHMIpT refers to I, i, 58, where /ove is to be similarly supplied; he 
also suggests that mae may stand for do, of which usage there are examples in Sh. 

98. what] Axport, § 254: Equivalent to whoever. Compare III, vi, 112. 

104. virtue] STEEVENS: That-is, valour; a Roman sense of the word. Thus 
Raleigh: ‘The conquest of Palestine with singular virtue they performed’ . 


2 aa 


7 a 
die 
SAT 


Bs 


7 


x 


\e 


\ 


\ 


{ 


A" 


[A trumpet sounds. 
i [Reads] If ae man of quality or degree within 
the lists of the army will maintain upon Edmund, supposed 
Earl Of Gloucester, that he is a manifold traitor, let him 
appear by the third sound of the trumpet; he is ud in his 


defence. 
* Edm. Sound!* 
Her. Again! 
Her, Again! 


Luss 


[First trumpet. 

[ Second trumpet. 

[ Third trumpet. 

[ Zrumpet answers within. 


Enter EDGAR, at the third sound, armed, with a Trumpet before him. 


Alb. Ask him his purposes, why he appears 


Upon this call o’ th’ trumpet. 
Her? ~ 


108, Enter a Herald.] As in Han. 
Om. Qq. After firmly, line 102, Ff, 
Rowe, Pope. After Zo / line 103, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. After me, line 106, Cap. 
Mal. Steev. Bos. Sing. Ktly. After 
herald ! line 103, Jen. Ec. 

SCENE VII. Pope+, Jen. 

108, 109. Come...this.] One line, Q,. 
108. herald,—Let.....sound,—] Cap. 
herald, let... found, QqFf. 

trumpet| Trumper F,. 

110. Capt. Sound, trumpet !| Om. 
Ff+. 

[A trumpet sounds.] Om. Qq. 

111. Her. [ Reads] Herald reads. Ff. 
Her. Qq. 

III, 112. within the lists] in the 
hoaft Qq. 

113. he is] he’s Qq. ; 

114. by] at Qq, Jen. Mal. Steev. Bos. 
Coll. Del. Sing. Sta. Wh. Ktly, Huds. 


What are you? 


120 


116, Edm. Sound /] Cap. Baft. Sound ? 
Q,. Batt. Sound. Q,. Om. Ff+. 

116, 117, 118. [First, Second, Third] 
12, 3B. 

116-118. Sound /...Again] Continued 
to Her. by Jen. 

116. [First trumpet.] Om. Qq. 

117. Her. Again!| Againe? Q.. 
Againe. Q,. 

[Second trumpet.] Om. Qq. 

118. Her. Again / [Third trumpet, 
Om. Qq. 

[Trumpet answers within.] Ff 
(him within F,F,). Om. Qq. After a 
pause a trumpet... Sta. 

Enter...him.] Enter Edgar at the 
third found, with a trumpet before him. 
Qq. (with Om. Q.). Enter Edgar 
armed. Ff. 

120-122. What.....summons ?| Two 
lines, the first ending guality ? Qq. 


ee UE UEE eIEEIUEEnE ESE SE SSSnISSSSnSaInIEISnEnn SET 


116. Sound] JENNENsS: The Qq are wrong in giving this to the Bastard. 
CAPELL: The spirit of Edmund’s character is here kept up; 


the Herald’s business. 


it was 


he anticipates the Herald, whose office he discharges himself. 
119. Ask him] BLAaKeway: This is according to the ceremonials of the trial by 


combat in cases criminal. 
28 


‘The Appellant and his procurator first come to the gate 


Your name? your quality ? and why you answer 
This present summons? 

Fdg. Know, my name is lost; 
By treason’s tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit ; 
Yet am I noble as the adversary 
I come to cope. 

Alb. Which is that adversary ?. 

Edg. What’s he that speaks for Edmund, Earl of 

Gloucester ? a 
Himself. What say’st thou to him? ~ oe 
~ Draw thy sword, 


125 


Edm. 

Ldg. 
That, if my speech offend a noble heart, 
Thy arm may do thee justice; here is mine. 


Behold, it is the privilege of mine honours, 130 


121. your quality] and quailitie Q,. 
and quality Q,, Jen. 
why you| why do you Ktly. 


Steev. Ec. Var. Knt, Coll. Del. Sing. 
Ktly. 
125. Which] What Q,. 


122. Know] O know Qq. 

122-125. Know...cope.|] The lines end 
tooth....mow't....all. in Q,. Three lines, 
ending zooth....canker-bit...all? in Q.. 

122, 123. lost; By.....tooth| Theob. 
loft by treafons tooth. Q,. loft by Trea- 
Sons tooth: Q,, Ff, Rowe, Pope. ~ 

124. Yet am I noble as) yet are I 
mowt Whereis Q,.. Where is Q.. 

125. cope.| cope with all. Q,. 
with all? Q.. 


128,129. That...arm.| One line, Qq. 

130. the...honours| Pope. the priuz- 
ledge of my tongue Qq, Cap. my priui- 
ledge, The priuiledge of mine honours 
(reading line 130 as two lines), Ff, Rowe, 
Knt, Del. Following the Ff, but read- 
ing line 130 as one line, Coll. Sing. Wh. 
Ktly. Following the Ff, but reading as 
three lines, ending my privilege.....pro- 
cope ~ fession...protest. Johns. 
cope withal Cap. Jen. 


... The Constable and Marshall demand by voice of herald, what he is, and why 
he comes so arrayed.’—Selden’s Dued/o, 

121,122, Your... summons?] ApsottT, § 382, removes the interrogation- 
marks, and considers ‘I ask’ as understood before the whole sentence. 

125. cope] For other instances of ‘cope’ as a transitive verb, signifying to ez- 
counter, see SCHMIDT (Lex.). 

126, What’s] See ApgorrT, § 254. 

130. privilege] WARBURTON: The charge he is going to bring against the Bas- 
tard, he calls the ‘privilege,’ &c. To understand which phraseology, we must 
consider that the old rites of knighthood are here alluded to; whose oath and pro- 
fession required him to discover all treasons, and whose privilege it was to have his 
challenge accepted, or otherwise to have his charge taken ro confesso. For if one 
who was no knight accused another who was, that other was under no obligation to 
accept the challenge, On this account it was necessary, as Edgar came disguised, to 
tell the Bastard he was a knight. JoHNSON: The ‘privilege’ of this ‘oath’ means the 
privilege gained by taking the oath administered in the regular initiation of a knight 
professed. MALONz’s interpretation seems the best: Edgar says: ‘Here I draw my 


my Eieacion. I protest,— ieee 131 
ry strength, place, youth, and eminence, 
_ Despite thy victor sword and fire-new fortune, 


Thy valour and thy heart,—thou art a traitor, 
_ False to thy gods, thy brother and thy father, 135 


~ Conspirant ' gainst this high illustrious prince, 
_ And, from the extremest upward of thy head 


To the descent and dust below thy foot, 

A most toad-spotted traitor. Say thou ‘No,’ 

This sword, this arm, and my best spirits are bent - 140 
To prove upon thy heart, whereto I fac 


Thou liest. 


’ Edm. In wisdom I should ask thy name; 
But, since thy outside looks so fair and partic 


132. Maugre| Maugure Q.,. 
place, youth| Ff+, Knt, Sing. 
Ktly, Sch. youth, place Qq et cet. shill, 
youth Coll. (MS). 
133. Despite] Defpight Qq. Defpife 
Ff. Spite of Pope+. 
victor sword] Cap. vwictor- 
Sword Ff+, Jen. Ktly, Sch. wicfor, 
Sword Qq. 
. fire-new fortune] Rowe. fire 
new Fortune Ff. fire new fortun’d Qq. 


136. Conspirant] Con/fpicuate Qq. 
Conspirate Cap. 
illustrious | illefeirous ¥F . 
138. below] beneath Qq, Jen. Steev. 
Ec. Var. Sing. Ktly, Huds. 
foot| feet Qq, Jen. Steev. Ec, 
Var. Knt, Sing. Ktly. 
139. traitor. Say] traytor fay Q,. 
140-142. This...liest.| Two lines, the 
first ending /Zirits, Qq. 
' 140. ave] 4sQ,.. Js Q. 
142. should] /holud Q.. 


135. chy gods] the gods Q,, Cap. 


sword. Behold it is the privilege or right of my profession fo draw it against a 
traitor. I- protest, therefore,’ &c. It is not the charge itself (as Warburton has 
erroneously stated), but the right of bringing the charge and maintaining it with his 
sword, which Edgar calls the privilege of his profession. MoBEerLy: The words 
which begin the line seem corrupt. Perhaps the true reading may be, ‘I hold it as 
the privilege of mine honour, My oath, and my profession ;’ that is, ‘I hold here my 
sword, to which I am entitled by honourable birth, as well as by my oath and pro- 
fession of knighthood.’ 

132. Maugre] WricuHT: In spite of. See Twelfth Night, IIl,i, 163. Cotgrave 
has, ‘ Maulgré eux. Mauger their teeth, in spight of their hearts, against their wills, 
whether they will or no.’ 

~ 132. It is not easy to see why the Qq should be here preferred; the imme- 
diate recurrence of the similar sounds is somewhat harsh; streng/Z, youth, place, 
eminence.—ED. 

142. wisdom] MAtone: Because, if his adversary was not of equal rank, Ed- 
mund might have declined the combat. Hence the herald proclaimed: ‘If any 
man of quality or degree,’ &c. So Goneril afterwards says: ‘ By the law of arms 
thou wast not bound to answer An unknown opposite.’ 


And that thy tongue some say of breedin cathes, 
What safe and nicely I might well delay ‘ m 
By rule of knighthood I disdain and spurn. 

Back do I toss these treasons to thy head ; 

With the hell-hated lie o’erwhelm thy heart ; 


Los f 
ee 
g brea 


Which, for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise, — 
This sword of mine shall give them instant way, 150. 
Where they shall rest for ever—Trumpets, speak! 


[Alarums. 


Alb. Save him, save him! 


They fight. Edmund falls. 


Gon, This is practice, Gloucester ; 


144. tongue] being Qq. 
some say] Qq, Mal. Knt, Del. 

Dyce, Glo.+,Sch. (/ome fay) Fi. some 
*say Pope et cet. 

145. Om. Qq. 

146. By rule] By right Qq. 

147. Back...head ;| Heere do I toffe 
thofe treafons to thy head. Q,. Om. Q,. 

148. hell-hated lie] hell hatedly Qq. 


[Alarums. They fight. Edmund 
falls.] Han. (subs.) Alarums. Fights, 
(after Aim / line 152) Ff, Rowe. Om. Qq.- 

152. Alb. Save...Gon. This] Gon. 
O, save him, save him; This Theob. 
Warb. Huds. Gon. Save him, O save 
him; this Han. Gon. Save him, save 
him; this Jen. a 

Save him,| Save him, sir, Cap. 


oerwhelm| oreturnd Q,. ore- O save him, Steev. Bos. Coll. Del. Wh. 
turn’d Q. Ktly. : 
149. Which...and scarcely bruise] To 152-155. This...beguzled. | Three lines, 
which...scarcely bruising Han. ending armes...oppo/ite,...beguild, Qq. 
scarcely| /carely F,. 152. practice] meere practifeQq. mere 
151. they shall] thou shalt Theob. prac#ice Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. Coll. Del. 
Warb. Johns. Sing. Wh. Ktly. 


144. say] Proof, See Macb. IV, iii, 143, and note. 

145. What... delay] EccLrs: What was that but the combat? And how can 
ne be said to ‘ disdain and spurn’ that which, without delay, he determines to under- 
take? I propose the alteration of one word, and to consider ‘delay’ as a noun in- 
stead of a verb: ‘ What safe and nicely I might c/aim, delay,’ &c. Perhaps, do may 
be understood after ‘ might well,’ and ‘ delay’ be construed as an infinitive. Possibly 
‘disdain and spurn’ may be supposed, as well as the following verb, to have a rela- 
tion to ‘those treasons’ in the accusative; in this way a slight change would render 
the expression more natural: “4z@ back do toss these,’ &c, [Again, in line 148,] the 
sense would receive some improvement from reading ‘Jfay the hell-hated lie,’ &c. 
MALONE: I suppose the meaning is, ‘ That delay which by the law of knighthood I 
might make, I scorn to make.’ ‘Nicely’ is punctiliously; if I stood on minute 
forms. SCHMIDT: ‘Delay’ is equivalent to Aeep back, refuse. Compare As You 
Like It, III, ii, 221: ‘Let me stay the growth of his beard, if thou delay me not 
the knowledge of his chin.’ 


149. Which] For instances where ‘which’ is equivalent to as to which, see 
ABBOTT, § 272. 


151. Where] CAPELL: ‘Where’ is Zo where, and the place meant is his ‘heart,’ 
152. Alb.] TnxEopatp (Nichols’s Zit. Z//ust. ii, 384) thought that this was ‘cer- 


t Sites Epppsiles “ee art not vanquish’d, 
But cozen’d and beguiled. 


Alb. Shut your mouth, dame, 155 


; ~ Or with this paper shall I stop it—Hold, sir ; 


5 


4 NOUS BAe iy 


‘a 


Thou worse than any name, read thine own Sil — 
No tearing, lady; I perceive you know it. 


Gon. Say, if I do, the laws are mine, not thine. 


153- arms] armesQq. Warre Ff+, 


Knt, Del. Sch, 
wast] art Qq. 
answer] offer Q.. 


155-158. Shut...know it.] Prose, Qq. 


155. Shut] Stop Qq. 
156. stop] /tople Q.. 


stop it.| stop it ? Coll. Del. Wh. 
roa fold, sir| Om. Qq, Pope, Theob. 
Han. Warb. Given to ‘ Gon.’ by Jen. 


[To Edg. Wh. Cap. MS.* 


157. zame] thing Qq, Pope, Theon. 
Han. Warb. 
158. Vo] nay no Q,. Nay, no Qy 


Jen. 

Vo tearing, lady ;| No tearing. 
—Lady, Johns. 

know it| know't Qq. 

[Gives the letter to Edmund. 
Johns. 

159, 160. Say...for’¢?] One line, Q 

Prose in Q.. 


| Nedigibich iui cru 
y, . % 


tainly a corruption either from Amé. or Lad., to signify doth the women, or Jadies.’ 
Afterwards, in his edition, he gave this speech to Goneril. ‘’Tis absurd,’ he says, 
‘that Albany, who knew Edmund’s Treasons and his own Wife’s Passion for him, 
should be sollicitous to have his Life sav’d.’ JoHNsON: Albany desires that Ed- 
mund’s life might be spared at present, only to obtain his confession, and to convict 
him openly by his own letter, WALKER (Crit. ii, 185): Theobald was right in 
giving the words, ‘O save him, save him’ (as he properly read), also to Goneril. 
HALLIWELL: It strikes me that the exclamations are too passionate to be spoken by 
any but Goneril. She cries out when she sees him fall,—O save him, save him !— 
and then, turning to Gloucester (Edmund), tells him that he is not to consider this a 
legal victory, for the reasons that follow. 

156, Hold, sir;] CarELL: Albany sees Edgar’s resentments carrying him to a 
present dispatch; which it behov’d him to hinder, as well for punishing Edmund 
with a death of more infamy as for getting out of him by torture or otherwise the 
whole iniquitous business in which he had been actor. DELtus, in his first edition, 
foilowed Capell’s interpretation, but in his second he adopted the correct view, 
pointed out by Dycr, who says: ‘ Hold, sir’ is spoken to Edmund, ‘ Hold’ being 
formerly a word commonly used when any one presented anything to another. 
Compare ‘ Hold, therefore, Angelo,’ &c., AZeas. for Meas. I, i, 43; ‘Hold, my hand,’ 
&e., Ful. Ces. I, iii, 117; ‘But, hold thee, take this garland,’ &c., 7. V, iii, 85. 
[For many other instances, see SCHMIDT (Lex. s. v. p.) where, however, this present 
one from Lear is not cited.] ScHMIDT, in his edition, compares it to the French, éenez, 
and adds that ‘from the manner in which the letter came into Albany’s hands, Albany 
could not know whether Edmund was acquainted with its contents or not. Those 
editors who follow the Qq inline 161 should follow them here, and omit “ Hold, sir.”’’ 

158. No tearing, &c.] For a somewhat similar incident, see Aimy Leir, in Ap- 
pendix, p. 401. 

Spee 


Who can arraign me for ’t? 
Alb, 

Know’ st thou this paper? 

Ldm. 


Most monstrous! 


Ask me not Stat TI know. 


via : % 2 ; 4 


Alf, Go after her; she’s desperate; govern her. 


Edm. 


What you on charged me with, that have I gone 


And more, much more; the time will bring it out. 
’Tis past, and so am I—But what art thou 165 
That hast this fortune on me? If thou’rt noble, 


160. can] /hal Qq, Cap. Jen. Steev. 
Ec, Var. Sing. Sta. Ktly. 
fort) for it Q,. 
[Exit.] Ff, Rowe, Knt, Sing. 
Sta. Ktly, Huds. Sch, Exit Gonorill. 
(after £ow line 161) Qq et cet. 
160, 161. Most...paper?| Cap. One 
line, QqFf+, Jen. Del. Huds. 
Most monstrous! Oh!— 
Knows't] Glo. Wr. Mob. Sch. Jo? 
monfirous! O, know'/e Ff, Rowe, Huds, 
Moft monftrous know ft Q,. Mon/fier, 
know/ft Q,, Pope+, Jen. Most monster- 
ous! know'st Cap.Ec. Ktly. Afost mon- 


161. Edm.] Baft. or Edm. Ff, Rowe, 
Knt, Del. i, Sing. Sta. Ktly, Huds. Sch. 
Gon. Qq et cet. 

know] do know Han. 

162. [To an Officer, who goes out 
after her. Cap. 

163.. SCENE VIII. Pope+, Jen. 

Two lines, the first ending with, 
Ff. 
have I| I have Rowe ii+. 

165-167. ’ 77s...thee.] Prose, in Q,. 

166. chow'rt] thou dee ftQ,. thou beet 
Q,. thou art Cap. Steev. Ec. Var. Knt, 
Del. Sing. Ktly. 


strous! know’ st Steev. et cet. 


161. Edm. Ask, &c.] KNnicHT: Why should Albany address the question ‘Know’st 
thou this paper?’ to Goneril, when he had previously said to her: ‘ No tearing, lady; 
I perceive you know it’? Dyck: These words are manifestly those of Goneril in her 
desperation, and proved by Edmund’s next speech not to belong to him. WHITE: 
These words are manifestly uttered by Goneril. Hupbson [following the Ff]: Albany 
might well ask Edmund, ‘ Know’st thou this paper?’ for, in fact, Goneril’s letter did 
not reach Edmund; he had not seen it. Edmund, with some spirit of manhood, 
refuses to make any answers that will criminate or blacken a woman by whom he is 
beloved; and then proceeds, consistently, to answer Edgar’s charges. COWDEN 
CLARKE: We think that Albany’s words, ‘Go after her; she’s desperate,’ show 
that he is intended to say them immediately upon Goneril’s uttering this refusal to 
be questioned, and then rushing out. [It seems to me, KNIGHT’s question is unan- 
swerable. Albany has distinctly said to Goneril, ‘I perceive you know it,’ and Gon- 
eril has brazened it out, eliciting Albany’s horrorstruck ‘ Most monstrous!’ Is it 
likely that he asks her a second time whether she knows it? and that she should an- 
swer evasively to this second question after having already virtually confessed her 
knowledge? ‘Know’st ¢Aow this paper?’ is clearly addressed to Edmund, who 
refuses to know anything of the letter, but confesses that what he has been openly 
charged with, that he has done. The groan that breaks from Albany in line 160, at 
the savélation of his wife’s abandoned effrontery, should not be omitted; it is as 
needful to the character as it is to the rhythm.—Eb.] 

166. on] Wricut refers to ‘upon,’ III, vi, 87. 


f. Make peeemtiients: to Cae usi 


ao - Tse t's exchange charity. 
no les in medi than TOU art, Edmund ; 


The dark and vicious place where thee he got 


Cost him his eyes. 


Ldm., Th’ hast spoken right ; tis ue: 


_ The wheel is come full circle; I am here. 175: 


Alb. Methought thy very eat did prophesy 


A royal nobleness. I must embrace thee; 


Let sorrow split my heart, if ever I 


a 


167. Let's] Let us Cap. Jen. Mal. Ec. 


Ktly. 
charity| our charity Pope, Han. 
169. th’ hast] Ff. thowst Rowe+. 
thou hast Qq et cet. 
171. pleasant] several Mrs Griffith. 
wices| vertues.Q,. vertues Q,. 
172-174. Make...cyes. | Two lines, Qq 
(the first ending vitious, Q.; the first 
ending place, Q,). 
172. plague us| /courge vs Qq, Theob. 
Warb. Johns. Cap. Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. 


173. thee he] he thee Q.. 
174,175. Zh’...here.] Prose, Q.. 
174. Th’ hast} Ff, Sch. Thou’st 
Rowe+, Sing. Wh. Ktly, Huds. Zhou 
hafe Qq et cet. 
right, *tis true] Ed. truth Qq. 
right, tis true Ff et cet. 
175. circle] circled Q,. circkled Q.. 
176. [To Edgar, Han. 
gait] Johns. gate QqFf. 
178, 179. Lét.....father!| One line, 


Qa: 


Sing. plague and punish us Han. plague ever I Did| I did euer Qg. 


us in their time Ktly. 


167. charity] JoHNsoN: Our author, by negligence, gives his heathens the senti- 
ments and practices of Christianity. In Mamet there is the same solemn act of final 
reconciliation, but with exact propriety, for the personages are Christians: ‘ Exchange 
forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet,’ &c. COWDEN CLARKE: Can we believe that 
the most careful dramatist that ever wrote set down anything ‘by negligence’? Is 
not the virtue of a magnanimous generosity proper to human nature in all ages and 
in all creeds? 

169. the more] According to ABBorT, § 480, the emphasis on this ‘more’ causes 
it, in scansion, to be prolonged. Abbott thus quotes and divides the line: ‘If 
more | the 7 | re hast | thou wréng’d | (éd) mé.’ See I, iv, 334. Wuire: Iam 
inclined to think that this imperfect line is corrupted, and that it was written: ‘If 
more, the more thou ¢hen hast wronged me. [I have preferred to print the line 
exactly as it stands in the Ff.—Ep.] 

171. WORDSWORTH (p. 113): The same sentiment is in the Apocryphal Book 
of Wisdom, xi, 16: ‘wherewithal a man sinneth, by the same also shall he be 


punished,’ 


i 


1 hate thee or thy father! _— 
Edg. - Worthy prince, 
I know’t. Rr aoe 
Alb. | Where have you hid yourself? 
How have you known the miseries of your father ?- 
Edg. By nursing them, my lord. List a brief tale; 
And when ’tis told, oh, that my heart would burst! 
The bloody proclamation to escape : 
That follow'’d me so near,—oh, our lives’ sweetness! 185 a oe 
That we the pain of death would hourly die 
- Rather than die at once !—taught me to shift 
J Into a madman’s rags, t’ assume a semblance 
2 That very dogs disdain’d; and in this habit 
4 Met I my father with his bleeding rings, 190 


Their precious stones new lost; became his guide, 
Led him, begg’d for him, saved him from despair ; 
Never—O fault !—reveal’d myself unto him, 1s 


179. I know’t| J know zt Q,, Mal. Ec. with....wed Jen. Mal.-Steev. Ec. Bos. 
Sch. J &now it well Han. Cap. Steev. Coll. Sing. Ktly, Dyce ii, Huds. 


At beginning of line 180, Han. Cap. 186. hourly die] hourly bear Pope+. 
Steev. Walker, Dyce ii, Huds. Sch. At hourly fly Jervis. 
end of line 179, QqFf et cet. 189. That] The Pope+. 

182-190. The lines end Lord,...told... 19l. Their] The Qq. 
proclamation....Neere,....d€ath,...ONCE.. stones] gems Pope+. 
vags...difdain'd :...rings, Qq. - new lost| new-lost Ktly. 

183,184. durst! The} burft the Q.. lost ; became] loft became Os 

185. follow’d] followed Qq, Sch. 193. O fault !—] (O fault) Ff, Rowe, 


186. we...would] with....Would Qq. Pope, Han. (O Father) Qq. 


180. WALKER (Crit. iii, 283): Arrange,—‘I know’t.| 4/4. Where have you 
hid yourself? how have you known | The miseries of your father?’ Or rather, per- 
haps,— | ‘I know’t. 4/6. Where have you hid yourself? how known,’ | &c. 

182. List] Although this is often used transitively, as here, may not Zo be here 
absorbed in the final ¢ of ‘ List’ ?—Ep. 

186. If the text of the Qq be preferred, JENNENs’s clever emendation, which has 
been adopted by many editors, follows naturally. Dycr, who was conservative, to 
timidity, in his first edition, adopted it in his second, when he was under the freer 
influence of LettsoM and WALKER. (He was mistaken, however, in attributing it 
to MALONE.) But the text of the Ff is intelligible, as BosweLL, DrELtus, and 
WRIGHT say, and change is needless. DELius remarks that in the text of the Qq 
the antecedent to ‘ That’ is to be eliminated from the ‘ our’ in the preceding lines. 

186, die] BAILEy (ii, 99) thinks this is ‘surely harsh language’ [z. e. Jennens’s 
text], and proposes vze in the sense of contend, strive, struggle. 

193. fault] I am inclined to think that De.ius is right here in giving this the 


“ee 


Burst smilingly. 


a a 
- 


betes , eg 


ur past, when I was arm d; 
pepe of this ere success 


? 


Evie" two eetratics of passion, joy ~ grief, 

Edm, This speech of yours hath moved me, 200 
And shall perchance do good; but speak you on; 
You look as you had something more to say. 

Alb. If there be more, more woful, hold it in; 


For I am almost ready to dissolve, 


Hearing of this. 
Pie UES. This would have seem’d a period 205 
194. arm'd ] armed Q,, Sch. 205. Hearing of this| Om. Q.. 
197. our] Ff, Rowe, Knt, Wh. Sch. 205-222. Edg. 7Jhis...stave.| Om. Ff, 
my Qq et cet. Rowe, Pope, Han. 
his] this F ,. a 205-208. This....extremity.| Theob. 
flaw d| flawed Sch. Three lines, ending /uch...too much,... 
203. more, more| any niore more Q,. extremitie Qq. Ending szch...sorrow... 
204, 205. For...this] One line, Q,. extremity Waxb. 


meaning of misfortune, a meaning which it sometimes bears, although this instance 
is not cited by either Dyce or ScuMInT in their Glossaries. 

198, 199. support! ’Twixt] WALKER (C77. iii, 284): Point rather ‘ the conflict 
to support Twixt two extremes,’ &c. 

202, 25) Asi. See Lil, iv, 15. 

205. Hearing of] ApBotT, §178: A verbal noun. ‘ Hearing of’ does not mean, 
as with us, ‘hearing about.’ Compare II, i, 39. 

205-208. WARBURTON: This is corrupted into miserable nonsense. We should 


read it thus: ‘This would have seem’d a period. But such | As love to amplify 


another’s sorrow, | To much, would make much more, and top extremity. Dopp 
(ii, 134) ingeniously perverts this into a reproach on Edmund: ‘ The bastard, whose 
savage nature is well display’d by it, desires to hear more; the gentle Albany, touch’d 
at the sad tale, begs him no more to melt his heart; upon which, Edgar observes, 
sensibly affected by Edmund’s inhumanity, ‘‘ One should have imagined, this would 
have seem’d a period, a sufficient end of woe, to such as love not sorrow, who are 
not pleased to hear of the distresses of others; but another (a person of another and 
more cruel temper) to amplify too much, (to augment and aggravate that which is 
already too great) would still make much more (would still increase it), and top 


extremity itself,” &c. Nothing can be plainer than this.’ HEATH understands 


‘another’ as referring to ‘ Kent, concerning whom the narration is immediately after 
continued.’ ‘But another (7. e. Kent) to amplify what was already too much, would 
make that much still more,’ &c. CAPELL’s text reads: ‘but, another ;— | (To 
amplify too-much, to make much more, | And top extremity,)’ |. Capell’s note on 


* To such as love not sorrow; but another, 
* To amplify too much, would make much more, 
* And top extremity. 

* Whilst I was big in clamour, came there in a man, 
* Who, having seen me in my worst estate, 210 
* Shunn’d my abhorr’d society; but then, finding — 

* Who ’twas that so endured, with his strong arms 


* He fasten’d on my neck, and bellow’d out > 
207. too much| too-much Cap. Steev. 210. worst estate| worser state Theob. “ 
Ec, Var. Coll. Del. Dyce, Huds. Warb. Johns. worse estate Knt. an) 
make much more,| make much, 211. then] now Theob. Warb. Johns. 
more, Johns, Jen. Sta. 212. that] had Theob. Warb. Johns. 
209. came there in] came there Theob. 213. fasten’d| Theob. faftened Qgq. 
Warb. Johns. Cap. Coll. Del. Sing. bellow’ d| bellowed Q,. 


Dyce, Wh. Ktly, Huds. 


the passage I transcribe for the benefit of the reader, who is doubtless quite as com- 
petent as I am, ‘to endow its purposes with words’: ‘The verses’ form was most 
easy; the change of ‘‘ would” into “to” presented sense, and points follow’d the 
sense. “much” and “too much” are put substantively; and “ another”? is—feke 
another, indicated by the tone and the pause: by which tone too, we may conceive. 
of what is put in parenthesis the sense following ;—sice you will put me upon 
amplifying what ts already too much, upon making much more, and topping ex- 
tremity, take another relation: The period contains a proper reproof of Edmund’s 
unfeelingness.’ STEEVENS thus paraphrases: ‘ This would have seemed a period to 
such as love not sorrow; but—another, z.¢. but I must add another, 7. e. another 
period, another kind of conclusion to my story, such as will increase the horrors of 
what has been already told.’ MALONE inclines to Dodd’s view: ‘ This, says Edgar, 
would have seemed the utmost completion of woe, to such as do not delight in 
sorrow; but another, of a different disposition, to amplify misery, would “ give more 
strength to that which hath too much.” Edgar’s words, however, may have no refer- 
ence to what Edmund has said, and he may only allude to the relation he is about 
to give of Kent’s adding a new sorrow to what Edgar already suffered, by recounting 
the miseries which the old king and his faithful follower had endured. STEEVENS: | 
Malone’s explanation may be just; and yet it is probable that we are struggling with 
a passage, the obscurity of which is derived from its corruption. CoLLIER: The 
disputed meaning seems to be: ‘but I have yet another misfortune to relate, which 
will make the rest too much,’ &c. MuirrorD (Gen. Mag., p. 469, 1844) thinks that 
a slight transposition will cure line 207, and proposes: ‘To amplify, qwozdd make 
much more too much. [All commentators, whether they understand ‘another’ as 
referring to maz or to misfortune, have taken ‘but’ in an adversative sense; but 
WRIGHT gives what seems the true explanation; he says:] ‘It seems better to take 
it as qualifying “ another,” as if [Edgar] said “ one more such circumstance only, by 
amplifying what is already too much, would add to it, and so exceed what seemed 
to be the limit of sorrow.” For this gerundial use of the infinitive, see III, v, 8.’ 


[The unaided Qq text is synonymous with. obscurity in almost every sentence.—ED. ] 
209. big] Dr.ius: Loud. 


* ‘Alb. 


” Qq, Mal. Bos. Coll. i, Wh. 


That | ever ear received; which in recounting 
grief grew pulasane oad the strings of life 

* Began to crack. Twice then the trumpets sounded, 

And there I left him tranced. _ 

But who was this? 

* Edg. Kent, sir, the banish’d Kent; who in disguise 220 
* Follow’d his enemy king, and did ae service 

* Improper for a slave.* 


inter a Gentleman, with a bloody knife. 
Gent. Help, help, oh, help! 
L£dg. ~ What kind of help? 
Alb, Speak, man! 


_ Edg. What means this bloody knife ? 


Gent. Tis hot, it smokes! 


223, &c. Gent.] Off. Cap. 
223. SCENE IX. Pope+, Jen. 
oh, help !| Om. Qq, Pope+. 


214. threw him] Theob. shrew me 


215. Told the most| And told the Q.. 


217. puissant | piersant Walker (Crit. 
iii, 284). 

218. crack. Twice] Theob. cracke 
twice, Qq. 

trumpets| trumpet Johns. Cap. 

Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. Knt, Sing. Ktly. 

221. Follow’d] Theob. Followed Qq. 

222. Enter...] Enter one witha bloudie 


223, 224. Edg. What kind...knife ?| 
Alb. What kinde of helpe, what meanes 
that bloudy knife ?Qq. 

224. this bloody| Ff+, Knt,Cam. Sch. 
that bloudy Qq et cet. 

’Tis| Its Qq. J#’s Cap. 

224,225.’ Tzs...dead/] Asin Steev.’85 
after Cap. One line, ending of— Qq. 


knife.Qq. Entera Gentleman. Ff. Re- Prose, Ff. First line ends heart, Rowet+, 
enter Officer hastily, with a bloody knife. Jen. 
Cap. 


214. him] (See Textual Notes.) Srrevens: There is tragic propriety in Kent’s 
throwing himself on the body of a deceased friend; but this propriety is lost in the 
act of clumsily tumbling a son over the lifeless remains of his father. MALONE: 
Kent, in his transport of joy at meeting Edgar, embraced him with such violence as 
to throw him on the dead body of Gloucester. Dyce (Remarks, p. 232): Kent’s 
tumbling down Edgar on the dead body of his father is an incident more suited to a 
comic pantomime than to a serious narrative in a tragedy. The progress of the error 
here is plain: ‘A7m’—‘’em’—‘me.’ Other corruptions may be traced in the same way ; 
for instance, we sometimes find ‘thou’ where the sense positively requires ‘ yon,’— 
the progress of that error having been—‘yon’—‘ you’—‘thou.” WuiTE: Does 
Edgar mean, ‘ Threw himself on my father’? the expression being like ‘ Ascends 
me into the brain.’ 

223. What kind of help?] W. W. Lioyp: I find something very expressive of 
the versatile and vigilant character of Edgar in this inquiry. 


It came even from the heart of—Oh, ane ’s dead 
Alb. Who dead? speak, man! 
Gent. Your lady, sir, your lady! and her sister 

By her is poison’d; she confesses it. 


Edm. Iwas conde to them both; all Let 


Now marry in an instant. 


Edg. Here comes ae eee ts) 
Alb. Produce the bodies, be they alive or dead. 


[Exit Gentleman. 


This judgement of the heavens, that makes us tremble, 


Touches us not with pity. [Zer Kent.]—Oh, is this he? 


The time will not allow the compliment 


Which very manners urges. 


Kent. I am come 235 
To bid my king and master aye good night. 


Is he not here ? 


Alb. Great thing of us forgot! 


225. It came] came FFF. 

Oh, she’s dead !| Om. Qgq. Cap. 
Mal. Steev.’93, Bos. Sing. Ktly. 

226. Who dead? speak, man !| Who 
man, fpeake? Q,. Who man? fpeake. 
Q,, Cap. Mal. Steev. Ec. Bos. Sing. Ktly. 
Who's dead ? Speak man. F +. 

228. poison’d| QFf+, Cap. Steev. 


Var. Knt, Del. Dycei, Wh. Sta. poy/oned ~ 


OP et cen: 

confesses| Ff+, Cap. Steev. Knt, 
Del. Sch. as confefi Q,. hath confeft 
Q, et cet. 

230. Edg....Kent.] Edg....Kent sir. 
(after Azzy, line 233), Qq, Jen. Steev. Ec. 
Var. Coll. Sing. Wh. Ktly. 

Kent.| Kent, sir. Qq, Cap. Jen. 
Steev. Ec, Var. Sing. Ktly. 
231. the] their Qa, Jen. 


alive] live F,F,, Rowe, Pope, 
Han. 

dead.| dead, Q,. dead: Q. 
dead; F. deadi F,, 


[Exit Gentleman.] Cam. Exit 
Gent. (after pity, line 233), Mal. et cet. 


Om. QqFf. 


232. judgement | [nuftice a Jen. 
tremble, | tremble. Ff. 
233. wus] Om. Q.. 

Enter Kent.] Q,. After Kezz, 
line 230, Ff+, Cap. After a//ow, line 
234, Q.. 
Oh, ts this he ?] Otis he, Qq, 
Mal. Ois this fhe? FFF ,, Rowe, Pope. 
Alb. O/ it zs he. Steev. Bos. Coll. Sing. 
Wh. Ktly. Alb. O, zs this he ? Jen. Ec. 
Coll. iii. 

233-235. Oh,...urges.| Two lines, the 
first ending a//ow, Qq, Johns. Jen. Ec. 

234. [To Kent. Han. 

235. Which] that Qq, Cap. 

urges | urge ¥ ., Rowe +, Jen. Ec. 

235, 236. L...night.] One line, Qq. 

235. fam] Sir, Jam Han. 

237 (and throughout the rest of the 
Scene), Alb.] Duke. Q.. 

237-239. Great... Kent ?] Prose, Q,. 

237. thing] things Q,. 

forgot !| Pope. forgot, Q.Ff. 
Sorgot. Q.. 


232, 233. TYRWHITT: If Sh, had studied Aristotle all his life, he would not perhaps 
have been able to mark with more precision the distinct operations of ¢error and pity. 
235. manners] WRIGHT: Used as a singular in Rom. & Ful. V, iii, 213: ¢ What 


manners is in this?’ 


os ¢, 
, wo —_ 
~~ = =i © 
[ow  °- = ~ 
‘ ‘ | 


KING LEAR 


eak, E ; aeoeres the Ging ? and where! s Cordelia?— 2 238 

est th ‘thou this object, Kent ? 

yk - [The bodies of Goneril and Regan ave brought in. : 

Kent. Alack, why thus? 

E ce a Yet Edmund was beloved; 240 

The one the other poison’d for my sake, . 

_ And after slew herself. am 
Alb, Even so.—Cover their faces. = 

: Edm. J pant for life; some good I mean to do, a 

~ Despite of mine own nature-—Quickly send, 2AE v 

_-—sCl Be brief in it, to th’ castle! for my writ “s 

Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia. 

Nay, send in time! 


‘ Alb. Run, run, oh, run! 
- Edg. To who, my lord?—Who has the office? send 
3 - Thy token of reprieve. 250 
., Edm. Wellthought on. Take my sword, 

Give it the captain. 
g Alb. Haste thee, for thy life! [Exit Edgar. 
4 239. [Pointing to the dead bodies. 247. and on| and Rowe, Han. Jen. 
Z Han. 248. oh, run!| O run, make haste. 
a [The...in.] Qq. (After line 238) Han. 
E* Dyce, Sta. Huds. Gonerill and Regans 249. To...ofice?| One line, Q.Ff, 
bs bodies brought out. (after dead. line 231) Rowe, Pope, Theob. i, Han. : 
% Ff+. To who] To whom FFF ,+, 
240-242. Vet...herself.] Prose, Q.. Jen. Ec. Coll, Del. Wh. Ktly, Huds. 

241. poison’ d | poyfoned Q,. . has| hath Qq, Glo.+. : 

% 244-248. J pant...time.| Prose, Q,. 251, 252. Weil...captain.| One line, 
ye 245. mine| my Qq. 


246. Be brief in it, to the| (Be briefe sword,Give| {word the Captaine, 
in it) to th’ Ff. Be briefe, int toth’ Q,. Give Q,, Jen. 


Z - bee bricfe, into the Q,, Pope+, Jen. _ 252. Alb.] Edg. Ff+, Jen. Steev. ’78, 
castle ! for my writ| Theob.(subs.) Sch. 
Caftie, for my Writ F,. cafile for my [ Exit Edgar. ] Mal. Exeunt Ed- 
writ, Qq. Chaftle for my Writ F,. gar, and Others. Cap. Exit Messenger. 
Caftle for my Writ FF ,. Theob. Exit a Captain. Sch. Om. 
DAless ees On. QqFf. 


246. brief] WricHT: Generally used of a narrative, and not of an action. Com- 
pare Rich. III: Il, ii, 43: ‘If you will live, lament; if die, be brief.’ 
249. To who] See IV, iii, 7. 
251,252. Noteworthy is the dramatic reading of Q,, followed by JENNENs: ¢ Take 
my sword, The Captain—give it the Bie ”—ED. 
29 


Edm. He hath commission from thy wife and me 
To hang Cordelia in the prison, and 
To lay the blame upon her own despair, 255 
That she fordid herself. 

Alb. The gods defend her !—Bear him hence awhile. 


“Re-enter LEAR, with CORDELIA dead in his arms; EDGAR, Captain, and others 
following, ~~ 


Lear. Howl, howl, howl! Oh, you are men of stones! 
Had I your tongues and eyes, I’ld use them so 
That heaven’s vault should crack! She’s gone for ever! 260 
I know when one is dead and when one lives. 
She’s dead as earth! Lend me a looking-glass ; 
If that her breath will mist or stain the stone, 


253-256. Prose, Q,. Four lines, end- 258. SCENE x. Pope+, Jen. 
ing me,...lay...de/paire.. her felfe, Q,- Howl,| Three times in Ff, Rowe, 
256. Om. Q,, Pope, Theob. Han. Knt, Del. Four times, Qq et cet. 
Warb. Cap. Mal. _ -you) your FF. 
257. [Edmund is borne off. Theob. stones] stone Pope+, Dyce ii, 
Re-enter...] Dyce. Enter... QqFf. Huds. Coll. iii. 
Lear...] Lear with Cordelia in 259. L’ld| [would Qq. 
his armes. QqFf. 260. She's] O, fhe ts Q,, Cap. Jen. 
dead] Rowe. Steev. Ec. Var. 
Edgar...following.] Edgar, and 263, 264. Jf...4ves.] One line in Q.. 
the rest, return. Cap. Edgar, Officer, 263. or] and Q,, Jen. 


and Others. Mal. Om. QqFf. 


256. fordid] Destroyed. See Ham. II, i, 103; V, i, 209. 

258. stones] WALKER (C77z. i, 237) cites this passage, in his Article xxxviii: On 
the frequent interpolation and omission of the final s in F,; so frequent, indeed, is 
this addition of the final s, that Walker ‘ would incline to think it originated in some 
peculiarity of Shakespeare’s handwriting, were it not that its frequency varies in 
different parts of the Folio, being comparatively rare in the Comedies (except, per- 
haps, in the Winter’s Tale), more common in the Histories, and quite common in 
the Tragedies” The following occur in the present tragedy, as noted by Walker: 
‘Place sézmes with Gold... Arme it in ragges,’ IV, vi, 163; ‘To come betwixt our 
sentences and our power,’ I, i, 169; ‘Since that respect and Fortunes are his love,’ 
I, i, 247; ‘He saies my Lord, your Daughters is not well,’ I, iv, 49; ‘And machi- 
nation ceases, Fortune owes you,’ V, i, 46; ‘For your claime faire Sisters,’ V, iii, 
85; and this present passage, to which a similar phrase occurs Zr. of Ven. IV, i, 313 
‘From brassie bosomes, and rough hearts of finds.’ So tooin Rich ZZ: III, vi, 224: 
‘Call them againe, I am not made of Stones.’ Of this error in the spelling of stones 
Walker candidly says that its ‘being so often repeated leads me to doubt whether it 
is an error at all,’ 

263. stone] CoLLier: This is altered to shine by the (MS) with great appear- 
ance of fitness, but we adhere to the old text as intelligible. ‘Stone’ and shine 


KING LEAR 


“Why, then she lives! 


Kent. Is this the promised end? | 264 


264. Why, then she] fhe then Q.. 


might be confounded by the old printer, and it was certainly the shine of the glass 
that was to be misted, or stained, by the breath of Cordelia. We relinquish shire 
unwillingly, Dertius: Lear refers to a crystal mirror, [Both Courter and SINGER 
withdrew their conjectures of stee/ and same respectively.] 

264, 265. Is... horror ?] CAPELL was the first to point out that ‘the “horror” 
of which this sight was the image; according to Edgar, is—the horror of the last day, 
or day of judgement, call’d emphatically—shaz horror.’ STEEVENS at first thought 
that Kent meant to ask: Is this conclusion such as the present turn of affairs seemed 
to promise? Or is it only, as Edgar replied, a representation of that horror which 
we suppose to be real? but Steevens afterwards acknowledged the excellence of the 
following explanation by Mason: By the ‘promised end’ Kent does not mean 
that conclusion which the state of their affairs seemed to promise; but the end of 
the world. In St. Mark’s Gospel, when Christ foretells to his disciples the end of 
the world, and is describing to them the signs that were to precede, and mark the 
approach of, our final dissolution, he says: ‘ For in those days shall be affliction such 
as was not from the beginning of the creation which God created, unto this time, 
neither shall be;’ and afterwards he says, ‘ Now the brother shall betray the brother 
to death, and the father the son; and the children shall rise up against their parents, 
and shall cause them to be put to death.’ Kent, in contemplating the unexampled 
scene of exquisite affliction which was then before him, and the unnatural attempt 
of Goneril and Regan against their father’s life, recollects these passages, and asks, 
whether that was the end of the world that had been foretold to us. To which 
Edgar adds, Or only a representation or resemblance of that horror? So Macbeth, 
when he calls upon Banquo, Malcolm, &c. to view Duncan murdered, says: ‘—up, 
up, and see The great doom’s image!’ There is evidently an allusion to the same 
passage in Scripture in a speech of Gloster’s which he makes, I, ii, 98, &c. If any 
critick should urge it as an objection to this explanation, that the persons of the drama 
are pagans, and, of consequence, unacquainted with the Scriptures, they give Sh. 
credit for more accuracy than I fear he possessed. S1TEEVENS: This note de- 
serves the highest praise, and is inserted with the utmost degree of gratitude to its 
author. [Although Mason’s view, for which a hint may have been supplied by 
Capell, is probably correct, yet the following note by HENLEY deserves consideration :] 
Does not this exclamation refer to the confidence expressed in her letter to himself, 
‘that—seeking to give losses their remedies—she should find time amidst the enor- 
mities of the state, to obtain the full effect of her purpose?’ As these words (sup- 
posing this to be their reference in the mouth of Kent) were not addressed to Edgar, 
there is no necessity for considering them as understood by him in their proper sense ; 
his resumption, therefore, or rather adaptation of them, may not only admit, but 
even require, a different interpretation. Mason’s is an ingenious, and may be the true 
one; for, though the passage of St. Mare, which he cites, does not refer to the ‘end 
of the world’ (as he might have learned from the 3oth verse of the same chapter)» 
but to the destruction of Jerusalem and the Jewish state, yet the prediction itself is 
vulgarly received in the sense in which he applies it. HIALLIWELL: The reference 


Pr | 
Edg. Or image of that horror ? saint MaDe 
Alb. : ¥ Fall and cease. u 265 
Lear. This feather stirs! she lives! If it be so, 
It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows 
265. Edg. Or....cease.] Om. Pope, 266-268. This... felt.] Prose, Q,. 
Theob. Han. Warb. 267. which] that Q,, Cap. Jen. Steev. 


Or...horror ?| Or...horror. Q,FE. Ec. Var. Sing. Ktly, Huds. 
Or...horror— Johns, O...horror / Cap. y 


is to the unexpected catastrophe, so unlooked for just at the moment when every- 
thing seemed to promise a happy termination to the innocent and injured parties in 
the drama, ' 

265. Fall and cease] CAPELL: These words were made very intelligible by the 
action accompanying; the wide display of his hands, and the lifting-up of his eye, 
both directed towards the heavens, would shew plain enough that it is they who are 
call’d upon to fai, and crush a world that is such a scene of calamity ... [The 
words mean] Fall, heaven! and let things cease!’ JENNENS tells us, ‘till a better 

# - emendation is proposed,’ to read as in his text: ‘Zag. O image of true honour! 
Be _ Alb, Fair and chaste.’ ‘Which,’ adds Jennens, ‘is a very natural exclamation on 
the murder of so amiable a creature.’ STEEVENS: Albany is looking with attention 
on the pains employed by Lear to recover his child, and knows to what miiseries he 
must survive when he finds them to be ineffectual. Having these images present to 
his eyes and imagination, he cries out: ‘ Rather fall, and cease to be at once, than 
continue in existence only to be wretched.’ Soin A//’s Weill, to cease is used for to 
die; and in Ham. the death of Majesty is called “the cease of majesty.’ See III, 
i, 7. MALONE: I doubt whether this speech is addressed to Lear. Mason: Pos- 
sibly this might be an allusion to the theatre, and Albany may mean to say, ‘Let 
fall the curtain, and end the horrid scene.” DaviEs (Dram. Mise. ii, 212): Perhaps 
Albany means, ‘ Lower your voice, and cease all exclamation, lest you interrupt the 
dying king.’ This is not unlike to the word ‘quietness’ in Amz. G Cleop. : Char- 
mian, on the Queen’s fainting, whispers to Iras, ‘O quietness!’ DELIUS supposes 
that Edgar and Albany continue Kent’s train of thought. Kent asks: Is this the 
promised end of the world? Or the image of that horror? asks Edgar. Of that 
fall and cease? continues Albany, ‘ Fall and cease’ are, therefore, to be considered 
substantives, and in apposition to ‘that horror.’ In his text Delius puts an interroga- 
tion-mark after ‘cease.’ MOBERLY seems to adopt Delius’s view: ‘“ Yes,” replies 
Albany, ‘of the general fall and cessation of all things.””’ [Would not the gaze of 
every spectator be riveted horrorstruck upon Lear and Cordelia? and is it likely that 
Albany’s attention would be so far diverted from the sight as to reply to Edgar’s 
question, which really needed no answer? If ‘ Fall and cease’ be addressed to Lear, 
there is a curt harshness in the words which is scarcely in keeping with Atbany’s 
character. I have tried in vain to find authority for interpreting ‘ Fall’ in the sense 
of ‘Fall back,’ ‘Give way.’ Then the sentence might be addressed to Kent and 
Edgar, and equivalent to ‘Make room, and hush.’ After all, Capell’s interpretation 
may be the true one; and yet, an address to the Heavens, unaccompanied by any 
invocation, is unusual, to say the least.—Ep. ] 

266, feather] WHALLEY: Compare 2 Hen. JV. IV, y, 31, 32: ‘By his gates of 
breath There lies a downy feather which stirs not.’ 


oO my good ee 
, away | 
"| ’Tis noble Kent, your friend. 
‘ Sod playa “oe you, mivederets, traitors all! 


em i 
ai ae. is’t ie ees td eg voice was ever soft, 
oa ~ Gentle and low, an excellent thing in woman.— 


Se 
pee ‘I kill’d the slave that was a-hanging thee. 275 
ms Capt. ’Tis true, my lords, he did. ‘ 
ye Oz Did I not, fellow? ai 
_ T have seen the day, with my good biting falchion a 
I would have made them skip. I am old now, . 7 
se a, . 268. O my] A myQq. Ah! my Jen. 275. a-hanging | Hyphen, Dyce. 
ee, [Kneeling. Theob. 276. Capt.] Gent. Ff. ’ 
" 270-275. Prose, Q.. 276-280. Did....straight.| Lines end 
<> 270. you,| your Q,. day,...would...now,...you ?... firaight. Q,. 
- murderers,| Murderors,F,. mur- Prose, Q.. 
4 _——stherers, FFF. murderousQ,. mur-  . 277. Ihave] [ha Q,. I’ve Popet, 
“ drous Q., Johns. Jen. Dyce ii, Huds. 
oe 272. Ha!| Om. Q,. (Begins line with my good| that with my Q,. 
ae 273), Cap. falchion| Fauchon Q,. Fauchion 
j —— 273. say’ st| fayefiQ,. fayfiQ,. fait Q,. Faulchion FE. 
.?, Ff. 278. them] him Ff, Rowe, Sch. 


274. woman] women Qq. Jen. 


270. murderers] Moperty: They have distracted his attention for a moment, 
‘- and in that moment he might have saved his child. 
4 271. I might have, &c.] ScHMmipT adopts in his text an emendation, which, he 
says, was proposed by EMIL PALLESKE: ‘ Ye might have,’ &c. ‘This emendation,’ 
Schmidt adds, ‘is so obvious and simple as to need no vindication.’ [Does not 
the preceding note by Moberly reveal that change is needless ?—Ep. ] 

273. voice] Moserty: This wonderfully quiet touch seems to complete the per- 
fection of Cordelia’s character, evidently the poet’s best loved creation, his type of 
the ideal Englishwoman. Her voice was the outward signature of her graciously- 
tempered nature. Burke’s description of his wife is a master’s variation on Shake- 
speare’s theme: ‘Her eyes have a mild light, but they awe you when she pleases; 
they command, like a good man out of office, not by authority, but by virtue. Her 
smiles are inexpressible. Her voice is a soft, low music, not formed to rule in public 
assemblies, but to charm those who can distinguish a company from a crowd. It has 

this advantage, you must be close to her to hear it.’ 

275. a-hanging] See AbsorT, § 24. 

277. falchion] WricHT: Properly a curved sword, ascimetar, In the Author- 
ized Version of Yudith, xiii, 6, it is spelled ‘ fauchin.’ 

29 * 


— 


KING LEAR 


And these same crosses spoil me-—Who are you? : nhs og 
Mine eyes are not o’ th’ best; I’ll tell you straight. . 280_ 
Kent. If fortune brag of two she loved and hated, 
One of them we behold. 
Lear, This’ a dull sight—Are you not Kent? 
Kent. The same, 
Your servant Kent. Where is your servant Caius? 


280. not o th’| not othe Q,. none Coll. iii (? 77s Huds.). Om. Qq, Pope, 
oth Q,, Rowe+, Cap. Jen. Steev. Var. Theob, Han. Warb. This is a dull fight 


Sing. Ktly. och F,. 0 th’ ¥F,. Ff et cet. 
281. brag] bragd Qq. 283.. you not] not you Qq. 
and| or Qq. 283,284. The same,...Caius?| As in 
282. we] you Jen. Cap. One line, Qq. Two, the first 


283. This’ a@ dull sight| Walker, Sch. ending Kenz, in Ff+, Jen. Mal. Sch. 
This is a dull light Jen. Wh. Huds. 


281, 282. If... behold] CAPELL: In Kent’s speech the two objects of fortune’s 
love and her hate are,—himself, and his master; they had both felt them, and both 
in extremity, hence the making her ‘brag’ of what had afforded her so notable a 
display of her power: of these two, says the speaker, you (the person spoke to) 
‘behold’ one, and I another. Eccies: I think Kent speaks of the object of her 
‘love’ indefinitely, without intending any particular person, but considers himself as 
the object of her ‘hate.’ MALONE: Kent may be only thinking of Lear, the object 
of her hate. MAson is non-committal, and tells us that ‘the latter,’ whom we now 
behold, is the object of fortune’s hate, but he does not tell us whether ‘the latter’ is 
Lear or Kent. DE.tus thinks it refers to Lear, as does also MOBERLY, ‘if the reading 
is correct.’? [Justice has scarcely been done, I think, to Jennens’s reading here; 
which might be improved, perhaps, by changing, as more in accordance with the 
ductus literarum, you to ye. Thus read, Kent refers to himself, in answer to Lear’s 
question, ‘ Who are you ?’—EpD. | 

283. This ... sight] CAPELL changed this phrase to ‘ This sight of mine | Is a 
dull sight,’ aaa remarks in his notes: ‘The language of the addition is so natural, 
and the addition so necessary, it will probably have the suffrage of all persons of 
candour as a good and certain amendment.’ JENNENS: The context seems to require 
we should read Zight. COLLIER (ed. 2) pronounces this change of ‘sight’ to Aight, 
which is also found in the (MS),-a very happy literal improvement. WHITE does 
not hesitate to adopt it, considering the ease with which the old long / and the 2 
might be mistaken for each other.: ‘ Lear’s evil day draws to its close, and “those 
that look out of the windows are darkened.”?’? WALKER ( Vers. 80) would divide 
the lines thus: One of them we behold, This’ a dull sight: | Are you not Kent? 
The same; your servant Kent. | Hupson: ‘Sight’ can have no fitness here, unless 
as referring to Lear’s eyesight. He is dying of heart-break; and, as often happens 
on the approach of death, he mistakes the sudden dimming of his eyes for a defect 
of light. Goethe’s last words are said to have been § More light!’ ABBoTT, § 461: 
We ought to scan ‘ This is a | dull sight | Aré you | not Ként? | The same.’ Cot. 
LIER (ed. 3): Lear has just before said that his ‘eyes are not of the best,’ and here 
he complains of the want of /igA¢, and does not mean to make the mere observation, 


nS Bier. He’s a good fellow, I can tell you that; 
| «He'll strike, and quickly too. He’s dead and Steen: 


Kent. No, my good lord; I am the very man— 


Lear. I1’ll see that seaieht 


Kent. That from your first of difference and decay 


Have follow’d your sad steps— 


Lear. 


You are welcome hither. 290 


Kent. Norno manelse. All’s cheerless, dark and deadly. 
Your eldest daughters have fordone themselves, 


285. He’s a]—He’s F,. "Twas a 
Theob. Han. Warb. Johns. Jen. 
you| Om. Qq. 
286. He’/]] He’d Theob. Han. Warb. 
Johns. Jen. 
287. man—] Pope. man. QqFf, Sch. 
288. [Looking at him more closely. 
Col. iii. 
289. first] life Qq, Pope. 
290. Have| Hane F,, 
Jollow d| followed Qq. 
steps—] Rowe, Pope, Theob. 


290. You are] You'rQ,. Vourare F,. 
You’re Pope+, Cap. Dyce ii. 
hither| hether Q.. 

291. Wor] ’ Zwas Pope, Han, 
Nor...deadly.| Two lines, Ff. 
else.| Johns. Jen. Del. Clarke. 

else ;— Theob. Warb. ed/e- QqFf et cet. 
All's] als Q, 
deadly| dead Theob. Warb. 
Johns. 

292. fordone| fore-done Ff. fore- 

doome Q,. foredoom’d Q,, Cap. Steev. 


Warb. Johns. Jen. Del. Ktly, Wr. stegs. 
QaqFf et cet. 


Ec. Var. Sing. Coll. ii, Ktly. 


‘This is a dull ségh¢t;’ the poor old king would hardly call the corpse of his darling 
daughter ‘a dull sight’; he is looking at Kent, whom he hardly recognizes, and com- 
plains of the bad Zg#/ which prevents him from seeing clearly. [In the text, for the 
sake of the metre, I have followed WALKER, who ( Vers. 30) suggested that Zhzs zs 
of the Ff should be contracted into a monosyllable, as it is in ‘ This’ a good block,’ 
IV, vi, 181.—Ep.] 
289. first of difference] ScHmipT: Compare ‘That from my first have been 
inclined to thrift.’— 77m. I, i, 118; ‘their first of manhood.’—/Macé. V, ii, 10. 

_ 291. Nor no man else] CapELL: The true force of these words is: Welcome, 
alas! here’s no welcome for me or any one. [Thig interpretation is hardly satis- 
factory, and yet it is apparently almost the only one which the punctuation of the 
QgqFf will yield. Rowe’s punctuation after ‘steps,’ which is followed above, in the 
text, seems better. Kent says, in effect, ‘I am the very man, and no one else, that 
has followed your sad steps.’ He does not catch either of Lear’s low apathetic 
replies : ‘I'll see that straight’ and ‘ You are welcome hither.’ This is also the view 
of Detius and of CLarKE. But ULrict objects to it, and says that not only does it 
leave ‘nor’ unaccounted for, but it is false in fact, since the Fool as well as Kent 
accompanied from the first Lear’s sad steps, and that, moreover, ‘else’ is unex- 
plained. Instead of the present text, Ulrici proposes to transpose the ‘ Nor’ and the 
‘no’: «No, nor man else,” that is, ‘No, neither I nor any other man is welcome 
here; here all’s cheerless, dark,’ &c. This agrees substantially with Capel ], and 
with MoBERLY, who paraphrases: ‘ Who can be “ welcome” to such a scene as this? ”] 

292. fordone] CAreLL: The propriety of fore- -doom' d strikes at first thought; the 


And desperately are dead. 
Lear. e wAR So" 1 think 
Als. He knows not what he says, and vain is it 
That we present us to him. « 
Fdg. Very bootless. 


Enter a Captain.» 


Capit. Edmund is aeag my lord. 


Al. 


That’s but a trifle here.— 


You lords and noble friends, know our intent: 

What comfort to this great decay may come 

Shall be applied. For us, we will resign, 

During the life of this old majesty, 300 
To him our absolute power.—[ Zo Edgar and Keni| You, to 


your rights ; 


With boot, and such addition as your honours 
Have more than merited. All friends shall taste 


293. Ay, so I think.| So thinke I to. 
Q,. So Lthinke too. Q,. 

294. says] faies F,. /ayes ¥¥,F,. 
Sees Qq, Jen. Sing. Ktly. 

zs 2f| zt 2s Qq, Cap. Jen. Steev. 

Ec. Var. Knt, Sing. Sta. Ktly, Glo. Wr. 

295. Enter....] Enter Captaine. Qq. 


Enter a Meffenger. (after Aim), Ff, ~ 


Rowe. 
296. Capt.] Mefs. or Mes. Ff. © 
296-310. That’s.,.sir.| Prose, Qq. 


296. here] Om. Pope, Theob. Han. 
Warb. 
2098. great] Om. Qq. 
301. [To Edgar and Kent] Mal. To 
Edg. Rowe. Om. QqFf. 
You, to your] to you, your Popet+, 
Jen. 


302. honours] honor Q,. 
303-305. Adi...see/] Asin Pope. The 
first line ends /2a// in Ff. 


sense of ‘fordone’ is imply’d in the words of the next line, and therefore useless in 
this. CoLLIER: Only Goneril has ‘fordone’ or destroyed herself. 

293. desperately] ScumipT: That is, in despair, so that their souls are lost, with- 
out hope of salvation, The phrase is thus applied to Barnardine in Afeas. for Meas. 
IV, ii, 152: ‘insensible of mortality and desperately mortal,’ 7. e. devoted to death 


without hope of salvation. 


294. says] (See Textual Notes.) JENNENS: The sense is, he won’t know us when 
he sees us, therefore ’tis in vain to present ourselves to him. 

298. great decay] CapELL: ‘ Decay’ stands for—decay’d person or thing, by the 
same figure that makes ‘majesty’ the person of majesty. STEEVENS: This means 
Lear, as if he had said, ‘this piece of decay’d royalty,’ ‘ this ruin’d majesty.’ DELIUS, 
I think, is right in referring it not to Lear, of whom Albany speaks afterwards as 
‘this old majesty,’ but to the collective misfortunes which this scene reveals. 

302. honours] Mason: These lines are addressed to Kent as well as Edgar; 
else the word ‘honours’ would not have been in the plural. 


KING LEAR 


_ The wages of their virtue, and all foes 


‘The cup of their deservings.—Oh, see, see ! 305 n 
Lear. And my poor fool is hang’d! No, no, no life! 
_ Why should a dog, a horse, a rat, have life, 3 
And thou no breath at all? Thou’'lt come no more, = 


_ Never, never, never, never, never !— 


305. Oh, see, see !| Given to Lear by 308. Thow'lt] O thou wilt Qa, Cap. i 
Han. Jen. Steev. Ec. Var. 

306. Mo, no, 20] no, no Qq. 309. Never] Three times in Qq, Jen. 

307. have] of Q,. Six times in Ktly. 


305. Oh, see, see!] CaPELL: These words are occasion’d by seeing Lear exert 
himself to embrace the body he lay upon once more, and pour his agonies over it. 

306. my poor fool] STzEvENs: This is an expression of tenderness ‘for his dead. 
Cordelia (not his Fool, as some have thought), on whose lips he is still intent, and 


2 4 dies away while he is searching there for indications of life. ‘ Poor fool,’ in the age 
3 of Sh., was an expression of endearment. I may add, that the Fool of Lear was 
4 long ago forgotten. Having filled the space allotted him in the arrangement of the 
a play, he appears to have been silently withdrawn, III, vi, That the thoughts of a 
7 _ father, in the bitterest of all moments, while his favourite child lay dead in his arms, 


f should recur to the antick who had formerly diverted him, has somewhat in it that I 

4 cannot reconcile to the idea of genuine sorrow and despair. Besides this, Cordelia 

was recently hanged; but we know not that the Fool had suffered in the same man- 

= ner, nor can imagine why he should. The party adverse to Lear was little interested 

. in the fate of his jester. The only use of him was to contrast and alleviate the sor- 

=z rows of his master; and, that purpose being fully answered, the poet’s solicitude about 

him was at an end. The term ‘ poor fool’ might indeed have misbecome the mouth 

of a vassal commiserating the untimely end of a princess, but has no impropriety 

when used by a weak, old, distracted king, in whose mind the distinctions of nature 

only survive, while he is uttering his last frantic exclamations over a murdered 

coe daughter. Sir JosHUA REyNoLDs: I confess I am one of those who have thought 
that Lear means his Fool, and not Cordelia. If he means Cordelia, then what I P 

have always considered as a beauty, is of the same kind as the accidental stroke of 

the pencil that produced the foam. Leat’s affectionate remembrance of the Fool, in 

this place, I used to think, was one of those strokes’ of genius, or of nature, which 

are so often found in Sh., and in him only. Lear appears to have a particular affec- 

tion for this Fool, whose fidelity in attending him, and endeavouring to divert him 

in his distress, seems to deserve all his kindness. ‘ Poor fool and knayve,’ says he, in 

the midst of the thunder-storm, ‘I have one part in my heart that’s sorry yet for 

thee.’ It does not, therefore, appear to me, to be allowing too much consequence to 

the Fool, in making Lear bestow a thought on him, even when in still greater distress, 

Lear is represented as a good-natured, passionate, and rather weak, old man; it is the 

old age of a cockered spoilt boy. There is no impropriety in giving to such a cha- 

racter those tender domestic affections which would ill become a more heroic cha- 

racter, such as Othello, Macbeth, or Richard III. The words, ‘ No, no, no life,’ I 

suppose to be spoken, not tenderly, but with passion: Let nothing now live ;—let 

there be universal destruction;—‘ Why should a dog, a horse, a rat, have life, and 


7 


KING LEAR 


re I IT — ~ = — _ J 
[306. my poor fool.] 


thou no breath at all?” It may be observed, that as there was a necessity, the neces- 


sity of propriety at least, that this Fool, the favourite of the author, of Lear, and 
consequently of the audience, should not be lost or forgot, it ought to be known what 
became of him. However, it must be acknowledged, that we cannot infer much 


‘from thence; Sh. is not always attentive to finish the figures of his groups. I have 


only to add, that if an actor, by adopting the interpretation mentioned above, should 
apply the words.‘ poor fool’ to Cordelia, the audience’ would, I should imagine, think 


it a strange mode of expressing the grief and affection of a father for his dead daugh- _ 


ter, and that daughter a queen. The words ‘poor fool’ are undoubtedly expressive 
of endearment, and Sh. himself, in another place, speaking of a dying animal, calls 
it ‘poor dappled fool,’ but it never is, nor never can be, used with any degree of 
propriety, but to commiserate some very inferior object, which may be loved, without 
much esteem or respect. MALONE: I have not the smallest doubt that Mr Steevens’s 
interpretation of these words is the true one. The passage, indeed, before us appears 
to me so clear, and so inapplicable to any person but Cordelia, that I fear the reader 
may think any further comment on it altogether superfluous. It is observable that 
Lear, from the time of his entrance in this scene to his uttering these words, and 
from thence to his death, is wholly occupied by the loss of his daughter. He is 
diverted, indeed, from it for a moment by the intrusion of Kent, who forces himself 
on his notice; but he instantly returns to his beloved Cordelia, over whose dead body 
he continues to hang. He is now himself in the agony of death; and surely at such 
a time, when his heart is just breaking, it would be highly unnatural that he should 
think of his Fool. But the great and decisive objection to such a supposition is that 
which Mr Steevens has mentioned—that Lear had just seen his daughter hanged, 
having unfortunately been admitted too late to preserve her life, though time enough to 
punish the perpetrator of the act; but we have no authority whatsoever for supposing 
his Fool hanged also. Whether the expression ‘ poor fool’ can be applied with pro- 
priety only to ‘inferior objects, for whom we have not much respect or esteem,’ is 
not, I conceive, the question, Sh. does not always use his terms with strict propriety, 
but he is always the best commentator on himself, and he certainly Zas applied this 
term in another place to the young, the beautiful, and innocent Adonis, the object 
of somewhat more than the esteem of a goddess: ‘ For pity now she can no more 
detain him; The poor fool prays her that he may depart.’ In Old English a foo/ 
and an zzmocent were synonymous terms. Hence, probably, the peculiar use of the 
expression ‘poor fool.’ In the passage before us Lear, I conceive, means by it dear, 
tender, helpless tnnocence! RANN: My hapless, innocent Cordelia. As You LIKE 
It (Gent. Mag. 1x, 402) imagines ‘ poor soul’ to be the original phrase. KNIGHT: 
‘Poor fool’ might indeed be here employed something like the ‘ excellent wretch’ 
of Othello; but we cannot avoid thinking that Sh., in this place, meant to express 
a peculiar tenderness, derived from Lear’s confused recollection of his regard for his 
poor follower, the Fool. In the depth of his distress during the storm Lear says: 
* Poor fool and knave, I have one part in my heart that’s sorry yet for thee.” And 
now, when the last and deepest calamity has fallen upon him, his expressions shape 
and Cordele 's ie “poor fool? COLA stint ae ae 
been hanged, the poet would hen robebli hos eek 
Pe. : Sie iat, P y chosen some other death for the Fool, 

: quite clear, supposing Lear to have allowed his thoughts 


_ Pray you, undo this button. Thank you, sir. 


a 310 
Do you see this? Look on her,—look,—her lips,— 

310. Pray you] pray Q,. 311. look,—her lips,—] Johns, (subs.) 

310-312. sir. Do...there!] fir, O, 0, Looke her lips, F,. looke on her lips, 

mer 0, 0, O:. Jt; O, 0, 0, 0, 0. Q,. F,. look on her lips, FF, Rowe, Pope, 

i? 311. on her,] on her? F,. Theob. Han. Warb. Cap. Ec. 


_ thus to wander from his daughter, lying dead before him. On the other hand, if Sh. 


did not mean to revert to the Fool, he has certainly omitted to account for a promi- 
nent and interesting character. WVERPLANCK: With this customary and familiar use 
of the phrase, when the whole interest of the scene is fixed on Cordelia’s death, and 
Lear himself, in the same breath addressing her (‘ And thou no breath at all? Thow'lt 
come no more’), it seems to me evident that it is to Cordelia alone that the phrase 
can allude. Hupson: These words refer, not to the Fool, but to Cordelia, on whose 
lips the old king is still intent, and dies while he is searching there for indications 
of life. W. W. Lioyp: I have no doubt that Sh. intended the Fool should be re- 
membered in Lear’s last exclamation, though no more may be meant than that in his 
wandering state he confuses the image of the Fool with that of his daughter in his 
arms. HALLIWELL: ‘Poor fool’ was formerly a common phrase of endearment. 
So Julia, speaking of Proteus, says: * Alas, poor fool! why do I pity him?’ The 
expression occurs as one of endearment, applied to a woman, in Cokain’s 7rappolin 
Suppos d a Prince, 1658:‘—You saw how I was employ’d; I could not leave the 
poor fool,—your lordship sees she loves me, and protest her labour is not lost” The 
old king is evidently thinking of his daughter, and knows the manner of her death, 
nay, kills the slave that did it, and eve he exclaims immediately after calling her 
poor fool, unbutton here, look on her, &c. I do. not think that it is even necessary 
to allow for the broken thought and incoherent expression of a madman, and imagine 
that his ideas of who is the victim, his daughter or his Fool, are confused in his 
crushed intellect. Dttus: Cordelia is here referred to, CHAMBERS: Not the Fool, 
but Cordelia. CowbDEN CLARKE: A term of endearment applied by Lear to his 


dead daughter. We do not believe that Sh. would have made the bereaved father 
recur for even one moment to any thought of other loss than the one before him—- 


his murdered daughter. Furthermore, if Sh. had intended to denote a tender remi- 
niscence of the Fool on the part of his old master, and to take an opportunity of 
definitely stating the mode of the Fool’s death, we do not think that he would have 
made this the opportunity, or Aanging the means by which the lad came to his end; 
he would not have reserved Lear’s mention of the faithful jester until a time when 
the father’s whole soul is engrossed with but one idea, nor would he have committed 
the dramatic tautology, as well as the dramatic injury to tragic effect, of making the 
Fool, as well as Cordelia, ‘hang’d.’ MosBerty: ‘ My poor darling.” He means Cor- 
delia, as the next words plainly show. WricHT: Cordelia; not the Fool. See 
Much Ado, Ul, i, 326: ‘1 thank it, poor fool, it keeps on the windy side of care.’ 
DyYCE ( Gloss.) : That is, Cordelia. WHITE and STAUNTON are silent. [Very reluc- 
tantly I have come to the conviction that this refers to Cordelia.—ED. | 

310. button] THE QUARTERLY REVIEW (April, 1833, p. 197): Scarcely have the 
spectators of this anguish had time to mark and express to each other their convic- 
tion of the extinction of his mind, when some physical alteration, made dreadfully 


Look there !—look there! 


Edg. He faints—My lord, my land 
Kent. Break, heart; I prithee, break! 
Edg. Look up, my lord. 
Kent. Vex not his ghost. Oh, let him pass! he hates him 
That would upon the rack of this tough world S15. 
“2 


3i2. [Dies.] H edis. F,. He dyes. Pope. 
F, He dies. FF. Om. “Qq. 314-316. Vex....longer.| Lines end 
faints.] Johns. faints, Q,Ff+. paffe,...wracke,...longer. Qq. 


faints Q,. 314. hates him] hates him much Qu» 
My lord, my lord!\ my lord. Glo. Wr. 
Fi}. 315. rack] wracke Qq¥ F,. wrackF,. 
313. Kent.] Lear, Qq. tough] rough Q.Q,, Pope+, Cap. 
up,| up QqF,. ¢o FFF, Rowe, 


visible, urges Albany to cry out, ‘Oh see, see!’ The intense excitement which Lear 
had undergone, and which lent for a time a supposititious life to his enfeebled frame, 
gives place to the exhaustion of despair. But even here, where any other mind 
would have confined itself to the single passion of parental despair, Sh. contrives to 
indicate by a gesture the very train of internal physical changes which are causing 
death. The blood gathering about the heart can no longer be propelled by its 
enfeebled impulse. Lear, too weak to relieve the impediments of his dress, 
which he imagines cause the sense of suffocation, asks a bystander to ‘ undo this 
button.’ 

313. Break... break!] (See Textual Notes.) WHITE: I am not sure that this 
speech does not belong to Lear. The stage-direction ‘ He dies,’ at the end of Lear’s 
foregoing speech, may be only a timely warning to the prompter, such as is con- 
stantly to be found in our old dramas, Possibly Lear was supposed to expire during 
Kent’s next speech. 

315. tough] Dycr (Rem. p. 232): Read, by all means, as Pope did, ‘rough.’ 
[Which Dyce, by no means, read when he came to print his edition.] CoLLTER (ed. 
2): ‘Tough’ does not so much apply to the ‘ world’ as to the ‘rack,’ on which Lear 
was not to be stretched out longer. WHITE: I am almost sure that Sh. wrote ‘ rough 
world.’ CAMBRIDGE EprTors: CAPELL reads rough in his text, believing that he 
had the authority of the first-Quarto [Q,] for it; but in his own copy, and that of 
the Duke of Devonshire, the reading is plainly ‘tough,’ though the ‘t’ is broken. 
[My copy of Q, once belonged to Capell, and was apparently his working copy, for 
it bears throughout, in Capell’s painfully neat and painfully illegible handwriting, a 
tolerably thorough collation with Q.. Now, singularly enough, in this copy the first 
letter in ‘tough’ is so much like an 7 (albeit a thick, clumsy one) that it would not 
occur to any one, at first sight, that the word was other than rough. It is only after 
close scrutiny, and a comparison with other imperfect letters, that it would enter any 
one’s imagination that perhaps the word might be ¢ tough.’ Capell evidently read it 
rough, and so did the printer of Jane Bell’s Quarto, who followed this edition and 


not Q.; I have, therefore, felt justified in recording it as such in the Textual Notes. 
--ED. | 


ee. ee 


Fy Se 


7 


KING LEAR 


tretch Hien ‘out longer. 
Edg. He is gone indeed. 316 
Kent. The wonder is he hath endured so long; 
He but usurp’d his life. 
Alb. Bear them from hence—Our present business 
Je general woe—[ To Kent and Edgar| Friends of my soul, 
“4 you twain 320 
Rule in this realm and the gored state sustain. 
Kent. J have a journey, sir, shortly to go; 


My master calls me, I must not say no. 


fdg. The weight of this sad time we must obey, 


Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say. 325 
316. He] O he Qaq, Jen. Steev. Ec. Or 
Var. Sing. Ktly. 323. calls me, [| cals, and J Qq, Jen. 
319. Alb.] Duke. Qq. Steey. Ec. Var. Sing. Ktly. 
320. Ls] Zs to Qq. [Dyes. F,. Dies. F,F,, Rowe, 
[To Kent and Edgar] Johns. Pope, Theob, Warb. Johns. Om. QqF,. 
321. realm] kingdome Qq. 324. Edg.] Ff, Rowe, Del. Sch. 


gored | gord¥f. goardQ,. good Duke. Qq. Alb. Pope et cet. 


321. sustain] JENNENS: The play would end best here. 

322, 323. JENNENS: Kent only declines the share in the government on account 
of his age. How unexpectedly and awkwardly would he die, after saying only, he 
had a journey shortly to go, and without bidding farewel/, or discovering any symp- 
toms of death. MALONE: Kent on his entrance in this scene says: ‘I am come To 
bid my king and master aye good night,’ but this, like the present speech, only marks 
the despondency of the speaker. The word ‘shortly’ decisively proves that Sh. did 
not mean to make him die on the stage. COLLIER: The stage-direction in F, is 
struck out by the (MS). Moseriy: ‘A journey’ to another world. So Horatio 
wishes to drink the remainder of the poison until hindered by the dying Hamlet. 
Kent, like Horatio, has ‘much of the Roman in him.’ CoLLigr (ed. 3): The con- 
cluding Scene of this noble tragedy is most imperfectly given in all impressions, 
whether Quarto or Folio. Possibly it was acted differently at different times and 
theatres; but, of course, this is only conjecture. ScHMIDT: ‘My master’ is Lear. 
It would be hard to find in Sh. a reference to God as ‘ master,’ 

324. Edg.] THEOBALD: This speech is given, in the Ff, to Edgar. Being a more 
favourite actor than he who performed Albany, in spite of decorum it was thought 
proper he should have the last word. WALKER (C777. ii, 185): It seems to me just 
possible,—yet hardly so,—that the Folio may be right. HALLIWELL: This speech is 
rightly assigned in the Qq to Albany, not to Edgar, as in the Ff, Albany being the 
person of greatest authority in the scene. It likewise appears to be intended as a 
gentle reproof to Kent’s despairing speech, telling him that ‘the weight of this sad 
time we must obey.’ Had Kent died, some sensation would have been created, and 
his death not passed over as a piece of stage-show that is expected; and the speech 
of Albany would have lost its pertinence. ScumipT: This speech clearly belongs 


30 


ne tes athe oe 327, mor 
x gem) oneal forme Qu mig | 


to ear, Hh me a reply to Albany is is due. ae the 
he says, viz. that for the moment he is incapable of saying what he ought, t 
—- means befits Albany, who, during this last tragic scene, has not for a moment lost 
Vay sight of public interests. On the other hand, the last two lines are in character 
spoken by the Duke, to whom dramatic etiquette gives the last word. Perhaps the 
____ true order might be restored by dividing these last few lines between them. - 
aye: 326, 327. JENNENS: The two last [sic] lines, as they stand, are silly and false; 
and are only inserted that any one may alter them for the better if they can. Hanmer 
has not made them a jot better. CAPELL thinks that Albany intimates that his life 
es will be shortened by the terrible scenes he has lived through. EccLies: The sense 
. : of this seemingly childish sentence would be somewhat mended by reading ‘and 
live so long.’ Dyce (ed. 2): The last line of this speech is certainly obscure in 
meaning. 

327. MoperLy: Age and fulness of sorrows have been the same-thing to the 
unhappy Lear; his life has been prolonged into times so dark in their misery and so- 
fierce in their unparalleled ingratitude and reckless passion, that even if we live as 
long as he has (which will hardly be), our existence will never light on days as evil 
as those which he has seen, 


Dis 2 Saal a a 8 


: pe 3 In the Registers of the Stationers Company,* for the year 1594, we find the fol- 
____ lowing entry: 
“vt /  tilijte die Muaij. 


pe 3 z ip] Entred alfoe for his Copie vnder th andes of bothe the wardens 
__ _Edward White.|. a booke entituled | 7%e mo/te famous Chronicle hiftorye of LEIRt 
; : hinge of England and his Three Daughters . . . vjiC,. 


Of this book no copy is known to be extant; this is the only trace we have of 
it. Possibly but few copies were issued; Edward White was not, at that time, a 
prominent stationer. If we were certain that this ‘booke’ was a drama we should 
_ be at liberty to conjecture that it is the original on which Shakespeare founded his 

_ tragedy, and that it has eluded our search out of the sheer perversity of that ‘ nature 
of things’ which Porson was wont to damn, and which seems to envelope in a thick 

_ mist everything pertaining to Shakespeare. But we know nothing more about it 
than is contained in the foregoing entry, and in this ignorance we get what comfort 
we may from the supposition that it is not really lost, but re-appears in the follow- 
ing entries: ¢ 


8 maij [1605] 
Simon Stafford Entred for his Copie vnder th andes of the Wardens A booke 
called ‘the Tragecall hiftorie of kinge LEIR and his Three 
Daughiers &c. Asitwaslatelie Acted . . . . « .« Vjt 


John Wright | Entred for his Copie by affignement from Simon Stafford and 
by confent of Mafter Leake, The Tragicall hiftory of kinge 
LEIRE and his Three Daughters | PROVIDED that Simon Staf- 
ford fhall haue the printinge of this booke|| . . . . vj@ 


: [It is evident that King Lear was printed by S. Stafford before 
A the 8th May, 1605, though not entered until it was assigned on 
4 that date.—ARBER. ] 

¥ | A few copies of this ‘booke’ are extant. It is perhaps worth noting that the 
; title which they now bear does not correspond exactly with that in the registered 
1 entry. The present title, as given by CAPELL (vol. i, p. 55), is as follows: ‘ The | 

a True Chronicle Hi- | ftory of King Letr, and his three | daughters, Gonorill, Ra- 
A gan, | and Cordella. | As it hath bene divers and fundry | times lately acted. | Lon- 


pon, | Printed by Simon Stafford for John | Wright, and are to bee fold at his fhop 
at | Chriftes Church dore, next Newgate- | Market, 1605.’ 
we Se Eee 


* ArBEr’s Transcript, ii, 649. + Lbid., iii, 289. 
30* Xx 353 


APPENDIX 


title-page, it is called ‘ The True Chronicle Hiftory.’ Now although the entries in 
the Register do not assume to give complete or exact titles (enough merely of the 
titles was recorded to identify the source whence came the various sums of money 
which were received by the Wardens), yet the use of the word ‘ Tragicall’ seems 
not altogether purposeless, especially when the assertion is added: ‘ As it was lately 
‘acted.’ It may be that Stafford looked more to the body of the drama than to 
the mere ending, in which case he was certainly justified in calling it a ‘tragicall 
hiftory,’ and as he was under no obligation to adhere afterward to the description 
given to the Warden, he may have described it, at the moment, according to its 
most characteristic feature. Still Malone and others scent fraud here, and Stafford 
has been accused of double-dealing, in that he called his ‘ booke’ one thing on the 
eighth of May, and another thing when it was actually presented to the public; in 
other words, as though his first intention were to deceive the public by calling that 
a tragedy which was no tragedy, but a comedy of a rarely felicitous ending, and 
that afterward that deception was abandoned as too palpable. Now if at this very 
time, the eighth of May, 1605, another play was acting, whose hero was Lear, one 
which was highly popular and at the same time a genuine tragedy, a desire on the 
part of Stafford to beguile purchasers into the belief that his ‘booke’ was the 
popular tragedy would perhaps explain his use of the word ‘ tragical’ and the refer- 
ence to its being ‘lately acted.’ If this conjecture, hardly more than ‘ gracious fool- 
‘ing’ at the best, be worth anything, we may get a hint from it of the date of the 
composition of Shakespeare’s Lear. 

Two years and a half after the date of this entry of King Leir, we find the follow- 
ing in the Stationers’ Registers : * 


26 Uovembris [1607] 
Nathaniel Butter Entred for their copie vnder th andes of Sir GzorcE Buck 
John Busby knight and: Th wardens A booke called. Mafter W1ILLIAM 
SHAKESPEARE his ‘hiftorye of Kinge LEAR’ as yt was played 
before the kinges maieftie at Whitehall uppon Sainc? Stephens 
night [26 December] at Chrifimas Laft by his maicfties fer- 
vantes playinge vfually at the * Globe’ on the Bankfyde. vj4 


Here, then, we have our first genuine Quarto edition of King Lear. In passing, 
it may be remarked that this entry, like the generality of entries at about this same 
time, is fuller in its description than those during Queen Elizabeth’s reign, an indi- 
cation, according to ARBER, of the stricter censorship of the press; in confirmation 
whereof, we see that it was necessary to cite the authority for the license not only of 
the Wardens, but also of Sir George Buck, the Master of the Revels. 

When the Quarto was published, in the next year, it bore the following title: 


M. William Shak-fpeare: | HZS| True Chronicle Hiftorie of the life and | death 
of King LEAR and his three | Daughters. | With the unfortunate life of Edgar, 
Sonne | and heire to the Earle of Glofter, and his | fullen and affumed humor 
of | Tom of Bedlam: | As it was played before the Kings Maieftie at Whitehall 
upon | S. Stephans night in Chrifmas Hollidayes. | By his Maiefties feruants 
playing vfually at the Gloabe | on the Bancke-fide. | LONDON, | Printed for 
Nathaniel Butter, and are to be fold at his fhop in Pazls | Church- -yard at the 
figne of the Pide Bull neere | St. Au/tins Gate. 1608. | 


Sign CMabaGn ga eee a 


* Axber’s Transcript, iii, 366, 


pees Cae 
‘In the Stationers’ Registers it is styled ‘ The Tragicall hiftory ;’ on its published ey 


THE TEXT oon 


In the original title-page ‘M. William Shak-fpeare’ is in much larger type than 
any other words on the page; ‘moreover,’ says CoLLiEr, ‘we have it again at the 
‘head of the leaf on which the tragedy commences, “ M. William Shake-fpeare, his 
‘hiftory of King Lear.” This peculiarity has never attracted sufficient attention, 
‘and it belongs not only to no other of Shakespeare’s plays, but to no other pro- 
‘duction of any kind of that period which we recollect. It was clearly intended to 
‘enable purchasers to make sure that they were buying the drama which “ M. Wil- 
‘liam Shake-fpeare” had written upon the popular story of King Lear.’ 

Were it not for the entry in the Stationers’ Registers we should be unable to fix 
the date of ‘S. Stephans night in Chriftmas Hollidayes ;’ as it is, however, we know 
that it was the twenty-sixth of December, 1606,—a date which should be borne 
in mind. 

This, however, is not the only edition published by N. Butter. In this very same 
year, 1608, he issued a second edition, with the following title: 


M. William Shake-fpeare, | A/7S| True Chronicle Hiftory of the life | and death 
of King Zear, and his | three Daughters. | With the unfortunate life of Ep- 
GAR, | fonne and heire to the Earle of Glocefter, and | his /ullen and affumed 
humour of TOM | of Bedlam. | As zt was plaid before the Kings Maiefty at 
White-Fall, up- | pon S. Stephens night, in Chrifimas Hollidaies. | By his Mai- 
efties Seruants, playing vfually at the | G/ode on the Banck-/fide. | Printed for 
Nathaniel Butter. | 1608. | 


As will be seen, the titles of these two editions are almost identical; the only ditter- 
ence, omitting varieties in type, lies in the imprint. In the second edition there is 
no allusion to the shop at the sign of the ‘ Pide Bull.’ 

When we turn to the contents, we find that it is not alone on the title-pages that 
these two editions vary. There are throughout such differences of spelling, punc- 
tuation, pagination, and of text, as suffice to make them two distinct editions. 

For the sake of convenience I shall refer to the former as the Pide Bull edition, 
or Q,; to the latter, as the 7. Butter edition, or Q,, And yet the precedence of one 
over the other, in point of time, is inferential merely; the evidence is only circum- 
stantial, direct evidence there is none; and so shifting are the grounds on which we 

“have to decide, that those keen and practised critics, Messrs CLARK and WRIGHT, 
at the conclusion of the collation of the two texts, as recorded in the Cambridge 
Edition, confess, in their Preface, that they believe, after all, that edition to be 
the later, which throughout their foot-notes they had cited as the earlier. In fact, 
I think it would be difficult to find in all Bibliography a puzzle greater than that 
which Nathaniel Butter has bequeathed to us. What complicates the puzzle and 
makes it almost ‘too intrinse to unloose,’ is that we have to choose not between two 
well-defined and separate editions, but between all the copies of the two editions. 
Mr HALLIWELL-PHILLIPPs says, that no two of the twelve copies of the Pide Bull 
edition that survive are exactly alike! Two copies of the same edition will be found 
to vary, errors in one will be corrected in the other, and errors in the latter corrected 
in the former. This confusion is well illustrated in the following extract from the 
Preface of the Cambridge Edition. Be it remembered that ‘Q,’ of the Cambridge 
Editors is what I have called Q,, or the N. Butter edition; their ‘Q,’ is my Q,, or 
Pide Bull edition. 

‘The differences in various copies of Q, are accounted for by supposing that the 
‘corrections were made before the sheets were all worked off, and that the corrected 


356 eh ns ee = 


‘and uncorrected sheets were bound up indiscriminately. It will be obsei red 
‘the readings of the uncorrected sheets of Q, agree for the most part with those of ¢ 
«Q,, and this led us to the conclusion which had previously been arrived at by Ca- 


. ae 
‘ell and also by J. P. Kemble, that the edition which we have called Q, was the — “ 


‘earlier of the two printed in the same year. But upon collating a copy of Q. in 
‘the Bodleian, which we have called Q, (Bodl. 1), we found evidence which points 
‘to an opposite conclusion. In Kent’s soliloquy (II, ii, 160) that copy, as will be — 
“seen in our notes, reads, <i 
nothing almost sees my rackles 
But miserie, &c. 

‘which of course is an accidental corruption, by displacement of the type, of “ my- 
‘rackles” (z.e. “miracles”’), the true reading. In the corrected copies of Q, this is 
‘altered, apparently by the printer’s conjecture, to “my wracke,” which is also the 
‘reading of Q,. Throughout the sheet in which this occurs the readings of Q, 
i agree with the corrected copiés of Q,, and had it not been for the instance quoted, 
‘we might have supposed that the corrections in the latter were made from Q,. 
‘But the corruption “my rackles”’ for ‘miracles’? must have come from the orig- 
‘inal MS, and “my wracke” is only a conjectural emendation, so that the order of 
‘succession in this sheet, at least, appears to be the following: First the uncorrected 
‘copy of Q,, then the same corrected, and lastly Q,. On the other hand it is re- 
‘markable that Q., if printed from Q, at all, must have been printed from a copy 
‘made up, with the exception just mentioned from IT, i, 128 to II, iv, 133, and an. 
* other containing from IV, vi, 224 to V, iii, 64, of uncorrected sheets. Another 
‘hypothesis which might be made, is that Q, and Q, were printed from the same 
‘manuscript, and that the printer of Q, corrupted “ miracles” into “ my wracke,” 
‘while the printer of Q, made it ‘my rackles,’’ which was afterwards altered by a 
‘reference to Q,.’ 

In Exuis’s Zarly English Pronunciation (i, 217, foot-note), a communication from 
Mr ALpIs WRIGHT is quoted, which states quite as conclusively the conviction of the 
Cambridge Editors, that they had been misled in their chronological order of the 
Qq: ‘We are now convinced that this edition [the Pide Bull edition, which is cited 
‘as Q, in the foot-notes of the Cam. ed.] was earlier than the one in the same year, 
‘which we have called Q,. These copies of Q, (so-called) differ from each other in 
‘having some of them been corrected while passing through the press. The earliest 
‘of these which we have met with is one of the two copies in the Bodleian, and we 
‘call it for distinction sake Q, (Bedl. 1). This has the reading three snyted: but 
‘ail the other copies of the same edition read three shewted. I suppose, therefore, 
‘that while the edition was in course of printing the error was discovered, and the 
‘correction communicated verbally to the compositor, who inserted it according to 
‘his own notions of spelling. It is not a question between the readings of two dif- 
‘ferent editions, but between an uncorrected copy and a corrected copy of the same 
‘edition. The later Quartos follow the corrected copy, but their testimony is of no 
‘value, because their reading is merely a reprint.’ [See also II, ii, 14.] 

I am inclined to think that the true solution of the puzzle is to be found, as has 
been suggested, in the blunders not of the printer but of the binder. The text of 
these Quarto editions was evidently set up piecemeal. For some reason or other 
‘Master N, Butter’ was in a hurry to publish his ‘booke,” and he, therefore, sent 
out the ‘copy,’ divided into several parts to several compositors, and these different 
parts, when printed, were dispatched to a binder to’be stitched (it is not probable that 


THE TEXT 


iS Gieeapeetian Quartos were more than merely stitched, or had other than 

ss paper r covers). We learn from ARBER’s invaluable 7ranscrift, ii, 881-2, that the 
ey “binding was not done by the printers, and as there were nearly fifty freemen binders a 

at that time in London, there must have been among them various degrees of excel- 


“lence; as ill-luck would have it, the several portions of this tragedy of Zear fell to aol 
_ the charge of a careless binder, and the signatures, corrected and uncorrected, from : a 
_ the different printers, were mixed up, to the confusing extent in which the few copies ie 


P- ‘that survive have come down to us. 

a That these Quartos were set up piecemeal is, I think, clear. On the forty- oe 
page of what I have called Q,, or the N. Butter edition, the lines do not ‘run on?’ 
the sentence stops in the middle and the rest of the line is left blank, thus: 


= toade pold, the wall-wort, and the water, ao in the fruite of his 
Pa heart, when the foule fiend rages, 
Eates cowdung for fallets, {wallowes the old rat, and the ditch- 


And as though the compositor were careless at the close of his task, some of the 
grossest misprints occur in these closing lines of his stint: not to mention /rw7fe in 
the foregoing lines for ‘fury,’ or wad/-wort for ‘ wall-newt,’ we have ‘ pingueuer the 
Seye, ‘hart lip, ‘ olde anelthu night Moore, &c. 

Another similar break occurs on the fifty-first page of this same Quarto. 

An indication that the Pide Bull edition was also set up by piecework is found 
at V, ili, 236, where 4d. is changed to Duke, and Due it continues throughout the 
rest of the play. 

It may be that the mere announcement on the title-page that the bend is ‘ printed 
‘for’ Nathaniel Butter, indicates that it was done by more than one printer; had it 
been the work of one sole printer it would perhaps have been so stated, as is not 
unfrequentiy the case in other Quartos. 

The Cambridge Editors say that ‘the printer’s device’ on Q,, or the N. Butter 
edition, ‘is that of J. Roberts.’ It is a matter of small moment, but I must confess 
that I mistrust any inferences drawn from the devices on the title-pages of the Shake- 
spearian Quartos. Undoubtedly, at times, these vignettes were the devices of the 
printers: Thomas Creede, for instance, has his initials inserted in his device. But 
different printers sometimes used the same device, as, for instance, John Danter in 
Romeo and Fuliet, 1597, and S[imon] S[tafford] in Henry ZV, 1599. Sometimes 
the device is clearly that of the stationer, and not that of the printer at all; Nicholas 
Ling in Hamlet, 1604, displays a fish, and Thomas Fisher in Mtdsummer Night's 
Dream has a King-fisher. Tf, however, any conclusion may be drawn from these 
vignettes or devices, then, perhaps, N[icholas] O[akes], whose vignette in Orhel/o, 
1622, is repeated on the title-page of the Pide Bull edition, was the printer of the 
latter also. 

The different readings in the different copies of the same Quarto gave rise to the 
assertion that there was a Third Quarto, also published in 1608, This assertion, 
instead of being a proof of the diligence and thoroughness with which the work of 
collation had been executed, unfortunately proves the opposite. Had the editors, 
who asserted this, been only a little more thorough, they would have been led prob- 
ably to maintain not that there were three editions merely, but three times three, 

It was reserved for the Cambridge Editors to disprove the existence of this Thira 


Quarto. In their Preface they say: 
‘It has been supposed, in consequence of statements made by Malone and Bos- 


7 


> 


Se ee oe 
‘Sa | x , 


\ 


) 


. 


358 


‘well, that a third edition of King Lear was published in 1608. We 5 
«that there is no evidence for this. In the Variorum Shakespeare (ii, 652), e q 
‘by Boswell in 1821, three Quartos are described, which are distinguished in the | 
‘notes to the play by the letters A, B, C, respectively. The first of these is a copy 
‘of Q,,* quoted by us as Q, (Bodl. 1); the second is a copy of Q,; and the third, 

‘which is in reality another copy of Q, and is quoted by us as Q, (Bodl. 2), is de- 

‘scribed as follows: : ret fl 

“Title the same as the two former, except that like the first it begins at signature 
B: and like the second, has no reference to the place of sale.” 

‘This statement of Boswell’s is taken from a note in Malone's handwriting pre- 
‘fixed to the copy in question, which we transcribe. ‘ 

“This copy of King Lear differs in some particulars from the two others in 
Vololvs ‘ 

“The title-page of it is the same as the second of those copies, that is, it has no 
direction to the place of sale, and the first signat. is B,—notwithstanding which 
there are minute diversities; thus, in this copy in 1 verso, we have ‘A foole 
vsurps my ded’; in the other, whose first signature is also B, we find—‘* My /foote 
usurps my Jody’, and in the copy without any direction to the place of sale (whose 
first signature is A) * My foofe usurps my head’.” - 

‘ Now it is a little remarkable that at present the copy has no title-page at all, and 


‘there is no trace of the title-page having been removed since the volume has been 


‘in its present condition, The probability is that the title was originally wanting, 
‘and that one had been supplied from a copy of Q, before it came into Malone’s 
‘hands, and that while it was in this condition he wrote the above note upon it. It 
‘was then sent to be bound in a volume with other quartos, and the tithe may have 
‘been lost at the binder’s, or may have been intentionally removed as not belonging 
‘to the book. ‘That alterations were made by the binder is evident from the fact 
‘that the copy to which Malone refers as the second of those in Vol, IV is in reality 
‘the first. Malone, writing his note when Vol. IV was arranged for binding, de- 
‘scribed the then order of the plays, which must afterwards have been altered, “In 
‘any case, however Malone’s statement is to be accounted for, it is quite, clear that 
‘Boswell must have described the Quarto after it was bound, when the title could 
‘not have existed. ; 

‘We have said that Boswell quotes the three Quartos of Lear, now in the Bod- 
‘leian, by the letters A, B, C, respectively. In doing so, however, he is not con- 
‘sistent. We record his mistakes, that others may not be misled by them. Bearing 
‘in mind, therefore, that A=Q, (Bodl. 1), B=Q,, and C=Q, (Bodl. 2), we find in 
‘Act 1, Scene 2 (vol. x, p. 97) “ Quarto B, awsvent; Quarto A, reads unreverent.” 
‘Here B and A should change places. In Act 111, Scene 7 (p. 188), “ Quarto A 
‘omits roguish.”’ for Aread C. In A@ tv, Scene 2 (p. 199), for “ Quartos B and 
‘C, the whistling,” read “ Quarto C” alone. In A& 1Vv, Scene 6 (p. 220), Band A 
‘should again be interchanged. .In A@ v, Scene 3 (p. 277), * Quarto A omits this 
‘line”; for A read B. It will be seen from these instances, that A has been in turn 
‘made to represent three different copies.’ 

A genuine second edition of the N. Butter Quarto (Q,) appeared in 1655; it was 
‘Printed by Fane Bell, and are to be fold at the Eaft-end of Christ- Church? Amer- 
ican gallantry suggests commendation of this edition, but candour hushes every syl- 


* Let me again remind the student that, in the Cambridge Edition, Qz refers to what I haze called 
Q:, or Pide Bull edition; and that their Qr is my Q2, or N, Butter edition.—Ep. 


of praise. It is a reprint, page for page, of Q,, and has almost reached the 
limi of incorrect typography. Here and there, in the earlier scenes, I have re- 
___ corded in the foot-notes, some of its grossest misprints; but, generally I have 
omitted all reference to it. F: 
As Rowe’s ill-luck put the Fourth and poorest Folio under his pillow, so here, I : Me 
think, the same ill-luck may, perhaps, have put Jane Bell’s Quarto in his pew, and é 
led him to peep into it now and then.’ See III, iv, 108, or III, vii, 60. 
—__- Davies (Dramatic Mise. ii, p. 167) ‘cannot help suspecting’ that Zear was not 
_ popular, because only two Quarto editions appeared before it was reprinted in the 
Folio. KNIGHT pronounces Davies’s ‘ argument worthless,’ ‘ for it must be remem- 
‘bered that other of Shakspere’s most perfect efforts, such as Macbeth, were not pub-— 
‘lished at all till they were collected in the Folio.’ ‘In all likelihood, the Quarto 
_ ‘editions were piratical and were probably suppressed. .. . Butter was undoubtedly 
‘not a publisher authorised by Shakspere, for he printed, in 1605, 7ze London 
‘ Prodigal, one of the plays fraudulently ascribed to our poet.’ COLLIER, on the 
other hand, thinks that Zeer was extremely popular, because it required more than 


E one edition in one year to satisfy the public demand. ‘Why, however,’ he says, ¢ it 
4 ‘was never republished in quarto in the interval [between 1608 and 1623] must be 
7 ‘matter of speculation; but such was not an unusual occurrence with the works of 
- four great dramatist; his Midsummer Night’s Dream, Merchant of Venice, and 
4 a ‘Troilus and Cressida, were each twice printed, the first two in 1600, and the last 
. _ in 1609, and they were not again seen in type until they were inserted in the 
; * Folio; there was also no second quarto of Much Ado about Nothing, nor of Love's 
p © Labour's Lost. 

q So much for the Quartos, with their puzzling, interlaced texts. It is comforting 
in to reflect that to decide upon the precedence, in point of time, of these editions, or, 
mother words, which is Q, and which is Q,, belongs wholly to the province of 
a ‘Bibliography; it has no bearing whatever on the elucidation of the text of this 


tragedy. 


In the Folio, Xing Lear appears in the division of Tragedies, and among them 
shares with Macbeth, Othello, and Cymbeline, the distinction of being divided into 
_ Acts and Scenes. I believe there is no dissenting voice to the opinion, that we 
have here a text much superior, in general, to that of the Quartos, and one that was 
printed from an independent manuscript. And yet in spite of this superiority, there 
are, as COLLIER says, few of Shakespeare’s plays which are more indebted than this, 
to the Quartos, for the completeness of their text. This arises from the remarkable 
difference in length between the Folios and the Quartos. The Quartos exceed the 
Folios by about a hundred and seventy-five lines, There are about two hundred 
and twenty lines in the Quartos that are not in the Folios, and the Folios contain 
fifty lines not to be found in the Quartos. This discrepancy, with its abridgement 
on the one hand and its amplification on the other, presents a highly interesting 
field of investigation. By whom were these excisions made when the text of the 
Folio came to be printed, amounting in one instance to the omission of an entire 
scene? By the master himself, or by the actors? Are they made in accordance 
with a plan, or at hap-hazard? Was the object to shorten the play, or to emphasise 
dramatic effects? Such are some of the questions which this very important fact 
suggests, and their answers have received more attention from German than from 


English scholars. 


APPENDIX —— ee 


Dr JoHNSON expressed the belief that the Folio was printed from Shakespeare's od Se 
« last revision, carelessly and hastily performed, with more thought of shortening the as ; 
scenes than of continuing the action. See note on III, vi, 100-113. ~ 

~ Teck (ix, 370) suggests that some of these omissions in the Folio maybe due 

to a deference to the censorship of the press, which after the death of James became : 

more strict; or again some of them may be due to the obscurity which speedily falls : 

on local allusions, or allusions to passing events, of which no play of Shakespeare a 

ce contains more; or again the Third Scene of Act Fourth may have been omitted, be- 

7 cause of the lack of an actor who could adequately represent it; or its omission may 

om have been due to a desire to simplify the plot, and to avoid complications which, 
as it stands, it unquestionably creates. f 

KNIGHT, who appears to have bestowed more thought upon the subject than other 
English editors, says: ‘Speech after speech, and scene after scene, which in the 
‘genuine copy of the Folio are metrically correct, are, in the Quarto, either printed 
“as prose, or the lines are so mixed together, without any apparent knowledge in 
‘the editor of the metrical laws by which they were constructed, that it would 
‘have been almost impossible, from this text alone, to have reduced them to any- 
‘thing like the form in which they were written by the author. This circumstance 
“appears to us conclusive, that these copies could not have been printed from the 
‘author’s manuscript; and yet they might have been printed from a genuine play- 
‘house copy.’ 

After mentioning the large omissions in the Folio of passages to be found in the 
Quarto, KNIGHT goes on to say, that it would be very easy to assume that these omis- 
sions were made by the editors of the Folio for the purpose of cutting the play down 
for representation; but this theory requires us to assume that the additions also, in the 
Folio, were made by the editors, and these comprise several such minute touches as 
none but the hand of the master could have added. He then examines the sub- 
ject more in detail: ‘In the First and Second Acts the omissions are very slight. 
‘In the opening of Act III we lose a spirited description of Lear in the storm— 
‘tears his white hair,” ete. But mark—it is descriféion ; and the judgement of 
‘Shakespeare in omitting it is unquestionable, for he subsequently shows Lear in 
‘action under precisely the same circumstances. In the sixth scene of the same 
‘act is omitted the imaginary trial of Regan and Goneril, “I will arraign them 
‘straight.” Was this a passage that an author would have thrust out carelessly 
‘and hastily ? It is impossible, as it would be presumptuous were it possible, un- 
‘hesitatingly to assign a motive for this omission. The physical exertion that would 
‘be necessary for any actor (even for Burbage, who we know played Lear) to carry 
‘through the whole of the third act might have been so extreme as to render it ex- 
‘pedient to make this abridgement; or, what is more probable, as Kent previous to 
‘this passage had said, “All power of his wits has given way to his impatience,” 
‘the imaginary arraignment might have been rejected by the poet, as exhibiting too 
‘much method in the madness, The rhyming soliloquy of Edgar, with which this 
‘scene closes, might have been spared by the poet without much compunction. The 
‘second scene of the fourth act, in which Albany so bitterly reproaches Goneril, is 
‘greatly abridged. In its amplified state it does not advance the progress of the 
‘action, nor contribute to the developement of the characters. The whole of the 
‘third scene of that act is also omitted. It is one of the most beautifully written 
‘of the play; and we should indeed regret had it not been preserved to us in the 
‘Quartos. But let it be borne in mind, that the greater part of the scene is purely 


ee «make us Letter understand the surpassing loveliness of Cordelia’s character, we 


THE TEXT 


5 and, exquisite as the description is, particularly in those parts which 


‘cannot avoid believing that the poet sternly resolved to let the effect of this won- 
«derful drama entirely depend upon its action. . . . The subsequent omissions, to the — 
end of the drama, are few and unimportant.’ 

STAUNTON says, that a ‘careful comparison of the Quarto and Folio texts con- 
‘vinces us that, unlike that of Richard I//, the text of Lear in the Folio is taken 
‘from a later and revised copy of the play. Whether the curtailment is the work 
‘of the author, it is impossible now to determine; it is not always judicious, and 
“some of the substitutions are inferior to the language they displace; yet, on the 
‘other hand, the additions that we meet with in the Folio bear the undoubted mark 
‘of Shakespeare’s mint; and while the metrical arrangement of the speeches in that 
‘edition has been esreilig regarded, the text of the Quartos is printed in parts 
‘without any observance of prosodial construction.’ ; 

Hitherto, as we have seen, the omissions in the Folio have been supposed to be 
abridgements made by Shakespeare himself. 

Dr DELtus,* however, denies this, not only with regard to the omissions in the 
Folio, but to the omissions in the Quartos also. 

- Before entering on the discussion, the learned {German premises that the texts of 
the two Quattos are to be considered as practically identical. There are, in effect, 
but two texts, , that of the Folios and that of the Quartos ; and the question is, are the 
variations in them due to the hand of Shakespeare? To answer this, Delius sub- 
jects the two texts to a minute comparison, and begins with a list of the varie lec- 
diones in the Quartos, which may be considered as errors either of the copyist or of 


the compositor, either of the pen or of the eye; according, as we think that they 


were to be found in the original MS, or were wrongly read by the printer—a dilem- 
ma hard to determine. This list, which I here reprint as a proof, if any were needed, 
that the conclusions at which Delius has arrived, were not reached without great care, 
contains several instances of what I cannot but think are not mere misprints, but 
words or phrases, which, making sense with the context, rise to the dignity of 
‘readings ;’ these I have marked with an asterisk. The text of the Quartos is in 
Italic; that of the Folios in Roman. 

I, i, 36, first intent *—fast intent; 38, Conferring *—Confirming ; 108, mzstresse 
—mysteries; 173, diseases *—disasters ; 180, friendship *—freedom; 219, you for 
voucht affections *—your fore-vouch’d affections. 

I, ii, 38, for your liking *—for your o’er-looking ; 117, sperdduall predominance * 
—spherical predominance; 128, mime—my cue; 128, them of Bedlam*—Tom 0’ 
Bedlam. 

I, iv, 109, pestilent gull—pestilent gall; 221, Either his notion weaknesse, or his 
discernings are lethargy—Either his notion weakens, or his discernings are leth- 
argied; 239, @ great palace *—a graced palace; 256, thou lessen my traine and— 
thou liest. My train are; 277, thourt disnatur’d—thwart disnatur’d; 293, should 
make the worst blasts—should make thee worth them; 293, «fon the untender— 
upon thee! The untented; 341, deter ought *—better oft. 

Il, i, 18, Which must ask breefenesse and fortune helpe*—Which I must act. 
Briefness and fortune work! 39, ward/ing—mumbling; 119, ¢hreatning—threading. 


See Ueber den urspriinglichen Text des King Lear. Shakespeare Year Book, x,50, Re- 
printed in Abhandlungen 2u Shakspere, p. 3593 Translated in Trans. of the New Shakspere Soc., 
1875-6, p. 125. 

31 


362 APPENDIX 


. 


II, ii, 70, 40 tz¢trench to tnloose—too intrinse to unloose; 104, dialopue—Sialect | 
127, stopping—stocking. ‘ et 

Il, iii, 17, service—farmes. ‘That the compositor here followed the ductus lite 
‘rarum is clear, when we remember that service was written /ervice.’ 

Il, iv, 1, hence *—home ; 8, heeles *—heads ; 85, meere Fustice—mere fetches ; 
156, look’a backe—look’d black; 261, mot the deed—not the need; 273, Jamely— 
tamely. 

III, i, 18, warrant of my arte—warrant of my note. 

Ill, ii, 2, carterickes and Hircanios—cataracts and hurricanoes; 58, concealend 
centers—concealing continents; 60, more sinned against their sinning—more sinned ‘ 
against than sinning. 

III, iv, 14, Save what beates their filiall ingratitude—Save what beats there. 
Filial ingratitude! 175, ¢o the dark towne—to the dark tower. 

III, vii, 32, 7 am true *—I am none; 85, Unbridle all the sparks—enkindle all 
the sparks. 

IV, i, 4, Stands still in experience—stands still in esperance; 53, 7 cannot dance 
at*—I cannot daub it [dance can be tortured into a meaning; Pope found enough in 
it to adopt it in his text.—Ep.]; 68, Stands your ordinance *—Slaves your ordinance ; 
70, under—undo; 74, Looks firmely *—Looks fearfully. 

IV, ii, 21, A mistress coward—A mistress’s command ;. 52, av eye discerving—an 
eye discerning ; 89, ot so cooke—not so tart. 

IV, vi, 19, Aer cock above—her cock a buoy; 57, dread summons—dread summit ; 
128, consummation—consumption ; 156, a dogge so bade in office—a dog’s obeyed in 
office [Decidedly an error of the ear—Ep.]; 189, ¢o shoot a troop of horse with fell 
—to shoe a troop of horse with felt; 282, fenced from my griefs *—sever’d from my 
griefs. Compare above, II, iii, 17, service—farmes. 

IV, vii, 36, Mine inturious dog—Mine enemy’s dog 

V, i, 52, Hard is the guess *—Here is the guess. 

V, iil, 66, 7he which tmmediate—The which immediacy ; 136, Conspicuofe—Con- 
spirant; 193, (O father) *—O fault! 

The conclusion which Delius draws from an examination of this list of misprints, 
‘which could be readily increased,’ is, ‘that the hand of the poet could have had 
‘nothing to do with them. In other words, Sh. wrote only what stands in the 
*Folio.’ A similar conclusion, he thinks, is also to be drawn from another class of 
readings in the Quartos, where evident misprints in one copy are corrected in an- 
other, such as II, ii, 121, where for the genuine ‘ancient’ we have ausrent, changed 
to miscreant,; also II, ii, 160, ‘miracles’; II, i, 100, ‘To have th’ expence,’ where, 
‘instead of “ th’ expence” whieh cannot have been very clearly written in the MS, 
‘the compositor of the Quarto first substituted «these ;” which, in some 
‘copies, was afterwards filled up from pure conjecture, as “wast and spoyle”’, 
‘III, iv, ‘Contentious’; III, vi, 94, 95, ‘Take up’; IV, ii, 56, 57, France— 
‘threats.’ [For all these instances reference to the Textual Notes will supply 
the various changes to be found in the Quartos.] Delius then examines a third 
class of errors, where the changes seem to be purely arbitrary, such as wil for 
‘shall,’ space or liberty for ‘space and liberty,” That for ‘Which, &c. &c. Then 
again there are certain differences where synonymous words are used—e, oe ri) Gone 
stoops to folly for ‘ falls to folly’; Ib. respects for ‘regards’; I, iii, disdike for ¢ dis- 
‘taste’; II, i, cattiff for ‘coward,’ &c, In view of all these different readings, De- 
lius makes the following strong point: ¢ Is it at all probable, that Shakespeare, even 


=< 


THE TEXT 


_ €granting that he revised the text, would have undertaken such superfluous trouble, | 


‘as, we cannot say to improve, but merely to change the text in these innumerable, 
‘and minute, and insignificant particulars; and for no conceivable reason withal, in- 
*stead of taking in hand some real incisive improvement? Or is it not more likely 
‘that a simple transcriber, attaching but slight importance to Shakespeare’s words as 
‘such, in the hurry of his work substituted heedlessly or purposely, any phrase that 
‘occurred to him for another, one particle for another, one mood or number for 
* another ?? 

In the substitution of prose for verse, of verse for prose, and in the omissions of 
words, phrases, and lines, in the Quartos, DELIUs sees the proof also that no trace 
of Shakespeare’s revising hand can be detected. He then returns to the text of 
the Folio, with its note-worthy omission of ‘ 220 lines,’ that are in the Quartos. All 
these omissions, he concludes, were made by the players, for the purpose of short- 
ening the time of representation, not by Shakespeare. In the Quartos we have the » 
play as it was originally performed before King James, and before the audience at 
the Globe, but sadly marred by misprints, printers’ sophistications, and omissions, 
perhaps due to an imperfect and illegible MS. In the Folio we have a later MS, 
belonging to the Theatre, and more nearly identical with what Shakespeare wrote. 
The omissions of the Quartos are the blunders of the printers; the omissions of the 
Folios are the abridgements of the actors. ‘ From the very nature of the case,’ says 
Delius, ‘it seems far more natural that the Poet, who was also an actor, should have 
‘been himself the one to mark the omissions in his own drama. But on the other 
‘hand, if we remember with what careless indifference Shakespeare committed his 
‘plays to the care of the Theatre for which he wrote them, without troubling himself 
‘about their fate or literary future; it will seem highly probable, that in the present 
‘instance he gave himself no further personal care about its representation, but left 
‘all that to those whom it most concerned—the actors of the Globe, the owners of 
‘the MS.’ Moreover, in 1608, when the Quartos were published, and the unabridged 
play may be presumed to have held the stage, Shakespeare was living at Stratford. 
Ts it to be supposed then,’ asks Delius, ‘that at that time or later—for the play may 
“have been abridged later—the actors would have applied to the absent, far-distant 
‘ poet, to modify his drama for the stage, when such a task would seem to them, ac- 
*customed as they were to matters of routine, an affair of such every-day occurrence, 
‘that they themselves could just as easily do it for themselves?’ Furthermore, De- 
lius thinks, that if Shakespeare himself had really revised this drama, we should 
have found more. emphatic traces of his revision than mere omissions of certain pas- 
sages. In the general character of these omissions, Delius sees a desire to spare to 
the utmost, and to strike out such passages only, which contain amplified descrip- 
tions; or which, at least, are not essential to the developement of the dramatic treat- 
ment or of the characters. This point is emphasised, because in his Introduction to 
the play Delius had been led by these very considerations to an opposite conclusion 
—viz., that none but Shakespeare could have discriminated between the needful 
and the useless. Delius then proceeds to examine these omissions of the Folio, in 
detail. Some of his remarks I have incorporated in the commentary under the pas- 
sages in the text where they apply; for the others, it may be said, that in any drama 
by Shakespeare, it is much more easy to say why a certain passage should not be 
omitted, than to give a reason why it should. The presence of any passage in a 
play of Shakespeare’s, is presumptive evidence that it is required; and to prove that 
it is not, lies upon those who approve of its excision. So perfect and so unerring a 


364 APPENDIX 


master was Shakespeare, that any abridgement of his plays is likely to be clumsy ; 
it is easier to maintain, that a piece of clumsy work was done by any one rather 
than by Shakespeare. As Delius, in this very Essay (p. 67), truly says’: ‘assuredly, 
‘Shakespeare did not himself think any passage in his Avng Lear superfluous, other- 
‘wise he would scarcely have inserted that which his editors might deem needless.’ 

Delius sums up as follows: ‘Having traced the variations between the Quarto 
‘and the Folio to their true source, we are led to the conclusion :—That there is o 
‘ evidence for the supposition that Shakspere himself revised this drama.’ 

Dr Koppen (Zexthritische Studien iiber Shakespeare's Richard III and King 
Lear, Dresden, 1877) comes to a conclusion directly opposed to Delius, and main- 
tains that it was Shakespeare’s own hand that cut out many of the passages both in 
the Quarto text and the Folio text. The larger portion of his Essay is devoted to 
attacking Delius’s position, and as destructive criticism does not come within my 
scope, I simply allude to his opposition without repeating his arguments. Koppel has 
evidently studied the notes in the Cambridge edition most thoroughly, and comes to 
the same conclusion as that to which the Cambridge Editors themselves had arrived 
before him—namely, that the N. Butter edition has been erroneously supposed to be 
Q, ; that the real Q, is that which in the notes to the Cambridge edition is called Q.. 
He maintains with vigor and plausibility, that there are many corrected passages in 
Q, (é. e. the Pide Bull), in ‘some of which it is clear beyond a peradventure, and 
‘in others it is highly probable, that resort was had to the original MS. For in- 
‘stance, in I, iv, 294 wntender becomes “ untented,”’ peruse, in the next line, be- 
‘comes “ pierce;’’ in line 336 mldte gentleness is corrected to “‘milkie gentleness.” 
‘Such corrections as these would never have been made by a compositor out of 
‘hand; with “mildie gentleness’? before him a compositor would never have 
‘thought of changing it to the poetic form of ‘‘milkie gentleness,” but would have 
‘corrected it simply to “mild gentleness ;’’ moreover, to suppose that in every case 
‘the compositor could have hit upon the correct word or phrase as we find them in 
‘the Folio, is simply incredible.’ In those instances where some copies of the Pide 
Bull edition have one reading, and other copies of the same edition have different 
ones (such as ausrent, my rackles, crulentious in some copies, and miscreant, my 
wrack, tempestious in others), Koppel infers that the MS must have been illegible. 

But, as has been before remarked, however interesting the discussion may be of 
the succession in time of these different Quartos, the question in reality is merely 
bibliographical; and Koppel acknowledges that all this collation is unimportant in 
comparison with the variation between the Quartos and Folios: according to the 
enumeration of the lines in the Cambridge edition, he finds two hundred and eighty- 
seven more lines in the Quarto than in the Folio, and one hundred and ten lines in 
the Folio which are wanting in the Quarto. As to whether the omissions in the 
Folio were due to Shakespeare or not, Koppel says, that however indifferent the 
poet may have been to the “terary fate of his dramas, it is inconceivable that Shake- 
speare, the Actor, Manager, Dramatist, and Theatre-poet, should have taken no care 
for the representation of his pieces, or for their adaptation to the stage, or for their 
needful abbreviations or amplifications. ‘Is it to be inferred that he took no per- 
‘sonal interest in the reproduction on the stage of his pieces, because he took no 
‘thought for their puddication in print? Far more likely is it that the literary future 
‘of his dramas pressed lightly on him, because the present practical interest in their 
‘representation, their scenic success, pressed upon’ him so heavily.’ No inference, 
Koppel thinks, as to the state of the text can be drawn from the date of the Quartos, 


_ ae TEXT mee : 
: 3 
nor from the statement on their title-pages, ‘as it was plaid . . . at Whitehall,’ which 
was merely a bookseller’s puff, and designed to show the difference between this edi- 
tion and the older play of King Leir, with no intention of more accurately specifying 
the very text which was given before his Majesty. ‘It is very possible that, when the 
‘First Quarto (Q, of the Cambridge edition) appeared, the version which is the basis 
‘of the Folio text had existed long before, and was used in public, notwithstanding 
‘that the MS which the publisher of the Quartos managed to procure, contained the 
‘earlier and discarded text; and perhaps it was for this very reason, because it was 
‘discarded, that it could be handed over to the publisher merely, perhaps, for the 
‘preparation of a transcript’ (p. 72). Wherefore, the mere publication alone of the 
Quartos in 1608 does not hinder us from supposing that the version which the Folio 
follows belongs to an earlier year, when Shakespeare was in London and not in Strat- 
ford. In view of all the circumstances of the case, if we cannot regard the additions 
of the Folio as original portions of the text, Dr Koppel thinks that the following may 
be supposed as possible: ‘ The ovigina/ form was, essentially, that of the Quarto, then 
‘followed a longer form, with the additions in the Folio, as substantially our modern 
‘editions have again restored them; then the shortest form, as it is preserved for us 
in the Folio’ (p. 74). 

7 ‘ Although in general the omissions in the Quarto may be attributed to Shakespeare, 
Z ‘yet we must be prepared to find several of them unworthy of the Poet; such for 
- instance is I, i, 38-43. The next omission in the Quartos, I, i, 47, 48, may very 
% ‘possibly be a later addition in the Folio. But it is not essential, its gist has been 
aa ‘already given in lines 35-38, and it may be considered as a skilful abridgement in 
a ‘the Quartos.’ [Space will not permit me to follow Dr Koppel in his criticisms and 
4 - explanations of all the omissions or additions of the Quartos and Folios; to a student 
‘¢ interested in such matters of collation, it will not be a tedious task to examine this 
é subject thoroughly for himself at first hand; it will cost him but little more trouble 
to do so than to look up all the references to act, scene, and line, which would be 
all that I could possibly give him here, were IJ to reproduce all of Dr Koppel’s essay, 
of which, however, I will give those passages that seem to me the most striking, 
wherein he assumes the task of proving that Shakespeare himself, with cause, added 

or omitted certain passages. The italics are Dr Koppel’s. ] 
At the conclusion of his examination of all the important passages omitted in the 
- Quartos, Dr Koppel finds (p. 82), ‘ with the trifling exception of only two passages, I, 
‘i, 38-43 and III, vi, 12-15, that nothing forbids their being regarded as later addi- 
‘tions by the Poet. That they really are so, it is obviously impossible zo prove, It 
‘would have to be assumed that these additions to the text of the tragedy,-made 
‘perhaps, not all at the same time, gradually so increased that at last a reduction 
‘proved to be necessary. The abridged form, rendered essentially shorter than the 
‘ piece originally was, would then be necessarily regarded as transmitted to us in ¢he 
‘ Folio. If we have thus shown that the passages wanting in the Quartos did not 
‘necessarily form a part of the original text, it is, on the other hand, at the same 
‘time shown, that these omissions were made at fitting places, and had the same 
‘ practical design of abridgement as in the later form s the piece, which was pre- 
‘pared for the stage, and which is the basis of the Folio." ... [P. 87.] Of the pas- 
sage, III, i, 7-15, omitted in the Folios, it may be ‘said that Shakespeare, after- 
‘wards, and partly before, partly in this scene, partly in what precedes, and in what 
‘follows, has enlarged sufficiently upon these things, the white uncovered head, the 
‘rain, the storm, the fearful night, and Lear’s mad defiance, and could when abridge- 

37 


, 


366 APPENDIX 


‘ment were the object, very well dispense with this passage... . Besides we may 
‘see here the artist’s hand in the choice of passages to be erased, expunging a grand 
‘ description of the King in the stormy night, which might weaken the impression 
‘of his actual appearance when he comes before us in the next scene.’... [P. 88.] 
The notable omission in the Folios of III, i, 30-42, Koppel justifies: ‘The suffer- 
‘ings of Lear being known in France (in the Quartos, merely the quarrel between 
‘the British Dukes, of which advantage was to be taken by the enemy, appears as 
‘the occasion for the French invasion), the sending of the nobleman to Dover to 
‘Cordelia is rendered superfluous, aimless, Hence, from the text of the Folio, we 
‘gather from this mission merely a cheering assurance of the approaching deliver- 
‘ance of Lear, which Kent gives to the nobleman, although only by hints. For he 
‘tells him only that from France, where Lear’s sufferings are known, war is com- 
‘ing, and that he will soon get to see Cordelia. The declaration, that F rench troops 
‘have already landed at Dover, is stricken out. This cheering intimation, which, 
‘as well as the material compensation (Kent’s purse and ring), was well earned by 
‘the good faith of the knight, fits well into this preparatory scene, which thus pos- 

_sesses the effect of a soothing pause in the rapid progress of the tragic action.’ 
Koppel’s hardest task lies in justifying the omission of the entire Third Scene of 
Act IV; while granting the justice of the general opinion that this scene is necessary 
for the reawakening of interest in Cordelia, who has not been seen since the intro- 
ductory scene, ‘yet,’ he urges, ‘ perhaps, for the expunging of this full poetic descrip- 
‘ tion, preceding the personal appearance of Cordelia, there was the same reason as 
‘for the omission, mentioned above, of the description of Lear before he himself 
‘appears in the stormy night. 

‘When then, with this scene, the necessary reason for the non-appearance of the 
‘French King in the subsequent warlike scenes is also left out, it does not prove 
“the impossibility of Shakespeare’s having made these erasures. How often Shake- 
*speare was careless in regard to secondary incidents, how often he even con- 
‘tradicts himself in such matters, is sufficiently known. Instances, more or less 
‘striking, may be found everywhere. For example, in this very scene in the orig- 
‘inal longer form of the tragedy, the Gentleman and Kent speak of a letter of 
‘Kent's (‘ Did your letters pierce,’ &c. &c.), which the former was to hand to Cor- 
‘delia; while, according, to an earlier scene of the Third Act, only an oral mes- 
‘sage had been entrusted to the Gentleman. So likewise in that scene, Kent and 
‘the Gentleman are to seek the King in different directions, and he who first lights 
‘on him was to holla the other; the Poet causes this arrangement to be made in de- 
‘tail, without any mention being made afterwards of its having been carried out, in 
‘the tragic scene where Lear is found by Kent. Kent does not trouble himself about 
‘his fellow-seeker, and consequently as little do we know where he has gone. Only 
‘in Dover do we find him again. Just so, in that scene, Kent gives to the same 
‘gentleman a ring which he is to show to Cordelia, and learn from her who § your 
‘fellow is That yet you do not know.’ Notwithstanding, we find that when the 
‘gentleman has delivered his message to Cordelia and reports the fact to Kent, he 
Se does not know that it is Kent with whom he is speaking; for Kent says: 

some dear cause Will in concealment wrap me up awhile; When I am known 
‘aright, you shall not grieve Lending me this acquaintance ;’? and when the gentle- 
‘man is speaking again (IV, vii, gt) with Kent, he tells him, as a report which he 


‘himself believes, that Kent is in Germany with Edgar.’ [It is only an inference 


a Roi . 
of Koppel’s, that the ‘gentleman’ in this scene is same as Kent’s messenger in the 


Re 


FHL TEXNT ee as 


_ former scene. The stage directions give simply ‘ gentleman,’ and it may well have 


been two different men.—Ep.] ‘Finally, a similar instance of carelessness is to be 


‘found in IV, iii, where it is said, that the French king must for urgent reasons re- 


‘turn to France, and that he has left Monsieur La Far ‘behind him, general’, And 
*yet the Poet forgot this entirely, This La Far is never afterwards alluded to. Cor- 
‘delia alone represents the French military power. It may well be supposed, that 
‘if it were the Poet who struck out this scene, the opportunity of getting rid of the 
“strange gentleman induced him, at the same time, to erase the more important men- 
‘tion of the king of France, closely connected therewith, together with the whole 
‘scene; which, on the whole, could be dispensed with. Moreover, it is not impos- 
‘sible, that, by the insertion of some brief passage, the hiatus thus made was filled 
‘up, and this passage was afterward forgotten in the MS of the Folio, or in the 
* printed edition.’ 

*[P. 93.] The last eight lines of Act III, which are omitted in the Folio, contain, 
‘in the Quartos, a contradiction between them and the opening scene of the next act; 
‘which, of itself, would lead us to suspect the genuineness of the Quartos, The 
‘Second Servant says: ‘ Let’s follow the old earl, and get the Bedlam To lead him,’ 
‘&c. But in the next scene, Gloucester is led by an ‘Old Man,’ and apparently 
‘meets the Bedlam by accident, and it is Gloucester himself who asks the Bedlam to 
‘lead him, This is, after all, only one of the many little things in Shakespeare in 
‘which, as we have shown above, especially in King Lear, inconsistencies and con- 
‘tradictions may be discovered, that do not authorise any hap-hazard assumption, 
‘that the passage in the Quartos is not genuine. But, on the other hand, this causes 
‘the omission in the Folio to appear all the more explicable and fitting. 

*[P. 94.] In IV, i, the passage in Edgar’s speech about ‘ Obidicut,’ * Hobbidi- 
*¢ dance,’ and ‘ Mahu,’ is omitted. The reference to Harsnet’s book, in this Tragedy, 
‘was desirable only so long as the book was fresh in men’s memories.’ 

On page 96-Dr Koppel sums up his conclusion: ‘Thus it appears that these 
‘omissions, with some exceptions quite immaterial, are of such a kind that they might 
‘very well have been made by the poet himself; in many cases, this possibility has 
‘more probability, in others less; and, furthermore, it is also fosszb/e, that different 
‘passages were stricken out at different times, and in part also by different hands.’ 


Dr ScumipT, at whose hands we have all received that valuable gift, Te Shake- 
speare Lexicon, has written an Essay on the 7ext of King Lear, of which only a 
portion, at this date, has appeared in type; and even of this portion, I can give only 
an abridgement. 

In all cases, where two texts exist, the Quartos and the Folios, the first thing to be 
done, according to Dr Schmidt, is to decide which of the two is authentic. ‘May we 
‘assume, that Shakespeare had such an interest in the publication of the Quartos as 
‘to give them an authority higher than that of the Folio, which appeared after his 
‘death? Or, on the other hand, shall we pin our faith exclusively to that form of 
‘the text whose lawful origin is undoubted? Are the different texts different remod- 


“ ellings, and if so, are the changes in the later, due to the hand of the Poet, or to 


‘that of another? To these questions there can be but one true answer, and until 
‘that answer be found, all genuine textual criticism is merely a groping in the dark. 
‘In England, it is customary to accord ‘ equivalent validity’ to the Quartos and Folios; 
‘and to decide at one time for one, and at another time for another, according to indi- 
‘ vidual bias; and the result is an eclectic text. When the editor is a man of taste, the 


368 APPENDIX 


‘reader, perhaps, does not fare so badly; but such dealing cannot be termed critical. 
‘ Even in the case where we have to deal with two different versions from the hand 
‘of a Poet himself, one of the two must be laid aside; no matter, whether we prefer 
‘that version which gives us the first hurried sketch, or that which has received the 
‘improvements of maturer judgement. To weld both into one, yields a result, which 
«never had any existence for the Poet himself even... . The universal acknowledge- 
‘ment, that the Romeo and Fuliet of 1597, the Hamlet of 1603, and the Quartos of 
‘ Henry V, and the 2d and 3d Parts of Henry VI, and of The Merry Wives, are mere 
« compilations, hastily made up from copies taken down from performances on the stage, 
‘and from untrustworthy recollections,—this acknowledgement can be but a question 
‘of time. . . . Shakespeare’s indifference to the fate of his dramas, has been praised by 
‘some and blamed by others, and all have perceived in it, the poet’s unconsciousness 
‘of his own greatness; whereas it may have been the natural result of the highest 
‘intellectual power, which finds in the joy of creating its fullest and completest 
‘reward, and in the prospect of the future loses all interest in the present and the 
‘past. ... Every doubt as to the unlawful character of these Quartos ought to be 
‘reasonably laid, when we have in the Preface to the Folio, such a decided, unam- 
‘biguous proof. ‘Where before you were abused,’ so we read there, ‘ with divers 
‘¢stolen and surreptitious copies, maimed and deformed by the frauds and stealths 
‘¢of injurious imposters that exposed them, even those are now offered to your view 
‘¢cured and perfect of their limbs,’ &c. It is remarkable, how completely this famil- 
‘jar announcement has been lost sight of, and discarded, by almost every Shakespeare 
‘student. Perhaps, it is thought, that editor against editor and publisher against pub- 
‘lisher, are not competent witnesses. And, moreover, the judge is not uncorrupted, 
‘The short-comings of the Folio, the sole authorised edition, give to the Quartos, 
‘spite of their lack of authenticity, such a disproportionate importance, that the mod- 
‘ern critic is in duty bound to thank them at every step; and cannot refrain from hold- 
‘ing them in high honour. Their present relative importance, induces a very natural 
‘delusion as to their absolute worth. It has been thought, that the foregoing sentence 
‘from the Preface in the Folio referred only to the six Quartos mentioned above, and 
‘that we were, therefore, justified in dividing the Quartos into authentic and spurious 
‘Quartos. In fact, several of them afford a text essentially complete and worthy of 
‘the poet, nay, some even appear to be set forth with greater care than the Folio. 
‘ But this, by no means, proves that there is no difference between a lawful and an 
‘unlawful edition; but at best only between more adroit and less adroit sophistications, 
‘and gives us no right to restrict, just as we please, the general assertion of the Folio, 
‘and to draw the line at a boundary which our own needs have set up. When this 
‘or that Quarto is termed authentic, it is not absolutely meant, that it must have been 
‘published in an authorised manner by the direct or indirect means of the lawful 
‘owner of the MS, But this expression implies rather, that authentic copies, by 
‘some means or other, must have come into the possession of the publisher. Of 
‘course, this would not be impossible, but it would be very difficult. ... The com- 
‘plete MS, be it remembered, was in the possession of the managers alone, among 
‘whom it is not likely that a traitor to their own monopoly would be found; the indi- 
‘vidual actors knew nothing more than their own parts, and it would, therefore, require 
‘an organised complicity of all of them, in a plot to place their collected réles in the 
‘hands of an outside purchaser. On the other hand, it could not have been difficult, 
‘where neither pains nor cost were spared, to procure by copyists in the Theatre a 
‘passable, nay, even a complete and correct printer’s copy. If it proved too much for 


i aaa THE TEXT 


_ fone short-hand writer, two or three could accomplish it, by relieving each other; and 
‘if it could not be finished at the first performance, it could certainly be done at the 
‘second o third. Here is hypothesis against hypothesis, possibility against possi- 
‘bility, and it will need a series of minute investigations to turn the scale. The fol- 
‘lowing pages will be devoted to the task of proving, that one of the so-called authentic 
‘ Quartos could have had its origin only in copies made at a performance on the stage, 
‘and that its various readings merit no regard in comparison with the text of the Folio, 
‘which has, at least, an indirect connection with the handwriting of the poet; and 
‘when, moreover, the Folio is not marred by manifest misprints. . . . 

‘[P. 5.] The omissions in the Folio are not of vital importance, owing to the firm 
‘structure of the drama, which does not permit much to be removed without danger 
‘to the whole; and they have been made by no unskilful hand. We may, therefore, 
‘assume, that we have here the piece in that shape in which it was presented on the 


4 é ‘ Shakespearian stage in the years just preceding its appearance in type, and it is 
‘manifest that it has suffered no material injury by its abridgements. These abridge- 
‘ments might have occurred all the more easily, if we suppose that the original MS 
: ‘had been neglected, mislaid, and finally lost. The greater completeness of the 


‘ Quartos, however, by no means proves, that they represent a more complete MS 
} ‘than the Folio; but only that they appeared, or were prepared, at a time, when the 
é _ drama was acted in its unabridged form, owing to a lack of sufficient experience of 
; '*the needs of the stage. 
*[P. 6.] It would be unfair to deny that a number of Quarto readings correct some 


, ; ‘unmistakeable misprints of the Folio. Thus I, i, 173, ‘diseases’ for dzsas¢ers x II, i, 
; ‘80, ‘strange news’ for strangeness ; II, ii, 130, ‘ dread’ for dead , II, iv, 34, ‘ whose’ 
e. ‘for chose; II, iv, 170, ‘blast her pride’ for d/ister ; 183, ‘fickle’ for fickly ; III, iv, 
| ‘53, ‘ford’ for sword; III, vi, 73, ‘tike’ for ight, IV, ii, 75, ‘thereat’ for ¢chreat; 
4 ‘IV, iv, 18, ‘distress’ for desires; IV, vi, 17, ‘walk’ for walked; 83, ‘coining’ for 


‘ crying ; 265,‘we'ld’ for we. But from all these we are not to conclude that the 
‘ Quartos were genuine, that is, that they were derived from authentic MSS; but the 
‘inference to be drawn, with the greater assurance from such separate instances, is 
‘that the actors during a performance pronounced these words or phrases rightly and 
clearly, which the compositor of the Folio read wrongly. 

‘These thirteen, or at most fifteen, instances in which the Folio is corrected by the 
* Quartos, are offset by numberless, utterly senseless, readings in the latter. When they 
‘read I, i, 39, first for ‘fast’; 37, of our state for ‘from our age’; 38, confirming for 
‘¢conferring’, &c, &c; it has never occurred to any modern editor to allow his previous 
‘ preference for the Quartos to have sway here. Nevertheless, it must be conceded, 
‘that such instances of carelessness as these have no bearing on the main question. 

‘More remarkable and significant is a third class of discrepancies, which give 
‘editors the most embarrassment—e, g., in the Quartos, I, i, 33, ‘my liege’ for my 
‘Jord; 34, ‘we shall’ for we will; 38, years for ‘strengths;’ 51, mzer’t doth most chat- 
‘lenge it for ‘nature doth with merit challenge ;’ 147, ‘stoops to folly’ for falls to 
‘ folly ; 181, protection for ‘dear shelter’; II, ui, 84, What's his offence for ‘What is 
‘¢his fault’; II, iv, 297, d/eak winds for ‘high winds’, &c. &c; and when we find in 
‘round numbers, a hundred more similar variations, it is obvious enough, that the 
‘fault is not to be laid to illegible MS, or to mere typographical errors. 

‘ The prevailing opinion is, that there are two different versions of the tragedy, that 
‘the Quartos contain the earlier and original, and the Folio the second and revised 


version. We cannot find the least historical support for a theory, that Shakespeare 
ae 


970. APPENDIX 


‘himself had any hand in such a revision. The editors of the Folio mention, as his 
‘ characteristic, that ‘we have scarce received from him a blot in his papers,’ and 
‘ Ben Jonson quotes the same from the mouth of his fellow-actors. It may be granted 
‘that genuine changes, such as Schiller introduced into his Robders, or Goethe into 
‘his Gé¢z, would not preclude in consequence thereof, the complete re-writing of his 
‘pieces, if, on other grounds, we had reason to believe that such changes there were. 
‘But absolutely excluded are all trifling corrections, changes in words and phrases 
‘that change nothing, which are utterly unimportant to the piece as a whole, and 
“even to the impression in detail. It would be impossible to recognize in such trifles 
‘the hand of the poet, even if we knew nothing of his ‘unblotted papers ;’ especially 
of a poet, who was by profession an actor. 

‘The only result from such a revision would have been vexation and confusion to 
the actors, who having once stamped upon their memories a certain phrase, would 
have to unlearn all their rdles for such bagatelles as these. It is very doubtful, if 

‘Ben Jonson would have had the chance to report Shakespeare’s praise in the mouth 
‘of his fellow-players, if he had ever set them such a task as this. .. . Everything 
‘becomes clear, as soon as we suppose that the MS for the Quartos was prepared by 
‘taking it down during a performance on the stage. Actors have now and then an 
‘unsure memory, or perhaps, they are not conscientious enough to use the precise 
‘word of the poet. It makes little difference to them, whether they say ‘stoops to 
‘© folly’ or ‘falls to folly’, ‘protection’ or ‘dear shelter’, &c. &c. Copyists writing 
‘rapidly use abbreviations (e.¢. my /. for ‘my lord’, but which the compositor makes 
‘«my liege’); and they leave gaps which they afterwards fill out erroneously from 
‘memory (e. g. ‘ bleak winds’ for ‘high winds’), they mis-hear much and mis-write 
much, A complete and exhaustive explanation, of all the changes in the Quarto 
‘Text, is to be found in the broad path, at every fresh station exposed to fresh dan- 
‘ gers, which the words of the poet travel, through the mouth of the actor, the ear of 
‘the spectator, the hand of the copyist, and the eye of the compositor.’ [Dr SCHMIDT 
brings forward certain classes of errors, to prove his position. I can give only the 
headings:] ‘1. The Quartos make no distinction between verse and prose; not even 
‘where the lines rhyme at the end of a scene. 2. Many errors of the Quartos are 
‘mistakes of the ear, not of the eye. 3. Capriciousness of the actors’ diction is 
‘noticeable in the use of expletives, like ‘come,’ ‘do,’ ‘ go to,’ ‘how,’ ‘sir,’ &c. In 
‘common life Englishmen are fond of beginning their sentences with such little words, 
‘which, like tuning-forks, give the key in which they intend tospeak. 4. The omissions 
‘in the Quartos are evidently due to the actors, occurring as they do in the middle of 
‘speeches, where care is taken merely to preserve the cue, &c. &c.’ [Dr ScHMIDT 
sums up as follows:] ‘Such are the reasons in general and in particular, which prove 
‘that the Quarto-Text of Avg Lear lacks authority, and that its various readings are to 
‘corcarincubiable enon adhe ister AEG eee 
* viction will take root and bear fruit : t ; Ree) sa ents: oa Ke, 
eee Bok sade gue rack experience be approximately 
Ponca business to rolls hi a ‘ ‘ hia ee os arse 
‘ $ convictions,’ [Nearly all the remainder of Dr 
Schmidt’s remarks will be found in the commentary to the text. Unfortunately, his 
essay is only a fragment. It does not extend beyond the second Scene of the first res 


Since the foregoing was written an article has appeared in Robinson's Epitome of 
Literature, 1 August, 1879, by the Rev. Mr-FLeay, on The Date and The Text of 


THE TEXT 


, rer 


this ae The portion that relates to the Text is substantially as follows :] ‘In the 
‘Quarto we have the version of the play as it was performed on the 26th of Decem- 
ber, 1606, before the King. Iam unable to trace any revivals of it, but the fact that 
‘the Folio is divided into Acts and Scenes, and the numerous omissions in it, prove 
‘that version to be an abridgement for stage purposes, most likely made after Shake- 
“speare’s retirement, and probably circa 1616-22. 

‘I will now proceed to examine some peculiarities in the versions. We must re- 
‘member that‘in 1605, when the original version (which we call ‘O’) was produced, 
‘the Queen had recently (in October, 1604) been consulting astrologers and firmly 

_ * believed in them; that James I. was popularly supposed to be on anything but good 
‘terms with Prince Henry; that his wholesale creation of knights had been satirised 
‘abundantly on the boards; and that England and Scotland had been merged in 
‘Great Britain by proclamation (October 20, 1604). Again, in 1606, December 26, 
‘when the revival took place, the Gunpowder Plot had disturbed the Court and people. 

‘ Now turn to I, ii, 103, seg., it is clear that a passage, innocent perhaps originally, 
‘but liable to misconstruction by the Court, has been carefully left out in the Quarto. 
*«This villain of mine comes under the prediction; there’s son against father: he 
‘ King falls from bias of nature, there's father against child. We have seen the best 
‘of our time,’ &c. 

*On the other hand, 1. 91 seg., 137 seg., which were inserted in the Quarto in place 
‘of this, speak of a ‘father that so tenderly and entirely loves him;’ ‘menaces and 
‘maledictions against king and nobles;’ (Gunpowder Plot;) ‘nuptial breaches;’ 
* (Lady Essex;) and the like, none of which allusions would be disagreeable to the 
* King. 

‘ Again, in I, iv, 345, seg., this passage was omitted : 

‘* This man hath had good counsel; a hundred knights, 
**Tis politic and safe to let him keep 

* At point a hundred knights; yes, that, on every dream 
* Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike, 


* He may enguard his dotage with their powers, 
‘ And hold our lives in mercy.” 


‘ But the strongest instance of this kind is in III, i, 22-42, where 22-29 (trom the 
‘ Folio) are clearly alternative with 30-42 (from the Quarto). In the Folio we read: 


‘* Who have, as who have not, that their great stars 
‘ Throned and set high? servants, who seem no less, 
‘Which are to France the spies and speculations 
‘Intelligent of our state ; what hath been seen, 

‘* & # # in * # * * something deeper, 


* Whereof, perchance, these are but furnishings.” 


‘But in the Quarto we are only told of ‘secret feet in some of our best ports,’ 
‘Is it not clear that the former passage would, in the winter of 1604-5, when the 
‘peace with Spain was not six months old—a peace procured by the bribery of Suf- 
‘folk, Northampton, Pembroke, Southampton, Dirleton, &c., &c.—be taken by the 
‘populace as a direct allusion to this scandalous corruption, and is it not also clear 
‘that the Court could not allow the play to be acted before them without the clever 
‘reformations introduced by Shakespeare in this Quarto version ? 

« Another omission of the same kind is that of the Merlin prophecy at the end of 
‘III, ii. James would not have tolerated even so distant a prospect of a time when 
€the realm of Albion should come to great confusion, and any allusion to the cut- 


poe 


APPENDIX. 


‘purse who ‘came to the throng’ during his first progress is known to have been 


‘very obnoxious to him. : 

‘It is clear then that the Quarto is, as stated on the title-page, the version ‘played 
‘before the King’s Majesty.’ It is, however, a scandalously incorrect and surrepti- 
‘tious copy of that version, taken from a wretchedly written MS. 

‘Taking it then that the Quarto is a somewhat altered version of *Q’ for Court 
‘performance, but very carelessly copied and erroneously printed, we have yet to 
‘examine the Folio. In this case, fortunately, as in the corresponding cases of 
‘Othello and Hamlet, we have two versions, one abridged considerably. It is not 
‘then possible for ingenuous editors to sneer at the very notion of abridgement as 
‘they do when it is suggested that 7he Tempest or Fulius Cesar have been curtailed 
‘for theatrical purposes. But they all agree that in this instance the alteration was 
‘made by Shakespeare himself. In spite of the recorded facts that Shirley, Massin- 
‘ger, &c. did rewrite great portions of Beaumont and Fletcher (who were then, 
«1616-40, esteemed above Shakespeare); in spite of the probability that portions, 
‘if not all, of his MSS were burnt with the Globe Theatre; in spite of the palpable 
‘fact that Zimon was so remodelled before 1623, and Macbeth, The Tempest, &c. 
‘afterwards, by D’Avenant and Dryden; in spite of the persistence to our own time 
‘of managers in playing Richard [1f, Macbeth, &c. in their altered forms, we are 
‘required to believe that Shakespeare, who left his plays to take care of themselves, 
‘and did not collect them like Jonson, was regarded as too sacred to be remodelled 
‘until his plays were published in 1623, but after that they were open to any one to 
‘refashion as he pleased; in other words, the very thing which preserved Jonson’s 
‘plays from being altered was the beginning of the corruption of Shakespeare’s. I 
‘believe, on the contrary, that this process began immediately after his death, and 
‘that nearly every play revived was, at the revival, revised also; abridged, ‘re- 
‘formed’ of oaths, &c., corrected by alteration of obsolete words, and ‘emended’ 


‘in metre as well as diction. In some cases I believe also interpolations were intro- 


‘ duced,—not, however, in this play of Zeav, to which I return, 

‘Besides the alterations I have noted from ‘O” to the Quarto, there are omissions 
‘in the Folio, especially in the later part of the play. Besides shorter ones of a line 
‘or so, which may be due to the careless copy, or of single words, which may be 
‘due to the printer, I may notice the following: I, iii, 16-23; I, iv, 154-169; I, iv, 
‘252-257; II, ii, 148-152 (clearly a purposed omission, not accidental, the metre 
‘being set right by inserting, ‘need’); III, vi, 18-59; III, vi, 109-122 (omitted 
‘because, as Heywood tells us, rhyme had become unfashionable) ; III, vii, 98-107; 
‘IV, i, 60-66; IV, i, 31-50; IV, i, 53-58; IV, i, 62-69. The whole of IV, iii 
‘ (intentional, for the scenes are renumbered Zertia for Quarta, etc., up to Septima, 
« which remains unaltered); IV, vii, 86-97; V, i, 23-28; V, iii, 54-59; V, ili, 203-221. 

‘ Now I cannot believe that these omissions were made by Shakespeare; the last 
‘one, for instance, narrating the meeting of Edgar and Kent, is necessary to the plot. 
‘See how abrupt line 229 (‘Here comes Kent’) becomes without it. But on this 
‘point, and on the incorrectness of the Quarto I need not enlarge. Four years since 
‘Prof. Delius, in an able paper, displayed his views on them, with which I entirely 
‘coincide. The portions of this article which I claim as original are the fixing the 
‘date of production in 1605, not 1606 [see Date of the Composition, p. 381], ond the 


‘hypothesis that the Quarto version was one altered by Shakespeare from ‘OQ? for 
‘production at Court. 


. 


‘While the very numerous irregularities of metre in the Quarto are due entirely to 


. bs Sea 


Bere” sie gard to his works, and Fletcher’s, or to any of the great dramatists, we can always 
<r re ‘tell if any play has been abridged by examination of this one peculiarity.’ 


-: 


A LIST OF VARIOUS READINGS IN CERTAIN QUARTOS, COLLATED 
BY THE CAMBRIDGE EDITORS, AND RECORDED BY THEM IN 
THE FOOT-NOTES OF THEIR EDITION. - 


The following collation is wholly the work: of Messrs CLARK and WricHT. I 
have not incorporated it in my own collation, as recorded in the foregoing Textual 
notes. The discrepancies hardly rise to the dignity of varie Jectiones, in the strict 
sense in which the phrase is used among schoolmen; they are little else than gross 
typographical blunders, and are interesting mainly for bibliographical purposes, in 
2 deciding the priority in printing among several copies, or even portions of copies, 
of Quartos of the same date. Interest too may be found in deciding whether the 
4 various readings are errors of the eye or of the ear. i 
< It is to be borne in mind, that I have here reprinted the collation exactly as it is 
7 recorded in the Cambridge Edition, except in some cases where the reading is iden- 
tical with the received text, there it seemed superfluous; and that ‘Q,’ of the Cam- 
_ bridge Edition is Q, of this, viz: the Pride Budi edition. 

' In their Preface the Cambridge Editors give the following explanation of the sym- 
bols which they have used: 
o *Q, (Cap.). The copy in Capell’s collection. 
a *Q, (Dev.). The copy in the Library of the Duke of Devonshire, 
: *Q, (Mus. per.). A perfect copy in the British Museum. (C. 34, K. 18). [Ash- 
bee’s Facsimile agrees with this.—ED. ] 
*Q, (Mus. imp.). An imperfect copy (wanting title) in the British Museum (C. 34, 
K. 17); formerly in the possession of Mr Halliwell. 
*Q, (Bodl. 1). A copy in the Bodleian Library (Malone 35), with the title, but 
wanting the last leaf. 
*Q, (Bodl. 2). A copy in the Bodleian Library (Malone 37), wanting title, but 
having the last leaf.’ 


I,i,95. You have degot] bgot Q, (Cap.). 

I, i, 102. Sure, I shall never marry] Matry Q, (Cap.). 

I, ii, 36. Edm.] Bast. Q,FfQ,. Ba. Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. per, & Bodl. 1, 2). 
Om. Q, (Mus. imp.). 

‘I, iv, 87. If you will measure your /ubber’s length] lubbers length Q, (Cap. & 

Dev.). lubbers, length Q, (Mus. per. & imp. & Bodl. 1, 2). 

I, iv, 148. They would have part on’t: and ladies évo,] on’t, and lodes too, Q,Q,. 
an't, and lodes too, Q, (Cap. & Dev.). an’t, and Ladies too, Q, 
(Bodl. 1, 2, Mus. per. & imp.). 

I, iv, 173. I would fain earn to lie] learne to lye Q, (Bodl. 1, 2, Mus. per. & 
imp.). /earne lye Q, (Cap. & Dev.). 


32 


. a 
I, iv, 185. 


‘LS iv,i293: 


I, iv, 295. 
I, iv, 335- 


I, iv, 336. 
}, iv, 338. 


II, i, 100. 


iy ig t20: 
LD, ajr22. 


TD, £29: 
1.7, 124% 
i; Lipats 

II, ii, 14. 
II, ii, 15. 


Tit bo Te 


Tat 138: 
II, ii, 160. 


II, ii, 162. 
II, ii, 166. 
TL, tit 05: 
II, 11, 16. 
EE, ai, 17. 
II, iii, 20, 
Ey, tv roy. 
II, iv, 98. 


II, iv, 100. 
TNs LOK, 
Ti,iv, 118. 


II, iv, 119 


SAV, re. 
II, iv, 133. 
II, iv, 188. 
II, iv, 223. 


III, ii, 35. 


now thou art an Soe thou Q, (Bodh 2, Mos. per & 
thou, thou Q,Q, (Cap. & Dev.). _ 
Blasts and fogs upon thee! The intended) secu? untender 


(Cap. & Dev.). upon the untented Q, (Bodl. 1, 2, Mus. pens & 


imp. 

Pierce ts sense about thee!] peruse Q,Q, (Cap. & Dev.). 

And hasten your return. No, no, my lord.| and after your returne 
—now my lord Q,. and after your returne now my lord Q, 
(Cap. & Dev.). & hasten your veturte now my lord Q, (Bodl. 
1, 2, Mus. per. & imp.). 

This miley gentleness] mil/kie Q, (Bodl. 1, 2, Mus. per. & imp.). 
mildie Q,Q, (Cap. & Dev.). 

You are much more aétask’d for want of wisdom] atfaskt for Q, 
(Bodl. 1, 2, Mus. per. & imp.). a/apé Q,Q, (Cap. & Dev.). 


“To have the waste and spoil of his revenues] the wast and spoyle of his 


Q, (Bodl. 1, 2, Mus. per. & ps these—and wast of this his 
Q, (Cap. & Dev.). 

Occasions, noble Gloucester, of some Jorse] foyse Q, (Bodl. 1, 2, Mus. 
per. & imp.). rise Q, (Cap. & Dev.). 

Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister Of differences] diferences Q, 
(Bodl. 1, 2, Mus, per. & imp.). defences Q,Q, (Cap. & Dev.). 

which I dest thought it fit] Zest Q, (Bodl. 1, 2, Mus. per. & imp.). 

To answer from our home.] hand Q,Q, (Cap. & Dev.). = 

Good dawning] deuen Q, (Bodl. 1). a 

three-suited | three snyted Q, (Bodl. 1). 

worsted-stocking | wosted stocken Q, (Bodl. 1). 

You stubborn ancient knave] ausrent Q, (Bodl. 1). 

basest and contemned’st wretches] belest and contaned Q, (Bodl. 1). 

Nothing almost see méracles] my wracke Q.Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. 
& imp. & Bodl. 2). my rackles Q, (Bodl. 1). = 

Who hath most] 20¢ Q, (Bodl. 1). 

Take] Late Q, (Bodl. 1). 

numb’d azd mortified] axzd is omitted in Q, Sees 1). 

Pins] Pies Q, (Bodl. 1). 

Jrom low farms] frame Q, (Bodl. 1). 

Turlygod| Tuelygod Q, (Bodl. 1). 

Sather Would with his] fate... with the Q, (Bodl. 1). 

commands her service] come and tends seruise Q, (Bodl. 1). 

‘Fiery’ ? ‘the fiery duke?’ Tell] The fierie duke, tell Q, (Bodl. 1). 

No| Mo Q, (Bodl. 1). 

cockney] cokney Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. & imp. & Bodl. 2). coz- 
nay Q, (Bodl. 1). 


» paste] past Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. & imp. & Bodl. 2). past Q, 


(Bodl. 1). 
divorce me from thy mother’s tomb] deuose... Sruit Q, (Bodl. 1). 
depraved | deptoued Q, (Bodl. 1). 
Allow] alow Q,Q,. allow Q, (Cap.). 
call it) callit Q, (Dev.). 
but] hut Q, (Dev.). 


<7 


i ~ 
Pragh 


Mua 


Contentious storm] eruleitions storm Q, (Mus imp. & Bodl. 1), 
tempestious storm Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. & Bodl. 2). 
O. raging] roring Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. & Bodl. 2). 
14. Save what das there.] deates Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. & Bodl. 2). 
: _ beares Q,Q, (Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). 
ale IIL, iv, 106. endings] leadings Q,Q, (Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). 
- cia Wy, 106, Come, unbution here.| Come on bee true. Q, (Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). 
“ Come on Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. & Bodl. 2). 
a U1, iv, x14, Lilibbertigibbet | Sriberdegibit Q, (Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). Fiiberde- 
gibek Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. & Bodl. 2). 
IIL, iv, 112, gives] gins Q, (Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). 
“IIL, iv, 112,113. and the pin, squints] the pin-queues Q, (Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). 
& the pin, squemes Q, (Cap. Dev. & Mus. per.). 
IT, iv, 113. hare-lip| hare lip Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. & Bodl. 2). harte lip Q, 
(Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). 
III, iv, 116. Ae met the night-mare] a nellthu night more Q, (Mus. imp. & 
acy’ Bodl. 1). he met the night mare Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. & 
7 Bod]. 2). 


J III, iv, 119. shee, witch,| thee, witch Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. & Bodl. 2). thee, 

x with Q, (Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). 

irae II, iv, 125. ¢adpole] tode pold Q, (Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). fod pole Q, (Cap. Dev. 
— Mus. per. & Bodl. 2). 
'. ITI, iv, 125. wall-newt | wall-wort Q, (Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). 
= es II, vi, 94. Take up, take up] Take up to keepe Q, (Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). Take 
Be. ee up the King Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. & Bodl. 2). 

o  — III, vii, 57. anointed | annoynted Q, (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2). aurynted Q, (Cap. 


Dev. Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). 
III, vii, 58. as his dave head] of his lou'd head Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. & Bodl. 


a = 1). on his lowd head Q, (Mus. per. & Bodl. 2). 

Bry: III, vii, 59. dzoy’d] layd Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). dod Q, (Mus. 
; , . per. & Bodl. 2). 

oe III, vii, 60. stelled] steeled Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). 

ea III, vii, 103. roguzsh] Om. Q, (Mus. per. & Bodl. 2). 


IV, i, 10. poorly led?| poorlie, leed, Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). 
parti, eyd, Q, (Mus. per: & Bodl. 2). 

IV, ii, 12. terror] terrer Q, (Mus. per. & Bodl. 2). caurre Q, (Cap. Dev. 
Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). 

IV, ii, 21. A mistress’s command] coward Q, (Cap. owe Mus. imp. & 
Bodl. 1). 

IV, ii, 21. Wear his; spare speech] this, spare Q, (Mus. per. & Bodl. 2). this 
spare Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). 

IV, ii, 27. @ woman’s] a is omitted in Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). 

IV, ii, 28. My fool usurps my Jody] My foote.. . body Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. 
& Bodl.1). A foole... bed Q, (Mus. per. & Bodl. 2). 

IV, ii, 29. worth the whistle] whistling Q, (Mus. per. & Bodl. 2). 

IV, ii, 32. 2s origin] z# Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). 7% Q, (Mus. per, 
& Bodl, 2). 

IV, ii, 45. by him so Senecfited | benifited Q, (Mus. per. & Bodl. 2). deniflicted Q. 
(Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). 


LV, 71,227. 
IV, vi, 239. 
IV, vi, 241. 
IV, vi, 255. 
. IV, vi, 256. 


IV, vi, 262. 


Wahl, 285 

V, iii, 29. 
V, iii, 48. 
iV, 101,50; 
V ills 5. 


V, iii, 58, 


IV, vi, 225. 


IV, vi, 226. 


these vile offences thi vild Q, (ins. pa 
(Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). 
Humanity] Humanly Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. & Bodl. all 


not 2now’st Fools do] know'st fools, do Q, (Cap. | Dev. Mus. imp. suk 


Bodl. 1). Anow’st, fools do Q, (Mus. per. & Bodl. 2). 

in our noiseless land] noystles Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). 
noyseles Q, (Mus. per. & Bodl. 2). 

thy state begins to threat] thy state begins thereat Q, (Mus. per. & 
-Bodl. 2). thy slayer begin threats Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. & 
Bodl. 1). 

W hiles thou,] Whzl’s Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). Whil’st 
Q, (Mus. per. & Bodl. 2). 

Proper deformity seems not] shewes Q, (Mus. per. & Bodl. 2). 
Marry, your manhood now—] manhood mew—Q, (Mus. per. & 
Bodl. 2). manhood now—Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). 
above, You justicers,| above you Iustisers Q, (Mus. per. & Bodl. 2). 
above your Justices Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. & Bodl. 1). 

The dounty and the Jenison of heaven.] The bornet and beniz Q, 
'(Cap. Dev. Mus. per. & Bodl. 1, 2). 

To boot, and boot| to boot, to boot Q, (Mus. imp.). Zo saue thee 
Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus, per. & Bodl. 1, 2). 

Jirst| Om. Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. & Bodl. 1, 2). 

vortnight| fortnight Q, (Cap. Dev, Mus. per. & Bodl. 1, 2). ~ 

your costard or my ballow] your coster or my battero Q, (Cap. Dev. 
Mus. per, & Bodl. 1, 2). your costerd or my bat Q, (Mus. imp.). 

rest you. Let’s see] you, lets Q, (Mus. imp.). you lets Q, (Cap. Dev. 
Mus. per. & Bodl. 1, 2). 

he speaks of May be] of may Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. per & Bodl. 1, 
2). of, may Q, (Mus. imp.). 

Reads] A Letter Q, (Mus. imp.). Om. Q, (Cap. Dey. Mus. per. & 
Bodl. 1, 2). 

alteration] abdication Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. & Bodl. 1, 2). 

One step] And Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. & Bodl. 1, 2). 

and appointed guard] Om. Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. & Bodl. 1, 2). 

common bosom] common bossome Q,(Mus.imp.). coren bossom Q, 
(Cap. Dev. Mus. per. & Bodl. 1, 2). : 

session. At this time We] session at this time, wee Q, (Mus. imp.). 
session at this time, mee Q, (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. & Bodl. 1, 2). 


sharpness] sharpnes Q, (Mus. imp.). shares Q, (Cap. Dey. Mus. 
per. & Bodl. 1, 2). 


DATE OF THE COMPOSITION 


THE Date of the Composition of this play can be ascertained with an unusual degree 
of accuracy. We have one limit fixed by external evidence, and another by internal, 
and the term between the two consists of merely three years: from 1603 to 1606. 

The external evidence is supplied by the Stationers’ Registers, which give us the 
Christmas holidays in 1606 as the earliest date before which the play must of course 
have been written. To the internal evidence we must look for the latest date after 
which it must have been written. 

There are three items of internal evidence, viz: first, the references to Dr Hars- 
net’s book, noted by THEOBALD ; secondly, the use by Edgar of ‘ British man’ instead 
of Englishman in the’ popular rhyme; this was noted by MALong; and thirdly, 
the reference by Gloucester to the ‘late eclipses,’ to which attention was called by 
Mr ALDIS WRIGHT. 


First, Dr Harsnet’s book. This was published in 1603. See IIT, iy, 53. Of the 
three items, this is really the only one that is sure beyond a peradventure. Concern- 


- ing the other two, there may be more or less difference of opinion. 


Of the Second, MALONE (vol. i, p. 352, 1790) says: ‘ This play is ascertained to 
‘have been written after October, 1604, by a minute change which Shakespeare made 
‘in a traditional line put into the mouth of Edgar: “ Fie, foh, fum, I smell the blood 
‘of a British man.” [See III, iv, 175.] The old metrical saying, which is found 
‘in one of Nashe’s pamphlets, printed in 1596, and in other books, was: “ Fy, fa, 
‘fum, I smell the blood of an Englishman.” Though a complete union of Eng- 
*Jand’and Scotland, which was projected in the first parliament that met after James’s 
£ accession to the English throne, was not carried into effect till a century afterwards, 
‘the two kingdoms were united in mame, and he was proclaimed King of Great 
* Britain, 24 October, 1604.’ 

MatonkE therefore assigns the composition to 1605, and thinks it ‘ extremely prob- 
able’ that it was performed for the first time in March or April of that year, ‘in which 
‘year the old play of King Leir, that had been entered at Stationers’ Hall in 1594, 
‘was printed by Simon Stafford for John Wright, who, we may presume, finding 
* Shakespeare’s play successful, hoped to palm the spurious one on the public for his.’ 
See p. 353. It is to be regretted that Malone did not furnish the proofs of his asser- 
tion that the old play of 1594 is identical with that which was afterwards printed in 
1605. Iam strongly inclined to believe that it is a fact, but I think it can only be 
conjecture when we assert that it is so. After imputing to Simon Stafford an intention 
to deceive the public, Malone is obliged to put the date of the performance as far 
back as March or April, 1605. It was on the eighth of May in that year that Stafford 
entered his book at Stationers’ Hall, and if Shakespeare’s Zear was then on the 
stage, or had been lately, it must have been written some months before. If, as 
Malone supposes, it was performed in March, it must have been written in January 
or February, in order to keep it within the year 1605. I do not remember that 
Malone anywhere expresses himself quite as explicitly as this, but if he had he would 
have carried CHALMERS completely with him; and if he had extended the compo- 
sition over a little longer space than two months, and stretched it into December or 


32* 377 


378 APPENDIX Ee 
: x ‘ Sire 
November, 1604, he would have taken with him Draxe also, and probably all others | 
who profess to detect sharp practice between the lines of Simon Stafford’s title-page ; 


but, as I said when speaking of the entry of Stafford’s book in the Stationers’ Regis- —. 


ters, these arguments, founded on a printer’s chance phrase, are to me only ‘gracious 
fooling. Simon Stafford, in all likelihood, tells the truth when he says his King 
Leir was ‘latelie acted.’ I dare say it was a popular play; it is quite a good speci- 
men of the third-rate class of comedies, and its success was sufficiently marked ~ 
to suggest to Shakespeare a tragedy on the same subject. And as to Stafford’s 
calling it a tragedy,—I really think that he was to a certain extent justified in retain- 
ing the impression which the whole drift of the play except the last two or three 
scenes left upon his mind. If the spectacle of a respectable elderly king, reduced 
to such an extremity of hunger as to induce his faithful attendant to offer him his 
bare and living arm as an article of diet, be not tragic, it is difficult to say what 
tragedy is. Moreover, DRYDEN in his Preface to The Spanish Friar speaks of a 
‘ Tragedy ending happily.’ The half-title of TATE’s version of this very play reads, 
‘The tragedy of King Lear,’ and we all know that the declared purpose of that 
version was to turn it into a comedy; and when we find even CAMPBELL, the poet, 
in his Remarks on this play, speaking of this same Aimg Leir as ‘a tragedy,’ I 
think we ought not to be too severe on an Elizabethan printer for applying to it the 
same title. In these days, when Henry VIII, Nero, and Judas Iscariot find vindi- 
cators, I really think a faint murmur might be raised for humble Simon Stafford. 

As I have said, CHALMERS (Supplemental Apology, p. 413) concurs generally with 
Malone in the belief that Zear was written early in 1605, but he thinks Malone is 
mistaken in some of his premises. For instance, he says that the argument, derived 
from the change of Lxg/ish to ‘ British,’ that the play was written after October, 
1604, is not absolutely conclusive, for ‘the fact is that there was issued from Green- 
‘wich a royal proclamation, on the 13th of May, 1603, declaring that, until a com- 
‘ plete union, the king held, and esteemed, the two realms, as Jresent/y united, and as 
‘one kingdom; and the two poets, Daniel, and Drayton, who wrote gratulatory verses 
‘on his accession, spoke of the two kingdoms as united, thereby, into one realm, by 
‘the name of Britain; and of the inhabitants of England and Scotland, as one 
‘people, by the denomination of British. Before King James arrived at London, 
‘Daniel offered tc him: ‘4A Panegyrike Congratulatory, delivered to the King’s most 
‘excellent Majesty at Burleigh-Harrington in Rutlandshire, which was printed in* 
1603, for Blount, with a Defence of Rhime: 

‘Lo here the glory of a greater day 
Than England ever heretofore could see 
In all her days... . 
And now she is, and now in peace therefore 
Shake hands with union, O thou mightie state, 


Now thou art all great Britain, and no more, 
No Scot, no English now, nor no debate.’ 


‘This very rare publication of Daniel confutes, by the fact, the Commentator's rea 
‘soning, from the proclamation; for we see how a poet did write before any procla- 
‘mation issued upon the point,’ 

DRAKE (Shakespeare and his Times, ii, 457) thinks it «more probable that its pro- 
duction is to be attributed to the close of 1604,’ for three reasons: First, if the chance 
from English to British were made out of compliment to the king she complnaen: 
would be all the greater if the change were made between the doclenatry proclama- 
tion of May, 1603, and the definitive proclamation of October, 1604. Secondly, the 


— 


- 


, 


r= 


| DATE OF THE COMPOSITION — 379 


f King Leir was entered on the Stationers’ books on the 8th of May, 1605, 
as Jately acted.’ Now, as the publisher hoped to impose on the public this 


4 


“hal old tragedy for Shakespeare’s successful drama, it was evidently intended that the - 


; word ‘ately’ should be referred by the reader to Shakespeare’s play; hence, it fol- 
_ lows that Zear had been acted some months before, and was not then actually per- 
c: forming. This inference harmonises with the supposition that Zear was written about 
the end of 1604, but does not agree with Malone's theory that it appeared in April, 
2 1605. Thirdly, ‘Cyméeline is assigned to 1605, and, in consequence of the removal 
_ of The Winter's Tale to 1613,’ the year 1604 is left vacant for the admission of Lear. 
KNIGHT observes that ‘ Malone and Drake are at issue on a question of merely three 
months, when the facts, which we really have, give us a range of three years.’ ‘It is 


& ‘sufficient,’ adds Knight, ¢ for us to be confirmed in the belief, derived from internal 


‘evidence, that Zear was produced at that period when the genius of. Shakespeare 
‘was “at its very point of culmination.”’ He ‘also points out that the Folio has 
‘English’ in IV, vi, 249 [see his note ad /oc.], despite the fact that the Quartos 
changed it to British, not only here, but in Edgar’s ‘ Fee, fa, fum.’ 

Mr Wricur thinks it well not to lay too much stress upon the change from 
‘English’ of the Folio to British of the Quarto, and to infer therefrom that the line in 

€ Folio was written before the royal proclamation in October, 1604, and corrected 
before the Quartos were printed in 1608. ‘It is as likely,’ says the Editor of the Clar- 
endon Edition, ‘ that Shakespeare, writing not long after 1604, while the change was 
‘still fresh, and before the word ‘ British’ had become familiar in men’s mouths, may 
‘have inadvertently written ‘ English,’ and subsequently changed it to ‘ British.’’ 


The Third item of indirect internal evidence is thus set forth by Mr ALDIS WRIGHT: 
‘We are helped forward another step in determining the date by a passage in Glou- 
*cester’s speech (I, ii, 98, ef seg.) : ‘ These late eclipses in the sun and moon portend 
‘no good to us.’ By those who observed the signs in the air and sky the great 
* eclipse of the sun, which took place in October, 1605, had been looked forward to 
‘with apprehension as the precursor of evil, especially as it was preceded by an 
eclipse of the moon within the space of a month. In arguing against such appre- 
‘hensions, John Harvey, of King’s Lynn, who reasoned with the ‘ wisdom of nature,’ 
‘in his book called 4 Discoursive Probleme Concerning Prophesies, printed in 1588, 
‘ wrote as follows (p. 119): 

«« Moreouer, the like concourse of two Eclipses in one, and the same month, shal 
«hereafter more eilidently in shew, and more effectually in deed, appeere, Anno 
“1590. the 7. and 21. daies of Iuly: and Avo 1598. the 11. and 25. daies of Feb- 
“ruary; and Anno 1601. the 29. day of Nouember, and 14. of December: but espe- 
“cially, and most notably Amo 1605. the second day of October, when the sunne 
«shall be obscured aboue 11. digits, and darknes appeere euen at midday, the Moone 
“ at the very next full immediately preceding hauing likewise beene Eclipsed. Wher- 
«fore as two Eclipses in the space of one month, are no great strange nouities, so if 
« either they, or an huge fearefull Eclipse of the Sunne were to iustifie or confirme 
“this oracle: the author thereof should haue staied his wisedome vntill after the 
“ foresaid yeere of Christ, 1605. when so rare a spectacle shall be seene, or the yeeres 
« 17606, 1607. or 1608. immediately following, when so mightie an Eclipse shall so 
« perlously rage.” 

‘Reading this in connection with the speech of Gloucester, which has been re- 
‘ferred to, and with what Edmund, the sceptic of the time, subsequently (I, ii, 120, 


‘124, 125) says, ‘O, these eclipses portend these divisions,” and, *I am thin 


«¢brother, of a prediction I read this other day, what should follow these eclipses,’ — 
“it can scarcely be doubted that Shakespeare had in his mind the great eclipse, and _ , 
‘that Lear was written while the recollection of it was still fresh, and while the 


«ephemeral literature of the day abounded with pamphlets foreboding the conse- 
‘quences that were to follow. If we imagine further that, in Gloucester’s words, 
«¢ machinations, Hollowness, treachery, and all ruinous disorders follow us disquietly 
““to our graves,’ there is a reference to the Gunpowder Plot of Nov. 5, 1605, we 
‘have another approximation to the date. But, without insisting too much upon this, 
‘it is, I think, highly probable that Shakespeare did not begin to write King Lear 
“till towards the end of the year 1605, and that his attention may have been directed 
‘to the story as a subject for tragedy by the revival of the older play above men- 
‘tioned, which was published in the same year. 

‘ Having now reduced the period of composition to the narrow limits between the 
“end of 1605 and Christmas, 1606, any attempt to assign the date more exactly must 
‘be purely conjectural and derived from internal evidence. It would be difficult to 
‘fix the precise season to which the storm in the third Act is appropriate. Various 
‘indications in the previous Act seem to point to the winter; such as the Fool’s 
‘speech (II, iv, 45), ‘ Winter’s not gone yet, if the wild geese fly that way,’ though 
‘of course this had also Another meaning. Again, the signs of the gathering storm 
‘are wintry, ‘the bleak winds do sorely ruffle,’ ‘’tis a wild night’; but Lear’s apos- 
*trophe is addressed to a violent summer tempest, and so Kent describes it. And in 
‘accordance with this all the colouring of the fourth Act is of the summer. Lear 
‘is seen 


Crown’d with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds, 
With hor-docks, hemlocks, nettles, cuckow-flowers, 
Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow 
In our sustaining corn.’ 


‘¢ Search every acre in the high-grown field,’ points to July, and we must not insist 
‘too much upon strict botanical accuracy, for this would be late for cuckoo-flowers, as 
‘well as for the samphire-gathering in a subsequent scene, which generally takes place 
‘in May. Perhaps Shakespeare began the play in the winter of 1605, and finished it 
‘in'the summer of 1606, while the fields were still covered with the unharvested corn, 
‘and the great storm of March was still fresh in his recollection,’ 

Mr Moser-y thinks that the play must have been written in 1605-6, ‘in the midst 
‘of the stirring events connected with the Gunpowder Plot; and the absence of 
‘allusion to them is a striking instance of the way in which Shakespeare’s mind, like 
‘that of Goethe in after-time, could keep aloof from subjects of absorbing public 
‘interest, and live simply among its own creations,’ 


Dyce adopts MALONE’s view (which, however, he erroneously attributes to STEE- 


VENS), that its date is March or April, 1605. 
Dr DELtus thinks that it must have been written in 1604 or 1605, in Shakespeare’s 
fortieth or forty-first year, 


Mr FLEAY (Shakespeare Manual, p. 47) says that it was probably produced early in 
1605, as the old play was then reprinted, and entered on the eighth of May as ‘ lately 
acted’ in order to deceive the public. 


I think we must remain content with the term of three years; no date more pre- 
cise than this will probably ever gain general acceptance. Iam afraid we are con- 


— 

381 

curiously in attempting to ascertain the precise year or time of the year. 

: pose that when Shakespeare alludes to winter there must be actually icicles 

hanging by the walk or that when he mentions flowers the meadows must be painted 1 ‘s, 

with delight before -his very eyes, is to put a narrow limitation to his imagination. ‘ 

His allusions to contemporary events are not always so defined as to be at once * 

; “manifest to close students or accomplished scholars. As we have seen, one editor 

discovers in this play a possible allusion to the Gunpowder Plot, while another dis- 

cerns none, To a certain extent this same vagueness holds true in regard to eclipses 

and other natural phenomena. I cannot but think we deal unworthily with Shake- 

Speare’s genius when we suppose that he needed, or that he himself felt that he 

needed, to resort to such allusions in order to produce dramatic effects. While we 

all agree in believing that he throws around his dramas the atmosphere of the times 

in which the scenes are laid, it can scarcely be but that his auditors, and assuredly 

Shakespeare himself, would have felt the jar that'an allusion to an event of yester- 

day would have instantly occasioned. At the same time, so truly did Shakespeare 

: __ write for the hour then present that it is presumptuous to say what he would not do 
, 


_ 


for that hour’s success. There are instances, undoubtedly, in his plays where he 
alludes to recent local events; but I do not think the number as large as is generally 
supposed. 

Since the foregoing was written the article by Mr FLEAy appeared, from which 
extracts were made at the close of the preceding article on The Text. Mr Fleay is 
= so eminent in all that pertains to metrical tests, and has devoted so much learning ta 

the discovery of the dates of these plays, that it is with reluctance that I acknow- 
ea ledge my inability to follow him to his exact conclusion. As will be seen, he follows 
the popular tide in reading fraud in Simon Stafford’s entry on the Stationers’ 
Registers. The following extract from Mr FLEAy’s article bears upon the present 
Z subject : 

* The date had long since been determined by Malone, as between October, 1604, 

’ ‘and the 8th of May, 1605, on satisfactory grounds; but Mr Aldis Wright has shifted 

‘it forward to the summer of 1606, in the plausible introduction to his edition of the 
‘play. Now, the whole theory of metrical tests depends on the date of this play. 
‘Shakespeare wrote Pericles (or his share of it), in 1606; and Pericles is as certainly 
‘in his fourth manner as Zeay is in his third; if the periods overlap my theories are 
- ‘worthless; and Zear and Pericles written within a few months would bring them 
‘dangerously near. Hence I have examined this question with special minuteness, 
‘and, I am glad to add, have been rewarded by a positive result. The play was 
‘written before May 8, 1605. For the old play of Ler (written for the Queen’s 
‘men, circa 1588, played by the Quéen’s and Sussex’s men at the Rose, 1593, April 
‘6; entered for E. White, 1594, May 14; entered for S. Stafford, and printed by him 
‘for J. Wright, to whom he assigned it, 1605, May 8) was put on the Stationers’ 
‘books as Zke TRAGICAL History of King Leir and his three daughters, &c., AS 
¢IT WAS LATELY ACTED. Now Mr Aldis Wright himself noticed that no writer 
‘(historical or theatrical) had given a tragic ending to this story till Shakespeare 
‘made his play ; ‘ Cordelia’s fate and character are all his own,’ says he. Hence the 
‘old «Chronicle History’ could not have been described as ‘ 77vagical’ in 1605 had 
‘not a ¢ragedy on the subject been ‘lately acted,’ nor could the ¢ragedy BANE been 
‘any other than Shakespeare’s. Hence Malone was right in his date and in his in- 
‘ference that Stafford (who had to do with the surreptitious editions of Pertc/es and 
‘ Edward ITT) wished to pass the old play off as Shakespeare’s. Wright, however, 


7 ye a Be ~— T 


382 APPENDIX 


‘had not the impudence to put Stafford’s ¢ Tragical History’ on his title-page, though 
‘he kept the ‘lately acted,’ which was probably, as far as the older play is concerned, 
‘not true, Accordingly, when the real ‘tragedy ’ was issued in 1608, Butter marks 
‘his edition as the genuine ‘ Dirty Dick,’ by putting ‘ Chronicle History’ on its fore- 
‘head; only in the Folio does the real name of ‘Tragedy’ appear. The date, then, 
‘is early in 1605.’ 

Again ‘the wheel has come full circle’; the same is'true of WRIGHT and FLEAY 
as of MALONE and CHALMERS: they differ only by a few months. Wright supposes 
that Shakespeare began the play, and Fleay that he ended it, in 1605. 

For me it is sufficient that we have the play; and all these discussions as to the 
time when it was written, even if they could give us the very day of the week and 
the very hour of the day, would still remain among the extrinsic facts which, it 
seems fated, are to be all that we shall ever learn about Shakespeare. While I am 
reading such delightful books as Shakspere, His Mind and Art, 1 yield to the glamour 
and confess the charm; and, kindled by the enthusiasm of the Director of the Mew 
Shakspere Society, and of his fellow-workers, I am persuaded that naught’s had, 
all’s spent, when our researches are not devoted to the discovery of the order of the 
plays; but I turn to the plays themselves, and, lost in their grandeur and their beau- 
ties, find that I am indifferent as to when they were written, where they were written, 
or even by whom they were written. Standards for measuring them we have none; 
they stand by themselves, written by no mortal hand. Well is it for him, and for us, 
that the man Shakespeare has faded, and left not a wrack behind. No outward 
life could rise to the grandeur of these plays. 

Shall we ever outgrow the wisdom of LessING? In one of his Hamburg criti- 
cisms, speaking of the pitiful spectacle made by Voltaire when suffering himself to 
be shown to the theatre after the performance of one of his plays, Lessing says: 
‘I know not which strikes me as the more pitiful, the childish curiosity of the public, 
‘or the conceited complaisance of the poet. How then do people think a poet looks ? 
‘Not like other men? And how weak must be the impression which the work has 
‘made when, in the same moment, the only curiosity is to hold up the figure of the 
‘master alongside of it! The true masterpiece, it seems to me, fills us so wholly 
‘with itself that we forget the author, and look upon it, not as the production of an 
‘individual, but of universal nature. ... I suppose the true reason why we know so 
‘little that is certain about the person and life of Homer is the excellence of his 
‘poems, We stand full of astonishment by the broad, rushing river, without thinking 
‘of its source in the mountains. We care not to know, we find our account in for- 
‘getting, that Homer, the schoolmaster in Smyrna, the blind beggar, is the very 
‘Homer who so enraptures us in his works. He leads us into the presence of the 
‘gods and heroes; the company must be very tedious, we must be greatly ennuied 
‘by it, if we are so very curious to know all about the doorkeeper who let us in. 
‘The illusion must be very weak, one must be little natural, but all the more sophis- 
*ticated, when one is sc anxious about the artist,’ 


THis SsOURCE.OF THE PLOT 


OF the two tragic stories in Lear, the source from which Shakespeare derived the 
subordinate one, that of Gloucester, is well known. The extract from Sidney’s Arcadia, 
containing the story of ‘the Paphlagonian unkind king,’ will be found on p. 386; it was 
pointed out, as similar to Gloucester’s, by our countrywoman, Mrs LENNox, in 1754, 
and I know of only one commentator, HUNTER (see IV, vi, 66), who has questioned, 
since then, the general belief that it was the original of Shakespeare’s secondary plot. 

There is some doubt, however, as to the source from which the main plot of Lear 
is directly derived. The story itself, in its broad outlines of doting paternal kind- 
ness repaid with filial ingratitude, and paternal harshness requited with devoted love, 
is as old as almost any story in English literature. It is told by Geoffrey of Mon- 
mouth in his Astoria Britonum, by Layamon in his Brut, by Robert of Gloucester, 
by Fabyan in his Chronicle, by Spenser in his Faery Queene, by Holinshed, by 
Camden, and it is found in the Afirour for Magistrates, the Gesta Romanorum, 
in Warner’s Albion's England, and, I dare say, elsewhere. It is not, however, 
likely that Shakespeare went to any of the older of these authorities for his ma- 
terials; we know how fond he was of Holinshed, and unless there were a drama 
ready to his hand to be remodelled, we should look to Holinshed; and there, indeed, 
some of the best of modern editors do find the immediate source of Shakespeare’s 
Zear. But I am afraid I cannot agree with them. MHolinshed, I think, furnished 
merely the indirect source of Zear. I think we can approach one step nearer and 
discern the direct source in the ante-Shakespearian drama of the Chronicle History of 
King Leir, which HALLIWELL, following MALONE, says was dramatized as early as 
1593 or 1594, and is probably the same that Edward White entered in the Stationers’ 
Registers in the latter of these years, and which reappeared as the ‘tragecall historie’ 
printed by Simon Stafford in 1605. The author of this old comedy of Aing Leir 
undoubtedly drew from the old chroniclers, probably Holinshed; and Shakespeare, 
I think, drew from him. But what false impressions are conveyed in the phrases 
which we have to use to express the process whereby Shakespeare converted the 
stocks and stones of the old dramas and chronicles into living, breathing men and 
women! We say he ‘ drew his original’ from this source, or he ‘found his materials’ 
in.that source. But how much did he ‘draw,’ or what did he ‘find’? Granting 
that he drew from Holinshed, or from the old comedy, or whence you please, where 
did he find Lear’s madness, or the pudder of the elements, or the inspired babblings 
of the Fool? Of whatsoever makes his tragedies sublime and heaven-high above 
all other human compositions,—of that we find never a trace. And this minds me 
to say that of all departments of Shakespearian study none seems to me more profit- 
less than this search for the sources whence Shakespeare gathered his dramas; the 
distance is always immeasurable between the hint and the fulfilment; what to our 
_ purblind eyes is a bare, naked rock becomes, when gilded by Shakespeare’s heavenly 
alchemy, encrusted thick all over with jewels. When, after reading one of his 
tragedies, we turn to what we are pleased to call the ‘original of his plot,’ I am 
reminded of those glittering gems, of which Heine speaks, that we see at night in 
lovely gardens, and think must have been left there by kings’ children at play, but 
when we look for these jewels by day we see only wretched little worms which 
crawl painfully away, and which the foot forbears to crush only out of strange pity. 

383 


If we must find an original for Zear, I think it is in the ae drama, Soe not in 


there comes across us an incident, or a line, or a phrase, that reminds us of Boeke 
speare’s Leary, and that this cannot be said of Holinshed’s story. For instance, in 

Leir we find a faithful courtier who defends Cordella to her father, and the old 
king replies, ‘ Urge this no more, and if thou love thy life.’ And this same courtier 
afterwards accompanies the old king in his exile as his faithful companion and ser- 
vant, Again, in the trial-scene Cordella murmurs aside her abhorrence at the hypoc- 
risy of her sisters’ asseverations of affection. Again, Leir alludes to Gonorill’s ‘young 
bones.’ Again, Perillus says of Leir, ‘ But he the myrrour of mild patience, Puts up 
‘all wrongs and never gives reply.’ Shakespeare’s Lear says: ‘No I will be the 
‘pattern of all patience, I will say nothing.’ Again, when Leir recognises Cordella 
after their estrangement he kneels to her, But it is needless to multiply instances. I 
have given on p. 393 ¢¢ seg. an abstract of the old drama, much too long and tiresome 
to be reprinted entire, and the reader can judge for himself, if he take any interest ina 
question which is, I repeat, to mea barren one, No one, I thiuk, has done fuller justice 
to the old drama, which, by the way, CAPELL called a ‘silly old play,’ than CAMPBELL, 
the poet, who, in his Remarks on Shakespeare’s Lear, says: ‘The elder tragedy of 
‘ King Leir is simple and touching. There is one entire scene in it, the meeting of 
‘Cordelia with her father in a lonely forest, » which, with Shakespeare’s Zear in my 
“memory and heart, I could scarcely read with dry eyes. This Zeir is a pleasing 
‘tragedy, and, though it precedes our poet’s Zeav, is not its prototype, and its mild 
‘merits only show us the wide expanse of difference between respectable talent and 
‘commanding inspiration, The two Lears have nothing in common but their aged 
‘weakness, their general goodness of heart, their royal rank, and their misfortunes, 
‘The ante-Shakespearian Lear is a patient, simple old man, who bears his sorrows 
‘very meekly, till Cordelia arrives with her husband, the King of France, and his 
‘victorious army, and restores her father to the throne of Britain. . . . In the old 
‘play, Leir has a friend Perillus, who moves our interest, though not so deeply as 
‘Kent in the later and grander drama. But, independently of Shakespeare’s having 
‘created a new Lear, he has sublimated the old tragedy into a new one by an entire 
‘originality in the spiritual portraiture of its personages... . In fine, wherever Shake- 
‘speare works on old materials you will find him not wiping dusted gold, but extract- 
‘ing gold from dust, where none but himself could have made the golden extraction.’ 


The story of Leir, as told by HoLtnsHED ( The second Booke of the historie of Eng- 
Zand, chaps. v, vi, ed. 1574) is as follows: 

‘Leir the sonne of Baldud, was admitted ruler ouer the Britaines, in the yeere of 
‘the world 3105, at what time Ioas raigned_as yet in Iuda. This Leir was a prince 
‘of right noble demeanor, governing his land and subiects in great wealth. He made 
‘the towne of Caerlier nowe called Leicester, which standeth vpon the riuer of Sore. 
‘It is written that he had by his wife three daughters without other issue, whose 
‘names were Gonorilla, Regan, and Cordeilla, which daughters he greatly loued, but 
‘specially Cordeilla the yoongest farre aboue the two elder. When this Leir therefore 
‘was come to great yeeres, & began to waxe vnweldie through age, he thought to 
‘ynderstand the affections of his daughters towards him, and preferre hir whome 
‘he best loued, to the succession ouer the kingdome. Whervpon he first asked 
‘Gonorilla the eldest, how well shee loued him: who calling hir gods to record, 
‘protested, that she loued him more than hir owne life, which by right and reason 


Holinshed ; and I mean by this, that, i in reading this old drama, every now and ‘then © 


SO TRC , OF THE PLOT 


oe deere vnto hir. With which answer the father being well pleased, 
second, and demanded of hir how well she loued him: who answered 


ing hir saiengs with great othes) that she loued him more than toung could 
se, and farre aboue all other creatures of the world. 


n called he his yoongest daughter Cordeilla before him, and asked of hir ae 


__ faecount she made of him: vnto whome she made this answer as followeth: Know- 
— ‘ing the great loue and fatherlie zeale that you haue always borne towards me, (for 
a «the which I maie not answere you otherwise than I thinke, and as my conscience 


= ‘leadeth me) I protest vnto you, that I haue loued you euer, and will continuallie 
<< while I liue) loue you as my naturall father. And if you would more vnderstand 
“of the loue that I beare you, assertaine your selfe, that so much as you haue, se 
‘much you are worth, and so much I loue you, and no more. The father being 
‘nothing content with this answer, married his two eldest daughters, the one vnto 
‘Henninus, the Duke of Cornewal, and the other vnto Maglanus, the Duke of 
‘ Albania, betwixt whome he willed and ordeined that his land should be deuided 
‘after his death, and the one halfe thereof immediatelie should be assigned to them 
a ‘in hand: but for the third daughter Cordeilla he reserued nothing. 
ar _ *Neuertheles it fortuned that one of the princes of Gallia (which now is called 
‘ France) whose name was Aganippus, hearing of the beautie, womanhood, and good 
- *conditions of the said Cordeilla, desired to haue hir in mariage, and sent ouer to 
; ‘hir father, requiring that he mighte haue hir to wife: te whome answere was made, 
a ‘that he might haue his daughter, but as for anie dower he could haue none, for 
7 
5 
4 
J 


‘all was promised and assured to hir other sisters alreadie. Aganippus notwith- 
‘standing this answer of deniall to receiue anie thing by way of dower with Cor- 
‘ deilla, tooke hir to wife, onlie moued thereto (I saie) for respect of hir person and 
‘amiable vertues. This Aganippus was one of the twelue kings that ruled Gallia in 
‘those daies, as in the Brittish historie it is recorded. But to proceed, 


¥ ¢ After that Leir was fallen into age, the two dukes that had married his twa 
G ‘eldest daughters, thinking long yer the gouernment of the land did come to their 
+ ‘hands, arose against him in armour, and reft from him the gouernance of the 


‘land, vpon conditions to be continued for terme of life: by the which he was put 
‘to his portion, that is, to liue after a rate assigned to him for the maintenance of his 
‘estate, which in processe of time was diminished as well by Maglanus as by Hen- 
‘ninus. But the greatest griefe that. Leir tooke, was to see the vnkindnesse of his 
‘daughters, which seemed to thinke that all was too much which their father had, 
‘the same being neuer so little: in so much, that going from the one to the other, he 
‘ was brought to that miserie, that scarslie they would allow him one seruaunt to waite 
*ypon him. 

‘In the end, such was the vnkindnesse, or (as I maie saie) the vnnaturalnesse 
‘which he found in his two daughters, notwithstanding their faire and pleasant 
‘ words vttered in time past, that being constreined of necessitie, he fled the land, and 
‘sailed into Gallia, there to seeke some comfort of his youngest daughter Cordeilla 
‘whom before time he hated. The ladie Cordeilla hearing that he was arriued in 
‘ poore estate, she first sent to him priuilie a certeine summe of monie to apparell 
‘himselfe withall, and to reteine a certein number of seruants that might attende 
‘ypon him in honorable wise, as apperteined to the estate which he had borne: and 
‘then so accompanied, she appointed him to come to the court, which he did, and 
‘was so ioifullie, honorablie, and louinglie receiued, both by his sonne in law 

_ * Aganippus, and also by his daughter Cordeilla, that his hart was greatlie com- 


33 2 


‘forted: for he was no lesse honored, than if he had Deene king 0 of the whole cou n 
‘trie himselfe. 

¢ Now when he had informed his son in law and his daughter i in = so he 
“beene vsed by his other daughters, Aganippus caused a mightie armie to be put in i 
‘yeadinesse, and likewise a greate nauie of ships to be rigged, to passe ouer into 
‘ Britaine with Leir his father in law, to see him againe restored to his kingdome. 


‘It was accorded, that Cordeilla should also go with him to take possession of the é 


‘land, the which he promised to leaue vnto hir, as the rightfull inheritour after his 
‘ decesse, notwithstanding any former’ grant made to hir sisters or to their husbands 
‘in anie maner of wise. i 

‘Herevpon, when this armie and nauie of ships were readie, Leir and his daugh- 
‘ter Cordeilla with hir husband tooke the sea, and arriuing in Britaine, fought with 
‘their enimies, and discomfited them in battell, in the which Maglanus and Henninus 
‘were slaine: and then was Leir restored to his kingdome, which he ruled after this 
‘by the space of two yeeres, and then died, fortie yeeres after he first began to reigne. 
‘His bodie was buried at Leicester in a vaut vnder the chanell of the riuer of Sore 
‘beneath the towne. 

‘ Cordeilla the yoongest daughter of Leir was admitted Q. and supreme gouernesse 
‘of Britaine, in the yeere of the world 3155, before the bylding of Rome 54, Uzia 
‘was then reigning in Juda, and Jeroboam ouer Israell. This Cordeilla after hir 
‘father’s deceasse ruled the land of Britaine right worthilie during the space of fiue 
‘yeeres, in which meane time hir husband died, and then about the end of those 
‘fiue yeeres, hir two nephewes Margan and Cunedag, sonnes to hir aforesaid sisters, 
‘disdaining to be vnder the gouernment of a woman, leuied warre against hir, and 
« destroied a great part of the land, and finallie tooke hir prisoner, and laid hir fast in 
“ward, wherewith she tooke suche griefe, being a woman of a manlie courage, and 
‘¢ despairing to recouer libertie, there she slue hirselfe.’ 


The following extract from SIR PHILIP SIDNEY’s 4rcadia (lib. ii, pp. 133-138, ed. 
1598, as quoted in the Clarendon ed.) contains the story out of which Shakespeare 
moulded Gloucester’s tragic fate. It is called, in ed. 1590, ‘ The pitifull state, and 
‘story of the Paphlagonian vnkinde king, and his kind sonne, first related by the son, 
‘then by the blind father’: 

‘It was in the kingdome of Gadacia, the season being (as in the depth of winter) 
‘verie cold, and as then sodainlie growne to so extreame and foule a storme, that 
‘neuer any winter (I thinke) brought forth a fowler child: so that the Princes were 
‘euen copelled by the haile, that the pride of the winde blew into their faces, to seeke 
‘some shrowding place which a certain hollow rocke offering vnto them, they made 
‘it their shield against the tempestS furie. And so staying there, till the violence 
‘thereof was passed, they heard the speach of a couple, who not perceiuing them, 
‘being hid within that rude canapie, held a straunge and pitifull disputation, which 
‘made them step out, yet in such sort, as they might see ynseene. There they per- 
‘ceiued an aged man, and a young, scarcelie come to the age of a man, both poorely 

‘arrayed, extreamely weather-beaten; the olde man blind, the young man leading 
‘him: and yet through all those miseries, in both there seemed to appeare a kind 
‘of noblenesse, not sutable to that affliction. But the first words they heard, were 
‘these of the old man. Well Zeonatus (said he) since I cannot perswade thee to 
‘leade me to that which should end my griefe, and thy trouble, let me now intreat 

thee to leaue mie: feare not, my miserie cannot be greater then it is, and nothing 


‘fall worse then I am: and do not I pray thee, do not obstinately continue to infect 
‘thee with my wretchednesse: but flie, flie from this region only worthie of me. 
«Deare father (answered he) do not take away from me the only remnant of my 
s happinesse: while I haue power to do you seruice, I am not whollie miserable. 


E ~ > ‘Ah my sonne (said he, and with that he groned, as if sorrow straue to breake his a 
_ *heart) how euill fits it me to haue such a sonne, and how much doth thy kindnesse : ie 
‘-vpbraid my wickednesse? These dolefull speeches, and some others to like pur- om 


pose (well shewing they had not bene borne to the fortune they were in,) moued the | 

‘Princes to go out vnto them, and aske the younger what they were? Sirs (answered 

‘he with a good grace, and made the more agreeable by a certaine noble kind of 

‘piteousnesse) I see well you are straungers, that know not our miserie, so well here 

= ‘knowne, that no man dare know, but that we must be miserable. Indeed our state 

. is such, as though nothing is so needfull vnto vs as pitie, yet nothing is more dan- 

*gerous vnto vs, then to make our selues so knowne as may stirre pitie; but your 

a ‘presence promiseth that crueltie shall not ouer-runne hate: and if it did, in truth 
4 3 ‘our state is sunke below the degree of feare. 
’ 
J 
| 


—T . | 


‘This old man (whom [I leade) was lately rightfull Prince of this countrie of 

_ * Paphlagonia, by the hard-hearted vngratefulnesse of a sonne of his, depriued, not 

_-_. fonely of his kingdome (whereof no forraine forces were euer able to spoyle him) 

4 *but of his sight, the riches which Nature graunts to the poorest creatures. Whereby, 

‘and by other his vnnaturall dealings, he hath bene driuen to such griefe, as euen 

‘now he would haue had me to haue led him to the top of this rocke, thence to cast 

*himselfe headlong to death: and so would haue made me, who receiued my life 

‘of him, to be the worker of his destruction. But noble Gentlemen, said he, if 

y ‘either of you haue a father, and feele what dutifull affection is engraffed in a sonnes 

c. ‘heart, let me intreat you to conueigh this afflicted Prince to some place of rest and 

*securitie: amongst your worthie acts it shall be none of the least, that a king of such 
: c might and fame, & so vniustlie oppressed, is in any sort by you relieued. 

ei i ‘But before they could make him answere, his father beganne to speake. Ah my 

| “sonne, said he, how euill an Historian are you, that leaue out the chiefe knot of all 

‘the discourse ? my wickednesse, my wickednesse: and if thou doest it to spare my 

eares, (the only sense now left me proper for knowledge) assure thy selfe thou doest 

= ‘mistake me: and I take witnesse of that Sunne which you see (with that he cast vp 

a ~this blind eyes, as if he would hunt for light) and wish my selfe in worse case then 

«I do wish my selfe, which is as euill as may be, if I speake vntrulie, that nothing 

‘is so welcome to my thoughts, as the publishing of my shame. Therefore know 

‘you Gentlemen (to whom from my heart I wish that it may not proue some ominous 

© foretoken of misfortune to haue met with such a miser as I am) that whatsoeuer my 

‘son (6 God, that truth binds me to reproch him with the name of my son) hath said 

‘is true. But besides those truthes, this also is true, that hauing had in lawfull mar- 

‘iage, of a mother fit to beare royall children, this sonne (such a one as partly you 

‘see, and better shall know by my short declaration) and so enioyed the expectations 

“ ‘in the world of him, till he was growne to iustifie their expectations (so as I needed 

«enuie no father for the chiefe comfort of mortalitie, to leaue another ones-selfe after 

‘me) I was caried by a bastard sonne of mine (if at least I be bound to beleeue the 

twords of that base woman my concubine, his mother) first to mislike, then to hate, 

"-— Jastlie to destroy, or to do my best to destroy this sonne (I thinke you thinke) vnde- 

‘seruing destruction. What wayes he vsed to bring me to it, if I should tell you, I 


APPENDIX 
= - * ‘ iol 
‘should tediouslie trouble you with as much poisonous hypocrisie, desperate fraud, 

y «smooth malice, hidden ambition, and smiling enuie, as in anie liuing person could a 
‘be harboured: but I list it not; no remembrance of naughtinesse delights me but = = 
‘mine owne; and me thinks, the accusing his traps might in some maner excuse <i am 
_— ‘my fault, which certainlie I lothe todo, But the conclusion is, that I gaue orders i 
‘to some seruants of mine, whom I thought as apt for such charities as my selfe, to 
‘leade him out into a forrest, and there to kill him. 

‘But those theeues (better natured to my sonne then myselfe) spared his life, let- 
: ‘ting him go to learne to liue poorely: which he did, giuing himselfe to be a priuate 7 
‘souldier in a countrey here by: but as he was ready to be greatly aduanced for ay ;. 
an ‘some noble peeces of seruice which he did, he heard newes of me: who (drunke a 
‘in my affection to that vnlawfull and vnnaturall sonne of mine) suffered my selfe so fete 
‘to be gouerned by him, that all fauours and punishments passed by him, all offices, 
‘and places of importance distributed to his fauorites; so that ere I was aware, I had 
‘left my selfe nothing but the name of a King: which he shortly wearie of too, with 
‘many indignities (if any thing may be called an indignitie, which was laid vpon me) a 
‘threw me out of my seat, and put out my eyes; and then (proud in his tyrannie) 
‘let me go, neither imprisoning, nor killing me; but rather delighting to make me 
‘feele my miserie; miserie indeed, if euer there were anie; full of wretchednesse, 
‘fuller of disgrace, and fullest of guiltinesse. And as he came to the crowne by so 
‘yniust means, as vniustlie he kept it, by force of straunger souldiers in Ci¢fade/s, the 
‘neasts of tyrannie, and murderers of libertie; disarming all his owne countrimen, 
‘that no man durst shew himself a wel-willer of mine: to say the truth (I thinke) 
‘few of them being so (considering my cruell follie to my good sonne, and foolish 
‘kindnesse to my vnkind bastard:) but if there were any who felt a pitie of so great 
“a fall, and had yet any sparkes of vnslaine dutie left in them towards me; yet durst 
‘they not shew it, scarcelie with giuing me almes at their doores; which yet was the 
‘onlie sustenance of my distressed life, no bodie daring to shew so much charitie, as 
‘to lend me a hand to guide my darke steps: till this sonne of mine (God knowes, 
‘worthy of a more vertuous, and more fortunate father) forgetting my abhominable 
‘wrongs, not recking daunger, and neglecting the present good way hee was in of 
‘doing himselfe good, came hither to do this kind office you see him performe to- 
‘wards me, to my vnspeakeable griefe; not onlie because his kindnesse is a glasse 
‘euen to my blind eyes of my naughtinesse, but that aboue all griefes, it grieues me 
‘he should desperatelie aduenture the losse of his well-deseruing life for mine, that 
‘yet owe more to Fortune for my deserts, as if he would carie mudde in a chest of — 
©Chrystall; for well I know, he that now raigneth, how much so euer (and with 
‘good reason) he despiseth me, of all men despised; yet he will not let slip any ad- 
‘uantage to make away him, whose iust title (ennobled by courage & goodnesse) 
‘may one day shake the seat of a neuer secure tyrannie. And for this cause I craued 
‘of him to leade me to the top of this rocke, indeed I must confesse, with meaning 
‘to free him from so serpentine a companion asI am, But he finding what I pur- 
‘posed, onely therein since he was borne, shewed himselfe disobedient ynto me, 
‘And now Gentlemen, you haue the true storie, which I pray you publish to the 
‘world, that my mischieuous proceedings may be the glorie of his filiall pietie, the 
‘onlie reward now left for so great a merite, And if it may be, let me obtaine that 
‘of you, which my sonne denies me: for neuer was there more pity in sauing any, 
‘ then in ending me, both because therin my agonie shall end, & so you shal preserue 
‘this excellent young man, who else wilfully followes his owne ruine.’ 


sf 


at found the bathes A ‘skill, 
S elu to soare: 


Ste after built the ¢ towne of Leicester, 


He had Tere dacebeeee faire, ae first hight Gozerell, 
Next after her his yonger Ragan was begot: - 
The third and last was I the yongest, nam’d Cordell. 
Vs all our father Leive did loue too well God wot. 
But minding her that lou’d him best to note, 

Because he had no sonne t’ enjoy his land, 


os 


He thought to guerdon most where fauour most be fand, 


2 «What though I yongest were, yet men me judg’d more wise 
tse “s Than either Gonerell, or Ragan more of age: 
And fairer farre: wherefore my sisters did despise 
_ My grace and gifts, and sought my wrecke to wage. 

_ But yet though vice on vertue die with rage 
____ It cannot keepe her vnderneath to drowne: 
- For still she flittes aboue, and reapes renowne. 


ee «My father thought to wed vs vnto Princely peeres, 
And ynto them and theirs diuide and part the land. 
For both my sisters first he call’d (as first their yeares 
Requir’d) their minds, and loue, and fauour t’vnderstand, 
(Quoth he) all doubts of dutie to aband 
: I must assay your friendly faithes to proue: 
Poe My daughters, tell me how you do me loue, 


‘ Which when they answered him they lou’d their father more 
Then they themselues did loue, or any worldly wight: 
He praised them and said he would therefore 
The lowing kindnesse they deseru’d in fine requite. 
So found my sisters fauour in his sight. 
By flatterie faire they won their fathers heart, 
Which after turned him and me to smart. 


; ¢ But not content with this, he asked me likewise 
If I did not him loue and honour well. 
No cause (quoth I) there is I should your grace despises 
For nature so doth bind and dutie me compell, 
To loue you, as I ought my father, well. 
Yet shortly I may chance, if Fortune will, 
To find in heart to beare another more good will. 


33* 


‘But while that I these ioyes so well enioy’d in France, pa 
My father Zeire in Britaine waxt vnwealdie old. 
Whereon his daughters more themselues aloft t’? aduance © 
Desir’d the Realme to rule it as they wold. 

; Their former loue and friendship waxed cold. 

’ Their husbands rebels void of reason quite 

Rose vp, rebeld, bereft his crowne and right: 
‘ Betwixt their husbands twaine they causde him to agree 
To parte the Realme, and promist him a gard ns ee 
Of sixtie Knights that on him should attendant bee, 
But in sixe moneths such was his hap too hard, 
That Gonerell of his retinue bard. 


=e The half of them, she and her husband reft: at 
y And scarce allow’d the other halfe they left. “ 

, ’ . 
e ; ’ ‘ As thus in his distresse he lay lamenting fates, 


When as my sister so, sought all his vtter spoile: 

The meaner vpstart courtiers thought themselues his mates, 

His daughter him disdain’d and forced not his foile. - 

Then was he faine for succour his to toile : D 
With halfe his traine to Cornwall there to lie : 
In greatest need, his Ragazs love to trie. 


‘So when he came to Cornwall, she with ioy 
Receiued him, and Prince A/ag/aurus did the like. 
There he abode a yeare, and liu’d without annoy: 
But then they tooke all his retinue from him quite : 
Saue only ten, and shew’d him daily spite. 
Which he bewail’d complaining durst not striue, 
Though in disdaine they last allow’d but fiue. 


‘What more despite could diuellish beasts deuise, 
Then ioy their fathers wofull daies to see? 
What vipers vile could so their King despise, 
Or so vnkind, so curst, so cruell bee? 
Fro thence againe he went to Albany, 
Where they bereau’d his seruants all saue one: 
Bad him content himselfe with that, or none, 


‘Eke at what time he ask’d of them to haue his gard, 
To gard his noble grace where so he went; 


cS make it short, to France he came at last to mee, 
gi And told me how my sisters ill their father vsde. 
jl ‘Then humblie ue besought my noble King so free, 


That he would aide my father thus by his abusde. 7 J by 
Who nought at all my humble hest refusde, 
But sent to euery coast of France for aide, >. 


Whereby King Zeive might home be well conueide, 


C The souldiers gathered from each quarter of the land 
Came at the length to know the noble Princes will : 
Who did commit them ynto captaines euery band. 
And I likewise of loue and reuerent meere good will 
Desir’d my Lord, he would not take it ill 

If I departed for a space withall, 
To take a part, or ease my fathers thrall. 


‘ He granted my request: Thence we arriued here, 

And of our Britaines came to aide likewise his right 

Full many subjects, good and stout that were. 
re By martiall feats, and force, by subjects sword and might, 
eg _The British Kings were faine to yeeld our right. 

& : Which wonne, my father well this Realme did guide 
= | Three yeares in peace, and after that he dide. 


SPENSER (Zhe Faery Queene, 1590, Second ils Canto x, 27, p. 130, ed. Kit- 
chin, 1877) : 


27. * Next him King Leyr in happy peace long raind, 
But had no issue male him to succeed, 
But three faire daughters, which were well uptraind 
In all that seemed fit for kingly seed ; 

; Mongst whom his realme he equally decreed 

5 To have divided. Tho when feeble age 

oH Nigh to his utmost date he saw proceed, 

: He cald his daughters, and with speeches sage 

Inquyrd, which of them most did love her parentage. 


F 
a 
: 


\ 
‘ 


‘i 


ve! 


te ee ee 


28, ‘ The eldest Gonorill gan to protest, 
That she much more than her owne life him lov’d; 
And Regan greater love to him profest 
Then all the world, when.ever it were proov’d; 
But Cordeill said she loved him, as behoov’d: 
Whose simple answere, wanting colours faire 
To paint it forth, him to displeasance moov’d, 
That in his crowne he counted her no haire, 
But ’twixt the other twaine his kingdom whole did shaire. 


a Was sent to Aganip of Celtia. — 
‘ fc Their aged syre, thus eased of his crowne, 
; A private life led in Albania = 

With Gonorill, long had in great renowne, . 
That nought him griev’d to beene from rule deposed downe. 


e: But without dowre, 


30. ‘ But true it is that, when the oyle is spent, 

- The light goes out, and weeke is throwne away; 
So when he had resignd his regiment, 
His daughter gan despise his drouping day, 
And wearie waxe of his continuall stay ; 
Tho to his daughter Regan he repayrd, 
Who him at first well used every way; < 
But when of his departure she despayrd, ; 4 

Her bountie she abated, and his cheare empayrd. ; 


31. ‘ The wretched man gan then avise too late, 


i: That love is not, where most it is profest; , , 
Pe 5 Too truely tryde in his extremest state ; De. 

e At last resolv’d likewise to prove the rest, = * 7 
a He to Cordelia him selfe addrest, ; > 

Who with entyre affection him receay’d, - _. : 2 


As for her syre and king her seemed best; 
And after all an army strong she leav’d, 
To war on those, which him had of his realme bereay’d. 


32. ‘So to his crowne she him restor’d againe, 
In which he dyde, made ripe for death by eld, 
And after wild it should to her remaine: 
Who peacefully the same long time did weld, 
And all men’s harts in dew obedience held; 
Till that her sisters’ children, woxen strong 
Through proud ambition, against her rebeld, 
And overcommen kept in prison long, 
Till wearie of that wretched life her selfe she hong.’ 


Mrs LENNOX (Shakespeare Illustrated, iii, 302, 17 54): In Shakespeare Cordelia 1s 
hanged by a soldier: a very improper Catastrophe for a Person of such exemplary Virtue. 

MALONE quotes, from Camden’s Remaines, 1674, Cordelia’s answer to her father, 
and thinks it ‘more probable that Shakespeare had it in his thoughts than 7he Mirour 
‘for Magistrates,as Camden’s book was published recently before he appears to have 
‘composed this play, and that portion of it which is entitled Wise Speeches, where 
‘ [the answer] is found, furnished him with a hint in Coriolanus. The answer is as 
follows: ‘that albeit she did love, honour, and reverence him, and so would whilst 
‘she lived, as much as nature and daughterlie dutie at the uttermost could expect, 
‘yet she did think that one day it would come to passe that she should affect another 


ind, whet she were married.’ Malone also notes 
‘that Shakespeare found the name softened into Cordelia. 


e tothe ani eae pearlah drama of aS ene the exact title whereof 


v a or Coe that the ingenuity of an cent partisan could convert or 
9 a suggestion of Shakespeare’s Lear. SKOTTOWE is the most zealous ad- 
I know, of the claims of King Leir ; 1am afraid his zeal outruns his wisdom. 
Thave incorporated in the abstract every passage to which he appeals for con- 
of his theory. I have followed the text given in Six Old Plays, &c., 1779. 
= In the opening scene Leir announces to his assembled court that, the obsequies of 


his «deceast and dearest queen’ having been duly performed, his care now is to see 
his eure befittingly married. As for himself, ‘One foot already hangeth in the 


* And I would faine resigne these earthly cares, 


- And thinke upon the welfare of my soule ; 
7 Which by no better means may be effected, 
Pr Then by resigning up the crown from me 
In equal dowry to my daughters three.’ 
_ -——._— A courtier, Skalliger by name, then proposes that, since his majesty knows well 


__---——s« «What several suters [the] princely daughters have,’ he should ‘ make them eche a 

*jointer more or lesse, As is their worth, to them that love professe.? To which Leir 
= replies, ‘ No more, nor lesse, but even all alike, My zeale is fixt, all fashioned in one 
*‘mould.’? Cornwall and Cambria, ‘two neere neighbouring kings,’ ‘ motion love to 


he ae 


“% € Gonorill and Ragan,’ but Cordella, it appears, has more than one lover; Leir says: 
Z * My youngest daughter, faire Cordella, vowes 

aoe No liking to a monarch, unlesse love allowes. 

ie She is sollicited by divers peeres ; 

ae But none of them her partial fancy heares. 

4 Yet, if my policy may her beguile, 


Ile match her to some king within this ile, 
And so establish such a perfit peace, 
As fortunes force shall ne’er prevaile to cease.” 


Perillus, another noble courtier, begs his majesty not to ‘force love, where fancy 
es * cannot dwell,’ and Leir replies: 


€I am resolv’d, and even now my mind 
Doth meditate a sudden strategem, 
To try which of my daughters loves me best ; 
Which till I know, I cannot be in rest, 
; This graunted, when they jointly shall contend, 
c ' Eche to exceed the other in their love: 
Then at the vantage will I take Cordedia, 
Even as she doth protest she loves me best, 
Tle say, then, daughter, graunt me one request, 
To shew thou lovest me as thy sisters doe, 
Accept a husband, whom my self will woo. 
This said, she cannot well deny my sute, 
Although (poore soule) her sences will be mute ; 
Then will I triumph in my policy, 
And match her with a king of Brittany,’ 


In the next scene Gonorill and Ragan reveal to each other their common hatred 
of Cordella, because she is ‘so nice and so demure; So sober, courteous, modest, and 
¢ precise,’ and also because she adopts all their own new-made fashions, and, what is 


- 


5 een Hi Ne 

’ a 7 7 ‘Sealy oe 

ee ee ee 
worse, improves on them. Skalliger en ters, and discloses to them 

; _ device for providing them with husbands by putting their affec ane for him 
; test, Whereupon Ragan exclaims: ; “s - 

*O that I had some pleasing mermaids voice, 

For to inchaunt his sencelesse sences with 1? 


_Skalligert takes his leave of them, ! ; es 


< Not doubting but your wisdomes will sree 
What course will best unto your good agree.” 

4 The sisters accordingly lay their plans to outbid Cordella in protestations of Shedieniee 
7 _ to their father, ‘who,’ as Ragan says, ‘ dotes, as if he were a child againe.’ Gonorill 5? 
smiles to think in what a woful plight Cordella will be by their answers, and how a 
her refusal to accept her father’s choice will convert his love into hate, ‘ For he, you 
‘know, is alwayes in extremes.’ 

In the next scene Leir, having summoned his daughters before him, tells them that 


| ; as ‘—pale grym death doth wayt upon his steps,’ he wishes them to ‘resolve a doubt 
Rs ‘which much molests his mind, which of the three to him would prove most kind ; 
ve ‘which loves him most.’ Gonorill replies that her love ‘cannot be in windy words 

- rehearst,’ that she would willingly sacrifice her life at his command, or ‘marry the 


‘meanest vassaile in the spaceous world.’ ‘O, how I doe abhorre this flattery,’ says 

Cordella, Ragan then reiterates pretty much what Gonorill has said, and, as she 
finishes, Cordella again says: ‘ Did never flatterer tell so false a tale. Leir then 
turns to his youngest daughter, and begs her to make ‘his joyes at full’: SX 


*Cordella. I cannot paint my duty forth in words, 
I hope my deeds shall make report for me: og 
But looke what love the child doth owe the father, “re 
The same to you I beare, my gracious lord. = 
Gonorili, Were is an answere answerlesse indeed : 
Were you my daughter, I should scarcely brooke it. 7 
Ragan. Dost thou not blush, proud peacock as thou art, = 2 
To make our father such a slight reply? : 
Leir, Why how now, minion, are you growne so proud?’ &c, ie- 


Cordella tries to explain, urging that her ‘ toung was never usde to flattery,’ but Leir a 
will not listen to her: 


‘Leir. Peace, bastard impe, no issue of King Lezr, 
I will not heare thee speake one tittle more. 
Call me not father, if thou love thy life, 
Nor these thy sisters once presume to name: 
Looke for no helpe henceforth from me or mine: 
Shift as thou wilt, and trust unto thyselfe.’ 


He then declares that he will divide his kingdom equally between her two sisters, 


and yield to them his throne. After Leir, Gonorill, and Ragan have left the stage, 
Perillus says: 


‘Oh, how I grieve, to see my lord thus fond, 
To dote so much upon vaine flattering words, 
Ah, if he but with good advice had weighed, 
The hidden tenure of her humble speech, 
Reason to rage should not have given place, 
Nor poore Cordedla suffer such disgrace.’ 


The scene then shifts to Gallia, where the king, whose name is not given, declares 


to his nobles his intention of visiting « Brittany’ in disguise, in order to select in the 


Weiaortiapeay a, and the king cansents:! 7 


we find the kings of Cornwall and of Cambria hasten- 
ao. receive their brides and each the ‘moity of halfe of Leir's 


Gonorill and Ragan discuss Cordella’s plight: 
~ *Gonorilt. I have incenst my father so against her, 


As he will never be reclaimd againe, 
apen. I was nofmuch behind to do ae like.’ 


as we! ‘ Leir. Goats good my lords, and sue not to reverse ‘ 
. Our censure, which is now irrevocable, 

: We have dispatched letters of contract 

. ~~ _—- Unto the kings of Cambria and of Cornwail: 
< Our hand and seale will justify no lesse: 

- ‘ Then do not so dishonour me, my lords, 

As to make shipwrack of our kingly word. ~* 
Tam as kind as is the pellican, 

That kils it selfe, to save her young ones lives: 
And yet is jelous as the princely eagle, 

That kils her young ones, if they do but dazell 

Upon the radiant splendor of the sunne.’ 


The kings of Cambria and of Cornwall enter, and draw lots for the halves of the 
=, _ kingdom. When this is accomplished, Perillus speaks: 


ae 
-- *T have bin silent all this while, my lord, 
Poe To see if any worthier then my selfe, 
wG Would once have spoke in poore Cordellaes cause: 
. But love or feare ties silence to their toungs. 
€ Oh, heare me speak for her, my gracious lord, 


, A Whose deeds have not deserv’d this ruthlesse doome, 

“4 As thus to disinherit her of all. 

a 4 Leir. Urge this no more, and if thou love thy life: 

a I say, she is no daughter, that doth scorne 

a f ~ To tell her father how she loveth him. 

+ Whoever speaketh hereof to mee againe, 

E . I will esteeme him for my mortal foe.’ 

4 The next scene discovers the ‘Gallian’ king and Mumford in ‘ Brittany,’ disguised as 
=e ‘pilgrims’; Cordella enters in deep dejection at the unhappy lot which, on this very 
eS marriage-day of her sisters, turns her into the world to seek her fortune. But she 
resolves: 

$s €] will betake me to my threed and needle, 

bc And earne my living with my fingers ends.’ 

a Of course the Gallian king, at the first sight of her, falls hopelessly in love, and 


begs to know the cause of her grief. ‘Ah pilgrims,’ replies Cordella, ‘ what availes 
to shew the cause, When there’s no meanes to finda remedy?’ ‘To utter griefe, 
doth ease a heart o’ercharg’d,’ answers the king, and then Cordella tells him how 
her father had cast her forth because she would not flatter him; and that he was 


even now celebrating her sisters’ marriages. 
* King. Sweet lady, say there should come a king 


As good as either of your sisters husbands, 
To crave your love, would you accept of him? 


396 APPENDIX 


“ Cordeila. Oh, doe not mocke with those in misery, 
Nor do not thinke, though fortune have the power, 
To spoil mine honour, and debase my state, 
That she hath any interest in my mind: 
For if the greatest monarch on the earth 
Should sue to me in this extremity, 
Except my heart could love, and heart could like, 
Better then any that I ever saw, 
His great estate should no more move my mind, 
Then mountaines move by blast of every wind.’ 


The disguised palmer then confesses that his master, the Gallian king, does in 
reality sue for her hand, But Cordella declines the offer, and, with that straightfor- 
wardness which is her marked characteristic, declares that she much prefers the 
palmer to his royal master, and concludes with saying: 


‘ Then be advised, palmer, what to do: 
Cease for thy king, seeke for thy selfe to woo. 
King. Your birth’s too high for any but a king. 
Cordelia. My mind is low ynough to love a palmer, 
Rather then any king upon the earth. 
King. O, but you never can indure their life, 
Which is so straight and full of penury. 
Cordelia. O yes, 1 can, and happy if I might: 
Tle hold thy palmers staffe within my hand, 
And thinke it is the scepter of a queene. 
Sometime Ile set thy bonnet on my head, 
And thinke I weare a rich imperial crowne. 
Sometime Ile help thee in thy holy prayers, 
And thinke I am with thee in paradise. 
Thus Ile mock fortune, as she mocketh me, 
And never will my lovely choice repent: 
For, having thee, I shall have all content.’ 


Although this speech corresponds to nothing in Shakespeare’s Zear, yet I can- 
not help inserting it, for a certain childlike sweetness in it; here Cordella is more 
lovely and loveable than Cordelia in the first Act of Zear. The Gallian king reveals 
himself, and Cordella accompanies him to church, ‘ because the world shall say, King 
Leir’s three daughters were wedded in one day.’ 

In the next scene ‘ Enter Perillus solus.’ 


‘The king hath dispossest himself of all, 
Those to advaunce, which scarce will give him thanks: 
His youngest daughter he hath turnd away, 
And no man knowes what is become of her, 
He sojourns now in CorzwadZ with the eldest, 
Who flattred him until she did obtaine 
That at his hands, which now she doth possesse: 
And now she sees hee hath no more to give, 
It grieves her heart to see her father live, 
Oh, whom should man trust in this wicked age, 
When children thus against their parents rage? 
But he the myrrour of mild patience, 
Puts up all wrongs and never gives reply : 
Yet shames she not in most opprobrious sort, 
To call him fool and doterd to his face, 
And sets her parasites of purpose oft, 
In scoffing wise to offer him disgrace. 
Oh yron age! O times! O monstrous, vilde, 
When parents are contemned of the child ! 


‘Salliges follows, which gives us an insight 
its’ to which Gonorill is subjected by her father: 
every ord. ? Again her mind runs on her dress : 


“I cannot make me a new fashioned gowne = 
And set it forth with more then common cost; ' 7 
But his old doting doltish withered wit, 
Is sure to exe asencelesse check for it’ 


er proposes as a remedy for her grievances that she shall ¢ abbridge’ half of 
wance. Gonorill accepts his counsel, and poe 


ae 
__ *T have restrained halfe his portion ace f 
. And I will presently restraine the other.’ 


In the next scene Cornwall appears anxious to find out from Leir the cause of his 
sadness, but in vain. Gonorill enters ‘in wished time,’ as her husband says, ‘to put as 
‘your father from these pensive dumps.’ But instead, Gonorill falls into a high rage 
a on the suspicion that her father had been complaining of her, and carrying tales to 

her husband: 


4% 
Bee. 


* Cornwall. Sweet, be not angry in a partial cause, 
He ne’er complain’d of thee in all his life. 
Father, you must not weigh a woman’s words. 
Leir. Alas, not I: poore soule, she breeds yong bones, 
And that is it makes her so tutchy sure. 
Gonorill. What, breeds young bones already! You will make 
An honest woman of me then, belike. 
ae. O vild olde wretch! who ever heard the like, 
~ That seeketh thus his owne child to defame?’ 


; And she angrily departs, telling her father: 


* For any one that loves your company, 
You may go pack, and seeke some other place, 
To sow the seed of discord and disgrace.” 


ae Leir ‘ weepes,’ and Perillus tries to comfort him: 


a *Zeiy. What man art thou that takest any pity 
Upon the worthlesse state of old Leir? 
Perillus. One, who doth beare as great a share of griefe, 
As if it were my dearest father’s case. 
Leir. Ah, good my friend, how ill art thou advisde, 
For to consort with miserable men... . 
Did I ere give thee living, to increase 
The due revenues which thy father left? ... 
Oh, did I ever dispossesse my selfe, 
And give thee halfe my kingdome in good will? ... 
" If they, which first by nature’s sacred law 
Do owe to me the tribute of their lives ; 
If they to whom I alwayes have bin kinde, 
And bountiful beyond comparison ; 
If they, for whom I have undone my selfe, 
And brought my age unto this extreme want, 
Do now reject, conteine, despise, abhor me, 
What reason moveth thee to sorrow for me?’ 


34, 


398 APPENDIX 


Perillus cries, and appeals to his tears as proof of his affection, and reminds Leir 
that he has ‘two daughters left.’ 


‘ Zeiv. Oh, how thy words adde sorrow to my soule, 
To thinke of my unkindnesse to Cordedla ! 
Whom causelesse I did dispossesse of all, 
Upon th’ unkind suggestions of her sisters.” 


However, he consents to leave Gonorill and to try Ragan. His departure, which 
is taken secretly, distresses Cornwall, who, accordingly, taxes his wife with having 
driven her father away by some great unkindness. Gonorill’s suggestion that her 
father has but ‘stolne upon her sister, at unawares, to see her how she fares,’ Corn- 
wall mistrusts, and resolves to send ‘a poste immediately to know, Whether he be 
‘arrived there or no.’ Gonorill intercepts his messenger, and, instead of his letters 
to Leir, substitutes letters to her sister to the effect that Leir ‘ hath detracted’ Ragan 
and ‘ given out slaundrous speaches against her.’ 

In the next scene Cordella, in a soliloquy, taxes herself with neglect in rendering 
thanks to God for all His benefits to her, which have far exceeded the reach of her 
deserts : 


‘ 

€I cannot wish the thing that I do want; 
I cannot want the thing but I may have, 
Save only this which I shall ne’re obtaine, 
My father’s love, oh this I ne’re shall gaine. 
I would abstaine from any nutryment, 
And pine my body to the very bones: 
Bare foote I would on pilgrimage set forth 
Unto the furthest quarters of the earth, 
And all my life-time would I sackcloth weare, 
And mourning-wise powre dust upon my head: 
So he but to forgive me once would please, 
That his gray haires might go to heaven in peace. 
And yet I know not how I him offended, 
Or wherein justly I have deserved blame. 
Oh, sisters! you are much to blame in this, 
It was not he, but you that did me wrong: 
Yet God forgive both him, and you, and me; 
Even as I doe in perfit charity. 
I will to church, and pray unto my Saviour, 
That ere I die, I may obtaine his favour.’ 


(Justice has never been done, I think, to the unaffected loveliness, at times, of Cor- 
della’s character in this old play.) The scene shifts to the neighborhood of Ragan’s 
castle, and Leir and Perillus enter almost worn out with fatigue. Leir tells his faithful 
counsellor to cease to call him Jord, ‘ And think me but the shaddow of myselfe.’ The 
prince of Cambria and Ragan come upon them unawares, and his daughter, recog- 
nising her father, dissembling her feelings of hatred at the sight of him, bids him 
welcome. Ragan remains on the stage after the rest have entered the castle, and 
receives the messenger from her sister, whose lying letters highly incense her, She 
determines to get rid of her father by assassination, and makes an appointment with 
the messenger to meet her and arrange the method of the deed which he undertakes 
to do. 

In the mean time Cordella’s distress is so great that her husband promises to send 


# A 4 : : ws : 
meAgS to King Leir, begging him to forgive his daughter and to come and 
visit her, 


od 


aes to ‘Corninsll; where Gonorill and en husband receive the 
1b yassador from the Gallian king, who comes with a message to Leir; but as Leir 
\ orill and Cornwall persuade the ambassador to tarry at thos court for 

cas Leir’s return, 


he court. The assassin appears before them and announces his design of 

them. Leir thinks that he must have been sent by Cordella, and is willing to 
submit to what he cannot but consider the justice of Heaven. He is undeceived by 
-Gonorill’s letter which the assassin shows him. While the two old men are praying 
for their lives, some highly opportune claps of thunder so ter tify the assassin that he 
drops his daggers and departs, after calling them,the ‘ parlosest old men that ere he 
heard.’ Perillus then persuades Leir to try his fortune with Cordella; and while 


they are crossing over to Brittany we find that the Gallian king, Cordella, and Mum- - 


ford devise a pleasant little excursion to the seaside for recreation, and that the 
Gallian ambassador, giving up all hope of finding Leir at Gonorill’s court, comes 
to Ragan’s; there he finds Ragan trying to persuade her husband that her father’s 
absence is due to Cordella’s machinations, and that Cordella has undoubtedly killed 
-Leir. This accusation she repeats to the ambassador, and falls into a great rage with 
him for attempting to defend his mistress, and strikes him. 
When Leir and Perillus land on the coast of Brittany, they are obliged to pay for 
_ their passage by exchanging their cloaks and gown for the ‘ sheep’s russet sea-gowne’ 
and ‘sea-caps’ of the sailors. In these rude garments they begin their inland 
journey, but have not gone far when Leir’s strength fails utterly through lack of food, 
and it is reserved to Perillus to display extreme loyalty by ‘ stripping up his arme’ and 
begging his royal master to ‘feed on this flesh, whose veines are not so dry,’ adding, 
Tle smile for joy, to see you suck my bloud,’ but Leir declines to be tempted, and while 
they are talking the Gallian king and Cordella approach; Cordella recognizes her 
father’s voice, but, by the advice of her husband, refrains from revealing herself. She 
- gives them food and drink, and, when their strength has returned, begs to know their 
story : 
* Leir. If from the first I should relate the cause, 
*Twould make a heart of adamant to weepe: 
And thou, poore soule, kind-hearted as thou art, 
Dost weepe already, ere I do begin. 


Cordella. For Gods love tell it; and when you have done, 
Tle tell the reason why I weepe so soone.’ 


Leir then tells his story, and ends with describing how Ragan has induced him to 
go to a certain spot some distance from the court, 


Pointing that there she would come talke with me: 
There she had set a shag haird murdring wretch, 
To massacre my honest friend and me. 

Then judge your selfe, although my tale be briefe, 
If ever man had greater cause of griefe. 

King. Nor never like impiety was done, 
Since the creation of the world begun. 

Leir. And now I am constraind to seeke reliefe 
Of her, to whom I have bin so unkind; 
Whose censure, if it do award me death, 


Usde me as as ever you di 
Vet, that his reverend age I 


nce might see, 


’ Ide creepe along, to meet him on my knee. _ patie get 
Leir. O,no mens children are unkind but mine. ones bet: 
Cordella. Condemne not all, because of others crime: a a 
- But looke, dear father, looke, behold and see > ve - : 
Thy loving daughter speaketh unto thee. [She knecless 
Leir. Q, stand thou up, it is my part to kneele, palielence —e 
: And aske forgivenesse for my former faults. [He kneeles. ; P 
5 f Cordella. O, if you wish I should enjoy my breath, _ * : : 
- ; Deare father rise, or I receive my death. [He riseth. - 
a : Leir, Then I will rise, to satisfy your mind, ; =ws 
— * But kneele againe, til pardon be resignd. [He kneeles. . a 
Cordella. I pardon you: the word beseemres not me: fe eg 
But I do say sc, for to ease your knee ; > 


You gave me life, you were the cause that I 
Am what I am, who else had never bin. 
: Leir. But you gave life to me and to my friend, - ~s 
oi Whose dayes had else had an untimely end. i, 
: Cordelia. You brought me up, when as I was but young, es 
And far unable for to helpe my selfe. : Px 
’ Leir. I cast thee forth, when as thou wast but young, ~ ; 
And far unable for to helpe thyselfe. i 
=, Cordella. God, world, and nature, say I do you wrong ~~ 
That can indure to see you kneele so long. ; 
King. Let me breake off this loving controversy, = a 
Which doth rejoice my very soule to see. 
Good father, rise, she is your loving daughter, [He riseth. ie 
And honours you with as respective duty, 
As if you were the monarch of the world. 7 
Cordelia, But I will never rise from off my knee, [Ske Aneeles. = 
Until I have your blessing, and your pardon : 
Of all my faults committed any way, 
From my first birth until this present day. : = 
Leir. The blessing, which the God of Abraham gave 
Unto the tribe of ¥xda, light on thee, 
And multiply thy dayes, that thou mayst see 
Thy childrens children prosper after thee. 
Thy faults, which are just none that I do know, ~ 
God pardon on high, and I forgive below. [She riseth. ‘ 
Cordelia. Now is my heart at quiet, and doth leape 
Within my brest, for joy at this good hap: 
And now (deare father) welcome to our court, 
And welcome (kind PeridZus) unto me, 
Mirrour of vertue and true honesty.’ 


The King and Mumford now take their turn at kneeling and rising; the former to 
register his oath that he will avenge Leir’s wrongs, the latter that he will bring back 
a wife out of Brittaine. 

The Gallian king at once puts his oath into practice, and lands in Brittaine with an 
army and takes possession of a town on the sea-coast. Before the fighting begins, 
Cordella says: 

* We that are feeble and want use of armes, 
Will pray to God, to sheeld you from all harmes, 


7 


i 


i ae .. cx "i ; 2 
E SOURCE OF THE PLOT 


1 ee _— * Letr, ~The while your hands do manage ceaselesse toile, 
* ; Our hearts shall pray, the foes may have the foile.’ 
rh Cornwall, Cambria, Gonorill, and Ragan appear with an army, but before the ud 
: battle begins there is a family meeting, at which Cordella terms Gonorill « shamelesse,’ 
and Gonorill retorts by calling Cordella a ¢ puritan’ and a ‘dissembling hypocrite,’ 
Perillus calls Gonorill a ‘ monster,’ and Ragan says she never heard a fouler-spoken 
man than Perillus. Leir interrupts these amenities, and adds to them, by addressing 


oe _ Ragan: 


* Out on thee, viper, scum, filthy parricide, 
More odious to my sight then is a toade: 
Knowest thou these letters? [She swatches them and teares them. f : q 
; After some further conversation in the same style, they proceed to business. Corn- 
____-wall and Cambria with their wives and soldiers .are put to flight, and Leir is rein- 
‘ stated in his kingdom. He gives thanks, first to the heavens and then to the Gallian 
4 king, acknowledges that Cordella’s ‘modest answere’ of aforetime was of the true 
stamp, promises to do the best he can to requite Perillus, and then: 


. 
‘ Thanks (worthy Mumford) to thee last of all, 
3 ; ? Not greeted last, ’cause thy desert was small : 
Be No, thou hast lion-like laid on to-day, 
; Chasing the Cormwal/ king and Cambria; 
g Who with my daughter, daughters did I say ? 
| haa To save their lives, the fugitives did play. 
4 io Come, sonne and daughter, who bid me advaunce, 
Repose with me awhile, and then for Fraunce. 
[Sound drumes and trumpets. Exeunt.’ 


In his Zuztroduction, Mr GRANT WHITE, speaking of this Azmg Ler, says that ‘we 


Ee *may be sure that Shakespeare was acquainted with it.’.. . [It] is a tolerable [play] 
‘for the time in which it was produced—the early Elizabethan period; but it has no 
y ‘resemblance of construction or language to Shakespeare’s tragedy, except that which 


ret ‘results from the use of the same story as the foundation of both. But in the great 
* dramatist’s work there is yet a slight vestige of his insignificant and utterly unknown 
‘ predecessor’s labours upon the same subject. It might have been fortuitous, as it 
‘was most natural, that in both Cordelia should kneel to her father when she first 
*sees him upon her return from France; but that in both the father should manifest 
‘an inclination to kneel to the daughter must be due, it would seem, to a reminis« 
«cence by the later dramatist of the work of his predecessor. So, too, when Shake- 
‘speare’s Lear exclaims, “’twas this flesh begot Those pelican daughters,” we may 
‘be quite sure that we hear an echo of these lines by the forgotten dramatist: “I am 
‘as kind as is the pelican That kills itself to save her young ones’ lives.” And 
‘having found these traces of the old play in Shakespeare’s memory, faint though 
‘they be, we may also presume that in Peri//ws, blunt and faithful counsellor and 
‘friend of the monarch in the elder play, we see a prototype of the noble character 
‘of Kent in the later. But in their scope, spirit, and purpose, aside from all ques- 
‘tion of comparative merit, the two works are entirely dissimilar; and after the 
closest examination of the earlier, I can find only these trifling and almost insig- 
‘nificant points of resemblance between them, except in incidents and characters 
‘which both playwrights owed to the old legend.’ 

Mr A. W. Warp, in his admirable History of English Dramatic Literature, i, 126 
(a work almost indispensable to the Shakespeare student), speaking of this King Lear, 
says: ‘ Yet, with all its defects, the play seems only to await the touch of a powerful 

34* 2A 


402 APPENDIX 


‘hand to be converted into a tragedy of supreme effectiveness; and while Shake- 
‘ spere’s genius nowhere exerted itself with more transcendent force and marvellous 
‘ versatility, it nowhere found more promising materials ready to its command.’ 


In Shakespeare Illustrated (iii, 301) Mrs Lennox says: ‘ The Chronicle of Holin- 
‘shed and Sidney’s Arcadia are not the only resources Shakespear had for his tragedy 
‘of Lear, if we may believe the editor of a collection of old ballads, published in 
‘the year 1726. In his /#/roduction to an old ballad, called A Lamentable Song of the 
‘ Death of King Lear and his three Daughters, he has these words: “I cannot be cer- 
‘tain directly as to the time when this Ballad was written; but that it was some years 
‘ before the play of Shakespeare appears from several circumstances, which to men- 
‘tion would swell my Ztroduction too far beyond its usual length.” It is to be wished 
‘that this writer, since he resolved not to exceed a certain length in his /utroduction, 
‘had omitted some part of it, in order to introduce those circumstances which were 
‘ of infinitely more consequence than anything else he has said on the subject of that 
‘old ballad. If it was really written before Shakespear's play, that great poet did 
‘not disdain to consult it, but has copied it more closely than either the Chronicle or 
‘Sidney. From thence (for ’tis mentioned nowhere else) he took the hint of Lear’s 
‘madness, and the extravagant and wanton cruelty his daughters exercised on him; 
‘the death of King Lear is also exactly copied. ... [The old ballad] bears so exact 
‘an analogy to the argument of Shakespear’s Aimg Lear, that his having copied it 
‘cannot be doubted, if indeed it be true that it was written before that tragedy.’ 

The friend of our countrywoman (Mrs Lennox was born in New York), Dr JoHN- 
SON, says: ‘ The story of this play is derived ... perhaps immediately from an old 
‘historical ballad. My reason for believing that the play was posterior to the ballad, 
‘rather than the ballad to the play, is, that the ballad has nothing of Shakespeare’s 
‘nocturnal tempest, which is too striking to have been omitted, and that it follows the 
‘chronicle; it has the rudiments of the play, but none of its amplifications; it first 
‘hinted Lear’s madness, but did not array it in circumstances. The writer of the ballad 
‘added something to the history, which is.a proof that he would have added more if it 
‘had occurred to his mind, and more must have occurred if he had seen Shakespeare.’ 

This ballad Bishop PeRcy reprinted in his Religues of Ancient English Poetry, i, 
211, ed. 1765, and says of it: ‘ The misfortune is that there is nothing to assist us in 
‘ascertaining its date, but what little evidence arises from within, this the reader 
‘must weigh and judge for himself. After all, ’tis possible that Shakespeare and 
‘the author of this ballad might both of them be indebted to [the older play of King 
‘Zeir]. This ballad is given from an ancient copy in the Golden Garland, bl. let. 
‘intitled ‘A Lamentable Song of the Death of King Leir, and his three Daughters. 
‘To the tune of “When flying fame,”’ : 

RITSON was the earliest, I think, to deny Shakespeare’s obligations to the old 
ballad. He says of it, that it ‘by no means deserves a place in any edition of 
‘Shakespeare, but is evidently a most servile pursuit,—not, indeed, of our author’s 
‘play, which the writer does not appear to have read, but—of Holinshed’s Chronicle, 
‘where, as in Geoffrey of Monmouth, the King of France is called Aganippus. I 
‘suppose, however, that the performance and celebrity of the play might have set the 
*ballad-maker at work, and furnished him with the circumstance of Lear’s madness, 
‘of which there is no hint either in the historian or the old play. The omission of 
‘any other striking incident may be fairly imputed to his want of either genius or in- 
‘formation, All he had to do was to spin out a sort of narrative in a sort of verse, 


+ fone 
= % 


eR Hi 


= 


voy yer W, 


\ 


Vea) Sees 
\, 


Li 


ey 
ry 


densiape of the publick curiosity. I much — 


can be produced anterior to a play upon the 

¢ ct, unless wile sales some very recent event.’ 
y safely trust to Ritson’s judgement when so good a critic as HAL- 
in it. Halliwell says, that the old ballad is chiefly ¢ founded on 


as elated by Holinshed, but written also with a recollection of Shake- 


tragedy. This ballad was probably issued early in the seventeenth century, 

ough no copy of so ancient a date is now known to exist. It cannot, of course, 

reckoned amongst the materials used by Shakespeare unless it be supposed, as 

is by some critics, to be anterior to the year 1608. It is far more likely to have 
‘been written in consequence of the popularity of the tragedy.’ 


‘The following i is the ballad, reprinted from Percy’s Religues : 


KING LEIR AND HIS THREE DAUGHTERS. 


«Kine LEtr once ruled in this land, 

With princely power and peace, — 

And had all things with hearts content, 
That might his joys increase : 

Amongst those things that nature gave, 
Three daughters fair had he, 

So princely seeming beautiful, 
As fairer could not be. 


‘So on a time it pleas’d the king 
A question thus to move, 
Which of his daughters to his grace 
Could shew the dearest love: 
For to my age you bring content, 
Quoth he, then let me hear 
_ Which of you three in plighted troth, 
The kindest will appear. 


* To whom the eldest thus began, 

Dear father, mind, quoth she, 

Before your face, to do you good, 
My blood shall render’d be: 

And for your sake my bleeding heart 
Shall here be cut in twain, 

Ere that I see your reverend age 
The smallest grief sustain. 


¢ And so will I, the second said: 

Dear father, for your sake, 

The worst of all extremities 
1’ll gently undertake ; 

And serve your highness night and day 
With diligence and love; 

That sweet content and quietness ; 
Discomforts may remove, 


404 APPENDIX 


‘In doing so, you glad my soul, 

The aged king reply’d; 

But what sayst thou, my youngest girl, 
How is thy love ally’d? : 

My love (quoth young Cordelia then) 
Which to your grace I owe, 

Shall be the duty of a child, 
And that is all I’ll show. 


‘ And wilt thou shew no more, quoth he, 

Than doth thy duty bind ? 

IT well perceive thy love is small, 
When as no more I find: 

Henceforth I banish thee my court, 
Thou art no child of mine; 

Nor any part of this my realm ; 
By favour shall be thine. 


* Thy elder sisters loves are more 

Than well I can demand, 

To whom I equally bestow 
My kingdome and my land: 

My pompal state and all my goods, 
That lovingly I may 

With those thy sisters be maintain’d 
Until my dying day. 


* ¢ Thus flattering speeches won renown, 

' By these two sisters here : 

The third had causeless banishment, 
Yet was her love more dear: 

For poor Cordelia patiently 
Went wandring up and down, 

Unhelp’d, unpity’d, gentle maid, 
Through many an English town: 


* Until at last in famous France 

She gentler fortunes found ; 

Though poor and bare, yet she was deem’d 
The fairest on the ground: 

Where when the king her virtues heard, 
And this fair lady seen, 

With full consent of all his court 
He made his wife and queen. 


‘ Her father, ‘old’ king Leir, this while 
With his two daughters staid, 
Forgetful of their promis’d loves, 
Full soon the same decay’d, 


ta ea 


\ 


. 


¥ 


‘be ee ee ee 
sie 


‘ 
¥ 


mY, 


She gave ‘allowiee Batt ten, 
And after scarce to three: _ 
Nay, one she thought too much for him: 
So took she all away, 
In hope that in her court, good king, 
He would no longer stay. 


* Am I rewarded thus, quoth he, 
_ In giving all I have 

Unto my children, and to beg 
For what I lately gave? 

T’ll go unto my Gonorell ; 
My second child, I know, 

Will be more kind and pitiful, 
And will relieve my woe. 


© Full fast he hies then to her court; 

Where when she hears his moan, 

Return’d him answer, That she griev’d, 
That all his means were gone: 

But no way could relieve his wants ; 
Yet if that he would stay 

Within her kitchen, he should have 
What scullions gave away. 


¢ When he had heard with bitter tears, 

He made his answer then; 

In what I did let me be made 
Example to all men. 

I will return again, quoth he, 
Unto my Ragan’s court; 

She will not use me thus, I hope, 
But in a kinder sort. 


* Where when he came, she gave command 

To drive him thence away: 

When he was well within her court 
(She said) he would not stay. 

Then back again to Gonorell, 
The woeful king did hie, 

That in her kitchen he might have 
What scullion boys set by, 


406 i APPENDIX 


‘ But there of that he was deny’d, 
Which she had promis’d late: 
For once refusing, he should not 
Come after to her gate. 
Thus twixt his daughters, for relief 
He wandred up and down; 
Being glad to feed on beggars food, 
That lately wore a crown. 


‘ And calling to remembrance then 

His youngest daughters words, 

That said the duty of a child 
Was all that love affords: 

But doubting to repair to her, 
Whom he had banish’d so, 

Grew frantick mad; for in his mind 
‘He bore the wounds of woe: 


‘Which made him rend his milk-white locks, 

And tresses from his head, 

And all with blood bestain his cheeks, 
With age and honour spread: 

To hills and woods, and watry founts, 
He made his hourly moan, 

Till hills and woods, and senseless things, 
Did seem to sigh and groan. 


‘ Even thus possest with discontents, 

He passed o’re to France, 

In hopes from fair Cordelia there, 
To find some gentler chance: 

Most virtuous dame! which when she heard 
Of this her father’s grief, 

As duty bound, she quickly sent 
Him comfort and relief : 


‘ And by a train of noble peers, 

In brave and gallant sort, 

She gave in charge he should be brought 
To Aganippus’ court; 

Whose royal king, with noble mind 
So freely gave consent, 

To muster up his knights at arms, 
To fame and courage bent. 


‘ And so to England came with speed, 
To repossesse king Leir, 
And drive his daughters from their thrones 
By his Cordelia dear: 


e-hearted noble queen, 
e battel slain: © 
Yet he good king, i in his old days, 
Possest his crown again. 


¢ But when he heard Cordelia’s death, 
Who died indeed for love 


CAL £ ee Of her dear father, in whose cause 


She did this battel move; 


= He swooning fell upon her breast, 


From whence he never parted; 
But on her bosom left his life, 
That was so truly hearted. 


«The lords and nobles when they saw 

The end of these events, 

The other sisters unto death 
They doomed by consents: 

And being dead, their crowns they left 
Unto the next of kin: 

Thus have you seen the fall of pride, 
And disobedient sin.’ 


It would be, I think, merely a waste of space to reprint any more versions of the 
same old story, such as are to be found in Warner’s 4/4i0n’s England, Layamon’s 
Brut, the Gesta Romanorum, &c. &c. Probably more versions have been already 
given, in the foregoing pages, than Shakespeare ever read or would have cared to 
read, 


KLEIN (Geschichte des Italienischen Dramas, i, 891) queries whether it be not 
possible that a hint of the idea of presenting in the same play, and in the same 
scene, assumed madness, real madness, and professional folly, may not have been 
derived from Le Stravaganze d’ Amore by Cristoforo Castelletti, published in Rome, 
1585, wherein similar types are to be found. ‘Old Metello, insane out of grief for 
‘his children, Alessandro an assumed Fool, and Bell’ Humore a professional one, 
‘represent in Castelletti’s comedy a trio jangled into discord, which finds its reso- 
‘lution in that infinitely pathetic terzetto of insanity in Zear, and reveals its artistic 
‘and tragic capabilities when the paroxysms of a tragic insanity, simulated at the 
*same time by a fictitious insanity, are soothed into tragic sorrow by a Fool. ‘The 
‘assumption of such a hint is all the more allowable since, as far as we remember, no 
‘drama is to be found before Zear wherein these three varieties of mental alienation 
‘are employed as a motif in one and the same scene; nay, as far as we know, no 
‘drama exists before Zear and Hamlet wherein feigned insanity is depicted at all, 
‘except in this very Stravaganze d’ Amore by Castelletti. Mock-insanity belongs to 
‘Comedy; to elevate it to Tragedy, to make it a potent foil to real insanity, as in 
‘Edgar and Lear, is the triumph of tragic art.’ 


—-'. > ae ro» oe ee ee ee 


DURATION OF THE ACTION 


EccLEs was the first to reckon the time consumed during the action of this tragedy. 
His computation is briefly as follows: 

OF course the first scene, containing the division of the kingdom, occupies one day. 

After this several months elapse, during which Lear may have taken up his abode 
with Goneril and Regan several times alternately, so that when Lear says, ‘ What 
: fifty of my followers at a clap! Within a fortnight!’ he may refer only to that por- 
tion of the current month during which he has been staying with Goneril. It is 
‘utterly impossible’ that this ‘ fortnight’ can refer to the very first fortnight after the 
division of the kingdom, because this does not allow sufficient time for the tidings 
of Lear’s cruel treatment to reach Cordelia, or for her to undertake that invasion of 
the kingdom which is already on foot. If the scene in which this expression occurs 
lad come directly after the first scene all would have been well, but, unfortunately, 
Shakespeare was careless, had ‘ indistinct ideas concerning the progress of the action,’ 
and was liable to ‘unhappy oversights,’ one of which he fell into here. According 
to Shakespeare, directly after the division of the kingdom, on the evening of the 
very day, or on any part of the following day, Edmund persuades Edgar to conceal 
himself from his father’s wrath. Now, if this order of scenes be retained, Edgar 
must lie concealed for several months, according to Eccles. Wherefore Eccles re- 
arranges the scenes, whereby that in which Goneril resolves to check her father 
(I, iti) follows the first; then comes, after a ‘very short interval,’ the ‘scene (I, iv) 
where Lear uses the expression ‘within a fortnight.’ Of course followed immediately 
by that wherein Lear sends Kent to Gloucester, and, with this, the First Act closes. 
See Eccles’s note on p. 42. 

Thus far, then, the time is as follows: The first scene takes up One Day. Then 
several months elapse, and we come to the day on which Goneril tells Oswald to 
treat her father when he returns from hunting with what ‘ weary negligence’ he will, 
and to prepare for dinner. A few minutes after Lear enters, and then ensues the 
stormy scene between him and Goneril. A few hours later Lear sends Kent to 
Gloucester with letters to Regan. This makes Two Days, and ends the First Act. 

A night now passes, and, at ‘any part of the day succeeding that on which Lear 
‘hurries from Goneril,’ the Second Act opens, and here Eccles places the scene (I, ii) 
which he omitted from the First Act, namely, that in which Edmund persuades Glou- 
cester of Edgar’s treachery, and persuades Edgar to conceal himself. Edgar remains 
in concealment until nightfall, when Edmund summons him forth, and, after the 
mock duel, forces him to fly. This closes the Third Day. No sooner is Edgar fled 
than Regan and Cornwall arrive at the castle, and ‘very shortly’ after them come 
Kent and Oswald, and the scene ensues where Kent is put in the stocks. While 
ok iat left, Dos. prepares the proclamation about Edgar, and, after ‘such 

@ rval as this circumstance may seem to render necessary,’ but still in the same 
night, Edgar appears (we are now at II, iv, of Eccles) and decides to turn Bedlam 
7 Sg lias next scene, Lear appears, and finds Kent stocked, it is still 

ana ame night, which we may conclude to be now far advanced.’ 

Eccles continues this night through the Second Act, and the first six scenes of Act 
ere acces in — Gloucester is blinded), Eccles says, ‘he sup- 

‘ : arly ing after Lear has been exposed to the tempest.’ This, 
40 


DURATION OF THE ACTION 409 


_ then, is the morning of the Fourth Day, In the course of it Gloucester meets Edgar, : 


and gets him to lead him to Dover, and says, ‘1’ th’ Jast nigh?’s storm I such a fellow 
saw. This is IV,i. While Gloucester and Edgar are going to Dover, Goneril and 
Edmund are journeying to the Duke of Albany’s palace, where they arrive (IV, ii) on 
‘the following day.’ ‘We may imagine it the morning.’ This, then, is the Fifth Day. 

Here arises a difficulty. As the scenes now stand, we have in Scene v, of Act IV, 
a conference between Regan and Oswald at Gloucester’s castle, and Oswald leaves 


_ for Dover. Of course some time must elapse before he reaches there, Eccles thinks 
a night at least, and yet in the very next scene he is at Dover, and is killed by Edgar, 


Now, there would be no objection to supposing that a night passes between these two 
Scenes, were it not that a previous scene leaves Cordelia’s century searching every 
acre of the high-grown field for Lear. The century was either successful or it was 
not. If it was not successful, Lear must have passed, in the open air, all this night, 
which we have just seen had to elapse between Oswald’s leaving Gloucester’s castle 
and his arrival at Dover. But Eccles believes that the century was successful, and 
that Lear was found before night. The order of scenes is therefore wrong, and 
Eccles changes them so as to bring the scene at Gloucester’s castle early in the Act 
(see p. 249), before Cordelia sends out the century, whereby time will be given for 
Oswald’s journey from Gloucester to Dover, and for Kent to have his conference 
with the Gentleman who had delivered his letters to Cordelia, and for Cordelia to 
send out her century to find her father, which the century succeeds in doing just 
before Oswald reaches Dover, and is killed by Edgar. This certainly makes the 
story connected and consistent. 

To return to the reckoning of time. Eccles’s Fourth Day finds Lear on his way to 
Dover, accompanied by certain hot questrists, and Gloucester blinded, guided to the 
same destination by Edgar. The next day, the Fifth, Goneril and Edmund reach 
the Duke of Albany’s castle, and Edmund leaves immediately to hasten the musters 
and- conduct the powers. On the evening of the next day (which makes the Sixth) 
Regan has the conference with Oswald, and tries to see the letter which Goneril had 
sent by him to Edmund, This is the displaced scene, the fifth of Act IV, which 
Eccles places as the third, and, to quote his words, ‘suppose it to pass on the even- 
‘ing of the third day since that, inclusively taken, on the morning of which Lear, 
* attended by certain of his knights, began to be conveyed from the castle of Gloster 
€on his route towards Dover.’ Eccles makes it in the evening, so as to account for 
Edmund’s having left Regan in the morning to dispatch Gloucester’s nighted life, 
and also to give time for Oswald’s journey to this point with Goneril’s letter to Ed- 
mund, and also because Regan begs Oswald to wait the safe conduct of her forces 
on the morrow. 

The next day (the Seventh), or ‘the fourth morning from that (both, however, in- 
‘ clusively) whereon Lear, with Kent and the rest of his attendants, began his progress 
«from Gloster’s castle, Goneril and Edmund from the same set out for the palace of 
« Albany, and, later in the day, the sightless Gloster began to proceed to Dover,’ we 
have Kent’s conference with the Gentleman who had szen and describes Cordelia, 
Our IV, iii; Eccles’s IV, iv. 

The next scene, where Cordelia sends out the century, Eccles ‘conceives to be 
«some part of the morning of the same day with the last scene.’ post 

In the ‘afternoon of the same day’ Gloucester is guided by Edgar to the imagi- 
nary cliff of Dover. ‘ This will allow time for Oswald G have performed his jour- 
ney’ after leaving Regan on the preceding evening. This is IV, vi. 


35 


410 o APPENDIX 


The next scene (IV, vii), where Lear is 1estored to his senses, Eccles imagines 


‘some part of a new day, viz: the fifth since the night of the storm.’ This makes 


the Eighth Day. 

To the first scene of Act V he assigns a new day, viz: ‘the sixth since the night 
of the storm,’ and this day, which is the Ninth, is ‘ continued to the end of the play.’ 

The number of days taken up by this drama has been computed by Mr P. A. 
DANIEL also, and printed in the Zransactions of the New Sh. Soc., 1877-9, p- 215. 
It differs somewhat from Eccles's, and extends the time over one more day. It is 
substantially as follows: 

The first scene occupies one day. 

The second scene, in which Edmund persuades Edgar to conceal himself, and 
which Eccles transposed to the next Act, Daniel places ‘on the day following the 
opening scene,’ and Gloucester’s exclamation, ‘ the king gone to-night,’ is interpreted 
‘in the sense of the night last passed, as it ‘is frequently used in these plays’ in 
that sense; and, moreover, ‘ Edmund, who here promises his father full satisfaction 
‘as to Edgar’s guilt, “without any further delay than thzs very evening,” could not 
‘say this if the night of the day on which he is speaking were already come.’ As 
Edgar goes into concealment on this day, Daniel allows him there to remain, in the 
same castle with his father, for about fourteen days, 

After this Second Day, in order to account for Lear’s exclamation: ‘ Within a 
fortnight!’ Daniel supposes an interval in the action of something less than that 
period. : 

With the third scene, ‘ at about mid-day,’ the action recommences, and, ceasing ‘a 
little after noon,’ carries us through the rest of the Act. This makes the Third 
Day. : 
Towards night of the following day, therefore the Fourth Day, the second Act 
begins. Edmund has the mock fight with Edgar, and Cornwall and Regan arrive at 
the castle ‘during the night; and this fact must fix the time of the second scene of 
‘this day,’ in which the quarrel between Kent and Oswald takes place. ‘It will be 
‘remembered that it was about mid-day in Day 3 that Kent tripped up Oswald’s heels, 
‘and shortly afterwards Lear sent him on this errand. When in this scene he again 
‘meets Oswald, he says, “ Zs zt two days ago since I tripped up thy heels, and beat thee 
‘before the king?’? We may suppose, then, that about a day and a half has been 
‘occupied in his journeying to Cornwall’s palace, and from thence to Gloucester’s 
‘castle, and that this is the second night or early morning since he set out with Lear’s 
‘letters; midnight of Day 4, or I or 2 A.M. of Day 5.’ 

On the morning after his flight Edgar resolves on disguising himself as Mad Tom. 
This is in ITI, iii, and on the Fifth Day. And on this same morning IT, iv, begins, 
and at III, vi, the day ends at night. Here we see Daniel gives one more day to the 
action than Eccles. Eccles makes all these scenes take place on the same night that 
Cornwall and Regan arrive at Gloucester’s castle. Apparently, Daniel is led to the 
supposition that it is the following day because when Cornwall and Regan ‘make 
their appearance, Lear bids them “Good morrow.’?? [ This, I fear, is somewhat in 
favour of Eccles. The time of day that was at hand, not that which was present, 
was commonly (Delius says ‘always’) used as a greeting. Thus, in Rom. & Ful. 
we find that after the very stroke of noon ‘good evening’ was the proper salutation. 
The objection to Eccles’s reckoning is that we have an excessively long night, to 
Daniel’s that we have an excessively long day. I doubt if upon either reckoning, 
or upon any minute reckoning, Shakespeare ever bestowed a thought. If he had, it 


On the moersitig of the Sixth Day (III, vii), Edmund accompanies Goneril from 
Gloucester’s castle back to Albany, Gloucester’s eyes are put out, and (in IV, i) he 


is led by Edgar to Dover. 


On account of the distance between Gloucester’s castle and Albany’s palace, a day 
is given to Edmund and Goneril to accomplish the journey, and this makes the 


_ Seventh Day, and IV, ii. 


Here Daniel marks ‘ 4” Jnterval. 

On the Eighth Day (IV, iii) we are in the French Camp near Dover, and a Gen- 
tleman tells Kent of his interview with Cordelia. ‘Some short interval between 
* Days 7 and 8 should probably be supposed; as the news now is that the forces of 
‘Albany and Cornwall are afoot (1. 50-1), which was not the case on the former day. 
‘Lear is in Dover,’ but his sovereign shame keeps him from Cordelia. 

We come now to the Ninth Day (IV, iv), and of it Daniel says: ‘I am not sure 


‘that I am right in making this scene the commencement of a separate day; it may ~ 


‘possibly be a continuation of Day No. 8, or it may be separated from that day by 
‘an interval of aday or two. Time is not marked except by the succession of events, 
* but on the whole they induce me to suppose this the morrow of Day No. 8. Lear 
‘has been met in the fields, crowned with wild flowers, and Cordelia sends out in 
‘search of him. The news is that “The British powers are marching hither- 
‘ward”’ (1. 21). 

‘fAct IV, sc. v. The scene shifts to Gloucester’s castle, or, as some editors make 
‘it, Regan’s palace. Goneril’s steward, Oswald, has arrived with a letter from his 
‘mistress for Edmund; but “he is posted hence on serious matter” (1.8). Albany’s 
‘troops, it seems, are already in the field; Regan’s are to “set forth to-morrow” 
*(1. 16). Regan warns the Steward that she intends to take Edmund for herself, and 
‘she offers him preferment if he can cut off old Gloucester. The position of this 
‘scene should mark it as occurring on the same day as scenes iv, and vi; but the 
‘news as to the movement of the troops favours the notion that it represents an 
‘earlier date; moreover, if it is allowed to retain its present place, we are called on 
‘to believe that Oswald, who again makes his appearance in sc, vi, is present with 
‘Regan, and is at Dover on one and the same day. Its true place seems to be in the 
‘interval I have marked between Days 7 and 8, and Eccles actually transposes it to 
-that position, making it, however, the evening of the day represented in Act IV, 
‘sc. ii, my Day 7. On the whole, I think it best to enclose it within brackets, as in 
‘other cases of scenes which I suppose to be out of the due order of time.]’ On 
this same day (the Ninth) Gloucester supposes that he has leaped from Dover Cliff, 
and Oswald is slain by Edgar. 

Day Tenth, and last. ‘ Observe that this must be a separate day if IV, v, is prop- 
‘erly placed; for Regan’s troops, which then were to set forth om ¢he morrow, are 
‘now present, led by Edmund, Indeed, but for the almost lightning-speed of the 
‘action, some little interval might be supposed between this and Day 9. The tap 
‘of the drum, heard in the last scene, is, however, against such an arrangement of 
‘the time.’ 

This day extends to the end of the tragedy, 

Thus, according to Daniel, ‘the longest period, including intervals, that can be 
‘allowed for this Play is one month; though perhaps little more than three weeks is 


‘ sufficient.’ 


His division of time is thus tabulated: ——" 
Day 1. Act, sc. 1. 
wer'2, Act 1, se, i. 
An Interval of something less than a fortnight. 
a 3. Act I, sc. lii, iv, and v. 
« 4, Act II, sc. i, and ii. : 
“ gs, Act II, sc. iii, and iv; Act III, sc. i-vi. 
ee « 6, Act III, se. vii; Act IV, sc. i. ; 
7 “7, Act IV, sc. ii, o 
Perhaps an Juéerval of a day or two. 
“« 8, Act IV, sc. iti. 
« —g. Act IV, sc. iv, v, and vi. 
; “ to. Act IV, sc. vii; Act V, sc. i-iii. 
- Eccles’s scheme, Daniel thinks, ‘however ingenious in some respects, cannot be =e 
‘reconciled with the notes of time the Play itself contains.’ 


INS ANTI Y, 


Mrs LENNox was the earliest, I think, to assert that Lear was really insane from 
the very first. She says (Shakespear Illustrated, iii, 287): Lear does not run mad 
till the third Act; yet his behaviour towards Cordelia in the first scene has all the 
appearance of a judgement totally depraved; . . . Lear banishes [Cordelia] his 
sight, consigns her over to want, and loads her with the deepest imprecations. What 
less than Phrenzy can inspire a rage so groundless, and a conduct soabsurd? Lear, 
while in his senses, acts like a madman, and from his first appearance to his last 
seems to be wholly deprived of his reason. 

JOsEPH WARTON, D. D. ( Zhe Adventurer, 5 Jan., 1754) : Madness being occasioned 
by a close and continued attention of the mind to a single object, Shakespeare 
judiciously represents the resignation of his crown to daughters so cruel and unnatu- 
ral, as the particular idea which has brought on the distraction of Lear, and which : 
perpetually recurs to his imagination, and mixes itself with all his ramblings, [This 
theory of the cause of Lear’s madness brought out a reply, on the following Satur- 
day, from Charles Ranger [Arthur Murphy] in the Gray’s-Jun Yournal, wherein it 
was contended that the ingratitude of Lear’s daughters, and not his loss of power, 
was the cause of his madness. To this an Anonymous correspondent replied in the 
next week’s issue, upholding Warton. Whether or not this Anonymous contributor 
was Warton himself, I really have not taken sufficient interest in the discussion to 
find out. Ranger rejoined in the course of the next few months, and to the second 
volume of The Gray’s-Inn Fournal I refer all who are interested in the dispute, 
which I am not.—Ep.] 

A. BricHam, M. D. (Shakespeare's Illustrations of Jnsanity, Am. Journ. of Insan- 
ity, July, 1844): Lear’s is a genuine case of insanity from the beginning to the end; 
such as we often see in aged persons. On reading it we cannot divest ourselves of 
the idea that it is a real case of insanity correctly reported, Still, we apprehend, the 


INSANITY erie 


play, or case, is generally misunderstood. The general belief is, that the insanity of 
Lear originated solely from the ill-treatment of his daughters, while in truth he was 


_ insane before that, from the beginning of the play, when he gave his kingdom away, 


and banished, as it were, Cordelia and Kent, and abused his servants. The ill-usage 
of his daughters only aggravated the disease, and drove him to raving madness. Had 
it been otherwise, the case, as one of insanity, would have been inconsistent and very 
unusual.; Shakespeare and Walter Scott prepare those whom they represent as insane, 
by education and other circumstances, for the disease,—they predispose them to 
insanity, and thus its outbreak is not unnatural. In the case of Lear the insanity is 
so evident before he received any abuse from his daughters, that, professionally 
speaking, a feeling of regret arises that he was not so considered and so treated. He 
was unquestionably very troublesome, and by his ‘new pranks,’ as his daughter calls 
them, and rash and variable conduct, caused his children much trouble, and intro- 
duced much discord into their households. In fact, a little feeling of commiseration 
for his daughters at first arises in our minds from these circumstances, though to be 
sure they form no excuse for their subsequent bad conduct. Let it be remembered 
they exhibited no marked disposition to ill-treat or neglect him until after the con- 
duct of himself and his knights had become outrageous. Then they at first reproved 


_ him, or rather asked him to change his course in a mild manner. Thus Goneril says 


to him: ‘I would you would make use of that good wisdom Whereof I know you 
‘are fraught; and put away These dispositions which of /a¢e transform you From what 
‘you rightly are’; showing that previously he had been different. This, however, 
caused an unnatural and violent burst of rage, but did not originate his insanity, for 
he had already exhibited symptoms of it, and it would have progressed naturally 
even if he had not been thus addressed. 

Lear is not after this represented as constantly deranged. Like most persons 
affected by this kind of insanity, he at times converses rationally. 

In the storm-scene he becomes violently enraged, exhibiting what may be seen 
daily in a mad-house, a paroxysm of rage and violence. It is not until he has seen 
and conversed with Edgar, ‘the philosopher and learned Theban,’ as he calls him, 
that he becomes a real maniac. After this, aided by a proper course of treatment, he 
falls asleep, and sleep, as in all similar cases, partially restores him. But the violence 
of his disease and his sufferings are too great for his feeble system, and he dies, 
and dies deranged. The whole case is instructive, not as an interesting story merely, 
but as a faithful history of a case of senile insanity, or the insanity of old age, 

I, Ray, M. D. (Am. Fournal of Insanity, April, 1847): In the tragedy of King Lear 
Shakespeare has represented the principal character as driven to madness by the un- 
expected ingratitude of his daughters; or, more scientifically speaking, he has repre- 
sented a strong predisposition to the disease as being rapidly developed under the ap- 
plication of an adequate exciting cause. It is no part of his object to excite curiosity 
by a liberal display of wildness and fury, nor awaken our pity by the spectacle of a 
mind in ruins and unconscious of its wretchedness. He aimed at dramatic effect, 
by opening the fountains of sympathy for a being of noble nature and generous im- 
pulses, cruelly despoiled of the highest endowment of man, but not so far as to lose 
all trace of his original qualities, or cease for a moment to command our deepest re- 
spect. In Lear we have a man of a hot and hasty temper, of strong and generous 
passions, of a credulous and confiding disposition, governed by impulses rather than 
deliberate judgement, rendered impatient of restraint or contradiction by the habit 
of command, with a nervous temperament strongly susceptible to the vexations of 


35* 


APPENDIX 


life, and, moreover, with all these moral infirmities aggravated by old age. With 
these simple elements of character is mingled and assimilated more or less of mental — 


derangement, with equal regard to pathological propriety and dramatic effect. And 
so nicely adjusted are the various elements of sanity and insanity, and so admirably 


do they support and illustrate one another, that we are not surprised in the progress _ 


of the action by violent contrasts; and we feel at last as if it were the most natural 
thing in the world that Lear should go mad, and precisely in the way represented by 
the poet. Mad as he becomes, the prominent attributes of his character are always 
to be seen. Through the whole play, he is the same generous, confiding, noble- 
hearted Lear. In short, assuming Lear to be an historical portrait, instead of a 
poetical creation, we should say there existed in his case a strong predisposition to 
insanity, and that, if it had not been developed by the approach of old age or the 
conduct of his daughters, it probably would have been by something else. His in- 
considerate rashness in distributing his kingdom among his children, his disinheriting 
the youngest for the fearless expression of her feelings, and his banishment of Kent 
for endeavoring to recall him to a sense of his folly,—all indicate an ill-balanced 
mind, if not the actual invasion of disease. This view of the case is confirmed by 
the conversation between the sisters immediately after the division of the kingdom 
[I, i, 287-299]. With a knowledge of insanity that could hardly have been ex- 
pected from any but a professional observer, Shakespeare has here and elsewhere 
recognized the fact, that very many of those who become insane are previously dis- 
tinguished by some of those mental irregularities that pass under the name of oddity 
or eccentricity. . . . The development of the early stage of Lear’s insanity, or its 
incubation, as it is technically cailed, is managed with masterly skill, the more sur- 
prising as it is that stage of the disease which attracts the least attention. And the 
reason is, that the derangement is evinced, not so much by delusions or gross im- 
proprieties of conduct, as by a mere exaggeration of natural peculiarities, by incon- 
sistencies of behaviour, by certain acts for which very plausible reasons are assigned, 
though they would never have been performed in a perfectly sound state of mind, by 
gusts of passion at every trifling provocation, or by doing very proper things at un- 
seasonable times and occasions. With his own free will and accord he gives away 
his kingdom, but finds it difficult to sink the monarch in the private citizen. He 
attaches to his person a band of riotous retainers, whose loose and lawless behaviour 
is destructive to the peace and good order of his daughter’s household. Goneril 
describes them as, ‘ Men so disordered, so debauched and bold, That this our court, 
‘infected with their manners, Shows like a riotous inn.’ Under such an infliction, 
it is not strange that she should remonstrate, and, had not the divine light already 
begun to flicker, he would have acknowledged the justice of the reproof. As it is, 
however, instead of admitting some share of the fault, he attributes the whole of it 
to her, flies ints a passion, pours upon her head the bitterest curses, upbraids her 
with the vilest ingratitude, and forthwith proclaims his wrongs to the public ear. 
Like most cases of this kind in real life, it would have, to a stranger, the appearance 
of a family quarrel springing from the ordinary motives of interest or passion, but 
where, really, the ill-regulated conduct resulting from the first influences of disease 
provokes Reashictions more or less necessary and appropriate, that become exciting 
causes of further disorder, Another life-like touch is given to the picture in Lear’s 
sa ae e “vedere i: ingratitude, not being aware, of course, that he 
Ee be iad ee ong before he had any reason to doubt their kind- 

5 5 g ore common than for the patient, when telling his 


if 


_ INSANITY ae 


‘Story, to fix upon some event, and especially some act of his friends, as the cause of 
his troubles, which occurred long subsequently to the real origin of his disorder, and 
might have had but an accidental connection with it. 

[P. 493.] ‘Oh, that way madness lies.” Unable as the insane are to perceive their 
own insanity, yet this apprehension of its approach, so frequently repeated by Lear, 
usually occurs during its incubation. While still able to control his mental mani- 
festations, the patient is tortured with anticipations of insanity ; but, when he actually 
becomes so insane that the most careless observer perceives the fact, then he enter- 
tains the most complacent opinion of his intellectual vigor and soundness. And yet 
this is one of the nicer traits of insanity, which the ordinary observer would hardly 
be supposed to notice. 

[P. 495.] Thus far, the progress of Lear’s insanity is represented with the closest 
fidelity to nature. It is not more different from the disease, as daily observed, than 
Lear’s moral and intellectual constitution, when in health, is different from ordinary 
men’s, At every interview reason seems to have lost somewhat more of its control. 
The mental excitement has been steadily increasing, until now, having reached its 
height, he goes about singing, dancing, and capering through the fields, fantastically 
decorated with weeds and flowers, looking, acting, and talking like a madman. His 


. perceptive organs are deceived by hallucinations ; and his discourse, though tinctured 


with his natural shrewdness and vigor of thought, is full of incoherence and incon- 
gruity. In short, he is now what is called zaving. In the representation of this 
condition we have another instance of Shakespeare’s unrivalled powers of observa- 
tion. To ordinary apprehension the raving of a maniac is but an arbitrary jumble 
of words and phrases, between which no connecting threads can be discerned. But, 
in fact, discordant and heterogeneous as they may appear, they are nevertheless sub- 
jected to a certain law of association, difficult as it may be frequently to discover it. 
The phenomenon may thus be physiologically explained. In consequence of the 
cerebral excitement, impressions long since made,—so long, perhaps, as to have been 
forgotten previous to the attack,—are so vividly and distinctly recalled that they ap- 
pear to be outward realities. So long as the z¢e//ect retains its integrity, it is able to 
recognize the true nature of this phenomenon; but, when touched by disease, it 
ceases to correct the error of perception. The impressions are actually considered 
to be what they appear, and the patient thinks and discourses about them as such, 

[P. 498.] Bearing in mind these facts, we readily see how there may always be some 
method in madness, however wild and furious it may be—some traces of that delicate 
thread which, though broken in numerous points, still forms the connecting link be- 
tween many groups and patches of thought. It is in consequence of Shakespeare’s 
knowledge of this psychological law that, in all his representations of madness, even 
though characterized by wildness and irregularity, we are never at a loss to perceive 
that the disease is real and not assumed. 

[P. 499.] It is not uncommon to meet with madmen of the most wild and turbulent 
description mixing up their utterances with the shrewdest remarks upon men and 
things, and the keenest and coolest invective againsi those who have incurred their 
displeasure. The poet, perhaps, has used the utmost license of his art in the present 
instance [IV, vi, 83-202], but if few madmen have exhibited so much matter mingled 
with their impertinency as Lear, it may be replied, in justification, that few men are 
endowed like Lear with such a union of strong passions and natural shrewdness of 


understanding. 
BUCKNILL [p. 164]: If this great and sound critic [Hallam, see p. 428] had pos- 


J 


APPENDIX 
sessed any practical knowledge of mental pathology, he could not have taken 


times be seen to grow stronger under the greatest trials of life, but never when the 
result of these trials is mental disease. So far as eloquence is the result of passion, 
excitement of passion may stimulate its display; and it is remarkable that so long 
as Lear retains the least control over his passion, his imagination remains compara- 
tively dull, his eloquence tame. It is only when emotional expression is unbridled 
that the majestic flow of burning words finds vent. It is only when all the barriers 
of conventional restraint are broken down, that the native and naked force of the soul 
displays itself. The display arises from the absence of restraint, and not from the 
stimulus of disease. 

[P. 167.] The persistency with which critics have refused to see the symptoms 
of insanity in Lear, until the reasoning power itself has become undeniably alien- 


_ ated, is founded upon that view of mental disease which has, until recently, been 


entertained even by physicians, and which is still maintained in courts of law, 
namely, that insanity is an affection of the intellectual, and not of the emotional, 
part of man’s nature. . . . With the exception of those cases of insanity which arise 
from injuries, blood-poisons, sympathetic irritations, and other sources of an unques- 
tionably physical nature, the common causes of insanity are such as produce emo- 
tional changes, either in the form of violent agitation of the passions, or that of a 
chronic state of abnormal emotion, which pronounces itself in the habitually exagge- 
rated force of some one passion or desire, whereby the healthy balance of the mind is 
at length destroyed. From these and other reasons founded upon the symptoma- 
tology and treatment of insanity, upon the definite operation of the reasoning facul- 
ties, and their obvious inability to become motives for conduct without the intervention 
of emotional influence, and also from the wide chasm which intervenes and must 
intervene between all the legal and medical definitions of insanity founded upon the 
intellectual theory and the facts as they are observed in the broad field of nature, the 
conclusion appears inevitable that no state of the reasoning can, by itself, be the 
cause or condition of madness; congenital idiocy and acquired dementia being alone 
excepted. The corollary of this is, that emotional disturbance is the cause and con- 
dition of insanity. ‘This is especially obvious in the periods during which the dis- 
ease is developing; ‘in the prodromic period of the disorder the emotions are always 
‘perverted while the reason remains intact.’ Disorders of the intellectual faculties 
are secondary; they are often, indeed, to be recognized as the morbid emotions 
transformed into perverted action of the reason; but in no cases are they primary 
and essential. How completely is this theory supported by the development of 
insanity, as it is portrayed in Lear! Shakespeare, who painted from vast observa- 
tion of nature, as he saw it without and felt it within, places this great fact broadly 
and unmistakably before us. It has indeed been long ignored by the exponents of 
medical and legal science, at the cost of ever-futile attempts to define insanity by its 
accidents and not by its essence; and, following this guidance, the literary critics of 
Shakespeare have completely overlooked the early symptoms of Lear’s insanity, and, 
according to the custom of the world, have postponed its recognition until he is run- 
ning about a frantic, raving madman. 

Dr Car Stark (Koenig Lear. Eine psychiatrische Shakespeare-Studie. Stuttgart, 
1871, p. §3): Only rarely do trouble, disillusion, violent affection, alone by them- 
selves, lead directly to insanity in a character disposed thereto; but generally, in ad- 
dition to these causes, there is a condition of the body that immediately occasions the 


view of the development of the character. Intellectual energy may, indeed, some- 


a rT \r 


in ay 
\ 


& 


> Pt 


» 


, 
- 
1£ 
’ 
ae 
, 


DR JOHNSON 


THE tragedy of Lear is deservedly celebrated among the dramas of Shakespeare. 
There is, perhaps, no play which keeps the attention so strongly fixed; which so much 
agitates our passions and interests our curibsity. The artful involutions of distinct 
interests, the striking oppositions of contrary characters, the sudden changes of for- 
tune, and the quick succession of events, fill the mind with a perpetual tumult of in-. 
dignation, pity,and hope. There is no scene which does not contribute to the aggra- 
vation of the distress or conduct of the action, and scarce a line which does not con- 
duce to the progress of the scene. So powerful is the current of the poet’s imagina- 
tion, that the mind which once ventures within it, is hurried irresistibly along. 

On the seeming improbability of Lear’s conduct it may be observed, that he is 
represented according to histories at that time vulgarly received as true. And, per- 
haps, if we turn our thoughts upon the barbarity and ignorance of the age to which 
this story is referred, it will appear not so unlikely as while we estimate Lear’s man- 
ners by our own. Such preference of one daughter to another, or resignation of 
dominion on such conditions, would be yet credible if told of a petty prince of 
Guinea or Madagascar. Shakespeare, indeed, by the mention of his earls and dukes, 
has given us the idea of times more civilized, and of life regulated by softer man- 


“ners; and the truth is, that though he so nicely discriminates, and so minutely de- 


scribes the characters of men, he commonly neglects and confounds the characters 
of ages, by mingling customs ancient and modern, English and foreign. 

My learned friend Mr Warton, who has, in Zhe Adventurer, very minutely criti- 
cised this play, remarks that the instances of cruelty are too savage and shocking, 
and that the intervention of Edmund destroys the simplicity of the story. These 
objections may, I think, be answered by repeating that the cruelty of the daughters 
is an historical fact, to which the poet has added little, having only drawn it into a 
series by dialogue and action, But I am not able to apologize with equal plausibility 
for the extrusion of Gloucester’s eyes, which seems an act too horrid to be endured 
in dramatic exhibition, and such as must always compel the mind to relieve its dis- 
tress by incredulity. Yet, let it be remembered, that our author well knew what 
would please the audience for which he wrote. 

The injury done by Edmund to the simplicity of the action is abundantly recom- 
pensed by the addition of variety by the art with which he is made to co-operate 
with the chief design, and the opportunity which he gives the poet of combining 
perfidy with perfidy, and connecting the wicked son with the wicked daughters, to 
impress this important moral, that villainy is never at a stop, that crimes lead to crimes, 

418 


a.” =. COL eemor ato 
ess : 
ete erminate in ruin, But, though this moral be incid ntally enforced, 
espeare has suffered the virtue of Cordelia to perish in a just cause, contrary 
to the natural ideas of justice, to the hope of the reader, and; what is yet more 
strange, to the faith of chronicles, ,.. A play in which the wi¢ked prosper, and the 
a virtuous miscarry, may doubtless be good, because it is a just representation of the 
common events of human life; but, since all reasonable beings naturally love justice, 
- I cannot easily be persuaded that the observation of justice makes a play worse; or 
that, if other excellencies are equal, the audience will not always rise better pleased 
from the final triumph of persecuted virtue, 

In the present case the publick has decided. Cordelia, from the time of Tate, has 
always retired with victory and felicity. And, if my sensations could add anything 
to the general suffrage, I might relate, that I was many years ago so shocked by Cor- 
delia’s death, that I know not whether I ever endured to read again(the last scenes 
of the play till I undertook to revise them as an editor. 


COLERIDGE 


(Notes and Lectures, p. 188, ed. 1874.)—[In the first scene of this tragedy] fr 

_ Lear, the persona patiens of his drama, Shakespeare passes without delay to the 
second in importance, the chief agent and prime mover, and introduces Edmund to 
gi our acquaintance, preparing us with the same felicity of judgement, and in the same 
easy and natural way, for his character in the seemingly casual communication of its 

origin and occasion. From the first drawing up of the curtain Edmund has stood 
: before us in the united strength and beauty of earliest manhood, Our eyes have 
: been questioning him. Gifted as he is with high advantages of person, and further 
; endowed by nature with a powerful intellect and a strong, energetic will, even with- 
out any concurrence of circumstances and accident, pride will necessarily be the sin 

that most easily besets him. But Edmund is also the known and acknowledged son 

of the princely Gloster; he, therefore, has both the germ of pride and the conditions 

best fitted to evolve and ripen it into a predominant feeling, Yet hitherto no reason 

appears why it should be other than the not unusual pride of person, talent, and birth, 

—a pride auxiliary, if not akin, to many virtues, and the natural ally of honorable im- 

~ pulses. But, alas! in his own presence his own father takes shame to himself for the 
= frank avowal that he is his father,—he has ‘ blushed so often to acknowledge him that 
‘he is now brazed to it!’ Edmund hears the circumstances of his birth spoken of 

with a most degrading and licentious levity,—his mother described as a wanton by her 

own paramour, and the remembrance of the animal sting, the low criminal gratifica- 

tions connected with her wantonness and prostituted beauty, assigned as the reason 

why ‘the whoreson must be acknowledged!’ This, and the consciousness of its 
notoriety, the gnawing conviction that every show of respect is an effort of courtesy, 

which recalls, while it represses, a contrary feeling; this is the ever-trickling flow of 
wormwood and gall into the wounds of pride; the corrosive virus which inoculates 

pride with a venom not its own, with envy, hatred, and a lust for that power which, 

in its blaze of radiance, would hide the dark spots on his disc; with pangs of shame 
personally undeserved, and therefore felt as wrongs, and with a blind ferment of vin- 

dictive working towards the occasions and causes, especially towards a brother, whose 
stainless birth and lawful honors were the constant remembrancers of his own debase- 

ment, and were ever in the way to prevent all chance of its being unknown, or over- 

looked and forgotten. Add to this, that with excellent judgement, and provident for 


¥, r 
_ APPENDIX 
. ane 
the claims of the moral sense,—for that which, relatively to the drama, is called poetic 
justice, and as the fittest means for reconciling the feelings of the spectators to the 
horrors of Gloster’s after-sufferings,—at least, of rendering them somewhat less un- 
endurable (for I will not disguise my conviction that, in this one point, the tragic in 
7 this play has been urged beyond the outermost mark and ne plus ultra of the dra- 
matic), Shakespeare has precluded all excuse and palliation of the guilt incurred by 
both the parents of the base-born Edmund, by Gloster’s confession that he was at . 
the time a married man, and already blest with a lawful heir to his fortunes. 

The mournful alienation of brotherly love, occasioned by the law of primogeni- See 
ture in noble families, or rather by the unnecessary distinctions engrafted thereon, za 7 
and this in children of the same stock, is still almost proverbial on the Continent,— 
especially, as I know from my own observation, in the south of Europe,—and appears 
to have been scarcely less common in our own island before the Revolution of 1688, 
if we may judge from the characters and sentiments so frequent in our elder comedies. 
There is the younger brother, for instance, in Beaumont and Fletcher’s play of the 
Scornful Lady, on the one side, and Oliver, in Shakespeare’s As You Like Jt, on the 
other. Need it be said how heavy an aggravation, in such a case, the stain of bas- 
tardy must have been, were it only that the younger brother was liable to hear his 
own dishonor and his mother’s infamy related by his father with an excusing shrug 
of the shoulders, and in a tone betwixt waggery and shame! 

By the circumstances here enumerated as so many predisposing causes, Edmund’s 
character might well be deemed already sufficiently explained, and our minds pre- 
pared for it. But in this tragedy the story or fable constrained Shakespeare to intro- 
duce wickedness in an outrageous form in the persons of Regan and Goneril. He 
had read nature too heedfully not to know that courage, intellect, and strength of 
character are the most impressive forms of power, and that to power in itself, without 
reference to any moral end, an inevitable admiration and complacency appertains, 
whether it be displayed in the conquests of a Buonaparte or Tamerlane, or in the form 
and the thunder of a cataract. But in the exhibition of such a character it was of the 
highest importance to prevent the guilt from passing into utter monstrosity,—which 
again depends on the presence or absence of causes and temptations sufficient to ac- 
count for the wickedness, without the necessity of recurring to a thorough fiendishness 
of nature for its origination, For such are the appointed relations of intellectual power 
to truth, and of truth to goodness, that it becomes both morally and poetically unsafe 
to present what is admirable,—what our nature compels us to admire,—in the mind, 
and what is most detestable in the heart, as co-existing in the same individual with- 
out any apparent connection, or any modification of the one by the other. That 
Shakspeare has in one instance, that of Iago, approached to this, and that he has 
done it successfully, is perhaps the most astonishing proof of his genius and the 
opulence of its resources. But in the present tragedy, in which he was compelled to 
present a Goneril and a Regan, it was most carefully to be avoided ;—and therefore 
the only one conceivable addition to the inauspicious influences on the preformation 
of Edmund’s character is given, in the information that all the kindly counteractions 
to the mischievous feelings of shame, which might have been derived from co-domes- 
tication with Edgar and their common father, had been cut off by his absence from 
homie, and foreign education from boyhood to the present time, and a prospect of its 
continuance, as if to preclude all risk of his interference with the father’s views for 


the elder and legitimate son;—‘ He hath been out nine years, and away he shall 
again,’ 


~~. 


LAMB 


‘ 


(Prose Works, p. 121, ed. 1836.)—So to see Lear acted,—to see an old man totter- 
ing about the stage with a walking-stick, turned out of doors by his daughters in a 
rainy night—has nothing in it but what is painful and disgusting. We want to take 
him into shelter and relieve him. That is all the feeling which the acting of Lear 
ever produced in me. But the Lear of Shakspeare cannot be acted. The con- 
temptible machinery by which they mimic the storm which he goes out in, is not 


More inadequate to represent the horrors of the real elements than any actor can be 


to represent Lear; they might more easily propose to personate the Satan of Milton 
upon a stage, or one of Michael Angelo’s terrible figures. The greatness of Lear is 
not in corporal dimension, but in intellectual: the explosions of his passion are 
terrible as a volcano: they are storms turning up and disclosing to the bottom that 
sea, his mind, with all its vast riches, It is his mind which is laid bare. This*case 
of flesh and blood seems too insignificant to be thought on; even as he himself 
neglects it. On the stage we see nothing but corporal infirmities and weakness, the 
impotence of rage; while we read it, we see not Lear, but we are Lear,—we are in 


his mind, we are sustained by a grandeur which baffles the malice of daughters and 


storms; in the aberrations of his reason, we discover a mighty irregular power of 
reasoning, immethodised from the ordinary purposes of life, but exerting its powers, 
as the wind blows where it listeth, at will upon the corruptions and abuses of man- 
kind. What have looks, or tones, to do with that sublime identification of his age 
with that of the Aeavens themselves, when, in his reproaches to them for conniving at 
the injustice of his children, he reminds them that ‘they themselves are old’? What 
gesture shall we appropriate to this? What has the voice or the eye to do with such 
things? But the play is beyond all art, as the tamperings with it show; it is too 
hard and stony; it must have love-scenes and a happy ending. It is not enough that 
Cordelia is a daughter, she must shine as a lover too. Tate has put his hook into 
the nostrils of this Leviathan, for Garrick and his followers, the showmen of the 
scene, to draw the mighty beast about more easily. A happy ending!—as if the 
living martyrdom that Lear had gone through,—the flaying of his feelings alive, did 
not make a fair dismissal from the stage of life the only decorous thing for him, If 
he is to live and be happy after, if he could sustain this world’s burden after, why 
all this pudder and preparation,—why torment us with all this unnecessary sympathy ? 
As if the childish pleasure of getting his gilt robes and sceptre again could tempt him 
to act over again his misused station,—as if at his years, and with his experience, 
anything was left but to die. 
Lear is essentially impossible to be represented on a stage. 


HAZLITT 


(Characters of Shakespear's Plays, 1817, p. 1 53.)—We wish that we could pass 
this play over and say nothing about it. All that we can say must fall far short 
of the subject; or even of what we ourselves conceive of it. To attempt to give 
a description of the play itself, or of its effect upon the mind, is mere impertinence; 
yet we must say something.—It is, then, the best of all Shakespear’s plays, for 
it is the one in which he was the most in earnest. He was here fairly caught in 
the web of his own imagination. The passion which he has taken as his subject 
is that which strikes its root deepest into the human heart; of which the bond is 


36 


. hale ee 
422 APPENDIX 


the hardest to be unloosed; and the cancelling and tearing to pieces of which 
gives the greatest revulsion to the frame. This depth of nature, this force of 
passion, this tug and war of the elements of our being, this firm faith in filial piety, 
and the giddy anarchy and whirling tumult of the thoughts at finding the prop failing 
it, the contrast between the fixed immoveable basis of natural affection, and the rapid, 
irregular starts of imagination, suddenly wrenched from all its accustomed holds and 
resting-places in the soul, this is what Shakespear has given, and what nobody else 
but he could give. So we believe.—The mind of Lear, staggering between the 
weight of attachment and the hurried movements of passion, is like a tall ship driven 
about by the winds, buffeted by the furious waves, but that still rides above the storm, 
having its anchor fixed in the bottom of the sea; or it is like the sharp rock circled 
by the eddying whirlpool that foams and beats against it, or like the solid promontory 
pushed from its basis by the force of an earthquake. 

The character of Lear itself is very finely conceived for the purpose. It is the 
only ground on which such a story could be built with the greatest truth and effect. 
It is his rash haste, his violent impetuosity, his blindness to everything but the dic- 
tates of his passions or affections, that produces all his misfortunes, that aggravates 
his impatience of them, that enforces our pity for him. The part which Cordelia 
bears in the scene is extremely beautiful; the story is almost told in the first words 
she utters. We see at once the precipice on which the poor old king stands from his 
own extravagant and credulous importunity, the indiscreet simplicity of her love 
(which, to be sure, has a little of her father’s obstinacy in it), and the hollowness of 
her sisters’ pretensions. Almost the first burst of that noble tide of passion, which 
runs through the play, is in the remonstrance of Kent to his royal master on the 
injustice of his sentence against his youngest daughter: ‘ Be Kent unmannerly, when 
Lear is mad!’ This manly plainness, which draws down on him the displeasure of 
the unadvised king, is worthy of the fidelity with which he adheres to his fallen 
fortunes. The true character of the two eldest daughters, Regan and Goneril (they 
are so thoroughly hateful that we do not even like to repeat their names) breaks out 
in their answer to Cordelia, who desires them to treat their father well: ‘ Prescribe 
not us our duties ’—their hatred of advice being in proportion to their determination 
to do wrong, and to their hypocritical pretensions to do right. Their deliberate 
hypocrisy adds the last finishing to the odiousness of their characters. It is the 
absence of this detestable quality that is the only relief in the character of Edmund 
the Bastard, and that at times reconciles us to him. We are not tempted to exagge- 
rate the guilt of his conduct when he himself gives it up as a bad business and writes 
himself down ‘plain villain.’ Nothing more can be said about it. His religious 
honesty in this respect is admirable... . 

It has been said, and, we think, justly, that the Third Act of O¢keZ/o and the first 
three Acts of Zear are Shakespear’s great master-pieces in the logic of passion; that 
they contain the highest examples, not only of the force of individual passion, but 
of its dramatic vicissitudes and striking effects arising from the different circum- 
stances end characters of-the persons speaking. We see the ebb and flow of the 
feeling, its pauses and feverish starts, its impatience of opposition, its accumulating 
force when it has time to re-collect itself, the manner in which it avails itself of every 
passing word or gesture, its haste to repel insinuation, the alternate contraction and 
dilatation of the soul, and all the ‘dazzling fence of controversy,’ in this mortal com: 
bat with poisoned weapons aimed at the heart, where each wound is fatal. We see 
in O¢hello how the unsuspecting frankness and impetuous passions of the Moor are 


me | MAZLITT- iS 


‘ mn =, = et ie ’ - 
= played upon and exasperated by the artful dexterity of Iago. In the present play, 
: that which aggravates the sense of sympathy in the reader, and of uncontrollable an- 
_ guish in the swollen heart of Lear, is the petrifying indifference, the cold, calculating, 
obdurate selfishness of his daughters. His keen passions. seem whetted on their . 
ie stony hearts. The contrast would be too painful, the shock too great, but for the 
=e intervention of the Fool, whose well-timed levity comes in to break the continuity 
of feeling when it can no longer be borne, and to bring into play again the fibres of 
sy a the heart just as they are growing rigid from over-strained excitement.’ The imagi- 
nation is glad to take refuge in the half-comic, half-serious, comments of the Fool, just 
_ as the mind, under the extreme anguish of a surgical operation, vents itself in sallies 
of wit. The character was also a grotesque ornament of the barbarous times in which 
alone the tragic ground-work of the story could be laid. In another point of view 
ee _ it is indispensable, inasmuch as while it is a diversion to the too great intensity of 
our disgust, it carries the pathos to the highest point of which it is capable, by show- 
ing the pitiable weakness of the old king’s conduct and its irretrievable consequences 
in the most familiar point of view. Lear may well ‘ beat the gate which let his folly 
in’ after, as the Fool says, ‘he has made his daughters his mothers.’ ... 
Shakespear’s mastery over his subject, if it was not art, was owing to a knowledge 
_ of the connecting links of the passions, and their effect upon the mind, still more 
_ wonderful than any systematic adherence to rules, and that anticipated and outdid 
all the efforts of the most refined art, not inspired and rendered instinctive by 
genius.... 
2 ae Four things have struck us in reading Zear- 

I. That poetry is an interesting study, for this reason, that it relates to whatever is 
most interesting in human life. Whoever, therefore, has a contempt for poetry, has 
a contempt for himself and humanity. 

2. That the language of poetry is superior to the language of painting, because 
the strongest of our recollections relate to feelings, not to faces. ; 

3. That the greatest strength of genius is shown in describing the strongest pas- 
sions; for the power of the imagination, in works of invention, must be in propor 
tion to the force of the natural impressions which are the subject of them. 

4. That the circumstance which balances the pleasure against the pain in tragedy 
is, that in proportion to the greatness of the evil, is our sense and desire of the op- 
posite good excited; and that our sympathy with actual suffering is lost in the strong 
impulse given to our natural affections, and carried away with the swelling tide of 
passion that gushes from and relieves the heart. 5; 

The Plain Speaker, 1826 (p. 479, ed. 1870).—Nobody from reading Shakespeare 
would know (except from the Dramatis Persone) that Lear was an English king. 
He is merely a king and a father. The ground is common: but what a well of tears 
has he dug out of it! There are no data in history to go upon; no advantage is 
taken of costume, no acquaintance with geography or architecture or dialect is neces- 
sary; but there is an old tradition, human nature—an old temple, the human mind, 
—and Shakespeare walks into it and looks about him with a.lordly eye, and seizes 
on the sacred spoils as his own. The story is a thousand or two years old, and yet 
the tragedy has no smack of antiquarianism in it. I should like very well to see Sir 
Walter give us a tragedy of this kind, a huge ‘globose’ of sorrow swinging round 
in mid air, independent of time, place, and circumstance, sustained by its own weight 
and motion, and not propped up by the levers of custom, or patched up with quaint, 
old-fashioned dresses, or set off by grotesque backgrounds or rusty armour, but in 


424 APPENDIX 


which the mere paraphernalia and accessories were left out of the question, and 
nothing but the soul of passion and the pith of imagination was to be found. ‘A 
‘dukedom to a beggarly denier,’ he would make nothing out of it. Does this prove 
that he has done nothing, or that he has not done the greatest things? No, but that 
he is not like Shakespeare. For instance, when Lear says, ‘ The little dogs and all, 
‘Tray, Blanche, and Sweetheart, see they bark at me!’ there is no old Chronicle of 
the line of Brute, no J/ack-letter broadside, tattered ballad, no vague rumour, in 
which this exclamation is registered; there is nothing romantic, quaint, mysterious 
in the objects introduced; the illustration is borrowed from the commonest and most 
casual images in nature, and yet it is this very circumstance that lends its extreme 
force to the expression of his grief, by showing that even the lowest things in crea- 
tion, and the last you would think of, had in his imagination turned against him. 
All nature was, as he supposed, in a conspiracy against him, and the most trivial and 
insignificant creatures concerned in it were the most striking proofs of its malignity 
and extent, It is the depth of passion, however, or of the poet’s sympathy with it, 
that distinguishes this character of torturing familiarity in them, invests them with 
corresponding importance, and suggests them by the force of contrast. It is not that 
certain images are surcharged with a prescriptive influence over the imagination from 
known or existing prejudices, or that to approach or even mention them is sure to 
excite a pleasing awe and horror in the mind (the effect in this case is mostly me- 
chanical)—the whole sublimity of the passage is from the weight of passion thrown 
into it, and this is the poet’s own doing. This is not trick, but genius. Meg Mer- 
rilies on her death-bed says, ‘ Lay my head to the East!’ Nothing can be finer or 
more thrilling than this in its way, but the author has little to do withit. Itis an 
Oriental superstition ; it is a proverbial expression; it is a part of the gibberish (sub- 
lime though it be) of her gypsy clan. ‘ Nothing but his unkind daughters could have 
‘brought him to this pass!’ This is not a cant phrase, nor the fragment of an old 
legend, nor a mysterious spell, nor the butt-end of a wizard’s denunciation. It is 
the mere natural ebullition of passion, urged nearly to madness, and that will admit 
no other cause of dire misfortune but its own, which swallows up all other griefs. 
The force of despair hurries the imagination over the boundary of fact and common 
sense, and renders the transition sublime, but there is no precedent or authority for 
it, except in the general nature of the human mind. I think, but am not sure, that 
Sir Walter Scott has imitated this turn of reflection, by making Madge Wildfire 
ascribe Jeanie Dean’s uneasiness to the loss of her baby, which had unsettled her 
own brain, Again, Lear calls on the Heavens to take his part, for ‘they are old 
like him.’ Here there is nothing to prop up the image but the strength of passion, 
confounding the infirmity of age with the stability of the firmament, and equalling 
the complainant, through the sense of suffering and wrong, with the Majesty of the 
Highest. This finding out a parallel between the most unlike objects, because the 
individual would wish to find one to support the sense of his own misery and help- 
lessness, is truely Shakespearian; it is an instinctive law of our nature, and the 
genuine inspiration of the Muse. Racine would make him pour out three hundred 
verses of lamentation for his loss of kingdom, his feebleness, and his old age, coming 


to the same conclusion at the end of every third couplet, instead of making him 
grasp at once at the Heavens for support. 


BLACKWOOD’S MAGAZINE 


(Vol. v, p. 228, May, 1819.)—We have yet to speak of the most pathetic of the 
plays of Shakespeare—Zear. A story unnatural and irrational in its foundation, but, 
at the same time, a natural favourite of tradition, has become, in the hands of Shake- 
speare, a tragedy of surpassing grandeur and interest. He has seized upon that germ 
of interest which had already made the story a favourite of popular tradition, and 
anfolded it into a work for the passionate sympathy of all—young, old, rich, and 
poor, learned, and illiterate, virtuous, and depraved. The majestic form of the kingly- 
hearted old man—the reverend head of the broken-hearted father—‘a head so old 
and white as this’—the royalty from which he is deposed, but of which he can never 
be divested—the father’s heart which, rejected and trampled on by two children, and 
trampling on its one most young and duteous child, is, in the utmost degree, a father’s 
still—the two characters, father and king, so high to our imagination and love, 
blended in the reverend image of Lear—4o¢# in their destitution, yet do¢2 in their 
height of greatness—the spirit blighted, and yet undepressed—the wits gone, and yet 
the moral wisdom of a good heart left unstained, almost unobscured—the wild raging 
of the elements, joined with human outrage and violence to persecute the helpless, 


_ unresisting, almost unoffending sufferer; and he himself in the midst of all imagin- 


able misery and desolation, descanting upon himself, on the whirlwinds that drive 
around him—and then turning in tenderness to some of the wild, motley association 
of sufferers among whom he stands,—all this is not like what has been seen on any 
stage, perhaps in any reality, but it has made a world to our imagination about one 
single imaginary individual, such as draws the reverence and sympathy which should 
seem to belong properly only to living men. It is like the remembrance of some 
wild, perturbed scene of real life. Everything is perfectly woeful in this world of 
woe. The very assumed madness of Edgar, which, if the story of Edgar stood 
alone, would be insufferable, and would utterly degrade him to us, seems, associated 
as he is with Lear, to come within the consecration of Lear’s madness. It agrees 
with all that is brought together :—the night—the storms—the houselessness—Glo’ster 
with his eyes put out—the Fool—the semblance of a madman, and Lear in his mad- 
ness, are all bound together by a strange kind of sympathy, confusion in the elements 
of nature, of human society, and the human soul, 

Throughout all the play is there not sublimity felt amidst the continual presence 
of all kinds of disorder and confusion in the natural and moral world,—a continual 
consciousness of eternal order, law and good? This it is that so exalts it in our 
eyes. There is more justness of intellect in Lear’s madness than in his right senses, 
as if the indestructible divinity of the spirit gleamed at times more brightly through 
the ruins of its earthly tabernacle. The death of Cordelia and the death of Lear 
leave on our minds, at least, neither pain nor disappointment, like a common play 
ending ill; but, like all the rest, they show us human life involved in darkness, and 
conflicting with wild powers let loose to rage in the world, a life which continually 
seeks peace, and which can only find its good in peace—tending ever to the depth 
of peace, but of which the peace is not here. The feeling of the play, to those who 
rightly consider it, is high and calm, because we are made to know, from and through 
those very passions which seem there convulsed, and from the very structure of life 
and happiness that seems there crushed—even in the law of those passions and that 
life—this eternal Truth, that evil must not be, and that good must be. ‘he only 
thing intolerable was, that Lear should, by the very truth of his daughter’s love, be 


36 * 


426 APPENDIX 


separated from her love; and his restoration to her love, and therewith to his own 
perfect mind, consummates all that was essentially to be desired—a consummation 
after which the rage and horror of mere matter-disturbing death seems vain and 
idle. In fact, Lear’s killing the slave who, was hanging Cordelia—bearing her dead 
in his arms—and his heart bursting over her,—are no more than the full consumma- 
tion of their reunited love ;—and there father and daughter lie in final and imper- 
turbable peace. Cordelia, whom we see at last lying dead before us, and over whom 
we shed such floods of loving and approving tears, scarcely speaks or acts in the play 
at all; she appears but at the beginning and the end, is absent from all the impres- 
sive and memorable scenes; and to what she does say there is not much effect given, 
yet, by some divine power of conception in Shakespeare’s soul, she always seems tu 
our memory one of the principal characters; and while we read the play she is con- 
tinually present to our imagination. In her sisters’ ingratitude, her filial love is felt; 
in the hopelessness of the broken-hearted king, we are turned to that perfect hope 
that is reserved for him in her loving bosom; in the midst of darkness, confusion, 
and misery, her form, like a hovering angel, is seen casting its radiance on the storm, 


MRS JAMESON 


(Characteristics of Women, second ed, 1833, ii, 88.) There is in the beauty ot 
Cordelia’s character an effect too sacred for words, and almost too deep for tears; 
within her heart is a fathomless well of purest affection, but its waters sleep in silence 
and obscurity,—never failing in their depth and never overflowing in. their fulness. 
Everything in her seems to lie beyond our view, and affects us in a manner which 
we feel rather than perceive. | The character appears to have no surface, no salient 
points on which the fancy can readily seize; there is little external development of 
intellect, less of passion, and still less of imagination. It is completely made out in 
the course of a few scenes, and we are surprised to find that in those few scenes 
there is matter of a life of reflection, and materials enough for twenty heroines., If 
Lear be the grandest of Shakespeare’s tragedies, Cordelia in herself, as a human 
being, governed by the purest and holiest impulses and motives, the most refined from 
all dross of selfishness and passion, approaches near to perfection ; and in her adapta- 
tion, as a dramatic personage, to a determinate plan of action, may be pronounced 
altogether perfect.“yThe character, to speak of it critically as a poetical conception, 
is not, however, to be comprehended at once, or easily; and, in the same manner, 
Cordelia, as a woman, is one whom we must have loved before we could have known 
her, and known her long before we could have known her truly, 4 

Most people, I believe, have heard the story of the young German artist Miller, 
who, while employed in copying and engraving Raffaelle’s Madonna del Sisto, was 
so penetrated by its celestial beauty, so distrusted his own power to do justice to it, 
that between admiration and despair he fell into a sadness; thence, through the 
usual gradations, into a melancholy, thence into madness; and died just as he had 
put the finishing-stroke to his own matchless work, which had occupied him for 
eight years. With some slight tinge of this concentrated enthusiasm I have learned 
to contemplate the character of Cordelia; I have looked into it till the revelation of 
its hidden beauty, and an intense feeling of the wonderful genius that created it, 
have filled me at once with delight and despair. Like poor Miiller, but with more 
reason, I do despair of ever conveying, through a different and inferior medium, 
the impression made on my own mind to the mind of another. ... 


) 


a’ oe 
: 7 


MRS FAMESON ee ae 


5 the overpowering, interest of the story, amid the terrible convul- 
and suffering, and pictures of moral and physical wretchedness 
A arrow p the soul, the tender influence of Cordelia, like that of a celestial 
, is felt and acknowledged without being understood. Like a soft star that ’ 
for a moment from behind a stormy cloud, and the next is swallowed up in 3 

> atid darkness, the impression it leaves is beautiful and deep, but vague. 
c of Cordelia to a critic or to a general reader, all agree in the beauty of the ; 
ponent: for all must feel it; but when we come to details, I have heard more vari- re 
ous and opposite opinions relative to her than to any other of Shakespeare’s cha- : 
racters—a proof of what I have advanced in the first instance, that from the sim- a 
plicity with which the character is dramatically treated, and the small space it occu- ie 
pies, few are aware of its internal power, of its wonderful depth of purpose. 

It appears to me that the whole character rests upon the two sublimest principles 


= of human action—the love of truth and the sense of duty; but these, when they 
. stand alone (as in the Avfigone), are apt to strike us as severe and cold. Shakespeare 
i < has, therefore, wreathed them round with the dearest attributes of our feminine 
2 nature, the power of feeling and inspiring affection. The first part of the play shows 
- us how Cordelia is loved, the second part how she can love. 

- _ [P. 97.] What is it, then, which lends to Cordelia that peculiar and individual 


truth of character which distinguishes her from every other human being? 

It is a natural reserve, a tardiness of disposition, ‘ which often leaves the history 
*unspoke which it intends to do;’ a subdued quietness of deportment and expres- 
sion, a veiled shyness thrown over all her emotions, her language, and her manner, © 
making the outward demonstration invariably fall short of what we know to be the 
feeling within. Not only is the portrait singularly beautiful and interesting in itself, 
but the conduct of Cordelia, and the part which she bears in the beginning of the 
story, is rendered consistent and natural by the wonderful truth and delicacy with 
which this peculiar disposition is sustained throughout the play. 

In early youth, and more particularly if we are gifted with a lively imagination, 

~ such a character as that of Cordelia is calculated above every other to impress and 
captivate us. Anything like mystery, anything withheld or withdrawn from our 
notice, seizes on our fancy by awakening our curiosity. Then we are won more by 
what we half perceive and half create than by what is openly expressed and freely 
bestowed. But this feeling is a part of our young life; when time and years have 
chilled us, when we can no longer afford to send our souls abroad, nor from our own 
superfluity of life and sensibility spare the materials out of, which we build a shrine 
for our idol—then do we seek, we ask, we thirst for that warmth of frank, confiding 
tenderness, which revives in us the withered affections and feelings, buried, but not 
dead. Then the excess of love is welcomed, not repelled; it is gracious to us as 
the sun and dew to the seared and riven trunk, with its few green leaves. Lear is 
old—‘ four-score and upward’—but we see what he has been in former days; the 
ardent passions of youth have turned to rashness and wilfulness; he is long passed 
that age when,we are more blessed in what we bestow than in what we receive. 
When he says to his daughters, ‘I gave you all!’ we feel that he requires all in re- 
turn, with a jealous, restless, exacting affection which defeats its own wishes. How 
many such are there in the world! How many to sympathize with the fiery, fond 
old man, when he shrinks as if petrified from Cordelia’s quiet, calm reply! 

[P. 114.] In the Avntigone there is a great deal of what may be called the effect 
of situation, as well as a great deal of poetry and character; she says the most beau- 


oj 


* pee a 
=e he re 
tiful things in the world, performs the most heroic actions, and all her words 
actions are so placed before us as to command our admiration. According to € 
classical ideas of virtue and heroism, the character is sublime, and in the delineation — 
there is a severe simplicity mingled with its Grecian grace, a variety, a grandeur, an 
elegance which appeal to our taste and our understanding, while they filland exalt 
the imagination; but in Cordelia it is not the external colouring or form, it is not 
what she says or does, but what she is in herself, what she feels, thinks, and suffers . 
which continually awaken our sympathy and interest, The heroism of Cordelia is 
more passive and tender—it melts into our heart; and in the veiled loveliness and 
unostentatious delicacy of her character there is an effect more profound and artless, 
if it be less striking‘and less elaborate, than in the Grecian heroine. To Antigone 
our admiration, to Cordelia our tears. Antigone stands before us in her austere and 
statue-like beauty like one of the marbles of the Parthenon. If Cordelia remind us 

of anything on earth, it is of one of the Madonnas in the old Italian pictures, ‘ with 

« downcast eyes beneath th’ almighty dove;’ and, as that heavenly form is connected 
with our human sympéthies only by the expression of maternal tenderness, or ma- 
ternal sorrow, even so//Cordelia would be almost too angelic were she not linked to 
our earthly feelings, bound to our very hearts, by her filial love, her wrongs, her 
sufferings, and her tears. i ; 


HALLAM 


(Introduction to the Lit. of Europe, iii, 308, 1837; London, 1869, eighth ed.)— 
If originality of invention did not so much stamp every play of Shakespeare that to ~ 
name one as the most original seems a disparagement to others, we might say that 
this prerogative of genius was exercised above all in Zear. It diverges more from 
the model of regular tragedy than A/acbeth or Othello, and even more than Hamlet ; 
but the fable is better constructed than in the last of these, and it displays full as 
much of the almost superhuman inspiration of the poet as the other two. Lear him- 
self is, perhaps, the most wonderful of dramatic conceptions, ideal to satisfy the most 
romantic imagination, yet idealized from the reality of nature. Shakespeare, in pre- 
paring us for the most intense sympathy with this old man, first abases him to the 
ground; it is not CEdipus against whose respected age the gods themselves have 
conspired; it is not Orestes, noble-minded and affectionate, whose crime has been 
virtue; it is a headstrong, feeble, and selfish being, whom, in the first Act of the 
tragedy, nothing seems capable of redeeming in our eyes; nothing but what follows, 
intense woe, unnatural wrong. Then comes on that splendid madness, not absurdly 
sudden as in some tragedies, but in which the strings that kept his reasoning power 
together give way one after the other in the-frenzy of rage and grief. Then it is 
that we find what in life may sometimes be seen, the intellectual energies grow 
stronger in calamity, and especially under wrong. An awful eloquence belongs to 
unmerited suffering. Thoughts burst out, more profound than Lear in his prosperous 
hour could ever have conceived; inconsequent, for such is the condition of madness, 
but in themselves fragments of coherent truth, the reason of an unreasonable mind. y 

Timon of Athens is cast as it were in the same mould as Lear; it is the same 
essential character, the same generosity, more from wanton ostentation than love of 
others, the same fierce rage under the smart of ingratitude, the same rousing up in 
that tempest of powers that had slumbered unsuspected in some deep recess of the 
soul; for had Timon or Lear known that philosophy of human nature in their calmer 
moments, which fury brought forth, they would never have had such terrible occa- 


in it far more touching than the self-beggary of Timon; though both one and the 
other have prototypes enough in real life. And as we give the old king more of our 
pity, so a more intense abhorrence accompanies his daughters and the evil characters 
of that drama than we spare for the miserable sycophants of the Athenian, . .. There 
seems to have been a period of Shakespeare’s life when his heart was ill at ease, and 
ill-content with the world or his own conscience; the memory of hours mis-spent, 
the pang of affection misplaced or unrequited, the experience of man’s worser nature 
which intercourse with unworthy associates, by choice or circumstance, peculiarly 
teaches ;—these, as they sank down into the depths of his great mind, seem not only 
to have inspired into it the conception of Lear and Timon, but that of one primary 


character, the censurer of mankind, 
t 


SHELLEY 


(Defence of Poetry, Essays, &c., 1840, p. 20.)—The modern practice of blending 
comedy with tragedy, though liable to great abuse in point of practice, is undoubt- 
edly an extension of the dramatic circle; but the comedy should be, as in King 
Lear, universal, ideal, sublime. It is perhaps the intervention of this principle 
which determines the balance in favour of King Lear against Edipus Tyrannus, or 
the Agamemnon, or, if you will, the trilogies with which they are connected; unless 
the intense power of the choral poetry, especially that of the latter, should be con- 
sidered as restoring the equilibrium. img Lear, if it can sustain this comparison, 
may be judged to be the most perfect specimen of the dramatic art existing in the 
world; in spite of the narrow conditions to which the poet was subjected by the 
ignorance of the philosophy of the drama which has prevailed in modern Europe. 


SWINBURNE 


(Fortnightly Rev., 1 Jan., 1876, p. 34.)—I am not minded to say much of Shake- 
speare’s Arthur; there are one or two figures in the world of his work of which 
there are no words that would be fit or good tosay. Another of these is Cordelia. 
The place they have in our lives and thoughts is not one for talk; the niche set apart 
for them to inhabit in our secret hearts is not penetrable by the lights and noises of 
common day. There are chapels in the cathedral of man’s highest art as in that of 
his inmost life, not made to be set open to the eyes and feet of the world. Love and 
death and memory keep charge for us in silence of some beloved names. It is the 
crowning glory of genius, the final miracle and transcendent gift of poetry, that it 
can add to the number of these, and engrave on the very heart of our remembrance 
fresh names and memories of its own creation. 


. 


DENTON J. SNIDER 


(System of Shakespeare's Dramas, vol. i, p. 131, St. Louis, 1877.)—The general 
action of the play has essentially two movements, which pass into each other by the 
finest and most intricate network. There is in it a double guilt and a double retri- 
bution. The first movement (embracing mainly three Acts) exhibits the complete 
disintegration of the family.. It portrays the first guilt and the first retribution—the 
wrong of the parents and its punishment. Lear banishes his daughter ; his daugh- 


“ tag 


> sion to display it. The thoughtless confidence of Lear in his children has something 


ie in turn drive fo out of doors. Gloster expels from I n 
rue and faithful son in favour of the illegitimate cade sae 
— falsely accused and betrayed by the latter. Cordelia, t¢ : S 
attempt to avenge the wrongs of her father. Thus the digeapeiones 
parents expelled, the false triumphant, the faithful in disguise and Cerctnaedt Such | F 
is the first movemenc=<the wrong done by the paren to — children, and its <. 
punishment. = toe 

The second movement will unfold dis second OE a from the oe 
second guilt—the wrong done by the children to their parents, and its punishment. ae i 
It must be observed, however, that the deeds of the children which are portrayed ea 
the first movement of the drama constitute their guilt. On the one hand they are ‘ 
instruments of retribution, but on the other hand their conduct is a violation of 
ethical principles as deep as that of their parents. . They are the avengers of guilt, 
but in this very act become themselves guilty, and must receive punishment. The 
general result, therefore, of the second movement will be the completed retribution. 
Lear and his three guilty daughters—for we have to include Cordelia under this 
category—as well as Gloster and his guilty son, perish. The faithful of both families _ 
% 
~ 


come together, in their banishment, in order to protect their parents; thereby, how- 
ever, Cordelia assails the established State. The consequence of her deed is death, 
The faithless of both families also come together; though they triumph in the 
external conflict, there necessarily arises a struggle among themselves—for how can 
the faithless be faithful to one another? The jealousy of the two sisters leads to a 
conspiracy, and to their final destruction. Edmund, faithless to both, falls at last by 
the hand of his brother, whom he has so deeply wronged. . . . 

[P. 152.] The Fool, too, is present in the tempest, trying to divert the king from 
his thoughts, and to jest away his approaching insanity: but it is to no purpose, —-— 
Wisdom—though, to effect its design, it has assumed the garb of folly—has not suc- 
ceeded. The Fool, therefore, drops out now; his function must cease when Lear is 
no longer rational, but has himself turned fool. It was his duty to reflect the acts 
of the King in their true character, so that the latter might behold what he was 
doing. When intelligence is gone this is impossible. 

[P. 160.] It is manifest that Cordelia is different from what she was in the First 

Act; a new element of her nature seems to have developed itself. Previously we 
saw her rigid moral code and her intellectuality brought into the greatest prominence ; 
now her character, in its softer and more beautiful features is shown; we behold her 
devotion to parent .as well as her intense emotional nature, which, however, she is 
able to keep under perfect control. Still, the germ of this new trait can be found in 
her earlier declarations and demeanour. - In the first Scene—that of the partition— 
she repeatedly expresses her affection for her father: « What shall Cordelia speak ?— 
‘Love and be silent,’ &c. It is not merely the physical repose prescribed by the 
doctor which clears up the clouded intellect of Lear—it is the presence of Cordelia, 
who brings with her a double restoration—that of subjective affection on the one 
hand, and that of objective institutions on the other. It was the loss of these, 
through the conduct of Regan and Goneril, which shattered his reason; sanity, there- 
fore, returns with the return of Cordelia. 

But her third purpose is that which ruins her cause, She brings a French army 
into England to secure to her father his right, as she says, by which she evidently 
means to place him again on the throne. She thus assails the highest ethical insti- 
tution of man—the State—and unwittingly commits herself the greatest wrong, 


Teams 


. ti ee ae 
 SNIDER-HUDSON 


ear h ad resigned his power and divided his kingdom; he had no longer 
any just claim to the crown. Her invasion of the country rouses up against her the 
head of the State, Albany, who was otherwise favourable both to her and to Lear. 
ut he had to defend his own realm, though he hates his associates and loves those 
__+ who are fighting against him. Had Cordelia been satisfied with the restoration of 

her father to his reason and to his family, Albany would have given her both aid 
_and sympathy. However much we may admire her character and regret her fate, 
/ however indignant we may be against her two sisters, still we must, in the end, say 
she did wrong—she violated the majesty of the State. In her affection for parent, 
she attempted to destroy the higher principle for the sake of the lower. The result 
is, she loses the battle, is taken prisoner, and perishes. 

[P. 166.] The action has now completed its revolution, and brought back to all 
the leading characters the consequences of their deeds; the double guilt and the 
double retribution have been fully portrayed. The treatment of children by parents, 
: and of parents by children, is the theme; both fidelity and infidelity are shown in 
* their most extreme manifestation. Two families are taken—that of the monarch 
3 and that of the subject; the former develops within itself its own collisions, free 
, from any external restraint, and hence exhibits the truest and most complete result; 
the latter is largely influenced and determined in its course by authority, but an 
authority which is itself poisoned with domestic conflict. The exhaustiveness of the 
treatment is worthy of careful study. Regan is faithless to parent; Goneril is faith- 
less to both parent and husband; Cordelia is true to both, yet assails another ethical 
, principle—the State. The two sons and the two sons-in-law exhibit also distinct 
-, phases of the domestic tie; they are still further divided, by the fundamental theme 

of the play, into the faithful and faithless—that is, a son and a son-in-law belong to 
each side. But it is a curious fact, that one very important relation of the family is 
wholly omitted—no mother appears anywhere; sonhood, daughterhood, wifehood, 
fatherhood, are all present, but the tenderest bond of existence—motherhood—is 
wanting. The poet evidently does not need it, for the action is already sufficiently 
full and complicated; perhaps, too, the character of the mother may be supposed to 
reappear in some of her children, as, for example, in Cordelia, who is so different 
from her father. But one cannot help commending the true instinct, or, what is more 
likely, the sound judgment, which kept such a mild and tender relation out of the 
cauldron of passion and ingratitude which seethes with such destructive energy in 
this appalling drama. 


HUDSON 


(Tragedy of King Lear, 4to, p. 14, Boston, 1879.)—There is no accounting for 
the conduct of Goneril and Regan but by supposing them possessed with a strong 
original impulse of malignity. The main points of their action were taken from the 
old story. Character, in the proper sense of the term, they have none in the legend, 
and the poet invested them with characters suitable to the part they were believed to 
have acted. : 

Whatever of soul these beings possess is all in the head; they have no heart to 
guide or inspire their understanding, and but enough of understanding to seize oc- 
casions and frame excuses for their heartlessness. Without affection, they are also 
without shame; there being barely so much of human blood in their veins as may 
suffice for quickening the brain without sending a blush to the cheek. With a sort 
of hell-inspired tact, they feel their way to a fitting occasion, but drop the mask as 


ae _ | 
430 eer 7 


432 APPENDIX 


soon as their ends are reached, caring little or nothing for appearances after their 
falsehood has done its work. There is a smooth, glib rhetoric in their professions 
of love, unwarmed with the least grace of real feeling, and a certain wiry virulence 
and intrepidity of mind in their after-speaking that is fairly terrific. No touch of 
nature finds a response in their bosoms; no atmosphere of comfort can abide their 
presence; we feel that they have somewhat within that turns the milk of humanity 
to venom, which all the wounds they can inflict are but opportunities for casting. 

The subordinate plot of the.drama serves the purpose of relieving the improba- 
bility of their behaviour. ... The agreement of the sister-fiends in filial ingratitude 
might seem, of itself, to argue some sisterly attachment between them. So that, to 
bring out their characters truly, it had to be shown that the same principle which 
unites them against their father will, on the turning of occasion, divide them against 
each other. Hence the necessity of setting them forth in relations of such a kind as 
may breed strife between them. In Edmund, accordingly, they find a character 
wicked enough, and energetic enough in his wickedness, to interest their feelings ; 
and, because they are both alike taken with him, therefore they will cut their way to 
him through each other’s life, And it is considerable that their passion for him pro- 
ceeds mainly upon his treachery to his father, as though from such similarity of action 
they inferred a congeniality of mind. For even to have hated each other from love 
of any one but a villain, and because of his villainy, had seemed a degree of virtue 
in beings such as they are... . 

As a portraiture of individual character, Lear himself holds, to my mind, much 
the same pre-eminence over all others which I accord to the tragedy as a dramatic 
composition, The delineation reminds me, oftener than any other, of what some 
one has said of Shakespeare,—that, if he had been the author of the humamheart, 
it seems hardly possible he should have better understood what was in it, and how 
it was made. And here, I think, may be fitly applied to him one of his own descrip- 
tions from his poem entitled 4 Lovers Complaint. 


*So on the tip of his subduing tongue 
All kind of arguments and questions deep, 
All replication prompt, and reason strong, 
For his advantage still did wake and sleep: 
To make the weeper laugh, the laugher weep, 
He had the dialect and different skill, 
Catching all passions in his craft at will.’ 


The poet often so orders his delineations as to start and propel the mind back- 
wards over a large tract of memory. As in real life, the persons, when they first 
come to our knowledge, bring each their several dower of good or evil inherited 
from their past hours. What they are now remembers what they were long ago, and 
in their to-day we have the slow cumulative result of a great many yesterdays. Thus 
even his most ideal characters are invested with a sort of historic verisimilitude; the 
effects of what they thought and did long before still remain with them, and in their 
present speech and action is opened to us a long-drawn vista of retrospection. And 
this is done, not in the way of narrative, but of suggestion; the antecedent history 
being merely implied, not related, in what is given. Sometimes he makes the per- 
sons speak and act from their whole character at once; that is, not only from those 
parts of it which are seen, but from those which lie back out of sight, from hidden 
causes, from motives unavowed, and even from springs and impulses of which the 
subject himself is not conscious. The effect of this is quite remarkable, and such as 


es “HUDSON . 3 


ee Ae é 
to outstrip the swiftest wing of analysis. It sends us right beyond the characters to 
_ Nature herself, and to the common elementary principles of all character, so touch-: 
ing the mind’s receptive powers as to kindle its active and productive powers. 

Lear is among the poet’s finest instances, perhaps his very finest, in this art of his- 
torical perspective. The old king speaks out from a large fund of vanishing recol- 
lections; and in his present we have the odour and efficacy of a remote and varied: 
past. The play forecasts and prepares, from the outset, that superb intellectual ruin 
where we have ‘matter and impertinency mix’d, reason in madness ;’ the earlier 
transpirations of the character being shaped and ordered with a view to that end. 
Certain presages and predispositions of insanity are manifest in his behaviour from 
the first, as the joint result of nature, of custom, and of superannuation. We see in 
him something of constitutional rashness of temper, which, moreover, has long been 
fostered by the indulgences and flatteries incident'to his station, and which, through 
the cripplings of age, is now working loose from the restraints of his manlier judg- 

. ment. He has been a wise and good man, strong in reason, just in feeling, and recti- 
tude of purpose, but is now decidedly past his faculties; which however, as often 
happens, is unapparent to him save as he feels it in a growing indisposition to the 
cares and labours of his office. So that there is something of truth in what Goneril 
says of him; just enough to make her appear the more hateful in speaking of it as 
she does: ‘ The best and soundest of his time hath been but rash; then must we look 
*to receive from his age, not alone the imperfections of long-ingraffed condition, but 
‘therewithal the unruly waywardness that infirm and choleric years bring with them.’ 
He is indeed full of inconstant starts and petty gusts of impatience, such as are ex. 
cusable only in those who have not yet reached, and those who have plainly outlived, 
the period of discretion and self-restraint. . . . 

The first two speeches of the play inform us that the division of the kingdom has 
already been resolved upon, the terms of the division arranged, and the several por- 
tions allotted. This fact is significant, and goes far to interpret the subsequent action, 
inasmuch as it infers the trial of professions to be but a trick of the king’s, designed, 
perhaps, to surprise his children into expressions which filial modesty would else for- 
bid. Lear has a morbid hungering after the outward tokens of affection: he is not 
content to know that the heart beats for him, but craves to feel and count over its 
beatings. The passion is indeed a selfish one, but it is the selfishness of a right 
generous and loving nature. Such a diseased longing for sympathy is not the growth 
of an unsympathizing heart. And Lear naturally looks for the strongest professions 
where he feels the deepest attachment. . 

Men sometimes take a strange pleasure in acting without or against reason; since 
this has to their feelings the effect of ascertaining and augmenting their power; as 
if they could make a right or a truth of their own. It appears to be on some such 
principle as this that arbitrariness, or a making of the will its own reason, sometimes 
becomes a passion in men. Such a stress of self-will proceeds, I apprehend, on much 
the same ground as Sir Thomas Browne’s faith, which delighted in making honours 
for itself out of impossibilities. That certain things could not be, was, he tells us, 
his strongest argument for believing them; that is, he felt the surer of his creed as 
it reversed the laws of thought, and grew by the contradictions of reason, The very 
shame, too, of doing wrong sometimes hurries men into a barring of themselves off 
from retreat. And so it appears to be with Lear in his treatment of Cordelia. In 
the first place, he wz// do the thing because he knows it to be wrong; and then the 
uneasy sense of a wrong done prompts him to bind the act with an oath; that is, 


37 BAS 


> 
because he ought not to have driven the nail, therefore he clinches it. | This actio 
of mind is. indeed abnormal, and belongs to what may be termed the borde land 
of sanity and madness; nevertheless, something very like it is not seldom met with in” 
men who are supposed to be in full possession of their wits. . . - = A 
But the great thing in the delineation of Lear is the effect and progress of his | oe 


? passion in redeveloping his intellect. For the character seems designed in part to ~ 

: illustrate the power of passion to reawaken and raise the faculties from the tomb in aa 

which age has quietly inurned them. And so in Lear we have, as it were, a handful 7 

.’ of tumult embosomed in a sea, gradually overspreading and pervading and convul- : 
sing the entire mass... . ~ "a 


When, however, the truth is forced home, and he can no longer evade or shuffle ae 
__ off the conviction, the effect is indeed terrible. So long as his heart had something 
7 to lay hold of and cling to and rest upon, his mind was the abode of order and 

peace. But, now that his feelings are rendered objectless, torn from their accus- 
tomed holdings, and thrown back upon themselves, there springs up a wild chaos of 
the brain, a whirling tumult and anarchy of the thoughts, which, till imagination has 
time to work, chokes down his utterance. Then comes the inward, tugging conflict, 
deep as life, which gradually works up his imaginative forces, and kindles them to a 
preternatural resplendence. The crushing of his aged spirit brings to light its hidden 
depths and buried riches. Thus his terrible energy of thought and speech, as soon 
cs as imagination rallies to his aid, grows naturally from the struggle of his feelings,—. 
a struggle that seems to wrench his whole being into dislocation, convulsing and 
upturning his soul from the bottom. Thence proceeds, to quote Mr Hallam, ‘that 
‘splendid madness, not absurdly sudden, as in some tragedies, but in which the strings 
‘that keep his reasoning powers together give way one after the other in the frenzy 
‘of rage and grief.’ 

In the transition of Lear’s mind from its first stillness and repose to its subsequent 
tempest and storm; in the hurried revulsions and alternations of feeling,—the fast- 
rooted faith in filial virtue, the keen sensibility to filial ingratitude, the mighty hunger 
of the heart, thrice repelled, yet ever strengthened by repulse; and in the turning-up’ 
of sentiments and faculties deeply imbedded beneath the incrustations of time and 
place ;—in all this we have a retrospect of the aged sufferer’s whole life; the abridged 
history of a mind that has passed through many successive stages, each putting off the 
form, yet retaining and perfecting the grace of the preceding. .. . 

In the trial of professions there appears something of obstinacy and sullenness in 
Cordelia’s answer, as if she would resent the old man’s credulity to her sisters’ lies 
by refusing to tell him the truth, But, in the first place, she is considerately careful 
and tender of him; and it is a part of her religion not to feed his dotage with the 
intoxications for which he has such a morbid craving. She understands thoroughly 
both his fretful waywardness and their artful hypocrisy ; and when she sees how he 
drinks in the sweetened poison of their speech, she calmly resolves to hazard the 
worst, rather than wrong her own truth to cosset his disease. Thus her answer pro- 
ceeds, in part, from a deliberate purpose of love, not to compete with them in the ‘ 
utterance of pleasing falsehoods. 

In the second place, it is against the original grain of her nature to talk much 
about what she feels, and what she intends. Where her feelings are deepest, there 
her tongue is stillest. She ‘cannot heave her heart into her mouth,’ for the simple 
reason that she has so much of it, And there is a virgin delicacy in genuine and 
deep feeling, that causes it to keep in the background of the life; to be heard rather 


HUDSON 435 


in its effects than in direct and open declarations. They love but little who can tell 
how much they love, or who are fond of prating about it. To be staling itself with 
verbal protestations seems a kind of sacrilege and profanation. Thus love is apt to 
be tongue-tied ; and its best eloquence is when it disables speech, and when, from very 
shame of being seen, it just blushes itself into sight. Such is the beautiful instinct 
of true feeling to embody itself sweetly and silently in deeds, lest from showing 
itself in words it should turn to matter of pride and conceit. For a sentimental cox- 
combry is the natural issue of a cold and hollow heart. 


Iti is not strange, therefore, that Cordelia should make it her part to ‘love and_ be. 


silent2-—Yet she is in no Sort a pulpy structure, or one whom it is prudent to trifle 
with, -where her forces are unrestrained by awe of duty: she has, indeed, a delect- 
able smack of her father’s quality; as appears in that glorious flash of womanhood, 
when she so promptly switches off her higgling suitor: 

* Peace be with Burgundy! 


Since that respects of fortune are his love, 
I shall not be his wife.’ 


ee What I have said of Cordelia’s affection holds true of her character generally. 
’ For she has the same deep, quiet reserve of thought as of feeling; so that her mind 
- becomes conspicuous by its retiringness, and draws the attention by shrinking from 
it. Though she nowhere says anything indicating much intelligence, yet she always 
strikes us, somehow, as being very intelligent; and even the more so, that her intel- 
ligence makes no special report of itself. It is as if she knew too much to show her 
knowledge. For the strongest intellects are by no means the most demonstrative; 
often they are the least so. And indeed what Cordelia knows is so bound up with 
her affections, that she cannot draw it off into expression by itself: it is held in per- 
fect solution, so to speak, with the other elements of her nature, and nowhere falls 
down in a sediment, so as to be producible in a separate state. She has a deeper and 
truer knowledge of her sisters than any one else about them; but she knows them 
by heart rather than by head; and so can /ee/ and acé, but not articulate, a prophecy 
of what they will do. Ask her, indeed, what she thinks on any subject, and her 
answer-will be that she thinks,—nay, she cannot ¢e//, she can only show you what 
she thinks. For her thinking involuntarily shapes itself into life, not into speech. ... 
Therefore it is that Cordelia affects us so deeply and so constantly without our 
being able to perceive how or why. And she affects those about her in the same 
insensible way; that is, she keeps their thoughts and feelings busy, by keeping her 
own hidden beneath what she does: an influence goes forth from her by stealth, and 
stealthily creeps into them; an influence which does not appear, and yet is irresist- 
ible, and irresistible even because it does not appear; and which becomes an under- 
current in their minds, circulates in their blood, as it were, and enriches their life 
with a beauty that seems their own, and yet is not their own: so that she steals upon 
us through them; and we think of her the more because they, without suspecting it, 


remind us of her. 
* Powers there are, 


That touch each other to the quick in modes 
Which the gross world no sense hath to perceive, 
No soul to dream of,’ 


No one can see Cordelia, and be the same he was before, though unconscious. the 
while of taking anything from her, It is as if she secretly deposited about his 
person some mysterious, divine aroma which, when he is remote from her and not 


> 
: 


: r : oa. ’ ey a ed = 
thinking of her, keeps giving out its Rema: and testifying, though he know 
that he has been with her. : 

Ac dingly, her father Is her most, a ike. m0 op 


ff from his bounty, but not out of his heart, ne grows full of unr 
_ some secret power about her, like magic, which he cannot live Sa rats ue 
did not dream of its existence when she was with him. And ‘since her going into. 
France the Fool has much pined away’; as though her presence were necessary to 
his health: so that he sickens upon the loss of her, yet suspects not wherefore, and 


knows but that she was sas and his spirits were nimble, she is gone and his spirits ‘ 
are drooping. ... a 
=<. Finally, I know of nothing which to compare Cordelia, nothing to illustrate a 
a Ber character by. An impefsonation of the holiness of; herself al if. 
is her own parallel; all the he objects that lend sean ta 
things, seem dumb“or inéloquent of meaning beside her. Superior; perhaps, to all 


‘ the rest of - espeare’s women i -in-be f character, she i as nevertheléss, sécon 

them as a living and breathing ‘reality. “We see her only in the relation 

of daughter, and hardly see her even there; yet We know what she is, or would be, in 

every relation of life, just as well as if we had seen her in them all. ‘ Formed for ri 
‘all sympathies, moved by all tenderness, prompt for all duty, prepared for all suffer 

‘ing,’ we seem almost to hear her sighs and feel her breath as she hangs, like a min- 
istering spirit, over her reviving father: the vision sinks sweetly and quietly into the 
heart, and, in its reality to our feelings, abides with us more as a remembrance than 
an imagination, instructing and inspiring us as that of a friend whom we had known, 
and loved in our youth. . 

There is a strange acqonlleve of qualities in the Fool, and a strange effect arising 
from their union and position, which I am not a little at a loss how to describe. I+ 
seems hardly possible that Lear’s character should be properly developed without 
him; indeed, he serves as a common gauge and exponent of all the characters about 
him,—the mirror in which their finest and deepest lineaments are reflected. Though 
a privileged person, with the largest opportunity of seeing, and the largest liberty of 
speaking, he everywhere turns his privileges into charities, making the immunities 
of the clown subservient to the noblest sympathies of the man. He is, therefore, by 
no means a mere harlequinian appendage of the scene, but moves in vital intercourse 
with the character and passion of the drama. He makes his folly the vehicle of 
truths which the king will bear in no other shape, while his affectionate tenderness 
sanctifies all his nonsense. His being heralded by the announcement of his pining 
away at the banishment of Cordelia sends a consecration before him; that his spirit 
feeds on her presence hallows everything about him. Lear manifestly loves him, 
partly for his own sake, and partly for hers, for we feel a delicate, scarce-discernible 
play of sympathy between them on Cordelia’s account; the more so, perhaps, that 
neither of them makes any explicit allusion to her; their very reserve concerning 
her indicating that their hearts are too full to speak. 

I know not, therefore, how I can better describe the Fool than as the soul of pathos 
in a sort of comic masquerade; one in whom fun and frolic are sublimed and idealized 
into tragic beauty; with the garments of mourning showing through and softened by 
the lawn of playfulness, His ‘labouring to outjest Lear’s heart-struck i injuries’ tells 
us that his wits are set a-dancing by grief; that his jests bubble up from the depths 
of a heart struggling with pity and sorrow, as foam enwreathes the face of deeply- 


‘HUDSON 437 ie 


; “pabled waters. So have I seen the lip quiver, and the cheek date into a smile, 


to relieve the eye of a burden it was reeling under, yet ashamed to let fall, There 
is all along a shrinking, velvet-footed delicacy of step in the Fool’s antics, as if 
awed by the holiness of the ground; and he seems bringing diversion to the thoughts, 


_ that he may the better steal a sense of woe into the heart. And I am not clear 


whether the inspired antics that sparkle from the surface of his mind are in more 


impressive contrast with the dark tragic scenes into which they are thrown, like 


rockets into a midnight tempest, or with the undercurrent of deep tragic a 
ness out of which they falteringly issue and play. 

_ Our estimate of this drama, as a whole, depends very much on the view we take 
of the Fool; that is, on how we interpret his part, or in what sense we understand 
it. Superficially considered, his presence and action can hardly seem other than a 
blemish in the work and a hindrance to its proper interest. Accordingly, he has 


_been greatly misunderstood, indeed totally misconstrued, by many of the Poet’s critics. 


And it must be confessed, that the true meaning of his part is somewhat difficult to 
seize; in fact, is not to be seized at all, unless one get just the right point of view. 
He has no sufferings of his own to move us, yet, rightly seen, he does move us, and 
deeply too. But the process of his interest is very peculiar and recondite. The 
most noteworthy point in him, and the real key to his character, lies in that, while 
his heart is slowly breaking, he never speaks, nor even appears so much as to think, 
of his own suffering. He seems, indeed, quite unconscious of it. His anguish is 
purely the anguish of sympathy; a sympathy so deep and intense as to induce abso- 
lute forgetfulness of self; all his capacities of feeling being perfectly engrossed with 
the sufferings of those whom he loves, He withdraws from the scene with the 
words, ‘And I’ll go to bed at noon,’ which means simply that the dear fellow is 
dying, and this, too, purely of others’ sorrows, which he feels more keenly than they 
do themselves. She who was the light of his eyes is gone, dowered with her father’s 
curse and strangered with his oath; Kent and Edgar have vanished from his recog- 
nition, he knows not whither, the victims of wrong and crime; the wicked seem to 
be having all things their own way; the elements have joined their persecutions to 
the cruelties of men; there is no pity in the Heavens, no help from the earth; he 
sees nothing but a ‘world’s convention of agonies’ before him; and his straining 
of mind to play assuagement upon others’ woes has fairly breached the citadel of his 
life. But the deepest grief of all has now overtaken him; his old master’s wits are 
all shattered in pieces: to prevent this, he has all along been toiling his forces to the 
utmost; and, now that it has come in spite of him, he no longer has anything to live 
for: yet he must still mask his passion in a characteristic disguise, and breathe out his 
life in a play of thought. I know not whether it may be rightly said of this hero in 
motley, that he 


‘hopes, till Hope creates 
- From its own wreck the thing it contemplates.’ 


Need it be said that such ideas of human character could grow only where the 
light of Christianity shines? The Poet’s conceptions of virtue and goodness, as 
worked out in this drama, are thoroughly of the Christian type,—steeped, indeed, in 
the efficacy of the Christian Ideal. The old Roman conception of human goodness, 
as is well known, placed it in courage, patriotism, honesty, and justice,—very high and 
noble indeed; whereas, the proper constituents of the Christian Ideal are, besides 
these, and higher than these, mercy, philanthropy, self-sacrifice, forgiveness of in- 


Me 


= 


resist 
ly unable to 


. ; : ns ae = yb Peete 
ing my thorough admiration for Mr Hudson’s zsthetic criticisms. _ 
student can afford to overlook them.—Ep.] 2 


ACTORS 


CoLuier (Eng. Dram. Poetry, iii, 274, second ed. 1879): To the list of characters 
in plays by Shakespeare sustained by BURBAGE, we have still to add Lear and Shylock, 
: so that we may safely decide that he was the chosen representative of all, or nearly 
rm all, the serious parts in the productions of our great dramatist. . . . How far the 
e. knowledge, on the part of Shakespeare, that he had a performer at his service,on = 
° whom he could always rely, may have tended to the perfection of some of the great 
a - works he has left us, is matter of interesting speculation... [Ina list of the parts = 
which ‘we now know Burbage represented,’ and ‘the dates at which we have rea- 
‘son to believe they were brought upon the stage,’ Collier gives ‘Lear 1605.2 Onp. hy 
. 299 of this same volume, Collier gives an ‘ Elegy upon Burbage, which was copied = 
> ‘many years ago from a manuscript in the possession of the late Mr Heber.’ The =* 
: lines referring to Lear are as follows]: ai 


‘Thy stature small, but every thought and mood 
Might thoroughly from thy face be understood; 
And his whole action he could change with ease 
From ancient Lear to youthful Pericles.’ 


[Another version of this Elegy, or rather an extract from another Elegy, is given 
in INGLEBY’s Centurie of Prayse (p. 131, second ed. 1879), which contains the fol- 
lowing: 


“no more young Hamlett, ould Heironymoe 
kind Leer, the Greued Moore, and more beside, 
that liued in him; haue now for euer dy’de.’ &c. 


The next actor of Lear, of any note, was probably BETTERTON. DownkEs, in his 
Roscius Anglicanus, in a list of the plays acted between 1662 and 1665, gives ‘The 
‘Tragedy of King Lear as Mr Shakespear wrote it before it was altered by Mr Tate.’ 
When afterwards Downes mentions Zeav, as acted in 1671 or 1672, ‘as Mr Shake- 
‘spear wrote it,’ DAviss, in a foot-note, says, ‘there can be no doubt that Betterton 
‘acted the part of Lear,’ and that probably ‘ Nokes acted the Fool.’ Tweity years 


after this, we find Betterton still acting it, but in Tate’s version. The next great 
actor was GARRICK. ] 


ae ee 
TARRICK 
_ 
a GARRICK 
me! ‘ 
Life of Garrick, i, 27): [When] GARRICK undertook the difficult character 
_of King Lear, he was transformed into a feeble old man, still retaining an air of royalty. 
"Quin, at the time, was admired in that character, but to express a quick succession 
was not his talent. BARRy, some years after, ventured to try his strength i 
Bm 5: 1 this dow of Ulysses, and certainly, with a most harmonious and pathetic voice, was a 
pet 2 - able to affect the heart in several passages, but he could not, with propriety, repre- : 
_--——s sent the old king out of his senses. He started, took long and hasty steps, stared 


-; 


[Pe a. 


a 


i about him in a vague, wild manner, and his voice was, by no means, in unison with “ 
Foose the sentiment. It was in Lear’s madness that Garrick’s genius was remarkably dis- a 
‘a tinguished. He had no sudden starts, no violent gesticulation; his movements were 

_--_ slow and feeble; misery was depicted in his countenance; he moved his head in the 4 
v% ’ most deliberate manner; his eyes were fixed, or, if they turned to any one near him, , 
x he made a pause, and fixed his look on the person after much delay ; his features, at : 
_--—s«éatihe: same time, telling what he was going to say before he uttered a word. During - ' 
the whole time he presented a sight of woe and misery, and a total alienation of 
mind from every idea but that of his unkind daughters. He was used to tell how 

_ he acquired the hints that guided him when he began to study this great and difficult 

3 part ; he was acquainted with a worthy man, who lived in Leman Street, Goodman’s 

“B Fields ; this friend had an only daughter about two years old; he stood at his dining- : 

3 room window, fondling the child, and dangling it in his arms, when it was his mis- r 

re fortune to drop the infant into a flagged area, and killed it on the spot. He remained 


at his window screaming in agonies of grief. The neighbours flocked to the house, 
ts took up the child, and delivered it dead to the unhappy father, who wept bitterly, 
ee and filled the street with lamentations. He lost his senses, and from that moment 
never recovered his understanding. As he had a sufficient fortune, his friends chose 
to let him remain in his house, under two keepers appointed by Dr Munro, Garrick 
frequently went to see his distracted friend, who passed the remainder of his life in 
going to the window, and there playing in fancy with his child. After some dalliance 
he dropped it, and, bursting into a flood of tears, filled the house with shrieks of 
grief and bitter anguish. He then sat down, in a pensive mood, his eyes fixedon 
one object, at times looking slowly round him, as if to implore compassion. Garrick 
was often present at this scene of misery, and was ever after used to say, that it gave 
him the first idea of King Lear's madness. ‘This writer has often seen him rise in 
company to give a representation of this unfortunate father. He leaned on the back 
of a chair, seeming with parental fondness to play with a child, and, after expressing 
the most heartfelt delight, he suddenly dropped the infant, and instantly broke out 
in a most violent agony of grief, so tender, so affecting, and pathetic that every eye 
in the company was moistened with a gush of tears. ‘There it was,’ said Garrick, 
‘that I learned to imitate madness; I copied nature, and to that owed my success in 
‘King Lear.’ It is wonderful to tell, that he descended from that first character in 
tragedy to the part of Abel Drugger; he represented the tobacco-boy in the truest 
comic style; no grimace, no starting, no wild gesticulation. He seemed to be a new 
man, Hogarth, the famous painter, saw him in Richard III, and on the following 
night in Abel Drugger; he was so struck that he said to Garrick, * You are in your 
‘element when you are begrimed with dirt or up to your elbows in blood.’ 


4h KEAN 

k. H. Dana ( The Idle Man,* p. 35, New York, 1821): A man has feelings e- 
‘times which can only be breathed out,—there is no utterance for them in words. I 
had hardly written this, when the terrible and indistinct ‘Ha!’ with which Mr Kean — 
‘makes Lear hail Cornwall and Regan, as they enter, in the fourth scene of the Second — 
Act, came to my mind. It seemed at the time to take me up and sweep me along in 
its wild swell. No description in the world could give a very clear notion of the sound. — 
It must be formed as well as it may be, from what has just been said of its effect.... 
. It has been so common a saying, that Lear is the most difficult of all characters to 
personate, that we had taken it for granted no man could play it so as to satisfy us. 
‘Perhaps it is the hardest to represent. Yet the part which we have supposed the 
‘most difficult, the insanity of Lear, is scarcely more so than the choleric old king. 
Inefficient rage is almost always ridiculous; and an old man, with a broken-down 
body, and a mind falling in pieces from the violence of its uncontrolled passions, is 
in constant danger of exciting our contempt along with our pity. It is a chance 
matter which we are moved to. And this it is which makes the opening of Lear so 
difficult. ... ; 

In most instances, Shakspeare has given us the gradual growth of a passion, with 
all such little accompaniments as agree with it, and go to make up the whole man. 
In Lear, his object being to represent the beginning and course of insanity, he has 
properly enough gone a little back of it, and introduced us to an old man of good 
feelings, but who had lived without any true principle of conduct, whose ungoverned 
passions had grown strong with age, and were ready upon any disappointment to 
make shipwreck of an intellect always weak. To bring this about, he begins with 
an abruptness rather unusual, and the old king rushes in before us, as it were, with 
all his passions at their height, tearing him like fiends. 

Mr Kean gives this as soon as a fit occasion offers itself. Had he put more of 
melancholy and depression, and less of rage, into the character, we should have 
been very much puzzled at his so suddenly going mad. The change must have been 
slower; and, besides, his insanity must have been of another kind. It must have 
been monotonous and complaining, instead of continually varying; at one time full 
of grief, at another playful, and then wild as the winds that roared about him, and 
fiery and sharp as the lightning that shot by him. The truth with which he conceived 
this was not finer than his execution of it. Not for an instant, in his utmost violence, 
did he suffer the imbecility of the old man’s anger to touch upon the ludicrous; 
when nothing but the most just conception and feeling of the character could have 
saved him from it. ; 

It has been said that Lear was a study for any one who would make himself 
acquainted with the workings of an insane mind. There is no doubt of it. And it 
is not less true that Mr Kean was as perfect an exemplification of it. His eye, when 
his senses are first forsaking him, giving a questioning look at what he saw, as if all 
before him was undergoing a strange and bewildering change which confused his 
brain—the wandering, lost motions of his hands, which seemed feeling for something 
familiar to them, on which they might take hold, and be assured of a safe reality— 


** When a number of a periodical published by the poet Dana, called The Idle Man, was put 
into his [Kean’s] hands, he read an analysis of his acting which it contained with the geatttent atten- 
tion, and at the close said, with evident gratification: ‘This writer understands me; he is a philo- 
sophical man. I shall take his work across the water.’—Hawkins’s Life of Kean, ii, 168.—Ep. 


) ‘ounded him—the continuous, but slight Greniaine motion of the cet ie 
sed, with fearful truth, the dreamy state of a mind fast unsettling, and 
‘making \ vain and weak efforts to find its way back to its wonted reason. There was 


; a childish, feeble gladness in the eye, and a half-piteous smile about the mouth at 


, which one could scarce look upon without shedding tears. As the derange- 
ment Ricrtasad upon him, his eye lost its notice of what surrounded him, wandering 


over everything as if he saw it not, and fastening upon the creatures of his crazed 


brain. The helpless and delighted fondness with which he clings to Edgar as an 
insane brother is another instance of the justness of Mr Kean’s conceptions. Nor 
does he lose the air of insanity even in the fine moralizing parts, and where he 


inveighs against the corruptions of the world, There is a madness even in his = 


reason. é 

The violent and immediate changes of the passions in Lear, so hard to manage 
without offending us, are given by Mr Kean with a spirit and fitness to nature which 
we had not imagined possible. These are equally well done both before and after 
he loses his reason. The most difficult scene in this respect is the last interview 
between Lear and his daughters, Goneril and Regan—(and how wonderfully does 
Mr Kean carry it through!)—the scene which ends with the horrid shout and cry 


‘with which he runs out mad from their presence, as if his very brain was on fire. 


The last scene which we are allowed to have of Shakspeare’s Lear, for the sim- 
ply pathetic, was played by Mr Kean with unmatched power. We sink down helpless 
under the oppressive grief. It lies like a dead weight upon our bosoms. We are de- 
nied even the relief of tears; and are thankful for the startling shudder that seizes 
us when he kneels to his daughter in the deploring weakness of his crazed grief. 

Mr Kean is never behind his author; but stands forward the living representative 
of the character he has drawn. When he-plays out of Shakspeare, he fills up where 
his author is wanting, and when in Shakspeare, he gives not only what is set down, 
but all that the situation and circumstances attendant upon the being he personates, 
could possibly call forth. He seems at the time to have possessed himself of 
Shakspeare’s imagination, and to have given it body and form, Read any scene 
of Shakspeare—for instance, the last of Zear that is played, and see how few words 
are there set down, and then remember how Kean fills it out with varied and mul- 
tiplied expressions and circumstances, and the truth of this remark will be too 
obvious for any one to deny. There are few men living, I believe, let them have 
studied Shakspeare ever so attentively, who can say that Mr Kean has not helped 
them as much to a true conception of him, as their own labour had done for them 


before. 


Hawkins (Life of Kean, ii, 116): The death of George III. [in 1820] removed the 
taboo constituted by the applicability of King Lear to the mental derangement which 
clouded the latter days of that firm, just, and equitable prince, and the tragedy was 
forthwith put in rehearsal both at Covent-garden and Drury-lane theatres. At the 
former an excellent cast was provided, Lear being assigned to Booth, Edmund to 
Macready, and Edgar to Charles Kemble. .. . He [Kean] ordered King Lear to be 
announced for the 24th of April. He assigned the Earl of Kent to Dowton, Edgar 
to Rae, and Cordelia to Mrs West, During his absence from the metropolis, his private 
rehearsals of the character had been almost unintermittent; and, as an illustration 
of his painstaking care, it may be recorded that on one occasion he acted scene after 


scene before the pier-glass from Se, noonday. e his 
Drury Lane he had never lost an opportunity of improvin. tain 
so anxious was he to impart truth and natural colouring to his saree 
order to observe the details and manifestations of real insanity, he constan' 
St. Luke’s and Bethlehem hospitals ere he appeared in the old king; and, tranq! 
relying upon the unfailing fertility of his intellectual resources, he anticipated ; 
effort as the last seal of his theatrical renown. ... He knew that, when he came to © 
the trial, his mind would be thoroughly imbued with the properties of the character 
... and, fearless as to the result, he quietly said ‘that he would make the audience 
«as mad as he himself should be.’. . . The expectation excited by the announcement = 
on the Covent-garden bills was doomed to be but partially realized, inasmuch as a : 
just interpretation of the character continued, as far as Booth was concerned, to re- ~*~ 
main a desideratum to the stage. In Lear his talents were buried, . . . George Fred- 
erick Cooke, wnapproachable in his day as Iago and Richard, overrated his powers + 
when he thought he could play Lear. . . . On the 24th of April [1820] Kean appeared - 
in the character of Lear for the first time. . . . Bannister adjudged it superior to Gar- 
rick’s; an enthusiastic admirer of Kemble allowed that it surpassed the fine delinea- 
tion given by his idol... . Who that once heard can ever forget the terrors of that 
terrific curse, where, in the wild storm of his conflicting passion, he threw himself 
on his knees, ‘lifted up his arms, like withered stumps, threw his head quite back 

‘and, in that position, as if severed from all that held him to society, breathed a 
‘heart-struck prayer, like the figure of a man obtruncated ?’ 

[A criticism on this performance appeared in Blackwood’s Magazine, frou which 
the following extracts are taken:] ‘In the first scene there was nothing to call for 
very particular notice. There was no approach to mock dignity, yet nothing like a 
want of the real, but a perfect propriety of conception and demeanour throughout. 
The rebuke to Cordelia, and the sudden change of his intentions towards her in 
consequence of her apparent coldness, were the evident results, not of the violated 
affections of a father, but the wounded pride of a king, accustomed throughout a 
long life to believe that his wishes and his will are essentially entitled to bear sway 
in all things. When he exclaims, ‘So be my grave my peace, as here I give My 
‘heart from her,’ &c., it is not the outraged parent cut off for ever from the undu- 
tiful child, but the ‘choleric king,’ pettishly spurning the control of reason and of 
right, because he had not been used to listen to them. And it was the same in the 
expression of his anger against the interference of Kent. It was not the real indig- 
nation resulting from violated confidence, but the conventional appearance of it in 
the vindication of affronted majesty. 

‘After this follows the scene with Goneril and Albany, in which he observes that 
they purposely slight him. Here the pride of the insulted monarch begins to give 
way before the rage and agony of the outraged father; or, rather, the two cha- 
racters, with the feelings attendant upon them, are blending together in the most 
extraordinary and impressive manner. The fearful curse at the close of this scene 
was given with tremendous force. It seemed to be screwed out of the bodily frame 
as if by some mechanical power set in motion by means independent of the will, 
and at the end the over-excited and exhausted frame, sinking beneath the supernatural 
exertion, seemed to crack and give way altogether. 

‘The next scene is the finish of the whole performance, and certainly it is the 
noblest execution of lofty genius that the modern stage has witnessed »—always ex- 
cepting the same actor’s closing scene in the Third Act of O¢hello. It is impossible 


for words to convey anything like an adequate description of the extraordinary act- 
ing in the whole of this scene—of the electrical effect produced from the transition 
from ‘ Bid em come forth and hear me,’ &c. to *O! are you come?’—the mingled 


7 — 


- 


Suspicion and tenderness with which he tells Regan of Goneril’s treatment of him; 
the exquisite tone of pathos thrown into the mock petition to Regan, ‘I confess that 
«Iam old,’ &c.; the wonderful depth and nobility of expression given to the ironical 
speech to Goneril,‘I did not bid the thunder-bearer strike,’ &c. ; the pure and touch- 


_ ing simplicity of «I gave you all’; and lastly, the splendid close of this scene with 


the speech, ‘ Heavens, drop your patience down,’ &c., in which the bitter delight of 
anticipated revenge, and the unbending sense of habitual dignity, contend against 
the throes and agonies of a torn and bursting heart. : 

“Of the Third Act, containing the scenes with Kent and Edgar during the storm, 


we must speak more generally. There may probably be some difference of opinion’ 


as to the manner in which these scenes were given, but, to our thinking, Mr Kean 
never evinced more admirable judgement than in choosing what appears to us to 
have been the only practicable course which the nature of his subject left him. The 
Lear of Shakespeare,—at least this part of it,—requires to be made intelligible to 
the senses through the medium of the imagination. The gradual, and at last total, 
breaking of the waters from the mighty deep of the human heart which takes place 
during these scenes would be intolerable in all the bareness, and with all the force, 
of reality. If it were possible to exhibit the actual Lear of Shakespeare on the 
stage, the performance must be forbidden by law. We really believe Mr Kean felt 
something of this kind, and studied and performed these scenes accordingly. He 
did not give a Zortrait, but a shadow of them. They came upon us in their different 
aspects, not as animated images of Lear, but as dreamlike recollections of him. Not 
so the scenes which remain to be spoken of, viz: the mad scene in the Fourth Act, 
and that in which he recovers his senses and recognizes his daughter Cordelia, in the 
Fifth. These were as true to nature and to Shakespeare as the most exquisite delicacy 
of conception, consummate judgement and taste, and an entire command over the 
springs of passion and pathos, could make them. In particular, the short scene where 
Lear wakes from slumber and recognizes Cordelia was beautiful in the highest de- 
gree, The mild pathos of his voice, and the touching simplicity of his manner, when 
he kneels down before her and offers to drink poison if she has it for him, can never 
be forgotten. In speaking of what is (rather coarsely) called the mad scene, we ne- 
glected to note the noble burst of dignified energy with which Lear exclaimed, ‘ Ay, 
‘every inch a king,’ and also the action all through the scene. His hands were as 
wandering and as unsettled as his senses, and as little under the control of habit or 
will, This was a very delicate touch of nature, and perfectly original... . 

‘ The only plausible objection that has been or that can be made to any part of this 
performance is, that in the mad scenes there is too little vehemence and variety. 
But this objection is made by persons who forget that Lear was a very foolish, fond 
old man, fourscore and upwards; and the profound knowledge of human life, and 
the piercing glance into the human heart, which he exhibited in these scenes, might 
be supposed to have come to him,—as they came to Shakespeare himself,—not by 
observation and sentiment, but by something which ordinary mortals can conceive of 
as nothing less than a species of direct inspiration,—some mysterious influence totally 
independent of the immediate state of the actual feelings and faculties,—and that 
therefore they would be likely to be dealt forth, not amidst the throes and agonies 
of the priestess delivering the sacred oracles from the tripod, but with the calm and 


444 DY  APRENDIN. ~ Se ee 


£ 


people.’ 


(Hawkins’s Life, ii, p. 2t2.)—Acting upon his own fine notion of the pencil and 


genius of Shakespeare, and stimulated by Hazlitt’s remonstrances and Charles Lamb’s 


Essays, Kean now [1823] determined to restore the previously rejected text of King 
Lear to the Fifth Act, thereby saving the audience from the unnatural and impossible 


recovery of the old king, and the consummation of the mawkish and improbable 
lh ves of Edgar and Cordelia, ‘That,’ said he on one occasion to his wife, during 
their residence at Bute in the previous summer, indicating with his finger the last 
scene in Lear, ‘is the sacred page I am yet to expound,’ The delight with which 
the intellectual world hailed this judicious restoration was great and unequivocal. ... 
Considerable disappointment was felt when it was found that the return to originality 
did not extend to the removal of the inconsistent love-scenes which deface the daugh- 
terly excellence of Cordelia, together with the despicable trash of poetical justice 
introduced by Tate in justification of his absurd alterations;. but the original catas- 
trophe, as written by Shakespeare, afforded Kean an opportunity of making what 
proved in his hands to be one of the most powerful appeals to the heart of which the 
stage has ever boasted, ‘The London audience have no notion of what I can do 
until they see me over the dead body of Cordelia.’ That had been his invariable 
exclamation whenever it was contended that nothing could be more sublime, more 
grand, more impressive than his Othello; and there he knelt, the cherished hope of 
years converted into reality at last, a dense and overflowing audience hanging with 
breathless attention on every word that fell from his lips, and many and many a 
tearful eye bearing testimony to the power with which he delineated the agonies of 
a broken heart. No language can do justice to his excellence. There was.no rant, 
no violence of action; all was characteristic only of the child-changed father. Stu 
pefied with grief and years, he was dead to all but the corpse before him; and to 
this the last glimmerings of sense and feeling were directed. His first intent gaze 
upon the dead—his childish yet earnest action in watching for the motion of the 
feather which should denote that the vital spark still smouldered—his involuntary 
clasping of her hands,—his address to her in the very dotage of despair,—his familiar 
yet pathetic exclamation, ‘Oh, thou wilt come no more, never, never,’ as if he had 
caught up some household words and fitted them to the sad emergency—his last 
pointing to her lips with his finger trembling in death ;—description is set at defiance, 


DEVRIENT 


Uxrict (Sh. Fahrbuch, 1867): Louis Devrient was, in the estimation of the great 
public, as well as in that of the critics, one of the most distinguished representatives 
of Shakespeare on the stage in recent times, not indeed in all the leading characters 
of the Poet,—he lacked the physical strength and stature for Macbeth, Othello, and 
Coriolanus,—but Lear, Richard III, Mercutio, Iago, Hubert, Shylock, Falstaff, he 
played to the end of his professional career. I well recollect here on the Berlin 
stage, and also at a later period, his spare figure of ordinary height, his intellectual 
countenance, his sharp-pointed, aquiline nose, his finely-cut mouth, his large, fiery 
eyes, his peculiar flexibility of body, his long, lean hands, so full of expression, His 
hands and his powerful eyes, joined with the play of his features, were almost his 
only means of representation, He could not produce any effect by attitudinizing, for 
there was nothing imposing in his personal presence; neither did his power lie in 


ellaeand fervour of the priest who was appointed to repeat those oracles to the 


1€ Betoes: Thus there were ‘left to =e only fs organs of the ee 


: gaa Patanet int closest relation to the soul. Hence his acting was at once a sublima- 


tion of physical expression and an incarnation of the spiritual; it was upon this 
_ ascendency of the power and authority of the spiritual over the sensuous appearance 
that at the peculiar charm of his artistic productions especially rested. 

One of his most distinguished parts was the representation of Lear,—a part in 
which, as in no other part, the heaviest weight of tragic suffering stands opposed to 
the smallest measure of action and power of endurance, a part in which all depends 
upon giving full expression to this deep, agonizing‘ suffering by which the king is 
crushed. I mention this part in particular because a comparison of Devrient’s acting 
with that of other celebrated actors affords me an opportunity of offering some 
remarks upon the much-criticised first scene of the first Act,—the exposition of the 
piece. As well as I can remember, in his appearance in this scene Devrient shows 
no trace of sadness, of ill-humor, or of a rough, despotic demeanor; with the expres- 
sion of kingly dignity there was united rather, one of gentleness, contented and serene. 


Indeed the character of the king must have had, originally, a happy element, a fond> 


ness for jesting and merriment; his relation to the Fool, whom he evidently loved 
almost as much as the Fool loved him. In this temper, glad to be able to relieve 
himself of the burthen of the government, with no foreboding of the fearful future, 
he sets himself to execute the act, which is to prove so calamitous tohim. The 
determination to abdicate and divide his kingdom among his daughters, he had come 
to some time before, which plainly appears from the words with which the piece 
opens, and to which Shakespeare certainly did not give so significant‘a place at the 
very beginning of the whole without design. .. . 

Devrient’s acting in the scenes of Lear’s madness presented no unnatural or exag- 
gerated motions; he acted those scenes almost wholly with his eyes, supporting the 
expression of his looks only by a corresponding play of feature and by a singu- 
larly significant motion of his fingers and hands. That by such simple means he 
produced such a powerful effect, he owed altogether to the fact that by nature he 
possessed large, full eyes. To any one not possessed of this gift, it would be diffi- 
cult, if not impossible, to produce like striking effects. But it only follows that one, 
not thus gifted, must either renounce the acting of Lear, or content himself with a 


less effect; together with the mad scenes, the part offers places enough to attest the 


mastery of the artist; and when that is apparent, it will not fail to command the 
approval and applause of the public. At all events, let no artist, who desires to 
deserve the name, permit himself ever to speculate upon the ignorance of the public, 
and aim, by a false representation, at effects which the nature of the subject and his 
own personality deny to him. This principle is the more strictly to be held to, the 
more urgently our realistic age insists upon nature and the truth of nature, and 
demands of the artist that he shall banish all idealistic elements from his acting. 
For bare nature is only artistic when it appears in clear, unsophisticated truth, because 
the kernel of truth bears at the same time the germ, although only the germ, of 
beauty. 


38 


iS Pee 


COSTUME — aS. 


ee 


Hs, ? a ae cae 4 
Sir WALTER Scorr (Quarterly Review, April, 1826): Before Kemble’s time there 


was no such thing as regular costume observed in our theatres. The actors repre- : 
sented Macbeth and his wife, Belvidera and Jaffier, and most other parts, whatever 
the age or country in which the scene was laid, in the cast-off court dresses of the 
nobility. Kemble used to say, that the modern dresses of the characters in the well- 
known print of a certain dramatic dagger-scene, made them resemble the butler and 
housekeeper struggling for the carving-knife. Some few characters, by a sort of pre- 
scriptive theatrical right, always retained the costume of their times—Falstaff, for 
example, and Richard III. But such exceptions only rendered the general appear- 
ance more anomalous. We have seen Yane Shore acted, with Richard in the old 
English cloak, Lord Hastings in a full court dress, with his white rod like a Lord 
Chamberlain of the last reign, and Jane Shore and Alicia in stays and hoops. We 
have seen Miss Young act Zara incased in whalebone, to an Osman dressed properly 
enough as a Turk, while Nerestan, a Christian knight in the time of the Crusades, 
strutted in the white uniform of the old French guards. These incongruities were 
perhaps owing to the court of Charles II. adopting, after the Restoration, the French 
regulation that players, being considered as in the presence of their sovereign, should 
wear the dress of the court drawing-room, while in certain parts.the old English 
custom was still retained, which preserved some attempt at dressing in character. 
Kemble reformed all these anachronisms, and prosecuted with great earnestness @ 
plan of reforming the wardrobe of the stage, collecting with indefatigable diligence 
from illuminated manuscripts, ancient pictures, and other satisfactory authorities, 
whatever could be gleaned of ancient costume worthy of being adopted on the 
theatre. Rigid and pedantic adherence to the dresses of every age was not possible 
or to be wished for. In the time when Lear is supposed to have lived, the British 
were probably painted and tattooed, and, to be perfectly accurate, Edgar ought to 
have stripped his shoulders bare before he assumed the character of Poor Tom. 
Hamlet, too, if the Amlethus of the Saxo Grammaticus, should have worn a bear- 
skin instead of his inky suit; and, whatever Macbeth’s garb should have been, of 
course a philabeg could have formed no part thereof. But, as the poet, carrying 
back his scene into remote days, retains still, to a certain extent, the manners and 
sentiments of his own period, so it is sufficient for the purpose of costume if every- 
thing be avoided which can recall modern associations, and as much of the antique 
be assumed as will at once harmonize with the purpose of the exhibition, and in so 
far awaken recollections of the days of yore as to give an air of truth to the scene. 
Every theatrical reader must recollect the additional force which Macklin gave to 
the Jew at his first appearance in that character, when he came on the stage dressed 
with his red hat, peaked beard, and loose black gown, a dress which excited Pope’s 
curiosity, who desired to know in particular why he wore a red hat. Macklin re- 
plied modestly, because he had read that the Jews in Venice were obliged to wear 
hats of that ilies ‘And pray, Mr Macklin,’ said Pope, ‘do players in general 
sia such pains ? ‘I do not know, sir,’ said Macklin, ¢ that they do, but, as I had 
staked my reputation on the character, I-was determined to spare no trouble in 
‘getting at the best information.’ Pope expressed himself much pleased. 


a 


vhole life “Kemble was intent on improving, by all means which oc- 
accuracy of the dresses he wore while in character. Macbeth was one 
plays i in which the better system of costume was adopted, and he wore 
d dress, as old Macklin had done before him. Many years afterwards 
was, delighted when, with our own critical hands, which have plucked many a 
plume e besides, we divested his bonnet of sundry huge bunches of black feathers, 

i saci made it look like an undertaker’s cushion, and replaced them with the single 
i es broad quill-feather of an eagle sloping across the noble brow; he told us afterwards 
i that the change was worth to him three distinct rounds of applause as he came for- 
ward in this improved and more genuine head-gear. 

With the subject of dress, modes of disposing and managing the scenes are nat- 
urally connected, and here also Kemble, jealous of the dignity of his art, called in 
the assistance of able artists, and improved in a most wonderful degree the appear- 
ld ance of the stage, and the general effect of the piece in representation. Yet, in our 
a opinion, the Muse of Painting should be on the stage the hand-maid, not the rival, 
E.” of her sisters of the drama. Each art should retain its due predominance within its 
“al own proper region. Let the scenery be as well painted, and made as impressive as 

a moderate-sized stage will afford; but, when the roof is raised to give the scene- 
| painter room to pile Pelign upon Ossa, when the stage is widened that his forests 
- may be extended, or deepened that his oceans may flow in space apparently in- 
4 J terminable, the manager who commands these decorations is leaving his proper duty, 
De and altering entirely the purpose of the stage. Meantime, as the dresses ought to be 
suited to the time and country, the landscape and architecture should be equally 
coherent. Means may besides be discovered, from time to time, tending to render 
the scenic deception more effective, and the introduction of such must be advan- 
tageous, provided always, that this part of theatrical business be kept in due subordi- 
tion to that which is strictly dramatic. 


VERPLANCK: The tale of Lear and his ‘three daughters fair’ belongs to the 
domain of old romance and popular tradition, and, told in poem, ballad, and many 
ruder ways, had become familiar to the English people. It belongs to that unreal 
‘but most potently believed history’ whose heroes were the household names of 
Europe,—Saint George and his brother-champions, King Arthur and Charlemagne, 
Don Belliani, Roland and his brother-Paladins, and many others, for part of whom 
time has done, among those ‘ who speak the tongue that Shakespeare spoke,’ what the 
burning of Don Quixote's library was meant to do for the knight. . . . Now, who 
that is at all familiar with the long train of imaginary history does not know that it 
ail had its own customs and costume, as well defined as the heathen mythology or 
the Roman history? All the personages wore the arms and habiliments, and obeyed 

- the ceremonials, of medizeval chivalry, very probably because these several tales were 
put into legendary or poetic form in those days; but whatever was the reason, it was 
in that garb alone that they formed the popular literature of Europe in Shakespeare’s 
time. It was a costume well fitted for poetical purposes, familiar in its details to 
popular understanding, yet so far beyond the habitual associations of readers as to 
have some tinge of antiquity; while (as the admirers of Ariosto and Spenser well 
know) it was eminently brilliant and picturesque. Thus, whether, like Chaucer, the 
poet laid his scene of Palamon and Arcite in Pagan Athens, under Duke Theseus ; 
or described, with the nameless author of Morte d’ Arthur, the adventures of the 
Knights of the Round Table: or with Ariosto, those of the French Paladins; or 


- 


448 APPENDIX 


- whether some humbler author told in prose the tale of Saint George, or the Seven 


Champions ; the whole was clothed in the same costume, and the courts and camps 
of Grecian emperors, British kings, Pagan or Turkish soldans, all: pretty much 
resembled those of Charles of Burgundy, or Richard of England, as described by 
Froissart and his brethren. 


To have deviated from this easy, natural, and most convenient conventional cos- 


tume of fiction, half believed as history, for the sake of stripping off old Lear’s 
civilized ‘lendings,’ and bringing him to the unsophisticated state of a painted 
Pictish king, would have shocked the sense of probability in an audience in Eliza- 


beth’s reign, as perhaps it would even now. The positive objective truth of history ~ 


would appear far less probable than the received truth of poetry and romance, of the 
nursery and the stage. Accordingly, Shakespeare painted Lear and his times in the 
attire in which they were most familiar to the imagination of his audience. .. . Such 
is our theory... . To the reader it clears away all anxiety about petty criticisms or 
anachronisms, and ‘such small deer,’ while it presents the drama to his imagination 
in the most picturesque and poetical attire of which it is susceptible. The artist, too, 
may luxuriate at pleasure in his decorations, whether for the stage or for the canvas, 
selecting all that he judges most appropriate to the feeling of his scene, from the 
treasures of the arts of the Middle Ages and the pomp and splendour of chivalry, 
without having before his eyes the dread of some critical antiquary to reprimand him, 
on the authority of Pugin or Meyrick, for encasing his knights in plate-armour, or 
erecting Lear’s throne in a hall of Norman architecture, a thousand years or more 
before either Norman arch, or plate-armour, had been seen in England. 


E. W. Gopwin (The Architecture and Costume of Shakespeare's Plays, The Archi- 
tect, 28 Nov. 1874): The early Celtic period, or a time at least from 100 to 400 
years before Christ, is the time best fitted to the story of Lear. To that early time 
belongs a considerable proportion of the bronze implements in the British remains 
preserved in Great Russell Street. The metals of that age were chiefly gold and 
bronze, although swords and daggers might possibly be of iron—a soft kind, easily 
bendable. Of the architecture of such a time it is hardly possible to say a word, for 
much the same reason that ‘the Spanish fleet could not be seen, because ’twas not in 
sight.’”. Stonehenge would appear to have been the limit of their powers in dud/ding, 
both in design and execution; their decoration consisted of dots and lines concentric, 
zigzag, or hatched; everything was planned upon the circle—the temple and the 
house or hut, the shield and the tore. Of the costume of such a remote time we 
know this much, that it was not of that abbreviated character that we were once 
asked to believe. From the discoveries of late years we learn that the early Celts 
(otherwise called Britons, Irish, Welsh) wore necklets (tores), armlets, bracelets, and 


brooches (or fibule); that in warfare they carried circular shields, two-edged but - 


pointless swords, spears, daggers, javelins, and arrows; that (for the ladies possibly) 
they formed singularly delicate gorgets, or perhaps head-tires, of gold, and imported 
beads of amber and glass. The dresses were doubtless chiefly made of homespun 
wool, full and without any shaping other than that obtained by belt of gold or bronze. 
The dresses would be probably sleeveless and fastened by fibula. The bronze swords 
were short, thirty-one inches, including handle, being an extreme size. The bronze 
circular shields vary in diameter from two feet, or thereabouts, to nine inches. In 
the centre is a conical boss about four or five inches high, and between this and the 
margin the space is relieved by circles of smaller bosses divided by concentric ridges, 


otek. kk or repoussé. It is supposed that no helmets of an 
oman invasion have as yet been discovered in this country; those 


have been found in Germany are of a plain conical form, quite near 
‘any practical purposes of the stage. 


cas GERMAN CRITICISMS 


ah 


VN ae Se 


A. W. SCHLEGEL 


- a 
+ 


: 


(Lectures on Dramatic Art, &c., 1808. Trans. by J. Black, ii, 204. London, 
1815.)—As terror in Macbeth reaches its utmost height, in King Lear the science of 
compassion is exhausted. The principal characters here are not those who act, but 


>)", 
a’ 


z those who suffer. We have not in this, as in most tragedies, the picture of a calamity 
a in which the sudden blows of fate seem still to honour the head whom they strike, in 
‘fe which the loss is always accompanied by some flattering consolation in the memory 
r of the former possession; but a fall from the highest elevation into the deepest abyss 
= of misery, where humanity i is stripped of all external and internal advantages, and 
a given up a prey to naked helplessness. The threefold dignity of a king, an old man, 


and a father is dishonoured by the cruel ingratitude of his unnatural daughters; the 
old Lear, who, out of a foolish tenderness, has given away everything, is driven out 
to the world a wandering beggar; the childish imbecility to which he was fast 
advancing changes into the wildest insanity; and when he is saved from the dis- 
graceful destitution to which he was abandoned, it is too late: the kind consolations 
of filial care and attention and true friendship are now lost on him; his bodily and 
mental powers are destroyed beyond all hope of recovery, and all that now remains 
to him of life is the capability of loving and suffering beyond measure. What a 
picture we have in the meeting of Lear and Edgar in a tempestuous night and in a 
wretched hovel! Edgar, a youth, by the wicked arts of his brother and his father’s 
blindness, has fallen as low from the rank to which his birth entitled him, as Lear; 
and he is reduced to assume the disguise of a beggar tormented by evil spirits as the 
only means of escaping pursuit. The king’s Fool, notwithstanding the voluntary 
degradation which is implied in his situation, is, after Kent, Lear’s most faithful 
associate, his wisest counsellor. This good-hearted Foci clothes reason with the 
livery of his motley garb; the high-born beggar acts the part of insanity; and both, 

were they even in reality what they seem, would still be enviable in comparison with 
the king, who feels that the violence of his grief threatens to overpower his reason. 
The meeting of Edgar with the blinded Gloster is equally heart-rending; nothing 
can be more affecting than to see the ejected son become the father’s guide, and the 
good angel, who, under the disguise of insanity, by an ingenious and pious fraud. 

38* 2D 


parse all the different eee hiolb Sea situations ‘by cater our oe are st 

by the Poet ? I will only make one observation respecting the structure of the whole. 
The story of Lear and his daughters was left by Shakspeare exactly as he found it — 
in a fabulous tradition, with all the features characteristical of the simplicity of old 
times, But in that tradition there is not the slightest trace of the story of Gloster 
and his sons, which was derived by Shakspeare from another source. The incorpo-_ 
ration of the two stories has been censured as destructive of the unity of action. 
But whatever contributes to the intrigue or the dénowement must always possess unity. 


And with what ingenuity and skill the two main parts of the composition are dove- — 


tailed into one another! The pity felt by Gloster for the fate of Lear becomes the 
means which enables his son Edmund to effect his complete destruction, and affords 
the outcast Edgar an opportunity of being the saviour of his father. On the other 
hand, Edmund is active in the cause of Regan and Goneril, and the criminal passion 
which they both entertain for him induces them to execute justice on each other and 
on themselves. The laws of the drama have therefore been sufficiently complied 
with, but that is the least. It is the very combination which constitutes the sublime 
beauty of the work. The two cases resemble each other in the main: an infatuated 
father is blind towards his well-disposed child, and the unnatural offspring, to whom 
he gives the preference, requite him by the destruction of his entire happiness. But 
all the circumstances are so different that these ‘stories, while they make an equal im- 
pression on the heart, form a complete contrast for the imagination. Were Lear 
alone to suffer from his daughters, the impression would be limited to the powerful 
compassion felt by us for his private misfortune. 

But two such unheard-of examples taking place at the same time have the appear- 
ance of a great commotion in the moral world: the picture becomes gigantic, and fills 
us with such alarm as we should entertain at the idea that the heavenly bodies might 
one day fall out of their regular orbits, To save, in some degree, the honour of human? 
nature, Shakspeare never wishes that his spectators should forget that the story takes 
place in a dreary and barbarous age; he-lays particular stress on the circumstance 
that the Britons of that day were still heathens, although he has not made all the 
remaining circumstances to coincide learnedly with the time which he has chosen. 
From this point of view we must judge of many coarsenesses in expression and 
manners; for instance, the immodest manner in which Gloster acknowledges his 
bastard, Kent’s quarrel with the Steward, and, more especially, the cruelty personally 
exercised on Gloster by the Duke of Cornwall. Even the virtue of the honest Kent 
bears the stamp of an iron age, in which the good and the bad display the same un- 
governable strength. Great qualities have not been superfluously assigned to the 
king; the Poet could command our sympathy for his situation without concealing 
what he had done to bring himself into it. Lear is choleric, overbearing, and almost 
childish from age, when he drives out his youngest daughter because she will not 
join in the hypocritical exaggerations of her sisters. But he has a warm and affec- 
tionate heart, which is susceptible of the most fervent gratitude, and even rays of a 
high and kingly disposition burst forth from the eclipse of his understanding. Of 
the heavenly beauty of soul of Cordelia, pronounced in so few words, I will not ven- 
ture to speak; she can only be named along with Antigone. Her death has been 
thought too cruel; and in England the piece is so far altered in acting that she re- 
mains victorious and happy. I must own, I cannot conceive what ideas of art 
and dramatic connection those persons have who suppose that we can, at pleasure, 


le conclusion to a tragedy ; a melancholy one for hard-hearted spectators, 
a y one for souls of a softer mould. After surviving so many sufferings, 
aoe een only die in a tragical manner from his grief for the death of Cordelia; and, 
if he is also to be saved, and to pass the remainder of his days in happiness, the 
whole loses its signification. According to Shakspeare’s plan the guilty, it is true, 
are all punished, for wickedness destroys itself; but the auxiliary virtues are every- 
where too late, or overmatched by the cunning activity of malice. The persons of » 
. this drama have only such a faint belief in Providence as heathens may be supposed 
to have, and the Poet here wishes to show us, that this belief requires a wider range 
than the dark pilgrimage on earth to be established in its utmost extent. 


FRANZ HORN, 


“ ; 
: (Shakspeare’s Schauspiele erléutert, 1823. i, 185.)—To this arbitrary heathen king 
comes at last the idea of resolving to reign no longer, and yet to remain in a manner 
still king. He has no pleasure any longer in attending to affairs. He attributes it 
to old age that he feels thus, but, nevertheless, he will continue invested with royal 
dignity, with the splendor of royalty. . . . Herein is his great error, and hence a great ‘Coa 
: : sin; for, except in rare cases, when a higher will makes itself manifest, man is = 
; bound never to desert his post in the State—it is not accident that has placed him 
there. But what follows when a king, from the impulse of a whim or some error, 
resigns his great office before God calls him to lay it down? History instances, 
and it is hardly necessary to mention, Charles V. and Christina of Sweden. 
It is entirely in character with the fantastic character of Lear, that he should re- 
solve to divide his kingdom according to the measure of love which he receives; 
and, as he would settle the matter at once, the measure must be determined by words. 
The censorious, as some critics have recently done, pronounce him offhand an old 
fool. We are not disposed to judge him harshly, but, without being too tender, we 
may charge him with a great error. There is a love with words, and a love without 
words, neither of which can take the place of genuine love, For this, Lear cares 
nothing, and, because he cares nothing for it, he commits a great sin against Cor- 
delia, and almost as great a sin against Kent. 
[P. 191.] Lear, in his agony, preserves his sense of justice perfectly. It is only 
what his daughters have done to him that afflicts him, not the elements that rage 
against his grey hairs. ‘I blame you not, I never gave you kingdoms.’ It is only 
pure sympathy which Nature manifests in her wild uproar. She alone stands by 
him, when nearly all human sympathy fails him... . Even the madness which comes 
over the old man is to be considered, in a sense, as the sympathy of Nature, and it 
is not wholly without solace, as it not only does not overcome, but rather exalts, 
Lear’s sense of royalty. ‘Ay, every inch aking.’ With this feeling he still wears 
the crown, though invisibly. 
[P. 193-] It would be an interesting subject for a prize essay which of the two 
is the worse, Regan or Goneril. I confess, I am not able to answer the question 
satisfactorily. I believe Shakspeare meant to leave it a question. It may be said 2 
that Goneril, as she was the first to ill-treat her father, was the worse; but it may be 
justly replied, that Regan was still worse, inasmuch as the sight of the tortured old 
man, so far from moving her, only causes her to torture him anew, so that nothing 
is left but madness, which, as we have already intimated, can be regarded as 
only a relief. On the whole, the Fool was in the right when he said that hoth 


a crab, p= 
__[P.,196.] But why should Cordelia suffer defeat? Is it not almost too painful 
to witness the failure of the plan for the protection of her father, and for the punish- 
ment of her sisters? And is it not a very natural feeling that has led some English — - 
and German critics to desire for the piece, or rather to give it, a different ending? 
I answer, it is reasonable that we should wish that virtue should be always victo= 


PP re MLA a 
1 Vee ee; a0 _ AP 
- a 7 


much like Rais other asa 


- 


were of a height, and that one tasted as. 


rious; but it is in accordance neither with history nor ethics always to give to virtue 
the victory. The world, with all ‘its powers,’ is, upon its own native soil, the earth, 
stronger and more powerful than the soft-hearted imagine, for it is every moment 
drawing new strength from its mother, the earth, and it is just on this account that 
‘the world with all its powers’ is to be conquered only in the sphere in which it 
does not reign (the ancients would say ‘in the air’). Is the poet then to be false to 
this eternal law, as history proclaims it, in order to gratify a praiseworthy, yet false, 
feeling? Was he to allow England to be conquered by France, so that the Prince 
of France should ascend the British throne with his wife Cordelia? Or was he 
bound to give us the pleasure of seeing the aged Lear restored to health, and again 
wielding the sceptre ? 

This is indeed what people have demanded, and, in truth, it would have been 
easy for the poet to gratify us on this point; and after this fashion perhaps: the 
guilty all to fall in the fight, the physician to give us the assurance that Lear’s good 
constitution is entirely sound again; Lear, in order not to convict the Doctor of 
lying, to publish certain good laws, the trumpets to sound, and the curtain to fall. 
As we have said, this ending, or something like it, would have been infinitely easy 
to the poet—if only he were not a poet. This circumstance alone prevented him. ~ 

How could we have put faith in him had he so carried out the piece? There are 
sufferings after which the heart can never again be wholly sound, nor feel itself able 
to enjoy life. Whoever carries this mark of misfortune on his brow and in his heart 
will only, with extreme trouble, find strength for the duties of life; to these he is 
bound, and no misfortune can absolve him from their obligation; but the sooner God 
calls him away, the sweeter is it for him, and it were a sinful weakness on our part 
not to acquiesce in his quiet despair. Thus Lear. Whoever has undergone what 
he underwent cannot szffer death; he welcomes it. 

[P. 199.] Even the poorest and humblest servant still has a respectable name, but 
Kent takes no such title; he calls himself Caius. Of all names, this is the meanest ; 
it is hardly a name, as in all schools, in Manuals of Logic, Grammars, &c. it stands as 
a makeshift for a// names. Just on this account, it is here excellently chosen, for 
Kent who, as a count and knight, is banished, will be nothing now, and believes 
there is no need that he should be anything else than a mere helper of the king, and, 
by this pure self-abnegation, he becomes the most faithful friend of the miserable king. 

[P. 216.] In Shakspeare’s rich gallery of fools, the Fool in Zear is the grandest 
and most tragic. He has more sense than all the rest of the men in the play put 
together. His disposition is truly noble and loveable. No one can see more clearly 
the great weakness of the old king, fast growing childish, than he, but no one can 
cherish towards him a more faithful love. Wonder not at the many cutting and 
bitter speeches that he makes; he must say them, for it is his office. We may be 
sure that he, the wise fool, knows that, in such terrible sufferings as those of the old 


king, a momentary annoyance is a sort of relief; at all events, far more easily borne 
than a state of constant depression. 


| SCHICK—ULRICI 


- 


453 es 


re ERNEST SCHICK 
espear’s King Lear, 1833, p. 203.)—We have yet a few words to say of a 


: _ chief person of the piece, which, because this person stands by himself, a single 

—— Specimen of the kind, we have kept for the last; we mean the Fvo/, His appearance 

Ae is tragedy is very significant, as the tragic effect is heightened in the greatest de- 
_ gree by his humour and the sharpness of his wit. No one but the Fool dared venture . 

_ to turn Lear’s attention to his great folly (the resignation of his power in his life.  - 

time), It is of the greatest importance that this unwise proceeding of the king should 

be directly pointed at, as with the finger of another, and it is made ever plainer to 

him how fodlishly, and, in relation to Cordelia, how unjustly he has acted. But the 

shrewd Fool knew how to clothe his mockeries so skilfully, and to produce them so 


om opportunely, that, although they are none the less cutting, their design is not so * 
4 prominent, and the king takes them because they come from the Fool, who is bound 

ia 

7 to speak truth, and to whom Lear is attached, even as the Fool, with the most de- 


voted love, is attached to Lear. But it is not only his wit, never running dry, although 
indeed alloyed by many a platitude, nor his invariable good humor and his clear 
: understanding, by which the Fool commands our sympathy, but, in an almost still 
higher degree, it is the loveableness of his character that interests us. He has pined 
away—as we learn before he appears—after the youngest of the princesses has gone 
to France, and has sorrowed the more for what the knight who relates his condition 
cannot mention to the king, namely, the unhappy circumstances under which the de- 
r parture of Cordelia has taken place. And how faithfully does he cling to the king 
in that fearful night, and, by forcing himself to appear merrier than he possibly could 
be in that condition, try in every way to calm the wild excitement of his master, and 
a lure him from his heartrending, maddening pain at the shameful ingratitude of his 
degenerate daughters. But the more the Fool is saddened at the sight of Lear’s 
failing mind, the fewer are his words, until at last the Poet, and with perfect truth, 
lets him disappear from the scene, as his later appearance would be without signifi- 
cance, and have a disturbing effect. But that we do not learn what becomes of him 
certainly seems strange, but it is not hard to explain it. It remained only for Lear 
to inquire for him, or, in one way or another, to make mention of him, but Lear is 
subsequently so entirely engrossed with his own fortunes and Cordelia’s, and so, as it 
were, buried in them, that he could not turn his thoughts to anything which was re- 
mote from these fortunes. It is highly probable that the Fool’s heart was broken by 
trouble and grief at Lear’s cruel fate. 


ULRICI 


(Shakespeare's dramatische Kunst, 1839. Trans. by L. Dora Schmitz. London, 
1876, vol. i, p. 433.) —In King Lear, love is once more made the fundamental 
motive of human life, but it’is again a different, a new manifestation of the divine 
power; it is the third and last main form in which love directly and actively influ- 
ences the development of human existence, and in which it is revealed as the first 
and most natural bond of the great organism of humanity, as the basis and funda- 
mental condition of all mental and moral culture. In Romeo and Fuliet it is the 
devotion of betrothed persons and the passionate enthusiasm of youthful love; in 
Othello it is the manly strength and fulness of conjugal affection, esteem, and fidelity ; 
in King Lear, on the other hand, it is parental love and filtal peverence that are 
regarded as the centre of all human relations, Here the family bond, in its deep, 


ay? 


The high noonday sun of love has sunk into the still glowing but fast-fading tin 
of evening. Lear, in mind and body, is still a vigorous old man, but nevertheles ma 
an old man, and one who has not yet overcome the failings of his nature—obstinacy _ - - 
and love of dominion, quickness of temper, and want of consideration; his hear# = 
alone has retained the fulness and freshness of youth. Therefore the rich portion as 
of love which has fallen to his lot he lavishes wholly upon his children; he gives a : 
them his all, hoping to find, in their love and gratitude, rest from the storms, anxieties, 
and troubles of life. But this love, which leads him to forget his position as king 
in that of the father, and to neglect all other duties in his anxieties as head of the 
family, which confounds the inward inclination with the outward affection—not 
merely erring momentarily, but in its obstinacy proving itself so prejudiced that b 
Kent’s endeavour to bring it te a true knowledge of itself fails completely in spite 
of the pertinacity with which he urges it,—this love, as in Othello and Romeo and 
Fuliet, is here also involved in one-sidedness and contradiction. Here, too, it is of 7 
a passionate character, devoid of all self-control, which is manifested in Lear's over- -2 
hasty banishment of Cordelia and Kent. Nay, his love is not even altogether true 
in itself, and for this very reason forms a wrong estimate of truth, and rejects genuine, 
pure love and exchanges it for semblance, falsehood, and hypocrisy. In short, love 
here, at the same time, falls into contradiction wth itself. The tragic conflict has 
increased, and from having been confined to external circumstances, has now sunk 
into the deepest depths of the heart; the question in the present case does not (as in 
Othello and Romeo and Fuliet) turn merely upon the contradiction between the 
inward justification of their loves and the right of parents which stands externally 
opposed to it; it does not turn merely upon the conflict into which Lear falls by fol- 
lowing the beautiful and perfectly justified impulse of his paternal heart—thus neglect - 
ing his duties as king, whereby the right of his paternal love becomes a wrong to his 
kingdom—but in Lear's very paternal love, the substance stands in contradiction 
with the form, the father’s right with the right of the Jover. As father, as head of 
the family, whose will determines the outward life of the children, in what they do 
or leave undone, Lear cannot only have demanded, but, in accordance with his 
nature, must even have imperiously and inconsiderately required, that his love should 
be returned by his children’s affection, even in the external acts of obedience and 
submission. However, Lear makes this demand not as a father, but as a lover; he 
confounds the external, obligatory, legal relation subsisting between a father and 
children with the internal, free, ethical relations of lovers, whose rights consist in 
the very fact that all outward rights and duties cease between them. He transfers 
the one relation to the other, and thereby places paternal and filial love in contradic- 
tion to one another, inasmuch as the child cannot perform what perhaps it ought and 
must do, because it is not addressed to its filial obedience, but to its free love, and 
thus opposes it. For love, in accordance with its very nature, lies in the deepest 
depths and freedom of the mind; it is itself this very depth and freedom expressed 
by communion of life, in which each seeks his inmost self and its ideal complement 
in that of another. The outward deed in itself is, therefore, of no consequence to 
it; as love, it is no outward action, but an inward, independent, and a self-sufficient 
life, which, owing to its very nature, expresses itself only in feelings and impulses, 


ore, be that love is the motive of actions, and that it speaks and acts 
not increased by this outward action; this outwardness is, in itself, of 


it to seek its own happiness in the happiness of the beloved. Hence it does 
; : its own sake, in order to, show and to prove itself, but purely for the 
sof the beloved object. For the same reason, also, it does not demand of the 

<S _ belov -d any ‘outward action, any palpable proof of love, but is merely concerned 
yy ir ~ about the communion of souls, about their zon in life and action. Nay, in its full 
5 gth and undimmed purity—such as we see in Cordelia, after her banishment— 

it fees not even demand love in return, but rejoices in it only when it is a free gift, 

j This true form of love is, indeéd, active in Lear; the substance is there, but it 
_ stands in contradiction with its form, and thereby with itself. In consequence of his 
_ confounding filial piety with free filial love, Lear not merely demands the love of his 
children as his due right, but also demands its outward confirmation in word and 


F _ deed, corresponding with the way and manner in which his own love manifests 
. itself. He values love according to its outward actions, and hence forms a wrong 
estimate of its entirely inward nature, which, in fact, cannot be estimated. But this 
" 


apparent fault of the understanding, this confusion of ideas, is, at the same time, the 

result of a defect of the heart in wishing not only to de loved, but also to appear to 

be loved, in order that in the measure of his children’s love, and in the greatness of 

their affection, he may, as in a mirror, behold and enjoy thé greatness and worth of 
_his own person. His Iove, consequently, is not pure and unconditional, for it is con- 
2 ferred conditionally only; that is, on condition of love in return and its outward 
testimony; it is not free and spontaneous, for it is not merely a direct feeling, but is 
reflected in itself, places the value on itself. Thus it becomes either weakly, sensi- 
tive to every rude touch, and unable to bear frankness and truth, or it becomes pre- 
tentious; and as a virtue becomes a vice through pride of virtue, so Lear’s love, 
owing to its demands, is, at the same time, egotism; in giving itself up, it at the 
same time withholds itself; thirsting for and greedy of love, it is, at the same time, 
selfish and filled with hate. This inner contradiction, this unconscious and yet 
actual cause of the discord in the nature of Lear’s paternal love, is the ethical foun- 
dation upon which the action is raised. The object and aim of the dramatic action 
is to solve this contradiction, to conciliate the old man’s love with itself, to purify and 
to restore to its disturbed state as a father and king, in an ideal form. 

A firm, a sincerely affectionate family bond, embracing equally all members, is a 
matter of impossibility with such a species of paternal love, A love like this, which 
demands love and external proofs of love, calls for a contradiction in love on the other 
side, while it bears and fosters a contradiction within itself. In its selfishness it either 
produces egotism, and, in its untruth, calls forth hypocrisy and sanctimoniousness, or 
it drives the true love on the other side back into its inmost self, and leads it to resist 
all external proofs, in sharp opposition to the false and unreal love. The contradic- 
tion in Lear’s paternal love, therefore, produces in his children also an external sep- 
aration; in Regan and Goneril we find selfishness and falsehood, in Cordelia a pure, 
frank, sincere, but silent and retiring love, sharply and distinctly prominent. Thus 
Lear’s paternal love, in place of calling forth the uniting bond of family love, rather 
itself produces the discord. The relation between father and daughters is not broken 
for the first time on the occasion of the division of the kingdom; it had already been 
internally destroyed by Lear’s own conduct, by the peculiar nature of his love; it is 
he who has not fastened the bond in its right place, it is tied merely by external re- 


‘it, but is the perfectly accidental, indifferent, unintentional expression of 


ay 
. lations and considerations; when these break down it unavoidably falls to piece 


first cause of the whole tragic complication; he himself is to blame for his children’s 


> oa 7 = J ee - 


This not only points to, but actually determines, the tragic fate of the hero and 
complication of the main action, for all that follows is but the necessary conseque 
of the destruction of the family bond. Thereby, however, Lear himself appears 


ce a 
the Pd 7 = 


—_ ‘ 


doings and sufferings; he falls owing to the one-sidedness, the errors and contradic- 
tions, in his own loving heart. 
[P. 440.] Lear and Gloster must be represented infinitely more as sinned against 


than sinning, so that.the spectator may clearly perceive the terrible, but infallible, = 

truth, that it is the nature of evil to spring up to an incalculable magnitude, like rank == i. 
weeds from small seeds, and that it is not so much the crime itself as the cazse of the .. be 
crime that is the chief fault of evil; moreover, that this cause invariably proceeds 7 


more especially from a want of moral firmness and a wrong state of family life. 
[P. 446.] But this murder of Cordelia—this veiled angelic form, with the tender ah 

beauty of her loving, maidenly soul, and yet so manly in her resolution and self- 

reliance, with her deep, peaceful heart which is so strong and pure in feeling, with : 

her silent love and self-denial, with her heroic royalty—does her death not seem like 

that of an innocent victim, and, though not without a motive, does it not, however, 

appear unreasonable and devoid of all internal necessity? It certainly does seem 

so; and yet, when more carefully examined, it is evident that Cordelia did not, from 

the beginning, stand upon that height of pure love and devotion, of self-control and 

self-denial, to which she subsequently rises. She, too, like all Shakspeare’s cha- 

racters, is not a pure, ideal form, but undergoes an inner development, a process of 

purification. Cordelia has inherited something of her father’s hasty temperament, 

of his pride and self-will. Shocked at the hypocrisy and dissimulation of her sisters, 

too proud even to endure the semblance of it, as if she too wanted to win favour 

and interest by similar flattering speeches and declarations of love (by ‘such a tongue 

‘that I am glad I have not, though not to have it hath lost me in your liking’), she, 

in the excitement of the moment, meets her father with undutiful defiance, and an- 

swers his loving questions with undeniable harshness and abruptness, in place of 

affectionately humouring his weakness, This she was not justified in doing, even 

though she did not understand his behaviour, and thought his conduct foolish. She 

is as well aware of the violence, the impetuosity and domineering spirit of her 

father’s nature, as Goneril, and yet she continues, regardless of his repeated entreaties 

to consider what she is saying, to reply in her obviously offensive and provoking 

manner, and finally to give an explanation which could not but irritate him even 

more, as it contained a distinct reproach against himself and his demands. What 

she must have expected, must have foreseen, occurs: Lear bursts out into a fit of 

rage; she does nothing to check it, to calm it; she lets its full force fall upon her, 

By this, however, she draws upon her own head a share of the great misery which 

must follow upon her being disinherited, and which, with some little thoughtfulness, 

she might have foreseen; nay, to a certain extent, she is chiefly to blame for the 

whole of the terrible catastrophe; it could not possibly have happened had she not 

been disinherited and banished. By her own fault, therefore, she has become en- 

tangled in the tragic fate which is hanging over her father’s house; she herself 

called it forth, and has, accordingly, also to fall with it. Her transgression, when 

compared with the misdeeds and crimes of those around her, does indeed appear 

next to nothing; she has certainly atoned for it by the tenderest love and devotion 

with which she hurries to the assistance of her aged father, and by which she saves, 


shim. But it was she who vagfewsred the power of evil, and, con- 
too is drawn along by it amid the general destruction. And yet her 
es not appear at all in proportion with the degree of her wrong-doing, 
0 will blame the Poet for being of the opinion, that it is a nobler fate to suffer 
o save a father than to live in the remembrance of the horrors which have 
upon her home, and for which she has been partly to blame? Or for his 
ring referred the solution of the incongruity between the wrong-doing and the 
consequent evil—an incongruity which in this world so frequently remains unsolved 
_ to a future state of existence; and for having considered such a death as Cor- 
-delia’s, not as a misfortune, but as the mere mode of transition to a better existence ? 

[P. 449.] It may be asked why the Fool and his humour are, in this tragedy, 
placed so decidedly and so prominently in the foreground. = + ~ Jt is evident, that 
Lear’s insanity is partly occasioned by the strange, fantastic ideas with which the 
Fool constantly keeps lashing the king’s folly; with these Edgar’s assumed madness 
co-operates even more effectually. 


MORITZ RAPP 


(Shakspere’s Schauspiele, Einleitung. Stuttgart, 1843, p. 7.)—What Lear has in 
common with O¢he//o is the soul of the Poet, dark, melancholy, deeply wounded, 
well-nigh shattered by the world; only here, in Zeav, still more than in Othello, 


toes has he concentrated in his work, painted in burning colors, all the bitterness which 
4 —s the depravity of human nature must generate in a sensitive heart. The Poet had 
o> daughters; that he had, perhaps, similar experiences may be supposed; divested of 
s the historical costume, the features of Lear look out upon us with the naturalness 
4 of ordinary life, so that we seem to see an unhappy citizen of the year 1600 

wrestling with madness rather than an old English king, much as Lear insists upon 


his regal dignity. Here is the charm which the poem has for the great public: 
Lear suffers from the domestic cross which is never wholly absent in any single 
family. It needs but a small quantity of hypochondria to magnify a situation of 
small occasions into such giant proportions. In this view, the poem may be styled 
the poetry or the tragedy of the choleric temperament, as Hamlet is of the melan- 
cholic, and Romeo of the sanguine nature. In Zar all is precipitous, in wild 
haste, thundering on, and this is the case even in the subordinate parts. 


GERVINUS 


(Shakespeare, 1849, Fourth edition, ii, 187. Leipzig, 1872.) —The rupture of tnese 
family relations is, in a manner, the central point of this tragedy, and, at first sight, 
one is prompted to regard as its ruling thought the representation of filial ingratitude. 
But, in truth, the idea of this work is far more comprehensive, and these domestic 
conflicts are rather the body than the soul of the play. But they add to the horror 
of the subject; the like condition of things among strangers would not have had 
equal power. These troubles, so heaped together, so gathered all into the bosom of 
the closest of kindred, represent, as Schlegel says, ‘a great insurrection in the moral 
‘world; the picture is gigantic, and the horror it awakens is kin to that which 
éwould be felt were the heavenly bodies to rush away from their appointed courses.’ 

If we are right in saying, that to depict the shock of mighty passions contending 
against the natural and moral boundaries of humanity is the special task of tragedy, 

aie) 


eee = . a ia vee, 
458 APPENDIX 


[ > 7 
é i. 


ok > ‘ 

then this task, in the piece before us, appears, as it were, generalized; while othe 
tragedies treat of single passions, this tragedy deals with passion in general, so that — 
the thoughtful reader must feel more or less deeply that it may be styled the tragedy — +o 
par excellence. In no other tragedy, in which there are so many characters, are 
they all equally given over to the most violent emotions. a 

[P. 191.]. At first sight no difference is discernible between the two sisters (‘as like 
‘as a crab is to a crab,’ says the Fool); upon a closer view it is surprising what a 
broad and clearly-defined contrast there is between them. The elder, Goneril, with Z 
the wolfish visage and the dark frontlet of ill-humour, is a masculine woman, full of ka 
purposes and intrigues of her own, whilst Regan seems more womanly, under the 
lead of Goneril, more passive, more dependent. Goneril’s boundlessly ‘ unbordered’ 
nature, rendering her a true offspring of that terrible age, shows itself in bloody under- m= 
takings bred in her own brain, while Regan’s evil nature is seen in her urging on the 
atrocities of others, as when Kent is set in the stocks and Gloster’s eyes are put out, 
The worse of the two is united to a noble gentleman (Albany), whom she reviles as 
“a moral fool,’ and the mildness and repose of whose character seem to her ‘ milky 
‘gentleness,’ and whose quiet power and resolute manliness she is only at a later 
period aware of. The better sister has the worse husband, whose fierce temperament 
tolerates no opposition and no remonstrance. Goneril, at the first, lords it over her 
husband, who recognizes her foresight, and yields to her wild temper, so long as he 
does not understand her; she pursues her own way, hardly listens to him, scarcely 
deigning him worthy of an answer; while Regan is submissive to the sullen and 
violent Cornwall, who is resolute and immoveable in his purposes. At the very first 
(sc. i) Goneril appears as the prime mover, and Regan as her echo. She it is who 
subsequently puts restraints upon the-king, she is the first to treat him with disrespect, 
to halve and dismiss his attendants, while Regan shows some lingering awe of him. 
But she is more afraid of her sister than her father, and suffers her father’s messenger 
rather than her sister’s servant to be ill-treated. Her sister knows her weakness; she 
does not think it sufficient to write; she goes to her and goes after her, to be sure of 
her joining in her plans. Regan cannot hurl forth stinging speeches like Goneril, 
she has not the same fierce eyes, her look (which Lear in his madness calls a squint) 
is comforting rather, her nature softer; and Lear hardly ventures to look closely at 
her when, in his madness, he sits in judgement upon her; he would have her heart 
anatomized. She says in a simple way far ruder things to her father than Goneril does, 
and yet her father hesitates to pronounce his curse on her as he does upon her sister, 
and that twice repeated. Goneril receives it with marble coolness, but Regan shud- 
ders and dreads to draw upon herself the like imprecation. Only when Goneril has 
laid bare in her presence her utter shamelessness and barbarity towards her old father, 
does Regan grow bolder also, and drive away the king’s knights; him alone will 
she harbour. When Goneril determines that the old man shall taste the consequences 
of his obstinacy and folly, and forbids Gloster, in spite of the raging storm, to detain 
him, Regan, with her characteristic weakness, falls in with her sister, After the 
serpent brood are relieved of their old father, then begins a strife in their families. 
Goneril mines deeper; the ill-treatment of Lear is only the prelude. She will have 
possession of the whole kingdom, she betroths herself to Edmund, her husband still 
living, exults in Cornwall's death, poisons Regan, joins with Edmund in putting Cor- 
delia to death, and plots at last against her husband’s life, whom she now fears since 
he has ‘Tearned with horror her evil deeds. Here again, in the contrast, Regan ap- 
pears simpler and less bold; only after Cornwall’s death does she engage herself 


ey 
459 
ut rhom she sends letters by Goneril’s servant, whose good faith she 
does no '; she falls a victim to the poison administered by her sister, herself 
- free fro suspicion of like murderous designs; in every respect, she is of a 
“more constrained nature than her sister, whose ‘woman’s will is of indistinguished 
© space.’ vA 
“Sete. 205.] To play the part of Edgar requires a man to be ‘every inch an actor.’ 
_ He changes at least six different times. At first he is Edgar; then Poor Tom; then, 
forgetting this part in his devotion to his father, he loses sight of it; then he describes 
the immeasurable depths of the pretended cliff, as if he himself stood dizzily upon 
it; next he is the dwelier on the shore, where Gloster thinks he has fallen ; then, 
after the meeting of his father with Lear, he is another beggar, and, in the presence 
of the steward, he is changed into a peasant; in the lists with Edmund, he is an un- 
known champion, and last, he is himself again. In all these parts he is cunning in 
the extreme; his father, on first meeting with Poor Tom, is dimly reminded of his 
son Edgar, then, and every time the danger of his being recognized appears to in- 
crease, he aims to keep his disguise the more. But his dissembling does not partake 
of the fear and excitability of Hamlet; from his father’s dead body, from Kent’s 
, 
> 
ea 


mortal agony, from scenes of the deepest emotion, Edgar goes to do battle with Ed- 
, mund, and he comes off victorious. Having such self-command, Edgar, we feel, is 
: equal in his disguise to the discharge of the most important services in his father’s 
a behalf; he is the support of his father in body and mind. 
; _ [P. 209.] In this play ethical justice is especially emphasized by the Poet himself, 
But where is justice in the death of Cordelia? Why does a better fate fall to Edgar, 
- - when he is to his father what Cordelia is to hers? But it is precisely this differ- 
ence in their fates that helps us to the meaning of the Poet. The wise and prudent 
forethought evinced by Edgar places him in-strong contrast with Cordelia. His 
means are always well adapted to his ends; not so is it with Cordelia. She attacks 
England with a French army to reinstate her father. The whole responsibility of 
this step falls upon her. She has besought her husband, with ‘important tears,’ to 
give her this army. To him this war was no pressing affair; he does not appear 
(and this Steevens and Tieck do not perceive, although it is obvious) with Cordelia 
in England; he occupies himself with other matters of State. We need not be told 
by her, that ‘no blown ambition incites’ her arms; we believe it already, but when 
she should have declared it to Albany she says nothing. Only the one thought of 
her filial love moves her. When she has found her father in Dover she resigns her 
army to her Marshal; this renders the attack the more serious, as it is directed on a 
kingdom divided and in peril. The brothers-in-law, hostile to each other, and op- 
posite as they are in their characters, join forces against it; the noble Albany unites 
with the terrible Edmund. But Albany is far more circumspect than Cordelia, At 
variance with Goneril and Edmund, he has, after Cornwall’s death, the prospect of 
the sole sovereignty when he has conquered and set aside Lear and Cordelia, He 
* declares, however, to the allies, that he separates the French invasion from the cause 
of Lear; this Cordelia had declared to no one, ‘The business of this war,’ says 
Albany, ‘toucheth us only as France invades our land not bolds the king;’” him will 
he favour, and treat the prisoners, moreover, according to their deserts, and in refer- 
ence to Ais own safety. A similar declaration made by Cordelia to Albany could 
have stopped the war and changed the result. But Cordelia, from her peculiar nature, 
makes it not, Her fault at the last is her fault at the first, What is self-evident she 
cannot utter; to that which fills her heart she cannot give words. So long as she 


\ 


Al ght © 
ade war Avany- leon that she cents the 
as Sate to France; but this idea, of the possibility of a French army's. 


‘on English soil, the patriotism of Shakespeare would not admit. Like De 
Cordelia falls a sacrifice to her own nature; in Cordelia’s case peculiar circu 
stances connected with her death reconcile us to it in a greater degree. Althou, 


conquered in battle, she has gained the better victory which alone she sought; she 
has outwardly restored her father. She has come with boundless thanks for Kent 
who had supported him, and with promises of all her treasures to the physician 


who would heal him; all these things show that her mind is full to overflowing 
of one thought, her father’s restoration, in bin all concern for her own safety is 
forgotten. 


DR CARL C. HENSE 


( Vortrége ‘tiber ausgewihite dramatische Dichtungen Shakespeare’s, Schiller’s, 
und Goethe's. Halberstadt, 1856, p. 43.)—Genuine humour breaks forth only out of 
a loving heart, and through his unbounded love for his master the Fool has purchased 
the right to tell him the bitter truth, and hold up the mirror before the wrong that he 
has done. 

As the Fool represents truth in the guise of humour, he cannot be brought forward 
until the rupture with the moral law has taken place; the disguised truth waits; the 
king has not for two days seen the Fool. In his grief for Cordelia’s banishment, the 


Fool has almost forgotten his part, and this affords us a pledge that, under the veil © 


of humour, the deepest earnestness is concealed. Only } in slight allusions does he 
touch the fault of the king, for roughly to waken up the injury done were the office 
not of love but of scorn. Hence the Fool makes the folly of the king the target of 
his humour; the harmless words he throws out conceal a deep and penetrating sig- 


nificance. When, immediately after Goneril’s first rude speech to her father, the — 


Fool breaks out with the apparently random words, ‘Out went the candle, and we 
were left darkling’—the words of an old song—the point is, that the light of the 
moral world has now ceased to shine, and the darkness incessantly increases (com- 
pare the words addressed to Kent by the Fool, Act II, sc. iv, with the words: ‘ We’ll 
set thee to school to an ant,’ &c.). As, however, the old king draws ever nearer to 
the brink of the abyss, the arrows of the Fool, aimed at the folly of the king, grow 
fewer, he catches oftener at some harmless, jesting remark, to cheer the suffering of 
his master, and to lighten the burthen of his own grief. The whole depth and power 
of his sorrow he crowds into a little song, for he has become thus rich in songs since 
the king, as he says, has made his daughters his mothers. In a similar way he 
expresses his impregnable devotion to the king in those deeply significant verses in 
which he promises not to desert the king in the storm, and the particular theme of 
which is that the wise are fools before God, but the fools in the eye of the world 
are justified by a higher Power. . 

The Fool has his place in the tragedy only so long as the king is able to perceive 
the truth veiled by the Fool’s humour. There is no longer room or need for him 
after the king becomes crazed. This crisis is the end of the Fool, 


; He vanishes, 
* goes to bed at mid-day,’ when his beloved master is hopelessly lost. 


KREYSSIG 
itber Shakespeare, &c., 1862, ii, 316.)—Goethe has pronounced the 
absurd. More recent criticism, certainly in view of that judgment harsh, 
t not without reason, has defended it as unobjectionable, but yet hardly with a con- 
ing, decisive result. It is doubtless only too natural that a hot-blooded gentle- 
n, long accustomed to the exercise of irresponsible power, should reward his 
re _ et ildr ,as well as his servants, not according to their services, but according to their 
address in flattering his self-love. When did not the flatterer feather his nest more 
successfully than the faithful, outspoken, independent servant? But in poetry, and 
especially in the drama, the subject-matter of a scene is not to be separated by the 
understanding from its form. And the form, in which Lear’s arbitrary humour 
expresses itself in this scene, finds its natural and ttue significance only in fact as the 
symbol of a whole series of presumable precedents. Is it not the behaviour of a 
man already unsettled in his understanding, when a father, in solemn assembly, sets 
his children a lesson in flattery, and when he formally proposes for the required 
display of bombast a downright cash premium, so that for the /asé vanity of the 
monarch grown old in the habit of being worshipped, there is no possibility of delu- 
: _ sion? And is the scene the first of the part which he plays? It notifies us to expect 
4 a reigning king, and the very first words are the words of a man with a crack in his 
ig a brain. It appears to me that Shakespeare here, in giving motive and a dramatic form 
: 


“a 
‘y 


oy = 
-» 


to the legend, is lacking in his usual care. This want is assuredly considerably alle- 
viated by the excellent elucidations of the scenes that follow. But the satisfaction 
subsequently afforded to the understanding cannot be any compensation to us if the 
imagination has previously had just reason to be offended. 
— [P. 318.] So much at least is clear. It is only the burthen and duties of empire 
; that the tired old king wishes to be rid of. That his regal rights can suffer changes, 
a never occurs to him. This is evident from the utter overthrow of his self-possession 
when the idea of this personal, indefeasible claim to absolute power is for the first 
time openly crossed by the complaints of Goneril. Very strikingly for his view of 
the situation, he makes not the remotest allusion to the substance of her complaint. 
© Art thou my daughter?’ This is his only reply when she complains of the beha- 
=e viour of his retinue. It was a monstrous illusion which drove him to that eventful 
abdication—the idea of the indestructible, all-embracing nature of his personal 
authority, which he imagines tobe wholly independent of what he possesses and can 
do. He recognizes no other relation to society but claim, right, mercy on his side, 
prayer, gratitude, devotion from all others, Naturally, the whole airy edifice tumbles 
into ruins so soon as the open secret becomes clear to him that that mystic regal great- 
ness falls to the ground with the loss of material power, and that the despot’s arbi- 
trary humour educates its favourites, even though they be his own children, to be 
intriguing slaves, when he sets aside their nobler, self-respecting eS disagree- 
able opponents, as creatures without court-manners. To the first contradiction which 
he has met perhaps for many years, Lear opposes a rage, boundless and incapable of 
all consideration. He raves and foams like some wild torrent around the rock which 
has rolled down into its waters. To the inquiries of the well-meaning Albany he 
returns no answer. His wrath blazes out in a half-insane curse upon Goneril, ‘the 
‘thankless child who has stung him sharper than a serpent’s tooth.’ Who does not 
feel the horror of his position? And yet the reckless outburst of his passion cer- 
tainly qualifies our tribute of sympathy by the violence to which it drives him. We 


39* 


-—- 


trad, that is, the disinterested, benefactor, or ‘that its 


blessed consciousness of genuine humanity, which has its Soniaitien in a free de 
tion to moral necessity, and not in the quicksand of selfish interest, driven hithe 
and thither by the waves of passion. Of that devotion there is no trace in the be 
viour of the irascible king. Revenge, violence, a taking back what he has given— 
these are his first thoughts. That by his abdication he has taken a position no longer sated 
wholly independent, finds no place in his ‘mind. The presentiment of madness comes — 
over him in the fearful collision of the blind, raging thirst for revenge with the laming 
consciousness of his lack of power. We are almost tempted to excuse the unfilial 
fye! fye! of the hard-hearted Regan, when the old man, at the bare mention of the 
strife with Goneril, breaks out into the well-known curse. And it needs the whole, 
overpowering impression of his weakness and helplessness, it needs the symbolism 
of ‘the corresponding uproar of the element, to secure the fulness of tragic sympathy ~ 
for the despairing old man, exposed on the barren heath to the fury of the storm. : 
The fearful magnificence of this celebrated scene requires no word of praise fram the 
commentator, and its terrible truth to nature makes every word expended upon it 
sound impertinent. His pain at the ingratitude of those whom he has heaped with 
favour and fortune, all the keener for the humiliating consciousness of his own un- 
questionable folly, passes into the fatal stability of the fixed idea, by the hot breath 
of which the springs of his spiritual life are dried up, until the phantom of madness 
settles weirdly down upon the dry, burnt-out waste. x 


= 


RUMELIN 


(Shakespeare- Studien, 1866, p. 61.)—The conduct of old Gloucester is not a whit 
more rational, That the lawful son of his father, grown up under his father’s eyes, 
and always regarded by him as true and amiable, should all at once engage in a con- 
spiracy with a vagabond bastard brother against his father's life, should even commit 
this design to paper, and throw the letter at random into that brother’s window, should 
seem to the old man utterly incredible; but that the old man banishes this son, without 
seeing and hearing him, that Edgar consents to have anything to do with the silly hocus- 
pocus of the sword-drawing, and flees without exposing the clumsy farce to his father, 
—in a word, these are circumstances past all belief, and hardly rise above nursery 
tales. As all proceeds so rapidly, and Edgar, one hardly understands how, is driven 
by lies from his father’s house, it is, as represented on the stage, scarcely intelligible. 
That Edgar comes on the stage as a crazy beggar is no more clearly explained, yet 
the reasons of it may be imagined; but that, in this disguise of a madman, he utters, 
without any necessity, so much useless talk, becomes extremely wearisome,* while 
the much-admired scene in the hut, through its length, and the inexhaustible stream 
of crazy speeches, is, according to our feeling, equally fatiguing. It might even be con- 
jectured that Shakespeare intended to give us here a sort of dramatic extravaganza, 
showing us specimens of three different kinds of fools all together, one really crazy, 
one pretending to be crazy, and one a Fool by profession—these he sets upon the 
scene side by side, and lets all three figure away in the finest style. 
ee ee ee i ie 

* KLEIN, of whose wide range of scholarship I am incompetent to judge, but whose pages charm 
me with their sparkling wit, in his Geschichte des Italienischen Dramas, vol. i, p. 890, quotes ina 


foot-note this remark by Riimelin about Edgar’s wearisome platitudes, and slyly adds; ‘ Edgar was 
just the very man, then, to write Shakespeare-Studien.’—Ep. 


s does not impress us, as it should, with a sense of a wrong, or of 
king. That afterwards this Oswald, when mortally struck, in the 
nt of his life, thinks of nothing but how he shall fulfil a command of his 
| presents a touching instance of fidelity, not at all in accord with the pre- 
seness of his character. That any one should be made to believe that, by a 
jump on the level ground, he has leaped a thousand fathom down, and come off un- 
red, is against all probability. 
Finally, the savage cruelty of digging out the eyes of Gloster with the leg of a 
_ chair on the stage! [‘ Die wilde Grausamkeit, dass dem niedergeworfenen Gloster 
auf der Biihne mit einem Stuhlfuss beide Augen ausgedriickt werden!’ Comment 


The whole action in Aig Lear has the character of a nursery tale of the horrible 
sort, only that it is lacking in the wonderful. 
"But nursery stories are not fit subjects for tragedy. The effect of the serious drama 
4 depends upon the supposition that we ourselves are of the same stuff, susceptible 
e of the same feelings, passions, and motives, as the persons whom the poet brings 
before us, that the same forces rule over our lives, that, consequently, the case put 
before us is of like concern to all. This illusion the poet can, at no price, suffer 
a ‘to be destroyed. He does not disturb it, or he hardly disturbs it, even when he 
« . introduces a supernatural element, so long as it is related or natural to the his- 
j torical basis on which the piece rests. Gods, ghosts, oracles, &c. appear, under 
; this condition, in agreement with fate and accident, which always have for us 
: an irrational side. But one thing, under all circumstances, must remain intact, 
namely, the psychological basis of all human action. In dramatic incidents we must 
recognize our own life mirrored; our logic, as of universal weight. The poet must 
' not attribute to his persons a higher degree of infatuation, of perverseness, and short- 
os sightedness than we hold ourselves and mankind at large liable to. When to the 
heroes, for whom he claims my reverence and my sympathy, I am compelled to 
object, that neither I nor any man in his senses would, in the given case, think of so 
acting, then is the illusion irretrievably ruined. It is just this that distinguishes the 
nursery tale from the legend, myth, and fable, that the actions of the hero of the 
tale are determined by motives which have force only in the world of dreams or of 
childhood. Hence the stuff of which nursery tales are composed may indeed be 
treated epically or lyrically, or be made available in fantastic comedies or musical 
pieces, as Shakespeare has employed it in the most brilliant manner. But it is re- 
pugnant to the very nature of the grave drama. From this point of view, the play 
of King Lear is of an entirely false kind, and Tieck’s attempt to reanimate it for 
the.German stage must necessarily remain without effect and success. 


WILHELM OECHELHAUSER 


” (Shakespeare dramatische Werke, Einleitung, 1871, p. 30.)—The Fool is the last 
and, at the saine time, the noblest creation of the kind in Shakespeare; he is by far 
the most intellectual and noblest of his fools. Two prevailing currents of feeling are 
conspicuous in the Fool. The first is his sorrow over Cordelia, to whom he is as 
faithful as a dog. ‘Since my young lady’s going into France, the Fool hath much 
¢pined away.’ This sorrow is expressed by the merciless blows which, far exceed- 
ing his traditional privilege, he deals at the king for his folly in abdicating his crown, 


is so. ummannerly towards the chamberlain that the cheeses 


is needless—Ep.] Of the eleven chief persons of the piece only three remain alive! 


464 APPENDIX 


and for his lack of just appreciation of his youngest daughter. We should hold the 
Fool to be hard-hearted, malicious, if it were not for his motive. But, with the in- 
creasing misfortunes of the old king, the tone of the Fool changes; sympathy with 
his old master gives another direction to his mind, and sweetens his bitterness. In 
the fearful night on the heath he still plays the fool only to meet the humour of the 
king in the usual way; for the rest he is all anxiety for his unhappy lord. He 
‘labours to outjest his [the king’s] heartstruck injuries.’ The réle requires a skilful 
portrayer of character. Comic actors hardly ever know how to master this. It is 
all the more difficult, as we have quite lost the understanding of this class, which 
still flourished even in Shakespeare’s time. The endeavour to support this réle 
by nonsensical mimicry should cease; the part is sustained by its own intellectual 
power. I would have the Fool represented as an elderly man, as a sort of family 
piece in the house of the eighty-year-old king. His office would naturally have 
become less perfunctory and easier. His probable years released him from the 
traditional demands made upon his class for physical activity. His speeches bear 
the stamp of the biting irony which is not an acquired thing, but which usually comes 
with age in one whose humble station does not correspond with his intellectual 
abilities. However this may be, the effect of this réle would be greatly increased if, 
in the stormy night, the mask of the Fool is allowed ever more and more to fall off, 
and the sad, faithful servant becomes more and more prominent, as in this scene the 
surroundings of the unhappy king must render the sympathy and concern of the 
Fool more lively. With this scene, alas! the Fool vanishes from the stage ;~he is in 
this piece treated, as his class were in actual life, as a simple object, having no claim 
upon one’s personal interest. 

[P. 36.] Cordelia should have yielded to Lear’s bizarre, yet harmless idea of plea- 
sing himself with his children’s protestations of love, and should, as she knew her 
father, have foreseen the consequences of her refusal to contribute to this pleasure, 
Following that first, one-sided impulse, she does not do so, and indirectly all the 
after misery springs from her refusal. Although man is answerable only for the nat- 
ural, foreseen consequences of his actions, and not for those which result from the 
concatenation of circumstances and the collision with the evil-doing of others, yet 
tragic criminality has another standard of punishment than that of the earthly judge. 
In this dark tragedy, tragic guilt knows no result but death; whoever in passing 
touches only the hem of its garment falls a victim to the powers of darkness. Thus 
is Cordelia’s death justified. But how nobly does she atone for her fault! With 
what fulness of love and tenderness does she call back her aged father to life and 
mental soundness! henceforth they are one; the whole life of the one, the whole 
life of the other, so interwoven the one with the other, that it is at once the highest 
poetry and the highest truth when they die together. 

The part of Cordelia is in every respect the opposite of that of Goneril, While 
the latter, a deep study, requires great acquaintance with the business of the stage, 
the former, may be acted by a talented beginner, if she only has a flexible organ 
united with deep, warm feeling. It is especially a rdle of feeling, which must be 
played with the greatest simplicity and naturalness, and necessarily by an actress of 
very youthful appearance. Many passages, for example, the recognition scene, be- 
long to the most pathetic scenes which the stage has to offer. An angelic loveliness 
is the atmosphere in which Cordelia has her being. But in the introduction a differ- 
ent tone is to be etritek, which most actresses miss. Here, by the intonation of her 
answer to Lear, ‘ Nothing,’ must be expressed the defiant emotion, which, although 


r onflict, the result of which is that laconic answer. To help this I would in- 
; zs fr her ics answer, ‘ Nothing,’ the query, ‘I?’ followed by a pause, expres- 

: 7 inward struggle, before she breaks out quickly and suddenly with the 
_ Once having committed herself so far, she becomes calm and composed, 
ut, ne. manifesting her deep pain at her father’s cruelty. It must appear 
how her heart still clings to her father, how fearfully she suffers under his curse. 
The insensibility of many of our Cordelias in this scene is not in place; it is not in 
harmony with her subsequent appearance. Her dumb play in the first Scene is the 


Gyatives, has eine up in her maa ee rise may be intimated by her 
her sisters are speaking), but then also there must be shown the > 


most difficult in the part. 2s > ee 

ym t 
i : VICTOR HUGO 
4 aa _ (William Shakespeare, 1864, p. 322.)—Lear, c’est ’occasion de Cordelia. La ma- 
é ~ ternité de la fille sur le pére; sujet profond; maternité vénérable entre toutes, si ad. 
/ "7 mirablement traduite par la légende de cette romaine, nourrice, au fond d’un cachot, 
a de son pére vieillard. La jeune mamelle prés de la barbe blanche, il n’est point de 
= spectacle plus sacré. Cette mamelle filiale, c’est Cordelia. ; 
“s Une fois cette figure révée et trouvée Shakespeare a créé son drame. Ot mettre 
. 4 cette rassurante vision? Dans un siécle obscur. Shakespeare a pris l’an 3105 du 
monde, le temps ot Joas était roi de Juda, Aganippus roi de France et Léir roi 
ee d@’Angleterre. Toute la terre était alors mystérieuse; représentez-vous cette époque: 


“<4 le temple de Jérusalem est encore tout neuf, les jardins de Sémiramis, batis depuis 
neuf cents ans, commencent a crouler, les premiéres monnaies d’or paraissent 4 Egine, 
la premiére balance est faite par Phydon, tyran d’Argos, la premiére éclipse de soleil 
est calculée par les chinois, il y a trois cent douze ans qu’ Oreste, accusé par les Eu- 
ménides devant l’Aréopage, a été absous. Hésiode vient de mourir, Homére, s’il 
vit encore, a cent ans, Lycurgue, voyageur pensif, rentre 4 Sparte, et l’on apergoil 
au fond de la sombre nuée de |’Orient le char de feu qui emporte Elie; c’est dans 
ce moment-la que Léir—Lear—vit et régne surles iles ténébreuses. Jonas,,Holo- 
pherne, Dracon, Solon, Thespis, Nabuchodonosor, Anaximéne qui inventera les signes 
du zodiaque, Cyrus, Zorobabel, Tarquin, Pythagore, Eschyle, sont 4 naitre; Coriolan, 
Xerxés, Cincinnatus, Périclés, Socrate, Brennus, Aristote, Timoléon, Démosthéne, 
Alexandre, Epicure, Annibal, sont des larves qui attendent leur heure d’entrer parmi 
les hommes; Judas Macchabée, Viriate, Popilius, Jugurtha, Mithridate, Marius et 
Sylla, César et Pompée, Cléopatre et Antoine, sont le lointain avenir, et au moment 
ou Lear est roi de Bretagne et d’Islande, il s’écoulera huit cent quatre-vingt-quinze 
ans avant que Virgile dise: Pedtus toto divisos orbe Britannos, et neuf cent cinquante 
ans avant que Sénéque dise: Ultima Thule. Les pictes et les celtes—les €cossais et 
les anglais,—sont tatoués. Un peau-rouge d’a présent donne une vague idée d’un 
anglais d’alors. C’est ce crépuscule que choisit Shakespeare; iarge nuit commode 
au réve ov cet inventeur a l’aise met tout ce que bon lui semble, ce roi Lear, et puis 
un roi de France, un duc Bourgogne, un duc de Cornouailles, un duc d’Albany, un 
comte de Kent et un comte de Glocester. Que lui importe votre histoire 4 lui qui a 
VPhumanité? D/ailleurs il a pour lui la légende, qui est une science, elle aussi; et, 
2E 


ro 


aitane que Vhistoire peut-étre, mais 4 un autre point dalgeet eae Shakespea 
est d’accord avec Walter Mapes, archidiacre d’Oxford, c’est poe chose; il 
admet, depuis Brutus jusqu’a Cadvalla, les quatre-vingt-dix-neuf re rois celtes 
précédé le scandinave Hengist et le saxon Horsa; et puisqu’il croit 4 Mulmutius, 
Cinigisil, a Céolulfe, 4 Cassibelan, 4 Cymbeline, 4 Cynulphus, & Arviragus, a Gui- — 
derius, 4 Escuin, a Cudred, 4 Vortigerne, 4 Arthur, 4 Uther Pendragon, ila bien le droit 2 
de croire au roi Lear, et de créer Cordelia. Ce terrain adopté, ce lieu de scéne dé=— 
signé, cette fondation creusée, il prend tout, et il batit son ceuvre. Construction inouie. 
Il prend la tyrannie, dont il fera plus tard la faiblesse, Lear; il prend la trahison, , 
Edmund; il prend le dévouement, Kent; il prend l’ingratitude qui commence par 
une caresse, et il donne a ce monstre deux tétes, Goneril, que la légende appelle- 
Gornerille, et Regane, que la légende appelle Ragaii; il prend la paternité; il prend 
la royauté; il prend la féodalité; il prend ambition; il prend la démence qu'il 
partage en trois, et il met en présence trois fous, le bouffon du roi, fou par métier, 2 a 
Edgar de Glocester, fou par prudence, le roi, fou par misére. C’est au sommet de cet 
entassement tragique qu’il dresse et penche Cordelia. d 
Il y a de formidables tours de cathédrales, comme, par exemple, la giralda de 
Séville, qui semblent faites tout entiéres, avec leurs spirales, leurs escaliers, leurs 
sculptures, leurs caves, leurs ccecums, leurs cellules aériennes, leurs chambres sonores, _ 
leurs cloches, leur plainte, et leur masse, et leur fléche, et toute leur énormité, pour 
porter un ange ouvrant sur leur cime ses ailes dorées. Tel est ce drame, /e Roi Lear. 
Le pére est le prétexte de la fille. Cette admirable création humaine, Lear, sert 
fle support 4 cette ineffable création divine, Cordelia. ‘Tout ce chaos de crimes, de 
vices, de démences et de miséres, a pour raison d’étre l'apparition splendide de la 
vertu. Shakespeare, portant Cordelia dans sa pensée, a créé cette tragédie comme 
un dieu qui, ayant une aurore a placer, ferait tout exprés un monde pour l’y mettre. 
Et quelle figure que le pére! quelle caryatide! C’est homme courbé. II ne fait 
que changer de fardeaux, toujours plus lourds. Plus le vieillard faiblit, plus le poids 
augmente. Il vit sous la surcharge. II porte d’abord l’empire, puis l’ingratitude, 
puis l’isolement, puis le désespoir, puis la faim, et la soif, puis la folie, puis toute la 
nature, Les nuées viennent sur sa téte, les foréts l’accablent d’ombre, l’ouragan s’abat 
sur sa nuque, l’orage plombe son manteau, la pluie pése sur ses épaules, il marche 
plié et hagard, comme s’il avait les deux genoux de la nuit sur son dos. Eperdu et 
immense, il jette aux bourrasques et aux gréles ce cri épique: Pourquoi me haissez- 
vous, tempétes ? pourquoi me persécutez-vous? Vous n’étes pas mes filles. Et alors, "i 
c’est fini, la Jueur s’éteint, la raison se décourage et s’en va, Lear est en enfance. 
Ah! il est enfant, ce vieillard. Eh bien! il lui faut une mére. Sa fille parait. Son 
unique fille, Cordelia. Car les deux autres, Regane et Goneril, ne sont plus ses 
filles que de la quantité nécessaire pour avoir droit au nom de parricides. 
Cordelia approche.—Me reconnaissez-vous, sire ?— Vous étes un esprit, je le sais, - 
répond le vieillard, avec la clairvoyance sublime de l’égarement. A partir de ce 
moment, l’adorable allaitement commence. Cordelia se met a nourrir cette vielle 
Ame désespérée qui se mourait d’inanition dans la haine. Cordelia nowrit Lear 
d’amour, et le courage revient; elle le nourrit de respect, et le sourire revient; elle le 
nourrit d’espérance, et la confiance revient; elle le nourrit de sagesse, et la raison re- 
vient. Lear, convalescent, remonte, et, de degré en degré, retrouve la vie. L’enfant 
redevient un vieillard, le vieillard redevient un homme. Et le voila heureux, ce 
misérable, C’est sur cet épanouissement que fond la catastrophe. Hlas, il y a.des | 
traitres, il y a des parjures, il y a des meurtriers, Cordelia meurt. Rien de plus 


+ 


ates, 
4 07 


- Le vieillard s’étonne, il ne comprend plus, et, embrassant ce cadavre, il 
d | meurt sur cette morte. Ce désespoir supréme lui est épargné de rester 

_ derriére elle parmi Jes vivants, pauvre ombre, tatant la place de son cceur vidé et 

eherel t son Ame emportée par ce doux étre qui est parti. O Dieu, ceux que vous 

vous ne les laissez pas survivre. 

eurer aprés ‘Penvolement de l’ange, étre le pére orphelin de son enfant, étre 


4 . plea mains par moments dans V’obscurité, et tacher de ressaisir quelqu’un qui était 1a, ob 
et donc est-elle? se sentir oublié dans le départ, avoir perdu sa raison d’étre ici-bas, 
‘+ étre désormais un homme qui va et vient devant un sépulchre, pas regu, pas admis; 
c’est une sombre destinée. Tu as bien fait, poéte, de tuer ce vieillard. 


—- 


: a . NAHUM TATE’S VERSION 
‘a AN edition like the present would be incomplete without some notice of the version 
ss of King Lear which held the stage for a hundred and sixty years, and in which all 
r 


| - our greatest actors, Garrick, Kemble, Kean, and others, won applause, and which 
ig was discarded only about forty years ago. It is so much easier to blame than to 
- praise that we echo very readily the anathemas that are now heaped on the name 
of Tate. But really Tate was little to blame; he was merely the exponent of the age 
in which he lived, and no genius. ‘ You must think of this, look you, the worm will 
— ‘do his kind.’ We must remember, too, that Zeary is the sublimest tragedy ever 
written, so awful in its grandeur that it almost passes into a realm by itself. Charles 
~ Lamb avers that it ought not to be acted at all, and in thus saying he exonerates Tate, 
to a certain extent, in the very breath with which he condemns him. Tate’s Version 
is better than none; if we had not Shakespeare’s play to read, surely it were better 
to listen to Tate than not to know the play at all. There is more of Shakespeare in 
Tate’s Version than there is of Tate. 
At any rate, I cannot but think that others, however hard they may be upon Tate for 
his laughable attempts to be Shakespearian in his changes, will, like myself, be a little 
softened towards him after reading his Dedication; a tone of reverence for Shake- 
speare runs through it that quite took me by surprise. It is as follows: To my Esteemed 
Friend Thomas Boteler, Esq; Sir, You have a natural Right to this Piece, since by 
your Advice I attempted the Revival of it with Alterations, Nothing but the Pow’r of 
your Persuasions, and my Zeal for all the Remains of Shakespear cou’d have wrought 
me to so bold an Undertaking. I found that the New-modelling of this Story wou’d 
force me sometimes on the difficult Task of making the chiefest Persons speak some- 
thing like their Character, on Matter whereof I had no Ground in my Author. Lear’s 
real and Edgar's pretended Madness have so much of extravagant Nature (I know 
not how else to express it), as cou’d never have started but from our Shakespear's 
Creating Fancy. The Images and Language are so odd and surprizing, and yet so 
agreeable and proper, that whilst we grant that none but Shakespear could have 
form’d such Conceptions; yet we are satisfied that they were the only Things in the 
World that ought to be said on those Occasions, I found the whole to answer your 


% | Poeil qui ’a plus la lumiére, étre le coeur sinistre qui n’a plus la joie, étendre les 


er = a Heap of Jes 


ae 


oa nast Se age 
he —o 3 


: als, 1 z P 
isurder, that it soon aid I had sida Giga 


2 
Likewibe gives Countenance to Zdgar’s Disguise, om that a enero Stee * 
, Story i is evidently _ 


was before a poor Shift to save his Life. The Distress of th 


heightened by it; and it particularly gave Occasion of a New Scene or Two, of more — 


Success (perhaps) than Merit, This method necessarily threw me on making the 
Tale conclude in a Success to the innocent distrest Persons: Otherwise I must have 
incumbred the Stage with dead Bodies, which Conduct makes many Tragedies con- 
clude with unseasonable Jests. Yet was I wract with no small Fears for so bold a 
Change, till I found it well receiv’d by my Audience; and if this will not satisfy 
the Reader, I can produce an Authority that questionless will. 
Neither ts it of so Trivial an Undertaking to make a Tragedy end ie pag ae ie 
happily, fortis more difficult to save than’tis to Kill: The Dagger Yrvex, 
and Cup of Poison are always in Readiness ; but to bring the Action 
to the last Extremity, and then by probable means to recover All, will require the 
Art and Fudgment of a Writer, and cost him many a Pang in the Performance, 
I have one thing more to apologize for, which is that I have us’d less Quaintness 
of Expression even in the Newest Parts of this Play. I confess, ’twas Design in me, 
partly to comply with my Author’s Style, to make the Scenes of a Piece, and partly 
to give it some Resemblance of the Time and Persons here Represented. This, Sir, 
I submit wholly to you, who are both a Judg and Master of Style. Nature had 
exempted you before you went Abroad from the Morose Saturnine Humour of our 
Country, and you brought home the Refinedness of Travel without the Affectation. 
Many faults I see in the following Pages, and question not but you will discover 
more; yet I will presume so far on your Friendship as to make the whole a Present 
to you, and Subscribe myself Your obliged Friend and humble Servant, N. TATE. 


PROLOGUE 


Since by Mistakes your best delights are made 

(For e’en your Wives can please in Masquerade), 
*Twere worth our while, to have drawn you in this Day 
By a new Name to our old honest Play; 

But he that did this Evenings Treat prepare 

Bluntly resolv’d before hand to declare \ 
Your Entertainment should be most old Fare. 

Yet hopes since in rich Shakespear’s soil it grew 
’Twill relish yet, with those whose tasts are true, 
\nd his Ambition is to please a Few. 

If then this Heap of Flow’rs shall chance to wear 
Fresh beauty in the Order they now bear, 

Even this Shakespear's Praise; each rustick knows 
*Mongst plenteous Flow’rs a Garland to Compose 
Which strung by this Course Hand may fairer show 
But ’twas a Power Divine first made ’em grow, 


we tl net this ee = got, 
Ih vain our Poets Preach, whilst Churchmen Plot. 


- r = 


7 THE PERSONS 


Aer agai te King Lear, ; . Mr, Betterton. 
= 20S > -Glesterz, Pe Mrs Gilles. 
Kent, F _ Mr, Wiltshire, 
Edgar, _ Mr. Smith. 
Bastard, Mr, Jo. Williams. 
Cornwall, Mr. Norris. : 
Albany, Mr. Bowman. 
Gentleman Vsher, Mr. Jevon. 
Goneril, Mrs. Shadwel. 
Regan, _ Lady Slingsby. 
— Cordelia, Mrs. Barry. 
al When the play opens Gloucester is already convinced of Edgar’s treachery, and 
5 Edmund is in high favour. 
Ee - As the royal procession is entering, before the division of the kingdom, Edgar, 
f * speaking to Cordelia at Entrance,’ declares his love for her, and is assured by her 
4 _ that his love is returned, so ardently, indeed, that Cordelia’s blunt replies to her 
be _ father are prompted, not so much by detestation of her sisters’ hypocrisy, as by a de- 
F re, sire to avoid marriage with Burgundy: 
: pes ‘Cordelia, [Aside] Now comes my trial, How am I distrest, 


That must with cold speech tempt the chol’rick king 
Rather to leave me Dowerless; then condemn me 
To loath’d embraces.” 


Cordelia is cast off, and Burgundy refuses her; of the King of France there is no 
mention throughout the play. Kent is banished. 

Now that Cordelia is in disgrace Edgar renews his suit, but Cordelia, true to the 
fashionable propriety of the last century, at once becomes coquettish, and thinks she 
must test Edgar’s love by coldness, and alleges that she is now no longer ‘the darling 
‘of aking.’ Whereupon Edgar: 

‘Thus Majesty takes most State in Distress! 
How are we tost on Fortune’s fickle floud ! 
The Wave that with surprising kindness brought 


The dear wreck to my arms, has snatched it back, 
And left me mourning on the barren shoar.’ 


The Bastard persuades Edgar to conceal himself, and then shows the forged letter 
to Gloucester; and here Tate so polishes up one of Shakespeare’s ‘jewels’ as to make 


40 


470 APPENDIX 


it dazzling; in the original Gloucester says to Edgar ‘wind me into him.’ Thus 
Tate: ; 
‘wind me into him, 
That I may bite the Traytor’s Heart, and fold 
His bleeding Entrals on my vengeful arm.’ 


The version now follows the original with tolerable fidelity, through Kent’s en- 
trance, in disguise, on Lear’s service, and through Lear’s curse on Goneril, of course, 
as is well known, with the omission of the Fool. 

In the next Act the Bastard induces Edgar to fly, and Gloucester in his rage tells 
the Bastard to ‘ pursue the villain And bring him peace-meal to me.’ 

Kent and Oswald arrive at Gloucester’s castle and have their quarrel; Kent calls 
Oswald, ‘Thou Escence-Bottle!’ and offers to ‘tread the muss-cat into mortar.’ 
Kent is put in the stocks. 

In the next scene Edgar enters, and, after uttering the first four or five lines of his 
soliloquy, ‘I heard myself proclaimed,’ &c., says: 


*‘—How easie now, 

**T were to defeat the malice of my Trale, 
And leave the griefs on my sword’s reeking Point: 
But Love detains me from Death’s peaceful Cell, 
Still whispering me, Cordedia’s in distress ; 
Unkind as she is, I cannot see her wretched, 
But must be near to wait upon her Fortune. 
Who knows but the white Minute yet may come, 
When Zdgar may do service to Cordelia, 
That charming hope still ties me to the Oar 
Of painful Life, and makes me to submit 
To th’ humblest shifts to keep that Life a Foot; 
My face I will besmear,’ &c. 


Again, the original is adhered to tolerably close throughout the rest of the Act. 
When Regan says, ‘What need one?’ and Lear, in the original, replies in those 
musical words of saddest pathos, ‘Oh, reason not the need,’ we have instead in the 
Version : 

* Regan. What need one? 
Lear. Bloud! Fire! here—Leprosies and bluest Plagues! 

Room, room for Hell to belch her Horrors up 

And drench the Civces in a stream of Fire; 

Heark how th’ Infernals eccho to my rage 

Their Whips and Snakes. 
Regan. How lewd a thing is Passion! 
Goneril. So old and stomachful.’ 


The Third Act opens with Lear, demented, on the heath, and again the original 
is followed in his speeches: ‘ Blow winds and dzrs¢f your cheeks,’ &c. 

In the next scene the Bastard receives love letters from both Regan and Goneril, 
and to him enters Gloucester, who reveals that he is plotting to restore Lear. As 
Gloucester is going out he is met by Cordelia, while the ‘ Bastard observes them at 9 
‘ distance.’ 

‘Cord. Turn, Gloster, Turn, by the sacred Pow’rs 
I do conjure you, give my griefs a Hearing, 
You must; you shall, nay I am sure you will, 
For you were always styl’d the Just and Good. 
Glost. What would’st thou, Princess? rise and speak thy griefs. 


Cord. Nay, you shall promise to redress’*em too 
Or here i’ll kneel forever; I entreat 


TATE’S VERSION 471 


* Thy succour for a Father, and a king, 
An injur’d Father and an injur’d king. 
Bast. O Charming Sorrow! how her Tears adorn her, 
Like Dew on Flow’rs, but she is vertuous, 
| And I must quench this hopeless Fire i’ th’ kindling. 
Glost. Consider, Princess, 
For whom thou begg’st, ’tis for the king that wrong’d Thee. 
‘ 3 : Cord. O name not that; he did not, cou’d not wrong me, 
: Nay, muse not, Gloster, for it is too likely 
This injur’d king e’er this, is past your Aid, 
And gone distracted with his Savage Wrongs. 
Sast. Vl gaze no more,—and yet my Eyes are charm’d. 
Cord. Or, what if it be Worse? 
Ce As ’tis too probable, this furious Night 
| Has pierc’d his tender Body, the bleak Winds 
And cold Rain chill’d, or Lightning struck him Dead; 
If it be so, your promise is discharg’d, 
And I have only one poor Boon to beg, 
That you’d convey me to his breathless Trunk, 
With my torn Robes to wrap his hoary Head, 
With my torn Hair to bind his Hands and Feet, 
Then with a show’r of Tears 
To wash his Clay-smear’d Cheeks, and dye beside him, 
Glost. Rise, fair Cordelia, thou hast Piety 
Enough ¢’ attone for both thy sisters Crimes. 
I have already plotted to restore 
My injur’d Master, and thy Vertue tells me 
We shall succeed, and suddenly. [2xit. 
Cord. Dispatch, Arante, 
Provide me a Diguise, well instantly 
Go seek the King and bring him some relief. 
Arante. How, Madam! Are you ignorant 
Of what your impious Sisters have decreed? 
Immediate Death for any that relieve him. 
Cord. Icannot dread the Furies in this case. 
Ar. Insucha Night as this? Consider, Madam, 
For many miles about there’s scarce a Bush 
To shelter in. 
Cord. Therefore no shelter for the King, 
And more our Charity to find him out: 
What have not Women dar’d for vicious Love? 
And we’ll be shining proofs that they can dare 
For Piety as much. Blow Winds, and Lightnings fall, 
Bold in my Virgin Innocence, I'll flie 
My Royal Father to relieve, or dye. [2xit. 
Bast. Provide mea diguise, we'll instantly 
Go seek the King: ha! ha! a lucky change 
That Vertue which I fear’d would be my hindrance, 
Has prov’d the Bond to my Design ; 
I’ll bribe two Ruffians shall at distance follow, 
And seise ’em in some desert Place; and there 
Whilst one retains her t’other shall return 
T’ inform me where she’s Lodg’d; [’ll be disguis’d too. 
Whilst they are poching for me, I'll to the Duke 
With these Dispatches,’ &c., &c. [2xit. 


In the next Scene we have Lear before the hovel where he meets Mad Tom, that 
eats the ‘ Wall-nut and the Water-nut.’ The original is again followed, but, be it 
always remembered, with the omission of the Fool. 

Lear, Edgar, Kent, and Gloucester depart, and Cordelia and her maid, Arante, 


he Beiaieape 
‘staff,’ and they run off bawling, ‘The Devil, th is 
Princess, but is obliged to keep up his disguise, with, Who relieves 


‘sleeps on the Nettle, with the Hedg-pig for his Pillow? > 


© Whilst Smug ply’d the Bellows “2 fas ¥ ~ 
She truckt with her Fellows, . Rae kee 
The Freckle-fac’d Mab 5 . on 
Was a Blouze, and a Drab, n ; “ro 
3 Yet Swithin made Oberon jealous.’ . : - 


pee He does not hold out long, however, but soon reveals himself, and explains the 
reason for his disguise, not forgetting to refer to her injunction upon him to trouble 
aes her upon the Theme of love no more. This proves too much for Cordelia, and she 


exclaims : f 
: ‘Come to my Arms, thou dearest, best of Men, . 
ng And take the kindest Vows, that e’er were spoke } 
: By a protesting Maid. 7 
oe ¥ ; Edgar. 1s’t possible? 
gee Cord. By the dear Vital Stream that baths my Heart, 


4 which, by the way, reminds us of Gray’s Bard, 
'y yi: 


¥ ~ 
; ¢ These hallow’d Rags of thine, and naked Vertue, = = , 
2 : These abject Tassels, these fantastick Shreds, . ie 
ae (Ridiculous ev'n to the meanest Clown) al 
F To me are dearer than the richest Pomp 
= Of purple Monarchs. ; 
: : Edgar, Generous, charming Maid,’ &c., &c. on 


And the Scene closes with Edgar’s offer to protect the two women while they re- 
tire to the hovel for the night. 


‘Meanwhile the Stars shall dart their kindest Beams, 


; And Angels visit my Cordelia’s Dreams.’ [Exeunt. 


In the next Scene Gloucester’s eyes are put out, and the unfortunate nobleman 
finds relief at the close, in a long speech bewailing his loss of sight: 


* No more to view the Beauty of the Spring, 
Nor see the Face of Kindred, or of Friend,’ &c., &c. 


But he resolves upon revenge, by exhibiting himself to the crowd, and enlisting their 
pity for himself and the King, and then, when his mission is accomplished, he will 
throw himself from some precipice on ‘the ragged Flint below, 


* Whence my freed Soul to her bright Sphere shall fly, 
Through boundless Orbs, eternal Regions spy, 
And like the Sun, be all one glorious Eye.’ 


The opening of the Fourth Act finds ‘Edmund and Regan amorously Seated, list- 
‘ening to Musick.’ Mutual vows are exchanged, and before Edmund departs he gives“ 
Regan ‘a happy Image to lodge in that breast where all his Treasure lies [ Pulling 
‘out a picture, drops a Note” Of course this is Goneril’s note, and Regan’s jealousy 
is confirmed. An Officer enters, who announces a great rebellion, stirred up by 
Gloucester, whom we find in the next scene, led to Dover by Edgar, but on the way 


with Cordelia The : scene on the aivnned ChE af Daves fol- 
7 the description of the Cliff is exact, except the omission of the 
; the mbered idle pebble chafes.’? Lear enters and raves as in the 
inal; is found by Cordelia’s messengers. Oswald enters, and is slain by Edgar, 
Goneril’s letter found. ~' 

e dios scene ‘ Lear is asleep on a couch; Cordelia, and attendants standing 


‘ sin my perfect - mind,’ when Cordelia exclaims: < «Nay, then farewel to Patience; 
_ € witness for me Ye mighty Pow’rs I ne’er complain’d till now!’ When Lear says, 
‘I think that Lady To be my Child Cordelia,’ Cordelia replies, ‘«O my dear, dear 
_ ¢Father!? 
‘Zear. Be your Tears wet? Yes faith; pray do not Weep, 
7 I know I have giv’n thee Cause, and am so humbled 
With Crosses since, that I cou’d ask 
Forgiveness of thee, were 1t possible 
That thou cou’dst grant it; but [’m well assur’d 
Thou canst not; therefore do I stand thy Justice; 
Tf thou hast Poison for me I will drink it 
Bless thee and dye. 
eae Cord. O pity, Sir, a bleeding Heart, and cease 
A = - This killing Language. 
_ Lear, Tell me, Friends, where am I? 
— Gent. In your own kingdom, Sir. 
= Lear. Do not abuse me. 
EB <7 Gent. Be comforted, good Madam, for the Violence 
ce. Of his Distemper’s past; we’ll lead him in, 
4 Nor trouble him, till he is better settled. 
a Wil’t please you, Sir, walk into freer Air? 
‘ ; Lear. You must bear with me, Iam Oldand Foolish. [They lead him off. 
4 Cord. The Gods restore you.—Heark, I hear afar 
The beaten Drum, Old Kent’s a Man of ’s Word. 
O for an Arm 
Like the fierce Thunderer’s, when the Earth-born Sons 
Storm’d Heav’n to fight this injur’d Father’s Battle! 
That I cou’d shift my Sex, and die me deep 
In his opposer’s Blood! But as I may, 
With Women’s Weapons, Piety and Pray’rs, 
T'll aid his Cause.—You never-erring Gods 
Fight on his Side, and Thunder on his Foes 
Such Tempests as his poor ag’d Head sustain’d; 
Your Image suffers when a Monarch bleeds. 
*Tis your own Cause, for that your Succors bring. 
Revenge your selves, and right an injur’d King.” 


End of the Fourth Act. 


The next Act opens with a short scene between Goneril and her ‘ Poisoner,’ 
in which the former is assured that the banquet and the poison for her ‘imperious 
‘Sister’ are ready. xeun¢, Then Edmund, alone in his tent, exults in language 
somewhat too warm for modern taste over the success of his amours with the two 
sisters. In the next scene, after Edgar has left Gloucester in the shadow of a tree 
while he goes off to the fight, Gloucester soliloquises thus : 


4o * 


P guy a a] 


_ The original is retained quite closely until Lear says, «I fear I am not 


ase be ‘hg ine which eased (see ih, p- 31 cee were : 


and challenges him to fight. All depart to witness the duel, and leave Kent and 


version, by Gloucester while the battle was in progress ? d: have 
through Macready’s Yournal for any notice of his stage-arrangement ae 
Edgar returns with the news that the battle is lost, and Albany and oneril, ‘&e. 
enter with Lear and Cordelia prisoners. Goneril in an Aside tells a captain to diss . 
patch the prisoners, and Edgar enters in disguise and impeaches Edmund of treason, as, 


Cordelia guarded. : ne 
‘Lear. O Kent, Cordelia! » et ; 
You are the only Pair that I e’er wrong’d ’ ~~ 
And the just Gods have made you Witnesses a 
Of my Digrace, the very shame of Fortune 
To see me chain’d and shackled at these years! 
Yet were you but Spectators of my Woes, 
Not fellow-sufferers, all were well! 
Cord. This language, Sir, adds yet to our Affliction. 
Lear, Thou Kent, didst head the Troops that fought my Battel, —_ 
Expos’d thy Life and Fortunes for a Master 
That had (as I remember) banisht Thee. ~ 
Kent. Pardon me, Sir, that once I broke your orders,’ &c. 


On learning that Kent had followed him as a servant Lear weeps and almost faints, ta 
but recovers, and bids the guards conduct them to prison, where they ‘ will sit alone 
‘like Birds i’ th’ Cage,’ &c., and departs, asserting that 


‘ Together we'll out-toil the spight of Hell 
And dye the Wonders of the World; Away.” 


The duel between Edgar and Edmund takes place, after much boasting on both — 
sides of their legitimate and illegitimate births, Edmund falls,and Regan and Gon- 
eril avow their love and jealousy over his bleeding body. Goneril reveals her attempt 
to poison Regan at the banquet on the previous evening, and expresses a desire to seé 


* How well that blasted Beauty will become 
Congealing Blood, and Death’s convulsive Pangs.’ 


Whereupon Regan retorts that she has done the same thing by Goneril, and poisoned 
her at her own banquet. Edmund stops what he terms their ¢ untimely strife,’ and 
is borne out in a resigned frame of mind, sustained by the reflection: 


‘ Who weuld not chuse, like me, to yield his Breath 
T’ have Rival Queens contend for him in Death, 


In the next and last scene Lear is discovered in prison asleep, with his head in 
Cordelia’s lap. Cordelia apostrophises the sleeping king, and wonders what fate has 
seized Edgar ‘in this general Wreck.’ 


*O Gods! a sudden Gloom o’erwhelms me, and the Image 
Of Death o’er-spreds the Place,x—Ha! Who are These? 


TATE’S VERSION 475 


Enter Captain and Officers with Cords. 


3 “ Capt. Now, Sirs, dispatch, already are you paid 
4 In part, the best of your Reward’s to come. 
: Lear, Charge, charge upon their Flank, their last Wing halts. 
Push, push the Battel, and the Day’s our own. 
Their Ranks are broke, down with Albany. 
fe Who holds my Hands ?—O thou deceiving Sleep, 
I was this very Minute on the Chace; 
And now a Prisoner here.—What mean the Slaves? 
You will not murther me? 
Cord. Help, Earth and Heaven! 
For your Souls sake, dear Sirs, and for the Gods. 
Ofc. No Tears, good Lady, no pleading against Gold and Preferment. 
Come, Sirs, make ready your Cords. 
Cord. You, Sir, I’ll seize, 
You have a humane Form, and if no Pray’rs 
Can touch your Soul to spare a poor King’s Life, 
If there be anything that you hold Dear, 
By that I beg you to dispatch me first. 
Capt. Comply with her Request; dispatch her First. 
Lear. Off Hell-hounds, by the Gods I charge you spare her. 
’"Tis my Cordelia, my true pious Daughter; 
No pity ?—Nay, then take an old Mans Vengeance. 
[Snatches a Partisan, and strikes down two of them; the rest quit 
Cordelia, and turn on him. Enter Edgar and Albany. 


Edg. Death! Hell! ye Vultures, hold your impious Hands, 
Or take a speedier Death than you wou’d give. 

Caft. By whose Command? 

Edg. Behold the Duke, your Lord. 

Al. Guards, seize those Instruments of Cruelty. 

Cord. My Edgar, Oh! 

Edg. My Dear Cordelia! Lucky was the Minute 
Of our Approach, the Gods have weigh’d our Suff’rings ; 
W’ are past the Fire, and now must shine to Ages. 

* Gent. Look here, my Lord, see where the generous King 

Has slain two of ’em. 

Lear. DidI not, Fellow? 
I’ve seen the Day, with my good biting Faulchion 
I cou’d have made ’em skip; I am Old now, 
And these vile Crosses spoil me; out of Breath? 
Fie, Oh! quite out of Breath, and spent. 

Ais, Bring in old Kent; and, Edgar, guide you hither 
Your Father, whom you said was near. [Zx. Edgar. 
He may be an Ear-Witness at the least 
Of our proceedings. 

Lear, Who are you? 
My Eyes are none o’ th’ Best, I’ll tell you streight ; 
Oh Aféany! Well, Sir, we are your Captives, 
And you are come to see Death pass upon us. 
Why this Delay ?—or is’t your Highness pleasure 
To gives us first the Tortour? Say yeso? 
Why here’s old Ken? and I, as tough a Pair 
As e’re bore Tyrants Stroke :—But my Cordelia, 
My poor Cordelia here, O pity !—— 

Ad. Take off their Chains.—Thou injur’d Majesty, 
The Wheel of Fortune now has made her Circle, 
And blessings yet stand ’twixt thy Grave and Thee,’ 


[Kent drought in here 


Albany goes on to tell Lear of the wickedness of Regan and Goneril, and that he 
has just left Edmund mortally wounded, and continues; 


476 


APPENDIX 


Since then my Injuries, Leas, fall in with Thine, 
I have resolv’d the same Redress for both. 

Kent. What says my Lord? 

Cord. Speak, fer me thought I heard 
The charming voice of a descending God. | 

Als. The Troops by Edmund rais’d, I have disbanded ; 
Those that remain are under my Command, 

What Comfort may be brought to chear your Age, 
And heal your Savage Wrongs, shall be apply’d; 
For to your Majesty we do resign \ 
Your Kingdom, save what part your Self conferr’d 
On us in Marriage. 

Kent. Hear you that, my Liege? 

Cord. Then they are Gods, and Vertue is their Care. 

Lear. Is’t possible ? 

Let the Spheres stop their Course, the Sun make halt, 
The Winds be husht, the Seas and Fountains rest ; 
All Nature pause, and listen to the Change. 

Where is my Kent, my Cajus? 

Kent. Here, my Liege. 

Lear, Why I have News, that will recall thy Youth; 
Hat Didst thou hear’t, or did th’ inspiring Gods 
Whisper to me alone? Old Lear shall be 
A King again. 

Kent. The Prince that Like a God has Pow’r, has said it. 

Lear. Cordelia then shall be a Queen, mark that; 
Cordelia shall be a Queen; Winds catch the Sound, 
And bear it on your rosie Wings to Heav’n. 

Cordelia is a Queen, 


Re-enter Edgar with Gloster. 


Al. Look, Sir, where Pious Edgar comes, 
Leading his Eye-less Father: O my Liege! 
His wondrous Story will deserve your Leisure; 
What he has done and suffer’d for your Sake, 
What for the fair Corde/ia’s. 
Glost, Where is my Liege? Conduct me to his Knees, to hail 
His second Birth of Empire; my dear Edgar 
Has, with himself, reveal’d the King’s blest Restauration, 
Lear, My poor dark Gloster. 
Glost, O let me kiss that once more Sceptred Hand! 
Lear. Hold, Thou mistak’st the Majesty, kneel here; 
Cordelia has our Pow’r, Cordelia’s Queen. 
Speak, is not that the noble Suff’ring Edgar ? 
Glost, My pious Son, more dear than my lost Eyes! 
Lear. I wrong’d him too, but here’s the fair Amends. 
Edg. Your Leave, my Liege, for an unwelcome Message; 
Edmund (but that’s a Trifle) is expir’d ; 
What more will touch you, your imperious Daughters 
Goneril and haughty Regan, both are Dead, 
Each by the other poison’d at a Banquet, 
This, Dying, they confest. 
Cord. O fatal Period of ill-govern’d Life! 
Lear, Ingrateful as they were, my Heart feels yet 
A Pang of Nature for their wretched Fall ;— 
But, Zdgar, I defer thy Joys too long: 
Thou serv’dst distrest Cordelia; take her Crown’d: 
Th’ imperial Grace fresh blooming on her Brow ; 
Nay Gloster, ‘Thou hast here a Father’s Right, 
Thy helping Hand t’ heap Blessings on their Heads, 
Kent, Old Ken? throws in his hearty Wishes too, 


1 calm Reflections on our Fortunes past 
Cheer’d with Relation of the prosperous Reign 
_ Of this celestial Pair; Thus our Remains 
Shall in an even Course of Thought be past 
Enjoy the present Hour, nor fear the Last. 
£dg. Our drooping Country now erects her Head, 
Peace spreads her balmy Wings, and Plenty blooms. 
Divine Cordelia, all the Gods can Witness. 
How much thy Love to Empire I prefer ! 
Thy bright Example shall convince the World 
(Whatever Storms of Fortune are decreed) . 
That Truth and Vertue shall at last succeed.’ [Zx. Omnes. 


The Epilogue, spoken by Mrs Barry, concludes with : 


‘ This Play’s Reviver humbly do’s admit 
Your abs’lute Pow’er to damn his part of it: 
But still so many Master-Touches shine 
Of that vast Hand that first laid this Design 
. That in great Shakespear's Right, He’s bold to say, 
If you like nothing you have seen this Day, 
The Play your Judgment damns, not you the Play.’ 


ADDISON, in Zhe Spectator (No. 40, April 16, 1711), says, ‘ King Lear is an admir- 
able tragedy . . . as Shakespeare wrote it; but as it is reformed according to the 
chimerical notion of poetical justice, in my humble opinion it has lost half its beauty.’ 


Davirs (Dram. Misc., ii, 212): Though Tate’s alterations are, in many places, 
mean and unworthy to be placedso near the composition of the best dramatic author, 
it must be confessed, that in the conduct of some Scenes, whether contrived by him- 
self or hinted to him by his friend Dryden, he is not unhappy. One situation of his 
is particularly affecting; where the Scene opens and discovers Lear, with his head 
on Cordelia’s lap, and the king in his sleep, attacking the forces of his enemies. The 
bringing that action forward to the audience, which is only related in the old play, 
of Lear’s killing the two soldiers employed to murder him and Cordelia, is a circum- 
stance that gives pleasure and exultation to the spectators, The half-breathing and 
panting of Garrick, with a look and action which confessed the infirmity of old age, 
greatly heightened the picture. To speak in Shakespeave’s phrase, this incident will 
be locked in the memory of those who have the pleasure to remember it. Barry, in 
this Scene, was a lively copy of Garrick’s manner, and had the superior advantage 
of a more important figure. Who could possibly think of depriving an audience, 
almost exhausted with the feelings of so many terrible Scenes, of the inexpressible 
delight which they enjoyed, when the old king in rapture cried out,— 


© Qld Lear shall be a King again’? 


478 APPENDIX 


ARTHUR MurPHY, whom Dr JoHNSON pronounced a very judicious critic, thus 
speaks of Tate’s Version (Gray’s-Inn Fournal, ii, 222, 1754): The close of this 
Tragedy is fall of Terror and Commiseration, and our great Poet has here given us 
a Death, which is not often to be found in the Play-house Bill of Mortality, vzz., 
the Death of Lear without the Dagger or the Bowl. But, perhaps, after all the 
Heart-piercing Sensations which we have before endured through the whole Piece, 
it would be too much to see this actually performed on the Stage; from the actor 
whom I have already named [Garrick] I am sure it would, though I should be glad 
to see the Experiment made, convinced at the same Time that the Play, as it is altered, 
will always be most agreeable to an Audience, as the Circumstances of Lear’s Res- 
toration, and the virtuous Edgar’s Alliance with the amiable Cordelia, must always 
call forth those gushing Tears which are swelled and ennobled by a virtuous Joy. 


MACREADY in his Reminiscences (p. 697, New York, 1875) says that ‘ Tate’s 
‘ King Lear was the only acting copy from the date of its production until the res- 
‘toration of Shakespeare’s tragedy at Covent Garden in 1838. Previously to that, 
‘I think, in the year 1823, or a little later, the play, Tate’s, was acted by Kean, with 
‘the last Scene of the original restored. I believe the elder Colman put out an 
‘alteration, but I question whether it was acted; certainly it did not hold its place 
‘on the stage.’ 


LIST OF EDITIONS COLLATED IN THE 
TEXTUAL NOTES 


The First Quarto (‘ The Pide Bull.’ 
Ashbee’s Facsimile) .. : 

The Second Quarto (‘N. Butter i) 

The First Folio 5 

The Second Folio .. 

The Third Quarto ae Bell's Ed. ) 

The Third Folio 

The Fourth Folio .. a5 

RowE (First Edition) a 

Rowe (Second Edition) .. o* 

Pore (First Edition) es oe 

Pore (Second Edition) .. 

THEOBALD (First Edition) 

THEOBALD (Second Edition) 

HANMER 

WARBURTON 

JOHNSON 

CAPELL 

JENNENS 

JOHNSON and STEEVENS 

JOHNSON and STEEVENS 

JOHNSON and STEEVENS 

MALONE 

ECCLES ae as ae 

STEEVENS 

RANN ane 

REED’S STEEVENS .. 

REED’S STEEVENS .. 

BOSWELL’S MALONE 

SINGER (First Edition) 

KNIGHT (First Edition) 

CouuieER (First Edition) 

De.ius (First Edition) 

Hupson (First Edition) .. 

SINGER (Second Edition) .. 

Dyce (First Edition) 

CoLLiER (Second ey 

STAUNTON . : 

RICHARD GRANT Wurre ae 


[Theob. ii] 
[Han.].. 

[ Warb.] 

[ Johns. ] 

[Cap.] .. 

[Jen.] + 
[Steev. *73] 
[Steev. ’78] 
[Steev. ’85] 

[ Mal.) 

[Ec.] | 26 
[Steev. ] 
[Rann].. 

[ Reed 03] 
[Reed ’13] 

[ Var. or Bos.] . 
[Sing. i] oie 
[ Knt, i] aie 
[ Coll. i] ae 
[ Del. i} ite 
[ Huds. i] Bt 
[Sing. ii] ee 
[Dyce i] er 
[ Coll. ii] ae 
[Sta.] .. ane 
[Wh.] .. Sie 


479 


pore hie Edition) > 
_KEIGHTLEY  .. ; 


‘Dyce (Second Edition) 


Hupson (School Edition) 

Dettus (Third Edition) 

MoBERLY (Rughy Edition) .. 

W. ALpiIs WricuT ( Clarendon Edition) 

CoLLiER (Third Edition) .. ja)_-[ Collin} 
SCHMIDT we ae oy ce apache) an 


The Agreement of the Folios is indicated by the symbol Ff; that of Q.pad Qe 
by Qa. 

The sign + after Ff, or F,, indicates the agreement of ne Popr, THEOBALD, 
HANMER, WARBURTON, aa tonne 

The same sign after Glo. indicates the agreement of the Globe Edition, the Cam- 
bridge Edition, and WRiGHT’s (Clarendon) Edition. 

The abbreviation (subs.) indicates that the reading is substantially given, ,and that 
immaterial variations in spelling, punctuation, or stage-directions are disregarded | 


When WARBURTON precedes HANMER, in the Textual Notes, it indicates that 


HANMER has adopted a suggestion of WARBURTON’S. 

When the VARIORUM OF 1821 follows MALONE’s edition of 1790, Var. stands for 
both; when they disagree, Bos., i. e., Boswell, stands for the former only. 

Coll, (MS) refers to Mr COLLIER’s annotated F,. 

Quincy (MS) refers to Mr Quincy’s annotated F,. 

The words e¢ ce¢. after any reading indicate that it is the reading of a// bad 
editions. 

The frequent omission of the apostrophe in the F,, a Hee of that edition, is 
not generally noted. 

An Emendation or Conjecture which is discussed in the Commentary is not repeated 
in the Textual Notes; nor is ‘ conj.’ added to any name in the Textual Notes unless 
it happens to be that of an editor, in which case its omission would be misleading. 

In the matter of punctuation the colon is used as it is in German, as equivalent 
to ‘namely.’ 

A dash at the close of a sentence, in the Text, indicates that the speaker changes 
his address from one person to another, 

All citations of Acts, Scenes, and lines in Romeo and Fuliet, Macbeth, and 
Hamlet refer to this edition of those plays; in citations from other plays the Globe 
fidition is followed. 


ae 


» 


ae 


a 
7 


BIBLIOGRAPHY OF KING LEAR 


ENGLISH*# 


SEVENTEENTH CENTURY 


The true Chronicle Historie of the life and death of King Lear, &c. 
[The Pide Bull edition. See p. 354.] oe od of ome .. 1608 
Lithographed by ASHBEE, 1868. 
The true Chronicle History of the life and death of King Lear, &c. 
[The WV. Butter edition. See p. 355.] a r bic Be -. 1608 
Reprinted by STEEVENS: * Twenty Plays,’ &c., r66e 
Lithographed by ASHBEE, 1867. 
True Chronicle History of the life and death of a Lear, &c. [The 


Fane Bell edition; see p. 358.] me ae »« 1655 
The History of King Lear, Acted at the Queen S T ees Revised 
with Alterations, by N. Tate. oe . 1681 


Reprinted in 1689, 1699, 1712, 1723, 1734, 1735, ee 1759; pnt at Cork, 
1761, 1767, 1771, 1779. 


EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 


Gildon: Remarks on the Plays of Sh., p. 404. .. ae 26 L7TO) 

Considerations on the Stage in Tragedy, a Criticism on King ‘eat oe oe ASE 

Peck: Explanatory and Critical Notes. .. as ve we oti -» 1740 

Upton: Observations, &c. .. a6 os os oe os oe +» 1746 

Edwards: Canons of Criticism. .. . oe ae ao ° -- 1748 
Other editions, 1750, 1753, 1758, 1765. 

Upton: Observations, &c. .. oe oe oe on oe -- 1748 


Mrs Lennox: Shakespear Illustrated, ae 2 ee ee Pe 1753-4 
Grey: Critical, Historical, and Explanatory Notes. oe sie oe «+ 1753 
Warton: The Adventurer, 8 December, ef seg. .. er oe ae -. 1754 
Murphy: Gray’s-Jnun Fournal, vol. ii, 15 June, e¢ seg. -- nv Ae ets 4 
Capell: Notes and Various Readings. he “* an oe ci ate £759 
Heath: A Reyvisal, &c. oe oe oe «+ 1765 
King Leir, 1605; reprinted by Seer in Tt dey Plays, &e. He ~. 1766 
Reprinted by Nichols in ‘ Six Old Plays, &c., 1779. 


* This English portion of the Bibliography was kindly prepared by my friend J. ParKER Norris, 
Esq. The titles of Shakespeare’s complete Works are omitted as surplusage.—Ep. 
Al 2F 481 


482 APPENDIX 


Tyrwhitt: Observations and Conjectures. . . te Sc 

Colman’s Acting Edition. .. ee A she aE 
Another edition, 1771. 

Mrs Montagu: An Essay. .. . .- os os 
Other editions, 1770, 1772, 1777; rye, 1810. 


Jennens: King Lear, collated with old and modern editions. 
Jennens: A Vindication of King Lear as lately published, &c. 


Hopkins’ Acting Edition. .. os <* 
Griffith; The Morality of Shakespeare s Drain a o- 
Capell: Notes and Various Readings. ae oe Gc 
Ritson: Remarks, Critical and Illustrative. 
Davies: Dramatic Miscellanies. London, and Dublin. 
Richardson: Essays, &c. .. wae Sip wee 
Other editions, 1797, 1798, 1812. 
Mason: Comments. London, and Dublin. 
Other editions, 1798; Dublin, 1807. 
Altered by Garrick. .. are 2 mie “vs s 
Eccles: Illustrations and Variorum Canineniiias 
Republished, Dublin, 1793; London, 1794, 1801, rs 
Ritson: Cursory Criticisms. . oes ; ate . 
Players’ Edition. 


Treland: ‘ Miscellaneous Papees Be. Peg Kynue ee sos and Folio. 


Dubois: The Wreath. mie ae es 


NINETEENTH CENTURY 
Altered by Tate and revised by Kemble. London. 


canus). .. oe we oe os 
Chedworth: Notes. 
Seymour: Remarks. .. 
Douce: Illustrations... 
Another edition, 1839. 
Lamb: Tales from Shakespeare, 


Pye: Comments on the Commentators. 
Revised by Kemble. .. A 
Players’ Edition. Manchester. oe 
Mrs Inchbald’s Edition, 

Weston: Short Notes. A 

Croft: Annotations. York... 


Deverell: Discoveries in Hieroglyphics ae other SoMeuivess 


Another edition, 1816. 

Schlegel: Dramatic Art, &c. Trans. by Black. .. 
Other editions, 1840, 1846, 1861. 

Becket: Shakespeare’s Himself Again. 

Drake: Shakespeare and his Times. 

Hazlitt: Characters of Shakespeare’s Plays. 
Other editions, 1818, 1838, 1854, 1870. 

Nichols: Literary Illustrations, &c., vol. ii. 


oe 


Other editions, 1816, 1822, 1831, +859, 1845, 1845, 1853, 1857, 1858, 1876. 


1766 
1768 


1769 


= LYZO 
wip72 


1774 


- 1775. 
Page i 62) 
EV SS 

. 1784 
. 1784 


1785 


1786 


- 1792 


~ 1792 
++ 1794 
- 1796 
- 1799 


? 1800 
Waldron: The Shakespearian Miscellany (containing Downes’s Gee Angh- 


. 1802 


1805 


++ 1805 
- 1807 


- 1807 


- . 1807 
-» 1808 
» « 1808 
-- 1808 

- 1808 
se SEO! 

. 1813 


- 1815 


1815 


pe tony 
- 1817 


- 1817 


ite Plain eee kei a <& 
eprinted, 1851, 1869. 
Drake: Memorials of Shakespeare. Slee ons cee gee TAGES 
| ‘Farren: Essayson Mania. .. eee oor a 2 Tasos 
* | Collier: History of English Dramatic Buctry, ee Fs entre sera ret: 


Second edition, 1879. 
‘Mrs Jameson: Characteristics of Women, CA 8 = DR Ost rey tee 
_ Other editions, 1833, 1836, 1846, 1858. : 

___ Players’ Edition. New York. “fa GO) ioe on Pi Se cane no Usals 
; Patterson: Natural History of the Insects mentioned in Shakespeare... .. 1838 
_ Another edition, 1842. 

Brown: Shakespeare’s Autobiographical Poems... .. «2 «+ «+ 1838 

Rankin: The Philosophy of Shakespeare. ate os a8 are -. I184t 

Collier: Shakespeare’s Library. .. on Cor a nee Big, mao ies) 

_ WVew edition by W. C. Hazlitt, 1875. 


eo 
— 


ae Dyce: Remarks, &c. mie ae oe ave ae ors ae .. 1844 
ae inntemer NEwmEnSiraOnGaauie ys) ec cle 8s ee oe ee TOSS 
a Badham: Criticism applied to Shakespeare. ee ice Ne ee ie EO 
—_= Ulrici: Shakespeare’s Dramatic Art (translated), London. .. .. .. 1846 
= ee ektion, Loudon, 1876. 

i Birch: Inquiry into the Philosophy and Religion of Shakespeare. .. -. 1848 
j Hudson: Lectures. New York. .. ae oe ome -- 1848 
4 Players’ Edition (Modern Standard Drama). New Varke an oe -. 1848 
_ / Coleridge: Notes and Lectures, .. ac o* oe Ac ae .. 1849 


i Reprinted, Liverpool, 1874. 
Mrs Cowden Clarke: Girlhood of Shakespeare’s Heroines. .. an 1850-52 
7 C. Gillmor: Reflections from Shakespeare’s Cliff. aie, tejete ets ae Lost 
Hartley Coleridge: Essays and Marginalia. as an a ene «» 1851 
Three Essays on King Lear (by Seeley, Young, and Hart). .. “6 seLOGE 
“Collier; Notesand Emendations. .. .. «2 «+ «2 e+ «+ 1852 
Second edition, 1853. 
Bell: Shakespeare’s Puck, &c. aia a0 an oe oe 2.» 1852-60 
Dyce: A Few Notes. c ae +e oe oe os wen Lo53 
Singer: The Text of Wakeocate Vindicated. we we oe oe oe 58} 
White: Shakespeare’s Scholar. New York. .. e es oe «+ 1854 
Walker: Shakespeare’s Versification. SI «e 2% oe as «+ 1854 
Burlesque “ King Queer.” .. ols oe an ors Ain An 90, USS 
Stephens: Shakespeare’s Story-teller. oe os oe a oe ong 


Collier: Seven Lectures. .. ++ «+ Fie Oty OO 1856 
Badham: The Text. .. ae Ac oe ore ote ot cals 2. 1856 
.. 1856 


Mitford: Cursory Notes. .. oie ve ce ae ae a 


484 APPENDIX 


Bathurst: Shakespeare’s Versification. .. <9) ee aga Se) ve ey f 
Another edition, 1859. 
Players’ Edition. an ar he os a ae 1857 
Lloyd: Essays (reprinted from Singer! Ss second edition.) rms tt 
Charles Kean’s edition. oe ae ae aie ae a eo .. 1858 
Rushton: Shakespeare a Lawyer. Liverpool. .. oe oe oe .. 1858 
Lord Campbell: Shakespeare’s Legal Acquirements. .. a> a «+ 1859 
Walker: Critical Examination of the Text. te =f =n on .- 1859 
Bucknill: The Psychology of een SC ae ae we .. 1859 
Dyce: Strictures, &c, aie : oes ots oe aie Eee. 1859 
Jervis: Proposed Emendations. .. ss “5 ere oe oe .. 1860 
Bucknill: Medical Knowledge of Shakespeare. .. ee “8 oe . 1860 
Nichols: Notes, &c. .. ae as = ee s as ee 1861-62 
Gervinus: Shakespeare Commentaries (translated). ee =e os +. 1862 
Another edition, 1875. 
Bailey: The Received Text. aie ae ae on Sis ae 1862-66 
Cowden Clarke: Shakespeare Characters... a6 te Sc tes eT kos 
Hackett: Notes, Criticisms, &c. New York. .. oe aie oe 2 8868 
Edited by Rev. John Hunter. (Longman’s Series.) .. «2 «+ 1865 
Stearns: Shakespeare’s Medical Knowledge. New York. .. A ae 115) 4 
Heraud: Shakespeare: his Inner Life. .. tee iris os ee . + 1865 
Players’ Edition. ote ats ae ae as oe a wis 2 1866 
Cartwright: New Readings. - - a : ‘ - 1866 
Kellogg: Delineations of Insanity. ‘New York. ae 5 . + 1866 
Keightley: The Shakespeare Expositor. .. : 5 - : - 1867 
Forsyth: Shakespeare: Some Notes. Baicburgh. oe ae - 1867 
Ross: Studies. : 5 7° airy a we 1867 
Bucknill: The Mad Folk of Shakerneeres ‘ ee ° ° 1867 
Giles: Human Life in Shakespeare. Boston. .. oe . : . 1868 
Preston: Studies. Philadelphia. 30 Sec a . . - 1869 
King Lear; or the Undutiful Children. .. oi : : .. 1870 
Daniel: Notes and Conjectural Emendations. 5 . 1870 
Players’ Edition (Cumberland’s Theatre). .. aa ate “2 1870 
Rushton: Shakespeare’s Euphuism. ( ae . 1871 
Edited by Moberly. (Rugby Edition.) : i ~ 1875 
Ray: Contributions to Mental patwes Bonen: 1873 
Lloyd: Critical Essays, . 1875 
Snider: Shakespeare’s Tragedies. m7 Coie: of Sheritaie Pikeeplin ) St. 
Louis. 1875 
Reprinted in a cntlected fom as § ‘System of Shaeriuce Deana 1877. 
Dowden: Shakespeare: His Mind and Art. : oe - 1875 
Ward: History of English Dramatic Poetry. ;: <s 1875 
Edited by Kemshead. a as ms se aus oa ve £075 
Edited by W. Aldis Wright. (Clarendon Edition.) Oxford. .. 1875 
Weiss: Wit, Humor, and Shakespeare. Boston. ate we ane 1876 
Fleay: Shakespeare Manual. : a se = ate 1876 
Edited by Moberly. (Rugby Edition.) se a me 5 1876 
Mayou: Natural History of Shakespeare. Manchester. 4 . se OMT, 


Dowden: Shakespeare Primer. 


| 


cj ARTICLES IN ENGLISH AND AMERICAN PERIODICALS 


Wea ° sie GSce = Mice es 28 Dec, 1878 
American Fnernal of oni. as July, 1844 
Architect. Godwin: The she vice ule eat fcasaue a Ghakespearcts Plays, 

28 Nov. 1874 

| Atheneum, Hales: Cordelia [in an Epitaph]. .. .. .. 2 Sept. 1876 

os Venables: To ‘ gallow.’ x ms 13 Nov. 1875 
Baily’s Motthly Magazine of Sports and Paw roras: Can; Shakespeare as a 

Sportsman. .. a . . a August & September, 1872 

Blackwood’s Magazine. Ganphall's doeainiens of Eng. Poetry. -- May, 1819 

uC a Characteristics of Women, .. a6 oe Heb. 1039 

Ce Cas New Readings in Shakespeare. oti «« Oct. 1853 


Colburn’s New Monthly Magazine. Jacox: The Physic prescribed to Pomp 
by Ex-King Lear. .. oss a4 eas Aa an a5 .. July, 1867 
Literary World. J.C. on IV, vii, 27, Be as pe ae I June, 1878 
Notes and Queries. I,i1,148: ‘Doom,’ .. 2% 56 Sh) Gunces Sa 
I, iv, 31: ‘I can keep honest counsel,’ ote an SG Pee Sehebe 


I, iv, 107: * Lady, the Brach,’.. ore A Air) fy eCiele Iw aieteropy 
Il, i, 58: ‘uncaught, and found. dispatch,” : Hy Tyce Et ip WS 
Sil: i, |5o: hz Ce Ss ae -6 Bo FR ay Oe Tite zm 
Rie i, So): cs CC Ge cits 50 cheese 16 Vigo 
II, ii, 29: ‘Sop o’ the moonshine, .. ate “it ett SO ctl eA 
“ 2G even UEeis ke wERit ce Att! oxi ee 


iy 20 tf 


Veiigt 220) 7 as“ a a ot aie ate Say Vid Beso ais 
II, ii, 158: ‘ Comest to the warm sun,’ ava oie Ge ie Bal sig) 
Tia, 15S te se ae ae oe oe eter | oder AOS 
15 eee pe 6 se ae ciattinete oe Se ET Oo Saty Gyaye) 

ce se oe oe oe pret Stllpe te iy, 223 


T,) -i, 153: ce 
II, iv, 159: ‘Strike her young bones,’ .. nies oid ee 
_II, iv, 221: ‘ Embossed,’ .. ahs re oe as Abe Zulet Ce Ey 
II, iv, 221: fe oe oe oe oe on pics efi, GO age BiBaprig, 
Ath "xi; 210 


isle SOP deat i 


MS iv; 220 2 se oe ae oe ee on Se i 
Wi, iv, 225 ¢ a oe o* on ee a2 oo. eile ai, 321 
iv, 225 so 56 50 ete as Ho Ae POG xl, 349 
II, iv, 221: a AD os As <s se eee xi, 391 
il, av, 2215 oe So An ois A A Sq Zid C'S olr/ 


Ain Xie 29 


II, iv, 221: sé 2° ee ae oe ee oe a 
] 66 

II, iv, 221: ae eo oe oe ee Ar pee Ath xii, 117 
41* 


Bee) as tog Leer. ano Sa Ee 6 May, 1876 


486 APPENDIX 


Notes and Queries (continued), 
II, iv, 221: ‘Embossed,’ . . ate An al o° .. 4th Ser. xii, 178 


Il, iv, 221: «“ fe ae eel vel ee ee Re 
II iv, 220 “ ae ar ae oh eis ae Ate ee XT Oy, 
III, iv, 73: ‘ Pelican daughters,’ - “5 ane ae romg tales oaxs 4ae 


III, iv, 174: ‘Child Rowland to the dark tower came,’ ae ene atl, 329 
Ul,iv,174:  “  « ce) i eye ee 
Ill, iv, 174: “ “ i Se TR 
C0 iv, 174: 66 “é “é “ec “ce “ec ar — 5th “s vi, 345 


IV, i, 20: ‘Our means secure us,’ ee he: ie Bae @ Cag eee 
UNG elas acre ee G3 ct “ aie oe ate os ESC evili, Pee 
IN ie Zot sa ss C. se Sia 3 sia St) “Sevag O77 
Wists u 2@istenes se é «e oe Ain Se ae, Sel ee 
VG Ie 20's nae es ce ss ee a 5e 50, TSE xd a 
TV ieose 6 fe “ sé ae ws aie ane Cc ae coy biel 
UN isco ee sg Ee os an Ae os Sst) SOexi 67 
IV, ii, 46: ‘If that the heavens,’ =e ae a ae 5th Sees 


EV, ais ib 7.8 o Dhy slayer er. mae oe oe ais aia, tae Oye 
TI neee Sb /G. | AC as ae A fee 2 sje) hthe 8% val eas 
IV, ii, 62: ‘Self-cover’d thing,’. . ac oe 5 ow) Sth eaves 
Vi) a1, G2 Ks ef a ai =e Ars ars «on Sth 4 yi, gos 
IV, iii, 19: ‘Her smiles and tears Were like a better way,’ .. 5th “ viii, 262 
IV, vi, 83: ‘They cannot touch me for coining,’ ac ate. 1G thw Se eons 
IV, vi, 98: ‘TosayIandno, .. xt Sic ore ~» ‘Stha ‘Sires 
Wits a OG on sc or ae S56 os, 5th (3 F- ty, 2e2 
Philological Society's Transactions. 
Interpretation of ‘forks,’ Lear IV, vi, 118, by W. C. Jourdain, p. 134. .. 1857 
Emendations proposed by W. C, Jourdain, p. 141. oe oe ++ 1860-1 
Robinson's Epitome of Literature. 


Crosby: Noteon) Ei, s525hlaiscaas roc “9 Sic 15 May, 1879 

“ “ Tan, 72) ane ae =o a Sic I July, 1879 

& “ TEM, ta 223 11S vii; 63; =: oe Ae I June, 1879 

Furness: I, iv, 218, ac 4 are are August, 1878 

The Cornell Review, Cluck: The Clown in See pee As March, 1875 
The Fortnightly Review. Swinburne: The Three Stages of Shakespeare. 

, May, 1875, & Jan. 1876 

The Galaxy. Richardson: Shakespeare as a Plagiarist. .. . . December, 1870 


“6 White: On Reading Shakespeare. Oct. & Nov. 1876, & Jan. & Feb. 1877 

The Gentleman’s Magazine. Clarke: Shakespeare’s Philosophers and Jesters. 
March, April, May, June, 1873 
os oe es on August, 1845 
The Quarterly Review. Life of Kenible me sive ee April, 1826 


is : s Sir Henry Halford’s Pea eye a April, 1833 


te 66 “cc 


BIBLIOGRAPHY—GERMAN 87 ~ 


- GERMAN * 


Wieland: ties theatralische Werke, vol. i. oie Ss .. Ziirich, 1762 
Herder: Von Deutscher Art und Kunst, Pe O3ee 0 bie Hamburg, 1773 


Eschenburg: Shakespear’s Schauspiele, vol. xi. aie .. Ziirich, 1776 
Schroeder: Koenig Lear, nach Shakespeare beasties (agente), Pentre) 
Bock: Koenig Lear, nach Shakespear (—Genée). ae an Bae 1779 
Dr H. E, Warnekros: Der Geist Shakespear’s, 2ter Theil, p. 224. Greifswald, 1786 
Kiichler: King Lear. [English Text and German Notes. ies oe LO ad 


Dr J. H. Voss: Kénig Lear [with music for ‘Then they for ender} joy did weep,’ 
and ¢ Sleepest or wakest thou, jolly shepherd,’ composed by Zelter]. Jena, 1806 


Tieck: Alt-Englisches Theater, p.x.  .. ae é ... Berlin, 1811 
H. Voss: Shakespeare’s Schauspiele, vol. iii aS Teessimtheen): . . Leipzig, 1819 
Franz Horn: Shakspeare’s Schauspiele erlautert, i, 183. aa . . Leipzig, 1823 
Beauregard Pandin: Koenig Lear, fiir die Bilhne (—Genée). site -. 1824 
L. Petz: Koenig Lear, iibersetzt (—Genée).  .. ae Ss its ee ko24 
J. Bapt. von Zahlhas: Koenig Lear, frei bearbeitet. .. ae Bremen, 1824 
Meyer: Shakespeare’s Sammtliche Werke, frei bearbeitet, vol. xiv. .. ? 1824 
Benda: Shakespeare’s dramatische Werke. od eo 53 . . Leipzig, 1825 
Kaufman: Shakespeare’s dramatische Werke, vol. i. .. 40 .. Berlin, 1830 
Echtermeyer, Henschel, and Simrock: Quellen des Shakespeare, &c., vol. iii, 

Disks a a ee ore dc on Benin, Looe 


Second edition, by uno sea Bonn, 1870. 
Baudissin: Koenig Lear. [This is in vol, viii of Schlegel’s translation, super- 
vised by Tieck. ] oe se oc .. Berlin, 1832 
J. M. Pierre: [English Text with eras Motes 1 ah Francfort O. M., 1832 
Schick: Kénig Lear: Mit einer Abhandlung iiber dieses Trauerspiel. Leipzig, 1833 
Dr H. T. Rétscher: Abhandlungen zur Philosophie der Kunst, p. 73. Berlin, 1837 
Ortlepp: Shakespeare’s dramat. Werke, vol. iii. ris nec Stuttgart, 1839 
C. A. West: Kénig Lear, fiir die Darstellung eingerichtet. .. .- Wien, 1841 
Dr Al. Schmidt: Sacherklarende Anmerkungen, u. s. w., p. 352. .. Danzig, 1842 
Keller and Rapp: sere sper ie “he vol, ii. [Lear was translated by 
Moritz Rapp.] . = 6 Stuttgart, 1843 
Lichtenberg: Briefe aus Paciand. 1776 (Mrs B arry as Gaukena, p- 252). 
Géttingen, 1844 
Dr H. T. Rétscher: Cyclus dramatischer Charaktere, Cordelia, p. 334. Berlin, 1844 
Dr F. T. Vischer: Aesthetick oder Wissenchaft des Schénen, vol. i, pp. 264, 
272, 280f, 307f, 312, 372, 461; vol. ii, pp. 166, 168, 175, 206, 368, 376; 
vol. iii, pp. 28, 35f, 46-49, 53, 233, 1190, 1335, 1384, 1396f, 1400, 1425, 
Reutlingen and Leipzig, 1846 


EAL Toms 
Delius: Die Tieck’sche Siakeseveteuiicl Pp: eo ats Sc .. Bonn, 1846 
Tieck; Kritische Schriften, 1, 5; iii, 226. 1852. nO ats . Leipzig, 1848 


- Gervinus: Shakespeare. Heldelvero, 1849 

Gerth: Warum hat Shakespear seinem Hee eee gliicklichen Ausgang gege- 
ben? ; : . Putbus, 1849 

Dr E. W. Sievers: oe ae fiir ae seeteredtg bearheiet . . Leipzig, 1851 


* The German and other Foreign portion of this Bibliography is compiled almost wholly from the 
present Editor’s Library. The references which he owes to Genfz, TH1mm, Boun, or Coun are 


duly credited. —Ep. 


“ ?P. ) , : 
_Jenken: Gptkelneaes paese Vee 


. e hs oe 


Dr C.-C. Hense: Vortrage tiber ausgew4hlte Peron 

“speare’s, Schiller’s, und Goethe’s, p. 40. .. gee yous 
Eduard Hiilsmann: Shakespeare. Sein Geist und seine Werke, p- 38. 
R. H. Westley: [English Text and Notes] .. os + 
Kreyssig: Vorlesungen tiber Shakespeare, ii, 303. oe oh ; erlit 
J. L. F. Flathe: Shakespeare in seiner Wirklichkeit, p. 441... . . Leipzi 
Rétscher: i taeania in seinen héchsten Charaktergebiiden, u. s. w., pp. 108 

112; 158, - By ca ae ee rs aaa Dresden, 1864 
Bodenstedt: Koenig Lear piconet Se kd a oe owt alae RE ee 
Moltke: Shakespeare’s ausgewdhlte dramat. Werke, vol. vi. .. (Circa?), 1865 
Prof. Dr Neumann: Ueber Lear und Ophelia. .. re ae Breslau, 1866 


Riimelin: Shakespeare-Studien, p.60, .. hs he Stuttgart, 1866 


Gustav Hauff: Shakespeare-Studien. Kénig Lear. 
Deutsches Museum, 17 Mai, 1866 
J. L. Klein: Geschichte des Italienischen Dramas. Erster Band, s. 890. 
Leipzig, 1866 
[Rev.] M. Petri: Zur Einftthrung Shakespeare’s in die christliche Familie, ps 
Ot Gs Pee kt cae) ee a Se ieee 
Georg Herwegh: Kénig Lear (Bodenstedt’s edition, vol. xx). . . Leipzig, 1869 
Jordan: Shakespeare’s dramat. Werke, vol. viii. a Hildburghausen, 1869 
Genée: Geschichte der Shakespeare’schen Dramen in Deutschland, pp. 255, 
260, 309), 310,321, 325, 336. «= . . Leipzig, 1870 
Dr Carl Stark: Kénig Lear. Eine peyaiahicehe Siaiespeare: ‘Studie, U. S. We 
Stuttgart, 1871 
Kreyssig: Shakespeare Fragen, p. 126... . .. “se ac . - Leipzig, 1871 
Ed. Tiessen: Kénig Lear... a aie “8 55 -. Stettin, 1871 
W. Oechelhauser: Kénig Lear. Fiir ae deutsche Biihne bearbeitet. Berlin, 1871 
Schlegel and Tieck: Herausgegeben durch die Deutsche Shakespeare-Gesell- 
schaft. Vol. xi, Kénig Lear, pain eingeleitet, und erlautert von A, 
Schmidt. ae 5 oe ne 24 -. Berlin, 1871 
Otto Ludwig: Shakespeare Sivdvene ey TO2.0 wee cers So . . Leipzig, 1872 
Deetz: Versuch zur Beseitigung des scheinbaren Widerspruch im Charakter 
Lear’s. (Deutsche Schaubiihne). (—Cohn). 3 ae «- §1873 
Max Moltke: Die Erste Lear-Scene. Ein Uaberseleutioaversiaeci™ 
Shakespear-Museum, Nos 9 and 10, 1873 
Benedix: Die Shakespearomanie. Zur Abwehr. re es Stuttgart, 1873 
Bodenstedt: Shakespeare’s Frauencharaktere, p. 151... an -. Berlin, 1874 
Liebau: Erzihlungen aus der Shakespeare-Welt, p. 107. -- Berlin, 1875 
Ernst Possart: Kénig Lear. Fiir die Darstellung bearbeitet. Miinchen, 1875 
Freih. von Friesen: Will. Shakspere’s Dramen, &c., p. Vice x6 -- Wien, 1876 
Tiessen; Beitrage zur Feststellung und Erklarung des Shakespeare-Text. 
[Archiv f, d. Studium d. n, Sprachen, lviii, 2 Heft, p.159.] Braunschweig, 1877 
Dr Richard Koppel: Textkritische Studien iiber Richard III und King Lear, 


p. 63. Dresden, 1877 


at eee Aas 


Sittlichen se mage aie Se =e 
: ty Innsbruck, 1879 _ 
oFek fei nee og os) berlin, 1879 
3 “witsieitens: Bithnen-Ausgabe, —. . Leipzig, 1879 
der deutschen eee é 


Devrient als Lear, foi ore POS Ome: 5 ii, 292 
: Ueber den ursprunglichen Text des Becnohaik ys cee 3 X, 50 a ai 
‘ote on ‘look a mouse, IV, vi... , re xi, 298 ciate 
v. Friesen: Ueber Shakespeare’s Quellen zu a Knig Lear, xii, 169 
- Notices : ok 
Neumann: Ueber Lear und Ophelia. oat ide iii, 406 

Lear als Speisekarte. [Bill of Fare of the Philadelphia Bhakepive Soc.] v, 369 
_ Stark: Eine psychiatrische Studie, &c. a; ate ore aA vi, 361 


Miss Beever: Lear. .. +e ae Se oma ane Ae vi, 364 
Tiessen: Lear. .. 1st Big ae eee Teall a ee pear a vii, 365 
4 BOHEMIAN 
a Ladislav Celakovsky: Dramatick4 Dila Williama Shakespeara. Kral Lear. 
= TENTS 9 5 gue S55 eet gna eer V Praze, 1856 
z t ; ; 
a DANISH 


Kong Lear: Oversat efter N. Tates Omarbeidelse. (—Thimm). .. -- 1794 
Peter Foersom: Shakespeare’s Tragiske Werker. Kong Lear. Anden Deel. 
Kidbenhavn, 1811 


3 
J 


4 


ot 18 


<e Reprinted, 1850, 1859. 


am S. Beyer: Kong Lear, Lystspil en 5 Act. af on .- Kidbenhayen, 1850 

-.  ‘Wosemose: Kong Lear. (—Thimm). P .. 1854 
Studier over Kong Lear. Af Clemens ueten (Nor Uatoee Tidskrift, III, 

iv). +e . 5 : Bo aie Upsala, ? 1853 


Kong Lear: Osaeee ae Edy, Manibckee 5 5 ae .- Kjobenhavn, 1878 


DUTCH 
Koning Lear, Treurspel in vyf Bedryven. Gevolgt naar het Fransch door 
Mevrouwe M. G. de Cambon. sie a #3 In ’sGravenhage, 1791 
Bloemlezing uit de dramatische Werken van Shakspeare. Door Mr iby Ph. C. 
van den Berg, p. 110. | fe ad oc oe .. Amsterdam, 1834 
W. van Loon: Koning Lear. ee : ae ean . - Utrecht, 1861 
H. de Beer: A Short Account of the Plots, &c., p20. ae Arnheim, 1871 


A. S. Kok: Shakespeare’s Dramatische Werken. Koning Lear, 4 Aflevering. 
Amsterdam, 1871 


490 APPENDIX 


FRENCH * 
Ducis: Le Roi Lear, Tragedie en cing Actes, représentée pour la premiére fois 
Gi iio af a5 are he $- Si sie 25 se 270s 
Le Roi Lear, tragedie, conformé aux representations donées 4 Paris. (—Bohn). 1828 
Deschamps: Scénes de. (—Bohn). .. rey a A -- 1841 
Carlhant: Tragedie. Avec le text Anglais en remand ‘(Bon fe 2 1047 
Devicque et Crisafulli: Le Roi Lear, drame en 5-actes et douze Tableaux. 
(—Thimm). .. AC EST eT OC -« 1857 
Victor Hugo: William Shakespeare, p eee ck ae A -. 1864 
Jules Lacroix: Le Roi Lear, drame en cing Actes, en vers cenit fie Shakspeare. 1868 
Le Chevalier de Chatelain: Le Roi Lear. Traduite en vers frangais. London, 1873 
GREEK 
Zaicorfpov ‘O Baaidebe Agp, wedétn XN. BaotAecddy, Sexmydpov, “Ev "ACHvatc, 
LbAdoyoe Hbayyeduoude. owe ate Ee teh (] 
0 BASIAEYS AHP, TPATQATA EK ror ATTATKOY METASPASORISA 
YIIO AHMHTPIOY BIKEAA. EN AOHNATS. .. oe .. 2 kOe 
HUNGARIAN 
Mich, Vérésmarty: Lear Kiraly. (—Cohn). .. 48 a ee Sia Ri 
ICELANDIC 
Lear Konungur, Sorgarleikur epter W. Shakspeare, i islenzkri pydingu epter 
Steingrim Thorsteinsson. Ay ai SA #2 Sis Reykjavik, 1878 
ITALIAN 
Leoni: I] Re Lear, (—Bohn). .. ae os one - Verona, 1821 
Teatro Copii di Shakspeare, voltato in prosa  Talana da Carlo Ruston: 
Padova, 1831 
fourth edition, Torino, 1859; Sixth edition, Firenze, 1874. 
Teatro scelto di Shakspeare, tradotto da Giulio Carcano, vol. i, p. 1, Firenze, 1857 
first illustrated edition, Milan, 1878. 
POLISH 
Dramata Willjama Shakspear’a, Przektad z Pierwotworu. Krol Lear. Tom. 
DL, 207. ate: ne 5 ae we ae Warszawa, 1858 
Dziela Dramatyczne Svein Przekdad Stanislawa Kézmiana. Krél Lyr. 
Tom. I, p. 95. A aie Tie ae ae aie . . Poznan, 1866 
Adam Plug: Krél ts, Tragedja Szekspira w 5 Aktach. .. Lwéw, 1870 


i SSFSSSsSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSsseseFeseseee 
* The French translations of Shakespeare’s Complete Works are given in Hamlet, vol. ii, p. 425. 


It seems superfluous to repeat them here.—Ep, 


1. V. Garbalya, 
eee 


2 SWEDISH 


Anonymous: Konung Lear. (—Bohn). 25 <2) +s  « Upsala, 1518 
- Hagberg: Shakspeare’s dramatiska Arbeten. Konung Lear. Ellofte bandet. 


ey Lund, 1861 


Pe ‘ 
if 


oat * As wiles I can make out, this i is the same translation as the preceding. It is, perhaps, need- 
oe - less to add that my knowledge of Russian barely extends beyond the alphabet, and that the foregoing 
attempt to convert these Russian titles into English letters is simply laughable,—Eb. 


alt 


eS Ne OO ae 
‘ Tne ee 


Lay ~ 


INDEX TO SOME OF THE MORE IMPORTANT NOTES, 
AND TO THE APPENDIX. 


Able’em .. ie 
Abused whe aa 


Accent = speech ote Pee tise ic 
Accommodate ons avccl Migrrevas 
A-cold wa ave os LIT, tiv, 
Action-taking re es are 
ACTORS ae ate 
Addition = external eisipennce Sy ae 
Addition = “te is CearLien, 
Admiration = astonishment Div; 
Advise Z ie tg (5 
Affliction = infliction 5 AY ert 
Aged. <i = DV ecivs 
oA Shin ities sia Myint, 
A-height .. one EV) Ny 
Ajax [pronunciation bf ] a; ais 
Albany [accent of].. Lely 
Albany [origin of}... ees, 
All [adverbial use]. . IV, vii, 
Allow aa : EPS ty, 
Allowance dinuakye 
Altogether fool feontete for 
abstract] . aie fry, 
Am Beiicapkt- 55 Ti air; 
Among are oe Div; 
Ancient of war Virwl ¥, 
And [used emphatically] « AIT ori 
Anguish EVs. 19, 
Answer 1 
Answer TV 
Apollo eee: 
Arch II; “4, 
Are you there el me LN), va; 
Aroint PLE iy, 
Array’d IV, vii, 
Arrest Vi, 1; 
As=as if 1; ll, 
As=as if sie Di iv; 
Aspect [accent of ].. ul aati; 
A-squint oe V,<ail, 


42 


.- IV, vi, 166 | Assured loss. . aie fr 
- ~ LV ;vii, 


53 


106 
81 
57 
15 

438 

135 
22 

230 
27 
49 
28 


i, IOI 


108 Pens hee 
At each ais ae sien UV oe Vibes 
At gate [absorption of article] III, vii, 16 
At heels, oe ols it, 153 
At legs [absorption " fartle] Lindy, 99 
At point ans : Ao) LA SEA esis) 
At point <° Sec rh Ll eeedge ess 
At task ces Se we Lyhive338 
Avert ae wit oe ll, ero 
A-work SC a8 Lil evs ko: 
‘Ay’ and ‘no’ too.. IV, vi, 99 
Ballow Sue a6) Ve Wal 240 
Bandy A aie sree ly, LV Ok 
Bans St ane Sa 88 hh Fe 
Barbarous .. ae ete Uj oy TR 
Barber-monger ai rey IE Vie 210) 
Bark ote > LET avi 265 
Bastard oe 35 cus) Lee 
Be [subjunctive] .. ae. evi 
Beard we oye s LV; vi,90 
Bearing oie oa se, LUD vin FOS 
Bed and warm ote eli Rivaeay 
Bedlam ve ye - sell wii eros 
Bedlam beggars .. sve) Aly, Ji, Pte! 
Begot on sh Pee ty (ok 
Believed A oom Vie atte) 
Be-met om ae cue, Vip eo 
Benediction . oe Ls Valpess 
Beseech Eestton of nomi- 
native] .. ae shee OO 
Be-weep ae ae ofa Lee hve 200 
Be-wray A sue eo? 
Bids .. ve ae LLL Pt; 9s 
Big=/loud .. ane ee Gh lll, 209 
Bird . IV, vi, 91 
BLACKWOOD’S Mackztin.. 425 
Blank site ies ee «Le AstteS 
Block , : IV, vi, 181 
Blood = disposition . iV, fii; 64 
493 


494 


Bene oe “E. 


Bosom Ae “5 
Bosom ae os 
Bound Pir) sie 
Bourn axed rane 
Bourn aS oie 
Brach ets AG 
Brach ine file 
Brains ob ae 
Break eee me 
Brief .. ae aie 
Bring away .. oe 
Brown bills .. ore 


Brow of youth 

Buoyed-up .. oe 
BURBAGE .. os 
Burdocks  .. % 


° ee 


ane 


Burgundy [pronunciation of] I, 


But = merely es 
Button 

Buzz .. =a at 
By day and night .. 
By the heads on 
Cackling 

Cadent ae ave 
CAMDEN’S Remiaines 
Camelot arc co 
Canwi... os we 
Canton. fon oe 
Capable sts oe 
Carbonado .. ie 
Case of eyes oie 
Gatrarens we 
Cataracts .. se 
Catastrophe .. a 
Censure at 
Censured 
Chambermaids 
Champains .. ° 


Chance [as an adverb] 
Character 

Character 

Charity 

Charms 

Ghetvor ye... 
Child-changed 
Childed ... father’d 
Child Rowland 


ies 


INDEX 


iv, 220 
v, 26 
iii, 
vii, 
vi, 
vi, 
iv, 
vi, 
Ms, 
iii, 313 
lii, 246 
ii, 135 
vi, 9I 
iv, 278 
vii, 59 
438 
Iv, 4 
van 
vi, 125 
lii, 310 
iv, 320 
1; 74 
iv, 8 


1, OX 
rise ney) 
61 
59 
bye 
iii, 167 
i, 39 
vi, 239 
17 
vi, 108 
iv, 174 


vii, 


Chill .. oF a Aree eat 
Choice and rarest .. Att cri 
Clamour {is nim hoc eee 
Clamour moisten’d viol Lip EE, 
Clearest chs <6 se) Vy Wis 
Climb up it .. a sin Meee wis 
Closet <S os i; 2h, 
Clothier’s yard BC IV, vi, 
Clout Se ane aia tL MigeWa 
Cock ae. aie ie RNG ew, 
Cockney ,, iv; 
Codpiece ~.. me oa 1ES iG 
Codpiece  .. «> LET ai, 
Cohorts aa vied Gy; 
COLERIDGE [on Edmund] .. : 

Comfortable I, iv, 
Comforting Rec + os Mele We 
Commit s BF «oT eee, 
Common saw aie Sg bite it 
Compact .. ENS 
Compact .. ome See Saas 
Conception .. ov be 
Condition .. ee area See 
Conditions .. Pee ee bak 
Conditions .. 2 DG 
Confine we II, iv, 
Confined .. an IV; 4, 
Consort hie ake Ra ail eg ois 
Constant pleasure .. PG i oD 3 
Constant will ae) Sieeeie 
Continents LUT ii, 
Convenient seeming axe DESI. 
Converse Efi, 
Convey lyea, 
‘Conein thy Nee cel 
Cordelia . . . remedies 10S ahi 
Corky oe III, vii, 
Corn... harm [rhyme] ITT, vi; 
Coronet Levneie 
Costard IV, vi, 
CosTUME ss ane 

Course ae Het 
Courtesy oe FLL, vit, 


Court holy water 


ee 


Cover faults . . 
Cowish 2 
Coxcomb 

Grab: os 

Crack aie 


ete LT eee 
Sie 
ii, 
iv, 
chen mg meV 
ii, 


, 
, 
4 


Craak >. ate 
Crow-keeper 

Cruel garters are 
Cruels else subscribe 
Cub-drawn .. ws 


Cuckoo-flowers 

RUG are we at 
Cullionly .. cas 
Curiosity 

Curiosity .. 
Curiosity 

Curious 4 ate 
Curled my hair es 
Curse of Lear ee 


Cut to th’ brains 


Darker 

Darkling 

Darnel : 
DATE OF COMPOSITION 
Daub it 

Dawning 

Deadly 

Dear .. 

Dear . « 

Dear cause .. 
Death-practised 
Deathsman .. 
Deboshed 

Decay 

Decline 

Deed of love 
Defend 

Deficient 

Defuse 

Dejected thing 
Delicate He 
Demanding «. 
Deny = refuse 
Depend 

Deprive 

Derogate 
Desperately .. 
DEVRIENT : 
Did [transitive use] 
Diffidences .. 
Diligence 
Disclaims in.. 


Discovery 


INDEX 


iv, 84 
iv, 243 
ii, 4 
iv, 274 
iii, 293 

444 
iv, 98 
il, 140 
iv, 34 
ii, 50 
i, 53 


PVUOISENGHONS Lie an se DE, Iypege 
Diseases... 46 on) Late 73 
Disnatured .. Ree rite athe aly) 
Dispatch ey, Wath Ts} 
Disposition ., on Aa He ape fel 
Disposition .. oie vem Le, INES 
Disquantity .. ae 7 Taviie42. 
Distract oe S5 oe LV Vy 270 
Ditch-dog .. ce «> IL, iv, 126 
Division 5 ome ates hed eel 
Do, de as ate as, LEE Maye gy, 
Dog .. ae sc wre LV cya e300 
Dolours i Sc See Lins 3 
Dolphin, my boy sen lL, dvs) 18 
Do thou for him stand .. I, iv, 138 
Doubted as ao Bie A Geen 5) 
Down, insulted [omission of 

nominative] an ive Li;eelign ney 
Dover Cliff .. se ale 2 Vig NEEL 
Dr JOHNSON [criticism, on 

the Tragedy] .. + 418 
Dragon ys ae re i i elie 
Drew [omission of nomina- 

tive] aie Age eh Ll, tye 
Dropped ore od suet UNG ieee 
DURATION OF ACTION 5 an hore 
Duteous Se ae ve LVG iyi 252 
Ear-kissing .. ane Be Ole ile ase) 
Ear, Light of nee oe LID, civ900 
Earnest ae OE on lb his. LoVe) 
Easy-borrowed. pride 7s LL, Pav 152 
Eclipses Ai = 6 at) LL yalipoS 
Effects os oie oo Led aso 
Elbows him .. wae stow LV ual uee 2 
Election makes notup .. I, i, 205 
Elements .. aus re SOUS 2 ath 
EIf all my hair As <li LO 
Embossed .. ne roe, dlliey aligy eed! 
Engine a ae 5 lle, *heeser 
English= British .. vie LVG ivi, 240 
Enguard a one See Lvs) 320 
Enormous state oie nls) 1,165 
Enridged .. a Me VG V1, eZ E 
Entire te ae eal; 59,230 
Epicurism .. 6.0 Boies hy AN deo 
Epileptic .. 50 aie, Leo 
Essay or taste ais ce. Lied 
Even but now ae Hem Oiy why <Se 


INDEX 


496 
Eveno’er .. Re .» LV, vii, 80{Fops .. oi a as ipo aieon 
Exhibition .. mie .. I, ii, 25 | For=on account of .. Tawra 
Expense and waste .. .- II, i, 100| Forbid thee .. aa > alt aay tS 
Eyes, Wantest thou.. .. III, vi, 23|Formystate.. .. .. V, i, 68 
Fordid “pe ane as  Viydli, 256 
Faery Queene ae < es SSOL hordone oy a. ae <a) V5 clil,,a92 
Paintin “Yen i «he CE Ay, CORRES.) na te eee eer oaaeeiaee 
Faith’d ne ape . II, i, yo|Forks.. ris ae » ad Mg OVS EEO 
Falchion .. «. «+ V, iii, 277|Fortnight .. .. .. I, iv, 289 
Fall and cease ere ws Vy Ili, 265 | Boxes ate a vue» Vy A seas 
Fare thee .. ts I, i, 179|Frateretto .. ae so LL pe oe 
Fa, sol, la, mi ‘ I, ii, 129 | Fraught a8 aa aun» Agiepreee 
Fast=fixed .. ae lopeaas pleas hyanse 53 1 tt oo Ne ope sien VE Avy SO) 
Father ee ewe RV vi,t228)| Breed” > Sees ee 
Fathom and a half .. . ITI, iv, 37|Freethings .. ..  .«. III, vi, 103 
Fault., .. =. %» -¥, iii, 193) Fromourhome -..  <siigenaag 
Hear==feariyfor snes .. IV, ii, 31 | From this=from this time.. I, i, 115 
Fear'd of .. ry .» II, i, rrr | Frontlet “a mis .. lyayned 
Fears.. aes i ; IN, xy, °g.\Eruitielly? ota oo LV ayi,263 
Feature aa oe . IV, ii, 63 | Fumiter oe ie wien EV ip gee 
Feelingly .. Ac oye EV g Vig S47 : 
Feet .. “0 Rie Si UW ss Fae Op er beer oe wet L,“ii,.<46 
Felicitate .. c 1, 3, 74.) Gat... ren xy IV, vi, 236 
Fell’d [omission of nom.].. IV, ii, 76} Gallow » ALL Gila 
Fellow =e .. II, i, 48 | Garb=dialect Ii, ays 
Helbrers me ens . IV, vi, 183 | GARRICK - 439 
Festinate . III, vii, 9 | Gasted TT, ats 
Fetches .. II, iv, 85] Generation .. wis yy lp 
Fire and food is . III, iv, 145 | GERVINUS .. “os ro ja mee 
First .. one ats . III, iv, 26) Give you good morrow II, ii, 154 
First cock . ITI, iv, 111 | Glass-gazing. . LI feal; 26 
First of difference .. V, iii, 289] Glib .. oe Ty: tipaeag 
Fish .. I, iv, 16] Gloucester [city of ] Lye ed 
Fitchew . IV, vi, 121 | Gloucester [spelling of ] Teds 
Five wits . III, iv, 56) Goneril [derivation] I, dget§2 
Flaws te! .. II, iv, 282] Gone, sir IV, vi, 41 
Flax and white of eggs . ITI, vii, 105 | Good-years Vy ail). 2a. 
Flesh.. -. II, ii, 42} Gorgeous II, iv, 265 
Flesh .. . Ill, iv, 71 | Gossamer IV, vi, 49 
Fleshment II, ii, 118 | Go, you Lexy 
Flibbertigibbet .. III, iy, 110]Go you, call... Trsivjetys 
Foins. . . IV, vi, 244 | Gloves III, iv, 84 
Fool”. % : I, iv, 91 | Grace Ill, it, 40 
Fool of fortune .. IV, vi, 189 | Graced palace TyI¥5:239 
Fools do those villains pity... IV, ii, 54] Gracious my lord LIT, ii, «6 
Fools had ne’er ‘ I, iv, 160 | Great... Li ator 
Footed . III, iii, 12 Greater V,, ili,” 22 
Foppery a ; I, ii, 112 | Great vices Ph «LMG vios 
Foppish...apish[rhyme].. I, iv, 161 | Great world=macrocosm .. IV, vi, 133 


es 


Groom a wi 5A 
Guardians .. we is 


Halcyon, E at see 
Handy-dandy vs = 
Hlarsnet’s Declaration, &c. 

Hate .. are Sy ie 
Haye you wisdom .. eo 
FLAZEIT E> osc * oe 


Hearing of .. Za a 
Hear, nature ak -s 
Heart ane Bs es 
Heat ¢: ‘ = 


Hecate fidiesyHable] oe 
Hell-black .. oe 
Helps be os se 
Hemlock .. 
Hence and avoid my sight .. 
Hence to-night oe 
HENSE ee a oe 
Here’s a os 
Here... where [as Keunah 4 

He that keeps nor crust .. 
Hide all .. 


INDEX 


II, iv, 214 
II, iv, 248 


TH; ii, 73 
os 428 
IV, vi, 151 
PER ie; 53 
INV, Clipe 
ie -ix-I90 
I, av; °°88 
ate | 
V, iii, 205 
I, iv, 269 
Til, ivy) 4 
I, 15° 305 
I, i, 109 


. III, vii, 59 


IV, iv, 10 


eervr iy, oe 


Ty dy 823 
e253 

22 460 
Ea, 187 


I, i, 260 


I, iv, 190 
ss LV, vi, 163 


High noises . . zie > III, vi, 109 
ESD es se re ~ LV, Vi, OE 
Him, them, and ’em con- 


founded .. aie 
Ilistory 25 45 om 
Hit together ries es 
Hog in sloth 
Hold, sir .. re ae 
HOLINSHED .. = 
Holy cords .. 2° an 
Hoppedance a2 
Horn o* o oe 
Horn is dry .. At 
Horrible 5 
Horse’s health 
Hospitable favours .. 
House, Becomes the 
How fearful [Dover Cliff]. . 
Howl.. se 
HUDSON me bie a 
Huco o oe ee 
Hundred pound .. oie 
Hurricanoes 

42* 


. III, vii, 81 


aS 1; 235 
1 spe LER 


2 LIT, iv, 90 


V, iii, 156 


Ts; . 69 


ELLs vin 30 


451 


oD ss a 
Sev aN ae 


ITam,Iam .. me 
Ice=Jshall.. ANS 
If for I want ne 


If thou lovest me ., 
Idle .. ac ee 
idle. oe oe 
idler. oe Sa 
Idle andfond ... 
Images os bx 
Immediacy .. Sic 
Impertinency 

Important en 
Impossibilities an 


Impress’d lances .. 
In [with verb of motile. 
In contempt . a 
Influence .. - 
Ingenious .. 
Ingraffed .. 

In mercy .. oe 
Innocent .. 
INSANITY .. 50 
In such conditions .. 
Intelligent 

Intelligent .. 
Intelligent party 
Interess’d 
Intermission . 

In the eeatined Fee 
In the least .. 

Into .. a 
Intrinse 

In your liking 

Is [emphatic] 

Cher ee Ae 

It head 

I...whistle .. 


JAMESON, Mrs 


. III, vi, 19] Jealous " 
.. III, vii, 39 Jealous curiosity .. 
II, iv, 149 | Jewels ats se 
IV, vi, 11| Judgement .. aC 
II, iv, 207 | Judicious 
431 | Joint stool .. = 
465 | Jupiter o* ae 
II, ii, 14] Justicer ee 
. IL, it, 2 Justicers ae +e 
2G 


IV, 


497 


Iam aman more sinn’d .. III, ii, 


vii, 
vi, 

i, 

ii, 
iii, 
iv, 
vi, 


498 


KEAN “ os 
Kent»... oe ie 
Les ine oe 
Kill’d in him o 
Dil kill, as ae 
Kind gods .. 
Kindly te oie 
King Leir [Ballad] | 
King Leir | Drama] 
Knapped .. op 
Knee his throne .. 
Kneel a ete 
Knives se vie 


Known and feeling sorrows 


Know you .. o 
KREYSSIG  .. a 


Labours are 
Ladies ae 
LAMB 

Lanced 


Last and least 
Lender’s books 
Less advancement .. 


Let-alone .. a 
Letter re ae 
Letters aie aie 
Life in ’t 

Lightning a 
Like .. ve ote 


Like a better way 
Lily-livered .. o° 
Lipsbury pinfold 

List 


Little world of man = m2cro- 


cosmn 
Look .. . ve 
Looks fearfully in .. 
Look you 

Loop’d 

Lord’s dependants , 
Lose 

Lusts .’, 

Luxury 

Lym... 


Machination.. 
Madam 
Madam’s 


oe 


TV; iu, 
i 
IV, vii, 
IV, vi, 


. IL, vii, 


Te 


INDEX. 

440 | Madded ore ni <e LMg at eae 
28 | Made good .. Py ; yD as 
37| Madeintent.. .. ..IV,vii, 9 
79 | Mad, not mad ae r I, ‘vs43 

185 | Main.. Sie ae hui eee 
34|Maindescry.. .. «. IV, vi, 212 
13 | Majesty [dissyllable] ene! Gen rere 

403 | Majesty [dissyllable] vic eg dasdend ae 

393| Manhood .. .. wa) LMstdugeos 

119| Manners .. o> sist Net liess 

211 | Many ie ee se « Sil ii 30 
59| Marry her .. ace T, Mote 
53 | Material sap. . TV, i 95 

221 | Mature “* TV, vi; 272 

268 | Maugre <= ei: Vi, iis 132 

461 | Means a Pi OW ot Lo 

Means secure us .. IN, 1820 
7|Meanstoleadit .. IV, iv, 20 

149| Measure failme .. LV, vil, 23 

421 | Meiny es oe Il, iv, 34 
52| Memories .. its IV, Naisuey 
82| Merlin’s prophecy .. «oe LUGS 80 
94| Messenger .. on II, ii, 46 

197 | Messengers .. ee dW ae oy 4 
80| Mild... BIC 3 sit LN dyes 

2|Milk.. are Ag : I, <i, 33 

247 | Milky gentleness T,¥, 336 

201 | Minces virtue IV, vi, 119 
35 | Minikin ar we a ELL evi a eae 

199 | Wirour for Magistrates .. <e 389 
19| Miscreant .. oe 15a, 260 
15 | Modest os ee Lays, 124. 

8 | Modest truth os LV. Vis es 
182|Modo...Mahu .. JIT av, 235 
Moiety ome a j Pleas Fee 5) 

10| Monopoly .. I, iv, 148 

12| Monsters it .. 5 1,34, 210 
72-| Mopping and mowing TV, 60 
93 | Moral=moralizing .. IV, i, 238 
31 | More [dissyllable] .. I, iv, 334 

17 | More corrupter ME ey) 
297 | More headier ay II, iv, 106 

i, 160 | More worse it I ig tads 
i, 116] More worthier I, i, 210 
67| Mortified .. ee Ti eilis ens 
Most poorest. . ar TY Waite, 

46 | Mother’s pains aie a denice 
97 | Mother, swells up toward .. II, iv, 54 

9 | Motion aa AL ep td, aS Efe) 


INDEX 499 


Much.. as ae i Sa ONS «<6 Se Sie RL LeayV seo 
Mumbling of a ae ete 40) || On beac... 2 a wig UNstt) lease 
Murderers .. am »- V, iti, 270 | One-trunk-inheriting ei) LAS eg 
Music et os IV, vil; 25 One's : he - sia tL, Evang 
My poor fool is doused -. V, iii, 306} Operation .. ane ce Ne tw ELO. 
. . Opposeless ., we pace No iat iets! 
— . Natural Aes 3 aye cds 1, a4) Opposites: a, , sis Vai Wye 
Wature ys: F3 .. I, i, 51] Oppress’d nature aieebe pa RIT avigeeos 
Nature, art my goddess .. I, ii, 1|Or=nor AS ae cool Oli 
Nature’s above art .. .. IV, vi, 86] Ordinance .. i So LV aee66 


a~ BREAD cis + 40 peel aise 97 | Others. fe aie erect uote yop 
Need.. re ae ve 11, dy,,2074/Our wishes, . oe se Ls lp D4 
Nero .. = ee Witte OW Outs... ae ee DL, ivaras 
Nether-stocks se -- II, iv, 1o{ Out nine “aA a= Se oles sb eet) 


Nettles Hhs5 ae eV dt, Overture © 5 aes was LEE vile os 
Nicely aie Bc -2) UI; iis 99:|,Owes:;.. on te eel IeeOL 
Nightingale .. sie .- III, vi, 30] Owes nothing 48 Meh 35 ae ©) 


Ninefold .. re ae Lis Iv, TES Owiest ore oe foe tieerhie Sis 
No, no, no, no se ws M5 As 

No tearing .. Se .» V, iii, 158 | Packs and sets oa Be ett ts 
Nobly oe = -. V, i, 28) Paphlagonian unkinde hing ate elo 
Noon.. ue =A we MAL vi, S37)? Parel! ae we ee LVS 40 
Nornomanelse .. 2. Vy all, 2o0|Particular . 34, ane vege 
Not an hour more norless.. IV, vii, 61] Particular .. ae we Lav, 280 


Note .. as Ae POLE ees To articular. |. one hoe VRS O. 
Note .. mie a .. IV, v, 29] Partingthem [stage-direction] II, ii, 4o 
Note .. 7 aS PE WV allly = 25y|eaSSi 25, « aie aS sa LV Eval 7, 


Nothing sis oe el, od, oO)|.eass ipom "1. Si UWE bly 3) 
Nothing sees pameles ell, i, LOL haw. . te ave ae he Cl ig Liga 
Not i’ th’ stocks, Fool ee US iv, 563) |) beascod one bee nee lbpsye dito 
Not met a8 ate Zep N, il, 2} bebble ore a = sl Vi, wien 
Not thought. . Fae ei is 75 ehelican ie Ars See T UK 9/3) 
Nuncle ioe Ane .- I, iv, 100] Pelting at ahs Pitot ae have ite) 

Perdu ate oe 2 LV wales 
Obidicut an oa Pe lvaeei. = Sou meendy, 56 one ore) LES iveeon 
Object eis ne ele i, 20s) eeriorce ets ve peels Bi/ 
Observants .. she eel ear Oa ubenurect ae ats ar Das A) 
OECHELHAUSER te ats -» 463/| Persever os ave oc LL eve ES 
Qiliads as . IV, y, 25 Persian attire aes el vi, 75 
Of [following verial wea I, iii, 1] Pestilent gall *° erste; nVs TOO 


Of =proximity we aie ls We ZL CW. 0 oe a0 oe, LUIS iv, 53 
OD ci ae ae .. Ld, vil, 901} Picture He aa seri. or 
Obs is: RE ve eV eit, 20)| bieced sé ate earls 1s, LOS 
Old course .. ae .. III, vii, 100] Piece of nature .. men DV, Wis 133 
Old fools .. cc See lite 20 Piont oe Cc oa ee lise, BOS 
Oldness Asc aes ely tl, 47 | Pxilicock A one Lohse 74: 


Ones. De re we Wy, til, 166)| Pittes ae ae ae LES ieee 
On necessity oie ae peril, E05 | Plackets es ore SEO 
On’s .. aie oe I, iv, 98| Plague of custom .. Tm. - olga lignns 


INDEX 


500 

Plate .. ae a 2 « LV, vi, 163 
PHohted | ya aur. wero Ep. ag eeee 
Plural by attraction Piel WE Penge srt 
Poise.. we a an bs ih eo) 
Policy i a ee gece pe 85 
onderous ac mae | eee asd ae 
Power oe wae ve Jyh 260 
Practice Emr oe opps Maas a, 
Practice es a tran LI, ERECT 
Practice 4e nt oj) LL, AV, ed 
Practices” ~ ... ba a) ks tage 
Practised ~~... aha ao LES ai S57 
Prefer ae Ws | GR ree 
Pregnant .. aha DT i, 296 
Presnant |. é «LV, vi, 222 
Prescribe not’ us .. fee dg. erg 
Presently ET, 1v,%33 
Press money. . at # a LV, vay Sy 
Pretence ae oe en or! See eet sy 
Prevent An a oS LIT iv; ESE 
Pricks ar Bc oo iS in 6 
Privilege” 7.5 oe Viet, 130) 
Profess ae ere ae ave TE 
Professed . < ae en Led, 275 
Professes .. ae oe Le 7S 
Proper iE, aie 
Proper deformity oe LV, 21;8"60 
Property are ake eld, dens 
Provoking merit .. Ties es 
Pudder ae ane Tif, ii 56 
Punishment. . Tt, avs 92; 
Puppet an TY pelle 33 
PUTT we Sic oe TIT, vi, 44 
Put him on .. ae wen Lk, Oo 
Putition= —.% ake cin dys OO 
Qualities .. Pe a) yee 
Quality II, iv, 88 
Quarrel III, vii, 76 
Queasy Toa, ary 
Question TV; in, 2 
Question oe VeCUlipe oe 
Questrists . III, vii, 16 
Rake up - LV, “vi, 272 
RAPP.. . «+ 457 
Rebel Il, iy 7a 
Regards 5 : Ly Vases 
Remainder... to be I, iv, 243 


Remediate .. tae 
Remember .. Rte 


Remorse ae aie 
Remotion .. a 
Renege Ale o- 


Report are oe 
Reposal = “s 
Reserve thy state .. 
Resolution .. * 
Respective construction 
Respects .. oe 
Respects of fortune 

Restoration hang .. 
Retention ‘ 

Revenging gods .. 


Reverbs < o. 
Riddle be re 
Ripeness .. oe 
Rivall’d oe 

Rogues a 2. 
Rotundity .. aS 
Rubb’d = 


RUMELIN .. re 


Sa, sa aie 

Safer sense .. ae 
Sallets ae = 
Salt: Ve. oe ae 
Sampire ee oe 
Sapient: ae a 
Savour te eta 
Savour at 

Say “S.. ae 
Scatter’d 

SCHICK =< 
SCHLEGEL 

Scythian 


Sea-monster.. 
Seeming .. 
Self=same .. 
Self-covered . . 
Self-mate and mate .. 
Sepulchring .. 
Serpent’s tooth 
Serving-man 
Sessa. . 
Sessa.. a} 
Seta. 

Set) 


ee 


aks 


EVs 


Lay 
IV, vii, 
V, iii, 


Set my rest .. =e xt aby 
Settling oe an 56 
Seven stars .. Re Pasagee © 
Shallisv 
Shall=JZ am wd to awe a 
Shall = Zam bound to a 
SHELLEY .. sa 


Short re tr tip AS 
Should =e =< oo Ls 
side”, a == ita 
Silly-ducking a> mee 
Similar ae ig TIL 5 
Since that .- = oe Al; 
Sinews He ois we LED, 
Sir [rhythm] os mets 
Sir [rhythm] alee Seneagons ut 
Sir [rhythm] se UI 
Sir [substantive] Uae 


Sith .. oe 55 ed soot 


SEE ss “2 =e Lf, 
Sizes .. Il, 
Slave. . = : ie 
Slaves aes 4 IV, 


Sleepest ne “i 5 
Slipshod .. 3 nite tc 


Smile once more .. Tt; 
Smile you .. II, 
Smooth i Wis 
Smulkin .. oe Ill, 
SNIDER oie : 
Snow aie ats IV, 
Snuffs ee as III, 


Some rene aa ots an, Be 
Soiled eels 
Something rend adverbially] 1A 
Sometime = formerly uf 
Some year ce eels 
So much as ad Pomme 
Sons at perfect age. i 


So out went the candle .. I, 1 


SOvecic, LO) x am wad, 
Sore aes b Ol Megs ane eels 
Sop o’ th’ moonshine Il, 
Sorry. . age regis 
SOURCE OF THE PLor 

Space os oe Ss ae 
Space ae 5.0 BV, 
Spare a0 1p 


Speak oe ns oie. 1 


INDEX 


i, 
vii, 
Vv; 
ii, 
i, 
i, 


vii, 
ii. 


1, 


122 
82 
34 

126 
33 

133 

429 
40 

ay #43 


501 

Speculations re py UN eet SY 
Spies. . : Po eRe EM 
anlar hs AAW MOREA to 
Sport... os va Lg. See 
Square of sense p I,, & 93 
ae . IV, vi, 136 
ars .. ae Ly airs 
Stell’d III, vii, 60 
Stern... III, vii, 62 
Stiberdigebit IV) 7a, 55. 
Stick .. ae 11, aiiyoens 
Stick’. . ont III, vii, 57 
Stlle.t Eels) *4,)230 
Still II, iv, 102 
Stocking .. II, ii, 128 
Stomach 7) Neines 
Stones oa Vy ali258 
Store .. At 5ONE Aah 
Strain ‘Vi, all, ae 
Strange iW, aby oes 
Strangeness .. IV, vi, 66 
Stranger’d I, -1; 203 
Subject ae IV, vi, 107 
Subscribed .. lai, 
Subscription . ; LET, ti, 05 
Succeed 7 20 we Ly, ergo 
Such [Omission of asafter] I, i, 208 
Such... chat Ty ai, 15 
Suggestion Ti 73 
Suited 7 Ve vilgeo 
Summoners .. ~ Lit; i, 59 
Sumpter II, iv, 213 
Sun ore vn ly OS 
Superfluous .. ~ 11; iv,2o2 
Superfluous . . LV 9aleeos 
Superflux IIl,‘iv, 35 
Super-serviceable UL, yao 
Surfeit N at (esas a3 
Suum, mun .. Ii, iv, 96 
Swear’st ae I, i, 160 
SWINBURNE .- . 429 
Swithold ~ III, iv, 114 
Tadpole III, iv, 124 
Tailor made thee i, i, 5° 
Taint. - ane I, 1, 220 
Take all oe TET, a. 5 
Taken : I, iv, 325 
Take physic, pomp . TIT, dv; 33 


502 


Taking ave A 
Taking ate me 
Tame ave one 
Tame ais Sun 
TATE’S VERSION .- 
elt. Me Oc 


Tenant ve are 
Tend.. are ene 
Tender-hefted 
Tender... weal 


Tenth day .. Bis 
Terrible 

That = for that 

That = 722 that 

That =so that 

That = where 

hate, Sa 

That L: am ces. 
That makes .. 


That nature which igen 


That patience 

That stirs .. ae 
That thing .. oe 
That’ worthied 
Thevease’ 3 ie 
The creating 


The man that makes his Ge 


The more .. : 
The promised coal Be 
The restoring 

THE TEXT Ar 
Thee .. on 0 
Thee = ¢hysel/ 
AOS PAS ae 
Theft. . 

Their evidence 
Their papers is 
Their... that 


thee 


Then they for sudden joy .. 


Thereat enraged 

There is a cliff 

These kind of knaves 
This’ a good block.. 
This’ a dull sight 

This two days 

Those ... as [ellipsis] 
Those wicked creatures 
Though that. 


Though . ae at 


INDEX 
iv, 160 | Thought-executing .. «Lilies 
iv, 58| Thoughts defile .. . III, vi, 110 
ii, 47| Thou wert .. at «2 Livy OS 
vi, 220] Threading .. ae oe, LI, -"4/ E29 
© 467| Three-suited.. ..  .. HL, ii, 14 
iv, 53} Threesuits .. .- ~ LIT civ, 129 
i, 14] Throughthe saa ic haspétoorn III, iv, 45 
i, 95| Thunder .. 4 a oes oie etry, 
iv, 168 | Thwart ae — cam, ekg tsa oaer 
iv 203.| Thy -x5> Sen ee TV, 4,053 
i, 175 | Thy state ne to eae o MV ge ray 
ii g2iwited in. oat Chen UL ars 
1, 167'| Like ..> P an se LER avig68 
iy WPL) stall! 2 death ate oad INES 
vii, 47 | Time, Soundest of his sheild 208 
it, 4)), Dime, Greetthe 5 + <MeDigp is 54: 
iv, 56| Time, Shall find TL, Saiy-a64) 
i, 63 | Times’ : i. DVS Bie 
vi, 76| Times, The best of OUT «le Le AO 
ley 32.) 7 Tisise ae as iV, i; 49 
iv, 268 | Tithing a a III, iv, 128 
iv, 272 | Lo be just... : TE. ows 
vi, 77 | T’ obey Sc 56 os, LE, ay tar 
li, 116|Toblame .. Se sd, aa 
vi, 142 | To effect sic oe eae 
ii, 14} To fall [transitive] + ome LL eavpeae 
li, 31 | To the charge ge se pel ethic Eree 
ili, 169 | To who ae aja) 0 V1 240 
iii, 264 | Tom... am [rhyme] os) LL citi geo 
iv, 9}Too short Sys - <a, 2 eee 
- 353) Top the legitimate .. Bae yeh tei 
iv, 179 | Tough ae AS 7« My aliy Ste 
iv, 254 | Toward Livy are 
vi, 30] Toward ate ELE, iii, S17 
vi, 44|Treachers .. ae oie OL ater T6 
vi, 34 (inal... TL visesz 
vi, 260 | Trick. . IV, vi, 105 
iii, 2 Trill’d LV, aii, 12 
iv, 168 | Trowest as Se vied, aLVee Ly 
ii, 75] Trundle-tail.. 3 » UL vie (6S 
i, 71} Tucket nie ere sy hel TS 
ii, 96] Tucket os An oe LE 1vyak7O. 
vi, 181 | Turlygod aie ane ca dL, atijeeso! 
ini, 283|| Tut .. are se i eaten ey 
iv, 69] Tutors Ill, ii, $3 
i, 96} Two hours - ORS Os 
iv, 253 
vi, 214 | ULRICI Fs pe; 
ii, 107 | Unaccommodated III, iv, 103 


INDEX 503 


Unbolted .. are -. Il, ii, 61] Weeds ae a «LV, viije 
Unbutton here ae .- ITI, iv, 105 | Well are worth 
, Unfee’d lawyer. .. -. I, iv, 124| What=whatever .. ee All, vigare 
; Unfortunate... he .. IV, vi, 68} What=whoever .. «a V5, 11,008 
Ungoverned.. 206 -. IV, iv, 19] What like.. offensive .. IV, ii, 11 


:. Unkind es oo, day Seo Whelked CIV, eos 
. Unkind [accent] .. -- III, iv, 69 | Wher Sc ey GE BIR is se 
Unnecessary re. -. II, iv, 151] Where=Zo where .. cach wipe nts as: 
Unnumbered oe .- IV, vi, 21 | Where=whereas .. Bi he Sant pe be) 
Unpossessing ne .- II, i, 67] Wherefore .. Se ae LI, “iv, 108 
Unprized .. sis ~et Ta, 258'| Which ees ae wie al, aveeoO 
Unsanctified . . aie .. IV, vi, 272] Which=es to which as | Vy i11,-F49 


Unsophisticated .. .- III, iv, 102 | White herring ave lll vise 3 
Unspoke .. hy -. I, i, 235 | Who=which nie Bo) Ube bee 7%) 
Unstate ss nis -. IT, ii, 95 | Who=whom atte ape any 


Untented .. .. «.. I, iv, 294] Who=whom a ah, BEARER 
Upon a6 Fe .. III, vi, 87 | Who [personifying irrational 

Upon his party AE pee lt, is) 20) antecedent] ne on LV, Liste 
Upon respect we etl iv, 2a) vy OO'scel 0 Less)... po HMM Hy OR 
Upright one ore rev, wi, 27 | Whoop, jae .. O83 we 01, iv, 208 
Usage Sin Sc: Senet ely, 25) | Wade). aie a0 LL yao, 
Validity 2. 2+ s+ Tf 801 Wistom of pare |) 2 Ti gp 
er. Ai ae nas eas Wonder = wonderful a0 IV, vii, 41 
Mary en ee TL, 74 | Word ori Vy say, Pee 
‘Vaunt couriers oe tees 5 Ward can wield ter wm L fy 54 
Villain ee LIE vil, 794 wa cust) IIL. iv, 

f Bee JUSHY : o- » lV, 79 
Mirtae aa i -+ Vs ili, 104) Word... age an ao) LV see ZO 
Voice ios ara sop Na tl, 273 Worships - oe oie L iv, 260 
Vulgar ane ae eis 5 Vly ZOO Worst ; a) Pe he ee 
Wage _ se 2 ae res et Worsted-stocking .. Bip Alles a ats 
Walk ee iV, vi, ogy TR es ate Teh eo 
Walking fire ie) .. III, iv, 109 Would [omission of relative] III, iv, 25 
Walks at first cock .. . . III, iv, 111] Write happy 7s ae V, fit36 
Wall-newt .. cd Meelis iv, 124. 

Walls < a ee 77 Yeoman ar a8 2 LIT, via 
Wantest tid ~ie .. III, vi, 23} Yet -- ac ae ves, Ly AVINSST 
Warrant ce oi .. I, iv, 304| Yet better thus avs wre Li Wis ael nerd 
Wash’d eyes on .. I, i, 267} You less know how ore LL evar 5 
Water .s oe —« TIT, iv, 124 | Youwerebest .. «. I, iv, 93 
Waterish -~. che .. I, i, 257 | Young bones Aw arene Lisp ins 159 
Wawl i ae .. IV, vi, 178 | Your honour oe alenen Ls edly. (93 


Weary cies oe oye. ky dil FS 
Web and pin bbs ayes TEDL SR ACs eres a are S| LU rT Ys) 


FINIS 


hers on 


= , 
2. ae Fe 


a, Raw Sasha 


—/. 


ans en ot Heese 


2 d a ~ 
\ ta * os a 
Cea: i i, 
+ P > - — 2 
+ Our : 
ya » 
Rad = — * met As 
ee 4 
. 


Date Due 


—_ 


ETE 
S"O9-BAX.972 


