5 


RICKS  COLLEGE 

L  1  IS  R  A  R  Y 


3   1404  00  206  313  6 


Accession   trrr/  C/.^^.s^TZ...... 

Class    a..!^...j£.z...^..JX 

Book      '\JT      T—a 


0 


DATE  DUE 


u 

- 

m*  i 

S  2002 

."IP  7 

.  r*  -i , 

JCi 

.  9  2010 

Demco 


<Dai/id  ©.  JAc^Kay  ££ib/tafty 


PR 
2753 
F5 
v.  6 


0 


1 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2012  with  funding  from 
Brigham  Young  University-Idaho 


http://archive.org/details/newvariorumediti13shak 


Othello 


A  NEW  VARIORUM  EDITION 


oi» 


Shakespeare 


EDITED  BY 

HORACE   HOWARD   FURNESS 


Othello 


[THIRTEENTH  IMPRESSION] 


PHILADELPHIA 
J.   B.   LIPPINCOTT  COMPANY 

LONDON  :    5   HENRIETTA   STREET,    COVENT   GARDEN 


Copyright,  1886,  by  J.  B.  Lippincott  Company. 


Wbstcott  &  Thomson,  Press  of  J.  B.  Lippincott  Company f 

Electrotypers  and  Stereotypers,  Phila.  Phiia. 


IN    MEMORIAM 


—  NEITHER    PRESENT    TIME,   NOR    YEARS    UNBORN 
CAN    TO    MY    SIGHT    THAT    HEAVENLY    FACE    RESTORE, 


PREFACE 


The  Shakespeare  Club, — 'many  millions  strong'  as  Christopher 
North  says, — is  made  up  of  readers  of  Shakespeare  and  students  of 
Shakespeare.  All  are  readers,  and  some  at  times  students.  When 
reading  Shakespeare,  we  resign  ourselves  to  the  mighty  current,  and 
let  it  bear  us  along  whithersoever  it  will ;  we  see  no  shoals,  heed  no 
rocks,  need  no  pilot.  Whether  spoken  from  rude  boards  or  printed 
in  homely  form,  the  words  are  Shakespeare's,  the  hour  is  his,  and  a 
thought  of  texts  is  an  impertinence. 

But  when  we  study  Shakespeare,  then  u:u  mood  changes ;  no 
longer  are  we  'sitting  at  a  play,'  the  passive  recipients  of  impres- 
sions through  the  eye  and  ear,  but  we  weigh  every  word,  analyse 
every  expression,  sift  every  phrase,  that  no  grain  of  art  or  beauty 
which  we  can  assimilate  shall  escape.  To  do  this  to  our  best  advan- 
tage we  must  have  Shakespeare's  own  words  before  us.  No  other 
words  will  avail,  even  though  they  be  those  of  the  wisest  and  most 
inspired  of  our  day  and  generation.  We  must  have  Shakespeare's 
own  text ;  or,  failing  this,  the  nearest  possible  approach  to  it.  We 
shall  be  duly  grateful  to  the  wise  and  learned,  who,  where  phrases 
are  obscure,  give  us  the  words  which  they  believe  to  have  been 
Shakespeare's;  but,  as  students,  we  must  have  under  our  eyes  the 
original  text,  which,  however  stubborn  it  may  seem  at  times,  may 
yet  open  its  treasures  to  our  importunity,  and  reveal  charms  before 
undreamed  of. 

This  original  text  is  to  be  found  in  the  First  edition  of  his 
Works,  published  in  1623,  and  usually  known  as  the  First  Folio, 
which  was  presumably  printed  from  the  words  written  by  Shake- 
speare's own  hand,  or  from  Stage  copies  adapted  from  his  manu- 
scripts. Be  it  that  the  pages  of  this  First  Folio  are  little  better 
tnan  proof-sheets,  lacking  supervision  of  the  author  or  of  any  other, 


Vi  PREFACE 

yet  '  those  who  had  Shakespeare's  manuscript  before  them  were 
more  likely  to  read  it  right  than  we  who  read  it  only  in  imagi- 
nation,' as  Dr  Johnson  said.  Even  grant  that  the  First  Folio  is, 
as  has  been  asserted,  one  of  the  most  carelessly  printed  books  ever 
issued  from  the  press,  it  is,  nevertheless,  the  only  text  that  we  have 
for  at  least  sixteen  of  the  plays,  and  condemn  it  as  we  may,  ■  still  is 
its  name  in  great  account,  it  still  hath  power  to  charm  '  for  all  of 
them.  Can  any  good  reason  be  urged  why,  in  this  present  play  at 
least,  we  should  not,  in  the  hours  devoted  to  study,  be  it  remem- 
bered, have  the  text  of  the  First  Folio  as  our  guide?  Is  there  not 
every  reason  why  we  should  ?  If  misspellings  occur  here  and  there, 
surely  our  common-school  education  is  not  so  uncommon  that  we 
cannot  silently  correct  them.  If  the  punctuation  be  deficient,  surely 
it  can  be  supplied  without  an  exorbitant  demand  upon  our  intel- 
ligence. And  in  lines  incurably  maimed  by  the  printers,  of  what 
avail  is  the  voice  of  a  solitary  editor  amid  the  Babel  that  vociferates 
around,  each  voice  proclaiming  the  virtues  of  its  own  specific?  Who 
am  I  that  I  should  thrust  myself  in  between  the  student  and  the 
text,  as  though  in  me  resided  the  power  to  restore  Shakespeare's 
own  words  ?  Even  if  a  remedy  be  proposed  which  is  by  all  acknow- 
ledged to  be  efficacious,  it  is  not  enough  for  the  student  that  he 
should  know  the  remedy ;  he  must  see  the  ailment.  Let  the  ail- 
ment, therefore,  appear  in  all  its  severity  in  the  text,  and  let  the 
remedies  be  exhibited  in  the  notes;  by  this  means  we  may  make 
a  text  for  ourselves,  and  thus  made,  it  will  become  a  part  of  our- 
selves, and  speak  to  us  with  more  power  than  were  it  made  for  us 
by  the  wisest  editor  of  them  all — it  may  be  *  an  ill-favoured  thing, 
sir,'  but — it  will  be  *  our  own.' 

Impressed  with  this  belief,  I  have  in  this  volume  abandoned  the 
plan,  heretofore  followed  in  this  edition,  and  instead  of  giving  a 
modernised  text,  have  reproduced  the  First  Folio,  reprinting  it  from 
my  own  copy  with  all  the  exactitude  in  my  power,  scanning  it  letter 
by  letter,  and  have  recorded  in  the  Notes  the  various  readings  of  all 
other  critical  editions.     For  a  fuller  exposition  of  what  I  have  done, 

0  ■  left  undone,  in  this  regard,  and  in  regard  to  the  text  in  general, 

1  <nust  refer  to  p.   460  of  the  Appendix. 


PREFACE  vii 

I  have  long  been  of  the  opinion  that  in  the  interpretation  of  Shake- 
speare's plays,  our  first  appeal,  and  perhaps  our  last,  should  be  made 
to  the  dramatic  instinct,  as  it  has  been  termed,  with  which  eminent 
Actors  are  especially  endowed.  To  see  Kean,  it  has  been  said,  was 
to  read  Shakespeare  by  '  flashes  of  lightning.'  Yet  how  seldom  do 
we  find  in  Shakespearian  Commentaries  any  reference  to  the  dramatic 
rendering  of  a  character,  or  of  a  passage,  by  an  eminent  Actor.  This 
is,  however,  not  altogether  the  fault  of  the  Commentators.  All  who 
have  read  much  of  the  Biographies  of  Actors  will,  I  think,  agree  with 
me  in  the  regret  that  explicit,  specific  descriptions  of  their  acting  are 
so  meagre.  Of  vague  generalisations,  conveying  no  definite  ideas,  we 
have  a  superfluity ;  but  of  the  tones,  or  looks,  or  emphasis  on  par- 
ticular words  or  lines  there  is  a  plentiful  lack.  What  help  is  given 
to  us  by  the  information  that  nothing  could  surpass  the  fervour  of 
Garrick's  wooing  as  Romeo,  or  that  Mrs  Siddons  was  wonderfully 
tragic  as  Lady  Macbeth?  What  we  require  is  the  report  like  that 
of  an  eye-witness  whose  record  is  taken  on  the  spot ;  then  we  shall 
know  Romeo's  every  tone  and  look  when  rich  music's  tongue  unfolds 
imagined  happiness.  There  are,  however,  scattered  here  and  there, 
explicit  definite  descriptions  of  the  treatment  by  eminent  Actors  of 
various  passages;  those  which  I  deemed  worthy  of  preservation  I 
have  recorded  in  the  Commentary.  At  my  solicitation  my  friend, 
Mr  Edwin  Booth,  wrote  out  for  me,  in  an  interleaved  copy  of  this 
play,  much  of  his  'business;'  I  cannot  but  think  that  to  others  his 
notes  will  be  as  interesting  and  as  valuable  as  I  have  found  them. 
It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  for  his  sake  that  the  notes  were  made 
with  no  view  to  their  being  printed. 

It  cannot  be  but  that,  in  the  selection  of  notes  for  an  edition  like 
the  present,  an  editor,  working  single-handed,  must  be  influenced 
by  his  own  tastes  and  predilections.  I  can  honestly  say,  however, 
that  if  I  have  been  single-handed  I  have  been  also  single-eyed, — 
single-eyed  to  the  one  object  of  elucidating  the  text.  We  do  not 
go  to  Shakespeare  to  study  grammar  or  scanning,  but  we  study  his 
grammar  that  we  may  understand  him,  and  arrange  the  scansion, 
that  every  charm  which  rhythm  can  yield  may  be  his,  as  of  right. 


viii  PREFACE 

Hence  the  prominence  which  I  have  given  to  all  grammatical  and 
verbal  criticism ;  which  is  to  be  regarded  solely  as  a  means  to  an 
end.  Without  a  complete  understanding  of  the  words  the  meaning  of 
the  whole  sentence  will  be  lost, — and  is  not  the  meaning  of  Shake- 
speare the  very  butt  and  sea-mark  of  our  utmost  sail?  It  is  as  con- 
tributors towards  this  object  that  I  regard  Actors,  and  have,  therefore, 
recorded  their  interpretations.  Herein  the  selection  of  notes  for  this 
volume  has  been  influenced  by  my  own  preference.  'It  is  impossible,' 
says  Dr  Johnson,  'for  an  expositor  not  to  write  too  little  for  some, 
'  and  too  much  for  others.  He  can  judge  what  is  necessary  only  by 
'  his  own  experience ;  and  how  long  soever  he  may  deliberate,  will  at 
1  last  explain  many  lines  which  the  learned  will  think  impossible  to  be 
'  mistaken,  and  omit  many  for  which  the  ignorant  will  want  his  help. 
'These  are  censures  merely  relative,  and  must  be  quietly  endured.' 

Since  these  words  were  written,  a  hundred  and  twenty  years  ago, 
what  numberless  busy  'expositors,'  high  and  low,  wise  and  simple, 
learned  and  ignorant,  clerk  and  lay,  at  home  and  abroad,  have  been, 
down  to  this  hour,  poring  over  every  Act,  and  Scene,  over  every  line, 
and  syllable  !  Is  there  anything  left  for  us  to  explore  or  to  discover? 
'Gentlemen,'  said  Dr  Barclay  in  one  of  his  Edinburgh  Lectures, 
'  Anatomy  may  be  likened  to  a  harvest-field.  First  come  the  reapers, 
'  who,  entering  upon  untrodden  ground,  cut  down  great  store  of  corn 
'  from  all  sides  of  them.  These  are  the  early  anatomists  of  modern 
'  Europe.  Then  come  the  gleaners,  who  gather  up  ears  enough  from 
'  the  bare  ridges  to  make  a  few  loaves  of  bread.  Such  were  the  anat- 
'  omists  of  the  last  century.  Last  of  all  come  the  geese,  who  still 
'  continue  to  pick  up  a  few  grains  scattered  here  and  there  among  the 
'stubble,  and  waddle  home  in  the  evening,  poor  things,  cackling 
'  with  joy  because  of  their  success.     Gentlemen,  we  are  the  geese  ' 

The  next  play  in  this  edition,  if  there  ever  be  one,  will  be,  prob- 
ably, The  Merchant  of  Venice. 

To  my  Father,  the  Rev.  Dr  Furness,  be  my  thanks  pressed  down 

and  running  over  for  all  that  he  has  done  for  me,  especially  for  hig 

translation  of  my  selections  from  the  German  in  the  Appendix. 

H.  H.  F. 
March,  1886 


Othello 


THE  TRAGEDIE  OF 

Othello,  the  Moore  of  Venice. 


Aftus  Primus.     Sccena  Prima. 

[310  a]  Enter  Rodorigo}and  I  ago. 

Rodorigo. 
Euer  tell  me,  I  take  it  much  vnkindly 
That  thou  (J ago)  who  haft  had  my  purfe,  5 

1.  Actus... Prima.]    Om.   Qq.     Act.  I,         iii,  Rife,  Huds. 

Scene  I.  Rowe.  4.  me^\  me.  Johns.  Steev.'73.    me;  Jen. 

2.  [Scene   Venice.    Rowe.      Scene,  a        Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  Cam.  Ktly,  Rife,  Huds 
Street  in  Venice.  Theob.  Wh.  ii. 

Enter...]  Enter  Iago  and  Roderigo.  much~\  very  Ff,  Rowe. 

Qq.    Enter..  Jago.  Q'81,  Rowe,  Pope  (so  5.  thou]  you  Qx. 
spelled  throughout).  Iago]  Om.  Q2Q3- 

4.  Neuer]  Tv/Ji,  neuer  Qq.  Warb.  Jen.  haJT\  has  QT. 

Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Sta.  Wh.  Glo.  Cam.  Dyce  had']  held  Cap.  conj  (p.  26  ec). 

1.  Scene.]   Fechter:  A  street  in  Venice — on  the  right  a  house  with  practicable 
door  and  window.  Night.     Booth  :  Venice.  A  dark  street.  Full  stage. 

2.  The  bracketed  numbers  and  letters  [310  a,  etc.]  indicate  the  page  and  column  in  Fx. 
4.  Neuer]  Coleridge  [Notes,  &c,  p.  247) :  Admirable  is  the  preparation,  so  truly 

and  peculiarly  Shakespearian,  in  the  introduction  of  Roderigo,  as  the  dupe  on  whom 
Iago  shall  first  exercise  his  art,  and  in  so  doing  display  his  own  character.  Roderigo, 
without  any  fixed  principle,  but  not  without  the  moral  notions  and  sympathies  with 
honour,  which  his  rank  and  connections  had  hung  upon  him,  is  already  well  fitted  and 
predisposed  for  the  purpose ;  for  very  want  of  character  and  strength  of  passion,  like 
wind  loudest  in  an  empty  house,  constitute  his  character.  The  first  three  lines  happily 
state  the  nature  and  foundation  of  the  friendship  between  him  and  Iago, — the  purse, — as 
also  the  contrast  of  Roderigo's  intemperance  of  mind  with  Iago's  coolness, — the  cool- 
ness of  a  preconceiving  experimenter.  The  mere  language  of  protestation, — •  If  ever 
I  did  dream  of  such  a  matter,  abhor  me,' — which,  falling  in  with  the  associative  link, 
determines  Roderigo's  continuation  of  complaint, — •  Thou  told'st  me,  thou  didst  hold 
him  in  thy  hate,' — elicits  at  length  a  true  feeling  of  Iago's  mind,  the  dread  of  con- 
tempt habitual  to  those  who  encourage  in  themselves,  and  have  their  keenest  pleasure 
in,  the  expression  of  contempt  for  others.  Observe  Iago's  high  self-opinion,  and  the 
moral,  that  a  wicked  man  will  employ  real  feelings,  as  well  as  assume  those  most  alien 
from  his  own,  as  instruments  of  his  purposes : — '  And,  by  the  faith  of  man,  I  know  my 
J  -       1  I 


2  THE   TRACED  IE   OF  OTHELLO  [act  i,  sc.  i. 

As  if  y  firings  were  thine,  fhould'ft  know  of  this.  6 

la.     But  you'l  not  heare  me.     If  euer  I  did  dream 

6.  Two  lines,  F4,  Rowe.  Wh.  Glo.   Rife,   Huds.     But...nur  One 
this.]  this —  Han.  Warb.  Dyce,  Sta.         line,  Mai. 

this;  Cap.  7.  you'l]  you  w ill  Qjt  Jen.  Steev.  Var. 

7.  But]  S' blood,  but  Qf.  'Sblood,  but  Coll.  Dyce,  Wh.  Glo.  Cam.  Rife,  Hur'.s. 
Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Dyce,  Sta.  Wh.  Glo.        you'le  Qa.    you'll  F  F   et  cet. 

Cam.  Ktly,  Clarke,  Rife,  Huds.    ' Sdeath,  7,  8.  If. ..me.]  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe+, 

but  Fechter.  Jen.  Var.  Coll.  Wh.  i.     If...matter,  One 

But. ..me.]  One  line,  QqF4,  Rowe  + ,  line,  Han.  Cap.  Steev.  Dyce,  Sta.  Wh.  ii, 

Cap.  Jen.   Steev.  Var.   Coll.  Dyce,   Sta.  Glo.  Cam.  Rife,  Huds. 

price,  I  am  worth  no  less  a  place.'  [I  am  afraid  that  Collier  '  frolicked  in  conjec- 
ture '  when  he  suggests  (ed.  iii)  that  •  the  interjection  Tush  may  have  been  formed  from 
hush;  while  Tut  (often  used)  was  probably  an  abbreviation  of  Tell  you  what.'  Skeat 
cites  Prompt.  Barv.,  where  Way  (in  a  note  s.  v.  Btrot )  says  that  •  Palsgrave  observes,  in 
his  enumeration  of  interjections,  "  Some  be  interiections  of  indignacion,  trut,  as  trut 
auant,  trut!"  "Trut,  an  interjection  importing  indignation,  tush,  tut,  fy  man.  Trut 
avant,  a  fig's  end,  no  such  matter,  you  are  much  deceived;  also,  on  afore  for  shame." 
Cotgrave.' — Ed.] 

4.  me]  Knight  believes  that  by  the  emphasis  falling  on  'me,'  as  here  in  the  F,  the 
expression  is  somewhat  more  in  Roderigo,$  vein,  and  that  the  omission  of  Tush  was 
not  accidental. 

6.  this]  Hudson  :  The  intended  elopement.  Roderigo  has  been  suing  for  Desde- 
mona's  hand,  employing  Iago  to  aid  him  in  his  suit,  and  paying  his  service  in  advance. 
The  play  opens  pat  upon  her  elopement  with  the  Moor,  and  Roderigo  presumes  Iago 
to  have  been  in  the  secret  of  their  intention. 

7.  But]  Knight,  the  first  editor  to  proclaim  an  absolute  trust  in  the  First  Folio, 
and  to  give  a  reason  for  the  faith  that  was  in  him,  here  at  the  very  outset  offers 
battle.  Steevens,  following  the  Qq,  had  said  that,  'the  Folio  suppresses  the 
oath  'sblood?  The  use  of  the  word  suppresses  seems  to  cast  a  slur;  and  Knight 
is  instantly  on  hand,  '  but  Steevens  does  not  tell  us,'  he  says,  '  what  the  Folio  does 
besides.  It  accommodates  the  rhythmical  arrangement  of  the  sentence  to  the  sup- 
pression of  the  oath.  This  is  certainly  not  the  work  of  some  botcher  coming  after  the 
author.  Such  instances  of  right  feeling  and  good  taste,  in  the  omission  of  offensive 
expressions,  constantly  occur  throughout  this  play  in  Fx.  In  the  Qto  such  offensive 
expressions  are  as  constantly  found.  The  modern  editions  cling  to  the  Qto  in  this 
particular,  upon  the  supposition  that  in  the  Folio  the  passages  were  struck  out  by  the 
Master  of  the  Revels.  The  Master  of  the  Revels  must  have  been  an  exceedingly 
capricious  person  if  he  thus  exercised  his  office  in  1623,  and  thus  neglected  it  in  1622. 
We  have  not  a  doubt,  seeing  that  the  structure  of  the  verse  is  always  accommodated  to 
the  alteration,  that  every  such  change  was  made  by  the  author  of  the  play.  It  was  not 
that  the  Master  of  the  Revels  was  scrupulous  in  the  use  of  his  authority  with  Ff,  and 
negligent  with  Qt,  but  that  both  Qto  and  Folio  were  printed  at  a  period  when  the  Stat- 
ute of  1604  [Qu.  1605  ?]  for  restraining  the  profane  use  of  the  sacred  name  in  stage- 
plays,  had  fallen  into  neglect.  But  the  Qto  was  printed  from  an  early  copy  of  the  play 
which  existed  before  the  Statute  came  into  operation.  The  Folio  contains  the  author's 
additions  and  corrections.  This  would  be  a  sufficient  reason,  if  there  were  no  other, 
for  preferring  fhe  text  of  the  Folio  in  this  as  well  as  in  other  matters.'     Collier  (ed.  i) 


act  i,  sc.  i.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


Of  fuch  a  matter,  abhorre  me. 

Rodo.     Thou  told'ft  me, 
Thou  did'ft  hold  him  in  thy  hate. 

Iago.     Defpife  me 
\{  I  do  not.     Three  Great-ones  of  the  Cittie, 
(In  perfonall  fuite  to  make  me  his  Lieutenant) 
Off-capt  to  him  :  and  by  the  faith  of  man 


10 


14 


8.  matter,  abhorre  me.~\  matter, —  Cap. 
me.]  me  then.  Han. 

9,  10.  Thou... hate. ~\  One  line,  Qq, 
Rowe-h,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Coll. 
Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  Wh.  Glo.  Cam.  Ktly, 
Rife,  Huds.     Thou... hold One  line,  Han. 

11,  12.  Defpife... Cittie~\  One  line,  Qq, 
Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce, 
Sta.  Wh.  Glo.  Cam.  Ktly,  Rife,  Huds. 


11-18.  Lines  end  not...fuit...him... 
price . . .  loving. . .  zvith . . .  fluff t. . .  conclusion 
(following  Qx)  Han. 

12.  Great-ones]  great  ones  Qq  et  cet. 

13.  Lieutenant]  LeiutenantQx.  Lieve- 
tenant  F2. 

14.  Off-capt]  Of  leapt  Qq.  Oft  cap fd 
(subs.)  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Steev. Var.  Coll. 
Sing.  Ktly,  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 


is  thoroughly  conservative,  observing  that  if  the  Master  of  the  Revels  expunged  '  'Sblood,' 
he  certainly  did  not  erase  '  Tush,'  and  since  both  were  probably  written  by  Shakespeare, 
both  had  better  be  retained. 

14.  Off-capt]  That  is,  says  Theobald,  stood  cap  in  hand,  soliciting  him.  So  in 
Ant.  6°  Cleo.  II,  vii,  64 :  '  I  have  ever  held  my  cap  off  to  thy  fortunes,'  and  in  Tim. 
IV,  iii,  212  :  *  And  let  his  very  breath,  whom  thou'lt  observe,  Blow  off  thy  cap.'  Jen- 
nens  suggests  that  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  the  Great  ones  often  begged  Othello,  cap 
in  hand,  to  promote  Iago,  and  adds,  '  'tis  very  likely  the  original  reading  was  Offd 
cap.'  The  reading  of  the  Qq,  says  Ritson  (p.  225)  is  'nonsense;'  whereas  an  'inti- 
mate knowledge  of  the  Qq'  convinces  Malone  that  'they  ought  not  without  very 
strong  reason  to  be  departed  from.'  No  such  strong  reason  appears  to  him  here,  prob- 
ably because  to  him  as  well  as  to  all  who  adopt  oft  capped,  Mason's  explanation  seems 
conclusive,  namely  that  '  to  cap  is  to  salute  by  taking  off  the  cap.  It  is  still  an  academic 
phrase.'  Knight  comes  to  the  defence  of  Fx,  and,  admitting  that  to  cap  in  ancient 
academical  phrase  meant  to  take  the  cap  off,  and  that  it  is  so  used  by  other  early  Eng- 
lish authors,  as  in  Drant's  Horace,  1567,  yet,  asks  Knight,  'is  oft  capped  supported  by 
the  context  ?  As  we  read  the  whole  passage,  three  great  ones  of  the  city  wait  upon 
Othello;  they  " off-capp'd," — they  took  cap-in-hand, — in  personal  suit  that  he  should 
make  Iago  his  lieutenant ;  but  he  evades  them,  &c.  He  has  already  chosen  his  officer. 
Here  is  a  scene  painted  in  a  manner  well  befitting  both  the  dignity  of  the  great  ones 
of  the  city  and  of  Othello  himself.  The  audience  was  given,  the  solicitation  was  hum- 
bly made,  the  reasons  for  refusing  it  courteously  assigned.  But  take  the  other  reading, 
oft  capp'd ;  and  then  we  have  Othello  perpetually  haunted  by  the  three  great  ones  of 
the  city,  capping  to  him  and  repeating  to  him  the  same  prayer,  and  he  perpetually  deny- 
ing them  with  the  same  bombast  circumstance.  Surely  this  is  not  what  Shakespeare 
meant  to  represent.'  White  (ed.  i)  suggests  that  '  capped '  seems  '  to  have  meant  to 
keep  the  cap  on,  not  to  take  it  off.  For  example :  "  And  this  of  Paull,  that  a  man 
should  neither  pray  nor  preach  capped,  or  with  his  head  covered,  is  also  cleane  abol- 
ished."— Cranmer's  Confutation  of  Unwritten  Verities,  1582,  p.  62.'  But  Dyce  (ed. 
iii)  is  not  convinced,  and  after  quoting  Malone,  opposes  White  with  a  definition  from 
Coles'?   Latin  Diet. ;    '  To  cap  a  person,  coram  aliquo  caput  aperire,  nudare?     ("I 


4  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO  [act  i,  sc.  i. 

I  know  my  price,  I  am  worth  no  worffe  a  place.  1 5 

But  he  (as  louing  his  owne  pride,  and  purpofes) 

Euades  them,  with  a  bumbaft  Circumftance, 

Horribly  ftufft  with  Epithites  of  warre, 

Non-fuites  my  Mediators.     For  certes,  faies  he,  19 

15    / am ]  P m  Pope  + ,  Dyce  iii,  Huds.  fwn . . ./ayes  he... was  he  ? ...  Arithmetition 

worffc]  wofe  F2.  QjJen.Coll.  war... conclusion. ..says he... 

16.  his  ozone]  Bis  Han.  officer. ..was  he? ...arithmetician  Pope  +  , 
purpofes]  purpose   Theob.  Warb.  Cap.  Rann,  Dyce,  Sta.  Wh.  Glo.  Cam. 

Johns.  Rife.  war. ..mediators... already. ..washe? 

17.  bumbajf]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  ...arithmetician  Mai.  war. ..nonsuits... 
bombajl  Theob.  says  he. . .  officer. .  .was  he  ?...  arithmetician 

18.  Epithites]  Epithets  F3F4.  Steev.  Var.      war... mediators.. .officer. 

18,  19.  warre, Non-fuits~\  Ff, Knt, Sing         arithmetician   Ktly.     war. ..mediators.. 
li.  7varre;  Non-fuits Q2Q3,  Rowe.  warre:         chose. ..was  he  ? ...arithmetician  (reading 
And  in  conclufion,  Nonfuits  Qt  et  cet.  Eve)  Huds. 

18-21.  Ending    lines,  warre. ..conclu-  19.  For  certes]  Certes  Pope  +  . 

prefer  Ft,  which  presents  no  difficulty.  To  Theobald's  citations  add  Tim.  II,  i,  18, 
where  the  posture  of  importunity  is  represented  as  when  •  the  cap  plays  in  the  right 
hand.'— Ed.] 

17.  bumbast]  Nares  :  Originally  cotton.  Hence,  because  cotton  was  commonly 
used  to  stuff  out  quilting,  &c,  bombast  also  meant  the  stuffing  of  clothes,  &c.  Hence 
applied  to  tumid  and  inflated  language.  [Cotgrave  gives :  Cottoner.  To  bumbast,  or 
stuffe  with  cotton. — Ed.] 

17.  Circumstance]  Reed:  That  is,  circumlocution.  See  Greene's  Tu  Quoque 
[p.  93,  Dodsley]  '  a  needless  labour,  sir,  To  run  and  wind  about  for  circumstance ; 
When  the  plain  word,  "  I  thank  you,"  would  have  serv'd.'  Also  in  Massinger's  Pic- 
ture [I,  i.]  '  therefore,  without  circumstance,  to  the  point.'  [The  editor  of  Greene's 
Tu  Quoque  calls  attention  to  the  great  similarity  between  the  line  there  cited  and  '  To 
wind  about  my  love  with  circumstance'  in  Mer.  of  Ven.  I,  i,  154;  conf.  Ham.  I,  v, 
127. — Ed.]  Knight:  /ago  does  not  mean  to  say  that  Othello  made  a  long  rigmarole 
speech  to  the  three  great  ones,  and  then  in  conclusion  nonsuited  the  mediators  by  tell- 
ing them  that  he  had  already  chosen  his  officer.  But,  in  the  spirit  of  calumny,  he 
imputes  to  Othello  that,  having  chosen  his  officer  before  the  personal  suit  was  made  to 
him  for  Iago,  he  suppressed  the  fact ;  evaded  the  mediators ;  and  nonsuited  them  with 
a  bombast  circumstance.  Fx  distinctly  separates,  for,  certes,  says  he,  from  nonsuits  my 
mediators.  Othello,  according  to  Iagds  calumnious  assertion,  says  the  truth  only  to 
himself. 

19.  Non-suites]  Lord  Campbell  (p.  112)  :  Here  is  a  striking  instance  of  Shake- 
speare's proneness  to  legal  phraseology.  Nonsuiting  is  known  to  the  learned  to  be  the 
most  disreputable  and  mortifying  mode  of  being  beaten ;  it  indicates  that  the  action  is 
wholly  unfounded  on  the  plaintiff's  own  showing,  or  that  there  is  a  fatal  .defect  in  the 
manner  in  which  his  case  has  been  got  up ;  insomuch  that  Mr.  Chitty,  the  great  special 
pleader,  used  to  give  this  advice  to  young  barristers  practising  at  nisi  prius  : — '  Always 
avoid  your  attorney  when  nonsuited,  for  till  he  has  a  little  time  for  reflection,  however 
much  you  may  abuse  the  Judge,  he  will  think  that  the  nonsuit  was  all  your  fault.' 

19.  DYCE  (ed.  iii) :  *FT  and  Q2  wrongly  omit  "And,  in  conclusion;"  but  probably 
something  has  been  lost  before  them.' — W.  N.  LETTSOM. 


act  i,  SC.  L]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  5 

I  haue  already  chofe  my  Officer.  And  what  was  he  ?  20 

For-footh,  a  great  Arithmatician, 

One  Michacll  CaJJio,  a  Florentine, 

(A  Fellow  almoft  damn'd  in  a  faire  Wife)  23 

20.  chofe]  chofen  Qv  Jen.  Steev.'78,'85,         Arithtnetician  Ff. 

Mai.  Rann.  22,  23.  «...  JVife](a  Florentine's... wife) 

OJfcer.     And]  officer,  and  Qq.  Warb. 

21.  For-footh]  Forfoolh    QqFf,  Rowe  23.  damn'd]  dambd  Qq. 

et  cet.  Jfz)£]  2#z/£  QqF2F4<  face  Cap.   /£/<? 

21.  Arithmatician]  Arithmetition  Qx.         Ktly. 

19,  20.  For  .  .  .  officer]  Theobald,  following  Pope  in  the  omission  of  For,  was 
the  first  to  mark  Certes  .  .  .  officer  as  a  quotation.  Of  the  edd.  who  follow  the  QqFf, 
Steev.'73,  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  Cam.  Cowden-Clarke,  Hal.  Rolfe,  Huds.  Wh.  ii,  mark  the 
quotation  as  beginning  (properly,  I  think)  with  certes.  For  can  be  no  part  of  Othello's 
speech.     All  other  edd.  follow  Cap.  in  including  For  in  the  quotation. — Ed. 

19.  certes]  Steevens:  That  is,  certainly,  in  truth.  Schmidt  [Lex.  s.  v.)  says  that 
here,  and  in  Hen.  VIII :  I,  i,  48,  '  certes '  is  a  monosyllable,  an  assertion  which  I  am 
afraid  must  be  marked  as  one  of  the  very  few  errors  which  that  admirable  lexicographer 
has  made.  An  English  ear  will  readily  guide  the  present  line  with  certes  as  a  dis- 
syllable, and  the  line  in  Hen.  VIII,  *  One,  certes,  that  promises  no  element,'  is  scanned 
by  reading  '  promises '  as  a  dissyllable,  a  contraction  of  which  Walker  (  Vers.  p.  62) 
gives  numerous  examples.  The  very  many  instances  of  'certes'  as  a  dissyllable  in 
Spenser  alone  would  teach  us  to  contract, 'in  Shakespeare,  almost  any  other  word  in 
the  line  rather  than  that.     [I  am  now  half  inclined  to  agree  with  Schmidt.  1887.] — Ed. 

21.  Arithmatician]  Steevens:  So,  in  Rom.  &  Jul.  Mercutio  says:  'one  that 
fights  by  the  book  of  arithmetic'  Malone  :  Iago  means  to  represent  Cassio  not  as  a 
person  whose  arithmetic  was  '  one,  two,  and  the  third  in  your  bosom,'  but  as  a  man 
merely  conversant  with  civil  matters,  and  who  knew  no  more  of  a  squadron  than  the 
number  of  men  it  contained.  Singer  thinks  that  Iago  refers  to  Cassio  as  a  man  whose 
knowledge  of  military  evolutions  was  drawn  entirely  from  books  on  tactics,  wherein 
'  the  movements  requisite  to  change  from  line  to  column,  &c.  are  worked  out  numeri- 
cally on  the  base  of  a  tactical  unit.'  C.  A.  Brown  (Sh.'s  Autobiog.  Poems,  p.  no), 
in  his  essay  to  prove  that  Shakespeare  had  visited  Italy,  says  that  there  was  good 
reason  why  Cassio,  the  Florentine,  should  be  derisively  termed  by  Iago  '  a  great  arith- 
metician,' 'a  counter-caster'  with  his  'debtor  and  creditor.'  'A  soldier  from  Florence, 
famous  for  its  bankers  throughout  Europe,  and  for  its  invention  of  bills  of  exchange, 
book-keeping,  and  everything  connected  with  a  counting-house,  might  well  be  ridiculed 
for  his  promotion,  by  an  Iago,  in  this  manner.' 

22.  Cassio]  Bodenstedt  (p.  ix)  says  that  Othello  chose  Cassio  because  he  pre- 
ferred him  personally  as  a  go-between  in  his  wooing  of  Desdemona,  and  moreover  it 
ministered  to  Othello's  pride  to  refuse  the  personal  suit  of  the  great  ones  of  the  city. 

22,  23.  Florentine,  .  .  .  Wife]  Theobald  maintains  that  Iago,  not  Cassio,  was 
the  Florentine ;  and  that  '  wife '  could  not  apply  to  Cassio,  who  was  unmarried,  but  that 
it  does  apply  to  Iago,  whose  '  fair  wife '  attends  on  Desdemona,  and  whose  marriage 
and  possible  subjection  to  his  wife  was  one  reason,  probably,  why  Othello  himself,  an 
unmarried  man, rejected  him  as  an  officer.  Iago  is  therefore  the  'fellow  almost  damn'd 
in  a  fair  wife,'  whereby  Shakespeare  '  means  Iago  had  so  beautiful  a  Wife  that  she  was 


THE    TRACED  IE   OF  OTHELLO  [ACT  I,  SC.  i 


[22,  23.  «  Florentine,  (A  Fellow  almost  damn'd  in  a  faire  Wife).'] 
hu  Heaven  on  Earth,  that  he  idoliz'd  her,  and  that  he  forgot  to  think  of  Happiness  in 
an  After-state,  as  placing  all  his  Views  of  Bliss  in  the  single  Enjoyment  of  her.  In 
this  sense,  Beauty,  when  it  can  so  seduce  and  engross  a  Man's  Thoughts,  may  be  said 
"almost  to  damn  him."  A  somewhat  similar  thought  is  in  Mer.  of  Ven.  Ill,  v,  80- 
83.'  Theobald  therefore  puts  these  words  in  parenthesis,  reading:  (the  Florentine's  A 
fellow  almost  damn'd  in  a  fair  wife,).  Hanmer  was  the  first  to  point  out  that '  from  many 
passages  of  this  play  (rightly  understood)  Cassio  was  a  Florentine,  and  Iago  a  Venetian,' 
and  that  as  Cassio  was  unmarried,  there  must  be  some  mistake  in  giving  him  a  wife ;  but 
Cassio's  beauty  is  often  hinted  at — an  attribute  which  rough  soldiers,  naturally  enough, 
would  treat  with  scom  and  ridicule.  Wherefore  Hanmer  reads  '  a  fellow  almost  damn'd 
in  a  fair  phyz?  Johnson  resigns  the  lines  to  'corruption  and  obscurity,'  adding,  'I 
cannot  think  it  very  plain  from  III,  i,  44,  that  Cassio  was  or  was  not  a  Florentine.' 
Tyrwhitt  (p.  2) :  The  great  difficulty  is  to  understand  in  what  sense  any  man  can 
be  said  to  be  'almost  damn'd  in  a  fair  wife  '  or  'a  fair  phyz.'  I  cannot  find  any  ground 
for  supposing  that  either  the  one  or  the  other  has  ever  been  reputed  to  be  damnable 
sins  in  any  religion.  There  is  the  same  expression  in  Mer.  of  Ven.  I,  i,  98 :  '  If  they 
should  speak,  would  almost  damn  those  ears,  Which,  hearing  them,  would  call  their 
brothers  fools.'  And  there  the  allusion  is  evident  to  the  Gospel-judgment  against  those 
who  call  their  brothers  fools.  I  am  inclined,  therefore,  to  believe  that  the  true  reading 
here  is  :  'A  fellow  almost  damn'd  in  a  fair  life,1  and  that  Shakespeare  alludes  to  the 
judgment  denounced  in  the  Gospel  against  those  of  tv/iom  all  men  speak  well.  The 
character  of  Cassio  is  such  as  would  be  very  likely  to  draw  upon  him  all  the  peril  of 
this  denunciation,  literally  understood.  Well-bred,  easy,  sociable,  good-natured,  with 
abilities  euough  to  make  him  agreeable  and  useful,  but  not  sufficient  to  excite  the  envy 
of  his  equals  or  to  alarm  the  jealousy  of  his  superiors.  In  several  other  passages  lago 
bears  his  testimony  to  the  amiable  qualities  of  his  rival.  Conf.  '  the  daily  beauty  of  his 
life,'  V,  i,  22.  I  will  only  add  that  however  hard  or  far-fetch'd  this  allusion  (whether 
Shakespeare's  or  only  mine)  may  seem  to  be,  Archbishop  Sheldon  had  exactly  the 
same  conceit  when  he  made  that  singular  compliment  to  a  nephew  of  Sir  William 
Temple,  that  '  he  had  the  curse  of  the  Gospel,  because  all  men  spoke  well  of  him.' 
Heath  (p.  551)  adopts  Theobald's  'Florentine's,'  and  'apprehends  the  meaning  to  be 
that,  notwithstanding  Iago  had  a  fair  wife,  he  had  little  chance  for  going  to  heaven, 
as  by  the  watchfulness  of  his  jealousy  he  made  it  extremely  difficult  for  her  to  do  her 
part  toward  sending  him  thither.'  JENNENS  in  his  text  marks  the  line  as  an  Aside, 
and,  retaining  the  parenthesis,  reads  'A  fellow's  almost  damn'd  in  a  fair  wife!'  In 
his  note,  after  condemning  Theobald's  emendation,  and  asserting  that  Hanmer's  is 
simply  equivalent  to  saying  that  '  Cassio's  a  damn'd  handsome  fellow,'  he  upholds 
his  own  text  by  pleading  that  he  has  '  only  supplied  an  s  after  "  fellow ;"  '  and  by 
supposing  that  'Shakespeare  meant  the  line  to  be  spoke  apart,  expressing  a  sudcieD 
motion  of  jealousy  in  Iago  on  naming  Othello  and  Cassio,  of  both  of  which  that  he 
was  jealous  appears  from  II,  iii.  And  Iago's  meaning  is,  "  To  be  manned  to  a  hand- 
some woman  (as  I  am)  is  almost  as  bad  as  being  damn'd ;  as  the  number  of  her  ad- 
mirers will  doom  the  husband  to  a  state  of  perpetual  jealousy."  '  Tollet  (  Var.'jS) : 
Some  might  have  no  objection  to  read  '  a  false  wife ;'  as  the  jealous  Ford  says, 
•see  the  hell  of  having  a  false  woman.' — Merry  Wives,  II,  ii ;  but  the  original  text 
may  mean  a  fellow  almost  as  unhappy  as  the  damned,  with  jealousy  of  a  fair  wife. 
S'J  EEVENS :  That  Cassio  was  married  is  not  sufficiently  implied  in  the  words  '  a  fellow 
ilmost  damn'd  in  a  fair  wife,'  since  they  mean,  according  to  Iago's  licentious  maui  ei 


act  i,  sc.  i.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  7 

[22,  23.  '  Florentine,  (A  Fellow  almost  damn'd  in  a  faire  Wife).'] 
of  expressing  himself,  no  more  than  a  man  'very  near  being  married.'  This  seems  to 
have  been  the  case  with  Cassio ;  see  IV,  i,  142.  Had  Shakespeare,  consistently  with 
Iago's  character,  meant  to  make  him  say  that  Cassio  was  •  actually  damn'd  in  being 
married  to  a  handsome  woman,'  he  would  have  made  him  say  it  outright,  and  not  have 
interposed  the  palliative  almost.  Whereas,  what  he  says  at  present  amounts  to  no  more 
than  that  (however  near  his  marriage)  he  is  not  yet  completely  damned,  because  he  is 
not  absolutely  married.  The  succeeding  parts  of  Iago's  conversation  sufficiently  evince 
that  Shakespeare  thought  no  mode  of  conception  or  expression  too  brutal  for  that  cha- 
racter. This  note  of  Steevens,  M alone  thinks,  clearly  explains  the  line,  and  has  there- 
fore 'no  doubt  that  the  text  is  right.'  M.  Mason  denies  the  correctness  of  Tyrwhitt's 
emendation,  because  Iago  would  never  have  given  to  Cassio  the  highest  commendation 
while  wishing  to  depreciate  him  to  Roderigo ;  though  afterward  in  speaking  to  himself 
in  V,  i,  he  gives  him  his  just  character.  Henley  :  Iago  is  enumerating  Cassio's  dis- 
qualifications ;  surely  his  being  well  spoken  of  by  all  men  could  not  be  one  of  them. 
It  was  in  regard  to  the  reported  marriage  of  Cassio  to  the  'customer,'  the  'most  fair 
Bianca,'  that  Iago  called  the  new  lieutenant  a  fellow  almost  damn'd.  Coleridge 
(Notes,  &c,  248)  prefers  life  '  as  fitting  to  Iago's  contempt  for  whatever  did  not  display 
power,  and  that  intellectual  power.'  Martinus  Scriblerus  (p.  16)  proposes  to  include 
'  almost  damn'd  in  a  fair  wife '  in  parenthesis,  as  thus  uttered  by  Iago  in  the  rapidity  of 
his  thoughts,  and  thus  paraphrases :  '  That  is,  "  a  fellow  that  never  set  a  squadron  in 
the  field  (a  circumstance,  which,  in  the  estimation  of  a  soldier,  almost  throws  contempt 
even  upon  a  beautiful  woman,  is  almost  damn'd  in  a  fair  wife)".  He  then  carries  on 
the  same  idea,  and  adds,  "  nor  the  division  of  a  battle  knows  more  than  a  spinster."  ' 
Becket  (i,  179):  For  'wife'  read  wise,  i.  e.  manner.  The  construction  is:  A  fellow, 
in  a  fair  wise,  almost  damn'd,'  i.  e.  a  fellow  of  whom  it  may  be  fairly  said,  or  to  use  a 
fair  manner  of  speaking,  that  he  is  almost  damned  (a  worthless  fellow).  Jackson 
(p.  402)  :  Why  should  Cassio  be  almost  damned  by  marrying  a  fair  woman  ?  Beauty, 
in  the  softer  sex,  detracts  not  from  virtue.  We  should  certainly  read  :  '  almost  damn'd 
in  a  frail  wife ;'  which  at  once  announces  the  licentious  character  of  Bianca,  and  that 
odium  designed  by  the  speaker  is  thus  cast  on  the  spirit  of  Cassio.  I  make  no  doubt 
the  compositor  mistook  the  word,  and  am  inclined  to  think  that  for  '  damn'd  '  we  should 
read  banrid ;  meaning,  that  they  were  as  near  being  married  as  though  the  bans  were 
published.  Tieck  (viii,  357)  assumes,  and  it  is  mere  assumption,  that  Florence  in 
Shakespeare's  time  was  noted  for  its  immorality — as  noted,  indeed,  as  Bulgaria  was 
from  earlier  times ;  and  that  Iago  calls  the  Veronese  Cassio  '  a  Florentine,'  in  order  to 
cast  on  him  the  imputation  of  extreme  immodesty.  Knight  finds  no  such  mystical 
meaning  in  these  words  as  Tieck  imputes  to  them,  but  that  Iago  distinctly  refers  to 
Bianca.  As  to  whether  Cassio  was,  or  was  not,  a  Florentine,  Knight  maintains  that 
we  can  gather  no  trustworthy  intimation  from  anything  which  Iago  may  say  on  this  or 
on  any  other  subject  (wherein  the  present  editor  agrees  with  him).  '  It  is  not  to  be 
forgotten  that  Iago,  throughout  the  whole  course  of  his  extraordinary  character,  is  rep- 
resented as  utterly  regardless  of  the  differences  between  truth  and  falsehood.  The 
most  absolute  lie, — the  half  lie, — the  truth  in  the  way  of  telling  it  distorted  into  a  lie, 
are  the  instruments  with  which  Iago  constantly  works.  This  ought  to  be  borne  in 
mind  with  reference  to  his  assertion  that  Cassio  was  a  Florentine.'  But  whether  Iago 
was  lying  or  not  in  this  instance,  Knight  thinks  emphatically  that  Iago  meant  to  speak 
'disparagingly  of  Cassio  when  he  called  him  a  Florentine.  He  was  an  "arithmetician," 
a  "  counter-caster,"  a  native  of  a  state  whose  inhabitants,  pursuing  the  peaceful  and 


8  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO  [act  i,  sc.  i. 

[22,  23.  *  Florentine,  (A  Fellow  almost  damn'd  in  a  faire  Wife).'] 
gainful  occupations  of  commerce,  had  armies  of  mercenaries.     Cassio,  for  this  reason, 
upon  the  showing  of  Iago,  was  one  that  "  never  set  a  squadron  in  the  field."  '     Col- 
lier thinks  that  the  unaltered  text  is  most  likely  right,  but  records  as  a  not  very  prob- 
able conjecture  the  substitution  of  guise  for  '  wife '  by  Mr  Petrie  of  Edinburgh.     Dyce 
{Remarks,  p.  233) :  The  text  may  be  right,  though  I.  doubt  it ;  but  I  cannot  help  won- 
dering greatly  that  Mr  Petrie,  when  he  conjectured  guise,  should  not  have  stumbled 
upon  wise  (way).     [Wherein  Dyce  is  anticipated  by  Becket.]     Maginn  (p.  264) :  The 
word  '  damn'd '   is,  I  think,  a  corruption  of  some  word  which  signified  delicate,  soft, 
dainty,  or  something  of  the  kind ;  and  that  for  '  in,'  we  should  read  as.     *  A  fellow 
almost  as  soft  and  delicate  as  a  fair  wife,'  as  dainty  as  a  woman.     I  am  not  fortunate 
to  supply  it,  but  I  have  somewhat  thought  it  was  '  almost  trimmed  as  a  fair  wife.'     Such 
a  fellow  as  the  •  neat  trim /j'-dressed  '  courtier,  *  perfumed  as  a  milliner,'  who  excited  the 
impatience  of  Hotspur.     I  throw  out  my  hint  for  the  leading,  or  misleading,  of  future 
editors.     White  (ed.  i)  reads  'almost  damn'd  in  a  fair  wise,'  that  is,  'a  fellow  almost 
damned  if  the  judgment  had  been  given  in  a  fair  manner,  a  use  of  damn  still  common 
as  applied  to  plays  and  operas.'     The  difference  between  '  wife  '  and  wife,  with  the  long 
r,  is  so  slight  that  White  wonders  at  any  difficulty  to  be  found  in  the  passage.     '  Be- 
sides, if  Cassio  had  been  betrothed  to  "a  customer,"  "a  fitchew,"  what  had  that  to  do 
«vith  his  soldierly  qualifications  ?'     In  his  (ed.  ii)  White  abandons  the  passage  as  in- 
comprehensible, if  the  difficulty  have  not  arisen  in  this  mistake  of  the  long  s  for  an  f 
Cartwright  (p.  38) :  Read  other  wise.     Cowden-Clarke  says  that  '  wife '  is  here 
used  in  the  sense  of  woman,  and  that  of  the  several  interpretations  proposed  the  true 
one  is :  '  A  fellow  who  would  almost  go  to  perdition  for  a  handsome  woman,'  or  •  a 
fellow  who  is  almost  lost  in  his  fondness  for  a  fine  woman ;'  and  to  it  Cassio's  conduct 
with  respect  to  Bianca  adds  probability.     Staunton  shrewdly  asks :  '  Are  we  quite 
assured  that  when  Iago  calls  Cassio  a  Florentine,  he  means  merely  that  Cassio  was  a 
native  of  that  town  ?     The  system  of  book-keeping  called  Italian  Book-keeping  came, 
as  is  well  known,  originally  from  Florence ;  and  he  may  not  improbably  use  "  Floren- 
tine," as  he  employs  "arithmetician,"  "counter-caster,"  and  " debtor-and-creditor,"  in 
a  derogatory  sense,  to  denote  the  mercantile  origin  and  training  which  he  chooses  to 
attribute  to  his  rival.'     As  to  the  belief  that  Iago  in  '  a  fair  wife '  refers  to  the  report 
that  Cassio  was  about  to  marry  Bianca,  Staunton  thinks  that  the  'objection  is  unanswer- 
able that  there  is  no  reason  for  supposing  that  Cassio  had  ever  seen  Bianca  until  they 
met  in  Cyprus.'     And  in  despair  of  eliciting  a  satisfactory  meaning  from  the  line, 
Staunton  says  that  he  has  sometimes  thought  Shakespeare  must  have  written  •  almost 
damn'd  in  a  fair-wife?     That  is,  '  a  fellow  by  habit  of  reckoning  debased  almost  into 
a  market-woman.     In  of  old  was  commonly  used  for  into  ;  we  still  say  fall  in  love? 
F.  A.  Leo  (N.  &•  Qu.  1865,  3d,  vii,  453) :  Iago  intends  to  say  that  Othello  has  made 
a  bad  choice  in  his  lieutenant,  a  man  who  is  a  mere  theorizer,  never  exposed  to  a 
shower  of  bullets,  and  knowing  no  more  of  the  division  of  a  battle  than  a  spinster, 
in  short,  'a  fellow  almost  damn'd  in  a.  faint  wife.'     J.  J.  B,  WORKARD   (Ar.  &  Qu. 
1865,   3d,  viii,  80):   Read   'almost  damn'd  in  a  fair  strife?     Here  the  unity  of  the 
idea  is  preserved  throughout.     Str,  in  sixteenth-century  writing,  might  easily  be  mis- 
taken for  w.     A  (Ibid,  p.  126):  No,  do  not  alter  Shakespeare,  and  make  him  more 
obscure  when  unnecessary.     I  have  never  had  a  doubt  about  his  meaning  in  this  pas- 
sage, which  really  seems  clear  enough.     Iago  wishes  to  show  that  Cassio's  weakness 
goes  beyond  even  that  of  a  woman — '  A  fellow '  of  ao  soft  a  character   that  a  similar 
disposition  would  be   'almost  damned   in  a  fair  wife.'     In  fine,  Cassio  is  so  weak  a 


ACT  I,  sc.  i.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  9 

[22,  23.  •  Florentine,  (A  Fellow  almost  damn'd  in  a  faire  Wife)/] 
creature  that  had  you  a  fair  wife  of  that  sort  you  would  condemn  her.  Bibliothecar. 
Chetham  {/bid.) :  Your  second  correspondent  [Workard]  in  this  passage  is  undoubtedly 
right  in  his  emendation,  but  not,  I  think,  in  insisting  on  unity  of  idea.  The  strife  is  not 
that  of  the  battlefield,  but  of  the  election.  'A  fellow  [who  would  have  been]  almost 
damn'd  In  a  fair  strife.'  Arrowsmith  (p.  38)  [whose  interpretation  will  be  found, 
I  think,  to  have  been  foreshadowed  by  Martinus  Scriblerus,  and  by  A. — Ed.]  :  Hard 
above  all  has  been  the  fate  of  '  in ;'  let  but  Iago  say  that  for  soldiership  his  com- 
rade Cassio  is  •  a  fellow  almost  damned  in  a  fair  wife ' — that  his  qualifications  for 
the  post  of  lieutenant  would  be  almost  discreditable  in  a  woman;  let  him  add 
withal,  as  though  on  set  purpose  to  preclude  every  chance  of  being  misunderstood, 
that  Cassio  possesses  no  more  strategic  knowledge  than  a  '  spinster,'  when  lo !  a 
goodly  troop  of  commentators,  clerk  and  lay,  bishop  and  bookseller,  lawyer  and  anti- 
quary, critic  professional  and  critic  amateur,  home-born  and  outlandish,  men  who  have 
read  much  and  men  who  have  read  nothing,  swarm  forth  to  bury  this  simple  remark 

under  a  pile  of  notes,  that  from  first  to  last  contain  not  an  inkling  of  its  purport 

The  words  are  to  be  taken  circumscriptly,  not  sent  gadding  after  Bianca,  or  no  one 
knows  who;  their  meaning  must  be  sought  and  found  within  the  compass  of  the  line 
in  which  they  stand.  Had  Shakespeare  written  'a  fellow  almost  damned  in  a  raw 
lad,'  the  dullest  brain  could  scarcely  have  missed  the  imputation  that  Cassio's  military 
abilities  would  be  almost  disallowed,  condemned  as  hardly  up  to  the  mark  in  an  inex- 
perienced boy ;  or  had  the  words  run,  '  a  fellow  almost  damned  in  an  old  maid,'  then, 
though  it  might  not  be  understood  how  an  officer,  after  Iago's  report,  of  Cassio's  in- 
capacity, should  be  almost  damned  in  one  of  her  sex  and  condition,  she  at  any  rate 
could  not,  like  the  '  fair  wife,'  have  been  discovered  at  Cyprus  in  a  young  courtesan. 
Or  not  altering  a  syllable,  with  only  a  slight  change  in  their  order,  let  us  place  the 
words  thus :  '  a  fellow  in  a  fair  wife  almost  damned ;'  by  this  disposition  of  them  the 
reader  is  pinned  to  their  true  construction ;  the  alliance  between  Cassio  and  the  fair 
wife  is  closer  than  the  commentators  suspected ;  they  harp  upon  conjugal  union,  Iago 
speaks  of  virtual  identity ;  they  seek  the  coupling  of  two  persons  in  wedlock,  he  con- 
templates an  embodiment  of  the  soldiership  of  the  one  in  the  condition  of  the  other, 
and  so  incorporated  he  pronounces  it  to  be  'in  a  fair  wife '  almost  reproveable;  adding, 
in  the  same  vein,  that  it  was  no  better  than  might  be  found  in  '  a  spinster.'  To  dwell 
on  this  point  longer  would  be  to  upbraid  the  reader's  understanding.  [Of  Arrowsmith's 
explanation  Dyce  (ed.  iii)  says :  '  Though  it  may  appear  to  some  to  be  rather  forced  and 
obscure,  I  am  far  from  asserting  it  to  be  wrong.']  Forsyth  (Shakspere,  &c,  p.  107) : 
As  contrasted  with  Staunton's  and  similar  glosses,  our  proposal  is  simplicity  itself.  It 
consists  in  throwing  out  the  word  '  wife '  as  a  misprint  very  easily  made,  and  by  a  differ- 
ence in  pointing  (to  which,  as  all  know,  neither  the  early  Qq  nor  the  Ff  paid  much 

attention)  to  read  thus  :  '  A  fellow  almost  damned ;  in  a  fair  strife  That  never,'  &c 

The  greatest  deficiency  of  the  expositors,  in  our  humble  view,  has  been  their  inability 
to  compare  the  author  with  himself,  and  if  this  is  intelligently  done  in  the  present  case, 
there  can  be  small  doubt  of  the  result.  Earl  OF  Southesk  (Saskatchewan,  p.  413) : 
May  it  not  mean  simply — '  A  man  almost  degraded  into  a  woman  '  (through  feminine 
tastes  and  habits)  ?  as  when  one  says :  '  A  soldier  wasted  in  a  parson,'  'A  farmer  spoilt 
in  a  king.'  This  sense  might  seem  clearer  were  the  definite  article  employed — the  fel- 
low, the  fair  wife.  Dr  Schmidt  avails  himself  of  a  translator's  privilege,  and  finding 
no  emendation  that  at  all  meets  the  requirements  of  the  case  he  strikes  out  the  line 
altogether,  'confident  that  no  reader  will  perceive  the  gap.'     Herr  thinks  that  *  framd 


IO  THE   TR  AG  ED  IE   OF  OTHELLO  [ACT  I,  SC.  i. 

That  neuer  fet  a  Squadron  in  the  Field, 

Nor  the  deuifion  of  a  Battaile  knowes  25 

25.   Battaile]  Battell  QqF  F  . 

or  damn'd  in  a  form  d  wax''  is  harmonious  with  the  context,  and  agrees  with  Iago's 
contemptuous  references  to  Cassio.  Hudson  (ed.  iii)  reads  wight  in  his  text  instead 
of  'wife,'  which,  he  thinks,  'cannot  be  explained  to  any  fitting  sense  but  by  methods 
too  subtile  and  recondite.'  Of  all  the  readings  hitherto  offered  he  prefers  Capell'syW. 
' It  suits  the  occasion  and  the  speaker  very  well ;  for  Iago  dwells  much  on  Cassio's  hand- 
someness of  person ;  recurs  to  it  again  and  again ;  and  builds  his  scheme  partly  on  that 
circumstance,  as  if  he  longed  to  make  it  the  ruin  of  Cassio,  sure  enough.  On  the  other 
hand,  however,  Iago's  thought  may  well  have  been  that  Cassio  was  badly  damaged  by 
the  fascinations  of  a  handsome  mistress ;  thus  referring  to  the  amorous  intrigue  with 
Bianca,  which  comes  out  so  strongly  in  the  course  of  the  play.  So  I  am  satisfied  we 
ought  to  read  zvight.  It  seems  to  me  a  very  natural  and  fitting  word  for  the  place ;  and, 
if  spelled  phonographically,  wife,  might  easily  be  misprinted  "wife;"  and  Iago  seems 
rather  fond  of  using  it  scoffingly  in  reference  to  women.  It  may  not  be  amiss  to  note 
that  Iago's  talk  about  Cassio  is  full  of  contempt.  Surely  a  reading  that  requires  an 
explanation  so  forced  as  Arrowsmith's  may  well  be  distrusted.  It  has  set  me  more 
than  ever  against  the  old  text.'  John  Hunter:  Cassio  is  here  regarded  as  about 
to  marry  his  mistress,  Bianca,  whose  charms,  it  would  seem,  were  such  as  to  make 
this  world  a  paradise  for  him,  and  thus  put  him  in  danger  of  forfeiting  the  happiness 
of  the  world  to  come.  The  notion  is  founded  on  the  parable  of  Dives  and  Laz- 
arus :  '  Son,  remember  that  thou  in  thy  life-time  receivcdst  thy  good  things,  and  like- 
wise Lazarus  evil  things ;  but  now  he  is  comforted,  and  thou  art  tormented.' — Luke 
xvi,  25.  Cf.  Mer.  of  Ven.  Ill,  v,  78-83.  Bulloch  {Studies,  p.  248) :  The  line  is  a 
concentrated  essence  of  Iago's  opinion  of  Cassio's  soldiership.  It  is,  as  it  were,  spoken 
by  the  bye,  and  amplified  in  the  speech.  I  therefore  propose  •  almost  damn'd  in  war- 
fare life.'  Warfare  does  not  occur  in  Shakespeare,  though  it  does  in  our  English 
Bible.  Crosby  (Robinson's  Epit.  of  Lit.,  15  Mar.  1879)  justifies  Fx  by  interpreting 
•  in  '  as  equivalent  to  on  account  of,  and  '  wife '  as  woman  in  general.  Thus  :  •  a  fellow 
who  is  willing  to  go  to  perdition — almost  sell  himself  to  the  devil — for  a  beautiful 
woman.'  R.  M.  Spence  (N.  &>  Qu.  1879,  5th,  xi,  3S3) :  I  offer:  'A  fellow  all  must 
damn  in  affairs  wise.'  Iago  says,  that  all  who  are  wise  in  military  affairs  must  con- 
demn the  appointment  of  a  man  who  knows  nothing  of  war,  but  '  bookish  theorie.' 
F.  A.  Leo  (Shakespeare- Notes,  p.  Ii6,  1885)  finds,  as  far  as  the  sound  is  concerned, 
that  '  damn'd  in '  could  have  been  '  very  easily  misunderstood  for  tempting]  and  that 
the  ductus  literarum  would  readily  explain  '  almost '  as  at  most ;  and  therefore  pro- 
poses, as  suiting  the  requirements  of  sound,  of  sense,  and  of  letters  :  '  A  fellow,  almost 
tempting  a  fair  wife.'  [In  conclusion  I  merely  re-echo  Dr  Johnson's  words :  '  This 
is  one  of  the  passages  which  must,  for  the  present,  be  resigned  to  corruption  and  ob- 
scurity.    I  have  nothing  that  I  can,  with  any  approach  to  confidence,  propose.' — Ed.] 

22-27.  Coleridge  (Notes,  &c,  248) :  Let  the  reader  feel  how  by  and  through  the 
glass  of  two  passions, — disappointed  vanity  and  envy, — the  very  vices  of  which  he  is 
complaining  are  made  to  act  upon  him  as  if  they  were  so  many  excellences ;  and  the 
more  appropriately,  because  cunning  is  always  admired  and  wished  for  by  minds  con- 
scious of  inward  weakness ;  but  they  act  only  by  half,  like  music  on  an  inattentive 
auditor,  swelling  the  thoughts  which  prevent  him  from  listening  to  it. 

25.  Battaile]    Cotgrave :    Battaile:   f.  A   batell,  or   fight,  betweene  two  armies; 


ICT  i,  sc.  L]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  \  , 

More  then  a  Spinfter.     Vnleffe  the  Bookifh  Theoricke:         26 

Wherein  the  Tongued  Confuls  can  propofe 

As  Mafterly  as  he.     Meere  pratle  (without  practife) 

Is  all  his  Souldierfhip.  But  he  (Sir)  had  th'ele6tion;  29 

26.  Spinfter.  Vnleffe]  Spinfter,  vnleffe  he,  meer  FF.  he ;  meere  Qq,  Rowe  et 
Qq,  Rowe.    Spinfter;  but  Pope  + .    Spin-         cet. 

fter :  Vnleffe  Ff,  Cap.  et  cet.  29.  Is  all]  In  allF^F^. 

Bookijh  Theoricke]  bookifh  Theor-  Souldierftiip...had]    soldiership- - 

ique  Qq  {blockijh  Q  ).  he  had  Pope  +  . 

27.  Tongued]  Q2Q3Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  th"  election]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Coll. 
Han.  Knt,  Sta.  Wh.  i.  togid  Dyce,  Huds.  Wh.  Huds.  the  election  Qq,  Han.  Cap. 
toged  Q7  et  cet.  et  cet. 

28.  he.     Meere]  Johns,     he,  Meere  Y^. 

also  a  battell,  or  maine  battell ;  the  middle  battallion,  or  squadron  of  an  army,  wherein 
the  Prince,  or  Generall,  most  commonly  marcheth;  also  the  whole  army;  and  some- 
times also,  any  squadron,  battalion,  or  part  thereof.  Nares  refers  to  Strutt  {Manners 
and  Customs,  &c,  iii,  2),  where  is  an  account  from  an  old  MS.  of  the  method  of  regu- 
lating these  divisions.  See  Macb.  V,  vi,  4,  and  notes  on  '  Lead  our  first  battle,'  where 
also  is  a  reference  to  Holinshed :  •  when  his  whole  power  was  come  togither,  he  divided 
the  same  into  three  battels.' 

26.  Theoricke]  :  For  the  two  other  instances  of  the  use  of  this  word,  see  Mrs 
Cowden-Clarke's  Concordance. 

i~j.  Tongued]  :  The  First  Qto  gave  Theobald  the  hint  for  his  emendation,  viz. : 
'that  the  Senators  assisted  the  Duke  in  Council  in  their  proper  gowns.''  Where, 
farther  on,  Iago  bids  Brabantio  'put  on  his  gown,'  Theobald  does  not  think  that 
night-gown  is  meant,  but  gown  of  office,  the  Senatorial  Gown;  adding  that  there  is 
not  that  contrast  of  terms  betwixt  '  tongued,'  that  there  is  betwixt  toged  and  soldier- 
ship ;  and  thereupon  cites  six  or  seven  instances  from  Latin  authors  (among  them,  of 
course,  Cicero's  'cedant  anna  togae '),  showing  that  'the  same  opposition  is  for  ever 
made '  between  toga  and  arma.  Boswell  says  wisely,  that  '  tongued '  agrees  better 
with  the  words  which  follow  :  '  mere  prattle  without  practice,'  a  remark  which  Dyce 
cites,  but  does  not  uphold,  believing  '  tongued '  to  be  a  misprint  for  toged,  since  the 
Folio  has  a  similar  error  in  Cor.  II,  iii,  122:  'Why  in  this  Wooluish  tongue  should  I 
stand  heere,'  &c. 

27.  Consuls]  :  Theobald  reads  counselors,  because  the  Venetian  nobility  consti- 
tuted the  great  Council  of  the  Senate ;  and  we  know  that  Brabantio  was  summoned  to 
the  Council  as  a  Senator,  for  '  Consul '  he  certainly  was  not ;  and  lastly,  because  the 
offices  of  Consuls  and  Tribunes  were  abolished  when  the  government  was  entrusted  to 
Doges.  But  Steevens  says,  that  '  consuls '  seems  to  have  been  commonly  used  for 
counsellors,  as  in  the  second  scene  of  this  act.  '  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,  and  Matthew 
Paris  after  him,  call  both  dukes  and  earls  "  consuls."  '  Malone  :  The  rulers  of  the 
state  or  civil  governors.  The  word  is  used  by  Marlowe,  in  the  same  sense,  in  Tambur- 
laine,  1 590  [First  Part,  I,  ii]  :  'Both  we  will  raigne  as  consuls  of  the  earth.'  [But 
Marlowe's  very  next  line :  '  And  mighty  kings  shall  be  our  Senators,'  may  be  with 
equal  propriety  cited  as  a  proof  that  'senators'  also  meant  'civil  governors.' — Ed.] 

28.  Masterly]  :  For  other  instances  where  -ly  represents  like,  of  which  it  is  a  cor 
rupt:on,  see  Abbott,  §  447. 


12  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO  [act  I,  sc.  i 

And  I  (of  whom  his  eies  had  feene  the  proofe  30 

At  Rhodes,  at  Ciprus,and  on  others  grounds 

Chriften'd,  and  Heathen)muft  be  be-leed,  and  calm'd 

By  Debitor,  and  Creditor.     This  Counter-cafter,  33 

31.  Cipn/s,]Cipres,Qq.    Cyprus;  Cap.  7>3-  Debitor]  Debtor Han. 

Steev.  Var.  Sing.  ii.  Debitor,  and  Creditor]  debitor-and- 

others]  Ff.     other  Qq  et  cet.  creditor  Sta. 

32.  Chrijlen'd]  F2,  Knt.  Chrijln'd  Creditor.  This  Counter-caJler,]Yi, 
Q3Q3-     Chrijlian  QXF3F4  et  cet.  Rowe,  Johns.  Jen.  Knt,  Sta.  Glo.  Cam. 

be  be-leed]  be  led  Qx,  Pope,     be  let         Creditor,  this  counter-cajler :  Qq,  Pope 
Warb.  et  cet. 

30.  his]  White  :  That  is,  Othello's. 

31.  others]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  233)  notices  the  remarkable  frequency  in  Fx  of  the 
interpolation  of  an  s  at  the  end  of  a  word,  and  adds  that  '  those  who  are  conversant 
with  the  MSS.  of  the  Elizabethan  Age,  may,  perhaps,  be  able  to  explain  its  origin. 
Were  it  not  for  the  different  degrees  of  frequency  with  which  it  occurs  in  different  parts 
of  the  F, — being  comparatively  rare  in  the  Comedies  (except,  perhaps,  in  Wint.  Tale), 
appearing  more  frequently  in  the  Histories,  and  becoming  quite  common  in  the  Trage- 
dies,— I  should  be  inclined  to  think  it  originated  in  some  peculiarity  of  Shakespeare's 
handwriting.'  [See  Lear,  V,  iii,  258.  Walker  gives  the  following  nine  instances,  in 
tins  play,  of  this  interpolation  as  he  considers  it,  viz :  the  present  passage,  where  '  others  ' 
appears  as  other  in  Qq;  'eares'  in  Fx  as  eare  in  QqFf,  I, iii,  245;  'likings,'  QqFf,  III, 
>>  53 >  'disproportions,'  Ff  as  disproportion  in  Qq,  III,  iii,  274;  *  Horrors,'  QqFf,  III, 
iii,  427;  'sorrowes,'  QqFf,  III,  iv,  136;  'workes'  in  Ff  as  worke  in  Qq,  IV,  i,  54; 
'scuses'  in  Ff  as  scuse  in  Qq,  IV,  i,  93;  'behauiors,'  Ff  as  behauior  in  Qq,  IV,  i,  119. 
To  these  nine  instances  a  tenth  may  be  added :  '  Thicks-lips,'  Fx,  as  thick  lips  in  Qq, 
I,  i,  72,  and  perhaps  we  might  include  an  eleventh:  'warres'  in  III,  iii,  77.  Now  if 
from  this  list  we  eliminate  the  three  words  wherein  the  Ff  and  the  Qq  agree,  and 
wherein  no  critic  but  Walker  has  found  the  s  superfluous,  viz :  likings,  horrors,  and 
sorrowes,  and  add  the  fourth,  warres,  which  only  Capell  changed  to  war,  we  shall  have 
seven  instances  remaining  where  this  s  is  found  in  the  Ff,  but  not  in  the  Qq.  If  then 
Walker's  adumbration  of  the  cause  of  this  s  be  accepted,  viz :  that  it  originates  in  some 
peculiarity  of  the  writing  of  that  hand  which  left  'scarse  a  blot  in  his  papers,'  this 
manifest  distinction  between  the  two  copies  adds  a  vindication,  by  no  means  insig- 
nificant, of  the  superior  authority  of  the  First  Folio. — Ed.] 

32.  Christen'd]  I  can  see  no  excellent  reason  why  we  should  not  retain  this 
word. — Ed. 

32.  be-leed]  Steevens  :  One  vessel  is  said  to  be  in  the  lee  of  another,  when  it  is 
,<0  placed  that  the  wind  is  intercepted  from  it.  Iago's  meaning,  therefore,  is,  that  Cassio 
had  got  the  wind  of  him  and  be-calmed  him  from  going  on.  Heath  and  Staunton 
conjectured  '  must  be  lee'd]  led  to  it  by  Qx  and  the  imperfect  measure  of  the  line. 

33.  Debitor,  and  Creditor]  Johnson  (Cym.  V,  iv,  171) :  That  is,  an  accounting- 
book.  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  Compare  the  title-page  of  a  very  early  work  on  book-keeping: 
4  A  Profitable  Treatyce,  called  the  Instrument  or  Poke  to  learne  to  knowe  the  good 
order  of  the  kepyng  of  the  famouse  reconynge,  called  in  Latyn,  Dare  and  Habere;  and 
in  Englyshe,  Debitor  and  Creditor?  &c,  1 543. 

23-  Counter-caster]  Way  (Foot-note  in  Prompt.  Tan',  s.  v.  Awgrym.  Algaris- 


ACTi.sc.  i.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  13 

He  (in  good  time)  muft  his  Lieutenant  be, 

And  I  (bleffe  the  marke)  his  Moorefhips  Auntient.  35 

34.  Lieutenant]  Leiutenant  Qq.  Qx  et  cet. 

35.  /  {bleffe]  Ff,  Knt.  /  Sir  {bleffe  35.  Moorejliips  Auntient]  WorJJiips 
Q2Q  ,  Rovve,  Johns.  Jen.     /,  God  bleffe         Ancient  Qx. 

mus) :  '  Augrym,  algorisme.  To  counte,  reken  by  cyfers  of  agryme,  enchifrer.  To 
cast  an  accomptes  in  aulgorisme  with  a  penne,  enchifrer.  To  cast  an  accomptes  with 
counters  after  the  aulgorisme  maner,  calculer.  To  cast  an  accomptes  after  the  comen 
maner,  with  counters,  compter  par  iect.  I  shall  reken  it  syxe  times  by  aulgorisme,  or 
you  can  caste  it  ones  by  counters.' — Palsg.  It  would  hence  appear  that  towards  the 
commencement  of  the  XVIth  century  the  use  of  the  Arabic  numerals  had  in  some 
degree  superseded  the  ancient  mode  of  calculating  by  the  abacus ;  and  counters,  which 
at  the  period  when  the  Promptorium  was  compiled,  were  generally  used.  Hereafter 
we  find  the  word  '  Countinge  Borde '  as  an  evidence.  They  were  not,  indeed,  wholly 
disused  at  a  time  long  subsequent ;  an  allusion  to  calculation  by  counters  occurs  in 
Shakespeare,  and  later  authors  prove  that  they  had  not  been  entirely  discarded.  Algo- 
rithm or  algorism,  a  term  universally  used  in  the  XlVth  and  XVth  centuries  to  denote 
the  science  of  calculation  by  9  figures  and  zero,  is  of  Arabic  derivation.  Dyce  ( Gloss.) 
says  that  pieces  of  false  coin  were  used  for  counters.  See  Cym.  V,  iv,  173. 

35.  marke]  Steevens  :  Kelly,  in  his  comments  on  Scots  proverbs,  observes  that 
the  Scots,  when  they  compare  person  to  person,  use  this  exclamation.  Dyce  {Gloss.) 
quotes  this  note  of  Steevens,  adding,  '  but  the  origin  and  the  meaning  of  the  excla- 
mation are  alike  obscure.' 

35.  Auntient]  J.  D.  {N  6°  Qu.  1879,  5th,  xii,  4) :  The  common  interpretation  of  this 
word  is  that  it  means  an  ensign,  in  the  double  sense  of  standard  and  standard-bearer. 
So  our  older  Dictionaries  explain  it ;  Cotgrave  has :  '  Enseigne,  an  ensigne,  auncient, 
standard-bearer.'  The  explanation  is  correct  as  far  as  it  goes,  but  is  not  sufficiently 
precise.  The  ancient  was  a  banner  bearing  an  heraldic  device,  the  token  of  ancient  or 
noble  descent,  borne  by  a  gentleman  or  leader  in  war.  '  Lord  Westmorland  his  ancyent 
rais'd,  The  dun  bull  he  rais'd  on  hie.' — The  Rising  in  the  North.  'Master,  master, 
see  you  yon  faire  ancyent,  Yonder  is  the  serpent  and  the  serpent's  head.' — Percy's 
Rel.  (ed.  1867)  i,  303.  The  servant  recognized  by  this  device  that  the  ship  belonged 
to  Duke  John  of  Austria.  The  word  was,  however,  used  to  denote  one  who  was  con- 
nected with  some  blazon  of  this  kind,  whether  as  an  attendant  to  a  standard  or  to 
some  gentleman  who  had  armorial  bearings.  In  the  English  edition  of  the  Janua 
Linguarum  Trilinguis,  by  J.  Comenius,  1662,  it  is  said,  that  'the  standard-bearers 
carrie  the  standards  in  the  midst  of  the  troops,  whom  the  ancients  march  before  with 
hangers;'  the  Latin  is,  'quos  pnecedunt  antesignani  cum  romphrcis '  (p.  245).  The 
word  antesignanus  is  explained  by  Ducange  as  one  'qui  proeibat  vexillo  ad  illius  cus- 
todiam.'  In  Anchoran's  Gate  of  Tongues  Unlocked  (ed.  1639),  which  is  based  on  the 
work  of  Comenius,  the  passage  runs  thus :  '  whom  the  lieutenants  precede  or  go  before 
with  long  two-handed  swords'  (p.  143).  From  these  instances  it  is  easy  to  see  how 
the  word  came  to  mean  a  personal  attendant  or  body-squire,  who,  says  Fosbrooke  {Ant. 
ii,  752),  'had  the  care  of  the  things  relating  to  the  person  of  the  knight,  carried  his 
master's  standard,  and  gave  the  catchword  in  battle,'  an  office  often  borne  by  men  of 
honourable  descent.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  in  Othello.  Iago  was  the  per- 
sonal attendant  of  the  Moor  in  a  military  capacity,  in  modern  language,  his  aide-de- 


14  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO  [act  i,  sc.  i. 

Rod.  By  heauen,  I  rather  would  haue  bin  his  hangman.  36 

logo.     Why,  there's  no  remedie. 
Tis  the  curffe  of  Seruice; 
Preferment  goes  by  Letter,  and  affection, 

And  not  by  old  gradation,  where  each  fecond  40 

Stood  Heire  to'th'firfl.     Now  Sir,  be  iudge  your  felfe, 
Whether  I  in  any  iuft  terme  am  Affin'd 
To  loue  the  Moored 

Rod.     I  would  not  follow  him  then. 

Iago.     O  Sir  content  you.  45 

I  follow  him,  to  ferue  my  turne  vpon  him. 
We  cannot  all  be  Matters,  nor  all  Mafters 
Cannot  be  truely  follow'd.     You  mail  marke  [310  F\ 

37,  38.  One  line,  Qq  et  cet.  Coll.     to  the  Qq,  Cap.  et  seq. 

37.  Why]  But  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  41.  Two  lines,  Qq. 
Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Ktly.  42.  Whether]  If  Pope  +  . 

38.  Seruice;]  feruice,  Qq.  Affirid]  afifigrtd  Qt,  Pope,  Theob. 

39.  Letter]  favour  Coll.  (MS).  Han.  Warb.     Affirrid  Fa. 

40.  And... old]  Notbytheolde Qq,  Jen.  45.  you.]  yotc,  QaQ,.     you;  Rowe. 
Steev.  Var.  Coll.     Not  (as  of  old)  Warb.  46.     him,  to]  him  to  Qx  et  cet. 

41.  tdttt]   to  t/i1   F3F4,  Huds.      t'the  48.  follow'd.     You]  follcnued,  you  Qq. 

camp,  receiving  orders  from  his  superior,  especially,  but  not  exclusively,  about  military 
movements.  It  was  in  accordance  with  his  duties  that  he  received,  through  Cassio, 
Othello's  lieutenant,  directions  about  the  watch  that  guarded  the  camp,  in  II,  iii 
White:  ' Ancient :  a  mere  phonetic  corruption  of  "ensign,"  consequent  upon  the  pro- 
nunciation of  e  as  short  a,  and  of  s  before  a  vowel  as  sh  ;  ancient  was  pronounced  not 
ane-shent,  but  an-shent  until  a  late  period. 

39.  Letter]  Johnson  :  By  recommendation  from  powerful  friends.  COWDEN- 
Clarke  :  May  it  not  mean  '  according  to  the  letter  of  his  promise,'  or  '  in  accordance 
with  theoretical  knowledge  and  pretensions '  ?  in  reference  either  to  Othello's  answer, 
*  I  have  chose  my  officer,'  or  to  Cassio's  '  bookish  theoric' 

40.  old  gradation]  Johnson  :  That  is,  gradation  established  by  ancient  practice. 

41.  Stood]  Abbott  (§361) :  The  subjunctive  (a  consequence  of  the  old  inflection) 
was  frequently  used,  not  as  now  with  would,  should,  &C,  but  in  a  form  identical  with 
the  indicative,  where  nothing  but  the  context  (in  the  case  of  past  tenses)  shows  that  it 
is  the  subjunctive.  In  the  present  instance,  if  it  be  asked,  what  is  the  difference  be- 
tween '  stood '  here  and  *  would  have  stood  '  I  should  say  that  the  simple  form  of  the 
subjunctive,  coinciding  in  sound  with  the  indicative,  implied  to  an  Elizabethan  more 
of  inevitability  (subject,  of  course,  to  a  condition  which  is  not  fulfilled).  'Stood' 
means  •  would  certainly  have  stood.'  The  possibility  is  regarded  as  an  unfulfilled  fact, 
to  speak  paradoxically.     Compare  the  Greek  idiom  of  Iva  with  the  indicative. 

42.  Affin'd]  Johnson  :  Do  I  stand  within  any  such  terms  of  propinquity,  or  relation 
to  the  Moor,  as  that  it  is  my  duty  to  love  him  ?  Staunton  :  By  any  moral  obligation 
am  bound,  &c.     [See  II,  ii,  243.] 

48.  shall]  Ahhott  ^§315) :  *  You  shall'  is  especially  common  in  the  meaning  of 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


THE  MOORE  OF   VENICE 


*5 


Many  a  dutious  and  knee-crooking  knaue ; 

That  (doting  on  his  owne  obfequious  bondage) 

Weares  out  his  time,  much  like  his  Matters  Affe, 

For  naught  but  Prouender,  &  when  he's  old  Cafheer'd. 

Whip  me  fuch  honeft  knaues.  Others  there  are 

Who  trym'd  in  Formes,  and  vifages  of  Dutie, 

Keepe  yet  their  hearts  attending  on  themfelues, 

And  throwing  but  fhowes  of  Seruice  on  their  Lords 

Doe  well  thriue  by  them. 

And  when  they  haue  lin'd  their  Coates 

Doe  themfelues  Homage. 

Thefe  Fellowes  haue  fome  foule, 

And  fuch  a  one  do  I  profeffe  my  felfe.   For  (Sir) 


50 


55 


60 


49.  dutious]  dtiteous  Rowe  ii. 
52.  naught]  noughe  Qt.     nought  Qq 
et  cet. 

&*  when  he's  old~\  and  when  old,  'j 
flan.     7vhen  old,  Steev. 
when]  Om.  Q3. 
Cafheer 'd]  cafhierd  Qq. 
Two  lines,  Q2Q_. 
53-56.  Whip... Lords']  Five  lines,  end- 
ing   knaues  : ...  for?nes,...  hearts,.  ..throw- 
ing... Lords  Qx.     Ending,  knaues : ...are, 
. . . duty, . . . themfelues ...L ords  Q2Q,. 

54.  trym'd]  trimdQ^    trimm'dRowe. 


56.  but]  out  Quincy  (MS.). 

57-60.  Doe... foule]  Two  lines,  Rowe 
et  cet. 

57.  Doe  well]  Well  Pope  +  ,  Huds. 
them.]  ''em,  Qq,  Jen. 

58.  they  haue]  they've  Pope-t- ,  Dyce. 

59.  themfelues]  themfelmes  F2. 

60.  Thefe]  Thofe  Qq. 
Fellowes]  folks  Pope  +  . 

61.  For  (Sir)]  Om.  Pope  +  .  Separate 
line,  Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Coll.  Wri.  i, 
Dyce,  Hal.  Glo. 


you  may,  you  will,  applied  to  that  which  is  of  common  occurrence,  or  so  evident  that 
it  cannot  but  be  seen. 

49.  knaue]  Staunton  thinks  that  it  carries  no  opprobrious  meaning  here,  but  is 
simply  servitor.  In  line  53,  Johnson  says  that  it  is  used  for  servant,  but  with  a  sly 
mixture  of  contempt. 

50.  obsequious]  Staunton  :  That  is,  obedient,  submissive  thraldom. 

53.  me]  The  ethical  dative,  adding  emphasis  or  vivacity  to  the  expressi^"  For 
instances  see  Abbott,  §  220. 

54.  trym'd]  Collier  (ed.  ii)  notes  that  his  (MS.)  amends  this  line  to  *  learn 'd  in 
forms  and  usages  of  duty,'  and  adds :  '  If  alteration  were  necessary  we  might  read, 
"trained  in  forms  and  usages ;"  but  change  is  inexpedient,  since  the  meaning  is  clear, 
and  "  visages  "  may  be  intended  as  an  antithesis  to  "  hearts  "  in  the  next  line.'  Staun- 
ton paraphrases  the  line  :  '  dress'd  in  shapes  and  masks  of  duty.'  White  pronounces 
Collier's  emendation  not  improbable. 

56.  throwing]  Walker  (  Vers.  p.  120)  cites  this  among  many  other  instances  as 
the  contraction  frequent  in  participles,  where  a  short  vowel  is  preceded  by  a  long  one 
or  a  diphthong.     Conf.  Ham.  V,  ii,  '  That  on  the  view  and  knowing  of  these  contents.' 

57.  Doe]  Hudson  thinks  this  was  probably  caught  by  the  transcriber's  or  printer's 
eye  from  '  Doe  '  in  line  59. 


16  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO  [act  I,  sc.  i 

It  is  as  fure  as  you  are  Rodorigoy  62 

Were  I  the  Moore,  I  would  not  be  lago : 

In  following  him,  I  follow  but  my  felfe. 

Heauen  is  my  Iudge,  not  I  for  loue  and  dutie,  65 

But  feeming  fo,  for  my  peculiar  end : 

For  when  my  outward  Action  doth  demonftrate 

The  natiue  act,  and  figure  of  my  heart 

In  Complement  externe,  'tis  not  long  after 

But  I  will  weare  my  heart  vpon  my  fleeue  70 

For  Dawes  to  pecke  at  ;  I  am  not  what  I  am. 

65.     Heauen~\  Heaven  Rowe  +  .  67.  doth~\  does  Q  . 

Heauen... I]  One  line,  Qq.  69.   Complement]    QqFf,    Han.    Knt, 

is  my]  be  ?ny  Jen.  Sing,  ii,  Ktly,  Del.  Huds.     compliment 

not  I]  not  I,  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope,  Rowe  ii,  et  cet. 

Theob.  Wart>.  Johns.  Jen.  71.  Two  lines,  Qq. 

65,  66.  for...fo~\  One  line,  Qx.  Dawes"]  Doues  Qx,  Mai. 

for. ..end]  One  line,  Q2Q3-  I  dm,.. am]    I'm. ..seem    Pope  +  . 

66.  peculiar]  pecular  Q  .  I'm... am  Johns. 

61.  For  (Sir)]  :  For  instances  of  placing  ejaculations,  appellations,  &c.  (as  in  Greek 
<pev,  &c.)  out  of  the  regular  verse,  as  Capell  placed  these  words,  see  Abbott,  §512. 

63.  I  would]  Hudson  :  Perhaps  for  should ;  and  if  so  the  meaning  may  be, '  Were 
I  in  the  Moor's  place,  I  should  be  quite  another  man  than  I  am.'  Or,  '  if  I  had  the 
Moor's  nature,  if  I  were  such  an  honest  dunce  as  he  is,  I  should  be  just  a  fit  subject 
for  men  that  "have  some  soul"  to  practise  upon.'  Perhaps,  lago  is  purposely  mixing 
some  obscurity  in  his  talk  in  order  to  mystify  the  gull. 

69.  Complement  externe]  Johnson  :  '  In  that  which  I  do  only  for  an  outward 
show  of  civility.'  'Surely,'  says  Knight,  'this  interpretation  [of  Johnson],  by  adopt- 
ing the  secondary  meaning  of  "Complement"  [compliment),  destroys  Iago's  bold 
avowal,  which  is,  that  when  his  actions  exhibit  the  real  intention  and  motives  of  his 
heart  in  outward  completeness,  he  might  as  well  wear  it  on  his  sleeve.'  Walker 
{Crit.  iii,  285)  cites  Tourneur,  Revenger's  Tragedy,  III,  i  (Dodsley,  vol.  iv,  p.  329) : 
*  The  old  duke,  Thinking  my  outward  shape  and  inward  heart  Are  cut  out  of  one 
piece  (for  he  that  prates  his  secrets,  His  heart  stands  o'th'outside),  hires  me  by  price 
To  greet,'  &c. 

71.  Dawes]  Malone  (1790)  adopts  doves  of  Qx,  and  justifies  it  in  a  note  which  I 
should  have  thought  scarcely  worth  the  quoting,  were  it  not  that  Halliwell,  in  his 
Folio  edition,  has  reprinted  it.  Malone  suspects  that  Shakespeare  had  in  his  thoughts 
the  following  passage  from  Lyly's  Euphues  and  his  England,  1580,  [p.  322,  Arber's 
Reprint]  :  '  For  as  al  coynes  are  not  good  yat  haue  the  Image  of  Cafar,  nor  al  golde 
that  are  coyned  with  the  kinges  stampe,  so  all  is  not  trueth  that  beareth  the  shew  of 
godlines,  nor  all  friends  that  beare  a  faire  face,  if  thou  pretende  such  loue  to  Euphues, 
carrye  thy  heart  on  the  backe  of  thy  hand,  and  thy  tongue  in  the  palme,  that  I  may  see 

what  is  in  thy  minde,  and  thou  with  thy  fingers  claspe  thy  mouth I  can  better  take 

a  blister  of  a  Nettle,  then  a  prick  of  a  Rose ;  more  willing  that  a  Rauen  should  pecke 
out  mine  eyes,  then  a  Turtle  pecke  at  them?  S teevens  thought  it  worth  while  to  de- 
fend FM,  saying  that  lago  means  that  he  would  expose  his  heart  as  a  prey  to  the  most 


act  I,  sc.  i.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  17 

Rod.  What  a  fall  Fortune  do's  the  Thicks-lips  owe  72 

If  he  can  carry't  thus  ? 

Iago.  Call  vp  her  Father : 
Rowfe  him,  make  after  him,  poyfon  his  delight,  75 

72.  fall]  Ff,  Knt.  full  Qq  et  cet.  74,  75.  Father:  Rowfe  him,']  Ff,  7:ieob. 
do's]  does  Qq.  Ktly.  father,  Rowfe  him,  Qq,  Re  we  ii, 
Thicks-lips]  thicklips  Qq.     thicke-         Pope,  Han.  Warb.  Jen.     Father.     Rouse 

lips  F2.     thick-lips  F^F4  et  cet.  him,  Rowe  i.   father,  Rouse  him.   Johns. 

73.  carry't]   carry' et  Qr.     carry  her         et  cet.  (subs.). 
Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Jen. 

worthless  of  birds, — daws,  which  are  treated  with  universal  contempt.  '  Shakespeare 
would  scarcely  have  degraded  the  amiable  tribe  of  doves  to  such  an  office,  nor  is  the 
mention  of  them  at  all  suitable  to  the  harsh  turn  of  Iago's  speech.'  Malone  rejoins 
that  Iago  meant  to  say,  that  '  not  only  birds  of  prey,  but  gentle  and  timid  doves  might 
peck  at  him  with  safety.'  ['  Daws '  are  the  only  carnivorous  birds,  I  think,  that  could 
be  here  referred  to  with  contempt,  or  without  dignifying  the  allusion. — Ed.]  Harting 
(p.  119):  The  Jackdaw  {Corvus  monedula)  has  not  been  so  frequently  noticed  by  Shake- 
speare as  many  other  birds,  and  in  the  half-dozen  instances  where  it  is  mentioned  it  is 
termed  '  daw.' 

71.  am]  Jennens:  This  signifies  I  am  not  that  inwardly  which  I  am  outwardly,  or, 
I  am  not  what  I  seem  to  appear  to  be.  Pope  has  here  turned  poetry  into  prose.  Hud- 
son :  Iago  probably  means  •  I  am  not  what  I  seem]  but  to  speak  thus  would  not  smack 
so  much  of  the  peculiar  dialect  with  which  he  loves  to  practise  on  the  dupe.  Maginn 
(p.  268)  :  Can  these  last  words  be  intended  as  a  somewhat  profane  allusion  to  the  title 
by  which  the  Almighty  reveals  himself  to  Moses  ?  Exod.  iii,  14.  I  Am  that  I  am  is 
the  name  of  the  God  of  truth.  /  am  not  what  I  a?n  is,  therefore,  a  fitting  description 
of  a  premeditated  liar. 

72.  fall]  I  can  recall  no  instance  in  this  play  where  Knight  ('Good  Knight,'  as 
Douglas  Jerrold  said  his  epitaph  should  be)  displays  more  ingenuity  in  extracting  a 
meaning  from  a  misprint  in  Yx,  than  in  this  word,  and  not  only  a  meaning,  but  a  hidden 
beauty  thoroughly  Shakespearian.  'Full  fortune,'  says  Knight,  'means  simply  how  for- 
tunate he  is.  But  the  Fx  conveys  a  much  more  Shakespearian  idea.  If  the  Moor  can 
cany  it  thus, — appoint  his  own  officer,  in  spite  of  the  great  ones  of  the  city  who  capp'd 
to  him,  and,  moreover,  can  secure  Desdemona  as  his  prize, — he  is  so  puff 'd  up  with  his 
own  pride  and  purposes,  and  is  so  successful,  that  fortune  owes  him  a  heavy  fall.  To 
owe  is  used  by  Shakespeare  not  only  in  the  ancient  sense  of  to  own,  but  in  the  modern 
sense  of  to  be  indebted  to,  to  hold  or  possess  for  another.  Fortune  here  owes  the  thick- 
lips  a  fall,  in  the  same  way  that  we  say,  "  He  owes  him  a  good  or  an  evil  turn."  This 
reading  is  very  much  in  Shakespeare's  manner  of  throwing  out  a  hint  of  coming  calam- 
ities.' Steevens  cites  '  full  fortune '  as  used  in  Cymb.  V,  iv,  1 10,  and  Malone  adds 
another  instance  in  Ant.  6°  Cleo.  IV,  xv,  24. 

72.  Thicks-lips]  For  the  spelling,  see  note  on  'others,'  line  31. 

72.  owe]  'To  owe  in  ancient  language  is  to  own,'  says  Steevens;  'very  true,' 
says  Pye,  '  but  do  not  explain  it  so  often.' 

73.  carry't]  Jennens  interprets  the  Qto  as  a  '  mistake  of  the  printer,  who  put  /  for 
r,  and  it  might  originally  be  written  carry  'er,  a  contraction  for  carry  her' 

75.  him  .  .  .  him]   RoLFE  says,  that  'the  first  "him"  refers  to  Brabantio,  the 


18  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO  [act  i,  sc.  i. 

Proclaime  him  in  the  Streets.     Incenfe  her  kinfmen,  76 

And  though  he  in  a  fertile  Clymate  dwell, 

Plague  him  with  Flies :  though  that  his  Ioy  be  Ioy, 

Yet  throw  fuch  chances  of  vexation  on't, 

As  it  may  loofe  fome  colour.  3o 

Rodo.  Heere  is  her  Fathers  houfe,  He  call  aloud. 

Iago.  Doe,  with  like  timerous  accent,  and  dire  yell, 
As  when  (by  Night  and  Negligence)  the  Fire 
Is  fpied  in  populus  Citties.  84 

76.  Streets.]  fireete,  Qx.    filreet,  Q2Q3,  8l.  houfe,  lie]  houfr,  He  Q3. 
Jen.    flreets,  F  .  [going  towards  the  door.  Ca;). 

77,  78.  though]  tho  Qq.  82.  Doe,]  QqFf,  Rowe  +  ,Wh. ii.     Do; 

79.  Yet  throw]  Yet :  throw  Fechter.  Cap.  et  cet. 

chances]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sta.  Del.  with  like]  with  Jen. 

changes  Qq  et  cet.  timerous]  Qq,  timorous  Ff. 

on't]  out  Qq.  83.  the  Fire]  a  fire  Han. 

80.  loofe]  lofe  Q3. 

second  to  Othello ;'  which  is  true  if  we  follow  Dr  Johnson's  punctuation.  But  I  j  re- 
fer to  follow  Fx,  where  clearly  Othello  alone  is  referred  to  in  both  cases.  Of  course 
we  know  that  Brabantio  is  'roused,'  and  we,  therefore,  suppose  that  reference  is  here 
made  to  that  fact ;  but  '  Call  up  her  father '  is  uttered  in  the  same  hurried,  parenthetical 
way  that  '  Incense  her  kinsmen  '  is  immediately  afterward ;  the  main  idea  is  to  rouse,  and 
disturb  Othello,  and  poison  his  delight.  But  I  am  not  countenanced  by  Booth,  whose 
notes  were  made  for  me  after  the  foregoing  was  written.  Booth  says,  '  make  this  clear 
to  the  audience  by  pointing  off  toward  the  Sagittary  at  the  second  "  him ;"  the  first, 
of  course,  refers  to  Brabantio,  but  gesture  must  explain  this  to  the  "  quantity  of  barren 
spectators." ' — Ed. 

77.  And  though]  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  156):  'And'  is  clearly  out  of  place;  read, 
'  Incense  her  kinsmen  :  An  though  he,'  &c. 

78.  though  that]  See  Abbott,  §  287;  Macb.  IV,  iii,  106,  Lear,  IV,  vi,  214. 

78.  be  Ioy]  Keightley  (Exp.,  p.  299) :  Perhaps  this  second  'joy'  was  suggested 
by  the  first,  instead  of  high,  bright,  or  some  other  adjective. 

79.  chances]  Knight  defends  the  Fx,  and  rightly,  I  think.  '  When  Roderigo,'  he 
says,  '  suggests  that  fortune  owes  Othello  a  fall,  Iago  eagerly  jumps  at  the  chances  of 
vexation,  which  the  alarm  of  Desdemona's  father  may  bring  on  him.'  It  seems  hardly 
necessary  to  define  '  chances,'  as  Staunton  does,  by  crosses  or  casualties,  a  cross  of 
vexation  is  almost  tautological;  I  think  'chances'  mean  here  simply  possibilities  of 
vexation,  which  might  discolour  Othello's  joy.  To  read  changes  of  vexation  (with 
the  Qq)  renders  the  contingency  of  '  may  lose '  superfluous.  A  change  of  vexation 
could  scarcely  fail  to  make  his  joy  lose  colour. — Ed. 

80.  As]  There  is  but  one  instance  given  in  Abbott,  §  109,  of  as  in  the  sense,  as 
here,  of  that  or  as  the  result  of  which,  after  such  ;  it  is  from  the  Sonn.,  but  no  number 
is  given  and  I  cannot  verify  it. 

82-84.  Gould  (p.  83)  :  J.  B.  Booth  uttered  these  words,  without  heat,  with  a  devil- 
ish unconcern,  as  if  pleased  with  the  fancy  of  terror  and  dismay ;  and  playing,  mean- 
while with  his  sword-hilt  or  puling  at  his  gauntlets.     He  then  strikes  on  the  door 


act  I,  sc.  i.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  19 

Rodo.     What  hoa  :  Brabantio,  Siginor  Brabantio,  hoa.  85 

Iago.  Awake  :  what  hoa,  Brabantio  :  Theeues,  Theeues. 
Looke  to  your  houfe,  your  daughter,  and  your  Bags, 
Theeues,  Theeues. 

Bra.  Aboue.     What  is  the  reafon  of  this  terrible 
Summons  ?  What  is  the  matter  there  ?  90 

Rodo.     Signior  is  all  your  Familie  within  ? 

Iago.     Are  your  Doores  lock'd  ? 

Bra.     Why  ?  Wherefore  ask  you  this  ? 

Iago.     Sir,  y'are  rob'd,  for  fhame  put  on  your  Gowne,  94 

85,86.  hoa]  ho  QqF^  89,90.  What.. .Summons?]   Fi.    One 

85.  Siginor]  Seignior  Qq.    Signior  Yi.  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

86.  Awake...  Brabantio"]  One  line,  Qq.  92.  your  Doores  lock 'd]  all  door  e  lockts 
Theeues,  Theeues]  Ff,  Knt,  Sta.  ho!  Qx.     all  doors  lock 'd  Pope  +  . 

thieves,  thieves !  Pope  + .    Theeues,  theeues,  94.  Sir]   QaQ-Ff,  Rowe,  Johns.  Cap. 

theeues  (sep.  line)  Qq.  (in  same  line),  Cap.  Knt.     Zounds  fir  Qx,  Pope  et  cet. 

et  cet.  y'are]  you  are  Qq,  Johns.  Cap.  Jen. 

87.  your  daughter]  you  Daughter  Qx.  Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Del.    yorfre  Rowe. 
89.  Aboue.]  at  a  window.  Qq.    within.  rob'd]  robUd  Q,Ff.     robd  QrQa. 

Cap.  Scene  II.  Pope +  ,  Jen. 

of  Brabantio's  house,  and  speaking  through  the  key-hole,  sounds  the  resonant  alarm, 
'  What  ho,  Brabantio !'  Yet  in  saying  this,  we  felt  his  mind  was  '  playing  with  some 
inward  bait.'     The  duplicity,  the  double  nature,  the  devil  in  him,  was  subtly  manifest. 

83,  84.  Warburton  :  This  is  not  sense,  take  it  which  way  you  will.  If  '  night  and 
negligence  '  relate  to  '  spied,'  it  is  absurd  to  say,  '  the  fire  was  spied  by  negligence.'  If 
*  night '  and  '  negligence  '  refer  only  to  the  time  and  occasion,  it  should  then  be  by  night 
and  thro1  negligence.  Otherwise  the  particle  by  would  be  made  to  signify  time  applied 
to  one  word,  and  cause  applied  to  the  other.  We  should  read,  therefore,  '  Is  spredj  by 
which  all  these  faults  are  avoided.  [Staunton  queries  if  Warburton  be  not  right.] 
Edwards  (p.  144) :  The  plain  meaning  is, — not  the  fire  was  spied  by  negligence,  but 
— the  fire,  which  came  by  night  and  negligence,  was  spied.  And  this  double  meaning 
to  the  same  word  is  common  to  Shakespeare  with  all  other  writers,  especially  where  the 
word  is  so  familiar  a  one,  as  this  in  question.  Ovid  seems  even  to  have  thought  it  a 
beauty,  instead  of  a  defect.  Johnson  :  The  particle  by  is  used  equivocally ;  the  same 
liberty  is  taken  by  writers  more  correct :  '  The  wonderful  creature  !  a  woman  of  reason  ! 
Never  grave  out  of  pride,  never  gay  out  of  season.'  M.  Mason  :  This  means  'during 
the  time  of  night  and  negligence.'  Knight  thinks  that  had  the  parenthesis  of  F,  been 
adopted,  all  discussion  might  have  been  saved.  Delius  interprets  it,  'according  tc 
Shakespeare's  use  of  the  copulas,  as  equivalent  to  nightly  negligence  or  negligence  by 
night,  and  qualifying  '  fire.'  [Surely  night  is  the  cause  that  a  fire  takes  place  without 
being  observed;  it  is  because  of  night  that  the  fire  is  neglected.  Could  we  not  here 
use  from  quite  as  well  as  by  t — Ed.] 

89.  Bra.  Aboue]  Booth  :  Brabantio  should  be  seen  through  the  open  window  at 
his  \  00k  or  papers ;  this  would  account  for  his  appearance,  instead  of  his  servants,  at 
this  '  terrible  summons.'     Iago  should  keep  in  shadow  during  this. 

94.  rob'd]  Gerard  here  detects  a  pun,  decidedly  clearer  in  French  than  in  Eruj- 


20  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO  [act  i,  sc.  i. 

Your  heart  is  burft,  you  haue  loft  halfe  your  foule  [311  a] 

Euen  now,  now,  very  now,  an  old  blacke  Ram  96 

Is  tupping  your  white  Ewe.     Arife,  arife, 

Awake  the  fnorting  Cittizens  with  the  Bell, 

Or  elfe  the  deuill  will  make  a  Grand-fire  of  you. 

Arife  I  fay.  100 

Bra.     What,  haue  you  loft  your  wits  t 

Rod.     Moft  reuerend  Signior,  do  you  know  my  voice? 

Bra.     Not  I  :  what  are  you  ? 

Rod.     My  name  is  Rodongo. 

Bra.     The  worffer  welcome :  105 

I  haue  charg'd  thee  not  to  haunt  about  my  doores: 
In  honeft  plaineneffe  thou  haft  heard  me  fay, 
My  Daughter  is  not  for  thee.     And  now  in  madneffe 
(Being  full  of  Supper,  and  diftempring  draughtes) 
Vpon  malitious  knauerie,  doft  thou  come  no 

To  ftart  my  quiet. 

Rod.     Sir,  Sir,  Sir. 

Bra.     But  thou  muft  needs  be  fure,  113 

95.  foale~\  foule;  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq.  Sing. 

96.  Euen  now,  now]  Euen  now  Qq,  105.  worfer]  worfe  Qq,  Pope,  Theob. 
F3F4,  Rowe,  Jen.  Steev.  Rann.  Sing.  Ev'n  Han.  Warb.  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Rann.  Var. 
now,  ev'n  Pope  +  .                                                Coll. 

99,  100.  One  line,  Qq.  106.  /  haue~\   Eve  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii, 

99.  deuill']  Diuell  QXQ2.     Devill  Q  .         Huds. 

Divell  F2.     Devil  FF.  108.  Daughter  is~\  daughter's  Pope  +  . 

you.]  you,  Qq.  1 10.  knatterie]   Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Del. 

100.  fay]  fad  Q  .  brauery  Qq  et  cet. 

101.  [appearing  above,  at  a  Window.  ill.  quiet.]  quiet ?  Qq.     quiet:  Cap. 
Cap.  112.  Sir.]  sir,  sir —  Steev.  Var.    Sir — 

104.  is]   is —  Cap.  Steev.  Rann.  Var.         Rowe  et  cet. 

lish :  II  y  a  peut-etre  un  jeu  de  mots  entre  le  mot  robb'd  et  robed  'revetu  d'une  robe 
Vous  etes  un  robin,  par  pudeur  mettez  votre  robe.' 

94.  for  shame]  Knight  :  This  is  not  used  as  a  reproach,  but  means— for  decency 
put  on  your  gown.  [See  note  on  Uongued,'  line  27,  where  Theobald  thinks  that  this 
refers  to  his  Senatorial  gown.] 

95.  burst]   For  many  instances  where  this  means  break,  see  Schmidt  s.  v. 

105.  worsser]  For  many  instances  of  double  comparatives  and  superlatives,  see 
Abbott,  §11. 

109.  distempring]  MALONE:  To  be  distempeied  with  liquor  was,  in  Shakespeare's 
time,  the  phrase  for  intoxication.  Conf.  Ham.  Ill,  ii,  28S. 

no.  Vpon]  See  Abbott,  §  191,  or  Lear,  V,  iii,  166. 

112.  Sir]  Gould  (p.  84) :  Why  cannot  some  actor  who  represents  the  silly  gentle- 
man,' make  him  interrupt  the  old  man  at  intervals  in  order  to  get  a  hearing,  instead  of 
repeating  '  Sir,  sir,  sir '  all  at  once,  as  is  invariably  done  upon  the  stage  ?  and  which 


act  i,  sc.  i.J  THE  MOORE  OF   VENICE  21 

My  fpirits  and  my  place  haue  in  their  power 

To  make  this  bitter  to  thee.  115 

Rodo.     Patience  good  Sir. 

Bra.     What  tell'ft  thou  me  of  Robbing  ? 
This  is  Venice  :  my  houfe  is  not  a  Grange. 

Rodo.     Moft  graue  Brabantio, 
In  fimple  and  pure  foule,  I  come  to  you.  120 

la.  Sir  :  you  are  one  of  thofe  that  will  not  ferue  God, 
if  the  deuill  bid  you.  Becaufe  we  come  to  do  you  feruice, 
and  you  thinke  we  are  Ruffians,  you'le  haue  your  Daugh- 
ter couer'd  with  a  Barbary  horfe,  you'le  haue  your  Ne-         124 

114.  fpirits]  Ff,  Rowe.  fpiritQqetcet.  121.  Sir;]  Sir,  Q2Q3Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 

their]  Ff,  Rowe -f,  Cap.  Knt.  them  Han.  Johns.  Knt.     Zouns  Sir,  Qx  et  cet. 

Qq  et  cet.  you  are]  you  are  not  Han.  (mis- 

117.  What]  What,  Qq.  print?) 

117,118.  What...Venice]¥l.  One  line,  122.  deuill]  Divell  F3. 

Qq  et  cet.  123.  and  you]  you  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Cap. 

118.  Grange]  graunge  Qq.  Jen.  Steev.  Rann.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

indeed  is  in  the  text  so  set  down  ?  Booth  :  This  should  indeed  be  so  spoken,  im- 
patiently, but  without  interrupting  Brabantio. 

114.  In  this  line  Knight  silently  adopts  spirit  of  Qq,  and  retains  'their'  of  the  Ff. 
I  think  it  would  have  been  better  had  the  change  been  reversed ;  '  spirits '  in  the  plural, 
thus  used,  is  quite  Shakespearian. — Ed. 

118.  Grange]  Warton:  That  is,  you  are  in  a  populous  city,  not  in  a  lone  house, 
where  a  robbery  might  be  easily  committed.  '  Grange '  is  properly  the  farm  of 
a  monastery,  where  corn  (Lat.  granum)  is  reposited.  But  in  Lincolnshire,  and  in 
other  Northern  counties,  every  lone  house,  or  farm  which  stands  solitary,  is  called  a 
grange.  Steevens  :  Conf.  Meas.  for  Meas.  Ill,  i,  278,  '  at  the  moated  grange  resides 
this  dejected  Mariana.'  Knight  refers  to  the  picture  of  neglected  loneliness,  which 
this  '  moated  grange '  in  Meas.  for  Meas.  suggested  to  Tennyson,  in  those  verses  which 
are  familiar  to  us  all. 

122.  deuill]  Gould  (p.  84) :  Actors  usually  commit  the  ludicrous  mistake  of  bring 
ing  down  the  emphasis  plump  on  '  devil,'  as  if  the  highest  motive  for  serving  God  were 
the  devil's  bidding !     J.  B.  Booth  said :  'that  will  not  serve  God,  if  the  devil  bid  you,' 
giving  the  plain  meaning,  that  the  devil's  bidding  was  no  argument  against  serving  God. 

123.  Ruffians]  Staunton:  Here  employed  in  its  secondary  sense  of  roisterer, 
swash-buckler,  and  the  like,  though  its  primary  meaning  was,  undoubtedly,  pander ; 
Latin  'leno,'  the  Italian  'roffiano.' 

124.  Nephewes]  Steevens  :  Here,  like  Lat.  nepos,  it  signifies  a  grandson,  or  any 
lineal  descendant,  however  remote.  Boswell  :  The  word  grandson  never  occurs  in 
Shakespeare.  Dyce  (Gloss.):  'Nephew,'  like  cousin,  was  formerly  used  with  great 
laxity.  See  /  Hen.  VI:  II,  v,  64,  where  nephew  ought  to  mean  cousin.  Halliwell 
appositely  cites  the  fact  that  Shakespeare  in  his  Will  speaks  of  his  grand -daughter,  Eliz- 
abeth Hall,  as  his  niece.  [See  Richardson's  Diet,  for  manifold  citations,  from  Robert 
of  Gloucester  down,  where  nephew  is  used  for  grandson  or  lineal  descendant.  Cooper's 
Thes.  *  Nepos  :  the  sonne  or  daughters  sonne,  a  nephew.' — Ed.] 


22  THE    7 RAGED IE   OF  OTHELLO  [act  i,  sc.  i. 

phewes  neigh  to  you,  you'le  haue  Courfers  for  Cozens:         125 
and  Gennets  for  Gcrmaines. 

Bra.     What  prophane  wretch  art  thou  ? 

Li.     I  am  one  Sir,  that  comes  to  tell  you,  your  Daugh- 
ter and  the  Moore,  are  making  the  Beaft  with  two  backs. 

Bra.     Thou  art  a  Villaine.  130 

I  ago.     You  are  a  Senator. 

Bra.     This  thou  (halt  anfwere.  I  know  thee  Rodorigo. 

Rod.     Sir,  I  will  anfwere  any  thing.  But  I  befeech  you 
If't  be  your  pleafure,  and  moft  wife  confent, 

(As  partly  I  find  it  is)  that  your  faire  Daughter,  135 

At  this  odde  Euen  and  dull  watch  o'th'night 

125.  neigh']  ney  Qx.  — a  Cap.  et  cet. 
Cozens]  cozt/ens  Qq.   CoufinsY F .  132.  know]  how  F2. 

126.  Germaines]    Iermans  Qt.      Ger-  Rodorigo]  Roderigo  Q,Q3- 
mans  QaQ3F3F4.     Germans  Fa.                             134-150.  Om.  Qx. 

128.  that  comes]  that  come  Qq.  136.  odde  Euen]  od  euen  Q2Q3-     odd- 

129.  are]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.  are  now  even  Mai.  et  seq.  odd  season  Rami.  conj. 
Qq  et  cet.  odd  hour  Cartwright. 

131.  are  a]  QqFf,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt.     are 

126.  Gennets]  Wedgwood:  Genet,  a  small-sized  Spanish  horse.  Sp.  gineto,  a 
light  horseman,  named  from  the  Berber  tribe  of  Zeneta,  who  supplied  the  Moorish 
sultans  of  Grenada  with  a  body  of  horse  on  which  they  placed  great  reliance.  [While 
the  alliteration  is  here  evident  of  gennets  and  germans,  it  is  not  impossible  that,  in 
addition,  in  Shakespeare's  time,  the  Berber  or  Moorish  origin  of  the  gennet  was  sug- 
gested to  an  auditor  quite  as  much  as  the  Spanish. — Ed.] 

126.  Germaines]  Dyce  [Gloss.) :   Relations. 

127.  prophane]  Johnson:  That  is,  what  wretch  of  gross  and  licentious  language? 
In  that  sense  Shakespeare  often  uses  this  word.  Steevens  :  Howell,  in  a  dialogue 
prefixed  to  his  edition  of  Cotgrave,  1673,  has  the  following:  'J'  aimerois  mieux  estre 
trop  ceremonieux,  que  trop  prophane,'  which  he  thus  anglicizes :  « I  had  rather  be  too 
ceremonious,  than  too  prophane.'  [See  II,  i,  188.] 

129.  See  Rabelais,  liv.  I,  cap.  iii. 

131.  You  are]  It  was  Upton  who  suggested  the  dash  after  these  words,  which  is 
found  in  all  editions  since  Capell's  time,  except  Knight's.  •  A  senator,'  says  Upton  (p. 
176),  'is  added  beyond  expectation;  any  one  would  think  Iago  was  going  to  call  him 
as  bad  names  as  he  himself  was  called  by  the  senator  Brabantio.' 

132.  thou]  Delius:  This  is  to  be  emphasized.  Brabantio  does  not  know  Iago,  and 
therefore  Roderigo,  whom  he  does  know,  must  answer  for  Iago's  insulting  remarks. 

136.  odde  Euen]  Johnson:  The  eve?i  of  night  is  midnight,  the  time  when  night 
is  divided  into  even  parts.  Henley  :  This  'odd  even'  is  simply  the  interval  between 
twelve  at  night  and  one  in  the  morning.  Steevens,  in  his  earlier  editions,  suggested 
'  odd  steven]  a  Chaucerian  word  signifying  time  ;  but  he  wisely  withdrew  the  suggestion 
in  his  Var.  '93,  although  not  before  M.  Mason  said  that  he  'should  chuse  to  read  dull 
season  as  an  expression  that  would  more  naturally  occur  either  to  Shakespeare  or  to 
Roderigo.'     M,'. '.one  thinks  that  'this  odd-even  of  the  night'  appears  to  mean  that  il 


act  I,  sc.  i.]  THE  MOORE   OF  VENICE  z$ 

Tranfported  with  no  worfe  nor  better  guard,  137 

But  with  a  knaue  of  common  hire,  a  Gundelier, 

To  the  groffe  clafpes  of  a  Lafciuious  Moore : 

If  this  be  knowne  to  you,  and  your  Allowance,  140 

We  then  haue  done  you  bold,  and  faucie  wrongs. 

But  if  you  know  not  this,  my  Manners  tell  me, 

We  haue  your  wrong  rebuke.     Do  not  beleeue 

That  from  the  fence  of  all  Ciuilitie, 

1  thus  would  play  and  trifle  with  your  Reuerence,  145 

Your  Daughter  (if  you  haue  not  giuen  her  leaue) 

I  fay  againe,  hath  made  a  groffe  reuolt, 

Tying  her  Dutie,  Beautie,Wit,  and  Fortunes 

In  an  extrauagant,  and  wheeling  Stranger,  149 

137.  nor]  or  F  F  ,  Rowe.  141.  wrongs.]  wrongs?  Q,Q3- 

138.  common]  Om.  Pope  +  .  146,  147.  (if..againe,]  In  parenthesis, 
Gundelier]    FfQ2Q  .      Gundalier         Q  . 

Rowe  +  .  Gondelier]ohns.)en.  Gondolier  148.  Tying]  Laying  Coll.  ii  (MS). 

Cap.  149.  In  an]  To  an  Pope +  ,  Rann.     On 

139.  Moore:]  Moor, —  Mai.  an  Cap.  Coll.  ii  (MS). 

140.  and]  and  to  Q  . 

was  just  approaching  to,  or  just  past,  that  it  was  doubtful  whether  at  that  moment  it 
stood  at  the  point  of  midnight,  or  at  some  other  less  equal  division  of  the  twenty-four 
hours ;  which  a  few  minutes  either  before,  or  after,  midnight  would  be.  So  in  Macb. 
Ill,  iv,  126:  'What  is  the  night?  Lady  M.  Almost  at  odds  with  morning,  which  is 
which.'  Abbott,  §  435  :  And  is  omitted.  Cicero  says,  that  the  extreme  test  of  a 
man's  honesty  is  that  you  can  play  at  odd  and  even  with  him  in  the  dark.  And  per- 
haps *odd-(and-)even '  here  means,  a  time  when  there  is  no  distinguishing  between 
odd  and  even. 

137.  Transported]  To  mend  this  incomplete  sentence  Hanmer,  followed  by  Ca- 
pell,  added  Be  before  line  136:  'Be  at  this  odd-even,'  &c.  Mason  added  it  before 
line  137.  Staunton  says,  that  'transported'  is,  equivalent  to  transported  herself 
[which  I  doubt],  and  Knight  says  that  he  must  leave  the  sentence  as  he  finds  it. 

138.  But]  See  Abbott,  §  127,  for  instances  of  but  used  in  the  sense  of  except,  fol- 
lowing negative  comparatives,  where  we  should  use  than. 

138.  Gundelier]  Walker  ( Vers.  p.  218)  shows  that,  just  as  pioneer,  engineer, 
muleteer,  &c.  should  be  written  pioner,  enginer,  muleter,  &c,  so  here  the  verse  requires 
gundeler.  Dyce  (ed.  iii)  yields  to  Walker's  authority,  and  asserts  that  '  if  the  author 
did  not  write  "gundeler"  ("gondoler "),  he  certainly  intended  the  word  to  be  so  pro- 
nounced.' Abbott  does  not  include  this  word  in  the  list  which  he  gives  (§  492)  of  the 
class  referred  to  by  Walker,  but  places  it  under  '  apparent  Alexandrines '  (§  497),  and 
contracts  it  gond{6)lier.     Walker's  treatment  is,  I  think,  the  better. — Ed. 

141.  saucie]  That  is,  insolent,  outrageous,  used  in  a  stronger  sense  than  merely 
malapert.  Conf.  Macb.  Ill,  iv,  25  :  '  I  am  ....  bound  in  To  saucy  doubts  and  fears.' 

144.  from]  For  instances  where  'from'  means  'apart  from,'  'awry  from,'  see  Ab- 
bott, §  158.     Also  Macb.  Ill,  i,  131,  'something  from  the  palace.' 

149.   In]  It  is  scarcely  necessary,  I  think,  to  suppose  that  '  In '  is  here  used  for  on  01 


24  THE    TR  AGED  IE   OF  OTHELLO  [act  i,  sc.  i. 

Of  here,  and  euery  where  :  ftraight  fatisfie  your  felfe.  150 

If  fhe  be  in  her  Chamber,  or  your  houfe, 
Let  loofe  on  me  the  Iuftice  of  the  State 
For  thus  deluding  you. 

Bra.     Strike  on  the  Tinder,  hoa  : 
Giue  me  a  Taper  :  call  vp  all  my  people,  155 

This  Accident  is  not  vnlike  my  dreame, 
Beleefe  of  it  oppreffes  me  alreadie. 
Light,  I  fay,  light.  Exit. 

lag.     Farewell:  for  I  muft  leaue  you. 
It  feemes  not  meete,  nor  wholefome  to  my  place  160 

To  be  produced,  (as  if  I  ftay,  I  fhall,)  [311  b~] 

Againft  the  Moore.     For  I  do  know  the  State, 
(How  euer  this  may  gall  him  with  fome  checke)  163 

151.  her]  your  Ff,  Rovve,  Jen.  161.  producled~\  Ff.  product 'd 'Qqetcet. 

153.  thus  deluding  you]  this  delufion  163.  How  euer]  Now  etier  Q,   [thus 

Qx.  noted  by  Jen.  and  Camb.  edd.     How  euer 

158.  Exit.]  Om.  QqFf.    Exit  Bra.  from  in  Ashbee.] 

above.  Han.  may]  my  Q  . 

160.  place]  pate  Qx. 

to.  The  idea  of  the  entire  surrender  of  Desdemona  to  Othello  is  intended,  which  '  in ' 
certainly  conveys,  even  better  than  on.  There  are,  assuredly,  instances  where  in  is 
used  where  we  should  now  use  on,  as  in  Gen.  i,  22;  Matt,  vi,  10,  also  /  Hen.  VI:  I, 
ii,  2  (all  cited  in  Bible  Word-Book),  where,  however,  the  phrase  'in  the  earth,'  is  im- 
mediately connected  with  '  in  the  heavens,'  and  is  not,  therefore,  exactly  parallel  with 
the  present  instance.     See  'in  your  owne  part,'  I,  iii,  91,  post. — Ed. 

149.  extrauagant]  Used  by  Shakespeare  three  times  and  uniformly  in  its  classical 
sense  of  wandering,  vagrant. 

149.  wheeling]  Collier  (ed.  ii)  adopts  wheedling  from  his  (MS),  as  it  is  'just  the 
epithet  that  would  be  applied  by  Roderigo  to  Othello,  who  had  cajoled  and  cheated 
Brabantio  out  of  his  daughter.'  Singer  (Sh.  Vind.  p.  279) :  Even  could  Collier  adduce 
an  instance  of  wheedling  before  the  reign  of  Charles  II.,  it  would  be  difficult  to  per 
suade  us  to  displace  'wheeling;'  for,  connected,  as  it  is,  with  'extravagant,'  it  is  no 
doubt  used  like  the  Italian  '  girevole,'  with  its  secondary  meaning  of  inconstant,  un 
steady.  That  wheedling  should  have  been  suggested,  makes  it  certain  that  Collier' 5. 
(MS)  in  this  instance  lived  not  earlier  than  the  last  century.  Staunton  says,  that  he 
would  prefer  whirling.  Schmidt  (Lex.)  thinks  that  from  meaning  '  to  fetch  a  com- 
pass,' as  in  Cor.  I,  vi,  19,  it  came  to  mean  'to  err  about,'  as  here  and  in  Tro.  &*  Cress. 
V,  vii,  2. 

156.  dream]  Coleridge  (Arotes,  &c.  249):  The  old  careful  senator,  being  caught 
careless,  transfers  his  caution  to  his  dreaming  power  at  least.  Booth  :  This  dream  is 
to  the  superstitious  Italian  convincing  proof  of  what  he  is  told,  and  accounts  for  his 
sudden  belief  in  his  friend's  treachery. 

163.  checke]  Johnson:  Some  rebuke. 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.J 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


25 


Cannot  with  fafetie  caft-him.     For  he's  embark'd 

With  fuch  loud  reafon  to  the  Cyprus  Warres, 

(Which  euen  now  ftands  in  Act)  that  for  their  foules 

Another  of  his  Fadome,  they  haue  none, 

To  lead  their  Bufineffe.     In  which  regard, 

Though  I  do  hate  him  as  I  do  hell  apines, 

Yet,  for  neceffitie  of  prefent  life, 

I  muft  (how  out  a  Flag,  and  figne  of  Loue, 

(Which  is  indeed  but  figne)that  you  fhal  furely  find  him 

Lead  to  the  Sagitary  the  raifed  Search: 


165 


170 


173 


164.  cajl-him~\  Hyphen,  only  in  Ff. 
embark'd]  imbarkd  QqF2. 

165.  Cyprus]  Cipres  Qq.  Cyprus* 
Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var. 
Knt,  Sing.  Sta.  Ktly. 

Warres]  war  Cap.  Rann. 

166.  Jiands]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Cap.  Rann. 
Del.     stand  Pope  et  cet. 

167.  Fadome]  fat 'home  Qq.  fadomF, 
Rowe  +  ,  Wh.    fathom  Cap.  et  cet. 

none]    not  Qx,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 
Rann.  Sing.  Ktly. 

168.  Bufineffe]  business  on  Cap. 


169.    Though]  Tho  Qq. 

hell  apines]  hell  Ff.  hells  paines 
Qq,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Sing,  hell  pains  Cap. 
Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  hell-pains  Dyce  et 
cet. 

172.  flgne)]  Ff.  figne,  Qq.  sign  :  Rowe 
i.     sign.)  or  sign.  Rowe  ii  et  cet. 

fJiall  furely  find]  may  surely  find 
Pope  + .     may  find  Han. 

172,  173.  find... Search]  One  line,  Qx. 

173.  Sagitary]  Sagiltar  Qx,  Cap.  Mai. 
Sagittary  Q2Q3F4. 


164.  cast]  Johnson:  That  is,  dismiss  him.  [See  II,  ii,  31 ;  II,  ii,  302;  V,  ii,  400.] 
Purnell  :  Cf.  '  castaway,'  and  Anglo-Indian  '  a  caster,'  '  a  horse  sold  out  of  a  regiment 
as  useless.' 

165.  Cyprus]  See  Abbott,  §22,  for  instances  of  the  conversion  of  proper  names 
into  adjectives,  for  which  license,  Abbott  says,  the  reason  is  to  be  found  in  an  increasing 
dislike  and  disuse  of  the  inflection  in  's.  Conf.  'Verona  walls,'  Rom.  &>  Jul.  Ill,  iii, 
17  [and  •  hell  pains,'  line  169  below,  where,  by  the  way,  in  Fx,  the  a  and  p  have  simply 
changed  places. — Ed.] 

167.  Fadome]  Booth  :  Touch  your  head  to  indicate  judgement,  not  your  breast  to 
imply  courage. 

168.  Businesse]  Coleridge  {Notes,  &c.  250):  The  forced  praise  of  Othello,  fol- 
lowed by  the  bitter  hatred  of  him  in  this  speech  !  And  observe  how  Brabantio's  dream 
prepares  for  his  recurrence  (1.  188)  to  the  notion  of  philtres,  and  how  both  prepare  for 
carrying  on  the  plot  of  the  arraignment  of  Othello  on  this  ground. 

173.  Sagitary]  Steevens  :  This  means  the  sign  of  the  fictitious  creature  so-called, 
i.  e.  an  animal  compounded  of  man  and  horse,  and  armed  with  a  bow  and  quiver. 
Knight  :  This  is  generally  taken  to  be  an  inn.  It  was  the  residence  at  the  Arsenal 
of  the  commanding  officers  of  the  navy  and  army  of  the  republic.  The  figure  of  an 
archer  with  his  drawn  bow,  over  the  gates,  still  indicates  the  place.  Probably  Shake- 
speare had  looked  upon  that  sculpture.  Singer  :  Yet  Cassio's  inquiry,  •  Ancient,  what 
makes  he  here  ?'  seems  to  imply  that  to  Shakespeare  the  sign,  whencesoever  he  derived 
it,  was  that  of  a  private  house  or  inn ;  and  that  it  was  a  representation  of  the  centaur 
of  the  zodiac,  or  of  the  Tale  of  Troy,  and  not  a  mere  bowman.     Th.  Elze  (Shake- 


26  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO  [act  i,  sc.  l 

And  there  will  I  be  with  him.     So  farewell.  Exit. 

Enter  Brabantio,  ivith  Seruants  and  Torches.  175 

Bra.     It  is  too  true  an  euill.     Gone  fhe  is, 
And  what's  to  come  of  my  defpifed  time,  177 

175.  Scene  III.  Pope +  ,  Jen.  uants   with    Torches   Qq,    Rowe,    Pope, 

Enter...]  Enter  Brabantio  [Bar-         Theob.  Jen. 
bantio  QJ  in  his  night  gowne,  and  Ser- 

speare  Jahrbuch,  1879,  x^v>  x74)  gives  a  curious  list  of  the  Inns  of  Venice  in  Othello's 
day,  of  which  history  has  preserved  the  names,  as  follows  :  '  al  Selvadego,  alio  Slurione, 
al  Cavaletto,  al  Capello,  alle  do  {due)  Spade,  alia  Campana,  al  S.  Giorgio  or  al  Flauto, 
al  Lion  bianco,  al  Gambaro,  alia  Luna,  aW  Aquila  nera,  alia  Corona,  all'  Angelo,  alia 
Torre, — but  al  Sagittario  has  not  yet  been  discovered.  The  most  probable  supposition 
is,'  continues  Th.  Elze,  '  that  it  was  an  imaginary  name  devised  by  Shakespeare,  which 
we  should  be  as  little  likely  to  discover  as  The  Pegasus  in  Genoa,  where  the  Pedant 
lodged  with  Baptista  in  Tarn,  of  Shr.  IV,  iv,  5.  A  certain  appropriateness  in  the 
names  and  characters  is  not  lacking :  the  soldier  lives  in  the  Sagittary,  the  Pedant  in 
the  Pegasus.''  Rolfe  disposes  of  Knight's  assertion,  that  this  was  the  Arsenal.  *  It 
appears,'  he  says,  in  his  Notes  ad  loc.  '  from  I,  ii,  53,  below,  that  Othello  was  not  at  his 
usual  lodging,  and  the  messengers  of  the  Senate  had  not  known  where  to  find  him. 
Cassio  also  asks  "What  makes  he  here  ?"  which  implies  that  he  was  in  an  unfamiliar 
place.  Note  also  what  Othello  says,  in  I,  iii,  143.  If  the  Arsenal  had  been  the 
"place,"  no  guide  to  it  would  have  been  necessary.'  In  an.  Addendum  on  p.  210, 
Rolfe  still  more  emphatically  disproves  Knight's  remark :  '  We  cannot  find  any  evi- 
dence that  the  Arsenal  at  Venice  was  ever  called  "the  Sagittary;"  probably  this  is  a 
mere  conjecture  of  Knight's.  The  figure  mentioned  by  Knight  is  not  "over  the  gates," 
but  is  one  of  four  statues  standing  in  front  of  the  structure.  It  represents  a  man  hold- 
ing a  bow  (not  "drawn")  in  his  hand,  but  is  in  no  respect  more  conspicuous  than  its 
three  companions.  If  Shakespeare  was  ever  in  Venice  he  probably  saw  the  statue  (if 
it  is  as  old  as  the  gateway,  which  was  built  in  1460),  but  we  cannot  imagine  why  it 
should  suggest  to  him  to  call  the  place  the  Sagittary.  That  word  means  not  an  ordi- 
nary archer,  but  a  Centaur  with  a  bow,  as  in  the  familiar  representations  of  the  zodiacal 
sign  Sagittarius.  This  is  its  sense  in  the  only  other  passage  in  which  Shakespeare  uses 
it,  Tro.  &  Cress.  V,  v,  14 :  "  the  dreadful  Sagittary  Appals  our  numbers."  That  the 
Sagittary  in  the  present  passage  cannot  be  the  Arsenal  is,  however,  sufficiently  clear 
from  I,  iii,  143,  144.  The  Arsenal  was  by  far  the  largest  and  most  prominent  public 
building,  or  collection  of  buildings,  in  all  Venice,  its  outer  walls  being  nearly  two  miles 
in  circuit.  To  suppose  that  anybody  in  the  employ  of  the  government  would  need  the 
help  of  Iago  in  finding  the  place  is  absurd.' 

177.  despised]  W'arburton  :  We  should  read  despited,  i.  e.  vexatious.  Heath: 
Brabantio  very  properly  calls  the  remaining  part  of  his  life  a  *  despised  time,'  since  the 
ill-conduct  of  his  only  daughter,  in  matching  herself  to  an  adventurer  so  much  beneath 
her  birth  and  rank,  could  not,  in  his  apprehension,  but  draw  great  contempt  on  himself. 
JOHNSON:  'Despised  time'  is  time  of  no  value  ;  time  in  which  'There's  nothing  serious 
in  mortality,  The  wine  of  life  is  drawn,  and  the  me*e  dregs  Are  left  this  vault  to  brag 
of,'  Macb  II,  iii,  89.  STEEVENS:  Again,  in  Rom.  &  Jul.  I,  iv,  no:  'a  despised  life 
closed  in  my  breast.' 


ICT  I,  sc.  L]  THE  MOORE   OF    VENICE  2J 

Is  naught  but  bitterneffe.     Now  Rodorigo,  178 

Where  didft  thou  fee  her  ?  (Oh  vnhappie  Girle) 

With  the  Moore  faift  thou?  (Who  would  be  a  Father?)  18c 

How  didft  thou  know  'twas  fhe?  (Oh  fhe  deceaues  me 

Paft  thought:)  what  faid  fhe  to  you  ?  Get  moe  Tapers  : 

Raife  all  my  Kindred.     Are  they  married  thinke  you  ? 

Rodo.     Truely  I  thinke  they  are. 

Bra.     Oh  Heauen  :  how  got  fhe  out  ?  185 

Oh  treafon  of  the  blood. 

Fathers,from  hence  trufr.  not  your  Daughters  minds 
By  what  you  fee  them  a6l.     Is  there  not  Charmes, 
By  which  the  propertie  of  Youth,  and  Maidhood 
May  be  abus'd  ?  Haue  you  not  read  Rodorigo,  190 

Of  fome  fuch  thing  ? 

178.  Is]  IQ3-  182.  moe]  Ff,  Ktly.     more  Qq  et  cet. 

naught  ]  Ff,  Rowe  i.     nought  Qq  183.  kindred]  kinred F 'aF '. 

et  cet.  185,  186.  One  line,  Qq,  Cap.  et  cet. 

bitterneffe.    Now]  bitterneffe notv  185.  got]  gat  Rowe  ii  +  . 

Qq.  186.  of  the]  of  my  Ff,  Rowe  +  . 

180.  faifl]  saidstT\\*to\>.  ii,  Han.Warb.  188.  Is  there]  Qq,  Var.  Sing.  Dyce, 
Johns.  Ktly,  Glo.  Cam.     Are  there  Ff  et  cet. 

181.  fhe  deceaues]   thou  deceiuefl  Qx,  1 89.  Maidhood]  manhood  Qq. 
Johns.  Jen.  Steev.  Rann.  Var.  Coll.    (No  191.  thing?]  thing.  QXQ2.  things ?  Q. 
parentheses  in  this  speech  in  Qx.) 

181.  deceaues]  May  it  not  be  permitted  here  to  'frolic  in  conjecture,'  and  suggest 
that  the  printer  has  accidentally  substituted  an  s  for  a  d,  and  that  we  should  read  de- 
ceaued?  Even  if  we  adopt  the  reading  of  Qx,  I  should  prefer  they  deceaued  to  'thou 
deceiuest.'  In  both  cases  a  certain  symmetry  of  the  sentence  is  preserved  in  the  alter- 
nation of  thought,  which  is  first  fixed  on  the  daughter,  and  then  on  the  Moor,  then 
recurring  to  the  daughter,  then  to  the  Moor  and  the  daughter  both  together,  then  to 
the  daughter,  and  then  to  them  both  together  again. — Ed. 

186.  blood]  Booth  :  With  emotion,  as  with  Shylock  :  'my  own  flesh  and  blood  to 
rebel !' 

188.  Is]  See  Abbott,  §335,  for  instances  where  the  quasi-singular  verb  precedes 
the  plural  subject.  This  usage  Abbott  explains  on  the  ground,  that  when  the  subject  is 
*s  yet  future,  and,  as  it  were,  unsettled,  the  third  jrerson  singular  might  be  regarded  as 
the  normal  inflection.  Such  passages  are  very  common,  particularly  in  the  case  of 
1  There  is.' 

188.  charmes]  Booth  :  In  your  study  of  this  play  bear  in  mind  the  superstition 
that  pervades  it.  Even  Othello,  while  sneering  at  it,  humours  it  when  Desdemona  is 
brought  before  the  Duke  as  a  witness  against  him ;  and  he  has  faith  in  the  '  antique 
token  '  and  the  sword  of  '  ice-brook's  temper.'  Reflections  like  these  help  the  actor  to 
feel  the  character  he  assumes. 

189,  190.  By  .  .  .  abus'd]  Johnson:  By  which  the  faculties  of  a  young  virgin 
may  be  infatuated  and  made  subject  to  illusions  and  false  imagination. 


28  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO  [act  l>  sc-  « 

Tfo/.     Yes  Sir  :  I  haue  indeed.  192 

Bra.     Call  vp  my  Brother  :  oh  would  you  had  had  her. 
Some  one  way,fome  another.     Doe  you  know 
Where  we  may  apprehend  her,and  the  Moore  ?  195 

Rod.     I  thinke  I  can  difcouer  him,  if  you  pleafe 
To  get  good  Guard,  and  go  along  with  me. 

Bra.     Pray  you  lead  on.     At  euery  houfe  He  call, 
(I  may  command  at  moft)get  Weapons  (hoa) 
And  raife  fome  fpeciall  Officers  of  might :  200 

On  good  Rodoi'igo,  I  will  deferue  your  paines.  Exe?int. 

192.  Yes... indeed]  I haue  fir  Qt.  198.  lie]  He  Q3.     TkY^     Pll\^ 

193.  Brother]    brothers   F3F4,    Rowe,  1 99.  moJl)~\moft :  or  most.  Qq  et  cet. 
Pope,  Han.  Weapons  [hoa)]  weapons  ho,  Qq. 

oh  would]  0  that  Qx,  Mai.  Steev.  200.  might]    FfQ2Q  ,    Rowe  +  ,   Cap. 

Coll.     Oh,  'would  Theob.  ii,  Warb.  Johns.  Jen.  Del.     night  QT  et  cet. 

Rann.  Ktly.  201.   On  good]  On,  good F. 

194.  you]  yon  Qx.  I  will]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.    He  Q,Qa. 

195.  her,  and]  her  arid  Theob.  iietseq.  He  Q.     /'// Pope  et  cet. 

198.  you  lead]  leade  me  Qr. 

193.  Brother]  Singer:  Gratiano  was  in  the  poet's  mind,  though  he  is  not  wanted 
or  called  upon  the  stage  till  the  Fifth  Act. 

x97-  g°]  Abbott,  §30,  notes  that  here,  as  in  Mid.  N.  D.  I,  i,  123,  Tarn,  of  Shr. 
IV,  v,  7 ;  2  Hen.  IV:  II,  i,  191,  'go '  is  used  where  we  should  use  come. 

199.  at  most]  Jourdain  (Philol.  Soc.  Trans.,  i860,  p.  141):  It  here  means,  'in 
the  greatest  degree?  Brabantio  being  one  of  the  council  of  three.  See  note  on  I,  ii,  16. 
[It  was  not  until  I  had  read  Jourdain's  note,  and  the  following  in  the  excellent  edition 
of  M.  D'Hugues  :  'Nous  n'avons  trouve  dans  aucun  lexique  l'explication  de  cette  locu- 
tion at  most?  that  any  obscurity  appeared  to  me  here.  Notwithstanding  Jourdain's  ex- 
planation, I  still  think  that  'at  most'  is  simply  elliptical  for  at  most  of  them.  Brabantio 
says,  in  effect,  '  I'll  call  at  all  the  houses  of  my  kindred ;  at  most  of  them  my  call  will 
be  obeyed.' — Ed.] 

200.  might]  Malone:  I  have  no  doubt  that  Shakespeare,  before  he  wrote  this 
play,  read  The  Commomvealth  and  Government  of  Venice,  translated  from  the  Italian 
by  Lewes  Lewkenor,  and  printed  in  Qto,  1599;  a  book  prefixed  to  which  we  find  a 
copy  of  verses  by  Spenser.  This  treatise  furnished  our  poet  with  the  knowledge  of 
those  officers  of  night  whom  Brabantio  here  desires  to  be  called  to  his  assistance.  '  For 
the  greater  expedition  thereof  of  these  kinds  of  judgements,  the  heades  or  chieftaines 
of  the  officers  by  night  do  obtaine  the  authority  of  which  the  advocators  are  deprived. 
These  officers  of  the  night  are  six,  and  six  likewise  are  those  meane  officers,  that  have 
only  power  to  correct  base  vagabonds  and  trifling  offenses.  Those  that  do  execute  this 
office  are  called  heades  of  the  tribes  of  the  city,  because  out  of  every  tribe  (for  the  city 
is  divided  into  six  tribes,)  there  is  elected  an  officer  of  the  night,  and  a  head  of  the 
tribe. — The  duty  of  eyther  of  these  officers  is,  to  keepe  a  watch  every  other  night  by 
turn,  within  their  tribes;  and,  now  the  one,  and  then  the  other,  to  make  rounds  about 
his  quarter,  till  the  dawning  of  the  day,  being  always  guarded  and  attended  on  with 
wearoned  officers  and  Serjeants,  and  to  see  that  there  be  not  any  disorder  done  in  th* 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


29 


Scena   Secunda. 

Enter  Othello,  Iago,  Attendants ,  with  Tore  hes. 

la.     Though  in  the  trade  of  Warre  I  haue  flaine  men, 
Yet  do  I  hold  it  very  ftuffe  o'th'confcience 
To  do  no  contriu'd  Murder  :  I  lacke  Iniquitie 
S  ometime  to  do  me  feruice.     Nine,  or  ten  times 
I  had  thought  t'haue  yerk'd  him  here  vnder  the  Ribbes. 

Othello.     'Tis  better  as  it  is. 


8 


1.  Scene  IV.  Pope +  ,  Jen. 

2.  Attendants]  and  attendants  Qq. 
with  Torches]  Om.  Cap.  Steev.  Mai. 

Var.  Sing. 

[The  Street.  Rowe.  Another  Street, 
before  the  Sagittary.    Theob. 

4.  ftuffe  d1  ttC  confeience]  ftuft  of  con- 
fcience  Qx. 

5.  Murder]  mur r her  Qx.  mtirtherQ, 
Pope,  Theob.  ii,  Ilan.Warb.  Cap.  Knt,Wh. 
i,  Rife. 

lacke]  lack  Q  .    lake  F2F  .    take  F4, 


Rowe. 

6.  Sometime]    Ff,    Rowe,    Knt,    Sea. 
Sometimes  Qq  et  cet. 

Nine,]  nine  QqF  F  . 

7.  I  had]  /Pope  +  .     /VWh.  ii. 

/  ''haue]  Dyce  ii,  Huds.  Wh.  ii.  tdve 
Pope  + .     to  haue  QqFf  et  cet. 

yerk'd]  ierk'd  Qx.  jerk'd  QaQ3, 
Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Rann.  Wh.  ii. 

vnder  the  Ribbes]  Separate  line,  Qq« 

Ribbes]  Rib  F  ,  Rowe. 

8.  'Tis]  It's  Pope  +  . 


darkness  of  the  night,  which  alwaies  emboldeneth  men  to  naughtinesse ;  and  that  there 
be  not  any  houses  broken  up,  nor  thieves  nor  rogues  lurking  in  corners  with  intent  to 
do  violence.' — Commonzvealth  of  Venice,  pp.  97,  99.  [This  note  of  Malone  seems  to 
have  satisfied,  with  the  exception  of  Delius,  all  modern  editors,  even  Knight,  who 
has,  in  many  another  passage,  maintained  the  FT  on  grounds  less  substantial  than  he 
might  have  stood  on  here.  If  Brabantio  had  wished  to  summon  to  his  aid  the  cus- 
tomary guardians  of  the  night,  the  epithet  '  special '  is  needless,  whereas  it  is  not  only 
expressed,  but  it  is  emphasized ;  it  is  transposed  from  the  noun  it  particularly  qualifies 
in  order  to  give  it  importance.  The  logical  order  is  '  officers  of  special  might,'  just  as 
'  the  whole  ear  of  Denmark '  in  Ham.  I,  v,  36,  means  '  the  ear  of  all  Denmark,'  or  as 
'  course  of  direct  session,'  Oth.  I,  ii,  105,  means  the  '  direct  course  of  session.'  I  am 
afraid  that  here  the  zeal  of  Malone's  learning  hath  eaten  him  up,  and  that  '  night '  oi 
Qt  is  a  misprint. — Ed.] 

2.  Torches]  Delius  :  To  Shakespeare's  public  this  conveyed  the  idea  not  only 
that  the  time  was  night,  but  also  that  the  scene  was  in  the  street. 

4.  it  very]  Is  not  this  a  case  of  the  absorption  of  the  definite  article  in  the  t  sound 
of  '  it '  ?— Ed. 

4.  stuff]  Johnson:  That  is,  substance  or  essence  of  the  conscience.  Lloyd:  Iago 
gains  the  confidence  of  Roderigo  by  the  proper  force  of  his  will,  and  by  plain  exposition 
of  politic  hypocrisy ;  this  is  his  course  with  a  fool  destitute  of  principles ;  his  pretensions 
to  honesty  [as  in  this  line]  gain  him  the  confidence  of  Othello,  whose  credulousness  in 
this  respect  would,  in  truth,  appear  to  us  as  gross  as  that  of  Roderigo,  but  that  it  is  not 
associated  with  the  same  circumstances  of  disgracefulness. 

7.  yerk'd]  Dyce  :  To  strike  with  a  quick,  smart  blow.  White  (ed.  ii) :  A  mere 
phonetic  spelling  of  jerked. 

8.  Coleridge:  How  well  these  few  words  impress  at  the  Dutset  the  truth  of  Othello's 


30  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  I,  sc.  ii. 

Iago.     Nay  but  he  prated, 
A.nd  fpoke  fuch  fcuruy,  and  prouoking  termes  10 

Againft  your  Honor,  that  with  the  little  godlineffe  I  haue 
I  did  full  hard  forbeare  him.     But  I  pray  you  Sir, 
Are  you  faft  married  ?  Be  affur'd  of  this, 
That  the  Magnifico  is  much  belou'd, 

And  hath  in  his  effect,  a  voice  potentiall  1 5 

As  double  as  the  Dukes  :  He  will  diuorce  you. 

11.  Againjl your  Honor"]  Separate  line,         Dyce,  Sta.Wh.  Glo.  Cam.  Del.  Rife,  Huds. 
Pope  et  seq.  For  be  fure  Qq  et  cet. 

12.  pray  you]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Dyce,  15.  his]  its  Quincy  (MS). 

Sta.Wh.  Glo.  Cam.  Del.  Rife,  Huds.  pray  16.  double]  noble  Quincy  (MS),     capa- 

Qq  et  cet.  ble  Cartwright.     indubitable  Bulloch. 

13.  Be  affur'd]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Knt,  Dukes]  Duke  Q  . 


own  character  of  himself  at  the  end — 'that  he  was  not  easily  wrought'  !  His  self-gov- 
ernment contradistinguishes  him  throughout  from  Leontes.  Gould  (p.  94) :  J.  B.  Booth 
gave  this  with  a  gravity,  a  weighty  distinctness  on  the  last  three  words,  '  better — as — it 
is,'  which  conveyed  a  reproof,  and  was  intended  to  dismiss  the  subject. 

9.  he  prated]  Steevens  asks,  'of  whom  is  this  said?  Of  Roderigo?'  Knight 
answers :  '  Iago  is  preparing  Othello  for  the  appearance  of  Roderigo  with  Brabantio, 
which  he  does  by  representing  that  Roderigo  has  communicated  to  him  his  intention  to 
apprise  Desdemona's  father  of  her  flight,  and  that  he  resented  his  expressions  toward 
Othello.' 

12.  forbeare]  Schmidt  (Lex.) :  To  spare,  to  let  alone.  Conf.  Ham.  V,  i,  261: 
'  For  love  of  God,  forbear  him.' 

1 2.  But]  Booth  :  Now  let  your  manner  be  more  serious. 

12.  you]  A  mere  enclitic  in  pronunciation,  absorbed  in  the  final  sound  of  'pray.' — 
Ed. 

14.  Magnifico]  Tollet:  'The  chiefe  men  of  Venice  are  by  a  peculiar  name  called 
Magnifici,  i.  e.  Magnificoes.' — Minsheu  [s.  v.  Magnificent.  Minsheu  adds :  Et  Aca- 
demiarum  Rectores  in  Germania,  eodem  titulo  insigniuntur. — Ed.] 

15.  his]  Staunton:  Here  employed  for  the  then  scarce  known  its,  and  refers  to 
'  voice.' 

16.  double]  Warburton,  followed  by  Theobald  (not  Capell,  as  Knight  says), 
interpreted  this  as  signifying  as  large,  as  extensive,  equivalent  to  the  Greek  dm7.ov£t 
and  cited  Dioscorides  and  Theocritus.  Whereupon  Dr  Johnson  thus  improved  the 
occasion :  All  this  learning,  if  it  had  even  been  what  it  endeavors  to  be  thought,  is,  in 
this  place,  superfluous.  There  is  no  ground  for  supposing,  that  our  author  copied  or 
knew  the  Greek  phrase ;  nor  does  it  follow,  that,  because  a  word  has  two  senses  in 
one  language,  the  word  which  in  another  answers  to  one  sense  should  answer  to  both. 
A f anus,  in  Latin,  signifies  both  a  hand  and  troop  of  soldiers,  but  we  cannot  say,  that 
'the  captain  marched  at  the  head  of  his  hand;'  or,  'that  he  laid  his  troop  upon  his 
sword.'  It  is  no*,  always  in  books  that  the  meaning  is  to  be  sought  of  this  writer,  who 
was  much  more  acquainted  with  naked  reason  and  with  living  manners.  '  Double '  lias 
here  its  atural  sense.  The  president  of  every  deliberative  assembly  has  a  double  voice. 
In  our  courts  the  chief  justice  and  one  of  the  inferior  judges  prevail  over  the  other  two. 


act  I,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  31 


[16.  'As  double  as  the  Dukes.'] 
Decause  the  chief  justice  has  a  double  voice.     Brabantio  had  in  his  effect,  tho'  not  by 
law  yet  by  weight  and  influence,  a  voice  not  actual  and  formal,  but  potential  and  ope- 
rative, as  double,  that  is,  a  voice  that  when  a  question  was  suspended  would  turn  the 
balance  as  effectually  as  the  Duke's.     *  Potential '  is  used  in  the  sense  of  science ;  a 
caustic  is  called  a  potential  fire.     Malone's  studies  in  early  Venetian  polity  played 
him  false  here;    so  far  from  the    Duke's  having  a  ' double  voice,'   it  appears  from 
Thomas's  History  of  Italy,  1560,  that  it  was  exactly  what  he  had  not:  'Whereas,'  says 
Thomas,  'many  have  reported,  the  duke  in  ballotyng  should  have  two  voices ;  it  is 
nothinge  so,  for  in  giving  his  voice  he  hath  but  one  ballot,  as  all  others  have.'     Nothing 
discouraged,  Malone  at  once  surmises  that  '  Shakespeare  might  have  gone  on  this  re- 
ceived opinion,  which  he  might  have  found  in  some  other  book.     Supposing,  however, 
that  he  had  learned  from  this  very  passage  that  the  Duke  had  not  a  double  voice  in  the 
Council  of  Seven,  yet  as  he  had  a  vote  in  each  of  the  various  Councils  of  the  Venetian 
State  (a  privilege  which  no  other  person  enjoys,)  our  poet  might  have  thought  himself 
justified  in  the  epithet  which  he  has  here  used ;  and  this  circumstance,  which  he  might 
have  found  in  a  book  already  quoted,  Contareno's  Commonwealth  and  Government  of 
Venice,  1 599,  was,  I  believe,  here  in  his  thoughts  :  "  So  great  is  the  prince's  authoritie, 
that  he  may,  in  whatsoever  court,  adjoine  himselfe  to  the  magistrate  therein,  being  presi- 
dent, as  his  colleague  and  companion,  and  have  equal  power  with  the  other  presidents," 
&c,  p.  41.     Again,  p.  42  :  "  Besides  this,  the  prince  hath  in  every  Councell  equal  author- 
itie with  any  of  them,  for  one  suffrage  or  lotte."    Thus  we  see,  continues  Malone,  though 
he  had  not  a  double  voice  in  any  one  assembly,  yet  as  he  had  a  vote  in  all  the  various 
assemblies,  his  voice,  thus  added  to  the  voice  of  each  of  the  presidents  of  those  assem- 
blies, might  with  strict  propriety  be  called  double  and  potential?     Steevens  :  Double 
and  single  anciently  signified  strong  and  zueak  when  applied  to  liquors,  and  perhaps  to 
other  objects.     In  this  sense  the  former  epithet  may  be  employed  by  Brabantio,  and  the 
latter  by  the  chief  justice  speaking  to  Falstaff:  'Is  not  your  wit  single?'     Here  the 
phrase  may,  therefore,  only  signify  that  Brabantio's  voice,  as  a  magnifico,  was  as  forcible 
as  that  of  the  Duke.     Henley  :  'The  double  voice'  of  Brabantio  refers  to  the  opinion, 
(which,  as  being  a  magnifico,  he  was  no  less  entitled  to,  than  the  duke  himself),  either, 
of  nullifying  the  marriage  of  his  daughter  contracted  without  his  consent ;  or,  of  sub- 
jecting Othello  to  fine  and  imprisonment  for  having  seduced  an  heiress.     Pye  [does 
one  reader  in  a  thousand  know  or  remember,  that  Pye  is  a  predecessor  of  Tennyson  as 
Poet-Laureate  ? — Ed.]  :  Surely  the  obvious  purport  of  the  passage  is  that  Brabantio, 
from  his  popularity  and  wealth,  has  effectually  such  a  weight  in  the  Senate  as  gives 
him  a  power  equal  to  the  double  vote  conferred  by  the  constitution  on  the  duke. 
Knight  :  It  is  clear  that  Shakespeare  did  not  take  the  phrase  in  a  literal  sense ;  for, 
if  he  had  supposed  that  the  duke  had  a  double  voice  as  duke,  he  would  not  have  as- 
signed the  same  privilege  to  the  senator  Brabantio.     Delius  :  If  what  Brabantio  says 
has  as  much  weight  as  what  the  duke  says,  his  voice  must  be  twice  as  potential  as  that 
of  the  other  nobles,  i.  e.  as  double  as  the  duke's.     Hudson:  'A  voice  potential  or 
powerful  as  much  so  as  the  Duke's.'     Jourdain  (Philol.  Soc.  Trans.,  i860,  p.  142) : 
This  is  an  historical  mistake  made  by  a  typographical  error;  the  'as'  should  be  of. 
The  Duke  had  not  a  double  voice,  but  the  members  of  the  Council  of  Three  had  very 
nearly  such,  as  the  following  will  show  : — '  Next  vnto  the  Duke  are  three  called  the 
Signori  Capi  or  Cai,  whiche  outwardly  seeme  inferioure  to  the  Duke,  and  yet  are  cf 
more  auctoritee  than  he.     For  theyr  power  is  so  absolute  that  if  there  happen  cause 
why,  they  maie  arrest  the  Duke.'—  The  historic  of  Italic,  by  William  Thomas,  1549. 


32 


THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act.  i,  sc.  ii 


Or  put  vpon  you,  what  reftraint  or  greeuance, 
The  Law  (with  all  his  might,  to  enforce  it  on) 
Will  giue  him  Cable. 

Othcl.     Let  him  do  his  fpight; 
My  Seruices,  which  I  haue  done  the  Signorie 
Shall  out-tongue  his  Complaints.     Tis  yet  to  know, 
Which  when  I  know,  that  boafting  is  an  Honour, 
I  fhall  promulgate.     I  fetch  my  life  and  being, 
From  Men  of  Royall  Seige.     And  my  demerites 
May  fpeake  (vnbonnetted)to  as  proud  a  Fortune 


17 

[312  d\ 

20 


25 


17.  or  greeuance]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap. 
Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Del.  and  greiv- 
ances  Q  .     and  greeuance  QXQ2  et  cet. 

18.  The]  That  Qx. 
enforce]  inforce  Qq. 

19.  Will]  Weele  Qq. 

21.  Seruices]  fervice  Q  . 

22.  out-tongue]  out  tongue  Qx. 
Complaints.]  complaints,  Qq. 

23.  Which. ..kttow]  Om.  Qx. 

24.  promulgate.]  provulgate,  Q  .    pro- 


mulgate) or  promulgate,  Pope  et  seq.  pro- 
mulge  Cap.  conj.  (p.  21,  a). 

25.  Seige.]Fs.  heightQQ^jen.  hight, 
Q3.     Siege  F3F   et  cet. 

demerites]  demerrits,  Q  . 

26.  {vnbomietted)]  vnbonnited Q  .  un- 
bonneting  Pope,  Warb.  and  bonneted 
Theob.  Johns.  Cap.  Jen.  e'en  bonneted 
Han. 

to]  Om.  Q2Q3. 


Therefore  I  read,  'as  double  of  the  Duke's.'  [In  note  on  I,  i,  199,  Jourdain  asserts 
that  Brabantio  belonged  to  this  Council  of  Three. — Ed.]  White  (ed.  ii) :  A  doubt- 
ful reading,  but  it  may  possibly  mean  merely  as  potential.  [If  Johnson's  interpretation 
be  not  the  obvious  one,  then  I  agree  with  White  that  the  reading  is  doubtful,  and  am 
inclined  to  think  that  we  might  read  '  as  double  of  It  is  Iago's  aim  to  poison  Othello's 
delight  and  plague  him  with  flies,  therefore  he  exaggerates  Brabantio's  power  in  the 
State,  even  to  saying  that  the  effect  of  Brabantio's  voice  is  as  potential  as  double  that 
of  the  Duke.  But  it  is  hardly  worth  the  time  and  labour  expended  on  it.  We  have 
the  '  double,'  and  surely  in  the  notes  the  '  toil  and  trouble,'  needing  but  the  '  fire  and 
chauldron '  to  complete  the  round. — Ed.] 

21.  To  smooth  away  this  Alexandrine,  Abbott  (§471)  scans :  My  seru  |  ices  which 
j  I've  done  |  the  Sign  |  iorie.     See  also  Walker,  Vers.,  p.  243. 

23,  24.  Booth  :  The  keynote  of  his  nature,  a  modest,  simple-hearted  gentleman, 
not  a  braggart  as  Iago  would  make  him  out. 

25.  Seige]  Johnson  :  Men  who  have  sat  upon  royal  thrones.  Clarendon  :  Seat, 
thence  rank,  because  people  sat  at  table  and  elsewhere  in  order  of  precedence.  See 
Ham.  IV,  vii,  77. 

25.  demerites]  Steevens:  This  has  the  same  meaning,  among  Elizabethan  writers, 
as  merits.  [Both  Bullokar,  1621,  and  Minsheu,  161 7,  give  Demerit:  A  desert.] 
Staunton  :  '  Demerit '  now  signifies  only  ill  desert ;  in  Shakespeare's  day  it  was  used 
indiscriminately  for  good  or  ill  deserving.  In  the  present  instance  it  is  apparently  em- 
ployed in  the  good  sense,  for  Othello  could  hardly  mean  that  his  blemishes  might  stand 
without  concealment  beside  the  dignity  he  had  achieved. 

26.  vnbonnetted]  Pope  :  It  should  be  7/ubonneting,  i.  e.  without  putting  off  the 
bonnet.     THEOBALD:  To  speak  ' unbonnetted '  is  to  speak  with  the  cap  off,  which  is 


act  I,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  33 

As  this  that  I  haue  reach'd.     For  know  Iagoy  2*] 

But  that  I  loue  the  gentle  Defdemona, 

I  would  not  my  vnhoufed  free  condition  29 

29.  not  my... condition^  not,  my... condition,  Qq. 

directly  opposite  to  the  poet's  meaning.  So  in  Lear,  III,  i,  14,  'unbonneted  he  runs.' 
Othello  means  to  say,  that  his  birth  and  services  set  him  upon  such  a  rank  that  he  may 
speak  to  a  Senator  of  Venice  with  his  hat  on,  i.  e.  without  showing  any  marks  of  defer- 
ence or  inequality.  I,  therefore,  am  inclined  to  think  Shakespeare  wrote  :  '  May  speak, 
and  bonnettedj  &c.  Or,  if  any  like  better  the  change  of  the  negative  un,  in  the  cor- 
rupted reading,  into  the  epitatic  im,  we  may  thus  reform  it :  '  May  speak  imbonnettedj 
&c.  [This  last  conjecture  was  withdrawn  by  Theobald  (ed.  ii),  but  proposed  anew  by 
Steevens,  without  credit.]  Johnson  :  Pope's  emendation  may  as  well  be  not  putting 
on  as  not  putting  off,  the  bonnet.  Steevens  :  Bonneter,  says  Cotgrave,  is  to  put  off 
one's  cap.  So  in  Cor.  II,  ii,  30.  Mr  Fuseli  explains  this  passage  as  follows :  •  I  am 
his  equal  or  superior  in  rank ;  and  were  it  not  so,  such  are  my  demerits,  that,  unbon- 
neted, without  the  addition  of  patrician  or  senatorial  dignity,  they  may  speak  to  as 
proud  a  fortune,'  &c.  '  At  Venice  the  bonnet,  as  well  as  the  toge,  is  a  badge  of  aris- 
tocratic honours  to  this  day.'  A.  C.  (in  VarJ  21)  :  '  Unbonneted '  is  uncovered,  re- 
vealed, made  known.  See  a  similar  expression  in  II,  iii,  '  you  unlace  your  reputation.' 
Coleridge  [Notes,  &c,  p.  250) :  Theobald's  argument  goes  on  the  assumption  that 
Shakespeare  could  not  use  the  same  word  differently  in  different  places ;  whereas  I 
should  conclude,  that  as  in  the  passage  in  Lear  the  word  is  employed  in  its  direct 
meaning,  so  here  it  is  used  metaphorically ;  and  this  is  confirmed  by  what  has  escaped 
the  editors,  that  it  is  not  '  I '  but  •  my  demerits '  that  may  speak  '  unbonneted,' — without 
the  symbol  of  a  petitioning  inferior.  Staunton  :  The  import  we  take  to  be, — my  ser- 
vices when  revealed  [unbonneted)  may  aspire  or  lay  claim  to  [may  speak  to)  as  proud 
a  fortune  as  this  which  I  have  attained.  Even  with  Fuseli's  interpretation  it  is  indis- 
pensable for  the  integrity  of  the  passage  that  '  speak  to '  be  understood  in  the  sense 
just  mentioned  of  aspire  or  lay  claim  to.  Schmidt  [Lex.) :  Perhaps  the  meaning  is 
simply :  I  may  say  so  with  all  courtesy  and  humility,  and  Othello's  words  must,  per- 
haps, be  accompanied  by  a  corresponding  gesture,  as  the  writing  of  F  seems  to  imply, 
by  placing  the  word  '  unbonnetted '  in  a  parenthesis.  White  (ed.  ii) :  The  question 
of  manners  in  Shakespeare's  time  as  to  the  hat  seems  very  difficult.  The  remembering 
courtesy,  the  off-capping,  and  the  unbonneting  are  quite  incongruous.  No  attempt  to 
reconcile  these  expressions  has  been  at  all  successful. 

29.  vnhoused]  Johnson  :  Free  from  domestic  cares.  A  thought  natural  to  an  ad- 
venturer. Whalley  :  To  Othello,  talking  as  a  soldier,  •  unhoused '  may  signify  the  hav- 
ing no  settled  house  or  habitation.  Hunter  [New  Illust.,  ii,  282) :  This  passage  affords 
one  of  the  best  proofs  of  Shakespeare's  acquaintance  with  the  Italian  language.  '  Un 
housed '  conveys  to  English  ears  no  idea  of  anything  which  any  one  would  be  unwil1  • 
ing  to  resign ;  and,  in  fact,  it  is  only  by  recollecting  the  way  in  which  the  Italians  use 
cassare  that  we  arrive  at  its  true  meaning,  which  is  tinmarried.  A  soldier  was  as 
much  'unhoused,'  in  the  ordinary  meaning  of  the  term,  after  marriage  as  before. 
Othello  would  not  resign  the  freedom  of  his  bachelor  estate.  Knight:  Othello  ex- 
presses no  satisfaction  at  having  been  houseless,  but  he  simply  uses  '  unhoused '  for 
unmarried.  The  husband  is  the  head  or  band  of  the  house, — the  unmarried  is  the 
unhowse-banded — the  '  unhoused.' 
3 


34  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  i,  sc.  ii. 

Put  into  Circumfcription,and  Confine,  30 

For  the  Seas  worth.    But  looke,  what  Lights  come  yond? 

Enter  Cajffio,  with  Torches. 

Iago.     Thofe  are  the  raifed  Father,  and  his  Friends  : 
You  were  beft  go  in. 

Othel.     Not  I  :  I  muft  be  found.  35 

My  Parts,  my  Title,  and  my  perfect  Soule 
Shall  manifeft  me  rightly.     Is  it  they  ?  37 

31.  Seas']  sea's  Theob.  et  seq.  seas'  Qq.  Enter,  at  a  Distance... Cap.  After  no, 
Anon.  (ap.  Cam.)  line  38,  Coll. 

worth.']  worth,  Qq.  33.  Thofe]  Thefe  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Var. 

Lights  come]  light  comes  Johns.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly. 

yond]  yonder  Qq,   Pope  +  ,   Jen.  34.  in.]  in:  Qx. 

Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly.    yond'  35.  found.]  found,  Qq. 

Cap.  36.  Parts]  part  Han. 

Scene  V.  Pope +  ,  Jen.  37.  manifeft]  manifeft IyY9. 

32.  Enter...]  Enter  Caffio  with  lights,  me  rightly.]  my  right  by :  QaQ3- 
Officers,  and  Torches  (after  worth,  line  31)  Is  it  they  ?]  it  is  they.  QI# 

31.  the  Seas  worth]  Johnson:  I  would  not  marry  her,  though  she  were  as  rich 
as  the  Adriatic,  which  the  Doge  annually  marries.  Steevens  :  As  the  gold  ring  an- 
nually thrown  by  the  Doge  into  the  Adriatic  cannot  be  said  to  have  much  enriched  it, 
I  believe  the  common  and  obvious  meaning  of  this  passage  is  the  true  one.  Pye  :  I 
think  Steevens  indubitably  right,  but  not  for  the  reason  he  gives.  I  believe  Johnson 
thought  no  more  of  the  Adriatic  being  enriched  by  the  annual  wedding-ring,  than 
Shakespeare  did  of  the  Adriatic  at  all.  [Steevens  refers  to  the  occurrence  of  the  same 
phrase  in  D'Avenant's  Cruel  Brother  (p.  131,  ed.  Maidment),  and  adds,  'perhaps  the 
phrase  is  proverbial.'  A  citation  from  D'Avenant,  in  a  case  like  this,  carries  but  little 
weight.  I  doubt  if  there  be  an  Act  in  all  D'Avenant's  plays,  wherein  Shakespearian 
phrases  may  not  be  found.  For  instance,  the  sixth  line  of  this  very  play  of  The  Cruel 
Brother  reads  :  '  This  way  to  madness  leads,'  and  '  excellent  wretch,'  occurs  more  than 
once  farther  on.  •  With  more  propriety  Steevens  refers  to  Wint.  Tale,  IV,  iv,  501,  and 
Hen.  V  :  I,  ii,  164;  but  is  again  far  afield  in  referring  to  Pliny's  Chapter  (IX,  34)  on 
The  Riches  of  tJie  Sea,  which  alludes  to  the  high  prices  paid  by  luxury  '  in  furnishing 
the  table  with  such  varietie  of  dishes,  in  pleasing  and  contenting  the  taste  with  so 
many  dainty  and  delicate  fishes.'  Conf.  Rich.  Ill:  I,  iv,  26 :  •  Wedges  of  gold,  great 
anchors,  heaps  of  pearls,  Inestimable  stones,  unvalued  jewels,  All  scatter'd  in  the  bot- 
tom of  the  sea.' — Ed.]  Booth  :  Note  the  frequent  reference  to  the  sea ; — for  the  same 
reason,  that  I  gave  anent  the  '  superstition '  in  the  play. 

34.  You  were]  Walker  [Crit.  ii,  202) :  Thou  wert  (sometimes  written  in  the  old 
poets  Th'wert),  you  were,  I  was,  &c,  occur  frequently,  both  in  Shakespeare  and  con- 
temporary dramatists,  in  places  where  it  is  clear  they  must  have  been  pronounced  as 
one  syllable,  in  whatever  manner  the  contraction  was  effected.  [See  Ham.  IV,  v,  14, 
and  Aiipott,  §461.] 

36.  Parts]  Schmidt  and  Rolfe  agree  in  interpreting  this  as  merits.  It  seems  to 
me  that  it  is  rather  the  endowments  of  nature,  his  natural  gifts,  like  '  your  sum  of  parts ' 
m  Ham.  IV,  vii,  74. — Ed. 


act  i,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  35 

Iago.     By  Ianus,  I  thinke  no.  38 

Othel.     The  Seruants  of  the  Dukes? 
And  my  Lieutenant  ?  40 

The  goodneffe  of  the  Night  vpon  you  (Friends) 
What  is  the  Newes  ? 

CaJJio.     The  Duke  do's  greet  you  (Generall) 
And  he  requires  your  hafte,  Poft-hafte  appearance, 
Enen  on  the  inftant.  45 

Othello.     What  is  the  matter,  thinke  you  ? 

CaJJio.     Something  from  Cyprus,  as  I  may  diuine  : 
It  is  a  bufineffe  of  fome  heate.     The  Gallies 
Haue  fent  a  dozen  fequent  Meffengers 

This  very  night,  at  one  anothers  heeles  :  50 

And  many  of  the  Confuls,rais'd  and  met, 

39,  40.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq.  Steev.'93  et  cet. 

39.  Dukes  ?~\  Duke,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq.  46.  What  is\  What ' s  Qq,  Jen. 

40.  Lieutenant  ?~\      Leiutenant,      Qt.  you  ?~\  you :  Qv 
Leiutenant  ?  Q2Q,.     lieutenant :  or  lieu-             47.    Cyprus']  Cipres  Qq. 
tenant.  Rowe  et  cet.                                                 48.   Gallies]  Galleyes  Qq. 

41.  you\  your  Q  .  49.  dozen]  dozzen  F2. 

42.  Newes  ?~\  newes.  Qx.  fequent  ]  frequent  Qz 
44.  hafle,  Pofl-hafle']  FT,  Rowe  + ,  Cap.             50.  at  one"]  one  at  Q2Q3- 

Var.  Coll.  Sing.Wh.  i,  Ktly.    hafl,pofl  hafl  51.   Confuls]   Counsel  Han.     Council 

Qx.    ha/?,pofl-haflQzQ3.    haste-post-haste        Johns. 


38.  Ianus]  Warburton  :  There  is  great  propriety  in  making  the  double  Iago 
swear  by  Janus,  who  had  two  faces.  The  address  of  it  likewise  is  as  remarkable ;  for 
as  the  people  coming  up  appeared  at  different  distances  to  have  different  shapes,  he 
might  swear  by  Janus  without  suspicion  of  any  other  emblematic  meaning. 

39,  40.  Is  it  not  better,  as  more  dramatic,  to  retain  the  two  separate  questions  of  the 
Folio  than  to  combine  them  as  in  the  Qto  ?  Knight  separates  them  by  a  semicolon, 
and  Staunton  by  an  exclamation-mark. — Ed. 

41.  goodness]  Delius:  May  night,  usually  unfriendly  to  everybody,  show  only  its 
good  side  to  you.  [Is  it  not  simply  the  ordinary  salutation  'good  day,'  or  •  Godgigoden  * 
adapted  to  the  hour  ? — Ed.] 

43.  Booth  :  Cassio  alone  knew  where  Othello  was  to  be  found.  Othello  says,  that 
he  knew  from  first  to  last  of  the  secret  love,  &c.  Remember  this  when  Iago  tells  you. 
'he's  married,'  &c. 

44.  haste,  Post-haste]  Ritson  :  The  comma,  hitherto  placed  after  ♦  haste,'  should 
be  a  hyphen.  '  Your  haste-post-haste  appearance '  is  your  immediate  appearance.  The 
words  '  Haste,  post,  haste,'  were,  in  our  author's  time,  usually  written  on  the  cover  of 
packets  or  letters  sent  express. 

51.  Consuls]  Theobald  changed  this  to  Couns'lers,  for  the  reasons  given  at  I, 
i,  27.  Knight  says,  that  in  both  cases  senators  were  probably  meant.  Th.  Elze 
(Sh.  Jahrbuch,  xiv,  179) :  Shakespeare  has  not  clearly  distinguished  between  the  Col- 
Ugio  and  the  Senate.     Brabantio's  accusation  of  Othello  could  not  have  been  brought 


36  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  i,  sc.  ii. 

Are  at  the  Dukes  already.     You  haue  bin  hotly  call'd  for,         52 

When  being  not  at  your  Lodging  to  be  found, 

The  Senate  hath  fent  about  three  feuerall  Quefts, 

To  fearch  you  out.  55 

Othel.     'Tis  well  I  am  found  by  you  : 
I  will  but  fpend  a  word  here  in  the  houfe, 
And  goe  with  you. 

Cajfio.     Aunciant,  what  makes  he  heere? 

Iago.     Faith,  he  to  night  hath  boarded  a  Land  Carradt,        60 

54.  hath  fent]  fent  Qq,  Pope,  Theob.  58.  And  goe]  And  then  go  Ktly. 

Han.  Warb.  Dyce  iii,  Coll.  iii,  Huds.  [Exit  Othello.  Rowe  et  seq. 

about]    aboue   QtQ2.       above   Q  ,  59-  Aunciant]  Ancient  Q2Q  Ff. 

Pope  -f ,  Coll.  i,  Wh.  i.     out  Johns.  60.  boarded]  boorded  QqFf,  Rowe  1. 

57,  58.  One  line,  Qq.  Carracl]    Carrick  Qx.      Carriacl 

57.  I will but  fpend]  He  fpend Qx.     I  Q2Q3.     Carrac  Ff. 
will  fpend  but  F3F4. 

before  the  Senate,  but  before  the  Ministerial  Council — the  Collegio.  The  Third  Scene 
of  the  First  Act  is  correctly  laid  in  the  '  Council  Chamber,'  not  in  the  •  Hall  of  the 
Senate.'  Properly  also,  Shakespeare  speaks  of  '  the  Council '  and  the  '  Consuls,'  thai 
is,  the  Counsellors ;  but  improperly  in  the  same  speech  of  the  'Senate'  and  [line  255] 
of  the  '  Senators.'  But,  perhaps,  Shakespeare  purposely  avoided  the  use  of  the  word 
College,  because  of  its  ambiguity  to  English  ears. 

52.  You  haue]  Lettsom  (ap.  Dyce,  ed.  iii)  would  read  'you  had  been,'  &c.  Hud- 
son adopted  the  emendation. 

54.  about]  Johnson  :  That  is,  about  the  city.  Collier  (ed.  i)  preferred  above  of 
the  Qq,  because  a  '"quest"  necessarily  searches  in  various  directions;  and  the  word 
"about"  may,  therefore,  be  considered  surplusage.  Cassio  means  that  more  than 
"three  several  quests"  have  been  sent  in  search  of  Othello.'  But  as  his  (MS)  re- 
tained '  about,'  Collier,  in  his  subsequent  editions,  followed  it. 

54.  Quests]  Steevens  :  That  is,  searches.  So  in  Heywood's  Brazen  Age,  1 61 3  : 
'  Now,  if  in  all  his  quests,  he  be  withheld.'  An  ancient  MS.  entitled  The  Boke  of 
Huntyng  that  is  cleped  Mayster  of  Game,  has  the  following  explanation  of  the  word 
'  quest ' :  '  This  word  quest  is  a  terme  of  herte  hunters  of  beyonde  the  see ;  and  is  thus 
moche  to  say  as  whan  the  hunter  goth  to  fynde  the  hert  and  to  herborow  him.'  Hal- 
liwell  cites  Cotgrave,  s.  v. '  Queste  :  f.  A  quest,  inquirie,  search,  inquisition,  seeking,'  &c. 

57.  spend]  Gerard:  Les  expressions  to  spend  et  to  pay  sont  a  tout  moment  em- 
ployees par  les  Anglais,  peuple  commercant  et  pratique  par  excellence.  lis  ne  ren- 
dent  pas,  ils  paient  une  visite;  ils  ne  passent  pas,  ils  depensent  leur  temps.  En 
Amerique  la  premiere  question  que  Ton  fait  sur  quelqu'un,  c'est :  Combien  vaut-il  ? 
[When  Mons.  Gerard  enacts  the  '  Pow'r,'  and  '  wad  the  giftie  gie  us,'  shall  not  we 
Americans  accept  it,  however  startling  the  revelation  ? — Ed.] 

59.  Booth  :  Speak  this  with  curiosity,  as  if  to  learn  what  Iago  knows  of  the  mar- 
riage. 

60.  Carratt]  Skeat  (Elym.  Diet.,  s.  v.) :  A  ship  of  burden.  (We  also  find  car- 
rick, which  comes  nearer  to  Low  Lat.  carrica,  a  ship  of  burden.)  Low  Lat.  carra- 
(are,  better  carrienre  to  lade  a  car. — Lat.  carrus,  a  car.     Staunton  :  A  ship  of  large 


act  I,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  37 

Ifitproue  lawfull  prize,  he'    made  for  euer.  61 

CaJJio.  I  do  not  vnderftand. 

lago.  He's  married. 

CaJJio.  To  who  ? 

Iago.     Marry  to Come  Captaine,will  you  go?  65 

Othel.  Haue  with  you. 

CaJJio.  Here  come  sanother  Troope  to  feeke  for  you. 

Enter  Brabaritio,  Rodorigo,  with  Officers yand  Torches. 
Iago.     It  is  Bradantio:Genera\\  be  aduis'd,  69 

03.  married~\  married  F2.  66.  Haue  with you.~\  Ha,  with  who  ?  Qx. 

64.  who]  whom  Q2Q.Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Jen.         Ha' with  you.  Q2Q3- 

Coll.  Ktly.  68.  Scene  VI.  Pope-f ,  Jen. 

[Enters  Brabantio,  Roderigo,  and  Enter...]  After  line  64,  Qq.     After 

others   with    lights,   and   weapons.    Qq.  intent  line  70,  Coll.  Dyce,  Wh.  Glo.  Cam. 

(Enter...  Q2Q3).     Re-enter.  Oth.  Cap.  Sta.  Del.  Rife,  Huds. 

65.  go?]  go?  Enter  Oth.  Rowe  +  . 

burden,  like  the  Spanish  galleon ;  but  the  compound  in  the  text  appears  to  have  been 
a  dissolute  expression. 

61.  lawfull  prize]  Lord  Campbell  (p.  114):  A  very  distinct  proof  that  Shake- 
speare was  acquainted  with  Admiralty  law,  as  well  as  with  the  procedure  of  West- 
minster Hall,  the  trope  indicating,  that  there  would  be  a  suit  in  the  High  Court  of 
Admiralty  to  determine  the  validity  of  the  capture. 

61.  he']  This  should  be  'he's,'  as  it  is  in  every  other  text,  but  in  the  copy  of  FT, 
from  which  this  is  reprinted,  the  s  has  fallen  out. — Ed. 

62.  Booth  :  But  show  the  audience  that  you  do. 

64.  To  who]  Theobald  (Nichols's  Illust.  of  Lit.,  ii,  586) :  Surely,  this  is  a  terrible 
forgetfulness  in  our  author.  How  came  Cassio  such  a  stranger  to  this  affair,  when  it 
afterward  appears  he  went  a-wooing  with  Othello  and  took  his  part  in  the  suit  ?  [Cf. 
Ill,  iii,  82.]  Ritson  (p.  227) :  It  is  very  easy  to  imagine,  that  Cassio  might  wish  to 
know  if  Iago  were  acquainted  with  the  lady,  to  prevent  the  latter's  suspecting  that  he 
was.  Blackstone  :  Cassio's  seeming  ignorance  might  only  be  affected,  in  order  to 
keep  his  friend's  secret  till  it  became  publicly  known.  Malone  :  Or  he  might  fear 
that  Othello  had  proved  false  to  the  gentle  Desdemona,  and  married  another.  Steev- 
ens  :  How  far  this  suspicious  apprehension  would  have  become  the  benevolent  Cassio, 
the  intimate  friend  of  Othello,  let  the  reader  judge.  Singer  :  It  was  probably  a  mere 
oversight  of  the  poet.  Abbott,  §  274,  gives  many  instances  where  the  inflection  of 
who  is  neglected.  See  IV,  ii,  115;  Macb.  Ill,  iv,  42;  Ham.  II,  ii,  193;  Lear,  IV, 
iii,  7  and  V,  iii,  249.     Booth  :  Feign  much  suqirise,  but  do  it  carefully. 

65.  Captaine]  Abbott,  §  506:  It  is  obvious  that  a  syllable  or  foot  may  be  supplied 
by  a  gesture,  a  beckoning,  a  movement  of  the  head  to  listen,  or  of  the  hand  to  demand 
attention,  as  here :  «  Marry  |  to — [Enter  0/the//o.)  |  Come,  cap  |  tain,  will  |  you  g6  ?* 
However,  we  may  scan,  '  Marry  |  to— Come  |  Cap(i)  |  tain  will  |  you  go,'  but  very 
harshly  and  improbably. 

66.  you]  STEEVENS :  This  expression  denotes  readiness. 

69.  aduised]  Johnson:  That  is,  be  coot,  be  cautious,  be  discreet. 


38  THE    TRACED  IE   OF  OTHELLO        [act.  i.  sc.  ii. 

He  comes  to  bad  intent.  70 

Othello.     Holla,  (land  there. 

Rodo.     Signior,  it  is  the  Moore. 

Bra.     Downe  with  him,  Theefe. 

Iago.     You,  Rodorigoe  ?  Cme  Sir,  I  am  for  you. 

Othe.     Keepe  vp  your  bright  Swords,  for  the  dew  will  7$ 

ruft  them.     Good  Signior,  you  fhall  more  command  with 
yeares,  then  with  your  Weapons. 

Bra.     Oh  thou  foule  Theefe, 
Where  haft  thou  ftow'd  my  Daughter/ 

Damn'd  as  thou  art,  thou  haft  enchaunted  her  80 

For  He  referre  me  to  all  things  of  fenfe,  [312  b\ 

(If  (he  in  Chaines  of  Magick  were  not  bound) 
Whether  a  Maid,  fo  tender,  Faire,  and  Happie, 
So  oppofite  to  Marriage,  that  fhe  fhun'd 
The  wealthy  curled  Deareling  of  our  Nation,  85 

71.  Holla,]  Ho  la,  Q3.  Coll.  iii. 

73.  [They  draw  on  both  sides.   Rowe.  80.  Damn'd]  Dambd  Qq. 

74.  Rodorigoe?  Cmi\  Rodorigo?  Come  8l.  lie"]  He  Q  . 

Ff.     Rodorigo,  come  Booth's  Rep.  things]  thing  Q  . 

75-77.  Verse    ending    them... years...  82.  Om.  Qx. 

Weapons  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq.  85.  wealthy    curled]    wealthy    culled 

76.  rujl  them]  rujl  em  Qq.     rust  'em  Warb.  Theob.  ii.     wealthiest  culVd  Han. 

Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Deareling]   Dearling  FaF ,   Knt. 

78,  79.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq.  Darling  F4>     dearlings  Wh.  i.     darlings 

79.  Jlow'd]  flowed  Qc\.    'stow'dWh.  i,  Qq  et  cet. 

72.  Booth  :  This  is  spoken  '  within.' 

74.  Booth  :  This  is  to  prevent  harm  to  Roderigo,  for  whose  purse  Iago  has  a  tender 
regard.  Make  the  audience  understand  this  by  your  manner  of  singling  him  out, — a 
look  will  do  it.  [See  Textual  Notes  for  another  instance  of  the  difference  between  the 
copy  of  Fx,  from  which  Lionel  Booth  reprinted,  and  that  from  which  this  edition  is 
reprinted. — Ed.] 

75.  Booth  :  Othello's  party — Cassio,  Iago,  and  others — should  ■  motion '  to  draw, 
when  these  words  restrain  them.  Brabantio's  friends  enter  with  swords  drawn.  Be 
very  respectful  to  Brabantio,  resent  his  abuse,  merely  with  a  look  of  momentary  anger. 

75.  for]  See  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  321),  for  an  Article,  with  many  examples,  on  the 
confusion  in  the  Folio  of  or  and  for.  Walker  would  here  read  or,  which  may  be 
correct,  but  of  the  instances  of  this  confusion,  cited  by  Walker,  the  present  is,  perhaps, 
the  least  manifest. — Ed. 

75.  Hudson  :  If  I  mistake  not  there  is  a  sort  of  playful,  good-humoured  irony  ex- 
pressed in  the  very  rhythm  of  this  line. 

85.  curled]  Warburton:  I  read  culled,  i.  e.  select,  chosen.  Shakespeare  uses 
the  word  frequently.  Cf.  Hen.  V:  III,  cho.  24.  ' Curled'  was  an  improper  mark 
of  diffr-snce  between  a  Venetian  and  a  Moor,  which  latter  people  are  remarkably 


86. 

fencurre\ 

F,F,. 

fincurr 

F4, 

Rowe  +  ,  Dyce  Hi, 

Huds. 

to  incurre 

Qq 

et  cet. 

87. 

Guardage-]  gardage  Qq. 

act  I,  ",c.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF    VENICE  39 

Would  euer  haue  (t'encurre  a  generall  mocke)  86 

Run  from  her  Guardageto  the  footie  bofome, 

Of  fuch  a  thing  as  thou :  to  feare,not  to  delight  ? 

Iudge  me  the  world,  if 'tis  not  groffe  in  fenfe, 

That  thou  haft  pra6lis'd  on  her  with  foule  Charmes  90 

Abus'd  her  delicate  Youth,  with  Drugs  or  Minerals, 

88.  as  thou  .]  as  thou  ?  Qq. 
delight?]  delight, Qx.  delight:  QaQ 

89-94.  Om.  Qt. 

89.  not]  no  Q  . 

curVd  by  nature.  Johnson  :  '  Curled '  is  elegantly  and  ostentatiously  dressed.  He 
had  not  the  hair  particularly  in  his  thoughts.  Steevens  :  Shakespeare  evidently 
alludes  to  the  hair  in  '  the  curled  Anthony,'  Ant.  <5r»  Cleo.  V,  ii,  304.  D'Avenant  uses 
the  same  expression  in  his  Just  Italian  [but  as  was  said  before,  parallel  expressions 
in  D'Avenant  are  of  small  avail. — Ed.]  Malone:  In  R.  of  L.,  981,  the  hair  is 
expressly  mentioned,  and  the  epithet  '  curled '  is  added  as  characteristic  of  a  person 
of  the  highest  rank :  '  Let  him  have  time  to  tear  his  curled  hair.'  [See  notes  in 
Lear,  III,  iv,  84,  'A  Serving-man,  proud  in  heart  and  mind;  that  curled  my 
hair.'— Ed.] 

85.  Deareling]  Knight:  This  Saxon  word  is  used  in  a  plural  sense.  Dyce  [Re- 
marks, p.  233) :  The  fact  is,  the  s  has  been  omitted  in  the  Folio  by  a  mistake  of  the 
compositor.  In  Shakespeare's  time  dearling  could  never  have  been  used  as  a  plural. 
That  even  Spenser  (who  antiquated  his  language  more  than  any  of  his  contemporaries) 
did  not  venture  to  employ  such  an  archaism,  is  proved  by  the  following  from  his  Hymne 
in  honour  of  Love  : — •  in  a  Paradize  Of  all  delight,  and  ioyous  happie  rest,  Where  they 
doe  feede  on  Nectar  heauenly  wize,  With  Hercules  and  Hebe,  and  the  rest  Of  Venus 
dearlings,  through  her  bountie  blest.' 

87.  Guardage]  Rolfe  :  Guardianship,  used  by  Shakespeare  nowhere  else. 

88.  to  feare]  Steevens  :  To  terrify,  as  in  j  Hen.  VI:  V,  ii,  2,  ■  a  bug  that  fear'd 
us  all.'  The  line  is  redundant  in  measure.  It  might  originally  have  ran,  '  Of  such  as. 
thou  :  to  fear,  not  to  delight.'  Malone  takes  •  fear '  to  be  a  substantive,  and  used  for 
the  object  of  fear;  but  Abbott,  §405,  more  correctly  explains  the  phrase  as  an  ellipsis, 
common  among  Elizabethans,  after  will  and  is,  e.  g.  '  I  will  to  the  weird  sisters.'  '  I 
must  to  Coventry.'  '  I  am  to  thank  you  for  it,'  i.  e.  I  am  bound  to  thank  you  for  it;  sc 
here  'such  a  thing  as  thou  (a  thing  fit)  to  fear  [act.),  not  to  delight.' 

89.  Judge  me]  Abbott,  §  365,  Let  the  world  judge  for  me.  This  optative  use 
of  the  subjunctive,  dispensing  with  '  let,'  '  may,'  &c,  gives  great  vigour  to  the  Shake- 
spearian line.  [It  is  doubtful  if  'me '  be  here  the  Ethical  Dative,  as  in  I,  i,  53  :  '  Whip 
me  such  honest  knaues,'  or  '  He  plucked  me  ope  his  doublet,'  Jul.  C<zs.  Brabantio  calls 
upon  the  world  really  to  judge  him  and  his  position,  which  he  immediately  proceeds  to 
state. — Ed.] 

90.  practis'd]  Very  frequently  used,  as  here,  in  the  sense  of  plotting,  with  arts  or 
magic.     See  Lear,  III,  ii,  57  :  '  Has  practis'd  on  man's  life.' 

91.  Minerals]  In  Ham.  IV,  i,  26,  '  a  mineral '  means  a  mine,  but  in  Cymb.  V,  v,  50, 
in  the  present  passage,  and  in  II,  i,  330,  it  is  used  in  the  sense  of  a  drug  or  mortal 
poison. 


40  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [ACTl.SC.il 

That  weakens  Motion.     He  haue't  difputed  on,  92 

92.  weakens  Motion]   weaken   motion  motion  Han.  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Wh.  Sts, 

Rowe,  Pope  i,  Knt,  Coll.  Dyce,  Glo.  Cam.  Huds.  wakens  motion  Ktly.  wake  emotion 

Del.  Rife,    weaken  notion  Theob.  Pope  ii,  Anon. 
Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Jen.  Rann.     waken 

92.  weakens  Motion]  Theobald  suggested  and  adopted  weaken  notion.  '  That 
is,  her  apprehension,  right  conception  and  idea  of  things,  understanding,  judgment ; 
and  supported  the  change  by  the  apposite  passage,  •  his  notion  weakens,1  Lear,  I,  iv, 
221.  Capell  thought  Theobald's  change  was  'open  to  no  objections.'  Malone  and 
Steevens  approved  of  Hanmer's  text,  seeing  that  motion  is  used  afterward  in  I,  iii, 
364,  in  the  same  sense,  and  also  in  Cymb.  II,  v,  20;  Ham.  Ill,  iv,  72;  A/eas.  for 
Meas.  I,  iv,  59;  and  because,  as  Malone  said,  there  was  'good  reason  to  believe  that 
the  words  weaken  and  waken  were  in  Shakespeare's  time  pronounced  alike.'  '  The 
objection  to  Theobald's  "  notion,"  '  continues  Malone, '  is  that  no  opiates  or  intoxicating 
potions  or  powders  of  any  sort  can  distort  or  pervert  the  intellects,  but  by  destroying 
them  for  a  time ;  nor  was  it  ever,  at  any  time,  believed  by  the  most  credulous  that  love- 
powders,  as  they  were  called,  could  weaken  the  understanding,  though  it  was  formerly 
believed  that  they  could  fascinate  the  affections ;  or,  in  other  words,  waken  motion. 
Brabantio  afterward  asserts,  "That  with  some  mixtures  powerful  o'er  the  blood  He 
wrought  upon  her."  Shakespeare,  in  almost  all  his  plays,  uses  blood  for  passion. 
And  one  of  the  Senators  asks  Othello,  not  whether  he  had  weakened  Desdemona's 
understanding,  but  whether  he  did  "  by  indirect  and  forced  courses  subdue  and  poison 
this  young  maid's  affections." '  Ritson  (p.  227),  however,  satisfactorily  vindicates  the 
Folio,  thus  :  To  '  weaken  motion '  is  to  impair  the  faculties.  It  was  till  very  lately, 
and  may  be  still  an  opinion,  that  philtres  or  love  potions  have  the  power  of  perverting, 
and  of  course  weakening  or  impairing,  both  the  sight  and  judgement,  and  of  procuring 
fondness  or  dotage  toward  any  unworthy  object  who  administers  them.  And  by 
motion  Shakespeare  means  the  senses  which  are  depraved  and  weakened  by  these 
fascinating  mixtures.  Staunton  thinks  that  this  view  is  expressly  contradicted  by 
what  Brabantio  has  just  said :  that  Desdemona  was  '  so  opposite  to  marriage,'  and  he 
♦therefore  readily  accepts  the  easy  emendation  Hanmer  offers.  Brabantio's  grievance, 
it  is  plain,  was  not  that  Othello  had,  by  charms  and  medicines,  abated  the  motions 
of  Desdemona's  sense,  but  that  he  had  aroused  and  stimulated  them.'  R.  M.  Spence 
(JV.  6°  Qu.,  1879,  5th,  xi,  383) :  Twice  elsewhere  in  this  Act  'motion '  means  emotion; 
the  usus  loquendi  thus  warrants  me  to  regard  emotion  as  the  meaning  of  the  word  in 
this  passage  also ;  if  so,  then  Hanmer's  waken  must  indubitably  be  adopted.  [Truly 
does  Knight  say  of  this  passage  that  the  notes,  here  very  much  abridged,  of  the  Com- 
mentators are  neither  satisfactory  in  a  critical  point  of  view,  nor  edifying  in  a  moral 
one. — Ed.] 

92.  disputed  on]  Staunton  :  This  is  an  allusion  to  the  manner  in  which  causes 
were  debated  by  the  judges  according  to  the  custom  of  Venice  formerly,  aud  it  affords, 
one  of  many  proofs  that  before  writing  Othello  Shakespeare  had  attentively  perused 
Lewkenor's  translation  of  The  Commonwealth  and  Government  of  Venice,  written  by 
the  Cardinall  Gasper  Contareno,  &c,  1599.  From  this  work  he  obtained  his  infor- 
mation concerning  those  '  officers  of  night,'  whom  Brabantio  directs  to  be  summoned ; 
his  knowledge  of  the  Arsenal;  as  well  as  several  particular  expressions,  such  as  Mine 
tares  enclined ;  doe  their  countrie  sendee  ;  experience  the  mistrcsse  of  all  things  ;  serve 
'he  turne ;  their  countrie  customs,  and  others  which  he  has  modified  and  transplanted 


act  I,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  41 

Tis  probable, and  palpable  to  thinking;  93 

I  therefore  apprehend  and  do  attach  thee, 

For  an  abufer  of  the  World,  a  pra6lifer  95 

Of  Arts  inhibited,  and  out  of  warrant; 

Lay  hold  vpon  him,  if  he  do  refift 

Subdue  him,  at  his  perill. 

Othe.     Hold  your  hands 
Both  you  of  my  inclining,  and  the  reft.  IOO 

Were  it  my  Cue  to  fight,  I  mould  haue  knowne  it 
Without  a  Prompter.     Whether  will  you  that  I  goe 
To  anfwere  this  your  charge  ? 

Bra.     To  Prifon,  till  fit  time 
Of  Law,  and  courfe  of  direc~t  Seffion  105 

93.  probable]  portable  Q2Q3,  Jen.  102.  Whether]     Whither    Ff,    Rowe. 

95.  For]  Such  Qx.  where  Qq  et  cet. 

96.  warrant ;]  warrant?  Qx.  that]  Om.  Pope  +  . 

99.  hands]  hand.  F  .  103.    To  anfwere]  And  anfwer  Qx. 

101.   Cue]  Qu.  Qx.  104,  105.  Jit... SeJ/ion]  Sep.  line,  Han. 

into  the  piece.  [Staunton  then  gives  a  long  extract  from  Contareno,  minutely  setting 
forth  the  way  in  which  criminal  questions  were  disputed  on  in  the  ancient  legal  courts 
of  Venice,  which  I  do  not  reprint.  I  cannot  detect  a  trace  of  any  influence  which  this 
legal  method  had  upon  Shakespeare's  mind,  either  while  writing  Othello  or  anything 
else,  other  than  that,  perhaps,  he  might  have  found  there  the  two  uncommon  words 
disputed  and  of,  which  Staunton  italicizes. — Ed.] 

95,  96.  Booth  :  Othello  and  Cassio  exchange  smiles  of  pity  for  the  old  man's 
credulity. 

99.  Booth  :  Now  Othello's  friends  draw.  Othello  stands  between  the  two  parties 
with  sheathed  scimetar  held  up ;  its  crescent  shape  lends  a  little  Oriental  atmosphere  to 
the  picture.     'Tis  harmless. 

101.  Cue]  In  Ham.  II,  ii,  534,  Wedgwood's  definition  is  quoted:  'The  last  words 
of  the  preceding  speech,  prefixed  to  the  speech  of  an  actor  in  order  to  let  him  know 
when  he  is  to  come  on  the  stage.  From  the  letter  Q  by  which  it  was  marked,  "  be- 
cause," says  Butler,  Eng.  Gra?n.,  1634,  "it  is  the  first  letter  of  quando,  when,  showing 
when  to  enter  and  speak."  '  [Note  Qx  in  Textual  Notes.]  Skeat  now  gives  a  differ- 
ent derivation ;  he  says,  '  that  an  actor's  cue  seems  to  be  the  same  word  as  queue,  as 
signifying  the  last  words  or  tail-end  of  the  speech  of  the  preceding  speaker.  Oddly 
enough,  it  was,  in  this  sense,  sometimes  denoted  by  Q ;  owing  to  the  similarity  of  the 
sound.' 

102.  Whether]  This  passage  is  cited  by  Walker  ( Vers.  106)  as  one  of  the  many 
instances  in  which  hither,  whether,  &c.  are  printed  as  dissyllables,  where  the  verse  indi- 
cates that  they  are  monosyllables.  Cf.  Macb.  I,  iii,  ill;  Ham.  Ill,  ii,  193;  Lear,  II, 
i>  53.  also  m  Aubott,  §466. 

105.  direct  Session]  Hudson:  The  language  is  rather  odd,  and,  perhaps,  some- 
what obscure ;  but  the  meaning  probably  is,  till  the  time  prescribed  by  law  and  by  tha 
regular  course  of  judicial  procedure. 


42  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  i,  sc.  ii. 

Call  thee  to  anfwer.  106 

Othe.     What  if  do  obey  ? 
How  may  the  Duke  be  therewith  fatisfi'd, 
Whofe  Meffengers  are  heere  about  my  fide, 

Vpon  fome  prefent  bufineffe  of  the  State,  1 10 

To  bring  me  to  him. 

Officer.     Tis  true  moft  worthy  Signior, 
The  Dukes  in  Counfell,and  your  Noble  felfe, 
I  am  fure  is  fent  for. 

Bra.     How?  The  Duke  in  Counfell  ?  115 

In  this  time  of  the  night  ?  Bring  him  away; 
Mine's  not  an  idle  Caufe.     The  Duke  himfelfe, 
Or  any  of  my  Brothers  of  the  State, 
Cannot  but  feele  this  wrong,  as  'twere  their  owne  : 
For  if  fuch  Actions  may  haue  paffage  free,  1 20 

Bond-flaues,and  Pagans  fhall  our  Statefmen  be.      Exeunt 

107.  if  do]  if  I  Pope,  Han.     if  I  doe  114.  /am']  Fm  Pope  + ,  Dyce  Hi,  Huds. 

QqFf  et  cet.  116.  night]  nigh  F2. 

111.  bring]  beare  Qq,  Coll.  i,  ii.  117.   Caufe.]  caufe,  Qx.     <"<* w/i? .•  Q3QS 

112.  Officer]  I.  O.  Cap.  121.  Bondflaues]    Bondflaues   QqF3. 
,  Tis]  Om.  Pope  +  .  Bond  flaves  F. 

116.  In]  For  other  instances  of  the  use  of  'in '  for  during  or  at,  see  Abbott,  §  161. 

121.  Pagans]  Theobald:  Would  Brabantio  infer,  if  his  private  injury  were  not 
redressed,  the  Senate  should  no  longer  pretend  to  call  themselves  Christians  ?     But 
pagans  are  as  strict  and  moral  as  the  most  regular  Christians  in  the  preservation  of  pri 
vate  property.     Difference  of  faith  is  not  concerned,  but  mere  human  policy.     I  there 
fore  read  pageants,  i.  e.  if  we  let  such  injurious  actions  go  unpunished  our  statesmen 
must  be  slaves,  ciphers  in  office,  and  have  no  power  of  redressing,  be  things  of  mere 
show  and  gaudy  appearance  only.     Steevens  :  I  believe  the  morality  of  either  Chris 
tians  or  pagans  was  not  in  our  author's  thoughts.     He  alludes  to  the  common  con 
dition  of  all  blacks,  who  come  from  their  own  country  both  slaves  and  pagans ;  and 
uses  the  word  in  contempt  of  Othello  and  his  complexion.     If  this   Moor  is  now 
suffered  to  escape  with  impunity,  it  will  be  such  an  encouragment  to  his  black  country- 
men, that  we  may  expect  to  see  all  the  first  offices  of  our  state  filled  up  by  the  pagans 
and  bondslaves  of  Africa.     Heath  (p.  534) .  It  is  certain  from  this  very  play  that  the 
Moor  had  been  both  a  bondslave  and  a  pagan,  though  at  that  time  he  was  neithei. 
Malone:  In  Shakespeare's  time  pagm  was  a  very  comnon  expression  of  contempt 


act  I.  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  43 

Sccena   Tertia. 

Enter  Duke,  Senators,  and  Officers, 

Duke.     There's  no  compofition  in  this  Newes, 
That  giues  them  Credite. 

1.  Sen.     Indeed,  they  are  difproportioned;  5 
My  Letters  fay,  a  Hundred  and  feuen  Gallies. 

Duke.  And  mine  a  Hundred  fortie. 

2.  Sena.     And  mine  two  Hundred  : 

But  though  they  iumpe  not  on  a  iuft  accompt, 

(As  in  thefe  Cafes  where  the  ay  me  reports,  10 

1.  Scene  VII.  Pope-f,  Jen.  Johns.  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 

The  Senate  House.  Rowe.     A  Council  5.  dif proportioned]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Jen. 

Chamber.  Cap.  Sta.     disproportion 'd  Pope  et  cet. 

2.  Enter...]  Enter  Duke,  and  Senators  7.  And  mine]  and  mine  Q2. 

fet  at  a  Table,  with  lights  and  Attendants.  a  Hundred  fortie']  F2F  ,  Knt,  Sta. 

Qq.  an  hundred  and  forty  QaQ,.     a  hundred 

3.  There's]  There  is  QqFf  et  cet.  and  forty  QXF^  et  cet. 

this]  Ff,  Rowe.    hisQ.    thefe  QXQ2  IO.  theayme]theyaym,dQJ.  theyayme 

et  cet.  Q2Q3-    they  aim  Pope,  Theob.  Johns.  Jen. 

5.  they  are]  they're  Pope,  Theob.  Han.         Rann.  Sing.  Flal. 

2.  Lloyd:  Central  in  the  First  Act  is  the  scene  in  the  Council  Chamber;  and  the 
consideration,  by  the  Duke  and  Senators,  of  the  news  from  Cyprus  is  no  mere  surplus- 
age ;  it  strikes  a  tone  of  dispassionate  appreciation  of  evidence  and  opinion  that  domi- 
nates all  the  succeeding  scenes  of  agitation  and  disorders.  From  inconsistent  intel- 
ligence, the  main  point  of  agreement  is  carefully  adopted  for  further  examination, 
notwithstanding  predisposition  to  underrate  it ;  intelligence,  otherwise  of  good  author- 
ity, is  condemned  as  fallacious  from  collateral  indications ;  and  lastly,  thus  prepared  for, 
the  last  courier  has  full  credence,  and  the  critical  circumstances  once  understood  action 
follows  at  once.  Othello  is  dispatched  that  very  night.  The  same  solid  perspicacity 
distinguishes  the  reception  of  the  complaint  of  Brabantio. 

3.  composition]  Warburton  :  That  is,  consistency,  concordancy. 

3.  this  Newes]  Skeat  [Diet.  s.  v.) :  The  form  newes  does  not  seem  to  be  older 
than  about  A.  D.  1500.  It  is  nothing  but  a  plural  formed  from  new  treated  as  a  subs., 
so  also  tidings.  It  is  a  translation  of  F.  nouvelles,  plural  of  nouvelle,  new  (Cotgrave) ; 
so  also  Lat.  nova  =  new  things,  i.  e.  news.  [From  a  rough  calculation  by  means  of  Mrs 
Cowden-Clarke's  Concordance,  I  find  that  Shakespeare  uses  this  word  in  the  singular 
more  than  three  times  as  often  as  in  the  plural. — Ed.] 

7.  Hundred  fortie]  White  (ed.  i) :  I  think  it  not  improbable  that  this  passage 
stood,  as  the  rhythm  requires  :  '  My  letters  say  a  hundred  seven  galleys.  Duke.  And 
mine  a  hundred  forty.  2  Sen.  Mine,  two  hundred.'  Purnell  :  The  occasional  omis- 
sion of  the  conjunction  in  numerals  may  be  a  relic  of  the  French  usage  (cent-quarante). 

10.  the  ayme]  Warburton  :  Where  there  is  no  better  ground  for  information 
than  conjecture.  Johnson  :  The  reading  of  Qa  has  a  sense  sufficiently  easy  and  com- 
modious. Where  men  report  not  by  certain  knowledge,  but  by  aim  and  conjecture. 
[For   *  her  instances  of  its  use  in  the  sense  of  guess,  conjecture,  see  Schmidt,  J  ex. 


44  THE   TRAGEDIE  OF  OTHELLO        [act  i,  sc.  in. 

'Tis  oft  with  difTerence)yet  do  they  all  confirme  1 1 

A  Turkifh  Fleete,and  bearing  vp  to  Cyprus. 

Duke.     Nay,  it  is  poffible  enough  to  Judgement; 
I  do  not  fo  fecure  me  in  the  Error, 

But  the  maine  Article  I  do  approue  1 5 

In  fearefull  fenfe. 

Savior  within.     What  hoa,  what  hoa,  what  hoa. 

Enter  Saylor. 
Officer.     A  Meffenger  from  the  Gallies.  [313  a] 

Duke.     Now  ?  What's  the  bufineffe  ?  20 

Sailor.     The  Turkifh  Preparation  makes  for  Rhodes, 

So  was  I  bid  report  here  to  the  State, 

By  Signior  Angelo. 

Duke.     How  fay  you  by  this  change  ? 

I.  Sen.     This  cannot  be  25 

By  no  affay  of  reafon.     'Tis  a  Pageant 

11.  do]  Om.  Pope,  Han.  19.  Officer]  Sailor  Qx.    First  Off.  Dyce. 

12.  Cyprus]  Ciprejfe  Qr     Cipres  Q2Q3-  Gallies]  Galley  Qx. 

14.  in  the]  to  the  Qq.  20.  Now?  What's  the]  Now,  the  Qq, 

15.  Article]  Articles  Qz.  Coll.  Wh.  Ktly.     Now?  the  Cap.  Steev. 

17.  Saylor  within]  One  within  Qq.  Mai.  Knt,  Sing. 

hoa]  ho  Qq.  23.  By    Signior    Angelo]    Om.    Qx, 

18.  Enter  Saylor.]  Enter  a  Meffenger.  Pope  +  .     Ending  line  22,  Q2Q,. 
(after  fenfe,  line  16),  Qq.   Enter  an  Officer  [they  withdraw.  Cap. 
bringing  in  a  Sailor.  Cap.     After  Gallies,  25,  26.  This... reafon]  One  line,  Qq. 
line  19,  Dyce.  26.  reafon.]  reafon —  Qq. 

s.  v.]  Collier  (ed.  ii)  adopts  from  his  (MS)  'with  the  same  reports,'  with  the  note 
that  '  the  clear  meaning  being,  that  even  when  reports  of  such  occurrences  are  mainly 
the  same,  it  is  often  with  difference.  It  appears  highly  probable  that  the  passage  was 
misheard,  as  well  as  misprinted,  and  that  the  true  text  is  what  we  have  adopted.' 
[Nevertheless,  Collier  returned  to  Fx  in  the  text  of  his  ed.  iii.  The  Cam.  Ed.  records 
•  aim  besorts  '  and  '  main  accords  '  as  anonymous  conjectures. — Ed.] 

14.  secure]  Staunton  paraphrases,  '  I  do  not  so  over-confidently  build  on  the  dis- 
crepancy ;'  but  Purnell,  with  more  fidelity  to  the  derivation  of  the  word,  « I  do  not 
lay  aside  anxiety  on  account  of  the  discrepancy.' 

21.  Rhodes]  See  Appendix,  'Date  of  the  Action.' 

24.  by]  For  other  instances  where  'by'  means  about,  concerning,  see  Abbott,  §  145. 
Purnell  refers  [as  does  also  Abbott]  to  '  1  Corinth,  iv,  4,  "I  know  nothing  by  myself" 
(the  Greek  being,  "I  am  conscious  of  nothing  against  myself"),  where  A 1  ford  quotes, 
"  I  know  no  harm  by  him,"  as  a  midland-county  current  expression.' 

25.  26.  cannot  .  .  .  no]  For  instances  of  double  negatives,  see  ABBOTT,  §406. 

26.  assay]  Johnson  :  Bring  it  to  the  test,  examine  it  by  reason  as  we  examine 
metals  by  the  assay,  it  will  be  found  counterfeit  by  all  trials. 


act  I,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF  VENICE  45 

To  keepe  vs  in  falfe  gaze,  when  we  confider  27 

Th'importancie  of  Cyprus  to  the  Turke ; 

And  let  our  felues  againe  but  vnderfland, 

That  as  it  more  concernes  the  Turke  then  Rhodes,  30 

So  may  he  with  more  facile  queflion  beare  it, 

For  that  it  ftands  not  in  fuch  Warrelike  brace, 

But  altogether  lackes  Usabilities 

That  Rhodes  is  drefs'd  in.     If  we  make  thought  of  this, 

We  muft  not  thinke  the  Turke  is  fo  vnskillfull,  35 

To  leaue  that  lateft,  which  concernes  him  firft, 

Neglecting  an  attempt  of  eafe,  and  gaine 

To  wake,  and  wage  a  danger  profitleffe. 

Duke.     Nay,  in  all  confidence  he's  not  for  Rhodes. 

Officer.     Here  is  more  Newes.  40 

Enter  a  Meffenger. 
Meffen.     The  Ottamites,  Reueren'd,  and  Gracious,  42 

27.  gaze,]  gaze :  or  gaze.  Qq  et  cet.  eafe  and  gaine,  To  wake  Q2QJ.F    et 
31.  facile"]  fertile  Pope.  cet. 

32-38.  Om.  Qx.  39.  Nay,~\  And  Qx. 

33.  But]  Who  Q2Q3.  all]  Om.  Rowe  ii. 

34.  thought]  nought Q2  (ap.  Steevens's  41.  a  Meffenger.]  a  2.  Meffenger.  Qf. 
reprint).  a  2  Meffenger  Q2Q,. 

37,  38.  eafe,  and  gaine  To  wake,]  F2.  42.  Reueren'd]  reverend  QqF  F  . 

28.  importancie]  Rolfe  :  Used  by  Shakespeare  nowhere  else. 

31.  facile  question]  Johnson:  'Question*  is  for  the  act  of  seeking,  with  more 
easy  endeavour.  Mason  :  May  carry  it  with  less  dispute,  with  less  opposition. 
Schmidt  {Lex.)  from  the  use  of  '  question '  in  the  sense  of  a  judicial  trial,  deduces 
the  meaning  here  of  '  a  trial  and  decision  by  the  force  of  arms  as  the  ultima  ratio 
regum.' 

32.  brace]  Johnson  :  State  of  defence.  White  (ed.  ii) :  Warlike  strain,  military 
necessity  or  compulsion.  [I  cannot  understand  how  White  deduces  this  interpretation. 
The  very  point  of  the  speech  is,  that  Cyprus  is  of  greater  '  military  necessity '  to  the 
Turk  than  Rhodes.  'Brace'  is,  I  think,  here  equivalent  to  readiness ;  when  a  knight 
had  braced  on  his  armour  he  was  ready. — Ed.] 

38.  wage]  Steevens  gives  as  the  meaning  here,  to  fight,  to  combat,  and  cites  in 
proof,  'To  wage  against  the  enmity  o'th'air.' — Lear,  II,  iv,  206;  but  'wage*  is  tran- 
sitive here;  accordingly,  Schmidt  gives  the  better  interpretation:  to  hazard,  to 
attempt. 

42.  Booth  here  begins  his  Scene  IV,  in  the  Council  Chamber.  The  Duke  and  the 
Senators  are  discovered  R.  with  a  Messenger  who  is  kneeling  before  them.  Enter  as 
the  scene  opens,  Gra.  Rod.  and  others.  The  advantage  of  placing  the  Duke  at  the 
side  instead  of  at  the  back  as  in  the  old  '  set '  is,  that  the  characters  need  not  turn  theii 
backs  on  the  audience  when  addressing  the  Duke. 


46  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  i,  sc.  iii. 

Steering  with  due  courfe  toward  the  He  of  Rhodes,  43 

Haue  there  inioynted  them  with  an  after  Fleete. 

i.Sen.     I,fo  I  thought  :  how  many,as  you  gueffe?  45 

Meff.     Of  thirtie  Saile  :  and  now  they  do  re-ftem 
Their  backward  courfe,  bearing  with  frank  appearance 
Their  purpofes  toward  Cyprus.     Signior  Montano, 
Your  truftie  and  moft  Valiant  Seruitour, 

With  his  free  dutie,  recommends  you  thus,  50 

And  prayes  you  to  beleeue  him. 

Duke.     'Tis  certaine  then  for  Cyprus  : 
Marcus  Luccicos  is  not  he  in  Towne  ? 

1.  Sen.     He's  now  in  Florence.  54 

44.  inioynted']   injoirfd  Rowe,   Pope,  50.  thus]  this  Lettsom  (ap,  Dyce  iii). 
Theob.  Han.  Warb.  51.  beleeue]    relieve    (T.    Clark,    Cap. 

them]  Om.  Qx,  Huds.  iii.  conj.),  Sing,  ii,  Ktly. 
Fleete. ]Jleete Qx.  fleet,  Q2Q3-  fleet —  52, 53.'  Tis. . .Luccicos]  One  line,Theob. 

Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Warb.  Johns. 

45.  Om.  Qx.  53.  Luccicos]    Lucchese,  Cap.  Steev. 

46.  thirtie]  30.  Qq.  Var.  Rahn.     Luccicos,  Booth's  Rep. 
re-flem]    rejlerine    Qt.       refieme  not  he]  not  here  Qx.  he  notFi,  Rowe, 

Q2Q  .  Pope,  Han.  Steev.Var.    he  not  here  Theob. 

48.  toward]  towards  QXQ,.  towarcsQ3.         Warb.  Johns. 

50.  his]  this  Cap.  (misprint).  Towne?]  Toivne.  Qx. 

44.  inioynted]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  285):  Injoint ?  Ham.  I,  ii,  20:  'Our  state  to 
be  disjoint,  and  out  of  frame.'  Yet  I  doubt  whether  the  cases  are  parallel.  [For 
other  instances  of  the  omission,  in  participles,  of  ed  after  d  ox  t,  see  Walker  [Crit.  ii, 
324),  and  Abbott,  §  342.] 

51.  beleeue]  Johnson:  The  late  learned  and  ingenious  Mr  Thomas  Clark,  of  Lin- 
coln's Inn,  read  the  passage,  '  relieve  him.'  But  the  present  reading  may  stand.  He 
entreats  you  not  to  doubt  the  truth  of  this  intelligence.  Capell  :  Montano's  message 
to  the  Senate  is  worded  with  great  politeness  in  all  the  parts  of  it ;  in  this  last  relief, 
the  thing  he  stood  in  want  of  and  wish'd,  is  only  insinuated;  knowing  it  would  follow 
from  them,  was  belief  accorded  him.  [This  emendation  of  relieve  for  '  believe,'  Col- 
lier attributed  to  Rev.  Mr  Barry.  Dyce  and  White  ascribe  it  to  Capell ;  White  pro- 
nounces it  'plausible;'  Dyce  (ed.  iii)  quotes  Lettsom  as  follows:  'Believe,'  I  think 
right  as  Johnson  takes  it.     Relieve  would  mean  '  send  a  successor?] 

53.  Luccicos]  Capell  changed  this  to  Lucchese,  and  justified  the  change  in  a 
note  in  his  usual  style:  'The  corniptions  of  "Veronese"  may  induce  belief,  that  this 
which  we  are  come  to  is  no  strain'd  one ;  and  the  Italian  will  call  it  necessary,  termi- 
nations like  that  below  being  unknown  in  his  language.'  '  But,'  asks  Knight,  with 
more  shrewdness  than  grammar,  'who  is  the  Duke  inquiring  after?  Most  probably  a 
Greek  soldier  of  Cyprus,  an  Estradiot,  one  who  from  his  local  knowledge  was  enabled 
to  give  him  information.  Is  it  necessary  that  the  Greek  should  bear  an  Italian  name  ? 
And  does  not  tbe  termination  in  cos  better  convey  the  notion  which  we  believe  the  poet 
to  have  h>d?' 


act  I,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


Duke.     Write  from  vs, 
To  him,  Port,  Poft-hafte,difpatch. 

I.  Sen.  Here  comes  Brabantio^nd  the  Valiant  Moore. 

Enter  Brabantio,  Othello,  Caffio,  Iago,  Rodorigo, 
and  Officers. 

Duke.     Valiant  Otkello,we  muft  ftraight  employ  you, 
Againft  the  generall  Enemy  Ottoman. 
I  did  not  fee  you  :  welcome  gentle  Signior, 
We  lack't  your  Counfaile,  and  your  helpe  to  night. 

Bra.     So  did  I  yours  :  Good  your  Grace  pardon  me. 
Neither  my  place,  hor  ought  I  heard  of  bufineffe 
Hath  rais'd  me  from  my  bed  ;  nor  doth  the  generall  care 


47 
55 


60 


05 


55,  56.  Two  lines,  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
Cap.     One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

Write...  Pofl,]  One  line,  Cap. 
Write. ..him]  One  line,  Pope,  Han. 

56.  To  him,]  wijh  him  Qt,  Cap.  Steev, 
Var.  Rann.  Sing,     to  him  Q2Q3- 

Pofl,  Pofl-hafle]  pojl,  pofl  hajl  Qq. 
Post-haste  Pope,  Han.  post-post-haste 
Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  Del.  Glo. 
Cam.  Huds.  Rife,  Wh.  ii. 

Pofl-hafle,  dispatch"]  Post-haste : 
dispatch  Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Sing. 


57.  Valiant]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe. 
Scene  VIII.  Pope +  ,  Jen. 

59.  and    Officers]     Defdemona,    and 
Officers  Qq  (after  line  56). 

60.  employ]  imploy  Qq. 

61.  Ottoman]  Ottaman  Qx. 

62.  [To  Braban.  Theob. 

63.  lack't]  lacke  Qf. 

65.  hor]  nor  Qq.    for  Ff. 
ought  ]  aught  Theob.  ii. 

66.  nor]  not  Q2. 

care]  Om.  Pope, Theob.  Han.Warb. 


56.  To]  Malone  interprets  the  text  of  the  Qq,  for  those  who  adopt  it,  as  meaning : 
'tell  him  we  wish  him  to  make  all  possible  hastef  and  adds  that  all  messengers  in  the 
time  of  Shakespeare  were  enjoined,  '  Haste,  haste ;  for  thy  life,  post  haste.' 

61.  Ottoman]  Malone:  It  is  part  of  the  policy  of  the  Venetian  state  never  to 
entrust  the  command  of  an  army  to  a  native.  '  To  exclude,  therefore,  (says  Contareno, 
trans,  by  Lewkenor,  1599)  out  of  our  estate  the  danger  or  occasion  of  any  such  ambi- 
tious enterprises,  our  ancestors  held  it  a  better  course  to  defend  the  dominions  on  the 
continent  with  foreign  mercenary  soldiers,  than  with  their  home-bred  citizens.'  Again  : 
*  alwaies  they  do  entertain  in  honourable  sort  with  great  provision  a  captaine  generally 
who  alwaies  is  a  stranger  borne.''  Reed:  So  in  Thomas's  Hist,  of  Italy,  p.  82:  'By 
lande  they  are  served  of  straungers,  both  for  generalls,  for  capitaines,  and  for  all  other 
men  of  warre ;  because  theyr  lawe  permitteth  not  any  Venetian  to  be  capitaine  over 
an  armie  by  lande :  Fearing,  I  thinke,  Caesar's  example.'  Schmidt  [Lex.)  queries 
whether  this  be  used  here  as  an  adjective  or  substantive ;  Rolfe  inclines  to  think  it  is 
the  former. 

62.  Booth  :  The  Duke  should  be  busy  with  papers  or  conferring  with  the  Senators, 
while  Brabantio  takes  his  seat ;  which  will  account  for  his  '  I  did  not  see  you.' 

64.  Good  your]  Abbott,  §13:  The  possessive  adjectives  when  unemphatic  are 
sometimes  transposed,  being  really  combined  with  nouns  (like  the  French  monsieur 
milord). 


48  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  i,  sc.  iii 

Take  hold  on  me.     For  my  perticular  griefe  67 

Is  of  fo  flood-gate,  and  ore-bearing  Nature, 

That  it  engluts,snd  fwallowes  other  forrowes, 

And  it  is  flill  it  felfe.  70 

Duke.     Why  ?  What's  the  matter  ? 

Bra.     My  Daughter  :  oh  my  Daughter ! 

Seu.     Dead  ? 

Bra.     I,  to  me. 
She  is  abus'd,  ftolne  from  me,  and  corrupted  75 

By  Spels,  and  Medicines,  bought  of  Mountebanks; 
For  Nature,  fo  prepoftroufly  to  erre,  JJ 

67.  hold  on]  any  hold  of  Q,.     hold  of         Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Jen.  Rann. 
QaQ3»  Coll.  Wh.  i.     any  hold  on  Rann.  73.  Sen.]  All.  Qq. 

griefe"]  grief es  Qr.  74.  /,] /Qq.    Ay,  Rowe.  Om.  Pope  +  . 

69.  engluts]  ingluts  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  75.  flolne]  stollen  Rowe  ii,  Pope. 
snd]  Ff.  76.  Medicines]   medicions  Q  .     mea"- 

70.  And  it]   And  yet   Rowe,    Pope,  cines  Cap.  (Errata). 

66.  To  eliminate  the  two  extra  syllables  in  this  line,  Johnson  proposes  to  omit 
*  care '  at  the  end ;  and  Steevens,  '  Hath '  at  the  beginning,  and  '  my '  before  '  bed." 

68.  so]  See  Abbott,  §67,  for  instances  where  'so'  is  used  before  an  adjective, 
where  now-a-days  we  use  the  adverbial  such  or  so  with  a.  But  note,  says  Abbott,  that 
in  these  instances  the  '  so '  follows  a  preposition.  After  prepositions  the  article  (see 
§  90)  is  frequently  omitted.  Shakespeare  could  have  written,  '  My  grief  is  of  nature 
so  floodgate,'  &c. 

69.  engluts]  Purnell  ;  French  '  engloutir,'  to  swallow. 

76,  Spels]  Grey  (ii,  312)  cites  a  law  of  I  Jac.  cap.  xii,  to  the  effect:  'That  if  any 
person  or  persons  should  take  upon  him  or  them,  by  witchcraft,  inchantment,  charm  or 
sorcery,  to  the  intent  to  provoke  any  person  to  unlawful  love ;  and  being  thereof  law- 
fully convicted,  should,  for  the  first  offence,  suffer  imprisonment  for  the  space  of  one 
whole  year,'  &c.  Warburton  says  that  Rymer  ridicules  this  accusation  of  charms 
and  medicines,  but  the  passage  in  Rymer  has  escaped  me,  and  small  wonder,  in  that 
headlong  torrent  of  amusing  abuse  of  Shakespeare.  Warburton,  however,  avails  him- 
self of  the  chance  to  cite  a  Venetian  law,  Dei  maleficii  et  herbarie,  cap.  xvii,  of  the 
code,  entitled  '  Delia  promission  del  maleficio.'  Whereupon  Steevens  remarks : 
'Though  I  believe  Shakespeare  knew  no  more  of  this  Venetian  law  than  I  do,  yet 
he  was  well  acquainted  with  the  edicts  of  that  sapient  prince  King  James  the  First.' 
'But,'  says  Ritson  (p.  228),  'there  is  no  doubt  that  Shakespeare  had  the  substance  of 
Brabantio's  speech  from  Cinthio's  novel,  however  he  might  come  by  it ;  and  Cinthio,  it 
may  be  supposed,  knew  something  of  the  Venetian  Statute.'  At  this  line  and  at  line 
80,  Booth  says,  Cassio  and  Othello  should  exchange  smiles,  as  at  I,  ii,  95. 

77-79.  to  erre  .  .  .  could  not]  Abbott  cites  this  passage  under  §350,  where  ex- 
amples are  given  of  the  use  of  '  to '  when  the  finite  principal  verb  is  an  auxiliary  or 
like  an  auxiliary,  as  in  Ham.  I,  v,  18  and  178,  and  thus  explains:  'Here  either  (1) 
"to  err"  depends  on  "could,"  i.  e.  "Nature  was  not  able  to  err;"  or  (2)  "could  not" 
might  perhaps  stand  for  "could  not  be,"  "was  impossible,"  having  for  its  subject 


act  I,  SC.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  49 

(Being  not  deficient,  blind,  or  lame  of  fenfe,)  78 

Sans  witch-craft  could  not. 

Duke.     Who  ere  he  be,  that  in  this  foule  proceeding  80 

Hath  thus  beguil'd  your  Daughter  of  her  felfe, 
And  you  of  her;  the  bloodie  Booke  of  Law,  [313  fr\ 

You  fhall  your  felfe  read,  in  the  bitter  letter, 
After  your  owne  fenfe  :  yea,  though  o  ur  proper  Son 
Stood  in  your  Action.  85 

Bra.     Humbly  I  thanke  your  Grace, 
Here  is  the  man;  this  Moore, whom  now  it  feemes 
Your  fpeciall  Mandate,  for  the  State  affaires 
Hath  hither  brought 

All.     We  are  verieforry  for't.  90 

Duke.     What  in  yonr  owne  part,  can  you  fay  to  this  ? 

Bra.     Nothing,  but  this  is  fo. 

Otlie.     Moft  Potent,  Graue,  and  Reueren'd  Signiors,  93 

78.  Om.  Qx.  fenfe,  yea  thoQ2Q.    sense ;  though  Pope. 
not]  Om.  Q  .  90.  All.]  Duke  and  Sen.  Mai. 

or]  nor  Johns.  We  are]  We're  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii, 

79.  Sans]  Saunce  Qx.  Huds. 

not.]    not —  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.   Steev.  verieforry]  very  forry  Fa. 

Rann.  Var.  Knt,  Sing,     not  be  Cap.  Ktly.  for't]  for  it  Steev.  Var.  Rann.  Coll. 

82.  her;]  her,  Qq.  Sing.  Wh.  Ktly,  Del. 

84.  your  07vne]  its  otvne  Qq,  Coll.  i.  91.  [To  Othel.  Theob.  et  seq. 

fenfe  :  yea,  though]  fenfe,  tho  Qx.  yonr]  Fx. 

"Nature  to  err."  In  (2)  "for"  may  be  either  (a)  a  conjunction,  or  (<£)  a  preposition: 
"  It  was  not  possible  for  Nature  thus  to  err."     I  prefer  (1).' 

77.  prepostrously]  Morel:  Worcester  donne  comme  etymologie  directe  un  ad- 
jectif  francais  '  prepostere,'  dont  nous  n'avons  pu  trouver  trace. 

84.  your]  Dyce  {Remarks,  p.  234) :  '  Your '  of  the  Folio  is  manifestly  the  true 
reading,  i.  e.  •  According  to  your  own  interpretation.' 

84.  proper]  That  is  own,  very.  Is  there  not  a  survival,  in  the  copious  vocabulary 
of  old  English  phrases  still  to  be  found  in  New  England,  of  this  word  in  this  sense? 
I  have  frequently  heard  the  phrases  there,  '  proper  good,'  «  proper  nice,'  in  the  sense 
of  '  very  good,'  '  very  nice.'  Webster  marks  it,  in  this  sense,  as  '  colloquial  and  vulgar,' 
which  is  in  favour  of  its  antiquity.  Gerard  calls  attention  to  it,  as  having  'la  m£me 
valeur  que  propre  en  francais:  "notre  propre  fils." ' — Ed. 

85.  action]  Johnson:  Were  the  man  exposed  to  your  charge  or  accusation. 
Morel  :  C'est  la  un  sens  tout  francais  du  mot. 

91.  in]  ABBOTT,  §  160,  gives  instances  of  'in'  used  for  on.     See  note  on  I,  i,  149. 

93,  &c.  Rymer  (p.  100) :  We  find  the  Duke  of  Venice  with  his  Senators  in  Coun- 
cel  at  Midnight,  upon  advice  that  the  Turks  or  Ottamites,  or  both  together,  were  ready 
in  transport  Ships,  put  to  sea,  in  order  to  make  a  Descent  upon  Cyprus.  This  is  the 
posture,  when  we  see  Brabantio  and  Othello  join  them.  By  their  Conduct  and  manner 
of  talk,  a  body  must  strain  hard  to  fancy  the  Scene  at  Venice;  And  not  rather  in  some 
4 


50  THE    TRACEDIE   OF   OTHELLO        [act.  i.  sc.  iii. 

My  very  Noble,  and  approu'd  good  Matters; 

That  I  haue  tane  away  this  old  mans  Daughter,  95 

It  is  moft  true  :  true  I  haue  married  her; 

The  verie  head,  and  front  of  my  offending, 

Hath  this  extent;  no  more.     Rude  am  I,  in  my  fpeech, 

And  little  blefs'd  with  the  foft  phrafe  of  Peace; 

For  fince  thefe  Armes  of  mine,  had  feuen  yeares  pith,  100 

Till  now,  fome  nine  Moones  wafted,  they  haue  vs'd 

Their  deereft  action,  in  the  Tented  Field  : 

And  little  of  this  great  world  can  I  fpeake, 

More  then  pertaines  to  Feats  of  Broiles,  and  Battaile, 

And  therefore  little  fhall  I  grace  my  caufe,  105 

In  fpeaking  for  my  felfe.    Yet,  (by  your  gratious  patience) 

98.  am  I~\  I  am  QaQ3-  104.  Feats  of  Broiles]  Ff,Rowe  4-,  Jen. 

my~\  Om.  Johns.  Knt,  Sta.    feate  of  broyle  Qf.    feates  of 

99-  /oft]  fei  Qq,Warb.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  broyles  QaQr    feats  of  broil  Cap.  et  cet. 

Coll.  105.  grace]  grac  Qa. 

ioi.  now,  fome]  now  fome  Qq.  106.  for]  of  Q  . 

Moones]  more  Jourdain.  gratious']  Om.  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 

102.  deerefl]  dearfl  F^.  Warb. 

of  our  Cinque-ports,  where  the  Baily  and  his  Fisher-men  are  knocking  their  heads  together 
on  account  of  some  Whale,  or  some  terrible  broil  upon  the  Coast.  But  to  show  them 
true  Venetians,  the  maritime  affairs  stick  not  long  on  their  hand;  the  public  may  sink 
or  swim.  They  will  sit  up  all  night  to  hear  a  Doctors  Commons,  Matrimonial,  Cause. 
And  have  the  Merits  of  the  Cause  at  large  laid  open  to  'em,  that  they  may  decide  it 
before  they  stir.  What  can  be  pleaded  to  keep  awake  their  attention  so  wonderfully  ? 
Never,  sure,  was  for?n  of  pleading  so  tedious  and  so  heavy,  as  this  whole  scene  and 
midnight  entertainment. 

96.  her]  Fechter  :  To  Brabantio  with  tender  courtesy. 

98.  Fechter's  version  :  •  Hath  this — [to  the  Senate)  this  extent !  {with  passion  on 
the  mute  denial  of  Brabantio)  no  more  !  (Brabantio  rises  in  anger  :  They  regard  each 
other  with  menace.  Several  members  rise  simultaneously ;  Othello  is  at  once  calm, 
a?id  submits  to  the  Council.) 

99.  soft]  Warburton  :  This  apology,  if  addressed  to  his  mistress,  had  been  well 
expressed.  But  what  he  wanted,  in  speaking  before  a  Venetian  Senate,  was  not  the 
soft  blandishments  of  speech,  but  the  art  and  method  of  masculine  eloquence.  I  am 
persuaded,  therefore,  that  set  of  the  Qq  is  right. 

101.  wasted]  Knight:  He  had  been  unemployed  during  nine  months. 

102.  deerest]  Johnson  :  That  is,  dear,  for  which  much  is  paid,  whether  money 
or  labour ;  dear  action  is  action  performed  at  great  expense,  either  of  ease  or  safety. 
Malone  thinks  it  here  means  most  important ;  Steevens  that  in  modern  language 
we  should  say,  their  best  exertion  ;  and  M.  Mason  that  it  means  their  favourite  action. 
[To  me,  Dr  W.  Alois  Wright's  definition  seems  exact :  '  dear  is  used  of  whatever 
touches  us  nearly,  either  in  love  or  hate,  joy  or  sorrow.'     See  //am.  I,  ii,  182. — Ed.] 

106.  speaking]  Forrest  emphasized  this  word,  and  *not  *  myself.' — Rees's  Life 
p.   Ho. 


Acr  i,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  51 

I  will  a  round  vn-varnifh'd  u  Tale  deliuer,  107 

Of  my  whole  courfe  of  Loue. 

What  Drugges,what  Charmes, 

What  Conjuration,  and  what  mighty  Magicke,  1 10 

(For  fuch  proceeding  I  am  charg'd  withall) 

I  won  his  Daughter. 

Bra.     A  Maiden,  neuer  bold  : 
Of  Spirit  fo  ftill,  and  quiet,  that  her  Motion  1 14 

107,  I  will]  I  would  Q2Q3-  III.  proceeding}  proceedings  Qq. 
vn-varniftC '  d]vtirauiJ1i' dQ2.  un-  I  am]  am  /Qq,  Jen. 

ravijh'd  Q  .  112.   Daughter.]    Daughter  with.    Ff, 

108,  109.  One  line,  Qq  et  cet.  Rowe  + ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Rann.  Coll.  Sing. 

109,  Iio.  Drugges,...  Charmes,...  Con-         Ktly,  Huds. 

iuration,]    Drugs  ? ...Charmes  ? ...conju-  113,   114.    A. ..Spirit]    One    line,    Qx 

ration  ?  F3F4,  Rowe  i.  (reading  bold  of  fpirit,). 

107.  vn-varnish'd  u]  This  is  a  noteworthy  and  praiseworthy  attempt  at  correcting 
a  typographical  error:  '  vn-varnish'd '  should  be  spelled  vn-uarnifli'd.  In  aiming  at 
correcting  it  by  the  substitution  of  the  u  for  the  v,  the  compositor  forgot  to  remove  the 
vt  and  put  u,  with  unusual  accuracy,  within  seven  letters  of  its  true  place. — El). 

108.  my  .  .  .  Loue]  That  is,  '  the  whole  course  of  my  love.'  This  construction, 
plain  enough  here,  sometimes  gives  rise  to  difficulty :  see  '  your  sovereignty  of  reason,' 
Ham.  I,  iv,  73;  'his  means  of  death,'  lb.  IV,  v,  207;  'my  better  part  of  man,'  Macb. 
V,  viii,  18,  and  many  other  examples  in  Abbott,  §423. 

109.  What]  The  preposition  with,  which  is  here  omitted,  as  in  so  many  other  in- 
stances of  adverbial  expressions  of  time,  or  of  manner  (see  Abbott,  §  202),  the  F2  sup- 
plied after  'daughter,'  line  112,  'The  editor  of  that  edition,'  says  Dyce  (ed.  iii),  'not 
knowing  that,  according  to  the  earlier  phraseology,  such  an  addition  was  unnecessary 
for  the  sense.'  Doubtless  through  inadvertence,  Grant  White  (ed.  ii)  says  that  with 
was  'recklessly  omitted.'  Cf.  'The  interim  having  weighed  it,'  Macb.  I, iii,  154;  'shall 
....  More  surfer  and  more  sundry  ways,'  lb.  IV,  iii,  48 ;  '  Which  time  she  chanted,' 
Ham.  IV,  vii,  179.  Delius  thinks  that  with  was  omitted,  because  the  preceding  line 
in  the  parenthesis  ended  in  '  withal.' 

112.  Rymer  (p.  101):  All  this  is  but  Preamble,  to  tell  the  Court  that  He  wants 
words.  This  was  the  Eloquence  which  kept  them  up  all  night,  and  drew  their  atten- 
tion in  the  midst  of  their  alarms.  One  might  rather  think  the  novelty  and  strangeness 
of  the  case  prevail'd  upon  them :  no,  the  Senators  do  not  reckon  it  strange  at  all.  In- 
stead of  starting  at  the  Prodigy,  every  one  is  familiar  with  Desdemona,  as  he  were  her 
own  natural  Father,  rejoice  in  her  good  fortune,  and  wish  their  own  several  Daughters 
as  hopefully  married.  •  Should  the  Poet  have  provided  such  a  Husband  for  an  only 
daughter  of  any  noble  Peer  in  England,  the  Black-amoor  must  have  chang'd  his  Skin, 
to  look  our  House  of  Lords  in  the  face. 

114.  Motion]  This  may  mean,  undoubtedly,  as  Grant  White  (ed.  ii)  interprets  it: 
'her  natural  desires,'  but  I  prefer  to  interpret  it  with  Schmidt  (Lex.),  'movement  of 
the  soul,  tendency  of  the  mind,  impulse;  German,  Regting,'  especially  since  'herself,' 
in  the  next  line,  refers  to  it.  Shakespeare  frequently  refers  to  the  soul  as  feminine. 
Cf.  'Since  my  dear  soul  was  mistress  of  her  choice,'  Ham.  Ill,  ii,  58;  'Could  torc.e 
his  soul  ....  That  from  her  working,'  lb.  II,  ii,  526. — Ed. 


52  THE   TR  AGED  IE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  i,  sc.  iii. 

Blufh'd  at  her  felfe,  and  flue,  in  fpight  of  Nature,  115 

Of  Yeares,  of  Country,  Credite,  euery  thing 

To  fall  in  Loue,with  what  fhe  fear'd  to  looke  on; 

It  is  a  iudgement  main'd,  and  moft  imperfect. 

That  will  confeffe  Perfection  fo  could  erre 

Againft  all  rules  of  Nature,  and  muft  be  driuen  120 

To  find  out  practifes  of  cunning  hell 

Why  this  mould  be.     I  therefore  vouch  againe, 

That  with  fome  Mixtures,  powrefull  o're  the  blood, 

Or  with  fome  Dram,(coniur'd  to  this  effect) 

He  wtought  vp  on  her.  125 

To  vouch  this,  is  no  proofe, 

Without  more  wider,  and  more  ouer  Teft 

Then  thefe  thin  habits,  and  poore  likely-hoods  128 

115.  her  felfe]  it  self e  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  125.  vp  on]  Ft. 

117.  on  ,-]¥(.    on — Rowe  +  ,Jen.   on?  126.    To]  Du.    To  Qx  et  cet. 
or  on  !  Qq  et  cet.  vouch]  youth  Qx. 

118.  main V]  maimd QXQ2.  maim\l  127.  wider]  certaine  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Cap. 
F2  et  cet.  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Rann.  Coll.  Sing.  Cam. 

imperfect.]  imperfect,  Qq.  Huds.     evidence  Coll.  (MS). 

119.  Perfection]  Affection  Theob.  Han.  ouer  Tefl]  over-  Tefl  Ff.  over  tefl 
Jen.                                                                        Q3,  Rowe.     ouert  tefl  Q^  et  cet. 

could]  would  Qq,  Jen.  128.   Then  thefe]  Thefe  are  Qq,  Coll. 

122.  be.]  be,  Qq.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Huds. 

125.  wtought]  Fx. 

118.  main'd]  In  reference  to  this  misprint  Dyce  says,  that  he  does  not  mean  to 
defend  it  when  he  observes  that  in  2  Hen.  VI:  IV,  ii,  172,  we  have  the  provincialism 
in  Cade's  speech :  '  mained,'  i.  e.  lamed. 

119.  Perfection]  To  Theobald  the  expression  perfection  erring  seemed  a  contra- 
diction. '  I  have  ventured,'  he  says,  '  to  imagine  that  our  author  wrote  "Affection  so 
nould  err."  '  Dr  Johnson  :  The  objection  is  childish;  'perfection'  is  used  here,  as 
almost  everywhere  else,  for  a  high  degree  of  excellence. 

121.  practises]  That  is,  stratagems,  treacherous  plots,  very  frequently  thus  used. 
Cf.  'a  pass  of  practice,'  Ham.  IV,  vii,  139;  'my  practices  ride  easy,'  Lear,  I, 
ii,   172. 

127.  more  wider]  Is  not  this  to  be  preferred  to  'more  certain'  of  the  Qq?  A  wide 
and  open  proof  seems  to  stand  in  clear  contrast  to  thin,  narrow  shows  and  trivial  con- 
jectures. Johnson  defines  'overt  test,'  open  proofs,  external  evidence ;  and  the  phrase 
'  thin  ....  seeming,'  xveak  shcnv  of  slight  appearance.  For  the  double  comparative 
'more  wider,'  see  Shakespeare  passim. — Ed. 

128.  habits]  Singer  :  'Thin  habits'  may  be  a  metaphor  from  dress,  but  it  may  also 
be  a  Larinism  from  habita,  things  considered,  reckoned,  as  in  the  phrase  habit  and 
repute,  i.  e.  held  and  esteemed.  John  Hunter  :  Than  the  thin  garb  with  which  you 
invest  the  matter,  and  vour  slender  probabilities  as  to  the  aspect  in  which  it  must  be 
generally  regarded. 


act  i,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF    VENICE  53 

Of  moderne  feeming,  do  prefer  againft  him. 

Sen.     But  Othello ,  fpeake,  1 30 

Did  you,  by  indirect,  and  forced  courfes 
Subdue,  and  poyfon  this  yong  Maides  affections  ? 
Or  came  it  by  requeft,  and  fuch  faire  queftion 
As  foule,  to  foule  affordeth  ? 

Othel.     I  do  befeech  you,  135 

Send  for  the  Lady  to  the  Sagitary. 
And  let  her  fpeake  of  me  before  her  Father; 
If  you  do  finde  me  foule,  in  herreport, 
The  Truft,  the  Office,  I  do  hold  of  you, 

Not  onely  take  away,  but  let  your  Sentence  140 

Euen  fall  vpon  my  life. 

Duke.     Fetch  Defdemona  hither. 

Othe.     Aunciant,  conduct  them  : 
You  beft  know  the  place. 

And  tell  fhe  come,  as  truely  as  to  heauen,  145 

I  do  confeffe  the  vices  of  my  blood, 
So  iuftly  to  your  Graue  eares,  He  prefent 

How  I  did  thriue  in  this  faire  Ladies  loue,  [3H  a\ 

And  fhe  in  mine. 

Duke.     Say  it  Othello.  150 

Othe.     Her  Father  lou'd  me,  oft  inuited  me  : 

129.  feeming]  feemings  QXQ2.  Q2Q3)* 

do]  you  Qq,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  143,  144.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  cet. 

Huds.     doe  F2.  144.  [Exit  Iago.  Rowe.     Exeunt  At 

130.  Sen.]  1  Sena.  Qq,  Rowe  et  cet.  tendants  and  Iago.    Cap. 
But]  Om.  Han.  145.  tell]  Fx. 
fpeake^]  speak;  Theob.  truely]  faithfully. 

135.  do]  Om.  Pope  +  .  heauen,]  Heav'n  or  Heaven  kowe 

136.  Sagitary]  SagittarQ^  Cap.    Sag-         et  cet. 

ittary  Q2Q3F4  et  cet.  146.  Om.  Qx. 

139.  Om.  Qr  151-154.  Lines  end  fal/ier... questioned 

142.  [Exit  two  or  three.  Qq.  (Exeunt...         me...  to  year...  pass' d.  Mai. 

129.  moderne]  Always,  I  believe,  used  by- Shakespeare  in  the  sense  of  trite,  ordi- 
nary, commonplace. — Ed.  Morel:  On  comprend  quelle  association  d'idees  a  pu 
donner  au  mot  cette  valeur.  II  y  a  la  un  corollaire  de  l'idee  qui  a  inspire  l'adage  cele- 
bre  :  major  a  longinquo  reverentia. 

133.  question]  That  is,  conversation,  discourse,  as  in  'made  she  no  verbal  ques- 
tion,' Lear,  IV,  iii,  24. 

136.  Sagitary]  See  I,  i,  173. 

147.  iustly]  That  is,  truthfully.  Among  the  Four  Cardinal  Virtues :  Temperance, 
Justice,  Prudence,  and  Fortitude,  the  second  includes  or  implies  Truth. — Ed. 

151.  Fkchter  :  (Regai  ding  Brabantio  with  regret.}    Her  father  lov'd  me  ! — {check* 


54  THE    TR  AGED  IE   OF   OTHELLO        [act  i,  sc.  lii. 

Still  queftion'd  me  the  Storie  of  my  life,  152 

From  yeare  to  yeare  :  the  Battaile,  Sieges,  Fortune, 

That  I  haue  paft. 

I  ran  it  through,  euen  from  my  boyifh  daies,  155 

Toth'very  moment  that  he  bad  me  tell  it. 

Wherein  I  fpoke  of  moft  difaftrous  chances : 

Of  mouing  Accidents  by  Flood  and  Field, 

Of  liaire-breadth  fcapes  i'th  imminent  deadly  breach  ; 

Of  being  taken  by  the  Infolent  Foe,  160 

And  fold  to  flauery.     Of  my  redemption  thence, 

152.  quejliorfd]  quejlioned  Qq.  155.  from~\  to  Q  . 

Slorie]  Jloryes  Qr  156.  bad~\  bade  QQ,,  Johns,  et  seq. 

153.  yeare  .]  yeare,  Qq.  157.  fpoke]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.Var.  Ktly. 
Battaile]  battailes  Qq.     Battails         /pake  Qq,  Cap.  et  cet. 

F2.     Battells  F3F4,  Rowe.     battles  Warb.  158.  Accidents  by]  accident  of  "Q,. 

et  seq.  159.   imminent  deadly]   Hyphened  by 

Fortune]  Ff,  Knt.   fortunes  Qq  et  Sta.  Del.  Pur. 
cet.  160.  Foe,]  foe:  Qr 

154.  haue pafl.]  haue  pafl :  Qq.  had  161.  flauery.]  flauery,  Qx.  flauery ; 
past.  Coll.  (MS),    have  passed.    With  his  Q2Q3,  Rowe  et  cet. 

demands  complying,  Ktly  conj.  Of  my]  and  my  Qt. 

ing  his  emotion,  and  continuing  calmly).  Booth  :  Brabantio  may,  perhaps,  manifest 
denial  of  Othello's  assertion ;  and  Othello's  tone,  after  a  slight  pause,  may  imply  that 
he  had  at  least  had  reason  to  think  so.  But  Love  often  meant  merely  liking,  and  sinct 
certainly  Brabantio  did  like  the  Moor,  it  may  not  be  proper  for  him  to  express  any  dis- 
approbation here. 

153.  Fortune]  Morel:  Aventures  ou  accidents.  Comparez  le  sens  du  mot  chez 
Froissard :  '  Leurs  vaisseaux  eurent  si  grand  forlzme  sur  mer  ....  que  plusieurs  de 
leurs  nefs  furent  peries.' 

154.  Purnell:  The  hemistich  adds  to  the  effect  of  the  enumeration  by  giving  the 
actor  time  to  think  over  the  list. 

157  et  seq.  Booth:  All  this  as  modestly  as  possible, — not  a  breath  of  bluster,  and 
not  declamatory ;  very  difficult  to  render  naturally.  The  Duke  and  Senators,  indeed 
all  present,  should  listen  with  rapt  attention. 

1 61-168.  In  some  early  Acting  Copies  these  lines  are  omitted,  and  in  their  place  the 
following  inserted : 

*  Of  battles  bravely,  hardty,  fought ;  of  victories 
For  which  the  conqueror  mourn'd,  so  many  fell  : 
Sometimes  I  told  the  story  of  a  siege, 
Wherein  I  had  to  combat  plagues  and  famine  ; 
Soldiers  unpaid;  fearful  to  fight, 
Yet  bold  in  dangerous  mutiny.' 

The  earliest  trace  of  them  that  I  can  find  is  in  the  Acting  Copy  for  the  '  Theatres  Royal 
in  Drury-Lane  and  Covent-Garden '  in  1770.  As  Garrick  did  not  retire  from  Drury- 
Lane  until  June,  1776,  it  is  not  improbable  that  these  lines  were  written  by  him ;  it  is 
hard  to  see  why  he  felt  any  necessity  for  the  substitution,  unless  he  were  infected  with 
lago'g  scor     for  'fantastical  lies.'     WOOD  {Personal  Recollections,  &c,  p.  265)   says 


ACT  I,  SC.1U.J  THE  MOORE   OF    VENICE  55 

And  portance  in  my  Trauellours  hiftorie.  [62 

Wherein  of  Antars  vail,  and  Defarts  idle, 

162.  portance  in  my]  with  it  all my Qx,  163.  Antars]    QqFf,   Rowe.     Antrees 

Pope,  Han.  Warb.  Qx.     antrtes  Tope,     antres  Theoh.  et  cet. 

Trauellours]  trauells  Qq,  Rowe.  Defarts]  Deferts  Qt,  Sing,  i,  Coll. 

Travellers   F2F .       Traveller's  F4,   Knt,  et  seq. 

Sing.  Ktly.     travels'  Glo.  Cam.  Dyce  iii,  idle]  wilde  FaF  .     wild  F4,  Pope, 

Huds.  Wh.  ii.     travel's  Pope  et  cet.  Han.  Sing.  i. 

that  he  '  distinctly  remembers  finding  these  lines  in  an  old  Covent-Garden  Prompt-book 
of  our  early  library,  not  in  the  printed  text,  but  interwritten  upon  a  blank  leaf.  [Ed- 
mund] Kean,  like  every  other  actor  or  reader  to  whom  I  have  applied,  had  never  met 
with  them,  but  acknowledged  their  great  beauty  and  power.' — Ed. 

1 62.  portance]  Rymer  (p.  90)  in  quoting  this  line  reads  portents.  Johnson  reads 
'portance  m'//'  and  explains  :  'my  redemption  from  slavery,  and  my  behaviour  in  it.' 
Steevens  :  Perhaps  Shakespeare  meant — my  behaviour  in  my  travels  as  described  in 
my  history  of  them.  '  Portance '  is  used  in  Cor.  II,  iii,  232.  Dyck  (Gloss.) :  That  is, 
bearing,  carriage,  deportment,  behaviour.  Knight  puts  a  full  stop  after  'portance,' 
and  includes  'Wherein  ....  speake,'  163-165,  in  parenthesis,  with  only  a  comma  after 
'  speake.'     Morel  :  Montaigne  l'emploie  comme  synonyme  de  '  facon  d'agir.' 

162.  Trauellours]  I  cannot  but  think  the  Qq  are  right  here.  Knight  thus  up- 
holds the  Ff :  Othello  modestly,  and  somewhat  jocosely,  calls  his  wonderful  relations 
a  traveller's  history, — a  term  by  which  the  marvellous  stories  of  the  Lithgows  and 
Coryats  were  wont  to  be  designated  in  Shakespeare's  day.  Dyce  :  A  personage  less 
inclined  to  jocoseness  than  Othello  cannot  well  be  conceived.  Dr  Richardson  suggests 
to  me  that  '  Trauellours '  is  a  misprint  for  travellous  (or  travailous),  and  adds  that 
Wiclif  has  'Jobs  trauailous  nights'  and  'the  traveilous  presoun  of  the  Egipcians;'  but 
though  the  epithet  is  very  properly  applied  to  '  nights '  or  to  a  '  prison,'  can  we  speak 
of  a  '  travailous  history '  ? 

163.  Antars]  Pope:  French,  grottoes.  Johnson:  Caves  and  dens.  Chalmers, 
(Supp.  Apol.,  464),  whose  learning  was  rather  tickle  o'  the  sere,  has  on  this  line  a  good 
specimen  note  :  '  Shakespeare  by  no  very  uncommon  quibble  has  used  the  expressions 
"  anters  vast "  and  "  desarts  idle  "  in  one  sense,  when  he  meant  another.    The  progress 

'  of  the  word  "  anters "  seems  to  be  this :  anters,  aunters,  aventers,  adventures ;  and 
hence  the  word  "anters"  came  to  signify,  in  the  language  of  Yorkshire,  strange  things 
or  strange  stories.  So  in  a  disputation  bytwene  a  Chrystens  mon  and  a  Jew,  written 
before  the  year  1300:  "  Hur  schull  we  longe  abyde  Auntres  [adventures]  to  hear." 
The  play  on  "  desarts  idle  "  consists  in  confounding  "  desart "  for  a  wilderness  with 
desert  for  merit;  and  deserts  idle,  or  unworthy  desert,  might  be  deemed  desert,  sine 
pulvere.' 

163.  idle]  Johnson  :  Every  mind  is  liable  to  absence  and  inadvertency,  else  Pope 
could  never  have  rejected  a  word  like  this  so  poetically  beautiful.  '  Idle '  is  an  epithet 
used  to  express  the  infertility  of  the  chaotic  state  in  the  Saxon  translation  of  the  Pen- 
tateuch. Gifford  (Sejanus,  I,  i)  :  It  does  not  seem  to  have  occurred  to  the  commen- 
tators that  wild  might  add  a  feature  of  some  import,  even  to  a  desert ;  whereas,  sterile 
leaves  it  j  -st  as  it  found  it,  and  is  (without  a  pun)  the  idlest  epithet  which  could  be 
applied.  1  >pe,  too,  had  an  ear  for  rhythm;  and  as  his  reading  has  some  touch  of 
Shakespeare,  which  the  other  has  not,  and  is  besides  better  poetry,  I  should  hope  thai 
it  will  one  day  resume  its  proper  place  in  the  text. 


56  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  I,  sc   iii 

Rough  Quarries,  Rocks,  Hills,  whofe  head  touch  heauen, 

It  was  my  hint  to  fpeake.     Such  was  my  Proceffe,  165 

And  of  the  Canibals  that  each  others  eate, 

The  Antropophague,  and  men  whofe  heads  167 

164.  Hills']  and  hi  Is  QqFf,  Rowe  et  cet.         et  cet. 

head]Ro-we\\.    heads  QqFf  etcet.  166.  others']  F2.     other  QqF  F   et  cet. 

165.  hint]  hent  QT,  Warb.  eate,]  eate ;  Qq. 

fpeake .]  fpeake,  Qq,  Knt.  167.  Antropophague]  Anthropophagie 

my]  Q2Q3Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.     the  Qt         Qq.     Anthropophagi  Ff,  Rowe  et  cet. 

165.  hint]  Warburton  adopted  hent,  interpreting  it  as  meaning  use,  custom,  a 
meaning  which  Johnson  said  hent  did  not  have  either  in  Shakespeare  or  in  any  other 
author,  adding :  '  hint '  or  cue  is  commonly  used  for  occasion  of  speech,  which  is  ex- 
plained by  such  is  the  process,  that  is,  the  course  of  the  tale  required  it.  Skeat 
{Etym.  Diet.,  s.  v.) :  Only  the  substantive  occurs  in  Shakespeare  ....  Hint  properly 
signifies  '  a  thing  taken,'  i.  e.  a  thing  caught  or  apprehended ;  being  a  contraction  of 
Middle  English  hinted,  taken ;  or  rather  a  variant  of  the  old  past  participle  hent,  with 
the  same  sense,  ....  which  occurs  in  Meas.  for  Aleas.  IV,  vi,  14. 

167.  Antropophague]  Whalley  (p.  73)  says,  that  the  origin  of  all  these  fables 
is  to  be  found  in  Sir  John  Mandeville's  Travels. — '  Aftreward  men  gon  be  many  Yles 
be  See,  unto  an  Yle  that  men  clepen  Milke  :  and  there  is  a  fulle  cursed  peple :  for  thei 
delyten  in  ne  thing  more,  than  for  to  fighten  and  to  sle  men.  And  thei  drynken  glad- 
lyest  mannes  Blood,  the  whiche  thei  clepen  Dieu'  [p.  195,  ed.  Halliwell].  'And  in 
another  Yle,  toward  the  Southe  duellen  folk  of  foule  Stature  and  of  cursed  kynde,  than 
have  no  Hedes;  and  here  Eyen  ben  in  here  Scholdres'  [p.  203,  lb.].  Theobald  :  Sir 
Walter  Raleigh  in  his  Travels  [The  Discoverie  of  Gviana,  1596,  p.  85,  ed.  Hakluyt 
Soc]  has  given  the  following  account :  '  Next  vnto  Arui  there  are  two  riuers  Atoica 
and  Caora,  and  on  that  braunch  which  is  called  Caora  are  a  nation  of  people,  whose 
heades  appeare  not  aboue  their  shoulders,  which  though  it  may  be  thought  a  meere 
fable,  yet  for  mine  owne  parte  I  am  resolued  it  is  true,  because  euery  child  in  the  prou- 
mces  of  Arromaia  and  Canuri  affinne  the  same :  they  are  called  Ewaipanoma  :  they  are 
reported  to  haue  their  eyes  in  their  shoulders,  and  their  mouths  in  the  middle  of  their 
breasts,  and  that  a  long  train  of  haire  groweth  backward  betwen  their  shoulders  .... 
It  was  not  my  chaunce  to  heare  of  them  til  I  was  come  away,  and  if  I  had  but  spoken 
one  word  of  it  while  I  was  there,  I  might  haue  brought  one  of  them  with  me  to  put 
the  matter  out  of  doubt.  Such  a  nation  was  written  of  by  Maundeuile,  whose  reportes 
were  held  for  fables  many  yeares,  and  yet  since  the  East  Indies  were  discouered,  wee 
finde  his  relations  true  of  such  thinges  as  heeretofore  were  held  incredible :  whether  it 
be  true  or  no  the  matter  is  not  great,  neither  can  there  be  any  profit  in  the  imagination, 
for  mine  owne  part  I  saw  them  not,  but  I  am  resolued  that  so  many  people  did  not  all 
combine,  or  forethinke  to  make  the  report.'  .  .  .  .  '  To  the  west  of  Caroli  are  diuers 
nations  of  Canibals,  and  of  those  Ewaipanoma  without  heades  '  [p.  108,  lb.  In  a  foot- 
note the  editor,  Sir  R.  H.  Schomburgk,  calls  attention  to  Humboldt's  mention  of  an  old 
Indian  whom  he  met,  who  boasted  of  having  seen  these  Acephali  with  his  own  eyes. — 
Ed.]  This  passage  in  Othello,  continues  Theobald,  and  the  same  allusion  in  Temp. 
Ill,  iii,  46,  help  us  in  fixing  the  date  of  these  plays ;  neither  of  them  could  have  been 
written  before  1596.  The  mystery  of  these  headless  People  is  accounted  for  by  Ol- 
earius,  who,  speaking  of  the  Samojeds,  a  people  of  Northern  Muscovy,  says :  •  Theii 


*ct  i,  sc.  Hi.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  57 

Grew  beneath  their  fhoulders.     Thefe  things  to  heare,  168 

168.   Grew]  Ff.   Did grow  Rowe.   Doe         Rowe,  Jen.     All  these  Pope  •+  .     this  Qt, 
^r^w  Qq  et  cet.  Coll.  Dyce,  Wh.  Glo.  Sta.  Cam.  Del.  Rife, 

Thefe   things']    Ff.     thefe   Q2Q3,         Huds. 

garments  are  made  like  those  that  are  call'd  Cosaques,  open  only  at  the  Necks.  When 
the  Cold  is  extraordinary,  they  put  their  Cosaques  over  their  Heads,  and  let  the  Sleeves 
hang  down ;  their  Faces  being  not  to  be  seen,  but  at  the  Cleft  which  is  at  the  Neck. 
Whence  Some  have  taken  Occasion  to  write,  that  in  these  Northern  Countries  there 
are  People  without  Heads,  ha\ing  their  Faces  in  their  Breasts.'  Staunton  thinks 
that  possibly  Shakespeare  had  in  mind  the  2d  chap,  of  the  Seventh  Book  of  Plinies 
Naturall  History,  wherein  the  Anthropophagi  and  these  headless  men  are  mentioned ; 
but  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  if  Shakespeare  had  ever  read  this  chapter  in  Pliny, 
brimming  over  as  it  is  with  monstrosities,  he  would  not  have  selected  as  a  striking 
item  in  Othello's  '  trauels  history '  such  a  trifling  distortion  as  a  man  with  his  face  in 
his  breast.  Within  a  few  pages  of  the  account  of  the  Anthropophagi  in  Sir  Walter's 
Discouerie,  mention  is  made  of  a  very  high  hill,  and  of  digging  out  crystals  with  dag- 
gers and  fingers, — rough  quarrying  certainly. — Ed. 

168.  Rymer  (p.  90) :  This  was  the  Charm,  this  was  the  philtre,  the  love-powder 
that  took  the  Daughter  of  this  Noble  Venetian.  This  was  sufficient  to  make  the 
Black-amoor  White,  and  reconcile  all,  tho'  there  had  been  a  Cloven-foot  into  the  bar- 
gain. A  meaner  woman  might  be  as  soon  taken  by  Aqua  Tetrachymagogon.  Shake- 
speare in  this  Play  calls  'em  the  supersubtle  Venetians.  Yet  examine  throughout  the 
Tragedy,  there  is  nothing  on  the  noble  Desdemona,  that  is  not  below  any  Country 
Chambermaid  with  us.  And  the  account  of  their  Noblemen  and  Senate  can  only  be 
calculated  for  the  latitude  of  Gotham.  Shaftesbury  [Advice  to  an  Author,  17 10, 
Part  III,  sect.  3) :  Tho  Christian  Miracles  may  not  so  well  satisfy  'em  [i.  e.  Atheists] ; 
they  dwell  with  the  highest  Contentment  on  the  Prodigys  of  Moorish  and  Pagan 
Countrys.  They  have  far  more  Pleasure  in  hearing  the  monstrous  Accounts  of  mon- 
strous Men  and  Manners,  than  the  politest  and  best  Narrations  of  the  Affairs,  the  Gov- 
ernments, and  Lives  of  the  wisest  and  most  polish'd  People This  Humour  our 

old  Tragick  Poet  seems  to  have  discover'd.  Pie  hit  our  Taste  in  giving  us  a  Moorish 
Hero,  full  fraught  with  Prodigy:  a  wondrous  Story-teller !  But  for  the  attentive  Part, 
the  Poet  chose  to  give  it  to  Woman-kind.  What  passionate  Reader  of  Travels,  or 
Student  in  the  prodigious  Sciences,  can  refuse  to  pity  that  fair  Lady,  who  fell  in  Love 
with  the  miracttlous  Moor?  especially  considering  with  what  sutable  grace  such  a 
Lover  cou'd  relate  the  most  monstrous  Adventures,  and  satisfy  the  wondering  Appetite 
with  the  most  wondrous  Tales;  [lines  165-169  are  here  quoted].  Seriously, 'twas  a 
woful  Tale !  unfit,  one  wou'd  think,  to  win  a  tender  Fair-one.  It's  true,  the  Poet  suf- 
ficiently condemns  her  Fancy;  and  makes  her  (poor  Lady!)  pay  dearly  for  it  in  the 
end.  But  why,  amongst  his  Greek  names,  he  shou'd  have  chosen  one  which  denoted 
the  Lady  Superstitious,  I  can't  imagine :  unless,  as  Poets  are  sometimes  Prophets  too, 
he  shou'd  figuratively  under  this  dark  Type  have  represented  to  us,  That  about  a  hun- 
dred Years  after  his  Time,  the  Fair  sex  of  this  Island  shou'd,  by  other  monstrous  Tales, 
be  so  seduc'd  as  to  turn  their  Favour  chiefly  on  the  persons  of  the  Tale-tellers ;  and 
change  their  natural  Inclination  for  fair,  candid,  and  courteous  Knights  into  a  Passion 
for  a  mysterious  Race  of  black  Enchanters :  such  as  of  old  were  said  to  creep  into 
Houses,  and  lead  captive  silly  Women But  whatever  monstrous  Zeal  x  super- 
stitious Passion  the  Poet  might  foretel,  either  in  the  Gentlemen,  Ladys,  or  comnon 


58  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  i,  sc.  iii. 

Would  Defdemona  ferioufly  incline : 

But  Mill  the  houfe  Affaires  would  draw  her  hence :  170 

Which  euer  as  fhe  could  with  hafte  difpatch, 

She'l'd  come  againe,  and  with  a  greedie  eare  172 

170.  houfe  Affairs']  house-affairs Tope.  171.  Which]  And  Qf. 

hence]    Ff,  Rowe,  Del.      thence  172.  She'l'd]  Shee'd  Qq.     She'ldYi. 

Qq  et  cet. 

People,  of  an  after  Age ;  'tis  certain  that  as  to  Books,  the  same  Moorish  Fancy,  in  its 
plain  and  literal  sense,  prevails  strongly  at  the  present  time.  Monsters  and  Monster- 
lands  were  never  more  in  request :  And  we  may  often  see  a  Philosopher,  or  a  Wit,  run 
a  Tale-gathering  in  those  idle  Desarts,  as  familiarly  as  the  silliest  Woman  or  the  merest 
Boy.  Warburton:  Discourses  of  this  nature  made  the  subject  of  the  politest  conver- 
sation, when  voyages  into,  and  discoveries  of,  the  new  world  were  all  in  vogue.  So, 
when  the  Bastard  Faulconbridge  in  King  John,  describes  the  behaviour  of  upstart  great- 
ness, he  makes  one  of  the  essential  circumstances  of  it  to  be  this  kind  of  table-talk. 
The  fashion  then  running  altogether  this  way,  it  is  no  wonder  a  young  lady  of  quality 
should  be  struck  with  the  history  of  an  adventurer.  Johnson  :  Whoever  ridicules 
this  account  of  the  progress  of  love,  shows  his  ignorance  not  only  of  history,  but  also 
of  nature  and  manners.  It  is  no  wonder  that,  in  any  age  or  in  any  nation,  a  lady — 
recluse,  timorous,  and  delicate — should  desire  to  hear  of  events  and  scenes  which  she 
could  never  see ;  and  should  admire  the  man  who  had  endured  dangers  and  performed 
actions,  which,  however  great,  were  yet  magnified  by  her  timidity. 

170.  still]  That  is,  constantly.  Very  frequent  in  Shakespeare  thus  used,  see  Rom. 
&  Jul.  V,  iii,  106;  Macb.  V,  viii,  14;  Lear,  II,  iv,  102;  Ham.  II,  ii,  42. 

170.  would]  Abbott,  §  330 :  •  Would '  often  means  '  liked,'  '  was  accustomed.'  Com- 
pare ecplXei. 

170.  hence]  Is  there  any  necessity  for  deserting  the  Ff  here  ?  Is  not  'hence  '  some- 
what more  vivid  than  '  thence,'  just  as  here  is  nearer  than  there  ? — Ed. 

172.  greedie  eare]  Malone  cites,  '  Hang  both  your  greedy  ears  upon  my  lips;  Let 
them  devour  my  speech,'  as  a  parallel  passage  from  Lust's  Dominion,  which  he  says 
was  written  by  Marlowe,  and  before  1593.  If  Marlowe  were  the  author,  it  was,  of 
course,  written  before  that  year,  the  year  in  which  Marlowe  was  killed.  Collier,  how- 
ever, has  shown  (Dodsley's  Old  Plays,  vol.  ii,  p.  311,  ed.  1825)  by  internal  evidence 
that  this  tragedy  was  written  after  1598,  the  year  in  which  Philip  II.  of  Spain  died, 
whose  death  is  represented  in  the  First  Act;  furthermore,  that  a  tract  was  printed  in 
London  in  1599,  called  'Abriefe  and  true  Declaration  of  the  Sicknesse,  last  words, 
and  Death  of  the  King  of  Spain,  Philip  Second,'  from  which  various  passages  of  the 
play  were  clearly  borrowed ;  Collier  cites  three  or  four  of  them,  which  reveal  not  '  simi- 
larity, but  identity.'  In  Henslowe's  Diary  (p.  165,  ed.  Shaks.  Soc),  an  item  refers  to 
the  payment  on  'the  13  of  febrearye,  1599,'  of  three  pounds  'for  a  boocke  called  the 
Spanesche  Mores  tragedie,  unto  Thomas  Deckers,  Wm.  Harton,  John  Daye ;'  this  trag- 
edy Collier  conjectured  [Hist,  of  Dram.  Poetry,  vol.  ii,  p.  477,  ed.  1879),  with  'great 
probability,'  says  Dyce  (Marlowe's  Works,  i,  p.  lviii),  to  be  the  same  as  Lust's  Do- 
minion. I  have  thought  it  worth  while  to  be  thus  particular  about  this  miserable  stuff, 
quite  as  wretched  as  portions  of  Titus  Andronicus,  which  it  somewhat  resembles,  be- 
cause Malone  finds  in  it  another  parallelism  with  Othello,  in  II,  i,  229,  and  Steevens 
Ties  so  far  as  to  suggest  that  possibly  Shikespeare  may  have  acted  in  it.     Collier  men 


alt  i,  sc.  lii.J  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  59 

Dcuoure  vp  it  y  difcourfe.     Which  I  obferuing,  173 

Tooke  once  a  pliant  houre,  and  found  good  meanes 

To  draw  from  her  a  prayer  of  earneft  heart,  175 

That  I  would  all  my  Pilgrimage  dilate, 

Whereof  by  parcels  (lie  had  fomething  heard, 

But  not  inftinctiuely  :  I  did  confent, 

And  often  did  beguile  her  of  her  teares, 

When  I  did  fpeake  of  fome  diftreffefull  ftroke  180 

That  my  youth  fuffer'd  :  My  Storie  being  done, 

She  gaue  me  for  my  paines  a  world  of  kiffes:  182 

173.  difcourfe.]  difcourfe;  Qq.  Dif-  Rovve  +  ,  Cap.  Rann.  intentively  Qq, 
courfe,  F  .                                                                Johns,  et  cet. 

176.  dilate]  relate  Quincy  (MS).  180.  diftreffefull]  diflreffed Q,,  Morel. 

177.  parcels]  parcell  Q,.  181.  fuffer'd]  fuffered  Qq. 

178.  not]  nought  Cap.  conj.  182.  kiffes]  Ff,  Rowe.     thanks  South- 
inflincliuely]     diflinclively  Ff,         em  (MS),    fighes  Qq  et  cet. 

tions  no  earlier  printed  copy  of  it  than  1657.  Malone  also  cites  from  the  Faerie  Queene, 
VI,  ix  (231,  ed.  Grosart),  '  Whylest  thus  he  talkt,  the  knight  with  greedy  eare  Hung  stilJ 
upon,'  &c.     And  Steevens  shows  that  aures  avida  may  be  found  in  Cicero. 

174.  good]  Forrest  emphasized  this  word — Rees's  Life,  p.  141. 

176.  dilate]  That  is,  relate  at  length.     Conf.  Ham.  I,  ii,  38,  'these  dilated  articles. 

178.  instinctiuely]  Knight:  A  decided  typographical  error.  This,  and  a  few 
other  errors  of  the  same  sort  which  are  corrected  by  a  reference  to  the  Qto,  prove  that 
the  Folio  was  printed  from  MS.,  and  most  probably  before  the  publication  of  the  Qto ; 
had  it  been  consulted,  these  errors  would  not  have  been  committed.  Steevens  :  In- 
tention and  attention  were  once  synonymous.  Desdemona,  who  was  often  called  out 
of  the  room  on  house-affairs,  could  not  have  heard  Othello's  tale  intentively,  i.  e.  with 
attention  to  all  its  parts.  Dyce  [Remarks,  p.  234)  :  Intentively  was  always  used  as 
equivalent  to  attentively,  not  only  by  the  writers  of  Shakespeare's  time,  but  by  those 
of  a  much  earlier  date.  Palsgrave  has  (Intentyfex  hedefull.' — '  Ententyfe,  busy  to  do  a 
thynge  or  to  take  hede  to  a  thyng.'  Singer  quotes  Bullokar's  Expositor :  '  Intentiue  ■ 
Which  listeneth  well,  and  is  earnestly  bent  to  a  thing.'  Lettsom  (Walker's  Crit.  i, 
181,  Foot-note) :  '  Distinctiuely '  seems  a  mere  sophistication  of  F2  for  instinctiuely,  the 
nonsensical  reading  of  Fx.  In  this  particular  passage  intentively  seems  to  mean  either 
all  at  a  stretch,  or  so  as  to  comprehend  the  story  as  a  whole.  R.  M.  Spence  (2V.  & 
Qu.,  5th,  xi,  383)  upholds  distinctively,  which  means,  he  alleges,  in  detail.  \_Enten- 
tivement :  Jntentiuely,  busily,  earnestly;  attentiuely,  carefully,  heedfully. — Cotgrave 
But  it  is  needless  to  multiply  proofs  that  intentiue  meant  attentiue.  Lettsom  seems  tc 
me  to  have  rightly  interpreted  the  requirements  of  the  meaning  here. — Ed.] 

180.  distresseful]  Morel,  whose  thoughtful  edition  enlists  respect  for  his  opinion 
prefers  the  Qto,  as  an  instance  where  the  past  participle  in  -ed  is  equivalent  to  the  ad 
jective  in  -full,  as  delighted  for  delightful,  &c. 

182.  kisses]  Pope:  Sighs  is  evidently  the  true  reading.  The  lady  had  been  for- 
ward indeed,  to  give  him  a  world  of  kisses  upon  the  bare  recital  of  his  story,  nor  does  i? 
agree  with  the  following  lines.     [And  yet  we  must  remember  that  kissing  in  Eliza 


60  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  i,  sc.  iii. 

She  fwore  in  faith  'twas  ftrange  :  'twas  paffing  ftrange,  183 

'Twas  pittifull  :  'twas  wondrous  pittifull. 

She  wifh'd  fhe  had  not  heard  it,  yet  fhe  wifh'd  185 

That  Heauen  had  made  her  fuch  a  man.    She  thank'd  me, 

183.  in  fait 7/]  I  faith  Qq.  ful,... pitiful.  ¥ '4,Ktly.  pitiful,... pitiful— 
fl range  :  . . .ftrange,"]   fl range, . . .  Rowe  + ,  Jen.    pittifull, . . .pittifull ;  Qq  et 

ftrange,  F2,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Glo.  Rife,  Wh.  cet. 

ii.    fl  range,... ftrange.  F3F4.    ftrange,...  185.  wiflt' d]  wiflit  Qc\. 

ftrange  ;  Qq  et  cet.  186.  thank  d]  thanked  Qq. 

184.  pittifull : ...pittifull .]  F2F3<    /#z- 

beth's  time  was  not  as  significant  as  it  is  now.  See  the  openness  with  which,  in  II,  i, 
Cassio  kisses  Emilia. — Ed.] 

183.  swore]  Steevens  quotes  Whitaker's  Vindication  of  Mary  Queen  of  Scots,  ii, 
487 :  '  Let  not  the  modern  reader  be  hurt  here  and  in  paragraph  X.  at  a  Lady,  a 
Queen,  and  a  Mary,  swearing.  To  aver  upon  faith  and  honour  was  then  called  swear- 
ing, equally  with  a  solemn  appeal  to  God,  and  considered  the  same  with  it And 

thus  Shakespeare  makes  Othello  to  represent  Desdemona  as  acting,  in  a  passage  [the 
present  one]  that  I  have  often  condemned,  before  I  saw  this  easy  explanation  of  it,  as 
one  among  many  proofs  of  Shakespeare's  inability  to  exhibit  the  delicate  graces  of 
female  conversation.'  '  This  remark,'  adds  Steevens,  '  serves  at  once  to  justify  Des- 
demona and  Queen  Mary,  and  to  show  what  kind  of  swearing  was  done  by  both ;  not 
a  bold  and  masculine  oath  put  into  the  mouth  of  Desdemona,  such  as  Elizabeth  fre- 
quently used,  but  a  more  earnest  affirmation  upon  her  faith  and  honour,  which  she  con- 
sidered as  the  same  with  a  solemn  appeal  to  God.'  Whitaker's  confession  that  he  had 
once  condemned  this  passage  as  one  of  the  many  proofs  of  Shakespeare's  inability  to 
exhibit  the  delicate  graces  of  female  conversation,  Knight  quotes,  but  attributes  it  to 
Steevens,  and  upon  Steevens  lets  fall  his  bitter  indignation.  '  Perhaps,'  he  says,  '  the 
remainder  of  his  many  proofs  would,  in  the  same  way,  have  been  destroyed,  if  he  had 
possessed  the  slightest  capacity  for  distinguishing  between  the  true  and  the  meretricious 
in  sentiment  and  style ;  but  what  could  be  expected  of  a  man  who,  writing  Notes  upon 
the  Sonnets,  laments  his  "piteous  constraint  to  read  such  stuff  at  all"  ?' 

183,  184.  The  punctuation  of  Fx  (discarded  by  almost  every  modern  editor)  in  these 
two  lines  is  noteworthy,  and,  in  my  opinion,  should  be  retained.  'It  was  strange;  nay, 
it  was  much  more  than  strange,  it  was  pitifull ;  it  was  wondrous  pitifull.'  Staunton 
says,  at  V,  ii,  236,  that  *  strange '  here  means  more  than  it  now  means,  it  is  equivalent 
to  1  incredible.' — Ed. 

185.  186.  She  .  .  .  man]  In  this  wish  of  Desdemona  is  'her'  the  accusative  or 
the  dative  ?  Our  German  brothers,  in  their  translations,  are  forced  to  decide  this  ques- 
tion ;  we  can  smiling  put  it  by.  Tieck  (or,  probably,  Baudissin,  to  whose  share  fell 
the  translation  of  Othello)  notes  that  Eschenburg  in  1779  translated  'her'  as  an  accu- 
sative, and  rightly,  as  Tieck  thinks :  *  der  Himmel  hatte  soldi  einen  Mann  aus  ihr 
gemacht,'  but  that  in  his  translation  of  1805  he  had  gone  astray  on  the  dative:  'der 
Himmel  hatte  ihr  solch  einen  Mann  bestimmt.'  Tieck  did  not  notice  that  the  error, 
f  such  it  be,  lay  farther  back  than  Eschenburg.  In  1766  Wieland  translated  the  line : 
'der  Himmel  hatte  einen  solchen  Mann  fur  sie  gemacht.'  Among  English  editors 
Anight  is  not  sure  that  the  dative  is  wrong;  Cowden-Clarke  (surely  a  good  author- 
ity on  matters  )f  womanly  delicacv, — if  not  the  court  of  last  resort  therein)  decides  foi 


Acr  i,  *c.  iii.J  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  6 1 

And  bad  me,  if  I  had  a  Friend  that  lou'd  her,  187 

I  mould  but  teach  him  how  to  tell  my  Story, 

And  that  would  wooe  her.     Vpon  this  hint  I  fpake, 

She  lou'd  me  for  the  dangers  I  had  paft,  190 

And  I  lou'd  her,  that  fhe  did  pitty  them. 

This  onely  is  the  witch-craft  I  haue  vs'd.  192 

187.  had']  hat  Q  .  189.  hint']  heate  Qq. 

lou\i~\  loned  Qq.  190.  loitd~\  loved  Q  . 
189.  %vooc\  ivoe  Q2Q3-  had"]  have  Ff,  Roue. 

Vpon~\  On  Pope  +  . 

the  dative,  and  even  thinks  it  strange  that  it  should  be  questioned ;  Hudson  also  is 
emphatically  in  favour  of  the  dative,  and  exclaims  at  those  who,  'lest  the  lady's  deli- 
cacy should  be  impeached!'  insist  on  the  accusative;  Rolfe  pronounces  in  favour  of 
the  dative :  '  That  is,  for  her,'  and  adds  that  what  follows  '  favours  this  explanation.' 
Purnell  thinks  it  is  the  dative,  but  gives  it  a  shade  of  softness  by  calling  it  the  ethical 
dative.  And  yet  in  spite  of  all  this  array,  I  cannot  bring  myself  to  believe  that  the 
voung  girl's  thoughts  had  so  quickly  turned  to  marriage, — she  was  still  lost  in  the  won- 
drous, pitiful  story,  which,  although  she  had  with  earnest  heart  prayed  for  it,  she  now 
wished  she  hadn't  heard ;  'yet  she  wished '  she  could  herself  have  seen  these  won- 
drous sights,  and  have  been  herself  the  hero  of  these  distressful  strokes.  Is  it  not  a 
most  natural  wish,  to  be  the  very  hero  himself  before  whose  feet  smooth  success  is 
strewed,  as  it  had  been  before  Othello's  ?  Is  it  unusual  to  hear  a  girl  express  the  wish 
that  she  were  a  man  ?  It  was  not  in  this  wish  that  Othello  detected  the  '  hint,'  but  in 
the  '  Friend  that  loved  her.'  If  Desdemona  had  expressed  the  wish  to  Othello's  face, 
that  Heaven  had  made  a  husband  for  her  just  like  Othello  himself,  I  doubt  if  the  latter, 
or  any  one  else,  would  have  softened  the  expression  into  a  '  hint? — Ed. 

192.  Lewes  (On  Actors,  &c,  p.  5):  Even  in  earlier  and  better  days  there  was 
much  in  [Kean's]  performance  of  Othello  which  was  spasmodic,  slovenly,  false.  The 
address  to  the  Senate  was  very  bad.  He  had  little  power  of  elocution,  unless  when 
sustained  by  a  strong  emotion ;  and  this  long,  simple  narrative  was  the  kind  of  speech 
he  could  not  manage  at  all.  He  gabbled  over  it,  impatient  to  arrive  at  the  phrase : 
1  And  this  was  all  the  witchcraft  I  have  used.  Here  comes  the  lady,  let  her  witness 
it.'  His  delivery  of  this  'point,'  always  startled  the  audience  into  applause  by  its 
incisive  tone  and  its  abrupt  transition ;  yet  nothing  could  be  more  out  of  keeping  with 
the  Shakespearian  character.  Othello  might  smile  with  lofty  disdain  at  the  accusation 
of  witchcraft,  or  rebut  it  calmly,  but  not  make  it  the  climax  of  a  withering  sarcasm, — 
attacking  the  word  '  witchcraft '  with  high  and  sudden  emphasis,  and  dropping  into  an 
almost  disrespectful  colloquialism  as  the  lady  appeared.  Indeed,  throughout  the  First 
and  Second  Acts,  with  the  exception  of  occasional  flashes  (as  in  the  passionate  fervour 
with  which  he  greets  Desdemona  on  landing  at  Cyprus),  Kean's  Othello  was  rather 
irritating  and  disappointing, — arresting  the  mind,  but  not  satisfying  it.  From  the 
Third  Act  onwards,  all  was  wrought  out  with  a  mastery  over  the  resources  of  ex- 
pression such  as  has  been  seldom  approached.  In  the  successive  unfolding  of  these 
great  scenes  he  represented  with  incomparable  effect  the  lion-like  fury,  the  deep  and 
haggard  pathos,  the  forlorn  sense  of  desolation  alternating  with  gusts  of  stormy  cries 
for  vengeance,  the  misgivings  and  sudden  reassurances,  the  calm  and  deadly  ieso- 
lution  of  one  not  easily  moved,  but  who,  being  moved,  was  stirred  to  the  very  depths. 


62  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [ACT  I,  SC.  iii. 

Here  conies  the  Ladie  :  Let  her  witnefle  it.  193 

Enter  Dejdemona,  Iago,  Attendants. 

Duke.    I  thinke  this  tale  would  win  my  Daughter  too,         195 
Good  Brabantio,  take  vp  this  mangled  matter  at  the  beft : 
Men  do  their  broken  Weapons  rather  vfe, 
Then  their  bare  hands. 

Bra.     I  pray  you  heare  her  fpeake  ? 
If  fhe  confeffe  that  fhe  was  halfe  the  wooer,  200 

Deftruclion  on  my  head,  if  my  bad  blame 
Light  on  the  man.  Come  hither  gentle  Miftris, 
Do  you  perceiue  in  all  this  Noble  Companie, 
Where  moil  you  owe  obedience? 

Def.     My  Noble  Father,  205 

I  do  perceiue  heere  a  diuided  dutie. 

193.  Two  lines,  Qq.  Pope  et  seq. 

Ladie  .•]  Lady,  QqF  F.  201.  on  my  head]  lite  on  me  Q^\.    {light 

194.  Attendants.]  and  the  reft.  Qq.  ...  Q2Q3). 

Scene  IX.  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  203.  this]  his  F2. 

195.  too,"]  to, —  Qx.  to; — Q2Q3«  too —  2°4~  moft  you\  you  mojl  Pope  + .  you 
Pope  +  .     too.  Rowe,  Johns,  et  seq.  must  Warb. 

196.  Good   Brabantio]    Separate   line,  205.  My  Noble]  Noble  Pope,  Han. 

Booth:  Let  this  line  be  the  climax,  not 'she  did  pity  them.'  After  192:  Re-enter 
Roderigo  and  others.  Their  return  announces  the  lady's  coming.  Fechter's  Stage 
direction  here  is :  '  Goes  to  lead  in  Desdemona.' 

195.  Booth:  Othello  should  playfully  acknowledge  this  compliment.  Lloyd: 
This  round,  unvarnished  tale  carries  conviction  to  all, — even  to  Brabantio  himself;  for 
though  he  professes  to  reserve  his  belief  till  his  daughter  shall  confess  whether  she 
were  half  the  wooer,  he  never  asks  her  that  question,  but  another  instead,  which  she 
could  not  have  answered  otherwise  than  she  did,  had  the  accusation  of  witchcraft  been 
well  founded. 

202.  Come  hither]  Fechter  directs  Othello  to  conduct  Desdemona  to  the  place 
he  (Othello)  occupied,  and  then  retire  among  his  followers.  Booth  :  The  '  evil  eye  ' 
*s  dreaded,  even  now,  by  superstitious  Italians,  more  than  other  charms ;  it  is  strange 
that  Shakespeare  did  not  refer  to  it.  Othello  must  not  '  give  a  loop  to  hang  a  doubt 
on '  touching  his  influence  over  Desdemona ;  he  must  not  even  look  at  her,  nor,  worse 
still,  go  to  meet  her,  which  the  Court  would  not  permit.  But  he  must  turn  his  back 
towards  her  until  she  announces  him  as  her  husband,  then  let  him  turn  and  face  her 
and  the  whole  Court. 

206-210.  Boaden  {Life  of  John  Kemble,  i,  258) :  I  question  whether  equal  dis- 
crimination was  ever  before  given  [as  by  Mrs  Siddons]  to  these  lines :  •  My  noble 
tather,  I  do  perceive  here,  a  divided  duty ;  To  you,  I  am  bound,  &c.  But  here's  my 
husband.'  Moberly  {Rom.  &  Jul.  II,  vi,  25,  in  that  most  exquisite  of  all  love-scenes 
where  Romeo  begs  Juliet  to  '  let  rich  music's  tongue  unfold  the  imagined  happiness ') : 
Compare  *he  admirable  way  in  which  Desdemona,  when  called  upon  to  say  whether 


act  I,  sc.  lii.]  THE  MOORE  OF   VENICE  63 

To  you  I  am  bound  for  life,  and  education  :  207 

My  life  and  education  both  do  learne  me, 

How  to  refpecT:  you.     You  are  the  Lord  of  duty, 

I  am  hitherto  your  Daughter.    But  heere's  my  Husband;        210 

And  fo  much  dutie,  as  my  Mother  fhew'd 

To  you, preferring  you  before  her  Father:  [3*4  &] 

So  much  I  challenge,  that  Imay  profeffe 

Due  to  the  Moore  my  Lord. 

Bra.     God  be  with  you  :  I  haue  done.  215 

Pleafe  it  your  Grace,  on  to  the  State  Affaires; 
I  had  rather  to  adopt  a  Child,  then  get  it. 
Come  hither  Moore; 
\  I  here  do  giue  thee  that  with  all  my  heart, 
Which  but  thou  haft  already,  with  all  my  heart  220 

207,  210,  222.  lam]  Pm  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  b'w'ye,  Jen.  God  be  wi^you  ;  Cap.  Glo. 
rii,  Huds.  Ktly.     God  VwVyou!   Sing,  ii,  Wh.  i, 

209.  you."]  you,  Qq.  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 

You  are]  You're  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii,  haue]  ha  Qq.     ha?  Jen. 

Huds.  219.  with  all]  withall  Q2Q3. 

the  Lord  of]  Lord  of  all  my  Qx.  220.  Om.  Qx. 

211.  Jhevfd]  JJiewed  Qq.  Which]  Which,  F4,  Rowe  et  seq. 

213.  much]  much  mujl  Q  .  all]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 
215.  God. .  .you  :]  God  buy,  Qq.     God 

her  love  for  Othello  grew  up  as  he  had  said,  confines  herself,  with  perfect  dignity,  to  a 
declaration  that  her  duty  is  now  to  the  Moor,  her  lord,  in  the  same  sense  in  which  her 
mother's  duty  had  been  to  her  father.  The  same  point  is  prettily  brought  out  in  the 
Galilie  of  Ponsard,  in  which  two  lovers,  Taddeo  and  Antonia,  are  imagining  a  conver- 
sation between  two  like  themselves  in  the  moon :  '  Ant.  Et  comment  repond  elle  ? 
Tadd.  Ah,  je  l'ignore  !  Ant.  Eh,  bien,  Je  le  sais,  moi.  Tadd.  (ardemment)  Parlez ! 
que  dit  elle  ?  Ant.  Rien.  Tadd.  Rien  ?  Ant.  Mais  elle  sourit,  sur  son  bras  s'appuie 
Et  se  sent  tout  emue  et  tout  epanouie.' 

208.  learne]  See  Schmidt  [Lex.)  for  eight  or  ten  instances,  besides  the  present, 
where  we  should  now  use  teach. 

214,  215.  Walker  ( Vers.,  227) :  'God  be  with  you'  is,  in  fact,  God  b1  wV  you  : 
sometimes  a  trisyllable,  sometimes  contracted  into  a  disyllable ;  now  Good-bye.  Ac- 
cordingly write  :  '  Due  to  the  Moor,  my  lord.  God  b'  wi'  you  !  I've  done '  [one  line. 
See  III,  iii,  433.] 

214.  Fechter  :  Othello  advances,  and  kisses  her  hand.  Brabantio,  overpowered, 
resumes  his  seat. 

217.  Schmidt  (Trans.)  refers  to  a  similar  thought,  amplified,  in  Much  Ado,  IV, 
i,  129. 

217.  get]  That  is,  beget.    For  other  instances  of  dropped  prefixes,  see  Abbott,  §  460. 

220.  White  :  The  omission  of  this  line  in  the  Qto  is  doubtless  due  to  an  oversight 
of  the  compositor,  caused  by  the  recurrence  of  the  same  words  at  the  end  both  of  tl  is 
and  of  the  previous  line. 


64  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act.  i,  sc.  iiu 

I  would  keepe  from  thee.     For  your  fake  (Iewell)  221 

I  am  glad  at  foule,  I  haue  no  other  Child, 

For  thy  efcape  would  teach  me  Tirranie 

To  hang  clogges  on  them.     I  haue  done  my  Lord. 

Duke.     Let  me  fpeake  like  your  felfe :  225 

And  lay  a  Sentence, 
Which  as  a  grife,  or  ftep  may  helpe  thefe  Louers.  227 

221.  For  your]   And  for  your  Han.  225.  your  felfe]  our  self  Warb. 

Cap.  227.  as  a]  like  a  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

222.  foule,  I]  foule.  LQX.  Cap. 

224.  them.]  em,  Qq.  grife]  greefe  Qq. 

my  Lord]    lord  Qx    (Steevens's  Louers.]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.     louers 

Rep.).  Into  your  fauour  (reading  Into...fauour 

225,  226.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq.  as  a  separate  line)  Qq  et  cet. 

219  et  seq.  Booth:  Let  the  actor  speak  these  lines  with  anguish,  and  he'll  find 
out  why  the  '  First  Old  Man '  is  generally  cast  for  so  small  a  part ;  the  audience  will 
tell  him. 

220.  hast]  Equivalent  to  'hast  it?  the  it  has  been  absorbed  in  the  final  /  of  'hast.' 
Compare  'That'  worthied  him,'  Lear,  II,  ii,  Il6. — Ed. 

221.  your]  Lettsom  :  The  sense,  as  well  as  the  metre,  requires  'For  my  own  sake, 
jewel.'  [Although  Hudson,  in  his  ed.  hi,  adopts  this  reading  of  Lettsom,  yet  in  his 
note  he  gives  what  is,  to  my  thinking,  a  sufficient  reason  for  adhering  to  the  Folio : 
*  For  your  sake '  can  nowise  be  made  to  tally  with  the  context,  except  by  taking  the 
phrase  as  equivalent  to  on  your  account, — a  sense  which,  to  be  sure,  it  sometimes 
bears,'  and  which  I  cannot  but  think  is  the  very  meaning  here :  'It  is  on  account  of 
your  example,  jewel,  that  I  am  glad,'  &c,  is  what  I  think  Brabantio  says  in  effect. — 
Ed.] 

223.  escape]  Cowden-Clarke :  Besides  its  meaning  of  'getting  forth,'  'flight,' 
'elopement,'  we  think  it  probable  that  'escape'  here  includes  the  sense  of  'sally,' 
'prank,'  as  shown  to  be  derived  from  the  French,  escapade. 

224.  To  hang]  That  is,  in  hanging  clogs,  &c.  For  instances  of  the  infinitive  thus 
indefinitely  used,  see  Abbott,  §356. 

225-227.  Hanmer  reads  and  divides  thus  :  •  Let  me  now  speak  more  like  yourself; 
and  lay  ||  A  sentence  in,  which,  like  a  grise  or  step  ||  May  help  these  lovers  here  into  your 
favour.' 

225.  your  selfe]  Warburton  :  It  should  be  '  our  self,'  i.  e.  let  me  mediate  between 
you  as  becomes  a  prince  and  common  father  of  his  people.  The  prince's  opinion,  here 
delivered,  was  quite  contrary  to  Brabantio's  sentiment.  Johnson  :  The  duke  seems  to 
mean,  when  he  says  he  will  speak  like  Brabantio,  that  he  will  speak  sententiously. 
Heath  (p.  557) :  That  is,  Let  me  add  my  own  judgement  in  confirmation  of  what 
you  yourself  have  just  said.  For  in  effect,  what  Brabantio  had  just  said,  implying  an 
acquiescence  in  what  was  done,  merely  because  it  was  done  and  could  not  be  undone, 
is  the  very  purport  of  the  duke's  speech.  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  :  That  is,  let  me 
speak  as  yourself  would  speak  were  you  not  too  much  heated  with  passion. 

227.  grise]  Dyce  (Gloss.):  A  step.  'She  gan  anone  by  greces  to  assende  Of  a 
Touret  in  to  an  hye  pynacle.' — Lydgate's  Warres  of  Troy,  B.  i,  ed.  1555  See  Twelfth 
Night,  III,  i,  135;  Tim.  IV,  iii.  16. 


ACT  I,  SC.  ill-] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


65 


When  remedies  are  paft,  the  griefes  are  ended  228 

By  feeing  the  worft,  which  late  on  hopes  depended. 

To  mourne  a  Mifcheefe  that  is  paft  and  gon,  230 

Is  the  next  way  to  draw  new  mifchiefe  on. 

What  cannot  be  prefern'd,  when  Fortune  takes  : 

Patience  ,  her  Iniury  a  mock 'ry  makes. 

The  rob'd  that  fmiles,  fteales  fomething  from  the  Thiefe, 

He  robs  himfelfe,  that  fpends  a  booteleffe  griefe.  235 

Bra.     So  let  the  Turke  of  Cyprus  vs  beguile, 
We  loofe  it  not  fo  long  as  we  can  fmile : 
He  beares  the  Sentence  well,  that  nothing  beares, 
But  the  free  comfort  which  from  thence  he  heares. 
But  he  beares  both  the  Sentence,  and  the  forrow,  240 

That  to  pay  griefe,  muft  of  poore  Patience  borrow. 
Thefe  Sentences,  to  Sugar,  or  to  Gall, 
Being  ftrong  on  both  fides,  are  Equiuocall. 
But  words  are  words,  I  neuer  yet  did  heare : 
That  the  bruized  heart  was  pierc'd  through  the  eares.  245 


228. 

Han. 
229. 
230. 
231. 
232. 

233- 

234. 
236. 


ended"]  ended,  Qq,  Cap.     ended ; 

the  worjl  ]  worjl  FF. 

gon\  Fx. 

new]  more  Qq,  Coll.  Wh.  i. 

preferri 'd]  preferu'd  QqFf. 

takes:]  takes,  Qq. 

mock' ry]  mockery  QxQ3¥f.    mock- 

the  Thiefe]  a  thiefe  Q  . 

So  let  ]  So,  let  Theob.  + ,  Jen. 

Cyprus]  Cipres  Qt. 


237.  loofe]  lofe  QqFf, 

238,  239.  beares... comfort]   cares  For 
the  false  comforts  Han. 

240.  beares]  heares  F  .  hears  F  ,  Row 
Pope,     heaps  Han. 

244.  words, . . . heare  :]    words, ...he arc, 
Qq.     words :...hear,  FF. 

245 .  bruized. .  .pierc'd] bruis'd. . .piercea 
QqFf  et  cet. 

pierc'd]  pieced  Theob.  +  ,  Cap. 
eares]  Fx. 


227.  louers]  The  addition  of  theQq:  'Into  your  favour'  is  not  needed;  does  it 
not,  in  fact,  sound  a  little  weak  after  the  Duke  has  said,  '  Let  me  speak  like  yourself  ? 
—Ed. 

228.  Compare  •  Past  cure  is  still  past  care,'  Love's  Lab.  V,  ii,  28 ;  '  What's  gone  and 
what's  past  help  Should  be  past  grief,'  Wint.  Tale,  III,  ii,  223 ;  '  Things  without  all 
remedy  Should  be  without  regard,'  Macb.  Ill,  ii,  II. — Ed. 

238.  nothing  beares]  Rann  :  Who  is  no  further  interested  therein  than  barely  to 
admire  the  moral  beauties  it  contains. 

239.  free  comfort]  Johnson  :  But  the  moral  precepts  of  consolation,  which  are 
liberally  bestowed  on  occasion  of  the  sentence. 

245.  pierc'd]  Theobald  :  It  is  obvious  that  the  text  must  be  restored,  as  Mr  War- 
burton  acutely  observed  to  me :  pieced,  i.  e.  That  the  wounds  of  sorrow  were  ever 
cured  or  a  man  made  heart-whole  merely  by  words  of  consolation.     Jennens  :  Theo- 
bald   and  all  after,  read  pieced  (i.  e.  cured),  because  *  pierced'  (it  seems)  signifies 
5 


66  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  i,  sc.  in. 

[245.  the  bruized  heart  was  pierc'd  through  the  eares]. 
wounded.  True,  so  it  does  sometimes ;  but  it  is  also  used  in  a  good  sense,  as  here,  for 
touching,  affecting,  comforting,  as  with  music,  the  '  bruised  heart ' — '  the  ear-piercing 
fife.' — Piec'd  is  a  wretched  emendation ;  who  ever  talked  of  piecing  a  bruise  ?  Sir 
Joshua  Reynolds  :  Shakespeare  was  continually  changing  his  first  expression  for 
another,  either  stronger  or  more  uncommon ;  so  that  very  often  the  reader,  who  has 
not  the  same  continuity  or  succession  of  ideas,  is  at  a  loss  for  its  meaning.  Many  of 
Shakespeare's  uncouth,  strained  epithets  may  be  explained  by  going  back  to  the  ob- 
vious and  simple  expression,  which  is  most  likely  to  occur  to  the  mind  in  that  state. 
i  can  imagine  that  the  first  mode  of  expression  that  occurred  to  the  poet  was  this : 
•  The  troubled  heart  was  never  cured  by  words.'  To  give  it  poetical  force,  he  altered 
the  phrase  :  '  The  wounded  heart  was  never  reached  through  the  ear.'  Wounded  heart 
he  changed  to  broken,  and  that  to  '  bruised,'  as  a  more  common  expression.  Reached 
he  altered  to  touched,  and  the  transition  is  then  easy  to  '  pierced,'  i.  e.  thoroughly  touched. 
When  the  sentiment  is  brought  to  this  state,  the  commentator,  without  this  unravelling 
clue,  expounds  piercing  the  heart  in  its  common  acceptation  wounding  the  heart,  which, 
making  in  this  place  nonsense,  is  corrected  to  pieced  the  heart,  which  is  very  stiff,  and, 
as  Polonius  says,  is  a  vile  phrase.  Steevens's  thoughts  turn  to  surgery,  and  he  sug- 
gests that  as  inflammation  sometimes  results  from  a  bruise,  a  cure  can  be  effected  only 
by  •  piercing '  or  lancing.  Malone  :  •  Pierced '  is  merely  a  figurative  expression,  and 
means  not  wounded,  but  penetrated  in  a  metaphorical  sense;  thoroughly  affected. 
[Malone  here  gives  a  dozen  citations  from  Shakespeare,  Spenser,  Marlowe,  and  Th' 
Mirrour  for  Magistrates,  which  merely  show  that  what  is  pierced  \s  penetrated ;  while 
the  need  is,  in  this  instance,  of  examples  in  proof  that  piercing  can  mean,  what  Jen- 
nens  rightly  says  it  means,  viz. :  penetrating  with  a  soothing  or  consoling  power.  Of 
Malone's  many  quotations  only  four  are  in  this  sense  quite  germane,  viz. :  '  Honest  plain 
words  best  pierce  the  ear  of  grief,'  Love's  Lab.  V,  ii,  763 ;  *  With  sweetest  touches 
pierce  your  mistress'  ear,'  Mer.  of  Ven.  V,  i,  67 ;  '  Nor  thee,  nor  them,  thrice  noble 
Tamburlane,  Shall  want  my  heart  to  be  with  gladness  pierc'd,'  Marlowe's  Tambur- 
lane,  Part  First,  I,  ii ;  '  Whose  [Melibcee's]  sensefull  words  empierst  his  hart  so  neare 
That  he  was  rapt  with  double  rauishment,'  Faerie  Queene,  Bk  VI,  ix,  233  (ed.  Grosart) 
Another  example  Malone  gives  from  Spenser,  where,  as  he  says,  '  we  have  the  very 
words  of  the  text,'  with  the  implication  that  the  drift  is  parallel,  which  I  do  not  think 
is  the  case.  It  is  in  the  description  of  Sclaunder,  Bk  IV,  viii,  231 :  '  Her  words  .... 
Which  passing  through  the  eares,  would  pierce  the  hart  And  wound  the  soule  it  selfe 
with  grief  vnkind :  For  like  the  stings  of  Aspes,  that  kill  with  smart,  Her  spightfull 
words  did  pricke,  and  wound  the  inner  part.'  Malone  quoted  only  the  words  which 
are  italicized,  probably  in  all  honesty,  and  the  trifling  matter  would  not  have  deserved 
attention  had  not  Knight,  and  Staunton,  and  even  Dyce,  been  misled  into  citing  the 
passage,  assuredly  without  looking  it  up ;  the  two  former,  unfortunately,  without  ac- 
knowledgement to  Malone.  Hudson  cites  it,  but  had  verified  it.  Purnell  says,  that 
we  must  'take  the  word  here  as  meaning  merely  reached.'  Bailey  (ii,  107),  whose 
notes  life  (or  at  least,  my  life)  is,  alas,  too  short  to  cite  in  full,  and  whereof  the 
felicity  is  not  always  in  direct  ratio  to  their  length,  proposed  as  an  emendation,  which 
he  is  'quite  sure  is  far  more  likely  to  have  been  Shakespeare's  language'  than 
either  '  pierced '  or  '  pieced ' :  '  That  the  bruis'd  heart  was  plastered  through  the  ear.' — 
Ed.1 

245.  eares]  See  I,  i,  31. 


act  I,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  bj 

I  h  umbly  bcfccch  you  proceed  to  th 'Affaires  of  State.  246 

Duke.  The  Turke  with  a  moft  mighty  Preparation 
makes  for  Cyprus :  Othello,  the  Fortitude  of  the  place  is 
beft  knowne  to  you.  And  though  we  haue  there  a  Subfti- 
tute  of  moft  allowed  fufficiencie;  yet  opinion,  a  more  250 
loueraigne  Miftris  of  Effects,  throwes  a  more  fafer 
voice  on  you  :  you  mure,  therefore  be  content  to  flubber        252 

246.  /...proceed]  Befeech you  no7vQq,  249.  you.]  you,  Qq. 
Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen.  Coll.  Wh.  i,  there]  here  Q  . 

Ktly,  Huds.  Rife.     I  humbly  befeech  you  250.  sitjficiencie  ;]    Ff,   Rowe+,  Jen. 

to  proceed  FF    [Humbly  F  ).  fufficiency,  Qq,  Cap.  et  cet. 

to  th\..of  State]   to  the. ..of  the  a  more]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

flate  Qq.    to  the... tfttt State  Theob.  Warb.  Knt.     a  Qq  et  cet. 

Johns.  Jen.  251.  fafer]   fafe    Ff,    Rowe+,    Cap. 

247.  a  mofi]  mofl  Qq.     a  Johns.  Rann. 

246.  I]  As  a  trifling  instance  of  the  way  in  which  typographical  errors  are  perpetu- 
ated in  the  early  editions,  it  may,  perhaps,  be  worth  noting  that  in  one  of  my  two  copies 
of  F  this  letter  is  exceedingly  faint,  in  the  other  copy  it  has  failed  to  leave  any  im- 
pression whatever,  although  the  type  has  not  fallen  out ;  the  space  that  it  should  occupy 
is  still  there  and  the  line  begins  « humbly,'  &c.  The  compositor  of  F4,  using  F  as  his 
copy,  failing  to  note  the  omission  of  this  '  I,'  leaves  a  space  at  the  beginning  of  the  line 
and  boldly  starts  with  a  capital  letter :  '  Humbly,'  &c. — Ed. 

247-254.  Collier  :  As  this  speech  is  the  only  one  in  this  part  of  the  scene  printed 
as  prose,  it  may  be  doubted,  especially  from  the  rhythm  of  some  of  the  passages,  whether 
it  was  not  originally  verse.  It  would  not  be  difficult  to  render  it  metrical.  Delius  : 
This  sudden  change  from  verse  to  prose  indicates  a  transition,  correspondingly  sudden, 
from  theoretical  moralizing  and  epigrammatic  banter  to  the  practical  demands  of  the 
moment  For  this  reason  in  the  Ff  the  prose  begins  even  in  the  last  words  of  Bra- 
bantio's  speech,  whereas  the  Qq  continue  the  rhythm :  '  Beseech  you  now  to  the  affairs 
3f  state.' 

248.  Fortitude]  Morel:  C'est  un  vieux  mot  francais  que  Montaigne  employait 
encore ;  mais  il  n'a  jamais  eu  dans  notre  langue  que  le  sens  du  latin  fortitudo,  force 
morale. 

248.  Booth  :  Othello  leaves  Desdemona  with  Cassio,  who  regards  her  with  tender, 
yet  respectful  admiration.  Iago,  at  back,  watches  them  curiously,  but  let  him  not  be 
obtrusive ;  he  must  keep  in  the  background  and  assume  this  expression,  and  feel  the 
curiousness,  even  if  only  one  person  in  the  whole  audience  sees  or  understands  it;  the 
'  censure,'  as  Hamlet  calls  it,  of  that  one  is  worth  all  the  rest. 

250.  more]  Collier  :  The  printer  caught  '  more  '  from  the  line  below,  and  inserted 
it  also  before  '  sovereign ;'  it  is  altered  to  most  in  the  (MS).  [Is  there  any  good  reason 
why  we  should  not  retain  the  '  more '  of  the  Ff  here  ? — Ed.] 

251.  Mistris]  D'Hugues:  II  est  naturel  que  l'opinion  soit  regard£e  comme  souve- 
raine  dans  une  r6publique.  Cependant  en  France,  dans  le  courant  du  XVIIe  siecle, 
Pascal  lui  rendait  le  meme  t6moignage  a  propos  d'un  livre  italien  intitule,  Delia  opi- 
nione,  regina  del  mondo. 

252.  slubber]  Steevens:  That  is,  obscure.  So  in  the  First  Part  of  Jeronimo% 
1605:  'The  evening,  too,  begins  to  slubber  day'  [p.  74,  ed.  Dodsley].     Rolfe  :  This 


6$  THE    TR  AGED  IE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  1,  SC.  Hi. 

the  gloffe  of  your  new  Fortunes,  with  this  more  flub-  253 
borne,  and  boyftrous  expedition. 

Othc.     The  Tirant  Cuftome,  moft  Graue  Senators,  255 

Hath  made  the  flinty  and  Steele  Coach  of  Warre 
My  thrice-driuen  bed  of  Downe.     I  do  agnize 
A  Naturall  and  prompt  Alacartie, 
I  finde  in  hardneffe  :  and  do  vndertake 

This  prefent  Warres  againft  the  Ottamitcs.  260 

Moft  humbly  therefore  bending  to  your  State, 
I  craue  fit  difpofition  for  my  Wife, 
Due  reference  of  Place,  and  Exhibition,  263 

253-  gl°Jfe\    g>-°lfe    F2-     grofs   F3F4,  259.  do]  would  Qf. 

Rowe.  260.   This...  Warres]  This... warre Qa 

more]  most  Rowe  ii.  F2.      This. ..war  QFF,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap. 

255.  Graue]  great  Qt.  Jen.  Rami.  Sing.  Ktly,  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 

256.  Coach~\    Ff,    Rowe.      Cooch   Qq.  These... wars  Mai.  et  cet. 

couch  Pope  et  cet.  Ottamites]   Ottomites  Q2Q3Ff  et 

257.  thrice-driuen]  thrice  driuen  Qx.  seq. 

258.  Alacartie~\  Fx.  263.  reference]  reuerence  Qx.     rever- 

259.  in]  it  Theob.  i,  Steev.'85.  ence  FF,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
hardneffe]  harness  Mason. 

word  occurs  in  Shakespeare  only  here,  and,  in  the  sense  of  slighting,  slurring  over,  in 
Mer.  of  Ven.  II,  viii,  39 :  '  slubber  not  business  for  my  sake.' 

253.  glosse]  Steevens  :  See  Math.  I,  vii,  34:  'golden  opinions  Which  would  be 
worn  now  in  their  newest  gloss.'  Rolfe  adds  from  Much  Ado,  III,  ii,  6  :  '  that  would 
be  as  great  a  soil  in  the  new  gloss  of  your  marriage.' 

257.  thrice-driuen]  Johnson  :  A  driven  bed  is  a  bed  for  which  the  feathers  are 
selected  by  driving  with  a  fan,  which  separates  the  light  from  the  heavy.  Booth  says 
that  he  has  heard  his  mother  say  that  this  driving  of  the  feathers  was  for  the  purpose 
of  drying  them,  and  that  not  until  they  had  been  thrice  driven  were  they  considered  fit 
for  use.     '  A  suggestive  movement  of  the  hands,'  he  adds,  '  might  explain  this.' 

257.  agnize]  Murray  {New  Eng.  Diet.,  s.  v.) :  To  recognize  the  existence  of,  to 
acknowledge,  to  confess  (with  examples  from  Becon,  Policy  of  War,  1543;  Woolton, 
Chr.  Manual,  1576.  In  Shakespeare  only  here).  Morel:  C'est  du  vieux  francais 
aqniser. 

259.  hardness]  Schmidt  [Lex.) :  Hardship.  Also  in  Cymb.  Ill,  vi,  21  :  'hard- 
ness ever  Of  hardiness  is  mother.'  [In  the  Quincy  (MS)  it  is  corrected  to  hardiness."] 
Potwin  (Bibliotheca  Sacra,  July,  1862) :  Compare  'endure  hardness  as  a  good  soldier 
of  Jesus  Christ.' — 2  Tim.  ii,  3. 

260.  This  .  .  .  Warres]  Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  No  doubt  formerly  the  plural  of  wat 
was  sometimes  used  as  equivalent  to  the  singular ;  but  in  the  next  page  Desdemona, 
speaking  of  the  same  expedition,  calls  it  'the  war.'  [See  I,  i,  31 ;  also  Lear,  V,  iii, 
258.     'This  present  war'  seems  to  be  preferable  to  'These  present  wars.1 — Ed.] 

263.  reference]  Johnson  :  I  desire  that  proper  disposition  be  made  for  my  wife, 
that  she  may  have  precedency  and  revenue,  accommodation  and  company,  suitable  to 
her  rank.     I  should  read  preference. 


act  i,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  MOORE   OF    VENICE 


With  fuch  Accomodation  and  befort 
As  leuels  with  her  breeding. 

Duke.     Why  at  her  Fathers  ? 

Bra.     I  will  not  haue  it  fo. 

Othe.     Nor  I. 

Def.     Nor  would  I  there  recide, 
To  put  my  Father  in  impatient  thoughts 
By  being  in  his  eye.     Moft  Grcaious  Duke, 
To  my  vnfolding,  lend  your  profperous  eare, 
And  let  me  finde  a  Charter  in  your  voice 
T'affiM:  my  fimpleneffe. 

Duke.     What  would  you  Defdemona  ? 

Def.    That  I  loue  the  Moore,  to  Hue  with  him, 


69 

265 


270 


275 


264.  With]  Which  Qt. 

Accomodation]  accomodation  ?  QT. 

266.  Why. . . Fathers]  Ff,  Rowe  -f- ,  Knt, 
Del.  If  you  pleafe,  bee't  at  her  fathers 
(One  line)  Qq,  Jen.  (Beginning  new  line 
with  Bee't)  Cap.  et  cet. 

267.  I  will]  Ff,  Rowe+,  Rann,  Knt. 
He  Qq,  Cap.  et  cet. 

269.  Nor. .  .there]  Ff,  Rowe  + .  I  would 
not  there  Knt  i.  Nor  I,  I  would  not  there 
Qq,  Cap.  et  cet. 


272.  your  profperous]  a  gracious  Qq, 
Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Rann.  Var.  your 
gracious  Pope,  Theob.  I  Ian.  Warb. 

273.  Charter]  character  Yf,  Rowe. 

274.  Taffifl]  And  if  Qx.  To  assist 
Cap. 

fimpleneffe.]  fimpleneffe . —  Qq. 

275.  you   Defdemona?]  you — -fpeake 

276.  /  loue]  Ff,  Knt.  I  did  loue  Qq 
et  cet. 


263.  Exhibition]  Steevens  :  Allowance.  The  word  is  at  present  used  only  at  the 
Universities.     [See  'The  king  ....  Confined  to  exhibition,'  Lear,  I,  ii,  25  and  notes.] 

264.  besort]  Cowuen-Clarke  :  Befitting  attendance,  proper  retinue.  Compare 
'such  men  as  may  besort  your  age,'   Lear,  I,  iv,  244. 

268.  Nor  I]  Booth:  Not  harshly,  but  firmly. 

272.  prosperous]  Steevens:  Propitious.  Morel:  Le  mot  n'a  plus  en  anglais  le 
sens  que  nous  trouvons  ici  et  que  le  francais  a  longtemps  conserve.  '  S'il  revere  les 
dieux,  ils  lui  seront  prosperes'' — Desmarets,  cit£  par  Littre. 

273.  Charter]  Johnson:  Let  your  favour  privilege  me.  Hudson:  About  the  same 
as  pledge  ox  guaranty.  The  word  is  used  in  a  considerable  variety  of  senses  by  Shake- 
speare, and  seems  to  have  been  rather  a  favourite  with  him,  as  with  other  Englishmen, 
probably  from  the  effect  of  Magna  Charta  and  other  like  instruments  in  securing  and 
preserving  the  liberties  of  England. 

276.  I  loue]  Knight  :  Desdemona's  love  remains,  and  though  the  did  of  the  Qq 
assists  the  rhythm,  it  enfeebles  the  sense.  Cowden-Clarke  :  Desdemona  is  gentle 
even  to  timidity;  but,  like  many  women  whose  gentleness  has  been  wrought  into  timid- 
ity by  a  too  rigid  strictness  of  their  elders,  she  is  capable  of  singularly  bold  action  and 
of  self-assertion  on  occasion.  Her  independent  act  in  leaving  her  father's  house,  and 
in  marrying  the  man  of  her  choice,  is  precisely  characteristic  of  the  one,  and  her  present 
speech  is  an  eminent  specimen  of  the  other.  Encouraged  by  loving  treatment,  she  is 
capable  of  moral  strength;  chilled  by  severity,  she  is  a  moral  coward. 


;o  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF   OTHELLO        [act  i,  sc.  iii. 

My  downe-right  violence,  and  ftorme  of  Fortunes,  2JJ 

May  trumpet  to  the  world.     My  heart's  fubdu'd  [315  a] 

Euen  to  the  very  quality  of  my  Lord;  279 

277.  and... Fortunes]    and  f come    of  278.  heart's  fubdiid~\  hearts  fubdued 

Fortunes  Q.    to  forms,  my fortunes  W rarb.         Qq. 

Fortunes]  Fortune  Ktly.  279.  very  quality]  vtmcfl  pleafure  Qr 

277.  Edwards  [Canons,  &.C.,  p.  144):  'Downright  violence,'  means  the  unbridled 
impetuosity  with  which  her  passion  hurried  her  on  to  this  unlawful  marriage;  and 

•  storm  of  fortunes  '  may  signify  the  hazard  she  thereby  ran  of  making  shipwreck  of 
her  worldly  interest.  Both  very  agreeable  to  what  she  afterwards  says :  •  to  his  hon- 
ours and  his  valiant  parts  Did  I  my  soul  and  fortunes  consecrate.'  Heath  (p.  557) : 
That  is,  my  entrance  upon  the  fortunes  I  have  chosen  in  that  violent  manner  of  pro- 
ceeding as  if  I  had  taken  them  by  storm.  Johnson  :  '  Violence '  is  not  violence  suf- 
fered, but  violence  acted.  Breach  of  common  rules  and  obligations.  Perhaps  the  Qto 
has  the  true  reading.  M.  Mason  cannot  understand  the  '  storm  of  fortunes  '  with  •  for- 
tunes '  in  the  plural,  and  asserts  that  we  should  read  either  '  scorn  of  fortunes,'  or 

*  storm  of  Fortune,'  the  latter  meaning  'not  the  injuries  of  Fortune,  but  Desdemona's 
own  high-spirited  braving  of  her.'  Steevens  :  The  same  mistake  of  scor?i  for  '  storm  ' 
occurs  in  the  old  copies  of  Tro.  &*  Cress.  I,  i,  35  :  'as  when  the  sun  doth  light  a 
scorn.'  Dyce  [Remarks,  &c,  p.  234)  believes  that  scorn  of  the  Qto  was  '  no  doubt 
right;'  but  as  an  editor  he  preferred  'storm.'  He  cites  a  passage,  which  Mason  had 
cited  before  him,  from  B.  and  Fl.'s  Honest  Man's  Fortune,  IV,  i:  'where  we  find,'  says 
Dyce,  'according  to  the  old  eds.,  "He'll  laugh  and  storm  you,"  &c,  while  the  ex- 
cellent MS.  of  that  play  in  my  possession  affords  the  true  reading :  "  He'll  laugh  and 
scorn  you,"  &c.'  Singer  :  '  Storm '  seems  to  be  used  intensively  of  violence,  '  the 
stormy  violence  I  have  used  against  my  fortunes.'  Hudson  :  The  meaning,  probably, 
is  the  state  or  course  of  life  which  the  speaker  has  boldly  ventured  upon  in  forsaking 
the  peaceful  home  of  her  father  to  share  the  storms  and  perils,  the  violences  and 
hardships,  of  a  warrior's  career.  Scorn  will  not  cohere  with  violence,  unless  by  making 
it  express  a  quality  of  Desdemona  herself,  not  of  her  fortunes.  She  evidently  means 
the  violence  and  storm  of  fortunes  which  she  has  braved  or  encountered  in  marrying 
the  Moor,  and  not  any  thing  of  a  violent  or  scornful  temper  in  herself.  Rolfe  :  The 
bold  action  I  have  taken,  and  the  stormy  fortunes  I  have  voluntarily  encountered,  in 
order  to  marry  him. 

279.  quality]  Malone:  That  is, profession.  'I  am  so  much  enamoured  of  Othello, 
that  I  am  even  willing  to  endure  all  the  inconveniences  incident  to  a  military  life  and 
to  attend  him  to  the  wars.'  That  this  is  the  meaning  appears  not  only  from  the  read- 
ing of  the  Qto :  '  even  to  the  utmost  pleasure  of  my  lord,  i.  e.  so  as  to  prompt  me  to  go 
with  him  wherever  he  wishes  I  should  go,'  but  also  from  the  whole  tenour  of  Desde- 
mona's speech,  viz :  that  as  she  had  married  a  soldier,  so  she  was  ready  to  accompany 
him  to  the  wars,  and  to  consecrate  her  soul  and  fortunes  to  his  honours  and  his  valiant 
parts ;  i.  e.  to  attend  him  wherever  his  military  character  and  his  love  of  fame  should 
call  him.  Cowden-Clarke  says  'quality'  here  means  'individual  nature,'  'moral  and 
mental  identity.'  Rolfe  interprets  it  '  very  nature.'  Hudson  :  '  Quality '  is  here  put 
for  nature,  idiom,  distinctive  grain,  or  personal  propriety.  Desdemona  means  that  hei 
heart  is  tamed  and  tuned  into  perfect  harmony  with  the  heroic  manhood  that  has  spoken 
out  to  her  from  Othello's  person,  that  her  soul  gravitates  towards  him  as  its  pre-estab- 


act  I,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  j\ 

I  faw  Othello's  vifage  in  his  mind,  280 

And  to  his  Honours  and  his  valiant  parts. 

Did  I  my  foule  and  Fortunes  confecrate. 

So  that  (deere  Lordsjif  I  be  left  behind 

A  Moth  of  Peace,  and  he  go  to  the  Warre, 

The  Rites  for  why  I  loue  him,  are  bereft  me :  285 

And  I  a  heauie  interim  (hall  fupport 

By  his  deere  abfence.     Let  me  go  with  him.  287 

280.  Othello's]  Othelloes  Qq.  Ktly. 

283.  deere]  my  dear  Q3>  285.  for  why]   Ff,   3.owe,  Knt,  Del. 

285.  Rites]  rights  Warb.  Knt.    parts         for  which  Qq  et  cet. 

lished  centre  and  home.  So  that  the  sense  of  the  passage  may  be  fitly  illustrated  from 
the  1 1  ith  Sonn.  :  '  And  almost  thence  my  nature  is  subdued  To  what  it  works  in,  like 
the  dyer's  hand.'  [Malone's  interpretation  of  '  quality '  has  been  followed  by  Dyce, 
Singer,  Delius,  and  Staunton,  and  unquestionably  it  is  a  technical  interpretation 
which  '  quality '  frequently  bears ;  see  a  striking  instance  of  it  in  Ham.  II,  ii,  333  : 
'Will  they  pursue  the  quality  no  longer  than  they  can  sing?'  and  lb.  411,  'give  us  a 
taste  of  your  quality,'  but  I  cannot  think  that  the  word  has  this  technical  sense  here. 
Desdemona  is  vindicating  her  indifference  to  the  storm  of  fortunes,  and,  glorying  in 
that  as  a  virtue  which  others  would  impute  to  her  as  a  fault,  proclaims  that  the  *  qual- 
ity '  in  Othello  which  might  be  supposed  to  be  most  abhorrent  to  her, '  even  to  that  very 
quality '  her  heart  is  subdued.  What  that  quality  is,  the  connection  of  thought  shows  : 
'  I  saw  Othello's  visage  in  his  mind ;'  and  as  she  had  fallen  in  love  with  his  mind,  his 
honours,  and  his  valour,  without  a  taint  of  passion,  so  had  she  fallen  in  love  with  the 
very  colour  of  his  face.  Henley  says,  that  '  quality '  means  '  the  Moorish  complexion 
of  Othello  and  his  military  profession]  but  I  do  not  think  that  the  passage  appeared  to 
Henley  as  it  appears  to  me,  for  he  goes  on  to  say  that  the  '  virtues  of  Othello  had  sub- 
dued her  heart  in  spite  of  his  visage ;'  whereas  the  '  very  quality '  distinctive  of  Othello 
was  the  colour  of  his  visage,  and  to  that,  even  to  that,  Desdemona  would  trumpet  to 
the  world,  her  heart  was  subdued. — Ed.] 

280.  Roffe  [Ghost  Belief  of  Sh.,  p.  4)  finds  included  in  these  words  'the  all-im- 
portant facts  '  that  we  are  all  ghosts  clad  in  gross  dimensions  and  muddy  vestures  of 
decay ;  that  the  ghost,  which  is  truly  the  man,  is  in  a  human  form  as  much  as  the 
body  is;  and  that  the  body  is  in  that  form  simply  because  the  ghost  or  soul  is  so. 
'  The  common  expression  that  we  see  the  mind  in  the  countenance,  of  course  conveys  a 
truth,  or  rather  a  part  of  the  truth ;  but  Desdemona's  words  are  fuller,  for  they  give  the 
fact  that  the  mind  has  a  visage  of  its  own.' 

285.  Rites]  Warburton:  Without  question  Shakespeare  wrote  rights,  i.  e.  the 
right  of  sharing  his  dangers  with  him.  Othello  tells  the  Senate :  '  She  lov'd  me  for 
the  dangers  I  had  passed,'  and  she  was  now  desirous  of  sharing  with  him  what  were 
to  come.  Keightley  (Exp.,  299) :  Is  not  this,  whether  we  read  '  rites '  <*r  rights, 
rather  indelicate  coming  from  the  lips  of  Desdemona?  Juliet  (Rom.  &  Jul.  Ill,  ii,  8) 
might,  to  herself,  speak  of  the  '  amorous  rites,'  but  for  Desdemona  to  do  so  before  the 
Senate  of  Venice  !  impossible.  Would  it  not,  then,  be  better  to  read  parts  ?  She  had 
just  said,  that  it  was  '  for  his  honours  and  his  valiant  parts '  she  loved  him. 

287.  deere]  See  Wright's  definition,  line  102. 


72 


THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO 


Otlie.     Let  her  haue  your  voice. 
Vouch  with  me  Heauen,  I  therefore  beg  it  not 
To  pleafe  the  pallate  of  my  Appetite : 
Nor  to  comply  with  heat  the  yong  affects 
In  my  defunct,  and  proper  fatisfaclion. 


[act.  i,  sc.  iii. 
288 

290 

292 


288,  289.  Let... I~\  Your  voyces  Lords  : 
befeech  you  let  her  will,  Haue  a  free  way, 
I  Qx,  Pope  + ,  Cap.  Your  voyces  Lords  : 
befeech  you  let  her  will  Haue  a  free  way  : 
Vouch  with  77ie  heauen,  I  (reading  Haue 
a  free  way  as  a  separate  line)  Q2Q3,  Rowe, 
Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Rann.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly, 
Coll.  iii,  Dyce  iii,  Huds.  {I do  befeech  you 
let  Her  will  Rann.  As  a  separate  line, 
Your  voices,  lords  Ktly,  Coll.  iii,  Dyce  iii, 
Huds.) 

288.  haue  your  voice]  Ff,  Knt,  Sta. 
Del.  have  your  voices  Dyce  i,  Wh.  Glo. 
Cam.  Rife. 

291,  292.  heat...deftmc7,~\  Ft,  Rowe, 
Wh.  i.  heate,  the  young  affedls  In  my 
defuncl,  Qq.  heat  the  young  effecls  In  my 
defuncl,  Ff  (yong  F2).     heat  the  young 


affects,  In  my  defunct  Pope,  Knt.  heat 
the  young  affects  In  my  defunct  Warb. 
heat,  the  young  Affects,  In  my  distinct 
Theob.  Steev. '93.  heat  affects  the  young, 
In  my  distinct  Han.  heat,  the  young  Af- 
fects, In  my  defunct  Johns.  Coll.  i,  Del. 
heat,  {the  young  affects  In  me  defunct} 
Upton,  Cap.  Jen.  Sing.  Dyce,  Glo.  Sta. 
Cam.  Coll.  iii,  Rife,  Wh.  ii.  heat,  {the 
young  effects  hi  me  defunct)  Steev. '85. 
heat,  the  young  affects,  In  my  disjunct 
Mai.  Var.  heat,  {the  young  aff eel's  In 
me  defunct)  Rann.  heat  of  the  young 
affects  In  my  distinct  Ktly.  wV  th'  heat 
of  young  affects, — In  me  defunct, —  Huds. 
iii.  heat,  and  young  affects,  In  my  dis- 
tinct Steev.  conj.  heat,  and  young  affects, 
In  my  disjunct  Rann.  conj. 


288,  289.  I  do  not  think  that  the  Qq  here  give  us  a  reading  which  is  of  essential 
importance.  There  is  a  tone  of  humble,  almost  servile,  entreaty  in  'beseech  you,' 
which  jars  a  little  on  the  dignified,  '  unbonneted '  bearing  of  Othello  throughout  this 
*cene. — Ed. 

291,  292.  heat  .  .  .  defunct]  Theobald  was  the  first  to  note  the  obscurity  of  this 
passage,  which,  as  it  had  been  theretofore  printed,  he  pronounced  a  '  period  of  as  stub- 
born nonsense  as  the  editors  have  obtruded  upon  poor  Shakespeare  throughout  his 
whole  works;'  the  difficulty  lay,  he  thought,  in  the  word  'defunct,'  which  'signifies 
nothing  else  either  primitively  or  metaphorically '  than  dead ;  and  Othello  could  not 
mean  to  say  that  '  appetite  was  dead  in  him,'  because  he  afterwards  says,  '  I  am  de- 
clined Into  the  vale  of  years;  yet  thafs  not  much.''  Wherefore  Theobald  changed 
*  defunct '  to  distinct,  and  paraphrased  the  passage  thus :  '  I  do  not  beg  her  company 
with  me,  merely  to  please  myself;  nor  to  indulge  the  heat  and  affects  (i.  e.  affections) 
of  a  new-married  man,  in  my  own  distinct  and  proper  satisfaction,  but  to  comply  with 
her  in  her  request  and  desire  of  accompanying  me.'  Shakespeare,  he  adds,  uses 
'affects'  for  affections  in  several  other  passages  which  are  cited.  Upton  (p.  183), 
reading  'the  young  affects'  in  parenthesis,  says  that  'defunct'  is  'not  to  be  taken 
strictly  here  as  signifying  absolutely  dead,  but  almost  so ;  or  from  the  Latin  defunctus, 
it  might  mean,  discharged  from  youthful  appetite,  and  proper  to  his  age  and  character. 
So  afterwards  (II,  i,  262),  Iago  says,  "there  should  be  loveliness  in  favour,  sympathy 
in  years,  manners,  beauties,  all  which  the  Moor  is  defective  in."  Now,  if  any  alter- 
ation be  proposed,  instead  of  "  defunct "  the  properest  word  seems  defect :  "  In  my 
defect  and  proper  satisfaction,"  in  whic.  sense  the  Latins  use  defectus.  Or  what  if, 
with  a  slighter  variation  still,  we  read  :  "  Nor  to  comply  with  heat  (the  young  affects 
In  me  defunct)  and  proper  "  ?  &c.'     Warhur  TON  paraphrases  thus  :  '  with  that  heat  and 


act  I,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  73 

[291,  292.  heat  the  yong  affects  In  my  defunct], 
new  affections  which  the  indulgence  of  my  appetite  has  raised  and  created ;'  and  then 
dogmatically  adds :  'this  is  the  meaning  of  "defunct,"  which  has  made  all  the  diffi- 
culty of  the  passage.'  Johnson,  whose  note,  wherein  he  follows  Upton's  '  in  me  de- 
funct,' does  not  agree  with  his  text,  says :  ' I  do  not  think  Theobald's  emendation 
clears  the  text  from  embarrassment,  though  it  is,  with  a  little  imaginary  improvement, 
received  by  Hanmer.  Warburton's  explanation  is  not  more  satisfactory :  what  made 
the  difficulty  will  continue  to  make  it.  "Affects"  here  stands  not  for  love,  but  for 
quality,  for  that  by  which  anything  is  affected.  "  I  ask  it  not,"  says  he,  "  to  please 
appetite,  or  satisfy  loose  desires,  the  passions  of  youth  which  I  have  now  outlived,  or 
for  any  particular  gratification  of  myself,  but  merely  that  I  may  indulge  the  wishes  of 
my  wife."  '  STEEVENS :  In  The  Bondman  (I,  iii,  p.  29,  ed.  Gifford)  by  Massinger  is  a 
passage  which  seems  to  countenance  and  explain  '  the  young  affects  In  me  defunct? 
Timoleon  is  the  speaker,  and  says  to  Cleon,  '  youthful  heats,  That  look  no  further  than 
your  outward  form,  Are  long  since  buried  in  me.'  Tyrwhitt  (p.  5) :  If  I  could  per- 
suade the  reader,  as  I  am  almost  persuaded  myself,  that  lines  292  and  293  have  by 
some  accident  changed  places,  and  that  the  passage  ought  to  read :  '  Nor  to  comply 
with  heat,  the  young  affects ;  But  to  be  free  and  bounteous  to  her  mind,  In  my  defunct 
and  proper  satisfaction,'  I  would  then  recommend  it  to  consideration,  whether  the 
word  '  defunct '  (which  would  be  the  only  remaining  difficulty)  is  not  capable  of  a  sig- 
nification drawn  from  the  primitive  sense  of  its  Latin  original,  which  would  very  well 
agree  with  the  context.  Tollet  :  I  would  propose :  '  In  my  defenc' t,  or  defenc 'd,' 
&.C.,  i.  e.  I  do  not  beg  her  company  merely  to  please  the  palate  of  my  appetite,  nor  to 
comply  with  the  heat  of  lust  which  the  young  man  affects,  i.  e.  loves  and  is  fond  of,  in 
a  gratification  which  I  have  by  marriage  defenc 'd,  or  inclosed  and  guarded,  and  made 

my  own  property I  am  persuaded  that  the  word  '  defunct '  must  be  at  all  events 

ejected.  Henley  :  Othello  here  supposes  that  his  petition  for  the  attendance  of  his 
bride  might  be  ascribed  to  one  of  these  two  motives :  either  solicitude  for  the  enjoy- 
ment of  an  unconsummated  and  honourable  marriage,  or  the  mere  gratification  of  a 
sensual  and  selfish  passion.  But  as  neither  was  the  true  one,  he  abjures  them  both : 
1 1  therefore  beg  it  not  To  please  the  palate  of  my  appetite ;  Nor  to  comply  with  heat 

( )  and  proper  satisfaction.'     The  former,  having  nothing  in  it  unbecoming,  he 

simply  disclaims.;  but  the  latter,  ill-according  with  his  season  of  life,  he  assigns  a  reason 
for  renouncing :  '  the  young  affects  In  me  defunct?  As  if  he  had  said,  *  I  have  out- 
lived that  wayward  impulse  of  passion  by  which  younger  men  are  stimulated.'  By 
♦young  affects'  the  poet  clearly  means  those  'youthful  lusts'  which  St.  Paul  admon- 
ishes Timothy  to  flee  from  and  the  Romans  to  mortify.  Malone  :  For  the  emendation 
disjunct  I  am  responsible.  Some  emendation  is  absolutely  necessary,  and  this  appears 
to  me  the  least  objectionable  of  those  which  have  been  proposed.  To  the  reading  of 
Upton  '  (the  young  affects  In  me  defunct),'  there  are  three  strong  objections.  The  first 
is,  the  suppression  of  the  word  being  before  defunct,  which  is  absolutely  necessary  to 
the  sense,  and  of  which  the  omission  is  so  harsh  that  it  affords  an  argument  against  the 
probability  of  the  proposed  emendation.  The  second  and  the  grand  objection  is,  that 
it  is  highly  improbable  that  Othello  should  declare  on  the  day  of  his  marriage  that  the 
youthful  affections  were  dead  in  him.  He  himself  (as  Theobald  has  observed)  informs 
us  afterwards  that  he  is  '  declined  into  the  vale  of  years ;'  but  adds  at  the  same  time, 
4  yet  that's  not  much?  This  surely  is  a  decisive  proof  that  the  text  is  corrupt.  My 
third  objection  to  Upton's  regulation  is,  that  by  the  introduction  of  a  parenthesis,  which 
is  not  found  in  the  old  copies,  the  words  '  and  proper  satisfaction '  are  so  unnaturally 


74  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  I,  sc.  in. 

[291,  292.  heat  the  yong  affecfts  In  my  defuntt]. 
disjoined  from  those  with  which  they  are  connected  in  sense,  as  to  form  a  most  lame 
and  impotent  conclusion;  to  say  nothing  of  the  awkwardness  of  using  the  word  'proper' 
without  any  possessive  pronoun  prefixed  to  it.  All  these  difficulties  are  done  away  by 
retaining  the  original  word  •  my,'  and  reading  disjunct,  instead  of  •  defunct ;'  and  the 
meaning  will  be,  '  I  ask  it  not  for  the  sake  of  my  separate  and  private  enjoyment,  oy 
the  gratification  of  appetite,  but  that  I  may  indulge  the  wishes  of  my  wife.'  RANN 
(reading  'the  young  affect's  In  me  defunct ')  :  'The  tumult  of  such  young  desires  is  at 
my  time  of  life  considerably  abated.'  Rann  here  anticipates  Gifford,  who  in  his  note 
on  the  passage  in  Massinger's  Bondman,  cited  by  Steevens,  says :  '"  Affects  "  occurs 
incessantly  in  the  sense  of  passions,  affections :  "  young  affects  "  are,  therefore,  per- 
fectly synonymous  with  yotithful  heats.  Othello  was  not  an  old  man,  though  he  had 
lost  the  fire  of  youth ;  the  critics  might,  therefore,  have  dismissed  that  concern  for  the 
lady,  which  they  have  so  delicately  communicated  for  the  edification  of  the  rising  gen- 
eration  I  would  wish  the  future  editors  of  Shakespeare  to  consider  whether  he 

might  not  have  given  affect  in  the  singular  (this  also  is  used  for  passion)  to  corre- 
spond with  heat.''  Knight  :  '  Comply  '  may  be  used  in  the  sense  of  supply,  '  affects  ' 
are  affections,  and  '  defunct '  does  not  necessarily  mean  dead.  Tyrwhitt  considers  that 
'  defunct '  may  be  used  in  the  Latin  sense  of  perfor?)ied.  As  function  has  the  same 
Latin  root,  we  would  suggest  that  Shakespeare  used  '  defunct '  for  functional,  and  then 
the  meaning  is  clear :  '  nor  to  gratify  the  young  affections  in  my  official  and  individual 
satisfaction.'  Collier  (ed.  i)  :  'In  my  defunct  and  proper  satisfaction '  is  merely  '  in 
my  cnun  dead  satisfaction '  or  gratification,  the  youthful  passions  or  '  young  affects  '  being 
comparatively  '  defunct '  in  him.  For  the  sense,  though  not  for  the  harmony  of  the 
verse,  it  ought  to  have  run  *  for  my  proper  and  defunct  satisfaction ;'  and  had  it  so 
run,  we  doubt  if  so  much  ink  would  have  been  spilt  and  wasted  upon  it.  It  requires 
no  proof  that  'proper'  was  often  used  for  own.  Dyce  [Remarks,  p.  235)  apprehends 
that  '  few  persons  will  be  satisfied  with  Collier's  explanation ;  nobody,  assuredly,  with 
Knight's,'  and  then  cites  the  passage  already  given  from  Massinger's  Bondman,  to- 
gether with  one  from  Fletcher's  Fair  Maid  of  the  Inn,  I,  i,  first  cited  by  Gifford,  to 
show,  as  Gifford  had  already  observed,  how  these  lines  of  Shakespeare  were  under- 
stood by  his  contemporaries.  'They  also  show,'  adds  Dyce,  'that  Upton's  alteration 
of  "my"  to  me  is  absolutely  necessary.'  Both  Dyce  and  Gifford  approve  of  Johnson's 
explanation.  Collier  (ed.  ii)  gives  the  lines  as  they  are  made  to  stand  in  his  (MS), 
thus :  '  Nor  to  comply  wi'  the  young  affects  of  heat  (In  me  defunct)  and  proper  satis- 
faction.' Jourdain  [Trans.  Fhilolog.  Soc,  i860,  p.  139)  is  anticipated  by  Tyrwhitt 
in  suggesting  that  the  lines  should  be  transposed,  but  asserts  as  '  his  firm  persuasion ' 
that  '  defunct '  is  a  misprint  for  default,  meaning  '  in  my  want  of  appearance,  in  my 
absence,  and  for  my  own  satisfaction.'  For  the  use  of  default  in  this  sense  Jourdain 
cites  several  examples.  White  (ed.  i) :  Utterly  unable  either  to  explain  this  passage 
or  to  suggest  in  what  particular  it  may  be  corrupted,  I  leave  it  exactly  as  it  appears  in 
the  old  copies.  Of  the  page  after  page  of  comment  which  has  been  written  upon  it, 
and  the  several  conjectural  attempts  which  have  been  made  to  modify  it  into  intelligi- 
bility, only  Johnson's  appears  worthy  of  notice That  Shakespeare,  although  he 

may  very  probably  have  written  '  comply  with  heat,'  wrote  '  comply  with  proper  satis- 
faction,' I  think  almost  impossible.  Bailey  (ii,  102)  is  dissatisfied  with  all  that  has 
been  said  about  this  passage,  and  asserts  that  nothing  can  be  less  felicitous  than  John- 
son's text,  wherein  the  parenthesis  and  the  change  of  *  my '  to  ??ie  combine  '  to  ruin  the 
m  -aning  of  the  speaker,  which  yet  seems  plain  enough.'     '  The  epithet  "  young  "  does 


act  I,  SC.  ni.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  ^ 


[291,  292.  heat  the  yong  affedls  In  my  defuncl]. 
not  refer,  as  is  generally  supposed,  to  young  people  or  the  young,  but  to  the  recency 
of  his  marriage.'     [Wherefore  Bailey  proposes  to  read  :]  '  Nor  to  comply  with  heat  of 
young  affects.'     '  Instead  of  merely  "  heat,"  Wheat  might  be  put  with  advantage  and 
with  the  probability  that  it  was  the  original  reading.     This  slight  emendation  gives  to 
the  line  clearness,  precision,  and  propriety.'     *"  Defunct"  is  used  in  its  etymological 
sense  to  have  done  with,  like  "  defunctus  laboribus  "  of  Horace,  and  by  its  use  here 
Othello  refers  to  the  gratification  of  his  moments  of  leisure  and  privacy,  when  he 
would  be  free  from  the  duties  of  his  office.     Perhaps,  to  comprise  the  same  meaning 
in  another  single  epithet,  we  could  not  select  a  better  than  unofficial :  "  In  my  un- 
official and  proper  or  personal  satisfaction."  '     Keightley  {Expositor,  p.  300)  after 
citing  Upton's  reading,  asks :  '  But  can  any  one  produce  a  single  instance  of  Shake- 
speare's thus  interposing  a  parenthesis  between  two  substantives  connected  by  a  copula, 
or  forming  a  sentence  like  that  in  the  parenthesis  ?  and  what  can  be  more  rugged  and 
disjointed  than  the  whole  passage  as  thus  arranged  ?     Would  not  the  following  not 
very  violent  corrections  make  the  whole  more  Shakespearian  and  more  harmonious  ? 
[See  Textual  Notes.]     "  Distinct  and  proper  "  means  separate  and  peculiar.     Distinct, 
the  correction  of  "defunct,"  I  regard  as  nearly  certain.     Its  meaning  here  is  separate. 
"  Sheds  stuff 'd  with  lambs  and  goats,  distinctly  kept,  Distinct  the  biggest,  the  more 
mean  distinct,  Distinct  the  youngest." — Chapman,  Odyss.,  ix,  34.'     Daniel  [Notes, 
&c,  p.  77):  Read:  'heat  the  young  affects — In  me  defunct — but  for  her  satisfaction 
And  to  be,'  &c.     Hudson  adopts  this  reading  with  the  remark  that  it  seems  to  him 
'  one  of  the  happiest  emendations  ever  made  of  the  Poet's  text.     Nor  can  the  changes 
be  justly  termed  violent ;  as  forher  might  easily  get  misprinted  "  proper ;"  and  such  trans- 
positions as  and  and  but  are  among  the  commonest  of  typographical  errors.'    Daniel  in- 
terprets '  the  young  affects '  as  that  •  which  affects  the  young,'  in  which  interpretation  he 
follows  Delius,  who  conceived  himself  justified  therein  by  Malone,  but  over  which  Dyce 
lifts  his  hands  in  wonder  at  '  what  Gifford  would  have  thought  if  he  had  lived  to  read 
it.     Rolfe  :  Othello  only  means  that  the  early  impetuosity  of  youthful  passions  is  past 
— that  he  can  control  them,  and  is  no  longer  controlled  by  them.     White  (ed.  ii) : 
The  parenthetic  passage  is  in  a  very  doubtful  condition.     The  confession  put  into 
Othello's  mouth  is  the  last  that  a  lover  would  make,  and  on  this  occasion,  especially 
after  Desdemona's  foregoing  speech.    Hudson  :  ' "  Defunct "  properly  goes  with  "  heat," 
not  with  "  affects."     Othello  means  simply  that  the  heat  of  youthful  impulse  has  cooled 
down,  that  his  passions  have  become  tempered  to  the  rule  of  judgement.'     Hudson 
agrees  with  Bailey  in  thinking  that  '  with '  should  be  with  the,  regarding  it  as  a  case 
of  absorption,  as  in  '  Bring  her  to  Try  with  Maine-course,'  Temp.  I,  i ;  *  Let's  all  sink 
with?  King,'  lb.     [Cf.  also  '  Holds  such  an  enmity  with'  blood  of  man,'  Ham.  I,  v,  65, 
and  Allen's  note  in  Rom.  6°  Jul.,  p.  429.]     Hudson  adds,  '  that  to  "  comply  with 
one's  own  satisfaction  "  is  not  and  never  was  English,  as  it  seems  to  me.'     [Is  not 
this  the  speech  to  be  expected  from  Othello  after  what  Desdemona  had  just  said  ?     As 
there  was  no  alloy  of  passion  in  her  love  for  him  whose  visage  she  saw  in  his  mind, 
and  to  whose  honours  she  had  consecrated  her  soul,  so  Othello  proclaimed  that  it  was 
for  the  nobler  intercourse  of  marriage  that  he  wanted  Desdemona  to  accompany  him, 
to  be  free  and  bounteous  to  her  mind,  not  to  please  the  palate  of  his  appetite ;  and  in 
saying  this,  he  wishes  as  delicately  as  possible  to  intimate  that  the  '  compulsive  ardour ' 
of  '  flaming  youth,'  as  Hamlet  calls  it,  was  over  for  him.     This,  I  think,  is  the  idea 
which,  if  we  heard  the  speech  on  the  stage  only,  we  should  all  gather  from  it,  nor  dc 
the  vavous  emendations  and  changes  convey  any  very  different  meaning.     Here  then, 


76  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  i,  sc.  iii. 

But  to  be  free,  and  bounteous  to  her  minde :  293 

And  Heauen  defend  your  good  foules,  that  you  thinke 

I  will  your  ferious  and  great  bufineffe  fcant  295 

When  fhe  is  with  me.     No,  when  light  wing'd  Toyes 

Of  feather'd  Ctipid,  feele  with  wanton  dulneffe  297 

293.  to  her]  of  her  Qt.  297.   Of]  And  Qq. 

295.  great]  good  Qq.  feele]Y^Y  .  foj'lesQq.  feel  Rowe 

296.  When]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Knt.  For  ii.  foil  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Coll.  Ktly.  feelY  *X 
Qq  et  cet.  cet. 

me.]    me; —  Qq.     me —   Rowe,  dulneffe]  dalliance  Theob.  com. 

Pope,  Han.  (withdrawn). 

I  think,  we  may  rest.  The  object  of  the  speaker  is  attained ;  he  has  given  us  his 
meaning.  As  a  mere  intellectual  amusement  we  may  inquire  into  the  passage  more 
curiously,  and  rearrange  the  puzzle  while  retaining  the  sense;  the  pleasure  and  the 
profit  will,  by  the  exercise,  accrue  to  ourselves  alone,  with  but  little  likelihood  of  ever 
heading,  except  in  imagination,  a  band  of  converts.  Moreover,  in  the  inexplicable  pas- 
sages in  Shakespeare,  like  '  the  runaway's  eyes,'  '  the  dram  of  eale,'  '  Vllorxa,'  the 
present  passage,  and  others,  after  the  printers  have  borne  all  the  obloquy  which  we  can 
heap  upon  them,  might  we  not  frown  a  little  at  Shakespeare  himself?  He  must  have 
written  rapidly.  Would  his  fame  be  seriously  impaired  or  stabbed  to  the  centre,  if  we 
cautiously  whispered  among  ourselves  that  he  now  and  then  wrote  carelessly  ? — Ed.] 

294.  defend  .  .  .  soules]  Steevens  says,  and  he  has  been  followed  by  all  editors 
who  have  noticed  the  word,  that  '  defend '  here  means  to  forbid,  a  meaning  which  it 
undoubtedly  bears  in  many  passages ;  but  it  may  be  doubted  if  it  be  worth  while  to 
reject  here  its  ordinary  meaning ;  if  it  has  a  military  flavour  it  is  certainly  not  inappro- 
priate to  Othello.  Abbott  gives  prevent  as  its  equivalent,  which  to  me  is  scarcely  better 
than  forbid. — Ed.  Collier  (Notes,  &c,  p.  451):  'Good  souls'  become  counsels  in 
the  (MS).  Othello  would  hardly  apply  ' good  souls'  to  the  Duke  and  Senators  of 
Venice.  [Certainly  a  plausible  emendation,  which  evidently  gave  Dyce  pause ;  he  ad- 
vises [Few  Notes,  p.  149)  'an  editor  of  Shakespeare  to  weigh  it  well  before  he  adopts 
it.'  'What  is  the  meaning,'  he  asks,  'of  "  Heaven  defend  your  cotinsels^T  adding  in 
parenthesis:  'If  "defend"  be  equivalent  here,  as  Steevens  supposes,  to  forbid,  the 
alteration  [counsels]  must  be  decidedly  wrong.' — Ed.] 

294.  that  .  .  .  think]  Abbott,  §  368 :  '  Think '  seems  used  subjunctively,  and 
•that'   as  a  conjunction,  in  this  passage,  i.  e.  'that  you  (should)  think.' 

296.  When]  Is  there  any  urgent  reason  for  deserting  the  Ff  hert  ?  For  those,  how- 
ever, who  prefer  the  Qq,  Abbott,  §  151,  gives  many  examples  wheic  For  is  equivalent 
to  because. — Ed. 

297.  seele]  Harting  (p.  69) :  'Seeling,'  consisted  in  sewing  a  thread  through  the 
upper  and  under  eyelids  of  a  newly-caught  hawk  to  obscure  the  sight  for  a  time,  and 
accustom  her  to  the  hood.  Turbervile,  in  his  Booh  of  Falconrie,  1575,  gives  the  fol- 
lowing directions  '  how  to  seele  a  hawke ' :  '  Take  a  needle  threeded  with  untwisted 
thread,  and  (casting  your  Hawke)  take  her  by  the  beake  and  put  the  needle  through 
her  eye-lidde,  not  right  against  the  sight  of  the  eye,  but  somewhat  nearer  to  the  beake, 
because  she  may  see  backwards.  And  you  must  take  good  heede  that  you  hurt  not 
the  webbe,  which  is  under  the  eye-lidde,  or  on  the  inside  thereof.  Then  put  youi 
needle  also  through  that  other  eye-lidde,  drawing  the  endes  of  the  thread  together,  tye 


act  I,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF    VENICE  77 

My  fpeculatiue,  and  offic'd  Inftrument :  298 

That  my  Difports  corrupt,  and  taint  my  bufineffe : 

Let  Houfe-wiues  make  a  Skillet  of  my  Helme,  300 

298.  offic'd]    actine   Qq,    Johns.    Jen.  299.  my  busineffie]   by  business  Steev 

Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Iluds.  '85. 

Injlrument]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Knt,  300.  Houfe-wiues]  hufwiues  Qq. 

Sing.  Del.     inflruments  Qq  et  cet.  Skillet]  skellet  Qq. 

them  over  the  beake  not  with  a  straight  knotte,  but  cut  off  the  threedes  endes  neare  to 
the  knotte  and  twist  them  together  in  such  sorte,  that  the  eye-liddes  may  be  raysed  so 
upwards,  that  the  Hawke  may  not  see  at  all,  and  when  the  threed  shall  ware  loose  or 
untyed,  then  the  Hawke  may  see  somewhat  backwardes,  which  is  the  cause  that  the 
threed  is  put  nearer  to  the  beake.  For  a  Sparrow-hawke  should  see  somewhat  back- 
wardes, and  a  Falcon  forwardes.  The  reas5  is  that  if  the  Sparrow-hawke  should  see 
forwardes,  shee  would  beat  off  her  feathers  or  break  them  when  she  bateth  upon  the 
fist,  and  seeing  the  companie  of  men,  or  such  like,  she  would  bate  too  much.'  Sir 
Emerson  Tennant  {Sketches  of  the  Nat.  Hist,  of  Ceylon,  p.  246),  says  :  '  Where  it  [the 
goshawk]  is  trained  for  hawking,  it  is  usual,  in  lieu  of  a  hood,  to  darken  its  eyes  by 
means  of  a  silken  thread  passed  through  holes  in  the  eyelids.'  This  practice  of  '■  seel- 
ing,' has  happily  given  way  to  a  great  extent  to  the  more  merciful  use  of  the  hood. 
[See post,  III,  iii,  242;  also  notes  on  'seeling  night,'  Alacb.  Ill,  ii,  46. — Ed.]  Wright 
[Bible  Word-Book,  s.  v.  Cieled) :  The  etymology  of  this  word  is  obscured  by  the  spell- 
ing, which  seems  to  connect  it  with  the  Fr.  ciel,  It.  cielo,  *  a  canopy.'  To  seel  or  seele 
a  room  was  to  cover  it  with  boards,  or  wainscotting,  like  Fr.  plancher.  To  seel  the  eyes 
of  a  hawk  or  dove  (Fr.  siller  les  yeux)  was  to  sew  up  their  eyelids.  •  What  we  now  call 
the  ceiling  was  formerly  called  the  upper-seeling,  Fr.  sus-lambris,  to  distinguish  it  from 
the  seeling  or  wainscotting  on  the  walls.' — Wedgwood,  Diet. 

298.  Malone  :  '  Speculative  instruments,'  in  Shakespeare's  language,  are  the  eyes, 
and  '  active  instruments,'  the  hands  and  feet.  As  '  seel '  is  here  metaphorically  used, 
it  applies  very  properly  to  the  '  speculative  instruments ;'  but  foils,  of  the  Qq,  agrees 
better  with  '  active  instruments.'  Knight  :  The  modern  editors  have  made  up  a  text 
between  the  Qto  and  Ff.  They  reject  the  foils  of  the  Qto,  and  adopt  the  '  seel '  of 
the  Ff,  while  they  substitute  the  active  of  the  Qto  for  the  '  offic'd '  of  the  Ff.  Having 
accomplished  this  hocus-pocus,  they  tell  us  that  speculative  instruments  are  the  eyes, 
and  active  instruments  the  hands  and  feet ;  that  to  '  seel '  is  to  close  the  eyelids  of  a 
bird,  which  applies  very  properly  to  the  speculative  instruments,  but  that  foils  better 
suits  the  active.  It  is  their  own  work  they  are  quarrelling  with,  and  not  that  of  the 
author.  Either  reading  is  good,  if  they  had  let  it  alone.  The  speculative  and  active 
instruments,  which  are  foiled,  are  the  thoughts  and  the  senses ;  the  speculative  and 
offic'd  instrument,  which  is  seeled,  is  the  whole  man  in  meditation  and  in  action.  When 
the  poet  adopted  the  more  expressive  word  seel,  he  did  not  leave  the  ugly  anomaly 
which  the  commentators  have  made.  He  took  the  whole  man  as  an  instrument,  spirit- 
ual and  material,  and  metaphorically  seeled  the  perceptions  of  that  instrument.  [Cf. 
*no  speculation  in  those  eyes,'  Macb.  Ill,  iv,  95.] 

300.  Skillet]  Halliwell  :  It  is  unlikely  that  the  poet  had  any  substantial  image 
in  his  mind  when  penning  this  line ;  but,  nevertheless,  the  following  note,  communi- 
cated by  Mr  Fairholt,  is  an  exceedingly  curious  one :  *  The  Museum  of  London  An- 
tiquities, formed  by  C.  Roach  Smith,  F.  S.  A.,  furnishes  a  curious  illustration  of  this 
passage,  proving  the  custom  of  so  turning  an  old  helmet  to  use.     In  this  instance  a 


78 


THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  i,  sc.  iil 


And  all  indigne,  and  bafe  aduerfities,  30 1 

Make  head  againft  my  Eftimation. 

Duke.     Be  it  as  you  (hall  priuately  determine, 
Either  for  her  ftay,  or  going  :  th'Affaire  cries  haft: 
And  fpeed  muft  anfwer  it.  305 

Sen.     You  muft  away  to  night. 

Othe.     With  all  my  heart. 

Duke.     At  nine  i'th'morning,  here  wee'l  meete  againe. 
Othello,  leaue  fome  Officer  behind 

And  he  fhall  our  Commiffion  bring  to  you :  310 

And  fuch  things  elfe  of  qualitie  and  refpect 
As  doth  import  you. 

Othe.     So  pleafe  your  Grace,  my  Ancient,  313 


302.  Eftimation]  reputation  Qq,  Coll. 
Ktly. 

304.  Either]  Or  Pope  + . 
her]  Om.  Qr 

th? Affaire  cries']  the  affaires  cry 

Qx- 

305.  anfwer  it.]  anfwer,  you  mufl 
hence  to  night.  Qq.  anfwer.  You  must 
hence  to-night.  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Coll.  iii.  an- 
swer it.  You  must  hence  to-night.  Johns. 
Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Rami.  Var.  Coll.  ii,  Ktly. 
answer't;  you  must  hence,  to-night.  Cam. 

306.  Sen.  You. ..night]    Defd. Tonight 


night. 
308. 

Rami. 


312. 

F3F4 


my  Lord ?  Du.  This  night.  Qq,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Rann. 
Var.  Coll.  Cam.  Ktly.  Des.  To-night,  my 
lord,  to-night ?  Pope,  Han.  I.  Sen.  You... 
Duke.  This  night.  \Yh.  i. 
nine]  ten  Qx. 

And  fuch]  Ff,  Rowe  +  .  Cap.  Jen. 
Knt.     With  fuch  Qq  et  cet. 
and  refpect]  or  refpect  Qx. 
import]  cone  erne  Q  .     import  to 
Rowe. 
313.  So]  Om.  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen. 
Steev.  Mai.  Rann.  Var.  Coll.  \Vh.  i. 


crested  Morion  of  the  sixteenth  century  has  been  fitted  with  a  hook  and  chain,  and 
formed  into  a  camp-kettle.  It  was  found  in  dredging  the  Thames  near  the  Tower  of 
London.' 

301.  indigne]  Dyce  [Gloss.) :  Unworthy,  disgraceful. 

303.  Booth  :  After  consultation  with  the  Senators. 

306.  Booth  :  Roderigo  shows  alarm  at  this,  but  Iago  quiets  him.  This  must  not 
interfere  with  the  action  of  the  scene,  but  merely  be  suggested. 

306.  In  reference  to  the  reading  of  the  Qq,  Knight  says :  It  appears  to  us  that  the 
vrareful  rejection  of  the  speech  of  Desdemona  was  a  great  improvement  in  the  Folio. 
Collier  (ed.  ii) :  It  is  surely  very  natural  that  Desdemona  should  express  surprise  at 
the  suddenness  of  the  command,  and  our  persuasion  is,  that  the  words  were  left  out  in 
tne  Folio  by  accident.  White  (ed.  i)  :  In  my  judgement  Shakespeare  probably  wrote 
<ne  passage  originally  as  in  the  Qq,  but  modified  it  from  a  consciousness  that  Desde- 
mona had  already  expressed  with  sufficient  candour  the  nature  of  her  feelings  towards 
Othello,  and  that  both  delicacy  and  truth  of  characterization  would  be  gained  by  sup- 
pressing her  exclamation. 

308.  nine]  Booth  :  Probably  the  hour  of  rehearsal  in  Shakespeare's  time. 

312.  As  doth]  For  other  instances  of  singular  verbs  in  relative  sentences  where  the 
antecedents  aie  plural,  see  Abbott,  §247;  also,  'it  is  not  words  that  shakes  me  thus,' 
IV,  i,  5">;  'they  laugh,  that  winnes,'  IV,  i,  141 ;  'you  [gods]  that  stirs,'  Lear,  II,  iv,  271. 


act  i,  sc.  Hi.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  79 

A  man  he  is  of  honefty  and  truft : 

To  his  conueyance  I  affigne  my  wife,  315 

With  what  elfe  needfull,  your  good  Grace  mail  think 

To  be  fent  after  me. 

Duke.     Let  it  be  fo :    • 
Good  night  to  euery  one.     And  Noble  Signior, 
If  Vertue  no  delighted  Beautie  lacke,  320 

Your  Son-in-law  is  farre  more  Faire  then  Blacke. 

Sen.     Adieu  braue  Moore,  vfe  Defdemona  well. 

Bra.     Looke  to  her(Moore)if  thou  haft  eies  to  fee: 
She  ha's  deceiu'd  her  Father,  and  may  thee.  Exit.        324 

316.  good]  Om.  Q3.  Ktly. 

319.  [to  Bra.  Cap.  324.  decerned]  deceiud'dQs.  deceivd^d 

320.  delighted]  delighting  Han.  Cap.  Q  . 

322.  Sen.]  1  Sena.  Qq.  and  may  thee]  may  doe  thee  Qf. 

323.  if.. .eies]   haue  a  quiche  eye  Qt,  Exit.]  Exeunt.  Qq. 
Johns.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Rann.  Var.  Sing. 

313-315.  So  .  .  .  wife]  Coleridge  (Notes,  &c,  250) :  Compare  this  with  the  be- 
haviour of  Leontes  to  his  true  friend  Camillo. 

316.  needfull]  Rolfe:  That  is,  whatever  else  your  grace  shall  think  needful,  &c. 
For  many  similar  transpositions,  see  Abbott,  §419  a.  Cf.  'whiter  skin  of  hers  then 
snow,'  V,  ii,  6. 

320.  delighted]  Warburton  :  This  is  a  senseless  epithet.  We  should  read  de- 
lighted, i.  e.  white  and  fair.  Johnson  :  I  should  rather  read  delight  or.  Delight  for 
delectation  or  power  of  pleasing,  as  it  is  frequently  used.  Steevens  :  The  meaning  is, 
if  virtue  comprehends  everything  in  itself,  then  your  virtuous  son-in-law  is,  of  course, 
beautiful ;  he  has  that  beauty  which  delights  every  one.  •  Delighted '  for  delighting, 
Shakespeare  often  uses  the  active  and  passive  participles  indiscriminately.  The  same 
sentiment  occurs  in  Twelfth  Night,  III,  iv,  403.  Tyrwhitt  :  '  Delighted '  is  used  for 
delighting  ox  delightful  in  Cymo.  V,  iv,  102.  [In  illustration  of  'the  delighted  spirit' 
in  Meas.  for  Meas.  Ill,  i,  Ritson  cites  from  Sir  Thos.  Herbert's  Relation  of  Some 
Years  Travels,  &c,  1634,  p.  104:  'Mirza  ....  gave  a  period  to  his  miseries  in  this 
world  by  supping  a  delighted  cup  of  extreame  poyson,'  which  Walker  (Crit.,  ii,  11) 
interprets  as  meaning  rendered  delicious  by  the  admixture  of  certain  ingredients. 
Thereupon  Walker  queries  if  '  delighted '  be  not  used  here  in  Othello  nearly  as  in  Her- 
bert— that  is,  endowed  with  delights,  deliciis  exornata.  Delius  adopts  this  interpre* 
tation,  and  it  is  to  me  also  eminently  satisfactory  both  here  and  in  Meas.  for  Meas.  ;  '  If 
virtue  lacks  not  beauty  that  is  endowed  with  every  delightsome  quality,  Then,'  &c. — Ed.] 

323-325.  Looke  .  .  .  faith]  Coleridge  (Notes,  &c,  251):  In  real  life,  how  da 
we  look  back  to  little  speeches  as  presentimental  of,  or  contrasted  with,  an  affecting 
event  ?  Even  so,  Shakespeare,  as  secure  of  being  read  over  and  over,  of  becoming  a 
family  friend,  provides  this  passage  for  his  readers  and  leaves  it  to  them. 

324.  Lloyd  :  Thus  it  is  that  the  Venetian  Senate  comes  to  the  truth  of  a  matter, 
and  the  impression  thus  gained  of  its  judiciousness  gives  great  emphasis  to  the  parting 
words  of  the  Senator  as  he  goes  out.  The  words  fall  on  the  heart  like  an  omen ;  it  is 
true,  then,  that  the  Senator  recognizes  as  no  improbability  the  ill-treatment  of  Desde- 


8o  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  I,  sc.  lii. 

Othe.     My  life  vpon  her  faith.     Honeft  Iago,  325 

My  Defdemona  muft  I  leaue  to  thee : 
I  prythee  let  thy  wife  attend  on  her, 
And  bring  them  after  in  the  beft  aduantage. 
Come  Defdemona,  I  haue  but  an  houre 

Of  Loue,  of  wordly  matter,  and  direction  330 

To  fpend  with  thee.     We  muft  obey  the  the  time.     Exit. 

Rod.     Iago. 

Iago.     What  faift  thou  Noble  heart? 

Rod.     What  will  I  do,  think'ft  thou  ?  334 

325.  faith.]  faith;  Qt.    faith  Q3<  331.  the  the]  Fx. 

327.  prythee]  preethee  Qx.  prethee  Q2  Exit.]  Exit  Moore  and  Defde- 
QFF.                                                                  mona.  Qq.     Exeunt.    Manent   Rodorigo 

328.  them]  her  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Coll.         and  Iago.  Pope. 

Wh.  i.  Scene  X.  Pope  +  ,  Jen.     Scene  V.  A 

the]  their  Ff,  Rowe.  dark  Street.  Booth. 
330.  wordly]  F.  332.  Iago .]  Iago — Johns.  Cap.  Sta.  Glo. 

matter]    Ff,    Rowe  + ,  Cap.  Jen.  Dyce  hi,  Huds.  Rife,  Wh.  ii. 
Knt,  Sta.     matters  Qq,  Mai.  et  cet.  333.  faift]  sayest  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

33l-  fpend]  fpeake  F9.    fpeak  F3F4,  334.  thinhft]thin/ceftQi,Rowe  +  ,Vai. 

Rowe-K  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Glo.  Cam.  Ktly,  Rife. 
thee.]  thee,  Qq. 

mona  by  the  gallant  husband  she  has  chosen  for  herself  at  such  a  sacrifice.  Even  so, 
and  the  words  strengthen  the  sense  of  separation  between  the  Moorish  and  the  Vene- 
tian noble ;  for  addressed  by  one  equal  to  another,  they  would  justify  an  answer  with 
the  hand  at  the  sword-hilt. 

324.  Fechter  :  Brabantio  goes  out  last,  disengaging  himself  from  his  daughter,  who 
attempts  to  kiss  his  hand ;  and  addressing  Othello  with  threatening  irony.  Booth  : 
Exeunt  Duke  and  Senators.  All  bow  to  them  as  they  pass.  Desdemona  appeals,  in 
action,  to  her  father. 

326.  Lloyd  :  Some  critics  moralize  the  fate  of  Desdemona  as  punishment  for  un 
dutiful  and  ill-assorted  marriage,  yet  the  punishment  falls  quite  as  severely  on  the 
severity  of  Brabantio, — on  his  cruelty,  we  may  say,  for  he  is  the  first, — and  out  of  un- 
natural pique, — to  belie  his  own  daughter's  chastity.  Morel  :  Ce  premier  acte  nous  a 
donne  jusqu'ici  une  exposition  complete  du  sujet.  Othello,  Desdemone,  Iago,  Cassio, 
les  caracteres  de  tous  les  personnages  principaux  nous  sont  deja  parfaitement  connus; 
tous  les  faits  dont  le  jeu  et  les  consequences  ameneront  les  peripeties  diverses  de  Tac- 
tion sont  indiques,  toutes  les  donn£es  du  probl^me  dramatiques  sont  fixees. — Les  deux 
vers  dits  par  Brabantio  sont  le  prelude  d'une  phase  nouvelle  de  l'intrigue :  ils  nous  font 
pressentir  les  suites  tragiques  de  ces  amour  sur  lesquilles  pese  des  la  premiere  heure  la 
malediction  d'un  pere. 

328.  aduantage]  Johnson  :  Fairest  opportunity. 

329.  Guizot  :  C'est  justement  le  contraire  de  ce  que  Voltaire  a  fait  dire  a  Orosmane 
cet  autre  jaloux,  dans  Zaire  :  'Je  vais  donner  une  heure  aux  soins  de  mon  empire  Et  lc 
reste  du  jour  sera  tout  a  Zaire.' 

334.  will]  The  despairing  emphasis  laid  on  this  word  shows,  I  think,  why  it  is  used* 
and  n«  *  shall. — Ed. 


act  I,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  8 1 

lago.     Why  go  to  bed  and  fleepe.  335 

Rod.     I  will  incontinently  drowne  my  felfe. 

Iago.     If  thou  do'ft,  I  mail  neuer  loue  thee  after.     Why 
thou  filly  Gentleman  ? 

Rod.     It  is  fillyneffe  to  Hue,  when  to  Hue  is  torment : 
and  then  haue  we  a  prefcription  to  dye,  when  death  is         340 
our  Phyfition. 

Iago.     Oh  villanous  :  I  haue   look'd  vpon  the  world 
for  foure  times  feuen  yeares,  and  fince  I  could  diftinguifh         343 

337.  If  thou  ddfl]    Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  et  cet. 

Han.  Knt,  Dyce,  Glo.  Sta.  Cam.  Huds.  339.  torment ]  Ff,  Knt,  Dyce,  Glo.  Sta. 

Rife,  Wh.  ii.    Well,  if  thou  doefl  Qq  et  cet.  Cam.  Huds.  Rife,  Wh.  ii.     a  torment  Qq 

after.']  after  it,  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  et  cet. 

Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Del.  340.  haue  we~\  we  haue  Qq. 

337,  338.  Why... Gentleman]  Separate  prefcription  to  dye]  prefcription, 
line,  Qq,  Theob.  Warb.  to  dye  Qq. 

338.  Gentleman  ?]  Ff.    Gentleman.  Qx  342.   Oh  villanous]  Om.  Qt. 

Qa.     Gentleman,  Q.     Gentleman  I  Rowe  /  haue]  I  ha  Qq.     I  hd  Jen. 

336.  incontinently]  Rolfe  :  Immediately ;  used  by  Shakespeare  here  only ;  see 
'incontinent,'  IV,  iii,  16,  in  the  same  sense.  Morel:  Le  mot,  employe  par  Mon- 
taigne et  Amyot,  a  ete  introduit  en  anglais  par  les  ecrivains  du  XVIe  siecle,  mais  ne 
s'est  pas  impose  a  l'usage. 

23^.  Gentleman]  Booth  :  Tapping  him  playfully  on  the  forehead.  Roderigo  is  a 
gentleman,  though  a  silly  one,  not  a  '  stage-idiot.' 

343.  yeares]  Malone:  From  this,  Iago's  age  may  be  ascertained;  and  it  corresponds 
with  the  account  in  the  novel  on  which  Othello  is  founded,  where  he  is  described  as  a 
young,  handsome  man.  [Le  Tourneur  having  said  in  his  translation :  Jago  pouvoit 
avoir  environ  quarante  ans ;  les  annees  qu'il  compte  sont  celles  de  l'experience,  Malone 
replies:]  that  Iago  meant  to  say  he  was  but  twenty-eight  years  old  is  clearly  ascertained 
by  his  marking  particularly,  though  indefinitely,  a  period  within  that  time  ['  and  since 
I  could  distinguish,'  &c]  when  he  began  to  make  observations  on  the  characters  of 
men.  Verplanck  :  The  actors  who  have  been  most  celebrated  in  the  part,  from  Quin 
to  Cooke,  are  understood  to  have  represented  Iago  as  at  least  a  middle-aged  man.  Yet 
the  incident  of  Iago's  youth  seems  to  add  much  to  the  individuality  and  intensity  of  the 
character.  An  old  soldier  of  acknowledged  merit,  who,  after  years  of  service,  see^  a 
young  man  like  Cassio  placed  over  his  head,  has  not  a  little  to  plead  in  justification  of 
deep  resentment,  and  in  excuse,  though  not  in  defence,  of  his  revenge ;  such  a  man 
may  well  brood  over  imaginary  wrongs.  The  caustic  sarcasm  and  contemptuous  esti- 
mate of  mankind  are,  at  least,  pardonable  in  a  soured  and  disappointed  veteran.  But 
in  a  young  man  the  revenge  is  more  purely  gratuitous,  the  hypocrisy,  the  knowledge, 
and  dexterous  management  of  the  worst  and  weakest  parts  of  human  nature,  the  reck- 
lessness of  moral  feeling, — even  the  stern,  bitter  wit,  intellectual  and  contemptuous, 
without  any  of  the  gayety  of  youth, — are  all  precocious  and  peculiar ;  separating  Iago 
from  the  ordinary  sympathies  of  our  nature,  and  investing  him  with  higher  talent  and 
blacker  guilt.  Cowden-Clarke  :  It  is  remarkable  that  Shakespeare  has  here  taken 
pains  to  specify  the  exact  age  of  Iago,  as  he  has  specified  that  of  Hamlet.     They  are, 


82  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO       [act.  i,  sc.  id, 

betwixt  a  Benefit,  and  an  Iniurie  :  I  neuer  found  man  that  [315  ti\ 
knew  how  to  loue  himfelfe.     Ere  I  would  fay,  I  would         345 
drowne  my  felfe  for  the  loue  of  a  Gynney  Hen,  I  would 
change  my  Humanity  with  a  Baboone. 

Rod.     What  fhould  I  do  ?     I  confeffe  it  is  my  fhame 
to  be  fo  fond,  but  it  is  not  in  my  vertue  to  amend  it. 

Iago.     Vertue?     A  figge,  'tis  in  our  felues  that  we  are        350 
thus,  or  thus.     Our  Bodies  are  our  Gardens,  to  the  which, 
our  Wills  are  Gardiners.     So  that  if  we  will  plant  Net-        352 

344.  betwixt]  betweene  Qq,  Jen.  Mai.  Guinney-j%«  F  ,  Rowe  +  .     Guinea-//.?;* 

Var.  Sing.  Ktly.     Om.  Steev.'93.  Johns. 

Iniurie  .*]  iniury,  QqFf.  348.  do  .?]  doe,  Ff,  Rowe. 

man]  a  man  Qq,  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  349.  in  my]  in  Mai.  Steev.'93,  Var. 

Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Del.  551.  our  Gardens]  gardens  Qq,  Jen. 

346.  Gynney  Hen]    Ginny  Hen   Qq.  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Dyce,  Cam. 

352.  Gardiners.]  Gardiners,  Qq. 


perhaps,  the  two  most  intellectual  characters  that  our  poet  has  drawn ;  and  he  has  made 
them  nearly  of  the  same  age,  as  if  at  that  period  of  life  a  man's  intellect  were  at  the 

culminating  point  of  activity  and  energy Iag°  is  a  hard,  cold-blooded,  almost 

vivacious  scoundrel  from  inherent  disposition,  who  uses  his  keen  intellect  with  the 
>ame  fierce  joy  in  its  skill  and  power  to  destroy  that  he  uses  his  sharp  dagger  or  sword. 
Hudson  (Introd.,  p.  22) :  Moreover  Iago's  youth  goes  far  to  explain  the  trust  which 
othi.rs  repose  in  him ;  they  cannot  suspect  one  so  young  of  being  either  skilled  in  vil- 
lainous craft  or  soured  by  hard  experience  of  the  world ;  while  his  polished  manners 
and  winning  address  gain  him  the  credit  of  superior  parts,  without  breeding  any  ques- 
tion of  his  truth. 

346.  Gynney  Hen]  Steevens  :  Anciently  the  cant  term  for  a  prostitute. 

350.  Vertue]  Coleridge  [Notes,  251):  This  speech  comprises  the  passionless 
character  of  Iago.  It  is  all  will  in  intellect ;  and  therefore  he  is  here  a  bold  partisan 
of  a  truth,  but  yet  of  a  truth  converted  into  a  falsehood  by  the  absence  of  all  the  neces- 
sary modifications  caused  by  the  frail  nature  of  man.  And  then  comes  the  last  senti- 
ment :  •  Our  raging  motions,  our  carnal  stings,  our  unbitted  lusts,  whereof  I  take  this 
that  you  call — love  to  be  a  sect  or  scion !'  Here  is  the  true  Iagoism  of,  alas !  how 
many!  Note  Iago's  pride  of  mastery  in  the  repetition  of  'Go,  make  money!'  to  his 
anticipated  dupe,  even  stronger  than  his  love  of  lucre ;  and  when  Roderigo  is  com- 
pletely won — '  I  am  chang'd.  I'll  go  sell  all  my  land,'  when  the  effect  has  been  fully 
produced,  the  repetition  of  triumph — '  Go  to ;  farewell ;  put  money  enough  in  your 
purse !' 

351.  thus,  or  thus]  Booth  :  Qy.  Point  up  and  down,  to  signify  good  or  bad  f 

351.  our  Gardens]  In  his  first  ed.  White  considered  'our'  an  inteqiolation  of  the 
printers,  due  to  the  recurrence  of  the  same  word  twice  elsewhere  in  this  clause  of  the 
sentence. 

352,  353.  Nettels]  Ellacombe  (p.  136):  We  have  two  native  species  (Urtica 
urens  and  U.  dioica).  '  Nettle,'  etymologically,  is  the  same  word  as  needle,  and  the 
plant  is  so  named  not  for  its  stinging  properties,  but  because  at  one  time  it  supplied  the 
chief  aid  to  sewing;  not  in  the  little  familiar  instrument,  but  in  the  thread,  and  very 


act  i,  sc.  hi.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  83 

tcls,  or  fowe  Lettice  :  Set  Hifope,  and  weede  vp  Time:  353 
Supplie  it  with  one  gender  of  Hearbes,  or  diftracl  it  with 

353.   Lettice:]   Lettice,   Qq.      httuce ;  353.  Hifope]  Ij 'op Qq.  HyfopY  .  Hyf- 

Theob.  fop  F4. 

Time]  thyme  Pope. 

good  linen  it  made.  In  many  parts  of  England  the  young  shoots  are  boiled  and  much 
relished  as  food,  and  M.  Soyer  tried  hard,  but  almost  in  vain,  to  introduce  it  as  a  most 
dainty  dish.  In  other  points  the  nettle  is  a  most  interesting  plant.  Microscopists  find 
in  it  most  beautiful  objects ;  entomologists  value  it  as  a  favourite  of  butterflies  and  other 
insects,  of  which  in  Britain  alone  upwards  of  thirty  varieties  feed  solely  on  the  nettle- 
plant,  and  it  marks  the  progress  of  civilization  by  following  man  wherever  he  goes. 
But  as  a  garden  plant  the  only  advice  to  be  given  is  to  keep  it  out  of  the  garden  by 
every  means,  where,  if  allowed,  it  would  soon  become  a  sad  weed. 

353.  Lettice]  Ellacombe  (p.  106) :  This  excellent  vegetable  with  its  Latin  name 
came  to  us,  probably,  from  the  Romans.  It  was  cultivated  by  the  Anglo-Saxons,  who, 
in  recognition  of  its  narcotic  qualities,  called  it  '  Sleepwort.'  In  Shakespeare's  time  the 
sorts  cultivated  were  very  similar  to  ours,  and  probably  as  good. 

353.  Hisope]  Ellacombe  (p.  97) :  The  Hyssopus  officinalis  is  not  a  British  plant, 
but  it  was  held  in  high  esteem  in  Shakespeare's  time.  It  is  now  very  little  cultivated ; 
it  has  not  much  beauty,  and  its  medicinal  properties  are  not  much  esteemed ;  yet  it  will 
always  have  an  interest  to  readers  of  the  Bible,  though  whether  or  not  the  hyssop  of 
Scripture  is  the  Hyssopus  offic.  is  still  a  question.  It  seems  likely  from  the  following 
passage  in  Lyly's  Euphues,  that  the  plants  were  not  named  at  random  by  Iago :  '  Good 
gardeiners,  in  their  curious  knots,  mixe  Hisoppe  with  Time,  as  ayders  the  one  to  the 
growth  of  the  other;  the  one  beeing  drye,  the  other  moyst '  [p.  37,  ed.  Arber]. 

353.  Time]  Ellacombe  (p.  233) :  It  is  one  of  the  most  curious  of  the  curiosities 
of  English  plant  names  that  the  Wild  Thyme, — a  plant  so  common  and  so  widely  dis- 
tributed, and  that  makes  itself  so  easily  known  by  its  fine,  aromatic,  pungent  scent  that 
it  is  almost  impossible  to  pass  it  by  without  notice, — has  yet  no  English  name,  and 
never  seems  to  have  had  one.  Thyme  is  the  Anglicized  form  of  the  Greek  and  Latin 
Thymum,  which  it  probably  received  from  its  use  as  incense  in  sacrifices;  while  its 
other  name,  serpyllum,  refers  to  its  creeping  habit.  It  is  another  curious  point  con- 
nected with  the  name  that  thymum  does  not  occur  in  the  old  English  vocabularies. 
Nor  is  even  its  Latin  form  found,  except  in  the  Prompt.  Parv.,  where  it  is  '  Tyme, 
herbe,  Tima,  timum — Tyme,  flowre,  Titnus?  It  is  thus  a  puzzle  to  know  how  it  can 
have  got  naturalized  among  us,  for  in  .Shakespeare's  time  it  was  completely  naturalized. 
It  is  as  a  bee-plant  especially  that  the  thyme  has  always  been  celebrated.  See  Ovid's 
Fasti,  v;  Vergil,  Eel.  vii.  The  wild  thyme  can  be  scarcely  considered  a  garden  plant, 
except  in  its  variegated  and  golden  varieties ;  but  if  it  ever  should  come  naturally  in  the 
turf,  it  should  be  welcomed  and  cherished  for  its  sweet  scent. 

354.  gender]  Bucknill  [The  Medical  Knowledge  of  Shakespeare,  p.  270):  This 
word,  which  with  a  degree  of  probability  not  more  overstrained  than  that  which  attrib- 
utes to  Shakespeare  the  knowledge  of  Harvey's  great  discovery,  by  a  literal  reading 
would  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  he  had  anticipated  Linnoeus's  theory  of  the  sexes  of 
plants.  No  other  author  I  know  of  uses  the  word  '  gender '  in  any  other  sense  than 
to  mark  the  attributes  of  sex ;  while  he  himself  uses  it  in  this  sense  in  several  passages : 
•the  1  imbers  of  the  genders,'  Merry  Wives,  IV,  i,  73.     But  he  also  uses  it  to  desig- 


84  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  I,  sc.  lii. 

many  :  either  to  haue  it  Merrill  with  idleneffe,  or  manu-  355 
red  with  Induftry,  why  the  power,  and  Corrigeable  au- 
thoritie  of  this  lies  in  our  Wills.  If  the  braine  of  our  Hues 
had  not  one  Scale  of  Reafon,  to  poize  another  of  Senfu- 
alitie,  the  blood,  and  bafeneffe  of  our  Natures  would 
conduct  vs  to  moft  prepoftrous  Conclufions.  But  we  360 
haue  Reafon  to  coole  our  raging  Motions,  our  carnall 
Stings,  or  vnbitted  Lufts  :  whereof  I  take  this,  that  you 
call  Loue,  to  be  a  Se6l,  or  Seyen. 

Rod.     It  cannot  be, 

Iago.     It  is  meerly  a  Luft  of  the  blood,  and  a  permiffion         365 
of  the  will.     Come,  be  a  man  :  drowne  thy  felfe  ?   Drown 

355.  to  haue]  haue  Ff,  Rowe+,  Cap.          nalY  ). 

Jen.  Rami.  362.  or]  Ff.     otcr  Qq,  Rowe  et  cet. 

355»  356-  manured]  manured Qq.  363.  Sect]  slip  Han.     set  Johns. 

357.   Wills]  will  Rowe  ii  +  .  Seyen]  /yen  Qq,  Rowe-f .    scyon 

braine]  F2.     Ballence  Q.     brain  Han.  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.    scien  Johns,    seyen 

F  F  .    beam  Theob.  Cap.  Rann.    ballance  Jen.     scion  Steev.'93. 

Q,Q2,  Rowe  et  cet.  365.  of  the  blood]  of  blood  Q  . 

361.  our  carnall]  or  carnall  Ff  (car-  permiffion]  pri7)iifJion  Q  . 

nate  a  kind  or  species,  as  '  the  great  love  the  general  gender  bear  him,'  Ham.  IV,  vii, 
18.  It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  it  is  in  this  sense  the  word  is  used  by  Iago,  and  that 
Shakespeare  had  not  necessarily  any  idea  of  the  sexual  physiology  of  plants  which  the 
great  Swedish  naturalist  developed  into  a  system ;  and  thus  also  when  he  refers,  in 
other  places,  to  the  sex  of  plants,  that  it  is  merely  a  poetical  metaphor. 

356.  Corrigeable]  For  many  instances  of  the  use  of  adjectives  in  able  and  ible  in 
an  active  sense,  see  Walker,  Crit.,  i,  183;  Abbott,  §3;  also  Ham.  I,  i,  57;  Leary 
I,  iv,  300.  Purnell  refers  to  Milton's  use  of  deceivable  in  both  an  active  and  a  pas- 
sive sense,  '  what  not  in  man  Deceivable  and  vain,'  Sams.  Agon.  [349] ;  '  blind,  and 
thereby  Deceivable,'  lb.  [941]. 

357.  braine]  Theobald  rejected  ballance  of  the  Qto  as  'certainly  wrong,'  because 
it  is  equivalent  to  saying,  *  if  the  scale  of  our  lives  had  not  one  scale,'  &c. ;  wherefore  he 
believed  that  the  true  word  is  bea?ne,  inasmuch  as  Shakespeare  'generally  distinguishes 
betwixt  the  Beam  and  Balance ;  using  the  latter  to  signify  the  scales,  and  the  former 
the  steel  bar  to  which  they  are  hung  and  which  poises  them.'  [Theobald's  argument 
and  the  examples  which  he  cited  in  support,  especially  one  from  Rich.  II :  III,  iv,  S7, 
where  balance  signifies  scale  and  nothing  else,  quite  converted  Capell,  who  '  yerked ' 
out  the  following  note]  :  Were  beam  spelt  as  of  old  with  an  (e)  final,  it's  corruption 
into  the  word  below  is  very  easy  and  natural :  consider'd  then  as  a  true  Folio  reading, 
the  word  beam  or  beame  merits  preference  that  way ;  and  if  consider'd  another  way,  as 
a  word  absolutely  unequivocal,  and  used  often  by  Shakespeare  in  the  sense  that  belongs 
to  it,  we  shall  not  greatly  applaud  the  gentlemen  who  discard  it  for  balance.  [Theo- 
bald overlooked,  I  think,  a  notable  instance  where  '  balance '  is  used  for  both  scales 
and  beam  in  Mer.  of  Ven.  IV,  i,  255  :  'Are  there  balance  here  to  weigh  the  flesh?' — 
Ed.] 

363.  Se<5\]  STEEVENS:  By  modern  gardeners  calle:  a  cutting. 


ACT  I,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


85 


Cats,  and  blind  Puppies.     I  haue  profeft  me  thy  Friend,         367 
and  I  confeffe  me  knit  to  thy  deferuing,  with  Cables  of 
perdurable  toughneffe.     I  could  neuer  better  fteed  thee 
then  now.     Put   Money  in  thy  purfe  :  follow  thou   the         370 
Warres,  defeate  thy  fauour,  with  an  vfurp'd  Beard.     I  fay 
put  Money  in  thy  purfe.  It  cannot  be  long  that  Defdemona 
ihould  continue  her  loue  to  the  Moore.     Put  Money  in 
thy  purfe :  nor  he  his  to  her.     It  was  a  violent  Commence- 
ment in  her,  and   thou   fhalt  fee  an  anfwerable   Seque-         375 
fixation,  put  but   Money   in  thy  purfe.     Thefe    Moores 


367.  haue  profefl]  profeffe  Qq,  Coll.  i. 

369.  toughneffe]  tounghnejfe  Q  . 
fleed]  Jleede  QXQ2.     stead  Han. 

et  seq. 

370.  thou  the~]  Ff,  Knt,  Dyce,  Glo.  Sta. 
Cam.  Huds.  Wh.  ii.  thou  these  Rowe+, 
Jen.  Rann.     thefe  Qq  et  cet. 

371.  defeate]  disseat  Warb. 
vfurp'd]  ufurped  Ff. 

372.  373.  be. ..continue]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 
Wh.  i.  be,  that  Defdemona  JJiould  long 
continue  Qq.   [be,  the  Q  )  et  cet. 

373.  to  the~\  vnto  the  Qq,  Cap.  Coll.  i. 


373>  374-  Moore.  Put. .. purfe :  nor] 
Moore, — put... purfe, —  nor  Qq  et  cet. 
(subs.). 

374.  he  his]  he  Q1# 

375.  in  her]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Knt, 
Del.     Om.  Qq  et  cet. 

Sequefl ration]  fequefleration  Q  . 

376.  put  but]  but  put  FF,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han. 

3 7 6, 3 7 7 .  purfe.  Thefe... wils  :  fill ]  Ff, 
Rowe  + .  purfe. —  Thefe... wills  :—fill Qq 
et  cet.  (subs.). 


368.  deseruing]  Schmidt  [Lex,  s.  v.)  interprets  this  as  'that  which  is  due  to  thee, 
viz. :  Desdemona's  love ;'  I  rather  think  that  it  has  here  no  special  reference,  but  refers 
to  deserts  or  merits  in  general,  quite  equivalent  to  worthiness  as  used  by  Shakespeare 
elsewhere. — Ed. 

369.  perdurable]  Simply  durable  with  the  Latin  prefix  per-,  equivalent  to  through, 
thorough . — Ed. 

371.  defeate]  Malone:  Florio,  A  Worlde  ofWordes,  1598,  gives  Disfare,  to  vnaoe, 
to  fpoile,  to  wafle,  to  marre,  to  vnmake,  to  defeate.  [Cotgrave,  Desfaire.  To  vndoe, 
breake,  defeat.] 

371.  fauour]  Henley:  It  here  means  that  combination  of  features  which  gives  tne 
face  its  distinguishing  character.  Wright  [Bible  Word- Book)  :  From  Fr.  faveur ;  it 
is  the  rendering  of  a  word  meaning  '  face,  countenance,  or  appearance,'  in  which  sense 
it  constantly  occurs  in  old  writers,  and  is  retained  in  the  adjectives  ill- favoured,  well- 
favoured. 

375,  376.  Sequestration]  Johnson  :  There  seems  to  be  an  opposition  of  terms 
here  intended,  which  has  been  lost  in  transcription,  We  may  read,  '  It  was  a  violent 
conjunction,  and  thou,'  &c. ;  or,  what  seems  to  me  preferable,  '  It  was  a  violent  com- 
mencement, and  thou  shalt  see  an  answerable  sequel?  Steevens  :  I  believe  '  seques- 
"xation'  is  here  used  for  sequel.  Shakespeare  might  conclude  that  it  was  immediately 
derived  from  sequor ;  it  may,  however,  mean  no  more  than  separation.  We  have  'a 
sequestor  from  liberty,'  III,  iv,  48.  Malone:  Surely  'sequestration'  was  used  in  the 
sense  of  separation  only,  or,  in  modern  language,  of  parting.  It  is  explained  in  Bui- 
lokar  [Expositor]  :  a  putting  apart.     Dyce  (Gloss.)  :  No  doubt  it  means  separation. 


86  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  i,  sc.  iii 

arc  changeable  in  their  wils  :  fill  thy  purfe  with  Money.  377 
The  Food  that  to  him  now  is  as  lufhious  as  Locufts, 
fhalbe  to  him  fhortly,  as  bitter  as  Coloquintida.  She 
muft  change  for  youth  :  when  fhe  is  fated  with  his  body  380 
flic  will  find  the  errors  of  her  choice.  Therefore,  put  Mo- 
ney in  thy  purfe.  If  thou  wilt  needs  damne  thy  felfe,  do 
it  a  more  delicate  way  then  drowning.  Make  all  the  Mo- 
ney thou   canft  :  If  Sanctimonie,  and  a  fraile  vow,  be-         38.4 

378.  Loctifts\LocuJlQ.  loches^Nzxh.  379,  380.  She. ..youth"]  Om.  Qjf  Theob. 
lohocks  Johns.  Warb.  Johns. 

379.  fJialbe...fliortl)^]fJialltohimf}iort-  381.  errors']  Ff,  Rowe-f,  Knt.  error 
ly  bee  Ff,  Rowe.     shall shortly  be  Pope  + .  Qq  et  cet. 

as  bitter  as]  as  acerbe  as  the  Qx.  choice.  Therefore]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 

as  bitter  as  a  Warb.  Johns.  Han.  Cap.  Knt.     choyce :  JJiee  mujl  haut 

change,  JJie  mujl.    Therefore  Qq  et  cet. 

378.  Locusts]  Warburton  :  Whether  you  understand  by  this  the  insect  or  tht 
fruit,  it  cannot  be  given  as  an  instance  of  a  delicious  morsel,  notwithstanding  the  exag- 
gerations of  lying  travellers.  The  true  reading  is  loches,  a  very  pleasant  confection 
introduced  into  medicine  by  the  Arabian  physicians ;  and  so  very  fitly  opposed  both  to 
the  bitterness  and  use  of  Coloquintida.  [Warburton's  '  very  pleasant  confection  '  be- 
comes a  '  sirop  tres-doux '  in  Le  Tourneur's  translation,  which  he  poetically  converts  in 
his  text  into  'lamanne  des  roseaux.' — Ed.]  Beisly  (p.  163):  These  'locusts'  are 
the  fruit  of  the  Carob  tree  (Siliqua  dulcis).  Gerarde  in  his  Herball  says  :  '  The  carob 
groweth  in  Apulia,  a  province  of  Naples,  and  other  countries  eastward,  where  the  cods 
are  so  full  of  sweet  juice  that  it  is  used  to  preserve  ginger.  It  groweth  also  in  sundry 
places  in  Palestine,  where  there  is  such  plenty  of  it  that  it  is  left  unto  swine  and  other 
wild  beasts  to  feed  on.  Moreover,  both  young  and  old  feed  thereon  for  pleasure,  and 
some  have  eaten  thereof  to  supply  and  keep  the  necessary  nutriment  of  their  bodies. 
This  is  of  some  called  St.  John's  bread,  and  thought  to  be  that  which  is  translated 
locusts  whereon  St.  John  did  feed  when  he  was  in  the  wilderness.  The  fruit  or  cod  is 
called  S'iliqua  dulcis?  ELLACOMBE  (p.  1 13)  says  it  is  the  fruit  of  'the  Ceratonia  siliqua, 
a  native  of  Southern  Europe  and  the  Levant.  Its  fruit  contains  a  sweet  pulp,  and  in 
Spain  and  elsewhere  it  is  fed  to  cattle.  The  Carob  was  cultivated  in  England  before 
Shakespeare's  time.  Its  name  survives  in  the  carat  of  the  jewellers,  who  in  trading  in 
the  East  used  the  Carob  beans  for  weighing  small  objects.  Though  the  Carob  tree  did 
not  produce  the  locusts  on  which  St.  John  fed,  there  is  little  doubt  that  the  "husks 
which  the  swine  did  eat,"  and  the  prodigal  son  longed  for,  were  the  produce  of  the 
Carob  tree.' 

379.  Coloquintida]  Reed:  This,  says  Bullein  (Buhvarke  of  Defence,  1579),  'is 
most  bitter,  white  like  a  baule,  full  of  seedes,  leaves  like  to  cucummers,  hoat  in  the 
second,  dry  in  the  third  degree.'  He  then  gives  directions  for  the  application  of  it, 
and  concludes,  'and  thus  do  I  end  of  coloquyntida,  which  is  most  bitter  and  must  be 
taken  with  discretion.' 

381.  Purnell:  The  repeated  reference  to  'money '  is  equivalent  to 'This  is  yon 
game.     But  you  must  be  prepared  to  pay  for  it.' 

383.  delicate  way]  Delius  :  That  is,  by  adultery  with  Desdemona. 


act  i,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


87 


twixt  an  erring  Barbarian,  and  fuper-fubtle  Venetian  be         385 
not  too  hard  for  my  wits,  and  all  the  Tribe  of  hell,  thou 
flialt  enioy  her  :  therefore  make  Money  :  a  pox  of  drow- 
ning thy  felfe,  it  is  cleane  out  of  the  way.     Seeke  thou  ra- 
ther to  be   hang'd   in   Compaffing  thy  ioy,  then   to  be 
drown'd,  and  go  without  her.  39c 

Rodo.     Wilt  thou  be  faft  to  my  hopes,  if  I  depend  on 
the  iffue  ? 

Iago.  Thou  art  fure  of  me:  Go  make  Money  :  I  haue 
told  thee  often,  and  I  re-tell  thee  againe,  and  againe,  I 
hate  the  Moore.  My  caufe  is  hearted;  thine  hath  no  leffe  395 
reafon.  Let  vs  be  coniun6liue  in  our  reuenge,  againft 
him.  If  thou  canfr.  Cuckold  him,  thou  doft  thy  felfe  a 
pleafure,  me  a  fport.  There  are  many  Euents  in  the 
Wombe  of  Time,  which  wilbe  deliuered.      Trauerfe  go,         399 


385.  erring]     arrant    Han.       errant 
Warb. 

and]  Ff,  Knt.     and  a  Qq,  Pope 
et  cet. 

fuper-fubtle]    stiper- supple    Coll. 
(MS). 

387.  Money  :  a]  money, — a  Qq. 

387,  388.    of  drowning  thy  felfe]    a 
drowning  Qq.     of  drowning  Jen. 

388.  it  is]  tis  Qq,  Jen. 

390.  drowned]  drowned  Qq. 

391,  392.  if  ..iffue]  Oni.  QT. 


393.  me:  Go... Money :  I]  me—goe... 
Money — /  Qq. 

haue]  had  Wh.  ii  (misprint  ?) 

394.  re-tell]  tell  Qq. 
thee]  the  Qr 

395.  hath]  has  Qq. 

396.  coniuncliue]  communicatiue  Qf. 

397.  Cuckold]  cuckole  Q  . 

398.  me]  and  me  QTQS,  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Rann.  Var.  Sing. 
Ktly. 

399.  Trauerfe]   Trauerce  Qt. 


385.  erring]  Warburton  :  We  should  read  errant,  that  is,  a  vagabond,  one  that  has 
no  house  nor  country.  Steevens:  So  in  Ham.  I,  i,  154,  '  Th'  extravagant  and  erring 
*pirit.'  Maeone  :  Perhaps  he  means  a  rover  from  Barbary.  M.  Mason  :  '  Erring ' 
is  explained  by  « extravagant  and  wheeling  stranger,'  I,  i,  149.  Ritson  (p.  229) :  Here 
is  a  collection  of  quibbles.  By  an  '  erring  Barbarian  '  is  meant  not  only  a  roving  Moor, 
but  a  shallow,  blundering  brute ;  and  this  character  is  set  in  opposition  to  that  of  a 
supersubtle  Venetian  woman.  The  vow,  he  concluded,  must  needs  be  frail  that  was 
made  between  two  such  unnatural  extremes  as  brutal  folly  and  the  most  refined  female 
cunning.     White  (ed.  ii)  considers  Hanmer's  text  'plausible.' 

389.  hang'd]   See  Cotgrave,  s.  v.  Couillatris. — Ed. 

399.  Trauerse]  Steevens,  who  has,  T  think,  been  uniformly  followed,  says  this  is 
an  '  ancient  military  word  of  command,'  and  cites  in  proof,  from  2  Hen.  IV:  III,  ii, 
291,  Falstaff' s  command  to  Wart  after  a  caliver  has  been  put  in  Wart's  hand,  '  Hold, 
Wart,  traverse,'  which  is  clearly  the  ordinary  fencing  or  musket-drill  phrase,  and  is 
scarcely  parallel  with  the  present  passage.  Malone  cites  Bullokar  (Eng.  Exp.,  s. 
v.)  :  '  Trauerse.  To  march  vp  and  downe,  or  to  moue  the  feete  with  proportion  as  in 
dancing,'  which  seems  somewhat  more  appropriate  here,  but  is  not  altogether  satis- 
factory.    L.  Booth's  Reprint  gives  a  comma  after  '  Trauerfe. ' — Ed. 


88 


THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  i,  sc.  iil 


prouide  thy  Money.     We  will  haue  more  of  this  to  mor-        400 
row.     Adieu. 

Rod.     Where  fhall  we  meete  i'th'morning  ? 

I  ago.     At  my  Lodging. 

Rod.     He  be  with  thee  betimes. 

Iago.     Go  too,  farewell.     Do  you  heare  Rodorigo  ?  405 

Rod.     He  fell  all  my  Land.  Exit. 

Iago.  Thus  do  I  euer  make  my  Foole,  my  purfe  : 
For  I  mine  owne  gain'd  knowledge  mould  prophane 
I  fl  would  time  expend  with  fuch  Snpe,  409 

But  for  my  Sport,  and  Profit  :  I  hate  the  Moore,  [3X6  a\ 

And  it  is  thought  abroad,  that  'twixt  my  meets 
She  ha's  done  my  Office.     I  know  not  if 't  be  true, 
But  I,  for  meere  fufpition  in  that  kinde, 
Will  do,  as  if  for  Surety.     He  holds  me  well,  414 


401.  Adieu]  Adiue  Qx. 

405.  Do... Rodorigo?]  Om.  Cap. 

heare]  here  FF. 
j  23 

405-407.  Rodorigo?...  Thus]  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope.  Roderigo  ?  Rod.  what  fay  you  ? 
lag.  No  more  of  drowning,  doe  you  heare  ? 
Rod.  / am  changed.  Exit  Roderigo.  lag. 
Goe  to,  farewell,  put money  enough  in  your 
purfe :  Thus  QT ;  followed  subs,  (except 
that  after  changed  they  add  merely  He  goe 
fell  all  my  land.  Exit  Roderigo.  lag. 
Thus)  Q2Q3,  Rann,  Dyce,  Glo.  Cam.  Rife, 
Wh.  ii.  Qx  is  also  followed  (including  He... 
land  from  QJ  by  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh. 


i,  Ktly,  Sta.  Del.  Huds.  Roderigo  ?  No 
more  drowning.  Rod.  /'//  sell  all  my 
land.     Iago.  Thus  Han. 

406.  He  fell]  He  goe  fell  Q2Q3,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Jen.  Rann,  Dyce,  Glo.  Sta. 
Cam.  Wh.  ii. 

Exit.]  Exit  Roderigo.  Qq. 

Scene  XI.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

408.  would]  fliould  Q  ,  Pope  + ,  Jei. 

409.  Snpe]  afnipeQq.  a  Swaine  Fa. 
a  Swain  FF,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

412.  She  hds]  Ha's  Qq.  He  ha's  Fg. 
Has  Dyce  iii.     He  has  F3F4  et  cet. 

true,]  true —  Qq.     true  ;  Johns. 

413.  But  I]  Yet  /Qq,  Jen.  Coll.  Del. 


409.  would]  See  Abbott,  §331,  for  passages  where  'would '  is  not  used  for  should. 
Here  '  would '  is  equivalent,  says  Abbott,  to  '  If  I  were  willing  to  expend,'  &c,  and 
should  would  take  from  the  sense. 

409.  Snpe]  Steevens  :  Woodcock  is  the  term  generally  used  by  Shakespeare  to 
denote  an  insignificant  fellow ;  but  Iago  is  more  sarcastic,  and  compares  his  dupe  to  a 
smaller  and  meaner  bird.  Halliwell  cites  Cotgrave :  '  a  snipe-knave,  so  called  be- 
cause two  of  them  are  worth  but  one  snipe.' 

410.  Coleridge  (p.  251):  Iago's  soliloquy — the  motive-hunting  of  a  motiveless 
malignity — how  awful  it  is  !  Yea,  whilst  he  is  still  allowed  to  bear  the  divine  image, 
it  is  too  fiendish  for  his  own  steady  view, — for  the  lonely  gaze  of  a  being  next  to  devil 
and  only  not  quite  devil, — and  yet  a  character  which  Shakespeare  has  attempted  and 
executed,  without  disgust  and  without  scandal !  Fechter  :  Roderigo  runs  out  at  the 
door  at  back.  Iago,  who  has  followed  him  so  far,  and,  leaning  against  the  door-post, 
watches  him  as  he  goer. ;  then  breaks  out  into  a  loud  laugh. 

414,  415.    IIf.raud  (p.  268):    Iago  is  the  really  jealous  person,  and  suspecting 


act  J,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  89 

The  better  fhall  my  purpofe  worke  on  him :  415 

CaJJitfc  a  proper  man  :  Let  me  fee  now, 

To  get  his  Place,  and  to  plume  vp  my  will 

In  double  Knauery.     How?  How?  Let's  fee. 

After  fome  time,  to  abufe  Othello's  eares, 

That  he  is  too  familiar  with  his  wife :  420 

He  hath  a  perfon,  and  a  fmooth  difpofe 

417.  /lis]  this  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope.  418.  Let's]  let  w<?  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Mai. 
to  plume]  to  make Qx.  plume¥J?A.         Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

418.  In]  A  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Steev.  419.  eares]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  eare 
Mai.  Var.  Sta.                                                      Qq  et  cet. 

Knauery... fee]     knauery — how,  420.  his]  my  Q  . 

how, — let  me  fee  Qq.  421.  hath]  has  Qq. 

Othello  with  his  own  wife  hates  him  accordingly,  and  determines  on  revenge.  Snider 
(vol.  i,  p.  100) :  The  true  motive  for  Iago's  hate  is  given  here  in  this  and  in  his  suc- 
ceeding soliloquies,  since  he  would  not  be  likely  to  announce  his  own  shame  or  herald 
his  self-degrading  suspicions.     He  considers  that  Othello  has  destroyed  the  chastity  of 

his  wife It  is  often  taken  for  granted  that  his  suspicions  are  wholly  groundless, — 

in  fact,  that  he  does  not  believe  them  himself.  [In  the  Appendix  will  be  found  Sni- 
der's  theory  that  Othello's  guilt  in  this  regard  is  one  of  the  hinges  of  the  tragedy. — 

Ed.]     But  that  Iago  is  sincere  in  his  belief  cannot  be  consistently  questioned 

With  this  interpretation  there  is  a  motive  quite  adequate  for  the  subsequent  vindictive 
conduct  of  Iago;  otherwise,  he  is  an  unnatural  character, — a  monstrosity.  His  slight 
in  regard  to  promotion  would  doubtless  excite  his  enmity,  but  not  an  enmity  sufficient 
to  involve  Desdemona  in  destruction,  or  even  Othello.  To  inflict  worse  than  death 
upon  a  man  because  he  did  not  advance  a  subordinate  when  he  could  have  done  so  is 
altogether  disproportionate  to  the  offence,  but  to  cause  his  wife  to  perish  also  is  merely 
horrible.  Thus  Iago  is  a  monster,  a  wild  beast,  and  needs  no  motive  at  all, — not  even 
neglect  of  promotion, — to  bring  on  a  rabid  fit  of  cruelty.  And  what  then  becomes  of 
the  artistic  merit  and  beauty  of  this  drama  ?  .  .  .  .  The  second  motive  is  therefore  the 
true  one,  and  at  the  same  time  is  adequate.  The  family  of  Iago  has  been  ruined  by 
Othello ;  now  Iago,  in  his  turn,  will  ruin  the  family  of  the  destroyer  of  his  domestic 
life.  Hence  Desdemona  is  included  in  his  retaliation.  He  thus  requites  the  Moor 
with  like  for  like.  His  conduct  is  logical,  and  his  revenge  only  equals  the  offence. 
But  there  is  absolutely  no  proportion  between  motive  and  deed  if  he  involved  Othello's 
family  in  destruction  merely  because  the  latter  would  not  promote  him. 

414.  Surety]  M.  Mason:  That  is,  'I  will  act  as  if  I  were  certain  of  the  fact.' 
414.  holds]  Reed  :  That  is,  '  esteems  me.'     So  in  Matt,  xxi,  26  :  '  All  hold  John 
as  a  prophet.' 

416.  proper]  Booth:  Not  only  handsome,  but  a  refined  and  dignified  gentleman  ; 
so  '  proper '  that  his  conduct  when  tipsy  is  the  more  surprising. 

417.  plume  vp]  Cowden-Clarke  :  As  if  any  project  that  involved  reduplication 
of  knavery  were  a  feather  in  the  cap  of  his  depraved  will,  a  thing  to  plume  himself 
upon  as  a  feat  of  intellectual  volition. 

421.  dispose]  Keightley  {Expositor,  p.  301)  :  I  do  not  see  clearly  the  sense  of 
'dispose'  here;  perhaps  we  should  read  discourse.     Abbott,  §451,  cites  this  in  a  list 


po  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [ac  r  I,  sc.  iii. 

To  be  fufpected  :  fram'd  to  make  women  falfe.  422 

The  Moore  is  of  a  free,  and  open  Nature, 

That  thinkes  men  honeft,  that  but  feeme  to  be  fo, 

And  will  as  tenderly  be  lead  by'th'Nofe  425 

As  Affes  are : 

I  haue't  :  it  is  engendred  :  Hell,  and  Night, 

Muft  bring  this  monftrous  Birth,  to  the  worlds  light.  428 

423.  is...Natnre~\  a  free  and  open  na-  425.  by'th?  Nofe"\bit' hnofe — Qf.  bith' 
ture  too,  QT.                                                             nofe —  Q2Q3- 

424.  feeme"]  feemes  QXQ3.    feems  Q  .  427.  hauft~\  haft  Qq. 

425.  426.  One  line,  Qq.  engendred~\  ingender" 'd 'Q,Q,.    in- 
425.  /ead~\  led  QqF3F4.                                    gt-ndr'd  Qr 

[Exit.  Qq. 

of  words  used  by  Shakespeare  as  nouns,  to  which  we  should  append  -ation  or  -ition, 
-ure  or  -ing.     [See  also  '  every  gale  and  vary,'  Lear,  II,  ii,  74.] 

427.  Night]  Warburton  changed  this  to  spite,  'i.  e.  love  of  mischief  and  love  ot 
revenge,'  an  emendation  which  Heath  (p.  559)  properly  called  'insipid,'  and  inter- 
preted the  original  as  meaning  '  Hellish  practices  working  in  impenetrable  darkness.' 

428.  Fechter's  Iago,  while  meditating  revenge,  'sits  on  the  angle  of  the  table,' 
'  leaning  his  forehead  on  his  hands,  his  face  hidden,'  but  at  '  How  ?  how  ?  Let's  see,' 
he  'slowly  raises  his  head  and  shows  his  face,  which  gradually  brightens  with  a  diabol- 
ical smile.'  At  the  last  word  of  the  scene  he  '  breaks  into  a  savage,  ringing  laugh, 
stops  suddenly,  turning  quickly  round,  and  looking  on  all  sides,  in  fear  that  he  has  been 
overheard.'  Booth  says :  Be  not  too  flippant  with  Roderigo,  nor  too  eager  to  show 
the  audience  your  villainy.  Change  your  manner  at  Roderigo's  exit  from  'bonhomie' 
to  seriousness. 

428.  '  Menar  per  il  naso,  to  leade  by  the  nose,  to  make  a  foole  of  one?  Florio,  A 
Worlde  of  Wordes,  1 598 — New  Sh.  Soc. 

428.  W.  N.  {Memorials  of  Sh.,  p.  356) :  Shakespeare  has  shown  great  judgement 
in  the  darkness  which  he  makes  to  prevail  in  the  first  counsels  of  Iago.  To  the  poet 
himself  all  the  succeeding  events  must  have  been  clear  and  determined;  but  to  bring 
himself  again  into  the  situation  of  one  who  sees  them  in  embryo,  to  draw  a  mist  over 
that  which  he  had  already  cleared,  must  have  required  an  exertion  of  genius  peculiar 
to  this  author  alone.  In  so  lively  a  manner  does  he  make  Iago  show  his  perplexity 
about  the  future  management  of  his  conduct,  that  one  is  almost  tempted  to  think  that 
the  poet  had  determined  as  little  himself  about  some  of  the  particulars  of  Iago's  de- 
6truct  en. 


Attus  Secundus.    Scena  Prima. 

Enter  Montano ,and  two  Gentlemen. 

Mon.     What  from  the  Cape,  can  you  difcerne  at  Sea? 

i.Gent.  Nothing  at  all,  it  is  a  high  wrought  Flood: 
I  cannot  'twixt  the  Heauen,  and  the  Maine,  5 

Defcry  a  Saile. 

Mon.     Me  thinks,  the  wind  hath  fpoke  aloud  at  Land, 
A  fuller  blaft  ne're  fhooke  our  Battlements : 
If  it  hath  ruffiand  fo  vpon  the  Sea,  9 

1.  Actus...]  Actus  2.   Scsena  I.  Qq.  4.  high    wrought]    high-wrought   F  , 
The  Capital  City  of  Cyprus.  Rowe.     A         Pope  et  seq. 

plat-form.  Cap.     A  Sea-port  town  in  Cy-  5.  Heauen"]  hauen  Qlf  Mal.Var.  heav'ns 

prus.  A  Platform.  Mai.  ...An  open  place  Rowe  ii,  Pope,  Han. 

near  the  quay.  Glo.  7.  hath  f poke]  does  fpeake  Q,Q9.    doth 

2.  Enter...]  Enter  A/ontanio,  Gouemor  fpeake  Q. 

of  Cypres,  with  two  other  Gentlemen.  Qq  Land~\  hand  Q  . 

{Cyprus  Q2Q3)-    Enter  Montano,  and  Gen-  9.  hath~\  ha  Qq. 

tlemen.  Ff. 


Rymer  :  P  or  the  Second  Act,  our  Poet  having  dispatcht  his  affairs  at  Venice  shews 
the  Action  next  (I  know  not  how  many  leagues  off)  in  the  Island  of  Cyprus.  The 
Audience  must  be  there  too ;  And  yet  our  Bays  had  it  never  in  his  head  to  make  any 
provision  of  Transport  Ships  for  them.  In  the  days  that  the  Old  Testament  was  Acted 
in  Clerkenwell  by  the  Parish  Clerks  of  London,  the  Israelites  might  pass  through  the 
Red  Sea ;  but  alas,  at  this  time  we  have  no  Moses  to  bid  the  Waters  make  way,  and  to 
Usher  us  along.  Well,  the  absurdities  of  this  kind  break  no  Bones.  They  may  make 
Fools  of  us,  but  do  not  hurt  our  Morals.  Fechter  :  Cyprus  :  A  Platform  before  the 
Town  looking  upon  the  Harbour.  At  the  back  of  the  Scene  a  large  Arcade.  Gate 
on  the  right.  Left  corner  a  Capstan,  around  it  bales  of  merchandise.  In  the  distance 
a  storm  which  is  gradually  abating.  Booth  :  Famagusta,  a  fortified  seaport  Town  in 
the  island  of  Cyprus.  Castle  on  Platform  R.  Sea-view  C.  Stone  seat  C.  Platform 
and  Steps  at  back.  Arch  L.  The  Scene  is  a  front  of  the  Castle  at  Sunset.  Cassio, 
Montano,  and  several  gentlemen  discovered.  [For  the  notes  of  Malone,  Reed,  an«l 
others  on  the  locality,  see  Appendix,  '  Date  of  the  Action.'] 

3.  Coleridge  {Notes,  253)  :  Observe  in  how  many  ways  Othello  is  made,  first,  oui 
acquaintance,  then  our  friend,  then  the  object  of  our  anxiety,  before  the  deeper  interest 
is  to  be  approached ! 

5.  Heauen]  Malone  is  the  only  editor  who  prefers  the  haven  of  Qx ;  we  should 
not  have  had  his  note  in  defence  of  it  had  he  not  read  in  Knolles's  History  of  the 
Turks,  1570,  that  there  was  a  '  haven  of  Famagusta,  which  was  defended  from  the 
main  by  two  great  rocks '  forty  paces  apart. 

91 


92  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  n,  sc.  i. 

What  ribbes  of  Oake,  when  Mountaines  melt  on  them,  10 

Can  hold  the  Morties.     What  fhall  we  heare  of  this? 

2  A  Segregation  of  the  Turkifh  Fleet : 
For  do  but  ftand  vpon  the  Foaming  Shore, 
The  chidden  Billow  feemes  to  pelt  the  Clowds,  14 

10.  Mountaines  ...them,~]      the     huge  12.   2]  2  Gent.  Qq. 
mountaine  vies  It,  Qx.    mounlaine...them,  13.  Loaming]  banning  Qx. 

Q2.     Mountains. ..them  FF.     the  huge  14.  chidden]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  Dycc 

mountains  melt  Pope,   Rami,     the  huge  i,  "Wh.  Glo.  Sta.  Cam.  Del.  Rife,    chiding 

mountain  melts  Jen.  Qq  et  cet. 

1 1 .  Morties. ~\  Ff,  Rowe.  morties, —  Qq.  Billo-u<~\  billcnves  Q„Q3,  Pope  + ,  Jen. 
morties ? Pope, Theob. i.   mortise ? 'or  mor-  feemes~\  feem  Q„,  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 
tice  ?  Theob.  ii  et  cet. 

10.  Mountaines]  In  adopting  the  Qq,  Pope  evidently  supposed  that  'mountains' 
here  referred,  not  to  water  but,  to  land ;  Theobald  showed  that  Shakespeare  refers  to 
'hills  of  seas'  in  this  very  Scene,  line  215,  and  'liquid  mountains'  in  Tro.  <5r>  Cress., 
and  that  he  had  abundance  of  classical  authority  for  the  simile,  in  Homer,  and  Vergil 
and  Ovid ;  and  that  therefore  *  mountains  '  here  refers  to  waves.  Despite  this  clear  ex- 
position, JENNENS,  the  sturdy  follower  of  Qx,  thinks  that  ■  the  sense  seems  to  require ' 
either  Pope's  text  or  his  own,  both  founded  on  the  Qto.  In  the  mes  It  of  Qx  he  sees, 
correctly,  a  typographical  error  for  melts,  and  thus  interprets  the  passage :  '  If  it  hath 
ruffian'd  so  upon  the  sea  as  here  at  land,  where  the  huge  mountain  melts  away  before 
the  storm,  what  ribs  of  oak  can  hold  the  mortise?  Theobald  did  not  consider  the  im- 
propriety of  waves  melting ;  clouds  have  been  said  to  melt  indeed,  but  never  waves 
that  I  remember.  I  don't  doubt  that  Shakespeare  had  the  following  passage  of  Scrip- 
ture in  his  eye,  "  The  mountains  melt  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord,"  &c.' 

12.  Segregation]  Dyce  [Gloss.):  A  separation,  or  dispersion.  White  (ed.  ii) : 
The  opposite  of  congregation;  an  extraordinary  use  of  the  word. 

13.  Foaming]  Steevens  :  The  Qto  offers  the  bolder  image,  i.  e.  the  shore  that 
execrates  the  ravage  of  the  waves.  Delius  :  Even  if  banning  were  erased  by  Shake- 
speare and  ■  foaming '  substituted,  the  former  justifies  '  chidden '  rather  than  chiding. 

14.  chidden]  Knight:  How  weak  is  the  chiding  billow  pelting  the  clouds !  but 
the  billow  'chidden'  by  the  blast  is  full  of  beauty.  [Both  Dyce  and  Schmidt  give 
to  this  word  in  this  passage  the  meaning  of  '  to  sound,  to  resound,  to  echo '  and  '  to  be 
noisy  about,'  and  they  refer  in  support  to  the  Qto.  But  this  definition  contains,  it  seems 
to  me,  but  a  small  share  of  the  full  definition  of  '  chidden.'  I  have  searched  in  vain 
for  a  passage  in  Shakespeare  where  '  to  chide '  has  the  meaning  to  sound,  and  that 
meaning  alone;  in  every  instance  there  is,  it  seems  to  me,  the  essential  idea  of  scold- 
ing, brawling,  contention  in  all  degrees,  from  'chiding  as  loud  as  thunder'  to  'the  sweet 
chiding  of  well-tuned  sounds.'  The  'gallant  chiding'  which  Hippolyta  [Mid.  Ar.  D. 
IV,  i,  120)  heard  when  Hercules  and  Cadmus  bayed  the  bear  in  a  wood  in  Crete,  ap- 
plies, I  think,  to  the  hunters  scolding,  urging  on,  the  hounds ;  which  Hippolyta  after- 
ward calls  a  '  musical  discord ;'  the  '  discord '  was  the  brawling  of  the  hunters,  the 
hounds,  their  followers,  and  the  bear;  the  'music'  was  the  softened  echoes  of  it  all 
from  '  the  skies,  the  fountains,  every  region  near.'  The  essential  idea  of  '  chiding '  is 
there  not  merely  'sound.'  The  'chiding  nativity'  of  Marina  {.Per.  Ill,  i,  32)  was  the 
rude,  brawling  welcome  to  the  world  given  tc  her  by  the  contest  of  '  fire,  air,  water 
earth,  and  Heaven.' — Ed.] 


act  ii,  sc.  i.J  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  93 

The  winde-fhak'd-Surge,  with  high  &  monftrous  Maine  1 5 

Seemes  to  caft  water  on  the  burning  Beare, 

And  quench  the  Guards  of  th'euer-fixed  Pole:  17 

15.  ?vinde-fiiak''d-Surge']Fj¥2.    winde  F,  Ro\ve  +  ,  Cap    Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 

fiiak'dfurgeQq.  wind-fliak 'd Surged '  F '  mane  Knt  et  cet. 

et  cet.  17.  euer-fixed~\  euer  fired  Qq,  Pope  +  , 

Maine]  F2.    mayne  Qq.    Main  F  Jen.     ever  fixed  F.,  Rowe,  Johns. 

15.  Maine]  To  Knight  belongs  the  credit  of  giving  the  modern  spelling  and  inter- 
pretation of  this  word ;  his  note  is  :  What  is  '  high  and  monstrous  main '  ?  We  use 
the  word  main  elliptically ;  for  the  main  sea,  the  great  sea,  as  Shakespeare  uses  it,  in 
*  'twixt  the  heaven  and  the  main.'  The  main  is  the  ocean.  Substitute  that  word,  and 
what  can  we  make  of  the  passage  before  us  ?  '  the  wind-shak'd  surge  with  high  and 
monstrous  ocean.'  But  adopt  the  word  mane,  and  it  appears  to  us  we  have  as  fine  an 
image  as  any  in  Shakespeare.  It  is  more  striking  even  than  the  passage  in  Hen.  IV. : 
1 — the  winds,  Who  take  the  ruffian  billows  by  the  top,  Curling  their  monstrous  heads.' 
In  the  high  and  monstrous  mane  we  have  a  picture  which  was  probably  suggested  by 
the  noble  passage  in  Job :  '  Hast  thou  given  the  horse  strength  ?  Hast  thou  clothed 
his  neck  with  thunder?'  One  of  the  biblical  commentators  upon  this  passage  remarks, 
that  Homer  and  Vergil  mention  the  mane  of  the  horse ;  but  that  the  sacred  author,  by 
the  bold  figure  of  thunder,  expresses  the  shaking  of  the  mane,  and  the  flakes  of  hair 
which  suggest  the  idea  of  lightning.  The  horse  of  Job  is  the  war-horse,  '  who  swal- 
loweth  the  ground  with  fierceness  and  rage ;'  and  when  Shakespeare  pictured  to  him- 
self his  mane  wildly  streaming,  'when  the  quiver  rattleth  against  him,  the  glittering 
spear  and  the  shield,'  he  saw  an  image  of  the  fury  of  the  '  wind-shak'd  surge,'  and 
of  its  very  form;  and  he  painted  it  with  'high  and  monstrous  mane.' 

17.  Guards]  Johnson:  Alluding  to  the  star  Arctophylax.  Steevens  :  I  wonder 
that  none  of  the  advocates  of  Shakespeare's  learning  have  observed  that  Arctophylax 
literally  signifies  'the  guard  of  the  Bear.'  J.  F.  Marsh  (A7".  6°  Qu.,  1877,  5th,  viii, 
83) :  Both  Johnson  and  Steevens  are  in  error ;  and  Shakespeare  knew  better  than  his 
commentators  what  he  was  talking  about  when  he  spoke  of  the  guards  of  the  pole, 
and  not  of  the  guard  of  the  Bear.  Arctophylax  is  not  a  synonym  for  the  star  Arcturus, 
but  for  the  constellation  Bootes ;  and  the  Bear,  of  which  he  is  the  guard,  or  rather 
keeper,  is  not  the  Little  Bear,  of  which  Polaris  is  the  lucida,  but  the  Great  Bear,  as  will 
be  evident  in  the  most  cursory  glance  at  a  celestial  globe.  Arctophylax,  whether  it 
mean  the  star  or  the  constellation,  has  no  connection  with  the  Polar  guards.  They  are 
the  two  stars  /3  and  y  Ursae  Minoris,  on  the  shoulder  and  foreleg  of  the  Little  Bear,  as 
usually  depicted,  or  sometimes  on  the  ear  and  shoulder.  They  were  more  observed  in 
Shakespeare's  time  than  now  for  the  purposes  of  navigation.  Norman's  Safeguard  of 
Sailers,  1 587,  has  a  chapter,  '  Howe  to  knowe  the  houre  of  the  night  by  the  Guards,' 
&c.  They  were  even  made  the  subject  of  mechanical  contrivances  for  facilitating  cal- 
culation, one  of  which  is  described  in  The  Arte  of  Navigation,  trans,  by  Richard  Eden 
from  the  Spanish  of  Martin  Curtis  (or  Cortez),  1561,  consisting  of  fixed  and  movable 
concentric  circles  with  holes,  through  which  to  observe  'the  two  starres  called  the 
Guardians,  or  the  mouth  of  the  home.'  Further  details  will  be  found  in  Admiral 
Smyth's  Cycle  of  Celestial  Objects,  ii,  331,  where  is  also  cited  Tap's  Seaman's  Gram- 
mar, 1609,  'containing  still  more  upon  the  Guards;'  and  Hood's  Use  of  the  Celestial 
Globe,  1590,  deriving  the  name  'from  the  Spanish  word  guardare,  which  is  to  beholde, 


94 


THE    TEA  G  ED  IE   OF  OTHELLO 


I  neuer  did  like  molleftation  view 
On  the  enchafed  Flood. 

Men.     If  that  the  Turkifh  Fleete 
Be  not  enfhelter'd,  and  embay'd,  they  are  drown'd, 
It  is  impoffible  to  beare  it  out. 

Enter  a  Gentleman. 
3  Newes  Laddes  :  our  warres  are  done : 
The  defperate  Tempefl  hath  fo  bang'd  the  Turkes, 
That  their  defignement  halts.     A  Noble  fhip  of  Venice, 
Hath  feene  a  greeuous  wracke  and  fufferance 


[act  ii,  sc.  i. 
18 

20 


25 


27 


19.  On  the  enchafed]  On  the  inchafed 
Qq.  On'th'enchafd  Han.  On  th'en- 
chafd  Steev.'93. 

20.  that  the]  that  be  the  F  . 

21.  enflielteS  d]  infhelteSd  QqFf, 
Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Coll.  Wh. 

embayed]  embayed  Qq. 
they  are~\  they're  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Sta. 
Dyce  iii,  Huds. 

22.  to  beare~\  Ff,  QjQ^  Rowe  +  ,  Knt, 
Coll.  Sing.  Dyce  i,  Wh.  i,  Cam.  Del.  they 
beare  Qx  et  cet. 

[Scene  II.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 


23.  Enter...]  Enter  a  third  Gentleman. 
Qq. 

24  and  throughout.  3.]  3  Gent.  Qq. 
Laddes:"]  F2.    Lords,  Qx,  Pope-f, 
Jen.  Lords /Stecv.  Mal.Var.  Rann.  Lads, 
or  Lads  :  Q2Q,F  F  ,  Rowe,  Johns,  et  cet. 
our]  your  Qq. 

25.  Turkes]  Turke  Qq. 

26.  Two  lines,  Q^Q.. 

26,  27.  That... feene]  One  line,  Qx. 

26.  A  Noble]  Another  Qx,  Pope.     A 
Han. 

27.  wracke]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope,  Knt, 
Sing.  Del.     wreck  Theob.  ii  et  cet. 


because  they  are  diligently  to  be  looked  unto,  in  regard  of  the  singular  use  which  they 
have  in  navigation.'  Shakespeare  probably  meant  to  include  in  the  Guards  all  the 
three  stars  [i.  e.  /3  and  y  Ursa?  Minoris,  and  Polaris]  required  for  the  observations 
above  noticed.  Otherwise  in  describing  a  tempest  which  seemed  to  cast  water  on  one 
constellation,  and  quench  two  of  the  principal  stars  of  another,  he  could  scarcely  have 
avoided  mentioning  the  third  star,  the  brightest  and  most  important  of  the  three. 

19.  enchafed]  There  is  an  unusual  number,  in  this  Scene,  of  words  with  the  prefix 
en :  enshelter'd,  embay'd,  ensteefd,  enclogge,  enwhcele.  In  Scene  iii,  enfetter  d,  en- 
mesh ;  in  IV,  i,  encave.     For  this  usage  elsewhere,  see  Abbott,  §  440. 

22.  to  beare]  For  those  who  prefer  they  bear  of  Qx,  Abbott,  §368,  explains  that 
it  is  probably  a  subjunctive,  and  •  that '  is  omitted. 

27.  wracke]  Hunter  (Disq.  on  The  Tempest,  p.  134)  condemns  the  substitution 
of  the  modern  spelling  in  this  word  as  a  loss  in  melody  in  the  lines  he  cites  from  The 
Tempest,  and  implies  that  we  should  throughout  the  plays  retain  the  old  word.  'These 
are  but  niceties  (he  says),  but  poetry  is  a  luxury,  and  should  therefore  be  as  refined  and 
perfect  as  possible.'  'The  reason  for  the  substitution  is  evident.  "Wrack"  has  in  a 
great  measure  gone  out  of  use,  though  we  still  use  the  familiar  phrase  "  wrack  and 
ruin."  But  "wrack"  continued  in  use  long  after  Shakespeare,  and  cannot  have  been, 
by  any  means,  extinct  in  the  days  of  Rowe.'  [For  four  instances  from  V.  &>  A.,  A',  of 
L.,  and  the  Sonn.,  where  the  rhyme  will  not  permit  the  substitution  of  wreck,  see  Mrs 
Furness's  Concordance,  s.  v. — Ed.] 


act  ii,  sc.  L]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  95 

On  moft  part  of  their  Fleet.  28 

Mon.     How?  Is  this  true/ 
3  The  Ship  is  heere  put  in.-  A  VerennefJ ra,  Michael  CaJJio  30 

28.  On]  Of  Johns.  Sing.  Dycei,  Del.   in  ;  A  Veronessa  ;  Han. 

their]   the  QjQ3,  Pope  ii,  Theob.  in,  A  Veronese;  Johns.  Cap.  Steev.'85.  in, 

Warb.  Johns.  A  Veronese" :  Mai.  Rann,  Steev/93,  Var. 

30.  Two  lines,  Qq,  Pope  et  seq.  Coll.  iii.     in:  A  Veronese,  Coll.  i,  Wh.  i, 

is  heere]  is  F.,  Rowe.  in;    A  Florentine,  Coll.   (MS).      in,  A 

in:  A  Verenneffa,]  in  :  A  Veronejfa,  Veronesa;  Glo.  Cam.  Dyce  iii.      in.     A 

i^q, Sta.  in :  A  Veroneffo,  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope.  Veronese*,  Ktly.     in;   A  Veronese,   Rife, 

in,  AVeronessa  ;  Theob.  Warb.  Jen.  Knt,  Wh.  ii. 

28.  most]  For  many  other  instances  of  the  omission  of  the,  see  Abbott,  §  89. 

30.  Verennessa]  Theobald,  by  simply  altering  the  punctuation,  was  the  first  to 
make  this  refer  to  the  ship  and  not  to  Cassio, '  who  was  no  Veronese,'  says  Theobald  in 
his  ed.  i ;  '  but  we  find  from  other  passages  in  the  play  he  was  of  Rome '  (withdrawn 
in  ed.  ii).  'The  vessel  properly  belonged  to  Verona,  but  was  in  the  service  of  Venice.' 
Heath  :  Shakespeare  had  no  ship  in  his  thoughts,  but  intended  to  inform  us  that 
Cassio  was  of  Verona,  an  inland  city  of  the  Venetian  State.  The  word  Veronese 
should  be  pronounced  after  the  Italian  manner  as  a  quadrisyllable.  T.  Warton  :  It 
was  common  to  introduce  Italian  words,  and  in  their  proper  pronunciation  then  familiar; 
see  Faerie  Queene,  III,  xii,  90:  'And  sleeues  dependant  Albanese-wyse?  The  ship 
was  a  Veronese,  just  as  we  now  say  a  Hamburgher.  Cassio  was  a  Florentine.  In  this 
speech  the  Third  Gentleman,  who  brings  the  news  of  the  wreck  of  the  Turkish  fleet, 
returns  to  the  tale,  and  tells  the  circumstances  more  distinctly.  In  his  former  speech 
he  speaks  of  '  a  noble  ship  of  Venice,'  and  now  he  adds :  '  The  very  ship  is  just  now 
put  into  port,  and  she  is  a  VeroneseV  That  is,  a  ship  fitted  out  or  furnished  by  the 
people  of  Verona,  a  city  of  the  Venetian  State.  Steevens  :  I  believe  we  are  all 
wrong.  Verona  is  an  inland  city.  E-very  inconsistency  may,  however,  be  avoided  if 
we  read  The  Veronessa,  i.  e.  the  name  of  the  ship  is  the  Veronessa.  [While  all  the 
critics  thus  far  had  stated  that  Verona  was  tributary  to  Venice,  yet,  having  cited  no 
authority,  they  had  apparently  drawn  the  fact  from  the  depths  of  their  consciousness ; 
it  was  reserved  for  M alone  to  justify  the  assertion  in  a  note,  which  is  the  only  one 
from  the  mass  that  Dyce  quotes,  as  follows  :]  '  Besides  many  other  towns  (says  Con- 
tareno),  castles,  and  villages,  they  [the  Venetians]  possess  seven  faire  cities ;  as  Trevigi, 
Padoua,  Vicenza,  Verona,  Brescia,  Bergamo,  and  Crema.' — Commonwealth  of  Venice, 
1599.  Knight  retains  the  Veronessa,  because  'as  a  feminine  it  is  applicable  to  a 
ship.'  Collier  :  The  Third  Gentleman  has  already  said  that  the  ship  was  '  of  Ven- 
ice,' and  it  is  not  likely  that  he  would  assert  just  afterwards  that  she  was  a  'Veronese;' 
it  seems  much  more  probable  that  he  would  by  mistake  call  Cassio,  whom  he  did  not 
know,  a  '  Veronese.'  Singer  :  Whether  a  Veronessa  signified  a  ship  fitted  out  by 
Verona,  or  designated  some  particular  kind  of  vessel,  is  not  yet  fully  established.  But 
as  it  has  not  hitherto  been  met  with  elsewhere,  the  former  is  most  probably  the  true 
explanation.  White  (ed.  i) :  There  is  difficulty  in  either  reading;  but  of  the  two 
errors,  one  of  which  it  is  necessary  to  suppose  on  Shakespeare's  part,  a  momertary  for- 
getfulness  appears  the  more  probable.     Keightley  {Exp.,  301) :  Another  instance  of 

the  poet's  negligence  or  forgetfulness Though  the  metre  is  perfect,  it  might  be 

better  to  insert  nam" J  or  one.     It  is  not  likely  that  the  ship  was  called  'the  Veronessa? 
Daniel  (p.  78) :  Read  :  'The  ship  is  here  r»ut  in,  |  "  La  Veronesa:"  Michael  Cassio,  | 


90  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  ii,  sc.  i. 

Lieutenant  to  the  warlike  Moore,  Othello,  31 

Is  come  on  Shore  .  the  Moore  himfelfe  at  Sea, 
And  is  in  full  Commiffion  heere  for  Cyprus. 

Mon.     I  am  glad  on't : 
Tis  a  worthy  Gouernour.  35 

3   But  this  fame  Caffio,  though  he  fpeake  of  comfort, 
Touching  the  Turkifh  loffe,  yet  he  lookes  fadly, 
And  praye  the  Moore  be  fafe  ;  for  they  were  parted 
With  fowle  and  violent  Tempeft 

Mon.     Pray  Heauens  he  be  :  40 

For  I  haue  feru'd  him,  and  the  man  commands  [3*6  b~\ 

31.  Lieutenant]  Leiutenant  QXQ2-  S3.  Jieere~\  bound  Daniel. 

to]  of  F  ,  Rowe  +  .  34,  35.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 

32.  on  Shore]  af/ioreQ^  af7ioreQf).  34.  Lam]  Pin  Pope -4- ,  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 
Moore]  Moor's  Dyce  conj.  38.  praye]  prayes  QqF2F  .  prays  F 
himfelfe]    QqFf,  Dyce,  Glo.  Sta.  et  cet. 

Cam.  Del.  Rife,  Wh.  ii.     himself 's  Rowe  40.  Heauens]  Ileauen  Qq,  Cap.  Jen. 

et  cet.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly. 

Lieutenant,'  &c.  Hudson  adopts  Daniel's  suggestion.  Rolfe  agrees  with  White  that 
the  confusion  is  perhaps  due  to  a  momentary  forgetfulness  on  Shakespeare's  part.  Til. 
ELZE  (Sh.  Jahrbuch,  xiv,  1 76) :  The  word  is  clearly  corrupt,  but  Fx  puts  us  on  the  right 
track.  Let  the  true  word  be  '  verrinessa,'  and  the  changes,  due  to  editorial  lack  of 
knowledge,  through  '  verennessa '  and  *  Veronessa '  to  '  Veronese '  are  easily  under- 
stood. Now  although  I  cannot  at  the  moment  give  an  Italian  authority  for  the  noun 
'  verinessa,'  yet  there  is  the  word  '  verrina '  and  the  verb  '  verrinare,'  which  is  an  old 
nautical  term  and  still  in  use,  equivalent  in  meaning  to  tenebrare,  perforare,  traforare, 
that  is,  to  '  cut  through,'  to  '  cleave,'  like  the  French  percer.  Wherefore  the  •  noble 
ship  of  Venice '  was  a  verrinessa,  *  un  perceflot.'  [Is  not  this  the  exact  equivalent 
of  the  nautical  term  '  cutter '  ?  If  only  an  instance  of  the  use  of  the  Italian  word 
could  be  produced,  this  vexed  question  would  be  settled  for  ever.  As  it  is,  Th.  Elze's 
explanation  seems  far  more  satisfactory  than  any  other ;  but  if  a  supersubtle  compositor 
forces  us  to  choose  between  a  lack  of  memory  on  Shakespeare's  part  and  a  lack  of 
geographical  information,  I  prefer  the  latter.  The  nationality  of  a  chance  ship,  men- 
tioned once  and  never  again,  is  of  less  moment  than  the  nationality  of  an  important 
•cnaracter ;  the  same  wind  that  can  blow  a  ship  to  Aleppo  can  waft  one  from  Verona. 
Furthermore,  how  in  the  wild  excitement  of  the  moment  could  the  Third  Gentle- 
man find  out  from  what  city  of  Italy  Cassio  came  ?  That  he  was  the  lieutenant  to 
the  warlike  Moor  might  be  revealed  at  a  glance  by  some  distinctive  decoration  of  his 
dress,  such  as  the  scarf  of  company,  which  always  bore  the  Captain's  colours. — Ed. 

33.  heere  for  Cyprus]  Unless  this  means  •  for  Cyprus,  here,'  it  is  not  easy  to  ex 
plain  it.  Daniel's  emendation  perfects  the  sense,  but  the  ductus  literarum  is  against 
it.— Ed. 

34.  John  Hunter  :  Montano  would  be  well  pleased  to  resign  the  post  in  a  time  0/ 
\o  great  peril  to  such  a  man  as  Othello,  under  whom  he  had  served. 

34.  on't]  See  Abs^tt,  §  181. 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.J 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


97 


Like  a  full  Soldier.     Let's  to  the  Sea-fide  (hoa) 
As  well  to  fee  the  Veffell  that's  come  in, 
As  to  throw-out  our  eyes  for  braue  Othello, 
Euen  till  we  make  the  Maine,  and  th'Eriall  blew, 
An  indiftincT:  regard. 

Gent.     Come,  let's  do  fo ; 
For  euery  Minute  is  expectancie 
Of  more  Arriuancie. 

Enter  CaJJio. 

CaJJi.     Thankes  you,  the  valiant  of  the  warlike  Ifle , 
That  fo  approoue  the  Moore  :  Oh  let  the  Heauens 
Giue  him  defence  againft  the  Elements, 
For  I  haue  loft  him  on  a  dangerous  Sea. 

Mo?i.     Is  he  well  fhip'd  ? 

CaJJio.     His  Barke  is  ftoutly  Timber'd,  and  his  Pylot 
Of  verie  expert,  and  approu'd  Allowance ; 


42 


45 


50 


55 


57 


42.  Two  lines,  Qq. 

hoa]  ho  Qq.     Om.  Pope  + . 

44.  throw-out]  J< 2.  throw  out  QqF F ' 
et  cet. 

45.  46.  Om.  Qx. 

ffl  Eriall  blew]  FaF3.  th'Ayre  all 
blue  Q2Q3.  tWErial  blue  F^  Rowe.  th' 
or  the  aerial  blue  Pope  et  cet. 

46.  An]  And  FfQ3. 

47.  Gent.]  3  Gent.  Qq. 
49.  more]  our  F  . 

Arriuancie]  Arrivancy  Ff,  Knt. 
arriuance  Qq  et  cet. 

Scene  III.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

51.  Thankes  you,]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  i, 
Dyce,  Wh.  i.    Thankes  to  Qq,  Pope  + ,  Cap. 


Jen.  Steev.  Mal.Var.  Coll.  iii.    Thanks  you 
Ktly.      Thanks,  you  Knt  et  cet. 

51.  the]  Ff,  Knt,  Coll.  iii.     this  Qq  et 
cet. 

warlike]    worthy  Qlt   Jen.   Rann. 
Om.  Q2Q3. 

52.  Moore:  Oh  let]  Moore,  and let  Qq. 
Moor!  O,  let  Knt. 

53.  againfl]  from  F4. 
the]  their  Qq. 

54.  a]  the  Q3. 

56.  his]  is  Q'8l. 

Pylot]    Pilate   Qx.     Pilot*  Q2Q3. 

Pilot  F  F  . 
3   4 

57.  Of.. .and]    Very    expert,    and  of 
Johns,  conj. 


44.  to  throw]  A  typographical  error,  in  the  omission  of  'to,'  begun  in  Reed's  Var. 
of  1803,  was  continued  in  the  Var.  of  1 813,  of  1821,  and  in  Singer's  ed.  i.     The  line 
thus  mutilated,  and  almost  painfully  prosaic,  was  accepted  as  complete  by  Guest  (i, 
239),  and  thus  bravely  scanned  :  '  As  |  throw  out  |  our  eyes  |  :  for  brave  |  Othel  |  lo.' 
Ed. 

49.  Arriuancie]  Dyce:  A  manifest  error  caught  from  the  'expectanaV  of  the  pre- 
ceding line.  Cowden-Clarke  :  There  is  a  marked  prevalence  of  words  ending  in  ce 
in  this  play. 

57.  expert,  and  approu'd  Allowance]  Steevens  :  This  is  put  for  *  allow'd  and 
approv'd  expertness.'     [For  a  list  of  similar  expressions  where  the  relations  of  adjec- 
tives and  their  nouns  seem  inverted,  like  '  paly  ashes,'  '  shady  stealth,'  Sec.  see  the  tx.  ■ 
cellent  Grammatical  Obs.  on  p.  141 7  of  Schmidt's  Lex. — Ed.] 
7 


98  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [ACT  II,  SC.  I. 

Therefore  my  hope's  (not  furfetted  to  death)  58 

Stand  in  bold  Cure. 

Within.     A  Saile,  a  Saile,  a  Saile.  60 

58.  hope's]  F2Qq.     hopes  ¥^A  et  cet.  60.  Within.]    Meff.    Qq.     4   G.    Cap. 

59.  [Enter  a  Meffenger.  Qq.    Enter  an-         Without.  Sta. 

other  Gentleman.  Cap.  Within...  Saile.']  In  margin  as  Stage 

Direction  Glo.  Cam.  Rife,  Wh.  ii. 

58,  59.  Johnson  :  I  do  not  understand  these  lines.  I  know  not  how  hope  can  be 
surfeited  to  death,  that  is,  can  be  increased,  till  it  be  destroyed ;  nor  what  it  is,  '  to  stand 
in  bold  cure ;'  or  why  hope  should  be  considered  a  disease.  Shall  we  read  :  '  Therefore 
my  fears,  not  surfeited  to  death '  ?  &c.  This  is  better,  but  it  is  not  well.  Shall  we 
strike  a  bolder  stroke,  and  read  thus :  '  Therefore  my  hopes,  not  forfeited  to  death, 
Stand  bold,  not  sure '  ?  Jennens  :  Wishes  may  be  called  the  food  upon  which  hope  is 
very  apt  to  surfeit ;  and  to  surfeit  to  death  too,  when  there  is  no  ground  or  foundation 
to  expect  the  thing  hoped  for.  Hope  is  in  perfect  health  where  the  grounds  for  it  are 
equal  to  the  wish ;  but  if  the  wish  preponderate  the  grounds  of  expectation,  hope  is  in 
a  sickly  state.  This  was  the  case  with  Cassio ;  his  wishes  for  Othello's  safety  were 
greater  than  the  probability  of  it,  for  he  had  left  him  on  a  dangerous  sea ;  so  his  hope 
was  sick ;  but  not  sick  to  death,  because  the  ship  had  a  good  pilot ;  this  thought  phys- 
icked hope,  and  put  it  in  a  bold  state  of  cure.  Steevens  :  Presumptuous  hopes,  which 
have  no  foundation  in  probability,  may  poetically  be  said  to  surfeit  themselves  to  death, 
or  forward  their  own  dissolution.  '  In  bold  cure '  means  in  confidence  of  being  cured. 
Malone  :  It  is  not  hope  which  is  here  described  as  the  disease ;  those  misgiving  appre- 
hensions which  diminish  hope  are,  in  fact,  the  disease,  and  hope  itself  is  the  patient. 
Henley:  I  believe  that  Solomon  upon  this  occasion  will  be  found  the  best  interpreter: 
'  Hope  deferred  maketh  the  heart  sick.'  Knight  :  Hope  upon  hope,  without  reali- 
zation, is-  a  surfeit  of  hope  and  extinguishes  hope.  Cassio  had  some  reasonable  facts  to 
prevent  his  hope  being  '  surfeited  to  death.'  Collier  :  The  meaning  seems  to  be,  that 
Cassio's  hopes  are  not  destroyed  by  constant  repetition  and  disappointment.  Singer  : 
Therefore  my  hopes,  not  surfeited  to  death  by  excess  of  apprehension,  stand  in  confi- 
dence of  being  cured.  Staunton  (Note  on  Ant.  6°  Cleo.  II,  i,  38)  :  As  in  our  early 
language  to  expect  most  commonly  meant  to  stay  or  wait,  so  to  hope  on  some  occasions 
was  used  where  we  should  now  adopt  to  expect.  (Note  on  present  passage)  :  '  Hopes  ' 
here  are  expectations  or  presentiments.  Cowden-Clarke  :  My  hopes,  not  having 
been  utterly  destroyed  by  reiterated  false  excitement  and  successive  defeat,  remain  in 
confident  expectation  of  being  fulfilled.  Hudson  :  Cassio,  though  anxious,  does  not 
despair ;  and  the  meaning  of  '  stand  in  bold  cure '  seems  to  be,  '  my  hopes,  though  near 
dying,  stay  themselves  upon,  or  are  kept  alive  by,  bold  conjecture;'  or,  it  may  be,  'are 
confident  of  being  cured.'  I  was  for  a  while  in  doubt  whether  to  read  'not  suffocate 
to  death '  or  '  not  sick  yet  unto  death;'  but  on  the  whole  preferred  the  former  as  involv- 
ing somewhat  less  of  change,  and  as  being  perhaps  rather  more  in  Shakespeare's  man- 
ner. D'Hugues:  II  est  clair  cependant  que  les  esperances  s'ajoutant  aux  esp6rances, 
sans  6tre  jamais  realisees,  constituent  un  trop  plein  (surfeit)  d'esperances,  qui  fait  eva- 
nouir  toute  esperance.  C'est  la  meme  chose  que  Moliere  a  voulu  dire  dans  le  fameux 
sonnet  d'Oronte :  Belle  Philis,  on  desespere  Alors  qu'on  espere  toujours.  [These  para- 
phrases are  all  of  them  intelligible,  and  would  be  entirely  satisfactory  could  we  only 
forget  the  text,  which  as  it  now  stands  is  unintelligible  to  me,  and  I  am  willing  to  '  say 
ditto  to'  I>  Johnson. — Ed.1 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


THE  MOORE   OF    VENICE 


99 


CaJJio.     What  noife  ? 

Gent.     The  Towne  is  empty ;  on  the  brow  o'th'Sea 
Stand  rankes  of  People,  and  they  cry,  a  Saile. 

CaJJio.     My  hopes  do  fhape  him  for  the  Gouernor. 

Gent.     They  do  difcharge  their  Shot  of  Courtefie, 
Our  Friends,  at  leaft. 

CaJJio.     I  pray  you  Sir,  go  forth, 
And  giue  vs  truth  who  'tis  that  is  arriu'd. 

Gent.     I  (hall.  Exit. 

Mon.     But  good  Lieutenant,  is  your  Generall  wiu'd? 

CaJJio.     Moft  fortunately  :  he  hath  atchieu'd  a  Maid 
That  paragons  defcription,  and  wilde  Fame  : 
One  that  excels  the  quirkes  of  Blazoning  pens, 
And  in  th'effentiall  Vefture  of  Creation, 
Do's  tyre  the  Ingeniuer. 


61 


65 


70 


75 


61. 
62. 


63. 
64. 


noife]  news  Cap. 
Gent.]  Meff.  Qq.     4  G.  Cap. 
empty  ;  on]  epmty,  one  Q  . 
Stand~\  otand  Qx.     Stands  Q3Q, . 
Gouernor]  guernemeyit  Qx.     gou- 
trnment  Q2.     government  Q  . 
[Guns  heard.  Cap. 

65,  69,  78,  112.  Gent.]  2  Gen.  Qq. 
their]  the  Qq. 

66.  Friends]  friend  Qq. 

[A  fhot.  Qq.     Sound  of  cannon. 
Johns. 

70.  Lieutenant]  Leiutenant  Q,Q2. 


7 1 .  fortunately  :]  fortunately,  Qq, 
Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

73.  quirkes  of]  Om.  Qx. 

74.  tfteffentiall]  the  effentiall  Qq. 
75-77.   Do's. ..in  f]  One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

75.  /yr<?  M*  Ingeniuer.]  beare  all  excel- 
lency: —  Qj,  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Steev.  Mal.Var. 
Coll.  Wh.  i,  Ktly.  beare  an  excellency : — 
Q2Q  ,  Rowe.  tire  the  Ingeniver  Ff.  tire 
the  inventer.  Cap.  Rami,  tire  the  ingener. 
Knt,  Dyce,  Glo.  Sta.  Cam.  Del.  Huds 
Rife,  tire  the  ingenier  Sing.  ii.  bear  all 
excellence  Wh.  ii.    tire  the  imaginer  Jervis. 


73.  excels]  Malone  :  See  103d  Sonn. :  '  a  face  That  over-goes  my  blunt  invention 
quite,  Dulling  my  lines,  and  doing  me  disgrace.' 

74,  75.  Warburton  :  It  is  plain  that  something  very  hyperbolical  was  here  in- 
tended. But  what  is  there  as  it  stands  ?  Why  this,  that  in  the  essence  of  creation 
she  bore  all  excellency.  The  expression  is  intolerable,  and  could  never  come  from  one 
who  so  well  understood  the  force  of  words  as  our  Poet.  The  essential  vesture  is  the 
same  as  essential  form.  So  that  the  expression  is  nonsense.  For  the  vesture  of  crea- 
tion signifies  the  forms  in  which  created  beings  are  cast.  And  essence  relates  not  to 
the  form,  but  to  the  matter.  Shakespeare  certainly  wrote :  '  And  in  terrestrial  vesture,' 
&c.  And  in  this  lay  the  wonder,  that  all  created  excellence  should  be  contained  within 
an  earthly  mortal  form.  Heath  (p.  559) :  I  entirely  agree  with  Warburton  that  the 
common  reading  is  indefensible I  should  rather  suspect  that  the  poet  wrote : 

And  in  the  sensual  vesture,'  &c.  The  sense  is,  And  within  that  vesture  of  the  human 
senses  with  which  she  is  clothed  by  the  Creator  she  is  endued  with  every  excellency. 
Johnson  :  I  do  not  think  •  essential '  inexplicable ;  it  seems  to  be  used  for  existent,  real. 
She  excels  the  praises  of  invention  says  he,  and  in  real  qualities  with  which  creation 
has  invested  her  bears  all  excellency.     [Line  75  in  the  Folio]  I  explain  thus  :  Does  tire 


IOO  THE   TRAGEDJE   OF   OTHELLO         [act  ii,  sc.  i. 

[74,  75.  essentiall  Vesture  of  Creation,  Do's  tyre  the  Ingeniuer.] 
the  ingenious  verse.  This  is  the  best  reading,  and  that  which  the  author  substituted 
in  his  revisal.  STEEVENS:  I  believe  the  word  '  tire '  was  not  introduced  to  signify  to 
fatigue,  but  to  attire,  to  dress.  The  verb  to  attire  is  often  so  abbreviated.  Thus  in 
Holland's  Leaguer,  1633:  'Cupid's  a  boy,  And  would  you  tire  him  like  a  Senator?' 
Again  in  Com.  of  Err.  II,  ii,  99:  'To  save  the  money  he  spends  in  tiring'  ['trim 
ming.' — Glo.]  'The  essential  vesture  of  Creation'  tempts  me  to  believe  that  it  was 
so  used  here.  I  would  read  something  like  this :  Does  tire  the  ingenuous  virtue,  i.  e. 
invests  her  artless  virtue  in  the  fairest  form  of  earthly  substance.  In  Mer.  of  Ven.  V, 
i,  64,  Lorenzo  calls  the  body  '  the  muddy  vesture  of  decay.'  It  may  be  observed  that 
ingener  did  not  anciently  signify  one  who  manages  the  engines  or  artillery  of  an  army, 
but  any  ingenious  person,  any  ?naster  of  liberal  science.  Cf.  Jonson's  Sejanus,  I,  i:  '  No, 
Silius,  we  are  no  good  ingeners,  We  want  the  fine  arts,'  &c.  Ingener,  therefore,  may 
be  the  true  reading  of  this  passage ;  a  similar  thought  occurs  in  Temp.  IV,  i,  10 :  '  For 
thou  shalt  find  she  will  outstrip  all  praise,  And  make  it  halt  behind  her.'  In  the  Argu- 
ment of  Sejanus,  Jonson  likewise  says  that  his  hero  '  worketh  with  all  his  ingene,'  ap- 
parently from  the  Latin,  ingenium.  M alone  :  Perhaps  we  should  read :  *  Does  tire 
the  ingene  ever.'  Ingene  is  used  for  ingenium  by  Puttenham,  Arte  of  Poesie,  1589: 
1  Such  also  as  made  most  of  their  workes  by  translation  out  of  the  Latin  and  French 
tongue,  and  few  or  none  of  their  own  engine  /'  engine  is  here  without  doubt  a  misprint 
for  ingene.  I  believe,  however,  the  reading  of  the  Qto  is  the  true  one.  If  '  tire '  was 
used  in  the  sense  of  weary,  then  *  ingener '  must  have  been  used  for  the  ingenious 
person  who  should  attempt  to  enumerate  the  merits  of  Desdemona.  We  have  in 
Fleckno's  Discourse  of  the  English  Stage,  1664:  'We  in  England  ....  having  pro 
ceeded  no  further  than  to  bare  painting,  and  not  arrived  to  the  stupendous  wonders  of 
your  great  ingeniers.'  For  a  similar  imagery  to  that  in  the  first  of  these  lines,  see  one 
of  Daniel's  Sonnets :  *  Though  time  doth  spoil  her  of  her  fairest  vaile  That  ever  yet 
mortalitie  did  cover.'  M.  Mason  :  The  reading  of  the  Folio  appears  to  have  been, 
'  Does  tire  the  engineer]  that  is,  '  One  whose  real  perfections  were  so  excellent  that  to 
blazon  them  would  exceed  the  abilities  of  the  ablest  masters.'  Henley  :  '  Ingenieur ' 
is  no  doubt  of  the  same  import  with  ingener  or  ingeneer,  though  perhaps  differently 
written  by  Shakespeare  in  reference  to  ingenious,  and  to  distinguish  it  from  ingeneer, 
which  he  has  elsewhere  used  in  a  military  sense.  Daniel  uses  ingeniate  :  '  Th'  adul- 
terate beauty  of  a  falsed  cheek  Did  Nature  (for  this  good)  ingeniate,'  &c.  Knight  : 
The  text  of  the  Folio  presents  no  difficulty  when  we  understand  the  word  ingener. 
The  word  engine  is  so  called  'because  not  made  without  great  effort  (ingenii)  of 
genius,  of  ingenuity,  of  contrivance.' — Richardson.  The  ingener,  then,  is  the  contriver 
by  ingenuity,  the  designer,  and,  here  applied  to  a  poet,  is  almost  literally  the  Greek 
•noiTjTTjq,  niaker.  Collier  (ed.  i) :  'Ingeniuer'  has  been  taken  for  inginer,  though 
if  that  were  the  true  word,  we  cannot  tell  why  the  compositor  should  have  put  so  many 
letters  into  it.  Jervis  (p.  25) :  Read :  '  doth  tire  the  imagine?'.'  Cf.  '  And  still  he 
did  it  by  first  telling  the  imaginer,  and  after  bidding  the  actor  think.' — Bacon's  Nat. 
Hist.  [Century  X,  p.  205,  ed.  1677. — Dyce],  Staunton:  By  ingener  is  meant,  per- 
haps, the  painter  or  artist,  as  in  the  extract  from  Fleckno  [quoted  by  Malone].  In- 
genier,  or  ingener,  was,  however,  a  term  for  any  ingenious  person ;  and  from  a  passage 
in  Certain  Edicts  from  a  Parliament  in  Eulopia,  by  Lady  Southwell :  '  Item,  that  no 
Lady  shall  court  her  looking-glasse,  past  one  houre  in  a  day,  unlesse  she  professe  to  be 
an  Ingenir,'  it  might  be  thought  in  the  present  instance  to  signify  what  is  now  called 
a  mo'-'is/e,  or  deviser  of  new  fashions  in  female  apparel.     White  (ed.  i) :  The  tame 


act  ii,  sc.  L]  THE  MOORE  OF   VENICE  ioi 

[74,  75.  essentiall  Vesture  of  Creation,  Do's  tyre  the  Ingeniuer.] 
reading  of  the  Qto  is  given  [in  the  text]  with  the  full  consciousness  that  it  does  not 
represent  the  passage  as  Shakespeare  left  it,  and  in  the  belief  that  very  probably  he 
did  not  write  it  at  all.  The  attempt  to  make  something  of  the  Folio  text  by  regarding 
the  last  word  as  a  misprint  of  ingener,  i.  e.  artist,  writer,  ingenious  person,  I  cannot  but 
regard  as  utterly  futile.  Possibly  '  tire  '  here  means  attire,  and  refers  to  •  vesture ;'  it 
may  also  mean  weary,  and  have  for  its  subject  the  word  or  phrase  which  is  incorrectly, 
or  both  incorrectly  and  imperfectly,  represented  by  '  ingeniuer.'  For  in  V.  &  A.t 
Venus's  tongue  is  called  'the  engine  of  her  thoughts;'  and  in  Tit.  And.  Ill,  i,  Mar- 
cus styles  Lavinia's  tongue  '  that  delightful  engine  of  her  thoughts.'  Here  Shake- 
speare may  have  meant  Cassio  to  say,  that  Desdemona's  charms  were  beyond  descrip- 
tion either  by  pen  or  tongue.  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  the  reading  of  the  text  [i.  e. 
the  Qto]  was  substituted  for  the  true,  but  illegible  or  incomprehensible,  reading  by  the 
transcriber  of  the  passage  who  prepared  the  copy.  Br.  Nicholson  (N.  &>  Qu.,  1865, 
3d,  viii,  43)  :  The  Qto  text  lacks  a  sufficient  rise  in  hyperbole  to  conclude  fitly  the  pre- 
vious hyperbolic  praises,  and  a  poetical  conclusion  to  the  simile  commenced  in  'vesture.' 
In  the  Folio  'tire'  cannot  mean  weary ;  but  as  a  verb  suggested  by  'vesture,'  and  hav- 
ing reference  to  it,  it  must  be  either  the  shortened  form  of  attire,  or  formed  (perhaps  for 
the  nonce,  as  is  not  unfrequent  in  writers  of  that  day)  from  tire,  a  head-dress;  and  this 
cither  transitively  or  agentially  in  the  sense  of  '  arrange  a  head-dress,'  or  reflectively  in 
the  sense  of  '  to  act  as.'  But  if  creation  be  represented  as  a  vesture,  it  follows  that 
Desdemona,  as  a  part  of  creation,  should  (agreeably  to  the  last  given  meaning  of  '  tire ') 
be  part  of  the  dress ;  and  giving  the  word  this  sense,  we  obtain  the  plain  meaning  cor- 
responding with  the  reading  of  the  Qto, — that  creation  being  the  vesture,  she,  Desde- 
mona, is  the  tire,  tiara,  or  crown  of  it,  one  who  '  tops  all.'  Again,  if  all  creation  be 
represented  as  a  vesture,  it  can  only  be  as  the  regal  robe  of  God  its  ingener  or  artificer; 
hence  we  may  consider  ingeniver  as  the  representative  of  some  form  of  ingener ;  the 
exact  form  is  unimportant,  but  I  would  prefer  the  French,  ingenieur,  as  this,  printed 
ingenievr,  might  easily  have  been  changed  by  an  ignorant  compositor  into  ingeniver. 
As  to  the  probable  origin  of  the  phrase,  I  cannot  but  think  that  these  two  lines  were 
formed  on  the  remembrance  of  Psalm  cii,  25,  26 :  '  Thou  hast  laid  the  foundation  of 
the  earth,  and  the  heavens  are  the  work  of  Thine  hands,  ....  they  all  shall  wax  old 
as  doth  a  garment,  and  as  a  vesture  shalt  Thou  change  them,  and  they  shall  be  changed.' 
This  being  combined  with  the  thought  of  Desdemona  as  a  pure  daughter  of  Eve,  the 
last  and  therefore,  according  to  the  previous  gradation  of  creation,  the  crowning  work 
of  God.  Combined,  perhaps,  with  these,  and  assisting  the  association  of  the  two,  may 
have  been  the  remembrance  of  the  ray,  circlet,  or  '  glory,'  which  surrounds  the  head 
of  sacred  images  or  pictures,  and  the  phrase  '  forasmuch  as  man  is  the  glory  of  God.' 
Possibly  the  reader  who  has  not  paid  attention  to  the  frequency  with  which  Shake- 
speare draws  from  Scriptural  sources,  and  to  the  frequency  with  which  these  form  his 
phrases,  may  consider  my  remarks  more  subtle  than  sound ;  but  the  addition  of  the 
word  '  essential '  strongly  corroborates  them,  and  illustrates  how  fully  and  perfectly 
Shakespeare  elaborated  a  thought,  and  how  comprehensively  and  succinctly  he  ex- 
pressed it.  Desdemona  is  represented  as  a  being  of  purity  and  love,  a  female  Abdiel 
'mong  Italian  women ;  and  hence  Cassio  is  made  to  break  out  into  such  expression- 
seeking  praise  as  to  call  her  the  top  of  creation,  as  creation  is  'essentially'  and  with- 
out 'the  accident'  of  sin,  or  as  it  was  when  it  was  beautiful  before  God  and  pronounced 
to  be  very  good.  Keightley  {Ext.,  p.  301):  It  seems  almost  impossible  to  make 
any  good  srnse  out  of  the  Folio.     '  The  essential,'  &c.  means  person,  body,  form. 


102  THE   TR  AG  ED  IE   OF  OTHELLO        [ACT.  H,  SO.  i. 

E?iter  Gentleman.  76 

How  now?  Who  ha's  put  in? 

Gent.     Tis  one  Iago,  Auncient  to  the  Generall. 

CaJJio.     Ha's  had  moft  fauourable,  and  happie  fpeed  : 
Tempefts  themfelues,  high  Seas,  and  howling  windes,  80 

The  gutter'd-Rockes,  and  Congregated  Sands, 
Traitors  enfteep'd,  to  enclogge  the  guiltleffe  Keele,  82 

Scene  IV.  Pope +  ,  Jen.  Glo.Wh.ii.    Z&VWh.i,  Huds.  Rife.    'Has 

76.  Enter...]  Enter  2  Gentleman  (after  Dyce  iii.     He  has  Qq  et  cet. 
line  77)  Qq.     Re-enter  Sec.  Gent.  Cap.  80.  higk~\  by  Q  . 

77.  How  now  ?~\  now,  Qq.  .A/bw/ /  Cap.  81.  gutter 'd- Roches']  guttered 'rochsQq. 
Rann.  gutter'' a  Rocks  Ff. 

ha's]  has  QqFf.  82.  enjleep'd,]  enfcerped  ;  Qf.     enur'd 

79.  Caffio.]  Om.  (continuing  speech  to  Tope  conj. 

2  Gent.)  Qq.  enclogge"]    F2F  .     enclog   F  ,  Cap. 

/fo'/J  //'aj  Rowe+.    7/r7j  Dyce  i,  Knt,  Del.     <:/<%>•  Qq  et  cet. 

Hudson  :  This  seems  to  mean,  she  is  one  who  surpasses  all  description,  and  in  real 
beauty  or  outward  form  goes  beyond  the  power  of  the  artist's  inventive  or  expressive 
pencil.  Rolfe  :  The  reading  of  the  Folio  is  doubtful,  but  it  is  preferable  to  the  tame 
phrase  of  the  Qto.  White  (ed.  ii) :  From  the  text  of  the  Folio  no  tolerable  reading 
or  sense  has  yet  been  extracted.  [It  is  to  be  feared  that  Steevens's  remark  on  I,  iii, 
291,  is  equally  applicable  here,  and  that  it  is  '  highly  probable  that  this  passage  will 
prove  a  lasting  source  of  doubt  and  controversy.' — Ed.] 

79.  Ha's]  An  instance  of  the  absorption  of  the  personal  pronoun,  similar  to  that 
of  *  it '  in  I,  iii,  220.  Dyce  in  his  last  edition  has  indicated  this.  Schmidt  in  his 
admirable  translation  thus  renders  this  line :  *  Er  stand  in  eines  guten  Engels  Schutz,' 
and  pleads  for  it  thus :  If  we  consider  the  meaning  of  this  line  in  connection  with 
what  follows  it  is  evident  that  there  must  be  some  reference  to  Desdemona.  '  Speed  ' 
in  Shakespeare  means  not  only  swiftness,  haste,  but  success,  fortune,  and  also  that 
propitious  power,  or  exalted  guardianship,  which  brings  success,  especially  in  the 
expression  of  good  wishes.  '  Saint  Nicholas  be  thy  speed !'  Two  Gent.  Ill,  i,  301 ; 
'  Hercules  be  thy  speed,'  As  You  Like  It,  I,  ii,  222,  and  elsewhere ;  and  with  a  comic 
turn  in  'good  manners  be  your  speed,'  1  Hen.  IV:  III,  i,  190.  Hence,  therefore, 
Desdemona  is  here  the  guardian  angel  who  saves  Iago's  ship,  and  at  the  conclusion 
of  the  speech  she  is  styled  not  without  a  purpose,  '  the  divine  Desdemona.' 

82.  ensteep'd]  Theobald  (Sh.  Rest.,  p.  143) :  That  is,  That  Rocks  and  Shoals 
lurk  under,  and  lye  covered  by  the  Deep,  treacherously  to  destroy  Vessels  which  hap- 
pen to  be  thrown  upon  them.  Steevens  :  Perhaps  escerped  was  an  old  English  word 
borrowed  from  the  French,  escarps,  which  Shakespeare,  not  finding  congruous  to  the 
image  of  clogging  the  keel,  afterwards  changed.  I  once  thought  it  might  be  Traitors 
enscarfd,  i.  e.  muffled  in  their  robes,  as  in  Jul.  Cats,  or  Ham.,  *  My  sea-gown  scarf  d 
about  me.'  Henley  :  Steevens's  difficulty  would,  perhaps,  have  been  removed  had 
he  recollected  Othello's  speech  in  IV,  ii,  60 :  *  Steep'd  me  in  poverty  to  the  very  lips.' 
Boswell:  Traitors  ensteep'd  are  merely  traitors  concealed  under  the  water.  Knight: 
Rocks  and  sand  are  beneath  the  water,  and  what  is  beneath  the  water  is  steep'd  in  the 
water.  The  identical  word  thus  applied  is  in  the  Faerit  Queene,  I,  xi,  276  :  *  Now  gan 
the  goldei    Phoebus  for  to  steepe  His  fierie  face  in  billowes  of  the  west.'     White  (ed 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.]  THE  MOORE   OF  VENICE  103 

As  hauing  fence  of  Beautie,  do  omit  83 

Their  mortall  Natures,  letting  go  fafely  by 

The  Diuine  Defdemona.  85 

Mon.     What  is  (he  ? 

CaJJlo.     She  that  I  fpake  of: 
Our  great  Captains  Captaine, 
Left  in  the  conduct  of  the  bold  Iagoy 

Whofe  footing  heere  anticipates  our  thoughts,  90 

A  Senights  fpeed.     Great  Ioue,  Othello  guard, 
And  fwell  his  Saile  with  thine  owne  powrefull  breath, 
That  he  may  bleffe  this  Bay  with  his  tall  Ship, 
Make  loues  quicke  pants  in  Defdemonaes  Armes, 
Giue  renew'd  fire  to  our  extincted  Spirits.  95 

Enter  Defdemona,  /ago,  Rodorigo,  and  Aimilia. 
Oh  behold,  97 

84.  mortall]  common  Qq.  95.  extincled]  extinfteft  FF.     extin- 

go  /a/ely]  safe  go  Pope  + ,  Cap.  guish'd  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

87,  88.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq.  Spirits.']  Ff.    fpirits  :  And  bring 

87.  /pake]  /poke  Qx.    /peak  Q'8l.  all  CypreJ/e  comfort, —  (subs.)  Qq  et  cet. 

2>2>.  great]  Om.  Q  .  {And  %ive  Rowe). 

94.  Make. ..in]  And  /wi/tly  come  to  96.  Enter...]  After  armes,  line  94  Qq 
Qq,  Jen.  Scene  V.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

95.  Two  lines,  Qq. 


i)  reads  enscarfd  and  upholds  the  word :  because  Shakespeare  never  uses  '  steep '  in 
the  sense  of  '  plunge '  or  '  submerge,'  but  always  in  that  of  '  lave '  or  '  soak,'  which  is 
almost  ridiculously  inappropriate  here;  because  'scarp'  in  Shakespeare's  day  meanl 
the  inner  slope  of  a  ditch  or  intrenchment,  then  as  now  descriptive  of  shelving  rocks: 
and  because  enscarped  might  be  easily  mistaken  for  '  ensteeped,'  owing  to  the  likenes» 
between  c  and  t  in  the  MS.  of  the  early  seventeenth  century.  Dyce  in  his  ed.  ii  re- 
minded White  of  Henley's  reference  to  IV,  ii,  60,  and  White  adopted  '  ensteep'd '  i» 
his  ed.  ii,  and  enscarfd  was  heard  of  no  more. 

84.  mortall]  Reed  :  That  is,  deadly,  destructive. 

88.  Captaine]  Malone  :  Cf. '  And  she  shall  be  sole  victress,  Caesar's  Csesar,'  Rich 
III:  IV,  iv,  336. 

91.  Ioue]  Malone  :  For  this  absurdity  I  have  not  the  smallest  doubt  that  the  Mas- 
ter of  the  Revels,  and  not  our  poet,  is  answerable.  [Malone  made  the  same  remark 
on  2  Hen.  VI:  IV,  x,  56,  where  the  Ff  have  *Jove,'  and  the  Qq  God.  The  infer- 
ence is  that  Malone  deemed  God  the  true  word  here ;  Hudson  has  adopted  it. — Ed.] 
Cowden-Clarke  :  We  believe  it  to  have  been  the  author's  own  word  characteristic- 
ally put  into  Cassio's  mouth  here.  To  this  day  Italians  use  mythological  adjurations 
in  common  with  Christian  appeals ;  and  in  Shakespeare's  time  the  custom  was  almosf. 
universal. 

95.  The  omission  in  the  Folio  of  the  phrase  found  in  the  Qto,  White  (ed.  ;)  pro 
nounces  due  to  'manifest  accident;'  as  well  as  me  in  line  104. 


104 


THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  n,  sc.  1. 


The  Riches  of  the  Ship  is  come  on  fhore : 
You  men  of  Cyprus,  let  her  haue  your  knees. 
Haile  to  thee  Ladie  :  and  the  grace  of  Heauen, 
Before,  behinde  thee,  and  on  euery  hand 
Enwheele  thee  round. 

Dcf.     I  thanke  you,  Valiant  CaJJio, 
What  tydings  can  you  tell  of  my  Lord  ? 

Caf.     He  is  not  yet  arriu'd,  nor  know  I  ought 
But  that  he's  well,  and  will  be  fhortly  heere. 

Def.     Oh,  but  I  feare  : 
How  loft  you  company  ? 

Cajfio.     The  great  Contention  of  Sea,  and  Skies 
Parted  our  fellowfhip.    But  hearke,  a  Saile. 

Within.     A  Saile,  a  Saile. 

Gent.     They  giue  this  greeting  to  the  Cittadell.* 
This  likewife  is  a  Friend. 


98 


IOO 


1.317*] 
106 


no 


113 


98.  onfliore]  afliore  Qt. 

99.  You]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
Warb.  Cap.  Knt,  Wh.  i.     Ye  Qq  et  cet. 

100.  thee  Ladie]  the  Lady  Q'81. 
tell]  tell  me  QqFf  et  cet. 
yet]  Om.  Ff. 

arriu'd]  arriuedQ^^  arivedQ  . 
ought]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

aught  Theob.  et  cet. 
108.  One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 
107.  feare:  How]   Ff.     feare: — how 
Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Sing.    fear. — How 
Coll.  i,  Wh.  i,  Ktly.   fear — how  Rowe  et 
cet. 


104. 
105. 


Warb. 
107, 


109.  Sea]  the  fea  QqFf  et  cet. 

1 10.  fellowfliip.]  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Jen.  Del. 
Huds.  fellowship —  Glo.  Cam.  Rife,  Wh. 
ii.    fellowfhip  :  Qq  et  cet. 

111.  Within... Saile]  [within]  A  faile, 
a  faile  (Stage  direct,  after  line  108)  Qq. 
Sound  of  Cannon.  Johns.  Cry  within  of — 
A  sail 7  a  sail :  afterwards,  Guns  (Stage 
direct.)  Cap.     After  fellowfhip  Coll. 

112.  this]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,Steev.'85.  their 
Qq  et  cet. 

greeting]  geerting  Q  . 
to  the]  to  this  Rowe  ii. 


98.  Riches]  For  instances  of  its  use,  according  to  its  derivation  as  a  singular  noun, 
gee  Schmidt,  s.  v. 

100-102.  Walker  (Crit.,  iii,  286) :  Wheel  for  circle  is  not  altogether  unfrequent  in 
the  old  dramatists.  Cf.  '  Heaven's  grace  in-wheel  you,  And  all  good  thoughts  and 
prayers  dwell  about  you.' — B.  and  F.  The  Pilgrim,  I,  ii,  p.  17,  ed.  Dyce.  Peck  {Me- 
moirs of  Milton,  p.  164)  :  These  lines  are  almost  directly  copied  in  77  Penseroso,  151  : 
*  And,  as  I  wake,  sweet  music  breathe  Above,  about,  and  underneath.' 

103.  Booth  :  Desdemona  gives  her  hand  to  Cassio,  who  kisses  it,  and  rises  from 
his  knee. 

107.  fear]  D'IIugues:  Est-ce  un  pressentiment  vague  et  myst£rieux  de  la  destined 
qui  1'attend  dans  cette  He  ?  Ce  mot  n'est  6videmment  pas  plac6  au  hasard  :  tout  a  un 
sens  dans  Shakespeare. 

112.  this]  White  (ed.  i) :  This  seems  a  misprint,  due  to  the  occurrence  cf  'this 
in  the  next  line.     [It  hardly  can  be  called  a  misprint.     To  me,  it  is  doubtful  if  it  be 
not  a  little  better  than  their. — En.] 


act  ii,  sc.  L]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  105 

Caffw.     See  for  the  Newes  : 
Good  Ancient,  you  are  welcome.     Welcome  Miftris:  1 15 

Let  it  not  gaule  your  patience  (good  Iago) 
That  I  extend  my  Manners.    Tis  my  breeding, 
That  giues  me  this  bold  fhew  of  Curtefie. 

Iago.     Sir,  would  fhe  giue  you  fomuch  of  her  lippes, 
As  of  her  tongue  fhe  oft  beftowes  on  me,  1 20 

You  would  haue  enough. 

Def.     Alas  :  fhe  ha's  no  fpeech. 

Iago.     Infaith  too  much  :  123 

114.  See...Newes~\So  fpeakes  this  voyce  120.  oft  beflowes~\  has  be/lowed  Qq. 
Q  .  on\  of  Ff,  Rowe  i. 

[Exit  Gentleman.  Cap.  et  seq.  121.  You  would~\  Ff,  Rowe.    F<?#VQq 

115.  [To  Emilia.  Rowe  et  seq.  et  cet. 

117.  [Kisses  her.  Johns.  123.  Infaith-]  F3F3>     I know  Qf.     In 
119.  Sir,~\  For  Qx.                                          faith  Q2  et  cet. 

118.  Courtesy]  Coleridge  [Notes,  &c,  254) :  Here  is  Cassio's  warm-hearted,  yet 
perfectly  disengaged,  praise  of  Desdemona,  and  sympathy  with  the  *  most  fortunately ' 
wived  Othello;  and  yet  Cassio  is  an  enthusiastic  admirer,  almost  a  worshipper,  of  Des- 
demona. Oh,  that  detestable  code  that  excellence  cannot  be  loved  in  any  form  that  is 
female,  but  it  must  needs  be  selfish  !  Observe  Othello's  '  honest,'  and  Cassio's  •  bold 
Iago,  and  Cassio's  full  guileless-hearted  wishes  for  the  safety  and  love-raptures  of 
Othello  and  *  the  divine  Desdemona.'  And  also  note  the  exquisite  circumstance  of 
Cassio's  kissing  Iago's  wife,  as  if  it  ought  to  be  impossible  that  the  dullest  auditor 
should  not  feel  Cassio's  religious  love  of  Desdemona's  purity.  Iago's  answers  are  the 
sneers  which  a  proud,  bad  intellect  feels  towards  women,  and  expresses  to  a  wife. 
Surely  it  ought  to  be  considered  a  very  exalted  compliment  to  women,  that  all  the  sar- 
casms on  them  in  Shakespeare  are  put  in  the  mouths  of  villains.  Booth  :  Kiss  her 
face ;  not,  as  is  frequently  done,  her  hand.  Iago  winces  slightly,  for  he  '  suspects  Cas- 
sio with  his  nightcap.'  I  was  once  so  irritated  by  Cassio's  kissing  the  hand  of  Emilia, 
despite  directions  at  rehearsal,  that  I  said  '  If  she  would  give  you  so  much  of  her 
hand,'  &c,  which  staggered  Cassio  and  set  all  the  actors  giggling. 

123  et  seq.  Rymer  (p.  no) :  Now  follows  a  long  rabble  of  Jack-pudding  farce  be- 
twixt Jago  and  Desdemona,  that  runs  on  with  all  the  little  plays,  jingle,  and  trash  below 
the  patience  of  any  Country  Kitchenmaid  with  her  Sweetheart.  The  Venetian  Donna 
is  hard  put  to  't  for  pastime  !  And  this  is  all,  when  they  are  newly  got  on  shore,  from 
a  dismal  Tempest,  and  when  every  moment  she  might  expect  to  hear  her  Lord  (as  she 
calls  him)  that  she  runs  so  mad  after,  is  arrived  or  lost.  And  moreover  '  in  a  town  of 
war,  the  people's  hearts  brimful  of  fear.'  Never  in  the  World  had  any  Pagan  Toet  his 
Brains  turned  at  this  Monstrous  rate.  But  the  ground  of  all  this  Bedlam- Buffoonery  we 
Raw  in  the  case  of  the  French  Strollers,  the  company  for  acting  Christ's  Passion,  or  the 
Old  Testament,  were  Carpenters,  Cobblers,  and  illiterate  fellows ;  who  found  that  the 
Drolls,  and  Fooleries  interlarded  by  them,  brought  in  the  rabble,  and  lengthened  their 
time,  so  they  got  money  by  the  bargain.  Our  Shakespeare,  doubtless,  was  a  great  Mas- 
ter in  this  craft.  These  Carpenters  and  Cobblers  were  the  guides  he  followed.  And  it 
is  then  no  wonder  that  we  find  so  much  farce  and  Apocryphal  matter  in  his  Tragedies. 


Io6  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  II,  SC.  I 

I  finde  it  flill,  when  I  haue  leaue  to  fleepe. 

Marry  before  your  Ladyfhip,  I  grant,  125 

She  puts  het  tongue  a  little  in  her  heart, 

And  chides  with  thinking. 

jEmil.     You  haue  little  caufe  to  fay  fo. 

Ictgo.     Come  on,  come  on  :  you  are   Pictures  out  of 
doore  :  Bells  in  your  Parlours  :  Wilde-Cats  in  your  Kit-         no 
chens  :  Saints  in  your  Iniuries  :  Diuels  being  offended  : 

124.  itflili,  when]  it,  I ';  for  when  Qf.  1 29-133.  Verse,  ending  doore:. ..kite h 

it Ji ill,  for  when  Q2Q3-  ens : ...offended : ...beds.  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 

haue~\  ha  Qq.  129.  you  are~\  yoitre  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii, 

leaue]  QaQ3Ff,  Coll.  i/Wh.  i.  lust         Huds. 

Coll.  ii  (MS),     lift  Q,  et  cet.  129,  130.  of  doore]   Knt.     adores  Qt. 

126.  het]  her  QqFf.  of  dores  Qgl^Q  .     of  doores  F  .     ci'donr* 

in  her]  in  Q  .  Cap.     of  doors  F   et  cet. 
128.  haue]  ha  QXQ2. 


Thereby  un-hallowing  the  Theatre,  profaning  the  name  of  Tragedy ;  And  instead  of 
representing  Men  and  Manners,  turning  all  Morality,  good  sense,  and  humanity  into 
mockery  and  derision. 

124.  Leaue]  Dyce  [Remarks,  &c,  p.  237) :  When  Collier  adopted  'leave'  of  the 
t  olio,  what  meaning  did  he  attach  to  it  ?  did  he  suppose  it  to  be  only  another  form  of 
*  leve,'  '  leef,'  or  •  lief '  (a  word  which,  I  apprehend,  was  never  used  as  a  substantive)  ? 
List  is  clearly  the  true  reading.  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  Lust  is  from  the  (MS.).  '  Leave' 
merely  means  '  when  I  have  permission  to  sleep,'  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  '  leef,' 
•leve,'  or  'lief.'  Dyce  [Strictures,  p.  197)  :  Collier's  present  explanation  of  'leave  ' 
makes  Iago  talk  sheer  nonsense. 

129.  Pictures]  Gerard:  Nous  avons  en  francais  la  meme  expression:  'Sagss 
eomme  des  images.'  [This  refers  to  the  '  paintings  '  with  which  Hamlet  taxes  women, 
III,  i,  142 :  'I  have  heard  of  your  paintings  too,  well  enough ;  God  has  given  you  one 
face,  and  you  make  yourselves  another.' — Ed.] 

129-133.  Steevens  :  Almost  the  same  thoughts  are  to  be  found  in  Puttenham's 
Arte  of  Poesie,  1 589  :  'We  limit  the  comely  parts  of  a  woman  to  consist  in  foure 
points,  that  is  to  be  a  shrewe  in  the  kitchin,  a  saint  in  the  Church,  an  Angell  at  the 
bourd,  and  an  Ape  in  the  bed '  [p.  299,  ed.  Arber].  See  also  Middleton's  Blurt,  Mas 
ter- Constable,  1 602  [III,  iii],  and  The  Miseries  of  Inforced  Marriage,  1607  [I,  i,  p. 
10,  ed.  Collier].  Puttenham,  who  mentions  all  other  contemporary  writers,  has  not 
once  spoken  of  Shakespeare  ;  so  that  it  is  probable  that  he  had  not  produced  anything 
of  so  early  a  date.  The  truth  is,  that  this  book  appears  to  have  been  written  several 
years  before  its  publication.  See  p.  115  [p.  152,  ed.  Arber],  where  the  author  refers 
to  Sir  Nicholas  Bacon,  who  died  in  1579,  and  recounts  a  circumstance,  from  his  own 
knowledge,  that  happened  in  1553.  Malone:  How  does  it  appear  that  this  book 
was  written  several  years  before  its  publication,  from  the  circumstances  mentioned  ? 
Puttenham  does  not  speak  of  Sir  Nicholas  Bacon  as  living ;  but  speaks  of  those  that 
knew  him;  from  which  we  might  rather  infer  that  it  could  not  be  written  before  1 578, 
when  that  lord  keeper  died. 

131.  Saints]  Johnson:  When  you  have  a  mind  to  do  injuries,  you  put  or  an  aui 
of  sanctity 


ACT  II,  SC.  1. 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


Players    in    your    Hufwiferie,   and    Hufwiues    in    your 
Beds. 

Dcf.     Oh,  fie  vpon  thee,  Slanderer. 

Iago.     Nay,  it  is  true  :  or  elfe  I  am  a  Turke, 
You  rife  to  play,  and  go  to  bed  to  worke. 

sEmil.     You  (hall  not  write  my  praife. 

Iago.     No, let  me  not. 

Defde.     What  would'ft  write  of  me,  if  thou  should'ft 
praife  me  ? 

Iago.     Oh,  gentle  Lady,  do  not  put  me  too,t, 
For  I  am  nothing,  if  not  Criticall. 

Dcf.     Come  on,  affay. 
There's  one  gone  to  the  Harbour? 

Iago.     I  Madam. 

Dcf     I  am  not  merry  :  but  I  do  beguile 


107 
135 


140 


H5 


132.  Hufwiferie]houfwiferyQl.  Huf 
wifery  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Knt.     huswifry 
Cap.     houfewifery  Q2Q3  et  cet. 
and]  Om.  Han. 

Hufwiues]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Knt. 
houfwiues  Qt,  Pope,  houfewiues  QaQ3 
et  cet. 

134.  Def.]  Om.  Qf. 

139.  Two  lines,  Qq.    One  line,  as  verse, 
Rowe  et  seq. 


139.  would' fl]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.  wouldfl 
thou  Qq  et  cet. 

140.  me?]  me.  F2F  . 

141.  too  J:]  toot  F2.     to'tQqF^F^ 

143.  Come  on,  affay]  Come,  one  assay 
Pope  + . 

143, 144.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 
affay.  There's]  affay — there's  Qq. 

144.  Harbottr  ?]    Harbour —    Rowe, 
Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

145.  /]  /,  FF.     Ay,  Rowe  et  seq. 


132.  Huswiues]  White  (ed.  ii)  :  In  Shakespeare's  day,  and  in  some  parts  of  Eng- 
land still,  housewife  is  pronounced  husif,  which  has  passed  into  hussy,  with  a  half  joc- 
ular, half  serious,  implication  of  wantonness,  which  seems  not  to  have  been  lacking 
three  hundred  years  ago.     Indeed,  perhaps,  we  should  read  here  '  hussies  in  your  beds.' 

134.  Jennens  :  Perhaps  this  speech  should  be  Emilia's ;  Iago's  next  speech  seems 
to  require  it.  Collier  :  In  a  handwriting  of  the  time  it  is  given  to  Emilia  in  the 
Duke  of  Devonshire's  copy  of  Qx. 

138.  No]  Booth:  Linger  on  'no,'  with  a  significant  side  glance  at  her.  All  thai 
he  says  till  he  speaks  '  Aside '  should  be  delivered  humorously,  to  conceal  his  bitter 
ness,  which  his  features  occasionally  reveal. 

140.  praise  me  ?]  Horn  (i,  340) :  Many  a  poet,  heaping  up  tragic  devices  for 
tragic  ends,  would  have  probably  represented  Desdemona  as  feeling  an  involuntary, 
foreboding  aversion  to  Iago ;  but  even  her  very  freedom  from  all  forebodings  is  in 
itself  deeply  tragic,  and  devised  with  a  rare  insight  into  character. 

142.  Criticall]  Johnson:  That  is,  censorious.  M\lone:  Cf.  Sonn.,  122,  'my 
adder's  sense  To  critic  and  to  flatterer  stopped  are.' 

145.  Booth  :  Cassio  should  make  this  reply.  He  has  been  awaiting  their  arrival , 
Iago  has  just  landed  with  Desdemona. 

146.  Coleridge   {Notes,  &c,  254) :    The  struggle  of  courtesy  in  Desdemona  U: 


108  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  II,  SC.  i. 

The  thing  I  am,  by  feeming  otherwife.  147 

Come, how  v/ould'ft  thou  praife  me  ? 

Iago.     I  am  about  it,  but  indeed  my  inuention  comes 
from  my  pate,  as  Birdlyme  do's  from  Freeze,  it  pluckes         150 
out  Braines  and  all.     But  my  Mufe  labours,  and  thus  fhe 
is  deliuer'd. 

If  Jlie  be  fait -e,  and  wife  \faireneffe,  and  wit , 
The  ones  for  vfe,  the  other  vfeth  it. 

Def     Well  prais'd  :  155 

How  if  fbe  be  Blacke  and  Witty  ? 

Iago.     If  fJie  be  blacke,  and  thereto  haue  a  wit, 
She7efnd  a  white,  that  fliall  Iter  blackneffe  fit. 

Def.     Worfe,  and  worfe. 

jEmil.     How  if  Faire,  and  Foolifh  ?  160 

Iago.     She  neuer  yet  was  foolifh  that  was  faire, 
For  enen  her  folly  helpt  her  to  an  heire. 

Defdc.  Thefe  are  old  fond  Paradoxes,  to  make  Fooles 
laugh  i'th'Alehoufe.  WThat  miferable  praife  haft  thou 
for  her  that's  Foule,  and  Foolifh.  165 

149-152.  Prose  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  153.  wife  :~\wife,  Qq.     wise, —  Cap. 

Han.  Warb.     Four  lines  of  verse,  ending  154.  vfeth~\  vfingQ  . 

inuention... freeze... labors... deluier'd  Qq  155,  156.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 

et  cet.  158.  fit]  hit  Qx. 

149.  indeed]  Om.  Qy  160,  165.  FoolifJi?]  foolifh.  F2F3< 
my]  Om.  Johns.  162.  her  to  an  heire]  her,  to  a  haire  Q  . 

150.  Freeze]  FfQq,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  163-165.  Three  lines,  ending  Alehoufe, 
frieze  Huds.  Wh.  ii.    frize  Steev.  et  cet.  ...her,..foolifJi?  Qq. 

151.  Braines"]  braine  Qq.  1 63.  old  fond]  old  Qq. 

152.  deliuer'd]  deliuered  QaFfQ3,  164.  V th' Alehoufe.]  V the  Alehoufe,^. 
Rowe+,  Jen.  Vth  Alehouse :  Q2.     Vtk  Alehoufe  Q  . 

153, 154, 157,  &c.  Printed  in  Roman,  Qx.  hafl]  hafle  F2. 

abstract  her  attention.  Delius  :  Perhaps  lines  146,  147  should  be  considered  as  an 
aside. 

158.  fit]  Steevens  :  I  believe  Qx  has  the  true  reading  here,  as  in  Love's  Lab.  IV,  i, 
127.     [To  the  same  effect,  Staunton.     See  Bishop  Percy's  Folio  MS.,  vol.  iv. — Ed.] 

161,  162.  Johnson  :  We  may  read:  'She  ne'er  was  yet  so  foolish  that  was  fair,  But 
even,'  &c.  Yet  I  believe  the  common  reading  to  be  right ;  the  law  makes  the  power 
of  cohabitation  a  proof  that  a  man  is  not  a  natural ;  therefore,  since  the  foolishest 
woman,  if  pretty,  may  have  a  child,  no  pretty  woman  is  ever  foolish.  Halliweel  : 
To  elucidate  this  sentence,  the  reader  may  remember,  that  '  if  one  have  so  much  know- 
ledge as  to  measure  a  yard  of  cloth ;  number  twenty  pence  rightly ;  name  the  days  o( 
the  week ;  or  become  the  parent  of  a  child ;  he  shall  not  be  accounted  an  idiot  by  die 
laws  of  the  realm.'  A  statement  of  which  may  be  seen  in  The  Student's  Companion, 
or  the  Reason  of  the  Law,  2d  ed.  1734. — Anon. 

163.  fond]  Dyce  (Lex.)  :  Foolish,  simple,  silly. 


act  it,  sc.  L]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  109 

I  ago.     There's  none  fo  foul e  and  foolifli  thereunto,  166 

But  do's  foule  pranks,  which  faire,  and  wife-ones  do. 

Defde.     Oh  heauy  ignorance  :  thou  praif  eft  the  worft 
beft.     But  what  praife   could'ft  thou  beftow  on  a  defer- 
uing  woman  indeed?    One, that  in  the  authorithy  of  her         170 
merit,  did   iuftly  put  on   the   vouch    of  very   malice   it  [317  b~\ 
felfe. 

Iago.     She  that  was  euerfaire ,  and  neuer  proud, 
Had  Tongue  at  will,  and  yet  was  7ieuer  loud : 
Neuer  lackt  Gold,  and  yet  went  neuer  gay,  175 

Fled  from  her  ivifJi  ,  and  yet  f aid  now  I  may. 

167.  wife-ones]  Hyphen,  Fs.  170.  authorithy]  Fx. 

168.  thou  praif  efl]  that praij 'es  Qq.  1 7 1,  merit]  merrits  Qt.     merits  Q2Q3- 
170.  indeed  ?]  indeed  /  Sing,    indeed, —              171,172.  it  felfe. ]F(,  Ktly.     it  felfe  ? 

Dyce,  Sta.     indeed,  Glo.  Cam.  Rife,  Wh.         Qq  et  cet. 

ii.     indeed;  Huds.  175.  went  neuer]  never  went  Theob.  ii. 

170.  Steevens  :  The  hint  for  this  question,  and  the  metrical  reply  of  Iago,  is  taken 
from  a  strange  pamphlet,  called  Choice,  Chance,  and  Change,  or  Conceits  in  their  Col- 
ours, 1 606  ;  when  after  Tidero  has  described  many  ridiculous  characters  in  verse,  Arno- 
filo  asks  him,  '  But,  I  pray  thee,  didst  thou  write  none  in  commendation  of  some  worthy 
creature  ? '  Tidero  then  proceeds,  like  Iago,  to  repeat  more  verses.  [It  would  not  have 
been  worth  while  to  cite  this  note  of  Steevens,  had  not  Singer  repeated  it,  without 
acknowledgement,  in  both  his  First  and  Second  editions.  I  never  saw  the  pamphlet, 
and  dislike  to  depart  from  the  safe  rule  of  verifying  all  Steevens's  citations,  especially 
those  wherefrom  Steevens  asserts  that  Shakespeare  '  took  hints,'  assertions  always  doubt- 
ful, frequently  absurd,  and  here  especially  uncertain,  in  view  of  the  date  1606. — Ed.] 

171.  put  on]  Theobald  could  not  understand  how  merit  could  put  on  the  vouch 
of  malice.  '  I  should  rather  think,'  he  says,  'that  merit  was  so  safe  in  itself,  as  to  repel 
and  put  off  all  that  malice  and  envy  could  advance  to  its  prejudice.'  He  therefore 
changed  his  text  to  '  put  down.'  Warburton  :  The  sense  is,  one  that  was  so  con- 
scious of  her  own  merit,  and  of  the  authority  her  character  had  with  every  one,  that 
she  durst  venture  to  call  upon  malice  itself  to  vouch  for  her.  This  was  some  commen- 
dation. And  the  character  only  of  the  clearest  virtue ;  which  could  force  malice,  even 
against  its  nature,  to  do  justice.  Johnson  :  To  pttt  on  the  vouch  of  malice,  is  to 
assume  a  character  vouched  by  the  testimony  of  malice  itself.  Capell  (p.  142) :  '  Put 
on '  is — push  on,  push  forward  the  unwilling ;  so  that  the  sense  is — push  malice  on  to 
vouch,  dare  it  to  give  its  testimony,  say  what  it  knows  of  her;  this  is  the  very  force 
of  '  put  on '  and  '  vouch,'  and  their  explanation  combin'd ;  and  other  comment  than 
this  the  passage  does  not  require. 

173  &c.  Booth  :  These  lines  should  be  spoken  as  though  composed  on  the  spur  of 
the  moment ;  not  glibly,  as  though  studied  beforehand. 

173.  She  that]  Abbott,  §  268  :  Generally  it  will  be  found  that  which  is  more  defi 
nite  than  that.  Which  follows  a  name,  that  a  pronoun.  Sometimes  which  is  used  in 
this  sense  to  denote  an  individual  or  a  defined  class,  while  that  denotes  a  hypothetical 
person  or  an  indefinite  class,  as  here. 


IIO  THE   TRAGEDIE   O*    OTHELLO         [act  II,  SC  i, 

She  that  being  angred,  her  reuenge  being  nie,  177 

Bad  her  wrong  flay ,  and  her  difpleafnre  flie : 

She  that  in  wifedome  neuer  zvas  fo  frail e, 

To  change  the  Cods-head  for  the  Salmons  taile :  1 8c 

She  that  coidd  thinke,  and  nenW  difclofe  Iter  mind, 

See  Suitors  following ,  and  not  looke  behind'. 

She  was  a  wight \  {if  euer  fnch  wightes  were) 

Def.     To  do  what  ? 

I  ago.     To  fickle  Fooles,  and  chronicle  fmall  Be  ere.  185 

177.  being]  when  Pope  +  .  183.  fuch  wightes]  Ff,  Knt,  Sta.  Del. 

181.  neu'r]  neWe  QqF3F4>     nev'r  F2.         fuch  wight  Qq  et  cet. 

ne'er  Rowe.  were)  ]  F2F  ,  Ro we  ii  + ,  Jen .  were. 

182.  Om.  Qz.  Qx.  were,)  Q2,  Rowe  i.  were.)  F  .  were, — 
not]  ne'er  Johns.  Johns. 

180.  To]  For  the  omission  of  as  in  relative  constructions,  see  Lear,  I,  iv,  36,  01 
Abbott,  §281. 

180.  Cods-head]  Steevens  :  That  is,  to  exchange  a  delicacy  for  coarser  fare.  See 
Queen  Elizabeth's  Household  Book  for  the  43d  year  of  her  Reign  :  *  Item,  the  Mastei 
Cookes  have  to  fee  all  the  salmons'  tailes,'  &c,  p.  296.  White  (ed.  ii) :  That  is,  to 
give  up  the  best  part  of  a  homely  thing  for  the  worst  part  of  something  very  fine. 
LOders  (p.  43)  detects  herein  another,  and  fur  feinere  Ohren  weniger  schmackhafte 
Bedeutung.  Purnell  :  By  the  despised  salmon's  tail  he  means  Othello,  whom  she  had 
chosen  in  preference  to  the  wealthy,  curled  darlings  of  Venice. 

182.  Booth:  A  glance  at  Roderigo  would  imply  that  Desdemona  is  the  'wight* 
particularly  referred  to.  Roderigo  has  long  been  an  unnoticed  follower.  [Qu.  Ought 
not  Roderigo  to  be  disguised  ?  Did  not  Iago  tell  him  to  defeat  his  favour  with  a 
usurped  beard  ?  It  seems  almost  impossible  to  suppose  that  Cassio  had  never  met  in 
Venice,  Desdemona's  assiduous  wooer,  Roderigo,  and  yet  see  line  297  of  this  scene, 
where  Iago  tells  Roderigo  that  Cassio  does  not  know  him.  Can  this  refer  to  anything 
else  than  to  his  '  defeated  favour '  ? — Ed.] 

183,  185.  were  .  .  .  Beere]  This  rhyme  is  recorded  merely  in  Ellis's  Early-Eng. 
Pron.,  p.  965.  It  is  hazardous  to  deny  that  a  perfect  rhyme  is  here  intended,  and  yet 
it  seems  to  me  that  Iago  pauses  so  long  in  search  of  one  that  Desdemona  breaks  in 
with  her  question ;  and  that  Iago,  thus  spurred,  rushes  to  his  lame  and  impotent  con- 
clusion, where  a  defective  rhyme  would  indicate  its  off-hand  character,  and  supply  a 
dash  of  humour  to  counteract  the  bitterness.  There  is,  however,  authority  elsewhere 
for  rhyming  were  and  beer.  In  Com.  of  Err.  IV,  ii,  9-10,  we  have  were  and  here ;  in 
R.  of  L.  631,  were  and  appear ;  in  Sonn.  140,  5,  were  and  near;  but  were  rhymes  with 
bear  in  Sonn.  1 3,  6.    Chapman  frequently  rhymes  here,  were,  there,  cheer,  and  dear. — Ed. 

185.  Chronicle]  In  this  word  Johnson  discerned  an  allusion  'to  the  Roman  prac- 
tice of  marking  the  jars  with  the  name  of  the  Consul.  The  appearance  of  such  a 
woman  would  make  an  era ,  but  as  the  merit  of  the  best  woman  is  but  small,  that  era 
might  be  properly  applied  to  the  distinction  of  the  different  ages  of  small  beer.'  This 
note  was  not  repeated  in  either  of  the  two  editions  which  Dr  Johnson  and  Steevens 
afterwards  edited.  In  its  stead  appeared  the  interpretation  by  Steevens,  which  has 
been  since  then  generally  accepted,  '  of  keeping  the  accounts  of  a  household  ' 


act  ll,  sc.  i.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  1 1 1 

Dcfde.     Oh  moft  lame  and  impotent  conclufion.     Do         186 
not  learne  of  him  ALmilia,  though  he  be  thy  husband. 
How  fay  you  (Cajfid)  is  he  not  a  moft  prophane,  and  li- 
berall  Counfailor  ? 

Cajfio.     He  fpeakes  home  (Madam)  you  may  rellifh         190 
hiin  more  in  the  Souldier,  then  in  the  Scholler. 

[ago.  He  takes  her  by  the  palme  :  I,  well  faid,  whif- 
per.  With  as  little  a  web  as  this,  will  I  enfnare  as  great 
a  Fly  as  CaJJio.  I  fmile  vpon  her,  do  :  I  will  giue  thee 
in  thine  owne  Courtfhip.  You  fay  true,  'tis  fo  indeed.  195 
If  fuch  tricks  as  thefe  ftrip  you  out  of  your  Lieutenan- 
trie,  it  had  beene  better  you  had  not  kifs'd  your  three  fin- 
gers fo  oft,  which  now  againe  you  are  moft  apt  to  play 
the  Sir,  in.     Very  good  :  well  kifs'd,  and  excellent  Curt-         199 

186-189.  Four  lines,  ending  conclufion  :  194.  giue]  F F.    catch  Qq,  Jen.    gyve 

...husband  ;  ...liberall...Counfellour.  Qq.  F2,  Rowe  et  cet.    glue  Daniel. 

187.  learne"]  lame  Q  .  thee]  you  Qq,  Jen. 

188.  liberall]  illiberal 'Kan.  1 95.  thine]  your  Qq,  Jen. 

189.  Counfailor]  censurerTheob.  Han.  Courtfhip]  courtefies  Qt,  Jen. 
Cap.  Coll.  iii  (MS),  Huds.  indeed.]  indeed —  Rowe. 

190.  191.  He. ..him]  One  line,  Qq.  196,  197.  Lieutenantrie]  Lieutenancy 

191.  the  Scholler]  Scholler  F2.  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

[They  converse  apart.  Cap.  197.  kifs'd]  rifl  Qq. 

192.  Iago.]  Iago.  Aside.  Rowe.  198.  againe]  againe,  Qq. 

/,]  /Qq.     Ay,  Rowe  et  seq.  199.  Very  good]  good Qx.     Very  good — 

faid,]  fed,  Qq.     said —  Rowe.  Rowe. 

whifper]  whisper —  Rowe.  kifs'd^]    kissed !    Steev.    et    seq. 

193.  With  as... will  I]  as... will  Qx.  (Johns,  conj.). 

194.  Fly]  Flee  Qr     Flie  Q2Q3.  and]  Q2Q3Ff,  Rowe +  ,  Cap.  Knt. 
I  fmile]  I,  fmile  Q2Q3Ff.     Ay,         an  QT  et  cet. 

smile  Rowe.  Curtfce]    courtefie   Qq.      Curtefie 

do:]  do —  Rowe.  F  . 

188.  prophane]  Johnson  :  Gross  of  language,  of  expression  broad  and  brutal.  See 
'profane  wretch,'  I,  i,  127. 

188.  liberall]  Warburton:  Licentious. 

189.  Counsailor]  Johnson:  This  seems  to  mean  not  so  much  a  man  that  give* 
counsel,  as  one  that  discourses  fearlessly  and  volubly.     A  talker. 

192.  Coleridge  [Notes,  &c,  254)  calls  attention  in  this  speech  to  the  importance 
given  to  trifles,  and  made  fertile  by  the  villainy  of  the  observer. 

192.  palme]  Booth  :  The  hands  of  both  should  be  ungloved.    They  seldom  are  so. 

192.  well  said]  Schmidt  (s.  v.  4,  2)  :  That  is,  well  done.  So  also  IV,  i,  133,  and 
V,  i,  124. 

194.  giue]  Pope:  Catch,  shackle. 

195.  Courtship]  Knight:  This  is  used  for  paying  courtesies. 

195.  You  .  .  .  indeed]  Delius  :  This  is  in  answer  to  Cassio's  last  speech. 
197.  three  fingers]  Booth:  Cassio  kisses  his  three  ringers  as  though  describing 
some  pleasing  act  or  scene,  not  as  though  complimenting  Desdemona. 


112  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF   OTHELLO         [act  II,  SC.  i. 

fie  :  'tis  fo  indeed.      Yet  againe,  your  fingers  to  your        200 

lippes    ?    Would    they    were    Clufter-pipes     for     your 

fake. 

The  Moore  I  know  his  Trumpet. 

CaJJlo.     'Tis  truely  fo. 

Def.     Let's  meete  him,  and  recieue  him.  205 

CaJJlo.     Loe,  where  he  comes. 

Enter  Othello,  a?id  Attendants. 

Oth.     O,  my  faire  Warriour. 

Def.     My  deere  Othello. 

Othe.     It  giues  me  wonder  great,  as  my  content  210 

To  fee  you  heere  before  me. 
Oh  my  Soules  Ioy.* 

If  after  euery  Tempeft,  come  fuch  Calmes, 
May  the  windes  blow,  till  they  haue  waken' d  death  :  214 

200.  'tis  Jo]  tis  Q3.  207.  Enter...]  Trumpets  within.   Enter 
againe,]  againe  Q3Q3-     again —         ...(after  line  203)  Qq.     (Trumpet  Q2Q3). 

Rowe.  Scene  VI.  Pope +  ,  Jen. 

to]  at  Qq,  Jen.  211,  212.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 

201.  Clujler-pipes]     Clijlerpipes  Qq.  212.  Oh]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 
Clijier-pipes  FaF3.     Clyjler-pipes  F4>  213.  come]  came  Q  . 

202.  fake.~\  fake. —  QXQ3^  Calmes~\  calmenejfe  Qq,  Steev.'85, 

[Trumpet.  Rowe.  Mai.  Rann.     calms  F  . 

203.  Moore]    Moore,    Qq.       Moor —  214.  waken' d]wakened QtQr  wakned 

Theob.     Moor.  Johns.     Moor!  Coll.  Q  . 

206.  comes"]  corne  F  F.. 
J  34 

199.  the  Sir]  Henley  :  That  is,  to  show  your  good  breeding  and  gallantry.  Staun- 
ton :  The  courtier,  or  gallant 

199.  Curtsie]  Johnson  :  Spoken  when  Cassio  kisses  his  hand,  and  Desdemona 
courtesies.  Malone  :  We  have  just  had  *  I  will  catch  you  in  your  own  courtesies ' 
[Qx].  Here,  therefore,  he  probably  meant  only  to  speak  of  Cassio,  while  kissing  his 
hand.  •  Well  kissed  !  an  excellent  courtesy ! '  i.  e.  an  excellent  salute.  Courtesy,  in 
the  sense  of  obeisance  or  salute,  was  applied  to  men  as  well  as  to  women.  •  The 
homely  villain  court'sies  to  her  low,'  R.  of  L.  1338.  Rolfe:  It  is  doubtful  whether 
this  refers  to  Cassio  or  Desdemona. 

208.  Warriour]  Steevens:  In  III,  iv,  173,  Desdemona  calls  herself  an  'unhand- 
some Warrior.'  This  phrase  was  introduced  by  our  copiers  of  the  French  Sonneteers. 
Ronsard  frequently  calls  his  mistresses  guerriires ;  and  Southern,  his  imitator,  is  not 
less  prodigal  of  the  same  appellation.  Had  I  not  met  with  the  word  thus  fantastically 
applied,  I  should  have  concluded  that  Othello  called  his  wife  a  '  warrior '  because  she  had 
embarked  with  him  on  a  warlike  expedition,  and  not  in  consequence  of  Ovid's  observa- 
tion :  '  Militat  omnis  amans,  et  habet  sua  castra  Cupido.'  [Southern  was  not  born  until 
nigh  a  half  century  after  Shakespeare's  death.  Steevens' s  reading  was  so  extensive, 
his  memory  so  tenacious,  and  his  wit  so  ready,  that  we  shall  always  owe  him  gratitude 


act  II,  sc.  i.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  113 

And  let  the  labouring  Barke  climbe  hills  of  Seas  215 

Olympus  high  :  and  duck  againe  as  low, 

As  hell's  from  Heauen.     If  it  were  now  to  dye, 

'Twere  now  to  be  mofr.  happy.     For  I  feare, 

My  Soule  hath  her  content  fo  abfolute, 

That  not  another  comfort  like  to  this,  220 

Succeedes  in  vnknowne  Fate. 

Def.     The  Heauens  forbid 
But  that  our  Loues 
And  Comforts  mould  encreafe 
Euen  as  our  dayes  do  grow.  225 

Othe.     Amen  to  rhat  ( fweet  Powers) 
I  cannot  fpeake  enough  of  this  content, 
It  ftoppes  me  heere  :  it  is  too  much  of  ioy. 
And  this,  and  this  the  greateft  difcords  be 
That  ere  our  hearts  fhall  make.  230 

215.  climbe']  clime  Qq.  225.  do  grow]  Om.  Steev.  conj. 

216.  Olympus  high]  Olympus-high  226.  rhat  {fweet  Powers)]  that  fweet; 
Steev.'93  et  seq.                                                  power,  Qx.     that  sweet  Prayer!  Warb. 

high  :]  high,  Qq.  that. — Sweet  powers  !  Sing,     that,  sweet 

217.  from]  for  Q  .  Powers  !  Rowe  et  cet. 

it]  /Rowe  ii  +  .  229.  And]  Let  Quincy  (MS). 

223,  224.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq.  difcords]  difcord  Qq. 

224.  encreafe]  increafe  QqF4>  [they  kiffe.  Qx.     kiffe.  Q2Q3« 

for  his  labours,  and  ought  not  to  '  mock  his  useful  toil '  if  now  and  then  he  wanders 
far,  very  far,  afield.  Desdemona  had  protested  that  she  could  not  stay  at  home  a 
'moth  of  peace,'  but  must  go  to  'the  War'  with  Othello;  and  to  that,  I  think,  is  the 
allusion  here. — Ed.].  Walker  {Vers.  p.  175)  notes  this  as  pronounced  dissolute*. 
Booth  :  They  embrace,  with  delicacy.  There  is  nothing  of  the  animal  in  this  '  noble 
savage.' 

215.  climbe]  Steevens  :  Cf.  'The  sea  making  mountaines  of  itself,  over  which 
the  tossed  and  tottering  ship  should  climbe,  to  be  straight  carried  downe  againe  to  a  pit 
of  hellish  darknesses — Sidney's  Arcadia,  b.  i. 

217.  Whalley  (p.  71):  Thus  in  Terence's  Eunuchus  [III,  v,  2;  ed.  Weise], 
Chaerea  in  an  ecstasy  of  joy  breaks  out  in  a  like  exclamation  :  '  Pro  Juppiter !  Nunc 
est  profecto,  interfici  quum  perpeti  me  possum,  Ne  hoc  gaudium  contaminet  vita  aegri- 
tudine  aliqua.'     Booth  :  To  be  uttered  in  low,  foreboding  tones. 

229.  and  this]  Malone  :  So  in  Marlowe's  Lusfs  Dominion  :  '  I  pri'thee  chide, 
if  I  have  done  amiss,  But  let  my  punishment  be  this  and  this  \_Kissing  the  Moor.' 
Steevens  :  Marlowe's  play  was  written  before  that  of  Shakespeare,  who  might  possi- 
bly have  acted  in  it  [see  I,  iii,  172].  Booth:  I  think  their  heart-throbs  are  better 
than  kisses.  Holding  Desdemona  clasped  to  his  breast,  Othello  feels  the  quick  beating 
of  her  heart  against  his  own.  [However  much  more  refined  than  kissing  this  inter- 
pretation may  seem  to  us  to  be,  the  stage  direction  in  the  Qq  leaves  us  in  no  doubt  as 
to  the  practice  in  Shakespeare's  day. — Ed.] 
8 


ii4 


THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  ii,  sc.  i. 


lago.     Oh  you  are  well  tun'd  now  :  But  He  fet  downe         231 
the  peggs  that  make  this  Muficke,  as  honeft  as  I  am. 

OtJie.    Come  :  let  vs  to  the  Caftle.  [318  a] 

Newes  (Friends)  our  Warres  are  done : 

The  Turkes  are  drown'd.  235 

How  do's  my  old  Acquaintance  of  this  Ifle  f 
( Hony)  you  fliall  be  well  defir'd  in  Cyprus, 
I  haue  found  great  loue  among'ft  them.     Oh  my  Sweet, 
I  prattle  out  of  fafhion,and  I  doate  239 


231, 232.  Prose,  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob. 
Warb.  Verse,  ending  now,...mufique,... 
am.  Qq  et  cet. 

231.  [Aside.  Rowe  et  seq. 
Oh]  Om.  Han. 

fet]  let  Pope  +  ,Cap.  Jen.  Steev.'85. 

232.  make]  t?iakes  Q3Q,- 

233.  let  vs]  lees  Qj  let's  Rowe  ii  +  , 
Cap.  Mai.  Steev.'93,  Var.  Sing. 

234.  235.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 


234.  Newes]  Now  Rowe  ii  +  . 

235.  drown'd]  dro  Q2. 

236.  do's  my]  doe  our  Qx,  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 
Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

of  this]  of  the  Qx .    in  this  Rowe  ii. 
[To  Montano.  Cap. 

237.  Hony]  Honny  Qq.     Honey  F  . 

238.  /  haue]   I've  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii, 
Huds. 


231.  set  downe]  Malone:  Who  can  prove  that  set  down  [in  opposition  to  lei 
down]  was  not  the  language  of  Shakespeare's  time,  when  a  viol  was  spoken  of?  To 
set  formerly  signified  to  tune,  though  it  is  no  longer  used  in  that  sense.  Steevens  : 
To  '  set  down '  has  this  meaning  in  no  other  part  of  our  author's  works.  However, 
virtus  post  nummos ;  we  have  secured  the  phrase,  and  the  exemplification  of  it  may 
follow  when  it  will.  Boswell  :  To  '  set  down '  has  the  same  meaning  as  to  put  down, 
to  lower.  Yet,  as  the  phrase  to  let  down  is  the  usual  phrase,  and  might  be  easily  cor- 
rupted, it  was  probably  the  true  one.  Cowden-Clarke  :  It  is  possible  that  '  set  down ' 
was  formerly  as  much  a  technical  musical  phrase  as  *  let  down '  is  now.  Hudson  :  It 
is  worth  noting  that  Milton's  Satan  relents  at  the  prospect  of  ruining  the  happiness 
before  him,  and  prefaces  the  deed  with  a  gush  of  pity  for  the  victims;  whereas  the 
same  thought  puts  lago  in  a  transport  of  jubilant  ferocity.  Is  our  idea  of  Satan's 
wickedness  enhanced  by  his  thus  indulging  such  feelings,  and  then  acting  in  defiance 
of  them,  or  as  if  he  had  them  not  ?  or  is  lago  more  devilish  than  he  ?  Booth  :  This 
should  be  spoken  with  calm  assurance ;  not  too  pointedly.  He  knows  he  will  make 
the  discord, — so  does  the  audience. 

236.  Acquaintance]  Capell  supposed  that  this  was  addressed  to  Montano  onlv, 
but  both  Jennens  and  Knight  assume  that  it  is  here  a  noun  of  multitude. 

237.  well  desir'd]  Steevens  :  That  is,  much  solicited  by  invitations.  So  in  the 
Paston  Letters :  '  at  the  whych  weddyng  I  was  with  myn  hostes,  and  also  desyryd 
by  the  jentylman  hym  selfe '  [i,  296,  ed.  Fenn ;  iii,  241,  ed.  Gairdner].  Delius 
doubts  this  interpretation,  and  prefers  the  simpler  and  more  obvious  meaning  of  wel- 
come, well  beloved,  like  'a  well-wish'd  king'  in  Meas.  for  Meas.,  II,  iv,  27;  in  which 
both  Rolfe  and  the  present  editor  agree  with  him. 

239.  fashion]  Johnson  :  Out  of  method,  without  any  settled  order  of  discourse. 
239.  dote]  Schmidt:    Talk   irrationally.      Gerard:    Comparez   le   mot    francais 
radote* 


act  ii,  sc.  i.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  115 

In  mine  owne  comforts.    I  prythee,  good  /ago,  240 

Go  to  the  Bay,  and  difimbarke  my  Coffers : 
Bring  thou  the  Matter  to  the  Cittadell  , 
He  is  a  good  one,  and  his  worthyneffe 
Do's  challenge  much  refpect.    Come  Defdemona, 
Once  more  well  met  at  Cyprus.  245 

Exit  Othello  and  Defdcmona. 
I  ago.     Do  thou  meet  me  prefently  at  the   Harbour. 
Come  thither,  if  thou  be' ft  Valiant,  (as  they  fay  bafe  men 
being  in  Loue,  haue  then  a  Nobilitie  in  their  Natures, 
more  then  is  natiue  to  them)  lift-me;  the  Lieutenant  to         250 

240.  comforts]  comfort  Pope  +  .  247.  thou]  you  Ff,  Rowe+,  Cap. 
/]  Om.  Pope  +  .  Harbour"]  1 'labour  Qx. 

prythee]preetheeQl.  pretheeQ2Q  248.  thither]  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Knt.    hither 

F3F4.  Qq,  Cap.  et  cet. 

241.  difimbarke]  difembarke  FF.  [Calling  him  back.  Cap. 

my]  thy  Ff.  248,  250.   [as. ..them)]  as. ..them — Qx. 

244.  Do's]  Doe's  F2.  (as — them) —  Q2Q3-     as... them.  Johns. 

Defdemona.]  Defdemoda  Q  .  250.  lifi-me.]  lift  me.  QqF  ,  Rowe  et 

246.  Exit...]  Exit.  Qx.    Exeunt.  Q2Q.  seq.     List  me,  Johns. 

Exeunt.  F  .  Lieutenant]  Leiutenant  QtQ^. 
Scene  VII.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 


242.  Master]  Johnson  says  this  is  the  Pilot,  but  Malone  says  that  the  '  Master'  is  a 
distinct  person,  and  has  the  principal  command  and  care  of  the  navigation  of  the  ship, 
under  the  captain;  Steevens  quotes  from  Smith's  Sea- Grammar,  1627,  'The  Master 
and  his  Mates  are  to  direct  the  course,  command  all  the  sailors,  for  steering,  trimming, 
and  sailing  the  ship,'  &c. 

245.  well  met]  John  Hunter  :  This  generally  means  you  (not  we)  are  well  met, 
that  is,  I  am  glad  to  meet  you. 

247.  This  dialogue,  Coleridge  (Notes,  &c,  255)  says,  is  the  rehearsal  on  the  dup* 
of  the  traitor's  intentions  on  Othello. 

247.  Collier  (ed.  i) :  Roderigo,  in  his  foolish  haste,  was  probably  starting  off  to 
meet  Iago  before  Iago  was  himself  gone,  when  he  was  impatiently  recalled  by  '  Come 
hither.'  Iago  had  already  told  him  to  meet  him  at  the  harbour,  so  that  the  repetition 
'  Come  hither '  was  needless.  Afterwards  Iago  changes  his  mind  and  tells  Roderigo 
to  meet  him  at  the  citadel.  Delius  supposes  that  line  242  was  addressed  to  a  servant. 
[To  me,  the  simplest  explanation  of  '  Come  hither '  is  that  Iago  wishes  Roderigo  to 
come  nearer  to  him  that  he  may  talk  more  confidentially. — Ed.]. 

248.  they  say]  Where  is  this  reference  to  be  found  ?  To  this  question,  with  the 
suggestion  that  it  might  be  in  Plato's  Symposium^  where  love  is  discussed,  Prof.  J.  D. 
Butler  (Shakespeariana,  p.  444,  Sept.,  1885)  replied  that  the  original  was  to  be  found 
in  the  following  passage :  ovbziq  ovt<j  Kai<6q,  bvriva  ovk  hv  avrbc  6  "Epwc  l-vtteov  Troir;atit 
npbc  aperr/v,  food'  bfioiov  etvat  rCi  hpiano  <j>vaei. — Symposium,  p.  179  a,  ed.  Hermann. 
*No  man  is  such  a  coward  that  love  would  not  so  inspire  him  to  valor  [or  virtue  in 
the  classical  sens'""  that  he  would  become  like  him  who  is  bravest  [best]  by 
nature. 


n6 


THE   TRACED  IE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  ii,  sc.  t 


night  watches  on  the  Court  of  Guard.     Firft,  I  muft  tell         25 1 
thee  this  :  Defdemona,  is  direclly  in  loue  with  him. 

Rod.     With  him  ?    Why,  'tis  not  poffible. 

I  ago.  Lay  thy  finger  thus :  and  let  thy  foule  be  in- 
ftru6ted.  Marke  me  with  what  violence  fhe  firft  lou'd  255 
the  Moore,  but  for  bragging,  and  telling  her  fantafticall 
lies.  To  loue  him  ftill  for  prating,  let  not  thy  difcreet 
heart  thinke  it.  Her  eye  muft  be  fed.  And  what  delight 
fhall  fhe  haue  to  looke  on  the  diuell  ?  When  the  Blood 
is  made  dull  with  the  Act  of  Sport,  there  fhould  be  a  260 
game  to  enflame  it,  and  to  giue  Satiety  a  frefli  appetite. 


251.  Court  of  Guard]  Court- of -Guard 
Dyce,  Ktly. 

of]  Om.  Rowe  ii. 
tnufl~\  will  Qq,  Jen. 

252.  thee  this :  Defdemona,]  thee,  this 
Defdemona  Qx,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns,  thee 
this:  Defdemona  FF4,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han.  Cam.  thee  this,  Defdemona  Q2Q3 
et  cet. 

254.  finger]  fingers  F  ,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Theob.  1 1  an.  Warb. 

255.  firfl]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe. 

257.  To]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Knt.  and 
willfJie  Qq  et  cet. 


257.  prating,]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.  prating t 
Cap.    prating?  Qq  et  cet. 

thy]  the  Qq. 

258.  thinke  it]  thinke fo  Qt. 

260.  be  a  game]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  be 
againe  Qx,  Theob. +  ,  Del.  be, — again 
Cap.  et  cet. 

261.  enflame]  influence  Wh.  ii  (mis- 
print?). 

to  giue]  giue  Qq. 

Satiety]  faciety  QXQ2.    fatity  Qy 

appetite.]  FfQq.     appetite  ;  Rowe, 

Pope,    appetite,  or  appetite, —  Theob.  Cap. 

et  cet. 


251.  Court  of  Guard]  Steevens:  The  place  where  the  Guard  musters. 

253.  Booth:  Express  by  a  slight  pause  and  by  a  reflective  tone,  after  'him,'  that 
you  believe  her  to  be  incapable  of  loving  any  man  but  Othello.  In  the  dialogue  that 
follows,  Iago  sees  that  Roderigo  is  losing  hope,  and  shows  his  anxiety  by  rapid  utter- 
ance and  nervous  manner. 

254.  thus]  Johnson  :  On  thy  mouth,  to  stop  it  while  thou  art  listening  to  a  wiser 
man.  D'Hugues:  Ces  parolles  sont  accompagnees  d'une  pantomime,  dans  laquelle 
Iago  saisk  la  main  de  Roderigo,  et  porte  l'un  de  ses  doigts  sur  ses  levres,  corame  pour 
lui  recommander  le  silence  le  plus  absolu. 

257.  The  Qq  have  the  better  text  here,  albeit  the  infinitive  in  the  Ff  might  be  used 
as  indicating  supreme  incredulity. — Ed. 

259.  diuell]  Hudson  :  Another  characteristic  fling  at  Othello's  color. 

261.  Satiety]  The  spelling  in  QZQ3  is  not  accidental,  but  is  the  same  as  that  in  the 
only  other  three  instances  where  the  word  occurs  in  Shakespeare.  '  And  yet  not  cloy 
thy  lips  with  loth'd  sacietie,'  V.  <&°  A.,  1593;  'A  mere  sacietie  of  commendations,'  Fx, 
Tim.  I,  i.  'And  with  sacietie  seeks  to  quench  his  thirst,'  Fx,  Tarn,  of  Shr.,  I,  i.  I  am 
inclined  to  think  that  occasionally  it  must  be  pronounced  as  a  trisyllable — certainly  in 
the  lines  from  Tarn,  of  Shr.  and  V.  &■>  A.,  where  a  trisyllabic  termination  is  wholly 
out  of  place.  Walker  (  Vers.  206)  goes  so  far  as  to  suggest  that  the  Elizabethan  poets 
dropped  the  syllable  before  -ty  in  '  all  substantives,  such  as  honesty,  liberty, purity.  Hence 
majesty  is  almost  uniformly  a  disyllabic'     Boaden  {Life  of  Kemble,  i,  252),  speaking 


act  II,  sc.  i.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  117 

Louelineffe    in    fauour,    fimpathy    in    yeares,    Manners,         262 
and  Beauties  :  all  which  the  Moore  is  defectiue  in.     Now 
for  want  of  thefe   required    Conueniences,   her   delicate 
tenderneffe  wil  finde  it  felfe  abus'd,  begin  to  heaue  the,         265 
gorge,  difrellifh  and  abhorre  the  Moore,  very  Nature  wil 
inftrucl:  her  in  it,  and  compell  her  to  fome  fecond  choice. 
Now  Sir,  this  granted  (as  it  is  a  moft  pregnant  and  vn- 
forcM  pofition)  who  (lands  fo  eminent  in  the  degree  of 
this   Forune,  as   Cajfio  do's  :  a  knaue  very  voluble  :  no         270 
further  confcionable,  then  in  putting  on  the  meere  forme 
of  Ciuill,  and  Humaine  feeming,  for  the  better  compaffe 
of  his  fait,  and  moft  hidden  loofe  Affection  ?    Why  none, 
why  none  :  A  flipper,  and  fubtle  knaue,  a  finder  of  occa-        274 

262.  Louelineffe]  Loue  lines  Qx.  Loue-  Qq  et  cet. 
lynes,  Q.  273.  mofl  hidden  loofe]  hidden  Qx.  most 

265.  266.  the,  gorge]  the  gorge  QqFf.  hidden-loose  Walker,  Sta.  Del.  Huds. 

266.  abhorre]  arbhore  Q  .  Affection  ?]  affections  :  Qq,  Jen. 

267.  in  it]  to  it  Qq.  273,  274.  Why  none,  why  none :]  Om. 

268.  a  mojl]  mojl  Q2Q3.  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

268.  269.  vnforc'd]  vnforced  Qq.  274.  flipper,  and  fubtle]  fubtle  flippery 

269.  eminent]  eminently  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Qq,  Jen.  Coll.  flippery,  and fubtle  F aF '. 
Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  \Vh.  i,  Cam.  fiippery  andfubtleF,  Rowe +  , Cap.  Steev. 
Ktly.  Mai.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

270.  Forune]  Fx.  274,  275.  finder  of  occafion]  Ff.  finder 

271.  further]  farder  Qq.  farther  Jen.  out  of  occ a/ions  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai. 
Coll.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Cam.  Ktly,  Del.  Huds. 

272.  Humaine  feeming]  hand-feeming  [finder-out,  Cap.  Del.  Huds.).  finder  of 
Qx.  human  seemingRowe,  Pope,  humane  warm  occasions  Johns,  finder  out  of  occa. 
feeming  Q2Q.Ff  et  cet.  sion  Wh.  i.    finder  of  occasions  Rowe  et 

compaffe]  Ff,  Rowe.     compaffing         cet. 

of  Sheridan's  Readings,  says  :  '  The  word  satiety  is  commonly  pronounced,  I  think,  with 
the  full  power  given  to  all  the  letters  as  they  stand,  and  the  accent  on  the  letter  i  in  the 
second  syllable.  Mr.  Sheridan  pronounced  it  as  if  written  sassiety.'  Although  Boaden 
goes  on  to  say  that  Chapman  in  his  Homer  always  spells  and  accents  this  word  saciety, 
he  does  not  make  it  any  clearer  whether  Sheridan  pronounced  it  as  of  three  syllables 
or  of  four.  It  is  scarcely  likely  that  Sheridan  pronounced  it  sas-si-e-ty  ;  it  would  bear  too 
strong  a  similarity  in  sound  to  society.  In  Sheridan's  Dictionary,  1797,  the  pronun- 
ciation is  given,  sa-ti'-e-ty. — Ed. 

262.  simpathy  in  yeares]  Purnell:  Perhaps  here,  as  in  Mid.  N.  D.  I,  i,  137, 
Shakespeare  is  thinking  of  his  own  marriage. 

266.  very]  As  in  Latin. 

268.  pregnant]  Nares  :  Full  of  force  or  conviction,  or  full  of  proof  in  itself.  [See 
Lear,  II,  i,  76,  and  note. — Ed.] 

270.  voluble]  Staunton  :  Not  fluent  in  speech,  as  the  word  now  imports,  but 
fickle,  inconstant. 

274.  slipper]  Knight:  Why,  when  the  editors  followed  the  Ff  in  the  arrangement 
of  the  words,  could  they  not  have  retained  this  fine  old  adjective  ? 


n8 


THE    TR  AG  ED  IE   OF  OTHELLO         [ACT  II,  SC.  U 


fion  :  that  he's  an  eye  can  ftampe,  and  counterfeit  Ad-  275 
uantages,  though  true  Aduantage  neuer  prefent  it  felfe. 
A  diuelifh  knaue  :  befides,  the  knaue  is  handfome,  young: 
and  hath  all  thofe  requifites  in  him,  that  folly  and  greene 
mindes  looke  after.  A  peftilent  compleat  knaue,  and  the 
woman  hath  found  him  already.  280 

Rodo.     I  cannot  beleeue  that  in  her,  fhe's  full  of  moft 
blefs'd  condition. 

Iago.     Blefs'd  figges-end .     The  Wine  fhe  drinkes  is 
made  of  grapes.     If  fhee  had  beene  blefs'd,  fhee  would 
neuer  haue  lou'd  the  Moore  :  Blefs'd  pudding.    Didft  thou        285 
not  fee  her  paddle  with  the  palme  of  his  hand?    Didft  not 
marke  that  ? 

Rod.     Yes,  that  I  did  :  but  that  was  but  curteiie. 

Iago.  Leacherie  by  this  hand  :  an  Index,  and  obfcure 
prologue  to  the  Hiftory  of  Luft  and  foule  Thoughts.  290 
They  met  fo  neere  with  their  lippes,  that  their  breathes 
embrac'd  together.  Villanous  thoughts  Rodorigo,  when 
thefe  mutabilities  fo  marfhall  the  way,  hard  at  hand 
comes  the  Mafter,  and  maine  exercife,  th'incorporate 
conclufion  :  Pifh.     But  Sir,  be  you  rul'd  by  me.     I  haue         295 


275.  he's]  has  QqFf. 
eye]  eye,  Qq. 

275,  276.  counterfeit...  it  felfe]  counter- 
feit the  true  aduantages  neuer  prefent 
the?nfelues  Qx. 

277.  A  diueiifli  knaue]  Om.  Qq. 

279.  peflilent  compleat]  pestilent-com- 
plete Walker,  Sta.  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 

280.  hath]  has  Qq. 

281.  in  her]  of  her  Pope  +  . 

282.  283,  284.  blefs'd]  blefl  Qq,  Cap. 
Jen.  Cam.  blessed  Var.  Coll.  Dyce,  Sta. 
Glo.  Ktly,  Del.  Huds.  Rife. 

282.  condition]  conditions  Q  ,Cap.  conj. 
Wh.  i. 

283.  drinkes]  drinke  F2. 

285.  Blefs^d pudding]  Om.  Qq.  blessed 
pudding  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  Ktly,  Coll.  iii, 
Rife,  Huds. 


286.  fee  her]  fe  her  Q  . 
286,  287.  Didfl...that]  Om.  Qx.    ded\1 
.that  Q3. 

288.  that  I  did]  Om.  Qq,  Cap. 

289.  Leacherie]  Lechery  Qq. 
obfcure]    Om.   Qx.      obscene  Sta 


conj. 
291 
292 


met]  meet  Warb. 

Villanous  thoughts]  Om.  Q  . 

Rodorigo]  Om.  Qq. 

293.  mutabilities]  Ff,  Rowe.     mutual 
ities  Qq  et  cet. 

hard]  hand  Qq. 

294.  comes... and]  conies  the  Qx,  Johns. 
comes  Roderigo.  the  mafler  and  the  Q^Q.,- 

tli1  incorporate]  the  incorporate  Qt 
Q2.     the  incorrupt  Q  . 

295.  Tifli]  Om.  Qq. 


278.  greene  mindes]  Johnson  :  Minds  unripe,  not  yet  fully  formed. 
282.  condition]  Johnson:  Qualities,  disposition  of  mind.      [See  IV,  i,  210.] 
286.  paddle]  Pupnell:  Corruption  of  pattle,  to  pat  gently. 

289.  Index]  Edwards  (Canons,  p.  156):  The  index  was  formerly  placed  at  tbi 
beginning  of  a  book.     [See  Ham.  Ill,  iv,  52.] 


KCT  II,  SC.  i.J 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


1I9 


brought  you   from    Venice.     Watch  you   to   night  :  for         296 
the  Command,  He  lay't  vpon  you.      CaJJio  knowes  you 
not  :  He  not  be  farre  from  you.     Do  you  finde  fome  oc- 
cafion  to  anger   CaJJio,  either  by  fpeaking  too  loud,  or  [318^] 
tainting    his    difcipline,    or     from    what    other     courfe         300 
you    pleafe,  which    the    time    fhall   more   fauorably   mi- 
tt ifter. 

Rod.     Well. 

Iagc.  Sir,  he's  rafh,  and  very  fodaine  in  Choller  :  and 
happely  may  ftrike  at  you,  prouoke  him  that  he  may  :  for  305 
euen  out  of  that  will  I  caufe  thefe  of  Cyprus  to  Mutiny. 
Whofe  qualification  fhall  come  into  no  true  tafte  a- 
gaine,  but  by  the  difplanting  of  CaJJio.  So  fhall  you 
haue  a  fhorter  iourney  to  your  defires,  by  the  meanes  I 
fhall  then  haue  to  preferre  them.  And  the  impediment  310 
moft  profitably  remoued,  without  the  which  there  were 
no  expectation  of  our  profperitie.  312 


for 
(P- 


296,  297.  for  the]  for  your  Qt. 

300.  tainting]  taunting  Cap.  conj, 
26  a). 

courfe]  caufe  Qx,  Coll.  iii. 

304.  he's]  Ffj  Rowe  + ,  Knt.  he  is  Qq 
et  cet. 

305.  happely]  haply  with  his  Trunchen 
Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i, 
Ktly.  (hoply  Q3.  happely  Wh.  i).  hap- 
pily Ff,  Rowe  + .     haply  Johns,  et  cet. 

306.  thefe]  those  Rowe  ii  + . 
Cyprus]  Cypres  Qx. 


306.  Mutiny.]  mutiny,  Qq.     mtitiny . 
Pope  et  seq. 

307.  qualification]  qualifications  Jen. 
tafle]  trufl  Qx.     tafl  Q3. 

307,  308.  againe]  again 't  Qq. 

308.  by  the]  by  FF,  Rowe  + . 
difplanting]  difplayingQ  .  trans- 
planting Theob.  ii,  Warb. 

310.  impediment]  impediments  Rowe 


11  +  . 
3"- 

Warb. 


profitably]  profitable  Q  . 

the  which]  which  Qq,  Pope +  ,  Jen. 

were]    was   Pope,   Theob.   Han. 


297.  knowes  you  not]    See  note,  line  182. 

300.  tainting]  Johnson  :  Throwing  a  slur  upon  his  discipline. 

307.  qualification]  Johnson  :  Whose  resentment  shall  not  be  so  qualified  ox  tern 
pered  as  to  be  well  tasted,  as  not  to  Attain  some  bitterness.  The  phrase  is  harsh,  ai 
least  to  our  ears.  Singer  :  '  Qualification,'  in  our  old  writers,  signifies  appeasement, 
pacification,  assuagement  of  anger.  '  To  appease  and  qualifie  one  that  is  angry ;  tran- 
quillum  facere  ex  irato.' — Baret.  Staunton  :  Whose  temperament,  crasis.  [In  Baret, 
1580,  I  do  not  find  the  definition  literally  as  cited  by  Singer.  Under  'Appease'  (to 
which  the  word  '  qualifie  '  is  referred)  is  given,  '  To  asswage,  appease  or  qualifie.  Ira- 
cundias  restinguere  et  cupiditates. — Cic.'  I  do  not  think  that  Dr.  Johnson's  paraphrase 
is  happy,  although  it  is  adopted  by  both  Dyce  and  Rolfe.  Halliwell,  Hudson, 
Cowden-Clarke,  and  Purnell  follow  Singer. — Ed.] 

310.  preferre]   Malone  :  That  is,  advance,  promote. 


120 


THE   TR  AG  ED  IE   OF  OTHELLO 


ACT.  II,  SC.  1. 


I  will  do  this,  if  you  can  bring  it  to  any  oppor- 

I  warrant  thee.     Meete  me  by  and  by  at  the 
I  muft  fetch  his  Neceffaries  a  Shore.     Fare- 


Exit. 


Rodo. 
tunity. 

I  a  go. 
Cittadell. 
well. 

Rodo.     Adieu. 

Iago.     That  CaJJio  loues  her,  I  do  well  beleeu't : 
That  (he  loues  him,  'tis  apt,  and  of  great  Credite. 
The  Moore  (howbeit  that  I  endure  him  not) 
Is  of  a  conftant,  louing,  Noble  Nature, 
And  I  dare  thinke,    he'le  proue  to  Defdemona 
A  moft  deere  husband.     Now  I  do  loue  her  too, 
Not  out  of  abfolute  Luft,  (though  peraduenture 
I  ftand  accomptant  for  as  great  a  fin) 
But  partely  led  to  dyetmy  Reuenge, 
For  that  I  do  fufpect  the  luftie  Moore 
Hath  leap'd  into  my  Seate.     The  thought  whereof, 


313 
315 


320 


325 


329 


313.  if  you  can]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Steev.'85, 
Knt,  Sing.  Ktly,  Del.  if  I  can  Qq  et 
cet. 

316.  a  Shore]  afhore  Q,FF4. 

318.  Adieu]  Adue  Qq. 
Exit.]  Om.  Q3. 

[Scene  VIII.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

319.  beleeu't]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  believe 
Pope  + .     beleeue  it  Qq  et  cet. 

321.  hotvbeit]  howbe't  Qq. 


322.  conflant,  louing]  constant-loving 
Sta.  Dyce  iii. 

louing,  Noble]  noble,  louing  Qq. 

324.  do]  Om.  Pope  4- . 

325.  peraduenture]  pcrapventure  Q  . 

326.  accomptant]  accountant  Q,Ff. 

327.  led]  lead  Qq. 

328.  luftie]  luflfull  Qq,  Mai.  Coll.  : 
lufly  Ff  et  cet. 

329.  thought]  thoughts  F  ,  Rowe. 


313.  if  you  can]  Jennens  :  The  sense  requires  if  I  can ;  Iago  had  brought  the 
affair  to  opportunity  by  fixing  on  Roderigo  for  one  of  the  watch ;  Roderigo's  part  re- 
mained to  be  done,  viz. :  provoking  Cassio,  which  in  this  speech  he  promises  to  do,  if 
opportunity  offered  to  give  him  cause.  Knight  :  But  Roderigo  is  not  one  of  those 
who  relies  upon  himself;  and  the  reading  of  the  Ff  is  far  more  characteristic.  Iago 
replies  to  this  expression  of  reliance  on  him,  'I  warrant  thee.'  Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  Iago's 
reply,  in  fact,  determines  nothing ;  it  suits  equally  well  with  either  lection. 

320.  him]  Booth  :  Pause,  as  though  questioning  the  possibility  of  this. 

322.  constant,  louing]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  29) :  I  think  Shakespeare  wrote  con- 
stant-loving;  inasmuch  as  Othello's  nature,  with  all  its  aptitude  for  true,  manly  affec- 
tion, could  hardly  be  described  as,  emphatically,  a  loving  nature. 

325,  327.  peraduenture  .  .  .  partely]  Swinrurne  [A  Study,  &c,  p.  179,  note). 
What  would  at  least  be  partly  lust  in  another  man  is  all  but  purely  hatred  in  Iago.  Foi 
'  partly '  read  wholly,  and  for  ■  peradventure '  read  assuredly,  and  the  incarnate  father 
of  lies,  made  manifest  in  the  flesh,  here  speaks  all  but  all  the  truth  for  once,  to  himself 
alone. 

329.  seate]  Coleridge  [Notes,  &c,  255) :  This  thought,  originally  by  Iago's  own 


act  ii,  sc.  i.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  12 1 

Doth  (like  a  poyfonous  Minerall)  gnaw  my  Inwardes  :  330 

And  nothing  can,  or  (hall  content  my  Soule 

Till  I  am  eeuen'd  with  him,  wife,  for  wift. 

Or  fayling  fo,  yet  that  I  put  the  Moore, 

At  leaft  into  a  Ielouzie  fo  ftrong 

That  iudgement  cannot  cure.     Which  thing  to  do,  335 

If  this  poore  Trafh  of  Venice,  whom  I  trace 

331.  or]  nor  Qq.  336.  Tra/Ji... trace]    tra/Ji...cruJh    Qx, 

332.  eeuen'd]  euen  Qq,  Steev.  Mai.  Mai.  brack. ..trace  Theob.  brack. ..cher- 
Sing.  w^Warb.    trash... trash  Steev. Var.  Dyce, 

wift]  Fx.  Sta.Wh.  Glo.  Cam.  Del.  Rife,     brack... 

334.  At  leajl]  At  last  Theob.  ii,Warb.         trash  Coll.  Hi  (MS),  Sing,  ii,  Huds. 
Johns. 

confession  a  mere  suspicion,  is  now  ripening,  and  gnaws  his  base  nature  as  his  own 
'  poisonous  mineral '  is  about  to  gnaw  the  noble  heart  of  his  general. 

330.  Minerall]  Johnson  :  This  is  philosophical.    Mineral  poisons  kill  by  corrosion. 

332.  eeuen'd]  According  to  Schmidt  (Lex.),  even  is  used  as  a  verb  in  two  other 
passages  :  AlPs  Well,  I,  iii,  3  ;  Cymb.  Ill,  iv,  184.  Skottowe  (ii,  78)  :  Of  this  enter- 
prise of  I  ago  nothing  afterwards  is  heard ;  Shakespeare  seems  either  to  have  forgotten 
his  original  intentions,  or  found  that  Iago  had  already  enough  business  on  his  hands. 
Booth  :  This  line  should  be  very  intense,  '  not  loud,  but  deep.' 

336.  Trash  .  .  .  trace]  Warburton  :  '  A  trifling  insignificant  fellow  may  perhaps 
be  called  Trash,  but  the  metaphor  of  hunting  is  not  preserved.  I  suppose  therefore 
that  the  word  is  brack,  which  is  a  low  species  of  hounds  of  the  chase,  and  a  term  gen- 
erally used  in  contempt.  As  to  "  trace,"  crush  of  Qx  is  plainly  a  corruption  of  cherish? 
Warton  was  the  first  to  suggest  that  trash  should  be  substituted  for  '  trace,'  but  he 
was  not  strictly  accurate  in  his  definition  of  its  technical  meaning ;  he  supposed  that  it 
meant  simply  to  rate,  to  check,  and  cited  Caratach's  reply  to  Nennius  (Bonduca,  I,  i) 
when  Nennius  taunted  him  with  flying  from  the  Romans :  '  I  fled  too ;  But  not  so 
fast, — your  jewel  had  been  lost  then,  Young  Hengo  there ;  he  trash V  me,'  i.  e.,  says 
Warton,  he  stopped  me.  At  last  Steevens  (1793)  discovered  the  meaning  of  trash 
which  has  since  been  generally  accepted.  'To  trash  is  still  a  hunter's  phrase,  and  sig 
nifies  to  fasten  a  weight  on  the  neck  of  a  dog,  when  his  speed  is  superior  to  that  of  his 

companions "  Trash  "  in  the  first  instance  in  this  line  may  be  used  to  signify  a 

worthless  hound,  as  the  same  term  is  afterwards  employed  to  describe  a  worthless 
female:  "I  do  suspect  this  trash"  (V,  i,  108).  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  support  the 
present  jingle  on  the  word,  it  is  so  much  in  our  author's  manner,  although  his  worst.' 
Knight  upholds  '  trace,'  but  was  misled  in  his  interpretation.  '  Trash '  and  '  trace,' 
aays  Knight,  'are  used  with  perfect  propriety.  The  "trash"  is  the  thing  traced, put 
in  traces — confined — as  an  untrained  worthless  dog  is  held,  and  hence  the  present 
meaning  of  trask.'  Dyce  (Remarks,  p.  237)  :  Knight's  explanation  of  'trash'  is  boi 
rowed  from  Richardson's  Diet.,  where  we  find :  '  A  trash — anything  (man,  dog) 
trashed  or  traced  or  confined  in  traces,  that  it  may  not,  because  it  would,  run  or  pursue 
too  fast,  rashly ;  like  an  untrained  dog ;  a  worthless  hound  ;  hence  it  is  anything  worth- 
less,' &c.  But  in  this  explanation  Richardson  is  undoubtedly  mistaken ;  he  gives  to 
trash  a  meaning  which  it  never  did  and  never  could  bear.  When  used  as  a  huntsman 
vr  dog-trainer's  term,  or  metaphorically  with  an  allus:on  to  their  practices,  it  invariably 


122  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  ii,  sc.  i. 

For  his  quicke  hunting,  ftand  the  putting  on,  337 

He  haue  our  Michael  CaJJlo  on  the  hip, 

signifies  the  thing  WHICH  RESTRAINS:  'Above  this  lower  roome  shall  be  your  hunts- 
mans  lodging,  wherin  hee  shall  also  keep  his  cooples,  liams,  collars,  trashes,  boxes,' 
•Sec. — Markham's  Conntrey  Contentments,  b.  i.  c.,  i,  p.  15,  1615.  The  trash,  whether  a 
strap,  a  rope  dragging  loose  on  the  ground,  or  a  weight,  was  fastened  round  the  neck  of 
a  too  forward  dog,  to  check  his  movements.  Collier  (ed.  ii)  in  justification  of  his 
(MS.)  says  that  '  trash  and  trace  were  used  somewhat  synonymously,  as  a  mode  of 
keeping  back  braches,  i.  e.  dogs,  who  hunted  too  quickly.  Iago  speaks  of  Roderigo  as 
a  poor  hound,  who  was  so  eager  in  the  chase  that  it  was  necessary  to  restrain  him.' 
Singer  (ed.  ii)  thinks  that  Warburton's  brach  is  correct,  and  that  crush  is  a  misprint 
for  trash.  *  The  converse  has  happened  in  the  Ind.  to  the  Tarn,  cf  Shr.,  where  brach 
has  been  misprinted  trash?  *  Roderigo  is  cheeked  or  trashed  by  Iago  for  his  quick 
hunting ;  i.  e.  he  is  in  too  great  a  hurry  to  come  to  an  explanation  with  Desdemona.' 
White  (ed.  i) :  '  Whom  I  trash,'  i.  e.  whom  I  restrain,  whip  in.  '  Trace '  seems  to 
have  been  only  a  varied  form  of  trash.  The  misprint  in  the  Qto  is  evidently  due  to  the 
likeness  of  c  and  /.  Staunton  cannot  subscribe  to  Warburton's  emendation  brach, 
'although  persuaded  that  " trash  of  Venice"  is  a  vitiation  of  what  the  poet  wrote. 
Trash  signifying  to  clog,  to  impede,  is  surely  the  genuine  word  for  "  trace  "  of  the 
Folio.'  Bailey  (ii,  108) :  It  is  plain  to  me  that  the  genuine  reading  is  leash,  i.  e. 
whom  I  hold  in  leash  for  the  quick  hunting  of  the  Moor.  Keightley  [Exp.  302) : 
'  The  jingle,'  Steevens  says,  '  being  in  Shakespeare's  manner.'  Now  to  this  I  object — 
first,  that  this  was  not  Shakespeare's  manner,  for  the  apparent  instances  of  it  are  mostly 
printers'  blunders ;  and,  secondly,  that  Roderigo  did  not  require  to  be  trashed  or  checked 
'  for  his  quick  hunting,'  for  he  was  always  hanging  back  and  ready  to  give  up  the  chase 
till  urged  on  by  Iago.  This  last  objection  also  applies  to  '  trace '  in  the  sense  of  fol- 
low or  accompany.  It  would  apply  also,  though  in  a  less  degree,  to  train,  which  would 
yield  a  tolerable  sense.  On  the  whole,  I  think  that  Iago's  words  may  have  been  praise, 
which  would  suit  his  sneering,  ironical  tone.  As  to  brach,  though  we  frequently  find  it 
used  of  a  woman,  I  believe  it  was  never  applied  to  a  man.  Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  I  give  the 
reading  of  Steevens,  but  I  now  (1865)  entertain  great  doubts  if  it  be  what  Shake- 
speare wrote.  [I  have  reserved  Halliwell's  note  for  the  last,  because  it  gives  what 
seems  to  me  to  be  the  true  interpretation ;  the  Folio  needs  no  change ;  « trace '  bears 
here  one  of  its  commonest  meanings ;  '  For  his  quick  hunting '  does  not  mean,  because 
of  his  quick  hunting'  but  in  order  to  make  him,  for  the  purpose  of  making  him,  hunt 
quickly,  a  meaning  of 'for'  which  White  (ed.  ii)  especially  notes,  and,  thus  noting  it,  it 
is  strange  that  White  should  have  missed  the  common  meaning  of  the  word  '  trace.'  Ii 
was  Steevens  who  gave  a  bias  to  the  word  from  which  it  never  recovered  until  Halli 
well  set  it  straight,  whose  note  is  as  follows :  ' The  meaning  seems  to  be — if  this  wietched 
fellow,  whose  steps  I  carefully  watch  in  order  to  quicken  his  pace,  follows  my  directions, 
I  will  have  our  Michael  Cassio  on  the  hip.' — Ed.] 

337.  the  putting  on]  Rolfe:  This  refers  to  h  s  picking  a  quarrel  with  Cassio. 
not  to  his  '  quick  hunting '  of  Desdemona. 

338.  hip]  Johnson  :  A  phrase  from  the  art  of  wrestling.  Dyce  [Remarks,  p.  52) : 
But  in  his  Dictionary  Johnson  derives  the  phrase,  and  with  more  probability,  from  hunt- 
ing- '  the  hip  or  haunch  of  a  deer  being  the  part  commonly  seized  by  the  dogs.'  [The 
phiase  occurs  twice  in  Mer.  of  Ven.  and  here,  the  only  three  times  in  Shakespeare ;  as 

nstances  eisewhere  are  not  common,  Dyce  gives  four ;  in  none  of  them,  however,  is  it 


act  ii,  sc.  i.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  123 

Abufe  him  to  the  Moore,  in  the  right  garbe 

(For  I  feare  CaJJio  with  my  Night-Cape  too)  340 

Make  the  Moore  thanke  me,  loue  me,  and  reward  me, 

For  making  him  egregioufly  an  Affe, 

And  pra6lifing  vpon  his  peace,  and  quiet, 

Euen  to  madneffe.     'Tis  heere  :  but  yet  confus'd, 

Knaueries  plaine  face,  is  neuer  feene,  till  vs'd.  Exit.         345 


339.  right]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.         cap  Ff. 

Johns.  Knt.     ranke  Qq  et  cet.  too]  to  Qq. 

340.  Night- Cape]  night  cap  Qq.  Night-  344.  madneffe.]  madnejfe  : — Q,Q3« 

clear  to  me  that  the  simile  is  derived  from  hunting.  Halliwell  gives  three  references ; 
two,  like  those  of  Dyce,  are  uncertain,  one  from  Fuller's  Historie  of  the  Holy  Warre, 
1647,  is  decidedly  from  wrestling,  'fearing  to  wrestle  with  the  king,  who  had  him  on 
the  hip,  and  could  out  him  at  pleasure  for  his  bad  manners.' — Ed.] 

339.  right  garbe]  Since  Johnson's  time,  every  modern  editor,  except  Knight, 
has  preferred  rank  of  the  Qto,  which  Steevens  interprets  as  meaning  'grossly,  i.  e 
without  mincing  the  matter,'  and  cites  Marston's  Dutch  Cotirtezan  [III,  i],  'Whether, 
in  the  ranke  name  of  madnesse, — whether  ?  '  To  this  meaning  Malone  adds,  lascivi- 
ous, as  in  Mer.  of  Ven.  [I,  iii,  81],  'The  ewes,  being  rank.'  For  'garbe'  Steevens 
cites,  'as  perhaps  employed  in  the  sense  here  required,'  Chapman's  Odyssey  [xviii, 
482]  where  '  cheek-proud  Melantho '  rails  at  the  disguised  Ulysses :  '  Or  'tis  like  To 
prove  your  native  garb,  your  tongue  will  strike  On  this  side  of  your  mouth.'  [Despite 
this  array  of  authority,  I  cannot  but  think  the  Folio  has  the  true  reading.  Iago's  plans 
are  not  settled,  all  is  '  but  yet  confus'd,'  details  will  depend  on  circumstances  as  they 
arise ;  the  main  point  is  to  get  Cassio  on  the  hip,  and  then  abuse  him  to  the  Moor  in 
the  right  garb,  in  the  best  fashion,  whatever  that  fashion  may  turn  out  to  be.  If  rank 
were  the  word  here,  I  do  not  think  that  Iago  would  say  '  the  rank  garb,'  as  though 
there  were  but  one  coarse  way  of  dealing,  but  rather  '  in  a  rank  garb.'  Whether  '  garb  ' 
is  here  used  subjectively  or  objectively,  as  the  style  of  address  which  Iago  will  himself 
assume  in  approaching  Othello  or  as  the  address  which  he  will  impute  to  Cassio,  is 
scarcely  important;  the  question  lies  in  the  use  of  'right'  or  rank.  I  prefer  the  former. 
It  is,  probably,  the  fear  which  Iago  expresses  in  the  next  line  that  has  influenced  the 
preference  for  rank  over  'right.'  But  this  fear  is  only  Iago's  'motive-hunting'  for 
dieting  his  revenge  on  Cassio ;  it  does  not  specify  the  manner  of  his  revenge,  all  that, 
as  he  expressly  says,  is  but  yet  confused,  which  would  hardly  be  true  if  he  had  already 
decided  that  the  garb  in  which  Cassio  was  to  be  abused  should  be  rank.  For  refer- 
ences to  '  garb '  see  Lear,  II,  ii,  92.  Singer  (ed.  ii)  says  that  '  rank  garb '  is  merely 
in  the  right  down  or  straightforward  fashion,  and  in  support  refers  to  '  the  right  butter- 
woman's  rank  to  market,'  which  is  about  as  apt  as  would  be  the  familiar  phrase  in 
tvhich  Hamlet's  uncle  refers  to  his  own  offence.  An  appropriate  support  of  the  Folio 
is  to  be  found  in  Mid.  N.  D.,  where  Helena  says,  '  I  am  a  right  maid  for  cowardice,' 
or  in  the  '  right  butterwoman '  in  Singer's  own  quotation  from  As  You  Like  It. — Ed.] 

344.  madnesse]  Hudson:  Here  we  have  perhaps  the  most  appalling  outcome  of 
Iago's  proper  character — namely,  a  pride  of  intellect,  or  lust  of  the  brain,  which  exults 
abovt    all  things  in  being  able  to  make  himself  and  others  pass  for  just  the  reverse  of 


124  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  n,  sc.  ii 


Scena   Secunda, 

Enter  Othello's,  Herald  with  a  Proclamation. 

Herald.  It  is  Othello's  pleafure,  our  Noble  and  Vali- 
ant Generall.  That  vpon  certaine  tydings  now  arriu'd, 
importing  the  meere  perdition   of  the  Turkifh   Fleete :  5 

euery  man  put  himfelfe  into  Triumph.  Some  to  daunce, 
fome  to  make  Bonfires,  each  man,  to  what  Sport  and 
Reuels  his  addition  leads  him.     For  befides  thefe  bene-  8 

1.  Scena  Secunda.]  Om.  Qq.  Scaena  6.  Triumph?]  triumph:  or  triumph; 
Secunda  F3.     Scene  IX.  Pope  +  ,  Jen.             Qq  et  cet. 

The  Street.  Pope.  7.  to  make]  make  Qq. 

2.  Enter...]  Enter  a  Gentleman  read-  Bonfires']  bonefires  QfQ-F  ,  Pope, 
ing  a  Proclamation.  Qx.  Theob.  Han.    bonefirs  Q2.    Bone-fires  F  , 

3.  Herald.]  Om.  Qq.  Rowe. 

pleafure,']  pleafure ;  Qx.  8.  addition]   Ff.     minde  Qt,  Pope  4- , 

4.  Generall.]  Generall;  Ff,  Rowe.  Jen.  addiction  Q2Q3,  Rowe  et  cet.  mind's 
Generally  Qq  et  cet.  addiction  Anon.  (ap.  Cam.). 

arriu'd]  arriued  Qq.  thefe]  this  Rowe  ii-K 

6.  euery]  that  euery  Qq. 

what  they  are ;  that  is,  in  being  an  overmatch  for  truth  and  Nature  themselves.  And 
this  soliloquy  is,  I  am  apt  to  think,  Shakespeare's  supreme  instance  of  psychologic  sub- 
tilty  and  insight ;  as  it  is  also  Iago's  most  pregnant  disclosure  of  his  real  springs  of 
action,  or  what  Coleridge  aptly  calls  '  the  motive-  hunting  of  a  motiveless  malignity.' 
For  it  is  not  that  Iago  really  believes  or  suspects  that  either  Cassio  or  Othello  has 
wronged  him  in  the  way  he  intimates ;  he  is  merely  seeking  to  opiate  or  appease  cer- 
tain qualms  of  conscience  by  a  sort  of  extemporized  make-believe  in  that  kind. 

345.  seene]  Johnson  :  An  honest  man  acts  upon  a  plan,  and  forecasts  his  designs ; 
but  a  knave  depends  upon  temporary  and  local  opportunities,  and  never  knows  his  own 
purpose  but  at  the  time  of  execution. 

5.  meere]  Abbott,  §15:  That  is,  unmixed  with  anything  else;  hence,  by  infer- 
ence, intact,  complete. 

6.  put  himselfe  into]  For  instances  of  this  reflexive  use,  see  Schmidt  (Lex.), 
where,  however,  I  find  neither  this  passage  nor  that  quoted  by  Steevens  in  Per.  I,  ii,  24. 

8.  addition]  Dyce  (ed.  iii)  calls  this  a  '  stark  misprint.'  Is  it  ?  Granting,  for  a 
moment,  that  it  is  nonsense,  would  it  be  altogether  out  of  place  in  the  mouth  of  a 
pompous  Herald,  who  has  just  given  us  a  taste  of  his  quality  in  the  stilted  phrase, 
4  put  himself  into  triumph '  ?  But  is  there  not  a  glimmer  of  meaning  to  be  discovered 
in  it  ?  That  '  addition '  may  mean  title  we  have  seen  in  Macb.,  Ham.,  and  Lear, 
and  that  it  may  so  mean  elsewhere,  see  examples  in  Schmidt,  s.  v.  Would  it  then 
be  a  '  stark  misprint '  were  the  Herald  to  use  it  here  in  this  military  sense  and 
transfer  the  title  to  the  holder  of  the  rank  himself?  Then  the  meaning  is  that  the 
soldiers  are  to  enjoy  themselves  according  to  their  rank — a  somewhat  superfluous 
proclamation,  it  must  be  confessed ;  it  is  hardly  to  be  supposed  that  Cassio  and  Iago 
would  fall  to  making  bonfires;  yet  is  it  not  in  keeping  with  the  rest  of  the  Herald's 


act  ii,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  125 

ficiall  Newes,  it  is  the  Celebration  of  his  Nuptiall.     So 
much  was  his  pleafure  mould  be  proclaimed.     All  offi-  10 

ces  are  open,  &  there  is  full  libertie  of  Feafting  from  this 
prefenr  houre  of  flue,  till    the    Bell  haue   told  eleuen.  [319  a] 
Bleffe  the  Ifle  of  Cyprus,  and  our  Noble  Generall  Othel- 
lo. Exit, 

Enter  Othello ',  Defdemona,  Caffio,  and  Attendants.  1 5 

Otke.     Good  Michael,  looke  you  to  the  guard  to  night. 

9.  Celebration]  Delebration  F_.  13.  Bleffe]    Ff,    Rowe  +  ,    Cap.    Km. 

Nuptiall]    Ff,    Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Heauen  bleffe  Qq  et  cet. 
Knt,  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  Cam.  Del.  Huds.  Cyprus]  Cypres  Qx. 

Rife,  Wh.  ii.     Nuptialls  Qq  et  cet.  13,  14.  Bleffe... Othello.]  As  a  separate 

11.  of  Feafting]  Om.  Qq.  line,  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

12.  prefenr]  Ff.  14.  Exit.]  Om.  Qq. 

ftue]  nine  Cap.  conj.  (p.  26  b).  Scene  X.  Han.  Johns.  Jen.    Scene  III. 

haue]  hath  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Cap.  et  seq. 

Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly.  The  Castle.  Theob. 

told]  toli'dFFA,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  15.  Enter...]  Enter  Othtllo,  Caffio,  and 

Wh.  i.  Desdemona.  Qq. 

phrases  ?  But  there  is  an  instance  in  Tro.  &  Cress.  (I,  ii,  24)  where  '  addition '  seems 
to  stand  for  characteristic  quality  or  natural  bent;  it  is  where  Alexander  says  that  Ajax 
*  hath  robbed  many  beasts  of  their  particular  additions ;  he  is  as  valiant  as  the  lion, 
churlish  as  the  bear,  slow  as  the  elephant.'  This  is  the  meaning  that  I  think  it  possi- 
ble for  '  addition '  to  bear  here,  certainly  with  enough  plausibility  to  remove  it  from  a 
black  list  of  '  stark  misprints.'  Each  man  is  to  betake  himself  to  what  sport  or  revel 
his  particular  disposition  leads  him  to  indulge  in ;  and  if  in  '  addition '  a  military  flavor 
be  found,  it  is  all  the  more  appropriate  among  soldiers.  Addiction  is  a  cacophonous 
word,  never  used  by  Shakespeare,  except  in  one  other  passage. — Ed. 

9.  Nuptiall]  Richardson  [Diet.  s.  v.) :  The  noun  is  usually  written  with  the  plu- 
ral termination  s.  Shakespeare  writes  it  without.  [This  assertion  of  Richardson  is  an 
illustration  of  the  fact  which  we  are  all  so  liable  to  forget,  viz. :  that,  omitting  V.  &* 
A.  and  Lucrece,  we  cannot  know  how  Shakespeare  wrote  anything  except  through  the 
medium  of  the  printers,  whose  work,  it  is  believed,  he  never  corrected.  In  this  very 
word  we  find  the  s  of  the  plural  in  the  Qq,  which  some  editors  think  were  fresher  from 
Shakespeare's  hand  than  the  Folio. — Ed.] 

10.  offices]  Halliwell:  The  rooms  appropriated  to  the  upper  servants  of  great 
families. 

13.  Blesse]  Walker  (i,  215)  supposes  that  the  word  God,  softened  in  the  Qq,  was 
omitted  by  the  editor  of  the  Folio  in  deference  to  the  well-known  act  of  Parliament ;  01 
was,  perhaps,  expunged  by  the  licenser  of  the  press. 

16.  Good  Michael]  Cowden-Clarke  (The  Shakespeare  Key,  p.  91) :  These  few 
words,  seemingly  insignificant,  are  of  important  dramatic  use.  They  give  augmented 
effect  to  Othello's  subsequent  anger  at  Cassio's  being  betrayed  not  only  into  neglect  of 
duty  in  preserving  order,  but  into  breach  of  order  himself;  while  they  set  well  before 
the  mind  Othello's  trust  and  confidence  in  Cassio  as  his  chosen  officer,  and  his  liking 
for  him  as  a  personal  friend,  calling  him  by  his  Christian  name  '  Michael,'  which,  after 


126 


THE    TEA  G  ED  IE   OF   OTHELLO        [ACT  II,  SC.  u. 


Let's  teach  our  felues  that  Honourable  flop, 
Not  to  out-fport  difcretion. 

Caf.     Iago,  hath  direction  what  to  do. 
But  notwithftanding  with  my  perfonall  eye 
Will  I  looke  to't. 

Othe.     Iago,  is  mofb  honed  : 
Michael,  goodnight     To  morrow  with  your  earlier!, 
Let  me  haue  fpeech  with  you.     Come  my  deere  Loue, 
The  purchafe  made,  the  fruites  are  to  enfue, 
That  profit's  yet  to  come  'tweene  me,  and  you. 
Goodnight.  Exit. 

Enter  Iago. 

Caf     Welcome  Iago  :  we  muft  to  the  Watch. 

Iago.  Not  this  houre  Lieutenant  :  'tis  not  yet  ten 
o'th'clocke.  Our  Generall  caft  vs  thus  earely  for  the 
loue  of  his  Defdemona :  Who,  let  vs  not  therefore  blame; 
he  hath  not  yet  made  wanton  the  night  with  her  :  and 
(he  is  fport  for  lone. 

Caf.     She's  a  raoft  exquifite  Lady. 


17 


20 


25 


30 


.55 


17.  that]  the  Qt. 

19.  direction"]  directed  Qt. 

notwithJlanding\     notwithjlaning 


20 


21.  to't]  to  it  Qq,  Jen. 

23.  your]  our  Mai.  Steev.  Var. 

24.  you.]  you,  Qq. 
[To  Desd.  Johns. 

26.  That]  The  Qt. 
profit's]  profits  Qq. 

y  tweene]  'tween  F3F4,  Rowe  + ,  Knt, 
Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  Cam.  Wli.  ii.  tweene  F2. 
twixt  Qq  et  cet. 

27.  Goodnight  ]  Cas.    Goodnight  Anon. 


(ap.  Cam.). 

27.  Exit.]  Exit  Othello  and  Dejdemona 
Qq. 

30.  Lieutenant]     Leiutenant     Q,Q2. 
Lieuetenant  F  . 

3 1 .  o'th'clocke]  aclock  Qq.    o'clock  Cap. 
Steev.  Mai.  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly,  Del. 

32.  Defdemona :]  Defdemona.  Qx.  Def- 
demona, Q2Q3- 

Who]   Qq,  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  Cam. 
Del.  Huds.  Rife,  Wh.  ii.    Whom  Ff  et  cet. 

33.  wanton  the  night  ]  the  wanton  nigh* 
Pope,  Han. 

35.  She's]  She  is  Qq,  Jen. 


the  one  final  impressive  appeal,  '  How  comes  it,  Michael,  you  are  thus  forgot  ? '  he 
never  again  uses. 

22.  honest]  D'Hugues  :  II  semble,  a  partir  de  ce  moment,  que  l'epithete  'honest' 
soit  devenue  inseparable,  dans  la  pensee  d'Othello,  du  nom  de  ce  scelerat.  La  des- 
tinee  a  de  ces  ironies,  et  1' esprit  humain  de  ces  aberrations. 

31.  cast]  Johnson,  perhaps  forgetting  that  in  I,  i,  164,  he  had  given  to  this  word 
the  meaning  which  is  now  generally  accepted,  to  dismi:s,  here  interprets  it  as  equiva- 
lent to  'appointed  us  to  our  stations.  To  cast  the  play'  he  continues,  'is  to  assign  to 
every  actor  his  proper  part.'  See  II,  ii,  302,  and  V,  ii,  400,  vrhere  the  meaning  to  dis- 
miss is  equally  suitable. — Ed. 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.J 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


127 


Iago,     And  He  warrant  her,  full  of  Game.  36 

Caf     Indeed  fhes  a  moft  frefh  and  delicate  creature. 

Iago,     What  an  eye  fhe  ha's  ? 
Methinkes  it  founds  a  parley  to  prouocation. 

Caf,     An  inuiting  eye  :  40 

And  yet  me  thinkes  right  modeft. 

Iago.     And  when  fhe  fpeakes, 
Is  it  not  an  Alarum  to  Loue  ? 

Caf,     She  is  indeed  perfection. 

Iago.     Well  :  happineffe  to  their  Sheetes.    Come  Lieu-  45 

tenant,  I  haue  a  ftope  of  Wine,  and  heere  without  are  a 
brace  of  Cyprus  Gallants,  that  would  faine  haue  a  mea- 
fure  to  the  health  of  blacke  Othello, 

Caf,     Not  to   night,  good  Iago,  I  haue  very  poore, 
and  vnhappie   Braines  for  drinking.     I  could  well  wifh  $0 

Curtefie  would  inuent  fome  other  Cuftome  of  enter- 
tainment. 52 


36.  her,]  her  QqF^,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
Jen. 

37.  f)ie  s]  fhe  is  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Mai. 
Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Del. 
(he's  Ff  et  cet. 

38.  39.  Prose,  Pope  et  seq. 

38.  ha's  ?]  has?  QqF3F4.     has!  Han. 

39.  to]  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Knt,  Dyce,  Wh.  i, 
Cam.  Del.     of  Qq  et  cet. 

40-43.  Two  lines,  Qq,  Pope  et  seq. 
43.  Is...  Loue  ?]  tis  an  alar  me  to  loue. 
Qq,  Jen. 


.43.  Alarum"]  alarm  Mai.  Steev. 

44.  She  is]  It  is  Q,. 

45.  Well:]  Well,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 
Sheetes. ]Jheetes —  Qq.  sheets  !  Han. 

46.  I  haue]  have  Jen.  (misprint?). 
Jlope]  stoup  Glo.  Cam.  Rife,  Wh.  ii. 

stoop  Rowe  et  cet. 

47.  Cyprus]  Cypres  Qx.     Cyprus'  Cap. 

48.  of]  of  the  Qq,  Theob.Warb.  Johns. 
Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i, 
Ktly. 


39.  Booth  :  Iago  watches  Cassio  intently. 

43.  Alarum]  Johnson  :  The  voice  may  sound  an  alarm  more  properly  than  the  tye 
can  sound  a  parley.  Ritson  (p.  229) :  The  eye  is  often  said  to  speak.  Thus  we  fre- 
quently hear  of  the  language  of  the  eye.  Surely  that  which  can  talk  may,  without  any 
violent  stretch  of  the  figure,  be  allowed  to  sound  a  parley.  Steevens  :  So  in  Tro.  &* 
Cress.  IV,  v,  55  :  •  There's  language  in  her  eye,  her  cheek,  her  lip,  Nay,  her  foot  speaks.' 
Booth  :  So  in  Mer.  of  Ven.  I,  i,  164:  'from  her  eyes  I  did  receive  fair  speechless  mes- 
sages.' 

46.  stope]  It  occurred  to  me  that  the  uniformity  of  spelling  in  Qq  and  Ff  might 
nere  betoken  the  pronunciation,  especially  as  this  form  is  given  by  Skeat  as  Middle 
English.  But  a  comparison  of  the  five  times  where  the  word  occurs  in  Shakespeare 
shows  that  no  such  inference  can  be  drawn.  It  is  '  stoope '  in  Twelfth  Night,  II,  iii, 
14;  'stope,'  lb.  129;  'stoupe,'  Ham.  V,  i,  68;  '  stopes,'  lb.  278.  The  fact  that  the 
spelling  agrees  in  three  cases  out  of  the  five  might  at  best  indicate  that  the  pronuncia- 
tion ws  in  the  transition  state  from  the  old  to  the  new. — Ed. 


128  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [ACTii.sc.il 

Iago.     Oh,  they  are  our  Friends  :  but  one  Cup,  He  53 

drinke  for  you. 

CaJJlo.     I  haue  drunke  but  one  Cup  to  night,  and  that  55 

was  craftily  qualified  too  :  and  behold  what  inouation 
it  makes  heere.  I  am  infortunate  in  the  infirmity,  and 
dare  not  taske  my  weakeneffe  with  any  more. 

Iago.     What  man  ?     'Tis  a  night  of  Reuels,  the  Gal- 
lants defire  it.  60 

Caf.     Where  are  they  ? 

Iago.     Heere,  at  the  doore  :  I  pray  you  call  them  in. 

Caf.     He  do't,  but  it  diflikes  me.  Exit. 

Iago.     If  I  can  faften  but  one  Cup  vpon  him 
With  that  which  he  hath  drunke  to  night  alreadie,  65 

He'l  be  as  full  of  Quarrell,  and  offence 
As  my  yong  Miftris  dogge. 
Now  my  ficke  Foole  Rodorigo, 
Whom  Loue  hath  turn'd  almoft  the  wrong  fide  out, 
To  Defdemona  hath  to  night  Carrows'd.  70 

53.  Friends  ;]  friends, —  Qq.  F  ,  Rowe,  Pope,    mistress1  Theob.  et  seq. 
Cup,]  Cup  F,  Rowe.     cup:  Qq,  67.  dogge.]dog: — Qq.     dog,  Ff. 

Theob.  ii  et  seq.  68.  Now  my]  Noy  miv  Q2. 

55.  haue}  ha  Qq.  69.  Whom... out]  ( Whom... out)  QaQ. 

56.  too:"]  to,  Q,Q2.     Om.  Johns.  hath]  has  Qq. 

57.  infortunate']  vnfortunate  Qq.  out]  outward  Qq,  J en.  Steev.  Mai. 
59.  Reuels,]  rez>els  ;  Cap.  Var.  Coll.  Wh.  i. 

63.  Exit.]  Om.  Ff.  70.  Carro7us'd.]carouj?Qq.  Carrows'd, 

67,  68.  One  line,  Qq,  Cap.  et  seq.  F2F  .     Carowrfd  F  . 

67.  Miftris]  Miftris's  F3.     Miflrifs's 

54.  He  drink  for  you]  What  does  this  mean  ?  Is  it  that  Iago  will  use  any  and 
every  argument,  even  one  as  ridiculous  as  drinking  by  proxy,  to  induce  Cassio  to  join 
the  revels  ? — Ed. 

56.  craftily  qualified]  Johnson:  Slyly  mixed  with  water.  [Cannot  'craftily' 
here  mean  strongly,  powerfully  ?  *  I  have  drunk  but  one  cup,  and  that  was  "  power- 
ful weak,"  too.'  The  necessity  of  his  '  qualifying '  his  cup  furtively  is  not  clearly  appa- 
rent to  me,  when  he  confesses  the  action  thus  freely  to  Iago.  To  be  sure,  Cassio  may 
have  accompanied  the  confession  with  a  wink  to  indicate  that  he  thought  it  a  good 
joke ;  but  this  jars  a  little  with  my  conception  of  Cassio's  character.  I  prefer  to  think 
that  he  openly  and  freely  qualified  that  first  cup,  and  the  innovation  it  wrought  made 
him  forget  to  qualify  the  second  among  the  lads  of  Cyprus. — Ed.] 

57.  heere]  Booth  :  Merely  a  flushed  face. 

63.  it  dislikes]  For  similar  instances  of  the  use  of  impersonal  verbs,  see  Abfoti, 

§297- 

64.  one  Cup]  Booth  :  This  should  warn  Cassio  against  overdoing  the  intoxi- 
cation. 


ACT  II,  SC.  a.]  THE  MOORE   OF    VENICE  129 

Potations,  pottle-deepe;  and  he's  to  watch.  71 

Three  elfe  of  Cyprus,  Noble  fwelling  Spirites, 

(That  hold  their  Honours  in  a  wary  diftance, 

The  very  Elements  of  this  Warrelike  Ifle) 

Haue  I  to  night  flufter'd  with  flowing  Cups,  75 

And  they  Watch  too. 

Now  'mongft  this  Flocke  of  drunkards  [319  b~\ 

Am  I  put  to  our  CaJJio  in  fome  Action 

That  may  offend  the  Ifle.     But  here  they  come. 

Enter  CaJJio,  Montano,  and  Gentlemen,  80 

If  Confequence  do  but  approue  my  dreame, 

My  Boate  failes  freely,  both  with  winde  and  Streame. 

Caf.   'Fore  heauen,  they  haue  giuen  me  a  rowfe  already.  83 

71.  watch.]  watch  Qq.  80.  Enter...]  Enter  Montanio,  CaJ/io, 

72.  elfe]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Knt,  Dyce  i,  and  others  (after  IJle,  line  79),  Qq.  Re- 
Wh.  i.    elves  Coll.  (MS),    lads  Qq  et  cet.         enter... (after  line  79),  Cap. 

Cyprus]  Cypres  Qx.  Scene  X.  Pope,  Warb.    Scene  XL  Han. 

73.  Honours]  honour  Qq.  Johns.  Jen. 

76,  77.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq.  81.  dreame]  DeemTheob.  Han.  Warb. 

76.  they]  the  Qq.  Cap. 

77.  'mong/l]  amongjl  Q  .  &$.  ''Fore  heauen]  Fore  God  Qq,  Cap. 

78.  Am  I]  I  am  Qq.     And  IY^A.  Jen.  Sta.  Glo.  Cam.  Dyce  iii,  Huds.  Rife, 
in]  on  Cap.  conj.  (p.  26  b).  Wh.  ii. 

79.  Two  lines,  Qq. 

71.  pottle-deepe]  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  A  pottle  was  a  measure  of  two  quarts  ('A  Pot- 
tle, Quatuor  libra  liquidorum,  congii  Anglicani  dimidium?  Coles's  Lat.  and  Eng. 
Diet.),  but  frequently  meaning  a  drinking-vessel  without  reference  to  the  measure. 

72.  else]  Delius  suggests,  with  great  ingenuity,  that  this  may  have  been  meant  for 
Ls,  the  abbreviation  of  Lords.  Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  In  my  former  edition  I  followed  the 
Folio  (comparing  King  John,  II,  i,  276  :  '  Bastards  and  else'')  ;  but  I  now  think  it  safer 
to  adhere  to  the  lection  of  the  Qq. 

73.  Rolfe:  That  is,  are  sensitive  with  regard  to  their  honour,  or  quick  to  take 
offence  at  a  supposed  insult. 

74.  Elements]  Johnson  :  As  quarrelsome  as  the  discordia  semina  rerum ;  as 
quick  in  opposition  as  fire  and  water.  Schmidt  (Lex.)  :  A  pure  extract,  as  it  were, 
the  very  quintessence  of  the  isle. 

80.  Montano]  Booth  doubts  if  Shakespeare  meant  to  have  Montano  take  part  in 
this  carouse,  and  therefore  makes  him  enter  later  from  a  different  direction  just  in  time 
to  see  Cassio  stagger  off.     Steevens  felt  the  same  impropriety;  see  his  note  line  85. 

81.  Consequence]  An  instance  of  the  omission  of  the  plural  s  in  words  whose 
termination  has  a  plural  sound.  See  Walker's  Vers.  Art.  Ii,  p.  243.  This  line  is  not 
there  noted.     Or  see  Abbott,  §471. 

81.  dreame]    Theobald  suggested  and  adopted  deem,  i.  e.  opinion,  judgement. 
Johnson  :  I  rather  read  scheme.    But  why  should  'dream '  be  rejected  ?    Every  scheme 
subsisting  only  in  the  imagination  may  be  termed  a  '  dream.' 
9 


13° 


THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO 


ACT  II,  SC.  11. 


Mon.  Good-faith  a  litle  one  :  not  paft  a  pint,  as  I  am  a 
Souldier.  85 

Iago.     Some  Wine  hoa. 

And  let  me  the  Cannakin  clinke \  clinke : 

And  let  me  the  Cannakin  clinke. 

A  Souldiers  a  man  :  0hy  mans  life's  but  a  fpan, 

Why  then  let  a  Souldier  drinke.  90 

Some  Wine  Boyes. 

Caf.     'Fore  Heauen  :  an  excellent  Song. 

Iago.  I  learn'd  it  in  Fngland  :  where  indeedthey  are 
moft  potent  in  Potting.  Your  Dane,  your  Germaine, 
and    your    fwag-belly'd    Hollander,    (drinke   hoa)    are  95 

nothing  to  your  Englifh. 

Cajfio.  Is  your  Englifhmen  fo  exquifite  in  his  drin- 
king ?  98 


84.  I  ani\  Pm  Cap. 

84,  104.  Mon.]  Gent.  Booth. 

84, 85.  as...  Souldier]  Separate  line,  Qq, 
Cap.  Steev.'85,  MaL'90. 

87.  [Jago  sings.  Rowe. 

87,  88.  Cannakin]  Cannikin  Qq,  Jen. 

87.  clinke,  clinke  :]  clink,  clink,  clink. 
Han.  Johns.  Cap. 

%^.  clinke.]  clinke,  clinke  :  Qq. 

89.  One  line,  QqFf,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Knt. 
Two  lines,  Cap.  et  cet. 

Oh.. .life's]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Knt, 


Wh.  i,  Sta.  Del.    Man's  life's  Coll.  iii.    a 
life's  Qq  et  cet. 

91.  Some  Wine]  Come,  wine  Jen. 

92.  'Fore  Heauen]  Fore  God  Qx,  Cap. 
Jen.  Sta.  Glo.  Cam.  Dyce  iii,  Huds.  Rife, 
Wh.  ii. 

96.  Englifli]  Englishman  Coll.  ii  (MS). 

97.  Englifhmen]  Englifh  man  Qq. 
EnglifJiman  Ff  et  cet. 

exquifite]  FfQ2Q3,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt, 
Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Rife,  expert  Qt 
et  cet. 


84.  rowse]  Gifford  (The  Duke  of  Milan,  Massinger,  vol.  i,  p.  237,  ed.  1805): 
A  'rouse'  was  a  large  glass  ('not  past  a  pint'  as  Iago  [sic]  says)  in  which  a  health 
was  given,  the  drinking  of  which  by  the  rest  of  the  company  formed  a  carouse.  Bar- 
naby  Rich  is  exceedingly  angry  with  the  inventor  of  the  custom,  which,  however,  with 
a  laudable  zeal  for  the  honour  of  his  country,  he  attributes  to  an  Englishman,  who,  it 
seems,  '  had  his  brains  beat  out  with  a  pottlepot '  for  his  ingenuity.  There  could  be  no 
rouse  or  carouse  unless  the  glasses  were  emptied.  In  process  of  time  both  these  words 
were  used  in  a  laxer  sense.  [See  Ham.  I,  ii,  127  ;  I,  iv,  8.]  Booth  :  Don't  be  drunk, 
but  silly, — absurdly  polite. 

85.  Souldier]  Steevens  :  If  Montano  was  Othello's  predecessor  in  the  government 
of  Cyprus  (as  we  are  told  in  the  Dramatis  Personre),  he  is  not  very  characteristically 
employed  in  the  present  scene,  where  he  is  tippling  with  people  already  flustered,  and 
encouraging  a  subaltern  officer,  who  commands  a  midnight  guard,  to  drink  to  excess. 

87,  &c.  Halliwell  :  This  song  appears  to  be  referred  to  in  The  Knave  in  Grain 
neiv  Vampt,  1640:  '  Fub.  The  drawers  have  drawne  him  out,  sir. — Lod.  Clinke, 
boyes. —  Toma.  Drinke,  boys. — Stult.  And  let  the  cannikin  clinke,  boyes.'  The  song 
itself  does  not  appear  to  have  been  discovered.  [This  allusion  I  cannot  find  in  In^ie- 
Dy's  Centurie  of  Pray se. — Ed.] 


act  ii,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF    VENICE  131 

Iago.     Why,  he  drinkes  you  with  facillitie,  your  Dane 
dead  drunke.     He   fvveates  not  to  ouerthrow  your  Al-         100 
maine.     He  giues  your  Hollander  a  vomit,  ere  the  next 
Pottle  can  be  fill'd. 

Caf.     To  the  health  of  our  Generall. 

M011.     I  am  for  it  Lieutenant  :  and  He  do  you  Iuflice. 

Iago.     Oh  fweet  England.  105 

King  Stephen  was  and-a  worthy  Peere, 

100.  fweates~\  f weaves  F2F .  /wears  dash  after  England,  and  with  king... peere 
F  ,  Rowe.  in  Roman)  Qx. 

104.  lie']  I  will  Qq,  Jen.  106.  and-a]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.    and 

105,106.  Oh. ..Peere]  One  line  (with         a  Q2Q3.    an  a  Theob.  Warb.  Johns,    a  Qx 

et  cet. 

97.  Englishmen]  Steevens  :  This  accomplishment  in  the  English  is  likewise  men- 
tioned in  B.  and  F.'s  The  Captain  [III,  ii,  p.  267,  ed.  Dyce]  :  *  Lod.  Are  the  English- 
men Such  stubborn  drinkers  ?  Piso.  Not  a  leak  at  sea  Can  suck  more  liquor ;  you  shall 
have  their  children  Christen'd  in  mull'd  sack,  and,  at  five  years  old,  Able  to  knock  a 
Dane  down.'  Singer  (ed.  ii) :  Peacham,  in  his  Compleat  Gentleman,  \d2.i,  p.  193, 
has  a  section  entitled,  '  Drinking  the  Plague  of  our  English  Gentry,'  in  which  he  says, 
' Within  these  fiftie  or  threescore  yeares  it  was  a  rare  thing  with  us  to  see  a  drunken 
man,  our  nation  carrying  the  name  of  the  most  sober  and  temperate  of  any  other  in  the 
world.  But  since  we  had  to  doe  in  the  quarrell  of  the  Netherlands  ....  the  custom 
of  drinking  and  pledging  healthes  was  brought  over  into  England ;  wherein  let  the 
Dutch  be  their  owne  judges,  if  we  equall  them  not ;  yea  I  think  rather  excell  them. 

99.  you]  D'Hugues:  Comme  on  dit  en  francais :  'il  vous  boit.' 

103.  Booth  :    Iago  empties  his  own  glass  on  the  ground. 

106,  &c.  Steevens:  So  in  Greene's  Quippe for  an  Vpstart  Courtier  [1592,  vol.  xi, 
p.  234,  ed.  Grosart],  '  I  tell  thee  sawcy  skipiack,  it  was  a  good  and  blessed  time  heer 
in  England  when  K.  Stephen  wore  a  pair  of  cloth  breeches  of  a  Noble  a  paire,  and 
thought  them  passing  costlye.'  Halliwell  :  This  ballad  is  alluded  to  in  Dekker's 
Guls  Horn-book  [1609,  vol.  ii,  p.  210,  ed.  Grosart]  :  'his  breeches  were  not  so  much 
worth  as  K.  Stephen's,  that  cost  but  a  poore  noble.'  [These  two  allusions,  together 
with  the  version  in  Percy's  Reliques,  point  to  an  English  origin  of  this  song.  The 
earliest  Scotch  version  (according  to  J.  W.  E.,  N.  6°  Qu.,  1876,  5th,  v,  249,)  is  in 
Allan  Ramsay's  Tea- Table  Miscellany,  about  1728,  certainly  later  than  Percy's  MS. 
by  three-quarters  of  a  century,  if  not  more.  Chappell  {Pop.  Mus.,  ii,  505)  remarks 
that  the  'tune  to  "Take  thy  old  Cloak  about  thee"  is  evidently  formed  out  of  Green 
Sleeves?  an  additional  reason,  perhaps,  for  assuming  its  English  origin.  The  version  in 
Percy's  Folio  Manuscript,  ii,  324,  is  as  follows : 

1  King  Harry  was  a  verry  good  K[e«§r/] 

I  trow  his  hose  cost  but  a  Crowne; 
he  thought  them  I2d  ouer  to  deere, 

therfor  he  called  the  taylor  Clowne. 
he  was  King  &  wore  the  Crowne, 

&  thouse  but  of  a  low  degree ; 
itts  pride  that  putts  this  cumtrye  downe ; 

man  !    put  thye  old  Cloake  about  thee ! ' — Ed] 


132 


THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  n,  sc.  ii. 


His  Breeches  cojl  him  but  a  Crowne, 

He  held  them  Six  pence  all  to  deere. 

With  that  he  caPd  the  Tailor  Lowne : 

He  was  a  wight  of  high  Renowne, 

And  thou  art  but  of  low  degree : 

'Tis  Pride  that  pulls  the  Country  doivne, 

And  take  thy  awl'd  Cloake  about  thee. 
Some  Wine  hoa. 

Caffio.  Why  this  is  a  more  exquifite  Song  then  the  o- 
ther. 

/ago.     Will  you  heare't  againe  ? 

Caf.  No  :  for  I  hold  him  to  be  vnworthy  of  his  Place, 
that  do's  thofe  things.  Well  :  heau'ns  aboue  all  :  and 
there  be  foules  muft  be  faued,  and  there  be  foules  muft 
not  be  faued. 

/ago.     It's  true,  good  Lieutenant. 


107 


no 


115 


120 


122 


108.  them]  'em  Qq. 

all  to]  all  too  Q,F3F4  et  seq. 
no.  wight]  weight  Han. 
113.  And]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Knt. 
Then  Qq  et  cet. 

thy]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Knt. 
thine  Qq  et  cet. 

awl'd]  Ff,  Rowe.     owd  Qx.     old 
Pope,  Han.     auld  Q2Q3  et  cet. 
115.  Why\  Fore  God  Qx. 
117.  heare't~\  hear  it  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
Knt  i,  Coll. 


117.  againe"]  agen  Qq. 

118.  to  be]  Om.  Qq. 
of  his]  in  his  Jen. 

119.  things.     Well :]  things:  well,  Qt 
things  well,  Q2Q3-    things.    Well —  Rowe. 

heau'ns]  HeanerCs  Q2Q,F  F . 
God's  Qj,  Cap.  Jen.  Sta.  Glo.  Cam.  Dyce 
iii,  Huds.  Rife,  Wh.  ii. 

120.  J7iuft  be~\  that  mujl  bee  Qq,  Rowe 
ii  +  ,  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 

120,  121.  and...faued]  Om.  Qq. 
122.  It's']  It  is  Qq,  Jen.  Coll.  Del. 


106.  and-a]  Compare  '  He  that  has  and — a  little  tiny  wit,'  Lear,  III,  ii,  74,  and 
'  When  that  I  was  and — a  little  tiny  boy,'  Twelfth  N.  V,  i,  398,  where  Abbott,  §  96, 
considers  the  use  of  •  and  '  as  equivalent  to  and  that  too.  [I  doubt  if  ever  in  old  Ballad 
days  it  conveyed  any  more  meaning  than  it  does  now.  It  pieced  out  the  line,  giving 
a  swing  to  the  rhythm  and  a  charm  of  homeliness  to  the  verse  which  are  to  me  as  inde- 
scribable as  they  are  indispensable. — Ed.] 

106.  Peere]  Ritson  (p.  230) :  That  is  a  worthy  lord,  a  title  frequently  bestowed 
upon  Kings  in  our  old  romances.  So,  in  Amadis  de  Gaule,  1619  :  '  Sir,  although  you 
be  a  King  and  a  great  lord?     Spenser  constantly  uses  the  word  '  peer '  in  this  sense. 

113.  awl'd]  This,  the  solitary  indication  of  an  unusual  pronunciation,  points,  I 
imagine,  to  a  rustic  rather  than  to  a  purely  Scotch  origin,  although  Capell  seems  to 
assume  that  the  whole  ballad  is  Scottish.  Speaking  of  the  line  in  which  this  word 
occurs,  Capell,  in  one  of  his  characteristic  notes,  says  that  the  usual  version,  'something 
unscotifies  it  to  it's  injury:  (a)  in  "take"  and  what  is  call'd  the  diphthong  in  "  auld" 
should  have  the  Scottish  twang  with  them,  namely — our  [ah)  sounded  broader;  and  to 
make  out  the  line's  Iambi,  the  first  syllable  of  "  about "  must  have  a  small  thesis,  and 
"thee"  a  full  one.'— Ed. 


act  ii,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  133 

Caf.     For  mine  owne  part,  no  offence  to  the  Generally         123 
nor  any  man  of  qualitie  :  I  hope  to  be  faued. 

Iago.     And  fo  do  I  too  Lieutenant.  125 

Cafjlo.  I  :  (but  by  your  leaue)  not  before  me.  The 
Lieutenant  is  to  be  faued  before  the  Ancient.  Let's  haue 
no  more  of  this  :  let's  to  our  Affaires.  Forgiue  vs  our 
finnes  :  Gentlemen  let's  looke  to  our  bufmeffe.  Do  not 
thinke  Gentlemen,  I  am  drunke  :  this  is  my  Ancient,  this  130 
is  my  right  hand,  and  this  is  my  left.  I  am  not  drunke 
now  :  I  can  ftand  well  enough,  and  I  fpeake  well  enough. 

Gent.     Excellent  well. 

Caf.     Why  very  well  then  :  you  muft  not  thinke  then, 
that  I  am  drunke.  Exit.         135 

Monta.     To  th'Platforme  (Mafters)  come,  let's  fet  the 
Watch.  137 

125.  too]  Om.  Qq.  '85,  Knt,  Sta.    fpeake  Qq  et  cet. 

126.  I:]  Ay,  Rowe  et  seq.    Ay;  Coll.  133.  Gent.]  All.  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  et  seq. 
(but]  but,  Theob.  134.  Why]  Om.  Qx. 

127.  haue]  ha  Qq.  thinke  then]  thinke  Qx. 

128.  Forgiue]  God  forgiue  Qx,  J en.  Del.  Scene  XI.  Pope,  Theob.  Warb.    Scene 
vs  our]  our  FF,  Rowe  +  .  XII.  Han.  Johns.  Jen. 

131.  this  is]  this  Qr  136.  Platforme]ptotformeQJQ3.    plet- 
left]  left  hand Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.         forme  Q.    plat-form  Cap. 

Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Del.  Mafters]  maiflers  Qx. 

132.  I  fpeake]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Steev.  fet]  fee  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

126.  '  The  habit  which  he  [Kean]  had  acquired  in  early  life,  and  which  led  to  such 
important  results,  viz. :  that  of  closely  observing  the  expression  of  the  human  face 
whenever  he  had  the  opportunity,  continued  with  him  to  the  last.  It  was  in  a  room  at 
the  Castle  one  night  that  he  was  asked  by  a  friend  when  he  studied  ?  Indicating  a 
man  on  the  other  side  of  the  room,  who  was  very  much  intoxicated,  but  who  was 
labouring  to  keep  up  an  appearance  of  sobriety,  he  replied,  "  I  am  studying  now.  I 
wish  L-ome  of  my  Cassios  were  here.  They  might  see  that,  instead  of  rolling  about  in 
the  ridiculous  manner  they  do,  the  great  secret  of  delineating  intoxication  is  the  en- 
deavour to  stand  straight  when  it  is  impossible  to  do  so.  The  only  man  who  ever 
played  the  drunken  scene  in  Othello  properly  was  Holland." ' — Hawkins's  Life  of 
Kean,  vol.  ii,  p.  360. 

129.  sinnes]  Booth  :  The  traditional  'business,'  said  to  be  Charles  Kemble's,  can- 
not be  improved  upon.  Cassio  drops  his  handkerchief,  and  in  his  effort  to  recover  it, 
falls  on  his  knees ;  to  account  for  this  position  to  his  companions,  he  attempts  to  pray. 
His  clothes  being  awry,  his  sword  has  slipped  to  his  right  side,  and  this  confuses  him 
for  a  moment  as  to  which  is  his  right  or  his  left  hand.  Whatever  you  do  here,  do  t 
delicately  and  with  great  seriousness,  and  show  a  readiness  to  fight  any  one  who  thints 
you're  drunk.  The  more  dignified  your  manner,  the  more  absurd  and  yet  correct  your 
performance  will  be. 

131.  right  .  .  .  left]  Purnell:  A  British  soldier  is  not  considered  drunk  if  he 
can  go  through  his  facirgs. 


l34 


THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [ACT  II,  SC.  ii. 


Iago,     You  fee  this  Fellow,  that  is  gone  before, 
He  's  a  Souldier,  fit  to  ftand  by  C&'far, 
And  giue  direction.     And  do  but  fee  his  vice, 
'Tis  to  his  vertue,  a  iuft  Equinox, 
The  one  as  long  as  th'other.    'Tis  pittie  of  him  : 
I  feare  the  truft  OtJicllo  puts  him  in, 
On  fome  odde  time  of  his  infirmitie 
Will  (hake  this  Ifland. 

Mont.     But  is  he  often  thus  ? 

Iago.     ?Tis  euermore  his  prologue  to  his  fleepe, 
He'le  watch  the  Horologe  a  double  Set, 
If  Drinke  rocke  not  his  Cradle. 

Mont.     It  were  well 
The  Generall  were  put  in  mind  of  it  : 
Perhaps  he  fees  it  not,  or  his  good  nature 


'38 

140 
[320  aj 

145 


150 
152 


139.  He's]  He  is  Qq,  Ff  et  cet. 
141.  vertue]  Virtues  F  F4,  Rowe  +  . 
143.  puts]  put  Qq. 

kim   in~\    in   him  Cap.  Coll.  iii, 
Huds. 

147.  his  prologue]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.    the 


Prologue  Qq  et  cet. 

148.  Horologe]  Horolodge  Q,Q2-    Hwo- 
logue  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap. 

150,  151.  One  line,  Qq. 

150.  It  were]  7wereQz.    T'wereQ2Q  . 

151.  were]  wete  Qx. 


136.  Booth  :  Montano  enters  here,  in  time  to  witness  Cassio's  conduct  as  he  goes 
off.  D'Hugues  :  On  a  juge  avec  raison  qu'une  pareille  exhibition  de  crapule  n'etait 
pas  absolument  necessaire  a  la  marche  ni  a  l'intelligence  du  drame,  et  que  Shakespeare 
aurait  aussi  bien  fait  de  supprimer  toute  cette  scene. 

140.  direction]  Hudson  :  How  differently  the  liar  speaks  of  Cassio's  soldiership 
to  Montano  and  to  Roderigo !  He  is  now  talking  where  he  is  liable  to  be  called  to 
account  for  his  words. 

141.  Equinox]  Rolfe:  Equal,  counterpart;  the  only  instance  of  the  word  in 
Shakespeare. 

143.  puts  him  in]  Dyce  (ed.  iii)  quotes  Lettsom's  approval  of  Capell's  emen- 
dation :  puts  in  him.  [I  think  that  change  is  needless  and  the  Folio  is  right.  The 
*  trust '  that  Othello  put  Cassio  in  was  that  of  being  Othello's  '  own  second,'  referred  to 
in  line  159. — Ed.] 

148.  Horologe]  Johnson  :  If  he  have  no  drink,  he'll  keep  awake  while  the  clock 
strikes  two  rounds,  or  four  and  twenty  hours.  Halliwell  quotes  a  description  by 
Admiral  Smyth  of  an  ancient  clock,  wherein  the  dial  is  described  as  'divided  into  24 
hours,  in  two  portions  of  12  each,  as  was  customary  on  the  clockfaces  of  those  days.' 
[This  starts  the  question  whether  a  'double  set'  is  twice  twelve  or  twice  twenty-four; 
Halpin  [Dram.  Unities,  p.  18)  affirms  that  as  'the  Italian  horologe  numbers  upon  its 
dial-plate  twenty-four  hours,  a  "double  set  "  or  round,  i.  e.  forty-eight  hours,  is  the  true 
time  meant.'  It  is,  however,  of  small  moment  here ;  Iago  is  not  to  be  taken  literally 
as  to  the  very  hours  and  minutes  of  Cassio's  watchfulness.  To  Halpin  the  term  is 
im]*)rtant ;  on  it  he  bases  his  theory  as  to  the  limit  of  a  dramatic  action. — Ed.] 


ACT  I",  sc.  ii.J 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


Prizes  the  vertue  that  appeares  in  CaJJio, 
And  lookes  not  on  his  euills  :  is  not  this  true  t 

Enter  Rodorigo. 

lago.     How  now  Rodorigo  ? 
I  pray  you  after  the  Lieutenant,  go. 

Mon.     And  'tis  great  pitty,  that  the  Noble  Moore 
Should  hazard  fuch  a  Place,  as  his  owne  Second 
With  one  of  an  ingraft  Infirmitie, 
It  were  an  honeft  A6lion,  to  fay  fo 
To  the  Moore. 

Iago,     Not  I,  for  this  faire  Ifland, 
1  do  loue  Caffio  well  :  and  would  do  much 
To  cure  him  of  this  euill,  But  hearke,  what  noife? 
Enter  Caffio  purfuing  Rodorigo, 

Caf,     You  Rogue  :  you  Rafcall. 


135 
153 

155 


160 


105 

167 


153.  Prizes']  Praifes  Qq. 
vertue]  vertues  Qx. 

154.  lookes]  looke  Qx. 

156,  157.  [Aside.  Cap.  Mai.  et  seq. 

157.  [Aside.  Wh.  i. 

[Exit  Rod.  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq.  push- 
ing him  out.  Cap. 

160.  of  an]  Om.  Ff. 

161.  162.  One  line,  Qq.  Two  lines,  the 
first  ending  fay,  Mai.  et  seq.  (except  Knt, 
Sta.). 

162.  To]  Unto  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Steev.'85. 


162.  Moore]  Moor,  lago  Anon.  (ap. 
Cam.) 

163.  Not]  NorQt. 

164.  [Helpe,  helpe,  within  {Italics,  in 
the  margin)  Qq,  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt. 
Within,  or,  A  cry  within,  or,  A  cry  with- 
out, help  !  help  !  Theob.  et  cet. 

165.  But]  Om.  Pope  +  . 

166.  Enter...]  Enter  Caffio,  driuing  in 
Roderigo.  Qq.     Re-enter...  Pope. 

167.  You  Rogue]  Zouns,  you  rogue  QT, 
Jen.  Cam. 


160.  ingraft]  Johnson:  An  infirmity  rooted,  settled  in  his  constitution.  Henley: 
This  explanation  seems  to  fall  short  of  the  poet's  meaning.  The  qualities  of  a  tree  are 
so  changed  by  being  engrafted,  that  its  future  fruits  are  not  such  as  would  have  natu- 
rally sprung  from  the  stock,  but  derive  their  qualities  from  the  graft  inserted  in  it. 
Conformably  to  this  idea  is  the  assertion  of  Hamlet  concerning  the  same  vice  of  his 
countrymen.  Malone:  Johnson's  explanation  is  certainly  just.  So  in  Lear,  I,  i,  295  ; 
'  the  imperfections  of  long-engrafted  condition.'  See  Abbott,  §  342,  for  other  instances 
of  tie  omission  of  the  participial  -ed  after  t.  Booth  :  This  is  not  the  language  of  one 
who  had  taken  part  in  the  carouse. 

161.  Action]  Walker  ( Vers.  230)  cites  this  as  an  instance  in  the  middle  of  the 
line  of  the  old  dissyllabic  pronunciation  of  -Hon,  so  very  common  at  the  end  of  a  line. 

161-236.  My  copy  of  Q2  is  imperfect  and  lacks  the  page  containing  these  lines.  For 
all  references  to  that  Qto  within  these  limits  I  am  indebted  to  the  Cambridge  Edition, 
which  we  can  all  trust  as  implicitly  as  anything  can  be  trusted  which  bears  the  com- 
mon stamp  of  human  imperfection. — Ed. 

164.  Dyce  justifies  the  stage  direction  here  of  the  Qq,  because  lago,  line  252,  says, 
'  There  comes  a  fellow,  crving  out  for  helpe,  And  Cassio  following  him,'  &c. 


136 


THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  II,  SC.  ii 


Mon.     What's  the  matter  Lieutenant?  168 

Caf.     A  Knaue  teach  me  my  dutie  ?     He  beate  the 
Knaue  into  a  Twiggen-Bottle.  170 

Rod.     Beate  me  ? 

Caf     Doft  thou  prate,  Rogue  ? 

Mon.     Nay,  good  Lieutenant  : 
I  pray  you  Sir,  hold  your  hand. 

CaJJlo.     Let  me  go(Sir)  17^ 

Or  He  knocke  you  o're  the  Mazard. 

Mon.     Come,  come  :  you're  drunke. 

CaJJlo.     Drunke  ? 

Iago.     Away  I  fay  :  go  out  and  cry  a  Mutinie. 
Nay  good  Lieutenant.     Alas  Gentlemen:  180 

Helpe  hoa.     Lieutenant.     Sir  Montano  : 
Helpe  Matters.     Heere's  a  goodly  Watch  indeed.  182 


1 69.  1 70.  Prose,  Qq,  Pope  + ,  Jen.  Cam. 
Dividing  the  lines  at  duty  !  Cap.  et  cet. 

169.  Knaue... dutie ?]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han.  Knaue,. ..duty .'Qq.  Knave. .. duty ! 
Theob. -f,  Jen.  Sta.  Glo.  Cam.  Knave,... 
duty  !  Cap.  Knave  to  teach . . .  duty  /  Dyce 
Hi.     Knave.  ...duty  !  Steev.  et  cet. 

Ile~\  but  Tie  Qq,  Jen.  Cam. 

1 70.  Twiggen-Bottle]  wicker  bottle  Qq, 
Cap.  Jen.  Coll.  Cam. 

171.  me?~\  Qq,  Jen.  me.  Ff.  me — 
Rowe  + .     me  !  Cap.  et  cet. 

172.  [Beats  Rod.  Cap.  et  seq. 

173.  174.  Prose,  Qq,  Jen.  Cam. 

173.  Nay]  Om.  Qq. 

[Staying  him.  Rowe  et  seq. 

174.  L pray  you]  pray  Qq. 


1 75> 1 76.  Prose,  Qq,  Rowe  + ,  Jen.  Cam. 

176.  knocke]  know  Ff,  Rowe. 
dre]  on  Q  . 

177.  you're]  you  are  Qq,  Jen. 

178.  [they  fight.  Qq. 

179.  [Aside.  Cap.  et  seq. 

[A  bell  rung.  Qf.     Exit  Rod.  Qa 

180.  Alas]  godfzvill  Qx.  God's-wilt 
Q2Q3,  Cam.  Del. 

181.  Sir  Montano:]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 
Sing.  Sir  Montanio,y?r,  Qx.  Sir,  Mon- 
tanio,y£r  Q2Q3-  — Sir,  Montano —  Pope, 
Han.  — Sir — Montano — Theob. +  .  Sir, 
— Montano, — Sir —  Cap.  et  cet. 

182.  Majlers]  majler  Qr 

[A  bell  rings.  Q2Q3,  Rowe  et  suA 


168.  Booth:  Montano  holds  Cassio. 

170.  Twiggen-bottle]  Booth:  That  is,  slash  him  till  he  resembles  a  'Chianti' 
bottle  covered  with  straw  net-work ;  such  a  bottle  as  he  has  been  drinking  from,  per- 
haps, is  in  his  mind.     I  have  such  a  bottle  used, — when  I  can  get  one. 

178.  Booth  :  Here  they  fight,  and  Cassio  should  utter  incoherent  sounds  as  though 
'high  in  oath,'  as  Iago,  line  261,  states  that  he  was.  I  think  Shakespeare  intended 
Cassio  to  '  cuss  '  a  little.  Montano  should  not  thrust,  but  merely  defend,  himself.  For 
the  same  reason,  to  make  his  subsequent  account  of  the  fray  correct,  Iago  should  dis- 
appear with  Roderigo  at  the  word  '  mutinie,'  and  before  they  return,  almost  immedi- 
ately, let  them  both  shout  'Mutiny!   Mutiny!'  behind  the  scenes. 

181.  Sir  Montano]  KNIGHT:  Iago  is  pretending  to  separate  the  lieutenant  and 
Montano,  but  he  is  not  familiar  with  Montano,  the  ex-governor,  and  he  gives  him  a 
title  cf  courtesy. 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


Who's  that  which  rings  the  Bell:  Diablo,  hoa: 
The  Towne  will  rife.     Fie,  fie  Lieutenant, 
You'le  be  afham'd  for  euer. 


137 
183 

185 


Enter  Othello ',  and  Atte?tdants. 

Othe.     What  is  the  matter  heere? 

Mon.     I  bleed  (till,  I  am  hurt  to  th'death. 


He  dies. 


188 


183.  that  which"]  that  that  Qq,  Cap.  Jen. 
Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Cam. 
Ktly.     that  who  Pope  + . 

Bell:  Diablo,  hoa  :]  bell?  Diablo 
— ho,  Qq. 

184.  Fie,  fie  Lieutenant]  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han.  Sing,  fie,  fie  Leiutenant,  hold 
Q2Q3,  Theob.Warb.  Johns.  Jen.  Knt.  godf- 
will  Leiutenant,  hold  Qx  et  cet. 

185.  You'le]  Ff,  Knt.  you  will  Qq  et 
cet. 

afiiam'd]  F3F4,  Knt.  Jham'd  Qq 
Fa  et  cet. 

186.  Enter...]  Enter  Othello,  and  Gen- 
tlemen with  weapons.  Qq. 


Scene  XII.  Pope,  Warb.  Scene  XIII. 
Han.  Johns.  Jen. 

187.  What  is]  what's  Q2Q3- 

188.  I  bleed]  Ff,  Q2Q3,  Rowe+,  Cap. 
Jen.  Steev.  Knt.  Zouns,  I  bleed  Qx,  Mai. 
et  cet. 

hurt]  hurt,  Qx.  hurt,  but  not  Ff, 
Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

He  dies.]  — he  dies.  Cap.  Steev. 
Del.  He  dies— Knt.  Om.Ql,Ff,Rowe+, 
Jen.  Mai.  Var.  Sing,  Dyce  i.  [he  faints. 
(As  Stage  direction)  Q2Q3,  Coll.  Wh.  Glo. 
Sta.  Cam.  Ktly,  Dyce  iii,  Huds.  Rife.  [He 
is  supported  (As  Stage  direction)  Coll.  iii. 
[assailing  Cassio  again.  Cap. 


183.  Diablo]  Collier  :  An  exclamation  employed  by  other  dramatists.  M.  Mason 
observes  that  •  it  is  a  mere  contraction  of  Diavolo,  the  Italian  word  for  the  devil.'  Why 
should  we  go  to  a  contraction  of  the  Italian,  when  '  Diablo '  is  the  ordinary  Spanish 
word? 

184.  Fie,  fie]  In  comparison  with  the  vehement  God's  will  of  the  Qq,  this  •  fie,  fie' 
does  sound  weak ;  but  is  Iago  in  earnest  ?  does  he  wish  to  be  vehement  ?  does  he  really 
want  Cassio  to  hold  ?  Between  his  desire  to  tarre  Cassio  on  and  yet  to  seem  to  hold 
him  back,  this  half-hearted  '  fie '  seems  to  me  a  not  unbefitting  exclamation  — Ed. 

185.  Dyce  pronounces  this  line,  as  compared  with  the  Qq,  'most  ridiculous.'  It 
does  not  make  me  laugh.  Indeed,  to  me,  it  is  as  much  better  than  the  Qq  as  an  ap- 
peal to  a  man's  own  self-respect  is  higher  than  an  appeal  to  the  opinion  the  world  may 
have  of  him.     Unfortunately,  we  must  not  forget  that  it  is  Iago  who  utters  it. — Ed. 

188.  He  dies]  Malone  :  The  editor  of  the  Folio,  thinking  it  necessary  to  omit  the 
first  word  of  the  line,  absurdly  supplied  its  place  by  adding  these  words  at  the  end  of 
the  line.  Tollet  :  Montano  thinks  he  is  mortally  wounded,  yet  by  these  words  he 
seems  determined  to  continue  the  duel  and  to  kill  his  antagonist,  Cassio.  So,  when 
Roderigo  runs  at  Cassio  in  Act  V,  he  says  :  '  Villain,  thou  diest.'  Steevens  :  That  is, 
he  shall  die.  He  may  be  supposed  to  say  this  as  he  is  offering  to  renew  the  fight.  Thus, 
Othello  in  his  very  next  speech  :  '  he  dies  upon  his  motion.'  I  do  not  therefore  regard 
these  words,  when  uttered  by  Montano,  as  an  absurd  addition  in  F  .  Knight  and 
Delius  give  the  same  explanation  as  Toilet's.  Collier  :  These  words  are,  in  fact, 
nothing  more  than  a  printer's  blunder,  which  F2  corrects  by  making  Montano  say,  '  I 
am  hurt,  but  not  to  the  death.'  The  true  stage  direction,  for  which  '  He  dies '  was,  no 
doubt,  intended,  is  found  in  Q2,  «  He  faints.'  [It  is  not  easy  here  to  decide  between 
the  rival  rlaims.     As  stage  directions  there  are  objections  both  to  '  He  dies '  and  '  He 


I3» 


THE   TRAGED1E   OF  OTHELLO       [act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


OtJie.     Hold  for  your  liues. 

lag.     Hold  hoa  :  Lieutenant,  Sir  Montano,  Gentlemen  :         190 
Ilaue  you  forgot  all  place  of  fenfe  and  dutie? 
Hold.     The  Generall  fpeaks  to  you  :  hold  for  fhame. 

Oth.     Why  how  now  hoa  ?  From  whence  arifeth  thisf 
.Are  we  turn'd  Turkes  ?  and  to  our  felues  do  that 
Which  Heauen  hath  forbid  the  Ottamittcs.  195 

For  Clinician  fhame,  put  by  this  barbarous  Brawle : 
He  that  ftirs  next,  to  carue  for  his  owne  rage, 
Holds  his  foule  light  .•  He  dies  vpon  his  Motion. 
Silence  that  dreadfull  Bell,  it  frights  the  Ifle,  199 


190.  Hold  hoa  :]Y^V  Hold,  h old 'QTQa, 
Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Holp,  hold 
Q3.     Hold  ho :  F4,  Rowe  et  cet. 

Sir  Montano,]  F2F  ,  Jen.  Knt, 
Sing.  Wh.  i.  fir  Montanio,  Qq.  Sir  Mon- 
tane, F  .  Sir,  Montano  Mai.  Steev.  Var. 
Coll.  Ktly.    Sir — Montano —  Rowe  et  cet. 

191.  place  offenfe]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Theob.  Steev.'85.  sense  of  place  Han.  et 
cet. 

192.  Hold.]  Om.  Pope-f .    Hold,  hold  I 


Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Ktly 
Closing  line  191,  Huds. 

192.  hold  for"]  hold,  hold,  for  Qq, 
Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Glo.  Cam.  Huds.  Rife,  Wh. 
ii.    for  Wh.  i. 

193.  arifeth]  arifes  Qq. 
195.  hath]  has  Qq. 

Ottamittes]  Ottamites  QqF4.  Otto- 
mites  Q'95  et  seq. 

197.  for  his]  forth  his  Qlt  Jen.  Steev. 
'85,  Mai.  Var. 


faints.'  Assuredly  Montano  does  not  die;  and  it  is  difficult  to  see  with  what  propriety 
a  man  who  had  fainted  could  be  adjured  to  stop  fighting,  both  by  Othello  and  Iago.  If 
these  words  be  not  a  stage  direction,  but  a  part  of  the  text,  there  is  to  Toilet's  interpre- 
tation this  objection,  viz. :  that  Montano  was  acting  throughout  in  self-defence,  as  he 
himself  tells  Othello,  line  227,  which  he  would  have  scarcely  piesumed  to  assert  had 
he  renewed  the  attack  with  such  bitterness  before  Othello's  very  eyes.  This  is  one  of 
the  passages,  I  think,  where  it  will  not  do  to  inquire  too  closely.  The  dramatic  action 
demands  a  barbarous  brawl,  in  which  Montano  shall  be  worsted,  and  latitude  is  given 
to  the  actors  to  portray  the  extent  of  his  discomfiture.  I  am  not  sure  that  Cowden- 
Clarke's  course  of  omitting  the  words  altogether  be  not  the  wisest. — Ed.] 

196.  barbarous  Brawle]  Wordsworth  (Sh.'s  Knowl.  and  Use  of  the  Bible, 
p.  225) :  This  line  is  one  of  those  which  make  it  difficult  to  believe  that  Shakespeare 
had  altogether  forgotten  his  schoolboy  classics.  Surely,  when  he  wrote  it  he  was  think- 
ing of  Horace  [Lib.  I,  Ode  xxvii]  :  '  Natis  in  usum  lsetitiae  scyphis  Pugnare  Thracum 
est;  tollite  barbarum  Morem,  verecundumque  Bacchum  Sanguineis  prohibite  rixis.' 
Fechter  :  Othello  speaks  with  passion. 

197.  carue  for]  Steevens  :  That  is,  supply  food  or  gratification  for  his  own  anger. 
So  in  Ham.  I,  iii,  20 :  'he  may  not  ....  Carve  for  himself.'  Schmidt :  To  indulge, 
to  act  at  a  person's  pleasure. 

198.  Booth  :  Iago  should  go  to  assist  Cassio,  hoping  that  he  is  hurt.  The  Gentle- 
men enter  in  time  to  care  for  Montano,  whom  they  place  on  the  seat  where  Desdemona 
sat. 

199.  dreadful  bell]  Walker  {Crit.  ii,  78)  cites  this  as  an  instance  of  the  use  ol 
'  dreadful '  in  an  active  sense,  as  in  Ham.  I,  ii,  207  :  '  This  to  me  In  dreadful  secrecy 


act  ii,  sc  fi.]  THE  MOORE  OF   VEMCE  139 

From  her  propriety.     What  is  the  matter,  Matters  ?  200 

Honeft  Iiigo,  that  lookes  dead  with  greeuing, 

Speake  :  who  began  this  ?    On  thy  loue  I  charge  thee  ? 

Iago,     I  do  not  know  :  Friends  all,  but  now,  euen  now. 
In  Quarter,  and  in  termes  like  Bride,  and  Groome  204 

200.  What  is]  what's  Qq,  Jen.  et  cet. 

Majlers]  Om.  Pope  +  .  202.  this?]  this,  Qq. 

201.  lookes]  QqFa.     looks  FF,  Rowe,  203.  not]  not  not  F2. 

Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns,    loo&st  Han.  all,]  all  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  et  seq. 

impart  they  did.'  Malone  :  When  David  Rizzio  was  murdered  in  Edinburgh,  the 
Provost  ordered  the  common  bell  to  be  rung,  and  five  hundred  persons  were  immedi- 
ately assembled.  So  in  Peacham's  Valley  of  Varietie,  where  he  is  speaking  of  the  use 
of  bells,  '  they  call  for  helpe  when  houses  in  cities  and  townes  are  on  fire ;  or  when 
there  is  any  mutinie  or  uproare.'  Halliwell  :  At  the  poet's  native  town,  Stratford- 
on-Avon,  it  has  been  the  practice  from  time  immemorial  to  ring  the  bell  of  the  Guild 
chapel  on  the  alarm  of  fire  being  given.  Alger  [Life  of  Forrest,  i,  308) :  From  the 
general  group  he  [Forrest  as  Othello]  turned  to  a  single  attendant  who  stood  at  his 
elbow,  and  delivered  the  command  in  a  subdued  tone,  as  though  it  were  not  intended 
for  the  ear  of  the  multitude.  Ottley  (Fee/tier's  Version,  &c,  p.  1 9) :  This  command 
Fechter  almost  screams  in  passion,  rushing  up  the  stage  the  while.  Kean  gave  it  calmly 
and  authoritatively,  as  a  thing  of  course,  and  '  more  in  sorrow  than  in  anger.' 

200.  propriety]  Johnson  :  From  her  regular  and  proper  state. 

201.  lookes]  An  instance  (cited  by  Walker,  CW/.  ii,  132)  of  s  substituted  for  st  in 
the  second  person  singular  of  the  verb.  Compare  IV,  ii,  207  ;  V,  ii,  79 ;  and  two  other 
striking  instances :  Ham.  I,  iv,  53  :  '  That  thou  ....  Revisits  thus  the  glimpses,'  &c., 
and  Lear,  IV,  vi,  160:  'Thou  hotly  lusts  to  use  her,'  &c.  I  think  this  usage  should 
be  observed  in  even  modern  editions,  when  to  give  the  full  grammatical  form  would 
result  in  harshness. — Ed. 

204.  Quarter]  Johnson  :  In  their  quarters ;  at  their  lodging.  Malone  :  That  is, 
on  our  station.  So  in  Timon,  V,  iv,  60 :  *  not  a  man  Shall  pass  his  quarter.'  Their 
station  or  '  quarter  '  in  the  present  instance  was  the  guardroom  in  Othello's  castle.  It 
cannot  mean  lodgings,  for  Montano  and  the  Gentlemen  had  continued,  from  the  time 
of  their  entrance,  in  the  apartment  of  Othello's  castle,  in  which  the  carousal  had  been ; 
and  Cassio  had  only  gone  forth  for  a  short  time  to  set  the  watch.  On  his  return  from 
the  platform  to  the  apartment  he  meets  Roderigo,  and  the  scuffle  ensues.  Ritson  (p. 
230) :  Rather,  at  peace,  quiet,  or,  as  Johnson  elsewhere  explains  it,  'in  friendship,  amity, 
concord.'  They  had  been  on  that  very  spot  (the  court  or  platform  before  the  castle) 
ever  since  Othello  left  them,  which  can  scarcely  be  called  be  ng  in  their  quarters  or  at 
their  lodging.  And,  indeed,  they  could  not  have  left  it  without  being  guilty  of  another 
offence,  as  they  were  directed  by  Othello  to  keep  the  watch.  Henley  denies  that  the 
phrase  ever  meant  in  quiet,  at  peace  ;  it  is  evident,  he  says,  that  the  'quarter'  referred  to 
was  that  apartment  of  the  castle  assigned  to  the  officers  on  guard,  where  Othello,  after 
giving  Cassio  his  orders,  had,  a  little  before,  left  him ;  and  where  Iago,  with  his  com- 
panions, immediately  found  him.  Pye  (p.  331) :  This  word,  in  the  military  language 
of  the  present  day  at  least,  seems  to  have  no  very  precise  meaning ;  but  the  meaning 
on  our  station  seems  the  leading  signification,  for  the  principal  camp-guard  of  a  regi- 
ment is  called  the  quarter  guard ;  but  a  regiment  in  quarters  has  no  such  guard. 


l40  THE   TR  AG  ED  IE   OF  OTHELLO       [ACT.  II.  SC  ii. 

Deuefting  them  for  Bed  :  and  then,  but  now :  205 

(As  if  fome  Planet  had  vnwitted  men) 

Swords  out,  ?nd  tilting  one  at  others  breaft.es,  [320  b~\ 

In  oppofition  bloody.     I  cannot  fpeake 

Any  begining  to  this  peeuifh  oddes. 

And  would,  in  Action  glorious,  I  had  loft  210 

Thofe  legges,  that  brought  me  to  a  part  of  it. 

Othe.     How  comes  it(Michaell)you  are  thus  forgot? 

Caf.     I  pray  you  pardon  me,  I  cannot  fpeake. 

Othe,     Worthy  Montano,  you  were  wont  to  be  ciuill : 
The  grauitie,  and  ftillneffe  of  your  youth  215 

The  world  hath  noted.     And  your  name  is  great 
In  mouthes  of  wifeft  Cenfure.     What's  the  matter 
That  you  vnlace  your  reputation  thus, 
And  fpend  your  rich  opinion,  for  the  name 
Of  a  night-brawler?     Giue  me  anfwer  to  it.  220 

Man.     Worthy  Othello,  I  am  hurt  to  danger, 

205.  DeueJling\DigeJlingQ:<X.  Di-  211.  Thofe']  Tkefe  Qx,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 
vejling  Q.'8l,  Rowe  ii  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Coll.         Mai.  Sing.  Ktly. 

Wh.  i.  212.  comes]  came  Qq,  Jen.  Coll.  Wh.  i, 

for  Bed:]  to  bed,  Qq,  Cap.  Hal.  Del. 

then,]  Om.  Q  .  are]  were  Qq,  Jen.  Coll.  Wh.  i, 

206.  men]  them  Coll.  (MS).  Hal. 

207.  Swords]  SwordY '  F ' ,  Rowe,  Pope.  214.  wont  to  be]  Ff,  Rowe,  Warb.  Knt. 
breafies]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.         wont  be  Qq  et  cet. 

Han.  Warb.    brefi  Q.    breaft  QXQ2  et  cet.  21 7.  mouthes]  men  Qx. 

208.  cannot]  can't  Pope 4- .  220.  to  it]  to' I  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Sta. 

209.  oddes]  Staunton  :  Headstrong  or  perverse  quarrel. 

212.  are  thus  forgot]  See  Abbott,  §295,  for  other  instances  of  the  use  of  to  be 
with  intransitive  verbs.  Thus,  '  I  am  declined,'  III,  hi,  309.  In  Booth's  Acting 
Copy,  'you'  is  italicized.  Cassio  has  staggered  towards  R.  H.  and  rests  against  a  col- 
umn of  the  Castle. 

213.  Fechter's  Acting  Copy  :  'I  pray  you  pardon  me  (Cassio  speaks  thickly,  steps 
short,  and  then,  in  deep  humiliation}  I  cannot  speak  ! — ' 

214.  wont  to  be]  Abbott,  §349,  following  indirectly  the  text  of  the  Qq,  wont  be, 
cites  it  as  an  instance  of  the  omission  of  to  of  the  infinitive,  which,  of  course,  it  may 
be ;  but  the  presence  of  *  to '  in  the  Ff  shows  that  in  the  Qq  it  may  be  merely  an  in- 
stance of  the  absorption  of  the  to  in  the  /  final  of  'wont.' — Ed. 

215-217.  Booth  :  Could  it  be  possible,  after  this,  to  suppose  that  Montano  was  one 
of  the  '  flock  of  drunkards '  ? 

218.  vnlace]  Johnson:  Slacken,  or  loosen.  Put  in  danger  of  dropping;  or  per- 
haps strip  off  its  ornaments. 

219.  spend]  Johnson  :  Throw  away  and  squander  a  reputation  so  valuable  as  yours. 
221.  Booth  :  Montano  is  still  seated,  supported  by  gentlemen,  one  of  whom  staunchas 

the  wound. 


act  ii,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  141 

Your  Officer  Iago,  can  informe  you,  222 

While  I  fpare  fpeech  which  fomething  now  offends  me. 

Of  all  that  I  do  know,  nor  know  I  ought 

By  me,  that's  faid,  or  done  amiffe  this  night,  225 

Vnleffe  felfe-charitie  be  fometimes  a  vice, 

And  to  defend  our  felues,  it  be  a  finne 

When  violence  affailes  vs. 

Othe,     Now  by  Heauen, 
My  blood  begins  my  fafer  Guides  to  rule,  230 

And  paffion(hauing  my  befh  iudgement  collied) 
Affaies  to  leade  the  way.     If  I  once  ftir,  232 

223.  me.~\  me,  Q,Q3-     Om.  Q2.  231.  collied]      coold     Qq.       choler'd 

224.  ought]  aught  Theob.  ii  et  seq.  Rowe  +  .     quell  d  Cap.  Coll.  ii.     cullied 

225.  me,]  me;  Ff.     nie  Q.'95  et  seq.  Bailey. 

faid ]  fed  Qx.  232.  If I  once]  Zouns,  if IQS.    If  once 

226.  fometimes]   fometime    Qq,    Cap.         I Q2Q,. 
Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Wh.  i. 

223.  something]  See  Ham.  Ill,  i,  173,  and  Lear,  I,  i,  20,  for  other  instances  of 
this  adverbial  use  like  somewhat. 

226.  selfe-charitie]  Johnson  :  Care  of  one's  self. 

227.  it]  Abbott,  §  404 :  From  this  passage  we  may  see  how  unnecessary  and  re- 
dundant our  modern  '  it '  is.  This  is  (if  the  order  of  the  words  be  disregarded)  as 
good  English  as  our  modern  '  Unless  it  be  a  sin  to  defend  ourselves.'  The  fact  is,  this 
use  of  the  modern  « it '  is  an  irregularity  only  justified  by  the  clearness  which  it  pro- 
motes. '  It,'  at  the  beginning  of  a  sentence,  calls  attention  to  the  real  subject  which  is 
to  follow.     '  It  is  a  sin,  viz.,  to  defend  one's  self.' 

229.  Booth  :  With  restrained  anger — not  loud. 

231.  collied]  Steevens  :  That  is,  passion  having  discoloured  his  judgement.  To 
colly  anciently  signified  to  besmul,  to  blacken  as  with  coal.  Malone  :  Cole  in  his  Diet., 
1679,  renders  '  collozv'd  by  denigratus  ;  to  colly,  denigro.'  Collier  (ed.  ii)  :  Quelled, 
i.  e.  subdued  or  conquered,  is  precisely  the  word  wanted,  and  we  find  it  in  the  (MS). 
It  is  to  be  remarked  that  if  short-hand  were  employed  in  obtaining  the  copy  of  Othello 
for  the  publisher,  the  very  same  letters  which  spell  quelled  would  also  spell  'collied,' 
and  even  coold.  Singer  (Sh.  Vind.,  p.  283) :  To  quell  is  never  used  by  Shakespeare 
in  any  other  sense  than  that  of  killing  or  exterminating.  I  pity  the  man  who  could  for 
a  moment  think  of  displacing  the  effective,  and  now  consecrated,  word  '  collied.'  Its 
obvious  meaning  is  darkened,  obfuscated ;  and  a  moio  appropriate  and  expressive  word 
could  not  have  been  used.  Dyce  {Strictures,  &c,  p.  199),  after  referring  to  the  use  of 
'collied'  in  Mid.  N.  D.  I,  i,  145,  and  after  citing  with  approval  what  Singer  says  of  the 
uniform  meaning  of  quell  in  Shakespeare,  and  after  quoting  what  Collier  says  about 
short-hand  spelling,  goes  on  to  say :  Yet  no  one  knows  better  than  Mr  Collier  that  the 
Othello  of  Fx,  which  has  the  reading  '  collied,'  was,  beyond  all  doubt,  printed  from  a 
transcript  belonging  to  the  theatre,  and  that  in  stage-copies  of  plays  {whether  intended 
for  the  use  of  the  prompter  or  of  the  actors)  short-hand  was  never  employed.  [Italics, 
Dyce's.]  Keightley  [Exp.  p.  302) :  Quelled  is  not  so  absurd  as  Singer  thinks  it 
D'Hugues  :  On  s'etonne  qu' Othello  puisse  trouver  de  si  belles  metaphores  pour  ex- 
primer  sa  colere,  au  moment  m&me  ou  il  commence  a  la  ressentir.     [See  III,  iii,  283.] 


142  THE   TRAGEDIE  OF  OTHELLO        [actii.sc.  ii. 

Or  do  but  lift  this  Arme,  the  beft  of  you  233 

Shall  finke  in  my  rebuke.     Giue  me  to  know 

How  this  foule  Rout  began  :  Who  fet  it  on,  235 

And  he  that  is  approu'd  in  this  offence, 

Though  he  had  twinn'd  with  me,  both  at  a  birth, 

Shall  loofe  me.     What  in  a  Towne  of  warre, 

Yet  wilde,  the  peoples  hearts  brim-full  of  feare, 

To  Manage  priuate,  and  domefticke  Quarrell?  240 

In  night,  and  on  the  Court  and  Guard  of  fafetie  ? 

'Tis  monftrous  :  Iago,  who  began't  ?  242 

236.  this]  his  Rowe  ii,  Pope,  Han.  240.    Quarrell']  quarrels  Qq,  Jen. 

237.  twinn'd]  twirid  Qx.  241.  and  guard  of]    of  guard  and 

238.  Shall]  shotdd  Q3.  Theob.  Han.  Johns.  Cap.  Mai.  Var.  Sing. 
loofe]  QqFf,  Rowe  i,  Jen.  Knt.  Ktly,  Coll.  iii  (MS),  Huds. 

loosen  Cap.     lose  Q.'95  et  cet.  242.  monjtrous]monsterous  Cap.  Steev. 

vie.]  me  ever.  Lettsom.  '85,  Ktly. 

What  in]  Ff,  Rowe  i.     what,  in  I  ago]  Say,  /ago  Pope-K 

Qq,  Rowe  ii,  Pope.     What,  and  in  Han.  began't  ]  began  Q,Qa.    degan  Q  , 

What!  in  Cap.  et  seq.      What!  even  in  began  it  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh. 

Huds.  conj.  i,  Ktly. 

of  warre,]  with  ?var  Daniel,  Huds. 

236.  approu'd]  Johnson  :  He  that  is  convicted  by  proof  of  having  been  engaged 
in  this  offence. 

238.  loose]  Jennens  :  That  is,  be  loose  from  me,  or  disjoined.  Knight  :  The 
same  word  as  lose,  but  differently  applied.  By  the  employment  of  lose  we  destroy  the 
force  of  '  The  ugh  he  had  twinn'd  with  me.' 

238.  Towne  of  warre]  Abbott,  §163:  In  Hen  V:  II,  iv,  7,  ' towns  of  war' 
means  garrisoned  towns,  and  so  probably  here,  like  our  '  man  of  war.' 

241.  Court  and  Guard  of  safetie]  Theobald:  Guard  of  safety,  though  couple- 
with  a  word  of  synonymous  construction,  was  never  soldiers'  language.  I  have  ver 
tured  to  make  the  conjunction  and  sign  of  the  genitive  case  change  places.  So  •  Court 
of  Guard,'  II,  i,  251 ;  'look  to  the  Guard,'  II,  ii,  16,  and  'bear  him  to  the  Court  of 
Guard,'  Ant.  &  Cleo.  IV,  ix,  32.  Malone  :  A  similar  mistake  occurs  in  '  all  place 
of  sense  and  duty,'  line  191.  'Court  of  guard'  is  established  as  a  technical  term  by 
the  uniform  usage  of  the  poets  of  Shakespeare's  time.  The  court  of  safety  may,  in  a 
metaphorical  sense,  be  understood ;  but  who  ever  talked  of  the  guard  (i.  e.  the  safety) 
of  safety  ?  Steevens  :  As  a  collocation  of  words,  as  seemingly  perverse,  occurs  in  Mid. 
N.  D.  Ill,  :,  192,  '  I  shall  desire  you  of  more  acquaintance,'  I  forbear  to  disturb  the 
text.  If  Safety,  like  the  Roman  Salus,  or  Recovery  in  Lear,  be  personified,  where  is 
the  impropriety  of  saying,  under  the  guard  of  Safety  ?  Thus,  Plautus,  in  his  Captivi  • 
'  Neque  jam  servare  Salus,  si  vult,  me  potest.'  Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  Steevens  defends  the  old 
reading  not  very  satisfactorily.  Cowden-Clarke  :  The  text  of  the  Ff  means,  in  the 
very  spot  and  gunrding-place  of  safety. 

242.  monstrous]  Walker  (  Vers.  11)  calls  attention,  as  did  Malone  before  him, 
to  the  trisyllabic  pronunciation  here  of  this  word;  neither  of  them,  however,  noticed 
(nor  did  the  Cambridge  Editois,  for  that  matter,)  that  Capell  had  long  before  so 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


Mon.     If  partially  Affin'd,  or  league  in  office, 
Thou  doft  deliuer  more,  or  leffe  then  Truth, 
Thou  art  no  Souldier. 

Iago.     Touch  me  not  fo  neere, 
I  had  rather  haue  this  tongue  cut  from  my  mouth, 
Then  it  fhould  do  offence  to  Michaell  CaJJio. 
Yet  I  perfwade  my  felfe,  to  fpeake  the  truth 
Shall  nothing  wrong  him.     This  it  is  Generall : 
Montana  and  my  felfe  being  in  fpeech, 
There  comes  a  Fellow,  crying  out  for  helpe, 
And  CaJJio  following  him  with  determined  Sword 
To  execute  vpon  him.     Sir,  this  Gentleman, 
Steppes  in  to  CaJJio »,  and  entreats  his  paufe  : 
My  felfe,  the  crying  Fellow  did  purfue, 
Leaft  by  hisc  lamour  (as  it  fo  fell  out) 
The  Towne  might  fall  in  fright.     He,(fwift  of  foote) 
Out-ran  my  purpofe  :  and  I  returned  then  rather 
For  that  I  heard  the  clinke,  and  fall  of  Swords, 
And  CaJJio  high  in  oath  :  Which  till  to  night 
I  nere  might  fay  before     When  I  came  backe 
(For  this  was  briefe)  I  found  them  clofe  together 


143 
243 

245 


250 


255 


243.  partially]  partiality  Qq. 
AJtn'd]  ajlgn'd  Q.'8i,  Q/95. 
league]    QqFf,    Rowe.      leagued 

Pope  et  cet. 

244.  doft]  doeft  QXQ2. 

deliuer  more,]  deliuer,  more  Qx. 

245.  no]  mo  Qv 

247.  I  had]  /WPope  +  . 

haue]  ha  Qx.     ha?  Q2Q3. 
cut  from  my]  out  from  my  Qx. 
out  of  my  Q2.     out  of  his  Q3. 

249.  fpeake  the]  fpeakfo  the  Ff,  Rowe. 


260 


263 


Thus 


250.  This]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sta. 
Qq  et  cet. 

it  is]  'tis  Pope  + . 

252.  comes]  corns  Q  . 

253.  him]  Om.  Pope  +  ,  Huds. 

255.  in  to]  into  Q2F2Q3F4,  Rowe  i. 

256.  My  felfe,]  my  felfe  QqF4  et  seq. 

257.  Leaft]  Left  QqFf  et  cet. 
259.  and]  Om.  Pope  +  . 

then]  Fv  Knt.     the  QqFf  et  cet. 

261.  oath]  oaths  Q  . 

262.  fay]  fee  Qx. 


printed  it  in  his  text :  monsterous.  Walker  goes  on  to  show  that  Drayton,  '  according 
to  his  manner  of  marking  a  doubtful  pronunciation  by  the  spelling,  writes  monsterous' 
*  There  is  also  a  third  spelling,  monstruous,'  found  in  Surrey,  and  in  the  Faerie  Queene, 
I,  ii,  line  366  (ed.  Grosart).     See  also  'mistress,'  IV,  ii,  104. — Ed. 

243.  Affin'd]  Steevens:  Affirid  is,  bound  by  proximity  of  relationship ;  but  here 
it  means  related  by  nearness  of  office.  In  I,  i,  42,  it  is  used  in  the  former  sense. 
Staunton  :  If,  bound  by  partiality.  Booth  :  Montano  should  be  in  total  ignorance 
of  the  cause  of  the  disturbance. 

253.  him]  Capell:  This  crept  into  the  line  from  the  line  beneath.  Dyce  and 
Walker  aho  suspect  that  it  is  an  interpolation. 


144  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF   OTHELLO        [act  ii,  sc.  ii. 

At  blow,  and  thruft,  euen  as  againe  they  were 

When  you  your  felfe  did  part  them.  26H 

More  of  this  matter  cannot  I  report, 

But  Men  are  Men  :  The  beft  fometimes  forget, 

Though  CaJJlo  did  fome  little  wrong  to  him, 

As  men  in  rage  ftrike  thofe  that  wifh  them  beft, 

Yet  furely  CaJJio,  I  beleeue  receiu'd  270 

From  him  that  fled,  fome  ftrange  Indignitie, 

Which  patience  could  not  paffe. 

OtJie.     I  know  I  ago.  [321  a\ 

Thy  honeftie,  and  loue  doth  mince  this  matter, 
Making  it  light  to  Caffio  :  Cajfio,  I  loue  thee,  271; 

But  neuer  more  be  Officer  of  mine. 

Enter  Defdemojia  attended. 

Looke  if  my  gentle  Loue  be  not  rais'd  vp : 

He  make  thee  an  example.  279 

264.  againe"]  agen  Qq.  268.  wrong]  woong  Q  . 

265.  When]  Whn  Qy  269.  thofe]  them  Q  . 

266.  cannot  I]  can  InotQq,  Cap.  Jen.  277.  Enter...]  Enter  Defdemona  with 
Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Del.  others.  Qq  (after  line  278)  Q2Q3. 

Ktly.  278.  rais'd]  raifde  Qx. 

274.  Coleridge  (Notes,  &c.,  255) :  Honesty  and  love  !  Ay,  and  who  but  the  readei 
of  the  play  could  think  otherwise  ? 

275.  thee]  Abbott,  §231  :  Thou,  in  Shakespeare's  time,  was  very  much  like  'du* 
now  among  the  Germans,  the  pronoun  of  affection  towards  friends ;  good-humoured 
superiority  to  servants ;  and  contempt  or  anger  to  strangers.  It  had,  however,  already 
fallen  somewhat  into  disuse,  and,  being  regarded  as  archaic,  was  naturally  adopted  in 

the  higher  poetic  style  and  in  the  language  of  solemn  prayer In  almost  all  cases 

where  thou  and  you  appear  at  first  sight  indiscriminately  used,  further  considerations 
show  some  change  of  thought,  or  some  influence  of  euphony  sufficient  to  account  for 
the  change  of  pronoun.  [In  a  foot-note,  Abbott  says  that  the  Elizabethan  distinction 
between  thou  and  you  is  remarkably  illustrated  in  Early  English,  as  detailed  by  Skeat 
in  William  of  Palerne.  The  passage  in  Skeat  is  as  follows,  and  is  the  result  of  a 
tabulation  of  the  best  examples  in  that  Romance  (about  A.  D.  1350)  and  also  in  the 
Romance  of  Alisaunder  (about  A.  D.  1340)]  :  '  Thou  is  the  language  of  a  lord  to  a 
servant,  of  an  equal  to  an  equal,  and  expresses  also  companionship,  love,  permission, 
defiance,  scorn,  threatening;  whilst  ye  is  the  language  of  a  servant  to  a  lord,  and  of 
compliment,  and  further  expresses  honour,  submission,  entreaty ' — Preface  to  William 
of  Palerne,  p.  xlii. — Ed.] 

279.  Ottley  (p.  19)  :  Kean  said  these  words,  before  preparing  to  go,  solemnly  and 
sadly,  as  if  justifying  and  explaining  a  painful  act  of  duty.  And  then  his  walk  up  the 
stage !  so  stately  and  grand,  his  cloak  swaying  gracefully  with  each  well-measured  step 
—who  that  saw  it  shall  forget  it  ? 


act  ii,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  145 

Def.     What  is  the  matter  (Deere  ?;  280 

Othe.     All's  well,  Sweeting : 
Come  away  to  bed.     Sir  for  your  hurts, 
My  felfe  will  be  your  Surgeon.     Lead  him  off: 
/ago,  looke  with  care  about  the  Towne, 

And  filence  thofe  whom  this  vil'd  brawle  diftra6ted.  285 

Come  Defdemona,  'tis  the  Soldiers  life, 
To  haue  their  Balmy  {lumbers  wak'd  with  ftrife.  Exit, 

Iago.     What  are  you  hurt  Lieutenant  ? 

Caf.     I,  paft  all  Surgery. 

Iago.     Marry  Heauen  forbid.  290 

Caf.     Reputation,  Reputation,  Reputation  :  Oh  I  haue 

280.  What  is]    QXF2,  Cap.  Steev.'85,        Johns.     To  Mon.  who  is  led  off.  Steev. 
Mai.  Knt.      What's  Q2Q3F3F4  et  cet.  283.  Lead  him  off]  Om.  Huds. 

(Deere?)]  Ff.  Dear ? Rowe, Cap.  [Exeunt  some  with  Mon.  Cap. 

Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Wh.  i,  285.  vil'd]  vile  QqFf. 

Ktly.     Om.  Qq  et  cet.  287.  Exit]    Exit   Moore,   Defdemona, 

281-283.  All's. ..off]  Lines  end,  bed. ...  and  attendants,  (after  line  288)  Qq. 
Surgeon  ...off.  Pope  + ,  Jen.  Steev.'85,  Mai.  Scene  XIII.  Pope,  Warb.    Scene  XIV. 

Coll.  Dyce,Wh.  Glo.  Cam.  Ktly,  Del.  Rife.  Han.  Johns.  Jen. 
bed. ..hurts... off  Steev.'93,  Var.  Sing.  289.  /,]  Ay,  Rowe.     Om.  Pope  +  . 

281.  All's]  AalVsQ.     All  is  Pope  +  .  290.  Marry  Heauen]  Mary  God  Qt. 
well,]    Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt.      well.  Mary  Heauen  QQ. 

Here  Johns,     well  now  Qq  et  cet.  291-294.  Four  lines,  ending  my  repu- 

282.  Come  away]  Com  away  Q.  Come,  tation...felfe...beaJliall,  my  reputation... 
away  F  ,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  i,  Han.         my  reputation,  in  Qq. 

Come  Theob.  ii,  Warb.     Co?ne,  let's  away  291.  Reputation]  Only  twice,  Qq,  Cap. 

Cap.  Oh  I]  7QX,  Cap. 

283.  Surgeon.]  surgeon.  [To  Montano.  291,  292.  haue]  ha  Qq. 

281.  Sweeting]  Steevens:  This  surfeiting  vulgar  term  of  fondness  originates  from 
the  name  of  an  apple  distinguished  only  by  its  insipid  sweetness. 

283.  Lead  him  off]  Malone:  I  am  persuaded  these  words  were  originally  a 
stage  direction.  In  our  old  plays  all  the  stage -directions  were  couched  in  imperative 
terms : — Play  music. — Ring  the  Bell. — Lead  him  off.  White  (ed.  i) :  Such  is  my 
opinion,  but  for  a  different  reason.  If  Othello  had  ordered  the  removal  of  Montano, 
he  would  have  said,  not  '  Lead  him  off,'  but  '  Lead  him  away.'  We  speak  of  a  man's 
being  or  having  been  led  off,  or  on,  in  the  sense  of  away,  or  onward;  but  when  we 
direct  a  man  to  be  taken  from  where  we  are,  we  say  '  away/  unless  we  are  upon  a 
staging,  or  some  place  of  that  kind,  which,  for  Shakespeare's  purposes,  Othello  was  not. 
The  rhythm  of  this  command,  too,  is  not  like  that  of  Shakespeare's  hemistichs.  But 
as  Qq  and  Ff  agree,  I  do  not  venture  to  change  it  upon  mere  opinion.  Rolfe  :  Ma- 
lone may  be  right. 

285.  Booth:  Iago  goes  off.     Cassio  braces  himself  for  the  sentence,  but  sinks  to 

the  ground  at  Othello's  exit.    At  line  288,  Iago  hurriedly  enters  to  Cassio.    In  Cassio's 

speech  '  Reputation,'  &c,  don't  preach ;  be  not  violent ;  avoid  rant ;  yet  be  impassioned, 

— feel  thoroughly  disgusted  with  yourself,  and  you'll  be  natural.    Walk  about,  but  don't 

stamp  or  '  saw  the  air.' 
10 


146  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [ACT  II,  SC  ii. 

loft  my  Reputation.     I  haue  loft  the  immortall  part  of         292 
myfelfe,  and  what  remaines  is  beftiall.     My  Reputation, 
Iago,  my  Reputation. 

I  ago.  As  I  am  an  honeft  man  I  had  thought  you  had  295 
receiued  fome  bodily  wound;  there  is  more  fence  in  that 
then  in  Reputation.  Reputation  is  an  idle,  and  moft  falfe 
impofition;  oft  got  without  merit,  and  loft  without  de- 
feruing.  You  haue  loft  no  Reputation  at  all,  vnleffe  you 
repute  your  felfe  fuch  a  loofer.  What  man,  there  are  300 
more  wayes  to  recouer  the  Generall  againe.  You  are 
but  now  caft  in  his  moode,(a  punifhment  more  in  poli- 
cie,  then  in  malice  )  euen  fo  as  one  would  beate  his  of- 
fenceleffe  dogge,  ro  affright  an  Imperious  Lyon.  Sue  to 
him  againe,  and  he's  yours.  305 

292.  part  of]  part  fir  of  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.         Q  . 

Mai.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly.  296.  fence]  offence  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Mai. 

293.  myfelfe]  my  falfe  Q3.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly,  Huds. 

294.  remaines]  remainrs  Q  .  300.  loofer]  lofer  Qq. 
deputation.]   reputation — Rowe  301.  more]  Ff,  Rowe.    Om.  Qq  et  cet. 

+  ,  Jen.  again]  agen  Qq. 

295.  /  had]    Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Steev.'85,  304.  ro]  to. 

Knt.     /  Qq  et  cet.  Imperious]  impious  Han.  ii  (mis- 

296.  receiued]  ?'eceiu\l  QxQa.    receVd         print). 

296.  bodily  wound]  Gould  ( The  Tragedian,  p.  87) :  The  simpler  meaning  i& 
conveyed  by  the  usual  emphasis  on  '  bodily.'  But  this  emphasis  would  oppose  bodily 
to  spiritual  wounds,  and  Iago  has  no  faith  in  the  latter.  J.  B.  Booth,  with  fine  penetra- 
tion, emphasized  both  these  words,  as  if  there  were  no  other  wounds  to  suffer  from. 

296.  sence]  Knight  :  The  sense  of  a  wound  is  its  sensibility. 

298,  299.  oft  .  .  .  deserving]  Booth  :  With  significant  glance  at  Cassio.  Do 
not  smile,  or  sneer,  or  glower, — try  to  impress  even  the  audience  with  your  sincerity. 
'Tis  better,  however,  always  to  ignore  the  audience ;  if  you  can  forget  that  you  are  a 
'shew'  you  will  be  natural.  The  more  sincere  your  manner,  the  more  devilish  your 
deceit.  I  think  the  '  light  comedian '  should  play  the  villain's  part,  not  the  « heavy 
man ; '  1  mean  the  Shakespearian  villains.  Iago  should  appear  to  be  what  all  but  the 
audience  believe  he  is.  Even  when  alone,  there  is  little  need  to  remove  the  mask 
entirely.     Shakespeare  spares  you  that  trouble. 

299,  300.  You  .  .  .  looser]  DuBois  ( Wreath,  p.  72)  cites  parallel  passages  from 
Menander  in  Plutarch  :  Ovfie v  7reirov8ac  deivbv,  av  /at)  irpoomufj — Thou  hast  suffered  no 
wrong,  unless  thou  dost  fancy  so.  Also  Epictetus,  Enchirid.,  c.  31  :  2f  yap  o/lAoc  ov 
p?.d\pei,  av  //?)  av  BilriQ.  T6re  fie  ea?j  fteflXa/Li/Lievoc,  brav  v7ro2.dj3r)C  j3AaTTTEoVai — No 
one  will  hurt  thee,  unless  thou  art  willing  he  should.  For  then  only  wilt  thou  be  hurt, 
when  thou  dost  think  thyself  hurt.  Also  Marcus  Antoninus,  B.  7,  §  14:  'Eyu  fie,  eav 
fir)  V7ro2.a(3o)  on  /ca/cov  to  avfi/3ej3^Kbc,  ovrro)  /3e/?/la/u//a^ — Unless  I  myself  think  that 
vhich  happens  an  evil,  I  am  still  unhurt. 

302.  cast]  Johnson:  Ejected  in  his  anger.     [See  I,  i,  164;  II,  ii,  31  ;  V.  ii,  400.] 


act  ii,  sc.  ii.J  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  [47 

Caf.  I  will  rather  fue  to  be  de  fpis'd,  then  to  deceiue  306 
io  good  a  Commander,  with  fo  flight,  fo  drunken,  and  fo 
indifcreet  an  Officer.  Drunke  ?  And  fpeake  Parrat?  And 
fquabble  ?  Swagger  ?  Sweare  ?  And  difcourfe  Fuftian 
with  ones  owne  fhadow  t  Oh  thou  invifible  fpirit  of  310 
Wine,  if  thou  haft  no  name  to  be  knowne  by,  let  vs  call 
thee  Diuell. 

Iago.     What    was    he    that   you    followed    with    your 
Sword  ?  What  had  he  done  to  you  t 

Caf     I  know  not.  315 

Iago.     Is't  poffible  ? 

Caf.     I  remember  a  maffe  of  things,  but  nothing  di- 
ftinctly :   a  Quarrell,  but  nothing  wherefore.      Oh,  that 
men  fhould  put  an  Enemie  in  their  mouthes,  to  fteale  a- 
way  their  Braines  ?  that  we  fhould  with  ioy,  pleafance,         320 
reuell  and  applaufe,  transforme  our  felues  into  Beafts. 

307.  flight]  light  Qq,  Jen.  Coll.  311.  knowne...vs]  konwen...ws  Q  . 
andfo]  and  Qq.  313,314.  What... Sword?]  One  line  as 

308-310.    Drunke  ?  ...fhadow  ?]    Om.  verse,  Qq. 

Qx.  313.  followed]  followed  Qq. 

308.  fpeake  Parrat ?~\  fpeak  Parrat?  316.  Is't]  Is  it  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Sing. 
F3,  Cap.   f peaky  Parrot  ?Yi,  Rowe,  Pope.  Ktly. 

speak?  Parrot, Theob.     speak?  parrot?  318.  Oh,~\  O  Q2Q3-      O  God,  Qt,  Jen. 

Han.     speak  Parrot,  Johns.  Jen.     speak  Coll.  Dyce,  Sta.Wh.Glo.  Cam.  Del.  Huds. 

Parrot  ?  Warb.  et  cet.  Rife. 

310.  invifible~\  ivnifidle  Q.  invincible  319,  320.  their. ..their"]  there. ..there  QI# 
Theob.  ii  (misprint ?),  Warb.  320.  Braines?]  braines;  Qq. 

311.  Wine,  if  thou]  wine;  thou  Q  .  320,  321.  pleafance,  reuell]  Reueli% 
Wine  !  if  thou  F  ,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  pleafure  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
Han.Warb.  Coll.  Del.  wine;  if  thou  Johns.  Coll.  Wh.  i. 

Jen. 

304.  affright]  As  Purnell  says,  this  does  not  suit  the  comparison.  Staunton 
suggests  appease,  which  certainly  accords  better  with  the  sense. — Ed. 

308.  Parrat]  War  burton  :  That  is,  to  act  foolishly  and  childishly.  [In  proof, 
Warburton  cites  a  passage  from  Skelton,  wherein  it  is  true  the  two  words  '  speke '  and 
*  Parrot '  occur,  but  they  occur  as  an  address  to  the  bird  to  speak,  and  not  as  in  the 
present  phrase.  The  very  title  of  the  piece  is  Speke,  Parrot,  and  Warburton's  quota- 
tion runs  thus :  '  These  maidens  ....  make  swete  my  bowre,  With,  Speke,  Parrot,  I 
pray  you,  full  curtesly  they  say,'  vol.  ii,  p.  2,  ed.  Dyce.  Cassio's  phrase  bears  its  clear 
meaning  of  senseless  talk,  but  I  have  met  no  other  instance  of  it.  Parallel  passages 
are  of  use  only  where  there  is  obscurity.  Here  there  is  none.  For  Shakespeare's  refer- 
ences to  parrots  and  their  ways,  see  Harting,  p.  272. — Ed.]  Morel  :  On  pourrait 
comparer  l'expression  familiere  du  francais,  'parler  negre.' 

320.  pleasance]  Morel  :  Marot  chez  nous  disait  encore  au  seizieme  siecle'les 
plaisances  mondaines,'  et  le  mot  nous  est  reste  dans  les  expressions  telles  que,  maison 
de  plaisance,  bateau  de  plaisance. 


148  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  n,  sc.  ii. 

Iago.     Why  ?  But  you   are  now  well   enough  :  how         322 
came  you  thus  recouered  ? 

Caf.     It  hath  pleas'd  the  diuell  drunkennefle,  to  giue 
place  to  the  diuell  wrath,  one  vnperfectneffe,  fhewes  me         325 
another  to  make  me  frankly  defpife  my  felfe. 

Iago.  Come,  you  are  too  feuere  a  Moraller.  As  the 
Time,  the  Place,  &  the  Condition  of  this  Country  ftands 
I  could  hartily  wifh  this  had  not  befalne  :  but  fince  it  is,  as 
it  is,  mend  it  for  your  owne  good.  330 

Caf.  I  will  aske  him  for  my  Place  againe,  he  fhall  tell 
me,  I  am  a  drunkard  :  had  I  as  many  mouthes  as  Hydra, 
fuch  an  anfwer  would  flop  them  all.  To  be  now  a  fen- 
fible  man,  by  and  by  a  Foole,  and  prefently  a  Beaft.  Oh 
ftrange!  Euery  inordinate  cup  is  vnblefs'd,  and  the  Ingre-  335 
dient  is  a  diuell. 

Iago.     Come,  come  :  good  wine,  is  a  good  familiar  [321  b~\ 
Creature,  if  it  be  well  vs'd  :  exclaime  no  more  againft  it. 
And    good    Lieutenant,    I    thinke,    you    thinke    I    loue 
you.  340 

Caf)  10.     I  haue  well  approued  it,  Sir .  I  drunke  ? 

322.  Why?]  Why,  QqF   et  seq.  335.  inordinate]  vnordinate  QT. 

324.  pleas 'd]  pleafde  Qx.  335,  336.  Ingredient]  ingredience  Qq, 

328.  6°  the]  the  Qq,  Han.  Cap. 

329.  not]  notfo  QXQ2,  Jen.  337.  familiar]  Fx. 

333.  them]  e?n  Qq.  341.  approued]  approou'd  QXQ2.     ap- 

334.  Foole]  foule  Qv  proved  Q3. 

334, 335- Ohf?range/]Om.Qq,Vope  +  ,  Sir.  I]  fir,— /Qq,  Sing.  ii.    Sir, 

Jen.  /  Ff. 

327.  Moraller]  For  other  instances  of  -er  appended  to  nouns  to  signify  the  agent, 
see  Abbott,  §  443. 

328.  Time,  the  Place]  Morel:  Iago  prend  ainsi  plaisir  a  rappeler  a  Cassio 
les  circonstances  qui  peuvent  rendre  sa  faute  plus  criminelle  et  son  remords  plus 
cuisant. 

335.  Ingredient]  In  that  excellent  contribution  to  Shakespearian  literature,  just 
published,  Studies  in  Shakespeare  (alas!  alas!  that  it  should  be  posthumous!)  Grant 
White  suggests  that  the  form  ingredience  should  be  retained  in  Macb.  I,  vii,  II,  in  IV, 
i,  34,  and  also  in  this  present  passage,  on  the  ground  that  '  the  idea  is  collective,  not 
separative.'  This  ground  is  valid  in  both  instances  in  Macb.,  but  is  less  sure  here,  albeit 
the  Qq  have  ingredience.  Not  only  are  the  Ff  uniform  in  giving  '  Ingredient,'  but  the 
plural  sound  of  ingredience  would  strike  harshly  before  the  singular  verb. — Ed. 

337.  familiar]  Morel:  C'est  le  mot  'devil,'  employe  par  Cassio,  qui  provoque  cettfl 
ironique  repartie. 

339.  Booth  :  In  tones  whose  subtlety  cannot  be  described. 


act  ii,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  149 

lago.     You,  or  any  man  liuing,  may  be  drunke  at  a         342 
time  man.     I  tell  you  what  you  fhall  do  :  Our  General's 
Wife,  is  now  the  Generall.     I  may  fay  fo,  in  this  refpe6t, 
for  that  he  hath  deuoted,  and  giuen  vp  himfelfe  to  the         345 
Contemplation,    marke  :  and    deuotement    of  her   parts 
and  Graces.     Confeffe  your  felfe  freely  to  her  :  Impor- 
tune her  helpe  to  put  you  in  your  place  againe.     She  is 
of  fo    free,    fo    kinde,   fo    apt,   fo    bleffed    a    difpofition, 
fhe   holds  it  a  vice   in   her  goodneffe,  not  to  do   more         350 
then    fhe    is    requefted.       This    broken    ioynt   betweene 
you,  and  her  husband,  entreat  her  to  fplinter.     And  my 
Fortunes  againft  any  lay  worth  naming,  this  cracke  of 
your  Loue,  fhall  grow  (longer,  then  it  was  before. 

Cajfio.     You  aduife  me  well.  355 

lago.     I  proteft  in  the  finceritie  of  Loue,  and  honefl 
kindneffe. 

Cajfio.     I   thinke  it  freely  :  and  betimes  in  the  mor-         358 

342,  343.  a  time]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Dyce,         ^{Q3,  Rowe,  Pope,  Knt,  Coll.  i.     denote- 
Wh.  i,  Glo.  Rife,    fome  time  Qq  et  cet.  ment  Theob.  et  cet. 

343.  man]  Om.  QI#  348.  her  helpe~\   her,  JJieeHl  helpe  Qq, 
/  tell]  Ff,  Rowe  + .     He  tell  Qq         Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly,  Del. 

et  cet.  349.  offo\  fo  Qq. 

345.  hath]  has  Qq.  350.  Jlie]  that/he  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 

346.  marke:    and]    marke    and  Qq.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Del. 
(mark   6°  Q)    Theob.    ii,  Warb.    Cam.  351.  broken  ioynt]  braule  Qr. 
mark  :  andY  .    — mark, — and  "Knt  i,  Sta.  354.  /longer]  Jlronger  QqF  F  . 

— mark! — and  Knt  ii,  Sing.  Ktly.    mark,  it  was]  ttvas  Qt.     fwas  Q2Q,. 

and  Rowe  et  cet.  356.  honejl]  Om.  Q  . 

deuotement]    Q,Q2.      devotement 


342.  at  a  time]  This  is  the  Scotch  'ae,'  meaning  one.  Compare  'Doth  not  rose- 
mary and  Romeo  begin  both  with  a  letter '  ?  Rom.  &  Jul.  II,  iv,  187  ;  '  these  foils  have 
all  a  length,'  Ham.  V,  ii,  232.     See  also  Abbott,  §  81. 

346.  marke]  Knight  says  that  this  is  here  used  as  an  interjection;  'to  make  the 
matter  still  more  ridiculous  ' !  exclaims  Dyce  (Rem.,  p.  239),  after  condemning  Knight's 
preference  for  '  devotement '  of  Ft. 

346.  deuotement]  Theobald  :  I  cannot  persuade  myself  that  our  Poet  would  ever 
have  said  any  one  devoted  himself  to  the  devotement  of  anything.  The  mistake  cer- 
tainly arose  from  a  single  letter  being  turned  upside-down  at  press.  The  three  words, 
Contemplation,  mark,  and  denotement,  are,  indeed,  in  some  degree  tautological,  but  the 
practice  is  allowed  for  the  sake  of  energy.  M alone  notes  the  frequent  occurrence  of 
this  accident  in  the  Qq  and  Ff.  Thus  in  Merry  Wives,  IV,  vi,  39,  '  deuote  her  to  the 
doctor;'  Ham.  I,  ii,  83,  'That  can  deuote  me  truly,'  where  in  both  cases  it  should  be 
denote.     For  other  instances  see  his  note  on  the  passage  in  Merry  Wives. 

352.  splinter]  Dyce:  To  secure  by  splint? 

353.  lay]   Ritson  •  Any  bet,  any  wager 


150 


THE   TRAGEDIE   OF   OTHELLO        [act  n,  sc.  ii. 


ning,  I  will  befeech  the  vcrtuous  Dcfdcmona  to  vndertake 
for  me  :  I  am  defperate  of  my  Fortunes  if  they  check  me. 

Iago.     You  are  in  the  right  :  good  night  Lieutenant,  I 
mull  to  the  Watch. 

Caffio.     Good  night,  honeft  Icigo. 

Exit  CaJJio. 

/ago.     And  what's  he  then, 
That  faies  I  play  the  Villaine? 
When  this  aduife  is  free  I  giue,  and  honeft, 
Proball  to  thinking,  and  indeed  the  courfe 
To  win  the  Moore  againe. 
For  'tis  mod  eafie 
Th'inclyning  Defdcmona  to  fubdue 
In  any  honeft  Suite.     She's  fram'd  as  fruitefull 


360 


365 


370 


372 


359.  LwilL]  will  /Qq,  Jen.  Mai.  Steev. 
befeech]  befech  Q  . 

360.  check  me."]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Knt. 
chtcke  me  here.  Qq  et  cet. 

361.  You. ..right]  One  line,  Qq. 

364.  Exit...]  Exit.  Qq. 

Scene  XIV.  Pope  i,  Warb.  Scene  XV. 
Han.  Johns.  Jen.  Scene  II.  Pope  ii  (mis- 
print). 

365,  366.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 


368.  Proball]  Probable  Rowe,  Cap. 
Steev. '85.  Likely  Pope  +  .  Provable 
Coleridge  in  quoting. 

369,  370.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 
369.  againe]  agen  Qq. 

371.  77/']  Ff,  Rowe 4-,  Jen.  Sing.  TO. 
Ktly,  Dyce  iii,  I  luds.     The  Qq  et  cet. 

371,  372.  fub due... Suite.  She's]  fub 
due, . .  .fuite,flie 's  Qx.  fubdue, . .  .fuiteflie's 

Q2Q3- 


363.  honest]  Booth  :  Not  too  pronounced. 

365.  Booth  :  Pause,  and  with  a  smile  of  satisfaction,  look  after  him. 
365.  Coleridge  (ATotes,  &c,  255):  He  is  not,  you  see,  an  absolute  fiend;  or,  at 
least,  he  wishes  to  think  himself  not  so. 

367.  free]  Johnson  :  This  counsel  has  an  appearance  of  honest  openness,  of  frank 
goodwill.  Henley:  Rather  gratis,  not  paid  for,  as  his  advice  to  Roderigo  was.  Pve 
(p.  333) :  His  counsel  has  not  the  appearance  only  of  honest  openness  and  frank  good- 
will, but  was  really  such  as  honest  openness  and  frank  goodwill  would  give.  Henley's 
notion  is  completely  absurd. 

368.  Proball]  Steevens  :  There  may  be  such  a  contraction  of  probable,  but  I  have 
not  met  with  it  in  any  other  book.  Abbreviations  as  violent  occur  in  the  works  of 
Churchyard.  Collier  :  A  colloquial  contraction  for  probable.  Corresponding  con- 
tractions are  'miseral'  for  miserable  in  Painter's  Palace  of  Pleasure,  i,  15 1;  and  in 
B.  Rich's  Dialogue  between  Mercury  and  a  Soldier,  1574,  we  have  'varial'  for  varia- 
ble. Singer:  A  contraction  of  probable  or  proveable.  HALLIWELL:  A  word  of  very 
rare  occurrence.  I  have  met  with  it  only  once  elsewhere,  in  Sampson's  Vmv  Breaker, 
or  the  Faire  Maid  of  Clifton,  1636:  'Didst  thou  not  make  me  draw  conveighances  ? 
Did  not  th'assurance  of  thy  lands  seeme  proball ?'  White  (ed.  ii) :  A  word  unknown 
elsewhere  :  but  what  cared  Shakespeare  for  that !  [For  other  somewhat  similar  con- 
tractions, see  Abbott,  §461.] 

371.  inclyning]   Malone  :  Compliant 


ACTH.SC.iL]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  151 

As  the  free  Elements.     And  then  for  her  373 

To  win  the  Moore,  were  to  renownce  his  Baptifme, 

All  Seales,  and  Simbols  of  redeemed  fin  :  375 

His  Soule  is  fo  enfettered  to  her  Loue, 

That  (he  may  make,  vnmake,  do  what  (he  lift, 

Euen  as  her  Appetite  fhall  play  the  God, 

With  his  weake  Function.     How  am  I  then  a  Villaine, 

To  Counfell  CaJJlo  to  this  paralell  courfe,  380 

Directly  to  his  good  ?     Diuinitie  of  hell, 

When  diuels  will  the  blacked  finnes  put  on, 

They  do  fuggeft  at  firft.  with  heauenly  fhewes, 

As  I  do  now.     For  whiles  this  honeft  Foole 

Plies  Dcfdemona,  to  repaire  his  Fortune,  38$ 

And  fhe  for  him,  pleades  ftrongly  to  the  Moore, 

He  powre  this  peftilence  into  his  eare : 

That  fhe  repeales  him,  for  her  bodies  LufV 

And  by  how  much  fhe  ftriues  to  do  him  good, 

She  fhall  vndo  her  Credite  with  the  Moore.  390 

So  will  I  turne  her  vertue  into  pitch, 

And  out  of  her  owne  goodneffe  make  the  Net, 

That  fhall  en-mafh  them  all. 

How  now  Rodorigo  ?  394 

374.  were]wer,tQIQ2.  were'tQ  , Rowe  384.  whiles']    while  QXF3F4,   Rowe  +  , 
et  seq.                                                                  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

375.  Simbols]  fymboles  Q  .  whiljl  Q2Q3- 

376.  enfetter 'd]  infetter'd  Qq.  385.  Fortune]  Ff,  Rowe  4,  Jen.  Knt. 
379.  How  am]  Am  Pope  4.                           fortunes  Qq  et  cet. 

381.  Diuinitie  of  hell]  '  Tis  helV  s  divin-  38%.  for  her]  from  her  Johns. 
ity  :  Pope,  Han.                                                        393,  394.  One  line,  Pope  et  seq. 

382.  diuels]  Devils  FF.  393.  en-mafh]  enmefli  QXQ2.    eneme/h 
the]    their   QqF  ,    Rowe  4,  Jen.         Q  .     enmafJi  F3F4,  Rowe. 

Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  them]  em  QI# 

Del.  394.  Rodorigo]  Rod'rigo  Pope,  Plan. 

372.  fruitefull]   Johnson  :    Liberal,  bountiful,  as  the  elements,  out  of  which  all 
things  are  produced.     [See  III,  iv,  46.] 

379.  Function]  Schmidt  [Lex.)  :  The  operation  of  the  mental  faculties.     [Very, 
very  doubtful.     See  Ham.  II,  ii,  529;  Macb.  I,  iii,  140. — Ed.] 

380.  paralell]  Johnson  :  That  is,  level,  and  even  with  his  design. 

380.  course]  Walker  (Crit.,  i,  165) :  Perhaps  dele  comma  after  'course.' 

382.  put  on]  That  is,  encourage,  thrust  forward.     A  parallel  instance  is  in  Macb 
IV,  iii,  239  :  '  the  powers  above  put  on  their  instruments.' 

383.  suggest]  Dyce:  To  tempt,  to  incite,  to  seduce. 

387.  Booth:  All  this  with  a  quiet  chuckle  and  increasing  intensity. 

388.  repeals]  Johnson  :  That  is,  recalls  him.     Collier  :  Its  etymological  sense. 


152 


THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [ACT  II,  SC.  ii. 

Enter  Rodorigo.  395 


Rodorigo.  I  do  follow  heere  in  the  Chace,  not 
like  a  Hound  that  hunts,  but  one  that  filles  vp  the 
Crie.  My  Money  is  almoft  fpent ;  I  haue  bin  to  night 
exceedingly  well  Cudgell'd  :  And  I  thinke  the  iffue 
will  bee,  I  mail  haue  fo  much  experience  for  my  paines;  [322  a\ 
And  fo,  with  no  money  at  all,  and  a  little  more  Wit,  re-  401 
turne  againe  to  Venice. 

Iago.     How  poore  are  they  that  haue  not  Patience  ? 
What  wound  did  euer  heale  but  by  degrees  ? 
Thou  know'ft  we  worke  by  Wit,  and  not  by  Witchcraft  405 

And  Wit  depends  on  dilatory  time : 
Dos't  not  go  well  ?   CaJJio  hath  beaten  thee, 
And  thou  by  that  fmall  hurt  hath  cafheer'd  Cajfto: 
Though  other  things  grow  faire  againft  the  Sun, 
Yet  Fruites  that  bloffome  firft,  will  firft  be  ripe  : 


395.  Enter...]  After  line  393,  Qq. 
Scene  XV.  Pope,  Warb.     Scene  XVI. 

Han.  Johns.  Jen. 

396.  do]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

398.  L  haue]  I  ha  Qq. 

399.  And]  Om.  Qq. 

400-402.  paines  ...Venice]  paines,  as 
that  comes  to,  and  no  ?noney  at  all,  and 
with  that  wit  returne  to  Venice.  Qx,  Jen. 
paines,  and  fo  no  mony  at  all,  and  with 
a  little  more  wit  returne  to  Venice.  Q2Q3- 

402.  againe]  Om.  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Mai. 


410 


Var.  Knt. 

403.  haue  not]  ha  not  Qt. 
405.  knowfi]  knowjl  Qq. 

407.  DosH]    Dofi    Qs.      Dojl   F3F4, 
Rowe  i.     Does't  Rowe  ii  et  seq. 

hath]  has  Qq. 

408.  hath]  Sing.  Dyce  iii.    hajl  QqFf 
et  cet. 

409.  grow]  grew  Qr 

410.  Yet]  £utQz. 

will. . .  ripe]  are  not  first  ripe  :  Han. 
firjl]  fire  % 


398.  Crie]  Dyce  :  A  pack,  properly  '  the  giving  mouth  of  hounds.'  '  A  crie  of 
Hounds  have  here  a  Deer  in  Chase.' — Sylvester's  Du  Bartas,  The  Magnificence, 
p.  213,  ed.  1632. 

408.  Booth  :  Roderigo  shows  delight  at  this,  and  is  anxious  to  learn  the  particulars, 
but  Iago  urges  him  to  go ;  then  with  triumphant  haste  speaks  the  concluding  lines. 

410.  ripe]  Johnson  :  Of  many  different  things,  all  planned  with  the  same  art  and 
promoted  with  the  same  diligence,  some  must  succeed  sooner  than  others,  by  the  order 
of  nature.  Everything  cannot  be  done  at  once ;  we  must  proceed  by  the  necessary 
gradation.  We  are  not  to  despair  of  slow  events,  any  more  than  of  tardy  fruits,  while 
the  causes  are  in  regular  progress  and  the  fruits  grow  fair  against  the  sun.  M  alone  : 
The  blossoming,  or  fair  appearance  of  things,  to  which  Iago  alludes,  is  the  removal  of 
Cassio.  As  their  plan  had  already  blossomed,  so  there  was  good  ground  for  expecting 
that  it  would  soon  be  ripe.  Iago  does  not  mean  to  compare  their  scheme  to  tardy 
fruits.  Deighton  :  Johnson  says  the  meaning  is  that  we  are  not  to  despair  of  slow 
events,  any  more  than  of  tardy  fruits,  while  the  causes  are  in  regular  progress,  and  the 
fruits  grow  fair  against  the  sun  :  but  Iagc  does  not  say  that  the  fruits  grew  fair  against 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


153 


Content  thy  felfe,  a-while.     Introth  'tis  Morning;  41 1 

Pleafure,  and  Action,  make  the  houres  feeme  fhort. 

Retire  thee,  go  where  thou  art  Billited : 

Away,  I  fay,  thou  fhalt  know  more  heereafter : 

Nay  get  thee  gone.  Exit  Rodorigo.        415 

Two  things  are  to  be  done : 

My  Wife  muft  moue  for  CaJJio  to  her  Miftris  : 

He  fet  her  on  my  felfe,  a  while,  to  draw  the  Moor  apart, 

And  bring  him  iumpe,  when  he  may  CaJJio  finde  419 


4.1 1. a-while]  awhile  Sing. 

Introth]  F2F3.  In  troth  F4,  Rowe  + , 
Knt,  Wh.  bi '  the  majfe  Qs.  bf  th  mafe 
QzQ3>  By  th'  mass  Cap.  Jen.  Huds.  By 
the  mass  Steev.  et  cet. 

412.  houres]  time  Jen. 

413.  Billited]  bill  ted  Qv 

415.,  416.  One  line,  Qq,  Mai.  et  seq. 
415-418.  Lines  end. gone... move... on — 
...apart,  Ktly. 

415.  Exit...]  Om.  Qq. 

416.  Two]  Some  Qq. 


418.  Two  lines,  the  first  ending  on.  Qq, 
Theob.  Warb.  et  seq. 

her  on]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  her  on. 
Qq.  her  on —  Ktly.   her  on  :  Theob.  et  cet. 

on... draw]  on  to  draw  Pope,  on ; 
so  draw  Han. 

a  while]  FfQ2Q  ,  Rowe,  Jen.  Sing. 
awhile  Qt.   the  while  Theob.  Warb.  et  cet. 

to  draw]  will  draw  Johns.  Steev. 
'85. 

419.  when\  where  Coll.  MS. 


the  sun.  On  the  contrary,  he  says  '  though  other  things  grow,  &c,  yet,  &c.  I  believe 
the  argument  is  this : — Iago  compares  Cassio  to  one  tree,  and  himself  and  Roderigo  to 
another  or  others.  Cassio,  he  says,  'grew  fair  against  the  sun'  while  they  were  in  the 
shade,  i.  e.,  Cassio  had  an  advantage  over  them  in  his  position  in  life ;  but  notwith- 
standing this,  they  had  '  blossomed  first,'  i.  e.,  had  by  their  successful  tumbling  him  out 
of  his  lieutenancy,  made  better  use  of  their  time  and  opportunities ;  and  arguing  from 
this,  it  was  likely  that  they  would  '  first  grow  ripe,'  i.  e.,  would  ultimately  beat  him  in 
the  race  by  attaining  their  objects,  while  he  would  end  in  failure  and  disgrace.  John- 
son's interpretation  quite  misses  the  point,  while  Malone  does  not  touch  the  first  of  the 
two  lines,  and  fails  to  explain  the  blossoming  first  and  getting  ripe  first,  which  are  im- 
portant words  here.  Hudson  :  The  meaning  seems  to  be,  'though  in  the  sunshine  of 
good  luck  the  other  parts  of  our  scheme  are  promising  well,  yet  we  must  expect  that 
the  part  which  first  meets  with  opportunity,  or  time  of  blossom,  will  soonest  come  to 
harvest,  or  catch  success.' 

411.  Introth]  Malone:  One  of  the  numerous  arbitrary  alterations  made  by  the 
Master  of  the  Revels  in  the  playhouse  copies,  from  which  a  great  part  of  the  Folio  was 
printed.  White  (ed.  i)  :  The  change  seems  to  be  due  rather  to  a  care  for  the  rhythm 
than  to  the  scruples  of  the  Master  of  the  Revels. 

418.  Theobald  :  This  unreasonable  long  Alexandrine  was  certainly  a  blunder  of 
the  editors;  a  slight  transposition  and  a  change  will  regulate  it.  [In  Text.  Notes, 
see  Theobald's  division  of  the  line,  wherein  he  followed  the  Qq.] 

418.  a  while]  Jennens  :  Perhaps  this  means  the  same  as  the  while,  and  may  bt  a 
contraction  for  at  the  while. 

418.  to  draw]  Steevens:  This  is  in  keeping  with  the  interrupted  speech.  Iago 
is  still  debating  with  b'mself  the  means  to  perplex  Othello. 


154  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  in  sc.  i. 

Soliciting  his  wife  :  I,  that's  the  way  :  420 

Dull  not  Deuice,  by  coldneffe,  and  delay.  Exit, 


A6lus  Tertius.    Scena  Prima. 

Enter  CaJJio,  Mufitians  y  and  Clowne. 

CaJJio.     Matters,  play  heere,  I  wil  content  your  paines, 
Something  that's  briefe:  and  bid,  goodmorrow  General. 

Clo.     Why  Matters,  haue  your  Inftruments  bin  in  Na-  5 

pies,  that  they  fpeake  i'th'Nofe  thus  ? 

420.  wife  :~\  wife — Ktly.  bid,  good  morrozv,  Theob.Warb.  Ktly.  bid, 

421.  not  Deuice]  not  deuife  Qq.  not,  Good-morro7v,]ohv\s.]en.Y^n\..  bid — good 
Device,  Theob.  Warb.                                          morrow,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Sing,    bid, 

Exit.]  Exeunt.  Qq.  good  morro7v  to  t/ie  Coll.  (MS),    bid 'Good 

1.  Actus...]  Om.  Qx.  Actus  3.  Sccenal.  morrow,  Glo.  Cam.  Dei.  Dyce  iii,  Wh.  ii. 
QjQ?     Actus... Scsena  Prima.  F2.  [They  play,  and  enter  the  Clowne.  Q2Q. 

Othello's  Palace.  Rowe.  Music  plays...  Theob. 

2.  Enter...]  Enter  Caffio, with Mufitians  5.  haue]  ha  Qq. 

and  the  Clowne,  Qx.     Enter  Caffio,  with  bin  in~\  bin  at  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 

Mufitians  Q2Q3.  Mai.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

3.  Maflers]  Mafler  Q  .  6.  fpeake]  play  Cap.  (corrected  in  Er- 

4.  bid,  goodmorrow]  F2.    bid  good  mor-  rata),     squeak  Coll.  ii  (MS),  Sing.  ii. 
row  QqF3.     bid  good  morrow,  F4,  Rowe,  i  'th']  i  'the  Qx.    i'thQ3Qr    ith'  Fy 
Pope,  Han.  Coll.  Dyce  i,  Wh.  i,  Sta.  Rife. 

419.  iumpe]  Exactly;  see  Shakespeare  passim. 

419.  when]  Collier  (ed.  ii)  Where  of  the  (MS.)  is  probably  wrong,  since  Iago  is 
adverting  more  to  time  than  to  place. 

2.  Theobald  (Nichols's  Illus.,  ii,  593) :  The  direction  for  this  entrance  does  not  seem 
entirely  right.  The  scene  should  be  before  Othello's  palace.  Cassio  should  speak  with 
the  musicians ;  after  his  speech  they  should  play  their  serenade ;  and  then  the  Clown 
should  enter,  as  from  the  house.  [This  scene  and  the  following  scene  are  generally 
omitted,  I  believe,  on  the  modern  stage. — Ed.] 

3.  play  heere]  Brand  {Pop.  Ant.,  ii,  176) :  The  custom  of  awaking  a  couple  the 
morning  after  the  marriage  with  a  concert  of  music,  is  of  old  standing.  In  the  letter 
from  Sir  Dudley  Carleton  to  Mr.  Winwood,  describing  the  nuptials  of  the  Lady  Susan 
with  Sir  Philip  Herbert,  it  is  stated  that,  •  they  were  lodged  in  the  council  chamber, 
where  the  King  gave  them  a  reveille  matin  before  they  were  up.'  Chappell  {Pop. 
Music,  &c,  p.  61) :  Any  song  intended  to  arouse  in  the  morning  was  formerly  called  a 
hunt's  up.  See  Rom.  &  Jul.  Ill,  v,  34.  Cotgrave  defines  *  Resveil :  A  Hunts-vp,  or 
morning  song  for  a  new-married  wife,  the  day  after  the  marriage.'  Ritson  :  Haut-boys 
are  the  wind-instruments  here  meant. 

5.  Naples]  Johnson:  A  loathsome  disease  first  appeared  at  the  siege  of  Naples. 
Parr  (p.  36) :  There  are  few  Clowns  in  Italy  know  this ;  but  every  clown  there  knows 
that  Pulcinella  is  the  Neapolitan  mask,  and  that  Pulcinella  speaks  through  the  nose. 
He  generally  knows,  too,  that  the  man  who  plays  the  puppet  puts  into  his  mouth  a  reed 
similar  to  that  which  is  placed  in  the  orifice  of  the  haut-boy.  Cowden-Clarke  :  The 
Neapolitans  have  a  singularly  drawling  nasal  twang  in  the  utterance  of  their  dialect. 


ACT  III,  SC.  1. 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


155 


Muf.     How  Sir?  how?  7 

Clo.     Are  thefe  I  pray  you,  winde  Infhruments  ? 

Muf.     I  marry  are  they  fir. 

Clo.     Oh,  thereby  hangs  a  tale.  10 

Muf.     Whereby  hangs  a  tale,  fir  ? 

Clow.     Marry  fir,  by  many  a  winde  Inftrument  that  I 
know.     But  Matters,  heere's  money  for  you  :  and  the  Ge- 
nerall  fo  likes  your  Mufick,  that  he  defires  you  for  loues 
fake  to  make  no  more  noife  with  it.  15 

Muf     Well  Sir,  we  will  not. 

Clo.  If  you  haue  any  Muficke  that  may  not  be  heard, 
too't  againe.  But  (as  they  fay)  to  heare  Muficke,  the  Ge- 
nerall  do's  not  greatly  care. 

Muf.     We  haue  none  fuch,  fir.  20 

Clow.  Then  put  vp  your  Pipes  in  your  bagge,  for  He 
away.     Go,  vanifli  into  ayre,  away.  Exit  Mu. 

Cajfw.     Doft  thou  heare  me,  mine  honeft  Friend  ? 

Clo.     No,  I  heare  not  your  honeft  Friend  : 
I  heare  you.  25 

CaJJio.  Prythee  keepe  vp  thy  Quillets,  trier's  a  poore 
peece  of  Gold  for  thee  :  if  the  Gentlewoman  that  attends 
the  Generall  be  ftirring,    tell  her,    there's  one  Cajfio  en-  28 


7,  9,  &c.  Muf.]  Boy.  Qq. 

8.  1 pray  you ,]  I  pray,  cald  QXQ2.  / 
pray  you,  cald  Q  ,  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
Coll.  Sing.  Ktly,  Del. 

10, 1 1.  tale]  tayle  Qq.  tail  Q.'&l,  Q.'95- 

13.  heere's]  heer's Q2.  hee'sF^.  tier's Q. 

14.  15.  for  loues  fake~\  of  all  loues  Qx, 
Johns.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly, 
Sta.  Dyce  iii,  Coll.  iii,  Huds. 

15.  no  more]  no  FfQ  ,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han. 

18.  too't']  to't  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 


20.  haue]  ha  Qq. 

21.  put  vp]  put  Qq. 

for  lie]  and  hye  Han.  Warb.  Jen. 

22.  into  ayre]  Om.  Q,,  Jen. 
Exit  Mu.]  Om.  Qq. 

23.  heare  me,  mine]  hear  my  Qq.  hear, 
mine  Theob.  + ,  Coll.  Wh.  hear,  my  Cap. 
et  cet. 

24.  25.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 
26.  therms]  there's  OFF,. 

28.  Generall]  Cenerals  wife  Qx.  Gen- 
erals  wife  Q2Q3>  Rowe  et  seq. 


14.  for  loues  sake]  Knight  :  The  Qto  has  the  prettier  phrase.  [See  Abbott, 
§  169,  for  other  instances  where  of  is  used  in  appeals.] 

18.  too't]  Is  there  a  pun  here?  White  (ed.  ii)  says  that  'in  "the  Generall"  we 
have  a  punning  allusion  to  the  indifference  of  the  general  public  to  music,'  and  I  think 
one  pun  is  quite  as  likely,  or  as  unlikely,  as  the  other. — Ed. 

21.  for  He  away]  Ritson  (p.  231):  This  must  be  wrong;  possibly— -fly  away. 
[An  unknown  former  owner  of  my  copy  of  Jennens  has  here  queried  on  the  margin, 
fore  all,  away,  which  is  both  ingenious  and  plausible. — Ed.] 

26.  Quillets]  Malone:  Nice  and  frivolous  distinctions.     [See  Ham.  V,  i,  94]. 


i;6 


THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  hi,  sc.  i. 


treats  her  a  little  fauour  of  Speech.     Wilt  thou  do  this  ? 

Clo.     She  is  ftirring  fir  :  if  fhe  will  fiirre  hither,  I  (hall 
feeme  to  notifie  vnto  her.  Exit  Clo. 


30 


Enter  Iago. 
In  happy  time,  Iago. 

Iago.     You  haue  not  bin  a-bed  then  ? 

CaJJio.    Why  no  :  the  day  had  broke  before  we  parted.  35 

1  haue  made  bold  {Iago)  to  fend  in  to  your  wife : 
My  fuite  to  her  is,  that  fhe  will  to  vertuous  Defdemona 
Procure  me  fome  acceffe.  [322  b~\ 

Iago.     He  fend  her  +0  you  prefently : 
And  He  deuife  a  meane  to  draw  the  Moore  40 

Out  of  the  way,  that  your  conuerfe  and  bufineffe 
May  be  more  free.  Exit 

CaJJio.     I  humbly  thanke  you  for^t.     I  neuer  knew 
A  Florentine  more  kinde,  and  honeft.  44 


29.  her]  ofherRovre  —  . 
Speech.]   fpeech —  Qq. 

30.  fir .... hither^]  sir,. ..hither.  Jen. 

31.  feeme  to]  soon  so  Sing,  ii   (MS). 
seem  so  to  Coll.  ii  (MS). 

if  Clo.]  Om.  Qx.  (After  Iago,  line 

33)  QA- 

7,  ]  Ff.  Caf.  Doe  good  my 
f?-iend ';  In  happy  Qq,  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
I-'. .  •  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly.  Cas.  Do, 
my  good  friend  [Enter  Iago]  hi  happy 
Rowe-t-,  Cap.  (subs.).  Cas.  Do,  good  my 
friend  [To  him  Enter  Iago]  In  happy 
Jen.  Dvce,  Sta.  Glo.  Cam.  Del.  Huds.  Rife, 
Wh.  ii'. 

34,  36.  haue]  ha  Qq. 

34     bin]  been  F  . 

a-bed]  a  bed  QqF  F  . 


35-37.  Why... Defdemona]  Lines  end, 
parted. ..her..  Defdemona  Qq.  Ending, 
parted. . . wife; ...her... Desdemona.  Johns. 
E  nding,  broke . . .  Iago  ...her...  Desdem  ona 
Cap.  et  seq. 

36.  Iago]  Om.  Pope  +  . 
"wife :]  wife, —  Qq. 

y].  to  her]  Om.  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
Wart. 

vertuous]  Om.  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
Wart. 

39.  to  you]  Om.  Pope  +  . 

42.  Exit.]  After  for  t,  line  43,  Cap.  Ktly, 
Glo.  Cam. 

43-  fort]  foritQx. 

43.  44.  Lines  end,  for3 1... honest.  Cap. 

44.  A  Florentine]  a  man  Cap. 


30,  31.  These  lines  are,  of  course,  prose.  In  the  Globe  Edition  they  chance  to 
divide  at  '  hither.'  White  overlooked  this,  and,  in  printing  his  second  edition  from 
the  Globe,  has  in  his  own  text  retained  the  division  at  •  hither '  and  printed  as  verse. 
1  To  err  :;  ."  and  no  divineness  is  needed  to  forgive  so  venial  a  slip  as  this. — Ed. 

31.  to  notifie  vnto]  Delius  :  A  pedantic,  affected  phrase  which  the  Clown  pur- 
posely uses,  and  in  such  a  way  as  to  leave  it  uncertain  that  he  himself  understood  it. 

33.  In  happy  time]  A  la  bonne  heure.     See  Rom.  &  Jul.  Ill,  v,  no;  Ham.  V, 
ii,  193,  &c,  ftc. 
38.  accesse]  F:r  the  accent,  see  Abbott,  §490. 
43,  44.  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  89)  suggests   'n  view  of  the  very  frequent  interpolation  of 


act  in,  sc.  i.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  157 

Enter  ^Emilia.  45 

JEmil.     Goodmorrow(good  Lieutenant)  I  am  forrie 
For  your  difpleafure  :  but  all  will  fure  be  well. 
The  Generall  and  his  wife  are  talking  of  it, 
And  fhe  fpeakes  for  you  ftoutly.     The  Moore  replies, 
That  he  you  hurt  is  of  great  Fame  in  Cyprus,  50 

And  great  Affinitie  :  and  that  in  wholfome  Wifedome 
He  might  not  but  refufe  you. But  he  protefts  he  loues  you 
And  needs  no  other  Suitor,  but  his  likings 
To  bring  you  in  againe. 

CaJJio,     Yet  I  befeech  you,  55 

If  you  thinke  fit,  or  that  it  may  be  done, 
Giue  me  aduantage  of  fome  breefe  Difcourfe 
With  Def demon  alone.  58 

47.  fure]  foone  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Theob.  Han.  Warb.     likings.  To  take  the 

Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly.  fafeft  occafion  by  the  front Qqetcet.  {Jirst 

51.  wholfome~\  Om.  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  occasion  ]ohns.  safst  occasion  Cap.  Steev. 
Warb.  '93,  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh.  Ktly,  Sta. 

52.  but}  bat  Q3.  Del.). 

refufe  you~\  refufe  Q2Q3,  Cap.  58.  Defdemon]  Ff,  Rowe,  Wh.  i,  Sta. 

he  protefis~\  Om.  Han.  Del.  Dyce  iii.     Defdemona  Qq  et  cet. 

53>  54-   likings  To~\  Ff,   Rowe,  Pope, 

a  in  the  Folio,  this  division  and  reading :  '  I  humbly  thank  you  for't  |  I  ne'er  knew 
Florentine  more  kind  and  honest.'  '  Perhaps,'  he  adds,  '  we  should  arrange  rather, — 
"  I  humbly  thank  you  for't ;  I  ne'er  knew  Florentine  |  More  kind  and  honest."  '  [See 
Capell's  reading  and  division,  in  Textual  Notes.] 

43.  humbly]  Dyce  (ed.  iii)  :  '  The  word  "  humbly "  is  constantly  used  with 
"thank,"  "pray,"  "beseech,"  and  the  like:  hence,  I  suppose,  a  transcriber  inserted 
it  here.  Cassio  was  Iago's  equal,  or  rather  his  superior,  and  would  scarcely  have  used 
the  word  even  in  his  present  dejected  state.' — W.  N.  Lettsom.  Here,  I  apprehend, 
*  humbly '  is  no  more  to  be  taken  in  its  literal  sense  than  is  '  humble '  now-a-days  when 
some  very  courteous  correspondent  signs  himself  *  Your  humble  servant.' 

44.  Florentine]  Malone  :  In  consequence  of  this  line,  a  doubt  has  been  enter- 
tained concerning  the  country  of  Iago.  Cassio  was  undoubtedly  a  Florentine,  as 
appears  by  I,  i,  22,  where  he  is  expressly  called  one.  That  Iago  was  a  Venetian  is 
proved  by  what  he  says  after  having  stabbed  Roderigo,  V,  i,  112.  All  that  Cassio 
means  to  say  here  is,  '  I  never  experienced  more  honesty  and  kindness  even  in  any  one 
of  my  own  countrymen  than  in  this  man.' 

47.  displeasure]  Steevens  :  The  displeasure  you  have  incurred  from  Othello. 

53.  likings]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  250) :  Why  the  plural?  In  F,  there  is  no  stop  aftef 
the  word ;  perhaps  s  has  usurped  the  place  of  the  comma,  as  it  has  elsewhere  [in  the 
examples  which  Walker  then  proceeds  to  give]. 

58.  Desdemon]  This  instance  of  the  name  thus  spelled  must  have  escaped 
Knight's  notice,  or,  I  think,  he  would  not  have  written,  or  at  least  would  have  modi- 
fied, the  following  note,  which  he  appends  to  III,  iii,  64:  'In  five  passages  in  the 


158  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      [act.  hi.  sc.  li. 

sEmil.     Pray  you  come  in  : 
I  will  beftow  you  where  you  (hall  haue  time  60 

To  fpeake  your  bofome  freely. 

CaJJio.     I  am  much  bound  to  you. 


Sccena   Secunda. 

Enter  Otliello,  I  ago,  and  Gentlemen. 

Othe.     Thefe  Letters  giue  (/ago)  to  the  Pylot, 
And  by  him  do  my  duties  to  the  Senate : 

That  done,  I  will  be  walking  on  the  Workes,  5 

Repaire  there  to  mee. 

/ago.     Well,  my  good  Lord,  He  doo't. 

Oth.     This  Fortification  (Gentlemen) fhall  we  fee't? 

Gent.     Well  waite  vpon  your  Lordfhip.  Exeunt  9 

59.  Pray  you~\  Pray  Ff,  Rowe.  4.  by  him']  bid  him  Cap.  conj.  (p.  28  b). 

62.  Om.  QI#  Senate]  State  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai. 

7"  am]  L^m   Pope,   Theob.   Han.  Var.  Coll.  Wh.  i. 

Warb.  5.  on  the]  to  the  QaQ3- 

[Exeunt.  QqF  F  .  Workes,"]  works;  Coll.  Dyce,  Glo. 

1.  Sccena...]  Om.  Qq,  Rowe.  Cam.     works, —  Knt,  Sta. 

2.  Enter ...  Gentlemen]  Enter  ...  other  7.  Well]  Om.  Pope  +  . 
Gentlemen.  Qq.  9.  Well]  WeQq,  Jen.  Coll.Wh.  i.    Weel 

3.  Pylot]  Pilate  QxQa.     Pilot  ^^^  Fa.     We'll  FgF4  et  cet. 

Folio  Desdemona  is  called  Desdemon.  The  abbreviation  was  not  a  capricious  one, 
nor  was  it  introduced  merely  for  the  sake  of  rhythm.  It  is  clearly  used  as  an  epithet 
[sic]  of  familiar  tenderness.  In  the  present  instance  [III,  iii,  64]  Othello  playfully 
evades  his  wife's  solicitations  with  a  rarely-used  term  of  endearment.  In  the  next 
case,  IV,  ii,  50,  it  comes  out  of  the  depth  of  conflicting  love  and  jealousy — "  Ah  !  Des- 
demon, away,  away,  away ! "  In  the  next  place  where  he  employs  it,  V,  ii,  29,  it  is 
used  upon  the  last  solemn  occasion  when  he  speaks  to  her,  "  Have  you  prayed  to-night, 
Desdemon  ?  "  And,  lastly,  it  is  spoken  by  him  when  he  has  discovered  the  full  extent 
of  his  guilt  and  misery,  "  O  Desdemon  !  dead  Desdemon,  dead."  The  only  other  occa- 
sion on  which  it  is  employed  is  by  her  uncle  Gratiano, — "  Poor  Desdemon !  "  Surely 
we  have  no  warrant  for  rejecting  such  a  marked  peculiarity.'  Walker  {Crit.  i,  230J 
suggests  that  Knight  supposed  the  spelling  in  the  present  instance,  the  sixth,  *  to  be  an 
erratum  ' ;  but  it  is  not ;  the  verse  requires,  as  Walker  says,  that  we  should  read  Desde- 
mon, and  assuredly  there  can  be  no  thought  of  '  familiar  tenderness '  here,  from  Cassio. 
This  alone  is  a  serious,  perhaps  fatal,  objection  to  Knight's  theory,  which  I  regretfully 
relinquish;  nor  is  the  objection  lessened  when  we  find,  as  Walker  points  out,  that  a 
double  form  of  proper  names  is  by  no  means  uncommon.  There  are  half  a  dozen 
instances  of  *  Helen '  foi  Helena  :n  Mid.  N.  D.,  and  again  in  Alfs  Well. — Ed. 


act  in,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  1 59 

Scoena   Tertia. 

Enter  Defdemona,  CaJJio,  and  ^Emilia. 

Def.     Be  thou  affur'd  (good  Caffw)  I  will  do 
All  my  abilities  in  thy  behalfe. 

ALmil.     Good  Madam  do  :  5 

I  warrant  it  greeues  my  Husband, 
As  if  the  caufe  were  his. 

Def.     Oh  that's  an  honeft  Fellow,  Do  not  doubt  CaJJio 
But  I  will  haue  my  Lord,  and  you  againe 
As  friendly  as  you  were.  10 

CaJJio.     Bounteous  Madam, 
What  euer  fhall  become  of  Michael  Caffio^ 
He's  neuer  any  thing  but  your  true  Seruant. 

Def.     I  know't  :  I  thanke  you  :  you  do  loue  my  Lord : 
You  haue  knowne  him  long,  and  be  you  well  affur'd  15 

He  fhall  in  flrangeneffe  ftand  no  farther  off, 
Then  in  a  politique  diftance. 

CaJJio.     I,  but  Lady,  18 


I.  Sccena  Tertia]  Om.  Qq.  Scene  II. 
Rowe. 

An  Apartment.  Rowe.  Before  the  Cas- 
tle. Cap.    The  Garden  of  the  Castle.  Dyce. 

3.  do]  use  Quincy  (MS). 

5.  6.  One  line,  Qq,  Pope  et  seq. 

6.  warrant]  know  Qq,  Pope-f,  Jen. 
Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly. 

7.  caufe]  Ff,  Rowe+,  Knt,  Sta.  Del. 
cafe  Qq  et  cet. 

8.  Fellow^]  fellow  : —  Qq.  Fellow  :  F 
F  ,  Rowe  +  .    fellow.  Johns,  et  seq. 

Do  not  doubt  ]  doubt  not  Pope  + . 


II.  Bounteous]  Bountious  Qx.  Most 
bounteous  Pope  +  ,  Cap. 

14.  I  know' t;]  O  fir,  Qq,  Cap.  Jen. 
Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly,  Huds. 
Iknow't,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Han.Warb. 
Knt,  Dyce,  Sta.     I  know' t!  Wh.  i. 

15.  You  haue]  You've  Pope  -f ,  Dyce  iii, 
Huds. 

be  you  well]  be  Q  . 

16.  flrangeneffe]  flrangefl  Qq.  in  s 
strangest  Anon  (ap.  Cam.  ed.). 

farther]  further   Steev.'93,    Var 
Dyce,  Glo.  Del.  Huds.  Rife,  Wh.  ii. 


Fechter's  setting  of  the  stage  for  this  scene  is  noteworthy ;  some  of  its  details  have 
been  since  adopted  by  eminent  actors,  and  the  public  has  not  given  due  credit  to  the 
originator.  It  is  thus  :  A  Room  in  the  Castle.  At  the  back,  an  arched  opening,  look- 
ing over  the  sea.  Right  and  left,  in  front, — and  facing  the  public, — two  large  doorways 
closed  with  tapestry.  At  the  left,  a  divan,  and  table  covered  with  papers,  maps,  instru- 
ments of  navigation,  &c.  On  the  right  a  low  chair  and  stool ;  around  and  about  them, 
embroideries,  music,  musical  instruments,  &c.  As  the  curtain  rises,  Desdemona,  seated, 
winds  off  silk,  which  Emilia  (sitting  on  the  stool)  holds  to  her;  Cassio  stands  respectfully 
before  Desdemona,  who  continues  her  work  as  she  speaks. 

16.  strangenesse]  The  Anonymous  conjecture  recorded  by  the  Cambridge  Ed- 
itors seems  singularly  happy. — Ed. 


l6o  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      [act  hi,  sc.  iil 

That  policie  may  either  laft  fo  long, 

Or  feede  vpon  fuch  nice  and  waterifh  diet,  20 

Or  breede  it  felfe  fo  out  of  Circumftances, 

That  I  being  abfent,  and  my  place  fupply'd, 

My  Generall  will  forget  my  Loue,  and  Seruice. 

Def.     Do  not  doubt  that  :  before  Almilia  here, 
I  giue  thee  warrant  of  thy  place.     Affure  thee,  [323  a\ 

If  I  do  vow  a  friendfhip,  He  performe  it  26 

To  the  laft  Article.     My  Lord  fhall  neuer  reft, 
He  watch  him  tame,  and  talke  him  out  of  patience ; 
His  Bed  fhall  feeme  a  Schoole,  his  Boord  a  Shrift, 
He  intermingle  euery  thing  he  do's  30 

With  Caffio's  fuite  :  Therefore  be  merry  CaJJio, 
For  thy  Solicitor  fhall  rather  dye,  32 

19.  That]  The  Qx.  23.  wilT\  would Jen. 

20.  wateri/Ji]  watrijh  Qx,  Cap.  and]  an  Q  . 

21.  Circumjlances]  Ff,  Rowe-K  cir-  24.  ^Emilia]  Emillia  Qq. 
cumjlance  Qq  et  cet.                                                 25.  place.]  place?  Q2. 

22.  fuppl/d]  fupplied  Qq.  27.  JJiall  neuer]  shan't  Han. 

19.  That  policie]  Johnson  :  He  may  either  of  himself  think  it  politic  to  keep  me 
out  of  office  so  long,  or  he  may  be  satisfied  with  such  slight  reasons,  or  so  many  acci- 
dents may  make  him  think  my  re-admission  at  that  time  improper,  that  I  may  be  quite 
forgotten. 

24.  doubt]  White  (ed.  ii) :  Do  not  imagine,  fear,  that. 

25.  warrant]  Coleridge  (p.  255) :  The  over-zeal  of  innocence  in  Desdemona. 

28.  tame]  Johnson:  It  is  said  that  the  ferocity  of  beasts,  insuperable  and  irre- 
claimable by  any  other  means,  is  subdued  by  keeping  them  from  sleep.  Steevens  :  It 
is  to  the  management  of  hawks  and  other  birds  that  Shakespeare  alludes.  So,  in  Cart- 
wright's  Lady  Errant ;  'we'll  keep  you,  As  they  do  hawks,  watching  until  you  leave 
Your  wildness.'  Again,  in  Monsieur  D1  Olive,  1606:  'your  only  way  to  deal  with 
women  and  parrots,  is  to  keep  them  waking.'  Harting  (p.  45)  :  A  wild  hawk  was 
sometimes  tamed  by  watching  it  night  and  day,  to  prevent  its  sleeping.  So,  in  '  An 
approved  treatyse  of  Hawks  and  Hawking,'  by  Edmund  Berk,  Gent,  1 619  : — •  I  have 
heard  of  some  who  watched  and  kept  their  hawks  awake  seven  nights  and  as  many 
days,  and  then  they  would  be  wild,  rammish,  and  disorderly.'  Pye  (p,  335) :  This 
strumpet-like  resolution  of  Desdemona  takes  off  much  from  the  interest  we  should  take 
in  her  fate.  [In  Pye's  Preface,  where  he  is  pleased  to  speak  favorably  of  Shakespeare 
(Pye  was  Poet  Laureate,  be  it  remembered),  he  observes  that  Shakespeare  'does  not 
possess  the  power  of  Otway,  and  many  inferior  poets,  in  exciting  pity.'  Should  not  a 
list  of  those  poets  who  are  superior  to  Shakespeare  in  exciting  pity  include  Pye  ?  Is 
there  anything  in  Shakespeare  that  excites  more  pity  than  this  remark  on  Desdemona? 
Pye  says  that  his  Notes  are  the  result  of  his  '  penisal '  of  Shakespeare,  which  has  been 
'  a  favorite  amusement  in  his  hours  of  leisure.'  With  what  force  is  not  the  truth  of  the 
infant  hymn  driven  home  to  us :  '  For  Satan  finds  some  mischief  still  For  idle  hands 
to  do ' !— Ed.] 


act  in,  sc.  in./  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  fbl 

Then  giue  thy  caufe  away.  3* 

Enter  Otliello,  and  Iago. 

AimiL     Madam,  heere  comes  my  Lord.  5» 

Cajfw.     Madam,  He  take  my  leaue. 
DeJ.     Why  ftay,  and  heare  me  fpeake. 
CaJJio.     Madam,  not  now  :  I  am  very  ill  at  eafe, 
Vnfit  for  mine  owne  purpofes. 

Def.     Well,  do  your  difcretion.  Exit  CaJJ-r*.  40 

Iago.     Hah?  I  like  not  that. 

OtheL     What  doft  thou  fay  ? 

Iago.     Nothing  my  Lord ;  or  if — I  know  not  what. 

OtheL     Was  not  that  CaJJio  parted  from  my  wife  ?  44 

33.  thy  caufe]  thee  caufe ;  Qt.  38.  /  am~\   Pin   Pope    'Iru.ob.   Han. 
Scene  IV.  Pope  +  ,  Jen.                                  Warb.  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 

33,37.  Lines  end,  comes... stay... speak  39.  purpofes]  purpofe  Qq,  Coll.  i,  Wh. 

Steev.'93,  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  i,  Ktly. 

34.  Enter...]  Enter  Othello,  Iago,  and  40.  Well]  Closing  line  39,  Sing.  Weli, 
Gentlemen  Qq.  ...at  distance.  Theob.  well,  (closing  line  39)  Cap.  Steev.'93,  Var. 
After  line  40,  Dyce,  Wh.  Glo.  Sta.  Huds.  41.  Hah  ?]  Ha,  Qq. 

Rife.  43-  '/-]  if,  Qx-     #-0.0,. 

37.  Why]  Nay  Q2Q3,  Jen. 

35  et  seq.  Delius  :  In  short  colloquies  like  this,  Shakespeare  is  fond  of  using  half 
Alexandrines,  which  are  usually  cut  up  by  the  Editors  into  blank  verse.  Capell's 
emendation  and  division  of  line  40  occurred  independently  to  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  147). 

40.  Fechter  :  Othello  and  Iago  appear  at  the  back,  in  the  gallery.  Emilia  draws 
the  tapestry  on  the  left,  to  give  passage  to  Cassio.  Iago  (as  by  an  involuntary  move- 
ment) touches  the  arm  of  Othello,  who  raises  his  head  at  the  moment  when  Cassio 
bows  to  Desdemona  and  goes  out.  Booth  :  Enter  Othello  and  Iago.  Desdemona 
and  Emilia  go  with  Cassio  into  the  garden  at  back,  and  Cassio  lingers  just  long 
enough  to  be  seen  by  Othello  and  Iago.  The  women  remain  for  a  moment  after 
his  exit. 

41.  Booth  :  Don't  growl  this, — let  it  barely  be  heard  by  the  audience. 

44.  Fechter  :  Othello  comes  forward,  opening  dispatches  and  petitions,  and  fol- 
lowed by  Iago.  Lewes  (On  Actors,  &c,  p.  156) :  It  is  one  of  Fechter's  new  arrange- 
ments that  Othello,  when  the  tempter  begins  his  diabolical  insinuation,  shall  be  seated 
at  a  table  reading  and  signing  papers.  When  I  first  heard  of  this  bit  of  '  business  '  it 
struck  me  as  admirable ;  and  indeed  I  think  so  still ;  although  the  manner  in  which 
Fechter  executes  it  is  one  of  those  lamentable  examples  in  which  the  dramatic  art  is 
subordinated  to  serve  theatrical  effect.  (Foot-note :  Having  now  seen  Salvini  in 
Othello,  1  conclude  that  this  'business'  was  imitated  from  him, — but  Fechter  failed 
to  imitate  the  expression  of  emotion  which  renders  such  business  significant.)  That 
Othello  should  be  seated  over  his  papers,  and  should  reply  to  Iago's  questions  while 
continuing  his  examination  and  affixing  his  signature,  is  natural ;  but  it  is  not  natu- 
ral,— that  is,  not  true  to  the  nature  of  Othello  and  the  situation, — for  him  to  be  dead 
II 


162  THE   TRAGEDJE   OF   OTHELLO      [ACT  III,  SC.  id. 

Iago.     CaJJio  my  Lord  ?  No  fure,  I  cannot  thinke  it  45 

That  he  would  fteale  away  fo  guilty-like, 
Seeing  your  comming. 

Oth.     I  do  beleeue  'twas  he. 

Def.     How  now  my  Lord  ? 
I  haue  bin  talking  with  a  Suitor  heere,  50 

A  man  that  languifhes  in  your  difpleafure. 

Oth.     Who  is't  you  meane  ? 

Def.     Why  your  Lieutenant  CaJJio  :  Good  my  Lord, 
If  I  haue  any  giace,  or  power  to  moue  you, 

His  prefent  reconciliation  take.  55 

For  if  he  be  not  one,  that  truly  louesyou, 
That  erres  in  Ignorance,  and  not  in  Cunning, 
I  haue  no  iudgement  in  an  honeft  face. 
I  prythee  call  him  backe. 

Oth.     Went  he  hence  now  ?  60 

Def.     I  footh  ;  fo  humbled, 
That  he  hath  left  part  of  his  greefe  with  mee 
To  fuffer  with  him.     Good  Loue,  call  him  backe.  63 

45.  Lord 7]  Lord? — Qq.  F  F4,  Theob.Warb.    In  sooth  Rowe,  Pope, 

46.  Jleale\  fneake  QT.  Han.    /'  sooth  Johns.  Jen.   Ay,  sooth  Cap. 

47.  your]  F2,  Knt.  you  QqF  F4,  Rowe         et  cet. 

et  cet.  humbled]  humbPd  Cap.  (corrected 

48.  do"]  Om.  Pope  +  .  in  Errata). 

48,  49.  One  line,  Walker.  62.  hath"]  has  Qq. 

53.  Caflio  :]  Cafllo,  Qq.     Caffio.  Ff.  greefe~\  grief es  Qq. 

60,  61.  One  line,  Walker.  63.  To  fuffer]  I fuffer  QJf  Mai.  Steev. 

61.  ffooth]F2.  Yes  faith  Qq.    I,  Sooth  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

to  the  dreadful  import  of  Iago's  artful  suggestions.  [I  do  not  know  when  Salvini 
first  acted  Othello,  but  Fechter,  I  believe,  had  acted  Othello  many  times  when  his  Art- 
ing  Copy  was  printed  in  186 1. — Ed.] 

48.  Booth  :  Exeunt  Iago  and  Emilia.  Their  presence  would  distract  attention ; 
besides,  it  is  proper  for  them  to  retire  during  an  interview  between  their  superiors. 

49.  Fechter  :  Othello  kisses  Desdemona  on  the  forehead. 

55.  take]  Warburton  :  Cassio  was  to  be  reconciled  to  his  General,  not  his  Gen- 
eral to  him  ;  therefore  '  take '  cannot  be  right.  We  should  read  make.  Johnson  :  To 
take  his  reconciliation,  may  be  to  accept  the  submission  which  he  makes  in  order  to  be 
reconciled. 

57.  Cunning]  Warburton  :  Design  or  purpose  simply.  Malone  :  Peihaps, 
rather,  kncnvledge,  the  ancient  sense  of  the  word.     It  is  opposed  to  ignorance. 

60.  Fechter  :  Othello  seats  himself  in  Desdemona's  chair  and  returns  to  his  papers, 
as  if  to  break  the  conversation. 

Ci.  humbled]  Walker  {Crit.  iii,  286):  A  trisyllable  here. 


act  III,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF    VENICE  163 

Otlicl.     Not  now  (fweet  Defdemori)  fome  other  time. 

Def     But  fhall't  be  fhortly  ?  6? 

Oth.     The  fooner  (Sweet)  for  you. 

Def.     Shall't  be  to  night,  at  Supper  ? 

OtJi.     No,  not  to  night. 

Def.     To  morrow  Dinner  then  ? 

OtJi.     I  fhall  not  dine  at  home  :  70 

I  meete  the  Captaines  at  the  Cittadell. 

Def.     Why  then  to  morrow  night,  on  Tuefday  morne, 
On  Tuefday  noone,  or  night  ;  on  Wenfday  Morne. 
I  prythee  name  the  time,  but  let  it  not  74 

64.  Defdemon]     F2F  Q2,    Knt,    Sing.  73.  night;  on]  night,  or  Qq,  Fope  +  , 

Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Sta.  Hal.  Del.  Coll.  iii,  Huds.  Jen.    night ;  or  Cap.  Steev.  Mal.Var.  Sing. 

Defdemona  QXQ3F4,  Rowe  et  cet.  Ktly. 

66.  The  fooner~\  Sooner  Pope,  Han.  Wen/day]  wedenfday  Q  .    wednef- 
68.  No,  not]  Not  Pope  +  .  day  QaF3F4. 

72.  on]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.     or  Qq  et  cet.  74.  prythee]  preethee  Qx.  prethee  Q2Q3 

73.  On  Tuefday]  Or  Tuesday  Pope  + ,  F  ^  ■  praytheeY^  pray  thee  Cap.  Steev. 
Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly.  Mai.  Var. 

noone]  morne  Qq. 

64.  Desdemon]  See  III,  i,  58.     Booth  :  He  leads  her  to  the  couch — they  sit. 

67.  to  night]  Heraud  (p.  278) :  I  know  not  whether  the  poet  had  any  design  in 
it,  but  it  may  be,  and  perhaps  profitably,  remarked  that  the  action  of  the  Third  Act 

takes  place  on  a  Sunday In  the  arrangements  of  the  scene,  the  different  persons 

engaged  in  it  should  appear  as  if  coming  from  their  devotions.  In  the  next  Act  we 
find  Othello  derisively  alluding  to  having  seen  the  meretricious  Emilia  so  engaged ; 
and  this  event  may  have  happened  on  this  very  Sunday,  and  probably  had. 

70.  Lewes  (p.  158) :  These  preceding  short,  evasive  sentences  are  subtly  expressive 
of  Othello's  mind ;  but  Fechter  misrepresents  them  by  making  Othello  free  from  all 
misgiving.  He  '  toys  with  her  curls,'  and  treats  her  as  a  father  might  treat  a  child  who 
was  asking  some  favour  which  could  not  be  granted  yet,  which  called  for  no  explicit 
refusal.  If  the  scene  stood  alone,  I  should  read  it  differently ;  but  standing  as  it  does 
between  the  two  attempts  of  Iago  to  fill  Othello's  mind  with  suspicion,  the  meaning  is 
plain  enough.  He  has  been  made  uneasy  by  Iago's  remarks ;  very  naturally,  his  bear- 
ing towards  his  wife  reveals  that  uneasiness.  A  vague  feeling,  which  he  dares  not 
shape  into  a  suspicion,  disturbs  him.  She  conquers  him  at  last  by  her  winning  ways ; 
and  he  vows  that  he  will  deny  her  nothing.  If  this  be  the  state  of  mind  in  which  the 
great  scene  begins,  it  is  obviously  a  serious  mistake  in  Fechter  to  sit  down  to  his  papers, 
perfectly  calm,  free  from  all  idea  whatever  of  what  Iago  has  suggested  ;  and  answering 
Iago's  insidious  questions  as  if  he  did  not  divine  their  import.  So  clearly  does  Othello 
divine  their  import  that  it  is  he,  and  not  Iago,  who  expresses  in  words  their  meaning. 
It  is  one  of  the  artifices  of  Iago  to  make  his  victim  draw  every  conclusion  from  prem- 
ises which  are  put  before  him,  so  that,  in  the  event  of  detection,  he  can  say,  '  I  said 
nothing,  I  made  no  accusation.'  All  he  does  is  to  lead  the  thoughts  of  Othello  to  the 
conclusion  desired. 

72,  7 }.  On]   Knight:  The  repetition  of  'on'  is  much  more  emphatic  than  cr. 


164 


THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      'act  hi.  se.  iii. 


Exceed  three  dayes.     Infaith  hee's  penitent : 
And  yet  his  Trefpaffe,  in  our  common  reafon 
(Saue  that  they  fay  the  warres  muft  make  example) 
Out  of  her  beft,  is  not  almoft  a  fault 
T'encurre  a  priuate  checke.     When  fhall  he  come  ? 
Tell  me  Othello.     I  wonder  in  my  Soule 
What  you  would  aske  me,  that  I  fhould  deny, 
Or  ftand  fo  manuring  on  ?  What  ?  Michael  Cajfio, 
That  came  a  woing  wirh  you  ?  and  fo  many  a  time 
(When  I  haue  fpoke  of  you  difpraifingly) 


75 


80 


84 


75.  Infaith']  Ifaith  Qq.  Infaith  Rowe 
et  seq. 

77.  warres]  war  Cap. 

77>  7&  example) . . . bcfl,]  Ff.  example.. . 
best,)  Rowe  ii,  Pope,  Han.  Knt,  Sta.  ex- 
amples... befl)  Qq  et  cet. 

78.  her]  QqFf,  Cap.  Coll.  i,  Dyce  i,  Wh. 
i,  Hal.  Del.  the  Sing,  ii,  Huds.  our  Coll. 
iii  (MS),     their  Rowe  et  cet. 

aim  off]  at  most  Anon  (ap.  Cam.). 
79-   T  encurre]  Tincurre  F2F  .  Tin- 


cur  F  ,  Rowe  +  ,  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Dyce  iii, 
Huds.      To  incurre  Qq  et  cet. 

81.  would]  could  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev 
Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Del. 

Ifliould]  I  would  Ff,  Rowe-t-. 

82.  manuring]  ?nuttering  Qt,  Pope 
Theob.  Warb.  mummering Johns,  mam- 
meting  or  mamm'ring  Cap.  et  cet. 

83.  fo]  Om.  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Steev.'oj. 

84.  dispraifingly]  disparagingly  Mrs 
Jameson. 


78.  her  best]  Johnson  :  The  severity  of  military  discipline  must  not  spare  the  best 
men  of  their  army  when  their  punishment  may  afford  a  wholesome  example.  Collier 
(ed.  i) :  A  personification  of '  the  wars,'  which  Shakespeare  often  treats  as  a  substantive 
in  the  singular.  Collier  (ed.  ii)  :  '  Her  best'  is  a  misprint  for  'our  best,'  as  appears 
by  the  (MS.)  .  Dyce  (ed.  i)  :  If  we  consider  '  the  wars  '  as  used  for  war  generally,  the 
usual  modern  alteration,  '  their  best,'  is  unnecessary.  Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  '  I  must  own  I 
think  "her"  wrong.  The  is  perhaps  better  than  their  or  our? — W.  N.  Lettsom. 
[Would  the  difficulty  be  lessened  by  considering  the  s  in  '  Warres '  that  superfluous 
letter  to  which  Walker,  I,  i,  31,  calls  attention,  and  of  which,  in  this  play,  some  eight 
instances  are  given  ? — Ed.] 

78.  not  almost]  Abbott,  §  29 :  'Almost'  frequently  follows  the  word  which  i: 
qualifies.  Hence,  in  negative  sentences  '  not-almost,'  where  we  should  use  '  almost 
not,'  or,  in  one  word,  '  scarcely,'  '  hardly.'  Thus,  here,  in  this  present  instance,  it  is 
equivalent  to,  'Is  not  {I  may  almost  say)  fault  enough  to,'  &c,  or,  'is  scarcely  fault 
enough  to,'  &c.  It  was  natural  for  the  Elizabethans  to  dislike  putting  the  qualifying 
1  almost '  before  the  word  qualified  by  it.  But  there  was  an  ambiguity  in  their  idiom. 
'  Not  almost-a-fault '  would  mean  '  not  approaching  to  a  fault ' ;  '  not-almost  a  fault, 
'very  nearly  not  a  fault.'  We  have,  therefore,  done  well  in  avoiding  the  ambiguity  by 
disusing  '  almost '  in  negative  sentences. 

82.  mam'ring]  Hanmer  (Gloss.) :  To  hesitate,  to  stand  in  suspense.  Halliweli 
cites  from  Lyly's  Euphues  [p.  299,  ed.  Arber]  :  '  I  stoode  in  a  great  mamering,  how  ] 
might  behaue  my  selfe,  least  being  too  coye  he  might  thinke  mee  proud,  or  vsing  tr>o 
much  curtesie,  he  might  iudge  mee  wanton.' 

83.  with  you]  See  Note  on  I,  ii,  64. 


act  in,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  165 

Hath  tane  your  part,  to  haue  fo  much  to  do  85 

To  bring  him  in  ?  Truft  me,  I  could  do  much. 

Oth.     Prythee  no  more  :  Let  him  come  when  he  will : 
I  will  deny  thee  nothing. 

Dcf.     Why,  this  is  not  a  Boone : 
'Tis  as  I  mould  entreate  you  weare  your  Gloues,  [323  &] 

Or  feede  on  nourifhing  difhes,  or  keepe  you  warme,  91 

Or  fue  to  you,  to  do  a  peculiar  profit 
To  your  owne  perfon.     Nay,  when  I  haue  a  fuite 
Wherein  I  meane  to  touch  your  Loue  indeed, 
It  mail  be  full  of  poize,  and  difficult  waight,  95 

And  fearefull  to  be  granted. 

Oth.     I  will  deny  thee  nothing. 
Whereon,  I  do  befeech  thee,  grant  me  this, 
To  leaue  me  but  a  little  to  my  felfe. 

Def.     Shall  I  deny  you  ?  No  :  farewell  my  Lord.  10c 

Oth.     Farewell  my  Defdemona^  He  come  to  thee  ftrait. 

86.  Truft  me]  Birlady  Qx.  93.  afuite]fuit  FF,  Ro\ve  +  . 
much.]  QjFf.    much, —  or  much —  95.  poize]  poife  Qq. 

Q  Q   et  cet.  difficult     waight]     difficulty    Q , 

87.  Prythee]  Preethee  Qx.  Prethee  Qa  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly, 
Q3F3F4.     Prithee  Q.'8l.  Sta. 

85.  [Re-enter  Iago  and  Em.  Booth.  waight]  weight  Q2Q3F  F  . 

90.  Gloues]  cloths  Warb.  101.  Defdemona]  DefdomonaQ^  Def- 

91.  dzyhes]  meats  Pope-f.  damona  F2.     Desdemon  Dyce  iii. 

92.  you,]  you  Cap.  He]  I  will  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
a]  Om.  Pope  + ,  Cap.  Steev.'93,Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

Dyce  iii,  Huds.  to  thee]  Om.  Pope  + . 

84.  dispraisingly]  Booth  :  Reprove  her  playfully.  Throughout  this  colloquy  gaze 
lovingly  in  her  face,  and  seem  to  encourage  her  to  coax  by  your  teasing  silence. 

86.  Booth:  Here  she  begins  to  'pout'  at  her  failure  to  obtain  his  consent,  and  he, 
fearing  that  she  has  misconstrued  his  silence  during  her  last  appeal,  stops  her  with  a  kiss. 

91.  dishes]  Walker  (Vers.  267):  The  extra  syllable  in  the  body  of  the  line 
seems  hardly  allowable,  where  the  pause  is  so  slight;  and  yet  'dish'  for  'dishes' 
appears  much  too  harsh. 

92.  a]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  88)  suggests  that  this  is  one  of  the  many  instances  where 
a  is  interpolated  in  the  Folio,  and,  if  it  can  be  dispensed  with,  it  should  be  omitted  here 
for  the  sake  of  rhythm.  [See  Text.  Notes.] 

95.  poize]  Knight:  In  the  sense  before  us  'poize'  is  balance,  and  Desdemona 
means  to  say  that,  when  she  really  prefers  a  suit  that  shall  task  the  love  of  Othello,  it 
shall  be  one  difficult  to  determine;  and,  when  determined,  hard  to  be  undertaken. 
Dyce  ( Gloss.) :  Weight,  moment,  importance.  Staunton:  Since  'poize'  means 
weight,  the  line  in  F  is  apparently  an  error,  arising  probably  from  the  poet's  having, 
in  the  first  instance,  written  both  poize  and  weight,  uncertain  which  to  adopt,  and  after- 
wards forgotten  to  cancel  the  discarded  word. 


166  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  01  HELLO     [act.  hi,  sc.  iii. 

Dcf.     ALmilia  come  ;  be  as  your  Fancies  teach  you  :  102 

What  ere  you  be,  I  am  obedient.  Exit. 

OtJi.     Excellent  wretch  :  Perdition  catch  my  Soule 
But  I  do  loue  thee  :  and  when  I  loue  thee  not,  105 

Chaos  is  come  againe. 

102.  come ;  be]  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Knt.   come.         Exeunt  Def.  and  Em.  Q2Q  . 
beitQq.   come;  bet/ Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Scene  V.  rope +  ,  Jen. 

Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly.     Come.   Be  104.  wretch :]    wretch,  Qq.      wretch: 

Johns,  et  cet.  Rowe.     wench  !  Theob.  Han.  Wh.  ii. 

103.  Exit]   Exit  Dcfd.  and  Em.  Qx. 

104.  Feci  iter  :  Othello  follows  her  with  his  eyes,  and  sends  her  a  last  kiss. 
104-106.  Booth  :  With  joyousness, — yet  there  should  be  an  undertone  of  sadness, 

—as  at  their  first  embrace  in  Cyprus.  Iago,  at  the  back  of  the  stage,  watches  him  with 
a  sneering  smile. 

104.  wretch]  Theobald:  This  word  can  scarce  be  admitted  to  be  used  unless  in 
compassion  or  contempt.  I  make  no  question  but  that  the  Poet  wrote  wench,  which 
was  not  then  used  in  that  low  and  vulgar  acceptation  as  at  present.  See  '  ill-starr'd 
wench,'  V,  ii,  335.  Upton  (p.  289,  n.) :  Giraldi  Cinthio  calls  Desdemona,  in  allusion 
to  her  name,  la  infelice  Disdemona.  And  I  make  no  question  but  Othello,  in  his  rap- 
turous admiration,  with  some  allusion  to  her  name,  exclaims,  '  Excellent  wretch? 
Heath  (p.  561) :  The  poison  of  jealousy  has  already  begun  to  work  in  Othello,  in- 
fused by  the  artful  hints  and  half  sentences  of  Iago,  and  by  the  frank  and  pressing 
solicitations  of  Desdemona  on  behalf  of  Cassio.  His  assurance  in  her  faith  and  vir- 
tue is  already  somewhat  staggered,  and  he  begins  to  consider  it  as  a  thing  possible  that 
she  may  be  unworthy  of  his  love.  To  this  state  of  mind  this  exclamation  is  admirably 
well  adapted,  expressing  the  utmost  fondness,  and  at  the  same  time  a  distrust  growing 
upon  him.  If  the  etymology  of  the  name  had  been  known  to  Shakespeare,  as  Upton 
suggests,  he  would  not  have  spoiled  it  by  changing  it  from  Disdemona  to  Desdemona. 
Johnson  :  The  meaning  of  the  word  '  wretch  '  is  not  generally  understood.  It  is  now, 
in  some  parts  of  England,  a  term  of  the  softest  and  fondest  tenderness.  It  expresses 
the  utmost  degree  of  amiableness,  joined  with  an  idea  which,  perhaps,  all  tenderness 
includes,  of  feebleness,  softness,  and  want  of  protection.  Othello,  considering  Desde- 
mona as  excelling  in  beauty  and  virtue,  soft  and  timorous  by  her  sex,  and  by  her  situ- 
ation absolutely  in  his  power,  calls  her  '  Excellent  wretch ! '  It  may  be  expressed  : 
'  Dear,  harmless,  helpless  excellence.'  Collier  :  Such  words  of  endearment  are  re- 
sorted to  when  those  implying  love,  admiration,  and  delight  seem  inadequate.  [One 
of  Collier's  best  notes  in  this  play. — Ed.]  Hudson  :  As  here  used,  '  wretch '  was  the 
strongest  expression  of  endearment  in  the  language.  White  (ed.  ii) :  It  is  needless 
to  point  out  that  '  wretch '  may  be  used  as  a  term  of  fondest  endearment ;  but  not  in 
connection  with  'excellent.'     The  misprint  [from  wench  to  'wretch']  was  easy. 

106.  Chaos]  Johnson  :  When  my  love  is  for  a  moment  suspended  by  suspicion,  * 
nave  nothing  in  my  mind  but  discord,  tumult,  perturbation,  and  confusion.  Steevens  : 
There  is  another  meaning  possible :  '  When  I  cease  to  love  thee,  the  world  is  at  an 
end,'  i.  e.,  there  remains  nothing  valuable  or  important.  The  first  explanation  may  be 
more  elegant ;  the  second  is  perhaps  more  easy.  There  is  the  same  thought  in  V.  &* 
A.,  1.  1019:  'For  he  being  dead,  with  him  is  beauty  slain,  And,  beauty  dead,  black 
Chaos  comes  again.'     [Hunter  (ii,  282)  also  cites  this  passage  from  V.  &  A.  «>?  one 


KCT  ill,  SC.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF  VENICE  167 

Iago.     My  Noble  Lord.  107 

Oth.     What  doft  thou  fay,  Iago  ? 

Iago.     Did  Michael  CaJJio 
When  he  wooM  my  Lady,  know  of  your  loue  ?  1 10 

Oth.     He  did,  from  firft  to  laft : 
Why  doft  thou  aske  ? 

Iago.     But  for  a  fatisfac~tion  of  my  Thought, 
No  further  harme. 

Oth.     Why  of  thy  thought,  Iago  ?  1 1 5 

Iago.     I  did  not  thinke  he  had  bin  acquainted  with  hir. 

Oth.     O  yes,  and  went  betweene  vs  very  oft. 

Iago.     Indeed?  118 

107.  Lord."]  QqFf.     lord, —  Theob.  et  113.  Thought,']  thoughts.  Qr. 

seq.  114.  further]  farther  Pope  ii. 

109,  no.  Did. ..Lady]  One  line,  Qq,  116.  he  had]  he'd  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
Pope  et  seq.  Warb. 

1 10.  he]  you  QqFf  et  cet.  hir]  it  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Cap.  Jen.  Wh. 
wodd]  wooed  Qq.                                   ii.     her  Qq  et  cet. 

in,  112.  One  line,  Qq,  Pope  et  seq.  117.  oft]  often  Qr. 

113.  for  a]  for  Qr 

of  the  many  in  this  play,  more  than  in  any  other,  which  remind  us  of  that  poem  and  of 
R.  of  L.]  Malone:  Compare  the  same  thought  in  Wint.  Tale,  IV,  iv,  490:  'It  can- 
not fail  but  by  The  violation  of  my  faith ;  and  then  Let  nature  crush  the  sides  o'  the 
earth  together  and  mar  the  seeds  within  ! '  Franz  Horn  (i,  330) :  Othello  refers  to 
the  chaos  in  his  life  before  he  knew  Desdemona. 

107.  Rymer  (p.  118):  One  might  think  after  what  we  have  seen,  that  there  needs 
no  great  cunning,  no  great  poetry  and  address  to  make  the  Moor  jealous.  Such  impa- 
tience, such  a  rout  for  a  handsome  young  fellow,  the  very  morning  after  her  marriage, 
must  make  him  either  to  be  jealous,  or  to  take  her  for  a  Changeling  below  his  jealousie. 
After  this  scene,  it  might  strain  the  Poet's  skill  to  reconcile  the  couple,  and  allay  the 
jealousie.  Iago  now  can  only  actum  agere,  and  vex  the  audience  with  a  nauseous 
repetition.  Whence  comes  it  then  that  this  is  the  top  scene,  the  scene  that  raises 
Othello  above  all  other  Tragedies  on  our  Theatres  ?  It  is  purely  from  the  Action ; 
from  the  Mops  and  the  Mows,  the  Grimace,  the  Grins,  and  Gesticulation.  [It  is  to 
be  hoped  that  the  reader  comprehends  the  motive  which  prompts  the  occasional  in- 
sertion of  these  criticisms  by  Rymer.  He  has  read  his  Shakespeare  to  little  purpose 
who  does  not  appreciate  the  relief,  amid  tragic  scenes,  afforded  by  a  dash  of  buf- 
foonery.— Ed.] 

114.  harme]  Booth:  With  the  merest  shade  of  emphasis.  Fechter:  Othello, 
at  the  table,  throwing  aside  some  of  his  papers  and  signing  others. 

116.  hir]  White  (ed.  ii)  :  Cassio's  acquaintance  or  non-acquaintance  with  Desde- 
mona had  no  necessary  connection  with  his  knowledge  of  Othello's  love.  [See  Text. 
Notes.] 

118.  Booth  :  Contract  the  brows,  but  do  not  frown, — rather  look  disappointed,  and 
merely  mutter  in  surprise,  '  Indeed  ' ! 


1 68 


THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      [act  hi,  sc.  iil 


Oth.  Indeed?  I  indeed.    Difcern'ft  thou  ought  in  that/ 
Is  he  not  honeft  ?  120 

Iago,     Honeft,  my  Lord  ? 

Oth.  Honeft?  I,  Honeft. 
Iago.     My  Lord,  for  ought  I  know. 

Oth.  What  do'ft  thou  thinke  ? 

Iago.     Thinke,  my  Lord?  125 

Oth.  Thinke,  my  Lord  ?     Alas,  thou  ecchos't  me ; 


119.  /  indeed']  Indeed  Qf.  Ay,  indeed 
Rowe  et  seq.     Om.  Steev.  conj. 

119,  123.  ought]  aught  Theob.  ii  et 
seq. 

119.  in  that]  of  that  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han. 

122.  Honejl?  I,  Honejl]  Ay,  honest 
(reading  lines  120,  121,  122  as  one  line) 
Steev.'93. 

124-126.    What... Lord?]    One    line, 


Steev.'93,  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh.  Glo. 
Del.  Rife. 

126.  Alas... me ;]  Separate  line,  Steev. 
'93,  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh.  Glo.  Del. 
Rife. 

Alas,  thou  ecchos^t]  Ff,  Rowe, 
Knt.  why  dojl  thou  ecchoe  Q2Q3,  Johns. 
Jen.  why,  by  heav'n,  thou  ecchdst  Pope  + . 
By  heauen  he  ecchoes  Qx  et  cet. 


121.  Honest]  Booth:  Hesitatingly. 

122.  Honest  ?]  Steevens  :  It  appears  from  many  instances  that  where  words  were 
lo  be  repeated  at  all,  our  old,  blundering  printers  continued  the  repetition  beyond  pro- 
priety. [See  Text.  Notes.]  Knight  :  This  re-echo  of  Iago's  echo  is  rejected  by  Steev- 
ens, because  it  violates  the  measure.  He  could  only  see  two  syllables  beyond  the  ten, 
without  any  regard  to  the  force  and  consistency  of  the  passage. 

123.  Booth:  With  indifference.  Fechter  marks  this  as  a  broken  speech,  by  a 
dash  after  '  know — ' 

125.  Booth  :  With  embarrassment. 

126.  Coleridge  {Note  on  Winter's  Tale,  p.  243) :  The  idea  of  this  delightful  drama 
[The  Winter's  Tale]  is  a  genuine  jealousy  of  disposition,  and  it  should  be  immediately 
followed  by  the  perusal  of  Othello,  which  is  the  direct  contrast  of  it  in  every  particular. 
For  jealousy  is  a  vice  of  the  mind,  a  culpable  tendency  of  the  temper,  having  certain 
well-known  and  well-defined  effects  and  concomitants,  all  of  which  are  visible  in  Leon 
tes,  and,  I  boldly  say,  not  one  of  which  marks  its  presence  in  Othello ; — such  as,  first, 
an  excitability  by  the  most  inadequate  causes,  and  an  eagerness  to  snatch  at  proofs ; 
secondly,  a  grossness  of  conception,  and  a  disposition  to  degrade  the  object  of  the  pas- 
sion by  sensual  fancies  and  images;  thirdly,  a  sense  of  shame  of  his  own  feelings 
exhibited  in  a  solitary  moodiness  of  humour,  and  yet  from  the  violence  of  the  passion 
forced  to  utter  itself,  and  therefore  catching  occasions  to  ease  the  mind  by  ambiguities, 
equivoques,  by  talking  to  those  who  cannot,  and  who  are  known  not  to  be  able  to, 
u-ierstand  what  is  said  to  them, — in  short,  by  soliloquy  in  the  form  of  dialogue,  and 
hence  a  confused,  broken,  and  fragmentary  manner ;  fourthly,  a  dread  of  vulgar  ridi- 
cule, as  distinct  from  a  high  sense  of  honour  or  a  mistaken  sense  of  duty ;  and  lastly, 
and  immediately  consequent  on  this,  a  spirit  of  selfish  vindictiveness. 

126.  Alas]  Malone:  One  of  the  numerous  alterations  made  in  the  Folio  by  the 
licenser.     Knishi  :  There  is,  in  this  reading,  a  quiet  expression  of  dread, — a  solemc 


act  in,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


169 


As  if  there  were  fome  Monfter  in  thy  thought  127 

Too  hideous  to  be  fhewne.     Thou  doft  mean  fomthing : 

I  heard  thee  fay  euen  now,  thou  lik'ft  not  that, 

When  Cafsio  left  my  wife.     What  didd'ft  not  like?  1 30 

And  when  I  told  thee,  he  was  of  my  Counfaile, 

Of  my  whole  courfe  of  wooing  ;  thou  cried'fi,    Indeede  ? 

And  didd'ft  contract,  and  purfe  thy  brow  together, 

As  if  thou  then  hadd'ft  fhut  vp  in  thy  Braine 

Some  horrible  Conceite.     If  thou  do'ft  loue  me,  135 

Shew  me  thy  thought. 

Iago.     My  Lord,  you  know  I  loue  you. 

Oth.     I  thinke  thou  do'ft  : 
And  for  I  know  thou'rt  full  of  Loue,  and  Honeftie, 
And  weigh'ft  thy  words  before  thou  giu'ft  them  breath,  140 

Therefore  thefe  flops  of  thine,  fright  me  the  more  : 
For  fuch  things  in  a  falfe  difloyall  Knaue 
Are  trickes  of  Cuftome  :  but  in  a  man  that's  iuft, 
They're  clofe  dilations,  working  from  the  heart,  144 


127.  thy]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Knt.  his 
Qx  et  cet. 

128.  doft]  didjl  Qx. 

129.  euen]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Dyce,  Glo. 
Cam.  Rife,     but  Qq  et  cet. 

lik'ft]  QqFf,  Rowe.  lik'dst  Pope 
et  cet. 

132.  Of  my]  Ff,  Rowe.  In  my  Qq  et 
cet. 

135.  Conceite"]  counfell  Q,.  conceits 
Rowe  ii. 

138.  do' ft]  doest  Theob.  ii,  Waxb. 

139.  And  for]  Qq,  Rowe  +  ,  Cam.    For 

Ff.     And,— for  or  And,  for  Cap.  et  cet. 

thou'rt]  thour't  F  F,.     thou  art 
..  3   4 

Qq,  Pope  ii,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 


Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly. 

139.  Loue  and]  Om.  Han. 

140.  weigh' ft]  weighefl  Qq. 

giu'fl  them]  giue  em  Qx.    giu'ft 

'"*  Q2Q3- 

141.  fright]  affright  Qx. 

142.  falfe  difloyall]  false-disloyal  Sta. 
144.  They're]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt,  Dyce, 

Wh.  i,  Sta.  Cam.  Del.  Huds.  They  are 
Qq  et  cet. 

clofe]  cold Ff,  Rowe,  Theob.Warb. 
Om.  Han. 

dilations]  FfQ2Q  ,  Rowe,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Jen.  Sta.  denotements  Qx, 
Pope,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev/93,  Var.  Hal.  dis- 
tillations Han.    delations  Steev.' 73  et  cet. 


foreboding  of  evil.  Collier  :  Tame  and  flat.  Hudson  :  It  is  not  easy  to  choose 
between  the  three  readings,  but  I  am  strongly  inclined  to  prefer  Q2.  Rolfe  :  The 
'  alas '  was,  of  course,  put  in  to  fill  the  gap  made  by  the  omission  of  the  oath. 

128.  Booth:  Iago  again  pretends  embarrassment. 

137.  Booth  :  Reproachfully.  Fechter  :  Taking  his  hand,  across  the  table,  and 
grasping  it  with  feigned  emotion. 

144.  dilations]  Upton  ^p.  291)  :  From  the  Latin  dilationes,  delayings,  pauses,  a 
differendo.  [This  is  one  of  the  very  many  instances  cited  by  Upton  to  prove  that 
Shakespeare  '  makes  Latin  words  English,  and  uses  them  according  to  their  original 
idiom.']  Warburton  :  These  stops  and  breaks  are  cold  dilations,  or  cold  keeping 
back  a  secret,  which  me"  of  phlegmatic  constitutions,  whose  hearts  are  not  swayed  01 


I^O  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      [act  hi,  sc  iii. 

That  Paflion  cannot  rule.  14c; 

Iago.     For  Michael  Ca/sio, 
I  dare  be  fworne,  I  thinke  that  he  is  honeft.  147 

147.  be  fwome~\  prefume  Qx.  147.  that  he~\  he  Q. 

governed  by  their  passions,  can  do ;  while  more  sanguine  tempers  reveal  themselves  at 
once,  and  without  reserve.  Johnson  :  The  reading  of  the  earlier  Quarto  was  changed 
by  the  author  not  to  'dilations,  but  to  delations ;  to  occult  and  secret  accusations,  work- 
ing involuntarily  from  the  heart,  which,  though  resolved  to  conceal  the  fault,  can- 
not rule  its  passion  of  resentment.  Steevens  :  I  should  willingly  have  adopted  Di 
Johnson's  emendation,  could  I  have  discovered  that  the  word  delation  was  ever  used 
in  its  Roman  sense  of  accusation,  during  the  time  of  Shakespeare.  Bacon  frequently 
employs  it,  but  always  to  signify  carriage  or  conveyance.  Malone  :  Delation  is  not 
found  in  any  Dictionary  that  I  have  seen,  nor  has  any  passage  been  quoted  in  support 
of  it.  On  the  contrary,  we  find  in  Minsheu  the  verb  '  To  delate,'  not  signifying  to 
accuse,  but  thus  interpreted  :  '  to  speak  at  large  of  anything,  vid.  to  dilate '/  so  that  if 
even  delations  were  the  word  of  the  old  copy,  it  would  mean  no  more  than  '  dilations.' 
No  reasonable  objection  can  be  made  to  denotements,  i.  e.,  indications,  or  recoveries, 
not  openly  revealed,  but  involuntarily  working  from  the  heart,  which  cannot  rule  and 
suppress  its  feelings.  Nothing  is  got  by  the  change  of  the  Folio  to  '  dilations,'  which 
was  undoubtedly  used  in  the  sense  of  dilatements,  or  large  and  full  expositions.  Bos- 
well  :  In  Todd's  Johnson  an  authority  is  given  for  delations  in  the  sense  of  accusa- 
tions, from  Wotten's  Remains,  p.  460,  ed.  1 651.  Knight  :  We  have  adopted  Johnson's 
ingenious  suggestion  of  delations,  i.  e.,  secret  accusations.  Staunton  :  '  Dilations  '  may 
be  a  contraction  of  distillations  [see  Text.  N.],  and  the  meaning  of  '  close  dilations,' 
secret  droppings.  White  (ed.  i)  :  Delations,  i.  e.,  subtle,  intimate  confessions  or  in- 
formations. White  (ed.  ii) :  Delations,  i.  e.,  revelations.  [To  me  the  interpretations, 
1  secret  accusation,'  and  the  others,  are  here  barely  intelligible.  What  has  frighted 
Othello  is  these  '  stops,'  these  pauses,  of  Iago,  which  he  would  have  disregarded  in  a 
false  knave,  as  a  common  trick,  but  in  a  man  that's  just,  such  '  stops,'  such  '  dilations  ' 
indicate  something  deeper,  some  horrible  conceit  which  he  hesitates  to  disclose,  and 
which  makes  him  weigh  his  words  and  protract  the  revelation.  For  •  dilation '  Shake- 
speare had  the  classical  and  common  Latin  word  meaning  to  delay,  as  Upton  pointed 
out,  and  he  had,  besides,  the  very  same  word,  exactly  so  spelled,  in  French.  Cotgrave 
gives  :  '  Dilation  :  A  deferring,  delaying,  prolonging,  protraction.'  I  do  not  think  this 
explanation  pre-eminently  happy.  I  have  seen  better  explanations  of  difficult  passages 
— and  worse. — Ed.] 

145.  Passion]  Staunton:  Unless  this  word  is  here  employed  in  the  unusual 
sense  of  prudence,  caution,  &c,  we  must  understand  Othello  to  mean, — working 
from  a  heart  that  cannot  govern  its  emotions.  [I  prefer  Warburton's  interpretation  in 
the  preceding  note. — Ed.]  Hudson:  It  should  be  noted  that  in  all  this  part  of  the 
dialogue  the  doubts  started  in  Othello  by  the  villain's  artful  insinuations  have  refer- 
ence only  to  Cassio.  There  is  not  the  least  sign  that  the  Moor's  thoughts  anywise 
touch  his  wife ;  and  Iago  seems  perplexed  that  his  suspicions  have  lighted  elsewhere 
than  he  had  intended.  The  circumstance  is  very  material  in  reference  to  Othello's 
predispositions,  or  as  regards  the  origin  and  nature  of  his  jealousy. 

147.  sworne]  DYCE  (ed.  ii,  1866) :  '  Should  not  this  be  written  with  a  break,  as  if 
Iago  were  correcting  himself?     "  I  dare  be  sworn — I  think,"  &c.' — W.  N.  Lett  so  \i, 


\ct.ii,  jc.  in.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  171 

Oth.     I  thinke  fo  too.  148 

Iago.     Men  fhould  be  what  they  feeme, 
Or  thofe  that  be  not,  would  they  might  feeme  none.  150 

Oth.     Certaine,  men  mould  be  what  they  feeme. 

Iago.     Why  then  I  thinke  Caf Sid's  an  honeft  man. 

Oth.     Nay,  yet  there's  more  in  this  ? 
I  prythee  fpeake  to  me,  as  to  thy  thinkings, 

As  thou  doft  ruminate,  and  giue  thy  worft  of  thoughts  155 

The  worft  of  words.  [324  a~\ 

Iago.     Good  my  Lord  pardon  me, 
Though  I  am  bound  to  euery  Acte  of  dutie, 
I  am  not  bound  to  that  :  All  Slaues  are  free :  159 

148.  too]  to  Qq.  Ktly,  Del. 

149.  what]  that  Qx.  154.  as  to]  to  Qt. 

150.  feeme  none.]  feeme,  Q  .  thy]  my  Rowe  ii. 

151.  Certaine,  men]  Certain  men,  Q  .  155-  As. ..worft]  One  line,  Han. 

151,  152.   Certaine...JVhy  then]   One  thy. ..thoughts]   the.. .thought  Q,. 

line  (reading  that  Cassio  is  in  152)  Steev.  thy  thoughts  Q  . 

'93.  156.  words]  word  Qx. 

153.  there's]  ther's  Q2Q,.  158.   Though  I  am]  I  am  not  Rowe  ii. 
this?]  this,  Qq.  159.  that:  All]  that,  all Rowe  + .  that 

154.  prythee]  pray  thee  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  all  Qq,  Han.  et  seq. 

(Jap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  free]  Ff.    free  to  Qq  et  cet. 

[Five  years  earlier,  Fechter  had  so  printed  the  line,  and  had  also  put  a  dash  aftei 
« Cassio.'— Ed.] 

149.  be]  Booth  :  With  the  least  possible  suggestiveness  in  tone  and  look. 

150.  none]  Warburton:  There  is  no  sense  in  this  reading.  I  suppose  Shake 
speare  wrote  knaves.  Heath  (p.  562) :  I  am  rather  inclined  to  think  that  it  should 
be :  '  they  might  be  known.'  That  is,  I  wish  there  were  any  certain  way  of  distin- 
guishing and  detecting  them.  Johnson  :  I  believe  the  meaning  is,  '  'would  they  might 
no  longer  seem,  or  bear  the  shape  of  men.'  Jennens  :  The  old  reading  is  plain 
enough.  Those  that  seem  honest  should  be  honest,  or  those  that  be  not  what  they 
aeern,  i.  e.,  honest,  would  they  might  seem  none,  i.  e.,  have  no  seeming  or  appearance 
of  honesty. 

151.  Fechter:  Rising,  without  leaving  the  table;    and  smiling  as  if  in  raillery. 

152.  Booth  :  As  though  you  would  dismiss  an  unpleasant  topic. 

158.  Though  I  am]  The  misprint  in  Rowe's  ed.  ii  (see  Text.  Notes)  Pope,  in  his 
edition,  prints  at  the  foot  of  the  page,  as  though  it  were  a  genuine  reading  of  the  old 
text,  and  a  proof  of  the  fidelity  of  his  collation.  In  his  Preface  Pope  says  that  he  had 
discharged  the  'dull  duty  of  editor  with  more  labour  than  he  expected  thanks;'  ap- 
parently at  times  the  dulness  was  very  great  and  the  labour  very  small. — Ed. 

159.  free  :]  Malone  [See  Text.  N.]  :  I  am  not  bound  to  do  that  which  even  slaves 
are  not  bound  to  do.  Steevens  :  So,  in  Cymb.  V,  i,  7  :  '  Every  good  servant  does  not 
all  commands :  No  bond  but  to  do  just  ones.'  Rolfe  :  We  may  say  that  '  free '  is 
equivalent  to  not  bound. 


iJ2 


THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      [act  hi  sc.  iii. 


Vtter  my  Thoughts  ?     Why  fay,  they  are  vild,  and  falce  ?        160 

As  where's  that  Palace,  whereinto  foule  things 

Sometimes  intrude  not  ?  Who  ha's  that  breaft  fo  pure, 

Wherein  vncleanly  Apprehenfions 

Keepe  Leetes,  and  Law-dayes,  and  in  Seffions  fit 

With  meditations  lawfull  ?  165 

Oth.     Thou  do'ft  confpire  againft  thy  Friend  {Iago) 
If  thou  but  think* ft  him  wrong'd,  and  mak'ft  his  eare 
A  ftranger  to  thy  Thoughts. 

Iago.     I  do  befeech  you, 
Though  I  perchance  am  vicious  in  my  gueffe  170 


I  bo.  Thoughts  ?~\  thoughts  :  Q2Q_. 

Why  fay,]  Why,  fay  Qq.  Why 
fay  FF4>     Why,  say,  Theob. 

they  are~\  they  re  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii, 
Huds. 

vild]  Ff,  Rowe.     vile  Qq  et  cet. 

161.  As  where's']  As,  where's  F  ,  Rowe  i. 

162.  he's]  has  QqF3F4< 

that]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  iii.  a 
Qq  et  cet. 

1 63.  Wherein]  Ff.    Butfome  Qq  et  cet. 


164.  Seffions]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Knt, 
Sing.  Ktly,  Del.     Sef/ion  Qq  et  cet. 
167.  think'fl . . .mak'fl]  thinkefl...mak- 

169,  170.  you,  ...perchance]  QqFf, 
Rowe,  Pope,  Cap.  you,  Cause  I  perchance 
Han.  you,  Think  I,  perchance,  Warb. 
you,  Though,  I- — perchance,  Johns,  you, 
Though  I,  perchance  Theob.  ii,  Jen.  Knt. 
you, —  Though  I,  perchance,  Mai.  Steev. 
'93  et  seq. 

170.  gueffe]  gheffe  Qq. 


160.  Booth  :  Don't  speak  this  as  though  you  held  your  thoughts  to  be  really  'vile 
and  false,'  nor  look  so;  be  frank  in  appearance. 

161,  162.  Malone:  So,  in  R.  of  L.,  854:  'But  no  perfection  is  so  absolute,  That 
some  impurity  doth  not  pollute.' 

163.  Wherein]  Qu.  a  misprint  for  Where  no? — Ed. 

164.  Leetes]  Warburton  :  A  metaphor  wretchedly  forced  and  quaint.  Steev- 
ENS  :  '  Leets  '  and  'law- days'  are  synonymous  terms:  '  Leet,'  says  Jacob,  Law  Diet., 
'is  otherwise  called  a  law-day.'  They  are  there  explained  to  be  courts,  or  meetings 
of  the  hundred,  'to  certify  the  King  of  the  good  manners,  and  government,  of  the 
inhabitants,'  and  to  enquire  of  all  offences  that  are  not  capital.  Malone  :  Who  has 
so  virtuous  a  breast  that  some  uncharitable  surmises  and  impure  conceptions  will  not 
sometimes  enter  into  it;  hold  a  session  there  as  in  a  regular  court,  and  'bench  by  the 
side '  of  authorized  and  lawful  thoughts  ?  We  find  the  same  imagery  in  the  30th  Son- 
net ;  *  When  to  the  sessions  of  sweet  silent  thought.' 

164.  Sessions]  Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  Session  occurs  in  Shakespeare  oftener  than 'ses- 
sions.' [See  Walker  (Crit.  i,  233),  Art.  xxxviii :  The  final  s  frequently  interpolated, 
and  frequently  omitted,  in  the  first  Folio.] 

170.  Though]  Theobald,  in  a  letter  to  Warburton  (Nichols's  Illust.  ii,  593), 
writes :  '  I  own  I  cannot  understand  the  reasoning  of  this  passage. — "  Though  I,  pei 
haps,  am  vicious,  &c,  do  not  let  your  wisdom  give  you  disturbance,"  &c.  Hoc  minimi 
indetur  Shakespearianum.  I  have  conjectured  "Think,  I  perchance,"  &c.  [Theobald 
did  not  repeat  this  in  his  ed.,  but  WARBURTON  did  in  his,  without  alluding  to  Theobald, 
and  complacently  added  that  the  sense  thereby  was  made  'pertinent  and  perfect.' — Ed.} 


act  ni,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  173 

(As  I  confeffe  it  is  my  Natures  plague  171 

To  fpy  into  Abufes,  and  of  my  iealoufie 

Shapes  faults  that  are  not)  that  your  wifedome 

From  one,  that  fo  imperfectly  conceits, 

Would  take  no  notice,  nor  build  your  felfe  a  trouble  175 

172.  Abufes]  abuse  Pope  +  .  1 74.  imperfeclly]  improbably  Johns. 

of  rny~\  Ff,  Rowe  i,  Pope  ii,  Knt,  conceits']    coniects    Qx.      conjects 

Dyce  i,  Wh.  i.     oft  my  Qq  et  cet.  Warb.  Jen.  Mai.  Steev.'93,  Var. 

I J 3.  Shapes]  Shape  Knt,  Dyce  i,  Wh.  i.  175.  Would]  You'd Qx,  Jen.  Mai.  Steev. 

that  your  wifedome]  Ff,  Rowe,  '93,  Var.     Will  Q  . 

Knt,  Sta.    /  intreate  you  then  Qx,  Pope  4- ,  Would  ...build]      Your    wisdom 

Jen.  MaL  Steev.'93,  Var.   that  your  wife-  would  not  build  Pope  + . 
dome  yet  Q2Q,  et  cet. 

Heath  (p.  562) :  'Vicious*  doth  not  signify  here,  wrong  ox  mistaken,  but,  apt  to  put 
the  worst  construction  upon  everything.  The  sense  then  is,  '  I  beseech  you,  though  I 
for  my  own  part  am  perhaps  apt  to  see  everything  in  the  worst  light,  which  is  a  fault  in 
my  nature  that  carries  its  own  punishment  with  it,  yet  let  me  intreat  you  that  my  imper- 
fect conjectures,  with  the  loose  and  uncertain  observations  on  which  they  are  founded, 
may  not  be  the  means  of  raising  disquiet  in  the  breast  of  a  person  whose  wisdom  is  so 
much  superior  to  mine.'  The  abrupt  and  broken  character  of  the  sentence  was  pur- 
posely intended,  as  it  represents  the  artful  perplexity  of  fraud  and  circumvention  prac- 
tising on  the  credulity  of  an  open,  honest  heart.  Steevens  :  Iago  seems  desirous  by 
his  abruptness  and  ambiguity  to  inflame  the  jealousy  of  Othello,  which  he  knew  would 
be  more  effectually  done  in  this  manner  than  by  any  expression  that  bore  a  determinate 
meaning.  The  jealous  Othello  would  fill  up  the  pause  in  the  speech,  which  Iago  turns 
off  at  last  to  another  purpose,  and  find  a  more  certain  cause  of  discontent,  and  a  greater 
degree  of  torture  in  the  doubtful  consideration  how  it  might  have  concluded,  than  he 
could  have  experienced  had  the  whole  of  what  he  inquired  after  been  reported  to  him 
with  every  circumstance  of  aggravation.  We  may  suppose  him  imagining  to  himself 
that  Iago  mentally  continued  the  thought  thus,  'Though  I — know  more  than  I  choose 
to  speak  of.'  Malone  :  The  adversative  '  though '  does  not  appear  very  proper ;  but 
in  an  abrupt  and  studiously  clouded  sentence  like  the  present,  where  more  is  meant 
than  meets  the  ear,  strict  propriety  may  well  be  dispensed  with.  Knight  :  The  mod- 
ern editors  enter  into  a  long  discussion  about  abruptness,  and  obscurity,  and  regulation 
of  the  pointing,  without  taking  the  slightest  notice  of  the  perfectly  clear  reading  of  the 
Folio,  which  we  give  without  the  alteration  of  a  point  or  letter.  Cowden-Clarke: 
'  Though '  is  here  used  in  the  sense  of  '  inasmuch  as  '  or  '  since.'  Rolfe  :  The  read- 
ing of  Qx  for  'that  your  wisdom,'  line  173,  perhaps  better  suits  the  broken  character 
of  the  sentence.  Possibly,  in  revising  the  play  Shakespeare  made  the  change  to  the 
more  logical  form  of  the  Folio,  and  overlooked  the  '  though,'  which  does  not  suit  that 
form  so  well.  Hudson  :  Iago  here  feigns  self -distrust,  and  confesses  that  he  has  the 
natural  infirmity  or  plague  of  a  suspicious  and  prying  temper,  that  he  may  make  Othello 
trust  him  the  more  strongly.  So  men  often  prate  about,  and  even  magnify,  their  own 
faults,  in  order  to  cheat  others  into  a  persuasion  of  their  rectitude  and  candour. 

174.  imperfectly]  Cambridge  Editors  :  Johnson  attributes  the  reading  improba- 
bly to  what  he  calls  '  the  old  Quarto.'     We  have  not  found  it  in  any  copies. 

174.  conceits]  Malone  :   Conjecl  of  the  Qx  is  to  conjecture,  a  word  used  by  othei 
writer?      Halliwell  :  '  Conceits '  looks  like  a  modernization  by  the  compositor. 


174  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      [act  in,  sc.  ui. 

Out  of  his  fcattering,  and  vnfure  obferuance  :  176 

It  were  not  for  your  quiet,  nor  your  good, 

Nor  for  my  Manhood,  Honefty,  and  Wifedome, 

To  let  you  know  my  thoughts. 

Oth.     What  doft  thou  meane  ?  180 

Iago.     Good  name  in  Man,  &  woman(deere  my  Lord) 

Is  the  immediate  Iewell  of  their  Soules ; 

Who  fteales  my  purfe,  fteales  trafh : 

Tis  fomething,  nothing ; 

'Twas  mine,  'tis  his,  and  has  bin  flaue  to  thoufands :  185 

But  he  that  filches  from  me  my  good  Name, 

Robs  me  of  that,  which  not  enriches  him,  187 

176.  his]  my  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  my  Lord;  Qx. 

178.  and]  Ff,  Rowe+,  Knt,  Sta.     or  182.  their]  our  Qq. 

Qq  et  cet.  183,  184.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 

180.  What... meane  ?]  Zouns.  Qx.  183.  Jleales  my]Jiel  es  my  Q  . 

181.  woman... Lord}]   woman's  deere  187.  enriches]  inriches  Qq. 

177.  Booth:  Not  mysteriously  as  though  you  really  have  anything  definite  in  your 
thoughts. 

181-188.  Booth:  Don't  fire  this  directly  at  Othello,  but  trust  to  the  'whiff  and 
wind '  of  it,  for  your  effect  on  him,  and  on  the  audience  too,  although  it  may  not  gain 
applause  from  them  as  do  the  scowls  and  growls  of  the  stage-villain. 

181.  and  woman]  Gould  (p.  88)  :  J.  B.  Booth,  isolating  the  words  'and  woman' 
by  a  pause  before  and  after,  and  completing  the  isolation  by  uttering  them  in  an  altered, 
clear,  low  tone,  aims  directly  at  Othello's  heart,  and  plants  in  it  the  first  surmise  of  his 
wife's  infidelity. 

184.  Staunton:  This  is  invariably  printed  'something,  nothing';  but  something- 
nothing  [as  in  Staunton's  text]  appears  to  have  been  one  of  those  compound  epithets 
to  which  our  old  writers  were  so  partial,  and  of  which  the  plays  before  us  afford  very 
many  more  examples  than  have  ever  been  noted.  The  precise  meaning  of  the  phrase 
is  not  easy  to  determine ;  the  only  instance  of  its  use  we  have  met  with  is  the  following : 

Before  this  newes  was  stale  came  a  taile  of  freshe  sammon  to  countermand  it  with 
certain  newes  of  a  something  nothing,  and  a  priest  that  was  neither  dead  nor  alive,  but 
suspended  between  both.' — A  Watch  Bayte  to  Spare  Provender,  &c,  1604.  It  appears, 
however,  to  have  been  nearly  equivalent  to  the  expression,  neither  here  nor  there. 

185.  Theobald  cites  several  passages  from  Greek  and  Latin  authors  concerning  the 
uncertainty  of  wealth,  '  which,'  he  says,  '  might  have  given  our  author  a  hint  for  this 
sentiment.'  [Is  it  not  strange  that  it  seems  never  to  have  occurred  to  the  earlier  editors 
of  Shakespeare,  who  certainly  had,  especially  Theobald,  a  great  reverence  for  their 
1  poet,'  as  they  termed  him,  that  Shakespeare  might  be  trusted  to  have  conceived,  now 
and  then,  here  and  there,  and  once  in  a  while,  an  original  idea,  with  quite  as  much 
likelihood  as  Lucian,  or  Apollodorus,  or  Publius  Syrus  ? — Ed.] 

187.  not]  White  (ed.  i) :  Were  it  not  that  this  quite  unexceptionable  reading  is 
found  in  both  Qq  and  Ff,  I  should  be  inclined  to  regard  '  not '  as  a  phonetic  misprint 
of  naught. 


act  in,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE  OF   VENICE  175 

And  makes  me  poore  indeed.  188 

Oth.     He  know  thy  Thoughts. 

Iago.     You  cannot,  if  my  heart  were  in  your  hand,  190 

Nor  fhall  not,  whil'ft  'tis  in  my  cuflodie. 

Oth.     Ha  ? 

Iago.     Oh,  beware  my  Lord,  of  iealoufie, 
It  is  the  greene-ey'd  Monfter,  which  doth  mocke  194 

189.  Ile~\  FfQ2Q  ,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Knt.  193.  Oh. ..iealou/iet~\0  beware  iealou/ie. 

By  heauen  Pie  Qx  et  cet.  Qx. 

Thoughts]  thought  Qx,  Cap.  Steev.  1 94.  It  is  the~\  It  is  a  Q2Q3,  Pope  + ,  Jen. 

Mai.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly.  mocke~\  QqF2.    mock  F3F4>    make 

192.  Oth.  Ha?]  Om.  Q..  Han.  Johns.  Cap.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Ktly, 

Huds.  Wh.  ii. 

188.  indeed]  Hunter  (ii,  283)  :  There  are  several  passages  in  Wilson's  Rhetorique 
which  remind  one  of  Shakespeare,  so  many  that  it  might  be  affirmed  to  be  a  book  which 
Shakespeare  had  at  some  period  of  his  life  not  only  read  but  studied.  The  resemblance 
of  this  present  passage  to  the  following  in  the  chapter  on  Amplification  is  remarkable : 
*  The  places  of  Logique  help  oft  for  amplification.  As,  where  men  have  a  wrong  opin- 
ion, and  think  theft  a  greater  fault  than  slander,  one  might  prove  the  contrary  as  well 
by  circumstances  as  by  arguments.  And  first,  he  might  shew  that  slander  is  theft,  and 
every  slanderer  is  a  thief.  For  as  well  the  slanderer  as  the  thief  do  take  away  another 
man's  possession  against  the  owner's  will.  After  that  he  might  shew  that  a  slanderer 
is  worse  than  any  thief,  because  a  good  name  is  better  than  all  the  goods  in  the  world, 
and  that  the  loss  of  money  may  be  recovered,  but  the  loss  of  a  man's  good  name  can 
not  be  called  back  again ;  and  a  thief  may  restore  that  again  which  he  hath  taken  away, 
but  a  slanderer  cannot  give  a  man  his  good  name  again  which  he  hath  taken  from  him.' 

189.  Booth  :  Indignantly,  not  with  rage. 

190.  191.  Booth  :  Respectfully,  not  defiantly. 
192.  Booth  :  With  a  tinge  of  anxiety. 

I93>  &c.  Booth:  In  a  tone  of  solicitude. 

194.  mocke]  In  a  letter  to  Warburton,  dated  'March  31,  1730,'  from  his  'most 
affectionate  and  obliged  friend  and  humble  servant,'  Theobald  says :  '  I  am  at  a  loss 
to  form  any  idea  to  myself,  how  jealousy  mocks  its  own  food,  or  the  cause  on  which  it 
subsists.  No  passion  whatever  is  more  in  earnest  than  jealousy,  or  more  intent  on  the 
object  which  exercises  it.  But  jealousy,  we  know,  is  generally  mistaken  in  its  object, 
and  raises  to  itself  uneasinesses  from  its  own  mistaken  conceptions.  What  if  we  should 
then  read,  "  which  doth  make"  &c,  i.  e.,  jealous  persons  feed  on  the  matter  of  their 
own  suspicions.'  Warburton's  reply  has  not  been  preserved.  The  future  bishop  required 
the  punctilious  return  of  all  his  letters  to  '  his  dearest  friend,'  and  perhaps  destroyed 
them,  but  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  he  failed  to  commend  the  emendation,  and 
probably  criticised  it  with  such  severity  that  Theobald  did  not  venture  to  allude  to  it  ir 
his  edition,  nor  did  Warburton  in  his  edition,  where,  instead,  a  note  is  found  justifying 
'  mock '  and  condemning  make>  which  in  the  mean  time  had  appeared  in  Hanmer's  text. 
Whether  or  not  the  emendation  is  original  with  Hanmer  it  is  impossible  to  say.  He 
rarely  gives  an  authority  for  his  changes.  It  is  possible  that  he  may  have  received  It 
from  Warburton,  who  may  have  passed  over  to  him  Theobald's  letters.     It  was  the  use 


176  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF   OTHELLO      [aci  hi,  sc.  iil 

[194.  the  greene-ey'd  Monster,  which  doth  mocke] 
by  Hanmer  of  Warburton's  notes,  without  giving  him  credit,  that  drove  Warburton  to 
issue  an  edition  of  his  own,  in  the  Preface  to  which  he  thus  meanly  and  haughtily  refers 
to  both  Theobald  and  Hanmer :  '  The  one,'  he  says,  '  was  recommended  to  me  as  a 
poor  man ;  the  other  as  a  poor  critic ;  and  to  each  of  them,  at  different  times,  I  com- 
municated a  great  number  of  observations,  which  they  managed,  as  they  saw  fit,  to  the 
relief  of  their  several  distresses.'  The  credit  of  this  emendation  (which  Grant  White 
asserts  to  be  the  'surest  ever  made  in  Shakespeare,'  and  therefore  well  worth  contend- 
ing for)  has  been,  I  believe,  generally  accorded  to  Hanmer  down  to  the  appearance  of 
the  invaluable  Cambridge  Edition,  where  for  the  first  time  it  is  rightly  given  as  a 
conjecture  of  Theobald.  Warburton's  note  in  his  edition  is  as  follows  :  •  Mock,'  i.  e., 
loaths  that  which  nourishes  and  sustains  it.  This  being  a  miserable  state,  Iago  bids 
him  beware  of  it.  The  Oxford  Editor  [Hanmer]  reads  make,  implying  that  its  sus- 
picions are  unreal  and  groundless,  which  is  the  very  contrary  to  what  he  would  here 
make  his  General  think,  as  appears  from  what  follows,  '  That  cuckold  lives  in  bliss,' 
&c.  In  a  word,  the  villain  is  for  fixing  him  jealous ;  and  therefore  bids  him  beware 
of  jealousy,  not  that  it  was  an  unreasonable,  but  a  miserable,  state,  and  this  plunges 
him  into  it,  as  we  see  by  his  reply,  which  is  only  •  Oh,  misery ! '  Grey  (ii,  318) :  That 
is,  '  'mock,'  with  an  apostrophe  for  ma?nock,  i.  e.,  by  continually  ruminating  or  chewing, 
it  makes  mammocks  of  it,  in  a  metaphorical  sense.  The  verse  will  bear  the  whole 
word  mammock,  and  will  stand  thus :  '  which  doth  mamock  The  meat,'  &c.  [This 
note  is  so  printed  as  to  imply  that  it  is  due  to  '  Mr  Smith,'  whom  Grey,  in  his 
Preface,  pronounced  'the  most  friendly  and  communicative  man  living;'  surely,  an 
enviable  elevation  above  the  vagueness  of  the  patronymic]  Heath:  'Mock'  cer- 
tainly never  signifies  to  loath.  Its  common  signification  is,  to  disappoint,  in  which 
sense  I  think  it  is  used  here.  The  proper  and  immediate  destination  of  food  is  to  sat- 
isfy hunger ;  when  this  end  is  not  attained  by  the  use  of  it,  the  food  may  be  metaphor- 
ically said  to  be  mocked  or  disappointed.  So  the  end  proposed  by  that  suspicious 
inquisitiveness,  which  is  the  natural  food  of  jealousy,  is  certainty  and  satisfaction  gome 
way  or  other.  But  this  end  it  very  rarely  attains,  and  those  very  doubts  and  suspicions 
are  perpetually  mocked,  and  disappointed  of  that  satisfaction  they  are  in  such  eager  pur- 
suit of.  Johnson  :  I  have  received  Hanmer's  emendation ;  because  to  '  mock '  does 
not  signify  to  loath ;  and  because,  when  Iago  bids  Othello  •  beware  of  jealousy,  the 
green-ey'd  monster,'  it  is  natural  to  tell  why  he  should  beware;  and  for  caution  he  gives 
him  two  reasons,  that  jealousy  often  creates  its  own  cause,  and  that,  when  the  causes 
are  real,  jealousy  is  misery.  Farmer  :  In  this  place,  and  some  others,  to  mock  seems 
the  same  with  to  mammock  [vide  Grey].  Jennens  :  I  am  apt  to  think  that  Shake- 
speare had  here  the  Crocodile  in  his  eye,  who,  by  its  tears,  is  said  to  deceive  and  entice 
its  prey.  To  '  mock '  is  used  by  our  Author  to  signify  to  delude  and  deceive.  But  if 
this  be  the  allusion,  what  is  the  meat  that  Jealousy  feeds  on  ?  And  the  context  seems 
to  show  that  Shakespeare  makes  Love  the  food  of  Jealousy.  '  That  cuckold  lives  in 
bliss,  who  certain  of  his  fate,  loves  not  his  wronger ' ;  he  feels  not  the  pang  of  Jeal- 
ousy, because  he  wants  that  which  nourishes  and  supports  it,  viz. :  Love.  But  how 
does  Jealousy  mock  love  ?  By  pretending  to  be  its  friend,  and  by  seeming  to  pity  and 
condole  with  it,  at  the  same  time  that  it  is  its  great  enemy  and  destroyer.  Steevens  : 
If  Shakespeare  had  written  a  green-ey'd  monster,  we  might  have  supposed  him  to 
refer  to  some  creature  existing  only  in  his  particular  imagination ;  but  '  the  green-ey'd 
monster'  seems  to  have  reference  to  an  object  as  familiar  to  his  readers  as  to  himself. 
It  is  known  that  the  tiger  kind  have  green  eyes,  and  always  play  with  the  victim  to 


act  in,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  177 


[194.  the  greene-ey'd  Monster,  which  doth  mocke] 
their  hunger  before  they  devour  it.  So,  in  R.  of  L.  554,  •  yet,  foul  night-waking  cat, 
he  doth  but  dally,  While  in  his  hold-fast  foot  the  weak  mouse  panteth.'  Thus,  a  jeal- 
ous husband,  who  discovers  no  certain  cause  why  he  may  be  divorced,  continues  to 
sport  with  the  woman  whom  he  suspects,  and,  on  more  certain  evidence,  determines  to 
punish.  There  is  no  beast  that  can  be  literally  said  to  make  its  own  food,  and  there- 
fore I  am  unwilling  to  receive  Hanmer's  emendation,  especially  as  I  flatter  myself  that 
a  glimpse  of  meaning  may  be  produced  from  the  old  reading.  One  of  the  ancient 
senses  of  the  verb  to  mock  is  to  amuse,  to  play  with.  Thus,  in  '  A  Discourse  of  Gen- 
tlemen lying  in  London  that  were  better  keep  House  at  Home  in  their  Country,'  1593 : 
1 A  pretty  toy  to  mock  an  ape  withal,'  i.  e.,  a  pretty  toy  to  divert  an  ape,  for  an  ape  to 
divert  himself  with.  The  same  phrase  occurs  in  Marston,  whose  Ninth  Satire  is  en- 
titled '  Here's  a  Toy  to  mocke  an  Ape  indeede,'  i.  e.,  afford  an  ape  materials  for  sport, 
furnish  him  with  a  plaything.  In  Ant.  &*  Cleo.,  'mock'  occurs  again:  'tell  him  He 
mocks  the  pauses  that  he  makes,'  i.  e.,  he  plays  wantonly  with  those  intervals  of  time 
which  he  should  improve  to  his  own  preservation.  Should  such  an  explanation  be 
admissible,  the  advice  given  by  Iago  will  amount  to  this :  Beware,  my  lord,  of  yielding 
to  a  passion  which,  as  yet,  has  no  proofs  to  justify  its  excess.  Think  how  the  interval 
between  suspicion  and  certainty  must  be  filled.  Though  you  doubt  her  fidelity,  you 
cannot  yet  refuse  her  your  bed,  or  drive  her  from  your  heart ;  but,  like  the  capricious 
savage,  must  continue  to  sport  with  one  whom  you  wait  for  an  opportunity  to  destroy. 
A  similar  idea  occurs  in  All's  Well :  '  so  lust  doth  play  With  what  it  loaths.'  Such  is 
the  only  sense  I  am  able  to  draw  from  the  original  text.  What  I  have  said  may  be 
liable  to  some  objections,  but  I  have  nothing  better  to  propose.  That  jealousy  is  a 
monster  which  often  creates  the  suspicions  on  which  it  feeds  may  be  well  admitted, 
according  to  Hanmer's  proposition ;  but  is  it  the  monster  ?  (i.  e.,  the  well-known  and 
conspicuous  animal),  or  whence  has  it  green  eyes  ?  Yellow  is  the  colour  which  Shake- 
speare usually  appropriates  to  jealousy.  It  must  be  acknowledged  that  he  afterwards 
characterizes  it  as  '  a  monster,  Begot  upon  itself,  born  on  itself.'  But  yet  '  what  damned 
minutes  tells  he  o'er,'  &c.  is  the  best  illustration  of  my  attempt  to  explain  the  passage. 
To  produce  Hanmer's  meaning  a  change  in  the  text  is  necessary.  I  am  counsel  for 
the  old  reading.  M.  Mason  :  It  is  so  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  extract  any  sense 
from  this  passage  as  it  stands,  even  by  the  most  forced  construction  of  it,  and  the  slight 
amendment  proposed  by  Hanmer  renders  it  so  clear,  elegant,  and  poetical,  that  I  am 
surprised  the  editors  should  hesitate  in  adopting  it,  and  still  more  surprised  that  they 
should  reject  it.  As  for  Steevens's  objection  that  the  definite  article  is  used,  not  the 
indefinite,  he  surely  need  not  be  told  in  the  very  last  of  these  plays  that  Shakespeare 
did  not  regard  such  minute  inaccuracies,  which  may  be  found  in  every  play  he  wrote. 
When  Steevens  compares  the  jealous  man,  who  continues  to  sport  with  the  woman  he 
suspects,  and  is  determined  to  destroy,  to  the  tiger  who  plays  with  the  victim  of  his 
hunger,  he  forgets  that  the  meat  on  which  jealousy  is  supposed  to  feed  is  not  the 
woman  who  is  the  object  of  it,  but  the  several  circumstances  of  suspicion  which  jeal- 
ousy itself  creates,  and  which  cause  and  nourish  it.  So  Emilia,  III,  iv,  183:  'They 
are  not  jealous  ever  for  the  cause,  But  jealous,  for  they  are  jealous;  'tis  a  monster 
Begot  upon  itself,  born  on  itself  This  passage  is  a  strong  confirmation  of  Hanmer's 
reading.  The  same  idea  occurs  in  Massinger's  Picture  [I,  i],  where  Matthias,  speak- 
ing of  the  groundless  jealousy  he  entertained  of  Sophia's  possible  inconstancy,  says : 
'but  why  should  I   nourish  A  fury  here,  and  with  imagined  food,  Holding  no  real 

ground  on  which  to  raise  A  building  of  suspicion.'     Imagined  food  is  food  created  bv 
12 


i;8  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      [act  hi,  sc.  ii'u 

[194.  the  greene-ey'd  Monster,  which  doth  mocke] 
imagination ;  the  food  that  jealousy  makes  and  feeds  on.     Henley  :  Mason's  objec- 
tions to  '  mock '  and  to  Steevens's  most  happy  illustration  of  it,  originate  entirely  in  hi* 
own  misconception,  and  a  jumble  of  figurative  with  literal  expressions.     To  have  been 
consistent  with  himself,  he  should  have  charged  Steevens  with  maintaining  that  it  was 
the  property  of  a  jealous  husband,  first  to  mock  his  wife,  and  afterwards  to  eat  her.     In 
Act  V  the  word  mocks  occurs  in  a  sense  somewhat  similar  to  that  in  the  passage  before 
us  :  '  villainy  hath  made  mocks  with  love.'     Malone  :  I  have  not  the  smallest  doubt 
that  Shakespeare  wrote  make.     The  words  make  and  mocke  are  often  confounded  in 
these  plays.     Mr  Steevens,  in  his  paraphrase  on  this  passage,  interprets  the  word  mock 
by  sport ;  but  in  what  poet  or  prose  writer,  from  Chaucer  and  Mandeville  to  this  day, 
does  the  verb  to  mock  signify  to  sport  with  ?     Besides,  is  it  true,  as  a  general  position, 
that  jealousy  {as  jealousy)  sports  ox  plays  with  the  object  of  love  (allowing  this  not  very 
delicate  interpretation  of  the  words,  the  meat  it  feeds  on,  to  be  the  true  one)  ?     The 
position  certainly  is  not  true.     It  is  Love,  not  Jealousy,  that  sports  with  the  object  of  its 
passion ;  nor  can  those  circumstances  which  create  suspicion,  and  which  are  the  meat 
it  feeds  on,  with  any  propriety  be  called  the  food  of  Love,  when  the  poet  has  clearly 
pointed  them  out  as  the  food  or  cause  of  Jealousy  ;  giving  it  not  only  being,  but  nutri- 
ment.  '  There  is  no  beast,'  it  is  urged,  '  that  can  literally  be  said  to  make  its  own  food.' 
It  is,  indeed,  acknowledged  that  jealousy  is  a  monster  which  often  creates  the  suspi- 
cions on  which  it  feeds,  but  is  it,  we  are  asked,  '  the  monster  ?  (i.  e.,  a  well-know7i  and 
conspicuous  animal),  and  whence  has  it  green  eyes  ?    Yellow  is  the  color  which  Shake- 
speare appropriates  to  jealousy.'     To  this  I  answer  that  yellow  is  not  the  only  colour 
which  Shakespeare  appropriates  to  jealousy,  for  we  have  in  Mer.  of  Ven.  Ill,  ii,  no, 
'shuddering  fear,  and  green- etfd  jealousy  ^ ;  and  I  suppose  it  will  not  be  contended  that 
he  was  there  thinking  of  any  of  the  tiger  kind.     If  our  poet  had  written  only  '  It  is  the 
green-ey'd  monster;  beware  of  it,'  the  other  objection  would  hold  good,  and  some  par- 
ticular monster  must  have  been  meant ;  but  the  words,  '  It  is  the  green-ey'd  monster, 
which  doth,'  &c,  in  my  apprehension  have  precisely  the  same  meaning  as  if  the  poet  had 
written,  *  It  is  that  green-ey'd  monster,  which,'  or  '  it  is  a  green-ey'd  monster.'     When 
Othello  says  to  Iago  in  a  former  passage,  '  By  heaven,  he  echoes  me,  as  if  there  were 
some  monster  in  his  thought,'  does  any  one  imagine  that  any  animal  whatever  was 
meant  ?     The  passage  in  a  subsequent  scene,  to  which  Steevens  has  alluded,  strongly 
supports  the  emendation  which  has  been  made :  'jealousy  ....  'tis  a  monster,  Begot 
upon  itself,  born  on  itself?     It  is,  strictly  speaking,  as  false  that  any  monster  can  be 
begot,  or  born,  on  itself,  as  it  is  that  any  monster  can  make  its  own  food ;  but,  poet- 
ically, both  are  equally  true  of  that  monster,  jealousy.     Steevens  seems  to  have  been 
aware  of  this,  and  therefore  has  added  the  word  literally  :  *  No  monster  can  be  liter- 
ally said  to  make  its  own  food.'     It  should  always  be  remembered  that  Shakespeare's 
allusions  scarcely  ever  answer  precisely  on  both  sides ;  nor  had  he  ever  any  care  upon 
this  subject.     Though  he  has  introduced  the  word  monster, — when  he  talked  of  its 
making  its  own  food  and  being  begot  by  itself,  he  was  still  thinking  of  jealousy  only, 
careless  whether  there  was  any  animal  in  the  world  that  would  correspond  with  this  de- 
scription.    That  by  the  words,  the  meat  it  feeds  on,  is  meant,  not  Desdemona  herself,  as 
has  been  maintained,  but  pabulum  zeloiypia,  may  be  likewise  inferred  from  a  preceding 
passage  in  which  a  kindred  imagery  is  found  :  '  That  policy  may  either  last  so  long,  Or 
feed  upon  such  nice  and  waterish  diet?  &c.     And  this  obvious  interpretation  is  still 
more  strongly  confirmed  by  Daniel's  Rosamond,  1592,  a  poem  which  Shakespeare  had 
diligently  read,  and  has  more  than  once  imitated  in  Rom.  &  Jul.  :  *0  jealousy  .... 


act  in,  sc.  hi.J  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  179 


[194.  the  greene-ey'd  Monster,  which  doth  mocke] 
Feeding  vpon  suspect  that  doth  venue  thee,  Happy  were  louers  if  they  neuer  knew 
thee.'  Becket:  I  substitute  muck,  i.  e.,  bedaub  or  make  foul ;  and  this  is  the  true 
character  of  jealousy,  it  &c,  &c.  For  the  '  green-eyed  monster '  I  read  the  agreinied, 
i.  e.,  sportive,  with  a  mixture  of  pleasure  or  satisfaction  in  what  it  is  engaged  in ;  in  which 
sense  the  word  is  used  by  our  earlier  writers.  The  lines  thus  altered  will  be  highly 
descriptive  of  jealousy.  Jackson  :  It  may  seem  strange  to  my  readers  that  a  small 
domestic  animal  may  have  been  the  mighty  green-eyed  monster  to  which  our  ingenious 
Bard  alludes — I  mean  the  mouse  ;  indeed,  familiarly,  it  is  often  called  a  little  monster ; 
but  its  eyes  are  not  to  say  green  ;  however,  a  white  mouse  in  Shakespeare's  time  would 
have  been  a  very  great  curiosity,  and  if  one  had  been  produced  with  green  eyes,  it  would 
have  equally  attracted  the  notice  of  the  naturalist.  Now,  the  mouse  has  a  peculiar  pro- 
pensity, '  which  doth  muck  the  meat  it  feeds  on.'  The  mouse,  after  it  has  glutted  on  a 
piece  of  nice  meat,  leaves  as  much  defilement  on  the  residue  as  it  possibly  can ;  and 
thus  treats  that  with  indecency  and  contempt  which  it  doted  on  until  its  hunger  was 
perfectly  appeased,  &c,  &c.  [Some  years  ago  I  announced  the  exhaustion  of  my 
patience  with  Andrew  Becket  and  Zachary  Jackson;  both  of  whom  at  times  have 
been  praised  by  my  betters.  I  know  that  only  unfamiliarity  with  these  two  writers 
would  impute  to  me  this  large  omission  as  a  fault;  and  as  an  attempt  to  hush 
even  this  source  of  hostile  criticism,  I  have  inserted  the  two  foregoing  notes.  I  feel 
that  my  vindication  is  complete.  There  is  a  third  Commentator,  the  sight  of  whose 
volume  starts  a  shudder.  From  him  let  me  here  add  the  last  note  that  I  will  ever 
take  from  his  pages,  as  follows :  Lord  Chedworth  :  I  think  I '  have  heard  or 
read,  though  I  cannot  recollect  where,  of  a  sort  of  large  dragon-fly,  that  voids  a 
greenish  foam  from  its  mouth,  and  then  gradually  sucks  it  in  again : — if  there  be 
such  a  creature,  it  would  be  sufficient  to  justify  the  expression,  '  green-ey'd  monster.' 
— Ed.]  Martinus  Scriblerus  {Explanations,  &c,  p.  19) :  What  if  the  poet  meant 
to  say  that  the  meat  mocked  the  monster,  instead  of  the  monster  mocking  the  meat  ? 
This  is  an  inverted  construction,  to  be  sure,  but  it  is  admissible  and  gives  a  very  good 
meaning.  Jealousy  is  certainly  a  monster  which  the  meat  it  feeds  on  doth  mock,  that 
meat  consisting  of  mere  surmises  and  '  trifles  light  as  air.'  •  It  is  the  green-eyed  mon- 
ster, which  doth  mock — The  meat  it  feeds  on ! '  Knight  :  One  of  the  difficulties 
would  be  got  over  by  adopting  the  indefinite  article,  *  a  green-eyed  monster,'  of  Q2 ; 
this  leaves  us  the  license  of  imagining  that  Shakespeare  had  some  chimera  in  his  mind, 
to  which  he  applied  the  epithet  '  green-eyed.'  We  have  no  doubt  that  mock  is  the  true 
word  ;  and  that  it  may  be  explained,  which  doth  play  with, — half  receive,  half  reject, — 
the  meat  it  feeds  on.  Farmer  [sic]  suggested  that  it  was  used  for  mammock,  which  Is 
not  unlikely.  Collier  :  Nothing  could  be  much  easier  than  for  a  compositor  to  mis- 
read make  '  mocke.'  The  sense  seems  indisputably  to  require  make.  It  was  so  altered 
by  Southern  in  his  copy  of  F  ,  and  such  too  is  the  emendation  of  the  (MS.).  Singer  : 
Jealousy  is  personified,  and  like  another  green-eyed  creature  of  the  feline  race,  sports 
with  its  prey,  mammocks  and  mocks  the  meat  it  feeds  on.    Cowden-Clarke  :  *  Mock  ' 

bears  the  sense  of  'disdain,'  'spurn,1  'tear  wrathfully,'  even  while  feeding  on 

Jealousy,  even  while  greedily  devouring  scraps  of  evidence,  and  stray  tokens  of  sup- 
posed guilt,  bitterly  scorns  them,  and  stands  self-contemned  for  feeding  on  them. 
Keightley  {Exp.,  303) :  Make  appears  to  me  indubitable ;  for  this  is  the  very  thing 
which  jealousy  does — witness  Ford  and  Leontes, — while  I  cannot  see  how  jealousy, 
which  is  given  to  anything  rather  than  mockery,  should  mock  its  food.  Hudson  [read- 
ing make']  :  That  is,  jealousy  is  a  self-generated  passion;  that  its  causes  are  subjective, 


180  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO    [act.  in.  sc.  Hi. 

The  meate  it  feeds  on.     That  Cuckold  Hues  in  bliffe.  195 

Who  certaine  of  his  Fate,  loues  not  his  wronger : 

But  oh,  what  damned  minutes  tels  he  ore, 

Who  dotes,  yet  doubts  :  Sufpe6t.s,  yet  foundly  loues?  198 

195.  The]  That  Qx.  198.  foundly]    Ff,   Dyce  i,  Sta.  Del. 
That]  What  Qr                                    fondly  Knt,  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Coll.  iii  (MS) 

196.  Fate,  loues  not  his]  Om.  Q  .  flrongly  Qq  et  cet. 

or  that  it  lives  on  what  it  imputes,  not  on  what  it  finds.  And  so  Emilia  afterwards 
describes  it.  Iago  is,  in  his  way,  a  consummate  metaphysician,  and  answers  perfectly 
to  Burke's  description :  '  Nothing  can  be  conceived  more  hard  than  the  heart  of  a 
thorough-bred  metaphysician.  It  comes  nearer  to  the  cold  malignity  of  a  wicked  spirit 
than  to  the  frailty  and  passion  of  a  man.'  White  (ed.  ii)  :  Theobald's  correction  is 
the  surest  ever  made  in  Shakespeare.  Without  it  the  passage  is  naught.  [I  have 
reserved  Hunter  and  Staunton  to  the  last,  because  both  give  what  seems  to  me  to  be 
emphatically  the  true  explanation,  and  one  which  occurred  to  me  before  I  had  read 
theirs.  How  many  times  the  sigh  is  breathed  :  '  Pereant  qui  ante  nos,'  &c.  The  meat 
that  jealousy  feeds  on  is  the  victim  of  jealousy,  the  jealous  man,  who  is  mocked  with 
trifles  light  as  air.  Substitute  mind  for  '  meat,'  and  is  not  the  meaning  clear  ?  Is  x 
the  mark  of  a  monster  to  make  his  food  ?  Then  are  cooks  monsters, — and  they  some 
times  are. — Ed.]  Hunter  [New  Must.,  ii,  284) :  Jealousy  mocks  the  person  whc 
surrenders  his  mind  to  her  influence,  deluding  him  perpetually  with  some  new  show 
of  suspicion,  sporting  herself  with  his  agonized  feelings,  just  as  the  feline  tribe  sport 
with  the  prey  which  they  have  got  into  their  power.  The  cat  is  'green-eyed.' 
Staunton  :  Strange  that  it  should  have  occurred  to  no  one  that  the  meat  the  mon- 
ster mocks  (i.  e.,  scoffs,  jibes,  or  ridicules),  while  he  feeds  on  it,  may  be  his  credulous 
victim, — that  thrice-wretched  mortal, — '  who  dotes,  yet  doubts ;  suspects,  yet  soundly 
loves.'  [Lueders  (p.  66)  also  gives  the  true  explanation,  and  quotes  as  applicable  to 
Theobald's  make  that  clever  definition  of  jealousy  by  Saphir,  as  clever  as  it  is  untrans- 
latable :  '  Eifersucht  ist  eine  Leidenschaft,  die  mit  Eifer  sucht,  was  Leiden  schafft.' 
My  friend,  Mr  Edwin  Booth,  confesses  his  conversion  to  '  mock,'  and  suggests  that 
Iago  can  indicate  by  touching  his  own  breast  that  the  victim  of  jealousy  is  the  meat 
it  feeds  on. — Ed.] 

196.  loues]  Jennens  calls  attention  to  the  reading  hates  in  Steevens's  Reprint, 
which  he  '  finds  in  no  other  edition.'  Cambridge  Edition  :  In  the  Devonshire  copy 
of  Qj,  which  formerly  belonged  to  Steevens,  and  which  was  the  original  of  his  reprint, 
the  word  '  loues '  is  partially  obliterated  by  being  changed  \\  ith  a  pen  to  •  hates,'  but 
being  still  obscure,  '  hates '  is  written  in  the  margin  opposite  in  the  same  hand  as  the 
stage  direction  mentioned  [in  a  previous  note].  Capell's  ccpy  has  distinctly  ' loues, 
and  that  this  was  originally  the  reading  of  the  Devonshire  copy  is  evident  from  the 
traces  of  the  letters  which  still  remain.  [These  marginal  stage  directions  in  the 
Devonshire  Qto,  just  alluded  to,  are,  as  the  Cambridge  Editors  inform  us,  in  a  17th 
century  hand.  '  More  than  one  hand  seems  to  have  been  employed,  and  there  are 
other  notes  of  a  much  later  date  in  pencil.'] 

198.  soundly]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  There  is  little  or  no  doubt  that  this  was  a  mis- 
print {ox  fondly.  The  (MS.)  and  Singer's  (MS.)  both  have  the  same  alteration.  Dyce 
{Strictures,  p.  1 99) :  The  two  MS.  Correctors  and  Collier  must  have  forgotten  what 
King  Henry  says  to  the  Princess  Katharine,  •  O  fair  Katharine,  if  you  will  love  me 


act  in,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE  OF   VENICE  181 

Oth.     O  miferie. 

Iago.     Poore,  and  Content,  is  rich,  and  rich  enough,  200 

But  Riches  fineleffe,  is  as  poore  as  Winter, 
To  him  that  euer  feares  he  mail  be  poore : 
Good  Heauen,  the  Soules  of  all  my  Tribe  defend 
From  Iealoufie. 

Oth.     Why  ?  why  is  this  ?  205 

rhink'ft  thou,  I'ld  make  a  Life  of  Iealoufie ; 
To  follow  ftill  the  changes  of  the  Moone 
With  frefh  fufpitions  ?  No  :  to  be  once  in  doubt, 
Is  to  be  refolu'd  :  Exchange  me  for  a  Goat, 
When  I  fhall  turne  the  bufineffe  of  my  Soule  210 

201.  Riches... is  as]  rich.. .is  Q  .  205.  this?"]  this,  Iago?  Cap. 

fineleffe]    endless    Pope,   Theob.  206.  Think? Jf]  Thinkejl  Q  . 

Han.  Warb.  Fid]  Pde  Qq. 

Winter]  want  Theob.  conj.  (with-  208,  209.  With... Is]  One  line,  Han. 

drawn).  209.  Is]  is  At  once  Han.     Is —  once 

203.  Heauen]  God  Qx.  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Sing.     Is  once  Qq 

205.  Why?  why]  Why,whyQci,~Dyce,         et  cet. 
Sta.  Glo.  Cam.  Rife,  Wh.  ii. 

soundly  with  your  French  heart,'  Hen.  V :  V,  ii.  White  (ed.  i)  :  I  cannot  hesitate, 
on  looking  at  the  whole  line,  to  believe  that  'soundly'  is  a  misprint  for  fondly.  True, 
Henry  V  says  to  Katharine  [as  quoted  by  Dyce],  but  the  sentiment  and  the  occasion 
of  the  two  passages  are  entirely  dissimilar. 

199.  O  miserie]  Booth  :  Spoken  without  reference  to  himself.  (I  claim  the  credit 
of  curing  Othello's  '  Misery  !  misery !  misery  ! '  as  formerly  given  by  actors.  I  directed 
my  father's  attention  to  it  when  I  was  a  boy,  and  he  approved.) 

201.  finelesse]  Johnson:  Unbounded,  endless,  unnumbered  treasures. 

201.  Winter]  Warburton:    Finely  expressed ;  '  winter '  producing  no  fruits. 

204.  Booth  :  A  pause.  Spoken  slowly  and  with  significance ;  watch  him  curiously 
to  observe  the  effect  of  your  poison,  suggest  the  '  evil  eye.'  Othello  now,  for  the  first 
time,  begins  to  be  conscious  of  a  doubt — which,  however,  he  immediately  shakes  off, 
and  turns,  as  though  from  a  trance,  to  Iago  with  a  clear  front. 

206.  Think'st  thou]  Halliwell  :  There  is  nothing  makes  a  man  suspect  much, 
more  than  to  know  little ;  and,  therefore,  men  should  remedy  suspicion  by  procuring 
to  know  more,  and  not  to  keep  their  suspicions  in  smother. — Bacon's  Essays  [p.  528, 
ed.  Arber]. 

209.  resolu'd]  C.  P.  Mason  {Athenatum,  22  Apr.  1876) :  Schmidt  explains  this  as, 
'  to  be  fixed  in  a  determination.'  I  would  suggest  that  it  here  means  '  to  be  freed  from 
uncertainty.'  The  gist  of  Othello's  speech  is  that,  if  once  he  doubts,  he  will  make  that 
first  occasion  settle  the  whole  question  for  ever,  by  having  the  doubt  turned  into  a  cer- 
tainty, one  way  or  the  other.  This  relation  between  doubting  and  being  resolved  is 
repeated  in  lines  219,  220:  lie  see  before  I  doubt,  &c. 

209.  White  (ed.  i) :  A  syllable  is  needed  for  the  verse,  and  the  omission  of  the 
ence  of  the.  Qq  seems  do  lbtless  accidental. 


1 82  THE    TE AGED  IE   OF  OTHELLO      [act  ill,  SC.  iu, 

To  fuch  exufflicate,  and  blow'd  Surmifes,  211 

Matching  thy  inference.     'Tis  not  to  make  me  Iealious, 

To  fay  my  wife  is  faire,  feeds  well,  loues  company, 

Is  free  of  Speech,  Sings,  Playes,  and  Dances  : 

Where  Vertue  is,  thefe  are  more  vertuous.  2 1 3 

Nor  from  mine  owne  weake  merites,  will  I  draw 

211.  exufflicate]  QqF2F3,  Rowe,  Pope,  212.   Iealious']  iealous  QqF F . 
Tlieob.    exufflicatedY '.    exsuffolate  Han.  213.  feeds  well,]  feeds,  we//,  Q. 
Warb.  Johns.  Jen.  Steev.'85.    exsufflicate  214.  Dances]   Ff,  Knt,  Sing,     dance* 
Cap.  et  cet.  we//  Qq  et  cet. 

blow'd]   Knt,  Sing,     blowed  Ff.  215.  are  more]  are  mqfi  Ff,  Rowe  +  . 

blowne  Qq  et  cet.  make  more  Warb. 

212.  thy]  the  Ff. 

211.  exufflicate]  Hanmer  defines  his  exsuffo/ate  by  '  whisper' d,  buzz'd  in  the 
ears ;  from  the  Italian  verb  sufflolare."1  Johnson  :  The  allusion  is  to  a  bubble.  Do 
not  think,  says  the  Moor,  that  I  shall  change  the  noble  designs  that  now  employ  my 
thoughts,  to  suspicions  which,  like  bubbles  b/own  into  a  wide  extent,  have  only  an 
empty  show  without  solidity ;  or  that,  in  consequence  of  such  empty  fears,  I  will  close 
with  thy  inference  against  the  virtue  of  my  wife.  Malone  :  Whether  our  poet  had 
any  authority  for  the  word  exsufflicate,  which  I  think  is  used  in  the  sense  of  swollen, 
and  appears  to  have  been  formed  from  sufflatus,  I  am  unable  to  ascertain.  Boswell  : 
This  may  be  traced  to  the  low  Latin  exsufflare,  to  spit  down  upon,  an  ancient  form  of 
exorcising,  and,  figuratively,  to  spit  out  in  abhorrence  and  contempt.  It  may  thus  sig- 
nify contemptible.  See  DuCange,  s.  v.  exsufflare.  Richardson  [Diet.  s.  v.) :  Exsuf- 
flare, it  is  true,  is  explained  by  Du  Cange  (consequentially)  to  signify  contemner e, 
despuere,  rejicere ;  arising  from  the  custom  in  the  Romish  administration  of  baptism 
of  renouncing  the  devil  and  all  his  works,  exsufflando  et  despuendo,  by  blowing  and 
spitting  him  away.  Hence,  also,  the  application  of  exsufflare,  and  exsufflatio  (common 
words  among  early  Latin  ecclesiastical  writers)  to  a  species  of  exorcism.  Exsufflation 
is  used  by  Bacon  in  its  ordinary  sense.  And  *  exufflicate  '  in  Shakespeare  is  not  im- 
probably a  misprint  for  exsuffldte,  i.  e.,  efflate  or  efflated,  puffed  out,  and  -consequently 
exaggerated,  extravagant, — to  which  '  blow'd '  is  added,  not  so  much  for  the  sake  of  a 
second  epithet,  with  a  new  meaning,  as  of  giving  emphasis  to  the  first.  Collier  :  The 
meaning  of  this  word  is  more  obvious  than  its  etymology ;  and  if  we  had  any  difficulty, 
it  would  be  removed,  perhaps,  by  the  additional  epithet  *  blow'd.'  It  is  one  of  the  words, 
the  origin  of  which  must  not  be  traced  with  too  much  lexicographical  curiosity.  Dyce 
( Gloss.) :  Exsufflicate,  swollen,  puffed  out.  For  my  own  part,  I  can  see  no  reason  to 
doubt  that  such  was  Shakespeare's  word,  and  such  the  meaning  he  intended  to  convey. 
White  (ed.  ii) :  That  is,  puffed  out,  thin  and  bubble-like,  or,  spat  upon,  according  to 
its  derivation,  as  to  which,  and  as  to  his  own  exact  meaning,  I  think  that  Shakespeare 
himself  was  not  clear. 

212.  Iealious]  Walker  (  Vers.  154)  calls  attention  to  this  uniform  spelling,  in  this 
play,  in  the  Folio. 

214.  Dances]  White  (ed.  i)  :  The  omission  of  well  was  doubtless  accidental. 

215.  vertuous]  Johnson  :  An  action  in  itself  indifferent  grows  virtuous  by  its  end 
ind  application. 


act  in,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  183 

The  fmalleft  feare,  or  doubt  of  her  reuolt,  217 

For  fhe  had  eyes,  and  chofe  me.     No  Iago, 

He  fee  before  I  doubt  ;  when  I  doubt,  proue ; 

And  on  the  proofe,  there  is  no  more  but  this,  220 

Away  at  once  with  Loue,  or  Iealoufie. 

la.     I  am  glad  of  this  :  For  now  I  fhall  haue  reafon       [324  £] 
To  fhew  the  Loue  and  Duty  that  I  beare  you 
With  franker  fpirit.     Therefore  (as  I  am  bound) 
Receiue  it  from  me.     I  fpeake  not  yet  of  proofe:  225 

Looke  to  your  wife,  obferue  her  well  with  Cafsio, 
Weare  your  eyes,  thus  :  not  Iealious,  nor  Secure : 
I  would  not  haue  your  free,  and  Noble  Nature, 
Out  of  felfe-Bounty,  be  abus'd  :  Looke  too't :  229 

218.  chofe]  chofen  Q2Q3-  Warb.  Huds. 

221.  or]  and  Q'8l,  Q'95,  Han.  225.  of~\forQ3. 

222.  /  am]  Pm  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  227.  Weare]  Were  Q  . 

Warb.  Dyce  iii,  Huds.  eyes']  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly 

this]  it  Qq,  Coll.  Dyce,  Wh.  Glo.  eie  Qq  et  cet. 

Cam.  Del.  Huds.  Rife.  Iealious]  iealous  QqF  F  . 

224.  I  am]  Pm  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  229.  too't]  to't  QZF3F4,  Rowe  et  seq 

217.  doubt  .  .  .  reuolt]  See  Schmidt  (Lex.)  for  many  other  instances  where  the 
former  means  apprehension,  suspicion  ;  and  the  latter,  faithlessness  in  love,  inconstancy. 
Gould  (p.  103) :  This  word,  'revolt,'  was  one  of  those  strokes  of  genius  in  tone  of 
which  J.  B.  Booth  furnished  such  numberless  examples.  It  came  with  an  access  of 
emphasis,  as  if  he  felt,  for  an  instant,  how  dreadful  a  thing  her  revolt  might  be,  then 
dismisses  the  thought  at  once. 

221.  Booth:  Touch  your  breast  to  signify  that  love  is  'hearted'  and  your  head  at 
jealousy,  to  denote  that  it  is  a  brain  disease  which  '  follows  still  the  changes  of  the  moon.' 

227.  thus]  Booth  :  With  a  side-glance  to  indicate  a  certain  degree  of  watchful  care. 

227.  nor  Secure]  Alger  (Life  of  Forrest,  i,  145) :  Forrest  represented  Iago  as  a 
gay,  dashing  fellow  on  the  outside,  hiding  his  malice  and  treachery  under  the  signs  of  a 
careless  honesty  and  jovial  good  humour.  One  point,  strictly  original,  he  made,  which 
powerfully  affected  Kean.  Iago,  while  working  insidiously  on  the  suspicions  of  Othello, 
says  to  him  [lines  226,  227].  All  these  words,  except  the  last  two,  Forrest  uttered  in 
a  frank,  easy  fashion ;  but  suddenly,  as  if  the  intensity  of  his  under-knowledge  of  evil 
had  automatically  broken  through  the  good-natured  part  he  was  playing  on  the  surface, 
and  betrayed  his  secret  in  spite  of  his  will,  he  spoke  the  words  nor  secure  in  a  husky 
tone,  sliding  down  from  a  high  pitch  and  ending  in  a  whispered  horror.  This  fearful 
suggestiveness  produced  from  Kean  a  reaction  so  truly  artistic  and  tremendous  that  the 
whole  house  was  electrified.  As  they  met  in  the  dressing-room,  Kean  said  excitedly, 
'  In  the  name  of  God,  boy,  where  did  you  get  that  ? '  Forrest  replied,  '  It  is  something 
of  rny  own.'  '  Well,'  said  he,  while  his  auditor  trembled  with  pleasure,  '  everybody 
who  speaks  the  part  hereafter  must  do  it  just  so.' 

229.  selfe-Bounty]  Warrurton:  That  is,  inherent  generosity.     [Just  as  'self 
tharity '  in  II,  ii,  226,  means  chnrjfv  to  one's  self,  so  here,  it  seems  to  me,  'self-bounty 


1 84  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      [act  hi,  sc.  Hi. 

I  know  our  Country  difpofition  well :  230 

In  Venice,  they  do  let  Heauen  fee  the  prankes 

They  dare  not  fhew  their  Husbands. 

Their  beft  Confcience, 

Ts  not  to  leaue't  vndone,  but  kept  vnknowne. 

Oth.     Doft  thou  fay  fo  ?  235 

Iago.     She  did  deceiue  her  Father,  marrying  you, 
And  when  fhe  feem'd  to  fhake,  and  feare  your  lookes, 
She  lou'd  them  mofL 

Oth.     And  fo  fhe  did. 

Iago.     Why  go  too  then  :  240 

230.  Country  difpofition~\  country-dis-         Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce,  Ktly. 
position  Johns,  country's  disposition  Steev.  234.  kept]  Ff,  Rowe  i.     keepe  Qx,  Cap. 
'85.                                                                      Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce, 

231.  Heauen]  God  Qx.  Ktly.     keep  ft  Q2.     keeft  Q3  et  cet. 
232>  233-  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq.  235.  fo?~]fo.  Qx. 

232.  not~\  Om.  Qx.  240.  Why]  Om.  Pope  +  ,  Cap. 

234.  leaue't]  leaue  Qx,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  too]  to  F3F4,  Rowe  et  seq. 

means  a  little  more  than  '  inherent  generosity ' ;  rather,  is  it  not  that  '  bounty,'  where 
'self  is  concerned,  which  approaches  what  we  should  call  ' self-forgetfulness  '  ? — Ed.] 
231.  Venice]  Johnson:  Here  Iago  seems  to  be  a  Venetian.      Henley:  There  is 
nothing  in  any  other  part  of  the  play,  properly  understood,  to  imply  otherwise. 

233.  234.  Booth  :  Very  confidentially. 

235.  Fechter  :  With  indignant  menace.  Booth  :  Let  your  tone  express  unbounded 
faith  in  Iago's  knowledge  of  '  human  dealings.' 

236.  Fechter  :  With  a  look  of  the  basilisk,  darting  the  sting  which  he  had  kept  for 
the  last. 

237.  seem'd]  Johnson  :  This  and  the  following  argument  of  Iago  ought  to  be 
deeply  impressed  on  every  reader.  Deceit  and  falsehood,  whatever  conveniences  they 
may  for  a  time  promise  or  produce,  are,  in  the  sum  of  life,  obstacles  to  happiness. 
Those  who  profit  by  the  cheat  distrust  the  deceiver,  and  the  act  by  which  kindness  is 
sought  puts  an  end  to  confidence.  The  same  objection  may  be  made,  with  a  lower 
uegree  of  strength,  against  the  imprudent  generosity  of  disproportionate  marriages. 
When  the  first  heat  of  passion  is  over,  it  is  easily  succeeded  by  suspicion,  that  the  same 
violence  of  inclination  which  caused  one  irregularity  may  stimulate  to  another ;  and 
those  who  have  shown  that  their  passions  are  too  powerful  for  their  prudence,  will, 
with  very  slight  appearances  against  them,  be  censured  as  not  very  likely  to  restrain 
them  by  their  virtue. 

238.  most]  Hudson  :  This  is  one  of  Iago's  artfullest  strokes.  The  instinctive 
shrinkings  and  tremblings  of  Desdemona's  modest  virgin  love  are  ascribed  to  craft, 
and  made  to  appear  a  most  refined  and  elaborate  course  of  deception.  His  deep  sci- 
ence of  human  nature  enables  him  to  divine  how  she  appeared. 

239.  Fechter  :  Othello  stops  at  once,  as  struck  by  a  thunderbolt !  His  face  changes 
by  degrees,  his  eyes  open  as  if  a  veil  had  been  taken  away !  Booth  :  Hoarsely  and 
with  despairing  look. 

240.  Fechter  :  Placing  nimself  behind  him  and  speaking  in  his  ear,  as  if  better  to 


act  in,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF  VENICE  185 

Shee  that  fo  young  could  giue  out  fuch  a  Seeming  241 

To  feele  her  Fathers  eyes  vp,  clofe  as  Oake, 

He  thought  'twas  Witchcraft. 

But  I  am  much  too  blame : 

I  humbly  do  befeech  you  of  your  pardon  245 

For  too  much  louing  you. 

Oth.     I  am  bound  to  thee  for  euer. 

Iagc.     I  fee  this  hath  a  little  dafh'd  your  Spirits : 

Oth.     Not  a  iot,  not  a  iot.  249 

242.feele]fealeQqF3.fealF4,  Rowe  +  ,  244,247.  I  am]  Pm  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii, 

Jen.  Coll.  Huds. 

Oake,~\  oak —  Rowe  et  seq.  244.  too  blame]  to  blame  F  ,  Rowe  et 

243,  244.  One  line,  Qq,  Pope  et  seq.  seq. 

243.  Witchcraft.]  Ff,  Coll.Wh.  i.  witch-  247.  to  thee]  to  to  thee '  F2.   to  you  Rowe 

craft :  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Mal.Var.  Knt,  Sing.  ii,  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 
Sta.     witchcraft —  Rowe  et  cet. 

instil  his  venom.  [Although  there  is  much,  as  I  have  said  elsewhere,  that  is,  to  me, 
highly  objectionable,  not  only  in  Fechter's  style  of  acting,  but  even  in  his  conception 
of  character,  yet  in  this  instance  he  jumps  with  the  very  way  in  which  it  is  barely  pos- 
sible that  Burbadge  spoke  these  lines  while  Shakespeare  listened.  See  Appendix, 
where  the  ballad  on  The  Tragedie  of  Othello  the  Moore  is  given,  wherein  it  is  said  of 
Iago  that  •  He  whisper'd  at  Othelloe's  backe,  His  wife  had  chaungde  her  minde,'  &c. 
—Ed.] 

242.  seele]  See  notes  on  I,  iii,  297.  Collier  :  The  ordinary  word  seal  seems  here 
only  intended. 

242.  Oake]  Johnson  :  There  is  little  relation  between  eyes  and  oak.  I  would  read 
owls.  '  As  blind  as  an  owl '  is  a  proverb.  [This  note  is  repeated  in  Johnson  and 
Steevens's  Variorum  editions  of  1773  and  1778,  but  in  that  of  1785,  after  Dr  Johnson':- 
death,  Steevens  omitted  it, — presumably  out  of  respect  to  his  friend's  memory. — Ed." 
Steevens  :  The  *  oak '  is,  I  believe,  the  most  close-grained  wood  of  general  use  in 
England.  'Close  as  oak'  means  close  as  the  grain  of  oak.  D.  (N.  6°  Qu.,  1857,  2d, 
iv,  44)  suggests  that  in  connection  with  '  seel,'  '  oak '  should  be  hawk,  *  an  alteration 
which,'  so  he  says,  '  gives  significancy  to  a  simile  which  has  otherwise  no  meaning  at 
all.'     Staunton  and  Harting  make  the  same  conjecture. 

243.  Fechter  :  Othello  stands  immovable  as  a  statue.  Booth  :  Othello  should 
wince  slightly  at  the  recollection. 

244.  much  too  blame]  See  also  line  328  in  this  same  scene.  This  phrase  'too 
blame '  is  so  common,  not  only  in  the  Folio  but  in  other  Elizabethan  authors,  that  Ab- 
bott, §73,  suggests  that  perhaps  'blame'  was  considered  an  adjective,  and  that  'too1 
may  have  been  used  as  in  Early  English  for  *  excessively.'  Even  in  modern  editions, 
it  seems  to  me,  this  '  too '  should  be  retained. — Ed. 

245.  of]  See  Abbott,  §  1 74,  for  other  instances  where  'of  means  'concerning,' 
'  about.' 

247.  Fechter  :  His  eyes  fixed — extending  his  hand  to  Iago,  without  looking  at 
him.     Booth:  With  great  constraint. 

249.  Ottley  (p.  22) :  Kean  gave  the^e  wordt  with  a  plaintive,  choking  cry,  •which 


1 86 


THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      I  act  hi,  sc.  iiL 


Icigo.     Truft  me,  I  feare  it  has : 
I  hope  you  will  confider  what  is  fpoke 
Comes  from  your  Loue. 
But  I  do  fee  y'are  moou'd : 
I  am  to  pray  you,  not  to  ftraine  my  fpeech 
To  groffer  iffues  ,  nor  to  larger  reach, 
Then  to  Sufpition. 

Oth.     I  will  not. 

Iago.     Should  you  do  fo  (my  Lord) 
My  fpeech  fhould  fall  into  fuch  vilde  fucceffe, 
Which  my  Thoughts  aym'd  not. 
CaJJids  my  worthy  Friend : 
My  Lord,  I  fee  y'are  mou'd : 

Oth.     No,  not  much  mou'd : 


250 


255 


260 


263 


250.  Tmjl  me]  I  faith  Qt,  Sta.  Glo. 
Cam.  Dyce  iii,  Rife,  Huds.  Wh.  ii. 
252,  253.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 

252.  your  Loue]  my  loue  QqFf  et  cet. 

253.  y?  are]  Ff,  Wh.  ii.  you  are  Qq, 
Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing. 
Wh.  i,  Ktly.    you're  Rowe  et  cet. 

259.  fJiould]  would  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 
into  fuch]  into  Q  . 
vilde]  vild  F  ,  Rowe.     vile  Qq, 
Pope  et  seq. 

fucceffe]  excess  Pope  ii. 


260,  261.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 

260.  Which]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  TheoU 
Han.  Warb.  Knt,  Dyce  i.     As  Qq  et  cet. 

aym'd  not]  F2.  ainC d  not  FF, 
Knt,  Dyce  i.  aim'd  not  at  Rowe.  aime 
not  at  Qq  et  cet. 

261.  worthy']  trufly  Qx. 

Friend :]  friend.  Pope,  friend — 
Glo. 

262.  y'are]  Ff,  Wh.  i.  you  are  Qq, 
Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai. Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing. 
Ktly.    you1  re  Rowe  et  cet. 


went  to  the  heart.  Fechter  :  Crosses,  and  leans  on  the  back  of  the  low  chair. 
Booth  :  With  forced  indifference  and  trembling  voice. 

250.  Booth  :  Soothingly. 

253.  Booth  :  A  smothered  moan. 

253.  y'are]  Both  here  and  in  262,  this  contraction,  it  seems  to  me,  should  be  used 
in  modern  editions  in  preference  to  the  usual  you're,  or  even  to  the  you  are  of  the  Qq. 
See  also  Walker,  line  450,  post. — Ed. 

255.  issues]  Warburton  :  Conclusions. 

255.  reach]  Walker  {Crit.  ii,  167)  cites  this  as  only  an  apparent  rhyme  with 
'speech'  in  the  preceding  line;  ' Fa  was  pronounced  nearly  as  a  in  mate.'' 

259.  successe]  Johnson  :  If  this  be  the  right  word,  it  seems  to  mean  consequence 
or  event,  as  successo  is  used  in  Italian.  Richardson  [Did.  s.  v.)  :  *  Success '  is  that 
which  is  come  to,  arrived  at,  reached,  or  attained ;  whether  good  or  bad.  '  I  haue  bene 
longer  in  describing,  the  nature,  the  good  or  ill  successe,  of  the  quicke  and  hard  witte, 
than  perchance  som  will  thinke,  this  place  and  matter  doth  require.' — Ascham,  Tht 
Scholemaster  [Book  i,  p.  35,  ed.  Arber]. 

261.  Fechter:  Othello  makes  a  step  in  advance,  his  hand  on  his  poignard 
Booth  :  Give  this  as  a  stiletto-stab  in  the  back — at  which  Othello  groans  aloud. 

263.  Fechter  :  Supporting  himself  by  the  chair,  and  then  sinking  down  on  it. 


act  in,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  187 

I  do  not  thinke  but  Defdemonds  honeft. 

Iago.     Long  Hue  fhe  fo ;  261; 

And  long  liue  you  to  thinke  fo. 

Oth.     And  yet  how  Nature  erring  from  it  felfe. 

Iago.    J,  there's  the  point : 
As  (to  be  bold  with  you) 

Not  to  affect  many  propofed  Matches  270 

Of  her  owne  Clime,  Complexion,  and  Degree, 
Whereto  we  fee  in  all  things,  Nature  tends : 
Foh,  one  may  fmel  in  fuch,  a  will  moft  ranke, 
Foule  difproportions,  Thoughts  vnnaturall. 

But  (pardon  me)  I  do  not  in  pofition  275 

Diftinctly  fpeake  of  her,  though  I  may  feare 
Her  will,  recoyling  to  her  better  iudgement, 
May  fal  to  match  you  with  her  Country  formes,  278 

264.  I  do]  doe  Q  .  273.  one]  we  Qq. 

265,  266.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq.  mojl]  mul  Q  . 

267.  it  felfe.]  it  felfe — FB.    itfelf—F3  274.  difproportions]  Ff,  Rowe  f ,  Jen. 
F  .     itself- —  Warb.  et  seq.                                  Knt,  Sta.     difproportion  Qq  et  cet. 

268,  269.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq.  276.  Diflinctly]  Deflinctly  QT. 

271.  her]  our  Steev.'85.  278.  fal  to  match]  fail  to  catch  Wh.  li 

272.  Whereto]  Wherein  Q  .  (misprint?). 

273.  Foh,]  Fie  Qq.    Foh  !  Rowe  et  seq. 


266.  think]  Booth  :  Perhaps  a  slight  emphasis  on  thfs,  though  I  doubt  its  value. 

267.  Booth  :  Referring  to  his  color.  (My  Father  indicated  this  by  a  glance  at  his 
hand  as  it  passed  down  before  his  eyes  from  his  forehead,  where  it  had  been  pressed). 
Iago  seizes  this  with  eagerness  and  interrupts  him. 

269.  bold  with  you]  Booth  :  My  Father  interpreted  this  as  a  covert  reference  tu 
Brabantio's  assertion  before  the  Senate  (I,  iii,  113)  that  Desdemona  was  'a  maiden 
never  bold,'  an  assertion  which  Othello,  with  his  knowledge  of  Desdemona's  share  in 
their  wooing,  might  somewhat  modify ;  my  Father,  therefore,  spoke  the  line  not  as  an 
apologetic  parenthesis  addressed  to  Othello,  as  it  is  usually  printed,  but  as  though  catch- 
ing up  and  pursuing  Othello's  own  train  of  thought,  and  thus  insidiously  summoning  to 
Othello's  memory  secret  occasions  when  Desdemona  had  shown  a  '  will  most  rank,'  and 
had  been  '  bold '  with  him.  I  wish  I  could  describe  the  white-lipped,  icy  smile,  the 
piercing  glance  at  Othello's  half- averted  face,  and  eager  utterance,  with  which  my 
Father  said,  'Ay,  there's  the  point;  as  to  be  bold  with  you.'' 

273.  will]  Johnson:  That  is,  wilfulness.  A  'rank  will'  is  self-will  overgrown  ana 
exuberant.  Ritson  (p.  235) :  To  smell  wilfulness  and  an  overgrown  self-will  is  a  fac 
ulty  peculiar  to  the  learned  critic.  But  with  all  imaginable  deference  to  him,  the 
expression  means,  inclinations  or  desires  most  foul,  gross,  and  strong -scented. 

274.  Booth  :  Othello  repels  this  by  a  look  of  indignation. 

274.  disproportions]  See  I,  i,  31. 

275.  position]  Collier  :  The  (MS.)  reads  suspicion,  but  if  this  were  the  word  wt, 
should  be  inclined  to  think  that  *  not '  had  also  been  misprinted  for  but,  the  meaninp 
of  Iago  then  beings  '  I  but  speak  of  her  distinctly  in  suspicion? 


188 


THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      [act  hi,  sc.  iii. 


And  happily  repent. 

Oth.     Farewell,  farewell :  280 

If  more  thou  doft  perceiue,  let  me  know  more : 
Set  on  thy  wife  to  obferue. 
Leaue  me  I  ago. 

Iago.     My  Lord,  I  take  my  leaue. 

Othel.     Why  did  I  marry  ?  285 

This  honefr.  Creature  (doubtleffe) 
Sees,  and  knowes  more,  much  more  then  he  vnfolds. 

Iago.     My  Lord,  I  would  I  might  intreat  your  Honor  [325  a~\ 
To  fcan  this  thing  no  farther  :  Leaue  it  to  time, 
Although  'tis  fit  that  Caffio  haue  his  Place ;  290 

For  fure  he  filles  it  vp  with  great  Ability ; 
Yet  if  you  pleafe,  to  him  off  a-while : 
You  fhall  by  that  perceiue  him,  and  his  meanes  :  293 


279,  happily']  haply  so  Pope  +  . 
repent. ,]  repent —  Ktly. 

280,  281.  Farewell,  farewell :  If  more] 
Farewell,  If  more  (as  one  line)  Qq. 

281,  283.  thou... Iago.]  Two  lines,  end- 
;ng  on... Iago.  Qq. 

281,  282.  One  line,  Rowe  et  seq. 

283.  [Going.  Rowe  et  seq. 

284,  285.  One  line,  Qq,  Cap.  et  seq. 

288.  Continued  to  Oth.  Ql# 
Iago.]  Om.  Qj. 
[Returns.  Cap. 

289.  To  fcan]  lag.     To  fcan  Qr. 


289.  farther]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt,  Coll. 
Sta.    further  Qq  et  cet. 

290.  Although  'tis  fit]  Tho  it  befit  QIt 
Jen.  Var.  Glo.  Cam.  Rife.  And  though  tis 
fit  Q2Q3,  Cap.  Sing.  And  though  it  befit 
Steev.  Mai. 

292.  to  him]  to  put  him  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Plan,     to  hold  him  Qq  et  cet. 

off]  o/Qt. 

a-while]  F2.  a  while  Q2Q,F  F  , 
Rowe-f,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Ktly. 
awhile  Q   et  cet. 


279.  happily]  Jennens  :  It  is  plain  that  haply  or  perchance  is  here  meant.  See, 
*o  the  same  effect,  Abbott,  §  42. 

280.  Gerard  :  Othello  n'est  pas  sans  amour-propre.  II  se  rend  justice  sur  ses  traits 
et  son  teint  basane  et  il  conviendra  avec  lui-meme  des  desavantages  de  sa  personne, 
mais  ce  qu'il  s'avoue  tout  bas  il  est  fache  de  l'entendre  de  la  bouche  d'un  autre,  et, 
tranchant  sur  ce  sujet,  il  congedie  Iago.  Fechter  :  Dismissing  Iago  with  a  gesture, 
but  stopping  him  as  he  goes  to  the  door.  Booth  :  Impatiently ;  unable  to  endure  his 
presence  any  longer ;  line  282  he  speaks  as  though  overcome  by  shame  at  his  own 
baseness  in  the  suggestion;  and  at  the  close  falls  on  a  seat. 

284.  Booth  :  A  quick,  fiendish  smile  of  triumph  and  a  rapid  clutch  of  the  fingers, 
as  though  squeezing  his  very  heart  (Othello's  face  is  buried  in  his  hands),  is  quite  legit- 
imate here,  but  do  it  unobtrusively,  as  you  vanish.  Fechter  :  Iago  pretends  to  go, 
but  stays  on  the  threshold  to  watch  Othello  from  the  opening  in  the  tapestry. 

288.  Booth  :  Othello  assumes  indifference  for  a  while,  but  it  leaves  him  at  the  men- 
tion of  Cassio. 

293.  meanes]  Johnson  :  You  shall  discover  whether  he  thinks  his  best  means,  his 
most  powerful  interest  is  by  the  solicitation  of  your  lady. 


act  in,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE  OF   VENICE  189 

Note  if  your  Lady  ftraine  his  Entertainment 

With  any  ftrong,  or  vehement  importunitie,  295 

Much  will  be  feene  in  that  :  In  the  meane  time, 

Let  me  be  thought  too  bufie  in  my  feares, 

(As  worthy  caufe  I  haue  to  feare  I  am) 

And  hold  her  free,  I  do  befeech  your  Honor. 

Oth.     Feare  not  my  gouernment.  300 

Iago.     I  once  more  take  my  leaue.  Exit, 

Oth.     This  Fellow's  of  exceeding  honefty, 

And  knowes  all  Quantities  with  a  learned  Spirit 

Of  humane  dealings.     If  I  do  proue  her  Haggard,  304 

294.  his]  her  Qq.  303.  learn' d]    Ff,   Rowe,  Pope,  Wh. 

295.  importunitie]  opportunity  VarJ '03,         learned  Qq  et  cet. 

'13, '21  (misprint).  303,304.  Spirit  Of]  Q^Ff,  Coll.  Sta. 

299.  Honor.]  Honor:  Ff.  Wh.  i.    fpirit,  0/Q3  et  cet. 

301.  Exit.]  Om.  Ff.  304.  humane]  humaine  Qx.     human 

Scene  VI.  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Rowe  et  seq. 

303.   Quantities]  Q2Q,Ff,  Rowe.  qual-                       dealings]  dealing  Qx. 

ities  Qj  et  cet.  do]  Om.  Pope  +  . 

294.  Entertainment]  Johnson  :  Press  hard  his  re-admission  to  his  pay  and  office. 
'  Entertainment '  was  the  military  term  for  admission  of  soldiers. 

295.  importunitie]  Walker  (  Vers.  201) :  The  i  in  -ity  is  almost  uniformly  dropped 
in  pronunciation.     [See  'satiety,'  II,  i,  261.] 

299.  Booth  :  Imploringly. 

300.  gouernment]  Johnson  :  Do  not  distrust  my  ability  to  contain  my  passion 
Gould  (p.  104) :  J.  B.  Booth  indicated  this  meaning  of  self-control  by  a  gesture 
strangely  original  and  fine — the  forefinger  of  the  lifted  hand  pointed  vertically  to  the 
top  of  the  head. 

301.  Fechter  :  He  retires  humbly — looking  on  from  the  back  with  a  triumphant 
smile.  At  the  door  raises  his  shoulders  in  contempt ;  and  exit.  Booth  :  Iago  should 
be  rapid  in  all  his  actions  except  at  this  point — do  nothing,  but  go  slowly  off  with  ;» 
tender  respect :  Othello  should  watch  Iago  keenly  till  he  is  gone. 

303,  304.  Johnson  :  The  construction  is,  He  knows  with  a  learned  spirit  all  quali 
ties  of  human  dealings.  Walker  (Crit.  i,  160) :  Queer e  whether  the  comma  ought 
not  to  be  expunged  after  •  spirit '  ?  '  And  knows  all  qualities  with  a  spirit  learned  of 
(i.  e.,  in)  human  dealings.  (I  believe  I  am  wrong  as  to  this  passage.)  [See  Text. 
Notes,  where  Walker  is  anticipated.]  Lettsom  \_Foot-note  to  Walker]  :  Notwith- 
standing Walker's  hesitation,  I  prefer  the  construction  which  he  has  suggested.  Qual- 
ity here,  as  frequently  elsewhere,  seems  to  mean  natural  disposition.  In  this  passage 
the  poet  has  unconsciously  described  himself. 

304.  Haggard]  Harting  (p.  57)  :  A  wild-caught  and  unreclaimed  mature  hawk, 
as  distinguished  from  an  'eyess '  or  nestling.  Steevens  :  From  a  passage  in  The  White 
Devil,  1612,  it  appears  that  it  was  a  term  of  reproach  sometimes  applied  to  a  wanton: 
«Is  this  your  perch,  you  haggard?  fly  to  th'  stews' — [Webster's  Works,  vol.  i,  p.  120, 
»d.  Dyce].     It  had,  however,  a  popular  sense,  and  was  used  for  wild  by  those  who 


190  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF   OTHELLO      [ACT  III,  SC.  ill 

Though  that  her  Iefles  were  my  deere  heart-firings,  305 

Fid  whittle  her  off,  and  let  her  downe  the  winde 

To  prey  at  Fortune.     Haply,  for  I  am  blacke, 

And  haue  not  thofe  foft  parts  of  Conuerfation 

That  Chamberers  hiue  :  Or  for  I  am  declined  309 

306.  Fid]  Pde  Qq.  307.  Haply']  Happily  Qq. 
downe]  dewne  Q2Q3.  lam]  Pm  Pope-K 

307.  prey]  pray  Qy 

thought  not  on  the  language  of  falconers.  Fechter  :  Rousing  himself,  and  trembling 
with  rage.  Booth  :  All  this  passage  should  be  spoken  more  with  anguish  than  with 
anger. 

305.  Iesses]  Harting  (p.  58)  :  These  were  two  narrow  strips  of  leather,  fastened 
one  to  each  leg,  the  other  ends  being  attached  to  a  swivel,  from  which  depended  the 
'  leash.'  When  the  hawk  was  flown,  the  swivel  and  leash  were  taken  off,  the  jesses  and 
bells  remaining  on  the  bird.  Turbervile,  in  his  Book  of  Falconrie,  1575,  speaking  of 
the  trappings  of  a  hawk,  says  :  '  Shee  must  haue  jesses  of  leather,  the  which  must  haue 
knottes  at  the  ende,  and  they  should  be  halfe  a  foote  long,  or  there  about ;  at  the  least 
a  shaftmeete  betweene  the  hoose  of  the  jesse,  and  the  knotte  at  the  ende,  whereby  you 
tye  the  hauke.' 

306.  whistle]  Johnson  :  The  falconers  always  let  fly  the  hawk  against  the  wind ; 
if  she  flies  with  the  wind  behind  her,  she  seldom  returns.  If,  therefore,  a  hawk  was 
for  any  reason  to  be  dismissed,  she  was  '  let  down  the  wind,'  and  from  that  time  shifted 
for  herself  and  'preyed  at  fortune.'  Dyce  [Few  Holes,  p.  149):  *Ajetter  un  oiseau. 
To  cast,  or  whistle  off,  a  hawke ;  to  let  her  goe,  let  her  flie.' — Cotgrave.  [It  is  need- 
less to  cite  the  numberless  allusions  throughout  Shakespeare  and  Elizabethan  authors 
to  every  the  minutest  department  of  Hawking.  To  Walker  (  Vers.  68)  I  can  simply 
refer ;  in  his  enthusiasm  for  scansion  he  would  be  willing  (if  I  understand  him)  to  pro- 
nounce 'whistle  her'  as  two  syllables. — Ed.] 

307.  blacke]  Fechter  :  Paces  the  stage,  and  starts  on  seeing  his  face  in  a  glass. 

308.  parts]  Reed  :  This  seems  to  be  here  synonymous  with  arts,  as  in  '  Tis  Pity 
She's  a  Whore,  speaking  of  singing  and  music :  '  They  are  parts  I  love '  [II,  i,  ed. 
Dyce].  Morel:  Le  mot  qui  est  reste  courant  dans  la  langue  est  commente  par  Vol- 
taire comme  suit :  '  Great  parts,'  de  grandes  parties.  D'ou  cette  maniere  de  parler  qui 
etonne  aujourd'hui  les  Francais  peut-elle  venir?  D'eux-mSmes.  Autrefois  nous  nous 
servions  de  ce  mot  de  parties  tres  communement  dans  ce  sens-la.  Clelie,  Cassandre, 
nos  autres  anciens  romans  ne  parlent  que  des  parties  de  leurs  heros  et  de  leur  heroines, 
et  ces  parties  sont  leur  esprit.  En  effet,  chacun  de  nous  n'a  que  sa  petite  portion  (in- 
telligence, de  m6moire,  de  sagacity.  Les  Francais  ont  laisse  echapper  de  leurs  diction- 
aires  une  expression  dont  les  Anglais  se  sont  saisis.  Les  Anglais  se  sont  enrichis  plus 
d'une  fois  a  nos  depens. — Diet,  philosophique,  s.  v.  '  Esprit.' 

309.  Chamberers]  Steevens  :  That  is,  men  of  intrigue.  So  in  the  Countess  of 
Pembroke's  Antonius,  1590:  '  FalPn  from  a  souldier  to  a  chamberer.'  Henley:  See 
Romans,  xiii,  13:  'Let  us  walk  honestly  as  in  the  day;  not  in  rioting  and  drunken- 
ness, not  in  chambering  and  wantonness.'  Wright  [Bible  Word- Book) :  Latimei,  in 
tiis  remarks  on  Rom.  xiii,  13,  thus  explains  the  word  :  'St.  Paul  useth  this  word  chain- 
binng ;  for  when  folks  will  be  wanton,  they  get  themselves  in  corners.' — Rem.  p.  iS 


act  in,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  191 

Into  the  vale  of  yeares  (yet  that's  not  much)  310 

Shee's  gone.     I  am  abus'd,  and  my  releefe 

Muft  be  to  loath  her.     Oh  Curfe  of  Marriage ! 

That  we  can  call  thefe  delicate  Creatures  ours, 

And  not  their  Appetites  ?  I  had  rather  be  a  Toad, 

And  Hue  vpon  the  vapour  of  a  Dungeon,  315 

Then  keepe  a  corner  in  the  thing  I  loue 

For  others  vfes.     Yet  'tis  the  plague  to  Great-ones, 

Prerogatiu'd  are  they  leffe  then  the  Bafe, 

'Tis  deftiny  vnfhunnable,  like  death : 

Euen  then,  this  forked  plague  is  Fated  to  vs,  320 

When  we  do  quicken.     Looke  where  fhe  comes : 

310.  the  vale]  the  valt  Qt.     a  vale  Q  .  317.  plague  to]  Ff,  Rowe.    plague  of 

?II.  abus'd]  aduis'd  Q  .  Qq  et  cet. 

releefe"]  releife  Q,Q3.  Great-ones]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  great 

312.  Curfe]  the  curse  Pope  +  .  ons  Q  .    great  ones  QXQ2,  Theob.  et  seq. 

315.  of  a]  in  a  Qq.  318.  Trerogatiu'd]  Prerogatiorfd  Q  . 

316.  corner]  cornet  Q.  319.  '  Tis]  This  Q. 

the  thing]  a  thing  Qq.  321.  Looke  where  five]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 

317.  vfes]  use  Pope  +  .  Del.     Defdemona  Q,Q2  et  cet. 

Schmidt  defines  it,  but  I  am  afraid  on  insufficient  grounds :  a  man  conversant  with  the 
arts  of  peace,  opposed  to  a  soldier ;  the  same  as  '  carpet-monger.' 

312.  Marriage]  Walker  [Vers.  176):  Pronounce  dissolute". 

314.  Appetites]  Booth  :  This  word  may  bother  the  many,  so  touch  your  heart  to 
signify,  likings,  or  longings. 

318.  Prerogatiu'd]  Malone:  Compare  As  You  Like  It,  III,  iii,  58,  where  Touch- 
stone holds  forth  a  contrary  opinion.  '  Shakespeare  would  have  been  more  consistent 
if  he  had  written :  Prerogativ'd  are  they  more  than  the  base  ? '  Othello  would  then 
have  answered  his  own  question  :  '  (No :)  'Tis  destiny  unshunnable,'  &c.  Steevens 
soothingly  remarks :  '  Allowance  must  be  made  to  the  present  state  of  Othello's  mind.: 
passion  is  seldom  correct  in  its  effusions.' 

319.  vnshunnable]  Malone  :  To  be  consistent,  Othello  must  mean  that  it  is  des- 
tiny unshunnable  by  '  great  ones,'  not  by  all  mankind. 

320.  forked  plague]  Percy  :  That  is,  the  horns  of  the  cuckold.  Malone  :  See, 
in  proof,  Tro.  &  Cress.  I,  ii,  178;  and  Wint.  Tale,  I,  ii,  186.  One  of  Harrington's 
Epigrams  contains  the  very  expression :  '  Actaeon  ....  Was  plagu'd  with  homes ;  .  .  .  . 
Wherefore  take  heed,  ye  that  are  curious,  prying,  With  some  such  forked  plague  you  be 
not  smitten,'  &c. 

321.  comes]  'The  burst  of  mixed  passions  with  which  Forrest  uttered  the  first  part 
of  this  speech  was  terrific.  His  voice  then  sank  into  tones  the  most  touching,  express- 
ive of  complaining  regret.  The  conclusion  seemed  to  have  excited  him  to  the  utmost 
pitch  of  loathing  and  disgust,  and,  as  he  sees  Desdemona  advancing,  he,  for  a  few  mo- 
ments, gazed  upon  her  with  horror.  The  feeling  gave  way,  and  all  his  former  tender- 
ness seemed  tc  return  as  he  exclaimed,  "  If  she  be  false,'1  &c.' — Alger's  Life  of  Forte st^ 
1,308. 


192  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      [act  in,  sc.  iu. 

Enter  Defdemona  and  Aimilia.  322 

If  me  be  falfe,  Heauen  mock'd  it  felfe : 
He  not  beleeue't. 

Def.     How  now,  my  deere  Othello  ?  325 

Your  dinner,  and  the  generous  Iflanders 
By  you  inuited,  do  attend  your  prefence. 

Oth.     I  am  too  blame. 

Def.     Why  do  you  fpeake  fo  faintly  ? 
Are  you  not  well  ?  330 

Oth.     I  haue  a  paine  vpon  my  Forehead,  heere. 

322.  Enter...]  After  line  323,  Qq,Dyce,  328.  too]  to  Qq,  F2F4  et  seq. 

Sta.  Del.  329,  330.  One  line,  Qq,  Cap.  Steev. 

323.  falfe]  fats  Qy  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly. 

Heauen    mock'd]    Ff.       O   then  329.  Why...faintly]Whyisyourfpeech 

heauen  mocks  Qq  et  cet.  fo  faint  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll. 

324.  beleeue't]  beleeue  it  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.         Sing.  Ktly. 

Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly,  Del.  331.  heere]  heare  Q2Q3- 

326.  Iflanders]  /lander  Qq. 

323,  324.  Coleridge  (p.  255) :  Divine !  the  effect  of  innocence  and  the  bettei 
genius ! 

323.  mock'd]  Malone:  That  is  [see  Text.  Notes],  renders  its  own  labours  fruit- 
less, by  forming  so  beautiful  a  creature  as  Desdemona,  and  suffering  the  elegance  of 
her  person  to  be  disgraced  and  sullied  by  the  impurity  of  her  mind, — such,  I  think,  is 
the  meaning, — the  construction,  however,  may  be  different.  If  she  be  false,  Oh,  thenj 
even  heaven  itself  cheats  us  with  '  unreal  mocker)','  with  false  and  specious  appear- 
ances, intended  only  to  deceive.  Steevens  :  The  first  of  the  foregoing  explanations 
is,  I  believe,  the  true  one.  If  she  be  false,  heaven  disgraces  itself  by  creating  womaE 
after  its  own  image.  To  have  made  the  resemblance  perfect,  she  should  have  been 
good  as  well  as  beautiful.  Knight  :  By  the  reading  of  the  Folio  we  may  understand 
that,  if  Desdemona  be  false, — be  not  what  she  appears  to  be, — heaven,  at  her  creation, 
instead  of  giving  an  image  of  itself,  mocked  itself, — gave  a  false  image.  The  reading 
of  the  Qq  is  more  forcible  and  natural. 

324.  Booth  :  I  strike  my  forehead  as  if  to  kill  the  devilish  thought.  After  Desde- 
mona and  Emilia  have  entered  it  is  better  for  the  latter  to  retire,  for  the  reason  given  at 
line  48  of  this  scene.  Moreover,  it  is  better  for  her  on  her  re-entrance  to  find  the  hand- 
kerchief than  to  steal  it. 

326.  generous]  Steevens:  The  islanders  of  rank,  distinction.  So,  in  Meas.for 
Meas.  IV,  vi,  1 3,  «  The  generous  and  gravest  citizens.'  See  also  Ham.  I,  hi,  74,  'select 
and  generous.' 

328.  too  blame]  See  supra,  III,  iii,  244. 

331.  Forehead]  R.YMER  (p.  121):  Michael  Cassio  came  not  from  Venice  in  the 
ship  with  Desdemona,  nor  till  this  morning  could  be  suspected  of  an  opportunity  with 
her.  And  'tis  now  but  dinner  time ;  yet  the  Moor  complains  of  his  forehead.  He 
might  have  set  a  guard  on  Cassio,  or  have  lockt  up  Desdemona,  or  have  observ'd  their 
carriage  a  day  or  two  longer.     He  is  on  other  occasions  phlegmatic  enough:  this  is 


act  in,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  193 

Def.     Why  that's  with  watching,  'twill  away  againe.  332 

Let  me  but  binde  it  hard,  within  this  houre 
It  will  be  well. 

Oth.     Your  Napkin  is  too  little :  335 

332.  Why]  Faith  Qx,  Mai.  Steev.'93,  333.  it  hard]  your  head  Qx. 

Var.  Coll.  Dyce,Wh.  Glo.  Cam.  Del.  Huds.  334.  well.']  well  againe.  Q,,  Jen. 

Rife.  335.  [She   drops    her    Handkerchief 

'twill]  t' will  QQ.     t'wllQy  Rowe. 

very  hasty.  [Rymer's  innuendo  that  in  the  pain  upon  his  forehead  Othello  here  covert 
ly  alludes  to  the  forked  plague  is,  I  am  afraid,  only  too  correct.  Delius,  also,  thus  inter 
prets  it.  Note  the  use  of  '  upon.'  If  this  reference  was  understood  by  Shakespeare's 
auditors, — and  it  seems  as  though  it  were  scarcely  possible  in  those  days  to  refer  to  the 
forehead  other  than  as  a  groundwork  for  this  plague, — then,  in  Desdemona's  tender 
response  they  perceived  a  proof  of  her  unconscious  innocence  which  is  otherwise  lost 
on  us. — Ed.] 

233.  Booth  :  She  kneels  to  do  so, — he  is  sitting. 

335.  Napkin]  Warner  (Letter  to  Garrick,  p.  35) :  This  word  is  still  used  to  sig- 
nify a  Handkerchief  in  Scotland  and  in  the  North  of  England,  especially  about  Shef 
field  in  Yorkshire.  We  meet  with  it  in  that  sense  in  the  Proceedings  in  Scotland  in 
the  Douglass  cause :  '  Lady  Jane  never  admitted  any  person  to  see  her  till  she  was 
fully  dress'd  ....  with  a  large  Napkin  on  her  breast.'  ['  Oft  did  she  heave  her  nap- 
kin to  her  eyne' — Lover's  Complaint,  21. — Ed.] 

335.  Collier  (ed.  i):  We  take  this  necessary  stage  direction  ['Let's  fall  her  Nap- 
kin'] from  a  MS.  note,  in  a  hand-writing  of  the  time,  in  the  Duke  of  Devonshire's  Qr. 
Dyce  (Remarks,  p.  239) :  The  stage  direction  inserted  by  other  modern  editors  is  far 
better,  viz.  ['  He  puts  the  handkerchief  from  him,  and  it  drops'].  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that,  while  Othello  pushes  away  the  handkerchief,  Desdemona  lets  it  fall :  Emilia 
(who  is  now  on  the  stage)  says  presently :  '  she  let  it  drop  by  negligence ;  And  I,'  &c. 
Collier  (ed.  ii)  :  This  stage  direction  ['  The  napkin  falls  to  the  ground']  and  others 
[' Offering  to  bind  his  head,  after  line  333]  are  from  the  (MS.)  [Where  stage  directions 
occur  in  the  Qq  or  Ff  they  are  to  be  reverently  accepted,  and  they  are  also  respectable 
in  Rowe,  as  indications  of  stage  tradition,  but  in  other  cases,  where  they  are  devised  by 
editors,  they  are  apt  to  be  intrusive  and  are  mostly  superfluous.  They  belong  more  to 
the  province  of  the  actor  than  to  that  of  the  editor.  We  editors  readily  lose  sight  of 
the  fact  that  we  are,  for  the  most  part,  mere  drudges,  humble  diggers  and  delvers  in 
forgotten  fields,  and  from  close  poring  over  the  words  of  a  dramatic  character  we  are 
apt  to  forget  ourselves,  and  bound  in  imagination  for  one  wild  moment  on  the  stage 
to  dictate  action  to  the  player-folk  themselves.  Picture  Dr  Johnson  in  the  role  of 
Mercutio !  Yet  when  Dr  Johnson  modified  or  inserted  stage  directions,  be  they  ever 
so  slight,  as  he  has  in  Mercutio's  speeches,  did  not  his  imagination,  for  an  instant, 
play  him  that  same  fantastic  trick?  To  editorial  stage  directions  far  more  than  to 
sesthetic  illustrations  the  phrase  '  sign-post  criticisms '  may  be  properly  applied,  as  it 
seems  to  me.  The  stage  directions  of  actors  stand  on  a  different  footing.  Here  lies 
the  actor's  true  province,  and  to  his  interpretations  must  be  applied  the  supreme  test 
of  public  judgement,  wherein  we,  as  a  part  of  that  public,  have  a  right  to  give  our 
voice.  Here  Fechter  decides  that  it  is  Othello  who  throws  down  the  handkerchief, 
and  does  it  in  a  rage ;  but  Booth,  with  finer  insight,  lets  Othello  gently  push  the  hand 
kerchief  aside  and  Desdemona  drop  it. — Ed.] 


194  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      [act  hi,  sc.  hi. 

Let  it  alone  :  Come,  He  go  in  with  you.  Exit.         336 

Def.     I  am  very  forry  that  you  are  not  well. 

sEmil.  I  am  glad  I  haue  found  this  Napkin : 
This  was  her  firft  remembrance  from  the  Moore, 
My  wayward  Husband  hath  a  hundred  times  340 

Woo'd  me  to  fteale  it.     But  fhe  fo  loues  the  Token, 
(For  he  coniur'd  her,  fhe  fhould  euer  keepe  it) 
That  fhe  referues  it  euermore  about  her, 
To  kiffe,  and  talke  too.     He  haue  the  worke  tane  out, 
And  giu't  Iago  :  what  he  will  do  with  it  345 

Heauen  knowes,  not  I : 

336.  Exit.]  Ex.  Oth.  and  Defd.  (after  344,  345.  lie... he  will"]  I  will  have  the 
napkin,  line  338)  Qq.    Exeunt  Ff.    After  work  \   To1  en  oat,  and  give  it  to  Iago,  but  \ 
line  337,  Rowe  et  seq.  What  he'll  (reading  What  he' 11.. .not  I'm 

337.  Om.    Cap.    (corrected    Notes,  ii,  lines  345,  346  as  one  line)  Han. 

148  b).  345,  346.  Lines  end,  Iago... I:  Johns. 

Scene  VII.  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mal.Var.  Sing.  Dyce,  Del. 

338.  Napkin  .•]  napkin  here.  Han.  Huds. 

341.  Woo'd]  Wooed  Qq.  345.  giu'l]  give  it  Steev.  Mai. 

342.  Jhould]  would  Var.'o3,  '13,  '21,  he  will]  hee'll  Qx,  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 
Sing.  i.                                                                Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Sing,     he' I Q2Q3. 

344.  talke  tod]  talke  to  QqFf.  346,  347.  One  line,  Ktly. 

haue]  ha  Qq. 

336.  Exit]  Booth  :  Take  time,  gently  push  the  handkerchief  from  her  hand  as  she 
is  in  the  act  of  binding  it  on  your  forehead.  Pass  her,  while  on  her  knees,  with  forced 
indifference,  but  turn  lovingly,  and  holding  your  arms  for  her  to  enter  them,  say  '  Come, 
I'll  go  in  with  thee.'  Then  with  a  long  soulful  look  into  her  eyes,  fold  her  tenderly 
to  your  heart  and  go  slowly  off.  Keep  time.  Don't  drawl  in  either  speech  or  move- 
ment, yet  be  not  abrupt  nor  rapid.  Every  movement,  gesture,  look,  and  tone  should 
be  in  harmony. 

338.  Fechter  :  Comes  forward  with  caution,  and  seizes  the  handkerchief,  which 
she  has  watched  narrowly  since  Othello  threw  it  down.  Booth  :  Emilia,  by  chance, 
sees  the  handkerchief  and  picks  it  up. 

339.  remembrance]  Staunton  :  That  is,  memorial,  or  forget-me-not. 

344.  tane  out]  Johnson  :  The  meaning  is  not,  to  have  the  work  picked  out  and 
leave  the  ground  plain,  but  to  have  this  work  copied  in  another  handkerchief.  Steev- 
ens  :  So  in  Middleton's  Women  Bevvare  Women,  I,  i,  'she  intends  To  take  out  other 
works  in  a  new  sampler.'  Again,  in  the  Preface  to  Holland's  Pliny  :  '  Thus  Nicophanes 
(a  famous  painter  in  his  time)  gave  his  mind  wholly  to  antique  pictures,  partly  to  exem- 
plifie  and  take  out  their  patternes.'  Blackstone  :  Her  first  thoughts  are  to  have  a 
copy  made  of  it  for  her  husband,  and  to  restore  the  original  to  Desdemona.  But  the 
sudden  coming  in  of  Iago,  in  a  surly  humour,  makes  her  alter  her  resolution,  to  please 
him.  Malone  :  This  scheme  of  having  the  work  copied  was  to  render  Emilia  less 
unamiable.  It  is  remarkable  that  when  she  perceives  Othello's  fury  on  the  loss  of  this 
token,  though  she  is  represented  as  affectionate  to  her  mistress,  she  never  attempts  to 
relieve  her  of  her  distress,  which  she  might  easily  have  done.  Shakespeare  fell  into 
this  incongruity  by  departing  from  Cinthio's  novel. 


act  in,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE  OF   VENICE  195 

T  nothing,  but  to  pleafe  his  Fantafie.  347 

Enter  I  ago. 

Iago.     How  now?  What  do  you  heere  alone? 

jEntil.     Do  not  you  chide  :  I  haue  a  thing  for  you.  350 

Iago.     You  haue  a  thing  for  me?  [325  b~\ 

It  is  a  common  thing 

Aimil.     Hah  ? 

Iago.     To  haue  a  foolifh  wife. 

ALmit.     Oh,  is  that  all  ?     What  will  you  giue  me  now         355 
For  that  fame  Handkerchiefe. 

Iago.     What  Handkerchiefe? 

Aimil.     What  Handkerchiefe? 
Why  that  the  Moore  firft  gaue  to  De/demona, 
That  which  fo  often  you  did  bid  me  fteale.  360 

Iago.     Haft  fholne  it  from  her? 

^Emil.     No  :  but  fhe  let  it  drop  by  negligence, 
And  to  th'aduantage,  I  being  heere,  took't  vp : 
Looke,  heere  'tis. 

Iago.     A  good  wench,  giue  it  me.  365 

347.  nothing... his~\  nothing  know,  but  361.  Jiolne]  Jlole  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Jloln 
for  his  Qx,  Johns.                                                F  .    Jlollen  F4,  Rowe,  Pope. 

348.  Enter...]  After  line  345,  Qq.  362.  No:  but  Jhe]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap. 
351,  352.  One  line,  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  et         Jen.  Steev.'85,  Knt.     No  faith,  Jhe  Qq 

seq.  et  cet. 

351.  You  haue"]  Ff,  Rowe +  ,  Jen.  Steev.  363.  th?~\  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Coll.  Dyce 
'85.     Om.  Qq  et  cet.                                           iii,  Huds.     the  Qq  et  cet. 

352.  thing — ]  thing.  Qx.     thing;  Cap.  tooh't-]  tooke  it  Q2Q3,  Steev.' 85, 
354.  wife~\  thing  Qx.                                         Mai. 

356,  357,  358.  Handkerchiefe']  hand-  364.  Vw]  Ff,  Rowe  +  .  it  is  Qq,  Han. 
kercher  Qx.                                                           et  cet. 

349-352.  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  287):  Arrange,  perhaps, — How  now!  |  What  do  you 
here  alone  ?  Emil.  Do  not  you  chide ;  |  I  have  a  thing  for  you.  /age.  A  thing  for 
me  ?  I  It  is  a  common  thing. 

350.  chide]  Booth  :  Note  this.  Iago's  manner  is  brusque, — disappointed  at  noi 
finding  Othello  here;  he  had  come  to  drive  the  dagger  deeper  in  his  heart. 

357.  Fechter  :  Earnestly.     Booth  :  Indifferently.     Up  stage. 

361.  Booth  :  Turn  quickly,  with  delighted  expectancy. 

362.  No]  Collier  (ed.  i)  :  The  Master  of  the  Revels  seems  to  have  been  capri- 
ciously scrupulous  in  this  play ;  here,  according  to  the  Folio,  '  'faith  '  was  erased  as  an 
oath,  and  this  not  for  the  first  time.     In  line  332  the  same  thing  occurs. 

363.  to  th'  advantage]  Johnson  :  I,  being  opportunely  here,  took  it  ur 
365.  Booth  :  Snatch  at  it  eagerly. 


196 


THE    TRAGEDIE   OF   OTHELLO      [act  hi,  sc.  iii. 


AimiL     What  will  you  do  with't,  that  you  haue  bene         366 
fo  earneft  to  haue  me  filch  it  ? 

Iago,     Why,  what  is  that  to  you  ? 

ALmiL     If  it  be  not  for  fome  purpofe  of  import, 
Giu't  me  againe.     Poore  Lady,  fhee'l  run  mad  370 

When  fhe  fhall  lacke  it. 

Iago,     Be  not  acknowne  on't : 
I  haue  vfe  for  it.     Go,  leaue  me.  Exit  AimiL 

I  will  in  CaJJids  Lodging  loofe  this  Napkin, 
And  let  him  finde  it.     Trifles  light  as  ayre,  375 

Are  to  the  iealious,  confirmations  ftrong, 
As  proofes  of  holy  Writ.     This  may  do  fomething.  377 


366,  367.  What...fo]    What. ..So   (As 
verse)  Qx.     (As  verse,  the  first  line  end- 
ing with  it)  Q2Q3.    Prose  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope. 
Wliat...earnefl]  One  line,  Theob. 
et  seq. 

366.  with't]  with  it  Qq,  Jen.  Steev. 
Mai.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

that"]  Om.  F3F4,  Rowe  +  . 
you  haue]  you've  Huds. 

367.  filch]  fetch  Q3.    filtch  F4,  Rowe. 

368.  what  is]  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Jen.  Steev. 
'85.     what's  Qq  et  cet. 

[Snatching  it.  Rowe. 

369.  ^]^VQaQ3,Pope  +  ,Cap.Jen. 
Cam.  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 

for]  Om.  Coll.  (MS). 

370.  Giu'tme]  Giuemee'tQ1Qs.     Give 
me't  Q  ,  Jen.    Give  it  me  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 


372,  373-  One  line,  Qq,  Jen.  Be. ..for 
it  One  line,  Cap.  et  seq.  (except  Ktly  ana 
Dyce  iii). 

372.  not  acknowne  orit]  Fa.  not  you 
knowne  on't  Q,Q3,  Pope  + ,  Cap.  Jen.  not 
you  acknowne  on't  Q2,  Dyce  iii,  Coll.  iii. 
not  you  known  oft  Mai.  Steev.'93,  Var. 
not  ac known  on't  FF  et  cet.  not  you 
known  in't  Johns,  conj. 

373-  for  it.]  for  it: — Qq.  /^rV  Walker 
Go,  leaue  me]  Separate  line,  Cap 
et  seq.  (except  Ktly  and  Dyce  iii). 

Exit  ^Emil.]  Exit  Em.  (after  nap- 
kin, line  374)  Qq. 

374.  loofe]  lofe  Qq. 

376.  iealious]  iealous  QqFf. 

377.  Writ.]  Wright,  Q3. 


368.  Why]  Booth  :  Pause  mysteriously,  *  Why ,'  as  if  about  to  give  her  some 

wonderful  reason.     Then  snatch  it,  with  *  What's  that  to  you  ? ' 

372.  acknowne]  Steevens  :  That  is,  do  not  acknowledge  anything  of  the  mattei. 
The  word  occurs  in  Golding's  Ovid :  •  Howbeit  I  durst  not  be  so  bolde  of  hope  ac 
knowne  to  bee'  [p.  91,  Lib.  vii,  632,  'nee  me  sperare  fatebar'],  Again  in  Putten- 
ham's  Arte  of  Poesie  [p.  260,  ed.  Arber]  :  *  so  would  I  not  haue  a  translatour  to  be 
ashamed  to  be  acknowen  of  his  translation.'  Porson  :  Again  in  The  Life  of  Ariosto,  in 
Harrington's  translation  of  Orlando,  ed.  1607  :  '  Some  say,  he  was  married  to  her  privi- 
lie,  but  durst  not  be  acknowne  of  it.' 

373.  Booth  :  Many  *  Iagos '  kiss  her,  and  coax  her  to  leave  him,—  he  is  given  rathei 
to  chiding  than  to  caressing. 

374.  Napkin]  Booth  :  Why  may  not  Cassio  bind  this  about  his  wounded  leg  at 
close  of  the  next  Act?     'Tis  traditional,  and  reasonable, — do  it. 

375.  376.  Hunter  (ii,  281):  Compare  V.  6°  A.  1023:  'Trifles  unwitnessed  with 
eye  or  ea    Thy  coward  heart  with  false  bethinking  grieves.' 


ACT  ill,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  197 

The  Moore  already  changes  with  my  poyfon :  378 

Dangerous  conceites,  are  in  their  Natures  poyfons, 

Which  at  the  firfl  are  fcarfe  found  to  diftafte :  380 

But  with  a  little  a6le  vpon  the  blood, 

Burne  like  the  Mines  of  Sulphure.     I  did  fay  fo. 

Enter  Othello. 
Looke  where  he  comes  :  Not  Poppy,  nor  Mandragora,  384 

378.  Om.  Qx.  383.  Enter...]  (After  blood,  line  381) 
poyfon]  poyfons  Ff,  Rowe  + .  QiQ2-      Om.  Q3-      After  yesterday,  line 

379.  Om.  Rowe  ii.  387,  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh.  Ktly,  Sta. 
Natures']  nature  Pope  +  .  Huds. 

380.  dijlajle~\  dijiajl  Qq.  Scene  VIII.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

381.  acle  vpon]  art,  vpon  Qx.  384.  nor]  Om.  F4. 

382.  Mines]  mindes  Qx. 

378.  my  poyson]  Staunton  :  The  repetition  of  '  poison '  here  is  so  inelegant  that 
we  may  well  suspect  the  word  in  one  line  was  caught  by  the  compositor's  eye  from  the 
other,  but  it  is  hard  to  say  in  which  the  corruption  lies.  Walker  {Crit.  i,  287) :  I 
once  thought  that  we  should  read  '  with  my  practise  ;'  but  it  would  seem  that  the  word 
required  should  be  similar  in  termination,  or  general  appearance,  to  *  poison ' ;  for  this 
line  has  dropt  out,  most  probably  from  that  cause,  in  Qx.   Therefore  I  conjecture  potion. 

382.  I  did  say  so]  To  Blackstone  this  exclamation  was  most  unmeaning  in  the 
mouth  of  such  a  speaker,  at  such  a  time ;  he  therefore  suggested  that  as  Iago  has  the 
handkerchief  in  his  hand  there  may  be  a  reference  to  it,  and  that  the  phrase  is  '  Hide 
it! — so— so';  but  he  'readily  retracted'  his  emendation  (though  still  thinking  the 
phrase  obscure)  after  reading  the  following  note  by  Steevens  :  Iago  first  ruminates  en 
the  qualities  of  the  passion  which  he  is  labouring  to  excite ;  and  then  proceeds  to  com- 
ment on  its  effects.  '  Jealousy  (says  he),  with  the  smallest  operation  on  the  blood,  flames 
out  with  all  the  violence  of  sulphur,'  &c.  '  I  did  say  so ;  Look  where  he  comes — ! ' 
i.  e.,  I  knew  that  the  least  touch  of  such  a  passion  would  not  permit  the  Moor  to  enjoy 
a  moment  of  repose : — I  have  just  said  that  jealousy  is  a  restless  commotion  of  the  mind; 
and  look  where  Othello  approaches,  to  confirm  the  propriety  and  justice  of  my  observa- 
tion. Hudson  :  The  moment  Iago's  eye  lights  on  Othello,  he  sees  that  his  devilish  in- 
sight of  things  was  punctually  prophetic  of  Othello's  case ;  that  his  words  are  exactly 
verified  in  the  inflamed  looks  of  his  victim.  Booth's  dramatic  instinct  clears  any  diffi- 
culty by  a  stage  direction — '  Othello  groans.' 

383.  In  a  note  on  Tro.  6°  Cress.,  Dyce,  in  his  Remarks,  p.  147,  shows  that  these 
stage  directions  were  not  meant  to  be  taken  as  the  actual  entrance  of  the  actor,  but  that 
they  were  merely,  as  in  the  present  case,  to  show  that  towards  the  end  of  a  soliloquy 
the  actor  who  spoke  next  was  to  prepare  himself  (or  be  summoned)  to  enter, — not  that 
he  was  to  come  on  the  stage  before  the  conclusion  of  the  soliloquy.  It  is  the  same  in 
IV,  i,  116,  where  'Enter  Cassio'  occurs  four  lines  before  Iago  addresses  him.  [I  sup- 
pose it  was  on  this  fact  that  Dyce  founded  his  positive  assertion  (see  note  on  II,  ii,  231) 
that  Fj  was  printed  from  a  stage  transcript,  and  not  from  one  where  shorthand  had  been 
used.  Knight  was  the  first  to  indicate  Othello  s>  entrance  at  the  proper  word,  although 
Capell  had  '  Enter  Othello,  at  a  distance? — Ed.] 

384.  Mandragora]  Staunton  quotes  from  Holland's  Pliny,  Bk.  xxv,  ch.  13: 
•This  herbe  Mandragoras,  some  writers  cal  Circeium;  and  two  kinds  there  be  "if  it* 


igS  THE   TRAGEDIE  OF  OTHELLO      [act  in,  sc.  in. 

Nor  all  the  drowfie  Syrrups  of  the  world  385 

Shall  euer  medicine  thee  to  that  fweete  fleepe 
Which  thou  owd'ft  yefterday. 

Oth.     Ha,  ha,  falfe  to  mee  ? 

Iago,     Why  how  now  Generall  ?  No  more  of  that. 

Oth,     Auant,  be  gone  :  Thou  haft  fet  me  on  the  Racke:        39Q 
I  fweare  'tis  better  to  be  much  abus'd, 
Then  but  to  know't  a  little. 

Iago,     How  now,  my  Lord  ? 

Oth.     What  fenfe  had  I,  in  her  ftolne  houres  of  Luft  ?  394 

387.  owd^fi]  owedjl  Qq,  Han.  Warb.  391.  fweare]  /ware  Q3. 

Johns.  Jen.  Glo.  Cam.  Huds.  had'stVoipe,  392.  know't]  know  Qlf  Rowe,  Pope, 

Theob.  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

yesterday]  yester-night  Edwards  393.  now]  Om.  Pope  +  . 

(in  jest).  394.  fenfe]  fence  Q2Qr     fent  F2F3< 

388.  Ha,  ha,]  Ha!  Pope-i-,  Cap.  fcent  F,  Rowe. 

falfe  to  mee  ?]  falfe  to  me,  to  me  ?  in  her]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Knt 

QiQ2»  Jen-   fa?fe  to  me  to  me  ?  Q3-    False  ?  of  her  Qq  et  cet. 

To  vie  !  to  me  !  Johns,   false  to  me  ?  to  me  ?  of  Lufl]  or  lust  Theob.  ii,  Warb. 

Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly.  Johns.  [See  Commentary.] 
390.  Thou  haft]  thou'st  Pope  + . 

the  white  which  is  supposed  the  male ;  and  the  black  which  you  must  take  for  the 

female It  may  be  used  safely  enough  for  to  procure  sleep,  if  there  be  good  regard 

Had  in  the  dose Also  it  is  an  ordinarie  thing  to  drink  it  ...  .  before  the  cutting 

or  cauterizing,  pricking  or  launcing  of  any  member  to  take  away  the  sence  and  feeling 
of  such  extreme  cures.  And  sufficient  it  is  in  some  bodies  to  cast  them  into  a  sleep 
with  the  smel  of  Mandrage,  against  the  time  of  such  Chirurgery.'  Hunter  (ii,  286)  : 
It  may  be  suspected  that  when  Shakespeare  used  the  word,  mandragora  had  but  a  tra- 
ditional and  historical  claim  to  be  reckoned  among  the  '  drowsy  syrups  of  the  world.' 
Bucknill  (p.  217):  Shakespeare  refers  to  this  plant  altogether  six  times,  and  it  is 
noteworthy  that  on  the  two  occasions  where  its  real  medicinal  properties  are  mentioned, 
the  Latin  term  mandragora  is  used ;  the  vulgar  appellation,  mandrake,  is  employed  when 
the  vulgar  superstition  is  alluded  to.  [See  notes  on  'mandrake'  in  R  om.  &  Jul  IV, 
iii,  47.] 

387-389.  Steevens  reads  and  divides  :  Which  thou  ow'dst  yesterday.  Oth.  1  la ! 
ha !  false  to  me  ?  |  To  me  ?     Iago.  Why,  how  now,  general  ?  no  more  of  that.  | 

388.  Booth  :  Mournfully.     Iago  addresses  him  as  though  not  expecting  him. 

394.  in]  Knight  :  Sense  of  is  the  modern  use  of  the  term  kncnvledge  of;  *  st-nse 
in '  is  the  more  proper  and  peculiarly  Shakespearian  use,  which  implies  the  impression 
upon  the  senses,  and  not  upon  the  understanding.     The  difference  is  the  same  as  be 
tween  a  sensible  man  and  a  man  sensible  to  pain. 

394.  of]  At  first  sight,  in  Theobald's  ed.  ii,  this  looks  like  or,  but  closer  scrutiny 
shows  the  r  to  be  simply  a  battered,  mutilated  f;  in  one  of  my  copies  of  this  edition, 
the  /  of  the  following  word  is  totally  lost,  and  half  of  the  u,  presumably  from  the  same 
accident  that  destroyed  the  upper  half  of  this  f.  But  WTarburton,  who  had  denounced 
Hanmer  for  not  comparing  Pope's  edition  with  Theobald's,  falls  here  under  his  uwn 


act  in,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  199 

I  faw't  not,  thought  it  not  :  it  hanri'd  not  me :  395 

I  flept  the  next  night  well,  fed  well,  was  free,  and  merrie. 

I  found  not  CaJJicfs  kiffes  on  her  Lippes : 

He  that  is  robb'd,  not  wanting  what  is  ftolne, 

Let  him  not  know't,  and  he's  not  robb'd  at  all. 

I  ago.     I  am  forry  to  heare  this  ?  400 

Oth.     I  had  beene  happy,  if  the  generall  Campe, 

Pyoners  and  all,  had  tafted  her  fweet  Body,  402 

395.  faw'l]  faw  it  F4,  Rowe,  Steev.  400.  I am~\  Pm  Huds. 

Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Del.  402.  Pyoners]    QqF2.      Pioners  Cap. 

396.  fed  well]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  Wh.  Glo.  Cam.  Del.  Rife. 
Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Del.     Om.  Qq  et  cet.  Pioneers  F3F4  et  cet. 

399.  know't]  know  it  Steev. 

condemnation ;  he  accepted  the  or,  without  comparing  it  with  any  edition,  and  incor- 
porated it  in  his  own  text  bare  of  comment.  So  likewise  did  Dr  Johnson,  who,  while 
using  Theobald's  text  to  print  from,  sneered  at  him  in  his  Preface,  and  raised  a  laugh 
against  him  by  saying :  '  I  have  sometimes  adopted  his  restoration  of  a  comma,  without 
inserting  the  panegyric  in  which  he  celebrated  himself  for  his  achievement.'  Sir,  he 
who  accepts  a  text  to  print  from  on  the  one  hand,  and  vilifies  his  benefactor  on  the 
other,  is,  on  this  occasion,  removed  alike  either  from  the  claims  of  consideration  or 
the  requirements  of  respect. — Ed. 

394  et  seq.  Steevens  calls  attention  to  certain  passages  in  Middleton's  Witch  resem- 
bling this  and  other  passages  in  this  scene,  to  which,  apparently,  he  attached  importance 
as  indications  that  Shakespeare  had  followed  Middleton,  but  Malone  afterwards  showed 
that  The  Witch  must  have  been  produced  after  1613.    [See  Macbeth,  Appendix,  p.  388.] 

396.  fed  well]  Knight  :  The  rejection  of  these  words  by  the  modern  editors  can 
be  accounted  for  only  by  the  fact  that  they  would  make  any  sacrifice  of  sense  or  poetry, 
and  prefer  the  feeblest  to  the  strongest  expression,  if  they  could  prevent  the  intrusion 
of  a  line  exceeding  ten  syllables.  This  sacrifice,  for  the  sake  of  a  tame  and  uniform 
rhythm,  is  even  more  ludicrous  when  they  strive  to  make  an  heroic  line  out  of  the 
broken  sentences  of  two  or  more  speakers,  as  in  line  122,  where  'Honest'  is  omitted. 
Collier  (ed.  i) :  A  strange  corruption,  for  which  it  is  difficult  to  account.  Collier 
(ed.  ii) :  An  absurd  insertion,  as  if  Othello  meant  to  say  that  he  had  fed  well  in  the 
night,  while  he  was  '  free  and  merry,'  a  corruption  of  the  verse  for  which,  however,  it 
is  not  difficult  to  account. 

396.  Fechter  :  In  a  feverish  agony  of  rage. 

398.  wanting]  Booth  :  I  prefer  knowing,  for  surely  Othello  did  'want'  Desdemona's 
love  at  all  times  and  forever.  [But  '  wanting '  is  here  used  not  in  the  sense  of  needing, 
but  of  missing, — and  yet  even  in  this  sense  it  has  a  lack  of  tenderness. — Ed.] 

398,  399.  Halliwell  quotes  Milton,  ix,  756:  'For  good  unknown  sure  is  not  had; 
or  had  And  yet  unknown,  is  as  not  had  at  all.' 

401.  Gould  (p.  105) :  We  may  imagine  the  guileless  hospitality  of  the  gentle  lady 
to  her  guests,  maddening  her  husband,  so  that  he  leaves  them  abruptly,  and  re-enters 
on  the  scene  to  Iago. 

402.  Pyoners]  Grose:  'A  soldier  ought  ever  to  retaine  and  keepe  his  arms  in 
safetie  and  forth  comming,  for  he  is  more  to  be  detested  than  a  coward,  that  will  lose 


200  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      [act  hi,  sc.  iii. 

So  I  had  nothing  knowne.     Oh  now,  for  euer  403 

Farewell  the  Tranquill  minde  ;  farewell  Content ; 

Farewell  the  plumed  Troopes,  and  the  bigge  Warres,  40; 

That  makes  Ambition,  Vertue  !  Oh  farewell; 

Farewell  the  neighing  Steed,  and  the  fhrill  Trumpe, 

The  Spirit-ftirring  Drum,  th'Eare- piercing  Fife,  408 

403.  knowne]  knowen  Q3.  406.  makes']    Qq,   Johns.    Cap.    Ktly. 

405.  Troopes]F3.  7>w/jFF4,Rowe  +  ,         make  Ff  et  cet. 
Cap.  Knt,  Sta.  Wh.  i,  Del.     troope  Qq  et  farewell ;]  farewell,  QqFf,  Rowe, 

cet.  Cam.    farewell !  Pope  et  cet. 

Warres]  war  Rowe  ii  +  ,  Cap.  408.  ///']  Ff,  Rowe+,  Cap.  Jen.  Dyce 

iii,  Huds.     the  Qq  et  cet. 

or  play  away  any  part  thereof,  or  refuse  it  for  his  ease,  or  to  avoid  paines ;  wherefore 
such  a  one  is  to  be  dismissed  with  punishment,  or  to  be  made  some  abject  pioner.' — 
Davies's  Art  of  War  and  England  Trainings,  1 619.  So,  in  The  Laws  and  Ordi- 
nances of  War,  established  by  the  Earl  of  Essex,  printed  in  1 640 :  *  If  a  trooper  shall 
loose  his  horse  or  hackney,  or  a  footman  any  part  of  his  arms,  by  negligence  or  lewd- 
nesse,  by  dice  or  cardes ;  he  or  they  shall  remain  in  qualitie  of  pioners,  or  scavengers, 
till  they  be  furnished  with  as  good  as  were  lost,  at  their  own  charge.'  Walker  (  Vers. 
p.  217)  shows  that  the  spelling  pioner,  from  the  flow  of  the  verse,  were  there  no  other 
indication,  should  be  retained.     [See  Ham.  I,  v,  163.] 

404  et  seq.  Malone  quotes  two  passages,  one  from  a  '  very  ancient  drama  entitled 
Common  Conditions?  and  another  from  a  Farewell  by  Peele,  which  he  intimates  may 
have  suggested  these  lines  to  Shakespeare.  Steevens  :  I  know  not  why  we  should 
suppose  that  Shakespeare  borrowed  so  common  a  repetition  as  those  diversified  fare- 
wells from  any  preceding  drama.  A  string  of  adieus  is  perhaps  the  most  tempting  of 
all  repetitions,  because  it  serves  to  introduce  a  train  of  imagery  as  well  as  to  solemnify 
a  speech  or  composition.  Wolsey,  like  Othello,  indulges  himself  in  many  farewells  ; 
and  the  Valete,  aprica  montium  cacumina !  Valete,  opaca  vallium  cubilia !  &c,  are  com- 
mon to  poets  of  different  ages  and  countries.  I  have  now  before  me  an  ancient  MS. 
English  poem,  in  which  sixteen  succeeding  verses  begin  with  the  word  farewell,  applied 
to  a  variety  of  objects  and  circumstances.  Booth  :  Utter  this,  looking  off, — towards 
Desdemona.  My  Father  once  said  to  me,  '  No  human  voice  could  surpass,  if  equal, 
Edmund  Kean's  in  his  delivery  of  this  passage.'  Begin  slowly,  with  suppressed  emo- 
tion; gradually  increase  the  volume  and  intensity  of  voice, — never  loud,  nor  let  your 
tones  be  too  tearful  or  tremulous, — it  becomes  monotonous. 

405.  plumed]  Daniel  {Athenaum,  14  Jan.  1871)  calls  attention  to  the  change  of 
this  word  to  plumped,  in  a  quotation  of  these  two  lines  in  Suckling's  Goblins,  1696, 
and  queries  whether  it  be  a  misprint,  or  a  misquotation,  or  the  reading  of  some  copy  of 
Othello  now  lost.  Its  meaning,  he  adds,  would  be  in  serried  ranks  ;  in  proof,  several 
illustrations  are  given  from  Hall's  Chronicle,  a  book  with  which  Shakespeare  must 
have  been  familiar.  Tiffin  (Athenaum,  28  Jan.  1871)  asserts  that  plumped  is  merely 
a  misprint  of  the  1696  edition  of  The  Goblins ;  in  the  edition  of  1658  it  is  correctly 
quoted  'plumed.' 

408.  Eare-piercing]  Warburton:  I  would  read  fear-* spersing,  i.  e.  fear-dispers- 
ing ;  whereupon  Edwards  (p.  34)  suspects  a  misprint,  and  that  Warburton  intended 
to  say,  *  I  would  write ;  for  no  man  living  can  read  such  a  cluster  of  consonants. 


ACi  in,  sc.  Hi.]  THE  MOORE   OF  VENICE  201 

The  Royall  Banner,  and  all  Qualitie, 

Pride,  Pompe,  and  Circumftance  of  glorious  Warre:  410 

And  0  you  mortall  Engines,  whofe  rude  throates 

Th'immortall  Ioues  dread  Clamours,  counterfet, 

Farewell  :  Othello's  Occupation's  gone.  413 

410.  Pride,  Pompe]  Prid.   Pompe  Q3-  The  Qq  et  cet. 

411.  you]  ye  Qq,  Jen.  412.  dread]  great  Qq. 
rude]  wide  Qq.  Clamours]  clamor  Qx. 

412.  Tft]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Dyce  iii.  counterfet]  counterfeit  QqFf. 

408.  Fife]  Warton  :  In  mentioning  the  fife  joined  with  the  drum,  Shakespeare, 
as  usual,  paints  from  the  life ;  those  instruments  accompanying  each  other  being  used 
in  his  age  by  the  English  soldiery.  The  fife,  however,  as  a  martial  instrument,  was 
afterwards  entirely  discontinued  among  our  troops  for  many  years.  It  was  first  used 
within  the  memory  of  man,  among  our  troops,  by  the  British  guards,  by  order  of  the 
Duke  of  Cumberland,  when  they  were  encamped  at  Maestricht,  in  the  year  1 747. 
They  took  it  from  the  Allies,  with  whom  they  served.  This  instrument,  accompanying 
the  drum,  is  of  considerable  antiquity  in  the  European  armies,  particularly  the  German. 
In  a  curious  picture  in  the  Ashmolean  Museum  at  Oxford,  painted  1525,  representing 
the  siege  of  Pavia  by  the  French  King,  where  the  Emperor  was  taken  prisoner,  we  see 
fifes  and  drums.  In  Rymer's  Foedera,  in  a  diary  of  King  Henry's  siege  of  Bulloigne, 
1544,  mention  is  made  of  the  drommes  and  viffleurs  marching  at  the  head  of  the  King's 
army.  The  drum  and  fife  were  also  much  used  at  ancient  festivals,  shows,  and  pro- 
cessions. Gerard  Leigh,  in  his  Accidence  of  Armorie,  printed  in  1576,  describing  a 
Christmas  magnificently  celebrated  at  the  Inner  Temple,  says,  '  we  entered  the  prince 
his  hall,  where  anon  we  heard  the  noyse  of  drum  and  fife.'  At  a  stately  masque  on 
Shrove-Sunday,  15 10,  in  which  King  Henry  VIII  was  an  actor,  Holinshed  mentions 
the  entry  '  of  a  drum  and  fife  appareled  in  white  damaske  and  grene  bonnettes  '— 
Chron.  Ill,  805,  col.  2.  Knight  :  Among  the  French  regiments  the  fife  is  not  found, 
and  is  so  completely  unknown  to  the  French  in  the  present  day,  that  M.  Alfred  de 
Vigny,  in  his  translation  of  this  passage  of  Othello,  gives  us  only  the  drum.  [It  is  to 
be  feared  that  Knight  drew  a  conclusion  from  insufficient  premises.  The  instrument 
was  known  in  France  in  the  days  of  Shakespeare.  Cotgrave  gives  •  Fifre  :  m.  A  Fife ; 
a  Flute,  or  little  pipe  accorded  with  a  Drumme,  or  Taber,'  and  that  it  was  never  '  com- 
pletely unknown '  may  be  inferred,  I  think,  from  the  fact  that  from  Le  Tourneur  in 
1776,  down  through  Laroche,  Guizot,  Hugo,  and  Cayrou,  to  Aicard  in  1882,  the 
word  '  fife '  is  translated  '  fifre,'  and  De  Vigny  is  the  solitary  exception  where  it  is  not 
found,  the  omission  being  presumably  due  to  the  exigencies  of  his  rhythm. — Ed.] 

410.  Circumstance]  Hunter  (ii,  286) :  So  singular  a  use  of  this  word  requires 
something  to  show  that  it  was  not  without  precedent.  Take  the  following  from  Lang- 
ley's  Translation  of  Polydore  Virgil,  where  we  find  that  the  Romans  celebrated  their 
dead  'with  great  pomp  and  circumstance' — Fol.  122,^.  [Steevens,  in  his  Preface, 
refer?  to  the  '  ambition  in  each  little  Hercules  to  set  up  pillars,  ascertaining  how  far  he 
had  traveled  through  the  dreary  wilds  of  black  letter.'  There  have  been,  however, 
very,  very  few  contributions  to  Shakespearian  literature  more  valuable,  or  more  attract- 
ive, than  Hunter's  New  Illustrations. — Ed.]  Rolfe  :  Shakespeare  uses  the  singular 
and  plural  indifferently.     See  R.  of  L.y  1262  and  1703. 

413.  Giles  (p.  227)     Othello  does  not  here  allude  once  to  his  re/1  grief,  or  to  his 


202  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      [act  in  sc.  iii. 

Iago.     Is't  pofTible  my  Lord  ? 

Oth.     Villaine,  be  fure  thou  proue  my  Loue  a  Whore;        415 

414.  7j7]  Is  it  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Sta.  Ktly,  Del.    pojfcble,  my  Lord  f 
pojjible   my  Lord ?~\  possible? —         Q°i*X  Booth's  Reprint  et  cet. 

My  Lord, —  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll. 

recent  happiness ;  but,  with  a  terrible  spring  of  the  mind,  he  leaps  the  chasm  of  afflic- 
tion into  which  he  cannot  dare  to  look,  and  alights  on  the  other  side,  amidst  the  tur- 
moils of  his  youth,  amidst  the  noise  and  glories  of  his  soldiership.  This  is  the  instinct 
of  the  mind  to  save  itself  from  madness.  The  mind  thus  blots  out  the  present  from  its 
view,  and  takes  refuge  in  the  past.  Othello  will  not  front  his  deadliest  loss ;  he  shrinks 
from  it,  to  grasp  with  associations  which  restore  him  for  an  instant  to  the  vigorous  gran- 
deur of  his  manhood ;  when  that  instant  is  over,  his  energies  collapse ;  then  comes  the 
depressing  sense  that  for  him  no  more  is  either  hope  or  action ;  and  so  he  murmurs 
*  Othello's  occupation's  gone.'  Othello,  in  this  passage,  reveals  the  casuistry  with  which 
the  mind  blinds  itself  to  ruin ;  the  sophistry  in  which  it  quibbles  with  despair ;  the 
maniac  strength  with  which  it  wrestles  against  fate  and  fact.  It  is  as  when  we  fall 
asleep  with  a  heavy  trouble  on  the  soul ;  the  soul  takes  advantage  of  this  silent  hour  to 
escape  from  its  bondage ;  again  it  is  on  the  sunny  hills ;  the  strength  of  youth  comes 
back,  with  the  gladness  of  love  and  the  hopes  of  life ;  not  once  does  the  spectre  of  ill 
throw  its  shadow  on  the  dream ;  the  vision  is  bright  while  the  eyes  are  shut ;  but  no 
sooner  do  they  open  than  the  dismal  reality  is  present,  and  it  cannot  be  dismissed. 

413.  Gould  (p.  106)  :  In  the  mere  word  'farewell'  his  [J.  B.  Booth's]  great  heart 
seemed  to  burst  as  in  one  vast  continuing  sigh.  The  phrase,  '  the  tranquil  mind,'  im- 
mediately succeeding,  came  in  clear  brain-tones,  with  a  certain  involved  suggestiveness 
of  meaning  almost  impossible  to  define,  but  as  if  the  tranquil  mind  had  flown.  The 
whole  passage,  with  its  successive  images  of  glorious  war  filing  and  disappearing  before 
the  mind's  eye,  employed  some  of  the  grandest  elements  of  voice,  subdued  to  retro- 
spective and  mournful  cadences.  '  Othello's  occupation's  gone.'  And  he  stood  with  a 
look  in  his  large  blue  eyes, — the  bronzed  face  lending  them  a  strange  sadness, — as  if 
all  happiness  had  gone  after.  Kean's  manner  in  this  scene  was  very  different.  At  the 
close  of  the  '  farewell '  he  raised  both  hands,  clasped  them,  and  so  brought  them  down 
upon  his  head,  with  a  most  effective  gesture  of  despair.  But  the  action  seems  to  us  like 
transferring  Othello  into  Edmund  Kean.  Fechter  :  Othello  falls  back  on  his  seat, 
quite  humbled. 

415.  Lewes  (p.  4) :  Kean's  range  of  expression  was  very  limited.  His  physical  apti- 
tudes were  such  as  confined  him  to  the  strictly  tragic  passions ;  and  for  these  he  was 
magnificently  endowed.  Small  and  insignificant  in  figure,  he  could  at  times  become 
impressively  commanding  by  the  lion-like  power  and  grace  of  his  bearing.  I  remem- 
ber the  last  time  I  saw  him  play  Othello,  how  puny  he  appeared  beside  Macready, 
until  in  the  Third  Act,  when,  roused  by  Iago's  taunts  and  insinuations,  he  moved 
towards  him  with  a  gouty  hobble,  seized  him  by  the  throat,  and,  in  a  well-known  explo- 
sion, '  Villain  !  be  sure,'  &c,  he  seemed  to  swell  into  a  stature  which  made  Macready 
appear  small.  On  that  very  evening,  when  gout  made  it  difficult  for  him  to  display 
his  accustomed  grace,  when  a  drunken  hoarseness  had  ruined  that  once  matchless 
voice,  such  was  the  irresistible  pathos, — manly,  not  tearful, — which  vibrated  in  his  tones 
and  expressed  itself  in  looks  and  gestures,  that  old  men  leaned  their  heads  upon  their 
arms  and  fairly  sobbed.  It  was,  one  must  confess,  a  patchy  performance  considered  a? 
a  whole ;  some  parts  were  miserably  tricky,  others  misconceived,  others  gabbled  over 


act  in,  sc.  hi.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  203 

Be  fure  of  it  :  Giue  me  the  Occular  proofe,  416 

Or  by  the  worth  of  mine  eternall  Soule,  [326  a] 

Thou  had'ft  bin  be;ter  haue  bin  borne  a  Dog 
Then  anfwer  my  wak'd  wrath. 

I  ago,     Is't  come  to  this  ?  420 

Oth.     Make  me  to  fee't  :  or  (at  the  leaft)  fo  proue  it, 
That  the  probation  beare  no  Hindge,  nor  Loope, 
To  hang  a  doubt  on  :  Or  woe  vpon  thy  life. 

Iago.     My  Noble  Lord. 

Oth,     If  thou  doft  (lander  her,  and  torture  me,  425 

Neuer  pray  more  :  Abandon  all  remorfe 
On  Horrors  head,  Horrors  accumulate : 
Do  deeds  to  make  Heauen  weepe,  all  Earth  amaz'd ;  428 

416.  Occular]  oculer  Qx.  ocular  Q2Q3  420.  Ht]  Is  it  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll. 
Ff.                                                                     Wi.  i,  Del. 

[Catching  hold  on  him.  Rowe.  421.  fee't]  see  it  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 

417.  mine]  mans  Qx,  Warb.  Sta.  Glo.  424.  Lord.]  QqFf,  Rowe.  lord — Pope 
Cam.  Dyce  hi,  Huds.  Rife,  Wh.  ii.     my        et  seq. 

Q2Q-,  Cap.  426.  remorfe]  remorce.  Qx.     remorce : 

418.  had'Jt  bin]  hadjl  Q'8l.     hadst         Q2.     remorfe  :  Qr 

much  Quincy  (MS).  427.  Horrors  head]  horror 'sheadHan. 

419.  Then]  That  Q3<  Johns,  et  seq. 

accumulate]  accumilate  Qx. 

in  haste  to  reach  the  '  points ' ;  but  it  was  irradiated  with  such  flashes  that  I  would 
again  risk  broken  ribs  for  the  chance  of  a  good  place  in  the  pit  to  see  anything  like  it. 
Booth  :  As  before,  with  smothered  intensity,  not  loud,  gradually  increasing,  till  '  If 
thou  dost  slander  her ' — when  the  full  force  of  Othello's  wrath  breaks  forth  in  violent 
tones  and  he  seizes  Iago,  who  cowers. 

415.  Loue]  Maginn  (p.  273) :  We  may  observe  that  he  still,  though  his  suspicions 
are  so  fiercely  aroused,  calls  her  his  '  love.'  It  is  for  the  last  time  before  her  death. 
After  her  guilt  is,  as  he  thinks,  proved,  he  has  no  word  of  affection  for  her.  She  is  a 
convicted  culprit,  to  be  sacrificed  to  his  sense  of  justice. 

417.  mine]  Steevens:  An  opposition  may  have  been  designed  between  man  anu 
'dog.'  [See  Text.  Notes.  Boswell,  in  the  Var.  of  '21,  gives  man's  as  the  reading 
of  a  Quarto  for  'my '  in  line  419.  I  think  it  is  merely  a  misprint  in  the  reference,  and 
that  the  varia  lectio  refers  to  '  mine '  in  this  present  line,  and  not  to  the  '  my.'  It  appa- 
rently puzzled  Collier,  or  I  should  not  have  referred  to  it. — Ed.] 

418.  have  been]  .See  Ham.  V,  i,  232,  or  Abbott,  §360. 

426.  remorse]  Malone:  All  tenderness  of  nature,  all  pity.  [See  post,  line  532.] 
Hudson  :  That  is,  apparently  here,  conscience ;  •  Cast  off  the  restraints  and  regards 
of  conscience  altogether.'  The  sense  of  pity,  however,  is  included  and  interfused  with 
it.    What  an  appalling  disclosure  this  speech  is,  of  Othello's  excruciating  agony  of  mind  1 

427.  Horrors  accumulate]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  253) :  Read  horror.  The  corrup- 
tion originated  in  the  preceding  'horrors.'     [See  I,  i,  31.] 

428.  weepe]  Steevens  :  Compare  Meas.  for  Meas.  II,  ii,  121 :  '  Plavs  such  fan- 
tastic tricks  before  high  Heaver.  As  make  the  angels  weep.' 


204 


THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      [act  m,  sc.  iii. 


For  nothing  canft  thou  to  damnation  adde, 
Greater  then  that. 

Iago.     O  Grace  !  O  Heauen  forgiue  me  ! 
Are  you  a  Man?  Haue  you  a  Soule?  or  Senfe  ? 
God  buy  you  :  take  mine  Office.     Oh  wretched  Foole, 
That  lou'ft  to  make  thine  Honefty ,  a  Vice  ! 
Oh  monftrous  world !  Take  note,  take  note  (O  World) 
To  be  direct  and  honeft,  is  not  fafe. 
I  thanke  you  for  this  profit,  and  from  hence 
He  loue  no  Friend,  fith  Loue  breeds  fuch  offence. 

Oth.     Nay  flay  :  thou  fhould'ft  be  honeft. 

Iago.     I  mould  be  wife  ;  for  Honeftie's  a  Foole, 
And  loofes  that  it  workes  for. 

Oth.     By  the  World, 
I  thinke  my  Wife  be  honeft,  and  thinke  fhe  is  not : 


430 


435 


440 


443 


429,  430.  One  line,  Qq. 
431.  forgiue]  defend  Qq,  Pope +  ,  Cap. 
Jen.  Steev.  Mal.Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Cam.  Ktly. 

433-  h*y\  QqF2F3-    v™1  F4»  Jen-    be 

ztf  Theob.Warb.  Johns.  VwV  Sing.  Dyce, 
Wh.  Huds.     be  wV  Rowe  et  cet. 

mine]  my  Q2Q,. 

Office.]  office, —  Qq. 

Oh]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 
434.  lou'fl]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Knt,  Wh. 
ii.     liuefi  Qq  et  cet. 

thine]  thy  Q'95. 


435.  world!]  world,  Qq. 
438.  fith]fince  Qq,  Jen.  Mai.  Steev.'93, 
Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Huds. 

439-  fla}'  :]fta>'>  Qq-   stay —  Rowe  +  . 
stay.  Johns.  Jen.  Coll.  Wh.  Ktly,  Del. 

honeft.]  honest —  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 
441.  loofes]  lofes  Ff. 

that]  what  Pope  +  . 
442-449.  Om.  Qx. 
443.  be]  is  F  F4,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap. 

and]  Om.  Cap. 


430.  Booth  :  I  carry  no  weapon  in  this  scene,  but  seeing  Iago's  dagger  I  clutch  it  in 
frenzy  and  am  about  to  stab  him,  when  the  Christian  overcomes  the  Moor,  and  throwing 
the  dagger  from  me,  I  fall  again  upon  the  seat  with  a  flood  of  tears.  To  this  weeping 
Iago  may  allude  in  his  next  speech,  where  he  says  contemptuously,  •  Are  you  a  man  ? ' 

433.  buy]  See  I,  iii,  215.  This  spelling  must  not  mislead  us  as  to  the  pronuncia- 
tion ;  '  buy '  should  not  be  pronounced  like  our  present  bye  ;  the  y  is  merely  phonetic, 
and  represents  not  ye  but  wV,  and  should  be  pronounced  like  it,  as,  indeed,  it  is  indi- 
cated by  Singer.       See  Text.  Notes. — Ed. 

434.  lou'st]  Knight  :  Surely  the  man  that  loves  to  carry  his  honesty  so  far  that  it 
becomes  a  vice  is  what  Iago  means  when  he  calls  himself  a  fool. 

438.  sith]  See  Ham.  II,  ii,  6,  where  Marsh  points  out  the  distinction  betv  en  sith 
and  since,  viz. :  that  sith  belongs  to  logic  and  since  to  time,  a  distinction  which  the 
printers  of  Shakespeare's  plays  were  not  always  careful  to  preserve. 

439.  Booth  :  Peremptorily,  as  to  your  subaltern,  and  Iago  halts  at  the  word  of  com  - 
inand. 

443.  be  .  .  .  is]  Abbott,  §  299 :  Be  expresses  more  doubt  than  is  after  a  verb  of 
thinking.  Very  significant  is  this  difference  in  this  line  of  the  doubtful  Othello  where 
is  is  the  emphatic  word  and  the  line  contains  the  extra  dramatic  syllable. 


ACT  III,  SC.  ill.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


205 


I  thinke  that  thou  art  iuft,  and  thinke  thou  art  not : 

He  haue  fome  proofe.     My  name  that  was  as  frefh  445 

As  Dians  Vifage,  is  now  begrim'd  and  blacke 

As  mine  owne  face.     If  there  be  Cords,  or  Kniues, 

Poyfon,  or  Fire,  or  fufifocating  ftreames, 

He  not  indure  it.     Would  I  were  fatisfied. 

Iago.     I  fee  you  are  eaten  vp  with  Paffion :  4  SO 

I  do  repent  me,  that  I  put  it  to  you. 
You  would  be  fatisfied  ? 

Oth.     Would?  Nay,  and  I  will. 

Iago.     And  may  :  but  how  ?  How  fatisfied,  my  Lord  ? 
Would  you  the  fuper-vifion  groffely  gape  on  ?  45  5 

Behold  her  top'd  ? 


445.  My]  Ff,  Rowe,  Mai.  Knt.     her 
Q3Q3etcet. 

446.  begrimed]  begrimd  Q3.    begrimed 

448.  flreames]  steams  Pope,  Han. 
450.  I  fee]  Ff,  Rowe.    I  fee  fir,  Qq  et 
cet. 

452.  fatisfied  ?~\  fatisfied.  Qq. 

453.  Would?]  Would,  Qq,  Rowe  i. 
and/]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Ktly.  and 

Pope  4- .     /  Qq  et  cet. 


454.  how?]  now?  Rowe  i. 

455.  you  the  fuper-vifion]  Ff,  Rowe, 
Knt,  Coll.  Ktly.  you,  the  fuperuifor  Qx, 
you,  the  fuperuifion  Q2Q3«  you  be  super- 
visor, Pope  +  .  you,  the  supervisor,  Cap. 
et  cet. 

on  ?]  on,  Qq.     on —  Dyce,  Wh. 
Glo.  Sta. 

456.  tofd]  Warb.  topt  Qq.  topfd 
Ff,  Rowe,  Pope  i,  Knt,  Sing.  Glo.  Ktly, 
Cam.  Wh.  ii.     tupped  Pope  ii  et  cet. 


445.  My  name]  Knight  :  There  is  probably  not  a  more  fatal  corruption  of  the  mean 
ing  of  the  poet  [than  her  of  Q2]  amongst  the  thousand  corruptions  for  which  his  editors 
•are  answerable.  It  destroys  the  master-key  to  Othello's  character.  It  is  his  intense 
feeling  of  honour  that  makes  his  wife's  supposed  fault  so  terrific  to  him.  It  is  not  that 
Desdemona's  name  is  begrimed  and  black,  but  that  his  own  name  is  degraded.  This 
one  thought,  here  for  the  first  time  exhibited,  pervades  all  the  rest  of  the  play ;  and 
when  we  understand  how  the  poison  operates  upon  Othello's  mind,  we  are  quite  pre- 
pared fully  to  believe  him  when  he  says,  in  conclusion, — '  For  naught  I  did  in  hate, 
but  all  in  honour.'  The  thought  that  his  own  name  is  now  tarnished  drives  him  at 
once  into  a  phrenzy.  He  has  said,  «/'//  have  some  proof ;  but  the  moment  that  the 
idea  of  dishonour  comes  across  his  sensitive  nature  he  b.irsts  into  uncontrolled  fury : 
'  If  there  be  cords,  ....  /'//  not  endure  it.''  Dyce  [Remarks,  p.  240) :  The  word 
'  own '  in  the  phrase  *  mine  own  face,'  is  alone  sufficient  to  refute  Knight's  long  and 
laborious  defence  of  '  My.'  Othello  would  not  have  said,  *  My  name  is  now  as  black 
as  mine  own  face.'  Mr  Knight's  text  of  the  present  tragedy  is,  on  the  whole,  as  bad 
as  his  text  of  Hamlet ;  and  a  worse  text  of  either  play  could  hardly  be  produced.  [These 
harsh  expressions  of  opinion  are  apt  to  make  one  antagonistic  and  far  from  willing  to 
accept  them  as  decisive.  In  justice  to  Dyce  it  should  be  noted  that  when,  a  dozen  years 
later,  he  became  himself  an  editor  of  Shakespeare,  his  tone  to  his  fellow-editors  became 
much  less  supercilious  and  dogmatic. — Ed.] 

450.  I  see  you  are]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  287)  prefers  this  to  the  /  see,  sir  of  the 
Qq,  and  contracts  'you  are'  to  y are.     See  line  253  above. 


206  THE    TR  AGED  IE   OF   OTHELLO     [ACT.  hi,  SC.  iii. 

Oth.     Death,  and  damnation.     Oh !  457 

Iago.     It  were  a  tedious  difficulty,  I  thinke, 
To  bring  them  to  that  Profpect  :  Damne  them  then, 
If  euer  mortall  eyes  do  fee  them  boulfter  460 

More  then  their  owne.     What  then  ?  How  then  ? 
What  (hall  I  fay?  Where's  Satisfa&ion  ? 
It  is  impoffible  you  mould  fee  this, 
Were  they  as  prime  as  Goates,  as  hot  as  Monkeyes, 
As  fait  as  Wolues  in  pride,  and  Fooles  as  groffe  465 

As  Ignorance,  made  drunke.     But  yet  ,  I  fay, 
If  imputation,  and  ftrong  c i re um fiances, 
Which  leade  directly  to  the  doore  of  Truth, 
Will  giue  you  fatisfaction,  you  might  haue't.  469 

457.  damnation.     Oh  !]  damnation —  461.  How  then  ?]  how  then,  say  you  ? 

oh  Qq.  Cap. 

459.  bring  them]  bring  em  Qq,  Rowe  + ,  462.  What. .  .fatisfaction  ?]  Where's  sat- 
Cap.  Jen.  Steev.'85,  Mai.  bring  Ff.  bring  isf action  ?  What  shall  I  say  ?  Cap. 

it  Coll.  (MS).  469.  you    might]    Ff,    Rowe -I- ,   Jen. 

Damne  them]  dam  em  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.'85,  Knt,  Del.    you  may  Qq  et  cet. 

Jen.  haue't]  hd't  Qq.     have  it  Steev. 

460.  mortall]  morall  Q  .  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Del. 
do  fee]  did  fee  Qq. 

457.  Hazlitt  (Hawkins's  Life  of  Kean,  ii,  209)  :  Kean  was  great,  as  we  expected, — 
surpassingly  great.  In  the  Third  Act  he  let  himself  loose  on  the  ocean  of  his  pas- 
sion, and  drove  on  in  darkness  and  in  tempest,  like  an  abandoned  barque.  The  agony 
of  his  heart  was  the  fiery  Moorish  agony,  not  cramped  in  within  an  actor's  or  a  school- 
man's confines,  but  fierce,  ungovernable,  dangerous.  You  knew  not  what  he  would  do 
next  in  the  madness  of  his  spirit, — he  knew  not  himself  what  he  should  do.  One  of 
the  finest  instantaneous  actions  of  Kean  was  his  clutching  his  black  hand  slowly  round 
his  head  as  though  his  brain  were  turning,  and  then  writhing  round  and  standing  in 
dull  agony  with  his  back  to  the  audience, — what  other  performer  would  so  have  forgot- 
ten himself? 

461.  462.  Capell  indicates  a  quotation  by  Italics  in  his  text,  and  thus  prints  these 
two  lines  :  '  More  than  their  own  !  What  then  ?  how  then,  say  you  ?  |  Where's  satis- 
faction ?  What  shall  I  say  ? '  Thereupon  he  has  the  following  wellnigh  unwedge- 
able  note :  What  is  spoke  in  another's  person  ought  ever  to  be  distinguished  from  what 
a  speaker  says  in  his  own ;  and  this  fitness  is  greatest  in  such  a  case  as  the  present, 
where  interrogations  follow  interrogations ;  for  want  of  such  distinction,  the  two  mem- 
bers of  nine  462]  (by  what  accident  transpos'd,  we  know  not ;  but,  probably,  of  the 
press)  keep  through  all  prior  copies  the  perverse  order  that  accident  put  them  in,  the 
latter  member  preceding :  Was  all  other  proof  wanting  that  what  is  now  the  first  mem- 
ber stands  in  it's  due  place,  we  might  receive  it  from  what  the  speaker  concludes  with, 
in  which  is  mention  of  '  satisfaction '  as  a  thing  of  Othello's  asking :  to  which  asking 
the  insertion  [of  say  you  in  line  461]  is  as  favorable  on  the  score  of  penpicuousness, 
as  it  is  to  the  verse's  numbers  which  ore  now  first  compleated. 


act  in,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


207 


Oth,     Giue  me  a  liuing  reafon  fhe's  difloyall.  470 

Iago.     I  do  not  like  the  Office. 
But  fith  I  am  entred  in  this  caufe  fo  farre 
(Prick'd  too't  by  foolifh  Honefty,  and  Loue) 
I  will  go  on.     I  lay  with  CaJJio  lately, 

And  being  troubled  with  a  raging  tooth,  475 

I  could  not  fleepe.     There  are  a  kinde  of  men, 
So  loofe  of  Soule,  that  in  their  fleepes  will  mutter 
Their  AfTayres  :  one  of  this  kinde  is  CaJJio  : 
In  fleepe  I  heard  him  fay,  fweet  Dejdemona, 

Let  vs  be  wary,  let  vs  hide  our  Loues,  480 

And  then  (Sir)  would  he  gripe,  and  wring  my  hand : 
Cry ,  oh  fweet  Creature  :  then  kiffe  me  hard, 
As  if  he  pluckt  vp  kiffes  by  the  rootes,  [326  b~\ 

That  grew  vpon  my  lippes,  laid  his  Leg  ore  my  Thigh, 
And  figh,  and  kiffe,  and  then  cry  curfed  Fate,  485 


470.  reafon]  reafon,  that  Qq,  Jen.  Mai. 
Var. 

471.  Iago.]  logo.  F2. 

472.  fith]  since  Theob.  ii,  Warb.  Johns. 

I  am]  Pm  Pope  +  ,  Sta.  Dyce  iii, 
Huds. 

in]  into  Qq,  Jen. 

473.  todt]  tdt  QqF3F4.  to  it  Steev. 
Mai.  Var. 

474.  on]  one  Q3. 

475-478.  Ff,  followed  by  Rowe,  Han. 
Cap.  Ktly.  Lines  zx\d,Jleep...foule... af- 
faires . . .  Cafsio.  Qq.  Ending,  tooth, . .  .sleep 
...soul...  off  airs...  Cassio  Pope  et  cet. 

476.  could]  colud  Q  . 

477.  fleepes]  fleep  Q'8l,  Q'95. 


478.  Their]  All  their  Han.  Of  their 
Cap. 

480.  wary]  merry  Qx. 

482.  Cry,  oh]  Cry  out,  Qq. 

then]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.     and  then 
Qq  et  cet. 

484-486.  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.  Ending  lines, 
leg... then... Moore.  Qq  et  cet. 

484.  That]  And  Rowe  ii,  Pope,  Han. 
laid]  Ff.    then  layed or  laied  Qq. 

lay  Rowe,  Knt.     then  /#j/Pope  +  .     and 
lay  Steev.' 85.     then  lay'd  Cap.  et  cet. 

ore]  Ff,  Rowe.     ouer  Qq  et  cet. 

485 .  fcgh  . . .  kiffe . . .  cry]  Ff,  Rowe  + , 
Steev.'8c  Knt.  fgh'd...hifed... cried  Qq 
et  cet. 


470.  liuing]  Malone  :  A  reason  founded  on  fact  and  experience,  not  on  surmise 
and  conjecture. 

477.  sleepes]  See  Ham.  IV,  vii,  30.  The  use  of  this  plural  form  is  so  common 
that  the  s  can  scarcely  be  regarded  as  an  interpolation  under  Walker's  Art.  xxxviii 
(Crit.  i,  233;  see  I,  i,  31);  it  is  rather  a  genuine  plural,  like  'loves,'  Ham.  I,  i,  173, 
1  consents,'  '  wills,'  '  sights,'  &c. 

481.  Booth:  Holds  Othello's  hand,  which  Othello  draws  with  disgust  from  his 
grasp. 

482.  Walker  {Crit.  ii,  20),  in  a  list  of  many  instances  where  creature  is  pronounced 
as  a  trisyllable,  cites  this  line,  but  doubts  whether  the  common  reading,  which  adopts 
and  then  of  the  Qq,  is  not  preferable ;  in  this  case  creature  would  be  a  dissyllable. 
Lettsom  (in  a  foot-note  to  Walker)  thinks  the  Qq  far  superior,  in  which,  however,  the 


208  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      [act  hi,  sc.  iii 

That  gaue  thee  to  the  Moore.  486 

Oth.     O  monftrous  !  monftrous  ! 

Iago.     Nay,  this  was  but  his  Dreame. 

Oth.     But  this  denoted  a  fore-gone  conclufion, 
'Tis  a  fhrew'd  doubt,  though  it  be  but  a  Dreame.  490 

Iago.     And  this  may  helpe  to  thicken  other  proofes, 
That  do  demonftrate  thinly. 

Oth.     He  teare  her  all  to  peeces. 

Iago.     Nay  yet  be  wife  ;  yet  we  fee  nothing  done, 
She  may  be  honeft  yet  :  Tell  me  but  this,  495 

Haue  you  not  fometimes  feene  a  Handkerchiefe 
Spotted  with  Strawberries,  in  your  wiues  hand  ? 

Oth.     I  gaue  her  fuch  a  one  :  'twas  my  firft  gift.  498 

487.  O  monflrous]  O  monflerous  Q  .  490.  JJirew* 'd]fJirewd Qq.  fJirewdeY  . 

488.  Nay]  Om.  Pope,  Han.  494.  Nay  yet]  Ff,  Rowe.     Nay,  but 

489.  denoted"]  denoted  Qx.  Qq  et  cet. 

fore-gone]  fore-gon  Q2Q3.  496, 499.  Handkerchiefe]  handkerchcf 

490-492.  '  Tis... thinly]  Given  to  Iago         Qx. 
by  Qx,  Warb.  497,  500.  wiues]  wife's  Rowe  et  seq. 

then  would  be  better  away,  for  cry  and  kiss  are  most  closely  connected,  and  this  then 
may  have  crept  in  from  the  then  two  lines  below. 

489.  conclusion]  Malone:  An  experiment,  or  trial.  See  Ant.  6°  Cleo.  V,  ii, 
358.  '  She  hath  pursued  conclusions  infinite  Of  easy  ways  to  die.'  [See  Ham.  Ill, 
iv,  195.]     Delius  finds  here  an  allusion  to  the  'conclusion'  in  II,  i,  295. 

490.  Johnson  :  I  think  this  line  is  more  naturally  spoken  by  Othello,  who,  by  dwell 
ing  so  long  upon  the  proof,  encouraged  Iago  to  enforce  it. 

490.  doubt]  Suspicion.     See  line  217  of  this  scene. 

493.  Fechter  :  Othello  crosses  with  the  fierceness  of  a  tiger,  and  with  action  as  if 
destroying  Desdemona's  work.  Booth  :  Here  you  may  let  the  savage  have  vent, — but 
for  a  moment  only ;  when  Othello  next  speaks  he  is  tame  again  and  speaks  sadly.  Iago 
has  caught  and  held  him  as  he  was  about  to  rush  off  to  '  tear  her  all  to  pieces.'  Do  not 
stoop  to  the  old  stage-trick  of  displaying  Desdemona's  handkerchief,  as  if  by  accident, 
while  Othello's  back  is  turned. 

494.  we  see]  Warburton  :  An  oblique  and  secret  mock  at  Othello's  saying,  '  Give 
me  ocular  proof.'  Hudson  :  Iago  is  exulting  in  his  intellectual  mastery,  as  shown  in 
the  success  of  his  lies.  Truth  prevails  by  her  own  might ;  lies  by  the  skill  of  the  liar ; 
hence,  gaining  his  ends  by  falsehood  is  to  Iago  just  the  sweetest  thing  in  the  world. 

497.  spotted]  Halliwell  :  Mr  Fairholt  sends  me  the  following  curious  note : 
*  The  ladies  of  the  Shakespearian  era  were  great  adepts  in  the  use  of  the  needle ;  the 
designs  they  made  use  of  were  consequently  conventional  like  those  worked  by  our 
grandmothers  in  the  school  sampler.  Flowers  and  fruits  were  depicted  in  a  sort  of 
heraldic  fashion,  and  repeated  mechanically  over  the  surface  to  be  ornamented.'  *  The 
habit  of  wearing  curiously  wrought  handkerchiefs,  which  prevailed  in  our  author's  day, 
was  derived  from  the  East,  where  it  was  customary  for  both  sexes  to  carry  them.'— 
Nott. 


act  in,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE  OF   VENICE  209 

Iago.     I  know  not  that  :  but  fuch  a  Handkerchiefe 
(I  am  fure  it  was  your  wiues)  did  I  to  day  500 

See  CaJJio  wipe  his  Beard  with. 

Oth.     If  it  be  that. 

Iago.     If  it  be  that,  or  any,  it  was  hers. 
It  fpeakes  againft  her  with  the  other  proofes. 

Othel.     O  that  the  Slaue  had  forty  thoufand  hues  :  505 

One  is  too  poore,  too  weake  for  my  reuenge. 
Now  do  I  fee  'tis  true.     Looke  heere  Iago, 
All  my  fond  loue  thus  do  I  blow  to  Heauen.     'Tis  gone. 
Arife  blacke  vengeance,  from  the  hollow  hell,  509 

500.   Jam"]  Pm  Pope +  ,  Dyce  iii,  Huds.  508.  Heauen.    ' 'Tis]  heauen, — /if  Qq. 

502.  If  it]  Ift  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  heaven  :  '  Tis  Pope  et  seq. 

that.]  that —  Rowe  et  seq.  '  Tis  gone]  Separate  line,  Pope  et 

503.  any,  it  was  hers.]  any,  it  was  hers,         seq.  (except  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Ktly). 

Qq.     any,  if 'twas  hers,  Ff,  Rowe+,  Cap.  508,  509.  '  Tis. ..hell]  One  line,  Ktly. 

Jen.  Steev.'85,  Knt.     any  that  was  hers,  509.  the  hollow  hell]  thy  hollow  cell 'Qq, 

Mai.  et  cet.  Johns.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing. 

507.  do  I]  I  doe  Q2Q3.  Glo.  Ktly,  Cam.Wh.  ii.     ttf  unhallowed 

true]  time  Qlf  Warb.  cell  Warb. 

503.  it  was  hers]  MALONE  :  For  the  emendation  that  in  place  of  'it,'  I  am  answer- 
able. The  mistake  probably  arose  from  yt  only  being  written  in  the  manuscript.  Steev- 
ENS  :  I  prefer  Mr  Malone's  correction  to  that  of  F2,  though  the  latter  gives  sense  where 
it  was  certainly  wanting.     Knight  prefers  F2  [as  does  also  the  present  Ed.]. 

505.  forty  thousand]  Elze  (Note  on  Ham.  V,  i,  257)  calls  attention  to  Shake- 
speare's fondness  for  this  number  as  an  expression  of  indefiniteness.  Booth  :  Whether 
this  refers  to  Cassio  or  Desdemona  I'm  uncertain.  He  would  prepare  swift  means  of 
death  for  her  and  tear  her  all  to  pieces,  yet  '  slave '  seems  very  inappropriate  to  apply 
to  a  woman.  I  think  he  has  Cassio  in  mind,  and  his  reference  to  him  in  the  Fifth 
Act,  •  Had  all  his  hairs  been  lives,'  seems  to  give  an  additional  warrant.  [Assuredly, 
it  was  Cassio.     I  doubt  if  Othello  even  heard  what  Iago  had  just  said. — Ed.] 

507.  true]  Warburton  upholds  Qx  as  an  'allusion  to  what  Othello  had  said  before, 
line  221  :  "Away  at  once  with  love  or  jealousy."     This  time  has  now  come.' 

508.  fond  love]  Booth  :  Although  the  savage  blood  is  up,  let  a  wave  of  humanity 
■weep  over  his  heart  at  these  words.  Breathe  out  '  'Tis  gone '  with  a  sigh  of  agony 
which  seems  to  exhale  love  to  heaven. 

509.  the  hollow  hell]  Warburton  :  '  Hollow '  as  applied  to  •  hell '  is  a  poor 
unmeaning  epithet.  It  is  corrupt,  and  should  be  read  unhallowed  cell,  i.  e.  the  infernal 
regions.  Steevens  :  The  same  phrase  occurs  in  Jasper  Heywood's  translation  of  Sen- 
eca's Thyestes,  1560:  'Where  most  prodigious  vgly  thinges  the  hollowe  hell  doth 
hyde.'  Holt  White:  Again  in  Paradise  Lost,  i,  314:  'He  call'd  so  loud,  that  all 
the  hollow  deep  Of  hell  resounded.'  Malone  :  Also,  line  542  of  the  same  book : 
*  the  universal  host  up  sent  A  shout  that  tore  hell's  concave.'  Knight  :  It  seems  per- 
fectly incredible  that  Johnson,  Steevens,  and  Malone  should  have  rejected  the  magnif- 
icent reading  '  hollow  hell ' ;  if  it  had  failed  to  impress  them  by  its  power,  the  imitations 
of  it  by  Milton  should  have  rendered  it  sacred.     But  let  us  only  mark  the  opposition 

14 


2IO  THE   TRACED  IE   OF  OTHELLO      [act  hi,  sc.  iii. 

Yeeld  vp  (O  Loue)thy  Crowne,  and  hearted  Throne  510 

To  tyrannous  Hate.     Swell  bofome  with  thy  fraught, 
For  'tis  of  Afpickes  tongues. 

Iago.     Yet  be  content. 

Oth.     Oh  blood,  blood,  blood. 

Iago.     Patience  I  fay  :  your  minde  may  change.  515 

Oth.     Neuer  Iago.     Like  to  the  Ponticke  Sea, 

510.  hearted}  harledQ^  parted  Warb.         blood  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll. 

511.  bofome]  boofome  Q  .  Sing.  Ktly. 

512.  Afpickes]  Af pecks  Q,.  514.  blood.]  blood —  Rowe+. 

[he  kneeles.  Q3Q3-  515-  minde  may j  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han 

513.  Yet]  Pray  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.         Knt.     mind  perhaps  may  Qq  et  cet. 
Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly.  516-523.  Iago... Heauen]  Om.  Qf 

[he  kneeles.  Qx.  516.  Two  lines,  Q2Q,. 

514.  blood,  blood,  blood.]   bloody  Iago,  Like  to]  Like  Pope,  Han.  Warb. 

of  the  two  lines :  '  All  my  fond  love  thus  do  /  blow  to  heaven.     Arise,  black  ven- 
geance, from  the  hollow  hell.'' 

510.  hearted]  Johnson:  The  heart  on  which  thou  wast  enthroned.  Malone: 
So,  Twelfth  Night,  II,  iv,  21 :  'It  gives  an  echo  to  the  very  seat  Where  Love  is 
throned.' 

511.  Swell]  Warburton:  Because  the  fraught  is  of  poison. 

513.  Booth  :  Iago  affects  remorse  for  having  'put  this  to  him,'  &c. 

514.  Fechter  :  He  rushes  about  as  if  seeking  his  prey. 

515.  Fechter:  Exciting  him.  Booth:  Eagerly,  as  if  to  clinch  the  nail  he  has 
driven  home. 

516.  Ponticke  Sea]  Pope:  This  simile  is  omitted  in  the  first  edition;  I  think  it 
should  be  so,  as  an  unnatural  excursion  in  this  place.  Steevens  :  Eveiy  reader  will, 
I  durst  say,  abide  by  Mr  Pope's  censure  on  this  passage.  When  Shakespeare  grew 
acquainted  with  such  particulars  of  knowledge,  he  made  a  display  of  them  as  soon  as 
opportunity  offered.  He  found  this  in  Holland's  Pliny,  Bk.  ii,  chap.  97,  1601  :  'And 
the  sea  Pontus  euermore  floweth  and  runneth  out  into  Propontis,  but  the  sea  neuer 
retireth  backe  againe  within  Pontus.'  Edwards,  in  his  MS.  notes,  conceives  this  simile 
to  allude  to  Sir  Philip  Sidney's  device,  which  was  the  Caspian  Sea,  with  this  motto,  Sine 
reflexu.  Knight  :  It  is  delightful  to  see  how  Shakespeare's  knowledge  impresses 
itself,  even  in  technicalities,  upon  practical  men  whose  minds  are  not  clouded  by  the 
low  pedantry  of  such  critics  as  Steevens.  A  gentleman,  who  writes  to  us  as  '  a  sailor,' 
begs  us  to  notice  this  passage  as  exhibiting  a  proof  of  the  poet's  knowledge  '  of  the 
continual  flow  of  the  tide  through  the  Gut  of  Gibraltar.'  Hunter  (ii,  279) :  Few  per- 
sons will  doubt  that  Steevens's  quotation  from  Holland's  Pliny  was  substantial  and 
good,  a  valuable  contribution  to  the  illustration  of  the  play ;  Knight's  correspondent's 
in  the  highest  degree  vain  and  ridiculous.  Swinburne  (p.  183) :  In  their  version  of 
Othello,  remarkably  enough,  the  '  player-editors,'  contrary  to  their  wont,  have  added  to 
the  treasure-house  of  their  text  one  of  the  most  precious  jewels  that  ever  the  prodigal 
afterthought  of  a  great  poet  bestowed  upon  the  rapture  of  his  readers.  Some  of  these, 
by  way  of  thanksgiving,  have  complained  with  a  touch  of  petulance  that  it  was  out  of 
dace  and  superfluous  in  the  setting;  nay,  that  it  was  incongruous  with  all  the  circum- 
stances,— out  of  tone  and  out  of  harmony  and  out  of  keeping  with  character  and  tune 


act  in,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  21 1 

Whofe  Icie  Current,  and  compulfiue  courfe,  517 

Neu'r  keepes  retyring  ebbe,  but  keepes  due  on 

To  the  Proponticke,  and  the  Hellefpont : 

Euen  fo  my  bloody  thoughts,  with  violent  pace  520 

Shall  neu'r  looke  backe,  neu'r  ebbe  to  humble  Loue, 

Till  that  a  capeable,  and  wide  Reuenge 

Swallow  them  vp.     Now  by  yond  Marble  Heauen,  523 

518.  Neu'r)   Mr  Q2Q3.     NevW  F8.  521.  neufr\  ne're  Q2Q3F3FA- 

Ne're  F3F4.     Ne'er  Rowe  et  seq.  522.  capeable]  capable  Ff. 

keepes]  Ff,  Knt.    knows  Coll.  Wh.  523.  by  yond]  be  yond  Q.     by  yond* 

i.    feels  Q2Q3  et  cet.  Cap. 

and  time.  In  other  lips,  indeed,  than  Othello's,  at  the  crowning  minute  of  culminant 
agony,  the  rush  of  imaginative  reminiscence  which  brings  back  upon  his  eyes  and  ears 
the  lightning  foam  and  tideless  thunder  of  the  Pontic  sea  might  seem  a  thing  less  nat- 
ural than  sublime.  But  Othello  has  the  passion  of  a  poet  closed  in,  as  it  were,  and 
shut  up  behind  the  passion  of  a  hero.  For  all  his  practical  readiness  of  martial  eye 
and  ruling  hand  in  action,  he  is  also  in  his  season  *  of  imagination  all  compact.'  There- 
fore it  is  that  in  the  face  and  teeth  of  all  devils  akin  to  Iago  that  hell  could  send  forth 
to  hiss  at  her  election,  we  feel  and  recognize  the  spotless  exaltation,  the  sublime  and 
sunbright  purity,  of  Desdemona's  inevitable  and  invulnerable  love.  When  once  we 
likewise  have  seen  Othello's  visage  in  his  mind,  we  see,  too,  how  much  more  of  great- 
ness is  in  this  mind  than  in  another  hero's.  For  such  an  one,  even  a  boy  may  well 
think  how  thankfully  and  joyfully  he  would  lay  down  his  life.  Other  friends  we  have 
of  Shakespeare's  giving  whom  we  love  deeply  and  well,  if  hardly  with  such  love  as 
could  weep  for  them  all  the  tears  of  the  body  and  all  the  blood  of  the  heart ;  but  there 
is  none  we  love  like  Othello. 

517.  Icie]  Singer  (ed.  ii) :  This  is  a  palpable  misprint  for  yesty. 

518.  keepes  .  .  .  keepes]  Malone:  Many  similar  repetitions  in  the  same  line,  due 
to  the  compositor's  mistakes,  may  be  found  in  Fs.  See  Ham.  II,  ii,  52;  lb.  Ill,  iii,  14, 
Knight:  The  repetition  would  not  be  objectionable  if  in  the  first  instance  it  gave  us  a 
clear  meaning, — the  same  meaning  as  in  the  second  instance, — but  it  is  not  so.  And 
yet  feels  does  not  seem  to  be  the  right  word.  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  Southern  altered  it  to 
knows  in  his  F  ,  and  it  is  knows  in  the  (MS).  White  (ed.  i)  'cannot  but  regard  feels 
as  a  mere  sophistication,'  but  in  his  ed.  ii  he  silently  adopts  it.  Walker  {Crit.  i,  314) : 
Feels  is  wrong ;  brooks  would  be  better,  though  not,  I  think,  the  true  word.  Keightley 
(Exp.  303)  :  I  doubt  much  if  the  original  word  was  not  makes,  which  I  have  given, 
corresponding  with  '  keeps '  in  not  personifying. 

523.  marble]  In  that  delightful  book,  The  Plain  Speaker  (p.  483,  Bohn's  ed.), 
Hazlitt  discerns,  with  an  insight  keen  and  poetic,  a  meaning  here  which  at  first  sight 
is  so  taking  that  I  cannot  but  regret  that  a  closer  scrutiny  will  hardly  justify  it,  or  at 
most  accept  it  only  as  one  of  those  interpretations  which  it  is  the  prerogative  of  a  fine 
critic  to  find  where  he  will.  Hazlitt  says :  '  when  Othello  swears  "  By  yon  marble 
heaven,"  the  epithet  is  suggested  by  the  hardness  of  his  heart  from  the  sense  of  injury ; 
the  texture  of  the  outward  object  is  borrowed  from  that  of  the  thoughts ;  and  that  noble 
simile,  "  Like  the  Propontic,"  &c,  seems  only  an  echo  of  the  sounding  tide  of  passion, 
and  to  roll  from  the  same  source,  the  heart.'     If  this  passage  in  Othello  were  the  only 


212  THE    TRAGED1E    OF  OTHELLO      [act  hi,  sc.  iii. 

In  the  due  reuerence  of  a  Sacred  vow, 

I  heere  engage  my  words.  525 

I  ago.     Do  not  rife  yet : 
Witneffe  you  euer-burning  Lights  aboue, 
You  Elements,  that  clip  vs  round  about, 
Witneffe  that  heere  Iago  doth  giue  vp 
The  execution  of  his  wit,  hands,  heart,  530 

524.  of]  to  Q3.  WitnefsyourY  ,  Rowe.  Witness,ye  Johns 
[He  kneels.  Rowe  et  seq.  528.   Fw]  Ye  Johns. 

525.  engage]  ingage  Qq.  [Iago  kneeles.  Qx. 
words. ,]  words — Ff,  Rowe +  , 'Jen.  530.  execution]  excellency  Q. 

526.  [Iago  kneels.  Q2,  Rowe  et  seq.  hands]  hand  Qq,  Cap. 

527.  Witneffe  you]  Witneffe  the  Q2Q3- 

instance  in  Shakespeare  where  '  marble '  is  applied  to  the  '  heavens,'  this  fine  inter- 
pretation might  stand  without  question.  But  it  is  used  elsewhere  in  passages  where  it 
cannot  have  a  subjective  meaning,  and  it  is  these  passages  and  others,  which,  I  think, 
should  determine  its  meaning  here.  In  Timon's  wild  address  to  the  earth  (IV,  iii,  191) 
he  bids  it  •  Teem  with  new  monsters,  whom  thy  upward  face  Hath  to  the  marbled 
mansion  all  above  Never  presented ;'  again,  twice  in  Cymb.  (V,  iv)  where  Sicilius  first 
invokes  Jupiter  to  '  Peep  through  thy  marble  mansion,'  and  then  when  Jupiter  retires, 
he  exclaims,  '  The  marble  pavement  closes.'  In  these  three  instances  '  marbled  '  is,  it 
seems  to  me,  purely  objective,  and  is  not  a  quality  projected  by  the  emotions  of  the 
speaker;  it  is  suggestive  of  all  the  imposing  pomp  of  masonry  with  cloud-capt  towers 
and  glistening  domes.  Furthermore,  Marston  uses  the  same  phrase,  as  Steevens  and 
Malone  pointed  out,  in  Soly?nan  and  Perseda,  1599:  '  Now  by  the  marble  face  of 
the  welkin,'  &c,  and  in  Antonio  and  Mellida,  1602:  'And  pleas'd  the  marble  heavens,' 
&c.  Lastly,  Milton  (Par.  Lost,  iii,  564)  describes  how  Satan  'into  the  world's  first 
region  throws  His  flight  precipitant,  and  winds  with  ease  Through  the  pure  marble  air 
his  oblique  way.'  We  are  safe  in  ascribing  a  classic  origin  to  many  a  Miltonic  phrase, 
and  it  was  Upton  (p.  25)  who,  in  vindicating  Paradise  Lost  from  the  strictures  of 
Bishop  Burnet,  shows  that  '  marble '  is  used  by  Milton  '  in  its  thoroughly  classic  sense 
from  [iapfiaipu,  to  sparkle,  to  glow,  or,  as  in  the  "sequor  marmoreum  "  of  Vergil,  the 
sea  shining  or  resplendent  like  marble.'  This,  then,  is  the  meaning  in  which,  I  think, 
it  was  always  used  by  Shakespeare,  of  course  without  a  thought,  or  perhaps  even  know- 
ledge, of  its  classic  origin.  '  Marble '  refers,  I  think,  to  color,  aglow  with  lacing  streaks, 
and  not  to  texture  or  to  substance. — Ed.  Schmidt  (Lex.  s.  v.)  queries  whether  '  mar- 
ble '  is  applied  to  the  heavens  on  account  of  their  eternity. 

523.  Booth  :  Kneels.  Both  hands  above  the  head,  with  upturned  palms  and  fingers 
towards  the  back.  I  used  this  gesture  impulsively,  in  England  first,  and  it  was  spoken 
of  as  suggestive  of  the  Orient.  Iago  watches  Othello  keenly — sidewise — during  his 
next  speech ;  while  Othello  seems  absorbed  and  with  upturned  eyes. 

528.  clip]  Dyce:  That  is,  embrace.  Purnell  :  Originally,  '  to  hold  tight';  and 
then,  as  the  shears  press  down  on  the  cloth  in  the  act  of  cutting,  the  later  meaning 
superseded  the  earlier. 

530.  execution]  Malone  :  That  is,  employment,  exercise.  Steevens  :  So  in  Tro. 
dr»  Cress   V,  vii,  6,  *  In  fellest  manner  execute  your  arms.' 


act  in,  SC.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  213 

To  wrong*  d  Othello's  Seruice.     Let  him  command,  531 

And  to  obey  mail  be  in  me  remorfe, 
What  bloody  bufineffe  euer. 

Oth.     I  greet  thy  loue, 
Not  with  vaine  thanks,  but  with  acceptance  bounteous,  53; 

And  will  vpon  the  inftant  put  thee  too't. 
Within  thefe  three  dayes  let  me  heare  thee  fay,  537 

532.  And  to  obey]  And  to  obey,  Qq,         Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly.     work 
Warb.  Johns.    Not  to  obey  Pope.    Nor  to         soever  Coll.  Huds. 

obey  Theob.  Han.     And  not  to  obey  Jen.  533.  euer.]  ever —  Knt. 

be  in  vie  remorfe]  be  remorce  Qx.  [Rising.  Cap. 

be  in  vie.  Remord  Warb.    be  in  me  no  re-  53°^  thee]  the  Q  . 
morse  Upton,  Cap.  todt]  tdt  QqF3F4. 

533.  bufineffe  euer]  worke  fo  euer  Qq, 

532.  And  to  obey]  Theobald  changed  Pope's  Not  to  Nor,  *  that  is,  let  your  corn 
mands  be  ever  so  bloody,  remorse  and  compassion  shall  not  restrain  me  from  obeying 
them.'  Upton  (p.  200) :  A  negative  particle  has  slipped  out  here,  we  must  read  *  And 
to  obey  shall  be  in  me  no  remorse.'  Johnson  :  Iago  devotes  himself  to  wronged 
Othello,  and  says,  '  Let  him  command  whatever  bloody  business,  and  in  me  it  shall  be 
an  act,  not  of  cruelty,  but  of  tenderness,  to  obey  him ;  not  of  malice  to  others,  but  of 
tenderness  to  him.'  Steevens  :  '  Remorse '  is  used  for  pity  in  Surrey's  translation  of 
the  Fourth  ^Eneid  :  '  Sister,  I  crave  thou  have  remorse  of  me.'  Again,  in  King  Ed- 
ward III.  1599:  'But  for  yourselves,  look  you  for  no  remorse,'  and  m  many  more 
instances,  but  I  shall  content  myself  to  observe  that  the  sentiment  of  Iago  bears  no 
small  resemblance  to  that  of  Arviragus  in  Cymb.  IV,  ii,  168  :  '  I'ld  let  a  parish  of  such 
Cloten's  blood,  And  praise  myself  for  charity.'  Reed  quotes  Mason  as  saying  that 
Shakespeare  seldom,  if  ever,  uses  the  word  in  any  other  sense.  [It  is  the  only  sense 
given  by  Dyce  [Gloss.)].  Tollet  :  That  is,  let  him  command  any  bloody  business, 
and  to  obey  him  shall  be  in  me  an  act  of  pity  and  compassion  for  wrong'd  Othello. 
Farmer  :  I  read,  '  let  him  command  Art  to  obey  shall  be  in  me  remorse  What  bloody 

business  ever '     '  And '  for  if  is  sufficiently  common ;  and  Othello's  impatience 

Drcaks  off  the  sentence,  I  think,  with  additional  beauty.  Knight  :  It  is  quite  clear 
that  Othello  interrupts  the  conclusion  of  Iago's  speech.  At  the  moment  when  he  has 
said  that  '  obedience  to  Othello  shall  stand  in  the  place  of  remorse  (mercy) — What 
bloody  business  ever'  (Othello  may  command),  Othello,  jumping  at  his  meaning,  at 
once  sets  him  upon  the  murder  of  Cassio.  Singer  (ed.  ii) :  '  To  remord — to  prey 
upon  continually  and  repeatedly ;  and  hence  Iago's  prefigured  remorse ;  a  feeling  that 
will  continually  prey  upon  his  mind — Mordax — Edax-cara.'  [This  Latin  I  do  not 
understand. — Ed.]  I  owe  this  admirable  solution  of  a  difficult  passage  to  the  kind- 
ness of  Dr  Richardson.  Hudson  :  '  Remorse  '  for  conscience,  simply.  Iago  has  said 
before, '  I  hold  it  very  stuff  o'  the  conscience  to  do  no  contrived  murder.'  So  the  mean- 
ing here  is,  '  Let  him  command  whatever  bloody  work  he  may,  to  perform  it  shall  be 
with  me  a  matter  of  conscience.'  This  explanation  is  Joseph  Crosby's.  White  (ed. 
ii) :    '  Remorse,'  a  doubtful  reading,  or  else  a  very  forced  use  of  the  word   in  the 

sense  of  pity,  for  Othello.     Bulloch  (p.  250) :  I  would  read,  « shall  be  in  mere 

remorse  What  bloody  business  severs?  That  is  the  ordinary  pity  experienced  at  the 
separation  ot  soul  and  body  in  others.     [See  III.  iii,  426.] 


214 


THE    TRAGEDIE   OF   OTHELLO      [act  hi,  sc.  Hi. 


That  Caffio's  not  aliue. 

Iago.     My  Friend  is  dead : 
'Tis  done  at  your  Requeft. 
But  let  her  Hue. 

Oth.     Damne  her  lewde  Minx  : 
O  damne  her,  damne  her. 
Come  go  with  me  a-part,  I  will  withdraw 
To  furnifh  me  with  fome  fwift  meanes  of  death 
For  the  faire  Diuell. 
Now  art  thou  my  Lieutenant. 

Iago.     I  am  your  owne  for  euer. 


538 
540 


Exeunt. 


545 


548 


539,  540.  One  line,  Cap.  Steev.  et  seq. 

540,  541.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

540.  at  your]  as  you  Qq,  Cap.  Jen. 

541,  543.    As   one   line,  Steev.'93   et 


seq. 


542,  543.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 


542,  543.  Damne]  Dam  Qq. 

542.  Minx]  minks  Qq. 

543.  0...her.]  Ff,  Ro\ve  +  ,  Jen.  Knt, 
Ktly.      O  dam  her.  Qq  et  cet. 

546,  547.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 
546.  Diuell]  deuili  Q2Q3-    Devil 'F^. 


538.  Booth  :  Iago  is  shocked,  of  course,  and  slightly  shudders  as  he  rises  to  his  feet. 
Line  541  he  speaks  beseechingly. 

539.  Theobald  :  In  like  manner  Jonson  in  his  Cataline  [III,  hi]  expresses  the 
impetuosity  of  Cethegus  for  the  death  of  Cicero,  '  He  shall  die.  Shall  was  too  slowly 
said ;  he's  dying,  that  Is  yet  too  slow ;  he's  dead.'  But  this  is  a  copy  from  Seneca's 
Hercules  Furens  [v.  644]  :  '  Si  novi  Herculem  Lycus  Creonti  debitas  poenas  dabit. 
Lentum  est,  dabit ;  dat ;  hoc  quoque  lentum  est ;  dedit.' 

542.  Minx]   Purnell:  Possibly  short  for  minikin. 

543.  Booth  :  Take  a  liberty  here  and  '  damn  her '  four  times ;  the  first  savagely,  the 
second  time  less  so,  melt  with  the  third,  and  choke  with  tears  at  the  fourth ;  the  merest 
pause — then  recover  and  '  Come,  go  with  me,'  &c.  Iago  shows  deep  grief  till  '  Now 
art  thou  my  lieutenant,'  then,  quickly  kneeling,  he  kisses  Othello's  hand,  and  his  face 
reveals  his  triumph.  Fechter's  Othello  returns  as  he  is  going  out,  and,  striking  Iago 
on  the  shoulder,  with  a  savage  smile  of  triumph  says,  '  Now  art  thou  my  lieutenant.' 

545.  death]  Rymer  (p.  92)  :  Othello  is  made  a  Venetian  General.  We  see  nothing 
done  by  him,  nor  related  concerning  him,  that  comports  with  the  condition  of  a  General,  or, 
indeed,  of  a  Man,  unless  the  killing  himself,  to  avoid  a  death  the  Law  was  about  to  inflict 
on  him.  When  his  jealousy  had  wrought  him  up  to  a  resolution  of  's  taking  revenge 
for  the  suppos'd  injury,  He  sets  Jago  to  the  fighting  part,  to  kill  Cassio ;  And  he  chuses 
himself  to  murder  the  silly  Woman  his  Wife,  that  was  like  to  make  no  resistance. 

548.  Booth  :  To  portray  Iago  properly  you  must  seem  to  be  what  all  the  characters 
think,  and  say,  you  are,  not  what  the  spectators  know  you  to  be ;  try  to  win  even  them 
by  your  sincerity.  Don't  act  the  villain,  don't  look  it  or  speak  it  (by  scowling  and 
growling,  I  mean),  but  think  it  all  the  time.  Be  genial,  sometimes  jovial,  always  gen- 
tlemanly. Quick  in  motion  as  in  thought ;  lithe  and  sinuous  as  a  snake.  A  certain  bluff- 
ness  (which  my  temperament  does  not  afford)  should  be  added  to  preserve  the  military 
flavour  of  the  character ;  in  this  particular  I  fail  utterly,  my  Iago  lacks  the  soldierly  qual 
ity.     My  consolation  is  that  we  know  him  more  as  a  courtier  than  as  a  soldier. 


ACT  III,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


215 


a 


Sccena  Quarta.  [327 

Enter  Defdemona,  ALmiliay  and  Clown, 

Def.  Do  you  know  Sirrah,  where  Lieutenant  CaJJio 
lyes? 

Clow,     I  dare  not  fay  he  lies  any  where.  5 

Def     Why  man  ? 

Clo,  He's  a  Soldier,  and  for  me  to  fay  a  Souldier  lyes, 
'tis  ftabbing. 

Def.     Go  too  :  where  lodges  he  ? 

Clo,     To  tell  you  where  he  lodges,  is  to  tel  you  where  10 

I  lye. 

Def.     Can  any  thing  be  made  of  this  t 

Clo.  I  know  not  where  he  lodges,  and  for  mee  to  de- 
uife  a  lodging,  and  fay  he  lies  heere,  or  he  lies  there,  were 
to  lye  in  mine  owne  throat.  15 

Def.     Can  you  enquire  him  out  ?  and  be  edified  by  n 
port? 

Clo.  I  will  Catechize  the  world  for  him,  that  is,  make 
Queftions,  and  by  them  anfwer.  19 


1.  Scsena   Quarta.]    Om.    Qq,   Rowe. 
Scene  IX.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

Another    Apartment    in    the    Palace. 
Theob.     Before  the  Castle.  Dyce. 

2.  Enter...]  Enter  Defdemonia,  Emil- 
ia and  the  Clowne.  Qq  [Defdemona  Q2Q3). 

3.  Lieut enant~\  the Leiutenqnt Qq,  Jen. 
Coll.  Wh.  i. 

7.  Clo.]  Om.  Qx. 

He's']  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Etyce,  Glo.  Cam. 
Huds.  Rife,  Wh.  ii.     He  is  Qq  et  cet. 

me~\  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
Knt,  Sing.  Ktly.     one  Qq  et  cet. 

8.  'tis]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt.    is  Qq  et  cet. 


9.  too  :]  to,  QXQ2.    to  Q  .    to :  If.    toH 
Knt. 

10,  11,  12.  Om.  Qx. 

14.  lies... there]  lies  there  Qq. 

15.  mine  own]  my  Qx.     my  own  Cap. 
Mai.  Steev. '93,  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

16.  enquire]  inquire  Qx. 
and  be~\  and  Q  . 

by]  to  Coll.  (MS). 
Catechize]  cathechize  Qq. 
and... anfwer]  Separate  line,  Qq. 
by  them]  make  them  Q  ,  Jen.  Steev. 
bid  the m  Theob. +  ,  Cap. 


18. 
19. 


'85 


3-24.  These  lines  are,  I  believe,  invariably  omitted  on  the  stage.  Fechter  con- 
tinues the  scene,  that  is,  it  is  still  III,  i.     Booth  at  line  25  begins  IV,  i. 

2.  Clown]  Douce  (ii,  272) :  He  appears  but  twice  in  the  play,  and  was  certainly 
intended  to  be  an  allowed,  or  domestic,  fool  in  the  service  of  Othello  and  Desdemona. 

4.  lyes]  Shakespeare  was  not  above  sharing  the  weakness  of  his  contemporaries  in 
making  puns  on  this  word.     See  also  Ham.  V,  i,  116. 

15.  throat]  John  Hunter :  This  meant,  to  utter  a  wilful  lie.  'To  lie  in  the  teeth ' 
was  less  intentional,  and  gave  less  offence. 

19.  by  them]  Warburton  :  The  Clown  was  to  go  seek  for  one;  he  says  he  will 
ask  for  him,  and  by  his  own  questions  make  answer.   Without  dcubt  we  should  read — 


2l6  THE   TRAGED1E   OF  OTHELLO      [act  in,  sc.  iv. 

Def     Seeke  him,  bidde  him  come  hither  :  tell  him,  I  20 

haue  moou'd  my  Lord  on  his  behalfe,    and  hope  all  will 
be  well. 

Clo.     To  do  this   is  within  the  compaffe  of  mans  Wit, 
and  therefore  I  will  attempt  the  doing  it.  Exit  Clo. 

Def.     Where  mould  I  loofe  the  Handkerchiefe,    ^J-  25 

milia  ? 

^Emil.     I  know  not  Madam. 

Def.     Beleeue  me,  I  had  rather  haue  loft  my  purfe 
Full  of  Cruzadoes.    And  but  my  Noble  Moore 
Is  true  of  minde,  and  made  of  no  fuch  bafeneffe,  30 

21.  moou'd"]  moued  Qq.  24.  Exit  Clo.]  Exit.  Qq. 

on]  in  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  25.  loofe]  lofe  Q'81  et  seq. 

Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Del.  the]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Knt, 

23.  of  mans  Wit]  of  a  man  Qx.  Wh.  i.     that  Qq  et  cet. 

24.  I  will]  IUe  or  He  Qq.  25,  62,  68,  105,  &c.   Handkerchiefe] 
doing  it]  doing  of  it  Qq,  Rowe  +  ,  handkercher  Qx.     Handkerchiffe  F  . 

Jen.  Steev.'85,  Mai.     doing  Rife.  28.  haue  lofl]  loofe  Qq.     lofe  Q'81. 

and  bid  them  answer ;  i.  e.,  the  world ;  those  whom  he  questions.  Henley  :  His 
design  was  to  propose  such  questions  as  might  elicit  the  information  sought  for  from 
him,  and,  therefore,  by  his  questions  he  might  be  enabled  to  answer.  Malone  :  That 
is,  and  by  them,  when  answered,  form  my  own  answer  to  you.  Rolfe  states  it  clearly : 
By  them  be  enabled  to  answer,  or  get  the  information  to  use  in  my  answer. 

24.  the  doing  it]  For  a  full  exposition  of  verbals,  followed  by  an  object,  see 
Abbott,  §  93,  or  Macb.  I,  iv,  8. 

25.  should  I  loose]  Abbott,  §325:  'Should,'  in  a  direct  question  about  the  past, 
6eems  to  increase  the  emphasis  of  the  interrogation,  since  a  doubt  about  the  past  (time 
having  been  given  for  investigation)  implies  more  perplexity  than  a  doubt  about  the 
future. 

25.  the]  White  (ed.  i)  :  That  of  the  Qq  has  a  loss  of  significance.  To  Desde- 
mona  this  handkerchief  was  at  any  time  the  handkerchief,  and  now  more  so  than  ever. 

27.  Hudson  :  Objection  has  been  made  to  the  conduct  of  Emilia  in  this  scene  as 
inconsistent  with  the  spirit  she  afterwards  shows.  I  can  discover  no  such  inconsist- 
ency. Want  of  principle  and  strength  of  attachment  are  often  thus  seen  united. 
Emilia  loves  her  mistress  deeply,  but  she  has  no  moral  repugnance  to  theft  and  false 
hood,  apprehends  no  fatal  consequences  from  the  Moor's  passion,  and  has  no  soul  to 
conceive  the  agony  her  mistress  must  suffer  by  the  charge  of  infidelity ;  and  it  is  but 
natural  that  when  the  result  comes  she  should  be  the  more  spirited  for  the  very  remem- 
brance of  her  own  guilty  part  in  the  process.  Booth  :  Emilia  speaks  with  slight  em- 
barrassment. 

28.  rather]  Cited  by  Walker  ( Vers.  108)  as  an  instance  of  its  contraction  into  a 
monosyllable.     See  also,  to  the  same  purpose,  Abbott,  §  466. 

29.  Cruzadoes]  Grey  :  A  Portuguese  coin,  in  value  three  shillings.  Johnson  : 
So  called  from  the  ck/ss  stamped  on  it.  Fechter  :  Desdemona  turns  over  her  work 
end  materials  to  find  the  handkerchief. 


ACT  III,  SC  iv.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


217 


As  iealious  Creatures  are,  it  were  enough  31 

To  put  him  to  ill-thinking. 

ALmil.     Is  he  not  iealious  ? 

Def     Who,  he?  I  thinke  the  Sun  where  he  was  borne, 
Drew  all  fuch  humors  from  him.  35 

JF.mil.     Looke  where  he  comes. 

Enter  OtJiello. 

Def.     I  will  not  leaue  him  now,  till  Caffio  be 
Call'd  to  him.    How  is't  with  you,  my  Lord  ? 

Oth.     Well  my  good  Lady  .  Oh  hardnes  to  diffemble  !  40 

How  do  you,  Defdemona  ? 

Def.     Well,  my  good  Lord. 

Oth.     Giue  me  your  hand. 
This  hand  is  moift,  my  Lady. 

Def.     It  hath  felt  no  age,  nor  knowne  no  forrow.  45 

Oth.     This  argues  fruitfulneffe,  and  liberall  heart : 
Hot,  hot,  and  moyft.     This  hand  of  yours  requires  47 


31,  33.  iealious~\  zealous  Q,Q2.  jealious 
Fa.    jeatous  Q3F3F4. 

37.  Enter...]  After  him  line  35,  Qq. 
After  forrow  line  45,  F3>  After  Lord? 
line  39,  F4,  Rowe  + ,  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt, 
Sing.  Ktly.  After  him  line  39,  Jen.  Dyce, 
Sta.  Glo.  Cam.  Del.  Rife,  Huds.  Wh.  ii. 

38,  39.  Lines  end,  now. ..Lord?  Qq, 
Cap.  Ending,  CaJ/io...Lord  ?  Steev.'93, 
Var.  et  seq.     Prose,  Mai. 

38.  tiff]  Let  Qt. 

39.  ?V/]  is  it  Qq,  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
Warb.  Jen.  Steev.'85. 


Scene  X.  Pope  + ,  Jen. 
40.   Oh...diJfemble~\    As   Aside,    Plan. 
Johns,  et  seq. 

42.  Def.]  Lef.  Fa. 
good~\  Om.  Pope  +  . 

43,  44.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 
45.  It  hath~\  Ff,  Rowe  ii.     It  yet  hath 

Rowe  i  +  ,  Jen.  Steev.'85,  Dyce,  Glo.  Rife, 
Huds.  Wh.  ii.     It  yet  has  Qq  et  cet. 
47.  Hot,  hot~\  Not  hot  Qv 

moyfl.~\  Ff,  Johns.  Jen.  Ktly.    moijl 
Qq.    moist —  Rowe  + .    moist :  Cap.  et  cet. 


35.  Rymer  (p.  126)  :  By  this  manner  of  speech  one  wou'd  gather  the  couple  had 
been  yoak'd  together  a  competent  while,  what  might  she  say  more,  had  they  been  man 
and  wife  seven  years  ? 

39.  to  him]  Fechter  :  Exit  Emilia  R.  at  the  moment  when  Othello  appears  at  the 
terrace.  He  observes  them  an  instant ;  then  comes  down,  straight  to  where  Desdemona 
has  been  deranging  her  work  and  materials,  looking  at  them  with  mistrust ;  when  he 
speaks  he  represses  his  anger.  Booth  :  Othello  addresses  Desdemona  as  he  passes 
her,  then  he  suddenly  changes  his  tone  and  manner  from  indifference  to  sadness. 

42.  Fechter  :  Coaxing  by  placing  her  hands,  clasped,  on  the  shoulders  of  Othello, 
who  releases  himself  from  her  caress  and  takes  her  hand. 

45.  Booth  :  At  the  word  *  sorrow'  he  looks  anxiously  into  her  eyes,  and  with  a  sigh 
proceeds. 

46.  fruitfulnesse]  Delius  :  That  is,  liberal,  bountiful,  as  '  fruitful '  is  used  in  II,  ii, 
372. 

47.  moyst]  Bucknill  {Med  Knowledge  of  Sh.  p.  273)  :  This  appean  to  txpress 


218 


THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO 


A  fequefter  from  Liberty  :  Farting,  and  Prayer, 
Much  Caftigation,  Exercife  deuout, 
For  heere's  a  yong,  and  fweating  Diuell  heere 
That  commonly  rebels  :  'Tis  a  good  hand, 
A  franke  one. 


[act  hi,  sc.  iv. 

50 
52 


48.  Prayer]  praying  Qq,  Jen.  Coll.  i, 
Wh.  i. 

49.  dettout]  devoted  Q  . 

50.  heere's]  there's  Daniel. 


50.  yong]  Jlrong  Warb. 

fweating]  fweatie  Q  . 
52.  franke  one]  very  frank  one  Han. 
frank  one  too  Cap.  Ktly. 


an  old  opinion  that  'a  moist  palm  indicates  a  hot  liver,'  one,  however,  which  Primrose 
considered  a  vulgar  error,  and  to  the  refutation  of  which  he  devoted  a  chapter.  Booth  ; 
Examining  its  lines  as  in  palmistry. 

49.  Exercise]  Malone  :  This  was  the  term  for  religious  duties.  *  Henry  VII,' 
says  Bacon,  '  had  the  fortune  of  a  true  Christian  as  well  as  of  a  great  king,  in  living 
exercised,  and  dying  repentant.' 

49,  etc.  Gould  :  As  he  uttered  these  words,  J.  B.  Booth  held  up  the  innocent  hand 
between  his  two  in  momentary,  but  fervent,  attitude  of  prayer.  Then,  still  holding  her 
hand  in  one  of  his  and  pointing  with  the  other,  and  looking  keenly,  but  without 
unkindness,  into  her  palm,  he  adds,  with  heightening  and  ringing  accent :  '  For  here's,' 
&c.  The  three  words,  *  That  commonly  rebels,'  in  changed  tone,  and  with  the  voice 
sustained  at  the  close,  and  given  in  such  a  manner  that  the  attentive  listener  supple- 
mented the  meaning — '  and  I  fear  must  do  so  in  your  case.'  So,  at  the  first  perform- 
ance. On  the  second,  a  fine  variation — '  For  here's  a  young  and  sweating — devil  here,' 
with  the  same  searching  intensity ;  then  a  kindly  doubt  seems  to  rise  in  his  mind,  and 
he  gives  her  the  benefit  of  it  in  saying — '  That  commonly  (slight  pause)  rebels? 

51,  etc.  Walker  (iii,  288) :  Arrange,  perhaps, — ''Tis  a  good  hand,  a  frank  one.  | 
Desd.  You  may  indeed  say  so ;  for  'twas  that  hand  |  That  gave  away  my  heart.'  [I 
record  this  note,  like  many  another  of  Walker,  simply  because  I  lack  the  moral  cour- 
age to  omit  it.  When  Walker  spends  his  time  and  ours  in  cutting  up  verses,  and  frag- 
ments of  verses  spoken  by  different  characters,  into  lines,  what  else  is  it  but  scanning 
by  the  eye  and  for  the  eye  ?  If  the  words  do  not  flow  musically,  cutting  them  into  lines 
will  not  make  them  musical.  If  they  do  flow  musically,  the  lines  will  take  care  of 
themselves.  Is  it  to  be  imagined  that  Shakespeare  ever  followed  any  guide  but  his 
ear  ?  What  does  the  ear  know  of  lines  ?  recurrent  or  uncurrent  rhythm  is  all  that  ever 
it  can  note. — Ed.] 

51,  52.  hand,  .  .  .  one.]  As  questions  in  Fechter's  copy. 

52.  Keightley  {Exp.  304)  :  I  have  given  in  my  edition  'A  frank  one  too,"  but  no 
addition  was  necessary.  I  made  an  error  for  the  sake  of  metre,  and,  I  think,  weak- 
ened the  passage.     [And  was  anticipated  by  Capell,  after  all. — Ed.] 

52.  Boaden  {Life  of  JCemble,  i,  259) :  During  this  speech  of  Othello,  Mrs  Siddons's 
face  had  a  beauty  of  expression  that  offered  one  of  the  most  striking  and  varying  pic- 
tures ever  contemplated.  The  surprise,  arising  to  astonishment,  a  sort  of  doubt  if  she 
heard  aright,  and  that  being  admitted,  what  it  could  mean  ;  a  hope  that  it  would  end 
in  nothing  so  unusual  from  him  as  an  offensive  meaning ;  and  the  slight  relief  upon 
Othello's  adding — « 'Tis  a  good  hand,  a  frank  one  ' ;  all  this  commentary  was  quite  a* 
legible  as  the  text. 


act  in,  s\:.  v/  ]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  219 

Def.     You  may  (indeed)  fay  f o  :  53 

For  'twas  that  hand  that  gaue  away  my  heart. 

Oth.     A  liberall  hand.    The  hearts  of  old,  gaue  hands  :  5  5 

But  our  new  Heraldry  is  hands,  not  hearts. 

55.  hand."]    Ff,    Rowe+,   Jen.    Ktly.  55.  hearts ...  hands]      hands  ...  hearts 

handy  Qq.     hand:  Cap.  et  cet.  Han.  Warb.  Cap. 

53.  You]  ABBOTT,  §483:  Emphasized  pronouns  sometimes  dispense  with  the  un- 
accented syllable.     Here  you  is  emphatic.     '  A  frank  |  one.      Yd  \  u  may  |  indeed  [ 
say  s6. 

55,  56.  In  these  lines  Warburton  discerned  a  satirical  allusion  to  the  creation  of 
baronets  by  James  the  First,  and  founded  on  it  the  date  of  the  composition  of  the  play. 
For  his  arguments  in  this  regard  and  Malone's  reply  to  them,  see  Appendix,  Date  of 
the  Composition.  Warburton  also  asserted  that  'it  is  evident  that  line  55  should  be 
read:  "The  hands  of  old  gave  hearts";  otherwise  it  would  be  no  reply  to  "For  'twas 
that  hand  that  gave  away  my  heart."  Not  so,  says  her  husband,  "The  hands  of  old 
indeed  gave  hearts;  but  the  custom  now  is  to  give  hands  without  hearts."  '  Johnson  : 
Of  emendation  there  is  no  need.  She  says  that  her  hand  gave  away  her  heart.  He 
goes  on  with  his  suspicion,  and  the  hand  which  he  had  before  called  frank,  he  now 
terms  liberal ;  then  proceeds  to  remark  that  the  hand  was  formerly  given  by  the  heart ; 
but  now  it  neither  gives  it,  nor  is  given  by  it.  Steevens  :  The  phrase  '  our  new  her- 
aldry' is  only  figurative,  without  the  least  reference  to  James's  creation  of  baronets. 
The  absurdity  of  making  Othello  so  familiar  with  British  heraldry,  the  utter  want  of 
consistency  as  well  as  policy  in  any  sneer  of  Shakespeare  at  the  badge  of  honours 
instituted  by  a  Prince  whom,  on  all  other  occasions,  he  was  solicitous  to  flatter,  and  at 
whose  court  this  very  piece  was  acted  in  1613,  most  strongly  incline  me  to  question  the 
propriety  of  Warburton's  historical  explanation.  Malone  :  The  hearts  of  old,  says 
Othello,  dictated  the  union  of  hands,  which  formerly  were  joined  with  the  hearts  of  the 
parties  in  them  ;  but  in  our  modern  marriages,  hands  alone  are  united,  without  hearts. 
Such  is  the  plain  meaning  of  the  words.  I  do  not,  however,  undertake  to  maintain 
that  the  poet,  when  he  used  the  word  '  heraldry,'  had  not  the  new  order  of  baronets  in 
his  thoughts,  without  intending  any  satirical  allusion.  Knight  :  We  do  not  think  that 
Shakespeare  would  have  gone  out  of  his  way  to  introduce  a  covert  sarcasm  at  a  passing 
event,  offensive  as  it  must  have  been  if  understood,  and  perfectly  useless  if  not  under- 
stood. The  obvious  meaning  of  the  words,  without  any  allusion,  is  plain  enough ;  and 
'  our  new  heraldry,'  if  it  be  any  more  than  a  figurative  expression,  may  be  easily  referred 
to  the  practice  of  quartering  or  joining  the  arms  of  husband  and  wife.  Dyce  (Remarks, 
p.  241)  :  The  reader  will  probably  recollect  with  dismay  the  immense  mass  of  annota- 
tion which  this  passage  has  called  forth  in  consequence  of  Warburton's  ridiculous  idea 
that  the  poet  alluded  here  to  the  new  order  of  baronets  created  by  King  James.  I  have 
only  to  observe  :  first, — that  the  word  '  heraldry '  (which  the  commentators  are  surprised 
at  finding  here)  was  evidently  suggested  to  Shakespeare  by  the  words  in  the  preceding 
line,  'gave  hands'  (to  'give  arms'  being  a  heraldic  term) ;  secondly,  that  Warner,  in 
his  Albion's  England,  p.  282,  ed.  1596,  has,  '  My  hand  shall  neuer  giue  my  heart,  my 
heart  shall  giue  my  hand.'  White  (ed.  i  and  ed.  ii)  adopts  Warburton's  idea.  In  his 
ed.  ii  he  says :  '  This  seems  to  be  the  new  heraldry  Othello  speaks  of ;  but  in  that  case, 
the  passage  was  probably  added  after  the  first  production  of  the  play.' 


220 


THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      [act  hi,  sc.  iv. 


Def.     I  cannot  fpeake  of  this  :  57 

Come,  now  your  promife. 

Oth.     What  promife,  Chucke? 

Def.     I  haue  fent  to  bid  Cajfio  come  fpeake  with  you.  60 

Oth.     I  haue  a  fait  and  forry  Rhewme  offends  me : 
Lend  me  thy  Handkerchiefe. 

Def     Heere  my  Lord.  [327  ^] 

Oth.     That  which  I  gaue  you. 

Def     I  haue  it  not  about  me.  65 

Oth.     Not  ? 

Def.     No  indeed,  my  Lord. 

Oth.     That's  a  fault  :  That  Handkerchiefe 
Did  an  Egyptian  to  my  Mother  giue  :  69 


57,  58.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 

58.  Come,  now~\  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Jen.  Come, 
come,  Qx.  Come  now  Q2Q3,  Han.  Mai. 
oteev.'93,  Var.     Come  now,  Cap.  et  cet. 

60.  I  haue~\  Pve  Pope,  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 

61.  forry]  fullen  Qq,  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
Coll.  Sing.  Ktly. 

Rhewme]rhumeQ\.  rheum  Rowe. 
06.  Not?]  Not.  Qq. 


66-68.  Not  ?.... fault :]  As  one  line, 
Steev.'93,  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,Wh. 
Sta.  Glo.  Rife. 

67.  No  indeed,]  No  faith  Qx. 

68.  That's]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Sing. 
Cam.      Thats  Qq.      That  is  Cap.  et  cet. 

That  Handkerchiefe]  Separate  line, 
Steev.'93,  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh. 
Sta.  Glo.  Del.  Rife. 

69.  ^Egyptian]  ^Egyptian  F2. 


OI.  sorry]  Johnson's  interpretation  of  sullen  of  the  Qq  is  'a  rheum  obstinately 
troublesome.'  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  Perhaps  the  word  is  sudden,  to  which  it  is  altered  in 
the  (MS.).     Fechter  :  Stretching  out  his  hand,  without  looking  at  her. 

04.  Booth  :  Quickly — hoping  to  see  the  one  he  gave  her. 

68.  Handkerchiefe]  Theobald  :  Cinthio  Giraldi  only  says  it  was  the  Moor's  gift 
upon  his  wedding  to  Desdemona ;  that  it  was  most  curiously  wrought  after  the  Moorish 
Fashion,  and  very  dear  both  to  him  and  his  wife,  '  il  qual  pannicello  era  lavorato  alia 
moresca  sottilissimamente,  &  era  carissimo  alia  Donna  &  parimente  al  Moro.'  Booth  : 
All  this  description  of  the  Handkerchief  should  be  told  with  an  air  of  intense  and 
earnest  mystery.  Desdemona  should  listen  in  wonder  and  speak  like  a  frightened 
child.  [This  description,  with  its  witchcraft,  is  among  those  passages  which  Knight 
{Biography,  p.  438)  cites  to  prove  that  Shakespeare  probably  visited  Scotland  in  the 
autumn  of  1 601.  I  cannot  see  that  the  inference  can  be  drawn  from  anything  stronger 
than  that  in  the  information  against  Isobell  Straquhan  for  witchcraft  it  is  averred  that 
she  made  a  charm  out  of  a  bent  penny,  a  clout,  and  a  piece  of  red  wax,  wherewith 
the  face  being  stroked,  love  and  marriage  would  follow. — Ed.] 

68,  etc.  Rymer  (p.  135) :  So  much  ado,  so  much  stress,  so  much  passion  and  repe 
tition  about  an  Handkerchief!     Why  was  not  this  call'd  the  Tragedy  of  the  Handker- 
chief? ....  The  Wardrobe  of  obsolete  Romances,  one  might  think,  were  a  fitter  place 
for  this  Handkerchief  than  that  it,  at  this  time  of  day,  be  worn  on  the  stage,  to  raise 
everywhere  all  this  clutter  and  tunnoil. 

69    Egyptian]    Hunter  (ii,  284) :    By  this,  Shakespeare  may  mean  either  an 


ACT  III,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


221 


She  was  a  Charmer,  and  could  almoft  read  70 

The  thoughts  of  people.     She  told  her,  while  fhe  kept  it, 

'T  would  make  her  Amiable,  and  fubdue  my  Father 

Intirely  to  her  loue  :  But  if  fhe  loft  it, 

Or  made  a  Guift  of  it,  my  Fathers  eye 

Should  hold  her  loathed,  and  his  Spirits  fhould  hunt  7$ 

After  new  Fancies.     She  dying,  gaue  it  me, 

And  bid  me  (when  my  Fate  would  haue  me  WWd) 

To  giue  it  her.     I  did  fo  ;  and  take  heede  on't, 

Make  it  a  Darling,  like  your  precious  eye : 

To  loofe't,  or  giue't  away,  were  fuch  perdition,  80 

As  nothing  elfe  could  match. 

Def.     Is't  poffible  ? 

Oth.     'Tis  true  :  There's  Magicke  in  the  web  of  it : 
A  Sybill  that  had  numbred  in  the  world 
The  Sun  to  courfe,  two  hundred  compaffes,  85 


72.  and fubdue]  fubdue  Yi,  Rowe  +  . 

73.  Repeated  at  the  top  of  the  next  page 
inQ,. 

Intirely]    Q,Q2Ff,    Rowe  +  ,    Jen. 
Steev.'85.     Intierly  Q  .     Entirely  Cap. 

74.  Guift]  gift  QqF3F4. 

75.  loathed]  lothely  Qf.     loathly  Cap. 
Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Sta.  Ktly. 

his]  her  Jen.  (misprint?). 
Spirits]  fpirit  Q'8i,  Wh.  i. 
fliould]  Om.  Pope  +  . 
77.  Wiu'd]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,Wh.  Del.  wiue 
Qq,  Cap.  et  cet. 


78.  onU]  oft  Mai.  Steev.'93,  Var. 

80.  loofe't]  F2,  Rowe  ii,  Pope,  loofe 
QiQ2-  lofe  Q3»  Jen-  Steev.'93,  Var.  Coll. 
Wh.  i,  Sing,  loos' t  FF,  Rowe  i.  lose't 
Theob.  et  cet. 

perdition]  prediction  Q  . 

82.  lit]  Is  it  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 

84.  had]  hath  Han.  ii. 
numbred]  numbered  Q  . 

85.  The... courfe]  The  Sun  to  make  Q  , 
Mai.  Steev.'93,  Var.  Of  the  sun's  course 
Han. 


./Egyptian  properly  so  called,  or  a  Gypsy  or  Bohemian,  as  the  same  people  are  called 
in  many  parts  of  the  continent.  Presents  of  this  kind  from  Gypsies  proper  occur  in 
Italian  Poetry ;  thus  Ariosto :  '  About  her  neck  a  jewel  rich  she  ware,  A  cross  all  set 
with  stones  in  gold  well  tried ;  This  relick  late  a  Boem  pilgrim  bare,  And  gave  her 
father  other  things  beside,'  &c.  But  the  mention  of  '  mummy,'  and  other  points  in  the 
passage,  seem  to  guide  us  to  the  true  Egyptians,  neighbours  of  the  Moors.  Elze  [Sh. 
Jahrbuch,  xi,  299)  calls  attention  to  Maudlin's  description  of  her  '  browder'd  belt,' 
which  'A  Gypsan  lady,  and  a  right  beldame  Wrought  by  moonlight,'  in  Jonson's 
Sad  Shepherd,  II,  i.  Elze  finds  a  noteworthy  similarity  therein  with  this  passage  in 
Othello. 

77.  Wiu'd]  It  is  not  necessary  to  adopt  the  Qq  here.  ■  Wiu'd '  is  in  the  same  con- 
struction as 'loathed,' line  75. — Ed. 

85.  to  course]  Johnson  :  The  expression  is  not  very  infrequent;  we  say,  I  counted 
the  clock  to  strike  four;  so  she  number'd  the  sun  to  course,  to  run,  two  hundred  com* 
passes,  two  hundred  annual  circuits. 


222  THE    TRAGEDIE    OF   OTHELLO     [ACT.  Ill,  SC.  iv. 

In  her  Prophetticke  furie  fow'd  the  Worke :  86 

The  Wormes  were  hallowed,  that  did  breede  the  Silke, 

And  it  was  dyde  in  Mummey,  which  the  Skilfull 

Conferu'd  of  Maidens  hearts. 

Def.     Indeed  ?  Is't  true  ?  90 

Oth,     Moft  veritable,  therefore  looke  too't  well. 

Def.     Then  would  to  Heauen,  that  I  had  neuer  feene't?  92 

86.  fcrufd]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.    /owed  90.  Is't]  is  it  Steev.'85,  Mai. 

Qq.     sew'd  Johns.  91.  todt]  tdt  QqF  F  .    to  it  Steev.'85, 

8j.  hallowed]  hollowed  Q  .     hallow fd  Mai. 

Cap.  et  seq.  92.  to  Heauen~\  to  God  Qq,  Jen.  Dyce, 

88.  dyde]diedQq.  dyedeF7.  dVdY^^.  Sta.  Glo.  Cam.  Rife,  Hucls.  Wh.  ii.     the 
Mummey]  Mommy  Q  .  Heaven  Ff. 

which]  with  QXQ3,  Jen.  feene't  ?]  feene  it.  Qq,  Jen.  Steev. 

89.  Conferu'd']  ConferuesQv]en.  Con-  Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly. 
cerue  Q2.     Conferve  Q  .  feeneU.  Ff.     seen't !  Rowe  et  cet. 

90.  Indeed?]  If aith^.    Indeed,  QjQy 

86.  Prophetticke  furie]  Hunter  (ii,  285) :  There  is  something  more  classical  in 
this  expression  than  is,  perhaps,  anywhere  else  to  be  found  in  these  plays ;  but  the 
phrase  may  have  presented  itself  to  Shakespeare  in  the  writings  of  Sylvester,  where  it 
often  occurs. 

88.  Mummey]  Steevens  :  The  balsamic  liquor  running  from  mummies  was  for- 
merly celebrated  for  its  anti-epileptic  virtues.  This  fanciful  medicine  still  holds  a  place 
in  the  principal  shops  where  drugs  are  sold.  Dyce:  A  preparation  for  magical  pur- 
poses, made  from  dead  bodies.  Steevens's  note  seems  irrelevant.  [I  doubt  if  the  word 
conveyed,  of  necessity,  any  reference  to  Egyptian  mummies ;  that  reference  was  perhaps 
restricted  to  mummia.  Falstaff  refers  to  himself  as  being  turned  by  drowning  into  a 
1  mountain  of  mummy,'  and  we  have  '  Witches'  mummy '  in  Macb.  IV,  i,  23,  which 
see  with  the  notes.  In  Johnson's  Did.  s.  v.  there  is  a  full  account  of  the  medicinal 
preparation,  from  Dr  Hill's  Materia  Medica,  and  in  Latham's  Johnson  a  passage  is 
given  from  Sir  T.  Herbert's  Travels,  &c.  1677,  which  shows  that  that  traveler  not  only 
did  not  associate  'mummy '  with  Egypt,  but  not  even  with  dead  bodies : — '  In  or  near  this 
place  is  a  precious  liquor  or  mummy  growing;  ....  a  moist,  redolent  gum  it  is,  sove- 
reign against  poisons.'  Steevens  cites  from  The  Microcosmos  of  John  Davies  of  Here- 
ford (1603,  p.  77,  ed.  Grosart) :  'That's  Mummey  made  of  the  meere  Hart  of  Love? 
That  Davies  was  well  read  in  Shakespeare's  Sonnets  is  felt  throughout  the  Microcosm, 
but  the  date  of  the  latter  is  rather  too  early  to  permit  the  supposition  that  it  had  been 
influenced  by  Othello. — Ed.] 

92.  Mrs.  Jameson  (ii,  38) :  Desdemona,  whose  soft  credulity,  whose  turn  for  the 
marvellous,  whose  susceptible  imagination  had  first  directed  her  thoughts  and  affections 
to  Othello,  is  precisely  the  woman  to  be  frightened  out  of  her  senses  by  such  a  tale  as 
this,  and  betrayed  by  her  fears  into  a  momentary  tergiversation.  It  is  most  natural  in 
such  a  being,  and  shows  us  that  even  in  the  sweetest  natures  there  can  be  no  complete- 
ness and  consistency  without  moral  energy.  There  is  an  incident  in  the  original  tale 
which  could  not  well  be  transferred  to  the  drama,  but  which  is  very  effective,  and  adds,  I 
think,  to  the  circumstantial  horrors  of  the  story.  Desdemona  does  not  accidentally  drop 
the  handkerchief;  it  is  stolen  from  her  by  Iago's  little  child,  an  infant  of  three  yean 


act  in.  sc.  iv.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  223 

Oth.     Ha?  wherefore?  93 

Def     Why  do  you  fpeake  fo  ftartingly  and  rafh  ? 

Oth.     Is't  loft  ?  Is't  gon  ?  Speak,  is't  out  o'th'way  ?  95 

Def.     Bleffe  vs. 

Oth.     Say  you  ? 

Def.     It  is  not  loft  :  but  what  and  if  it  were  ? 

Oth.     How  ? 

Def.     I  fay  it  is  not  loft.  IOO 

Oth.     Fetcht,  let  me  fee't. 

Def.     Why  fo  I  can  :  but  I  will  not  now : 
This  is  a  tricke  to  put  me  from  my  fuite, 
Pray  you  let  Cajfio  be  receiu'd  againe. 

Oth.     Fetch  me  the  Handkerchiefe,  105 

My  minde  mif-giues. 

94.  flartingly]flaringly  F3FV  Steev.'85,  Mai.     Fetch 7  QqF4  et  cet 
raft]  rq/hly  Qx.  101.  fee't]  fee  it  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Mai. 

95.  Is't... Is't]  Is  it... Is  it  Steev.'85.  Var.  Knt,  Cam. 

is't  out]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sta.     is  it  102.  can:]  Ff.     can  fir,  Qq  et  cet. 

out  Qq  et  cet.  104.  Pray  you]  I  pray  Qq,  Cap.  Jen. 

o'th']o' the  Qq.  oth'Y^  oftheSteev.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Sing.  Ktly, 

96.  ^/^>]Q2Q3Ff,  Rowe +  ,  Cap.  Knt.  Del. 

Heauen  bleffe  QT  et  cet.  105,  106.  One  line,  Qq  et  seq. 

98.  and  if]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  105.  the]  that  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai. 
i,  Jen.  Knt.     an  if  Theob.  ii  et  cet.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly,  Del. 

99.  How?]  Ha.  Qq.  Ha!  Pope  +  ,  106.  mif-giues.]  misgives —  Rowe, 
Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly.  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb.    misgives  me — 

101.  Fetcht]  F2.    Fetcht'  F3.    Fetch  it         Ktly. 

old,  whom  he  trains  or  bribes  to  the  theft.  The  love  of  Desdemona  for  this  child, 
her  little  playfellow, — the  pretty  description  of  her  taking  it  in  her  arms  and  caressing 
it,  while  it  profits  by  its  situation  to  steal  the  handkerchief  from  her  bosom,  are  well 
imagined,  and  beautifully  told ;  and  the  circumstance  of  Iago  employing  his  own  inno- 
cent child  as  the  instrument  of  his  infernal  villainy  adds  a  deeper,  and,  in  truth,  an 
unnecessary  touch  of  the  fiend,  to  his  fiendish  character.  [It  is  so  common  among  the 
critics  to  accuse  Desdemona  of  telling  a  falsehood  here,  that  gratitude  is  due  to  Mrs 
Jameson  for  the  milder  term  '  tergiversation.'  Although  Desdemona  herself  says, 
'where  should  I  lose  the  handkerchief?'  she  did  not  believe  it  to  be  actually  lost,  irre- 
coverably gone ;  it  was  merely  mislaid,  and  a  further  search  would  reward  her  with 
discovery.  If  she  had  not  been  terrified  she  might  have  told  all  this  to  Othello  (and 
we  should  not  have  had  the  tragedy,  which  would  be  a  relief),  but,  as  it  is,  I  think  in 
her  soul  she  believed  she  was  telling  the  truth. — Ed.] 

94.  startingly  and  rash]  Walker  (Cril.  i,  220)  cites  this,  among  others,  as  an 
mstance  of  the  termination  -ly  attached  to  one  adjective  and  affecting  others.  See  also 
Abbott,  §397,  or  Schmidt,  p.  1419. 

105-115.  Booth:  This  little  'bit'  is  difficult  to  act  without  being  tame,  or  too  vio- 
lent. I  have  never  hit  it.  [At  line  1 14,  FECHTER  actually  directs  Othello  to  seize 
Desdemona  violently,  and  raise  his  hand  is  if  to  strike  her ! — Ed.] 


224  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF   OTHELLO      [act  hi,  sc.  iv. 

Dcf.  Come,  come  :  you'l  neuer  meete  a  more  fuffici-  107 
ent  man. 

Oth.     The  Handkerchiefe. 

Def     A  man  that  all  his  time  1 10 

Hath  founded  his  good  Fortunes  on  your  loue ; 
Shar'd  dangers  with  you. 

Oth.     The  Handkerchiefe. 

Dcf.     Infooth,  you  are  too  blame. 

Oth.     Away.  Exit  Othello.         1 1 5 

107.  Come,  come  :]  Separate  line,  Cap.  Hi.  founded  his]  founded  Q. 

Steev.  et  seq.  112-115.  Shared... A way.~\  Two  lines, 

Come... neuer]  Come,  youll  ne'e*  first  ending  sooth,  Ktly. 

Pope  +  .  112.  you.]  you  :  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 

109,  113.   Handkerchiefe.]    handker-  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Del.    you — Steev. 

chief!  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  Ktly,  Cam.  Coll.  '73,   Dyce,    Sta.  Glo.  Ktly,  Cam.   Rife, 

Hi,  Rife,  Huds.  Wh.  ii.    Handkerchief —  Huds.  Wh.  ii. 

Rovve  et  cet.  114.  Infooth]  If "aith  Qt.  Separate  line, 

109,  no.  Handkerchiefe.  Def.  A  man]  Steev.'93. 

handker cher.  Def.  I  pray  talke  me  of  Caf  too]  to  Q3F  • 

sio.  Oth.  The  handkercher.  Def.  A  man  115.  Away.]  Zotms.  Qx. 
QT,  Johns.  Jen.  et  seq. 

109,  1 10.  It  is  easy  to  see  how  the  printer  came  to  omit  the  sentences  given  in  the 
Qx.-Ed. 

109.  When  De  Vigny  makes  his  dashing  attack  on  the  French  Classic  School,  ridi- 
culing its  horror  at  the  word  mouchoir,  which,  under  the  hands  of  the  fastidious  Ducis, 
becomes  a  'bandeau  de  diamants,  que  l'heroine  (as  De  Vigny  says)  voulut  garder  m£me 
au  lit  de  peur  d'etre  vue  en  neglige,'  our  hearts  and  admiration  go  entirely  with  him, 
and  an  almost  instinctive  contempt  arises  for  any  one  who  can  find  in  such  a  word,  as 
*  handkerchief,'  at  such  a  time,  anything  unworthy  of  this  tragic  scene.  But  will  not 
the  curl  of  our  lips  at  Ducis  straighten,  and  even  some  fellow-feeling  for  him  spring 
up,  if  we  imagine  the  word  as  it  is  in  the  Qto,  uttered  by  Othello  with  passionate  vehe- 
mence ?  As  this  word  sounds  to  us,  so  must  mouchoir,  on  the  stage,  have  sounded  to 
Ducis. — Ed. 

1 10.  A  man]  Bodenstedt  (Sh.  Jahrbuch,  ii,  263) :  With  the  same  recklessness 
and  self-will  with  which  Desdemona,  out  of  love  to  Othello,  had  exposed  herself  to 
the  anger  of  her  Father,  she  now  defies  the  anger  of  her  husband  out  of  friendship 
to  Cassio. 

115.  Away]  Fielding:  Nothing  can  be  more  provoking  to  the  human  temper,  nor 
more  dangerous  to  that  cardinal  virtue,  Patience,  than  solicitations  of  extraordinary 
offices  of  kindness  in  behalf  of  those  very  persons  with  whom  we  are  highly  incensed. 
For  this  reason  Shakespeare  hath  artfully  introduced  his  Desdemona  soliciting  favours 
for  Cassio  of  her  husband,  as  the  means  of  inflaming  not  only  his  jealousy,  but  his  rage, 
to  the  highest  pitch  of  madness ;  and  we  find  the  unfortunate  Moor  less  able  to  com- 
mand his  passion  on  this  occasion  than  even  when  he  beheld  his  valued  present  to  his 
wife  in  the  hands  of  his  supposed  rival.  In  fact,  we  regard  these  efforts  as  insults  to 
our  understanding;  and  to  such  the  pride  of  man  is  with  great  difficulty  Irought  to 
submit. —  Tom  Jones,  ix,  3,  quoted  by  Halliwell. 


act  in,  sc.  iv.]  THE  MOORE  OF  VENICE  225 

AZmiL     Is  not  this  man  iealious  ?  1 16 

Def.     I  neu'r  faw  this  before. 
Sure,  there's  fome  wonder  in  this  Handkerchikfe, 
I  am  moft  vnhappy  in  the  loffe  of  it. 

^EmiL     'Tis  not  a  yeare  or  two  fhewes  vs  a  man  :  120 

They  are  all  but  Stomackes,  and  we  all  but  Food, 

They  eate  vs  hungerly,  and  when  they  are  full 

They  belch  vs. 

Enter  Iago,  and  CaJJio. 

Looke  you,  CaJJio  and  my  Husband.  125 

Scene  XL  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  119.  the  loffe  of  it.']  the  loffe.  Qx. 

116.  iealious]  iealous  ox  jealous  Qq  121.  They  are]  They1  r<?  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 
F  F  .  are  all]  are  Rowe  ii,  Pope,  Han. 

117.  neu'r]ne'reQ1..  nere  Q^Q.  never  122.  they  are]  they're  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii, 
F3F4,  Rowe.     ne'er  Pope  et  cet.  Huds. 

118.  Sure]  Sir  Qr  123,  125.  One  line,  Qq  et  seq. 
there's]  ther's  Q2Q3-  124.  Enter...]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Wh.  i. 
Handkerchikfe]  F,.  After  line  119  Qq.     After  line  125  Pope 

119.  lam]  Pm  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii,  Huds.  et  cet.     Enter  Cassio  and  Iago.  Dyce. 

120.  Rymer  (p.  126)  :  As  if  for  the  first  year  or  two  Othello  had  not  been  jealous  ? 
This  Third  Act  begins  in  the  morning,  at  noon  she  drops  the  Handkerchief,  after  dinner 
she  misses  it,  and  then  follows  all  this  outrage  and  horrible  clutter  about  it.  If  we 
believe  a  small  Damosel,  in  the  last  scene  of  this  Act,  this  day  is  effectually  seven  days. 
Our  Poet  is  at  this  plunge,  that  whether  this  Act  contains  the  compass  of  one  day,  of 
seven  days,  or  of  seven  years,  or  of  all  together,  the  repugnance  and  the  absurdity 
would  be  the  same.  For  Othello,  all  the  while,  has  nothing  to  say  or  to  do,  but  what 
loudly  proclaim  him  jealous ;  her  friend  and  confident  Emilia  again  and  again  rounds 
her  in  the  ear  that  the  Man  is  jealous ;  yet  this  Venetian  dame  is  neither  to  see,  nor  to 
hear ;  nor  to  have  any  sense  or  understanding,  nor  to  strike  any  other  note  but  Cassio, 
Cassio.  Steevens  :  This  line  has  no  reference  to  the  duration  of  the  action,  or  to  the 
length  of  time  that  Desdemona  had  been  married.  What  Emilia  says  is  a  sort  of  pro- 
verbial remark,  of  general  application,  where  a  definite  time  is  put  for  an  indefinite. 
Besides,  this  *  year  or  two '  may  refer  to  the  beginning  of  the  acquaintance  and  inti- 
macy between  the  couple.  Pye  (p.  342) :  Emilia's  saying,  '  it  is  not  a  year  or  two 
shews  us  a  man,'  may  be  well  supposed  to  insinuate,  how  then  should  a  month  or  two, 
or  even  a  day  or  two  ? 

121.  White  (ed.  ii)  :  Emilia  means,  They  are  nought  but  stomachs,  and  we  nought 
but  food.  The  obscurity  results  from  an  inversion  of,  They  are  but  all  stomach,  and 
we  but  all  food.  [There  may  be  an  inversion  here,  but  I  do  not  think  that  it  is  the 
inversion  which  White  points  out.  *  All '  does  not  qualify  '  stomachs,'  or  *  food,'  but 
« They '  and  '  we.'  The  meaning  is  that  they,  every  one  of  them,  are  merely  stomachs 
for  which  we,  every  one  of  us,  are  merely  food.  When  White  represents  Shakespeare 
as  making  man  revert  to  the  Gasteropods  or  to  the  Amcebas,  his  admiration  and  exal- 
tation of  our  demi-god  go  one  step  farther  than  mine.  '  We  know  what  we  are,  but 
we  know  not  what  we  may  be,'  as  Ophelia  says,  so  that  I  may  even  yet  be  brought  to 
believe  that  Shakespeare  anticipated  Darwin, — but  not  from  this  passage. — Ed.] 

125.  Booth  :  As  if  glad  to  change  the  subject. 
15 


226  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      [act  hi,  sc.  iv. 

Iago.     There  is  no  other  way  :  'tis  fhe  muft  doo't:  126 

And  loe  the  happineffe  :  go,  and  importune  her. 

Def.  How  now  (good  Caffio)  what's  the  newes  with  [328  a] 
you  ? 

Caffio.     Madam,  my  former  fuite.     I  do  befeech  you,  130 

That  by  your  vertuous  meanes,  I  may  againe 
Exift,  and  be  a  member  of  his  loue, 
Whom  I,  with  all  the  Office  of  my  heart 
Intirely  honour,  I  would  not  be  delayd. 

If  my  offence,  be  of  fuch  mortall  kinde,  135 

That  nor  my  Seruice  pan:,  nor  prefent  Sorrowes, 
Nor  purpos'd  merit  in  futurity, 
Can  ranfome  me  into  his  loue  againe, 
But  to  know  fo,  mufb  be  my  benefit : 

So  fhall  I  cloath  me  in  a  forc'd  content,  140 

And  fhut  my  felfe  vp  in  fome  other  courfe 

126.  dodt]  doe  it  Qq.   ddt  FgF4,  Rowe         Rowe+,  Jen. 

et  seq.  136.  Sorrowes"]  sorrow  Walker. 

131.  I  may  againe]  I  doe  befeech  you  :  140.  cloath]  cloth  Qx,  Cap.    c loathe  F  . 

Q  .  clothe  Johns. 

133.  Office]  duty  Qx,  Johns.  Jen.  Steev.  141.  JJiut... in]  Jhoote... in  Qx,  Johns. 
Mai.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly.  Jen.   shoot  myself  upon  Cap.  Rann.   sh<  ipe 

134.  delay  d]  delayed  QQ2.  delaydeQ^.         myself  upon  Rann  conj.      suit... in  and 
136.  nor  my]  neither  Qx,  Johns.  Steev.         shoot  myself  forth   in   Anon.  conj.    ap. 

Mai.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly.     not  my  Q2Q3Ff,         Cam. 

127.  happinesse]  Hudson:  That  is,  good  hap,  or  lucky  chance ;  referring  to  the 
timely  and  opportune  meeting  with  Desdemona.  Morel  :  C'est  bien  Equivalent  du 
fran<;ais  :  '  Quel  bonheur ' ! 

127.  importune]  Rolfe:  For  the  accent,  see  also  Rom.  df  Jul.  I,  i,  138;  and 
Ham.  I,  iii,  IIO. 

131.  vertuous]  Morel:  *  Vertuous,' puissant,  nous  rappelle  le  sens  primitif  du  fran- 
cais  vertu  *  Vertu  me  done  [donne-moi  force]  vers  cele  gent  hale  (Roland  d  Ronce- 
vaux,  cit£  par  Littr6). 

133.  Office]  Singer:  *  Office'  and  duty  of  the  Qq  are  synonymous.  Thus  Baret 
— '  Dutie,  office,  dutie  of  behaviour  in  honestie  and  reason :  officium. 

136.  Sorrowes]  Another  instance,  according  to  Walker  (Crit.  i,  246),  of  the  inter- 
polated *,■  see  I,  i,  31. 

141.  shut]  Steevens:  That  is,  I  will  put  on  a  constrained  appearance  of  being 
contented  and  shut  myself  up  in  a  different  course  of  life,  no  longer  to  depend  on  my 
own  efforts,  but  to  wait  for  relief  from  the  accidental  hand  of  charity.  See  the  same 
expression,  'shut  up  In  measureless  content,'  Macb.  II,  i,  16.  Mason  prefers  shoot, 
that  is,  to  push  suddenly,  or  forward.  *  Cassio  means  that  he  will  push  forward  into 
some  other  line  of  life  and  seek  his  fortune.'  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  We  formerly  suggested 
that  'And  set  myself  upon  some,'  &c,  may  have  been  the  true  lection;  but  the  (MS.» 
tells  us  to  put  it,  *  And  shift  myself  upon  some  other  course.' 


act  in,  sc.  iv.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  227 

To  Fortunes  Almes.  142 

Def.     Alas  (thrice-gentle  Caffio) 
My  Aduocation  is  not  now  in  Tune ; 

My  Lord,  is  not  my  Lord  ;  nor  fhould  I  know  him,  145 

Were  he  in  Fauour,  as  in  Humour  altered. 
So  helpe  me  euery  fpirit  fanctified, 
As  I  haue  fpoken  for  you  all  my  heft, 
And  flood  within  the  blanke  of  his  difpleafure 
For  my  free  fpeech.     You  muft  awhile  be  patient:  150 

What  I  can  do,  I  will  :  and  more  I  will 
Then  for  my  felfe,  I  dare.     Let  that  fuffice  you. 

Iago.     Is  my  Lord  angry  ? 

dErniL     He  went  hence  but  now : 
And  certainly  in  ftrange  vnquietneffe.  155 

Iago,     Can  he  be  angry  ?  I  haue  feene  the  Cannon 
When  it  hath  blowne  his  Rankes  into  the  Ayre, 
And  like  the  Diuell  from  his  very  Arme 
PufFt  his  owne  Brother  :  And  is  he  angry  ? 

Something  of  moment  then  :  I  will  go  meet  him,  160 

There's  matter  in't  indeed,  if  he  be  angry.  Exit 

Def     I  prythee  do  fo.    Something  fure  of  State, 
Either  from  Venice,  or  fome  vnhatch'd  practife 
Made  demonftrable  heere  in  Cyprus,  to  him, 
Hath  pudled  his  cleare  Spirit  :  and  in  fuch  cafes,  165 

142.  Almes~\  arms  Pope.  Cap. 

143.  thrice-gentle]  thrice  gentile  Q  .  Scene  XII.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 
146.  altered]  altred  QXQ2.     altr'd  Q.  163.  or  fome']  of  some  Johns. 

149.  Jlood~\  floop  Q.  164.  demonftrable  heere~\  here  demonr 

159.  is  he~\  Ff,  Rowe,  Sing.  Wh.  i.    can  strable  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 
he  be  Qq  et  cet.  heere~\  her  Han.  ii  (misprint?). 

161.  Exit.]  Om.  Qq.    After  fo  line  162,  165.  pudled]  pulld  Q  . 

142.  Almes]  Malone  :  That  is,  waiting  patiently  for  whatever  bounty  or  chance 
may  bestow  upon  me.     See  'at  fortune's  alms,'  Lear,  I,  i,  277. 

146.  Fauour]  Johnson:  That  is,  in  look,  in  countenance.     See  I,  Hi,  371. 

149.  blanke]  Johnson  :  Within  the  shot  of  his  anger.  Steevens  :  The  white 
mark  at  which  the  shot  or  arrows  were  aimed. — [Note  on  Ham.  IV,  i,  42.] 

153.  Booth:  With  surprise. 

159.  Brother]  Malone  :  Something  is  suppressed  here.  I  ago  means  to  say  '  and 
his  own  brother  puffed  from  his  side, — and  mean-while  have  seen  him  cool  and  unruf- 
fled? Booth  :  What  is  apparently  omitted  here,  my  Father,  following,  I  presume,  old 
itage  traditions,  a) ways  supplied  by  adding  'yet  he  stood  unmoved.' 

163.  vnhatch'd  practise]  Johnson:  Some  treason  that  has  not  taken  effect. 

165.  pudled]  Rolfe:  Muddied,  disturbed,  or  the  Yankee 'riled.' 


228  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      [act  hi,  sc.  iv. 

Mens  Natures  wrangle  with  inferiour  things,  166 

Though  great  ones  are  their  obie6l.    'Tis  euen  fo. 

For  let  our  finger  ake,  and  it  endues 

Our  other  healthfull  members,  euen  to  a  fenfe 

Of  paine.    Nay,  we  muft  thinke  men  are  not  Gods,  170 

Nor  of  them  looke  for  fuch  obferuancie 

As  fits  the  Bridall.    Befhrew  me  much  JEmilia,, 

I  was  (vnhandfome  Warrior,  as  I  am) 

Arraigning  his  vnkindneffe  with  my  foule : 

But  now  I  finde,  I  had  fuborn'd  the  Witneffe,  175 

167-170.   Though...  Gods']   Lines  end,  171.  obferuancie']  obfertiances Qq,  Mai. 

object, . . . ake, . . .  members, . . .  thinke, . . .  gods,  Steev.'93,  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Glo.  Ktly,  Wh. 

Qq,  Cap.  ii.      obferuance  Ff.      observance  always 

167.  Though]  ThoQQ.      The  Q3<  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

their]  the  Qq.  1 72.  fits]  fit  Mai.  Steev.'93,  Var.  Coll. 

168.  endues]  endures  Q.    induces  Ktly         Sing.  Wh.  Glo.  Ktly. 

conj.  173.  Warrior]  7vrangler  Han.  Warb. 

169.  euen  to  a]  Ff,  Rowe,  Steev.'85,  174,  175-  Arraigning... vnkindnejfe.. 
Knt,  Sta.  with  a  Pope  +  .  Euen  to  that  fuborn1  d]  Arraingning...unkinknejfe.. 
Qq  et  cet.  fubborne  Q  . 

171.  Nor]  Not  Q  . 

167-170.  Walker  [Crit.  iii,  288)  proposed,  for  the  sake  of  ocular  scansion,  a  divis- 
ion of  these  lines  that  happens  to  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  Qq  (which  was  pointed 
out  by  Lettsom),  and  also  of  Capell  (which  was  not  pointed  out  by  Lettsom). 

168.  endues]  Johnson  :  I  believe  it  should  be,  rather,  subdues  our  other  healthful 
members  to  a  sense  of  pain.  Malone  :  The  meaning  is,  this  sensation  so  gets  pos- 
session of,  and  is  so  infused  into,  the  other  members,  as  to  make  them  all  participate 
of  the  same  pain.  Dyce  [Gloss.),  after  quoting  this  paraphrase  of  Malone,  adds, — 
'  rightly  perhaps.' 

171.  obseruancie]  Hudson:  That  is,  watchful,  tender,  and  devout  attention.  So 
in  As  You  Like  It,  V,  ii,  102,  where  Silvius  describes  '  what  'tis  to  love ' :  *  It  is  to  be 
....  All  adoration,  duty,  and  observance,  All  humbleness,  all  patience,'  &c.  Rolfe  : 
Not  used  by  Shakespeare  elsewhere. 

172.  As  fits]  Rolfe:  Another  suggestion  of  '  long  time.' 

172.  the  Bridall]  Delius  :  Used  as  a  noun  by  Shakespeare  only  here. 

173.  Warrior]  Johnson:  Evidently,  unfair  assailant.  Cowden-Clarke :  A 
lovely  reminiscence  of  her  husband's  having  called  her  '  my  fair  warrior '  in  the  joy 
of  his  first  meeting,  on  arrival. 

174.  176.  Arraigning  .  .  .  falsely]  Heard  (Sh.  as  a  Lawyer,  p.  76,  ed.  ii) : 
This  is  clearly  a  reference  to  the  crime  of  subornation  of  perjury,  which  is  an  offence 
at  common  law,  and  consists  in  the  procuring  another  to  take  such  a  false  oath  as  con- 
stitutes perjury  in  the  principal,  or  person  taking  it. 

175.  Witnesse]  Walker  ( Vers.  244  and  246)  gives  this,  among  many  others,  as 
an  instance  of  a  plural,  but  which,  because  it  already  ends  in  s,  lacks  that  additional 
plural  sound.  In  many  of  these  examples  Walker  would  end  the  word  with  an  apos- 
trophe, to  indicate  that  although  it  is  the  singular  both  in  spelling  and  in  pronunciation, 


ACT  III,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


229 


And  he's  Indited  falfely.  176 

ALmil.     Pray  heauen  it  bee 
State  matters,  as  you  thinke,  and  no  Conception, 
Nor  no  Iealious  Toy,  concerning  you. 

Def.     Alas  the  day,  I  neuer  gaue  him  caufe.  180 

jEmiL     But  Iealious  foules  will  not  be  anfwer'd  fo ; 
They  are  not  euer  iealious  for  the  caufe, 
But  iealious,  for  they're  iealious.     It  is  a  Monfter 
Begot  vpon  it  felfe,  borne  on  it  felfe. 

Def,     Heauen  keepe  the  Monfter  from  Othello's  mind.  185 

ALmiL     Lady,  Amen. 

Def.     I  will  go  feeke  him.     Caffio,  walke  heere  about : 
If  I  doe  finde  him  fit,  He  moue  your  fuite, 
And  feeke  to  effecT:  it  to  my  vttermoft.  Exit 

Caf.     I  humbly  thanke  your  Ladyfhip. 


190 


Enter  Bianca. 


Bian.     'Saue  you  (Friend  CaJJio^) 


176.  Indited]  indicted  Coll.  et  seq. 
(except  Del.). 

177—179.  Lines  end,  thinke... toy... you. 
Qq,  Cap.  et  seq. 

178.  State  matters]  State-matters  F  . 
State-matter  Pope. 

no~\  on  Steev.'93  (misprint). 

179.  Nor  no~\  Nor  Rowe  4-. 

179,  181,  183,  212.  Iealious]  FXF2. 

182.  iealious]  Fx. 

the  caufe]  a  cause  Pope-K 

183.  they're]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt,  Sta. 
Dyce  iii,  Huds.     they  are  Qq  et  cet. 

//  is]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sta.     It's 
Pope  + .     tis  Qq  et  cet. 

184.  vpon]  unto  Q  . 


I92 

185.  the]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Knt.     that 
Qq  et  cet. 

Othellds]  OthelVs  F2. 

187.  heere  about]  F2.     here  about  Qq, 
Jen.  Ktly.     hereabout  F3F   et  cet. 

187-lV,  ii.]  Om.  Booth. 

189.  to  effect]  f  effect  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii, 
Huds. 

vttermojl]  utmojl  Q  . 
Exit.]  Exeunt  Defd.  and  Emillia 
(opposite  to  lines  189, 190)  Qq.    Ex.  Des- 
dem.  and  yEmil.  at  one  door;  Cassio,  at 
the  other.  Theob. 

Scene  XIII.  Pope  +  ,  Jen.    Changes  to 
the  street  before  the  Palace.  Theob. 

191.  Enter...]  After  line  192,  Q.    Re- 
enter Cassio  meetincr  Bianca.  Theob. 


yet  it  is,  in  reality,  a  plural.  In  this  present  passage,  however,  if  I  understand  Walker 
aright,  he  would  have  the  full  plural  form,  witnesses,  because  it  seems  '  more  natural.' 
But  I  do  not  think  it  would  be  correct.  The  word  here  is  singular,  not  plural.  There 
was  but  one  '  Witness,'  viz. :  this  solitary  instance  of  discord  in  her  advocation,  and 
this  it  was  that  had  been  '  suborned,'  by  falsely  interpreting,  as  a  lack  of  observance, 
that  which  was  in  truth  due  to  *  something  of  state.' — Ed. 

179,  etc.  Iealious]  White  (ed.  ii) :  It  is  worth  while  to  remark  that  this  word  was 
pronounced  jelyus  in  Shakespeare's  time  It  is  almost  invariably  spelled  jealious,  as 
here  five  times  within  five  lines.  [See  Walker's  note  on  III,  iii,  212,  where  he  is  more 
cautious  lhan  White,  and  restricts  the  peculiarity  of  this  spelling  to  the  First  Polio.     It 


230 


THE   TRAGEDIE   CF  OTHELLO      [act  hi,  sc.  iv. 


CaJJio.     What  make  you  from  home?  [328  b~\ 

How  is't  with  you,  my  moil  faire  Bianca  ? 
Indeed  (fweet  Loue)  I  was  comming  to  your  houfe.  195 

Bian.     And  I  was  going  to  your  Lodging,  CaJJio. 
What?  keepe  a  weeke  away  ?  Seuen  dayes,  and  Nights  ? 
Eight  fcore  eight  houres  ?  And  Louers  abfent  howres 
More  tedious  then  the  Diall,  eight  fcore  times  ? 
Oh  weary  reck'ning.  200 

CaJJio,     Pardon  me,  Bianca  : 
I  haue  this  while  with  leaden  thoughts  beene  prefl, 
But  I  fhall  in  a  more  continuate  time 
Strike  off  this  fcore  of  abfence.    Sweet  Bianca 
Take  me  this  worke  out.  205 

Bianca.  Oh  CaJJio,  whence  came  this  ? 
This  is  fome  Token  from  a  newer  Friend, 
To  the  felt- Abfence  :  now  I  feele  a  Caufe  :  208 


193.  make]  makes  F4,  Rowe+,  Var. 
Huds. 

194.  is't]  is  it  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 

195.  Indeed]  Q2Q3Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt. 
Ifaith  Qt  et  cet. 

comming]  going  Q  . 
houfe]  lodging  Cap.  (misprint  ?) 
198.  Louers]   Qq.     Loves   Ff,  Rowe. 
lover's  Pope,  Han.    lovers'  Theob.  et  cet. 
200.   Oh]  No  Qx. 

reckoning]  reckoning  QXQ2,  Jen.  et 
seq.     reckning  Q  . 

202.  leaden]  laden  Qt. 


203.  continuate  time]  conuenient  time 
Qx,  Pope  + ,  Cap.  Jen.  Coll.  iii.  continuate  ; 
of  time,  Q3. 

204.  Giving  her  Desdemona's  hand- 
kerchief. Rowe  et  seq. 

206.  Oh]  Om.  Han. 

207.  a]  Om.  Johns,  (misprint). 

207,  208.  Friend,... now]  Ff.  friend, 
To  the  felt  abfence,  now  Qx.  friend  To 
the  felt  abfence,  now  Q2Q3-  friend ;  To 
the  felt-absence,  now  Rowe,  Jen.  friend . 
Of  thy  felt  absence,  now  Pope-f .  fnend. 
To  the  fell  absence  now  Cap.  et  cet.  (subs.). 


is  almost  uniformly  Jealous  in  the  Qq.  See  Textual  Notes  in  this  scene,  lines  31,  2>Z* 
and  116. — Ed.] 

193.  make]  Collier  (eds.  i  and  ii) :  A  Saxon  idiom,  which  Malone  destroyed  by 
printing  makes.     [See  Text.  Notes.] 

195.  I  was]  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  202)  cites  this  instance,  with  others,  as  a  proof  that 
/  was,  from  its  position  in  the  line,  must  have  been  pronounced  as  one  syllable,  in 
whatever  manner  the  contraction  was  effected.     See  also  Ham.  IV,  v,  14. 

197.  weeke]  Hudson  :  It  would  seem  by  this  that  seven  days  at  least  have  elapsed 
since  Cassio  was  cashiered ;  perhaps  much  more,  as  the  '  leaden  thoughts '  may  have 
been  kept  off  for  some  time  by  the  thoughts  of  Desdemona's  promise  of  intercession, 
and  brought  on  again  by  the  unexpected  delay. 

203.  continuate]  Johnson  :  That  is,  less  interrupted,  time  which  I  can  call  more 
my  own. 

204.  score]  Delius  finds  here  a  punning  allusion  to  Bianca's  *  eight  score' 

205.  Take  .  .  .  out]  See  'coppied'  line  219,  and  III,  iii,  344. 


ACT  III,  SC.  iv.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


231 


Is't  come  to  this  ?    Well,  well. 

Cajfio.     Go  too,  woman  : 
Throw  your  vilde  geffes  in  the  Diuels  teeth, 
From  whence  you  haue  them.     You  are  iealious  now, 
That  this  is  from  fome  Miftris,  fome  remembrance; 
No,  in  good  troth  Bianca. 

Bian.     Why,  who's  is  it  ? 

CaJJio.     I  know  not  neither : 
I  found  it  in  my  Chamber, 
I  like  the  worke  well  ;  Ere  it  be  demanded 
(As  like  enough  it  will)  I  would  haue  it  coppied : 
Take  it,  and  doo't,  and  leaue  me  for  this  time. 

Bian.     Leaue  you  ?  Wherefore  ? 

CaJJio.     I  do  attend  heere  on  the  Generall, 
And  thinke  it  no  addition  nor  my  wifh 
To  haue  him  fee  me  woman'd. 

Bian.     Why,  I  ptay  you  ? 

CaJJio.     Not  that  I  loue  you  not. 

Bian.     But  that  you  do  not  loue  me. 
I  pray  you  bring  me  on  the  way  a  little, 
And  fay,  if  I  fhall  fee  you  foone  at  night  ? 


210 


215 


220 


22; 


229 


209.  ZfV]  Is  it  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll. 
Wh.  i. 

Well,  well.']  Om.  Qx.     Well,  well, 
well—  Ktly. 

210.  Go  too,  woman  :]  Go  to  woman, 
Qq.  Well,  go  to,  woman  ;  Han.  Woman, 
go  to!  Cap.  Steev.'93. 

211.  vilde gejfes]  vile  ghejfes  QxQa.  vile 
^uejfes  Q3. 

212.  them]  'em  Cap. 

214.  in  good  troth]  by  my  faith  Qx,  Cam. 
in  good  truth  Johns. 

215.  who's]  whofe  Q2Q3F3F4. 


216,  217.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 

216.  neither :]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Knt, 
Dyce,  Sta.  Del.    fweete,  Qq  et  cet. 

219.  I  would]  Ff,  Rowe.  Pde  Qq  et 
cet. 

223.  nor  my]  nor  do  I]  Quincy  (MS). 

224.  him]  h  m  F2. 

225.  226.  Om.  Qx. 
225.  ptay]  Fx. 

227.  But.. .me]  Nor  that  you  love  me. 
Han. 

229.  night?]  night.  Qq. 


221.  Wherefore]  Walker  ( Vers.  112):  With  the  stronger  accent  on  the  latter 
syllable. 

223.  addition]  Rolfe  :  That  is,  credit. 

224.  woman'd]  Abbott,  §  294:  That  is,  accompanied  by  a  woman. 

229.  soone  at]  White  (ed.  i,  note  on  Merry  Wives,  I,  iv,  8) :  This  plrase  was 
used  with  a  meaning  which  it  is  not  very  easy  to  express.  It  may,  perhaps,  be  taken 
to  signify  surely,  or  without  let  or  hindrance,  which  is,  probably,  the  radical  meaning 
of  'soon.'  See  Richardon's  Diet.  Marston  has  two  instances  of  it, — 'O  wee  will 
mount  in  triumph :  soone  at  night  He  set  his  head  up.' — Antonio  and  Mellida,  Part  I, 


232  THE   TR AGED  IE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  iv,  sc  i. 

CaJJio.     'Tis  but  a  little  way  that  I  can  bring  you,  230 

For  I  attend  heere  :  But  He  fee  you  foone. 

Bian.     'Tis  very  good  :  I  muft  be  circumftanc'd. 

Exeunt  omnes.  233 


A6lus  Quartus.    Scena  Prima. 

Enter  Othello,  and  Iago. 

Iago.  Will  you  thinke  fo? 

Oth.  Thinke  fo,  Iago} 

Iago.  What,  to  kiffe  in  priuate  ?  5 

Oth.  An  vnauthoriz'd  kiffe  ? 

233.  Exeunt...]  Exeunt.  Qq.  Qq. 

1.  Actus...]  Actus.  4.  Qj.     Actus  4.  3-52«  Om.  Fechter. 

Sccena  1.  Q2Q3  (Scaena  Q3).  3-5.  Will...  What]  One  line,  Cap.  et 

A  Room  of  State.  Rowe.  A  Court  before  seq. 

the  Palace.  Theob.     An  open  place,  be-  4.  Iago  ?~\  Iago.  Qq. 

fore  the  Castle.  Steev.  6.  kiffe  ?~\  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt.   kijfe.  Qq, 

2.  Enter...]    Enter  Iago  and  Othello.  Johns,  et  cet. 

Act  III.  '  Gentlemen,  as  yet  I  can  but  thanke  you ;  but  I  must  bee  trusted  for  my 
ordinarie  soone  at  night.' — What  You  Will,  V,  i.  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  About.  Schmidt: 
This  very  night,  so  early  as  to-day  in  the  evening. 

231.  soone]  Cassio  here  uses  this  word  in  the  sense  of  nightfall,  an  acceptation  to 
which  Arrowsmith  (p.  7)  first,  as  far  as  I  know,  called  attention  by  the  following 
quotation  from  Gil's  Logonomia  Anglica,  ed.  161 9: — 'Quickly  cito,  sooner  citior  aut 
citius,  soonest  citissimus  aut  citissime,  nam  '  soon '  hodie  apud  plurimos  significat  ad 
primam  vesperam,  olim  cito.'  Whether  or  not  this  acceptation  of  '  soon '  lies  perdu  in 
the  preceding  phrase,  '  soon  at  night,'  I  do  not  feel  competent  to  say,  but  I  suspect 
that  it  does. — Ed. 

232.  'Tis  very  good]  Deighton  :  Said  with  bitterness. 

232.  circumstanc'd]  Mason  :  I  must  give  way  to  circumstances. 

3-6.  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  288) :  Arrange,  perhaps, — Will  you  think  so?  |  Think  so, 
Iago  ?  What,  to  kiss  in  private  ?  [  An  unauth6riz'd  kiss.  Lettsom  [in  a  foot-note]  : 
Walker,  intentionally  or  otherwise,  has  placed  a  full  stop  after  kiss.  So  the  Qq,  I 
believe,  and  Dyce ;  the  Ft  has  a  note  of  interrogation.  [See  Text.  Notes.]  Are  these 
short  speeches  properly  distributed  ?  Iago  seems  to  have  been  pretending  that,  if 
Othello  had  caught  Cassio  kissing  Desdemona,  that  would  have  been  no  proof  of  guilt 
in  the  lady  and  her  friend ;  from  this  Othello  seems  to  have  dissented.  Qu., — '  Thinks 
so,  Iago !  what,  to  kiss  in  private  !  |  An  unauthoriz'd  kiss  ! '  Deighton  is  inclined  to 
think  that  lines  3  and  5  should  be  also  given  to  Othello,  and  that  Iago  first  speaks  at 
line  7. 

6.  vnauthoriz'd]  For  the  accent,  '  unauth6riz'd,'  see  Walker  (  Vers.  Art.  xxxvii, 
p.  194)  or  Abbott,  §491. 


act  iv,  sc.  I]  THE  MOORE   OF  VENICE  233 

Iago.     Or  to  be  naked  with  her  Friend  in  bed,  7 

An  houre,  or  more,  not  meaning  any  harme  / 

Oth.     Naked  in  bed  {Iago)  and  not  meane  harme  ? 
It  is  hypocrifie  againft  the  Diuell :  IO 

They  that  meane  vertuoufly,  and  yet  do  fo, 
The  Diuell  their  vertue  tempts,  and  they  tempt  Heauen. 

Iago.     If  they  do  nothing,  'tis  a  Veniall  flip  : 
But  if  I  giue  my  wife  a  Handkerchiefe. 

Oth.     What  then  ?  1 5 

Iago.     Why  then  'tis  hers  (my  Lord)  and  being  hers, 
She  may  (I  thinke)  beftow't  on  any  man. 

Oth.     She  is  Protectreffe  of  her  honor  too  : 
May  fhe  giue  that?  19 

7.  Friend]  Friends  Ff.  Sing.  Sta.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Del.     So  thy  Qq 

7,  9.  in  bed]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Knt,         et  cet. 

Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  Cam.  Coll.  in,  Wh.  ii.  14.  But  if  I]  But  I¥^A. 

abed  Qq  et  cet.  14,  22.  Handkerchiefe.]  handkercher. 

8.  harme  ?]  harme.  Qx.  Qx.    Handkerchiffe.  F  .    handkerchief — 

12.  tempts ;  and]    tempts  not ;  Warb.         Rowe  et  seq. 

Han.  18.  Protectreffe]  proprietor  Warb.  conj. 

13.  If  they]  Ff,   Rowe  +  ,  Knt,  Coll.         Han.  propertied 'Warb.  proprietress Cap. 

too:]  to,  Qt. 

7  and  9.  naked]  Dyce,  in  both  his  Second  and  his  Third  Edition,  prints  these 
words  with  an  accent,  thus  :  '  naked.'  I  wish  I  knew  why ;  especially  since  a  similar 
forethought  for  heedless  readers  of  this  word  is  not  extended  by  Dyce  elsewhere ;  after 
having  learned  to  lean  on  our  accented  /s,  we  are  liable  to  read,  in  his  edition,  that 
Emilia  wishes  rascals  to  be  lashed  'nak'd  through  the  world,'  and  that  Othello  threatens 
Gratiano  that  he  will  assault  him  •  nak'd  as  he  was.' — Ed. 

10.  Diuell]  Johnson  :  This  means,  hypocrisy  to  cheat  the  devil.  As  common  hypo- 
crites cheat  men  by  seeming  good,  and  yet  living  wickedly,  these  men  would  cheat  the 
devil,  by  giving  him  flattering  hopes,  and  at  last  avoiding  the  crime  which  he  thinks 
them  ready  to  commit.  Rymer  (p.  128) :  At  this  gross  rate  of  trifling,  our  General 
and  his  Auncient  March  on  most  heroically ;  till  the  jealous  Booby  has  his  Brains 
turn'd ;  and  falls  in  a  Trance.  Would  any  imagine  this  to  be  the  Language  of  Vene- 
tians, of  Souldiers,  and  mighty  Captains  ?  no  Bartholomew  Droll  cou'd  subsist  upon 
such  trash.  [According  to  Allibone  (Diet.),  Pope  considered  Rymer,  '  on  the  whole, 
one  of  the  best  critics  we  ever  had ' ;  Dryden  and  Sir  Walter  Scott  quote  him  with 
respect ;  Dr  Johnson  was  disgusted  at  his  '  ferocity ' ;  Sergeant  Talfourd  praises  his 
acuteness  at  the  expense  of  his  judgement,  and  Lord  Macaulay  deems  him  •  the  worst 
critic  that  ever  lived.' — Ed.] 

12.  Heauen]  Henley;  The  true  key  to  the  explanation  of  this  passage  may  be 
found  in  St.  Matthew,  iv,  7.  The  poet's  idea  is,  that  the  devil  tempts  their  virtues 
by  stirring  up  their  passions,  and  they  tempt  heaven  by  placing  themselves  in  such 
a  situation  as  makes  it  scarcely  possible  to  avoid  falling,  by  the  gratification  of 
them. 


234  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  iv,  sc.  i. 

Iago,     Her  honor  is  an  Effence  that's  not  feene,  [329  a~\ 

They  haue  it  very  oft,  that  haue  it  not.  21 

But  for  the  Handkerchiefe. 

OtJie.     By  heauen,  I  would  moil  gladly  haue  forgot  it : 
Thou  faidft  (oh,  it  comes  ore  my  memorie, 

As  doth  the  Rauen  o're  the  infectious  houfe :  25 

Boading  to  all)  he  had  my  Handkerchiefe. 

Iago,     I  :  what  of  that  ? 

Othe.     That's  not  fo  good  now. 

lag.  What  if  I  had  faid,  I  had  feene  him  do  you  wrongf 
Or  heard  him  fay  (as  Knaues  be  fuch  abroad,  30 

Who  hauing  by  their  owne  importunate  fuit, 
Or  voluntary  dotage  of  fome  Miftris,  32 

25.  infectious']  Ff, Rowe, Cap.  Knt, Sta.  27-29.  I...  What]  As  one  line,  Dyce, 
Del.     infected  Qq  et  cet.  Glo.  Cam.  Huds.  Rife,  Wh.  ii. 

26.  all)  he]  Ff.  all.)  He  Qq.  all,  he  29.  had  faid,  I  had]  said,  I'' ad  Pope, 
Rowe.    ill, — he  Pope  ii,  Theob.Warb.   all,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns,     said,  I  had  Han. 

— he  Han.  et  cet.  30.  heard]  heare  F2.    hear  FF. 

Handkerchiefe]     hankercher    Qx.  fay  [as]  say  ?  as  Han. 

hankerchief  Warb.  32.  Or]  Or  by  the  Qf. 

23.  forgot]  De  Vigny  :  11  est  bien  beau,  a  mon  avis,  qu'Othello  ait  oubli£  cette 
circonstance,  legere  en  apparence,  et  qu'il  faut  lui  rappeler  souvent.  Cela  diminuera 
beaucoup  le  reproche  que  Ton  fait  a  Shakespeare  d'avoir  construit  toute  1' intrigue  sur 
un  fondement  aussi  peu  solide  que  le  mouchoir  perdu. 

25.  Rauen]  Harting  (p.  99) :  Go  where  we  will  over  the  face  of  the  wide  world, 
the  hoarse  croak  of  the  raven  is  still  to  be  heard.  He  was  seen  perched  on  the  bare 
rocks,  looking  over  the  dreary  snows  of  the  highest  points  visited  in  Arctic  expeditions 
Under  the  burning  sun  of  the  equator  he  enjoys  his  feast  of  carrion.  He  was  discov- 
ered in  the  islands  of  the  Pacific  by  Captain  Cook ;  and  in  the  lowest  Antarctic  regions 
travellers  have  found  him  pursuing  his  cautious  predatory  life,  just  as  in  England.  From 
the  earliest  times,  with  his  deep  and  solemn  voice  he  has  always  commanded  attention, 
and  in  his  croakings  the  superstitious  have  found  something  unearthly  and  ominous.  By 
the  Romans  he  was  consecrated  to  Apollo  and  regarded  as  a  prophet  of  good  or  of  evil. 
Through  a  long  course  of  centuries  this  character  has  clung  to  him ;  and  even  at  this 
day  there  are  many  who  believe  that  the  raven's  croak  predicts  a  death.  No  wonder 
then  that  Shakespeare  has  used  thfs  widespread  belief,  and  has  introduced  the  raven 
into  many  of  the  solemn  passages  of  his  Plays.  Malone  quotes  these  fine  lines  of 
Marlowe,  Jew  of  Malta,  II,  i,  1 :  •  Thus,  like  the  sad  presaging  raven,  that  tolls  The 
sick  man's  passport  in  her  hollow  beak,  And  in  the  shadow  of  the  silent  night  Doth 
shake  contagion  from  her  sable  wings.' 

27.  Purnell  :  Iago  would  attach  no  importance  to  that.  Othello  says  that  that  is 
unlike  his  usual  wisdom. 

28.  29.  That's  .  .  .  wrong]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  288) :  Arrange,  perhaps, — That's 
not  so  good  now.     What  if  I  had  said  |  I  had  seen  him  do  you  wrong  ?  | 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


235 


Conuinced  or  fupplyM  them,  cannot  chufe  33 

But  they  muft  blab.) 

Oik.     Hath  he  faid  any  thing  ?  35 

Iago.     He  hath  (my  Lord)  but  be  you  well  affur'd, 

No  more  then  he'le  vn-fweare. 

Oik.     What  hath  he  faid  ? 

« 

Iago.     Why,  that  he  did  :  I  know  not  what  he  did. 

Otke.     What?  What?  40 

Iago.     Lye. 

Oik.     With  her  ? 

Iago.     With  her  ?  On  her  :  what  you  will. 

Otke.     Lye  with  her  f  lye  on  her  ?  We  fay  lye  on  her, 
when  they  be-lye-her.      Lye  with  her  :  that's  fullfome  :  45 

Handkerchiefe  :  Confeflions  :  Handkerchiefe.     To  con- 


33.  Conuinced or]Coniured or Q2.  Con- 
jured or  Q  .  convinced  or  Theob.  Han. 
Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  convincd  her  and 
Ktly. 

fuppl/d  ]Ff,Wh.  suppled Theob. 
Han.Warb.  Johns.  supp/'dCzp.  fupplied 
Qq  et  cet. 

cannot  ]  they  cannot  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns,  then  cannot  Han.  straight  cannot 
Cap. 

34.  blab.)]  blab.  Q,,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
Steev.'85,  Del.  blab:  Cap.  blab — Jen. 
Mai.  et  seq. 

39.  Why]  Q2Q3Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Cap.  Steev. 
85,  Knt.     Faith  Qx  et  cet. 

he...  did. ,]  he  did  I  know  not  what; 
he  did.  Rann. 

he  did :  F\  Ff.   he  did— I  Qq  et  cet. 

40.  What  ?  What  ?]  But  what  ?  Qx,  Jen. 
What?  Q2Q3. 

41.  Lye.~\  Lye —  Rowe  et  seq. 


43.  her?  On  her ;]  her,  on  her,  Qq. 
her  ?  on  her —  Rowe,  Pope,  her;  on  her — 
Theob.  Warb.  Johns,  her  !  on  her —  Han. 
her,  on  her —  Jen.  her  ; — on  her  ; —  Knt, 
Sta.     her,  on  her ;  Cap.  et  cet. 

will.]  will —  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

44.  45.  We. ..be-lye-her]  Om.  Pope, 
Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

45.  be-lye-her.']  bely  her ;  Qq,  Cap. 
be-lye  her  FF. 

her :  that's]  her,  Zouns,  that's  Q  . 
her !  Zouns,  that's  Jen.  Cam. 

46.  Handkerchiefe : Confessions  :  Hand- 
kerchiefe.] handkerchers,  ConfeJ/ion,  han- 
kerchers.  Qx.  handkerchiefs,  confefjion, 
handkerchiefs  Q2Q,-  handkerchief- — con- 
fessions— handkerchief — handkerchief — 
Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 

46-52.  To  confeffe...diuell]  Om.  Qx. 
46-48. To confeffe...confeffe]  Om.  Pope, 
Han. 


33.  Conuinced  or  supply'd]  Theobald  :  I  read  •  convinced  or  suppled?  and  the 
meaning  is,  there  are  some  such  long-tongued  knaves  in  the  world,  who,  if  they  through 
(he  force  of  importunity  extort  a  favour  from  their  mistress,  or  if  through  her  own  fond- 
ness they  make  her  pliant  to  their  desires,  cannot  help  boasting  of  their  success.  To 
convince,  here,  is  not,  as  in  the  common  acceptation,  to  make  sensible  of  the  truth  of 
anything  by  reasons  and  arguments ;  but  to  '  overcome,  get  the  better  of  &c.  Jennens  : 
I  see  no  reason  for  this  alteration ;  Iago  is  here  describing  two  sorts  of  gallants ;  one 
who  by  their  importunities  have  convinced,  or  overcome,  their  mistresses ;  the  other,  who, 
when  their  mistresses  voluntarily  doated  on  them,  have  supplied  them  with  the  effects  of 
love.    Steevens  :  •  Supplied '  is  certainly  the  true  reading.    See  Meas.  for  Meas.  V,  i,  2 1 2. 

44-52.  Here,  as  in  Lear,  IV,  vi,  127,  the  highest  passion  of  all,  .js  AsroTT  (§511) 
says,  is  expressed  in  prose      Compare  lines  198  et  seq.  of  this  Scene. 


236  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  iv,  sc.  L 

feffe,  and  be  hangM  for  his  labour.     Firft,  to  be  hang'd,  47 

and  then  to  confeffe  :  I  tremble  at  it.  Nature  would  not 
inueft  her  felfe  in  fuch  fhadowing  paffion,  without  fome 
Iuftruction.     It  is  not  words  tha/  fhakes  me  thus,  (pim)  50 

47.  and  be  hang'd]  and  be  hangea  Q  ,         Warb. 

Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Dyce,  Sta.  50.  Iujlruction]  Ft.    induction  Warb. 

48.  then  to  confeffe  :"]  then — to  confess  !         Han.  Cap. 

Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  not]  no  Rowe  ii. 

49.  Jhadowing~\  shuddering  CoW..  (MS).  J1iakes~\  QqFf,  Cap.  Cam.  Del.  shake 
paJfion\  Om.  Pope,  Theob.  Han.         Rowe  et  cet. 

46-52.  To  .  .  .  diuell]  Pope:  No  hint  of  this  trash  in  the  first  edition.  Malone  : 
See  Marlowe's  Jew  of  Malta,  IV,  i :  '  Blame  not  us,  but  the  proverb, — Confess  and  be 
hanged.'  Halliwell  :  Again  in  Shirley's  Love  Tricks  [IV,  vi]  :  Ruf  Did  you  hear 
him  confess  it?  Bub.  Here's  right  confess  and  be  hanged  now.'  Walker  {Crit.  iii, 
289)  :  In  the  confusion  of  Othello's  mind,  '  handkerchief,'  from  the  sound  and  its  com- 
ing in  connection  with  '  confessions,'  suggests  the  idea  of  hanging. 

50.  Instruction]  Warburton:  The  starts  and  broken  reflections  in  this  speech 
have  something  very  terrible,  and  show  the  mind  of  the  speaker  to  be  in  inexpressible 
agonies.  But  the  words  we  are  upon  have  a  sublime  in  them  that  can  never  be  enough 
admired.  The  ridiculous  blunder  of  writing  *  instruction  '  for  induction  (for  so  it  should 
be  read)  has,  indeed,  sunk  it  into  arrant  nonsense.  Othello  is  just  going  to  fall  into  a 
swoon ;  and,  as  is  common  for  people  in  that  circumstance,  feels  an  unusual  mist  and 
darkness,  accompanied  with  horror,  coming  upon  him.  This,  with  vast  sublimity  of 
thought,  is  compared  to  the  season  of  the  sun's  eclipse,  at  which  time  the  earth  becomes 
shadowed  by  the  induction  or  bringing  over  of  the  moon  between  it  and  the  sun.  This 
being  the  allusion,  the  reasoning  stands  thus,  My  nature  could  never  be  thus  overshad- 
owed, and  falling,  as  it  were,  into  dissolution  for  no  cause.  There  must  be  an  induc- 
tion of  something;  there  must  be  a  real  cause.  My  jealousy  cannot  be  merely  imagi- 
nary. Ideas,  words  only,  could  not  shake  me  thus,  and  raise  all  this  disorder.  My 
jealousy  must  be  grounded,  therefore,  on  matter  of  fact.  This  word  is  used  in  this 
sense  in  Rich.  Ill :  IV,  iv,  5.  Johnson  :  This  is  a  noble  conjecture,  and,  whether 
right  or  wrong,  does  honour  to  its  author.  Yet  I  am  in  doubt  whether  there  is  any 
necessity  of  emendation.  There  has  always  prevailed  in  the  world  an  opinion  that, 
when  any  great  calamity  happens  at  a  distance,  notice  is  given  of  it  to  the  sufferer  by 
some  dejection  or  perturbation  of  mind,  of  which  he  discovers  no  external  cause.  This 
is  ascribed  to  that  general  communication  of  one  part  of  the  universe  with  another, 
which  is  called  sympathy  and  antipathy;  or  to  the  secret  monition,  instruction,  and 
influence  of  a  Superior  Being,  which  superintends  the  order  of  nature  and  of  life. 
Othello  says,  Nature  could  not  invest  herself  in  such  shadowing  passion  without 
instruction.  It  is  not  words  that  shake  me  thus.  This  passion  which  spreads  its 
clouds  over  me  is  the  effect  of  some  agency,  more  than  the  operation  of  words ;  it  is 
one  of  those  notices  which  men  have  of  unseen  calamities.  Heath  (p.  569) :  Othello 
feels  all  his  faculties  failing  him  on  the  sudden,  and  a  cloudy  or  misty  darkness  creeping 
very  fast  upon  him.  This  circumstance  suggests  to  him  the  thought  that  his  very  nature, 
which  sympathizes  with  him  in  his  present  agony,  must  have  received  some  secret  mys- 
terious instruction,  intimation,  or  instinctive  knowledge  of  the  reality  of  that  calamity 
which  so  deeply  oppresses  him,  otherwise  she  would  never  have  spontaneously  invested 


act  iv,  sc.  i.]  THE  MOORE   OF    VENICE  237 

Nofes,  Eares,  and  Lippes  :  is't  poffible.     Confefle?  Hand-  51 

kerchiefe  ?  0  diuell.  Falls  in  a  Traunce. 

Iago.     Worke  on, 
My  Medicine  workes.    Thus  credulous  Fooles  are  caught, 
And  many  worthy,  and  chaft  Dames  euen  thus,  55 

(All  guiltleffe)meete  reproach  :  what  hoa  ?  My  Lord? 
My  Lord,  I  fay  :  Othello. 

Enter  Cajfio. 
How  now  CvJJio  ? 

Caf.     What's  the  matter?  60 

51.  poffible!\  pofsible  ?  QaQ3-  possible!  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  on  my  medicine, worke; 
Rowe.  Qq.  on,  My  medicine,  work  !  Theob.  et  cet. 

51,52.  Confejfe  ?  Hand  kerchiefe  ?]  Con-  55, 56.  Dames  ...guiltleJJ'e)']  dames,  euen 

/ess/ — Handkerchief ! —  Rowe.  thus  all  guiltleffe,  Qx. 

52.  Falls...]  He  fals  downe.  Qt.  Falles  57.  Othello.]  Othello,—  Qq,  Theob. 
...trance.  Q2Q3FV  Johns. 

53-59.  Prose,  Qq.  58.  Enter...]  After  line  59,  Qq. 

53»  54*  One  line,  Cap.  Scene  II.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

on,   My    Medicine    workes .]    Ff,  60.  What's]   What  is  Steev.'93,  Var. 

herself  in  that  horrid  darkness  which  he  now  felt  overwhelming  him.  Sir  J.  Rey- 
nolds :  Othello  alludes  only  to  Cassio's  dream,  which  had  been  invented  and  told  him 
by  Iago.  When  many  confused  and  very  interesting  ideas  pour  in  upon  the  mind  all 
at  once,  and  with  such  rapidity  that  it  has  not  time  to  shape  or  digest  them,  if  it  does 
not  relieve  itself  by  tears  (which  we  know  it  often  does,  whether  for  joy  or  grief)  it 
produces  stupefaction  and  fainting.  Othello,  in  broken  sentences  and  single  words,  all 
of  which  have  a  reference  to  the  cause  of  his  jealousy,  shows  that  all  the  proofs  are 
present  at  once  to  his  mind,  which  so  overpowers  it  that  he  falls  into  a  trance,  the  nat- 
ural consequence.  Malone  :  Induction,  in  Shakespeare's  time,  meant  introduction  or 
prelude,  and  at  no  time  signified  bringing  over,  as  Warburton  interprets  it. 

50.  that  shakes]  See  I,  iii,  312. 

51.  Lippes]  Steevens  :  Othello  is  imagining  to  himself  the  familiarities  which  he 
supposes  to  have  passed  between  Cassio  and  his  wife.  If  this  be  not  the  meaning,  we 
must  suppose  he  is  meditating  a  cruel  punishment  for  the  guilty  lovers. 

53.  Fechter  here  begins  his  Act  IV.  Othello  and  Iago  discovered.  Othello  is 
stretched,  unconscious,  on  the  divan.  Iago  behind,  contemplating  him  with  a  diabol- 
ical sneer. 

54.  workes]  An  interpolated  s,  according  to  Walker.     See  I,  i,  31. 

57-200.  Salvini  justifies  his  omission  of  this  portion  of  the  scene  on  the  ground 
that  it  is  not  in  accord  with  Othello's  character.  '  Is  it  to  be  imagined,'  he  asks,  '  that 
a  man  of  the  Moor's  haughty  and  violent  temper  could  command  himself  during  the 
recital  of  his  dishonour  from  the  lips  of  his  wronger  ?  Would  you  not  suppose  that  he 
would  spring  like  a  tiger  on  Cassio  and  tear  him  to  pieces  ?  To  be  sure,  Cassio  would 
gain  enough  time  to  clear  up  the  misunderstanding,  and  the  Tragedy  would  fall  through. 
Hence,  either  this  scene  must  be  retained  to  the  injury  of  Othello's  character,  or  it  must 
be  omitted.'  The  gap  in  the  story  Salvini  considers  as  filled  by  Othello's  assertion  in 
the  last  scene,  that  he  had  seen  the  Handkerchief  in  Cassio's  hand. 


238 


THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  iv,  sc.  l 


Iago.     My  Lord  is  falne  into  an  Epilepfie,  61 

This  is  his  fecond  Fit  :  he  had  one  yefterday. 

Caf.     Rub  him  about  the  Temples. 

Iago,     The  Lethargie  muft  haue  his  quyet  courfe : 
If  not,  he  foames  at  mouth  :  and  by  and  by  65 

Breakes  out  to  fauage  madneffe.     Looke,  he  ftirres  .* 
Do  you  withdraw  your  felfe  a  little  while, 
He  will  recouer  ftraight  :  when  he  is  gone, 
I  would  on  great  occafion,  fpeake  with  you. 
How  is  it  Generall  ?  Haue  you  not  hurt  your  head  ?  70 

Othe.     Doft  thou  mocke  me  ? 

Iago.     I  mocke  you  not,  by  Heauen: 
Would  you  would  beare  your  Fortune  like  a  Man. 

Othe.     A  Horned  man's  a  Monfter,  and  a  Beaft. 

Iago.     Trier's  many  a  Beaft  then  in  a  populous  Citty,  75 

And  many  a  ciuill  Monfter. 

Othe.     Did  he  confeffe  it  ? 

Iago.     Good  Sir,  be  a  man  : 
Thinke  euery  bearded  fellow  that's  but  yoak'd  79 


61.  falne]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope,  fell 
Theob.  Warb.  fallen  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly.  faWn  Han. 
et  cet. 

62.  is  his]  is  the  F  ,  Rowe  + . 

64.  Iago.  The]  lag.  No,  forbeare,  The 
Qq  {forbare,  Q3)  Pope  et  seq. 

haue  his]  have  Q3. 

65.  at]  at*  Ed.  conj. 

66.  heflirres]  he  Jlarres  Q  . 

68.  69.  gone... fpeake]  gon...fpake  Q  . 

69.  [Exit  Cassio.  Rowe  et  seq. 

70.  head?]  hand?  Ff  {hand;  F  ) 


71.  Doft  thou]  Doft  Q3,  Cap. 
me  ?]  me  ?  Exit  Caf.  Q2Q3. 

72.  you  not,  by]  Ff,  Rowe  +  .  you  no 
by  Q3.    you  ?  no  by  QtQ2  et  cet. 

Heauen  :]  heaven  ;  I  mock  you  not. 
Cap. 

73.  Fortune]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Plan. 
Cap.  Knt,  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  Cam.  Del.  Coll. 
in,  Wh.  ii.    fortunes  Qq  et  cet. 

like]  life  F2. 
77.  confeffe  it  ?]  confeffe  ?  Qq. 
79.  euery]  ever  Qv 


61.  Epilepsie]  Bucknill  {Med.  Knowledge  of  Sh.  p.  274)  :  This  designation 
appears  a  mere  falsehood.  It  is  to  be  observed,  however,  that  Shakespeare's  know- 
ledge of  epilepsy  here  goes  farther  than  mjul.  Cces.  I,  ii,  256,  since  he  describes  the 
maniacal  excitement  which  so  often  follows  the  fit.  When  Cassio  has  been  persuaded 
to  withdraw,  Iago  applies  to  the  patient  himself  the  truthful  and  correct  designation 
of  his  morbid  state. 

62.  yesterday]  Cowden-Clarke  :  Iago  is  so  solid  a  liar  that  this  cannot  be  taken 
literally ;  but  it  aids  to  give  the  effect  of  long  dramatic  time. 

64.  White  (ed.  i) :  The  words  [supplied  by  the  Qq,  see  Text.  Notes,"^  were  omitted 
from  the  Folio,  accidentally  we  may  be  sure. 

71.  mocke]  John  Hunter  :  As  if  Iago  had  meant  the  hurt  done  to  the  head  when 
one  is  made  a  horned  monster. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


239 


May  draw  with  you.     There's  Millions  now  aliue,  80 

That  nightly  lye  in  thofe  vnproper  beds, 

Which  they  dare  fweare  peculiar.     Your  cafe  is  better. 

Oh,  'tis  the  fpight  of  hell,  the  Fiends  Arch-mock, 

To  lip  a  wanton  in  a  fecure  Cowch; 

And  to  fuppose  her  chaft.     No,  let  me  know,  [329  b~\ 

And  knowing  what  I  am,  I  know  what  fhe  fhallbe.  86 

Oth.     Oh,  thou  art  wife  :  'tis  certaine. 

Iago.     Stand  you  a  while  apart, 
Confine  your  felfe  but  in  a  patient  Lift, 

Whil'ft  you  were  heere,  o' re-whelmed  with  your  griefe  90 

(A  paffion  moft  refulting  fuch  a  man) 


80.  you.   There's]  you,  there's  Qq. 
There's    Millions']    Millions    are 

Pope  + . 

now]  uow  F2. 

81.  lye]  lyes  Qx. 

82.  peculiar] prculiarY j.  peculiorQ3. 
cafe]  caufe  Ff,  Rowe. 

83.  Oh,  'tis]  O  this  Q3.    Oh,  it  is  Han. 
82-88.    Lines  end,  cafe. ..hell,.. .in,... 

chafl.  ...am... wife ;... apart,  Han.  (read- 
ing you  now  line  88). 


85.  let  me]  let  not  me  Q  . 

87.  'tis]  that's  Cap.  (Corrected  in  Er- 
rata). 

88.  Stand  you]  Stand  you  now  Han. 

89.  Lifl,]  lift :  Qq.     list.  Rowe. 

90.  heere,  d  re-whelmed]  here  ere  while, 
mad  Qx,  Steev.  Mai.  Rann.  Var. 

91.  refulting]  Ff,  Rowe.  vnfutingQt. 
vnftting  Q2Q3,  Pope,  Han.  Cap.  Coll. 
Dyce  iii.     unsuiting  Theob.  et  cet. 


81.  vnproper]  Dyce:  Not  peculiar  to  an  individual,  common.  Rolfe:  Shake- 
speare uses  it  only  here ;  improper,  that  is,  not  becoming,  only  in  Lear,  V,  iii,  222. 

82.  peculiar]  White  (ed.  ii) :  Equivalent  to  belonging  to  one ;  that  is,  to  each 
one  of  them  (the  millions)  respectively. 

83.  spight]  Schmidt  {Lex.  s.  v.) :  Vexation,  mortification.  Rolfe  :  It  rather 
seems  to  be  malice.  The  'spite  of  hell '  is  explained  by  'the  fiend's  arch-mock.'  The 
man  is  not  mortified,  for  he  does  not  know  his  disgrace. 

84.  secure]  Malone  :  In  a  couch  on  which  he  is  lulled  into  a  false  security.  So, 
•though  Page  be  a  secure  fool,'  &c,  Merry  Wives,  II,  i,  241.  [For  other  instances  of 
the  accent  on  the  first  syllable,  see  Walker  ( Vers.  292)  or  Abbott,  §  492.] 

85-87.  Walker  {Crit.  iii,  289)  proposes  an  arrangement,  'if  the  reading  be  right,' 
of  these  lines,  wherein  he  was  anticipated  by  Hanmer.     See  Text.  Notes. 

86.  she]  Steevens  :  Redundancy  of  metre,  without  improvement  of  sense,  inclines 
one  to  consider  this  word  as  an  intruder.  Iago  is  merely  stating  an  imaginary  case  as 
his  own.  « When  I  know  what  I  am,  I  know  what  the  result  of  that  conviction  shall 
be.'     To  whom,  indeed,  could  the  pronoun  '  she  '  grammatically  refer  ? 

89.  List]  Collins  :  That  is,  barrier,  bound.  Keep  your  temper,  says  Iago,  within 
the  bounds  of  patience. 

90.  o're-whelmed]  Knight:  These  words,  in  the  Qq,  afford  one  evidence, 
amongst  many,  that  both  his  texts  were  printed  from  a  manuscript. 

91.  resulting]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  That  unfitting  was  the  word  usually  recited  on 
the  stage  we  miy  infer,  perhaps,  from  its  having  been  thus  altered  in  the  (MS.). 


240 


THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  iv,  sc.  i 


Cajfw  came  hither.     I  fhifted  him  away, 

And  layd  good  fcufes  vpon  your  Extafie, 

Bad  him  anon  returne  :  and  heere  fpeake  with  me, 

The  which  he  promised.     Do  but  encaue  your  felfe, 

And  marke  the  Fleeres,  the  Gybes,  and  notable  Scornes 

That  dwell  in  euery  Region  of  his  face. 

For  I  will  make  him  tell  the  Tale  anew; 

Where,  how,  how  oft,  how  long  ago,  and  when 

He  hath,  and  is  againe  to  cope  your  wife. 

I  fay,  but  marke  his  gefture  :  marry  Patience, 

Or  I  fhall  fay  y'are  all  in  all  in  Spleene, 

And  nothing  of  a  man. 

Othe.     Do' ft  thou  heare,  Iago, 
I  will  be  found  moft  cunning  in  my  Patience : 
But(do'ft  thou  heare)  moft  bloody. 

Iago.     That's  not  amiffe, 
But  yet  keepe  time  in  all  :  will  you  withdraw  ? 
Now  will  I  queftion  CaJJio  of  Bianca, 
A  Hufwife,  that  by  felling  her  defires 
Buyes  her  felfe  Bread,  and  Cloath.     It  is  a  Creature 


92 


95 


IOC 


105 


IIu 


92.  hither."]  hither,  Qq. 

93.  layd~\  layed  Qq.     laid  Ff. 
fcufes  vpon]fcufe,  vpon  Qx.  fcufes 

on  Ff,  Rowe  +    fcufe  vpon  Q2Q3  et  cet. 

94.  Bad]  Bid  Qx.   Bade  Johns,  Steev. 
et  seq. 

returne:]  retire,  Qq. 

heere  fpeake]  her  fpeake  Q  . 

95.  Do  but]  but  Qq,  Coll.  Wh.  i. 
encaue]  incaue  Qq. 

96.  Fleeres]  Ieeres  Qx.    geeres  Q3Q3- 
Gybes]  Jibes  Qt. 

98.  Tale]  rale  Qy 

100.  hath]  has  Qq. 

1 01.  geflure :  marry]  ieaflure,  mary 
Qq. 


102.  fare]  Ff,  Rowe,  Wh.  Dyce  iii, 
Huds.  you're  Pope,  Han.  you  are  Qq 
et  cet. 

all  in  all]  all-in-all  Sta.  Huds. 
in  Spleene]  a  spleen  Johns,  conj. 
Cap.     one  spleen  Lettsom  conj.  Huds. 
104.  thou]  Om.  Cap. 

107.  Iago.]  aago.  Fa. 

108.  But  yet]  But  Q3. 

[Othello  withdraws.  Rowe.  Othel- 
lo conceals  himself.  Cap. 

109.  Bianca,]  Bianca?  Q  . 

III.  Cloath]  cloathes  Qq.     cloth  F3F4, 
Rowe+.     clothes  Steev.'93  et  seq. 
It  is  a  Creature]  Om.  Q  . 


93.  scuses]  Walker  {Crit.  i,  239)  cites  this  in  the  same  article  referred  to  at  I,  i, 
31,  adding  'it  is  possible  that  Shakespeare  may  have  written  'scuses  on.'  Neither 
Walker  nor  his  Editor  noticed  that  this  is  the  reading  of  all  the  Ff  but  the  First.  For 
the  dropped  prefix,  see  Abbott,  §  460. 

102.  in  Spleene]  Steevens  :  We  still  say,  such  a  one  is  in  wrath,  in  the  dumps, 
&c.     The  sense,  therefore,  is  plain.     Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  Lettsom  suggests  '  one  spleen.' 

no.  Huswife]  White  (ed.  ii) :  Pronunciation,  husif;  sense,  hussy. 

III.  It  is]  Rolfe:  Used  contemptuously,  as  in  Rom.  6°  Jul.  IV,  ii,  14. 


alt  IV,  sc.  i.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  241 

That  dotes  on  Cajfiofas  'tis  the  Strumpets  plague  112 

To  be-guile  many,  and  be  be-guil'd  by  one) 

He,  when  he  heares  of  her,  cannot  reftraine 

From  the  exceffe  of  Laughter.     Heere  he  comes.  115 

Enter  CaJJio. 

As  he  fhall  fmile,  Othello  fhall  go  mad : 

And  his  vnbookifh  Ieloufie  muft  conferue  118 

113.  be-guile  ...be-guiVd]  beguile...  116.  Enter...]  After  line  113,  Qq.  After 
beguWd  QqF  F  .                                                  wrong  line  120,  Dyce,  Sta.  Wh. 

114.  reftraini\  Ff,  Rowe,  Sta.  refraine  Scene  III.  Pope +  ,  Jen. 

Qq  et  cet.  118.  conferuc~\  conjier   Qq.     construe 

Rowe  et  seq. 

116.  See  note,  III,  iii,  383. 

118.  vnbookish]  Whiter  (p.  112),  after  citing  many  instances  where  Shakespeare 
has  used  the  imagery  of  a  book  in  connection  with  love,  ends  with  the  celebrated 
description  of  Cressida  (  Tro.  6°  Cress.  IV,  v,  54)  wherein  Ulysses  speaks  of  '  unclasp- 
ing the  tables  of  their  thoughts  To  every  ticklish  reader;'  and  the  same  metaphor, 
Whiter  is  persuaded,  Iago  uses  here.  '  The  "  unbookish '"'  jealousy  of  Othello,'  says 
Whiter,  '  is  that  which  confounds  his  knowledge  in  the  Books  of  Love,  and  blinds  his 
discernment  respecting  the  language  of  Lovers.  It  will  cause  him  to  mistake  the 
artless  smiles  and  gestures  of  Cassio  for  the  significant  expressions  of  amorous  parley. 
Whether  our  Poet  intended  to  comprehend  the  whole  of  this  meaning,  I  am  not  able 
to  decide :  I  am  convinced,  however,  that  this  remote  epithet  "  unbookish,"  as  applied 
to  jealousy,  was  suggested  to  his  mind  by  the  above  very  singular  imagery  of  the  Lover 
and  the  Book.'  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  289)  noticed  what  had  escaped  Whiter,  that  'un- 
bookish '  is  connected  with  •  construe,*  but  when  he  adds  that  '  it  is  explained  by  it,'  he 
does  not  take  me  wholly  with  him.  '  Unbookish '  is  certainly  used  here  in  an  unusual 
sense ;  it  is  as  though  there  were  Books  of  Jealousy,  like  Saviolo's  Practise  of  Honorable 
Quarrels,  which  should  guide  Othello,  but  did  not.  Warburton's  explanation,  followed 
by  Dyce  and  others,  that  it  is  equivalent  to  ignorant,  is  scarcely  sufficient.  The  use  of 
'bookish'  in  the  first  scene  of  this  play,  in  its  manifest  meaning  (where  Iago  talks 
of  the  '  bookish  Theoric v),  shows  that  more  is  meant  by  '  unbookish '  than  mere  lack 
of  knowledge  or  of  skill.  Until  a  better  can  be  given,  Whiter's  explanation  seems  the 
nearest,  viz. :  that  Shakespeare  having  so  frequently  compared  love  and  lovers  to  books, 
here,  by  the  association  of  ideas,  makes  Othello's  misconstruction  of  Cassio's  smiles  due 
to  Othello's  lack  of  learning  in  the  books  of  love. — Ed. 

118.  consenie]  This  is  a  mere  misprint,  of  one  letter,  for  construe,  which  is  spelled 
in  the  Qq  as  it  was  probably  pronounced.  It  is  spelled  conster  in  the  Ff  Twelfth  Night, 
ill,  i,  54;  thus  also  in  FJFJ?3  Tarn,  of  Shr.  Ill,  i,  30  and  40;  constured  in  Qq  Merry 
Wives,  I,  iii,  42 ;  consture  in  Love's  Lab.  V,  ii,  341 ;  consters  in  R.  of  L.  324,  and  con- 
sterin  Pass.  Pil.  14,  8;  construe  in  all  other  instances,  viz.:  Two  Gent.  I,  ii,  56;  Ff 
Merry  Wives,  I,  iii,  42;  Ff  Love's  Lab.  V,  ii,  341 ;  Jul.  Cas.  I,  ii,  44;  I,  iii,  34;  II,  i, 
307 ;  2  Hen.  IV:  IV,  i,  103.  Collier,  in  all  honesty  doubtless,  says  that  Fx  has  con- 
serve, which  shows  how  necessary  it  is  to  have  the  ipsissimce  Uteres  of  the  original  text 

in  sight,  where  the  w's  are  not  converted  to  v's.      Dyce  (Remarks,  p.  54,  note  on  the 
16 


242 


THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [ACT  IV,  SC.  1. 


Poore  CaJJids  fmiles,  geftures,  and  light  behauiours 

Quite  in  the  wrong.    How  do  you  Lieutenant?  120 

Caf     The  worfer,  that  you  giue  me  the  addition, 
Whofe  want  euen  killes  me. 

Iago.     Ply  Defdemona  well,  and  you  are  fure  on't : 
Now,  if  this  Suit  lay  in  Bianco? s  dowre, 
How  quickely  mould  you  fpeed?  125 

Caf,     Alas  poore  Caitiffe.  • 

Oth,     Looke  how  he  laughes  already. 

Iago,     I  neuer  knew  woman  loue  man  fo. 

Caf.     Alas  poore  Rogue,  I  thinke  indeed  fhe  loues  me. 

Oth.     Now  he  denies  it  faintly  :  and  laughes  it  out.  130 

Iago,     Do  you  heare  Cajfio  ? 

Oth,     Now  he  importunes  him 
To  tell  it  o're  :  go  too,  well  faid,  well  faid. 

Iago,     She  giues  it  out,  that  you  fhall  marry  her. 
Do  you  intend  it?  135 

Caf     Ha,  ha,  ha. 

Oth,     Do  ye  triumph,  Romaine  ?  do  you  triumph?  137 


119.  Poore]  Our  Theob.  conj.  (with- 
drawn). 

behauiours]  Ff,  Rowe.   behauiour 
Qq  et  cet. 

120.  you]  Ff,  Rowe.    you  now  Qq  et 
cet. 

Lieutenant]  Leiutenant  Qq. 

121.  worfer]  worfe  Q  . 

giue]  gave  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

123.  onU]  oft  Mai.  Steev.'93,  Var. 

124.  [Speaking  lower.  Rowe. 
dowre]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sta.  Del. 

power  Qq  et  cet. 

126.  Caitiffe]  catiue  Qq. 


127.  130,  132,  137,  141,  145,  149,  154, 
158,  176.  As  Aside,  Theob.  Warb.  et  seq. 

128.  woman]  Ff,  Knt,  Coll.  Dyce  i,  Sta. 
Wh.  Glo.  Del.  Rife,    a  woman  Qq  et  cet. 

129.  indeed]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Steev. 
'85,  Knt.     ifaith  Qx  et  cet. 

130.  it  out]  out  Pope  +  . 

132,  133.  Now. ..d  re]  One  line,  Qq. 

132.  importunes]  in  portunes  Q. 

133.  it  o're]  it  on  QZQ2.     it  out  Q3< 
go  too]  go  to  QqFf. 

well /aid,  well  faid]  well  faid  Qq. 
137.  Do  ye]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope.    Doe  you 
Qq  et  cet. 


Mer.  of  Ven.  II,  ii)  says  that  the  form  misconster  is  common  in  our  early  writers,  and 
gives  several  instances. — Ed. 

119.  behauiours]  See  I,  i,  31,  or  Walker  (Crit.  i,  241). 

124.  dowre]  Knight  :  Dower  in  the  sense  of  gift.  Collier  :  The  letter  d  having 
been  turned  in  the  Folio,  '  power '  there  became  dower.  Delius  thinks  that  '  dower ' 
accords  better  with  what  Iago  afterwards  insinuates,  viz. :  '  she  gives  it  out  that  you 
shall  marry  her.' 

133.  well  said]  See  II,  i,  192. 

137.  Romaine]  Wareurton  :  Never  was  a  more  ridiculous  blunder  than  the  word 
'  Roman.'  Shakespeare  wrote  rogue,  which,  being  obscurely  written,  the  editors  mis- 
took for  Rome,  and  so  made  Roman  of  it.     Johnson  :  Othello  calls  him  '  Roman ' 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.J 


THE  MOORE   OF  VENICE 


243 


Caf,     I  marry.    What  ?  A  cuftomer  ;prythee  beare 
Some  Charitie  to  my  wit,  do  not  thinke  it 
So  vnwholefome.     Ha,  ha,  ha. 

Oth,     So,  fo,  fo,  fo  :  they  laugh ,  that  winnes. 

I  ago.     Why  the  cry  goes,  that  you  marry  her. 

Caf,     Prythee  fay  true. 

Iago,     I  am  a  very  Villaine  elfe. 

Oth,     Haue  you  fcoar'd  me  ?  Well. 


138 


140 


145 


138-140.  I... ha.']  Two  lines,  ending 
wit. . .  ha.  Q  .  Three  lin  es,  ending  Cujlom- 
er. . . wit, ...ha.  Q2Q3,  Walker.  Prose,  Pope 
et  seq. 

138.  I  marry.]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
Knt.     /  marry  her  ?  Qq  et  cet. 

What  ?  A  Cujlomer]  Om.  Qx. 
prythee]  I prethee  Qq,  Jen.  Steev. 
Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Cam. 
Del. 

141.  So,fo,fo,fo]  So,/o  F3F4,  Rowe + . 
they  laugh]  laugh  Qx,  Cap. 
winnes]    Ff.      wins   QXQ2,   Cap. 


wines  Q  .     win  F  ,  Rowe  et  cet. 

142.    Why]    FfQ2Q3,    Rowe-h,    Cap. 
Steev.'85,  Knt.     Faith  Qx  et  cet. 

that  you]  F2,  Knt.  you  JJiall 
Qx.  that  you  Jhall  Q/^J^JPAt  Rowe  et 
cet. 

marry]  merry  Q  . 

144.  very]  Om.  Han. 

145.  Haue. ..me?]  Om.  Coll.  (MS). 
Haue]  Ha  Qq. 

fcoar'd  me  ?  Well^/lor^d  me  well. 
QT.  fcoar ^dme  ;  well.  Ff.  scor'dme?  Well. 
Theob.  ii  et  seq. 


ironically.  'Triumph,'  which  was  a  Roman  ceremony,  brought  Roman  into  his 
thoughts.  '  What ! '  says  he,  '  you  are  now  triumphing  as  great  as  a  Roman  ?  '  Collier 
(ed.  ii)  :  The  (MS.)  informs  us  that  for  '  Roman '  we  ought  to  substitute  der  me.  This 
may  be  so,  and  the  reason  for  '  Roman,'  in  reference  to  '  triumph,'  is  not  obvious ;  but 
as  the  change  is  somewhat  violent,  and  in  no  respect  compulsory,  we  do  not  make  it. 
PuRNELL :  Shakespeare  had  been  studying  for  the  Roman  plays  about  this  time. 

138.  customer]  Johnson  :  A  common  woman,  one  that  invites  custom.  White 
(ed.  ii)  :  Both  Iago  and  Cassio  are  led  by  the  occasion  to  make  out  Bianca  worse,  or  at 
least  lower  in  condition,  than  she  was.  Wise,  in  his  Glossary  appended  to  his  Shake- 
speare and  his  Birthplace,  gives  this  word  as  in  use  in  this  sense  among  the  peasantry 
of  Warwickshire  at  this  day. 

139.  Charitie]  Walker  (  Vers.  201)  :  The  i  in  -ity  is  almost  uniformly  dropped  in 
pronunciation.     See  also  III,  iii,  295. 

141.  winnes]  See  I,  iii,  312. 

145.  scoar'd]  Johnson  :  Have  you  made  my  reckoning?  have  you  settled  the  term 
of  my  life  ?  Steevens  :  To  score  originally  meant  no  more  than  to  cut  a  notch  upon 
a  tally,  or  to  mark  out  a  form  by  indenting  it  on  any  substance.  But  it  was  soon  fig- 
uratively used  for  setting  a  brand  or  mark  of  disgrace  on  any  one,  and  it  is  employed 
in  this  sense  here.  Collier  (ed.  ii)  :  In  view  of  the  reading  of  the  Qq,  we  cannot  be 
by  any  means  sure  that  '  scored '  is  the  true  lection ;  possibly  some  other  word  ought  to 
be  substituted.  The  sense  usually  attached  to  the  phrase  has  been  :  Have  you  marked 
me  like  a  beast,  which  you  have  made  me,  by  giving  me  horns.  Staunton  :  That  is, 
branded,  unless  the  word  is  a  misprint.  Delius  :  Othello  applies  to  Desdemona  Iago's 
words,  '  you  shall  marry  her,'  and  asks,  '  Have  you  made  out  my  reckoning  ?  Are 
you  finished  with  me  ? '  it  is  not  until  Othello  is  out  of  the  way  that  a  marriage  with 
her  is  possib  le.     Hudson  :  I  am  not  clear  as  to  the  meaning  of  this.     To  score  was  to 


244 


THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  iv,  sc.  i. 


Caf.     This  is  the  Monkeys  owne  giuing  out : 
She  is  perfwaded  I  will  marry  her 
Out  of  her  owne  loue  &  flattery,  not  out  of  my  promife. 

Oth.     Iago  becomes  me  :  now  he  begins  the  ftory. 

CaJJio.  She  was  heere  euen  now  :  (he  haunts  me  in  e- 
uery  place.  I  was  the  other  day  talking  on  the  Sea- 
banke  with  certaine  Venetians,  and  thither  comes  the 
Bauble,  and  falls  me  thus  about  my  neck. 

Oth.  Crying  oh  deere  CaJJio,  as  it  were:  his  iefture  im- 
ports it. 

CaJJio.     So  hangs,  and  lolls,  and  weepes  vpon  me  : 
So  makes,  and  pulls  me.     Ha,  ha,  ha. 

Oth.  Now  he  tells  how  fhe  pluckt  him  to  my  Cham- 
ber :  oh,  I  fee  that  nofe  of  yours,  but  not  that  dogge,  I 
(hall  throw  it  to. 

CaJJio.     Well,  I  muft  leaue  her  companie. 

Iago.     Before  me  :  looke  where  fhe  comes. 


146 


[330  *] 
150 


155 


160 


162 


146-148.  Prose,  Qq,  Pope  et  seq. 
146.  Monkeys]  monkies  QqF  F  . 
149.  becomes]  becons  Fa.     beckorts  F  . 
beckons  QqF  et  cet. 

151.  the  other]  tother  Qq,  Jen. 

152.  thither']  theither  Q3> 

comes  the]  comes  this  Qq,  Jen.  Vax. 
Coll.  i,  Wh.  i. 

153-  and. ..thus]  by  this  hand  Jhe  fals 
thus  Qx,  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  fals  me 
thus  Q2Q3-  and,  by  this  hand,  she  falls 
me  thus  Coll.  Wh.  Del.  Glo.  Cam.  Rife. 

neck.]  FfQq,  Jen.    neck —  Rowe. 
neck  :  Cap. 


154.  ieflure]  geflure  QsQ3Ff. 
156,  157.  Prose,  Qq,  Pope  et  seq. 

156.  lolls]  iolls  Q2.    jolls  Q3. 

157.  fJiakes]  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Knt.  hah  Q3- 
hales  QXQ2  et  cet. 

pulls]  pu  Q2.    puis  Q  . 
158-160.  Two  lines,  ending  chamber., 
to.  Qq.     Three,  ending  chamber... dog... 
to.  Ktly. 

159.  oh,  I]  /Qq. 

but  not]  but  now  Ff. 

160.  throw  it]  throw 't  Qq,  Jen. 
162,  164.  Iago.,  Caf.]  Om.  Q2Q3. 


cut  notches  in  a  stick,  and  accounts  were  formerly  kept  by  scoring  the  items  thus  ii» 
what  were  called  tally-sticks.  In  AlPs  Well,  IV,  iii,  we  have  the  line,  '  After  he  scorest 
he  never  pays  the  score '/  and  the  context  there  shows  the  meaning  to  be,  that  when  he 
has  sworn  a  woman  into  granting  his  wish,  he  never  keeps  his  oaths ;  or  what  the  Poet 
elsewhere  calls  'beguiling  virgins  with  the  brokens  seals  of  perjury.'  So,  in  the  text, 
the  meaning  may  be,  '  Have  you  run  up  an  account  against  me,  which  I  must  pay  ? 
very  well,  I'll  see  you  paid.'  Or  it  may  be,  '  Have  you  squared  the  account  with  me 
for  cashiering  you  ?  ' 

159.  nose  .  .  .  dogge]  Deighton  (p.  62) :  I  see  your  nose,  which  I  shall  soon 
tear  from  your  face  and  fling  to  the  first  dog  that  comes  in  my  way. 

162.  Before  me]  Schmidt  interprets  this  as  equivalent  to  'by  my  soul,'  and  refers 
to  Twelfth  Night,  II,  iii,  194.  Purnell  considers  it  as  a  euphemism  for  'before  God.' 
and  refers  to  Cor.  I,  i,  124. 


act  iv,  sc.  i.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  245 

Enter  Bianca.  163 

Caf     'Tis  fuch  another  Fitchewimarry  a  perfum'd  one? 
What  do  you  meane  by  this  haunting  of  me  ?  165 

Bian.  Let  the  diuell,  and  his  dam  haunt  you  :  what 
did  you  meane  by  that  fame  Handkerchiefe,  you  gaue 
me  euen  now  t  I  was  a  fine  Foole  to  take  it :  I  muft  take 
out  the  worke  ?  A  likely  piece  of  worke,  that  you  fhould 
finde  it  in  your  Chamber,  and  know  not  who  left  it  there.  170 
This  is  fome  Minxes  token,  &  I  muft  take  out  the  worke? 
There,  giue  it  your  Hobbey-horfe,  wherefoeuer  you  had 
it,  He  take  out  no  worke  on't. 

CaJJio,     How  now,  my  fweete  Bianca  ? 
How  now  ?  How  now?  175 

Othe.     By  Heauen,  that  fhould  be  my  Handkerchiefs. 

Bian,     If  you'le  come  to  fupper  to  night  you  may,  if 
you  will  not,  come  when  you  are  next  prepared  for.     Exit 

Iago.     After  her  :  after  her. 

Caf.     I  muft,  fhee'l  rayle  in  the  ftreets  elfe.  180 

Iago.     Will  you  fup  there  ? 

CaJJio.     Yes,  I  intend  fo. 

Iago.     Well,  I  may  chance  to  fee  you  :  for  I  would  ve- 
ry faine  fpeake  with  you. 

Caf.     Prythee  come  :  will  you  ?  18$ 

163.  Enter...]  After  line  161,  Qq.  After  172.  it  your]  it  the  Qq,  Jen. 

line  164,  Dyce.  174,  175.  One  line,  Qq,  Pope  et  seq. 

Scene  IV.  Pope  +  ,Jen.  177.  If...if]  Ff,  Rowe+,  Knt,  Sing. 

164.  Caf.]  Om.  Qx.  Ktly.     An. ..an  Qq  et  cet. 

Fitchew]  ficho  Qx.  180.  I  muJT\  Ff,  Rowe+,  Cap.  Steev. 

164,  165.  one?   What]  one,  what  Qx.  '85,  Knt.     Faith  I  mufl  Qx  et  cet. 

one  :   What  Q2Q3F3F4.  in  the]  Vthe  Qq,  Cap.  Jen. 

167,  176,  190.  Handkerchief e]    hand-  Jlreets]    Ff,    Rowe  +  ,    Knt,  Sta. 

kercher  Qx.     Handkerchiffe  or  Hanker-  Wh.  i.    Jireete  Qx.    Jlreet  Q2Q3  et  cet. 

chiffeY  .  181.  Will... there  ?]     You  fup    there. 

169.  the  worke]  the  whole  worke  Qx,  Q2Q3'      You  sup  there  ?  Johns. 

Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly.  182.  Yes,]  FfQ2Q3,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Jen. 

170.  know  not]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Knt,  Steev.'85,  Knt,  Dyce  iii,  Huds.  Faith  Qx 
Coll.  Sta.  Wh.  i,  Del.    not  know  Qq  et  cet.  et  cet. 

171.  worke?]  worke;  Qq,  Han.  work!  185.  Prythee]  Preethee  Qx.  Prethe  Qa 
Knt,  Sing.  Sta.  Q3<     Prelhee  F3<     Prithee  F4. 

164.  such  another]  See  Schmidt  (s.  v.  another),  for  other  instances  of  this  kindly 
contemptuous  phrase,  to  which  Schmidt  gives  as  equivalent  the  German  '  auch  so  eine. 

164.  Fitchew]  Dyce  (Gloss.)  :  A  polecat,  and  the  cant  tenn  for  a  strumpet.  [The 
Qq  give  what  was  probably  the  pronunciation.     Cotgrave  has  Fissau. — Ed.] 

172.  Hobbey-horse]  Dyce  (Gloss.):  An  abandoned  woman 


246 


THE    TRAGEDIE   OF   OTHELLO        [a;t  iv,  sc.  I 


Iago, 

Oth. 

Iago. 

Oth. 

Iago. 

Oth. 

Iago. 


Go  too  :  fay  no  more. 
How  fhall  I  murther  him,  Iago. 
Did  you  perceiue  how  he  laughM  at  his  vice  ? 
Oh,  Iago. 

And  did  you  fee  the  Handkerchiefe  ? 
Was  that  mine  ? 

Yours  by  this  hand  :  and  to  fee  how  he  prizes 
the  foolifh  woman  your  wife  :  fhe  gaue  it  him,  and  he 
hath  giu'n  it  his  whore. 

Oth,     I  would  haue  him  nine  yeeres  a  killing : 
A  fine  woman,  a  faire  woman,  a  fweete  woman  ? 
Iago.     Nay ,  you  muft  forget  that. 
Othello.     I,  let  her  rot  and  perifh,  and  be  damn'd  to 
night,  for  fhe  fhall  not  liue.     No,  my  heart  is  turn'd  to 
flone  :  I  ftrike  it,  and  it  hurts  my  hand.     Oh,  the  world 
hath  not  a  fweeter  Creature  :  fhe  might  lye  by  an  Em- 
perours  fide,  and  command  him  Taskes. 


186 


190 


195 


200 


202 


186.  too:  fay]  to,  fay  Qv   to  fay  Q^ 
to;  fay  Ff. 

more."]    more.     Exit    Caffio.   Qq. 
more.  Exit.  Ff. 

Scene  V.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

[Coming  hastily  from  his  conceal- 
ment. Cap.     Advancing.  Coll. 

187.  murther]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Knt, 
Wh.  i,  Rife,     murder  Qq,  Johns,  et  cet 

Iago.]    Iago?   QqF  F  ,  Rowe  et 
seq. 

188.  laugh' d]  laughed  Qq. 


189.  Iago.]  Iaga.  Q2. 
192-194.  Om.  Qq. 

195.  196.  Prose,  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Coll.  et 
seq. 

196.  woman  ?]  woman.  Qq.  woman  /— 
Rowe  et  seq. 

197.  forget that.] forget.  Qt.  forget  that 

198.  /,]  And  Qq.     Ay,  Rowe  et  seq. 
damn'd]  damWd  Qq. 

200.  flone]  a  flone  Q2Q,. 

20 1,  hath]  has  Qq. 


192-194.  Jknnens  :  The  omission  of  this  speech  in  Qx  evidently  appears  to  be  a 
blunder  of  the  compositors ;  for  Othello's  speech,  '  Was  that  mine  ? '  concludes  the 
page ;  and  the  catchword  to  the  next  page  is  lag.,  which  shows  that  this  speech  of  Iagc 
was  in  the  MS. ;  otherwise  the  catchwords  would  have  been  '  I  would.' 

195.  a  killing]  See  Abbott,  §24,  for  instances  of  a-  before  verbal  nouns  where  it 
represents  on  ;  as  here,  '  nine  years  on,  or  in  the  act  of  killing.' 

198-202.  This  speech  is  assuredly  ?netric  prose.  In  moments  of  wild  passion  the 
least  restraints  of  verse,  even  to  Shakespeare  it  seems,  are  choking,  yet  the  phrases 
will  fall  rhythmically.  I  cannot  find  that  any  one  has  ever  attempted  to  cut  it  up  into 
lines,  and  yet  Walker  {Crit.  ii,  23)  says  that  'creature,'  in  line  201,  is  'probably  a 
dissyllable '  where  the  innuendo  is  that  it  occurs  in  verse.  To  my  ear  '  creature '  is 
better. — Ed. 

200.  stone  .  .  .  hand]  Steevens  :  This  thought,  as  often  as  it  occurs  to  Shake- 
speare, is  sure  to  be  received,  and  as  often  counteracts  his  pathos.  See  Ant.  <5r»  Clen. 
IV,  ix,  16. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


247 


Iago.     Nay,  that's  not  your  way.  203 

Othe.     Hang  her,  I  do  but  fay  what  fhe  is  :  fo  delicate 
with  her  Needle  :  an  admirable  Mufitian.     Oh  fhe  will        20«> 
fing  the  Sauageneffe  out  of  a  Beare  :  of  fo  high  and  plen- 
teous wit,  and  inuention  f 

Iago,     She's  the  worfe  for  all  this. 

Othe.     Oh,  a  thoufand,  a  thoufand  times  : 
And  then  of  fo  gentle  a  condition?  210 

Iago.     I  too  gentle. 

Othe.     Nay  that's  certaine  : 
But  yet  the  pitty  of  it,  Iago  :  oh  Iago,  the  pitty  of  it 
Iago.  [330  b\ 

Iago.     If  you  are  fo  fond  ouer  her  iniquitie  :  giue  her        215 
pattent  to  offend,  for  if  it  touch  not  you,  it  comes  neere 
no  body. 

Oth.     I  will  chop  her  into  Meffes  :  Cuckold  me  t 

Iago.     Oh,  'tis  foule  in  her.  219 


204.  do  but]  do  not  Q3Q3. 

206.  high  and~\  high  a  Ff,  Rowe. 

206,  207.  plenteous]   plentious   QXF3. 
plentions  Q3. 

207.  inuention  ?~\  inuention.  Qq.     in- 
vention!—  Rowe. 

209,  210.  Prose,  Qq,  Cap.  et  seq. 

209.  Oh,  a]  A  Qq. 

thotifand,  a  thou/and]  Ff, 
Rowe  + ,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Del. 
thousand-thousand  Sta.  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 
thoufand  thoufand  Qq  et  cet. 

210.  a  condition  ?]  a  condition.  QjQ2, 


Jen.  a  condition,  Q  .  condition  !  Pope  + . 
a  condition  !  Cap.  et  seq. 

212-214.  One  line,  Qq.  Prose,  Cap.  et 
seq. 

212.  Nay]  fQx. 

213, 214.  oh  Iago,. ..Iago.]  the  pitty.  Qx. 
oh  the  pitty.  Q2Q3,  Jen. 

215.  you  are]  you  be  Qq,  Cap.  Jen. 

216.  touch]  touches  Qq,  Cap. 

218.  Meffes  :]  meffes —  Qx.     meffes, — 
Q2Q3-     messes.  Johns. 
me  ?]  me  t  Qq. 


203.  your  way]  Deighton  (p.  63) :  That  is,  it  won't  do  for  you  to  let  your  thoughts 
dwell  upon  her  many  excellences,  or  you  will  be  unmanned. . 

206.  Malone  :  So  in  V.  dr>  A.  1096 :  *  when  he  hath  sung  The  tiger  would  be  tame  ' 

210.  condition]  See  II,  i,  282. 

212.  Mrs  Jameson  (ii,  35) :  Desdemona  displays  at  times  a  transient  energy,  arising 
from  the  power  of  affection,  but  gentleness  gives  the  prevailing  tone  to  her  character- 
gentleness  in  its  excess, — gentleness  verging  on  passiveness, — gentleness  which  not  only 
cannot  resent,  but  cannot  resist.  Here  in  this  passage  the  exceeding  softness  of  Desde- 
mona's  temper  is  turned  against  her  by  Iago,  so  that  it  suddenly  strikes  Othello  in  a  new 
point  of  view,  as  the  inability  to  resist  temptation ;  but  to  us,  who  perceive  the  character 
as  a  whole,  this  extreme  gentleness  of  nature  is  yet  delineated  with  such  exceeding 
refinement  that  the  effect  never  approaches  to  feebleness.  It  is  true  that  once  her 
extreme  timidity  leads  her,  in  a  moment  of  confusion  and  terror,  to  prevaricate  about 
the  fatal  handkerchief. 

216.  pattent]  See  Chalmers,  on  Date  of  Composition,  in  Appendix. 


248 


THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  iv,  sc.  1 


Oth.     With  mine  Officer  ?  220 

Iago.     That's  fouler. 

Othe.  Get  me  fome  poyfon,  Iago,  this  night.  He  not 
expoftulate  with  her  :  leaft  her  body  and  beautie  vnpro- 
uide  my  mind  againe  :  this  night  Iago. 

Iago.     Do  it  not  with  poyfon,  ftrangle  her  in  her  bed,        225 
Euen  the  bed  fhe  hath  contaminated. 

Oth.     Good,  good : 
The  Iuftice  of  it  pleafes  :  very  good. 

Iago.     And  for  Caffio,  let  me  be  his  vndertaker : 
You  fhall  heare  more  by  midnight.  230 

Enter  Lodouico,  Defdemona,  and  Attendants. 

Othe.     Excellent  good  :  What  Trumpet  is  that  fame  ? 

Iago.     I  warrant  fomething  from  Venice, 
'Tis  Lodouico,  this,  comes  from  the  Duke. 
See,  your  wife's  with  him.  235 


220.  Officer?]    Officer.   Qq.      officer! 
Rowe. 

222.  night.  He]  night  lie  Qq. 

223.  beautie~\  her  beauty  FF,  Rowe  + . 

224.  againe:]  agen,  Qq. 

225.  226.  Prose,  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  et  seq. 

225.  her  in]  here  hi  Q  . 

226.  Euen]  Even  in  Pope  +  . 

227.  228.  One  line,  Qq;  or  prose,  Cap. 
et  seq. 

228.  pleafes:   very]  pleafes  very  Qx. 
pleafes,  very  Q2Q3- 

229.  230.  Prose,  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai. 
Var.  Dyce,  St*.  Glo.  Cam. 

230.  midnight.]  midnight.  A  Trumpet. 
Qq. 


230.  [A  trumpet  within.  Theob.  After 
good,  line  232,  Dyce. 

Scene  VI.  Pope.  After  line  233,  Plan. 
After  line  235,  Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 

231.  Enter...]  After  Lodovico  line  234, 
Cap.     After  line  235,  Steev. 

232.  Two  lines,  Qq. 

233-235.  I.. .him.]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Knt.  Something  from  Venice fure,  (fure  ; 
Q2.  fure  Q3)  tis  Ludouico,  Come  from  the 
Duke,  and  fee  your  wife  is  with  him.  Qq 
et  cet.  (subs.).  I  warrant  you  'tis  some- 
thing come  from  Venice.  Oh  !  it  is  Lodovico 
from  the  Duke.  And  see  your  wife  is  with 
him.  Han. 

234.  this,  comes]  Fa,  Knt.  this  comes 
F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope. 


222-229.  Walker  (Crit.  i,  11)  thus  divides  these  lines:  'I'll  not  expostulate  with 
her,  lest  her  body  |  And  beauty  unprovide  my  mind  again :  j  This  night,  Iago.  |  Do't 
not  with  poison,  strangle  her  in  her  bed,  |  Even  the  bed  she  hath  contaminated.  |  Good, 
good :  I  The  justice  of  it  pleases ;  very  good.  |  And,  |  For  Cassio,  let  me  be  his  under- 
taker.' I  But  the  latter  part  is  very  doubtful.  Dyce  [Rem.  241)  anticipated  Walker 
as  regards  225,  226.  '  This  speech,'  says  Dyce,  '  (printed  by  all  the  modern  editors  as 
prose)  is,  I  suspect,  two  lines  of  blank  verse.' 

223.  vnprouide]  Rolfe  :  Used  by  Shakespeare  only  here. 

233-235.  According  to  Walker  [Vers.  65),  'warrant'  is  a  monosyllable,  and  (Crit. 
i,  223)  something  is  pronounced  something.     [The  lines  in  the  Qq  are  smoother.— 


Ed.] 


act  rv,  sc.  i.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


249 


Lodo.     Saue  you  worthy  Generall.  236 

Othe.     With  all  my  heart  Sir. 

Lod.  The  Duke,  and  the  Senators  of  Venice  greet  you. 

Othe.     I  kiffe  the  Inftrument  of  their  pleafures. 

Def.     And  what's  the  newes,  good  cozen  Lodoaico  ?  240 

lago.     I  am  very  glad  to  fee  you  Signior.* 
Welcome  to  Cyprus. 

Lod.     I  thanke  you  :  how  do's  Lieutenant  Caffio  ? 

Iago.     Liues  Sir, 

Def.     Cozen,  there's  falne  betweene  him,  &  my  Lord,  245 

An  vnkind  breach  :  but  you  fhall  make  all  well. 

Othe.     Are  you  fure  of  that  ? 

Def     My  Lord  ? 

Othe.     This  faile  you  not  to  do,  as  you  will 

Lod.     He  did  not  call  :  he's  bufie  in  the  paper,  250 

Is  there  deuifion  'twixt  my  Lord,  and  CaJJio  ? 

Def.     A  moft  vnhappy  one  :  I  would  do  much 
T'attone  I  them  for  the  loue  I  beare  to  Caffio.  253 


236.  Saue  you]  God  fave  the  Qx,  Jen. 
God  save  you  Mai. 

238.  the  Senators]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Senators  Qq,  Han. 
Cap.  et  seq. 

[Gives  him  a  letter.  Rowe. 

239.  pleafures]  good  pleasures  Han. 
Cap. 

[Opens  and  peruses  it.  Cap. 
241,  242.  One  line,  Qt,  Cap.    /...  Wel- 
come One  line,  Ktly. 
241.  very]  Om.  Cap. 


241.  Signior:]  Seignior: — QjQa» 

243.  you]  you,  sir  Cap. 

244.  Sir,]  fir.  QIf  Ff. 

247.  [Aside.  Theob.  Warb. 

248.  Lord?]  Lord.  Qq. 

249.  [Reads.  Theob.  et  seq. 
will — ]  will. —  QrQ2- 

251.  , twixt  my]  betweene  thy  Q  .  'twixt 
thy  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 

253.  T  attone]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,Wh.  i,  Dyce 
iii,  Huds.     To  attone  Qq  et  cet. 


237.  Malone  :  This  does  not  relate  to  what  Lodovico  has  just  said,  but  is  spoken  by 
Othello  while  he  salutes  him.  Steevens  :  I  know  not  how  the  meaning  of  this  speeh 
can  be  ascertained,  unless  by  reference  to  the  salutation  of  Lodovico.  The  distracted 
Othello,  considering  his  own  happiness  at  an  end  in  this  world,  readily  catches  at  the 
idea  of  future  felicity  suggested  by  the  words :  '  'Save  you,  general ! '  In  his  reply, 
therefore,  he  must  be  supposed  to  welcome  the  pious  wish  expressed  in  his  behalf.  In 
Meas.forMeas.  II,  ii,  157,  two  replies  of  Angelo,  equally  equivocal,  are  derived  from 
similar  premises  :  •  Isab.  Heaven  keep  your  honour  safe  !  Ang.  Amen  ! '  Again,  at 
the  conclusion  of  the  same  scene  :  '  Isab.  'Save  your  honour!  Ang.  From  thee  :  even 
from  thy  virtue  ! '  If  it  be  urged  that  '  'save  you  '  only  means  preserve  you  in  this  world, 
my  sense  of  the  passage  will  not  be  much  weakened :  as  our  protection,  even  '  heret 
upon  this  bank  and  shoal  of  time,'  depends  on  the  Almighty. 

253.  attone]  Johnson:  Make  them  one ;  reconcile  them  Henley:  The  verb  is 
fo  -med  by  the  coalesce  ice  of  the  words  at  one. 


250  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [ACT  IV,  SC.  i 

0  th,  Fire,  and  brimeftone. 

Def,  My  Lord.                                                                           255 

Oth,  Are  you  wife  ? 

Def,  What  is  he  angrie  ? 

Led,  May  be  thLetter  mou'd  him. 
For  as  I  thinke,  they  do  command  him  home, 

Deputing  Cafsio  in  his  Gouernment.  260 

Def,  Trull  me,  I  am  glad  on't. 

Othe,  Indeed  ? 

Def,  My  Lord  ? 

Othe,  I  am  glad  to  fee  you  mad. 

Def,  Why,  fweete  Othello  ?                                                      265 

Othe,  Diuell. 

254.  brime/lone]  Brim/lone  QqF  F  .  262.  Indeed?]   Indeed,  Qq.     Indeed! 

255.  Lord.]  Lord!  Pope.  Rowe. 

258.  May  be~\  'May  be,  Theob.  263.  Lord?]  Lord.  Qq.    Lord!  Rowe. 
261.  Trujl  me]  By  my  troth  Q,,  Jen.  265.  Why]  How  Qq,  Jen.  Mai.  Steev 

Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly,  Cam.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly. 

lam]  Pm  Steev.'93.  Othello?]  Othello—  Glo. 

266.  [Striking  her.  Theob. 

256.  Oth.]  Fechter  gives  this  speech  to  Iago,  directing  him  to  seize  the  arm  of 
Othello  across  the  table  and  stop  him  violently.  Othello,  '  rising  furiously,'  had  just 
uttered  line  254.  [Much  as  I  dislike  the  Porte  St.  Martin,  or  Bowery,  style  of  Fechter's 
Othello,  I  must  confess  that  here  his  suggestion  strikes  me  as  worthy  of  consideration. 
There  is  no  small  degree  of  propriety  in  representing  the  cool  Iago  as  recalling  Othello 
to  his  senses ;  and  even  if  Iago's  attempt  be  obtrusive  or  unmilitary,  it  is,  perhaps,  a 
less  dramatic  fault  than  what  might  seem  the  anticlimax  of  a  sedate  expostulation, 
addressed  to  Desdemona  after  the  furious  explosion,  '  Fire  and  brimstone.' — Ed.] 

259.  Theobald  :  Othello  is  but  just  arrived  at  Cyprus ;  the  Senate  could  hardly 
yet  have  heard  of  the  Ottoman  fleet  being  scattered  by  the  tempest ;  and  Othello  is  at 
once  remanded  home,  without  any  imputation  suggested  on  his  conduct,  or  any  hint 
of  his  being  employed  in  a  more  urgent  Commission.  Tis  true,  the  deputation  of  Cas- 
sio  in  his  room  seems  designed  to  heighten  the  Moor's  resentment ;  but  some  probable 
reason  should  have  been  assigned  for  his  recall.  As  to  what  Iago  says  afterwards,  that 
Othello  is  to  go  to  Mauritania,  this  is  only  a  lie  of  his  own  invention  to  carry  his  point 
with  Roderigo.  Lloyd  :  The  news  that  Othello  is  superseded  recalls  the  impressions 
of  the  judicial  deliberations  of  the  Venetian  Senate  in  the  First  Act,  and  seems  to  com- 
plete the  proof  of  the  infallible  instincts  of  the  statesmen. 

264.  Cowden-Clarke  :  We  cannot  help  thinking  that  the  author  probably  wrote, 
' I  am  mad  to  see  you  glad'  But  we  have  not  ventured  to  alter  the  text ;  because 
Othello's  reply,  as  it  stands,  allows  the  meaning  to  be  understood  of  '  I  am  glad  to  see 
you  unwise,'  in  reference  to  his  having  asked,  '  Are  you  wise  ?  ' 

265.  Othello  ?]  Daniel  (p.  79) :  This  speech  should  be  marked  as  exclamatory. 
It  is  one  of  the  innumerable  instances  where  the  printers  use  the  *  ? '  for  the  ' ! ' 

266.  That  Theobald  added  the  proper  stage  direction  here  there  can  be,  unfortu- 


act  iv,  sc.  i.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  25 1 

Def.     I  haue  not  deferu'd  this.  267 

Lod.     My  Lord,  this  would  not  be  beleeu'd  in  Venice, 
Though  I  fhould  fweare  I  faw't.    'Tis  very  much, 
Make  her  amends  :  fhe  weepes.  270 

Othe.     Oh  diuell,  diuell : 
If  that  the  Earth  could  teeme  with  womans  teares, 
Each  drop  fhe  falls,  would  proue  a  Crocodile : 
Out  of  my  fight. 

Def.     I  will  not  flay  to  offend  you.  275 

Lod.     Truely  obedient  Lady  : 
I  do  befeech  your  Lordfhip  call  her  backe. 

Othe.     Mifhris.  [331  ^] 

Def.     My  Lord. 

Othe.     What  would  you  with  her,  Sir?  280 

Lod.     Who  I,  my  Lord/ 

Othe.     I,  you  did  wifh,  that  I  would  make  her  turne  : 
Sir,  flie  can  turne,  and  turne  :  and  yet  go  on 
And  turne  againe.     And  fhe  can  weepe,  Sir,  weepe. 
And  fhe's  obedient  :  as  you  fay  obedient.  285 

Very  obedient  :  proceed  you  in  your  teares. 

269.  faw>t]  saw  it  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  275.  to  offend]  foffend  Pope  +  ,  Dyce 

Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Del.  iii,  Huds. 

much,]    much;   Theob.      much.  [Going.  Rowe. 

Johns.  276.  Truely]  Ff,  Rowe.    TruelyanQq 

272.  womans]  womens  Qq.  et  cet. 

273.  Crocodile]  crocadile  Qq.  282.  /,]  //  Rowe,  Pope.    Ay,  Theob. 


285.  JIie's]JJieisQ_ 


nately,  no  doubt.  This  blow  is  the  ineffaceable  blot  in  Othello's  history  which  leaves, 
upon  me  at  least,  a  more  painful  impression  than  even  the  smothering.  This,  is  simply 
the  rage  of  a  coward ;  that,  is  an  act  of  supposed  justice.  Fechter  strikes  with  the 
letter  which  he  holds ;  this  is  a  shade  better  than  the  backhanded  blow  which  Salvinj 
delivers  full  on  those  sweet  lips,  and  which  makes  your  own  lips  grow  white  as  death, 
at  the  sight. — Ed. 

272.  teeme]  Johnson  :  If  women's  tears  could  impregnate  the  earth.  By  the  doc- 
trine of  equivocal  generation,  new  animals  were  supposed  producible  by  new  combina 
tions  of  matter.  See  Bacon,  vol.  iii,  p.  70,  ed.  1740.  Malone:  'It  is  written,'  say.' 
Bullokar,  'that  the  crocodile  will  weepe  ouer  a  man's  head  when  he  hath  deuoured  the 
body,  and  then  will  eate  vp  the  head  two.  Wherefore  in  Latine  there  is  a  proverbe, 
Crocodili  Lachrymce,  crocodiles  teares,  to  signifie  such  teares  as  are  fained,  and  spent 
onely  with  intent  to  deceiue  or  doe  harme.' — Expositor,  1621. 

273.  falls]  For  other  instances  of  intransitive  verbs  used  transitively,  see  Abbott, 
§291. 

286.  teares.]  Warner  suggests  an  interrogation-mark  :  'What !  will  you  still  con- 
tinue to  be  a  hypocrite  by  a  display  of  this  well-painted  passion  ?' 


252 


THE   TR  AGED  IE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  iv,  sc.  L 


Concerning  this  Sir,  (oh  well-painted  paffion)  287 

I  am  commanded  home  :  get  you  away : 

He  fend  for  you  anon.     Sir  I  obey  the  Mandate, 

And  will  returne  to  Venice.    Hence,  auaunt :  290 

Cajfw  fhall  haue  my  Place.    And  Sir,  to  night 

I  do  entreat,  that  we  may  fup  together. 

You  are  welcome  Sir  to  Cyprus. 

Goates,  and  Monkeys.  Exit. 

Lod.     Is  this  the  Noble  Moore,  whom  our  full  Senate        295 
Call  all  in  all  fufficient  ?  Is  this  the  Nature 
Whom  Paffion  could  not  fhake  ?  Whofe  folid  vertue 
The  fhot  of  Accident,  nor  dart  of  Chance  298 


288.  home :]  here : — Qs.    home: — Q2 
Q  .     home —  Rowe. 

289.  anon. ~\anon: — QXQ2.    a none  : — 
Q  .     anon —  Rowe. 

Mandate]  mandat  Qq. 

290.  Venice."]  Venice  : —  Qq. 
auaunt  :~\  auant,  Qq.    avant ! — 

Rowe. 

[Exit  Desd.  Rowe. 
293,  294.  One  line,  Qq,  Cap.  et  seq. 
293.  You  are"]  YouWe  Cap. 
Cyprus.]  Cypres, —  Qq. 


Scene  VII.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

296.  all  in  all]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Jen.  Glo. 
Cam.  Rife,  Wh.  ii.    all-in-all  Pope  et  cet. 

Is  this  the]  This  the  noble  Qq,  Jen. 
Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly.  this  the 
Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Coll.  ii,  Cam. 

297.  Whom]  Which  Pope  +  . 

298.  Accident]  accidents  Jen. 
nor]  or  Han. 

Chance]      Change    Warb.    conj 
Theob. 


290.  Fechter:  Othello,  finding  in  the  dispatch  the  name  of  'Cassio,'  which  he 
mutters,  tears  it  violently,  and  turns  in  his  rage  to  Desdemona,  who  shrinks  affrighted. 

291.  Place]  Steevens:  Perhaps  this  is  addressed  to  Desdemona,  who  had  just 
expressed  her  joy  on  hearing  Cassio  was  deputed  in  the  room  of  her  husband. 

294.  Malone  :  Iago,  in  III,  iii,  464,  alludes  to  '  goates '  and  '  monkeyes  '  where  he 
says  that  ocular  proof  of  Cassio's  and  Desdemona's  guilt  was  impossible.  These  words, 
we  may  suppose,  still  ring  in  Othello's  ears.  Steevens  :  A  reference  to  a  distant  scene 
but  ill  agrees  with  the  infuriation  of  Othello's  mind.  His  fancy,  haunted  by  still  grow- 
ing images  of  lewdness,  would  scarce  have  expressed  his  feelings  in  recollected  phrase 
ology.  Boswell  :  They  were  words  which  he  was  not  likely  to  have  forgotten.  Fech- 
ter :  Aside, — and  as  if  comprising  the  whole  world  in  a  bitter  sarcasm.  As  he  goes  out 
he  casts  a  last  infuriated  glance  at  Desdemona's  door. 

296.  Is  this  the]  Dyce  (Rem.  242) :  The  word  noble  in  the  Qq  was  undoubtedly 
inserted  by  a  mistake  of  the  compositor,  his  eye  having  caught  it  from  the  preceding 
line. 

298.  Theobald  :  I  cannot  see,  for  my  heart,  the  difference  betwixt  the  shot  of  acci- 
dent and  dart  of  chance.  The  words,  and  things  they  imply,  are  purely  synonymous ; 
but  that  the  Poet  intended  two  different  things  seems  plain  from  the  discretive  adverb. 
Chance  may  afflict  a  man  in  some  circumstances;  but  other  distresses  are  to  be 
accounted  for  from  a  different  cause.  I  am  persuaded  our  Author  wrote :  '  nor  dart 
of  change?  In  several  other  places  he  industriously  puts  these  two  words  in  opposi- 
tion to  each  other.     Heath  (p.  569) :  There  is  no  occasion  for  Theobald's  alteration. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


THE  MOORE   OF    VENICE 


2<>3 


Could  neither  graze,  nor  pierce  ? 

Iago.     He  is  much  chang'd.  300 

Lod.     Are  his  wits  fafe  ?  Is  he  not  light  of  Braine  ? 

Iago,     He's  that  he  is  :  I  may  not  breath  my  cenfure. 
What  he  might  be  :  if  what  he  might,  he  is  not, 
I  would  to  heauen  he  were. 

Lod.     What  ?  Strike  his  wife  ?  305 

Iago.     ' Faith  that  was  not  fo  well  :  yet  would  I  knew 
That  fhroke  would  proue  the  worft. 

Lod.     Is  it  his  vfe  ? 
Or  did  the  Letters,  worke  vpon  his  blood, 
And  new  create  his  fault  f  310 

/ago.     Alas,  alas : 
It  is  not  honeftie  in  me  to  fpeake  312 


299.  graze]  raze  Warb.  Theob.  Han. 

300.  changed]  changed  Qq. 

301.  light  of]  of  light  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope. 

302.  He's]  He  is  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt. 
He's—  Sta. 

that  ]  what  Pope  + . 

breath]  F3Q2Q3,  Rowe,  Cap. 
breathe  Q,F3F4,  Pope  et  cet. 

cenfure.]  cenfure,  Qq.  censure 
Jen.  Cam.  Wh.  ii.     censure  :  Coll.  iii. 

303.  be :]  Ff,  Jen.  Cam.  Wh.  ii.   be,  Qq. 


be, —  or  be,  Rowe  et  cet. 

303.  if  what]  FfQ2Q3,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 
Sing.  Wh.  Ktly,  Glo.  Cam.  Huds.  Rife. 
ifasQT.     if,  what  Cap.  et  cet. 

305.  What?  ...wife?]  What,...  wife. 
Qq.  What,... wife?  Ff.  What,... wife  I 
Rowe  ii  et  seq. 

308.  Is  it]  It  is  Q3. 

310.  new  create]  new- create  Pope  et 
seq. 

his]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.   this  Qq  et  cet. 


*  Accident '  is  commonly  used  to  denote  personal  calamities ;  '  chance,'  to  distinguish 
those  in  which  we  are  involved  in  consequence  of  more  general  revolutions  of  fortune. 

299.  graze]  Warburton  :  'Tis  no  commendation  to  the  most  solid  virtue  to  be  free 
from  the  attacks  of  fortune,  but  that  it  is  so  impenetrable  as  to  suffer  no  impression. 
Now,  to  '  graze '  signifies  only  to  touch  the  superficies  of  anything.  That  is  the  attack 
of  fortune ;  and  by  that  virtue  is  try'd,  but  not  discredited.  We  ought  certainly,  there- 
fore, to  read  raze,  i.  e.,  neither  lightly  touch  upon  nor  pierce  into.  The  ignorant  tran- 
scribers being  acquainted  with  the  phrase  of  a  bullet  grazing,  and  '  shot '  being  men- 
tion'd  in  the  line  before,  they  corrupted  the  true  word.  Johnson  :  To  *  graze '  is  not 
merely  to  touch  superficially,  but  to  strike  not  directly,  not  so  as  to  bury  the  body  of  the 
thing  striking  in  the  matter  struck.  Theobald  trifles,  as  is  usual.  *  Accident  and  •  chance ' 
may  admit  a  subtle  distinction ;  '  accident '  may  be  considered  as  the  act,  and  '  chance ' 
as  the  power  or  agency  of  Fortune ;  as,  It  was  by  chance  that  this  accident  befel  me. 
At  least,  if  we  suppose  all  corrupt  that  is  inaccurate,  there  will  be  no  end  of  emenda- 
tion. Malone  :  I  do  not  see  the  least  ground  for  supposing  any  corruption.  As 
1  pierce '  relates  to  '  the  dart  of  chance,'  so  '  graze '  is  referred  to  '  the  shot  of  accident. 

302,  303.  That  the  punctuation  of  these  lines  is  puzzling  may  be  inferred  from  the 
fact  that  the  Cambridge  Editors,  in  1 866,  did  not  follow  their  own  punctuation  of  1864 
1  do  not  think  that  the  Fx  can  be  much  improved. — Ed. 

T>6,  307.  yet  .  .  .  worst]  Purnell:  Probably  this  is  an  aside. 


254  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO       [act  iv,  sc.  ii. 

What  I  haue  feene,  and  knowne.    You  fhall  obferue  him,         3 1 3 
And  his  owne  courfes  will  deonte  him  fo, 

That  I  may  faue  my  fpeech  :  do  but  go  after  315 

And  marke  how  he  continues. 

Lod.     I  am  forry  that  I  am  deceiu'd  in  him.      Exeunt, 

Scena  Secunda, 

Enter  Otliello,  and  ^Emilia, 
Othe.     You  haue  feene  nothing  then  t  3 

313.  him]  Om.  Q,Qr  I.  Scena...]  Scene  VIII.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

314.  deonte']  denote  QqFf.  An  Apartment.  Rovve.     A  room  in  the 

315.  after]  after  him  Q2Q3,  Jen.  Castle.  Mai. 

317.  lam]  /'#?Pope  +  ,Dyceiii,  Huds.  3.  then  ?]  then.  Qq. 

that  I  am]  that  I  was  Han. 

317.  Fechter:  They  go  out  as  following  Othello;  who,  as  soon  as  they  are  out  of 
sight,  appears  from  the  tapestry  on  the  left,  bringing  forward  Emilia,  and  speaks  as  con- 
tinuing to  interrogate.  [Of  course  the  Scene  continues.  Here  begins  Booth's  Second 
Scene,  Act  fourth.]  Lloyd  :  When  this  Scene,  in  which  the  fainting  Othello  appears 
as  the  suffering  and  passive  instrument  of  Iago,  is  left  out  in  representation,  the  best 
acting  in  the  world,  or  to  be  in  the  world,  will  not  preserve  the  Scene  in  the  bed-cham- 
ber from  having,  to  well-ordered  sympathies,  all  the  shockingness  of  a  contrived,  cold- 
blooded murder. 

Scena  Secunda]  Malone  :  There  are  great  difficulties  in  ascertaining  the  place 
of  this  Scene.  Near  the  close  of  it,  Iago  says  to  Desdemona,  *  Go  iny  and  weep  not,' 
which  would  lead  us  to  place  it  in  the  court  before  Othello's  castle.  These  words 
may,  indeed,  be  explained  to  mean,  '  Go  into  the  supper-room '  (though  I  do  not  think 
that  the  meaning) ;  but  immediately  afterwards  Roderigo  enters  and  converses  with 
Iago,  which  decisively  ascertains  the  scene  not  to  be  in  Othello's  house  ;  for  Roderigo, 
who  had  given  the  first  intelligence  to  Brabantio  of  his  daughter's  flight,  and  had 
shortly  afterwards  drawn  his  sword  on  Othello  and  his  partisans,  certainly  would  not 
take  the  liberty  of  walking  into  his  house  at  pleasure.  On  the  other  hand,  what 
Othello  says  early  in  the  scene  to  Emilia,  line  35,  '  shut  the  door]  and  his  subsequent 
address  to  her  as  he  goes  out,  as  decisively  point  out  a  room  in  Othello's  castle  as  the 
place  of  the  Scene,  and  compel  us  to  place  the  several  interlocutors  there,  however 
inconsistent  with  Roderigo's  entry  and  Iago's  address  to  Desdemona.  The  truth  is, 
that  our  poet  and  his  audience,  in  this  instance  as  in  many  others,  were  content,  from 
want  of  scenery,  to  consider  the  very  same  spot,  at  one  and  the  same  time,  as  the 
outside  and  inside  of  a  house.  Cowden-Clarke  :  But  if  it  be  remembered  that  a 
portion  of  the  mansion  is  used  as  a  guard-room,  it  would  be  natural  enough  that  Rode- 
rigo should  seek  Iago  there,  and,  not  finding  him,  should  pursue  his  search  in  some  of 
the  apartments  adjacent ;  moreover,  it  should  be  remembered  that  Roderigo  is  partially 
disguised,  and  therefore  not  likely  to  be  recognized  as  the  man  who  gave  Brabantio 
intelligence  of  Othello's  having  married  Desdemona. 

3-5.  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  289) :  Arrange,  perhaps, — *  You  have  seen  nothing  then  ?  Nor 
everhea/d,  |  Nor  ever  did  suspect.  Yes,  you  have  seen  |  Cassio  and  she  together.'  Booth: 
Othello  should  look  her  steadily  in  the  eyes  while  questioning  her  with  incredulous  tones 


act  iv,  sc.  ii.J  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  255 

s£mil.     Nor  euer  heard  ;  nor  euer  did  fufpedt. 

Othe.     Yes,  you  haue  feene  CaJ/io^nd  fhe  together.  5 

AZniu     But  then  I  faw  no  harme  :  and  then  I  heard, 
Each  fyllable  that  breath  made  vp  betweene  them. 

Othe.     What  ?  Did  they  neuer  whifper  ? 

<d2tnil.     Neuer  my  Lord. 

Othe.     Nor  fend  you  out  o'thVay  ?  IO 

dEtnil.     Neuer. 

Othe.     To  fetch  her  Fan,  her  Gloues,  her  Mask,  nor  no- 

^Emil.     Neuer  my  Lord.  (thing  ? 

Othe.     That's  ftrange. 

^Emil.     I  durft(my  Lord) to  wager,  fhe  is  honeft:  IS 

Lay  downe  my  Soule  at  flake  :  If  you  thinke  other, 
Remoue  your  thought.     It  doth  abufe  your  bofome; 
If  any  wretch  haue  put  this  in  your  head  , 
Let  Heauen  requit  it  with  the  Serpents  curfe,  19 

5    Yes,"]  Yes,  and  Qq.  her  gloues  Qq. 

Jhe~\  her  Pope  +  ,  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Ktly.  12,13.  nothing  ?]  nothing.  Q3.  nothings 

7    them~\  'em  Qq,  Jen.  Q  . 

8.  What?]  Ff,  Rowe  +  .    What!  Coll.  18.  wretch']  wreatch  Qr 

Wh.  i,  Ktly.     What,  Qq  et  cet.  haue]  ha  Qq.    hath  F3F4,  Rowe  +  , 

10.  Nor]  Never  Q3.  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

11.  Neuer]  Never,  my  lord.  Ktly.  19.  Heauen]  heauens  Qx. 

12.  her  Gloues,  her  Mask]  her  mask,  requit]  requite Q,Ff.  require  QQ. 

5.  she]  See  Abbott,  §211,  and  to  the  instances  there  given  of  this  use  of  'she' 
for  her,  add  :  ' the  earth  hath  swallow'd  all  my  hopes  but  she'  Rom.  6°  Jul.  I,  ii,  14. 
Schmidt  also  gives,  'she  that  was  thy  Lucrece,'  R.  of  L.  1682;  '1  will  detest  myself 
also  as  well  as  she,'  Meas.for  Meas.  II,  i,  76;  '  She  should  this  Angelo  have  married,' 
lb.  Ill,  i,  221 ;  'but  she  I  can  hook  to  me,'  Wint.  Tale,  II,  iii,  6;  'for  she  that  scorned 
at  me,  now  scorned  of  me,'  Rich.  Ill :  IV,  iv,  102.  White  (ed.  ii)  :  Mere  careless- 
ness ;  not  the  '  grammar '  of  Shakespeare's  time. 

12.  Fan]  Halliwell  quotes  from  Fairholt  that  the  most  ordinary  fan  used  by 
Venetian  ladies  was  the  flag  or  vane-shaped  fan,  moving  round  an  upright  handle. 

12.  nor]  Elze  (Notes,  &c.  p.  189):  Although  this  line,  as  far  as  my  knowledge 
goes,  has  never  been  queried,  yet  I  cannot  but  think  it  faulty ;  I  feel  certain  that 
Shakespeare  wrote,  '  her  mask,  her  nothing.'  Compare  Cor.  II,  ii,  81  :  '  To  hear  my 
nothings  monster'd,'  although  it  seems  doubtful  whether  nothing  is  to  be  understood  in 
the  same  sense  in  these  two  passages.  Wint.  Tale,  I,  ii,  295  :  '  nor  nothing  have  these 
nothings,  If  this  be  nothing.' 

15.  durst  .  .  .  to]  For  other  instances  of  the  insertion  and  omission  of  to  before 
the  infinitive,  see  Abbott,  §  349. 

15-22.  Booth:  During  this  Othello  is  a  little  moved.  He  takes  a  chair  from 
behind  the  arras  and  sits. 

16.  other]  For  this  adverbial  use,  equivalent  to  otherwise,  see  Abbott,  §  12,  p.  24. 


256 


THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO       [act  iv,  sc.  n. 


For  if  fhe  be  not  honeft,  chafte,  and  true,  [331  U\ 

There's  no  man  happy.    The  pureft  of  their  Wiues  21 

Is  foule  as  Slander. 

OtJie.     Bid  her  come  hither  :  go.  Exit  ^Emilia. 

She  faies  enough  :  yet  fhe's  a  fimple  Baud 

That  cannot  fay  as  much.     This  is  a  fubtile  Whore :  25 

A  Cloffet  Lockeand  Key  of  Villanous  Secrets, 
And  yet  fhe'le  kneele,  and  pray  :  I  haue  feene  her  do't. 

Enter  Defdemonay  and  ^Emilia. 

Def.     My  Lord,what  is  your  will  ? 

Othe.     Pray  you  Chucke  come  hither.  30 

Def.     What  is  your  pleafure  ? 

Oth.     Let  me  fee  your  eyes  :  looke  in  my  face. 

Def.     What  horrible  Fan  tie's  this  ? 

Othe.     Some  of  your  Function  Miftris  : 
Leaue  Procreants  alone,  and  fhut  the  doore:  35 

Cough,  or  cry  hem;  if  any  bodycome  : 
Your  Myftery,  your  Myftery  :  May  difpatch.  Exit   ALmi.  37 


21.  their  Wines']  her  Sex  Qx,  Jen. 
23.  Exit...]  After  Slander  line  22,  Qq. 

25.  Whore"]  one  Han. 

26.  Clojfet  Lockeand  Key]  clofet,  locke 
and  key,  Qq.  cloffet-lock  and  key  Rowe, 
Pope,  closet-lock-and-key  Mai.  Steev.'93, 
Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  Wh.  i, 
Ktly,  Del.  Huds. 

27.  /  haue]  I  ha  Qq.  I've  Pope  + , 
Dyce  iii,  Huds. 

28.  Enter. ..and]  Reenter... with  Cap. 


Scene  IX.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

30.  Pray  you]  Ff,  Rowe+,  Knt,  Sta. 
Pray  Qq  et  cet. 

32.  eyes  :  looke]  eyes — looke  Qq,  Jen. 
eyes.  Look  Johns. 

32»  33-  looke. ..this  ?]  As  one  line,  Cap. 
Steev.  et  seq. 

34.  [To  ^Emilia.  Han.  Johns,  et  seq. 

36.  Cough]  Coffe  Qq. 

37.  May]  nay  QqFf. 
Exit...]  Om.  Q3Q3. 


27.  pray]  Heraud  (p.  279) :  Emilia's  supposed  hypocrisy  embitters  Othello  both 
against  her  and  her  calumniated  mistress.  Perhaps,  too,  the  poet  intended  his  free- 
thoughted  and  noble  Moor  to  entertain  a  customary  protest  against  superstitious  cere- 
monies ;  and  here  we  have  a  glimpse  vouchsafed  of  his  religious  tendency.  It  is  in 
this  furtive  manner  that  Shakespeare  always  alludes  to  the  theological  aspects  of  his 
theme.  Never  will  he  altogether  neglect  them ;  but  nowhere  will  he  thoroughly  unveil 
them.  Botn  political  and  religious  prudence  are  evidently  observed  by  Shakespeare  in 
the  treatment  of  all  his  subjects.  The  spirit  of  the  time  compelled  him  to  this  reticence. 
[See  Heraud,  III,  iii,  67.] 

32.  Booth  :  She  looks  up,  but,  frightened  by  his  piercing  glare,  drops  her  eyes  again. 

37.  Cowden-Clarke  :  Othello  taunts  Emilia  with  having  made  a  traffic  in  conni- 
vance at  stolen  meetings  between  Cassio  and  Desdemona,  and  now  bids  her  give  a 
specimen  of  her  proficiency  in  her  avocation.  Hudson  :  As  in  mere  wantonness  of 
self-torture,  Othello  here  fondles  the  most  agonizing  conceptions,  and  seeks  a  morbid 


ACT  IV,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


257 


Def.     Vpon  my  knee,  what  doth  your  fpeech  import?  38 

I  vnderftand  a  Fury  in  your  words. 

Othe.     Why  ?  What  art  thou  ?  40 

Def     Your  wife  my  Lord  :  your  true  and  loyall  wife. 

Othello.  Come  fweare  it  :  damne  thy  felfe,  leaft 
being  like  one  of  Heauen,  the  diuells  themfelues  mould 
feare  to  ceaze  thee.  Therefore  be  double  damn'd :  fweare 
thou  art  honeft.  45 

Def.     Heauen  doth  truely  know  it. 

Otke.Hea.uen  truely  knowes,  that  thou  art  falfe  as  hell. 

Def.     To  whom  my  Lord  ? 
With  whom  ?  How  am  I  falfe  ? 

Othe.     Ah  Def  demon,  away,  away,  away.  50 

Def.     Alas  the  heauy  day  :  why  do  you  weepe  ? 
Am  I  the  motiue  of  thefe  teares  my  Lord  ? 
If  happely  you  my  Father  do  fufpect, 
An  Inftrument  of  this  your  calling  backe,  54 


38.  knee]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt.  knees  Qq 
et  cet. 

doth]  does  Qq. 

39.  words."]  Ff,  Rowe.  words,  But  not 
the  words.  (As  a  separate  line)  Qq  et  cet. 
( your  words  Pope  +  ) . 

40.  Why?]Yiy  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Why,Qci 
et  cet. 

41.  42.  your  true.. .felfe]  As  one  line, 
Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  and.,  felfe  as  one  line, 
Steev.'93,  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh.  Glo. 
Ktly,  Rife. 

42-45.  Come... honeft]  Verse,  lines  end- 
ing felfe ...  themfelues. ..damrt 'd ...  honeft 
Qq,  Cap.  et  seq.  Three  lines,  ending  one .. . 
thee. ..honeft  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

42.  leaft]  Left  Q2Q3.    Om.  Ff,  Rowe. 


44.  ceaze]  ceafe  Qq.    ceife  F  .  feize  F  . 

47.  Dividing  the  line  at  knowes  Rowe  + . 

48,  49.  One  line,  Qq,  or  prose,  Cap.  et 
seq. 

50.  Ah  Defdemon,]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Knt,  Dyce,  Sta.  Del.  Huds.  Ah>  Desde- 
mona!  Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 
O  Desdemon  Wh.  i,  Coll.  iii.  O  Defde 
mona,  Qq  et  cet. 

[Sits.  Booth. 

51.  heauy]  heavenly  Q  . 

52.  motiue]   occafcon  Qq,  Jen.   Steev. 
Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly. 

thefe]  thofe  Qq,  Jen. 
[Kneels  beside  him.  Booth. 

53.  happely]  F2F3.    happily  F4,  Rowe. 
haply  Qq  et  cet. 


relief  in  thinking  of  Emilia  as  doing  the  office  or  mystery  of  a  procuress.     A  master- 
stroke of  delineation. 

38.  Rymer  (p.  130) :  Here  follows  another  storm  of  horrour  and  outrage  against  the 
poor  Chicken,  his  Wife.  Some  Drayman  or  drunken  Tinker  might  possibly  treat  his 
drab  at  this  sort  of  rate,  and  mean  no  harm  by  it ;  but  for  his  excellency,  a  My  Lord 
General,  to  Serenade  a  Senator's  Daughter  with  such  a  volly  of  scoundrel  filthy  Lan- 
guage, is  sure  the  most  absurd  Maggot  that  ever  bred  from  any  Poets  addle  brain. 

43.  Heauen]  Cowden-Clarke  :  These  few  words  serve  to  paint  Desdemona's  look 
of  angelic  purity,  as  well  as  the  impression  it  creates,  even  on  her  husband's  jaundiced 
sight. 

50.  Desdemon]  See  III,  i,  58. 
17 


258 


THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO       [act  iv,  sc.  i:. 


Lay  not  your  blame  on  me  :  if  you  haue  loft  him, 
I  haue  loft  him  too. 

Othe,     Had  it  pleas'd  Heauen, 
To  try  me  with  Affliction,  had  they  rain'd 
All  kind  of  Sores,  and  Shames  on  my  bare-head: 
Steep'd  me  in  pouertie  to  the  very  lippes, 
Giuen  to  Captiuitie,  me,  and  my  vtmoft  hopes, 
I  mould  haue  found  in  fome  place  of  my  Soule 
A  drop  of  patience.     But  alas,  to  make  me 
The  fixed  Figure  for  the  time  of  Scorne, 
To  point  his  flow,  and  mouing  finger  at. 


55 


60 


65 


55.  you  haue]  yorive  Pope. 

55.  56.  lofl...lofl]  left. ..left  Qx. 

56.  /]  Why  I  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 

57.  Heauen]  heavens  Johns.  Ktly. 

58.  they]  Ff,  Johns.  Dyce,  Glo.  Cam. 
Ktly,  Del.  Rife,  Wh.  ii.  it  Han.  he  Qq 
et  cet. 

rained]  rant'd  Qx. 

59.  kin  I]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,Cap.  Steev.'85. 
kindes  Q^^     hinds  Q  et  cet. 

on]  no  Q3. 

bare-head]  bare  head  QqF  . 

61.  Giutn]  Give  Q  . 

vtmoft]    Om.    Qq,    Pope,   Theob. 
Han.  Warb. 

62.  place]  part  Qq,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev.'o^, 
Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly. 


63.  drop]  prop  Theob.  conj.  withdrawn. 

64.  The  fixed  Figure]  Ff,  Knt,  Dyce  i, 
Sta.  Del.    A  fixed  figure,  Qq  et  cet. 

for... of]  of.,  for  Hunter,  Sta. 
time]  hand  Rowe  + ,  Cap.  Jen.  Coll. 
ii. 

65.  flow,  and  mouing]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Theob.  Han.  Knt,  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Del.  cold 
unmoving  Cartwright.  flow  vnmouing 
Qq  et  cet. 

finger]  fingers  Qx. 
at.]  at —  Rowe  +  ,  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce 
i,  Sta.  Del.  Ktly.  at;  Coll.  Wh.  i.  at! 
Glo.  Cam.  Dyce  iii,  Huds.  Rife,  Wh.  ii, 
at —  oh,  oh,  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
(01  01  in  separate  line,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai. 
Var.). 


57  et  seq.  Booth  :  With  all  the  pathos  you  are  capable  of. 

58.  they]  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  1 10)  shows  that '  Heaven '  is  used  as  plural,  by  instances 
not  alone  from  Shakespeare,  but  from  Massinger,  Beaumont  and  Fletcher,  Shirley,  Ford, 
and  others.     See  Ham.  Ill,  iv,  173,  175. 

64,  65.  Steevens  :  We  call  the  hour  in  which  we  are  to  die,  'the  hour  of  death,' — the 
time  when  we  are  to  be  judged,  '  the  day  of  judgement,' — the  instant  when  we  suffer 
calamity,  '  the  moment  of  evil ' ;  and  why  may  we  not  distinguish  the  time  which 
brings  contempt  along  with  it  by  the  title  of  '  the  time  of  scorn '  ?  Othello  takes  his 
idea  from  a  clock.  '  To  make  me  (says  he)  a  fixed  figure  (on  the  dial  of  the  world) 
for  the  hour  of  scorn  to  point  and  make  a  full  stop  at ! '  By  '  slow  unmoving  finger ' 
our  poet  could  have  meant  only  '  so  slow  that  its  motion  was  imperceptible.'  Thus,  in 
Ant.  &>  Cleo.  Ill,  iii,  22,  the  messenger,  describing  the  gait  of  the  demure  Octavia,  says, 
she  creeps ;  Her  motion  and  her  station  are  as  one,'  i.  e.,  she  moved  so  slowly  that  she 
appeared  as  if  she  stood  still.  Malone  :  Might  not  Shakespeare  have  written  *  for  the 
scorn  of  time,'  &c,  1.  e.,  the  marked  object  for  the  contempt  of  all  ages  and  all  time  ? 
So  in  Ham.  Ill,  i,  70,  '  the  whips  and  scorns  of  time.'  However,  in  support  of  the 
old  copies  it  may  be  observed  that  *  scorn '  is  personified  in  the  88th  Sonnet :  •  And 
place  my  merit  in  the  eye  of  scorn.'     The  epithet  unmoving  may  likewise  derive  some 


act  iv,  sc.  ii.j  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  259 


[64,  65.  time  of  Scorne  .  .  .  slow,  and  mouing  finger.] 
support  from  the  104th  Sonnet,  in  which  this  very  thought  is  expressed  :  '  Ah  !  yet  doth 
beauty,  like  a  dial-hand,  Steal  from  his  figure,  and  no  pace  perceiv'd ;  So  your  sweet 
hue,  which  methinks  still  doth  stand,  Hath  motion,  and  mine  eye  may  be  deceiv'd.' 
In  the  clocks  of  the  last  age  there  was,  I  think,  in  the  middle  of  the  dial-plate,  a 
figure  of  Time,  which,  I  believe,  was  in  our  poet's  thoughts  when  he  wrote  the  passage 
in  the  text.  The  finger  of  the  dial  was  the  technical  phrase.  So  in  Albovine,  by 
D'Avenant,  1629 :  '  Even  as  the  slow  finger  of  the  dial  Doth  in  its  motion  circular 
remove  To  distant  figures.'  The  reading  of  Fx,  *  and  moving,'  certainly  agrees  with 
the  image  presented,  and  its  counterpart,  better  than  unmoving,  which  can  be  applied 
to  a  clock  only  by  license  of  poetry  {not  appearing  to  move),  and  as  applied  to  '  scorn  ' 
has  but  little  force,  to  say  nothing  of  the  superfluous  epithet  '  slow ' ;  there  needs  no 
ghost  to  tell  us  that  that  which  is  unmoving  is  '  slow.'  '  Slow '  implies  some  sort  of 
motion,  however  little  it  may  be,  and  therefore  appears  to  me  to  favour  the  reading 
of  Ff.  M.  Mason:  Perhaps  we  should  read,  'slowly  moving  finger  at.'  Hunter  (ii, 
287)  :  I  have  little  doubt  that  the  particles  'of  and 'for'  have  changed  places;  and 
that,  on  the  whole,  the  true  reading  is,  '  The  fixed  figure  of  the  time,  for  Scorn  To 
point  his  slow  and  moving  finger  at.'  It  is  of  the  nature  of  that  feeling  which  leads  a 
person  to  suppose  himself  an  object  of  scorn  and  derision,  to  think  of  himself  also  as 
an  object  of  universal  attention.  Thus,  Othello  represents  to  himself  that  he  shall  be 
'the  fixed  figure  of  the  time,'  the  one  object  of  public  attention,  every  passer-by  point- 
ing at  him  the  finger  of  scorn.  Knight  :  There  is  certainly  the  most  extraordinary 
confusion  in  Malone's  interpretation ;  if  the  figure  of  Time  be  in  the  middle,  the  dial- 
hand  points  from  it,  and  not  at  it,  and  there  is  nothing  more  remarkable  in  one  numeral 
of  a  clock  than  in  another.  But  why  are  we  to  have  the  notion  of  a  clock  at  all  ?  There 
is  nothing  whatever  in  the  passage  to  warrant  us  in  believing  tnat  the  poet  meant  such 
a  metaphor.  By  the  '  fixed  figure '  we  understand,  literally,  a  living  man  exposed  to 
public  shame ;  or  an  effigy  exhibited  to  a  multitude,  as  Butler  has  it,  '  To  punish  in 
effigie  criminals.'  By  '  the  time '  we  receive  the  same  idea  as  in  Ham.  Ill,  i,  70,  where 
'  time '  is  used  distinctly  to  express  the  times,  the  age ;  and  it  is  used  in  the  same  way 
by  Ben  Jonson  :  '  Oh,  how  I  hate  the  monstrousness  of  time  ! '  In  the  expression  before 
us,  then,  the  '  time  of  scorn '  is  the  age  of  scorn.  The  '  slow  finger '  is  the  pausing 
finger,  pointing  at  the  fixed  figure ;  but  while  it  points  it  moves  in  mockery.  Shake- 
speare was  probably  thinking  of  the  Digito  Monstrari  of  the  ancients,  and  it  may  be, 
also,  of  the  finger  gesticulations  of  the  Italians.  Collier  (ed.  ii)  reads,  with  his 
(MS.),  'hand  of  scorn'  and  'slowly  moving  finger';  but  returns  to  the  Qq  in  ed.  iii. 
White  (ed.  i) ;  '  Unmoving'  may  mean  either  that  the  finger  of  scorn  does  not  move 
from  its  object,  or  that  it  moves  so  slowly  that  its  motion  is  not  perceived.  So  in  Lyly's 
Euphues  :  '  You  were  ignorant  of  the  practices,  thinking  the  Diall  stands  still,  because 
you  cannot  perceive  it  to  move.' — Sig.  E  e,  ed.  1597.  'The  tongue  of  a  Louer  should 
be  like  a  poynt  in  a  Dial,  which  though  it  goe  none  can  see  it  going.' — lb.  Sig.  Y,  3,  b. 
I  was  once  in  favour  of  Hunter's  transposition.  But  'the  time  of  scorn'  is  a  phrase 
like  'the  day  of  sorrow,'  'the  hour  of  joy,'  'the  age  of  progress.'  Bailey  (ii,  112) 
makes  '  the  passage  run  '  thus  :  '  A  fixed  figure  for  the  time,  in  scorn,  To  point  his  sly 

and  mocking  finger  at, '  and  then  adds :    '  These  epithets  greatly  enhance  the 

expression  of  Othello's  horror  of  the  ridicule  of  the  world.'  Keightley  {Exp.  305) : 
I  see  no  need  of  changing  the  text  of  the  Qto.  '  The  Time  of  scorn '  is  the  scornful 
age  or  world,  a  frequent  sense  of  '  time  ' ;  and  we  should  print,  '  To  point  his  slow — 
unmoving  finger  at,'  the  latter  term  being  a  correction  of  the  former.     Delius  :  •  Slovi 


260  THE   TRACED  IE    OF    OTHELLO       [act  iv,  sc.  n. 

Yet  could  I  beare  that  too,  well,  very  well  :  66 

But  there  where  I  haue  garnerd  vp  my  heart, 

Where  either  I  mult  Hue,  or  beare  no  life, 

The  Fountaine  from  the  which  my  currant  runnes, 

Or  elfe  dries  vp  ;  to  be  difcarded  thence,  70 

Or  keepe  it  as  a  Cefterne,  for  foule  Toades 

To  knot  and  gender  in.     Turne  thy  complexion  there  :  72 

67.  there  where]  there  ."where  Qr.  there,  71.  Toades]  Taodes  Q  . 

where  Q2Q3.  72.  in.]  in  :  Qq. 

69.  Fountaine]  foundation  Q3<  there:]  there,  Qq.     thence  Warb. 

7 1 .  Cejlcrne]  cejlern  Y%.     Ci/lern  F ' .  there  !  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Sing. 

and  moving,'  according  to  Shakespeare's  use  of  the  copula,  forms  one  idea  [like  '  by 
night  and  negligence,'  I,  i,  83].  Massey  {The  Secret  Drama,  &c.  p.  257)  :  Othello 
cannot  mean  that  he  is  made  into  a  clock  or  a  dial,  but  the  laughing-stock  of  the  time. 
R.  H.  Legis  (A7-.  6°  Qu.  5th,  vi,  25),  having  appropriated  Hunter's  emendation,  and 
changed  '  slow  '  to  low,  asserts  '  the  image  '  to  be  '  absolutely  correct  in  both  sense  and 
artistic  rectitude.'  Bulloch  (p.  252)  assumes  that  Othello  'had  in  view  the  scurrilous 
writers  of  pithy  lampoons,  those  vile  scoffing  wits  who  ridiculed  misfortune  and  enjoyed 
the  degradation  of  others,'  and  therefore  thus  emended  :  '  A  fixed  figure  for  the  rhymer's 
scorn,  To  point  his  foul  unmoving  finger  at.'  Cowden-Clarke  :  We  take  the  '  time 
of  scorn '  to  be  an  impersonation  of  the  scornful  spirit  of  the  epoch,  and  alluding  to 
the  image  of  Time  which  many  ancient  clocks  bore.  To  our  minds  the  combination 
'  slow,  unmoving,'  serves  exactly  to  describe  the  hand  of  a  dial,  with  its  onward-stealing 
yet  apparently  still  finger ;  so  that,  in  every  way,  the  idea  of  the  clock  is  presented  to 
the  imagination  by  this  passage.  John  Hunter  :  •  For  the  time  of  scorn '  is  for  scorrts 
opportunity.  Hudson  :  '  The  time  of  scorn '  means,  I  think,  the  age  of  scorn,  that  is, 
the  whole  period  during  which  scorn  may  be  said  to  live.  The  '  fixed  figure '  is  simply 
the  speaker  himself.  As  to  slow  unmoving,  the  sense  of  it  can  be  better  felt  than 
expressed ;  we  can  see  the  sneer  darting  from  the  inexorable  finger,  ever  slowly  moving 
with  the  object,  never  moving f-om  it  Rolfe  :  That  Shakespeare  should  be  supposed 
to  have  written  '  slow  and  moving,'  shows  what  a  poet  may  suffer  at  the  hands  of  a  pro- 
saic critic.  The  mistake  in  the  Folio  was  doubtless  one  of  the  ear  in  transcribing  the 
MS.  [I  am  afraid  that  this  may  be  classed  among  those  readings  to  which  Steevens 
elsewhere  refers  as  having  hitherto  disunited  the  opinions  of  the  learned,  and  which 
1  will  continue  to  disunite  them  as  long  as  England  and  Shakespeare  have  a  name.' — 
Ed.] 

67.  garner'd]  Johnson  :  The  'garner'  and  the  'fountain'  are  improperly  conjoined. 
Rolfe  :  But  a  succession  of  metaphors  is  not  a  fault,  like  the  mixing  of  them.  Delius  : 
The  word  is  finely  chosen ;  to  '  garner '  is  to  store  that  on  which  life  depends. 

67-70.  This  passage  Salvini  adduces  as  proof  that  Othello  was  not  jealous,  but  that 
his  love  was  of  a  purely  poetic  nature,  untainted  with  passion. 

72-74.  Johnson:  At  such  an  object  do  thou,  Patience,  thyself  change  colour;  at 
this  do  thou,  even  thou,  rosy  cherub  as  thou  art,  look  grim  as  hell.  The  old  editions 
and  the  new  have  it :  *  /  here  look  grim  as  hell.'  /  was  written  for  ay,  and  not  since 
corrected.  [It  was  hard,  very  hard,  for  Dr  Johnson  to  be  just  to  Theobald,  'poor  pid- 
dling Tibbald.'     The  foregoing  note  is  substantially  the  same  as  Theobald's,  and  foi 


act  iv,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


26l 


Patience,  thou  young  and  Rofe-lip'd  Cherubin, 
I  heere  looke  grim  as  hell. 

Def.     I  hope  my  Noble  Lord  efleemes  me  honeft. 

Othe,     Oh  I,  as  Sommer  Flyes  are  in  the  Shambles, 
That  quicken  euen  with  blowing.    Oh  thou  weed : 
Who  art  fo  louely  faire,  and  fmell'ft  fo  fweete, 
That  the  Senfe  akes  at  thee, 
Would  thou  had'ft  neuer  bin  borne. 

Def,     Alas,what  ignorant  fin  haue  I  committed  ? 


73 
75 


80 


73.  thou]  thy  Qq. 

74.  /  heere]  I  here  QqF3F4,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Warb.  Ay,  there  Theob.  There, 
there  Han.  Ay,  here  Johns.  Jen.  Ay,  there, 
Cap.  et  seq. 

75.  my  Noble]  my  Ff. 

76.  Sommer  Flyes]  fummers  flies  Qq. 
Summer-flies  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

Shambles]  fliamples  Q  . 
77-79.   Oh.. .thee]   Two  lines,  ending 
faire. ..thee  Qq,  Warb.  Jen. 

77.  thou  weed ':]  thou  blacke  weede,  Qq, 
Jen.  thou  bale  weed  Warb.  thou  base  weed 


Heath. 

78.  Who. ../aire,]     Why. .. faire  t    Qq, 
Warb.  Jen. 

and  fmelVfl]    Thou  fmelVfl  Qq, 
Warb.  Jen. 

79,  80.  That... borne.]  One  line,  Cap. 
Steev.  et  seq. 

79.  akes]  ashes  F2.    asks  F$F4,  Rowe  i. 

80.  thou  hadfl]  thad'fl  F3<     thou'dfl 
F  ,  Rowe. 

neuer]  Ff,  Rowe.   ne're  Qq.    ne'e* 
Pope  et  cet. 

bin]  been  FF. 


over  thirty  years,  when  Dr  Johnson  wrote,  Theobald's  text  had  read  Ay  for  /.  To 
S.  T.  P.  (N.  6°  Qu.  5th,  vi,  405),  Dr  Johnson's  interpretation  seems  very  forced  and 
inapplicable.  The  suggestion  is  then  ventured  that  '  possibly  the  words  were  meant  as 
addressed  to  Desdemona,  who  first  blushes  at  Othello's  gross  accusations.  He  then 
bursts  out  in  admiration  of  her  beauty ;  and  then  when  she  looks  gravely  indignant, 
challenges  her  to  "look  grim  as  hell."  '  S.  T.  P.  demands  no  verbal  change,  but  appa- 
rently finds  the  passage  cured  by  an  heroic  exhibition  of  exclamation-marks. — Ed.] 

73.  Cherubin]  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  either  Shakespeare,  or  his  contempo- 
raries, knew  or  cared  that  this  is  a  Chaldee  Plural.  Cotgrave  translates  '  Cherubin, 
a  cherubin,'  and  it  is  probably  through  the  French  that  the  word  was  introduced  into 
English. — Ed. 

76.  Sommer  Flyes]  These  words  might  serve,  in  F4  as  an  approximate  test,  among 
the  various  copies,  of  priority  in  printing.  The  Cammudge  Edition  notes  between 
them  a  hyphen.  In  one  of  my  copies  of  F  ,  this  hyphen  is  distinct  and  unmistaka- 
ble; in  the  second,  it  is  quite  faint;  in  the  third,  it  has  vanished,  leaving  behind  a 
warning  to  all  not  to  lean  too  confidingly  on  the  punctuation  of  the  old  texts. — Ed. 

79,  80.  Walker  [Crit.  iii,  289)  reduces  these  two  lines  to  the  rhythmical  standard 
by  omitting  '  That '  and  contracting  '  thou  hadst ' :  '  The  sense  aches  at  thee, — Would 
th'  hadst  ne'er  been  born  ! '     [See  Text.  N.] 

79.  akes]  Thus  the  verb  is  uniformly  spelled  throughout  the  Folio;  one  of  the 
instances,  we  have  had  before  in  this  play,  III,  iv,  168;  the  noun  is  spelled  ache,  and 
its  plural  is  dissyllabic,  from  which  it  is  reasonable  to  infer  that  the  singular  was  pro- 
nounced aatsh.  There  'js  an  oversight  in  Ellis's  Early  Eng.  Pronunciation,  p.  930, 
where  this  present  line  is  cited  as  an  instance  of  a  '  Monosyllabic  Plural.' — Ed. 


262 


THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO       [act  iv,  sc.  ii. 


OtJie.  Was  this  faire  Paper  ?  This  moft  goodly  Booke  82 

Made  to  write  Whore  vpon  ?  What  commited, 
Committed  ?  Oh,  thou  publicke  Commoner,  [332  a~\ 

I  mould  make  very  Forges  of  my  cheekes,  85 

That  would  to  Cynders  burne  vp  Modeftie, 
Did  I  but  fpeake  thy  deedes.     What  commited  ? 
Heauen  fboppes  the  Nofe  at  it,  and  the  Moone  winks : 
The  baudy  winde  that  kiffes  all  it  meetes, 
Is  hufh'd  within  the  hollow  Myne  of  Earth  90 


82.  Paper  ?]  paper,  Qq. 

83.  vpon  f\  on  ? —  Qx,  Jen. 

lVhat~\  What,  Qx.  what,  what 
Theob.  Warb.  Han.  Johns.  Cap.  What 
rin  Ktly. 

84-87.  Om.  Qx. 

87.  Did]  Jliould  Cap.  (Corrected  in 
Errata). 


87.  /  but]  but  I  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 

deedes.]  deed.  Jen.  Steev.'85. 
What]   What,  what  Theob.  Han. 
Warb.  Johns.  Cap.     What  sin  Ktly. 
commited]  Fx.     committad  Q  . 
90.  hollow]  hallow  Qx. 


82.  83.  Steevens  :  Massinger  has  imitated  this  in  The  Emperor  of  the  East,  IV,  v. 
Gifford,  in  a  note  (p.  321)  to  this  passage  in  Massinger,  observes  that  there  are  sev- 
sral  other  short  passages  in  that  same  scene  copied  from  Othello.  Rolfe  :  For  the 
metaphor,  compare  King  John,  II,  i,  485;  Rom.  &  Jul.  I,  iii,  87;  III,  ii,  83;  R.  of 
L.  615,  1253,  &c. 

83.  commited]  Malone  :  This  word,  in  Shakespeare's  time,  besides  its  general 
signification,  seems  to  have  been  applied  particularly  to  unlawful  acts  of  love.  [Might 
not  this  have  been  due  to  its  use  in  the  Seventh  Commandment  ? — Ed.]  Knight  : 
Othello,  indignant  at  Desdemona's  question,  with  a  mocking  fury  repeats  it  foui 
times, — 'what  committed?'  The  commentators  have  changed  it  into  an  interjectional 
phrase,  telling  us  that  '  committed '  had  a  peculiar  signification.  The  plain  and  natural 
interpretation  seems  the  true  one.  Deighton  agrees  with  Knight ;  '  Othello  repeats 
interrogatively,  over  and  over  again,  the  last  word  of  Desdemona's  speech,  which  is 
here  used  in  its  ordinary  sense.' 

84.  Booth  :  Not  too  violently, — more  of  indignation  than  anger. 

85.  my]  White  (ed.  i) :  I  suspect  that  Shakespeare  wrote  thy.  The  misprint  is 
common.  Othello  has  already,  when  with  Iago,  spoken  Desdemona's  imputed  deeds 
veiy  plainly ;  and  would  Shakespeare  have  forgotten  that  Othello's  cheeks  were  too 
dark  to  show  a  blush  ?  or,  still  more,  would  he  have  referred  the  blush  in  such  a  case 
to  the  countenance  of  the  man  when  the  woman  was  present  ?  In  Tit.  And.  IV,  ii, 
Aaron  the  Moor  speaks  of  Chiron's  '  beauty '  as  a  '  treacherous  hue,  that  will  betray 
with  blushing?  whereas  his  own  blackamoor  child  is  a  '  lad  fram'd  of  another  leer.1 
Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  But,  as  Lettsom  observes,  '  Othello  is  speaking  not  of  blushes,  but  of 
heat.'  White  (ed.  ii) :  A  doubtful  reading.  Shakespeare  surely  may  have  written 
*  thy  cheeks.'  Not  only  was  it  Desdemona's  part  to  flush,  but  Othello's  cheek  was 
black. 

89.  baudy]  Malone:  So  in  Mer.  of  Ven.  II,  vi,  16.  Halliwei.l:  The  wind  is 
more  elegantly  alluded  to  in  Hen.  V,  as  the  '  chartered  libertine.'  Rolfe  :  So,  Mid, 
<V.  D.  II,  i,  129. 


ACT  IV,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


263 


And  will  not  hear,t.     What  commited  ? 

Def.     By  Heauen  you  do  me  wrong. 

Othe.     Are  not  you  a  Strumpet? 

Def.     No,  as  I  am  a  Chriftian. 
If  to  preferue  this  veffell  for  my  Lord, 
From  any  other  foule  vnlawfull  touch 
Be  not  to  be  a  Strumpet,  I  am  none. 

Othe.     What,  not  a  Whore  ? 

Def.     No,  as  I  (hall  be  fau'd. 

Othe.     Is't  pofiible  ? 

Def.     Oh  Heauen  forgiue  vs. 

Othe.     I  cry  you  mercy  then. 
I  tooke  you  for  that  cunning  Whore  of  Venice, 
That  married  with  Othello.     You  Miftris, 

Enter  ALrnilia. 
That  haue  the  office  oppofite  to  Saint  Peter, 
And  keepes  the  gate  of  hell.    You,  you  :  I  you. 


91 


95 


100 


105 
107 


91.  hear't.]  hear't: —  Qq.     hear  of  it 
Ktly.     hear  it  Steev.  et  seq. 

What  commited ?]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Knt.  what  committed, — impudent  flrum- 
pet.  Qq.  Committed? — impudent  strum- 
pet! Han.  Committed!  what  committed 7 
Impudent  strumpet !  Cap.  What  sin  com- 
mitted! Impudent  strumpet !  Ktly.  What 
committed? — Impudent  strumpet !  Theob. 
et  cet. 

Reading  Impudent  strumpet  as  if  of 
*lne  92,  Cap.  Coll.  et  seq. 

96.  other]  hated  Qx,  Jen.  Wh.  i. 

99.  fau'd.]  faued.    Enter  Emillia  Qx. 
faued.  Q3Q3. 

100.  Is't]  Is  it  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll. 
Wh.  i,  Del. 

ioi.  forgiue  vs\  forgiueneffe  Qx. 
102.  mercy  then.]  mercy,  Qx. 


103.  Venice,]  Venice,   Enter  Emillia. 

Q,Q3- 

104.  Othello.  You]  Othello.  [Raising 
his  voice]  You  Glo.  Cam.  Wh.  ii. 

Scene  X.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

You  Miflris,]  Come  you,  mistress, 
Han.  You,  mistress,  there!  Cap.  You, 
misteress,  Ktly. 

105.  Enter...]  After  you.  line  107,  Knt, 
Coll.  iii.  After  hell  line  107,  Dyce,  Sta. 
Wh.  Glo.  Cam.  Del. 

106.  Saint  Peter]  S.  Peter  Qq.  Saint 
Peter's  Ktly. 

107.  keepes]  QqF2.  keeps  FF4>  keeli 
Rowe  et  cet. 

gate  of]  gates  in  Qq. 

hell.]  hell,  Qx.     hell;  Q9Q3. 

You,you  :  lyou.]  I,you,you,you , 
Qx.  you,  you,  I,  you  Q2Q3.  you,  you  !  Ay 
you!  Rowe  et  seq. 


95.  vessell]  Upton  (p.  219):  Thus,  in  /  Thess.  iv,  4:  'To  possess  his  vessel  in 
sanctification.' 

104.  Mistris]  Walker  (  Vers.  48) :  That  is,  '  mist(e)ress.'  [See  Keightley,  Text. 
N.,  and  II,  ii,  242.] 

106.  opposite]  Hudson  :  The  opposition  is  between  Emilia,  as  keeper  of  the  gate 
of  Hell,  and  Saint  Peter,  as  keeper  of  the  gate  of  Heaven.  The  sense,  therefore, 
requires  that  the  special  emphasis,  if  there  be  any,  should  be  laid  on  'opposite.' 

107.  Booth  :  Desdemona  sinks  to  the  floor,  whence  Emilia,  at  line  ill,  raises  her 


264 


THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO       [act  iv,  so  ii. 


We  haue  done  our  courfe :  there's  money  for  your  paines : 
I  pray  you  turne  the  key,  and  keepe  our  counfaile.    Exit. 

Amil.     Alas,  what  do's  this  Gentleman  conceiue  ? 
How  do  you  Madam  ?  how  do  you  my  good  Lady  ? 

Def.     Faith,  halfe  a  fleepe. 

Ami.     Good  Madam, 
What's  the  matter  with  my  Lord  ? 

Def.     With  who  ? 

Amil.     Why,  with  my  Lord,  Madam  ? 

Def.     Who  is  thy  Lord  ? 

Amil.     He  that  is  yours,  fweet  Lady. 

Def.     I  haue  none  :  do  not  talke  to  me,  Amilia, 
I  cannot  weepe  :  nor  anfweres  haue  I  none, 
But  what  mould  go  by  water.     Prythee  to  night, 
Lay  on  my  bed  my  wedding  fheetes,  remember, 
And  call  thy  husband  hither. 

Amil.     Heere's  a  change  indeed.  Exit. 

Def.     'Tis  meete  I  fhould  be  vs'd  fo  :  very  meete. 
How  haue  I  bin  behau'd,  that  he  might  fticke 
The  fmall'ft  opinion  on  my  leaft  mifvfe  ? 


108 


no 


115 


I2Ci 


125 
127 


108.  We  haue]  WehaQq.    We'veDyce 
iii. 

113,  114.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 

115.  who]  whom  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Jen.  Coll. 
Ktly.     whom,  ALmilia  ?  Han. 

116.  Why,]  Om.  Cap.  Steev.^. 

117.  118.  Om.  Qx. 

119.  I  haue]  I  ha  Qq. 

120.  anfweres]    F2.      anfwers    FF, 
Rowe.     anfwer  Qq  et  cet. 

121.  Prythee]  Pray  Pope  +  . 


122.  my  wedding]  our  wedding  Qx,  Jen. 

124.  Heere's]  Here  is  Qq,  Cap.  Jen. 
Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly. 

125.  vs'd]  vfde  0,0,.     ufed  %. 
very  meete.]  very  well;  Qx. 

1 27.  fmalVfl]fniallefl  Qx,  Rowe  i,  Jeu. 

on]  of  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

leafl  mifvfe?]  greatefl  abufe  Qx, 

Jen.  great' 'st  abuse  Steev.  Mai.  Rann.  Var. 

Sta.  Dyce  iii,  Huds.     least  misdeed  Coll. 

(MS). 


108.  paines]  Hudson  quotes  White  :  Othello,  who  in  his  relations  towards  women 
is  one  of  the  most  delicate  and  sensitive  of  men,  in  the  bitterness  of  his  soul  pays  his 
wife's  own  maid  as  he  leaves  the  former's  bed-chamber;  not  either  to  reward  or  to 
offend  Emilia,  but  that  he  may  torment  his  own  soul  by  carrying  out  his  supposition  to 
its  most  revolting  consequences.  Fechter  :  He  throws  a  purse  on  the  table  and  exit. 
Booth  :  Don't  use  a  purse,  it  is  absurd,  and  'tis  not  likely  that  Iago  would  pass  it  by ; 
he  confesses  himself  a  thief  in  his  dealings  with  Roderigo,  and  he  would  never  leave  a 
purse  of  money  unheeded  on  the  floor.  This  purse  once  tempted  me  so  annoyingly 
that  I  picked  it  up,  and  very  properly  was  reproved  for  it, — but  I  could  not  help  it. 

121.  water]  Hudson:  That  is,  be  expressed  by  tears.  Surely  a  conceit  quite  out 
of  place.  Laertes,  in  Ham.  IV,  iv,  vents  a  similar  one  on  learning  that  his  sister  is 
drowned. 

127.  snisvse]  Singer:  'On'  must  be  understood  to  signify  of     The  sense  appears 


act  IV,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE  OF   VENICE  265 

Enter  Iago.  and  ALrnilia.  128 

Iago.     What  is  your  pleafure  Madam  ? 
How  is't  with  you  ?  1 30 

Def.     I  cannot  tell  :  thofe  that  do  teach  yong  Babes 
Do  it  with  gentle  meanes,  and  eafie  taskes. 
He  might  haue  chid  me  fo  :  for  in  good  faith 
I  am  a  Child  to  chiding. 

Iago,     What  is  the  matter  Lady  ?  135 

jEmil.     Alas  (Iago)  my  Lord  hath  fo  bewhor'd  her, 
Throwne  fuch  difpight,  and  heauy  termes  vpon  her 
That  true  hearts  cannot  beare  it. 

Def.     Am  I  that  name,  Iago  ? 

Iago,     What  name,(faire  Lady  ?)  140 

Def.     Such  as  fhe  faid  my  Lord  did  fay  I  was. 

ALmil.     He  call'd  her  whore  :  a  Begger  in  his  drinke : 
Could  not  haue  laid  fuch  termes  vpon  his  Callet.  143 

Scene  XI.  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  138.  That]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt.    As  Qq 

129.  130.  One  line,  Pope  et  seq.  et  cet. 

130.  is't]  is  it  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  beare  it]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,Knt.  bean 
Wh.  i.  Qq  et  cet. 

131.  yong]youngQ<\.  yourFf,  Rowe,  141.  faid]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Knt,  Sta. 
Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb.  fayes  Qq  et  cet. 

133.  haue]  ha  Qq.  143.  laid]  layed  Q,Q2.     laied  Q3. 

134.  to]  at  Qx,  Jen.  fuch]  worse  Cap.  conj. 

135.  What  is]  What's  F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Callet]  called  Coll.  Dyce,  Sta.  Wh 
Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Steev.'93,  Var.  Coll.  Glo.  Cam.  Del.  Rife. 

Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  Wh.  Glo.  Cam.  Ktly,  Del. 

to  be :  '  How  have  I  behaved  that  he  can  attach  the  smallest  notion  of  the  least  mis- 
conduct ? '  Hudson  [adopting  Qx]  :  A  very  harsh  and  awkward  expression,  but  mean- 
ing, '  What  have  I  been  doing,  that  upon  my  worst  act  he  should  fasten  the  slightest 
imputation  of  crime  ? '  We  cannot  take  '  on '  here  as  equivalent  to  of  for  the  connec- 
tion is  *  stick  on '  and  not  '  opinion  on ' ;  so  that  '  least '  of  F,  does  not  give  the  right 
sense.  ['  How  have  I  been  behaved  that  he  could  find  the  smallest  possible  fault  with 
my  smallest  possible  misdeed  ? '  a  paraphrase  which  is  substantially  the  same  as  Cowden- 
Clarke's.— Ed.] 

136-138.  Cowden-Clarke  :  This  shows  that  Emilia,  among  her  other  objection- 
able characteristics,  is  a  listener, — a  mean  listener  at  doors. 

139.  that  name]  Mrs  Jameson  (ii,  42) :  A  stroke  of  consummate  delicacy,  sur- 
prising, when  we  remember  the  latitude  of  expression  prevailing  in  Shakespeare's  time, 
and  which  he  allowed  his  other  women  generally.  So  completely  did  Shakespeare 
enter  into  the  angelic  refinement  of  the  character. 

143.  Callet]  Gifford  (Note  in  Jonson's  Volpone,  IV,  i,  p.  277) :  Callet,  callat,  or 
calot  is  used  by  all  our  old  writers  for  a  strumpet  of  the  basest  kind.  It  is  derived,  as 
Urry  observes,  from  calote,  Fr.,  a  sort  of  cap  once  worn  by  country-girls;  and,  like  a 


266  THE   TR  AGE  DIE   OF  OTHELLO       [act  IV,  SC.  il 

I  ago.     Why  did  he  fo  ? 

Def.     I  do  not  know  :  I  am  fure  I  am  none  fuch.  14$ 

Iago.     Do  not  weepe,  do  not  weepe  :  alas  the  day. 

ALmil.     Hath  fhe  forfooke  fo  many  Noble  Matches  ? 
Her  Father  ?  And  her  Country  ?  And  her  Friends  t 
To  be  calPd  Whore?  Would  it  not  make  one  weepe?        [332  b\ 

Def.     It  is  my  wretched  Fortune.  1 50 

Iago.     Befhrew  him  for't : 
How  comes  this  Tricke  vpon  him  ? 

Def.     Nay,  Heauen  doth  know. 

Aimi.     I  will  be  hang'd,  if  fome  eternall  Villaine, 
Some  bufie  and  infinuating  Rogue,  153 

Some  cogging,  cozening  Slaue,  to  get  fome  Office, 

145.  I  am  fure]  Fmsure  Pope  +  ,Dyce  148.  And  her  Friends']  all  her  friends 

iii.  Qx. 

147.  Hath]  Has  Qq,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev.  151,  152.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe+,  Jen. 

'93,  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly.  151.  for 7]  for  it  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Mai. 

Var.  Coll.  Wh.  i. 

hundred  other  terms  of  this  nature,  from  designating  poverty  or  meanness,  finally  came, 
by  no  unnatural  progress,  to  denote  depravity  and  vice.  Dyce  [Gloss.)  cites  Cotgrave  : 
'  Goguenelle,  A  fained  title,  or  tearme,  for  a  wench;  like  our  Gixie,  Callet,  Minx,  &c.' 
Wedgwood  (s.  v.  ed.  ii) :  Probably  an  unmeasured  use  of  the  tongue  is  the  leading 
idea.  ne.  to  callet,  to  rail,  or  scold ;  calleting,  pert,  saucy,  gossiping.  [I  do  not  find 
it  in  Skeat. — Ed.] 

150.  Othello  echoes  this  with  'Who  can  control  his  fate ? '  V,  ii,  328. — Ed. 

154.  Fechter  :  Suspiciously  eyeing  Iago.  Cowden-Clarke  :  Emilia,  by  no  means, 
here  refers  to  her  husband,  but  to  some  one  who,  as  she  thinks,  has  misled  both  Iago 
and  Othello.  She  has  before  told  the  Moor,  '  If  any  wretch  have  put  this  in  your  head, 
let  Heaven  requite  it  with  the  serpent's  curse.'  Her  suspicion  never  for  an  instant  falls 
on  her  own  husband.  [Witness  her  incredulity,  in  the  last  Scene,  when  Othello  tells 
her  it  was  '  her  husband '  who  first  told  him  Desdemona  was  false  to  wedlock. — Ed.] 
Booth  :  This  is  spoken  without  intended  reference  to  Iago. 

154.  eternall]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  62)  cites  this  passage  and  Ham.  I,  v,  21;  V,  ii, 
352,  and  Jul.  Cats.  IV,  ii,  160,  as  instances  of  the  inaccurate  use  by  Shakespeare  of 
'eternal'  for  infernal.  See  also,  to  the  same  effect,  Abbott,  Introduction,  p.  16. 
[Walker's  instances  from  Ha?7ilet  may  be  well  chosen ;  in  '  this  eternal  blazon,'  and  in 
'  what  feast  is  toward  in  thine  eternal  cell,'  Shakespeare  may  have  used  the  word  inac- 
curately ;  it  is  also  possible  that  the  error  is  the  printer's.  But  here  in  Othello  and  in 
Jul.  Cas.  ('  There  was  a  Brutus  once,  that  would  have  brook'd  Th'  eternal  devil,'  &c.) 
the  supposition  of  inaccuracy  is,  I  think,  far  from  probable.  Walker  himself  says  that  the 
phrase  '  eternal  villain '  seems  to  be  still  in  use  among  the  common  people,  and  antici- 
pates the  thought  which  rises  in  every  American  mind,  when  he  adds:  'I  need  scarcely 
notice  the  Yankee  'tarnal.'  When  needs  must,  nowadays,  we  speak  of  our  friends  as 
'  everlasting  fools  ' ;  I  think,  therefore,  that  here  Emilia  means  what  she  says. — Ed.] 

156.  Slaue]  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  307) :  Does  'slave'  here  mean  anything  more  than 


ACT  iv,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  267 

Haue  not  deuis'd  this  Slander  :  I  will  be  hang'd  elfe.  157 

Iago,     Fie,  there  is  no  fuch  man  :  it  is  impoffible. 

Def.     If  any  fuch  there  be,  Heauen  pardon  him. 

ALmiL    A  halter  pardon  him :  160 

And  hell  gnaw  his  bones. 
Why  mould  he  call  her  Whore  ? 
Who  keepes  her  companie  ? 
What  Place  ?  What  Time  ? 

What  Forme  ?  What  liklyhood  ?  165 

The  Moore's  abus'd  by  fome  moft  villanous  Knaue, 
Some  bafe  notorious  Knaue,  fome  fcuruy  Fellow. 
Oh  Heauens,  that  fuch  companions  thou'd'ft  vnfold, 
And  put  in  euery  honeft  hand  a  whip 

To  lafh  the  Rafcalls  naked  through  the  world,  170 

Euen  from  the  Eaft  to  th'Weft. 

Iago,     Speake  within  doore. 

^Emil,     Oh  fie  vpon  them:  fome  fuch  Squire  he  was 
That  turn'd  your  wit,  the  feamy-fide  without,  174 

157.  Haue]    Has    Ff,   Rowe+,   Cap.  168.  thou 'd'f]  thoadjl  QxQ2.  Jhould/l 
Steev.'85.                                                          Qr 

deuis'd]  deuifde  QXQ3>     devifed  170.  Rafcalh~\  rafcall  QqFf,  Rowe  +  , 

Q  .  Cap.  Mai.  Steev.'93,  Var.  Sing.  Coll.  Hi. 

I  will}  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.    Pie  Qx.  171.  Euen]  Ev'n  Pope  +  . 

lie  Q2Q3.     Pll  Pope  et  cet.  to  th']  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Wh.  i.     tdth 

158.  Fie~\  Separate  line,  Dyce  iii.  Q3Q3'     *°  Me  Qx  et  cet. 

159.  there  be]  there  are  Q,Q3.  172.  doore]  dores  Qq,  Jen. 
160-165.  Three  lines,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq.              173.  them]  him  Qq,  Han.  Cap.  Steev. 

166.  mojl  villanous]  outragious  Qx.  Mai.  Var.  Sing. 

168.  Oh  Heauens]  Ff,  Rowei.  0  heauen  Squire]  ' Squire  F  ,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

Qq  et  cet.  173—175-  fome... Moore]  Aside  to  Iago 

companions]     companion     Han.  Sta. 
Cap.  174.  feamy-fide]  feamy  fide  QqF  F  . 

villain,  abandoned  wretch  ?     This  use  of  '  slave '  (compare  the  Italian  cattivo,  whence 
our  caitiff)  is  frequent  in  old  plays. 

158.  Walker  [Vers.  272):  Arrange  and  write,  perhaps, — « Fie  |  There's  no  such 
man,  it  is  impossible.'  [Dyce  (ed.  iii)  adopted  this.]  Booth  :  Wait  until  the  effect 
of  her  speech  is  past.  Fechter  :  Iago  has  not  even  frowned,  but  looks  at  her  with 
cold  self-possession. 

167.  notorious]  Johnson  :  For  gross,  not  in  its  proper  meaning  for  known. 

168.  companions]  Malone:  Used  as  a  word  of  contempt,  in  the  same  sense  <u> 
fellow  is  at  this  day. 

172.  Johnson  :  Do  not  clamour  so  as  to  be  heard  beyond  the  house.  Booth  :  Goes 
to  her  and  speaks  low. 

174.  seamy-side]  Johnson:  That  is,  inside  out.  Steevens  :  Compare  II,  ii,  69: 
'Whom  Love  hath  turn'd  almost  the  wrong  side  out.' 


268  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO       [act  iv,  sc.  ii. 

And  made  you  to  fufpe<5t  me  with  the  Moore.  175 

Iago.     You  are  a  Foole  :  go  too. 

Dcf.     Alas  Iago, 
What  fhall  I  do  to  win  my  Lord  againe  ? 
Good  Friend,  go  to  him  :  for  by  this  light  of  Heauen, 
I  know  not  how  I  loft  him.    Heere  I  kneele  :  180 

If  ere  my  will  did  trefpaffe  'gainft  his  Loue, 
Either  in  difcourfe  of  thought,  or  actuall  deed, 
Or  that  mine  Eyes,  mine  Eares,  or  any  Sence  183 

176.  [Aside  to  Emilia.  Sta.  180.  Two  lines,  Q2Q3. 

too]  to  QqFf.  180-193.  Heere...ms]  Om.  Qx. 

177.  Alas]    Ff,    Rowe  +  ,   Cap.    Knt,  180.  [kneeling.  Rowe+,  Cap.  Jen. 
Dyce,  Sta.  Wh.  i,  Coll.  iii.    0  good  Qq  et  182.  Either]  Or  Pope  +  . 

cet.  of  thought]    or   thought    Q9Q3» 

179.  for]  Om.  Pope  +  .  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Steev.'85,  Huds. 

176.  Booth  :  Angrily,  but  sotto  voce. 

181.  Booth  :  Iago  replaces  chair  behind  the  arras. 

182.  discourse  of  thought]  This  phrase  is  no  easier  of  comprehension  than  the 
similar  phrase  in  Ham.  I,  ii,  150,  to  which  Malone  refers  :  *  discourse  of  reason.'  The 
precise  meaning  which  our  ancestors  attached  to  '  discourse '  it  is  now  very  difficult  to 
determine,  as  Gifford  says  in  a  note,  cited  in  this  edition,  on  the  passage  in  Hamlet. 
Johnson,  in  his  Diet.,  defines  it  as  '  the  act  of  the  understanding,  by  which  it  passes  from 
premises  to  consequences,'  which  is  little  else  than  a  paraphrase  of  his  own  illustration 
from  Glanville,  which  reads  :  '  The  third  act  of  the  mind  is  that  which  connects  propo- 
sitions, and  deduceth  conclusions  from  them;  and  this  the  schools  call  discourse;  and 
we  shall  not  miscall  it,  if  we  name  it  reason.'  But  that  it  was  not  mere  *  reason,'  as 
Shakespeare  used  it,  is  clear  from  the  phrase  '  discourse  of  reason,'  nor  that  it  was  merely 
'  the  reasoning  faculty,'  as  some  have  defined  it,  as  is  shown  by  this  phrase  in  Othello, 
*  the  discourse  of  thought.'  May  it  not  be  that  in  the  few  instances  where  Shakespeare 
uses  it  in  reference  to  the  operations  of  the  mind  (I  speak  with  great  hesitation)  that  its 
Latin  origin  was  uppermost  in  his  thought,  vaguely,  perhaps,  but  still  operative,  espe- 
cially if,  as  is  not  unlikely,  he  pronounced  the  word  'discoorse,'  Hidemici?  This 
would  lead  to  Singer's  paraphrase,  discursive  range,  which,  although  somewhat  tauto- 
logical, is,  perhaps,  as  satisfactory  as  any  that  has  been  yet  proposed.  Why  may  we 
not  omit  the  discursive,  and  say  that  '  discourse  when  applied  to  the  mind  means  the 
range  ? '  Thus,  '  a  beast  that  wants  the  range  of  reason  ' ;  '  he  that  made  us  with  so 
large  a  range,  looking  before  and  after.'  This,  too,  will  explain  what  Guildenstern 
says  to  Hamlet  (III,  ii,  320),  'put  your  discourse  into  some  frame,'  i.  e.,  'restrict  the 
range  of  your  fancies.'  And  here,  too,  in  Othello,  Desdemona  says,  *  either  in  range 
of  thought,  or  actual  deed.' — Ed.  Steevens  gives  a  note,  signed  '  C,'  to  the  effect  that 
the  Qq  are  right,  and  that  Desdemona  refers  to  the  three  ways  of  committing  sin,  men 
tioned  in  the  Catholic  Catechisms  [and  in  our  Liturgy,  adds  Steevens],  viz. :  in  thought, 
word,  and  deed.  Verplanck  and  Hudson  prefer  the  Qq.  The  former  says:  'The  or. 
of  the  Qq  appears  to  me  more  probable  in  itself,  because  more  impressive,  and  more  in 
unison  with  the  particularity  of  Desdemona's  asseveration  of  innocence  in  every  possi- 
ble manner.' 


ACT  IV,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


Delighted  them  :  or  any  other  Forme. 

Or  that  I  do  not  yet,  and  euer  did, 

And  euer  will,  (though  he  do  fliake  me  off 

To  beggerly  diuorcement)  Loue  him  deerely, 

Comfort  forfweare  me.     Vnkindneffe  may  do  much, 

And  his  vnkindneffe  may  defeat  my  life, 

But  neuer  taynt  my  Loue.     I  cannot  fay  Whore, 

It  do's  abhorre  me  now  I  fpeake  the  word, 

To  do  the  A6t,  that  might  the  addition  earne, 

Not  the  worlds  Maffe  of  vanitie  could  make  me. 

Iago,     I  pray  you  be  content  :  'tis  but  his  humour 
The  bufineffe  of  the  State  do's  him  offence. 

Def.     If 'twere  no  other. 

Iago.     It  is  but  fo,  I  warrant, 
Hearke  how  thefe  Inftruments  fummon  to  fupper : 
The  Meffengers  of  Venice  ftaies  the  meate, 


269 
185 


190 


195 


199 


184.  them:  or]  Ff.    them  on  Rowe  4- . 
them  in  Q2Q3  et  cet. 

Forme, .]    forme;    Q2Q3-    form: 
FF  . 

3     A 

1 88.  forfweare  me.~\  for  f ware  me  Q  . 

190.  cannot]  can't  Pope  +  ,  Cap. 

191.  do's]  doth  Q2Q3. 

192.  the  addition]  th'  addition  Q2Q3, 
Pope  + ,  Jen.  Dyce  iii. 

195.  offence.]  Ff,  Rowe.    offence,  And 
he  does  chide  with  you  Qq  et  cet. 

196.  'twere]  t'ware  Q  . 

other.]  QqFf,  Rowe.    other  !  Knt, 
Sta.  Wh.  i.     other —  Pope  et  cet. 


197.  //  is]  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai. 
Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Sta.  Ktly.    Tis  Qq  et  cet. 

warrant^]  warrant  you,  Qq,  Jen. 
Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 
[Trumpets.  Rowe. 

198.  fummon]  fummon  you  Qq,  Jen. 

1 99.  The. . . meate]  And  the  great  Mef- 
fengers of  Venice  flay,  Qx,  Johns.  Jen. 
Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Sing.  The  meate,  great 
Meffengers  of  "V enice  fi 'ay  ;  Q2Q3. 

Meffengers]  Meffenger  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Cap. 

flaies  the  meate]  flayes  the  meat 
F  F  ,  Ktly.     stay  the  meat  Knt  et  seq. 


191.  abhorre]  Rolfe:  It  is  abhorrent  to  me,  it  fills  me  with  horror;  the  only 
instance  of  this  sense  in  Shakespeare.  [' Here  hung  those  lippes  ....  now  they 
abhorre  me,'  Ham.  Qx,  line  1946. — Ed.] 

193.  vanitie]  White  (ed.  ii) :  Splendor,  finery,  as  in  'Vanity  Fair.' 

194.  Booth:  Iago  assists  Desdemona  to  rise. 

195.  196.  In  the  line  here  regained  from  the  Qq,  many  editors,  following  Steevens 
and  Malone,  note  that  '  chide  with '  is  the  phraseology  of  the  time,  and  adduce  examples. 

199.  Knight:  Steevens  calls  the  reading  of  the  Folio  'poor,'  but  its  precision  and 
familiarity  make  it  more  dramatic  and  characteristic.  White  (ed.  ii)  :  *  Stay  the  meat,' 
that  is,  for  the  meat.  In  some  parts  of  England  a  visitor  is  still  invited  to  'stay  dinner.' 
Vice-regal  persons  and  grandees  had,  and  in  some  courts  still  have,  all  their  movements 
announced  by  trumpets.  [Either  '  Messengers  '  is  wrongly  in  the  Plural  or  '  staies  ' 
is  wrongly  in  the  Singular,  and  at  first  sight  the  'extravagant  and  erring'  s  might  be 
thought  to  come  under  Walker's  Article  (cited  at  I,  i,  31),  but  I  am  inclined  to  think 
that  '  stairs '  is  in  the  Singular  by  attraction  with  '  Venice.' — Ed.] 


270 


THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO       [act  iv,  sc.  ii. 

200 


Go  in,  and  weepe  not  :  all  things  mall  be  well. 

Exeunt  Defdemona  and  ./Emilia. 

Enter  Rodorigo. 
How  now  Rodorigo  ? 

Rod.     I  do  not  finde 
That  thou  deaPft  iuftly  with  me.  205 

/ago.     What  in  the  contrarie  ? 

Rodori.  Euery  day  thou  dafts  me  with  fome  deuife 
Iago,  and  rather,  as  it  feemes  to  me  now,  keep'ft  from 
me  all  conueniencie,  then  fupplieft  me  with  the  leaft  ad- 
uantage  of  hope  :  I  will  indeed  no  longer  endure  it.  Nor  210 
am  I  yet  perfwaded  to  put  vp  in  peace,  what  already  I 
haue  foolifhly  fuffred. 

/ago.     Will  you  heare  me  Rodorigo  ?  213 

Rodori.     I  haue  heard  too  much  .*  and  your  words  and  [333  *z] 


200.  welll  W*H  Q3* 

201.  Exeunt...]  Exit  women.  Qq. 
Scene  XII.  Pope  +  ,  Jen.     Scene  III. 

Booth.     Scene  II.  Fechter. 

204,  205.  One  line,  Qq,  Pope  et  seq. 

205.  deaVJT\  dealjl  Qq.  dealest  Dyce, 
Glo.  Cam.  Rife. 

207-212.  Euery... fuffred~\  Six  lines, 
verse,  ending  Iago...from  me,...leafl...it 
...  already... fufferd.  QT. 

207.  dafts]  Knt.  dofftjl  Qq.  do/is  Ff. 
doffejl  Q'8l.  doft'st  Rowe+,  Jen.  Cap. 
daff'st  Coll.  Sta.  Wh.  Del.  Huds.  daffest 
Dyce,  Glo.  Cam.  Rife,  doffst  Han.  et 
cet. 


207.  dei life]  device  Ff. 

208.  me  now,]  me,  thou  Q  . 

keeffl]  keepejl  Qx.     keeffl  Q2Q3- 

209.  then]  thou  F  .  that  Warb.  than 
Rowe. 

212.  fuffred]  fufferd '  Qt.  ftiffered  Q, 
Q3.    fuffeSd  F3FA. 

214,  215.  Two  lines,  the  first  ending 
words,  Qx.  Three,  ending  much... per- 
formance...together  QzQ,. 

214.  /]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Johns. 
Knt.  Sir,  7Q2Q3,  Cap.  Faith  fQ^t  cet. 
and  your]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Knt. 
for  your  Qq  et  cet. 


200.  Booth  :  Sometimes  the  scene  ends  here,  in  which  case,  exit  Iago  with  an 
angry  glance  at  Emilia. 

203.  Booth  :  They  run  against  each  other, — Iago  somewhat  embarrassed.  Rode- 
rigo  refuses  his  proffered  hand,  and  while  the  former  is  speaking  207  et  seq.  Iago  is 
somewhat  nervous. 

207.  Every  day]  Cowden-Clarke :  Effect  of  'long  time'  given;  though  they 
have  been  in  Cyprus,  according  to  'short  time,'  but  one  day. 

207.  dafts]  An  instance,  under  Walker's  Article  (Crit.  ii,  128),  on  the  substitu- 
tion of  s  for  st  in  the  second  person  singular  of  the  verb.     See  II,  ii,  201. 

209.  aduantage  of  hope]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  Ought  we  not  to  read,  '  the  least 
hope  of  advantage '  ?  [If  Collier  can  thus  ask,  should  he  not  have  been  contented 
with  merely  converting  '  the  time  of  scorn,'  line  64  of  this  scene,  into  '  the  scorn  of 
time,'  and  not  have  changed  it  to  the  '  hand  of  scorn  '  ?  The  two  phrases  are  parallel, 
if  we  choose  to  make  them  so ;  but  it  is  not  necessnry.     '  Advantage  of  hope '  is  the 


ACT  IV,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


271 


Performances  are  no  kin  together. 

I  ago.     You  charge  me  moft  vniuftly. 

Rodo.  With  naught  but  truth  :  I  haue  wafted  my 
felfe  out  of  my  meanes.  The  Iewels  you  haue  had  from 
me  to  deliuer  Defdemona,  would  halfe  haue  corrupted  a 
Votarift.  You  haue  told  me  fhe  hath  receiu'd  them, 
and  returned  me  expectations  and  comforts  of  fodaine 
refpe6l,  and  acquaintance,  but  I  finde  none. 
,     Iago'.     Well,  go  too  :  very  well. 

Rod.  Very  well,  go  too  :  I  cannot  go  too,  (man)  nor 
tis  not  very  well.  Nay  I  think  it  is  fcuruy  :  and  begin  to 
finde  my  felfe  fopt  in  it. 

Iago.     Very  well. 

Rodor.  I  tell  you,  'tis  not  very  well  :  I  will  make  my 
felfe  knowne  to  Defdemona.  If  fhe  will  returne  me  my 
Iewels,  I  will  giue  ouer  my  Suit,  and  repent  my  vnlaw- 
full  folicitation.  If  not,  affure  your  felfe,  I  will  feeke 
fatisfaction  of  you. 

Iago.     You  haue  faid  now. 


215 


220 


225 


23O 


233 


215.  Performances]  performance  Qq. 

217.  With... truth]  Om.  Qx. 

218.  out  of  my]  out  of  Qq,  Cap. 

219.  deliuer]  Ff,  Rowe.  deliuer  to  Qq 
et  cet. 

220.  hath]  has  Qq,  Mai.  Steev.  Var. 
Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly. 

them]  em  Qq. 

221.  expectations]  expectation  Qq. 
comforts]  comforst  Q  . 

222.  acquaintance]  acquittance  Qx, 
Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Cap.  Jen.  Mai.  Steev. 
'93,  Var.  Sing,     acquintance  Q  . 


223.  very  well]  very  good  Qx. 

224.  225.  nor  tis]  it  is  Qx. 

225.  Nay  I  think  it  is]  by  this  hand, 
I  fay  tis  very  Qx,  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var 
Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Cam.  Ktly,  Del.  (all 
read  it  is  except  Jen.  Cam.).  I  fay  fis 
very  Q2Q3. 

226.  fopt]  QqFf.  /^VRowe  +  ,  Cap 
Jen.  fobbed Steev.  Mai.  Wh.  fopped Dycc: 
Cam.  Del.    fobbed  Var.  et  cet. 

228.  I tell  yoti,  'tis]  I  fay  it  is  Qq,  Jen 
231.  I  will]  neQt.     /lcQ9Q3. 
233.  now.]  now —  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 


advantage  tc  be  derived  from  hope ;  it  was  because  Iago  doffed  him  with  devices  that 
he  had  no  hope,  and  had  lost  even  that  advantage. — Ed. 

214,  215.  Collier:  Here  we  meet  with  an  extraordinary  variation  in  copies  of  F. j 
that  belonging  to  the  Duke  of  Devonshire  has  the  following  at  the  top  of  the  page : 
« I  have  heard  too  much  :  And  hell  graw  his  bones  Performances.'  Cambridge  Edit- 
ors :  The  mistake  was  discovered  and  corrected  in  other  copies.  This  accounts  for  the 
*  and '  which  the  corrected  copies  still  retain  instead  of  '  for.' 

223.  Booth  :  With  nonchalance,  walking  up  and  down,  both  here  and  at  227,  but 
Roderigo's  threat  to  make  himself  known  to  Desdemona  arrests  Iago,  and  he  instantly 
plans  the  removal  of  Roderigo  as  well  as  Cassio. 

229.  knowne]  Can  this  refer  to  anything  else  but  his  disguise  ?  his  favour,  defeated 
with  an  usurp'd  beard  ? — Ed. 


272  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF   OTHELLO       [ACT  IV,  SC.  tt 

Rodo.     I  :  and  faid  nothing  but  what  I  proteft.  intend- 
ment of  doing.  235 

Iago.  Why,  now  I  fee  there's  mettle  in  thee :  and 
euen  from  this  inftant  do  build  on  thee  a  better  o- 
pinion  then  euer  before  :  giue  me  thy  hand  Rodorigo, 
Thou  haft  taken  againft  me  a  moft  iuft  excepti- 
on :  but  yet  I  proteft  I  haue  dealt  moft  directly  in  thy  240 
Affaire. 

Rod,     It  hath  not  appeer'd. 

Iago.  I  grant  indeed  it  hath  not  appeer'd  :  and 
your  fufpition  is  not  without  wit  and  iudgement. 
But  Rodorigo,  if  thou  haft  that  in  thee  indeed,  which  245 
I  haue  greater  reafon  to  beleeue  now  then  euer  (  I 
meane  purpofe,  Courage,  and  Valour  )  this  night 
fhew  it.  If  thou  rhe  next  night  following  enioy  not 
Defdemona,  take  me  from  this  world  with  Treache- 
rie,  and  deuife  Engines  for  my  life.  250 

Rod.     Well:  what  is  it  ?  Is  it  within,  reafon  and  com- 
paffe  ? 

Iago,     Sir,  there  is   efpeciall  Commiffion  come   from 
Venice  to  depute  CaJJio  in  Othello's  place. 

Rod.     Is  that  truef  Why  then  Othello  and  Defdemona        255 
returne  againe  to  Venice. 

234.  and  faid~\  and  L  haue  faid  Qx,  248.  enioy']    enioy ejl   Qq,  Jen.  Steev. 

Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Del. 

Ktly,  Del.  250.  for]  from  Q3. 

234,235.  intendment]  entendment Qq.  251.  wh  at  is  it?]'  Om.  Qq. 

237.  infant]  time  Qx.  within^]  within  QqFf. 

do]  do  /Rowe  +  .  253-264.  Sir...braines]  Eleven  lines, 

239,240.  exception]  conception  Qq.  ending:    Venice  ...place.. .Defdemona... 

240.  but  yet]  but  Rowe  ii  +  .  V enice... him... lingered. ..fo  (Qx.     deter 

241.  Affaire]  affaires  Qx.  tninate    Q2Q3)...Cafsio...//z'w  ? ...place.,, 

242.  appeer'd]  appeared  Qq.  braines  Qq. 

245.  in  thee]  within  thee  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.             253.  efpeciall]  a  special 'Mai.  conj 
Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,                      Commiffion]  command  Q  . 
Del. 

238.  giue  .  .  .  hand]  Booth  :  Roderigo  does  not,  but  Iago  wheedles,  and  gets  his 
hand  laughingly. 

243-250.  Booth  :  This,  very  earnestly. 

250.  Engines]  Ritson  :  This  seems  to  mean,  to  contrive  racks,  tortures,  &c.  Dyce 
(Gloss.) :  Does  it  not  rather  signify  •  contrive  artful  means  to  destroy  my  life  ?  '  ('  An 
Engine  [device],  Artifcium,  Itigenium.'' — Coles's  Lat.  and  Eng.  Diet.)  [See  Lear, 
I,  iv,  262]. 

256.  Booth  :  Roderigo  is  elated  at  the  thought  of  Desdemona's  return  to  Venice, 


act  iv,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE  OF   VENICE  273 

Iago.     Oh  no  :  he  goes   into   Mauritania  and  taketh        257 
away   with   him    the    faire    Defdemona,    vnlefle   his   a- 
bode    be    lingred    heere   by    fome    accident.      Where- 
in  none   can   be   fo    determinate,    as   the    remouing  of        260 
CaJJio. 

Rod,     How  do  you  meane  remouing  him  ? 

Iago.     Why,  by  making   him   vncapable   of  Othello's 
place  :  knocking  out  his  braines. 

Rod,     And  that  you  would  haue  me  to  do.  265 

Iago,  I  :  if  you  dare  do  your  felfe  a  profit,  and  a 
right.  He  fups  to  night  with  a  Harlotry  :  and  thither 
will  I  go  to  him.  He  knowes  not  yet  of  his  Honourable 
Fortune,  if  you  will  watch  his  going  thence  (which 
I  will  fafhion  to  fall  out  betweene  twelue  and  one)  270 
you  may  take  him  at  your  pleafure.  I  will  be  neere 
to  fecond  your  Attempt,  and  he  fhall  fall  betweene 
vs.  Come,  ftand  not  amaz'd  at  it,  but  go  along  with 
me  :  I  will  fhew  you  fuch  a  neceffitie  in  his  death,  that 
you  fhall  thinke  your  felfe  bound  to  put  it  on  him.  It  275 
is  now  high  fupper  time  :  and  the  night  growes  to  waft. 
About  it. 

Rod,     I  will  heare  further  reafon  for  this. 

Iago,     And  you  fhalbe  fatisfi'd.  Exeunt,        279 

257.  taketh]    Ff,    Rowe  +  ,   Cap.   Jen.  266.  and  a]  and  Qq. 

Steev.85,  Knt.     takes  Qq  et  cet.  267.  Harlotry]  harlot  Qx,  Pope +  ,  Jen. 

259,260.  Wherein]  whereof  Qz.^.  conj.  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 

(P«  35  &)•  268.  him.  He]  him; — heQtQ2.  him— 

262.  him]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Knt,  Sta.  he  Q3. 

of  him  Qq  et  cet.  276.  high]  nigh  Mason. 

263.  by  making]  making  Cap.  conj.  waft]  wafle  F  .  waist  Mai.  conj. 
(P*  35  &)'                                                                277*  {.Enter  Othello,  Defdemona,  Lo- 

vncapable]  incapable  Waib.  Johns.  douico,  Emillia,  and  Attendants  Q. 

265.  do.]  FfQq,  Rowe,  Cap.    do?  Pope  279.  fhalbe]  shall;  be  Sta. 
et  seq.  fatisfd]  fatisfied  Qq. 

266.  if]  andifQq.  Exeunt.]  Ex.  lag.  and  Rod.  Qx. 

his  home  as  well  as  hers ;  and  is  correspondingly  disappointed  when  Iago  says  it  is  to 
Mauritania.     The  '  removing  of  Cassio '  Iago  speaks  slowly,  and  mysteriously. 

259.  Mauritania]  Theobald  :  This  is  only  a  Lie,  of  Iago's  own  invention,  to  carry 
a  point  with  Roderigo.     [See  Othello's  Color,  in  Appendix.] 

206.  Booth  :  Utter  all  this  rapidly, — don't  give  Roderigo  a  chance  to  think. 

267.  Harlotry]  See  Rom.  &  Jul.  IV,  ii,  14. 
276.  high]  Steevens  :  That  is,  full  complete  time. 

276.  wast]  Malone:  The  night  is  wasting  apace.     [See  Ham.  I,  ii,  198:  'the 

dead  vast,'  where  Malone  makes  the  same  conjecture  as  here.    See  Text.  Notes.-— Ed."] 
18 


274 


THE   TR AG  ED  IE  0*    OTHELLO      [act  rv,  sc.  irl. 


Scena   Tertia. 

Enter  Othello,  Lodouico,  Defdemonay  ALmilia, 
and  Atendants. 

Lod.  I  do  befeech  you  Sir,  trouble  your  felfe  no  further. 

Oth.     Oh  pardon  me  :  'twill  do  me  good  to  walke. 

Lodoui.  Madam,  good  night  :  I  humbly  thanke  your 
Ladyfhip. 

Def.     Your  Honour  is  mod  welcome. 

Oth.     Will  you  walke  Sir  ?  Oh  Defdemotia. 

Def.     My  Lord. 

Othello.  Get  you  to  bed  on  th'inftant,  I  will  be  re- 
turned forthwith  :  difmiffe  your  Attendant  there  :  look't 
be  done.  Exit. 

Def.     I  will  my  Lord 

ALm.  How  goes  it  now?  He  lookes  gentler  then  he  did. 

Def.     He  faies  he  will  returne  incontinent, 
And  hath  commanded  me  to  go  to  bed, 
And  bid  me  to  difmiffe  you. 


[333  *] 


io 


i* 


18 


I.  Scena...]  Scene  XIII.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 
A  Room  in  the  Castle.  Cap. 

4.  I  do  befeech"]  'Beseech  Cap. 

5.  pardon  me~\  pardon  FF,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han. 

'twill]  itJJiall  Qq. 

6.  Madam]  Madame  Qx. 

9.  Dividing  the  line  at  Sir  ?  Cap.  Steev. 
'93  et  seq.  (except  Huds.). 

Sir?  Oh]  Ff,  Pope  +  ,  Knt,  Ktly. 
fir: — O  Qq,  Rowe.  sir? — Ot  Jen. 
Huds.     sir? — O, —  Cap.  et  cet. 

Defdemona.]  Desdemona  ! —  Rowe 
-f .  Desdemona, —  Cap.  et  seq. 

[Ex.  Lod,  &c.  Han.  Stepping  back. 


Cap. 

II.  bed... in/i ant,]  bed, o'the  inJlantKj<\. 
on  thy]  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Wh.   dthe  Qq, 
Cap.  Jen.     on  the  Steev.  et  cet. 

11.  12.  return 'd  forthwith  :]  returned, 
forthwith,  Qt.    return' d,  forthwith  Q2Q3. 

12.  difmiffe]  dif patch  Qq. 
there  :]  there, —  Qq. 

look't]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Dyce, 
Wh.  i,  Huds.    looke  it  or  look,  it  Qq  et  cet. 

13.  Exit.]  Exeunt.  Qq. 

17.  And]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt,  Sta.     He 
Qq  et  cet. 

18.  bid]  Ff,  Rowe  +  .     bad  Q,,  Cap. 
Jen.     bade  Q2Q3  et  cet. 


279.  shalbe]  Note  Staunton's  ingenious  punctuation,  which  is  likely  to  give  ax* 
editor  pause. — Ed. 

5.  walke]  Cowden-Clarke  :  This  shows  the  restlessness  of  the  body,  with  fever 
of  the  mind. 

9.  walke]  Schmidt  :  That  is,  withdraw ;  as  in  Lear,  IV,  vii,  83. 

15.  Hazlitt  (p.  51):  In  this  short  speech  of  Emilia's  there  occurs  one  of  those 
side-intimations  of  the  fluctuations  of  passion  which  we  seldom  meet  with  but  in  Shake- 
speare. After  Othello  has  resolved  upon  the  death  of  his  wife  and  bids  her  dismiss  her 
attendant  for  the  night,  Emilia  says  •  he  looks  gentler  than  he  did.'  Shakespeare  has 
here  put  into  half  a  line  what  some  authors  would  have  spur  out  into  ten  set  speeches. 


act  iv,  sc.  Hi.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


275 


AZmi.     Difmiffe  me  / 

Def.     It  was  his  bidding  :  therefore  good  ^Emiliay  20 

Giue  me  my  nightly  wearing,  and  adieu. 
We  muft  not  now  difpleafe  him. 

^EmiL     I,  would  you  had  neuer  feene  him. 

Def.     So  would  not  I  :  my  loue  doth  fo  approue  him, 
That  euen  his  ftubborneffe,  his  checks,  his  frownes,  25 

(Prythee  vn-pin  me)  haue  grace  and  fauour. 

^Emi.  I  haue  laid  thofe  Sheetes  you  bad  me  on  the  bed. 

Def.  All's  one  :  good  Father,  how  foolifh  are  our  minds  ? 
If  I  do  die  before,  prythee  fhrow'd  me 
In  one  of  thefe  fame  Sheetes.  30 

Aimil.     Come,  come  .*  you  talke. 

Def.     My  Mother  had  a  Maid  called  Barbarie,  32 


19.  Difmiffe]  To  dismiss  Ktly. 
23.  /,  would]  Would Q2Q3*  Ay,  would 
Knt.     /would  QjFf  et  cet. 

25.  checks']  cheeks  Jen.  (misprint  ?). 
his  frownes]  and  frownes  Qq,  Pope 

ii,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 
Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Del. 

26.  and]  ond  F2. 

fauour.]  fauour  in  them.  Qq,  Rowe 
ct  seq. 

[beginning  to  undress.  Cap. 

27.  /  haue]  Tve  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 
laid]  laied  QtQa. 

thofe]  thefe  Qf. 
bad]  bade  Qx. 


28.  one  :  good  Father^]  Ff.  one,  good 
father  ;  Q3Q,.  one  ;  good  Father  !  Rowe  4- , 
Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  i, 
Sing.  Wh.  i,  Del.  one  good  faith  :  Qt. 
one.  Good  faith,  Dyce,  Coll.  ii,  Sta.  Glo. 
Ktly,  Cam.  Coll.  iii,  Huds.  Rife,  Wh.  ii. 

minds?]  Ff,  Rowe  +  .    minds;  Qa 
Q  .     minds  !  Han.  et  cet. 

29.  before^]  before  thee,  QqFf  et  cet. 
fit  row''  d]fJt  rowd  QqFf. 

30.  thefe]  Ff,  Rowe  + .    thofe  Qq  et  cet. 

31.  talke.]  talk —  Ktly. 

32.  39.  Barbarie]  Barbary  Qq.  Barbara 
Ff  et  cet.  (line  39,  Brabarie  Ft). 


26.  Walker  (Crit.  i,  92)  :  Whence  in  them  ?  it  is  not  in  the  Folio.  Qu.,  'have  a 
grace  and  favour.'  Lettsom  (Foot-note  to  Walker) :  The  words  '  in  them  '  appear  in 
Q  The  Folio  reading,  as  emended  by  Walker,  is  such  as  Shakespeare  might  well 
have  written ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  additional  words  do  not  look  either  like  a  sophis  • 
tication  or  a  printer's  blunder. 

29.  Cornhill  Magazine  (Oct.  1866):  This  presentiment  of  Desdemona  does  not 
bear  the  same  tests  as  that  of  Romeo  [see  note  ad  loc.  V,  i,  1],  nor  Hamlet  [V,  ii,  207]. 
She  had  no  reason  to  apprehend  a  violent  death,  but  she  had  enough  to  apprehend  from 
Othello's  anger.  He  had  struck  her  and  called  her  the  vilest  names.  Naturally,  these 
unkindnesses  would  throw  her  into  a  deep  state  of  depression.  '  A  sort  of  gain-giving' 
would  naturally  trouble  her  and  exclude  every  chance  of  a  real  presentiment,  the  essence 
of  which  is,  that  it  shall  be  spontaneous,  at  a  time  when  you  have  no  reason  to  look  for 
it,  when  you  are  not  under  the  influence  of  any  fear  or  anxiety  from  known  causes,  and 
when,  perhaps,  you  have  some  difficulty  in  its  interpretation. 

31.  talke]  P^or  other  instances  where  this  means  to  talk  idly,  to  prattle,  see  Schmidt. 

32.  Maid]  See  Le  Tourneur,  in  Appendix,  *  Othello's  Colour.' 

32.  Barbarie]   Knight  :  Barbarie  is  a  pretty  word,  and  we  would  not   willingly 


2j6  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO       [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 

She  was  in  loue  :  and  he  fhe  lou'd  prou'd  mad,  33 

And  did  forfake  her.     She  had  a  Song  of  Willough, 

An  old  thing  'twas  :  but  it  exprefs'd  her  Fortune,  35 

And  flie  dy'd  Tinging  it.    That  Song  to  night, 

Will  not  go  from  my  mind  :  I  haue  much  to  do, 

But  to  go  hang  my  head  all  at  one  fide 

And  fing  it  like  poore  Brabarie :  prythee  difpatch. 

Ami.     Shall  I  go  fetch  your  Night-gowne  ?  40 

Def.     No,  vn-pin  me  here, 
This  Lodouico  is  a  proper  man. 

Ami.     A  very  handfome  man. 

Def     He  fpeakes  well.  44 

2)%  34-  and. ..her.]  and  he,  she  lov'd,  37.  /  haue]    I've   Pope  +  ,   Dyce  iii, 

forsook  her,  And  she  prov'd  mad :  Warb.  Huds. 

34.  had~\  has  Qx.  to  do"]  ado  Pope  + .     to-do  Huds. 

34.  &c.  Willough]  willow  QqF4.  38,  39.  Prose,  Q2Q3- 

35.  old]  odd  Quincy  (MS).  3%.  But]    Not    Theob.    conj.    (with 

36.  dyfd]  died  Qq.  drawn),  Han.  Cap. 

37.  Two  lines,  Q2Q,.  at  one]  on  one  Han.     d  one  Cap 
go]  grow  Rowe  i.  Steev.'85. 

mind;]  mind —  Qx.  40.  go]  Om.  Cap. 

37-58.  L haue... next.]  Om.  Qx.  44.  He]  And  he  Cap.  Steev.'93,  Var. 

change  it ;  but  it  would  appear  like  an  affectation  of  singularity  to  retain  it.  Walker 
{Crit.  iii,  290) :  The  form  is  not  yet  obsolete  among  the  common  people.  [It  is  still  fre- 
quently so  pronounced  in  New  England.  I  doubt  if  any  New  England  old  lady  who 
can  sing  •  Barbara  Allen,'  would  pronounce  it  otherwise  than  '  Barbarie  Allen.' — Ed.] 

^.  mad]  Johnson:  I  believe  that  'mad'  only  signifies  wild,  frantic,  uncertain. 
RiTSON :  Here  it  ought  to  mean  inconstant.  Keightley  :  For  '  mad,'  which  is  cer- 
tainly wrong.  Theobald  read  bad,  and  I  think  he  was  right.  '  Proved  bad '  answers  to 
our  present  turned  out  bad.  Regarding  bad  as  rather  low  and  trivial,  I  read  in  my  Edi- 
tion false,  as  that  is  the  term  in  the  ballad.  I  thought  •  mad '  might  have  been  suggested 
by  '  maid '  in  the  preceding  line.  [Theobald  proposed  bad  in  a  letter  to  Warburton 
(Nichols,  Illust.  ii,  599),  but  did  not  allude  to  it  in  his  edition,  where  the  text  is  *  mad.' 
Capell  reads  bad ;  no  one  else. — Ed.]  Cowden-Clarke  :  We  see  no  reason  to  suppose 
it  used  in  any  other  sense  than  insane. 

37,  38.  Johnson  :  This  is,  perhaps,  the  only  insertion  made  in  the  latter  editions 
which  has  improved  the  play.  The  rest  seem  to  have  been  added  for  the  sake  of 
amplification,  or  of  ornament.  When  the  imagination  had  subsided,  and  the  mind  was 
no  longer  agitated  by  the  horror  of  the  action,  it  became  at  leisure  to  look  round  for 
specious  additions.  This  addition  is  natural.  Desdemona  can  at  first  hardly  forbear 
to  sing  the  song ;  she  endeavors  to  change  her  train  of  thoughts,  but  her  imagination 
at  last  prevails,  and  she  sings  it. 

37.  to  do]  For  instances  where  this  is  equivalent  to  ado,  see  Schmidt,  s.  v.  b,  or 
Ham.  II,  ii,  338.  But,  as  Rolfe  well  observes,  in  this  present  passage  it  'may  have 
00  more  than  its  ordinary  meaning:  /  have  to  do  much,  that  is,  make  a  great  effort.' 

38.  But]  For  instances  of  'but'  signifying  prevention,  see  Abbott,  §  1 22. 


ACT  iv,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  277 

/Emil.     I  know  a  Lady  in  Venice  would  haue  walk'd  45 

barefoot  to  Paleftine  for  a  touch  of  his    nether  lip. 

Def.     The  poor e  Soule  fat  jinging^by  a  Sic  amour  tree.  47 

45.  I... walk'd]  One  line,  as  verse,  Cap.         46.  nether]  neither  Q2F2F  ,  Theob.  i. 
Ktly.  47.  Dei*.]  Defdemona  Tings  Q2Q3-  Sing- 

would]  who  would  Steev.*93,  Var.     ing.  Rowe. 

46.  barefoot]  barefooted Q2,  Q' '8i,  Dyce  finging]    Ff,    Rowe  +  ,    Steev.'85, 
iii.                                                                       Knt.     finghing  Q  .     fighing  Q2,  Cap.  et 

for]  fore  Q  .  cet. 

47.  Collier  (ed.  i)  referred  to  a  ballad,  'of  which  some  of  the  stanzas  ended  with 
"  For  all  the  grene  wyllow  is  my  garland,"  by  old  John  Heywood,  preserved  in  MS.  in 
B.  H.  Bright's  library.'  [This  ballad  is  printed  in  The  Shakespeare  Society's  Papers,  vol. 
i,  p.  44 ;  it  has  nothing  in  common  with  Desdemona's  song  except  the  refrain.  War- 
ton  [Hist.  Eng.  Poetry,  iii,  287,  note)  mentions  a  song,  called  The  Willow-Garland, 
attributed  to  Edwards,  and  which  he  thinks  is  the  same,  that  is  licensed  to  T.  Col  well 
in  1564  (22  July, — Arber's  7ranscript}  i,  270),  beginning,  'I  am  not  the  fyrst  that  hath 
taken  in  hande,  The  wearynge  of  the  willowe  garlande.'  Percy  [Reliques,  1765,  vol. 
i, p.  175)  gives  a  black-letter  ballad  from  the  Pepys  Collection  thus  entitled,  'A  Lovers 
complaint,  being  forsaken  of  his  love.  To  a  pleasant  tune.'  The  stanzas  which  corre- 
spond to  those  of  Shakespeare  are  as  follows :] 

A  poore  foule  fat  fighing  under  a  ficamore  tree, 

O  willow,  willow,  willow  ! 
With  his  hand  on  his  bofom,  his  head  on  his  knee ; 

O  willow,  willow,  willow  ! 

O  willow,  willow,  willow  ! 

Sing,  O  the  greene  willow  fhall  be  my  garland. 
******* 

The  cold  ftreams  ran  by  him,  his  eyes  wept  apace, 

O  willow,  &c. 
The  fait  tears  fell  from  him,  which  drowned  his  face ; 

O  willow,  &c. 
Sing,  O  the  greene  willow,  &c. 

The  mute  birds  fate  by  him,  made  tame  by  his  mones ; 

O  willow,  &c. 
The  fait  tears  fell  from  him,  which  foftned  the  ftones*. 

O  willow,  &c. 
Sing,  O  the  greene  willow,  &c. 

Let  nobody  blame  me,  her  fcornes  I  do  prove ; 

O  willow,  &c. 
She  was  borne  to  be  fair ;  I,  to  die  for  her  love ; 

O  willow,  &c. 
Sing,  O  the  greene  willow,  &c. 

This  ballad,  Collier  says,  is  obviously  a  comparatively  modern  re-impression  (abovu 
the  year  1640  or  1650)  of  a  much  older  production.  Chappell  (i,  206) :  The  song, 
which  Desdemona  sings,  is  contained  in  a  MS.  volume,  with  accompaniment  for  the 


278 


THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      [act  iv,  sc.  iiL 


[Sing  Willough,  Willough,  Willough.] 
lute,  in  the  British  Museum  (Addit.  MSS.  15,117).  Mr  Ilalliwell  considers  the  tran- 
script to  have  been  made  about  the  year  1633;  Mr  Oliphant  (who  catalogued  the 
Musical  MSS.)  dates  it  about  1600;  but  the  manuscript  undoubtedly  contains  songs 
of  an  earlier  time,  such  as, — « O  death  !  rock  me  asleep,  Bring  me  to  quiet  rest,'  &c, 
attributed  to  Anne  Boleyn,  and  which  Sir  John  Hawkins  found  in  a  MS.  of  the  reign 
of  Henry  VIII.  ['  The  music  is  older  than  1600.  It  is  found  in  Thomas  Dallis's  MS. 
"  I  ,ute  Book,"  with  the  title,  "  All  a  greane  willow."  Dallis  taught  music  at  Cambridge ; 
and  his  book,  dated  1583,  is  now  in  the  Library  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin.' — Shak- 
spere's  Songs,  p.  50,  New  Sh.  Soc.  1884.  In  this  same  excellent  publication  of  Tke 
New  Shakspei-e  Society  ten  compositions  of  this  song  are  enumerated.  Zelter's  com- 
position is  given  in  Voss's  Othello,  Jena,  1806;  in  Le  Tourneur  the  composition  by 
Martini  is  given ;  and  for  Ducis's  Romance  du  Saule  the  music  was  composed  by 
Gretry.  Of  course  the  song  is  also  to  be  found  in  the  Opera  of  Otello  by  Rossini. 
The  music  here  given  is  from  Chappell's  Popular  Music  of  the  Olden  Time,  i,  207  ; 
however  lovely  the  melody,  its  charm  is  heightened  by  the  knowledge  that  its  plaintive 
notes  once  '  sighed  along '  the  traverses  of  the  Globe  Theatre. — Ed.] 


Rather  slow  and  smoothly. 


* 


-n 


sf 


Ritard. 


PP 


_4-r — ' 3^- 

— 1 —       . — ^    1 
m «-{ — f — i-^- 


,«/ 


n. 


s     J    JJ= 


*s 


-J— J— £: 


i=^=5E^=SEE» 


-f- 


tnf  The  poor  soul  sat    sigh-ing    by  a      si  -  ca-more  tree.  Sing  willow,willow, willow  !  With  his 

1         I 


^S 


f 


J8_4t 


m 


*-+■•£- 


-&- 


•&: 


^=r. 


^ 


pzztzzt 


A  te7tipo. 


^E 


/  1 


^^£ 


a*s£ 


§=fe5 


aJ— J— --=* 


hand  in     his      bosom,  and  his  head  upon  his  knee  ;  Oh  !  willow, willow, willow,willow,  Oh  ! 

^L 


EE 


3 


t   r   ri 


r? 


*=& 


*- 


willow,  willow,  willow,  willow,  Shall  be    my  gar  -  land  :    Sing      all      a   green  wil-  low, 


r* 1* *- 


=^f4^=? 


r — r " 


r 


wil-low,  willow,  wil -low.  Ah  me!     the  green     wil  -  low  must      be    my    gar  -  land. 


gP=£ 


S 


^Eg 


iliS 


act:  iv,  sc.  iii.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


2/9 


Sing  all  a  greene  Willough : 

Her  hand  on  her  bofome  her  head  on  her  knee, 

Sing  Willough,  Willough,  Willough. 

The  f re  fit  Streames  ran  by  her,  and  murmured  her  moanes 

Sing  Willough,  &c. 

Her  fait  te  ares  fell  from  her,  and  foftned  the  flones, 

Sing  Willough,  &c.  (Lay  by  thefe) 

Willough,  Willough.  (Prythee  high  thee  :  he'le  come  anon) 

Sing  all  a  greene  Willough  mufl  be  my  Garland. 

Let  no  body  blame  him,  his  f cor ne  I  approue. 

(Nay  that's  not  next.     Harke,  who  is't  that  knocks  ? 

s£mil.     It's  the  wind. 

Def.  IcalPd  my  Loue  falfe  Loue :  but  what  f aid  he  then  ? 
Sing  Willough,  &c. 
If  I  court  mo  women,  youHe  couch  with  mo  men. 


48 


50 


60 


62 


52.  61.  Willough,  &c]  willow,  willow, 
willow;  Q2Q3,  Cap.  Jen.  Coll.  Dyce,  Sta. 
Wh.  Glo.  Cam.  Del.  Huds.  Rife. 

53.  Her  fait]  The  salt  Cap.  (corrected 
in  Errata). 

and]  which  Q3Q3,  Jen. 

54.  Sing  Willough,  &c]  Ff.  fing  wil- 
low, &c.  Q2,  Rowe  + ,  Jen.  Steev.'85.  fling- 
willow  &c.  Q  .     Om.  Cap.  et  cet. 

(Lay  by  thefe)~\  Rowe  i,  Johns.  Jen. 
(Lady  by  thefe)  Ff,  Rowe  ii.  Om.  Pope, 
Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Separate  line,  no 
parenthesis,  Cap.  et  cet. 

[giving  her  her  Jewels.  Cap.  Jen. 

55.  Willough,  Willough.]  willow,  wil- 
low. QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Jen.  Wil- 
low, willow,  &c.  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Sing  willow,  willow,  willow.  Cap.  et  cet. 

(Prythee ...anon)~\  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Theob.  i,  Han.  Jen.  Separate  line,  Q2Q3, 
Theob.  ii,  Warb.  Johns.  Separate  line,  no 
parenthesis,  Cap.  et  cet. 

high-]  hie  QaQ3. 


57.  Marked   as   Second  Stanza,  Cap. 
Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly,  Coll.  iii. 

approue.]  approue  :  Q2Q^  approve, 
—  Cap.  et  seq. 

58.  Nay. ..next."]  In  parenthesis,  Jen. 
Harke.~\  Hark  !  hark  !  Cap. 

who  is*t  that]  who's  that  Qq.  who 
is  it  that  Theob.  ii,  Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 
Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly, 
Del. 

59.  It's']  It  is  Qx,  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
Coll.  Sta.  Wh.  i,  Del.     Tis  Q9Q3. 

60-62.  Def.  I... men.]  Om.  Qx. 

60.  falfe  Loue]  falfe,  Q2Q3- 

62.  mo  women]  no  women  F„F,.    more 
J  34 

women  Ro\ve  +  ,  Jen.  Steev.'85,  Dyce  iii. 
moe  women  Glo.  Ktly,  Cam.  Del.  Rife, 
Wh.  ii. 

couch]  touch  Upton. 

mo  men]  more  men  Rowe -f-,  Jen. 
Steev. '85,  Dyce  iii.  moe  men  Glo.  Ktly. 
Cam.  Del.  Rife,  Wh.  ii. 


54.  Lay  by  these]  After  this  Aside,  nearly  every  modern  editor,  even  Keightley 
(for  whose  punctuation  I  have  much  respect),  puts  a  colon  or  a  semicolon,  as  though 
the  sentence  were  incomplete.  Almost  the  same  can  be  said  of  the  punctuation  after 
•anon'  in  the  next  line;  a  few  editors  do  put  a  full  stop  there.  Let  the  record  of  the 
punctuation  of  these  lines  at  least,  be  red-lettered  for  Isaac  Jaggard. — Ed. 

58.  knocks]  W.  N.  (Memorials  of  Sh.  p.  364) :  What  gives  a  finishing  stroke  to 
the  terror  of  this  midnight  scene  is  the  rustling  of  the  wind,  which  the  affrighted  imagi- 
nation of  Desdemona  supposes  to  be  one  knocking  at  the  door.     This  circumstance. 


280  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF   OTHELLO      [act  rv,  sc.  iii. 

So  get  thee  gone,  good  night  :  mine  eyes  do  itch :  [334  a\ 

Doth  that  boade  weeping  ? 

JEmil,  'Tis  neyther  heere,  nor  there*  65 

Def     I  haue  heard  it  faid  fo.    O  thefe  Men,  thefe  men  ! 
Do'ft  thou  in  confcience  thinke  (tell  me  ^Emilia) 
That  there  be  women  do  abufe  their  husbands 
In  fuch  groffe  kinde  ? 

sEmil.     There  be  fome  fuch,  no  queftion.  70 

Def    Would'ft  thou  do  fuch  a  deed  for  all  the  world  ? 

Aimil.     Why,  would  not  you  ? 

Def     No,  by  this  Heauenly  light. 

&mil.     Nor  I  neither,  by  this  Heauenly  light: 
I  might  doo't  as  well  i'th'darke.  75 

Def     Would'ft.  thou  do  fuch  a  deed  for  al  the  world  ? 

^EtniL     The  world's  a  huge  thing : 
It  is  a  great  price,  for  a  fmall  vice. 

Def     Introth,  I  thinke  thou  would'ft  not. 

jEmil.     Introth  I  thinke  I  mould,  and  vndoo't  when  80 

I  had  done.     Marry,  I  would  not  doe  fuch  a  thing  for  a 
ioynt  Ring,  nor  for  meafures  of  Lawne,  nor  for  Gownes,  82 

63.  So]  Now  Qx.  price,  as  one  line,  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai. 

63,  64.  mine... weeping]  One  line,  Qx.         Var.  Coll.  et  seq. 

64.  Doth]  does  Qq,  Cap.  77.  world's]  world  is  Qq,  Johns.  Cap. 
66-70.  Om.  Qx.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  1, 
69.  kinde]  kindes  Q2Q3-  Ktly,  Del. 

71.  deed]  thing  Q3Q3,  Cap.  78.  //  is]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Dyce,  Glo 

74, 75.  Prose,  Han.  Cam.  Del.  Dyce  iii.  Cam.  Rife,  Wh.  ii.    '  Tis  Cap.  et  cet. 
Nor. ..might,  as  one  line,  Ktly.  79.  Introth]  Good  troth  Qlf  Mai.  Steev. 

74.  Nor]  No,  nor  Cap.  '93,  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

75.  doo't  as  well]  doe  it  as  wellQv  as  80.  Introth]  By  my  troth  Qx,  Mai. 
well  doe  it  Q,Qr  Steev.'93,  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

Vth']  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Wh.  in  the  vndoo't]  unswear't  Han. 

Qq.     V  the  Cap.  et  cet.  81.  done.]  done  it,  Qq. 

76.  Would'fl]  Would  Qx.  82.  ioynt  Ring]  joirid-ring  Wh.  i. 
deed]  thing  Qx,  Jen.  nor  for  meafures]  or  for  meafur. 

77.  78.  Prose,  Han.  Jen.  Knt.  The...         Qq. 

which  would  have  been  overlooked  as  trifling  by  an  inferior  writer,  has  a  most  sublime 
effect  in  the  hands  of  Shakespeare. 

62.  mo]  Walker  {Crit.  iii,  290) :  Why  write  'mo'  [in  modern  editions]  ?  This, 
indeed,  is  the  spelling  of  Fx,  but  Fs  has  '  mo '  or  '  moe '  in  numberless  places  where  no 
one  has  thought  it  necessary  so  to  read,  unless  the  rhyme  demanded  it. 

71-94.  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  These  lines  are  struck  out  with  a  pen  in  the  (MS.),  as  if 
not  acted  in  the  time  of  the  old  annotator. 

78    Dyce  (ed.  iii)  :  A  quotation  evidently.     [Printed  by  Dyce  as  a  distich.] 

82    ioynt  Ring]  Steevens  :  These  rings  will  be  best  described  by  a  passage  in 


act  iv,  sc.  iii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  28 1 

Petticoats,  nor  Caps,  nor  any  petty  exhibition.     But  for  83 

all  the  whole  world  :  why,  who  would  not  make  her  hus- 
banda  Cuckold,  to  make  him  a  Monarch/  I  mould  ven-  85 

ture  Purgatory  for't. 

Def.     Befhrew  me,  if  I  would  do  fuch  a  wrong 
For  the  whole  world. 

jEmil.     Why,  the  wrong  is  but  a  wrong  i'th'world; 
and  hauing  the  world  for  your  labour,    'tis  a  wrong  in  90 

your  owne  world,  and  you   might  quickly  make  it  right. 

Dff.     I  do  not  thinke  there  is  any  fuch  woman. 

JEmiL     Yes,  a  dozen  :  and  as  many  to'th'vantage,    as 
would  ftore  the  world  they  plaid  for. 

But  I  do  thinke  it  is  their  Husbands  faults  95 

If  Wiues  do  fall  :  (Say,  that  they  flacke  their  duties, 
And  powre  our  Treafures  into  forraigne  laps; 
Or  elfe  breake  out  in  peeuifh  Iealoufies, 
Throwing  reftraint  vpon  vs  :  Or  fay  they  ftrike  vs, 
Or  fcant  our  former  hauing  in  defpight)  100 

Why  we  haue  galles  :  and  though  we  haue  fome  Grace, 

83.  Petticoats']  or  Petticotes  Qx.  V  th  Q2Q3.     V  the  Qt  et  cet. 
nor  Caps']  or  Caps  Q2Q3.  91.  right]  wright  Q3. 

petty]  fuch  Qx.  93.  tdttt]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.Wh.  to  the 

84.  ali  the]  the  Qq,  Cap.  Qq  et  cet. 

•world:]  world?  Qx.  world!  Han.  93,  94.  As  verse,  Theob.  Warb.  Cap. 

world, —  Cap.  et  seq.  Mai.    Yes... many  one,  line,  Steev.'93,  Var. 

why,]  vds  pitty,  Qx.  Coll.  Sing. 

85.  Cuckold]  cuckole  Qt.  94.  plaid]  played  Qq. 

86.  for't]  for  it  Qq,  Jen.  95-H2.  Om.  Qx. 

87,88.  Prose,  Jen.  Steev.'93,  Var.  Knt,  97 .  powre]  poure  Q2.   pouerQ.  pour 

Coll.  Sing.  Ktly,  Huds.  F3F4. 

87.  a  wrong]  wrong  Q2Q3.  our]  out  Rife. 

89.  VtfC\  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Wh.  99.  vpon]  on  Rowe  ii  +  . 

Dryden's  Don  Sebastian  :  ' a  curious  artist  wrought  them,  With  joints  so  close  as 

not  to  be  perceiv'd ;  Yet  are  they  both  each  other's  counterpart :  Her  part  had  Juan 
inscrib'd,  and  his  had  Zayda,  (You  know  those  names  are  theirs)  and,  in  the  midst,  A 
heart  divided  in  two  halves  was  plac'd.  Now  if  the  rivets  of  these  rings  inclos'd,  Fit 
not  each  other,  I  have  forg'd  this  lye :  But  if  they  join,  you  must  forever  part.' 

83.  exhibition]  Dyce  (Gloss.)  :  An  allowance,  a  pension.     See  Lear,  I,  ii,  25. 

89.  wrong  i*  th'  world]  White  (ed.  ii) :  That  is,  a  wrong  in  the  world's  eye,  a 
conventional  wrong.  Emilia  is  quibbling.  Purnell  :  It  is  only  wrong  if  it  becomes 
known  to  the  world ;  now,  if  one  is  to  gain  the  worlc  for  it,  the  world  is  at  your  com- 
mand, and  therefore  it  is  no  matter. 

93.  vantage]  Steevens  :  That  is,  to  boot,  over  and  above. 

100.  hauing]  Johnson  :  Our  former  allowance  of  expense. 

101.  Grace]  In  a  theological  sense. — Ed. 


282  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO      [act  iv,  sc.  iii 

Yet  haue  we  fome  Reuenge.     Let  Husbands  know,  102 

Their  wiues  haue  fenfe  like  them  :  They  fee,  and  fmell, 

And  haue  their  Palats  both  for  fweet,and  fowre, 

As  Husbands  haue.     What  is  it  that  they  do,  105 

When  they  change  vs  for  others  t  Is  it  Sport? 

I  thinke  it  is  :  and  doth  Affe6tion  breed  it  ? 

I  thinke  it  doth.     Is't  Frailty  that  thus  erres  ? 

It  is  fo  too.     And  haue  not  we  Affections  ? 

Defires  for  Sport?  and  Frailty,  as  men  haue  ?  no 

Then  let  them  vfe  vs  well  :  elfe  let  them  know, 

The  illes  we  do,  their  illes  inftru6t  vs  fo. 

Def.     Good  night,  good  night : 
Heauen  me  fuch  vfes  fend, 
Not  to  picke  bad,  from  bad ;  but  by  bad,  mend.      Exeunt        115 

108.  Is't]  It's  Var.  (misprint).  Steev.  Coll.  ii.     too  Rowe  i. 
no.  Sport']  sports  Warb.  Johns.  113,  114.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 

in.  them...them~\  em.. .em  Q2Q3-  1 14-  Heauen]  God  Qx. 

112.  The  illes]  The  ill  Q.  vfes]  vfage  Qx,  Johns.  Cap.  Steev. 

fo.]  to.  Ff,  Rowe  ii  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Mai.  Var. 

103.  sense]  Malone  and  Dyce:  That  is,  sensual  appetite.  [As  Hamlet  uses  it 
in  his  interview  with  his  mother.] 

114,  115.  Hunter  (ii,  288):  Shakespeare  having  remarked  in  King  John,  'How 
oft  the  sight  of  means  to  do  ill  deeds  Makes  ill  deeds  done,'  we  may  probably  take 
these  words  of  Desdemona  as,  beside  their  purpose  in  the  drama  itself,  intended  as  a 
hint  and  warning  to  the  audience  not  to  be  infected  by  the  fearful  instance,  about  to  be 
presented,  of  the  higher  paroxysms  of  passion.  We  have  noticed  similar  cautions  on 
other  occasions. 

114.  vses]  Johnson:  Usage  is  an  old  word  for  custom,  and,  I  think,  better  than 
'  uses.'  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  We  may  almost  suspect  that  neither  *  uses '  nor  usage  is  cor- 
rect ;  perhaps  '  uses '  ought  to  be  issues,  i.  e.,  results ;  in  Tim.  I,  i,  23,  we  have  seen 
'  issues '  misprinted  uses.  Staunton  :  It  may  be  doubted  whether  either  '  uses '  or 
usage  is  the  poet's  word.  [« Uses,'  it  seems  to  me,  is  emphatically  right.  It  is  merely 
a  repetition  of  Emilia's  own  word.  Emilia  has  threatened  that  if  '  husbands  do  not 
"  use  us  well,"  it  will  be  their  fault  if  we  follow  their  example.'  Desdemona  prays 
that  she  may  receive  such  •  uses '  that,  instead  of  imitating  the  bad  by  bad,  she  may 
be  able  even  to  mend  and  become  better  thereby.  The  noble,  self-forgetting  music  in 
which  /Emilia  dies,  goes  far  to  drive  away  the  shadow  that  envelops  her  theft  of  the 
handkerchief,  for  which,  in  the  retrospect,  we  are  ready  to  make  every  excuse.  But 
no  excuses  can  be  suggested  for  her  here.  Her  insidious  references  to  Lodovico,  and 
her  allusion  to  Othello's  blow,  while  Desdemona's  lips  are  still  bruised  from  it,  stone 
our  hearts,  and  we  can  see  in  her  here  only  the  dark  foil  to  Desdemona's  snow-white 
purity. — Ed.] 


ACTV,  sc.  i.]  THE  MOORE   OF    VENICE  283 


Aflus  Quintus.    Scena  Prima. 

Enter  /ago,  and  Rodorigo. 

/ago.     Heere,  ftand  behinde  this  Barke, 
Straight  will  he  come  : 

Weare  thy  good  Rapier  bare,  and  put  it  home :  5 

Quicke,  quicke,  feare  nothing;  He  be  at  thy  Elbow, 
It  makes  vs,  or  it  marres  vs,  thinke  on  that, 
And  fixe  moft  firme  thy  Refolution. 

Rod.     Be  neere  at  hand,  I  may  mifcarry  in't.  [334  b\ 

/ago.     Heere,  at  thy  hand  :  Be  bold,  &  take  thy  ftand.  10 

Rod.     I  haue  no  great  deuotion  to  the  deed, 
And  yet  he  hath  giuen  me  fatisfying  Reafons : 
?Tis  but  a  man  gone.     Forth  my  Sword  :  he  dies. 

/ago.  I  haue  rub'd  this  yong  Quat  almoft  to  the  fenfe,  14 

I.  Actus...]   Actus.  5.  Qx.      Actus  5.  10.  Jland]  /word  Qx,  Pope,  Theob. 

Scoena  I.  Q2Q,.  Han.  Warb.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 

The  Street.  Rowe.  A  Street  before  the  [Retires  to  a  little  distance.  Cap. 

Palace.  Theob.  II.  deed~\  dead  Qf. 

3,  4.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq.  12.  And~\  Om.  Pope  +  . 

3.  Barke]  F2.   Butte  Qq.   BarkY^^.  hath]  has  Qq,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev.'o^, 

balk  Sing.  Wh.  i.   bulk  Rowe  et  cet.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Del. 

7.  on]  o/Qq.  13.   [Stands  apart.  Theob. 

8.  mojl]  more  Q2Q3-  14.  I  haue]  Pve  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii. 
10.  Be  bold]  Behold  Ff,  Rowe.  Quat]  gnat  Qv  Pope,  Warb.    knot 

Theob.     quab  Han. 

3.  Barke]  Knight  :  We  prefer  the  more  intelligible  reading  bulky  although  we 
have  little  doubt  that  '  bark '  was  correctly  used  by  Shakespeare  in  this  instance  as  a 
projecting  part  of  the  fortification, — a  buttress.  Singer  :  I  feel  assured  that  balke  was 
intended,  and  not  bulk.  Palsgrave  renders  that  word  by  pouste,  and  Huloet  defines  it. 
*  the  chief  beame  or  piller  of  a  house.' 

8.  Resolution]  White  (ed.  ii) :  Five  syllables. 

14.  Quat]  JOHNSON:  Hanmer  reads  quab,  a  gudgeon ;  not  that  a  gudgeon  can  be 
rubbed  to  much  sense,  but  that  a  man  grossly  deceived  is  often  called  a  gudgeon. 
Upton  reads  quail,  which  he  proves,  by  much  learning,  to  be  a  very  cholerick  bird. 
Theobald  would  introduce  knot,  a.  small  bird  of  that  name.  A  *  quat '  in  the  midland 
counties  is  a  pimple,  which  by  rubbing  is  made  to  smart,  or  is  rubbed  to  sense.  Rode- 
rigo  is  called  a  'quat'  by  the  same  mode  of  speech  as  a  low  fellow  is  now  termed  in 
low  language  a  scab.  [Dr  Johnson  forgot  that  Shakespeare  uses  this  word  too. — 
Ed.]  To  rub  to  the  sense  is  to  rub  to  the  quick.  Steevens  cites  several  instances  of 
the  use  of  'quat'  in  Dekker  and  others,  but  more  to  the  purpose  is  it  that  Wise  (p.  156) 
gives  it  in  his  Glossary  of  Warwickshire  Words,  as  in  use  at  this  day,  in  the  same  sense 
as  here. 


284 


THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO  [act  v,  sc.  l 


And  he  growes  angry.     Now,  whether  he  kill  CaJJio, 
Or  CaJJio  him,  or  each  do  kill  the  other, 
Euery  way  makes  my  gaine.     Liue  Rodorigo, 
He  calles  me  to  a  reftitution  large 
Of  Gold,  and  Iewels,  that  I  bob'd  from  him, 
As  Guifts  to  Dcfdemona. 
It  mull  not  be  :  If  CaJJfio  do  remaine, 
He  hath  a  dayly  beauty  in  his  life, 
That  makes  me  vgly  :  and  befides,  the  Moore 
May  vnfold  me  to  him  :  there  ftand  I  in  much  perill : 
No,  he  muft  dye.     But  fo,  I  heard  him  comming. 

Enter'  CaJJio. 

Rod.     I  know  his  gate,  'tis  he  :  Villaine  thou  dyeft. 

Caf.     That  thruft  had  beene  mine  enemy  indeed, 
But  that  my  Coate  is  better  then  thou  know* ft : 
I  will  make  proofe  of  thine. 


15 


20 


25 


30 


15.  angry.    Now,]    angry   now:   Qt. 
angry,  now,  Q2.     angry,  now  Q  . 

17.  gaine]  game  Qq,  Jen.  Coll.  Wh.  i, 
Ktly,  Rife. 

19.  Of]  For  Qq. 

22.  hath]  has  Qq. 

dayly]  dayniy  Jabez  (N.  &  Qu.  5, 
vii,  83). 

24.  him:  there]  him  there;  Q  . 
much  perill  ]  perill  Qt,  Pope  + ,  Jen. 

25.  Butfo,]  be'tfo,  Qq,  Jen.  Sing.  Ktly. 
Be  it  so,  Pope  + .   be't  so  ;  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Dyce 


iii,  Huds.     Be't  so.  Cam. 

25.  heard]  heare  or  hear  QqFf  et  cet 
[Exit  Jago.  Rowe. 

27.  gate]  gait  Johns. 

[He  runs  at  Cassio  and  wounds  him. 
Rowe. 

28.  mine]  my  Qq. 

29.  know'Jl]  thintfjl  Qx,  Jen.  Steev. 
Mai.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

30.  [Fight.  Iago  cuts  Cassio  behind  in 
the  Leg,  and  Exit.  Then  Rod.  and  Cas- 
sio fall.  Theob. 


17.  Liue]  For  instances  where  the  subjunctive  may  be  indicated  by  placing  the 
verb  before  the  subject,  see  Abbott,  §361. 

19.  bob'd]  Malone:  That  I  fool'd  him  out  of.  [Both  Malone  and  Dyce  cite 
Coles's  Latin  Did.,  1679,  as  an  authority  for  this  word;  but  Rider's  Latin  Diet,  of 
1626,  half  a  century  earlier,  gives  'A  bob  or  mocke,  sanna?  It  is  still  current  slang 
here  in  America. — Ed.] 

25.  But  so]  Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  Qy.  if  intended  for  '  But,  soft '  ?  Hudson  :  And  so  I 
suspect  it  should  be. 

29.  Coate]  Malone  supposes  that  Iago  overhearing  this,  and  inferring  from  it  that 
Cassio  wears  secret  armour,  afterwards  wounds  Cassio  in  the  leg.  Knight  says  that 
the  characteristics,  according  to  Vecellio,  of  the  costume  of  a  'soldato  disarmato,'  which 
would  be  that  of  Cassio  and  Iago  when  off  guard,  were  the  'buff  jerkin  and  the  scarf 
of  company,'  and  that  it  is  to  this  'buff  jerkin '  that  Cassio  refers,  and  not  to  any  secret 
armour.  Theobald  asserts,  however,  that  Shakespeare  '  copied  his  Italian  Novelist  in 
this  incident,'  wherein  it  is  stated  that  the  Ancient  'dirrizzd  un  colpo  alle  gambe,  per 
farlo  cad  ere.' 


ACT  V,  SC.  1.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


285 


Rod.     Oh,  I  am  flaine.  3 l 

CaJJlo.     I  am  maym'd  for  euer : 
Helpe  hoa  :  Murther,  murther. 

Enter  Othello. 

Oth.     The  voyce  of  CaJJio,  Iago  keepes  his  word.  35 

Rod.     0  Villaine  that  I  am. 

Oth.     It  is  euen  fo. 

Caf.     Oh  helpe  hoa  :  Light,  a  Surgeon. 

Oth.     ?Tis  he  :  0  braue  Iago,  honeft,  and  iuft, 
That  haft  fuch  Noble  fenfe  of  thy  Friends  wrong,  4c 

Thou  teacheft  me.     Minion,  your  deere  lyes  dead, 
And  your  vnbleft  Fate  highes  :  Strumpet  I  come : 
For  of  my  heart,  thofe  Charmes  thine  Eyes,  are  blotted. 
Thy  Bed  luft-ftain'd,  fhall  with  Lufts  blood  bee  fpotted. 

Exit  Othello.  45 

Enter  Lodouico  and  Gratiano. 

Caf.     What  hoa?  no  Watch?  No  paffage  ? 
Murther,  Murther. 

Gra.     'Tis  fome  mifchance,  the  voyce  is  very  direfull.  49 


31.  [Fight,  and  both  fall.  Rowe. 

32,  33.  One  line,  Qq,  Pope  et  seq. 

32.  I  am]  Pm  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 
mayni'd]  maind  Qx. 

33.  Helpe]  light  Qq,  Cap.  Coll. 
Murther,  murther. ~\  murder,  Q2Q3* 

34.  Enter...]  Enter  Othello,  above  at  a 
Window.  Rowe. 

Scene  II.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

37.  //  is]  Harke  tis  QXQ3.  Harhe,  tis 
Q3,  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly.  '  Tis 
Knt,  Sta. 

euen]  e'en  Coll.  Wh.  i. 

41.  me.  Minion]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Sing. 
Wh.  Glo.  Ktly,  Cam.  Rife,  me; — minion 
Qq,  Knt,  Dyce  iii.  me — minion  Pope  et 
cet. 


42.  vnblefl  Fate  highes  :]fate  hies  apace 
Qx,  Pope  4- ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var, 
Sing,  vnbleji  fate  hies  ;  Q2Q3-  unblestfatt 
hies  apace ;  Ktly. 

43.  For  of]  For  off  Ff,  Rowe.  From 
off  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Forth  of 
Qq,  Johns,  et  seq. 

are]  have  Han.  ii. 

44.  Bed  lufl-flain'd]  Bed-lefl-Jlain'd 
FF. 

345.  Exit...]  Ex.  Qx.     Exit.  QQ. 

46.  Enter...]  Enter  ...at  a  distance. 
Theob. 

Scene  III.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

47,  48.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 
49.  voyce]  Ff,  Rowe +  ,  Cap.  Knt,  Dyce 

i,  Sta.     cry  Qq  et  cet. 


39-44.  Ingleby  [Shakespeare,  the  Man,  &c.  ii,  1 92),  believing  that  Shakespeare  did 
not  intend  Othello  to  speak  at  all  in  this  Scene,  denies  that  Shakespeare  wrote  these 
lines,  which  he  calls  *  atrocious  stuff.' 

43.  For  of]  Unquestionably  a  misprint  for  Forth  of,  of  which  form  see  other 
instances  in  Abbott,  §  156. 

47.  passage]  Johnson:  No  passengers ?  nobody  going  by?  Singer:  A.  passen- 
ger anciently  signified  a  passage-boat  or  vessel,  and  could  not,  therefore,  be  used  in  its 
modern  sense  without  an  equivoque. 


2$6  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF   OTHELLO  [act  v,  sc.  i. 

Caf.     Oh  helpe.  50 

Lodo.     Hearke. 

Rod.     Oh  wretched  Villaine. 

Lod.     Two  or  three  groane.     'Tis  heauy  night ; 
Thefe  may  be  counterfeits  :  Let's  think't  vnfafe 
To  come  into  the  cry,  without  more  helpe.  55 

Rod.     Nobody  come  :  then  fhall  I  bleed  to  death. 

Enter  Iago. 

Lod.     Hearke. 
•   Gra.     Here's  one  comes  in  his  fhirt,  with  Light,  and 
Weapons.  60 

Iago.     Who's  there  ? 
Who's  noyfe  is  this  that  cries  on  murther  ? 

Lodo.     We  do  not  know. 

Iago,     Do  not  you  heare  a  cry  ? 

Caf.     Heere,  heere  :  for  heauen  fake  helpe  me.  65 

Iago.     What's  the  matter  ? 

Gra.     This  is  Othello's  Ancient,  as  I  take  it. 

Lodo.     The  fame  indeede,  a  very  valiant  Fellow. 

Iago.     What  are  you  heere,  that  cry  fo  greeuoufly  ?  69 

51.  Hearke !\  Hark,  hark  !  Ktly.  60.  [Re-enter  Iago  with  a  light.  Dyce. 
53*  groane]  grones  Qq.  groansFope  +  f  61,  62.  One  line,  Qq,  Pope  et  seq. 

Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  62.  0»]0«/Ff,  Rowe +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 

'  Tis]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.   it  is  a  Qq  et  '85. 

cet.  murther  ?]    murther  thus  ?   Coll. 

55.  into]    QqFf,   Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Sing.  (MS). 

Ktly.     in  to  Cap.  et  cet.  63.  We]  I  Qq,  Jen. 

56.  come:]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope.  come,Qq.  64.  Do]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Knt.  Did 
come  ?  Theob.  et  cet.  Qq  et  cet. 

57.  Enter  Iago]  Enter  Iago  with  a  light.  65.  heauen]  heattensQq.  heaven's  Han. 
Qq.     Enter  Jago  in  his  shirt.  Rowe.  et  seq. 

59.  Light]  lights  Qq. 

52.  John  Hunter:  Roderigo  here  reproaches  himself. 

53.  groane]  Knight  :  Lodovico  does  not  merely  say  that  there  are  two  or  three 
groans  from  one  man,  but  that  two  or  three  men  groan ;  and  he  adds,  '  these  may  be 
counterfeits.'  Lettsom  (Walker,  Crit.  iii,  290,  foot-note) :  How  could  people  at  a  dis- 
tance distinguish  whether  groans  proceeded  from  one  person  or  from  more,  when  the 
groaners  were  lying  close  together  ?  [Probably  they  did  not  both  groan  in  the  same 
key. — Ed.] 

53.  heauy]  Johnson  :  A  thick,  cloudy  night,  in  which  an  ambush  may  be  com- 
modiously  laid.     Purnell  :  '  Gloomy.'     Used  elsewhere  only  of  the  eye  in  this  sense. 

62.  cries  on]  M alone:  So  in  Eastward  Hoe,  1605:  'Who  cries  on  murder? 
Lady,  was  it  you  ? '  That  line  is  a  parody  on  a  line  in  The  Spanish  Tragedy.  See 
also  Ham.  V,  ii,  351.     White  (ed.  i) :  That  is,  cries  continually  murder. 


actv,  sc.  i.]  THE  MOORE  OF  VENICE  287 

Caf.     Iago  ?  Oh  I  am  fpoyl'd,  vndone  by  Villaines :  yc 

Giue  me  fome  helpe. 

Iago.     0  mee,  Lieutenant ! 
What  Villaines  haue  done  this  ? 

Caf.     I  thinke  that  one  of  them  is  heereabout,  74 

And  cannot  make  away.  [335  a] 

Iago.     Oh  treacherous  Villaines  : 
What  are  you  there  ?  Come  in,  and  giue  fome  helpe. 

Rod.  O  helpe  me  there. 

Cajfio.     That's  one  of  them. 

Iago.     Oh  murd'rous  Slaue  !  O  Villaine !  80 

Rod.     O  damn'd  Iago  \  O  inhumane  Dogge ! 

Iago.     Kill  men  i'th'darke  ? 
Where  be  thefe  bloody  Theeue  s  ? 
How  filent  is  this  Towne  ?  Hoa,  murther,  murther.  84 

70.  Iago?]  Iago,  Qq.  80.  murd'rous]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Wh. 

lam]  Pm  Pope  +  ,  Dyceiii,  Huds.  ii.     murderous  Qq,  Johns,  et  cet. 

72,  73.  One  line,  Qq,  Pope  et  seq.  [Thrufts  him  in.  Q2Q3-  Jago  stabs 

72.  mee,]  my  Qx.     me  Q3.     me,  QaFf  him.  Rowe. 

et  cet.  8l.  inhumane]  inhumaine  QjQ,.     w* 

74.  that  one]  the  one  Qq.  humaine  Q  . 

77.  [To  Lod.  and  Gra.  Theob.  Dogge!]  dog, — 0, o, o.  Qq,  Cap.  Jen. 

78.  me  there.]  me!  here.  Coll.  Wh.  1.  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
there]  Ff,  Rowe-h,  Jen.  Sta.    here  [Dies.  Han. 

Qq  et  cet.  82,  83.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 

79.  them]  em  Qq.  82.  men]  him  Qx. 

83.  thefe]  thofe  Qq. 

79.  Booth  :  Cassio  takes  Desdemona's  handkerchief, — the  gift  of  Othello, — from 
his  pocket  and  binds  his  leg. 

80.  Hawkins  [Life  of  Kean,  i,  253) :  Previous  actors  of  Iago  did  not  appear  to  have 
remembered  that  the  whole  fortune  of  the  Ancient  hinged  upon  this  event ;  they  stabbed 
Roderigo,  and  then  walked  away  with  perfect  ease  and  satisfaction.  Not  so  Kean.  He 
gave  and  repeated  the  murderous  thrust  till  no  life  could  be  supposed  to  remain ;  but 
feeling  this  to  be  too  important  a  matter  to  be  left  in  doubt,  he,  though  conversing 
coolly  with  those  about  him,  threw  his  eye  continually  towards  the  prostrate  body,  with 
an  intensity  as  if  he  would  pierce  its  vital  recesses  to  ascertain  the  important  fact 
Sometimes  he  walked  by  it  carelessly  and  surveyed  it  with  a  glance  too  rapid  to  be 
observed ;  sometimes  he  deliberately  approached  it  and  looked  at  it  with  his  candle,  as 
if  to  satisfy  the  spectators  that  it  was  the  villain  who  had  attacked  his  friend  Cassio, 
and  thus  he  continued  to  watch  and  hover  over  it  until  he  left  the  stage,  his  manner 
perfectly  cool,  while  his  eye  expressed  the  most  restless  anxiety. 

83.  be]  Abbott,  §  299 :  Be  is  used  in  questions  implying  doubt :  *  where  can  they 
be?' 

84.  Booth  :  As  Iago  is  about  to  stab  Cassio,  he  sees  Lodovico  and  Gratiano  approach- 
ing with  servants  and  torches. 


288 


THE    TR  AG  ED  IE   OF  OTHELLO  [act  v,  sc.  i. 


Iago. 

Lod. 

Iago. 

Gra. 

fao-o. 


What  may  you  be  ?  Are  you  of  good,  or  euill  ?  85 

Lod.     As  you  fhall  proue  vs,  praife  vs. 
Signior  Lodouico  ? 
He  Sir. 

I  cry  you  mercy  :  here's  CaJJio  hurt  by  Villaines. 
Caffio  ?  90 

How  is't  Brother  ? 
Caf.     My  Legge  is  cut  in  two. 
Iago.     Marry  heauen  forbid  : 
Light  Gentlemen,  He  binde  it  with  my  fhirt. 

Enter  Bianca.  95 

Bian.     What  is  the  matter  hoa?  Who  is't  that  cry'd  ? 
Iago.     Who  is't  that  cry'd  ? 
Bian.     Oh  my  deere  CaJJio, 
My  fweet  CaJJio  :  Oh  CaJJio ',  CaJJio,  CaJJio. 

Iago.     O  notable  Strumpet.     CaJJio,  may  you  fufpecl:  IOO 

Who  they  fhould  be,  that  haue  thus  mangled  you  ? 
Caf.     No. 

Gra.     I  am  forry  to  finde  you  thus ; 
I  haue  beene  to  feeke  you. 

Iago.     Lend  me  a  Garter.     So  : Oh  for  a  Chaire        105 

To  beare  him  eafily  hence. 

Bian.     Alas  he  faints.     Oh  CaJJio,  CaJJio,  CaJJio. 
Iago.     Gentlemen  all,  I  do  fufpecl:  this  Tram 
To  be  a  party  in  this  Iniurie. 
Patience  awhile,  good  CaJJio.     Come,  come  ;  1 10 


87.  Lodouico?]       Lodouico.       QqFf, 
Rowe,  Pope. 

88,  89.  He... hurt]  As  one  line,  Steev. 
'93,  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

90.  Caffio  ?]  Caflio.  QqF3F4.     Cassiol 
Cap. 

91.  is't"]  is  it  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai. 
Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly. 

Scene  IV.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

96.  cry'd?]  cried?  Qq. 

97.  As  a  quotation.  Sta. 

cry'd?]  cried.  QLQ2.    cry'd !  Han. 
Coll.  Dyce,  Glo.  Cam.  Rife,  Wh.  ii. 

98.  99.  Thus  divided,  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Jen. 
One  line,  Qq.     Prose,  Cam.  Rife,  Huds. 


Oh... fweet  Caffio :  as  one  line,  Cap.  et  cet. 

99.  My... Caffio.]  O  my  fweete  Cafsio, 
Cafsio,  Cafsio.  Qq. 

101.  haue  thus"]  thus  haue  Qq,  Jen. 

103,  104.  One  line,  Qq,  Cap.  et  seq. 

I  am"]  Tm  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Dyce  iii,  Huds. 

104,  I  haue]  Pve  Dyce  iii,  Huds. 

105,  106.  Om.  Qf.     Prose,  QaQr 
109-111.  Two  lines,  ending,  Cafsio.. 

no  ?  Qx.   Three,  ending,  Cafsio.. . light :... 
no?Q,Q3. 

109.  be  a  party]  beare  a  part  Qq. 
this  Iniurie]  this  Qx. 

no.  Come,  come;]  Om.  Q_. 


101.  should]  See  III,  iv,  25. 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


289 


Lend  me  a  Light  :  know  we  this  face,  or  no  ?  Ill 

Alas  my  Friend,  and  my  deere  Countryman 
Rodorigo}  No  :  Yes  fure  :  Yes,  'tis  Rodorigo. 

Gra.     What,  of  Venice  ? 

Iago.     Euen  he  Sir  :  Did  you  know  him?  115 

Gra.     Know  him?  I. 

Iago.     Signior  Gratiano  ?  I  cry  your  gentle  pardon : 
Thefe  bloody  accidents  muft  excufe  my  Manners, 
That  fo  negle6led  you. 

Gra.     I  am  glad  to  fee  you.  1 20 

Iago.     How  do  you  CaJJio  ?  Oh,  a  Chaire,  a  Chaire. 

Gra.     Rodorigo  ? 

Iago.     He,  he,  'tis  he  : 
Oh  that's  well  faid,  the  Chaire. 

Some  good  man  beare  him  carefully  from  hence,  125 

He  fetch  the  Generall's  Surgeon.     For  you  Miftris, 
Saue  you  your  labour.     He  that  lies  flaine  heere  [CaJJio) 
Was  my  deere  friend.     What  malice  was  between  you  f 

Caf.     None  in  the  world  :  nor  do  I  know  the  man  ? 

Iago.     What?  looke  you  pale?  Oh  beare  him  o'th'Ayre.         130 
Stay  you  good  Gentlemen.     Looke  you  pale,  Miftris  ? 


112.  Countryman]  coimtrey  man  :  Qq. 

113.  Yes,  'tis]  Q2Q3,  Cap.  Knt.  Yea,  'tis 
Ff,  Rowe  + .     O  heauen  Qx,  Jen.  et  cet. 

Rodorigo]  Rederigo  Q2Q, . 

114.  What  ]  Roderigo  ?  what  Cap.  conj . 
(P-  36  h). 

116.  /]    QqFf.     Ah!   Rowe+.     Ay. 
Han.  et  cet. 

117.  your]  Ff,  Rowe+,  Cap.  Knt,  Sta. 
you  Qq  et  cet. 

120.  I  am]  Pm  Dyce  iii. 

123,  124.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 

123.  He,  he,]  He,  Qq. 

[Enter  Some  with  a  Chair.  Cap. 


124.  the]  a  Qq. 

126.  GeneraWs]  General  Y  . 
[To  Bianca.  Johns. 

127.  labour.  He]  labour,  he  Qq. 
(Caflio)]  Om.  Han. 

128.  between]  betwixt  QjQ,.  betwixQa. 

1 29.  ?nan  ?]  man  ;  F  .  man.  Qq,  Rowe 
et  seq. 

130.  [To  Bianca.  Johns. 

o'tti]  outdth  Qx.  outoth!  Ff.  out 
d  th'  Rowe  + ,  Jen.  Dyce  iii,  Wh.  ii.  o'  the 
Knt.     out  J  the  Q2Q3  et  cet. 

131.  Gentlemen.]    Gentlewoman,    Qq, 
Mai.  V-jt. 


112.  Countryman]  Steevens  :  This  passage  incontestably  proves  that  Iago  was 
meant  for  a  Venetian.     Booth  :  Iago  is  very  much  overcome. 

124.  well  said]  See  II,  i,  192. 

131.  Gentlemen]  Malone  upholds  the  Qq :  'No  reason  can  be  assigned  why 
Lodovico  and  Gratiano  should  leave  before  they  had  heard  from  Iago  further  partic- 
ulars of  the  attack  on  Cassio,  merely  because  Cassio  was  borne  off;  whereas,  Bianca 
would  naturally  endeavour  to  accompany  Cassio,  to  render  him  assistance.'  Boswell 
agrees  with  Malone,  and  thinks  that  Iago  stops  Bianca  under  a  pretended  suspicion 
19 


200 


THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO  [act  v,  sc.  i. 


Do  you  perceiue  the  gaftneffe  of  her  eye  ? 
Nay,  if  you  flare,  we  fhall  heare  more  anon. 
Behold  her  well  :  I  pray  you  looke  vpon  her : 
Do  you  fee  Gentlemen  ?  Nay,  guiltineffe  will  fpeake 
Though  tongues  were  out  of  vfe. 

sEmil.     Alas,  what  is  the  matter  ? 
What  is  the  matter,  Husband? 

Iago.     CaJJio  hath  heere  bin  fet  on  in  the  darke 
By  Rodorigo,  and  Fellowes  that  are  fcap'd : 
He's  almoft  flaine,  and  Rodorigo  quite  dead. 

ALmiL     Alas  good  Gentleman  :  alas  good  Cafsio. 

Iago,     This  is  the  fruits  of  whoring.     Prythe  Emilia, 
Go  know  of  CaJJio  where  he  fupt  to  night. 


132 


135 


140 
[335  <*] 


144 


132.  gqyine//"e]  ieq/lures  QtQ2.  jejiures 
Q  .  gejlures  Q'81.  ghastness  Knt,  Sing. 
Ktly,  Del. 

[To  Bianca.  Rowe. 

133.  if  you  flare]  an  you  Jlirre  Qq. 
{Jlirr  Q  ).     an  you  stir  : —  Coll.  Hal. 

heare]  haue  Qq. 

134.  well :... you]  well... you,  Qq.  well, 
...you  Rowe. 

135.  Do...guiltineffe]  One  line,  Qq, 
Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

136.  vfe.']  vfe.   Enter  Em,  Qq.    (Emi. 

Q*Q,)- 

Scene  V.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

137.  138.  One  line,  Qq,  Cap.  et  seq. 
(except  Knt). 


x37»  I3%-  Alas,  what  is...  What  is]  Yi, 
Rowe+,  Knt.  Alas!  what's. ..what's 
Coll.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Hal.  Rife.  'Las,  what's 
...what  is  Sta.  'Las  what's... what's  Qq 
et  cet. 

139.  hath  heere  bin]  has  here  bin  Qq, 
Cap.  has  heen  Q'8l.  has  been  Q'95- 
hath  there  been  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 

141.  quite]  Yi,  Rowe,  Knt.  Om.  Qq, 
Pope  et  cet. 

143.  fruits]  Yi,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sta.  Wh. 
i,  Del.    fruite  Qq  et  cet. 

Prythe]  pray  Qx,  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 
prithee  Q2FF,  Rowe,  Knt,  Dyce,  Glo. 
Cam.Rlfe,Wh.ii.  PretheeYQ.  'PSythee 
Sing.  Ktly.     Pr'yihee  Cap.  et  cet. 


that  she  would  try  to  escape.  Reed  defends  the  Ff  on  the  ground  that  it  was  more 
proper  for  the  two  gentlemen  to  leave  with  Cassio  in  order  to  assist  him,  than  to  stay 
and  gratify  their  curiosity.  Respect  for  Othello's  successor,  if  not  personal  regard, 
would  have  dictated  such  a  proceeding  had  they  not  been  stopped  by  Iago's  desiring 
them  not  to  go. 

135.  will]  Morel:  Ce  n'est  pas  un  futur,  mais  une  forme  emphatique  on  frequenta- 
tive. Le  latin  donne  parfois  une  valeur  analogue  aux  desinences  du  futur :  Cantabit 
vacuus  coram  latrone  viator.' — Juvenal. 

136.  use]  Steevens  :  So  in  Ham.  II,  ii,  569:  'For  murder,  though  it  have  no 
iongue,  will  speak  With  most  miraculous  organ.' 

144.  to  night]  M alone:  In  the  last  Scene  of  the  preceding  Act,  Iago  informs 
Roderigo  that  Cassio  was  to  sup  with  Bianca;  that  he  would  accompany  Cassio  to  her 
house,  and  would  take  care  to  bring  nim  away  from  thence  between  twelve  and  one 
Cassio,  too,  had  himself  informed  Iago  (IV,  i)  that  he  would  sup  with  Bianca,  and  Iago 
had  promised  to  meet  him  at  her  house.  Perhaps,  however,  Iago  chose  to  appear  igno- 
rant of  Cassio's  movements  during  the  evening.     Steevens  :  Yet  how  happens  it  that 


ACT  v,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


291 


What,  do  you  fhake  at  that  ?  145 

Bian,     He  iupt  at  my  houfe,  but  I  therefore  (hake  not. 

Iago.     O  did  he  f o  ?  I  charge  you  go  with  me. 

Aimil.     Oh  fie  vpon  thee  Strumpet. 

Bian.     I  am  no  Strumpet,  but  of  life  as  honeft, 
As  you  that  thus  abufe  me.  150 

JEmil.     As  I  ?  Fie  vpon  thee. 

Iago.     Kinde  Gentlemen : 
Let's  go  fee  poore  Caffw  dreft. 
Come  Miftris,  you  muft  tel's  another  Tale. 

^Emilia,  run  you  to  the  Cittadell,  155 

And  tell  my  Lord  and  Lady,  what  hath  happ'd : 
Will  you  go  on  afore  ?  This  is  the  night 
That  either  makes  me,  or  fo redoes  me  quight.        Exeunt        158 


Sccena  Secunda. 

Enter  Othello,  and  Defdemona  in  her  bed. 
Oth.     It  is  the  Caufe,  it  is  the  Caufe  (my  Soule) 


148.  Oh  fie]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Knt, 
Coll.  Wh.  i.  Fie  Q2Q3.  Fie,  fie  Ql  et  cet. 

151.  Fie]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt,  Coll.  Wh. 
i.  foughyfie  Qx,  Jen.  now  fie  Q8Q3-  foh! 
fie  Cap.  et  cet. 

152,  153.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 
153-  go\  Om.  Pope  +  . 

154.  teVs]  tell  us  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 
Rann.  Knt. 

155.  you]  Om.  Pope,  Theob.  i,  Han. 

156.  hath]  has  Qq,  Mai.  Steev.'o^,  Var. 
Sing.  Ktly. 

157.  on  afore?]  on,  I  pray,  Qt.  on, 
I  pray  ?  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing. 


Rife,     on  ?  I  pray  ;  Q2Q3-     on  ?  I  pray. 
Glo.  Cam.  Wh.  ii. 

157.  [Aside.  Steev.  et  seq. 

158.  makes]  markes  Qx. 

1.  Sccena...]  Om.  Qq.  Scene  VI. 
Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

2.  Enter...]  Enter  Othello  with  a  light. 
Qx.  Enter  Othello  with  a  light,  and  Def- 
demona in  her  bed.  Q2Q_.  A  Bed-cham- 
ber: Desdemona  is  discover'd  asleep  in 
her  bed.  Enter  Othello.  Rowe.  Enter 
Othello  with  a  light  and  a  sword.  Pope. 
...A  light  burning.  Steev. 


Bianca,  instead  of  replying, — •  He  supp'd,'  &c,  did  not  answer,  addressing  herself  to 
Iago :  '  Why,  you  well  know  |  He  supp'd,'  &c.  The  former  line  being  imperfect, 
some  such  words  might  have  been  omitted.  Or,  perhaps,  our  author  was  unwilling 
that  Bianca  should  say,  in  the  presence  of  Iago's  wife,  that  he  too  had  been  of  Cassio's 
supper-party ;  and  hence  this  seeming  inconsistency.  Singer  :  We  must  suppose  that 
Iago  thought  it  more  secure  to  waylay  Cassio,  as  we  find  he  does,  without  actually  join- 
ing him  at  supper-time. 

157.  Booth  :  Watch  them  well  off,  then  take  a  look  at  Roderigo  and  speak  hoarsely. 

158.  foredoes]  See  Ham.  II,  i,  103. 

2.  Knight  is  at  some  pains  to  explain  the  setting  of  the  stage  for  this  Scene 
in  Shakespeare's  time,  and,  with  the  aid  of  Tieck  and  Ulrici,  devises  a  satisfactory 
arrangement,  whereby  we  have  a  stage  within  the  stage.      But  I  do  lot  think  that 


292  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  v,  sc.  ii. 


[2.  Enter  Othello,  and  Defdemona  in  her  bed.~\ 
much  real  information  has  been  added  to  that  which  Malone  has  left  us;  certainly  Dyce 
and  Collier  found  nothing  to  add,  and  all  that  Malone  was  able  to  discover  was,  sub- 
stantially, that  there  was  a  balcony,  or  upper  stage,  at  the  back  of  the  principal  stage, 
and  that,  in  addition  to  the  principal  curtain  in  the  front,  there  were  others,  as  substi- 
tutes for  scenes,  which  were  called  traverses,  and  could  be  drawn  aside,  disclosing 
inner  compartments.  It  is  really  not  difficult  to  imagine  that  even  these  simple  resources 
were  adequate  to  all  the  needs  of  this  last  scene. — Ed.  Fechter  :  Desdemona's 
Chamber.  At  the  back  a  large  window  with  balcony,  overlooking  the  sea.  On  the  left 
of  the  window  an  arch  discovering  an  oratory ;  by  the  half- raised  curtain  is  seen  a  prie 
Dieu,  surmounted  by  a  Madonna,  and  lighted  by  a  red  lamp.  On  the  same  side,  in  front, 
a  bed  raised  by  two  steps.  A  door  at  the  right.  A  high  and  elegant  Venetian  lamp 
burns  at  the  head  of  the  bed,  where  Desdemona  lies  asleep;  a  small  toilette  glass, 
fallen  from  her  hand,  lies  near  her.  Her  clothes  scattered  about.  On  the  balcony, 
Othello,  motionless,  enveloped  in  a  long  white  burnous,  is  looking  at  the  stars.  Far 
off, — at  sea, — is  heard  the  Song  of  Willow.  As  the  voices  die  away,  Othello,  who, 
during  the  last  couplet,  comes  slowly  forward  to  the  bed  to  look  at  Desdemona,  acci- 
dentally touches  the  glass  in  which  he  sees  his  bronzed  face, — (  With  bitter  despair)  ; 
'  It  is  the  cause,  it  is  the  cause,  my  soul!  (returning  to  the  window,  his  eyes  fixed  on  the 
heavens!)  Let  me  not  name  it  to  you,  you  chaste  stars ! — {looking  at  his  face  once 
again).  It  is  the  cause  !  (He  violently  throws  the  glass  into  the  sea,  goes  to  the  door, 
locks  it,  advances  to  the  bed,  half  drawing  his  sword  ;  then  suddenly  stops,  and  returns 
it  to  the  scabbard*)  Yet  I'll,'  &c.  Booth  :  A  Bed-chamber  in  the  Castle.  Raised 
Bed  l.,  opposite  to  large  Window  R.  Moonlight  streams  through  window  and  falls 
upon  Bed.  Door  c.  Divan  c.  A  Light  burning  on  Table.  Desdemona  in  Bed,  asleep, 
discovered.  Othello  also  discovered.  Booth  (MS.) :  I  prefer  the  bed  at  the  side  of 
the  stage,  with  the  head  towards  the  audience ;  it  is  of  more  importance  that  Othello's 
face  should  be  seen  than  Desdemona's  dead  body,  and  the  killing  is  partly  hidden  at 
the  same  time.  Mrs  F.  A.  Kemble  (Temple  Bar,  July,  1884)  :  This  last  Scene  pre- 
sents technical  difficulties  in  its  adequate  representation  which  have  never  yet  been 
even  partially  overcome.  The  audience,  of  course,  cannot  be  expected  to  sit  by  and 
see  Desdemona  smothered ;  the  curtains  of  the  alcove  in  which  the  bed  is,  are  there- 
fore lowered  during  that  operation,  but  it  is  very  desirable,  if  not  absolutely  necessary 
that  she  should  be  both  heard  and  seen  when  she  gasps  out  her  dying  exculpation  of 
her  husband,  and  while  she  is  perpetually  apostrophized  by  Emilia,  Othello,  and  Lodo- 
vico.  The  lines  addressed  to  the  lamp,  '  If  I  quench  thee,  thou  flaming  minister,' 
should  certainly  be  spoken  with  the  light  in  near  juxtaposition  to  the  bed,  and  the 
intense  pathos  of  the  following  ones,  '  When  I  have  plucked  the  rose,'  &c,  can  only 
be  given  with  due  effect, — and  what  effect  Salvini's  voice  would  give  to  them ! — by 

Othello  leaning  over  his  sleeping  wife The  position  of  the  bed  (which  for  all  the 

purposes  of  the  Scene  would  be  altered  with  advantage  to  the  side  of  the  stage),  by 
which  Othello  is  constrained  to  turn  his  back  to  the  audience  while  addressing  Desde 
mona,  if  she  remains  in  it,  has,  we  suppose,  induced  Signor  Salvini  to  make  her  come 
from  the  alcove  and  speak  the  greater  part  of  the  dialogue  standing  in  front  of  it ;  an 
alteration  of  the  stage  tradition  which  hurts  the  effect  of  the  Scene,  and  is  untrue  to 
the  intention  of  Shakespeare,  who  makes  Othello  tell  his  wife  that  she  is  on  her  death- 
bed, and  in  reply  to  his  furious  command,  '  Peace,  be  still,'  receives  th  ?  answer,  '  I 
will;  what  is  the  matter?'  with  which  the  terrified  woman  cowers  down  upon  her 
pillow  like  a  poor,  frightened  child.     Indeed,  the  whole  Scene  loses  its  most  pitiful 


ACTV.sc.  ii]  THE  MOORE   OF    VENICE  293 

Let  me  not  name  it  to  you,  you  chafle  Starres, 

It  is  the  Caufe.     Yet  He  not  fhed  her  blood,  5 

Nor  fcarre  that  whiter  skin  of  hers,  then  Snow, 

element,  by  allowing  Desdemona  to  confront  Othello  standing,  instead  of  uttering  the 
piteous  pleadings  for  mercy  in  the  helpless  prostration  of  her  half-recumbent  position ; 
although  we  have  no  doubt  that  a  most  powerful  effect  might  be  produced  by  any 
actress  equal  to  the  situation,  who  should  herself  rush  from  the  bed  to  Othello's  feet, 
as  she  utters  the  piercing  denial,  'No,  no,  no;  send  for  the  man  and  ask  him.' 

3,  4.  Johnson  :  The  abruptness  of  this  soliloquy  makes  it  obscure.  The  meaning,  I 
ihink,  is  this : — I  am  here  (says  Othello  in  his  mind)  overwhelmed  with  horror.  What 
is  the  reason  of  this  perturbation  ?  Is  it  want  of  resolution  to  do  justice  ?  Is  it  the 
dread  of  shedding  blood  ?  No ;  it  is  not  the  action  that  shocks  me,  but  '  it  is  the 
cause,  it  is  the  cause,  my  soul.'  Steevens  :  Othello,  full  of  horror  at  the  cruel  action 
which  he  is  about  to  perpetrate,  seems  at  this  instant  to  be  seeking  his  justification,  by 
representing  to  himself  the  cause,  i.  e.,  the  greatness  of  the  provocation  he  had  received. 
He  may,  however,  mean, — It  is  the  cause  of  chastity  and  virtue  that  I  maintain.  Hud- 
son :  Othello  means  that  Desdemona's  crime  is  the  sole  motive  or  reason  that  impels 
him  to  the  present  act;  that  in  this  alone  he  has  a  justifying  cause,  a  'compelling  occa- 
sion,' for  what  he  is  about  to  do;  so  that  he  cannot  justly  lie  under  the  reproach 
of  having  acted  from  any  subjective  or  self-generated  animus  of  revengeful  jealousy. 
White  (ed.  ii) :  This  is,  to  me,  one  of  the  most  doubtful  and  perplexing  passages  in 
all  these  plays.  Which  is  the  emphatic  word,  '  it '  or  '  is  '  or  '  cause,'  and  what  is  '  the 
cause,'  and  of  what  it  is  the  cause,  I  confess  that  I  am  not  ready  to  decide.  That  '  it ' 
in  the  second  line  refers  to  Desdemona's  supposed  unchastity  is  plain  enough ;  but  that 
her  unchastity  is  'the  cause'  is  not  so  certain.  For  Othello  to  say  to  himself,  and  at 
this  moment,  that  Desdemona's  conduct  is  the  cause  of  his  intended  murder,  seems 
very  tame;  and  the  [eighth]  line,  with  its  conclusion,  'else  she'll  betray  more  men,' 
seems  to  imply  that  Othello  has  deluded  himself  into  looking  upon  his  act  as  providen- 
tial rather  than  retributive,  and  that  '  cause  '  is  his  emphatic  word.  [If  '  cause  '  is  the 
emphatic  word,  and  assuredly  it  is  when  it  first  occurs,  it  should  not  receive  an  equal 
emphasis  twice  in  the  same  line ;  then  White's  perplexity  falls  on  all  of  us.  Is  the 
second  'it'  or  the  second  'is'  to  be  emphatic?  I  should  prefer  to  let  the  emphasis 
fall  on  '  is.'  But  is  it  necessary  to  emphasize  any  one  word  ?  Is  not  the  mere  repeti- 
tion of  each  word  in  itself  an  emphasis  of  each  word  ? — Ed.] 

4.  chaste  Starres]  Hudson  :  In  classical  poetry  the  Moon  is  Diana,  the  goddess 
of  chastity,  and  the  stars  are  the  train  of  virgins  attending  on  her.  The  epithet 
*  chaste '  thus  applied  suggests  the  nature  of  the  cause  which  the  purity  of  the  stars 
forbids  to  be  named  in  their  presence.  The  Alhenaum  (10  April,  1875) :  After  deliv- 
ering the  speech,  '  It  is  the  cause,'  slowly,  the  first  lines  being  spoken  close  to  the  door 
by  which  he  enters,  Othello  [Salvini]  kisses  his  sleeping  wife,  then  goes  to  the  window, 
and  stands  with  the  lightning  playing  upon  his  face. 

6.  whiter]  For  many  instances  of  this  transposition  of  the  adjective,  see  Abbott, 
§419  a,  and  Walker  (Crit.  i,  160). 

6.  of  hers]  Abbott,  §  239  :  '  This  of  yours '  is  now,  as  in  E.  E.,  generally  applied 
to  one  out  of  a  class,  whether  the  class  exist  or  be  imaginary.  We  could  say  '  this  coat 
of  yours,'  but  not  (except  colloquially)  '  this  head  of  yours.'  It  is,  however,  commonly 
used  by  Shakesp'n  °,  as  in  the  present  instance,  where  even  the  conception  of  J  class 
is  impossible. 


294 


THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO 


And  fmooth  as  Monumentall  Alablafter : 

Yet  fhe  muft  dye,  elfe  iTiee'l  betray  more  men : 

Put  out  the  Light,  and  then  put  out  the  Light : 


[act  v,  sc.  ii. 
7 


7.  as~]  and  Pope  ii. 

Alablafter]  QqF2F3,  Rowe  ii,  Pope. 
Alabajler  ¥  ,  Rowe  i. 

[Lays  clown  the  sword.  Theob. 

9.  Light,... Light:}  QqFf,  Mai.  Steev. 
'93,  Var.'03,  Var.'i3,  Var.'2i,  Dyce  i,  Glo. 
Cam.  Del.  Wh.  ii.  Light,  and  then  put 
out  the  Light,  Rowe  i.  Light,  and  then 
put  out  the  Light,  Rowe  ii.  light,  and 
then  put  out  the  light ;  Pope,  light,  and, 
then, put  out  the  light ;  Theob.   light :  and 


then — put  out  thy  light.  Han.  light,  and 
then — Put  out  the  light?  Warb.  Jen.  Knt, 
Coll.  i,  Coll.  ii.  light,  and,  then — Put  out 
the  light?  Johns,  light,  and  then — Put 
out  the  light!  Cap.  Steev.'78,  Steev.'85, 
Rann,  Sing.  Sta.  Ktly,  Rife,  light,  and, 
then — Put  out  the  light !  Steev.  '73.  light, 
and  then  put  out  the  light.  Wh .  i.  light, — 
G>id  then  put  out  thy  light :  Dyce  ii,  Dyce 
iii,  Coll.  iii,  Huds.  light,  and  then  put  out 
the  light?  Hal. 


7.  Alablaster]  Hunter  (ii,  281) :  Compare  with  this,  R.  of  L.,  '  Where,  like  a  vir- 
tuous monument  she  lies.' — 391.  And  again,  '  Without  the  bed  her  other  fair  hand 
was,  On  the  green  coverlet ;  whose  perfect  white  Shew'd  like  an  April  daisy  on  the 
grass.' — lb.  393.  And  again,  'With  more  than  admiration  he  admired  Her  azure 
veins,  her  alabaster  skin,  Her  coral  lips,  her  snow-white  dimpled  chin.' — lb.  418. 
Murray  {New  Eng.  Diet.):  The  spelling  in  the  1 6-1 7th  centuries  is  almost  always 
alablaster ;  apparently  due  to  a  confusion  with  arblaster,  a  cross-bowman,  also  written 
alablaster. 

8.  more  men]  Hunter  (ii,  288) :  I  confess  the  sense  is  not  clear  to  me.  It  seems 
as  if  it  should  be  that  Othello  is  the  •  betrayed,'  not  Cassio,  or  any  other  person  whom 
the  Moor,  in  his  disordered  mind,  may  suppose  to  be  a  second  Cassio.  I  would  there- 
fore suggest  as  worthy  of  consideration,  that  the  words  may  have  been  originally,  '  else 
she'll  betray  me  more.''  This  conjecture  is,  to  a  certain  extent,  supported  by  the  use 
of  the  word  'betray'  in  the  following  passage  of  Beard's  Theatre  of  God's  Judgment, 
1 53 1 :  'Out  of  the  same  fountain  sprang  the  words  of  Queen  Hecuba  in  Euripides, 
speaking  to  Menelaus  touching  Helen,  when  she  admonished  him  to  enact  this  law, 
that  any  woman  which  should  betray  her  husband's  credit  and  her  own  chastity  to 
another  man,  should  die  the  death.' — p.  387. 

9.  Upton  (p.  177) :  Othello  enters  with  a  taper  (not  with  a  sword,  for  he  intended 
all  along  to  strangle  his  wife  in  her  bed),  and  in  the  utmost  agony  of  mind  says,  he  has 
cause  for  his  cruelty,  a  cause  not  to  be  named  to  the  chaste  stars ;  'tis  fit,  therefore,  Des- 
demona  should  die.  '  I'll  put  out  the  light,  and  then,' — strangle  her,  he  was  going  to 
say ;  but  this  recalls  a  thousand  tender  ideas  in  his  troubled  soul ;  he  stops  short — If  I 
quench  the  taper,  how  easy  'tis  to  restore,'  &c.  Warburton  :  The  meaning  is,  1  will 
put  out  the  light,  and  then  proceed  to  the  execution  of  my  purpose.  But  the  expression 
of  putting  out  the  light,  bringing  to  mind  the  effects  of  the  extinction  of  the  light  of 
life,  he  breaks  short,  and  questions  himself  about  the  effects  of  this  metaphorical  extinc 
tion,  introduced  by  a  repetition  of  his  first  words,  as  much  as  to  say,  But  hold,  let  me 
first  weigh  the  reflections  which  this  expression  so  naturally  excites.  Farmer  :  War- 
burton's  punctuation  gives  a  spirit  which,  I  fear,  was  not  intended.  It  seems  to  have 
been  only  a  play  upon  words.  '  To  put  out  the  light '  was  a  phrase  for  '  to  kill.'  Field- 
ing {A  Journey  from  this  World  to  the  Next,  Miscellanies;  1743,  vol.  ii,  p.  65) :  I  then 
observed  Shakespeare  standing  between  Betterton  and  Booth,  and  deciding  a  Differ- 
ence 1  etween  those  two  great  Actors,  concerning  the  placing  an  Accent  in  one  of  b.» 


ACTV.SCii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  295 


[9.  Put  out  the  Light,  and  then  put  out  the  Light :] 
lines ;  this  was  disputed  on  both  sides  with  a  Warmth,  which  surprised  me  in  Elysium, 
till  I  discovered  by  Intuition  that  every  Soul  retained  its  principal  Characteristic,  being, 
indeed,  its  very  Essence.  The  Line  was  that  celebrated  one  in  Othello :  'Put  out  the 
Light,  and  then  put  out  the  Light,'  according  to  Betterton.  Mr  Booth  contended  to  have 
it  thus  :  •  Put  out  the  Light,  and  then  put  out  the  Light.'  I  could  not  help  offering  my 
Conjecture  on  this  Occasion,  and  suggested  it  might  perhaps  be :  •  Put  out  the  Light, 
and  then  put  out  thy  Light.'  Another  hinted  a  Reading  very  sophisticated  in  my  Opin- 
ion, '  Put  out  the  Light,  and  then  put  out  thee,  Light,'  making  '  Light '  to  be  in  the  voca- 
tive Case.  Another  would  have  altered  this  last  Word,  and  read, '  Put  out  thy  Light,  and 
then  put  out  thy  Sight.'  But  Betterton  said,  if  the  Text  was  to  be  disturbed,  he  saw  no 
reason  why  a  Word  might  not  be  changed  as  well  as  a  Letter,  and  instead  of  '  put  ou . 
thy  Light,'  you  might  read, '  put  out  thy  eyes.1  At  last  it  was  agreed  on  all  sides  to  refei 
the  matter  to  the  decision  of  Shakespeare  himself,  who  delivered  his  Sentiments  as  fol- 
lows :  '  Faith,  Gentlemen,  it  is  so  long  since  I  wrote  the  Line  I  have  forgot  my  Meaning. 
This  I  know,  could  I  have  dreamt  so  much  Nonsense  would  have  been  talked  and  writ 
about  it,  I  would  have  blotted  it  out  of  my  Works ;  for  I  am  sure,  if  any  of  these  be  my 
Meaning,  it  doth  me  very  little  Honour.'  He  was  then  interrogated  concerning  some 
other  ambiguous  Passages  in  his  Works,  but  he  declined  any  satisfactory  Answer,  saying, 
if  Mr  Theobald  had  not  writ  about  it  sufficiently,  there  were  three  or  four  more  new 
Editions  of  his  Plays  coming  out,  which  he  hoped  would  satisfy  every  one ;  Concluding, 
'  I  marvel  nothing  so  much,  as  that  Men  will  gird  themselves  at  discovering  obscure 
Beauties  in  an  author.  Certes,  the  greatest  and  most  pregnant  Beauties  are  ever  the 
plainest  and  most  striking;  and,  when  two  Meanings  of  a  Passage  can  in  the  least  bal 
ance  our  Judgements  which  to  prefer,  I  hold  it  matter  of  unquestionable  Certainty  that 
neither  of  them  are  [sic']  worth  a  farthing.'  Malone  :  The  poet,  I  think,  meant  merely 
to  say :  '  I  will  now  put  out  the  lighted  taper  which  I  hold,  and  then  put  out  the  light 
of  life  /'  and  this  introduces  his  subsequent  reflection  and  comparison,  just  as  aptly,  as 
supposing  the  latter  words  of  the  line  to  be  used  in  the  same  sense  as  in  the  beginning 
of  it,  which  cannot  be  done  without  destroying  that  equivoque  and  play  of  words  of 
which  Shakespeare  was  so  fond.  I  believe,  however,  that  Shakespeare  wrote,  '  and 
then  put  out  thy  light';  and  the  reading  of  Qx  in  line  1 2,  'but  once  put  out  thine? 
seems  to  me  to  countenance  this  emendation.  [This  very  line  in  the  Folio  Knight 
adduces  as  strengthening  Warburton's  interpretation.]  Boswell  :  If  Warburton's  expla- 
nation be  an  error,  it  is  demptus  per  vim,  and  I,  for  one,  am  very  sorry  to  part  with  it. 
Broken  sentences  are  very  much  in  Shakespeare's  manner,  and  are  surely  natural  in 
the  perturbed  state  of  Othello's  mind.  I  am  unwilling  to  persuade  myself  that  a  regu- 
ation  of  the  text  which  contains  so  much  beauty  could  be  merely  the  refinement  of  a 
critic,  and  that  our  great  author,  in  one  of  his  most  highly- wrought  scenes,  instead  of  it, 
intended  nothing  but  a  cold  conceit.  [Both  Steevens  and  Malone  cite  many  instances 
from  Shakespeare,  his  predecessors,  and  contemporaries,  to  prove  that  '  to  put  out  the 
light '  means  '  to  kill '  or  to  die.  As  if  the  inverted  torch  were  not  as  old  as  mortuary 
symbolism ! — Ed.]  White  (ed.  i)  :  Warburton's  ingenious  reading  makes  the  second 
clause  the  lively  expression  of  stimulated  intelligence ;  to  me  it  is  the  despairing  utter 
ance  of  the  profoundest  woe.  Walker  {Crit.  iii,  291):  Read,  I  believe,  'then  put 
out  thy  light ! '  or,  possibly,  '  her  light.'  Cambridge  Editors  :  Mr  Goldwin  Smith, 
regarding  the  line  in  question  as  a  stage  direction  which  has  crept  into  the  text,  sug- 
gests >.o  us  that  the  passage  ought  to  be  printed  as  follows :  '  Yet  she  must  die,  else 
she'll  '->etray  more  men.'     [Takes  off  his  sword,  and  then  puts  out  the  light.]     If  I 


2g6  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  v,  sc.  ii 

If  I  quench  thee,  thou  flaming  Minifter,  10 

I  can  againe  thy  former  light  reftore, 

Should  I  repent  me.     But  once  put  out  thy  Light, 

Thou  cunning' ft  Patterne  of  excelling  Nature, 

I  know  not  where  is  that  Promethcean  heate 

That  can  thy  Light  re-Lume.  15 

When  I  haue  pluck'd  thy  Rofe, 

I  cannot  giue  it  vitall  growth  againe, 

It  needs  muft  wither.     He  fmell  thee  on  the  Tree. 

Oh  Balmy  breath,  that  doffc  almoft  perfwade  19 

12.  me]  Om.  Pope  +  .  not  putting  it  out.  Han. 

thy  Light]  thine  Qq,  Jen.  Rann,  16.  thy]  the  Qq,  Han.  Jen.  Rami,  Glo. 

Steev.'93,  Var.  Sing.  Ktly.  Cam.  Dyce  iii,  Coll.  iii,  Huds.  Rife,  Wh.  ii. 

13.  cunning ft"]  cunning  Qx,  Jen.  18.  needs  muft]  mtijl  needes  Qq,  Glo. 

14.  Tiomethxan]  promethianQq.  Pro-  Cam.  Rife,  Wh.  ii. 

methean  Ff.  thee]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Knt.     the 

heate]  fire  Cap.  conj.  (p.  37  a).  F3.     it  Qq,  Johns,  et  cet. 

15.  16.  One  line,  Qq,  Cap.  et  seq.  [Kiffes  her.  Q2Q3-     ^e  kiffes  her 

15.  re-Lu?ne]  F2F  .  returneQt.  return-         (after  lines  22,  23)  QT. 

ine  Q2Q3,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.'85.    re-lumine  19.  Oh]  A  Qq.     O  Rowe.     Ah  Glo. 

Rowe  +  .    re-lume  F  .    relume  Mai.  et  cet.  dojl  almoft]  doth  almost  Qq,  Knt. 

[Sets  down  the  Taper.  Theob.  ...         almost  dost  J  en. 

quench  thee,'  &c,  or  thus  :  ' alabaster.    [  Takes  off  his  sword.]    Yet  she  must  die, 

else  she'll  betray  more  men.  \_Puts  out  the  light.]  If  I  quench  thee,'  &c.  Dyce 
(ed.  iii) :  I  agree  with  Malone  and  Walker  that  [thy  light]  is  the  true  reading,  though 
Bos  well  objects  to  it  as  introducing  'a  cold  conceit '  (he,  we  may  suppose,  having  sud- 
denly forgotten  what  a  crop  of  'conceits '  there  is  in  Shakespeare).  Compare  the  con- 
text :  '  but  once  ptit  out  thy  light,  ....  that  can  thy  light  relume.'  [Surely  Malone 
knew  that  his  change  to  '  thy  light '  was  not  original.  Farmer's  reference  to  Fielding 
is  quoted  in  Malone's  own  edition ;  it  was  this  casual  reference  to  Fielding  that  led  me 
to  look  up  the  passage.  Ought  not  Dyce  to  have  known  that  it  was  at  least  as  old  as 
Hanmer  ?  Dyce  is  unsparing  in  his  criticisms  of  mistakes  or  oversights  in  others,  yet 
he  is  no  more  infallible  than  the  rest  of  us.  In  the  interpretation  of  the  present  line 
every  one  will  decide,  and  for  the  nonce  rightly,  according  to  his  own  temperament. 
Warburton's  suggestion  suits  mine. — Ed.]  Theobald  gives  us  a  glimpse  of  the  stage 
business  of  his  day  where  he  says :  '  The  players  in  all  the  companies  wherever  I  have 
seen  this  tragedy  performed,  commit  the  absurdity  of  making  Othello  put  out  the  can- 
dle.' He  goes  on  to  say,  '  Desdemona  is  discovered  in  her  bed  in  the  dark ;  Othello 
enters  the  chamber  with  a  taper.  If  there  were  any  other  lights  in  the  room,  where 
would  be  the  drift  of  putting  out  his  ?  If  there  were  no  others,  and  that  he  put  out 
his,  how  absurd  is  it  for  Desdemona  in  the  dark  to  talk  of  his  "  eyes  rolling,"  and  his 
"  gnawing  his  nether  lip."  '  The  difficulty  is  solved,  Theobald  thinks,  by  making 
Othello  set  down  the  light  while  he  goes  to  kiss  Desdemona ;  this  wakens  her,  and  so 
'  they  continue  in  discourse  together  till  he  stifles  her.'  [How  vapid  is  the  Italian 
translation  :  Ch'  io  spenga  questa  face,  E  poi  la  vita  sua.'] 

16.  thy  Rose]  To  me,  this  is  far  preferable  to  the  rose  of  the  Qq.    This  is  'beauty's 
Rose '  of  the  S  nnets. — Ed. 


ACT  v,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


Iuftice  to  breake  her  Sword.     One  more,  one  more : 
Be  thus  when  thou  art  dead,  and  I  will  kill  thee, 
And  loue  thee  after.     One  more,  and  that's  the  laft 
So  fweet,  was  ne're  fo  fatall.     I  muft  weepe, 
But  they  are  cruell  Teares  :  This  forrow's  heauenly, 
It  ftrikes,  where  it  doth  loue.     She  wakes. 

Def.     Who's  there  t  Othello  ? 

OtheL     I  Defdemona. 

Def     Will  you  come  to  bed,  my  Lord? 

Oth.     Haue  you  pray'd  to  night,  Defdemon  ? 

Def.     I  my  Lord. 

Oth.     If  you  bethinke  your  felfe  of  any  Crime 
Vnreconcil'd  as  yet  to  Heauen,  and  Grace, 
Solicite  for  it  ftraight. 


297 
20 


'b 


30 


33 


20.  Iujlice~\  Iuftice  her  felfe  Qq,  Jen. 
Steev.'85,  Mai.  Rann. 

Sword.  One  more,  one  more  :] 
fword  once  more,  Qx.  fword :  one  more ; 
Q2Q3-  Sword. —  Once  more —  Jen.  Steev. 
'85,  Mai.  Rann. 

22.  One  more"]  Once  more  Qx,  Jen.  Steev. 
'85,  Mai.  Rann. 

and  that's"]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Dyce, 
Sta.    that 's  Pope  + .    and  this  Qq  et  cet. 


25.  where]  when  Qx,  Jen. 
doth]  does  Qq. 

She  wakes.] — She  wakes —  Pope. 
She  wakes —  Steev.  A  Stage  direction, 
reading  //...Othello?  as  one  line,  Anon, 
ap.  Cam. 

27.  /]  /,  QqF3F4.     Ay,  Rowe. 
29.  pray'd]  prayed  Qq. 

Defdemon]  F2,  Knt,  Dyce,  Sta. 
Del.     Defdemona  QqF  F  et  cet. 


23.  weepe]  Booth  :  Remember  how  often  he  is  moved  to  tears, — therefore  I  do 
not  attempt  to  restrain  them  in  the  excess  of  passion  here,  in  Act  III,  and  elsewhere. 
[Yet  Othello  himself  says  that  his  eyes  are  '  unused  to  the  melting  mood.' — Ed.] 

24.  heauenly]  Johnson  :  *  This  tenderness,  with  which  I  lament  the  punishment 
which  justice  compels  me  to  inflict,  is  a  holy  passion.'  I  wish  these  two  lines  could  be 
honestly  ejected.  It  is  the  fate  of  Shakespeare  to  counteract  his  own  pathos.  Steev- 
ens  :  The  '  cruel  tears '  seem  adopted  from  the  fabulous  history  of  the  crocodile 
[Rolfe  quotes  this,  and  befittingly  adds  an  exclamation  mark] ;  the  •  heavenly  sor- 
row '  from  a  passage  in  the  Scriptures.  Deighton  :  Othello  surely  means,  '  I  can- 
not help  weeping  at  your  fate,  but  my  tears  do  not  soften  my  heart,  so  as  to  change 
my  determination  to  kill  you.'  Hudson  :  The  tears  are  cruel,  because,  while  heart 
wringing  pity  is  streaming  from  the  eyes,  an  overmastering  strain  of  duty  is  forcing 
him  to  what  is,  objectively,  an  act  of  cruelty.  And  the  very  loveliness  of  the  victim 
only  works  to  intensify  his  purpose,  lest  love  should  usurp  the  crown  that  belongs  to 
a  higher  passion, — a  passion,  too,  that  must  wear  the  crown,  else  love  itself  will  fall 
from  its  propriety.  Pathos  carried  to  the  most  soul-searching  height !  And  the  •  sor- 
row is  heavenly,'  because  it  is  baptized  and  washed  into  holiness  by  the  sacred  and 
divine  regards  of  justice. 

33.  Solicite]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  291) :  That  is, plead,  as  in  thf  old  sense  of  sr/ici- 
tor;  yet  I  dc  n<  ■  know  that  plead  exactly  expresses  the  meaning. 


298  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  v,  sc.  ii. 

Def     Alacke,  my  Lord, 
What  may  you  meane  by  that  ?  35 

Oth.     Well,  do  it,  and  be  breefe,  I  will  walke  by : 
I  would  not  kill  thy  vnprepared  Spirit, 
No,  Heauens  fore-fend)  I  would  not  kill  thy  Soule. 

Def     Talke  you  of  killing  ? 

Oth.     I,  I  do.  40 

Def     Then  Heauen  haue  mercy  on  mee. 

Oth.     Amen,  with  all  my  heart.  [336  a] 

Def     If  you  fay,  I  hope  you  will  not  kill  me. 

Oth.     Humh. 

Def     And  yet  I  feare  you  :  for  you're  fatall  then  45 

When  your  eyes  rowle  fo. 
Why  I  fhould  feare,  I  know  not, 
Since  guiltineffe  I  know  not  :  But  yet  I  feele  I  feare. 

Oth.     Thinke  on  thy  finnes. 

Def.     They  are  Loues  I  beare  to  you.  50 

Oth.     I,  and  for  that  thou  dy'ft. 

Def.     That  death's  vnnaturall,  that  kils  for  louing. 
Alas,  why  gnaw  you  fo  your  nether-lip  ? 
Some  bloody  paffion  makes  your  very  Frame : 
Thefe  are  portents  :  but  yet  I  hope,  I  hope,  55 

34,  35.  One  line,  Qq,  Cap.  et  seq.  48.  guiltinejfe]  guilt  Pope-K 

34.  Alacke]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt,  Dyce,  But]  Om.  Pope  +  . 

Sta.  Huds.     Alas  Qq  et  cet.  50.  They  are]  They're  Pope  +  ,  Dycc 

35.  may]  doe  Q3Q3,  Glo.  Rife,  Wh.  ii.         Hi,  Huds. 

38.  Heauens]  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Knt.  heauen  Loues]  love  Ff. 

Qq  et  cet.  I  beare]  to  beare  Q  . 

41,42.  haue. ..heart]  As  one  line,  Cap.  51.  /,  and]  And  Qq. 

Steev.  et  seq.  (except  Cam.).  dy^Jl]  diejl  Qq. 

43*  fay~\fayf°  QqFf  et  cet.  52.  vnnaturall... louing]    unnatural; 

44.  Humh]  Hum  Qq.    Humph!  Mai.  what!  kill  for  loving !  Plan. 

45.  you're]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Dyce  iii,  Huds.  53.  gnaw]  knaw  Q2Q3- 
yare  Q2Q3-    you  are  Qx  et  cet.  nether-lip]  neather  lip  Qq. 

46.  47.  One  line,  Qq,  Theob.  et  seq.  55.  I  hope,  I  hope]  I  hope  Qq. 

36.  walke  by]  Booth  :  Paces  the  room. 

38.  Soule]  Steevens  :  Othello  appears  to  have  been  a  favourite  of  his  author ;  he  has 
bestowed  on  him  that  piety  which  he  had  refused  to  Hamlet.     See  Ham.  Ill,  iii,  94. 

42.  Booth  :  Say  it  with  all  your  heart  and  soul. 

52.  vnnaturall]  Malone:  Compare  Rich.  Ill :  I,  ii,  134,  *  It  is  a  quarrel  most 
unnatural,  To  be  revenged  on  him  that  loveth  you.' 

54.  Fechter  :  She  throws  back  the  coverlet,  rises,  and  sits  on  the  bed. 

55.  portents]  For  other  instances  of  'portent'  thus  accented  on  the  last  syllabic 
see  Abbott,  §  190. 


act  v,  sc.  u.]  THE  MOORE   OF  VENICE  299 

They  do  not  point  on  me.  56 

Oth.     Peace,  and  be  ftill. 

Def.     I  will  fo  :  What's  the  matter  ? 

Oth.     That  Handkerchiefe 
Which  I  fo  lou'd,  and  gaue  thee,  thou  gau'ft  to  Caffio.  6c 

Def.     No  by  my  Life,  and  Soule  :  fend  for  the  man, 
And  aske  him. 

Oth.     Sweet  Soule,  take  heed,  take  heed  of  Periury, 
Thou  art  on  thy  death-bed. 

Def.     I,  but  not  yet  to  dye.  65 

Oth.     Prefently. 
Therefore  confeffe  thee  freely  of  thy  finne : 
For  to  deny  each  Article  with  Oath, 
Cannot  remoue,  nor  choake  the  ftrong  Conception 
That  I  do  grone  withall.     Thou  art  to  dye.  70 

Def.     O  Heauen  haue  mercy  on  me. 

Oth.     I  fay,  Amen. 

Def.     And  haue  you  mercy  too.     I  neuer  did 
Offend  you  in  my  life  :  neuer  lou'd  Caffio, 

But  with  fuch  generall  warrantie  of  Heauen,  75 

As  I  might  loue.     I  neuer  gaue  him  Token. 

Oth.     By  Heauen  I  faw  my  Handkerchiefe  in's  hand. 
O  periurM  woman,  thou  do'ft  ftone  my  heart,  78 

58.  will  fo:~\  Ff,  Rowe+,  Cap.  Jen.  64.  Thou  art]  thouWt  Steev.'93,  Var. 
Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly.  will,  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Dyce  iil, 
f°*  QiQ3-    wMfo,  Q3«    "will  so.  Johns,  et         Huds. 

cet.  66.  Prefently]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob. 

59,  60.  That...thee\  One  line,  Qq,  Cap.         Warb.  Johns.     Yes,  prefently  Qq  et  cet 
Steev.  et  seq.  69.  Conception^  conceit  Q2,  Jen. 

59,  &c.  Handkerchiefe]  handkercher  *J\.  O  Heauen]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Jen. 
Qx.                                                                         Steev.'85,  Knt.     Then  Lord  Qq  et  cet. 

60,  gau'fl]  gauefl  Qq.  73,  74.  /...Caffio]  One  line,  Qq. 
to]  Om.  FF,  Rowe  + .                                74.  life  ;  neuer]  life, — neuer  Qq. 

61,  62.  Lines  end,  Soule : ...him.  Qq,  77*  in's]  in  his  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Mai. 
Cap.  Steev.  et  seq.                                              Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

63, 64.  Lines  divided,  heed,. ..death-bed.  78.  periur,d...dol/l]periured...doe/lQt. 

Cap.  Steev.  et  seq.  my]  thy  Qx. 

58.  will  so  :]  Note  the  punctuation  of  Q,Q2;  indicating  what  seems  to  me  to  be  the 
true  reading :  « I  will. — So. — What's,'  &c. — Ed. 

65.  Booth  :  Desdemona  comes  from  her  bed,  and  rests  tremblingly  against  it. 

66.  Presently]  Abbott,  §  59 :  That  is,  '  at  the  present  time,'  '  at  once,'  instead  of, 
as  now,  '  soon,  but  not  at  once.' 

71.  Booth  :  Sinking  on  her  knees.  During  the  rest  of  this,  down  to  line  98,  she  i» 
half  reclining  on  the  steps  and  dais  of  the  bed. 


300  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  v,  sc.  ii. 

And  makes  me  call,  what  I  intend  to  do, 

A  Murther,  which  I  thought  a  Sacrifice.  80 

I  faw  the  Handkerchiefe. 

Def.     He  found  it  then  : 
I  neuer  gaue  it  him  :  Send,  for  him  hither. 
Let  him  confeffe  a  truth. 

Oth.     He  hath  confeft.  85 

Def.     What,  my  Lord  ? 

Oth.     That  he  hath  vs'd  thee.  87 

79.  makes']  makejl  QxFf.    makjl  Q2Q3-  85.  hath]  has  Qq. 

80.  Murther]  Ff,  Rowe-f,  Cap.  Knt,  87.  hath  vs^d  thee.]  Ff,  Rowe,  Km, 
Wh.  Rife,     murder  Qq,  Johns,  et  cet.              Dyce,  Wh.  Glo.  Cam.  Del.  Rife,   hath — 

84.  Let]  And  let  Qx,  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  vds  death.  Qx.  hath — vfde  thee.  Q2Q3  et 
Var.  Sing.  Ktly.  cet. 

80.  Sacrifice]  Johnson  :  This  line  is  difficult.  *  Thou  hast  hardened  my  heart, 
and  makest  me  kill  thee  with  the  rage  of  a  murderer,  when  I  thought  to  have  sacrificed 
thee  to  justice  with  the  calmness  of  a  priest  striking  a  victim.'  I  suspect  '  thy  heart ' 
of  Qx  to  be  genuine.  The  meaning  then  will  be, — '  Thou  forcest  me  to  dismiss  thee 
from  the  world  in  the  state  of  the  murdered  without  preparation  for  death,  when  I 
intended  that  thy  punishment  should  have  been  a  sacrifice  atoning  for  thy  crime.'  I 
am  glad  that  I  have  ended  my  revisal  of  this  dreadful  scene.  It  is  not  to  be  endured. 
Halliwell  :  Many  readers  will  probably  sympathize  with  Dr  Johnson's  concluding 
observation.  Without  disputing  the  masterly  power  displayed  in  the  composition  of  the 
present  tragedy,  there  is  something  to  my  mind  so  revolting,  both  in  the  present  Scene 
and  in  the  detestable  character  of  Iago,  which  renders  a  study  of  the  drama  of  Othello 
rather  a  painful  duty  than  one  of  pleasure.  [I  do  not  shrink  from  saying  that  I  wish 
this  Tragedy  had  never  been  written.  The  pleasure,  however  keen  or  elevated,  which 
the  inexhaustible  poetry  of  the  preceding  Acts  can  bestow,  cannot  possibly,  to  my  tem- 
perament, countervail,  it  does  but  increase,  the  unutterable  agony  of  this  closing  Scene. 
-Ed.] 

85-98.  Hales  (p.  112)  :  For  the  most  part  Shakespeare  delights  in  tracing  the  action 
of  the  great  moral  laws  of  the  world,  and  showing  how  fearful  is  the  penalty  of  trans- 
gression. But  sometimes  he  exhibits  a  yet  more  dreadful  spectacle, — a  spectacle  mys- 
terious, inscrutable,  soul-prostrating.  It  is  Fate  blind,  inexorable,  rapacious.  Desde- 
mona  is  one  of  Fate's  choicest  victims.  Her  '  graces  serve  '  her  '  but  as  enemies.'  Her 
very  virtues  bring  on  her  ruin.  What  is  most  innocent  is  construed  into  evidence 
against  her.  In  obeying  the  best  instincts  of  her  clear  spirit  she  excites  the  evilest 
suspicions  and  secures  the  bitterest  condemnation.  The  truth  from  her  lips  is  turned 
into  a  lie.  In  the  present  passage,  her  answers,  by  an  almost  incredible  infelicity, 
are,  through  the  very  purity  of  her  nature,  just  such  as  to  confirm  Othello's  detestable 
impeachment.  Could  replies  be  more  unfortunate  ?  She  lies  in  the  toils  of  P'ate,  and 
there  is  no  escape  for  her.  We  may  go  further  than  her  name  in  Greek,  Avodauiuv, 
'ill-starred,'  and  say  it  is  merely  a  variation  of  dvcfiaifwvia,  'ill-starredness.'  She  is 
uot  only  unhappy,  she  is  unhappiness  itself. 

87.  vs'd  thee]  Collier  (ed.  iii) :  The  First  Qto  gives  an  important  reading,  as  if 
Othello  were  choked  and  unable  to  utter  the  words.     [To  be  sure  *  uds  death  '  is  net 


actv,  sc.  ii.l  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  30 1 

Def     How?  vnlawfully  ?  88 

Oth.     I. 

Def.     He  will  not  fay  fo.  90 

Oth.     No  :  his  mouth  is  ftopp'd : 
Honeft  I  ago  hath  'tane  order  for't. 

Def.     Oh,  my  feare  interprets.     What  is  he  dead  ? 

Oth.     Had  all  his  haires  bin  hues,  my  great  Reuenge 
Had  ftomacke  for  them  all.  95 

Def.     Alas,  he  is  betrayed,  and  I  vndone. 

Oth. Out  Strumpet  :  weep'ft  thou  for  him  to  my  face? 

Def.     0  banifh  me,  my  Lord,  but  kill  me  not. 

Oth.     Downe  Strumpet. 

Def.     Kill  me  to  morrow,  let  me  liue  to  night.  100 

Oth.     Nay,  if  you  ftriue. 

Def.     But  halfe  an  houre. 

Oth.     Being  done,  there  is  no  pawfe. 

Def.     But  while  I  fay  one  prayer.  104 

93.  Oh,... interprets.]  My  feare  inter-  97.  iveefji']  weepejl  Qq. 
prets  then, —  Qq,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  101.  if~\  an  Qq. 

Cap.  Jen.   Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Jlrine.~\  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope,  Knt. 

Ktly.     My  fear  interprets.   Oh  !  Han.  strive —  Theob.  et  cet. 

94.  95.  my. ..all.]  One  line,  Qq.  102.  houre.~\hotir — Rowe,  Pope,  Har. 

95.  them~\  'em  Qt,  Jen.     em  Q2Q3-  J03  is  omitted,  joining  in  one  lines  102, 

96.  betray? d~\  betrayed  Q.  104,  by  Qx,  Pope,  Han.   Dividing  it  at  done 
/]  Pm  Han.  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Sta. 

97.  Out  Strumpet  .•]  Oflrumpet, —  Qq.  Wh.  i,  Ktly. 

an  uncommon  exclamation  in  the  old  dramas  ('  vds  pitty '  occurs  in  Qt  at  IV,  iii,  84), 
but  Desdemona's  next  question  shows  clearly,  I  think,  that  it  is  out  of  place  here. — 
Ed.] 

92.  'tane  order]  Steevens  :  That  is,  has  taken  measures.     [See  Schmidt,  s.  v.  2.] 

94.  Hues]  Steevens  :  This  thought  appears  to  have  been  very  common ;  it  occurs 
frequently  in  dramas  prior  to  Othello. 

97.  Booth  :  Enraged.  After  his  next  speech  there  is  a  struggle,  during  which 
Othello  hides  her  from  the  audience  while  she  gets  back  upon  the  bed. 

103.  Being  done]  Knight  :  A  correspondent  suggests  that  the  reading  should  be, 
*  being  down,  there  is  no  pause.'  We  cannot  agree  to  receive  Othello's  meaning  so 
literally.  He  certainly  has  already  said,  '  Down,  strumpet,'  and  has  probably  at  that 
moment  commenced  the  death-struggle ;  for  he  adds,  '  n  ly,  if  you  strive.'  But  the 
words  'being  done '  appear  to  us  to  have  a  much  greater  depth  of  meaning.  They  are 
not  addressed  to  Desdemona,  but  exhibit  what  is  passing  in  Othello's  mind.  The  con- 
flict between  his  love  and  his  wounded  honour  is  over;  he  looks  upon  the  act  of  retri- 
bution as  done  when  he  has  lrrted  his  murderous  hand  against  his  wife.  It  is  done. 
For  the  mere  completior  o\  the  violence,  which  will  then  be  mercy,  •  there  is  no 
pause.' 


302  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  v,  sc.  ii. 

0th.     It  is  too  late.  Smothers  her.         105 

Emilia  at  the  doore. 

ALmiL     My  Lord,  my  Lord  ?  What  hoa  ? 
My  Lord,  my  Lord.  [336  ^J 

Oth.  What  noife  is  this  ?  Not  dead?  not  yet  quite  dead  ? 
I  that  am  cruell,  am  yet  mercifull,  1 10 

I  would  not  haue  thee  linger  in  thy  paine  ? 
So,  fo.  112 

105.  //  is  too]  Tis  too  Qx,  Jen.     Tis  to  Scene  VII.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

Q,Q3-  106.  ^Emilia...]  Emillia  calls  within. 

Smothers  her.]  he  ftiflles  her.  Qx.  Qq. 

he  (tines  her.  (after  line  104)  Q2Q3-    At-  107,  108.  One  line,  Qq,  Pope  et  seq. 

tempts  to  smother  her.  Rowe  ii.  109.  noife]  voyce  Qq,  Jen. 

105,  107.  late.   iEmil.  My  Lord]  late.  Ill,  112.  One  line,  Qq. 

Def.  O  Lord,  Lord,  Lord.  Em.  My  Lord  1 12.  [Stabbing  her.  Rann. 
Qt,  Jen.  Coll.  Ktly. 

105.  Steevens  :  After  this  speech,  Qx  adds  an  invocation  from  Desdemona,  consist 
ing  only  of  the  sacred  name  thrice  repeated.  As  this  must  be  supposed  to  have  been 
uttered  while  she  is  yet  struggling  with  death,  I  think  an  editor  may  be  excused  from 
inserting  such  a  circumstance  of  supererogatory  horror.  Singer  was  misled  by  this 
note  of  Steevens,  as  was  pointed  out  by  the  Cambridge  Editors,  and  '  invented  a  read- 
ing of  Q, ' ;  he  says  that  Desdemona's  invocation  was  '  God  !  God !  God  ! '  Collier 
(ed.  i)  having  adopted  these  exclamations,  which,  as  he  said,  are  found  only  in  Qt,  Dyce 
[Rem.  242),  adds:  'And  there  Collier  ought  (with  the  other  modern  editors)  to  have 
left  them ;  for  they  were  most  probably  foisted  into  the  text  by  the  players.  So  far  is 
"  O  Lord,  Lord,  Lord! "  from  adding  to  the  terror  or  pathos  of  the  scene,  that  [sic"]  it  is 
disgustingly  vulgar;  and  being  immediately  followed  by  Emilia's  "My  lord,  my  lord ! 
what  ho !  my  lord,  my  lord/"  the  effect  of  the  whole  is  not  a  little  comic'  Collier, 
nothing  intimidated,  calmly  printed  the  Quarto's  words  in  his  next  edition.  Where- 
upon Dyce,  in  his  next  edition,  observed  that  though  he  had  protested  against  the 
insertion  of  '  Oh  Lord,  Lord,  Lord,'  as  disgustingly  vulgar,  &c,  his  '  protest  appears  to 
have  had  no  other  effect  than  to  make  Mr  Collier  the  more  determined  to  retain  it  in 
his  second  edition.'  In  his  third  and  last  edition  Collier  again  imperturbably  prints 
the  invocation  from  the  Qto,  and  says  that  the  words  are  '  exclamations  by  Desdemona, 
to  show  that  she  is  not  killed,  and  she  speaks  afterwards.' 

105.  Booth  :  Long  pause.     Emilia's  rap  must  not  be  loud. 

112.  In  the  Appendix  will  be  found  the  Ballad  which  was  discovered  among  the  Eger- 
ton  Papers  by  Collier.  From  this  ballad  we  learn  that  the  earliest  actor  of  Othello,  Bui 
badge,  Shakespeare's  friend  and  fellow-actor,  stabbed  Desdemona,  and  '  dyed  to  gory 
red,  his  hands  of  blackest  shade.'  Collier,  however,  shows  that  the  writer  •  spoke  at 
random '  in  it,  with  regard  to  Burbadge's  early  career,  and  its  antic juity  has  been  recently 
questioned,  so  that  its  authority  as  to  the  'stabbing'  must  pass  for  what  it  is  worth. 
Prom  the  tone  of  Francis  Gentleman's  remarks  in  the  Dramatic  Censor  (i,  148)  in 
1770,  where  he  is  presumably  criticising  Garrick,  we  may  infer  that  the  stabbing  of 
Desdemona  was  an  innovation  which  needed  justification.  Gentleman  says :  '  The 
revival  of  Desdemona  from  a  state  of  suffocation,  and  her  expiring  without  any  fresh 
violence,  we  apprehend  to  I  2  rather  absurd,  therefore,  highly  approve  Othello's  stabbing 


act  v,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  303 

[112.  I  would  not  haue  thee  linger  in  thy  paine  ?  So,  so.] 
her  with  a  dagger, — drawing  blood  accounts  naturally  for  gaining  power  of  speech,  and 
yet  may  be  mortal.'  The  editors  and  commentators,  in  the  Variorum  Editions,  are  singu- 
larly silent.  Stkevens  alone  alludes  to  the  question,  and  he  approves  of  '  stabbing '  on 
the  ground,  suggested  by  Gentleman,  of  its  relief  to  congestion,  and  believes  that  a 
stage  direction  to  that  effect  had  been  accidentally  omitted.  This  omission  was  sup- 
plied by  Rann,  the  solitary  editor  who  has  inserted  it.  Knight  thinks  it  is  '  most 
probable'  that  Othello  stabs  Desdemona,  'according  to  the  practice  of  the  modern 
stage.  His  previous  resolution,  "  I'll  not  shed  her  blood,"  is  forgotten  in  the  agony 
and  terror  of  the  moment,  when  he  says  "not  dead,  not  yet  quite  dead.'"  Delius 
believes  that  if  Shakespeare  had  '  intended  Othello  to  stab  Desdemona,  he  would  have 
given  us  in  the  context  some  hint,  no  matter  how  slight,  from  which  it  might  be  inferred. 
The  lack  of  this  hint,  coupled  with  the  express  stage  directions,  compels  us  to  suppose 
that  with  the  "  So,  so  "  Othello  again  stifles  Desdemona.'  Collier  says,  in  reference 
to  the  stabbing,  that  '  it  may  be  so.'  Hudson  thinks  the  stage  custom  of  stabbing 
' may  be  right.'  Cowden- Clarke  believes  that  ' "  So,  so  "  may  merely  be  intended  to 
represent  that  Othello  heaps  more  clothes  around  her,  pressing  the  pillow  more  closely 
upon  the  mouth.'  Dyce,  Staunton,  White,  Rolfe,  and  Purnell  are  silent.  Fech- 
ter  :  Passing  his  poignard  under  the  pillow  and  turning  away  his  eyes.  Booth  :  Hide 
your  face  in  trembling  hand  while  you  stab  and  groan  '  So,  so ' ;  the  steel  is  piercing 
your  own  heart.  Salvini  :  I  think  that  this  '  So,  so '  means  that  Othello  kneels  on  her 
breast  to  hasten  her  death. 

Thus  far  Editors  and  Actors,  with  a  ground-tone  from  the  public  at  large  to  the  effect 
that  there  does  seem  to  be  something  not  altogether  true  to  physiology  in  the  subsequent 
revival  of  Desdemona ;  yet,  such  is  the  Anglosaxon  faith  in  Shakespeare,  that,  in  any 
variance  between  him  and  Nature,  Shakespeare  is  considered  quite  able  to  hold  his  own. 

It  was  the  phrase  '  Pale  as  thy  smock '  which  first  caught  my  attention ;  it  seemed  to 
reveal  either  an  oversight  on  Shakespeare's  part,  or  that  he  had  intended,  contrary  to  the 
directions  in  the  QqFf,  that  Desdemona  should  be  stabbed.  As  far  as  I  know,  no  one 
has  ever  noticed  the  bearing,  on  the  manner  of  Desdemona's  death,  of  this  exclamation. 
To  my  layman's  small  knowledge  there  seemed  here  a  violation  of  physiological  laws 
so  downright,  in  representing  a  smothered  person  as  pale,  that  I  knew  Shakespeare,  who 
could  note  the  '  crimson  drops  i'  the  bottom  of  a  cowslip,'  never  could  have  committed 
it.  The  reality  before  our  very  eyes  cannot  be  as  vivid  as  the  coinage  of  his  brain  was 
to  Shakespeare.  What  he  saw,  he  spoke ;  so  that  he  must  either  have  known  of  a  case 
where  congestion  of  blood  in  the  face  did  not  follow  stifling,  or  he  must  have  intended 
Othello  to  stab  Desdemona ;  which,  after  all,  would  only  half  solve  the  difficulty ;  the 
^tabbing  would  leave  the  face  pale,  but  the  smock  red,  as  I  thought.  For  Shakespeare's 
credit  I  felt  no  concern,  but  I  did  feel  mortified  for  Nature,  on  whose  behalf  it  seemed 
that  if  ever  our  best  medical  wisdom  were  to  be  unmuzzled,  this  was  the  hour.  To  this 
trial,  in  which  Nature  is  the  defendant  (not  Shakespeare,  perish  the  thought !)  I  hoped 
to  summon  such  an  array  of  experts  that  their  verdict  would  be  accepted  as  final  wher- 
ever the  masters  in  medicine  are  known  and  honored,  or  any  faith  exists  in  diagnosis. 
To  each  one  of  the  following  eminent  men,  whose  friendship  I  am  glad  to  own,  I  sent 
a  copy  of  this  last  Scene,  with  the  following  passages  underscored  :  *  Yet  I'll  not  shed 
her  blooiV;  'So,  so';  'She's  Dead';  'Ha,  No  More  Moving?  Still  as  the  Grave1; 
*  I think  she  stirs  again, — No';  all  Desdemona's  words  after  the  smothering:  'Your 
niece,  Whose  breath,  indeed,  these  hands  have  newly  stopped' ;  and  lastly,  '  Pale  as  thy 
tmock,'  accompanying  which  were  these  questions:    I.  Do  you  think  it  likely  that 


304  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  v,  sc.  ii. 

[112.  I  would  not  haue  thee  linger  in  thy  paine  ?  So,  so.] 
Othello  stabbed  Desdemona  at  *  So,  so '  ?     2.  If  he  stabbed  her,  could  her  smock  be 
pale?     3.  If  she  were  smothered,  could  she  be  pale?     4.  In  either  case,  could  she 
speak  after  apparent  death?     5.  If  she  could  speak,  why  did  she  not  quite  revive? 
6.  From  what  cause,  then,  did  she  really  die  ? 

To  these  questions  there  came  the  following  answers : — 

Dr.  D.  Hayes  Agnew  :  In  answer  to  your  inquiry,  I  would  say  that  Shakespeare  has 
been  most  unfortunate  in  killing  Desdemona.  Death  by  strangulation,  inferred  from 
the  language  used  by  Othello  :  '  Whose  breath  indeed,  these  hands  have  newly  stopped] 
cannot  readily  be  reconciled  with  a  temporary  revival  and  ability  to  speak  at  three  dif 
ferent  times  on  the  part  of  the  victim,  after  all  signs  of  life  had  apparently  disappeared 
nor  with  the  post-mortem  appearances,  in  which  the  color  of  the  face  and  of  the  smock 
are  compared  (both  presumably  white). 

Against  the  theory  of  death  by  stabbing,  we  have  the  declaration  of  Othello  himself, 
'  Yet  Fli  not  shed  her  blood]  and  the  supposed  absence  of  blood-stains  on  the  clothing 
of  Desdemona,  indicated  by  the  expression,  'pale  as  thy  smock '/  and  yet  all  the  phe- 
nomena before  and  after  death  are  comprehensible  on  the  theory  of  internal  hemor- 
rhage, namely,  the  possibility  of  a  stab  in  a  vital  region  of  the  body,  without  more 
than  a  few  drops  of  blood  being  seen  externally ;  syncope,  resembling  actual  death, 
causing  a  temporary  arrest  of  bleeding  and  a  return  to  consciousness  and  to  speech, 
followed  by  the  recurrence  of  a  rapidly-fatal  hemorrhage,  leaving  the  face  bloodless 
and  pale. 

There  is,  however,  a  theory  which  (though  somewhat  strained)  would  meet  all  the 
conditions  of  the  text ;  namely,  that  death  ensued  from  the  secondary  effects  of  injury 
to  the  larynx.  It  is  true  that  in  fatal  cases  following  laceration  or  fracture  of  that 
organ,  the  patient  dies  from  a  slow  asphyxia,  and  may  be  rendered  voiceless  by  the 
lesion ;  but  surgical  writers  refer  to  instances  in  which,  after  violence  applied  to  the 
neck  and  the  person  apparently  suffocated,  partial  recovery  has  followed  with  ability  to 
speak,  and  yet  death  suddenly  followed  from  shock,  with  probably  some  spasm  of  the 
glottis.  In  shock  the  blood  retreats  from  the  superficial  vessels,  giving  to  the  surface 
the  pallor  of  death.  Probably  such  were  the  conditions  in  the  case  of  Desdemona. 
Dr.  D.  G.  Brinton  :  There  is  not  a  word  in  the  text  about  stabbing,  and  several 
passages  make  directly  against  it.  In  describing  Desdemona's  death,  Othello  distinctly 
states  that  he  'stopped  her  breath,' — smothered  her.  Death  by  stabbing,  therefore, 
could  not  have  been  in  the  mind  of  the  author  at  all. 

This  leads  to  the  further  result  that  her  death  is  not  represented  as  the  immediate  act 
of  her  husband ;  he  is  not  the  murderer  that  he  thinks  himself;  his  hands  refused  the 
deed  and  failed  at  the  second  attempt,  as  they  did  at  the  first.  Again  she  moves  and 
speaks.  But  her  frail  body  has  been  put  to  too  severe  a  strain.  Anxiety  and  fear  have 
been  too  much  for  her  debilitated  heart,  and  her  last  and  superhuman  effort  to  exculpate 
her  loved  husband  completely  exhausts  her  vital  powers ;  the  central  organ  fails,  and 
she  falls  back  dead  from  « cardiac  exhaustion.'  We  may  call  it  « paralysis  of  the  heart,' 
like  that  brought  about  by  certain  potent  poisons,  or  that  which  supervenes  in  feeble 
subjects  on  sudden  and  violent  emotions,  either  of  fear  or  joy.  We  know  little  of  the 
intimate  pathology  of  this  fatal  process.  Writers  say  that  such  physical  or  mental 
shocks  'extinguish  life  by  their  action  on  the  cardiac  plexus.'  The  phrase  sounds 
well,  but  leaves  us  where  we  were  before. 

Such  instances  are  by  no  means  rare,  and  must  have  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
author  of  Othello.     A  number  of  them  were  quoted  for  the  defence  in  a  trial  in  New 


act  v,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  305 


[112.  I  would  not  haue  thee  linger  in  thy  paine  ?  So,  so.] 
York  City  a  few  years  ago.  The  victim,  wife  of  a  physician,  was  smothered  by  the 
assassin.  The  defence  was,  that  the  attempt  at  suffocation  was  abortive,  that  she  revived, 
but  died  of  heart-shock  from  fright  and  struggling.  The  theory  of  her  death  thus 
advanced  by  the  defence  is  my  theory  of  the  death  of  Desdemona.  It  consistently 
explains  the  appearance  of  her  face,  her  smock,  her  recovery  of  speech,  &c,  and  relieves 
us  from  the  painful  and  repugnant  contemplation  of  her  husband  as  her  actual  murderer. 
I  shall  be  delighted  if  these  crude  remarks  aid  you  in  any  degree  in  throwing  light  on 
the  train  of  thought  in  this  wonderful  literary  creation. 

Dr  J.  M.  Da  Costa  :  The  features  of  Desdemona's  death  cannot,  I  believe,  be  recon- 
ciled to  strict  scientific  facts ;  it  is  best  to  accept  them  as  not  transgressing  poetic  license. 
That  she  should  have  spoken  after  being  smothered  is  not  possible ;  if  she  had  regained 
consciousness  sufficiently  to  speak  intelligently,  as  she  did,  recovery  would  have  ensued, 
though  death  might  have  happened,  after  a  time,  from  injuries  induced  by  the  violence. 

Concerning  the  pallor  of  the  countenance,  it  is  contrary  to  the  customary  conception 
of  death  by  strangulation ;  the  face  is  held  to  be  suffused  and  swollen,  of  dusky  or  vio- 
let hue ;  but  the  great  poet,  in  assuming  it  otherwise,  has  not  been  guilty  of  error.  The 
countenance  in  strangulation  may  be  pale  and  sunken ;  indeed,  so  eminent  an  authority 
as  Casper  declares  his  observation  to  have  taught  him  that  the  greater  number  of  per- 
sons strangled  have  neither  a  turgid  nor  a  livid  countenance,  but  one  simply  like  that 
of  any  other  corpse. 

These  statements  deal  with  the  supposition  that  Desdemona's  death  was  caused  by 
strangling.  If  the  stage  tradition  of  her  being  also  stabbed  be  admitted  as  correct,  a 
view  suggests  itself  which  removes  all  difficulties.  The  effect  of  the  bleeding  would 
be  to  relieve  the  cerebral  and  pulmonary  congestion  occurring  in  strangulation.  She 
revives  sufficiently  to  speak ;  the  internal  hemorrhage  continues ;  she  dies  exhausted, 
and,  as  always  in  death  from  loss  of  blood,  with  extreme  pallor  marked.  '  Pale  as  thy 
smock '  Othello  might  well  say ;  nor  need  a  poet's  words  be  so  literally  construed  as  to 
exclude  the  thought  of  some  blood-stains  on  the  white  garment ;  though  in  point  of  fact 
a  stab  severing  large  vessels  in  the  chest  may  prove  fatal  without  giving  rise  to  external 
bleeding. 

The  stabbing  subsequent  to  the  smothering  makes,  then,  the  death  of  Desdemona 
one  which  is  described  with  the  closest  attention  to  truth.  Whether  the  stage  tradition 
represent  Shakespeare's  thought  is,  of  course,  an  open  question.  There  is  that  in  the 
text,  however,  which  supports  the  supposition  of  the  stabbing,  notwithstanding  Othello's 
first-declared  intention  of  not  shedding  blood.  He  sees  her  linger,  and  he  determines 
on  quick,  decisive  measures.  The  words  '  So,  so,'  when  he  is  supposed  to  stab  her, 
are  short,  abrupt  expressions,  very  suitable  to  rapid,  sudden  movements  as  in  stabbing. 

Dr  William  A.  Hammond  :  The  matter  that  engrosses  your  attention  has  many 
features  of  interest  to  me,  and  your  questions  lead  up  to  several  important  points. 

Without  going  into  details,  I  may  say,  first,  I  do  not  think  Othello  stabbed  Desde- 
mona ;  he  expressly  says,  '  I  will  not  shed  her  blood.'  I  am  of  the  opinion  that,  at  the 
vords  '  So,  so,'  he  pressed  the  pillow  more  forcibly  against  her  face. 

If  he  stabbed  her,  I  think  it  possible,  though  not  probable,  that  her  smock  might  be 
>ale. 

If  she  were  smothered  she  might  be  pale.  Persons  who  are  smothered  do  not  ordi- 
narily show  any  signs  of  having  suffered  a  violent  death.  For  my  views  in  full  on  this 
point,  permit  me  to  refer  you  to  my  novel,  Mr  Oldmixon,  chap,  xiii,  in  which  Hogarth 

Oldmixon  smothers  his  wife. 
20 


306  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF   OTHELLO         [act  v,  sc.  ii. 

[112.  I  would  not  haue  thee  linger  in  thy  paine  ?  So,  so.] 

If  she  were  smothered  sufficiently,  she  certainly  could  not  speak  after  the  act.  A 
person  smothered,  and  speaking  afterwards,  would  not  die  from  the  smothering.  The 
mere  fact  of  her  sj leaking  shows  that  she  was  not  smothered  to  the  extent  necessary  to 
cause  death. 

As  to  what  really  killed  her,  I  think  it  is  clearly  apparent  that  Shakespeare  was  ignor- 
ant of  the  modus  operandi  of  smothering.  She  ought  not  to  have  died  at  all  so  far  as 
any  act  of  Othello's  is  directly  concerned,  except,  perhaps,  from  what  is  called  a  *  broken 
heart,'  or  from  extreme  shock  to  her  nervous  system. 

Dr.  William  Hunt  :  You  have  asked  me  some  interesting  questions  about  Desde- 
mona's  death.  I  am  happy  to  be  able  to  answer  you  positively  and  at  once ;  her  sad 
end  is  no  pathological  puzzle  to  me.  She  died  of  fracture  of  the  cricoid  cartilage  of  the 
larynx.  Shakespeare  is  entirely  consistent,  and  must  have  had,  as  in  everything  else, 
an  intuitive,  if  not  practical,  knowledge  of  the  subject.  Years  ago  I  wrote  an  Article 
upon  that  fracture,  founded  upon  a  case  of  it.  The  Article  is  quoted  as  authority  to  this 
day.  I  collected  all  the  reported  cases  I  could  find,  and  several  of  them  were  like 
Desdejnona's.  It  was  a  piece  of  unpardonable  oversight  in  me  that  I  did  not  put  her 
in  the  list.  The  poet's  story  is  exactly  in  accordance  with  the  ordinary  sequence  of 
symptoms.     There  is  nothing  for  a  school-boy  or  anybody  else  to  laugh  at  in  it. 

Othello,  true  to  his  stated  purpose,  did  not  '  shed  her  blood,  nor  scar  that  whiter  skin 
of  hers  than  snow.'  He  first  tried  a  very  ineffectual  method  of  smothering  with  pillows. 
His  poor  victim  was  simply  dazed,  '  not  dead.'  Seeing  this,  he  grasps  her  neck  with  his 
powerful  hands,  his  thumbs  being  over  the  larynx,  and  with  two  strong  squeezes  and  a 

*  So,  so,'  garrotes  her. 

The  cricoid  cartilage  breaks,  and  under  the  shock  there  is  '  no  more  moving.'  She 
is  'still  as  the  grave.'  But  I  have  no  doubt  she  did  'stir  again';  had  any  good  aus- 
cultator  placed  his  ear  to  her  chest  he  would  have  heard  her  heart  beating  feebly  and 
rapidly.  Paleness,  not  lividity,  would  accompany  this  condition.  I  have  seen  it  so  in 
others.  A  short  time  passes.  Desdemona  slowly  and  temporarily  reacts.  An  exciting 
conversation  is  held  in  her  presence.  She  hears,  and  in  a  smothered,  hoarse  whisper, 
perfectly  audible,  she  speaks ;  there  is  a  slight  spitting  of  blood,  for  which,  in  her  nicety, 
she  uses  a  handkerchief  she  had  about  her,  and  which  must  have  reminded  her  of  that 
other  fatal  one  '  spotted  with  strawberries,'  and  so  her  smock  is  left  pale  and  unde- 
filed.  In  my  case  the  patient  was  pale  as  a  ghost,  and  his  speech  as  hoarse  as  a  raven's. 
Gradually  Desdemona  succumbs  to  the  pressure  of  swelling  and  emphysema,  and  to  the 
nervous  shock.  Tracheotomy  was  the  only  thing  that  might  have  saved  her,  but  there 
was  nobody  there  to  perform  it,  and  the  chance  was  slim.  I  have  thus,  I  think,  answered 
all  your  questions.     Does  not  Othello  himself  acknowledge  my  method  when  he  says, 

*  There  lies  your  niece,  whose  breath  indeed  these  hands  have  newly  stopped  '  ?   There 
svas  never  a  clearer  case.     Is  not  Shakespeare's  universality  wonderful  ? 

Rest  assured,  Desdemona  died  of  fracture  of  the  larynx.  The  history  and  the  sequences 
ire  without  flaws. 

In  future,  let  no  Othello  stab;  and  let  Desdemona  learn  a  hoarse,  grating,  audible 
(vhisper  that  will  rasp  the  audience  into  sympathetic  agony. 

Dr  Ad.  Lippe  :  To  the  first  question,  I  answer  No ;  Othello  stifles,  but  does  not  stab 
Desdemona ;  he  had  said  '  I  will  not  shed  her  blood ' ;  at  '  So,  so,'  he  stifles  her  the 
nore. 

Had  she  been  stabbed,  her  smock  would  have  been  saturated  with  blood. 

If  she  were  smothered,  she  could  be  nothing  else  but  pale. 


ACTV.sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  307 

jfcmil.  within.    What  hoa?  my  Lord,  my  Lord  ?  113 

Oth.     Who's  there  ? 

113.  within.]  Om.  Qq. 


Had  she  been  stabbed  and  the  dirk  or  knife  not  withdrawn,  she  might  have  spoken. 
If  the  dagger  had  been  withdrawn,  she  could  not  have  spoken.  If  smothered,  and, 
since  Othello  says  '  I  think  she  stirs  again,'  not  fully  dead,  a  few  drops  remaining  in 
the  left  heart  would  permit  of  a  contraction,  and  the  lungs  not  being  completely 
clogged  would  allow  the  utterance  of  a  few  words.  These  last  few  contractions  of  the 
left  heart  must  have  been  caused  by  the  violent  mental  emotions  produced  by  Emilia's 
relation  and  her  questions.  These  few  remaining  drops  having  been  expelled,  her 
ability  to  speak  ceased,  and  she  was  fully  dead.  The  real  cause  of  her  death  was 
suffocation  and  stifling.  In  Wharton  and  Stille's  Medical  Jurisprudence,  ii,  802,  we 
find  a  complete  vindication  of  Shakespeare :  '  Homicidal  Suffocation.  Those  who 
are  usually  the  victims  of  this  form  of  murder  are  infants  and  the  aged,  or  those 
who  are  otherwise  helpless.  So  slight  a  degree  of  resistance  is  necessary  to  defeat 
the  purpose  of  the  assassin,  that  a  great  disproportion  of  strength  must  exist  for  the 
attempt  to  be  successful.  Nevertheless,  those  miserable  wretches,  Burke  and  his 
accomplices,  reduced  murder  by  suffocation  to  a  system,  choosing  it  as  a  mode  of  death 
most  likely  to  leave  no  mark  of  crime  behind  it.  The  murderer  bore  with  his  whole 
weight  upon  the  breast  of  his  victim,  and  with  his  hands  forcibly  covered  the  mouth 
and  nostrils  till  death  came  on.  The  body  of  one  of  the  victims  presented,  according 
to  Dr  Christison,  so  few  traces  of  injury,  that  without  the  assistance  of  proof  from  other 
sources,  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  have  declared  that  the  death  was  not  a  nat- 
ural one.'  How  well  Shakespeare  knew  the  difference  between  suffocation  and  stran- 
gulation is  evident  from  his  masterly  description  of  the  latter  in  the  case  of  Gloucester 
in  2  Hen.  VI;  III,  ii.  Suffocation  alone  caused  the  death  of  Desdemona,  and  the 
suffocation  was  slow.  Violent  mental  emotion  caused  the  heart  to  expel  the  last  few 
drops  of  blood,  and  when  the  right  side  of  the  heart  became  filled  with  dark  venous 
blood,  she  died.  How  violent  mental  emotions  can  affect  the  heart  belongs  to  the  deep 
mysteries  of  Nature.     Materialists  cannot  solve  the  question. 

Dr  S.  Weir  Mitchell  :  I  suppose  Shakespeare  would  have  put  in  a  stage  direction 
at  '  So,  so,'  if  he  had  meant  that  Othello  used  a  dagger.  Were  I  an  actor  I  should 
simply  throttle  her  fiercely  again  and  again  as  I  said  '  So,  so.'  With  this  view  her 
smock  need  not  trouble  us.  Death  by  strangling  leaves  the  face  horribly  congested,  not 
pale.  Believing  that  Othello  simply  choked  Desdemona,  how  could  she  have  been 
pale  of  visage  and  spoken  several  distinct  sentences  with  so  clear  a  brain  as  the  rele- 
vancy of  her  words  displays,  and  yet  have  been  fatally  strangled  ? 

It  could  not  have  been ;  but  I  fancy  Shakespeare  cared  little  for  realism  when  he 
desired  an  explanatory  dramatic  effect. 

If  there  is  evidence  that  Shakespeare  meant  that  Othello  choked  her  insufficiently,  and 
finished  with  a  dirk,  it  becomes  clearer,  because  then  speech,  partial  recovery,  death  from 
bleeding,  help  us  to  understand  the  passage.  At  the  same  time  the  face  would  have  been 
paling  from  blood-loss,  and  as  to  the  smock,  all  wounds  do  not  bleed  externally ;  ther  a 
little  blood  on  the  smock  would  not  have  made  less  for  him  its  general  whiteness. 

Again,  where  Othello  says  he  has  '  newly  stopp'd  her  breath,'  he  does  not  speak 
of  what  would  have  been  the  more  striking  object  to  the  spectator,  the  dagger- wound. 
For  him,  too,  that  would  have  been  the  murder,  not  the  ineffectual  throttle. 


308  THE   TR  AG  ED  IE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  v,  sc.  u 

ALmiL  Oh  good  my  Lord,  I  would  fpeake  a  word  115 
with  you. 

Oth.     Yes  :  'Tis  ^Emilia  :  by  and  by.     Shee's  dead. 
'Tis  like  fhe  comes  to  fpeake  of  Caffio's  death  : 
The  noife  was  high.     Hah,  no  more  moouing  ? 
Still  as  the  Graue.     Shall  fhe  come  in?  Wer't  good?  120 

I  thinke  fhe  ftirres  againe     No,  what's  beft  to  do  ? 
If  fhe  come  in,  fhee'l  fure  fpeake  to  my  wife : 
My  wife,  my  wife  :  what  wife  ?  I  haue  no  wife. 
Oh  infupportable  !  Oh  heauy  houre ! 

Me  thinkes,  it  fhould  be  now  a  huge  Eclipfe  125 

Of  Sunne,  and  Moone ;  and  that  trr'affrighted  Globe 
Did  yawne  at  Alteration. 

&mil.     I  do  befeech  you 
That  I  may  fpeake  with  you.     Oh  good  my  Lord.  129 

115,  128.  iEmil.]  Emil.  within.  Mai.  126.  ttt]  Ff,  Rowe  ii  +  ,  Jen.  Coll.  Wh. 

115.  good  my]  my  good  F3F4,  Rowe-h.  i,  Dyce  iii.     the  Qq  et  cet. 

I  would]  Pde  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  127.  Did]  Ff,  Rowe  i,  Knt.     Should 

117.  ./Emilia:  by  and  by :]  Emilia,  by  Qq  et  cet. 

and  by:   Qq.     JEmilia — by   and  by —  Alteration^]  Alteration —  Rowe, 

Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

119.  high]   here  Qx,  Jen.  Glo.  Cam.  128,  129.  I  do... Lord]  One  line,  Qq. 

Rife,  Wh.  ii.  Good  my  lord,  \  I  do  beseech  you  I  may 

119,  120.    moouing?   Still]    moving;  speak  with  you.  Cap.     I  do... with  you. 

Still  Jen.  One  line,  Johns.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var. 

121.  beft  to  do]  the  beft  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Coll.  Sta.  Wh.  i,  Del. 

Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  128.  do]  Om.  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

122.  Jhe  come]  fhe1 II come  Coll.  iii.  129.  That  I]  /Qq,  Johns.  Jen.  Steev. 

123.  wife:  what  wife?]  wife,  my  wife;  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Del. 
Qx.  Oh  good]  good  Qx. 

I  haue]  I  ha  Qq. 

119.  noise  .  .  .  high]  Booth  :  That  is,  of  the  struggling  with  Desdemona,  whose 
cries  were  mingled  with  Othello's  angry  voice.  (Irving  supposes  this  to  refer  to  Emilia's 
knock.)     [Does  not  this  refer  to  Roderigo's  attack  on  Cassio? — Ed.] 

119.  Walker,  in  his  Article  'On  the  omission  of  repeated  words'  (Crit.  ii,  144), 
queries  if  still  be  not  omitted  at  the  end  of  this  line  ?     Hudson  answered  in  the  affirm 
ative  by  adding  it,  '  because,'  as  he  says,  '  the  metre  certainly  wants  it,  and  the  sense 
even  more,  perhaps,  than  the  metre.' 

122.  wife]  Booth:  At  this  word  he  pauses  as  if  stunned,  or,  rather,  puzzled  by  so 
strange  a  word,  and  mutters  it  twice  inquiringly,  then,  under  the  full  force  of  the  horror, 
he  almost  screams,  '  I  have  no  wife ! '  and  falls  prostrate  on  the  divan  in  centre  of  the 
stage,  where  he  writhes  while  speaking  the  lines  that  follow. 

125-127.  Theobald  :  Let  the  Poet  account  for  the  profanation,  if  he  has  committed 
any ;  but  it  is  very  obvious  to  me  his  allusion  is  grounded  on  a  certain  solemn  circum- 
stance, when  darkness  is  said  to  have  covered  the  whole  face  of  the  land ;  when  rocks 
were  rent ;  and  graves  opened. 


act  v,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  309 

Oth.     I  had  forgot  thee  :  oh  come  in  ALmilia.  130 

Soft,  by  and  by,  let  me  the  Curtaines  draw. 
Where  art  thou  ?  What's  the  matter  with  thee  now  ? 

Enter  Aimilia. 

ALmil.     Oh  my  good  Lord,  yonders  foule  Murthers 
done.  135 

Oth.     What  ?  now  ? 

JEmil.     But  now,  my  Lord. 

Oth.     It  is  the  very  error  of  the  Moone, 
She  comes  more  neerer  Earth  then  fhe  was  wont, 
And  makes  men  mad.  140 

ALmil.    Caffio,  my  Lord,  hath  kill'd 
A  young  Venetian,  call'd  Rodorigo. 

Oth.     Rodorigo  kilPd  ?  and  Caffio  kill'd? 

ALmil.     No,  Caffio  is  not  killed. 

Oth.     Not  Caffio  kill'd?  Then  Murther's  out  of  tune,  145 

And  fweet  Reuenge  growes  harm. 

Def.     O  falfely,  falfely  murder'd.  147 

130.  forgot]  forgotten  Q2Q3,  Cap.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Del.    What, 

oh  come]  come  Q2Q3,  Cap.  Qx  et  cet. 

132.  [Unlocks  the  door.  Theob.  139.  neerer]  neere  the  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Cap. 

133.  Enter...]  After  draw  line  131,  Qq.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i, 
After  thou  ?  line  132,  Dyce.  Ktly,  Dyce  iii. 

134.  my  good]  good  my  Steev.'93,  Var.  141,  142.  Caffio...  Venetian]  One  line, 
Coll.  i,  ii.  Qq,  Cap.  et  seq. 

yonders]  yonder1  s  Qq.  141.  hath]  has  Qq,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev. 

Murthers]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Del. 
Cap.  Knt,  Wh.  ii.      murders  Qq,  Sing.  143.  Two  lines,  Cap.  Steev.  et  seq. 

Dyce  i,  Glo.  Ktly,  Cam.    murther  Theob.  147.  murder  dl]  murdered  Qq.     mur- 

Warb.  Wh.  i,  Rife,    murder  Johns,  et  cet.  ther'd  Theob.    Han.    Warb.    Knt,    Wh. 

136.  What?]  FfQ2Q3,  Rowe +  ,  Steev.  Rife. 

130.  Feciiter  :  Othello  goes  to  the  door,  which,  in  his  agitation,  he  tries  to  open  at 
the  hinges ;  and,  perceiving  his  mistake,  leans  against  the  wall  distracted,  wiping  the 
cold  damps  from  his  forehead. 

134.  my  good]  Dyce:  Perhaps  Steevens  and  the  others  may  be  right;  Emilia  has 
just  before  twice  used  that  form  of  expression. 

134.  murther]  Booth  :  Othello  starts  at  this  word. 

139.  more  neerer]  Compare  Ham.  II,  i,  11,  or  Abbott,  §11,  for  instances  of  double 
comparatives  and  superlatives. 

147.  Keightley  :  It  would  not  be  possible,  in  the  whole  compass  of  poetry,  to  find 
a  more  glaring  absurdity  than  this  of  making  Desdemona  speak  after  she  had  been 
smothered.  [The  following  extract,  involving,  as  it  does,  a  name  around  which  still 
cluster  holy  memories  in  living  hearts,  is  of  a  date  so  recent  that  I  should  hesitate  to 
use  it  here  did  I  imagine  that  any  service  in  the  illustration  of  Shakespeare  could  bring 
aught  but  honour,  or  that  T  should  hereby  lightly  treat  him  whose  voice  appeared  to 


310  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  v,  sc.  ii. 

ASmif.     Alas  !  what  cry  is  that  t  148 

Oth.     That?  What  ? 

SEmil.     Out,  and  alas,  that  was  my  Ladies  voice.  1 50 

Helpe,  helpe  hoa,  helpe.     Oh  Ladie  fpeake  againe, 
Sweet  Defdemona,  oh  fweet  Miftris,  fpeake. 

Def.     A  guiltlefle  death,  I  dye. 

^Emil.     Oh  who  hath  done  this  deed  ? 

Def.     No  body  :  I  my  felfe,  farewell :  155 

Commend  me  to  my  kinde  Lord  :  oh  farewell. 

Oth.     Why,  how  mould  fhe  be  murdred  ?  157 

148.  Alas']  0  Lord  Qt,  Cap.  Jen.  Ahlas  154.  this  deed]  As  beginning  155,  Cap. 

Q3.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i, 

cry  is"]  cry's  Steev.' 93.  Ktly,  Dyce  iii. 

150.  that  was]  it  is  Qx,  Jen.     it  was  156.   [She  dies.  Qq. 

QaQ  .  157.   murdred]  murdered '  Qq. 

154.  hath]  has  Qq. 

me  the  solitary  one  worth  listening  to,  on  a  London  Sunday,  thirty  years  ago. — Ed.] 
'  When  I  returned  at  5  A.  M.  next  day,  copious  effusion  had  taken  place  in  one  of  the 
pleura,  and  death  was  close  at  hand  ....  almost  immediately  afterwards,  without  any 
struggle,  all  was  over, — as  it  seemed.  We  remained  kneeling  around  the  bed.  No 
sound  came  from  the  motionless  chest,  the  beating  of  the  artery  under  my  finger  was 
no  longer  perceptible ;  the  hand,  which  a  moment  before  was  grasping  mine,  had  relaxed 
its  hold;  the  countenance  was  no  longer  scored  by  lines  denoting  difficulty  in  breathing; 
the  spark  in  the  eye  had  gone  out,  and  nowhere,  so  far  as  I  could  see,  was  there  any 
reason  for  thinking  that  the  fire  of  life  was  still  smouldering.  I  could  find  no  such 
reason  then,  I  can  find  no  such  reason  now.  And  yet  shortly  afterwards,  he,  who 
seemed  to  have  died,  and  to  have  been  dead  for  several  minutes,  or  moments,  minutes 
rather  than  moments,  as  I  remember  them,  slowly  raised  himself  upon  one  of  his 
elbows  into  a  half-sitting  posture,  and  said  distinctly,  "  The  peace  of  God,  which  pass- 
eth  all  understanding,  keep  your — our — hearts  and  minds  in  the  knowledge  and  love 
of  God,  and  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord ;  and  the  blessing  of  God  Almighty,  the 
Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  be  amongst  us  and  remain  with  us  always;"  and 
having  so  said,  without  another  word,  he  lay  down  and  died — again.     The  voice  in 

which  these  words  were  uttered  was  the  old  familiar  voice,  clear  and  solemn 

Between  them  and  the  preceding  words,  which  were  hurried  and  scarcely  coherent, 
and  almost  lost  in  distracting  sounds  connected  with  lack  of  breath,  a  broad  line  of 
separation  must  be  drawn.     In  uttering  these  last  words  no  difficulty  in  breathing  or 

speaking  was  noticeable I  cannot  confound   these  words  with  any  ordinary 

death-bed  utterances.' — Dr  C.  B.  Radcliffe  {Life  of  Frederick  D.-nison  Maurice,  2d 
ed.,  vol.  ii,  p.  645,  London,  1884). 

150.  Booth  :  Emilia  rushes  to  the  bed  and  throws  back  the  curtains. 

155,  156.  Booth:  This  should  affect  Othello;  he  believes  her  dying  with  a  lie  on 
her  lips,  and  he  shows  how  it  pains  him.  His  next  speech  is  in  half-choked  utter- 
ances. Fechter  says  that  this  line  157  is  spoken  'looking  at  Emilia  with  steady 
effrontery.'  Elze  {Notes,  &c,  2d  Ser.  p.  157)  would  divide  these  lines  at  'me,'  read- 
ing the  second,  '  To  my  |  kind  lord.  |  O,  fare  I  well.' 


act  v,  uc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF    VENICE  311 

sEmil.     Alas  :  who  knowes  ?  158 

Oth.     You  heare  her  fay  her  felfe,  it  was  not  I. 

Ainiil.     She  faid  fo  :  I  muft  needs  report  the  truth.  160 

Oth.     She's  like  a  Liar  gone  to  burning  hell, 
'Twas  I  that  kill'd  her. 

ALrniL     Oh  the  more  Angell  fhe,  and  you  the  black- 
er Diuell. 

Oth.     She  turn'd  to  folly  :  and  fhe  was  a  whore.  165 

ALmil.     Thou  do'ft  bely  her,  and  thou  art  a  diuell. 

Oth.     She  was  falfe  as  water. 

sEmil.     Thou  art  rafh  as  fire,  to  fay 
That  fhe  was  falfe.     Oh  fhe  was  heauenly  true.  169 

159.  heare]  Ff,  Rowe.  heard Qq  et  cet.  168.  Thou  art~\  Thou  as  Qt.    Thou'rt 

160.  the  truth]  a  truth  Qq,  Coll.  Wh.  i.  Cap. 

161.  burning]  burne  in  Q3,  Cap.  168,  169.  to  fay. ..true]  One  line,  Qq, 
163,  164.  Two  lines,  Cap.  Steev.  et  seq. 

161,  162.  Fechter:  With  a  burst  of  triumph.  Booth:  With  deep  emotion,  not 
harshly. 

163.  Angell]  Hudson:  Emilia  evidently  means  that  Desdemona  is  the  more  angel 
for  having  spoken  the  falsehood  in  question.  And  surely  all  well-ordered  minds  must 
agree  with  her;  at  all  events,  I,  for  one,  cannot  choose  but  love  and  honour  Desde- 
mona the  more  for  that  lie.  For,  indeed,  the  sweet,  dear  sufferer  knows  that  Othello 
is  driven  onward  by  some  monstrous  delusion ;  that  some  hideous  inspiration  has  put 
him  clean  out  of  his  native  self;  that  he  is  sure  to  have  the  worst  of  it,  and  so  is  even 
more  an  object  of  compassion  than  herself;  and  the  unspeakable  agony  legible  in  his 
features  wrings  her  pure  soul  with  a  pity  so  intense  as  to  take  from  her  all  sense  of  the 
pangs  of  death ;  and  so  her  last  breath  is  hallowed  with  a  tender  yearning  to  shield 
him,  as  far  as  she  possibly  can,  from  the  dreadful  retributions  which  await  him,  both 
from  without  and  from  within,  when  the  truth  shall  be  known.  So  deep  and  sacred  is 
the  head  and  spring  of  Desdemona's  dying  falsehood !  It  is  a  lie  born  of  the  very  holi- 
ness of  truth  itself! 

165.  folly]  Malone:  This  signifies  here,  as  in  the  sacred  writings,  wantonness  or 
unchastity.  So  in  R.  of  L.,  556  :  '  Her  sad  behaviour  feeds  his  vulture  folly.'  Steev- 
ens:  So  in  Deut.  xxii,  21  :  'She  hath  wrought  folly  in  Israel.'  Morel:  C'est  une 
vieille  acception  du  francais  '  folie '  qui  a  persiste  jusqu'  au  dix-septieme  siecle.  La 
Fontaine  dit  encore  'faire  la  folie'  pour  'se  livrer  a  la  debauche.'  Prof.  George 
Allen  (MS  note) :  So  also  in  Greek.  Cf.  Euripides,  Hippolytus,  644:  rj  ffanr/xavoc 
ywrj  I  yv&firi  fipaxeia  fiupiav  afojpedr).  Monk  says  :  fiupin,  impudicitia,  vel  libido,  qua 
significatione  adhibitur  etiam  in  Ion,  557. 

167.  as  water]  Johnson:  As  water  that  will  support  no  weight,  nor  keep  any 
impression.  Purnell  :  The  comparison  is  as  old  as  Jacob's  farewell  to  his  sons : 
•Reuben,  unstable  as  water/ — Gen.  xlix,  4. 

168.  Thou  art]  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  203) :  To  be  pronounced  as  one  syllable.  See 
I,  ii,  34;  III,  iv,  195. 


312  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  v,  sc.  ii. 

Oth.     Caffio  did  top  her  :  Ask  thy  husband  elfe.  170 

0,  I  were  damn'd  beneath  all  depth  in  hell: 
But  that  I  did  proceed  vpon  iuft  grounds 
To  this  extremity.     Thy  Husband  knew  it  all. 

sEmil.     My  Husband?  [337  #] 

Oth.     Thy  Husband.  175 

Aimil.     That  fhe  was  falfe  to  Wedlocke  ? 

Oth.     I,  with  CaJJio  :  had  fhe  bin  true, 
If  Heauen  would  make  me  fuch  another  world, 
Of  one  entyre  and  perfect  Chryfolite, 
Fid  not  haue  fold  her  for  it.  180 

jEmil.     My  Husband? 

Oth.     I,  'twas  he  that  told  me  on  her  firft, 
An  honeft  man  he  is,  and  hates  the  flime 
That  ftickes  on  filthy  deeds. 

Aimil.     My  H usband  ?  185 

Oth.     What  needs  this  itterance,  Woman  ? 

170.  top]   QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope  i,  Knt,  180.  for  it]  for"  t  Cap. 

Coll.  i,  Sing.  Glo.  Ktly,  Cam.  Wh.  ii.   tup  182.  me  on  her  firfi]  Ff,  Knt.    me  Jirjl 

Pope  ii  et  cet.  Qq  et  cet. 

173.  extremity]  extreme  Steev.  conj.  184.  on]  one  Q  . 

174.  Husband '?]  husbatid :  Q2Q3-  186,  187.  One  line,  or  prose,  Qq,  Cap. 
177.  Two  lines,  Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Steev.  et  seq. 

Sing.  186.  itterance,    Woman?]     iteration? 

I,  with]  Ay,  and  with  Ktly.  woman,   Qq,   Ktly.     iteration,  woman  ? 

had]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Knt.  nay,  Pope  (subs.)  +  ,  Jen.  Steev.'S5,  Mai.  Coll 

had  Qq  et  cet.  Sing.  Glo.  Cam.  Wh.  ii. 

true]  but  true  Coll.  (MS). 

171,  172.  Booth:  With  vigour;  in  justification  of  what  he  has  done. 

179.  Chrysolite]  Holland's  Translation  of  Pliny1  s  Natural!  Historie,  The  seuen  and 
thirtieth  Booke,  Chap,  viii :  '  The  Topaze  or  Chrysolith,  hath  a  singular  green  colour 
by  it  selfe,  for  which  it  is  esteemed  very  rich,  and  when  it  was  first  found,  it  surpassed 

all  others  in  price It  is  said,  that  the  first  that  tooke  a  liking  vnto  the  stone,  was 

queene  Berenice  the  mother  of  Ptolome  the  second,  and  that  by  the  meanes  of  Phile- 
mon (lieutenant  generall  to  her  son  in  those  countries)  who  presented  one  of  them  to 
the  said  queen.  Of  which  Chrysolit,  Ptolomceus  Philadelphus  K.  of  Egypt,  caused  the 
statue  of  his  wife  Arsinoe  to  be  made,  4  cubits  long ;  and  in  honour  of  the  said  queene 
his  wife,  dedicated  it  in  a  chappell  named  the  Golden  temple.'  [This  passage  in  Hoi 
land's  Pliny  is  referred  to  by  Plumptre.  Can  it  be  doubted  that  it  was  the  story  of  this 
precious  statue  which  suggested  '  chrysolite '  to  Shakespeare  ? — Ed.]  White  (ed.  ii) :  A 
greenish,  yellow  stone  of  no  rarity  and  small  value.  It  is  little  worn  :  probably  Shake- 
speare never  saw  one ;  but  the  word  promises  largely,  and  it  sounded  well  in  his  verse. 

185.  Rolfe:  Emilia's  astonishment  here  is  sufficient  proof  that  she  did  not  before 
luspect  Iago  of  being  the  '  eternal  villain  '  that  had  devised  this  slander.    See  IV,  ii,  154, 

186    itterance]  See  note  on  '  Reprobance,'  line  261, post. 


actv,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  313 

I  fay,  thy  Husband.  187 

jEmii.     Oh  Miftris, 
Villany  hath  made  mockes  with  loue 
My  Husband  fay  fhe  was  falfe?  190 

Oth.     He,  Woman ; 
I  fay  thy  Husband  :  Do'ft  vnderfhand  the  word? 
My  Friend,  thy  Husband;  honed,  honeft  I  ago. 

<dEmil.     If  he  fay  fo,  may  his  pernicious  Soule 
Rot  halfe  a  graine  a  day  :  he  lyes  to'th'heart,  195 

She  was  too  fond  of  her  moft  filthy  Bargaine. 

Oth.     Hah  ? 

ALmil.     Do  thy  wotft : 
This  deede  of  thine  is  no  more  worthy  Heauen, 
Then  thou  was't  worthy  her.  200 

Oth.     Peace,  you  were  beft. 

sEmil.  Thou  haft  not  halfe  that  powre  to  do  me  harm, 
As  I  haue  to  be  hurt.     Oh  Gull,  oh  dolt, 
As  ignorant  as  durt  :  thou  haft  done  a  deed 
(I  care  not  for  thy  Sword)  He  make  thee  known,  205 

188-193.  Om.  Qx.  196.  too  fond]  to  fond  Q3. 

188,189.  One  line,  Q2Q3,  Rowe  et  seq.  198.  wotfT\  Fx. 

189.  hath~\  had  Y .     has  Rowe +  .  202.  that  powre~\  the  power  Qq,  Jen. 

190.  fayfJie~\  Ff,  Rowe  +  .  fay  that fJie  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly,  Huds. 
Q2Q   et  cet.  203.  be  hurt~\  bear  hurt  Han. 

191.  192.  One  line,  QaQ3-  204.  thou  hafT\  thou'st  Pope  +  . 

193.  honeft,  honefi~\  honest-honest  Sta.  deed~\  Ff,  Rowe  i.     deed —  Qq  et 

194.  fay~\  says  Theob.  cet. 

195.  tdtti~\  QqFf,  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Wh.  i,  205.  Sword~\  wordY^. 
Huds.     to  the  Cap.  et  cet.  known~\  know  Qq. 

189.  mockes]  Johnson:  '  Villainy '  has  taken  advantage  to  play  upon  the  weak- 
ness of  a  violent  passion.  Hudson  :  That  is,  villainy  has  made  a  sport  and  mockery 
of  love,  by  playing  upon  it,  and  beguiling  it  into  a  conflagration  of  its  own  home. 
Emilia  probably  refers  to  Desdemona's  friendly  efforts  in  Cassio's  behalf. 

195.  to'th'heart]  The  Cambridge  Editors  note  that  Johnson  reads  'o'  th'  heart.' 
In  my  copy  of  Johnson  the  /of  '  to '  is  very  faint,  but  I  think  it  is  unmistakably  pres- 
ent. There  is,  however,  no  indication  whatever  of  an  apostrophe  after  the  0.  Let  the 
vanity  be  pardoned  which  prompts  me  to  show  how  exact  is  my  collation,  by  comparing 
it  with  that  of  the  Cambridge  Editors. — Ed. 

202,  203.  Johnson  :  She  means  to  say,  '  I  have  in  this  cause  power  to  endure  more 
than  thou  hast  power  to  inflict.'     Malone  :  Compare  Hen.  VIII :  III,  ii,  387,  '  I  am 

able Out  of  a  fortitude  of  soul,  I  feel,  To  endure  more  miseries Than  my 

weak  '-earted  enemies  dare  offer' ;  and  2  Hen.  VI:  IV,  i,  130 :  •  More  can  I  bear  than 
you  dare  execute.' 

203.  As]  See  Abbott,  §  109,  for  an  instance  of 'as'  for  that  without  the  antecedent  so. 


314  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  v,  sc.  ii 

Though  I  loft  twenty  Hues.     Helpe,  helpe,  hoa,  helpe  :  206 

The  Moore  hath  kill'd  my  Miftris.     Murther,  murther. 

Enter  Montano,  Gratiano,  and  Iago. 

Mbn.     What  is  the  matter  ?  How  now  Generall  ? 

JEmiL  Oh,  are  you  come,  Iago  :  you  haue  done  well,  210 
That  men  mufl  lay  their  Murthers  on  your  necke. 

Gra.     What  is  the  matter  ? 

ALmil.     Difproue  this  Villaine,  if  thou  bee' ft  a  man  : 
He  fayes,  thou  told' ft  him  that  his  wife  was  falfe : 
I  know  thou  did'ft  not  :  thou'rt  not  fuch  a  Villain.  215 

Speake,  for  my  heart  is  full. 

Iago,     I  told  him  what  I  thought, 
And  told  no  more 
Then  what  he  found  himfelfe  was  apt,  and  true. 

sEmil.     But  did  you  euer  tell  him,  220 

She  was  falfe  ? 

Iago,     I  did. 

AimiL     You  told  a  Lye  an  odious  damned  Lye : 
Vpon  my  Soule,  a  Lye ;  a  wicked  Lye.  224 

206.  hoa,  helpe']  0  helpe  Qq.  212.  Gra.]  All.  Qq. 

207.  hath]  has  Qq,  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  213.  Difproue  this  Villaine]  Disprove 
Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly,  Del.  it,  villain  Cap.  Disprove  this  villany  Cap. 

208.  Enter... and  Iago]    Enter... Iago,  conj.  Rann. 

and  others.  Qq.  (Gragantio  QaQ3).  215.  did'Jl]  dijl  Q2Qr 
Scene  VIII.  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  thou'rt]  thou  art  Qq. 

209.  [Staying  him.  Cap.  217,  218.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 

210.  you  haue]  yoti've  Dyce  iii,  Huds.  219.  Then]  But  Cap. 

211.  Murthers]  murder  Qq.  220,  221.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq 

206.  Booth  :  Othello  goes  to  the  bed,  and  lies  moaning  there,  not  loudly. 
211.  Booth  :  Iago,  of  course,  is  much  astonished. 

213.  this  Villaine]  Capell  (having  misprinted  it  instead  of  'this,'  has  the  follow- 
ing note,  which  is  unusually  lucid) :  One  of  the  present  Editor's  oversights  is  corrected 
in  the  '  Errata.'  At  discover}7,  and  in  ruminating  upon  it,  it  appears  to  him  that  there 
is  a  further  mistake  by  the  old  printers  made  in  the  same  line  :  *  villaine]  as  they  point 
it,  is  predicated  of  Othello ;  suppose  their  pointing  erroneous,  and  make  villaine  a  voca- 
tive, it  then  belongs  to  Iago ;  but  this  direct  application,  and  to  their  face,  of  such  a  term 
as  is  villaine  to  parties  standing  in  such  relation  as  both  do  to  the  speaker,  is  a  trespass 
on  character;  and  may  easily  be  remov'd  by  supposing  the  word  intended  was — villainy, 
which  takes  off  the  directness. 

214.  Booth  :  Iago  hardens  himself,  as  it  were,  looking  straight  before  him;  immov- 
able,— and  answers  after  a  pause,  and  doggedly. 

222.  Booth  :  Short  and  sharp.  He  darts  a  quick,  steely  glance  at  her  in  defiance, 
iMit  quails  as  she  proceeds,  and  speaks  line  227  with  desperation. 


actv,  sc.  ii.]  1HE  MOORE   OF  VENICE  315 

Shee  falfe  with  CaJJio  ?  225 

Did  you  fay  with  CaJJio  ? 

Iago.     With  CaJJio,  Miftris  ? 
Go  too,  charme  your  tongue. 

Emit.     I  will  not  charme  my  Tongue ; 
I  am  bound  to  fpeake,  230 

My  Miftris  heere  lyes  murthered  in  her  bed. 

AIL     Oh  Heauens,  forefend. 

EmiL     And  your  reports  haue  fet  the  Murder  on. 

Othello,     Nay  ftare  not  Mafters, 
It  is  true  indeede.  235 

Gra.     'Tis  a  ftrange  Truth. 

Mont,     O  monftrous  Adte. 

EmiL     Villany,  villany,  villany :  L337  b~\ 

I  thinke  vpon't,  I  thinke  :  I  fmel't  :  O  Villany : 
I  thought  fo  then  :  He  kill  my  felfe  for  greefe.  240 

225-230.  Three  lines,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq.  232.  All.]  Mon.  Gra.     Cap.  Dyce  iii, 

225.  Shee  falfe]  She  was  falfe  Q  .  Huds. 

230.  I  am]  Pm  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  iii.  232-241.  Put  in  margin.  Pope,  Han. 
231-241.  Om.  Qx.  233.  Murder]    murderer   Q2,   Johns. 

231.  heere  lyes]  lies  here  Pope  +  .  Murther  FF. 

murthered]      murdered     QjQ3'  234,  235.  One  line,  Q2Q3,  Rowe,  Theob. 

murther 'd  Pope  et  seq.  Warb.  et  seq. 

bed.]   bed,   Q  ,   Cap.    Dyce,    Sta.  239.  I  frneVt:  O  Villany]  I  fmell  a 

Huds.  villany  Q2Q  . 


228.  charme]  Johnson  :  I  know  not  whether  I  have  read,  or  whether  my  own 
thoughts  have  suggested,  an  alteration  here.  It  seems  to  me  not  improbable  that 
Shakespeare  wrote  clam  your  tongue ;  to  clam  a  bell  is  to  cover  the  clapper  with  felt, 
which  drowns  the  blow  and  hinders  the  sound  [qu.,  hinders  the  blow  and  drowns  the 
sound?  The  Cambridge  Editors  record  i  chain,  Anon,  conj.' — Ed.]  Malone:  That 
is,  compel  to  be  silent,  as  if  by  the  power  of  enchantment.  Steevens  :  Thus  Jonson, 
Cynthia's  Revels  [I,  i]  :  « Charm  your  skipping  tongue.'  Also  Faerie  Queene,  V,  ix 
[line  350]  :  '  That  well  could  charme  his  tongue,  and  time  his  speach.'  [For  addi- 
tional examples  in  Shakespeare,  see  Schmidt.] 

236.  strange]  Staunton:  This  is  one  of  the  many  word-  which  have  lost  weight 
and  emphasis  since  Shakespeare's  time.  With  us  it  imports  no  more  than  unusual,  not 
customary,  &c. ;  but  when  Desdemona  spoke  of  the  Moor's  adventures  as  '  strange,' 
she  meant  that  they  were  wonderful,  incredible  ;  and  it  is  in  this  deeper  sense  of  the 
word  that  Gratiano  employs  it  here. 

239.  In  the  punctuation  of  this  line  the  Ff  are  followed  by  the  Globe,  Hudson,  Rolfe, 
White  ii.  All  other  editions  substantially  follow  Rowe  in  separating  the  first  clause : 
*  I  think  upon't — I  think — I  smell't — O  villainy ! '  except  Staunton,  whose  punctua- 
tion seems,  to  me,  the  best :  *  I  think  upon't, — I  think  I  smell't; — O,  villainy  ! — ' — Ed. 

240.  then]  Steevens  :  That  is,  at  the  instant  when  she  gave  Desdemona's  hand- 
kerchief to  Iago;  for  even  then  Emilia  appears  to  have  suspected  it  was  sought  after 


316  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF   OTHELLO         [act  v,  sc.  it 

0  villany  !  villany  !  241 
lago.     What,  are  you  mad  ? 

1  charge  you  get  you  home. 

Emil.     Good  Gentlemen,  let  me  haue  leaue  to  fpeake : 
'Tis  proper  I  obey  him  ;  but  not  now :  245 

Perchance  lago,  I  will  ne're  go  home. 

Oth.     Oh,  oh,  oh. 

Emil.     Nay,  lay  thee  downe,  and  roare  : 
For  thou  haft  kill/d  the  fweeteft  innocent, 
That  ere  did  lift  vp  eye.  250 

Oth.     Oh  fhe  was  fowle  / 
I  fcarfe  did  know  you  Vnkle,  there  lies  your  Neece, 
Whofe  breath  (indeed)  thefe  hands  haue  newly  ftopp'd : 
I  know  this  acte  fhewes  horrible  and  grim. 

Gra.     Poore  Desdemon :  255 

242,  243.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq.  251.  [Rising.  Theob. 

246.  Perchance\  Perhaps  Q2Q3-  254.  horrible]  terrible  Qq,  Coll.  Wh.  i. 

247.  Oh,  oh,  oh.~\  Oh  !  oh  !  oh  !  oh  !  Cap.  255,  256.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 
Steev.'93,  Ktly.  255.  Defdemon]  F2,  Knt,  Dyce,  Sta, 

[Oth.  fals  on  the  bed.  Qq.  (falls         Del.  Huds.   Desdemone  Cap.  Defdemona 
Q2Q3)- QqF3F4  et  cet. 

for  no  honest  purpose,  and  there  asks  her  husband  :  '  What  will  you  do  with  it  ?  '  &c., 
Ill,  hi,  366.  Cowden-Clarke  :  In  allusion  to  her  suspicions  at  IV,  ii,  154;  she  seems 
to  be  about  to  say,  '  I  thought  then  that  there  was  villainy  going  on,  but  little  thought 
my  husband  was  the  author.'  The  very  thought  that  lago  could  be  capable  of  such 
villainy,  causes  her  to  interrupt  her  half-uttered  sentence  with  '  I'll  kill  myself  for 
grief.'     Rolfe  agrees  with  Cowden-Clarke. 

246.  I  will]  Abbott,  §319:  Some  passages  which  are  quoted  to  prove  that  Shake- 
speare used  will  with  the  first  person  without  implying  wish,  desire,  &c,  do  not  warrant 

such  an  inference  [see  Ham.  V,  ii,  167] There  is  a  difficulty  in  the  expression 

'perchance  I  will"1;  but,  from  its  constant  recurrence,  it  would  seem  to  be  a  regular 
idiom.  Compare  this  passage  in  Othello  with  Com.  of  Err.  IV,  i,  39 :  *  Ferchance  I 
will  be  there  as  soon  as  you,'  and  Mer.  of  Ven.  II,  v,  52  :  '  Perhaps  I  will  return  imme- 
diately.' In  all  these  passages  'perchance'  precedes,  and  the  meaning  seems  to  be  in 
the  last  example,  for  instance :  '  My  purpose  may,  perhcps,  be  fulfilled,'  and  '  my  pur- 
pose is  to  return  immediately,'  or,  in  other  words,  '  If  possible,  I  intend  to  return  imme- 
diately.' In  all  these  cases  the  '  perhaps '  stands  by  itself.  It  does  not  qualify  will, 
but  the  whole  of  the  following  sentence. 

247.  Booth  :  lago  gloats  over  this  quietly.     Emilia  sits  on  divan,  c. 

252.  Vnkle]  Booth  :  Gratiano  falls  into  a  seat  near  the  bed,  soon  after  his' entrance, 
when  he  discovers  his  niece  dead. 

255.  Desdemon]  See  III,  i,  58.  Delius  :  Gratiano  appears  to  have  come  to  Cyprus 
lo  bring  to  Desdemona  the  news  of  her  Father's  death.  [In  that  '  the  gentle  lady'  nevei 
knew  of  her  Father's  death,  is  the  one  tiny  glimmering  ray  of  comfort  in  this  blackness. 
—Ed.] 


actv,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  317 

I  am  glad  thy  Father's  dead,  256 

Thy  Match  was  mortall  to  him  :  and  pure  greefe 

Shore  his  old  thred  in  twaine.    Did  he  Hue  now, 

This  fight  would  make  him  do  a  defperate  turne: 

Yea,  curfe  his  better  Angell  from  his  fide,  260 

And  fall  to  Reprobance. 

Oth.     'Tis  pittifull  :  but  yet  Iago  knowes 
That  fhe  with  Caffio,  hath  the  Act  of  fhame, 
A  thoufand  times  committed.      CaJJio  confeft  it, 
And  fhe  did  gratifie  his  amorous  workes  265 

With  that  Recognizance  and  pledge  of  Loue 
Which  I  firft  gaue  her  :  I  faw  it  in  his  hand : 
It  was  a  Handkerchiefe,  an  Antique  Token 
My  Father  gaue  my  Mother.  269 

256.  lam]  /'/«Pope  +  ,Dyceiii,  Huds.  266.  that~\  (he  Qx. 

258.  in  twaine]  atwaine  Qx.  267.  gaue  her]  gave  Pope,  Har.. 

261.  Reprobance]  Ff,  Cap.  Knt,  Dyce,  268.  a~\  an  Pope  +  ,  Steev.'85. 

Wh.  i,  Del.  Huds.  Rife,    reprobation  Qq  268,  280.  Handkerchiefe']  handkercher 

et  cet.  Q,. 

263.  hath]  had  Q2Q3,  Theob.  Warb.  268.  Antique]  Anlick  F3F4,  Rowe. 
Johns. 

260.  side]  Malone  :  So  in  Sonn.  144 :  '  My  female  evil  Tempteth  my  better  angel 
from  my  side.' 

261.  Reprobance]  In  his  Article  on  'the  instance  of  error  in  the  beginning  or 
earlier  parts  of  words,  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  241)  says  :  'By  the  way,  terminations  in  ance 
for  ation  are  not  infrequent.'  He  then  gives  five  or  six  instances  in  addition  to  the 
present.  His  Editor,  Lettsom,  in  a  foot-note,  says  :  '  So  we  have  a  little  above  "  iter- 
ance," which  is  necessary  for  the  metre.  Collier  reads  iteration  and  reprobation  with 
the  Qq,  because  there  is  no  authority  for  the  other  forms.  That  is  the  very  reason  why 
they  were  corrupted  in  the  Qq.' 

262.  Booth  :  Iago,  who  has  turned  aside,  now  faces  them  as  all  look  towards  him. 

264.  thousand]  Pye  (p.  342) :  This  is  merely  hyperbolical,  and  is  used  every  day 
by  impatient  men  in  common  speech  for  five  or  six.  Cowden-Clarke  :  Merely  an 
indefinite  number ;  used  here  to  convey  the  effect  of  long  time.  See  '  a  hundred  times/ 
HI,  hi,  339. 

265.  gratifie]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  291) :  That  is,  express  her  gratitude  for,  recompense. 
269.  Mother]  Steevens  :  In  III,  iv,  69,  Othello  says  that  '  an  Egyptian '  gave  this 

handkerchief  to  his  Mother;  and  here  he  says  it  was  his  Father.  This  has  been  cen- 
sured as  an  oversight  in  Shakespeare,  but  perhaps  it  is  only  a  fresh  proof  of  his  art.  The 
first  account  of  the  handkerchief,  as  given  by  Othello,  was  purposely  ostentatious,  in 
order  to  alarm  his  wife  the  more.  When  he  mentions  it  a  second  time,  the  truth  was 
sufficient  for  his  purpose.  Cowden-Clarke  :  Even  this  slight  deviation  from  truth 
works  its  own  retribution.  Had  not  Othello  over-excited  Desdemona's  fears  by  his 
description  of  the  handkerchief,  she  might  not  have  been  led  to  prevaricate  and  into 
falsehood. 


318  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  v,  sc.  ii. 

Emit,     Oh  Heauen  !  oh  heauenly  Powres  !  270 

lago.     Come,  hold  your  peace. 

Etnil.     'Twill  out,  'twill  out.     I  peace  ? 
No,  I  will  fpeake  as  liberall  as  the  North ; 
Let  Heauen,  and  Men,  and  Diuels,  let  them  all, 
All,  all,  crie  fhame  againft  me,  yet  He  fpeake.  275 

lago.     Be  wife,  and  get  you  home. 

EmiL     I  will  not. 

Gra.     Fye,  your  Sword  vpon  a  Woman. 

EmiL     Oh  thou  dull  Moore, 
That  Handkerchiefe  thou  fpeak'ft  of  280 

I  found  by  Fortune,  and  did  giue  my  Husband: 
For  often,  with  a  folemne  earneftneffe, 
(More  then  indeed  belonged  to  fuch  a  Trifle) 
He  begg'd  of  me,  to  fbeale't. 

lago.     Villanous  Whore.  285 

EmiL     She  giue  it  Cajfio}  No,  alas  I  found  it, 
And  I  did  giu't  my  Husband. 

lago.     Filth,  thou  lyeft.  288 

270.  Oh...Fowres]  O  God,  0  heauenly  273.  North;']  ayre  QT,  Pope,  Theob. 
God  Qj,  Sta.  Han.  Warb.  Cap.  Jen.  Mai.  Steev.  Var. 

271.  Come]  Zouns  Qx,  Sta.  Sing.  Ktly.     wind  Co\\.  (MS). 

272.  'Twill  out,  'twill  out.]    FfQ2Q3,  274.  them]  em  Qq,  Jen. 

Cam.    '  Twill  out,  'twill:  Qt.   '  Twill  out,  277.  [Jago  offers  to  stab  his  wife.  Rowe. 

} twill  out —  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.      'Twill  out,  278.  Fye]  As  closing  line  277,  Cap. 

'twill  out !  Sta.  Huds.     '  Twill  out,  'twill  Steev.  et  seq. 

out ; —  Cap.  et  cet.  279,  280.  One  line,  Qq,  Pope  et  seq. 

I  peace  ?]  Ff,  Cap.  I  peace  !  Rowe,  280.  of]  on,  Qq,  Jen. 

Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Dyce,  Wh.  Glo.  Cam.  284.  fleale't]    F2F3,  Sing.   Ktly,   Su. 

Huds.  Rife.    I,  peace  !  Warb.    /  hold  my  Jleale  it  QqF4  et  cet. 

peace  fcr,  no,  Qq,  Johns,  et  cet.  286.  giue]  gaue  Qq,  Johns. 

273.  No]  Om.  Qq,  Jen.  Sing.  Ktly.  No,  alas]  Alas  F3F4,  Rowe  + . 
I  will  fpeake  as]  lie  be  in  f peaking,  found  ]  find  Q  . 

Qq,  Jen.  Sing.  Ktly.  287.  giu't]  give  it  Steev.'85,  Mai. 

271.  Booth  :  lago  had  not  thought  of  her  betraying  him,  and  now  starts  and  trem- 
bles violently. 

273.  North]  Compare  Cymb.  I,  iii,  36 :  « the  tyrannous  breathing  of  the  north  Shakes 

all  our  buds  from  growing.'     Also  R.  of  L.  1335  :  ' hie  as  fast  As  lagging  fowls 

oefore  the  northern  blast.'  It  was  the  wind  which,  it  seems  to  me,  symbolized  masterful 
rudeness.  Steevens  cites  from  Webster's  White  Devil  [p.  92,  ed.  Dyce]  :  '  And  let  th' 
irregular  north  wind  sweep  her  up,'  which  does  not  help  us  much. — Ed. 

281.  by  Fortune]  Morel  :  Cf.  la  locution  francaise:  'Comme  elle  dis.-.it  ces  mots 
I  Le  loup,  de  fortune,  passe.' — La  Fontaine. 

288.  Filth]  Dyce  [Few  Notes,  p.  149) :  Here  lago  uses  a  term  synonymous  with 
the  word  he  has  just  oprlied  to  her.    Compare  Greene's  ATotable  Discouery  of  Coosnage, 


ACTV.sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  319 

EmiL     By  Heauen  I  do  not,  I  do  not  Gentlemen : 
Oh  murd'rous  Coxcombe,  what  mould  fuch  a  Foole  290 

Do  with  fo  good  a  wife  ? 

Oth.     Are  there  no  ftones  in  Heauen, 
But  what  ferues  for  the  Thunder  ? 
Precious  Villaine. 

Gra.     The  woman  falles  :  295 

Sure  he  hath  kill'd  his  Wife. 

EmiL     I,  I  :  oh  lay  me  by  my  Miftris  fide. 

Gra.     Hee's  gone,  but  his  wife's  kill'd. 

Mon.     'Tis  a  notorious  Villain  :  take  you  this  weapon        299 

290.  [To  Oth.  Cap.  293.  But... for]  For  what  then  serves 

291.  wife']  woman  Qq,  Coll.  i,  ii,  Glo.         Warb. 

Wh.  ii.  femes']  QqF2F3,  Cap.  ferve  F4  et 

[The  Moore  runnes  at  Iago.  Iago  cet. 

kils  his  wife.  Qq.     Jago  breaks  through,  294.  Precious]  pretious  Qt.  pernitious 

and  wounds  his  Wife,  then  runs  out.  Rowe.  Q2Q3- 

Oth.  offers  to  stab  Iago  but  is  disarmed  by  295,  296.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 

Mont.  Dyce.  297.  [Exit  Iago.  Qq. 

293,  294.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq.  299.  you  this]  your  Qq.     this  Pope  + 

Cap. 

■kc,  1592  [p.  44,  ed.  Grosart]  :  'To  him  will  some  common  filth  (that  neuer  knew 
loue)  faine  an  ardent  and  honest  affection.'  Halliwell  :  '  Filth,'  applied  to  man  or 
woman,  was  a  term  implying  the  greatest  possible  degree  of  contempt. 

291.  wife]  Dyce  {Remarks,  p.  243) :  It  is  absolutely  necessary  to  adopt  here  the 
reading  of  the  Folio. 

292,  293.  Warburton  :  Without  question  Shakespeare  wrote  and  pointed  thus : 
*  Are  there  no  stones  in  heaven  ?  For  what  then  serves  the  thunder  ?'  i.  e.  are  there 
no  bolts  in  heaven  for  this  villain  ?  for  what  purpose  then  serves  the  thunder,  that 
instrument  of  vengeance  ?  [Kean  adopted  this  emendation;  see  Wood's  Personal  Rec- 
ollections, &c,  p.  264. — Ed.]  Steevens  :  Othello  does  not  demand  a  thunder-bolt  for 
Iago.  He  only  asks,  if  there  are  no  lesser  degrees  of  chastisement  more  proportioned 
to  the  guilt  of  mortals,  ready  to  drop  down  on  such  villains  as  Iago,  though  Omnipo- 
tence withholds  its  thunder  as  too  noble  an  instrument  for  the  punishment  of  crimes 
like  his  ?  Shakespeare  might,  however,  mean,  Does  heaven  reserve  its  thunder  only  to 
make  a  noise  ?  has  it  no  implements  of  mischief  to  punish  as  well  as  terrify  ?  Malone: 
Has  not  heaven  one  supernumerary  bolt,  to  hurl  directly  at  the  head  of  this  atrocious 
villain  ?    Must  all  the  stores  of  its  arsenal  be  reserved  for  common  and  ordinary  thunder  ? 

294.  Precious]  Collier  :  Pernitious  of  the  Qq  does  not  suit  the  measure.  Dyce 
(ed.  iii)  :  ' "  Precious  villain  "  is  more  in  the  style  of  Cloten  than  of  Othello :  qu.  Per- 
nicious with  Q2.  This  could  scarcely  have  crept  in  from  "pernicious  caitiff"  80  lines 
below.  Collier's  metrical  objection  is  "  naught."  See  Walker,  Vers.,  Sec,  Art.  ix.' — 
Lettsom.  [I  have  failed  to  find  this  passage  in  Walker;  it  certainly  is  not  in  Art.  ix. 
I  therefore  give  it  on  Lettsom's  authority. — Ed.] 

299.  notorious]  See  IV,  ii,  167.  ROLFE:  Iago  was  not  a  notorious  villain  in  it* 
modern  sense ;  his  villainy  had  but  just  then  become  known. 


320  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  v,  sc.  ii 

Which  I  haue  recouer'd  from  the  Moore :  300 

Come  guard  the  doore  without,  let  him  not  paffe, 

But  kill  him  rather.     He  after  that  fame  villaine, 

For  'tis  a  damned  Slaue.  Exit. 

Oth.     I  am  not  valiant  neither:  [338  a] 

But  euery  Punie  whipfter  gets  my  Sword.  305 

But  why  mould  Honor  out-liue  Honefty  ? 
Let  it  go  all. 

jJEmil.     What  did  thy  Song  boad  Lady  i 
Hearke,  canft  thou  heare  me  ?  I  will  play  the  Swan, 
And  dye  in  Muficke  :  Willoiighy  Willough,  WillottgJi.  310 

Moore,  me  was  chafte  :  She  lou'd  thee,  cruell  Moore, 
So  come  my  Soule  to  bliffe,  as  I  fpeake  true : 
So  fpeaking  as  I  thinke,  alas,  I  dye. 

Oth.     I  haue  another  weapon  in  this  Chamber,  314 


300.  haue   recouer'd]    haue  here  re-  Scene  IX.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

couered  Qq.     recover 'd  have  here  Pope  i.  308-310.  W/W...Willough]  Om.  Q. 

have  here  recovered  Pope  ii  et  seq.  310.  [Singing.  Dyce. 

301.  Come  guard]  Some  guard  Theob.  313.  alas,  I  dye.~\  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt, 
conj.  (withdrawn).  Wh.  i.     I  die,  I  die.  Qq  et  cet. 

303.  Exit.]  Exit  Mont,  and  Gratiano.  [She  dies.  Qq. 
Qq.     Exit  Montano.  Knt. 

303.  Slaue]  See  IV,  ii,  156. 

305.  Punie]  Booth  :  Can  we  infer  from  this  that  Othello  was  a  large  man?  Yet, 
further  on  he  speaks  of  his  '  little  arm.'  The  Moors,  I  believe,  are  usually  slight  of 
build  and  wiry.  [I  think  it  is  more  an  expression  of  contempt  in  both  cases,  without 
any  reference  to  physical  size.  Is  the  contemptuous  inferiority  implied  in  '  whipster ' 
due  to  a  survival  of  the  feeling  of  feminine  weakness  involved  in  the  feminine  termina- 
tion ?— Ed.] 

306.  Honor  .  .  .  Honesty]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  22)  suggests  that  'Honor'  belongs 
to  birth,  dignity,  grace  of  mind  or  person,  while  '  Honesty '  is  equivalent  to  virtue, 
and  cites  Wint.  Tale,  II,  i,  66 :  '  She  is  a  goodly  lady  ....  'Tis  pity  she's  not 
honest-honourable '  (the  hyphen  is  Walker's),  i.  e.,  honourable  with  honesty.  Also 
Hen.  VIII :  I,  i,  39  :  ' As  I  belong  to  worship,  and  affect  In  honour  honesty.'  «  Each 
of  these  words,  by  the  way,'  adds  Walker,  '"honour"  and  "honesty,"  was,  at  times, 
used  in  both  meanings.' 

309.  Swan]  Steevens  :  Compare,  for  the  same  thought :  Mer.  of  Ven.  Ill,  ii,  44, 
and  King  John,  V,  vii,  21.  Rolfe  adds  'And  now  this  pale  swan  in  her  watery  nest 
Begins  the  sad  dirge  of  her  certain  ending,' — R.  of  L.  161 1;  and  'death-divining 
swan.' — Phoen.  &*  Turt.  15.  Douce  (i,  262),  in  a  note  on  the  passage  from  Mer.  of 
Ven.,  cited  by  Steevens,  proves  the  antiquity,  from  Plato  to  Luther,  of  the  belief  in  the 
swan's  dving  song. 


ACT  v,  sc.  ii.] 


THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE 


321 


It  was  a  Sword  of  Spaine,  the  Ice  brookes  temper : 
Oh  heere  it  is  :  Vnkle  I  muft  come  forth. 

Gra.     If  thou  attempt  it,  it  will  cofb  thee  deere  ; 
Thou  haft  no  weapon,  and  perforce  muft  naffer. 

Oth.     Looke  in  vpon  me  then,  and  fpeake  with  me, 
Or  naked  as  I  am  I  will  affault  thee. 

Gra.     What  is  the  matter? 

Othel.     Behold,  I  haue  a  weapon  : 
A  better  neuer  did  it  felfe  fuftaine 
Vpon  a  Soldiers  Thigh.     I  haue  feene  the  day, 
That  with  this  little  Arme,  and  this  good  Sword, 
I  haue  made  my  way  through  more  impediments 
Then  twenty  times  your  flop.    But  (oh  vaine  boaft) 
Who  can  controll  his  Fate  ?  ?Tis  not  fo  now. 
Be  not  affraid,  though  you  do  fee  me  weapon'd : 
Heere  is  my  iournies  end,  heere  is  my  butt 
And  verie  Sea-marke  of  my  vtmoft  Saile. 
Do  you  go  backe  difmaid?  ?Tis  a  loft  feare  : 


315 


320 


325 


330 


332 


315.  It  was]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.     //  is 
Qq  et  cet. 

the  Ice  brookes]  the  Ifebrookes  Qq. 
the  Ice  brooks  F3F4.  the  Ebrds  Pope, 
Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Cap. 

temper  .•]  temper  ; —  Cap.  temper. 
—  Coll. 

316,317.  forth.  Gru.]  forth.  Gra.with- 
n.  Gra.  Qq.  forth.  Gra.  [within]  Pope. 
forth.  Gra.  [without]  Sta. 

319.  with  me~\  to  me  Qq,  Coll. 


320.  [Re-enter  Gra.    Theob. 
322.  Behold]  lo!  Pope  +  . 
324.  /  haue]  I've  Pope  +  ,  Dyoe  iii, 
Huds. 

326.  I  haue  made]  I  made  Pope,  Han. 
Eve  made  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Dyte  iii, 
Huds. 

327.  your  flop]  you  flop  QXFF4. 
329-335-  Om.  Qr. 

331.  And  verie]  The  very  Q3Q,» 
Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen.  Steev.'85. 


315.  Ice  brookes]  Johnson  :  Steel  is  hardened  by  being  put  red-hot  into  very  cold 
water.  Steevens  identifies  the  'ice  brook'  with  the  river  called  Salo  (now  Xalon), 
near  Bilbilis,  by  citations  from  Martial  [Epig.  IV,  lv,  15,  and  I,  xlix,  12]  and  Justin,  1, 
44.  Pope's  needless  change  was  thus  justified  by  Blackstone  :  I  incline  to  read  '  'tis 
ebroes  temper.'  If  we  suppose  that  the  words,  'tis  ebroes,  were  huddled  together,  either 
in  transcribing  or  composing,  thus,  'lisebroes,  the  compositor,  in  running  it  over  with  his 
eye,  might  (to  make  it  sense,  as  he  thought)  add  a  couple  of  letters,  and  divide  the 
words  thus  :  th' isebrokes,  which  is  nearly  as  it  stands  in  the  old  Qto.  I  doubt  whether 
'  ice-brooks '  are  usual  in  the  climate  of  Spain.  Malone  :  How  this  fact  may  be,  I 
know  not ;  and  I  am  confident  Shakespeare  did  not  inquire. 

320.  naked]  White  (ed.  ii) :  That  is,  weaponless,  as  Gratiano  supposes  him. 

327.  stop]  Steevens  :  So  in  Cor.  I,  i,  72 :  '  cracking  ten  thousand  curbs  Of  more 
strong  link  asunder,  than  can  ever  Appear  in  your  impediment.' 

328.  Fate]  The  echo  of  Desdemona's  'It  is  my  wretched  Fortune.' — Ed. 

21 


322 


THE    TR AG ED IE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  v,  sc.  il. 


Man  but  a  Rufh  againft  Othello's  breft,  33  \ 

And  he  retires.     Where  fhould  Othello  go  ? 

Now  :  how  doft  thou  looke  now?  Oh  ill-Starr'd  wench,         335 

Pale  as  thy  Smocke  :  when  we  fhall  meete  at  compt, 

This  looke  of  thine  will  hurle  my  Soule  from  Heauen, 

And  Fiends  will  fnatch  at  it.    Cold,  cold,  my  Girle  ? 

Euen  like  thy  Chaftity.     O  curfed,  curfed  Slaue ! 

Whip  me  ye  Diuels,  340 

From  the  poffeffion  of  this  Heauenly  fight : 

Blow  me  about  in  windes,  roaft  me  in  Sulphure, 

Wafh  me  in  fteepe-downe  gulfes  of  Liquid  fire. 

Oh  Defdemon !  dead  Defdemon  :  dead.    Oh,  oh !  344 


335.  Now :  how]  Ff.  How  Q2Q3-  Now 
—how  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Now,  how  Cap.  et 
cet. 

ill-Starr'd]  ill  florid  Q3. 

336.  compt]  count  Qx.     ''count  Jen. 
339, 340.  Three  lines,  Rife.   O... Diuels 

one  line,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Var.  Knt. 

339.  curfed,  curfed]  curfed  Qq, 
Pope  + ,  Jen.  Coll.  Glo.  Cam.  Wh.  ii. 

340.  ye]  you  Qq. 

342.  roqfl]  and  roafl  FF,  Rowe. 

343.  fleepe-downe]fleepe  downe  Qq. 
gulfes]  Gulf  Rowe  ii. 

344.  Oh... oh  I]  Knt.  0  Desdemon! 
dtad,  Desdemon  !  dead!  O,  O  !  Sta.  Huds. 
O  Defdemona,  Defdemoua,  dead,  O,  o,  o. 
Qt.  0  Defdemona,  Defdemona ;  dead,  O, 
0, 0.  Q2Q3'  Oh  Desdemona,  Desdemona  ! 
dead!  oh,  oh,  oh!  Jen.      O  Desdemona ! 


Desdemona!  dead?  0,  O,  0!  Coll.  O 
Desdemona !  Desdemona !  dead!  \  Oh! 
Oh  !  Oh  !  Glo.  Cam.  Rife,  Wh.  ii.  Oh 
Defdemon  !  dead  Defdemon  :  dead.  dead. 
Oh,  oh  !  Fa.  Oh  Defdemona !  dead  Def- 
demona :  dead,  dead.  Oh,  oh  !  F3.  Oh  Def- 
demona !  Dead,  Defdemona  :  Dead,  dead. 
Oh,  oh  !  F4,  Rowe.  Oh  Desdemona  !  Des- 
demona !  dead,  dead!  oh,  oh  !  Pope  + .  O 
Desdemone !  dead,  Desdemone  ?  dead? 
dead?  \  O,  o,  o!  Cap.  O  Desdemona  ! 
Desdemona!  dead?  \  Dead?  0!  0!  O! 
Steev.'73,  '78,  '85,  Mai.  Rann,  Steev.'93, 
Var.'o3,  '13,  '21,  Sing.  Ktly.  O  Desde- 
mon !  dead,  Desdemon  !  dead !  O  !  Dyce, 
Wh.  i,  Del.  O  Desdemona  !  Desdemona  ! 
dead  ?  O  !  Hal.  O  Desdemona  !  Desde- 
mona !  dead!  Oh,  oh,  oh  !  Clarke. 


333.  An  allusion,  says  Staunton,  to  the  mock  tournaments,  in  which  the  combat- 
ants were  armed  with  rushes  in  place  of  spears.  This  leads  Delius  to  conjecture  that 
the  reading  should  be  '  Run  but  a  rush,'  &c. 

334.  Booth  :  Goes  towards  the  bed,  near  which  his  sword  falls  from  his  hand. 

335.  wench]  Steevens:  This  originally  signified  only  a  young  woman.  Cassan- 
dra, in  Whetstone's  Promos  and  Cassandra,  1578,  says  of  herself:  '  O  wretched  wench, 
where  may  I  first  complayne  ?  '  Again :  *  Therefore,  sweet  wenche,  helpe  me  to  rue 
my  woe.'  It  is  used  without  any  dishonourable  meaning  in  the  Bible :  '  Now  Jona- 
than and  Ahimaaz  stayed  by  En-rogel ;  .  .  .  .  and  a  wench  went  and  told  them,'  &c. — 
2  Sam.  xvii,  17.  And  by  Gawin  Douglas,  in  his  version  of  the  JEneid :  'audetque 
viris  concurrere  virgo.  This  wensche  stoutlye  rencounter  durst  with  men.'  Halli- 
WELL :  Here  we  find  it  applied  to  a  princess :  '  For  Ariodant  so  lov'd  the  princely 
wench,  That  Neptune's  floods  unneth  his  flames  cold  quench.' — Har.  Ariost.  v,  20. 
[There  was,  nevertheless,  I  think,  a  faint  subaudition  of  inferiority  of  some  kind. — En.} 

336.  compt]  Dyce  :  That  is,  the  reckoning  at  the  Judgement-day. 


act  v,  sc.  ii.J  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  323 

Enter  Lodouico,  Caffio,  Montano,  and  Iago,  345 

with  Officers. 

Lod.     Where  is  this  rafh,  and  rnoft  vnfortunate  man? 

Oth.     That's  he  that  was  Othello  :  heere  I  am. 

Lod.     Where  is  that  Viper  ? 
Bring  the  Villaine  forth.  3 50 

Oth,     I  look  down  towards  his  feet ;  but  that's  a  Fable, 
If  that  thou  bee'ft  a  Diuell,  I  cannot  kill  thee. 

Lod.     Wrench  his  Sword  from  him. 

Iago.     I  bleed  Sir,  but  not  killM. 

Othel.     I  am  not  forry  neither,  IPd  haue  thee  Hue:  355 

For  in  my  fenfe,  'tis  happineffe  to  die. 

Lod.     Oh  thou  Othello,  that  was  once  fo  good,  357 

345.  Enter...]  Enter  Lodouico,  Mon-  349.  thai']  this  Qx. 

tano,  Iago,  and  Officers,  CaJJio  in  a  Chaire.  352.  If  that]  If  Qt. 

Qq.   {Iago  Om.  Q2Q3)-    Enter  Lodovico,  [Oth.  wounds  Jago.  Rowe. 

Cassio  led  in  wounded,  Montano,  and  Iago  353.  Wrench]  Wring  Qx. 

Prisoner,  with  Officers.  Rowe.  354.  bleed... not]    bleed,   but  am    not 

Scene  X.  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Han.  ii. 

347.  vnfortunate]  infortunate  Qq.  357.  that  was]  Ff,  Steev.'85,  Var.  Knt, 

348.  Othello :  heere]  Othello  ;  [pointing  Sing.  Ktly.  wast  Rowe  + ,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev. 
to  his  wife]  here  Cap.  that  wert  Qq  et  cet. 

349.  350.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 

339.  Slaue]  Booth  :  By  gesture  show  that  you  mean  Iago.  [Until  now,  I  had 
always  thought  that  this  referred  to  Othello  himself. — Ed.] 

342.  Blow  .  .  .  wind.es]  Douce  calls  attention  to  that  immortal  passage  in  Meas. 
for  Meas.  Ill,  i,  124 :  'To  be  imprison'd  in  the  viewless  winds,  And  blown  with  rest 
less  violence  round  about  The  pendent  world.' 

344.  See  III,  i,  58.  Collier  (ed.  ii)  says  that  the  'line  ends  strictly  at  "dead," ' 
but  then  Collier  reads  '  Desdemona.' 

345.  Cassio]  Collier  :  From  the  omission  in  the  Folio  of  the  stage  direction  here 
found  in  the  Qq,  we  may  infer  that  the  practice  of  our  old  stage  in  this  respect  was  not 
uniform.  In  modern  times  Cassio  walks  in  lame,  and  supported,  with  the  handker 
chief  as  a  bandage  about  his  wounded  leg. 

350.  Booth  :  Othello  draws  the  bed-curtains  close  at  Iago's  entrance,  that  Desde 
mona's  corpse  may  not  be  polluted  by  Iago's  gaze.     All  eyes  are  fastened  on  Iago,  thus 
giving  Othello  the  chance  to  assault  him  unobserved. 

351.  feet]  Johnson:  To  see  if,  according  to  the  common  opinion,  his  feet  be 
cloven. 

354.  I  bleed]  Maginn  (p.  260,  note) :  This  is  strange  language.  Should  it  not  be, 
'I  [i.  e.,  Ay,  as  usual  in  Shakespeare],  bled,  sir,  but  not  killed '  ? 

356.  Booth  :  '  If  't  were  now  to  die,  'twere  now  to  be  most  happy.'  The  same  sad 
refrain  first  heard  in  the  very  heaven  of  his  happiness,  now  in  his  hell  of  misery.  I„et 
it  be  faintly  heard  wherever  possible  through  your  performance  of  this  cnaracter. 

357.  so  good]  Booth  :  Not  a  savage  brute.     Remember  this. 


324  THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO        [act  v,  sc  h. 

Falne  in  the  practife  of  a  curfed  Slaue,  358 

What  mall  be  faide  to  thee. 

Oth.     Why  any  thing :  360 

An  honourable  Murderer,  if  you  will: 
For  nought  I  did  in  hate,  but  all  in  Honour. 

Lod.     This  wretch  hath  part  confefh  his  Villany : 
Did  you  and  he  confent  in  CaJJio's  death. 

Oth.     I.  365 

Caf.     Deere  Generall,  I  neuer  gaue  you  caufe. 

Oth.     I  do  beleeue  it,  and  I  aske  your  pardon : 
Will  you,  I  pray,  demand  that  demy-Diuell, 
Why  he  hath  thus  enfnar'd  my  Soule  and  Body.  [338  b\ 

/^•.Demand  me  nothing  :  what  you  know,  you  know:  370 
From  this  time  forth,  I  neuer  will  fpeake  word. 

Lod.     What?  not  to  pray  ? 

Gra.     Torments  will  ope  your  lips.  373 

358.  curfed]  Ff,  Rowe+,  Cap.  Steev.  366.  neuer  gaue]  did  neuer  giue  Qq, 
Mai.  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly.  damned        Jen. 

Qq  et  cet.  367.  your]  you  Qq,  Coll.  i,  Glo.  Del. 

359.  Jhall]  Jhould  Qq.  Rife. 

thee.']  thee  ?  QqF4  et  seq.  368.  I  pray]  pray  Qx. 

362.  /  did  in]  did  I  in  Qq,  Jen.  Sta.  369.  en/nar'd]  infnar'd  Qq. 

Cam.  Del.     I  did  F4.  373.  ope]  op'e  Qx. 

358.  in]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  291):  'In'  for  into,  ut  scepe ;  for  Shakespeare  can 
scarcely  have  written,  '  Fall'n  into  th'  practise.' 

358.  practise]  Johnson  :  In  the  snare,  by  the  stratagem. 

358.  cursed]  Dyce  (ed.  iii)  :  I  prefer  the  Qq,  because  Othello  has  a  little  before 
exclaimed  '  O  cursed,  cursed  slave ! ' 

371.  Swinburne  (p.  179) :  Iago  has  within  him  a  sense  or  conscience  of  power 
incomparable :  and  this  power  shall  not  be  left,  in  Hamlet's  phrase,  '  to  fust  in  him 
unused.'  A  genuine  and  thorough  capacity  for  human  lust  or  hate  would  diminish  and 
degrade  the  supremacy  of  his  evil.  He  is  almost  as  far  above  or  beyond  vice  as  he  i5 
beneath  or  beyond  virtue.  And  this  it  is  which  makes  him  impregnable  and  invulner- 
able. When  once  he  has  said  it,  we  know  as  well  as  he  that  henceforth  he  never  will 
speak  word.  We  could  smile  almost  as  we  can  see  him  to  have  smiled  at  Gratiano's 
most  ignorant  and  empty  threat,  being  well  assured  that  torments  will  in  no  wise  ope 
his  lips ;  that  as  surely  and  as  truthfully  as  ever  did  the  tortured  philosopher  before 
him,  he  might  have  told  his  tormentors  that  they  did  but  bruise  the  coating,  batter  the 
crust,  or  break  the  shell  of  Iago.  Could  we  imagine  a  far  other  lost  spirit  than  Fari- 
nata  degli  Uberti's  endowed  with  Farinata's  might  of  will,  and  transferred  from  the 
sepulchres  of  fire  to  the  dykes  of  Malebolge,  we  might  conceive  something  of  Iago's 
attitude  in  hell, — of  his  unalterable  and  indomitable  posture  for  all  eternity.  Booth  : 
I  grind  my  teeth  at  this,  not  because  it  '  takes,'  but  because  I  feel  that  it  expresses 
determination  never  to  speak  again. 


actv,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE  OF   VENICE  325 

Oth.     Well,  thou  doft  beft. 

Lod.     Sir,  375 

You  fhall  vnderftand  what  hath  befalne, 
(Which,  as  I  thinke,  you  know  not)  heere  is  a  Letter 
Found  in  the  pocket  of  the  flaine  Rodorigo, 
And  heere  another,  the  one  of  them  imports 
The  death  of  CaJJio,  to  be  \  ndertooke  380 

By  Rodorigo. 

Oth.     O  Villaine ! 

CaJJio.     Moft  Heathenifli,  and  moft  groffe. 

Lod.     Now,  heere's  another  difcontented  paper 
Found  in  his  pocket  too  :  and  this  it  feemes  385 

Rodorigo  meant  t'haue  fent  this  damned  villaine : 
But  that  (belike)  Iago  in  the  interim 
Came  in,  and  fatisfi'd  him. 

Oth.     Oh  thou  pernitious  CaitifTe  ; 
How  came  you  {CaJJio)  by  that  Handkerchiefe  390 

That  was  my  wiues  ? 

CaJJio.     I  found  it  in  my  Chamber : 
And  he  himfelfe  confefl  it  but  euen  now, 
That  there  he  dropt  it  for  a  fpeciall  purpofe, 
Which  wrought  to  his  defire.  395 

374.  dqft~\  doejl  Qq.  387.  interim]  nicke  Qx,  Jen. 

375,  376.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq.  388.  fatisfi 'd]  fatisfied  Qq. 

377.  not]  Om.  Johns.  389.  Oh  thou]  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Knt,  Sta 

heere  is]  here's  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Del.     O  the  Qq  et  cet. 

Warb.  Dyce  iii.  Caitiffe]  catieffe  Qq. 

379.  the  one]  one  Pope  +  .  390.  that]  a  Qq,  Jen. 

380,  381.  One  line,  Qq.  Handkerchiefe]  handkercher  Qx. 
vndertooke  By]   vndertooke  —  by  391.  wuies]  wifes  Qq.     wife's  Rowe. 

Qx.  393.  it  but]  Ff,  Rowe +  ,  Jen.     it  Qx. 

386.  t'haue]    Ff,   Rowe  +  ,   Dyce   iii,         but  Cap.  et  cet. 
Huds.     to  haue  Qq  et  cet.  394.  fpeciall]  fpeaciall  Q  . 

377.  Letter]  Koester  (Sh.  Jahrbuch,  i,  p.  142)  finds  here,  in  the  needlessness  of 
these  letters,  and  in  the  fact  that  they  rehearse  only  what  is  already  known  to  the 
audience,  a  proof  that  the  scenes,  in  which  the  events  related  in  these  letters  occur, 
were  omitted  in  the  representation. 

382.  Villaine]   Ritson  :  Read,  for  the  sake  of  both  sense  and  metre :  villainy 
'Of  course,'  says  Walker  {Crit.  ii,  45). 

388.  satisfi'd]  White  (ed.  ii) :  Gave  him  enough;  killed  him.     [See  IV,  ii,  279.] 

390.  Booth  :  After  a  pause, — looking  wonderingly  at  the  handkerchief. 

393.  it]  Malone:  This  was  manifestly  caught  by  the  compositor's  eye  glancing  on 
the  next  line. 


320  THE    TR  AG  ED  IE   OF  OTHELLO         [ACTV.SC.ii. 

Othei.     O  Foole,  foole,  foole  !  396 

CaJJio.     There  is  befides,  in  Rodorigo's  Letter, 
How  he  vpbraides  Iago,  that  he  made  him 
Braue  me  vpon  the  Watch  :  whereon  it  came 
That  I  was  caft  :  and  euen  but  now  he  fpake  400 

(After  long  Teeming  dead)  Iago  hurt  him, 
Iago  fet  him  on. 

Loci.     You  muft  forfake  this  roome,  and  go  with  vs : 
Your  Power,  and  your  Command  is  taken  off, 
And  CaJJio  rules  in  Cyprus.     For  this  Slaue,  405 

If  there  be  any  cunning  Crueltie, 
That  can  torment  him  much,  and  hold  him  long, 
It  mail  be  his.     You  fhall  clofe  Prifoner  reft, 
Till  that  the  Nature  of  your  fault  be  knowne 
To  the  Venetian  State.     Come,  bring  away.  410 

Oth.     Soft  you  ;  a  word  or  two  before  you  goe : 
I  haue  done  the  State  fome  feruice,  and  they  know't:  412 

398.  vpbraides\    obraides   Q2Q3.      up-  Cam.  Coll.  iii,  Huds.     them  Coll.  (MS). 

braipes  F  .  bring  him  Qq  et  cet. 

Iago]  lagos  Q  .  411.  before  you  goe\  Om.  Qx. 

400.  but~\  Om.  Roweii  +  .  412.  I  haue~\  I've  Pope  +  ,   Dyce  iii, 

fpake~\fpeake  Q  .  said  Rann  conj.  Huds. 

405.  For]  Fore  Q  .  know't']  know  it  Steev.  Mai.  Var 

410.  bring]    Ff,    Rowe,    Pope,    Han.  Rann,  Coll.  Wh.  i. 
Johns.  Cap.  Steev.'93,  Knt,  Dyce,  Sta. 

396.  Hawkins  {Life  of  Kean,  i,  229) :  Booth,  Garrick,  Barry,  and  Kemble  raved, 
tore  their  hair,  and  became  convulsed  with  passion  when  expressing  these  words,  but 
Kean  knew  better ;  he  felt  no  agony  at  the  moment,  because  neither  Shakespeare  nor 
Nature  taught  him  to  feel  any,  '  and  he  repeated  the  word  quickly  and  almost  inarticu- 
lately, and  with  a  half  smile  of  wonder  at  his  incredible  stupidity  in  having  been  such 
a  "fool."  '  Ottley  (p.  32) :  It  is  needless  to  remind  those  who  saw  Kean  in  this  pas- 
sage, of  the  marvellous  use  he  made  of  the  occasion, — his  eye  wandering  in  vacancy,  as 
stupefied  by  amazement,  remorse,  and  despair, — and  the  clasped  hands,  palms  upwards, 
gathered  across  the  head,  as  if  to  crush  a  fevered  brain,  which  threatened  to  burst  out 
into  a  volcano, — exclaiming  the  while  with  trembling,  gasping  utterance,  and  in  ago- 
nized tones  :  'Fool !  fool !  fool ! '  Booth  :  From  this  onward,  I  imagine  Othello  to  be 
on  the  very  verge  of  pure  insanity. 

400.  cast]  See  I,  i,  164;  II,  ii,  31 ;  II,  ii,  302. 

411.  Soft  you]  Gould  (p.  116):  As  J.  B.  Booth  begins  this  speech  he  takes  a 
6ilken  robe  and  carelessly  throws  it  over  his  shoulder;  then  reaches  for  his  turban,  pos- 
sessing himself  of  a  dagger  he  had  concealed  therein.  Booth  :  Othello  opens  the  cur- 
tains,— pauses, — kisses  DesdemoB..., — slowly  and  with  deepest  feeling  of  remorse,— 
turns  towards  the  others,  who,  in  respectful  sympathy,  droop  their  heads,  and,  there- 
fore, do  not  sec  his  purposed  suicide  until  it  is  too  late. 


act  v,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF  VENICE  327 

No  more  of  that.     I  pray  you  in  your  Letters,  413 

When  you  fhall  thefe  vnluckie  deeds  relate, 

Speake  of  me,  as  I  am.     Nothing  extenuate,  415 

Nor  fet  downe  ought  in  malice. 

Then  muft  you  fpeake, 

Of  one  that  lou'd  not  wifely,  but  too  well : 

Of  one,  not  eafily  Iealious,  but  being  wrought, 

Perplexed  in  the  extreame  :  Of  one,  whofe  hand  420 

(Like  the  bafe  Iudean)  threw  a  Pearle  away 

415.  of  me,  as  I am]  of  them  as  they  420.  Perplexed]  Pcrplext  Qq.  per- 
are  Qx,  Jen.  plex'd  Rowe. 

416.  417.  One  line,  Qq,  Pope  et  seq.  421.  bafe]  bare  Cartwright. 

417.  mufl  you]  you  muft  QaQ3.  Iudean]  Indian  QqF3F4.  Judian 

418.  too  well]  to  well  Q3.  Theob.  Warb.  Judean  Han.  Johns.  Steev. 

419.  Iealious]  Fa.     zealous  or  jealous  Mai.  Var.     Indian  Fa  et  cet. 

420.  Perplexed]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  291) :  This  word,  as  Shakespeare  understood 
it,  meant  much  more  than  with  us.  [In  proof,  many  instances  are  cited,  Cymb.  V,  v, 
108;  Two  Gent.  II,  iii,  9,  &c,  and  a  striking  one  from  Sidney's  Arcadia,  Bk.  ii,  p.  189, 
1.  4 :  '  But  the  truth  indeed  is,  that  partly  with  the  shame  and  sorrow  she  took  of  her 
father's  faultiness,  partly  with  the  fear,  that  the  hate  I  conceived  against  him,  would 
utterly  disgrace  her  in  my  opinion,  whensoever  I  should  know  her,  so  vehemently  per- 
plexed her,  that  her  fair  colour  decayed,  and  daily  and  hastily  grew  into  the  extreme 
working  of  sorrowfulness,'  &c] 

421.  Iudean]  Pope:  In  the  first  edition  it  is  Judian,  occasion'd,  probably,  by  the 
word  Tribe  just  after,  but  the  common  reading  is  better ;  as  the  word  Tribe  is  applica- 
ble to  any  race  of  people,  and  the  thought  of  an  ignorant  Indian's  casting  away  a  pearl 
very  natural  in  itself,  whereas  to  make  sense  of  the  other,  one  must  presuppose  some 
particular  story  of  a  Jew  alluded  to,  which  is  much  less  obvious.  Theobald  adopted 
Judian  on  the  grounds  that  no  Indian  was  so  ignorant  as  not  to  know  the  value  of 
pearls ;  that  an  Indian  would  have  been  called  rude  and  not  '  base ' ;  that  '  pearl '  is 
metaphorical,  and  by  it  '  our  author  very  properly  means  a  fine  woman'  To  Pope's 
objection  to  Judian,  that  it  must  contain  a  reference  to  some  particular  Jew,  Theobald 
opposes  the  story  of  '  Herod,  who  in  a  fit  of  blind  jealousy  threw  away  such  a  jewel 
of  a  wife  as  Mariamne,'  whose  story  was  dramatized  in  1613  by  Lady  Elizabeth  Carew. 
Lastly,  that  the  accent  was  no  obstacle  to  a  poet  who  shortens  the  second  syllable  in 
Euphrates.  Warburton  agrees  with  Theobald,  and  adds  that  from  the  phrase  '  out- 
herod  Herod '  applied  to  a  poor  player  in  Hamlet,  the  existence  of  a  tragedy  on  Herod 
is  to  be  inferred.  [Malone  afterwards  showed  that  the  Herod  here  alluded  to  was  a 
character  in  one  of  the  ancient  Mysteries.]  Upton  (p.  255) :  In  the  First  book  of  the 
Ethiopian  romance  of  Heliodorus  there  is  the  story  of  Thyamis,  an  Aegyptian  robber, 
who  fell  in  love  with  Chariclea ;  stung  with  jealousy,  and  despairing  of  possessing  her 
himself,  he  resolves  to  murder  her ;  and  thinking  he  had  killed  her  (but  it  happened  to 
be  another),  he  cries  out,  '  Alas,  poor  maid,  these  are  the  nuptial  gifts  I  present  thee.' 
This  story  is  alluded  to  in  Twelfth  Night,  V,  i,  121 ;  and  it  is  this  same  story,  it  seems 
to  me,  that  Othello  refers  to  here,  and  the  phrase  should  therefore  be,  '  Like  the  base 


328  THE    TR  AG  ED  IE   OF   OTHELLO         [act  v,  sc.  ii. 

[421.  (Like  the  base  Iudean)  threw  a  Pearle  away]. 
Egyptian,  threw,'  &c.  This  exactly  agrees  with  the  Romance.  'Twas  Thyamis's  own 
hand,  and  he,  too,  in  a  strong  fit  of  love  and  jealousy,  that  committed  this  murder. 
Brabantio  had  called  Othello  '  a  foul  thief.'  These  circumstances  crowd  into  Othello's 
mind,  and  with  great  propriety  he  calls  himself  '  the  base  Egyptian?  As  for  Theo- 
bald's reference  to  Herod  and  Mariamne,  very  little  will  be  found  in  it  applicable  to 
Desdemona's  case.  Othello  was  a  private  murderer,  Herod  brought  his  wife  to  public 
justice;  Desdemona  was  fond  of  the  Moor,  the  Jewess  hated  her  husband,  and  always 
treated  him  with  scorn  and  contempt.  On  the  other  hand,  the  story  of  the  Egyptian 
thief  is  very  minutely  applicable,  and  the  passage  in  Twelfth  Night  shows  that  oui 
author  was  pleased  with  the  allusion.  It  seems  the  corruption  was  owing  to  some  sort 
of  ill-written  abbreviation,  that  might  be  in  the  original,  as  Egpian,  and  which  could 
not  be  easily  understood  by  printer  or  player.  Hfath  (p.  571)  defends  Indian 
against  Theobald's  objections  by  asserting,  first :  That  Indians  do  not  know  the  value 
of  pearls.  '  Nay,  even  at  this  day  the  various  tribes  of  Indians  who  inhabit  the  conti- 
nent of  North  America,  would  joyfully  exchange  the  most  valuable  pearl  that  might 
accidentally  fall  into  their  hands  for  a  bottle  of  rum,  or  a  flask  of  gunpowder.'  Sec- 
ondly :  •  Base '  is  used  to  signify  not  only  villainous  and  treacherous,  but  mean,  vulgar, 
uninstructed  in  the  arts  of  polished  life.  Thirdly  :  That  the  '  pearl '  doth  not  mean  a 
fine  woman  in  virtue  of  a  metaphor,  but  is  only  likened  to  one,  to  wit,  to  Desdemona, 
in  virtue  of  a  comparison  or  similitude.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  three  unanswer- 
able objections  to  Judian.  First :  There  is  no  such  word,  and  the  verse  will  not  permit 
Judaan.  Secondly :  It  contradicts  the  probable  truth  of  the  manners,  as  it  is  in  the 
highest  degree  improbable  that  Othello,  born  a  Negro  or  Moor,  and  bred  in  the  tented 
field,  and  rude  in  speech,  should  have  ever  heard  of  Herod  and  Mariamne.  Thirdly : 
There  is  not  the  least  resemblance  between  the  two  stories,  except  that  both  Othello 
and  Herod  put  their  wives  to  death,  the  one  privately,  the  other  publicly.  Steevens  : 
I  cannot  join  with  the  learned  critics  in  conceiving  this  passage  to  refer  either  to  the  ig- 
norance of  the  natives  of  India,  in  respect  of  pearls,  or  to  the  well-known  story  of  Herod 
and  Mariamne.  The  poet  might  just  as  fairly  be  supposed  to  have  alluded  to  that  of 
Jephthah  and  his  Daughter.  Othello,  in  detestation  of  what  he  had  done,  seems  to  com- 
pare himself  to  another  person  who  had  thrown  away  a  thing  of  value,  with  some  cir- 
cumstances of  the  meanest  villainy,  which  the  epithet  base  seems  to  imply  in  its  general 
sense,  though  it  is  sometimes  used  only  for  low  or  mean.  The  Indian  could  not  prop- 
erly be  termed  base  in  the  former  and  most  common  sense,  whose  fault  was  ignorance, 
which  brings  its  own  excuse  with  it ;  and  the  crime  of  Herod  surely  deserves  a  more 
aggravated  distinction.  I  do  not  believe  the  poet  intended  to  make  the  present  simile 
coincide  with  all  the  circumstances  of  Othello's  situation,  but  merely  with  the  single  act 
of  having  basely  (as  he  himself  terms  it)  destroyed  that  on  which  he  ought  to  have  set 
a  greater  value.  As  the  pearl  may  bear  a  literal  as  well  as  a  metaphorical  sense,  I 
would  rather  choose  to  take  it  in  the  literal  one,  and  receive  Pope's  rejected  explana- 
tion, presupposing  some  story  of  a  Jew  alluded  to,  which  might  be  well  understood  at 
that  time,  though  now,  perhaps,  forgotten,  or,  at  least,  imperfectly  remembered.  I  have 
read  in  some  book,  as  ancient  as  the  time  of  Shakespeare,  the  following  tale,  though  at 
present  I  am  unable  either  to  recollect  the  title  of  the  piece  or  the  author's  name  [That 
obliging,  and  yet  treacherous,  memory ! — Ed.]  :  '  A  Jew,  who  had  been  prisoner  fox 
many  years  in  distant  parts,  brought  with  him  at  his  return  to  Venice  a  great  number 
of  pearls,  which  he  offered  on  the  'change  among  the  merchants,  and  (one  alone 
excepted)  disposed  of  them  to  his  satisfaction.     On  this  pearl,  which  was  the  largest 


act  v,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  329 

[421.  (Like  the  base  Iudean)  threw  a  Pearle  away], 
ever  shown  at  market,  he  had  fixed  an  immoderate  price,  nor  could  be  persuaded  to 
make  the  least  abatement.  Many  of  the  magnificoes,  as  well  as  traders,  offered  him 
considerable  sums  for  it,  but  he  was  resolute  in  his  first  demand.  At  last,  after  repeated 
and  unsuccessful  applications  to  individuals,  he  assembled  the  merchants  of  the  city,  by 
proclamation,  to  meet  him  on  the  Rialto,  where  he  once  more  exposed  it  to  sale  on  the 
former  terms,  but  to  no  purpose.  After  having  expatiated,  for  the  last  time,  on  the  sin- 
gular beauty  and  value  of  it,  he  threw  it  suddenly  into  the  sea  before  them  all.'  Though 
this  anecdote  may  appear  inconsistent  with  the  avarice  of  a  Jew,  yet  it  sufficiently  agrees 
with  the  spirit  so  remarkable  at  all  times  in  the  scattered  remains  of  that  vindictive 
nation.  '  Richer  than  all  his  tribe '  seems  to  point  out  the  Jew  again  in  a  mercantile 
light,  and  may  mean  that  '  the  pearl  was  richer  than  all  the  gems  to  be  found  among  a 
set  of  men  generally  trading  in  them.'  Neither  do  I  recollect  that  Othello  mentions 
many  things  but  what  he  might  fairly  have  been  allowed  to  have  had  knowledge  of  in 
the  course  of  his  peregrinations.  Of  this  kind  are  the  similes  of  the  Euxine  Sea  flow- 
ing into  the  Propontick,  and  the  Arabian  trees  dropping  their  gums.  The  rest  of  his 
speeches  are  more  free  from  mythological  and  historical  allusions  than  almost  any  to 
be  found  in  Shakespeare,  for  he  is  never  quite  clear  from  them ;  though  in  the  design 
of  this  character  he  seems  to  have  meant  it  for  one  who  had  spent  a  greater  part  of  his 
life  in  the  field,  than  in  the  cultivation  of  any  other  knowledge  than  what  would  be  of 
use  to  him  in  his  military  capacity.  It  should  be  observed,  that  most  of  the  flourishes 
merely  ornamental  were  added  after  the  first  edition ;  and  this  is  not  the  only  proof  to 
be  met  with,  that  the  poet,  in  his  alterations,  sometimes  forgot  his  original  plan.  Far- 
mer :  I  abide  by  the  old  text  Judian,  and  to  the  allusion  to  Herod  in  the  play  of  Mari- 
amne  :  '  I  had  but  one  inestimable  jewel — Yet  I  in  suddaine  choler  cast  it  downe,  And 
dasht  it  all  to  pieces.'  Malone  :  I  once  thought  that  the  accent  here  given  to  Judean 
was  a  strong  objection  to  this  reading :  and  that  the  word  must  have  been  Judian  or 
Judaan  (as  a  derivative  from  Judo),  which  would  not  suit  the  metre.  But  the  objec- 
tion was  founded  on  a  mistake ;  for  derivative  words  of  this  kind  were  thus  accented 
in  Shakespeare's  time.  Thus,  in  Merry  Wives,  we  have  in  the  old  copies,  '  an  Epicur- 
ian  rascal,'  which  ascertains  the  pronunciation  of  that  word  to  have  been  different  for- 
merly from  what  it  is  now.  The  word  is  also  thus  spelt  in  North's  Plutarch.  Again, 
in  Ant.  &•>  Cleo.  II,  i,  24 :  *  Keep  his  brains  fuming,  Epicurean  cooks.'  Those  who 
would  adopt  the  original  reading,  Indian,  may  urge  in  its  support  that  the  pearl  natu- 
rally brings  a  people  of  the  East  to  Shakespeare's  mind ;  the  connection  in  his  time 
being  considered  so  strong,  that  a  contemporary  author  has  distinguished  the  inhabitants 
of  India  by  an  epithet  founded  on  the  circumstance  of  their  abounding  in  pearls  :  '  where 
the  bright  sun  with  neighbour  beams  Doth  early  light  the  pearled  Indians.' — Cornelia, 
by  T.  Kyd,  1594.  On  the  other  hand,  the  word  4  tribe  '  is  strongly  in  favour  of  'Judean,' 
and  I  have  now  no  doubt  that  it  is  the  true  one.  Webster,  in  his  Appius  and  Virginia, 
1654,  has  •  the  jewels  that  she  wore,  More  worth  than  all  her  tribe '  [p.  217,  ed.  Dyce]. 
Boswell  :  Read  Indian.  *  Tribe  '  is  not  peculiarly  applicable  to  Jews ;  it  meant,  as 
we  learn  from  Cockeram,  a  kindred,  and  is  constantly  used  at  this  day  in  speaking  of 
Indians.  The  Jews  are  not  in  general  described  as  willing  to  throw  away  what  is  val- 
uable ;  and  it  is  not  likely  that  Shakespeare  would  allude  to  an  anecdote  of  a  single 
individual,  of  which,  perhaps,  none  of  his  auditors  had  ever  heard ;  but  in  our  author's 
time,  when  voyages  of  discovery  to  America  were  common,  each  '  putter-out  of  five  for 
one '  was  probably  stimulated  by  a  description  of  the  riches  he  might  find  there,  and 
of  the  facility  with  which  the  Indians,  base,  on  account  of  their  ignorance,  would  part 


330  THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  v,  sc.  iL 


[421.  (Like  the  base  Iudean)  threw  a  Pearle  away], 
with  them.  [Boswell  here  cites  two  allusions  to  the  casting  away  of  pearls  and  gems 
by  Indians,  one  from  Howard's  The  Woman's  Conquest,  1671,  and  another  from  Hab- 
ington's  Castara,  1634,  p.  67,  ed.  Arber].  Coleridge  [Notes,  &c,  p.  256,  referring 
to  Warburton's  note) :  Thus  it  is  for  no-poets  to  comment  on  the  greatest  of  poets ! 
To  make  Othello  say  that  he,  who  had  killed  his  wife,  was  like  Herod,  who  killed 
Mariamne ! — Oh,  how  many  beauties,  in  this  one  line,  were  impenetrable  to  the  ever 
thought-swarming,  but  idealess,  Warburton  !  Othello  wishes  to  excuse  himself  on  the 
score  of  ignorance,  and  yet  not  to  excuse  himself, — to  excuse  himself  by  accusing. 
This  struggle  of  feeling  is  finely  conveyed  in  the  word  '  base,'  which  is  applied  to  the 
rude  Indian,  not  in  his  own  character,  but  as  the  momentary  representative  of  Othello's. 
Indian, — for  I  retain  the  old  reading, — means  American,  a  savage  in  genere.  Knight  : 
We  might  have  thought  that  there  was  in  Fx  only  a  substitution  of  u  for  n,  had  we  not 
turned  to  all  the  passages  in  that  edition  where  '  Indian '  occurs,  and  found  it  invariably 

spelt  I-n-d-i-a-n To  show  how  far  conjecture  may  be  carried,  we  may  mention 

that  a  correspondent  wishes  to  impress  upon  us  that  the  allusion  was  to  Judas  Iscariot. 
Collier  :  The  meaning  is  very  clear,  the  allusion  obscure ;  and  the  probability  is,  that 
Shakespeare  referred  to  some  known  fable  of  the  time,  now  lost.  Dyce  [Remarks, 
p.  243) :  It  was  rather  unnecessary  in  Boswell  to  refer  to  Cockeram,  since,  in  the  pres- 
ent play,  Iago  says,  'the  souls  of  all  my  tribe  defend  From  jealousy ! ' — III,  iii.  The 
latter  part  of  Boswell's  note  [i.  e.,  the  citations  from  Habington  and  Howard]  (the  most 
valuable  of  Boswell's  contributions  to  the  illustration  of  Shakespeare)  proves,  I  think, 
that  Othello  alludes  to  no  particular  story,  but  to  '  the  Indian '  as  generally  described ; 
and  to  the  passages  just  cited  the  following  may  be  added :  '  The  wretched  Indian 
spumes  the  golden  ore.' — Drayton,  Legend  of  Matilda,  sig.  F,  f  7, — Poems,  n.  d. 
White  {Shakespeare  Scholar,  p.  443) :  There  appears  to  me  not  a  doubt  that  Fx  is 
right,  and  that  the  allusion  is  to  Herod  and  Mariamne.  [White  here  gives  a  long 
extract  from  George  Lunt,  of  which  the  following  is  an  abstract]  :  The  expression  is 
one  of  generalization,  demanding  the  ready  understanding  of  the  reader.  Whether  he 
understand  the  particular  allusion  or  not,  at  least  it  should  be  of  that  character  that  he 
might,  or  ought  to  have  known  it ;  and  not  drawn  from  a  source  so  remote  as  to  be  out 
of  his  reach.  On  this  ground  we  are  willing  to  set  up  any  possible  Judean  against  any 
Indian  that  can  be  imagined.  In  the  first  place,  'tribe '  is  a  word  peculiarly  appropriate 
to  the  Jewish  people.  Next,  '  base '  would  be  held  peculiarly  descriptive  of  the  Jewish 
people ;  in  common  understanding,  it  would  fit  any  Jew  and  all  Jews.  There  would 
have  been  a  manifest  impropriety  in  the  epithet  as  denoting  the  characteristics  of  East 
Indians  in  general.  Lastly,  the  word  '  Judean,'  in  reality,  means  something  more  than 
Jew.  A 'Judean'  is,' in  fact,  an  inhabitant  of  Judea ;  and  thus,  in  correspondence 
with  Shakespeare's  common  mode  of  expression,  the  word  might  naturally,  and  with 
more  force  would,  refer  to  Herod,  King  of  Judea,  as  the  Judean,  'par  excellence, — as 
representing  the  State.  [Thus  far  Lunt.  White  then  resumes,  and  emphasizes  the  abso- 
lute necessity  of  a  reference  to  a  particular  story.  In  Boswell's  citations  and  in  Dyce's, 
not  only]  is  the  Indian  generally  described,  but  the  act.  No  specific  deed  is  referred  to  ; 
there  is  a  mere  allusion  to  a  characteristic  of  the  Indian.  Not  so  in  Othello's  speech. 
In  that,  a  particular  person  and  a  particular  act  must  be  alluded  to,  because  Othello 
likens  himself,  not  to  the  Indian  who  throws  a  pearl  away,  but  to  '  the  base  Judean ' 
who  '  threw  a  pearl  away.'  The  reference  is  to  some  story,  specific  and  unmistakable ; 
can  there  be  a  shadow  of  a  doubt  that  Herod's  was  the  story  referred  to,  and  that  we 
should  not  disturb  the  Ff?     [Six  years  later,  in  his  edition,  White  says]:  To  my 


actv,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF    VENICE  331 

Richer  then  all  his  Tribe  :  Of  one,  whofe  subdu'd  Eyes,  422 

Albeit  vn-vfed  to  the  melting  moode, 

Drops  teares  as  faft  as  the  Arabian  Trees  424 

422.  fubdu'd^fubduedQq.  Om.  Pope,  424.  Drops']    Qx,    Ktly.      Dropt   Jen. 

Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Drop  Q2Q3Ff  et  cet. 

maturer  judgement  and  more  careful  consideration,  the  allusion  appears  to  be  to  the 
ignorance  of  the  Indians  in  regard  to  the  value  of  their  gold  and  jewels,  which  was  a 
matter  of  more  common  remark  two  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago  than  it  is  at  present. 
[In  White's  Second  Edition  there  is  no  note  whatsoever  on  the  passage.]  Walker 
(Crit.  iii,  292):  Indian,  certainly.  Staunton:  We  follow  the  Qq,  but  must  admit 
that  a  good  case  has  been  made  out  for  the  reading  of  the  Folio.  John  Hunter  :  As 
there  are  several  allusions  in  old  poetry  to  the  wretchedness  or  ignorance  of  the  Indians 
in  spurning  the  golden  ore  and  casting  away  pearls  and  gems,  we  have  no  doubt  that 
Indian  was  our  author's  word.  Collier  (ed.  iii) :  We  may  add,  what  has  never  been 
referred  to,  that  in  G.  Fenton's  translation  of  Guevara,  1582,  p.  277,  '  Judea'  is  mis- 
printed India, — '  Titus  having  subdued  the  countrey  of  India,  and  taken  the  great  city 
of  Hierusalem,'  &c.  This  would  rather  show  that  the  true  reading  is  Judean  ;  but 
either  way  the  sense  is  precisely  the  same.  Thos.  M'Grath  (N.  &>  Qu.  4th,  iii,  120) 
elaborates  Steevens's  allusion  to  the  story  of  Jephthah  and  his  Daughter,  and  maintains 
that  no  parallel  could  be  much  closer  than  that  between  the  Judean  and  Othello  :  '  We 
have  a  story  of  a  Jew,  a  member  of  the  tribe  of  Ephraim  or  Manasseh,  base  in  birth, 
who,  with  his  07vn  hand,  threw  away  a  treasure,  the  pearl  of  his  tribe.  A  story  also 
well  known  to  Shakespeare,  for  we  find  it  commented  on  in  his  other  plays.'  [That 
Othello  killed  his  wife,  and  Jephthah  his  daughter,  does  not  disconcert  M'Grath,  for  he 
philosophically  adds,  '  we  cannot  expect  every  minute  detail '  to  be  exact  in  counter- 
part.] Hudson  :  Whether  Shakespeare  meant  an  allusion  to  any  particular  story  of  an 
Indian,  or  to  the  Indians  as  generally  described,  is  not  quite  clear ;  probably  the  latter. 
Cowden-Clarke  :  Even  though  we  follow  the  Qq,  we  confess  to  entertaining  con- 
siderable doubts  whether  the  Folio  may  not,  after  all,  give  what  Shakespeare  wrote. 
Purnell:  Read  Judeean,  and  refer  to  Herod  and  Mariamne.  [In  N.  6°  Qu.  6th, 
iii,  264,  H.  K.  gives  two  citations  to  show  the  common  repute  of  an  Indian's  indiffer- 
ence to  the  value  of  gems;  one  is  from  Carew,  '  To  A.  D.,'  and  is  given  by  Walker  (Crit. 
iii,  292),  and  the  other  is  from  Pierce  Pennilesse,  p.  80.  In  the  next  volume,  p.  245, 
of  the  same  periodical,  A.  E.  Quekett  adds  a  passage,  to  the  same  effect,  from  Chap- 
man's Revenge  for  Honour,  IV,  ii.  Again,  in  The  Academy,  14  April,  1883,  II.  A 
Evans  calls  attention  to  the  words  '  Indian '  and  '  pearle '  in  Bullen's  Reprint  of  Glap 
thorne's  The  Lady  Mother,  p.  121.  And  I  dare  say  many  and  many  another  allusion 
can  yet  be  found, — but  to  me  all  are  idle  that  are  subsequent  to  the  date  of  Othello,  and 
are  general  in  expression,  without  referring  to  any  particular  Indian,  who,  on  some  espe- 
cial occasion,  threw  away  a  pearl.  I  have  reserved  Halliwell's  opinion  to  the  last, 
because,  to  me,  it  gives  the  true  explanation.  It  is  as  follows :  *  The  epithet  '  base ' 
appears  to  support  '  Iudean,'  which,  if  correct,  I  cannot  but  think,  notwithstanding  that 
the  idea  has  been  ridiculed,  refers  to  Judas  Iscariot.'  Is  there  not,  may  I  be  permitted 
to  add,  suggestion  even  in  the  identity  of  the  two  first  syllables,  Judas  and  Judean  ? 
Once  before  in  this  Scene,  Othello's  agonized  thoughts  had  turned  for  a  fit  comparison 
to  that  dread  time  when  the  affrighted  globe  yawned  and  darkness  covered  the  face  of 
tne  earth.-  -Ed.] 


332  THE   TR  AG  ED  IE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  v,  sc.  H. 

Their  Medicinable  gumme.     Set  you  downe  this  :  425 

And  fay  befides,  that  in  Aleppo  once, 

Where  a  malignant,  and  a  Turbond-Turke 

Bcate  a  Venetian,  and  traduc'd  the  State, 

I  tooke  by  th'throat  the  circumcifed  Dogge, 

And  fmoate  him,  thus.  430 

425.  Medicinable]  Ff,  Knt,  Del.  Rife.  Qt.      Turban d  Turke  Q2Qy     Turband 

tned'  cinable  Cap.  Steev.'85,  Mai.  Dyce,  Turk  Rowe  i.      Turban  d  Turk  Pope. 
Sta.  Wh.  i.     medicinal!  Q<\  et  cet.  429.  by  ttt]   Ff,  Rowe,  Pope  i,  Han. 

gumme]  gums  Johns.  Johns.  Jen.  Wh.  i.     bV  th  Qq.     by  CaD. 

427.  Where]  When  Coll.  (MS).  by  the  Theob.  et  cet. 

malignant]  Malignant  Qx.  430.   [He  ftabs  himfelfe.  Qq. 

Turbond-Turke]  Turband  Turke 

425.  Medicinable]  Rolfe:  Shakespeare  has  the  word  in  four  other  passages 
{Much  Ado,  II,  ii,  5;  Tro.  &*  Cress.  I,  iii,  91 ;  lb.  Ill,  hi,  44,  and  Cymb.  Ill,  ii,  33)  \ 
in  all  it  is  equivalent  to  medicinal,  and  in  all  pronounced  as  here  medicinable .  Medic- 
inal, in  the  only  instance  in  which  Shakespeare  uses  it  ( I  Vint.  Tale,  II,  iii,  37  :  '  Do 
come  with  words  as  medicinal  as  true '),  is  pronounced  medicinal,  which  would  net 
suit  the  measure  here. 

425.  gumme.]  Hunter  (ii,  289)  thinks  from  the  description  in  The  Great  Herbal, 
that  this  is  the  gum  called  '  Bernix,'  which  was  used  in  medicine.  Buckntll  (p.  274) : 
Probably  not  gum  arabic,  but  myrrh. 

426.  Aleppo]  Steevens  :  I  am  told  that  it  is  immediate  death  for  a  Christian  to 
strike  a  Turk  in  Aleppo.     Othello  is  boasting  of  his  own  audacity. 

427.  Turbond]  Delius  :  Shakespeare  seems  to  have  connected  the  idea  of  arro- 
gance with  turbans.  See  in  Cymb.  Ill,  iii,  6  :  '  that  giants  may  jet  through  And  keep 
their  impious  turbans  on.'  Fechter  :  Othello  here  seizes  and  forces  Iago,  still  bound, 
to  kneel  before  Desdemona,  but  promptly  intercepted  by  Lodovico  and  Montano,  he 
draws  his  poignard,  and  suiting  the  action  to  the  word  utters  the  last  two  lines  429, 
430;  stabs  himself,  and  throws  the  dagger  at  the  feet  of  Iago;  then,  tottering,  walks 
to  the  bed ;  but,  unable  to  reach  Desdemona,  falls  in  despair  and  dies. 

430.  Hawkins,  Life  of  Kean  (i,  75) :  Kean's  falling  on  his  back  in  the  last  Scene  of 
Othello  was  suggested  by  an  incident  in  nature.  He  was  giving  a  young  officer  some 
instruction  in  fencing,  when  he  accidentally  received  an  alarming  wound  in  the  breast, 
from  the  effect  of  which,  becoming  insensible,  he  fell  to  the  ground  on  his  back.  When 
he  recovered  his  senses  he  asked,  •  How  did  I  fall  ?'  Booth  :  At  the  word  '  thus ' 
Othello  stabs  himself,  cries  *0,  Desdemona  !'  makes  an  effort  to  reach  the  bed,  clutch- 
wig  (not  much)  for  the  curtains  as  he  falls  back  dead. 

430.  Dyce  (ed.  iii) :  When  Othello  offers  to  stab  Iago  he  is  disarmed  by  Montano, 
but  he  has  'another  weapon, — a  sword  of  Spain.'  Of  that  weapon,  after  wounding 
Iago,  he  is  also  deprived ;  this  is  shown  not  only  by  the  exclamation  of  Lodovico, 
'  Wrench  his  sword  from  him,'  but  by  the  remark  of  Cassio,  '  This  I  did  fear,  but 
thought  he  had  no  weapon.'  The  instrument  he  now  uses  must,  therefore,  have  been 
a  dagger,  which  was  concealed  about  his  person.     [See  Gould,  line  411.] 

430.  Salvini  upholds  his  disregard  of  the  usage  of  Shakespeare's  own  stage,  as 
shown  by  the  directions  in  the  Qq,  and  prefers  cutting  the  throat  to  stabbing,  on  the 
following  grounds:   'First,  it  is  the  use  and  wont  of  African  tribes  thus  to  execute 


Acrv,  sc.  ii.]  THE  MOORE   OF   VENICE  333 

Lod.     Oh  bloody  period.  43 1 

Gra.     All  that  is  fpoke,  is  marr'd. 

Oth.     I  kift  thee,  ere  I  kill'd  thee  :  No  way  but  this, 
Killing  my  felfe,  to  dye  vpon  a  ki ffe.  Dyes 

Caf.  This  did  I  feare,  but  thought  he  had  no  weapon :  [339  a] 
For  he  was  great  of  heart. 

Lod.     Oh  Sparton  Dogge  :  437 

432.  that  is\   Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Steev.'85,  434.  Dyes.]  He  dies.  Qq. 

Mai.  Knt,  Sta.     that's  Qq  et  cet.  437.  Sparton']  SpartaneQq.    Spartan 

434.  kitfe]  kifo  Q3.  Ff. 

criminals  or  armed  prisoners  of  war;  secondly,  the  shape  of  their  weapons  is  more 
adapted  to  a  blow  than  a  thrust ;  thirdly,  Shakespeare  does  not  forbid  my  mode  of 
death  ;  Othello  simply  says  :  "  I  took  by  the  throat  the  circumcised  dog,  and  smote  him 
thus;"  allusion  having  been  made  to  the  throat,  it  seems  to  me  more  natural  that  the  ac- 
tion should  lie  there  where  attention  was  directed  and  'the  dog'  was  seized.  A  fourth 
and  last  reason  is,  that  the  critics  of  this  mode  of  death  adduce  only  two  trifling  argu- 
ments against  it ;  namely,  that  a  man  after  his  throat  is  cut  cannot  speak ;  as  though  a 
single  artery  were  not  enough,  but  that  the  carotid  must  be  severed !  The  second  argu- 
ment is  even  more  trifling,  almost  absurd,  namely :  tradition,  to  which,  with  all  respect 
be  it  said,  I  will  not  subject  myself.'  [ — Translation  of  a  Lecture  delivered  in  Florence 
by  the  eminent  Tragedian,  and  contributed  by  him  to  Lewinsky's  Vor  den  Coulissen,  Ber- 
lin (ii,  219).  A  translation  by  Mr  Botta  from  the  original  Italian  appeared  in  The  Cen- 
tury for  November,  188 1. — Ed.] 

430.  To  divert  all  suspicion,  Kean  simulated  a  pride  in  his  punishment  of  the  tur- 
baned  Turk,  and  as  his  eyes  wandered  with  searching  brilliance  from  face  to  face  in 
order  to  see  whether  any  suspicion  as  to  his  object  lurked  in  their  minds,  he  went 
through  the  concluding  words  with  inimitable  strength  and  beauty :  '  And  smote  him, — 
thus  /'  and  as  he  spoke  the  glistening  steel  entered  his  breast ;  a  frozen  shudder  swept 
over  his  frame, — every  physiological  indication  of  his  suffering  was  faithfully  and  dis- 
tinctly marked ;  and  in  the  attempt  to  imprint  a  last  kiss  on  the  cold,  rigid  face  of  his 
wife,  he  fell  backwards, — dead. — Hawkins,  Life  of  Kean,  i,  231.  We  only  object 
to  the  virulence  with  which  he  stabs  himself, — a  virulence  which  Othello  would  feel 
neither  against  himself  at  the  moment,  nor  against  the  '  turbaned  Turk '  (whom  he  had 
slain)  at  such  a  distance  of  time. — Hazlitt,  quoted  in  lb.,  p.  234. 

431,  432.  Booth  :  Let  Cassio  speak  these  lines  sorrowfully,  while  all  show  grief  by 
pose  and  action  as  the  slow  curtain  falls. 

433.  No  way  but  this]  Must  not  this  phrase  have  floated  through  Macaulay's  mem- 
ory ?  See  Lays  of  Ancient  Rome,  Virginia  :  *  Then  clasp  me  round  the  neck  once 
more,  and  give  me  one  more  kiss ;  And  now,  mine  own  dear  little  girl,  there  is  no  way 
but  this.' — Ed. 

434.  Dyes]  The  winds  have  blown,  till  they  have  waken'd  death,  and  after  this 
tempest,  comes  the  calm. — II,  i,  213. — Ed. 

437.  Sparton]  Hanmer  :  The  dogs  of  Sparta  were  reckoned  among  those  of  tne 
most  fierce  and  savage  kind.  Singer  :  The  reference  seems  to  be  to  the  determined 
silence  of  Iago,  and  to  the  proverbial  silence  of  the  Spartans  under  suffering,  as  well  as 
to  the  savageness  of  the  dogs. 


334 


THE    TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO         [act  v,  sc.  ii. 


More  fell  then  Anguifh,  Hunger,  or  the  Sea:  438 

Looke  on  the  Tragicke  Loading  of  this  bed : 

This  is  thy  worke  :  440 

The  Obiect  poyfons  Sight, 

Let  it  be  hid.     Gratiano,  keepe  the  houfe,  [339  b~\ 

And  feize  vpon  the  Fortunes  of  the  Moore, 

For  they  fucceede  on  you.     To  you,  Lord  Gouernor, 

Remaines  th  eCenfure  of  this  hellifh  villaine  :  445 

The  Time,  the  Place,  the  Torture,  oh  inforce  it : 

My  felfe  will  ftraight  aboord,  and  to  the  State, 

This  heauie  Act,  with  heauie  heart  relate.  Exeunt. 


FINIS. 


439.  Tragicke]  targicke  Q  . 
Loading]  lodging  Qq. 

440,  441.  One  line,  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq. 
443.  feize]  ceaze  Qq. 


444.  on  yoii]  to  you  Qq,  Rowe  -+- ,  Jen. 
Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

445.  Cenf ure]  fenf ure  Q'Sl. 

446.  Torture,  oh]  torture:  0  Qq. 
448.  Exeunt.]  Exeunt  omnes.  Qq. 


443.  seize  vpon]  Walker  {Crit.  iii,  293):  That  is,  take  possession  of;  the  law 
term,  as  in  Rich.  II:  II,  i,  160:  'we  do  seize  to  us  The  plate,  &c.  Whereof  our  uncle 
Gaunt  did  die  possess'd.'  So  also  lb.  IV,  i,  181  :  '  Here,  cousin,  seize  the  crown,'  and 
Much  Ado,  V,  iv,  53 :  'Which  is  the  lady  I  must  seize  upon.' 

444.  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  Gratiano  was  uncle  to  Desdemona,  and  it  is  hardly  to  be 
supposed  that  Othello  left  any  known  heirs  behind  him.  Gratiano,  therefore,  took 
possession  of  the  '  fortunes  of  the  Moor '  in  right  of  his  niece. 

448.  Coleridge  {Notes,  &c,  p.  256) :  Let  me  repeat  that  Othello  does  not  kill  Des- 
demona in  jealousy,  but  in  a  conviction  forced  upon  him  by  the  almost  superhuman 
art  of  Iago,  such  a  conviction  as  any  man  would  and  must  have  entertained  who  had 
believed  Iago's  honesty  as  Othello  did.  We,  the  audience,  know  that  Iago  is  a  villain 
from  the  beginning;  but  in  considering  the  essence  of  the  Shakespearian  Othello  we 
must  perseveringly  place  ourselves  in  his  situation  and  under  his  circumstances.  Then 
we  shall  immediately  feel  the  fundamental  difference  between  the  solemn  agony  of  the 
noble  Moor,  and  the  wretched  fishing  jealousies  of  Leontes,  and  the  morbid  suspicious- 
ness of  Leonatus,  who  is,  in  other  respects,  a  fine  character.  Othello  had  no  life  but  in 
Desdemona;  the  belief  that  she,  his  angel,  had  fallen  from  the  heaven  of  her  native 
innocence,  wrought  a  civil  war  in  his  heart.  She  is  his  counterpart ;  and,  like  him,  is 
almost  sanctified  in  our  eyes  by  her  absolute  unsuspiciousness,  and  holy  entireness  of 
love.     As  the  curtain  drops,  which  do  we  pity  the  most  ? 


THE   MOORE   OF   VENICE  335 


The  Names  of  the  Adlors. 

Thello,  the  Moore, 


Brabantio,  Father  to  Defdemona. 
Caffio,  an  Honourable  Lieutenant. 
Iago,  a  Villaine.  5 

I-16.  Om.  Qq.  3.  Brabantio. ..]    Brabantio,  a   Mag- 

1.  The  Names...]  The  Actors  Names.  nifico,...  Q'8l.  Brabantio,  z  noble  Ven- 
Ff.   (At  the  beginning  of  the  Play  in  F  )         etian.  Rowe. 

Dramatis  Persona.  Q'8l  et  seq.  4.  CaJJio...~\  Caffco,  his  Lieutenant  Gen- 

2.  Othello...']  Othello... General  of  the         eral.  Q'8l. 

Army  in  Cyprus.  Q'8 1.    Othello... General  5.  Iago...~\  Jago,  ftandard-bearer  to  the 

for  the  Venetians  in  Cyprus.  Rowe.  Moor;  a  Villain.  Q'81.   his  Ancient.  Cap. 

2.  Othello]  Steevens  :  It  is  highly  probable  that  Shakespeare  met  with  this  name 
in  some  tale  that  has  escaped  our  researches :  as  I  likewise  find  it  in  Reynolds's  God's 
Revenge  against  Adultery,  standing  in  one  of  his  Arguments  as  follows  :  '  She  marries 
Othello,  an  old  German  soldier.'  This  History  (the  eighth)  is  professed  to  be  an  Ital- 
ian one.  Here  also  occurs  the  name  of  Iago.  It  is  likewise  found,  as  Dr  Farmer 
observes,  in  The  first  and  second  part  of  the  History  of  the  famous  Euordanus,  Prince 
of  Denmark.  With  the  strange  Adventures  of  Iago,  Prince  of  Saxonie  :  And  of  both 
theyr  severall  fortunes  in  Love.  At  London,  printed  by  I.  R.  for  R.  B.  1605.  It  may, 
indeed,  be  urged  that  these  names  were  adopted  from  this  tragedy,  but  I  trust  that  every 
reader  who  is  conversant  with  the  peculiar  style  and  method  in  which  the  work  of  hon- 
est John  Reynolds  is  composed,  will  acquit  him  of  the  slightest  familiarity  with  the  scenes 
of  Shakespeare.  B.  H.  C.  (N.  &°  Qu.,  2d,  x,  269) :  In  1606,  M.  A.  Othelio,  a  learned 
jurisconsult,  wrote  a  reply  to  the  Bull  of  Excommunication  which  Pope  Paul  V.  issued 
against  the  Doge,  Senate,  and  Republic  of  Venice.  Ruskin  (Munera  Pulveris,  p.  126) : 
This  means,  I  believe,  '  the  careful ' ;  all  the  calamity  of  the  tragedy  arising  from  the 
single  flaw  and  error  in  his  magnificently- collected  strength.  Mrs  F.  A.  Kemble 
{Records  of  Later  Life,  1 884,  p.  88)  :  I  have  two  drawings  which  Mrs  Somerville 
made  for  me ;  one,  a  delicate  outline  sketch  of  what  is  called  Othello's  House  in  Ven- 
ice, and  the  other,  a  beautifully-executed  coloured  copy  of  his  shield,  surmounted  by 
the  Doge's  cap,  and  having  three  mulberries  for  a  device, — proving  the  truth  of  the 
assertion  that  the  Otelli  del  Moro  were  a  noble  Venetian  folk,  who  came  originally 
from  the  Morea,  whose  device  was  the  mulberry,  and  showing  how  curious  a  jumble 
Shakespeare  has  made,  both  of  name  and  device,  in  calling  him  a  Moor,  and  embroider- 
ing his  arms  on  his  handkerchief  as  strawberries.  In  Cinthio's  novel  the  husband  is  a 
Moor,  and,  I  think,  called  by  no  other  name. 

5.  Iago]  Ruskin  (Munera  Pulveris,  p.  127):  'Iago'  and  'Iachimo'  have,  evi 
dently,  the  same  root, — probably  the  Spanish  Iago,  Jacob,  •  the  supplanter.'     W.  C. 
Hazlitt  [Shakespeare's  Library,  Pt.  I,  vol.  ii,  284) :  So  far  as  I  can  judge,  there  is  a 
certain  inconsistency  in  the  form  which  this  name  (a  form  of  James)  is  allowed  to  take 
in  the  modern  editions.     When  the  /  or  i  of  the  old  printed  copies  is  otherwise  altered 


336 


THE   TRAGEDIE   OF  OTHELLO 


Rodorigo,  a  gull'd  Gentleman. 

Duke  of  Venice. 

Senators. 

Montano,  Gouernour  of  Cyp7iis. 

Gentlemen  of  Cyprus. 

Lodouico,tf;z<i  Gratiano,  two  Noble  Venetians. 

Saylors. 

Clowyie. 


10 


Defdemona,  Wife  to  Othello. 
^Emilia,  Wife  to  Iago. 
Bianca,  a  Curtezan. 


15 


6.  Rodorigo . . .  ]  Roderigo,  a.  foolifh  Gen- 
tleman, that  follows  the  Moor  in  hopes  to 
Cuckold  him.  Q'8l.  Rodorigo,  a  fool- 
ish Gentleman  in  love  with  Desdemona. 
Rowe. 

8.  Senators.]  Om.  Rowe. 

9.  Montano...~\  Mlaoanio,  the  Moors 
Predeceffor  in  the  Government  of  Cyprus. 
Q'8i.  (M?«/aww...Predeflbr...Q'95). 

II.  Lodouico~\  Lodovico  their  kinfman. 
Q'8l.  [i.  e.  to  Brabantio  and  Gratiano]. 
Gratiano~\   Gratiano,  his  Brother. 
Q'8l.  [i.  e.  to  Brabantio], 


13.  Clowne.]  Clown,  Servant  to  the 
Moor.  Q'81. 

15.  ALmilia... Iago.]  Emillia...Jago. 
Q'81.     s£milia...Jago.  Rowe. 

16.  Bianca...~\  Bianca,Ca£id sVJ ench. 
Q'81. 

Officers,  Gentlemen,  Meflengers,  Mu- 
ficians,  Herald,  Attendants.  Q'8l. 

Scene  Cyprus.  Q'81.  Scene  for  the 
First  Act  in  Venice ;  during  the  rest  of 
the  Play  in  Cyprus.  Rowe. 

Throughout  the  play  the  names  are 
spelled  Roderigo  and  Emillia  in  the  Qq. 
And /ago  in  Q'81,  Q'95.  Rowe,  Pope. 


to  J  or  j,  Iago  alone  remains  unchanged, — perhaps  to  meet  rhythmical  exigencies.  It 
is,  in  fact,  the  same  name  as  Jago,  which  is  still  a  common  appellation  in  Cornwall. 

9.  Montano]  Steevens:  Though  Montano's  rank  in  Cyprus  cannot  be  exactly 
ascertained,  yet,  from  many  circumstances,  we  are  sure  he  had  not  the  powers  with 
which  Othello  was  subsequently  invested. 

14.  Desdemona]  Shaftesbury  was  the  earliest  to  call  attention  to  a  meaning  in  this 
name  (see  I,  iii,  168),  but  he  translated  it  'superstitious.'  Upton  (p.  288)  corrected  it, 
saying  that  '  the  name  is  not  derived  from  ^etcnSaifiuv,  but  AvaSai/uuv,  that  is,  the  "  unfor- 
tunate " ;  and  Cinthio,  making  the  word  feminine,  calls  her  Disdemona.'  [See  Hales. 
V,ii,85.] 


APPENDI X 


APPENDIX 


THE  TEXT 


In  the  Registers  of  the  Stationers'  Company  (Arber's  Transcript,  vol.  iv,  p.  59) 
occurs  the  following  Entry: 

6°  ^rtobris  1621 
Thomas  Walkley     Entred  for  his  copie  vnder  the  handes  of  Sir  George  Buck, 
and  Master  Swinhowe  warden,  The  Tragedie  of  OTHELLO  the 
Moore  of  Venice vjrt 

During  the  next  yea*  this  'copie'  was  published  with  the  following  title  page: 

THE  I  Tragcedy  of  Othello,  |  The  Moore  of  Venice.  |  As  it  hath  beene  diuerfe  times 
acted  at  the  |  Globe,  and  at  the  Black-Friers,  by  |  his  Maieflies  Seruants.  \  Writ- 
ten by  William  Shakefpeare.  |  [Vignette]  |  LONDON,  |  Printed  by  N.  O.  for 
Thomas  Walkley,  and  are  to  be  fold  at  his  |  fhop,  at  the  Eagle  and  Child,  in 
Brittans  Burffe.  |  1622. 

N.  O.  stands,  probably,  for  Nicholas  Oakes,  and  as  the  Vignette  is  the  same  as  that 
on  the  title  page  of  the  Pide  Bull  edition  of  King  Lear,  it  may  be  that  he  was  the 
printer  of  the  latter  also  (see  Lear,  p.  357). 

To  this  edition,  which,  following  the  Cambridge  Editors,  I  have  called  the  First 
Quarto,  or  QT,  is  prefixed  the  following : 

The  Stationer  to  the  Reader. 
'To  fet  forth  a  booke  without  an  Epiflle,  were  like  to  the  old  Englifh  proiderbe,  A  blew 
coat  without  a  badge,  &  the  Author  being  dead,  I  thought  good  to  take  that  piece  of 
worke  vpon  mee  :  To  commend  it,  I  will  not,  for  that  which  is  good,  I  hope  euery  man 
will  commend,  without  intreaty  :  and  I  am  the  bolder,  becaufe  the  Authors  name  is 
fuffcient  to  vent  his  worke.  Thus  leauing  euery  one  to  the  liberty  of  iudgement :  T 
haue  ventered  to  print  this  Play,  and  leaue  it  to  the  generall  cenfure. 

Yours, 
Thomas  Walkley. 

On  p.  20  it  has  Aclus  2  Scosna  I,  a  division  which  corresponds  to  all  other  editions; 
and  so  also  does  Aclus  4,  on  p.  61,  and  Aclus  5,  on  p.  77.  There  is  no  reference  to 
Actus  3.  Up  to  p.  74  the  pagination  is  correct;  from  there  to  the  last  page  it  i?  quite 
irregular.     The  last  page  is  99,  in  reality  it  is  91. 

339 


340 


APPENDIX 


In  the  next  year  we  find  the  following  Entry  in  the  Register  of  the  Stationers'  Com- 
pany (Arber's  Transcript,  iv,  107) : 


Master  Blounte 
Isaak  Jaggard 


8°  ^obtmbris  1623 
Entred  for  their  Copie  vnder  the  hands  of  Master  Doctor  Worrall 
and  Master  Cole  warden  Master  William  Shakspeers  Comedyes 
Histories,  and  Tragedyes  soe  manie  of  the  said  Copies  as  are  not 
formerly  entered  to  other  men.     .     .     .     viz*    .     .     . 


vij- 


COMEDYES 


The  Tempest 

The  two  gentknien  of  Verona 

Measure  for  Measure 

The  Comedy  of  Errors 

As  you  like  it 

AWs  well  that  ends  well 

Twelfe  flight 

The  winters  tale 


Histories 


The  thirde  parte  of  HENRY  ye  SlXT 

Henry  the  Eight 


Tragedies 


Coriolanus 
Timon  of  Athens 
Julius  Caesar 
Mackbeth 
Anthonie  and  Cleopatra 
Cymbeline 
It  will  be  noted  that  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the  Entry,  no  play  is  included 
in  this  list  of  which  an  authentic  Quarto  had  been  already  printed ;  yet  when  the  vol- 
ume was  published,  it  contained  these  Quarto  plays.     From  which  it  is  to  be  presumed 
that  the  interests  in  these  Quartos  had  become  vested  in  various  ways,  by  purchase, 
inheritance,  or  marriage,  in  the  proprietors  of  the  Folio :  Jaggard,  Blount,  Smithwicke, 
and  Apsley.     But  there  is  a  mystery  about  Othello.     It  certainly  appeared  in  Quarto, 
and  it  certainly  appeared  in  the  Folio,  and  yet  Thomas  Walkley  had  not  resigned  all 
his  interest  in  it  in  1623.     For  in  the  Stationers'1  Registers  (Arber,  iv,  194)  we  find  the 
following : 

imo  Utartii  162?  [i.  e.,  1628] 
Assigned  ouer  vnto  him  by  Thomas  Walkley,  and  Consent  01  a 
Court  holden  this  Day  all  the  estate  right  title  and  Interest  which  he 
hath  in  these  Copies  following xviijd 

viz* 

A  kinge  and  no  hinge. 

PHILASTER  or  love  lies  ableeding. 

ORTHELLO  the  more  of  Venice. 
It  is  not  easy  to  reconcile  this  proof  of  property  still  vested  in  Walkley  with  tne 
appearance  of  Othello  in  the  First  Folio.  Collier  suggests  that,  '  most  likely,  the  pub- 
lishers of  the  Folio  purchased  Walkley's  interest  at  a  date  posterior  to  the  entry  of 
their  undertaking  at  Stationers'  Hall,  and  thus  became  entitled  to  include  it  in  their 
noble  volume,'  which  does  not  help  us.  Although  the  Folio  was  issued  in  1623,  the 
printing  mus":  have  been  in  hand  long  before  that.      Indeed,  there  are  not  wanting 


Master  Richard 
Hawkins 


THE    TEXT  341 

copies  which  are  supposed  to  bear  the  genuine  date  1622,  the  very  year  in  which 
Walkley  issued  his  Quarto,  so  that  the  two  books  must  have  been  in  the  hands  of 
the  printers  at  the  same  time.  Can  we  here  infer  some  private  understanding  between 
the  publishers?  Was  it  to  emphasize  his  possession  of  the  Quarto,  while  acquiesc- 
ing in  its  appearance  in  the  Folio,  that  Walkley  put  forth  his  unusual  address  '  to 
the  Reader '  ?  But  speculations  are  idle ;  even  if  they  led  to  assurance,  what  should 
we  gain  ?  Merely  a  better  knowledge  of  the  private  affairs  of  Thomas  Walkley. 
1  When  all's  done,  you  look  but  on  a  stool.'  Of  more  importance  is  it  that  two 
years  later,  in  1630,  Richard  Hawkins  put  his  assignment  to  use  by  issuing  a  Quarto 
Othello  with  exactly  the  same  title-page,  except  that  there  is  a  different  Vignette,  and 
that  it  is  stated  to  be :  '  Printed  by  A.  M.  for  Richard  Hawkins,  and  are  to  be  fold 
at  I  his  fhoppe  in  Chancery-Lane,  neere  Sergeants-Inne.  |  1630.' 

This  is  the  Second  Quarto,  or  Q2. 

We  next  meet  '  Orthello '  in  the  Stationers'  Register  (Arber,  iv,  p.  420),  when  on 
the  29°  |ttaij,  1638,  vrsula  Hawkins  widdow  (late  wife  of  Richard  Hawkins 
deceased)  assigned  to  'Master  Mead  and  Master  Meredith'  certain  'Copies'  'which 
did  belong  vnto  her  said  husband ;'  in  the  list  of  twenty-five  titles,  which  follows,  appears 
'  Orthello  the  More  of  Venice  a  play.'  Master  Mead  and  Master  Meredith  did 
not  long  retain  possession  of  Orthello ;  on  the  25th  of  January  of  the  following  year, 
1639,  they  assigned  over  to  Master  William  Leake  'these  Copies,'  'following  which 
were  Entred  vnto  them  from  Mistris  Hawkins.'  Again  in  this  list  also  we  have 
'Orthello  the  More  of  Venice  a  Play.'  For  sixteen  long  years  did  Master  Leak 
permit  the  dust  to  settle  on  Orthello  before  he  published  what  he  called,  on  the  Title- 
page,  'The  fourth  Edition.'  The  rest  of  the  title-page  is  exactly  the  same,  barring 
a  Crown  for  a  Vignette,  as  in  the  preceding  Quartos,  except  that  it  is :  '  Printed  for 
William  Leak  at  the  Crown  in  Fleet-  \  Jlreet,  between  the  two  Temple  Gates, 
1655.' 

This  is  the  Third  Quarto,  or  Q  . 

A  Players  Quarto  appeared  in  1681,  as  'now  [acted]  at  the  Theater  Royal,  by  His 
Majesties  Servants.'  It  is  '  Printed  for  W.  Weak,  and  are  to  be  fold  by  Richard 
Bent  I  ley  and  M.  Magnes  in  Rujjfel  Street  near  Covent-  \  Garden,  1 68 1.'  Halliwell 
suggests  that  '  Weak '  is  a  misprint  for  Leak.  If  it  be  the  same  W.  Leak  that  published 
the  Third  Qto,  who  was  presumably  the  same  W.  Leake  that  was  '  called  as  an  Assist- 
ant'  to  the  Stationers'  Company,  seventy-seven  years  before,  in  1604,  it  may  be  a  mis- 
print, it  cannot  possibly,  after  such  a  protracted  existence,  be  a  misnomer.  Reprints  of 
this  Quarto  followed  in  1687  and  1695. 

Meanwhile  the  First,  Second,  Third,  and  Fourth  Folios  had  appeared  in  1623,  1632, 
1663,  and  1685. 

Here  bibliographic  interest  in  all  of  them  ceases.  Their  value  to  us  as  texts  is  all 
that  is  of  importance  now.  Although  this  value  is  somewhat  difficult  of  adjustment, 
there  is  greater  harmony  among  Editors  with  regard  to  it  in  this  play  than  usually  falls 
to  the  lot  of  a  play  which  has  attendant  satellites  in  the  shape  of  Quartos. 

We  have  Four  Folios  and  Three  Quartos.  How  many  independent  texts  are  there 
and  what  are  their  respective  values  ? 

The  Four  Folios  are  practically  one.  For  any  changes  introduced  after  the  First 
was  issued,  there  is  no  more  authority  to  be  yielded  than  is  due  to  the  intelligence, 
more  or  less  keen,  of  a  compositor.  For  the  text  of  the  First  Folio  there  must  have 
been  used  either  the  original  MS  of  Shakespeare  (Heminge  and  Condell  asserted  that 
they  had  so  used  it,  but  then  we  know  that  in  the  case  of  certain  other  plays  this  was 


342 


APPENDIX 


1  a  grace  snatched  beyond  the  bounds  of  truth ')  or  else  a  stage  copy,  which,  perhaps 
contained  no  single  word  written  by  Shakespeare's  own  hand. 

Considering  the  twenty  years  since  Shakespeare's  ink  was  drv  on  the  original,  and 
considering  the  burning,  between  whiles,  of  ' The  Globe'  and  its  contents  (it  was  a  con- 
flagration of  the  world  to  us),  this  latter  supposition,  that  the  Folio  was  printed  from  a 
stage  copy,  seems  the  more  probable.  In  either  case  Shakespeare's  personal  friends 
vouched  for  its  accuracy,  and  no  similar  authority  vouches  for  any  other.  This,  then, 
the  text  of  the  Folio  of  1623,  becomes  the  text  of  the  play;  and  in  any  claim  for  pref- 
erence put  forth  by  other  texts  the  burden  of  proof  lies  on  the  claimants,  the  presump- 
tion of  authenticity  is  all  in  favour  of  Fx.  As  we  have  seen  at  II,  ii,  231,  Dyce,  whose 
opinion  on  such  matters  is  of  very  great  weight,  asserts  that  this  play  in  Fx  was  '  beyond 
all  doubt  printed  from  a  transcript  belonging  to  the  theatre.' 

On  the  other  side  stand  the  three  Quartos. 

The  First,  as  we  have  seen,  was  issued  by  a  Stationer  named  Walkley.  What  manu- 
script he  used,  or  how  he  obtained  it,  we  cannot  know.  He  says  in  his  address  '  to  the 
reader,'  that  the  author  is  dead;  it  is,  therefore,  not  likely  that  he  received  the  MS 
from  Shakespeare  during  Shakespeare's  lifetime  and  kept  it  lying  idle  for  five  or  six 
years.  Nor  is  it  likely  that  Walkley's  text  was  taken  down  surreptitiously  by  short- 
hand from  a  performance  on  the  stage :  the  stage  directions  are  not  sufficient  in  number, 
nor  descriptive  enough  in  character,  to  indicate  an  eye-witness ;  and  although  four  of 
the  Acts  are  noted,  there  are  no  divisions  into  Scenes.  Yet  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
Walkley's  text  is  an  original  text,  and  that  it  is  not  the  same  as  that  of  the  Folio.  In 
a  comparison  of  the  two,  mere  omissions  go  for  nothing.  Counting  ever}'  line  of  the  Folio, 
not  as  verses  but  as  lines,  as  is  done  in  the  preceding  pages  of  this  volume,  and  count- 
ing the  lines  in  the  Quarto  in  the  same  way,  there  are,  roughly  speaking,  more  than 
three  hundred  and  fifty  lines  in  the  Folio  that  are  omitted  in  the  Quarto.  Knight,  who 
with  closer  accuracy,  computed  the  verses,  reckons  the  number  at  '  a  hundred  and  sixty- 
three.'  But  additions  are  important ;  they  are  presumably  from  the  hand  of  the  author ; 
and  in  the  way  of  additions  there  are  ten  or  fifteen  lines  in  the  Quarto,  Knight  says  less 
than  ten,  which  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  Folio.  This  alone  goes  far  to  stamp  the  Qto 
as  an  independent  text.  But  the  most  noticeable  difference,  one  that  strikes  every  reader 
at  once,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  in  the  first  speech  of  Iago  and  among  the  last 
speeches  of  Emilia,  and  in  Cassio's  drunken  scene,  lies  in  the  use  of  oaths  and  adjurations. 
'Zounds,'  'God,'  ''Sblood,'  etc.,  scattered  through  the  First  Quarto,  are  either  omitted 
altogether  or  are  toned  down,  in  the  Folio.  Hence  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt 
that  in  the  First  Quarto  we  have  a  genuine  text,  and  since  it  cannot  be  supposed  to  have 
come  from  Shakespeare,  and  was  not  taken  down  by  short-hand,  we  are  forced  to  con- 
clude that  it  too  was  a  play-house  copy,  and,  I  think,  an  old  one,  possibly  '  stolne.'  It 
is  not  worth  while  here  to  enter  upon  a  minute  comparison  of  the  two  texts.  The  very 
purpose  of  the  Textual  Notes  in  the  foregoing  pages  is  to  enable  the  student  to  do  that 
for  himself.  It  is  not  hard  to  grow  interested  in  minute  collation,  but  then  one  must  do 
it  for  himself,  at  first  hand.  Simply  to  repeat  another's  work  is  most  tolerable  arid  not 
to  be  endured.  It  is  no  better  than  proof-reading,  proof-reading,  too,  uncheered  by  the 
hope  of  blunders. 

The  older  Editors,  from  Johnson  to  the  time  of  Knight,  were  influenced  in  favour  of 
this  Qto,  which  they  considered  older  and  more  authentic.  Knight  followed  the  Folio, 
upholding  its  text  always  through  thick,  and  sometimes  through  thin.  Collier  leaned 
to  the  Second  Qto,  but  since  his  time  the  balance  of  favour  has  been  on  the  side  of  the 
Folio,  which  is,  to  me,  far  and  away  the  better. 


THE    TEXT  343 

Perhaps  it  is  well  to  mention  that  Pope,  in  his  '  Table  of  the  Several  Editions '  which 
ne  had  used,  closed  his  list  with  the  title  of  an  Othello,  undated,  but  '  Published  by 
Tho.  Walkely,  Quarto,  (soon  after  his  Death,  as  appears  by  the  Preface.)'  Overlooking 
Pope's  somewhat  startling  announcement  of  •  Walkely's '  posthumous  performance, 
Malone  conjectured  that  this  Quarto  was  simply  Q  ,  whose  date  had  been  '  cut  off, 
which  frequently  happens  in  old  plays.'  Capell,  both  in  his  •  Table  of  Plays '  and  in 
his  Appendix,  refers  to  this  undated  Qto,  but  it  is  on  the  authority  of  Pope.  The 
Cambridge  Editors  think  that  the  reference  to  the  publisher's  preface  is  conclusive  that 
Pope's  Qto  was  the  Qto  of  1622.  No  undated  Qto  having  been  discovered  from  Pope's 
day  to  the  present,  we  may  safely  acquiesce  in  Malone's  opinion. 

The  Second  Quarto  appeared  in  1630.  Have  we  here  an  independent  text,  or 
merely  a  reprint  ?  Malone  dismissed  it  as  '  an  edition  of  no  authority,'  but  Collier 
espoused  its  cause  with  zeal,  on  the  ground  that  it  '  was  unquestionably  printed  from 
a  manuscript  different  from  that  used  for  the  Qto  of  1622  or  for  the  Folio  of  1623; 
and  presents  a  number  of  various  readings,  some  of  which  singularly  illustrate  the 
original  text  of  Othello?  Collier  cites  III,  hi,  518,  where  Q2  gives  the  word  feels 
adopted  by  the  majority  of  Editors,  instead  of  '  keepes,'  of  the  Ff.  Grant  White, 
however,  does  not  estimate  this  Qto  as  highly  as  Collier  does  (Dyce  and  Staunton  do 
not  even  mention  it  in  their  Prefaces)  ;  he  says,  in  reference  to  it,  in  his  Introduction : 
'  After  a  careful  consideration  of  its  readings,  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is 
'  only  a  reprint  of  the  Qto  of  1622,  corrected  by  the  text  of  the  Folio,  having  some 
'  typographical  errors  peculiar  to  itself,  and  a  very  few  unimportant  corrections  and 
'  sophistications,  such  as  crept  into  almost  every  dramatic  reprint  of  the  period.      I 

*  therefore  regard  it  as  of  no  authority,  and  make  no  mention  of  its  readings.'  The 
Cambridge  Editors  agree  in  the  main  with  Grant  White.  '  After  a  minute  compari- 
'son,'  they  say,  'of  the  two  [Quartos]  it  appears  to  us  clear  that  the  Quarto  of  1630 
'  must  have  been  printed  from  a  copy  of  the  Quarto  of  1622,  which  had  received  addi- 

*  tions  and  corrections  in  manuscript.  The  resemblances  between  the  two  are  too  close 
'  to  allow  of  any  other  supposition.     These  additions  and  corrections,  though  agreeing 

*  for  the  most  part  with  the  First  Folio,  which  had  appeared  in  the  interval,  were  derived 

*  from  an  independent  source.' 

It  by  no  means  follows  that  'this  independent  source'  was  Shakespeare  or  his 
MS. ;  a  compositor  or  an  actor  would  be  competent  to  have  suggested  the  changes. 
With  this  understanding,  I  quite  agree  with  this  conclusion,  to  which,  I  think,  any  one 
would  the  more  readily  come  if  the  two  copies  and  the  Folio  were  placed  open  side  by 
side.  Where  Fr  supplies  the  omissions  of  Qr,  Q2  follows  Fx,  and  even  where  it  differs 
from  Fx  there  seems  to  be  more  an  attempt  to  correct  than  to  rewrite.  For  instance, 
II,  i,  45,  '  Euen  till  we  make  the  Maine,  and  th'  Eriall  blew,'  is  not  in  Qx ;  in  Q2  the 
line  is  found,  but  it  is  evidently  an  attempt  to  convert  nonsense  into  sense,  and  not  an 
jriginal  reading :  '  Euen  till  we  make  the  Maine  and  th'  Ayre  all  blue.'  Again,  oaths 
and  adjurations  are  sometimes  omitted  and  sometimes  retained,  even  on  the  same  page; 
as  though  the  excision  had  been  attempted  but  done  carelessly.  Once  more,  let  the 
Textual  Notes  suffice  for  any  further  investigation,  if  the  subject  be  worth  it. 

The  Third  Quarto  is  a  reprint  of  Q2;  if  it  were  a  good  reprint,  it  would  be  to  that 
extent  respectable ;  as  it  is,  it  is  worthless.  I  have  recorded  its  separate  readings  only 
here  and  there  as  mere  curiosities.  I  can  say  nothing  worse  of  it  than  that,  having 
been  issued  in  the  same  year  with  the  Third  Quarto  of  King  Lear,  I  think  Jane  Bell 
mi-st  have  printed  them  both,  and  tried  her  'prentice  hand  on  Othello. 


344 


APPENDIX 


THE   DATE  OF  COMPOSITION. 

The  earliest  attempt  to  fix  the  Date  of  the  Composition  of  this  Play  was  made  by 
Warburton,  who  asserted  that  there  was  an  allusion  to  the  creation  of  baronets  by 
James  the  First,  in  the  words  of  Othello  to  Desdemona  in  III,  iv,  55:  'The  hearts 
of  old,  gaue  hands :  But  our  new  Heraldry  is  hands,  not  hearts.'  '  The  expression 
'  of  "  new  heraldry,"  '  says  Warburton, '  was  a  satirical  allusion  to  the  times.  Soon  after 
1  King  James  the  First  came  to  the  crown,  he  created  the  new  dignity  of  baronets  for 
'  money.     Amongst  their  other  prerogatives  of  honour,  they  had  an  addition  to  their 

*  paternal  arms,  of  a  hand  gules  in  an  Escutcheon  argent.  And  we  are  not  to  doubt 
'  but  that  this  was  the  new  heraldry  alluded  to  by  our  author :  by  which  he  insinuates 
'  that  some  then  created  had  hands  indeed,  but  not  hearts ;  that  is,  money  to  pay  for 

*  the  creation,  but  no  virtue  to  purchase  the  honour.  But  the  finest  part  of  the  poet's 
'  address  in  this  allusion  is  the  compliment  he  pays  to  his  old  mistress,  Elizabeth.  For 
« James's  pretence  for  raising  money  by  this  creation,  was  the  reduction  of  Ulster,  and 
'  other  parts  of  Ireland ;  the  memory  of  which  he  would  perpetuate  by  that  addition 
'  to  their  arms,  it  being  the  arms  of  Ulster.  Now  the  method  used  by  Elizabeth  in  the 
'  reduction  of  that  Kingdom  was  so  different  from  this,  the  dignities  she  conferred  being 

*  on  those  who  employed  their  steel,  and  not  their  gold,  in  this  service,  that  nothing  could 
'  add  more  to  her  glory,  than  the  being  compared  to  her  successor  in  this  point  of  view  : 
'  nor  was  it  uncommon  for  the  dramatic  poets  of  that  time  to  satirize  the  ignominy  of 
4  James's  reign.  So,  Fletcher,  in  The  Fair  Maid  of  the  Inn.  One  says,  '  I  will  send 
' '  thee  to  Amboyna  in  the  East  Indies  for  pepper.'  The  other  replies,  •  To  Amboyna  ? 
* '  so  I  might  be  pepper'd.'  Again,  in  the  same  play,  a  Sailor  says,  '  Despise  not  this 
' '  pitch'd  canvas,  the  time  was,  we  have  known  them  lined  with  Spanish  ducats.' ' 

This  'satirical  allusion'  of  Warburton  would  fix  the  date  at  161 1,  the  year  in  which 
Tames  instituted  the  order  of  Baronets,  and  in  this  date  there  arose  general  acquiescence. 
Malone,  in  his  first  edition,  1790,  accepted  it,  but  under  protest.  After  quoting  War- 
burton's  note,  '  our  Hibernian  coadjutor,'  as  Steevens  calls  him,  proceeded  thus  to  criti- 
cise it : 

'  By  what  chemistry  can  the  sense  which  Warburton  has  affixed  to  this  passage  be 
'  extracted  from  it  ?  Or  is  it  probable  that  Shakespeare,  who  has  more  than  once 
'  condescended  to  be  the  encomiast  of  the  unworthy  founder  of  the  order  of  Baronets, 
'  who  had  been  personally  honoured  by  a  letter  from  his  majesty,  and  substantially 
'  benefited  by  the  royal  license  granted  to  him  and  his  fellow-comedians,  should  have 
1  been  so  impolitic,  as  to  satirize  the  king,  or  to  depreciate  his  new-created  dignity  ? 
' .  .  .  .  On  every  marriage  the  arms  of  the  wife  are  united  to  those  of  the  husband. 

*  This  circumstance  it  was,  that  suggested  heraldry  in  this  place It  was  the  office 

'  of  the  herald  to  join,  or,  to  speak  technically,  to  quarter  the  arms  of  the  new-married 

*  pair.  Hence  with  his  usual  license,  Shakespeare  uses  *  heraldry '  for  junction,  or 
'  union  in  generall.  Thus  in  R.  of  L.  64,  the  same  term  is  employed  to  denote  that 
'  union  of  colours  which  constitutes  a  beautiful  complexion.  This  passage  not  afford- 
'  ing  us  any  assistance,  we  are  next  to  consider  one  in  The  Alchemist,  by  Ben  Jonson, 
'  which,  if  it  alluded  to  an  incident  in  Othello,  as  Steevens  seems  to  think  it  does, 

*  would  ascertain  this  play  to  have  appeared  before  1610,  in  which  year  The  Alchemist 

*  was  first  acted :  '  Lovewit.  Dids't  thou  hear  a  cry,  says't  thou  ?  Neighbour.  Yes,  sir, 
'  •  like  unto  a  man  that  had  been  strangled  an  hour,  and  could  not  speak.'  But  I  doubt 
'  whether  Othello  was  here  in  Jonson's  contemplation.  Old  Ben  generally  spoke  out ; 
'  and  if  he  had  intended  to  sneer  at  the  manner  of  Desdemona's  death.  I  think  he 


DATE   OF  COMPOSITION  345 

1  would  have  taken  care  that  his  meaning  should  not  be  missed,  and  would  have  writ- 
'  ten — 'like  unto  a  woman,'  &c.'  Although  Othello  was  not  printed  until  1622,  Malone 
said  'it  was  acted  at  court  early  in  the  year  1613 ' ;  and,  as  an  authority  for  this  state- 
ment, cited  '  MS.  Vertue,'  for  an  account  whereof  see  Chalmers,  post.  Malone  con- 
tinues :  '  I  have  persuaded  myself  that  Othello  was  one  of  Shakespeare's  latest  per- 
'  formances ;  a  supposition  to  which  the  acknowledged  excellence  of  the  piece  gives 
•some  degree  of  probability.  It  is  here  [i.  e.,  in  Malone's  edition  of  1790]  attributed 
'to  the  year  161 1,  because  Warburton's  comment  on  the  passage  may  convince  others, 

•  though,  I  confess  it  does  not  satisfy  me.  Emilia  and  Lodovico,  two  of  the  characters 
'  in  this  play,  are  likewise  two  of  the  persons  in  May-day,  by  Chapman,  first  printed  in 

•  1611.' 

The  value  of  Warburton's  citation  from  Fletcher's  Fair  Maid  of  the  Inn,  Malone 
destroyed  in  his  note  on  III,  iv,  55,  where  he  says  'that  play  indeed  never  was  per- 
'  formed  before  King  James,  being  the  last  play  but  one  that  Fletcher  wrote,  and  not 
'produced  till  the  22nd  of  Jan.  1625-6,  after  the  death  both  of  its  author  and  King 
'  James ;  but  when  it  was  written,  he  must,  from  the  circumstances  already  mentioned, 

•  have  had  the  court  before  his  eyes.' 

Malone  died  in  181 2,  and  when  the  Variorum  of  1821  appeared,  it  was  found  that 
he  had  abandoned  the  date  of  161 1  and  adopted  1604,  but  before  this  change  became 
known,  two  other  dates  had  been  proposed. 

First:  Chalmers  [Supplemental  Apology,  1799,  p.  457)  urged  a  date  later  even  than 
Warburton,  '  who,'  said  Chalmers,  '  is  partly  right,  and  partly  wrong.     By  what  chem- 

•  istry  could  this  critic  extract  such  a  sense  from  this  passage  ?  asks  Mr  Malone.  The 
'  answer  must  be,  the  same  sort  of  chemistry,  which  so  frequently  enabled  the  observant 
'  dramatist  to  captivate  his  audience,  by  his  striking  allusions  to  the  passing  scene ;  to 
'  satyrise  without  lampoon;  and  to  throw  out  sarcasms  without  scoffing.  In  IV,  i,  Iago, 
'  working  on  the  jealousy  of  Othello,  artfully  remarks :  '  If  you  are  so  fond  over  her 
' '  iniquity,  give  her  [a]  patent  to  offend.'  The  audience,  who  knew  from  their  feel- 
'  ings,  how  much  vexation  had  arisen  from  the  patents  of  monopoly,  which  Queen  Eliz- 
'  abeth  and  King  James  had  so  frequently  granted,  and  so  often  retracted,  must  have 

•  been  electrified  by  this  fine  stroke  of  well-timed  satire Warburton  was  right  in 

•  supposing  that  the  stroke  at  the  new  heraldry  was,  incidentally,  aimed  at  the  creation 
'  of  baronets,  which  was  attended  with  uncommon  circumstances.  The  epoch  of  this 
'  order  was  undoubtedly  May,  161 1.  But,  unluckily,  for  the  speculation  of  Warburton, 
'  the  additional  armorial  bearing,  of  the  bloody  hand,  was  not  given  by  the  patent  of 

•  creation.     The  order  had  scarcely  been  created  when  a  dispute  arose,  during  those 

•  punctilious  times,  about  precedence,  between  the  baronets  and  the  younger  sons  of 
'  viscounts,  and  barons.  On  this  difficult  point  King  James  sat  personally,  during  three 
'  several  days,  to  hear  the  learned  counsel ;  to  take  the  information  of  Heralds ;  and  to 
'  consider  the  proofs :  And,  in  the  end,  he  decided  against  the  baronets,  declaring  he 
'  had  not  had  any  purpose  to  wrong  third  parties  tacitly,  whatever  he  might  intend  to 
'  confer,  by  his  creation,  on  others  :  But  the  King,  wishing  to  ampliate  his  favour  towards 
'the  baronets,  granted  them  by  a  second  patent,  dated  28  May,  1612,  among  other  pre- 

heminences,  '  the  arms  of  Ulster,  that  is,  in  a  field  argent,  a  hand  geules,  or  a  bloudie 
'  hand'  Spenser  will  inform  us,  in  his  State  of  Ireland,  '  that  the  bloody  hand  is 
'  O'Neel's  badge'  Such,  then,  was  the  new  heraldry,  which  Shakespeare  played  with, 
in  order  to  please  his  audience !  Yet  we  see  clearly,  from  the  second  patent,  in  161 2, 
that  the  epoch,  which  was  assigned  to  Othello  in  161 1,  cannot  be  supported.  And  we 
must,  therefore,  look  for  the  true  date  in  some  subsequent  year.      The  fact  is,  that  the 


346  APPENDIX 

1  baronets  had  to  encounter  a  severer  shock.     A  great  noise  was  made  in  the  llouje  of 

♦  Commons  on  the  23  May,  1614,  about  the  creation  of  Baronets.    This  clamour  against 

*  the  King's  right  to  create  such  an  order  was  silenced  in  committee There  was, 

'a  few  days  before,  a  still  louder  outcry  raised,  in  the  House  of  Commons,  with  much 
'  greater  cause,  against  patents  of  monopoly.  Owing  to  those  remarkable  coincidences, 
'and  powerful  reasons,  I  am  of  opinion,  that  Othello  was  written  in  1614;  and,  being 
1  written  at  this  epoch,  was  the  last,  as  it  was  one  of  the  greatest,  of  his  labours.' 

Malone  had  stated,  as  we  have  seen,  that  Othello  '  was  acted  at  Court  early  in  the 
year  1613,'  and  gave  as  his  authority  '  Vertue's  MS.'  This  date,  if  authentic,  would 
overthrow  Chalmers's  chronology ;  wherefore  Chalmers  set  to  work  '  making  some 
'  inquiries  by  a  friend  what  manuscript  of  Vertue's  it  were,  which  I  saw  so  often  quoted 
'  about  scenic  matters,  and  Mr  Steevens  was  so  obliging  'as  to  say  :  '  The  books,  from 
• '  which  those  extracts  were  made,  with  several  others  lost,  belonged  to  Secretary  Pepys, 
'  '  and  afterwards  to  Dr  Rawlinson,  who  lent  them  to  Mr  Vertue.  There  is  a  MS  note 
' '  subjoined  to  the  MSS  of  Vertue,  which,  about  thirty  years  ago,  were  lent  to  Mr  Steev- 
' '  ens  by  Mr  Garrick.'  Much  is  it  to  be  lamented  that  any  MS  or  book  which  furnished 
' an  illustration  of  Shakespeare,  and  having  once  been  seen,  should  ever  disappear.     I 

•  would  bow  to  any  register  of  the  time ;  but  I  will  not  allow  Vertue,  though  a  very  dili- 
'  gent  collector,  to  draw  deductions  for  me  which  are  to  militate  against  the  strongest 
'  probabilities.' 

Second :  though  Chalmers  discarded  Vertue's  MS,  Drake  [Shakespeare  and  his 
Times,  ii,  528)  accepted  it;  and  taking  its  date,  viz:  the  '  1st  of  January,  1613,'  as  a 
final  limit  in  one  direction,  and  the  date  of  the  '  Second  Patent '  to  the  Baronets,  viz : 
the  '28th  of  May,  1612,  as  a  starting-point  on  the  other,  Drake  felt  '  no  hesitation  in 
expressing  '  the  belief  that  Othello  was  written  in  the  interval  between  the  two.' 

We  now  come  to  Malone's  final  decision  in  the  Variorum  of  1821 ;  a  decision, 
which,  although  formed  on  evidence  now  lost,  has  been  generally  concurred  in  down 
to  the  present  day.  To  his  note  in  1790  (quoted  above),  Malone  now  adds :  'A  passage 
'  in  the  Essays  of  Sir  Wm  Cornwallis,  the  younger,  1601,  may  have  suggested  to  Shake- 
'  speare  the  mention  of  the  new  heraldry  upon  which  Warburton  has  put,  what  I  think, 
'  a  most  erroneous  interpretation  :  '  We  of  these  later  times  full  of  a  nice  curiositie  mis- 
' '  like  all  the  performances  of  our  forefathers ;  we  say  they  were  honest  plaine  men, 

' '  but  they  want  the  capering  wits  of  this  ripe  age They  had  wont  to  give  their 

'  '  hands  and  their  hearts  together,  but  we  think  it  a  finer  grace  to  looke  asquint,  our 
* '  hand  looking  one  way  and  our  heart  another.1  If  the  simile  of  the  '  Pontick  Sea,' 
'in  III,  iii,  is  an  allusion  to  Pliny,  translated  by  Philemon  Holland  in  1601,  this  will 

•  assist  us  further  in  ascertaining  the  date  of  this  play.     We  know  it  was  acted  in  1604, 

•  and  I  have,  therefore,  placed  it  in  that  year.' 

On  this  last  very  noteworthy  sentence,  Boswell  has  the  following :  '  Mr  Malone 
'  never  expresses  himself  at  random.     I  therefore  lament  deeply  that  I  have  not  been 

*  able  to  discover  upon  what  evidence  he  knnv  this  important  and  decisive  fact.' 

Here,  for  the  moment,  we  must  leave  the  discussion  of  this  final  date  of  Malone,  and 
proceed  chronologically. 

In  1836,  Collier  [New  Particulars,  p.  58)  announced  his  discovery  of  the  proof 
that  Othello  was  written  not  in  1604,  according  to  Malone's  chronology,  but  as  early  as 
1602.  This  fact  was  obtained  from  the  Accounts  preserved  at  Bridgewater  House  in 
the  handwriting  of  Sir  Arthur  Mainwaring,  of  the  expenses  incurred  by  Sir  Thomas 
Egerton,  afterwards  Lord  Ellesmere,  in  entertaining  Queen  Elizabeth  and  her  Court 
for  three  days  at  Harefield.     'It  is  headed,  '310  July  et  i°  et  2°  Augusti,  1602,  the 


DATE   OF  COMPOSITION  347 

44  Queenes  Matle  beeing  at  Ilarefield  iij  nights,'  and  among  the  particulars  is  the  fol- 
lowing: 46  Aug.  1602.  Rewardes  to  the  Vaulters  Players  and  Dauncers.  Of  this  £\q 
* '  to  BurbkU^e's  players  for  Othello  ....  64  18  10.' '  *  It  is  indisputable,'  says  Collier, 
4  from  this  evidence,  that  Othello  was  acted  at  Harefield  in  1602.' 

Knight  accepted  this  date  in  his  edition  which  followed  shortly  after  Collier's  ai» 
nouncement. 

A  few  years  after  this,  Peter  Cunningham,  a  man  of  literary  and  antiquarian  tastes, 
was  appointed  to  a  situation  in  the  Audit  Office,  Somerset  House,  and  forthwith  started 
on  a  search  for  *  old  papers,'  rummaging  *  in  dry  repositories,  damp  cellars,  and  still 
damper  vaults,  for  books  of  accounts,  for  warrants,  and  for  receipts.'  He  found  many 
documents  of  value,  but  still  nothing  of  commanding  interest,  until  at  last  his  perse 
verance  was  rewarded.  *  My  last  discovery,'  he  says,  '  was  my  most  interesting ;  and 
*  alighting  as  I  now  did  upon  two  official  books  of  the  Revels, — one  of  Tylney's  and 
4  one  of  Buc's, — which  had  escaped  both  Musgrave  and  Malone,  I  at  last  found  some 
4  thing  about  Shakespeare, — something  that  was  new,  and  something  that  was  definitive. 
4  This  was  my  little  Guanahana'  [sic~\.  And  this  was  all.  Cunningham  was  destined 
to  find  no  more.  Still  it  was  a  great  4  find' ;  any  4  find  '  connected  with  Shakespeare  is 
great.  Malone's  Transcripts  from  ten  of  the  Books  of  the  Revels  are  printed  in  vol.  ii* 
of  the  Variorum  of  182 1,  pp.  364-409,  and  at  the  close  of  the  last,  ending  in  1587-8&, 
Malone  adds :  4  There  is  no  subsequent  Revels  Account  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Eliza- 
4  beth  now  extant,'  wherein  he  was  probably  correct.  Cunningham's  discovery,  which 
he  calls  4Book  XII,'  opens  with  November,  1605. 

These  '  Revels  Books '  are  the  Accounts  of  the  expenses  incurred  for  the  entertain- 
ment of  Royalty  by  the  Master  of  the  Revels,  a  title  which  sufficiently  defines  itself. 
From  1579  to  1610  this  office  was  filled  by  one  man,  Edmund  Tylney,  who  deserves 
a  fame  which  has  not  been  vouchsafed  to  him.  His  term  extended  over  nearly  the 
whole  of  Shakespeare's  dramatic  life;  through  his  hands  and  under  his  eyes  must 
have  passed  the  original  manuscripts  (4  O  happy  reader,  by  no  critic  vex't !')  of  upwards 
of  thirty  of  those  immortal  plays.  Since  Edmund  Tylney  adorns  no  tale,  let  him  at 
least  point  a  moral.  The  first,  fresh  inhalation  of  Shakespeare's  poetry  in  Shake- 
speare's own  handwriting  ought  to  have  proved  a  liberal  education,  but,  alack  the 
day !  in  Tylney's  case  it  did  not ;  witness  the  following  uncouth  description  of  his 
office ;  its  lack  of  polish  can  be  accounted  for,  I  fear,  only  by  the  fact  that  he  read  the 
text  without  the  help  of  the  commentators :  4  The  Office  of  ye  Revells  consistethe  of 
4  a  Wardropp,  and  other  several  Roomes,  for  Artificers  to  worke  in,  viz.  Taylors,  Im- 
4  brotherers,  Propertimakers,  Paynters,  Wyerdrawers,  and  Carpenters,  togeather  with  a 
4  convenient  place  for  ye  Rehearsalls  and  settinge  forthe  of  Playes  and  other  Shower 
4  for  those  Services.'  It  is  the  infinite  variety  of  expenses,  big  and  little,  necessarily 
connected  with  these  duties  that  composes  these  Revels  Books,  whereof  the  whole 
Series  was  printed  by  The  Shakespeare  Society  in  1842  under  Cunningham's  editorial 
supervision.  For  the  most  part  it  is  weary,  dreary  reading,  wherein  it  is  inconceivable 
that  human  intelligence  can  find  present  interest,  an  endless  repetition  of  the  most  insig- 
nificant items,  which  would  require  Dickens's  immortal  4pair  of  million-magnifying  ga» 
microscopes,  of  hextra  power '  to  enlarge  into  even  a  languid  interest.  We  find  page 
after  page  embalming  the  facts  that  the  Master  of  the  Revels  spent  so  many  pence  foi 
4  A  peece  of  small  corde,'  4  A  pound  of  glewe,'  4  A  peece  of  greate  corde,'  4  Yox  pynnes,' 
1  For  allom,'  4  For  broomes,'  &c,  &c,  tScc.  But  on  pp.  203,  204,  we  are  startled  broad 
awake  by  the  sight  of  the  4  greatest  name  in  all  literature;'  it  is  true  that  in  4  Shaxberd  ' 
its  fa-our,  like  Roderigo's,  is  defeated,  literally,  with  an  vsurp'd  beard, — but  it  is  there  \ 


348 


APPENDIX 


The  Poets  wen 

mayd  the  plaiei 


We  read : 

The  Plaiers  1605 

By  the  Kings         Hallamas  Day  being  the  first  of  Nouembar 
Maties  plaiers  A  Piay  m  tne  Banketinge  house  att  Whithall  Shaxberd 

called  The  Moor  of  Venis. 

(In  the  original,  '  Shaxberd '  is  not  placed  here,  but  opposite  the  play  of  Mesur  for 
Mesur.)  Then  follows  a  list  of  twelve  or  thirteen  plays,  such  as  'the  Merry  Wiues  of 
Winsor,'  '  Mesur  for  Mesur,'  '  The  Plaie  of  Errors,'  '  How  to  larne  of  a  woman  to  wooe,' 
(Sic,  with  the  names  of  '  Shaxberd,'  '  Hewood,'  &c,  in  the  margin,  a  practice  observed 
nowhere  else  in  the  volume.  Although  this  is  headed  1605,  internal  evidence  in  the 
rest  of  the  entries  shows  that  the  true  date  is  1604. 

This  date  of  the  performance  of  Othello  in  1604,  of  course,  corroborated  Collier's  of 
1602,  and  it  is  safe  to  say  that  it  influenced  every  editor  down  to,  and  including,  Dyce 
in  1866.     The  original  MS  volume,  from  which  Cunningham  printed,  disappeared. 

Verplanck,  who  wrote  shortly  after  Cunningham's  publication,  unwillingly,  on  aes- 
thetic grounds,  relinquished  the  later  dates  of  Malone  and  Chalmers.  The  emotions  and 
passions  depicted  in  Othello  are  not,  so  he  thought,  such  as  could  be  reasoned  out  from 
a  young  Poet's  mind,  or  portrayed  by  any  effort  of  an  inexperienced  imagination. 
'  Richard  and  Romeo,  and  The  Tempest  (whatever  may  have  been  their  actual  dates) 
*  might  have  been  the  creations  of  youthful  genius,  but  Othello  required  actual  experi- 
'  ence,  or  close  observation,  of  the  workings  of  bitter  passions,  in  however  humble  a 
'  form,  yet  in  actual  life.'  So  impressed  was  Verplanck  with  this  belief  that,  in  order 
to  reconcile  the  Othello  of  1602  with  the  Othello  of  1622,  he  suggested  that  the  former 
'  may  have  been,  like  the  original  Hamlet,  barely  an  outline,  sufficient  for  dramatic 
'  effect,  containing  all  the  incidents  and  characters,  but  wanting  some  of  the  heightened 
'  poetry  and  intense  passion  of  the  drama  we  now  read.' 

The  controversy  that  arose  in  1859  over  the  genuineness  of  the  MS  Corrections  in 
Collier's  Second  Folio,  extended  to  the  other  Shakespearian  documents  put  forth  by  Col- 
lier in  his  JVew  Tacts  and  New  Tarticulars,  and  among  them  to  the  papers  in  Bridge- 
water  House,  with  the  item  of  ^64  paid  to  'Burbidge's  players  for  Othello''  in  1602, 
the  only  one  which  concerns  us  here.  I  do  not  find  that  this  paper  is  anywhere,  early 
in  the  controversy,  specifically  mentioned  as  spurious.  Halliwell,  to  whose  opinion  as 
to  the  genuineness  of  the  five  Bridgewater  documents  great  weight  is  deservedly  attached, 
did  not  see  this  Othello  item  (Hamilton's  Inquiry,  p.  81),  and  although  Hamilton,  in 
his  Inquiry  (p.  84),  says  that  '  these  [five]  documents  are  given  in  Appendix  I,'  yet 
when  we  turn  to  Appendix  I,  this  Othello  item  is  not  there,  and  it  is  stated  (p.  109) 
that  there  are  six  documents,  and  when  we  come  to  count  them  we  find  that  there  are, 
in  all,  seven  documents ;  and  had  the  Othello  item  been  given,  there  would  have  been 
eight.  I  dare  say  this  confusion,  or  discrepancy,  is  all  my  own,  and  shall  accept  with 
equanimity  any  imputation  on  my  editorial  fidelity  or  capacity.  I  might  as  well  con- 
fess, at  once,  not  merely  to  an  indifference,  but  to  an  aversion,  to  all  this  discussion  over 
the  authorship  of  these  documents.  It  is  one  thing  to  prove  a  document  a  forgery,  but 
it  is  another,  and  a  very  different  thing,  to  say  who  is  the  forger.  The  imputation  of 
dishonesty,  and  a  motiveless  dishonesty  at  that,  cast  upon  one  to  whom  every  student 
of  dramatic  history  is  under  lasting  obligations,  is  so  painful  that  I  have  always  avoided 
the  whole  matter;  and  while  ready  to  accept  results,  as  to  genuineness,  arrived  at  by  my 
betters,  must  beg  to  be  suffered  to  retain  my  private  judgement  as  to  the  hand  by  which 
the  dishonesty  was  committed.     While  thus  confessing  that  my  reading  has  not  been 


DATE   OF  COMPOSITION  349 

thorough,  I  wish  it  understood  that,  from  what  I  have  read,  I  have  received  the  deep 
impression  that  if  these  documents,  and  the  MS  corrections  in  F2,  are  forged,  it  was  not 
Collier  who  was  guilty ;  he  must  have  been  the  dupe,  not  the  forger.  In  the  department 
of  '  the  Collier  controversy '  my  library  is  incomplete,  and  will  remain  so.  I  have  felt 
that  this  obtrusive  personal  reference  is  necessary  to  explain  the  omission  of  all  discus- 
sion as  to  the  character,  genuine  or  otherwise,  of  this  reference  by  Collier  to  the  per- 
formance of  Othello  in  1602.  Dyce,  in  his  first  edition  (vol.  i,  p.  lxix),  quotes  Collier, 
but  with  a  caveat.  Staunton  is  more  outspoken.  In  his  Preface  to  Othello,  alluding 
to  this  Bridgewater  item,  he  says,  •  the  suspicion  long  entertained  that  the  Shakespear- 
ian documents  in  that  collection  are  modern  fabrications  having  now  deepened  almost 
into  certainty,  the  extract  in  question  is  of  no  historical  value.'  Halliwell,  in  his 
Folio  Edition  (1865,  vol.  i,  p.  188),  while  stating  the  questionable  character  of  all  the 
Bridgewater  documents,  passes  no  judgement  on  the  Othello  item,  because  that  one, 
as  he  says,  he  had  not  seen.  In  his  Preface  to  Othello  in  that  same  edition,  he 
passes  it  over  in  silence.  Dyce,  in  his  Second  Edition  (1866,  vol.  i,  p.  77),  quotes 
Staunton's  verdict,  and  adds,  from  Hardy's  Review  of  the  Present  State  of  the  Shake- 
spearian Controversy,  p.  60 :  '  The  writing,  the  ink,  and  the  signature  [of  the  paper 
containing  the  Othello  item]  equally  condemn  it  at  once.'  I  can  find  no  notice  of  it 
in  Halliwell-Phillipps's  Outlines  of  the  Life  of  Shakespeare,  1885,  5th  edition. 

Here  we  must  leave  its  further  consideration,  and  turn  to  the  Editors  in  chronolog- 
ical order.  The  next  in  point  of  time  is  Grant  White,  who,  in  his  First  Edition,  was 
strongly  influenced  by  Warburton's  theory,  and  inclined  to  place  the  date  in  161 1. 
'  It  seems  impossible  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that  this  passage  [i.  e.,  '  our  new  heraldry 
' '  is  hands,  not  hearts  ']  was  written  after  the  creation  of  the  first  baronets  ' ;  '  although 
'  it  is  possible  that  the  play  was  written  before  the  creation,  and  that  the  allusion  was 

*  introduced  immediately  afterwards,  it  is  not  probable.'  Collier's  Bridgewater  docu- 
ment has  been  '  pronounced  a  forgery,'  but  even  should  it  '  prove  genuine,  the  perform- 
'  ance  of  a  play  called   Othello  by  '  Burbidge's  players,'  in  1602,  cannot,  for  reasons  to 

be  presently  given,  be  accepted  as  conclusive  evidence  that  Shakespeare's  tragedy  was 
'  then  written.  As  to  the  genuineness  '  of  Cunningham's  item  from  the  Revels  Account, 
there  can  be  no  doubt ;  and  '  the  probability  seems  strong  that  the  play  in  question  was 
'  Shakespeare's  Othello.  But  is  it  certain  ?  Not  quite,  in  my  opinion.  It  may  have 
«  been  a  play  founded  on  Giraldi  Cinthio's  story,  and  called  The  Moor  of  Venice,  which 
'  was  written  by  another  playwright,  and  which,  being  the  property  of  his  company, 

*  Shakespeare  afterwards  entirely  re-wrote,  taking  the  names  of  Othello  and  Iago  from 
1  the  History  of  the  Prince  of  Denmark,  before  mentioned.      This  supposition  is  so 

*  much  in  accordance  with  Shakespeare's  practice,  and  the  heraldic  allusion  before 
'  mentioned  is  entitled  to  such  weight  in  the  decision  of  the  question,  that,  although 
'  there  seems  no  sufficient  ground  for  a  fixed  opinion  upon  the  subject,  I  am  inclined  to 
'place  the  date  of  the  composition  of  this  tragedy  rather  after  1 61 1  than  before  that 

*  year.     There  is  yet  another  fact  which  leads  towards  this  conclusion Troilus 

*  and  Cressida  and  Pericles  were  published  in  1609;  and  after  a  lapse  of  thirteen 
'  years  without  the  appearance  of  one  of  Shakespeare's  dramas  from  the  press,  this  trag- 
'  edy  was  published  in  1622,  although  there  were  then  nineteen  of  no  inferior  rank 

*  among  his  works  which  were  known  to  the  public  only  upon  the  stage.  Why  this 
'  long  interval  passed  thus  unimproved  by  the  dealers  in  dramatic  literature,  and  why 
'  this  play  was  chosen  from  among  so  many,  to  be  published  only  a  year  before  the 
'  appearance  of  the  collected  edition,  (the  intentions  in  regard  to  which  could  hardly 
« have  been  unknown  to  the  trade,  or  even  to  the  public,)  can  only  be  a  matter  of  very 


35o 


APPENDIX 


'  vague  conjecture.  We  know  that  it  was  high  in  general  favour;  but  I  am  incline5 
1  to  the  opinion  that  in  addition  to  this  claim  upon  a  publisher's  notice,  it  had  also  that 
of  being  one  of  its  author's  very  latest  productions.  It  certainly  seems  strange  that 
1  after  thirteen  years  had  passed  without  the  publication  of  one  of  Shakespeare's  plays, 
1  during  the  first  half  of  which  period  he  produced  works  which  were  as  well  adapted  for 
'  the  press  as  any  that  had  previously  been  issued,  a  publisher  should  go  back  at  least 

•  eighteen  years  for  one,  which  was  the  case  if  The  Moor  of  Venise  performed  before  King 
'  James,  in  1604  was  Shakespeare's  Othello,  in  the  only  form  in  which  it  is  known  to  us.' 

If  there  were  in  those  days  only  one  play  called  The  Moor  of  Vents,  and  if  the 
heraldic  allusion  were  not  a  later  insertion,  it  was  reserved  for  Sir  Frederic  Madden 
to  overthrow  completely  Warburton's  date  of  1 61 1.  Among  the  MSS  in  the  British 
Museum  there  is  an  account  of  the  journey  in  England  of  Lewis  Frederick,  Prince  of 
Wirtemberg,  in  1610,  'which  has  been  briefly  penned  in  the  French  language  by  me, 
Hans  Jacob  Wurmsser  von  Vendenheym.'  In  this  journal  Madden  found  the  follow- 
ing entry  in  the  month  of  April :  '  Lundi,  30.  S.  E.  alia  au  Globe  lieu  ordinaire  ou  Ton 
joue  les  Commedies,  y  fut  represents  l'histoire  du  More  de  Venise.' 

Halliwell  in  his  Folio  edition,  relying  on  the  Revels  Book,  puts  the  date  of  com- 
position 'some  time  previously  to  November  1st,  1604,'  and  adds  a  reference  to  the  per- 
formance of  the  play  seen  by  the  Prince  of  Wirtemberg;  and,  'again,  in  an  account  of 
'  plays  acted  before  Prince  Charles,  the  Lady  Elizabeth,  and  the  Prince  Palatine  Elector, 
'  early  in  the  year  1613,  in  both  instances  under  its  title  of  the  '  Moor  of  Venice.'  .... 
'  The  twelfth  Public  Act,  which  was  passed  in  the  first  Parliament  of  James,  some  time 
between  March  19th  and  July  7th,  1604,  was  levelled  'against  conjuration,  witch- 
' '  crafte,  and  dealinge  with  evill  and  wicked  spirits.'  [Cited  by  Grey,  see  I,  iii,  76.] 
'  In  the  course  of  this  Act  it  is  enacted,  that  '  if  any  person  or  persons  shall,  from  and 
' '  after  the  feaste  of  Saint  Michaell,  the  Archangell  next  comminge,  take  upon  him  or 
' '  them  by  witchcrafte,  mchantment,  charme  or  sorcerie,  to  tell  or  declare  in  what  place 
' '  any  treasure  of  golde  or  silver  should  or  might  be  founde  or  had  in  the  earth  or  other 
' '  secret  places,  or  where  goodes  or  thinges  loste  or  stollen  should  be  founde  or  become, 
' '  or  to  the  intent  to  provoke  any  person  to  unlawfull  love,''  then  such  person  or  persons, 
'  if  convicted,  '  shall  for  the  said  offence  suffer  imprisonment  by  the  space  of  one  whole 
« '  yere  without  baile  or  maineprise,  and  once  in  everie  quarter  of  saide  yere  shall,  in  some 
' '  markett  towne  upon  the  markett  day,  or  at  such  tyme  as  any  faire  shal  be  kepte  there, 
' '  stande  openlie  upon  the  pillorie  by  the  space  of  sixe  houres,  and  there  shall  openlie 
' '  confesse  his  or  her  error  and  offence.'     It  seems  probable  that  part  of  the  First  Act 

•  of  Othello  would  not  have  assumed  the  form  it  does,  had  not  the  author  been  familiar 
'  with  the  statute,  in  common  with  the  public  of  the  day,  the  Duke  referring  to  such 

•  a  Law  when  he  tells  Brabantio,  that  his  accusation  of  the  employment  of  witchcraft 
'  shall  be  impartially  investigated.  If  this  be  the  case,  the  date  of  the  composition  of 
'this  tragedy  may  be  positively  assigned  to  the  year  1604.'  To  this  note  Halliwell- 
Phillipps  adds  in  his  Outlines,  &c,  5th  ed.,  p.  541 :  'Although  the  offence  named  in 
'  the  statute  refers  not  to  the  .use  of  charms  to  make  people  love  one  another,  but  to  the 
'  employment  of  them  for  the  provocation  of  unlawful  love,  yet  still  this  may  be  said  to 
'  have  an  oblique  application  to  the  story  of  the  tragedy  in  the  surreptitious  marriage  of 
'  Othello.     By  the  Act  of  James,  a  previous  one,  5  Eliz.  c.  16,  of  a  similar  character 

•  was  '  utterlie '  repealed,  and  the  object  of  the  second  Act  appears  to  have  been  to 
'  punish  the  sane  offence  more  severely.'  [The  existence  of  an  Act  of  a  'similar 
characler'  already  in  force,  somewhat  weakens  this  argument,  as  it  seems  to  me.] 

In  a  note  on  III,  iii,  183:  'Who  steals  my  purse  steals  trash,'  Halliwell  observes 


DATE   OF  COMPOSITION  351 

•This  is  imitated  by  one  J.  M.  in  an  unpublished  manuscript,  '  The  Newe  Metamor- 
phosis, or  a  Feaste  of  Fancie,  or  Poeticall  Legcndes,  written  by  J.  M.,  gent.,  1600.' 
This  imitation  would  give  the  date  of  the  play  to  an  earlier  period  than  is  stated 
[above],  but  the  year  1600,  attached  to  the  manuscript,  appears  to  indicate  the  era  \v 
which  the  poem  was  commenced : 

"  The  highwayman  that  robs  one  of  his  purse 
"  Is  not  so  bad ;  nay,  these  are  ten  tymes  worse ! 
"  For  these  doe  rob  men  of  their  pretious  name, 
"  And  in  exchange  give  obloquie  and  shame."  ' 

Staunton  in  his  note  on  the  same  passage  cites  this  reference  of  Halliwell,  and 
adds :  '  But  the  reflection  is  sufficiently  trite,  and  in  both  instances,  as  in  many  others 
'  where  it  occurs,  was  probably  founded '  on  passages  in  Homily  XI,  pt.  2,  Homily  XII, 
pt.  I.  Halliwell- Phillipps  {Outlines,  p.  163,  first  ed.)  now  pronounces  the  passage 
from  J.  M.  to  be  '  of  no  critical  value  to  the  enquiry.  Although  the  date  of  1600  appears 
'  on  the  title-page  of  that  poem,  the  manuscript  itself  contains  a  distinct  allusion  by  name 
'to  Speed's  Theatre  of  Great  Britaine,  a  work  first  published  in  161 1.'  (For  a  fuller 
account  of  The  New  Metamorphosis,  see  p.  98,  and  Appendix  C  of  the  2nd  edition  of 
that  fine  revelation  of  Shakespeare's  early  and  wide  influence,  Ingleby's  Centurie  of 
Prayse,  which,  in  this  2nd  Edition,  revised  and  added  to  by  Miss  Lucy  Toulmin 
Smith,  adds  another  instance  of  enduring,  scholarly  work,  in  the  Shakespearian  field, 
done  by  a  woman.) 

In  1868,  The  Athenceum  (20th  of  June)  announced  a  painful  discovery  in  connection 

with  the  Revels  Books,  edited  for  The  Shakespeare  Society  by  Cunningham.     In  The 

Galaxy  oS.  November  following,  the  story  of  the  discovery  was  re-told  by  Grant  White 

with  fuller  details,  which  he  had  'learned  from  authentic  sources.'     It  is  substantially 

as  follows :  '  The  story  about  the  finding  of  the  Revels  Book  had  passed  out  of  mind, 

'  though  not  out  of  memory,  when  about  three  months  ago  an  oldish  man,  broken  down 

'  by  hard  drinking,  appeared  at  the  British  Museum  and  presented  for  sale  an  old  manu- 

'  script  volume,  which  contained,  he  said,  records  of  much  value  about  the  early  English 

drama,  and  which  ♦  his  friend,  Mr  Collier,  said  was  worth  sixty  guineas.'    It  was  Peter 

Cunningham,  and  the  volume  was  that  one  of  the  '  Revels  Accounts,'  which  contained 

the  record  of  the  performance  of  nine  plays  by  Mr  Shaxberd.    The  volume  was  retained 

for  examination  before  purchase,  was  found  to  be  public  property,  and  was,  of  course, 

held  as  such.     So  interesting  a  volume  attracted  at  once  the  attention  of  the  experts 

of  the  Audit  Office,  and  they  at  once  discovered  that,  although  the  book  was  genuine, 

that  part  of  it  which  was  of  greater  interest  than  all  the  rest,  the  leaves  containing  thf* 

'  record  of  the  performance  of  Shakespeare's  plays,  was  a  forgery,  a  gross  forgery  from 

'  beginning  to  end.    Mr  Duffus  Hardy,  of  the  Rolls  Court,  than  whom  there  is  no  better 

*  authority  in  England,  not  excepting  Sir  Frederic  Madden  himself,  so  pronounces  it, 

'  and  so  do  the  distinguished  Shakespearian  scholars,  the  Rev  Alexander  Dyce  and  Mr 

'  J.  O.  Halliwell,  although  they  have  founded  part  of  their  editorial  labours  upon  it 

'  It  is  to  be  remarked,  that  the  important  entries  are  made  upon  two  .'eaves  lying  loose 
'in  the  volume,  and  that  these  leaves,  and  these  only  of  all  the  vol  lme,  have  in  the 
'  margin  the  names  of  the  writers  of  the  plays.  There  is  other  writing  upon  the  mar- 
'  gins,  usually  mere  index  words  for  convenience  of  reference ;  but  here  only  in  the 
'  course  of  thirteen  books,  which  when  put  into  print  make  two  hundred  and  twenty- 
'  six  octavo  pages,  is  the  name  of  the  author  of  a  play,  mask,  or  interlude  given.  This 
'  circumstance  in  itself,  of  which  no  notice  seems  to  have  been  taken,  casts  great  sus 


-^.    * .-    -  .-^_^  .    .^.^... .  ^ ,.    —,.,,■     I.    -,T    -,.      -|T  r      —    -   -    -    ^ -    -        ■      w- 


352  APPENDIX 

'  picion  upon  the  pages  on  which  these  records  appear,  and  when  it  is  found  that  they 

*  are  loose  and  were  never  bound  into  the  volume,  suspicion  approaches  certainty.     But 

*  the  evidence  of  the  writing  itself  is  said  to  settle  the  question  at  once  for  any  person 
•familiar  with  old  manuscript And  now  who  is  the  forger  ?     The  conclusion  that 

'  Peter  Cunningham  is  the  man  seems  unavoidable.' 

From  an  Article  in  The  British  Quarterly  Review  of  January,  1869,  we  learn,  in 
reference  to  this  MS  volume  which  Cunningham  offered  to  the  British  Museum,  that 
'  it  only  required  a  glance  of  the  experts  to  discover  that  the  list  of  Shakespeare's  plays 

*  performed  before  the  Court  in  the  years  alluded  to,  had  been  appended  to  the  old  doc- 

*  uments  by  a  modern  hand.  *  The  trifling  and  uninteresting  items  of  expenditure  are 
'  genuine,  but  the  book  containing  these  appears  to  have  also  contained  some  blank 
'  pages,  into  which  the  forger  has  crammed  the  whole  of  the  writings  referring  to 
'  Shakespeare.' 

But  the  mystery  connected  with  these  entries  in  the  Revels  Book  by  no  means  ends 
here.  Recent  revelations  have  shown  that  Malone  was  right  when  he  said  that  he 
knew  Othello  was  acted  in  1604;  and  the  proof  of  this  knowledge,  which  Boswell 
failed  to  find,  has  been  discovered,  and  it  turns  out  to  be  this  very  list,  which,  or  a  copy 
of  it,  Cunningham  is  accused  of  forging  in  1842.  These  revelations  are  made  in  that 
inestimable  volume,  for  which  too  much  gratitude  to  the  author  cannot  be  shown,  espe- 
cially by  us  Americans,  debarred  as  we  are  from  all  access  to  original  records,  the  Out' 
lines  of  the  Life  of  Shakespeare,  by  Halliwell-Phillipps.  From  the  Fifth  Edition,  18S5, 
p.  607,  I  quote  the  following : 

'  There  are  substantial  reasons  for  believing,  that  although  the  manuscript  [of  the 
'  pages  of  Cunningham's  Revels  Book]  itself  is  spurious,  the  information  which  it  yields 
' is  genuine. 

'In  the  year  1791  Sir  William  Musgrave,  the  First  Commissioner  of  the  Board  of 
'  Audit,  made  arrangements  for  Malone's  inspection  of  the  ancient  manuscripts  then  in 
'  his  office,  these  including  what  he  termed  '  records  of  the  Master  of  the  Revels  for 
' '  1604  and  1605.'  These  facts  are  derived  from  explicit  notes  that  will  be  found  in 
'the  Variorum  Shakespeare,  ed.  1821,  iii,  361,  363.  That  Malone  availed  himself  of 
'  the  opportunity,  and  visited  Somerset  House  for  the  express  purpose  of  examining 
'  the  whole  collection  of  the  documents  that  pertained  to  the  Office  of  the  Revels,  is 
•evident  from  his  own  statement  in  the  work  just  quoted,  iii,  361 ;  and  amongst  the 
'  papers  that  came  with  that  portion  of  his  library  which  was  added  to  the  treasures  of 
'  the  Bodleian  in  182 1  is  a  leaf  which  contains  the  following  memoranda  no  clue,  how- 
'  ever,  being  given  to  the  source  whence  they  were  derived: — '1604  &  1605 — Edd. 
' '  Tylney — Sunday  after  Hallowmas — Merry  Wyves  of  Windsor  perfd  by  the  K's  play- 
' '  ers — Hallamas — in  the  Banquetting  hos.  at  Whitehall  the  Moor  of  Venis — perfd.  by 
' '  the  K's  players — on  S*.  Stephens  Night — Mesure  for  Mesur  by  Shaxberd  "  [as  in  the 
case  of  the  Revels  Book,  only  so  much  is  cited  here  as  applies  to  Othello  and  Shax- 
berd]. 

'  Although  the  contents  of  this  leaf  are  not  in  Malone's  handwriting,  there  is  no 
'  doubt  whatever  that  it  belonged  to  his  collection  of  materials,  it  being  one  with  others 
« of  an  analogous  character  that  were  in  a  loose  bundle  of  scraps  which  formed  part  of 

*  the  original  gift  to  the  Bodleian,  and  had  remained  uncatalogued  and  inaccessible  to 
'  students  until  they  were  bound  in  recent  years  under  the  direction  of  Mr  H.  S.  Har- 

*  per,  one  of  the  officials  of  that  library.  The  leaf  containing  the  abridged  transcript 
'just  given  is  now  preserved  in  MS.  Mai.  29;  and  Mr  Harper,  who  well  recollects 

arranging  the  papers  for  the  formation  of  that  volume,  assures  me  that  there  is  no 


DATE   OF  COMPOSITIOA  353 

•  possibility  of  any  of  its  contents  having  been  acquired  subsequently  to  the  reception 
'of  the  Malone  Collection  in  1821.  There  is  nothing  either  in  the  character  of  the 
1  handwriting  or  in  the  form  of  the  transcript,  to  justify  the  faintest  suspicion  that  it  is 
'  in  itself  a  forgery.  It  has,  on  the  contrary,  every  indication  of  being  a  faithful  abridge- 
'  ment,  sent  most  probably  to  Malone  from  the  Audit  Office,  of  the  list  which  was 
'printed  in  1842.  There  now  arises  the  crucial  enquiry  for  the  period  at  which 
'  Malone  became  acquainted  with  the  information  yielded  by  that  list,  for,  unless  he 
'  met  with  the  latter  for  the  first  time  nearly  at  the  end  of  his  career,  it  is  incredible 
'  that  he  should  have  accepted  the  genuineness  of  any  of  its  important  details  without 
'  a  personal  examination  of  the  original.  Such  an  assumption  is  incompatible  with  the 
'  numerous  traces  of  the  unwonted  assiduity  that  pervaded  his  Shakespearian  researches. 
'  Now,  although  there  is  at  present  no  direct  evidence  of  the  fact,  the  little  that  is  known 
'  favours  the  belief  that  he  was  in  possession  of  the  contents  of  the  existing  forgery 
'  within  a  few  years  after  his  invitation  to  the  Audit  Office  in  1791,  while  nothing  has 
'  been  produced  which  is  in  the  slightest  degree  inconsistent  with  that  opinion.  Let 
'  the  following  intimations  be  carefully  weighed  :  The  material  novelties  that  are  iritro- 
1  duced  into  that  forgery  are  restricted  to  the  dates  therein  given  of  the  performances 
'  of  Othello  and  Measure  for  Measure,  and  the  entries  respecting  these  are  the  only 
'  items  which  Malone  would  have  been  absolutely  compelled  to  notice  in  his  disserta- 
'  tion  on  the  order  of  Shakespeare's  plays.  With  respect  to  the  first,  he  took  the  new 
1  chronological  fact  for  granted  when  he  made  the  following  decisive  statement, — '  we 
' '  know  it  {Othello}  was  acted  in  1604,  and  I  have  therefore  placed  it  in  that  year,' — 
'important  words  that  were  penned  before  his  death  in  181 2  {Variorum  Shakespeare, 

*  ed.  1 82 1,  ii,  404)  ;  and  there  can  hardly  be  a  reasonable  doubt  that  he  was  relying  on 
'  the  same  testimony  when  he  observed  in  another  work :  '  I  formerly  thought  that 
' '  Othello  was  one  of  our  great  dramatic  poet's  latest  compositions,  but  I  now  know, 
' '  from  indisputable  evidence,  that  was  not  the  case ' — note  to  a  passage  in  Dryden's 
'  Grounds  of  Criticism,  ed.  1800,  pp.  258,  259.  If  the  former  work,  the  Variorum  of 
'  1 82 1,  had  not  been  impaired  by  the  disadvantages  attending  its  posthumous  com- 
'  pilation,  it  being  the  product  of  Malone's  imperfectly  revised  text  and  essays,  the  con- 
'  firmation  of  his  assertion  respecting  the  date  of  the  tragedy  would  no  doubt  have  been 
'  given ;  and  to  the  same  unfortunate  accident  must  be  imputed  the  circumstance  of  his 
'  observations  on  the  date  of  Measure  for  Measure  in  that  edition  being  a  mere  reprint 
'  of  those  which  had  appeared  in  1790.  It  is  altogether  impossible  that  so  experiencea 
'  a  record-student  as  Malone  could  have  been  even  transiently  deceived  by  the  forgery 
'  now  in  existence,  while  the  character  of  its  ink  encourages  the  suspicion  that  it  could 
'  not  have  been  perpetrated  until  long  after  his  death  in  181 2.  The  latter  opinion  is  to 
'  some  extent  supported  by  its  entries  not  belonging  to  the  more  graphic  species  of  lite- 
'  rary  frauds  that  were  current  before  that  period.  Then  there  is  the  extreme  improb- 
'  ability  that  Malone  should  have  lighted  upon  two  documents,  each  of  them  yielding 
'  the  unexpected  information  of  the  early  date  of  Othello,  while  his  acknowledged  rigid 

♦  integrity  excludes  the  very  thought  that  he  would  have  been  accessory  to  a  deception 
'  in  the  matter.  It  may,  therefore,  on  the  whole,  be  fairly  presumed  that  he  had  access 
'•  in  or  before  1800  to  a  genuine  manuscript  that  included  in  some  form  the  entries  that 
'  are  given  in  the  abridged  transcript ;  for  we  may  feel  sure  that  he  would  never  have 
'  used  the  words  '  indisputable  evidence '  in  respect  to  one  of  them  until  he  had  made 
'  a  personal  scrutiny  of  the  original,  even  if  his  residence  had  not  been,  as  it  was,  within 
'  less  than  an  hour's  walk  from  the  Audit  Office.    There  appears  to  be  only  one  solution 

*  that  reconciles  all  the  known  facts  of  the  case.     It  is  that  the  forger  had  met  with, 

23 


354 


APPENDIX 


*  and  reproduced  in  a  simulated  form,  trustworthy  extracts  from  a  genuine  record  that 
'  had  disappeared  from  that  Office.     This  view  of  the  case  is  essentially  supported  by 

*  what  is,  in  respect  to  the  present  inquiry,  the  important  discovery  at  Hatfield  of  the 
'  note  of  Sir  Walter  Cope,  which  mentions  the  revival  of  Love's  Labour's  Lost  by  the 
'  King's  Company  in  or  shortly  before  January,  1605,  an  evidence  that  could  not  have 

*  been  known  to  the  imposter,  and  one  of  a  fact  that  would  have  been  beyond  even  the 
1  remote  probability  of  a  successful  conjecture.  On  the  other  hand,  with  the  single  excep- 
'  tion  of  the  day  assigned  for  the  performance  of  that  comedy,  there  are  no  questionable 
'  indications  of  any  kind  in  the  contents  of  the  fabricated  list,  nothing  that  cannot  be  either 

*  explained  or  corroborated.     The  only  other  feature  that  could  really  justify  a  suspicion 

*  is  the  quaint  orthography  of  the  poet's  name,  but  this  no  doubt  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the 
'  illiteracy  of  the  original  scribe ;  and  it  may  be  added  that  similar  forms  were  in  pro 
'vincial  use,  e.  g.,  Shaxber,  Chapel-lane  deed,  1572,  and  Stratford  MS.,  1704;  Shax- 
'  bere,  Henley-street  conveyance,  1573;  Shaxbeer,  Stratford  MS.,  1737.'  [Halliwell- 
Phillipps  here  gives  six  confirmatory  facts  of  the  performance  of  the  plays  from  the 
accounts  of  the  Treasurer  of  the  Chambers,  and  two  for  the  performance  of  the  maskes 
from  Winwood's  Memorials  ;  four  of  these  confirmatory  facts  from  the  accounts  of  the 
Treasurer  of  the  Chambers,  Cunningham  also  reprinted  in  the  Preface  to  his  Revels 
Books,  pp.  xxxvi,  xxxvii.     Halliwell-Phillipps  then  continues]  :  '  It  would  appear  from 

*  these  notices  either  that  the  fabricator  had  not  before  him  a  complete  list  of  the  plays 
'  that  had  been  acted,  or  that  he  intentionally  omitted  a  number  of  entries.    Whatever 

*  may  have  been  the  exact  nature  of  his  proceedings,  it  is  certain  that  the  particulars 
'  of  the  forgery  were  not  based  upon  the  defective  information  given  in  the  official 

*  accounts  of  the  Treasurer  of  the  Chambers.  If  that  had  been  the  case,  it  would  be 
'  necessary  to  assume  that  he  went  recklessly  out  of  his  way  to  insert  a  fictitious  notice 
'  of  a  performance  on  a  day  that  was  not  sanctioned  by  those  accounts,  the  high  proba- 
1  bility  of  the  accuracy  of  that  solitary  discrepancy  having,  moreover,  been  lately  revealed 
'  by  the  discovery  of  an  evidence  to  which  he  could  not  have  had  access.  This  singular 
'  coincidence  may  fairly  be  held  to  outweigh  the  suspicion  attending  the  omission  in  the 
'  Treasurer's  ledger,  an  oversight  of  a  very  unusual  character,  and  yet  an  error  infinitely 

*  more  likely  to  occur  than  the  preternatural  ratification  of  what  would  have  been  by 
'  itself  an  extravagant  conjecture.  Upon  a  balance  of  probabilities  there  can  thus 
'  hardly  be  a  doubt  that  Love's  Labour's  Lost  was  revived  at  Court  very  early  in  Janu- 
'  ary  of  1605  in  a  representation  that  was  not  honoured  by  the  presence  of  the  Queen. 

*  When,  therefore,  a  play  was  to  be  selected  almost  immediately  afterwards  for  the 
'  entertainment  of  Her  Majesty  at  Lord  Southampton's,  it  was  natural  that  Burbadge, 
'  who  had  only  one  day's  notice  of  the  intended  performance,  should  have  recom- 
'  mended  a  drama  which  his  company  had  just  then  in  hand,  and  which  at  the  same 
'  time  would  have  been  a  novelty  to  the  only  spectator  whose  approval  was  regarded.' 

Ward,  whose  valuable  History  of  English  Dramatic  Literature  preceded  Halli- 
well-Phillipps's  discovery  of  Malone's  transcript,  says :  According  to  internal  evidence 
of  character  and  manner  there  can  be  no  difficulty  in  assigning  to  this  play  a  date  not 
far  removed  from  those  of  Macbeth  and  Lear,  a  conclusion  fairly  supported  by  the 
'  tests '  of  versification.  No  trustworthy  external  evidence  exists  as  to  the  date  of 
Othello,  unless  importance  be  attached  to  the  [passage  in  The  Newe  Metamorphosis^ 
cited  by  Halliwell.  But  Halliwell,  as  we  have  seen,  subsequently  withdrew  all  belief 
in  its  critical  value]. 

Hudson,  on  the  strength  of  the  performances  before  the  Duke  of  Wirtemberg  in  1610, 
and  before  Prince  Charles  in  1613,  from  Burbadge's  Elegy  (see  post),  and  from  the  lack 


DATE   OF   COMPOSITION  355 

of  other  authentic  contemporary  notices,  is  inclined  to  give  a  late  date,  either  1609  or 
early  in  1610.     'And  the  internal  evidence  of  style  and  manner  is,  I  think,  in  entire 

*  harmony  with  that  conclusion ;  the  diction,  versification,  and  psychologic  inwardness 

*  being  such  as  to  speak  it  into  close  chronological  neighbourhood  with  Cymbeline  and 

*  Coriolanus? 

(n  the  New  Shakspere  Society's  Transactions,  1874,  p.  10,  Fleay,  by  the  application 
of  Metrical  Tests,  puts  the  date  of  Othello  as  1605,  and  lb.,  p.  450,  Ingram,  in  his  tabula- 
tion of  the  Plays  according  to  the  Nunibers  of  Light  and  Weak  Endings,  gives  Othello 
the  Twenty-first  place,  between  Julius  Ccesar  and  Lear. 

Dowden  (Shakspere,  His  Mind  and  Art,  p.  223) :  Around  the  year  1600  are 
grouped  some  of  the  most  mirthful  comedies  that  Shakspere  ever  wrote.  Then  a  little 
later,  as  soon  as  Hamlet  is  completed,  all  changes.    From  1604  to  1610  a  show  of  tragic 

figures,  like  the  kings  who  passed  before  Macbeth,  filled  the  vision  of  Shakspere 

During  these  years  the  imaginative  fervour  of  Shakspere  was  at  its  highest,  and  sus- 
tained itself  without  abatement.  There  was  no  feverish  excitement  in  his  energy,  and 
there  was  no  pause During  a  certain  brief  season  it  may  have  been  that  Shak- 
spere altogether  ceased  to  write  for  the  stage.  But  now  in  unbroken  series,  year  by 
year,  one  great  tragedy  succeeds  another.  Having  created  Othello,  surely  the  eye  of  a 
poet's  mind  would  demand  quietude,  passive  acceptance  of  some  calm  beauty,  a  period 
of  restoration.  But  Othello  is  pursued  by  Lear,  Lear  by  Macbeth,  Macbeth  by  Antony 
and  Cleopatra,  Antony  and  Cleopatra  by  Coriolanus. 

The  Cambridge  Editors  were,  I  think,  the  first  to  call  attention  to  '  many  oaths 
and  expletives '  in  Qx  (see  Text,  p.  342)  which,  in  all  the  later  editions,  are  altered  or 
omitted.  'This  shows,'  they  continue,  'that  the  MS.  from  which  it  was  printed  had 
« not  been  recently  used  as  an  acting  copy.'  (From  which  I  infer  that  they  would 
throw  back  the  date  of  composition  to  the  early  years  of  the  century.) 

Knight  had  noticed  long  ago  this  difference  in  one  particular  passage  between  the 
Folio  and  Quarto  (see  I,  i,  4),  and  had  conjectured  therefrom  that  the  First  Quarto  was 
written  before  the  passage  of  the  Statute  3  Jac,  1605,  against  profanity  on  the  stage. 

Furnivall  places  it  in  Shakspere's  Third  Period  (1 601-1608),  as  a  companion  to 
Macbeth  in  The  Tempter-yielding  Group,  with  the  date  (?  1604). 

Rolfe  groups  this  play  with  Lear  and  Macbeth,  'when  Shakespeare  was  in  the  full 
maturity  of  his  powers.' 

Grant  White's  latest  conclusion  is  that  while  the  allusion  to  the  '  new  heraldry ' 
points  to  161 1,  we  have  an  authentic  record  of  its  performance  in  April,  1610.  'It  is 
'  more  than  possible,  then,  that  the  tragedy  was  originally  written  before  1606  (in  1605 
'or  1604),  and  that  it  afterwards  received  additions  on  some  special  occasions.' 

If  '  time  will  unfold  what  plighted  cunning  hides,'  we  need  but  cross  our  hands  and 
wait.  (Will  not  a  few  shreds  of  Shakespeare's  mantle  suffice  to  cover  me,  if,  patterned  by 
his  fondness  for  quibbles,  I  suggest  that  '  time  will  unfold  what  plighted  Cunningham 
hides '  ?)  Nothing  else  but  time,  I  fear,  will  ever  solve  the  mystery  of  these  forged 
leaves  in  the  Revels  Book.  That  they  are  forged  is  a  settled  fact.  But,  unlike  other 
forgeries,  their  substance  is  genuine.  Their  items  are  all  authenticated  by  extrinsic 
evidence.  The  rough  transcript  found  by  Halliwell-Phillipps  among  Malone's  papers 
repeats  every  item,  except  three,  word  for  word.  If  this  transcript  is  a  true  copy  from 
a  genuine  original,  then  are  Cunningham's  pages  a  true  copy  from  the  same;  and,  as 
w«  have  seen,  in  Malone's  transcript  Halliwell-Phillipps  puts  entire  faith.  When  a 
scholar  so  learned  and  so  cautious  leads  the  way,  ought  we  not  to  follow  ?  Were  we 
all  to  trust  ourselves  Mnreservedly  to  his  guidance,  it  is  doubtful  if  Shakespearian  liter- 


356  APPENDIX 

ature  would  ever  receive  a  single  harmful  bias  'down  the  ringing  grooves  of  change.' 
Yet,  at  the  same  time,  may  we  not  be  permitted,  just  by  way  of  showing  off  an  inde- 
pendence which  we  do  not  possess,  to  scrutinize  somewhat  closely  for  a  minute  or  two 
that  same  transcript  of  Malone  ? 

One  argument  in  favour  of  its  being  a  draft  from  a  genuine  original,  which  has  great 
weight  with  Ilalliwell-Phillipps,  is  that  Malone  said  he  knew  Othello  was  acted  in  1604, 
which  he  would  not  have  said  without  the  fullest  documentary  proof,  such  proof  as  an 
inspection  of  the  original  would  alone  have  afforded.  We  all  know  how  thoroughly 
trustworthy  Malone  is,  and  nothing  can  be  farther  from  my  intention  than  to  impugn 
his  accuracy ;  and  yet,  although  it  is  not  likely,  it  is  not  inconceivable  that  Malone's 
knowledge  extended  no  farther  than  to  this  rough  transcript.  Malone  had  the 
same  confidence  in  Sir  William  Musgrave  that  we  all  have  in  Malone,  and  if  Sir 
William  had  sent  the  transcript  to  him  as  a  memorandum  of  a  document  awaiting  his 
inspection,  it  is  perfectly  consistent  with  honesty  that  Malone  should  refer  to  the  con- 
tents of  this  transcript  as  '  known '  even  before  he  had  examined  the  original,  or  even 
if  he  had  never  examined  the  original.  Granting  that  this  transcript  came  from  Som- 
erset House,  (and  it  is  not  easy  to  see  whence  else  it  could  have  come,)  Malone  would 
not  hesitate  on  the  strength  of  it  to  believe  in  the  existence  of  the  original  document. 
Indeed  my  supposition  receives  some  faint  colour  from  a  letter  of  Malone  to  Sir  Wil- 
liam Musgrave  in  my  possession.  In  it  Malone  says  :  '  I  mean  to  print  Queen  Eliza- 
beth's letter  to  Lady  Paget  as  it  stands  in  Nichols's  Progresses,  copied  from  a  MS  of 
Dr  Birch  in  the  Museum ;  surely  there  can  be  no  harm  in  saying  that  the  original  is 
still  extant.'  (The  Italics  are  Malone's.)  I  also  happen  to  have  Sir  William  Mus- 
grave's  reply  to  this  very  letter,  in  which  he  shows  more  caution  than  Malone,  for  he 
says :  '  I  certainly  have  not  any  objection  against  your  saying,  "  That  you  have  been 
informed  that  the  original  is  still  extant."  '  Although  this  correspondence  refers  to  facts 
which  it  was  necessaiy  to  keep  secret,  and  therein  is  somewhat  removed  from  ordinary 
cases,  yet  it  is,  perhaps,  worth  citing,  as  showing  that  Malone,  like  all  the  rest  of  us, 
was  willing  to  accept  as  fact  that  which  was  known  to  be  such  by  one  in  whom  he  had 
an  absolute  trust.  Do  we  not  all  accept  The  Oiitlines  of  the  Life  of  Shakespeare  in 
the  same  faith  ?  What  the  original  document  could  have  been  from  which  this  rough 
transcript  was  taken,  it  is  hard  to  imagine.  I  do  not  see  how  it  could  have  belonged 
to  the  Accounts  either  of  the  Treasurer  of  the  Chambers  or  of  the  Master  of  the  Revels. 
The  fact  that  it  gives  the  names  of  the  authors  of  the  plays  renders  it  wholly  unlike 
either;  it  is  anomalous  in  that  regard.  Could  it  have  been  the  hasty  memorandum  of  the 
Revels  accountant,  from  which  he  intended  afterwards  to  fill  out  his  books,  and  for  that 
purpose  left  the  blank  pages  subsequently  utilized  by  Cunningham;  who,  having  found 
the  memorandum,  fulfilled  the  long-neglected  duty,  and  then  destroyed  the  original  ? 
But  these  imaginings  are  idle,  and  particularly  idle  in  one  as  ignorant  in  such  matters 
as  myself.  It  was  the  mistrust  in  this  transcript  of  Malone,  written  in  an  unknown 
hand,  of  an  unknown  date,  from  an  unknown  source,  save  that  it  was  among  Malone's 
papers,  and  unknown,  apparently,  even  to  Bos  well,  that  led  me  to  give  as  large  a  space 
as  I  did  to  Halliwell-Phillipps's  defence  of  it,  which,  be  it  distinctly  remembered,  is 
based  mainly  on  Sir  Walter  Cope's  notice  of  the  revival  of  Love's  Labour's  Lost. 

In  dealing  with  questions  like  this  of  the  date  of  the  composition  of  a  play,  it  seems 
to  me  that  it  is  of  the  first  moment  to  keep  before  us  the  end  and  aim  which  gives  the 
subject  its  importance ;  we  ought  to  adjust  our  lines  of  perspective  and  so  arrange  our 
objects  in  view  that  each  shall  have  its  true  relative  value,  and  that  we  be  not  in  .danger 
of  confounding  nearness  with  magnitude  or  importance.     Every  one  has  a  right  to  select 


DATE   OF   THE  ACTION  357 

his  vanishing-point,  and  arrange  his  lines  as  suit  him  best ;  to  me  it  is  a  great  charm  in 
the  study  of  Shakespeare  that  the  number  of  points  from  which  that  myriad-minded 
man  can  be  studied  are  as  myriad  as  his  mind.  If  we  are  searching  for  the  facts  of 
his  outward  life,  then  the  days  and  months  and  years  when  he  wrote  his  plays  are  of 
essential  importance.  But  if  the  outward  conditions  of  his  muddy  vesture  of  decay  do 
not  attract  us,  and  we  are  straining  to  catch  sound  of  immortal  harmony,  what  profit 
to  us  then  is  there  in  tides  and  times  ?  Would  a  year  or  two,  one  way  or  the  other, 
in  the  composition  of  Othello,  or  a  dozen  years,  for  that  matter,  bring  us  any  nearer  to  a 
knowledge  of  the  Moor  ?  Would  a  single  throb  be  added  to  Romeo's  last  farewell  to 
Juliet  if  we  knew  the  very  day,  or  the  very  hour  of  the  day,  when  Shakespeare  wrote 
the  scene  ?  We  must  beware  that  we  do  not  confound  in  any  question  like  this,  the 
essential  and  the  accidental.  Does  the  history  of  the  Koh-i-nor  add  one  doit  to  its 
value  or  one  tint  to  its  rays  ?  It  is  not  the  knowledge  that  it  was  written  in  1604  or  in 
1704  that  fills  our  theatres  when  Othello  is  on  the  stage. 

Accepting  the  date  of  1604,  I  began  with  a  reliance  on  time,  and  a  trust  in  Halli- 
well-Phillipps;  there  we  may  safely  remain,  •  enshelter'd  and  embay'd.' 


DATE   OF  THE  ACTION 


Malone  (Note  on  II,  i,  1)  :  All  the  modern  editors  following  Rowe  have  supposeu 
the  capital  of  Cyprus  to  be  the  place  where  the  scene  of  Othello  lies  during  the  last  four 
Acts,  but  this  could  not  have  been  Shakespeare's  intention ;  Nicosia,  the  capital  city 
of  Cyprus,  being  situated  nearly  in  the  centre  of  the  island,  and  thirty  miles  distant 
from  the  sea.  The  principal  sea-port  town  of  Cyprus  was  Famagusta,  where  there  was 
formerly  a  strong  fort  and  commodious  haven, — the  only  one  of  any  magnitude  in  the 
island ;  and  there  undoubtedly  the  scene  should  be  placed.  '  Neere  unto  the  haven 
(says  Knolles),  standeth  an  old  castle,  with  four  towers  after  the  ancient  manner  of 
building.'     To  this  castle  we  find  Othello  presently  repairs. 

It  is  observable  that  Cinthio,  whose  novels  were  first  published  in  1565,  makes  no 
mention  of  any  attack  being  made  on  Cyprus  by  the  Turks.  From  our  poet's  having 
mentioned  the  preparations  against  this  island,  which  they  first  assaulted  and  took  from 
the  Venetians  in  1570,  we  may  suppose  that  he  intended  that  year  as  the  era  of  his 
tragedy ;  but  by  mentioning  Rhodes  as  also  likely  to  be  assaulted  by  the  Turks,  he  has 
fallen  into  an  historical  inconsistency,  for  they  were  then  in  quiet  possession  of  that 
island,  of  which  they  became  masters  in  December,  1522;  and  if,  to  evade  this  diffi- 
culty, we  refer  Othello  to  an  era  prior  to  that  year,  there  will  be  an  equal  incongruity ; 
for  from  1473,  when  the  Venetians  first  became  possessed  of  Cyprus,  to  1522,  they  had 
not  been  molested  by  any  Turkish  armament. 

Reed  :  The  time  of  this  play  may  be  ascertained  from  the  following  circumstances 
Selymus  the  Second  formed  his  design  against  Cyprus  in  1569,  and  took  it  in  15  71 
This  was  the  only  attempt  the  Turks  ever  made  upon  that  island  after  it  came  into  the 
hands  of  the  Venetians  (which  was  in  the  year  1473),  wherefore  the  time  must  fall  in 
with  some  part  of  that  interval.  We  learn  from  the  play  that  there  was  a  junction  of 
the  Turkish  fleet  at  Rhodes  in  order  for  the  invasion  of  Cyprus ;  that  it  first  came  sail- 
ing towards  Cyprus,  then  went  to  Rhodes,  there  met  another  squadron,  and  then  re- 
sumed its  way  to  Cyprus.  These  are  real  historical  facts  which  happened  when  Mus- 
tapha,  Selymus's  general,  attacked  Cyprus  in  May,  1570,  which,  therefore,  is  the  true 
period  of  this  performance.     (See  Knolles 's  History  of  the  Turks,  pp.  8.38,  846,  867.) 


358  APPENDIX 

KNIGHT:  The  Republic  of  Venice  became  the  virtual  sovereign  of  Cyprus  in  1471, 
when  it  assumed  the  guardianship  of  the  son  of  Catharine  Cornaio,  who,  being  left  a 
widow,  wanted  the  protection  of  the  Republic  to  maintain  the  power  which  ..er  husband 
had  usurped.  The  island  was  then  first  garrisoned  by  Venetian  troops.  Catharine,  in 
1489,  abdicated  the  sovereignty  in  favour  of  the  Republic.  Cyprus  was  retained  by 
the  Venetians  till  1570,  when  it  was  invaded  by  a  powerful  Turkish  force,  and  was 
finally  subjected  to  the  dominion  of  Selim  II  in  157 1.  From  that  period  it  has  formed 
[until  it  was  acquired  a  few  years  ago  by  England]  a  part  of  the  Turkish  Empire. 
Nicosia,  the  inland  capital  of  the  island,  was  taken  by  storm;  and  Famagusta,  the 
principal  sea-port,  capitulated  after  a  long  and  gallant  defence.  It  is  evident,  there- 
fore, that  we  must  refer  the  action  of  Othello  to  a  period  before  the  subjugation  of 
Cyprus  by  the  Turks.  The  locality  of  the  scenes  after  the  First  Act  must  be  at  Fama- 
gusta, which  was  strongly  fortified, — a  fact  which  Shakespeare  must  have  known,  when 
in  III,  ii,  Othello  says :  '  I  will  be  walking  on  the  works, .' 

Staunton  gives  a  long  extract  from  Knolles's  History  narrating  the  '  circumstances 
originating  the  siege  of  Nicosia,  "the  chief  and  richest  citie  of  all  the  Island,"  and  the 
ultimate  conquest  of  Cyprus  by  the  Turk,  (for  there  was  no  "  segregation  of  the  Turk- 
ish fleet "  as  the  play  supposes,)  of  which  the  most  important,  it  might  be  said  the  only 
important,  items,  (and  Italicized  by  Staunton,)  are  as  follows  :  '  For  Mustapha,  author  of 
that  expedition,  had  before  appointed  Piall  Bassa  at  a  time  prefixed  to  meet  him  at  the 
Rhodes,  and  that  he  that  came  first  should  tarrie  for  the  other,  that  so  they  might 
together  saile  into  Cyprus?  And  again  :  '  The  whole  fleet  at  that  time  consisted  of  two 
hundred  galleys,  amongst  whom  were  diverse  galliots,'  &c. 


DURATION   OF  THE  ACTION 

Shakespeare's  art  in  dealing  with  Time  was  first  noticed  by  Halpin  and  Professor 
Wilson,  and  was  referred  to  in  the  Preface  of  Hamlet,  where  is  given  a  brief  exposition 
of  their  views.  According  to  Professor  Wilson,  Shakespeare  counts  off  days  and  hours, 
as  it  were,  by  two  clocks,  on  one  of  which  the  true  Historic  Time  is  recorded,  and  on 
the  other  the  Dramatic  Time,  or  a  false  show  of  time,  whereby  days,  weeks,  and  months 
may  be  to  the  utmost  contracted.  It  is  as  though  the  hour-hand  pointed  to  historic 
time,  while  the  minute-hand,  recording  fresh  sensations  with  every  swing  of  the  pendu- 
lum, tells  dramatic  time.  While  the  former  has  traveled  from  one  figure  to  another, 
the  latter  has  traversed  the  whole  twelve,  and  is  true  to  the  hour  when  the  hammer 
falls.  We  know  that  but  an  hour  has  passed,  and  yet,  following  the  minute-hand,  we 
have  lived  through  the  whole  twelve.  In  no  one  way,  it  is  submitted,  does  Shake- 
speare show  more  emphatically  than  in  this,  that  he  wrote  his  plays  to  be  heard  and 
not  read.  In  the  theatre  no  trace  is  noted  of  this  art,  or  even  trick  (be  it  respectfully 
termed) ;  while  on  the  printed  page  it  may  be  detected  in  almost  every  Scene.  In  no 
play  is  this  glamour  carried  to  greater  lengths  than  in  Othello.  That  Desdemona 
should  be  murdered  within  thirty-six  hours  after  landing  in  Cypius  is  what  no  spec- 
tator of  the  play  can  readily  believe ;  and  yet  to  the  reader  of  the  tragedy  this  headlong 
speed  is  so  real  that  it  was  proclaimed  two  hundred  years  ago  by  Rymer,  who  hissed 
and  cackled  over  what  he  considered  an  absurdity  so  glaring,  that  he  believed  the 
exposure  would  forever  disgrace  and  dethrone  Shakespeare.  Perhaps  it  is  well  that 
Professor  Wilson  did  not  know  in  whose  footsteps  he  was  unconsciously  treading — but 
to  what  a  different  goal ! 


DURATION  OF   THE  ACTION  359 

Whilst  this  legerdemain  in  regard  to  dramatic  or  llusory  time  is  thus  pronoun :ed  in 
Othello,  in  scarcely  any  other  is  the  historic  or  real  '.ime  more  clearly  noted.  We  can 
follow  the  characters  through  each  day,  nay,  we  can  discover  even  the  very  days  of  the 
week,  and  that  Othello  landed  in  Cyprus  on  Saturday  afternoon. 

In  the  foregoing  pages  no  notes  in  regard  to  this  question  of  time  have  been  included, 
except  one  or  two  here  and  there,  enough  to  recall  to  the  student's  memory  that  such  a 
question  exists,  and  should  be  borne  in  mind. 

It  is  but  fair  to  say,  at  the  outset,  that  there  are  not  wanting  good  scholars  who  deny 
this  theory  of  Double  Time,  and  who  variously  interpret  the  allusions  which  Halpin 
and  Wilson  consider  indications  of  it.  It  will  be,  of  course,  my  endeavour  duly  to  set 
forth  their  opposition ;  but,  for  the  present,  let  the  correctness  of  the  theory  be  assumed, 
and  let  it  be  taken  for  granted  that  here,  in  Othello,  Shakespeare  has  interwoven  two 
different  computations  of  time,  the  historical  or  real,  the  dramatic  or  illusory. 

I  propose  first  to  note  the  passages  which  point  to  Historic  Time,  and  as  briefly  as 
possible ;  the  whole  play  is  at  hand  and  compression  is  obligatory. 

The  drama  opens  at  night.  Within  an  hour  after  the  council  is  adjourned,  Othello 
and  Desdemona  start  for  Cyprus.      This  night  we  may  fancifully  call  the  First  Day, 

How  long  the  voyage  from  Venice  to  Cyprus  lasts,  we  have  no  means  of  knowing. 
The  distance  was  great,  thirteen  or  fourteen  hundred  miles,  and  the  labouring  barks 
were  slow  and  delayed  by  a  tempest ;  ten  days  or  a  fortnight  is  none  too  long.  lago's 
arrival  anticipated  Cassio's  expectation  by  a  se'en  nights'  speed.  The  desperate  tem- 
pest had  lasted  during  the  night,  when  the  wind-shak'd  surge  had  seemed  to  cast 
water  on  the  burning  Bear;  it  had  evidently  cleared  up  in  the  afternoon,  and  the  aerial 
blue  appeared.  The  afternoon  was  Saturday.  At  five  o'clock  the  Herald  announced 
that,  upon  certain  tidings  now  arrived  of  the  perdition  of  the  Turkish  fleet,  there  was 
to  be  sport  and  revels  till  the  bell  have  tolled  eleven.  Othello  tells  Cassio  to  look  to 
the  guard  to-night,  and  before  ten  o'clock  Iago  has  begun  his  temptation  of  Cassio, 
from  which  hour  the  action  steadily  proceeds  through  the  night,  until  Cassio,  after  his 
disgrace,  resolves  to  beseech  the  virtuous  Desdemona  to  undertake  for  him  betimes  in 
the  morning.  Although  on  parting  Iago  wishes  him  good-night,  yet  the  day  was  break- 
ing, and  Cassio  did  not  go  to  bed.  As  soon  as  he  thinks  Emilia  is  stirring,  he  appears 
before  Othello's  dwelling  with  some  musicians,  to  give  his  General  the  good-morrow 
customary  on  the  morning  after  marriage. 

This  is  the  beginning  of  the  Second  Day,  and  in  Cyprus,  and  Sunday. 

Emilia  admits  Cassio,  and  promises  to  bestow  him  where  he  should  have  time  to 
speak  his  bosom  freely  to  Desdemona.  The  great  Third  Scene  of  the  Third  Act  opens 
with  this  interview  between  Desdemona  and  Cassio;  which  is  broken  off  by  the  return  of 
Othello,  with  Iago,  from  an  inspection  of  the  works ;  the  gentle  lady  intercedes  for  the 
disgraced  Lieutenant,  and  here  we  learn  the  days  of  the  week :  'Des.  Good  love,  call  him 
'  back.  Oth.  Not  now,  sweet  Desdemona,  some  other  time.  Des.  But  shall't  be  shortly  ? 
*  Oth.  The  sooner,  sweet,  for  you.  Des.  Shall't  be  to-night  [Sunday],  at  supper?  Oth. 
'  No,  not  to-night.  Des.  To-morrow  [Monday]  dinner  then  ?  Oth.  I  shall  not  dine  at 
'  home ;  I  meet  the  Captains  at  the  citadel.  Des.  Why  then  to-morrow  [Monday]  night, 
'  on  Tuesday  morn.  On  Tuesday  noon  or  night,  on  Wednesday  morn.  I  prithee  thee 
name  the  time,  but  let  it  not  exceed  three  days.' 

Before  this  scene  closes  Othello  has  become  lago's  victim,  and  withdraws  to  furnish 
nimself  with  some  swift  means  of  death  for  Desdemona,  but  first  he  wishes  to  discover 
the  truth  of  lago's  assertion  that  Cassio  has  the  handkerchief;  to  Desdemona  he  there- 
tort   goes  at  once.     That  Othello  goes  instantly  to  Desdemona,  I  infer  not  only  froru 


360  APPENDIX 

the  eternal  fitness  of  things,  (he  never  could  have  been  in  her  company  one  minute 
without  resolving  his  doubts),  but  also  from  his  Aside  when  he  first  greets  her :  *  Oh 
hardness  to  dissemble !'  This  is  his  first  attempt  at  dissembling,  therefore  the  first  time 
that  he  had  seen  her.  He  finds  that  the  handkerchief  is  gone,  and  leaves  her  in  fury. 
Cassio  sees  Bianca  and  promises  to  call  on  her  that  evening,  which  is  of  course  Sunday 
evening,  and  with  this  interview  between  Cassio  and  Bianca  the  Third  Act  closes. 

The  only  chance  thus  far,  it  seems  to  me,  for  any  time  to  elapse  is  between  the  close 
of  the  Third  and  the  beginning  of  the  Fourth  Act.  I  was  at  one  time  in  great  hopes 
that  at  least  some  days  could  be  wedged  in  here,  especially  since  the  conversation,  with 
which  the  Act  opens,  between  Iago  and  Othello  is  not  only  general  in  its  character,  as 
though  they  were  discussing  some  abstract  question  of  morality,  but  Othello  had  actually 
forgotten  all  about  the  handkerchief.  I  was  the  victim  of  Shakespeare's  art,  and  two 
little  words  of  Bianca's  bind  the  two  Acts  together  as  one  in  point  of  time.  Bianca 
asks  Cassio  what  he  meant  by  that  same  handkerchief  which  he  gave  her  even  now; 
so  that  we  are  still  in  Sunday,  in  the  afternoon,  after  the  generous  islanders  invited  by 
Othello  had  had  their  dinner.  Bianca  repeats  her  invitation  to  Cassio  to  come  to  supper 
to-night.  To  supper  likewise  Othello  invites  Lodovico,  who  arrives  from  Venice  before 
this  Scene  closes.  Before  the  next  Scene  closes  the  trumpets  summon  to  this  very 
supper.  After  Bianca's  supper  Cassio  is  wounded,  and  after  the  supper  to  the  Vene- 
tian Ambassadors,  Desdemona  is  smothered, — on  Sunday  night,  within  thirty-six  hours 
after  her  arrival  in  Cyprus. 

The  indications  of  Dramatic  Time  are  not  so  easily  enumerated  ;  they  are  often  mere 
hints,  vanishing  touches,  leaving  an  impression  not  by  their  force,  but  by  their  frequent 
and  varied  repetition. 

It  is  not  till  the  Moor  is  caught  in  the  whirlwind  of  passion  raised  by  Iago  that  any 
necessity  arises  for  these  hints  of  Protracted  Time.  But,  when  once  caught  up,  it  is 
of  the  utmost  necessity  that  the  action  should  drive  ahead  in  storm ;  one  minute's  calm 
would  explain  everything ;  yet  the  delusion  must  be  complete  that  Othello's  passion  is 
of  gradual  growth.  Before  our  eyes  it  must  be  made  to  pass  through  all  stages  of  devel- 
opment. In  the  First  Act,  therefore,  there  are  but  few  indications,  that  I  can  detect, 
of  this  Dramatic  Time.  There  are  one  or  two  towards  the  close  of  it,  where  Iago  tells 
Roderigo  that  '  It  cannot  be  that  Desdemona  should  long  continue  her  love  to  the 
Moor,  nor  he  his  to  her,  it  was  a  violent  commencement,  and  thou  shalt  see  an  answer- 
able sequestration.'  The  past  tense  flits  by  us,  and  the  marriage  of  the  Moor,  within 
the  hour,  seems  already  like  an  old  story.  Again,  before  the  Senate,  Othello  speaks  as 
though  this  were  not  the  first  campaign  in  which  he  had  been  accompanied  by  his  wife. 
He  promises  for  himself  with  an  assurance,  clearly  born  of  experience,  when  he  repels 
the  thought  that  •  Light-winged  toys  of  feathered  Cupid  '  could  '  seel  his  speculative  and 
officed  instruments.'  Again,  Iago,  at  the  very  close,  leaves  us  with  the  impression  that 
his  knavery  will  be  slow  in  its  advances.  '  Let's  see :  After  some  time  to  abuse  Othello's 
ear.'  Trusting  in  this  promise  that  the  process  will  be  slow,  we  accept  the  order  of  the 
subsequent  events  as  in  fulfilment  of  it. 

Of  one  fact  in  this  First  Act  it  is  important  to  be  sure,  before  we  leave  it,  and  this  is 
that  Othello's  marriage  takes  place  on  the  very  night  that  it  was  discovered  by  Brabantio ; 
the  first  words  that  Roderigo  utters  refer  to  it  as  an  end  of  all  his  hopes,  and  Iago  tells 
Cassio  shortly  afterwards  that  Othello  •  is  made  forever  if  the  land  carack  prove  lawful 
prize  which  he  has  secured  to-night.1  If  we  may  suppose  that  Othello  and  Desdemona 
were  married  for  some  time  before  the  night  on  which  the  play  opens,  then  many  of  the 
difficulties  of  the  Short  Time  in  Cyprus  disappear.     This  theory  was  started  and  dis- 


DURATION  OF  THE  ACTION  36 1 

proved  by  Professor  Wilson  in  his  Christopher  under  Canvas  for  April,  1850,  p.  510.* 
Seward,  one  of  the  interlocutors,  is  represented  as  starting  this  theory,  '  That  there  was 
long  time  at  Venice  after  marriage,  and  short  time  at  Cyprus;'  and  in  support  urged  that 

*  the  pliant  hour '  which  Othello  says  he  once  took  to  ask  Desdemona  to  be  his  wife,  can- 
not refer  to  the  day  on  which  the  play  commences ;  also,  that  much  weight  should  be 
given  to  the  calm  tone,  the  husband-like  and  matron-like  demeanor,  of  Othello  and 
Desdemona  when  confronted  with  the  Senate.     Professor  Wilson  thus  disposes  of  it. 

•  North.  The  thing  most  preposterous  to  me  in  a  long  marriage  at  Venice,  is  the 

*  continued  lying  position  in  which  it  places  Othello  and  Desdemona  towards  her  father. 

*  Two  months — say — or  three  or  four — of  difficult  deception  !  when  the  uppermost  cha- 
1  racteristic  of  both  is  clear-souledness — the  most  magnanimous  sincerity.  By  that, 
'  before  anything  else,  are  they  kindred  and  fit  for  one  another.  On  that,  before  any- 
thing else,  is  the  Tragedy  grounded — on  his  unsuspicious  openness,  which  is  drawn, 
'  against  its  own  nature,  to  suspect  her  purity  that  lies  open  as  earth's  bosom  to  the  sun. 
'  And  she  is  to  be  killed  for  a  dissembler !  In  either,  immense  contrast  between  the 
'  person  and  fate.     That  These  Two  should  truckle  to  a  domestic  lie ! 

1  Seward.  Why  should  not  Othello  marry  Desdemona,  and  keep  her  at  her  father's 
'  as  theorized  ? 

1  North.  It  is  out  of  his  character.  He  has  the  spirit  of  command,  of  lordship,  of  do- 
'  minion — an  animus  imperiosus.  This  element  must  be  granted  to  fit  him  for  his  place ; 
'  and  it  is  intimated,  and  is  consistent  with  and  essential  to  his  whole  fabric  of  mind. 
'  Then,  he  would  not  put  that  which  belonged  to  him  out  of  his  power,  in  hostile  keep- 
'  ing — his  wife  and  not  his  wife.  It  is  contrary  to  his  great  love,  which  desires  and 
'  would  feed  upon  her  continual  presence.  And  against  his  discretion,  prudence,  or 
« common  sense,  to  risk  that  Brabantio,  discovering,  might  in  fury  take  sudden  violent 

*  measures — shut  her  up  in  a  convent,  or  turn  her  into  the  streets,  or  who  knows  what 

'  — kill  her The  least  that  can  be  said  is,  that  it  invests  the  sanctimony  of  mar- 

'  riage  with  the  air  of  an  illicit  amour. 

'  Talboys.  Then  the  high-minded  Othello  running  the  perpetual  and  imminent  risk 
'  of  being  caught  thieving  —  slipping  through  loop-holes  —  mouse-holes  —  key-holes. 
1  What  in  Romeo  and  Juliet  is  romance,  between  Othello  and  Desdemona  is  almost 
'  pollution. 

'  North.  What  a  desolating  of  the  Manners  of  the  Play  !  Will  you  then,  in  order 
'  to  evade  a  difficulty  of  the  mechanical  construction,  clog  and  whelm  the  poetry,  and 
'  moral  greatness  of  the  Play,  with  a  preliminary  debasement  ?     Introduce  your  Hero 

*  and  Heroine  under  a  cloud  ?  .  .  .  .  My  dear  Seward — pray,  meditate  but  for  a  moment 
'  on  these  words  of  Desdemona  in  the  Council  Chamber :  "  My  noble  Father,  I  do  per- 
'  ceive  here  A  divided  duty." — I,  iii,  205-214.  These  are  weighty  words — of  grave 
'  and  solemn  import — and  the  time  has  come  when  Desdemona  the  Daughter  is  to  be 

*  Desdemona  the  Wife.     She  tells  simply  and  sedately — affectionately  and  gratefully — 

*  the  great  primal  Truth  of  this  our  human  and  social  life.     Hitherto  her  Father  has 

*  been  to  her  the  Lord  of  Duty — the  Lord  of  Duty  henceforth  is  to  be  her  Husband. 
1  Othello,  up  to  that  night,  had  been  but  her  Lover;  and  up  to  that  night — for  the  hid- 

*  den  wooing  was  nothing  to  be  ashamed  of  or  repented — there  had  been  to  her  no 

*  S^e  Blackwood's  Magazine  for  November,  1849,  April  and  May,  1850:  These  articles,  having 
been,  in  substance,  reprinted  in  the  Transactions  0/  The  New  Shakspere  Society,  1875-76  and  1877- 
79,  are  accessible  to  all.  These  Dies  Boreales  are  brilliant,  though  lacking  somewhat  of  the  charm 
of  the  youth  and  lustihood  and  poetry  of  the  Nodes  Ambrosiana ,  with  their  central  figure,  that 
idealized  character, — the  Shepherd. — Ed. 


362  APPENDIX 

'divided  Duty' — to  her  Father's  happiness  lad  been  devoted  her  whole  filial  heart. 
But  had  she  been  a  married  woman  for  week?  or  months  before,  how  insincere — how 
hypocritical  had  that  appeal  been  felt  by  herself  to  be,  as  it  issued  from  her  lips !  The 
Duty  had,  in  that  case,  been  '  divided '  before — and  in  a  way  not  pleasant  for  us  to 
think  of — to  her  Father  violated  or  extinct.  Grant  that  Othello  and  Desdemona  must 
be  married  for  two  months  before  he  murders  her — that  our  hearts  and  imaginations 
require  it.  The  resemblance  to  the  ordinary  course  of  human  affairs  asks  it.  We 
cannot  bear  that  he  shall  extinguish  her  and  himself — both  having  sipped  only,  and 
not  quaffed,  from  the  cup  of  hymeneal  felicity.  Your  soul  is  outraged  by  so  harsh  and 
malignant  a  procedure  of  the  Three  Sisters.  Extended  time  is  required  for  the  prob- 
ability— the  steps  of  change  in  the  heart  of  Othello  require  it — the  construction  and 
accumulation  of  proofs  require  it — the  wheel  of  events  usually  rolls  with  something 
of  leisure  and  measure.  So  is  it  in  the  real  World — so  must  it  seem  to  be  on  the 
Stage — else  no  verisimilitude — no  '  veluti  in  speculum.'  '  Two  months  shall  elapse 
between  marriage  and  murder,'  says  Shakespeare — going  to  write.  They  must  pass  at 
Venice,  or  they  must  pass  at  Cyprus.  Place  Shakespeare  in  this  position,  and  which 
will  he  choose  ?  If  at  Venice,  a  main  requiring  condition  is  not  satisfied.  For  in  the 
fits  and  snatches  of  the  clandestine  marriage  Othello  has  never  possessed  with  full 
embrace,  and  heart  overflowing,  the  happiness  which  he  destroys.  If  an  earthquake 
is  to  ruin  a  palace,  it  must  be  built  up  to  the  battlements  and  pinnacles ;  furnished, 
occupied,  made  the  seat  of  Pleasure,  Pomp,  and  Power ;  and  then  shaken  into  heaps 
— or  you  have  but  half  a  story.  Only  at  Cyprus,  Othello  possesses  Desdemona.  There 
where  he  is  Lord  of  his  Office,  Lord  over  the  Allegiance  of  soldier  and  civilian — of  a 
whole  population — Lord  of  the  Island,  which,  sea-surrounded,  is  as  a  world  of  itself — 
Lord  of  his  will — Lord  of  his  Wife.  But  if,  my  dear  Seward,  Shakespeare  elects 
time  at  Venice,  he  wilfully  clouds  his  two  excellent  Persons  with  many  shadows  of 
indecorum,  and  clogs  his  Action  with  a  procedure  and  a  state  of  affairs,  which  your 
Imagination  loses  itself  in  attempting  to  define — with  improbabilities — with  impracti- 
cabilities— with  impossibilities.  If  he  was  resolute  to  have  a  well- sustained  logic  of 
Time,  I  say  it  was  better  for  him  to  have  his  Two  Months  distinct  at  Cyprus.  I  say 
that,  with  his  creative  powers,  if  he  was  determined  to  have  Two  Calendar  Months 
from  the  First  of  May  to  the  First  of  July,  and  then  in  One  Day  distinctly  the  first 
suspicion  sown  and  the  murder  done,  nothing  could  have  been  easier  to  him  than  to 
have  imagined,  and  indicated,  and  hurried  over  the  required  gap  of  time ;  and  that  he 
would  have  been  bound  to  prefer  this  course  to  that  inexplicable  marriage  and  no  mar- 
riage at  Venice.  But  Shakespeare,  my  dear  Boys,  had  a  better  escape.  Wittingly 
or  unwittingly,  he  exempted  himself  from  the  obligation  of  walking  by  the  Calendar. 
He  knew,  or  he  felt,  that  the  fair  proportionate  structure  of  the  Action  required  liberal 
time  at  Cyprus.  He  took  it ;  for  there  it  is,  recognized  in  the  consciousness  of  every 
sitting  or  standing  spectator.  He  knew,  or  he  felt,  that  the  passionate  expectation  to 
be  sustained  in  the  bosoms  of  his  audience  required  a  rapidity  of  movement  in  his 
Murder-Plot,  and  it  moves  on  feet  of  fire. 

*  Seward.  Venice  is  beginning  to  fade  from  my  ken. 

*  North.  You  must  go  to  the  Tremendous  Double  Time  at  Cyprus,  knowing 
'  that  the  solution  is  to  be  had  there,  or  nowhere.'  * 

Daniel  [Time  Analysis  of  the  Plots,  &c,  New  Shaksfere  Society  Trans.,  1877—79, 
p.  239)  fully  agrees  with  Professor  Wilson  that  there  is  no  long  time  at  Venice  after 

*  These  extracts  are  not  literal  transcripts  ;  space  obliges  me  to  condense  them  painfully. — Ed. 


DURATION  OF  THE  ACTION  363 

marriage,  but  thinks  that  the  supposition  of  '  long  time  at  Venice  before  marriage '  is 
necessary,  as  it  is  the  very  foundation  whereon  Iago  subsequently  builds  up  Othello's 
jealousy  by  his  repeated  references  to  Cassio's  former  connection  with  Desdemona,  and 
of  his  having  been  from  first  to  last  the  confidant  of  Othello's  wooing.  Wilson  having 
said  that  there  is  not  the  slightest  ground  for  supposing  an  acquaintance,  or,  at  least,  inti- 
macy, between  Desdemona  and  Emilia  before  they  started  together  from  Venice,  Daniel 
controverts  it,  and  asserts  that,  '  rightly  considered  there  is  good  ground  for  supposing 
a  prior  acquaintance  in  the  very  first  lines  of  the  play.'  Roderigo's  first  speech, 
'  Never  tell  me,  &c.'  is,  says  Daniel,  <  unintelligible,  Roderigo's  whole  connection  with 
'  Iago  impossible,  except  on  the  supposition  that  Iago  has  for  some  time  previous  to  the 
'  commencement  of  the  action  been  fooling  the  poor  gull  on  the  strength  of  his  acquaint 

*  ance,  therefore  probably  of  Emilia's  acquaintance,  with  Desdemona.  It  offers  the  only 
' possible  explanation  of  the  reproaches  with  which  Roderigo  assails  Iago  here  and  in  sub- 

•  sequent  scenes  in  Cyprus,  II,  iii;  IV,  ii.  The  "hundred  times"  that  Iago  woo'd  his 
'  wife  to  steal  the  handkerchief,  Othello's  questioning  with  Emilia  (IV,  ii),  and  numer- 
'  ous  incidents  of  her  connection  with  Desdemona,  are  only  possible  on  the  supposition 
'  of  this  prior  acquaintance  for  the  belief  in  which  Wilson  sees  not  the  slightest  ground.' 

I  am  afraid  that  Daniel  doth  protest  a  tiny  bit  too  much.  When  he  says  that  '  it  offers 
the  only  possible  explanation  of  the  reproaches  with  which  Roderigo  assails  Iago,'  to 
what  does  the  '  it '  refer  ?  To  Iago's  acquaintance  with  Desdemona,  or  to  Emilia's 
acquaintance  with  her?  If  to  the  former,  it  is  hardly  an  answer  to  Wilson;  if  to  the 
latter,  he  has  just  said  that  Iago's  use  of  that  acquaintance  was  only  probable,  and  Wil 
son  would  at  once  deny  it  altogether,  on  the  ground  that  the  acquaintance  did  not  exist. 
It  seems  to  me  that  all  of  Daniel's  difficulties  here  and  in  Othello's  questioning  of  Emilia, 
for  which  '  long  time  at  Venice  before  marriage  '  offers,  for  him,  the  only  solution,  ought 
to  be  solved  by  Wilson's  Double  Time  ;  but  this  solution  has  not  proved  satisfactory  to 
Daniel,  whose  opinion  on  this,  as  on  all  Shakespearian  topics,  is  entitled  to  great  weight 
and  great  respect.  That  Roderigo  and  Iago  were  acquainted  with  each  other  long  before 
Othello  was  married,  it  has  never,  for  a  minute,  occurred  to  anybody  to  deny ;  but  to  say  that 
the  only  possible  way  in  which  Iago  could  have  persuaded  Roderigo  of  his  power  to  help 
him  into  Desdemona's  graces,  was  by  the  nearness  in  which  Emilia  stood  to  her,  or  by 
the  acquaintance  of  the  two  women  with  each  other,  or  even  by  his  own  acquaintance 
with  her,  is  to  put  a  limit  to  Iago's  fertility  of  resource  in  lying  and  to  Roderigo's  capa- 
city for  being  gulled,  which  I,  for  one,  flatly  refuse  to  set ;  given  great  capacity  to  be  deceived 
on  the  one  hand,  and  great,  almost  illimitable,  capacity  to  deceive  on  the  other,  and  it 
seems  to  me  that  we  have  all  that  is  needed  for  an  indefinite  number  of  ways  in  which 
an  explanation  can  be  found  of  Iago's  influence  over  Roderigo.  Have  we  not  a  speci- 
men of  Iago's  lying  in  that  very  First  Scene  ?  Does  not  Shakespeare,  at  the  very  outset, 
give  us  a  cue  to  the  way  in  which  Iago  has  been  tolling  Roderigo  on,  by  that  lying 
description,  every  syllable  of  it  false,  of  Othello,  the  regal  Gentleman,  evading  three 
Venetian  Noblemen  with  bombast  circumstance !  horribly  stuffed  with  epithets  of  war  ? 
When  Iago  can  thus  lie  about  Othello,  is  it  to  be  supposed  that  he  needs  such  a  trifle 
as  the  presence  of  his  wife  near  Desdemona,  in  order  to  induce  in  Roderigo  a  belief  of 
his  unbounded  influence  with  the  Magnifico  and  his  daughter  ?  I  am  much  afraid  that 
if  we  give  ourselves  up  to  this  supposition,  the  Gull  will  have  companions. 

Furthermore,  Daniel  interprets  the  gift  of  the  handkerchief,  not  as  a  marriage  gift, 
but  as  a  betrothal  gift,  which  Othello  might  have  made  long  before  his  marriage,  where- 
by ample  opportunity  is  given  for  •  the  hundred  times '  that  Iago  asked  Emilia  to  steal 
it.       When  n  y  fate  would  have  me  wive,'  read  the  Qq  (III,  iv,  77),  which  will  fully 


364 


APPENDIX 


support  Daniel's  interpretation,  and  'the  hundred  times'  before  marriage;  but  'When 
my  fate  would  have  me  wived,'  read  the  Ff,  which  will  not  support  Daniel's  interpreta- 
tion, and  with  it  will  tumble  '  the  hundred  times '  before  marriage.  I  prefer  the  Ff,  but 
Daniel,  of  course,  will  elect  to  follow  the  Qq,  and  there  is  no  excellent  reason  why  he 
should  not,  only  somewhere  along  the  pathway  I  think  it  would  do  no  hann  to  rear  a 
placard,  bearing  on  it,  '  Beware  of  using  the  word  impossible  in  Shakespeare ! ' 
Professor  Wilson  thus  takes  up  the  subject  of  Protracted  Time.* 
'  Talboys.  Long  Time  cunningly  insinuates  itself,  serpentwise,  throughout  Desde- 
'  mona's  first  recorded  conversation  with  Cassio,  at  the  beginning  of  III,  iii,  25 — the 
* '  Dreadful  Scene.'     Thus :  '  Assure  thee,  If  I  do  vow  a  friendship,  I'll  perform  it,' 

•  and  so  on,  down  to  line  33  :  '  Than  give  thy  cause  away.'  This  points  to  a  protracted 
'  time  in  the  future — and  though  announcing  an  intention  merely,  yet  somehow  it  leaves 

•  an  impression  that  Desdemona  carries  her  intention  into  effect — that  she  does  '  watch 
'  him  tame,'  does  make  his  '  bed  seem  a  school ' — does  '  intermingle  everything  she 
'  does  with  Cassio's  suit.'  Then  Desdemona  says  :  '  I  have  been  talking  with  a  suitor 
'  here,  A  man  that  languishes  in  you?-  displeasure.'  I  cannot  listen  to  that  line,  even 
'  now,  without  a  feeling  of  the  heart-sickness  of  protracted  time — '  hope  deferred  maketh 
'  the  heart  sick  ' — languishes  !  even  unto  death.  I  think  of  that  fine  line  in  Wordsworth : 
1 '  So  fades — so  languishes — grows  dim,  and  dies.'     Far  in  this  Scene,  Othello  says  to 

•  I  ago  :  '  If  more  thou  dost  perceive,  let  me  know  more  :  Set  on  thy  wife  to  observe.' 
'  Iago  has  not  said  that  he  had  perceived  anything,  but  Othello,  greatly  disturbed,  speaks 

•  as  if  Iago  had  said  that  he  had  perceived  a  good  deal ;  and  we  might  believe  that  they 
1  had  been  a  long  time  at  Cyprus.  Othello  then  says  :  *  This  honest  creature,  doubtless, 
'  Sees  and  knows  more,  much  more,  than  he  unfolds.'  In  all  this,  sir,  we  surely  have 
'  a  feeling  of  longish  time.     '  O  curse  of  marriage !  That  we  can  call  those  delicate 

•  creatures  ours — And  not  their  appetites.'  This  is  the  language  of  a  some-time  mar- 
«  ried  man — not  of  a  man  the  morning  after  his  nuptials. 

'  North.  The  Handkerchief. 

'  Talboys.  Ay — Emilia's  words,  III,  iii,  338-344 :  '  I  am  glad  I  have  found  this 
'  napkin,'  &c.  Here  we  have  long  time,  and  no  mistake.  Iago  has  wooed  her  to  steal 
'  it  a  hundred  times  !  When  and  where  ?  Since  their  arrival  at  Cyprus.  The  words 
'  naturally  give  us  the  impression  of  long  time.  In  none  of  his  soliloquies  at  Venice, 
'  or  at  Cyprus  on  their  first  arrival,  has  Iago  once  mentioned  that  Handkerchief  as  the 
«  chief  instrument  of  his  wicked  design — and  therefore  Emilia's  words  imply  weeks  at 
'  Cyprus.     Again,  line  396 :  '  I  slept  the  next  night  well.'     Next  night — night  after 

•  night — many  nights — many  wedded  nights — long  time  at  Cyprus. 

'  North.  And  then  Cassio's  dream. 

1  Talboys.  'I  lay  with  Cassio — lately.'  Where,  but  at  Cyprus?  'Cursed  fate! 
'  that  gave  thee  to  the  Moor.'  And  on  Othello  going  off  in  a  rage  about  the  handker- 
'  chief — what  saith  Desdemona  ?  '  /  ne'er  saw  this  before.'  These  few  words  are  full 
'  charged  with  long  time. 

'  North.  They  are.  And  Emilia's — '  'Tis  not  a  year  or  two  shows  us  a  man.' 
'  True,  that  is  a  kind  of  general  reflection — but  a  most  foolish  general  reflection  indeed, 
'  if  made  to  a  Wife  weeping  at  her  husband's  harshness  the  day  after  marriage. 

'  Talboys.  Emilia's   'year  or  two'  cannot  mean  one  day — it  implies  weeks — or 

•  months.     Desdemona  then  says, — '  Something,  sure,  of  state,  Either  from  Venice,  or 

*  Blackwood's  Maga.,  April,  1850 :  Again  I  wish  to  say  that  these  are  not  transcripts,  but  meagre 
*bridge~ients,  from  which,  however,  I  trust  nothing  essential  is  omitted. — Ed. 


DURATION  OF   THE  ACTION  365 

'  some  unhatch'd  practice,'  &c.  Does  not  that  look  like  long  time  at  Cyprus  ?  Unlike 
'  the  language  of  one  who  had  herself  arrived  at  Cyprus  from  Venice  but  the  day  before. 
'And  in  continuation,  Desdemona's  'such  observances  As  fit  the  bridal]  III,  iv,  171. 
'  And  that  thought  brings  sudden  comfort  to  poor   Desdemona,  who  says  sweetly : 

*  'Beshrew  me  much,  Emilia,'  &c,  down  to  line  176.  That  is — why  did  I,  a  married 
'  woman  some  months  old,  forget  that  the  honeymoon  is  gone,  and  that  my  Othello, 
1  hero  as  he  is,  is  now — not  a  Bridegroom — but  a  husband  ?     '  Men  are  not  gods.' 

'  North.  And  Bianca?     She's  a  puzzler. 

'  Talboys.  A  puzzler,  and  something  more.  (See  III,  iv,  192-204.)  Here  the 
'  reproaches  of  Bianca  to  Cassio  develop  long  time.  For,  besides  his  week's  absence 
'  from  her  house,  there  is  implied  the  preceding  time  necessary  for  contracting  and 
'  habitually  carrying  on  the  illicit  attachment.  Bianca  is  a  Cyprus  householder ;  Cassio 
1  sups  at  her  house ;  his  intimacy,  which  has  various  expressions  of  continuance,  has 
'  been  formed  with  her  there ;  he  has  found  her,  and  grown  acquainted  with  her  there, 
'  not  at  Venice.     I  know  it  has  been  suggested  that  she  was  his  mistress  at  Venice — 

*  that  she  came  with  the  squadron  from  Venice ;  but  for  believing  this  there  is  here  not 
1  the  slightest  ground.  '  What !  keep  a  week  away  ?'  would  be  a  strange  exclamation, 
'  indeed,  from  one  who  knew  that  he  had  been  but  a  day  on  shore — had  landed  along 
'  with  herself  yesterday  from  the  same  ship — and  had  been  a  week  cooped  up  from  her 
1  in  a  separate  berth.  And  Bianca,  seeing  the  handkerchief,  and  being  told  to  '  take 
'  me  this  work  out,'  cries — '  To  the  felt  absence  now  I  feel  a  cause?  *  To  the  felt  ab- 
'  sence,'  Eight  score  eight  hours  !  the  cause  ?    Some  new  mistress  at  Cyprus — not  forced 

separation  at  sea. 

'  North.  Then,  Talboys,  where  Othello  is  listening  to  the  conversation  of  Iago 
'and  Cassio,  which  he  believes  relates  to  his  wife,  Othello  says,  IV,  i,  145.  'Have 
'  you  scored  me  ?'  That  is,  have  you  marked  me  for  destruction,  in  order  that  you 
'  may  marry  my  wife  ?  Othello  believes  that  Cassio  is  said  to  entertain  an  intention  of 
'  marrying  Desdemona,  and  infers  that,  as  a  preliminary,  he  must  be  put  out  of  the  way. 
'  This  on  the  first  day  after  marriage  ?     No,  surely — long  time  at  Cyprus. 

'  Talboys.  Iago  says  to  Cassio  :  '  This  is  his  second  fit :  he  had  one  yesterday.''  This 
'  is  a  lie — but  Cassio  believes  it.  Cassio  could  not  have  believed  it,  and  therefore  Iago 
'  would  not  have  told  it,  had  '  yesterday '  been  the  day  of  the  triumphant,  joyful,  and 
'  happy  arrival  at  Cyprus.  Assuredly,  Cassio  knew  that  Othello  had  had  no  fit  that  day; 
'  that  day  he  was  Othello's  lieutenant — Iago  but  his  Ancient — and  Iago  could  know 
'  nothing  of  any  fits  that  Cassio  knew  not  of — therefore — Long  Time. 

'  North.  '  For  I  will  make  him  tell  the  tale  anew,  Where,  how,  how  oft,  how  long 
'  ago,  and  when,  He  hath — and  is  again  to — '    He  does  so — and  Othello  believes  what 
'  he  hears  Cassio  tell  of  Bianca  to  be  of  Desdemona.     Madness  any  way  we  take  it— 
'  but  madness  possible  only — on  long  time  at  Cyprus. 

'  Talboys.  Then,  sir,  'They  do  command  him  home,  Deputing  Cassio  in  his  gov 
'  ernment.'     What  are  we  to  make  of  that? 

'  North.  The  Recall,  except  after  considerable  time,  would  <>iake  the  policy  of  the 
'  Senate  frivolous — a  thing  Shakespeare  never  does,  for  the  greatness  of  political  move- 
'  ments  lies  everywhere  for  a  support  to  the  strength  and  power  of  his  tragical  fable. 
'  Half  that  we  know  of  Othello  out  of  the  Scenes  is,  that  he  is  the  trusted  General  of 
'  the  Senate.  What  gravity  his  esteem  with  you  derives  hence,  and  can  we  bear  to 
'  think  of  him  superseded  without  cause  ?     Had  Lodovico,  who  brings  the  new  com- 

*  mission,  set  off  the  day  after  Othello  from  Venice  ?  No.  You  imagine  an  intercourse, 
1  which  has  required  time,  between  Othello,  since  his  appointment,  and  the  Senate. 


366  APPENDIX 

'  Why,  in  all  the  world,  do  they  thus  suddenly  depose  him,  and  put  Cassio  in  his  place  ? 

*  You  cannot  very  well  think  that  the  next  measure  of  the  Senate,  after  entrusting  the 

*  command  of  Cyprus,  their  principal  Island,  to  their  most  tried  General,  in  most  criti- 
'  cal  and  perilous  times,  was  to  displace  him  ere  they  hear  a  word  from  him.     They 

*  have  not  had  time  to  know  that  the  Turkish  Fleet  is  wrecked  and  scattered,  unless 

*  they  sit  behind  Scenes  in  the  Green-room. 

1  Talboys.  We  must  conclude  that  the  Senate  must  give  weeks  or  months  to  thus 

*  New  Governor  ere  interfering  with  him. — To  recall  him  before  they  know  he  has 

*  reached  Cyprus — nay,  to  send  a  ship  after  him  next  day — or  a  day  or  two  following 
'  his  departure — would  make  these  '  most  potent,  grave,  and  reverend  Signors,'  enig- 

*  mas,  and  the  Doge  an  Idiot.     What  though  a  steamer  had  brought  tidings  back  to 

*  Venice  that  the  Turks  had  been  '  banged  '  and  '  drowned  ?  '  That  was  not  a  sufficient 
'  reason  to  order  Othello  back  before  he  could  have  well  set  his  foot  on  shore,  or  taken 
'  more  than  a  look  at  the  state  of  the  fortifications,  in  case  the  Ottoman  should  fit  out 
'  another  fleet. 

'  North.  Then  mark   Lodovico's   language.      He  asks,  seeing  Othello  strike  his 
«  wife — as  well  he  may — '  Is  it  his  use  ?  '     Or  did  the  letters  '  work  upon  his  blood, 

*  and  new-create  this  fault  ?  '  And  Iago  answers,  '  It  is  not  honesty  in  me  to  speak 
'  what  I  have  seen  and  known?  Lodovico  says,  '  The  noble  Moor,  whom  our  Senate 
1  call  all  in  all  sufficient.'  Then  they  have  not  quarrelled  with  him,  at  least — nor  lost 
'  their  good  opinion  of  him  !    Iago  answers,  '  He  is  much  changed  ?  '    What,  in  a  day  ? 

*  And  again — '  It  is  not  honesty  in  me  to  speak  what  I  have  seen  and  known.'  What, 
'  in  a  day  ?  Lodovico  comes  evidently  to  Othello  after  a  long  separation — such  as 
'  affords  room  for  a  moral  transformation ;  and  Iago's  words — lies  as  they  are — and 
'  seen  to  be  lies  by  the  most  unthinking  person — yet  refer  to  much  that  has  passed  in 
'  an  ample  time — to  a  continued  course  of  procedure.  But  in  all  the  Play,  nothing  is 
'  so  conclusive  of  long  time  as  IV,  ii,  3-14.  If  all  this  relates  to  their  residence  at 
'  Cyprus,  it  indicates  many  weeks.  Then  a  word  about  Emilia.  Now,  consider,  first, 
'  her  character.  She  seems  not  very  principled,  not  very  chaste.  Yet  how  strong  her 
'  affection  for  Desdemona,  and  her  faith  in  her  purity !  She  witnesses  for  her,  and  she 
'  dies  for  her !    I  ask,  how  long  did  that  affection  and  that  opinion  take  to  grow  ?  a  few 

*  days  at  Venice,  and  a  week  while  they  were  sea-sick  aboard  ship  ?     No.     Weeks — 

*  months.  A  gentle  lady  once  made  to  me  that  fine  remark, — '  Emilia  has  not  much 
'  *  worth  in  herself,  but  is  raised  into  worth  by  her  contact  with  Desdemona — into  heroic 

*  *  worth  ! '  *  I  care  not  for  thy  sword — I'll  make  thee  known,  though  I  lost  twenty 
' '  lives.'  The  impure  dying  a  voluntary  martyr  for  the  pure  is  to  the  highest  degree 
'  affecting — is  the  very  manner  of  Shakespeare,  to  express  a  principal  character  by  its 

*  influence  on  subordinate  ones — has  its  own  moral  sublimity ;  but  more  than  all,  for 
* our  purpose,  it  witnesses  time.  Love,  and  Faith,  and  Fidelity,  won  from  her  in  whom 
'  these  virtues  are  to  be  first  created  !  Othello,  in  his  wrath,  calls  Emilia  '  a  closet-lock- 
' '  and-key  of  villainous  secrets  :  and  yet  she'll  kneel  and  pray ;  I  have  seen  her  do't.' 
'  Where  and  when  ?     It  could  only  have  been  at  Cyprus ;  and  such  language  denotes  a 

*  somewhat  long  attendance  there  on  Desdemona.     *  Some  of  your  function,  mistress,' 
renewed  to  Emilia — when,  after  conversing  with  Desdemona,  Othello  is  going  out — 

*  is  his  treatment  of  one  whom  he  supposes  to  have  been  serviceable  to  his  wife's  and 
'  Cassio's  amour.     Where  ?     There,  only  there,  in  Cyprus,  by  all  witnessing,  palpably. 

She  could  not  before.  He  speaks  to  her  as  professional  in  such  services,  therefore 
4  long  dealing  in  them ;  but  this  all  respects  this  one  intrigue,  not  her  previous  life. 
'  The  wicked  energy  of  tlv  forced  attribution  vanishes,  if  this  respects  anything  but  her 


DURATION  OF   THE  ACTION  367 

helpfulness  to  his  wife  and  her  paramour,  and  at  Cyprus — there — only  there.    Nothing 

*  points  to  a  farther  back  looking  suspicion.     Iago's  '  thousand  times  committed  '  can 

*  only  lengthen  out  the  stay  at  Cyprus.  Othello  still  believes  that  she  once  loved  him 
'  — that  she  has  fallen  to  corruption.  Could  he  have  the  most  horrible,  revolting,  and 
'  loathsome  of  all  thoughts,  that  he  wedded  her  impure  ?  and  not  a  hint  given  of  that 
'  most  atrocious  pang  ?  Incredible — impossible !  I  can  never  believe,  if  Shakespeare 
1  intended  an  infidelity  taking  precedency  of  the  marriage,  that  he  would  not  by  word 
'  or  by  hint  have  said  so.'     [In  answer  to  this  last  assertion,  Daniel  urges,  as  is  men- 

*  tioned  above,  that  'the  very  foundation  on  which  Iago  builds  up  Othello's  jealousy  '  is 
the  relationship  existing  before  marriage  between  Cassio,  Desdemona,  and  the  Moor 
himself;  'surely,'  says  Daniel  (p.  229),  'this  is  a  pretty  strong  hint,  and  Othello,  in  IV, 
'  ii,  103,'  where  he  first  directly  accuses  Desdemona  of  unchastity,  '  gives  another 
pretty  strong  hint  too.']     •  Lastly,  the  wedding  sheets  were  reserved ;  they  had  been 

*  laid  by  for  weeks — months — time  long  enough  to  give  a  saddest  character  to  the 
'  bringing  them  out  again — a  serious,  ominous  meaning — disturbed  from  the  quietude, 
'  the  sanctity,  of  their  sleep  by  a  wife's  mortal  presentiment  that  they  may  be  her  shroud.' 

In  that  storehouse  of  information,  The  Shakespeare  Key  (p.  217),  Cowden-Clarke 
gives  the  following  references  to  Long  Time,  which  were  not  noticed  by  Wilson :  I,  iii, 
283-328;  I,  iii,  419;  II,  i,  32;  II,  i,  89-91;  III,  iii,  64-75 ;  ^-,496;  .#.,537  J  HI, 
iv,  130.  On  this  last  passage  is  the  following  note  :  '  It  is  in  this  brief  Scene  that  so 
much  lapse  of  time  is  implied ;  for  Cassio  speaks  of  his  '  former  suit,'  and  Desdemona 
sends  for  him  to  inform  him  of  the  progress  she  has  made  in  her  advocacy  on  his 
behalf,  although  there  is  no  absolutely-stated  interval  since  she  begged  Othello  to  let 
Cassio  come  and  plead  for  recall,  and  her  husband  refused  to  allow  this  return  to  be 
made  either  'to-night,'  'to-morrow,'  or  within  the  next  'three  days.'  So  systematically 
is  Long  Time  implied  while  Short  Time  is  preserved,  that  it  is  impossible  not  to  believe 
in  this  having  been  the  author's  thorough  intention  and  artistic  plan.'  Also,  III,  iv, 
145;  IV,  ii,  163;  Ib.y  182;  lb.,  207-212. 

Even  in  addition  to  these  enumerated  by  Wilson  and  Cowden-Clarke,  it  seems  to 
me  that  a  few  other  instances  which  intimate  Long  Time  may  be  gleaned.  Thus, 
II,  ii,  345,  on  the  very  first  evening  in  Cyprus,  after  Cassio's  disgrace,  Iago  speaks 
of  Othello's  having  given  himself  up  to  the  contemplation  of  Desdemona's  graces  to 
such  an  extent  that  the  general's  wife  is  now  the  general ;  such  an  assertion  seems 
to  require  a  long  course  of  marked  attention,  in  public  and  in  private,  to  justify  it. 
Again,  Roderigo  was  a  man  of  wealth ;  in  the  pursuit  of  his  pleasure  he  could  afford 
to  buy  jewels  rich  enough  to  half  corrupt  a  votarist ;  before  he  left  Venice  he  may  be 
supposed  to  have  fulfilled  his  promise  to  Iago,  and  to  have  converted  all  his  land  into 
money ;  his  last  words  were,  '  I'll  go  sell  all  my  land.'  Iago  speaks  of  the  amount 
of  his  gold  and  jewels  as  large;  and  yet  he  has  been  in  Cyprus  but  a  few  hours  before 
he  tells  Iago  that  his  money  is  almost  spent,  that  he  has  not  more  than  enough  to  last 
him  to  get  back  to  Venice ;  and  in  referring  to  himself  as  hunting  in  a  chase  we  have 
visions  of  a  lavish  expenditure,  day  after  day,  and  week  after  week;  nor  does  Iago 
diminish  this  impression  when  he  speaks  of  the  dilatory  time  and  of  the  patience  which 
their  work  demands.  Again,  Cassio  expresses  to  Desdemona  a  fear  that  the  policy 
which  obliges  Othello  to  treat  him  coldly  may  last  so  long  that  Othello  will  forget  him. 

This  question  of  Shakespeare's  use  of  these  Two  Times  is  so  important  (of  more 
importance  in  this  than  in  almost  any  other  play)  that  it  is  incumbent  on  us  to  give 
good  heed  to  Wilson's  explanation  of  it,  whereof  the  substance  I  have  here  endeav- 
oured to  extract  • 


368  APPENDIX 

1  The  usefulness  of  the  Two  Times  is  palpable  from  first  to  last — of  the  Shoit  Time 
'  for  maintaining  the  tension  of  the  passion — of  the  Long  for  a  thousand  general  nseds. 

*  Thus  Bianca  must  be  used  for  convincing  Othello  very  potently,  positively,  unanswer 
'  ably.     But  she  cannot  be  used  without  supposing  a  protracted  intercourse  between 

*  her  and  Cassio.  Iago's  dialogue  with  him  falls  to  the  ground  if  the  acquaintance 
'  began  yesterday.     But  superincumbent  over  all  is  the  necessity  of  our  not  knowing 

*  that  Iago  begins  the  Temptation,  and  that  Othello  extinguishes  the  Light  of  his  Life, 
'  all  in  one  day.  And  observe  how  this  concatenation  of  the  passionate  scenes  operates. 
1  Let  the  Entrances  of  Othello  be  four — A,  B,  C,  D.  You  feel  the  close  connection  ot 
'  A  with  B,  of  B  with  C,  of  C  with  D.     You  feel  the  coherence,  the  nextness,  and  all 

*  the  force  of  the  impetuous  Action  and  Passion  resulting.    But  the  logically-consequent 

*  near  connection  of  A  with  C,  and  much  more  with  D,  as  again  of  B  with  D,  you  do 

*  not  feel.   Why  ?   When  you  are  at  C,  and  feeling  the  pressure  of  B  upon  C,  you  have 

*  lost  sight  of  the  pressure  of  A  upon  B.  At  each  entrance  you  go  back  one  step — you 
'  do  not  go  back  two.     The  suggested  intervals  continually  keep  displacing  to  distances 

*  in  your  memory  the  formerly  felt  connections.  This  could  not  so  well  happen  in  real 
'  life,  where  the  relations  of  time  are  strictly  bound  upon  your  memory,  though  some- 
'  thing  of  it  happens  when  passion  devours  memory.     But  in  fiction,  the  conception 

*  being  loosely  held,  and  shadow}',  the  feat  becomes  easily  practicable.  Thus  the  Short 
'  Time  tells  for  the  support  of  the  Passion,  along  with  the  Long  Time,  by  means  of  vir- 
'  tuous  installations  from  the  hand  or  wing  of  Oblivion.  From  one  to  two  you  feel  no 
'  intermission — from  two  to  three  you  feel  none — from  three  to  four  you  feel  none ;  but 

*  I  defy  any  man  to  say  that  from  one  to  four  he  has  felt  none.  I  defy  any  man  to  say 
'  honestly  that  *  sitting  at  the  Play '  he  has  kept  count  from  one  to  four.  Besides  every 
'  past  Scene,  constituting  a  marked  moment  in  the  progress  of  the  Play,  has  the  effect  foi 

*  the  Poet,  as  well  as  for  you,  of  protracting  the  time  in  retrospect, — throwing  everything 
'that  has  passed  further  back.  The  goings- out  and  re-enterings  of  Othello  have  a 
'  strangely  deluding  effect — they  disconnect  the  time  more  than  you  can  think — and  all 
'  the  changes  of  persons  on  the  stage,  all  shiftings  of  scenes  and  droppings  of  curtains, 
'  break  and  dislocate  and  dilate  the  time  to  your  imagination,  till  you  do  not  in  the  least 
'  know  where  you  are.     In  this  laxity  of  your  conception,  all  hints  of  extended  time 

*  sink  in  and  spring  up,  like  that  fungus  which,  on  an  apt  soil,  in  a  night  grows  to  a 
'  foot  diameter.  Shakespeare,  we  have  seen,  in  his  calmer  constructions,  shows,  in  a 
'  score  of  ways,  weeks,  months ;  that  is  therefore  the  true  time,  or  call  it  the  historical 

*  time.  Hurried  himself,  and  hurrying  you  on  the  torrent  cf  passion,  he  forgets  time, 
'  and  a  false  show  of  time,  to  the  utmost  contracted,  arises.  I  do  not  know  whether 
4  he  did  not  perceive  this  false  exhibition  of  time,  or  perceiving,  he  did  not  care.  But 
'  we  all  must  see  a  reason,  and  a  cogent  one,  why  he  should  not  let  in  the  markings  of 
1  protraction  upon  his  dialogues  of  the  Seduced  and  the  Seducer.  If  you  ask  me,  How 
'  stood  the  time  in  the  mind  of  Shakespeare  ?  I  answer,  I  do  not  know.     The  ques 

*  tion  splits  itself  into  two  :  first,  '  How  did  he  project  the  time  ?  '  Second,  '  How  did 
* '  he  conceive  it  in  the  progress  of  the  Play  ? '  My  impression  is,  that  he  projected 
'  extended  time.  If  so,  did  he  or  did  he  not  know  tha.  in  managing  the  Seduction  he 
'  departed  from  that  design  by  contracting  it  into  a  Day  ?  Did  he  deliberately  entertain 
'a  double  design?  If  he  did,  how  did  he  excuse  this  to  himself?  Did  he  say,  'A 
' '  stage  necessity,  or  a  theatrical  or  dramatic  necessity  ' — na.  tiely,  that  of  sustaining  at 

*  the  utmost  possible  reach  of  altitude  the  tragical  passion  and  interest — '  requires  the 

*  •  precipitation  of  the  passion  from  the  first  breathing  of  suspicion — the  '  Ha !  Ha !  I 
' '  like  not  that,'  of  the  suggesting  Fiend — to  the  consecrated  '  killing  myself,  to  die  upon 


DURATION  OF   THE  ACTION  369 

• « a  kiss ! ' — all  in  the  course  of  fifteen  hours — and  this  tragical  vehemency,  this  impet- 
' '  uous  energy,  this  torrent  of  power  I  will  have ;  at  the  same  time  I  have  many  reasons 

*  *  — amongst  them  the  general  probability  of  the  action — for  a  dilated  time ;  and  I,  being 
1  •  a  magician  of  the  first  water,  will  so  dazzle,  blind,  and  bewilder  my  auditors  that 

*  *  they  shall  accept  the  double  time  with  a  double  belief — shall  feel  the  unstayed  rush- 
' '  ing  on  of  action  and  passion,  from  the  first  suggestion  to  the  cloud  of  deaths— and 
1 '  yet  shall  remain  with  a  conviction  that  Othello  was  for  months  Governor  of  Cyprus 
* '  — they  being  on  the  whole  unreflective  and  uncritical  persons  ?  ' 

'  Talboys.  And,  after  all,  who  willingly  criticises  his  dreams  or  his  pleasures  ? 

*  North.  And  the  Audience  of  the  Globe  Theatre  shall  not — for  *  I  hurl  my  dazzling 
'  *  spells  into  the  spungy  air,'  and  ■  the  spell  shall  sit  when  the  curtain  has  fallen.'  Shake- 
'  speare  might,  in  the  consciousness  of  power,  say  this.    For  this  is  that  which  he  has — 

*  knowingly  or  unknowingly — done.  Unknowingly  ?  Perhaps — himself  borne  on  by 
'  the  successively  rising  waves  of  his  work.  For  you  see,  Talboys,  with  what  prolonged 
1  and  severe  labour  we  two  have  arrived  at  knowing  the  reality  of  the  case  which  now 
■  lies  open  to  us  in  broad  light.  We  have  needed  time  and  pains,  and  the  slow  settling 
'  of  our  understandings,  to  unwind  the  threads  of  delusion  in  which  we  were  encoiled 

*  and  entoiled.     If  a  strange  and  unexplained  power  could  undeniably  so  beguile  us — a 

*  possibility  of  which,  previously  to  this  examination,  we  never  have  dreamt,  how  do  we 
4  warrant  that  the  same  dark,  nameless,  mysterious  power  shall  not  equally  blind  the 
* *  Artificer  of  Fraud '  ?  There  are  the  Two  Times,  the  Long  and  the  Short ;  and  each 
'  exerts  upon  you  its  especial  virtue.  I  can  believe  that  Shakespeare  unconsciously  did 
'  what  Necessity  claimed, — the  impetuous  motion  on,  on,  on  of  the  Passion, — the  Long 

*  Time  asked  by  the  successive  events ;  the  forces  that  swayed  him,  each  in  its  turn,  its 

*  own  way.  And  put  up  with  these  Two  Times  we  must, — one  for  our  sympathy  with 
'  Othello's  tempest  of  heart, — one  for  the  verisimilitude  of  the  transaction. 

<  Illusion,  a  constituent  of  Poetry,  is  when  the  same  thing  is,  and  is  not.  Pa — 
'  God  bless  him ! — makes  believe  to  be  a  Lion.  He  roars,  and  springs  upon  his  prey. 
'  He  at  once  believes  himself  to  be  a  Lion,  and  knows  himself  to  be  Pa.     Just  so  with 

*  the  Shakespeare  Club — many  millions  strong.     The  two  times  at  Cyprus  are  there  ; 

*  the  reason  for  the  two  times — to  wit,  probability  of  the  Action,  storm  of  the  Passion — 
'  is  there ;  and  if  any  wiseacre  should  ask,  *  How  do  we  manage  to  stand  the  known 

*  together-proceeding  of  two  times  ?'  the  wiseacre  is  answered — '  We  don't  stand  it — 
'  for  we  know  nothing  about  it.  We  are  held  in  a  confusion  and  a  delusion  about  the 
'  time.'  We  have  effect  of  both — distinct  knowledge  of  neither.  We  have  suggestions 
'  to  our  Understanding  of  extended  time — we  have  movements  of  our  Will  by  precipi- 
'  tated  time.  Does  any  man  by  possibility  ask  for  a  scheme  and  an  exposition,  by  which 
'  it  shall  be  made  luminous  to  the  smallest  capacity  how  we  are  able  distinctly  all  along 
« to  know,  and  bear  in  mind,  that  the  preceding  transactions  are  accomplished  in  a  day, 
1  and  at  the  same  time  and  therewithal,  distinctly  all  along  to  know  and  bear  in  mind 
'  that  the  same  transactions  proceeding  before  our  eyes  take  about  three  months  to 
'  accomplish?  Then,  I  am  obliged — like  the  musicians,  when  they  are  told  that,  if 
1  they  have  any  music  that  may  not  be  heard,  Othello  desires  them  to  play  it — to  make 
1  answer,  '  Sir,  we  have  none  such.'  It  is  to  ask  that  a  deception  shall  be  not  only 
'  seemingly  but  really  a  truth  !  If  you  ask  me — which  judiciously  you  may — what  or 
'  how  much  did  the  Swan  of  Avon  intend  and  know  of  all  this  astonisl.ing  legerdemain, 

*  when  he  sang  thus  astonishingly  ?     Was  he,  the  juggler,  juggled  by  aerial  spirits, — 

'  as  Puck  or  Ariel  ?  I  put  my  finger  to  my  lips,  and  nod  on  him  to  do  the  same ;  and 

if  I  am  asked,  •  Shall  a  modern  artificer  of  the  Drama,  having  the  same  pressure  from 
24 


3;o 


APPENDIX 


*  within  and  from  without,  adopt  this  resource  of  evasion  ?'  I  can  answer  with  great 
1  confidence,  •  He  had  better  look  before  he  leap.' 

*  Talboys.  Assume,  sir,  that  Shakespeare  knew  what  he  was  doing. 
'  Nor  th.  Then  the  Double  Time  is  to  be  called — an  Imposture. 

*  Talboys.  Oh.  my  dear  sir, — oh,  oh ! 

*  North.  A  good-natured  Juggler,  my  dear  Talboys,  has  cheated  your  eyes.     You 

*  ask  him  to  show  you  how  he  did  it.  He  does  the  trick  slowly — and  you  see.  '  Now, 
'  *  good  Conjurer,  do  it  slowly,  and  cheat  us?  *  I  can't.  I  cheat  you  by  doing  it  quickly. 
' '  To  be  cheated,  you  must  not  see  what  I  do ;  but  you  must  think  that  you  see.'  When 
« we  inspect  the  Play  in  our  closets  the  Juggler  does  his  trick  slowly.  We  sit  at  the 
'  Play,  and  he  does  it  quick.  When  you  see  the  trick  again  done  the  right  way, — that 
'  is,  quick, — you  cannot  conceive  how  it  is  that  you  no  longer  see  that  which  you  saw 
'  when  it  was  done  slowly !     Again  the  impression  returns  of  a  magical  feat. 

1  Talboys.  I  doubt,  if  we  saw  Othello  perfectly  acted,  whether  all  our  study  would 

*  preserve  us  from  the  returning  imposture.' 

For  me,  after  this  revelation,  '  the  rest  is  silence.'  The  only  time  when  Wilson  does 
not  take  me  with  him  is  when  he  suggests  that  Shakespeare's  use  of  these  Two  Times 
may  have  been  unconscious.  The  more  I  study  Shakespeare,  the  more  profoundly  do 
I  become  impressed  with  the  evidences  on  every  hand  of  his  consummate  art.  From 
the  bias  to  the  world's  estimate  of  him  which  Milton  gave  us  we  have  scarcely  yet 
recovered.  There  are  not  wanting  those  who  even  at  this  late  day  believe  that  Shake- 
speare warbled  his  native  wood  notes  wild  with  as  much  unconsciousness  as  does  a  song- 
sparrow.  It  will  be  many  a  long  day  yet,  I  think,  before  we  exhaust  the  evidences 
of  his  myriad-sided  art.  There  can  be  no  subtle  effect  produced  on  us  by  the  inter- 
lacing of  these  Two  Times  which  Shakespeare  himself  did  not  feel,  and  did  not  fore- 
cast. 

Daniel,  however,  does  not  believe  in  these  Two  Times,  and  is  inclined  to  attribute 
the  discrepanc  ies,  which  a  disbelief  in  them  detects,  to  the  imperfect  state  of  the  text, 
an  asylum  always  at  hand  and  wide  open  as  a  retreat  from  any  and  every  Shakespearian 
difficulty ;  lest  I  do  injustice  to  a  scholar  whose  opinion  is  entitled  to  more  weight  than 
mine,  let  me  quote  his  words  : 

Daniel  (New  Shakespere  Soc.  Trans.,  1877-79,  Parth,  p.  231) :  'But  though  I  think 
'  it  must  be  admitted  that  long  time  at  Venice  before  marriage  is  an  element  worthy  of 
'  consideration  as  affording  some  explanation  of  many  otherwise  simply  impossible  inci- 
« dents  of  the  play,  I  am  forced  to  admit  that  this  explanation  is  far  from  satisfactory. 
'  Incidents  such  as  the  recall  of  Othello  by  the  Senate  before  it  could  be  known  that 
'  he  had  landed  in  Cyprus  are  not  affected  by  it  in  the  least.    Long  time  at  Cyprus  after 

*  marriage  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the  probability  of  the  plot ;  but  before  I  seek  refuge 
« in  the  ....  inexplicable  mystery  of  '  double  time,'  I  should  like  to  be  convinced  that 

*  the  author  himself  did  not  provide  it.  I  say,  with  Professor  Wilson,  that  •  with  his 
'  creative  powers,  if  he  was  determined  to  have  Two  Calendar  Months  from  the  First 
'  of  May  to  the  First  of  July,  and  then  in  One  Day  distinctly  the  first  suspicion  sown 
« and  the  murder  done,  nothing  could  have  been  easier  to  him  than  to  have  imagined, 

*  and  indicated,  and  hurried  over,  the  required  gap  of  time.'  Long  familiarity  with 
'  Shakespeare's  work  has  convinced  me,  as  it  must  have  convinced  most  students,  that 
4  we  cannot  with  certainty  affirm  that  any  of  his  plays  have  reached  us  in  the  state  in 

*  which  they  left  his  hands  :  in  some  cases  their  corruption  and  mutilation  for  stage  pur- 

*  poses  can  be  proved  to  demonstration,  and  it  is  quite  possible  that  in  Othello  some 
•scenes  may  have  been  struck  out  and  others  so  run  together  as  to  confuse  the  time- 


DURATION  OF  THE  ACTION  371 

plot  originally  laid  down  by  the  author.     The  links  in  the  chain  of  time,  the  absence 

*  of  which  so  startles  the  reader,  would  not  be,  and  indeed  are  not,  missed  in  the  visible 

*  action  on  the  stage;  but  we  should  not,  therefore,  rashly  jump  to  the  conclusion  that  they 
'  never  existed,  and  therefore  that  the  author  deliberately  designed  an  impossible  plot.' 

Fleay  [Robinson's  Epitome  of  Literature,  15th  June,  1879)  proposes  a  third  solu- 
tion, which  partakes  somewhat  of  the  nature  of  Daniel's,  in  so  far  as  it  suggests  a  divis- 
ion of  the  Acts  different  from  that  in  the  QqFf.  Convertite  as  I  am  to  Wilson's  Double 
Time,  I  find  answers  therein,  in  the  foregoing  pages,  to  Fleay's  arguments.  After  a  rapid 
review  of  the  First  and  Second  Acts,  and  Scenes  i,  ii,  and  iii  of  Act  Third,  Fleay  pro- 
ceeds :  '  So  far  the  commentators  and  I  are  agreed,  but  I  do  not  agree  that  a  consider- 
'  able  time  must  have  elapsed  since  the  landing,  to  render  the  dialogue  intelligible. 
'  They  allege,  for  instance,  that  Roderigo's  money  could  hardly  have  been  spent  on  the 
'  first  night  of  his  arrival.     Why  not  ?     The  voyage  has  been  tempestuous,  and,  unless 

*  I  quite  misinterpret  the  allusions  to  it,  has  occupied  not  less  than  a  week.  Roderigo 
'  is  just  the  man  to  empty  his  purse  in  one  night's  gaming,  and  Iago  would  not  procras- 
'  tinate  in  that  matter.  Moreover,  he  may  have  been  spending  heavily  at  Venice  before 
4  the  marriage. 

*  Iago  has  asked  Emilia  a  hundred  times  to  steal  the  '  hankercher.'  When  ?  says 
'Daniel.  On  the  voyage,  surely.'  [Daniel,  in  a  foot-note,  p.  231,  says,  'Mr.  E.  H. 
'  Pickersgill  calls  attention  to  the  time  occupied  by  the  voyage  to  Cyprus  as  suggesting 
'  a  possible  explanation  with  reference  to  Emilia's  'hundred  times.' '] 

'  Iago  says :  '  I  lay  with  Cassio  lately.'  But  Cassio  has  not  been  abed  in  Cyprus, 
'  says  Daniel  again.  And  what  then  ?  Does  this  over-careful  critic  take  this  statement 
'  for  a  narrative  of  fact  ?  or  does  he  imply  that  Shakespeare  must  have  made  all  his 
'  villains  lie  so  carefully  as  never  to  clash  with  possibility  ? 

'  Up  to  this  point  the  arguments  for  a  long  residence  in  Cyprus  seem  to  me  over- 
'  strained  and  futile :  and  at  this  point  comes  in  the  same  question  I  raised  as  to  A 

*  Midsummer  Nighfs  Dream  :  'are  the  present  divisions  into  acts  to  be  regarded  as 
' '  authentic '  ?  Why  should  they  be,  since  they  can  in  no  instance  be  traced  to  Shake- 
'  speare's  lifetime  ?  I  would  therefore  end  the  Third  Act  here,  and  allow  a  week's 
'  interval  between  this  Scene  and  the  next.  There  is  no  reason  for  the  immediate  con- 
'  secution  of  the  Scenes,  except  Wilson's  opinion,  regarded  as  cogent  by  Daniel,  that 

*  Othello  would  not  have  let  an  hour  elapse  before  inquiring  about  the  '  hankercher.' 
'  Perhaps  Othello  would  not :  but  Othello  under  Iagds  inspiration  probably  would. 
'  And,  besides,  we  have  the  positive  statement  of  Bianca  that  Cassio  has  been  away 

*  for  a  week  ;  and,  moreover,  time  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the  Senate  to  hear  of  the 
'  loss  of  the  Turkish  fleet,  and  to  send  to  recall  Othello.  These  are  positive  integral 
1  parts  of  the  plan,  not  to  be  neglected  in  any  scheme. 

1  And  why  are  scholiasts'  opinion  of  what  their  author  should,  must,  or  ought  to  have 
1  done,  to  be  preferred  to  the  direct  allegations  of  the  text  ?  In  IV,  i,  again,  we  hear 
'  that  Othello  had  a  fit  yesterday.  This  at  once  disproves  Daniel's  notion  that  Acts  III, 
'  IV,  V,  all  take  place  on  one  day,  and  gives  us  a  reason  for  Othello's  delay  in  inquir- 
'  ing  about  the  '  hankercher.'  Othello,  under  Iago's  guidance,  has,  it  seems  to  me, 
'  been  waiting  (after  III,  iii)  to  let  Desdemona  betray  herself:  after  some  days  she  does 
'  so  by  a  repeated  application  on  Cassio's  behalf  (III,  iv,  18).  The  first  application  had 
'  been  utilized  by  Iago  to  excite  Othello,  and  so  produced  the  first  fit.  But  this  is  con- 
jectural. My  main  object  is  not  to  add  more  guesses  to  Shakespearian  criticism,  but 
4  to  submit  the  following  scheme  of  time  for  this  play, — not  founded  on  my  own  preju- 
'  dications,  but  taken  from  the  text  itself : 


372 


APPENDIX 


'  Act  I,  Sc.  i,  ii,  iii. — One  day.    Interval  for  voyage.    Act  II,  St .  i,  ii,  iii. — One  day. 

•  Act  III,  Sc.  i,  it,  iii. — One  day  (Sunday).     Interval  of  a  week,  at  least.     Act  IV% 

*  Sc.  i,  ii,  iii;  Act  V,  Sc.  i,  ii,  iii. — One  day.     Where  my  Act  IV  begins  with  what 
'  is  now  Act  III,  Sc.  iv,  and  my  Act  V  with  the  present  Act  IV,  Sc.  iii.' 


THE   SOURCE   OF  THE   PLOT 

Pope  :  The  Story  is  taken  from  Cynthio's  Novels.  Theobald  :  Cinthio  Giraldi 
seems  to  have  designed  his  Tale  as  a  Document  to  young  Ladies  against  dispropor- 
tioned  Marriages :  di  non  se  accompagnare  con  huomo,  cui  la  Natura,  6°  il  Cielo,  <5r* 
il  modo  della  Vita  disgiunge  da  noi ;  that  they  should  not  link  themselves  to  such, 
against  whom  Nature,  Providence,  and  a  different  way  of  Living  have  interposed  a 
Bar.  Our  Poet  inculcates  no  such  Moral ;  but  rather,  that  a  Woman  may  fall  in  Love 
with  the  Virtues  and  shining  Qualities  of  a  Man,  and  therein  overlook  the  Difference 
of  Complexion  and  Colour. 

Farmer  :  I  have  seen  a  French  translation  of  Cynthio,  by  Gabriel  Chappuys,  Paris, 
1584.  This  is  not  a  faithful  one,  and  I  suspect  through  this  medium  the  work  came 
into  English.  [This  translation  is  reprinted  by  Francois-Victor  Hugo  in  his  edition 
of  Shakespeare,  Paris,  1868,  vol.  v,  pp.  443-458. — Ed.] 

Simrock  (Quellen  des  Shakespeare,  &c,  Berlin,  1831,  iii,  181)  ridicules  the  idea  that 
it  is  necessary  to  find  a  translation  into  English  of  Giraldi  Cinthio.  •  As  if,'  he  says  in 
.scorn,  'it  would  not  have  been  mere  child's  play  for  such  a  genius  as  Shakespeare  to 
have  mastered  Italian  and  French !  ....  It  is  as  probable  that  the  story  of  Cinthio 
'was  founded  in  fact  as  in  fiction.  Waiblinger,  in  the  Taschenbuch,  Penelope,  1831, 
'  asserts  that  there  is  an  Italian  ballad  on  this  subject  of  Othello,  but  we  have  looked 
'  for  it  in  vain  in  Wolff's  Egeria.  At  all  events,  the  style  of  the  "  novel "  renders  it  not 
'  unlikely  that  it  originated  in  some  popular  romance,  such  as  minstrels,  who  wandered 
'  around  the  country  with  painted  placards,  were  wont  to  sing.  This  "novel "  belongs 
'  to  the  best  of  Cinthio's,  whose  skill  as  a  narrator  we  do  not  highly  prize.'  [While 
declining  to  accept  Rawdon  Brown's  hypothesis  as  set  forth  in  his  Marin  Sanuto 
(see  post),  Simrock  in  his  2d  edition  in  1870  expressed  himself  as  not  doubting  but 
that]  '  the  Moor  was  an  historic  character,  not  a  negro,  whose  colour  had  been  miscon- 
'  ceived  through  a  mistaken  interpretation  of  his  name.' 

Knight  :  It  is  not  improbable  that  [Cinthio's  novel]  is  of  Oriental  origin ;  the  re- 
venge of  the  Moor,  as  there  described,  is  of  that  fierce  and  barbarous  character  which 
is  akin  to  the  savage  manner  in  which  supposed  incontinence  is  revenged  amongst  the 
Arabs.  The  painfully  affecting  tale  of  The  Three  Apples,  in  The  Thousand  and  One 
Nights,  is  an  example  of  this ;  and,  further,  there  is  a  similarity  between  the  stolen 
apple  and  the  stolen  handkerchief.  The  malignity  of  the  slave  in  the  Arabian  tale, 
too,  is  almost  as  motiveless  as  that  of  Iago ;  [but  the  Iago  of  Cinthio  was  not  motive- 
less.— Ed.] 

Collier  :  Shakespeare  may  have  read  Cinthio's  story  in  the  original  language ;  it  is 
highly  probable  that  he  was  sufficiently  acquainted  with  Italian  for  the  purpose. 

[In  1837,  Rawdon  Brown  published,  at  Venice,  Ragguagli  sulla  Vita  e  sulle  Opere 
di  Marin  Sa?mto,  6°r.,  wherein  (i,  226-235)  ne  conjectured  that  a  certain  'Christophal 
Moro,'  a  '  Luogotenente  di  Cipro,'  who  returned  from  Cyprus  in  1508  after  having 
lost  his  wife,  was  the  original  of  the  Moor  of  Venice  of  Giraldi  Cinthio.  In  the  inci- 
dents of  this  warrior's  life  Brown  found  sufficient  similarity  to  the  novel  of  Cinthio  to 


THE  SOURCE   OF   THE  PLOT  373 

lead  him  to  suppose  that  the  story  was  popular  enough  to  have  supplied  the  details  to 
Shakespeare  at  the  hands  of  some  of  the  members,  high  or  low,  attached  to  the  Italian 
Embassy  in  London.  In  the  name  Barbarigo,  of  the  Secretaries  of  the  Embassy  from 
1610  to  1616,  Brown  discerns  the  name  Brabantio;  in  Gratiano,  a  certain  Gradenigo; 
in  Montano,  a  Mocenigo,  &c.  The  theory  in  this  shape  depends  for  its  support  on  a 
date  for  the  composition  of  Othello  quite  as  late  as  that  assigned  to  it  by  Warburton  or 
Chalmers;  and  as  we  have  relinquished  all  dates  after  1604,  this  theory,  I  fear,  must 
be  abandoned  with  them.  Its  author,  however,  did  not  desert  it;  he  subsequently 
returned  to  it,  and  this  time  with  a  date  as  early  as  1603;  see  his  letter  in  7 'he 
Academy,  post.  One  fact,  in  connection  with  it,  is  certainly  curious,  and  that  is  that  in 
the  Barbarigo  family,  as  proved  by  an  Item  in  a  Will,  there  actually  was  a  slave-girl 
named  Barbara.  Brown  sums  up  his  theory,  which  finely  witnesses  to  his  knowledge 
of  early  Venetian  History,  as  follows  (p.  234) :  '  I  suppose  that  there  was  a  mystery 
1  connected  with  the  death  of  Cristofal  Moro,  the  "  Luogotenente  "  of  Cyprus,  out  of 
'  which  was  made  a  romance  by  mingling  fact  and  fancy.  This  romance,  passed  over 
'  to  England  years  and  years  afterwards,  was  translated  and  read  by  Shakespeare.  Ven- 
1  ice  was  the  fashion  ;  and  from  a  romance  of  Venetian  history  The  Moor  of  Venice 
1  became  an  English  tragedy.' — Ed. 

Klein  (Geschichte  des  Dramas.  Das  Italienische  Drama,  ii,  384)  finds  a  resem- 
blance which  he  deems  quite  striking  between  several  passages  in  Othello  and  Ludov- 
ico  Dolce's  Marianna  (first  acted  in  1565),  and  suggests  that  Shakespeare  while  work- 
ing on  his  tragedy  may  have  had  the  Italian  in  view. 

In  Marianna  there  is  one  situation  which  resembles  Othello.  Salome,  Herod's 
sister,  has  secretly  accused  Marianna,  Herod's  wife,  of  having  bribed  his  cup-bearer  to 
poison  him.  Erode  (Herod)  cross-questions  the  cup-bearer,  who  confirms  the  charge. 
Like  Othello,  Herod  demands  proofs.  '  The  Cup-bearer  envelops  Erode's  soul  in  his 
'  snaky  coils,  until,  like  Iago,  he  finds  the  chance  to  dart  his  poisonous  fang.  '  They 
' '  who  brood  on  crime,'  he  hisses;  'play  the  game  so  close  that  one  hand  knows  not 
' '  what  the  other  does.' '  Erode  is  determined  that  the  cup-bearer  shall  repeat  the 
accusation  in  the  presence  of  the  Queen,  and  Marianna  is  called. 

Erode  addresses  her : 

'  Marianna,  io  torrei  perder  il  regno, 
E  insieme  rimaner  mendico  e  nudo 
Prima,  ch'aver  cagion,  come  n'  ho  troppa 
D'  imputarti,  o  crudel,  delitto  alcuno.' 

To  which  Marianna  replies  : 

'  Se  delitto  e  d'  avervi  amato  sempre 
Con  quello  amor,  ch'  amar  si  dee  consorte, 
Et  onorato,  come  mio  Signore, 
Avete  alta  cagion  d'  odiarmi  ognora.' 

(4  Marianna,  I  would  gladly  lose  my  kingdom,  And  remain  for  aye  a  beggar  ana 
unclad,  Rather  than  have  cause,  as  but  too  much  I  have,  To  impute  to  thee,  O  cruel 
one,  any  crime.'  The  parallel  passage,  which  will  occur  to  every  one,  is,  of  course  : 
1  Had  it  pleas'd  Heaven,'  &c,  IV,  ii,  57.  Marianna's  reply  is  in  the  same  scene  :  '  If 
it  be  a  crime  to  have  always  loved  you  With  that  love  with  which  one  should  love  a 
husband,  And  to  have  honoured  you  as  my  lord,  You  have  deep  cause  to  hate  me 
always.') 


374 


APPENDIX 


While  noting  these  parallelisms,  and  suggesting,  as  I  have  said,  that  Shakespeare 
may  have  used  Marianna  as  a  lay  figure  in  draping  his  tragedy,  Klein  acknowledges 
the  grander  scale  on  which  Shakespeare  worked  and  the  loftier  key  in  which  his 
drama  is  pitched ;  whereby  '  the  wild,  gloomy,  hellish  temperament  of  a  Herod  is  trans- 
figured into  the  lofty,  noble,  clear  soul  of  a  grand-hearted,  g-dleless  man.'  To  me  it 
would  be  impossible  in  Shakespeare's  case  to  infer  any  familiarity  with  Dolce,  even 
were  the  parallelisms  many  times  more  numerous  and  more  exact.  But  Klein's  opin- 
ions on  dramatic  subjects  are  always  to  be  respectfully  heard,  and  treated  with  the 
deference  due  to  an  antagonist  wdiose  weapon,  were  he  living,  would  be  *  the  whole 
tree  of  knowledge  torn  up  by  the  roots.' 

In  The  Academy  (9th  January,  1875)  appeared  the  letter  above  referred  to,  written 
in  Venice,  from  Rawdon  Brown,  which  gives  interesting  and  fuller  details  from  early 
Venetian  documents  concerning  the  bearers  of  the  name  of  '  Moro,'  in  one  of  whom, 
Christopher,  as  we  have  seen,  the  writer  finds  the  original  Othello.  After  giving  some 
proofs  of  credulity,  on  the  part  of  the  Venetian  Senate,  in  stories  quite  as  marvellous  as 
an)r  in  Othello's  travels'  history,  Brown  proceeds  :  ■  Fronting  the  summit  of  the  "  Giants' 

*  Stair,"  where  the  Doges  of  Venice  were  crowned,  there  are  still  visible  four  shields 
'"spotted  with  mulberries"  ("strawberries"  in  the  description  of  Desdemona's  hand- 
'  kerchief),  indicating  that  that  part  of  the  palace  portal  on  which  they  are  carved  was 
'  terminated  in  the  reign  of  Christopher  Moro,  whose  insignia  are  three  mulberries  sable 
'  and  three  bends  azure  on  a  field  argent ;  the  word  "  Moro  "  signifying  in  Italian  either 
1  mulberry-tree  or  blackamoor. 

'  In  July,  1469,  this  Doge  ....  Christopher  Moro  effected  indirectly  the  annexation  of 
'  Cyprus  to  Venice,  and  in  May,  1505,  as  a  reward  for  military  and  diplomatic  services, 

*  the  Grand  Council  elected  his  namesake — Christopher  Moro,  son  of  Lorenzo — lord- 
'  lieutenant  of  the  island,  where  he  remained,  after  his  term  of  service  had  expired,  and 
'  by  reason  of  his  being  thus  accidentally  on  the  spot,  he  was  appointed  to  defend  it  from 
«  an  hypothetical  attack  which,  according  to  report,  was  meditated  either  by  the  Soldan, 
1  the  Sofi,  or  the  Turk.  This  statement  exists  in  the  summary  of  a  dispatch  from  Chris - 
'  topher  Moro's  successor,  the  Lord-Lieutenant  Lorenzo  Giustinian,  who  adds  that  he 
1  and  the  counsellors  had  "  elected  Christofal  Moro  captain  of  the  fourteen  ships  detained 
'  by  them  for  fear;  "  and  it  is  a  curious  coincidence  that  the  tenour  of  the  official  advices 
'  from  Cyprus  corresponds  precisely  with  the  causes  assigned  for  the  subsequent  dispatch 
'  of  Othello  from  Venice  for  the  defence  of  that  island,  as  in  Act  I,  Scene  iii,  of  Shake- 
1  speare's  tragedy.  And,  finally,  the  return  of  Christopher  Moro  to  Venice  is  recorded  in 
1  Marin  Sanuto's  Diaries  thus :  A.  D.  150S,  October  22.     "  Item.    The  ship  from  Syria 

*  arrived,  having  on  board  Christopher  Moro,  on  his  return  from  the  Lord-Lieutenancy 
'  of  Cyprus.  1508,  October  26.  In  the  morning  there  presented  himself  to  the  College, 
'  Christopher  Moro,  returned  Lord-Lieutenant  from  Cyprus,  and  elected  Captain  in  Can- 
'  dia,  wearing  his  beard  for  the  death  of  his  wife  [Desdemona  ?]  on  her  way  from  Cyprus, 

*  as  heard  previously,  and  he  made  his  report."  ....  To  return  to  Christopher  Moro.  He 
'  was  decidedly  a  lady's  man,  as  according  to  Barbara's  genealogies  he  was  married  four 
'  times.  Nor  should  it  be  forgotten  that  the  tale,  whether  told  by  Cinthio  or  Shake- 
'  speare,  must  have  its  incidents  dated  between  14S6,  when  Catherine  Cornaro  abdicated 
'  in  favour  of  Venice,  until  the  fall  of  Famagosta,  in  1 5  7 1 .  Further,  Moro's  military 
'  exploits  in  the  Romagna,  against  Cresar  Borgia,  and  subsequently  during  the  League 

of  Cambrai,  as  recorded  by  the  Venetian  historians,  and  by  an  inscription  which  once 

*  existed  in  the  Palazzo  Pretorio  at  Padua,  would  warrant  his  saying  of  himself,  '  I  have 
done  the  State  some  service,  and  they  know  it.' 


THE   SOURCE   OF   THE  PLOT 


375 


*  Cinthic  s  novel,  it  may  be  added,  would  never  have  sufficed  Shal>  espeare  for  hia 
Othello.  The  Italian  described  Desdemona's  handkerchief  as  a  'nose-napkin'  (pan- 
nicello  da  naso),  and  says  it  was  most  delicately  wrought,  but  does  not  give  the  design, 
which  reveals  the  whole  thing.     Had  he  called  things  by  their  right  names,  the  sale 

'  of  his  book  in  Venice  would  have  been  prohibited Among  the  Venetians  in  Eng- 

'  land  from  1603  to  1615  there  were  the  secretary  Scaramelli,  and  the  ambassadors  Duodo, 

*  Correr,  Francesco  Contarini,  and  Foscarini,  from  one  or  other  of  them,  or  from  some 
'  of  their  attendants,  Shakespeare — who  may,  perhaps,  have  been  struck  by  some  Eng- 
1  lish  translation  of  Cinthio's  tales — might  easily  have  ascertained  the  true  story  of  his 
■  Othello.' 

In  The  Academy  of  20  February,  1875,  E.  H.  Pickersgill  replied  to  Rawdon 
Brown,  and  among  other  arguments  gives  a  shrewd  reason  for  Shakespeare's  conversion 
(if  it  be  a  conversion)  of  the  'three  mulberries  sable'  into  'strawberries.'  By  the 
'  assumption  that  the  "  strawberries  "  were  Othello's  insignia  at  all,  we  should  involve 
'  Shakespeare  in  a  gross  inconsistency.     For,  of  course,  in  that  case,  Cassio,  when  he 

*  found  the  handkerchief  dropped  in  his  bed-chamber,  could  not  have  been  in  doubt 
'  respecting  its  ownership ;  he  would  have  recognized  it,  at  once,  as  the  property  of 
'  Desdemona.  In  Cinthio's  novel,  Cassio  actually  does  recognize  it,  not  by  any  insig- 
«  nia  upon  it,  but  by  the  curious  inwrought  "  Moresco  work."  '  Furthermore,  Pickers- 
gill  asks :  '  If  Shakespeare  was  acquainted  with  the  historical  Moro's  military  exploits 
'  in  the  Romagna,  why  does  he  prefer  to  mention  Rhodes,  Cyprus,  and  Aleppo  as  the 
'  scenes  of  the  exploits  of  his  Othello  ?'  The  most  conclusive  argument  against  Brown's 
theory  Pickersgill  finds  in  the  actual  date,  settled  by  Reed,  of  Othello's  dispatch  to 
Cyprus  [see  p.  357],  which  was  sixty  years  after  Christopher  Moro's  governorship  of 
the  island. 

Lastly,  in  The  Athenceum,  18  September,  1875,  C.  Elliot  Browne  asks:  'Was 
'  Shakespeare  indebted  for  any  part  of  the  conception  of  Othello  to  the  story  of  Sam- 
'  piero,  the  famous  Corsican  leader  ?  .  .  .  .  The  hint  was  thrown  out  more  than  a  cen- 
'  tury  ago  by  the  anonymous  writer  of  a  paper  in  Dodsley's  Museum,  when  replying  to 
'  some  of  Rymer's  criticisms  upon  this  drama.  He  said  (in  substance),  why  this  con- 
« tinual  cry  about  the  unnaturalness  of  Othello,  when  there  is  evidence  from  real  life 
'  that  a  brave  soldier,  whose  character  resembled  in  many  points  that  which  Shake- 
'  speare  has  given  to  the  Moor,  being  placed  in  similar  circumstances  of  terrible  per- 

*  plexity,  behaved  almost  exactly  as  Othello  is  represented  to  have  done  ? 

'  There  is  some  resemblance  between  the  careers  of  Sampiero  and  Othello.  Sam- 
'  piero,  or,  as  the  name  is  more  correctly  written,  San  Pietro  di  Bastelica,  was  an  Italian 
'  adventurer  in  the  service  of  France,  who  had  arrived  at  high  distinction  by  conduct 

*  and  valour ;  and  he  had  married,  against  the  wish  of  all  her  relatives,  the  beautiful 

'  Corsican  heiress,  Vanina  d'Ornano In  1563,  Sampiero,  leaving  his  wife  in  France, 

'  went  to  Constantinople  to  beg  assistance  for  the  Corsicans  from  the  Turks.  During 
'  this  absence  his  Genoese  enemies  are  said  to  have  tampered  with  some  servants  of  his 

*  wife's  household,  and  caused  a  report  to  reach  Constantinople  that  she  was  living  on 
'  too  intimate  terms  with  his  secretary,  Antonio.  Immediately  returning  to  France, 
'  Sampiero  came  up  with  his  wife  at  Aix ;  and  after  a  scene  which  all  accounts  agree 

to  have  been  characterized  on  his  part  by  a  strange  mixture  of  passionate  tenderness 

*  and  brutal  ferocity,  and  on  hers  by  gentle,  uncomplaining  submiss  on,  he  asked  pardon 
'  upon  his  knees  for  the  deed  he  was  about  to  commit,  and  deliberately  strangled  her 
'  with  her  handkerchief.  It  is  proper  to  add,  that  there  is  in  existence  another  version 
'  of  the  affair,  in  which  the  cause  of  Vanina's  fate  is  attributed  to  her  husband's  indig 


376  APPENDIX 

*  nation  at  some  secret  advances  which  she  had  made  to  the  Genoese  government  fo! 
4  the  purpose  of  obtaining  his  pardon,  thus  excluding  altogether  the  motive  of  jealousy. 

'  Although  wanting  in  several  important  points  of  resemblance,  this  story  comes 

*  much  nearer  to  the  murder-scene  of  the  drama  than  that  of  the  tale  in  the  "  Heca- 
'  tommithi."  ....  This  Sampiero  tragedy  made  so  great  a  noise  in  Europe,  that  it  is 
1  almost  impossible  to  believe  that  Shakespeare  would  be  unacquainted  with  it.' 


The  Hecato?nmithi  of  Giouanbattista  Giraldi  Cinthio  are  divided  into  Ten 
Decades,  each  Decade  devoted  to  a  particular  subject,  whereto  ten  Stories  or  Novels 
furnish  the  appropriate  illustrations. 

The  Third  Decade  deals  with  *  The  Unfaithfulness  of  Husbands  and  of  Wives,'  and 
is  dedicated,  let  us  hope  with  permission,  to  the  '  Illvstrissima  Signora  la  Signora  Laura 
Eustochia  da  Este.' 

The  Seventh  Novel  in  this  Decade  is  here  faithfully  reprinted  from  the  original  edi- 
tion, issued  '  In  Venegia  M-D-LXVI.'  Here  and  there  the  ampersands  are  changed 
to  e  and  et ;  and  u  is  changed  to  v. 

A  translation  of  this  Novel  appeared  in  Mrs  Lenox's  Shakespear  Illustrated,  1753, 
vol.  i,  p.  101.    Again  in  1795,  it  was  translated  by  Wolstenholme  Parr;  this  trans 
lation  was  reprinted  by  Collier  in  the  first  edition  of  Shakespeare' 's  Library,  and  again 
by  W.  C.  Hazlitt  in  the  second.     Lastly,  in  1855,  by  John  Edward  Taylor.     This 
translation  is  here  reprinted  on  the  same  page  with  the  Italian. 

It  was  translated  into  German  by  Wieland,  and  appeared  in  the  Teutsche  Mercur, 
Weimar,  1773,  p.  63.  Again  by  Echtermeyer,  Henschel,  and  Simrock  in  Quellen 
der  Shakespeare,  Berlin,  1 83 1. 

Of  the  author,  Giraldi  Cinthio,  Taylor,  in  the  Introduction  to  his  Translation,  says 
that  he  '  was  a  nobleman  of  Ferrara,  and  a  Professor  of  Philosophy  in  that  city ;'  and 

*  adds  that  '  it  is  somewhat  amusing  to  read  the  terms  in  which  he  speaks  of  the 
'  composition  of  his  work,  in  connection  with  his  '  grave  studies  of  philosophy,' — by 
1  the  light  of  which,  the  fount  and  origin  of  laudable  habits,  and  of  all  honest  disci- 
'  pline,  and  likewise  of  every  virtue,  I  have  sought  to  perfect  my  work,  which  is  wholly 
'  directed,  with  much  variety  of  examples,  to  censure  vicious  actions  and  to  praise  honest 
'  ones, — to  make  men  fly  from  vice  and  embrace  virtue.'    What  could  the  reader  expect 

*  from  this  proem  (which  is  found  totidem  verbis  in  all  the  books  of  this  school),  but  a 
work  of  untarnished  purity  and  morality  ? — all  I  can  say  is,  he  would  be  disappointed  ' 


DECA  TERZA 

Un  Capitano  Moro  piglia  per  mogliera  una  cittadina  Venetiana,  un  suo  Alfieri  Faccusu 
di  adulterio  al  Marito  ;  cerca,  che  V  Alfieri  uccida  colui,  ch'  egli  credea  P  Adultero  ; 
il  Capitano  uccide  la  Moglie,  2  accusato  dalV  Alfieri,  non  confessa  il  Moro,  ma 
essendovi  chiari  inditij,  2  bandito  ;  Et  lo  scelerato  Alfieri,  credendo  nuocere  ad  altrit 
procaccia  a  si  la  morte  miseramente.  [A  Moorish  Captain  takes  to  wife  a  Ven- 
etian Dame,  and  his  Ancient  accuses  her  of  adultery  to  her  husband;  it  is  planned 
that  the  Ancient  is  to  kill  him  whom  he  believes  to  be  the  adulterer;  the  Captain  kills 
the  woman,  is  accused  by  the  Ancient,  the  Moor  does  not  confess,  but  after  the  inflic- 
tion of  extreme  torture,  is  banished ;  and  the  wicked  Ancient,  thinking  to  injurt 
other     provided  for  himself  a  miserable  death. ,] 


THE  SOURCE   OF   THE  PLOT  377 

NOVELLA   VII. 

FU  gia  in  Venezia  un  Moro,  molto  valoroso,  il  quale,  per  essere  pr6  della  persona, 
e  per  haver  dato  segno,  nelle  cose  della  guerra,  di  gran  prudenza,  e  di  vivace  in- 
gegno,  era  molto  caro  a  que'  signori,  i  quali  nel  dar  premio  a  gli  atti  vertuosi  avanzano 
quante  Republiche  fur  mai.  Avenne,  che  una  virtuosa  Donna,  di  maravigliosa  bellezza, 
Disdemona  chiamata,  tratta  non  da  appetito  donnesco,  ma  dalla  virtu  del  Moro,  s'  inna- 
mor6  di  lui :  et  egli,  vinto  dalla  bellezza,  e  dal  nobile  pensiero  della  Donna,  similmente 
di  lei  si  accese,  et  hebbero  tanto  favorevole  Amore,  che  si  congiunsero  insieme  per  matri- 
monio,  anchora  che  i  parenti  della  Donna  facessero  cid,  che  poterono,  perche,  ella  altro 
marito  si  prendesse,  che  lui :  e  vissero  insieme  di  si  Concorde  volere,  et  in  tanta  tran- 
quillita,  mentre  furono  in  Venetia,  che  mai  tra  loro  non  fu  non  dird  cosa,  ma  parola 
men,  che  amorevole.  Occorse,  che  i  Signori  Venetiani  fecero  mutatione  delle  genti 
d'  arme,  ch'  essi  sogliono  tenere  in  Cipri :  et  elesseno  per  Capitano  de  soldati,  che  la 
mandavano,  il  Moro.  II  quale,  anchora  che  molto  lieto  fosse  dell'  honore,  che  gli  era 
offerto  (perd  che  tal  grado  di  degnita  non  si  suol  dare  senon  ad  huomini,  e  nobili,  e 
forti,  e  fedeli,  e  che  habbiano  mostrato  havere  in  se  molto  valore)  si  scemava  nondimeno 
la  sua  allegrezza,  qualhora  egli  si  poneva  innanzi  la  lunghezza,  e  la  malagevolezza  del 
viaggio,  pensandosi,  che  Disdemona  ne  devesse  rimanere  offesa :  la  Donna,  che  altro 
bene  non  haveva  al  mondo,  che  il  Moro,  et  era  molto  contenta,  del  testimonio,  c'  haveva 
havuto  il  Marito  della  sua  virtu  da  cosl  possente,  e  nobile  Republica  non  vedea  1'  hora, 
che  il  Marito,  colle  sue  genti,  si  mettesse  in  camino,  et  ella  andasse  seco  in  compagnia  in 
cosl  honorato  luogo,  ma  le  dava  gran  noia  il  vedere  il  Moro  turbato.  Et,  non  ne  sapendo 
la  cagione,  un  giorno  mangiando  gli  disse ;  Che  vuole  egli  dir,  Moro,  che  poi,  che  vi  e 
stato  dato  dalla  Signoria  cosl  honorato  grado,  ve  ne  state  tanto  maninconico ;  a  Disde- 
mona disse  il  Moro,  Turba  la  contentezza  del  ricevuto  honore,  l'amore,  che  io  ti  porto, 
perche  io  veggo,  di  necessita,  delle  due  cose  deverne  avenir  1'  una :  overo,  che  io  ti 
meni  con  esso  meco  a  pericoli  del  Mare :  o  vero,  che,  per  non  ti  dar  questo  disago,  ti 

There  once  lived  in  Venice  a  Moor,  who  was  very  valiant  and  of  a  handsome  person ; 
and  having  given  proofs  in  war  of  great  skill  and  prudence,  he  was  highly  esteemed  by 
the  Signoria  of  the  Republic,  who  in  rewarding  deeds  of  valour  advanced  the  interests 
of  the  State. 

It  happened  that  a  virtuous  lady  of  marvellous  beauty,  named  Disdemona,  fell  in  love 
with  the  Moor,  moved  thereto  by  his  valour ;  and  he,  vanquished  by  the  beauty  and  the 
noble  character  of  Disdemona,  returned  her  love ;  and  their  affection  was  so  mutual  that, 
although  the  parents  of  the  lady  strove  all  they  could  to  induce  her  to  take  another  hus- 
band, she  consented  to  marry  the  Moor ;  and  they  lived  in  such  harmony  and  peace  in 
Venice  that  no  word  ever  passed  between  them  that  was  not  affectionate  and  kind. 

Now  it  happened  at  this  time  that  the  Signoria  of  Venice  made  a  change  in  the  troops 
whom  they  used  to  maintain  in  Cyprus,  and  they  appointed  the  Moor  commander  of  the 
soldiers  whom  they  dispatched  thither.  Joyful  as  was  the  Moor  at  the  honour  proffered 
him,  such  dignity  being  only  conferred  on  men  of  noble  rank  and  well-tried  faith,  and 
who  had  displayed  bravery  in  arms, — yet  his  pleasure  was  lessened  when  he  reflected 
on  the  length  and  dangers  of  the  voyage,  fearing  that  Disdemona  would  be  pained  at 
his  absence.  But  Disdemona,  who  had  no  other  happiness  in  the  world  than  the  Moor, 
and  who  rejoiced  to  witness  the  testimony  of  his  valour  her  husband  had  received  from 
so  powerful  and  noble  a  Republic,  was  all  impatient  that  he  should  embark  with  his  troops, 
and  longed  to  accompany  him  to  so  honourable  a  post.  And  all  the  more  it  vexed  her 
to  see  the  Moor  so  troubled ;  and  not  knowing  what  could  be  the  reason,  one  day,  when 
they  were  at  dinner,  she  said  to  him,  '  How  is  it,  O  Moor,  that  when  so  honourable  a  post 
has  been  conferred  on  you  by  the  Signoria,  you  are  thus  melancholy  ? ' 

The  Moor  answered  Disdemona,  '  My  pleasure  at  the  honour  I  have  received  is 
disturbed  by  the  love  I  bear  you ;  for  I  see  that  of  necessity  one  of  two  things  must 
happen, — either  that  I  take  you  with  me  to  encounter  the  perils  of  the  sea,  or,  to  save 


378 


APPENDIX 


lasci  in  Venetia.  La  prima  non  mi  potrebbe  essere  se  non  grave,  perche  ogni  fatica, 
che  tu  ne  sostenessi,  et  ogni  pericolo,  che  ci  sopravenisse,  mi  recherebbe  estrema  mo 
lestia.  La  seconda,  devendoti  lasciare,  mi  sarebbe  odioso  a  me  medesimo;  perche, 
partendomi  da  te,  mi  patirei  dalla  mia  vita.  Disdemona,  ci6  inteso ;  Deh,  disse,  Marito 
mio,  che  pensieri  son  questi  che  vi  vanno  per  1'  animo  ?  a  che  lasciate,  che  cosa  tal  vi 
turbi  ?  voglio  io  venire  con  voi,  ovunque  anderete,  Se  bene  cosl  devessi  passare  in  camiscia 
per  lo  fuoco,  come  son  per  venire  per  acqua  con  voi,  in  sicura,  e  ben  guarnita  nave :  e, 
se  pure  vi  saranno  pericoli,  e  fatiche,  io  con  voi  ne  voglio  essere  a  parte,  e  mi  terrei 
d'essere  poco  amata  da  voi,  quando,  per  non  mi  havere  in  compagnia  nel  mare,  pensaste 
di  lasciarmi  in  Venetia,  o  vi  persuadeste,  che  piu  tosto  mi  volessi  star  qui  sicura,  ch'  es- 
sere con  voi  in  uno  istesso  pericolo.  Perd  voglio,  che  vi  apparecchiate  al  viaggio,  con 
tutta  quella  allegrezza,  che  merita  la  qualita  del  grado,  che  tenete.  Gittd  allhora  le 
braccia  al  collo  tutto  lieto  il  Moro  alia  Mogliera,  e  con  un  affettuoso  bacio  le  disse : 
Iddio  ci  conservi  lungamente  in  questa  amorevolezza,  Moglie  mia  cara :  et,  indi  a  poco, 
pigliati  gli  suoi  arnesi,  e  messossi  ad  ordine  per  lo  camino,  entrd,  colla  sua  Donna,  e  con 
tutta  la  compagnia,  nella  galea  :•  e  date  le  vele  al  vento,  si  mise  in  camino :  e  con 
somma  tranquillita  del  Mare,  se  n'andd  in  Cipri.  Haveva  costui  nella  compagnia  un 
alliero  di  bellissima  presenza,  ma  della  piu  scelerata  natura,  che  mai  fosse  huomo  del 
mondo.  Era  questi  molto  caro  al  Moro,  non  havendo  egli  delle  sue  cattivita  notitia 
alcuna.  Perche,  quantunque  egli  fosse  di  vilissimo  animo,  copriva  nondimeno,  coll' 
alte,  e  superbe  parole,  e  colla  sua  presenza,  di  modo  la  vilta,  ch'  egli  chiudea  nel  cuore, 
che  si  scopriva  nella  sembianza  un'  Ettore,  od  un  Achille.  Havea  similmente  menata 
questo  malvagio  la  sua  Moglie  in  Cipri,  la  quale  era  bella,  et  honesta  giovane :  e  per 
essere  Italiana,  era  molto  amata  dalla  Moglie  del  Moro,  e  si  stava  la  maggior  parte  del 
giorno  con  lei.  Nella  medesima  compagnia  era  ancho  un  Capo  di  squadra,  carrissimo 
al  Moro :  Andava  spessissime  volte  questi  a  casa  del  Moro,  e  spesso  mangiava  con  lui  e 

you  from  this  danger,  I  must  leave  you  here  in  Venice.  The  first  could  not  be  other- 
wise than  serious  to  me,  for  all  the  toil  you  would  have  to  bear  and  every  danger  that 
might  befall  you  would  cause  me  extreme  anxiety  and  pain,  yet,  were  I  to  leave  you 
behind  me,  I  should  be  hateful  to  myself,  since  in  parting  from  you  I  should  part  from 
my  own  life.' 

Disdemona,  on  hearing  this,  replied :  '  My  husband,  what  thoughts  are  these  that 
wander  through  your  mind  ?  Why  let  such  things  disturb  you  ?  I  will  accompany 
you  whithersoe'er  you  go,  were  it  to  pass  through  fire,  as  now  to  cross  the  water  in  a  safe 
and  well-provided  ship ;  if  indeed  there  are  toils  and  perils  to  encounter,  I  will  share 
them  with  you.  And  in  truth  I  should  think  you  loved  me  little  were  you  to  leave  me 
here  in  Venice,  denying  me  to  bear  you  company,  or  could  believe  that  I  would  liefer 
bide  in  safety  here  than  share  the  dangers  that  await  you.  Prepare  then  for  the  voy- 
age with  all  the  readiness  which  the  dignity  of  the  post  you  hold  deserves.' 

The  Moor,  in  the  fulness  of  his  joy,  threw  his  arms  around  his  wife's  neck,  and  with 
an  affectionate  and  tender  kiss  exclaimed, '  God  keep  you  long  in  such  love,  dear  wife!' 
Then  speedily  donning  his  armour,  and  having  prepared  everything  for  his  expedition, 
he  embarked  on  board  the  galley  with  his  wife  and  all  his  troops,  and,  setting  sail,  they 
pursued  their  voyage,  and  with  a  perfectly  tranquil  sea  arrived  safely  at  Cyprus. 

Now  amongst  the  soldiery  there  was  an  Ensign,  a  man  of  handsome  figure,  but  of  the 
most  depraved  nature  in  the  world.  This  man  was  in  great  favour  with  the  Moor,  who 
had  not  the  slightest  idea  of  his  wickedness ;  for,  despite  the  malice  lurking  in  his  heart, 
he  cloaked  with  proud  and  valorous  speech  and  with  a  specious  presence  the  villainy 
of  his  soul  with  such  art  that  he  was  to  all  outward  show  another  Hector  or  Achilles. 
This  man  had  likewise  taken  with  him  his  wife  to  Cyprus,  a  young,  and  fair,  and  vir- 
tuous lady ;  and  being  of  Italian  birth  she  was  much  loved  by  Disdemona,  who  spent 
the  greater  part  of  every  day  with  her. 

In  the  same  Company  there  was  a  certain  Captain  of  a  troop,  to  whom  the  Moor  was 
a  uch  affectioned.     And  Disdemona,  for  this  cause,  knowing  how  much  her  husband 


THE   SOURCE   OF   THE  PLOT  379 

con  la  Moglie.  La  onde  la  Donna  che  lo  conosceva  cosl  grato  al  suo  Marito,  gli  dava 
segni  di  grandissima  benivolenza.  La  qual  cosa  era  molto  cara  al  Moro.  Lo  scelerato 
Attiero,  non  curando  punto  la  fede  data  alia  sua  Moglie,  ne  amicitia,  ne  fede,  ne  obligo, 
ch'  egli  havesse  al  Moro,  s'  innamor6  di  Disdemona  ardentissimamente;  e  volt6  tutto  il 
suo  pensiero  a  vedere,  se  gli  poteva  venir  fatto  di  godersi  di  lei :  ma  non  ardiva  di  dimo- 
strarsi,  temendo,  che,  se  il  Moro  se  ne  avedesse,  non  gli  desse  subito  morte.  Cerc6  egli 
con  varij  modi,  quanto  piu  occultamente  poteva,  di  fare  accorta  la  Donna,  ch'  egli  1'  amava. 
Ma  ella,  c'  havea  nel  Moro  ogni  suo  pensiero,  non  pensava  punto  ne  alio  Alfiero,  ne  ad  altri. 
Et  tutte  le  cose,  ch'  egli  facea,  per  accenderla  di  lui,  non  piu  operavano,  che  se  fatte  non  le 
havesse.  Onde  s'  imagin6  costui,  che  ci6  avenisse,  perche  ella  fosse  accesa  del  Capo  di 
squadra ;  e  pensd  volerlosi  levar  dinanzi  agli  occhi,  e  non  pure  a  cid  pieg6  la  mente,  Ma 
muto  1'  amore,  ch'  egli  portava  alia  Donna,  in  acerbissimo  odio ;  e  si  die,  con  ogni  studio, 
a  pensare,  come  gli  potesse  venir  fatto,  che  ucciso  il  Capo  di  squadra,  se  non  potesse 
goder  della  Donna,  il  Moro  anco  non  ne  godesse.  Et  rivolgendosi  per  1'  animo  varie 
cose,  tutte  scelerate,  e  malvagie,  alia  fine,  si  deliberd  di  volerla  accusare  di  Adulterio  al 
Marito,  e  dargli  ad  intendere,  che  Y  Adultero  era  il  Capo  di  squadra;  Ma  sappiendo  costui 
Y  amore  singolare,  che  portava  il  Moro  a  Disdemona,  e  1'  amicitia,  ch'  egli  havea  col 
Capo  di  squadra,  conosceva  apertamente,  che,  se  con  astuta  froda  non  faceva  inganno  al 
Moro,  era  impossible  a  dargli  a  vedere  ne  1'  uno,  ne  1'  altro.  Per  la  qual  cosa  si  mise 
ad  aspettare,  che  il  tempo,  et  il  luogo  gli  aprisse  la  via  da  entrare  a  cosl  scelerata  impresa. 
Et  non  passd  molto,  che  il  Moro,  per  haver  messa  mano  alia  spada  il  Capo  di  squadra, 
nella  guardia,  contra  un  soldato,  e  dategli  delle  ferite,  lo  priv6  del  grado :  la  qual  cosa 
fu  gravissima  a  Disdemona.  Et  molte  volte  haveva  tentato  di  rappacificare  il  Marito  con 
lui.  Tra  questo  mezzo  disse  il  Moro  alio  scelerato  Alfieri,  che  la  Moglie  gli  dava  tanta 
seccagine  per  lo  Capo  di  squadra,  che  temea  finalmente,  di  non  essere  astretto  a  ripi- 
gliarlo.    Prese  da  cid  il  maF  huomo  argomento  di  por  mano  a  gli  orditi  inganni,  e  disse ; 

valued  him,  showed  him  proofs  of  the  greatest  kindness,  which  was  all  very  grateful  to 
the  Moor.  Now  the  wicked  Ensign,  regardless  of  the  faith  that  he  had  pledged  his 
wife,  no  less  than  of  the  friendship,  fidelity,  and  obligation  which  he  owed  the  Moor, 
fell  passionately  in  love  with  Disdemona,  and  bent  all  his  thoughts  to  achieve  his  con- 
quest ;  yet  he  dared  not  to  declare  his  passion  openly,  fearing  that,  should  the  Moor 
perceive  it,  he  would  at  once  kill  him.  He  therefore  sought  in  various  ways,  and  with 
secret  guile,  to  betray  his  passion  to  the  lady;  but  she,  whose  every  wish  was  centred 
in  the  Moor,  had  no  thought  for  this  Ensign  more  than  for  any  other  man ;  and  all  the 
means  he  tried  to  gain  her  love  had  no  more  effect  than  if  he  had  not  tried  them.  But 
the  Ensign  imagined  that  the  cause  of  his  ill  success  was  that  Disdemona  loved  the 
Captain  of  the  troop ;  and  he  pondered  how  to  remove  him  from  her  sight.  The  love 
which  he  had  borne  the  lady  now  changed  into  the  bitterest  hate,  and,  having  failed 
in  his  purposes,  he  devoted  all  his  thoughts  to  plot  the  death  of  the  Captain  of  the 
troop  and  to  divert  the  affection  of  the  Moor  from  Disdemona.  After  revolving  in  his 
mind  various  schemes,  all  alike  wicked,  he  at  length  resolved  to  accuse  her  of  unfaith- 
fulness to  her  husband,  and  to  represent  the  Captain  as  her  paramour.  But  knowing 
the  singular  love  the  Moor  bore  to  Disdemona,  and  the  friendship  which  he  had  for  the 
Captain,  he  was  well  aware  that,  unless  he  practised  an  artful  fraud  upon  the  Moor,  it 
were  impossible  to  make  him  give  ear  to  either  accusation ;  wherefore  he  resolved  to 
wait  until  time  and  circumstance  should  open  a  path  for  him  to  engage  in  his  foul 
project. 

Not  long  afterwards  it  happened  that  the  Captain,  having  drawn  his  sword  upon  a 
soldier  of  the  guard,  and  struck  him,  the  Moor  deprived  him  of  his  rank ;  whereat 
Disdemona  was  deeply  grieved,  and  endeavored  again  and  again  to  reconcile  her  hus- 
band to  the  man.  This  the  Moor  told  to  the  wicked  Ensign,  and  how  his  wife  impor- 
tuned him  so  much  about  the  Captain  that  he  feared  he  should  be  forced  at  last  tc 
receive  hin  back  to  service.     Upon  this  hint  the  Ensign  resolved  to  act,  and  began  to 


380  APPENDIX 

Hi  forse  Disdemona  cagione  di  vederlo  volentieri.  Et  perche  ?  disse  il  Moro,  Io  non 
voglio,  rispose  1'  Alfieri,  por  mano  tra  marito,  e  moglie :  ma,  se  terrete  aperti  gli  occhi, 
voi  stesso  lo  vi  vedrete ;  Ne  per  diligenza,  che  facesse  il  Moro,  voile  1'  Alfieri  piu  oltre 
passare :  Benche  lasciarono  tali  parole,  cosl  pungente  spina  nell'  animo  del  Moro,  che  si 
diede  con  sommo  studio  a  pensare  ci6,  che  volessero  dire  tali  parole,  e  se  ne  stava  tutto 
maninconioso.  La  onde,  tentando  un  giorno  la  Moglie  di  ammollire  1'  ira  sua  verso  il 
Capo  di  squadra,  e  pregandolo  a  non  volere  mettere  in  oblio  la  servitu,  e  1'  aniicitia  di 
tanti  anni,  per  un  picciolo  fallo ;  essendo  massimamente  nata  pace,  fra  il  Soldato  ferito, 
et  il  Capo  di  squadra,  venne  il  Moro  in  ira,  e  le  disse :  Gran  cosa  e  questa,  Disdemona, 
che  tu  tanta  cura  ti  pigli  di  costui,  Non  e  perd  egli  ne  tuo  fratello,  ne  tuo  parente,  che 
tanto  ti  debba  essere  a  cuore.  La  Donna,  tutta  cortese,  et  humile ;  non  vorrei,  disse,  che 
voi  vi  adiraste  con  meco,  altro  non  mi  muove,  che  il  dolermi  di  vedervi  privato  di  cosi 
caro  amico,  qual  s6,  per  lo  testimonio  di  voi  medesimo,  che  vi  e  stato  il  Capo  di  squadra : 
non  ha  perd  egli  commesso  si  grave  errore,  che  gli  debbiate  portare  tanto  odio.  Ma  voi 
Mori  sete  di  natura  tanto  caldi,  ch'  ogni  poco  di  cosa  vi  muove  ad  ira,  et  a  vendetta.  A 
queste  parole  piu  irato  rispose  il  Moro,  tale  lo  potrebbe  provare,  che  non  sel  crede : 
vedrd  tal  vendetta  delle  ingiurie,  che  mi  son  fatte,  che  ne  resterd  satio.  Rimase  la 
Donna  tutta  isbigotita  a  queste  parole  :  et,  veduto  fuor  del  suo  costume,  il  Marito,  contra 
lei  riscaldato,  humilmente  disse;  altro,  che  buon  fine,  a  parlarvi  di  cid  non  mi  ha  indotta, 
ma  perche  piu  non  vi  habbiate  di  adirar  meco,  non  vi  dird  piu  mai  di  cid  parola.  Veduta 
il  Moro  la  instanza,  che  di  nuovo  gli  havea  fatta  la  Moglie,  in  favore  del  Capo  di  squadra, 
s'  imagin6  che  le  parole,  che  gli  havea  detto  1'  Alfieri,  gli  havessero  voluto  significare,  che 
Disdemona  fosse  inamorata  di  lui,  et  se  n'  andd  a  quel  ribaldo  tutto  maninconioso,  e 
comincid  a  tentare,  che  egli  piu  apertamente  gli  parlasse.  L'  Alfieri,  intento  al  danno 
di  questa  misera  Donna,  dopo  1'  havere  finto  di  non  voler  dir  cosa,  che  fosse  per  dispiacer- 

work  his  web  of  intrigue.  '  Perchance,'  said  he,  '  the  lady  Disdemona  may  have  good 
reason  to  look  kindly  on  him.' 

'  And  wherefore  ?  '  said  the  Moor. 

1  Nay,  I  would  not  step  'twixt  man  and  wife,'  replied  the  Ensign,  '  but  let  your  eyes 
be  witness  to  themselves.' 

In  vain  the  Moor  went  on  to  question  the  officer, — he  would  proceed  no  further ; 
nevertheless,  his  words  left  a  sharp,  stinging  thorn  in  the  Moor's  heart,  who  could  think 
of  nothing  else,  trying  to  guess  their  meaning  and  lost  in  melancholy.  And  one  day, 
when  his  wife  had  been  endeavouring  to  pacify  his  anger  toward  the  Captain,  and  pray 
ing  him  not  to  be  unmindful  of  ancient  services  and  friendship  for  one  small  fault,  espe 
daily  since  peace  had  been  made  between  the  Captain  and  the  soldier  he  had  struck, 
the  Moor  was  angered,  and  exclaimed,  '  Great  cause  have  you,  Disdemona,  to  care  so 
anxiously  about  this  man  !  Is  he  a  brother,  or  your  kinsman,  that  he  should  be  so  near 
your  heart  ? ' 

The  lady,  with  all  gentleness  and  humility,  replied,  '  Be  not  angered,  my  dear  lord ; 
1  have  no  other  cause  to  bid  me  speak  than  sorrow  that  I  see  you  lose  so  dear  a  friend 
as,  by  your  own  words,  this  Captain  has  been  to  you ;  nor  has  he  done  so  grave  a  fault 
that  you  should  bear  him  so  much  enmity.  Nay,  but  you  Moors  are  of  so  hot  a  nature 
that  every  little  trifle  moves  you  to  anger  and  revenge.' 

Still  more  enraged  at  these  words,  the  Moor  replied,  '  I  could  bring  proofs — by  heaven 
it  mocks  belief!  but  for  the  wrongs  I  have  endured  revenge  must  satisfy  my  wrath.' 

Disdemona,  in  astonishment  and  fright,  seeing  her  husband's  anger  kindled  against 
her,  so  contrary  to  his  wont,  said  humbly  and  with  timidness,  '  None  save  a  good  intent 
has  led  me  thus  to  speak  with  you,  my  lord ;  but  to  give  cause  no  longer  for  offence, 
I'll  never  speak  a  word  more  on  the  subject.' 

The  Moor,  observing  the  earnestness  with  which  his  wife  again  pleaded  for  the  Cap- 
tain, began  to  guess  the  meaning  of  the  Ensign's  words ;  and  in  deep  melancholy  he 
went  to  seek  that  villain  and  induce  him  to  speak  more  openly  of  what  he  knew 
Then  the  Ensign,  who  was  bent  upon  injuring  the  unhappy  lady,  after  feigning  at  first 


THE  SOURCE   OF  THE    PLOT  381 

gli,  mostrandosi  vinto  da  preghi  del  Moro,  disse;  Io  non  posso  negare,  che  non  m'  in- 
cresca  incredibilmente,  di  havervi  a  dir  cosa,  che  sia  per  esservi  piu  di  qualunque  altra 
molesta :  ma,  poi  che  pur  volete,  ch'  io  la  vi  dica,  e  la  cura,  che  io  debbo  havere  dell' 
honor  vostro,  come  di  mio  signore,  mi  sprona  anco  a  dirlovi,  non  voglio  hora  mancare  ne 
alia  vostra  dimanda,  ne  al  debito  mio.  Devete  adunque  sapere,  che,  non  per  altro,  e 
grave  alia  Donna  vostra  il  veder  il  Capo  di  squadra  in  disgratia  vostra,  che  per  lo  pia- 
cere,  che  ella  si  piglia  con  lui,  qual'  hora  egli  in  casa  vostra  viene  :  come  colei,  a  cui  gia 
e  venuta  a  noia  questa  vostra  nerezza.  Queste  parole  passarono  il  cuore  al  Moro  insino 
alle  radici :  Ma,  per  saper  piu  oltre  (anchora,  ch'  egli  credesse  vero  quanto  havea  detto 
1'  Alfieri,  per  lo  sospetto,  che  gia  gli  era  nato  nell'  animo)  disse,  con  fiero  viso ;  non  s6  io 
che  mi  tenga,  che  non  ti  tagli  questa  lingua,  tanto  audace,  che  ha  havuto  ardire  di  dar  tale 
infamia  alia  Donna  mia.  L'  Alfiero  allhora,  non  mi  aspettava,  disse,  Capitano,  di  questo 
mio  amorevole  ufficio,  altra  mercede;  Ma,  poi  che  tanto  oltre  mi  ha  portato  il  debito 
mio,  et  il  desiderio  dell'  honor  vostro :  io  vi  replico,  che  cosl  sta  la  cosa,  come  intesa 
1'  havete,  et  se  la  Donna,  col  mostrar  di  amarvi,  vi  ha  cosl  appannati  gli  occhi,  che  non 
habbiate  veduto  quel,  che  veder  devevate,  non  e  mica  per  ci6,  che  io  non  vi  dica  il  vero. 
Perche  il  medesimo  Capo  di  squadra  1'  ha  detto  a  me,  come  quegli,  cui  non  pareva  la 
sua  felicita  compiuta,  se  non  ne  faceva  alcuno  altro  consapevole ;  Et  gli  soggiunse  :  e,  se 
io  non  havessi  temuta  1'  ira  vostra,  gli  havrei  dato,  quando  cid  mi  disse,  quella  mercede, 
coll'  ucciderlo,  della  quale  egli  era  degno.  Ma  poscia,  che  il  farvi  sapere  quello,  che 
piu  a  voi,  che  a  qualunque  altro  appartiene,  me  ne  fa  havere  cosl  sconvenevole  guider- 
done :  me  ne  vorrei  essere  stato  cheto,  che  non  sarei,  tacendo,  incorso  nella  disgratia 
vostra.  II  Moro  allhora  tutto  cruccioso,  se  non  mi  fai,  disse,  vedere  cogl'  occhi  quello, 
che  detto  mi  hai,  viviti  sicuro,  che  ti  far6  conoscere,  che  meglio  per  te  sarebbe,  che  tu 
fossi  nato  mutolo.  Agevol  mi  sarebbe  stato  questo,  soggiunse  il  Malvagio,  quando  egli 
in  casa  vostra  veniva,  ma  hora,  che,  non  per  quello  che  bisognava,  ma  per  vie  piu  lieve 

great  reluctance  to  say  aught  that  might  displease  the  Moor,  at  length  pretended  to 
yield  to  his  entreaties,  and  said,  '  I  can't  deny  it  pains  me  to  the  soul  to  be  thus  forced 
to  say  what  needs  must  be  more  hard  to  hear  than  any  other  grief;  but  since  you  will 
it  so,  and  that  the  regard  I  owe  your  honour  compels  me  to  confess  the  truth,  I  will  no 
longer  refuse  to  satisfy  your  questions  and  my  duty.  Know,  then,  that  for  no  other 
reason  is  your  lady  vexed  to  see  the  Captain  in  disfavour  than  the  pleasure  that  she  has 
in  his  company  whenever  he  comes  to  your  house,  and  all  the  more  since  she  has  taken 
an  aversion  to  your  blackness.' 

These  words  went  straight  to  the  Moor's  heart ;  but  in  order  to  hear  more  (now  that 
he  believed  true  all  that  the  Ensign  had  told  him)  he  replied,  with  a  fierce  glance, 
« By  heavens,  I  scarce  can  hold  this  hand  from  plucking  out  that  tongue  of  thine,  so 
bold,  which  dares  to  speak  such  slander  of  my  wife ! ' 

•  Captain,'  replied  the  Ensign,  '  I  looked  for  such  reward  for  these  my  faithful 
offices, — none  else ;  but  since  my  duty,  and  the  jealous  care  I  bear  your  honour,  have 
carried  me  thus  far,  I  do  repeat,  so  stands  the  truth,  as  you  have  heard  it  from  these 
lips ;  and  if  the  lady  Disdemona  hath,  with  a  false  show  of  love  for  you,  blinded  your 
eyes  to  what  you  should  have  seen,  this  is  no  argument  but  that  I  speak  the  truth. 
Nay,  this  same  Captain  told  it  me  himself,  like  one  whose  happiness  is  incomplete 
until  he  can  declare  it  to  another ;  and,  but  that  I  feared  your  anger,  I  should  have 
given  him,  when  he  told  it  me,  his  merited  reward,  and  slain  him.  But  since  inform- 
ing you  of  what  concerns  you  more  than  any  other  man  brings  me  so  undeserved  a 
recompense,  would  I  had  held  my  peace,  since  silence  might  have  spared  me  your  dis- 
pleasure.' 

Then  the  Moor,  burning  with  indignation  and  anguish,  said,  « Make  thou  these  eyes 
self-witnesses  of  what  thou  tell'st,  or  on  thy  life  I'll  make  thee  wish  thou  hadst  been 
born  without  a  tongue.' 

'  An  easy  task  it  would  have  been,'  replied  the  villain,  '  when  he  was  used  to  visit,  at 


3^2 


APPENDIX 


cagione,  1  havete  scacciato,  non  mi  potra  essere  se  non  malagevole,  che  anchora  che  io 
stimi,  ch'  egli  di  Disdemona  si  goda,  qualhora  voi  gliene  date  1'  agio,  molto  pid  cauta- 
mente  lo  dee  fare  hora,  che  si  vede  esservi  venuto  in  odio,  che  non  facea  di  prima.  Ma 
anco  non  perdo  la  speranza  li  potervi  far  vedere  quel,  che  creder  non  mi  volete.  Et 
con  queste  parole  si  disparti  ono.  II  misero  Moro,  come  tocco  da  pungentissimo  strale, 
se  n'  and6  a  casa,  attendenco  che  venisse  il  giorno,  che  1"  Alfieri  gli  facesse  veder  quello, 
che  lo  devea  far,  per  sempre,  misero.  Ma  non  minor  noia  dava  al  maladetto  Alfieri  la 
castita,  ch'  egli  sapeva,  che  osservava  la  Donna,  perche  gli  parea  non  poter  ritrovar  modu 
a  far  credere  al  Moro  quello,  che  falsamente  detto  gli  haveva :  e,  voltato  in  varie  parti 
il  pensiero,  pensd  lo  Scelerato  a  nuova  malitia.  Andava  sovente  la  Moglie  del  Moro, 
come  hd  detto,  a  casa  della  Moglie  dell'  Alfieri,  e  se  ne  stava  con  lei  buona  parte  del 
giomo,  onde  veggendo  costui  ch'  ella  talhora  portava  seco  un  pannicello  da  naso,  ch'  egli 
sapeva,  che  le  havea  donato  il  Moro,  il  qual  pannicello  era  lavorato  alia  moresca  sot- 
tilissimamente,  et  era  carissimo  alia  Donna,  e  parimente  al  Moro,  si  pensd  di  torgliek 
secretamente,  e  quindi  apparecchiarele  1'  ultimo  danno.  Et  havendo  egli  una  fanciulla  di 
tre  anni,  la  quale  era  molto  amata  da  Disdemona,  un  giorno,  che  la  misera  Donna  a  casa 
di  questo  reo  si  era  andata  a  stare,  prese  egli  la  fanciulla  in  braccio,  et  alia  Donna  la 
porse  :  La  quale  la  prese,  e  la  si  reccd  al  petto ;  questo  Ingannatore,  che  eccellentemente 
giocava  di  mano,  le  levd  da  cintola  il  pannicello  cosi  accortamente,  ch'  ella  punto  non 
se  ne  avide,  e  da  lei,  tutto  allegro,  si  dipartl.  Disdemona,  ci6  non  sappiendo,  se  ne  andd 
a  casa :  e  occupata  da  altri  pensieri,  non  si  avide  del  pannicello.  Ma,  indi  ad  alquanti 
giorni,  cercandone,  e  nol  ritrovando,  stava  tutta  timida,  che  il  Moro  con  gliele  chiedesse, 
come  egli  sovente  facea.  Lo  scelerato  Alfieri,  pigliatosi  commodo  tempo,  se  ne  andd  al 
Capo  di  squadra,  e  con  astuta  malitia  gli  lasci6  il  pannicello  a  capo  del  letto,  ne  se  ne 
avide  il  Capo  di  squadra,  se  non  la  seguente  mattina,  che  levandosi  del  letto,  essendo  il 
pannicello  caduto  in  terra,  vi  pose  il  piede  sopra :  ne  sapendosi  imaginare,  come  in  casa 

your  house ;  but  now  that  you  have  banished  him,  not  for  just  cause,  but  for  mere  friv- 
olous pretext,  it  will  be  hard  to  prove  the  truth.  Still,  I  do  not  forego  the  hope  to  make 
you  witness  of  that  which  you  will  not  credit  from  my  lips.' 

Thus  they  parted.  The  wretched  Moor,  struck  to  the  heart  as  by  a  barbed  dart, 
returned  to  his  home,  and  awaited  the  day  when  the  Ensign  should  disclose  to  him  the 
truth  which  was  to  make  him  miserable  to  the  end  of  his  days.  But  the  evil-minded 
Ensign  was,  on  his  part,  not  less  troubled  by  the  chastity  which  he  knew  the  lady  Dis- 
demona observed  inviolate ;  and  it  seemed  to  him  impossible  to  discover  a  means  of 
making  the  Moor  believe  what  he  had  falsely  told  him ;  and,  turning  the  matter  over  in 
his  thoughts  in  various  ways,  the  villain  resolved  on  a  new  deed  of  guilt. 

Disdemona  often  used  to  go,  as  I  have  already  said,  to  visit  the  Ensign's  wife,  and 
remained  with  her  a  good  part  of  the  day.  Now,  the  Ensign  observed  that  she  carried 
about  with  her  a  handkerchief,  which  he  knew  the  Moor  had  given  her,  finely  embroid- 
ered in  the  Moorish  fashion,  and  which  was  precious  to  Disdemona,  nor  less  so  to  the 
Moor.  Then  he  conceived  the  plan  of  taking  this  kerchief  from  her  secretly,  and  thus 
laying  the  snare  for  her  final  ruin.  The  Ensign  had  a  little  daughter,  a  child  three 
years  of  age,  who  was  much  loved  by  Disdemona,  and  one  day,  when  the  unhappy 
lady  had  gone  to  pay  a  visit  at  the  house  of  this  vile  man,  he  took  the  little  child  up  in 
his  arms  and  carried  her  to  Disdemona,  who  took  her  and  pressed  her  to  her  bosom ; 
whilst  at  the  same  instant  this  traitor,  who  had  extreme  dexterity  of  hand,  drew  the  ker- 
chief from  her  sash  so  cunningly  that  she  did  not  notice  him,  and  overjoyed  he  took 
his  leave  of  her. 

Disdemona,  ignorant  of  what  had  happened,  returned  home,  and,  busy  with  other 
thoughts,  forgot  the  handkerchief.  But  a  few  days  afterwards,  looking  for  it  and  not 
finding  it,  she  was  in  alarm,  lest  the  Moor  should  ask  her  for  it,  as  he  oft  was  wont  to 
do.  Meanwhile,  the  wicksd  Ensign,  seizing  a  fit  opportunity,  went  to  the  Captain  of 
the  troop,  and  with  crafty  malice  left  the  handkerchief  at  the  head  of  his  bed  without 
his  discovering  the  trick,  until  the  following  morning,  when,  on  his  getting  out  of  bed, 


THE  SOURCE   OF  THE  PLOT  383 

1'  havesse,  conoscendolo  cosa  di  Disdemona,  deliberd  di  dargliele :  et  attendendo  che  il 
Moid  fosse  uscito  di  Ctit,  se  ne  and6  all'  uscio  di  dietro,  et  ivi  picchi6;  voile  la  For- 
tune, che  pare*,  che  coll'  Alfieri  congiurata  si  fosse  alia  morte  della  meschina:  che  in 
quell  hora  appunto,  il  Moro  si  venne  a  casa :  et  udendo  picchiare  1'  uscio,  si  fece  alia 
finestra :  e  tutto  cruccioso,  disse,  chi  picchia  la?  II  Capo  di  squadra,  udita  la  voce  del 
Moio,  temendo,  ch'  egli  non  scendesse  a  danno  suo,  senza  rispondere  parola  si  diede  a 
fuggire.  II  Moro,  scese  le  scale :  e  aperto  1'  uscio,  usci  nella  strada,  e  cercando  di  lui 
nol  ritrov6.  Onde  entrato  in  casa,  pieno  di  mal  talento,  dimandd  alia  Moglie,  chi  fosse 
colui,  che  la  giu  picchiava.  La  Donna  rispose  quel,  che  vero  era,  che  nol  sapeva.  Ma 
il  Moro  disse,  mi  ha  egli  paruto  il  Capo  di  squadra ;  Non  s6,  io  disse  ella,  se  sia  stato 
ne  egli,  ne  altri.  Rattenne  il  Moro  il  furore,  quantunque  d'  ira  ardesse,  Ne  prima  voile 
far  cosa  alcuna,  che  parlasse,  coll'  Alfieri,  alquale  subitamente  se  n'  and6,  e  gli  disse 
quanto  era  occorso,  e  lo  pregd  ad  intendere  dal  Capo  di  squadra  tutto  quello,  ch'  egli 
poteva  intorno  a  ci6.  Egli,  lieto  di  cosl  fatto  avenimento,  gli  promise  di  farlo.  Et  al 
Capo  di  squadra  parld  un  giorno  costui,  che  il  Moro  era  in  luogo,  onde  gli  poteva  vedere 
insieme  ragionare.  Et  parlandogli  di  ogn'  altra  cosa,  che  della  Donna,  faceva  le  mag- 
giori  risa  del  mondo:  e  mostrando  di  maravigliarsi,  facea  di  molti  atti,  e  col  capo,  e  colle 
mani,  come,  che  udisse  cose  maravigliose.  11  Moro,  tosto  che  gli  vide  partiti,  andd  verso 
1'  Alfieri,  per  sapere  cid,  che  colui  detto  gli  havesse.  Questi,  dopo  haversi  fatto  lungamente 
pregare,  al  fin  gli  disse,  non  mi  ha  egli  celata  cosa  alcuna,  e  mi  ha  detto,  che  si  ha 
goduto  della  Moglie  vostra  ogni  volta,  che  voi  coll'  esser  fuori,  gli  ne  havete  dato  tempo  : 
e  che  1'  ultima  fiata,  ch'  egli  e  stato  con  lei,  gli  ha  ella  donato  quel  pannicello  da  naso, 
che  voi,  quando  la  sposaste,  le  deste  in  dono.  II  Moro  ringratid  1'  Alfieri,  e  gli  parve, 
che  se  ritrovava,  che  la  Donna  non  havesse  il  pannicello,  potesse  essere  chiaro,  che  cosl 
fosse,  come  gli  havea  detto  1'  Alfieri.    Per  la  qual  cosa  un  giorno,  dopo  desinare,  entrato 

the  handkerchief  fell  upon  the  floor,  and  he  set  his  foot  upon  it.  And  not  being  able  to 
imagine  how  it  had  come  into  his  house,  knowing  that  it  belonged  to  Disdemona,  he 
resolved  to  give  it  to  her ;  and  waiting  until  the  Moor  had  gone  from  home,  he  went  to 
the  back  door  and  knocked.  It  seemed  as  if  fate  conspired  with  the  Ensign  to  work 
the  death  of  the  unhappy  Disdemona.  Just  at  that  time  the  Moor  returned  home,  and 
healing  a  knocking  at  the  back  door,  he  went  to  the  window,  and  in  a  rage  exclaimed, 
•  Who  knocks  there  ? '  The  Captain,  hearing  the  Moor's  voice,  and  fearing  lest  he 
should  come  down  stairs  and  attack  him,  took  to  flight  without  answering  a  word.  The 
Moor  went  down,  and  opening  the  door  hastened  into  the  street  and  looked  about,  but 
in  vain.  Then,  returning  into  the  house  in  great  anger,  he  demanded  of  his  wife  who 
it  was  that  had  knocked  at  the  door.  Disdemona  replied,  as  was  true,  that  she  did  not 
know ;  but  the  Moor  said,  *  It  seemed  to  me  the  Captain.' 

'  I  know  not,'  answered  Disdemona,  '  whether  it  was  he  or  another  person.' 
The  Moor  restrained  his  fury,  great  as  it  was,  wishing  to  do  nothing  before  consult 
ing  the  Ensign,  to  whom  he  hastened  instantly,  and  told  him  all  that  had  passed,  pray- 
ing him  to  gather  from  the  Captain  all  he  could  respecting  the  affair.  The  Ensign, 
overjoyed  at  the  occurrence,  promised  the  Moor  to  do  as  he  requested,  and  one  day  he 
took  occasion  to  speak  with  the  Captain  when  the  Moor  was  so  placed  that  he  could 
see  and  hear  them  as  they  conversed.  And  whilst  talking  to  him  of  every  other  sub- 
ject than  of  Disdemona,  he  kept  laughing  all  the  time  aloud,  and,  feigning  astonish- 
ment, he  made  various  movements  with  his  head  and  hands,  as  if  listening  to  some 
tale  of  marvel.  As  soon  as  the  Moor  saw  the  Captain  depart,  he  went  up  to  the  En- 
sign to  hear  what  he  had  said  -to  him.  And  the  Ensign,  after  long  entreaty,  at  length 
said,  '  He  has  hidden  from  me  nothing,  and  has  told  me  that  he  has  been  used  to  visit 
your  wife  whenever  you  went  from  home,  and  that  on  the  last  occasion  she  gave  him 
this  handkerchief  which  you  presented  to  her  when  you  married  her.' 

The  Moor  thanked  the  Ensign,  and  it  seemed  now  clear  to  him  that,  should  he  find 
Disdemona  not  to  have  the  handkerchief,  it  was  all  true  that  the  Ensign  had  told  to 
him.     One  day,  therefore,  after  dinner,  in  conversation  with  his  wife  on  various  sub- 


384  APPENDIX 

in  varij  ragionamenti  colla  Donna,  le  chiese  il  pannicello.  La  infelice  che  di  questo 
havea  molto  temuto,  a  tal  dimanda,  divenne  nel  viso  tutta  fuoco ;  et  per  celare  il  rossore, 
il  quale  molto  bene  not6  il  Moro,  corse  alia  cassa,  e  finse  di  cercarlo.  Et  dopo  molto 
haverlo  cercato ;  non  s6,  disse,  com'  hora  non  lo  ritrovi,  1'  havreste  voi  forse  havuto  ?  s'  havuto 
lo  havessi,  disse  egli,  perche  te  lo  chiederei  io  ?  ma  ne  cercherai  piu  agiatamente  un'  altra 
volta.  Et  partitosi  comincid  a  pensare,  come  devesse  far  morire  la  Donna,  et  insieme  il 
Capo  di  squadra,  si,  che  a  lui  non  fosse  data  colpa  della  sua  morte.  Et  pensando  giorno, 
et  notte  sopra  ci6,  non  poteva  fare,  che  la  Donna  non  si  avedesse,  ch'  egli  non  era 
quegli,  che  verso  lei,  per  adietro,  essere  soleva.  Et  gli  disse  piu  volte,  che  cosa  havete 
voi,  che  cosl  vi  turbi  ?  che  ove  solevate  essere  il  piu  festoso  huomo  del  mondo,  siete 
hora  il  piu  maninconico,  che  viva  ?  Trovava  il  Moro  varie  cagioni  di  rispondere  alia 
Donna,  ma  non  ne  rimaneva  ella  punto  contenta.  Et  posto  ch'  ella  sapesse,  che  per 
niuno  suo  misfatto,  non  devesse  essere  cosi  turbato  il  Moro,  dubitava  nondimeno,  che  per 
la  troppa  copia,  ch'  egli  haveva  di  lei,  non  gli  fosse  venuta  a  noia.  Et  talhora  diceva  colla 
Moglie  dell'  Alfieri,  Io  non  sd,  che  mi  dica  io  del  Moro,  egli  soleva  essere  verso  me  tutto 
amore,  hora,  da  non  sd  che  pochi  giorni  in  qua,  e  divenuto  un'  altro :  et  temo  molto  di 
non  essere  io  quella,  che  dia  essempio  alle  giovani  di  non  maritarsi  contra  il  voler 
de  suoi ;  et  che  da  me  le  Donne  Italiane  imparino,  di  non  si  accompagnare  con  huomo, 
cui  la  Natura,  et  il  Cielo,  et  il  modo  della  vita  disgiunge  da  noi.  Ma,  perche  io  sd,  ch'  egli 
e  molto  amico  del  vostro  Marito,  et  communica  con  lui  le  cose  sue :  vi  prego,  che  se 
havete  intesa  cosa  alcuna  da  lui,  della  quale  mi  possiate  avisare,  che  non  mi  manchiate 
di  aiuto,  et  tutto  cid  le  diceva  dirottamente  piangendo;  la  Moglie  dell'  Alfieri,  che  il  tutto 
sapeva,  (come  colei,  cui  il  Marito  haveva  voluta  usare  per  mezzana  alia  morte  della 
Donna)  ma  non  l'haveva  ella  mai  voluto  acconsentire,  et  temendo  del  Marito,  non  ardiva 
di  dirle  cosa  alcuna ;  Solo  le  disse,  habbiate  cura  di  non  dare  di  voi  sospetto  al  Marito,  0 
cercate  con  ogni  studio,  ch'  egli  in  voi  conosca  amore,  et  fede ;  cid  faccio  io,  disse  ella, 

jects,  he  asked  her  for  the  kerchief.  The  unhappy  lady,  who  had  been  in  great  fear 
of  this,  grew  red  as  fire  at  this  demand ;  and  to  hide  the  scarlet  of  her  cheeks,  which 
was  closely  noted  by  the  Moor,  she  ran  to  a  chest  and  pretended  to  seek  the  hand- 
kerchief, and  after  hunting  for  it  a  long  time,  she  said, '  I  know  not  how  it  is — I  cannot 
find  it ;  can  you,  perchance,  have  taken  it  ?  ' 

*  If  I  had  taken  it,'  said  the  Moor,  '  why  should  I  ask  it  of  you  ?  but  you  will  look 
better  another  time.' 

On  leaving  the  room,  the  Moor  fell  to  meditating  how  he  should  put  his  wife  to 
death,  and  likewise  the  Captain  of  the  troop,  so  that  their  death  should  not  be  laid  to 
his  charge.  And  as  he  ruminated  over  this  day  and  night,  he  could  not  prevent  his 
wife's  observing  that  he  was  not  the  same  towards  her  as  he  had  been  wont ;  and  she 
said  to  him  again  and  again, '  What  is  the  matter  ?  What  troubles  you  ?  How  comes  it 
that  you,  who  were  the  most  light-hearted  man  in  the  world,  are  now  so  melancholy  ? ' 

The  Moor  feigned  various  reasons  in  reply  to  his  wife's  questioning,  but  she  was  not 
satisfied,  and,  although  conscious  that  she  had  given  the  Moor  no  cause,  by  act  or  deed, 
to  be  so  troubled,  yet  she  feared  that  he  might  have  grown  wearied  of  her ;  and  she 
would  say  to  the  Ensign's  wife,  *I  know  not  what  to  say  of  the  Moor;  he  used  to  be 
all  love  towards  me ;  but  within  these  few  days  he  has  become  another  man ;  and 
much  I  fear  that  I  shall  prove  a  warning  to  young  girls  not  to  marry  against  the  wishes 
of  their  parents,  and  that  the  Italian  ladies  may  learn  from  me  not  to  wed  a  man 
whom  nature  and  habitude  of  life  estrange  from  us.  But  as  I  know  the  Moor  is  on 
such  terms  of  friendship  with  your  husband,  and  communicates  to  him  all  his  affairs,  I 
pray  you,  if  you  have  heard  from  him  aught  that  you  may  tell  me  of,  fail  not  to  befriend 
me.'     And  as  she  said  this,  she  wept  bitterly. 

The  Ensign's  wife,  who  knew  the  whole  truth  (her  husband  wishing  to  make  use  of 
her  to  compass  the  death  of  Disdemona),  but  could  never  consent  to  such  a  project, 
dared  not,  from  fear  of  her  husband,  disclose  a  single  circumstance :  all  she  said  was, 
*  Beware  lest  you  give  any  cause  of  suspicion  to  your  husband,  and  show  to  him  by 


THE  SOURCE   OF  THE  PLOT  385 

ma  nulla  mi  giova.  II  Moro,  in  questo  mezzo  tempo,  cercava  tutta  via  di  piu  certificarsi 
di  quello,  che  non  havrebbe  voluto  ritrovare :  e  preg6  1'  Alfieri,  che  operasse  di  modo, 
che  potesse  vedere  il  pannicello  in  podesta  del  Capo  di  squadra :  e  benche  ci6  fosse 
grave  al  Malvagio,  gli  promise  nondimeno  di  usare  ogni  diligenza,  perche  egli  di  cid  si 
certificasse.  Haveva  il  Capo  di  squadra  una  donna  in  casa,  che  maravigliosi  trapunti 
faceva  su  la  tela  di  rensa,  la  quale  veggendo  quel  pannicello,  et  intendendo,  ch*  era 
della  Donna  del  Moro,  et  ch'  era  per  esserle  reso,  prima  ch'  ella  1'  havesse,  si  mise 
a  fame  un  simile :  e  mentre  ella  ci6  faceva,  s'  avide  1'  Alfieri,  ch'  ella  appresso  uno 
finestra  si  stava,  e  da  chi  passava  per  la  strada  poteva  essere  veduta,  onde  fece  egli  cid 
vedere  al  Moro,  II  quale  tenne  certissimo,  che  1'  honestissima  Donna  fosse  in  fatto  Adul- 
tera ;  Et  conchiuse  coll'  Alfiero,  di  uccidere  lei,  et  il  Capo  di  squadra,  trattando  ambidue 
tra  loro  come  cid  si  devesse  fare ;  lo  pregd  il  Moro,  ch'  egli  volesse  essere  quegli,  che  il 
Capo  di  squadra  uccidesse,  promettendo  di  restargliene  obligato  eternamente.  Et  ricu- 
sando  egli  di  volere  far  cosa  tale  come  malagevolissima,  e  di  molto  pericolo,  per  essere 
il  Capo  di  squadra  non  meno  accorto,  che  valoroso,  dopo  molto  haverlo  pregato,  datagli 
buona  quantita  di  danari,  lo  indusse  a  dire,  che  proverebbe  di  tentar  la  fortuna.  Fatta 
questa  resolutione,  uscendo  una  sera  il  Capo  di  squadra  di  casa  di  una  meretrice,  colla 
quale  egli  si  sollazzava,  essendo  la  notte  buia,  gli  si  accostd  1'  Alfiero  con  la  spada  in 
mano,  et  gli  dirizzd  un  colpo  alle  gambe,  per  farlo  cadere,  et  avenne,  ch'  egli  gli  taglid 
la  destra  coscia  a  traverso,  onde  il  misero  cadde  :  gli  fii  addosso  1'  Alfieri,  per  finire  di 
ucciderlo.  Ma  havendo  il  Capo  di  squadra,  che  coraggioso  era,  et  avezzo  nel  sangue,  et 
nelle  morti,  tratta  la  spada;  et,  cosl  ferito  come  egli  era,  dirizzatosi  alia  difesa,  grid6  ad 
alta  voce ;  io  sono  assassinate  Per  la  qual  cosa,  sentendo  1'  Alfieri  correr  gente,  et 
alquanti  de  Soldati,  ch'  ivi  attorno  erano  alloggiati,  si  mise  a  fuggire,  per  non  vi  essere 
colto :  e,  data  una  volta,  fe  vista  anch'  egli  di  essere  corso  a  romore.  Et  ponendosl 
tra  gli  altri,  vedutagli  mozza  la  gamba,  giudicd  che  se  bene  non  era  morto,  morirebbe 

every  means  your  fidelity  and  love.' — '  Indeed  I  do  so,'  replied  Disdemona,  '  but  it  is 
all  of  no  avail.' 

Meanwhile  the  Moor  sought  in  every  way  to  convince  himself  of  what  he  fain 
would  have  found  untrue,  and  he  prayed  the  Ensign  to  contrive  that  he  might  see  the 
handkerchief  in  the  possession  of  the  Captain.  This  was  a  difficult  matter  to  the 
wicked  Ensign ;  nevertheless,  he  promised  to  use  every  means  to  satisfy  the  Moor  of 
the  truth  of  what  he  said. 

Now,  the  Captain  had  a  wife  at  home  who  worked  the  most  marvellous  embroidery 
upon  lawn,  and  seeing  the  handkerchief,  which  belonged  to  the  Moor's  wife,  she 
resolved,  before  it  was  returned  to  her,  to  work  one  like  it.  As  she  was  engaged  in 
this  task,  the  Ensign  observed  her  standing  at  a  window,  where  she  could  be  seen  by 
all  the  passers-by  in  the  street,  and  he  pointed  her  out  to  the  Moor,  who  was  now  per- 
fectly convinced  of  his  wife's  guilt.  Then  he  arranged  with  the  Ensign  to  slay  Disde- 
mona and  the  Captain  of  the  troop,  treating  them  as  it  seemed  they  both  deserved. 
And  the  Moor  prayed  the  Ensign  that  he  would  kill  the  Captain,  promising  eternal 
gratitude  to  him.  But  the  Ensign  at  first  refused  to  undertake  so  dangerous  a  task,  the 
Captain  being  a  man  of  equal  skill  and  courage ;  until  at  length,  after  much  entreating 
and  being  richly  paid,  the  Moor  prevailed  on  him  to  promise  to  attempt  the  deed. 

Having  formed  this  resolution,  the  Ensign,  going  out  one  dark  night,  sword  in  hand, 
met  the  Captain  on  his  way  to  visit  a  courtesan,  and  struck  him  a  blow  on  his  right 
thigh,  which  cut  off  his  leg  and  felled  him  to  the  earth.  Then  the  Ensign  was  on  the 
point  of  putting  an  end  to  his  life,  when  the  Captain,  who  was  a  courageous  man  and 
used  to  the  sight  of  blood  and  death,  drew  his  sword,  and,  wounded  as  he  was,  kept 
on  his  defence,  exclaiming  with  a  loud  voice, '  I'm  murdered  !'  Thereupon  the  Ensign, 
hearing  the  people  come  running  up,  with  some  of  the  soldiers  who  were  lodged  there- 
abouts, took  to  his  heels  to  escape  being  caught;  then  turning  about  again,  he  joined 
the  crowd,  pretending  to  have  been  attracted  by  the  noise.  And  when  he  saw  the 
Captain's  leg  cut  off,  he  judged  that,  if  not  already  dead,  the  blow  must,  at  all  events. 

25 


3$6  APPENDIX 

ad  ogni  modo  di  quel  colpo ;  e,  quantunque  fosse  di  cid  lietissimo,  si  dolse  nondimeno 
col  Capo  di  squadra,  come  s'  egli  suo  fratello  fosse  state  La  mattina  la  cosa  si  sparse 
per  tutta  la  Citta,  et  andd  anco  alle  orecchie  di  Disdemona,  onde  ella,  ch'  amorevole 
era,  et  non  pensava  ch'  indi  le  dc  vesse  avenir  male,  mostrd  di  havere  grandissimo  dolore 
di  cosi  fatto  caso ;  di  cid  fece  il  Moro  pessimo  concetto.  Et  and6  a  ritrovare  1'  Alfieri, 
et  gli  disse ;  Tu  sai  bene,  che  1'  Asina  di  mia  Moglie  e  in  tanto  affanno,  per  lo  caso  del 
Capo  di  squadra,  ch'  ella  e  per  impazzare.  Et  come  potevate,  disse  egli,  pensare  altri  • 
mente,  essendo  colui  1'  anima  sua  ?  Anima  sua,  eh  ?  replied  il  Moro,  lo  le  trarrb  ben'  io 
1'  anima  del  corpo,  che  mi  terrei  non  essere  huomo,  se  non  togliessi  dal  mondo  questa 
malvagia.  Et  discorrendo  1'  uno  con  1'  altro,  se  di  veleno,  o  di  coltello  si  devea  far 
morir  la  Donna,  ne  accettandosi  questo,  ne  quello  da  loro,  disse  1'  Alfiero ;  un  modo  mi 
e  egli  venuto  nella  mente,  che  vi  sodisfararete,  et  non  se  ne  havra  sospetto  alcuno.  Et  egli 
e  tale,  La  casa,  ove  voi  state,  e  vecchissima,  e  il  palco  della  camera  vostra  ha  di  molte 
fessure ;  voglio,  che  con  una  calza  piena  di  rena  percotiamo  Disdemona,  tanto  ch'  ella 
ne  muoia,  perche  non  appaia  in  lei  segno  alcuno  di  battitura :  morta,  ch'  ella  sara,  faremo 
cadere  parte  del  palco,  et  romperemo  il  capo  alia  Donna,  fingendo,  che  una  trave  nel 
cadere  rotta  gliele  habbia,  et  uccisa :  et,  a  questo  modo,  non  sara  persona,  che  di  voi  pigli 
sospetto  alcuno,  stimando  ognuno  la  sua  morte  essere  venuta  a  caso.  Piacque  al  Moro, 
il  crudel  consiglio :  et,  aspettato  il  tempo,  che  convenevole  gli  parve,  essendo  egli  una 
notte  con  lei  nel  letto,  et  havendo  gia  nascoso  1'  Alfieri  in  un  camerino,  che  nella  camera 
entrava,  1'  Alfiero,  secondo  1'  ordine  tra  lor  dato,  fe  non  s6  che  strepito  nel  camerino : 
e,  sentitolo,  subitamente  disse  il  Moro  alia  Moglie ;  hai  tu  sentito  quello  strepito  ?  hollo 
sentito,  disse  ella;  levati  soggiunse  il  Moro,  e  vedi  che  cosa  e.  Levossi  la  infelice  Disde- 
mona :  e,  tosto  ch'  ella  fu  appresso  il  camerino,  n'  uscl  1'  Alfieri,  il  quale,  essendo  forte, 
et  di  buon  nerbo,  colla  calza,  che  in  punto  haveva,  le  diede  una  crudel  percossa,  nel 

end  his  life ;  and  whilst  in  his  heart  he  was  rejoiced  at  this,  he  yet  feigned  to  compas- 
sionate the  Captain  as  he  had  been  his  brother. 

The  next  morning  the  tidings  of  this  affair  spread  through  the  whole  city,  and  reached 
the  ears  of  Disdemona ;  whereat  she,  who  was  kind-hearted  and  little  dreamed  that  any 
ill  would  betide  her,  evinced  the  greatest  grief  at  the  calamity.  This  served  but  to  con- 
firm the  Moor's  suspicions,  and  he  went  to  seek  for  the  Ensign,  and  said  to  him,  '  Do 
you  know  that  my  wife  is  in  such  grief  at  the  Captain's  accident  that  she  is  well  nigh 
gone  mad.' 

'  And  what  could  you  expect,  seeing  he  is  her  very  soul  ? '  replied  the  Ensign. 

'  Ay,  soul  forsooth  ! '  exclaimed  the  Moor ;  '  I'll  draw  the  soul  from  out  her  body ;  call 
ine  no  man  if  that  I  fail  to  shut  the  world  upon  this  wretch.' 

Then  they  consulted  of  one  means  and  another — poison  and  daggers — to  kill  poor 
Disdemona,  but  could  resolve  on  nothing.  At  length  the  Ensign  said,  '  A  plan  comes 
to  my  mind,  which  will  give  you  satisfaction  and  raise  cause  for  no  suspicion.  It  is 
this :  the  house  in  which  you  live  is  very  old,  and  the  ceiling  of  your  chamber  has 
many  cracks ;  I  propose  we  take  a  stocking,  filled  with  sand,  and  beat  Disdemona 
with  it  till  she  dies ;  thus  will  her  body  bear  no  signs  of  violence.  When  she  is  dead 
we  can  pull  down  a  portion  of  the  ceiling,  and  thus  make  it  seem  as  if  a  rafter  falling 
on  her  head  had  killed  the  lady.  Suspicion  cannot  rest  on  you,  since  all  men  will 
impute  her  death  to  accident.' 

This  cruel  counsel  pleased  the  Moor,  and  he  only  waited  for  a  fitting  time  to  execute 
the  plot.  One  night,  when  he  and  Disdemona  had  retired  to  bed,  the  Ensign,  whom 
the  Moor  had  concealed  in  a  closet  which  opened  into  the  chamber,  raised  a  noise  ir 
the  closet,  according  to  a  concerted  plan ;  whereat  the  Moor  said  to  his  wife,  '  Did  you 
not  hear  that  noise  ?' 

1  Indeed  I  heard  it,'  she  replied. 

'  Rise,'  said  the  Moor,  '  and  see  what  'tis.' 

The  unhappy  Disdemona  rose  from  bed,  and  the  instant  she  approached  the  closet, 
out  rushed  the  Ensign,  and  being  strong  and  of  stout  nerve,  he  beat  her  cruelly  with 


THE  SOURCE   OF   THE  PLOT  387 

mezzo  della  schiena,  onde  la  Donna  subito  cadde,  senza  poter  trarne  appena  fuori  il 
fiato.  Ma  con  quella  poca  voce,  che  pote  havere,  chiam6  il  Moro,  che  1'  aiutasse ;  et 
egli,  uscito  del  letto,  le  disse,  Sceleratissima  Donna,  la  mercede  hai  della  tua  dis- 
honesta,  cosl  si  trattano  quelle,  che  fingendo  di  amare  i  loro  Mariti,  pongono  loro  le 
coma  in  capo.  La  misera  Donna,  ci6  udendo,  e  sentendosi  giunta  al  fine  (perd  che 
1'  Alfiero  un'  altro  colpo  dato  le  havea)  disse,  che  in  testimonio  della  sua  fede,  ella  chia- 
mava  la  giustitia  divina,  poi,  che,  quella  del  mondo  le  veniva  meno ;  et  chiamando  ella 
Iddio,  che  1'  aiutasse,  sopragiungendo  la  terza  percossa,  rimase  uccisa  dall'  empio  Alfieri. 
Poscia,  messala  nel  letto,  e  spezzatale  la  testa,  fecero  egli,  et  il  Moro,  cadere  come  haveano 
ordinato  fra  loro  il  palco  della  camera,  e  comincid  il  Moro  a  chiamare  soccorso,  che  1? 
casa  cadeva,  alia  voce  del  quale  corsono  i  vicini,  e  scoperto  il  letto,  trovarono  la  Donna 
sotto  le  travi  morta.  La  qual  cosa,  per  la  buona  vita  della  Donna,  increbbe  ad  ognuno. 
II  giorno  seguente  fu  Disdemona  sepellita,  con  universal  dolore  di  quel  popolo.  Ma  non 
voile  Iddio,  giusto  riguardatore  de  gli  animi  altrui,  che  cosl  gran  sceleragine  se  ne  rima- 
nesse  senza  la  dicevole  pena.  Imperd,  che  il  Moro,  che  la  Donna  haveva  amato  piu., 
che  gli  occhi  suoi,  veggendosene  privo,  comincid  ad  havere  tanto  desiderio  di  lei,  che 
P  andava,  come  fuori  di  se,  cercando  per  tutti  i  luoghi  della  casa :  et  considerando  tra 
se,  che  P  Alfieri  era  stato  cagione,  ch'  egli  havesse  perduta,  colla  sua  Donna,  tutto  il 
dolce  della  vita,  et  anco  se  medesimo ;  gli  venne  lo  Scelerato  in  tanto  odio,  che  non 
haveva  occhio,  col  quale  vedere  lo  potesse  :  et,  se  non  havesse  havuto  timore  della  inviola- 
bile  giustitia  de  Signori  Venetiani,  P  havrebbe  palesamente  ucciso.  Ma  non  potendo 
far  questo,  con  sua  salvezza,  gli  lev6  la  insegna,  e  piu  nol  voile  nella  compagnia,  onde 
nacque  tanta  aspra  nimicitia  tra  P  uno,  e  P  altro,  che  non  si  potrebbe  imaginare  la  mag- 
giore,  ne  la  piu  grave.  Per  la  qual  cosa  P  Alfiero,  peggiore  di  tutti  gli  scelerati,  volto 
tutto  il  pensiero  a  danni  del  Moro.    Et,  ritrovato  il  Capo  di  squadra,  che  gia  era  risanato, 

the  bag  of  sand  across  her  back ;  upon  which  Disdemona  fell  to  the  ground,  scarce 
able  to  draw  her  breath ;  but  with  the  little  voice  she  had  left,  she  called  upon  the 
Moor  for  aid.  But  the  Moor,  leaping  from  bed,  exclaimed,  '  Thou  wickedest  of  women, 
thus  has  thy  falseness  found  its  just  reward,  the  recompense  to  wives  who,  counterfeit- 
ing love,  place  horns  upon  their  husbands'  brows.' 

The  wretched  lady,  hearing  these  words,  and  feeling  that  she  was  near  her  end,  (for 
the  Ensign  had  given  her  another  blow,)  appealed  to  the  justice  of  Heaven,  since  jus- 
tice here  had  failed  her,  in  proof  of  her  fidelity  and  truth ;  and  as  she  was  thus  calling 
Heaven  to  witness,  the  wicked  Ensign  inflicted  a  third  blow,  under  which  she  sank  life- 
less on  the  floor. 

Then  the  Ensign  and  the  Moor,  laying  Disdemona  on  the  bed  and  wounding  her 
head,  pulled  down  part  of  the  ceiling  of  the  chamber,  as  they  had  arranged  ;  where- 
upon the  Moor  began  to  call  aloud  for  help,  exclaiming  that  the  house  was  falling. 
Hearing  this  uproar,  the  neighbours  all  came  running  up,  and  there  found  Disdemona 
lying  dead  beneath  a  rafter, — a  sight  which,  from  the  good  life  of  that  poor  lady,  did  fill 
all  hearts  with  sorrow. 

On  the  following  day  Disdemona  was  buried,  followed  to  the  grave  by  the  universal 
grief  of  the  people.  But  Heaven,  the  just  regarder  of  all  hearts,  willed  not  that  so 
wicked  a  deed  should  go  unpunished.  Ere  long  the  Moor,  whom  Disdemona  had 
loved  more  than  her  own  life,  began  to  feel  such  sorrow  at  her  loss  that  he  went 
wandering  about  as  one  bereft  of  reason,  searching  in  every  part  of  the  house.  And 
reflecting  in  his  thoughts  that  the  Ensign  had  been  the  cause  that  he  had  lost,  with 
Disdemona,  all  joy  in  life,  he  conceived  so  deep  a  hatred  to  that  wicked  man  he  could 
not  bear  to  set  eyes  on  him,  and  had  it  not  been  for  his  fear  of  the  inviolable  justice 
of  the  Signoria  of  Venice,  he  would  have  slain  him  openly.  But  being  unable  to  do 
this  with  safety,  he  deprived  him  of  his  rank,  and  would  not  allow  him  to  remain  in 
his  Company ;  whereat  such  an  enmity  arose  between  the  two  that  no  greater  or  more 
deadly  can  be  imagined. 

The  Ensign,   hat  wickedest  of  all  bad  men,  now  turned  his  thoughts  to  injuring  the 


388  APPENDIX 

et  con  una  gamba  di  legno  se  n'  andava  in  vece  della  tagliata,  gli  disse ;  Venuto  e  fl 
tempo,  che  tu  possi  far  vendetta  della  tua  tagliata  gamba :  Et,  quando  tu  voglia  venire  con 
esso  meco  a  Venetia,  io  ti  dird,  chi  e  stato  il  malfattore,  che  qui  non  ardirei  di  diiloti, 
per  molti  rispetti :  et  io  ne  fard,  per  te,  testimonio  in  guidicio.  II  Capo  di  squadra,  che 
si  ritrovava  fieramente  offeso,  et  non  sapeva  perche ;  ringrati6  1'  Alfieri,  e  seco  a  Venetia 
se  ne  venne.  Ove  giunti,  che  furono,  egli  gli  disse,  che  il  Moro  era  stato  quegli,  che 
gli  havea  tagliata  la  gamba,  per  openione,  che  gli  era  nata  nella  testa,  che  egli  si  giacesse 
con  Disdemona :  e,  che,  per  questa  medesima  cagione  egli  haveva  uccisa  lei,  e  poscia  data 
voce,  che  il  palco  caduto  uccisa  1'  havesse.  II  Capo  di  squadra,  inteso  ci6,  accusd  il  Moro 
alia  Signoria,  e  della  gamba  a  lui  tagliata,  e  della  morte  della  Donna,  et  indusse  per 
testimonio  1'  Alfieri,  il  quale  disse ;  che  1'  uno,  e  1'  altro  era  vero,  perche  il  Moro  haveva 
il  tutto  communicato  seco,  e  1'  havea  voluto  indurre  a  fare  1'  uno,  e  1'  altro  maleficio :  e  che, 
havendo  poscia  uccisa  la  Moglie,  per  bestial  gelosia,  che  gli  era  nata  nel  capo,  gli  havea 
narrata  la  maniera,  ch'  egli  havea  tenuto  in  darle  morte.  I  Signori  Venetiani,  intesa  la 
crudelta,  usata  dal  Barbaro,  in  una  lor  cittadina,  fecero  dar  delle  mani  addosso  al  Moro 
in  Cipri,  e  condurlo  a  Venetia,  e  con  molti  tormenti  cercarono  di  ritrovare  il  vero.  Ma, 
vincendo  egli,  col  valore  dell'  animo,  ogni  martorio,  il  tutto  negd,  cosl  constantemente, 
che  non  se  ne  pote  mai  trarre  cosa  alcuna.  Ma,  se  bene,  per  la  sua  constanza,  egli 
schifd  la  morte,  non  fu  perd,  che,  dopo  lo  essere  stato  molti  giorni  in  prigione,  non  fosse 
dannato  a  perpetuo  essilio,  nel  quale  finalmente  fu  da  parenti  della  Donna,  com'  egli 
meritava,  ucciso.  Ando  1'  Alfieri  alia  sua  patria :  et,  non  volendo  egli  mancare  del  suo 
costume,  accusd  un  suo  compagno,  dicendo,  ch'  egli  ricercato  1'  havea  di  ammazzare  un 
suo  nimico,  che  gentilhuomo  era,  per  la  qual  cosa  fu  preso  colui,  et  messo  al  martorio : 
et  negando  egli  esser  vero,  quanto  dicea  1'  accusatore,  fu  messo  al  martorio  anco  1'  Alfieri 
per  paragone.     Ove,  fu  talmente  collato,  che  gli  si  corropero  le  interiora :  onde,  uscito 

Moor;  and  seeking  out  the  Captain,  whose  wound  was  by  this  time  healed,  and  who 
went  about  with  a  wooden  leg  in  place  of  the  one  that  had  been  cut  off,  he  said  to 
him,  '  'Tis  time  you  should  be  avenged  for  your  lost  limb ;  and  if  you  will  come  with 
me  to  Venice,  I'll  tell  you  who  the  malefactor  is,  whom  I  dare  not  mention  to  you  here 
for  many  reasons ;  and  I  will  bring  you  proofs.' 

The  Captain  of  the  troop,  whose  anger  returned  fiercely,  but  without  knowing  why, 
thanked  the  Ensign,  and  went  with  him  to  Venice.  On  arriving  there  the  Ensign  told 
him  that  it  was  the  Moor  who  had  cut  off  his  leg,  on  account  of  the  suspicion  he  had 
formed  of  Disdemona's  conduct  with  him ;  and  for  that  reason  he  had  slain  her,  and 
then  spread  the  report  that  the  ceiling  had  fallen  and  killed  her.  Upon  hearing  which, 
the  Captain  accused  the  Moor  to  the  Signoria,  both  of  having  cut  off  his  leg  and  killed 
his  wife,  and  called  the  Ensign  to  witness  the  truth  of  what  he  said.  The  Ensign 
declared  both  charges  to  be  true,  for  that  the  Moor  had  disclosed  to  him  the  whole 
plot,  and  had  tried  to  persuade  him  to  perpetrate  both  crimes ;  and  that,  having  after- 
wards killed  his  wife  out  of  jealousy  he  had  conceived,  he  had  narrated  to  him  the 
manner  in  which  he  had  perpetrated  her  death. 

The  Signoria  of  Venice,  when  they  heard  of  the  cruelty  inflicted  by  a  barbarian  upon 
a  lady  of  their  city,  commanded  that  the  Moor's  arms  should  be  pinioned  in  Cyprus,  and 
he  be  brought  to  Venice,  where,  with  many  tortures,  they  sought  to  draw  from  him  the 
truth.  But  the  Moor,  bearing  with  unyielding  courage  all  the  torment,  denied  the  whole 
charge  so  resolutely  that  no  confession  could  be  drawn  from  him.  But,  although  by 
his  constancy  and  firmness  he  escaped  death,  he  was,  after  being  confined  for  several 
days  in  prison,  condemned  to  perpetual  banishment,  in  which  he  was  eventually  slain 
by  the  kinsfolk  of  Disdemona,  as  he  merited.  The  Ensign  returned  to  his  own  coun- 
try, and,  following  up  his  wonted  villainy,  he  accused  one  of  his  companions  of  having 
sought  to  persuade  him  to  kill  an  enemy  of  his,  who  was  a  man  of  noble  rank ;  where- 
upon this  person  was  arrested  and  put  to  the  torture ;  but  when  he  denied  the  truth  of 
what  his  accuser  had  declared,  the  Ensign  himself  was  likewise  tortured  to  make  him 
prove  the  truth  of  his  accusations ;  and  he  was  tortured  so  that  his  body  ruptured,  upon 


OTHELLO'S   COLOUR  389 

di  prigione,  et  condotto  a  casa,  miseramente  se  ne  morl ;  tal  fece  Iddio  vendetta  della 
innocenza  di  Disdemona.  Et  tutto  questo  successo  narrd  la  Moglie  dell'  Alfieri,  del 
fatto  consapevole,  poi  ch'  egli  fa  morto,  come  io  lo  vi  h6  narrato. 

which  he  was  removed  from  prison  and  taken  home,  where  he  died  a  miserable  death. 
Thus  did  Heaven  avenge  the  innocence  of  Disdemona;  and  all  these  events  were  nar- 
rated by  the  Ensign's  wife,  who  was  privy  to  the  whole,  after  his  death,  as  I  have  told 
them  here. 


OTHELLO'S  COLOUR 


Gentleman  (Dram.  Censor,  1770,  i,  151):  I  remember  once  to  see  this  esteemed 
performer  [Quin]  play  the  Moor  in  a  large  powdered  major  wig,  which,  with  the  black 
face,  made  such  a  magpie  appearance  of  his  head,  as  tended  greatly  to  laughter ;  one 
stroke,  however,  was  not  amiss — coming  on  in  white  gloves,  by  pulling  off  which  the 
black  hands  became  more  realized.     [Quin  retired  from  the  stage  in  1750. — Ed.] 

Othello's  colour,  and  Desdemona's  indifference  to  it,  is  intimated  and  explained  by 
LeTourneur  in  a  note  on  '  My  Mother  had  a  Maid  called  Barbarie,'  IV,  iii,  32,  which 
he  thus  translates :  *  Ma  mere  avoit  aupres  d'elle  une  jeune  fille,  nominee  Barbara. 
C'eloit  une  Moresse,  une  pauvre  Moresse,'  and  refers  us  to  Othello's  speech  before 
the  Senate,  I,  iii,  151,  where,  in  a  note,  it  is  explained  that,  to  Desdemona,  Othello's 
'  couleur  noire  n'etoit  pas  non  plus  pour  elle  une  nouveaute.  On  verra  dans  la  suite, 
que  sa  mere  avoit  une  Moresse  a  son  service.  Ainsi  son  amour  pour  un  brave  More 
n'a  rien  d'etrange  ni  d'invraisemblable.  Habituee  des  l'enfance  a  la  compagnie  d'une 
Moresse,  elle  a  du  Stre  moins  revoltee  de  cette  couleur  dans  un  age  plus  avance.' 

John  Galt  (Lives  of  the  Players,  London,  1 831,  i,  268):  It  would  be  a  curious 
speculation  to  attempt  to  determine  the  cause  of  Garrick's  failure  in  Othello,  for  a  fail- 
ure it  must  be  considered,  as  compared  with  his  transcendency  in  other  parts.  In  the 
just  and  natural  inflection  of  the  voice,  we  have  no  cause  to  doubt  that  he  was  equally 
excellent.  The  probability,  therefore,  is  that  he  failed  in  the  expression  of  the  coun- 
tenance alone,  and  that  this  default  and  short-coming  to  expectation  was  entirely  owing 
to  the  black  disguise  he  was  obliged  to  assume. 

On  the  epithet  'thick-lips,'  applied,  I,  i,  72,  by  Roderigo  to  Othello,  Coleridge 
(p.  249)  has  the  following :  Roderigo  turns  off  to  Othello ;  and  here  comes  one,  if  not 
the  only,  seeming  justification  of  our  blackamoor  or  negro  Othello.  Even  if  we  sup- 
posed this  an  uninterrupted  tradition  of  the  theatre,  and  that  Shakespeare  himself,  from 
want  of  scenes,  and  the  experience  that  nothing  could  be  made  too  marked  for  the 
senses  of  his  audience,  had  practically  sanctioned  it, — would  this  prove  aught  concern- 
ing his  own  intention  as  a  poet  for  all  ages  ?  Can  we  imagine  him  so  utterly  ignorant 
as  to  make  a  barbarous  negro  plead  royal  birth, — at  a  time,  too,  when  negroes  were  not 
known  except  as  slaves  ?  As  for  Iago's  language  to  Brabantio,  it  implies  merely  that 
Othello  was  a  Moor,  that  is,  black.  Though  I  think  the  rivalry  of  Roderigo  sufficient 
to  account  for  his  wilful  confusion  of  Moor  and  Negro,  yet,  even  if  compelled  to  give 
this  up,  I  should  think  it  only  adapted  for  the  acting  of  the  day,  and  should  complain 
of  an  enormity  built  on  a  single  word,  in  direct  contradiction  to  Iago's  '  Barbary  horse.' 
Besides,  if  we  could  in  good  earnest  believe  Shakespeare  ignorant  of  the  distinction, 
still  why  should  we  adopt  one  disagreeable  possibility  instead  of  a  ten  times  greater  and 
more  pleasing  probability  ?  It  is  a  common  error  to  mistake  the  epithets  applied  by  the 
dramatis  persona  to  *ach  other  as  truly  descriptive  of  what  the  audience  ought  to  sev 


390 


APPENDIX 


or  know.  No  doubt  Desdemona  saw  Othello's  visage  in  his  mind;  ytt,  as  we  are  con 
stituted,  and  most  surely  as  an  English  audience  was  disposed  in  the  beginning  of  th. 
seventeenth  century,  it  would  be  something  monstrous  to  conceive  this  beautiful  Vene- 
tian girl  failing  in  love  with  a  veritable  negro.  It  would  argue  a  disproportionateness, 
a  want  of  balance,  in  Desdemona,  which  Shakespeare  does  not  appear  to  have  in  the 
least  contemplated. 

Hawkins  {Life  of  Edmund  Kean,  i,  221)  :  Kean  regarded  it  as  a  gross  error  to 
make  Othello  either  a  negro  or  a  black,  and  accordingly  altered  the  conventional  black 
to  the  light  brown  which  distinguishes  the  Moors  by  virtue  of  their  descent  from  the 
Caucasian  race.  Although  in  the  tragedy  Othello  is  described  with  a  minuteness  which 
leaves  no  doubt  that  Shakespeare  intended  him  to  be  black,  there  is  no  reason  to  sup- 
pose that  the  Moors  were  darker  than  the  generality  of  Spaniards,  who,  indeed,  are 
half  Moors,  and  compared  with  the  Venetians  he  would  even  then  be  black.  There  is 
some  variety  in  the  colour  of  the  Moors,  but  it  never  approaches  so  deep  a  hue  as  to 
conceal  all  change  of  colour.  Betterton,  Quin,  Mossop,  Barry,  Garrick,  and  John 
Kemble  all  played  the  part  with  black  faces,  and  it  was  reserved  for  Kean  to  innovate, 
and  Coleridge  to  justify,  the  attempt  to  substitute  a  light  brown  for  the  traditional  black. 
The  alteration  has  been  sanctioned  by  subsequent  usage. 

Hunter  {New  Illust.,  ii,  280)  :  Shakespeare,  in  IV,  ii,  257,  seems  to  point  to  Mau- 
ritania as  the  native  country  of  Othello,  who  is  hence  to  be  regarded  as  a  Moor  in  the 
proper  sense  of  the  word,  a  native  of  the  northern  coast  of  Africa,  towards  the  west ; 
and  the  expression  '  black '  is  to  be  interpreted  as  meaning  no  more  than  very  darky 
and  this  in  comparison  with  the  fair  European.  Moor,  however,  it  may  be  observed, 
was  used  by  English  writers  very  extensively,  and  all  the  dark  races  seem,  by  some 
writers,  to  be  regarded  as  comprehended  under  it.  Sir  Thomas  Elyot  calls  the  Ethi- 
opians, Moors.  A  distinction  was  sometimes  made  between  black  Moors  and  white 
Moors. 

Knight  [Note  on  I,  i,  72) :  This  passage  has  been  received  as  indicating  the  inten- 
tion of  Shakespeare  to  make  Othello  a  Negro.  It  is  very  probable  that  the  popular 
notion  of  a  Moor  was  somewhat  confused  in  Shakespeare's  time,  and  that  the  descend- 
ants of  the  proud  Arabs,  who  had  borne  sovereign  sway  in  Europe  ('men  of  royal 
siege'),  and,  what  is  more,  had  filled  an  age  of  comparative  darkness  with  the  light 
of  their  poetry  and  their  science,  were  confounded  with  the  uncivilized  African,  the 
despised  slave.  We  do  not  think,  however,  that  Shakespeare  had  any  other  intention 
than  to  paint  Othello  as  one  of  the  most  noble  and  accomplished  of  the  proud  children 
of  the  Ommiades  and  Abbasides.  The  expression  '  thick-lips,'  from  the  mouth  of  Rod- 
erigo,  can  only  be  received  dramatically,  as  a  nick-name  given  to  Othello  by  the  folly 
and  ill-nature  of  this  coxcomb.  Whatever  may  have  been  the  practice  of  the  stage, 
even  in  Shakespeare's  time, — and  it  is  by  no  means  improbable  that  Othello  was  repre- 
sented as  a  Negro, — the  whole  context  of  the  play  is  against  the  notion.  [The  fol- 
lowing observations  were  communicated  to  Knight  by  a  friend :]  In  the  ages  of  her 
splendour,  Venice  was  thronged  with  foreigners  from  every  climate  of  the  earth ;  and 
nowhere  else,  perhaps,  has  the  prejudice  of  colour  been  so  feeble.  A  more  important 
fact,  as  regards  Desdemona's  attachment,  is  that  it  was  the  policy  of  the  Republic  to 
employ  foreign  mercenaries,  and  especially  in  offices  of  command,  for  the  obvious  pur- 
pose of  lessening  to  the  utmost  the  danger  of  cabal  and  intrigue  at  home.  The  fami- 
lies of  Senators,  or  other  chief  citizens,  were  in  the  habit  of  seeing,  in  their  dark-com- 
plexioned guests,  those  only  who  were  distinguished  by  ability  and  by  the  official  rank 
therebj'  gained, — picked  men,  whose  hue  might  be  forgotten  in  their  accomplishments. 


Or  HELLO'S  COLOUR  391 

Ii  Hack»,tt's  Notes  and  Comments  on  Shakespeare,  pp.  217-249,  are  certain  obser- 
vations and  opinions  by  John  Quincy  Adams,  which  cannot  but  '  make  the  judicious 
grieve.'  So  high  is  my  admiration  for  that  great  statesman,  that  it  seems  almost  like 
an  act  of  lese-majestie,  even  to  refer  to  these  opinions  here.  The  ex-President  out- 
llerauds  Heraud  in  his  denunciation  of  Desdemona;  not,  however,  like  Heraud,  for 
her  lack  of  truth,  but  on  the  score  of  her  wantonness  as  shown  by  her  marriage  with  a 
'rude,  unbleached  African.'  It  is  enough  to  refer  to  these  Notes;  let  who  will,  search 
them  out.  I  cannot  but  think  that,  by  way  of  palliation,  we  may  therein  read  between 
the  lines  the  public  answer,  wrung  from  the  depths  of  vexation,  to  that  inconsequent 
question  with  which  the  Abolitionists  of  old  were  wont  constantly  to  be  assailed,  and 
which  that  '  old  man  eloquent '  must  have  had  thrust  at  him  a  thousand  times  :  '  How 
would  you  like  your  daughter  to  marry  a  nigger  ?  ' — Ed. 

Verplanck  :  There  was  nothing  in  the  Moor's  descent  so  to  affect  his  social  position 
in  the  eyes  of  Cinthio's  readers  or  Shakespeare's  audience,  as  to  surprise  them  at  his 
being  received  on  equal  footing  in  the  family  of  a  Venetian  noble,  or  attaining  the 
highest  military  rank  in  the  service  of  the  Republic.  Yet  it  is  equally  clear  that,  in 
regard  to  Desdemona,  his  race  and  colour  are  not  a  matter  of  indifference ;  they  are 
especially  dwelt  upon  as  one  of  the  grounds  of  jealousy;  they  place  between  the  Moor 
and  the  Venetian  lady  a  natural  barrier,  which  it  requires  a  '  downright  violence  and 
storm  of  fortune '  to  break  down.  It  is  the  admiration  of  high  intellect,  of  heroic  qual- 
ities and  achievements, — such  as  has  been  sometimes  known  in  real  life  to  overcome 
most  strange  disparities  of  age,  character,  and  external  circumstances, — which  gives 
the  lady  to  see  Othello's  visage  only  *  in  his  mind.'  She  does  not  lose  her  own  social 
position  by  marriage  with  one  under  whom  Italian  and  Cypriot  nobles  (Cassio,  Iago, 
Montano)  are  ambitious  to  serve,  and  with  whom  the  princes  and  rulers  of  the  State 
associate  as  companions ;  yet  her  love  to  him  would  appear  in  itself  strange  and  unac- 
countable, had  not  the  Poet  opened  to  us  '  the  pure  recesses  of  her  mind,'  and  showed 
us  whence  it  sprung. 

Wilson  {Blackwood's  Maga.,  April,  1850,  p.  484) : 

*  North.  I  cannot  but  believe  that  the  Othello  of  Shakespeare  is  black,  and  all 

*  black.     I  cannot  conceive  the  ethnography  of  that  age  drawing,  on  the  stage  espe- 

*  daily,  the  finer  distinction  which  we  know  between  a  Moor  and  a  Blackamoor  or 

*  Negro.     The  opposition,  entertained  by  Nature,  is  between  White  and  Black,  not 

*  between  White  and  Brown.  You  want  the  opposition  to  tell  with  all  its  power :  "  I 
'  saw  Othello's  visage  in  his  mind  "  is  nothing,  unless  the  visible  visage  is  one  to  be 
'  conquered, — to  be  accepted  by  losing  sight  of  it.     I  say  again,  I  cannot  imagine  the 

*  contemporary  audience  of  Shakespeare  deciding  colour  between  a  Moor  and  a  Negro. 
'  The  tradition  of  the  Stage,  too,  seems  to  have  made  Othello  jet  black.  Such,  I  opine, 
'  was  the  notion  of  the  Moor,  then,  to  the  People,  to  the  Court,  to  the  Stage,  to  Shake- 
* speare. 

*  Talboys.  Woolly-headed? 

* North.  Why,  yes, — if  you  choose, — in  opposition  to  the  "curled  darlings." 

*  Talboys.  Yet  Coleridge  said,  "it  would  be  something  monstrous  to  conceive  this 

*  beautiful  Venetian  girl  falling  in  love  with  a  veritable  Negro." 

*  North.  Coleridge  almost  always  thought,  felt,  wrote,  and  spoke  finely,  as  a  Critic, 
'  — but  may  I  venture,  in  all  love  and  admiration  of  that  name,  to  suggest  that  the  re- 

*  moval  which  the  Stage  makes  of  a  subject  from  reality  must  never  be  forgotten  ?  In 
1  life  you  cannot  bear  that  the  White  Woman  shall  marry  the  Black  Man.     You  could 

*  not  br  or  that  an  English  Lady  Desdemona, — Lady  Blanche  Howard, — should,  undei 


392 


APPENDIX 


'  any  imaginable  greatness,  marry  General  Toussaint  or  the  Duke  of  Marmalade. 
'  Your  senses  revolt  with  offence  and  loathing.  But  on  the  stage  some  consciousness 
'  that  everything  is  not  as  literally  meant  as  it  seems, — that  symbols  of  humanity,  and 
'  not  actual  men  and  women,  are  before  you, — saves  the  Play. 

1  Talboys.  I  believe  that  Wordsworth's  line,  "The  gentle   Lady  married  to  the 

•  Moor,"  expresses  explicitly  the  feeling  of  the  general  English  heart, — pity  for  the 
'  contrast,  and  a  thought  of  the  immense  love  that  has  overcome  it. 

*  North.  White  and  Black  is  the  utter  antithesis, — as,  at  intensity,  Night  and  Day. 
'  Yes,  Talboys, — every  jot  of  soot  you  take  from  his  complexion,  you  take  an  iota  from 

•  the  signified  power  of  love. 

'  Talboys.  As  you  say,  sir,  the  gap  which  is  between  the  Stage  and  Reality  must 
'  prevent,  in  our  hearts,  anything  like  loathing  of  the  conjunction. 

1  North.  The  touch  of  such  an  emotion  would  annul  the  whole  Tragedy.  A  dis- 
'  parity,  or  a  discrepancy,  vast  as  mysterious, — but  which  love,  at  the  full,  is  entitled  to 
1  overlook — overstep !  Whether  Fate  dare  allow  prosperity  to  a  union  containing  so 
1  mighty  an  element  of  disruption,  is  another  question.  It  seems  like  an  attempt  at 
1  overruling  the  "  Sterna  fcedera  rerum."  ....  Talboys,  I  cannot  help  thinking  that 
'  Shakespeare  shows  up  in  Othello  foul  passions, — that  you  see  in  him  two  natures  con- 
1  joined, — the  moral  Caucasian  White  and  animal  tropical  Black.  In  the  Caucasian, 
'  the  spiritual  or  angelical  in  us  attains  its  manifestation.  In  the  offspring  of  the  trop- 
'  ics,  amongst  the  sands  and  under  the  suns  of  Africa,  the  animal  nature  takes  domina- 
'  tion.  The  sands  and  suns  that  breed  Lions,  breed  men  with  Lions'  hearts  in  them. 
'  The  Lion  is  for  himself  noble,  but  blood  of  the  Irrational  in  the  veins  of  the  Rational 
'  is  a  contradiction.     The  noblest  moral  nature  and  the  hot  blind  rage  of  animal  blood ! 

'  Talboys.  Ay,  the  noblest  moral  nature,  and  high  above  every  other  evidence  of  it, 

•  his  love  of  Her, — which,  what  it  was,  and  what  it  would  have  remained,  or  become, — 
'  and  what  he  was  and  would  have  been,  had  Iago  not  been  there,  we  may  imagine ! 
'  With  all  the  power  of  a  warrior,  and  a  ruler,  he  has  the  sensibility  of  a  Lover, — with 
« all  spontaneous  dignity  and  nobility,  he  has  the  self-mastery  of  reason, — before  his 
'  overthrow. 

'  North.  Wherefore,  my  dear  Sheriff,  I  prefer  Othello  as  a  specimen  of  the  Ethical 

•  Marvellous.  Like,  as  in  another  kingdom,  a  Winged  Horse,  or  a  Centaur, — the  meet- 
« ing  of  two  natures  which  readily  hold  asunder.     All  this  has  under  the  ^Ethiop  com- 

•  plexion  its  full  force, — less  if  you  mitigate, — if  not  mitigate  merely,  but  take  away, 
'  where  are  we  all  ?  The  innate  repugnance  of  the  White  Christian  to  the  Black  Moor- 
'  ish  blood,  is  the  ultimate  tragic  substratum, — the  "  must "  of  all  that  follows.  Else, — 
'  make  Othello  White, — and,  I  say  again,  see  where  we  are  ! 

1  Talboys.  Shakespeare,  sir,  was  not  one  to  flinch  from  the  utmost  severity  of  a 
'  Case. 

1  North.  Not  he,  indeed, — therefore  I  swear  Othello  is  a  Blackamoor. 

*  Talboys.  And  I  take  it,  sir,  that  Othello's  natural  demeanour  is  one  of  great  grav- 
1  ity,  to  which  the  passionate  moods  induced  are  in  extremity  of  contrast.     I  conceive 

that,  by  these  mixtures  and  contrasts,  he  is  rendered  picturesque  and  poetical. 

1  North.  I  swear  Othello  was  a  Blackamoor, — and  that  Desdemona  was  the  Whitest 
* Lady  in  Europe.' 

Grant  White  (Shakespeare's  Scholar,  1854,  p.  432) :  Shakespeare  nowhere  calls 
Othello  an  Ethiopian,  and  also  does  not  apply  the  term  to  Aaron  in  the  horrible  Titus 
Andronicus  ;  but  he  continually  speaks  of  both  as  Moors ;  and  as  he  has  used  the  first 
word  elsewhere,  and  certainly  had  use  for  it  as  a  reproach  in  the  mouth  of  Iago,  if 


OTHELLO'S  COLOUR  393 

seems  that  he  must  have  been  fully  aware  of  the  distinction  in  grade  between  the  two 
races,  although  his  notion  of  their  distinctive  traits  was,  perhaps,  neither  very  true  nor 
very  clear.  Indeed,  I  could  never  see  the  least  reason  for  supposing  that  Shakespeare 
intended  Othello  to  be  represented  as  a  negro.  With  the  negroes  the  Venetians  had 
nothing  to  do,  that  we  know  of,  and  could  not  have,  in  the  natural  course  of  things ; 
whereas,  with  their  over-the-way  neighbours,  the  Moors,  they  were  continually  brought 
in  contact.  These  were  a  warlike,  civilized,  and  enterprising  race,  which  could  furnish 
an  Othello ;  whereas,  the  contrary  has  always  been  the  condition  of  the  negroes.  The 
reasons  for  supposing  Othello  to  be  a  negro  are  few  and  easily  set  aside,  which  is  not 
the  case  of  those  which  show  him  to  be  a  Moor.  The  most  conclusive  of  the  former 
is  Roderigo's  calling  Othello  '  thick  lips ' ;  but  this  is  the  result  of  Shakespeare's  want 
of  exact  information.  He  had,  doubtless,  never  seen  either  a  Moor  or  a  negro,  and 
might  very  naturally  confuse  their  physiological  traits ;  but  a  man  of  his  knowledge 
and  penetration  could  not  fail  to  know  the  difference  between  the  position  and  the 
character  of  the  nation  which  built  the  Alhambra  and  that  which  furnished  their  stock 
in  trade  to  the  Englishmen  who,  when  he  wrote  Othello,  were  supplying  the  planta- 
tions in  the  West  Indies  with  slaves,  and,  soon  after  his  death,  introduced  negro  slavery 
into  Virginia.  In  addition  to  this  epithet  •  thick  lips,'  there  are  several  allusions  to 
Othello  as  having  the  visage  of  the  devil,  as  black,  and  as  being,  therefore,  the  very 
reverse  of  attractive  to  a  woman  like  Desdemona.  But  this  proves  nothing;  for 
Shakespeare  has  applied  these  identical  epithets  to  so  eminent  and  undeniable  a  Moor 
as  the  Prince  of  Morocco.  In  the  Mer.  of  Ven.  I,  ii,  Portia  says,  upon  the  announce- 
ment of  the  royal  Moor,  '  if  he  have  the  condition  of  a  saint  and  the  complexion  ol  a 
devil,  I  had  rather  he  would  shrive  me  than  wive  me.'  He  himself  prays  her,  '  Mis- 
like  me  not  for  my  complexion ' ;  and  she,  when  he  has  selected  the  wrong  casket, 
says,  '  May  all  of  his  complexion  choose  me  so ' ;  and  yet  he  was  not  jetty  black  like 
a  negro,  but  tawny ;  for  the  stage  direction  in  II,  i,  in  the  Qq  is,  *  Enter,  Morochus,  a 
tawny  Moor,  all  in  white?  Plainly,  then,  the  devilish  visage  attributed  to  Othello,  and 
the  assumed  repulsiveness  of  his  colour,  makes  him  out,  in  Shakespeare's  estimation, 
only  a  Moor,  and  not  even  a  very  black  Moor  at  that.  But  there  is  direct  evidence 
that  he  was  a  Mauritanian  [from  Iago's  calling  him  a  '  Barbary  horse,'  and  from  his 
telling  Roderigo  that  Othello  was  going  to  Mauritania]. 

Henry  Reed  [Lectures  on  Tragic  Poetry,  p.  268) :  The  repulsive  notion  that  Othello 
was  a  black, — a  coarse-featured  African, — seems  to  me  directly  at  variance  with  the  requi- 
sitions of  both  poetry  and  history ;  and  I  cannot  but  think  it  is  an  error,  which  may  be 
traced  either  to  some  false  critical  theory,  or  else  more  probably  to  the  too  literal  inter- 
pretation of  passages  in  the  play,  the  unimaginative  reading  which  is  fatal  so  often  to 
the  spirit  of  poetry.  The  hero  is  styled  'Othello,  the  Moor;'  such  is  his  title  and 
familiar  designation  throughout.  He  was  one  of  that  adventurous  race  of  men  who, 
striking  out  from  the  heart  of  Arabia,  had  made  conquest  of  Persia  and  Syria ;  and, 
overturning  the  ancient  sovereignty  of  Egypt,  swept  in  victory  along  the  whole  north- 
ern coast  of  Africa;  and,  passing  thence  across  the  narrow  fnth  of  the  Mediterranean, 

scattered  the  dynasty  of  the  Goths  with  Roderic  at  their  head How  true  to  his 

nature  was  it  for  Othello  to  stand  in  conscious  pride, — the  descendant  of  a  race  of 
kings,  the  representative  of  the  Arabs  who  had  been  sovereigns  of  Europe, — his  spirit 
glowing  with  noble  ancestral  memories !  And,  on  the  other  hand,  how  perfectly  con- 
sistent it  was  with  the  debasing  malignity  of  Iago,  and  with  the  petulant  disappoint- 
ment of  Roderigo,  to  be  blind  to  all  that  ennobled  and  dignified  the  Moorish  name — 
to  see  no  distinction  between  the  chivalrous  Moor,  the  chieftain  of  Christian  nrmks, 


394 


APPENDIX 


and  the  barbarous  Ethiop, — the  despised  slave.  It  was  natural  that  vulgar  words  should 
be  uttered  from  the  lips  of  such  men,  and  also  that  the  parental  frenzy  of  Desdemona's 
father  should  find  relief  in  the  same  strain  of  vituperative  misrepresentation,  the  pro- 
pensity of  a  fresh  and  angry  grief  to  magnify  its  injury.  Such  are  the  authorities  that 
have  led  to  the  supposition  that  Othello  was  black.  In  one  scene,  indeed,  he  speaks 
so  of  himself;  but  it  is  when  he  is  in  Iago's  grasp, — when  he  is  '  changing  with  the 
poison.'  The  agony  of  doubt  has  heaved  over  the  lofty  complacent  bearing  of  his 
happier  moments,  and  his  speaking  of  himself  as  black  is, — what  is  very  natural  to 
such  condition  of  mind, — a  piece  of  morbid  exaggeration ;  just  as  when,  in  the  same 
scene,  he  describes  himself  as  '  declined  into  the  vale  of  years.'  On  every  account,  it 
is  better  to  clear  the  fancy  of  this  false  conception  of  Othello's  colour,  most  of  all  for 
the  sake  of  our  sympathies  with  the  gentle  Desdemona ;  for  if  we  are  brought  to  be- 
lieve that  this  bright,  this  fair-faced,  Venetian  lady  was  wedded  to  a  black,  we  should 
almost  be  tempted  to  think  that  the  monstrous  alliance  was  fitly  blotted  out  in  its  fear- 
ful catastrophe The  Moorish  complexion  of  Othello,  not  intended  to  produce  in 

our  minds  disgust  at  Desdemona's  choice,  is  made  to  serve  an  important  dramatic  pur- 
pose, in  that  it  greatly  ministers  to  his  suspicions  of  his  wife's  fidelity.  It  is  the  first 
unprompted  argument  for  doubt ;  the  first  suggested  by  Othello's  own  thoughts,  and, 
of  course,  quickly  seized  on  and  fomented  by  Iago.  It  serves,  too,  to  account  for  the 
extreme  sensitiveness  of  Othello's  sense  of  honour, — that  which  is  a  prime  element  in 
his  character. 

J.  E.  Taylor  {Introduction  to  Trans,  of  Cinthio,  p.  13) :  We  have  merely  to  deal 
with  the  poet's  own  conception  of  the  character,  and  to  take  this  as  the  standard  by 
which  to  judge  its  delineation :  the  drama,  as  a  work  of  art,  is  simply  amenable  to  the 
rules  of  art.  And  this  is  an  instructive  instance  of  the  fact  that  artistic  truth  may  con- 
sist with  accidental  errors  which  lie  beyond  the  pale  of  art ;  the  character  of  Othello 
may  be  in  itself  perfect, — faultless ;  and  yet,  when  a  nationality  is  affixed  to  it,  it  may 
violate  the  physical  and  moral  laws  of  nature  displayed  in  the  distinction  of  races. 
This  is  a  very  minor  point  of  mere  speculation,  not  of  criticism ;  still  it  is  open  to  dis- 
cussion. The  novelist  speaks  of  the  blackness  (negrezza)  of  the  Moor,  and  that  Shake- 
speare had  the  outward  figure  of  a  black  present  to  his  thoughts  appears  more  than 

probable  from  numerous  allusions  in  the  Play Nothing  can  be  more  conclusive 

than  these  expressions,  and  the  tradition  of  the  Stage  (there  is  reason  to  believe)  has 
uniformly  represented  Othello  as  a  black  from  Shakespeare's  day  to  the  present. 
Nevertheless,  this  in  no  degree  affects  the  character  of  the  Moor,  for  the  reasons  just 
stated. 

Halliwell:  The  reference  to  'Mauritania,'  IV,  ii,  257,  surely  settles  the  disputed 
question,  Was  Othello  a  negro  ?  Certainly  not.  He  was  a  Moor  of  lofty  lineage,  with 
thick  lips  and  a  very  dark  complexion.  '  Black  Othello '  was  the  dark-complexioned 
Othello.  So  the  word  '  black '  was  employed  in  Shakespeare's  time,  as  in  the  follow- 
ing extract :  '  Quest.  Why  do  some  women  love  men  that  bee  blacke,  and  other,  those 
that  be  faire  and  well  coloured  ?  An.  Women  of  feeble  sight  love  them  that  bee  blacke, 
because  blacknesse  doth  joyne  and  unite  the  sight  too  much  disparkled,  and  by  this 
meanes  doth  comfort  the  same.  Or  else  we  may  well  say  that  every  thing  doth  love 
and  desire  his  like.  They  therefore  which  be  hote  of  nature  love  them  that  be  blacke, 
because  they  be  more  prone  to  heate.  Other  which  be  of  colder  nature  do  love  them 
that  be  white,  because  they  be  of  cold  complexion,  the  mother  of  whitenesse.' — Delect- 
able Demaundes  and  Pleasant  Questions,  1596,  p.  10. 

Hudson  (also  in  reference  to  •  Mauritania ') :  This  passage  proves,  so  far  as  anything 


OTHELLO'S  COLOUR  395 

said  jy  ligo  may  be  believed,  that  Othello  was  not  meant  to  be  a  Negro,  as  has  been 
represented,  both  on  the  stage  and  off,  but  a  veritable  Moor.  His  kindred,  the  Mauri- 
tanians, — from  whose  *  men  of  royal  siege  he  fetched  his  life  and  being,'  and  among 
whom  he  was  about  to  retire, — though  apt  enough  to  be  confounded  with  the  negroes, 
were  as  different  from  them  externally  as  brown  is  from  black ;  internally,  in  mind  and 
character,  the  difference  was  far  greater.  [In  his  Preface,  p.  33,  Hudson  writes :]  The 
difference  of  Moors  and  Negroes  was  as  well  known  in  Shakespeare's  time  as  it  is  now ; 
and  that  he  thought  them  the  same  is  no  more  likely  from  this  play  than  from  The  Mer- 
chant of  Venice,  where  the  Prince  of  Morocco  comes  as  a  suitor  to  Portia,  and  in  a  stage 
direction  of  the  Qto  is  called  '  a  tawny  Moor.' 

Mary  Preston  {Studies  in  Shakespeare,  1869,  p.  71):  In  studying  the  play  01 
Othello,  I  have  always  imagined  its  hero  a  white  man.  It  is  true  the  dramatist  paints 
him  black,  but  this  shade  does  not  suit  the  man.  It  is  a  stage  decoration,  which  my 
taste  discards ;  a  fault  of  colour  from  an  artistic  point  of  view.  I  have,  therefore,  as  J 
before  stated  in  my  readings  of  this  play,  dispensed  with  it.  Shakespeare  was  loo  cor- 
rect a  delineator  of  human  nature  to  have  coloured  Othello  black,  if  he  had  personally 
acquainted  himself  with  the  idiosyncrasies  of  the  African  race. 

We  may  regard,  then,  the  daub  of  black  upon  Othello's  portrait  as  an  ebullition  of 
fancy,  a  freak  of  imagination, — the  visionary  conception  of  an  ideal  figure, — one  of 
the  few  erroneous  strokes  of  the  great  master's  brush,  the  single  blemish  on  a  faultless 
work. 

Othello  was  a  white  man !  [The  Authoress  dates  her  Preface  from  '  Oaklands,  Har- 
ford County,  Maryland.' — Ed.] 

Lewes  {On  Actors  and  the  Art  of  Acting,  p.  145) :  Othello  is  black, — the  very  trag- 
edy lies  there ;  the  whole  force  of  the  contrast,  the  whole  pathos  and  extenuation  of  his 
doubts  of  Desdemona,  depend  on  this  blackness.  Fechter  makes  him  a  half-caste,  whose 
mere  appearance  would  excite  no  repulsion  in  any  woman  out  of  America. 

Erl  Rygenhoeg  [Am.  Bibliopolist,  Dec,  1875) :  A  thousand  examples  might  be 
quoted  to  show  that  in  Shakespeare's  time  a  dark  or  brunette  complexion  was  indicated 
by  calling  a  person  'black.'  Thus,  in  the  English  Bible,  161 1,  Song  of  Solomon,  i,  6,  7  ; 
and  in  the  very  play  under  consideration,  II,  i,  Desdemona  asks,  '  How  if  she  be  black 
and  witty  ? ' 

Snider  (i,  105) :  Othello  was  not  a  Hottentot  on  the  one  hand,  nor  was  he  a  Cauca- 
sian on  the  other ;  he  was,  however,  born  in  Africa,  and  his  physiognomy  is  thoroughly 
African.  The  point  which  the  Poet  emphasizes  so  often  and  so  strongly  is  the  differ- 
ence of  race  between  him  and  Desdemona.  He  is  her  equal  in  rank,  for  he  comes  of 
royal  lineage ;  he  is  the  peer  of  her  family  in  honor  and  fame,  for  he  is  the  most  dis- 
tinguished man  in  Venice.  The  sole  difference  which  is  selected  as  the  ground  of  the 
collision  is  the  difference  of  race.  This  fact  is  sufficient  for  all  dramatic  purposes,  to 
ascertain  the  exact  shade  of  his  skin  may  be  left  to  those  who  have  leisure  to  play  with 
probabilities. 

Grant  White  [Note  in  2d  Edition  on  *  thick  lips,'  I,  i,  72)  :  Shakespeare's  notions 
about  Moors  and  Negroes  were,  we  may  be  sure,  far  from  being  clear  and  discrimi- 
nating; and  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  even  Moors  have  thicker  lips  than  the  white 
European  races. 

[That  Shakespeare  meant  to  represent  Othello  as  '  black,'  I  cannot  but  think,  and 
'  black '  in  the  full  meaning  of  the  word,  not  '  dark-complexioned '  as  Desdemona  uses 
it  in  '  How  if  she  be  black  and  witty,'  nor  '  tawny,'  but  thoroughly  black.  Disregard- 
ing the  'thick  lips '  of  Iago,  or  the  'sootie  bosome '  of  Brabantio,  or  any  phrase  uttered 


396  APPENDIX 

by  Othello's  enemies  in  moments  of  passion,  to  me,  beyond  a  peradventure,  Othello 
himself  supplies  the  evidence,  'which  will  not  down,'  where  he  says  (III,  iii,  445)' 
1  My  name  that  was  as  fresh  As  Dian's  visage,  is  now  begrim'd  and  blacke  As  mine 
owne  face.'  The  epithet  'begrim'd'  amplifies  and  confirms  the  sootie  hue.  Its  aesthetic 
propriety,  I  am  taught  by  Wilson;  its  offencelessness,  when  I  read  the  play,  I  learn  from 
Lamb;  and  since  actors  now  present  the  tawny  hue,  I  am  not  offended  when  'sitting  at 
the  play.'— Ed.] 

ACTORS 
The  first  Actor  of  Othello  was  Richard  Burbage,  at  whose  death,  in  1618,  appeared 
an  Elegy,  which,  '  from  a  manuscript  in  the  possession  of  the  late  Mr  Heber,'  Collier 
printed  in  his  History  of  Dramatic  Poetry  (iii,  299,  2nd  ed.J.     The  following  are  the 
lines  which  relate  to  Othello: 

*  But  let  me  not  forget  one  chiefest  part 

*  Wherein,  beyond  the  rest,  he  mov'd  the  heart, 
'  The  grieved  Moor,  made  jealous  by  a  slave, 

'  Who  sent  his  wife  to  till  a  timeless  grave, 

'  Then  slew  himself  upon  the  bloody  bed. 

'  All  these  and  many  more  with  him  are  dead.' 

Another  version  is  given  in  Ingleby's  Centurie  of  Prayse  (p.  131,  2nd  ed.)  from  a 
MS.  in  the  Huth  Library,  whereof  all  that  concerns  us  here  is  as  follows : 

'  hee's  gone  &  w*  him  what  A  world  are  dead. 

*  which  he  reuiu'd,  to  be  reuiued  foe, 

•  no  more  young  Hamlett,  ould  Heironymoe 

'  kind  Leer,  the  Greued  Moore,  and  more  befide, 
'  that  liued  in  him;  haue  now  for  euer  dy'de.' 

The  name  of  Nathan  Field  appears  among  the  list  of  Actors,  prefixed  to  the  Firs:. 
Folio.  Collier  in  his  Hist,  of  Dram.  Poetry  (iii,  437,  2d  ed.)  has  the  following  con- 
cerning him :  '  If  we  may  believe  an  epigram  written  about  this  time  and  handed  down 
to  us  in  MS,  Field  was  of  a  jealous  turn  of  mind ;  and  it  leads  us  to  remark  upon  the 
probability  that  Burbage,  some  time  before  his  death,  had  relinquished  to  Field  the  part 
of  Othello.'     [The  first  two,  and  last  two  lines  of  this  epigram,  are  as  follows  :]    '  Field 

is,  in  sooth,  an  actor — all  men  know  it,  And  is  the  true  Othello  of  the  poet Since, 

as  the  Moore  is  jealous  of  his  wife,  Field  can  display  the  passion  to  the  life.' 

Halliwell- Phillips  {Outlines,  5th  ed.,  p.  177):  The  Tragedy  of  Othello,  orig- 
inally known  under  the  title  of  the  Moor  of  Venice,  ....  was  very  popular,  Leonard 
Digges  speaking  of  the  audiences  preferring  it  to  the  laboured  compositions  of  Ben 
Jor302-  In  1609,  a  Stage-loving  parent,  one  William  Bishop  of  Shoreditch,  who  had 
perhaps  been  taken  with  the  representation  of  the  tragedy,  gave  the  name  of  Othello's 

perfect  wife  to  one  of  his  twin  daughters These  scattered  notices,  accidentally 

preserved,  doubtlessly  out  of  many  others  that  might  have  been  recorded,  are  indicative 
of  its  continuance  as  an  acting  play ;  a  result  that  may,  without  disparagement  to  the 
author,  be  attributed  in  some  measure  to  the  leading  character  having  been  assigned  to 
the  most  accomplished  tragic  actor  of  the  day, — Richard  Burbage.  The  name  of  the 
first  performer  of  Iago  is  not  known,  but  there  is  a  curious  tradition,  which  can  be  traced 
as  far  back  as  the  close  of  the  Seventeenth  century,  to  the  effect  that  the  part  was  orig- 
inally undertaken  by  a  popular  comedian,  and  that  Shakespeare  adapted  some  of  the 


ACTORS 


397 


speeches  of  that  character  to  the  peculiar  talents  of  the  actor.  [Hereupon  are  given 
the  two  following  Illustrative  Notes :]  According  to  Wright's  Historia  Histrionica, 
1699,  p.  4,  Taylor  was  distinguished  in  this  part  [Iago],  but  probably  not  until  after 
the  death  of  Shakespeare.  The  insertion  of  Taylor's  name  in  the  list  of  Shakespear- 
ian actors  in  ed.  1623,  merely  proves  that  he  had  been  one  of  them  in  or  before  that 
year.  « I'm  assur'd,  from  very  good  hands,  that  the  person  that  acted  Iago  was  in 
much  esteem  of  a  comedian  which  made  Shakespear  put  several  words  and  expressions 
into  his  part,  perhaps  not  so  agreeable  to  his  character,  to  make  the  audience  laugh, 
who  had  not  yet  learnt  to  endure  to  be  serious  a  whole  play.' — Gildon's  Reflections  on 
Rymer's  Short  View  of  Tragedy,  1694. 

Malone  {Hist.  Account  of  the  English  Stage,  Var.  '21,  vol.  Hi,  p.  126):  The  first 
woman  that  appeared  in  any  regular  drama  on  a  public  stage,  performed  the  part  of 
Desdemona ;  but  who  the  lady  was,  I  am  unable  to  ascertain.  The  play  of  Othello  is 
enumerated  by  Downes  as  one  of  the  stock-plays  of  the  King's  Company  on  their  open- 
ing their  theatre  in  Drury  Lane  in  1663;  and  it  appears  from  a  paper  found  with  Sir 
Henry  Herbert's  Office-book,  that  it  was  one  of  the  stock-plays  of  the  same  company 
from  the  time  they  began  to  play  without  a  patent  at  the  Red  Bull  in  St.  John  Street. 
Mrs  Hughs  performed  the  part  of  Desdemona  in  1663,  when  the  company  removed  to 
Drury  Lane,  and  obtained  the  title  of  the  King's  Servants ;  but  whether  she  performed 
with  them  while  they  played  at  the  Red  Bull,  or  in  Vere  Street,  has  not  been  ascer- 
tained. Perhaps  Mrs  Saunderson  made  her  first  essay  there,  though  she  afterwards 
was  enlisted  in  D'Avenant's  Company.  The  received  tradition  is,  that  she  was  the 
first  English  actress.  [Mrs  Saunderson  afterwards  married  Betterton.  Unmarried 
women  were  not  called  Miss  *  until  after  the  Revolution,'  says  Davies  in  his  edition 
of  Downes,  p.  28 ;  the  first  instance  of  its  use  which  he  found  was  in  Flecknoe's  Epi- 
grams, 1669. — Ed.]  The  verses  which  were  spoken  by  way  of  introducing  a  female 
to  the  audience  were  written  by  Thomas  Jordan,  printed,  I  believe,  in  1662.  [Malone 
here  reprints  the  whole  Prologue,  but  I  think  a  short  extract  will  satisfy  all  demands 
of  curiosity  or  of  refinement :] 

But  to  the  point : — In  this  reforming  age 

We  have  intents  to  civilize  the  stage. 

Our  women  are  defective,  and  so  siz'd 

You'd  think  they  were  some  of  the  guard  disguis'd : 

For  to  speak  truth,  men  act,  that  are  between 

Forty  and  fifty,  wenches  of  fifteen ; 

With  bone  so  large,  and  nerve  so  incompliant, 

When  you  call  Desdemona,  enter  Giant. — 

We  shall  purge  everything  that  is  unclean, 

Lascivious,  scurrilous,  impious,  or  obscene ; 

And  when  we've  put  all  things  in  this  fair  way, 

Barebones  himself  may  come  to  see  a  play.' 

is  in  the  same  strain  of  apology  [with  a  side-light  thrown  on  Othello  s» 


The  Epilogue 
colour] : 


Then  he  that  censures  her  in  such  a  case, 
Hath  a  soul  blacker  than  Othello's  face. 
But  ladies  what  think  you  ?  for  if  you  tax 
Her  freedom  with  dishonour  to  your  sex, 
She  means  to  act  no  more,  and  this  shall  be 
No  other  play  but  her  own  tragedy.' 


39* 


APPENDIX 


From  a  paper  in  Sir  Henry  Herbert's  handwriting,  I  find  that  Othello  was  performed 
by  the  Red  Bull  Company  (afterwards  his  Majesty's  Servants)  at  their  new  theatre  in 
Vere  Street,  near  Clare  Market,  on  Saturday,  December  8,  1 660,  for  the  first  time  that 
winter.  On  that  day,  therefore,  it  is  probable  an  actress  first  appeared  on  the  English 
stage. 

Collier  {New  Facts,  &c,  1835,  p.  6)  stated  that  he  had  been  permitted  to  examine 
at  Bridgewater  House  the  manuscripts  of  Lord  Ellesmere,  the  Keeper  of  the  Great 
Seal  to  Queen  Elizabeth  and  Lord  Chancellor  to  James  I ;  among  the  papers,  there 
preserved,  he  found  a  volume  of  MS  Ballads ;  collected,  as  he  conjectured,  '  about  the 
date  of  the  Protectorate,  when  old  broadsides  were  becoming  scarce,  and  new  one:1  far 
from  abundant,  as  the  Puritans  set  their  faces  against  anything  like  popular  amusements. 
I  apprehend  that  most  of  those  in  the  volume  were  copied  from  printed  originals,  many 
of  which  are  now  lost.'  In  the  list  of  these  Ballads,  as  given  by  Collier  [New  Particu- 
lars, &c,  1836,  p.  45),  there  appeared  the  following:  'Tragedy  of  Othello  the  Moor. 
'  Anonymous,  but  following  Shakespeare's  Tragedy  very  closely.     Not  printed.' 

'  There  can  be  no  doubt,'  Collier  goes  on  to  say,  '  that  this  Ballad  was  written  subse- 
quently to  Shakespeare's  tragedy ;  it  was  founded  upon  the  play  in  consequence  of  its 

popularity,  and  not  the  play  upon  it It  varies  slightly  from  the  play,  and  makes 

Iago  a  Spaniard,  as  indeed  his  name  indicates.  The  change  was,  perhaps,  made  in 
accordance  with  the  prejudice  of  the  time  when  it  was  written,  possibly  about  1625, 
after  the  breaking  off  of  the  Spanish  Match.  It  is  as  follows,  and  here  I  preserve  the 
spelling  of  the  MS,  since  it  may  aid  in  some  degree  in  fixing  the  age  of  the  production : 

THE  TRAGEDIE  OF  OTHELLO  THE  MOORE 

The  foule  effects  of  jealousie, 

Othelloe's  deadly  hate, 
Iagoe's  cruell  treacherie, 

And  Desdemonae's  fate, 
In  this  same  ballad  you  may  reade, 

If  soe  you  list  to  bye, 
Which  tells  the  blackest,  bloodiest  deede 

Yet  ever  seen  with  eye. 

In  Venice  City,  long  time  since, 

A  Noble  Moore  did  live, 
Who  to  the  daughter  of*  a  Prince 

In  secrecie  did  wive. 
She  was  as  faire  as  he  was  blacke, 

A  sunshine  and  a  cloude  : 
She  was  as  milde  as  playfull  childe, 

But  he  was  fierce  and  proude. 

And  lovede  he  her,  as  well  he  might, 

For  deerlie  she  lovde  him  : 
She  doated  on  his  brow  of  night, 

And  on  each  swarthie  limbe. 
Othello  was  this  noble  Moore, 

A  Souldeir  often  tride, 
Who  many  victories  did  procure 

To  swell  Venetian  pride. 

Faire  Desdemona  was  the  name 

This  lovelie  ladie  bare  : 
Her  father  had  great  wealth  and  fame, 

And  she  his  onelie  heire. 


ACTORS  399 

Therefore,  when  he  at  length  found  out 

His  daughter  thus  was  wed, 
To  breake  their  bonds  he  cast  about, 

But  onelie  firmer  made. 

And  much  rejoiced  he  to  know, 

And  to  that  end  did  worke, 
The  State  his  wife  would  part  him  fro 

To  fight  against  the  Turke. 
But  she  ne  would  remaine  behinde, 

For  that  she  did  not  wed ; 
She'd  live  and  die  with  one  so  kinde, 

And  soe  she  plainlie  said. 

The  Turkes  the  while  did  threat  the  Isle 

Of  Cyprus  with  a  fray, 
And  thither  must  Othello  speede 

And  that  without  delaye. 
To  Cyprus  steere  they  both,  nor  feare 

Could  touch  the  lady's  hart ; 
The  Lord  she  lovde  she  knew  was  neare, 

Whom  death  should  not  depart. 

But  when  they  came  to  Cyprus  Isle 

To  her  great  joye  they  found, 
That  heaven  had  fought  the  fight  the  while 

The  Turkes  were  sunk  and  drownd. 
A  storme  had  late  assailde  their  fleete, 

That  most  of  them  were  lost : 
And  you  will  owne  it  was  most  meete 

The  crescent  should  be  crost. 

Now,  while  upon  the  Isle  they  stayde, 

The  luckelesse  lotte  befell, 
By  a  false  Spaniard's  wicked  ayde, 

Which  I  am  now  to  tell. 
He  was  the  Antient  to  the  Moore 

For  he  so  closelie  wrought, 
He  held  him  honest,  trusty,  sure, 

Until  he  found  him  nought. 

Iflgo  was  the  monster's  name, 

Who  lovde  the  lady  long ; 
But  she  denied  his  sute  and  claime. 

Though  with  a  gentle  tongue. 
For  this  he  silent  vengeance  vowd 

Upon  the  happie  Moore, 
And  took  a  way  without  delay 

To  make  his  vengeance  sure. 

There  was  a  Captain  of  the  band, 

And  Cassio  was  his  name, 
In  happie  moode  by  nature  pland, 

Of  strong  and  lustie  frame : 
He  was  Lieftenant  to  the  Moore, 

A  post  of  trust  and  weight, 
And  therefore  he  must  partner  bee 

Of  the  foule  traitor's  hate. 

He  whisper' d  at  Othelloe's  backe 

His  wife  had  chaungde  her  minde, 
And  did  not  like  his  sootie  blacke, 

As  he  full  soone  would  finde ; 


400 


APPENDIX 

But  much  preferrd  the  ruddie  dye 

Of  her  owne  countreymen ; 
And  bade  him  keepe  a  warie  eye 

On  her  deportment  then. 

Tut,  tut,  then  quoth  the  hastie  Moore, 

Deepe  as  the  throat  you  lye. 
I  wish  I  did,  quoth  he,  for  sure 

Much  liefer  would  I  die, 
Then  see  what  I  my  selfe  have  seene. 

What  have  y  m  seene  ?  he  cride — 
What  onelie  would  become  a  queane, 

Not  my  deare  general's  bride. 

He  heare  no  more,  Othello  said : 

That  I  am  blacke  is  true, 
And  she  is  faire  as  morning  ayre 

But  that  she  always  knew. 
Well  onelie  keepe  a  warie  eye 

Upon  her  actions  now  : 
Cassio's  the  man,  I  do  not  lye, 

As  you  will  soone  allowe. 

You  thought  she  lovde  you,  that  she  came 

With  you  to  this  hot  Isle : 
Cassio  was  with  you,  and  the  dame 

On  him  did  closelie  smile. 
I  needes  must  grieve  to  see  my  Lord 

So  wantonly  deceived : 
Thus  far  I  prithee  take  my  word, 

It  is  to  be  believed. 

O  god,  what  proofe  hast  thou  of  this 
What  proofe  that  she  is  foule  ? 

Proofe  you  would  have — tis  not  amis, 
He  give  it  on  my  soule. 

Cassio  will  talke  you  in  his  sleepe, 

And  speakes  then  of  your  wife. 
He  cannot  anie  secret  keepe 

An  it  would  save  his  life 
This  showes  that  he  may  love  my  wife, 

The  doubting  Moore  replied ; 
And  if  tis  true  she  loves  him  too, 

Better  they  both  had  died. 

Behold,  my  Lord,  Iago  said, 

Know  you  this  token  true  ? 
And  then  a  handkerchief  displaid, 

Which  well  Othello  knewe. 
Twas  one  he  Desdemona  gave 

When  they  were  wedded  first, 
Wrought  with  embroiderie  so  brave : 

With  rage  he  well  nie  burst. 

Whence  got  you  that,  whence  got  you  that  ? 

Tell  me  or  instant  die  ! 
She  gave  it  Cassio,  but  thereat 

Why  roll  your  yellow  eye  ? 
It  is  but  one  of  tokens  more 

That  he,  I  know,  can  bost ; 
And  she  has  his,  no  doubt,  good  store, 

I  recke  not  which  has  most. 


ACTORS  401 

Now,  this  same  well  knowne  handkerchiotc 

That  very  morne  he  stole, 
And  thus  the  cruel  vengeful  theife 

Rackde  brave  Othelloes  soule. 
His  wife  was  true,  and  pure  as  dewe 

Upon  the  lillie  white. 
No  bounds  his  tameless  passion  knew 

But  rushing  from  the  sight, 

He  sought  his  lady  as  she  layde 

Within  her  virgin  bed, 
And  there  his  hands  of  blackest  shade 

He  dyed  to  gory  red  : 
But  first  he  chargde  her  with  the  crime. 

Which  ever  she  denyed, 
And  askt  but  for  a  little  time 

To  prove  the  traytor  lyed. 

O,  twas  a  piteous  sight  to  see 

A  thing  so  meeke  and  faire, 
Tome  with  such  salvage  crueltie 

By  her  long  lovelie  haire. 
Then  came  the  caitiffe  to  rejoyce 

His  blacke  hart  with  the  viewe, 
But  soone  twas  provde  by  many  a  voice 

The  Ladie  had  beene  true. 

Twas  provde  the  handkerchiefe  he  stola. 

And  then  the  same  he  layde 
Where  Cassio  for  a  suertie  came, 

That  he  might  be  betrayde. 
Othello  stood  as  one  distraught 

To  heare  what  thus  was  shownc, 
That  Desdemona,  even  in  thought, 

To  sinne  had  never  knowne. 

He  fomde,  he  stampt,  he  ravde,  he  tore, 

To  thinke  upon  his  deede 
Then  struck  Iago  to  the  floore, 

But  onelie  made  him  bleede. 
For  deadliest  tortures  he  was  savde, 

And  suffring  them  he  dide  : 
A  lesson  milde  to  tray  tors  vilde, 

May  such  them  still  betide. 

Upon  his  Desdemonae's  coarse 

Othello  cast  him  than, 
In  agonie  of  deepe  remorse, 

A  broken  harted  man. 
With  charitie,  he  said,  relate 

What  ymi  this  day  have  seene, 
Think  once  how  well  I  servde  the  State, 

And  what  I  once  have  beene. 

Then  with  the  dagger,  that  was  wet 

With  his  dear  Ladies  bloud, 
He  stabde  him  selfe  and  thus  out  let 

His  soule  in  gory  floud. 
This  storie  true  you  oft  times  knew, 

By  actors  playde  for  meede ; 
But  still  so  well,  twas  hard  to  teil 

If  twas  not  truth  in  deede. 


26 


402  APPENDIX 

Dicke  Burbidge,  that  most  famous  man, 

That  actor  without  peere, 
With  this  same  part  his  course  began, 

And  kept  it  manie  a  yeare. 
Shakespeare  was  fortunate,  I  trow, 

That  such  an  actor  had. 
If  we  had  but  his  equall  now 

For  one  I  should  be  glad. 

Finis. 

[In  a  fool  lie  te  on  the  fourth  line  of  the  last  stanza,  Collier  says :]  '  As  Burbage 
"  began  his  course  "  as  an  actor  many  years  before  Othello  was  written,  the  meaning 
Df  the  author  of  this  ballad  may  be  that  Burbage  played  the  part  of  Othello  originally, 
and  retained  it  until  his  death.  Otherwise,  we  must  take  it  as  a  mere  guess,  and  not  a 
happy  one,  that  Burbage  commenced  as  an  actor  in  Othello.  The  great  probability  is, 
that  Burbage  was  upon  the  stage,  as  a  boy,  when  Shakespeare  first  joined  the  company 
in  1586  or  1587.'  [Collier  reiterates  in  the  text  that]  *  Burbage  was,  of  course,  dead, 
and  it  is  certainly  a  mistake  to  assert  that  he  began  his  course  with  Othello.'  [Some 
of  the  other  ballads  in  this  volume  have  been  held  to  be  spurious,  and,  I  suppose,  on 
the  principle  of  nosciiur  ex  sociis,  doubts  have  been  cast  on  the  foregoing.  Indeed, 
Ingleby  publicly  challenged  its  genuineness  in  The  Academy  in  1876.  The  stanza 
which  he  selected  as  proving  its  '  very  modern  composition '  is  the  tenth,  and  the  line 
which  he  therein  italicised  is,  '  He  whisper1  d  at  Othelloe's  backe '/  he  also  italicised,  in 
the  same  stanza,  the  words  •  much  preferrd?  He  then  justifies  his  challenge  and  mar- 
shals his  proof  that  the  whole  ballad  is  a  forgery,  as  follows :  •  The  first  line  of  this 

•  stanza  [viz.  the  line  just  quoted  in  Italics]  might  have  been  suggested  by  the  second 

•  of  Retsch's  Outlines  to  Schiller's  Fridolin,  of  which  Mr  Collier  published  a  transla- 

•  tion  of  great  merit  in  1824.'  This  is  all  the  proof,  which  I  can  find,  that  he  adduces. 
ITiat  a  scholar  so  eminent  and  a  critic  so  keen  should,  with  apparent  gravity,  give  us 
this  hypothetical  pluperfect  subjunctive  might  have  been,  after  whetting  our  appetites 
for  a  downright  perfect  indicative  was,  lay  beyond  my  comprehension,  till  my  eye 
caught  the  date  of  the  Number  of  The  Academy — the  First  of  April ! — Ed.] 

Samuel  Pepys,  1660,  October  11. — Here,  in  the  Park,  we  met  with  Mr  Salisbury, 
who  took  Mr  Creed  and  me  to  the  Cockpit  to  see  '  The  Moor  of  Venice,'  which  was 
well  done.  Burt  acted  the  Moor ;  by  the  same  token,  a  very  pretty  lady  that  sat  by 
me,  called  out,  to  see  Desdemona  smothered. 

1666,  August  20. — To  Deptford  by  water,  reading  'Othello,  Moor  of  Venice,'  which 
1  ever  heretofore  esteemed  a  mighty  good  play ;  but  having  so  lately  read  '  The  Adven- 
tures of  Five  Houres,'  it  seems  a  mean  thing. 

1 668,  February  6. — To  the  King's  playhouse,  and  there  ....  did  see  '  The  Moor  of 
Venice '  but  iU  acted  in  most  parts ;  Mohun,  which  did  a  little  surprise  me,  not  acting 
lago's  part  by  much  so  well  as  Clun  used  to  do ;  nor  another  Hart's,  which  was  Cas- 
sia's ;  nor,  indeed,  Burt  doing  the  Moor's  so  well  as  I  once  thought  he  did.* 

Hawkins  {Life  of  Kean,  ii,  379) :  On  the  25th  of  March,  1833,  Kean  made  his 
last  appearance,  as  it  proved,  in  Othello,  Charles  Kean  being  the  Iago  and  Ellen  Tree 
the  Desdemona.  There  had  been  no  rehearsal.  He  was  assisted  from  his  carriage 
into  the  dressing-room,  where  he  sank,  drooping  and  nerveless,  into  a  chair.  *  Tell  my 
boy,'  he  said  to  Charles  Kemble,  with  whom  he  had  become  reconciled,  *  that  I  want 

*  All  of  Pepys's  allusion?  to  Shakespeare's  plays  are  collected  in  Inglbby's  admirable  Centuru 
p  Prayse;  from  which  those  only  which  refer  to  Othello  are  here  givs-i. — Ed. 


ACTORS— KEAN  403 

lo  see  him.'  When  Charles  entered  the  dressing-room,  he  found  his  father  so  weak 
that  he  deemed  it  advisable  to  ask  Mr  Warde  to  be  in  readiness  to  proceed  with  the 
part  in  case  of  an  emergency.  '  I  am  very  ill,'  Kean  murmured ;  '  I  am  afraid  I  shall 
not  be  able  to  go  on.'  Cheered  up  by  Charles  Kemble,  who  stood  by  his  side  with  a 
glass  of  very  hot  brandy-and-water,  he  dressed  himself  with  difficulty.  Charles  led 
his  father  from  the  dressing-room  to  the  wing,  and  as  the  Scene  opened  they  went  on. 
'  The  Scene  in  which  the  Moor  appeared,  followed  by  mine  Ancient,'  says  a  writer  in 
Eraser's  Magazine  three  months  afterwards,  'can  never  be  forgotten  by  those  who 
beheld  it.  The  applause  was  tumultuous, — the  spirit  of  enthusiasm  pervaded  all, — and 
never  more,  perhaps,  were  the  generous  sympathies  of  an  audience  displayed  more 
vividly  than  at  this  moment.  It  may  well  be  considered  an  era  in  the  annals  of  the 
Stage,  for  we  might  vainly  trace  through  those  annals  for  a  parallel  to  that  scene.  It 
was  not  merely  the  fact  of  a  father  and  son  having  attained  to  such  excellence  in  the 
histrionic  art  as  to  be  thus  qualified  to  assume,  in  the  same  play  and  on  the  same  occa- 
sion, the  two  most  difficult  characters  in  the  whole  range  of  the  tragic  drama,  unprece- 
dented as  that  fact  really  is, — it  was  not  the  mere  novelty  of  a  new  Iago;  but  there 
stood  Edmund  Kean,  the  only  Othello  of  the  modern  stage,  no  longer  opposing  the 
bent  of  his  son's  genius,  but  sacrificing  all  his  repugnance  to  that  son's  adoption  of  his 
profession,  and  entering  with  him  upon  a  trial  of  skill  in  that  play  in  which  so  many  an 
Iago  had  proved  but  a  foil.  It  was  a  spectacle  never  to  be  forgotten,  to  see  the  great 
tragedian  leading  forward  his  son, — attesting,  with  a  father's  pride,  their  perfect  recon- 
ciliation,— enjoying  the  paternal  triumph  which  his  success  at  so  early  an  age  could  not 
fail  to  excite  in  such  a  heart  as  Kean's.'  The  performance  progressed.  Noble  as  ever 
was  his  quiet  rebuke  of  Cassio, — '  How  comes  it,  Michael,  you  are  thus  forgot  ? '  majes- 
tic and  portentous  as  ever  was  his  dismissal  of  the  offender.  Before  the  great  Third 
Act  commenced  he  found  that  his  strength  was  rapidly  sinking,  and  he  anxiously 
enjoined  his  son, — '  Mind,  Charley,  that  you  keep  before  me ;  don't  get  behind  me  in 
this  Act.  I  don't  know  that  I  shall  be  able  to  kneel;  but,  if  I  do,  be  sure  that  you  lift 
me  up.'  He  went  on  ;  his  determination  seemed  more  than  a  match  for  his  weakness ; 
md  as  Iago  distilled  the  first  drops  of  poison  into  his  ear,  the  force,  beauty,  and  truth 
of  his  acting  exhibited  the  evidence  of  the  unfading  charm  within.  He  came  off  with 
Desdemona,  and  as  he  seated  himself  in  a  chair  near  one  of  the  wings,  he  said,  with 
obvious  gratification,  '  Charles  is  getting  on  to-night ;  he's  acting  very  well.  I  suppose 
that  is  because  he  is  playing  with  me.'  When  he  re-entered  with  '  What,  false  to  me  !  * 
&c.,  it  was  with  difficulty  that  he  succeeded  in  keeping  his  footing,  but  the  stillness  of 
the  immense  auditor}'  in  front  seemed  to  make  him  think  that  something  must  be  done, 
and  he  shone  out  brilliantly  in  the  authoritative  repulsion  of  Iago,  '  Avaunt,  begone,' 
and  the  whirlwind  of  passion  with  which  he  continued  to  accompany,  '  I  found  not 
Cassio's  kisses  on  her  lips.'  This  exertion  cost  him  dear,  as  his  increasing  feebleness 
showed;  but  the  'Farewell'  apostrophe  was  as  sweet,  as  musical,  as  unutterably 
pathetic  as  of  old.  For  the  last  time  the  melodiousness  of  his  unexerted  tones  '  came 
over  the  spirit  like  the  desolate  moaning  of  the  blast  that  precedes  the  thunderstorm,' 
or  like  '  the  hollow  and  not  unmusical  murmur  of  the  midnight  sea  after  the  tempest 
had  raved  itself  to  rest ' ;  for  the  last  time  those  tones  '  sank  into  the  heart  like  the 
sighing  of  the  gentle  breeze  among  the  strings  of  an  aeolian  harp,  or  among  the 
branches  of  a  cypress  grove,' — -farewell !  '  Is  it  possible  ? — my  lord  ! '  and  then  as  he 
endeavoured  to  abandon  himself  to  the  overwhelming  storm  of  passion  which  followed 
this  calm, — rage,  hatred,  intervening  doubts, — all  the  Moorish  fire  and  passionateness 
which  blazed  out  as  he  turned  upon  Iago, — a  marked  change  came  over  the  tragedian. 


404 


APPENDIX 


— he  trembled, — stopped, — tottered, — reeled ;  Charles,  fearing  the  worst,  went  forward 
and  extended  his  arms ;  the  father  made  another  effort  and  advanced  towards  his  son 
with,  '  Villain,  be  sure,'  &c.,  but  it  was  of  no  use,  and  with  a  whispered  moan,  ■  I  am 
dying, — speak  to  them  for  me,'  he  sank  insensible  into  Charles's  arms.'  A  saddening 
conviction  that  the  acting  of  Edmund  Kean  was  at  an  end  impressed  itself  upon  the 
hearts  of  all ;  amidst  earnest  and  sympathizing  applause  he  was  gently  removed  from 
the  sight  of  those  whom  he  had  so  often  moved  to  admiration,  to  terror,  to  wonder, 
and  to  tears ;  and  with  a  delicacy  rarely  indeed  displayed  in  a  theatre,  the  major  part 
of  the  audience,  not  waiting  to  see  the  play  finished,  went  away.  [Three  weeks  later. 
on  the  15th  of  May,  Kean  died.] 


COSTUME 

Murphy  {Life  of  Garrick,  i,  105) :  Garrick's  benefit  was  announced  in  the  montn 
of  March,  for  that  night  he  was  prepared  to  act  the  Moor  of  Venice.  He  was  aware 
that  his  stature  was  inferior  to  that  of  his  predecessors,  and,  to  assist  his  figure,  he  chose 
to  appear  in  a  Venetian  dress. 

[It  may  be  rash  to  say  it,  but  I  doubt  if  this  '  Venetian  dress '  amounted  to  anything 
more  than  a  high  Oriental  turban  with  a  plume  on  it ;  my  reason  for  this  supposition 
is,  that  it  was  this  costume  which  gave  rise  to  a  witticism  which  has  been  variously 
attributed  to  Quin,  to  Foote,  and  to  Garrick  himself,  and  which  would  lose  its  point  if 
the  costume  were  wholly  Venetian  or  wholly  Oriental.  Hogarth's  series  of  pictures, 
with  which  we  are  all  familiar,  '  The  Harlot's  Progress,'  were  at  that  time  in  the  height 
of  their  popularity ;  ladies'  fans  were  decorated  with  copies  of  them,  and  the  series  had 
even  been  put  on  the  stage,  I  believe,  as  tableaux.  One  of  the  series  represents  the 
heroine  upsetting  the  breakfast  table,  just  as  a  little  Negro  page  is  bringing  in  the  tea- 
kettle. The  boy  is  jet  black  with  rolling  white  eyes,  and  dressed  in  laced  coat  and 
knee-breeches,  and  with  a  disproportionately  large  turban  on  his  head  surmounted  by 
an  aigret.  When  Garrick,  then,  appeared  on  the  stage  in  his  novel  costume  as  Othello, 
it  is  said  that  Quin  exclaimed  to  his  neighbour,  '  Here's  Pompey, — but  where's  the  tea- 
kettle ?'  Garrick's  dress,  therefore,  must  have  been  the  same  as  Pompey's,  or  there 
would  have  been  no  laugh.  Although  both  Quin  and  Foote  were  fully  clever  enough, 
and  more  than  cruel  enough,  to  make  the  speech,  yet  I  prefer  to  think  that  it  was 
Garrick  himself,  as  I  have  seen  it  somewhere  stated,  who  said  when  he  was  dressing 
for  the  stage :  '  I  suppose  Quin  will  say  when  he  sees  me,  "  Here's  Pompey,  but  where's 
the  tea-kettle?"  '  To  this  is  sometimes  added,  'the  tea-kettle  and  the  lamp]  which  I 
am  afraid  reveals  an  unfamiliarity,  on  the  part  of  the  narrator,  with  the  source  of  the 
witticism.  Fitzgerald  {Life  of  Garrick,  i,  153)  distinctly  says,  that  on  this  occasion 
Garrick  was  dressed  in  a  'bright  scarlet  officer's  coat.' — Ed.] 

Russell  {Representative  Actors,  p.  128) :  In  his  autobiography,  F.  Reynolds  tells 
us  he  remembers  seeing  Barry  act  Othello  '  in  a  full  suit  of  gold-laced  scarlet,  a  small 
cocked  hat,  knee-breeches,  and  silk  stockings,  conspicuously  displaying  a  pair  of  gouty 
legs.' 

Boaden  {Life  of  Kemble,  i,  256) :  In  March,  1785,  Othello  was  acted  at  Drury-Lane 
Theatre ;  Othello  by  Mr  Kemble — Desdemona,  Mrs  Siddons.  The  dress  of  the  Moor 
at  that  time  was  a  British  general  officer's  uniform,  equally  improper  with  the  Moorish 
jacket  and  trousers  of  modern  times.  The  general  of  an  Italian  State  would  wear  its 
uniform;  he  would  never  be  indulged  with  a  privilege  of  strutting  about  like  'a  malig- 


COSTUME  405 

nant  and  a  turbaned  Turk'  at  the  head  of  a  Christian  army.  Mr  Kemble  always 
played  parts  of  this  character  very  finely.  He  was  grand,  and  awful,  and  pathetic. 
But  he  was  a  European ;  there  seemed  to  be  philosophy  in  his  bearing ;  there  was 
reason  in  his  rage ;  he  acted  as  if  Othello  truly  described  himself  when  he  calls  him- 
self '  one  not  easily  jealous.'  He  had  never,  I  think,  so  completely  worked  himself 
into  the  character  as  to  be  identified  with  it,  as  was  surely  the  case  in  his  Hamlet,  his 
Macbeth,  his  King  John. 

Knight  :  It  has  been  maintained  that,  as  General  of  the  Venetian  army,  Othello 
should  wear  a  Venetian  dress ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  has  been  contended  that 
the  Moorish  garb  was  the  more  correct,  as  well  as  more  effective.  That  Othello  was 
a  Christian  may  be  inferred  from  his  marriage  with  a  Christian,  and  we  have,  more- 
over, Iago's  express  testimony,  where,  in  II,  iii,  he  speaks  of  Othello  as  ready,  for  Des- 
demona's  sake,  to  renounce  'his  baptism,  All  seals  and  symbols  of  redeemed  sin.' 
There  ought,  therefore,  to  be  no  question  as  to  which  habit  is  more  correct ;  the  con- 
vert would  indubitably  put  off  his  turban  with  his  faith,  and  assume  the  dress  of  that 
Republic  whose  religion  he  had  adopted  and  whose  officer  he  had  become.  Indeed, 
from  the  commencement  of  Act  II,  there  can  be  neither  doubt  nor  choice  allowed  on 
the  subject,  as  the  General  of  the  Venetian  forces,  to  whatever  nation  he  might  trace 
his  birth  (and  he  was  always  a  foreigner)  [see  I,  iii,  61],  assumed,  on  the  day  of  his 
election,  a  peculiar  habit,  consisting  of  a  full  gown  of  crimson  velvet,  with  loose 
sleeves,  over  which  was  worn  a  mantle  of  cloth  of  gold,  buttoned  upon  the  right 
shoulder  with  massy  gold  buttons.  The  cap  was  of  crimson  velvet,  and  the  baton  of 
office  was  of  silver,  ensigned  with  the  winged  lion  of  St.  Mark  [Knight  gives  an 
engraving  of  this  dress  from  Vecellio].  Of  the  '  Italian  foot '  Vecellio  gives  us  a  speci- 
men. His  defensive  armour  consists  of  a  back  and  breast-plate,  mail  sleeves,  and  that 
peculiar  species  of  head-piece  called  a  morion.  The  '  lads  of  Cyprus '  may,  with  great 
probability,  be  supposed  to  have  belonged  to  the  body  of  Greek  cavalry,  first  employed 
by  the  Venetians.  Vecellio  presents  us  with  the  costume  of  a  '  soldato  disarmato,' 
which  would  be  that  of  Cassio  and  Iago  when  off  guard.  Its  characteristics  are  the 
buff  jerkin  and  the  scarf  of  company.  See  V,  i,  29.  The  scarf  was  the  only  uniform 
then  known  amongst  officers ;  it  bore  the  colours  of  the  captain  under  whom  they 
served,  and  is  the  origin  of  the  modern  sash. 

Coryat,  who  travelled  in  1608,  says,  in  his  Crudities  [ii,  19,  ed.  1776]  :  'I  saw  the 

Duke  [i.  e.,  Doge]  in  some  of  his  richest  ornaments He  wore  two  very  rich 

robes,  or  long  garments,  whereof  the  vppermost  was  white,  of  cloth  of  silver,  with 
great  massy  buttons  of  gold;  the  other  cloth  of  silver  also,  but  adorned  with  many 
curious  workes  made  in  colours  with  needleworke.  [His  train  was  then  holden  up 
by  two  Gentlemen.]'  Howell,  in  his  Survey  of  the  Signorie  of  Venice,  1 65 1,  after 
telling  us  that  the  Duke  '  always  goes  clad  in  silk  and  purple,'  observes  that  '  some- 
times he  shows  himself  to  the  public  in  a  robe  of  cloth  of  gold,  and  a  white  mantle ; 
he  hath  his  head  covered  with  a  thin  coif,  and  on  his  forehead  he  wears  a  crimson 
kind  of  mitre,  with  a  gold  border,  and,  behind,  it  turns  up  in  form  of  a  horn ;  on  his 
shoulders  he  carries  ermine  skins  to  the  middle,  which  is  still  a  badge  of  the  Consuls 
habit;  on  his  feet  he  wears  embroidered  sandals'  (Vecellio  says  'slippers')  'tied  with 
gold  buttons;  and  about  his  middle  a  most  rich  belt,  embroidered  with  costly  jewels.' 
The  chiefs  of  the  Council  of  Ten  wore  '  red  gowns  with  long  sleeves,  either  of  cloth, 
camlet,  or  damask,  according  to  the  weather,  with  a  flap  of  the  same  colour  over  their 
left  shoulders,  red  stockings  and  slippers.'  The  rest  of  '  The  Tenne,'  according  to 
Coryat  [p.  33] ,  wore  '  blrcke  chamlet  gownes  with  maruellous  long  sleeues,  that  reach 


406  APPENDIX 

almost  downe  to  the  ground.'  The  ' clarissimoes '  generally  wore  'gownes  of  blacke 
cloth,  and  ouer  their  left  shoulder  they  haue  a  flappe  made  of  the  same  cloth,  and 
edged  with  black  laffata';  and  all  these  'gowned  men,'  says  the  same  author,  'doe 
weare  marueilous  little  blacke  caps  of  felt,  without  any  brimmes  at  all,  and  very  dimin- 
utiue  falling  bands,  no  ruffes  at  all,  which  are  so  shallow,  that  I  haue  seene  many  of 
them  not  aboue  a  little  inch  deepe.'  The  colour  of  their  under-garments  was  also  gen- 
erally black,  and  consisted  of  a  '  slender  doublet  made  close  to  the  body,  without  much 
quilting  or  bombast,  and  long  hose  plaine,  without  those  new  fangled  curiosities  and 
ridiculovs  superfluities  of  panes,  plaites,  and  other  light  toyes  vsed  with  vs  English 
men.'  '  Young  lovers,'  says  Vecellio,  '  wear  generally  a  doublet  and  breeches  of  satin, 
tabby,  or  other  silk,  cut  or  slashed  in  the  form  of  crosses  or  stars,  through  which  slashes 
is  seen  the  lining  of  coloured  taffata ;  gold  buttons,  a  lace  ruff,  a  bonnet  of  rich  velvet, 
or  silk,  with  an  ornamental  band,  a  silk  cloak,  and  silk  stockings,  Spanish  morocco 
shoes,  a  flower  in  one  hand,  and  their  gloves  and  handkerchief  in  the  other.'  Speak- 
ing of  the  ladies  of  Venice,  Coryat  [p.  35]  says :  '  Most  of  the  women,  when  they 
walke  abroad,  especially  to  Church,  are  vailed  with  long  vailes,  whereof  some  doe 
reach  almost  to  the  ground  behinde.  These  vailes  are  eyther  blacke,  or  white,  or  yel- 
lowish. The  blacke  eyther  wiues  or  widowes  do  weare ;  the  white,  maides,  and  so  the 
yellowish  also ;  but  they  weare  more  white  then  yellowish.  It  is  the  custome  of  these 
maydes,  when  they  walke  in  the  streetes,  to  couer  their  faces  with  their  vailes,  vert  - 
cundice  causa,  the  stuffe  being  so  thin  and  slight,  that  they  may  easily  looke  through 

it.    For  it  is  made  of  a  pretty  slender  silke,  and  veiy  finely  curled Now  whereas  I 

said  before,  that  only  maydes  do  weare  white  vailes,  and  none  else,  I  meane  these 
white  silk  curled  vayles,  which  (as  they  tolde  me)  none  doe  weare  but  maydes.  But 
other  white  vayles  wives  doe  much  weare,  such  as  are  made  of  holland,  whereas  the 
greatest  part  is  handsomely  edged  with  great  and  very  faire  bone  lace.'  Vecellio  states 
that  courtesans  wore  black  veils  in  imitation  of  women  of  character.  We  must  not  for- 
get that  singular  portion  of  a  Venetian  lady's  costume  at  this  period,  '  the  Chioppine.' 
[See  notes  on  Ham.  II,  ii,  407.] 

The  following  costumes  are  given  in  Booth's  Prompt  Book,  p.  120 :  Othello, — 
First  Dress  :  A  long  gown  of  cashmere,  wrought  with  gold  and  various  colours.  This 
is  looped  up  to  the  hip,  on  the  left  side,  with  jewels.  A  Moorish  burnoose,  striped  with 
purple  and  gold.  Purple  velvet  shoes,  embroidered  with  gold  and  pearl.  A  sash  of 
green  and  gold.  A  jewelled  chain.  Second  Dress ;  Steel-plate  armour.  A  white 
burnoose  made  of  African  goat's  hair.  Third  Dress  :  A  long,  white  gown,  Moorish, 
with  hood,  and  with  scarlet  trimmings.  A  white  sash  made  of  goat's  hair.  Scarlet 
velvet  shoes.  Pearl  ear-rings.  (These  dresses,  although  conformable  to  Christian 
ideas,  are  devised  with  a  view  to  express  the  gorgeous  barbaric  taste  of  the  Moor.) 
Desdemona, — First  Dress:  White  satin  train,  trimmed  with  illusion  and  pearls. 
High,  pointed  corsage,  with  ruff.  Long,  puffed  sleeves;  pearls  between  puffs.  Stom- 
acher, elaborately  embroidered  with  pearls.  Girdle  of  the  same.  Diamond  ear-rings, 
cross,  and  pin.  Mary  Stuart  cap  made  of  white  satin  and  pearls.  Second  Dress  :  Drab 
satin  train,  embroidered  with  gold.  Blue  satin  poncha,  embroidered  with  gold.  Blue 
satin  Mary  Stuart  cap,  trimmed  with  gold  leaves.  Third  Dress  :  Rose-coloured  satin 
train ;  the  front  breadth  of  white  satin,  trimmed  with  three  point-lace  flounces,  headed 
b\  a  pearl  fringe.  High,  pointed  corsage,  with  ruff.  White,  pointed  stomacher,  em- 
broidered with  pearls.  Pearl  girdle.  Sleeves  puffed  with  white  satin.  Bands  of  rose 
und  pearls  between  puffs.     Mary  Stuart  cap  of  rose  satin,  trimmed  with  pearls. 

Wilhelm  Oecheliiauser  (Finleitung,  p.  28) :  There  is,  strictly  speaking,  no  one 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— DR   JOHNSON  407 

j^ne  imaginable  upon  which  Cassio's  interview  with  Desdemona,  Othello's  great  scene 
with  Iago,  the  loss  of  the  handkerchief,  Iago's  conversation  with  Emilia,  the  second 
interview  of  Othello  with  Iago,  Desdemona's  with  Othello  and  Emilia,  and  in  addition 
the  appearance  of  Bianca  and  her  dialogue  with  Cassio,  could  be  acted  one  after  the 
other.  I  suggest  a  terrace,  therefore,  connected  by  a  colonnade,  with  the  castle  ir. 
view,  and  to  be  entered  thence  as  from  the  street.  There  is,  however,  no  serious 
objection  to  use  the  hall  [usually  set  for  II,  iii,  in  ordinary  Acting  Copies],  with  per- 
haps an  elevated  background  and  colonnade;  so  that  then  half  the  piece  from  the 
Second  [Third]  Scene  of  Act  II  to  the  last  Scene  of  Act  IV,  inclusive,  might  be  acted 
without  change. 

The  costume  should  be  that  of  the  period  of  the  Renaissance,  as  it  was  in  Venice. 
The  architecture  is,  for  Venice,  partly  Gothic  in  its  combination  with  Byzantine  motives, 
and  partly  of  the  early  Renaissance  style ;  in  Cyprus,  it  has  an  Oriental  character. 

E.  W.  Godwin  contributed  to  The  Architect  a  valuable  series  of  suggestive  and 
instructive  papers  on  The  Architecture  and  Costume  of  Shakspere's  Plays.  The  issue 
of  15  March,  1875,  was  devoted  to  Othello. 


ENGLISH   CRITICISMS 


/ 


Dr  Johnson  :  The  beauties  of  this  play  impress  themselves  so  strongly  upon  the 
attention  of  the  reader,  that  they  can  draw  no  aid  from  critical  illustration.  The  fiery 
openness  of  Othello,  magnanimous,  artless,  and  credulous,  boundless  in  his  confidence, 
ardent  in  his  affection,  inflexible  in  his  resolution,  and  obdurate  in  his  revenge ;  the 
cool  malignity  of  Iago,  silent  in  his  resentment,  subtle  in  his  designs,  and  studious  at 
once  of  his  interest  and  his  vengeance ;  the  soft  simplicity  of  Desdemona,  confident 
of  merit,  and  conscious  of  innocence,  her  artless  perseverance  in  her  suit,  and  her  slow- 
ness to  suspect  that  she  can  be  suspected,  are  such  proofs  of  Shakespeare's  skill  in 
human  nature  as,  I  suppose,  it  is  in  vain  to  seek  in  any  modern  writer.  The  gradual 
progress  which  Iago  makes  in  the  Moor's  conviction,  and  the  circumstances  which  he 
employs  to  enflame  him,  are  so  artfully  natural,  that,  though  it  will  perhaps  not  be  said 
of  him  [Othello]  as  he  says  of  himself,  that  he  is  '  a  man  not  easily  jealous,'  yet  we 
cannot  but  pity  him,  when  at  last  we  find  him  *  perplexed  in  the  extreme.' 

There  is  always  danger  lest  wickedness,  conjoined  with  abilities,  should  steal  upon 
esteem,  though  it  misses  of  approbation ;  but  the  character  of  Iago  is  so  conducted, 
that  he  is  from  the  first  Scene  to  the  last  hated  and  despised.  Even  the  inferior 
characters  of  this  play  would  be  very  conspicuous  in  any  other  piece,  not  only  for  their 
justness,  but  their  strength.     Cassio  is  brave,  benevolent,  and  honest,  ruined  only  by 


408 


APPENDIX 


his  want  of  stubbornness  to  resist  an  insidious  invitation.  Roderigo's  suspicious  cre- 
dulity and  impatient  submission  to  the  cheats  which  he  sees  practised  upon  him,  and 
which  by  persuasion  he  suffers  to  be  repeated,  exhibit  a  strong  picture  of  a  weak  mind 
betrayed  by  unlawful  desires  to  a  false  friend ;  and  the  virtue  of  Emilia  is  such  as  we 
often  find,  worn  loosely,  but  not  cast  off,  easy  to  commit  small  crimes,  but  quickened 
and  alarmed  at  atrocious  villainies.  The  Scenes  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  are 
busy,  varied  by  happy  interchanges,  and  regularly  promoting  the  progression  of  the 
btory ;  and  the  narrative  in  the  end,  though  it  tells  but  what  is  already  known,  yet  is 
necessary  to  produce  the  death  of  Othello.  Had  the  scene  opened  in  Cyprus,  and  the 
preceding  incidents  been  occasionally  related,  there  had  been  little  wanting  to  a  drama 
of  the  most  exact  and  scrupulous  regularity. 


Malone  :  I  cannot  forbear  to  conclude  our  commentaries  on  this  transcendent  poet 
with  the  fine  eulogy  which  the  judicious  and  learned  Lowth  has  pronounced  on  him, 
with  a  particular  reference  to  this  tragedy,  perhaps  the  most  perfect  of  all  his  works : 

'In  his  viris  [tragediae  Graecae  scilicet  scriptoribus]  accessio  quaedam  Philosophise 
erat  Poetica  facultas :  neque  sane  quisquam  adhuc  Poesin  ad  fastigium  suum  ac  culmen 
evexit,  nisi  qui  prius  in  intima  Philosophia  artis  suae  fundamenta  jecerit. 

1  Quod  si  quis  objiciat,  nonnullos  in  hoc  ipso  poeseos  genere  excelluisse,  qui  nunquam 
habiti  sunt  Philosophi,  ac  ne  literis  quidem  praeter  caeteros  imbuti ;  sciat  is,  me  rem 
ipsam  quaerere,  non  de  vulgari  opinione,  aut  de  verbo  laborare :  qui  autetn  tantum 
ingenio  consecutus  est,  ut  naturas  hominum,  vimque  omnem  humanitatis,  causasque 
eas,  quibus  aut  incitatur  mentis  i?npetus  aut  retundiiur,  penitus  perspectas  habeat, 
ejusque  omnes  motus  oratione  non  modo  explicet,  sed  effingat,  planeqtie  oculis  subjiciat , 
sed  excitet,  regat,  commoveat,  moderetur ;  eum,  etsi  disciplinarum  instrumento  minus 
adjutum,  eximie  tamen  esse  Philosophutn  arbitra?'i.  Quo  in  genere  affectum  Zelotypiae, 
ejusque  causas,  adjuncta,  progressiones,  effectus,  in  una  Shakspeari  nostri  fabula,  copi- 
osius,  subtilius,  accuratius  etiam  veriusque  pertractari  existimo,  quam  ab  omnibus  om- 
nium Philosophorum  scholis  in  simili  argumento  est  unquam  disputatum'  (Prcelectio 
prima,  edit.  1763,  p.  8).  Verplanck:  The  remarkable  criticism  of  Bishop  Lowth, 
often  before  quoted  in  its  original  exquisite  Latinity,  deserves  to  be  more  familiarly 
known  to  the  English  reader  :^He  whose  genius  has  unfolded  to  him  the  knowledge 
of  man's  nature  and  the  force  of  his  passions ;  has  taught  him  the  causes  by  which  the 
soul  is  moved  to  strong  emotions,  or  calmed  to  rest ;  has  enabled  him  not  only  to 
explain  in  words  those  emotions,  but  to  exhibit  them  vividly  to  other  eyes ;  thus  ruling, 
exciting,  distracting,  soothing  our  feelings, — this  man,  however  little  aided  by  the  dis 
cipline  of  learning,  is,  in  my  judgement,  a  philosopher  of  the  highest  rank.  In  this 
manner,  in  a  single  dramatic  fable  of  our  own  Shakespeare,  the  passion  of  jealousy,  its 
causes,  progress,  incidents,  and  effects,  have  been  more  truly,  more  acutely,  more  copi- 
ously, and  more  impressively  delineated  than  has  been  done  by  all  the  disquisitions  of 
all  the  philosophers  who  have  treated  on  this  dark  argument.'  I 


In  1796,  at  Exeter,  England,  appeared  a  volume  of  Essays,  by  a  Society  of  Gentle- 
men, wherein,  on  pp.  395-409,  is  found :  An  Apology  for  the  Character  and  Conduct 
of  Iago.  The  anonymous  writer  urges  as  palliations  of  Iago's  conduct :  first,  his  being 
tupplanted,  through  Othello's  insensibility  and  unkindness,  by  Cassio,  and  the  writer 
thereupon  ■  appeals  with  safety  to  the  officers  of  the  British  army '  to  know  if  Iago's 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— COLERIDGE 


409 


hostility  were  not  excusable ;  second,  he  suspects  Othello's  relations  with  Emilia ;  third 
(and  this  is  quite  original),  '  Iago  having  a  right  to  expect  promotion,  had  lived,  it  may 
naturally  be  concluded,  more  profusely  than  he  would  otherwise  have  done ;  had  in- 
volved himself  in  difficulties,  or,  as  Emilia  expresses  it,  had  "scanted  his  former 
havings";  another  cause  for  chagrin  and  anger  against  Othello,  whose  cruel  neglect 
had  obliged  him  to  stoop  to  meannesses  he  would  otherwise  have  detested.'  Fourth,  he 
suspected  Cassio  had  played  him  false  at  home.  Fifth,  he  was  by  no  means  convinced 
of  Desdemona's  virtue  and  purity ;  '  his  suspicions  of  his  wife  had  soured  his  temper 
and  excited  in  him  a  general  aversion  to  the  female  sex.'  Lastly,  the  writer,  who  trusts 
that  '  if  he  has  not  wholly  washed  the  blackamoor  white,  he  has  at  least  taken  a  shade 
from  his  colour,'  in  showing  that  Iago's  conduct  admits  of  much  palliation,  thus  sums 
up :  '  On  the  whole,  his  conduct  to  Roderigo,  concerning  which  no  accusation  has  been 
preferred,  appears  to  be  the  least  excusable.  To  him  he  was  indebted  for  pecuniary 
obligations,  but  for  none  of  any  kind  to  either  of  the  other  characters.  On  the  con- 
trary, from  the  first  of  them  he  had,  most  decidedly  and  incontrovertibly,  received 
injuries  of  the  severest  kind.  He  had  no  trivial  cause  for  his  aversion  to  Cassio. 
Desdemona,  as  being  a  woman,  was  not  an  object  of  his  regard ;  as  the  friend  of  Cassio 
and  ^Emilia  she  appeared  to  him  in  a  disgusting  light,  and  more  so  probably  considered 
as  the  wife  of  Othello.  In  order  to  distress  him,  however,  not  to  gratify  any  aversion 
towards  Desdemona,  he  contrives  her  death :  she  is  merely  an  instrument  to  effectuate 
his  vengeance;  and  if  vengeance  can  be  vindicated  by  an  accumulation  of  injuries, 
Iago's,  though  exorbitant,  was  just.' 


Coleridge  [Notes,  252) :  Dr  Johnson  has  remarked  that  little  or  nothing  is  wanting 
to  render  Othello  a  regular  tragedy  but  to  have  opened  the  play  with  the  arrival  of 
Othello  at  Cyprus,  and  to  have  thrown  the  preceding  Act  into  the  form  of  narration. 
Here,  then,  is  the  place  to  determine  whether  such  a  change  would  or  would  not  be  an 
improvement ;  nay  (to  throw  down  the  glove  with  a  full  challenge),  whether  the  trag- 
edy would  or  would  not,  by  such  an  arrangement,  become  more  regular, — that  is,  more 
consonant  with  the  rules  dictated  by  universal  reason,  on  the  true  common-sense  of 
mankind,  in  its  application  to  the  particular  case.  For  in  all  acts  of  judgement,  it  can 
never  be  too  often  recollected,  and  scarcely  too  often  repeated,  that  rules  are  means  to 
ends,  and,  consequently,  that  the  end  must  be  determined  and  understood  before  it  can 
be  known  what  the  rules  are  or  ought  to  be.  Now,  from  a  certain  species  of  drama, 
proposing  to  itself  the  accomplishment  of  certain  ends, — these  partly  arising  from  the 
idea  of  the  species  itself,  but  in  part,  likewise,  forced  upon  the  dramatist  by  accidental 
circumstances  beyond  his  power  to  remove  or  control, — three  rules  have  been  abstracted ; 
in  other  words,  the  means  most  conducive  to  the  attainment  of  the  proposed  ends  have 
been  generalized,  and  prescribed  under  the  names  of  the  three  Unities, — the  unity  of 
time,  the  unity  of  place,  and  the  unity  of  action, — which  last  would,  perhaps,  have  been 
as  appropriately,  as  well  as  more  intelligibly,  entitled  the  unity  of  interest.  With  this 
last  the  present  question  has  no  immediate  concern ;  in  fact,  its  conjunction  with  the 
former  two  is  a  mere  delusion  of  words.  It  is  not  properly  a  rule,  but  in  itself  the 
great  end  not  only  of  the  drama,  but  of  the  epic  poem,  the  lyric  ode,  of  all  poetry, 
down  to  the  candle-flame  cone  of  an  epigram, — nay,  of  poesy  in  general,  as  the  proper 
generic  term  inclusive  of  all  the  fine  arts  as  its  species.  But  of  the  unities  of  time  and 
place,  which  alone  are  entitled  to  the  name  of  rules,  the  history  of  their  origin  will  be 
their  best  criterion.     You  might  take  the  Greek  chorus  to  a  place,  but  you  could  not 


410 


APPENDIX 


bring  a  place  to  them  without  as  palpable  an  equivoque  as  bringing  Birnam  wood  to 
Macbeth  at  Dunsinane.  It  was  the  same,  though  in  a  less  degree,  with  regard  to  the 
unity  of  time ;  the  positive  fact,  not  for  a  moment  removed  from  the  senses,  the  pres- 
ence, I  mean,  of  the  same  identical  chorus,  was  a  continued  measure  of  time ;  and 
although  the  imagination  may  supersede  perception,  yet  it  must  be  granted  to  be  an 
imperfection,  however  easily  tolerated,  to  place  the  two  in  broad  contradiction  to  each 
other.  In  truth,  it  is  a  mere  accident  of  terms ;  for  the  Trilogy  of  the  Greek  theatre 
was  a  drama  in  three  Acts,  and,  notwithstanding  this,  what  strange  contrivances  as  to 
place  there  are  in  the  Aristophanic  Frogs.  Besides,  if  the  law  of  mere  actual  percep- 
tion is  once  violated,  as  it  repeatedly  is,  even  in  the  Greek  tragedies,  why  is  it  more 
difficult  to  imagine  three  hours  to  be  three  years  than  to  be  a  whole  day  and  night  ? 


Wordsworth  :  Wings  have  we, — and  as  far  as  we  can  go 

We  may  find  pleasure ;  wilderness  and  wood, 
Blank  ocean  and  mere  sky,  support  that  mood 
Which  with  the  lofty  sanctifies  the  low. 
— TJreams,  Books,  are  each  a  world ;  and  books,  we  know, 
Are  a  substantial  world,  both  pure  and  good ; 
Round  these,  with  tendrils  strong  as  flesh  and  blood, 
Our  pastime  and  our  happiness  will  grow. 
There  find  I  personal  themes,  a  plenteous  store, 
(    Matter  wherein  right  voluble  I  am, 
To  which  I  listen  with  a  ready  ear ; 
STwo  shall  be  named  pre-eminently  dear, — 
The  gentle  Lady  married  to  the  Moor ; 
And  heavenly  Una,  with  her  milk-white  Lamb. 
\  —Personal  Talk,  III,  1807. 

(Vol.  iv,  p.  25,  ed.  Knight,  1883.) 


Lamb  {Works,  London,  1870,  iii,  102;  published  originally  in  Hunt's  Reflectory 
circa  1810)  :  How  many  dramatic  personages  are  there  in  Shakespeare,  which,  from 
some  circumstance,  some  adjunct  to _ their  character,  are  improper  to  be  shown  to  our 
bodily  eye  !  Othello,  for  instance.  '  Nothing  can  be  more  soothing,  more  flattering  to 
the  nobler  parts  of  our  natures,  than  to  read  of  a  young  Venetian  lady  of  highest 
extraction,  through  the  force  of  love  and  from  a  sense  of  merit  in  him  whom  she 
loved,  laying  aside  every  consideration  of  kindred,  and  country,  and  colour,  and  wed- 
ding with  a  coal-black  Moor, — (for  such  he  is  represented,  in  the  imperfect  state  of 
knowledge  respecting  foreign  countries  in  those  days,  compared  with  our  own,  or  in 
compliance  with  popular  notions,  though  the  Moors  are  now  well  enough  known  to  be 
many  shades  less  unworthy  of  a  white  woman's  fancy) — it  is  the  perfect  triumph  of 
virtue  over  accidents,  of  the  imagination  over  the  senses.  She  sees  Othello's  colour  in 
his  mind.  But  upon  the  stage,  when  the  imagination  is  no  longer  the  ruling  faculty, 
but  we  are  left  to  our  poor,  unassisted  senses,  I  appeal  to  every  one  that  has  seen 
Othello  played,  whether  he  did  not,  on  the  contrary,  sink  Othello's  mind  in  his  cciour; 
whether  he  did  not  find  something  extremely  revolting  in  the  courtship  and  wedded 
caresses  of  Othello  and  Desdemona;  and  whether  the  actual  sight  of  the  thing  did  not 
overweigh  all  that  beautiful  compromise  which  we  make  in  reading.    And  the  reason  it 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— HAZLITT  411 

ahould  do  so  is  obvious,  because  there  is  just  so  much  reality  presented  to  our  sense* 
as  to  give  a  perception  of  disagreement,  with  not  enough  of  belief  in  the  internal 
motives, — all  that  which  is  unseen, — to  overpower  and  reconcile  the  first  and  obvious 
prejudices.  What  we  see  upon  a  stage  is  body  and  bodily  action ;  what  we  are  con- 
scious of  in  reading  is  almost  exclusively  the  mind,  and  its  movements ;  and  this,  I 
think,  may  sufficiently  account  for  the  very  different  sort  of  delight  with  which  the 
same  play  so  often  affects  us  in  the  reading  and  the  seeing. 

[Foot-note]  :  The  error  of  supposing  that  because  Othello's  colour  does  not  offend 
us  in  the  reading,  it  should  also  not  offend  us  in  the  seeing,  is  just  such  a  fallacy  as 
supposing  that  an  Adam  and  Eve  in  a  picture  shall  affect  us  just  as  they  do  in  the 
poem.  But  in  the  poem  we  have  for  a  while  Paradisaical  senses  given  us,  which  vanish 
when  we  see  a  man  and  his  wife  without  clothes  in  the  picture.  The  painters  them 
selves  feel  this,  as  is  apparent  by  the  awkward  shifts  they  have  recourse  to,  to  make 
them  look  not  quite  naked ;  by  a  sort  of  prophetic  anachronism,  antedating  the  inven- 
tion of  fig-leaves.  So  in  the  reading  of  the  play,  we  see  with  Desdemona's  eyes ;  in 
the  seeing  of  it,  we  are  forced  to  look  with  our  own. 

Hazlitt  [Characters  of  Shakespeare 's  Plays,  London,  1817,  p.  54)  :  The  character 
of  Iago  is  one  of  the  supererogations  of  Shakespeare's  genius.  Some  persons,  more 
nice  than  wise,  have  thought  this  whole  character  unnatural,  because  his  villainy  is 
without  a  sufficient  motive.  Shakespeare,  who  was  as  good  a  philosopher  as  he  was  a 
poet,  thought  otherwise.  He  knew  that  the  love  of  power,  which  is  another  name  for 
the  love  of  mischief,  is  natural  to  man.  He  would  know  this  as  well  or  better  than 
if  it  had  been  demonstrated  to  him  by  a  logical  diagram,  merely  from  seeing  children 
paddle  in  the  dirt  or  kill  flies  for  sport.  (  Iago,  in  fact,  belongs  to  a  class  of  characters, 
common  to  Shakespeare  and  at  the  same  time  peculiar  to  him ;  whose  heads  are  as 
acute  and  active  as  their  hearts  are  hard  and  callous.  :  Iago  is  to  be  sure  an  extreme 
instance  of  the  kind ;  that  is  to  say,  of  diseased  intellectual  activity,  with  an  almost  per- 
fect indifference  to  moral  good  or  evil,  or  rather  with  a  decided  preference  of  the  latter, 
because  it  falls  more  readily  in  with  his  favourite  propensity,  gives  greater  zest  to  his 
thoughts  and  scope  to  his  actions.  He  is  quite  or  nearly  as  indifferent  to  his  own  fate 
as  to  that  of  others ;  he  runs  all  risks  for  a  trifling  and  doubtful  advantage ;  and  is  him- 
self the  dupe  and  victim  of  his  ruling  passion — an  insatiable  craving  after  action  of  the 
most  difficult  and  dangerous  kind.  '  Our  antient '  is  a  philosopher,  who  fancies  that 
a  lie  that  kills  has  more  point  in  it  than  an  alliteration  or  an  antithesis ;  who  thinks  a 
fatal  experiment  on  the  peace  of  a  family  a  better  thing  than  watching  the  palpitations 
in  the  heart  of  a  flea  in  a  microscope ;  who  plots  the  ruin  of  his  friends  as  an  exercise 
for  his  ingenuity,  and  stabs  men  in  the  dark  to  prevent  ennui.  His  gayety,  such  as  it 
is,  arises  from  the  success  of  his  treachery ;  his  ease  from  the  torture  he  has  inflicted 
on  others.  He  is  an  amateur  of  tragedy  in  real  life;  and  instead  of  employing  his 
invention  on  imaginary  characters  or  long-forgotten  incidents,  he  takes  the  bolder  and 
more  desperate  course  of  getting  up  his  plot  at  home,  casts  the  principal  parts  among 
his  nearest  friends  and  connections,  and  rehearses  it  in  downright  earnest  with  steady 
nerves  and  unabated  resolution The  habitual  licentiousness  of  Iago's  conver- 
sation is  not  to  be  traced  to  the  pleasure  he  takes  in  gross  or  lascivious  images,  but  to 
his  desire  of  finding  out  the  worst  side  of  everything,  and  of  proving  himself  an  over- 
match for  appearances.  He  has  none  of  '  the  milk  of  human  kindness '  in  his  com- 
position.    His  imagination  rejects  everything  that  has  not  a  strong  infusion  of  the  most 


412 


APPENDIX 


unpalatable  ingredients ;  his  mind  digests  only  poisons.  Virtue  or  goodness,  or  what* 
ever  has  the  least  •  relish  of  salvation  in  it,'  is,  to  his  depraved  appetite,  sickly  and 
insipid ;  and  he  even  resents  the  good  opinion  entertained  of  his  own  integrity,  as  if  it 
were  an  affront  cast  on  the  masculine  sense  and  spirit  of  his  character.  Thus  at  the 
meeting  between  Othello  and  Desdemona,  he  exclaims  :  '  O,  you  are  well  tun'd  now  ! 
But  I'll  set  down  the  pegs  that  make  this  music,  As  honest  as  I  am  ' — his  character  ol 
bonhomie  not  sitting  at  all  easily  upon  him.  In  the  scenes  where  he  tries  to  work 
Othello  to  his  purpose  he  is  proportionably  guarded,  insidious,  dark,  and  deliberate. 
We  believe  nothing  ever  came  up  to  the  profound  dissimulation  and  dexterous  artifice 
of  the  well-known  dialogue  in  the  Third  Act,  where  he  first  enters  upon  the  execution 
of  his  design  (III,  hi,  107-128).  The  stops  and  breaks,  the  deep  workings  of  treachery 
under  the  mask  of  love  and  honesty,  the  anxious  watchfulness,  the  cool  earnestness, 
and,  if  we  may  so  say,  the  passion  of  hypocrisy  marked  in  every  line,  receive  their  last 
finishing  in  that  inconceivable  burst  of  pretended  indignation  at  Othello's  doubts  of  his 
sincerity:  'O  grace!  O  Heaven  forgive  me!'  [lb.  430-437.) 

If  Iago  is  detestable  enough  when  he  has  business  on  his  hands  and  all  his  engines 
at  work,  he  is  still  worse  when  he  has  nothing  to  do,  and  we  only  see  into  the  hollow- 
ness  of  his  heart.  His  indifference  when  Othello  falls  into  a  swoon  is  perfectly  dia- 
bolical. The  part,  indeed,  would  hardly  be  tolerated,  even  as  a  foil  to  the  virtue 
and  generosity  of  the  other  characters  in  the  play,  but  for  its  indefatigable  industry 
and  inexhaustible  resources,  which  divert  the  attention  of  the  spectator  (as  well 
as  his  own)  from  the  end  he  has  in  view  to  the  means  by  which  it  must  be  accom- 
plished.* 


Macaulay  in  his  Essay  on  Dante  {Knighfs  Quarterly  Magazine,  Jan.,  1824), 
alludes  to  the  little  impression  the  forms  of  the  external  world  appeal*  to  have  made  on 
Dante's  mind.  'The  feeling  of  the  present  age,'  he  goes  on  to  say,  'has  taken  a  direc- 
tion diametrically  opposite.     The  magnificence  of  the  physical  world,  and  its  influence 

on  the  human  mind,  have  been  the  favorite  themes  of  our  most  eminent  poets 

The  orthodox  poetical  creed  is  more  catholic.  The  noblest  earthly  object  of  the  con- 
templation of  man  is  man  himself.  The  universe,  and  all  its  fair  and  glorious  forms, 
are  indeed  included  in  the  wide  empire  of  imagination ;  but  she  has  placed  her  home 
and  her  sanctuary  amidst  the  inexhaustible  varieties  and  the  impenetrable  mysteries  of 
the  mind.  Othello  is,  perhaps,  the  greatest  work  in  the  world.  From  what  does  it 
derive  its  power  ?  From  the  clouds  ?  From  the  ocean  ?  From  the  mountains  ?  Or 
from  love  strong  as  death,  and  jealousy  cruel  as  the  grave  !  What  is  it  we  go  forth  to 
see  in  Hamlet  ?  Is  it  a  reed  shaken  with  the  wind  ?  A  small  celandine  ?  A  bed  of 
daffodils  ?  Or  is  it  to  contemplate  a  mighty  and  wayward  mind  laid  bare  before  us  to 
the  inmost  recesses  ?' 

Macaulay  {Edinburgh  Review,  1827,  vol.  xlv,  p.  272) :  Othello  murders  his  wife; 
he  gives  orders  for  the  murder  of  his  lieutenant;  he  ends  by  murdering  himself.  Yet 
he  never  loses  the  esteem  and  affection  of  a  Northern  reader — his  intrepid  and  ardent 
spirit  redeeming  everything.  The  unsuspecting  confidence  with  which  he  listens  to  his 
adviser,  the  agony  with  which  he  shrinks  from  the  thought  of  shame,  the  tempest  of 
passion  with  which  he  commits  his  crimes,  and  the  haughty  fearlessness  with  which  he 

*  The  criticism  from  which  these  extracts  have  been  made  originally  appeared  substantially  in 
The  Examiner ,  23  July,  1814,  as  we  learn  from  a  foot-note  by  W.  C.  Hazlitt,  p.  20,  in  The  Round 
Table,  1881.— Ed. 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— MRS   JAMESON  413 

avows  them,  give  an  extraordinary  interest  to  his  character.  Iago,  on  the  contrary,  is 
the  object  of  universal  loathing.  Many  are  inclined  to  suspect  that  Shakespeare  has 
been  seduced  into  an  exaggeration  unusual  with  him,  and  has  drawn  a  monster  who 
has  no  archetype  in  human  nature.  Now  we  suspect  that  an  Italian  audience,  in  the 
fifteenth  century,  would  have  felt  very  differently.  Othello  would  have  inspired 
nothing  but  detestation  and  contempt.  The  folly  with  which  he  trusts  to  the  friendly 
professions  of  a  man  whose  promotion  he  had  obstructed, — the  credulity  with  which  he 
takes  unsupported  assertions  and  trivial  circumstances  for  unanswerable  proofs, — the 
violence  with  which  he  silences  the  exculpation  till  the  exculpation  can  only  aggravate 
his  misery,  would  have  excited  the  abhorrence  and  disgust  of  the  spectators.  The  con- 
duct of  Iago  they  would  assuredly  have  condemned ;  but  they  would  have  condemned 
it  as  we  condemn  that  of  his  victim.  Something  of  interest  and  respect  would  have 
mingled  with  their  disapprobation.  The  readiness  of  his  wit,  the  clearness  of  his  judge- 
ment, the  skill  with  which  he  penetrates  the  dispositions  of  others  and  conceals  his 
own,  would  have  ensured  to  him  a  certain  portion  of  their  esteem. 


Mrs  Jameson  {Characteristics  of  Women,  London,  1833,  2nd  ed.,  ii,  31) :  The  cha 
racter  of  Hermione  is  addressed  more  to  the  imagination, — that  of  Desdemona  to  the 
feelings.  All  that  can  render  sorrow  majestic  is  gathered  round  Hermione ;  all  that 
nan  render  misery  heart-breaking  is  assembled  round  Desdemona.  The  wronged  but 
self-sustained  virtue  of  Hermione  commands  our  veneration ;  the  injured  and  defence- 
ess  innocence  of  Desdemona  so  wrings  the  soul  '  that  all  for  pity  we  could  die.'  Des- 
demona, as  a  character,  comes  nearest  to  Miranda,  both  in  herself  as  a  woman,  and  in 
the  perfect  simplicity  and  unity  of  the  delineation ;  the  figures  are  differently  draped,— 
the  proportions  are  the  same.  There  is  the  same  modesty,  tenderness,  and  grace ;  the 
same  artless  devotion  in  the  affections,  the  same  predisposition  to  wonder,  to  pity,  to 
admire;  the  same  almost  ethereal  refinement  and  delicacy;  but  all  is  pure  poetic  nature 
within  Miranda  and  around  her ;  Desdemona  is  more  associated  with  the  palpable  real- 
ities of  every-day  existence,  and  we  see  the  forms  and  habits  of  society  tinting  her  lan- 
guage and  deportment ;  no  two  beings  can  be  more  alike  in  character,  nor  more  distinct 
as  individuals. 

(P.  35.)  The  confession  and  the  excuse  for  her  love  are  well  placed  in  the  mouth  of 
Desdemona,  while  the  history  of  the  rise  of  that  love,  and  of  his  course  of  wooing,  is, 
with  the  most  graceful  propriety,  as  far  as  she  is  concerned,  spoken  by  Othello,  and  iD 
her  absence.  The  last  two  lines  summing  up  the  whole, — '  She  lov'd  me  for  the  dan 
gers  I  had  pass'd,  And  I  lov'd  her  that  she  did  pity  them ' — comprise  whole  volumes 
of  sentiment  and  metaphysics. 

(P.  39.)  With  the  most  perfect  artlessness,  she  has  something  of  the  instinctive, 
unconscious  address  of  her  sex ;  as  when  she  appeals  to  her  father : — '  So  much  duty 
as  my  mother  show'd  To  you,  preferring  you  before  her  father,  So  much  I  challenge, 
that  I  may  profess  Due  to  the  Moor,  my  lord.'  And  when  she  is  pleading  for  Cassio  : — 
'  What !  Michael  Cassio  !  That  came  a  wooing  with  you ;  and  many  a  time,  When  I 
have  spoken  of  you  disparagingly  [sic]  Hath  ta'en  your  part  ? '  In  persons  who  unite 
great  sensibility  and  lively  fancy,  I  have  often  observed  this  particular  species  of  address, 
which  is  always  unconscious  of  itself,  and  consists  in  the  power  of  placing  ourselves  in 
the  position  of  another,  and  imagining,  rather  than  perceiving,  what  is  in  their  hearts. 
We  women  have  this  address  (if  so  it  can  be  called)  naturally,  but  I  have  seldom  met 
with  it  in  men.     It  is  not  inconsistent  with  extreme  simplicity  of  character,  and  quite 


T& 


414  APPENDIX 

distinct  from  that  kind  of  art  which  is  the  result  of  natural  acuteness  and  habits  of 
observation,— quick  to  perceive  the  foibles  of  others,  and  as  quick  to  turn  them  to  its 
own  purposes ;  which  is  always  conscious  of  itself,  and  if  united  with  strong  intellect, 
seldom  perceptible  to  others.  In  the  mention  of  her  mother,  and  the  appeal  to  Othello's 
self-love,  Desdemona  has  no  design  formed  on  conclusions  previously  drawn ;  but  her 
intuitive  quickness  of  feeling,  added  to  her  imagination,  leads  her  more  safely  to  the 
same  results,  and  the  distinction  is  as  truly  as  it  is  delicately  drawn. 

(P.  43.)  There  is  another  peculiarity  which,  in  reading  the  play  of  Othello,  we  rather 
ieel  than  perceive :  through  the  whole  of  the  dialogue  appropriated  to  Desdemona  there 
is  not  one  general  observation.  Words  are  with  her  the  vehicle  of  sentiment,  and  never 
of  reflection ;  so  that  I  cannot  find  throughout  a  sentence  of  general  application.  The 
same  remark  applies  to  Miranda ;  and  to  no  other  female  character  of  any  importance 
or  interest — not  even  to  Ophelia. 

The  rest  of  what  I  wished  to  say  of  Desdemona  has  been  anticipated  by  an  anony- 
mous critic,  and  so  beautifully,  so  justly,  so  eloquently  expressed,  that  I  with  pleasure 
erase  my  own  page,  to  make  room  for  his : 

'  Othello]  observes  this  writer,  '  is  no  love-story ;  all  that  is  below  tragedy  in  the  pas- 
sion of  love,  is  taken  away  at  once  by  the  awful  character  of  Othello ;  for  such  he  seems 
to  us  to  be  designed  to  be.  He  appears  never  as  a  lover,  but  at  once  as  a  husband ;  and 
the  relation  of  his  love  made  dignified,  as  it  is  a  husband's  justification  of  his  marriage, 
is  also  dignified,  as  it  is  a  soldier's  relation  of  his  stern  and  perilous  life.  His  love  itself, 
as  long  as  it  is  happy,  is  perfectly  calm  and  serene, — the  protecting  tenderness  of  a  hus- 
band. It  is  not  till  it  is  disordered  that  it  appears  as  a  passion :  then  is  shown  a  power 
in  contention  with  itself, — a  mighty  being  struck  with  death,  and  bringing  up  from  all 
the  depths  of  life  convulsions  and  agonies.  It  is  no  exhibition  of  the  power  of  the 
passion  of  love,  but  of  the  passion  of  life,  vitally  wounded,  and  self-overmastering.  If 
Desdemona  had  been  really  guilty,  the  greatness  would  have  been  destroyed,  because 
his  love  would  have  been  unworthy,  false.  But  she  is  good,  and  his  love  is  most  per- 
fect, just,  and  good.  That  a  man  should  place  his  perfect  love  on  a  wretched  thing  is 
miserably  debasing,  and  shocking  to  thought ;  but  that  loving  perfectly  and  well,  he 
should  by  hellish  human  circumvention  be  brought  to  distrust  and  dread,  and  abjure 
his  own  perfect  love,  is  most  mournful  indeed, — it  is  the  infirmity  of  our  good  nature 
wrestling  in  vain  with  the  strong  powers  of  evil.  Moreover,  he  would,  had  Desdemona 
been  false,  have  been  the  mere  victim  of  fate ;  whereas  he  is  now  in  a  manner  his  own  vic- 
tim. His  happy  love  was  heroic  tenderness ;  his  injured  love  is  terrible  passion ;  and  dis- 
ordered power,  engendered  within  itself  to  its  own  destruction,  is  the  height  of  all  tragedy. 

'  The  character  of  Othello  is,  perhaps,  the  most  greatly  drawn,  the  most  heroic,  of 
any  of  Shakespeare's  actors ;  but  it  is,  perhaps,  that  one  also  of  which  his  reader  last 
acquires  the  intelligence.  The  intellectual  and  warlike  energy  of  his  mind,  his  tender- 
ly ness  of  affection,  his  loftiness  of  spirit,  his  frank,  generous  magnanimity,  impetuosity 
like  a  thunderbolt,  and  that  dark,  fierce  flood  of  boiling  passion,  polluting  even  his 
/  imagination,  compose  a  character  entirely  original,  most  difficult  to  delineate,  but  per- 
fectly delineated.' 

Emilia  in  this  play  is  a  perfect  portrait  from  common  life,  a  masterpiece  in  the  Flem- 
ish style ;  and,  though  not  necessary  as  a  contrast,  it  cannot  be  but  that  the  thorough 
vulgarity,  the  loose  principles  of  this  plebeian  woman,  united  to  a  high  degree  of  spirit, 
energetic  feeling,  strong  sense,  and  low  cunning,  serve  to  place  in  brighter  relief  the 
exquisite  refinement,  the  moral  grace,  the  unblemished  truth,  and  the  soft  submission 
of  Desdemona. 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— MAGINN 


4*5 


(P.  47.)  I  will  only  add  that  the  source  of  the  pathos  throughout, — of  that  pathos 
which  at  once  softens  and  deepens  the  tragic  effect, — lies  in  the  character  of  Desde- 
mona.  No  woman,  differently  constituted,  could  have  excited  the  same  intense  and 
painful  compassion  without  losing  something  of  that  exalted  charm  which  invests  her 
from  beginning  to  end,  which  we  are  apt  to  impute  to  the  interest  of  the  situation,  and 
to  the  poetical  colouring ;  but  which  lies,  in  fact,  in  the  very  essence  of  the  character. 
Desdemona,  with  all  her  timid  flexibility  and  soft  acquiescence,  is  not  weak ;  for  the 
negative  alone  is  weak,  and  the  mere  presence  of  goodness  and  affection  implies  in 
itself  a  species  of  power; — power  without  consciousness,  power  without  effort,  power 
with  repose, — that  soul  of  grace ! 

I  know  a  Desdemona  in  real  life,  one  in  whom  the  absence  of  intellectual  power  is 
never  felt  as  a  deficiency,  nor  the  absence  of  energy  of  will  as  impairing  the  dignity, 
nor  the  most  imperturbable  serenity  as  a  want  of  feeling ;  one  in  whom  thoughts  appear 
mere  instincts,  the  sentiment  of  rectitude  supplies  the  principle,  and  virtue  itself  seems 
rather  a  necessary  state  of  being  than  aa'imposed  law.  No  shade  of  sin  or  vanity  has 
yet  stolen  over  that  bright  innocence/  No  discord  within  has  marred  the  loveliness 
without,  no  strife  of  the  factitious  world  without  has  disturbed  the  harmony  within. 
The  comprehension  of  evil  appears  for  ever  shut  out,  as  if  goodness  had  converted  all 
things  to  itself;  and  all  to  the  pure  in  heart  must  necessarily  be  pure.  The  impression 
produced  is  exactly  that  of  the  character  of  Desdemona;  genius  is  a  rare  thing,  but 
abstract  goodness  is  rarer."  •  In  Desdemona  we  cannot  but  feel  that  the  slightest  mani- 
Festation  of  intellectual  power  or  active  will  would  have  injured  the  dramatic  effect. 
She  is  a  victim  consecrated  from  the  first,  ■  an  offering  without  blemish,'  alone  worthy 
of  the  grand  final  sacrifice ;  all  harmony,  all  grace,  all  purity,  all  tenderness,  all  truth  ! 

But,  alas !  to  see  her  fluttering  like  a  cherub,  in  the  talons  of  a  fiend ! to  see  her 

O  poor  Desdemona ! 


Maginn  {Shakespeare  Papers,  London,  i860,  p.  257) :  What  appears  to  me  to  be  the 
distinguishing  feature  of  Shakespeare  is,  that  his  characters  are  real  men  and  women, 
not  mere  abstractions.  In  the  best  of  us  all  there  are  many  blots ;  in  the  worst  there 
are  many  traces  of  goodness.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  angels  or  devils  in  the  world. 
We  have  passions  and  feelings,  hopes  and  fears,  joys  and  sorrows  pretty  evenly  dis- 
tributed among  us ;  and  that  which  actuates  the  highest  and  the  lowest,  the  most  virtu- 
ous and  the  most  profligate,  the  bravest  and  the  meanest,  must,  in  its  original  elements, 
be  the  same.  People  do  not  commit  wicked  actions  from  the  mere  love  of  wickedness ; 
there  must  always  be  an  incentive  of  precisely  the  same  kind  as  that  which  stimulates 
to  the  noblest  actions, — ambition,  love  of  adventure,  passion,  necessity.  All  our  virtues 
closely  border  upon  vices,  and  are  not  unfrequently  blended.  The  robber  may  be  gen- 
erous,— the  miser,  just, — the  cruel  man,  conscientious, — the  rake,  honourable, — the  fop, 
brave.     In  various  relations  of  life,  the  same  man  may  play  many  characters  as  distinct 

from  one  another  as  day  from  night It  is  necessary  for  a  critical  investigation  of 

character,  not  to  be  content  with  taking  things  merely  as  they  seem.  We  must  endeav- 
our to  strip  off  the  covering  with  which  habit  or  necessity  has  enveloped  the  human 
mind,  and  to  inquire  after  motives  as  well  as  to  look  to  actions 

As  Shakespeare,  therefore,  draws  men,  and  not  one-sided  sketches  of  character,  it  i« 
always  possible  to  treat  his  personages  as  if  they  were  actually  existing  people ;  ana 
Acre  is  always  some  redeeming  point.  The  bloody  Macbeth  is  kind  and  gentle  to  his 
wife;  the  gore-stained  Pochard,  gallant  and  daring;  Shy  lock  is  an  affectionate  father 


416  APPENDIX 

and  a  good-natured  master;  Claudius,  in  Hamlet,  is  fond  of  his  foully-won  queen,  and 
exhibits,  at  least,  remorse  for  his  deed  in  heart-rending  soliloquies ;  Angelo  is  upnght 
in  public  life,  though  yielding  tG  sore  temptation  in  private ;  Cloten  is  brutal  and  insult- 
ing, but  brave ;  the  ladies  are  either  wholly  without  blemishes,  or  have  merits  to  redeem 
them 

But  Iago  !  Ay !  there's  the  rub.  Well  may  poor  Othello  look  down  to  his  feet,  and 
not  seeing  them  different  from  those  of  others,  feel  convinced  that  it  is  a  fable  which 
attributes  a  cloven  hoof  to  the  devil.  Nor  is  it  wonderful  that  the  parting  instruction 
of  Lodovico  to  Cassio  \_sic~\  should  be  to  enforce  the  most  cunning  cruelty  of  torture  on 
the  hellish  villain,  or  that  all  the  party  should  vie  with  each  other  in  heaping  upon  him 
words  of  contumely  and  execration.  His  determination  to  keep  silence  when  ques- 
tioned, was  at  least  judicious  ;  for  with  his  utmost  ingenuity  he  could  hardly  find  any- 
thing to  say  for  himself.     Is  there  nothing,  then,  to  be  said  for  him  by  anybody  else  ? 

No  more  than  this.  He  is  the  sole  exemplar  of  studied  personal  revenge  in  the  plays. 
The  philosophical  mind  of  Hamlet  ponders  too  deeply,  and  sees  both  sides  of  the  ques- 
tion too  clearly,  to  be  able  to  carry  any  plan  of  vengeance  into  execution.  Romeo's 
revenge  on  Tybalt  for  the  death  of  Mercutio  is  a  sudden  gust  of  ungovernable  rage. 
The  vengeances  in  the  Historical  Plays  are  those  of  war  or  statecraft.  In  Shylock,  the 
passion  is  hardly  personal  against  his  intended  victim.  A  swaggering  Christian  is  at 
the  mercy  of  a  despised  and  insulted  Jew.  The  hatred  is  national  and  sectarian.  Had 
Bassanio  or  Gratiano,  or  any  other  of  their  creed,  been  in  his  power,  he  would  have 
been  equally  relentless.  He  is  only  retorting  the  wrongs  and  insults  of  his  tribe  in 
demanding  full  satisfaction,  and  imitating  the  hated  Christians  in  their  own  practice*. 
It  is,  on  the  whole,  a  passion  remarkably  seldom  exhibited  in  Shakespeare  in  any  form. 
Iago,  as  I  have  said,  is  its  only  example  as  directed  against  an  individual.  Iago  had 
been  affronted  in  the  tenderest  point.  He  felt  that  he  had  strong  claims  on  the  office 
of  lieutenant  to  Othello.  The  greatest  exertion  was  made  to  procure  it  for  him,  and 
yet  he  was  refused.  What  is  still  worse,  the  grounds  of  the  refusal  are  military; 
Othello  assigns  to  the  civilians  reasons  for  passing  over  Iago,  drawn  from  his  own 
trade,  of  which  they,  of  course,  could  not  pretend  to  be  adequate  judges.  And  worst 
of  all,  when  this  practised  military  man  is  for  military  reasons  set  aside,  who  is  ap- 
pointed ?  Some  man  of  greater  renown  and  skill  in  arms  ?  Th  at  might  be  borne ; 
but  it  is  no  such  thing.  We  will  find  in  many  professional  periodical  works  the  com- 
plaint reiterated  that  '  Preferment  goes  by  letter  and  affection,  Not  by  old  gradation,' 
and  many  a  curse,  loud  and  deep,  is  inflicted  on  that  account  upon  the  Horse  Guards 
and  Admiralty,  who,  fortunately,  have  no  individual  responsibilities  on  which  disap- 
pointed Ancients  can  fasten.  I  am  sure  no  British  soldier  or  sailor  would  carry  his 
anger  farther  than  a  passing  growl,  but  the  example  of  Bellingham  shows  that  even  in 
our  assassin-hating  nation  a  feeling  of  injustice  done  by  a  superior  will  drive  a  man 
to  satiate  his  vengeance  even  upon  those  who  have  not  done  him  wrong.  In  the  coun- 
try of  Iago,  whether  from  his  name  we  conclude  it  to  be  Spain,  or  from  his  service, 
Italy,  none  of  the  scruples,  or,  rather,  principles,  which  actuate  or  restrain  English  gen- 
tlemen, existed.  Least  of  all  were  they  to  be  found  in  the  motley  armies  of  adven- 
turers gathered  from  all  quarters,  and  Iago  could  not  be  expected  to  be  very  scrupulous 
as  to  his  method  of  compassing  his  revenge.  But  how  effect  it  ?  He  is  obliged  to 
admit  that  Othello's  standing  in  the  state  is  too  important  to  render  it  possible  that 
public  injury  could  be  done  him.  In  his  unhoused  condition  no  point  of  vantage  pre- 
sented itself  whence  harm  could  be  wrought.  Just  then,  when  Ligo's  heart  was  filled 
with  rage,  and  his  head  busily,  but  vainly,  occupied  in  devising  means  for  avenging 


ENGLISH   CRITICISMS— MAG  INN  417 

himself  on  the  man  by  whom  that  rage  was  excited, — just  then  Atl:,  the  Goddess  of  Mis- 
chief, supplies  him  with  all  that  deepest  malignity  could  desire,  by  the  hasty,  ill-mated, 
and  unlooked-for  marriage  of  Othello.  It  was  a  devil-send  that  the  most  sanguine 
•  spirit  could  not  have  anticipated,  and  Iago  clutched  it  accordingly  with  passionate 
eagerness.     He  was  tempted  and  he  fell. 

When  he  first  conceived  his  hatred  against  Othello,  he  had  no  notion  that  it  would 
be  pushed  to  such  dire  extremity.  Revenge  is  generally  accompanied  by  vanity,  indeed 
there  must  be  always  a  spice  of  vanity  in  a  revengeful  disposition.  He  who  so  keenly 
feels  and  deeply  resents  personal  injury  or  affront  must  set  no  small  value  upon  him- 
self. The  proud  are  seldom  revengeful,  the  great  never.  We  accordingly  find  that 
Iago  engages  in  his  hostilities  against  Othello  more  to  show  his  talents  than  for  any 
other  purpose.  He  proudly  lauds  his  own  powers  of  dissimulation,  which  are  to  be 
now  displayed  with  so  much  ability  (I,  i,  64-68).  He  fancies  himself  superior  to  all 
around  in  art  and  knowledge  of  the  world.  Roderigo  is  a  mere  gull  (I,  iii,  409). 
Cassio  he  considers  to  be  not  merely  unskilled  in  war,  but  a  fool  (II,  ii,  384).  Othello 
is  an  ass  in  his  estimation  (I,  iii,  426).  The  'inclining'  Desdemona  he  utterly  despises, 
as  one  who  fell  in  love  with  the  Moor  merely  for  his  bragging  and  telling  fantastical 
lies.  His  wife  he  calls  a  fool ;  and  with  these  opinions  of  his  great  superiority  of  wis- 
dom and  intellect,  he  commences  operations  to  enmesh  them  all,  as  if  they  were  so 
many  puppets.  It  would  be  a  strange  thing,  indeed,  he  reflects,  if  I  were  to  permit 
myself  to  be  insulted  and  my  rights  withheld  by  such  a  set  of  idiots,  whom  I  can  wind 
round  my  finger  as  I  please. 

He  seated  him  in  the  seat  of  the  scorner,  a  character  which  he  who  is  accounted  the 
wisest  of  men  continually  opposes  to  that  of  true  wisdom.  '  Seest  thou,'  says  Solomon, 
in  the  Proverbs  copied  out  by  the  men  of  Hezekiah,  King  of  Judah,  which,  whether 
they  be  inspired  or  not,  are  aphorisms  of  profound  and  concentrated  wisdom, — '  Seest 
thou  a  man  wise  in  his  own  conceit  ?  there  is  more  hope  of  a  fool  than  of  him.' 

And  the  career  of  Iago  ends  with  his  own  destruction,  amid  the  abomination  set 
down  in  another  chapter  of  Proverbs  as  the  lot  of  the  scorner.  The  jealousy  of  Othello 
is  not  more  gradually  and  skilfully  raised  and  developed  than  the  vengeance  of  Iago. 
At  first  angry  enough,  no  doubt;  but  he  has  no  defined  project.  He  follows  the  Moor 
to  take  advantage  of  circumstances  to  turn  them  to  his  own  use.  Nothing  of  peculiar 
malignity  is  thought  upon:  if  he  can  get  Cassio's  place,  he  will  be  satisfied  (I,  iii,  417). 
The  marriage  and  the  sight  of  Desdemona  point  out  to  him  a  ready  way  of  accomplish- 
ing this  object.  The  thought  occurs  suddenly,  and  he  is  somewhat  startled  at  first. 
He  asks  himself  with  eager  repetition, *  How  ?  how  ? '  and  pauses  to  think, — '  Let  me 
see — .'  It  is  soon  settled.  '  After  some  time,  to  abuse  Othello's  ear,  That  he  is  too 
familiar  with  his  wife.'  But  it  still  alarms  him :  '  I  have  it — It's  engendered :  Hell 
and  night  Must  bring  this  monstrous  birth  to  the  world's  light.' 

The  plot  is  not  matured  even  when  they  all  arrive  at  Cyprus.  '  'Tis  here,  but  yet 
confused — Knaver/s  plain  face  is  never  seen  till  used.'  When  once  fairly  entered 
upon,  however,  it  progresses  with  unchecked  rapidity.  He  is  himself  hurried  resist- 
lessly  forward  by  the  current  of  deceit  and  iniquity  in  which  he  has  embarked.  He  is 
as  much  a  tool  or  passive  instrument  as  those  whom  he  is  using  as  such. 

Some  critics  pronounce  his  character  unnatural,  as  not  having  sufficient  motive  for 
the  crimes  he  commits.  This  is  not  wise.  He  could  not  help  committing  them. 
Merely  to  put  money  in  his  purse,  he  gulled  Roderigo  into  a  belief  that  he  could  assist 
the  poor  dupe  in  his  suit  for  Desdemona.  There  is  no  remarkable  crime  in  this.  Nor 
can  we  blame  him  for  being  angry  at  being  somewhat  scornfully  passed  over ;  we  can, 
27 


4i8 


APPENDIX 


at  all  events,  enter  into  his  feelings  when  he  wishes  to  undermine  one  whom  he  con- 
siders to  be  unworthily  preferred  to  him,  and  to  obtain  a  place  which  he  thinks  should 
be  his  own,  if  patronage  had  been  justly  dispensed.  It  was  a  base  thing,  indeed,  io 
malign  a  lady,  and  possess  her  husband  with  jealousy ;  but  he  could  not  have  calcu- 
lated on  the  harvest  ot  death  and  crime  which  the  seed  of  suspicion  that  he  was  sow- 
ing was  destined  to  bring  up.  When  he  makes  Cassio  drunk,  he  only  anticipates  that 
he  will  put  him  in  such  action  as  may  offend  the  isle.  When  framing  the  device  that 
is  to  destroy  the  lieutenant,  no  thoughts  of  murder  arise  before  him. 

He  has  no  regard  for  the  feelings  of  Othello,  but  dreams  not  that  he  will  kill  Desde- 
mona,  whom  he  says  he  loves.  As  for  the  lady  herself,  his  low  estimation  of  woman 
would,  of  course,  lead  him  to  think  but  little  about  her  peace  and  quiet.  He  excuses 
himself,  besides,  by  referring  to  the  rumour  that  Othello  had  given  him  cause  to  be 
jealous.  It  is  plain  that  he  does  not  pretend  to  lay  any  great  stress  upon  this ;  nor  can 
we  suppose  that,  even  if  it  were  true,  it  would  deeply  affect  him ;  but  he  thinks  lightly 
of  women  in  general,  and  has  no  respect  whatever  for  his  wife.  Indeed,  Othello  does 
not  hold  Emilia  in  much  esteem ;  and  her  own  conversation  with  Desdemona,  as  she 
is  undressing  her  for  bed  (IV,  iii),  shows  that  her  virtue  was  not  impregnable.  The 
injury,  therefore,  Iago  was  about  to  do  Desdemona,  in  lessening  her  in  the  respect  of 
her  husband  by  accusing  her  of  such  an  ordinary  offence  as  a  deviation  from  chastity, 
and  one  which  he  did  not  visit  with  any  particular  severity  on  his  own  wife,  must  have 
seemed  trivial.  He  could  not  have  been  prepared  for  the  dire  tempest  of  fury  which 
his  first  hint  of  her  unfaithfulness  aroused  in  the  bosom  of  Othello.  Up  to  that  moment 
he  had  done  nothing  more  than  gull  a  blockhead,  and  endeavour,  by  unworthy  means, 
to  undermine  a  rival ;  trickery  and  slander,  though  not  very  honourable  qualities,  are 
not  of  such  rare  occurrence  in  the  world  as  to  call  for  the  expression  of  any  peculiar 
indignation  when  we  find  them  displayed  by  a  clever  and  plotting  Italian. 

They  have,  however,  led  him  to  the  plain  and  wide  path  of  damnation.  He  cannot 
retract  his  insinuations.  Even  if  he  desired,  Othello  will  not  let  him.  Iago,  therefore, 
had  no  choice  but  to  go  forward.  He  was  evidently  not  prepared  for  this  furious  out- 
burst ;  and  we  may  acquit  him  of  hypocrisy  when  he  prays  Othello  to  let  her  live.  But 
Cassio  must  die : — '  He  hath  a  daily  beauty  in  his  life  That  makes  me  ugly.'  A  more 
urgent  reason  immediately  suggests  itself : — *  And  beside,  the  Moor  May  unfold  me  to 
him:  then  stand  I  in  much  peril.  No — he  must  die?  The  death  of  Desdemona 
involves  that  of  Roderigo  : — '  Live  Roderigo  ?  He  calls  me  to  a  restitution  large  Of 
gold  and  jewels,  that  I  bobb'd  from  him  As  gifts  to  Desdemona.     //  must  net  be? 

Here  is  the  direct  agency  of  necessity.  He  must  remove  these  men.  Shortly  after, 
to  silence  the  clamorous  testimony  of  his  wife,  he  must  kill  her.  He  is  doomed  to 
blood. 


Edinburgh  Review  {Recent  Shakespearian  Literature,  July,  1840,  p.  491):  But 
of  all  Shakespeare's  tragic  dramas,  that  which  most  closely  resembles  the  classical 
models  in  the  simplicity  and  obviously  comprehended  perfection  of  its  plan,  is  also  that 
which,  in  its  catastrophe  and  its  general  impression  on  the  mind,  approaches  most 
nearly  to  the  spirit  of  heathen  classicism.  Othello  has  in  it,  not  indeed  in  reality  but 
in  appearance,  much  of  the  terrific  fatalism  which  overshadows  the  beautiful  in  the 
Attic  tragedy;  the  idea  of  power,  irresistible,  irresponsible,  unfathomable,  consigning 
humanity  to  utter  destruction.  Almost  all  votaries  of  Shakespeare  seem  to  have  felt, 
at  od?  stage  or  another,  in  their  study  of  this  magnificent  and  most  passionate  drama, 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— EDINBURGH  REVIEW       419 

nn  abased,  passive,  hopeless  weight,  which  no  other  of  his  works  leaves  behind.  The 
source  of  this  feeling  does  not  lie  in  the  sad  fate  of  Desdemona ;  for,  though  that  is 
one  of  the  elements,  it  is  not  the  principal ;  the  effect  of  her  touching  death-scene  is 
skilfully  softened,  and  kept  in  strict  subordination  to  the  leading  purpose ;  and  the  eyes 
that  weep  for  the  gentle  lady's  fate  look  up  through  their  tears  with  reviving  hope  to 
heaven.  But  the  terrible  force  lies  in  the  catastrophe  which  follows.  Othello  falls 
by  his  own  hand,  a  consummation  which  Shakespeare  has  nowhere  else  given  to  any 
of  his  tragic  characters,  except  in  Lear  and  in  one  or  two  of  the  Roman  plays ;  all  the 
three  having  their  scene  in  heathenism.  And  even  the  suicide  is  less  harrowing  than 
the  prostration  of  soul  which  has  preceded  it ;  a  despair  which  annihilates  every  thought 
and  feeling  except  the  consciousness  of  unendurable  misery.  Nor  does  any  after-scene 
alleviate  the  gloom ;  '  the  object  poisons  sight,'  but  it  is  hid  from  us  only  by  the  drop- 
ping of  the  curtain;  and  the  Moor  has  scarcely  expired  when  the  drama  closes.  When, 
again,  when  we  look  back  on  the  causes  which  have  produced  this  profoundly  tragic 
catastrophe,  we  seem,  at  the  first  glance,  to  discover  nothing  that  can  impart  a  moral 
justification  of  its  horror.  The  bower  of  wedded  happiness  seemed  guarded  by  love 
and  honour ;  and  its  inhabitants,  though  frail  because  mortal,  seemed  to  be  stained  by 
no  such  guilt  as  should  have  condemned  them  to  an  end  like  this.  Yet  into  such  a 
scene  of  peace  the  tempter  has  crept,  seducing  the  hand  of  man  himself  to  lay  deso- 
late his  home.  All  critics  of  name  have  felt,  more  or  less  strongly,  the  perplexity  of 
the  moral  enigma  which  lies  under  this  tragic  tale ;  but  the  character  of  the  Moor,  in 
which  the  explication  must  be  sought,  has  been  interpreted  more  contradictorily  than 
any  other  in  the  range  of  the  poet's  works,  Hamlet  itself  not  excepted. 

In  truth  this  drama,  if  we  were  able  to  penetrate  wholly  into  its  mysteries  of  concep- 
tion, would  not  be  what  it  is :  the  work  in  which  the  poet  has  united  more  admirably 
than  in  any  other  the  two  great  elements  of  dramatic  art.  Lear  is  at  once  more  orig- 
inal in  invention,  more  active  in  imagination,  more  softly  pathetic  in  feeling ;  Romeo 
and  Juliet  has  more  of  true  poetry ;  Macbeth,  a  closer  amalgamation  of  tragic  action 
with  thought  properly  ethical ;  and  Hamlet  traverses  a  world  of  thought  in  which  all 
other  existing  dramas  linger  at  the  frontier.  But  Othello,  above  every  other  drama, 
unites  vehemence  and  nature  in  tragic  emotion,  with  truth  and  vigour  in  the  delineation 
of  character.  This  play,  above  all  others,  harmonizes  those  two  elements,  and  makes 
each  the  counterpart,  the  supplement,  the  condition  of  the  existence,  of  the  other. 

And  as  even  those  feel  who  have  considered  as  a  defect  the  unsoftened  sternness  of 
the  closing  impression,  that  impression  is  not  one  which,  thus  unsoftened  and  unrelieved, 
lingers  long  in  the  mind.  As  the  closing  images  fade  into  distance  in  the  memory,  and 
the  earlier  groups  come  successively  into  the  foregrounds,  a  picture  is  gradually  formed 
in  which  we  recognize  with  reverential  wonder,  though  with  incapacity  to  account  for 
all  its  effects,  a  solemn  representation  of  human  life  in  its  most  awful  relations.  If 
philosophy,  if  observation  of  the  world,  if  reflection  on  the  destiny  of  man,  as  that  des- 
tiny appears  to  him  in  his  natural  blindness,  furnish  no  key-note  to  harmonize  this  song 
of  tragic  import,  religious  contemplation  opens  a  view  in  which  all  becomes  deeply  and 
truly  significant.  We  glance  backward  upon  the  mysteriously  revealed  leaves  of  the 
book  of  Time,  in  which  is  written  the  sin  that  has  made  the  earth  barren.  We  gaze 
forward  through  darkness,  yet  not  without  hope,  on  that  great  journey  of  the  soul  in 
which  mortal  life  is  but  a  step.  We  behold  the  principle  of  evil  walking  the  earth  for 
a  time  in  human  shape,  and  allowed  to  convert  into  agents  of  destruction  all  Ihe  finest 
of  those  qualities  whose  union  makes  up  the  compound  nature  of  man ;  counting  kin 
alike  with  angelic  fellow-<  reatures,  and  with  the  cold  clay  which  imprisons  his  imraor* 


420 


APPENDIX 


tal  spirit.  When  the  tempted  has  become  a  murderer,  the  work  of  the  temptation  is 
but  half  accomplished.  The  mind  of  the  victim  is  not  yet  wholly  poisoned,  his  heart 
not  yet  wholly  crushed.  He  must  behold — and  how  does  his  very  soul  recoil  from  him- 
self at  the  discovery ! — he  must  behold  the  unmasked  visage  of  the  fiend  whom  he  has 
served ;  he  must  learn  that  all  which  he  has  done  has  been  worse  than  done  in  vain. 
In  one  deep  silent  pause  the  events  of  a  lifetime  pass  across  his  mind,  and  he  awakens 
from  the  trance  a  broken-hearted  man.  Every  principle  which  once  made  his  character 
strong  and  lofty  is  annihilated  within  him ;  love,  imagination,  pride  of  honour  and  of 
intellect,  all  are  wrecked  in  one  tremendous  shock.  The  soldier  feels  his  courage 
broken  like  a  rush ;  the  man  whose  better  nature  passion  could  not  shake,  weeps  like 
a  child ;  the  last  effort  of  his  overthrown  will  is  but  sufficient  to  consummate  the  triumph 
of  evil  •  and  the  noble  Moor  dies  the  most  awful  of  deaths. 


Campbell  {Remarks  on  the  Life  and  Writings  of  Shakespeare)  :  Some  allege  that 
Iago  is  too  villainous  to  be  a  natural  character,  but  those  allegers  are  simpleton  judges 
of  human  nature :  Fletcher  of  Saltoun  has  said  that  there  is  many  a  brave  soldier  who 
never  wore  a  sword ;  in  like  manner,  there  is  many  an  Iago  in  the  world  who  never 
committed  murder.  Iago's  '  learned  spirit  '  and  exquisite  intellect,  happily  ending 
in  his  own  destruction,  were  as  requisite  for  the  moral  of  the  piece  as  for  the  sustaining 
of  Othello's  high  character ;  for  we  should  have  despised  the  Moor  if  he  had  been 
deceived  by  a  less  consummate  villain  than  '  honest  Iago.'  The  latter  is  a  true  charac- 
ter, and  the  philosophical  truth  of  this  tragedy  makes  it  terrible  to  peruse,  in  spite  of  its 
beautiful  poetry.  Why  has  Aristotle  said  that  tragedy  purifies  the  passions  ?  for  our  last 
wish  and  hope  in  reading  Othello  is  that  the  villain  Iago  may  be  well  tortured. 

This  drama,  by  itself,  would  have  immortalized  any  poet ;  what,  then,  are  we  to  think 
of  Shakespeare,  when  we  may  hesitate  to  pronounce  it  the  best  of  his  plays  !  Certainly, 
however,  it  has  no  superior  in  his  own  theatre,  and  no  rival  in  any  other.  The  Moor  is 
at  once  one  of  the  most  complex  and  astonishing,  and  yet  most  intelligible  pictures,  that 
fiction  ever  portrayed  of  human  character.  His  grandeur  of  soul  is  natural,  and  we 
admire  it ;  his  gentleness  is  equally  natural,  and  we  love  him  for  it ;  his  appearance  we 
cannot  but  conceive  to  be  majestic,  and  his  physiognomy  benevolent.  The  Indian 
Prince  Ramohun  Roy,  who  delighted  all  hearts  in  London  a  few  years  ago,  and  who 
died  to  our  sorrow,  was  the  only  living  being  I  ever  saw  who  came  up  to  my  concep- 
tion of  Othello's  appearance.  But  the  Moor  had  been  bred  a  barbarian,  and  though 
his  bland  nature  and  intercourse  with  the  more  civilized  world  had  long  warred  against 
and  conquered  the  half-natural  habits  of  barbarism,  yet  those  habits  at  last  broke  out, 
and  prevailed  in  the  moments  of  his  jealousy.  I  He  is  not  a  jealous  man  by  nature,  but, 
being  once  made  jealous,  he  reverts  to  savageness,  and  becomes  as  terrible  as  he  had 
before  been  tender.  This  contrast  in  his  conduct,  however,  is  not  an  Ovidian  meta 
morphosis,  but  a  transition  so  probably  managed  as  to  seem  unavoidable ;  yet,  the  natu- 
ralness of  the  change  prevents  neither  our  terror  nor  pity;  on  the  contrary,  the  sweet 
ness  of  his  character  before  its  fall  is  the  smoothness  of  the  stream  before  its  cataract ; 
and  his  bland  dispositions,  heretofore  displayed,  appear,  like  a  rich  autumnal  day,  con- 
trasted with  the  thunder-storm  of  its  evening. 

The  terrors  of  the  storm  are  also  made  striking  to  our  imagination  by  the  gentleness 
of  the  victim  on  which  they  fall, — Desdemona.  Had  one  symptom  of  an  angry  spirit 
appeared  in  that  lovely  martyr,  our  sympathy  with  her  would  have  been  endangered ; 
but  Shakespeare  knew  better. 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— EDINBURGH  REVIEW       421 

Edinhurgh  Review  {Shakespeare1 's  Critics,  &c.,  July,  1849,  P-  43) :  An  ordinary  man 
can  model  a  rude  figure  out  of  clay ;  but  to  bend  the  marble  to  the  slightest  caprices  of 
the  mind,  to  make  its  stubborn  material  plastic  to  the  most  airy  and  delicate  conceptions, 
is  the  work  only  of  a  great  artist.  (  To  take  an  example  from  the  dramatic  representation 
of  Character :  However  much  we  may  delight  in  delineations  of  character  for  their  own' 
sake,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  art  of  the  dramatist  is  not  shown  in  the  mere  por- 
trayal of  mental  states,  but  in  the  adaptation  of  those  mental  states  to  the  purposes  of  the 
drama.  A  character  may  be  drawn  with  skill,  and  yet  not  be  dramatic.  All  the  traits 
which  do  not  assist  the  fuller  comprehension  of  the  story  are  superfluous  and  inartistic. 
Suppose  jealousy  be  the  passion  of  the  play,  as  in  Othello.  For  simple  theatrical  pur- 
poses the  writer  may  confine  himself  almost  exclusively  to  this  passion,  and  only  exhibit 
in  Othello  the  jealous  husband.  It  is  obvious,  however,  that  our  sympathies  will  not  be 
greatly  stirred,  unless  in  this  jealous  husband  we  recognize  other  passions  and  other 
traits  of  human  nature ;  and  the  great  problem  is,  so  to  contrive  and  combine  these 
additional  features  as  not  only  to  make  the  character  individual  and  engaging,  but  to 
help  forward  the  action  and  interest  of  the  piece.  An  ordinary  Moor,  in  a  paroxysm 
of  jealousy,  would  be  a  far  less  touching  sight  than  that  of  the  high-minded,  chivalric, 
open,  affectionate  Othello.  The  art  of  the  poet  is,  therefore,  to  delineate  these  other 
qualities ;  and  the  art  of  the  dramatist  is  to  make  them  dramatic  agents  in  the  devel- 
opment of  his  story.  Accordingly,  all  that  we  see  and  hear  of  Othello  are  not  simply 
preparations  for  the  exhibition  of  his  jealousy  and  wrath,  but  are  circumstances  skilfully 
adapted  for  bringing  out  the  story.  We  thus  learn  both  how  the  gentle  Desdemona  was 
justified  in  her  love,  and  how  Iago  found  him  so  easy  a  victim ;  so  that  at  last  we  listen 
not  only  with  patience,  but  compassion,  to  the  noble  speech  in  which,  at  the  moment 
of  executing  his  stern  sentence  on  himself,  he  seeks  to  show  that  he  was  worthy  of  a 
better  fate.  Had  Shakespeare  introduced  traits  into  this  portrait  which,  though  con- 
sistent in  themselves,  yet  had  no  bearing  on  the  general  picture,  he  would  have  ruined 
its  dramatic  interest.  People  do  not  go  to  the  theatre  to  learn  Moorish  customs  or  to 
analyse  character,  but  to  see  a  drama ;  and  a  drama  is  not  a  mirror  of  life  in  all  its 
fulness  and  in  all  its  details.     It  is  an  episode  in  life,  and  must  be  so  circumscribed. 

Edinburgh  Review  {Thackeray 's  Works,  Jan.,  1854,  p.  223):  For  the  perfection 
of  the  inconsistent  character  (as,  indeed,  for  the  perfection  of  every  other)  we  must  go 
to  Shakespeare.  One  of  the  finest,  among  the  many  that  he  has  drawn,  is  Othello. 
He  is  a  union  not  merely  of  dissimilar  qualities,  but  of  dissimilar  natures.  He  is  a 
civilized  barbarian.  All  that  we  know  of  his  birth  is  that  it  is  '  fetched  from  men  of 
royal  siege.'  How  or  when  he  became  a  Christian  we  are  not  told ;  but  it  is  certain 
that  he  must  have  passed  his  childhood  in  a  harem,  acquiring  with  his  earliest  impres- 
sions the  jealousy  and  suspicion  respecting  women,  and  the  domestic  despotism  of  a 
Mahometan  court.  His  youth  and  manhood  are  military ;  and  we  find  him,  at  the 
opening  of  the  play,  somewhat  declined  into  the  vale  of  years,  a  grave  and  dignified 
soldier.  All  the  barbarian  is  obliterated  during  the  first  two  Acts.  Nothing  can  be 
more  calm  or  more  polished.  He  does  not  resent  the  contumely  or  even  the  violence 
of  Brabantio ;  he  pleads  his  cause  with  consummate  moderation  and  skill.  The  sus- 
picion, aroused  on  the  very  morning  after  the  arrival  in  Cyprus,  by  Iago's  dark  hints, 
acts  on  Othello  like  a  specific  poison.  It  sets  on  fire  all  the  old  Mahometan  lendency 
to  jealousy  which  a  European  life  seemed  to  have  eradicated.  His  barbarian  nature 
reappears.  At  first  his  habits  of  civilization  combat  it.  He  proposes  to  act  as  becomes 
a  great  Venetian  noble;  to  inquire  into  his  wife's  conduct,  and,  if  Iago's  suspicions 
prove  unfounded,  to  forget  them ;  if  they  are  confirmed,  to  separate  himself  from  Des- 


422 


APPENDIX 


demona  :  '  If  I  do  prove  her  haggard,  I'll  whistle  her  off,'  &c.  [Tago's  lying  represen- 
tations of  Cassio's  guilty  revelations  when  asleep]  Othello  swallows  with  savage  cre- 
dulity. He  no  longer  thinks  of  inquiry  or  separation.  He  is  again  the  Arab  or  the 
Bedouin  of  his  youth,  and  no  conduct,  except  such  as  might  fit  a  Bedouin  or  an  Arab, 
occurs  to  him.     He  cries,  '  Oh  blood,  Iago,  blood  !  Within  these  three  days  let  me  heai 

thee  say,  That  Cassio's  not  alive Now  art  thou  my  lieutenant.'     The  last  words 

are  remarkable.  Othello  has  so  thoroughly  forgotten  the  habits  of  civilised  life,  that 
he  does  not  see  that,  after  having  murdered  his  wife,  the  daughter  of  a  Venetian  sena- 
tor, and  assassinated  Cassio,  a  man  of  high  rank  in  the  Republic,  he  cannot  remain 
governor  of  Cyprus.  From  thence  until  the  very  last  Scene  the  savage  reigns  triumph- 
ant. He  does  not  preserve  even  the  outward  proprieties  of  his  station,  but  insults  and 
strikes  his  wife  in  the  presence  of  the  envoy  from  the  Senate. 

But  the  instant  that  he  has  satiated  his  revenge,  the  spirit  from  the  desert  seems  to  be 
appeased  by  the  sacrifice  and  quits  him.  He  now  *  knows  that  his  act  shows  horrible 
and  grim.' 

[In  his  remarks  on  '  Now  art  thou  my  Lieutenant,'  the  Reviewer  has  been  anticipated 
by  Professor  Wilson  in  his  Christopher  under  Canvas,  for  April,  1850,  'What  did 
'  Othello  intend  to  do,'  asks  North,  '  after  all  was  accomplished  ?     He  was  stone-blind 

*  to  the  future.     What  does  he  expect?  that  when  he  has  killed  his  wife,  everything  is 

•  to  go  on  as  smoothly  as  before  ?  That  no  notice  will  be  taken  of  it  ?  or  that  he  will 
'  have  to  make  another  speech  to  the  Senate  ?     He  has  told  them  how  he  married 

*  her, — the  counterpart  will  be  to  relate  '  a  plain,  unvarnished  tale  of  my  whole  course 

«  of  smothering  and  stabbing  her  with  bolster  and  dagger.     '  Now  thou  art  my  lieuten- 

•  ant '  shows — if  not  stone-blindness, — a  singular  confidence  in  the  future.' — Ed.] 


J.  A.  Heraud  [Shakspere,  His  Inner  Life,  London,  1865,  p.  268)  :  The  credulous 
Moor  of  Cinthio  is  very  unlike  the  loving  Othello  of  the  play,  and  his  tempter  is  moved 
to  his  infamous  course  by  his  illicit  love  for  Desdemona.  This  weak  passion  is,  in  the 
play,  transferred  to  Roderigo, — a  creation  of  Shakspere's  own,  partly  as  a  comic  relief 
to  the  tragic  action  and  partly  as  a  link  of  sympathy  with  the  audience.  Iago  is  the 
really  jealous  person,  and,  suspecting  Othello  with  his  own  wife,  hates  him  accordingly 

and  determines  on  revenge A  perfect  hero  cannot  be  made   interesting,  and 

Shakespeare  gives  to  all  his  heroes,  whatever  may  be  their  abstract  qualities,  some 
human  infirmity  by  which  they  secure  our  sympathy.  Perfect  love,  such  as  would 
belong  to  a  perfect  soul,  would  '  cast  out  all  fear,'  and  that  of  Othello  is  so  perfect  in 
its  degree  that  it  is  '  not  easily  jealous,'  nor  is  it  naturally  suspicious.  But  it  c  n  be 
'wrought,'  and  therefore  there  is  in  his  otherwise  perfect  character  a  peccant  part. 
From  his  scene  with  Emilia,  when  he  throws  her  the  purse  as  the  portress  of  Hell's 
gate,  he  shows  that  he  has  •  poured  his  treasures  into  foreign  laps  ' ;  and  from  the  reve- 
lation which  Emilia  makes  of  her  own  character  to  her  mistress,  it  is  not  impossible 
that  her  husband's  ugly  suspicions  were  not  ill-founded.  Othello  had  been  no  celibate, 
nor  pretended  to  be  such,  and  previous  to  his  acquaintance  with  Desdemona  had  culti- 
vated some  experiences  by  which  his  virtue  had  not  been  strengthened.  There  was 
this  flaw  in  his  conduct,  and  by  this  inlet  both  suspicion  and  jealousy  might  enter; 
neither  could  have  found  a  thoroughfare  in  a  perfectly  innocent  character.  Even  the 
'perfect  soul,'  living  the  life  of  camps,  had  found  the  preservation  of  its  innocence 
impossible.  In  proportion  that  it  had  sinned  it  had  become  weak,  and  thus  Othello 
leas  laid  open  to  the  temptation  of  Iago,  and  liable  to  a  further  fall.     All  mankind  a?e, 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS-   J.  A.  HERAUD  423 

ti  some  respect  or  other,  similarly  exposed  from  similar  causes  to  evil  communication ; 
and  our  conscience,  therefore,  leads  us  to  pity  and  forgive  the  noble  Moor  for  his  ob- 
vious fault  and  the  fatal  consequences.  These  reasons  are  philosophical  and  true ;  and 
therefore  we  must  not  accept  Othello  as  an  absolute  and  direct  affirmation  of  a  perfect 
loving  soul,  but  as  a  negative  instance  approximating  perfection  as  near  as  possible,  yet 
fallible  because  it  could  not  be  identified  with  it.     This  view, — all  but  the  highest, — 

simply  because  it  is  not  the  highest,  makes  the  character  and  the  tragedy  possible 

The  theme  of  the  play  is  Love.  In  Romeo  and  Juliet,  Love  before  marriage  was  the 
argument,  now  it  is  Love  after.  The  common  Idea  is  differently  conceived  by  the  per- 
sons of  the  drama Othello  and  Iago  divide  the  moral  and  intellectual  view,  and 

the  real  debate  is  between  the  two  principals.  The  latter  is  naturally  a  jealous  hus 
band,  and  the  revenge  which  he  seeks  is  to  infect  his  enemy  with  the  same  plague. 
Unfortunately  for  his  victim,  there  is  a  joint  in  his  armour  loose,  as  in  that  of  every 
man,  and  there  enters  the  poisoned  point  of  his  foeman's  spear.  The  tragedy,  how- 
ever, might  not  have  been  possible  at  all  but  for  a  defect  in  Desdemona's  character. 
Her  passion  was  romantic,  and  there  exists  fiction  in  whatever  is  romantic.  She  suffers 
from  illusion  and  loves  to  be  deluded.  If  she  is  self-deceived,  she  likewise  deceives 
others.  It  is  on  this  ground  that  Brabantio  warns  Othello :  •  She  has  deceived  her 
father,  and  may  thee.'  In  word,  deed,  thought,  she  must  have  been  guilty  of  false- 
hood ;  and,  virtuous  as  she  otherwise  is,  we  find  in  the  development  of  the  drama  that 
she  has  one  foible.  It  is  the  slightest  of  foibles,  but  one  frequently  fatal, — a  habit  of 
fibbing.  From  a  timidity  of  disposition  she  frequently  evades  the  truth,  when  attention 
to  its  strict  letter  would  raise  a  difficulty.  Practically,  too,  she  dallies  with  falsehood  : 
'  I  am  not  merry,  but  I  do  beguile  The  thing  I  am  by  seeming  otherwise.'  To  seem 
otherwise  than  she  is,  in  order  to  obtain  her  end,  is  at  all  times  lawful  in  her  estimation; 
not  meaning  ill,  but  to  make  matters  easy.  Reticent  as  Hero, — perhaps  more  so,  because 
her  conduct  suppressed  the  truth  when  it  did  not  falsify  it, — there  was  always  an  amount 
of  '  seeming '  in  it  which  misled  observers :  '  A  maiden  never  bold ;  Of  spirit  so  still 
and  quiet,  that  her  motion  Blushed  at  herself.'  Yet,  all  the  time,  she  was  carrying  on 
a  love-intrigue  with  a  man  of  another  race  and  colour,  in  which  she  was  '  half  the 
wooer.'  When  this  fact  is  pointed  out  to  Othello,  it  naturally  raises  suspicion.  One 
so  accustomed  to  deport  herself  gives  no  certain  index  in  her  behaviour  by  which  her 
mental  or  her  moral  state  may  be  judged  of.  All  this  proceeds  not  from  criminality  of 
disposition,  but  indolence  or  susceptibility  of  temper.  Iago  practises  on  the  quality  • 
*  For  'tis  most  easy  The  inclining  Desdemona  to  subdue  In  any  honest  suit.'  And, 
even  so,  she  readily  undertakes  the  cause  of  Cassio,  and  assures  him  of  success.  With 
her  .the  end  consecrates  the  means,  and  she  regards  nothing  but  the  success  of  her 
enterprise.  How  she  pleads  with  Othello  for  Cassio  we  know.  With  characteristic 
lenity  she  makes  light  of  his  fault,  falsely  arguing,  not  unconsciously  :  '  Save  that  they 
say,  the  wars  must  make  examples,'  &c.  And  immediately  gives  us  an  insight  into 
her  little  foible,  and  how  habitually  she  was  induced  to  indulge  in  it :  'What!  Michael 
Cassio,  That  came  a- wooing  with  you,  and  many  a  time  When  I  have  spoke  of  you  dis- 
praisingly  Hath,'  &c.  So  that  Desdemona  had  not  only  disguised  her  sentiments  from 
her  father,  but  had  idly  sought  to  do  the  same  from  Cassio,  who  was  in  the  secret. 
Iago  might  have,  indeed,  inferred  from  this  conduct  that  the  '  super-supple  Venetian,' 
his  mistress,  was  willing  to  regard  the  lieutenant  with  special  favour.  As  she  warms 
in  her  advocacy  with  Othello,  she  puts  a  further  false  colouring  on  the  transaction,  pre- 
tending to  disparage  the  importance  to  her  of  the  suit  she  was  promoting :  '  Nay,  when 
I  hav*  a  suit  Wherein  I  mean  to  touch  your  love  indeed,  It  shall  be  full  of  poise  and 


424  APPENDIX 

difficult  weight,  And  fearful  to  be  granted.'  No  lawyer  for  a  fee  pleaded  more  intrepidly 
in  behalf  of  a  criminal  client,  whose  acquittal  he  desired  in  the  face  of  the  clearest  evi- 
dence. And  in  the  affair  of  the  handkerchief  we  find  in  her  the  same  indifference  to 
truth.  She  had  dropped  it  in  a  moment  of  excitement,  and  probably  forgot  the  fact ; 
but  she  is  at  no  pains  to  recollect,  and  finds  it  easier  to  feign  an  excuse  for  the  nonce, 
than  to  cast  about  for  the  true  reason.  She  had  certainly  questioned  Emilia  about  it, 
and  recognized  its  importance,  if  Othello  were  a  jealous  person ;  but  as  he  is  not,  she 
will  not  think  too  much  about  it.  When  Othello  asks  for  it,  she  is  frightened  into  a 
direct  lie.  If  at  this  critical  moment  Desdemona  had  confessed  the  truth,  the  tragedy 
would'have  been  prevented  and  Iago's  plot  nipped  in  the  bud.  Even  on  her  death- 
bed the  case  is  the  same.  She  tells  Emilia  that  she  had  killed  herself.  ....  The  truth 
is,  that  the  lady's  faults  only  render  her  more  womanly.  They  are  mainly  those  of  her 
sex,  ay,  and  of  the  most  amiable  of  her  sex.  Desdemona  is  not  a  strong-minded,  ration- 
alistic woman ;  but  a  tender,  loving,  and  devoted  one,  brought  up  in  the  lap  of  luxury 
and  swayed  by  her  feelings  rather  than  by  her  reason.  Nevertheless,  we  should  not 
conceal  from  ourselves  that  there  is  even  in  this  a  defect,  and  that  therefrom  a  number 
of  injurious  effects  ensue  which  may  end  fatally. 

[*  I  should  have  mentioned  the  very  impolite  behaviour  of  Mr  Burchell,  who,  during 
this  discourse,  sate  with  his  face  turned  to  the  fire,  and  at  the  conclusion  of  ever}'  sen- 
tence would  cry  out  "  Fudge !"  ' — Vicar  of  Wakefield. — Ed.] 


Edward  Dowden  {Shakspere — His  Mind  and  Art,  London,  1875,  p.  226)  :  There 
are  certain  problems  which  Shakspere  at  once  pronounces  insoluble.  He  does  not,  like 
Milton,  propose  to  give  any  account  of  the  origin  of  evil.  He  does  not,  like  Dante,  pur- 
sue the  soul  of  man  through  circles  of  unending  torture,  or  spheres  made  radiant  with 
the  eternal  presence  of  God.  Satan,  in  Shakspere's  poems,  does  not  come  voyaging  on 
gigantic  vans  across  Chaos  to  find  the  earth.  No  great  deliverer  of  mankind  descends 
from  the  heavens.  Here,  upon  the  earth,  evil  is, — such  was  Shakspere's  declaration 
in  the  most  emphatic  accent.  Iago  actually  exists.  There  is  also  on  the  earth  a  sacred 
passion  of  deliverance,  a  pure  redeeming  ardour.  Cordelia  exists.  This,  Shakspere 
can  tell  for  certain.  But  how  Iago  can  be,  and  why  Cordelia  lies  strangled  across  the 
breast  of  Lear — are  these  questions  which  you  go  on  to  ask  ?  Something  has  been 
already  said  of  the  severity  of  Shakspere.  It  is  a  portion  of  his  severity  to  decline 
all  answers  to  questions  such  as  these.  Is  ignorance  painful  ?  Well,  then,  it  is  pain- 
ful. Little  solutions  of  your  large  difficulties  can  readily  be  obtained  from  priest  or 
philosophe.  Shakspere  prefers  to  let  you  remain  in  the  solemn  presence  of  a  mys- 
tery. He  does  not  invite  you  into  his  little  church  or  his  little  library  brilliantly  illu- 
minated by  philosophical  or  theological  rushlights.  You  remain  in  the  darkness.  But 
you  remain  in  the  vital  air.     And  the  great  night  is  overhead 

If  the  same  unknowable  force  which  manifests  itself  through  man,  manifests  itself  like- 
wise through  the  animal  world,  we  might  suppose  that  there  were  some  special  affinities 
between  the  soul  of  Othello  and  the  lion  of  his  ancestral  desert.  Assuredly  the  same 
malignant  power  that  lurks  in  the  eye  and  that  fills  with  venom  the  fang  of  the  serpent, 
would  seem  to  have  brought  into  existence  Iago.  '  It  is  the  strength  of  the  base  ele- 
ment that  is  so  dreadful  in  the  serpent ;  it  is  the  very  omnipotence  of  the  earth 

It  scarcely  breathes  with  its  one  lung  (the  other  shrivelled  and  abortive) ;  it  is  passive 
K)  the  sun  and  shade,  and  is  cold  or  hot  like  a  stone ;  yet  "  it  can  outclimb  the  monkey, 
outswim  the  fish,  outleap  the  zebra,  outwrestle  the  athlete,  and  crush  the  tiger."    It  is  a 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— D.  J.  SNIDER  425 

divine  hieroglyph  of  the  demoniac  power  of  the  earth, — of  the  entire  earthly  nature.'  * 
Such  is  the  serpent  Iago. 

(P.  242.)  Of  the  tragic  story,  wha.  is  the  final  issue  ?  The  central  point  of  its  spirit- 
ual import  lies  in  the  contrast  betw  een  the  two  men,  Iago  and  his  victim.  Iago,  with 
keen  intellectual  faculties  and  manifold  culture  in  Italian  vice,  lives  and  thrives  after 
his  fashion  in  a  world  from  which  all  virtue  and  beauty  are  absent.  Othello,  with  his 
barbaric  innocence  and  regal  magnificence  of  soul,  must  cease  to  live  the  moment  he 
ceases  to  retain  faith  in  the  purity  and  goodness  which  were  to  him  the  highest  and 
most  real  things  upon  earth.  Or,  if  he  live,  life  must  become  to  him  a  cruel  agony. 
Shakspere  compels  us  to  acknowledge  that  self-slaughter  is  a  rapturous  energy, — that 
such  prolonged  agony  is  joy  in  comparison  with  the  earthy  life-in-death  of  such  a  sou' 
as  that  of  Iago.  The  noble  nature  is  taken  in  the  toils  because  it  is  noble.  Iago  sus- 
pects his  wife  of  every  baseness,  but  the  suspicion  has  no  other  effect  than  to  intensify 
his  malignity.  Iago  could  not  be  captured  and  constrained  to  heroic  suffering  and  rage. 
The  shame  of  every  being  who  bears  the  name  of  woman  is  credible  to  Iago,  and  yet 
he  can  grate  from  his  throat  the  jarring  music :  '  And  let  me  the  canakin  clink,  clink ! 
And  let  me  the  canakin  clink  ! '  There  is  therefore,  Shakspere  would  have  us  under- 
stand, something  more  inimical  to  humanity  than  suffering, — namely,  an  incapacity  for 
noble  pain.  To  die  as  Othello  dies  is  indeed  grievous.  But  to  live  as  Iago  lives,  de- 
vouring the  dust  and  stinging — this  is  more  appalling. 

Such  is  the  spiritual  motive  that  controls  the  tragedy.  And  the  validity  of  this  truth 
is  demonstrable  to  every  sound  conscience.  No  supernatural  authority  needs  to  be  sum- 
moned to  bear  witness  to  this  reality  of  human  life.  No  pallid  flame  of  hell,  no  splen- 
dour of  dawning  heaven,  needs  show  itself  beyond  the  verge  of  earth  to  illumine  this 
truth.  It  is  a  portion  of  the  ascertained  fact  of  human  nature,  and  of  this  our  mortal 
existence.  We  look  upon  '  the  tragic  loading  of  the  bed,'  and  we  see  Iago  in  presence 
of  the  ruin  he  has  wrought.  We  are  not  compelled  to  seek  for  any  resolution  of  these 
apparent  discords  in  any  alleged  life  to  come.  That  may  also  be ;  we  shall  accept  it, 
if  it  be.  But  looking  sternly  and  strictly  at  what  is  now  actual  and  present  to  our 
sight,  we  yet  rise  above  despair.  Desdemona's  adhesion  to  her  husband  and  to  love 
survived  the  ultimate  trial.  Othello  dies  '  upon  a  kiss.'  He  perceives  his  own  calam- 
itous error,  and  he  recognizes  Desdemona  pure  and  loyal  as  she  was.  Goodness  is  jus- 
tified of  her  child.  It  is  evil  which  suffers  defeat.  It  is  Iago  whose  whole  existence 
has  been  most  blind,  purposeless,  and  miserable — a  struggle  against  the  virtuous  powers 
of  the  world,  by  which  at  last  he  stands  convicted  and  condemned. 


D.  J.  Snider  [System  of  Shakespeare's  Dramas,  St.  Louis,  1877,  ii,  97)  :  In  Othello 
there  are  three  essential  divisions  or  movements  of  the  entire  action.  The  First  is  the 
external  conflict  in  the  Family.  The  right  of  the  daughter  to  choose  a  Moor  for  her 
husband  is  asserted  against  the  will  of  the  parent.  Both  sides  appeal  to  the  State, 
which  decides  in  favour  of  the  marriage,  and  Othello  carries  off  his  bride  in  triumph. 
The  guilt  of  Desdemona  is  here  indicated.  The  Second  movement  shows  the  internal 
conflict  in  the  Family  between  husband  and  wife.  The  married  pair,  though  successful 
in  their  external  struggle  with  the  father,  are  now  rent  asunder ;  for  between  such  cha- 
racters no  secure,  permanent  ethical  union  is  possible.  Jealousy  must  arise.  Iago  seized 
only  what  was  already  prepared,  and  used  it  for  his  own  purposes.    The  guilt  of  Othello 

*  Ouoted  from  Richard  Owen  by  Rusk  in,  The  Queen  of  the  Air,  p.  83. 


426  APPENDIX 

and  liis  Ancient  is  here  shown.  The  Third  movement  is  the  retribution,  which  brings 
home  to  every  person  the  consequences  of  his  deed. 

[It  is  in  the  Second  movement  that  Snider  is  obliged  to  put  forth  his  strength,  and 
in  order  to  account  for  the  existence  of  jealousy  in  a  '  character  fundamentally  free 
from  jealousy,'  or  to  explain  how  •  an  unsuspicious  person  becomes  filled  with  the  most 
deadly  suspicion,'  he  follows  the  line  of  argument  set  forth  by  Heraud,  but  urges  it  with 
an  emphasis  which  no  one  else  has  ventured,  or  been  sufficiently  skilful,  to  give.  As  I 
differ  from  him,  toto  cash,  I  shall  do  my  best,  by  copious  extracts,  omitting  no  single 
essential  sentence,  to  set  forth  his  position  with  entire  fairness.  I  think  no  one  can 
read  even  these  extracts,  let  alone  the  two  volumes  from  which  they  are  taken,  without 
respect  for  the  earnestness  and  admiration  for  the  ingenuity  with  which  this  Ethical 
view  of  Shakespeare's  dramas  is  elaborated, — the  subject  is  evidently  in  an  adept's 
hand.  At  the  close  of  these  extracts  from  Snider's  volume,  I  shall  not  repeat  the  quota- 
tion from  Goldsmith  which  I  appended  to  Heraud,  however  fitly  it  may  express  my  feel- 
ings ;  after  Snider's  more  vigorous  attack  I  am  afraid  it  might  be  construed  as  a  tribute 
to  his  force  and  as  the  resort  of  feebleness  where  sturdy  arguments  are  lacking. — Ed.] 

(P.  in.)  The  character  of  the  Moor  is  a  contradiction, — and,  hence,  an  impossibil- 
ity,— without  some  adequate  ground  for  the  great  change  which  it  undergoes.  If  he 
were  naturally  jealous,  there  would  be  needed  no  motive  for  his  conduct;  but  the  diffi- 
cult point  lies  in  the  fact  that  he  is  naturally  without  jealousy.  His  characterization, 
as  well  as  that  of  Iago,  has  been  pronounced  unnatural ;  and  so  it  is,  unless  some  ade- 
quate impelling  principle  can  be  given  to  account  for  the  total  inversion  of  his  nature. 
(P.  112.)  Iago's  disbelief  in  the  honour  of  woman  must  be  regarded  as  the  result  of 
his  own  experience.  Married  life  has  for  him  brought  forth  only  its  bitterest  fruits. 
....  That  his  opinion  of  Emilia  is  true  is  very  plainly  indicated  in  the  last  Scene  of 
Act  IV.  Othello  is  also  well  acquainted  with  her  character.  He  knows  her  falsehood 
and  inndelity ;  he  will  not  believe  any  of  her  statements,  and  loads  her  with  the  most 
opprobrious  epithets. 

We  are  now  brought  face  to  face  with  a  question  which  it  is  by  no  means  pleasant  to 
consider,  but  which  has  to  be  discussed  if  we  wish  to  comprehend  the  Poet's  work. 
Must  we  regard  the  Moor  as  guilty  of  what  Iago  suspects  him  ?  There  is  nothing  in 
the  play  which  shows  that  Othello  was  innocent  of  the  charge,  but  there  is  much  which 
shows  that  he  was  not  innocent.  The  very  fact  that  this  suspicion  is  cast  upon  him 
almost  at  the  beginning,  and  is  nowhere  removed,  seems  sufficient  to  raise  the  presump- 
tion of  guilt.  It  hangs  over  him  like  a  cloud  which  will  not  pass  away.  Then  Emilia's 
character,  instead  of  precluding,  strengthens  the  supposition  of  criminal  intercourse,  and 
the  notion  is  still  further  upheld  by  the  knowledge  of  her  habits  which  Othello  betrays. 
But  the  veil  is  never  wholly  removed.  Why  does  not  the  Poet  openly  state  the  offence, 
so  as  to  leave  no  doubt  ?  It  is  evident  that  he  does  not  wish  to  soil  the  union  with 
Desdemona  by  dwelling  on  Othello's  incontinence,  nor  does  he  desire  to  throw  into 
the  background  the  difference  of  race  as  the  leading  motive  of  the  play.  Still,  he 
would  not  have  us  forget  the  dark  surmise ;  there  it  remains  suspended  over  the  Moor 
to  the  last.  Iago,  to  be  sure,  is  a  liar ;  but  his  lies  are  meant  for  others,  and  not  for 
himself.  Besides,  Iago  is  not  more  certain  at  first  than  we,  his  readers  and  hearers, 
are ;  but  the  complete  success  of  his  plan,  which  is  based  on  the  Moor's  guilt,  confirms, 
both  for  him  and  for  us,  the  truth  of  the  suspicion. 

So  much  is  indicated  in  the  course  of  the  play ;  but,  it  the  deeper  motives  of  th» 
various  characters  are  carefully  examined,  this  conclusion  would  seem  to  become  irre- 
sistible.    Iago  is  manifestly  assailed  with  the  same  burning  jealousy  which  afterward? 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— D.    J.  SNIDER  427 

wrought  such  terrific  effects  in  Othello.  Now,  what  will  be  the  manner  of  his  revenge? 
The  most  logical  and  adequate  would  be,  '  wife  for  wife ;'  hence  his  first  thought  is  to 
debauch  Desdemona.  But  nothing  more  is  heard  of  this  plan,  for  it  could  not  possi- 
bly be  successful.  Then  comes  his  most  shrewd  and  peculiar  method  of  avenging  his 
wrong.  If  he  cannot  dishonour  Othello  in  reality,  he  can  do  it  in  appearance,  with 
almost  the  same  results.  His  purpose  is  to  make  Othello  believe  that  Desdemona  is 
untrue.  This  will  be  a  revenge  sufficient  for  his  end.  It  will  destroy  Othello's  happi- 
ness and  peace  of  mind  just  as  well  as  the  truth ;  it  will  bring  upon  Othello  that  which 
he  has  brought  upon  Iago.  Another  phase  of  the  question  now  comes  up  for  solution : 
How  far  was  it  possible  to  excite  such  a  passion  in  a  character  like  that  of  Othello  ? 
The  free,  open,  unsuspecting  nature  of  the  Moor  is  noted  by  Iago  himself;  his  noble 
and  heroic  disposition  would  appear  least  likely  to  be  subject  to  jealousy.  Yet  this  is 
the  very  form  of  revenge  chosen  by  Iago  with  surpassing  skill.  This  is,  therefore,  just 
the  weak  side  of  Othello's  character.  Why  ?  The  solution  of  the  problem  lies  in  the 
fact  above  mentioned, — that  Iago's  suspicion  concerning  Emilia  is  true.  Othello  has 
been  guilty  of  adultery ;  he  is,  therefore,  aware  that  the  infidelity  of  wives  is  a  fact. 
Here  lies  the  germ  of  his  belief  in  the  faithlessness  of  Desdemona.  His  own  act  thus 
comes  home  to  him  and  renders  him  accursed ;  his  faith  in  justice  can  only  make  him 
more  ready  to  think  that  he  will  be  punished  through  his  wife,  since  that  is  the  mode 
which  his  own  guilt  suggests.  Such  is  the  initial  point  of  the  fearful  jealousy  of  the 
Moor,  which  Iago  knows  exactly  how  to  reach,  since  it  is  a  matter  lying  wholly  within 
his  own  experience ;  and  he  knows  also  that  Othello,  on  account  of  previous  criminality, 
must  be  as  capable  of  this  passion  as  himself.  Both  the  revenge  of  Iago  and  the  jeal- 
ousy of  Othello,  therefore,  can  be  adequately  motived  only  by  the  guilty  conduct  of  the 
Moor  towards  the  Ancient's  wife. 

Moreover,  there  is  no  other  ground  for  the  relation  of  marriage  between  Iago  and 
Emilia,  except  as  a  basis  for  these  two  main  motives  of  the  drama.  Thus,  too,  we  see 
one  of  the  fundamental  rules  of  Shakespeare  vindicated, — that  man  cannot  escape  his 
own  deed ;  hence  Othello  is  the  author  of  his  own  fate,  since  by  his  guilt  he  has  called 
up  the  avenger  who  will  destroy  him  and  his  family ;  while,  without  the  view  above 
developed,  he  must  appear  as  an  innocent  sufferer  deceived  by  a  malicious  villain.  It 
will,  therefore,  be  seen  that  two  things  of  the  greatest  importance  have  their  sole  expla- 
nation in  this  view ;  namely,  the  manner  of  Iago's  revenge,  and  his  knowledge  of  the 
assailable  point  in  Othello's  character.  Here,  also,  we  find  the  solution  of  the  Moor's 
contradictory  nature.  He  is,  in  general,  unsuspecting ;  but,  on  account  of  his  guilt,  he 
is  capable  of  one  suspicion ;  namely,  that  wives  may  be  faithless.  The  Poet  has  thus 
added  to  the  distinction  of  race, — for  which  the  Moor  could  not  be  blamed, — a  second 
motive,  the  criminal  deed,  of  which  he  must  take  the  responsibility.  The  military  life 
of  Othello  will  furnish  the  third  principle, — that  of  honour,  which  will  impel  him  to 
destroy  the  wife  whom  he  thinks  to  have  violated  it  in  its  deepest  and  most  tender 
part. 

[Iago's  plans  being  thus  unfolded,  Snider  shows  that  his  instruments  are :  First, 
Roderigo ;  Second,  Cassio,  •  an  open  and  notorious  libertine,'  whom  Iago  also  suspects 
of  undue  familiarity  with  Emilia, — a  suspicion  which  is  not  confirmed  in  the  play.  But 
to  remove  all  doubt  of  Cassio's  moral  weaknesses,  Bianca  is  introduced  by  the  Poet. 
*  There  is  no  other  ground  why  such  an  offensive  relation  should  be  dragged  into  the 
drama.'     Emilia  is  the  Third  instrument.] 

(P.  118.)  Such  are  the  instruments;  but  Iago  himself  has  to  manage  the  far  more 
difficult  case  of  Othello  in  his  relation  to  Desdemona.     This  brings  us  now  to  the  main 


428 


APPENDIX 


development  of  the  drama,  and,  perhaps,  the  most  complete  psychological  portraiture 
in  Shakespeare.  Iago  begins  the  manipulation  of  Othello's  mind  through  a  series 
of  influences  adapted  exactly  to  the  shifting  phases  of  the  Moor's  disposition,  and 
increasing  in  intensity  to  the  end.  Given  a  noble,  unsuspecting  character,  the  design 
is  to  portray  those  causes  which  not  only  turn  it  into  the  opposite  of  itself,  but  make  it 
destroy  its  most  beloved  object.  The  primal  basis  to  work  upon  lies  in  Othello's  own 
consciousness  of  guilt.  The  first  point  is  to  faintly  touch  his  suspicion,  which  is  accom- 
plished most  easily,  for  he  readily  believes  what  he  himself  has  done  to  others  may 
happen  in  his  own  case.  We  see  how  the  slightest  hint  from  Iago  casts  a  shadow 
over  his  whole  being.  ' Iago.  Ha!  I  like  not  that.  Othello.  What  dost  thou  say? 
Iago.  Nothing,  my  lord,  or  if —  I  know  not  what.  Othello.  Was  not  that  Cassio  parted 
from  my  wife  ?'  etc.  A  word  from  Desdemona  is  sufficient,  however,  to  allay  his  mis- 
trust, but  another  word  from  Iago  is  sufficient  to  arouse  it  anew  in  all  its  intensity.  Can 
any  one  doubt  that  this  hasty  suspicion,  on  the  part  of  an  unsuspecting  character,  can 
have  any  other  ground  than  the  consciousness  of  the  same  kind  of  guilt  which  he  is  so 
ready  to  suspect  in  another  ?  Iago's  artifices  are  unquestionably  skilful,  but  he  found  a 
most  fruitful  and  well-prepared  soil;  and,  besides,  his  very  skilfulness  rests  upon  hi3 
comprehending  and  utilizing  so  thoroughly  the  psychological  effects  of  Othello's  crime. 
It  is  impossible  to  think  that  an  honest  and  innocent  man  could  have  been  so  easily 

led  astray [In  the  dialogue  where  Iago  cautions  Othello  to  beware  of  jealousy, 

Iago  has  a  twofold  purpose, — viz.,  to  inspire  Othello  with  suspicion,  and  yet  to  shun 
any  suspicion  directed  against  himself.]  (P.  121.)  Othello  is  caught,  the  reason  is 
manifest.  A  universally  suspicious  nature  could  not  have  been  thus  entrapped;  it 
must  have  suspected  the  purpose  of  Iago  also,  with  all  his  adroitness.  Othello  is, 
however,  naturally  unsuspecting.  But  guilt  has  furnished  the  most  fruitful  soil  for  one 
kind  of  suspicion ;  that  soil  Iago  cultivates.  Hence  the  Moor  is  afraid  of  only  one 
thing, — the  infidelity  of  his  wife ;  the  tricks  of  Iago  lie  outside  of  the  horizon  of  his 
suspicion.  On  the  other  hand,  a  completely  innocent  nature  could  not  have  been  thus 
entrapped ;  the  psychological  basis  would  have  been  wholly  wanting.  Here  is  seen 
the  reason  for  the  marked  outlines  of  Othello's  character.  He  is  not  naturally  sus- 
picious, otherwise  he  must  have  suspected  the  purpose  of  Iago ;  nor  is  he  guiltless,  for. 
if  he  were,  his  jealousy  could  not  have  been  reached  by  any  such  artifice. 


Edward  Rose  [Sudden  Emotion  :  Its  Effect  upon  Different  Characters  as  Shown 
by  Shakspere — New  Shakspere  Society,  Transactions,  1880-82,  p.  1).*  [The  differ- 
ent characters  upon  which  Rose  proposes  to  note  the  effect  of  sudden  emotions  are 
'  essentially  two :  the  men  who  are  habitually  self-conscious,  given  to  analyse  their  own 
minds  and  deeds,  and  the  men  who  are  not.'  After  proposing  as  types  of  the  former 
some  modern  poets,  such  as  Tennyson,  Browning,  and  Clough,  men  who  constantly 
look  into  their  own  minds  and  examine  their  own  motives ;  and  as  types  of  the  latter, 
men  like  Darwin  and  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  who  act  from  obvious  motives  and  with 
a  minimum  of  self-consciousness, — Rose  proceeds  :] 

With  this  prelude,  let  me  state  my  theory  as  to  the  effect  of  sudden  emotion — I  mean 
sudden  emotion  of  the  most  intense  kind — upon  characters  of  these  two  opposing  types, 

*  I  cannot  refrain  from  expressing  my  admiration  of  this  thoughtful  Essay,  and  regret  that  I  can- 
not reproduce  it  all  here.  Had  the  New  Shakspere  Society  done  no  other  sterling  work  in  that  year, 
the  appearance  of  this  and  a  following  Essay  by  Mr  Rose  would  have  been  sufficient  to  justify  its 
existence. — Ed. 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS— ROSE  429 

as  shown  by  Shakspere.  A  man  of  simple  nature  sees  a  fact  and  realizes  it :  a  man 
in  whom  the  reflective  intellect  predominates  thinks  about  it.  Therefore,  a  great  sud- 
den emotion  stuns  the  one,  makes  him  helpless  for  the  time :  the  other  does  not  realize 
it  so  intensely, — it  is  more,  as  I  have  said,  a  great  deal  of  new  matter  to  think  about, 
and  his  intellect  is  thus  stimulated  to  think  twice  as  fast  as  usual.  Or  I  might  put  it 
thus :  our  moral  nature  takes  a  thing  as  a  whole,  our  intellect  examines,  dissects  it ; 
therefore  a  great  event  awes  our  moral  nature,  but  sets  our  intellect  hard  at  work,  and, 
therefore,  men  in  whom  the  moral  nature  predominates  are  stunned,  while  men  chiefly 
intellectual  are  stimulated,  by  a  sudden  occurrence  of  the  highest  joy  or  sorrow. 

That  Shakspere  held  this  theory  was  suggested  to  me  by  two  parallel  passages : 
those  in  which  are  shown  the  effects  of  the  Ghost's  revelation  upon  Hamlet,  and  of  the 
murder  of  Duncan  upon  Macbeth.  [Here  follows  the  confirmation  of  his  theory  in 
these  passages,  and  on  p.  10  we  resume :]  I  will  now  take  some  extreme  instances 
of  the  opposite  type  of  character — Othello,  Desdemona,  Macduff — that  no  intermediate 
gradations  may  make  the  contrast  less  striking.  But  first  I  must  point  out  that  the  most 
intense  emotion  of  these  simpler  characters  is  not  so  easily  put  into  words  by  the  drama- 
tist, for  the  reason  that  its  typical  expression  is  silence,  or  inarticulate  sounds  of  grief  or 
joy.  The  poet  must  either  leave  these  to  the  actor,  or  give  a  verbal  picture,  not  strictly 
dramatic,  of  a  mind  which,  in  reality,  would  be  stunned  and  speechless.  The  former 
alternative  is  a  dangerous  one,  which  Shakspere  has  rarely  adopted, —  perhaps  the 
example  most  nearly  perfect  is  that  of  Helena,  in  the  Second  Act  of  AWs  Well  that 
Ends  Well,  who  makes  only  one  speech  of  a  dozen  words  after  Bertram  has  refused  to 
marry  her.  In  the  alternative  which  he  generally  chose,  of  giving  to  intense  emotion 
words  more  coherent  than  those  of  nature  would  be,  there  is,  I  think,  a  rule  by  which 
we  can  distinguish  these  utterances  from  such  perfectly  dramatic  speeches  as  those  of 
Hamlet  and  Macbeth :  the  latter  are  rich  in  intellect,  filled  with  varied  thoughts  vari- 
ously expressed ;  the  former  are  little  more  than  repetitions  of  the  one  crushing  concep- 
tion, in  words  often  curiously  monotonous.  Thus,  Macduff's  '  All  my  pretty  ones  ?  Did 
*  you  say  all?  O  hell-kite  !  All?  What,  all  my  pretty  chickens  and  their  dam  At  one 
'  fell  swoop  ? '  We  see  so  little  of  Macduff  that  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  sum  up  his 
character ;  but  all  his  one  chief  scene, — with  Malcolm  first,  and  then  with  Ross, — indi- 
cates a  man  of  strong  and  simple  feelings.  The  words  he  forces  out  are  only  spoken 
at  the  urging  of  his  companion,  who,  indeed,  expresses  in  one  phrase  Shakspere's 
theory  as  to  the  crushing  effect  of  emotion  on  those  characters  who  allow  themselves  to 
realize  it  completely  and  immediately  : — '  The  grief  that  does  not  speak  Whispers  the 
o'erfraught  heart  and  bids  it  break.' 

Desdemona,  the  most  lovable,  I  think,  of  Shakespeare's  women,  is,  perhaps,  the 
strongest  example  of  the  rule  I  have  proposed.  Othello's  attack  at  once  stuns  her; 
she  is  brave,  and  denies  his  accusation  as  soon  as  he  speaks  it  clearly,  but  the  effort  is 
almost  too  much  for  her.  When,  a  moment  later,  Emilia  asks  her  how  she  does,  she 
can  answer  only,  'Faith,  half  asleep.'     [See  IV,  ii,  1 13-134.] 

And,  after  she  has  roused  herself  to  one  great  protest  against  her  lord's  suspicion,  her 
mind  relapses  into  bewildered  helplessness  for  the  short  remainder  of  her  life.  She  goes 
over  again  and  again  the  one  thought  that  she  can  take  in, — the  enormous,  utterly  im- 
possible crime  of  which  she  is  accused.  She  realizes  only  the  accusation ;  she  cannot 
even  think  the  existence  of  the  sin.  An  exquisitely  subtle  touch  shows  how  she  tries, 
with  her  perfect  innocence,  to  imagine  what  guilt  is.  She  sees  Lodovico,  a  young  and 
handsome  man,  and  wonders  if  it  could  be  possible  for  her,  another's  wife,  to  love  him. 
She  resolves  that  she  '  could  not  do  such  a  deed  for  the  whole  world.'    In  the  last  scene 


43Q 


APPENDIX 


of  all  there  is  no  spring,  no  elasticity  about  her  mind ;  no  reflection,  one  might  say  no 
thought.  In  almost  all  other  cases  Shakspere  shows  how  strangely  the  brain  does 
its  work  in  moments  of  great  emotion.  Here,  by  exception,  he  shows  a  perfectly  sim- 
ple nature  beaten  down  by  terrible  reality.  At  the  end  her  words  have  the  directness 
and  the  oneness  of  a  child's  begging  helplessly  for  delay  of  punishment : — '  O  banish 
me,  my  lord,  but  kill  me  not ! — Kill  me  to-morrow :  let  me  live  to-night ! — But  half  an 
hour ! — But  while  I  say  one  prayer !' 

Hero,  by  the  way,  in  Much  Ado  About  Nothing,  is  but  an  early  sketch  of  Desde- 
mona :  when  she  is  similarly  accused,  after  a  few  sentences  of  simple  answers  and 
ejaculations,  she  falls  in  a  swoon. 

The  great  character  of  Othello  undoubtedly  belongs  to  this  class.  He  has  a  strong 
and  healthy  mind  and  a  vivid  imagination,  but  they  deal  entirely  with  first  impressions, 
with  obvious  facts.  If  he  trusts  a  man,  he  trusts  him  without  the  faintest  shadow  of 
reserve.  Iago's  suggestion  that  Desdemona  is  false  comes  upon  him  like  a  thunder- 
bolt. He  knows  this  man  to  be  honest,  his  every  word  the  absolute  truth.  He  is 
stunned,  and  his  mind  accepts  specious  reasonings  passively  and  without  examination. 
Yet  his  love  is  so  intense  that  he  struggles  against  his  own  nature,  and  for  a  time  com- 
pels himself  to  think,  though  not  upon  the  great  question  whether  she  is  false.  He 
cannot  bring  his  intellect  to  attack  Iago's  conclusions,  and  only  argues  the  minor  point : 
Why  is  she  false  ?  But  even  this  effort  is  too  much  for  him.  It  is,  I  have  said,  against 
nature ;  and  nature,  after  the  struggle  has  been  carried  on  unceasingly  for  hours,  re- 
venges herself — he  falls  into  a  fit.  That  this  is  the  legitimate  climax  of  overpowering 
emotion  on  an  intensely  real  and  single  character  is  plain.  This  obstruction  and  chaos 
of  the  faculties  is  the  absolute  opposite  of  the  brilliant  life  into  which  Hamlet's  intel- 
lect leaps  on  its  contact  with  tremendous  realities. 

The  soliloquy  at  the  end  of  Othello's  first  scene  with  Iago  may  appear  to  make 
rather  against  my  theory ;  it  does  not  merely  repeat  one  thought,  it  goes  from  point  to 
point :  '  If  I  do  prove  her  haggard  I'll  whistle  her  off.  Haply  that  I  am  black — or, 
for  I  am  declined  into  the  vale  of  years — yet  that's  not  much.  My  relief  must  be  to 
loathe  her.  'Tis  the  plague  of  great  ones.'  But  this  contradiction,  I  fancy,  is  only 
apparent.  He  is  trying  to  force  his  mind  to  work,  as  I  have  said,  and  it  flutters  help- 
lessly from  one  minor  point  to  another;  moreover,  jealousy  is  a  mean  and  worrying 
passion,  attaching  itself  to  details,  not  grand  and  broad  like  the  greatest  love,  hate,  or 
ambition.  My  theory,  by  the  way,  may  help  to  account  for  what  has  always  troubled 
critics — the  extraordinary  quickness  with  which  Othello's  faith  in  Desdemona  yields 
to  Iago's  insinuations.  Sudden  and  intense  emotion  stuns  his  nature,  and  makes  it 
incapable  of  resistance. 


GERMAN  CRITICISMS— VOSS,  SCHLEGEL  431 


GERMAN   CRITICISMS 

JOHANN  Heinrich  Voss  {Shakespeare 's  Othello,  uebersctzt,  Jena,  1806,  p.  vi) :  For 
several  years  it  was  the  wish  of  Schiller  to  see  Othello  put  upon  our  stage,  but  he  was 
too  busy  with  his  own  creations  to  undertake  the  humbler  task  of  translation.  Accord- 
ingly, when  I  became  more  intimate  with  him  I  complied  with  his  proposal,  and  en- 
gaged in  the  agreeable  task  of  working  at  a  translation  of  this  masterpiece  of  the  Muse 
of  Shakspeare.  To  it  I  devoted  all  my  leisure  hours,  and  at  the  beginning  of  1805 
handed  to  Schiller  the  first  draft  of  a  faithful  translation.  We  went  through  it  together, 
discussing  with  critical  nicety  the  difficult  passages  until  finally  the  work  received  its 
present  form.  Schiller  proposed  in  the  warmer  coming  days  of  Spring  to  have  the 
piece  put  upon  the  stage  and  to  superintend  the  rehearsal.  This  he  did  not  live  to 
do ;  the  day  of  his  death  came  sooner  than  the  first  of  Spring ! 

The  unusual  length  of  the  play,  and  the  changes  which  the  centuries,  since  Shak 
speare's  time,  had  produced  not  only  in  the  demands  of  the  Stage  but  of  the  public  ren- 
dered certain  important  modifications  necessary,  which  Schiller  effected  with  as  sparing 
a  hand  as  possible.  He  regretted  the  necessity  of  striking  out  the  beginning  of  Act  II, 
where  Iago  gives  utterance  to  that  hatred  of  the  other  sex  which  he  subsequently  puts 
into  practice.  Schiller  was  less  sparing  in  other  places,  where  Shakspeare  out  of  the 
inexhaustible  wealth  of  his  genius  lavishes  it  with  full  hands  more  plenteously  than 
was  necessary.  The  character  of  Bianca, — a  role  indispensable,  in  order,  through  the 
introduction  of  the  handkerchief,  to  excite  the  frenzy  of  Othello  to  the  highest  degree, — 
has  been  in  some  respects  refined,  wherefor  there  was  no  essential  but  only  a  super- 
ficial reason.  Act  IV  Schiller  began  with  the  swooning  of  Othello,  which  is  suff  • 
ciently  explained  by  Iago's  words  :  '  Work  on  !  My  medicine  works.'  From  a  feat 
ful  effect  a  fearful  cause  might  be  inferred,  and  this  we  decided  to  be  better  than  to 
have,  as  in  the  original,  both  the  cause  and  the  effect  before  our  eyes.  In  the  undress- 
ing scene,  the  noble  Desdemona,  while  Emilia  makes  her  coarse  speech,  stands  with 
out  listening  to  her,  sunk  in  her  misgivings,  and  strikes  in  with  the  last  verse  of  the 
willow-song. 

These  are  the  most  important  changes  made  by  the  immortal  man.  //  was  his  last 
work  ! 


A.  W.  SCHLEGEL  (Lectures  on  Dramatic  Art  and  Literattire.  Translated  by  John 
Black,  London,  181 5,  vol.  ii,  p.  189) :  If  Romeo  and  Juliet  shines  with  the  colours  of 
the  dawn  of  morning,  but  a  dawn  whose  purple  clouds  already  announce  the  thunder 
of  a  sultry  day,  Othello  is,  on  the  other  hand,  a  strongly-shaded  picture ;  we  might  call 
it  a  tragical  Rembrandt.  ,.  What  a  fortunate  mistake  that  the  Moor,  under  which  name 
a  baptized  Saracen  of  "the  northern  coast  of  Africa  was  unquestionably  meant  in  the 
novel,  has  been  made  by  Shakespeare,  in  every  respect,  a  negro !  We  recognize  in 
Othello  the  wild  nature  of  that  glowing  zone  which  generates  the  most  raging  beasts 
of  prey  and  the  most  deadly  poisons,  tamed  only  in  appearance  by  the  desire  of  fame, 
by  foreign  laws  of  honor,  and  by  nobler  and  milder  manners.  His  jealousy  is  not  the 
jealousy  of  the  heart,  which  is  incompatible  with  the  tenderest  feeling  and  adoration 
of  the  beloved  object;  it  is  of  that  sensual  kind  from  which,  in  burning  climes,  has 
sprung  the  disgraceful  ill-treatment  of  women  and  many  other  unnatural  usages.  A 
drop  of  this  poison  flows  in  his  veins,  and  sets  his  whole  blood  in  the  most  disorderly 
fermentation.     The  Moor  seems  noble,  frank,  confiding,  grateful  for  the  love  shown 


432  APPENDIX 

him ;  and  he  is  all  this,  and,  moreover,  a  hero  that  spurns  at  danger,  a  worthy  leader 
of  an  army,  a  faithful  sen-ant  of  the  state ;  but  the  mere  physical  force  of  passion  puts 
to  flight  in  one  moment  all  his  acquired  and  accustomed  virtues,  and  gives  the  upper 
hand  to  the  savage  in  him  over  the  moral  man.  The  tyranny  of  the  blood  over  the 
will  betrays  itself  even  in  the  expression  of  his  desire  of  revenge  against  Cassio.  In 
his  repentance  when  he  views  the  evidence  of  the  deed,  a  genuine  tenderness  for  his 
murdered  wife,  and  the  painful  feeling  of  his  annihilated  honour,  at  last  burst  forth ; 
and  he  every  now  and  then  assails  himself  with  the  rage  a  despot  shows  in  punishing 
a  runaway  slave.  He  suffers  as  a  double  man ;  at  once  in  the  higher  and  lower  sphere 
into  which  his  being  was  divided.  While  the  Moor  bears  only  the  nightly  colour  of 
suspicion  and  deceit  on  his  visage,  Iago  is  black  within.  He  pursues  Othello  like  his 
evil  spirit,  and  with  his  light,  and  therefore  the  more  dangerous,  insinuations,  he  leaves 
him  no  rest ;  it  is  as  if  by  means  of  an  unfortunate  affinity,  founded,  however,  in  nature, 
this  influence  was,  by  necessity,  more  powerful  over  him  than  the  voice  of  his  good 
angel  Desdemona.  A  more  artful  villain  than  this  Iago  has  never  been  portrayed;  he 
spreads  his  net  with  a  skm '  which  nothing  can  escape.  The  repugnance  inspired  by 
his  aims  becomes  supportable  from  the  attention  of  the  spectators  being  directed  to  his 
means ;  they  furnish  infinite  employment  to  the  understanding.  Cool,  discontented,  and 
morose,  arrogant  where  he  dare  be  so,  but  humble  and  insinuating  when  it  suits  his  pur- 
pose, he  is  a  complete  master  in  the  art  of  dissimulation ;  accessible  only  to  selfish  emo- 
tions, he  is  thoroughly  skilled  in  rousing  the  passions  of  others,  and  of  availing  himself 
of  every  opening  which  they  give  him :  he  is  as  excellent  an  observer  of  men  as  any 
one  can  be  who  is  unacquainted  with  higher  motives  of  action  from  his  own  experi- 
ence ;  there  is  always  some  truth  in  his  malicious  observations  on  them.  He  does  not 
merely  pretend  to  an  obdurate  incredulity  as  to  the  virtue  of  women,  he  actually  enter- 
tains it ;  and  this,  too,  falls  in  with  his  whole  way  of  thinking,  and  makes  him  the 
more  fit  for  the  execution  of  his  purposes.  As  in  everything  he  sees  merely  the  hate- 
ful side,  he  dissolves  in  the  rudest  manner  the  charm  which  the  imagination  casts  over 
the  relation  between  the  two  sexes ;  he  does  so  for  the  purpose  of  throwing  into  com- 
motion the  senses  of  Othello,  whom  his  heart  might  easily  have  convinced  of  the  inno- 
cence of  Desdemona.  This  must  serve  as  an  excuse  for  the  numerous  expressions  in 
the  speeches  of  Iago  from  which  modesty  shrinks  back.  If  Shakespeare  had  written 
in  our  days  he  would  not,  perhaps,  have  dared  to  hazard  them ;  but  this  must  certainly 
have  injured  the  truth  of  the  picture.  Desdemona  is  an  offering  without  blemish. 
She  is  not,  it  is  true,  a  high  ideal  representation  of  sweetness  and  enthusiastic  passion 
like  Juliet;  full  of  simplicity,  softness,  and  humility,  and  so  innocent  that  she  can 
hardly  form  to  herself  an  idea  of  the  possibility  of  infidelity,  she  seems  calculated  to 
make  the  most  yielding  and  tender  wife.  The  female  propensity  wholly  to  follow  a 
foreign  destiny  has  led  her  into  the  only  error  she  ever  committed, — that  of  marrying 
without  the  consent  of  her  father.  Her  choice  seems  wrong ;  and  yet  she  has  been 
gained  over  to  Othello  by  that  which  induces  the  female  to  honour  in  man  her  pro- 
tector and  guide, — admiration  of  his  determined  heroism,  and  compassion  for  the  suffer- 
ings which  he  had  undergone.  With  great  art  it  is  so  contrived  that  from  the  very 
circumstance  that  the  possibility  of  a  suspicion  of  herself  never  once  enters  her  mind, 
she  is  the  less  reserved  in  her  solicitation  for  Cassio,  by  which  she  more  and  more 
heightens  the  jealousy  of  the  Moor.  To  give  still  greater  effect  to  the  angelic  purity 
of  Desdemona,  Shakspeare  has  in  Emilia  associated  with  her  a  companion  of  doubtful 
virtue.  From  the  sinful  levity  of  this  woman,  it  is  also  conceivable  that  she  should  not 
confess  the  abstraction  of  the  handkerchief  when  Othello  violently  demands  it  bact  • 


GERMAN  CRITICISMS—HORN,    ULRfCI  433 

this  would  otherwise  be  the  circumstance  in  the  whole  piece  the  most  diffic.lt  to  justify. 
Cassio  is  portrayed  exactly  as  he  ought  to  be  to  excite  suspicion  without  actual  guilt, 
amiable  and  nobly  disposed,  but  easily  seduced.  The  public  events  of  the  first  two 
Acts  show  us  Othello  in  his  most  glorious  aspect,  as  the  support  of  Venice  and  the  terror 
of  the  Turks ;  they  serve  to  withdraw  the  story  from  the  mere  domestic  circle,  which 
is  done  in  Romeo  and  Juliet  by  the  dissensions  between  the  houses  of  Montague  and 
Capulet.  No  eloquence  is  capable  of  painting  the  overwhelming  force  of  the  catas 
trophe  in  Othello,  the  pressure  of  feelings  which  measure  out  in  a  moment  the  abysses 
of  eternity. 


Franz  Horn  {Shakespeare }s  Schauspiele  erlautert,  Leipzig,  1823,  ii,  336)  :  Nothing 
in  poetry  has  ever  been  written  more  pathetic  than  the  scene  preceding  Desdemona's 
death;  I  confess  I  almost  always  turn  away  my  eyes  from  the  poor  girl  with  her 
infinitely  touching  song  of  '  Willow,  willow,  willow/  and  I  would  fain  ask  the  Poet 
whether  his  tragic  arrow,  which  always  hits  the  mark,  does  not  here  pierce  almost  too 
deeply.  I  would  not  call  the  last  word  with  which  she  dies  a  lie,  or  even  a  '  noble ' 
lie ;  this  qualification  has  been  wretchedly  misused.  The  lie  with  which  Desdemona 
dies  is  divine  truth,  too  good  to  come  within  the  compass  of  an  earthy  moral  code. 

As  already  said,  all  these  scenes  reach  the  supreme  degree  of  the  pathetic  as  no  other 
Poet  has  ever  reached  it ;  and  here  a  question  may,  perhaps,  be  permitted  that  seems 
almost  paradoxical :  who  is  there  who  could  have  aided  the  poor  dear  child  Desde- 
mona? To  my  thinking,  the  best  and  surest  would  have  been  Portia  of  Belmont,  who 
cut  short  all  idea  of  love  for  the  Prince  of  Morocco  with  the  bare  thought  that  he  was 
black;  but  then  Desdemona  would  not  have  been  Desdemona. 


Ulrici  {Shakespeare 's  dramatische  Kunst.,  Leipzig,  1847,  2te  Aflge,  iste  Abt.,  p.  379. 
Translated  for  Bonn's  Library  by  Miss  L.  Dora  Schmitz,  London,  1876,  vol.  i,  p.  418)  : 
The  main  springs  of  the  action  consequently  lie  in  the  characters  of  the  persons  repre- 
sented, and  yet  the  tragic  catastrophe  arises  only  indirectly,  not  directly,  out  of  the  dis- 
position and  the  mode  of  action  of  the  tragic  heroes.  The  construction  of  the  piece, 
in  this,  differs  distinctly  from  that  of  Shakespeare's  other  tragedies.  In  Romeo  and 
Juliet,  Hamlet,  King  Lear,  and  Macbeth,  nay,  even  in  his  Historical  Tragedies,  the 
poet,  in  the  first  place,  exhibits  a  certain  position  of  affairs ;  he  describes  the  circum- 
stances, relations,  and  situations,  as  well  as  the  characters  of  the  surrounding  persons 
among  whom  his  tragic  heroes  live ;  in  other  words,  he  first  lays  the  foundation  upon 
which  the  edifice  is  to  be  raised,  but  whose  construction  it  is  directly  to  affect  only  in 
so  far  as  the  fortunes  of  his  heroes  proceed,  it  is  true,  from  this  foundation,  but,  in  the 
first  place  and  directly,  from  their  own  characters,  their  own  actions,  their  freedom,  and 
self-determination.  Thus,  to  give  an  example :  in  Romeo  and  Juliet  the  furious  hatred 
between  the  Capulets  and  Montagues  does,  indeed,  form  the  basis  of  the  tragic  catas- 
trophe, but  this  relation  is  a  positive  one  to  the  two  lovers ;  they,  therefore,  are  aware 
of  it,  and  if  they  nevertheless  follow  the  impulse  of  their  passionate  love, — out  of 
which  alone  their  tragic  ruin  is  developed, — then  it  is  their  own  will  or  the  necessary 
consequence  of  their  own  characters.  The  relations  and  circumstances,  as  well  as  the 
secondary  persons  who  surround  them,  certainly  do  help  on  their  fate,  but  the  primary 
cause  of  it  is,  nevertheless,  the  state  of  their  own  minds  and  the  manner  of  their  own 

action.    It  is  different  with  our  present  drama.   Othello  does  not  know  of  Iago's  hatred, 
28 


434  APPENDIX 

of  his  revengeful  spirit,  of  his  wickedness  and  cunning ;  he  does  not  see  the  cliffs  upot 
which  his  life  is  to  be  wrecked,  hence  he  cannot  order  his  purposes  and  actions  in 
accordance  with  them.  His  mode  of  action,  therefore,  does  not  only  not  arise  fron 
his  freedom,  but,  directly,  not  even  from  his  character ;  it  is  rather  caused  by  an  incon- 
ceivable imposition  practised  upon  him  by  another  person;  without  this  imposition  there 
is  in  Othello's  whole  being  not  even  the  smallest  corner  from  which  such  monstrous 
deeds  could  burst  forth.  It  is  only  this  external  influence  which  first,  as  it  were,  breaks 
down  his  whole  character,  and  turns  the  lowest  portion  of  it  uppermost.  That  he  allows 
himself  to  be  deceived  arises,  it  is  true,  from  his  own  individuality,  but  only  partially. 
For,  on  the  other  hand,  the  deceit  is  so  cunningly  contrived,  so  favored  by  circum 
stances,  that  even  the  most  cautious  and  most  circumspect  person  would  have  been 
deceived  by  it.  In  short,  the  distinguishing  peculiarity  of  our  drama  consists  in  its 
being  a  tragedy  of  intrigue,  whereas  all  Shakespeare's  other  tragedies  are  rather  trag- 
edies of  character. 

This  distinction,  which  has  long  been  recognized  in  the  domain  of  comedy,  has  hith- 
erto not  found  place  in  the  aesthetic  criticism  of  tragedy,  owing  to  the  very  good  reason 
that,  in  reality,  the  predominance  of  intrigue  is  opposed  to  the  nature  of  tragedy.  In- 
trigue, because  invariably  based  upon  the  special  objects  of  a  single  individual,  neces- 
sarily has  the  stamp  of  accident  and  caprice.  If,  therefore,  it  is  made  the  lever  of  the 
action,  the  primary  cause  of  the  tragic  catastrophe,  the  tragedy  loses  its  character  of 
grandeur  and  sublimity ;  it  is  precipitated  from  the  region  of  a  higher  necessity,  of  a 
fate, — which,  indeed,  lies  in  the  inmost  nature  of  man  himself  and  proceeds  from  it, 
but  then  overpowers  and  masters  him, — into  the  lower  sphere  of  every-day  life,  in  which 
only  the  limited  interests  and  purposes  of  single  individuals  mutually  combat  and  out- 
wit one  another.  The  downfall  of  human  greatness  and  beauty  which  is  not  founded 
upon  its  own  immediate  weakness  or  one-sidedness,  but,  though  not  altogether,  yet 
chiefly,  occasioned  by  the  cunning  and  the  power  of  the  evil  which  opposes  it,  is  some- 
thing revolting ;  it  offends  the  human  sense  of  justice,  and  calls  forth  a  doubt  of  the 
divine  order  in  the  world.  In  short,  k  disturbs  the  impression  of  what  is  tragic,  be- 
cause it  places  the  contradictions  of  human  existence  in  the  sharpest  dissonance  with- 
out indicating  their  d6noument,  or  revealing  that  reconciling  power  which  lies  under 
all  events  ordained  by  God. 

From  the  predominance  of  intrigue,  it  follows  as  a  matter  of  course  that  chance  also 
plays  an  important  part,  and  that  in  a  certain  sense  it  assumes  the  character  of  intrigue. 
For  chance  is,  in  fact,  but  objective  caprice,  the  caprice  of  subjective  chance ;  both  cor- 
respond with  one  another  because  they  are  internally  of  one  nature.  Now,  chance  is 
to  be  as  little  excluded  from  tragedy  as  intrigue ;  both  are  essential  elements  of  human 
life,  and,  therefore,  have  a  perfect  right  to  be  represented  in  all  human  actions  and  for- 
tunes. And  yet  it  is  only  in  the  field  of  comedy  that  they  have  a  right  to  be  a  princi- 
pal power  in  the  dramatic  development ;  they  may  predominate  only  in  comedy.  In 
tragedy,  on  the  other  hand,  they  must  be  employed  only  as  an  additional  means  to  fur- 
ther the  development,  or  as  the  echo  of  the  outer  world,  which  merely  answers  to  the 
hero's  disposition  and  mode  of  action ;  whereas  the  actual  cause  of  the  tragic  fate  must 
be  in  the  character  and  actions  of  the  hero  himself.  Regarded  in  this  light,  chance,  as 
we  have  already  seen  in  Romeo  and  Juliet,  represents,  so  to  say,  the  invisible  hand  of 
Providence,  which  leads  the  tragic  complication  to  its  necessary  goal ;  used  in  this  way, 
it  can  produce  the  greatest  tragic  effect.  In  Othello  the  catastrophe  is  first  introduced 
and  occasioned  by  chance.  Othello,  '  the  noble  nature  whom  passion  could  not  shake,' 
who,  in  fact,  is  vulnerable  only  in  the  one  point,  in  his  love  for  Desdemona,  is  first 


GERMAN  CRITICISMS— ULR  J  CI 


435 


plunged  into  the  heat  of  passion  by  Iago's  villainy  and  by  the  play  of  chance  which 
favours  it,  and  is  thus  thrown  out  of  the  centre  of  his  existence  and  brought  to  ruin. 
The  first  accident  is  the  circumstance  of  Desdemona's  losing  her  handkerchief, — which 
is  as  much  accident  as  carelessness ;  the  second  is  that  Emilia  finds  the  handkerchief; 
the  third,  that  Cassio  gives  it  to  Bianca  to  have  the  embroidery  copied ;  the  fourth,  that 
Othello  sees  it  in  Cassio's  hand ;  the  fifth,  that  Bianca  happens  to  be  at  hand  to  help  in 
deceiving  Othello  by  Cassio's  conduct  in  conversation  with  Iago ; — it  is  all  these  acci- 
dents which  help  to  convince  Othello  of  Desdemona's  infidelity,  and  which  thus  effect 
the  complete  ruin  of  his  character.  They  are,  therefore,  pre-eminently  the  levers  of 
the  action.  Of  course,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  indeed  highly  tragic  that  human  virtue 
is  not  able  to  hold  its  own  against  blind  chance  and  common  intrigue ;  but  it  is  tragic 
only  on  condition  that  it  is  founded  upon  the  insufficiency  of  the  power  of  the  good 
itself.  If,  however,  the  powers  of  evil  are  called  forth  only  by  accident  and  intrigue, 
if,  accordingly,  the  moral  force  is  broken  only  so  far  that  it  is  no  longer  able  to  defend 
itself,  then  the  tragic  pathos  is  carried  beyond  itself,  up  to  a  point  where  it  becomes 
converted  into  what  is  hideous  and  horrible. 

The  chief  motives  of  the  action — which,  accordingly,  lie  but  partly  in  the  characters 
ot  the  dramatic  personages,  for  the  most  part  in  the  outward  accidental  circumstances — 
in  our  present  drama  again  naturally  determine  the  composition  of  the  piece,  and,  more- 
over, in  the  first  place,  the  external  composition ;  that  is,  the  interdependence  of  the  sepa- 
rate scenes,  the  development  of  the  characters  in  a  definite  succession  of  actions  and 
situations,  and  the  order  in  which  the  incidents  of  the  action  are  presented  to  the  spec- 
tator. (Beauty  of  composition — like  every  other  formal  beauty — demands,  above  all 
things,  harmony,  clearness,  and  design ;  that  is,  it  demands  that  the  final  aim  of  the 
action,  the  point  to  which  the  dramatic  development  finally  leads,  should,  from  begin- 
ning to  end,  be  perceptible  through  the  separate  Scenes,  and  that  the  characters, 
the  action,  and  the  plot  should  be  developed  as  rapidly  as  clearly.  This  beauty  of 
arrangement  is  exhibited  in  the  highest  perfection  in  Othello.  (  Even  the  exposition  (the 
First  Scene  of  the  First  Act)  is  a  proof  of  this :  Roderigo's  conversation  with  Iago  not 
only  makes  us  acquainted  with  the  characters  of  both,  but  Iago's  hatred,  jealousy,  and 
revenge  at  once  reveal  the  chief  motive  of  the  whole  action ;  whereas  Brabantio's 
appearance,  his  grief  and  rage, — representing  the  right  of  the  family  which  is  violated 
in  him, — throws  a  dark,  tragic  shadow  over  Othello's  and  Desdemona's  love  at  the 
very  commencement  of  the  piece.  The  following  Scenes  show  us,  partly  Othello's 
heroic  figure  in  the  zenith  of  his  fame  and  renown,  and  partly  describe  his  relation  to 
Desdemona,  the  origin,  the  deep  intensity,  purity,  and  truth  of  their  love,  and  then 
once  more  point  to  the  storm  which  threatens  their  union.  The  Second  Act  shows  us 
the  threads  out  of  which  the  complication  of  the  Third  Act  is  woven ;  first,  Othello's 
arrival  in  Cyprus,  the  description  of  his  position  in  the  still  restless  and  agitated  coun- 
try, which  again  is  the  reason  of  his  subsequent  severity  towards  Cassio ;  then  Iago's 
opinions  of  the  female  sex,  which  throw  a  significant  light  upon  Emilia's  character  as 
well  as  upon  his  marriage  with  her;  thereupon  we  have  the  announcement  of  the  fes- 
tival, which  forms  the  basis  of  the  following  and  closing  Scene ;  lastly,  we  have  Cas- 
sio's drunkenness,  his  quarrel  with  Roderigo  and  Montano,  his  deposition,  and  Iago's 
advice  to  him  to  entreat  Desdemona's  intercession.  The  Third  Act  then  weaves  the 
given  threads  into  the  net  which  Othello,  in  his  vehemence,  draws  over  his  own  head. 
It  is  easily  seen  that  from  this  point  everything  runs  on  in  a  straight  line,  without  digres- 
sion, towards  the  one  goal.  It  is  only  the  Second  Scene  of  the  Third  Act  that  seems  v" 
to  be  a  makeshift,  which  might  well  be  dispensed  with.      But  to  make  up  for  this,  the 


/ 


436 


APPENDIX 


conclusion  of  the  same  Act,  as  well  as  of  the  Fourth  and  Fifth  Acts,  are  the  more  mas- 
terly  in  composition.  With  flash  upon  flash  the  tragic  thunder-cloud  relieves  itself  of 
its  lightnings ;  with  every  word,  with  every  turn  of  the  representation,  the  course  of  the 
action  makes  an  important  advance ;  from  every  quarter  we  see  but  the  one  goal ;  and 
yet  everything  glides  on  in  a  natural  flow  without  disturbance  and  force.  As  rapidl) 
and  naturally  does  the  path,  in  the  end,  run  down  from  its  highest  summit ;  the  way  in 
which  Othello  is  undeceived,  Iago  unmasked  and  brought  to  confession,  is  a  true  mas- 
terpiece of  dramatic  development. 

And  yet  the  external  composition,  were  it  ever  so  perfect,  does  not  make  the  work 
of  art  an  organic  whole ;  it  is,  rather,  only  the  mechanical  side,  the  external,  formal 
beauty  of  lines  and  outlines,  extremely  important  for  rendering  the  work  intelligible 
and  as  regards  effect,  but  a  merit  shared  by  every  well-devised  piece  of  machinery. 
The  drama  first  becomes  a  living  organism  by  its  internal  unity,  from  which  all  its 
members  and  parts  grow  forth  as  from  a  fructified  germ  and  develop  in  accordance  with 
their  destiny,  in  which  unity  life  has  its  inmost  source,  and  necessarily  determines  the 
external  form,  as  well  as  the  internal  arrangement  and  formation,  of  the  whole. 


G.  G.  Gervinus  {Shakespeare,  Leipzig,  1849.  Translated  by  F.  E.  Bunnett,  Lou 
don,  1863,  ii,  48)  :  Whoever  has  had  opportunity  of  drawing  frequent  experience  from 
family  and  married  life,  will  find  that  no  other  of  Shakespeare's  Plays  presents  such 
rich  and  striking  application  to  the  actual,  oft-recurring  circumstances  of  life, — to  cir- 
cumstances and  experiences  which  attest  that  the  tragedy  brought  about  by  parental 
tyranny  is  often  exceeded  by  that  which  arises  from  the  wilfulness  of  the  child.  With 
however  good  reason  we  assume  to  ourselves  the  freedom  of  the  marriage  choice  and 
the  right  of  the  child,  yet  the  counter-claim  which  Shakespeare  makes  in  the  Winter's 
Tale  is  the  justest  and  the  most  natural  which  can  be  advanced :  in  making  this  choice 
the  father  should  be  at  least  heard.  However  independently  the  newly-founded  family 
ought  to  enter  upon  life,  universal  experience  tells  us  that  there  is  no  security  when  it 
has  forcibly  sundered  itself  from  the  elder  families  out  of  which  it  arose.  Men  who 
from  caprice  or  wilfulness  disturb  the  peace  of  a  family,  are  little  qualified  to  maintain 
peace  in  their  own.  The  first  transgression  makes  the  way  easy  for  another;  the 
deceitful  act  makes  even  him  mistrustful  against  whom  deceit  was  practised  in  love ; 
the  passion  which  once  forsakes  the  path  of  discretion  destroys  the  belief  in  self-com- 
mand and  in  the  power  of  virtue.  And  where  doubts  of  this  kind  are  once  planted  in 
the  mind,  unhappiness  and  discord  are  necessarily  the  bitter  fruit. 

(P.  51.)  The  task  lay  before  the  Poet  to  exhibit  the  passions  of  jealousy  to  that 
extent  in  which  the  lover  can  be  thought  capable  of  destroying  the  object  of  his  love. 
We  think  a  man  of  inflamed  sensibility,  of  heated  blood,  of  the  most  violent  irritabil- 
ity, especially  capable  of  such  a  deed ;  and  even  him  only  in  the  frenzy  of  intoxication, 
in  the  sudden  incentive  of  opportunity,  in  the  feverish  excitement  of  a  fit  of  rage.  But 
such  a  deed  would  never  be  a  subject  for  art;  such  a  man,  acting  in  an  irresponsible 
condition,  would  never  win  our  sympathy  for  his  tragic  fate.  But  could  it  be  conceiv- 
able that  such  a  deed  could  ever  be  committed  by  a  man  of  fixed  character  and  stead- 
fast disposition,  who,  indeed,  before  the  act  had  captivated  our  irtterest  ?  in  whom  this 
passion,  one  of  the  lowest  which  actuate  a  man,  could  appear  so  *  ainobled  that  he,  even 
in  spite  of  and  after  such  a  deed,  could  engage  our  sympathy,  ay,  even  excite  our  pity  ? 
It  would  appear  improbable.  And  yet  the  poet,  in  Othello,  has  made  such  a  man  com- 
mit such  a  deed ;  or,  rather,  he  has  made  it  even  there  be  committed  by  a  man  who 


GERMAN  CRITICISMS— LUDWIG  437 

united  two  natures,  calmness  with  ardour,  rashness  with  circumspection,  the  traits 
which  make  the  murder  possible,  and  those  which  allow  us  to  admire  and  pity  the 
murderer. 

(P.  103.)  «I  am  glad  thy  father's  dead,'  says  Gratiano;  'this  sight  would  make  him 
do  him  a  desperate  turn.'  But  this  sentence  is  also  true  in  its  reverse  sense.  If  Des- 
demona  had  lived  to  know  it,  not  the  death  of  her  father,  but  the  cause  of  his  death 
would  have  been  an  experience  to  her  just  as  fearfully  undeceiving  as  the  lost  con- 
fidence of  Othello.  For  just  as  she  had  no  foreboding  of  this,  she  had  none  also  of 
the  effect  which  her  independent  step  had  had  upon  her  father.  The  same  nature  and 
qualities  were  at  work  in  her  when  she  gave  the  fatal  blow  to  the  life  of  her  father  and 
when  she  gave  occasion  for  the  suspicion  of  her  husband.  The  same  innocence  of 
heart,  the  same  lack  of  suspicion,  the  same  inability  to  intend  any  harm  to  any  one, 
allowed  no  touch  of  bashfulness  to  appear  in  her,  in  the  first  instance,  before  the  public 
council,  and  placed  on  her  lips,  subsequently,  the  dangerous  intercession  in  behalf  of 
Cassio.  In  both  cases  she  intended  to  do  right  and  good,  and  from  the  very  purity  of 
her  consciousness  arose  her  misconstrued  actions.  Like  Othello,  like  Romeo  and  Juliet, 
she  falls  a  sacrifice  to  her  own  nature,  and  not  to  the  law  of  any  arbitrary  and  unjust 
moral  statute;  to  a  nature  which,  in  the  strength  of  that  directness  and  originality 
which  interests  us  all,  oversteps  the  limits  of  social  custom,  unites  guilt  and  innocence 
in  strange  combination,  which  brings  down  death  upon  itself  as  a  punishment,  and 
endures  death  as  a  triumph, — a  nature  which  divides  our  feelings  between  admiration 
and  pity.  It  seems  as  if  here  perfect  satisfaction  is  afforded  to  all  the  demands  of  trag- 
edy. It  seems,  also,  that  this  performance  is  consistent  with  the  freest  moral  view. 
For  the  Poet,  by  this  conclusion,  has  not  once  for  all  condemned  every  unequal  mar- 
riage, nor  every  secret  union,  just  as  little  as  in  Romeo  and  Juliet  he  has  condemned 
all  passionate  love.  With  such  partiality  Shakespeare  has  never  and  nowhere  medi- 
tated upon  moral  problems.  Otherwise,  in  All's  Well  that  Ends  Well  he  would  not 
have  carried  an  unequal  marriage  to  a  prosperous  end  through  so  many  difficulties ;  he 
would  not  in  Cymbeline  have  suffered  a  secret  union  to  turn  out  for  good ;  nor  in  the 
Merchant  of  Venice  would  he  have  justified  the  abduction  of  a  child  and  a  self-willed 
marriage.  Not  the  letter  of  the  law,  but  the  circumstances  and  nature  of  men,  are,  in 
the  poet's  wise  opinion,  the  spring  from  which  good  and  evil,  happiness  and  unhappi- 
ness,  arise.  These  furnish  also  the  line  of  conduct  according  to  which  both  must  be 
measured.  In  proportion  to  the  circumstance  and  nature  of  the  man,  evil  often  becomes 
a  source  of  good,  and  good  a  source  of  evil,  apparent  happiness  a  misfortune,  and  mis- 
fortune a  happiness.  And  this  is  with  conscious  intention  observed  and  carried  out  in 
this  play,  in  which  the  noble  Desdemona  falls  into  sin  through  innocence  and  goodness, 
and  by  a  sinful  lie  commits  the  most  beautiful  act  of  forgiveness. 


Otto  Ludwig  {Shakespeare- Studien,  Leipzig,  1872,  p.  116) :  Strange  is  it  that,  at 
a  time  when  our  modern  tragedies  are  no  longer  tolerated  and  we  hear  it  said  that  the 
age  for  tragedies  is  past,  the  tragedies  of  Shakespeare  still  continue  popular,  and  not 
alone  among  those  who  study  him  or  perhaps  extol  his  plays  merely  on  account  of 
his  name  and  in  order  not  to  lose  their  reputation  among  the  leaders  of  opinion.  His 
tragedies  deal  with  the  most  frightful  subjects,  with  events  terrible  beyond  our  concep- 
tion, with  the  most  violent  passions  represented  as  in  the  common  order  of  things. 
What  are  the  reasons  that  these  works  give  pleasure  even  to  our  sophisticated  age  ?  1 
believe 


438 


APPENDIX 


i.  That  as  to  their  subjects,  the  reason  may  be  found  in  Shakespeare's  sound  moral 
judgement  of  men  and  things. 

2.  And  as  concerns  the  mode  of  representation,  the  reason  lies  in  the  subdued 
moderation  of  great  power,  the  grand  repose  of  great  vitality,  the  avoidance  not 
of  the  violent,  but  of  violence  in  the  representation  thereof.  Shakespeare  portrays 
the  violent,  but  not  violently.  It  lies  in  the  breadth  with  which  he  sets  forth  his 
characters  and  their  manifestations, — the  constant  keeping  in  mind  that  it  is  not 
reality  but  art  that  we  have  before  us,  in  the  richly  picturesque,  elevated  speech, 
which  always  avoids  the  poor,  the  hasty,  the  abrupt,  which  a  direct  expression  of 
the  matter  in  hand  would  have  the  appearance  of  in  reality;  the  interlacing  of 
allied  devices,  the  methodical  movement. — The  thought  is  with  Shakespeare  im- 
mediate, as  well  as  the  feeling  and  action,  but  the  rhythm,  although  representative, 
is  always  in  due  artistic  moderation. — The  correct  relation  between  strength  and 
weakness,  where,  as  with  Michael  Angelo,  even  the  subordinate  figures  are  still  beyond 
the  medium  fulness  of  the  real. — Then  the  shortness  of  the  Scenes,  the  restrictions  set 
to  the  different  movements,  often  indeed,  in  the  progress  of  the  action  the  simple  pause 
and  physical  relief  of  the  change  of  Scenes. — The  avoidance  of  all  material  means  of 
straining  the  attention ;  the  importance  of  time  and  place  to  the  good  or  bad  result  is 
only  hinted  at,  never  dwelt  upon.  Furthermore,  the  brilliant  roles  by  which  admiration 
of  the  art  of  the  great  actor  helps  to  act  against  the  involuntary  delusion  of  the  spec- 
tator ;  then  the  wealth  of  the  action,  which  does  not  permit  us  to  dwell  too  long  upon 
any  one  part;  the  fulness  of  poetry;  the  ideality  of  the  characters;  the  moral  consider- 
ations,— all  these  characteristics  of  the  Poet  make  him  for  ever  popular. — Desdemona's 
fault  is  a  negative,  unconscious  one,  a  lack  of  foresight  resulting  from  her  character. 
Why,  nevertheless,  has  her  fearful  ending  nothing  of  the  horrible  ?  Because,  I  believe, 
her  suffering  gives  her  occasion  to  show  such  perfect,  spiritual  beauty,  that  one  forgets 
the  cause  and  almost  the  suffering  even ;  nay,  we  are  even  thankful  therefor.  Then 
through  the  sympathetic  effect  of  her  ideal  repose ;  because  the  creature  in  her,  struggles 
not ;  she  fascinates  us  with  her  sweet  submission  to  her  suffering,  caring  more  for  hei 
murderer  than  for  herself.  Then  there  is  the  artistic  beauty  and  repose  of  the  repre- 
sentation itself.  Then  there  is  the  harmony  of  the  deed  with  the  plot, — for  Othello  is 
really  the  one  to  be  most  pitied.  Here  hints  may  be  found  for  the  representation  of 
the  ideal, — Othello  has  declared  his  murderous  resolve.  He  bids  Desdemona  to  get  to 
bed  and  to  dismiss  Emilia.  Next  the  preparation  for  the  deed  by  the  attack  on  Cassio ; 
a  second  time  Othello's  resolve  declared.  The  Scene  ends,  a  change  follows ;  Desde- 
mona asleep  alone, — a  light, — Othello  enters.  His  solemn,  judicial  bearing!  Thus 
the  murder  and  its  relation  to  both  parties  make  a  much  deeper  impression  because  we 
are  not  terrified,  and  for  the  same  reason  the  effect  is  much  more  artistic  and  softened. 
And  further,  there  is  a  retarding,  alleviating  element  in  Desdemona's  repose  of  charac- 
ter. Thus  we  have  the  deed  itself,  without  any  of  the  repulsive  accidents  which  such 
a  deed  would  have  in  reality.  The  poet  who  knows  how  to  treat  it  so  humanly  may 
well  venture  to  deal  with  the  most  terrible  subjects. 

(P.  119.)  Fatalism  in  Tragedy. — In  tragedies  of  character  and  of  passion  there  is 
always  something  fatalistic.  We  may  always  say:  To  such  and  such,  this  or  that 
ought  not  to  have  happened.  The  mingle  of  freedom  and  necessity  which  is  in  our 
thinking,  in  our  desires,  and  in  our  action,  exists  also  in  our  fate.  The  best  part  of 
poetic  impression,  of  the  tragic,  lies  in  the  feeling  of  this  insoluble  mixture.  We  may 
see  the  necessity  of  consequences,  but  not  of  causes.     That  there  may  be  such  a  man 


GERMAN  CRITICISMS— LUDWIG  439 

in  such  circumstances,  this  we  see,  but  not  why  he  is  such  as  he  is  nor  why  he  is  placed 
in  such  circumstances. 

(P.  121.)  In  every  character  of  eveiy  play  of  Shakespeare's  the  punishment  is  in 
proportion  to  the  wrong-doing.  How  mild  is  the  punishment  of  Desdemona,  of  Cor- 
delia for  a  slight  wrong ;  how  fearful  that  of  Macbeth, — every  moment  from  the  com- 
mission of  his  crime  to  his  death,  he  suffers  more  than  all  the  suffering  of  these  two 
women.  His  deliberate  crime  belongs  to  the  cold  passions ;  as  the  deed  is  done  with 
forethought  and  in  cold  blood,  so  it  is  avenged  by  the  long-continued  tortures  of  con- 
science. 

(P.  127.)  How  wonderfully  is  the  Motive  of  the  play  devised  in  the  First  Act  of 
Othello  !  The  whole  movement  is  so  conducted  as  to  show  us  the  fuel  which  lies  in 
the  characters  themselves,  and  in  the  circumstances  of  the  marriage.  And  what  wealth 
of  causes  or  motives  for  jealousy  is  made  to  appear  in  the  course  of  the  remaining  Acts. 
True  it  is  that  at  the  first  seeing  or  reading  of  the  play,  the  corporeal  life  of  the  action 
obscures  the  force  and  number  of  the  motives;  but  the  oftener  and  the  more  connect- 
edly the  tragedy  is  seen  or  read,  so  much  the  more  convincing  they  become.  Herein 
lies  the  warrant  for  the  immortality  of  this  work  of  Shakespeare's.  The  other  plays, 
the  oftener  they  are  read,  lose  their  probability  and  necessity ;  but  this  play  gains  in 
these  respects  upon  a  more  intimate  acquaintance.  We  here  may  learn,  First :  The 
art  of  devising  motives.  For  even  from  what  has  happened  before  the  play  opens,  as 
well  as  from  what  happens  in  the  First  Act,  we  know  the  reason  why,  and  also  the 
stoiy  how.  Second :  We  learn  construction  of  the  dialogue,  whereby  the  motives 
hinted  at  become  possible.  The  dialogue  is  natural,  unforced ;  everything  tending  to 
betray  the  intention  is  avoided. — What  completeness  !  Through  the  lively,  impressive 
movement,  through  the  ideality  of  the  characters,  through  the  abounding  dicta  of  expe- 
rience, through  sympathy  with  Iago's  savoir  faire  and  superior  intellect,  through  his 
expectant  tone,  and  through  the  purposes  which  he  betrays,  how  perfectly  are  the 
senses,  the  heart,  and  the  understanding  engrossed  and  kept  busy  !  Into  what  a  free, 
poetic  region  is  the  ordinary  stuff  for  tragedy  elevated  by  the  imposing  background  of 
Venice !  What  a  theatre-setting  for  all  the  characters !  What  sharply-drawn  forms, 
rendered  all  the  sharper  by  contrast !  How  richly  is  a  simple  story  transfigured !  The 
whole  First  Act  might  have  been  compressed  into  one  Scene.  A  few  questions  and 
answers  might  have  served  to  tell  the  whole  story.  But  if  the  purpose  was  to  model 
and  mould  his  characters  to  render  a  sufficing  motive  for  the  whole,  past,  present,  and 
future,  then  three  Scenes  had  to  be  made  out  of  one.  And  from  the  way  in  which  he 
has  carried  them  out,  there  is  no  desire  on  the  part  of  the  spectator  to  have  them  com- 
pressed. I  perceive  ever  more  plainly  that  Shakespeare's  form  for  the  most  perfect 
tragedy  is  indispensable ;  that  it  is  no  license,  but  a  law.  How  much  of  real,  corpor- 
eal life,  how  much  of  the  relationship  between  Othello  and  Iago  Brabantio  and  Rode- 
rigo,  would  have  been  lost  by  the  concentration  of  these  three  Sc  enes  into  one !  What 
a  scenic  measure  would  there  have  been  created  thereby,  from  which  the  succeeding 
Acts  would  have  suffered !  By  the  way,  how  wise  it  is  in  Shakespeare  not  to  let 
Othello  alone  go  blindly  into  Iago's  snares;  that  all  are  equally  ready  to  be  deceived 
by  him  makes  Othello's  confidence  in  him  not  only  probable,  but  even  excusable. 
Othello  thereby  loses  the  look  of  folly  which  would  otherwise  have  been  the  case. 
Everything  here  is  merely  an  unfolding  of  the  plot  by  means  of  the  action.  All  the 
distracted  life,  the  rousing  of  Brabantio,  his  search  for  Othello,  their  meeting, — all  these 
arj  nothing  but  helps  to  give  a  living  exposition  of  the  preface  to  the  story  of  the  cha- 
racter and  utter  unnaturalness  of  this  mesalliance,  and  of  whatever  can  serve  to  awaken 


440  APPENDIX 

jealousy. The  characters  and  incidents  are  taken  out  of  the  sphere  of  ordinary  r«ality 

Whatever  in  and  of  them  is  not  exclusively  related  to  the  object  of  the  action  repre- 
sented, whatever  is  not  a  necessary  member  thereof,  is  entirely  stripped  away.  This  it 
is  which  Lessing  terms  the  simplification  of  the  stuff,  by  which  the  dramatic  action  is 
made  to  serve  the  ideal.  Thus  the  action  stands  like  a  group  in  sculpture,  everywhere 
transparent  and  rounded,  not  merely  in  relief  or  only  half  free.  In  Othello,  Shakespeare, 
more  than  elsewhere,  gives  us  an  epitome  of  Nature,  a  symbol  of  the  laws  that  rule  the 
course  of  the  world;  the  science  of  jealousy,  its  natural  history  illustrated  by  concrete 
example.  But  it  is  only  one  kind  of  jealousy,  the  noblest,  born  not  of  the  offended 
senses,  but  of  wounded  honour ;  so  to  speak,  moral,  spiritual  jealousy.* 


Friederich  Bodenstedt  {Jahrbuch  d.  deutschen  Sh.  Gesellschaft,  1867,  p.  258)  : 
*  That  Desdemona  left  her  father  for  the  Moor  involves  no  crime,'  says  Vischer.  *  The 
foolish,  irascible  man  deserves  no  better.  Her  love  for  her  father  and  her  love  for  her 
husband  were  not  to  be  reconciled.'  This  opinion  appears  to  me  to  be  more  bold  than 
correct.  Let  us  come  to  an  understanding  by  taking  into  consideration  this  act  with  its 
immediate  consequences.  A  tenderly  beloved  daughter  breaks  the  heart  of  her  father 
by  a  secret  marriage,  without  having  even  made  the  attempt  to  obtain  his  consent.  She 
forsakes  the  old  man,  whom  she  has  sorely  wounded,  without  one  tender  word ;  depre- 
cates his  displeasure  without  imploring  his  blessing.  She  speaks  to  hirn  not  as  a  child 
to  a  father,  but  like  an  advocate  addressing  his  reason,  not  appealing  to  his  heart ;  or, 
like  a  debtor  settling  with  his  creditors, — so  much  is  due  to  one,  so  much  to  another, 
and  so  much  to  a  third. 

If  such  an  attitude  of  a  child  to  a  father,  whose  whole  heart  is  bound  up  in  that  child, 
involves  no  fault,  then  this  word  has  lost  its  meaning.  I  am  sure  that  here,  as  in  Lear, 
it  was  the  earnest  purpose  of  Shakespeare  to  represent  a  serious  wrong  done  by  a  child 
to  a  father,  and  that  the  popular  feeling,  to  which  Vischer  himself,  in  another  place  as 
well  as  in  this  instance,  appeals,  will  find  Desdemona  guilty.  Her  sin  lies  not  in  the 
fact  that  she  loves  the  Moor,  and  for  love  of  him  forsakes  her  father,  but  that  in  this, 
the  most  critical  step  in  her  life,  she  has  no  consideration  for  her  father,  but  justifies 
herself  in  terms  as  rude  as  if  he  were  to  her  the  most  indifferent  person  in  the  world. 
She  insists  as  coolly  upon  her  right  as  Shylock  upon  his  bond.  We  can  readily  imag- 
ine that  Desdemona  knew  that  it  was  impossible  to  obtain  her  proud  father's  consent. 
We  can  suppose,  also,  that  Othello,  in  order  to  avoid  the  humiliation  of  a  rejection,  en 
couraged  her  in  secretly  consummating  her  hastily  formed  determination ;  but  nothing 
of  this  kind  appears  in  the  text,  and  it  is  just  the  care  which  the  Poet  takes  to  avoid 
every  hint  in  this  direction  that  shows,  in  the  plainest  manner  possible,  his  intention  to 

emphasize  in  the  sharpest  way  Desdemona's  lack  of  filial  affection It  is  this  lack 

of  filial  piety,  as  well  as  the  fact  that  Desdemona,  having  grown  up  without  a  mother's 
tender  care  and  without  brother  or  sister,  had  early  learned  to  depend  upon  herself,  that 
explains  her  indifference  to  the  opinion  of  the  world,  the  marked  self-dependence  of  her 
character,  and  the  unbending  determination  with  which,  in  the  weightiest  step  of  her  life, 
she  takes  counsel  only  of  her  own  heart.     In  a  city  where  wealth  and  luxury  flourished 


*  These  notes  of  Ludwig  are  to  me  always  interesting  (whether  I  agree  with  them  or  not  is  an- 
other matter),  as  the  memoranda  and  jottings  for  his  own  use  of  a  professional  dramatist,  who  was 
considered  one  of  the  most  promising  of  recent  times  in  Germany.  Their  occasional  obscurity  and 
fragmentary  style  are  doubtless  due  to  the  fict  that  their  publication  was,  unfortunately,  post* 
humcus. — En 


GERMAN  CRITICISMS— BODENSTEDT 


441 


in  their  fullest  bloom  there  is  such  a  lack  of  able  men  that  the  lead  in  war  is  given  to 
an  adventurer,  to  a  Moor, — this  it  is  that  wins  her  heart.  She  is  light,  airy,  like  a  sunny 
May  day ;  he  is  black  and  ugly  as  an  overclouded  day  in  autumn,  and,  withal,  so  little 
blinded  to  his  own  repulsive  exterior  that  he  never  would  have  ventured  to  woo  Des- 
demona  had  not  she  made  advances  towards  him.     She  is  touched  by  his  lofty,  manly 

qualities,  by  his  frank,  noble  character The  noblest  impulses  have  brought  together 

two  pure  hearts ;  we  feel  that  they  are  worthy  each  of  the  other,  and  yet  we  cannot, 
from  the  first,  evade  the  fear,  that  presses  involuntarily  upon  us,  of  the  consequences 
of  this  union.  We  see  before  us  perfect  womanhood  in  the  most  graceful  shape,  and 
perfect  manhood  in  a  form  most  repulsive ;  and  it  is  as  if  day  and  night  came  together ; 
the  two  cannot  unite  ! 

This  remark  seems  to  lead  us  away  from  the  tragic  motive  of  the  play  which  we  have 
indicated  above ;  but,  in  reality,  it  only  results  therefrom,  pointing  back  to  it  as  its  source. 
For  what  else  is  it  than  a  sorrowful  conviction  that  from  such  a  singular  union, — a  union 
so  unnatural  that  in  the  eyes  of  Brabantio,  no  happiness  could  come  to  his  daughter,— 
what  but  this  feeling  caused  his  opposition,  and  broke  his  heart  when  the  union  became 
unalterable?  A  large  share  of  wounded  pride  and  indignant  pain  at  the  disregard  shown 
for  his  paternal  authority  may  be  taken  into  account,  but  the  essential  thing  with  him  is 
to  be  found  in  his  concern  for  his  child.  And  so  long  as  family  ties  are  held  sacred, 
Desdemona  will  be  held  guilty  towards  her  father  by  every  healthy  mind.  Without 
keeping  in  mind  this  wrong,  in  which  Othello  shares,  done  by  the  heroine,  otherwise  so 
lovely,  the  drama  loses  its  sacredly  tragic  character,  and  degenerates  into  a  mere  intrigue. 
For  that  such  a  finished  villain  as  Iago  should  destroy  the  happiness  of  two  such  excel- 
lent persons  as  Othello  and  Desdemona,  without  at  the  same  time,  consciously  or  uncon- 
sciously, serving  higher  purposes,  can  make  an  impression  which  is  only  sorrowful,  not 
tragic.  It  is  otherwise  when  we  take  things  as  they  are  and  keep  strictly  to  the  Poet's 
own  words,  putting  nothing  into  the  play,  but  explaining  everything  by  what  is  in  it. 
Then  Desdemona's  tragic  fate  affects  us  because  we  see  that  she  is  the  fate  herself  which 
prepares  the  soil  whereon  Iago  sows  the  seed  of  his  deadly  mischief.  She  voluntarily 
exchanges  the  peace  of  her  father's  house  for  the  stormy  life  which  she  must  see  before 
her  as  the  wife  of  Othello.  She  is  fully  aware  of  the  fatal  meaning  of  the  step  she 
takes,  and  is  so  little  forced  to  it  that  she  bids  defiance  to  the  whole  world  in  taking  it. 
She  breaks  her  father's  heart  to  follow  her  own  heart.  She  takes  upon  herself  the 
whole  responsibility  and  all  the  consequences  of  her  act.  After  such  a  beginning  no 
healthy  temperament  can  look  for  a  happy  ending. 

(P.  264.)  It  is  touching  now  to  see  how  the  love,  which  brings  them  together,  unfolds 
ever  more  nobly  the  farther  apart  they  are  sundered  by  an  unhappy  fate.  One  would 
suffer  like  them  to  be  so  beloved !  A  moment  of  such  love  outweighs  the  longest  ordi- 
nary life.  Herein  is  to  be  found  that  inner  spiritual  compensation  for  the  bitter  tragedy 
of  their  outward  life. 

(Einleitung  zu  der  Uebersetzung  des  Othello,  p.  vii)  :  Commentators  have  considered 
it  cruel  in  Shakespeare  to  permit  two  such  thoroughly  noble  natures  as  Othello  and 
Desdemona  to  be  the  victims  of  such  a  wretch  as  Iago.  Whoever  fails  to  understand 
in  Shakespeare's  tragic  characters  the  relation  between  sin  and  punishment,  may  regard 
the  former,  in  this  case,  light  in  comparison  with  the  latter ;  for  with  the  Poet  the  wrong- 
doing is  not  always  a  crime,  popularly  considered,  but  often  a  mere  lack  of  prudence  or 
thoughtful ness,  or  the  predominance  of  feeling  over  prudence  and  reason.  So  also  with 
him  death  is  not  always  to  be  taken  as  a  punishment,  but  often  as  a  release  from  a  blasted 
life  o   ■»*  a  rescue  from  an  unhappy  future. 


442  APPENDIX 

WlLHELM  Oechelhausek  {Othello,  fiir  die  deutsche  Buhne  bearbeitet,  Weimai 
1876.  Einleitung,  p.  13) :  Othello  is  above  all  things  hero  and  warrior.  Before  Des- 
demona's  charms  had  kindled  the  flame  of  love  in  his  heart,  warlike  exploits,  battles, 
and  adventures,  were  the  element  in  which  he  lived.  The  African  retired  into  the 
background  behind  his  position  in  the  military  service  of  the  Christian  Republic  of 
Venice,  to  which  he  was  devoted  body  and  soul ;  to  have  vindicated  the  honor  of 
which  was  his  last  proud  recollection  before  death.  When,  therefore,  actors,  as  many 
do,  seek  to  give  to  the  personation  a  dash  of  Muli  Hassan,  and  to  make  the  African 
blood  of  Othello  a  prominent  quality,  it  is  an  error,  mere  clap-trap.  Only  in  the 
Third  and  in  the  beginning  of  the  Fourth  Act,  where  Iago  with  cynical  calculation 
speculates  upon  the  warmth  of  his  senses,  the  southern  passion  of  Othello  may  be, 
somewhat  beyond  our  European  limits,  moderately  personated.  For  the  rest,  he  who 
forgets  his  paint  represents  Othello  best.  It  is  not  the  design  of  the  tragedy  to  illustrate 
the  Moorish  character ;  every  European  of  like  quality  would,  in  like  circumstances,  do 
just  as  Othello  did.  It  is  not  the  peculiar  jealousy  of  a  Moor,  but  jealousy  in  a 
character  little  disposed  to  it,  that  the  poet  depicts.  He  did  not  make  Othello  a  Moor 
(or,  as  Schlegel  thinks,  he  mistook  the  Saracen  of  novels  for  a  Moor)  in  order  to  mark 
the  representation  of  him  with  the  stamp  of  his  race.  He  had  a  far  deeper  ethical  aim, 
namely,  to  contrast  the  greatness  of  Othello's  character  with  the  ideal  purity  of  Desde- 
mona's  love. 

Othello,  then,  should  be  personated  not  with  the  bizarre  hastiness  and  vivacity  of  the 
African,  but  with  the  quiet,  nay  aristocratic  bearing  of  the  hero,  of  the  mature  man  of 
high  position,  who  has  '  declined  into  the  vale  of  years.'  Such  is  the  manner  in  which 
he  presents  himself  before  us  in  the  beginning  of  the  piece ;  the  dignity  and  repose 
with  which  he  confronts  the  enraged  father,  the  manly  self-consciousness,  and  the 
noble  modesty  and  simplicity  which  mark  his  story  of  his  love,  reveal  to  us  the  essen- 
tial qualities  of  his  character.  In  Othello  there  is  no  trace  of  the  parvenu,  who  feels 
himself  uncertain  of  the  high  position  which  he  has  reached,  alternating  between  bully- 
ing and  cringing,  as  is  often  witnessed  in  real  life.  He  is  conscious  of  his  royal  de- 
scent and  of  his  services,  and  with  just  pride  takes  for  granted  their  silent  recognition, 
without  any  thought  of  forcing  it  by  boasting  and  importunity. 

(P.  20.)  The  direct  opposite  to  the  part  of  Othello  must  stand  boldly  out  in  the 
thoroughly  plebeian  bearing  of  Iago.  Othello  is  an  aristocrat  and  a  gentleman; 
Iago,  from  crown  to  sole,  a  plebeian,  no  trim,  knightly  villain  like  Edmund.  Flis 
vulgar  bearing,  with  which  his  dress  even  should  be  in  accord,  must  be  represented  as 
auxiliary  to  his  cunning.  Herein  is  the  point  where  most  personators  of  Iago  entirely 
fail, — the  like  is  most  frequently  the  case  in  the  personation  of  Richard  III, — namely, 

in  the  skilful  wearing  of  the  mask  of  an  honest  man A  plebeian,  countrified 

behaviour,  a  homely,  careless  dress,  a  tone,  now  of  broad  cynicism  and  soldierly 
jest,  and  then  of  honesty,  of  fellow-feeling,  of  unselfish  friendship  (a  masterpiece  in 
this  respect  is  the  great  Act  III,  Scene  iii)  must  illustrate  the  personation  of  tins  r5le. 
Admirably  does  he  hit  the  right  tone  for  every  person  and  every  situation ;  the  keenest 
knowledge  of  men  underlies  his  diabolical  speculations  on  the  weakness  of  every  indi- 
vidual. His  long  and  frequent  dialogues  with  Roderigo  show  us  an  original  nuance 
of  his  ordinary  bearing.  To  all  others  he  is  always  on  the  qui  vive ;  only  with  this 
gull  has  he  an  easier  task.  He  ill-treats  and  plucks  this  pigeon  with  the  keenest 
humour,  as  if  to  refresh  himself,  all  in  the  tone  of  the  consideration  of  a  well-meaning 
older  friend.  Humour  and  sarcasm  form  the  salient  qualities  of  his  character;  he 
takes  thorough  delight  in  his  devil's  work,  which  breaks  out  in  his  humour. 


GERMAN  CRITICISMS— FRIESEN  443 

(T.  si.)  Iago  is  to  be  represented  as  at  least  of  the  same  age  as  Othello, — that  is,  as 
of  ripe  manhood. 

(P.  26.)  Generally  speaking,  too  little  attention  is  paid  to  the  part  of  Emilia,  the 
wife  of  the  infamous  Ensign.  Most  of  the  adaptations  for  the  stage  omit  too  large  a 
portion  of  her  r6le ;  and  stage  managers  assign  it  to  inferior  talent,  as  if  any  soubrette 
of  the  theatre  were  equal  to  it.  The  important  part  which  Emilia  takes  in  the  catas- 
trophe, her  touching  devotion  to  her  mistress,  the  moral  courage  with  which  she  con- 
fronts the  deluded  Moor  and  her  guilty  husband,  should  indicate  that  here  is  work  foi 
a  skilful  and  gifted  artist.  Emilia,  in  the  drama,  is  in  the  position  of  a  servant ;  in 
Cinthio's  novel  she  appears  more  as  a  friend.  On  the  stage  she  should  be  represented 
in  a  character  between  the  two,  as  this  finds  its  justification  in  Italian  manners  at  that 
period.  Her  notions  of  conjugal  fidelity,  as  she  airs  them  in  the  last  Scene  of  the 
Fourth  Act,  are  of  no  account,  and  stand  in  sharpest  contrast  with  the  ideal  which 
her  infinitely  finer  natured  mistress  has  of  the  marital  relations.  But  nowhere  is  there 
found  any  ground  for  supposing,  as  Schlegel  does,  that  Emilia's  practice  was  in  accord- 
ance with  her  loose  talk.  Cinthio  in  the  novel  calls  her  '  a  beautiful  and  honourable 
person.'  How  often  do  women  talk  in  a  light-minded  fashion,  which  authorizes  no 
unfavourable  inferences  as  to  their  actual  characters. 

In  her  whole  conduct  Emilia  is  chargeable  with  only  one  fatal  weakness :  obtaining 
at  her  husband's  wish  the  lost  handkerchief  upon  which  hangs  such  a  fearful  tragedy. 
She  certainly  had  no  suspicion  of  the  evil  purpose  of  Iago,  to  whom  she  stands  in  a 
relation  of  cold  indifference.  Putting  this  one  error  out  of  sight,  she  is  the  faithful, 
devoted  servant  and  friend  of  Desdemona,  the  unterrified  asserter  of  her  innocence, 
even  when  she  is  threatened  with  death ;  first  by  the  Moor,  and  then  by  her  husband, 
showing  therein  great  moral  courage.     Her  position  in  the  last  Scene  can  be  made  of 

commanding  importance. Emilia  is  to  be  represented  as  young,  but  certainly  older 

than  Desdemona. 


Herm.  Freih.  von  Friesen  {Shakspere-Studien,  Wien,  1876,  iii,  132) :  In  connec- 
tion with  the  character  of  Othello,  composed  as  it  is  of  so  many  elements,  there  comes 
the  question  whether  this  drama,  in  opposition  to  the  other  works  of  Shakspere,  is  to  be 
regarded  as  illustrative  of  character  or  of  intrigue.  It  must  be  granted  that  if  the  fate 
of  Othello  and  Desdemona  is  determined  by  Iago's  intrigues,  then  the  essential  ele- 
ment of  a  tragedy, — namely,  the  tragic  fault  of  the  sufferers, — is  wanting,  and  the  Poet 
is  exposed  to  an  undeniable  reproach.  Apparently,  the  predominance  of  intrigue  over 
the  whole  development  of  the  action  of  the  play  is  not  to  be  questioned.  We  must,  first 
of  all,  agree  as  to  what  is  to  be  understood  by  intrigue,  if  it  is  to  be  rejected  as  a  mo- 
tive power  to  a  tragic  result.  Under  all  circumstances  it  is  indispensable  that,  in  a  true 
tragedy,  the  person  in  whom  the  interest  centres  must  be  led  to  his  fate  without  loss  of 
his  free  will  and  choice.  Certainly,  then,  the  voluntary  and  deliberate  proceedings  of 
one  or  more  persons,  by  which  another  individual  is  deprived  of  his  freedom  of  thought 
and  action,  and  is  thereby  doomed  to  destruction,  excludes  the  tragic  fault.  But  it  does 
not  follow  that  in  tragedy  the  cunning,  lies,  and  plots  of  one  individual  practised  upon 
another  are  not  to  be  introduced.  Only  the  influence  of  these  must  be  so  related  to 
the  character  of  the  person  suffering  under  )t  that  he  shall  be  driven  to  his  fate,  not 
irresistibly,  but  only  through  the  passion  which  has  already  shaken  his  freedom  to  the 
utmost,  so  that  in  truth  he  yields  only  to  the  impulse  of  his  own  will. 

This  being  premised  in  regard  to  Iago's  influence  upon  the  fate  of  Othello,  no  one 


444  APPENDIX 

will  be  disposed  to  deny  the  power  of  Iago.  Yet  there  is  still  the  question  whether  the 
criminality  of  the  intrigue  and  its  fatal  effect  rests  only  upon  Iago,  or  whether  the  actual 
ground  of  this  effect  lies  not  in  Othello's  personal  character.  (P.  135.)  Notwithstand- 
ing the  righteous  indignation  with  which  we  regard  Iago,  upon  Othello's  head  falls  the 
chief  fault.  The  right  to  lay  it  to  his  account  begins  in  the  natural  qualities  of  his 
character,  and  gains  in  weight,  by  the  circumstances  just  mentioned,  from  the  wonder- 
ful, or  at  least  unusual,  excitement  of  his  mind.  As  in  all  Shakspere's  creations,  we 
cannot  help  confessing  that  such  an  individuality  as  Othello's, — not  only  endowed 
with  the  most  distinguished  gifts,  but  having  qualities  and  ways  of  thought  even  an- 
tagonistic,— that  such  a  character,  and  such  a  character  alone,  would  lie  open  to  the 
diabolical  influence  of  Iago.  All  so  happens  as  to  remind  us,  step  by  step,  that  for  any 
other  to  ward  off  Iago's  assaults  would  have  been  easy ;  and  if,  full  of  sympathy  for 
Othello  and  full  of  indignation  at  Iago,  we  are  blind  to  this  possibility,  and  seem  to  see 
Othello  helplessly  entangled  in  the  net  which  Iago  weaves,  the  reason  of  it  is  in  the 
impression  which  the  finished  work  of  the  Poet  makes  on  us,  in  the  brilliancy  of 
Othello's  speeches,  in  the  poetic  force  of  the  emotions  which  gush  involuntarily  from 
within  him,  contrasted  with  the  coarse  hints  of  Iago,  sounding,  as  it  were,  from  the 
nether  world.  While  the  former  delights  us  and  the  latter  stirs  our  indignation,  we 
take  sides  and  pardonably  overlook  the  Poet's  hint  that,  although  Othello  is  caught  in 
an  almost  inextricable  net,  he  has  not  lost  his  freedom.  With  what  skill  does  the  Poet 
use,  among  other  circumstances,  everything  which  he  found  in  the  novel !  In  the 
novel,  Cassio  steals  away  from  Othello's  sight  when  he  knocks  secretly  at  the  back 
door  of  the  house  to  return  the  handkerchief  to  Desdemona,  which  is  sufficient  to 
increase  the  jealousy  of  Othello  after  it  has  already  been  awakened  by  Iago.  In  the 
drama  (III,  iii)  his  withdrawal  from  Desdemona's  presence  at  the  appearance  of 
Othello  is  suspicious,  and  only  on  this  account  affords  Iago  a  circumstance  for  the  first 
step  in  his  plot  because  the  mind  of  the  Moor  is  in  a  state  of  intense  excitement.  Fur- 
thermore, how  narrowly  Othello  escaped  hearing  what  Iago  and  Cassio  are  talking 
about  (IV,  i).  A  word  that  he  might  have  caught  would  have  been  enough  to  con- 
vince him  of  Iago's  treachery.  Even  the  way  in  which  the  fatal  handkerchief  makes 
its  appearance  is,  in  the  drama,  with  fine  poetic  instinct,  entirely  different  from  that  of  the 
novel.  In  the  novel,  a  counterfeit  of  it  is  shown  to  Othello  through  a  window.  Thus, 
Othello  was  not  at  all  in  a  position  to  penetrate  the  deception,  while  here  he  has  only 
to  demand  an  explanation  to  rend  the  whole  plot  to  pieces.  Equally  ingenious  is  it 
that  the  handkerchief  in  the  drama  is  lost  through  Othello's  and  Desdemona's  care- 
lessness ;  while  in  the  novel,  Iago  gets  possession  of  it  by  cunning.  The  whole  devel- 
opment of  the  tragic  result  hangs  upon  the  finest  threads.  And  here  it  is  especially 
that  the  connection  of  Iago's  relation  to  Roderigo  appears  of  the  greatest  significance. 
That  in  the  first  examination  of  Cassio  the  inquiry  into  the  disturbance  does  not  extend 
to  the  question  who  the  man  was  whom  Cassio  had  beaten,  and  what  cause  he  had  given 
therefor,  is  a  circumstance  only  possible  from  Othello's  unsuspicious  disposition ;  while, 
had  the  inquiry  been  pushed  that  far,  Iago's  villainy  would  have  been  laid  bare  at  the 
outset.  In  what  danger  Iago  was  in  this  respect  we  can  surmise  when  Roderigo  (IV,  ii), 
in  his  distrust  of  Iago,  threatens  to  go  directly  to  Desdemona.  A  spark  of  this  distrust 
m  the  soul  of  Othello  would  have  saved  him  and  Desdemona.  The  struggle  of  Othello 
before  the  murder  is  at  once  most  significant  and  most  touching.  Throughout,  the  tragic 
event  tends  to  a  catastrophe  which  results  not  from  accident  or  the  overpowering  force 
of  another  person,  but  only  from  a  destiny  originating  in  the  inmost  nature  of  the  indi- 
vidual.    To  the  very  last  moment  of  this  fearful  scene  the  threads  are  not  severed 


GERMAN  CRITICISMS— GENSICHEN,  BULTHAUPT    445 

by  which  Othello  and  Desdemona  might  he  saved.  This  possibility,  presented  before 
our  eyes  with  masterly  power,  is  what  moves  us  most  painfully  with  mingled  emotions 
of  fear  and  sympathy.  Let  the  calm  judgement  of  the  spectator  be  blinded  and  over- 
come by  the  powerful  tones  which  the  Poet  draws  forth  from  the  instrument  of  his 
genius ;  I  yet  venture  to  maintain  that  the  catastrophe  finds  its  necessity  in  the  nature  of 
Othello.  Even  if  the  demoniac  power  of  Iago  drove  him  to  the  fatal  act,  the  ground 
therefor  lies  only  in  Othello's  personal  nature  and  disposition.  In  the  freedom  with 
which  the  Poet  changes  the  catastrophe  as  it  is  in  the  novel,  we  have  an  unquestionable 
proof  of  his  poetic  art  in  this  direction. 


O.  F.  Gensichen  (Studienbldtter,  Berlin,  1881,  p.  67) :  In  the  last  Act,  after  the 
heart-breaking  scene  in  which  the  whole  fabric  of  her  happiness  falls  in  ruins  before 
her,  Desdemona  can  with  the  guileless  innocence  of  a  child, — fall  asleep. 

Wonderful,  indeed,  appears  this  sleep.  No  reconciling  word  between  herself  and 
Othello  has  been  spoken ;  she  knows  that  Othello  will  appear  again  in  a  moment,  that 
he  wishes  to  speak  with  her  alone,  and  for  that  reason  Emilia  is  dismissed.  His  com- 
ing must  explain  the  terrible  change  that  came  over  him, — why  his  love  and  reverence 
have  been  turned  into  contempt  and  rage.  Desdemona,  whose  perfect  devotion  finds 
that  even  the  stubbornness,  the  checks,  the  frowns  of  her  husband  '  have  grace  ana 
favour,'  must  await  with  the  most  painful  impatience  this  critical  interview ;  what  rest 
could  she  find  before  peace  was  restored  between  her  and  Othello  ?  And  yet  she  can 
fall  asleep,  and  so  profound  is  her  slumber  that  she  is  disturbed  neither  by  the  tumult 
in  the  street  nor  by  the  entrance  of  Othello  into  her  chamber.  Even  his  kisses  fail  to 
awaken  her. 

Here  we  see  the  contrast  between  her  genuine  woman's  nature  and  the  full  man's 
nature  in  Othello.  His  '  bloody  passion  shakes  his  very  frame,'  his  '  eye  rolls,'  he 
'  gnaws  his  nether  lip ' ;  Desdemona  peacefully  sleeps,  and  awakes  to  receive  him  with, 
'  Will  you  come  to  bed,  my  lord  ?'  instead  of  seeking  to  deliver  him  from  his  unworthy 
suspicions.  Here,  too,  we  find  that  lovely  freedom  from  care  which,  in  the  conscious- 
ness of  her  purity,  takes  not  upon  itself  the  trouble  of  considering  the  individual  differ- 
ence of  temperament.  And  it  is  just  this  point  which  renders  intelligible  the  possibility 
of  a  rupture  of  her  relation  to  Othello. 

[In  their  zealous  and  praiseworthy  pursuit  of  '  the  tragic  fault '  which  shall,  by  refer- 
ring all  our  misfortunes  to  our  own  misdeeds,  harmonize  Shakespeare's  tragedies  with 
human  life,  some  of  our  German  brothers  are  inclined  to  push  the  search  to  its  remotest 
bounds.  Thus  Gensichen  finds  that  the  tragic  termination  of  Othello's  wedded  life 
might  have  been  avoided  had  he  only  kept  up  such  observances  as  fit  the  bridal.  '  Had 
Othello  retained  a  trace,'  he  says  (p.  83),  '  of  the  gallantry  of  a  lover,  he  would  have 
picked  up  the  handkerchief  which  Desdemona  let  fall  when  she  tenderly  wished  to  bind 
it  round  his  forehead.  It  was  through  this  neglect  of  a  courteous  act  that  Othello  him- 
self provided  Iago  with  the  weightiest  proof  of  his  wife's  infidelity.' — Ed.] 


Heinrich  Bulthaupt  {Dramaturgic  der  Classiker,  Oldenburg,  1883,  p.  222)  :  A 
villainous  knavery,  a  combination  of  accidents,  is  Desdemona's  ruin.  Her  horrible  and 
unmerited  end  excites  the  most  painful  emotion.  Cordelia's  moral  elevation,  her  nature,— 
which,  notwithstanding  her  womanly  tenderness,  so  far  from  shrinking  from  the  conflict 
with  life .  advances  to  meet  it, — stands  in  a  much  more  intimate  relation  to  the  dark  powers 


446 


APPENDIX 


of  Fate  than  this  fine,  sensuous  character  of  Desdemona,  made,  as  she  is,  for  the  full- 
est enjoyment  of  life.  Cordelia's  death  affects  us  tragically.  Desdemona's  is  simply 
horrible.  Can  any  one  who  is  not  infatuated  take,  with  Otto  Ludwig,  a  different  view  ? 
Can  it  be  seriously  maintained  that  sin  and  punishment  are,  in  her  case,  skilfully  propor- 
tioned, and  that  her  punishment  for  no  heinous  fault  was  '  mild '  ?  Mild, — this  horrible 
death  ?  Granting  that  mere  physical  destruction  by  murder  amounts  to  nothing,  but, 
for  this  young  creature,  who  is  pure  love,  pure  devotion,  can  anything  be  more  terrible 
than  to  find  herself  treated  as  a  harlot,  and  to  be  deliberately  strangled  by  the  hands  of 
that  man  for  whom  she  had  sacrificed  everything  ?  In  her  last  moments,  from  her  awak- 
ing to  her  death,  did  not  a  whole  hell  yawn  before  her?  How  is  it  possible  to  misunder- 
stand this  awful  martyrdom  !  The  very  circumstance  that  there  is  no  proportion  be- 
tween her  fate  and  her  fault  affects  us  only  the  more  profoundly.  This  unmerited 
suffering  ennobles  her,  creates  the  deepest  sympathy,  and  wins  every  heart.  We  forget 
every  error  that,  in  the  thoughtlessness  of  youth,  she  may  have  committed.  We  can  only 
bend  the  knee  before  her.  Her  loveliness,  like  a  saint's,  is  transfigured  by  her  tears,  by 
her  death.  From  the  same  source  from  which  has  come  all  that  she  has  done,  or  left 
undone,  comes  her  last  word,  '  Farewell !  Commend  me  to  my  kind  lord.'  Her  kind 
lord  !  Him  who  has  murdered  her !  This  unconquerable  love,  to  my  feeling,  is  appa- 
rent in  a  slight,  thoroughly  Shakespearian  touch,  than  which  nothing  can  be  more 
beautiful.  When  the  Willow  Song  of  poor  Barbara  occurs  to  her,  when  her  heart  is 
full  to  overflowing  of  suffering,  she  suddenly  remarks,  apparently  without  connection, 
'  Lodovico  is  a  proper  man.'  The  whole  scene  of  her  ill-treatment  at  the  hand  of  her 
husband,  the  coming  of  her  relative,  like  a  true  knight,  to  her  defence, — all  is  present 
to  her  again  and  to  us.  But  she  will  not  complain  of  her  loved  husband,  who  has 
done  the  worst  to  her,  who  has  struck  her.  She  thinks,  as  the  memory  of  the  bittei 
scene  fills  her  mind  with  grief  and  her  eyes  with  tears,  only  of  him  who  had  so  kindly 
taken  her  part,  *  He  is  a  proper  man ! '     '  And  he  speaks  well ! '  she  adds. 


FRENCH  CRITICISMS— VOLTAIRE,   DUCIS  447 


FRENCH   CRITICISMS. 

In  Zaire,  Voltaire  imitated  the  ground-plan  of  Othello;  that  is,  Othello's  Oriental 
blood  was  repeated  in  Orosmane,  the  Soldan  of  Jerusalem,  for  the  handkerchief  was 
substituted  an  intercepted  letter  whose  innocent  contents  were  misinterpreted ;  Zaire 
dies  by  the  hands  of  Orosmane,  who  in  turn  kills  himself.  For  a  full  comparison  of 
these  two  tragedies,  I  must  refer  all  who  are  interested  to  that  admirable  Memoire, 
*  couronn6  au  Concours  institue  par  le  Gouvernement  Beige  entre  les  Universites  du 
Royaume,'  Histoire  de  V Influence  de  Shakespeare  sur  le  Theatre  Francais,  par  Albert 
Lacroix,  Bruxelles,  1856,  pp.  53-70;  or  to  Guizot's  comparison  in  the  Preface  to 
his  translation  of  Othello.  See  also  the  Introductions  to  the  admirable  editions  of 
Othello,  edited  for  schools,  by  Gerard,  and  D'Hugues,  in  1883,  and  by  Morel  in 
1884.— Ed. 


J.  F.  DuciS  (Othello.  Representee  pour  la  premiire  fois  en  1792.  Avertissementl) 
La  tragedie  d'Othello  est  une  des  plus  touchantes  et  des  plus  terribles  productions 
dramatiques  qu'ait  enfant£e  le  genie  vraiment  createur  de  ce  grand  homme.  L'ex6- 
crable  caractere  de  Jago  y  est  exprim6  surtout  avec  une  vigueur  de  pinceau  extraordi- 
naire. Avec  quelle  souplesse  effrayante,  sous  combien  de  formes  trompeuses,  ce  ser- 
pent caresse  et  seduit  le  genereux  et  trop  confiant  Othello !  Comme  il  l'infecte  de  tous 
ses  poisons !  comme  il  l'enveloppe  de  tous  ses  replis !  enfin,  comme  il  le  serre,  comme 
il  l'etouffe  et  le  dechire  dans  sa  rage !  Je  suis  bien  persuade  que  si  les  Anglais  peuvent 
observer  tranquillement  les  manoeuvres  d'un  pareil  monstre  sur  la  scene,  les  Francais  ne 
pourraient  jamais  un  moment  y  souffrir  sa  presence,  encore  moins  l'y  voir  d6velopper 
toute  l'etendue  et  toute  la  profondeur  de  sa  sceleratesse.  C'est  ce  qui  m'a  engage  a  ne 
faire  connaitre  le  personnage  qui  le  remplace  si  faiblement  dans  ma  piece,  que  tout  a  la 
fin  du  d6noument,  lorsque  le  malheur  d'Othello  est  consomme  par  la  mort  de  la  plus 
fidele,  de  la  plus  tendre  amante,  qu'il  vient  d'immoler  aux  aveugles  transports  de  sa 
jalousie.  Je  me  suis  bien  garde  de  le  faire  paraitre  du  moment  qu'il  est  connu,  du 
moment  que  je  r6v6l6  au  public  le  secret  affreux  de  son  caractere.  Je  n'ai  pas  manqu6 
non  plus,  des  que  je  l'ai  pu,  dans  un  court  r6cit,  d'instruire  ce  meme  public  de  sa  puni- 
tion,  de  sa  mort  cruelle  dans  les  tortures.  J'ai  pens6  mfime  que  si  le  spectateur  avait 
pu,  dans  le  cours  de  la  tragedie,  le  soupconner  seulement,  au  travers  de  son  masque, 
d'etre  le  plus  scel£rat  des  hommes,  puisqu'il  est  le  plus  perfide  des  amis,  e'en  elait  fait 
du  sort  de  tout  l'ouvrage,  et  que  l'impression  predominante  d'horreur  qu'il  eut  inspiree 
aurait  certainement  amorti  l'intdret  et  la  compassion  que  je  voulais  appeler  sur  l'amante 
d'Othello  et  sur  ce  brave  et  malheureux  Africain.  Aussi  est-ce  avec  une  intention  tres- 
determinSe  que  j'ai  cach6  soigneusement  a  mes  spectateurs  ce  caractere  atroce,  pour  ne 
pas  les  revolter. 

Quant  a  la  couleur  d'Othello,  j'ai  cru  pouvoir  me  dispenser  de  lui  donner  un  visage 
noir,  en  m'ecartant  sur  ce  point  de  l'usage  du  theatre  de  Londres.  J'ai  pens6  que  le 
teint  jaune  et  cuivr6,  pouvant  d'ailleurs  convenir  aussi  a  un  Africain,  aurait  l'avantage 
de  ne  point  revolter  l'ceil  du  public,  et  surtout  celui  des  femmes,  et  que  cette  couleur 
leur  permettrait  bien  mieux  de  jouir  de  ce  qu'il  y  a  de  plus  delicieux  au  theatre,  e'est- 
a-dire  de  tout  le  charme  que  la  force,  la  variete  et  le  jeu  des  passions  repandent  sur  le 
visage  mobile  et  anim6  d'un  jeune  acteur,  bouillant,  sensible  et  enivr6  de  jalousie  et 
d' amour  .... 


443 


APPENDIX 


J'ai  maintenant  a  parler  de  mon  denoument.  Jamais  impression  ne  flit  plus  terrible. 
Toute  l'assemblee  se  leva,  et  ne  poussa  qu'un  cri.  Plusieurs  femmes  s'evanouirent. 
On  eut  dit  que  le  poignard  dont  Othello  venait  de  frapper  son  amante  etait  entre  dans 
tons  les  coeurs.  Mais  aux  applaudissemens  que  Ton  continuait  de  donner  a  l'ouvrage 
se  mSlaient  des  improbations,  des  murmures,  et  enfin  meme  une  espece  de  soulevement 
J'ai  cru  un  moment  que  la  toile  allait  se  baisser.  D'ou  pouvait  naitre  une  impression 
si  extraordinaire,  une  agitation  si  tumultueuse  ?  Me  tromperais-je,  en  croyant  qu'elle 
venait  de  l'extreme  interet  que  j'avais  inspire  pour  Hedelmone  [Desdemona] ;  de  ce 
que  mon  spectateur  avait  desire  trop  passionnement  qu'elle  put  desabuser  Othello  de 
son  erreur;  de  ce  que  je  l'avais  tenu  trop  long-temps  dans  les  angoisses  de  la  terreur 
et  de  l'esperance;  de  ce  que  son  desir,  trompe  au  moment  du  coup  de  poignard,  s'etait 
tourne  en  une  sorte  de  desespoir,  et  avait  revoke  sa  douleur  meme  contre  l'auteur  de 
l'ouvrage  ? 

Comment  se  fait-il  cependant  que  le  public,  apres  avoir  eu  tant  de  peine  a  me  par- 
donner  mon  denoument,  soit  revenu  le  voir  encore  pendant  le  cours  de  douze  represen- 
tations ?  Ne  serait-ce  pas  qu'il  a  ete  averti  par  la  reflexion  qu'  Othello  n'est  point  un 
homme  feroce,  mais  un  amant  egare,  un  Africain  jaloux,  un  More,  qui  frappe  ce  qu'il  a 
de  plus  cher,  et  qui  ne  survivra  pas  a  sa  victime  ?  Ne  serait-ce  pas  qu'il  a  senti  par 
instinct  que  les  naturels  les  plus  tendres  et  les  plus  sensibles,  une  fois  pouss^s  dans  les 
exces,  sout  quelquefois  les  plus  pres  de  la  barbarie,  par  la  raison  peut-etre  qu'ils  en 
etaient  les  plus  eloignes  ? 

Cependant  quoique  le  public  ait  le  droit,  sous  tous  les  climats,  de  tracer  aux  auteurs 
les  limites  de  la  terreur  et  de  la  pitie,  ces  limites  pourtant  sont  plus  ou  moins  recule'es 
selon  le  caractere  des  differentes  nations.  Mon  denoument  a  eu  de  la  peine  a  passer  a 
Paris ;  et  a  Londres,  les  Anglais  soutiennent  tres-bien  celui  de  Shakespeare.  Ce  n'est 
point  avec  un  poignard  qu'  Othello,  sur  leur  theatre,  immole  son  innocente  victime ;  il 
lui  presse,  dans  son  lit,  et  avec  force,  un  oreiller  sur  la  bouche,  il  le  presse  et  le  represse 
encore  jusqu'  a  ce  qu'elle  expire.  Voila  ce  que  des  spectateurs  francais  ne  pourraient 
jamais  supporter.  Un  poete  tragi  que  est  done  oblige  de  se  conform  er  au  caractere  de 
la  nation  devant  laquelle  il  fait  representer  ses  ouvrages.  C'est  une  verite  incontest- 
able, puisque  son  principal  but  est  de  lui  plaire.  Aussi,  pour  satisfaire  plusieurs  de  mes 
spectateurs,  qui  ont  trouv£  dans  mon  denoument  le  poids  de  la  pitie  et  de  la  terreur 
excessif  et  trop  penible,  ai-je  profite  de  la  disposition  de  ma  piece,  qui  me  rendait  ce 
changement  tres-facile,  pour  substituer  un  denoument  heureux  k  celui  qui  les  avait 
blesses ;  quoique  le  premier  me  paraisse  toujours  convenir  beaucoup  plus  a  la  nature  et 
a  la  moralite  du  sujet,  et  que  je  l'aie  eu  sans  cesse  en  vue,  comme  il  est  facile  de  le 
remarquer  des  le  commencement  et  dans  le  cours  de  ma  tragedie.  Mais  comme  je  l'ai 
fait  imprimer  avec  les  deux  denoumens,  les  directeurs  des  theatres  seront  les  maitres  de 
choisir  celui  qu'il  leur  conviendra  d'adopter. 

[I  think  the  limit  of  tolerance  is  reached  in  thus  listening  to  Ducis  himself.  It 
is  easy  to  be  severe,  and  it  is  easier  still  to  make  fun.  But  we  must  remember  that 
he  lived  in  an  age  when  the  versions  of  Shakespeare  which  held  the  English  stage 
were  more  discreditable  to  the  taste  of  the  English  public  than  Ducis's  versions  to  the 
taste  of  the  admirers  of  Racine  and  Corneille.  The  name  of  Othello  is  the  only  one 
which  Ducis  retained  among  his  Dramatis  Personse,  which  are  as  follows  :  Moncenigo, 
doge  de  Venise.  Loredan,  fi Is  de  Moncenigo.  Odalbert,  sinateur  vinitien.  Hedelmone/ 
fille  d'  Odalbert.  Hermance,  nourrice  d' 'Hedelmone.  Othello,  giniral  des  troupes 
vinitiennes.     Pezare,  Venitien.     La  scene  est  a  Venise. — Ed.] 


FRENCH  CRITICISMS— GUIZOT  449 

GuizOT,  in  the  Notice  sur  Othello,  which  precedes  his  Translation,  after  speaking  of 
the  vivifying  effect  of  Shakespeare's  genius  on  the  dry  bones  of  Cinthio's  novel,  thus 
proceeds:  Ainsi  cr6e  le  po€te,  et  tel  est  le  g6nie  po6tique.  Les  6v6nements,  les  situa- 
tions meme  ne  sont  pas  ce  qui  lui  importe,  ce  qu'il  se  complalt  a  inventer :  sa  puissance 
veut  s'exercer  autrement  que  dans  la  recherche  d' incidents  plus  ou  moins  singuliers, 
d'aventures  plus  ou  moins  touchantes;  c'est  par  la  creation  de  l'homme  lui-mfime 
qu'elle  se  manifeste ;  et  quand  elle  cr6e  l'homme,  elle  le  cr£e  complet,  arnie  de  toutes 
pieces,  tel  qu'il  doit  fitre  pour  suffire  a  toutes  les  vicissitudes  de  la  vie,  et  offrir  en  tous 
sens  l'aspect  de  la  r6alit6.  Othello  est  bien  autre  chose  qu'un  mari  jaloux  et  aveugld, 
et  que  la  jalousie  pousse  au  meurtre ;  ce  n'est  la  que  sa  situation  pendant  la  ptece,  et 
son  caract&re  va  fort  au  dela  de  sa  situation.  Le  More  brule  du  soleil,  au  sang  ardent, 
a  l'imagination  vive  et  brutale,  credule  par  la  violence  de  son  temperament  aussi  bien 
que  par  celle  de  sa  passion ;  le  soldat  parvenu,  fier  de  sa  fortune,  et  de  sa  gl»ire,  respec- 
tueux  et  soumis  devant  le  pouvoir  de  qui  il  tient  son  rang,  n'oubliant  jamais,  dans  les 
transports,  de  l'amour,  les  devoirs  de  la  guerre,  et  regrettant  avec  amertume  les  joies  de 
la  guerre  quand  il  perd  tout  le  bonheur  de  l'amour;  l'homme  dont  la  vie  a  6te  dure, 
agitee,  pour  qui  des  plaisirs  doux  et  tendres  sont  quelque  chose  de  nouveau  qui  l'etonne 
en  le  charmant,  et  qui  ne  lui  donne  pas  le  sentiment  de  la  securite,  bien  que  son  carac- 
tdre  soit  plein  de  g6nerosit£  et  de  confiance ;  Othello  enfin,  peint  non-seulement  dans 
les  portions  de  lui-meme  qui  sont  en  rapport  present  et  direct  avec  la  situation  acci- 
dentelle  ou  it  est  place,  mais  dans  toute  I'etendue  de  sa  nature  et  tel  que  l'a  fait  l'en- 
semble  de  sa  destinee ;  c'cst  la  ce  que  Shakespeare  nous  fait  voir.  De  meme  Iago 
n'est  pas  simplement  un  ennemi  irrlt6  et  qui  veut  se  venger,  ou  un  scelerat  ordinaire 
qui  veut  d6truire  un  bonheur  dont  l'aspect  rimportune ;  c'est  un  scel&rat  cynique  et 
raissonneur,  qui  de  l'egolsme  s'est  fait  une  philosophic,  et  du  crime  une  science ;  qui 
ne  voit  dans  les  hommes  que  des  instruments  ou  des  obstacles  a  ses  interdts  personnels ; 
qui  meprise  la  vertu  comme  une  absurdity  et  cependant  la  hait  comme  une  injure ;  qui 
conserve,  dans  la  conduite  la  plus  servile,  toute  l'independance  de  sa  pensee,  et  qui,  au 
moment  oil  ses  crimes  vont  lui  couter  la  vie,  jouit  encore,  avec  un  orgueil  feroce,  du 
mal  qu'il  a  fait,  comme  d'une  preuve  de  sa  superiorite. 

Qu'on  appelle  l'un  apres  l'autre  tous  les  personnages  de  la  trag6die,  depuis  ses  heros 
jusqu'aux  moins  considerables,  Desdemona,  Cassio,  Emilia,  Bianca;  on  les  verra  par- 
aitre,  non  sous  des  apparences  vagues,  et  avec  les  seuls  traits  qui  correspondent  a  leur 
situation  dramatique,  mais  avec  des  formes  precises,  completes,  et  tout  ce  qui  constitue 
la  personnalite.  Cassio  n'est  point  la  simplement  pour  devenir  l'object  de  la  jalousie 
d' Othello,  et  comme  une  n£cessit6  du  drame,  il  a  son  caractdre,  ses  penchants,  ses  qual- 
ites,  ses  defauts ;  et  de  la  d6coule  naturellement  1' influence  qu'il  exerce  sur  ce  qui  arrive 
Emilia  n'est  point  une  suivante  employee  par  le  poete  comme  instrument  soit  du  nceud, 
soit  de  la  d6couverte  des  perfidies  qui  amenent  la  catastrophe ;  elle  est  la  femme  de 
Iago  qu'elle  n'aime  point,  et  a  qui  cependant  elle  ob&t  parce  qu'elle  le  craint  et 
quoiqu'elle  s'en  m6fie ;  elle  a  mfime  contracts,  dans  la  soci6t6  de  cet  homme,  quelque 
chose  de  Pimmoralite  de  son  esprit ;  rien  n'est  pur  dans  ses  pensees  ni  dans  ses  paroles ; 
cependant  elle  est  bonne,  attached  a  sa  maitresse ;  elle  deteste  le  mal  et  la  noirceur. 
Bianca  elle-m6me  a  sa  physionomie  tout  a  fait  independante  du  petit  rdle  qu'elle  joue 
dans  Paction.  Oubliez  les  evenements,  sortez  du  drame ;  tous  ces  personnages  demeur- 
eront  reels,  anim6s,  distincts ;  ils  sont  vivants  par  eux-m§mes ;  leur  existence  ne  s'evan- 
ouira  point  avec  leur  situation.  C'est  en  eux  que  s'est  d6ploy6  le  pouvoir  crtateur  du 
po€te,  et  les  faits  ne  sont,  pour  lui,  que  le  theatre  sur  lequel  il  leur  ordonne  de  monter.' 
29 


450 


APPENDIX 


It  was  with  a  translation  of  Othello  that,  over  fifty  years  ago,  in  1829,  Le  Comte 
Alfred  de  Vigny  undertook  to  break  the  Academic  chains  which  enfettered  the  French 
drama.  His  struggle  ar.d  final  triumph,  aided  by  Victor  Hugo,  Emile  Deschamps, 
le  DUC  de  Broglie,  Charles  Nodier,  Beranger,  and  others,  form  an  exceedingly 
instructive  and  interesting  chapter  in  the  History  of  the  French  Stage,  but  which 
scarcely  comes  within  the  scope  of  the  present  work.  All  that  I  can  do  here,  is  again 
to  refer  the  student  to  Lacroix's  admirable  Memoire,  p.  292  et  seq. ;  and  to  quote 
from  De  Vigny's  Preface  the  tenns  of  the  problem  which  he  submitted  to  the  French 
public,  from  which  an  idea  may  be  formed  of  the  plan  of  the  whole  campaign. 

'Or,  voici  le  fond  de  ce  que  j'avais  a  dire  aux  intelligences,  le  24  octobre,  1820. 

"  Une  simple  question  est  a  resoudre.     La  voici : 

"  La  scene  franchise  s'ouvrira-t-elle,  ou  non,  a  une  tragedie  moderne  produisant : — 
dans  sa  conception,  un  tableau  large  de  la  vie,  au  lieu  du  tableau  resserre  de  la  catas- 
trophe d'une  intrigue ; — dans  sa  composition,  des  caracteres,  non  des  r6les,  des  scenes 
paisibles  sans  drame,  melSes  a  des  scenes  comiques  et  tragiques ; — dans  son  execution, 
un  style  familier,  comique,  tragique,  et  parfois  6pique  ?"  ' 

It  is  not  difficult  to  see  what  the  result  must  have  been  when  Othello  was  brought 
torward  as  an  answer  to  these  questions.  Our  Gallic  brothers  are  not  stocks  and 
stones,  and  the  contest  was  as  short  as  it  was  sharp.  Academic  frigidity  melted  under 
the  rays  of  a  warmth  which,  springing  from  Nature,  was  directed  by  Art,  Shakespeare's 
art,  the  finest  the  world  has  known. 

In  the  following  January,  in  1830,  an  Article  appeared  in  the  Revue  frangaise  by 
M.  le  due  de  Broglie,  which  I  should  like  to  transfer  bodily  to  these  pages.  I  admire 
it  for  its  style,  its  boldness,  its  liberality,  its  admiration  of  Shakespeare  even  while  con- 
fessing a  fidelity  to  certain  convictions  which  are  opposed  to  Shakespeare.  Herewith 
are  passages  which  we  cannot  afford  to  overlook : 

Le  Theatre  Francois  s'est  rendu,  faute  d'avoir  6te  secouru  a  propos  et  ravitailie  en 
temps  opportun.  Dans  la  soiree  du  25  octobre  dernier,  Attila- Shakespeare  en  a  pris 
possession  avec  armes  et  bagages,  enseignes  deployees,  au  fracas  de  mille  fanfares. 
Pauvres  poetes 'de  la  vieille  roche,  qu'allez-vous  devenir?  II  ne  reste  plus  aux  ames 
faibles  qu'a  se  rendre,  a  sacrifier  sur  l'autel  des  faux  dieux,  et  aux  vrais  croyants  qu'a 
s'envelopper  la  t€te  de  leur  manteau. 

Plaisanterie  a  part,  la  revolution  qui  s'opere  depuis  quelque  temps  dans  le  gout  du 
public  est  un  ph6nomdne  curieux  et  singulidrement  digne  d'attention.  Jamais  plus 
notable  changement  ne  s'est  prononce'  avec  plus  d'6clat  et  de  rapidity. 

(P«  53-)  Que  cet  homme  [Shakespeare]  est  un  etonnant  peintre  de  la  nature  hu- 
maine!  combien  il  est  vrai  qu'il  a  recu  d'en  haut  quelque  chose  de  cette  puissance  crea- 
trice  qui  souffle  sur  un  peu  de  poussiere,  et  qui  l'anime  pour  la  vie  et  l'eternite- ! 

Dans  l'entrevue  avec  Brabantio,  Othello  ne  prononce  pas  quinze  vers;  devant  le 
s£nat,  Desd6mona  n'en  profere  pas  vingt ;  et  pourtant  deja  Othello  existe  tout  entier, 
Desd6mona  existe  tout  entiere ;  ils  sont  la,  l'un  et  l'autre,  vivant  sous  nos  yeux,  se 
d6ployant  sans  contrainte,  dans  toute  la  grace  et  la  singularity  de  leur  caractere,  dans 
toute  leur  individuality  naive  et  imp6rissable.  Supprimez  le  reste  de  la  pi&ce,  vous 
n'effacerez  de  notre  m^moire  ni  Desdemona  ni  Othello ;  placez-les  a  plaisir  dans  un 
autre  ordre  de  circonstances ;  allez,  6vertuez-vous :  mals  ne  vous  trompez  pas,  car  nous 
les  connaissons,  nous  savons  d'avance  ce  qu'ils  peuvent  dire  ou  faire. 

Et  pourtant,  dans  ces  caracteres,  que  de  complexity,  que  de  contrastes,  que  de  finesse 
et  de  nuances ! 

(P.  57.)  Figurez-vous  un  homme  qui  n'aurait  v6cu  depuis  longtemps  qu'a  la  clarti 


FRENCH  CRITICISMS— DE   VIGNY  451 

des  bougies,  des  lampions  ou  des  verres  de  couleur,  qui  n'aurait  vu  que  des  cascades 
d'opera,  des  montagnes  de  toile  peinte  et  des  guirlandes  de  fleurs  artificielles,  et  qui  se 
trouverait  transports  tout-a-coup,  par  une  magnifique  matinee  du  mois  de  juillet,  au 
souffle  de  l'air  le  plus  pur,  sous  les  tranquilles  et  gracieux  noyers  d'Interlaken,  en  face 
des  glaciers  d'Oberland;  et  vous  aurez  une  assez  juste  id6e  de  la  situation  morale  d'un 
habitu6  de  nos  premieres  representations  lorsqu'il  vient  a  se  trouver,  a  l'improviste,  en 
presence  de  ces  beaut6s  si  simples,  si  grandes  et  si  naturelles. 

Un  second  point  sur  lequel  le  sentiment  involontaire  du  public  francais  s'est  trouve 
tout-a-fait  en  disaccord  avec  les  admirateurs  de  Shakespeare,  e'est  le  role  d'lago.  Ce 
r6le,  qui  est  la  cheville  ouvriere  de  la  piece,  est  grandement  c61ebre  en  Angleterre  et 
ailleurs ;  tous  les  critiques  sans  exception,  anglais,  allemands  ou  francais,  ne  tarissent 
pas  dans  leurs  61oges.  A  la  sc£ne,  il  nous  a  paru  d6plaire  gdn6ralement ;  dSplaire 
d'une  manidre  tres-prononcee,  et  qui  allait  croissant  d'acte  en  acte,  tellement  que,  t>'il 
eflt  6t6  jou6  avec  moins  d'aplomb  et  de  decision,  il  ltd  serait  certainement  arriv6  mal- 
heur.     Pourquoi  a-t-il  d6plu  ? 

II  etait  assez  curieux,  a  la  fin  de  chaque  acte,  d' entendre  chaque  spectateur  donnei 
la  raison  de  sa  repugnance,  le  motif  de  son  aversion.  Celui-ci  trouvait  Iago  trop  im- 
moral ;  celui-la,  au  contraire,  ne  le  trouvait  pas  assez  habile  hypocrite :  on  ne  se  vante 
pas  ainsi  de  sa  sc£leratesse,  disait-il ;  un  troisieme  6tait  revoke  de  voir  commettre  le 
crime  en  plaisantant ;  ainsi  de  suite. 

Selon  nous,  le  r6le  a  d6plu  parce  qu'il  n'est  pas  bon ;  parce  qu'il  est,  non  pas  incon- 
sequent (quoi  de  plus  naturel  a  l'homme  que  l'incons6quence  ?)  mais  incoherent,  parce 
que  les  parties  dont  il  se  compose  ne  tiennent  pas  ensemble,  et  qu'a  son  6gard,  on  ne 
sait  vraiment  a  quelle  idee  se  prendre.  Telle  est  du  moins  notre  mani£re  de  voir.  Que 
les  devots  a  Shakespeare  nous  anathdmatisent,  si  e'est  leur  bon  plaisir. 

Qu'est-ce  qu'Iago  ? 

Est-ce  le  malin  esprit,  ou  du  moins  son  reprSsentant  sur  la  terre  ?  Othello  a-t-il 
raison  quand  il  le  regarde  aux  pieds  pour  voir  s'il  ne  les  aurait  pas  fourchus  ?  Est-ce 
un  gtre  qui  fait  le  mal  pour  l'amour  du  mal,  et  qui  vient  souffler  des  poisons  sur  l'union 
d'Othello  et  de  DesdSmona,  par  ce  seul  motif  que  Desdemona  est  une  creature  ang6- 
lique  et  qu'Othello  est  un  homme  loyal,  brave  et  g6n6reux  ? 

Alors  pourquoi  donner  a  Iago  des  motifs  humains  et  int6ress£s  ?  Pourquoi  nous 
montrer  en  lui  une  basse  cupidity,  le  ressentiment  d'une  injure  faite  a  son  honneur, 
l'envie  d'un  poste  plus  61ev6  que  le  sien  ?  Pourquoi  le  voyons-nous  ddvaliser  ce  pauvre 
Roderigo,  comme  Scapin  ou  Sbrigani  escamotent  a  un  imbecile  la  bourse  qu'il  a  dans 
son  pourpoint?  Ces  passions  de  bas  aloi  dStruisent  tout  le  fantastique  du  rSle;  le 
d6mon  n'a  ni  humeur  ni  honneur ;  il  n'a  ni  rancune,  ni  colore,  ni  convoitise ;  e'est  un 
personnage  d6sint6ress6 ;  il  fait  le  mal  parce  que  le  mal  est  le  mal,  et  qu'il  est,  lui,  le 
malin. 

Iago  est-il,  au  contraire,  comme  il  s'en  fait  gloire,  le  parfait  dgolste,  l'homme  qui  sait, 
au  supreme  degr6,  s'aimer  lui-meme,  l'Stre  qui  sait  subordonner  hi6rarchiquement  ses 
d6sirs,  selon  leur  degrd  d'importance,  et  disposer  ensuite  ses  actions  de  mani£re  a  tendre 
invariablement  a  sa  plus  haute  satisfaction,  coute  que  coute  a  autrui,  sans  scrupule,  sans 
remords,  et  aussi  sans  se  laisser  d6tourner  par  des  vell6it6s  d'un  ordre  inferieur  ? 

Alors  pourquoi  poursuit-il  en  m^me  temps  trois  ou  quatre  buts  distincts,  et  d'une 
importance  pour  lui  tres-inegale  ?  Pourquoi  entreprend-il  coup  sur  coup  vingt  projets 
differents  qu'il  abandonne  l'un  apres  l'autre?  Pourquoi  surtout  prodigue-t-il,  dans 
chaque  occasion,  cent  fois  plus  de  m£chancet6  que  le  besoin  de  la  circonstance  ne  le. 
comporte  ? 


452 


APPENDIX 


(P.  62.)  II  [Iago]  reussit,  dira-t-on. 

II  r£ussit,  ainsi  le  veut  l'auteur.     Mais  le  bon  sens,  qu'en  dit-il  ? 

L'auteur  lui-mfime  reussit,  mais  d'ou  vient  ?  C'est  parce  que  telle  est  la  prciondeui 
et  la  vivacite  de  sa  conception  premiere  que  les  invraisemblances  les  plus  choquantes, 
les  absurdites  les  plus  inconcevables  passent  inapercues ;  c'est  parce  que  personne  n'a 
l'envie  ni  le  loisir  de  regarder  aux  ressorts  du  drame.  Autre  chose  est  pourtant  de 
nous  donner  ces  absurdites  pour  des  merites. 

Oui,  cela  est  tres-vrai ;  depuis  le  premier  moment  ou  la  premiere  insinuation  s'echappe 
des  levres  d'lago  pour  atteindre  Poreille  du  More,  depuis  ces  paroles  fatales :  '  Ah !  ceci 
me  deplait,'  jusqu'  au  moment  solennel  ou  le  rideau  tombe  sur  les  cadavres  des  deux 
amants,  le  spectateur  n'a  pas  la  possibility  de  respirer.  Vous  entendriez  voler  une 
mouche  dans  la  salle,  et  bien  maladroits  sont  les  amis  dont  le  zele  s'efforce  d'inter- 
rompre  par  des  applaudissements  cette  anxi&6  qui  va  croissant  de  minute  en  minute. 

Des  le  premier  mot,  tout  est  dit,  tout  est  d6cid6. 

Adieu  pour  jamais,  Desdemona,  adieu  Othello.  Desdemona  n'apparalt  plus  que 
comme  l'innocent  oiseau  qui  se  debat  faiblement  sous  la  serre  d'un  vautour,  mais  d'un 
vautour  qui  se  d£bat  lui-meme  en  furieux  sous  la  serre  d'un  autre  vautour,  et  se  venge, 
sur  la  pauvre  victime,  des  effroyables  tortures  auxquelles  il  est  en  proie. 

Le  spectateur  contemple  ce  tableau,  non  point  avec  cette  curiosite  inquiete  qui  passe 
tour  a  tour  de  la  crainte  a  l'espoir,  mais,  s'il  est  permis  de  le  dire,  et  en  tenant  compte 
de  toutes  les  differences,  avec  quelque  chose  de  cette  angoisse  inexprimable  qui  s'empare 
de  nous  lorsque,  dans  une  cour  de  justice,  nous  assistons  aux  vains  efforts  de  malheureux 
entrained  vers  une  condamnation  fatale  et  indubitable. 

(P.  69.)  La  scene  ou  Desdemona  se  deshabille,  avant  de  se  mettre  au  lit,  est  done 
bien  veritablement,  pour  elle,  ce  quart  d'heure  de  grace  que  Ton  accorde  aux  con- 
damnes  avant  de  les  conduire  au  supplice ;  en  vain  essaie-t-elle  de  donner  le  change 
a  Emilia,  de  se  faire  illusion  a  elle-m£me,  de  detourner  sa  pensee  sur  quelque  sujet 
frivole ;  le  plus  intime  de  son  ame  reparait  et  surgit  a  chaque  mot.  Et  telle  est  aussi 
cette  scene  pour  le  spectateur  6perdu ;  il  compte  les  minutes ;  il  s'attache  au  moindre 
incident ;  il  se  cramponne  a  la  moindre  chose ;  il  demande  pourquoi  pas  encore  ce  nceud, 
pourquoi  pas  encore  cette  agrafe ;  il  voudrait,  en  quelque  sorte,  saisir  Desdemona  par 
sa  robe  et  la  retenir. 

Poetes  tragiques,  voila  votre  maitre ;  prenez  lecon  de  lui,  si  vous  savez  en  prendre. 


Victor  Hugo  {William  Shakespeare,  Paris,  1864,  p.  321) :  Maintenant  qu'est-ce 
qu'Othello  ?  C'est  la  nuit.  Immense  figure  fatale.  La  nuit  est  amoureuse  du  jour. 
La  noirceur  aime  l'aurore.  L'africain  adore  la  blanche.  Othello  a  pour  clart6  et  pour 
folie  Desdemona.  Aussi  comme  la  jalousie  lui  est  facile !  II  est  grand,  il  est  auguste, 
il  est  majestueux,  il  est  au-dessus  de  toutes  les  tetes,  il  a  pour  cortege  la  bravoure,  la 
bataille,  la  fanfare,  la  banniere,  la  renomm^e,  la  gloire,  il  a  le  rayonnement  de  vingt  vie 
toires,  il  est  plein  d'astres,  cet  Othello,  mais  il  est  noir.  Aussi  comme,  jaloux,  le  heros 
est  vite  monstre !  le  noir  devient  negre.     Comme  la  nuit  a  vite  fait  signe  a  la  mort ! 

A  cdte  d'Othello,  qui  est  la  nuit,  il  y  a  Iago,  qui  est  le  mal.  Le  mal,  l'autre  forme 
de  l'ombre.  La  nuit  n'est  que  la  nuit  du  monde ;  le  mal  est  la  nuit  de  Tame.  Quelle 
obscurity  que  la  perfidie  et  le  mensonge  !  avoir  dans  les  veines  de  l'encre  ou  la  trahison, 
c'est  la  m£me  chose.  Quiconque  a  coudoye  l'imposture  et  le  parjure,  le  sait ;  on  est  a 
tatons  dans  un  fourbe.  Versez  l'hypocrisie  sur  le  point  du  jour,  vous  eteindrez  le  soleil. 
C'est  la,  grace  aux  fausses  religions,  ce  qui  arrive  a  Dieu. 


FRENCH  CRITICISMS— VICTOR   HUGO,   TAINE        453 

Iago  pris  d'Othello,  c'cst  le  precipice  pres  du  glissement.  Par  ici !  dit-il  tout  bas. 
Lc  piege  conseille  la  c£cit6.  Le  tenebreux  guide  le  noir.  La  tromperie  se  charge  de 
reclaircissement  qu'il  faut  a  la  nuit.  La  jalousie  a  le  mensonge  pour  chien  d'aveugle. 
Contre  la  blancheur  et  la  candeur,  Othello  le  negre,  Iago  le  traitre,  quoi  de  plus  terri- 
ble! ces  fierocites  de  l'ombre  s'entendent.  Ces  deux  incarnations  de  l'eclipse  con- 
spirent,  l'une  en  rugissant,  l'autre  en  ricanant,  le  tragique  etouffement  de  la  lumiere. 

Sondez  cette  chose  profonde,  Othello  est  la  nuit.  Et  etent  la  nuit,  et  voulant  tuer, 
qu'est-ce  qu'il  prend  pour  tuer  ?  le  poison  ?  la  massue  ?  la  hache  ?  le  couteau  ?  Non, 
l'oreiller.  Tuer,  c'est  endormir.  Shakespeare  lui-meme  ne  s'est  peut-fitre  pas  rendu 
compte  de  ceci.  Le  cr6ateur,  quelquefois  presque  a  son  insu,  obeit  a  son  type,  tant  ce 
type  est  une  puissance.  Et  c'est  ainsi  que  Desdemona,  epouse  de  l'homme  Nuit,  meurt 
*toufFee  par  l'oreiller,  qui  a  eu  le  premier  baiser  et  qui  a  le  dernier  souffle. 


H.  TAINE  (Histoire  de  la  Literature  Anglaisey  Paris,  1866,  ii,  232) :  Mais  le  trait 
qui  Iago  veritablement  acheve,  et  le  range  a  c6t6  de  Mephistopheles,  c'est  la  verit6 

atroce  et  le  vigoureux  raisonnement  par  lequel  il  egale  sa  sceleratesse  a  la  vertu 

Ajoutez  a  tous  ces  traits  une  verve  diabolique,  une  invention  intarissable  d'images,  de 
caricatures,  de  saletes,  un  ton  de  corps  de  garde,  des  gestes  et  des  gouts  brutaux  de  sol- 
dat,  des  habitudes  de  dissimulation,  de  sang-froid  et  de  haine,  de  patience,  contracted 
dans  les  penis  et  dans  les  ruses  de  la  vie  militaire,  dans  les  miseres  continues  d'un  long 
abaissement  et  d'une  esperance  frustr6e ;  vous  comprendrez  comment  Shakespeare  a  pu 
changer  la  perfidie  abstraite  en  une  figure  reelle,  et  pourquoi  l'atroce  vengeance  d'lago 
n'est  qu'une  suite  necessaire  de  son  nature],  de  sa  vie  et  de  son  education. 


In  proof  of  the  difficulties  attending  the  translation  of  Shakespeare  into  German,  1 
gave  in  Macbeth  eighteen  or  twenty  German  versions  of  'Double,  double  toil  and 
trouble,'  &c. ;  which  was  well  enough  chosen  as  an  instance  where  foreigners  have  to 
contend  with  a  difficulty  that  might  be  termed  merely  technical.  The  lines,  to  Eng- 
lish ears,  convey  but  little  definite  meaning ;  their  vagueness,  combined  with  the  bub- 
bling sound  as  of  boiling,  imparts  the  Abracadabra  suggestion  of  a  witch's  charm.  I  am 
not  sure  that  some  of  the  versions  there  given  do  not  fulfil  the  essential  conditions  of  a 
translation  where,  as  I  have  said,  the  difficulty  is  technical.  A  fairer  test  of  translation 
is  to  be  found  in  lines  where  words  have  a  peculiar  signification  and  an  inherent  charm 
to  English  ears,  without  which  the  whole  passage  is  naught,  and  where,  if  a  single  word 
be  changed,  the  spell  is  snapt,  just  as  the  fractured  point  of  a  Prince  Rupert's  tear 
reduces  the  crystal  globule  to  sand.  For  instance,  take  those  lines  which  Iago  utters  as 
he  sees  Othello  approaching,  after  the  first  administration  of  the  '  poisonous  mineral '  • 

'  Look  where  he  comes :  Not  poppy,  nor  mandragora, 
Nor  all  the  drowsy  syrups  of  the  world, 
Shall  ever  medicine  thee  to  that  sweet  sleep 
Which  thou  owd'st  yesterday.' 


454 


APPENDIX 


It  seems  sheer  impertinence  to  attempt  to  point  out  to  English  readers  any  especial 
charm  'where  every  phrase  is  full  of  beauty,  but  for  my  present  purpose  I  must  be  par- 
aoned  for  calling  attention  to  three  words  here.  Is  there  any  other  word  in  the  Eng- 
lish tongue  that  can  be  substituted  for  '  drowsy '  ?  Sleepy  certainly  cannot.  There  is  no 
resistance  in  sleepy.  For  sleep  one  composes  his  limbs,  and  repose  is  wooed.  Narcotic 
is  worse,  it  has  a  repulsive  odor ;  and  soporific  is  pedantic.  But  in  '  drowsy '  there  is 
half-wakefulness,  utter  weariness,  and  nodding  resistance  to  the  potent  drug.  Thus, 
also,  'syrup,'  which  is  not  juice,  ox  potion,  or  essence,  or  extract,  nor  anything  but  that 
heavy  liquid  sweetness  whose  very  sluggishness  suggests  its  power  in  reserve,  whose 
inertness  by  contrast  renders  its  essence  more  quick,  and  it  is  redolent  of  its  home  in  the 
East.  Lastly  comes  •  medicine,'  with  its  suggestion  of  illness,  and  dis-ease,  and  resto- 
ration. Of  course  all  the  other  words  in  these  lines  are  exquisitely  chosen,  but  then 
they  are  such  as  can  be  transferred  readily  from  one  language  to  another.  The  vague 
sonorousness  of  <  mandragora '  speaks  quite  as  powerfully,  it  may  be  supposed,  to  French 
or  German  or  Italian  ears  as  to  ours.  But  the  three  words  which  I  have  specified, 
•  drowsy,'  '  syrup/  and  *  medicine,'  must  be  felt,  or  the  translation  falls  short ;  it  may 
be  through  the  fault  of  the  translator  or  through  the  deficiency  of  his  mother  tongue. 

Furthermore,  in  examining  the  following  translations,  another  question  suggests 
itself, — a  question  which  I  have  never  been  able  to  answer  satisfactorily.  Should  a 
translation  of  poetry  be  in  prose  or  rhythm  ?  A  discussion  of  this  far-reaching  ques- 
tion is  hardly  germane  here ;  my  present  purpose  is  fulfilled  in  calling  attention  to 
what  seems  to  me  to  be  the  fact,  that  in  the  prose  translations  which  follow,  the  sug- 
gestions of  the  original  are  reproduced  somewhat  more  completely  than  in  those  in 
rhythm.  But,  alack  the  day,  what  does  the  passage  amount  to  without  the  exquisite 
cadence  of  '  Nor  all  the  drowsy  syrups  of  the  world '  ?  which  seems,  in  its  undulation 
merely,  to  suggest  the  quiet  •  unfurling '  of  twilight  and  the  solemn  tolling  of  the  cur- 
few. '  In  every  language,'  said  Southey,  '  there  is  a  magic  of  words  as  untranslatable 
as  the  Sesa?7ie  in  the  Arabian  tale, — you  may  retain  the  meaning,  but  if  the  words  be 
changed  the  spell  is  lost.'  Of  course,  this  is  true  in  German.  Not  while  the  world 
lasts  will  Gretchen's  song  be  translated :  '  Meine  Ruh  ist  hin,  Mein  Herz  ist  schwer.' 

Le  Tourneur,  Paris,  1776:  Va,  ni  l'opium,  ni  la  mandragore,  ni  toutes  les  potions 
assoupissantes  de  l'univers  ne  te  rendront  jamais  ce  doux  sommeil  que  tu  gofitas  hier 
pour  la  derniere  fois. 

Alfred  de  Vigny,  Paris,  1829  : 

Va,  dechire  ton  cceiu  !  va,  ni  le  feu,  ni  l'eau, 
Les  boissons  de  pavot,  d'opium,  de  mandragore, 
Ne  pourront  te  guerir  et  te  donner  encore 
Ce  paisible  sommeil  que  tu  goutas  hier. 

Benjamin  Laroche,  Paris,  1842 :  Le  voici  qui  vient ! — Ni  les  pavots,  ni  la  mau 
dragore,  ni  tous  les  sirops  soporifiques  du  monde  ne  te  rendront  le  doux  sommeil  que 
tu  avais  hier. 

Francois-Victor  Hugo,  Paris,  1862:  Tenez,  le  voici  qui  vient!  Ni  le  pavot,  ni 
la  mandragore, — ni  tous  les  sirops  narcotiques  du  monde — ne  te  rendront  jamais  ce 
doux  sommeil— que  tu  avais  hier. 


CAN  SHAKESPEARE  BE    TRANSLATED t  455 

M  Alcide  Cayrou,  Paris,  1876: 

Va !  recours  au  pavot  comme  a  la  mandragore, 
Si  tu  le  veux,  choisis  l'opium,  l'ellebore : 
Tu  n'auras  plus  jamais,  non,  ce  sommeil  heureux 
Que  tu  goutais  hier  dans  ton  nid  amoureux ! 

Louis  de  Grammont,  Paris,  1882: 

Othello  vient.     Ah  !  e'en  est  fait.     Le  plus  puissant 

Narcotique  jamais  ne  pourra  rendre  au  More 

Le  sommeil  qu'il  goulait  hier.     La  mandragore 

Et  le  pavot  seront  desormais  superflus 

Pour  vaincre  son  angoisse  :  il  ne  dormira  plus  ! 

Jean  Aicard,  Taris,  1882: 

II  vient Je  disais  done  ?  .  .  .  .  Mandragore  ou  pavots, 

Va,  rien  ne  saura  plus  te  rendre  le  repos ! 


Wieland,  Zurich,  1766:  Seht,  da  kommt  er  !  Weder  Mohn-Saamen,  noch  Man- 
dragora,  noch  alle  einschlafernde  Safte  in  der  Welt  zusammen  genommen  werden  dir 
jemals  diesen  sUssen  Schlaf  wiedergeben,  den  du  gestern  noch  hattest. 

Eschenburg,  Mannheim,  1779:  Sieh,  da  k5mmt  er ! — Weder  Mohnsamen,  noch 
Mandragora,  noch  alle  einschlafernde  Safte  auf  der  Welt  werden  dir  jemals  den  stissen 
Schlaf  wieder  schaffen,  den  du  gestern  noch  hattest. 

Ludewig  Schubart,  Leipzig,  1802:  Sieh  da  kommt  er  wieder.  Wfder  Mohnsaft, 
noch  Alraun,  noch  alle  einschlafernden  Safte  der  Welt,  werden  dir  je  den  stissen  Schlaf 
wieder  verschaffen,  den  du  noch  gestern  genossen. 

Dr  Johann  Heinrich  Voss,  Jena,  1806: 

Da  kommt  er  her !     Nicht  Mohn  noch  Mandragora 
Noch  alle  Schlummersafte  der  Natur 
Erktinsteln  je  den  stissen  Schlaf  dir  wieder, 
Den  du  noch  gestern  hattest. 

Johann  Wilhelm  Otto  Benda,  Leipzig,  1826: 

Da  kommt  er !  sieh  !     Nicht  Mohn,  Mandragora, 
noch  alle  andre  Safte  fur  den  Schlaf 
stell'n  je  den  siissen  Schlummer  wieder  her, 
den  du  noch  gestern  schliefst. 

Philtpp  Kaufmann,  Berlin,  1832: 

Da  kommt  er  schon !     Kein  Mohnsaft  nocn  Alraun, 
Noch  alle  Schlafgetranke  in  der  Welt 
Stelln  je  dir  wieder  her  den  stissen  SchlaC 
Den  du  noch  gestern  hattest. 


456  APPENDIX 

A.  W.  von  Schlegel  (?  Baudissin)  Berlin,  1832 : 

Da  kommt  er.     Nicht  Mandragora  noch  Mohn, 
Noch  alle  Schlummersafte  der  Natur 
Verhelfen  je  dir  zu  dem  siissen  Schlaf, 
Der  gestern  dich  erquickt. 

Ernst  Ortlepp,  Stuttgart,  1839: 

Sieh  da,  er  kommt !     Nicht  Mohn,  nicht  Mandragora, 
Noch  alle  Schlummersafte  der  Natur 
Sind  fahig,  dir  den  siissen  Schlaf  zuruckzuzaubern. 
Den  du  noch  gestern  schliefst. 

Moriz  Rapp,  Stuttgart,  1843: 

Nicht  Mohnsaft,  noch  ein  Opium,  noch  was  sonst 
Von  Specerei'n  wirkt  auf  den  goldnen  Schlummer, 
Nichts  soil  dir  jemals  mehr  dazu  verhelfen, 
Wie  du  ihn  gestern  noch  geschlummert  hast 

Dr  F.  Jencken,  Mainz,  1854 : 

Da  kommt  er  her !  nicht  Mohn  noch  Mondragora,  \nc\ 
Nicht  irgend  sonst  ein  tuchtig  Schlummersaftchen, 
Wird  Deiner  Nacht  die  sanfte  Ruh  mehr  schaffen, 
Wie  sie  Dir  gestern  noch  vergSnnt 

Oswald  Marbach,  Leipzig,  1864 : 

Da  kommt  er!     Ha,  nimm  Opium,  mein  iTeund, 
Nimm  was  du  willst,  fur  dich  giebts  keinen  Trank, 
Der  den  gesunden  Schlaf  dir  wieder  giebt 
Den  du  bis  heut  gehabt. 

W.  Jordan,  Hildburghausen,  1867  : 

Da  kommt  er.     Mohnsaft  nicht,  noch  Mandragora, 
Noch  alle  Schlummertranke  der  Natur 
Verhelfen  dir  zum  siissen  Schlaf  von  gestern. 

Friederich  Bodenstedt,  Leipzig,  1867 : 

Da  kommt  er  her.    Nicht  Mohn,  noch  Mandragora, 
Noch  alle  Schlummersafte  dieser  Welt 
Verschaffen  je  den  siissen  Schlaf  dir  wieder, 
Der  gestern  dein  war. 

L.  Tieck  (Bearbeitet  von  Dr  A.  Schmidt.     Herausgegeben  durch  die  Deutschi 
Shakespeare-Gesellschaft),  Berlin,  187 1 : 

Da  kommt  er.     Mohnsaft  nicht  noch  Hexenkraut, 
Noch  alle  Schlummerkrafte  der  Natur, 
Verhelfen  je  dir  zu  dem  siissen  Schlaf, 
Den  du  noch  gestern  hattest. 


CAN  SHAKESPEARE  BE   TRANSLATED?  457 

MAX  Moltke,  Leipzig,  n.  d. : 

Doch  sieh,  er  kommt ! — Nicht  Mohn,  nicht  Mandragora, 
Noch  alle  Schlummersafte  von  dcr  Welt 
Verschaffen  je  den  silssen  Schlaf  dir  wieder 
Den  du  noch  gestern  schliefst 


IQANNHZ  A.  MANQAH.  EN  K2N2TANTIN0TII0AEI.  1873. 

*I<Jov  lpxtr<u'  *a^  ovre  WK(JV,  ovre  jiavdpayopac,  *<**  ovdi  irdvra  ra  vnvurriKa  irora 
tov  kSojiov  6k"kow  dwadij  va  aol  eiravayayuot  rbv  yXvnvv  iiulvov  vttvov,  tov  diroiov 
AnfjXavoec  £0£c  &£  re^evraiav  fopav. 

AHMHTPI02  BIKEAA.  EN  A6HNAI2.  1876. 

"Ep^erou. — Ovt"  tj  Oepeianrj,  ovre  6  fiavdpay6pact 
ovt*  bXa  ra  vnvurina  nal  larpiKa  tov  Kdafxov 
dbf  rjfmopovv  •K'kkov  irori  rbv  iirvov  va  aov  dfaoovv, 
irov  x^C  y%VKOKOip.rjd7jKec. 


Shakspeare  voIgarizzatet  &c,  Firenze,  1801 :  Eccolo,  ei  viene;  Nfc  il  papavero,  ne 
la  mandragora,  ne  qualunque  altra  pozione  sonnifera,  potra  ridonarti  quel  dolce  sonno, 
di  cui  jeri  hai  gustato. 

Ignazio  Valletta,  Firenze,  1830:  Gnardate  come  viene !  n£  papavero,  n£  mandra- 
gola,  ne  tutti  i  soporiferi  del  mondo  ti  porgeran  pin  quella  grata  medicina  di  sonno,  che 
godevi  jeri. 

Giunio  Bazzoni  e  Giacomo  Sormani,  Milano,  1830 :  Oh !  eccolo  che  giugne.  No, 
ne  i  papaveri,  ne1  la  mandragora,  ne  tutte  le  bevande  soporifere  dell'  universo  potranno 
giammai  renderti  quel  dolce  sonno  di  cui  godesti  la  scorsa  notte. 

Carlo  Rusconi,  1831 :  Eccolo!  .  .  .  .  Nt  i  papaveri,  nd  la  mandragola,  ne  alcun 
soporifero  di  questo  mondo  potra  pin  renderti  il  dolce  sonno  che  ieri  ancora  provasti. 

GiULlo  Carcano,  Milano,  1843-53  (used  by  Salvini  and  Rossi): 

— —  Ve'  ch'  egli  vien.     Giammai 
Papavero  o  mandragora,  n£  quante 
Ha  il  mondo  essenze  soporose,  darti 
II  rimedio  potran  di  quel  soave 
Sonno  che  jer  gustasti. 

Andrea  Maffei,  Firenze,  1869: 

£  qui !  .  .  .  .  Non  succo  d'erbe, 

Non  virtu  di  mandragora,  nd  d'altra 
Soporosa  sostanza  a  te  potranno 
Quel  dolce  sonno  ridonar  che  gli  occhi 
Jeri  ancor  ti  velava. 


45  8 


APPENDIX 


Jaime  Clark,  Madrid,  n.  d.  (?  1873-74) : 

— Vedle  alii.     Ni  adormidera 
Belefio,  ni  mandragora,  ni  todos 
Los  zumos  soporiferos  del  mundo 
Podran  apropinarte  el  dulce  sueno 
Que  disfrutaste  ayer. 


Let  me  not  be  understood  as  citing  these  translations  in  any  carping,  tutical  spirit 
They  are  all  good,  and  some  of  them  admirable,  as  exact  and  literal  as  is  possible. 
Where  they  have  failed,  they  have  failed  because  they  must. 

I  add  the  following,  and,  did  space  permit,  could  continue  the  series  in  Russian,  in 
Polish,  in  Bohemian,  and  in  Hebrew, — not,  however,  as  examples  of  translation,  for 
my  having  in  these  languages  is  a  younger  brother's  revenue,  but  as  illustrations  of  the 
universality  of  Shakespeare's  presence  in  every  land,  and  in  every  tongue : — 

Turriaan  Moulin,  Haarlem,  1857 : 

Daar  komt  hij,  zie !     Geen  mankop  of  alruin, 
Geen  sluimerdrank  ter  wereld  die  uw  oog 
Ooit  aan  dien  zoeten  slaap  wefir  helpen  zal, 
Die  gister  u  verkwikte. 

Dr  L.  A.  J.  Burgersdijk,  Leiden,  1885  : 

Daar  komt  hij,  zie  !     Geen  heul-  noch  alruinsap, 
Noch  al  der  wereld  sluimerdranken  brengen 
Den  zoeten  slaap  u  weder,  die  nog  gist'ren 
U  eigen  was. 


Carl  August  Hag-berg,  Lund,  1861 : 

Der  kommer  han. 
Nu  kan  ej  opium,  mandragora 
Och  hela  vida  verldens  slummer-droppi\r 
FSrhjelpa  dig  till  lika  ljuflig  s5mn, 
Som  den  du  sof  i  gar. 


Edv  Lembcke,  Kjdbenhavn,  1866 : 

der  er  han. 

Nu  skal  ei  Valmu,  ei  Alrunesaft, 
ei  nogen  Sovedrik  i  Verden  vide 
di^  mere  dysse  i  saa  sod  en  Sdvxi 
scoa  den,  du  sov  igaar. 


LIST    OF    EDITIONS    COLLATED    IN    THE 
TEXTUAL    NOTES 


The  First  Quarto  (Ashbee's  Facsimile)  [Qx] 

The  First  Folio  [FJ    .  . 

The  Second  Quarto [QJ    .  . 

The  Second  Folio       [Fa]    .  . 

The  Third  Quarto [Q  ]    .  . 

The  Third  Folio         [F3]     .  . 

The  Fourth  Folio [FJ    .  . 

Rowe  (First  Edition) [Rowe  i] 

Rowe  (Second  Edition) [Rowe  ii] 

Pope  (First  Edition)         [Pope  i] 

Pope  (Second  Edition) [Pope  ii] 

Theobald  (First  Edition)  .  .        .  .  [Theob.  i] 

Theobald  (Second  Edition)      .  .        .  .  [Theob.  ii] 

Hanmer [Han.] 

Warburton         [Warb.] 

Johnson [Johns.] 

Capell [Cap.] 

Jennens [Jen-]  •  • 

Johnson  and  Steevens [Steev.  ,rj^\ 

Johnson  and  Steevens [Steev.  '78] 

Johnson  and  Steevens [Steev.  '85] 

Malone [Mai.] 

Steevens [Steev.] 

Rann  [Rann] 

Reed's  Steevens  [Var.  '03] 

Reed's  Steevens  [Var.  '13] 

Boswell's  Malone       [Var-] 

Knight [Knt]  .  . 

Collier  (First  Edition) [Coll.  i] 

Singer  (Second  Edition)  .  .         .  .  [Sing,  ii] 

Dyce  (First  Edition)        [Dyce  i] 

Collier  (Second  Edition)         .  .        .  .  [Coll.  ii] 

Staunton [Sta.]  . . 

R.  Grant  White  (First  Edition)         .  .  [Wh.  i] 
The     Globe    Edition     (Clark     and 

Wright)  [Glo.] 

Keightley . .  [Ktly] 


. .  1622 

. .  1623 

. .  1630 

. .  1632 

..   1655 

.  .  1664 

.     ..  1685 

. .  1709 

. .  1714 

. .  1723 

. .  1728 

. .  1733 

. .  1740 

. .  1744 

. .  1747 

. .   1765 

. .  1768 

. .  1773 

. .  1773 

..  177^ 

.     ..  1785 

. .  1790 

. .  1793 

(?)  1794 

..   1803 

..  1813 

. .  1821 

■  •    . 

. .  1841 

.     ..  1843 

•  •       • 

.     ..  1856 

.     ..  1857 

.     ..  185s 

•  •       • 

. .  i860 

•  •       • 

. .  1861 

•  •       • 

. .  1864 

•  •       • 

. .  1864 

459 


460 


APPENDIX 


Charles  and  Mary  Cowden-Clarke  [Clarke]  (?)  1864 

The  Cambridge  Edition  (Clark  and 

Wright)  [Cam.]  1866 

Halliwell  (Folio  Edition)       .  .         .  .  [Hal.]  1865 

Dyce  (Second  Edition) [Dyce  ii]  1866 

Delius  (Third  Edition) [Del.]  1872 

Dyce  (Third  Edition) [Dyce  iii] 1875 

Collier  (Third  Edition)  . .        . .  [Coll.  iii] 1877 

Rolfe        [Rife]  1879 

Hudson [Huds.]  1881 

R.  Grant  White  (Secoid  Edition)     . .  [Wh.  ii]  1883 

In  the  Textual  Notes  the  symbol  Ff  indicates  the  agreement  of  the  Second,  Third, 
and  Fourth  Folios.     The  agreement  of  the  three  Quartos  is  indicated  by  Qq. 

The  frequent  omission  of  the  apostrophe  in  the  Second  Folio,  a  peculiarity  of  that 
edition,  is  not  generally  noted. 

The  sign  +  indicates  the  agreement  of  Rowe,  Pope,  Theobald,  Hanmer,  War- 
burton,  and  Johnson. 

When  Warburton  precedes  Hanmer  in  the  Textual  Notes,  it  indicates  that  Han- 
mer has  followed  a  suggestion  of  Warburton's. 

The  words  et  cet.  after  any  reading  indicate  that  it  is  the  reading  of  all  other 
editions. 

The  abbreviation  (subs.)  indicates  that  the  reading  is  substantially  given,  and  that 
immaterial  variations  in  spelling,  punctuation,  or  stage  directions  are  disregarded. 

Coll.  (MS)  refers  to  Collier's  annotated  Second  Folio. 

Quincy  (MS)  refers  to  Quincy's  annotated  Fourth  Folio. 

An  Emendation  or  Conjecture  which  is  discussed  in  the  Commentary  is  not  repeated 
In  the  Textual  Notes;  nor  is  'conj.'  added  to  any  name  in  the  Textual  Notes  unless 
it  happens  to  be  that  of  an  editor,  in  which  case  its  omission  would  be  misleading. 

All  citations  of  Acts,  Scenes,  and  Lines  in  Romeo  and  Juliet,  Macbeth,  Hamlet, 
and  Lear  refer  to  this  edition  of  those  plays ;  in  citations  from  other  plays  the  Globe 
Edition  is  followed. 

I  have  not  called  attention  to  every  little  misprint  in  the  Folio.  A  reference  to  tne 
Textual  Notes  will  always  show  them  to  be  misprints  by  the  agreement  of  all  the 
Editors  in  their  correction. 

Nor  is  notice  taken  of  the  first  Editor  who  adopted  the  modern  spelling,  or  who 
substituted  commas  for  a  parenthesis,  or  changed  ?  to  !.  At  the  same  time  some 
comparatively  trifling  peculiarities  are  noted,  such  as  the  use  of  hyphens,  to  which 
some  Editors,  Staunton,  for  instance,  attach  value.  The  variations  in  the  spelling 
of  the  word  '  murther,'  where  it  occurs  so  frequently  in  Act  V,  is  not  noted.  The 
spelling  is  almost  uniformly  murder  in  the  Quartos,  but  in  the  Folios  it  is  apparently 
arbitrary;  in  V, ii,  145,  it  is  '  Murther,'  and  in  the  second  line  after,  we  have  'murderM.' 

Otherwise,  even  the  most  manifest  misspellings  in  the  Quartos  and  Folios  are  re- 
corded, to  supply  what  aid  they  may  in  estimating  the  value  of  the  texts  or  their  indi- 
viduality ;  for  instance,  '  Cyprus '  and  '  Lieutenant '  are  almost  invariably  spelled,  in  the 
First  Quarto,  Cypres  and  Leiutenant.  I  have  tried  always  to  record  ever)-  instance  in 
the  Quartos,  especially  in  the  First,  of  any  really  intelligent  punctuation. 


EDITIONS  COLLATED  IN  THE   TEXTUAL  NOTES    46 1 

It  may  well  be  conceived  that  no  part  of  my  labours  is  more  onerous  than  this  of 
collation ;  for  which  there  is  so  little  to  show,  and  at  which  I  do  not  suppose  that 
one  reader  in  a  hundred,  or  in  five  hundred,  ever  even  as  much  as  glances.  But  the 
work  has  to  be  done,  somebody  must  do  it,  and  I  seem  to  have  drawn  the  unhappy  lot. 
Wherefore  let  me  say  that,  thus  far,  I  have  not  flinched,  but,  to  ensure  accuracy,  I  have 
gone  over  every  syllable  of  the  collation,  in  these  forty,  and  more,  editions,  twice,  sev- 
eral months  apart,  and  have  arisen  from  the  task  with  the  conviction  that  I  have,  after 
all,  by  no  means  evaded  the  inexorable  law  of  imperfection. 

It  once  occurred  to  me  that  if  I  ever  hereafter  edit  another  play,  which  is  very 
doubtful,  I  might  abridge  the  labour  by  disregarding  the  successive  editions  put  forth 
by  the  same  editor,  and  take  only  his  last  edition,  in  which,  presumably,  his  maturest 
judgement  is  to  be  found.  But  this  attempt,  I  am  afraid,  would  be  vain.  Editors  have 
rights  which  those  who  collate  cnem  are  bound  to  respect,  and  foremost  among  these 
rights  is  that  of  credit  for  precedence  in  emendation ;  this  can  be  respected  only  by  noting 
the  first  editions.  If  therefore  of  a  modern  Editor  his  first  edition  must  be  recorded,  it 
is  equally  incumbent  to  note  his  last.  Nigh  twenty  years  of  close  study  passed  between 
Dyce's  First  Edition  and  his  latest,  over  thirty-five  between  Collier's,  and  shall  we  take 
the  sallet  days  and  disregard  the  ripened  judgement  ?  Wherefore  I  see  no  chance  to 
ease  the  task  in  this  direction, — nor  in  any  other.  If  this  burdensome  collation  is  to 
be  done  at  all,  it  must  be  done  so  thoroughly  that  future  students  may  begin  where  we 
leave  off. 

In  the  collation  of  the  Quartos  and  Folios  I  have  allowed  myself  no  discretion ; 
what  has  attracted  my  attention,  I  infer  would  attract  any  one  else's.  In  these  days, 
when  Shakespeare's  mood  is  to  be  detected  in  the  number  of  syllables  in  his  lines,  I 
shrink  from  fathoming  the  issues  which  may  depend  on  the  spelling  of  a  word. 

I  have  taken  no  notice  of  the  commentaries  on  the  text  given  by  Robert  Devereli. 
in  the  annotated  Othello  contained  in  the  Third  Volume  of  his  Hieroglyphics ;  of  course 
they  illustrate  nothing  but  the  midsummer  madness  of  the  poor  fellow  whose  pure 
lunacy  explains  all  difficulties  by  '  appearances  in  the  moon.'  For  instance,  I  open 
the  volume  at  random :  *  There  has  been  much  question  about  the  manner  of  pro- 
*  nouncing  the  line,  "  If  I  quench  thee,"  &c. ;  but  if  the  first  part  of  it  be  referred  to 
'  the  taper  only  (as  formed  out  of  the  streaks  of  light  on  Cassio's  body),  and  the  latter 
1  part  not  merely  to  the  death  of  Desdemona  (in  character),  but  to  the  obscuration,  or 
«  extinction  rather,  of  the  part  of  the  moon  which  forms  her  prototype,  the  difficulty  will 
'  be  removed.'  It  is  not  easy  at  first  to  repress  a  smile, — it  is  impossible,  over  some  of 
the  many  grotesque  wood-cuts, — but  the  pathos  of  the  jangled  bells  drowns  all  sense 
of  the  ludicrous,  and  we  can  only  close  the  book  with  a  sigh. 

Although  in  the  Preface  I  have  referred  to  tne  notes  which  my  friend  Edwin  Booth 
prepared  for  me,  and  which  enrich  the  foregoing  pages,  yet  I  wish  again,  for  his  sake,  to 
emphasise  the  fact  that  their  informal,  off-hand  style  is  due  to  the  circumstances  under 
which  they  were  written,  with  no  thought  on  his  part  that  they  were  to  be  seen  by  any 
one  but  by  him  at  whose  request  they  were  made.  On  the  last  page  of  the  Prompt 
Book  wherein  they  were  written  is  the  following  note,  which,  I  think  should  be  given 
here,  as  it  explains  and  justifies  what  I  have  just  said  :  *  Some  Notes  for  ye  Novice,  H. 
H.  F.  I  have  jotted  here  some  of  the  odd  notions  that  flit  through  my  head  while  act- 
ing. In  cold  blood  'tis  difficult  to  recall  them,  but  I  think  I've  done  pretty  well.  Much 
may  be  stale, — I've  often  found  my  '  original '  ideas  very  well  moth-eaten  and  musty  with 


462  APPENDIX 

age,  and  'tis  long  since  I  have  overhauled  the  Commentators.  I  find  that  I've  repealed 
myself  often,  and  in  my  '  fidgets '  have  left  out  words  in  many  sentences,  while  the 
grammar  (which  I  abhor)  will  doubtless  confuse  you.  However,  I  have  kept  my 
promise  as  best  I  can.  I  hope  when  you  act  Othello  or  Iago,  or  any  other  character 
in  this  play,  that  my  suggestions  may  be  of  service.' 

In  the  Commentary  I  have,  in  many  a  place,  put  Ed.  where  I  should  much  prefer  to 
have  omitted  it.  But  I  beg  to  have  it  understood  that  it  is  present  not  as  a  claimant, 
but  as  a  safeguard,  that  upon  none  of  my  betters  may  be  fathered  my  folly.  Partly  for 
the  same  reason,  I  have  in  my  notes  used  the  First  Person  Singular,  but  mainly  because 
if  anywhere  we  are  restricted  to  the  expression  of  our  own  individual  opinions,  it  is  in 
the  interpretation  of  Shakespeare ;  there,  as  in  the  Republic  of  Letters,  each  man  can 
speak  but  for  himself  alone,  and  the  monarchical  '  we '  is  an  assumption  of  authority 
without  the  substance. 

[In  this  closing  hour  of  my  labour,  and  since  the  foregoing  has  been  put  in  type, 
the  mail  brings  me  the  Facsimile  of  the  First  Quarto,  '  publisht '  by  C.  Praetorius  in 
London,  with  an  admirable  Introduction  by  Herbert  A.  Evans,  M.  A.,  which  gives, 
clearly  and  succinctly,  all  needful  information  in  regard  to  this  particular  Text,  and  a 
comparison  of  it  and  the  First  Folio.  This  Facsimile  is  one  of  a  series  of  all  the 
Shakespearian  Quartos,  now  issuing  in  London,  whose  excellence  is  to  be  paralleled 
but  by  its  cheapness.  If  any  word  of  mine  can  extend  a  knowledge  of  this  most 
commendable  publication,  I  can  only  wish  that  I  were  '  trumpet-tongued.' — Ed.] 


LIST   OF   BOOKS   FROM   WHICH   EXTRACTS 
HAVE   BEEN   MADE 


GlRALDI  Cinthio  :  Hecatommithi,  Venegia          1 566 

HOLLAND:   Translation  of  Plinie    ..         ..         ..  1635 

Rymer  :  Short  View  of  Tragedy      .  .         .  .         .  .         .  .         .  .         .  .         .  .  1693 

Earl  of  Shaftesbury:  Characteristics 1714 

Peck  :  New  Memoirs  of  Milton 1740 

Fielding:  A  Journey  from  this  World  to  the  Next        1743 

Upton  :   Observations  .  .         1746 

Whalley:  Enquiry  into  the  Learning  of  Shakespeare 1 748 

Grey:   Critical,  Historical,  and  Explanatory  Notes         ..         ..         ..         ..  1754 

Edwards:  Canons  of  Criticism        1765 

Percy:  Reliques         1765 

Heath  :  Revisal,  &c 1765 

Tyrwhitt:   Observations,  &c 1766 

Warner:  Letter  to  Garrick            1768 

Gentleman:  Dramatic  Censor 1770 

Le  Tourneur:  Shakespeare,  traduit  di  V  Anglois,  Paris            1 776 

Warton  :  History  of  English  Poetry,  vol.  iii         1781 

Ritson:  Remarks,  &c 1783 

Davies:  Dramatic  Miscellanies 1784 

M.Mason:  Comments,  &>c 1785 

Ducis:   CEuvres,  Paris  (edition  1830)          1792 

Whiter:  Specimen  of  a  Commentary,  &c.          .  .  1794 

Parr  :  Story  of  the  Moor  of  Venice 1 795 

Essays  by  a  Society  of  Gentlemen,  Exeter    ..         ..         ..         ..         ..         ..1796 

Du  Bois:   The  Wreath         .  .        .  .         . .         1799 

Chalmers:  Supplemental  Apology 1799 

MURPHY :  Life  of  Garrick 1801 

Waldron  .  Shakespearian  Miscellany 1802 

Lord  Chedworth  :  Notes,  &>c 1805 

Voss:   Othello,  uebersetzt,  Jena          1806 

Douce:  Illustrations 1807 

Pye:   Comments  on  the  Commentators         .  .         .  .         .  .         .  .         .  .         .  .  1807 

Deverell:  Discoveries  in  Hieroglyphics,  &>c 1813 

Martinus  Scriklerus  :  Explanations,  &>c,  Edinburgh           18 14 

Becket:  Shakespeare's  Himself  Again 1815 

SCHLEGEL:  Lectures,  translated  by  Black 1815 

Drake:  Shakespeare  and  his  Times           1 81 7 

Hazlitt:   Characters,  &c.    ..                     1817 

463 


464 


APPENDIX 


Nichols  :  Literary  Illustrations,  <5rv.,  vol.  ii        1817 

Zachary  Jackson:  Shakespeare*  s  Genius  Justified       1818 

Horn:  Shakespeare^  s  Schauspiele  erlautert,  Leipzig         1823 

Boaden  :  Life  of  J.  P.  Kemble        1825 

Hazlitt:  Plain  Speaker 1826 

Drake:  Memorials  of  Shakespeare ..  1828 

Dr  Broglie:  Sur  Othello,  Paris 1830 

Simrock:   Quellen  des  Shakespeare's,  Berlin  1 83 1 

Collier:  History  of  English  Dramatic  Poetry  (ed.  ii,  1879) '831 

Galt:  Lives  of  the  Players 1831 

Mrs  Jameson  :  Characteristics  of  Women 1832 

Collier  :  New  Facts 1835 

Collier  :  New  Particulars 1836 

Rawdon  Brown:  Ragguagli  sulla  Vita  di  Marin  Sanuto,  &C,  Venice       . .  1837 

Campbell:  Dramatic  Works  of  Shakespeare        1 838 

Guest:  History  of  English  Rhythms  1838 

Brown:  Shakespeare's  Autobiographical  Poems 1838 

Collier:  Further  Particulars        1839 

Shakespeare  Society:   The  Revels  Book  1842 

Collier  :  Shakespeare's  Library  (New  Edition  by  W.  C.  Hazlitt,  1 875)         . .  1843 

DYCE :  Remarks,  &>c.  1844 

HUNTER  :  New  Illustrations,  &*c 1 845 

Verplanck  :  Shakespeare's  Works,  New  York 1847 

Brand:  Popular  Antiquities,  &c.  (Bonn's  edition,  1873)  ^48 

HALPIN:  Dramatic  Unities 1 849 

Roffe:   Ghost  Belief  of  Shakespeare  1 85 1 

Collier  :  Notes  and  Emendations 1852 

Dyce:  Few  Notes 1853 

SINGER:  Shakespeare's  Text  Vindicated *853 

Pepys  :  Diary,  &*c.  (Fifth  Edition,  London)         1854 

Quincy  :  MS  Corrections  in  F.s  Boston 1854 

White  :  Shakespeare's  Scholar         1854 

Walker:  Shakespeare's  Versification         1 854 

Taylor:   The  Moor  of  Venice  1855 

Wood:  Personal  Recollections,  <5rY.,  Philadelphia  1855 

Collier:  Seven  Lectures,  <5rv.         1856 

Lloyd:  Essays  (from  Singer's  Second  Edition) 1858 

Lord  Campbell:  Shakespeare's  Legal  Acquirements '859 

Walker:   Critical  Examination  of the  Text,  &>c.  '859 

Reed:  Lectures  on  English  History,  London        1859 

Dyce:  Strictures,  &c.  1859 

Bucknill:  Shakespeare's  Medical  Knowledge i860 

Jervis  :  Proposed  Emendations        i860 

Maginn  :  Shakespeare  Papers  i860 

Fechter:  Acting  Edition 1861 

Ottley:  Fechter's  Othello 1861 

BAILEY :    The  Received  Text 1862 

Gervinus  :  Commentaries  (trans,  by  F.  E.  Bunnett),  London 1863 


LIST  CF  BOOKS 


465 


HACKETT:  Notes,  &*c,  New  York 

DEIGHTON  :  Notes  on  Othello,  Allahabad 

Victor  Hugo:    William  Shakespeare,  Paris 

Wordsworth  :  Shakespeare  and  the  Bible 

Beisly  :  Shakespeare 's  Garden 

IIeraud  :  Shakespeare.  His  Inner  Life    .  . 

Arrowsmith:  Shakespeare's  Editors  and  Commentators 

Cartwright  :  New  Readings         

Taine  :  Litterature  Anglaise  (Deuxieme  Edition),  Paris 
Bodenstedt  :   Othello,  uebersetzt,  Leipzig 

Forsyth  :  Some  Notes,  &>c 

Klein  :   Geschichte  des  Dramas.     Bos  Italienische,  Lei} 
IvEIGHTLEY :  Shakespeare  Expositor 
Gould  :   The  Tragedian 

Fitzgerald  :  Life  of  Garrick         

Giles  :  Human  Life  in  Shakespeare 

Hawkins:  Life  of  Edmtind Kean 

Mary  Preston  :  Studies  in  Shakespeare,  Philadelphia 
ABBOTT :  Shakespearian  Grammar  .  . 
Daniel  :  Notes  and  Emendations 

I  ,AMB :    Works,  London         

Harting:   Ornithology  of  Shakespeare 
LUDWIG :  Shakespeare- Studien,  Leipzig 

RUSKIN :  Munera  Pulveris 

Massey  :    The  Secret  Brama,  6°<r 

John  Hunter  :   Othello,  with  Notes 

Rees  :  Life  of  Eorrest 

Dowden  :  Shakspere.  His  Mind  and  Art 

Lewes  :   On  Actors  and  the  Art  of  Acting 

Ward:  History  of  English  Bramatic  Poetry        .  . 

Earl  OF  Southesk  :  Saskatchewan 

Friesen  :  Shakspere- Studien,  Wien 

Fleay  :  Shakespeare  Manual 

Ulrici  :  Shakespeare 's  Bramatic  Art,  &*c.  (translated  by 

Oechelhauser  :   Othello,  bearbeitet,  Weimar 

Snider:  System  of  Shakespeare 's  Bramas,  St  Louis 

Alger:  Life  of  Forrest 

Bulloch  :  Studies  on  the  Text  of  Shakespeare     .  . 

Edwin  Booth  :  Prompt-Book  of  Otkitiv 

Ella  combe:  Plant- Lore  of  Shakespeare  .. 

Herr  :  Scattered  Notes,  &c,  Philadelphia 

Cowden-Clarke  :    The  Shakespeare  Key 

Ingleby  :   Centurie  of  Prayse 

Moberly  :  Romeo  and  Juliet 

Swinburne:  A  Study  of  Shakespeare 

GENS1CHEN  :  Studienblatter,  Berlin  .  . 

fNGLEBY:  Shakespeare.      The  Man  and  the  Book,  Part  ii 

Elze  :  Hamlet 

Bulthaupt  :  Dramaturgic  der  Classiker,  Oldenburg 
30 


)Zlg 


Miss 


Schmitz) 


[863 
[864 
[864 
[864 
[864 
[865 
:865 
[866 
[866 
[867 
[867 
[867 
[867 
[868 
[868 
;868 
[869 
[869 
[870 
[870 
[870 
[871 
[872 
[872 
[872 

1873 

[874 

[875 
[875 
[875 

i875 
[876 
[876 
[876 
[876 
[877 
[877 
[878 
[878 
[878 

[879 
[879 
[879 
[880 
[880 
\i 
[881 
[882 


466 


APPENDIX 


GERARD :    Othello,  avec  des  Notes.    Freddie  d'une  Etude  sur  Shakespeare,  par 

Dr  James  Darmesteter,  Paris     .  . 
PURNELL :    Othello,  with  Notes 
D'Hugues  :   Othello,  avec  des  Notes,  Paris 
Wordsworth  :  Works  (ed.  Knight) 
Heard:  Shakespeare  as  a  Lawyer 
Mrs  Kemble:  Records  of  Later  Life 
Hales:  Notes  and  Essays    .  . 

Elze  :  Notes  on  Elizabethan  Dramatists,  Halle    .  . 
Morel  :   Othello,  avec  des  Notes,  Paris 
HALLIWELL-PHILLIPPS  :  Outlines  of  the  Life  of  Shakesp 
Leo  :  Shakespeare- Notes 
Grant  White:  Studies  in  Shakespeare 

Chappell's  Popular  Music 

Russell's  Representative  Actors 


eare  (Fifth  Edition 


1SS3 
1883 
1883 
1883 
18S3 
1884 
1884 
1884 
1S84 
1885 
1885 
18S6 
n.  d. 
n.  d. 


The  Academy 

American  Bibliopolist 

The  Athenaum 

Bibliotheca  Sacra 

Blackwood 's  Magazine 

Comhill  Magazine 

Edinburgh  Review 

The  Galaxy 

New  Shakspere  Society 

Notes  and  Queries 

Philological  Society's    Transactions 

Robinson  s  Epitome  of  Literature 

Sh  akespea  riana 

Temple  Bar 


INDEX 

A  =  before  verbal  nouns 

•     IV,    i,  195 

liegnrned 

Ill,  iii,  445 

A~*  one         

•      Hi  »,  342 

Besort           

I,  iii,  264 

Abhor           

.     IV,  ii,  191 

Bodenstedt,  Remarks 

44c 

Absorption  of  it 

I,  iii,  220 

Bombast 

I,    i,    17 

Absorption  of  personal  pro 

Booth's  Reprint, Variations  in 

I,  ii,    74 

noun          

.      II,    i,    79 

Booth's  Reprint        "          " 

I,  i»,  399 

Absorption  of  t  final 

II,  ii,  214 

Brace 

I,  iii,    32 

Absorption  of  the     .  . 

I,  ii,      4 

Brown,  Ravvdon,  Source   of 

Absorption  of  you   .  . 

I,  ii,     12 

Plot            

372 

Acknown 

.    Ill,  iii,  372 

Browne,  E.  Elliot,  Source  of 

Action,  Date  of 

357 

Plot           

375 

Action,  Duration  of 

359 

Bulthaupt,  Remarks 

445 

Active  sense  of  adjectives  ii 

i 

But  =  except 

I,    i,  133 

•able  or  -ible 

I,  iii,  356 

But  =  prevention 

IV,  iii,    38 

Actors            

396 

By  =  about 

I,  iii,    24 

Actress,  the  first 

397 

Adams,  J.  Q.,  Notes 

391 

Campbell,  Remarks 

420 

Addition 

.      II,  ii,      8 

Carve 

.         .  . 

II,  ii,  197 

Adjectives   in   -able   or  -ibi 

'e 

Cast   .  . 

.  . 

I,    i,  164 

used  actively 

I,  i",  356 

Cast   .  . 

.  . 

II,  ii,    31 

Advised  =  cautious  .  . 

I,  ii,    69 

Cast   .  . 

.  . 

II,  ii,  202 

Affects,  the  young   .  . 

I,  iii,  291 

Cast   .  . 

.  . 

V,  ii,  400 

Affin'd           

I,    i,    42 

Certes 

.          .  . 

I,    i,     19 

Affin'd           

.      II,  ii,  243 

Chamberers  . 

.  . 

III,  iii,  309 

Aim  =  guess 

I,  iii,     IO 

Chances 

.  . 

I,    i,    79 

Akes              

.     IV,  ii,    79 

Charter 

.  . 

I,  i",  273 

And-a           

II,  ii,  106 

Cherubin 

>  . 

IV,  ii,    73 

Anthropophague 

I,  iii,  167 

Chidden 

.  . 

II,    i,    14 

Apology  for  Iago     .  . 

408 

Chrysolite 

.  . 

V,  ii,  179 

Arrivancie 

.      II,    i,    40 

Cinthio,  Giral 

di 

376 

As  (omitted) 

.      II,    i,  180 

Circumstance 

I,    i,    17 

As  =  that,  after  such 

I,    i,    80 

Coat  (secret  armour) 

V,    i,    29 

As  =  that 

.      V,  ii,  203 

Coleridge  on  Othello's  Colour 

389 

Assay 

I,  iii,    26 

Coleridge  on  the  Unities     .  . 

409 

Auntient 

•        I,    i,    35 

Collied          

II,  ii,  231 

Committed 

IV,  ii,    83 

Ballad  of  Othello     .  . 

398 

Companions 

IV,  ii,  168 

Beam 

I,  "i,  357 

Composition,  Date  of          .  . 

344 

Beard 

I,  iii,  371 

Composition 

I,  i»,      3 

Hef°re  me     .  . 

.     IV,    i,  162 

Condition 

. 

.  . 

II,    i,  28? 

467 


468 


APPENDIX 


Condition 

.   iv, 

i,  2IO 

Dreadful  bell 

II,  ii,  199 

Consequence     (omission    of 

Ducis's  Version 

447 

plural  s)    .  . 

.      II, 

ii,    8 1 

Construe 

■   iv, 

i,  118 

Edinburgh  Review.  . 

418 

Consuls          

If 

if    27 

Edinburgh  Review .  . 

421 

Consuls 

If 

i»,    51 

Lnchafed 

•      II,    i,    19 

Contraction  in  participles    . 

I, 

i,    56 

Engines 

.     IV,   ii,  250 

Convinc'd 

.     IV, 

i,    33 

Ensteeped 

II,    i,    82 

Costume 

404 

Enwheele 

II,    i,  102 

Counter-caster 

I, 

i,    33 

Erring 

I,  i",  385 

Countryman    (Iago  a  Vene 

Escape  =  escapade 

I,  iii,  223 

tian) 

.    v, 

i,  112 

Essentiall  vesture     .  . 

■      II,    i,    74 

Courtesy 

.    II, 

i,  118 

Eternal  =  infernal    .  . 

IV,  ii,  154 

Court  of  Guard 

.    II, 

i,  251 

Ethical  dative 

■       I,    i,    53 

Craftily  qualified 

.    II, 

ii,    56 

Exclusion  of  native  officers 

I,  iii,    61 

Creature  =  trisyllable 

.  Ill, 

iii,  482 

Exhibition 

I,  iii,  263 

Crie    .  . 

.    II, 

ii,  398 

Exhibition 

IV,  iii,    S3 

Cries  on        

•    v, 

i,    62 

Extravagant 

I,    i,  149 

Criticall 

.    II, 

i,  142 

Exufflicate 

III,  iii,  211 

Cue 

I, 

ii,  101 

Cunning 

.  Ill, 

»i,    57 

Fadome 

I,    i,  167 

Curled  darlings        .  . 

I, 

ii,    85 

Faire  wife 

Falls,  used  transitively 

I,    i,    22 

•     IV,    i,  273 

Damn'd  in  a  faire  wife 

I, 

i,    22 

Favour 

I,  »i,  371 

Daniel,  Duration  of  Action 

37o 

Fear,  active  use  of  .  . 

I,  ii,    88 

Dearest 

I, 

iii,  102 

Fife 

III,  iii,  408 

De  Broglie,  Remarks 

450 

First  Quarto 

339 

Defeat           

I, 

iii,  371 

Florentine 

HI,    i,    44 

Defunct 

I, 

iii,  291 

Folio  printed  from  a  theatrt 

Delighted 

I, 

iii,  32° 

transcript  .  . 

II,  ii,  231 

Demerits  =  merits    .  . 

I, 

ii,    25 

Folly  =  wantonness  .  . 

.      V,  ii,  165 

Desdemon 

.  Ill, 

i,    58 

Fond 

II,    i,  163 

Desdemona,  the  meaning  01 

I, 

iii,  168 

For,  confused  with  or 

I,  ",    75 

Desdemona        "          " 

336 

Forehead 

III,  iii,  331 

Desdemona  .  . 

.    v, 

ii,    85 

Fortitude 

I,  iii,  248 

Despised 

I, 

i,  *77 

Forty  =  indefinite  number  . 

III,  iii,  505 

DeVigny's  Othello 

45o 

Free 

II,  ",  367 

Dilations 

.  Ill, 

iii,  144 

Free 

.    Ill,  iii,  150 

Direct  session 

I, 

ii,  105 

Friesen,  Remarks     .  . 

443 

Discourse  of  thought 

.     IV, 

ii,  182 

From  =  away  from  .  . 

I,    i,  144 

Dispose 

I, 

iii,  421 

Fruitfull        

II,  ii,  372 

Dote 

.    II, 

i,  239 

Function 

II.  ii,  379 

Double  comparative 

•     I, 

iii,  127 

Double  comparatives 

I, 

i,  105 

Garbe 

II,    i,  339 

Double  negatives     .  . 

I, 

iii,    25 

Genischen,  Remarks 

445 

Double  of  the  duke's 

I, 

ii,     16 

Gervinus,  Remarks 

436 

Doubt  =  suspicion    .  . 

.  Ill, 

iii,  217 

Gloss 

I,  iii,  252 

Doubt  =  suspicion    .  . 

.  Ill, 

iii,  490 

Go  =  come 

I,    i,  197 

Dovvden,  Remaiks  .  . 

424 

God  be  with  you 

I,  iii,  214 

INDEX 

469 

God  buy  you             .  . 

.    Ill,  iii,  433 

Inversion  of  adjectives  and 

Grace            

.     IV,  iii,  101 

nouns 

•      II,    i,    57 

Gratify           

.      V,  ii,  265 

Is,  with  plural  subject 

I,    i,  188 

Graze 

.     IV,    i,  299 

I  was  =  a  monosyllable 

.    Ill,  iv,  195 

Green-ey'd 

.    Ill,  iii,  194 

Grise 

I,  iii,  227 

Jameson,  Mrs,  Remarks     . 

413 

Guards  of  the  Pole  .  . 

.      II,    i,    17 

Jealious 

.     Ill,  iii,  212 

Guizot,  Remarks 

449 

Jealious         

.    Ill,  iv,  179 

Gundelier 

.        I,    i,  138 

Jealousy      (Leontes's      an 

1 

Othello's) 

.    Ill,  iii,  126 

Habits           

I,  iii,  128 

Johnson,  Dr,  Criticism 

407 

Ilalliwell,  Othello's  Coloui 

394 

Jove  substituted  for  God     . 

.      II,    1,    91 

Handkerchief,  description  o 

f    III,  iv,    68 

Justly  =  truthfully     .  . 

I,  iii,  147 

Hands,  not  hearts    .  . 
Hardness 
Hazlitt,  Remarks 
Heaven,  a  plural 

.    III,iv,    56 

I,  iii,  259 

411 

.     IV,  ii,    58 

Kean's  last  appearance 
Klein,  Source  of  Plot 
Knave 

402 

373 
I,    i,    49 

Heraud,  Remarks,   .  . 
Hip,  on  the 

422 
.      II,    i,338 

Lamb,  Charles,  Remarks    . 
Learn  =  teach 

410 
I,  iii,  208 

His  =  its 

If  ",    15 

Liberall         

.      II,    i,  188 

Honor... Honesty     .  . 

.      V,  ii,  306 

Lookes  (for  lookst) 

II,  ii,  201 

Hope's  (not  surfetted  to  deat 

h)    II,    i,    58 

Lowth,  Remarks 

408 

Horn,  Remarks 

Hudson,  Othello's  Colour  . 

433 
394 

Ludwig,  Remarks    .  . 
Lust's  Dominion 

437 
I,  iii,  172 

1 1  us  wi  ues 

.      II,    i,  132 

Lust's  Dominion 

11,    i,  229 

/  in  -ity,  dropped    .  . 

.    Ill,  iii,  295 

Macaulay,  Remarks 

412 

I  ago,  apology  for 

408 

Maginn,  Remarks    .  . 

415 

Iago's  age 

If  iii,  343 

Maine           

•       II,    i,     15 

Iago's  jealousy 

I,  iii,  414 

Mandragora 

.    Ill,  iii,  384 

lago,  the  name 

335 

Marble          

.    Ill,  iii,  523 

Idle 

If  i»,  163 

Marke,  bless  the 

•       I,    i,    35 

Incontinently           .  . 

I,  iii,  336 

Mauritania 

.     IV,  ii,  259 

Index 

II,    i,  289 

Meere            

•      II,  »,      5 

In  =  during 

I,  ii,  116 

Might,  Officers  of    .  . 

I,    i,  200 

Ingeniuer  ... 

.      II,    i,    75 

Mineral 

•      II,    i,  33° 

Ingredient 

.      II,  »,  335 

Minerals 

I,  »,    91 

In  happy  time 

•    HI,    i,    33 

Mistress  =  trisyllable 

.     IV,  ii,  104 

In  =  into 

.      V,  ii,  358 

Modern         

I,  iii,  129 

Injointed 

I,  i«,    44 

Mocke          

.    Ill,  iii,  194 

In  =  on 

.        I,  iii,    85 

Mocks           

.      V,  ii,  189 

Insertion  in  Acting  Copies  . 

I,  iii,  161 

Moe               

.     IV,  iii,    62 

In  spleen 

.     IV,    i,  102 

Monstrous  =  trisyllable 

II,  ii,  242 

Instruction 

.     IV,    i,    50 

Moraller 

.      II,  ii,  327 

Intentively 

I,  iii,  178 

Mortal           

.      II,    i,    84 

Interpolated  a 

.    Ill,  iii,    92 

Most  {the  omitted)  .  . 

.      II,    i,    28 

Interpolated  s 

.    Ill,  iv,  136 

Motion          

I,  ii,    92 

Interpolation  of  s     .  . 

•        I,    i,    31 

Motion          

I,  iii,  114 

Interpolation  of  s     .  . 

•     IV,    i,    54 

Mummey 

.    Ill,  iv,    88 

47° 

APPENDIX 

Napkin 

•    HI,  "i,  335 

Pye's  remark  on  Desdemona    III,  iii,    28 

Negatives,  double    .  . 

.       I,  hi,  125 

Pyoners 

.     Ill,  iii,  402 

Nephewes 

I,    i,  124 

News 

I,  i»,      3 

Qualification             .  . 

.      II,    i,  307 

Non-suites 

I,    i,    19 

Quality 

I,  iii,  279 

North            

.      V,  ii,  273 

Quarter 

II,  ii,  204 

Not  almost 

.    Ill,  hi,    78 

Quartos,  The 

339 

Notorious 

.      V,  ii,  299 

.  Question 

I,  iii,    31 

Nuptiall         

•      II,  »,      9 

Question  —  conversation 

I,  i»,  133 

Quests 

I,  »,    54 

Oake             

.    Ill,  iii,  242 

Obsequious 

I,    i,    50 

Raven 

.    IV,    i,    25 

Odd  even 

I,    i,  136 

Reed,  Othello's  Colour 

393 

Oechelhauser,  Remarks 

442 

Remorse 

.    Ill,  iii,  426 

Of  =  concerning       .  . 

.    Ill,  iii,  245 

Repeals 

.      II,  ii,  3S8 

Off-capt         

I,    i,    14 

Reprobance 

V,  ii,  261 

Officers  of  might     .  . 

I,    i,  200 

Resolu'd 

.    Ill,  iii,  209 

Of  hers         

.      V,  ii,      6 

Revolt  =  inconstancy 

.    Ill,  iii,  217 

Omission  of  plural  s 

.      II,  ii,    81 

Riches  (sing.)           .  . 

.      II,    i,    9S 

Or  confused  with  for 

I,  ii,    75 

Right  garbe              .  . 

•      II,    i,  339 

Othello's  Colour 

3% 

Ripe 

II,  ii,  410 

Othello,  the  name    .  . 

335 

Rose,  on  Sudden  Emotion  . 

428 

Other  —  otherwise     .  . 

.    IV,  ii,    16 

Rymer,  General  estimate  of 

IV,    i,    10 

Pagans 

I,  ii,  121 

6*  interpolated 

I,    i,    31 

Parts  (Voltaire) 

.    Ill,  iii,  308 

S  inteqx)lated 

.    Ill,  iv,  136 

Passage          

•      V,    i,    47 

S  interpolated 

.    IV,    i,    54 

Passion          

.    Ill,  iii,  145 

S  for  st         

.    IV,  ii,  207 

Pattent           

.     IV,    i,  216 

Sagitary 

.       I,    i,  173 

Pepys,  Diary 

402 

Sagitary 

I,  iii,  136 

Perplexed 

V,  ii,  420 

Salvini's  omission    .  . 

•    IV,    i,    57 

Pickersgill,  Source  of  Plot  . 

375 

Satiety 

II,    i,  261 

Pierced 

I,  iii,  245 

Saucie 

I,    i,  141 

Plot,  Source  of 

372 

Save  you 

•     IV,    i,  237 

Ponticke  Sea 

.    Ill,  iii,  516 

Schlegel,  Remarks  .  . 

431 

Portance 

I,  iii,  162 

Scorn,  time  of 

.    IV,  ii,    64 

Portents  (accent)     .  . 

•      V,  ii,    54 

Second  Quarto 

341 

Practised  ■-=  plotted  .  . 

I,  ii,    90 

Secure 

I,  iii,     14 

Prefixes  dropped 

I,  iii,  217 

Seele 

.    Ill,  iii,  242 

Pregnant 

.      II,    i,  268 

I,  iii,  297 

Presentiment 

.     IV,  iii,    29 

Seige 

I,  ii,    25 

Presently 

.      V,  ii,    66 

Seize  upon 

.      V,  ii,  443 

Preston,  Othello's  Colour   . 

395 

Segregation  .  . 

.      II,    i,    12 

Proball           

.      II,  ii,  368 

Selfe-Bounty 

.    Ill,  iii,  220 

Prophane 

I,    i,  127 

Selfe-charitie            .  . 

II,  ii,  226 

Prophane 

.      II,    i,  188 

Sense 

•     IV,  iii,  103 

Profanity,  Statute  against    . 

I,    i,      7 

Sequestration            .  . 

•        I,  i»,  375 

Proper = very 

I,  iii,    84 

Set  down 

II,    i,  231 

Put  or            

-      II,    i,  171 

Shaftesbury,     derivation     1 

f 

Put  on 

•      II,   »,  382 

Desdemona           .  . 

I,  iii,  168 

INDEX 


47* 


She--  licr 
She  that 
Should  I  lose 
Simrock,  Source  of  Plot 
Singular   verbs    with    plural 

antecedents 
Sir,  the 
Sith 
Skillet 
Slave 
Sleepes 
Slipper 
Slubber 

Snider,  Remarks 
So = such 
Solicit 

Soon  at  night 
Speculative  instrument 
Spells 
Splinter 

Stage  directions 
Stage   directions    not   to   be 

taken  literally 
Stage   transcript    the   source 

of  F, 
Still  =  constantly 
Stope 
Strange 
Stuff 
Subjunctive  indicated  by  po 

sition  of  the  verb 
Substitution  of  s  for  st 
Success 
Superfluous  s 
Superfluous  s 
Swore 

Talk 

Tame  (Fye's  Remark) 

Tane  out 

Text,  Discussion  of 

Thick-lips     .  . 

Third  Quarto 

Thou  art  =  monosyllabic     . 

Thou  (where  used) 

Three  fingers 

Time  of  scorn  .  . 

To,  omitted  before  infinitive 

To  do  «=  ado  .  . 


IV,  ii,      5 

Hi    i,  173 
III,  iv,    25 

372 

I,  iii,  312 
II,    i,  199 

III,  iii,  438 
I,  iii,  300 

IV,  ii,  156 
III,  iii,  477 

II,    i,  274 

If  iii,  252 

425 
I,  iii,    68 

V,  ii,    33 

III,  iv,  229 

If  i",  297 

I,  iii,    76 

Hf  ii,  352 
in,  iii,  335 

III,  iii,  383 

II,  ii,  231 

I,  iii,  170 

II,  ii,    46 

V,  ii,  256 
I,  ii,      4 

V,    i,    17 

II,  ii,  201 

III,  iii,  259 

I,    i,    31 

III,  iii,    78 
I,  iii,  183 

IV,  iii,    31 

III,  iii,    2S 

III,  iii,  344 

341 
I,    i,    72 

341 
V,  ii,  168 
II,  ii,  275 

II,    i,  197 

IV,  ii,    64 
IV,  ii,    15 

IV,  iii,    37 


Tongued 
Too  blame    .  . 
To  who         .  . 
Trash . . .  trace 
Traverse 
Trym'd  .  . 

Uds  pitty 
Ulrici,  Remarks 
Unbonnetted 
Unbookish    .  . 
Unhoused 
Unproper 
Uses  .  . 
UsuqVd 

Vanity 

Verennessa   .  . 

Vertuous 

Villaine 

Visage 

Voltaire's  Zaire 

Voluble 

Voss,  Schiller's  version 

Walk  =  withdraw     .  . 

Wanting  =  missing  .  . 

Warrant  =  monosyllal  )le 

Waste 

Well  desired 

Well  said 

Wench 

Were... beer  (rhyme) 

Wheeling 

Whether  =  monosyllal  >lc 

Who  (uninflected)   .  . 

Will  =  wish   .. 

Wilson's  Rhetorique 

Wilson,  Othello's  Colour 

With,  omission  of    .  . 

Wordsworth's  Sonnet 

Would  =  liked 

Wracke 

Wretch 

Y'are 

Y'are 

Yerk'd 

You  (where  used)  .  . 

You  were  (monosyllabic) 


1,    i,    27 

III,  iii,  244 
I,   ii,    64 

11 ,    if  336 

I,  iii,  399 
1,    i,    54 

IV,  iii,    84 

433 

I,  ii,    26 

IV,    i,  118 

I,  ii,    29 

IV,  i,    81 
IV,  iii,  114 

I,  iii,  37 1 

IV,  ii,  193 

II,    i,    3° 

III,  iv,  131 
V,  ii,  213 
I,  iii,  280 

447 
IT,    i,  270 

431 

IV,  iii,      9 

III,  iii,  398 

IV,  i,  233 
IV,  ii,  276 

II,  i,  237 

IV,  i,  133 

V,  ii,  355 
II,  i,  183 

I,    i,  149 

I,   ii,  102 

I,   ii,    64 

V,   ii,  246 

III,  iii,  188 

391 

I,  iii,  109 

410 

I,  iii,  170 

II,    i,    27 

III,  iii,  104 

III,  iii,  253 

III,  iii,  450 

I,  :i,      7 

II,  ii,  27* 

',   ».    34 


