LIBRARY  of  PHILLIPS  ACADEMY 


DOUGLAS  CRAWFORD 
MEMORIAL  FUND 


A  Reproduction  of  ah  Engraving  by  Cross;  the  Frontispiece  to  Sir  George  Buck's 
Life  of  Richard  HI.  Probably  a  Copy  op  the  Portrait  in  the  National  Portrait  Gal¬ 
lery,  London,  the  Catalogue  whereof  informs  us  that,  the  Artist  is  ‘Unknown.’  and 
also  that,  ‘A  Similar  Picture,  Engraved,  the  reverse  way,  by  Vertue,  when  at  Kensington 
Palace,  is  in  the  Royal  Collection  at  Windsor,  and  a  third  at  Knowsley,  ln  the  possession 
of  the  Earl  of  Derby.’ 


A  NEW  VARIORUM  EDITION  . 

OF 

Shak espeare 


The  Tragedy 

OF 

Richard  the  Third: 

WITH  THE 

Landing  of  Earle  Richmond, 

AND  THE 

Ba  ttell  a  t  Bos ivor  th  Field. 

FOURTH  IMPRESSION 

EDITED  BY 

HORACE  HOWARD  FURNESS,  Jr. 


PHILADELPHIA  &  LONDON 
J.  B.  LIPPINCOTT  COMPANY 


P  R  E  FAC  E 


It  is  certainly  fortunate  that  very  few  of  Shakespeare’s  plays  are 
furnished  with  such  a  number  of  sources  whence  the  text  is  to  be  drawn, 
or  such  a  mosaic  text,  when  finally  obtained,  as  Richard  the  Third.  It 
appeared  in  what,  according  to  Heminge  and  Condell,  were  ‘stolne 
and  surreptitious’  Quartos  no  less  than  six  times  before  it  was  set  forth 
‘cured  and  perfect  of  [its]  limbes’  in  the  Folio  of  1623.  And  it  is  the 
differences  between  these  multitudinous  texts  that  present  to  an  editor 
one  of  the  gravest  problems  in  the  whole  range  of  Shakespearian  litera¬ 
ture;  a  determination  of  the  true  text  demands  wary  walking;  to  omit 
a  reading  in  the  Quarto  seems  sacrilege :  to  include  every  reading  spells 
confusion.  In  the  following  pages  the  text  of  the  First  Folio  is  reprinted 
with  all  the  accuracy  at  my  command;  in  it  is  incorporated,  and 
designated  by  asterisks,  the  additions  of  the  Quartos,  whereof  the 
omissions  and  transpositions  are  duly  recorded  in  the  Textual  Notes. 
Thus  the  present  text,  which,  to  a  certain  extent,  is  a  text  of  shreds  and 
patches,  has  at  least  the  merit  of  omitting  nothing  which  we  have  reason 
to  believe  was  Shakespeare’s  own — we,  like  Garrick,  cannot  lose 
one  drop  of  that  immortal  man. 

No  one  familiar  with  that  department  of  Shakespearian  study  which 
deals  with  textual  problems  can  be  at  all  surprised  at  the  variety  and 
number  of  theories  and  solutions  proposed  to  account  for  the  mystery 
of  the  eight  Quarto  versions  of  the  present  play.  The  field  is  spacious 
and  excellently  furnished  with  pitfalls  and  quagmires,  wherein  each 
critic  views  with  pleasure  his  rivals  caught  or  floundering,  while  he  him¬ 
self,  in  his  own  opinion,  walks  triumphant  and  secure;  we  are  involun¬ 
tarily  reminded  of  Pope’s  well-known  lines: 

‘  ’Tis  with  our  judgements  as  our  watches;  none 
Go  just  alike,  but  each  believes  his  own.’ 

The  earliest  mention  of  this  play  is  to  be  found  in  the  Stationer’s 
Registers ,  under  the  date  of  20th  October,  1597,  as  follows: 

Andrewe  wise.— Entered  for  his  copie  vnder  th  andes  of 
master  Barlowe,  and  master  warden  man 
The  tragedie  of  king  Richard  the  Third  with 
the  death  of  the  Duke  of  Clarence . vjd  * 


*  Arber’s  Transcript ,  iii,  25. 


v 


VI 


PREFACE 


Shakespeare’s  name  is  not  here  given,  nor  does  his  name  appear 
on  the  title-page  when,  in  the  same  year,  the  book  was  finally  issued. 
There  can  be,  I  think,  no  evidence  of  the  popularity  of  the  play  surer 
than  the  number  of  its  editions  which  were  issued  at  short  intervals. 
Thus,  the  present  play  was  reprinted,  including  the  two  Folios,  ten 
times  in  thirty-seven  years.  Six  of  the  eight  Quartos  appeared,  as  has 
just  been  said,  before  the  Folio  of  1623;  the  first  five,  during  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  lifetime.  In  the  Appendix,  under  The  Text,  will  be  found  a 
transcript  of  the  title-pages  of  these  Quartos,  but  to  facilitate  present 
reference  the  dates  are  here  given:  Qlf  1597;  Q2,  1598;  Q3,  1602;  Q4, 
1605;  Qs,  1612;  Qe,  1622;  Q7,  1629;  Q8,  1634. 

It  follows,  as  of  course,  that  any  discussion  of  the  Text  increases, 
not  only  in  volume  and  intricacy,  but  in  theories,  near  or  far-fetched, 
in  direct  proportion  to  the  number  of  Quartos  with  their  variations 
from  the  Folio  or  among  themselves.  Happy  the  editor  who  has  before 
him  for  collation  the  simple  text  of  the  Folios,  with  no  disturbing  outside 
element! 

The  present  play  is  distinguished  by  the  extraordinary  divergence 
of  the  text  of  the  Quarto  of  1 597  from  that  of  the  Folio.  Were  this 
divergence  confined  solely  to  verbal  changes,  the  editor  would  be  guided 
in  the  task  of  forming  a  composite  text  either  by  his  own  personal 
preference  or  by  the  consensus  of  opinion  of  his  predecessors;  but  the 
divergences  here  are  so  wide  that  no  such  guides  avail  him.  There  are 
many  consecutive  lines  in  the  Folio  whereof  there  are  no  traces  in  the 
Quarto,  and  again  there  are  similar  lines  in  the  Quartos  which  are 
omitted  in  the  Folio.  These  additions,  both  in  the  Folios  and  Quartos, 
seem,  in  some  instances,  necessary  to  complete  the  sense;  and  in  others, 
mere  amplifications  of  what  has  been  already  perhaps  too  concisely 
expressed.  Take,  for  example,  a  passage  in  the  scene  between  Richard 
and  Buckingham  in  Act  IV,  scene  ii,  where  the  following  lines  (112- 
131)  are  omitted  in  the  Folio: 

1 A  King  perhaps. 

Buck.  My  Lord.  112 

King.  How  chance  the  Prophet  could  not  at  that  time, 

Haue  told  me  I  being  by,  that  I  fhould  kill  him. 

Buck.  My  lord,  your  promife  for  the  Earledome.  115 

King.  Richmond,  when  laft  I  was  at  Exeter, 

The  Maior  in  curtefie  fhowd  me  the  Caftle, 

And  called  it  Ruge-mount,  at  which  name  I  ftarted, 

Becaufe  a  Bard  of  Ireland  told  me  once 

I  fhould  not  liue  long  after  I  faw  Richmond.  120 

Buck.  My  Lord. 

King.  I,  whats  a  clocke? 

Buck.  I  am  thus  bold  to  put  your  grace  in  mind 


123 


PREFACE 


VI 1 


Of  what  you  promifed  me. 

King.  Wei,  but  whats  a  clocke?  125 

Buck.  Vpon  the  ftroke  of  ten. 

King.  Well  let  it  ftrike. 

Buck.  Whie  let  it  ftrike? 

King.  Becaufe  that  like  a  Iacke  thou  keepft  the  ftroke 
Betwixt  thy  begging  and  my  meditation.  130 

I  am  not  in  the  giuing  vein  to  day.’ 

Hardly  any  voice  will  be  raised,  I  think,  in  dissent  from  the  opinion 
that  these  lines  in  the  Quarto  are  an  extremely  valuable  addition; 
moreover,  there  are  certain  of  these  lines,  such  as  the  following: 

‘like  a  Jack  thou  keep’st  the  stroke 
Betwixt  thy  begging  and  my  meditation. 

I  am  not  in  the  giving  vein  today.’ 
which  are,  perhaps,  as  familiar  as  any  in  Shakespeare. 

Such  an  omission  in  the  Folio  seems  to  suggest  that,  for  dramatic 
purposes,  scenes  were  here  and  there  curtailed;  but  then,  on  the  other 
hand,  what  cause  can  be  assigned  for  the  addition  in  the  Folio  of  lines 
305-359  in  Act  IV,  scene  iii?  In  the  Quarto  this  scene  is  the  longest 
in  the  play,  and  it  is  not  easy  to  imagine  the  dramatic  purpose  to  be 
gained  by  making  Richard’s  long  speech  to  the  Queen  even  longer. 
This  is  not  his  concluding  speech,  and  apparently  it  has  upon  her  no 
more  effect  than  those  that  precede  it.  And  even  if  it  be  that  these 
fifty-five  lines  are  dramatically  superfluous,  who  would  willingly  expunge 
them,  when  with  them  would  be  lost  such  lines  as:  ‘Look  what  is  done 
cannot  be  amended,’  etc.,  or  ‘The  liquid  drops  of  tears  that  you  have 
shed,’  etc.  ?  Pickersgill’s  remarks  on  this  and  other  omitted  passages 
{Appendix,  p.  446)  are  noteworthy. 

These  are  but  two  instances  out  of  many  where,  on  the  one  hand,  the 
Folio  text  is,  both  for  stage  purposes  and  as  poetry,  inferior  to  the  Quarto, 
and,  on  the  other,  where  the  Quarto  is  as  poetry  inferior,  but  for  stage 
purposes  superior,  to  the  Folio.  On  the  whole,  the  majority  of  those 
who  have  grappled  with  the  gnarled  and  almost  unwedgeable  question 
of  the  relation  between  Quarto  and  Folio  regard  the  Quarto  as  the 
playhouse,  or  prompter’s  copy,  and  the  Folio  as  the  version  of  the 
play  as  originally  written  by  Shakespeare.  This  solution,  however, 
although  it  will  not  account  for  all  the  differences  between  the  two 
texts,  does  yet  solve  so  many  that  we  must,  for  the  present  at  least, 
accept  it.  What  solution,  however,  can  we  possibly  suggest  in  cases 
such  as  the  following:  Act  III,  scene  i  (wherein  the  young  king  is 
received  by  Gloucester)  consists  of  two  hundred  and  twenty-five  lines, 
and  there  are  but  forty  variations  between  the  Quarto  and  Folio, 
whereof  the  majority  are  mere  verbal  changes,  while  the  two  texts  here 


Vlll 


PREFACE 


and  there  are  identical  for  ten  or  fifteen  lines  at  a  time?  Whereas 
Act  I,  scene  iv  (wherein  Clarence  converses  first  with  the  Keeper  and 
then  with  the  murderers)  in  the  same  number  of  lines,  there  are  one 
hundred  and  twelve  decided  variations,  not  mere  verbal  changes,  but 
whole  lines,  either  altered  or  omitted  entirely;  and  where  the  differences 
are  for  the  most  part  apparently  arbitrary  and  purposeless;  but  which 
a  nice  discrimination  might  possibly  regard  occasionally  as  improve¬ 
ments;  and  for  stage  purposes  I  cannot  see  that  anything  is  gained  by 
the  Quarto  arrangement. 

It  is,  however,  about  the  Third  Quarto,  1602,  that  the  conflict  has 
been  fiercest.  Collier,  in  his  First  Edition,  in  1842,  was  the  earliest 
to  call  attention  to  certain  agreements,  between  the  texts  of  this  Quarto 
and  of  the  Folio,  and  to  be  found  only  in  these  two  texts;  he  thereupon 
suggested  that  possibly  this  Third  Quarto  had  been  used  as  the  copy 
from  which  the  Folio  had  been  printed.  This  suggestion  has  been 
adopted  by  several  commentators,  principally  German. 

Supposing  that  each  text  was  printed  from  a  manuscript,  the  ques¬ 
tion  as  to  the  text  which  was  printed  from  the  earlier  manuscript  at  once 
assumes  importance;  Collier,  however,  rested  content  with  having 
indicated  the  similarity  and  left  to  others  the  task  of  a  deeper  inves¬ 
tigation. 

Delius  and  Spedding  are  the  staunch  upholders  of  the  Folio  as  the 
earliest  and  authentic  text,  while  the  Cambridge  Editors  are  as  zeal¬ 
ous  in  championship  of  the  First  Quarto.  It  may  be  safely  said,  I  think, 
that  if  Dr  Wright’s  sagacious  genealogy  of  the  texts  of  the  First  Quarto, 
1597,  and  the  Folio  be  not  the  true  solution  of  all  their  variations,  it 
ought  to  be  ( Appendix ,  The  Text).  His  conclusions  may  be  thus  sum¬ 
marised:  the  First  Quarto  was  printed  from  a  transcript,  by  another 
hand,  of  the  author’s  original  MS;  the  Folio  was  printed  from  a  trans¬ 
cript  of  the  author’s  MS  after  many  revisions  by  the  author.  The 
stage-directions  of  the  Folio  are  more  in  number  and  fuller  than  in  the 
Quarto,  which  shows,  as  Dr  Wright  thinks,  that  this  second  trans¬ 
cript  was  made  for  the  theatre’s  library. 

Although  the  Third  Quarto,  1602,  has  been  claimed  as  that  from 
which  the  Folio  was  printed,  it  does  not  hold  its  position  unshared. 
The  Sixth  Quarto,  1622,  according  to  P.  A.  Daniel,  has  much  in  com¬ 
mon  with  the  Folio — in  fact,  more  than  any  other  Quarto,  and,  more¬ 
over,  the  closeness  of  its  date  to  that  of  the  Folio  renders  it  likely  that 
the  editors  would  have  used  this  Quarto  for  copy.  The  extreme  rarity 
of  this  Quarto  of  1622  caused  Collier  to  doubt  its  actual  existence. 

Malone  is  the  earliest  to  assign  a  Date  of  Composition  to  the  present 
play,  and  placed  it  in  1597,  in  the  same  year  with  the  First  Quarto. 
Thus  it  appears  in  his  Chronological  Order  of  all  the  plays,  in  1790.  A 


PREFA  CE 


IX 


few  years  later,  George  Chalmers  published  his  Supplemental  Apology 
for  the  Believers  in  the  Shakespeare  Papers,  which  was  not  so  much  an 
Apology  for  the  Believers  in  ‘  the  Ireland  forgeries,  ’  as  a  cloak  to  cover 
a  violent  attack  on  Steevens  and  Malone.  Chalmers,  also,  made  a 
chronological  list  of  the  plays,  pointing  out  various  errors  in  Malone’s 
list,  and,  among  other  changes,  assigned  the  date,  1595,  to  Richard  III.; 
Malone  evidently  felt  some  force  in  the  argument  of  Chalmers,  and 
accordingly  the  date  is  changed  to  1593  in  the  Variorum  oj  1821 ,  which 
may  be  regarded  as  Malone’s  Second  Edition,  edited,  after  his  death, 
by  Boswell,  the  son  of  Johnson’s  biographer,  and  Malone’s  literary 
executor.  In  the  Appendix,  under  Date  of  Composition,  will  be  found, 
in  the  present  volume,  a  list  of  the  dates  assigned  by  various  editors  and 
commentators,  ranging  from  1590  to  1597.  The  consensus  of  opinion 
is  in  favour  of  1593  or  1594. 

It  has  been  so  frequently  asserted  that  the  Chronicles  of  Hall  and 
of  Holinshed  are  the  sources  whence  Shakespeare  derives  the  plots  of 
his  Historical  Plays,  that  a  repetition  of  the  assertion  seems  almost  super¬ 
fluous.  Indeed,  these  Chronicles  were  the  basis  of  all  the  historical  plays 
founded  on  the  periods  which  they  covered.  Resemblances  between 
Richard  III.  and  the  older  Latin  play,  Richardus  Tertius,  acted  at 
Oxford,  and  also  The  True  Tragedy  of  Richard  the  Third,  1594,  are  due, 
not  so  much  to  any  familiarity  of  Shakespeare  with  the  works  of  his 
predecessors,  as  to  the  fact  that  they  may  be  all  referred  to  a  com¬ 
mon  source.  As  an  Appendix  to  Richard  III.,  in  the  Variorum  0)  1821 f 
Boswell  reprinted  a  part  of  the  older  play:  The  True  Tragedie  of 
Richard  the  Third.  Earlier  than  this,  Steevens  had  called  attention 
to  the  entry  of  this  play,  on  the  Stationers’  Registers,  but  made  no  mention 
of  having  seen  the  play  itself.  At  the  close  of  his  reprint,  Boswell  has 
the  following  note:  ‘I  have  not  thought  it  necessary  to  point  out  the 
particular  passages  in  which  a  resemblance  may  be  traced  between  the 
foregoing  drama  and  Richard  III.;  but,  I  think,  the  reader  will  be 
satisfied  that  Shakespeare  must  have  seen  it  when  he  sat  down  to  the 
composition  of  his  own  play.’ 

A.  Skottowe,  in  his  Life  of  Shakespeare,  a  few  years  later,  and 
Barron  Field,  who  edited  the  play  for  the  Shakespeare  Society  in  1844, 
agree  with  Boswell  that  there  are  points  common  to  both  plays,  for 
which,  their  common  source,  the  Chronicles,  will  not  account.  Field, 
in  his  Introduction,  says:  ‘The  following  line  in  the  Battle-scene  is, 
in  my  opinion,  quite  enough  to  show  that  Shakespeare  considered 
Nature,  as  Moliere  said  of  Wit,  as  his  property,  and  that  he  had  a  right 
to  seize  it  wherever  he  found  it: 11  King.  A  horse,  a  horse,  a  fresh  horse.”’ 
Collier,  on  the  other  hand,  could  see  no  resemblances  but  such 
as  were  accidental  and  trivial.  The  point  wherein  Collier  thought 
the  two  most  nearly  approached  each  other  was  the  incident,  just  before 


X 


PREFA  CE 


the  murder  of  the  Princes,  of  Richard’s  taking  a  page  into  his  conh- 
dence;  but  Field  clearly  shows  that  both  dramatists  were  here  evidently 
following  either  More’s  Life  of  Richard  the  Third ,  or  Holinshed,  who 
copied  More. 

It  is,  I  think,  needless  to  discuss  whence  Holinshed  derived  his 
material.  The  sources  of  his  Chronicles  were,  naturally,  the  works  of 
his  predecessors,  and,  for  Shakespeare,  the  question  of  their  truth  as 
infallible  history  was,  doubtless,  of  small  moment;  that  he  regarded 
them  but  lightly  is  shown  by  the  many  liberties  he  took  with  them, 
compressing  years  into  weeks  and  stretching  weeks  out  to  months, 
mingling  characters  and  events  which  were  never  so  placed.  It  must, 
however,  be  borne  in  mind  that  Shakespeare  wrote  for  the  stage;  and 
the  machinery  of  his  mimic  fate  must  proceed  in  its  own  way  and  work 
out  its  own  ends. 

An  extract  from  an  article  by  E.  E.  Rose  on  Shakespeare  and  His¬ 
tory  is  an  admirable  exposition  of  Shakespeare’s  attitude  towards 
the  Chronicles,  and  is  given  on  p.  579  in  the  Appendix.  It  deserves  the 
careful  consideration  of  those  who  question  the  introduction,  by  the 
dramatist,  of  such  scenes  as  the  wooing  of  Anne  by  Richard,  the  curse 
of  Margaret,  and  of  Clarence’s  dream. 

The  attitude  of  the  Chroniclers  themselves  toward  the  temper  of  the 
time  should  be  no  less  taken  into  account.  At  the  close  of  the  long  and 
bitter  contention  of  the  two  houses  of  York  and  Lancaster,  the  most 
dangerous  of  the  Yorkists  had  been  defeated  and  the  Lancastrians  held 
undisputed  sway;  what  then  more  natural  than  that  the  character  of  the 
defeated  tyrant  should  be  blackened  as  much  as  possible,  in  order  to 
flatter  and  extol  the  conqueror?  The  sympathy  of  all  classes  was 
deeply  Lancastrian;  hence  the  number  of  plays  and  poems  on  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  Richard’s  usurpation  and  of  his  miserable  downfall.  Seven  ver¬ 
sions  of  the  story  are  extant,  all  of  them  antedating  Shakespeare’s 
play.  Scarcely  one  has  survived  in  popular  remembrance.  Shakes¬ 
peare  alone  has  made  Richard  III.  live;  the  character  drawn  by  that 
mighty  hand  is  the  one  which  all  of  us  remember  and  accept  as  true, 
in  spite  of  all  apologists.  Whether  or  not  it  be  Richard’s  true  char¬ 
acter  need  concern  no  reader  of  the  play.  Sir  George  Buck  made  an 
heroic  effort  to  clear  the  reputation  of  Richard  from  the  many  stains 
cast  upon  it  by  the  Chroniclers,  as  did  also  Horace  Walpole  and 
Miss  Caroline  Halsted,  and,  in  our  own  day,  Sir  Clements  R. 
Markham,  but  the  remarks  by  quaint  and  venerable  Fuller,  on  Buck’s 
Life  of  Richard  III.,  are  so  delightfully  characteristic,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  seem  to  apply  so  fitly  to  other  apologists,  that  I  cannot  forbear 
quoting  them  in  full: — 


PREFACE 


xi 


‘Duke  Richard  was  low  in  stature,  crook-backed,  with  one  shoulder 
‘  higher  than  the  other,  having  a  prominent  gobber-tooth,  a  warlike 
‘countenance  which  well  enough  became  a  soldier.  Yet  a  modern 
‘  author,  in  a  book  by  him  lately  set  forth,  eveneth  his  shoulders,  smooth- 
‘  eth  his  back,  planeth  his  teeth,  maketh  him  in  all  points  a  comely  and 
‘beautiful  person.  Nor  stoppeth  he  here;  but,  proceeding  from  his 
‘  naturals  to  his  morals,  maketh  him  as  virtuous  as  handsome,  which 
‘  in  some  sense  may  be  allowed  to  be  true;  concealing  most,  denying  some, 
‘  defending  others,  of  his  foulest  facts,  wherewith  in  all  ages  since  he 
‘  standeth  charged  on  record.  For  mine  own  part,  I  confess  it  no  heresy 
‘  to  maintain  a  paradox  in  history,  nor  am  I  such  an  enemy  to  wit  as  not 
‘  to  allow  it  leave  harmlessly  to  disport  itself,  for  its  own  content,  and 
‘  the  delight  of  others.  Thus  Cardan  hath  written  his  Encomium 
‘  Neronis;  and  others  (best  husbandmen  who  can  improve  the  barrenest 
‘  ground!)  have  by  art  endeavoured  to  praise  as  improbable  subjects. 
‘  But  when  men  shall  do  it  cordially,  in  sober  sadness,  to  pervert  people’s 
‘  judgments,  and  therein  go  against  all  received  records,  I  say,  singularity 
‘  is  the  least  fault  can  be  laid  to  such  men’s  charge.  Besides,  there  are 
‘  some  birds,  “sea-pies”  byname,  who  cannot  rise  except  it  be  by  flying 
‘  against  the  wind,  as  some  hope  to  achieve  their  advancement  by  being 
‘  contrary  and  paradoxical  in  judgment  to  all  before  them  ’  (Church 
History ,  i,  528). 

I  have  thought  it  well  to  include  the  older  play,  The  True  Tragedie  oj 
Richard  the  Third,  in  the  Appendix,  as  several  references  are  made  to 
it  in  the  Commentary;  it  is  reproduced  from  that  edited  by  Barron 
Field  for  the  Shakespeare  Society  in  1844.  Only  those  notes  are 
retained  wherein  Field  calls  attention  to  a  similarity  to  Shakespeare’s 
play,  or  to  an  apparent  corruption  of  the  text. 

I  have  not  thought  it  necessary  to  reprint  Cibber’s  Version  of 
Richard  III.,  but  have  compiled  a  table,  showing  Cibber’s  additions, 
for  which  absolute  completeness  is  not  claimed;  it  is  extremely  difficult 
at  times  to  decide  just  what  shall  be  counted  as  wholly  or  partly  Cibber’s. 
Thus,  in  Act  II,  scene  i,  he  gives  these  lines  to  Anne: 

‘If  ever  he  have  child,  abortive  be  it, 

Prodigious  and  untimely  brought  to  light, 

Whose  hideous  form,  whose  most  unnatural  aspect, 

May  fright  the  hopeful  mother  at  her  view, 

And  that  be  heir  to  his  unhappiness.’ 

The  following  is  Shakespeare’s: 

‘  If  ever  he  have  child,  abortive  be  it, 

Prodigious  and  untimely  brought  to  light, 

Whose  ugly  and  unnatural  aspect 


Xll 


PREFACE 


May  fright  the  hopeful  mother  at  the  view; 

And  that  be  heir  to  his  unhappiness.’ 

Wherefore,  only  those  lines  which  contained  a  decided  change  of 
sense  have  been  included,  in  the  table,  as  additions  due  to  Cibber,  which 
is  perhaps  as  near  as  can  be  attained  in  any  attempt  to  disentangle  the 
various  threads  in  a  network  thus  intricate. 

It  is,  however,  well  to  remember  that  Cibber’s  Version  held  supreme 

I  sway  on  the  stage  for  over  one  hundred  years  (from  1700  until  1845) — 
longer,  indeed,  than  Shakespeare’s  own  play  (1593  to  1700).  Cibber’s 
Richard  was  truer  to  the  Richard  of  the  Chronicles  than  Shakespeare’s; 
he  was  a  villainous  usurper,  keeping  the  rightful  sovereign  from  the 
throne.  But  it  is,  I  think,  not  without  significance  that,  while  on  the 
stage,  Cibber’s  Richard  received  an  applause  denied  to  Shakespeare, 
the  editors  of  Shakespeare  altogether  ignored  Cibber’s  Version,  beyond 
a  contemptuous  reference  by  Warburton  to  a  change  made  in  the  text, 
and  Steevens’s  words  of  praise  for  certain  of  Cibber’s  omissions. 

It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  acknowledge  my  gratitude  to  those 
who  have  shown  much  courtesy  to  me  in  the  work  of  preparing  these 
pages — first  and  foremost,  to  him  who  has  ever  been  my  most  patient 
guide  and  counsellor,  I  can  but  echo  the  words  of  Duncan:  ‘More  is 
thy  due  than  more  than  all  can  pay.’  To  Mr  Charles  E.  Dana,  for 
many  valuable  references  to  Heraldry  and  Armour;  to  Dr  Morris 
Jastrow,  Jr.,  Librarian  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania;  to  Mr  George 
M.  Abbot  and  his  efficient  assistant,  Mr  D.  C.  Knoblauch,  of  the 
Philadelphia  Library,  for  unfailing  attention  to  many  demands. 


September ,  / go8 


H.  H.  F.,  Jr. 


Richard  the  Third 


GENEALOGICAL  TABLE 


K/  « 

-  f  % 

°  K*  <=  H 

•O  . 

'“■g'So'-S^3 
3  r  O 

E5  w 
rt  D  ^ 

Sj,3  H 

O  jj 


M 
•a 
-•C 
•OJ2 


Q 

«  — 
< 

* 

o 

w 


£ 

rt  8t3  R.S 


w 


1-2  i 

o  h 

MtU 

■E| -JJ 

rt  3  rt 

|«  £ 
S 


•  .> 
C  oo 

S*| 

*3  .  M' 
<  «  8 
»  5« 
U  MX 

5^  5 


CO 


•>*♦*  in 
O  y 

5*  u  c 

-  O  M  2 

.*>  3  a 


ZJ 

OO 


CT3_ 

c£ 

□  J 


So? 

-H  * 

•3  t> 

Jg  ^  t3 
-*  o  - 
u,K 

WJ  J 


*■*  ®  >■.  M  V* 

gmCt.kJ  . 

2^3  i/V**  2  \» 

-£S 


<8 


«8<G 


X 

§ 

i£ 

-zX 

-a  o 
W  u" 
.* 
3 

Q 


►  <?•«  . 

Q 

£  $*■? 


•o  r™  rt  43 

ww£  - 


<u  . 

*5  ox 

oj  ox 


W.o 


-«  ot 

J3J1  O 

.a  => 

p<Q  - 


O 

Pi  6 

-<■  $ 
>>  M 

O  -O 

w 


«»■ 

•l^s 
15  8“ 

.«  ^ 


n  0 
-  v  o~ 
W  c/) 

_.  ■*- 
c  o 

"o  £ 


§  ®  2 

«3  S 

C  Q  o 


JJ  u 
«£ 
•b«  3 
B  rt 
rt  o> 

s« 


gf 
>  " 
>x 

Z  £ 

£3  M 

B.d 


ctf  ..vj 
X  oo 

<-i  c> 


.  ^ 
S;v 

«*§to 
*  •  « 

*  £  3 
*  *  2 


H  N  • 
-  mS  ^ 

5  M.  2^ 

18  K- 

S 

-o  £ 


►-»  xo 
>  H 

Ptf  H 

5S  ? 

y  H 

W 


3  ^  ^  * 

rt  0  w  2> 

O  <u  ^  ~  & 


■  j  rt  a 

°n  “i 
J=Q>3- 

o  «o 


s»\  ^ 

0=1 

hI^ 


T*  O  uWOO 

«  .,  a  rovo 
c  «  J  m  fO. 

-o^  i: «  « 
•-3Q0^T3 


■i>c^MB 


L 


.  fO  Vj 

>  5->s 

■^.  .  r's 
^■o.e  a 


A  .S’g- 

^  'O 

VO  .to 

W 

«d« 


o 

XI 

p 

H 


i 

o 


>  j$j>s 

^  « 


/  X  Q 


W 


^  5 


•r'O 

■o^§ 

§WJ 

Bb  -ft 

o  o 

x  -n  . 

WsPl 


hH 

^  .  5»  . 

.  H  M  ^  Jj 

K  i 


,-5  b 


:>  co' 


3 

«CpP  J 

c/i  3 


X  .  «8 

W  g^T« 

.s 

*u 

Ph 


&§0-s 

—  Ofl*  .  .  1  .  "*  i—  ^ 

o  c  b  aj 


ifN  .&•«' 

Sso’i  . 

t  .5*  h  r«  -S  o  2  t?- 

OfV'r'lO  w-«*^i  " 


”5  S^- 

§5®| 

“  £  tl  J3  «8 

S|«s- 


Dramatis  Perfonae 


KING  Edward  IV. 

Edward,  Prince  <9/"  Wales,  afterwards  Edward  V.  \  Sons  to  Ed- 
Richard,  Duke  of  York,  j  ward  IV. 

George,  Duke  of  Clarence,  Brother  to  Edward  IV.  5 

I.  Dramatis  Personae]  First  given  by  5.  George... Clarence']  Om.  Cib. 

Rowe. 


2.  King  Edward  IV.]  Stubbs  (iii,  219):  Edward  IV.  was  not  perhaps  quite 
so  bad  a  man  or  so  bad  a  king  as  his  enemies  have  represented;  but  even  those 
writers  who  have  laboured  hard  to  rehabilitate  him,  have  failed  to  discover  any 
conspicuous  merits.  With  great  personal  courage  he  may  be  freely  credited;  he 
was,  moreover,  eloquent,  affable,  and  fairly  well  educated.  He  was  as  a  man, 
vicious  far  beyond  anything  that  England  had  seen  since  the  days  of  John;  and 
more  cruel  and  blood-thirsty  than  any  king  she  had  ever  known.  There  had  been 
fierce  deeds  of  bloodshed;  cruel  and  secret  murders  under  former  kings;  but  Edward 
IV.  far  outdid  all  that  his  forefathers  and  his  enemies  together  had  done.  The 
death  of  Clarence  was  but  the  summing  up  and  crowning  act  of  an  unparalleled 
list  of  judicial  and  extra-judicial  cruelties  which  those  of  the  next  reign  supplement 
but  do  not  surpass. — Ramsay  (ii,  453):  Edward  IV.  was  a  man  of  much  the  same 
type  as  the  Fastolfs,  and  Pastons,  and  Plumptons,  who  have  left  us  their  portraits 
in  their  private  correspondence:  hard,  narrow,  unscrupulous;  and  endowed  with 
the  iron  will  and  relentless  purpose  necessary  to  keep  the  men  he  had  to  rule  in 
order.  But  these  characteristics  were  not  developed  in  a  day.  Twenty-two 
years  of  government  turned  him  from  the  most  trustful  to  the  most  suspicious  of 
men;  yet  he  was  always  true  to  those  who  served  him  well.  With  the  middle 
and  lower  classes  he  appears  to  have  been  distinctly  popular  to  the  last;  his  con¬ 
vivial  habits  and  easy  accessible  manners  would  account  for  that.  The  Londoners 
might  well  like  a  king  who  lived  and  moved  so  much  among  them.  What  the 
gentry  thought  of  him  is  more  doubtful;  but  Lancastrian  opposition  had  died 
out,  partly  through  Edward’s  consistent  efforts  at  conciliation.  His  private  life 
was  more  irregular  than  that  of  any  king  since  John;  but  he  never  imported  the 
royal  prerogative  of  might  into  love-affairs,  always  working  his  way  through  bland¬ 
ishment  and  largess.  His  intrigues  seem  to  have  been  mostly  carried  on  with 
women  not  of  the  highest  position. 

5.  George,  Duke  of  Clarence]  Marshall:  Shakespeare  has  invested  the 
character  of  this  worthless  scion  of  the  House  of  York  with  an  interest  which,  as 
far  as  history  shows,  he  did  not  deserve.  He  had  all  the  vices  of  his  two  brothers, 
without  their  courage.  The  enmity  between  him  and  Richard  dated  from  the 
time  when  the  latter  proposed,  soon  after  the  murder  of  her  youthful  husband, 


1 


1 


2 


DRAMATIS  PERSONAS 


Richard,  Duke  t?/"  Gloucester,  Brother  to  Edward  IV,  6 

afterwards  King  Richard  III. 

Cardinal,  Archbishop  of  York. 

Duke  of  Buckingham.  9 

8.  Cardinal ]  Thomas  Rotheram...  Steev.  et  seq. 

to  marry  the  widow  of  Edward,  Prince  of  Wales.  Richard’s  object  was  to  obtain 
some  portion  of  the  great  wealth  which  the  king-maker  had  left  and  which  Clarence 
had  coolly  appropriated  without  a  thought.  This  quarrel  began  as  early  as  1472. 
In  December,  1476,  Clarence’s  wife  died.  For  some  time  before  that  event  he 
had  withdrawn  from  court  and  held  very  little  communication  with  his  elder  brother. 
Scarcely  was  his  wife  consigned  to  the  tomb  when  Clarence  solicited  the  hand 
of  Mary,  only  daughter  of  Charles  the  Bold.  The  opposition  of  Edward  to  this 
match  made  the  breach  between  the  brothers  still  wider. 

6.  Richard]  Wright:  In  the  first  year  of  his  reign  (1461)  Edward  IV.  created 
his  two  younger  brothers  dukes.  As  Richard  was  born  October  2,  1452,  he  was 
not  nineteen  years  old  when  Henry  VI.  was  murdered  and  could  not  have  fought 
at  the  battle  of  St.  Alban’s  in  1455,  or  at  Wakefield  in  1460,  or  at  Mortimer’s  Cross 
in  1461,  as  is  represented  in  2  and  J  Henry  VI.;  still  less  could  he  have  taken  part 
in  the  scene  immediately  after  the  death  of  Cade  in  1450. — J.  C.  Collins  (p.  270): 
It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  say  that  in  this  drama  Shakespeare  has  immortalised 
a  portrait  and  a  career  as  purely  fictitious  as  the  popular  representation  of  Machia- 
velli.  In  truth,  More’s  account  of  Richard  is  as  purely  a  figment  of  the  imagination 
as  his  Utopia.  Whether  he  or  Cardinal  Morton  is  to  be  held  responsible  for  it, 
grosser,  and  in  all  probability  more  baseless,  calumnies  have  never  been  circulated 
about  an  English  prince.  When  Shakespeare  adopted  them  they  had  passed 
into  tradition,  and,  even  if  he  suspected  them  to  be  fiction,  he  would  probably 
have  had  little  scruple  in  giving  currency  to  a  fiction  so  acceptable  to  his  audience 
and  to  Queen  Elizabeth. 

8.  Cardinal,  Archbishop  of  York]  French  (p.  217):  According  to  some  writers 
the  real  name  of  this  prelate  was  Scot,  but  being  born  in  1423  at  Rotherham  county, 
York,  he  is  said  to  have  assumed  the  name  of  his  birthplace  in  lieu  of  his  own 
patronymic.  But  in  Cooper’s  Athena  Cantabrigienses  he  is  called  ‘the  son  of 
Sir  Thomas  Rotheram,  Knight  and  Alice  his  wife.’  Thomas  Rotheram  was 
‘a  lance’  in  the  retinue  of  Lord  Ros  at  Agincourt,  and  he  was  probably  the  Bishop’s 
father.  [See  also  Campbell,  Lives  0}  the  Chancellors,  i,  pp.  369-374.] 

9.  Duke  of  Buckingham]  Oechelhauser  ( Einjiihrungen ,  i,  149)  sees  in 
the  character  of  Buckingham,  as  drawn  by  Shakespeare,  ‘a  mere  puppet  of  Richard 
with  whose  cleverness  Buckingham’s  is  placed  in  direct  contrast;  somewhat  the 
same  relation  as  in  the  characters  of  Wagner  and  Faust.  Richard  is  the  type  of 
an  intellectual  hypocrite,  while  Buckingham  is  that  of  a  soft-hearted  hypocrite, 
he  hesitates  for  a  moment  at  the  murder  of  Edward’s  sons,  and  this  hesitation  is 
his  destruction.  But,  throughout,  Buckingham  stands  more  closely  to  Richard 
than  the  others  of  Richard’s  party, — Catesby,  Ratcliffe,  and  Lovel, — who  are 
merely  his  implements, — Buckingham  is  his  confidant.  Moreover,  his  royal  blood 
should  be  evident  both  in  his  bearing  and  dress.  These  points  being  considered 
and  the  role  interpreted  by  a  clever  actor,  the  part  will  gain  a  significance  greater 
than  heretofore.’ 


DRAMATIS  PERSONAE 


3 


Duke  of  Norfolk.  io 

Earl  of  Surrey. 

Marquis  of  Dorset,  Son  to  the  Queen. 

Earl  Rivers,  Brother  to  the  Queen. 

Lord  Gray. 

Cardinal  Bourchier,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury.  15 

Earl  of  Richmond,  afterwards  King  Henry  VII. 

Bishop  of  Ely. 

Lord  Hastings. 

Sir  Thomas  Vaughan.  19 


12.  to  the  Queen\  to  Queen  Eliza¬ 
beth  Theob. 

14.  Gray ]  Gray,  Son  to  Queen  Eliza¬ 
beth  Theob. 

*5-  Cardinal  Bourchier\  Added  by 
Cap. 

Bourchier]  Cap.  Var.  Mai.  Steev. 


Var. ’03, ’13,  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Cam.  Bou- 
chier  Var.  ’21  et  cet. 

17.  Bishop...]  John  Morton,  Bishop 
...  Steev.  et  seq. 

19.  Sir  Thomas  Vaughan ]  Added  by 
Theob.  ...a  Friend  to  the  Queen’s 
Family.  Han. 


10.  Duke  of  Norfolk]  French  (p.  221):  This  is  the  first  time  that  a  member 
of  the  house  of  Howard,  destined  to  take  the  highest  rank  next  to  princes  of  the 
blood,  is  brought  upon  the  scene  in  one  of  Shakespeare’s  plays.  The  father  of 
this  character  was  Sir  Robert  Howard,  a  zealous  Lancastrian,  who  married  Margaret 
Mowbray,  eldest  daughter  of  the  banished  Duke  of  Norfolk  in  King  Richard  II. 
The  male  line  of  the  ancient  Mowbrays  having  become  extinct  in  1475,  Richard  III. 
created  John  Howard,  the  character  in  this  play,  Duke  of  Norfolk,  June  28th,  1483, 
and  Earl  Marshal  of  England,  honours  which  have  remained  in  the  family  of 
Howard  to  the  present  day.  This  date  is  well  worthy  of  remark,  as  it  was  only 
six  days  after  the  time  which  is  usually  given  for  the  death  of  Edward  the  Fourth’s 
second  son,  Richard,  Duke  of  York,  who  was  also  Duke  of  Norfolk.  Was  not 
King  Richard,  therefore,  certain  that  his  nephew  was  no  more  before  he  raised 
his  own  friend  to  that  young  prince’s  dignity? 

14.  Lord  Gray]  French  (p.  225):  This  character,  sometimes  styled  the 
‘Lord  Richard  Grey,’  was,  strictly  speaking,  only  of  knightly  degree,  Sir  Richard 
Grey,  youngest  son  of  Elizabeth  Woodville  and  Sir  John  Grey. 

15.  Cardinal  Bourchier]  French  (p.  217):  This  prelate  was  Thomas  Bourchier, 
second  son  of  William  Bourchier,  Earl  of  Eu,  by  his  wife  Anne  Plantagenet,  daughter 
and  eventually  sole  heir  of  Thomas  of  Woodstock,  youngest  son  of  Edward  the 
Third.  Thomas  Bourchier  was  appointed  to  the  see  of  Worcester  in  1434,  and 
promoted  to  Canterbury  in  1454.  He  died  in  i486  very  soon  after  he  united 
Henry  VII.  to  Elizabeth  of  York. 

17.  Bishop  of  Ely]  See  Campbell,  Lives  0}  the  Chancellors,  i,  388-396. 

18.  Lord  Hastings]  Malone  ( Note  on  III,  iv,  117):  William,  Lord  Hastings 
was  beheaded  on  the  13th  of  June,  1483.  His  eldest  son  by  Catherine  Neville, 
daughter  of  Richard  Neville,  Earl  of  Salisbury,  and  widow  of  William,  Lord  Bon- 
ville,  was  restored  to  his  honors  and  estate  by  Henry  VII.  in  the  first  year  of  his 
reign.  The  daughter  of  Lady  Hastings  by  her  first  husband  was  married  to  the 
Marquis  of  Dorset,  who  appears  in  this  play. 


4 


DRAMATIS  PERSONAS 


Sir  Richard  Ratcliff,  'j 

Lord  Lovel,  V  Friends  to  the  Duke  of  Gloucester. 

Catesby,  J 

Sir  James  Tyrrel,  a  Villain . 

Sir  William  Stanley. 


20 


24 


24.  Sir  William  Stanley ]  Thomas, 
Lord  Stanley ,  Lord  Steward  of  K.  Ed¬ 
ward  IV.’s  Household,  afterward  Earl 


of  Derby.  Theob.  Warb.  Thomas,  Lord 
Stalney  Johns,  (misprint).  Lord  Stanley 
Pope  et  cet.  (subs.) 


20.  Sir  Richard  Ratcliff]  Marshall:  It  seems  that  to  Ratcliff  was  entrusted 
the  charge  of  all  Richard’s  interests  in  the  north  of  England.  In  the  Paston  Letters 
is  one  from  Richard  Duke  of  Gloucester  to  Lord  Neville,  dated  June  nth,  1483 
(No.  874),  in  which  he  requests  that  he  ‘  wyll  yef  credence  to  .  .  .  Richarde  Ratclyff, 
thys  beerrer,  whom  I  nowe  do  sende  to  you,  enstructed  with  all  my  mynde  and 
entent’  (vol.  iii,  p.  306).  This  Lord  Neville  was  probably  the  heir  to  the  earldom 
of  Westmoreland. 

22.  Catesby]  French  (p.  235):  This  character  in  the  play  married  Margaret, 
daughter  of  Lord  Zouch  of  Harringworth,  by  whom  he  had  a  son,  George  Catesby, 
to  whom  his  father’s  forfeited  estates  were  restored,  by  Henry  VII.,  probably 
through  the  interest  of  that  king’s  minister,  Sir  Richard  Empson,  George  Catesby’s 
father-in-law.  After  his  death  Margaret  married  Sir  Thomas  Lucy  of  Charlecote 
and  their  grandson  is  the  Justice  Shallow  of  Shakespeare’s  time. 

24.  Sir  William  Stanley]  At  Stanley’s  first  entrance  (I,  iii,  21)  he  is  called 
Derby.  Theobald  says:  ‘This  is  a  blunder  of  inadvertence  which  has  run  through 
the  whole  chain  of  impressions.  It  could  not  well  be  original  in  Shakespeare,  who 
was  most  minutely  intimate  with  his  history,  and  the  intermarriages  of  the  nobility. 
The  person  here  called  “Derby”  was  Thomas  Lord  Stanley,  Lord  Steward  of 
Edward  the  Fourth’s  household.  But  this  Thomas  Lord  Stanley  was  not  created 
Earl  of  Derby  till  after  the  accession  of  Henry  the  Seventh;  and  accordingly,  after¬ 
wards,  in  the  Fourth  and  Fifth  Acts  of  this  play,  before  the  Battle  of  Bosworth-field, 
he  is  everywhere  called  Lord  Stanley.’ — R.  G.  White:  Theobald’s  reason  for 
changing  ‘Derby’  to  Stanley  is  insufficient,  as  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  mis¬ 
take  was  Shakespeare’s,  and  an  editor  is  not  justifiable  in  substituting  what  his 
author  should  have  written  for  what  he  did  write.  But  as  the  personage  in  ques¬ 
tion  is  called  Stanley  thirteen  times  during  the  Third,  Fourth,  and  Fifth  Acts  in  the 
Folio,  and  as  the  variation  has  no  essential  importance,  and  Stanley  has  held 
possession  of  the  Text  for  a  century  and  a  quarter,  it  may,  under  protest,  be  allowed 
to  remain. — Cambridge  Edd.:  The  error  must  have  been  due  to  the  author,  who 
would  not  have  written  ‘my  lord  of  Stanley,’  and,  therefore,  we  have  retained 
‘Derby’  wherever  both  Quarto  and  Folio  agree  in  reading  it. — Dyce  (ed.  ii): 
Grant  White’s  is,  I  think,  the  best  method  of  dealing  with  this  difficulty.  To 
suppose  that  Shakespeare  wrould  have  called  the  same  person  ‘Derby’  in  some 
places  of  the  play,  and  Stanley  in  other  places,  appears  to  me  a  most  extravagant 
idea :  nor  have  I  any  doubt  that  the  confusion  of  the  names  was  occasioned  by  the 
conflicting  texts  of  the  Tragedy. — Spedding  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  67): 
If  the  Quarto  had  kept  to  ‘Darby’  all  through,  the  explanation  would  have  been 
comparatively  easy.  I  should  have  thought  that  the  corrector  of  the  Folio  had 


DRAMA  TIS  PERSONAL 


5 


0 


Earl  of  Oxford, 

Blunt, 

Herbert, 

Sir  William  Brandon 
Brackenbury,  Lieutenant  of  the  Tower. 
Two  Children  of  the  Duke  of  Clarence. 
Lord  Mayor. 

Sir  Christopher  Urswick,  a  Priest. 


25 


r  Friends  to  the  Earl  of  Richmond. 


3° 


32 


30.  Two  Children  of  the  Duke]  A  32.  Sir. ..Priest]  Added  by  Theob. 

young  Son...  Cap.  A  young  Son...  A  (and  Chaplain  to  the  Countess  of  Rich- 

young  Daughter...  Dyce  et  seq.  mond.)  Han. 


observed  the  anachronism  and  meant  to  remove  it;  that  he  had  begun  his  work  of 
correction  in  the  Third  Act,  and  had  completed  it  for  the  remainder,  as  far  as  the 
dialogue  was  concerned;  but  that  he  had  forgotten  or  postponed  the  two  first  Acts, 
and  had  not  attended  to  the  stage-directions  and  marginal  names  in  the  two  last. 
For  it  is  to  be  observed  that  Stanley  is  never  called  ‘Derby’  in  the  dialogue  after 
the  Second  Act. — W.  W.  Lloyd:  Stanley  shares  a  portion  of  the  mental  qualifica¬ 
tions  of  Richard;  but  he  approaches  him  only  as  nearly  as  simulation  to  dissimula¬ 
tion,  coolness  to  daring,  prudence  of  caution  to  that  of  adventurousness.  Much 
of  the  value  of  the  character  would  be  due  to  his  being  seen  on  the  stage  when 
he  was  not  heard.  In  Act  I,  Sc.  iii,  he  makes  conciliatory  reply  to  the  Queen’s 
accusation  of  his  wife, — the  Queen  who  risks  affronting  him  as  she  pursues  vin¬ 
dictively  Hastings,  the  only  other  lord  who  had  the  disposition  to  protect  her  son. 
Richard  enumerates  Stanley  among  his  dupes,  but  there  is  no  proof  of  it,  and 
Stanley’s  silence  is  marked,  and  was  designed  to  be  remarkable,  throughout  the 
scene  of  weak  wrangling  with  Margaret  and  weaker  part-taking  with  Richard 
against  her  by  Dorset  and  the  rest.  Not  less  significant  is  his  silence  when  Hastings, 
who  had  rejected  his  counsel,  is  arrested,  and  he  follows  with  the  rest  to  Gloster’s 
invitation,  ‘The  rest  who  love  me  rise  and  follow  me.’  Thus  he  foils  the  pene¬ 
tration  even  of  Richard,  who  trusts  him  with  suspicion  but  still  trusts  him,  with 
pledge  in  keeping;  thus  he  carries  on  the  important  negotiations  between  Richmond 
and  Elizabeth,  and  at  last,  at  the  decisive  and  very  latest  moment,  he  lays  aside 
the  mask,  though  his  son’s  life  may  be  the  forfeit,  and  the  fortune  of  Bosworth 
Field  is  decided. 

30.  Two  Children]  Wright:  The  two  children  of  Clarence  were  Edward 
Plantagenet,  Earl  of  Warwick,  who  was  beheaded  by  Henry  VII.,  Nov.  21,  1499, 
and  Margaret  Plantagenet,  afterward  Countess  of  Salisbury  and  mother  of  the 
famous  Cardinal  Pole.  She  suffered  the  same  fate  as  her  brother,  May  27, 

1541- 

32.  Sir  Christopher]  French  (p.  239):  Lysons  says  ( Environs  of  London, 
ii,  475):  ‘Christopher  Urswick,  presented  to  the  rectory  of  Hackney,  by  Bishop 
Hall,  anno  1502,  was  a  man  of  very  considerable  eminence.  His  abilities  as  a 
statesman  which  had  been  evinced  in  his  successful  endeavor  to  promote  the  union 
between  Henry  VII.,  to  whom  he  was  chaplain,  and  Elizabeth  of  York,  induced 


6 


DRAMATIS  PERSONAS 


Another  Priest . 


Tressel  ) 

Berkeley  j  Gentlemen  attending  on  Lady  Anne. 

Queen  to  Edward  IV. 

Queen  Margaret,  Widow  of  Henry  VI. 


33 

35 

37 


33.  Another  Priest]  Added  by  Cap.  Dyce. 

34,  35.  Tressel,  Berkeley ]  Added  by  37.  Queen... Henry  VI.]  Om.  Cib. 


the  King  to  employ  him  in  various  important  negociations  and  embassies.  He 
was  installed  Dean  of  Windsor  in  1495,  and  enjoyed  at  the  same  time  the  arch¬ 
deaconry  of  Richmond  and  Yorkshire.’ 

36.  Queen  to  Edward  IV.]  French  says  (p.  243)  that  in  only  one  instance 
has  he  ‘met  with  the  time  of  Elizabeth  Woodvile’s  death,  and  then  it  was  merely 
stated  to  have  occurred  the  Friday  before  Whitsuntide.  As  Easter  Day  in  1492 
fell  on  the  22nd  of  April,  the  exact  date  of  her  decease  was  the  8th  of  June.  Her 
will,  dated  April  10,  1492,  exhibits  a  touching  picture  of  her  maternal  affection, 
and  her  poverty,  having  nothing  but  her  blessing  to  bequeath  to  her  children, 
for — “  I  have  no  worldly  goods”  is  her  mournful  confession.  She  was  buried  in 
St.  George’s  Chapel,  Windsor.’ — Strickland  (iii,  346):  That  Elizabeth  died 
destitute  of  personal  property  is  no  proof  of  previous  persecution,  since  several 
queens  who  were  possessed  of  the  undivided  dower  appanage,  and  whose  children 
were  provided  for,  died  not  much  richer.  (The  creditors  of  Eleanora  of  Castile 
and  Marguerite  of  France  were  not  paid  till  long  after  the  deaths  of  those  queens. 
Queen  Phillippa  died  in  debt.)  Edward  IV.  had  endowed  his  proud  mother 
as  though  she  were  a  queen-dowager;  while  his  wife  was  dowered  on  property 
to  which  he  had  no  real  title. — Oechelhauser  ( Einfiihrungen ,  i,  149):  Next  to 
Richard’s,  Elizabeth’s  may  be  considered  the  principal  role.  With  due  regard 
to  her  having  two  grown  sons,  Dorset  and  Grey,  by  her  former  husband,  she 
should  not  be  represented  as  too  young  (perhaps  the  latter  half  of  her  thirtieth 
year),  yet  still  lovely  and  charming.  The  chroniclers  lay  great  stress  on  the  loveli¬ 
ness  of  her  character,  her  charm,  and  well-chosen  speech.  [Oechelhauser  has, 
perhaps,  been  herein  slightly  misled  by  the  chroniclers,  Hall  and  Holinshed,  who 
systematically,  and  purposely,  lightened  the  characters  of  all  those  in  opposition 
to  Richard  III.  Later  historians  give  a  different  account  of  Elizabeth,  describing 
her  as  utterly  selfish  and  unscrupulous  where  the  advancement  of  her  relatives 
was  at  stake.  Miss  Strickland  says  there  doubtless  never  was  a  queen  ‘who 
had  a  more  unfortunate  faculty  of  making  enemies.’ — Ed.] 

37.  Queen  Margaret]  Mrs.  Jameson  (ii,  199):  Margaret,  as  exhibited  in 
these  tragedies,  is  a  dramatic  portrait  of  considerable  truth,  and  vigour,  and  con¬ 
sistency — but  she  is  not  one  of  Shakespeare’s  women.  He  who  knew  so  well 
in  what  true  greatness  of  spirit  consisted — who  could  excite  our  respect  and  sym¬ 
pathy,  even  for  a  Lady  Macbeth,  would  never  have  given  us  a  heroine  without  a 
touch  of  heroism;  he  would  not  have  portrayed  a  high-hearted  woman  struggling 
unsubdued  against  the  strangest  vicissitudes  of  fortune;  yet  left  her  without  a 
single  quality  which  would  excite  our  interest  in  her  bravely  endured  misfortunes — 
and  this  in  the  very  face  of  history;  he  would  have  breathed  into  the  woman  some 
of  his  own  sweet  spirit — he  would  have  given  her  a  soul. — Verplanck  ( Note  on 


DRAMATIS  PERSONAL 


7 


[37.  Queen  Margaret] 

IV,  iv,  1):  As  we  find  in  Richard  III.,  all  these  characteristics  of  Margaret  are 
adopted  and  recapitulated,  it  is  clear  that  this  argument  against  the  character 
being  Shakespeare’s  destroys  itself,  by  proving  too  much;  for  it  would  prove  that 
this  play  too  was  not  his,  which  no  one  can  assert  in  the  wildest  mood  of  critical 
conjecture.  Shakespeare  might  certainly  have  given  a  more  heroic  cast  to  Mar¬ 
garet  of  Anjou;  but  the  truth  evidently  is  that,  having,  partly  from  the  intimation 
of  the  chroniclers,  adopted  this  view  of  Margaret’s  ferocity  and  conjugal  infidelity, 
he  must  have  seen  that  he  could  not  breathe  into  such  a  personage  ‘  his  own  sweet 
spirit’  any  more  than  into  Goneril  or  Regan,  and  therefore  placed  her  in  bold 
and  unmitigated  contrast  to  the  mild  virtues  of  the  ‘holy  Henry.’  The  comparison 
of  Margaret  with  Lady  Macbeth  suggests  a  deep  moral  truth,  which  must  have 
been  in  the  Poet’s  mind,  though  he  has  not  embodied  it  in  formal  moral  declama¬ 
tion.  Our  interest  in  Lady  Macbeth  is  kept  up  in  spite  of  her  crimes,  by  her 
unflagging  and  devoted  attachment  to  her  husband,  and  their  mutual  and  touching 
confidence  and  solace  in  each  other,  even  in  guilt  as  well  as  in  sorrow.  Margaret 
has  no  communion  with  Henry’s  heart:  she  scorns  him,  and  her  affections  roam 
elsewhere.  That  last  redeeming  virtue  of  woman  being  lost,  Margaret  has  nothing 
left  but  her  talent  and  courage;  and  those  qualities  alone  cannot  impart  the  respect 
and  sympathy  which  we  continue  to  feel  for  the  guilty  but  nobler  wife  of  Macbeth. 
— Marshall:  Students  who  read  Shakespeare  only,  can  discourse  most  eloquently 
on  the  grand  idea  of  Margaret,  the  impersonation  of  Nemesis,  glorying  in  the 
vengeance  which  falls  on  those  who  had  been  either  principals  or  accomplices  in 
all  the  horrible  acts  of  cruelty  which  the  Yorkist  party  perpetrated.  But  when 
the  play  is  brought  to  the  true  test  of  a  play — when  it  is  acted — were  Margaret 
to  be  represented  by  one  who  had  inherited  all  the  talent  and  reputation  of  a  Sid- 
dons,  added  to  the  prestige  of  a  popular  favorite  at  the  present  day,  no  one  would 
take  much  interest  in  her,  or  regard  her  otherwise  than  as  something  of  a  bore, 
who  interferes  with  the  main  action  of  the  drama. — Minto  (286):  Amidst  the 
circle  of  tearful,  afflicted  women  bereaved  by  the  multiplied  villanies  of  Richard, 
Margaret  stands  out  with  irrepressible  fierceness  flashing  through  and  burning 
up  her  tears,  husbandless,  childless,  friendless,  utterly  impotent,  but  indomitable. 
In  her  young  and  beautiful  days,  when  Suffolk  brought  her  from  France  as  ‘  nature’s 
miracle,  ’  to  be  the  wife  of  King  Henry,  she  gave  ample  proof  that  she  was  a  woman 
of  spirit.  This  was  one  of  Shakespeare’s  earlier  efforts;  but  he  never  again  equalled 
the  concentrated  bitter  fierceness  of  this  she-wolf’s  hunger  for  revenge,  fiendish 
laughter  over  its  partial  accomplishment,  and  savage  prayer  for  its  completion. 
Words  could  not  hiss  and  sting  with  more  envenomed  intensity  than  in  the  speech 
that  she  concludes  with  the  prayer  for  Richard’s  death:  ‘Cancel  his  bond  of  life, 
dear  God,  I  pray  That  I  may  live  to  say  The  dog  is  dead.’ — French  (245):  Sir 
Walter  Scott  has  introduced  Margaret  in  Anne  of  Geier stein  in  the  decline  of  her 
age,  and  in  the  loss  of  her  power,  but  not  of  her  intellect;  and  he  speaks  of  her  as 
one  ‘who,  if  she  occasionally  abused  victory  by  cruelty  and  revenge,  had  made 
some  atonement  by  the  indomitable  resolution  with  which  she  had  supported  the 
fiercest  storms  of  adversity.’ — S.  A.  Brooke  (Trans.  New  Sh.  Soc.,  1880-86, 
p.  512):  Margaret  is  a  mighty  figure:  more  Greek  in  conception  than  any  other 
figure  in  Shakespeare — the  Fate  and  Fury  together  of  the  play.  She  does  nothing 
for  its  movement.  She  is  outside  its  action,  but  broods  above  it,  with  arms  out¬ 
stretched  in  cursing,  an  evil  bird  of  God — the  impersonation  of  all  the  woe  and 


8 


DRAMATIS  PERSONAS 


[37*  Queen  Margaret] 

crime  of  the  civil  strife  of  England,  and  of  its  avenging  punishment.  Worn, 
like  ‘  a  wrinkled  witch,  ’  tall,  with  the  habit  of  command,  she  has  not,  like  Richard, 
been  inhuman,  but  she  has  outlived  humanity,  and  passed  into  an  elemental  power. 
She  has  also  been  so  long  under  the  curse  of  men  for  her  cruelty,  that  the  curse 
has  divided  her  from  men.  So  also  has  her  strange  sorrow — she  is  altogether 
joyless.  It  is  not  till  she  finds  the  Duchess  of  York  and  Edward’s  Queen  in  their 
hopeless  pain  that  she  feels  herself  at  one,  even  for  a  little  while,  with  any  human 
creature.  Then  she  sits  down  and  curses  with  them.  She  has  all  the  eloquence 
of  primeval  sorrow  and  hate.  ‘Life  is  her  shame,’  but  she  ‘waits  vengeance,’ 
hungering  for  it  like  a  wolf.  It  is  the  only  thing  that  brings  a  smile  to  her  withered 
lip.  And  her  vengeance  is  felt,  like  an  actual  presence  in  the  air,  by  all  who  die. 
She  is  not  only  Margaret  and  hate  to  them,  but  the  spirit  in  whom,  for  punishment, 
the  Divine  justice  abides.  And  when  she  passes  away,  still  alive,  departs  in 
awful  joy,  like  one  of  the  immortals:  ‘These  English  woes  will  make  me  smile  in 
France.’  It  is  the  most  supernatural  conception  in  Shakespeare. — Lloyd:  The 
introduction  of  Queen  Margaret,  contrary  to  the  truth  of  history,  is  invented  with 
admirable  effect;  her  invectives  bring  up  the  horrors  of  the  civil  war  with  the  liveli¬ 
ness  that  is  required  to  give  force  to  their  sequel;  her  penetration  and  denounce¬ 
ment  of  the  nature  and  purposes  of  Richard  heighten  our  sense  of  the  blindness 
and  weakness  of  his  victims,  who  neglect  the  warning,  and  generally  relieve  the 
great  contrast  of  the  piece  by  the  intervention  of  a  second  character  of  eloquence, 
pertinacity,  clear-sightedness,  and  decision. — Hudson  ( Introd .,  p.  36):  As  in  the 
earlier  plays  Richard  supplies  a  forecast  of  the  style  of  character  which  the  pro¬ 
ceedings  then  on  foot  were  likely  to  generate  and  hand  down  to  future  times,  so  in 
the  later  play  Margaret  supplies  a  corresponding  retrospect.  She  was  continued 
on  the  scene,  to  the  end,  apparently,  that  the  parties  might  have  a  terrible  present 
remembrancer  of  their  former  deeds;  just  as  the  manhood  of  Richard  had  been 
anticipated  for  the  purpose,  as  it  would  seem,  of  forecasting  the  final  issues  from 
the  earlier  stages  of  that  multitudinous  tragedy.  So  that  there  appears  to  be  some 
reason  in  the  ways  of  Providence,  as  well  as  in  the  laws  of  Art,  why  Margaret  should 
still  be  kept  in  presence,  as  the  fitting  counterpart  of  that  terrible  man  as  he  grows 
on  from  youth  to  manhood,  and  from  manhood  to  his  end,  at  once  the  offspring 
and  the  avenger  of  civil  butchery.  Her  condition  is,  here,  vastly  different  indeed 
from  what  it  was  in  the  earlier  plays,  but  her  character  remains  the  same.  She 
is  here  stripped  of  arms  and  instruments,  so  that  her  thoughts  can  no  longer  work 
out  in  acts.  But,  for  this  very  cause,  her  Amazonian  energies  concentrate  them¬ 
selves  so  much  the  more  in  her  speech;  and  her  eloquence,  while  retaining  all  its 
strength  and  fluency,  burns  the  deeper,  forasmuch  as  it  is  the  only  organ  of  her 
mind  which  she  has  left.  In  brief,  she  is  still  the  same  high-grown,  wide-branching 
tree,  now  rendered  leafless  indeed,  and,  therefore,  all  the  fitter  for  the  blasts  of 
heaven  to  howl  and  whistle  through!  Long  suffering  has  deepened  her  fierceness 
into  sublimity.  At  once  vindictive  and  broken-hearted,  her  part  runs  into  a  most 
impressive  blending  of  the  terrible  and  the  pathetic  .  .  .  She  is  a  sort  of  wailing 
or  ululating  chorus  to  the  thick-thronging  butcheries  and  agonies  that  wind  their 
course  through  the  play.  A  great,  brave,  fearful  woman  indeed  made  sacred  by 
all  the  anguishes  that  a  wife  and  a  mother  can  know! — Warner  (p.  218):  Mar¬ 
garet  is  introduced  much  after  the  fashion  of  a  Chorus,  a  combination  of  prediction 
and  commentary  upon  the  persons  and  events  with  whom  her  influence  is  still 


DRAMA  TIS  PERSONS  g 

Anne,  Widow  of  Edward,  Prince  of  Wales,  Son  38 

to  Henry  VI,  afterwards  married  to  the  Duke  of 
Gloucester.  40 

Dutchess  of  York,  Mother  to  Edward  IV,  Clarence, 
and  Richard  III. 

Sheriff ‘  Pursuivant,  Citizens ,  Ghosts  of  those  mur¬ 
der'd  by  Richard  III.  with  Soldiers  and  Attendants. 

A  Page ,  a  Scrivener.  45 

The  Scene  in  England. 

42.  After  this  line,  an  infant  Daughter  Dyce. 

of  Clarence,  is  added  by  Cap.  et  seq.  45.  A  Page,  a  Scrivener]  Added  by 

43.  Sheriff]  Sheriff  of  Wiltshire.  Cap. 


powerful.  This  vindictive  shade  of  Margaret  in  the  play  is  one  of  the  great  artistic 
and  dramatic  triumphs  of  the  poet. 

38.  Anne,  Widow  of  Edward,  Prince  of  Wales]  Gairdner:  The  Earl  of 
Warwick’s  younger  daughter,  Anne,  had  been  betrothed  to  the  son  of  Henry  VI. 
It  does  not  appear  that  she  was  married  to  him,  although  she  is  often  spoken  of  as 
his  widow;  on  the  contrary,  the  language  of  contemporary  writers  implies  that 
she  was  only  contracted  or  engaged  to  him.  (The  Croyland  writer,  p.  557,  says 
she  was  desponsata,  and  even  after  the  Prince’s  death  he  speaks  of  her  as  puella.) 
In  point  of  fact,  at  the  date  of  his  death  she  had  not  completed  her  fourteenth 
year.  She  was  born  on  June  11,  1456.  [The  question  of  Anne  Neville’s  marriage 
to  Edward,  Prince  of  Wales,  may  be  found  concisely  stated  in  Miss  Caroline 
Halsted’s  History  of  Richard  III.,  Chap.  VII.  As  the  subject  is  one  of  purely 
historic  interest,  I  trust  the  omission  of  a  more  detailed  statement  will  be  par¬ 
doned. — Ed.] 

41.  Dutchess  of  York]  Malone:  Cicely,  daughter  of  Ralph  Neville,  first  Earl 
of  Westmoreland,  and  widow  of  Richard,  Duke  of  York,  who  was  killed  at  the 
battle  of  Wakefield  in  1460.  She  survived  her  husband  thirty-five  years,  living 
till  the  year  1495. 


The  Tragedy  of  Richard  the  Third: 

with  the  Landing  of  Earle  Richmond,  and  the 

Battell  at  Bofworth  Field. 


Aftus  Primus.  Scoena  Prima. 


Enter  Richard  Duke  of  Glojler  ,folus. 
OW  is  the  Winter  of  our  Difcontent, 


5 


4.  A&us  Primus.  Scoena  Prima.]  Act 
I.  Scene  i.  Rowe. 

The  Court.  Pope,  + .  London.  A 
Street.  Cap. 

5.  Glofter,]  Glocefter,  Q,Q3-8,  Pope 


ii.Theob.  i.  Glo’ ster,  Rowe.  Gloucester, 
Pope  i, +  ,  Cam. +.  Richard,  Cap. 

5.  folus.]  Om.  Cap. 

6.  our]  Om.  Q3_s.  sour  Strutt  ap. 
Seymour. 


x.  The  Tragedy]  Theobald:  This  tragedy,  though  it  is  called  the  Life  and 
Death  of  this  Prince,  comprises,  at  most,  but  the  last  eight  years  of  his  time;  for 
it  opens  with  George,  Duke  of  Clarence,  being  clapped  up  in  the  Tower;  which 
happened  in  the  beginning  of  the  year  1477;  and  closes  with  the  death  of  Richard 
at  Bosworth,  which  battle  was  fought  on  the  22nd  of  August,  1485. — Steevens: 
It  appears  that  several  dramas  on  the  present  subject  had  been  written  before 
Shakespeare  attempted  it.  The  date  of  Qx  is  1597,  but  before  this,  viz.,  August 
15,  1586,  was  entered  at  the  Stationers’  A  tragical  Report  oj  King  Richard  the 
Third,  a  Ballad.  It  may  be  necessary  to  remark  that  the  words  song,  ballad, 
enterlude,  and  play  were  often  synonymously  used. — Warton:  Harington,  Apol- 
ogie  for  Poetrie,  prefixed  to  his  Ariosto,  1590,  says:  ‘For  Tragedies,  to  omit  other 
famous  Tragedies,  that  which  was  played  at  St.  Iohn’s  in  Cambridge,  of  Richard 
the  third,  would  move  (I  think),  Phalaris  the  tyrant,  and  terrifie  all  tyrannous 
minded  men.’  [Sig  4,  recto;  ed.  1634.]  He  most  probably  means  Shakes¬ 
peare’s;  and  if  so,  we  may  argue  that  there  is  some  more  ancient  edition  of  this 
play  than  Qt;  at  least  this  shows  how  early  Shakespeare’s  play  appeared;  or  if 
some  other  Richard  the  Third  is  here  alluded  to  by  Harington,  that  a  play  on 
this  subject  preceded  our  author’s. — Farmer:  The  play  mentioned  by  Harington 
was  a  Latin  one,  written  by  Dr.  Legge,  and  acted  at  St.  John’s  College,  some 
years  before  1588,  the  date  of  the  copy  in  the  Museum.  A  childish  imitation  of 
Legge’s  play  was  written  by  one  Lacy,  1583;  which  had  not  been  worth  mentioning 
were  they  not  confounded  by  Capell. — Tyr whitt:  The  Latin  play  of  King  Rich¬ 
ard  III.  (MSS  Harl.  n.  6926)  has  the  author’s  name,  Henry  Lacey,  and  is  dated 
1586. — Steevens:  Heywood,  in  his  Actor’s  Vindication,  mentions  the  play  of 
King  Richard  III.  acted  at  St.  John’s  Cambridge,  and  in  the  Stationers’  Registers, 
June  19,  1594,  Thomas  Creede  made  the  following  entry:  ‘An  enterlude,  intituled 


11 


12 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  I,  sc.  i. 


[i.  The  Tragedy  of  Richard  the  Third.] 

the  tragedie  of  Richard  the  Third,  wherein  is  showen  the  death  of  Edward  the 
ffourthe,  with  the  smotheringe  of  the  twoo  princes  in  the  Tower  with  a  lamentable 
end  of  Shores  wife,  and  the  coniunction  of  the  two  houses  of  Lancaster  and  Yorke.’ 
This  could  not  have  been  the  work  of  Shakespeare,  unless  he  afterwards  dismissed 
the  death  of  Jane  Shore,  as  an  unnecessary  incident,  when  he  revised  the  play. 
Perhaps,  however,  it  might  be  some  translation  of  Lacey’s  play,  at  the  end  of  the 
first  Act  of  which  is:  ‘The  showe  of  the  procession,  i.  Tipstaff e.  2.  Shore’s 
wife  in  her  petticote,  having  a  taper  burning  in  her  hand,’  etc. — Malone:  At 
the  end  of  a  rare  poetical  miscellany,  without  either  printer’s  name  or  date,  entitled: 
Licia,  or  Poems  of  Love,  is  subjoined  a  poem  with  this  title:  The  rising  to  the 
Crowne  of  Richard  the  Thirde,  written  by  himselfe;  but  whether  it  preceded  or  fol¬ 
lowed  our  author’s  historical  drama,  I  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain.  I  conceive, 
however,  that  this  poem,  which  consists  of  three  hundred  verses  in  six-line  stanzas, 
preceded  Shakespeare’s  Richard  III.  He,  however,  took  nothing  from  it.  But 
the  true  origin  of  this  play  was  doubtless  that  piece  which  was  entered  in  the  Sta¬ 
tioners’  Registers  on  June  19,  1594,  which  I  suspect  was  then  printed,  and  may  per¬ 
haps  be  hereafter  discovered.  In  this,  as  in  several  other  instances,  the  bookseller, 
I  believe,  was  induced  to  publish  the  old  play  in  consequence  of  the  success  of  the 
new  one,  and  before  it  had  yet  got  into  print.  This  piece  was  probably  written  by 
either  Marlowe  or  Greene,  and  doubtless  had  been  exhibited  some  years  before. 
.  .  .  The  real  length  of  time  in  this  piece  is  fourteen  years  (not  eight,  as  Theobald 
supposed);  for  I,  ii,  commences  with  the  funeral  of  Henry  VI.,  who  is  said  to  have 
been  murdered  on  the  21st  of  May,  1471.  The  imprisonment  of  Clarence,  which 
is  shown  in  I,  i,  did  not,  in  fact,  take  place  till  i477-’78. — Wright  ( Introd .,  vii): 
It  was  no  part  of  the  business  of  the  dramatist  to  follow  the  historian  too  closely, 
or  to  observe  the  unities  of  place  and  time.  The  play  opens  in  1471,  and  before 
the  end  of  Act  I.  we  are  hurried  forward  six  years  to  the  death  of  Clarence,  which 
is  made  to  be  nearly  contemporary  with  the  death  of  Edward  six  years  later  still. 
In  this  way,  however,  the  interval  of  Edward’s  reign,  uneventful  for  dramatic 
purposes,  is  bridged  over,  and  the  catastrophe  of  the  struggle  of  the  rival 
houses  is  reached. — S.  T.  Coleridge:  This  play  should  be  contrasted  with 
Richard  II.  Pride  of  intellect  is  the  characteristic  of  Richard,  carried  to  the 
extent  of  even  boasting  to  his  own  mind  of  his  villany,  whilst  others  are  present 
to  feed  his  pride  of  superiority;  as  in  his  first  speech,  II,  i.  Shakespeare  here,  as 
in  all  his  great  parts,  develops  in  a  tone  of  sublime  morality  the  dreadful  conse¬ 
quences  of  placing  the  moral,  in  subordination  to  the  mere  intellectual,  being. 
In  Richard  there  is  a  predominance  of  irony,  accompanied  with  apparently  blunt 
manners  to  those  immediately  about  him,  but  formalized  into  a  more  set  hypocrisy 
towards  the  people  as  represented  by  their  magistrates. — Hartley  Coleridge 
(ii,  172):  In  quantity  and  proportion,  Richard  II.  is  a  more  regular  tragedy  than 
Richard  III.;  in  quality,  there  never  was  a  profounder  tragedy  than  that  which 
commences  on  this  page — an  absolute  destiny  involved  in  a  human  will — an  instru¬ 
ment  of  fate  self-chosen,  self-condemned,  excommunicated  by  nature,  yet  with  an 
intellect  concentrated  by  frost,  works  in  the  misshaped  shape  of  Richard — a  thing 
far  more  to  be  pitied  than  abhorred.  It  is  not  tragic,  it  is  tragedy. — Schlegel 
(P-  437):  Shakespeare  intended  that  terror  rather  than  compassion  should  prevail 
throughout  this  tragedy:  he  has  rather  avoided  than  sought  the  pathetic  scenes 
which  he  had  at  command.  Of  all  the  sacrifices  to  Richard’s  lust  of  power,  Clarence 


ACT  I,  sc.  i.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


[l.  The  Tragedy  of  Richard  the  Third.] 

alone  is  put  to  death  on  the  stage:  his  dream  excites  a  deep  horror,  and  proves 
the  omnipotence  of  the  poet’s  fancy;  his  conversation  with  the  murderers  is  power¬ 
fully  agitating;  but  the  earlier  crimes  of  Clarence  merited  death,  although  not 
from  his  brother’s  hand.  The  most  innocent  and  unspotted  sacrifices  are  the 
two  princes:  we  see  but  little  of  them,  and  their  murder  is  merely  related.  Anne 
disappears  without  our  learning  anything  further  respecting  her:  in  marrying  the 
murderer  of  her  husband  she  had  shown  a  weakness  almost  incredible.  The 
parts  of  Lord  Rivers,  and  other  friends  of  the  Queen,  are  of  too  secondary  a  nature 
to  excite  a  powerful  sympathy;  Hastings,  from  his  triumph  at  the  fall  of  his  friend, 
forfeits  all  title  to  compassion;  Buckingham  is  the  satellite  of  the  tyrant,  who  is 
afterwards  consigned  by  him  to  the  axe  of  the  executioner.  In  the  background 
the  widowed  Queen  Margaret  appears  as  the  fury  of  the  past,  who  invokes  a  curse 
on  the  future:  every  calamity  which  her  enemies  draw  down  on  each  other  is  a 
cordial  to  her  revengeful  heart.  Other  female  voices  join  from  time  to  time  in 
the  lamentations  and  imprecations.  But  Richard  is  the  soul,  or  rather  the  demon, 
of  the  whole  tragedy.  He  fulfils  the  promise  which  he  formerly  made  of  leading 
the  murderous  Machiavel  to  school.  Notwithstanding  the  uniform  aversion 
with  which  he  inspires  us,  he  still  engages  us  in  the  greatest  variety  of  ways  by 
his  profound  skill  in  dissimulation,  his  wit,  his  prudence,  his  presence  of  mind, 
his  quick  activity,  and  his  valour.  He  fights  at  last  like  a  desperado,  and  dies  the 
honourable  death  of  a  hero  on  the  field  of  battle.  Shakespeare  could  not  change 
this  historical  issue,  and  yet  it  is  by  no  means  satisfactory  to  our  moral  feelings. 

5.  Enter  Richard]  Wright:  Henry’s  murder  by  Richard  took  place  in  the  Tower 
on  the  night  of  Tuesday,  21st  May,  1471  ( Warkworth  Chronicle ,  p.  21,  Camden 
Soc.);  his  body  was  brought  to  St.  Paul’s  on  the  eve  of  Ascension  Day,  and  on  the 
following  morning  he  was  conveyed  to  Chertsey  to  be  buried  there.  The  play, 
therefore,  opens  on  Ascension  Day,  23d  May,  1471;  unless  we  suppose  the 
First  and  Second  Scenes  were  on  different  days,  in  which  case  the  play  begins 
on  May  22nd.  The  scene  is  probably  near  the  Tower. — Ordish  (p.  60): 
When  Richard  III.  was  produced  at  the  Lyceum  Theatre,  in  1887,  the  stage 
represented  the  end  of  a  street,  a  corner-gable  casting  a  shadow,  a  sun-dial 
in  the  foreground.  Bells  were  ringing — characteristic  of  Plantagenet  and  early 
Tudor  London — the  sun  was  shining  brightly  in  the  street  beyond  the  gable-end 
and  in  the  foreground;  presently  a  shadow  was  cast  on  the  wall  of  the  street,  a 
moving  shadow,  and  Richard,  passing  through  the  shadow  of  the  gable,  steps 
out  into  the  sunlight  as  he  comes  towards  the  dial,  and  then  the  bells  cease.  The 
figure  of  the  Duke,  not  ignoble  though  deformed,  and  the  flashing  eye  from  a 
pale,  intellectual  face  athwart  a  cluster  of  dark  locks,  emerging  from  this  street 
of  ancient  London,  formed  a  living  picture  of  history  never  to  be  forgotten. 

6.  Now,  etc.]  Richardson  (p.  12):  In  this  first  scene  we  have  the  loathsome 
deformity  of  Richard  displayed,  with  such  indications  of  mind  as  altogether  sup¬ 
press  our  aversion.  Indeed,  Shakespeare,  in  the  beginning  of  Richard’s  soliloquy, 
keeps  that  deformity,  to  which  he  would  reconcile  us,  out  of  view;  nor  mentions  it 
till  he  throws  discredit  upon  its  opposite:  this  he  does  indirectly.  Richard  treats 
the  sports  and  pastimes  of  a  peaceful  court  with  irony:  he  scoffs  at  them;  does 
not  blame,  but  despises  them.  By  thus  throwing  discredit  on  the  usual  attendants 
of  grace  and  beauty,  he  lessens  our  esteem  for  those  qualities,  and  proceeds  with 
less  reluctance  to  mention  his  own  hideous  appearance.  Here,  too,  with  great 


14 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  i. 


[6.  Now  is  the  Winter  of  our  Discontent,  etc.] 
judgement  on  the  part  of  the  poet,  the  speech  is  ironical.  To  have  justified  or 
apologised  for  deformity  with  serious  argument  would  have  been  no  less  ineffectual 
than  a  serious  charge  against  beauty.  The  intention  of  Shakespeare  is  not  to 
make  us  admire  the  deformity  of  Richard,  but  to  make  us  endure  it.  His  con¬ 
tempt  of  external  appearance,  and  the  easy  manner  in  which  he  considers  his  own 
defects,  impress  us  strongly  with  the  apprehension  of  his  superior  understanding. 
His  resolution,  too,  of  not  acquiescing  tamely  in  the  misfortune  of  his  form,  but 
of  making  it  a  motive  for  him  to  exert  his  other  abilities,  gives  us  an  idea  of  his 
possessing  great  vigour  and  strength  of  mind.  Not  dispirited  with  his  deformity, 
it  moves  him  to  high  exertion.  Add  to  this  that  our  wonder  and  astonishment 
are  excited  at  the  declaration  he  makes  of  an  atrocious  character;  of  his  total  insen¬ 
sibility;  and  resolution  to  perpetrate  the  blackest  crimes. — Skottowe  (i,  191): 
So  well  was  the  poet  pleased  with  the  principles  on  which  the  character  of  Gloucester 
[in  the  True  Tragedy  of  Richard  Duke  of  York ]  was  constructed  that  his  Richard 
exhibits  a  continuation  of  their  development.  He  is  fierce  and  bloody  and  his 
bold  designs  are  unchecked  by  any  moral  curb.  If  his  character  were  to  be  esti¬ 
mated  only  from  this  opening  soliloquy,  it  might  be  contended  that  the  foundation 
of  his  ambition  was  laid  in  repinings  at  a  deformity  repulsive  to  love  and  effeminate 
delights  of  peace;  but  it  is  evident  from  3  Henry  VI.  that  ambition  in  the  general 
sense  and  common  form  of  that  passion  was  his  characteristic,  and  that  it  was 
strengthened,  not  created,  by  the  malicious  desire  of  the  power  of  revenging  himself 
on  men  better  graced  by  nature.  He  is  morose  and  savage  when  disappointed  or 
opposed,  but  in  the  flood  of  prosperity  he  unbends;  his  wit  is  brilliant,  sometimes 
playful,  though  generally  distinguished  by  bitter  irony,  sarcastic  levity,  and  wanton 
insult. — Hunter  (ii,  79):  This  long  soliloquy  is  a  kind  of  prologue  to  the  ensuing 
tragedy;  and  it  seems  as  if  Shakespeare  had  formed  the  intention  of  making  Richard 
a  theatrical  character,  without  being  very  solicitous  whether  he  caught  the  real 
features  of  the  real  Richard.  It  is  manifest  that  when  the  poet  introduces  him 
as  saying  ‘I  am  determined  to  prove  a  villain,’  the  audience  must  have  been  pre¬ 
possessed,  and  the  subsequent  events  must  be  made  to  correspond  with  the  image 
the  Poet  had  at  the  outset  presented  before  them.  A  man  who,  owing  to  personal 
defects,  has  no  pleasure  in  the  gentle  arts  of  peace,  with  a  capacity  for  business 
and  enterprise,  able  and  eloquent,  with  no  limits  to  his  ambition,  wading  through 
slaughter  to  a  throne,  uneasy  there,  and  dying  at  last  in  battle,  is  a  fine  character  for 
a  dramatic  writer,  preparing  not  a  tragedy,  but  a  history. — H.  Reed  (p.  320):  The 
peculiar  significancy  of  the  opening  scenes  of  Shakespeare’s  plays  has  been  often 
noticed,  and  it  may  now  be  observed  that  of  them  all,  Richard  III.  is  the  only 
one  that  opens  with  a  soliloquy,  as  if  to  indicate  the  moral  solitariness  of  the  char¬ 
acter.  He  is  represented  as  feeling  himself  marked  by  nature  to  stand  apart  from 
his  fellow  men;  and  as  all  social  feeling  is  extinguished,  the  humanity  of  his  nature 
dies  with  it,  and  all  that  is  left  is  an  almost  supernatural  selfishness,  proud  and 
self-assured — ‘This  word  love  which  grey-beards  call  divine,  Be  resident  in  men 
like  one  another,  And  not  in  me.  7  am  myself  alone.' — 3  Henry  VI:  V,  vi,  81-83. 
— Hudson  ( Sh .  His  Life,  etc.,  p.  150):  From  the  outset  the  utmost  care  is  taken 
by  Shakespeare  that  in  our  first  impression  of  the  full-grown  Richard  his  thought- 
swarming  head  may  have  the  start  of  his  bloody  hand.  Which  order,  by  the 
way,  is  clean  reversed  in  Cibber’s  patch-work  preparation  of  the  play;  the  murder 
of  the  sainted  Henry  being  there  foisted  in  at  the  opening,  so  that  admiration  of 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


15 


[6.  Now  is  the  Winter  of  our  Discontent,  etc.] 

Richard’s  intellect  is  forestalled  by  abhorrence  of  his  wickedness.  Assuredly 
it  is  neither  wise  nor  right  thus  to  tamper  with  the  Poet’s  workmanship.  This 
opening  soliloquy,  so  startling  in  its  abruptness,  and  so  crammed  with  poetry 
and  thought,  has  the  effect  of  duly  pre-engaging  our  minds  with  the  hero’s  active, 
fertile,  scheming  brain. — Warner  (p.  208):  The  soliloquies  in  Richard  III.  are 
a  dramatic  necessity.  We  could  not  get  at  the  real  man  without  them.  But 
in  the  mouth  of  Richard  the  soliloquies  are  far  more  than  instruments  of  dramatic 
art:  they  are  in  keeping  with  the  character  Shakespeare  seeks  to  lay  before  us. 
There  was  absolutely  no  soul  in  whom  Richard  could  confide.  He  loves  no  one, 
trusts  no  one,  strange  to  say,  hates  no  one,  but  uses  all.  Now  such  a  man  must,  as 
it  were,  think  aloud  .  .  .  Here  we  have,  then,  a  self-revelation,  not  only  as  a  rhetori¬ 
cal  ornament  and  dramatic  necessity,  but  as  a  psychological  truth. — Fitzgerald 
(ii,  52):  In  this  opening  soliloquy  Garrick’s  Richard,  instead  of  ‘chuckling’  over 
his  own  deformity,  and  taking  a  pleasure  in  being  so  odious  to  others,  showed 
himself  pained  and  uneasy  when  he  dwelt  on  these  defects.  That  reflection  seemed 
to  be  only  a  fresh  incentive  to  avenge  himself  on  those  who  were  more  blessed 
by  nature. — T.  R.  Gould  (p.  39):  With  head  bent  in  thought,  arms  folded,  and 
slow,  long  step,  longer  it  would  seem  than  the  height  of  his  figure  might  warrant, 
yet  perfectly  natural  to  him,  and  so  that  his  lifted  foot  emerged  first  into  view, 
[Junius  Brutus],  Booth  appeared  upon  the  scene,  enveloped  and  absorbed  in  the 
character  of  Richard.  He  carried  distinctness  of  articulation  to  an  extreme, 
pronouncing  ‘ocean’  as  a  trisyllable. — Oechelhauser  ( Einjiihrungen ,  i,  158): 
The  action  of  this  first  scene  should  not,  I  think,  take  place  in  a  street,  but  in  the 
courtyard  of  the  Tower,  the  same  wherein  later  the  scenes  of  the  reception  of  the 
young  king  and  of  Elizabeth’s  farewell  address  to  her  sons  are  laid.  On  one 
side  is  a  small  door  or  wicket,  through  which  Brackenbury  and  Clarence  exeunt. 
(It  is  important  that  this  door  should  be  on  the  side  and  not  in  the  back  scene, 
since  were  it  in  the  latter  position,  Elizabeth  in  her  final  apostrophe  to  the  Tower 
would  be  compelled  to  turn  her  back  to  the  audience  and  thus  be  at  such  a  distance 
that  her  voice  would  have  to  be  raised  to  too  loud  a  tone.)  The  scenery  should, 
of  course,  represent  the  Tower  at  the  Plantagenet  period — for  which  a  wood-cut 
will  be  found  in  Halliwell’s  Folio  edition. 

6.  Winter  .  .  .  Discontent]  Malone:  So  in  the  old  play  Wily  Beguil'd:  ‘After 
these  blustering  blasts  of  discontent.’  Wily  Beguil’d  is  mentioned  by  Nash  in 
Have  With  You  to  Saffron  Waldon,  which  appeared  in  1596.— Steevens:  Thus 
in  Sidney’s  Astrophel  and  Stella:  ‘Gone  in  the  winter  of  my  miserie.’  [This  note 
by  Steevens  does  not  appear  in  any  of  the  Variorum  editions  before  that  of  1803. 
This  would  not  be  worth  the  noting  were  it  not  that  such  independent  additions 
by  Reed  are  rare.  It  may  be  remarked  that  1.  7,  sonnet  lxix,  of  Astrophel  and 
Stella ,  reads:  ‘Gone  is  the  winter  of  my  misery.’  The  error  was  not  corrected  in 
the  two  following  Variorum  editions.] — Vaughan  (iii,  1)  points  out  that  ‘discon¬ 
tent,*  as  here  used,  signifies  ‘that  peculiar  form  of  ill-feeling  which  is  involved 
in  a  state  of  enmity  and  strife,’  and  quotes  2  Henry  VI.,  Ill,  i,  200:  ‘My  body 
round  engirt  with  misery;  For  what’s  more  miserable  than  discontent.’ — Murray 
( N .  E.  D.,  s.  v.  Discontent )  under  the  definition:  ‘The  state  or  condition  of 
being  discontented;  dissatisfaction  of  mind,’  quotes,  ‘1591  Spenser  M.  Hubbard, 
898,  To  waste  long  nights  in  pensive  discontent,’  and  after  quoting  the  present 
line,  adds  ‘1647  Clarendon:  History  0}  Rebellion,  I,  31,  2.  The  country  full  of 


[act  i,  sc.  i. 

7 


j6  the  life  and  death  of 

Made  glorious  Summer  by  this  Son  of  Yorke: 
And  all  the  clouds  that  lowr’d  vpon  our  houfe 
In  the  deepe  bofome  of  the  Ocean  buried. 


7.  Son ]  fonne  Qq.  sun  Rowe  et  seq. 

8.  lowr’d  ]  lowrd  Qi-5.  low'r  Q?. 
lowr  Qg.  lour'd  Cap.  Sta.  Cam.  + ,  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Huds.  lower* * 3 * * * 7 8 9 d  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce 


9 

i,  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Ktly,  Rife. 

9.  bofome]  bowels  Qg. 

buried.]  buried ,  Q4.  bury' d  Rowe, 
Theob.  Ilan.  YVarb.  Johns,  buried:  Cap. 


pride,  mutiny  and  discontent,  c.  (with  plural).  A  feeling  of  discontent  or  dis¬ 

satisfaction.  1588  Shakespeare  Tit.  And.,  I,  i,  443,  Dissemble  all  your  griefs  and 

discontents.’ — Schmidt  {Lex.)  gives  numerous  examples  wherein  ‘discontent 

may  mean  ‘grief,  vexation .’  The  line  above  quoted  by  Vaughan  and  the  present 
one  are  cited.  The  German  translators,  following  Schlegel’s  lead,  thus  render  the 

line:  ‘Nun  ward  der  Winter  unsers  Missvergnugens,’  where  ‘Missvergniigen’ 

seems  hardly  to  convey  the  exact  shade  of  meaning  which  the  passage  demands; 
the  metre  here,  however,  required  a  word  of  four  syllables. — Ed. 

7.  Son  of  Yorke]  Steevens:  Alluding  to  the  cognizance  of  Edward  IV. 
which  was  a  sun,  in  memory  of  the  three  suns,  which  are  said  to  have  appeared  at 
the  battle  which  he  gained  over  the  Lancastrians  at  Mortimer’s  Cross.  [See 
j  Henry  VI:  II,  i,  26-40.]  So,  in  Miseries  0}  Queen  Margaret,  Drayton:  ‘Three 
suns  were  seen  that  instant  to  appear,  Which  soon  again  shut  themselves  up  in  one; 
Ready  to  buckle  as  the  armies  were,  Which  this  brave  duke  took  to  himself  alone.’ 
[P.  131,  ed.  1631.] — Hunter  (ii,  79):  Few  changes  could  be  less  judicious  than 
that  of  ‘Son’  to  sun  [see  Text.  Notes.]  The  intention  of  the  dramatist  was  to 
connect  this  with  the  preceding  play,  and  to  show  at  once  that  the  son  of  that  York 
with  whom  the  audience  had  been  familiar  was  now  on  a  prosperous  throne.  Of 
course,  the  word  ‘son’  would  also  be  regarded  as  appropriate  to  the  metaphor. 
This  may  not  have  been  in  the  best  taste,  but  it  suited  the  taste  of  the  audience. 
There  is  a  similar  instance  in  Hamlet  [I,  ii,  67],  and  another  in  Scene  iii  of  this 
Act,  11.  179,  180.  [In  a  note  on  the  line  in  Hamlet,  which  is  above  cited, 
Hunter  makes  no  mention  of  any  quibble  being  intended — the  line  is  presumably 
‘Not  so,  my  lord;  I  am  too  much  i’  the  sun’;  he  says:  ‘“To  be  in  the  sun,”  “to  be 
in  the  warm  sun,”  were  phrases  not  uncommon  in  the  time  of  Shakespeare,  and 
for  a  century  later,  to  express  the  state  of  being  without  family  connections,  desti¬ 
tute  of  the  comforts  of  domestic  life.’  A  meaning  which  is  obviously  inapplicable 
in  the  present  passage. — Ed.] 

8.  lowr’d]  In  the  Appendix :  Plan  of  the  Work,  credit  is  given  to  the  Cam¬ 
bridge  Editors  for  all  readings  from  the  sixth,  seventh,  and  eighth  Quartos. 
I  have,  nevertheless,  deemed  it  advisable  to  anticipate  this  acknowledgement  here, 
at  the  first  appearance  of  an  independent  reading  from  the  seventh  and  eighth 
Quartos. — Ed. 

9.  In  .  .  .  buried.]  Vaughan  (iii,  2)  prefers  the  punctuation  of  Q4  [see  Text. 
N oles ]  since  ‘  the  clearing  of  the  clouds  from  our  house  is  a  reason  for  binding 
our  brows  and  hanging  up  our  arms,  and  changing  our  stern  alarums  to  merry 
meetings,  this  new  combination  of  all  into  one  sentence  improves  the  logical  con¬ 
nection  of  the  thought.’ — Dunlap  (ii,  392):  [During  the  first  three  lines  of  this 
soliloquy  Cooke]  was  without  motion,  his  hands  hanging  at  ease;  at  the  beginning 
of  the  fourth,  ‘In  the  deep  bosom,’  he  lifted  the  right  hand  a  little,  with  a  gently 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


17 

IO 


Now  are  our  browes  bound  with  Victorious  Wreathes, 

Our  bruifed  armes  hung  vp  for  Monuments  ; 

Our  fterne  Alarums  chang’d  to  merry  Meetings ; 

Our  dreadfull  Marches,  to  delightfull  Meafures. 

Grim-vifag’d  Warre,  hath  fmooth’d  his  wrinkled  Front :  14 

12.  Alarums']  alarmts  Qt.  14.  vi/ag’d]  vifagde  Qq. 

13.  Meafures.]pleafures.  Q4_g.  mens-  -wrinkled  ]  wringled  Q3Q4Q5- 

ures  :  Cap.  (corrected  in  Errata). 

sweeping  motion,  and  then,  turning  the  palm  downwards,  he  continued,  ‘of  the 
ocean,’  and  made  a  short  pause;  then  sinking  his  hand  (the  palm  parallel  with 
the  earth)  and  his  voice  at  the  same  time,  finished  the  sentence  by  the  word 
*  buried.’ 

10,  11.  Now  .  .  .  Monuments]  Malone:  Compare  Lucrece,  109,  no. 
‘Made  glorious  by  his  manly  chivalry,  With  bruised  arms  and  wreaths  of  victory.’ 
— Wright:  ‘Hung  up  for  monuments,’  like  the  armour  of  the  Black  Prince  at  Can¬ 
terbury,  and  the  helmet,  shield  and  saddle  of  Henry  V.,  which  once  hung  over  his 
tomb  in  Westminster  Abbey.  ‘The  former,’  says  Dean  Stanley  ( Memorials  0} 
Westminster  Abbey ,  ed.  1868,  p.  150),  ‘is  in  all  probability  “that  very  casque 
that  did  affright  the  air  at  Agincourt,  ”  which  twice  saved  his  life  on  that  eventful 
day — still  showing  in  its  dints  the  marks  of  the  ponderous  sword  of  the  Duke 
of  Alenfon.’ 

12.  Alarums]  Murray  (N.  E.  D.,  s.  v.  Alarm)-.  Forms:  alarom,  alarome, 
allarum,  alarum  (adopted  from  Old  French  alarme,  adopted  from  Italian  allarme- 
all'armel )  ‘To  [the]  arms!’  originally  the  call  summoning  to  arms,  and  thus,  in 
languages  that  adopted  it,  a  mere  interjection;  but  soon  used  in  all  as  the  name  of 
the  call  or  summons.  Erroneously  taken  in  the  seventeenth  century  for  an  English 
combination  all  arm!  and  so  written;  cf.  similar  treatment  of  alamode  and  alamort. 
From  the  earliest  period  there  was  a  variant  alarum  due  to  rolling  the  r  in  pro¬ 
longing  the  final  syllable  of  the  call. 

13.  dreadfull]  For  other  examples  of  ‘dreadful’  used  thus  in  an  active  sense, 
see  Walker,  Crit.,  ii,  78;  or  Abbott,  §  3. 

13.  Marches  .  .  .  Measures]  Wright:  There  is  the  same  contrast  between 
‘marches’  and  ‘measures’  in  Alexander  and  Campaspe,  Lyly,  IV,  iii :  ‘But  let 
us  draw  in,  to  see  how  well  it  becomes  them  to  tread  the  measures  in  a  daunce, 
that  were  wont  to  set  the  order  for  a  march.’ — [p.  348,  ed.  Bond.] 

13.  Measures]  Nares:  A  grave  solemn  dance,  with  slow  and  measured  steps, 
like  the  minuet.  ‘For  hear  me  Hero;  wedding  and  repenting,  is  as  a  Scotch  jig, 
a  measure,  and  a  cinque  pace’  ( Much  Ado,  II,  i,  77).  As  these  dances  were  of  so 
solemn  a  nature,  they  were  performed  at  public  entertainments  in  the  Inns  of 
Court;  and  it  was  not  thought  inconsistent  for  the  first  characters  in  the  law  to 
bear  a  part  in  treading  the  measures.  [For  numerous  examples  of  ‘measure’ 
used  in  this  sense  see  Schmidt,  Lex.  6.] 

14-18.  Grim-visag’d  Wane  .  .  .  pleasing  of  a  Lute]  I.  Reed:  Compare, 
Lyly,  Alexander  and  Campaspe,  1584:  ‘Is  the  warlike  sound  of  drum  and  trump 
turn’d  to  the  soft  noise  of  lyre  and  lute  ?  The  neighing  of  barbed  steeds,  whose  loud¬ 
ness  filled  the  air  with  terror,  and  whose  breaths  dimned  the  sun  with  smoak, 
converted  to  delicate  tunes  and  amorous  glances.’ — [p.  330,  ed.  Bond.  Compare 


i8 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  i. 


And  now,  in  ftead  of  mounting  Barbed  Steeds, 
To  fright  the  Soules  of  fearfull  Aduerfaries, 

He  capers  nimbly  in  a  Ladies  Chamber, 

To  the  lafciuious  pleafing  of  a  Lute. 


18 


15 


15.  now,  in]  now  in  Qq. 


in  Jlead~\  in  Jleed  QIFJ.  in  sted 


16.  Aduerfaries^]  aduerfaries.  Q,Qa. 

17.  Ladies]  Ladle's  F3.  lady's  Rowe 


Q?.  instead  Rowe  et  seq. 

16.  Soules]  foule  Warb.  conj. 


et  seq. 

18.  Lute.]  loue.  Qq. 


also  the  following  from  Ven.  Ad.,  where  Venus,  in  speaking  of  the  time  when  Mars 
wooed  her,  says:  ‘Over  my  altars  hath  he  hung  his  lance,  His  batter’d  shield,  his 
uncontrolled  crest,  And  for  my  sake  hath  learn’d  to  sport  and  dance,  To  toy,  to 
wanton,  dally,  smile  and  jest,  Scorning  his  churlish  drum  and  ensign  red.’  (103-108.) 
— Ed.] — Delius  takes  ‘war’  by  metonymy  for  warrior. — J.  C.  Collins  (p.  68):  This 
looks  like  a  mistranslation  of  Sophocles’  Ajax,  1.  706:  ‘ e/.vaev,  aivbv ,  ayog  an'  bfifia- 
tdv  'A pyc,’  and  to  this  mistranslation,  it  may  be  added,  Shakespeare  would  be  led 
by  all  the  Latin  versions,  Vitus  Winsemius  turning  it,  ‘dissolvit  enim  gravem 
dolorem  ab  oculis  Mars’;  Stephens  paraphrasing  it,  ‘Nam  tristis  dolor  furorque 
mitigatus  est’;  and  Rotallerus,  ‘tristes  etenim  abstersit  ab  oculis  Mars  violentus 
solicitudines’;  this  last  apparently  being  the  version  which  Shakespeare  followed. 
[In  the  same  connection  Collins  pleads  for  the  force  of  accumulated  examples 
in  substantiating  his  claim  for  Shakespeare’s  classical  knowledge.  Unless  we 
bear  in  mind  this  plea,  the  foregoing  solitary  example  seems,  it  must  be  ad¬ 
mitted,  inadequate  enough. — Ed.] 

15.  Barbed]  Murray  (IV.  E.  D.):  Of  a  horse:  Armed  or  caparisoned  with 
a  barb  or  bard;  properly,  barded. — Ibid.  (j.  v.  Bard):  Obsolete  except  historically. 
Anglo-French  barde ,  horse-armour,  also  ‘a  long  saddle  for  an  ass  or  mule,  of  canvas,’ 
Cotgrave;  cf.  Italian  barda,  horse-armour,  also  pack-saddle.  These  and  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  a  dialectic  French  aubarde  seem  to  identify  the  word  with  Spanish  and 
Portuguese  albarda,  pack-saddle,  referred  by  Devic  to  Arabic  al-bardakah,  ‘  cover¬ 
ing  placed  over  the  back  of  a  beast  to  alleviate  the  pressure  of  a  pack-saddle’  (Frey- 
tag).  Whether  the  French  sense  ‘defensive  armour  for  a  horse’  arose  out  of 
this  is  doubtful,  x.  A  protective  covering  for  the  breast  and  flanks  of  a  war-horse, 
made  of  metal-plates,  or  of  leather  set  with  metal  spikes  or  bosses,  but  sometimes 
merely  ornamental,  and  made  of  velvet. — Ib.  (j.  v.  Barded) :  Armed,  caparisoned 
or  covered  with  bards.  1501.  Douglas.  Pal.  Hon.,  I,  xlvii,  A  bardit  curser  stout  and 
bald.  1535  Coverdale,  Joel,  II,  4.  They  are  to  loke  vpon  like  bayrded  horses. 

17.  He  capers]  Johnson:  War  capers.  This  is  poetical,  though  a  little 
harsh;  if  it  be  York  that  ‘capers,’  the  antecedent  is  at  such  a  distance  that  it  is  al¬ 
most  forgotten.  [If  war  be  permitted  to  smooth  his  wrinkled  front,  may  he  not 
also  indulge  in  a  caper? — Ed.] — Douce  (ii,  32):  The  amorous  temper  of  Edward 
the  Fourth  is  well  known;  and  there  cannot  be  a  doubt  that  by  the  ‘lascivious 
pleasing  of  a  lute,’  he  is  directly  alluded  to.  The  subsequent  description  likewise 
that  Richard  gives  of  himself  is  in  comparison  with  the  king.  Johnson  thought 
the  image  of  ‘war  capering’  poetical;  yet  it  is  not  easy  to  conceive  how  ‘grim- 
visaged  war’  could  caper  ‘in  a  lady’s  chamber.’ — Wright:  War,  still  personified 
as  a  rough  soldier. 

18.  Lute]  Vaughan  (iii,  3):  I  believe  the  reading  of  the  Qq  [love]  to  be  the 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


19 


But  I,  that  am  not  fhap’d  for  fportiue  trickes, 

Nor  made  to  court  an  amorous  Looking-glaffe  :  20 

I,  that  am  Rudely  ftampt,  and  want  loues  Maiefty, 


19.  I,]  I  Qq.  /, —  Cap.  Mai.  Ran. 
Steev.  Varr.  ’03,  ’13,  Dyce  i,  Sta. 

flap' d  for]  Jhapte  for  Q,Q2QV 
Jharpe  for  Q4QS.  fharpe  of  Q*Q7Qg. 
fhapte  of  Steev.  rep.  ap.  Cam.  ii. 

20.  Nor ]  Not  Q2. 


20.  amorous]  am'rous  Pope,  Han. 
Warb.  Johns. 

Looking  -glaffe]  looking  lass 

Vaughan  (iii,  4). 

21.  Maiefly]  grace  Han. 


true  one.  Instead  of  mounting  steeds  in  order  to  frighten  timid  adversaries,  war 
now  capers  in  a  chamber  in  order  to  give  lascivious  pleasure  to  his  lover.  The 
final  cause  is  thus  expressed  by  ‘to’  in  both  instances  of  its  occurrence;  and  so  a 
far  more  perfect  contrast  is  sustained.  Further,  to  dance  to  the  ‘pleasing  of  a 
lute’  is  a  somewhat  wavering  and  misty  image. 

19.  20.  But  I  .  .  .  Looking-glasse]  In  a  letter  to  the  Academy,  12  Dec.,  1874, 
J.  G.  Mathews  calls  attention  to  the  resemblance  between  this  passage  and 
the  following  in  a  short  poem  entitled  Ignoto,  included  among  Epigrammes  and 
Elegies,  by  J.  D.  [John  Davies]  and  C.  M.  [Christopher  Marlowe]:  ‘I  am  not 
fashioned  for  these  amorous  times,  To  count  thy  beauty  with  lascivious  rhymes;  I 
cannot  dally,  caper,  dance,  and  sing,  Oiling  my  saint  with  supple  sonnetting.’ 
Marshall  {Intro.,  p.  9)  also  notes  the  similarity  between  these  passages — appar¬ 
ently  unaware  that  Mathews  has  anticipated  him,  and  adds:  ‘It  may  be  remarked 
that  this  poem  [ Ignoto ]  does  not  appear  in  the  subsequent  editions  [of  Epigrammes ], 
which  are  both  undated;  but,  on  the  authority  of  Ritson,  the  date  of  the  first  edition 
is  generally  assigned  to  1596.  The  resemblance  of  expression  is  sufficient  to 
suggest  that  the  one  author  might  have  had  the  other’s  lines  in  his  mind  at  the 
time.’  Marshall  wisely  refrains,  I  think,  from  directly  applying  the  charge  of 
plagiarism  either  to  Marlowe  or  to  Shakespeare.  Stokes  (p.  30),  after  citing 
the  letter  by  Mathews,  prefers  to  regard  Marlowe  as  the  copyist.  The  poem 
may  be  found  in  Dvce’s  Marlowe,  vol.  iii,  p.  263,  and  in  Bullen’s  edition,  vol. 
iii,  p.  246. — Ed. 

20.  amorous  Looking-glasse]  Schmidt  (Lex.):  A  looking-glass  that  reflects 
a  face  fond  of  itself. — Tawney:  ‘Amorous’  may  also  mean  pertaining  to  love, 
as  the  mirror  is  part  of  Cupid’s  paraphernalia.  Thus  the  passage  would  mean, 
to  endeavour  to  gain  the  favour  of  a  looking-glass,  love’s  chosen  instrument.  This 
can  be  effected  only  by  careful  adornment  of  the  person.  It  seems  possible  that 
‘looking-glass’  may  here  mean  a  beloved  lady,  who  reciprocates  affection.  Perhaps 
this  is  the  simplest  explanation.  It  may  be  illustrated  by  King  John,  II,  i,  496- 
503.  [Both  Schmidt  and  Tawney  thus  make  the  looking-glass  passive.  But 
Richard  is  sneering,  not  at  himself,  but  at  the  idle  pleasures  of  the  time,  and  uses 
‘amorous,’  I  think,  in  the  same  sense  in  which  he  speaks  of  the  ‘lascivious  pleas¬ 
ing  of  a  lute’ — the  sound  of  the  lute  is  not  ‘lascivious’  nor  the  glass  ‘amorous,’ 
though  both  are  active  agents  in  producing  the  effects  characterized  by  the  ad¬ 
jectives. — Ed.] 

21.  I,  that  am  Rudely  stampt]  ‘Richarde  the  third  sonne  was  in  witte  and 
courage  egall  with  either  of  them,  [Edward  and  George  Duke  of  Clarence]  in 
bodye  and  prowesse  farre  under  them  bothe,  little  of  stature,  ill  fetured  of  limmes, 


20 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  I,  sc.  i. 


To  flrut  before  a  wonton  ambling  Nymph  :  22 

I,  that  am  curtail’d  of  this  faire  Proportion, 

Cheated  of  Feature  by  diffembling  Nature,  24 

23.  of  this ]  of  his  Vaughan  (iii,  5).  thus  of  Coll.  MS. 


croke  backed,  his  left  shoulder  much  higher  than  his  right,  hard  fauoured  of  visage, 
and  such  as  is  in  states  called  warlye,  in  other  men  otherwise,  he  was  malicious, 
wrathfull,  enuious,  and,  from  afore  his  birth,  ever  frowarde.’  {More,  p.  8.) — 
Lloyd  ( Int .  Essay):  The  deformity  of  Richard  is  a  circumstance  as  essential  to 
the  rancour  of  his  passion  as  the  blackness  of  Othello — it  wounds  his  pride  and 
irritates  his  spite,  and  stirs  his  rankling  revenge.  He  dwells  upon  the  symbol  of 
royalty  as  personal  ornament  compensating  for  natural  personal  defects.  Hence 
he  dwells  on  the  very  name  of  it,  and  the  indications  are  absolute  that  after  his 
success  his  costume  is  to  be  completed  by  constantly  wearing  the  crown — and 
the  trait  is  akin  to  the  affection  for  rich  attire  ascribed  to  him  by  history,  and  not 
unusual  with  the  deformed.  [See  Appendix:  Richard's  Deformity .] 

21.  Maiesty]  For  examples  where  unaccented  syllables  are  softened  and  almost 
ignored,  see  Abbott,  §  468. 

22.  ambling]  Wright:  Mincing,  walking  affectedly,  with  a  dancing  gait. 
Compare  Hamlet,  III,  i,  151:  ‘You  jig,  you  amble,  and  you  lisp.’  Also  1  Henry 
IV:  III,  ii,  60:  ‘The  skipping  king  he  ambled  up  and  down.’ 

23.  this]  Hudson:  ‘This’  is  probably  here  used  indefinitely,  and  with  some¬ 
thing  of  a  sneer.  Compare  2  Henry  IV:  I,  ii,  126:  ‘This  apoplexy  is,  as  I  take 
it,  a  kind  of  lethargy.’  [Hudson  is  perhaps  right  in  detecting  a  sneer  in  this  remark 
by  Richard,  but  it  is  somewhat  difficult  to  understand  how  ‘this’  could  ever  be 
used  indefinitely. — Ed.] 

23.  Proportion]  Wright:  The  goodly  form  appropriate  to  such  luxurious 
indulgence.  Compare  2  Henry  VI:  I,  iii,  57:  ‘I  thought  King  Henry  had 
resembled  thee  In  courage,  courtship,  and  proportion.’  Also:  Tit.  And.,  V,  ii, 
106:  ‘Well  mayst  thou  know  her  by  thy  own  proportion.’  [Schmidt  {Lex.)  gives 
two  other  examples  of  ‘proportion’  used  in  this  sense:  Mer.  of  Ven.,  Ill,  iv,  14; 
and  All’s  Well,  V,  iii,  51. — Ed.] 

24.  Feature]  Wright:  ‘Feature’  was  used  by  Shakespeare  and  the  writers 
of  his  time  in  a  larger  sense  than  at  present.  It  denoted  the  whole  exterior  per¬ 
sonal  appearance,  and  was  not  confined,  as  now,  to  the  face.  ‘Feature’  was  applied 
to  the  body  as  favour  to  the  face.  [For  discussion  as  to  meaning  and  interpretation 
of  ‘feature’  in  Shakespeare  and  other  writers  see  As  You  Like  It,  III,  iii,  5,  this 
ed. — Ed.] 

24.  dissembling]  Warburton:  By  dissembling  is  here  meant,  nature  that  puts 
together  things  of  a  dissimilar  kind,  as  a  brave  soul  and  a  deformed  body. — 
Johnson:  ‘Dissembling’  is  here  put  very  licentiously  for  fraudfnl,  deceitful. — 
Henley,  in  support  of  Warburton’s  interpretation,  quotes:  ‘Whyle  things  stoode 
in  this  case,  and  that  the  manner  of  addying  was  sometime  too  short  and  sometime 
too  long,  els  dissembled  and  let  slip  together’ — Golding’s  translation  of  Julius 
Solinus,  1587. — Malone:  I  once  thought  that  Johnson’s  interpretation  was  the 
true  one.  Dissimulation  necessarily  includes  fraud,  and  this  might  have  been 
sufficient  to  induce  Shakespeare  to  use  the  two  words  as  synonymous,  though 
fraud  certainly  may  exist  without  dissimulation.  The  following  lines  in  the  old 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


21 


Deform’d,  vn-finifh’d,  fent  before  my  time  25 

Into  this  breathing  World,  fcarfe  halfe  made  vp, 

And  that  fo  lamely  and  vnfafhionable, 

That  dogges  barke  at  me,  as  I  halt  by  them. 

Why  I  (in  this  weake  piping  time  of  Peace)  29 

25.  vn-finijh' d]  vnfini/ht  Q q.  vnfin-  27.  vnfa/hionable  I  unfashionably 

ijh'd  Ff.  Pope,+  ,  Cap.  Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Ran. 

26.  fcarfe]  Om.  Q3Q,Q5.  28.  by]  at  Q?Qg. 

29.  Why]  While  Qg. 

King  John ,  1591,  seem  rather  in  favour  of  Warburton’s  interpretation:  ‘  Can  nature 
so  dissemble  in  her  frame,  To  make  the  one  so  like  as  like  may  be,  And  in  the 
other  print  no  character,  .  .  .  ?’ — Capell:  In  a  speech  of  this  Richard’s,  following 
the  act  of  stabbing  King  Henry  in  the  last  play  [j  Henry  VI:  V,  vi,  68-83]  he  is 
made  to  ‘descant’  upon  his  person  in  terms  resembling  the  present,  and  uses  these 
among  others:  ‘I  have  no  brother,  I  am  like  no  brother:  And  this  word  love,  which 
grey-beards  call  divine,  Be  resident  in  men  like  one  another,  and  not  in  me;  I 
am  myself  alone.’  This  may  induce  belief  with  some  readers  that  the  term  in 
question  is  us’d  in  the  uncommon  sense  of  forming  dissimilarly  forming  unlike 
to  others:  we  may  see  elsewhere  resemble  put  for  make  like;  And  wherefore 
not  ‘dissemble’ — make  unlike?  [Capell  has  herein  anticipated  Douce,  who  says 
(ii,  32):  ‘“dissemble”  .  .  .  signifies  the  reverse  of  to  resemble,  in  its  active  sense, 
and  is  not  used  as  dissimulare  in  Latin.’  Marshall  quotes  Douce,  adding;  ‘  There 
is  no  satisfactory  evidence  that  resemble  ever  had  this  meaning  make  like.'  In 
support  of  Capell’s,  and  Douce’s,  interpretation  of  resemble  in  an  active  sense, 
it  may  be  said,  as  a  partial  answer  to  Marshall’s  objection,  that  the  Century  Dic¬ 
tionary,  s.  v.  resemble  2,  ‘To  represent  as  like  something  else;  liken,  compare,’ 
gives  the  following  quotation  from  Spenser,  Faerie  Queetie,  III,  x,  21:  ‘Andth’ 
other  al  yclad  in  garments  bright,  .  .  .  He  did  resemble  to  his  lady  bright.’ — Ed.] — 
Singer  interprets  ‘dissembling’  as  disfiguring  or  distorting,  and  cites  the  use  of 
‘dissembling  glass’  in  Mid.  N.  Dream,  II,  ii,  98.  Wright  considers  Johnson’s 
interpretation  as  probably  more  nearly  correct,  wherewith  the  present  editor  agrees. 
‘Dissemble’  in  the  sense  of  fraudulent,  deceitful,  is  used  in  three  other  passages 
in  this  play:  I,  ii,  261,  262:  ‘And  I,  no  friend  to  back  my  suit  withal  But  the 
plain  devil  and  dissembling  looks’;  II,  i,  13:  ‘Dissemble  not  your  hatred,  swear 
your  love’;  II,  ii,  34:  ‘Think  you  my  uncle  did  dissemble  Grandam?’  wherefore 
may  it  not  be  reasonably  supposed  that,  in  this  present  line,  it  is  used  in  this  same 
sense  also? — Ed. 

27.  lamely  and  vnfashionable]  For  examples  of  ellipsis  of  adverbial  inflec¬ 
tions  see  Abbott,  §  397. — Webb:  The  succession  of  monosyllables  in  this  fine 
suggests  a  slow,  jerky  movement,  such  as  one  would  expect  in  Richard’s  gait. 

28.  halt]  Wright:  In  Genesis  xxxii,  31,  it  is  said  that  Jacob  ‘halted  upon 
his  thigh.’ 

29.  weake  piping  time]  Wright:  Compare  Much  Ado,  II,  iii,  13-15,  ‘I  have 
known  when  there  was  no  music  with  him  but  the  drum  and  the  fife,  and  now 
had  he  rather  hear  the  tabor  and  the  pipe.’ — Marshall  offers  as  an  explanation 
alternative  to  that  given  by  Wright  that  ‘weak  piping  time’  may  refer  to  the  feeble, 
shrill-voiced  women  or  old  men. 


22 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  i. 


Haue  no  delight  to  paffe  away  the  time,  30 

Vnleffe  to  fee  my  Shadow  in  the  Sunne, 

And  defcant  on  mine  owne  Deformity. 

And  therefore,  fince  I  cannot  proue  a  Louer,  33 

31.  fee]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Knt,  et  cet. 

Coll.  Sing.  Hal.  Rife,  fpie  or  spy  Qq  32.  on]  one  Q?. 

31.  see]  R.  G.  White:  The  Quarto  reading  \_spy\  implies  intentional  observa¬ 
tion,  the  idea  of  which  is  not  conveyed  by  the  Folio.  The  change  could  hardly 
have  been  accidental;  but  as  it  is  consistent  with  Richard’s  character  that  he  should 
find  it  a  bitter  delight  to  pass  away  his  time  in  spying  out  his  own  deformity,  and 
goading  himself  on  in  his  remorseless  course  by  comparison  of  his  personal  defects 
with  others’  perfections,  it  is  possible  that  spy  was  changed  to  ‘see’  in  the  acting 
copy,  by  some  book-holder  (i.  e.,  prompter)  or  actor. 

32.  descant]  Nares:  To  make  division  or  variation,  in  music,  on  any  par¬ 
ticular  subject.  Originally  accented  like  the  noun  from  which  it  was  formed; 
but  now  mixed  with  the  class  of  verbs  regularly  accented  on  the  last  syllable,  and 
in  that  form  not  obsolete. — Wright  quotes  from  the  second  part  of  Morley’s 
Plaine  and  Easie  Introduction  to  Practicall  Musicke,  1597:  ‘Last  of  all,  they  take 
it  [descant]  for  singing  a  part  extempore  vpon  a  playne-song,  in  which  sence  we 
commonly  vse  it:  so  that  when  a  man  talketh  of  a  Descanter,  it  must  be  vnder- 
stood  of  one  that  can  extempore  sing  a  part  vpon  a  playnesong’  (p.  70). — Malone, 
while  acknowledging  that  the  original  meaning  of  ‘descant’  was  to  make  variations 
as  in  music,  yet  prefers  to  believe  the  word  is  here  used  ‘  in  its  secondary  and  collo¬ 
quial  sense,  without  any  reference  to  music.’  Both  Schmidt  (Lex.)  and  Murray 
( N .  E.  D.)  agree  with  Malone.  Murray  quotes  the  present  line  (s.  v.  descant, 
2)  and  also  ‘  circa  1510  More,  Picus,  Works,  15,  1:  The  company  of  the  court  .  .  . 
descanted  thereof  to  his  rebuke;  1571,  Golding.  Calvin  on  Psalms,  ii,  7;  They  have 
curiously  descanted  upon  theis  woords.’ — Wright:  Mr  Hugh  Carleton  has 
pointed  out  to  me  that  Richard,  whose  love  of  music  is  well  known  (Sharon  Turner’s 
History,  ed.  1839,  vii,  31),  plays  upon  the  terms  of  his  favourite  art  throughout 
this  speech:  ‘measures,’  ‘lute,’  ‘proportion,’  ‘piping,’  ‘descant,’  ‘determined,’ 
‘inductions,’  ‘set,’  being  all  used  with  a  special  sense  in  music.  [The  use  of 
musical  phrases  is  common  throughout  Shakespeare’s  plays,  and  by  characters 
who  need  not  always  be  considered  as  having  any  special  love  of  music.  Bucking¬ 
ham  in  this  play  (III,  vii,  50)  uses  this  word  ‘descant’  as  a  noun.  If  Shakespeare 
had  a  design  thus  to  show  a  side  of  Richard’s  character,  as  is  ingeniously  and 
plausibly  suggested,  he  has  apparently  confined  it  to  this  first  soliloquy. — Ed.] 

33.  since  I  .  .  .  Louer]  Johnson:  Shakespeare  very  diligently  inculcates  that 
the  wickedness  of  Richard  proceeded  from  his  deformity,  from  the  envy  that  rose 
from  the  comparison  of  his  own  person  with  others,  and  which  incited  him  to  dis¬ 
turb  the  pleasures  that  he  could  not  partake. — Hudson  (Life,  etc.,  ii,  145):  Rich¬ 
ard’s  sense  of  personal  disgrace  begets  a  most  hateful  and  malignant  form  of  pride — 
the  pride  of  intellectual  force  and  mastery.  Hence  he  comes  to  glory  in  the  matter 
of  his  shame,  and  magnify  his  strength  of  fertility  and  wit.  .  .  .  On  much  the  same 
principle  he  nurses  to  the  highest  pitch  his  consciousness  of  moral  deformities. 
To  succeed  by  wrong,  to  rise  by  crime,  to  grow  great  by  inverting  the  moral  order 
of  things  is,  in  his  view,  the  highest  proof  of  genius  and  skill. — Wright:  Bacon, 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


23 


To  entertaine  thefe  faire  well  fpoken  dayes, 

I  am  determined  to  proue  a  Villaine,  35 

34-  ■well  fpoken\  well-fpoken  F3F4  et  seq. 


in  Essay  xliv.  Of  Deformity,  says:  ‘Deformed  persons  are  commonly  even  with 
Nature:  For  as  Nature  hath  done  ill  by  them;  So  doe  they  by  Nature:  Being 
for  the  most  part,  (as  the  Scripture  saith)  void  of  Naturall  Affectiou;  and  so  they 
have  their  Revenge  of  Nature.’  [The  First  Edition  of  Bacon’s  Essays  is  dated 
1597,  the  same  year  as  the  present  play;  the  Essay  on  Deformity  did  not  appear, 
however,  until  the  edition  of  1612;  it  is,  therefore,  possible  that  Bacon  may  have  had 
Shakespeare’s  Richard  in  mind. — Ed.] 

34.  well  spoken  dayes]  Malone:  I  am  strongly  inclined  to  think  that  Shakes¬ 
peare  wrote  'dames,’  and  that  the  word  ‘days’  was  caught  by  the  compositor’s 
eye  glancing  on  a  subsequent  line. — Boswell:  Malone’s  objection  to  the  old 
reading  was  principally  upon  a  notion  that  ‘fair’  and  ‘well  spoken’  could  not, 
with  propriety,  be  applied  to  ‘days.’  Compare:  Twelfth  Night,  II,  iv,  6:  ‘Of 
these  most  brisk  and  giddy-paced  times.’  Also  Timon,  IV,  iii,  493:  ‘Strange 
times,  that  weep  with  laughing,  not  with  weeping.’  Jonson,  Every  Man  Out  of 
his  Humour:  'ignorant  well-spoken  days.’  [ — Induction,  1.  77.] 

35.  I  am  .  .  .  Villaine]  C.  Lamb  {Works,  iii,  282):  Richard  does  not  mean 
that  because  he  is  by  shape  and  temper  unfitted  for  a  courtier,  he  is  therefore  deter¬ 
mined  to  prove,  in  our  sense  of  the  word,  a  wicked  man.  ‘Villain’  is  here  undoubt¬ 
edly  used  for  churl,  or  clown,  opposed  to  a  courtier;  and  the  incipient  deterioration 
of  the  meaning  gave  the  use  of  it  in  this  place  great  spirit  and  beauty.  A  wicked 
man  does  not  necessarily  hate  courtly  pleasures;  a  clown  is  naturally  opposed  to 
them.  The  mistake  of  this  meaning  has,  I  think,  led  the  players  into  that  hard 
literal  conception  with  which  they  deliver  this  passage,  quite  foreign,  in  my  under¬ 
standing,  to  the  bold  gay-faced  irony  of  the  soliloquy.  Richard,  upon  the  stage, 
looks  round,  as  if  he  were  literally  apprehensive  of  some  dog  snapping  at  him; 
and  announces  his  determination  of  procuring  a  looking-glass,  and  employing  a 
tailor,  as  if  he  were  prepared  to  put  both  in  practice  before  he  should  get  home — 
I  apprehend  ‘a  world  of  figures  here.’ — Scott  {Essays,  iii,  34):  J.  P.  Kemble  never 
could  look  the  part  of  Richard,  and  it  seemed  a  jest  to  hear  him,  whose  countenance 
and  person  were  so  eminently  fine,  descant  on  his  own  deformity.  He  was,  per¬ 
haps,  sensible  of  this,  for  he  used  to  argue  that  Richard  III.,  being  of  high  descent 
and  breeding,  ought  not  to  be  vulgar  in  his  appearance  or  coarse  in  his  cruelty. 
There  certainly  should  prevail  a  tinge  of  aristocracy  about  the  dramatic  Richard, 
but  it  ought  not  to  be  of  a  generous  or  chivalrous  character,  or,  whatever  the  figure 
of  the  historical  Richard  may  have  been,  that  of  a  handsome  prince. — J.  C.  Hare 
(p.  408):  There  are  several  things  in  Richard’s  position  which  justify  a  great 
difference  in  the  representation  of  his  inward  being.  Above  all,  his  deformity 
seemed  to  separate  him  from  sympathy  and  communion  with  his  kind,  and  to 
be  a  plea  for  thinking  that,  as  he  was  a  monster  in  body,  he  might  also  be  a  monster 
in  heart  and  conduct.  I  cannot  but  think  that  Shakespeare  would  have  made  a 
somewhat  different  use  even  of  this  motive,  if  he  had  rewritten  the  play  in  the 
maturity  of  his  intellect.  Would  not  Richard  then,  like  Edmund  and  Iago,  have 
palliated  and  excused  his  crimes,  and  played  tricks  with  his  conscience  ?  Would 
he  not  have  denied  and  avowed  his  wickedness,  almost  with  the  same  breath? 


24 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  i. 


And  hate  the  idle  pleafures  of  thefe  dayes.  36 

Plots  haue  I  laide,  Inductions  dangerous, 

36.  hate']  bate  Johns,  conj.  37.  Inductions']  inductions  Q,Q2. 

At  all  events,  since  the  justification  that  may  be  alleged  for  Richard’s  bolder  avowals 
of  his  wichedness  results  from  the  peculiar  idiosyncrasy  of  his  position  and  his 
physical  frame,  he  is  a  most  unsafe  model  for  other  poets  to  follow,  though  a  very 
tempting  one.  The  main  difficulties  of  dramatic  poetry  are  smoothed  down  when 
a  writer  can  make  his  characters  tell  us  how  good  and  how  bad  he  designs  them 
to  be. — Hudson,  after  quoting  a  portion  of  Hare’s  remarks,  says  {Life,  etc.,  ii,  154): 
‘But  does  not  Richard’s  most  distinctive  feature,  as  compared  with  Iago  and  Ed¬ 
mund,  stand  mainly  in  this,  that  intellectual  pride  is  in  a  more  exclusive  manner 
the  constituent  of  his  character?’  Hare  furthermore  finds  fault  with  the  self- 
analysis  in  the  soliloquies  of  Richard  in  this  play,  and  in  3  Henry  VI.,  on  the 
ground  that  ‘it  is  as  contrary  to  nature  for  a  man  to  anatomize  his  heart  and  soul 
thus,  as  it  would  be  to  make  him  dissect  his  own  body.’  Which  Hudson  thus 
excuses:  ‘Richard  as  drawn  by  Shakespeare  in  action  no  less  than  in  speech  has 
a  dare-devil  intellectuality,  in  the  strength  of  which,  for  aught  I  can  see,  he  might 
inspect  and  scrutinize  himself  as  minutely  and  as  boldly  as  he  would  another 
person,  or  as  another  person  would  him.  And  why  might  he  not,  from  the  same 
cause,  grow  and  harden  into  a  habit  of  facing  his  blackest  purposes  as  unflinchingly 
as  he  does  his  unsightly  person,  and  even  of  taking  pleasure  in  over-painting  their 
wickedness  to  himself,  in  order  at  once  to  stimulate  and  to  gratify  his  lust  of 
the  brain?’ — Petri  (p.  213):  In  these  words,  ‘I  am  determined  .to  prove  a 
Villain,’  is  contained  the  germ  which  the  progress  of  the  drama  must  develop. 
— Brandes  (i,  152):  When  J.  L.  Heiberg  refused  to  produce  Richard  III.  at 
the  Royal  Theatre  in  Copenhagen,  he  expressed  a  doubt  whether  ‘we  could  ever 
accustom  ourselves  to  seeing  Melpomene’s  dagger  converted  into  a  butcher’s 
knife.’  He  doubted,  justly  enough,  the  psychological  possibility  of  the  phrase 
‘I  am  determined  to  prove  a  villain’;  but  with  a  very  slight  change  in  the  form 
of  expression  the  idea  is  by  no  means  indefensible.  .  .  .  To  Richard  the  lust  of  power 
is  an  inward  agony.  He  compares  himself  to  a  man  ‘  lost  in  a  thorny  wood,  ’  and 
sees  no  way  of  deliverance  except  to  ‘hew  his  way  out  with  a  bloody  axe.’  Thus 
is  he  tormented  by  his  desire  for  the  crown;  and  to  achieve  it  he  will  ‘drown  more 
sailors  than  the  mermaid  shall;  .  .  .  Deceive  more  slyly  than  Ulysses  could;.  .  . 
add  colours  to  the  chameleon;  .  .  .  And  send  the  murd’rous  Machiavel  to  school.’' 
If  this  is  to  be  a  villain,  then  a  villain  he  is. 

36.  idle  pleasures]  ‘Idle’  is  here  used,  I  think,  not  in  the  sense  of  indolent r 
unemployed,  or  as  in  Hamlet,  ‘I  must  be  idle,’  III,  ii,  95,  where  ‘idle’  means 
wild,  flighty  in  speech,  but  in  the  sense  of  frivolous,  trifling.  Schmidt  {Lex.)  gives 
numerous  examples  of  ‘idle’  in  this  latter  sense. — Ed. 

37.  Plots  haue  I  laide]  Steevens:  Marston  has  put  this  line,  with  little 
variation,  into  the  mouth  of  ‘Fame’:  ‘Plots  ha’  you  laid?  inductions  dangerous?’ 
[The  Fawne,  II,  i.] — Richardson  (p.  15):  It  may  be  said  perhaps  that  the  colour¬ 
ing  here  is  by  far  too  strong,  and  that  we  cannot  conceive  characters  to  exist  so- 
full  of  deliberate  guilt  as  thus  to  contemplate  a  criminal  conduct  without  sub¬ 
terfuge,  and  without  imposing  on  themselves.  It  may  be  thought  that  even  the- 
Neros  and  the  Domitians,  who  disgraced  human  nature,  did  not  consider  them- 


act  i,  sc.  i.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

By  drunken  Prophefies,  Libels,  and  Dreames, 

To  fet  my  Brother  Clarence  and  the  King 
In  deadly  hate,  the  one  againft  the  other  : 

And  if  King  Edwardbe  as  true  and  iuft, 

38.  By  ...Dreames']  Transposed  to  follow  1.  40.  Johns. 

selves  so  atrociously  wicked  as  they  really  were;  but,  transported  by  lawless  passions, 
deceived  themselves,  and  were  barbarous  without  perceiving  their  guilt.  Yet  the 
view  which  Shakespeare  has  given  us  of  Richard’s  deliberate  guilt  is  not  incon¬ 
sistent.  With  his  other  enormities  and  defects,  he  represents  him  incapable  of 
feeling,  though  he  may  perceive  the  difference  between  virtue  and  vice.  ...  I  will 
indeed  allow  that  the  effect  would  have  been  as  powerful,  and  the  representation 
better  suited  to  our  ideas  of  human  nature,  had  Richard,  both  here  and  in  other 
scenes,  given  indications  of  his  guilt  rather  by  obscure  hints  and  surmises,  than 
by  an  open  declaration. — Courtenay  ( Commentaries ,  etc.,  ii,  64):  The  insinuation 
that  Edward’s  jealousy  of  Clarence  was  brought  about  by  Gloucester  is  one  of  the 
instances  which  abound  in  the  play,  of  that  which  may,  indeed,  be  almost  deemed 
its  design,  the  blackening  of  the  character  of  the  king  whom  the  grandfather  of 
Queen  Elizabeth  had  dethroned. — Jesse  ( Richard  III.,  etc.,  p.  113):  Two  of  the 
most  bigoted  of  the  Tudor  Chroniclers,  Hall  and  Holinshed,  not  only  are  silent 
on  the  charge  of  Gloucester’s  having  been  the  instigator  of  his  brother’s  death, 
but  admit  that  he  impugned  the  rigour  of  the  sentence  passed  upon  Clarence.  .  .  . 
Had  Richard  availed  himself  of  his  privilege  as  a  peer,  and  sat  and  voted  at  Clar¬ 
ence’s  trial,  presumptive  evidence  would  have  been  afforded  that  he  desired  his 
brother’s  death.  But  not  only  is  there  no  evidence  of  his  having  sat  at  that  tribunal, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  much  more  reason  to  believe  that  at  the  time  of  Clar¬ 
ence’s  trial  and  execution  Richard  was  quietly  discharging  the  duties  of  his  govern¬ 
ment  in  the  north  of  England.  [Holinshed  was  not  altogether  silent  on  the  subject 
of  Richard’s  complicity,  since  he  copied  the  following  from  More’s  Life  of  Richard: 
‘Somme  wise  menne  also  weene,  that  his  [Gloucester’s]  drifte  couertly  conuayde, 
lacked  not  in  helping  furth  his  brother  of  Clarence  to  his  death:  whiche  hee  resisted 
openly,  howbeit  somwhat  (as  menne  demed)  more  faintly  then  he  that  wer  hartely 
minded  to  his  welth’  (p.  10). — Ed.] 

37.  Inductions]  Johnson:  Preparations  for  mischief.  The  ‘induction’  is 
preparatory  to  the  action  of  the  play.  [Compare  IV,  iii,  7:  ‘A  dire  induction 
am  I  witness  to’;  also,  /  Henry  IV:  III,  1,  2:  ‘Our  inductions  full  of  prosperous 
hope.’  Webb  prefers  to  take  ‘induction’  in  its  technical,  musical  sense  ‘Of  a 
beginning  in  a  scheme  of  music,’  as  has  been  already  suggested  by  Carleton;  see 
note  by  Wright  on  ‘descant,’  1.  32. — Ed.] 

38.  drunken  Prophesies]  Compare  II,  i,  132:  ‘a  drunken  slaughter’;  or  see 
Schmidt,  §  14,  p.  1423. 

41.  Edward  .  .  .  iust]  Warburton’s  interpretation  ‘if  Edward  be  as  open- 
hearted,  and  free  from  deceit’  seems  hardly  relevant.  Johnson  interprets  ‘if 
Edward  keep  his  word’;  to  both  of  these  Monck  Mason  objects,  preferring:  ‘If 
Edward  hold  his  natural  disposition  and  be  true  to  that.’  Vaughan  says:  ‘even 
if  the  king  were  as  just  as  I  [Richard]  am  treacherous,  yet  Clarence  should  today 
be  in  prison.’  Wright’s  interpretation  ‘as  true  and  just,  and  therefore  the  less, 
likely  to  entertain  any  suspicion,’  is,  I  think,  the  best. — Ed. 


25 

38 

40 


26 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  i. 


As  I  am  Subtle,  Falfe,  and  Treacherous,  42 

This  day  fhould  Clarence  clofely  be  mew’d  vp : 

About  a  Prophefie,  which  fayes  that  G, 

Of  Edwards  heyres  the  murtherer  fhall  be.  45 


43.  mew'  ci\  mewed  Q  .  mewd  Qs- 

44,  45.  About... be~\  Om.  Pope. 

44.  Prophefie~\  adrohefie  Q4Q3- 
Prophecy  F  . 


45.  Edwards']  Eed wards  Q..  Ed¬ 
ward’s  f3f4. 

murtherer\  Ff,  +  ,  Cap.  mttr- 
therers  Q,Q2,  Knt,  Wh.  i,  Huds.  mur¬ 
derer  Var.  ’78  et  cet. 


43.  mew’d  vp]  Skeat  (Diet.):  In  English,  the  sense  of  a  cage  is  the  oldest, 
whence  the  verb  mew,  to  enclose.  At  a  later  date  the  verb  mew  also  meant,  to 
moult,  which  is  the  original  sense  in  French. 

44.  a  Prophesie]  The  misprint  adrohesie  in  Q4  would  hardly  be  worth  the 
noting  were  it  not  that  this  Quarto  has  several  other  like  slight  divergences  from 
the  preceding  Qq,  e.  g.,  I,  i,  78:  ‘secure’  Q3;  securde  Q4;  I,  i,  144:  ‘Bussards’ 
QjQ2  ;  Buzars  Q3Q4 ;  I,  ii,  95:  ‘didst’  Qs;  didest  Q4;  I,  ii,  104:  ‘bloudy’  Q2; 
bloodly  Q3Q4  ;  I,  ii,  149:  ‘revengd’  Q3;  revengde  Q4.  These  few  examples 
are  taken  from  the  First  Act  only;  doubtless  the  list  might  be  extended.  Those 
interested  will  find  materials  for  comparison  in  the  Text.  Notes  throughout  the 
rest  of  the  play.  There  is,  however,  one  small  point  which  may  possibly  be  worth 
notice:  had  the  compositor  a  printed  page  before  him,  these  slight  changes  would 
not  have  been  likely  to  occur;  but  were  he  composing  from  dictation,  the  chances 
for  such  variations  would  be  increased.  It  will  be  noticed  from  the  Text.  Notes 
that  Q5,  with  scarcely  an  exception,  repeated  these  misprints,  which,  I  think,  points 
to  the  inference  that  possibly  Q5  was  set  up  from  the  printed  copy  of  Q4. — Ed. 

44,  45.  Prophesie,  ..  .be]  ‘Some  haue  reported  that  the  cause  of  this  noble¬ 
man’s  death  rose  of  a  foolish  prophesie,  which  was,  that,  after  K.  Edward,  one 
should  reigne,  whose  first  letter  of  his  name  should  be  G.  Wherewith  the  king  and 
queene  were  sore  troubled,  and  began  to  conceiue  a  greeuous  grudge  against  this 
duke,  and  could  not  be  in  quiet  till  they  had  brought  him  to  his  end.’ — Holinshed, 
Edward  IV. — Oechelhauser  (Essay,  p.  65):  These  following  lines  reveal  the 
weakest  part  of  this  soliloquy;  Shakespeare  should  at  least  have  thought  of  a 
better  motive  for  Edward’s  spite  against  Clarence.  Holinshed,  indeed,  could 
easily  have  afforded  him  one,  in  the  insolent  and  ambitious  bearing  of  his  turbu¬ 
lent  brother.  Holinshed  refers  to  this  prophecy,  about  the  letter  G,  as  current 
among  the  people;  but  to  represent  Richard  as  the  originator  of  it  is  a  grave  error, 
since  it  might  quite  as  well  refer  to  Gloucester  himself — Holinshed  says  that  after 
Richard’s  usurpation  the  people  so  interpreted  it. — Marshall’s  observation  that 
‘  Shakespeare’s  authority  for  this,  and  the  following  lines,  is  Hall,  who  got  it  from 
Polydore  Vergil,’  is  not  quite  correct.  Neither  Polydore  Vergil,  nor  Hall,  Holins¬ 
hed,  and  More  connect  Gloucester  in  any  way  with  the  origin  of  this  prophecy.  As 
the  existence  of  such  a  warning  is  mentioned  by  both  Hall  and  Holinshed,  it  seems 
as  needless  as  impossible  to  say  which  historian  was  Shakespeare’s  authority. 

Ed. — Churchill  (p.  51):  John  Rous  [Historia  Regum  Anglia,  circa  1490] 
represents  the  prophecy  about  G  as  the  sole  cause  of  Clarence’s  death.  In  the 
days  of  Henry  VII.  it  appears  such  a  prophecy  was  considered  cause  enough. 
[Churchill  also  calls  attention  to  the  fact  that  Rous  is  the  first  of  the  Chroniclers 


act  I,  sc.  i.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

Diue  thoughts  downe  to  my  foule,  here  Clarence  comes. 


2  7 
46 


Enter  Clare?ice ,  and  Brakenbury, guarded. 

Brother,  good  day  :  What  meanes  this  armed  guard 
That  waites  vpon  your  Grace  ? 

Cla.  His  Maiefty  tendring  my  perfons  fafety,  50 


46.  Diue... comes]  Two  lines,  ending 
foule... comes  Qq. 

47.  and... guarded.]  with  a  guard  of 
men.  Qq.  (gard  Q,Q2  )  guarded,  and 
Brackenbury.  Rowe  ii  et  seq. 

48.  day]  dayes  Qq.  (daies  Q6. ) 

49-51.  That. ..Tower]  Lines  end, 


Alaiejly ...appointed...  Tower.  Pope  et 
seq. 

50,  51.  His. ..appointed]  One  line, 
Qq. 

50.  tendring]  QqFf,  Rowe.  Tend'- 
ring  Pope, +  ,  Wh.  i.  Tendering  Var. 
’73  et  cet. 


who  mentions  such  a  prophecy.  Wright,  after  quoting  the  foregoing  passage 
from  Holinshed,  refers  to  Heywood’s  2  Edward  IV.  (Works,  i,  131-134),  wherein 
the  authorship  of  this  prophecy  is  attributed  ‘to  a  Friar  Anselm,  of  St.  Bartholo¬ 
mew’s.’ — Ed.] — J.  R.  Lowell  (p.  81):  In  the  Mirour  for  Magistrates  these  lines 
are  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  Duke  of  Clarence :  ‘  A  prophesie  was  found,  which 

sayd  a  G,  Of  Edwards  children  should  destruction  bee.’  [ — ed.  1610,  p.  385. 
The  title  of  this  legend  is:  lHow  George  Plantagenet  third  sonne  of  the  Dvke  of 
Yorke,  was  by  his  brother  King  Edward  wrongfully  imprisoned,  and  by  his  brother 
Richard  miserably  murdered  the  11  of  Januarie,  An.  Dom.,  A.  D.  1478.’  It 
appeared  in  the  First  Edition  of  the  Mirour,  1559,  and  is  attributed  to  Baldwin. — 
Ed.] 

46.  Diue  thoughts]  Webb:  On  the  first  approach  of  another  human  being 
Richard  prepares  to  dissemble,  and  bids  his  real  thoughts  disappear  like  so  many 
evil  spirits  to  the  most  secret  recesses  of  his  soul. 

47.  Enter  Clarence]  Ramsay  (ii,  422,  footnote )  says  that  Clarence’s  estates 
were  confiscated  as  from  ‘Michaelmas  1477,  but  no  evidence  of  the  date  of  his 
arrest  has  yet  been  found.’  He  was  impeached  before  a  Parliament  summoned 
for  the  16th  J anuary,  1478.  [For  a  detailed  account  of  the  charges  against  Clarence, 
and  also  of  the  trial,  see  either  Ramsay,  ii,  419-425,  or  Lingard,  IV,  ch.  ii, 
p.  207  et  seq. — Ed.] 

47.  Brakenbury]  Wright:  At  the  time  of  Edward’s  death  the  Marquis  of 
Dorset  is  said  to  have  been  Constable  of  the  Tower  (Bayley:  History  of  the  Tower 
of  London,  i,  64).  Sir  Robert  Brakenbury  was  not  confirmed  in  his  office  till 
March  9,  1483-4.  [ Syllabus  of  Rymer’s  Fcedera,  p.  502. — French  (p.  221)  says 
that  Edward  made  John  Howard  Constable  of  the  Tower  in  1470,  but  there  is 
apparently  an  error  in  this  date,  as  at  that  time  Edward  was  suppressing  a  rebellion 
in  the  North,  and  was  not  restored  to  the  throne  until  after  the  Battle  of  Barnet, 
April  14,  1471.  Rymer  (op.  cit.)  has  not  recorded  any  such  appointment  during 
the  years  1470  or  1471. — Ed.] 

50.  His  Maiesty]  Barnard:  An  anachronism.  The  title  used  by  Edward  IV. 
was  ‘most  high  and  mighty  prince.’  Sometimes  the  term  I nvictissimus  was  applied 
to  him:  he  had  won  every  battle  in  which  he  commanded. — Bradley  (N.  E.  D. 
s.  v.  d.  2):  In  England  [his,  your,  her]  majesty  occurs,  in  its  Latin  form,  from 
the  twelfth  century,  though  examples  of  the  vernacular  form  are  not  met  with  before 


28 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  i. 


Hath  appointed  this  Condu6l,to  conuey  me  to  th’Tower  51 
Rich.  Vpon  what  caufe  ? 

Cla.  Becaufe  my  name  is  George. 

Rich.  Alacke  my  Lord,  that  fault  is  none  of  yours  : 

He  fhould  for  that  commit  your  Godfathers.  55 

O  belike,  his  Maiefty  hath  fome  intent,  • 

That  you  fhould  be  new  Chriftned  in  the  Tower.  57 


55.  Godfathers ]  goodfithers  Q4QS- 
Grandfathers  Ff.  godfathers  Qg.  god¬ 
father  Steev.  Rep.  (footnote). 

56.  0 ]  Om.  Pope, +  . 


57.  fhould] fiall  Qq,  Cap.  Mai.  Var. 
Dyce,  Sta.  Cam. 

new  Chriftned ]  new  christened 
Theob.  new-christen’ d  Cap.  Mai.  Dyce, 
Sta.  Cam.  + ,  Huds. 


the  fifteenth  century.  It  was  not  until  the  seventeenth  century  that  ‘your  majesty' 
entirely  superseded  the  other  customary  forms  of  address  to  the  sovereign.  Henry 
VIII.  and  Queen  Elizabeth  were  often  addressed  as  ‘Your  Grace’  and  ‘Your 
Highness,’  and  the  latter  alternates  with  ‘Your  Majesty’  in  the  dedication  of  the 
Bible  of  1611  to  James  I. 

50.  tendring]  For  examples  of  ‘tender’  in  the  sense  having  regard  for,  see 
Schmidt  {Lex.). 

51.  Hath  .  .  .  Tower]  Pope’s  rearrangement  of  lines  49-51  (see  Text.  Notes ) 
avoids  the  apparent  Alexandrine  in  line  51  as  given  in  the  Qq  and  Ff,  but  at  the 
same  time  alters  the  accent  on  the  word  ‘Conduct,’  throwing  it  back  on  the  first 
syllable — possibly  the  noun  and  verb  were  accented  alike;  as  is  partly  confirmed 
by  the  line  in  Rom.  &  Jul.,  V,  iii,  116,  ‘Come  bitter  conduct,  come  unsavory 
guide.’ — Ed. 

54-  Alacke]  Skeat  {Did.):  Said  in  some  dictionaries  to  be  ‘a  corruption  of 
alasl’  which  would  be  an  unusual  phonetic  change.  It  is  more  probably  a  corrup¬ 
tion  of  ah!  lord!  or  ah  lord  Christ!  Otherwise,  it  may  be  referred  to  Middle 
English  lak,  signifying  loss,  misfortune.  ‘God  in  the  gospel  grymly  repreueth  All 
that  lakken  any  lyf,  and  lakkes  han  hem-selue,  ’  Piers  Plowman,  x,  262.  Thus 
‘alack’  would  mean  ah!  failure,  or  ah!  a  loss,  and  alackaday  would  stand  for 
ah!  a  loss  today!  It  is  almost  always  used  to  express  failure.  In  modern  English 
lack  seldom  has  this  sense,  but  merely  expresses  want.  [Murray  {N.  E.  D.) 
accepts  this  derivation  by  Skeat. — Ed.] 

56.  O]  Marshall:  Pope’s  omission  [see  Text.  Notes ]  makes  the  transition  of 
thought  from  1.  55  somewhat  too  abrupt. 

56.  belike]  Wright  {Note  on  I,  i,  130;  Mid.  N.  Dream):  This  word  is 
unusual  if  not  singular  in  form.  It  is  recorded  in  Nodal  and  Milner’s  Lancashire 
Glossary  as  still  in  use.  [Wright,  in  a  note  on  the  present  line,  adds:  ‘If  like  be 
regarded  as  an  adverb,  we  may  perhaps  compare  the  formation  of  this  word  [belike] 
with  that  of  beyond,  beneath.’] — Guest  (p.  36):  The  prefix  be  is  found  elided  in 
the  works  of  almost  all  our  dramatists,  but  in  some  cases  there  is  reason  to  believe 
that  the  word  which  is  represented  shorn  of  a  syllable  is,  in  fact,  the  root  of  the 
compound,  instead  of  being  its  remnant.  We  find  ’long  not  infrequently  written 
for  belong,  although  the  rhythm  requires  but  one  syllable. 

57.  new  Christned]  Barnard:  Apart  from  the  reference  to  the  prophecy 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


29 

53 


But  what’s  the  matter  Clarence ,  may  I  know  ? 

Cla.  Yea  Richard,  when  I  know  :  but  I  proteft 
As  yet  I  do  not :  But  as  I  can  learne,  60 

He  hearkens  after  Prophefies  and  Dreames, 

And  from  the  Croffe-row  pluckes  the  letter  G  : 

And  fayes,a  Wizard  told  him,  that  by  G, 

His  iffue  difinherited  fhould  be. 

And  for  my  name  of  George  begins  with  G,  65 

It  followes  in  his  thought,  that  I  am  he. 

Thefe  (as  I  learne)  and  fuch  like  toyes  as  thefe, 

Hath  moou’d  his  Highneffe  to  commit  me  now. 

Rich.  Why  this  it  is,  when  men  are  rul’d  by  Women  :  69 


58.  what's]  what  is  Q3-s. 

Clarence,]  Clarence  ?  Cap.  et  seq. 

59.  I  know]  I  doe  know  Q^g. 

but]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll,  i,  ii,  Wh.  i, 
Hal.  for  Qq  et  cet. 

61.  Prophefies]  prophecies  QqF^. 

62.  Crojfe-row]  cross  row  Var.  ’73 


(misprint). 

66.  It  followes]  It  fellowes  Q$.  If 
follows  Fa. 

67.  fuch  like]  fuch  F3F4.  such-like 
Knt  ii,  Dyce,  Huds. 

68.  Hath]  F2F3.  Haue  Qq  et  cet. 

69.  rul' d]  rulde  Qq.  ruled  Cam.  + . 


there  seems  to  be  an  anticipatory  allusion  to  the  Malmsey  wine  in  which  Clarence 
was  drowned.  This  would  be  unconscious  on  Gloucester’s  part,  but  the  audience 
would  be  familiar  with  the  tradition.  [It  is  perhaps  worth  noting  that  in  the 
Mir  our  for  Magistrates,  Legend  of  Clarence,  occurs  the  following:  ‘And  in  a  But  of 
Malmesey  standing  by,  New  christned  me  because  I  should  not  cry.’ — ed.  1610, 
p.  891. — Ed.] 

61.  hearkens  after]  Wright:  That  is,  listens  to,  and  so,  enquires  about.  Com¬ 
pare  Much  Ado,  V,  i,  216:  ‘Hearken  after  their  offence,  my  lord.’  So  also  listen 
after  is  used  in  the  True  Tragedie  0}  Richard  the  Third:  ‘I  will  listen  after  successe 
of  the  Duke  of  Buckinghame.’  [ — Appendix,  p.  525. — Murray  ( N .  E.  D .)  gives 
numerous  examples  of  ‘hearken  after’  used  in  the  sense  to  enquire  about;  the 
earliest  quotation  is  dated  1523;  among  them  he  also  quotes  the  foregoing  line 
from  Much  Ado,  but  not  the  present  line,  which  is  earlier  in  date.  To  these  two 
examples  Schmidt  adds  the  third  and  only  remaining  one — Love's  Labour’s,  I,  i, 
219. — Ed.] 

62.  Crosse-row]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D .):  The  alphabet,  from  the  figure  of  the 
cross  formerly  prefixed  to  it;  =  Christ-cross-row.  ante  1529  Skelton  Against  Vene- 
mous  Tongues  ‘In  your  crosse  row  nor  Christ  crosse  you  spede’  .  .  .  1531  Tindale 
Exp.  1  John  2  ‘  A  man  can  by  no  meanes  reade,  excepte  he  be  taught  the  letters 
of  the  crosserowe.’ 

63.  Wizard  told  him]  See  note  by  Wright,  1.  44,  above. 

65.  for]  For  examples  of  ‘for’  used  in  sense  because  of,  see  Abbott,  §  151. 

67.  toyes]  See  Schmidt  {Lex.)  for  other  examples  of  ‘toy’  used  in  sense  of 
idle  jolly,  fancy. 

69.  this  it  is]  Wright:  Compare  Two  Gentlemen,  V,  ii,  49:  ‘Why,  this  it  is 
to  be  a  peevish  girl’;  and  Ant.  dr  Cleo.,  II,  vii,  12:  ‘Why,  this  it  is  to  have  a  name 


30 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  i. 


’Tis  not  the  King  that  fends  you  to  the  Tower,  70 

My  Lady  Grey  his  Wife,  Clarence  ’tis  fhee. 

That  tempts  him  to  this  harfli  Extremity.  72 

1 

7l.Jhee.]Jhe,  Q,Q3Ff.  Jhe  Q3Q,QS-  72.  harjh ]  Ff,  Rowe,  +  ,  Cap.  Var. 

72  .tempts]  Q^Ff,  Rowe,  +  ,  Cap.  Mai.  Sing.  Ktly.  Om.  Qq  et  cet. 

Var.  Mai.  Coll,  i,  ii.  {temps  Q3.)  tempers  Extremity .]  extermitie  :  Q$. 

Qj  et  cet. 

in  great  men’s  fellowship.’  [It  is,  perhaps,  worth  notice  that  in  these  three  passages 
the  phrase  ‘this  it  is’  is  introduced  by  ‘Why.’ — Ed.] 

71.  My  Lady  Grey]  See  Dram.  Person.:  Queen  to  Edward  IV. 

72.  tempts]  Malone:  We  should  undoubtedly  read  tempers  as  in  Qr  To 
temper  is  to  mould,  to  fashion.  So  in  Titus  And.,  IV,  iv,  109:  ‘And  temper  him 
with  all  the  art  I  have.’  In  Q2  tempts  was  corruptly  printed  for  tempers.  The 
metre  being  then  defective,  the  Editor  of  F,  supplied  the  defect  by  adding  ‘harsh’ 
to  the  line. — Spedding  {Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  4):  I  think  the  reading 
of  Qj  is  probably  what  Shakespeare  wrote,  because  tempers  is  more  likely  to 
have  been  corrupted  into  tempts  than  the  reverse.  The  mistake  may  have 
arisen  from  the  use  in  the  MS  of  the  contracted  form  of  per.  .  .  .  The  insertion 
of  ‘harsh’  is  a  correction  which  the  author  himself  might  have  made  if  he  found 
the  imperfect  line  in  the  copy  which  he  was  correcting,  and  did  not  remember 
what  he  had  originally  written.  There  is  not  much  to  choose  between  the  two 
lines. — Pickersgill  {Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875-76;  p.  80):  I  cannot  agree  with 
Spedding  in  his  conjecture  as  to  the  ‘contracted  form  of  per .’  For  the  corrupted 
form  tempts  is  found  first  in  Qa,  which  was  printed,  not  from  MS,  but  from  Qr 
As  the  error  of  the  Second  Quarto  is  reproduced  substantially  by  all  the  following 
Qq,  there  can  be  very  little  doubt,  I  think,  that  the  copy  which  the  corrector  used, 
at  least  as  far  as  this  passage  is  concerned,  was  one  of  the  later  Qq,  probably  the 
Third.  [By  ‘the  corrector’  Pickersgill  here  refers  to  the  author  of  certain  changes 
in  the  Folio  text  as  compared  to  that  of  the  Qq.  Spedding  classifies  these  altera¬ 
tions  under  a  number  of  heads,  regarding  them  as  due  to  various  causes.  The 
present  change  Spedding  attributes  to  the  printer  of  the  Folio.  See  Appendix: 
Text. — Ed.]  We  come  then  to  the  heart  of  the  question — can  we  suppose  that 
the  corrector  was  Shakespeare?  Can  we  suppose  that  Shakespeare  would  adopt 
the  reading  tempts,  which  a  mere  printer’s  error  had  introduced  into  the  copy  which 
he  was  revising?  I  cannot  see  any  propriety  in  the  reading  of  the  Folio.  Why 
should  Lady  Grey  be  said  to  tempt  the  King,  when  she  is  represented  throughout 
Gloucester’s  speech  as  having  him  completely  under  her  control?  Only  three 
lines  before,  Gloucester  had  cited  the  committal  of  Clarence  as  an  illustration  of 
what  occurs  when  ‘men  are  ruled  by  women.’  Eve  tempted  Adam,  it  is  true,  but 
Jezabel  stirred  up  (nearly  =  tempered )  Ahab;  and  the  latter  is  certainly  the  true 
analogy.  Upon  the  other  hand,  if  the  corrector  were  not  the  author,  he  would, 
of  course,  accept  the  reading  which  he  found,  as  it  no  doubt  gives  a  fair  sense. — 
Halliwell:  This  is  a  remarkable  and  decisive  instance  of  the  First  Folio’s  want 
of  authority  as  regards  part  at  least  of  the  present  drama.  A  MS  corrector  of  my 
copy  of  ed.  1629  alters  the  line  to — ‘That  tempts  him  now,’  etc.' — Wright:  The 
reading  of  Q3  is  undoubtedly  correct.  Compare  Two  Gentlemen,  III,  ii,  64: 
‘Where  you  may  temper  her  by  your  persuasion  To  hate  young  Valentine  .  .  .  ’ 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


31 


Was  it  not  (hee,  and  that  good  man  of  Worfhip, 

Anthony  Woodeulle  her  Brother  there, 

That  made  him  fend  Lord  Ha/lings  to  the  Tower  ? 

74.  Woodeulle]  WooduileQq.  Wood-  75,76.  Tower  ?  ...deliuered  ?]  tower? 

ville  F,FS.  Woodvil  F4,  Rowe,  +  .  ...deliuered.  Ff,  Rowe  ii,  +  ,  Sing.  Ktly. 

Woodeville  Cap.  et  cet.  (subs.)  tower  ...delivered.  Rowe  i.  tower,  ...de- 

her]  he  her  Han.  liuered  ?  Qq  et  cet. 

[The  Text.  Notes — hard  food  for  minds — show  in  no  uncertain  fashion  the  reading 
which  has  received  the  largest  popular  approval.  Moreover,  is  not  this  a  case  where 
the  excellent  scholastic  rule,  Durior  lectio  prejercnda  est,  exactly  applies?  ‘ Tempts' 
is  more  easily  comprehended  than  tempers.—  Ed.] 

73-  g°od  man  °f  Worship]  Hunter  ( lllust .,  ii,  81):  Perhaps  there  is  historical 
evidence  that  the  Plantagenet  princes  were  accustomed  to  speak  thus  of  the  Wood- 
viles.  If  not,  it  ought  to  be  remembered  that,  whatever  his  father  may  have  been,  the 
mother  of  Woodvile  was  of  the  house  of  Luxemburgh,Jaquetta,  Duchess  of  Bedford. 

74.  Anthony  Woodeulle]  French  (p.  224):  Anthony  Woodville,  Earl  Rivers, 
was  the  eldest  brother  to  the  Queen  of  Edward  IV.,  who  made  him  a  Knight  of 
the  Garter  and  appointed  him  governor  to  his  son,  the  Prince  of  Wales.  As  one 
of  the  faithful  friends,  as  also  being  uncle  to  the  young  princes,  Earl  Rivers  was 
looked  upon  with  great  dislike  by  the  Duke  of  Gloucester. 

74.  Anthony  .  .  .  there]  Malone,  who  seldom  hesitates  to  sacrifice  sound  to 
metre,  here  suggests  that  ‘there’  is  to  be  pronounced  as  a  disyllable.  Steevens, 
although  himself  somewhat  too  fond  of  such  ‘procrustean  scansions,’  querulously 
remarks  that  he  has  too  often  been  obliged  to  say  that  he  has  ‘no  faith  in  this 
disyllabical  pronunciation  of  “  there,  ”  ’  and  prescribes  as  a  cure  for  the  metre  that 
‘Woodeville  be  pronounced  as  a  trisyllable,’  and  adds  that  it  is  still  so  pronounced 
‘by  a  gentleman  of  that  name.’  Steevens  is,  I  think,  anticipated  by  Capell, 
who  says:  ‘The  metre  in  this  line  is  made  out  by  what  may  be  call’d  a  new  amend¬ 
ment — a  quaint  spelling  of  the  family  name  of  Earl  Rivers,  covering  a  piece  of 
witty  abuse,  which  we  shall  leave  to  decypherers.’  [See  Text.  Notes.]  Webb 
also  suggests  that  the  pronunciation  Woodeville  is  intended  as  a  pun  on  Wood- 
devil.  But  the  spelling  of  all  names,  both  in  Qq  and  Ff,  is  far  too  erratic,  I  fear, 
to  form  any  safe  guide  to  pronunciation.  (See  this  name  in  T ext.  Notes;  also  ‘  Glos- 
ter,’  1.  5.)  Neither  Malone’s  note  nor  Steevens’s  answer  appears  in  the  Variorum  of 
1821:  Although  the  word  ‘there’  has  attached  to  it  the  figure  8,  there  is  no  note 
on  the  line  at  the  foot  of  the  page;  moreover,  the  words  ‘Humbly  complaining’ 
(I.  83)  are  also  numbered  8,  which  last  figure  corresponds  to  Johnson’s  note  on 
that  and  the  next  line.  Possibly  Malone  withdrew  his  suggestion  and  Boswell 
purposely  omitted  the  note,  but  neglected  to  remove  the  figure,  which  now  remains 
as  the  only  record,  on  the  page  of  the  Variorum  of  1821,  of  this  little  tilt  between 
Steevens  and  Malone.  Collier’s  MS  corrector  improves  the  metre  by  reading 
‘her  same  brother,’  an  addition  that  Collier  says  ( Emendations ,  p.  324)  ‘is  a  con¬ 
siderable  increase  of  contempt  as  well  as  an  improvement  in  the  verse.’  Singer 
{Sh.  Vind.,  p.  165)  strongly  disapproves  of  this  last  addition,  remarking,  with  an 
ungentlemanly  innuendo,  that  ‘The  interpolation  only  adds  “a  considerable 
increase  of  contempt”  for  such  impertinent  meddlars.’  Both  Keightley  and 
Abbott  prefer  to  take  ‘Woodeville’  as  a  trisyllable. — Ed. 

75.  That  .  .  .  Tower]  Wright:  The  histories  say  nothing  directly  of  the  com- 


73 

75 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  i. 


32 

From  whence  this  prefent  day  he  is  deliuered  ?  76 

We  are  not  fafe  Clarence ,  we  are  not  fafe. 

Cla.  By  heauen,  I  thinke  there  is  no  man  fecure 
But  the  Queenes  Kindred, and  night-walking  Heralds, 

That  trudge  betwixt  the  King,  and  Miftris  Shore .  80 

Heard  you  not  what  an  humble  Suppliant 

Lord  Hajlings  was,  for  her  deliuery  ?  82 


76.  prefent~\  Ora.  Rowe, +  . 

78.  heauen]  head  n  Pope, +  . 
there  A]  there' s  Cap. 
man  fecure]  Ff.  man  is  fecurde 
QtQ3Q3.  man  fecurde  Q4-  man  fceurde 
Q5.  man  fe cur'd  Q6Q?.  man  fecurd 
Q8.  man  is  secure  Cap. 


80.  trudge  betwixt ]  truge  betweene 
Q7Q8.  trudge  between  Pope,  + ,  Cap. 

81.  you]  ye  Huds.  Cam.  +  . 

82.  was,  for  her]  was,  for  his  F3F3. 
was  for  his  F4,  Rowe,  was  to  her  for 
his  Qq  et  cet. 


mittal  of  Hastings  to  the  Tower,  although  it  is  implied  in  the  narrative  of  Sir  Thomas 
More.  [The  following  passage  is  from  More’s  Lije  of  Richard,  p.  77;  Wright 
quotes  from  Holinshed,  who  copied  almost  verbatim  from  More. — Ed.]  ‘  Upon  the 
very  tower  wharfe  so  nere  the  place  where  his  head  was  of  so  sone  after,  there  met 
he  with  one  Hastinges  a  perseuant  of  his  own  name.  And  of  their  meting  in  that 
place,  he  was  put  in  remembraunce  of  an  other  time  ...  At  which  other  tyme  the 
Lord  Chamberlein  had  ben  accused  vnto  king  Edward,  by  the  lord  Riuers  the 
quenes  brother,  in  such  wise  that  he  was  for  the  while  (but  it  lasted  not  long)  farre 
fallen  into  the  kinges  indignacion,  and  stode  in  gret  fere  of  himselfe.’ 

78.  secure]  Vaughan  (iii,  7):  Shakespeare  ( Tempest ,  II,  i,  309)  makes  use  of 
the  active  participle  ‘securing’  in  the  sense  of  making  and  keeping  safe:  ‘Whiles  we 
stood  here  securing  your  repose.’  As  he  has  used  the  active,  so  is  it  not  improbable 
that  he  might  use  the  passive,  participle  in  the  same  sense.  I  would  read,  therefore, 
partly  with  the  Qq,  ‘there’s  no  man  is  secured.’ 

79.  night-walking  Heralds]  Delius:  An  ironical  designation  of  those  cour¬ 
tiers  who  are  the  accredited  emissaries  between  Edward  and  Jane  Shore.  [Is 
there  not  something  more  than  irony  in  Gloster’s  adjective  ‘night-walking’?  I 
think  that  what  he  implies  is  that  it  is  not  safe  for  honest  men  to  be  abroad  at  night, 
and  that  none  but  those  who  are  on  a  dishonest  errand  may  pass  the  King’s  guards 
unmolested.  There  was  but  one  mission  for  a  herald  whose  ‘limited  service’ 
was  nocturnal  between  the  King  and  Jane  Shore. — Ed.] 

82.  was  .  .  .  deliuery]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  4):  Here  the 
Folio  is  evidently  wrong.  [See  Text.  Notes.]  But  the  error  may  have  arisen 
from  an  interlinear  correction  misunderstood.  The  corrector,  who  evidently 
disliked  lines  of  twelve  syllables, — I  do  not  call  this  line  [as  in  the  Qq]  an  Alex¬ 
andrine,  meant,  I  think,  to  strike  out  to  her.  But  if  the  correction  was  not 
clearly  made,  or  if  the  printer  was  careless,  it  might  easily  happen  that  ‘her’ 
was  left  instead  of  his. — Pickersgill  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  81):  It 
appears  to  me  the  omission  of  the  words  to  her  leaves  the  sense,  or  at  all  events 
the  perspicacity,  of  the  passage  defective,  and  that  this  was  evident  to  the  corrector 
himself,  who  therefore  deliberately  altered  his  delivery  to  ‘her  delivery’  in  order 
to  make  it  clear  to  whom  Lord  Hastings  addressed  his  prayers.  Spedding  holds 


act  i,  sc.  i.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  33 

Rich.  Humbly  complaining  to  her  Deitie,  83 

Got  my  Lord  Chamberlaine  his  libertie. 

lie  tell  you  what,  I  thinke  it  is  our  way,  85 

If  we  will  keepe  in  fauour  with  the  King, 

To  be  her  men,  and  weare  her  Liuery. 

The  iealous  ore-worne  Widdow,and  her  felfe, 

Since  that  our  Brother  dub’d  them  Gentlewomen, 

Are  mighty  Gofsips  in  our  Monarchy.  go 

Bra.  I  befeech  your  Graces  both  to  pardon  me, 

His  Maiefty  hath  ftraightly  giuen  in  charge,  92 


83,  84.  Rich.  Humbly  ...libertie]  Clar¬ 
ence.  Humbly  ...libertie  Johns,  conj. 
83.  Humbly]  Humble  Qs* 

85.  tr]  were  Q7Qg.  » 

88.  ore-worne]  orewoime  Qq.  ( ore - 
werne  Qs>)  o'  re-worn  F3F4.  o'  er-worn 
Rowe  et  seq.  (subs.) 


90.  our ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Knt, 
Coll.  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Ktly,  Rife,  this  Qq 
et  cet. 

91.  Bra.]  Bro.  Qq. 
befeech]  beg  Pope,  + . 
me,]  me  ?  Qq. 

92.  Jlraightly]  straitly  Pope. 
giuen]  giv'n  Pope,  +  . 


that  the  passage,  as  it  stands  in  the  Folio,  cannot  be  Shakespeare's;  I  have  given 
good  reason,  I  think,  for  supposing  that  it  is  the  corrector's.  [See  Abbott,  §  494.] 

85.  way]  For  examples  of  ‘way’  in  sense  of  course,  means,  see  Schmidt  {Lex.  5). 

88.  ore-worne]  Marshall:  Elizabeth  Woodville  was  born  in  1437,  so  that 
even  if  we  take  1477  as  the  date  of  the  present  Act,  her  age  would  be  no  more 
than  forty.  But  Richard  is  sneering  at  the  fact  that  she  had  been  married  before 
she  became  Edward’s  wife. 

88.  Widdow  .  .  .  selfe]  Johnson:  That  is,  the  Queen  and  Jane  Shore. 

89.  that]  For  examples  of  ‘that’  as  a  conjunctional  suffix  see  Abbott,  §  287. 

89.  Gentlewomen]  Wright:  The  Queen’s  kindred  were  ennobled  after  her 
marriage,  but  they  were  hardly  ‘made  gentlefolks,’  for  her  father  was  of  a  good 
Northamptonshire  family,  and  had  been  created  Baron  Rivers  in  1448,  and  Earl 
Rivers  in  1466;  and  her  mother  was  the  Dowager  Duchess  of  Bedford.  Mistress 
Shore  had  never  any  title  of  rank  conferred  upon  her. 

90.  Gossips]  Skeat  {Diet.):  The  old  sense  of  ‘  gossip  ’  was  sponsor  in  bap¬ 
tism;  literally,  god-relative  (god-sib).  The  word  sib  in  Anglo-Saxon  means 
peace,  but  there  was  a  derived  word  meaning  relative,  of  which  there  are  some 
traces. 

91.  I  beseech]  Dyce,  in  his  second  Edition,  omits  the  ‘I’  for  the  sake  of  improv¬ 
ing  the  metre;  Wright  acknowledges  the  justice  of  such  an  omission,  and  both 
Hudson  and  Marshall  follow  Dyce.  See  Abbott,  §  456. 

92.  His  Maiesty  .  .  .  charge]  Wright:  The  Act  for  Clarence’s  attainder  was 
passed  in  the  17  Edward  IV.,  and  on  February  8,  1477-8,  the  Duke  of  Buckingham 
was  appointed  Lord  'High  Steward  of  England,  to  see  the  sentence  carried  out. 
Clarence’s  death  was  on  February  18.  [See  note  on  1.  47  supra.] 

92.  straightly]  Wright:  That  is,  strictly.  Compare  Matt,  ix,  30:  ‘And 
J esus  straitly  charged  them,  saying,  see  that  no  man  know  it.' 


3 


34 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  i. 


That  no  man  fhall  haue  priuate  Conference  93 

(Of  what  degree  foeuer)  with  your  Brother. 

Rich.  Euen  fo,and  pleafe  your  Worfhip  Brakenbury ,  95 

You  may  partake  of  any  thing  we  fay  : 

We  fpeake  no  Treafon  man  ;  We  fay  the  King 
Is  wife  and  vertuous,  and  his  Noble  Queene 

Well  ftrooke  in  yeares,  faire,  and  not  iealious.  99 


94.  your]  Ff,  Rowe,  + ,  Coll.  Wh.  i. 
his  Qq,  Var.  ’73  et  cet. 

95.  fo,~\  so  ?  Cap.  Var.  ’73,  Sing.  Ktly. 
and]  an't  Pope, +.  an  Cap.  et 

seq. 

95, 1 14.  Brakenbury]  Brokenbury  Qq. 

96.  partake ]  pertake  Q;. 


98.  his]  the  Q7> 

99.  Jlrooke~\  Jlroke  Qr  struck  Var.  ’78 
et  seq. 

faire]  yet  fair  still  Cap.  fair 
loving  Seymour. 

iealious~\  F2.  iealous  QqF3F4. 
over-jealous  Han.  jealous  Rowe  et  cet. 


95.  and]  Keightley  ( Exp .  Preface,  p.  iv)  acknowledges  that  he  did  not  read 
through  the  Variorum  of  1821  until  after  making  all  his  emendations;  and  whenever 
he  found  that  he  had  been  anticipated  it  ‘was  a  source  of  real  pleasure’  to  him,  as 
a  ‘proof  of  the  correctness  of  his  emendation.’  In  the  present  case  the  Variorum 
might  not  have  excited  this  feeling  of  pleasure,  but  had  Keightley  looked  through 
Pope’s  or  Theobald’s  Edition  he  would  have  seen  that  he  had  been  anticipated 
in  proposing  to  read  an't  instead  of  ‘and.’ — Ed. 

96.  partake]  Wright:  That  is,  share;  and  so,  hear.  Used  absolutely  in 
Coriol.,  IV,  iv,  184:  ‘O  slaves,  I  can  tell  you  news, — news,  you  rascals!  What, 
what,  what?  Let’s  partake.’ 

99.  Well  .  .  .  iealious]  Walker  (Vers.  154)  gives  a  number  of  examples  wherein 
‘jealous’  must,  for  the  sake  of  the  metre,  be  pronounced  as  spelt  in  this  line,  though, 
as  Keightley  observes,  none  of  Walker’s  examples  is  from  Shakespeare.  Keightley 
(Exp.,  p.  262)  prefers ‘ reading  “years”  and  “fair,”  as  more  suited  to  the  slow,  chaffing 
tone  of  Gloucester.’  Abbott  thinks  it  might  be  possible  to  scan  as  Keightley  sug¬ 
gests,  but  prefers  taking ‘jealious’ as  a  trisyllable.  (See  Guest,  p.  198.)  Wright 
points  out  that  ‘  “iealious”  is  the  uniform  spelling  in  the  First  Folio  of  Othello,  even 
where  the  metre  does  not  require  it.’  In  a  note  on  ‘beautious,  ’  Love's  Labour's , 
IV,  i,  72,  this  edition,  the  Editor  says:  ‘There  is  a  noticeable  tendency  on  the 
part  of  Shakespeare’s  compositors  to  insert  an  additional  syllable  in  such  words 
as  jealous,  dexterous,  stupendous,  etc.,  which  they  spell  jealious,  dexterious,  stupen¬ 
dous.  (See  note  in  Twelfth  Night,  IV,  iii,  30,  of  this  edition.)  This  has  been 
generally  considered  a  corruption,  but  I  incline  to  think  that  it  was  an  allowable 
pronunciation,  sometimes  even  available  for  rhythm’s  sake.  This  preference 
for  the  form  -ious  is  found  in  words  where  the  simpler  form  does  not  exist,  such 
as  prolixious,  robustious,  superbious,  splendidious,  and  cannot  be  attributed  solely 
to  the  compositors;  we  have  it  now-a-days  in  the  vulgar  mischievious.  Possibly 
such  words  as  tedious,  gracious,  delicious,  may  be  responsible  for  this  tendency.  .  .  . 
In  the  note  on  Twelfth  Night,  IV,  iii,  30,  cited  above,  are  gathered  examples 
of  this  termination  in  -ious.  To  them  add  from  Milton:  “All  with  incredible, 
stupendious  force.” — Samson  Agonistes,  line  1628.’  As  an  instance  of  the  small 
dependence  to  be  placed  on  the  spelling  of  the  Folio,  see  the  spelling  ‘ielous’ 
in  1.  88. — Ed. 


ACT  i,  sc.  i.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


35 


We  fay,  that  Shores  Wife  hath 
A  cherry  Lip,  a  bonny  Eye,  a 

ioi.  A  cherry  Lip]  One  line,  Steev. 
Var.  ’03,  ’13. 

cherry]  chery  Q?. 


IOO 

tongue  : 

ioi.  a  bonny  Eye ]  Om.  Pope,  +  , 
Cap. 


a  pretty  Foot, 
pafsing  pleafing 


99.  strooke  in  yeares]  Wright:  Here  ‘struck’  is  from  the  Anglo-Saxon 
strican ,  to  go  quickly,  to  run,  Early  English  strikeji.  In  the  Ormulum,  11.  14804, 
14810,  ‘strac  inn’  is  went  in.  Hence  is  derived  the  substantive  stroke  in  the  sense 
of  pace.  Consequently,  ‘well  struck’  is  jar  advanced.  .  .  .  With  this  may  be  com¬ 
pared  the  phrase  ‘stepped  in  years’  which  occurs  in  old  writers.  For  example: 
Holland’s  Pliny,  vii,  46:  ‘Now  this  Aglaus  was,  good  honest  man,  well  stept  in 
yeeres.’ — Wordsworth  (Sh.  Knowledge,  etc.):  We  find  in  Luke  i,  7:  ‘They  had 
no  child  because  that  Elizabeth  was  barren,  and  they  both  were  now  well  stricken 
in  years.’  In  Tyndale’s  translation,  1534,  and  Cranmer’s,  1539,  the  words  were 
‘well  stricken  in  age’;  which  we  find  also  in  Genesis  xviii,  n,  and  xxiv,  1.  Is  it 
possible  that  our  translator  of  St.  Luke  altered  the  expression  out  of  deference  to 
this  passage  of  Shakespeare?  Steevens,  in  his  note  in  the  Variorum  edition,  calls 
the  phrase  ‘an  odd,  uncouth  expression.’  It  does  not  appear  to  have  occurred  to 
him  that  it  is  used  several  times  in  the  English  Bible;  still  less  that  our  poet  might 
have  chosen  it  in  this  passage  because  the  Queen  spoken  of  was  also  an  Elizabeth, 
wife  of  Edward  IV. 

100.  101.  Shores  Wife  .  .  .  tongue]  Shakespeare  was  perhaps  indebted  to 
More  for  this  characterisation  of  Jane  Shore:  ‘Proper  she  was  and  faire:  nothing 
in  her  body  that  you  wold  haue  changed,  but  if  you  would  haue  wished  her  some¬ 
what  higher.  .  .  .  Yet  delited  not  men  so  much  in  her  bewty,  as  in  her  plesant  be- 
hauiour.  For  a  proper  wit  had  she,  and  could  rede  wel  and  write,  mery  in  com¬ 
pany,  redy  and  quick  of  aunswer,  neither  mute  nor  ful  of  bable,  some  time  taunt¬ 
ing  without  displesure  and  not  without  disport,’  p.  83. — Ed. 

101.  cherry  Lip]  Seymour:  There  seems  to  have  been  something  lost  in  the 
enumeration  of  the  lady’s  features,  perhaps  words  like  these:  ‘fair  forehead  dim¬ 
pled  cheeks.’  [It  is  somewhat  difficult  to  understand  why  Seymour  should  wish 
to  add  six  extra  syllables  to  a  line  already  too  long,  as  it  appears  in  the  Qq  and  Ff. 
It  is  possible  that  he  had  before  him  either  Steevens  1793,  or  Reed’s  Steevens  1803; 
1813,  wherein  the  words  ‘A  cherry  lip’  are  printed  as  one  line;  these  with  Seymour’s 
addition  will  complete  a  line  of  ten  syllables. — Ed.] — Guest  (p.  272):  The  differ¬ 
ence  in  the  flow  of  this  line  and  the  next  was  certainly  not  accidental.  The  Liber¬ 
tine  sneer  upon  the  wretched  mistress  was  to  be  contrasted  with  the  bitter  sarcasm 
levelled  at  more  formidable,  and  therefore  more  hated  rivals.  But  in  the  text, 
as  ‘corrected’  by  Steevens,  this  happy  turn  of  the  rhythm  is  lost. — Keightley 
{Exp.,  p.  79):  It  has  never  to  my  knowledge  been  sufficiently  noticed  that  Shakes¬ 
peare  makes  occasional  use  of  the  seven  foot  verse  of  Golding’s  Ovid  and  Phaer’s 
Virgil,  works  in  which  it  is  evident  he  was  extremely  well-read.  This  line  is  such 
a  verse.  Compare  also  Much  Ado,  II,  i,  99:  ‘My  visor  is  Philemon’s  roof  within 
the  house  is  Jove. — Why  then  your  visor  should  be  thatch’d. — Speak  low  if  you 
speak  love.’  [Abbott,  §  498,  classifies  this  line  in  Rich.  III.  as  ‘a  pure  Alexandrine, 
or  nearly  so,  if  the  text  be  correct.’  ‘Much  virtue  in  If.’ — Ed.] 


2 5  THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  i. 

And  that  the  Queenes  Kindred  are  made  gentle  Folkes.  102 
How  fay  you  fir?  can  you  deny  all  this  ? 

Bra.  With  this  (my  Lord)  my  felfe  haue  nought  to 

doo.  I05 

Rich.  Naught  to  do  with  Miftris  Shore  ? 

I  tell  thee  Fellow,  he  that  doth  naught  with  her 
(Excepting  one)  were  beft  to  do  it  fecretly  alone. 

Bra.  What  one,  my  Lord  ? 

Rich.  Her  Husband  Knaue,  would’ ft  thou  betray  me?  I  io 


102.  And  that ]  That  Rowe, +,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  And  Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13, 
Knt,  Coll.  MS. 

Kindred]  kin  Marshall. 
gentle  Folkes]  gentle-folks  Rowe. 
gentlefolk  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 

103.  fr?']  fir  Qq. 

104.  haue]  hath  Q?. 
nought]  naught  Dyce. 

106-108.  Naught. ..one]  Ff, +  .  Two 
lines,  ending  fellow,  ...one,  Qq  et  cet. 

106,  X07.  Naught. ..thee  Fellow ,] 

What,  fellow  ?  nought. ..you  Sir,  Pope,  + . 
Naught]  Nought  Q?. 


106.  to]  Om.  Vaughan. 

Miflris]  Mijlrejfe  Qq.  Miftrifs  F3> 
Miflrefs  F4. 

107.  doth]  Om.  Wh  i  (misprint). 
doth... with  her]  In  sens.  obs. 

108.  109.  were  ...Lord  ?]  As  one  line, 
omitting  alone  Cap. 

108.  were]  ’  Twere  Cap. 

to]  he  Qq,  Cam.  Webb,  Taw. 
Om.  Han. 

alone]  Om.  Pope,  +  ,  Cap. 

109.  no.  Bra.  ...me?]  Om.  Q,. 

1 10.  me?]  me  ?  ha  ?  Cap. 


106.  Naught]  Collins  (p.  112)  compares  the  ‘whole  turn  of  this  passage, 
with  the  play  on  the  word,’  to  Tit.  And.,  IV,  ii,  73-76. 

107.  108.  he  that  .  .  .  were  best  to]  Wright:  [In  the  Qq]  there  is  first  of 
all  a  confusion  of  construction,  the  second  ‘he’  being  superfluous,  and  rendering 
the  previous  ‘he,’  with  its  attendant  clause,  a  kind  of  suspended  nominative. 
Further,  the  expressions  I  were  best,  he  were  best,  are  possibly  corruptions  of  me 
were  best  =  it  were  best  for  me,  etc.  See  Abbott,  §§  230,  352. 

108.  109,  were  .  .  .  one]  Steevens:  Surely  the  adjective  ‘alone’  is  an  inter¬ 
polation.  Besides,  this  word  deranges  the  metre,  which,  without  it,  would  be 
regular — for  instance,  ‘Were  best  to  do  it  it  secretly.  What  one.’ — Malone:  The 
above  note  is  a  good  specimen  of  Steevens’s  readiness  to  suppose  an  interpolation 
in  the  old  copies,  whenever  he  chose  to  disturb  the  text.  He  does  not  seem  ever 
to  have  perceived  that  many  short  prosaical  sentences  are  frequently  interposed 
in  Shakespeare’s  metrical  dialogues.  Of  this  kind  are  the  words — ‘What  one, 
my  lord? — and  the  following  line:  Her  husband,  knave,  etc.  [Steevens  was, 
however,  not  the  first  offender  in  this  instance.  See  Text.  Notes. — Ed.] — Boswell: 
These  four  speeches  were  probably  all  designed  for  prose.  What  verse  can  be 
made  out  of  line  114? 

no.  would’st  .  .  .  me]  That  is,  would  you  make  me  say  openly  what  might  be 
considered  treason?  Perhaps  Richard  means  to  imply  that  he  himself  is  also  as 
guilty  as  the  King. — Ed. 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


3  7 


115 


Bra.  I  do  befeech  your  Grace  III 

To  pardon  me,  and  withall  forbeare 
Your  Conference  with  the  Noble  Duke. 

Cla.  We  know  thy  charge  Brakenbury, and  wil  obey. 

Rich.  We  are  the  Queenes  abie<5ts,and  muft  obey. 

Brother  farewell,  I  will  vnto  the  King, 

And  whatfoe’re  you  will  imploy  me  in, 

Were  it  to  call  King  Edwards  Widdow,  Sifter,  1 1 


III.  / do]  Om.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

(Co]  Ff, +,  Coll.  Om.  Qq  et  cet. 
m-113.  I... Duke ]  Two  lines,  ending 
me. ..Duke  Pope,  +  .  Two  lines,  ending 
withal... duke  Cap.  et  seq. 

111,  1 12.  Bra.  ...forbeare]  One  line, 

Qq. 

1 12.  withall]  to  Pope, +  . 


1 13.  Conference]  Conference  Ff.  con¬ 
ference  Rowe  i.  conferences  Rowe  ii. 
conf'rence  Pope,  + . 

Noble]  Om.  Pope,  + . 

1 17.  whatfoe're]  whatfoeuer  Qq,  Cap. 
Var.  ’03,  ’13,  ’21,  Cam.  Globe,  Taw. 
you  will  ]  you’ll  Cap. 


hi.  I  .  .  .  beseech]  See  note,  line  91  supra. 

1 15.  We  .  .  .  obey]  Seymour:  I  cannot  but  suspect  that  Richard’s  remark 
was  suggested  by  words  different  from  those  uttered  by  Clarence,  who,  in  the 
meekness  of  his  loyalty,  might  naturally  have  said:  ‘We’re  the  king’s  subjects 
and  we  will  obey.’ 

115.  abieefts]  Johnson:  That  is,  not  the  queen’s  subjects,  whom  she  might 
protect,  but  her  ‘abjects,’  whom  she  drives  away. — Monck  Mason:  I  cannot 
approve  of  Johnson’s  explanation.  Gloucester  forms  a  substantive  from  the 
adjective  abject,  and  uses  it  to  express  a  lower  degree  of  submission  than  is  implied 
by  the  word  ‘subject,’  which  otherwise  he  would  naturally  have  made  use  of. 
The  ‘Queen’s  abjects’  means  the  most  servile  of  her  subjects,  who  must,  of  course, 
obey  all  her  commands;  which  would  not  be  the  case  of  those  whom  she  had  driven 
away  from  her.  In  a  preceding  passage  Gloucester  says  of  Shore’s  wife—'  I  think, 
it  is  our  way,  If  we  will  keep  in  favour  with  the  king  To  be  her  men  and  wear 
her  livery’;  the  idea  is  the  same  in  both  places,  though  the  expression  differs.  In 
Jonson’s  Every  man  out  of  his  Humour  Puntarvolo  says  to  Swift:  ‘I’ll  make  thee 
stoop,  thou  abject.’ — Steevens:  This  substantive  was  not  of  Shakespeare’s 
formation.  We  meet  with  it  in  Psalm  xxxv,  15:  ‘ — yea,  the  very  abjects  came 
together  against  me  unawares.’  [Murray  ( N .  E.  D.)  gives  two  examples  of 
‘abject,’  in  the  sense  of  an  outcast,  earlier  than  that  quoted  by  Steevens,  but  does 
not  note  the  present  line  as  an  example  of  the  meaning,  correctly  interpreted,  as 
I  think,  by  Mason.  For  a  somewhat  similar  use  of  ‘abject’  in  opposition  to  subject 
compare:  ‘I  accompt  all  those  abiects,  that  be  not  hir  [Elizabeth’s]  subiectes,’ 
Lyly,  Euphues  Glass  for  Europe. — p.  208,  ed.  Bond. — Ed.] 

1 1 6.  I  will  vnto  the  King]  For  examples  of  ‘ellipsis  of  verb  of  motion  before  a 
preposition  or  adverb,’  see  Abbott,  §  405. 

118.  Widdow]  Johnson:  This  is  a  very  covert  and  subtle  manner  of  insinua¬ 
ting  treason.  By  slipping,  as  it  were  casually,  ‘widow’  into  the  place  of  wife, 
he  tempts  Clarence  with  an  oblique  proposal  to  kill  the  king.  [Did  Johnson 
forget  that  he  himself  had  explained  ‘widow,’  line  88  above,  as  referring  to  the 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  I,  sc.  i. 


38 

I  will  performe  it  to  infranchife  you. 

Meane  time,  this  deepe  difgrace  in  Brotherhood,  120 

Touches  me  deeper  then  you  can  imagine. 

Cla.  I  know  it  pleafeth  neither  of  vs  well. 

Rich.  Well, your  imprifonment  fhall  not  be  long, 

I  will  deliuer  you,  or  elfe  lye  for  you  : 

Meane  time,  haue  patience.  125 

Cla.  I  muft  perforce  :  Farewell.  Exit  Clar. 

Rich  Go  treade  the  path  that  thou  fhalt  ne’re  return: 

Simple  plaine  Clarence ,  I  do  loue  thee  fo, 

That  I  will  fhortly  fend  thy  Soule  to  Heauen, 

If  Heauen  will  take  the  prefent  at  our  hands.  130 

But  who  comes  heere?  the  new  deliuered  Hajlings  ? 


Enter  Lord  Hajlings. 


132 


1 19.  infranchife ]  enfranchife  Qf. 

120,  125.  Meane  time]  Meantime  Knt. 
120.  in]  of  Ff,  Rowe,  +  . 

124.  elfe]  Om.  Qq,  Sta. 

125,  126.  Meane... Farewell]  As  one 
line,  Steev.  et  seq. 

125.  patience]  patience  S.  Walker. 

1 26.  perforce]  preforce  Qs> 


126.  Farewell]  Om.  Han. 

Exit  Clar.]  Ex.  Brak.  Clar. 
Rowe  et  seq.  (subs. ) 

127.  ne're]  neare  Q2. 

130.  our]  my  Han. 

13 1.  new  deliuered]  new- delivered 


Pope,  + . 

Haftings  ?]  Hajlings  Q?. 


Queen,  where  there  is  no  insinuation  of  any  kind? — Ed.] — Steevens:  King 
Edward’s  widow  is,  I  believe,  only  an  expression  of  contempt,  meaning  the  widow 
Grey  whom  Edward  had  chosen  for  his  queen.  Gloucester  has  already  called  her 
‘the  jealous  o’erworn  widow.’ 

1 19.  infranchise]  Wright:  That  is,  to  set  you  at  liberty.  The  word  is  still 
used  in  a  technical  sense  in  reference  to  copyhold  land,  or  to  persons  who  have  no 
vote  as  citizens;  but  in  its  literal  meaning  it  is  not  employed,  though  it  frequently 
occurs  in  Shakespeare. 

1 2 1.  Touches  me  deeper]  Tawney:  There  is,  no  doubt,  an  intentional 
ambiguity  in  the  phrase.  Richard  intends  Clarence  to  take  it  in  the  sense,  1  afflicts 
me  more  profoundly,’  but  it  may  also  mean  ‘concerns  me  more’;  probably  in 
the  sense,  ‘I  had  more  hand  in  it  than  you  imagine.’ 

124.  lye  for  you]  I.  Reed:  That  is,  be  imprisoned  in  your  stead.  To  ‘lie’ 
was  anciently  to  reside,  as  appears  by  many  examples. — [There  is  here  doubtless 
a  play  upon  the  word,  as  in  Sir  Henry  Wotton’s  definition:  ‘An  ambassador  is 
an  honest  man  sent  to  lie  abroad  for  the  commonwealth.’ — Ed.] 

126.  I  must]  Steevens:  Alluding  to  the  proverb:  ‘Patience  perforce  is  medi¬ 
cine  for  a  mad  dog.’  [Ray’s  Proverb's,  p.  ioo,  ed.  1815. — Ed.] 

129.  I  will  ...  to  Heauen]  Boas  (p.  15 1):  This  light-hearted  mirth  in  a  frat¬ 
ricide  appalls  us,  but  to  Richard  the  moral  aspect  of  the  situation  never  presents 
itself:  he  is  simply  tickled  by  its  irresistible  humor. — [See  note  by  Courtenay, 
1.  37  supra.] 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


39 


Hajl .  Good  time  of  day  vnto  my  gracious  Lord.  133 

Rich.  As  much  vnto  my  good  Lord  Chamberlaine  : 

Well  are  you  welcome  to  this  open  Ayre,  135 

How  hath  your  Lordfhip  brook’d  imprifonment? 

Hajl.  With  patience  (Noble  Lord)  as  prifoners  muft: 

But  I  fhall  Hue  (my  Lord)  to  giue  them  thankes 
That  were  the  caufe  of  my  imprifonment. 

Rich.  No  doubt,  no  doubt,  and  fo  fhall  Clarence  too,  140 
For  they  that  were  your  Enemies,  are  his, 

And  haue  preuail’d  as  much  on  him,  as  you, 

Hajl.  More  pitty,that  the  Eagles  fhould  be  mew’d, 

Whiles  Kites  and  Buzards  play  at  liberty. 

Rich.  What  new'es  abroad  ?  145 

Hajl.  No  newes  fo  bad  abroad,  as  this  at  home : 

The  King  is  fickly,  weake,  and  melancholly, 

And  his  Phyfitians  feare  him  mightily. 

Rich.  Now  by  S.Iohn,that  Newes  is  bad  indeed.  149 


1 33.  gracious]  gratious  Q,. 

135.  Well  are  you]  Well,  are  you  Q7> 
Well,  you  are  Qg. 

this]  the  Q,Q2,  Pope,  +  ,  Cam.  +  , 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

143.  Eagles ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll,  i,  ii, 
Wh.  i,  Hal.  Eagle  Qq  et  cet. 

144.  Whiles ]  Ff,  Rowe.  While  Qq 
et  cet. 


144.  Kites ]  kights  Q2. 

Buzards ]  bujjfards  Q,Qj.  buzars 
Q3.s.  Buzzards  Rowe. 

play]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  prey  Qq 

et  cet. 

149.  S.Iohn]  Ff,  Rowe.  Saint  Paul 
Qq  et  cet. 

that ]  Ff,  +  ,  Var. ’78,  ’85,  Ran. 
Coll,  this  Qq  et  cet. 


133.  Good  time  of  day]  Wright:  A  common  mode  of  salutation,  which 
appears  in  a  fuller  form  in  2  Henry  IV:  I,  ii,  107:  ‘God  give  your  lordship  good 
time  of  day.’ 

142.  preuail’d]  For  other  examples  where  ‘prevail’  means  to  overcome,  see 
Schmidt  ( Lex .). 

143.  Eagles]  The  Ff  reading  is,  I  am  inclined  to  think,  the  correct  one,  since 
the  other  two  nouns,  ‘Kites’  and  ‘Buzzards,’  are  plural.  If  the  Qq  were  composed 
from  dictation,  it  would  be  almost  impossible  to  distinguish  ‘  Eagle  should,  ’  from 
‘  Eagles  should.’ — Ed. 

143.  mew’d]  See  note,  1.  43  supra. 

144.  play]  It  would  be,  perhaps,  difficult  to  find  a  single  example  wherein 
Rowe  follows  anv  text  other  than  that  of  the  Ff;  it  is  not  strange,  therefore,  that 
he  here  prints  what  is  evidently  a  compositor’s  error,  either  of  eye  or  ear.  With 
Pope  the  case  is,  however,  different;  many  Qq  readings  which  he  adopts,  without 
comment,  are  not  as  obviously  correct  as  the  present  one.  See  Text.  Notes. — Ed. 

148.  feare]  For  examples  of  the  ‘omission  of  the  preposition  after  certain  verbs 
which  may  be  regarded  as  transitive,’  see  Abbott,  §  200. 

149.  S.Iohn]  That  the  Qq  is  the  correct  reading  may  be  seen  by  comparing 


40 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  i. 


0  he  hath  kept  an  euill  Diet  long,  15° 

And  ouer-much  confum’d  his  Royall  Perfon: 

’Tis  very  greeuous  to  be  thought  vpon. 

Where  is  he,  in  his  bed  ? 

Hajl.  He  is. 

Rich.  Go  you  before,  and  I  will  follow  you.  155 

Exit  Hajlings. 

He  cannot  liue  I  hope,  and  muft  not  dye, 

Till  George  be  pack’d  with  poft-horfe  vp  to  Heauen. 
lie  in  to  vrge  his  hatred  more  to  Clarence , 

With  Lyes  well  fteel’d  with  weighty  Arguments,  160 

And  if  I  faile  not  in  my  deepe  intent, 

Clarence  hath  not  another  day  to  liue  : 

Which  done,  God  take  King  Edward  to  his  mercy, 

And  leaue  the  world  for  me  to  bufsle  in. 

For  then,  lie  marry  Warwickes  yongeft  daughter.  165 


150.  an  euill ]  on  ill  Q?.  an  ill  Qg. 
I5I * * * * VI.-  ouer-much ]  ouermuch  Qq,  Cam. 
+  (subs.) 

152.  greeuous]  grieuous  Qt.  greevous 
Fa.  grievous  F3F4. 

153,  154.  Where. ..*>]  As  one  line, 
Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13,  Knt,  Coll,  i,  ii, 
Ktly. 

153.  Where  is  he,\  Ff,  Rowe,  +  ,  Knt. 
What  is  he  Qx_3.  (  What!  Qg.)  Where  is 


he?  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Ktly,  Rife. 
What,  is  he  Q4  et  cet. 

154.  He  is]  He  is,  my  Lord  Han. 

155.  you]  yon  Q3. 

158.  pojl-hor/e]  posthorse  Knt,  Dyce, 
Wh.  i,  Hal.  post-haste  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS), 
Huds. 

160.  With]  Which  Q8F3F4,  Rowe. 
164.  bufsle]  buff  ell  Qq.  buflle  F4. 


I,  ii,  40,  46;  III,  iv,  85;  V,  iii,  250.  More  was  Holinshed’s  authority,  and  thereby, 
perhaps,  Shakespeare’s  also,  for  giving  this  form  of  oath  to  Richard,  ‘by  saynt 
Poule  (quod  he)  I  wil  not  to  dinner  til  I  se  thy  hed  of’  (p.  73). — Ed. 

150.  an  euill  Diet]  ‘They  thinke  that  he  long  time  in  king  Edward’s  life  fore¬ 
thought  to  be  king;  in  case  that  the  king  his  brother  (whose  life  he  looked  that 
euill  diet  should  shorten)  should  happen  to  deceasse  while  his  children  were  yoong.’ 
— Holinshed. — Wright:  ‘Diet’  here  denotes  generally  mode  o /  life. 

158.  post-horse]  Singer  ( Sh .  Vind.,  p.  165):  [Collier’s  MS  corrector’s  change] 
Of  ‘  post-horse  ’  to  posthaste,  we  may  allow  to  be  an  admissible  correction  of  a  prob¬ 
able  misprint,  and  therefore  possibly  right. — Dyce:  I  believe  the  old  text  is 
right;  ‘with  post-horse’ — meaning  with  the  speediest  possible  conveyance. 

164.  bussle]  Tawney:  The  expression  is  an  instance  of  rhetorical  understate¬ 
ment.  Richard  intended  to  display  a  mischievous  activity. 

165.  Warwickes  yongest  daughter]  Malone:  Lady  Anne,  the  widow  of 
Edward  Prince  of  Wales.  [See  Dram.  Person,  s.  v.  Anne,  1.  39.] — Vaughan  (iii, 
10):  This  line  possesses  an  interest  as  contrasting  the  historical  knowledge  of 
Shakespeare  writing  Richard  III.,  with  that  of  the  poet  who  composed  3  Henry 

VI.  In  that  play  the  wife  of  Prince  Edward,  son  of  Henry  VI.,  is  twice  erroneously 


act  i,  sc.  i.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

What  though  I  kill’d  her  Husband,  and  her  Father, 


41 

166 


166.  kill'd ]  kild  Qq.  her  father !  Wh.  i,  Ktly.  his  father , 

her  Father,']  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sta.  Booth,  her  father  ?  Pope  et  cet. 

described  as  the  eldest  daughter  of  Warwick:  that  is,  in  II,  iii,  and  in  IV,  iv;  and 
yet  that  wife  is  the  ‘Warwick’s  youngest  daughter  of  this  scene. 

166.  I  kill’d  her  Husband]  ‘Sir  Richard  Crofts .  . .  brought  foorth  his  prisoner 
prince  Edward, . . .  whom  when  king  Edward  had  aduised,  he  demanded  of  him, 
how  he  durst  so  presumptuouslie  enter  into  his  realme  with  banner  displaied? 
Wherevnto  the  prince  boldlie  answered,  saieng:  “To  recouer  my  fathers  kingdome 
&  heritage,  from  his  father  and  grandfather  to  him,  and  from  him  after  him  to 
me,  lineallie  descended.”  At  which  words  king  Edward  said  nothing,  but  with 
his  hand  thrust  him  from  him,  or  (as  some  saie)  stroke  him  with  his  gantlet;  whom 
incontinentlie,  George  duke  of  Clarence,  Richard  duke  of  Glocester,  Thomas 
Greie  marquesse  Dorcet,  and  William  lord  Hastings,  that  stood  by,  suddenlie 
murthered.’ — Holinshed,  Edward  IV. — Walpole  (p.  6):  A  cotemporary  names 
the  king’s  servants  as  perpetrators  of  this  murder:  Is  not  that  more  probable 
than  that  the  king’s  own  brothers  should  have  dipped  their  hands  in  so  foul  an 
assassination?  Richard,  in  particular,  is  allowed  on  all  hands  to  have  been  a 
brave  and  martial  prince:  he  had  great  share  in  the  victory  at  Tewkesbury.  .  .  . 
Such  men  may  be  carried  by  ambition  to  command  the  execution  of  those  who 
stand  in  their  way,  but  are  not  likely  to  lend  their  hand,  in  cold  blood,  to  a  base 
and,  to  themselves,  useless  assassination.  How  did  it  import  Richard  in  what 
manner  the  young  prince  was  put  to  death  ?  If  he  had  so  early  planned  the  ambi¬ 
tious  designs  ascribed  to  him,  he  might  have  trusted  his  brother  Edward,  so  much 
more  immediately  concerned,  that  the  young  prince  would  not  be  spared.  If  those 
views  did  not,  as  is  probable,  take  root  in  his  heart  till  long  afterwards,  what  interest 
had  Richard  to  murder  an  unhappy  young  prince?  This  crime  therefore  was  so 
unnecessary,  and  is  so  far  from  being  established  by  any  authority,  that  he  deserves 
to  be  entirely  acquitted  of  it. — Gairdner  (p.  16):  If  this  was  Richard’s  first 
heinous  crime,  it  was  probably  one  in  which  he  was  only  an  accessory,  or  in  which, 
if  a  principal  actor,  he  received  great  encouragement  from  those  about  him.  On 
the  other  hand,  to  suppose  him  altogether  guiltless  in  this  matter  is  a  great  violation 
of  all  reasonable  probability.  For  however  feeble  may  be  the  direct  evidence  of 
his  complicity,  it  would  be  absurd  to  suppose  that  he  either  disapproved  the  act, 
or  was  greatly  shocked  at  it. — Legge  (i,  108):  Carte,  whom  Horace  Walpole 
describes  as  ‘one  of  the  few  modern  historians  who  seem  not  to  have  swallowed 
implicitly  all  the  vulgar  tales  propagated  by  the  Lancastrians  to  blacken  the  house 
of  York,’  distinctly  says  that  the  murder  was  perpetrated  by  Dorset  and  Hastings 
( History  of  England,  ii,  190).  If  the  fact  of  the  murder  could  be  established,  they 
were  certainly  the  most  likely  agents.  What  appears  least  likely  is  that  Richard, 
the  youngest  of  the  four  implicated,  a  lad  of  eighteen,  described  as  good-natured 
and  obsequious,  would,  in  the  presence  of  his  elders,  to  whom  he  had  always  shown 
deference,  execute  the  royal  vengeance  and  in  so  doing  claim  precedence  over  them. 
And  this  is  confirmed  by  Buck,  who  says  [p.  81]  he  had  seen  ‘in  a  faithfull  Manu¬ 
script  Chronicle  of  those  times,  that  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  onely  of  all  the  great 
persons,  stood  still  and  drew  not  his  sword.’  Such  an  attitude  is  precisely  what 
we  should  expect  from  the  young  chivalrous  knight,  who,  however  willing  to  strike 


42 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  i. 


The  readieft  way  to  make  the  Wench  amends,  167 

Is  to  become  her  Husband,  and  her  Father : 

The  which  will  I,  not  all  fo  much  for  loue, 

As  for  another  fecret  clofe  intent,  1 70 

168.  Is  to]  Is — to  Mai.  Steev.  Var. 

down  a  foe  in  fair  fight,  would  not  sully  his  honour  by  slaying  in  cold  blood  a  pros¬ 
trate  enemy. — Brooke:  ( Sh .  Trans.,  1880-6,  p.  512):  It  is  a  total  absence  of 
Love,  and  therefore  of  conscience,  which  makes  Richard  try  to  do  things  which 
to  any  one  who  believed  in  love  would  seem  impossible.  No  other  man  would 
have  wooed  lady  Anne  as  he  does,  or  asked  Elizabeth  for  her  daughter.  It  is  only 
these  wants  in  Richard  which  make  on  his  side  these  scenes  natural.  [The  three 
lines  beginning:  ‘What  though,’  etc.]  are  incredible  on  the  lips  of  any  one  who 
had  ever  loved.  It  is  only  when  he  has  won  her  that  he  is  astonished;  and  in  the 
astonishment  a  faint  gleam  of  belief  in  the  existence  of  moral  right  and  wrong 
for  others  comes  upon  him.  ‘She  has  God  and  her  conscience  against  her.’  But 
this  only  serves  to  deepen  his  scorn  of  himself  and  others,  and  the  mixture  of  bitter¬ 
ness,  contempt,  and  isolation  is  wonderful  in  the  soliloquy  which  ends  the  wooing 
scene.  [This  article  on  Richard  III.  is  reprinted  in  Brooke’s  volume  On  Ten 
Plays  of  Shakespeare,  p.  xoo,  with  many  slight  verbal  changes.  Any  minute 
discussion  of  the  question  of  Gloucester’s  share  in  this  murder  is,  I  think,  out  of 
place  here — it  is  sufficient  for  Shakespeare’s  purposes  that  Richard’s  complicity 
is  mentioned  both  by  Hall  and  Holinshed;  and  the  question  then  resolves  itself 
into  an  enquiry  into  the  historical  accuracy  of  these  two  chroniclers.  In  all  such 
historical  discussions  we  must  strictly  remember  that  ‘The  play’s  the  thing,’  and 
that  historical  accuracy  is  not  the  thing. — Ed.] 

166.  her  Father]  Wright:  In  the  battle  of  Barnet,  where  Warwick  was  slain, 
Richard  commanded  the  vanguard  of  his  brother’s  army,  but  the  death  of  Warwick 
is  attributed  to  one  of  Edward’s  soldiers.  ‘He  lept  vpon  a  horse  to  flie,  and  com- 
ming  into  a  wood  where  was  no  passage,  one  of  king  Edwards  men  came  to  him, 
killed  him,  and  spoiled  him  to  the  naked  skin.’ — Holinshed,  p.  685. — Tawney: 
I  believe  ‘Father’  refers  to  Henry  VI.  The  word  is  used  in  the  sense  of  father- 
in-law  in  I,  iii,  144,  and  in  many  other  passages. 

169.  The  which]  See  Abbott,  §  270. 

169.  not  .  .  .  for  loue]  Jesse  ( Memor .  of  Richard  III.,  etc.,  p.  55):  May  it  not 
have  been  at  Middleham  [the  establishment  of  Warwick]  in  the  days  of  their  child¬ 
hood,  that  Richard  was  first  inspired  by  that  memorable  passion  which  was  destined 
to  triumph  over  all  human  opposition,  even  when  Anne  Neville  had  become  the 
betrothed,  if  not  the  bride,  of  another,  and  which  was  eventually  rewarded  by  her 
becoming  his  wife  and  queen  ?  [J  esse,  in  a  preceding  passage,  shows  that  Richard 
was  sent,  as  a  young  boy,  to  Middleham  to  be  under  the  supervision  of  Warwick; 
and  for  his  military  education. — Ed.] 

170.  secret  close  intent]  Hudson:  This  probably  was  to  get  into  his  hands 
the  son  and  daughter  of  Clarence,  who  had  been  left  in  the  care  of  their  aunt,  Lady 
Anne,  and  had  succeeded  to  the  large  portion  of  the  vast  estates  of  their  grand¬ 
father,  the  Earl  of  Warwick. — Wright:  It  is  not  clear  how  Richard’s  marriage 
with  Anne  could  be  supposed  to  favour  his  plans  for  obtaining  the  crown. — Warner 
(p.  170):  Richard’s  object  in  the  marriage  was  twofold:  first,  to  get  Anne’s  enor- 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


43 


By  marrying  her,  which  I  mull  reach  vnto.  17 1 

But  yet  I  run  before  my  horfe  to  Market : 

Claretice  ftill  breathes,  Edward  ft  ill  hues  and  raignes, 

When  they  are  gone,  then  mud  I  count  my  gaines.  Exit  174 


Scena  Secunda. 


1 7 1.  By...vnto]  Which  I,  by  marry¬ 
ing  her ,  must  reach  unto  Han.  Which 
I  must  reach  unto  by  marrying  her 
Ktly. 

marrying ]  marring  Q?. 


173.  breathes ,  ...raignes"]  Hues,  ...Ed¬ 
ward Jlill  raignes  Q7Q8- 

I.  Scena  Secunda.]  Orn.  (scene  con¬ 
tinued)  Qq. 

A  Street.  Theob.  et  seq.  (subs.) 


mous  property,  and  second,  perhaps,  to  unite  himself  ever  so  slenderly  with  the 
Lancaster  family,  in  preparation  for  his  future  assault  upon  the  throne. 

172.  But  .  .  .  Market]  Barnard:  The  notion  seems  to  be  that  the  horse  is 
carrying  to  market  articles  for  sale,  or  perhaps  is  to  be  sold  there  itself. 

1.  Scena  Secunda.]  Capell  (ii,  174):  The  action  of  this  scene  (that  is,  the 
enterrment)  is  in  truth  the  play’s  first,  according  to  history;  upon  which  the  poet 
is  trespasser  six  year  at  least,  in  making  the  commitment  of  Clarence  a  prior  inci¬ 
dent:  but  the  step  was  necessary  for  the  better  knitting  together  this  life’s  enor¬ 
mities,  and  disposing  them  into  a  play;  which  is  done  with  great  artifice,  difficulties 
being  considered. — Courtenay  (ii,  66):  It  is  remarkable  that  Shakespeare, 
while  he  introduces  Gloucester  courting  the  widowed  Anne  in  the  public  streets, 
had  not  heard  the  circumstances  of  the  marriage,  as  related  by  a  contemporary. 
The  Croyland  Continuator  tells  us  that  Clarence  concealed  his  sister-in-law  from 
the  pursuit  of  Gloucester,  but  that  she  was  at  last  discovered  in  London,  in  the 
disguise  of  a  cook-maid,  and  then  placed  in  sanctuary.  Although  the  marriages 
of  the  fifteenth  century — perhaps  the  women  of  that  time — are  not  to  be  judged 
by  our  present  notions,  I  cannot  but  regard  the  marriage  of  Anne  as  a  material 
point  in  the  evidence  which  disproves  Gloucester’s  part  in  the  death  of  Prince 
Edward  and  King  Henry. — Jesse  ( Memor .  of  Rich.  III.,  p.  101):  At  the  time 
when  the  corpse  of  Henry  VI.  was  on  its  way  to  Chertsey,  Richard  was  marching 
with  his  brother,  King  Edward,  against  the  Bastard  Falconbridge. — Skottowe 
(i,  192):  Sober  criticism  will  question  whether  dramatic  effect  be  not  lessened 
by  this  scene.  The  confidence  of  the  wooer  is  inconsistent  with  his  previously 
expressed  opinion,  that  his  assumption  of  the  character  of  a  lover  would  be  pre¬ 
posterous.  His  surprise  at  his  success  pleads  guilty,  by  anticipation,  to  the  objec¬ 
tion  which  might  be  justly  urged  against  the  probability  of  his  preceding  conquest. — 
Richardson  (p.  18):  In  considering  this  scene,  it  is  necessary  that  we  keep  in 
view  the  character  of  Lady  Anne.  The  outlines  of  this  character  are  given  us 
in  her  own  conversation;  but  we  see  it  more  completely  finished  and  filled  up, 
indirectly  indeed,  but  not  less  distinctly,  in  the  conduct  of  Richard.  She  is  repre¬ 
sented  by  Shakespeare  of  a  mind  altogether  frivolous;  incapable  of  deep  affection; 
guided  by  no  steady  principles  of  virtue,  produced  or  strengthened  by  reason  and 
reflection;  the  prey  of  vanity,  which  is  her  ruling  passion;  susceptible  of  every 


44 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 


[i.  Scena  Secunda.] 

feeling  and  emotion;  sincere  in  their  expression  while  they  last,  but  hardly  capable 
of  distinguishing  the  propriety  of  one  more  than  another;  and  so,  exposed  alike 
to  the  influence  of  good  and  bad  impressions.  There  are  such  characters:  persons 
of  great  sensibility,  of  great  sincerity,  of  no  rational  or  steady  virtue,  and  conse¬ 
quently  of  no  consistency  of  conduct.  They  now  amaze  us  with  their  amiable  vir¬ 
tues;  and  now  confound  us  with  apparent  vices.  Richard,  in  his  management  of 
Lady  Anne,  having  in  view  the  accomplishment  of  his  ambitious  designs,  addresses 
her  with  the  most  perfect  knowledge  of  her  constitution.  He  knows  that  her 
feelings  are  violent;  that  they  have  no  foundation  in  steady  determined  principles 
of  conduct;  that  violent  feelings  are  soon  exhausted;  and  that  the  undecided  mind, 
without  choice  or  sense  of  propriety,  is  equally  accessible  to  the  next  that  occur. 
All  that  he  has  to  do,  then,  is  to  suffer  the  violence  of  one  emotion  to  pass  away, 
and  then  as  skilfully  as  possible  to  bring  another,  more  suited  to  his  designs,  into 
its  place.  Thus  he  not  only  discovers  much  discernment  of  human  nature,  but 
also  great  command  of  temper  and  great  dexterity  of  conduct.  In  order,  as  soon 
as  possible,  to  exhaust  her  temporary  grief  and  resentment,  it  is  necessary  that 
they  be  swollen  and  exasperated  to  their  utmost  measure.  In  truth,  it  is  resent¬ 
ment,  rather  than  grief,  which  she  expresses  in  her  lamentation  for  Henry.  Accord¬ 
ingly  Richard,  inflaming  her  disorder  to  its  fiercest  extreme,  breaks  in  abruptly 
upon  the  funeral  procession.  This  stimulates  her  resentment;  it  becomes  more 
violent  by  his  appearing  altogether  cool  and  unconcerned  at  her  abuse;  and  thus 
she  vents  her  emotion  in  fierce  invectives  and  imprecations.  But  before  the  ve¬ 
hemence  of  her  anger  can  be  entirely  abated,  she  must  bring  home  to  her  fancy 
every  aggravating  circumstance,  and  must  ascertain  every  particular  wrong  she 
has  suffered.  When  she  has  done  this,  and  expressed  the  consequent  feelings,  she 
has  no  longer  any  topics  or  food  for  anger,  and  the  passion  will,  of  course,  subside. 
Richard,  for  this  purpose,  pretends  to  justify  or  to  extenuate  his  seeming  offences; 
and  thus,  instead  of  concealing  his  crimes,  he  overcomes  the  resentment  of  Lady 
Anne  by  bringing  his  cruelties  into  view.  This  has  also  the  effect  of  impressing 
her  with  the  belief  of  his  candour. — Oechelhauser  (Essay,  etc.,  p.  82)  is  not 
wholly  satisfied  with  Richardson’s  estimate  of  Anne’s  character,  and  does  not 
consider  that  it  is  borne  out  by  her  later  behaviour.  He  adds:  ‘What  great  interest 
could  this  wooing-scene  arouse,  if  we  are  to  consider  Anne  as  wicked,  if  indeed  we 
regard  her  as  mentally  insignificant?  I  think  Shakespeare  wishes  her  to  be  recog¬ 
nised,  both  intellectually  and  morally,  as  a  true  daughter  of  Eve,  with  the  normal 
weakness,  and  especially  the  normal  vanity  of  her  sex,  no  more,  no  less.  “Frailty, 
thy  name  is  woman.”  Wherein  would  lie  the  great  charm  of  this  scene,  if  Anne 
be  not  considered  of  the  ordinary  type?  The  acting  of  this  short  part  of  Anne 
affords  great  scope  and  deep  study;  I  know  scarcely  any  other  role  wherein  mere 
histrionic  intuition  would  be  of  less  avail  than  here.’ — Hartley  Coleridge  (ii, 
172):  '0  MaKap'i.T7jg,  whose  dealings  with  Shakespeare  sometimes  remind  me  of 
Bentley’s  Milton,  disliked  this  scene  so  much  that  he  would  not  admit  it  to  be  of 
Shakespeare’s  original  conception,  though  he  could  not  deny  that  the  words,  as 
they  stand  at  present,  were  of  his  composition.  Of  that,  indeed,  there  can  be  no 
doubt.  Any  one  of  the  old  writers  in  such  a  scene  would  have  been  far  more 
gross  and  offensive.  Still  it  is  possible  that  he  borrowed  the  situation  from  an 
older  play;  and,  as  it  is  admirably  adapted  for  acting,  to  have  omitted  it  would 
have  offended  both  the  audience  and  the  actors. — Gervinus  (i,  377):  Not  often 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


45 


[i.  Scena  Secunda.] 

has  a  task  like  that  of  the  poet’s  here  been  ventured  upon,  when  he  produces  a 
scene  full  of  improbability,  in  which  the  principal  part  is  played  by  Anne,  whose 
character  is  prepared  or  delineated  in  no  other  scene,  where,  in  the  most  unnatural 
situation,  vanity,  self-complacency,  and  weakness  must  be  displayed  in  a  moment; 
the  part  of  the  Matron  of  Ephesus  in  a  tragedy,  which  is,  however,  neither  incred¬ 
ible  nor  forced.  We  must,  at  the  same  time,  bear  in  view  that  the  murder  of  her 
relatives  admits  of  excuse,  as  among  the  unavoidable  evils  of  war  and  defence.  We 
must  take  into  account  the  extraordinary  degree  of  dissimulation,  which  deceives 
even  experienced  men;  and  for  this  reason  the  artist  who  is  to  play  Richard  must 
woo  indeed,  more  as  an  actor  than  as  a  lover,  but  must  still  go  to  the  very  limits 
of  deception  even  for  the  initiated  spectator.  We  have  further  to  consider  how 
the  part  of  repentance,  and  atonement  becomes  a  valiant  soldier,  and  how  pardonable 
is  the  womanly  weakness  which  delights  in  the  idea  of  endeavoring  to  support 
and  save  such  a  penitent;  we  must  remember  that  the  unwonted  mildness  of  the 
tyrant  is  three  times  more  effective  than  the  gentleness  of  the  weak.  How  little 
Shakespeare  scrupled  at  this  scene,  he  seemed  to  desire  to  prove,  by  repeating  it 
towards  the  end  of  the  play  in  Richard’s  suit  with  the  mother, — his  sworn  enemy, — 
for  her  own  daughter. — Hudson  ( Sh his  Life,  etc.,  p.  150) :  This  scene  is,  indeed,  far 
from  being  the  best,  or  even  among  the  best,  in  the  play;  but  it  combines  a  remark¬ 
able  variety  of  characteristic  points,  and  happily  exemplifies  Shakespeare’s  method 
of  diverting  off  the  offensiveness  of  Richard’s  acts  by  the  entertainment  of  his  gifts. 
.  .  .  Lady  Anne’s  seeming  levity  in  yielding  to  the  serpent-flatteries  of  the  wooing 
homicide  is  readily  forgiven  in  the  sore  burden  of  grief  which  it  entails  upon  her, 
in  her  subdued  gentleness  to  other  destined  victims,  and  in  the  sad  resignation 
with  which  she  forecasts  the  bitterness  of  her  brief  future.  Her  nature  is  felt  to  be 
all  too  soft  to  stand  against  the  crafty  and  merciless  tormentor  into  whose  hand 
she  has  given  herself. — Warner  (p.  213):  To  my  mind  there  is  one  explanation, 
and  one  only,  of  the  mental  and  moral  attitude  of  Lady  Anne.  Richard  was  the 
strong  man  of  his  times.  Ugly  and  deformed,  still  he  was  a  powerful  individuality. 
By  sheer  force  of  intellectual  strength  he  dominated  and  fascinated  men  as  well 
as  women.  If  by  any  chance  Anne  had  come  under  the  spell  of  Richard’s  magic, 
winning  power,  she  could  easily  proceed  step  by  step,  from  hatred  of  his  crimes 
and  contempt  for  his  person,  to  admiring  his  genius,  and  exulting  that  even  in  seem¬ 
ing,  the  strong  man  was  at  her  feet.  She  might  not  have  really  believed  that  her 
‘  beauty  was  the  cause  of  that  effect,  ’  but  she  must  have  been  moved  to  hear  it  so 
alleged.  In  other  words,  Anne  was  in  love  with  Richard,  and  all  that  sparring 
of  the  courtship  scene  is  the  resistance  of  one  who  expects  to  be  captured  and 
desires  to  be.  It  must  be  remembered,  of  course,  that  even  with  such  a  dissembler 
as  Richard  one  interview  would  not  accomplish  all  he  achieved.  Nearly  two 
years  of  romantic  pursuit,  baffled  again  and  again  by  the  jealousy  of  Clarence, 
is  crowded  within  the  compass  of  these  lines. — Lounsbury  (p.  188):  Voltaire, 
in  order  to  give  to  the  Marquise  du  Deffand  a  full  comprehension  of  the  ridicu¬ 
lousness  of  the  pretensions  put  forth  in  behalf  of  Shakespeare,  furnished  her  with 
a  slight  sketch  of  Richard  III.  His  account  is  not  so  far  out  of  the  way,  for  Vol¬ 
taire,  as  might  have  been  anticipated.  There  are  probably  in  it  not  more  than 
half  a  score  of  instances  of  errors  of  fact,  or  of  inference.  Voltaire  took  the  special 
mourner  at  the  funeral  of  Henry  VI.  to  be  the  widow  of  Henry.  It  required  almost 
a  genius  for  inaccuracy  to  make  this  particular  mistake,  with  the  text  of  the  original 


46  THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 

Enter  the  Coarfe  of  He nrie  the  fixt  with  Halberds  to  guar  d  it ,  2 

Lady  Anne  being  the  Mourner. 

Anne.  Set  downe,  fet  downe  your  honourable  load, 

If  Honor  may  be  fhrowded  in  a  Herfe  ;  5 

Whil’ft  I  a-while  obfequioufly  lament 
Th’vntimely  fall  of  Vertuous  Lancafter. 

Poore  key-cold  Figure  of  a  holy  King,  8 


2,  3.  Enter. ..Mourner.]  Enter  Lady 
Anne,  with  the  hearfe  of  Harry  the  6. 
Qq.  (Laydy  Q3.  Henrie  the  fixt.  Q?). 
Enter  the  Corpse  of  Henry  the  Sixth, 
born  in  an  open  Coffin,  and  slenderly 
attended  :  Gentlemen  bearing  Halberds, 
with  it ;  and  Lady  Anne  as  Mourner. 
Cap.  et  seq.  (subs.) 

4.  Anne.]  Lady  An.  QtQ2.  Lady 
Anne  Q3_6. 


4.  Set... fet]  Sit. ..fit  Q2. 

load]  l  Q,  (Ashbee).  Lord  Qq. 
6.  Whifiji ]  Whilejl  Q^.  Whiljl  Q, 
et  cet. 

a-while ]  Ff,  Rowe,  awhile  Pope,  4 , 
Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  Huds.  Coll,  iii,  Rife. 
a  while  Cap.  et  cet. 

8.  key-cold  ]  key  cold  Pope,  elay-cold 
Han. 


before  his  eyes.  Still  he  accomplished  it.  Richard  is,  therefore,  represented  as 
wooing,  not  a  young  woman,  but  the  fierce  Margaret  of  Anjou,  who  was  actually 
more  than  a  score  of  years  older  than  himself.  Had  Voltaire  found  in  Shakespeare 
a  blunder  so  gross,  there  would  have  been  hardly  any  limit  to  the  delight  with 
which  he  would  have  gloated  over  it,  or  to  the  frequency  with  which  he  would 
have  called  it  to  the  attention  of  his  correspondents  and  readers. 

2.  Halberds]  Wright:  This  means  the  same  as,  Gentlemen  with  halberds, 
as  ‘ancient’  or  ‘ensign’  is  ensign  bearer,  and  ‘trumpet’  signifies  trumpeter. 

4.  Set  downe  .  .  .  load]  Dyce  {Few  Notes,  p.  103):  Shakespeare  had  in  his 
recollection  a  line  at  the  commencement  of  a  scene  in  the  Sec.  Part  of  the  T rouble- 
some  Raigne  of  King  John:  ‘  Set  downe,  set  downe,  the  loade  not  worth  your  paine.’ 
(Sig.  K  4,  ed.  1622.)  [Is  it  not  a  little  temerarious  to  assert  positively  what 
Shakespeare  had,  or  had  not,  in  his  recollection  ? — Ed.] 

5.  If  Honor  .  .  .  Herse]  To  this  parenthesis  there  is  one  that  is  possibly 
similar  in  Holinshed’s  account:  ‘The  dead  corps  on  the  Ascension  euen  was 
conueid  with  billes  and  glaues  pompouslie  (if  you  will  call  that  a  funerall  pompe) 
from  the  Tower  to  the  Church  of  Saint  Paule,’  etc. — Ed. 

6.  obsequiously]  See  Schmidt  {Lex.)  for  other  examples  of  ‘obsequious’ 
used  as  applying  to  mourning. 

8.  key-cold]  Steevens  says:  ‘A  key,  on  account  of  the  coldness  of  the  metal 
of  which  it  is  composed,  was  anciently  employed  to  stop  any  slight  bleeding.’ 
He  gives  as  an  example,  ‘  It  is  best  you  hide  your  head,  for  feare  your  wise  braines 
take  key-colde.’ — Satiro-mastix,  Dekker,  1602.  This  quotation  seems  hardly  to 
illustrate  the  explanation,  or  even  to  apply  to  the  present  passage.  Malone  gives,  I 
think,  a  more  apposite  and  earlier  use  of  the  phrase,  ‘  And  then  in  key-cold  Lucrece  ’ 
bleeding  stream  He  falls.’ — Rape  of  Luc.,  line  1774.  Knight  finds  fault  with 
Steevens’s  note  on  the  ground  that  it  is  ‘forced,’  and  quotes:  “  ‘But  for  Christ 
and  obtaining  an  interest  in  him,  O  how  key-cold  are  they.” — Gurnall’s  Chris- 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


47 


Pale  Allies  of  the  Houfe  of  Lancafter  ; 

Thou  bloodleffe  Remnant  of  that  Royall  Blood,  io 

Be  it  lawfull  that  I  inuocate  thy  Ghoft, 

To  heare  the  Lamentations  of  poore  Anne, 

Wife  to  thy  Edward,  to  thy  flaughtred  Sonne, 

Stab’d  by  the  felfefame  hand  that  made  thefe  wounds. 

Loe,  in  thefe  windowes  that  let  forth  thy  life,  1 5 

I  powre  the  helpleffe  Balme  of  my  poore  eyes. 

O  curfed  be  the  hand  that  made  thefe  holes  : 

Curfed  the  Heart,  that  had  the  heart  to  do  it :  18 


II.  Be  it}  Be  V  Pope, +  . 

13.  f aught  red}  Q3_s,  Ff,  Rowe. 
Jlaughter'd  Pope, +  .  Jlaughtered  Q, 

et  cet. 

14.  hand}  hands  Qq. 
wounds ]  holes  Qq. 

15.  thefe~\  thofe  Qq. 
forth}  foorth  Q.Q^. 

16.  Balme }  blame  Q$. 


17.  O  curfed ]  Curjl  Qq.  Curs'd 
Pope,+  (  —  Var.  ’73),  Sta.  Cursed 
Cam.  4- . 

thefe }  thefe  fatall  Q,Q2,  Cam.+ 
(  —  Rife),  the  fatall  Qq. 

18.  Curfed }  Curjl  be  Qq.  Curs’d  be 

Pope,  + . 

do  it}  do  V  Walker  (Vers.  79). 


tian  in  Complete  Armour,  a  popular  work  of  the  seventeenth  century.’  That 
‘key-cold’  was  employed  in  two  senses  is  shown  by  Murray  (N.  E.  D.),  who 
divides  the  examples  of  its  use  under  two  heads — those  referring  to  cold  in  death, 
others  to  devoid  of  warmth  of  feeling;  having  no  zeal  or  fervour.  Under  the  first 
head  Murray  quotes:  ‘1529  More,  Dyaloge  II,  Works,  185;  2.  That  body  bereth 
them  yet  about,  sicke  and  noughty  and  cay  colde  as  thei  be.  1593  Tell  Troth’s 
New  Year’s  Gift,  4.  Joyning  burning  Sommer  with  kea-cold  winter.’  Under 
the  second  heading  Murray  gives  a  number  of  examples  extending  from  1534  to 
1734.  Knight’s  quotation  properly  belongs,  I  think,  to  this  second  class;  and 
the  present  line  to  the  first.  Wright  quotes  a  passage  from  Gower’s  Confessio 
Amantis,  Bk,  VI.  (ed.  Pauli),  vol.  iii,  p.  9:  ‘For  certes  there  was  neuer  keie 
Ne  frosen  is  vpon  the  walle  More  inly  cold,  than  I  am  alle.’  Can  this  possibly 
furnish  a  slight  reason  for  taking  a  key  as  a  standard  of  coldness,  not  solely  on 
account,  as  Steevens  says,  of  the  ‘coldness  of  the  metal,’  but  because  the  large 
house-key  was  hung,  possibly,  near  the  door,  against  the  cold  stones  of  the 
wall,  and  was,  therefore,  necessarily  colder  than  other  objects  of  iron  in  the 
room  ? — Ed. 

ii.  inuocate]  For  two  other  examples  of  ‘invocate’  used  in  this  sense,  see 
Schmidt  (Lex.). 

13.  Wife  to  thy  Edward]  See  Anne  Neville,  Dram.  Person. 

15.  windowes  .  .  .  life]  Tawney:  The  metaphor  is  perhaps  based  upon  the 
superstitious  custom  of  leaving  open  the  window  when  a  person  is  dying.  Com¬ 
pare  King  John,  V  vii,  29:  ‘It  would  not  out  at  windows  nor  at  doors.’ 

16.  helplesse]  For  examples  of  other  adjectives  used  in  active  sense,  see  Walker, 
Crit.,  ii,  87. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 


48 

Cnrfed  the  Blood,  that  let  this  blood  from  hence  : 

More  direfull  hap  betide  that  hated  Wretch  20 

That  makes  vs  wretched  by  the  death  of  thee, 

Then  I  can  with  to  Wolues,to  Spiders,  Toades, 

Or  any  creeping  venom’d  thing  that  hues.  23 

19.  Cnrfed ]  Ft.  22.  Wolues,  to]  Ff,  Rowe,  Wh.  Rife. 

Cnrfed... hence]  Om.  Qq,  Pope,  +  .  adders,  Qq  et  cet. 

23.  venom' d]  venomde  Qq. 


19.  the  Blood]  For  numerous  examples  wherein  ‘blood’  may  mean  disposition, 
or  temper,  see  Schmidt  {Lex.). 

22.  to  Wolues  .  .  .  Toades]  R.  G.  White:  It  has  been  remarked  that  the 
next  line  shows  that  the  Qq  give  the  true  reading,  because  wolves  are  not  ‘creeping 
things.’  If  the  Folio  had  merely  ‘wolves’  for  adders,  this  reasoning  would  be  good, 
if  not  conclusive;  but  it  has  ‘to  wolves,  to  spiders,’  etc.,  where  the  repetition  of  the 
preposition  cuts  off  the  connection  which  would  otherwise  exist  between  ‘wolves’ 
and  ‘creeping  venom’d  thing,’  which  refers  only  to  spiders  and  toads.  The  change 
seems  clearly  to  have  been  made,  upon  the  revision  of  the  play,  for  the  purpose 
of  giving  the  passage  variety  of  thought  and  rhythm. — Delius  {Jahrbuch,  vii,  161): 
That  Shakespeare  first  thought  of  Gloucester  as  like  a  ‘wolf,  ’  seems  to  be  the  sim¬ 
plest  explanation  of  this  reading  of  the  Folio.  Afterwards,  on  rearranging  the 
sentence,  he  perhaps  placed  the  amendment  in  the  margin — to  adders  instead  of 
‘to  wolves,  to’ — an  emendation  that  the  anonymous  editor  of  the  Quarto  seems 
alone  to  have  noticed. — Spedding  {Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  i875-’76;  p.  4)  also  thinks 
the  Folio  reading  to  be  an  unfinished  correction  by  Shakespeare,  and  adds:  ‘There 
seems  to  be  nothing  to  induce  another  to  alter  anything.  But  Shakespeare  himself, 
on  reading  the  passage  over,  may,  perhaps,  have  observed  that,  the  particular  act 
which  calls  forth  the  curse,  being  one  of  open  violence  and  not  of  secret  treachery, 
there  is  an  incongruity  in  wishing  to  the  actor  the  fate  of  “  creeping  venom’d  things,  ” 
and  he  may  have  meant  to  alter  it  by  the  substitution  of  wolves,  and  noxious  creatures 
of  that  kind.  If  it  be  thought  extravagant  to  suppose  that  Shakespeare  would 
not  have  completed  the  correction  when  he  was  about  it,  inquire  of  our  poets  what 
they  do,  when  they  cannot  quite  make  up  their  minds,  on  the  instant  how  to  finish 
a  passage  which  they  have  begun.’ — Pickersgill  {Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  i875~’76;  p.  82): 
I  regard  the  reading  ‘wolves’  as  confirmatory  of  the  theory,  that  the  Folio  {minus 
the  corrector’s  emendations)  gives  us  the  play  as  it  was  originally  composed.  I  can 
see  no  difficulty  in  supposing  that  Shakespeare,  in  the  outpour  of  his  invention, 
wrote  down  the  lines  as  we  have  them  in  the  Folio.  In  fact,  I  think  we  want 
‘wolves’  here,  as  well  as  ‘spiders’  and  ‘toads’ — the  former,  to  express  the  blood¬ 
thirsty  ferocity  of  Gloucester,  and  the  latter,  to  indicate  the  loathing  with  which 
Anne  regards  him.  I  consider  the  correction  of  the  Quarto  a  deliberate  cor¬ 
rection,  but  I  am  very  doubtful  whether  it  is  Shakespeare’s. 

23.  venom’d]  Wright:  Compare  ‘The  gilded  newt  and  eyeless  venom’d 
worm,’  Timon,  IV,  iii,  182.  Similarly  poisoned  is  used  for  poisonous  in  Lyly’s 
Euphues  (ed.  Arber),  p.  196:  ‘Nylus  breedeth  the  precious  stone  and  the  poysoned 
serpent.’  [For  another  familiar  example  see  Macbeth,  IV,  i,  4:  ‘In  the  poisoned 
entrails  throw.’] 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


49 


If  euer  he  haue  Childe,  Abortiue  be  it, 

Prodigeous.  and  vntimely  brought  to  light,  25 

Whofe  vgly  and  vnnaturall  Afpedt 

May  fright  the  hopefull  Mother  at  the  view, 

And  that  be  Heyre  to  his  vnhappineffe. 

If  euer  he  haue  Wife,  let  her  be  made 

More  miferable  by  the  death  of  him,  30 

Then  I  am  made  by  my  young  Lord,  and  thee. 

Come  now  towards  Chertfey  with  your  holy  Lode, 

Taken  from  Paules,  to  be  interred  there. 

And  ftill  as  you  are  weary  of  this  waight, 

Reft  you,  whiles  I  lament  King  Henries  Coarfe.  35 


24.  Abortiue~\  abrotiue  Q  . 

be  it~\  be  V  Walker  (  Vers.  79). 
28.  And...vnhappinejfe~\  Om.  Qq. 

30.  More...the~\  As... as  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.  + . 

death ]  health  Vaughan. 

31.  young ]  poore  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

32.  towards]  tozdrds  Pope,  + .  tosvard 
Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Steev.  Var. 

Chertfey]  Cherlley  Q6.  Cherfey  Qg. 
34  weary ]  awearie  Q  .  a  wearie 


Q4Qs- 

34.  this ]  Ff,  +,  Coll.  Wh.  i.  the  Qq 
et  cet. 

35.  whiles ]  while  Pope, +. 

Coarfe]  fate  Daniel. 

35.  37,  40,  41-  Coarfe ]  Q3.s,  Ff,  +  . 
Corfe  Qt  et  cet.  ( courfe  Q4.) 

35,  36.  Coarfe.  Enter...]  QqFf,+, 
Var. ’78,  ’85,  Ran.  Sta.  Cam.  +  .  corfe. 
Bearers  take  up  the  Corpse  and  move 
forward  :  Enter...  Cap.  et  cet. 


25.  Prodigeous]  That  is,  portentous,  monstrous. 

26.  Aspedt]  Abbott  (§  490)  gives  numerous  examples  of  the  shifting  of  accent 
in  certain  words. 

28.  vnhappinesse]  Steevens:  That  is,  disposition  to  mischief.  So,  in  Much 
Ado,  I,  i,  361:  ‘Dreamed  of  unhappiness  and  waked  herself  with  laughing.’ 
Wright  notes  that  these  are  the  only  passages  in  Shakespeare  wherein  the  word 
occurs. 

30.  death]  Sir  William  Blackstone  ( Sh .  Soc.  Papers,  i,  98)  conjectures 
that  we  should  here  read  life,  since,  when  Anne  repeats  the  curse,  IV,  i,  86,  she 
says,  ‘As  miserable  by  the  life  of  thee.’  Blackstone  was,  however,  anticipated 
by  Cibber,  whose  arrangement  was  first  published  in  1700,  nine  years  before 
Rowe’s. — Ed. 

30.  of  him]  For  other  examples  of  a  pronoun  used  for  a  pronominal  adjective 
see,  if  needful,  Abbott,  §  225. 

32.  Chertsey]  Ordish  (p.  59):  Richard,  we  may  imagine,  after  watching  his 
brother  Clarence  pass  on  towards  the  fateful  Tower,  had  lingered  in  Candlewick 
Street  (now  Cannon  Street),  in  expectation  of  the  funeral  cortege;  the  destination, 
Chertsey,  suggests  that  he  may  have  intercepted  the  procession  on  its  way  from 
the  Cathedral  to  Paul’s  wharf. — Marshall:  Chertsey  is  in  Surrey  near  the 
Thames,  not  far  below  Staines.  There  was  a  very  ancient  Abbey  there,  having 
a  mitred  Abbot  with  a  seat  in  the  House  of  Lords.  The  convent  buildings  have 
long  since  been  demolished,  and  only  a  very  few  fragments  are  now  remaining. 


4 


50 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Enter  Richard  Duke  of  Glojler.  36 

Rich.  Stay  you  that  beare  the  Coarfe,  &  fet  it  down. 

An.  What  blacke  Magitian  coniures  vp  this  Fiend, 

To  flop  deuoted  charitable  deeds  ? 

Rich.  Villaines  fet  downe  the  Coarfe,  or  by  S.  Paul,  40 

lie  make  a  Coarfe  of  him  that  difobeyes. 

Gen.  My  Lord  ftand  backe,  and  let  the  Coffin  paffe. 

Rich.  Vnmanner’ d  Dogge, 

Stand’ft  thou  when  I  commaund  : 

Aduance  thy  Halbert  higher  then  my  breft,  45 

Or  by  S.  Paul  lie  ftrike  thee  to  my  Foote, 

And  fpurne  vpon  thee  Begger  for  thy  boldneffe.  47 


36.  Enter... Glofter.]  Ff, +  .  Enter 
Richard.  Cap.  Var.  ’73.  Enter  Glofter, 
or  Gloucefter.  Qq  et  cet. 

Glofter]  Glocefter  Q,. 

37.  Rich.]  Glo.  Qq  (throughout). 

38.  An.]  La.  Qq.  Anne  F4. 
Magitian ]  Magician  FjF^. 

39.  deeds?}  deedes.  Q,. 

40.  Villaines ]  Villaine  Qq.  Villains 
Ff. 


42.  My  Lord ]  My  L.  Q3>  Om.  Q6. 

43,  44.  Vnmanner' d...  commaund} 
Ff,  Rowe.  One  line,  Qq  et  cet 

43.  Vnmanner’ d}  Vnmannerly  Qg. 

44.  Stand '/!}  /land  QqFf  et  seq. 

45.  Halbert}  halberd  Cap.  et  seq. 

47.  boldneffe.}  QqFf,  +  ,  Var. ’78,  ’85, 

Ran.  Sta.  Cam.  + .  boldness.  [Corpse  set 
down.  Cap.  et  cet. 


40.  Villaines]  Wright  thinks  the  Quarto  reading  may  perhaps  be  the  true  one, 
since  Richard’s  speech  is  ‘addressed  to  the  Gentleman  in  command  of  the  party 
of  halberdiers.’  But  is  not  this  first  speech  of  Richard’s  addressed  directly  to  the 
bearers  ?  Possibly  the  Quarto  reading  originated  in  the  similarity  in  sound  between 
‘Villain  set’  and  ‘Villains  set.’ — See  also  I,  i,  143.  Do  not  these  examples  prove 
that  the  compositors  followed  the  voice  of  him  who  read  aloud  the  copy  to  them  ? — 
Ed. 

41.  lie  .  .  .  disobeyes]  Johnson:  Compare  Hamlet,  I,  iv,  85:  ‘I’ll  make  a 
ghost  of  him  that  lets  me.’ 

44.  Stand’st  thou]  Pickersgill  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875-76;  p.  82):  As  I 
cannot  see  that  the  printer  was  likely  to  fall  into  error  here,  I  am  disposed  to  attri¬ 
bute  the  reading  of  the  Folio  to  the  corrector.  He  frequently  displays  an  inability 
to  appreciate  the  force  of  a  recurrent  word,  and  ‘stand’st  thou  when  I  command?’ 
furnishes  a  sufficient  sense,  if  we  give  to  ‘stand’  the  meaning  of  withstand, 
oppose. 

45-  Halbert]  Wright:  That  is,  a  kind  of  pole-axe,  or  long-handled  axe, 
with  a  pike  attached.  In  Icelandic  barda  signifies  an  axe,  and  Professor  Skeat 
connects  the  first  part  of  the  word  with  helm,  a  helve  or  handle,  the  form  in  Middle 
High  German  being  helm  barte,  or  helbarte.  It  may  be  that  the  Icelandic  barda 
is  derived  from  the  Middle  High  German  barta,  a  broad  axe,  and  as  this  in  Old 
High  German  is  parta,  it  is  also  possible  that  ‘halberd’  and  partisan,  as  they 
denote  similar  weapons,  may  be  etymologically  connected. 

47.  spume  vpon]  Wright  says:  ‘Elsewhere  in  Shakespeare  “spurn”  is  fol- 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


51 

48 


Anne.  What  do  you  tremble?  are  you  all  afifraid  ? 

Alas,  I  blame  you  not,  for  you  are  Mortall, 

And  Mortall  eyes  cannot  endure  the  Diuell.  50 

Auant  thou  dreadfull  minifter  of  Hell  ; 

Thou  had’ft  but  power  ouer  his  Mortall  body, 

His  Soule  thou  canft  not  haue:  Therefore  be  gone. 

Rich.  Sweet  Saint,  for  Charity,  be  not  fo  curft. 

An.  Foule  Diuell,  55 

For  Gods  fake  hence,  and  trouble  vs  not, 

For  thou  haft  made  the  happy  earth  thy  Hell  : 

Fill’d  it  with  curfing  cries,  and  deepe  exclaimes : 

If  thou  delight  to  view  thy  heynous  deeds, 

Behold  this  patterne  of  thy  Butcheries.  60 

48.  tremble?]  tremble ,  Qq.  55,  56.  Foule. ..not']  Ff,  Rowe.  One 

51.  Auant]  Q3^Ff,  +  .  Auaunt  Qt  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

et  cet.  55.  Diuell]  dev' l  Pope,  +  . 

dreadfull]  fearefull  Q6.  56.  and]  Om.  Pope,  +  . 

53.  haue]  hurt  Han.  59.  heynous]  hainous  QqF^,  Rowe  i. 

heinous  F3  et  cet. 

lowed  by  at  or  against .  ’  According  to  Bartlett’s  Concordance,  Shakespeare  uses 
‘spurn’  or  ‘spurned’  thirty-three  times:  in  eight  cases  with  the  preposition  at, 
and  once  each  with  against  and  upon.  As  an  example  of  the  construction  ‘  spurn 
on,’  Wright  quotes:  ‘She  had  on  suche  a  chaunce  sporned  That  all  her  mod  [dis¬ 
position]  was  overtorned.’ — Gower,  Confessio  Amantis,  Bk.  IV  (ed.  Pauli),  vol.  ii, 
p.  44. 

49.  you  are  Mortall]  Are  we  to  infer  from  this  that  Anne  considers  herself 
divine?  she  is  not  only  able  to  bear  the  sight  of  Richard,  but  even  to  command 
him  to  depart. — Ed. 

50.  Mortall  eyes]  Barnard:  Shakespeare  probably  means  us  to  understand 
that  Richard  possessed  the  power  of  fascination  through  the  evil  eye,  a  faculty 
conferred  upon  him  by  a  compact  with  the  devil.  [Previous  to  this  note  in  his 
edition  of  this  play,  Barnard  had  written  an  article  (TV.  &  Q.,  23d  May,  1896, 
p.  402)  on  Richard  III.  and  the  Evil  Eye;  therein  he  presents  as  proofs  of  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  intention  a  number  of  passages  from  the  play  wherein  allusions  to  ‘  sight,  ’ 
‘eyes,’  ‘devil/  occur.  Barnard’s  remarks  will  be  found  under  the  passages  to 
which  they  directly  refer. — Ed.] 

54.  curst]  That  is,  shrewish,  as  in  Shakespeare  passim. 

55.  Diuell]  For  instances  of  monosyllabic  pronunciation  of  certain  words 
composed  of  two  short  syllables,  see  Walker,  Vers.,  p.  64,  or  Guest,  p.  52. 

58.  exclaimes]  Compare  IV,  iii,  139;  Rich.  II:  I,  ii,  2;  Tro.  &  Cress., 
V,  iii,  91;  and  Tit.  And.,  IV,  i,  86.  For  other  examples  of  like  forms,  see  Abbott, 
§45i- 

60.  patterne]  Wright:  Compare  ‘Thou  cunning’st  pattern  of  excelling  nature, ’ 
Othello,  V,  ii,  11.  And,  ‘That  peerlesse  paterne  of  Dame  Natures  pride,  ’  Faerie 
Queene,  IV,  vi,  24. 


52 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Oh  Gentlemen,  fee,  fee  dead  Henries  wounds,  61 

Open  their  congeal’d  mouthes,  and  bleed  afrefh. 

Blufh,  blufh,  thou  lumpe  of  fowle  Deformitie  : 

For  ’tis  thy  prefence  that  exhales  this  blood 

From  cold  and  empty  Veines  where  no  blood  dwels.  65 

Thy  Deeds  inhumane  and  vnnaturall, 

Prouokes  this  Deluge  moft  vnnaturall. 

O  God !  which  this  Blood  mad’ft,  reuenge  his  death: 

O  Earth !  which  this  Blood  drink’ ft,  reuenge  his  death. 

Either  Heau’n  with  Lightning  ftrike  the  murth’rer  dead  :  70 


62.  afrejh]  a-frejh  F3F4,  Rowe  i. 

65.  where  ...  dwels]  whence  ...  wells 
Warb.  conj. 

66.  Deeds']  Ff,  + .  deed  Qq  et  cet. 

67.  Prouokes ]  Provoke  F4, +  . 

68.  mad' ft]  madejl  Q,_3. 


70.  Either ]  Or  Pope,  +  (  — Var.’73). 
Either ,  Cap. 

Heau'n ]  heauen  Qq.  heaven , 

Cap.  et  seq. 

murth’rer]  murtherer  Cap.  Knt. 
mtirderer  Var.  ’78  et  cet. 


62.  Open  .  .  .  bleed  afresh]  Referring  to  the  belief  that  a  murdered  body  will 
bleed  afresh  in  the  presence  of  the  murderer.  Churchill  (p.  223)  says  this 
‘reference  to  the  reopening  of  Henry’s  wounds  rests  upon  Holinshed’s  account 
of  Henry’s  burial  (derived  from  Warkworth);  there  is  no  mention  of  the  fact  in 
Hall.’  The  widespread  belief  in  this  superstition  is  attested  by  the  numerous 
examples  of  its  mention  by  earlier  authors.  Steevens  quotes  a  remark  by  Tollet 
that  ‘this  opinion  seems  to  be  derived  from  the  ancient  Swedes,  or  Northern  nations 
from  whom  we  descend;  for  they  practised  this  method  of  trial  in  dubious  cases, 
as  appears  from  Pitt’s  Atlas,  in  Sweden,  p.  20.’  See  Grey,  ii,  53,  or  Knight 
{Historical  Notes,  at  end  of  play)  for  an  account  of  a  trial  wherein  this  belief  was 
used  to  testify  against  a  murderer.  Reed  cites  King  James’s  Demonologie,  ed. 
1608,  p.  422,  as  having  a  reference  to  this  superstition.  Wright  refers  to  Scott’s 
Fair  Maid  of  Perth  where  the  body  of  Proudfute  is  exposed  in  the  church  of  St. 
John  for  the  purpose  of  applying  this  test  for  the  discovery  of  his  slayer.  He 
cites  also  Brand’s  Popular  Antiquities  (Bohn’s  Antiq.  Library),  iii,  229. — Ed. 

64.  exhales]  Wright:  That  is,  draws  forth.  Shakespeare  always  uses  the 
word  in  this  sense,  as  when  he  speaks  of  ‘some  meteor  that  the  sun  exhales’  {Rom. 
br  Jul.,  Ill,  v,  13),  connecting  the  latter  part  of  the  word  with  the  English  hale, 
and  not  with  the  Latin  halare,  to  breathe.  In  the  inflated  language  of  Pistol, 
Hen.  V:  II,  i,  66,  exhale  is  simply  draw  [sc.  a  sword]:  ‘The  grave  doth  gape  and 
doting  death  is  near,  Therefore  exhale.’ 

69.  Earth  .  .  .  drink’st]  Tawney:  Compare  Genesis,  iv,  2,  ‘the  ground  which 
hath  opened  her  mouth  to  receive  thy  brother’s  blood  from  thy  hand’;  and 
1  Hen.  IV:  I,  i,  5,  6:  ‘No  more  the  thirsty  entrance  of  this  soil  Shall  daub  her 
lips  with  her  own  children’s  blood.’  There  is  a  still  bolder  figure  in 3  Henry  VI: 
II,  iii,  23:  ‘Then  let  the  earth  be  drunken  with  our  blood.’  [See  also  IV,  iii,  32, 
33,  of  this  play. — Ed.] 

7°.  Either]  For  examples  of  monosyllabic  pronunciation  of  certain  disyllables 
ending  in  -ther,  see  Walker,  Vers.,  p.  103. 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


53 

71 


Or  Earth  gape  open  wide,  and  eate  him  quicke, 

As  thou  doft  fwallow  vp  this  good  Kings  blood, 

Which  his  Hell-gouern’d  arme  hath  butchered. 

Rich.  Lady,  you  know  no  Rules  of  Charity, 

Which  renders  good  for  bad,  Bleffings  for  Curfes.  75 

An.  Villaine,  thou  know’ft  nor  law  of  God  nor  Man, 

No  Beaft  fo  fierce,  but  knowes  fome  touch  of  pitty. 

Rich.  But  I  know  none,  and  therefore  am  no  Beaft. 

An.  O  wonderfull,  when  diuels  tell  the  truth  ! 

Rich.  More  wonderfull,  when  Angels  are  fo  angry  :  80 

Vouchfafe  (diuine  perfection  of  a  Woman) 

71.  Earth ]  Earth ,  F3F4  et  seq.  75.  renders ]  render  Q?Qg. 

72.  dofT\  doefl  Q,_s.  didfl  Q6.  76.  nor  Jaw]  Ff,  +  ,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i, 

73.  his]  this  F3F4.  Ktly.  no  law  Qq  et  cet. 

74.  Rules ]  rule  Q,Q8.  81.  Vouchfafe ]  Voutfafe  Qx. 


71.  Earth  .  .  .  quicke]  Wright:  There  is  probably  a  reference  here  to  Num¬ 
ber,  sxvi,  30 :  ‘  But  if  the  Lord  make  a  new  thing,  and  the  earth  open  her  mouth, 
and  swallow  them  up,  with  all  that  appertain  unto  them,  and  they  go  down  quick 
into  the  pit;  then  ye  shall  understand  that  those  men  have  provoked  the  Lord.’ 
[Compare  True  Tragedie  0}  Richard  Duke  of  Yorke:  ‘Maie  that  ground  gape  and 
swallow  me  alive.’  Sh.  Soc.  Reprint,  p.  122. — Ed.] 

73.  butchered]  Wright:  It  is  worth  while  to  draw  attention,  once  for  all,  to 
the  unusual  number  of  instances  in  this  play  in  which  the  participial  termination 
-ed  is  accentuated.  [A  noteworthy  reminder.  No  one  who  has  pondered  over 
every  syllable  of  this  play,  for  the  purposes  of  collation,  can  fail  to  be  struck 
with  this  peculiarity. — Ed.] 

74-76.  you  .  .  .  thou]  See  Abbott,  §  233,  and  compare  III,  ii,  137,  138. 

77.  but  knowes]  For  examples  of  omission  of  subject  in  relative  clauses,  fol¬ 
lowing  ‘but,’  see  Abbott,  §  123. 

77-  touch]  That  is,  sensation,  feeling.  For  other  examples,  see  Schmidt 
{Lex.  4). 

78.  But  ...  no  Beast]  Richard’s  reasoning  seems  to  be  that  if  to  know  some 
trace  of  pity  be  the  mark  of  a  beast,  inasmuch  as  he  does  not  show  that  mark  he 
cannot  be  a  beast.  Anne’s  next  remark  applies  to  the  first  part  of  his  speech; 
she  hardly  hears  its  ending. — Ed. 

81.  Vouchsafe  (diuine  perfection  of  a  Woman),  etc.]  Richardson  (p.  22): 
Here  also  we  may  observe  the  application  of  those  flatteries  and  apparent  obse¬ 
quiousness,  which,  if  they  cannot  take  effect  at  present,  otherwise  than  to  give 
higher  provocation,  yet  when  her  wrath  subsides,  will  operate  in  a  different  direc¬ 
tion,  and  tend  to  excite  that  vanity  which  is  the  predominant  disposition  of  her 
mind,  and  by  means  of  which  he  will  accomplish  his  purpose.  It  was  not  alone 
sufficient  to  provoke  her  anger  and  her  resentment  to  the  utmost,  in  order  that 
they  might  immediately  subside;  but,  by  alleging  apparent  reasons  for  change 
of  sentiment,  to  assist  them  in  their  decline.  Though  Lady  Anne  possesses  no 
decided,  determined  virtue,  yet  her  moral  nature,  uncultivated  as  it  appears,  would 


54 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Of  thefe  fuppofed  Crimes,  to  giue  me  leaue  82 

By  circumflance,  but  to  acquit  my  felfe. 

An.  Vouchfafe  (defus’d  infeflion  of  man)  84 


82.  fuppofed  Crimes']  Ff,  + ,  Knt,  Wh. 
i,  Huds.  Rife,  fuppofed  euills  Qq,  Var. 
’73  et  cet. 

83.  acquit]  acquite  Qq. 


84.  Vouchfafe]  Voechfafe  Qa. 

defus'd]  Qq,  Cam. +  .  diffuf'd 
F3F4  et  cet. 

man]  a  man  Qq,Ff  et  seq. 


discern  impropriety  in  her  conduct;  would  suggest  scruples,  and  so  produce  hesita¬ 
tion.  Now,  in  order  to  prevent  the  effect  of  these,  it  was  necessary  to  aid  the  mind 
in  finding  subterfuge  or  excuse,  and  thus  assist  her  in  the  pleasing  business  of 
imposing  upon  herself.  Her  seducer  accordingly  endeavours  to  gloss  his  conduct, 
and  represents  himself  as  less  criminal  than  she  at  first  apprehended. — Boas 
(p.  151):  The  whole  process  of  this  wooing  is  a  masterpiece,  and  a  cardinal  illus¬ 
tration  of  Richard’s  methods.  With  complete  confidence  in  his  powers  he  makes 
no  attempt  to  smooth  away  difficulties,  but  lays  siege  to  Anne  under  what  seem 
wantonly  unfavourable  conditions.  Dissimulation  as  a  fine  art  cannot  go  further 
than  in  this  scene,  and  Richard  may  well,  as  soon  as  Anne’s  back  is  turned,  break 
into  ecstatic  self-congratulations. — Macready  (p.  142):  ‘Macready’s  courtship  of 
Lady  Anne,  though  by  no  means  the  most  successful  of  his  scenes,  is,  nevertheless, 
deserving  of  particular  mention  for  one  reason.  That  reason  is  that  it  was  con¬ 
ducted  in  a  spirit  of  assumed  sincerity,  and  with  a  total  disregard  of  those  sarcastic 
touches  which  tell  so  well  in  the  acting,  while  they  detract  from  the  consistency 
of  Richard’s  dissimulation.’ — J.  Haines  in  Morning  Chronicle,  London,  26  October, 
1819. 

82.  supposed  Crimes]  R.  G.  White:  If  evils  were  the  original  word,  the  change 
was  evidently  made  with  intention,  and  is  a  great  improvement;  for  it  opposes 
known  evils  to  supposed  crimes;  and  the  evils  which  Anne  actually  suffered,  and 
for  which  she  claims  the  right  to  curse,  were  the  direct  consequence  of  crimes 
which  Richard  calls  ‘supposed.’  By  the  change,  too,  Shakespeare  freed  the  line 
of  a  superfluous  and  harmful  syllable  in  a  part  of  the  verse  in  which  he  solicitously 
avoided  irregularity. 

84.  defus’d]  Johnson:  I  believe  ‘diffus’d’  in  this  place  signifies  irregular, 
uncouth;  such  is  its  meaning  in  other  passages  of  Shakespeare. — Steevens:  It 
may  mean,  ‘thou  that  art  as  dangerous  as  a  pestilence,  that  infects  the  air  by  its 
diffusion.’  It  may,  however,  mean  irregular.  So,  in  Merry  Wives:  ‘rush  at 
once  With  some  diffused  song,’  IV,  iv,  54.  Again  in  Greene’s  Farewell  to  Follie, 
1617:  ‘I  haue  seene  an  English  gentleman  so  defused  in  his  sutes;  his  doublet 
being  for  the  weare  of  Castile,  his  hose  for  Venice.’  [p.  253;  ed.  Grosart.  See 
also  Hen.  V:  V,  ii,  61:  ‘defused  attire  and  everything  that  seems  unnatural.’] 
— R.  G.  White:  I  suspect  that  ‘defus’d’  is  a  misprint  for  an  epithet  antithetical 
to  ‘divine’  in  Richard’s  speech.  If  ‘deprav'd  infection  of  a  man’  had  been  found 
in  any  old  copy,  I  think  that  it  would  have  been  adopted  without  question. — 
Wright:  ‘Defus’d  infection’  is  a  phrase  coined  to  match  ‘divine  perfection,’ 
and  the  play  upon  words  was  more  aimed  at  by  the  writer  than  their  appropriateness. 
‘Defused’  is  properly  disordered  and  must  here  mean  shapeless. — Webb:  The  word 
‘  defus’d  ’  would  have  more  point  if  taken,  not  from  di-,  in  various  directions,  and 
jusus,  poured,  but  in  the  sense  of  decocted,  giving  the  prefix  de-  its  usual  sense  of 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


55 

85 


Of  thefe  knowne  euils,  but  to  giue  me  leaue 
By  circumftance,  to  curfe  thy  curfed  Selfe. 

Rich.  Fairer  then  tongue  can  name  thee,  let  me  haue 
Some  patient  leyfure  to  excufe  my  felfe. 

An.  Fouler  then  heart  can  thinke  thee, 

Thou  can’ft  make  no  excufe  currant, 

But  to  hang  thy  felfe. 

Rich.  By  fuch  difpaire,  I  fhould  accufe  my  felfe. 

An.  And  by  difpairing  fhalt  thou  ftand  excufed, 

For  doing  worthy  Vengeance  on  thy  felfe, 

That  did’ft  vnworthy  daughter  vpon  others.  95 

Rich.  Say  that  I  flew  them  not. 


85.  Of]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope.  For  Qq  et 
cet. 

86.  curfe]  accuse  Spedding. 

89-91.  Fouler... felfe]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope. 

Two  lines,  ending  make.,  felfe  Qq  et 
cet. 

89.  heart]  art  Knt  i. 

90,  91.  currant ,  But  to...]  that  will 
be  currant,  Unless  thou...  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han. 


92.  difpaire]  defpaire  Q,Q2Fa.  dif- 
pare  Q4QS-  defpair  F3F4> 

93.  difpairing]  defpairing  ifYf.  dif- 
paring  Q^. 

fhalt ]  fhouldfl  Qq,  Cam.  4- ,  Huds. 

95.  That]  Which  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  Globe. 
did'Jl]  diddejl  Q4QS. 

96.  not.]  QjQj.g.Ff, +  .  not?  Q2  et 
cet. 

96,  97.  As  one  line,  Steev.  et  seq. 


from.  The  whole  phrase  would  then  mean  ‘essence  of  poison,’  as  if  she  looked 
upon  Richard  as  some  refinement  or  quintessence  of  villainy. — Barnard:  ‘Infec¬ 
tion’  is  a  word  regularly  used  of  the  ‘evil  eye.’  [See  note  on  line  50;  compare 
also  1.  168.] 

85.  euils]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  6):  I  suppose  it  was  for 
the  sake  of  the  metre  that  ‘evils’  was  not  changed  to  crimes  in  this  line  [see  Text. 
Notes,  1.  82].  It  could  not  have  been  done  without  some  further  alteration; 
and  as  the  necessary  alteration  could  have  involved  no  difficulty  for  the  author, 
it  must  be  admitted  to  be  more  like  the  work  of  a  corrector  who  was  not  the  author; 
although  the  corrector  of  this  play,  whoever  he  was,  has  shown  himself  quite  capable 
of  dealing  with  such  a  difficulty. 

88.  patient  leysure]  Compare,  for  a  somewhat  similar  construction,  ‘At  your 
kind’st  leisure,’  Macbeth,  II,  i,  24;  and:  ‘At  your  best  leisure,’  Jul.  Cces.,  Ill, 
i,  5.— Ed. 

90.  currant]  That  is,  genuine,  in  the  same  sense  as  the  word  is  now  applied  to 
money.  % 

93.  dispairing  .  .  .  excused]  Seymour:  This  argument  is  urged  to  Cromwell 
in  the  Introduction  to  the  famous  pamphlet,  Killing  No  Murder:  ‘Let  this  con¬ 
sideration  arm  and  fortify  your  highness’s  mind  against  the  fears  of  death  and 
the  terrors  of  an  evil  conscience,  that  the  good  you  shall  do  by  your  death  will,  in 
some  sort,  atone  for  the  evils  of  your  life.’ 

96-100.  Say  that  .  .  .  slaine  ...  I  did  not  .  .  .  aliue]  For  other  examples  ot 
apparent  Alexandrines  with  trimeter  couplets,  see  Abbott,  §  500. 


56 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  I,  sc.  ii. 


An.  Then  fay  they  were  not  flaine  :  97 

But  dead  they  are,  and  diuellifh  flaue  by  thee. 

Rich.  I  did  not  kill  your  Husband. 

An.  Why  then  he  is  aliue.  ioo 

Rich.  Nay,  he  is  dead,  and  flaine  by  Edwards  hands. 

An.  In  thy  foule  throat  thou  Ly’ft, 

Queene  Margaret  faw 

Thy  murd’rous  Faulchion  fmoaking  in  his  blood  : 

The  which,  thou  once  didd’ft  bend  againft  her  breft,  105 

But  that  thy  Brothers  beate  aflde  the  point. 

Rich.  I  was  prouoked  by  her  fland’rous  tongue, 

That  laid  their  guilt,  vpon  my  guiltleffe  Shoulders. 

An.  Thou  was’t  prouoked  by  thy  bloody  minde, 

That  neuer  dream’ft  on  ought  but  Butcheries:  HO 

Did’ ft  thou  not  kill  this  King  ? 

97.  Then...Jlaine]  Why  then  they  are 
not  dead  Qq,  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta. 

Cam.  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

99,  100.  As  one  line,  Steev.  et  seq. 

101.  hands ]  Ff,  +  .  hand  Qq  et  cet. 

102,  103.  In... faw]  Ff,  Rowe.  One 
line,  Qq  et  cet. 

102.  foule]  soul’s  Mai.  Steev.  Var. 

’03,  ’13.  • 

Ly’JT]  Ff, +  ,  Cap.  Var.  Mai. 
li’st  Wh.  i.  liejl  Qq  et  cet.  (subs.) 

103.  Margaret]  Marg’ret  Pope,  +  . 

104.  murd ’rous]  Ff,  +  .  bloudy  Q,Q2- 
bloodly  Q3_6.  bloody  Q  .  tnurth'rous 
Wh.  i.  murtherous  Rife,  murderous 
Var.  ’73  et  cet. 

Faulchion]  falchion  Coll,  et  seq. 


106.  thy]  my  Q7> 

Brothers]  brother  Q3-5. 

107.  prouoked]  provok’ d  F4> 
Jland'rous]  Jlaunderous  Q,.3. 

Jlanderous  Q4Q5>  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce, 
Cam. 

108.  no.  That]  Which  Qq,  Mai.  Sta. 
Cam.  Taw.  Webb,  Barn. 

108.  their]  her  Q?. 

110.  dream' Jl]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt. 
dreamt  Qq  et  cet. 

ought  ]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
Cap.  aught  Theob.  et  cet. 

111,  1 1 2.  Did’Jl...ye.]  As  one  line, 
Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’  13,  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce, 
Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Ktly,  Huds. 

III.  King  ?]  king.  Qx. 


99.  I  .  .  .  your  Husband]  See  note  on  I,  i,  166;  or  Jesse  {Mem.  0}  King 
Rich.),  p.  85  et  seq. 

101.  by  Edwards  hands]  Wright:  In  3  Hen.  VI:  V,  v,  Edward,  Clarence, 
and  Richard  all  stab  the  young  prince. 

104.  Faulchion]  Skeat  {Diet.):  This  word  may  have  been  really  taken  from 
the  French  jauchon,  and  afterwards  altered  to  falchion  by  the  influence  of  the 
Italian  or  Low  Latin  falci,  crude  form  of  falx,  a  sickle. 

105,  106.  The  which  .  .  .  the  point]  See  3  Hen.  VI:  V,  v,  41-43. 

105.  bend]  That  is,  direct,  aim.  For  numerous  examples  of  this  use  of  ‘bend,’ 
see  Schmidt  {Lex.).  Wright  quotes  Stow’s  Annales  (ed.  1580,  p.  1082)  ‘.  .  .  the 
next  morning,  he  bent  seauen  great  peeces  of  Ordinance  Culuerings,  and  Demi 
Canons,  against  the  foote  of  the  Bridge.’ — Tawney  calls  attention  to  a  similar 
use  of  Lat.  tendo. 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


57 
1 1 2 


Rich.  I  graunt  ye. 

An.  Do’ft  grant  me  Hedge-hogge, 

Then  God  graunt  me  too 
Thou  may’ft  be  damned  for  that  wicked  deede,  1 1 5 

O  he  was  gentle,  milde,  and  vertuous. 

Rich.  The  better  for  the  King  of  heauen  that  hath  him. 

An.  He  is  in  heauen,  where  thou  fhalt  neuer  come.  1 18 


1 1 2.  I  graunt  ]  I  did,  I  grant  Mar¬ 
shall. 

ye]  yea  Q,Q3.  yee  Q3_5.  ye,  yea 

Ritson. 

113,  1 14.  Do'Jl...too]  Ff,  Rowe.  One 
line,  Qq  et  cet. 


113.  Hedge-hogge,]  hedge-hog?  Pope 
et  seq. 

1 1 5.  damned]  damnd  Q,Q3. 

1 1 7.  better]  Ff,  Rowe,  fitter  Qq  et 
cet. 


1 1 2.  I  graunt  ye]  ‘He  slewe  with  his  owne  handes  king  Henry  the  sixt,  being 
prisoner  in  the  tower,  as  menne  constantly  saye,  and  that  without  commaundmente 
or  knoweledge  of  the  king  .  . .  ’ — More,  p.  9. — ‘The  occasion  of  the  murder  of  Henry 
VI.  hath  no  other  proof  but  the  malitious  affirmation  of  one  man;  for  many  other 
men  more  truly  did  suppose  that  he  died  of  mere  grief  and  melancholy,  when  he 
heard  the  overthrow  of  his  cause  and  friends,  with  the  slaughter  of  the  prince  his 
son:  and  Johannes  Majerus  saith  it  was  reported,  King  Henry  VI.  died  of  grief 
and  thought.’ — Buck,  bk,  iii,  81. — Wessels  (p.  13):  It  appears  that  the  murder 
of  Henry  is  imputed  to  Richard  more  upon  vague  reports  than  any  sufficient  ground, 
and,  moreover,  it  seems  difficult  to  explain  why  Richard  should  have  committed 
so  foul  a  deed  from  which  he  could  not  derive  any  advantage  for  himself.  Edward 
and  even  Clarence  were  much  more  interested  in  it.  According  to  Shakespeare, 
Richard  is  concerned  in  the  death  because  Henry  stands  between  him  and  the 
crown,  but  in  reality  there  is  no  proof  whatever,  not  even  any  probability,  that 
Richard  should  have  begun  to  covet  the  crown  as  early  as  King  Henry’s  death. 

1 13.  Hedge-hogge]  Tawney  gives  as  a  reason  for  Anne’s  use  of  this  epithet 
that  ‘  the  hedge-hog  was  an  ill-omened  beast,  ’  but  was  it  not  also  the  hump-backed 
appearance  of  that  animal  which  suggested  its  application  to  ‘crook-backed  Rich¬ 
ard.’  And  may  there  not  be  also  a  subaudition  of  Richard’s  crest?  See  I,  iii, 
237. — Ed. 

117.  The  better  .  .  .  him]  Steevens:  Compare  Pericles,  IV,  i,  10:  ‘I’ll  do  ’t: 
but  yet  she  is  a  goodly  creature.  The  fitter  then  the  gods  should  have  her.’ — 
Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  158):  ‘So  much  the  better  is  it  for  the  King  of  Heaven 
who  has  him,’  replies  Gloucester  in  frivolous  mockery  of  the  praise  which  Anne 
has  given  to  the  dead  King.  But  the  Anonymous  Corrector,  by  changing  this 
to  the  fitter,  weakens  and  anticipates,  by  this  tautology,  a  thought  amplified  by 
Gloucester  in  his  next  speech:  ‘he  was  fitter  for  that  place  than  earth.’  [Might 
not  ‘the  better’  refer  to  King  Henry? — Ed.] 

1 18.  heauen  .  .  .  come]  There  is  a  curious  resemblance  between  this  line 
and  some  lines  in  a  Scottish  ballad,  The  Daemon  Lover:  ‘  “O  yon  are  the  hills 
of  Heaven”  he  said  “Where  you  will  never  win.”  ’ — Child,  pt.  viii,  p.  360,  where 
the  editor  says  that  this  ballad  was  first  published  in  Scott’s  Minstrelsy,  5th 
Edition,  18x2. — Ed. 


58 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Rich.  Let  him  thanke  me,  that  holpe  to  fend  him  thi¬ 
ther  :  120 

For  he  was  fitter  for  that  place  then  earth. 

An.  And  thou  vnfit  for  any  place,  but  hell. 

Rich.  Yes  one  place  elfe,  if  you  will  heare  me  name  it. 

An.  Some  dungeon. 

Rich.  Your  Bed-chamber.  125 

An.  Ill  reft  betide  the  chamber  where  thou  lyeft. 

Rich.  So  will  it  Madam,  till  I  lye  with  you. 

An.  I  hope  fo. 

Rich.  I  know  fo.  But  gentle  Lady  Anne, 

To  leaue  this  keene  encounter  of  our  wittes,  130 


1 1 9.  holpe']  help' d  Pope,  + .  holp  Cap. 
Var.  ’73  et  seq. 

123.  you]  ye  Qj-j. 

124.  125.  As  one  line,  Steev.  Var.  ’03, 
’13,  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Ktly, 
Huds. 

dungeon.]  dungeon ,  perhaps. 
Steev.  conj. 

125.  Bed-chafnber]  bedchamber  QtQa. 


127.  till ]  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Var.  ’73.  'till  F2  et  cet. 

128.  129.  I  hope... Anne]  QqFf,  +  , 
Cap.  Var.  Mai.  Knt,  Sta.  As  one  line, 
Steev.  et  cet. 

129.  I]  And  I  Han. 

fo.  But  ]  fo,  but  Qq. 

130.  keene]  Qt.  kinde  Qq  (subs.  ) 
our]  your  Q7Q8- 


1 19.  holpe]  Wright:  This  form,  both  of  the  preterite  and  the  participle,  is 
the  more  common  in  Shakespeare. 

129.  But  .  .  .  Anne]  Richardson  (p.  26):  Richard  was  well  aware  that  a 
declaration  of  love  from  him  would,  of  course,  renew  her  indignation.  He  accord¬ 
ingly  manages  her  mind  in  such  a  manner  as  to  soften  its  violence,  by  suggesting 
the  idea  of  his  passion,  in  the  part  of  the  dialogue  containing,  in  his  language, 
the  ‘keen  encounter  of  their  wits,’  as  a  matter  not  altogether  serious;  and  after¬ 
wards  when  he  announces  it  more  seriously,  by  mentioning  it,  as  it  were,  by  chance 
and  indirectly.  Still,  however,  with  those  precautions  to  introduce  the  thought 
with  an  easy  and  familiar  appearance,  it  must  excite  violent  indignation.  Here, 
therefore,  as  in  the  former  part  of  the  scene,  he  must  have  recourse  to  the  same 
command  of  temper,  and  of  the  same  means  of  artfully  irritating  her  emotion, 
till  it  entirely  subsides.  Accordingly,  he  adheres  without  deviation  to  his  plan; 
he  persists  in  his  adulation;  provokes  her  anger  to  its  utmost  excess;  and,  finally, 
by  varying  the  attitudes  of  his  flatteries,  by  assuming  an  humble  and  suppliant 
address,  he  subdues  and  restores  her  soul  to  the  ruling  passion.  In  the  close  of 
the  dialogue  the  decline  of  her  emotion  appears  distinctly  traced.  It  follows 
the  same  course  as  the  passion  she  expresses  in  the  beginning  of  the  scene.  She 
is  at  first  violent;  becomes  more  violent;  her  passion  subsides;  yet,  some  ideas  of 
propriety  wandering  across  her  mind,  she  makes  an  effort  to  recall  her  resentment. 
The  effort  is  feeble;  it  only  enables  her  to  express  contempt  in  her  aspect;  and  at 
last  she  becomes  the  prey  of  her  vanity.  In  the  concluding  part  of  the  dialogue 
she  does  not,  indeed,  directly  comply  with  the  suit  of  Richard,  but  indicates  plainly 
that  total  change  in  her  disposition  which  it  was  his  purpose  to  produce. 

130.  To  leaue  .  .  .  wittes]  The  Cowden-Clarkes:  The  dialogue  here  in  its 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


59 

131 


And  fall  fomething  into  a  flower  method. 

Is  not  the  caufer  of  the  timeleffe  deaths 
Of  thefe  Plantagenets ,  Henrie  and  Edward , 

As  blamefull  as  the  Executioner. 

An.  Thou  was’t  the  caufe,  and  moft  accurfl:  effe<5t.  135 


131.  fomething]  Ff,  +  ,  Coll.  Wh.  i, 
Hal.  Rife,  fomewhat  Qq,  Var.  ’73  et 
cet. 

132.  timeleffe]  teem-leffe  Q4. 

134.  Executioner.]  Qt.  executioner  ? 
QqFf  et  seq. 


135.  was' l  ]  FaF3.  ar/Qq, Cam. Globe, 
Taw.  Webb,  wafl  F4  et  cet. 

and]  of  that  Edwards  (Supple¬ 
ment,  Canons  of  Crit.) 

effetfl]  th' effect  Han.  Huds. 


smartness  of  retort  and  brisk  interchange  of  repartee  partakes  much  of  the  style  of 
Love's  Labour’s  Lost,  which  is  confirmatory  of  our  opinion  respecting  the  early  date 
at  which  the  present  play  was  written. — Lloyd:  I  doubt  whether  the  exact  extent 
to  which  it  is  true  that  the  lady’s  retorts  had  ceased  to  be  expressions  of  living 
hate  and  indignation  can  be  truly  appreciated  in  reading,  or  otherwise  than  as 
heard  with  the  natural  emphasis  that  they  command  for  themselves  when  spoken 
and  with  the  gestures  visible  that  they  inspire  in  an  accomplished  and  sensitive 
performer.  It  is  not  that  the  poet  leaves  blanks  and  vacancies  to  be  filled  up  by 
actors,  adding  to  the  delineation  somewhat  of  their  own  which  the  words  do  not 
define  and  prescribe  for  them,  but  that  there  is  some  histrionic  illustration  pre¬ 
scribed  by  the  words  which  only  makes  itself  felt,  and  breaks  forth  into  expression 
in  the  heat  and  urgency  of  actual  realization.  It  was  for  the  actual  scene  that  the 
plays  were  written,  and  the  conveniences  of  readers  are  forgotten  and  sacrificed 
while  security  is  taken  against  undue  exaggeration  there.  [This  note  by  Lloyd 
seems  almost  to  have  been  written  in  answer  to  Lamb  in  his  Essay  On  the 
Tragedies  0}  Shakespeare:  ‘It  may  seem  a  paradox,  but  I  cannot  help  being  of 
opinion  that  the  plays  of  Shakespeare  are  less  calculated  for  performance  on  a 
stage  than  those  of  almost  any  dramatist  whatever.  Their  distinguishing  excel¬ 
lence  is  a  reason  that  they  should  be  so.  There  is  so  much  in  them  which  comes 
not  under  the  province  of  acting,  with  which  eye,  and  tone,  and  gesture,  have 
nothing  to  do.’ — Works,  iii,  20. — Ed.] 

130.  our]  The  reading  of  Q7  your  might  possibly  have  occurred  through  the 
resemblance  of  the  written  f  in  ‘of,’  to  y.  In  general,  Q7  follows  Q5. 

131.  something]  For  other  examples  of  ‘something,’  see  Walker,  Crit.  i,  222. 

131.  slower]  Steevens:  As  quick  was  put  for  spritely,  so  ‘slower’  was  put  for 
serious.  In  the  next  scene  Lord  Grey  desires  the  Queen  to  ‘cheer  his  grace  with 
quick  and  merry  words.’ 

132.  timelesse]  Wright:  This  appears  to  have  been  a  favourite  word  with 
Shakespeare  in  his  early  days,  for  it  occurs  in  Lucrece ,  [1.  44]  and  in  those  plays 
which  must  be  referred  to  this  first  period  of  his  career. 

135.  cause  .  .  .  effedt]  Warburton:  ‘Effect’  for  executioner.  He  asks  was 
not  the  causer  as  ill  as  the  executioner?  She  answers,  thou  wast  both.  But, 
for  causer,  using  the  word  ‘cause,’  this  led  her  to  the  word  ‘effect,’  for  execution, 
‘executioner.’  But  Hanmer  will  make  a  fine  oratorical  period  of  it.  [See  Text. 
Notes.] — Johnson:  I  cannot  but  be  rather  of  Hanmer’s  opinion  than  Warburton’s, 


6o 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Rich.  Your  beauty  was  the  caufe  of  that  effe<5t :  136 

Your  beauty,  that  did  haunt  me  in  my  fleepe, 

To  vndertake  the  death  of  all  the  world, 

So  I  might  liue  one  houre  in  your  fweet  bofome. 

An.  If  I  thought  that,  I  tell  thee  Homicide,  140 

Thefe  Nailes  fhould  rent  that  beauty  from  my  Cheekes. 

137.  that ]  Ff,  Rowe,  +  ,  Knt,  Coll.  139.  liue]  rejl  Qq.  lie  Lettsom  ap. 

Sing.  Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Huds.  which  Qq,  Dyce  ii. 

Var.  ’73  et  cet.  one ]  that  Qs. 

14 1,  rent  ]  Ff.  rend  Qq  et  cet. 


because  effect  is  used  immediately  in  its  common  sense,  in  answer  to  this  line. — 
Capell:  ‘Thou  wast  the  causer,  and  most  accurs’d  efiecter’  of  the  deaths  above 
mention’d.  Thus  interpreted,  the  execration  is  direct  gainst  her  enemy’s  person; 
and  that  it  might  be  so,  was  probably  the  temptation  for  putting  a  constraint,  which 
is  us’d  presently  as  it  ought:  was  it  so  in  this  place  (as  it  is  made  by  an  alteration 
contended  for)  [see  Text.  Notes ]  there  seems  something  of  impropriety,  if  not 
absurdity,  in  the  epithet’s  application. — Steevens:  I  believe  the  obvious  sense 
is  the  true  one.  So  in  the  Yorkshire  Tragedy,  1608:  ‘thou  art  cause,  Effect,  quality, 
property;  thou,  thou,  thou’  [p.  281,  col.  a.  Folio  1685].  Again,  Sidney’s  Arcadia, 
Bk,  ii:  ‘Both  cause,  effect,  beginning,  and  the  ende  Are  all  in  me’  [p.  241  vers. 
1590;  ed.  Sommers.] — The  Cowden-Clarkes:  That  is:  Thou  wast  the  cause 
and  this  was  thy  ‘most  accurs’d  effect’;  ‘effect’  being  here  used  for  deed,  or  that 
which  was  effected. — Marshall:  ‘Effect’  has  here  the  meaning  of  agent  some¬ 
what  as  in  expressions  like:  ‘I’ll  be  the  death  of  him.’  The  word  ‘effect’  is  used 
because  of  its  occurrence  in  the  next  line,  in  order  to  make  a  sort  of  antithesis 
between  the  two  speeches. — Vaughan  (iii,  13):  I  think  that  ‘effect’  means  the 
immediate  effect  of  the  first  cause,  and  the  immediate  cause  of  the  final  effect — in 
fact,  the  second  cause,  or,  as  Shakespeare  calls  it  sometimes,  ‘the  second  means.’ 
‘Effect’  has  elsewhere  this  sense  of  direct  second  cause,  as  in  Tro.  &  Cress.,  V,  iii, 
108:  ‘Words,  words,  mere  words,  no  matter  from  the  heart,  The  effect  doth  operate 
another  way.’  Schmidt  {Lex.)  interprets  ‘effect’  as  here  meaning  performance , 
realization,  the  abstract  for  the  concrete. — Wright:  It  is  difficult  in  such  a  quib¬ 
bling  dialogue  to  attach  very  strict  meanings  to  the  words  employed.  ‘Cause 
and  effect’  would  seem  to  be  used  as  a  comprehensive  phrase  to  denote  the  whole 
of  any  action  from  beginning  to  end,  and  Anne  perhaps  means  to  imply  that  the 
murder  of  Henry  and  his  son  was  altogether  the  work  of  Richard,  who  was  both 
prompter  and  executioner.  We  have  other  instances  of  this  play  upon  words 
in  Hamlet,  II,  ii,  101-103. 

140.  Homicide]  According  to  Murray  {N.  E.  D.),  this  word  is  applied  both  to 
the  act  and  to  the  agent,  among  early  writers,  in  about  equal  proportion;  Shakes¬ 
peare  uses  it,  however,  in  reference  to  the  agent  only.  Compare  Macbeth,  III,  i,  32, 
where  ‘parricide’  is  used  for  the  act. — Ed. 

141.  rent]  Wright:  This  is  the  frequent  form  of  the  word  [rend]  in  the  Author¬ 
ised  Version  of  1611,  although  in  modern  editions  it  is  only  found  in  Jeremiah, 
iv,  30:  ‘Though  thou  rentest  thy  face  with  painting.’  It  occurs  several  times 
in  Shakespeare. 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


6l 


Rich.  Thefe  eyes  could  not  endure  y  beauties  wrack,  142 
You  fhould  not  blemifh  it,  if  I  flood  by  ; 

As  all  the  world  is  cheared  by  the  Sunne, 

So  I  by  that  :  It  is  my  day,  my  life.  145 

An.  Blacke  night  ore-fhade  thy  day,  &  death  thy  life. 

Rich.  Curfe  not  thy  felfe  faire  Creature, 

Thou  art  both. 

An.  I  would  I  were,  to  be  reueng’d  on  thee. 

Rich.  It  is  a  quarrell  moft  vnnaturall,  150 

To  be  reueng’d  on  him  that  loueth  thee. 

An.  It  is  a  quarrell  iuft  and  reafonable, 

To  be  reueng’d  on  him  that  kill’d  my  Husband. 

Rich.  He  that  bereft  the  Lady  of  thy  Husband, 

Did  it  to  helpe  thee  to  a  better  Husband.  155 

An.  His  better  doth  not  breath  vpon  the  earth. 

Rich.  He  hues,  that  loues  thee  better  then  he  could. 

An.  Name  him. 

Rich.  Plantagenct. 

An.  Why  that  was  he.  160 

Rich.  The  felfefame  name,  but  one  of  better  Nature. 

An.  Where  is  he  ? 

Rich.  Heere :  Spits  at  him.  163 


142.  not ]  neuer  Qq,  Cam.  Taw. 
y\fweet  Qq,  Theob. Warb.  Johns. 

Cam.  Taw.  Barn,  that  F3F4  et  cet. 

wrack]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob. 
i,  Wh.  i,  Rife,  wreck  Theob.  ii  et  cet. 

143.  it~\  them  Qq. 

146.  ore-Jhade]  ouerfhade  Qq.  o' re- 
-Jhade  F3F4. 

147,  148.  Curfe...both]  Ff,  Rowe. 
One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

149.  reueng'd]  reuengde  Q3_s. 

1 5 1 .  reueng'd]  reuengde  Q4QS- 
thee ]  you  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

153.  kill'd  ~\Jlew  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  Globe, 
Taw. 


154.  the]  F2F3.  thee  Qq,F4  et  cet. 

156.  b  reath]  Qq,  Cap.  breathe  Ff  et  cet. 

157.  He]  Go  too,  he  Qq  (subs.) 
thee]  you  Qq,  Varr.  Mai.  Steev. 

Varr.  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Sta.  Cam. +  . 

158-160.  Name... he]  One  line,  Steev. 
et  seq, 

162-164.  Where ...  me]  One  line, 
Steev.  et  seq. 

162.  he?]  he.  Q4. 

163,  164.  Heere :  ...me.]  One  line, 
Pope,  +  ,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai. 

163.  Rich.]  Om.  F2. 

Spits...]  She  fpitteth...  Qq  (after 
he.  line  162,  Qt). 


163.  Spits  at  him]  Seymour:  This  indelicate  action  Rosalind  was  not  ashamed 
either  to  commit  or  tell  us  of.  [/Is  You  Like  It,  III,  ii,  438.] — Barnard  (See  note 
1.  50  supra):  Anne  spits  to  avert  the  ‘infection’  of  the  evil  eye.  Spitting  was  be¬ 
lieved  to  be  a  preventive  against  fascination,  as  against  other  forms  of  danger 
or  ill  luck.  [This  is  not  the  usual  form  of  stage-direction,  in  a  prompter’s  copy. 
It  is  not  mandatory,  but  descriptive. — Ed.] 


62 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  I,  sc.  ii. 


Why  doll:  thou  fpit  at  me. 

An.  Would  it  were  mortall  poyfon,  for  thy  fake.  165 

Rich.  Neuer  came  poyfon  from  fo  fweet  a  place. 

An.  Neuer  hung  poyfon  on  a  fowler  Toade. 

Out  of  my  fight,  thou  doft  infe<5l  mine  eyes. 

Rich.  Thine  eyes  (fweet  Lady)  haue  infefted  mine. 

An.  Would  they  were  Bafiliskes,  to  ftrike  thee  dead.  1 70 
Rich.  I  would  they  were,  that  I  might  dye  at  once  : 

164.  thou]  Om.  Q7Q8.  167.  fowler ]  fouler  Ff. 

me.]  mee?  Qq.  him?  Qg.  1 68.  mine]  my  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

165.  Would]  ’  Would Cap.  Mai.  Steev.  170.  Would]  'Would  Cap.  Var.  ’78, 

Varr.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly.  ’85,  Mai.  Ran.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Coll. 

166.  a]  Om.  Rowe  i.  Sing.  Ktly. 

165.  mortall  poyson]  Grey  (ii,  56):  An  allusion  probably  to  the  Sultan  of 
Cambaya,  who  did  eat  poison  from  his  cradle,  and  was  of  that  poisonous  nature 
that  when  he  was  determined  to  put  any  nobleman  to  death,  he  had  him  stript 
naked,  spit  upon  him,  and  he  instantly  died. 

167.  poyson  .  .  .  Toade]  ‘All  manner  of  toads,  both  of  the  earth  and  water 
are  venomous,  although  it  be  held  that  the  toads  of  the  earth  are  more  poysonful 
than  the  toads  of  the  water  .  .  .  But  the  toads  of  the  land,  which  do  descend  into  the 
marishes,  and  so  live  in  both  elements,  are  most  venomous,  and  the  hotter  the 
country  is  the  more  full  are  they  of  poyson.’ — Topsel,  p.  730. 

170.  Basiliskes]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.):  A  fabulous  reptile,  also  called  a 
cockatrice,  alleged  to  be  hatched  by  a  serpent  from  a  cock’s  egg;  ancient  authors 
stated  that  its  hissing  drove  away  all  other  serpents,  and  that  its  breath,  and 
even  its  look,  was  fatal.  So  called,  says  Pliny,  from  a  spot  resembling  a  crown 
on  its  head;  mediaeval  authors  furnished  it  with  ‘a  certain  combe  or  coronet.’ 
[‘  There  is  some  question  amongst  writers  about  the  generation  of  this  serpent  [the 
Cockatrice,  or  Basilisk]:  for  some  affirm  him  to  be  brought  forth  of  a  cock’s 
egg  .  .  .  which  egg  set  upon  by  a  snake  or  a  toad  bringeth  forth  the  Cockatrice, 
being  half  a  foot  in  length,  the  hinder-part  like  a  snake,  the  former  part  like  a 
cock,  because  of  a  treble  combe  on  his  forehead.  .  .  .  Among  all  living  creatures, 
there  is  none  that  perisheth  sooner  than  doth  a  man  by  the  poyson  of  a  cockatrice, 
for  with  his  sight  he  killeth  him,  because  the  beams  of  the  Cockatrices  eyes  do 
corrupt  the  visible  spirit  of  a  man,  which  visible  spirit  corrupted  all  the  other 
spirits  coming  from  the  brain  and  life  of  the  heart  are  thereby  corrupted,  and  so 
the  man  dyeth.’ — Topsel,  Hist.  0 /  Serpents,  p.  677. — For  an  interesting  ‘sense- 
history  ’  of  the  word  Cockatrice,  see  Murray,  s.  v.] 

171.  I  would  they  were]  Hazlitt  (Sh.  Char.,  149):  Kean’s  courtship  scene 
with  Lady  Anne  is  an  admirable  exhibition  of  smooth  and  smiling  villainy.  The 
progress  of  wily  adulation,  of  encroaching  humility,  is  finely  marked  by  his  action, 
voice,  and  eye.  He  seems,  like  the  first  Tempter,  to  approach  his  prey  secure 
of  the  event,  and  as  if  success  had  smoothed  his  way  before  him.  Cooke’s  manner 
of  representing  this  scene  was  more  vehement,  hurried,  and  full  of  anxious  uncer¬ 
tainty.  This,  though  more  natural  in  general,  was  less  in  character  in  this  partic¬ 
ular  instance.  Richard  should  woo  not  as  a  lover  but  as  an  actor — to  show  his 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


63 

172 


For  now  they  kill  me  with  a  liuing  death. 

Thofe  eyes  of  thine,  from  mine  haue  drawne  fait  Teares  ; 

Sham’d  their  Afpe£ts  with  ftore  of  childifh  drops  : 

Thefe  eyes,  which  neuer  fhed  remorfefull  teare,  175 

172.  they]  thy  05.  1 74.  Afpeetls]  afpedl  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. 

kill]  kit/  F,.  Glo.  + . 

175-186.  Thefe... weeping.]  Om.  Qq. 

mental  superiority,  and  power  of  making  others  the  playthings  of  his  will. — [Horn 
(iii,  140)  and  Oechelhauser  ( Einfiihrungen ,  p.  155)  both  think  that  it  is  the 
situation  which  here  appeals  to  Anne  more  than  what  Richard  says  to  her.  The 
idea  of  a  deadly  enemy  thus  suing  to  her,  and  kneeling  as  a  suppliant  at  her 
feet,  has  more  effect  towards  moving  her  than  even  the  sword,  thrust  into  her  hands 
accompanied  by  the  request  for  death,  if  she  think  it  deserved.  Richardson’s 
analysis  of  Anne’s  character  (see  I,  ii,  1;  129)  is,  I  think,  a  much  more  satisfactory 
explanation. — Ed.] — Moulton  (p.  98):  Such  a  scene  as  the  wooing  scene  might 
be  impossible  as  a  fragment;  it  becomes  possible  enough  in  the  play,  where  it  has  to 
be  taken  in  connection  with  the  rest  of  the  plot,  throughout  which  the  irresistibility 
of  the  hero  is  prominent  as  one  of  the  chief  threads  of  connection.  Nor  is  it  any 
objection  that  the  Wooing  Scene  comes  early  in  the  action.  The  play  is  not  the 
book,  but  the  actor’s  interpretation  on  the  stage,  and  the  actor  will  have  collected 
even  from  the  latest  scenes  elements  of  the  interpretation  which  he  throws  into  the 
earliest.  The  fascination  of  irresistibility,  then,  which  is  to  act  by  instinct  in  every 
scene,  may  be  arrived  at  analytically  when  we  survey  the  play  as  a  whole — when 
we  see  how,  by  Richard’s  innate  genius,  by  the  reversal  in  him  of  the  ordinary 
relation  of  human  nature  to  crime,  especially  by  his  perfect  mastery  of  the  successive 
situations  as  they  arise,  the  dramatist  steadily  builds  up  an  irresistibility  which 
becomes  a  secret  force  clinging  to  Richard’s  presence,  and  through  the  operation 
of  which  his  feats  are  half  accomplished  by  the  fact  of  his  attempting  them. 

172.  a  liuing  death]  Steevens:  The  same  conceit  occurs  in  the  Trimming 
of  Thomas  Nash,  1597:  ‘How  happy  the  rat,  caught  in  a  trap,  and  there  dies  a 
living  death.’  Again  in  Watson’s  Sonnets,  1580:  ‘Loue  is  a  sowr  delight;  a  sugred 
greefe,  a  liuinge  death’  [Hekatompathia,  Sonnet  xviii. — ed.  Arber]. — Malone: 
Compare  also  ‘For  I  have  heard  it  is  a  life  in  death  That  laughs  and  weeps,  and 
all  but  with  a  breath.’  Ven.  &  Ad.,  11.  412-414. 

173.  Those  eyes  of  thine]  Abbott  (§  239):  This  of  yours,  is  now,  as  in  early 
English,  generally  applied  to  one  out  of  a  class,  whether  the  class  exist  or  be  imag¬ 
inary  ...  It  is,  however,  commonly  used  by  Shakespeare  where  even  the  con¬ 
ception  of  a  class  is  impossible.  [Compare:]  ‘Will  not  a  calf  skin  stop  that 
mouth  of  thine?’  King  John,  III,  i,  299. 

175-186.  These  eyes  .  .  .  weeping]  Wright:  This  passage  was  perhaps  added 
by  Shakespeare  to  the  original  draft  of  the  play. — Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  p.  132) 
sees  in  this  passage  another  evidence  of  Shakespeare’s  desire  to  unite  the  three 
parts  of  Henry  VI.  with  Richard  III.  As  a  reason  for  its  omission  from  the  Quartos, 
Delius  points  out  that  Richard  III.  had  been  more  successful  than  the  trilogy  and 
could  therefore  stand  alone  without  aid.  For  further  discussion  on  these  lines,  see 
Appendix,  Pickersgill  on  the  Text. — Ed. 

175.  These  eyes]  Wright:  Compare  3  Hen.  VI:  II,  i,  79,  where  Richard, 


64 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 


No,  when  my  Father  Yorke,  and  Edward  wept,  176 

To  heare  the  pittious  moane  that  Rutland  made 
When  black-fac’d  Clifford  fhooke  his  fword  at  him. 

Nor  when  thy  warlike  Father  like  a  Childe, 

Told  the  fad  ftorie  of  my  Fathers  death,  180 

And  twenty  times,  made  paufe  to  fob  and  weepe: 

That  all  the  ftanders  by  had  wet  their  cheekes 
Like  Trees  bedafh’d  with  raine.  In  that  fad  time, 

My  manly  eyes  did  fcorne  an  humble  teare  : 

And  what  thefe  forrowes  could  not  thence  exhale,  185 

Thy  Beauty  hath,  and  made  them  blinde  with  weeping. 

I  neuer  fued  to  Friend,  nor  Enemy : 

My  Tongue  could  neuer  learne  fweet  fmoothing  word.  188 


176.  No,]  Not  Pope, +  ,  Cap.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 

wept,]  wept.  F3F4. 

179.  thy ]  my  F3F4. 

183.  bedajh' d]  be-da/h' d  F3F4,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 


1 83.  raine.  In]  rain :  in  F3F4  et 
seq. 

188.  Tongue]  lougue  Qs> 

fmoothing]  foothing  Qq,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta. 

word.]  words:  Qq,  Rowe,  +  , 
Sta.  Cam.  + ,  Huds. 


after  hearing  the  news  of  the  slaughter  of  his  father  and  brother,  exclaims:  ‘I 
cannot  weep;  for  all  my  body’s  moisture  Scarce  serves  to  quench  my  furnace¬ 
burning  heart.’  In  the  same  scene  the  news  is  announced  not  by  Warwick,  as  here 
represented,  but  by  a  messenger. 

176.  No]  Malone:  The  same  phraseology  occurs  in  a  subsequent  passage: 
‘  I  hope  he  is  much  grown  since  last  I  saw  him.  But  I  hear  no’  (II,  iv,  8).  [Dyce 
(ed.  ii)  declines  to  accept  any  similarity  between  these  two  passages,  as  does  also 
the  present  Ed.] 

177.  Rutland]  Barnard:  This  allusion  to  the  scene  of  Rutland’s  death  is 
unhistorical,  for  at  that  time  York  was  either  dead  or  a  prisoner  at  the  point  of 
execution,  while  Edward  was  in  Herefordshire,  and  Gloucester  in  London.  [Poly- 
dore  Vergil,  Hall,  and  Holinshed  have  undoubtedly  neglected  to  mention  the  fact 
that  Edward  and  York  heard,  at  the  same  moment,  of  the  murder  of  Rutland; 
but  then  these  same  chroniclers  have  also  omitted  any  account  of  this  wooing 
of  Anne.  Since,  then,  it  is  a  fictitious  Richard  who  is  here  speaking,  why  should 
he  be  restricted  to  historic  accuracy? — Ed.] 

182.  That]  For  omission  of  so  before  ‘that’  see,  if  necessary,  Abbott, 
§  283. 

183.  bedash’d]  Rolfe  calls  attention  to  this  as  the  only  appearance  of  this 
word  in  Shakespeare. 

185.  exhale]  See  1.  64  supra. 

188.  smoothing]  Wright:  That  is,  flattering;  ‘soothing’  as  in  the  Qq  is  used 
in  the  same  sense.  Compare  I,  iii,  311,  and  Coriol.,  II,  ii,  77:  ‘You  soothed 
not,  therefore  hurt  not.’  In  Bunyan’s  Holy  War  Mrs.  Soothe-up  is  the  wife  of 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


65 


But  now  thy  Beauty  is  propos’d  my  Fee, 

My  proud  heart  fues,  and  prompts  my  tongue  to  fpeake. 

She  lookes  fcornfully  at  him. 
Teach  not  thy  lip  fuch  Scorne  ;  for  it  was  made 
For  killing  Lady,  not  for  fuch  contempt. 

If  thy  reuengefull  heart  cannot  forgiue, 

Loe  heere  I  lend  thee  this  fharpe-pointed  Sword, 

Which  if  thou  pleafe  to  hide  in  this  true  breft, 

And  let  the  Soule  forth  that  adoreth  thee, 

I  lay  it  naked  to  the  deadly  ftroke, 

And  humbly  begge  the  death  vpon  my  knee. 

He  layes  his  brejl  open,flie  offers  at  with  his  /word. 


190 


195 


200 


191.  She. ..him.]  Om.  Qq. 

192.  lip. ..it  it/rtj]  lips. ..they  were  Qq, 
Cam.  +. 

194.  forgiue, ]  forgive,  [kneels  and 
gives  his  sword.  Cap. 

1 95-  fharpe-pointed ]  fharpe  pointed 
Qq. 

196.  this  true ]  true  this  Q3. 


196.  brefl]  Fa.  bofome  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 
breafl  F3F4  et  cet. 

197.  forth ]  fourth  Fa. 
adoreth]  adorneth  Q7Qg. 

198.  the]  thy  Q6F3. 

199.  knee']  knees  Q8. 

200.  He...fword.]  Om.  Qq. 
at]  at  it  Ff  et  seq. 


Mr.  Flatter.  [Compare  also  I,  iii,  54:  ‘Smile  in  mens  faces,  smooth,  deceive, 
and  cogge.’ — Ed.] 

189.  But  now]  For  other  examples  of  the  omission  of  that  after  ‘now,’  see 
Abbott,  §  284  (p.  194). 

192.  thy  lip  such  Scorne]  In  speaking  would  it  not  be  difficult — almost  impos¬ 
sible — to  distinguish  between  ‘thy  lip  such  scorn’  of  the  Folios  and  thy  ‘lips 
such  scorn’  of  the  Qq?  The  pronoun  following  would,  of  course,  decide  by  its 
number,  whether  its  antecedent  were  singular  or  plural.  But  is  the  plural  to 
be  here  preferred?  Is  not  the  expression  of  scorn  or  contempt  restricted 
to  the  lower  lip?  Compare  Wint.  Tale,  I,  ii,  431;  where  Polixenes  tells 
Camillo  that  Leontes  ‘falling  a  lip  of  much  contempt,  speeds’  from  him. — 
Ed. 

196.  hide]  Tawney:  The  word  means  sheathe  in  As  You  Like  It,  II,  vii,  119. 
A bdo  is  used  by  Virgil  in  the  same  sense — AEneid,  ii,  553.  [Is  not  ‘sheathe,’  ex 
vi  termini,  a  peaceful  action?  It  is  so  certainly  in  Orlando’s  case,  where  ‘hide’ 
may  well  be  equivalent  to  it.  But  is  it  so  equivalent  here?  or  is  it  so  in  Virgil, 
when  Pyrrhus  plunged  his  sword  up  to  the  hilt  in  the  side  of  Polites? 
Shmthed  would  be  there,  I  think,  a  weak  translation  of  abdidit;  and  would 
be,  I  speak  in  all  modesty,  equally  so  here,  as  a  paraphrase  of  ‘hide.’ — • 
Ed.] 

199.  the  death]  Wright:  Used  technically  for  a  judicial  punishment,  as  in 
Henry  V:  IV,  i,  81:  ‘When  they  have  feared  the  death,  they  have  borne  life 
away.’  [For  other  examples  of  this  technical  use,  see  Schmidt  {Lex.),  or  Abbott, 
§92.] 


66 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Nay  do  not  paufe  :  For  I  did  kill  King  Henrie ,  20 1 

But  ’twas  thy  Beauty  that  prouoked  me. 

Nay  now  difpatch  :  ’Twas  I  that  ftabb’d  yong  E dward, 

But  ’twas  thy  Heauenly  face  that  fet  me  on. 

She  fals  the  Sword.  205 

Take  vp  the  Sword  againe,  or  take  vp  me. 

An.  Arife  Diffembler,  though  I  with  thy  death, 

I  will  not  be  thy  Executioner.  208 


201.  For...  Henrie]  twas  I  that  kild 
your  hufbattd  Qq,  Sta. 

Henrie]  Henry  F3F4> 

203.  Jlabb' d yong  Edward]  kild  king 
Henry  Qq,  Sta. 


203.  yong  ]  young  F  F(. 

205.  She  fals...]  Fa.  She  falls...  F3F4, 
+  .  She  throws  away...  Cap.  Here  She 
lets  fall...  Qq  et  cet.  (subs.) 

208.  thy]  the  Qq,  Cam.  Taw.  Barnard. 


201-203.  King  Henrie  .  .  .  yong  Edward]  The  Folio  reading  of  these  two 
speeches  by  Richard  is,  I  think,  dramatically  more  effective  than  that  of  the  Qq 
(see  Text.  Notes)-,  the  latter,  it  is  true,  preserves  the  correct  chronological  sequence 
of  the  murders  of  Edward  and  King  Henry,  but  is  it  not  somewhat  in  the  nature 
of  anticlimax  that  Richard  should  mention  first,  the  greater  cause  of  Anne’s 
hatred  ?  A  somewhat  similar  change  by  the  later  Qq  occurs  in  V,  iii,  166  and 
173,  where,  in  QjQa,  the  ghosts  of  the  two  young  Princes  appear  before  that  of 
Hastings;  but  as  all  the  other  ghosts  enter  in  the  order  of  their  murders,  Qs_g 
reverse  that  given  in  Q,Q2. — Ed. 

202.  thy  Beauty]  Johnson:  Shakespeare  countenances  the  observation  that 
no  woman  can  ever  be  offended  with  the  mention  of  her  beauty. 

203.  I  .  .  .  stabb’d]  See  notes  on  I,  i,  166. 

205.  fals  the  Sword]  For  other  examples  of  ‘fall’  used  transitively  compare 
V,  iii,  153;  190,  also  As  You  Like  It,  III,  v,  5;  and,  indeed,  Shakespeare  passim. 

206.  Take  vp]  Marshall:  This  line  is  perhaps  burlesqued  in  the  following  pas¬ 
sage  from  the  First  Part  of  Jeronimo:  ‘Take  up  thy  pen,  or  I’ll  take  up  thee.’ — 
Haz.  Dods.,  iv,  368.  [Is  there  not  a  confusion  of  dates  here?  In  the  preface  to 
Hazlitt’s  Dodsley,  p.  348,  in  a  footnote,  Gilchrist  says:  ‘It  appears  from  Hens- 
lowe’s  papers  that  the  Comedy  of  Hieronimo  was  played  by  the  Lord  Strange’s 
men  the  10th  April  1591.’  The  first  Quarto  of  Rich.  III.  bears  the  date  1597. 
Is  it  probable  that  Rich.  III.  was  so  well  known  six  years  earlier  that  a  line  in 
it  might  be  recognised  in  a  burlesque? — Ed.] 

208.  Executioner]  Bradley  (TV.  E.  D.)  quotes  the  present  line  as  the  earliest 
use  of  ‘executioner’  in  the  sense:  ‘one  who  puts  another  to  death.’  As  applied 
exclusively  to  the  ‘official  who  carries  out  a  sentence  of  death,  a  headsman,’  Bradley 
quotes,  ‘  1561  Brende,  Q.  Curtius,  viii,  153.  He  being  a  kynge  had  vsed  the 
detestable  office  of  an  execucyoner.’  Schmidt  (Lex.)  cites  under  ‘a  euphemism 
for  a  murderer,’  2  Hen.  VI:  III,  i,  276:  ‘Say  you  consent  and  censure  well  the 
deed  And  I’ll  provide  his  executioner.’  As  the  speaker  is  here  referring  to  Hum¬ 
phrey,  Duke  of  Gloucester,  who  has  been  arrested  for  high  treason,  ‘executioner’ 
may  mean  the  official  as  well  as  a  murderer.  Inasmuch  as  2  Henry  VI.  appeared 
in  Quarto  in  1594,  three  years  before  Rich.  III.,  we  have,  if  Schmidt  be  right, 
a  use  of  the  word,  in  a  restricted  sense,  earlier  than  that  given  by  Bradley. — Ed. 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


67 


Rich.  Then  bid  me  kill  my  felfe,  and  I  will  do  it. 

An.  I  haue  already.  210 

Rich.  That  was  in  thy  rage  : 

Speake  it  againe,  and  euen  with  the  word, 

This  hand,  which  for  thy  loue,  did  kill  thy  Loue, 

Shall  for  thy  loue,  kill  a  farre  truer  Loue, 

To  both  their  deaths  (halt  thou  be  acceffary.  215 

An.  I  would  I  knew  thy  heart. 

Rich.  ’Tis  figur’d  in  my  tongue. 

An.  I  feare  me,  both  are  falfe. 

Rich.  Then  neuer  Man  was  true. 

An.  Well,  well,  put  vp  your  Sword.  220 

Rich.  Say  then  my  Peace  is  made. 

An.  That  (halt  thou  know  heereafter. 

Rich.  But  thall  I  Hue  in  hope. 

An.  All  men  I  hope  Hue  fo. 

Vouchfafe  to  weare  this  Ring. 

*La.  To  take  is  not  to  giue. 

210, 211.  I. ..rage']  As  one  line,  Steev. 
et  seq. 

21 1.  That]  Tu/h,thatQ(\,  Sta.Cam.  + . 
thy]  the  Q3-^- 

212.  the]  thy  Ff,  +  . 

213.  This]  That  Q(\,  Cam.  +  . 

214.  thy]  my  Qg. 

215.  Jhalt  thou]  thou  Jhalt  Q^-g, 

Globe +  . 

216-225.  I..- Ring]  As  six  lines,  end¬ 
ing  Jigur*  d  in... Man... /word... know... 
men. ..Ring.  Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13.  As 
five  lines,  ending  tongue... true... made... 
hope  f  ...ring.  Sing.  Ktly. 

219.  neuer  Man  was]  neuer  was  man 


225 


Q,Qa.  man  Was  never  Steev.  Var.  ’03, 
’13- 

222.  Jhalt  thou]  Jhall  you  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.  +  .  shall  thou  Ktly. 

223.  Jhall  I]  I  Jhall  Q2-8. 

225.  Vouchjafe]  Ff.  Glo.  Voutjaje 
Q,.  Gol.  Vouchjaje  Qa.  Glo.  Vouchjaje 
Qq  et  cet.  (subs. ) 

225-227.  Ring.  Rich.  Looke...]  Ff. 
ring.  Look...  Rowe,  + .  ring.  La.  To 
take  is  not  to  give.  Glo.  Looke...  Qq, 
Var.  ’73  et  cet. 

225.  Ring. ]  ring.  [She  puts  on  the 
ring.  Johns. 

226.  *  La.  ...giue]  Qq.  Om.  Fx,Ff. 


216-225.  I  would  .  .  .  Ring]  Steevens,  struggling  to  avoid  all  irregularity 
in  the  pentameter  lines,  divides  these  ten  lines,  according  to  Knight,  ‘into  six  of 
the  vilest  resemblances,  to  the  eye,  of  blank  verse  that  Steevens’s  botching  ever 
achieved.’  Malone,  in  reply  to  a  feeble  apology  by  Steevens  for  ‘a  slight 
transposition  in  line  219,  for  the  sake  of  the  metre,’  remarks:  ‘I  have  again 
and  again  had  occasion  to  observe  that  short  prose  speeches  are  perpetually 
intermingled  with  the  metrical  dialogue  of  our  poet  and  his  contemporaries;  but 
I  am  inclined  to  think  that,  in  the  present  instance,  these  speeches  were  intended 
for  the  short  metre  of  six  syllables,  as  suited  to  this  light  and  flippant  courtship.’ 
For  examples  of  this  use  of  the  trimeter  couplet,  see  Abbott,  §  500. — Ed. 

225.  Vouchsafe  to  weare  this  Ring]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76; 


68 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Rich.  Looke  how  my  Ring  incompaffeth  thy  Finger,  227 
Euen  fo  thy  Breft  inclofeth  my  poore  heart  : 

Weare  both  of  them,  for  both  of  them  are  thine. 

And  if  thy  poore  deuoted  Seruant  may  230 

But  beg  one  fauour  at  thy  gracious  hand, 

227.  my]  thy  Ff.  this  Qq,  Cap.  Varr.  229.  Weare]  Were  Q4^. 

Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  +  .  230.  deuoted ]  Om.  Q^. 

thy]  my  Ff.  Seruant  ]  fuppliant  Qq,  Theob. 

228.  my]  me  Q5Q6.  Warb.  Johns.  Var.  ’73,  Sta.  Cam.+. 


p.  6) :  That  the  ring  was  given  to  Anne  by  Richard,  and  not  to  Richard  by  Anne, 
and  that  no  change  was  intended  in  that,  I  hold  to  be  certain.  It  is  plainly  no 
correction,  but  an  ordinary  accident  of  the  press.  The  printer  had  missed  out 
the  whole  of  Anne’s  last  half  line  speech.  [See  Text.  Notes.]  The  reader  (or 
whoever  in  those  days  was  charged  with  correcting  the  first  proof),  finding  Richard’s 
name  prefixed  to  two  successive  speeches,  thus:  Anne.  All  men  I  hope  live  so. 
Rich.  Vouchsafe  to  wear  this  ring.  Rich.  Look,  how  this  ring  encompasseth,  &c., 
struck  out  one  of  them,  and  (as  it  happened)  he  struck  out  the  first  .  .  .  The 
state  of  the  type  bears  traces  of  what  occurred,  for  the  word  ‘Vouchsafe’  does  not 
range  with  the  other  lines. 

225.  Ring]  Wessel  here  represents  Richard  as  ‘inducing’  Anne  to  accept  ‘his 
ringlet,’ — highly  sentimental,  but  hardly  what  either  Richard  or  Shakespeare  pre¬ 
sumably  intended.  Collier’s  MS  Corrector  adds  the  same  line  as  in  the  Qq. 
In  referring  to  this  addition  of  the  MS,  Singer  ( Sh .  Vind.,  p.  166)  says:  ‘it  was 
most  probably  derived  from  some  later  edition,  unless  we  are  to  suppose  that 
this  fortunate  corrector  had  all  the  early  editions  at  his  command! — a  supposition 
highly  improbable.’  Oechelhauser  (Essay,  79)  thinks  this  line  was  intention¬ 
ally  omitted,  in  the  Folio,  by  Shakespeare  for  aesthetic  reasons.  To  this  Delius 
(Jahrbuch,  vii,  p.  165)  takes  exception  on  the  ground  that  had  such  been  the  case 
Shakespeare  would  have  been  forced  to  modify  the  speeches  before  and  after 
this  one.  Delius  is  the  staunch  advocate  of  the  Folio  as  the  authentic  text. 
It  is  not  quite  clear  how  he  accounts  for  the  absence  of  the  present  line. 
Spedding’s  is,  I  think,  the  simplest  explanation. — Ed. — Schmidt  (Jahrbuch,  xv, 
p.  314):  It  cannot  be  denied  that  by  this  answer  of  Anne  the  scene  loses  a  certain 
amount  of  beauty.  It  may  have  been  the  most  judicious  of  answers  to  have  given, 
if  any  answer  be  necessary,  but  it  is  more  poetical  and  more  natural  for  Anne 
to  remain  silent,  and  only  mutely  suffer  Richard  to  place  the  ring  upon  her  finger. 
The  stage-direction,  ‘She  puts  on  the  ring,'  is  due  to  later  editors  and  does  not  agree 
with  Richard’s  words:  ‘Look  how  my  ring  encompasseth  thy  finger,’  which  words 
perhaps  unwillingly  suggest  the  stage  performance,  that  here  he  has  taken  her 
hand  in  his  and  is  regarding  it. — Tawney:  Anne  apparently  means  that  her  be¬ 
trothal  or  engagement  would  not  be  valid  unless  she  gave  a  ring  to  Richard  in 
exchange  for  his. 

230.  Seruant]  Collier:  The  Old  Corrector  makes  the  Folio  correspond  with 
the  Quartos  in  reading  suppliant;  we  may  therefore  feel  assured  that  this  word 
was  that  of  the  Poet.  [To  this  note  Singer  (Sh.  Vind.,  p.  166)  replies  that  Collier 
‘rejected  it  in  his  own  edition,  as  a  matter  indifferent!’] 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.J 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


69 

232 


Thou  doft  confirme  his  happineffe  for  euer. 

An.  What  is  it  ? 

Rich.  That  it  may  pleafe  you  leaue  thefe  fad  defignes, 
To  him  that  hath  moft  caufe  to  be  a  Mourner, 

And  prefently  repayre  to  Crosbie  Houfe  : 

Where  (after  I  haue  folemnly  interred 
At  Chertfey  Monaft’ry  this  Noble  King, 

And  wet  his  Graue  with  my  Repentant  Teares) 

I  will  with  all  expedient  duty  fee  you, 

For  diuers  vnknowne  Reafons,  I  befeech  you, 


232.  his}  this  F3F4. 

233.  What}  Wat  Q3. 

234.  may  ...you}  would. ..thee  Qq, 
Cam.  + . 

235.  mojl}  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  Wh. 
i,  Hal.  Rife,  more  Qq  et  cet. 

236.  Crofbie}  Crofby  F^. 


236.  Hou/e .  ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Wh.  i, 
Rife,  place.  Qq  {place,  Q,QS)  et  cet. 
(subs.) 

237.  intern'd}  enterred  Q^. 

238.  Mortajl'ry}  Monastery  Knt, 
Coll.  Dyce,  Hal.  Cam.  Huds. 

240.  duty}  duetie  Q3> 


234.  leaue]  For  this  omission  of  to  of  the  infinitive,  see  Abbott,  \  349. 

236.  presently]  For  examples  of  presently,’  meaning  immediately,  straightway, 
see  Shakespeare  passim. 

236.  Crosbie  House]  Steevens:  This  magnificent  house  was  built  in  the 
year  1466,  by  Sir  John  Crosby,  grocer  and  w’oolman. — Wright:  At  the  time  at 
which  the  play  opens  Sir  John  Crosby  was  still  living  in  his  own  house.  After 
various  vicissitudes  of  fortune,  during  which  it  was  used  as  a  Presbyterian  meeting¬ 
house  and  a  packer’s  warehouse,  the  fine  hall  of  Crosby  Place  has  been  in  recent 
times  restored,  and  is  an  interesting  example  of  the  architecture  of  the  period  at 
which  it  was  built.  There  seems  to  be  no  reason  why  the  folios  should  in  two 
passages  read  ‘Crosby  House’  and  in  the  third  (I,  iii,  363),  ‘Crosby  Place.’  Both 
More  and  Hall  call  it  ‘  Crosbies  place  in  Bishops  gates  strete  wher  the  protectour 
kept  his  household.’ — Boswell-Stone  (p.  346):  Richard’s  entreaty  that  she 
would  go  to  Crosby  Place,  and  receive  a  visit  from  him  there,  was  perhaps  suggested 
by  the  mention  of  his  having  ‘kept  his  household’  as  Protector,  at  Crosbies  in 
Bishops  gates  street  {Holinshed,  iii,  721).  A  slip  of  the  pen,  or  a  compositor’s 
error,  may  account  for  Richard’s  order  that  the  body  be  taken  to  White-Friars, 
not  to  Chertsey.  After  its  removal  from  St.  Paul’s,  Henry’s  corpse  rested  at 
Black-Friars  and  was  thence  conveyed  to  Chertsey.  [While  these  pages  are  going 
through  the  press,  the  preservation  of  Crosby  Hall  is  in  perilous  jeopardy. — 
Ed.] 

239.  wet]  For  omission  of  -ed  in  participles  formed  from  verbs  ending  in  d  or  t, 
see  Abbott,  §  342. 

240.  expedient]  That  is,  quick,  expeditious. 

241.  vnknowne]  Schmidt  {Lex.):  That  is,  such  as  I  must  not  tell.  Compare 
‘That  I  have  frequent  been  with  unknown  minds.’ — Sonn.  cxvii,  5.  [This  inter¬ 
pretation  is,  presumably,  correct;  still,  may  not  ‘unknown’  here  mean  unknown  to 
you  only?  Neither  Hall  nor  Holinshed  mentions  any  reason  for  Richard’s  anxiety 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  I,  sc.  ii. 


70 

Grant  me  this  Boon.  242 

An.  With  all  my  heart,  and  much*  it  ioyes  me  too, 

To  fee  you  are  become  fo  penitent. 

Treffel  and  Barkley ,  go  along  with  me.  245 

Rich.  Bid  me  farwell. 

An.  ’Tis  more  then  you  deferue  : 

But  fince  you  teach  me  how  to  flatter  you, 

Imagine  I  haue  faide  farewell  already.  249 


245.  Treffel]  TreJJill  Qq.  Trassel 
Rowe  ii,  +  . 

Barkley]  Ff,  Rowe, +  .  Bartley 
Q3_8  (subs. )  Berkeley  Cam.  + .  Berkley 
Cap.  et  cet. 

246,  247.  One  line,  Steev.  et  seq. 


249.  /aide]  fayd  Q3- 
249,  250.  already.  Exit.]  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Theob.  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Rife. 
alreadie.  Exit.  Glo.  Sirs,  take  vp  the 
corfe.  Qq  et  cet.  (  Take  up...  Han.  Take  up 
...sirs  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt.) 


for  an  alliance  with  Anne  Neville.  From  the  Croyland  Continuator  Shakespeare 
might  have  learned  of  the  quarrel  between  Richard  and  the  Duke  of  Clarence, 
over  Richard’s  designs  upon  the  Neville  property,  through  marriage  v/ith  Anne,  but 
if  so,  why  should  he  make  Richard,  when  speaking  of  his  intention  to  woo  Anne, 
say:  ‘not  all  so  much  for  love,  As  for  another  secret  close  intent?’ — I,  i,  169. 
Richard,  in  his  soliloquies,  is  usually  outspoken;  he  takes  us  completely  into  his 
confidence;  this  withholding  of  a  reason  is,  apparently,  not  according  to  his 
habit.  Dare  the  hint  be  whispered  that  possibly  the  real  reason  was  not  yet 
decided  upon  definitely  by  Shakespeare? — Ed.] 

243.  With  all  my  heart]  Oechelhauser  {Essay,  p.  77):  Riimelin  thinks 
that  Anne  should  here  have  answered:  ‘This  is  neither  time  nor  place  to  speak 
with  you.’  But  in  my  opinion  the  Anne  who,  in  such  a  situation,  could  give  such 
a  thoroughly  common-place  answer,  would  not  have  so  easily  surrendered  as 
does  the  Anne  of  Shakespeare. 

244.  penitent]  It  was  Richard’s  preceding  speech,  I  think,  which  turned  the 
scale  in  his  favour — he  had  made  Anne’s  beauty  the  motive  for  his  deeds;  the 
excuse  was  pleasing,  doubtless,  yet  at  the  same  time  was  there  not  something  of 
self-praise  in  it  ?  was  he  not  putting  himself  at  least  on  a  level  with  her  ?  but  when 
he  humbly  speaks  of  Henry  as  a  ‘noble  King’;  of  himself  as  the  chiefest  mourner, 
about  to  wet  Henry’s  ‘grave  with  repentant  tears,’  the  last  barriers  of  Anne’s 
resentment  fall;  the  citadel  surrenders. — Ed. 

245.  Tressel  and  Barkley]  French  (p.  251):  The  latter  person  was  no 
doubt  meant  for  one  of  the  noble  family  of  that  name,  and  may  be  intended  for 
one  of  the  sons  of  James,  sixth  Lord  Berkley,  who  were  Lancastrians.  ‘Tressel,’ 
a  name  I  have  not  found  in  any  county  history,  is  probably  a  misprint  for  T russel, 
an  eminent  and  ancient  family  seated  in  the  county  of  Warwick  in  the  time  of 
Henry  II.  The  Trussels  were  of  consequence  in  the  reigns  of  the  first  three 
Edwards. — Wright:  More  probably  the  names  were  Shakespeare’s  own  invention. 

247-249.  ’Tis  more  .  .  .  already]  Anne  means,  I  think,  not  that  my  bidding 
you  farewell  is  more  than  you  deserve,  but  to  fare  well  is  more  than  your  due. 
—Ed. 

249.  Imagine  .  .  .  already]  Duport  (i,  p.  324):  Even  Gloucester’s  hypocrisy 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


n 

Exit  two  with  Anne .  250 

Gent.  Towards  Chertfey,  Noble  Lord  ? 

Rich.  No  :  to  White  Friars,  there  attend  my  comming  252 


250.  Exit]  Ex.  F4.  Exeunt.  Rowe,  +  . 
...two  with  Anne.]  Om.  Qq. 

Lady,  Tressel,  and  Barkley.  Knt  et  seq. 
(subs. ) 

251.  Gent.]  Ser.  Qq. 

Chertfey ]  Chertfie  Qq. 


251.  LordT\  Lord.  Qf. 

252.  No  /]  No,  Q,Q,.  Now  Ff, 
Rowe. 

Friars ]  Friers  Q,Q2-  Fryers 
Qq. 


and  adroitness  of  speech  are  insufficient  to  render  actual  so  sudden  a  success; 
and,  moreover,  the  scene  loses  interest  through  its  lack  of  preparation. — Steevens: 
Cibber  was  so  thoroughly  convinced  of  the  ridiculousness  and  improbability  of 
this  scene  that  he  thought  himself  obliged  to  make  Tressel  say:  ‘When  future 
chronicles  shall  speak  of  this  They  will  be  thought  romance  not  history.’  Thus 
also,  in  Twelfth  Night,  where  Fabian,  observing  the  conduct  of  Malvolio,  says: 
‘If  this  were  played  upon  a  stage  now,  I  could  condemn  it  as  an  improbable  fiction’ 
[III,  iv,  140].  From  an  account  of  our  late  unsuccessful  embassy  to  the  Emperor 
of  China,  we  learn,  indeed,  that  a  scene  of  equal  absurdity  was  represented  at  a 
theatre  in  Tientsin:  ‘One  of  the  dramas  particularly  attracted  the  attention  of 
those  who  recollected  scenes,  somewhat  similar,  upon  the  English  stage.  The 
piece  represented  an  Emperor  and  Empress  living  in  supreme  felicity,  when,  on  a 
sudden,  his  subjects  revolt,  a  civil  war  ensues,  battles  are  fought,  and  at  last  the 
arch-rebel,  who  was  a  general  of  cavalry,  overcomes  his  sovereign,  kills  him  with 
his  own  hand,  and  routs  the  imperial  army.  The  captive  Empress  then  appears 
upon  the  stage  in  all  the  agonies  of  despair,  naturally  resulting  from  the  loss  of 
her  husband  and  of  her  dignity,  as  well  as  the  apprehension  of  that  of  her  honour. 
Whilst  she  is  tearing  her  hair,  and  rending  the  skies  with  her  complaints,  the  con¬ 
queror  enters,  approaches  her  with  respect,  addresses  her  in  a  gentle  tone,  soothes 
her  sorrows  with  his  compassion,  talks  of  love  and  adoration,  and  like  Gloucester 
with  Lady  Anne,  prevails,  in  less  than  half  an  hour,  on  the  Chinese  Princess  to 
dry  up  her  tears,  to  forget  her  deceased  consort,  and  yield  to  a  consoling  wooer.’ — 
Marshall:  This  scene  is  not  the  only  one  of  its  kind.  Rotrou,  in  his  Wenceslas 
1637,  depicts  the  impunity  and  triumph  of  ‘one  of  the  worst  characters  that  was 
ever  drawn.’  In  that  play  the  curtain  drops  on  the  ‘vanishing  reluctance  of  the 
heroine  to  accept  the  hand  of  a  monster  whom  she  hated,  and  who  had  just  mur¬ 
dered  her  lover  in  the  person  of  his  own  brother.’ — Hallam,  Literature  of  Europe, 
pt.  iii,  ch.  vi,  sect.  2,  §  31.  There  is  a  somewhat  similar  scene  at  the  end  of 
Beaumont  and  Fletcher’s  Bloody  Brother.  Corneille,  too,  in  Le  Cid,  thought  it 
not  inconsistent  with  propriety  that  Chimene  should  marry  Roderigue  after  he 
had  killed  her  father. 

252.  White  Friars]  Barnard:  Black-Friars  is  probably  correct;  thence  the 
body  was  to  be  taken  by  water  to  Chertsey.  The  house  of  the  White-Friars  did 
not  abut  on  the  river,  while  that  of  the  Black-Friars  did.  [See  note  by  Boswell- 
Stone  on  1.  236  above.] — Ordish  (p.  68) :  It  is  astonishing  and  delightful  to  find 
how  many  names,  once  familiar  to  Shakespeare,  have  survived  to  greet  our  eyes 
in  the  streets  of  Victorian  London.  In  his  day  Whitefriars  was  a  notorious  locality, 
in  character  greatly  altered  since  the  period  of  Richard  III.,  and  to-day  a  street 


72 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Exit  Coarfe  253 

Was  euer  woman  in  this  humour  woo’d  ? 

Was  euer  woman  in  this  humour  wonne  ?  255 

He  haue  her,  but  I  will  not  keepe  her  long. 

What?  I  that  kill’d  her  Husband,  and  his  Father, 

To  take  her  in  her  hearts  extreameft  hate. 

With  curfes  in  her  mouth,  Teares  in  her  eyes, 

The  bleeding  witneffe  of  my  hatred  by,  260 


253.  Exit  Coarfe]  Rowe,  Pope.  Ex¬ 
eunt.  manet  Glo.  Qq  et  cet.  (subs.) 

254.  woo' d  ?]  woed,  Qt.  woed  ?  Qq. 

255.  wonne  ?]  wonne  :  Q,. 

256.  her,"]  her —  Rowe,+  ,  Var.  ’78, 
’85,  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta. 
Ktly. 

257.  What?  I  that  kill d]  What  I 
that  kild  Q,Q2Q4Qj.  What  I ?  that  kild 


Q3.  What  1  haue  kill'd  Q?.  What  ? 
I  haue  kill'd  Q8F3F4>  What !  I  that 
kill'd  Rowe,  +  .  What !  I,  that  kill'd 
Cap.  et  seq. 

257.  his]  her  Q^. 

258.  hate ]  heate  Qz-s. 

260.  my]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Coll. 
Wh.  i,  Rife,  her  Qq  et  cet 


name  testifies  to  the  site.  In  Shakespeare’s  time  the  monastery  and  its  church 
were  things  of  the  past. 

255.  Was  euer  .  .  .  wonne]  Compare  Titus  Andronicus ,  II,  i,  82,  83:  ‘She 
is  a  woman,  therefore  may  be  woo’d  She  is  a  woman  therefore  may  be  won.’  And 
also  1  Henry  VI:  V,  iii,  77,  78:  ‘She’s  beautiful  and  therefore  to  be  woo’d  She 
is  a  woman  therefore  to  be  won’;  also  Son.  xli,  56:  ‘Gentle  thou  art,  and  there¬ 
fore  to  be  won,  Beauteous  thou  art,  therefore  to  be  assailed.’ 

257.  What  .  .  .  Father]  Verplanck  (i,  62):  Whatever  doubt  later  inquiry 
may  have  thrown  on  Richard’s  personal  agency  in  the  deaths  of  Anne’s  husband 
and  his  father,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  was  identified  with  their  enemies; 
and  that  her  husband  was  slain,  if  not  by  Richard’s  hand,  by  his  comrades  and 
soldiers.  How  it  came  to  pass  that,  after  this,  Anne,  the  widow  of  Prince  Edward, 
became  the  wife  of  Richard,  is  an  historical,  not  a  dramatic  difficulty;  and  the 
poet’s  solution,  that  she  was  a  weak  and  vain  woman,  easily  won  by  the  flattery 
of  a  man  of  the  highest  rank  and  talents,  is  at  least  as  probable  as  any  other,  and 
is  perhaps  the  one  least  discreditable  to  her  memory. 

257.  his  Father]  See  I,  i,  166. 

260.  my  hatred]  Dyce:  Surely  1.  258  shows  that  the  Quarto  reading  is  correct. — 
Hudson  [in  defence  of  the  Quarto  reading]  Richard  is  speaking  of  the  causes 
which  the  Lady  Anne  has  for  hating  himself,  and  regards  King  Henry’s  death  as 
one  of  them,  and  the  presence  of  Henry’s  bleeding  corse  is  a  witness  to  that  hatred. 
— R.  G.  White:  The  bleeding  corpse  of  King  Henry  was  no  witness  to  Anne’s 
hatred:  it  bled  in  witness  of  Richard’s.  Compare  1.  62  supra. — Spedding  ( Sh . 
Trans.,  1875-76;  p.  7):  I  suspect  that  the  Quarto  reading  represents  Shakespeare’s 
meaning;  but  the  alteration  is  one  which  might  suggest  itself  to  any  intelligent 
inattentive  reader,  and  therefore  cannot  be  fairly  laid  to  the  charge  of  the  corrector. 
The  dead  body  of  Henry  was  not  so  much  the  ‘witness’  as  the  motive  or  ground  of 
Anne’s  hatred, whereas  it  was  really  the  ‘  witness’  of  Richard’s  hatred  of  her  father-in- 
law. — Pickersgill  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  i875-’76;  p.  83):  This  is  one  of  those  passages, 


ACT  i,  '>c.  ii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  73 

Hailing  God,  her  Conscience,  and  thefe  bars  againft  me,  261 
And  I,  no  Friends  to  backe  my  Suite  withall, 

But  the  plaine  Diuell,  and  diSSembling  lookes  ? 

And  yet  to  winne  her  ?  All  the  world  to  nothing. 

Hah  I  265 

Hath  the  Sorgot  alreadie  that  braue  Prince, 

Edward,  her  Lord,  whom  I  (  Some  three  monthes  Since)  267 


261.  Halting ]  With  Pope, +,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 

262.  no  Friends']  nothing  Qq,  Cam.  + . 
no  thing  Sta. 

withall]  at  all  Q,Q2,  Cam. +  . 
with  all  Q4  (Bodl.  ap.  Cam.) 

263.  lookes?]  lookes,  Qq. 


264,  265.  And. ..Hah  /]  One  line,  Qq, 
Coll.  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Sta. 

264.  her  ?  All]  Ff.  her  all  Qq.  her , 
all  Cam. +  ,  Ktly.  her — all  Rowe  et 
cet. 

to  nothing.]  to  nothing?  Q^. 
is  nothing  Q,Q8. 


the  force  of  which  one  feels  but  might  be  puzzled  to  demonstrate.  Suffice  it  to  say 
that  the  reading  of  the  Quarto  is  poetry,  that  of  the  Folio  is  prose.  The  alteration, 
therefore,  is  precisely  what  we  might  expect  from  the  corrector, — a  person,  I  believe, 
of  fair  intelligence,  but  absolutely  devoid  of  taste.  .  .  .  The  gross  and  self-evident 
blunders  which  are  perpetuated  through  the  whole  series  of  the  Qq  of  this  very 
play,  and  even  the  mistakes  of  the  Folio  itself,  point  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
printers  of  Shakespeare’s  time  were  not  in  the  habit  of  furnishing  proofs  at  all. 

261.  Hauing]  For  other  examples  of  ellision,  or  softening  of  v,  see  Walker, 
Vers.,  p.  242,  or  Abbott,  §  466. 

262.  no]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  39):  It  is  not  improbable  that, 
between  the  writing  of  the  play  and  the  revision,  the  modern  accentuation  of  nothing 
[as  in  the  Qq]  had  become  more  general  or  more  marked.  [See  Walker  ( Crit .,  i, 
221)  for  numerous  examples,  both  in  Shakespeare  and  in  his  contemporaries,  of 
the  shifting  accent  of  something  and  nothing.  See,  too:  ‘And  fall  something  into 
a  slower  method,’  1.  131  above. — Ed.] 

262.  withall]  Delius,  who  considers  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  148)  the  Folio  text  as  the 
original,  and  the  Quarto  as  one  amended  by  an  anonymous  corrector,  supposes 
that  here  the  corrector  misunderstood  ‘withal’  as  used  by  Shakespeare.  He  then 
adds  in  a  foot-note:  ‘That  the  corrector  did  not  understand  “withal”  in  the  Shakes¬ 
pearean  sense  is  shown  by  another  alteration  further  on,  the  Folio  has,  IV,  iii,  294: 
“And  bid  her  wipe  her  weeping  eyes  withal”;  the  Quarto  has  dry  for  wipe  and 
therewith  for  withal .’ — Wright  thinks  the  Folio  reading  was  made  ‘probably  to 
avoid  the  repetition  of  nothing  two  lines  below.’ 

267.  three  monthes]  Malone:  Here  we  have  the  exact  time  of  this  scene 
ascertained,  namely,  August,  1471.  King  Edward  is,  however,  in  the  Second  Act 
introduced  dying.  That  King  died  in  April,  1483;  so  there  is  an  interval  between 
th&  and  the  next  Act  of  almost  twelve  years.  Clarence,  who  is  represented  in 
the  preceding  scene  as  committed  to  the  Tower  before  the  burial  of  Henry  VI., 
was,  in  fact,  not  confined  nor  put  to  death  till  seven  years  afterwards,  March,  1477-8. 
— Wright:  Three  weeks  would  have  been  nearer  the  mark.  The  battle  of  Tewkes¬ 
bury  was  fought  on  the  4th  of  May,  1471,  and  Henry’s  body  was  taken  to  Chertsey 
on  Ascension  Day,  May  23. 


7  4 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  r,  sc.  ii. 


Stab’d  in  my  angry  mood,  at  Tewkesbury  ?  268 

A  fweeter,  and  a  louelier  Gentleman, 

Fram’d  in  the  prodigallity  of  Nature  :  270 

Yong,  Valiant,  Wife,  and  (no  doubt)right  Royal, 

268.  Tewkesbury ]  Fa,  Knt,  Coll.  iii.  271.  Valiant,  Wife]  wise,  and  valiant 

Tewxbury  Qq.  (  Tewxbery  Qr)  Tewkf-  Pope, +  .  valiant,  wise,  kind  S.  Walker 
bury  F3F4  et  cet.  (Crit.  ii,  16). 

269-272.  A  sweeter  .  .  .  affoord]  Sarrazin  gives  ( Jahrbuch ,  xxix,  xxx,  1894, 
p.  92;  quoted  in  Love’s  Labour’s  Lost,  p.  338  of  this  edition)  a  number  of  passages 
in  L.  L.  L.,  whereto  parallels  in  style  are  to  be  found  in  Richard  III.  and  Lucrece. 
‘  Sometimes  the  parallelism  extends  to  the  thought  and  even  to  the  words  as  in  [the 
present  lines]  and  thus  in  the  following  passage  from  Love’s  Labour’s  Lost,  II,  i,  12: 
“Be  now  as  prodigal  of  all  dear  grace  As  nature  was  in  making  graces  dear  When 
she  did  starve  the  general  world  beside,  And  prodigally  gave  them  all  to  you.”  ’ 

269-272.  A  sweeter,  and  a  louelier  .  .  .  affoord]  Vaughan  (iii,  p.  14):  Both 
Pope’s  and  Walker’s  changes  [see  Text.  Notes]  I  believe  are  wrong.  Shakes¬ 
peare,  according  to  his  frequently  adopted  custom,  has  here  made  ‘valiant’  a 
trisyllable.  There  is,  however,  an  incoherence  in  the  sense.  It  ought  to  run, 
in  accordance  with  the  modern  value  of  ‘again,’  either:  ‘So  sweet  and  lovely  a 
gentleman  the  world  cannot  again  afford,  ’  or  ‘  A  sweeter  and  a  lovelier  gentleman 
the  world  cannot  afford’;  otherwise  ‘again’  is  out  of  place,  and  so  also  is  ‘no  doubt.’ 
[If  I  understand  Vaughan’s  objection,  it  is  to  the  use  of  ‘again,’  meaning  a  second 
time,  with  an  adjective  in  the  comparative  degree;  thus  it  would  be  incorrect  to 
say:  The  world  cannot  a  second  time  produce  a  lovelier  gentleman;  whereas  what 
Richard  wishes  to  say  is  that  the  world  never  produced  as  lovely  a  gentleman. 
Vaughan  offers  as  a  substitute  for  the  present  line,  ‘As  sweet  and  as  lovely  a  gentle¬ 
man.’ — Ed.] 

269.  louelier  Gentleman]  Wright:  Hall  describes  Prince  Edward  as  ‘a  goodly 
feminine  &  a  wel  feautered  yonge  gentleman,’  which  Holinshed  changes  to  ‘a 
faire  and  well  proportioned  yoong  gentleman.’ 

271.  and  .  .  .  Royal]  Johnson:  Of  the  degree  of  Royalty  belonging  to  Henry 
VI.  there  could  be  no  doubt,  nor  could  Richard  have  mentioned  it  with  any  such 
hesitation:  he  could  not,  indeed,  very  properly  allow  him  royalty.  I  believe  we 
should  read:  loyal,  that  is,  true  to  her  bed.  He  enumerates  the  reasons  for  which 
she  should  love  him.  He  was  young,  wise,  and  valiant;  these  were  apparent  and 
indisputable  excellencies.  He  then  mentions  another  not  less  likely  to  endear 
him  to  his  wife,  but  which  he  had  less  opportunity  of  knowing  with  certainty, 
‘and,  no  doubt,  right  loyal.’ — Steevens:  Richard  is  not  speaking  of  King  Henry, 
but  of  Edward  his  son,  whom  he  means  to  represent  as  full  of  all  the  noble  properties 
of  a  king.  ‘No  doubt,  right  royal,’  may,  however,  be  ironically  spoken.  [From 
Fabyan’s  Chronicle  we  learn  that:  ‘This  prynce  beynge  with  all  honour  and 
reuerence  sacryd  &  crystened,  was  named  Edwarde,  .  .  .  whose  noble  mother 
susteyned  not  a  little  dysclaunder  and  obsequy  of  the  comon  people,  saying  he 
was  not  the  natural  sone  of  Kynge  Henrye,  but  chaungyd  in  the  cradell,  to  hyr 
dishonour  and  heuynesse,  which  I  ouerpasse.’  Septima  pars  Henrici  VI.,  p.  628, 
ed.  Ellis. — Ed.] 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


75 


The  fpacious  World  cannot  againe  afifoord  :  272 

And  will  fhe  yet  abafe  her  eyes  on  me, 

That  cropt  the  Golden  prime  of  this  fweet  Prince, 

And  made  her  Widdow  to  a  wofull  Bed  ?  275 

On  me,  whofe  All  not  equals  Edwards  Moytie  ? 

On  me,  that  halts,  and  am  mifhapen  thus  ? 

My  Dukedome,  to  a  Beggerly  denier  !  278 


272.  World ]  Word  F2. 

affoord:}  Qf.  affoord.  Qq.  afford: 
F,.  afford ,  F3F4. 

273.  yet  abafe }  yet  debafe  Qq,  Pope,  + , 
Sta.  Cam.  + .  abafe  Fa.  thus  abafe 
F3F4,  Rowe. 

275.  Bed?}  bed,  Q,. 

277.  halts ]  Ff,  Rowe,  halt  Qq  et 


cet. 

277.  mifhapen ]  vnfliapen  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.  +  .  mis-shapen  Pope  et  cet. 
(subs.) 

thus  ?}  thus.  Q,Q2. 

278.  to  a }  to  be  a  Q  . 

Beggerly  denier }  Widow's  chas¬ 
tity  Cib. 


272.  affoord]  Skeat  {Diet.):  This  word  should  have  but  one  /.  The  double 
/  is  due  to  a  supposed  analogy  with  words  that  begin  with  afi-  in  Latin,  where 
aff  is  put  for  ad]-;  but  the  word  is  not  Latin  and  the  prefix  is  not  ad-.  Besides 
this,  the  pronunciation  has  been  changed  at  the  end.  Rightly  it  should  be  aforth, 
but  the  th  has  changed  as  in  other  words;  cj.  murther,  further ,  provincially  jurder. 
Middle  English  aforthen  =  to  afford,  suffice,  provide.  ‘  And  thereof  was  Piers 
proude,  and  put  hem  to  worke,  And  yaf  him  mete  as  he  myghte  aforth  [».  e.,  could 
afford  or  provide],  and  mesurable  huyre.’ — P.  Plowman,  vi,  200. 

276.  not  equals]  For  other  examples  of  omission  of  do  before  ‘not,’  see  Abbott, 

§  3°S- 

276.  Moytie]  Walker  {Vers.,  122):  The  spelling  in  the  Folio  here  indicates 
the  pronunciation;  indeed,  the  word  is  frequently,  perhaps  usually,  spelt  moity. 
[In  the  majority  of  passages  wherein  the  word  occurs  in  the  Folio  it  is  spelt 
‘moity.’ — Ed.] 

277.  halts]  This  third  person  singular  is  probably  due  to  a  species  of  attraction 
caused  by  ‘equals’  in  the  preceding  line. 

278.  Beggerly]  For  examples  of  ellision  of  the  vowel  at  end  of  syllable,  see 
Guest,  p.  59. 

278.  denier]  Murray  (AT.  E.  D .):  A  French  coin,  the  twelfth  of  the  sou; 
originally  like  the  Roman  denarius  and  English  penny,  of  silver;  but  from  16th 
century  a  small  copper  coin.  Hence  used  as  the  type  of  a  very  small  sum.  c  1425 
Wyntoun  Cronicle,  VI,  v,  60.  To  the  kyrk  ilka  yhere  Of  Rome  he  heychte  a 
denere.  1580  H.  Gifford  Gilloflowers  (1875)  132.  And  in  his  purse  to  serve  his 
neede,  Not  one  deneere  he  had.  1611  Cotgrave,  Denier  a  penny,  a  deneere;  a 
small  copper  coin  valued  at  the  tenth  part  of  an  English  pennie.  [From  these 
examples  we  may,  I  think,  infer  that  it  was  pronounced  as  a  disyllable,  even  if 
the  metre  did  not  suggest  it  in  the  present  line. — Ed.] — Warburton:  This  may 
be  right,  but  perhaps  Shakespeare  wrote  Taniere,  French,  a  hut  or  cave. — Edwards 
{Canons,  p.  95):  It  is  more  than  ‘perhaps,’  that  Shakespeare  never  thought  of 
‘taniere’;  which  is  a  den;  caverne  ou  les  betes  sauvage  se  retirent:  and  when  it  is 
used  figuratively  for  the  habitation  of  a  man,  it  is  considering  him  as  living,  not 


ye  THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  ii. 

I  do  miftake  my  perfon  all  this  while : 

Vpon  my  life  the  findes(although  I  cannot,)  280 

My  felfe  to  be  a  maru’llous  proper  man. 
lie  be  at  Charges  for  a  Looking-glaffe, 

And  entertaine  a  fcore  or  two  of  Taylors, 

To  ftudy  fafhions  to  adorne  my  body  : 

Since  I  am  crept  in  fauour  with  my  felfe,  285 

I  will  maintaine  it  with  fome  little  coft. 

But  fir  ft  lie  turne  yon  Fellow  in  his  Graue, 

And  then  returne  lamenting  to  my  Loue.  288 


281.  maru' Ilous~\  Ff,  Rowe,  +  .  mar- 
vailous  Qq.  marvelous  Cap.  et  cet. 
(subs.) 

282.  Charges]  charge  Q8. 

283.  a]  fome  Qq,  Varr.  Sta.  Cam. +  . 

284.  adorne]  adore  Q3_5. 


286.  fome]  a  Q3-8,  Sta. 

287.  yon  Fellow  in]  you  fellow  in 
Q4_$.  yon  fellow  into  Han.  yon'  fellow 
in  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt, 
Coll.  Wh.  i,  Hal. 


like  a  poor  man,  in  a  cottage,  but  like  a  beast.  What  put  Warburton  upon  this 
emendation,  I  suppose,  was  that  he  thought  a  dukedom  to  a  penny  was  no  fair 
bet;  and  that  the  wager  would  be  more  equal,  if  the  beggar  were  to  impone,  as 
Osric  says,  his  cottage. 

279.  I  do  mistake  .  .  .  while]  Coleridge  {Led.,  p.  127):  The  inferiority  of 
his  person  made  Richard  seek  consolation  and  compensation  in  the  superiority 
of  his  intellect;  he  thus  endeavored  to  counterbalance  this  deficiency.  ...  It 
was  the  same  pride  of  intellect,  or  the  assumption  of  it,  that  made  John  Wilkes 
vaunt  that,  although  he  was  so  ugly,  he  only  wanted,  with  any  lady,  ten  minutes’ 
start  of  the  handsomest  man  in  England. 

281.  maru’llous]  For  the  contraction,  compare  Jonson,  Every  Man  out,  etc.: 
‘  I  marie  in  what  cold  nook  he  found  this  lady  out,  ’  p.  63,  ed.  Gifford.  For  exam¬ 
ples  of  adjectives  used  as  adverbs,  see  Shakespeare  passim. — Ed. 

281.  proper]  That  is,  handsome,  well  formed. 

282.  at  Charges]  Wright:  Baret,  Alvearie,  has:  ‘To  be  at  part  of  the  charges. 
In  partem  impensae  venire.’  Compare  Ads,  xxi,  24:  ‘Them  take,  and  purify 
thyself  with  them,  and  be  at  charges  with  them’;  that  is,  lay  out  money  upon  them, 
or  as  Tyndale  expresses  it,  ‘do  cost  on  them.’  And  1  Corinthians,  ix,  7:  ‘Who 
goeth  a  warfare  any  time  at  his  own  charges?’ 

283.  entertaine]  That  is,  take  into  service. 

285,  286.  I  am  crept  .  .  .  little  cost]  Abbott  (§  193):  The  obvious  interpreta¬ 
tion  is:  since  I  have  crept  into  the  good  graces  of  myself;  but  the  second  line  shows 
the  ‘I’  to  be  superior  to  ‘myself’  which  is  to  be  maintained  by  the  ‘I.’  The  true 
explanation  is:  since  I  have  crept  into  (Lady  Anne’s)  favour  with  the  aid  of  my 
personal  appearance,  I  will  pay  some  attention  to  my  person.  Compare,  prob¬ 
ably,  Hamlet,  III,  ii,  207. 

287.  in]  For  examples  of  ‘in’  used  for  into,  see  Abbott,  §  159,  or  Shakespeare 
passim. 


ACT  I,  SC.  iii.  ] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


77 


Shine  out  faire  Sunne,  till  I  haue  bought  a  glaffe, 

That  I  may  fee  my  Shadow  as  I  paffe.  exit.  290 


Scena  Tertia. 


Enter  the  Queene  Mother ,  Lord  Riucrs , 
and  Lord  Gray. 

Riu.  Haue  patience  Madam,  ther’s  no  doubt  his  Maiefty 
Will  foone  recouer  his  accuftom’d  health.  5 

Gray.  In  that  you  brooke  it  ill,  it  makes  him  worfe, 

Therefore  for  Gods  fake  entertaine  good  comfort, 

And  cheere  his  Grace  with  quicke  and  merry  eyes  8 


290.  Shadow ]  body  Mansfield. 

1.  Scena  Tertia.]  Scene  continued, 
Qq.  Act  II,  Sc.  i.  Irving. 

Changes  to  the  Palace.  Theob.  + .  A 
Room  in  the  Palace.  Cap.  et  seq. 
(subs.) 

2,  3.  the  Queene... Lord  Gray.]  Ff. 
Queene,  Lord  Riuers,  and  Gray.  Qq, 
Rowe,+  (...and  Dorset.  Han.)  the 


Queen,  Lord  Rivers  her  brother,  and 
Lord  Gray  her  son.  Var. ’73,  ’78,  ’85. 
Queen  Elizabeth,  Lord  Rivers  and  Lord 
Gray.  Mai.  et  cet.  (subs.) 

4.  theP  s ]  theres  Qq.  there  is  F4, 
Rowe,  there's  F2F3  et  cet. 

6.  brooke"]  boroke  Qa. 

8.  eyes ]  Ff,  + ,  Wh.  i.  words  Qq,  Var. 
’73  et  cet. 


289,  290.  Shine  .  .  .  passe]  This  rhyme  is,  I  think,  an  echo  of  the  lines  in  the 
first  soliloquy,  ‘Why  I  (in  this  weak  piping  time  of  Peace)  Have  no  delight  to 
pass  away  the  time  Unless  to  see  my  shadow  in  the  sun  And  descant  on  mine  own 
deformity.’  I,  i,  30-32. — Ed. 

1.  Scena  Tertia]  Wright:  The  scene  is  laid  in  the  palace  at  Westminster, 
which  formerly  stood  on  the  south  side  of  Westminster  Hall.  ‘This  hath  been,’ 
says  Stow,  ‘the  principal  seat  and  palace  of  all  the  kings  of  England  since  the 
Conquest;  for  here  have  they  in  the  great  hall  kept  their  feasts  of  coronation  espe¬ 
cially,  and  other  solemn  feasts,  as  at  Christmas  and  such  like,  most  commonly’ 
( Survey ,  etc.,  pp.  1 72-1 74).  The  date  of  this  scene  is  April,  1483. 

3.  Lord  Gray]  See  French,  Dram.  Person.,  1.  15. 

4.  Maiesty]  For  examples  of  softening  unaccented  syllables  of  a  polysyllable, 
see  Abbott,  §  468. 

6.  In  .  .  .  worse]  Tawney:  There  appears  to  be  a  confusion  of  two  construc¬ 
tions,  ‘the  fact  that  you  take  it  ill  makes  him  worse’  and  ‘in  that  you  take  it  ill, 
you  make  him  worse.’  The  line  may  be  literally  paraphrased,  ‘Because  you 
take  it  ill,  the  fact  that  you  do  so  makes  him  worse.’ 

8.  eyes]  R.  G.  White:  It  would  seem  that  if  words  [of  the  Qq]  were  the  original 
reading,  the  change  was  made  in  the  revision.  It  was  because  the  Queen  appeared 
despondingly,  ‘brook’d  it  ill,’  that  the  king  was  worse,  as  Gray  would  make  it 
appear;  and  therefore  he  begs  her  to  look  upon  her  husband  with  lively,  cheerful 
eyes. 


78 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iii. 


Qu.  If  he  were  dead,  what  would  betide  on  me  ? 

If  he  were  dead,  what  would  betide  on  me  ?  10 

Gray.  No  other  harme,  but  Ioffe  of  fuch  a  Lord. 

Qu.  The  Ioffe  of  fuch  a  Lord,  includes  all  harmes. 

Gray.  The  Heauens  haue  bleft  you  with  a  goodly  Son, 

To  be  your  Comforter,  when  he  is  gone. 

Qu.  Ah!  he  is  yong  ;  and  his  minority  15 

Is  put  vnto  the  truft  of  Richard  Gloujier , 

A  man  that  loues  not  me,  nor  none  of  you. 

Riu.  Is  it  concluded  he  fhall  be  Protestor  ? 

Qu.  It  is  determin’d,  not  concluded  yet : 

But  fo  it  muft  be,  if  the  King  mifcarry.  20 

Enter  Buckingham  and  Derby. 


9.  on]  Ff,  Rowe,  of  Qq  et  cet. 
me?]  me.  Q,Q2. 

12.  harmes]  harme  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 

15.  Ah!]  Oh  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 
yong]  young  Q,F3F4. 

16.  vnto]  in  Q  Qg.  into  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  Var.  ’73,  ’78,  ’85,  Ran. 


16.  Richard  Gloufter]  Fa.  Rich. 
GloceJlerQq.  Richard  Glo'ster  Rowe,  + . 
Richard  Gloucester  Cam.  + .  Richard 
Glofter  F3F4,  Var.  ’73  et  cet. 

21.  Derby.]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Cam.  +  , 
Ktly.  Darby.  Qq.  Stanley  (throughout) 
Theob.  et  cet. 


9.  If .  .  .  me]  This  is  the  last  line  at  the  foot  of  the  column,  in  the  Folio, 
and  though  the  catchword  is  properly  ‘ Gray ,’  the  compositor  has  repeated  the 
line  at  the  top  of  the  next  page.  Possibly  the  stints  given  to  the  compositors 
were  incorrectly  marked. — Ed. 

9.  betide]  Wright:  'Betide’  is  here  used  loosely  for  become.  It  properly 
means  to  happen,  come  to  pass,  and  is  sometimes  followed  by  to  and  sometimes 
used  without  any  preposition. 

12.  The  losse  .  .  .  harmes]  Compare  ‘Where  the  greater  malady  is  fixed, 
The  lesser  is  scarce  felt,’  Lear,  III,  iv,  8. — Ed. 

15,  16.  his  minority  .  .  .  Glouster]  ‘Than  he  [Edward  the  Fourth]  made 
his  Will,  wherin  he  constitutyd  his  soones  his  heyres,  whom  he  commyttyd  to  the 
tuytion  of  Rycherd  his  brother,  duke  of  Glocester,  and  bestowyd  muche  goodes 
devoutly.’ — Polydore  Vergil,  p.  171. 

16.  vnto]  For  a  similar  use  of  ‘unto’  meaning  into,  compare  ‘He  hath  turned 
a  heaven  unto  a  hell,’  Mid.  N.  Dream,  I,  i,  207,  wherein  Q3  and  the  Ff  read 
into;  and  ‘our  wars  Will  turn  unto  a  peaceful  comic  sport,’  1  Henry  VI:  II,  ii, 
45.— Ed. 

19.  determin’d  .  .  .  concluded]  Wright:  It  is  resolved  upon,  though  no  formal 
record  of  the  fact  has  been  made.  At  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  the  book,  in 
which  official  entries  are  made  of  the  decisions  of  the  Master  and  Seniors,  is  called 
the  Conclusion  Book. 

21.  Derby]  See  Dram.  Person.,  Sir  William  Stanley,  1.  24. 


ACT  i,  SC.  iii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  79 

Gray. Here  comes  the  Lord  of  Buckingham  &  Derby.  22 
Buc.  Good  time  of  day  vnto  your  Royall  Grace. 

Der.  God  make  your  Maiefty  ioyful,as  you  haue  bin 
Qn.  The  Counteffe  Richmond,  good  my  L.of  Derby .  25 

To  your  good  prayer,  will  fcarfely  fay,  Amen. 

Yet  Derby,  notwithftanding  fhee’s  your  wife, 

And  loues  not  me,  be  you  good  Lord  affur’d, 

I  hate  not  you  for  her  proud  arrogance. 

Der.  I  do  befeech  you,  either  not  beleeue  30 

The  enuious  danders  of  her  falfe  Accufers  : 

Or  if  fhe  be  accus’d  on  true  report, 

Beare  with  her  weakneffe,  which  I  thinke  proceeds 
From  wayward  fickneffe,and  no  grounded  malice. 

Qu.  Saw  you  the  King  to  day  my  Lord  of  Derby.  35 

Der.  But  now  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  and  I, 


22.  comes]  Ff,  Q^g.  come  Q,Q2  et 

cet. 

Lord]  Ff.  Lords  Qq  et  cet. 
dr']  and  QqF4. 

24.  bin~\  been  Q,K4.  beene  Q2.  bene 

Q<QS- 

25.  L.  of  Derby]  Lo :  of  Darby 
Q,Q2Q3.  Lord  of  Barbie  Q4Q5- 

26.  prayer ]  praiers  Q,Q3-8.  prayers 
Q2,  Cam.  + . 

fcarfely ]  fcarce  Q.Qg. 


28.  Lordafftid d~\  Lo.aJfurdeQQflf 
Lord  affured  Q4QS- 

29.  arrogance ]  arrogancie  Q3-8. 

30.  do]  Om.  Q3_g. 

31-  falfe~\  Om.  Q*-s- 

32-  on]  in  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

35.  Qu.]  Riu.  Qq  (subs.),  Cap.  Ran. 
Cam.  -t ,  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

Lord  of  Derby.]  Lo  :  of  Darby  ? 
Q, .  I.o.of  Darbie  ?  Q2.  Lord  of  Darbie  ? 
Q3Q4Q5.  Lord  of  Derby  ?  Ff. 


25.  Countesse  Richmond]  Malone:  Margaret,  daughter  to  John  Beaufort, 
first  Duke  of  Somerset.  After  the  death  of  her  first  husband,  Edmund  Tudor, 
Earl  of  Richmond,  half  brother  to  Henry  VI.,  by  whom  she  had  only  one  son, 
afterwards  King  Henry  VII.,  she  first  married  Sir  Henry  Stafford,  uncle  to  Hum¬ 
phrey,  Duke  of  Buckingham. 

25.  good  my  L.]  For  transposition  of  possessive  adjectives,  see  Abbott,  §  13. 

32.  on]  Wright  quotes,  as  examples  of  the  Q  reading  in,  2  Henry  VI:  III, 
ii,  257:  ‘In  pain  of  your  dislike  or  pain  of  death,’  and  Coriol.,  Ill,  iii,  102:  ‘In 
peril  of  precipitation.’ 

33,  34.  Beare  .  .  .  malice]  Derby,  in  his  anxiety  to  excuse  his  wife,  here 
indirectly  acknowledges  that  there  are  some  certain  grounds  for  the  Queen’s 
suspicions.  He  begins  with  speaking  of  ‘slanders’  and  false  accusations,  and  yet 
admits  a  cause  for  the  slanderous  reports  which  have  reached  the  Queen. — Ed. 

35.  Qu.]  Capell  (ii,  175):  If  what  the  Queen  asks  at  1.  38  be  consider’d  by 
the  judicious,  the  Quarto  assignation  of  this  speech  will  seem  the  gracefuller: 
Rivers,  a  wise  and  grave  person,  judges  from  the  countenance  of  the  lords  he 
addresses  that  they  had  no  bad  news,  and  asks  it  to  give  his  sister  some  comfort. 

36.  But  now]  That  is,  even  now  at  this  instant. 


8o 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  I,  sc.  iii. 


Are  come  from  vifiting  his  Maiefty.  37 

Que.  What  likelyhood  of  his  amendment  Lords. 

Buc.  Madam  good  hope,  his  Grace  fpeaks  chearfully. 

Qu.  God  grant  him  health,  did  you  confer  with  him?  40 
Buc.  I  Madam,  he  defires  to  make  attonement 
Betweene  the  Duke  of  Gloufter,  and  your  Brothers, 

And  betweene  them,  and  my  Lord  Chamberlaine, 

And  fent  to  warne  them  to  his  Royall  prefence.  44 


37.  Are  come]  Came  Qq. 

38.  What]  With  QtQ2. 

39.  J 'peaks ]  fpeaketh  Q3. 

41.  I]  Ay  Cap.  Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh. 
i,  Hal.  Ktly,  Huds. 

I  Madam]  Madame  we  did  Qq, 
Pope, +  ,  Sta.  Cam. +. 


41.  he']  Om.  F3F4. 

defires]  seeks  Pope,  +  . 
to]  Om.  Q4. 

42,43.  Betweene... betweene]  Betwixt 
...betwixt  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +. 

44.  to]  lo  Q4. 

to  his]  ot  his  Q6.  of  his  Q7Q8. 


41.  I  Madam]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  39):  The  Quarto  line 
is  distinctly  irregular;  which  the  Corrector  alters,  with  the  obvious  intention  of 
removing  the  irregularity. 

41.  attonement]  More  twice  makes  use  of  this  word  in  speaking  of  the  recon¬ 
ciliation  between  the  Queen’s  kindred  and  that  of  the  King:  ‘the  late  made  attone- 
mente,  in  whyche  the  kinges  pleasure  hadde  more  place  then  the  parties  willes’ 
(p.  20),  and  ‘hauyng  more  regarde  to  their  olde  variaunce,  then  their  new  attone¬ 
ment’  (p.  22). — Ed. 

42.  Duke  of  Glouster]  Wright:  Richard  is  charged  by  More  with  fomenting 
the  quarrels  with  the  queen’s  family:  ‘And  for  as  muche  as  hee  well  wiste  and  holpe 
to  mayntayn,  a  long  continued  grudge  and  hearte  brennynge  betweene  the  Quenes 
kinred  and  the  kinges  blood  eyther  partye  enuying  others  authoritye,  he  nowe 
thought  that  their  deuision  shoulde  bee  (as  it  was  in  dede)  a  fortherlye  beginnynge 
to  the  pursuite  of  his  intente’  (pp.  n,  12). 

42.  Brothers]  Capell  (ii,  175):  In  the  opening  of  Act  Second,  where  that 
atonement  takes  place  which  Buckingham  speaks  of,  performance  differs  from 
his  account;  for  there  we  find  some  sons  of  this  Queen  and  but  one  brother: 
that  there  was  design  of  atoning  at  least  a  second,  his  expressions  are  evidence; 
and  who  the  intended  second  might  be,  may  be  gather’d  with  some  certainty  from 
expressions  in  Act  Third  and  elsewhere:  In  that  Act  the  Prince  is  made  to  lament, 
with  great  feeling,  the  absence  of  ‘more  uncles,’  his  speeches  pointing  plainly  to 
a  recent  comitment  just  imparted. — Wright:  The  only  ‘brother’  of  the  Queen 
mentioned  in  this  play  is  Earl  Rivers.  But  the  first  Earl  Rivers,  Elizabeth’s  father, 
had  seven  sons  and  six  daughters. — Daniel  ( Introd .,  p.  xvi;  foot-note):  I  suspect 
that  the  original  author  of  the  play  was  not  very  clear  as  to  the  relationship  of  his 
dramatis  persona,  and  that  he  supposed  Grey,  who  is  nowhere  referred  to  as  one 
of  the  Queen’s  sons,  to  be  one  of  her  brothers.  In  two  places  in  the  Quarto,  I, 
iii,  73;  IV,  iii,  402,  ‘brothers,’  of  the  Folio,  is  corrected  to  brother,  though  in  the 
four  other  places  this  correction  has  been  overlooked. 

44  warne]  That  is,  summon. 


ACT  I,  SC.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


8l 


Qu.  Would  all  were  well,  but  that  will  neuer  be,  45 

Ifeare  our  happineffe  is  at  the  height. 

Enter  Richard. 

Rich.  They  do  me  wrong, and  I  will  not  indure  it, 

Who  is  it  that  complaines  vnto  the  King, 

Thar  I  (  forfooth  )  am  fterne,  and  loue  them  not  ?  50 

By  holy  Paul ,  they  loue  his  Grace  but  lightly, 

That  fill  his  eares  with  fuch  diffentious  Rumors. 

Becaufe  I  cannot  flatter,  and  looke  faire, 

Smile  in  mens  faces,  fmooth,  deceiue,  and  cogge, 

Ducke  with  French  nods,  and  Apifh  curtefie,  55 


45.  Would~\  'Would  Warb.  Johns. 
Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Sing. 
Ktly. 

bel\  be.  Q5. 

46.  height ]  highejl  Qq. 

47.  Richard]  Glocefter  Qq.  Glou¬ 
cester  Rowe,  Pope,  Warb.  Johns.  Glou¬ 
cester  and  Hastings.  Han.  ...Hastings, 
and  Dorset,  with  him.  Cap.  et  seq. 
(subs.) 

48.  indure ]  endure  QrQ2Q3F3F4. 

*/,]  it.  Qa-5,  Coll. 

49.  is  it~\  Ff,  Rowe,  Wh.  i.  are  they 


Qq  et  cet. 

49.  complaines ]  Q^Ff,  Rowe,  com¬ 
plain  Qg  et  cet. 

49.  50.  King,  ...not .?]  King,  ...not . 
Q,.  King ? ...not :  Qq. 

50.  Thar\  Fx. 

51.  holy ]  wholy  Q6. 

52.  diJfentious~\  difcentious  Q,Q3-  dis- 
centions  Q2. 

53.  look  e]  Ff,  Rowe, +  .  fpeake  Qq, 
Var.  ’73  et  cet. 

54.  fmooth~\  sooth  Theob.  conj.  (Nich¬ 
ols — Lit.  Hist.,  ii,  454). 


47.  Enter  Richard]  Collier  ( Emendations ,  etc.,  p.  325):  We  meet  with  a  very 
characteristic  stage-direction  [by  the  MS  Corrector]  here:  it  is,  Enter  Richard, 
stamping  angerly,  which,  no  doubt,  shows  the  manner  of  some  early  actor  of  the 
part,  perhaps  of  Burbage  himself,  the  original  Richard;  for,  supposing  the  corrector 
of  the  Folio,  1632,  never  to  have  seen  him  (he  died  in  March,  1619),  his  peculiarities 
in  the  performance  would,  most  probably,  be  traditionally  handed  down  to  his 
successors. 

53,  54.  I  cannot  .  .  .  cogge]  Courtenay  (ii,  68):  It  may  be  doubted  whether 
this  pretension  to  a  rugged  manner,  and  an  inaptitude  to  the  arts  of  cajolery,  is  quite 
consistent  with  the  wooing  of  the  Princess  Anne,  which  has  been  described.  [Is 
not  the  main  purpose  of  Richard  throughout,  to  seem  a  saint  when  most  he  plays 
the  devil?  And  are  we  ever  to  expect  consistency  in  him?  He  tells  Anne  that 
his  tongue  could  never  learn  sweet  smoothing  word  until  prompted  by  her  beauty. 
— Ed.] 

54.  smooth]  See  note  on  ‘  smoothing ,  ’  I,  ii,  188. 

54.  cogge]  Wright  (Note  on  Coriol.,  Ill,  ii,  133):  That  is,  cheat,  cozen.  Cot- 
grave  gives,  ‘Ioncher.  To  strew.  .  .  also,  to  gull;  cog,  or  foist  with;  lie  vnto, 
deceiue,  giue  gudgeons,  beare  in  hand  with  vntruthes;  also  to  dallie,  ieast  or  toy 
with.’ 

55.  French  nods]  Steevens:  An  importation  of  artificial  manners  seems 
to  have  afforded  our  ancient  poets  a  never  failing  topic  of  invective.  So,  in  a 

6 


82 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iii. 


I  muft  be  held  a  rancorous  Enemy.  56 

Cannot  a  plaine  man  Hue,  and  thinke  no  harme, 

But  thus  his  fimple  truth  muft  be  abus’d, 

With  filken,  flye,  infinuating  Iackes? 

Grey.  To  who  in  all  this  prefence  fpeaks  your  Grace  60 

Rich.  To  thee,  that  haft  nor  Honefty,  nor  Grace  : 

When  haue  I  iniur’d  thee?  When  done  thee  wrong? 

Or  thee?  or  thee?  or  any  of  your  Faction  ? 

A  plague  vpon  you  all.  His  Royall  Grace 

(Whom  God  preferue  better  then  you  would  with)  65 

Cannot  be  quiet  fcarfe  a  breathing  while, 


56.  rancorous']  rankerous  Qq.  ranc'- 
rous  Cap.  (corrected  in  Errata). 

58.  his  fimple]  in  fimple  Qs-  in  fimpla 

q«- 

59.  With]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Coll.  Wh. 
i,  Hal.  Rife.  By  Qq  et  cet. 

60.  Grey.]  Ri.  Qq.  (Ry.  Q,.)  Riv. 
Cam.  +  . 

who]  whom  QqFf  et  seq. 


61.  nor  Honeflyi]  not  honejlie  Q4, 
Rowe,  Pope. 

62.  63 .  thee  ?  ...  wrong  ?  ...  thee  ?  ... 
thee  f]  thee , ...  wrong , ... thee , ... thee ,  Qq 
( or  the  or  the  Q,). 

63.  Faction  ?]  faction  :  Q,. 

64.  Grace]  perfon  Qq,  Pope,  + , 
Cam.  +  . 


Tragicall  Discourse  of  the  Haplesse  Man's  Life,  by  Churchyard,  1593:  ‘We  make 
a  legge  and  kisse  the  hand  withall,  (A  French  deuice  nay  sure  a  Spanish  tricke) 
And  speake  in  print,  and  say  loe  at  your  call  I  will  remaine  your  owne  both  dead 
and  quicke.  A  courtier  so  can  give  a  lobbe  a  licke,  And  dress  a  dolt  in  motley  for 
a  while,  And  so  in  sleeue  at  silly  woodcocke  smile.’ — Weight:  Mercutio,  while 
he  addresses  Romeo  with  ‘Signor  Romeo,  bon  jour!  there’s  a  French  salutation 
to  your  French  slop,’  has  no  terms  to  express  his  contempt  of  ‘such  antic,  lisping 
affected  f antasticoes  ’  {Rom.  dr  Jul.,  II,  iv).  [This  contempt  for  all  things  French 
survived  until  the  time  of  Nelson.  It  will  be  remembered  that  one  of  the  precepts 
given  by  him  to  all  midshipmen  under  him  is  ‘To  hate  a  Frenchman  as  he 
would  the  Devil.’ — Ed.] 

59.  Iackes]  Skeat  {Did.):  The  phrase  ‘thou  Sire  John’  is  in  Chaucer,  Cant. 
Tales,  14816;  on  which  Tyrwhitt  remarks:  ‘I  know  not  how  it  has  happened  that 
in  the  principal  modern  languages,  John,  or  its  equivalent,  is  a  name  of  contempt, 
or  at  least  of  slight.  So  the  Italians  use  Gianni,  from  whence  Zani;  the  Spaniards 
Juan,  as  hobo  Juan,  a  foolish  John;  the  French  Jean,  with  various  additions;  and 
in  English  when  we  call  a  man  a  John,  we  do  not  mean  it  as  a  title  of  honour. 
Chaucer,  in  1.  3708,  uses  Jacke  fool,  as  the  Spaniards  do  bobo  Juan,  and  I  suppose 
Jack-ass  has  the  same  etymology.’  ‘Go  fro  the  window,  Jacke  fool,  she  said.’ 
This  Middle  English  Jacke  is  obviously  borrowed  from  the  French  Jaques,  but 
it  is  very  remarkable  that  this  common  French  name  is  considered  as  an  equivalent 
to  the  English  common  name  John,  since  it  really  answers  to  Jacob. 

66.  Cannot  .  .  .  scarse]  Wright:  The  double  negative  is,  perhaps,  due  to  the 
adverb  being  separated  from  the  verb.  [See  1.  95,  post.] 

66.  breathing  while]  Compare  Ven.  dr  Ad.,  ‘It  shall  be  fickle  false  and 


ACT  I,  SC.  iii-3 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


83 

67 


But  you  muft  trouble  him  with  lewd  complaints. 

Qu.  Brother  of  Gloufter,you  miftake  the  matter: 

The  King  on  his  owne  Royall  difpofition, 

(And  not  prouok’d  by  any  Sutor  elfe)  70 

Ayming  (belike )at  your  interiour  hatred, 

That  in  your  outward  a<5Hon  fhewes  it  felfe 
Againft  my  Children,  Brothers,  and  my  Selfe, 

Makes  him  to  fend,  that  he  may  learne  the  ground.  74 


69.  on ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Dyce,  Wh.  i. 
of  Qq  et  cet. 

72.  That]  Which  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 
action]  allions  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

73.  Children ]  kindred  Qx,  Cam.  + . 
kinred  Qq. 

Brothers ]  brother  Qq. 

74.  Makes  ...  ground. ]  Ff,  Rowe. 
Makes  him  to  fend ,  that  thereby  he  may 
gather  The  ground  of  your  ill  will ;  and 
to  remoue  it.  Qq,  Cam.  ii.  Makes  him 
to  send  that  he  may  learn  the  ground  Of 


your  ill  will,  and  thereby  to  remove  it. 
Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Hath  sent 
for  you  that  he  may  learn  the  ground 
Of  your  ill  will,  and  thereby  may  remove 
it.  Han.  Hath  sent  for  you  ;  that  thereby 
he  may  gather  The  ground  of  your  ill 
will,  and  so  remove  it.  Cap.  Makes  him 
to  send,  that  thereby  he  may  gather  The 
ground  of  your  ill  will ;  and  so  remove 
it.  Var.  ’73  et  cet. 

74.  him]  time  Vaughan. 


full  of  fraud  Bud  and  be  blasted  in  a  breathing-while,’  1.  1142.  It  is,  perhaps, 
worth  noting  that  these  two  are  the  only  passages  in  which  this  phrase  occurs, 
and  that  the  dates  of  composition  of  Venus  &  Adonis  and  Richard  III.  are  not 
widely  separated. — Ed. 

67.  lewd]  Bradley  ( N.E.D .  s.  v.):  5.  Of  persons,  their  actions,  etc.:  Bad, 
vile,  evil,  wicked,  base;  unprincipled,  ill-conditioned;  good-for-nothing,  worthless, 
‘  naughty.’ 

69-74.  The  King  .  .  .  Ayming  .  .  .  Makes]  Delius:  Shakespeare  forgot  that 
‘the  king’  is  here  the  subject  of  ‘makes,’  and  thus  refers  to  the  king  as  ‘him,’  just 
as  though  ‘royal  disposition’  were  the  subject. — Abbott  (§  376):  The  participle 
with  a  nominative  originally  intended  to  be  absolute  seems  here  diverted  into  a 
subject,  i.  e.,  the  fact  that  the  king  guesses  at  your  hatred  makes  him  send. 

69.  on]  For  examples  of  ‘on’  meaning  in  consequence  of  see,  if  needful,  Abbott, 
§  180.  For  ‘of  as  in  Qq,  see  §  168. 

70.  else]  Wright:  Of  course  ‘else’  is  superfluous,  as  in  Macbeth  V,  viii,  4: 
‘Of  all  men  else  I  have  avoided  thee.’  The  construction  may  be  compared  with 
that  in  the  well-known  lines  of  Milton,  Paradise  Lost,  iv,  323,  324:  ‘Adam  the 
goodliest  of  men  since  born  His  sons;  the  fairest  of  her  daughters,  Eve.’  Professor 
Masson,  in  his  note  on  that  passage,  refers  to  Paradise  Lost,  ii,  678,  679,  for  a 
similar  instance:  ‘God  and  his  Son  except,  Created  thing  naught  valued  he  nor 
shunned.’ 

73.  Brothers]  See  1.  42,  supra. 

74.  Makes  .  .  .  ground]  R.  G.  White:  Whatever  may  be  the  case  with 
regard  to  the  missing  line  [as  in  the  Quarto],  nothing  can  be  clearer  than  that  in 
the  Folio  we  have,  not  an  accidental  corruption,  but  a  part,  at  least,  of  the  result 
of  a  revision  of  the  passage,  in  which  Shakespeare  rid  this  of  the  superfluous  thereby, 
and,  happily,  both  for  sense  and  rhythm,  substituted  ‘learn  the  ground’  for  ‘gather 


84 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iii. 


Rich.  I  cannot  tell,  the  world  is  growne  fo  bad,  75 

That  Wrens  make  prey,  where  Eagles  dare  not  pearch. 

Since  euerie  Iaeke  became  a  Gentleman, 

There’s  many  a  gentle  perfon  made  a  Iaeke. 

Qn.  Come,  come,  we  know  your  meaning  Brother 
You  enuy  my  aduancement,  and  my  friends  :  (Glofler  80 


75-  growne]  growen  Qt. 

76.  maki r]  way  Q7Qg. 

make  prey]  may  prey  Q3-8,  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 
prey ]  pray  Qx. 

77.  Iaeke]  Fx. 


80.  my  aduancement  ]  mine  aduance¬ 
ment  Qj-g. 

friends]  friends'  Knt,  Dyce,  Wh. 
i,  Sta.  Cam. +,  Ktly,  Coll.  iii. 

(  Glofler]  Glo.  Qq.  (Gl.  Qf). 


the  ground.’  What  alteration  he  may  have  made  in  the  remainder  of  the  passage, 
accident  has  prevented  us  from  knowing;  and  we  are  therefore  obliged  to  take  it 
from  the  unrevised  copy. — The  Cowden-Clarkes:  The  construction  in  this  speech 
is  peculiar,  and  contains  that  want  of  strict  consecution  which  Shakespeare  is  so 
fond  of  giving,  in  order  to  mark  the  utterer’s  agitation. — Spedding  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans., 
1875— '76;  p.  8):  Though  the  alteration  here  made  in  the  Folio  is  a  very  considerable 
one,  and  might  at  first  sight  appear  to  be  certainly  intentional  and  deliberate,  I  am 
inclined  to  think  that  it  was  really  accidental.  The  irregularity  in  the  construction 
of  the  sentence  (which,  though  natural  enough  in  an  eager  speaker,  does  not  seem 
to  be  wanted  for  any  dramatic  purpose)  might  naturally  have  recommended  it 
for  correction.  But  though  the  latter  part  of  the  sentence  would  have  borne 
correction  so  well — I  am  inclined  myself  to  think  that  it  still  needs  some — the 
alteration  made  in  the  Folio  does  not  touch  it.  It  is  difficult  to  see  the  motive  of 
such  an  alteration,  whoever  made  it,  and  I  suspect  that  it  has  arisen  from  a  mis¬ 
understanding  by  the  printer  of  the  directions  in  the  copy.  If  the  manuscript, 
or  corrected  copy,  which  was  sent  to  the  press  could  be  produced,  I  should  expect 
to  find  in  it  directions  for  an  alteration  such  as  that  suggested  by  Pope.  [See  Text. 
Notes.] — Wright:  The  Quarto  reading  is  an  instance  of  the  construction,  by  which, 
when  two  infinitives  depend  upon  an  auxiliary  verb,  the  second  is  often  preceded 
by  to.  Compare  Cymb.,  Ill,  ii,  64-66:  ‘How  we  may  steal  from  hence,  and  from 
the  gap  That  we  shall  make  in  time,  from  our  hencegoing  And  our  return,  to 
excuse.’  Again,  in  the  Prayer  Book  Version  of  Psalm  lxix,  26:  ‘Let  their  habi¬ 
tation  be  void:  and  no  man  to  dwell  in  their  tents,’  and  Psalm  Ixxxviii,  8:  ‘That 
they  might  put  their  trust  in  God:  and  not  to  forget  the  works  of  God.’ 

76.  Wrens]  Barnard  sees  ( Notes  &  Queries,  14  March,  1896)  in  this  use  of 
the  name  ‘wren’  a  fourfold  allusion  to  the  Woodvilles  thus:  a  scornful  comparison 
with  the  size  of  the  wren;  the  size  of  the  Woodville  family  and  the  proverbially 
numerous  progeny  of  the  wren;  the  fact  that  the  wren  was  regarded  as  unholy; 
finally,  that,  as  the  wren  had  been  made  king  of  the  birds  by  a  trick,  so  by  sorcery 
Edward  IV.  obtained  his  wife  Elizabeth  Grey,  to  whom  the  Woodvilles  owed  their 
rise. 

76.  make  prey]  Wright:  ‘Make’  is  frequently  joined  with  a  substantive  so 
as  to  be  equivalent  to  the  cognate  verb,  so  make  pursuit  =  pursue,  III,  ii,  34;  make 
abode=  abide,  Two  Gent.,  IV,  iii,  23.  See  III,  v,  90. 


ACT  I,  SC.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


85 

81 


God  grant  we  neuer  may  haue  neede  of  you. 

Rich. Meane  time,  God  grants  that  I  haue  need  of  you. 

Our  Brother  is  imprifon’d  by  your  meanes, 

My  felfe  difgrac’d,  and  the  Nobilitie 
Held  in  contempt,  while  great  Promotions  85 

Are  daily  giuen  to  ennoble  thofe 
That  fcarfe  fome  two  dayes  fince  were  worth  a  Noble. 

Qu.  By  him  that  rais’d  me  to  this  carefull  height, 

From  that  contented  hap  which  I  inioy’d, 

I  neuer  did  incenfe  his  Maieftie  90 

Againft  the  Duke  of  Clarence ,  but  haue  bin 
An  earneft  aduocate  to  plead  for  him. 

My  Lord  you  do  me  fhamefull  iniurie, 

Falfely  to  draw  me  in  thefe  vile  fufpedls. 

Rich\  You  may  deny  that  you  were  not  the  meane  95 


82.  grants ]  grant  Q^. 

/]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Hal.  we  Qq 

et  cet. 

84.  difgrac'  d~\  difgract  Qx. 

85.  while  great  ]  whil/l  many  faire 
Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + .  while  many  fair 
Pope,  +  ,Var.  ’21,  Coll.  iii.  while  many 
great  Coll,  i,  ii,  Hal. 

88.  carefull]  careful  F4  et  seq. 

91.  bin]  beene  Qq.  been  F4. 


92,  93.  aduocate  ...fhamefull  1  aduocat 
...fhamfull  Q4Q5. 

94.  thefe  ...  fufpedls ]  fuch  ...fufpedl 
Q7Qg.  these  wild  suspects  Pope,  + . 

95.  Rich !]  Fx. 

deny  that  you  were  not  ]  deny  too 
that  you  were  Han.  Cap. 

meane]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  Sing. 
Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Ktly,  Rife,  caufe 
Qq  et  cet. 


87.  Noble]  Wright:  A  very  obvious  pun,  to  which  a  worthy  parallel  may 
be  found  in  /  Henry  VI:  V,  iv,  23:  ‘You  have  suborn’d  this  man  Of  purpose  to 
obscure  my  noble  birth.  ’Tis  true  I  gave  a  noble  to  the  priest  The  morn  that 
I  was  wedded  to  her  mother.’ — Barnard:  The  ‘noble’  was  a  gold  coin  worth 
6s.  8d.,  or  half  a  mark.  It  was  first  struck  by  Edward  III.,  and  took  its  name 
from  the  excellence  of  the  metal.  The  sum  survives  in  the  solicitor’s  fee. 

88.  carefull]  Wright:  Compare  ‘O  full  of  careful  business  are  his  looks!’ 
Rich.  II:  II,  ii,  75. 

89.  hap]  Compare  I,  ii,  20. 

94.  in]  See  I,  ii,  287. 

94.  suspe<5\s]  Compare  III,  v,  37. 

95.  deny  .  .  .  not]  For  examples  of  a  double  negative,  see  Walker,  Crit.,  i,  66; 
and  line  66,  above  for  a  triple  negative,  see  Twelfth  Night,  III,  i,  163;  As  You 
Like  It,  I,  ii,  27,  of  this  ed. — R.  G.  White  (ed.  ii):  As  often  happened,  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  heedlessness  led  him  to  write  the  reverse  of  what  he  intended  to  write. 
[Inasmuch  as  this  ‘often  happens’  in  Shakespeare,  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  R.  G. 
White  has  not  furnished  us  with  at  least  a  few  examples. — Ed.] 

95.  meane]  The  Cowden-Clarkes:  It  is  noteworthy  that  not  only  does  Shake¬ 
speare  use  ‘  mean  ’  where  now  means  is  the  word  employed,  but  that  on  three  occa- 


86  THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iii. 

Of  my  Lord  Ha/lings  late  imprifonment.  96 

Rin.  She  may  my  Lord,  for - 

Rich.  She  may  Lord  Riuers ,  why  who  knowes  not  fo? 

She  may  do  more  fir  then  denying  that : 

She  may  helpe  you  to  many  faire  preferments,  100 

And  then  deny  her  ayding  hand  therein, 

And  lay  thofe  Honors  on  your  high  defert. 

What  may  fhe  not,  the  may,  I  marry  may  fhe. 

Riu.  What  marry  may  fhe  ? 

Ric.  What  marrie  may  fhe  ?  Marrie  with  a  King,  105 

A  Batcheller,  and  a  handfome  [tripling  too, 

I  wis  your  Grandam  had  a  worfer  match.  107 


97.  Riu.]  Ryu.  Q,.  Reu.  Q^. 

Lord ,  for - ]  Lord.  Qq. 

98.  Lord  Riuers]  Lo  :  Ryuers  Q,Q,. 
L.  Riuers  Q3-5. 

102.  defert  ]  deferts  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +. 

103.  may  fie]  my  fhe  Qs. 
fie  not,]  fhe  not  ?  Qj_s. 

may,  ...fhe.]  may,  ...she —  Cap. 
Cam.  + ,  Ktly.  may —  ...she —  Rowe  et 
cet. 

I]  yea  Qq,  Cam.  +  .  ay  Rowe 

et  cet. 


104,  105.  marry  ...marrie]  mary... 
mary  Q,. 

104 .  fhe?] fhe.  Qx. 

106.  Batcheller]  batchelor  Qt,F4. 
batcheler  Q^j. 

and  ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  Wh. 
i,  Hal.  Rife.  Ora.  Qq  et  cet. 

handfome]  handfom  F4,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Theob. 

107.  I  wis]  Iwis  Q,Q2Q3.  I-wis  Ktly. 
had  a]  had  Qs> 


sions  he  uses  means  as  if  it  were  a  singular  noun;  and,  moreover,  this  mode  of  par¬ 
lance  is  still  in  use;  we  sometimes  say:  ‘There  is  hardly  a  safer  means  of  effecting 
it.’ 

105.  King]  This,  of  course,  refers  to  Edward  IV. 

106.  stripling]  Skeat  {Diet.):  The  sense  is,  one  as  thin  as  a  strip,  a  growing 
lad  not  yet  filled  out.  Compare  ‘you  tailor’s  yard,  you  sheathe,  you  bow-case,’ 
1  Henry  IV:  II,  iv,  273. 

107.  I  wis]  Skeat  {Diet.):  It  is  to  be  particularly  noted  that  the  Middle  English 
prefix  i  { =  Anglo  Saxon  ge)  is  often  written  apart  from  the  rest  of  the  word,  and 
with  a  capital  letter.  Hence,  by  the  mistake  of  editors,  it  is  sometimes  printed 
‘I  wis,’  and  explained  to  mean  I  know.  Hence,  further,  the  imaginary  verb  wis, 
to  know,  has  found  its  way  into  our  dictionaries.  But  it  is  pure  fiction,  the  verb 
being  wit.  ‘I  wis’  means  certainly. 

107.  Grandam  .  .  .  worser  match]  Vaughan  (iii,  p.  20) :  It  is  remarkable 
that  Shakespeare,  at  first  sight,  seems  to  have  here  just  missed  a  taunt  which  would 
have  suited  the  language  of  Richard  more  precisely;  for  Lord  Rivers’s  mother 
did  marry  much  beneath  her,  and  his  father  was,  in  consequence,  fined  by  Henry  VI. 
for  his  presumption  in  achieving  this  alliance.  His  grandmother,  on  the  contrary, 
did  not  make  a  derogatory  match,  although  she  married  a  man  of  still  lower  rank, 
in  the  person  of  his  grandfather,  John  de  Wydevill,  who  was  a  simple  esquire  of 
the  county  of  Northampton.  In  the  general  sense  of  the  terms,  she  did  not  make 


act  i,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


8  7 
108 


Qu.  My  Lord  of  Gloufter,  I  haue  too  long  borne 
Your  blunt  vpbraidings,  and  your  bitter  fcoffes  : 

By  heauen,  I  will  acquaint  his  Maieftie  no 

Of  thofe  groffe  taunts  that  oft  I  haue  endur’d. 

I  had  rather  be  a  Countrie  feruant  maide 
Then  a  great  Queene,  with  this  condition, 

To  be  fo  baited,  fcorn’d,  and  ftormed  at, 

Small  ioy  haue  I  in  being  Englands  Queene.  1 15 

Enter  old  Queene  Margaret. 

Mar.  And  lefned  be  that  fmall,  God  I  befeech  him, 

Thy  honor,  ftate,  and  feate,  is  due  to  me. 

Rich.  What?  threat  you  me  with  telling  of  the  King  ? 

I  will  auouch’t  in  prefence  of  the  King  :  1 20 


III.  Of]  With  Qq,  Cap.  Mai.  Sta. 
Cam.  + ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

that  oft  I]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll. 
Dyce  i,  Wh.  i,  Hal.  I  often  Qq  et  cet. 

l\  2.  feruant  maide]  serving-maid 
Coll.  Wh.  i,  Hal. 

1 14.  fo  baited ,  f corn'd,  ...formed] 
thus  taunted ,  f corned  ...  bailed  Qq, 
Pope,  +  ,  Var.  ’21,  Coll.  Sing.  Hal.  Sta. 
Cam. +  ,  Huds. 

formed ]  form'd  F  .  stormed 
Dyce,  Huds. 

1 16.  Enter...]  Scene  iv.  Enter... 
Pope,  Han.  Warb.  Johns.  After  line 


1 14.  Qq,  Cap.  Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Cam.  +  . 

1 16.  old  Queene  Margaret.]  Qu.  Mar¬ 
garet.  Qq  ( Margret  Qj-j.  )  Rowe,  + 
(subs.).  ...  at  a  distance.  Cap.  et  seq. 
(subs.) 

1 17.  lefned ]  lessen'd  Rowe  et  seq. 
him]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  Dyce, 

Wh.  i,  Huds.  thee  Qq  et  cet. 

1 19.  telling  of  telling ,  or  Q2. 

King?]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope.  King? 

Tell  him  and  fpare  not ,  looke  what  I 
haue  fayd  Qq  (I fayd  Q3_g. )  et  cet. 

120.  auouch't  ]  Ff,  Rowe,  auouch  Qq 
et  cet. 


even  a  ‘bad  match,’  because  it  was  equal  and  suitable.  But  in  truth  it  would 
have  less  well  suited  the  Duke  of  Gloucester  to  allude  to  her  mother’s  derogatory 
marriage,  than  to  her  grandmother’s  equal  marriage,  inasmuch  as  it  would  have 
recalled  the  only  bright  point  of  Elizabeth’s  descent — that  is,  the  rank  of  her  mother 
Jacquetta,  daughter  of  the  Earl  of  St  Paul,  who,  when  Duchess  of  Bedford,  con¬ 
descended  to  a  union  with  Sir  Richard  Wydevill,  who  was  only  a  knight. 

107.  worser]  For  examples  of  double  comparative,  see  Abbott,  §  ii. 

111.  Of]  That  is,  about ,  concerning ;  as  in  the  titles  of  Bacon’s  Essays. 

1 1 2.  seruant  maide]  Rolfe  notes  that  serving-maid  (See  Text.  Notes )  is  a 
word  ‘which  Shakespeare  nowhere  uses.’ 

1 14.  stormed]  See  I,  ii,  73,  or  Walker  ( Vers .,  p.  45).  Compare  Mer.  of  Ven., 
I,  iii,  138:  ‘Why  look  you,  how  you  storm.’  Also  Rom.  Jul.,  I,  v,  62:  ‘Wher- 
fore  storm  you  so?’ 

117.  him]  For  other  instances  of  like  substitution,  see  Walker,  Crit.,  i,  215. 

1 19.  with  telling  of  the  King]  Compare  ‘  I  mean  your  voice  for  crowning  of 
the  king,’  III,  iv,  34. 

120.  I  will  .  .  .  King]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  9):  Though  a 
slight  change  [‘  avouch' t  ’]  is  introduced  in  this  line,  to  save  the  grammar,  which  had 


88 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iii. 


I  dare  aduenture  to  be  fent  to  th’Towre.  12 1 

’Tis  time  to  fpeake, 

My  paines  are  quite  forgot. 

Margaret.  Out  Diuell, 

I  do  remember  them  too  well :  125 


121.  I  dare ...  Tenure]  Om.  Qq, 
Pope,  + . 

to  be ]  be  Steev.  conj. 

122.  123.  ’  Tis... forgot]  Ff,  Rowe. 
One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

123.  My]  when  Q^g. 


124,  125.  Out. .. well :]  Ff,  Rowe. 
One  line,  Knt,  Coll.  VVh.  i,  Hal. 
One  line,  and  reading  I  remember  Qq  et 
cet. 

125.  them]  thee  Theob.  ii,  Warb. 
Johns. 


been  disordered  by  the  omission  [of  the  Quarto  line],  I  am  inclined  to  think  that 
the  omission  itself  was  an  accident.  This  change  may  have  been  introduced  by 
the  reader  or  editor  merely  to  make  sense.  But  a  new  line  [121]  has  been  added 
to  the  passage,  as  in  the  Quarto,  which,  as  the  Cambridge  editors  adopt  it,  I  presume 
they  do  not  include  among  those  which  cannot  be  ascribed  to  Shakespeare.  This 
line  I  suppose  to  have  been  inserted  in  a  copy  (containing  the  line  omitted  in  the 
Folio)  which  was  sent  to  the  printer;  and  I  suppose  both  the  loss  of  the  missing  line 
and  the  insertion  of  the  ‘V  in  that  which  followed,  to  have  been  the  work  of  the 
printing  office,  no  other  corrector  having  seen  or  had  anything  to  do  with  it.  ...  I 
have  no  doubt  that  in  printing  the  first  three  lines  as  in  the  Quarto,  and  inserting  the 
line  which  was  added  in  the  Folio,  the  Cambridge  editors  have  restored  the  passage 
to  the  shape  in  which  Shakespeare  intended  it  to  stand.  [‘Tell  him  and  spare  not 
look  what  I  have  said,  I  will  avouch  in  presence  of  the  King;  I  dare  adventure 
to  be  sent  to  the  Tower.’  This  reading  commended  by  Spedding  is  not  the 
Cambridge  Editors’,  but  Capell’s,  and  is  adopted  by  the  majority  of  editors. 
— Ed.] — Pickersgill  {Ibid.,  p.  84) :  It  is  perfectly  true  that  there  is  scarcely  any 
error  more  common  with  the  early  printers  of  Shakespeare’s  plays  than  the  omission 
of  a  line;  but  it  is  not  usual  with  them,  as  far  as  I  know,  to  make  alterations  in  order 
to  remedy  the  disorder  which  is  thereby  occasioned.  Take  from  this  very  play  an 
instance,  where  the  printer,  through  omitting  a  line,  has  produced  absolute  nonsense: 
‘These  babes  for  Clarence  weep,  so  do  not  they,’  II,  ii,  89.  I  am,  therefore,  of  the 
opinion  that  the  alteration  was  intentionally  made  by  the  corrector,  and  I  can  easily 
understand  that  the  omitted  line  was  too  free  and  vigourous  for  his  taste.  With 
regard  to  the  omitted  line  of  the  Folio,  I  should  say  that  it  is  Shakespeare’s,  but 
it  was  intentionally  omitted  from  the  Quarto.  To  my  mind  it  is  much  better  away, 
and  a  judicious  corrector  would  not  have  restored  it. 

124.  Out]  Murray  {N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  ‘Out,’  interjection ):  1.  As  an  imperative 
exclamation,  with  ellipsis  of  verb.  2.  An  exclamation  expressing  lamentation, 
abhorrence,  or  indignant  reproach;  often  conjoined  with  alas /  [Compare:  ‘Out 
on  ye  owls  !’  IV,  iii,  543.] 

125.  them]  Both  Warburton  and  Johnson  printed,  I  think,  from  Theobald’s 
second  edition,  where  the  text  here  reads  thee  for  ‘  them.’  Warburton  proposes 
and  prints  No  instead  of  ‘Out’;  Johnson  objects  to  this  change  and  suggests 
that  ‘Out’  be  retained  but  that  thee  be  amended  to  ‘them,’  unconscious  of  the 
fact  that  he  is  merely  restoring  the  original  text.  Neither  Warburton’s  nor  John¬ 
son’s  note  was  included  in  the  Variorum  of  1821. — Ed. 


act  i,  sc.  iii. ] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


89 

126 


Thou  killd’ft  my  Husband  Henrie  in  the  Tower, 

And  Edward  my  poore  Son,  at  Tewkesburie. 

Rich.  Ere  you  were  Queene, 

I,  or  your  Husband  King  : 

I  was  a  packe-horfe  in  his  great  affaires  : 

A  weeder  out  of  his  proud  Aduerfaries, 

A  liberall  rewarder  of  his  Friends, 

To  royalize  his  blood,  I  fpent  mine  owue. 

Margaret.  I  and  much  better  blood 
Then  his,  or  thine. 

Rich.  In  all  which  time, you  and  your  Husband  Grey 
Were  fadlious,  for  the  Houfe  of  Lancajler  ; 

And  Riuers,  fo  were  you  :  Was  not  your  Husband, 

In  Margarets  Battaile,  at  Saint  Albovs,  flaine  ?  1 39 


130 


135 


126.  killd'Jl]JleweJl  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 
kild'Jl  Fa. 

127.  Tewkesburie]  Teuxburie  Qq. 
(  Teuxbury  Qx. )  Tewksbury  F3F4< 

128,  129.  Ere. ..King]  Ff,  Rowe. 
One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

129,  134.  I]  Yea  Qq,  Cam. +.  Ay 
Rowe  et  cet. 

133 •  fPent\  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Sing. 
Wh.  i,  Hal.  Ktly,  Rife,  fpilt  Qq  et  cet. 


133.  owue]  Ft. 

134,  *35-  I.. .thine]  Ff,  Rowe.  One 
line,  Qq  et  cet. 

137.  Lancafter]  Lancanjler  Q3Q4- 

138.  you:  tVas]  you,  was  Qt.  you. 
Ws  Q2.  you.  Was  Qq,  Cam.  +  ,  Ktly, 
Coll.  iii. 

139.  Margarets]  Marg  'ret 's  Pope,  + . 
Albons]  A/bones  QI(>  Albans 


128,  129.  Ere  .  .  .  King]  Wright:  In  1460,  when  Edward  first  became  king, 
Richard  was  eight  years  old;  but  the  dramatist  has  disregarded  the  facts  of  history 
throughout  the  play.  [Is  it  not  well  to  bear  in  mind  that  many  allusions  such  as 
the  present  may  really  refer  to  incidents  in  the  older  play,  the  True  Tragedie  oj 
Richard,  Duke  oj  Yorke,  which  later  became  3  Henry  VI.,  and  hereby  relieve 
Shakespeare,  as  a  dramatist,  from  all  inaccuracy  as  an  historian?  See  note  by 
Malone  on  11.  137-9,  below. — Ed.] 

133.  royalize]  Steevens:  So,  in  Claudius  Tiberius  Nero,  1607:  ‘  Who  means 
tomorrow  for  to  royalize  The  triumphs.’ — Wright:  Florio  (W orlde  oj  Wordes, 
1598)  has,  ‘  Realizzare,  to  royalize  or  make  kinglie.’ 

137—1:39.  Were  factious  .  .  .  slaine]  Johnson:  It  is  said  in  3  Hen.  VI:  III, 
ii,  6,  that  Sir  John  Grey  died  ‘in  quarrel  of  the  house  of  York.’ — Malone  ( Note 
on  3  Hen.  VI:  III,  ii,  6):  This  is  in  every  particular  a  falsification  of  history. 
Sir  J  ohn  Grey  fell  in  the  second  battle  of  St.  Albans,  which  was  fought  on  Shrove 
Tuesday,  1460-1,  fighting  on  the  side  of  King  Henry.  Shakespeare  in  new  mould¬ 
ing  this  play  [j  Hen.  VI.]  followed  implicitly  his  author  (for  these  five  lines,  with 
only  a  slight  variation,  are  found  in  the  old  play)  without  giving  himself  the  trouble 
to  examine  the  history;  but  a  few  years  afterwards,  when  writing  Richard  III.,  he 
was  not  warped  by  a  preceding  misrepresentation  of  another  writer:  he  stated 
from  the  chronicles  this  matter  truly  as  it  was;  and  this  is  one  of  the  numerous 


90 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iii. 


Let  me  put  in  your  mindes,  if  you  forget  140 

What  you  haue  beene  ere  this,  and  what  you  are : 

Withall,  what  I  haue  beene,  and  what  I  am. 

Q.M.  A  murth’rous  Villaine,  and  fo  ftill  thou  art. 

Rich.  Poore  Clarence  did  forfake  his  Father  Warwicke , 

I,  and  forfwore  himfelfe  (which  Iefu  pardon.)  145 

Q.  M.  Which  God  reuenge. 

Rich.  To  fight  on  Edwards  partie,  for  the  Crowne, 

And  for  his  meede,  poore  Lord,  he  is  mewed  vp  : 

I  would  to  God  my  heart  were  Flint,  like  Edwards , 

Or  Edivards  foft  and  pittifull,  like  mine  ;  150 

I  am  too  childifh  foolifh  for  this  World. 

(2-Tf.High  thee  to  Hell  for  fhame,  &  leaue  this  World 
Thou  Cacodemon,  there  thy  Kingdome  is.  153 


140.  mindes]  minde  Qs> 
you]  yours  Qq. 

141.  this]  nozuQ q,  Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Mai. 
Ran.  Steev.  Varr.  Cam.  +  ,  Huds. 

143.  murth'  rous]  Ff,  Rowe, +  ,  Wh. 
i.  murtherous  Qq,  Knt.  murderous 
Cam. +,  Huds.  tnurd'rous Johns,  etcet. 
148.  Lord ]  Lo  :  Q,Qa. 


15X.  childifh  foolifh]  Ff,  Rowe,  child¬ 
ifh,  foolifh  Q,Q3,  Pope,  Han.  childish- 
foolish  Theob.  et  cet. 

152.  Hfh]  F2.  /£*Q3Q4F3F4.  Hie 

Q,Q,  et  cet- 

this ]  the  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

153.  Cacodemon ]  Cacodocmon  F3F4> 
cacadcemon  Cap.  (corrected  in  Errata). 


circumstances  that  prove  incontestably,  in  my  apprehension,  that  he  was  not  the 
original  author  of  2  and  3  Henry  VI. 

139.  Margarets  Battaile]  Ritson:  That  is,  Margaret’s  army. — Wright:  It 
is  called  ‘  Margaret’s  battle  ’  because  she  was  victorious  in  it,  to  distinguish  it  from 
the  first  battle,  fought  on  Thursday,  22  May,  1455,  in  which  Henry  was  defeated. 
No  doubt  there  are  plenty  of  instances  in  which  ‘battle’  means  army,  but  this  is 
not  one. 

140.  Let  me  .  .  .  forget]  Capell  (ii,  176):  The  numbers  of  this  line  are  so 
remarkable  in  themselves  (three  trochees  with  intervention  of  one  iambus)  and 
so  accommodated  to  the  passion  and  character,  a  reader’s  notice  is  due  to 
them. 

144.  Clarence  .  .  .  Warwicke]  See  3  Hen.  VI:  V,  i,  or  Boswell-Stone,  p. 
335.  Clarence  married  Isabel  Neville,  Warwick’s  elder  daughter. 

147.  on  Edwards  partie]  Compare:  ‘hopes  to  find  you  forward  Upon  his 
party.’— Ill,  ii,  54;  also  IV,  iii,  565. 

148.  meede]  That  is,  reward.  See  I,  iv,  282. 

148.  mewed]  Wright:  The  pun  is  exceedingly  bad,  though  perhaps  not  worse 
than  those  which  abound  in  the  three  parts  of  Henry  VI. 

1 5 1.  childish  foolish]  For  other  examples  of  compound  adjectives,  see  Walker, 
Crit.  i,  21,  or  Abbott,  §  2.  See  ‘  eluish-mark’d,’  1.  237;  gentle-sleeping,  1.  300 
post. 

153.  Cacodemon]  Wright:  That  is,  evil  demon,  evil  spirit.  The  word  occurs 


ACT  I,  SC.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


9l 


Riu.  My  Lord  of  Glofter :  in  thofe  bufie  dayes, 

Which  here  you  vrge,  to  proue  vs  Enemies,  1 55 

We  follow’d  then  our  Lord,  our  Soueraigne  King, 

So  fhould  we  you,  if  you  fhould  be  our  King. 

Rich.  If  I  fhould  be  ?  I  had  rather  be  a  Pedler  : 

Farre  be  it  from  my  heart,  the  thought  thereof. 

Qu.  As  little  ioy  (my  Lord,)  as  you  fuppofe  160 

You  fhould  enioy,  were  you  this  Countries  King, 

As  little  ioy  you  may  fuppofe  in  me, 

That  I  enioy,  being  the  Queene  thereof. 

Q.M.  A  little  ioy  enioyes  the  Queene  thereof, 

For  I  am  fhee,  and  altogether  ioyleffe  :  165 


154,  156.  Lord]  Lo:  Q.Q,. 

156.  follow' d]  follow  Q?. 

Soueraigne]  lawfull  Qq,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Ran.  Steev. 
Varr.  Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 
sod  reign  Pope,  Han. 

157-  we  you]  we  now  Q6Q7. 
you,  if]  you  if  Qf. 
fhould]  would  F3F4. 


159.  thereof]  of  it  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +  , 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  Coll.  iii. 

160.  Qu.]  Q.  M.  Q,Q,.  Qu.  Nar.  Q.. 
Qu.  Mar.  Q6Q7.  Q.  Mar.  Q,. 

162.  you  may]  may  you  Qq,  Cap.  Sta. 
Cam. +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

164.  Q.M.]  Om.  Q7Qg. 

A]  As  Heath,  Dyce,  Sta.  Wh. 
ii,  Marshall.  And  Wh.  i. 


nowhere  else  in  Shakespeare,  and  savours  rather  of  a  playwright  who  had  been 
to  the  University.  It  had  made  its  way  into  Italian.  Florio  (A  Worlde  0 f  Words, 
1598)  gives:  * Cacodemone,  an  euill  spirit  or  diuell.’  It  appears  also  to  have  been 
used  in  the  language  of  astrology,  ‘  Mars  with  the  dragon’s  tail  in  the  third  house, 
.  .  .  Then  Jupiter  in  the  twelfth  the  Cacodemon,’  Beaumont  and  Fletcher,  The 
Bloody  Brother,  IV,  ii. 

156.  Soueraigne  King]  Knight:  The  correction  of  the  Folio  was  certainly 
necessary;  for  Rivers  would  hardly  have  ventured  to  use  the  epithet  lawful  (legiti¬ 
mate)  in  the  presence  of  Gloucester. — Marshall:  Compare,  for  a  like  sentiment, 
3  Henry  VI:  III,  i,  95,  96,  also  Heywood,  2  Edward  IV.,  (Works,  p.  133).  [The 
lines  from  3  Henry  VI:  appear,  but  with  slight  variation,  in  the  older  play,  The 
True  Tragedie  0}  Richard  Duke  of  Yorke,  III,  iii,  50-52,  ed.  Cam. — Ed.] 

160-162.  As  .  .  .  As]  Vaughan:  Either-  the  second  ‘as,’  it  seems,  should  be 
altered  into  so,  or  the  second  ‘as  little  joy,’  omitted.  If  the  present  form  is  to  be 
preserved,  I  have  suspected  that  Shakespeare  wrote  ‘A  little  joy.’  This  suggestion 
is  confirmed  by  the  language  in  which  Margaret  echoes  this  sentiment  of  Eliza¬ 
beth.  [According  to  the  text  of  the  Quartos  and  Ff,  where  a  comma  follows 
‘King,’  Vaughan’s  grammatical  criticism  is,  of  course,  just;  but  with  a  period 
after  ‘King,’  as  in  the  Ff,  his  criticism  is,  I  think,  needless.  In  the  present  text 
we  have  two  parallel  sentences:  ‘  You  suppose  you  would  have  little  joy  were 
you  King;  with  equal  right  you  may  suppose  that  I  would  have  little  joy  in  being 
Queen.’  There  is  no  exact  proportion  intimated,  as  there  would  be  in  ‘just  as 
little  joy  as  you  would  feel  just  so  little  joy  I  would  feel’;  but  merely  a  parallel 
is  implied  in  the  Ff. — Ed.] 


92 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF 


[act  i,  sc.  iii. 

1 66 


I  can  no  longer  hold  me  patient. 

Heare  me,  you  wrangling  Pyrates,  that  fall  out, 

In  (haring  that  which  you  haue  pill’d  from  me :  168 

1 66.  patient.  ]  patient:  Qt.  patient.  1 68.  In  /haring]  In  /having  out  Qq. 

[advancing.  Cap.  et  seq.  (subs.)  patient.  (/ /baking  out  Q7Qg). 

[She  advances.  They  all  start.  Coll.  you]  yon  Fa. 

(MS).  pill’d]  pild  Qq. 

167.  you]  ye  Johns. 


166.  I  can  .  .  .  patient]  Warburton:  This  scene  of  Margaret’s  imprecations 
is  fine  and  artful.  She  prepares  the  audience,  like  another  Cassandra,  for  the 
following  tragic  revolutions. — Steevens:  Surely  the  merits  of  this  scene  are 
insufficient  to  excuse  its  improbability.  Margaret,  bullying  the  court  of  England 
in  the  royal  palace,  is  a  circumstance  as  absurd  as  the  courtship  of  Gloster  in 
a  public  street. — Gervinus  (i,  386):  The  excess  and  repetition  of  Margaret’s 
revengeful  curses  alone  are  to  be  blamed,  not  the  thing  itself.  We  must  be  on 
our  guard  of  appearing  on  the  side  of  those  interpreters  who  consider  the  intro¬ 
duction  of  Margaret,  and  her  reproaches  at  court,  absurd,  as  well  as  Richard’s 
wooing  in  the  street.  It  is  a  wise  contrast,  which  necessitates  the  part  assigned  to 
Margaret,  and  even  the  glaring  prominence  given  to  her  curses  and  their  fulfilment 
has  its  wise  intention.  The  more  secretly  the  sins  of  this  brood  of  hypocrites  were 
practised,  the  more  visibly  and  notoriously  would  punishment  overtake  them; 
the  manifest  retribution  of  God  should  appear  all  the  more  evident  against  the 
secrecy  and  the  deceit  of  men;  and  the  interference  of  eternal  justice  ought  plainly 
to  appear  against  the  evil-doers  who  think  to  ensnare  heaven  itself;  who  believe 
not  in  an  avenging  power,  nor  in  the  curse,  which  rests  on  evil  deeds  themselves. — 
Wright:  The  extravagance  of  the  situation  is  in  harmony  with  the  exaggeration 
of  the  principal  character.  If  we  once  accept  Richard  as  a  reality,  nothing  else 
in  the  play  is  out  of  proportion.  In  his  world  such  things  would  not  appear  incon¬ 
gruous. — Collier  ( Emendations ,  etc.,  p.  325):  Manuscript  stage-directions  are 
hardly  as  numerous  in  this  as  in  some  other  plays;  but  still  on  all  occasions  they 
are  sufficient  for  the  due  conduct  of  the  representation;  when,  for  instance,  ‘old 
Queen  Margaret’  arrives,  a  note  of  behind  is  made  against  every  sentence  she 
utters,  until  she  conies  forth  with  ‘I  can  no  longer,’  etc.  Start  all  is  then  added 
in  the  margin,  to  indicate  the  surprise,  if  not  alarm,  her  sudden  appearance 
created. 

168.  In]  That  is,  while,  during.  For  other  examples,  see,  if  needful,  Abbott, 

§  164. 

168.  sharing]  Wright:  For  this  earlier  and  literal  (Anglo-Saxon  sceren,  to 
divide)  sense,  compare  Timon,  IV,  ii,  23:  ‘The  latest  of  my  wealth  I’ll  share 
amongst  you.’  Also  /  Henry  IV:  II,  ii,  104. 

168.  pill’d]  Skeat:  Also  spelt  peel.  But  the  words  peel,  to  strip,  and  peel,  to 
plunder,  are  from  different  sources,  though  much  confused;  we  even  find  ‘pill’ 
used  in  the  sense  to  strip.  The  sense  of  stripping  goes  back  to  Latin  pellis,  skin, 
or  to  pilare,  to  deprive  of  hair. — Wright  quotes,  as  an  illustration  of  this  use  of 
‘pill,’  Richard  II:  II,  i,  246:  ‘The  commons  hath  he  pill’d  with  grievous  taxes,’ 
and  Hall,  Edward  IV:  p.  302:  ‘But  what  soeuer  their  outward  words  were,  their 


ACT  I,  SC.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


93 


Which  off  you  trembles  not,  that  lookes  on  me  ? 

If  not,  that  I  am  Queene,  you  bow  like  Subiedts  ;  170 

Yet  that  by  you  depos’d,  you  quake  like  Rebells. 

Ah  gentle  Villaine,  doe  not  turne  away.  (fight  ? 

Rich.Foule  wrinckled  Witch,  what  mak’ft  thou  in  my 
Q.M.  But  repetition  of  what  thou  haft  marr’d, 

That  will  I  make,  before  I  let  thee  goe.  175 

Rich.  Wert  thou  not  banifhed,  on  paine  of  death  ? 


169.  off]  F,. 

170.  am ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Wh.  i,  Rife. 
being  Qq  et  cet. 

17 1.  by  you]  by  ou  Q3.  by  on  Q4> 
depos'd]  difpofed  Q7Q8. 

Rebells.]  rebels :  Qq.  ( reabels  : 

Q?.)  Reblls.  F2.  Rebels.  F3F4,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Theob.  i.  rebels  ?  Theob.  ii  et 


seq. 

172.  Ah  gentle]  O  gentle  Qq.  ( gentile 
Q?.)  Sta.  Cam.-!-. 

173.  mak'Jl]  makest  Huds. 

174.  marr’d]  mard  Qq. 

176-178.  Rich.  Wert ...  abode]  Om. 

Qq. 

176.  banifhed]  banished  Dyce. 


inward  cogitacions  were  onlye  hope  of  spoyle,  and  desyre  to  robbe  and  pyll.’  [Com¬ 
pare  also  Tirnon,  IV,  i,  12.] 

170.  I  am  Queene]  R.  G.  White:  The  sense  is  clear  enough  in  the  Folio, 
and  the  construction  preferable  in  respect  to  the  impressiveness  of  the  speech. 
I  am  convinced  that  the  change  [from  the  Quarto]  was  made  by  the  author  partly 
for  these  reasons,  partly  to  avoid  the  very  unpleasant  cacophony  being  queen. — 
Spedding:  This  is  one  of  those  slight  changes  which  easily  make  themselves  in  the 
process  of  printing.  The  meaning  is  clear  enough,  but  the  wording  (though  not 
altogether  unlike  the  style  in  which  Margaret  sometimes  expresses  herself)  is 
so  unusual  as  to  provoke  conjectural  emendation. 

172.  gentle  Villaine]  Warburton:  We  should  read  ungentle  villain. — John¬ 
son:  The  meaning  of  ‘gentle’  is  not,  as  the  commentator  imagines,  tender  or 
courteous,  but  high-born.  An  opposition  is  meant  between  that  and  ‘villain,’ 
which  means  at  once  a  wicked  and  a  low-born  wretch.  So  before:  ‘Since  every 
Jack  is  made  a  gentleman  There’s  many  a  gentle  person  made  a  Jack.’ — J.  M. 
Mason:  ‘Gentle’  appears  to  me  to  be  taken  in  its  common  acceptation,  but  to 
be  used  ironically. — The  Cowden-Clarkes:  By  the  epithet  ‘gentle’  we  think  is 
involved  many  significant  and  taunting  allusions.  She  means  he  is  high  by  birth, 
low  by  nature;  a  supreme  or  arch  villain,  a  smooth-tongued  or  stealthy  villain, 
who  would  creep  away  from  her  presence  to  avoid  her  reproaches. 

173.  mak’st]  Wright:  That  is,  what  dost  thou?  The  temptation  to  pun 
upon  ‘make’  and  ‘mar’  seems  to  have  been  irresistible.  Compare  Love's  Labour's 
Lost,  IV,  iii,  190-192;  also  As  You  Like  It,  I,  i,  31-34. 

176.  Wert  thou  not  banished]  Malone:  Margaret  fled  into  France  after  the 
battle  of  Hexham  in  1464,  and  Edward  soon  afterwards  issued  a  proclamation 
prohibiting  any  of  his  subjects  from  aiding  her  to  return,  or  harbouring  her 
should  she  attempt  to  revisit  England.  She  remained  abroad  till  the  14th  of 
April,  1471,  when  she  landed  at  Weymouth.  After  the  battle  of  Tewkesbury, 
May,  1471,  she  was  confined  in  the  Tower  until  1475.  She  died  in  France  in 


94 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  SC.  iii. 


Q.M.  I  was  :but  I  doe  find  more  paine  in  banifhment,  177 
Then  death  can  yeeld  me  here,  by  my  abode. 

A  Husband  and  a  Sonne  thou  ow’ft  to  me, 

And  thou  a  Kingdome  ;  all  of  you,  allegeance  :  180 

This  Sorrow  that  I  haue,  by  right  is  yours, 

And  all  the  Pleafures  you  vfurpe,  are  mine. 

Rich.  The  Curfe  my  Noble  Father  layd  on  thee, 

When  thou  didft  Crown  his  Warlike  Brows  with  Paper, 

And  with  thy  fcornes  drew’ft  Riuers  from  his  eyes,  185 

And  then  to  dry  them,gau’ft  the  Duke  a  Clowt, 

Steep’d  in  the  faultleffe  blood  of  prettie  Rutland: 

His  Curfes  then,  from  bitterneffe  of  Soule, 

Denounc’d  againft  thee,  are  all  falne  vpon  thee  : 

And  God,  not  we,  hath  plagu’d  thy  bloody  deed.  190 


177.  I  was"]  One  line,  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

178.  my ]  Om.  Ff. 

179.  ow'Jl]  owejl  Qq,  Cam. +  ,  Huds. 
to]  vnto  Q6Q7Q8. 

181.  This]  The  Qq,  Pope,  +  ,  Sta. 
Cam.  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

182.  Pleafures]  pleafure  Q?. 
are]  is  Q^. 

183.  my]  me  Q*. 


183.  on]  one  Q7Qg. 

185.  fcornes]  fcorne  Qq,  Sta. 

187.  faultleffe]  Q,Qa.  Om.  Q^. 

189.  Denounc'd]  Denounfl  Q,Q2Q3. 
all]  Om.  Q^Ff. 

190.  hath]  have  F3F4,  Rowe,  has 
Pope,  + . 

plagu ’  d  ]  plagde  Q,Q2.  plagude 
Q3Q5-  plaugde  Q4. 


1482.  The  present  scene  is  in  1477;  so  that  her  introduction  here  is  a  mere  poet¬ 
ical  fiction. 

183-187.  The  Curse  .  .  .  Rutland]  See  3  Henry  VI:  I,  iv,  78-95. — Moulton 
(p.  1 1 3):  The  key-note  struck  by  Gloucester  is  taken  up  in  chorus  by  the  rest, 
who  find  relief  from  the  crushing  effect  of  Margaret’s  curses  by  pressing  the  charge 
home  upon  her.  This  is  only  a  detail,  but  it  is  enough  to  carry  the  effect  of  the 
enveloping  action  a  degree  further  back  in  time:  the  events  of  the  play  are  a  nemesis 
on  York  for  wrongs  done  to  Lancaster,  but  now  it  seems  these  old  wrongs  against 
Lancaster  were  retribution  for  yet  older  crimes  Lancaster  had  committed  against 
York.  As  in  architecture  the  vista  is  contrived  so  as  to  carry  the  general  design 
of  the  building  into  indefiniteness,  so  here,  while  the  grand  nemesis,  of  which 
Margaret’s  presence  is  the  representative,  shuts  in  the  play  like  a  veil,  the  momentary 
lifting  of  the  veil  opens  up  a  vista  of  nemeses  receding  further  and  further  back 
into  history. 

185.  scornes]  Wright:  The  singular  of  the  Quartos  is  less  dissonant  in  a  line 
already  abounding  in  sibilants.  Otherwise  *  scorns’  in  the  sense  of  scoffs,  expressions 
of  scorn,  has  plenty  of  authority.  Compare  Hamlet,  III,  i,  70:  ‘For  who  would 
bear  the  whips  and  scorns  of  time?’  Also  Othello,  IV,  i,  83. 

190.  plagu’d]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  verb,  1.  transit.):  To  afflict  with  plague 
or  calamity  (especially  in  reference  to  divine  punishment);  to  torment,  harass. 
Perhaps  sometimes  like  Latin  plagare,  to  strike.  Now  rare  or  archaic. 


act  I,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


95 

I9I 


Qu.  So  iuft  is  God,  to  right  the  innocent. 

Haft.  0,’twas  the  fouleft  deed  to  flay  that  Babe, 

And  the  moft  mercilefle,that  ere  was  heard  of. 

7?f«.Tyrants  themfelues  wept  when  it  was  reported. 

Dorf.No  man  but  prophecied  reuenge  for  it.  195 

Buck.  Northumberland ,  then  prefent,  wept  to  fee  it. 

Q.M.  What  ?  were  you  fnarling  all  before  I  came, 

Ready  to  catch  each  other  by  the  throat, 

And  turne  you  all  your  hatred  now  on  me  ? 

Did  Yorkes  dread  Curfe  preuaile  fo  much  with  Heauen,  200 
That  Henries  death,  my  louely  Edwards  death, 

Their  Kingdomes  Ioffe,  my  wofull  Banifhment, 

Should  all  but  anfwer  for  that  peeuifh  Brat  ? 

Can  Curfes  pierce  the  Clouds,  and  enter  Heauen  ? 

Why  then  giue  way  dull  Clouds  to  my  quick  Curfes.  205 


191.  Qu.]  Q.Mar.  Rowe,  Pope.Theob. 
Queen  Elizabeth.  Warb.  conj.  Mai.  et 
seq. 

193.  ere]  euer  Qq.  e' re  F3F4. 

199.  all. ..now]  Q,,Ff  («/  Fa.)  now 


...all  Qq.  [now. ..now  Q7Qj). 

199.  on]  one  Q?. 

202.  Ioffe]  loft  Q7Qg. 

203.  Should]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll. 
Wh.  i,  Hal.  Rife.  Could  Qq  et  cet. 


191.  So  .  .  .  innocent]  Ritson:  So,  in  Thomas,  Lord  Cromwell,  1602:  ‘How 
just  is  God  to  right  the  innocent?’  [p.  231,  Fourth  Folio,  col.  6]. — Wright:  The 
author  of  Thomas,  Lord  Cromwell,  must  have  copied  from  Richard  III.  or  repeated 
himself. 

192.  that  Babe]  Shakespeare  is  here  referring  not  to  the  historic  murder  of 
Rutland  by  Clifford,  but  to  the  episode  as  it  is  given  in  the  True  Tragedie 
of  Richard  Duke  of  York,  I,  iii,  and  with  but  a  few  small  changes  repeated  in 
3  Henry  VI:  I,  iii.  The  author  of  the  True  Tragedie  was,  possibly,  misled  by 
Hall,  who  speaks  of  Rutland  as,  at  this  time,  ‘  scarce  of  the  age  of  .xii.  yeres,  a  faire 
gentleman  and  a  maydenlike  person.’  In  fact,  Edmund,  Earl  of  Rutland,  the 
third  son  of  the  Duke  of  York,  was  born  in  1443,  therefore  at  the  Battle  of  Wake¬ 
field,  in  1460,  he  was  seventeen  years  old — nine  years  older  than  Richard. — Ed. 

196.  Northumberland  ...  it]  Northumberland  was  not  a  witness  to  the  murder, 
but  was  moved  to  tears  by  the  sight  of  York’s  grief.  See  3  Henry  VI:  I,  iv,  169 
et  seq. — Ed. 

203.  but]  J.  M.  Mason:  The  sense  seems  to  require  that  we  should  read 
‘Could  all  not’;  there  are  no  words  so  frequently  mistaken  for  each  other  as  not 
and  ‘but.’ — Malone:  ‘But’  is  only — could  nothing  less  answer  for  the  death 
of  that  brat  than  the  death  of  my  Henry  and  Edward?  [For  examples  of  ‘but’ 
meaning  only  see,  if  needful,  Abbott,  §  128.] 

203.  peeuish]  Dyce  (Gloss.):  This  word  appears  to  have  generally  signified, 
during  Shakespeare’s  days,  silly,  foolish,  trifling,  though  no  doubt  the  word  was 
formerly  used  to  signify,  as  now,  pettish,  perverse. 

205.  dull  .  .  .  quick]  For  this  use  of  ‘dull’  in  the  sense  of  dead,  lifeless,  compare 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc,  iii. 


96 

Though  not  by  Warre,  by  Surfet  dye  your  King,  206 

As  ours  by  Murther,  to  make  him  a  King. 

Edward  thy  Sonne,  that  now  is  Prince  of  Wales, 

For  Edward  our  Sonne,  that  was  Prince  of  Wales, 

Dye  in  his  youth,  by  like  vntimely  violence.  210 

Thy  felfe  a  Queene,  for  me  that  was  a  Queene, 

Out-liue  thy  glory,  like  my  wretched  felfe  : 

Long  rnay’ft  thou  liue,to  wayle  thy  Childrens  death, 

And  fee  another,  as  I  fee  thee  now, 

Deck’d  in  thy  Rights,  as  thou  art  ftall’d  in  mine.  215 

Long  dye  thy  happie  dayes,  before  thy  death, 

And  after  many  lengthened  howres  of  griefe, 

Dye  neyther  Mother,  Wife,  nor  Englands  Queene. 

Riuers  and  Dorfet ,  you  were  ftanders  by,  219 


206.  Though ]  If  Qq,  Pope, +  ,  Sta. 
Cam.  +. 

207.  ours ]  our  Q3Q5-  out  Q4. 
Murther ]  Ff,  Rowe,  4- ,  Knt,Wh. 

i,  Rife,  murder  Qq,  Var.  ’73  et  cet. 

208.  209.  tkat...that~\  which... which 
Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

209.  our\  my  Qq,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Huds. 

was~\  was  a  Q  .  was  the  Qg. 

210.  Dye\  Died  Q8. 
violence ]  violences  Q6Q,. 


212.  Out-liue ]  Outline  Q,Qa,  Knt, 
Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Hal.  Sta.  Cam. +  . 
Out  line  Q3Q4QS- 

213.  death~\  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll. 
Sing.  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Ktly,  Rife.  Ioffe  Qq 
et  cet. 

214.  thee~\  thee  thee  Fa. 

215.  Rights ]  Glorie  Qq,  Sta.  rites 
Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

fall' d  ]  fald  Qq. 

217.  length'  ned  ]  Ff,  Rowe,  + .  length¬ 
ened  Qq.  lengthen'd 'Wove.  ’73  et  cet. 


Ven.  &  Ad.,  212:  ‘Well-painted  idol,  image  dull  and  dead.’  Schmidt  gives  also 
several  other  examples. — Ed. 

206.  Surfet]  Johnson:  Alluding  to  his  luxurious  life. 

210.  like  vntimely]  Wright:  For  this  use  of  ‘like’  with  an  adjective  compare 
Temp.,  Ill,  iii,  66:  ‘My  fellow-ministers  Are  like  invulnerable.’  Also  Hen.  V: 
II,  ii,  183. 

210.  violence]  He  who  wishes  to  read  vi'lence  instead  of  the  flowing  word 
‘violence’  (with  the  vio-  slightly  slurred)  may  find  justification  in  Abbott,  §  468. 
—Ed. 

21 1.  for  me]  That  is,  instead  of  me. 

215.  stall’d]  Abbott  (§  460)  gives  this  as  an  instance  of  a  dropped  prefix,  i.  e. 
for  in-stalled.  Whitney  ( New  Cent.  Diet.,  s.  v.  to  induct  into  office,  to  install) 
gives:  ‘But  in  his  State  yer  he  be  stall’d  .  .  .  He  thus  dilates,’  Sylvester’s  Du 
Bartas  [3rd  Day,  Week  ii,  pt.  4],  The  Captaines;  and  also  the  present  line. 
Wright  quotes  Greene,  Friar  Bacon,  II,  xi:  ‘A  friar  newly  stalled  in  Brazen- 
nose.  ’ — Ed. 

219.  Riuers  .  .  .  standers  by]  Wright:  Hall  does  not  mention  Rivers  among 
the  bystanders. 


act  I,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


97 

220 


And  fo  waft  thou,  Lord  Ha/lings ,  when  my  Sonne 
Was  ftab’d  with  bloody  Daggers:God,  I  pray  him, 

That  none  of  you  may  liue  his  naturall  age, 

But  by  fome  vnlook’d  accident  cut  off. 

Rich. Haue  done  thy  Charme,^  hateful  wither’d  Hagge. 

Q.M.  And  leaue  out  thee?  flay  Dog,  for  y  fhalt  heare  me.  225 
If  Heauen  haue  any  grieuous  plague  in  ftore, 

Exceeding  thofe  that  I  can  with  vpon  thee, 

O  let  them  keepe  it,  till  thy  finnes  be  ripe, 

And  then  hurle  downe  their  indignation 

On  thee,  the  troubler  of  the  poore  Worlds  peace.  230 

The  Worme  of  Confcience  ftill  begnaw  thy  Soule, 

Thy  Friends  fufpe<5t  for  Traytors  while  thou  liu’ft, 

And  take  deepe  Traytors  for  thy  deareft  Friends  :  233 


220.  wafl~\  was  Qj-y. 

222.  his~\  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Dyce,  Wh. 
i,  Sta.  Ktly,  Huds.  Rife,  your  Qq  et 
cet. 

223.  vnlook'd  accident ]  vnlookt  acci¬ 
dent  Qq.  un-look' d-for  accident  F3F4. 
unlooked  for  accident  Rowe,  unlook'd 
for  accident  all  Han.  unlook' d  accident 
be  Ktly. 


224.  wither' d  ]  withred Qt.  withered 
Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

225.  the e?]  the  Q,Q,. 

226.  Heauen\  Heav'ns  Rowe  ii, +  . 
Heavens  Rowe  i,  Coll.  iii. 

230.  the  troubler\  thou  troubler 
Rowe,  + . 

232.  Hu' y?]  liuefl  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

233-  for  thy ]  forth  Q4> 


223.  But]  Abbott  (§385):  Where  the  negative  is  part  of  the  subject,  as  in 
‘none,’  a  new  subject  must  be  supplied  following  ‘but,’  thus:  ‘But  (each  of  you),’ 
etc.  [If  this  line  be  the  conclusion  of  Margaret’s  speech,  Richard’s  imperative 
‘Have  done  thy  charm’  lacks  vigour,  I  think.  Does  he  not  interrupt  her  in  the 
full  tide  of  her  invective  ?  A  comma  after  ‘  but,  ’  and  the  substitution  of  a  dash 
for  the  period  after  ‘off,’  is  the  punctuation  humbly  suggested  by  the  present  Ed.] 

223.  vnlook’d]  Wright:  ‘Unlooked,’  in  the  sense  unlooked  for,  is  peculiar  to 
this  play. 

225.  And  .  .  .  me]  Cowden-Clarke  ( Sh .  Char.,  p.  467):  The  effect  of  Queen 
Margaret’s  appearance,  despair-crowned  and  breathing  curses,  in  the  earlier 
scenes  of  the  play,  is  that  of  a  human  ghost  foreboding  the  aftercoming  of  those 
shadowy  apparitions  of  his  victims  that  surround  Richard’s  tented  bed  on  Bos- 
worth  field,  which  was  to  be  his  death-bed. 

226-229.  Heauen  .  .  .  their]  Compare  Macbeth,  II,  i,  5:  ‘There’s  husbandry  in 
heaven  Their  candles  are  all  out,’  where  ‘heaven’  is  also  used  as  a  plural. — Ed. 

231.  Worme  of  Conscience]  Wright:  In  the  margin  of  the  Geneva  Version 
of  Isaiah,  lxvi,  24:  ‘their  worm  shall  not  die,’  is  explained  as  ‘a  continual  torment 
of  conscience,  which  shall  ever  gnaw  them,  and  never  suffer  them  to  be  at  rest.’ — 
Barnard:  The  ‘Worm  of  Conscience’  is  a  character  in  the  Pilgremage  of  the 
Sowle,  a  spiritual  romance  printed  by  Caxton  in  1483.  Richard  was  a  patron  of 
Caxton.  [So  also  were  Earl  Rivers,  and  many  others. — Ed.] 


7 


gS  THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iii. 

No  fleepe  clofe  vp  that  deadly  Eye  of  thine, 

Vnleffe  it  be  while  fome  tormenting  Dreame  235 

Affrights  thee  with  a  Hell  of  ougly  Deuills. 

Thou  eluifh  mark’d,  abortiue  rooting  Hogge, 

Thou  that  waft  feal’d  in  thy  Natiuitie 

The  flaue  of  Nature,  and  the  Sonne  of  Hell :  239 


234.  that  deadly  Eye]  the  deadly  eyes 

Q7Qs- 

235.  7 uhile]  7vhilejl  Q^j.  whiljl  Q6 
Q7Q8,  Cam.  + . 

236.  Affrights ]  Affright  F4,  Rowe. 
ougly]  ugly  QqF3F4. 

237.  eluijh  mark'd]Y2.  eluijhmarkt 


Qq,  Han.  elvijh ,  mark' d  F3>  elvijh , 
marklY 4.  elvish-mar kt Rowe,  + .  elvish- 
-mark' d  Var.  ’73  et  cet. 

237.  mark' d,  abortiue]  markt  abortiue 

Q,- 

23 9.  Jlaue ]  shame  Anon.  ap.  Theob.  i. 
(Omitted  in  ed.  ii.) 


237.  eluish  mark’d]  Steevens:  The  common  people  of  Scotland  (as  I  learn 
from  Kelly’s  Proverbs)  have  still  an  aversion  to  those  who  have  any  natural  defect 
or  redundancy,  as  thinking  them  ‘mark’d’  out  for  mischief. — Wright:  According 
to  Allan  Ramsay,  cattle  which  were  supposed  to  be  bewitched  by  fairies  were 
called  ‘elf-shot.’  Compare  what  Margaret  says  of  Richard  in  J  Hen.  VI:  II,  ii, 
135:  ‘But  thou  art  neither  like  thy  sire  nor  dam;  But  like  a  foul  mis-shapen  stig- 
matic,  Mark’d  by  the  destinies  to  be  avoided.’  Birth-marks,  in  connection  with 
the  old  belief  in  planetary  influence,  were  thought  to  be  indications  of  character. 
The  Wife  of  Bath,  in  Chaucer,  justifies  the  very  explicit  confession  she  makes  of 
her  experiences  by  saying:  ‘  I  had  the  prynte  of  Saynte  Venus  sel.’  [1.  605.] 

237.  rooting  Hogge]  Warburton:  The  expression  is  fine,  alluding  (in  mem¬ 
ory  of  her  young  son)  to  the  ravage  which  hogs  make,  with  the  finest  flowers,  in 
gardens;  and  intimating  that  Elizabeth  was  to  expect  no  other  treatment  for  her 
sons. — Johnson:  There  is  no  such  heap  of  allusions  as  the  commentator  imagines. 
She  calls  him  ‘hog,’  as  an  appellation  more  contemptuous  than  boar,  as  he  is  else¬ 
where  termed,  from  his  ensigns  armorial.  [See  Note,  1.  327,  supra.] — Henley:  The 
propriety  of  Warburton’s  note,  notwithstanding  what  J ohnson  hath  subjoined,  is 
fully  confirmed  by  the  satirical  rhyme  of  Collingbourne,  which  is  thus  preserved 
in  Heywood’s  2  Edward  IV:  ‘The  cat,  the  rat,  and  Lovell  our  dog  Do  rule  all  Eng¬ 
land  under  a  hog.  The  crook-bakt  Boare  the  way  hath  found  To  root  our  Roses 
from  the  ground.  Both  flower  and  bud  will  he  confound,  Till  King  of  beasts  the 
swine  be  crownde:  And  then  the  Dog,  the  Cat,  and  Rat,  Shall  in  his  trough  feed 
and  be  fat.’  [p.  177,  ed.  Pearson.  The  persons  meant  were  Catesby,  Lovel,  and 
Ratcliff. — Ed.] 

238,  239.  seal’d  .  .  .  slaue  of  Nature]  Warburton:  The  expression  is  strong 
and  noble,  and  alludes  to  the  ancient  custom  of  masters  branding  their  profligate 
slaves;  by  which  it  is  insinuated  that  his  misshapen  person  was  the  mark  that 
nature  had  set  upon  him  to  stigmatize  his  ill  conditions.  Shakespeare  expresses 
the  same  thought  in  the  Com.  of  Err.,  IV,  ii,  19:  ‘He  is  deformed,  crooked  .  .  . 
Stigmatical  in  making.’  But  as  the  speaker  rises  in  her  resentment,  she  expresses 
this  contemptuous  thought  much  more  openly,  and  condemns  him  to  a  still  worse 
state  of  slavery:  ‘Sin  death  and  hell  have  set  their  marks  on  him.’  Only,  in  the 
first  line,  her  mention  of  his  moral  condition  insinuates  her  reflections  on  his  defor- 


ACT  I,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


99 


Thou  flander  of  thy  heauie  Mothers  Wombe,  240 

Thou  loathed  Iffue  of  thy  Fathers  Loynes, 

Thou  Ragge  of  Honor,  thou  detefted— 

Rich.  Margaret.  243 


240.  heauie  Mothers ]  mothers  heauie 
Qq,  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Sing. 
Coll,  ii,  Sta.  Cam. +.  mother's  Johns. 
242.  Ragge]  wrack  Warb. 


242.  detejled—]  detejled ,  drY.  Qq.  de- 
iejled.  Fs. 

243-245.  Margaret. ..not.']  One  line, 
Steev.  et  seq. 


mity;  and,  in  the  next,  her  mention  of  his  deformity  insinuates  her  reflections 
on  his  moral  condition:  And  thus  he  has  taught  her  to  scold  in  all  the  elegance 
of  figure.  [Theobald,  in  his  first  edition,  gives  the  foregoing  note  by  Warburton, 
adding  thereto  a  remark  on  its  ingenuity.  In  his  second  edition,  three  years  later, 
he,  however,  omits  both  note  and  observation. — Ed.] — Malone:  Part  of  War- 
burton’s  note  is  confirmed  by  a  line  in  Rape  of  Luc.:  ‘Worse  than  a  slavish  wipe, 
or  birth-hour’s  blot’  [1.  53]. — Schmidt  (Notes,  p.  492):  Theobald’s  explanation 
seems  somewhat  too  studied  and  remote.  The  expression,  perhaps,  means  no 
more  than  through  the  operation  of  nature,  Richard  is  determined  upon  villainy 
and  baseness,  and  is  only  dignified  through  blind  chance. 

239.  slaue  .  .  .  Sonne  of  Hell]  Collier  (Emendations,  etc.,  p.  326):  The 
Old  Co  rector  informs  us  that  this  line  ought  to  run  with  two  remarkable  changes: 
‘The  stain  of  Nature  and  the  scorn  of  Hell.’  Stain  and  scorn  must  surely  have 
been  the  language  of  our  great  dramatist;  and  when  we  bear  in  mind  that  stain 
was  of  old  spelt  staine,  and  scorn,  scorne,  it  is  not  difficult  to  discover  how  the  blun¬ 
ders  arose. — Singer  (Sh.  Vind.,  p.  166):  I  do  not  think  that  stain  and  scorn  are 
exactly  the  words  Shakespeare  would  have  used;  for  Richard  would  have  been 
rather  the  glory  than  the  scorn  of  Hell.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  corrector  of  my 
Second  Folio  should  have  tried  his  hand  also  on  this  passage,  and,  as  it  seems  to 
me,  with  better  success.  He  would  read:  ‘The  shame  of  Nature  and  the  spawn 
of  hell.’ — Anon.  (qu.  Lettsom?  New  Readings,  ii,  p.  316):  ‘Slave’  is  unques¬ 
tionably  the  right  word.  As  for  ‘scorn  of  hell,’  that,  in  certain  cases,  might  be  a 
compliment,  and  is  no  more  than  what  a  good  man  would  desire  to  be. — Walker 
(Crit.,  ii,  307):  Does  ‘slave’  here  mean  anything  more  than  villain,  abandoned 
wretch?  This  use  of  ‘slave’  (compare  Italian  cattivo,  whence  our  caitiff)  is  fre¬ 
quent  in  old  plays.  Othello,  IV,  ii,  132:  ‘Some  cogging,  cozening  slave.’  In 
Hamlet,  II,  ii,  198:  ‘the  satirical  rogue,’  the  Folio  has  ‘slave.’  jonson,  Every 
Man  in  his  Humour,  V,  i,  Gifford,  vol.  i,  p.  151:  ‘You  knave  you  slave,  you 
rogue,  do  you  say  you  must,  sirrah?’  [Also  I,  ii,  98,  supra.]  In  the  present  passage, 
therefore,  a  ‘slave  of  Nature’  will  mean  neither  more  nor  less,  I  think,  than  a 
born  villain.  Cymb.,  V,  ii,  4:  ‘Or  could  this  carl,  A  very  drudge  of  nature’s,  have 
subdued  me  in  my  profession?’ — R.  G.  White  (Sh.  Scholar,  p.  342):  ‘Slave  of 
nature’  here  does  not  mean  one  who  serves  nature,  one  who  is  a  bondman  to 
nature;  but  one  who  is  the  lowest,  the  most  servile  in  the  whole  realm  of  nature. 
When  one  Irishman  calls  another  ‘the  thief  o’  the  world,’  he  does  not  mean  to 
accuse  the  other  of  purloining  this  planet,  but  of  being  eminently  the  thief  of  the 
world.  So  Margaret  calls  Gloucester  eminently  the  slave  of  nature. 

242.  Ragge]  Compare  ‘these  overweening  rags  of  France,’  V,  iii,  371;  also 
Timon,  IV,  iii,  271. 

243.  Margaret]  Oechelhauser  (Einfuhrungen ,  etc.,  p.  148):  Far  different 


IOO 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iii. 


Q.M.  Richard .  Rich.  Ha. 

Q.M.  I  call  thee  not.  245 

Rich.  I  cry  thee  mercie  then  :  for  I  did  thinke, 

That  thou  hadfl  call’d  me  all  thefe  bitter  names. 

Q.M.  Why  fo  I  did,  but  look’d  for  no  reply. 

Oh  let  me  make  the  Period  to  my  Curfe. 

Rich.  ’Tis  done  by  me,  and  ends  in  Margaret.  250 

<2^.Thus  haueyou  breath’d  your  Curfe  againft  your  felf. 

Q.M.  Poore  painted  Queen,  vain  flourifh  of  my  fortune,  252 


245.  thee]  the  Q6Q?. 

246.  I...lhen]  Then  I crie  thee  mercie 
Qq.  (/  Om.  Qg.) 

did  thinke]  had  thought  Qq, 


Cam.  +. 

247.  That ]  Om.  Q^j. 

thou  hadjl ]  thou  kali  Q.Qo. 
25l.  Qu.]  Om.  Q7Q3. 


is  the  behaviour  of  Richard  under  the  curse  of  his  mother  and  under  that  of  Mar¬ 
garet,  herself  besmirched  with  sin.  In  the  present  situation  he  treats  Margaret’s 
invective  but  as  a  jest,  and  mockingly  turns  her  curses  back  upon  her  own  head. 
His  mother’s  curse,  on  the  other  hand,  produces  in  him  a  complete  moral  and 
physical  breakdown,  and  he  but  half-heartedly  rouses  himself  to  the  political  neces¬ 
sity  of  wooing  Elizabeth’s  daughter. — Churchill  calls  attention  (p.  506)  to  a  line 
in  the  True  Tragedy  0}  Richard  the  Third,  wherein,  at  the  end  of  the  discussion 
scene,  Buckingham  says:  ‘Sound  trumpet  in  this  parley,  God  save  the  king,’  to 
which  Richard  adds:  ‘Richard.’  (See  Appendix,  The  True  Trag.,  etc.)  ‘The 
situation,  ’  continues  Churchill,  ‘  is  entirely  different,  but  the  trick  is  in  a  sense  the 
same.  In  the  older  play  Buckingham  utters  a  blessing  which  Richard,  by  the 
insertion  of  his  own  name,  causes  to  his  satisfaction  to  fall  upon  himself.’ 

244.  Ha.]  In  a  modernised  text  this  should,  I  think,  be  spelled  Hey,  with  Theo¬ 
bald’s  interrogation  point  adopted  by  a  majority  of  editors.  Any  other  punctuation 
misses  the  point,  as  is  clear  from  Margaret’s  ‘I  call  thee  not.’  Compare  Shy- 
lock’s  ‘What  saies  that  foole  of  Hagar’s  off-spring?  ha.’  II,  v,  46,  of  this  ed. — Ed. 

245-247.  call  .  .  .  call’d]  Vaughan  (iii,  25):  By  the  word  ‘call’  is  intended 
an  equivocation  which  the  commentators  have  not  perceived.  ‘To  call’  is  to 
summon  to  presence  or  answer  by  uttering  the  name  of  a  person.  But  ‘to  call’ 
is  also  to  chide,  rate  violently  and  with  abuse.  We  have  in  the  Si  lex  Scintillans 
of  Vaughan,  the  Silurist,  ‘man  is  call’d  and  hurl’d  by  each’  (distraction);  and  so, 
again,  in  a  passage  of  our  poet  whose  meaning  has  escaped  all  critics:  ‘Methinks 
I  see  him  stamp  thus  and  call  thus:  Come  on,  you  cowards!’ — Coriol.,  I,  iii,  35. 
Where  ‘call  thus’  does  not  mean  simply  summon,  but  rate  and  storm  at.  [That 
examples  of  ‘call,’  in  the  sense  of  to  chide  with  abuse,  may  be  found,  is  undeniable. 
Murray  ( N .  E.  D .)  furnishes  several,  but  his  earliest  quotation  is  not  from  the 
present  play,  but  from  Ford’s  ’Tis  Pity,  etc.,  1633.  Moreover,  the  first  edition  of 
Silex  Scintillans,  quoted  by  Vaughan,  is  dated  1650,  and  is,  therefore,  I  fear,  like 
even  the  quotation  from  Ford,  too  late  to  be  used  for  examples  of  a  word  occurring 
in  Shakespeare.  In  the  passage  from  Coriol.,  quoted  above,  ‘call’  may  quite  as 
well  mean  exclaim  loudly  as  rate  and  storm  at. — Ed.] 

246.  I  cry  thee  mercie]  Compare  IV,  iii,  551,  and  V,  iii,  261. 

252.  vain  flourish]  Wright:  That  is,  mere  empty  ornament  of  that  rank 


ACT  I,  sc.  iii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

Why  ftrew’ft  thou  Sugar  on  that  Bottel’d  Spider, 


IOI 


253 


253.  Bottel'd ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Ktly  conj.  (Exp.  p.  262).  bottle-  Coll. 
Theob.  Han.  boiled  Q3-6.  bottl'd  Cap.  MS. 
bottled  Q,Q2  et  cet.  bloated  Grey  (ii,  63). 

which  is  rightly  mine.  Similarly  in  Hamlet ,  II,  ii,  91,  the  ‘outward  flourishes’ 
are  the  external  details  of  a  speech — mere  ornaments,  which  have  nothing  to  do 
with  the  matter.  [Compare  Love's  Labour's  Lost,  II,  i,  14:  ‘my  beauty  though 
but  mean  Needs  not  the  painted  flourish  of  your  praise,’  wherein  ‘painted’ 
occurs  as  in  the  present  line.  The  dates  of  composition  of  the  present  play  and 
Love’s  Labour’s  Lost  are  held  to  be  very  near  in  time. — Ed.] 

253.  Bottel’d  Spider]  Johnson:  A  spider  is  called  ‘bottled’  because,  like 
other  insects,  he  has  a  middle  slender,  and  a  belly  protuberant.  Richard’s  form 
and  venom  made  her  liken  him  to  a  spider. — Steevens:  A  critic  who  styles  him¬ 
self  ‘Robert  Heron,  Esquire ’  (though  his  title  to  Esquireship  is  but  ill  supported 
by  his  language,  ‘puppy,  booby,  wise-acre,’  etc.,  being  the  usual  distinctions  he 
bestows  on  authors  who  are  not  his  favourites),  very  gravely  assures  us  that  ‘a 
bottled  spider  is  evidently  a  spider  kept  in  a  bottle  long  fasting,  and  of  consequence 
the  more  spiteful  and  venomous.’  May  one  ask  if  the  infuriation  of  our  Esquire 
originates  from  a  similar  cause  ?  Hath  he  newly  escaped,  like  Asmodeo,  from  the 
phial  of  some  Highland  sorcerer,  under  whose  discipline  he  had  experienced  the 
provocation  of  Lenten  imprisonment?  Mrs  Raffald  disserts  on  bottled  goose¬ 
berries,  and  George  Falkener  warns  us  against  bottled  children,  but  it  was  reserved 
for  our  Esquire  (every  one  knows  who  our  Esquire  is)  to  discover  that  spiders, 
like  ale,  grow  brisker  from  being  ‘  bottled,  ’  and  derive  additional  venom  from  being 
starved.  It  would  be  the  interest  of  every  writer  to  wish  for  an  opponent  like  the 
Esquire  Heron,  did  not  the  general  credit  of  letters  oppose  the  production  of  such 
another  critic.  So  far  I  am  from  wishing  the  lucubrations  of  our  Esquire  to  be 
forgotten  that  I  counsel  thee,  gentle  reader  (and  especially,  provided  thou  art 
a  hypochondriac),  to  peruse,  and  (if  thou  canst)  to  reperuse  them,  and  finally  to 
thank  me  as  thy  purveyor  of  a  laugh.  Every  man  should  court  a  fresh  onset 
from  an  adversary,  who,  in  the  act  of  ridiculing  others,  exposes  himself  to  yet 
more  obvious  ridicule.  [‘Robert  Heron,  Esq.,’  was  the  assumed  name  of  a  Scotch¬ 
man,  John  Pinkerton,  author,  among  other  works,  of  a  volume  entitled  Letters 
of  Literature,  which,  on  account  of  its  violent  and  dogmatic  assertions,  excited 
much  controversy  at  the  time  of  its  publication  in  1785.  A  reason  may,  pos¬ 
sibly,  be  found  for  the  foregoing  note  by  Steevens,  with  its  sundry  innuendoes,  in 
the  concluding  paragraph  of  Robert  Heron’s  Letters  criticising  the  Variorum  of 
1785.  ‘Let  us  not  dismiss  the  book  without  due  thanks  to  Mr  Steevens;  to  whom 
the  readers  of  Shakespeare  are  as  much  obliged  as  those  of  Hudibras  to  Dr 
Grey.  Both  of  them  are  completely  versed  in  “All  such  reading  as  was  never 
read.”  Both  are  fellow  Labourers  in  the  congenial  mines  of  dulness;  where  no  man 
of  taste  or  science  ever  dirtied  himself.  Both  have  explained  their  author  without 
being  capable  of  understanding  him.’  In  a  former  letter  appears  the  note  referred 
to  by  Steevens.  A  full  account  of  ‘our  Esquire’  will  be  found  in  Allibone’s 
Dictionary  of  Authors,  s.  v.  John  Pinkerton. — Ed.] — Ritson:  That  is,  a  large, 
bloated,  glossy  spider:  supposed  to  contain  venom  proportionate  to  its  size.  The 
expression  occurs  again  in  IV,  iii,  84. — Keightley  {Exp.,  p.  262):  As  ‘bottled’ 
has,  as  far  as  my  knowledge  extends,  but  one  sense,  and  one  which  would  give  no 


102 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc,  iii. 


Whofe  deadly  Web  enfnareth  thee  about  ? 

Foole,  foole,  thou  whet’ft  a  Knife  to  kill  thy  felfe  :  255 

The  day  will  come,  that  thou  fhalt  with  for  me, 

To  helpe  thee  curfe  this  poyfonous  Bunch-backt  Toade. 

Hafl. Falfe  boding  Woman,  end  thy  frantick  Curfe, 

Leaft  to  thy  harme,  thou  moue  our  patience. 

<2.Tf.Foule  fhame  vpon  you,  you  haue  all  mou’d  mine.  260 
i?/.Wereyou  wel  feru’d,you  would  be  taught  your  duty. 

Q.M. To  ferue  me  well,  you  all  fhould  do  me  duty, 

Teach  me  to  be  your  Queene,  and  you  my  Subiedls  : 

O  ferue  me  well,  and  teach  your  felues  that  duty.  264 


256.  day]  time  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 
that~\  when  Q2-8.  Sta. 

257.  this"]  that  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Huds. 

poyfonous~\  QjFf,  Rowe,  Dyce, 
Rife  (subs.)  poifoned  Q^.  ( poifond 
Q  .)  pois’nous  Pope  et  cet. 

258—314.  Hast.  Falfe  boding ...  Prophe- 
tejfe.-]  Om.  Coll.  MS. 


258.  Falfe  boding ]  Q^Ff.  Falfe 
boajling  Q?Qg.  False  loading  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han.  False-boading  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  False-boding  Cap.  et  cet. 

260.  alF\  oil  Qs. 

262.  all  j  Om.  QyQg. 

263.  you\  yon  Q2. 

264.  O  ferue~\  Obferve  Q7Q8. 


meaning  here,  the  spelling  of  the  Folio  may  be  intended  to  show  that  the  verb 
comes  from  ‘bottel’  or  1  bottle’  in  the  sense  of  truss,  bundle,  as  a  bottle  of  hay  or  straw, 
a  sense  which  it  retains  in  various  compounds  in  the  provincial  dialects.  ‘  Bottel’d’ 
would  then  answer  to  ‘ bunch-back’d  toad’  further  on. — Baynes  (p.  388):  In  a 
popular  work  published  a  few  years  before  Shakespeare  came  to  London,  and 
with  which  he  was  familiar,  we  find  ‘bottles  of  flesh’  given  as  a  synonym  for  great 
wens  in  the  throat — the  Italian  word  gozzuti  being  glossed  in  the  margin  as  follows: 
‘  men  in  the  mountaynes  with  great  bottels  of  flesh  under  their  chin  through  the 
drinking  of  snow  water.’ — Marshall:  I  do  not  know  to  what  spider  Johnson 
intends  to  refer.  Unfortunately  for  his  statement,  those  spiders  found  in  England 
which  are  black  are  distinguished  by  having  a  longer  and  narrower  abdomen 
than  almost  any  other  species.  One  of  the  commonest  may  be  seen  frequently 
in  houses,  a  formidable-looking  insect  with  long  and  powerful  legs  and  a  particularly 
thin  body.  [Under  ‘bottled’  Murray  (N.  E.  D .)  gives  the  present  passage  as 
an  example  of  ‘Resembling  a  bottle,  protuberant,  swollen,’  and  refers  to  bottle  sb2 
and  v1.  Unfortunately  Baynes  does  not  give  his  reference.] 

257.  poysonous]  For  poisoned  as  in  Qq  compare  ‘venomed,’  I,  ii,  23,  and  note. 

257.  Bunch-backt]  Wright:  An  epithet  appropriate  to  Richard  and  not  to 
the  animal  to  which  he  is  compared.  Florio  ( World  of  Wordes,  1598)  has:  ‘Scrig- 
nuto,  crookt-backe,  croopt,  bunch-backt,  as  camels  be.’ — Marshall:  Any  one 
who  has  seen  a  toad  when  attacked  by  a  dog  will  admit  that  ‘bunch-backt’  is  a 
most  appropriate  epithet.  The  toad  bunches  up  his  back  preparatory  to  emitting 
the  venom  secreted  in  the  follicles  on  his  shoulders,  which  is  his  only  defence 
against  his  assailant. 

264.  O  serue]  The  reading  of  Q7  ( observe )  is,  I  think,  not  unworthy  of  attention. 
That  is,  observe  in  its  derivative  sense  from  observare,  to  pay  court  as  a  courtier. 


act  I,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


103 

265 


Dorf.  Difpute  not  with  her,  thee  is  lunaticke. 

Q.M.  Peace  Matter  Marquette,  you  are  malapert, 

Your  fire-new  ftampe  of  Honor  is  fcarce  currant. 

O  that  your  yong  Nobility  could  iudge 
What  ’twere  to  lofe  it,  and  be  miferable. 

They  that  ftand  high,  haue  many  blafts  to  fhake  them,  270 
And  if  they  fall,  they  dafh  themfelues  to  peeces. 

Rich.  Good  counfaile  marry,  learne  it,  learne  it  Mar¬ 
quette. 

Dor.  It  touches  you  my  Lord,  as  much  as  me. 

Rich.  I,  and  much  more  :  but  I  was  borne  fo  high:  275 


265  lunaticke]  lunatique  Qq, 

266.  Mafier]  maijler  Q4Q5- 

267.  fire-new]  fire  new  Q4. 

268.  could  ]  can  Ff,  Rowe. 

270.  many]  mighty  Qg,  Sta. 
blafis]  blafi  Qt. 

271.  them/ elites]  them  Q7Q8. 


272.  marry]  ma?y  QjQ,. 

274.  touches ]  toucheth  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

275.  It  and ]  Yea  and  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 
Ay  and  Rowe  et  cet. 

high:]  Ff,  Rowe,  +  .  high,  Qq 

et  cet. 


Compare  Hamlet,  III,  i,  162:  ‘The  observed  of  all  observers,’  where  this  meaning 
obtains.  After  Margaret’s  fierce  invectives,  and  imperious  demands  that  the  circle 
about  her  should  do  duty  to  her,  is  it  quite  in  keeping  that  she  should  end  with 
a  plaintive  entreaty:  ‘O  serve  me  well.’ — Ed. 

266.  malapert]  Bradley  ( N .  E.  D .):  Presumptuous,  impudent,  saucy.  Here 
ntal  has  (as  in  maladroit,  malcontent)  the  effect  of  reversing  a  favourable  significa¬ 
tion;  but  the  English  sense  of  the  compound  points  to  its  having  been  apprehended 
as  if  formed  on  mal  (in  the  sense  ‘improperly’)  yapert,  bold,  outspoken,  insolent. 

267.  Your  .  .  .  currant]  Grey  (ii,  57):  Shakespeare  may  here  allude  to  the 
institution  of  the  title  of  Marquis  here  in  England  as  a  special  dignity:  which 
was  no  older  than  Richard  II.  Robert  Vere,  Earl  of  Oxford,  was  the  first  who, 
as  a  distinct  dignity,  received  the  title  of  Marquis. — Boswell-Stone  (p.  347): 
As  this  scene  cannot  be  historically  dated  before  April  9,  1483,  barely  eight  years 
had  elapsed  since  Edward,  on  April  18,  1475,  ‘created  the  Lord  Thomas,  mar- 
quesse  Dorset,  before  dinner’  (Holinshed,  iii,  702).  I  take  this  date  from  Stow 
(7x3),  Holinshed’s  authority  for  the  passage  in  which  Grey’s  elevation  to  the 
dignity  of  marquess  is  recorded. 

267.  fire-new]  Wright:  Compare  Lear,  V,  iii,  132:  ‘Despite  thy  victor  sword 
and  fire-new  fortune.’  Also  Twelfth  Night,  III,  ii,  23:  ‘jests,  fire-new  from  the 
mint.’ 

268,  269.  O  that  .  .  .  miserable]  See  IV,  iii,  122,  and  note. 

275.  but  ...  so  high]  Hazlitt  (Sh.  Char.,  p.  149):  The  idea  conveyed  by 
these  lines  is  never  lost  sight  of  by  Shakespeare,  and  should  not  be  out  of  the  actor’s 
mind  for  a  moment.  The  restless  and  sanguinary  Richard  is  not  a  man  striving 
to  be  great,  but  to  be  greater  than  he  is;  conscious  of  his  strength  of  will,  his  power 
of  intellect,  his  daring  courage,  his  elevated  station;  and  making  use  of  these  advan¬ 
tages  as  giving  him  both  the  means  and  the  pretext  to  commit  unheard-of  crimes 


104 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iii. 


Our  ayerie  buildeth  in  the  Cedars  top,  276 

And  dallies  with  the  winde,  and  fcornes  the  Sunne. 

Mar.  And  turnes  the  Sun  to  fhade  :  alas,  alas,  278 

276,277.  Mnemonic,  Warb.  aery  Dyce,  Cam.  + .  eyrie  Huds.  aiery 

276.  ayerie]  Q2Q4Q6Q7Q8Ff.  airy  Q,  et  cet. 

Rowe,  +  .  ai’ry  Han.  eyry  Coll.  Wh.  i.  276.  Cedars]  Cadars  Q3Q5- 

and  to  shield  himself  from  remorse  and  infamy. — Hunter  ( lllust .,  ii,  82):  The 
effect  of  this  splendid  passage  is  greatly  injured  by  what  is  called  the  regulation 
of  the  modern  editors.  ‘But’  should  not  be  printed  with  a  capital  letter  and  there 
should  be  a  colon  at  ‘high.’  Gloucester  admits  that  Margaret’s  remark  suits 
himself  as  well  as  Dorset,  and,  reflecting  on  the  meaner  descent  of  Dorset,  observes 
that  whatever  elevation  he  had  was  by  his  birth,  not  as  Dorset’s,  by  the  will  of 
the  sovereign.  The  two  lines  that  follow  are  only  an  expansion  of  the  same  senti¬ 
ment.  According  to  the  present  regulation,  we  must  understand  him  to  say  that 
he  was  born  so  high  that  their  aiery  buildeth,  etc.,  which  enfeebles  the  passage 
greatly.  [Hunter  unwittingly  advocates  the  very  punctuation  of  the  Ff;  the  comma 
after  ‘high’  is  not  a  modern  ‘regulation,’  see  Text.  Notes. — Ed.] 

276.  ayerie]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  Aerie):  Probably  formed  on  French  aire 
with  same  sense.  The  etymology  of  the  latter  is  doubtful;  Littre  classes  it  with 
other  senses  of  aire:  Latin  area,  ‘  a  spot  of  level  ground,  an  open  place,  a  threshing- 
floor’;  whence  ‘surface  plaine  du  rocher  ou  l’aigle  fait  son  nid.’  Diez,  comparing 
Provenjale  aire,  takes  ‘family,  race,  stock,’  as  the  original  idea,  and  suggests  Latin 
ager  or  atrium.  The  probability  rests  between  area  and  atrium;  the  latter,  as 
M.  Paul  Meyer  notes,  would  account  well  for  the  dubiety  of  gender  in  Old  French. 
The  spelling  Eyrie  seems  to  have  been  introduced  by  Spelman  (Glossary,  1664) 
to  support  his  notion  of  its  derivation  from  egg.  Eyre  was  an  occasional  spelling 
of  aire,  the  earlier  form  in  which  the  Old  French  had  itself  been  adopted  in  Middle 
English.  (2)  The  brood  in  the  nest;  or,  figuratively,  a  noble  stock  of  children. 
[Murray  quotes  the  present  line  as  the  earliest  use  of  ‘Aery’  in  this  figurative 
sense.  Wright  quotes  Cotgrave:  * Herage:  An  ayrie  of  hawkes:  and  hence, 
a  brood,  kind;  stocke,  linage.’ — Ed.] 

276.  Cedars  top]  Wright:  Compare  3  Hen.  VI:  V,  ii,  11 :  ‘Thus  yields  the  cedar 
to  the  axe’s  edge,  Whose  arms  gave  shelter  to  the  princely  eagle.’  And  Marlowe, 
Edward  II.  (ed.  Dyce,  p.  201):  ‘A  lofty  cedar-tree,  fair  flourishing,  On  whose 
top-branches  kingly  eagles  perch.’ — Marshall:  Pliny  says  (bk  x,  chap,  iii): 
‘Build  they  [Eagles]  doe  and  make  their  nests  upon  rocks  and  trees.’  Shakespeare 
and  Marlowe  may  have  remembered  this  passage;  but  a  cedar  tree  is  certainly  not 
the  tree  one  would  expect  an  eagle  to  select.  [Cedars  and  pine  trees  have  ever 
been  emblematic  of  height,  as  oaks  are  of  age.  Compare:  ‘A  great  eagle  with 
great  wings  .  .  .  came  unto  Lebanon  and  took  the  highest  branch  of  the  cedar.’ 
— Ezekiel  xvii,  3;  the  ‘high  tops’  of  ‘the  mountain  pines’  are  referred  to  in  Mer. 
of  Ven.,  IV,  i,  75.— Ed.] 

277.  And  .  .  .  Sunne]  J.  Knight  {Theatrical  Notes,  p.  171):  Here  there  should 
be  an  emphasis  on  ‘dallies’  and  on  ‘scorns,’  seeing  that  the  intention  is  to  convey 
that  the  blasts  and  other  influences,  before  spoken  of  as  dangerous  to  others,  are 
innocuous  or  pleasurable  to  him  and  his  lineage. 

278.  279.  Sun  .  . .  Sonne]  Ritson:  Her  distress  cannot  prevent  her  quibbling. 


act  i,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


105 


Witneffe  my  Sonne,  now  in  the  fhade  of  death, 

Whofe  bright  out-fhining  beames,  thy  cloudy  wrath  280 

Hath  in  eternall  darkneffe  folded  vp. 

Your  ayery  buildeth  in  our  ayeries  Neft : 

O  God  that  feed;  it,  do  not  fuffer  it, 

As  it  is  wonne  with  blood,  loft  be  it  fo. 

Buc.  Peace,  peace  for  fhame  :  If  not,  for  Charity.  285 

Mar.  Vrge  neither  charity,  nor  fhame  to  me  : 

Vncharitably  with  me  haue  you  dealt, 

And  fhamefully  my  hopes  (  by  you  )  are  butcher’d. 

My  Charity  is  outrage,  Life  my  fhame, 

And  in  that  fhame,  ftill  Hue  my  forrowes  rage.  290 

Buc.  Haue  done,  haue  done. 

Mar.  O  Princely  Buckingham,  lie  kiffe  thy  hand,  292 


279.  Sonne]  funne  Q5_g.  sun  Var. 
’78,  ’85,  Ran.  Sta. 

280.  out-Jhining ]  outjhining  Qq. 

281.  darkneffe]  darkenes  Qt.  dark e- 

neJFe  Q2f2- 

282.  ayery  ...ayeries]  F2F3.  aierie... 
aieries  Qq.  ayry ...ayries  F4.  airy... 
airy's  Rowe,  +  .  ai'ry...ai'ry's  Han. 
eyry...eyry's  Coll.  Wh.  i.  aery. ..aery's 
Dyce,  Cam. +.  eyrie... eyrie' s  Huds. 
aiery...aiery's  Cap.  et  cet. 

284.  if]  Ff,  Rowe,  was  Qq  et  cet. 
lofl  be  it  fo]  so  be  it  lost  Pope,  + 
(—Var. '73). 


285.  Peace ,  peace]  Haue  done  Qq, 
Cam.  + . 

288.  my  ...you]  by  you  my  hopes  Qq, 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam. +  , 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

290.  that]  my  Qq,  Pope,  +,  Var.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Ktly,  Huds. 

Jlill]Jhall  Q6Q7Q8. 

Hue]  lives  Sing.  Ktly. 

291.  Haue  done ,  haue  done.]  Haue 
done.  Qq. 

292.  Mar.]  Q.  Mary.  Q6. 

Princely]  pricely  Q4. 

lie]  I  will  Qq.  7V,f  F3F4.  / 

Cap.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta. 


Wright:  Nor  did  the  grief  of  Constance  in  King  John.  Gaunt  on  his  death-bed 
is  made  to  pun  on  his  name.  [May  we  not  add  Lady  Macbeth’s  play  on  the 
word  ‘guilt’? — Ed.] 

285.  Buc.]  Walker  ( Crit .,  ii,  188):  Can  this  speech  be  really  Buckingham’s? 
Compare  the  two  following  speeches  of  Margaret  with  each  other.  I  speak  doubt¬ 
fully. — Wright:  The  Folio  reading  is  perhaps  on  account  of  the  ‘Have  done’  in 
Buckingham’s  next  speech.  We  must  suppose  that  the  first  line  of  Margaret’s  next 
speech  is  addressed  to  Buckingham,  and  that  she  then  turns  to  Richard  and  the  rest. 

289.  My  .  .  .  shame]  Hudson:  That  is,  outrage  is  the  only  charity  shown  me, 
and  a  life  of  shame  is  all  the  life  permitted  me.  ‘My  charity’  may  mean  either 
the  charity  done  by  me  or  that  done  to  me;  here  it  means  the  latter. 

290.  And  .  .  .  rage]  Webb:  These  lines  express  the  very  ecstasy  of  passion, 
and  must  not  be  pressed  too  closely.  As  far  as  a  matter-of-fact  meaning  can  be 
extracted  from  them,  it  is:  I  am  ashamed  to  continue  to  live:  but  while  I  endure 
that  shame  ( i .  e.,  as  long  as  she  lives)  may  the  rage  caused  by  my  wrongs  con> 
tinue  in  its  strength. 


io6 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iii. 


In  figne  of  League  and  amity  with  thee  : 

Now  faire  befall  thee,  and  thy  Noble  houfe  : 
Thy  Garments  are  not  fpotted  with  our  blood  : 
Nor  thou  within  the  eompaffe  of  my  curfe. 


293 


295 


Buc.  Nor  no  one  heere  :  for  Curfes  neuer  paffe 
The  lips  of  thofe  that  breath  them  in  the  ayre. 


Mar.  I  will  not  thinke  but  they  afcend  the  sky, 
And  there  awake  Gods  gentle  fleeping  peace. 


300 


294.  Noble]  princely  Qq,  Sta. 
296.  eompajpe]  Fs. 

207.  no  one!  none  O  . 


Qq,  Pope,  + ,  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta. 
Cam.  +,  Huds. 


300.  Goa’s]  gods  Qj.  God's  F3F4. 


gentle  Jleeping  ]  gentle-sleeping 


299.  I  will  not  thinke]  lie  not  beleeue  Theob.  et  seq. 

297,  298.  Curses  neuer  .  .  .  ayre]  Warburton:  Of  those  who  make  a  practice 
of  cursing  their  enemies,  and  do  it  as  often  as  they  breathe.  The  curses  of  such 
never  ascend  to  the  throne  of  vengeance. — F.  P.  Barnard  ( Notes  and  Queries , 
9  May,  1896) :  There  seems  to  be  a  reference  here  to  the  old  belief  that  imprecations, 
sorcery,  and  the  like,  to  be  efficacious,  should  take  place  within  walls,  and  that 
in  the  open  air  their  power  was  restricted.  Tithelberht,  King  of  Kent,  at  his  first 
interview  with  the  missionary  Augustine,  ‘Sitting  in  the  open  air,  ordered  Augus¬ 
tine  and  his  companions  to  be  brought  into  his  presence.  For  he  had  taken  pre¬ 
caution  that  they  should  not  come  to  him  in  any  house,  lest,  according  to  an  ancient 
superstition,  if  they  practised  any  magical  arts,  they  might  impose  upon  him.’ — 
Bede,  Eccles.  Hist.,  A.  D.  597. — Tawney:  Buckingham  means  to  say:  And  no  one 
here  comes  within  range  of  your  curse,  for  curses  never  take  effect  outside  the 
lips  of  those  who  utter  them.  [What  the  venerable  Bede  calls  an  ‘ancient  super¬ 
stition’  must  be  ancient  indeed,  but  in  the  present  scene  it  is  evident  that  Buck¬ 
ingham  alone  believed  it,  or  at  least  knew  of  it;  the  open  air  did  not  cause  Anne  to 
modify  her  remarks  in  regard  to  Richard;  nor  did  it  deter  the  Duchess  of  York  from 
hurling  her  most  heavy  curse  upon  her  son’s  head  when  she  bade  him  farewell. 
Buckingham  himself  seems  to  have  lost  faith  in  the  ancient  belief,  for  at  his  death, 
referring  to  this  present  episode,  he  says:  ‘Now  Margaret’s  curse  falls  heavy  on 
my  neck.’ — Ed.] 

299,  300.  I  will  .  .  .  peace]  Birch  (p.  198) :  Thus  they  who  pretend  to  believe 
in  a  Providence,  in  their  turn  disbelieve  it;  and  she  who  scoffed  at  the  idea  when 
it  was  called  to  witness  in  their  favour,  believes  it  when  they  assert  their  disbelief 
to  escape  its  consequences.  But  what  else  does  such  a  dialogue  convey  but  doubt 
and  contempt  of  its  interference — a  satire  upon  its  supposed  operations,  alternately 
accepted  and  rejected,  and  chiefly  proclaimed  by  a  religious  buffoon,  Richard. 
The  issue  of  all  which  would  seem  to  point  out  that  Providence  cared  not  to  pre¬ 
vent,  could  only  second,  the  effusion  of  blood;  and  in  that  all  his  power  lay. — • 
Wordsworth  ( Sh.’s  Knowledge,  p.  203):  Instead  of  omitting  these  last  words, 
as  does  Bowdler,  it  would  have  been  a  wiser  course  to  have  drawn  attention  to  the 
enormity  of  the  crimes,  some  committed  already,  and  others  remaining  to  be 
committed,  by  Richard.  If  malediction  could  ever  be  justifiable,  it  was  justifiable — 
I  had  almost  said  it  was  charitable — in  the  case  and  under  the  circumstances  in 


ACT  I,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


I07 


O  Buckingham,  take  heede  of  yonder  dogge  :  301 

Looke  when  he  fawnes,  he  bites;  and  when  he  bites, 

His  venom  tooth  will  rankle  to  the  death. 

Haue  not  to  do  with  him,  beware  of  him, 

Sinne,  death,  and  hell  haue  fet  their  markes  on  him,  305 

And  all  their  Minifters  attend  on  him. 

Rich.  What  doth  fhe  fay,  my  Lord  of  Buckingham. 

Buc.  Nothing  that  I  refpeft  my  gracious  Lord. 

Mar.  What  doft  thou  fcorne  me 
For  my  gentle  counfell  ?  310 

And  footh  the  diuell  that  I  warne  thee  from. 

O  but  remember  this  another  day:  312 


301.  take  heede]  beware  Qq,  Pope,  +  , 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 

303.  rankle]  rackle  Q  . 
to  tht r]  thee  to  Qq. 

304.  not]  nought  Coll,  ii,  iii,  Mar¬ 
shall. 

305.  on]  upon  Pope,  + ,  Cap.  Var.  ’78, 
’85,  Ran. 


309,  310.  Mar.  What  ...counfell]  Ff, 
Rowe.  One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

310,311.  counfell ? ...from.]  Ff.  coun¬ 
fell,  ...from  :  Qx.  counfell,  ...from  ?  Q3_g, 
Coll.  Hal.  Rife,  counfell?... from  ?  Qa 
et  cet. 

3 1 1 .  footh]  foothd  Q6.  foothe  Qt  et 
cet.  smooth  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 


which  Shakespeare  has  introduced  it,  and  put  it  into  the  mouth  of  a  woman — 
that  woman  a  mother,  and  that  mother  once  a  Queen. 

299.  but]  For  explanation  of  this  ‘but,’  signifying  otherwise  than,  see  Abbott, 
§  122.  Compare  V,  ii,  22. 

303.  venom]  For  nouns  used  as  adjectives,  see  Shakespeare  passim. 

304.  not  to  do]  The  emendation  naught  to  do,  ascribed  by  the  Cambridge 
Edd.  to  ‘Anon.’  may  possibly  antedate  Collier’s  second  and  third  edition  (see 
Text.  Notes).  Marshall  adopts  it  in  order  to  avoid  the  ‘disagreeable  emphasis 
on  “not”  but  also,  in  support  of  the  present  reading,  compares  Meas.  for  Meas., 
I,  i,  64,  65,  and  2  Hen.VI:  V,  ii,  56. — Ed. 

305.  Sinne,  death,  and  hell]  Blackstone:  Possibly  Milton  took  from  hence 
his  famous  allegory. — Holt  White:  Milton  might  as  probably  catch  the  hint 
from  the  following  passage  in  Latimer’s  Sermons,  1584,  fol.  79:  ‘Here  came  in 
death  and  hell,  sinne  was  their  mother.  Therefore  they  must  have  such  an  image 
as  their  mother  sinne  would  geue  them.’ — Malone:  As  we  know  that  Milton  was 
a  diligent  reader  of  Shakespeare,  surely  Sir  William  Blackstone’s  suggestion  is 
the  more  probable. — Hunter  (New  Illust.,  ii,  p.  83):  To  me  it  appears  that 
there  is  nothing  here  which  can  be  assumed  to  have  suggested  such  an  allegory 
as  the  one  alluded  to  [by  Blackstone];  and  also  that  the  real  origin  of  the  allegory 
is  so  plainly  in  the  Epistle  of  St.  James,  i,  15,  as  to  preclude  further  inquiry. — 
Wright:  Though  Milton  was  a  student  of  Shakespeare,  he  read  his  Bible  as 
well,  and  the  combination  of  these  three  words  could  hardly  have  accidentally 
suggested  any  new  idea  to  a  mind  thoroughly  familiar  with  the  theology  of  his 
time. 

31  x.  sooth]  See  !.  54  of  the  present  scene,  or  I,  ii,  188  supra. 


io8 


th£  life  and  death  of 


[act  i,  sc.  iii. 
313 


When  he  fhall  fplit  thy  very  heart  with  forrow : 

And  fay  (poore  Margaret) was  a  Propheteffe  : 

Liue  each  of  you  the  fubie6ts  to  his  hate,  315 

And  he  to  yours,  and  all  of  you  to  Gods.  Exit. 


314.  ( poore  Margaret)]  Ff.  poore 
Margaret  Qq  et  cet. 

Margaret]  Mar g'  ret  Pope,  + . 


315.  fubiefts  to]  fubieefls  of  Q,_t. 
subject  to  Pope,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

316.  yours]  your  Q,Qa.  you  Q^. 

Gods]  God  Qg. 


314.  And  say  .  .  .  Prophetesse]  Buckley  compares  (p.  131,  foot-note)  this 
line  with  /Eschylus,  Agamemnon:  ‘  Kal  av  p  iv  rayu  napuv  ayav  aAr/dopavrcv 
oiKTcpac  ipelc.’  1240-41.  Browning  thus  translates:  ‘And  soon  thou  present, 
“True  prophet  all  too  much”  wilt  pitying  style  me.’  Edward  Fitzgerald,  in  his 
vigorous  version,  omits  these  concluding  lines  of  Cassandra’s  speech. — Ed. 

314.  (poore  Margaret)]  Spedding  classifies  {Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875 — ’76;  p.  10) 
the  parenthesis  here  among  those  alterations  of  the  Quarto  Text  not  intended 
by  Shakespeare.  ‘But,’  he  adds,  ‘would  any  corrector  have  done  so  who  under¬ 
stood  English  ?  Clearly  it  is  evidence  of  too  little  editorial  care,  not  too  much.’ 

315,  316.  Liue  each  ...  to  Gods]  Walpole  (p.  144):  It  is  evident,  from  the 
conduct  of  Shakespeare,  that  the  house  of  Tudor  retained  all  their  Lancastrian 
prejudices,  even  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth.  In  this  play  he  seems  to  deduce 
the  woes  of  the  house  of  York  from  the  curses  which  Queen  Margaret  had  vented 
against  them;  and  he  could  not  give  that  weight  to  her  curses  without  supposing 
a  right  in  her  to  utter  them. — Knight  ( Studies  of  Sh.,  p.  195):  This  was  the 
poetical  faith  of  the  author  of  these  dramas — the  power  of  the  curse  was  associated 
with  the  great  idea  of  a  presiding  Fate.  But  Margaret’s  were  not  the  only  curses. 
Richard  himself  refers  to  the  same  power  of  a  curse — that  of  his  father,  insulted 
in  his  death-hour  by  the  scorns  of  Margaret.  This  is  the  assertion  of  the  equal 
justice  which  is  displayed  in  the  dramatic  issue  of  these  fearful  events;  not  justice 
upon  the  house  of  York  alone,  which  Walpole  thinks  Shakespeare  strove  to  exhibit 
in  deference  to  Tudor  prejudices,  but  justice  upon  the  house  of  Lancaster  as  well 
as  the  house  of  York,  for  those  individual  crimes  of  the  leaders  of  each  house  that 
had  made  a  charnal  ground  of  England.  When  that  justice  had  asserted  its 
supremacy,  tranquillity  was  to  come.  The  poet  has  not  chosen  to  exhibit  the 
establishment  of  law  and  order  in  the  astute  government  of  Henry  VII.;  but  in 
Henry  VIII.  he  has  carried  us  onward  to  a  new  state  of  things,  when  the  power 
of  the  sword  was  at  an  end.  He  came  as  near  to  his  own  times  as  was  safe  or 
fitting;  but  he  contrasts  his  own  times  with  the  days  of  civil  fury  in  a  prophetic 
view  of  the  reign  of  Elizabeth:  ‘In  her  days,  every  man  shall  eat  in  safety,  Under 
his  own  vine,  what  he  plants;  and  sing  The  merry  songs  of  peace  to  all  his  neigh¬ 
bors,’  Hen.  VIII:  V,  iv,  35-37. — Petri  (p.  221):  It  will  be  noticed  how  all 
stand  overcome  and  transfixed  after  Margaret’s  exit.  This  is  the  exposition  of 
the  whole  drama,  and  all  that  we  hear  in  the  course  of  the  play  is  nothing  more 
than  the  development  of  that  which  Margaret’s  lips  have  uttered,  and  we  stand  in 
wonder  at  the  fine  skill  of  Shakespeare.  Yet  do  we  not  hear  as  an  undertone, 
‘Vengeance  is  mine,  I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord’? — Hudson  {Introduction,  p.  37): 
Both  Margaret  and  the  Duke  of  York  seem  but  to  have  a  foresight  of  future  woe 


ACT  I,  SC.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


IO9 

Buc.  My  haire  doth  ftand  an  end  to  heare  her  curfes.  317 
Riu.  And  fo  doth  mine,  I  mufe  why  fhe’s  at  libertie. 

Rich.  I  cannot  blame  her,  by  Gods  holy  mother, 

She  hath  had  too  much  wrong,  and  I  repent  320 

My  part  thereof,  that  I  haue  done  to  her. 

Mar.  I  neuer  did  her  any  to  my  knowledge.  322 


317.  Buc.]  Ff,  +  ,  Var. ’78,  ’85,  Ran. 
Haft.  Qq  et  cet. 

an]  Ff,Q7Qg,  Rowe,  Pope,  on 
Qq  et  cet. 

318.  mufe  why ]  wonder  Qq,  Pope, +  , 
Sta. 


319.  Gods']  God's  F3F4. 

321.  to  her]  Om.  Qq. 

322.  Mar.]  Qu.  Q^j,  Cap.  Var.  ’78, 
’85,  Ran.  Haft.  Q^Qg.  Der.  F3F4. 
Dors.  Rowe,  + .  Qu.  Eliza.  Mai.  et  seq. 


to  the  other,  as  the  proper  consequence  of  past  or  present  crimes.  The  truth 
is,  Margaret’s  curses  do  but  proclaim  those  moral  retributions  of  which  God  is 
the  author  and  Nature  His  minister;  and  perhaps  the  only  way  her  future  character 
could  be  carried  on  into  these  scenes  was  by  making  her  seek  indemnity  for  her 
woes  in  ringing  changes  upon  the  woes  of  others. 

317.  an  end]  Murray  (N.  E.  D.  s.v.  An;  preposition,  obsolete):  The  original 
form  of  the  preposition  which  in  prehistoric  English,  in  accordance  with  the  regular 
phonetic  history  of  short  a  before  nasals,  was  rounded  to  on,  a  form,  unlike  the 
parallel  ond,  hond,  ever  after  retained.  .  .  .  After  nth  century  when  on-  in  com¬ 
bination  was  generally  reduced  to  a-  before  a  consonant,  an-  before  a  vowel,  the 
same  befell  on,  preposition,  to  some  extent,  especially  in  familiar  phrases,  as  an  edge, 
an  end,  etc.  But  in  course  of  time  all  these  were  altered  back  to  on,  or  changed 
to  in;  an  being  retained  only  in  those  in  which  its  prepositional  character 
was  no  longer  apparent,  as  to  go  an  (now  a)  hawking,  twice  an  hour.  [It  is 
possibly  noteworthy  that  the  Qq  retain  the  more  modern  form  ‘  on  end,’  and  the 
Folios  the  more  ancient  ‘an  end.'  In  the  three  other  passages  in  which  this  phrase 
appears  in  the  Folio  it  is  as  here.  Dyce  (ed.  ii),  in  a  note  on  2  Hen.  VI:  III, 
ii,  318,  says:  ‘The  variation  [‘an’  for  on]  goes  for  nothing,  because  our  early 
writers  have  both — sometimes  in  the  same  work:  compare  Chapman’s  Homer: 
“the  haire  stood  vp  on  ende  On  Agamemnon,”  Iliad,  Bk  iv,  p.  54,  ed.  Folio; 
“the  haire  stood  vp  an  ende  On  Ajax,”  lb.,  Bk  xv,  p.  209.’  Here,  in  Chapman, 
curiously  enough,  occurs  the  same  discrepancy  between  the  form  of  the  preposition 
and  the  date  of  publication.  The  first  seven  books  of  Chapman’s  Iliad  were 
published  in  1596, — one  year  before  Q,  of  the  present  play, — and  therein,  as  we 
see  from  Dyce’s  note,  the  phrase  is  on  end.  The  rest  of  the  work  appeared  in 
1600,  and  the  phrase  then  is  an  end.  These  may  be,  in  both  cases,  nothing  more 
than  printing-office  vagaries,  but  that  the  same  variations  should  occur  in  two 
works  so  nearly  contemporaneous  is  not  a  little  remarkable. — Ed.] 

318.  And  .  .  .  libertie]  For  apparent  Alexandrines,  see  Abbott,  §  494. 

320.  She  hath  had]  The  ictus  here  falling  on  *  hath  ’  imparts,  I  think,  a  con¬ 
cessive  tone  to  the  speech,  as  though  the  speaker  had  weighed  both  sides  of  the 
question,  and  had  come  to  a  reluctant  conclusion. — Ed. 

322.  Mar.]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875-76;  p.  10):  This  was  undoubtedly 
an  error  of  press  or  pen  [and  not  an  alteration  intended  by  Shakespeare].  The 


no 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iii. 


Rich.  Yet  you  haue  all  the  vantage  of  her  wrong:  323 

I  was  too  hot,  to  do  fomebody  good, 

That  is  too  cold  in  thinking  of  it  now  :  325 

Marry  as  for  Clarence ,  he  is  well  repayed  : 

He  is  frank’d  vp  to  fatting  for  his  paines, 

God  pardon  them,  that  are  the  caufe  thereof. 

Riu.  A  vertuous,  and  a  Chriftian-like  conclufion 
To  pray  for  them  that  haue  done  fcath  to  vs.  330 


323.  Yet ]  But  Qq,  Cam, +  . 
vantage ]  'vantage  Johns. 
her]  this  Qq. 

324.  hot]  hoat  Qj. 

325.  of  it]  one  it  Q?.  on  it  Qg. 

326.  as]  Om.  Pope.  +  ( — Var.  ’73). 

327.  frank'd]  frankt  Qq.  ( franckt 


Q,0 

328.  thereof]  of  it  Qq,  Var.  ’21,  Sta. 
Cam.  +,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

329?  and  a]  and  Q?Q8. 

Chriflian-Iike]  Chriflianlike  Qq. 
Chriflian  like  F2. 

33°.  fcath]  fcathe  QqF'v 


nine  preceding  woman-speeches  had  had  ‘Mar.’  prefixed,  and  the  transcriber 
or  printer  had  not  got  over  the  habit  of  inserting  it. 

324,  325.  I  was  .  .  .  now]  Marshall:  Gloucester  evidently  here  refers  to  the 
supposed  ingratitude  of  Edward.  (See  above,  122,  123,  and  133.) 

327.  frank’d  vp]  Bradley  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  Frank,  v1,):  1.  To  shut  up  and  feed 
(up)  in  a  frank.  Ibid.  (s.  v.  Frank,  substantive2,):  1.  An  enclosure,  especially 
to  feed  hogs  in;  a  sty.  [Verplanck  suggests  that  there  is  here,  perhaps,  another 
allusion  to  the  armorial  boar  of  York,  (see  1.  237,  supra).  Schmidt  (Anmerkungen, 
p.  98)  also  makes  the  same  suggestion.  It  is,  of  course,  possible  that  Shakespeare 
did  intend  to  refer  here  to  the  boar;  he  does  hereafter  in  IV,  iv,  4,  using,  more¬ 
over,  the  same  phrase:  ‘That  in  the  sty  of  the  most  deadly  boar,  My  son 
George  Stanley  is  frankt  up  in  hold.’  In  the  present  line,  however,  which  refers 
to  Clarence’s  detention  by  Edward,  the  case  is  different;  a  boar  as  an  heraldic 
device  or  badge  was  used  neither  by  Clarence  nor  Edward.  Mrs  Bury  Palliser 
says  (p.  374):  ‘The  device  of  a  boar  was  used  by  Richard  before  he  was  king. 
His  cognisance  was,  a  rose  supported  on  the  dexter  side  by  a  bull,  a  badge  of  the 
house  of  Clare,  and  on  the  sinister  by  a  boar,  which  boar  he  had  found  among 
the  badges  of  the  house  of  York.  The  latter  he  selected  for  his  own  personal 
device,  and  it  was  that  by  which  he  was  generally  designated.’  The  personal 
device  of  the  Duke  of  Clarence  was  that  of  the  house  of  Clare — a  black  bull  (op. 
cit.,  p.  374,  footnote).  The  present  use  of  ‘frank,’  coupled  with  ‘fatting,’  clearly 
refers  to  domestic  swine,  and  is  thoroughly  characteristic  of  Richard’s  grim  hum¬ 
our.  Is  there  not  likewise  something  of  contempt  in  the  alliteration  (which 
Shakespeare’s  ear  heard  more  quickly  than  any  one  else’s) :  ‘  frank’d  up  to  fatting 
for;’  there  is  a  hostile,  if  not  a  contemptuous,  tone  in  the  very  f-sound,  as  in  the 
words,  Fie,  Faugh. — Ed.] 

327.  to  fatting]  For  other  examples  of  ‘  to’  in  the  sense  of  to  that  end,  see  Abbott, 
§  186. 

330.  scath]  Skeat  (Diet.  s.  v.)  shows  that  this  word  appears  in  slightly  varying 
forms  in  several  other  languages,  and  adds:  ‘All  from  Teutonic  base  Skath,  to 


ACT  I,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


III 


Rich.  So  do  I  euer,  being  well  aduisM.  331 

Speakes  to  himfelfe . 

For  had  I  curft  now,  I  had  curft  my  felfe. 

Enter  Catesby. 

Cates.  Madam,  his  Maiefty  doth  call  for  you,  335 

And  for  your  Grace,  and  yours  my  gracious  Lord. 

Qu.  Catesby  I  come,  Lords  will  you  go  with  mee. 

Riu.  We  wait  vpon  your  Grace. 

Exeunt  all  but  Glojler. 

Rich.  I  do  the  wrong,  and  firft  begin  to  brawle.  340 

The  fecret  Mifcheefes  that  I  fet  abroach, 


331-333.  euer ...J elf e.~\  Aside.  Walker, 
Cam.  +. 

332.  Speakes  to  himfelfe.]  Om.  Qq. 
Aside.  Rowe  et  seq. 

333.  curjl  now,]  Q4Ff.  curjl ,  now 
Qq. 

334.  Enter  Catesby.]  Om.  Qq. 

335.  Cates.]  Qx.  Catf.  Qq. 

336.  your  ...Lord]  Ff,  Rowe,  your 
Grace ,  and  you  my  noble  Lo :  Q,Q2, 
Pope,  + ,  Knt,  Wk.  i.  your  noble  Grace  : 
and  you  my  noble  Lord  Q3-6.  your  noble 
grace  and  you  my  Lord  Q,Q8.  your 
grace , — and  you,  my  noble  lords.  Cap. 
et  cet.  (subs.) 


337.  Catesby]  Catsby  Q^s. 

I...mee.]  we. ..vs.  Qq,  Pope,  +  , 

Sta.  Cam. +  .  I...me?  F_F.  et  cet. 

3  4 

338.  I'Ve  wait  vpon]  Madame  we  will 
attend  Qq,  Pope, +  ,  Varr.  Mai.  Steev. 
Varr.  Sta.  Cam. +. 

339.  all  but  Gloller]  man.  Ri.  Q,Qa. 
ma.  Glo.  Qq. 

340.  the]  thee  Q4_g,F3F4. 
begin']  began  Qq. 

340,  341.  brawle.  The ]  braule  The 
QxQa.  braule.  The  Qq. 

341.  Mifcheefes]  Mifchiefe  Q3-8. 
abroach]  a-broach  F3F4> 

Rowe,  + . 


harm;  probably  formed  as  a  denominative  verb  from  an  Aryan  past  participle 
Skata,  wounded;  so  that  the  sense  is:  to  make  to  be  wounded,  to  inflict  wounds 
upon.’ 

331.  being  well  aduis’d]  Walker  ( Crit .,  iii,  173):  These  words  ought  to 
be  included  in  the  aside.  [Marshall  also  proposes  this  arrangement,  and  so 
prints  it. — Collier  calls  attention  (ed.  ii)  to  this  as  one  of  the  rare  instances  where 
an  aside  is  marked  as  such  in  the  Folio. — Ed.] 

336-338.  And  for  .  .  .  your  Grace]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  i875-’76; 
p.  61):  As  the  message  is  worded  in  the  Qq  one  of  the  Dukes  is  left  out;  the  Queen, 
to  whom  it  is  addressed,  answers  for  all,  and  I.ord  Rivers  speaks  in  the  name 
of  the  other  Lords,  to  whom  the  Queen  turns  and  invites  to  accompany  her,  address¬ 
ing  herself,  probably,  more  directly  to  her  brother,  Lord  Rivers,  who  answers. 
It  is  a  small  thing,  but  it  has  been  done  on  purpose,  and,  I  think,  varies  and  enlivens 
the  action. 

337.  I  come]  Cambridge  Edd.:  In  Capell’s  copy  of  the  Seventh  Quarto  an 
old  MS  Corrector  has  converted  we  come  into  welcome. 

341.  set  abroach]  Murray  ( N.E .  D.  s.  v.  Abroach,  adverb ):  2.  In  a  state  to 
be  diffused  or  propagated;  afloat;  a-foot;  astir.  To  set  abroach:  to  broach,  to  set 
a-foot,  to  publish  or  diffuse. 


I  12 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  I,  sc.  iii. 


I  lay  vnto  the  greeuous  charge  of  others.  342 

Clarence ,  who  I  indeede  haue  caft  in  darkneffe, 

I  do  beweepe  to  many  fimple  Guiles, 

Namely  to  Derby,  Hajlings,  Buckingham,  345 

And  tell  them  ’tis  the  Queene,  and  her  Allies, 

That  ftirre  the  King  againft  the  Duke  my  Brother. 

Now  they  beleeue  it,  and  withall  whet  me 

To  be  reueng’d  on  Riuers,  Dorfet,Grey.  349 


342.  greeuous]  greeuious  Q?.  greuious 
Q8.  grievous  F3F4. 

343.  who ]  whom  QqFf  et  seq. 
cafl]  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  Sing. 

Wh.  i.  laid  Qq  et  cet. 

darknejfe]  darkenejfe  Qq  (darke¬ 
ns  Q,. ) 

345.  Derby,  Haftings]  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Ktly.  Hajlings ,  Darby  Qq,  Cam. 
+  .  Hastings,  Stanley  Sta.  Dyce  ii,  iii, 


Huds.  Stanley,  Hastings  Theob.  et 
cet. 

345.  Buckingham]  Buckinham  Q4. 

346.  tell  them  7;j]  fay  it  is  Qq.  (was 

Qg  )  Hal. 

347.  King}  K.  Q3_5. 

348.  it]  me-Qq. 

whet]  wijh  Q8.  they  zvhet  Ktly. 

349.  Dorfet]  Ff,  + ,  Knt.  Vaughan 
Qq,  Var.  ’73  et  cet. 


343.  cast  in  darknesse]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  11):  The 
change  ‘cast’  for  laid  is  one  which  Shakespeare  himself  would  naturally  have 
made  when  he  observed  that  the  same  word  had  been  used  in  the  preceding  line, 
in  a  different  sense. — Pickersgill  (Ibid.,  p.  85):  Gloucester,  we  must  remember, 
is  not  above  verbal  quibbling:  and  I  have  little  doubt  that  the  author  repeated 
the  word  laid  consciously  and  deliberately.  I  should  cite  this,  as  an  example 
of  the  class  of  alterations,  apparently  made  to  avoid  the  recurrence  of  the  same 
word,  even  where  the  recurrence  adds  to  the  force  of  the  passage. — Wright:  If 
such  changes  are  supposed  to  have  the  authority  of  Shakespeare’s  supervision,  it 
would  seem  that  a  less  appropriate  word  has  here  been  substituted.  Richard’s 
influence  is  throughout  supposed  to  be  concealed,  and  laid  expresses  this  much 
better  than  ‘  cast,  ’  which  implies  more  direct  action  on  his  part.  The  phrase  ‘  laid 
in  darkness’  was  perhaps  borrowed  from  the  Prayer-Book  version  of  Psalm  xliii.  3: 
‘  He  hath  laid  me  in  the  darkness,  as  the  men  that  have  been  long  dead.’ 

344.  Guiles]  Bradley  (N.  E.  D .):  A  credulous  person;  one  easily  imposed 
upon;  a  dupe.  Of  doubtful  and  perhaps  mixed  origin;  the  above  sense  would 
be  natural  as  a  transferred  use  of  ‘gull,’  an  unfledged  bird,  especially  a  gosling; 
but  it  is  also  possible  that  the  substantive  may  be  from  ‘gull,’  to  delude,  and  that 
this  verb  may  be  an  application  of  ‘gull,’  to  gorge,  cram. 

345.  Namely]  Murray  (N.  E.  D.)  gives  as  the  first  definition  of  this  word: 
‘  Particularly,  especially,  above  all,  ’  which  would  excellently  apply  here  (and,  in 
fact,  Vaughan  (iii,  29)  asserts  that  it  does),  were  it  not  that  Dr  Murray  adds, 
that  in  this  sense  it  is  ‘  usually  ’  preceded  by  and.  Consequently,  it  appears  to 
come  most  befittingly  under  Dr  Murray’s  3d  division,  where  numerous  examples 
from  1450  to  the  present  day  are  given  of  its  meaning:  ‘To  wit;  that  is  to  say; 
videlicet,’  which  is  also  the  present  meaning  given  by  Schmidt  (Lex.). — Ed. 

349.  Riuers,  Dorset,  Grey]  Pickersgill,  in  answer  to  Spedding’s  remark 
(Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875-’ 76;  p.  11)  that  he  could  see  ‘no  possible  reason  for  the 


act  i,  sc.  iii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  113 

But  then  I  figh,  and  with  a  peece  of  Scripture,  350 

Tell  them  that  God  bids  vs  do  good  for  euill  : 

And  thus  I  cloath  my  naked  Villanie 
With  odde  old  ends,  ftolne  forth  of  holy  Writ, 

And  feeme  a  Saint,  when  moft  I  play  the  deuill. 

Enter  two  murthcrers.  355 

But  foft,  heere  come  my  Executioners, 

How  now  my  hardy  flout  refolued  Mates,  357 


350.  But']  Bnt  Q2. 

/]  Om.  Q3-$. 

351.  God]  Cod  Q4. 
do]  to  do  Q$. 

353.  odde  old]  old  odd  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. 
+  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Ktly,  Huds. 

Jlolne  forth]  Fa.  flolne  out  Qq, 
Sta.  Cam. +  .  Jlol'n  forth  F3F4  et  cet. 


355.  two  murtherers]  Ff,  Theob. 
Warb.  Executioners  Qq  (after  1.  356). 
two  Villains  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  two 
Murderers.  Johns,  et  seq. 

357.  hardy]  handy  Pope,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns. 

flout  refolued]  stout  -resolved 
Sing.  Dyce,  Huds.  Ktly,  Rife. 


Quarto  change  of  Rivers,  Vaughan,  Grey,’  says  (p.  85):  ‘Inasmuch  as  it  is 
upon  Rivers,  Vaughan,  and  Grey  (and  not  upon  Rivers,  Dorset,  and  Grey) 
that  Gloucester’s  vengeance  falls,  it  is  most  appropriate  that  Vaughan’s  name 
should  be  mentioned  rather  than  Dorset’s.  But,  upon  the  other  hand,  it  is  clear 
that  a  corrector,  who  could  not  be  expected  to  be  so  conversant  with  the  relations 
of  the  different  parts  of  the  play  as  the  author  himself,  might  not  unnaturally 
stumble  at  Vaughan’s  name.  Vaughan  had  never  been  mentioned  before;  he 
plays  a  very  insignificant  part  in  the  drama.  Dorset,  on  the  contrary,  had  made 
a  prominent  figure  in  this  very  scene;  Dorset  was  nephew  to  Rivers,  and  brother 
to  Grey,  and  luckily  his  name  would  fit  into  the  verse  quite  as  well  as,  or  even 
better  than,  Vaughan’s.  Accordingly,  ‘Vaughan’  was  struck  out,  and  Dorset 
inserted. — Vaughan  (iii,  p.  29):  ‘Vaughan’  being  in  its  native  Welsh  a  word 
of  two  syllables,  Vychan,  or  Vechan,  Shakespeare  assumed  this  pronunciation 
of  it  as  disyllabic  whenever  he  used  it.  ‘Vaughan’  was,  perhaps,  J‘n  Shakespeare’s 
time,  pronounced  Vaugh-an. 

352-354.  And  thus  ...  I  play  the  deuill]  Birch  (p.  199):  Shakespeare  might 
have  the  idea  that  those  who  affected  Puritanism  in  his  times  were  playing  the 
devil  when  they  seemed  the  saint;  but  such  a  hypocrite  as  Richard  could  not  delude, 
and  could  only  have  been  intended  as  a  gross  satire  to  make  an  audience  easily 
laugh.  [The  present  passage  was,  possibly,  in  Heywood’s  mind  when  he  put  into 
the  mouth  of  Gloucester  the  following:  ‘Thus  must  thou  Richard,  Seeme  as  a  saint 
to  men  in  outward  show,  Being  a  very  diuill  in  thy  heart.  Thus  must  thou  couer 
all  thy  villanies,  And  keepe  them  close  from  ouerlookers  eyes.’ — 2  Edward  IV., 
1600,  p.  185,  ed.  Pearson.  Compare  also:  ‘The  devil  can  cite  scripture  for  his  pur¬ 
pose.  ’ — Mer.  of  Ven.,  I,  iii,  99. — Ed.] 

353.  odde  old  ends]  Wright:  That  is,  quotations  not  specially  appropriate. 
Compare  Much  Ado,  II,  iii,  244:  ‘I  may  chance  have  some  odd  quirks  and 
remnants  of  wit  broken  upon  me.’  And  Mer.  of  Ven.,  II,  ii,  66:  ‘According 
to  Fates  and  Destinies  and  such  odd  sayings.’ 

357.  hardy  stout  resolued]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  32):  Shakespeare  very  rarely 
8 


1 14  THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  Hi. 

Are  you  now  going  to  difpatch  this  thing?  358 


358.  you  now]  ye  now  Q3_5.  ye  not  358.  thing  ?]  deed ?  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 

Q6Q7Qs  (subs0 

strings  together  three  adjectives  without  an  and.  [Although  Singer’s  second  edi¬ 
tion  preceded  Walker’s  Crit.  in  date  of  publication,  Walker’s  notes  were  written 
long  before  1856.  See  Text.  Notes. — Ed.] 

358-369.  Are  you  .  .  .  tongues]  Churchill  shows  (pp.  484  and  509)  that  there 
are  certain  resemblances,  verbal  and  otherwise,  between  this  scene  of  Gloucester 
with  the  two  Murderers,  and  that  in  Marlowe’s  Edward  II.,  wherein  Mortimer 
instructs  Lightborn;  and  also  like  resemblances  to  the  scene  in  the  True  Tragedy 
of  Richard  III.,  where  Tyrell  instructs  the  murderers.  It  may  be  not  unremunera- 
tive  to  the  student  of  Shakespeare  to  compare  his  treatment  of  this  theme,  namely, 
the  instigation  to  murder,  in  Macbeth,  III,  i,  74-140;  King  John,  III,  iii,  58- 
70;  Hamlet,  IV,  vii,  100-163;  also  the  present  play,  IV,  ii,  20-90. — Ed. 

358.  Are  .  .  .  this  thing]  Walpole  (p.  13):  Hall,  Holinshed,  and  Stow  say 
not  a  word  of  Richard  being  the  person  who  put  the  sentence  in  execution;  but, 
on  the  contrary,  they  all  say  he  resisted  the  murder  of  Clarence:  all  too  record 
another  circumstance  which  is  perfectly  ridiculous,  that  Clarence  was  drowned 
in  a  butt  of  Malmsey.  Whoever  can  believe  that  a  butt  of  wine  was  the  engine 
of  his  death,  may  believe  that  Richard  helped  him  into  it,  and  kept  him  down 
till  he  was  suffocated.  But  the  strong  evidence  on  which  Richard  must  be  acquitted, 
and  indeed  even  of  having  contributed  to  his  death,  was  the  testimony  of  Edward 
himself.  Being  sometime  afterward  solicited  to  pardon  a  notorious  criminal, 
the  King’s  conscience  broke  forth:  ‘Unhappy  brother!’  cried  he,  ‘for  whom  no 
man  would  intercede — yet  all  can  be  intercessor  for  a  villain!’  If  Richard  had 
been  instigator  or  executioner,  it  is  not  likely  that  the  King  would  have  assumed 
the  whole  merciless  criminality  to  himself,  without  bestowing  a  due  share  on  his 
brother  Gloucester.  Is  it  possible  to  renew  the  charge,  and  not  recollect  this 
acquittal? — Gairdner  also  thinks  (p.  44)  that  through  insufficient  evidence 
Gloucester  may  be  acquitted  of  the  charge  of  being  directly  concerned  with  the 
death  of  Clarence,  and  adds:  ‘It  must  be  observed  that  Richard  and  his  family, 
to  some  extent,  benefitted  by  Clarence’s  attainder.  Three  days  before  the  Duke 
was  actually  put  to  death  one  of  his  titles — that  of  Earl  of  Salisbury — was  con¬ 
ferred  upon  Richard’s  eldest  son.  Afterwards  Richard  obtained  by  grant  from 
the  Crown  undivided  possession  of  the  lordship  of  Barnard  Castle,  of  which  he 
had  hitherto  held  only  a  moiety  in  right  of  his  wife.  On  the  21st  of  February — 
just  three  days  after  the  death  of  Clarence— Richard  obtained  licences  from  the 
King  for  the  foundation  of  two  separate  religious  establishments  in  the  North 
of  England.  These  designs  no  doubt  may  have  been  in  his  mind  before;  but  the 
date  at  which  he  took  active  steps  to  carry  them  out  must  certainly  have  been 
owing,  in  some  degree,  to  the  death  of  Clarence.’ — Legge  (i,  156):  If  we  must 
seek  an  explanation  in  some  particular  contemporary  event  for  the  act  of  piety 
on  behalf  of  Richard  and  his  wife  [spoken  of  by  Gairdner],  one  wholly  congenial 
with  his  nature  might  be  conjectured  in  the  birth  of  his  son.  The  exact  date 
of  his  birth  is,  indeed,  uncertain,  but  as  Rous  states  that  he  was  seven  years  old 
when  created  Prince  of  Wales,  in  September,  1483,  we  may  conclude  that  it  was 
in  1477.  Richard’s  petition,  which  received  the  sanction  of  Parliament  on  the 


ACT  I,  sc.  iii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

Vtl.We  are  my  Lord,  and  come  to  haue  the  Warrant, 
That  we  may  be  admitted  where  he  is. 

Ric.  Well  thought  vpon,  I  haue  it  heare  about  me : 
When  you  haue  done,  repay  re  to  Crosby  place ; 

But  firs  be  fodaine  in  the  execution, 

Withall  obdurate,  do  not  heare  him  pleade ; 

For  Clarence  is  well  fpoken,  and  perhappes 
May  moue  your  hearts  to  pitty,  if  you  marke  him. 

Vil.  Tut,  tut,  my  Lord,  we  will  not  ftand  to  prate, 
Talkers  are  no  good  dooers,  be  affur’d  : 

We  go  to  vfe  our  hands,  and  not  our  tongues. 

Rich.  Your  eyes  drop  Mill-ftones,  when  Fooles  eyes 


115 

360 


365 


370 


359.  Vil.]  Ff,  Rowe.  Exec.  Qx.  Execu. 
Q2.  Exe.  Q3_5.  1  Vil.  Pope,  + .  i.M. 

Cap.  1  Mur.  Var. ’73  et  seq.  (subs.) 
361.  Ric.  Well]  Glo.  It  was  well  Qq. 
me:]  me.  [gives  the  warrant. 

Cap. 

367.  Tut ,  tut,]  Tujh  Qq,  Cam. +  . 
Om.  Pope,  +  .  Sep.  line,  Cam.  + . 


367.  my  Lord ]  feare  not  my  lord  Qq, 
Pope,  +  ,  Cam. -f. 

368.  dooers,  be  a  (fur3  d  .•]  Q2F2F3-  doers 
be  ajfured :  Q,Q3-8.  doers;  beaffur'd, 
F4  et  cet.  (subs. ) 

369.  go]  come  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

370.  Mill-Jlones]  miljlones  Qq. 


16th  of  January,  must  have  been  presented  to  the  King  in  the  preceding  year, 
and  the  argument  from  the  coincidence  of  dates  is  fatal  to  the  idea  of  an  act  of 
atonement,  and  favors  that  of  a  thank-offering,  which  it  naturally  suggests  to  the 
unprejudiced  inquirer.  [For  a  further  consideration  of  Gloucester’s  complicity  in 
the  death  of  Clarence,  see  Miss  Halsted,  Ch.  xi,  or  Oechelhauser,  Essay,  p. 
66;  also  I,  i,  37,  note. — Ed.] 

358.  this  thing]  Malone:  Seagars,  in  his  Legend  oj  Richard  the  Third,  speaking 
of  the  murder  of  Gloucester’s  nephews,  makes  him  say:  ‘What  though  he  refused, 
yet  be  sure  you  may  That  other  were  as  ready  to  take  in  hand  that  thing.’  The 
coincidence  was,  I  believe,  merely  accidental. 

360.  he]  The  Cowden-Clarkes:  This  mention  of  their  intended  victim  by  the 
simple  pronoun  ‘  he,  ’  while  no  name  has  been  mentioned,  is  precisely  one  of  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  touches  of  naturalness,  equalled  by  Richard’s  characteristic  mention  of 
the  projected  deed  as  ‘this  thing.’  ’[Compare  Macbeth,  II,  ii,  4,  n,  14,  52,  where 
Macbeth  and  Lady  Macbeth  allude  to  the  murder  of  Duncan  merely  as  ‘it.’ — 
Ed.] 

363.  sodaine]  Wright:  That  is,  quick.  So  in  Temp.,  II,  i,  306:  ‘Then  let  us 
both  be  sudden.’  And  Julius  Caes.,  Ill,  i,  19:  ‘Casca,  be  sudden,  for  we  fear 
prevention.’  Hence  suddenly  signifies  hastily  or  rashly,  as  in  1  Timothy,  v,  22: 
‘Lay  hands  suddenly  on  no  man,’  where  the  Greek  is  raxlu f.  [Compare  also: 
‘sudden  and  quick  in  quarrel.’ — As  You  Like  It,  II,  vii,  1 5 1 .] 

364.  obdurate]  For  change  of  accent  in  certain  words,  see  Abbott,  §  490. 

370,  371.  Mill-stones  .  .  .  Teares]  Steevens:  This  is,  I  believe,  a  proverbial 

expression.  It  is  used  again  in  the  tragedy  of  Ccesar  and  Pompey,  1607:  ‘Men’s 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iv. 


1 1 6 

fall  Teares :  371 

I  like  you  Lads,  about  your  bufineffe  ftraight. 

Go,  go,  difpatch. 

Vil.  We  will  my  Noble  Lord.  374 


Scena  Quarta. 


Enter  Clarence  and  Keeper. 


371.  falT\  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  Sing, 
Hal.  Ktly,  Rife,  drop  Qq  et  cet. 

372.  bufineffe  fraight  ]  buftnejfe.  Ex¬ 
eunt.  Qq. 

37* 1 2-374-  Jiraight...Lordf\  Om.  Qq. 
go.  [Exeunt.  Pope,  +  ( — Var. ’73). 

373.  374.  One  line,  Steev.  et  seq. 


2 

1.  Scena  Quarta.]  Scene  continued, 
Qq.  Scene  v.  Pope,  Han.  Warb.  Johns. 
Act  ii,  Scene  ii.  Irving. 

The  Tower.  Pope  et  seq.  (subs.) 

2.  and  Keeper.]  Ff,  Rowe.  Broken- 
bury.  Qq.  and  Ratclifife.  Booth,  and 
Brack  enbury.  Pope  et  cet. 


eyes  must  mill-stones  drop  when  fools  shed  tears.’  [See,  also,  Tro.  Cress.,  I,  ii, 
158:  ‘Hecuba  laughed  that  her  eyes  ran  o’er — With  mill-stones.’ — Ed.] 

1.  Scena  Quarta]  The  variations  between  the  text  of  the  Folio  and  of  the 
Quartos  are,  in  this  scene,  more  numerous  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  play  of 
the  same  length;  not  only  are  there  verbal  changes,  but  whole  lines  are  at  times 
added  or  omitted;  that  which  is  printed  as  verse  in  the  Qq  is,  in  the  Folio, 
printed  as  prose.  The  Quarto  is,  possibly,  the  acting  version  of  the  more  com¬ 
plete,  or  Folio,  text.  Oechelhauser  ( Einfuhrungen ,  i,  143)  considers  the  best 
arrangement  that  adopted  by  Devrient,  viz.,  transposing  this  whole  scene  to  the 
opening  of  Act  II.  In  the  first  place,  Act  I.  is  disproportionately  long  compared 
to  the  other  Acts,  and  Act  II.  is,  moreover,  the  shortest.  Secondly,  the  dramatic 
effect  of  Richard’s  announcement  of  the  death  of  Clarence  is  heightened  by  repre¬ 
senting  the  murder  as  directly  preceding  it,  and  not,  as  in  the  Folio  arrangement, 
separating  it  by  the  greater  interval  of  an  intermission  between'  the  First  and 
Second  Acts.  Edwin  Booth  followed  Devrient’s  arrangement. — Ed. 

2.  Enter  Clarence  and  Keeper]  Hunter  (Must.,  ii,  83) :  The  Folio  arrangement 
is  the  better,  as  is  apparent  from  two  considerations:  First,  that  it  is  improbable 
Brackenbury,  who  was  the  Lieutenant  of  the  Tower,  should  pass  the  night  in  the 
sleeping  room  of  his  prisoner;  and,  secondly,  when  Brackenbury  makes  those  reflec¬ 
tions  on  the  miseries  of  royalty  while  Clarence  is  asleep,  they  have  no  relation  to 
the  dream  and  the  perturbed  state  of  mind  of  Clarence  of  which  the  dream  was 
indicative.  They  suit  a  person  entering  the  cell  where  Clarence  sleeps  after  having 
related  his  dream  to  another,  as  Brackenbury  is  represented  to  have  done  in  the 
Folios,  but  not  a  person  who  had  been  listening  to  the  deeply  affecting  words 
of  Clarence.  The  remarks  also  interposed  by  the  person  whom  Clarence  is  address¬ 
ing  are  more  those  of  an  uncultivated  person,  such  as  the  keeper,  than  of  one  like 
Brackenbury.  The  arrangement  of  the  Folios  is  more  worthy  of  Shakespeare. — 
Knight:  There  does  not  appear  any  reason  for  deviating  from  the  arrangement 
of  the  Qq. — Dyce:  The  opening  of  this  scene:  ‘why  looks  your  grace  so  heavily 
to-day,’  shows  distinctly  that  it  takes  place  during  the  day , — in  the  earlier  part  of 
the  day, — Brackenbury  having  just  come  to  visit  his  prisoner;  and  when  Clarence 


ACT  I,  SC.  iv.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


II 7 

Keep.  Why  lookes  your  Grace  fo  heauily  to  day.  3 

Cla.  0,1  haue  paft  a  miferable  night, 

So  full  of  fearefull  Dreames,  of  vgly  fights,  5 

That  as  I  am  a  Chriftian  faithfull  man, 

I  would  not  fpend  another  fuch  a  night 
Though  Twere  to  buy  a  world  of  happy  daies  : 

So  full  of  difmall  terror  was  the  time.  9 

3-77.  Keep.]  Bro.  Qq.  gajlly  dreames  Qq,  Pope,  +,  Sta.  Cam.  +. 

3.  to  day.]  to  day  ?  Qq.  Om.  F^F^.  6.  Chrijlian  faithfully  Christian, 

5.  fe are  full.,  fights]  rgly  fights,  of  faithful  Hutchesson  MS  ap.  Cam. 

says  to  Brackenbury,  ‘I  prithee  sit  by  me  awhile  ...  I  fain  would  sleep,’  he 
evidently  means  no  more  than  that  Brackenbury  should  remain  beside  him  while 
he  refreshed  himself  by  a  short  slumber.  Hence  it  is  that,  immediately  after  wishing 
Clarence  ‘good  rest,’  Brackenbury  remarks:  ‘reposing  hours,  Makes  the  night 
morning  and  the  noon-tide  night.' — Collier  ( Emendations ,  p.  327):  Perhaps, 
when  this  play  was  first  performed  the  company  could  only  afford  one  actor  for 
both  parts,  and  Brackenbury  was,  therefore,  made  to  officiate  as  Lieutenant  and 
as  keeper  [see  Text.  Notes]',  but  afterwards,  when  the  company  became  more 
numerous,  it  was  thought  better  to  divide  the  characters.  In  all  editions  the  two 
Murderers  deliver  their  warrant  to  Brackenbury.  [R.  G.  White’s  note  is  to  this 
same  effect.] — Skottowe  (i,  194):  Shakespeare  seems  to  have  been  indebted  to  his 
own  imagination  only  for  the  scene  of  Clarence  in  prison,  his  beautiful  narrative  of 
his  dream,  and  the  less  happy  dialogue  of  the  murderers. — Daniel  ( Introd .,  p.  xv): 
The  author  seems  to  have  begun  the  scene  with  the  intention  of  making  the  keeper 
in  attendance  on  Clarence  a  distinct  personage,  and  then,  as  the  scene  progressed, 
to  have  resolved  that  Brackenbury  himself  should  be  this  keeper.  I  do  not  see 
how  else  we  are  to  account  for  the  way  in  which  Brackenbury  enters,  takes  up  the 
words  of  the  keeper,  and  assumes  his  post. — Wright:  The  change  of  the  Folios 
was  made  apparently  because  it  was  felt  incongruous  in  an  official  of  Brackenbury’s 
rank  to  discharge  the  office  of  a  gaoler.  But  it  must  be  remembered  that  his 
prisoner  was  a  prince  of  the  blood.  Tradition  associates  the  scene  of  Clarence’s 
murder  with  the  Bowyer  Tower.  See  Knight’s  London,  ii,  239. 

3,  4.  to  day  .  . .  night]  Do  not  these  two  words  convey  to  us  at  once  a  measurable 
lapse  of  time  during  which  Clarence  has  been  languishing  in  the  Tower?  yet  it 
was  in  the  first  scene  that  we  saw  him  conveyed  thither,  and  events  have  followed 
each  other  so  rapidly  that  it  is  hardly  possible  to  say  just  where  a  passage  of  time 
even  as  long  as  a  night  has  occurred.  Daniel  places  an  interval  between  scenes  ii 
and  iii,  thus  making  scene  iii  begin  the  second  day  of  the  action;  hereby  Clarence 
is  a  prisoner  of  but  one  day,  while  according  to  the  Croyland  Chronicle,  ‘  within  ten 
days  of  his  condemnation  Clarence  was  executed  ’ — and  even  then  he  had  been  con¬ 
fined  in  the  Tower  for  some  time.  His  death  occurred  18  February,  1478. — Ed. 

6.  faithfull]  Johnson:  That  is,  not  an  infidel.  [Barnard  notes  that  this  is 
the  only  example  in  Shakespeare  of  ‘faithful’  in  this  sense,  and  compares  Ephes.  1, 
1:  ‘To  the  faithful  in  Christ  Jesus.’  Wright  cites  Mer.  of  Ven.,  II,  iv,  38:  ‘a 
faithless  Jew.’ — Ed.] 

7.  such  a]  Abbott  (§  85):  ‘A’  is  here  used  pleonastically. 


1 1 8 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iv. 


Keep. What  was  your  dream  my  Lord,  I  pray  you  tel  me  io 
£7#.Me  thoughts  that  I  had  broken  from  the  Tower, 

And  was  embark’d  to  croffe  to  Burgundy, 

And  in  my  company  my  Brother  Gloufter, 

Who  from  my  Cabin  tempted  me  to  walke, 

Vpon  the  Hatches  :  There  we  look’d  toward  England,  15 


10.  my  Lord ,  ...me]  I  long  to  heart 
you  tell  it.  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

11.  Me  thoughts ]  Q,_3,Ff,  Rowe, 

Dyce,  Cam.  + .  Me  thought  Q4-a.  Me- 
thought  Pope  et  cet. 


II,  12.  that... to  Burgundy]  I  -was 
imbarkt  for  Burgundie  Qq,  Sta. 

15.  There ]  Q^.Ff,  Rowe,  Knt. 
Thence  Q,_s  et  cet. 


11.  Me  thoughts,  etc.]  Hunter  (IUust.,  ii,  84):  This  is  one  of  the  scenes  in 
which  Shakespeare  is  supposed  to  have  been  most  successful.  In  one  part  he  is 
eminently  so;  in  what  part  is  he  not?  but  the  part  to  which  I  particularly  allude 
is  the  opening  of  the  dream.  I  can  never  read  these  lines  without  having  the 
image  before  me  of  the  two  illustrious  brothers  pacing  the  deck,  and  seeming  to 
hear  their  august  colloquy;  and  without  at  the  same  time  being  reminded  of  the 
wars  in  which  they  had  lost  father  and  brother  and  many  other  near  relations;  and 
of  their  own  recorded  and  unrecorded  adventures, — their  wanderings  in  woods  and 
fells,  their  sufferings  and  escapes  in  the  battle-field.  This  is,  perhaps,  the  highest 
triumph  of  the  poet’s  art. 

11.  Me  thoughts]  Dyce  (Note  on  Wint.  Tale,  I,  ii,  154,  ed.  ii):  ‘ Methoughts’ 
is,  no  doubt,  a  form  which  we  occasionally  meet  with;  but  since,  a  few  lines  after, 
the  Folios  have  met  bought,  the  variation  was  evidently  introduced  by  the  scribe 
or  the  printer,  not  by  Shakespeare. — Walker  (Vers.  284)  suggests  that  ‘methoughts’ 
is  formed  by  contagion  from  methinks. — Skeat  (s.  v.  methinks ):  Here  me  is  the 
dative  case  of  the  first  personal  pronoun;  and  thynceth  is  from  the  impersonal 
verb  thyncan,  to  seem,  quite  distinct  from  thencan,  to  think.  [Compare  III,  i,  75.] 

12.  to  Burgundy]  Malone:  Clarence  was  desirous  to  assist  his  sister  Margaret 
against  the  French  king,  who  invaded  her  jointure-lands  after  the  death  of  her  hus¬ 
band,  Charles,  Duke  of  Burgundy,  who  was  killed  at  the  siege  of  Nancy,  in  January, 
i476-’77.  Isabel,  the  wife  of  Clarence,  being  then  dead,  he  wished  to  marry  Mary, 
the  daughter  and  heir  of  the  Duke  of  Burgundy;  but  the  match  was  opposed  by 
Edward,  who  hoped  to  have  obtained  her  for  his  brother-in-law,  Lord  Rivers; 
and  this  circumstance  has  been  suggested  as  the  principal  cause  of  the  breach 
between  Edward  and  Clarence.  Mary  of  Burgundy,  however,  chose  a  husband 
for  herself,  having  married  in  August,  1477,  Maximilian,  son  of  the  Emperor  Fred¬ 
eric. — Barnard:  Clarence’s  dream  might  also  carry  him  back  to  the  days  of  his 
childhood,  when,  after  the  battle  of  Wakefield,  he  and  Gloucester  were  sent,  for 
safety,  to  Utrecht,  where  they  remained  for  a  time  under  the  protection  of  Philip, 
Duke  of  Burgundy. 

14.  Who]  For  ‘who,’  used  as  ‘relative  to  introduce  a  fact  about  the  antecedent,’ 
see  Abbott,  §  259  (2). 

15.  Hatches]  Murray  (N.  E.  D .):  Formerly  (in  plural,  rarely  in  singular), 
a  movable  planking  forming  a  kind  of  deck  in  ships;  hence  also  the  permanent 
deck.  1552.  Huloet:  Hatche  of  a  shyppe  where  they  walke,  pergula. 


ACT  I,  sc.  iv.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


1 19 
16 


And  cited  vp  a  thoufand  heauy  times, 

During  the  warres  of  Yorke  and  Lancafter 
That  had  befalne  vsAs  we  pac’d  along 
Vpon  the  giddy  footing  of  the  Hatches, 

Me  thought  that  Gloufter  (tumbled,  and  in  falling  20 

Strooke  me  (that  thought  to  flay  him)ouer-boord, 

Into  the  tumbling  billowes  of  the  maine. 

O  Lord,  me  thought  what  paine  it  was  to  drowne, 

What  dreadfull  noife  of  water  in  mine  eares, 

What  fights  of  vgly  death  within  mine  eyes.  25 

Me  thoughts,  I  faw  a  thoufand  fearfull  wrackes  : 

A  thoufand  men  that  Fifhes  gnaw’d  vpon  :  27 


1 6.  heauy]  fearefull  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

17.  18.  Lancafler  ...befalne  vs.  As... 
along ]  Lancafler,  ...befallen  vs:  As... 
along ,  Qq  (vs,  as  Q,.) 

18.  vs]  us  us  Fa. 

we]  he  Ff,  Rowe. 

pac’d]  pact  Qx.  pafl  Qq.  pass'd 

Han. 

20.  falling]  fumbling  Qq,  Sta. 

21.  Strooke]  Stroke  Q,_4.  Strook  F3F4, 
Cap.  Struck  Rowe  et  cet. 

thought  ]  sought  Pope,  + . 

23.  0  Lord,]  Lord ,  Lord ,  Qq,  Pope, 


+  ,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 

24.  water]  waters  Q,_5,  Rowe,+ 
(  —  Var.  ’73),  Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

25-  fight*  °f  vgly]  vgly  fights  of  Qq, 
Coll,  ii,  iii,  Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds.  (a  fight  of  vgly  Q?Q 8.) 

26.  Me  thoughts]  FaF3-  Methoughts 
F4,  Rowe.  I  thought  Pope,  +  ( — Var. 
’73).  Met  bought  Qq  et  cet. 

wrackes]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Theob.  i,  Knt,  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Rife,  wrecks 
Theob.  ii  et  cet. 

27.  A]  Ten  Qq,  Cam. +  . 


18.  pac’d]  Vaughan  (iii,  30):  I  have  little  doubt  that  past,  of  the  later  Qq 
and  Folios,  is  the  reading  of  Q3 — printed ‘pact,’ just  as  passed  is  printed  past, 
faced  is  printed  fac’t. 

20.  Me  thought]  See  1.  11  supra. 

22.  Into  .  .  .  the  maine]  Could  words  more  perfectly  picture  a  storm-swept 
sea?  The  phrase  ‘tumbling  billows’  seems  to  carry  with  it  the  same  power  of 
imagery  as  the  noXviphoicpoio  HaAciaarg  of  Homer. — Ed. 

24.  noise  of  water  .  .  .  eares]  Steevens  refers  to  a  note  on  ‘the  whelming 
tide,’  Milton,  Lycidas,  1.  157,  ed.  Warton,  1791.  [Warton’s  note  on  this  line 
(edition  of  1785)  is  as  follows:  ‘In  the  manuscript,  and  the  edition  of  1638, 
it  is  “ humming  tide.”  Perhaps  with  a  more  striking  sense,  and  in  reference  to 
the  distant  sound  of  the  waters  over  his  head,  while  he  was  exploring  “the  bottom 
of  the  monstrous  world.”  The  alteration  was  made  in  the  second  edition,  1645. 
Dr  Warton  adds,  “The  epithet  humming,  which  he  had  first  used,  reminds  us 
also  of  the  strong  image  of  Virgil,  when  Aristeus  descended  to  his  mother’s  Cavern, 
“Ingenti  motu  stupefactus  aquarum,”  Georgies,  iv,  365.”’ — The  ‘Dr  Warton,’ 
to  whom  reference  is  here  made,  is  the  Reverend  Joseph  Warton,  brother  to 
Thomas  Warton. — Ed.] — Pickersgill  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  107):  What 
Shakspere  wrote  is  probably  an  echo — perhaps  unconsciously — of  the  phrase  in 
Revelation  i,  15,  and  passim,  ‘the  sound  of  many  waters’ ;  but  the  unusual  plural 


120 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc,  iv. 


Wedges  of  Gold,  great  Anchors,  heapes  of  Pearle,  28 

Ineftimable  Stones,  vnvalewed  Iewels, 

All  fcattred  in  the  bottome  of  the  Sea,  30 

Some  lay  in  dead-mens  Sculles,  and  in  the  holes 

Where  eyes  did  once  inhabit,  there  were  crept 

(As  ’twere  in  fcorne  of  eyes)  refledling  Gemmes,  33 

20.  All...Sea\  Om.  Qq,  Fope,+  31.  the!  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll,  ii,  iii,  Wh.  i, 

( — Var.  ’73).  Rife,  thofe  Qq  et  cet. 

fcattrcd~\fcatterredY 9.  scatter'd  33.  (As...eyes)~\  As... eyes  Qq  (eies  Q^) 

Rowe  et  seq.  (subs.) 

displeased  the  reviser  [of  the  Quarto],  and  so  he  changed  the  word  into  the 
singular.  [See  Text.  Notes,  III,  iii,  17,  26.] 

28.  Wedges]  Barnard  notes  that  ‘Wedge  originally  meant  simply  a  mass  of 
metal  without  any  reference  to  shape,’  and  compares:  ‘As  sparkles  from  the 
anvil  us’d  to  fly  When  heavy  hammers  on  the  wedge  are  swaid.’ — Spenser.  [No 
reference  given.  Shakespeare  uses  ‘wedge’  only  here  in  this  sense  of  a  mass 
of  metal,  and  four  times  in  the  sense  of  an  instrument  for  cleaving.  See  Tro. 
Cress.,  I,  i,  35:  ‘My  heart  as  wedged  with  a  sigh  would  rive  in  twain.’;  Ibid.,  I, 
iii,  316:  ‘Blunt  wedges  rive  hard  knots.’  Also  Hen.  VIII:  IV,  i,  58;  and  Coriol., 
II,  iii,  30. — Ed.] 

28.  Anchors]  Wright:  It  has  been  suggested  to  me  by  a  learned  friend  that, 
as  the  rest  of  the  description  refers  to  precious  things,  gold,  pearls,  and  so  on, 
we  should  here  read  great  ingots  instead  of  great  ‘  anchors.’  The  word  was  known 
to  Shakespeare  and  is  used  by  him  in  Meas.  }or  Meas.,  Ill,  i,  26:  ‘Like  an  ass 
whose  back  with  ingots  bows.’  It  was,  moreover,  the  technical  word  for  the  bars 
of  unwrought  silver  such  as  might  be  found  in  the  wreck  of  a  plate  ship  from  the 
Spanish  main. 

29.  vnvalewed  Iewels]  Malone:  ‘Unvalued’  is  here  used  for  invaluable. 
So  in  Lovelace’s  Posthumous  Poems,  1659:  ‘the  unvalewed  robe  she  wore  Made 
infinite  lay  lovers  to  adore.’ — Steevens:  Again  in  Chapman’s  Homer:  ‘to  buy 
For  presents  of  unvalued  price,  his  daughter’s  liberty,’  Iliad,  Bk,  i;  and  Ibid.: 
‘Still  shaking  Jove’s  unvalewed  shield.’  Bk,  xv.  [The  majority  of  editors  agree 
in  thus  interpreting  ‘unvalued’  in  this  passage.  Tawney  suggests,  however,  that 
this  word  may  here  mean  ‘inestimable  gems,  which  nevertheless  are  not  prized 
as  jewels  because  no  one  sees  them.’  Malone’s  example  of  ‘unvalued’  is,  perhaps, 
a  little  late  for  an  illustration  of  Shakespeare;  but  the  two  examples  by  Steevens 
show,  I  think,  that  Malone’s  interpretation  has  much  in  its  favour;  particularly 
when  it  is  remembered  how  nearly  contemporaneous  are  Chapman’s  translation 
and  the  present  play.  Shakespeare  uses  ‘unvalued’  in  but  one  other  passage, 
Hamlet,  I,  iii,  19:  ‘He  may  not  as  unvalued  persons  do  Carve  for  himself.’ 
Wherein  ‘  unvalued  ’  is  clearly  to  be  understood  in  its  more  modern  sense  of  with¬ 
out  value.  The  question  of  this  word’s  exact  shade  of  meaning  in  the  present 
passage  is,  therefore,  I  think,  undecided. — Ed.] 

33.  reflecting  Gemmes]  For  this  use  of  ‘reflect,’  meaning  to  shine,  compare 
Rape  of  Luc.:  ‘whether  it  is  that  she  reflects  so  bright,’  1.  376;  also  Tit.  And.,  ‘whose 
virtues  will  Reflect  on  Rome  as  Titan’s  rays  on  earth,’  I,  i,  226.  Craigie  ( N .  E. 
D.)  marks  its  use  in  this  sense  as  obsolete. — Ed. 


ACT  I,  SC.  iv.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


1 2  I 


That  woo’d  the  flimy  bottome  of  the  deepe, 

And  mock’d  the  dead  bones  that  lay  fcattred  by.  35 

Keep.  Had  you  fuch  leyfure  in  the  time  of  death 
To  gaze  vpon  thefe  fecrets  of  the  deepe  ? 

C/a.  Me  thought  I  had,  and  often  did  I  ftriue 
To  yeeld  the  Ghoft  :  but  ftill  the  enuious  Flood 
Stop’d  in  my  foule,  and  would  not  let  it  forth  40 

To  find  the  empty,  vaft,  and  wand’ring  ayre : 

But  fmother’d  it  within  my  panting  bulke, 

Who  almoft  burft,  to  belch  it  in  the  Sea.  43 


34.  That  ]  Which  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  4- . 
woo' d  ]  woed  Qi-4.  wade  Q5_g. 
strew' d  Heath. 

37.  thefe~]  the  Qq,F4>  Rowe,  +  ,  Dyce, 
Cam.  + . 

38.  39.  and  often. ..Ghojl]  Om.  Qq, 
Sta. 

39.  but  ]  for  Qq,  Sta. 

40.  Stop  d  in]  Kept  in  Qq,  Pope, +  , 
Sta.  Cam.  +  .  stopp' d-in  Dyce  i,  Huds. 


kept-in  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

41.  find]feeke QjQ^Varr.  Mai.  Steev. 
Varr.  Sta.  Cam. +  .  keepe  Q3.8. 

empty,  vafl,  and  wand'  ring"] 
emptie  vafl  and  wandering  Qi-S.  empty 
vast ;  and  wander  in  Vaughan  (iii,  33). 

42.  f mother' d  ]  f mothered  Qq. 

43.  Who']  Ff,  Rowe,  Ktly.  Which 
Qq  et  cet. 


34.  woo’d  .  .  .  deepe]  Johnson:  That  is,  by  seeming  to  gaze  upon  it;  or, 
as  we  now  say,  to  ogle  it. 

35.  mock’d]  Delius:  The  jewels  turned  away  contemptuously  from  the  scattered 
bones. — Tawney:  ‘Mocked’  seems  rather  to  mean,  insulted.  The  bright  gems 
were  so  out  of  keeping  with  the  dead  bones  that  they  might  be  said  to  insult  them. 

40,  41.  Stop’d  .  .  .  find]  Hunter  ( Illust .,  ii,  85):  The  text  of  the  Folio  is 
here  to  be  preferred  to  that  of  the  Quartos.  The  soul  is  compared  to  a  subtile 
essence  confined  in  a  narrow  space,  an  image  which  is  frequently  presented  by 
Shakespeare.  Again,  the  substitution  of  ‘who’  for  which  [1.  43]  better  expresses 
the  struggling  of  Clarence  to  let  his  soul  escape.  Far  better  it  seems  to  me  is 
the  reading  of  the  Folio:  ‘in  this  sore  agony’  [1.  44],  and  there  is  more  of  energy 
in  Clarence’s  reply:  ‘No,  no,  my  dream  was  lengthen’d  after  life.’  [1.  45]. 

41,  vast]  Steevens:  ‘Vast’  is  waste,  desolate — vastum  per  inane.  [For  other 
examples  of  this  peculiar  use  of  ‘vast,’  see  Walker,  Crit.,  ii,  38.] — Malone: 
Perhaps  we  should  point  thus:  ‘To  seek  the  empty  vast,  and  wand’ring  air.’ 
That  is,  to  seek  the  immense  vacuity.  Compare  Wint.  Tale,  I,  i,  33:  ‘Shook 
hands  over  a  vast’  [This  note  is  not  repeated  in  the  Variorum  of  ’21;  it  may,  there¬ 
fore,  I  think,  be  considered  withdrawn. — Ed.] 

42,  43.  panting  bulke  .  .  .  burst,  to  belch]  Guest  (p.  17):  If  the  mere  sound  of 
the  words  hiss  and  bah  recall  the  cry  of  the  animal,  so  may  the  muscular  action 
which  the  organs  exert  in  pronouncing  the  words  stmggle,  wrestle,  call  up  in  the 
mind  the  play  of  muscle  and  sinew  usual  in  these  encounters.  Wherever  there  is 
resemblance  there  may  be  association.  .  .  .  We  may  observe  that  in  making  any 
continued  muscular  effort  we  draw  in  the  breath  and  compress  the  lips  firmly. 
Now  this  is  the  very  position  in  which  we  place  the  organs  when  pronouncing 
the  letters  b,  p.  I  have  no  doubt  that  to  this  source  may  be  traced  much  of  the 


122 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iv. 


Keep.  Awak’d  you  not  in  this  fore  Agony  ? 

Clar.  No,  no,  my  Dreame  was  lengthen’d  after  life.  45 

O  then,  began  the  Tempeft  to  my  Soule. 

I  pad:  ( me  thought )  the  Melancholly  Flood, 

With  that  fowre  Ferry-man  which  Poets  write  of,  48 


44.  in]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Knt,  Coll. 
Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly.  with  Qq  et  cet. 

45.  No,  no,]  0  no,  Qq,  Theob.  Han. 
Warb.  Johns.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 
Sing.  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 

lengthen' d  ]  lengthened  Q4,  Cam. 
+  .  lengthned  Qq,  Pope,  +  . 


45,  46.  life.  O  then,]  Ff,  Rowe,  life , 
0  then  Qq  et  cet. 

46,  47.  Soule.  I pafl]  foule,  Who  pajl 
Qq.  foul ,  I  pajl  Ff  et  cet.  (subs.) 

48.  fowre  Ferry-man]  Ff.  sour  Ferry- 
-man  Rowe,  Cap.  Knt,  Coll,  i,  ii,  Sing. 
Wh.  i,  Hal.  Ktly.  grim  ferriman  Qq 
et  cet.  (subs.) 


beauty  of  the  following  verses:  ‘Smother’d  it  within  my  panting  bulk  Which  almost 
burst  to  belch  it  in  the  sea.’  ‘ — But  first  from  inward  grief  His  bursting  passion 
into  plaints  thus  poured.'  Paradise  Lost,  Bk,  ix,  1.  97. 

42.  bulke]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.) :  Within  a  few  years  of  its  first  appearance, 
‘bulk’  occurs  in  the  senses  belly,  trunk  0}  the  body,  due  apparently  to  confusion 
with  bouk,  which  word  it  has  entirely  superseded  in  literary  English.  1533  Elyot, 
Castle  of  Helth  (1541),  89:  ‘The  boulke,  called  in  latyn  thorax,  whiche  conteyneth 
the  brest,  the  sides,  the  stomake,  and  entrayles.’  Ibid  (s.  v.  Bouk):  2.  The 
trunk  of  the  body;  hence  the  body  of  a  man  or  animal.  After  fourteenth  century 
only  Scottish  dialectic. 

47.  I  past]  For  a  justification  of  who,  as  in  Qq,  see  Abbott,  §  264. 

47.  Melancholly  Flood]  Wright:  That  is,  the  Styx.  For  ‘flood’  in  the 
sense  of  river,  see  Joshua  xxiv,  2:  ‘Your  Fathers  dwelt  on  the  other  side  of  the 
flood  in  old  time’;  that  is,  beyond  the  river  Euphrates. 

48.  sowre  Ferry-man]  Wright:  Which  epithet  [ grim  or  ‘sour,’  see  Text. 
Notes]  should  be  preferred  it  is  difficult  to  say,  both  being  used  in  the  sense  of 
morose,  crabbed.  [Both  Rolfe  and  Marshall  prefer  the  Folio  reading.  As 
an  epithet,  appropriate  to  Charon,  ‘Sour’  is,  without  doubt,  applicable,  but  is  it 
not  one  such  as  almost  any  poet  would  have  used  ?  With  all  humility  I  suggest, 
therefore,  that,  possibly,  the  word  here  used  by  Shakespeare  was  stowre.  The 
meaning  of  which  is  thus  explained  by  Dr  B.  Nicholson  ( N .  &  Qu.,  25  May,  1878) 
in  a  note  on  ‘sowre  and  firmeset  Earth,’  Macbeth,  II,  i,  69,  this  ed.:  ‘I  propose 
by  adding  one  letter  to  sowre  to  read  “stowre  and  firm-set  earth.”  Halliwell 
(Phillipps)  gives  stour  as  still  an  eastern  county’s  provincialism  for  stiff,  or  inflexible, 
and  quotes  from  Palsgrave:  “Stoure,  rude  as  coarse  cloth  is,  gros,"  and  “stowre 
of  conversation,  estourdy.”  So  also  Ray,  Glossary  of  -  South  and  East  Country 
Words  (Eng.  Dial.  Soc.):  “ Stoure,  adj.,  inflexible,  sturdy,  and  stiff,  spoken  also 
of  cloth  in  opposition  to  limber."  Again  in  writings  just  prior  to,  or  contempor¬ 
aneous  with,  Shakespeare’s,  we  have  ( Prompt .  Parv.):  “Stoor  (store,  MS,  King’s 
Coll.  Cam.),  hard  or  boystous.  Austerus,  rigidus.”  “Thys  pange  was  greater 
.  .  .  then  when  the  stower  nayles  .  .  .  were  .  .  .  driven  throughe  his  handes  and 
fete,”  Latimer,  Serm.  7  (Arber’s  repr.,  p.  185).  I  may  add  that  exactly  the  same 
mistake,  as  I  think,  occurs  in  Herbert’s  Church  Porch,  st.  xx,  1.  3:  “Constancie 
knits  the  bones  and  makes  us  soure  (Wm.’s  MS);  stowre  (pr.  edds.).”’  With  this 


act  I,  sc.  iv.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  1 23 

Vnto  the  Kingdome  of  perpetuall  Night. 

The  firft  that  there  did  greet  my  Stranger-foule,  50 

Was  my  great  Father-in-Law,  renowned  Warwicke, 

Who  fpake  alowd :  What  fcourge  for  Periurie, 

Can  this  darke  Monarchy  affoord  falfe  Clarence  ? 

And  fo  he  vanifh’d.  Then  came  wand’ ring  by, 

A  Shadow  like  an  Angell,  with  bright  hayre  55 

Dabbel’d  in  blood,  and  he  fhriekM  out  alowd 


50.  Stranger-foule ]  Jlranger foul  Qq. 
Jlrangers  soule  Qg. 

51.  renowned ]  renowmed  Q,^. 

52.  fpake~\  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Wh.  i,  Rife. 
cried  Qq  et  cet. 

alcnud :  What  ]  alowd  what  Qf. 
alowd ,  what  Q^. 


54.  vanijh’d.  Then\vanijht :  thenQ<\. 
( vanijht ,  then  Q4<) 

55.  with~\  in  Qq. 

56.  Dabbel' d~\  Dab  led  Qq.  ( Dadled 

Jhriek' d~\  fquakt  Qt.  fqueakt  Qs 
Q3Qs-  fqaueakt  Q4.  squeak' d  Cam.  + . 


meaning  of  ‘stowre’  Charon  is  described  as  inflexible,  austere,  which  is  unusual 
but  is,  perhaps,  as  applicable  as  morose,  crabbed. — Ed.] 

48.  Poets]  Probably  Virgil  and  Dante.  Compare:  ‘Portitor  has  horrendus 
aquas  et  flumina  servat  Terribili  squalore  Charon’ — ALneid,  Bk,  vi,  11.  298,  299. 
Also:  ‘Caron  dimonio  con  occhi  di  bragia  Loro  accennando,  tutte  le  raccoglie. ’ 
— Injerno,  iii,  109,  no;  Cary  thus  translates:  ‘Charon  demoniac  form  With  eyes 
of  burning  coal,  collects  them  all’ — Ed. 

51.  Father-in-Law]  Clarence  married  Isabel,  the  elder  daughter  of  Warwick. 

51.  renowned]  Wright:  For  the  spelling  renowmed  of  the  first  five  Qq,  see 
Cotgrave,  ‘  Renomme  .  .  .  Renowmed,  famous,  of  much  note.’ 

52,  53.  What  .  .  .  Periurie  .  .  .  false  Clarence]  See  3  Hen.  VI:  V,  i,  103 
et  seq.  Warwick  there  addresses  Clarence  as  a  ‘traitor,  perjured  and  unjust.’ 

55.  A  Shadow  like  an  Angell]  This  refers  to  Edward,  Prince  of  Wales, 
son  of  Henry  VI.  Duport  erroneously  interprets  it  as  the  spirit  of  Queen  Mar¬ 
garet. — Ed. 

55,  56.  bright  hayre  .  .  .  blood]  Steevens:  Lee  has  transplanted  this  image 
into  his  Mithradates,  IV,  i:  ‘Cold  Lucretia’s  mourning  shadow  His  curtains 
drew,  and  lash’d  him  in  his  eyes  With  her  bright  tresses,  dabbled  in  her  blood.’ 

56.  shriek’d]  Hunter  ( Illust .,  ii,  85):  When  we  remember  the  passage  in 
Hamlet,  I,  i,  115:  ‘Did  squeak  and  gibber  in  the  Roman  streets,’  and  the  vox 
tenuis  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Elysian  fields,  the  reading  [of  the  Qq]  is  not  at  once 
to  be  dismissed  or  forgotten. — Wright  (Note  on  Jul.  Caes.,  II,  ii,  24):  That 
ghosts  had  thin  and  squeaking  voices  was  a  belief  in  the  time  of  Homer,  who  com¬ 
pares  the  noise  of  the  souls  of  the  suitors,  whom  Hermes  conducted  to  Hades,  to  the 
noise  of  a  string  of  bats  when  disturbed  in  a  cave  ( Odyss .,  xxiv,  5-8).  Compare 
Horace,  Sat.  i,  8,  41:  ‘Quo  pacto  alterna  loquentes  Umbrae  cum  Sagana  resona- 
rent  triste  et  acutum.’  And  Virgil,  ALneid,  vi,  491,  of  the  shades  which  /Eneas 
saw:  ‘Pars  tollere  vocem  Exiguam.’ — Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76; 
p.  62):  The  Folio  change  was  made  because,  no  doubt,  the  word  [squeak’ /]  had 
already  begun  to  lose  the  tragic  character  which  it  once  had,  and  to  be  unfit  for 
such  associations.  Its  unfitness  would  be  felt  at  once  by  every  Englishman  now 
living.  The  correction,  whoever  made  it,  proves  that  it  had  begun  to  be  felt  then; 


124 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  I,  sc.  iv. 


Clarence  is  come,  falfe,  fie  eting,  periur’d  Clarence ,  57 

That  ftabb’d  me  in  the  field  by  Tewkesbury : 

Seize  on  him  Furies,  take  him  vnto  Torment. 

With  that  (me  thought) a  Legion  of  foule  Fiends  60 

Inuiron’d  me,  and  howled  in  mine  eares 
Such  hiddeous  cries,  that  with  the  very  Noife, 

I  ( trembling )  wak’d,  and  for  a  feafon  after, 

Could  not  beleeue,  but  that  I  was  in  Hell, 

Such  terrible  Imprefsion  made  my  Dreame.  65 

Keep.  No  maruell  Lord,  though  it  affrighted  you, 


58.  by ]  at  Q7Q8. 

Tewkesbury]  Teuxbery  Qx.  Teux- 
burie  Q*.s. 

59-  vnto  Torment ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 
Coll,  i,  ii,  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Rife,  unto  tor¬ 
ments  Coll.  iii.  to  your  torments  Qq  et 
cet. 

60.  (me  thought )]  me  thoughts  Qx. 
me  thought  Qa-5.  ( methought )  F4. 


61.  me,]  me  about,  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

62.  hiddeous]  heddeous  Fa. 

63.  I  (trembling)]  I  trembling,  Qq. 

65.  Imprefsion]  impressions  Rowe  i. 
my]  the  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + , 

66.  Lord]  (my  Lot)  Qq.  my  lord 
Cam.  +. 

though]  that  Pope,  +  ,  Varr.  Ran. 


and  if  the  word  had  any  part  of  the  effect  on  an  English  ear  which  it  now  has, 
Shakespeare  would  surely  have  avoided  it. — Pickersgill  (Ibid.,  p.  104):  Spedding 
must  have  forgotten  for  the  moment  the  lines  in  Hamlet,  I,  i,  written  certainly  in 
1602  or  thereabouts.  [Quoted  by  Hunter,  see  note  supra.]  Again,  in  Ant.  &* 
Cleo.,  written  probably  several  years  later,  the  word  is  used  precisely  as  Clarence 
uses  it,  namely,  to  describe  a  boy’s  voice:  ‘I  shall  see  Some  squeaking  Cleopatra 
boy  my  greatness,’  V,  ii,  220. 

57.  fleeting]  Bradley  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v .):  f  2.  That  moves  constantly,  shifting 
unstable  wandering;  hence  of  a  person  or  his  attributes:  Changeable,  fickle, 
inconstant,  vacillating.  1592  Greene,  Groat's  Worth  of  Wit  (1617),  15:  ‘If  I 
finde  thee  firme,  Lamilia  will  be  faithfull :  if  fleeting,  she  must  ...  be  infortunate.’ 
1606  Ant.  &  Cleo.  ‘The  fleeting  Moone  No  planet  is  of  mine,’  v,  ii,  240. 

58.  That  stabb’d  .  .  .  Tewkesbury]  See  3  Hen.  VI:  V,  v,  40. 

60.  me  thought]  See  line  11  supra. 

60.  foule  Fiends]  This  adjective  ‘foul’  applied  to  ‘fiend’  seems  to  have  been 
a  favorite  one  with  Shakespeare.  The  phrase  occurs  thirteen  times  in  the  plays. 
It  was,  possibly,  chosen  on  account  of  alliteration. — Ed. 

60,  61.  Fiends  Inuiron’d  me]  Steevens:  Milton  seems  to  have  thought  on 
this  passage  where  he  is  describing  the  midnight  sufferings  of  our  Saviour,  Para¬ 
dise  Regain'd,  Bk,  iv:  ‘Infernal  ghosts,  and  hellish  furies,  round  Environ’d  thee, 
some  howl’d,  some  yell’d  some  shriek’d’  [11.  422,  423]. 

61.  Inuiron’d  me]  Spedding  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  39):  The  Folio 
omits  about  [see  Text.  Notes],  and  so  gets  rid  of  the  alexandrine:  an  irregularity 
frequent  in  Rich.  II.,  but  in  the  ‘Histories  of  the  second  period’  very  much  less 
so:  one,  therefore,  which  Shakespeare  had  learned  to  dislike,  and  might  be  expected 
to  remove  in  correcting. 

66.  No  maruell  .  .  .  though]  Schmidt  (Lex.):  That  is,  It  is  not  strange  that. 


ACT  I,  SC.  iv.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


125 

I  am  affraid  ( me  thinkes  )  to  heare  you  tell  it.  67 

Cla.  Ah  Keeper,  Keeper,  I  haue  done  thefe  things 
(That  now  giue  euidence  againft  my  Soule) 

For  Edwards  fake,  and  fee  how  he  requits  mee.  70 

O  God!  if  my  deepe  prayres  cannot  appeafe  thee, 

But  thou  wilt  be  aueng’d  on  my  mifdeeds, 

Yet  execute  thy  wrath  in  me  alone : 

O  fpare  my  guiltlefle  Wife,  and  my  poore  children.  74 


67.  I  am]  I  promi/e  you ,  I  am  Qq, 
Sta.  Cam. +  . 

(me  thinkes )]  Om.  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. 
+  .  methinks  F4  et  cet. 

68.  Ah]  O  Qq,  Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 

Keeper ,  Keeper, ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll. 
Wh.  i,  Hal.  Ktly,  Rife.  Brokenburie 
Qq.  Brakenbury  Pope  et  cet. 


68.  thefe ]  thofe  Qq,  Pope,  + ,  Dyce, 
Hal.  Cam.  +  ,  Huds.  Coll.  iii. 

69.  That  now  giue~\  Which  now  beare 
Qq.  Sta.  Cam.  +. 

71-74.  O  God ! ...children]  Om.  Qq, 
Cap. 

73.  wrath]  will  Huds.  iii. 

in]  Ff,  Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Sta.  Cam. +, 
Ktly,  Coll.  iii.  on  Rowe  et  cet. 


Compare,  ‘no  marvel  though  thy  horse  be  gone.’ — Ven.  Ad.,  390;  ‘no  marvel 

then  though  I  mistake  my  view.’ — Sonn.  148,  1.  11. 

71-74.  O  God  .  .  .  children]  Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  134):  This  short  and 
moving  prayer,  uttered  by  Clarence  before  he  falls  asleep,  is  so  thoroughly  in  keep¬ 
ing  with  Shakespeare’s  accustomed  style  of  foreshadowing  coming  events — here  in 
particular  the  danger  threatening  Clarence’s  family — that  we  can  hardly  conceive 
of  it  as  any  later  addition  by  the  poet,  were  it  not  that  the  somewhat  arbitrary 
omission  of  these  four  lines  in  the  Qq  shows  a  rough,  uncompromising  revision. 
— Brooke  (p.  109):  Immediately,  pat  on  the  point,  and  done  in  Shakespeare’s 
way  of  setting  over  against  a  grave  thought  the  same  thought  in  a  grotesque  or 
ghastly  framework,  there  is  now  a  parody,  with  a  grim  earnestness  in  it,  of  this 
same  question  of  the  vengeance  of  conscience.  Is  there  that  in  us  which  punishes 
with  thought?  Is  there  a  wrath  beyond  ourselves?  an  imperative  command 
within  us?  If  so,  is  it  worth  regarding?  The  murderers  debate  the  question 
from  their  rude  standpoint,  and  settle  the  matter  as  the  robbing  and  murdering 
kings  and  nobles  had  settled  it.  They  have  a  warrant  for  their  crime;  it  is  done  on 
command.  But  these  considerations  are  indifferent,  of  these  conscience  might 
get  the  better;  but  the  reward,  the  gain— that  conquers  conscience;  and  arguing 
to  and  fro  with  extraordinary  variety  of  base  and  cunning  thought  and  phrase, 
they  end  by  attacking  conscience  as  the  most  dangerous  enemy  of  states  and 
societies.  This  is  exactly  Richard’s  point  of  view  put  coarsely.  Yet  these  two 
are  not  as  bad  as  Richard.  They  do  feel  the  pull  of  conscience.  He  could 
not. 

72.  But]  For  the  transition  of  ‘but’  from  except,  unless,  to  the  adversative 
meaning  on  the  other  hand,  see  Abbott,  §121. 

74.  my  .  .  .  Wife]  Wright:  Clarence’s  wife  Isabel,  died  12  December,  1476, 
before  the  time  of  this  scene. 


126 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iv. 


Keeper,  I  pry  thee  fit  by  me  a- while,  75 

My  Soule  is  heauy,  and  I  faine  would  fleepe. 

Keep. I  will  my  Lord,  God  giue  your  Grace  good  reft. 


Enter  Brakenbury  the  Lieutenant. 

Bra.  Sorrow  breakes  Seafons,  and  repofing  houres,  79 


75.  Keeper... a-while,]  I  pray  thee 
gentle  keeper  Jlay  by  me ,  Qq,  Cap.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Sing.  Sta.  Cam.  + , 
Ktly.  /  pry  thee  Brackenbury ,  stay  by 
me,  Pope, +  . 

me]  me;  [retiring  to  a  chair.  Cap. 
et  seq.  (subs.) 

a-while]  a  while  FjF^. 


77.  rejl.]  rest.  [Clarence  sleeps.  Johns. 
Varr.  Ran. 

78,  79.  Enter.. .Lieutenant.  Bra.]  Ff, 
Rowe.  Om.  Qq  et  cet. 

78.  Enter  Brackenbury]  Clarence  re¬ 
poses  himself  on  a  chair,  and  sleeps,  then 
enter  Brackenbury.  Wh.  i,  Rife. 

79.  [Aside.  Pope, +. 
breakes]  breake  Q  . 


75.  Keeper]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  i875-’76;  p.  69):  It  is  easier  to  ex¬ 
plain  how  the  name  of  Brackenbury  got  into  the  text,  supposing  the  keeper  to  have 
been  originally  meant  to  be  another  man,  than  how  ‘Keeper’  got  in,  supposing 
that  he  was  originally  meant  to  be  the  Lieutenant  of  the  Tower.  If,  as  has  been 
suggested  [see  note  by  Collier,  1.  2  supra],  the  company  was  not  strong  enough 
to  supply  two  actors  for  the  two  parts,  both  would  be  given  to  the  actor  who  played 
Brackenbury;  and  in  the  play-house  copy  the  stage-directions  would  be  altered 
accordingly.  The  introduction  of  the  name  in  the  dialogue  would  follow,  of  course; 
the  actor  himself  would  feel  the  necessity  of  it.  [Spedding  continues  substantially 
as  follows:]  The  wonder  is  that  it  was  not  introduced  in  both  places,  instead  of 
only  one.  But  I  think  that  if,  in  the  original  manuscript,  the  person  in  charge  of 
Clarence  had  been  meant  to  be  the  Lieutenant  of  the  Tower,  the  words  gentle 
keeper  would  not  have  been  found  in  Qr  That  question  is,  however,  of  little 
consequence.  For  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  last  corrector  wished  Clarence’s 
attendant  in  this  scene  to  be  taken  for  another  and  an  inferior  officer.  For  he 
has  changed  Brackenbury  to  ‘Keeper’  in  no  less  than  six  places;  and  marked  con¬ 
spicuously  the  place  where  Brackenbury  is  to  enter.  He  has,  indeed,  omitted  to 
insert  exit  Keeper,  but  the  context  shows  conclusively  that  the  ‘Keeper’  is  sup¬ 
posed  to  retire  upon  the  entrance  of  his  chief.  [See  Note  by  R.  G.  White,  1.  ioo, 
post.] 

79.  Bra.  Sorrow  .  .  .  Seasons]  Pope:  Brackenbury  enters  pronouncing  these 
words:  which  seem  to  me  a  reflection  naturally  resulting  from  the  foregoing  con¬ 
versation,  and  therefore  continued  to  be  spoken  by  the  same  person,  as  it  is  in 
the  first  edition. — Malone:  The  Keeper  and  Brackenbury  who  was  Lieutenant 
of  the  Tower  was  certainly  the  same  person. — Cambridge  Editors  ( Note  v.):  We 
have  decided  to  adhere  to  the  Qq,  as  they  undoubtedly  give  what  Shakespeare 
originally  wrote,  and  the  alteration  found  in  the  Ff  is  not  of  such  obvious  propriety 
that  we  should  unhesitatingly  attribute  it  to  the  hand  of  the  author. — Spedding 
(Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  70):  In  answer  to  [the  foregoing  note],  it  might  be 
enough  to  ask  whose  hand  was  so  likely  to  have  made  such  an  alteration,  and 
what  reason  is  there  for  doubting  that  this  should  be  added  to  the  many  alterations 


ACT  I,  SC.  iv.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


127 

80 


Makes  the  Night  Morning,  and  the  Noon-tide  night : 

Princes  haue  but  their  Titles  for  their  Glories, 

An  outward  Honor,  for  an  inward  Toyle, 

And  for  vnfelt  Imaginations 
They  often  feele  a  world  of  reftleffe  Cares  : 

So  that  betweene  their  Titles,  and  low  Name,  85 

There’s  nothing  differs,  but  the  outward  fame. 

Enter  two  Murtherers.  87 


81.  Glories ]  troubles  Johns,  conj. 
guerdons  Bailey. 

83.  Imaginations ]  imagination  Qq, 
Sta.  Cam.  + . 

85.  betweene']  betwixt  Qq,  Cam. +  . 
their ]  your  Q3_8. 


85.  Name]  names  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

87.  Scene  VI.  Pope,  + . 

Enter  two  Murtherers.]  The  mur¬ 
therers  enter.  Qq.  Enter  two  Villains. 
Rowe,  Pope. 


which  the  Cambridge  Edd.  admit  to  be  Shakespeare’s  ? — Marshall  :  If  we  suppose 
Brackenbury,  on  his  entrance,  to  pause  a  little  and  contemplate  the  sleeping  Clar¬ 
ence,  the  words  to  which  he  gives  utterance  are  appropriate,  and  may  well  be  detached 
from  the  first  line  of  the  speech,  [beginning:  ‘I  will  my  Lord.’]  The  unnecessary 
introduction  of  a  minor  character  is  what  a  practical  dramatist  generally  endeavors, 
if  possible,  to  avoid;  and  we  cannot  say  that  there  is  sufficient  reason  for  any  such 
introduction  here.  Clarence  was  evidently  committed  to  Brackenbury’s  special 
charge;  and  it  is  more  likely  that  he  would  have  made  such  confidences  to  him 
than  to  an  inferior  officer. 

81-83.  Prices  .  .  .  Imaginations]  Johnson:  That  is:  The  glories  of  princes 
are  nothing  more  than  empty  titles;  and  they  often  suffer  real  miseries  for  imaginary 
and  unreal  gratifications.  It  would  more  impress  the  purpose  of  the  speaker,  and 
correspond  better  with  the  following  lines,  if  for  ‘glories’  we  read  troubles. — 
Vaughan  (iii,  34):  The  distinction  is  not  between  fact  and  imagination  of  fact, 
but  between  pains  of  imagination  felt  and  pleasures  of  imagination  unfelt.  It 
is  this  want  of  pleasure  in  the  imaginative  realisation  of  their  honours  which 
converts  their  titles  into  something  no  better  than  want  of  any  titles  at  all  would 
be,  while  the  actual  pain  of  the  mental  entertainment  of  their  cares  leaves  their 
anxieties  with  all  their  natural  vexation. 

83,  84.  And  for  .  .  .  Cares]  The  Cowden-Clarkes:  The  effect  of  this  passage 
is  rendered  somewhat  perplexed,  from  the  employment  of  ‘for,’  which  is  twice 
used  in  its  usual  sense,  and  the  third  time  in  the  sense  of  instead  of.  Moreover, 
be  it  observed  that  Shakespeare  not  infrequently  gives  this  effect  of  perplexity  to 
his  reflective  soliloquies:  thereby  indicating  those  dimly  expressed  thoughts  which 
pass  through  the  brain  of  the  soliloquiser. 

87.  two  Murtherers]  Cowden-Clarke  ( Sh .  Char.,  p.  464):  The  two  Murderers 
are  drawn  with  a  terribly  bold  and  masterly  hand.  They  are  not  only  designed 
with  a  marked  difference  from  any  others  of  Shakespeare’s  murderers  (such,  for 
instance,  as  Tyrrel,  Dighton,  and  Forrest,  and  those  in  Macbeth  who  are  gentlemen 
of  fallen  fortunes),  but  these  have  such  perfect  individuality  as  to  be  unlike  and 
quite  distinct  from  each  other.  Throughout  the  scene  you  recognise  the  one 


128 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iv. 


I  .Mur.  Ho,  who’s  heere  ?  88 

Bra.  What  would’ft  thou  Fellow?  And  how  camnvft 

thou  hither.  9° 

2 .Mur.  I  would  [peak  with  Clarence ,  and  I  came  hi¬ 
ther  on  my  Legges. 

Bra.  What  fo  breefe? 
i .  ’Tis  better  (Sir)  then  to  be  tedious  : 

Let  him  fee  our  Commiffion,  and  talke  no  more.  Reads  95 
Bra.  I  am  in  this,  commanded  to  deliuer 
The  Noble  Duke  of  Clarence  to  your  hands. 

I  will  not  reafon  what  is  meant  heereby, 

Becaufe  I  will  be  guiltleffe  from  the  meaning. 

There  lies  the  Duke  afleepe,  and  there  the  Keyes.  IOO 


88.  I. Mur.]  Om.  Qq.  I  Vil.  Rowe, 
Pope. 

Ho,  who' s  heerel]  Om.  Qq. 
heere ]  there  Warb.  Johns. 

89,  90.  What. ..hither]  In  Gods  name 
what  are  you,  and  how  came  you  hither  ? 
Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  .  In  God’s  name,  what 
art  thou  ?  how  cam' st  thou  hither  Pope,  + 
(  — Var.  ’73). 

89.  camm'Jl ]  cam' Jl  F3F4. 

91.  2.Mur.]  Exe.  Qq  (subs.).  i.Murd. 
Mai.  et  seq. 

with]  wite  Q4QS- 

92.  Legges ]  legs  Qq,F4. 

93.  What  ]  Yea,  are  you  Q,Q2,  Cam. 
+ .  Yea,  are  ye  Qq,  Sta.  What,  F4< 

94.  1.]  2  Murd.  Mai.  et  seq. 

I.  ’  Tis... to  he]  2  Exe.  O  fir,  it  is 


better  to  be  briefe  then  Q,Qa,  Var.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam.  +  .  {...better  be... 
Q3_s,  Cap.)  ’  Tis  better  to  be  brief  than 
Marshall  conj. 

95.  Let  him  fee]  Shew  him  Qq,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Sta.  Cam.+. 

and]  Om.  Qq,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam. +  . 

Reads]  He  readeth  it.  Qq.  Brack- 
enbury  receives  a  paper,  and  reads  it. 
Cap.  Mai.  et  seq.  (subs.) 

98.  heereby]  thereby  Q3_g. 

99.  from]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Wh.  i.  of 
Qq  et  cet. 

100.  There... Keyes.]  Ff,  +  ,  Knt,  Coll. 
Dyce  i,  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Heere  are  the  keyes, 
there  fits  the  Duke  a  feepe,  Qq  et  cet. 


ruffian  from  his  companion,  though  not  otherwise  designated  than  as  ‘  1  Murderer ' 
and  ‘  2  Murderer,  ’  being  third  or  fourth  class  characters  in  the  play.  From  the 
preliminary,  short  interview  with  Gloucester,  where  the  First  Murderer  alone 
speaks,  and  assures  the  Duke:  ‘be  assur’d  We  go  to  use  our  hands,  and  not  our 
tongues’;  down  to  the  scene  where  they  perpetrate  the  deed,  the  first  man  displays 
the  bold,  ruthless,  callous  villain,  dashed  with  a  spice  of  ferocious  humour;  and 
the  other  is  a  vacillating  creature,  whom  circumstances  and  not  predisposition 
have  made  what  he  is. 

89.  What  .  .  .  Fellow]  Wright  suggests  that  this  change  from  the  Quarto 
reading  was,  perhaps,  made  to  avoid  a  prosecution  for  profanity  under  the  Act 
of  3  James  I.  (See  1.  120  and  note.) 

100.  There  .  .  .  asleepe]  Knight:  We  have  no  doubt  it  was  intended  that 
Clarence  should  retire  to  the  secondary  stage,  and  there  lie  upon  a  couch. 

100.  and  .  .  .  Keyes]  R.  G.  White:  It  was  a  violation  of  all  propriety  to  make 
Sir  Robert  Brakenbury,  Lieutenant  of  the  Tower,  go  about  with  a  bunch  of  pon- 


ACT  I,  SC.  iv.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


129 


lie  to  the  King,  and  fignifie  to  him,  10 1 

That  thus  I  haue  refign’d  to  you  my  charge.  Exit. 

1  You  may  fir,  ’tis  a  point  of  wifedome  : 


Far  you  well. 

2  What,  (hall  we  flab  him  as 

101.  the... to  hint']  his  Maiejlie,  and 
certifie  his  Grace  Qq,  Sta. 

102.  to  you  my  charge ]  my  charge  to 
you  Q,Qa,  Cam. +.  my  place  to  you 
Q3-s>  Sta. 

Exit]  Om.  Qq. 


he  fleepes.  105 

X03.  You...’tis]  Do  so  it  is  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.  + . 

104.  Far  you  well ]  Om.  Qq,  Sta. 
Fare  you  well  Ff. 

105.  we]  I  QIQa. 

Jleepes.  ]  Jleepes  ?  Qq,F3F4. 


derous  keys  at  his  girdle  or  in  his  hand.  These  keys  were  evidently  carried  by 
the  keeper,  a  higher  sort  of  gaoler,  but  a  person  of  rank  much  inferior  to  Braken- 
bury,  the  commander  of  the  Tower.  [See  1.  2,  supra,  and  Notes.] — Hudson 
(p.  206) :  May  not  the  Lieutenant  have  taken  the  keys  from  one  of  his  subordinates 
for  the  purpose  of  visiting  Clarence?  And  is  there  not  quite  as  much  impropriety 
in  making  Clarence,  a  prince  of  the  royal  blood,  unbosom  himself  so  freely  in  a 
dialogue  with  a  mere  turnkey  of  the  prison?  [By  ‘there’  is,  perhaps,  meant  to 
be  indicated  that  Brackenbury  either  tosses  the  bunch  of  keys  at  the  feet  of  the 
Murderers,  or  that  he  has  laid  them  upon  the  table  on  entering.  Determined  to  be 
guiltless  of  having  helped  the  Murderers  in  carrying  out  an  order  the  purpose 
of  which  he  surmises  at  once,  he  makes  them  take  the  keys  instead  of  placing  them 
directly  in  their  hands. — Ed.] 

103.  point  of  wisedome]  Wright:  That  is,  a  proceeding  which  argues  wisdom. 
Compare  /  Hen.  IV:  V,  i,  122:  ‘Hal  if  thou  see  me  down  in  the  battle  and  bestride 
me,  so;  ’tis  a  point  of  friendship.’ 

105.  What,  shall  we,  etc.]  Fleay  ( Sh .  Manual,  p.  132)  thinks  that  the  follow¬ 
ing  dialogue  between  the  Murderers  is  an  'nterpolation  by  Peele;  and  also  says 
that,  ‘of  the  earlier  plays  Richard  III.  is  thv  only  one  that  is  absolutely  devoid 
of  comedy.’  On  this  latter  point  Bristol  (p.  .vi)  remarks:  ‘Perhaps  no  play  of 
Shakespeare  adheres  more  closely  to  the  classical  standard  with  regard  to  its 
tragical  unity  than  Richard  III.  It  lacks,  let  u  be  admitted,  the  unclassical 
admixture  of  comedy.  But  the  play  is  of  such  a r  intensely  cruel  and  tragic 
nature  that  it  could  with  less  consistency  than  any  other  play  admit  of  the 
introduction  of  a  comic  strain.  Its  very  diabolism  seems  to  forbid  any  relief 
to  the  horror,  or  the  admission  of  any  ray  of  jest  or  clowmshness  into  the  dam¬ 
nable  darkness.  If,  however,  by  the  term  humor  we  may  ini  lude  the  idea  of  wit, 
sarcasm,  cunning  and  adroit  play  of  words,  then,  certainly,  one  of  the  great¬ 
est,  if  grimmest,  humorists  of  Shakespeare’s  creation  is  Richard  III.  There  are 
lines  in  the  first  soliloquy  that  contain  humor.  Gloucester’s  wooing  of  Lady 
Anne,  even  in  the  presence  of  the  corpse  of  Henry  VI.,  is  not  only  most  eloquent, 
but  consummately  witty,  bordering  at  least  on  the  humorous.’ — Webb:  The 
insertion  of  a  humorous  colloquy  between  the  two  murderers  just  before  one  of  the 
tragic  deeds  of  the  play  is  quite  in  Shakespeare’s  manner.  In  some  instances, 
as  in  Macbeth,  a  comic  scene  comes  as  a  welcome  interlude  to  relieve  the  prevailing 
gloom.  Here  the  object  is  rather  to  deepen  the  tragic  interest.  An  audience 


9 


130 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iv. 


1  No  :  hee’l  fay  ’twas  done  cowardly,  when  he  wakes  106 

2  Why  he  fhall  neuer  wake,  vntill  the  great  Iudge- 
ment  day. 

1  Why  then  hee’l  fay,  we  flab’d  him  fleeping. 

2  The  vrging  of  that  word  Iudgement,  hath  bred  a  Iio 
kinde  of  remorfe  in  me. 

1  What?  art  thou  affraid  ? 

2  Not  to  kill  him,  hauing  a  Warrant, 

But  to  be  damn’d  for  killing  him,  from  the  which 

No  Warrant  can  defend  me.  1 15 

1  I  thought  thou  had’ft  bin  refolute. 

2  So  I  am,  to  let  him  liue. 

I  lie  backe  to  the  Duke  of  Gloufter,  and  tell  him  fo.  1 1 8 

106.  No  :  hee'l]  No,  then  he  will  Qq, 

Sta.  Cam.  + . 

No  : ...cowardly]  One  line,  Qq. 

107, 108.  Why  ...day.  ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Han. 

Knt,  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Rife.  When  he 
wakes.  Why  foole  he  Jhall  neuer  vjake 
till  the  iudgement  day  Qq  et  cet.  (As 
two  lines,  ending:  wakes,  ...day.  Qq.) 

107.  vntill  the  great  ]  till  the  Qq,  Cap. 

Sta.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

109.  hee'l]  he  will  Qq,  Cam. +  . 
no,  in.  The  ...bred]  One  line,  Qq. 

1 1 2.  What  /]  What,  Qq. 


strung  to  the  highest  pitch  of  expectation,  and  with  the  certain  knowledge  that 
some  desperate  deed  is  soon  to  be  enacted  before  their  eyes,  must  have  found  an 
additional  horror  in  the  spectacle  of  these  two  desperadoes  cutting  their  rough 
jokes  with  unconcern. — Sharpe  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  i88o-’86;  p.  524):  There  are 
some  general  rules  running  through  the  plays,  as  to  when  prose  and  metre  are 
to  be  employed.  They  are  not  very  positive  rules,  and  they  vary  in  strength  in 
different  plays.  I  find  that  poor,  uneducated  men  speak  prose,  even  in  plays 
that  are  mostly  in  metre  .  .  .Then  there  are  rules  in  many  plays  about  certain 
persons  speaking  prose,  and  others  metre,  or  rather,  these  should  be  called  par¬ 
ticular  applications  of  the  general  rules.  The  use  of  prose  or  metre  by  a  person 
depends  upon  his  character,  or  the  state  of  mind  that  he  is  in  at  the  time,  or  to 
whom  he  is  speaking.  [The  Qq  print  this  scene  throughout  in  metrical  form. 
— Ed.] 

iii.  remorse]  That  is,  pity;  for  other  examples  of  this  meaning,  see  Shakes¬ 
peare  passim. 

113-115.  Not  to  .  .  .  me]  Marshai.l:  It  would  seem  that  while  writing  por¬ 
tions  of  this  scene  the  author  was  in  hesitation  whether  to  write  them  in  prose  or 


1 1 2.  thou]  Om.  Q7Q8,  Cap. 
affraid  ?]  afraid.  Q,. 

113-115.  Not  to. ..defend  me]  Two 
lines,  the  first  ending  :  damn' d  Qq. 

1 1 3.  Warrant,]  Warrant.  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han.  Knt,  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Rife. 
warrant  for  it  Qq  et  cet. 

1 14.  the]  Om.  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 

115.  me]  vs  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

116.  117.  1  thought... liue]  Om.  Qq. 

1 1 6.  bin]  been  F^. 

1 18.  lie]  Om.  Qq,  Cam. +  .  I'le  F^. 
and]  Om.  Qq,  Cam. +  . 


verse. 


ACT  I,  SC.  iv.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


131 


2  Nay,  I  prythee  ftay  a  little : 

I  hope  this  paffionate  humor  of  mine,  will  change,  120 

It  was  wont  to  hold  me  but  while  one  tels  twenty. 

1  How  do’ft  thou  feele  thy  felfe  now  ? 

2  Some  certaine  dregges  of  confcience  are  yet  with¬ 
in  mee. 

1  Remember  our  Reward,  when  the  deed’s  done.  125 

2  Come,  he  dies  :  I  had  forgot  the  Reward. 


II9-121.  Nay  ...twenty]  Two  lines, 
ending  :  will  ...twenty  Qq. 

1 19.  Nay...  a  little J  I  pray  thee  Jlay  a 
while.  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

I  prythee]  prethee  F3-  prithee  F4. 

120,  1 21.  Prose,  Pope  et  seq. 

120.  this. ..of  mine]  my  holy  humor 
Qq,  Var. ’21,  Dyce,  Hal.  Sta.  Cam.  +  , 
Huds.  Rife,  this  holy  humor  of  mine. 
Pope,+  ,  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13,  Coll, 
iii.  this  compassionate  humor  of  mine 
Cap.Varr.  Ran.  Coll.  (MS),  Sing.  (MS). 


1 21.  It  was]  twas  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

tels  twenty]  would  tell  xx.  Qq. 
would  tell  twenty  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Cam.  +  .  could 
tell  xx.  Q7Q8,  Sta.  (subs.) 

123.  Some]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
Knt.  Faith  some  Qq  et  cet. 

125.  our]  the  F3F4,  +  . 

deed's]  deed  is  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

126.  Come]  Zounds  Qq,  Coll.  Dyce, 
Wh.  i,  Hal.  Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Huds. 


120.  passionate]  Malone:  The  modern  substitution  compassionate  is  unnec¬ 
essary.  ‘  Passionate,  ’  though  not  so  good  an  epithet  as  that  which  is  furnished 
by  the  Quarto,  is  sufficiently  intelligible.  The  Second  Murderer’s  next  speech 
proves  that  holy  was  the  author’s  word.  The  player-editors  changed  it,  as  they 
did  many  others,  on  account  of  the  statute,  3  Jac.  I.  c.  21.  In  line  123  they, 
from  the  same  apprehension,  omitted  the  word  ‘faith.’  [See  also  1.  89,  and  note, 
supra.] 

122.  How  .  .  .  now]  Marshall:  The  actor  must  evidently  pause  a  short  time 
before  this  speech,  in  order  to  give  his  comrade  time  to  count  twenty.  There  is 
a  good  deal  of  humor  in  this  scene.  It  reminds  one  more  of  the  prose  parts  of 
Henry  IV.  than  of  the  earlier  historical  plays.  The  speech  of  the  Second  Mur¬ 
derer  on  conscience ,  11.  134-145,  is  quite  in  Shakespeare’s  best  style. 

123.  Some  certaine  dregges]  Lloyd:  The  germ  of  much  of  the  dialogue  of  the 
Murderers  seems,  among  other  parallels  to  be  found  in  the  True  Tragedie  of  Rich¬ 
ard  the  Third:  ‘Dent.  I  promise  thee,  Will,  it  greeues  mee  to  see  what  mone 
these  young  Princes  make,  I  had  rather  then  fortie  pounds  I  had  nere  tane  it  in 
hand,  tis  a  dangerous  matter  to  kill  innocent  princes  I  like  it  not.  Will.  Why  you 
base  slaue,  are  you  faint  hearted,  a  little  thing  would  make  me  strike,  I  promise 
thee.  Dent.  Nay  go  forward,  for  now  I  am  resolute:  but  come  lets  too  it.’ 
[See  note  by  Churchill,  1.  271,  post.] — Schelling  (p.  107):  The  overpowering 
pathos  of  the  scenes  depicting  the  murder  of  the  King  [in  Marlowe’s  Edward  II.] 
must  have  created  a  lasting  impression  on  the  play-goers  and  dramatists  of  the 
time  and  affected  subsequent  treatment  of  like  situations.  The  murder  of  Clarence 
presents  a  situation  not  dissimilar.  Here,  as  in  the  tragedy  of  Woodstock,  the 
murderers  are  distinguished,  one  showing  qualms  of  conscience.  Clarence,  too, 
discovers  murder  in  his  executioner’s  face,  as  do  both  Edward  and  Woodstock. 
See  Edward  II.,  V,  v,  44;  Woodstock:  V,  i,  130-134. 


I32 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iv. 


1  Where’s  thy  confcience  now.  127 

2  O,  in  the  Duke  of  Gloufters  purfe. 

1  When  hee  opens  his  purfe  to  giue  vs  our  Reward, 

thy  Confcience  flyes  out.  130 

2  ’Tis  no  matter,  let  it  goe  :  There’s  few  or  none  will 
entertaine  it. 

1  What  if  it  come  to  thee  againe  ? 

2  lie  not  meddle  with  it,  it  makes  a  man  a  Coward  :  1 34 


127.  Where's ]  Where  is  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

128.  O ,]  Om.  Qq,  Varr.  Mai.  Steev. 
Varr.  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Ktly, 
Huds. 

129.  When ]  So  when  Qq,  Cap.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam. +  , 
Ktly. 

13°.  thy ]  Thy  Qq. 

13 1 .  ’  Tis  no  matter ]  Om.  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.  + . 


13 1.  it]  vs  Q2Fa. 

132.  entertaine ]  enteraine  Q4- 

1 33.  What  ]  How  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 
134-144.  Eleven  lines,  ending :  thing, 

...Jleale,  ...  him:  ...  detedls  ...  mutinies... 
objiacles,  ...found.  ...  all ...  euery  ...trujl 
without  it.  Qq. 

134.  it,~\  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Dyce, 
Wh.  i,  Huds.  it,  it  is  a  dangerous  thing 
Qq  et  cet. 


132.  entertaine]  That  is,  take  into  service.  Compare  I,  ii,  283. 

133.  What  if  .  .  .  againe]  Wordsworth  {Sh.'  s  Knowledge,  etc.,  p.  135):  The  dia¬ 
logue  between  the  two  Murderers  is  an  extraordinary  instance  of  our  poet’s  deep 
acquaintance  with  the  most  secret  workings  of  the  human  heart — such  as  I  know 
not  where  to  look  for  in  any  other,  unless  it  be  in  the  author  of  the  Book  of  Proverbs, 
King  Solomon.  The  phraseology  would  be  of  small  account,  if  the  imitation  of 
Scriptural  language  were  not  accompanied,  as  it  most  evidently  is,  by  an  honest 
desire  to  give  effect  to  the  moral  lessons  which  the  Bible  contains. 

134.  it,  it]  The  Cowden-Clarkes:  We  believe  the  omission  of  the  words  as 
in  the  Qq  [see  Text.  Notes ]  to  have  been  made  for  acting  purposes,  because  there 
is  a  kind  of  repetition  of  the  words  farther  on  in  the  same  speech.  But  it  is  pre¬ 
cisely  in  Shakespeare’s  mode  of  emphasising  a  point,  to  thus  repeat  it;  and  most 
naturally  it  is  put  into  the  mouth  of  a  common-mannered  arguer,  like  the  present 
speaker.  Very  noteworthy,  too,  as  a  point  of  high  dramatic  art  in  harmony  and 
unity  of  moral  aim,  is  the  occurrence  of  a  speech  upon  conscience  here  from  a 
rough  fellow  like  this  Second  Murderer,  and  the  occurrence  of  another  upon  con¬ 
science  afterwards  from  the  royal  hero-villain  of  the  play.  Compare  the  diction, 
the  profound  ethical  lesson,  and  the  perfectly  characteristic  and  poetical  appro¬ 
priateness  of  these  two  speeches,  and  then  say  whether  our  Shakespeare  be  not 
indeed  a  writer  to  learn  from  and  glory  in. 

134.  it  makes  a  man  a  Coward]  Wright  compares  Hamlet,  III,  i,  83:  ‘Thus 
conscience  does  make  cowards  of  us  all.’  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  Conscience 
II.  Consciousness  of  right  and  wrong;  moral  sense)  quotes  this  line  from  Hamlet. 
With  all  deference  to  my  betters  I  suggest  that,  in  Hamlet,  the  context  hardly 
seems  to  warrant  this  interpretation;  e.  g.,  ‘who  would  fardels  bear,  To  grunt 
and  sweat  under  a  weary  life,  But  that  the  dread  of  something  after  death, 
The  undiscover’d  country  from  whose  bourn  No  traveller  returns,  puzzles  the 
will  And  makes  us  rather  bear  those  ills  we  have  Than  fly  to  others  that  we  know 


act  i,  sc.  iv.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  ^3 

A  man  cannot  fteale,  but  it  accufeth  him  :  A  man  cannot  135 
Sweare,  but  it  Checkes  him :  A  man  cannot  lye  with  his 
Neighbours  Wife,  but  it  detects  him.  ’Tis  a  blufhing 
fhamefac’d  fpirit,  that  mutinies  in  a  mans  bofome  :  It 
filles  a  man  full  of  Obftacles.  It  made  me  once  reftore  a 
Purffe  of  Gold  that  (by  chance)  I  found  :  It  beggars  any  140 
man  that  keepes  it  :  It  is  turn’d  out  of  Townes  and  Cit- 
ties  for  a  dangerous  thing,  and  euery  man  that  means  to 
liue  well,  endeuours  to  truft  to  himfelfe,  and  liue  with¬ 
out  it. 

I  ’Tis  euen  now  at  my  elbow,  perfwading  me  not  to  145 
kill  the  Dkue. 


135.  136.  A  man  cannot  Ssveare]  he 
cannot  sweare  Q,Q2,  Sta.  Cam.  +  .  he 
cannot  Jleale  Qq. 

136.  A  man ]  He  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 

137.  him.  ’  7i'r]  Him.  It  is  Q,Q2. 
Him,  it  is  Q3Q4QS. 

138 .  fhatnefac'd]  Ff,  Rowe.  fhame- 
faJ*  Q,Q3»  Cam.  + .  JhamfaJl  Q2Q4Q5. 
Jhamfull  Q?.  Jhomefull  Qg.  shame- 
-fa?  d  Pope  et  cet. 

139.  a  man]  one  Qq,  Theob. +  ,  Var. 
Mai.  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam. +  ,  Huds. 

reflore]  teflore  Q2. 


140.  Purffe]  piece  or  peece  Qq. 

{by  chance )  ]  Om.  Qq,  Sta. 

Cam.  +  . 

141.  of  Townes]  of  all  Townes  Qq, 
Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Sta.  Cam. 
+  ,  Ktly,  Huds. 

143.  trujl  to]  trufl  to  To  Q,. 

and  liue]  and  to  liue  Q,-6, 
Cam.  + . 

145.  ’  Tis]  Ff,  +  ,  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly. 
Zounds  it  is  Qq  et  cet. 

’  Tis... me]  One  line,  Qq. 

146.  Dkue]  Fx. 


not  of?  Thus  conscience  does  make  cowards  of  us  all;  And  thus  the  native  hue 
of  resolution  is  sicklied  o’er  with  the  pale  cast  of  thought.’  Is  there  in  this  any 
question  of  moral  sense?  Does  not  the  use  of  ‘thus’  rather  convey  the  idea  that 
it  is  the  thinking  too  precisely  on  the  event,  or  the  speculating  thereon  too  deeply, 
without  any  reference  to  the  right  or  to  the  wrong,  which  makes  us  hesitate  ?  The 
next  line,  ‘  And  thus,  ’  etc.,  is,  I  think,  an  amplification  of  the  same  thought.  In 
the  present  line  in  Rich.  III.  the  Murderer  uses  ‘conscience’  not  as  in  Hamlet’s 
use  of  it,  but  in  the  sense  of  moral  judgement;  as  does  Richard  himself  in  V,  iii, 
211;  225;  352;  354.— Ed. 

138.  shamefac’d]  Skeat  {Did.):  A  corruption  of  shamejast,  by  a  singular 
confusion  with  face,  due  to  the  fact  that  shame  is  commonly  expressed  by  the 
appearance  of  the  face.  We  find  shamefastness  in  Spenser,  Faerie  Queene,  IV,  x, 
50.  [Derived  from]  Anglo-Saxon,  scamu,  shame;  and  fast,  fast,  firm. — Wright: 
In  the  same  way  in  3  Hen.  VI:  IV,  viii,  52,  ‘shamefac’d’  is  the  spelling  of  the 
Folios,  while  in  the  original  play,  The  True  Tragedie  of  Richard  Duke  of  Yorke, 
it  is  shame  fast.  The  corruption  is  at  least  as  early  as  Sidney’s  Arcadia  (quoted 
in  Richardson’s  Dictionary ).  [Whitney  {New  Cent.  Did.)  gives  examples  of 
both  forms  of  this  word,  as  used  in  the  same  work,  Guevara,  Letters  (translated 
by  Hellowes,  1577):  ‘Men  shamefaced  and  of  noble  minds,’  p.  256;  and  ‘  .  .  a 
mother  shall  send  her  sonne  to  the  house  of  a  gentleman,  clad,  shod,  shamefast,’ 
.  .  .  p.  151.— Ed.] 


*34 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iv. 


2  Take  the  diuell  in  thy  minde,  and  beleeue  him  not :  147 

He  would  infinuate  with  thee  but  to  make  thee  figh. 


147,  148.  7 ake...ftgh.~\  Prose,  Pope 


147.  Take. ..in']  Shake. ..out  of  Cap. 
Shake  off  this... in  Heath. 


et  seq. 

148.  but  ]  Om.  Qq. 


147,  148.  Take  the  diuell  .  .  .  him  not:  He  .  .  .  insinuate]  Warburton:  One 
villain  says,  Conscience  is  at  his  elbows,  persuading  him  not  to  kill  the  Duke.  The 
other  says,  take  the  devil  into  thy  nearer  acquaintance,  ‘into  thy  mind,’  who  will 
be  a  match  for  thy  conscience,  and  believe  it,  etc.  It  is  plain  then  that  ‘him’  in 
both  places  in  the  text  should  be  it,  namely,  conscience. — Capell  (N otes,  ii,  p.  1 78) : 

‘  Take  the  devil  in  thy  mind  ’  admits  of  no  interpretation  that  reason  can  acquiesce 
in;  but  taking  ‘devil’  for  ‘conscience’  (which  is  the  matter  in  argument,  and  the 
only  ‘devil’  the  present  speaker  had  thought  of)  and  allowing  the  two  corrections 
which  none  will  call  violent,  a  great  and  open  consistency  reigns  throughout. 
[See  Text.  Notes .] — Steevens:  Shakespeare  so  frequently  uses  both  these  pro¬ 
nouns  indiscriminately,  that  no  correction  is  necessary. — Malone:  In  the  Mer. 
of  Ven.  we  have  a  long  dialogue  between  Launcelot,  his  Conscience,  and  the  Devil 
[Act  II,  sc.  ii].  But  though  Conscience  were  not  here  personified,  Shakespeare 
wrould  have  used  ‘him’  instead  of  it.  He  does  so  in  almost  every  page  of  these 
plays. — Rann:  Follow  the  fiend’s  advice  that  first  put  thee  upon  this  enter- 
prize,  and  pay  no  regard  to  the  suggestions  of  conscience,  which  will  only  serve 
to  sink  thy  spirits. — Hudson:  ‘Him’  refers  to  ‘Conscience’  not  to  ‘Devil.’ — To 
‘insinuate  with’  is  to  make  friends  with,  to  beguile.  The  idea  of  conscience 
trying  to  wheedle  and  steal  a  man  out  of  the  Devil’s  leading  is  a  most  Shakes¬ 
pearean  stroke  of  art.  And  the  grim  humour  of  these  hired  cut-throats  in  thus 
jesting  away  the  approaches  of  preventive  remorse  is  a  capital  instance  of  the 
Poet’s  inwardness  with  Nature.  For  even  so  men  often  laugh  and  sport  them¬ 
selves  through  the  perpetration  of  crime,  the  supremacy  of  the  moral  law,  the  self- 
assertive  rights  of  conscience  instinctively  prompting  them  to  such  tricks  of  evasion. 
I  can  hardly  think  of  any  one  particular  wherein  Shakespeare’s  moral  sanity  of 
genius  is  more  pregnantly  manifested. — Delius:  ‘The  devil’  is  Conscience  per¬ 
sonified.  The  Murderer  warns  his  companion  to  beware,  and  have  nothing  to  do 
with  this  devil. — Wright:  ‘Conscience’  and  the  ‘devil’  are  here  the  same.  ‘Insin¬ 
uate  with  thee’  means,  would  wind  himself  into  thy  confidence,  ingratiate  himself 
with  thee.  Compare  Ven.  &  Ad.,  1012:  ‘With  death  she  humbly  doth  insinuate.’ 
[Murray  ( N .  E.  D.)  marks  this  word  as  obsolete  in  the  foregoing  sense.  Schmidt 
interprets  it  as  meaning,  in  the  present  passage,  to  intermeddle.  This  is,  possibly, 
a  slight  error  of  inadvertence,  as  in  the  preceding  paragraph  ‘insinuate’  followed 
by  with  is  explained  in  accordance  with  Wright,  and  the  line  from  Ven.  Ad. 
given  by  him  is  also  quoted. — Ed.] — G.  Joicey  ( Notes  fir5  Queries,  12  May,  1894): 
I  suggest  that  ‘in  thy  mind’  may  be  a  misprint  for  in  the  wind.  The  First  Murderer 
says:  ‘It  is  even  now  at  my  elbow’;  the  Second  replies,  in  effect:  Then  if  that 
devil,  thy  conscience,  is  at  thy  elbow,  take  him  in  the  wind  with  it.  When  the 
elbow  is  quickly  jerked  back  it  takes  any  one  who  is  behind  it  very  accurately  in 
the  wind.  [‘O  wad  some  power  the  gif  tie  gie  us,’  etc.  But  had  such  a  ‘power’ 
been  at  the  commentator’s  elbow,  should  we  have  had  his  ingenious  explanation  ? — 


Ed.] 


ACT  I,  SC.  iv.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


135 


I  I  am  ftrong  fram’d,  he  cannot  preuaile  with  me. 


2  Spoke  like  a  tall  man,  that 
Come,  fhall  we  fall  to  worke? 

I  Take  him  on  the  Coftard, 
Sword,  and  then  throw  him  into 

149.  I am]  Tut ,  lam  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 
flrong  fram'd  ]  frong  in  fraud 

Qq.  strong  framed  Cam.  + .  strong  in 
fratne  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

preuaile]  peuaile  Q4. 
me.]  me,  I  warrant  thee.  Qq, 

Cam.  +  . 

150.  Spoke]  Soode  Stood  Q5_8. 
man... thy]  Ff,  Rowe,  fellow... 

his  Qq  et  cet. 

I5i-  we]  me  Rowe  i. 

fall  to  worke  ?]  to  this  geare  ? 


refpefts  thy  reputation. 

150 

with  the  hiltes  of  thy 

the  Malmefey-Butte  in 

iS3 

Qq,  Cam. +.  (geere.  Qx.) 

152.  on]  Ff,  +  ,  Knt,  Coll. 

Dyce  i, 

Wh.  i,  Hal.  ouer  Qq  et  cet. 

hiltes]  Hilt  Q7Q8,  Rowe,  + . 
thy]  my  Q3_s. 

153.  throw  him  into]  we  will  chop 
him  in  Qq,  Cam.  +.  clap  him  into  Mar¬ 
shall  conj. 

Malmefcy-]  malmfey,  Q7Q8. 
Malmfie-  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns. 


150.  tall  man]  That  is,  brave,  stout. 

152.  Take]  Whitney  (Cent.  Did.  s.  v.  Take,  32):  To  inflict,  as  a  blow,  on; 
hence,  to  fetch  (a  person  or  an  animal)  a  blow;  strike.  ‘The  potter  yn  the  neke  hem 
toke,  To  the  gronde  sone  he  yede.’  Robin  Hood  a'nd  the  Potter  (Child’s  Ballads, 
v.  2 1).  ‘A  rascal  takes  him  o’er  the  face,  and  fells  him,’  Fletcher,  Humorous 
Lieutenant,  II,  ii.  [See  also  Schmidt  (Lex.)  s.  v.  Take,  par.  I.] 

152-  Costard]  For  other  examples  of  this  name  of  an  apple,  applied  to  the 
head,  see  Shakespeare,  passim. 

152.  hiltes]  Murray  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  hilt):  1.  The  handle  of  a  sword,  or 
dagger.  Jb.  Formerly  often  in  plural,  with  same  sense,  circa  1450.  Merlin,  103: 
‘Arthur  toke  the  swerde  be  the  hiltes,  and  .  .  .  yaf  it  to  the  Archebisshopp.’  1599. 
Shakespeare,  Hen.  V:  II,  i,  68:  ‘lie  run  him  vp  to  the  hilts,  as  I  am  a  soldier.’ 

153.  throw  .  .  .  Malmesey-Butte]  Hunter  (Ulus.,  ii,  87):  In  the  first  year 

of  King  Richard  III.  the  Commons  complain  in  Parliament  that  the  butts  of 
Malmesey  wine  imported  formerly  were  wont  to  be  made  so  as  to  contain  seven 
score  gallons,  .  .  .  and  the  least  six  score  and  six,  the  price  of  which  was  fifty  shill¬ 
ings;  .  .  .  but  now  of  late  the  merchants  have  reduced  the  size,  so  that  they  now 
scarcely  hold  five  score  and  eight  gallons,  for  which  they  demand  eight  marks.  It  is 
enacted  that  hereafter  no  butt  shall  be  admitted  which  does  not  contain  the  old 
measure  of  six  score  and  six  gallons.  1  Ric.  Ill,  c.  13. — Churchill  (p.  58):  In  de 
Comines’  account  appears  for  the  first  time  the  famous  butt  of  Malmsey  in  which 
Clarence  is  said  to  have  been  drowned,  [p.  54]  ‘  Le  roy  Edouard  feit  mourir  son 

frere  le  due  de  Clarence  en  une  pippe  de  malvoysie,  pour  ce  qu’il  se  vouloit  faire 
Roy  comme  on  disoit’  (1  :  69).  [p.  57]  De  Comines  had  a  certain  personal  con¬ 
nection  with  the  English  affairs  of  which  he  writes.  He  was  the  diplomatic  agent 
of  Charles  of  Burgundy,  when  Warwick  and  Clarence  took  refuge  in  France,  [p.  52] 
The  first  six  books  of  his  memoirs  were  written  between  1488  and  1504.  [p.  74] 
The  statement  that  Clarence  was  put  to  death  in  a  butt  of  wine  occurs  for  the 
second  time  [in  Fabyan’s  Chronicle,  1516].  De  Comines’  work,  if  seen  by  Fabyan, 
must  have  been  seen  in  MS.  It  is  not  mentioned  by  Fabyan  as  one  of  his 


136 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iv. 


the  next  roome. 

2  O  excellent  deuice  ;  and  make  a  fop  of  him.  155 

1  Soft,  he  wakes. 

2  Strike. 

1  No,  wee’l  reafon  with  him. 

Cla.  Where  art  thou  Keeper?  Giue  me  a  cup  of  wine. 

2  You  fhall  haue  Wine  enough  my  Lord  anon.  160 


155-  ant/]  Om.  Qq. 
fop]  fcoope  Q3. 

156- 158.  I  Soft, ...  2  Strike.  I  No, 
wee'l]  I  Hark e,  he  Jlirs,  fhall  I flrike  ? 
2  No,firfl  lets...  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + .  {flrike. 
Qx )  I  Vil.  Soft,  he  wakes.  Shall  I  strike  ? 


2  Vil.  No,  we'll...  Pope, +  . 

156.  wakes.]  wakes.  [Cla.  stirs.  Cap. 

158.  him.]  him. Cla.  awaketh.Q3Q4Qs. 

159.  Keeper?]  keeper,  Qq. 

160.  2]  Ff, +  .  1  Qq.  Sec.  Murd. 

Cam.  +  .  1  Murd.  Var. ’78  et  cet. 


sources,  and  there  is  no  indication  elsewhere  that  he  ever  used  it.  It  is  more  prob¬ 
able,  therefore,  that  both  authors  derived  their  account  from  popular  report. — 
Wright:  In  Hall’s  Chronicle  (Edward  IV.,  p.  326)  it  is  said  that  Clarence  ‘was 
priuely  drouned  in  a  But  of  Maluesey.’  In  Holinshed,  and  in  a  later  passage  of 
Hall  (p.  342),  this  is  changed  to  ‘malmesie’;  for  the  two  are  identical,  the  wines 
deriving  their  name  from  Napoli  di  Mai vasia  in  the  Morea,  where  they  were 
originally  made.  Cotgrave  has:  ‘ Malvoisie:  f.  Malmesie’;  and  Malvesie  is  the 
form  used  in  Chaucer.  [In  regard  to  the  price  of  Malmsey  at  this  time  the  fol¬ 
lowing,  from  Stowes  Survey,  1598,  may,  possibly,  be  of  interest:  ‘I  read,  in  the 
reign  of  Henry  VII.,  that  no  sweet  wines  were  brought  into  this  realm  but 
Malmsies  by  the  Longobards,  paying  to  the  king  for  his  license  six  shillings  and 
eightpence  of  every  butt,  besides  twelve  pence  for  bottle  large.  I  remember 
within  this  fifty  years  Malmsey  not  to  be  sold  more  than  one  penny  halfpenny 
the  pint’ — p.  240,  ed.  Morley. — Ed.] 

158.  No  .  .  .  him]  The  First  Murderer  has  apparently  forgotten  both  Richard’s 
warning  in  regard  to  the  plausible  manner  of  Clarence,  and  his  own  reply  that 
they  were  going  to  use  their  ‘hands  and  not  their  tongues.’  The  Qq  give  this 
speech  to  the  2  Murderer;  it  is  certainly  more  like  the  vacillating  spirit  he  has 
shown,  than  that  of  the  decisive  manner  of  the  First  murderer.  ‘  Reason  ’  is  here, 
as  frequently  in  Shakespeare,  talk  with,  converse. — Ed. 

159-169.  thou  .  .  .  you]  Chambers:  The  uses  of  ‘thou’  and  ‘you’  may  be  seen 
very  clearly  in  this  passage.  ‘  Thou  ’  is  the  customary  address  from  superiors  to  in¬ 
feriors,  and  is  expressive,  besides,  of  any  excitement  or  sensibility,  of  familiar  tender¬ 
ness  as  well  as  of  anger;  of  reverence  as  well  as  of  contempt.  Thus  the  constant 
address  of  Venus  to  Adonis  in  Shakespeare’s  poem  is  ‘thou’;  of  Adonis  to  Venus, 
‘you.’  The  swaggering  host  in  Merry  Wives  uses  ‘thou’  to  everybody  as  long  as 
he  is  in  his  pride,  but  ‘you’  when  he  is  crestfallen.  In  a  solemn  style  even 
princes  are  addressed  with  ‘thou’  {Hen.  V:  IV,  vii,  74),  whereas  Falstaff  uses 
‘you’  even  to  Jove  {Merry  Wives,  V,  v,  6).  Here  Clarence  addresses  the  Mur¬ 
derers  with  ‘thou,’  but  in  replying  they  address  him  with  ‘you.’  Afterwards 
when  they  reproach  him  with  his  faults,  they  address  him  with  ‘thou.’  Lines 
168,  169  seem  discrepant,  but  here  Clarence  is  addressing  both  Murderers.  [See 
Abbott,  §  232.] 


ACT  I,  SC.  iv.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


137 

l6l 


Cla.  In  Gods  name,  what  art  thou  ? 

I  A  man,  as  you  are. 

Cla.  But  not  as  I  am  Royall. 

1  Nor  you  as  we  are,  Loyall. 

Cla.  Thy  voice  is  Thunder,  but  thy  looks  are  humble.  165 

1  My  voice  is  now  the  Kings,  my  lookes  mine  owne. 

Cla.  How  darkly,  and  how  deadly  doft  thou  fpeake? 

Your  eyes  do  menace  me  :  why  looke  you  pale? 

Who  fent  you  hither?  Wherefore  do  you  come  ? 

2  To,  to,  to -  170 

Cla.  Tomurtherme? 

Both.  I,  I. 

Cla.  You  fcarfely  haue  the  hearts  to  tell  me  fo, 

And  therefore  cannot  haue  the  hearts  to  do  it. 

Wherein  my  Friends  haue  I  offended  you  ?  175 

1  Offended  vs  you  haue  not,  but  the  King. 


162.  I  A]  2  A  Qq.  Sec.  Murd.  A 
Cam.  +  . 

163.  lam ]  lam ,  Qq. 

164.  1  Nor ]  2  Nor  Q,-4.  Sec.  Murd. 
Nor  Cam.  4 . 

166.  I  My]  2  My  Qq.  Sec.  Murd.  My 
Cam.  + . 

167.  fpeake  ?]  fpake  ?  Q3Q4. 

168.  Your  ...pale  ?]  Om.  Qq. 

169.  Who... you  come?]  Tell  me  who 
you  are  ?  wherefore  come  you  hither  ? 
Qq,  Sta.  ( came  Q?Q8.) 


170.  2  To,]  Am.  To,  Qq.  Both  Murd. 
To,  Mai.  et  seq.  (subs.) 

To,  to,  to - ]  To,  to,  to,  to 

-  Cap.  (errata). 

1 7 1.  me?]  me.  Q,Q2. 

172.  Both.  I,  I.]  Am.  I.  Qq.  Both. 
Ay,  ay.  Rowe  et  seq. 

173.  You]  Ye  Johns.  Var.  ’73. 
fcarfely]  fcarce  Q?Qa. 
hearts]  heart  Q^-g. 

174.  hearts]  heart  Q?Qg. 


167.  How  darkly,  and  how  deadly]  The  Cowden-Clarkes:  These  few  im¬ 
pressively  descriptive  words  afford  ample  instruction  to  those  performers  who 
would  duly  enact  the  parts  of  the  two  murderers. 

168.  Your  eyes  .  .  .  looke  you  pale]  Delius  (Jahrbuch,  vii,  134):  The  omission 
of  this  line  in  the  Quarto  cannot  be  due  to  Shakespeare;  the  anonymous  cor¬ 
rector’s  dull  mind  probably  could  not  understand  the  apparent  contradiction 
herein  contained. — Koppel  (p.  18) :  An  explanation  of  this  omission  more  natural 
than  that  by  Delius  would  be,  that  the  co-worker  on  this  shortened  copy,  from 
which  the  Quarto  was  printed,  omitted  the  line  on  purely  dramatic  [and  com¬ 
passionate?]  grounds,  because,  perhaps,  the  inadequate  performance  of  it,  was 
in  annoying  contrast  to  its  meaning. — Vaughan  (iii,  37):  These  words  seem 
inconsistent  with  Clarence’s  very  last  speech:  ‘But  thy  looks  are  humble’:  for 
Clarence  hardly  can  have  meant  merely  general  demeanour  by  ‘looks.’  Possibly 
these  words  should  be  addressed  to  the  Second  Murderer.  [The  word  ‘you* 
shows,  I  think,  that  this  line  is  addressed  to  both  Murderers;  see  note  by  Cham¬ 
bers,  11.  159-169,  supra. — Ed.] 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  I,  sc.  iv. 


138 

Cla.  I  fhall  be  reconcil’d  to  him  againe.  1 77 

2  Neuer  my  Lord,  therefore  prepare  to  dye. 

Cla.  Are  you  drawne  forth  among  a  world  of  men 
To  flay  the  innocent?  What  is  my  offence  ?  180 

Where  is  the  Euidence  that  doth  accufe  me? 

What  lawfull  Queft  haue  giuen  their  Verdidl  vp 
Vnto  the  frowning  Iudge?  Or  who  pronounc’d 
The  bitter  fentence  of  poore  Clarence  death, 

Before  I  be  conuidt  by  courfe  of  Law?  185 

To  threaten  me  with  death,  is  moft  vnlawfull. 

I  charge  you,  as  you  hope  for  any  goodneffe,  187 


179.  drawne  forth  among ]  cold  forth 
from  out  Qq,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam. +  .  cull'd 
...from  out  Johns,  conj. 

180.  What  A]  What's  F3F4,  Rowe,  + . 
offence?]  offence.  Q4. 

181.  is]  are  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

that  doth~\  that  do  QtQ2,  Cam.  + . 

to  Q3-5- 

183.  Iudge  ?]  iudge ,  Qq. 


184.  Clarence]  Clarence’s  F4,  Rowe. 
184,  185.  death,  ...Law  ?]  death?... 
law,  Ff  et  seq. 

186.  threaten ]  thteaien  Q3.  thereaten 

Q4 -6- 

vnlawfull .]  vnlawfull :  Qq. 

187.  for  any  goodneffe ]  Ff,  Rowe, 
Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13,  Knt.  to  haue  re¬ 
demption  Qq  et  cet. 


179.  drawne  forth]  Steevens:  I  adhere  to  the  Quarto  reading.  [See  Text. 
Notes.]  Compare  Nobody  and  Somebody,  1598:  ‘Thou  art  cald  foorth  amongst 
a  thousand  men,  To  minister  this  soueraigne  Ancidote.’  [ — Sig.  D.  Privately 
Printed  by  Alexander  Smith,  of  Glasgow.] 

181.  is  the  Euidence]  Wright:  In  the  Qq,  ‘evidence’  is  plural,  and  is  used 
in  the  collective  sense  of  the  body  of  witnesses.  Compare  Lear,  III,  vi,  37. 

182.  Quest]  That  is,  inquest;  compare  Hamlet,  V,  i,  24:  ‘crowner’s  quest  law.’ 

184.  frowning  Iudge]  Vaughan:  Compare  ‘The  sad-eyed  justice  with  his 
surly  hum  Delivering  o’er  to  executor  pale  The  lazy,  yawning  drone.’ — Hen.  V: 
I,  ii,  202. 

185.  conuitft  .  .  .  Law]  See  I,  i,  47,  Note. 

185.  conuidV]  For  other  examples  of  past  tenses  and  participles,  from  verbs 
ending  in  t,  where  the  present  remains  unaltered,  see  Walker,  Crit.,  ii,  324,  or 
Abbott,  §  342. 

187.  for  any  goodnesse]  Steevens:  I  have  adopted  these  words  from  the 
Folio,  for  the  sake  of  introducing  variety;  the  idea  of  redemption  being  comprised 
in  the  next  line  as  it  stands  in  the  Qq. — Malone:  This  arbitrary  alteration  was 
made,  and  the  subsequent  line  was  omitted  [See  Text.  Notes ]  by  the  editors  of 
the  Folio,  to  avoid  the  penalty  of  the  statute,  3  Jac.  21.  For  the  sake  of  variety, 
however,  Steevens  follows  neither  copy.  To  obtain  variety  at  the  expense  of 
the  author’s  text,  is  surely  a  very  dear  purchase.  Nor  is  the  variety  here  obtained 
worth  having;  for  the  words  as  you  hope  to  have  redemption,  do  not  supersede, 
but  naturally  introduce,  the  following  line.  I  adhere,  therefore,  to  Shakespeare’s 
words,  in  preference  to  the  arbitrary  alteration  made  by  a  licenser  of  the  press.  .  .  . 
Steevens,  by  inserting  the  substituted  words,  and  also  retaining  the  latter  part  of 


act  i,  sc.  iv.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

That  you  depart,  and  lay  no  hands  on  me : 

The  deed  you  vndertake  is  damnable. 

1  What  we  will  do,  we  do  vpon  command. 

2  And  he  that  hath  commanded,  is  our  King. 

Cla.  Erroneous  Vaffals,the  great  King  of  Kings 

Hath  in  the  Table  of  his  Law  commanded 
That  thou  fhalt  do  no  murther.  Will  you  then 
Spurne  at  his  Edi£t,  and  fulfill  a  Mans  ? 

Take  heed  :  for  he  holds  Vengeance  in  his  hand, 

To  hurle  vpon  their  heads  that  breake  his  Law. 

2  And  that  fame  Vengeance  doth  he  hurle  on  thee, 


139 

188 

190 


195 


198 


188.  That]  Ff,  +  ,  Cap.  Var. ’78,  ’85, 
Ran.  By  Chrijh  deare  bloud  Jhed  for 
our  greeuous  fames  That  Qq  et  cet. 
hands  on]  hand  one  Q?. 

1 91.  w]  vs  is  Q7Q8. 

our]  the  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +. 

192.  Vaffals]  vaffaile  Qq.  vassal 
Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Sta. 
Cam.  +  . 

193.  the  Table]  the  tables  Q,Q2,  Cam. 
+  .  his  tables  Q3^. 


193.  his]  this  Rowe  i. 

194  fhalt]  fhall  F2. 

murther.  Will  you]  murther , 
and  wilt  thou  Qq.  ( murder  Q,Q2.)  Cam. 
+  .  murder  ;  Wilt  thou  Cap.  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  murther,  Will  you  Ff 
et  cet.  (subs.) 

195.  Edict]  edicts  F^F4,  Rowe  i. 

196.  hand]  hands  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

198.  hurle]  throw  Qq. 


what  had  been  struck  out,  has  formed  a  sentence,  not  only  without  authority,  but 
scarcely  intelligible,  at  least  if  the  preposition  ‘by’  is  to  be  connected  with  the 
word  ‘goodness.’  If,  on  the  other  hand,  he  meant  that  the  words — ‘as  you  hope 
for  any  goodness,’  should  be  considered  as  parenthetical  (as  he  seems  to  have 
intended,  by  placing  a  point  after  ‘goodness’),  and  that  the  construction  should 
be — ‘I  charge  you  by  Christ’s  dear  blood,  that  you  depart,’  then  his  deviation 
from  the  author’s  text  is  still  greater. — Birch  (p.  199):  There  are  other  instances 
of  this  particular  appeal  [as  given  in  the  Quarto],  by  other  characters  of  Shakes¬ 
peare;  if  it  be  here  properly  altered  under  the  statute  of  James,  in  all  it  must  be 
equally  condemned.  The  use  of  it  by  Isabel,  in  Mens,  for  Meas.,  II,  ii,  72-79, 
has  been  allowed,  and  is  admired;  though  she  pleaded  for  another’s  life,  and 
Clarence  for  his  own.  But  religion  in  this  play  was  more  suspicious  than  in  any 
other,  by  the  irony  put  upon  it.  If  introduced  unnecessarily  here,  how  much 
more  unnecessarily  where  the  same  subjects  are  treated  with  levity,  by  serious 
and  comic  characters,  as  fitting  jokes! 

192.  Erroneous]  Rolfe:  Not  elsewhere  applied  to  a  person  by  Shakespeare. 
He  uses  the  word  only  here  and  in  j  Hen.  VI:  II,  v,  90. 

198.  And  .  .  .  Vengeance]  Marshall:  These  two  speeches  would  seem  to 
indicate  that  these  Murderers  were  not  taken  from  the  low  or  peasant  class.  They 
seem  to  have  been  acquainted  with  the  history  of  the  time;  and  were  probably 
soldiers  of  fortune,  or  mercenaries,  who  must  have  been  common  enough  during 
the  civil  wars;  as  they  were  also  in  Elizabeth’s  time,  through  the  war  in  the  Nether¬ 
lands. 


[act  i,  sc.  iv. 

200 


Did’ft  breake  that  Vow,  and  with  thy  treacherous  blade, 

Vnrip’ft  the  Bowels  of  thy  Sou’raignes  Sonne. 

2  Whom  thou  was’t  fworne  to  cherifh  and  defend.  205 

1  How  canft  thou  vrge  Gods  dreadfull  Law  to  vs, 

When  thou  haft  broke  it  in  fuch  deere  degree  ? 

Cla.  Alas!  for  whofe  fake  did  I  that  ill  deede  ? 


For  Edward ,  for  my  Brother,  for  his  fake. 

He  fends  you  not  to  murther  me  for  this  : 

210 

For  in  that  finne,  he  is  as  deepe  as  I. 

If  God  will  be  auenged  for  the  deed, 

212 

I40  THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF 

For  falfe  Forfwearing,  and  for  murther  too  : 
Thou  did’ft  receiue  the  Sacrament,  to  fight 
In  quarrell  of  the  Houfe  of  Lancafter. 

1  And  like  a  Traitor  to  the  name  of  God, 


199.  murther ]  tnuder  Q3. 

200.  Sacrament ]  holy  sacrament  Qq, 
Sta.  Cam. +  . 

200,  201.  to  fight... Lancafier]  One 
line,  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

204.  Vnrif JT\  Vnripp'fi  F4,  Rowe  i. 
Vnript  Q7Q8.  Unrip'dst  Rowe  ii  et 
seq. 

205.  was’t ]  wert  Qq,  Pope, +  ,  Sta. 
Cam.  +. 


207.  broke~\  brooke  Q?. 

fuch  deere~\  fo  deare  Qq,  Cam.  + . 
fuch  high  F3F4,  Rowe,  +  (  — Var. ’73). 

208.  deede  ?]  deed ,  Q,Q2. 

210.  He fends  you\  Why  firs ,  he  fends 
ye  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + .  Why  firs ,  as  sepa¬ 
rate  line,  Cam.  + . 

21 1.  that~\  this  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 

212.  auenged  for  the ]  reuenged  for 
this  Qq,  Cam.  + . 


198-200.  thee  .  .  .  Thou]  See  Note  on  11.  159-169,  supra. 

201.  In  .  .  .  Lancaster]  Wright:  Compare  3  Hen.  VI:  III,  ii,  6:  ‘in  quarrel 
of  the  house  of  York.’ 

204.  Vnrip’st]  Wright:  This  word  is  thus  printed  in  the  older  copies,  probably 
on  account  of  the  difficulty  in  pronunciation  caused  by  so  many  consonants.  Sim¬ 
ilarly  in  Temp.,  I,  ii,  333:  ‘Thou  strokedst  me  and  madest  much  of  me,’  F,  has: 
‘Thou  stroakst  me  &  made  much  of  me.’  [See  Temp.,  I,  ii,  393  of  this  ed.,  or 

Walker,  Crit.,  ii,  128;  where  revisits  Hamlet,  I,  iv,  53,  is  discussed;  or  affects, 

Ant.  &"  Cleo.,  I,  iii,  87  of  this  edition.  Compare  also  II,  i,  108,  post. — Ed.] 

207.  deere]  Murray  (2V.  E.  D.  s.  v.  dear,  a.*) :  2.  Hard,  severe,  heavy,  grievous; 

fell,  dire.  Common  in  Old  English  poetry,  but  found  in  no  prose  writing.  .  .  . 
It  appears  in  Spenser  (by  whom  it  was  perhaps  revived),  occurs  frequently  in 
Shakespeare,  in  seventeenth  century  poets,  and  archaically  in  Shelley.  By  these 
later  writers  it  was  probably  conceived  of  only  as  a  peculiar  poetical  sense  of  dear, 
esteemed,  valued,  and  there  are  uses  in  Shakespeare  evidently  associated  with  both 
sense-groups.  Rich.  II:  I,  iii,  151:  ‘The  datelesse  limit  of  thy  deere  exile.’ 

210.  He  sends  you]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  i875-’76;  p.  40):  It  may  be 
doubtful  whether,  Why  Sirs  [see  Text.  Notes ]  was  meant  for  part  of  the  line,  or 
for  an  extra-metrical  exclamation. 

210.  you]  For  examples  of  use  of  ye  and  ‘you,’  see  Abbott,  §  236. 


ACT  I,  SC.  iv.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


141 

O  know  you  yet,  he  doth  it  publiquely,  213 

Take  not  the  quarrell  from  his  powrefull  arme : 

He  needs  no  indireft,  or  lawleffe  courfe,  215 

To  cut  off  thofe  that  haue  offended  him. 

1 

1  Who  made  thee  then  a  bloudy  minifter, 

When  gallant  fpringing  braue  Plantagenety 
That  Princely  Nouice  was  ftrucke  dead  by  thee  ? 

Cla.  My  Brothers  loue,  the  Diuell,  and  my  Rage.  220 

1  Thy  Brothers  Loue,  our  Duty,  and  thy  Faults, 

Prouoke  vs  hither  now,  to  daughter  thee.  222 


213.  O  know  ...publiquely]  Om.  Qq. 
In  margin,  Pope,  Han. 

yet ]  that  Farmer,  Steev.  Varr. 

215.  or  lawlejfe]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Knt, 
Coll.  Wh.  i.  nor  lawful  Q^.  nor  law- 
lejfe  Qr  et  cet. 

218.  gallant  fpringing ]  Q,Ff,  Rowe, 
Sing.  Ktly.  gallant fpring  Q^.  gallant, 
springing,  Johns.  Var.  ’73.  gallant- 
spirited  Anon.  ap.  Cam.  gallant- spring¬ 


ing  Pope  et  cet. 

219.  That  ]  The  Q^s. 

ftrucke]  Jlroke  Qx.  flrooke  Q^. 

221.  our  Duty]  the  diuell  Qq. 

Faults]  fault  Qq,  Pope,  +  ,  Cap. 

Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Van-.  Cam. +  ,  Dyce  ii, 
iii,  Huds.  Coll.  iii. 

222.  Prouoke  ...  flaughter]  Haue 

brought  ...murder  Qq. 


213.  yet]  Steevens:  We  should  read  that  instead  of  ‘yet.’  In  the  MS  copy 
that  would  naturally  have  been  written  y*.  Hence  the  mistake,  which  I  have 
corrected,  by  the  advice  of  Dr  Farmer. 

218.  gallant  springing]  Johnson:  That  is,  blooming  Plantaganet;  a  prince 
in  the  spring  of  life. — Malone:  Compare  Spenser,  Shepherd's  Calendar,  1579: 
‘That  wouldest  me  my  springing  youngth  to  spil’ — February,  1.  51. — Wright: 
The  figure  is  the  same  as  that  employed  in  J  Hen.  VI:  II,  vi,  46-51. 

219.  Princely  Nouice]  Johnson:  That  is,  youth,  one  yet  new  to  the  world. — 
Wright:  Cotgrave  gives:  ‘ Nouice :  com.  A  nouice,  a  young  Monke,  or  Nunne; 
one  thats  but  newly  entred  into  th’  Order;  also,  a  yongling,  or  beginner,  in  any 
profession.’ 

220.  My  Brothers  loue]  ‘Brothers’  is  here  used  as  the  subjective  genitive. 
That  is,  my  love  of  my  brother. 

221.  our  Duty]  Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  159)  objects  to  the  Quarto  reading, 
devil,  on  the  ground  that,  it  was  not  likely  that  the  murderers  would  refer  to  the 
devil  in  justification  of  an  action  which  they  undertook  in  obedience  to  the  commands 
of  the  King. — Vaughan  (iii,  43):  I  would  retain  the  reading  of  the  Qq.  The 
subsequent  conversation  of  the  Murderers  discloses  that  they  did  not  pretend  to 
be  actuated  by  the  love,  or  to  be  employed  in  the  execution,  of  justice;  and  it  is 
consistent  with  the  ideas  of  our  poet  to  make  the  devil  betray  into  punishment 
those  whom  he  has  instigated  to  the  crime  which  is  punished.  So  in  Rich.  II. 
Sir  Piers  of  Exton  says:  ‘The  devil  that  told  me  I  did  well,  Now  says  the  deed  is 
chronicled  in  hell,’  V,  v,  105.  [Compare  also  Macbeth,  I,  iii,  123-126.  ‘And 
oftentimes,  to  win  us  to  our  harm,  The  instruments  of  darkness  tell  us  truths,  Win 
us  with  honest  trifles,  to  betray’s  in  deepest  consequence.  ’ — Ed.] 


142 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iv. 


Cla.  If  you  do  loue  my  Brother,  hate  not  me  :  223 

I  am  his  Brother,  and  I  loue  him  well. 

If  you  are  hyrM  for  meed,  go  backe  againe,  225 

And  I  will  fend  you  to  my  Brother  Gloufter : 

Who  fhall  reward  you  better  for  my  life, 

Then  Edzvard  will  for  tydings  of  my  death. 

2  You  are  deceiu’d, 

Your  Brother  Gloufter  hates  you.  230 

Cla.  Oh  no,  he  loues  me,  and  he  holds  me  deere : 

Go  you  to  him  from  me. 

1  I  fo  we  will. 

Cla.  Tell  him,  when  that  our  Princely  Father  Yorke, 

Bleft  his  three  Sonnes  with  his  victorious  Arme,  235 

He  little  thought  of  this  diuided  Friendfhip  : 


223.  If... lone"]  Ok  if  you  loue  Qq, 
Cam.  + . 

my]  Om.  Q4Q5Q6. 

225.  are  hyr'  d~\be  hirdcQq.  be  hired 
Cam.  + .  are  hit* I 2 3 d  F3F4  et  cet. 

meed ]  neede  Q2_g.  need  Pope. 
227.  fhall ]  will  Qq,  Pope,  +  . 


229,  230.  You  are. ..hates  you ]  Ff, 
Rowe.  One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

232,  233.  As  one  line,  Steev.  et  seq. 

233,  238.  I]  Am.  Qq. 

/]  Ay  Rowe  et  seq. 

235.  Arme,']  Ff,  Rowe,  arme  :  And 
chargd  vs  from  his  foule  to  loue  each 
other ,  Qq  et  cet. 


230.  Glouster  hates  you]  Malone:  Walpole  some  years  ago  suggested  from 
the  Chronicle  of  Croyland,  that  the  true  cause  of  Gloucester’s  hatred  to  Clarence 
was,  that  Clarence  was  unwilling  to  share  with  his  brother  that  moiety  of  the 
estate  of  the  great  Earl  of  Warwick,  to  which  Gloucester  became  entitled  on  his 
marriage  with  the  younger  sister  of  the  Duchess  of  Clarence,  Lady  Anne  Neville. 
[See  Walpole,  p.  12,  foot-note.]  This  account  of  the  matter  is  fully  confirmed 
by  a  letter  from  Sir  John  Paston  to  his  brother,  dated  17  February,  147 1-2. 
‘  Yisterday  the  Kynge,  the  Qween,  my  Lordes  of  Claraunce  and  Glowcester, 
went  to  Scheen  to  pardon;  men  sey,  nott  alle  in  cheryte;  what  wyll  falle,  men 
can  nott  seye.  The  Kynge  entretyth  my  Lorde  off  Clarance  ffor  my  Lorde  of 
Glowcester;  and,  as  itt  is  seyde,  he  answerythe,  that  he  may  weell  have  my  Ladye 
hys  suster  in  lawe,  butt  they  schall  parte  no  lyvelod,  as  he  sey  the;  so  what  wyll 
falle  can  I  nott  seye.  ’  [Paston  Letters,  iii,  38]. 

233.  I  so  we  will]  This  line  is,  perhaps,  worth  noting  as  an  example  of  irony 
in  its  Greek  sense,  i.  e.,  dissimulation.  Compare  the  reply  of  Banquo:  ‘My  lord, 

I  will  not,  ’  when  Macbeth  says  to  him,  *  Fail  not  our  feast,’  III,  i,  28. — Ed. 

234-  that]  For  examples  of  ‘that’  used  as  a  conjunctional  affix,  see  Abbott, 
§  287. 

235>  236.  Blest  .  .  .  Friendship]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  n): 
[The  omission  of  the  line  ‘  And  charged  us  from  his  soul  to  love  each  other  ’  in  the 

Folio],  if  done  on  purpose,  would  certainly  look  like  the  work  of  a  very  injudicious 
corrector.  But  it  is  not  like  the  way  in  which  editorial  mis-judgement  commonly 
acts;  whereas  the  dropping  out  of  a  whole  line  is  one  of  the  ordinary  accidents  of 


ACT  I,  SC.  iv.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


143 


Bid  Gloufter  thinke  on  this,  and  he  will  weepe.  237 

1  I  Milftones,  as  he  leffoned  vs  to  weepe. 

C/a.  O  do  not  flander  him,  for  he  is  kinde. 

1  Right,  as  Snow  in  Harueft :  240 

Come,  you  deceiue  your  felfe, 

’Tis  he  that  fends  vs  to  deftroy  you  heere. 

C/a.  It  cannot  be,  for  he  bewept  my  Fortune, 

And  hugg’d  me  in  his  armes,  and  fwore  with  fobs, 

That  he  would  labour  my  deliuery.  245 

1  Why  fo  he  doth,  when  he  deliuers  you 


237.  on]  of  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

238.  Miljlones]  Millstones  Pope  et  seq. 
(subs.) 

leffoned]  leffond  Qi_s. 

240.  Right]  Om.  Pope,  +  (  —  Var. 
’73).  Sep.  line,  Cam. +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 

Right,  Right  Vaughan. 

240,  241.  Right... felfe]  Ff,  Rowe. 
One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

as. ..felfe]  One  line,  Cam. +  , 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

241.  Come,  you  deceiue  your]  Ff,Rowe. 
thou  deceiufl  thy  Qq.  Thou  deceivest  thy 


Cam.  + . 

241.  Come]  Om.  Pope,  +  . 

242.  f ends... heere]  fent  vs  hither  now 
to  flaughter  thee  Qx,  Cam. +  .  ( murder 

Q*-8.) 

243.  244.  he. ..Fortune,  And]  when 
I  parted  with  him,  He  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

244.  hugg'd  ]  hudg  Qs. 

246—248.  1  Why. ..2  Make]  2  Why 
...  I  Make  Qq.  Sec.  Murd.  Why... 
First  Murd.  Make  Cam.  +  . 

246.  when  ...you]  now  ...thee  Qq, 
Cam.  +  . 


the  press,  where  there  is  no  editor  to  look  after  it.  [Spedding,  therefore,  includes 
this  among  the  alterations  in  the  Folio  not  intended  by  Shakespeare.] 

237,  238.  he  .  .  .  Milstones]  Steevens:  So,  in  Massinger’s  City  Madam: 
‘  — He  good  gentleman  Will  weep  when  he  hears  how  we  are  used, — yes,  mill-stones.’ 
[IV,  iii,  5,  6.  See  I,  iii,  371,  supra.] 

239.  O  .  .  .  kinde]  Oechelhauser  (Essay,  p.  70) :  It  is  manifest  from  this, 
how  great  is  Gloucester’s  power  of  dissimulation  afterward  revealed  to  others, 
who  could  not  have  known  him  nearly  so  well  as  his  own  brother.  In  the  drama 
his  other  brother  Edward  has  no  suspicion  of  Gloucester’s  intrigues. 

240.  Snow  in  Haruest]  Wright:  Referring  to  Proverbs,  xxvi,  1:  ‘As  snow  in 
summer,  and  as  rain  in  harvest,  so  honour  is  not  seemly  for  a  fool.’  The  First 
Murderer  understands  ‘kind’  in  the  sense  of  natural. 

243-245.  he  bewept  .  .  .  deliuery]  Marshall:  Referring  back  to  the  first 
scene  of  this  act  we  do  not  find  anything  in  the  text  to  warrant  this  description  by 
Clarence  of  the  farewell  between  him  and  his  treacherous  brother;  but  it  is  possible 
that  these  lines  are  intended  to  give  a  hint  to  the  actor  of  Richard  in  his  parting 
scene  with  Clarence,  and  that  the  final  farewell,  though  no  words  are  spoken, 
should  be  as  emotional  in  action  as  it  is  here  described.  [This  exaggeration  by 
Clarence  is  the  natural  consequence,  I  think,  of  his  intense  desire  to  convince  the 
murderers  of  their  mistake.  His  life  may  depend  upon  a  single  word;  in  such 
a  crisis  is  he  to  be  held  strictly  accountable  ? — Ed.] 

245.  labour]  Murray  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  I.  6,  7,  and  8)  gives  many  examples  of 
this  transitive  use  of  ‘  labour,’  marking  it,  however,  as  obsolete. — Ed. 


144 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iv. 


From  this  earths  thraldome,  to  the  ioyes  of  heauen.  247 

2  Make  peace  with  God,  for  you  muft  die  my  Lord. 

Cla.  Haue  you  that  holy  feeling  in  your  foules, 

To  counfaile  me  to  make  my  peace  with  God,  250 

And  are  you  yet  to  your  owne  foules  fo  blinde, 

That  you  will  warre  with  God,  by  murd’ring  me. 

O  firs  confider,  they  that  fet  you  on 

To  do  this  deede,  will  hate  you  for  the  deede. 

2  What  fhall  we  do  ?  255 

Clar.  Relent,  and  faue  your  foules  : 

Which  of  you,  if  you  were  a  Princes  Sonne, 

Being  pent  from  Liberty,  as  I  am  now, 

If  two  fuch  murtherers  as  your  felues  came  to  you, 

Would  not  intreat  for  life,  as  you  would  begge  260 

Were  you  in  my  diftreffe. 


247.  earths\  worlds  Qq,  Cam. +. 
earth's  F3F4  et  cet. 

heauen]  heav'n  Pope, +  . 

248.  Make]  Makes  Qr 

249-252.  Haue  you. ..your  foules... 
are  you. ..your  owne  foules. ..you  will] 
Hafl  thou. ..thy  foule...art  thou. ..thy 
owne  foule...thou  wilt  Qq,  Cap.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam. +  ,  Huds. 

249.  foules]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll. 
Wh.  i.  soul  Pope  et  cet. 

25* 2-  by\  f°r  Qj-s- 

murd'ring  me.]  Ff.  murdring 
me.  Q,Q7Q8.  murdering  me  ?  Q2  et  cet. 

253.  0]  Ah  Qq,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev. 
Varr. 

they]  he  Qq,  Cap.  Var.  ’78,  ’85, 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 


254.  the  deede]  this  deede  Qq. 

255,  256.  One  line,  Steev.  et  seq. 
257-260.  Which. ..life]  Transposed  to 

follow  1.  263,  Tyrwhitt,  Steev.  Varr. 
Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Cam.  + ,  Rife. 

257-261.  Which. ..diftreffe]  Om.  Qq, 
Cap.  Sta.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  ii.  In  margin, 
Pope,  Han.  Transposed  to  follow  1.  267, 
Knt  i,  Sing.  Ktly. 

260.  as]  ah  !  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 

260,  261.  as... diftreffe]  As  one  line 
and  transposed  to  follow  1.  266,  Tyrwhitt, 
Steev.  Varr.  Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Cam. +  .  so... 
distress  Sing.  MS. 

261.  difreffe.]  distress — Theob.Warb. 
Johns.  Var.  Mai.  Huds.  i.  distress ,  so 
pity  me  Coll,  ii  (MS). 


249~252-  y°u  •  •  •  you  .  .  .  you]  Lettsom  (ap.  Dyce  ii):  The  first  four  lines 
of  this  speech  are  addressed  to  the  Second  Murderer  only,  who  alone  had 
recommended  Clarence  to  make  his  peace  with  God.  The  Qq,  therefore,  are 
right  in  using  the  singular.  The  other  two  lines  require  the  plural.  [The  plural 
‘ soules’  in  1.  251  may  possibly  be  explained  by  the  difficulty  in  distinguishing 
between  ‘soul  so  blind’  and  ‘souls  so  blind,’  granting  that  the  compositors  were 
composing  from  dictation;  see,  for  another  like  example,  I,  i,  143,  supra. — Ed.] 

257-26i.  Which  .  .  .  distresse]  Johnson:  These  six  lines,  which  are  not  in  the 
Qq,  are  not  necessary,  but  so  forced  in  that  something  seems  omitted  to  which 
these  lines  are  the  answer.  I  cannot  but  suspect  that  they  are  now  misplaced, 
and  should  be  inserted  here,  somewhat  after  this  manner:  'Clar.  A  begging  prince 
what  beggar  pities  not?  Vil.  A  begging  prince!  Clar.  Which  of  you,  if  you  were 


ACT  I,  SC.  iv.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


145 


•  [257-261.  Which  of  you  .  .  .  Were  you  in  my  distresse] 
a  prince’s  son/  etc.  Upon  this  provocation  the  Villain  naturally  strikes  him. — 
Tyrwhitt’s  arrangement,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  Text.  Notes,  has  commended 
itself  to  the  majority  of  editors.  It  seems,  on  the  whole,  the  most  satisfactory  solu¬ 
tion  of  one  of  the  most  intricate  textual  problems  in  this  textually  difficult  play. 
Knight  says  (ed.  i)  that  he  has  followed  ‘the  Folio,  instead  of  adopting  the  arbi¬ 
trary  regulations  of  the  modern  editors.’  The  Cambridge  Edd.  were  the  first 
to  show  that  Knight  has  followed  neither  Folio  nor  Qq,  but  has  produced  an 
entirely  new  arrangement  (see  Text.  Notes).  They  add:  ‘Here  perhaps  the 
printer  has  mistaken  Knight’s  marginal  directions.  If  such  an  error  can  escape 
the  notice  of  so  careful  an  editor,  how  likely  is  it  to  occur  in  the  Folio,  which  could 
hardly  be  said  to  have  an  editor  at  all!’  The  mistake  is  corrected  in  Knight’s 
second  edition,  the  text  there  following  the  Folio.  Dyce,  who  had  followed  Tyr¬ 
whitt’s  arrangement  in  his  first  edition,  says  (ed.  ii,  p.  460) :  ‘  I  am  now  convinced 
that  the  best  way  of  remedying  the  confusion,  which  the  intolerable  carelessness 
of  the  player-editors  has  occasioned  here,  is  to  omit  the  lines  which  are  found  only 
in  the  Folio — lines  belonging  to  some  manuscript  that  differed  from  the  manuscript 
of  the  tragedy  followed  in  the  original  Quarto.’ — Staunton:  The  confusion  of 
the  text  as  presented  in  the  Folio  is  confirmatory,  perhaps,  of  our  theory  that  the 
text  of  this  play  in  that  edition  is  made  up  in  parts  from  an  earlier  MS  than  that; 
from  which  the  Qq  were  printed.  These  six  lines  were  apparently  the  poet’s 
first  sketch  of  a  speech  for  Clarence,  and  which  he  no  doubt  intended  to  be 
superseded  by  his  after-thought,  and  this  retention  has  reduced  the  trialogue  to 
chaos.  Let  any  one  compare  the  speeches  as  they  stand  in  the  Folios  with  the 
concise  and  lucid  colloquy  of  the  Qq  and  he  will  not  find  it  difficult  to  determine 
which  text  bears  the  latest  marks  of  the  author’s  hand. — R.  G.  White  (ed.  i)  assigns, 
wrongly,  I  think,  the  dash  after  ‘distress,’  1.  261,  to  Hudson,  ed.  i  (see  Text.  Notes), 
and  says  that  he  supposes  Hudson  presumes  that  the  Duke  ‘is  about  to  say  “As 
you  would  beg  &c.,  so  I  beg,”’  &c.  White  then  adds:  ‘I  am  unable  to  look  so  far 
into  Clarence’s  intentions  as  to  decide  upon  the  merits  of  this  reading.’  Hudson 
himself,  in  his  ed.  ii,  apparently  agrees  with  White’s  criticism  and  comes  to  White’s 
conclusion:  ‘It  is  manifest,’  he  says,  ‘that  the  Folio  additions  serve  no  purpose 
but  to  embarrass  and  enfeeble  the  dialogue:  besides,  in  some  places  it  is  hardly 
possible  to  make  any  sense  out  of  them.  To  amend  the  latter  fault,  they  have  been 
variously  tinkered  at,  but  with  only  partial  success.  I  therefore  have  no  scruple 
...  in  omitting  them  altogether  as  an  unauthorised  intrusion.’  The  Cambridge 
Edd.  ( Note  vii)  suppose  that:  ‘If  Shakespeare  wrote  these  additional  lines  [as  in 
the  Folio]  in  the  margin  of  his  original  MS.,  nothing  is  more  likely  than  that  a 
copyist  should  have  misplaced  them.  In  IV,  iii,  55,  56,  two  lines,  undoubtedly 
added  by  Shakespeare,  are  thus  misplaced  in  the  Folio.’  Spedding  (Sh.  Soc. 
Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  12)  suggests  that  these  six  lines  be  transposed  to  follow 
1.  267:  ‘A  begging  prince,’  etc.,  apparently  unconscious  that  he  had  been  anticipated 
by  Knight,  ed.  i.  Spedding  also  changes  the  period  after  ‘distress,’  1.  261,  to 
a  dash;  he  adds:  ‘The  Second  Murderer  seeing  the  other  preparing  to  stab  Clarence 
from  behind,  interrupts  him,  and  tries  to  put  him  on  his  guard.  No  other  change 
seems  to  me  to  be  wanted.  But  this  is  a  case  of  too  little  care,  rather  than  too 
much,  on  the  part  of  the  editor — if,  indeed,  there  was  any  editor  in  the  business.’ 
In  reply  to  the  above  note,  Wright  remarks:  ‘If  the  Second  Murderer  is  influenced 
by  Clarence’s  words,  this  seems  to  be  a  reason  why  a  special  appeal  to  him  should 


10 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  i,  sc.  iv. 


146 

1  Relent?  no:  ’Tis  cowardly  and  womanifh.  262 

Cla.  Not  to  relent,  is  beaftly,  fauage,  diuellifh  : 

My  Friend,  I  fpy  fome  pitty  in  thy  lookes  : 

O,  if  thine  eye  be  not  a  Flatterer,  265 

Come  thou  on  my  fide,  and  intreate  for  mee, 

A  begging  Prince,  what  begger  pitties  not. 

2  Looke  behinde  you,  my  Lord. 

1  Take  that,  and  that,  if  all  this  will  not  do,  Stabs  him. 

lie  drowne  you  in  the  Malmefey-But  within.  Exit.  270 

2  A  bloody  deed,  and  defperately  difpatcht : 


262.  Relent? no.-]  Relent, Qq.  Relent? 
Pope, +  ,  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sing. 
Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Relent!  No,  no: 
Ktly. 

263.  fauage,  diuellifh]  fauage,  and 
diuellifh  Q^g- 

265.  thine"]  thy  Qq. 

267.  begger]  hearer  Bailey. 

268.  2  Looke. ..my  Lord.]  Om.  Qq. 
Pope,  Cap.  Sta.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

269.  1]  Om.  Fa. 


269.  Take... that]  I  thus,  and  thus: 
Qq,  Cap.  Sta.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

if]  and  if  Cap. 

all]  Om.  Qq,  Cap.  Sta. 

do]  feme  Qq,  Cap.  Var.  ’78,  ’85, 

Sta. 

Stabs  him.]  He  (tabs  him.  Qq. 

270.  drowne  you. ..within]  chop  thee 
...in  the  next  roome  Qq,  Sta. 

Exit.]  Om.  Qq. 

271.  difpatcht]  perform'd  Qq,  Sta. 


follow  the  lines  addressed  to  both.’ — Marshall:  The  lines  given  by  the  Qq  are 
quite  sufficient;  but,  at  the  same  time,  it  is  possible  that  the  reading  of  Ft  may  be 
the  right  one,  according  to  one  of  the  versions  which  the  author  had  written;  and 
that  these  six  lines  were  intended  to  be  spoken  by  Clarence  as  a  rapid  and  passionate 
appeal,  which  did  not  admit  of  the  First  Murderer’s  answering  at  once;  and  that 
the  author  intended  the  latter  to  pause  in  his  answer,  as  if  reflecting.  This  view 
is  supported  by  the  form  of  his  answer  in  Fp  ‘Relent?  No,’  etc.,  which  seems  to 
indicate  that  he  was  rather  moved  by  Clarence’s  appeal  at  first,  and  hesitated  a 
moment  whether  to  listen  to  him  or  not. 

268-273.  Looke  . .  .  murther]  Booth  thus  distributes  these  speeches:  ‘  1st  Murd. 
Look  behind  you,  my  lord — [ Clarence  turns  away]— take  that — [stabs  him]  2nd 
Murd.  And  that  [sfota  him].  If  all  this  will  not  do  I’ll  drown  you  in  the  malmsey- 
butt  within.  [Ax  Clarence  falls,  the  2nd  Murderer  kneels  as  if  to  raise  and  carry 
him. — The  1st  Murderer  throws  down  his  dagger  and  turns  in  horror  as  he  speaks, 
xst  Murd.  A  bloody  deed,  and  desperately  despatched!  How  fain,  like  Pilate, 
would  I  wash  my  hands  of  this  most  grievous  guilty  murder  done!  [Curtain.]' 
Thus  Irving,  Clarence  having  retired  to  a  curtained  recess,  is  out  of  sight  during 
the  dialogue  between  the  Murderers:  ‘Clar.  [Within]  Where  art  thou,  Keeper? 
give  me  a  cup  of  wine.  Sec.  Murd.  You  shall  have  wine  enough,  my  lord,  anon. 
[Exit  within.]  First  Murd.  Take  that,  and  that:  if  all  this  will  not  do  [Stabs 
him  within .]  I’ll  drown  you  in  the  malmsey-butt  within.  Sec.  Murd.  [Re-entering.] 
A  bloody  deed,  and  desperately  performed!  How  fain,  like  Pilate  would  I  wash 
my  hands  Of  this  most  grievous  guilty  murder  done!  [Exit.]' 

271.  A  bloody  .  .  .  dispatcht]  Churchill  (p.  510):  Compare  True  Tragedy  of 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


1 47 

How  faine  (like  Pilate)vfO\i\d  I  wafh  my  hands  272 

Of  this  moft  greeuous  murther.  Enter  i.Murtherer 

1  How  now?  what  mean’ft  thou  that  thou  help’ll  me 
not?  By  Heauen  the  Duke  fhall  know  how  flacke  you  275 
haue  beene. 

2 .Mur.  I  would  he  knew  that  I  had  fau’d  his  brother, 

Take  thou  the  Fee,  and  tell  him  what  I  fay, 

For  I  repent  me  that  the  Duke  is  flaine.  Exit. 

1  .Mur.  So  do  not  I  :  go  Coward  as  thou  art.  280 

Well,  lie  go  hide  the  body  in  fome  hole, 

Till  that  the  Duke  giue  order  for  his  buriall : 

And  when  I  haue  my  meede,  I  will  away, 

For  this  will  out,  and  then  I  muft  not  flay.  Exit  284 


A 61ms  Secimdus.  ScoenaPrima. 

— • 

Flourijh. 

Enter  the  King  Jicke , the  Queene,  Lord  Marqueffe 
Dorfet ,  Riuers ,  Ha/lings ,  Catesby, 

Buckingham ,  Wooduill.  5 


272.  ( like  Pilate )would  I]  would  I 
like  Pilate  Q,Q8. 

hands ]  hand  Qi-,. 

273.  murther ]  guiltie  murder  done 
Qq,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 

Enter  I.Murtherer]  Om.  Qq. 

274-276.  Two  lines,  ending:  not... 
beene.  Pope  et  seq. 

274,  275.  How  now  ? ...not  ?]  Why 
doejt  thou  not  help  me  ?  Qq,  Sta.  {me,  Qt.) 

275,  276.  By  Heauen... haue  beene] 
One  line,  reading  :  By  heauen... thou  art 
Qq,  Sta. 

275.  Heauen]  heauens  Q,.5,  Sta.  Cam. 
+ .  Heav'  n  Rowe,  + . 

281.  Well... hide  the]  Now  muft  I  hide 


his  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

282.  Till  that. ..giue]  Vntill...take  Qq, 
Sta.  Cam. +  . 

283.  will]  muft  Qq,  Pope, +  ,  Sta. 
Cam.  + . 

284.  then]  here  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 
Exit]  Exeunt  Qq.  ...with  the 

body.  Cap.  et  seq.  (subs.) 

I.  Adtus..  Prima.]  Om.  Qq.  Act  II, 
Sc.  iii.  Irving. 

The  Same,  a  Room  in  the  Palace. 
Cap. 

2-5.  Flourilh  ...  Wooduill.]  Enter 
King,  Queene,  Haftings,  Riuers,  &c.  Qq. 
(Ryuers,  Dorcet,  &c.  Q,Q2  )  ...Grey  and 
others.  Cap.  et  seq. 

3.  King  ficke...]  King  Edward,  led 
in  sick...  Cap.  et  seq. 


Richard  III.:  ‘  Terrell .  How  now,  Myles  Forest,  is  this  deed  dispatcht?  For.  I 
sir,  a  bloodie  deed  we  haue  performed.’  [See  note  by  Lloyd,  1.  123,  supra.] 

3-5.  Enter  .  .  .  Riuers  .  .  .  Catesby  .  .  .  Wooduill]  Wright:  In  this  stage- 
direction  Grey  is  omitted,  and  ‘Catesby’  and  ‘Woodville’  introduced.  But  Catesby 
does  not  appear  in  the  scene,  and  Woodville  is  the  same  as  Earl  Rivers,  the  Queen’s 


148 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ii,  sc.  i. 


King.  Why  fo  :  now  haue  I  done  a  good  daies  work.  6 

You  Peeres,  continue  this  vnited  League  : 

I,  euery  day  expert  an  Embaffage 
From  my  Redeemer,  to  redeeme  me  hence. 

And  more  to  peace  my  foule  fhall  part  to  heauen,  10 

6.  Why']  Om.  Qq.  io.  more  to]  Ff,  Knt,  Coll,  more  in 

haue  /]  I  haue  Qq.  Rowe,  Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13,  Sing.  Ktly. 

8.  /,]  /  Qq,  Rowe  et  seq.  more  at  Cap.  Coll.  MS.  now  in  Qq  et 

9.  redeeme]  recall  Pope,  Han.  release  cet. 

Kinnear.  part  to]  part  from  Q,Q2. 


brother.  The  authority  for  this  part  of  the  play  is  More’s  Life  of  Richard  III.,  as 
incorporated  both  in  Hall’s  and  Holinshed’s  Chronicles.  [See  Appendix:  Source 
of  Plot.] 

6.  King.  Why  .  .  .  work.]  Dowden  ( Sh .  His  Mind,  etc.,  p.  192):  [King  Ed¬ 
ward]  did  not  interest  the  imagination  of  Shakespeare.  He  is  the  self-indulgent, 
luxurious  king.  The  one  thing  which  Shakespeare  cared  to  say  about  him  was 
that  his  pleasant  delusion  of  peace-making  shortly  before  his  death  was  a  poor 
and  insufficient  compensation  for  a  life  spent  in  ease  and  luxury  rather  than  in 
laying  the  hard  and  strong  bases  of  a  substantial  peace.  A  few  soft  words  and 
placing  of  hands  in  hands  will  not  repair  the  ravage  of  fierce  years,  and  the  decay 
of  sound  human  bonds  during  soft,  effeminate  years.  Just  as  the  peace-making 
is  perfect,  [Richard]  stands  before  the  dying  king  to  announce  that  Clarence  lies 
murdered  in  the  Tower.  This  is  Shakespeare’s  comment  upon,  and  condemnation 
of,  the  self-indulgent  King. — Marshall:  Scene  1  of  The  True  Tragedy  of  Richard 
III.,  was  very  probably  the  foundation  of  this  scene  in  Shakespeare’s  play.  The 
older  play  begins  with  a  kind  of  prologue  between  Truth  and  Poetrie  and  the 
Ghost  of  Clarence.  Then  comes  the  scene  which  corresponds  with  this  one,  with 
the  stage  direction:  ‘Enter  Edward  the  Fourth,  Lord  Hastings,  Lord  Marcus,  and 
Elizabeth.  To  them  Richard.’  [Marshall  quotes  several  passages  wherein  the 
words  ‘league,’  ‘perfect  love,’  ‘confusion’  occur  in  both  plays;  he  then  adds:] 
The  scene  in  the  old  play,  which  is  much  longer  than  the  corresponding  one  in 
Shakespeare’s  play,  ends  with  the  death  of  the  king;  and  Richard,  though  he  is 
present,  does  not  speak.  We  have  given  these  slight  parallels  from  the  two  scenes 
to  prove  how  very  little  use  Shakespeare  made  of  the  old  play. 

6.  now]  Vaughan  (iii,  47):  I  would  restore  the  Quarto  reading.  ‘Now’  is 
disyllabic.  The  meaning  of  the  verses  thus  given  is:  Now  that  I  have  done  a 
good  day’s  work  I  beg  of  you  to  perpetuate  it.  The  Folio  amendment  disfavors 
this  construction.  Its  motive  was  the  supposed  monosyllabic  character  of  ‘now’ 
probably.  [Are  we  then  to  suppose  that  this  disyllabic  ‘character  of  now’  is 
caused  by  an  extra  twinge  of  pain,  making  the  dying  monarch  ejaculate  ‘Ne-ow!’? 
—Ed.] 

10.  to  .  .  .  to]  Spedding  {Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875—’ 76;  p.  13):  I  think  we  may 
assume  that  Shakespeare  could  not  have  intended  to  change  in  [as  in  the  Qq]  for 
‘to.’  But  as  from  had  to  be  changed  to  ‘to’  before  ‘heaven’;  and  it  is  possible 
that  he  may  have  meant  to  substitute  at  for  ‘  in,  ’  before  ‘  peace,  ’  it  is  easy  to  suppose 
some  confusion  in  the  directions  that  would  account  for  such  an  error  of  the  press. 


act  ii,  sc.  i.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

Since  I  haue  made  my  Friends  at  peace  on  earth. 
Dorfet  and  Riuers,  take  each  others  hand, 


149 


11 


II.  made~\  fet  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 
earth.]  earth  :  Qq. 


12.  Dorfet  and  Riuers]  Hastings  and 
Rivers  Rowe,  + ,  Coll.  MS.  Riuers  and 
Hajiings  Qq  et  cet. 


[In  Steevens’s  Reprint,  1766,  part  for  is  given  in  a  foot-note.  But  from  what  Qto 
is  not  specified.  As  the  Cambridge  Edd.  refer  to  it  simply  as  ‘quoted,’  it  is  to 
be  inferred  that  they  were  not  able  to  locate  for  in  any  Qto.  Nevertheless  R.  G. 
White  adopted  it  in  his  first  edition. — Ed.] 

12.  Dorset  and  Riuers]  Spedding  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1 875—’ 76;  p.  13):  Here  we 
find  in  the  Folio  an  important  variation  [from  the  Qq],  evidently  deliberate  and 
intentional,  yet  evidently  wrong;  and  therefore  [to  be  classed  among  the  alterations 
not  intended  by  Shakespeare].  Now,  as  Dorset  had  had  no  quarrel  with  his  uncle 
Rivers,  and  as  the  immediately  subsequent  dialogue  makes  it  certain  that  Rivers 
and  Hastings  were  the  persons  really  addressed,  we  may  surely  conclude  that  such 
an  alteration  cannot  have  proceeded  from  any  one  who  knew  the  relations  of  the 
dramatis  personae — therefore  not  from  Shakespeare  of  all  men.  But  though  I  can¬ 
not  doubt  that  this  variation  was  something  more  than  an  accident  of  the  press, 
.  .  I  do  very  much  doubt  whether  the  alteration  as  it  stands  was  that  which  the 
alterer  intended.  ...  It  is  easy  to  imagine  that  a  line  has  dropped  out  in  the  print¬ 
ing,  or  that  a  correction  had  been  begun  in  the  MS  and  left  incomplete.  Either 
is  possible;  but  the  accident  in  printing  is  the  more  probable,  because  we  know 
otherwise,  that  it  is  a  very  common  one.  Suppose  the  corrected  passage  stood  thus 
in  the  copy  sent  to  press:  ‘Dorset  and  Rivers,  Hastings,  Buckingham,  Come 
all  before  me:  take  each  other’s  hand.’  This  would  have  fitted  the  place  .  .  . 
and  left  no  difficulty.  The  omission  ...  of  the  last  half  of  one  line  and  the  first 
half  of  the  next  is  ...  an  accident  very  liable  to  occur,  and  as  we  have  no  rea¬ 
son  to  suppose  that  ...  an  editor  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  the  sheets  before 
they  were  settled,  .  .  .  such  an  accident  here  would  explain  the  whole  thing.  ...  Of 
course  I  do  not  imagine  that  the  words  which  I  have  supplied  were  those  really 
written  between  the  lines  of  the  corrected  copy.  But  I  do  think  that  they  must 
have  been  words  to  that  effect. — Pickersgill  (op.  cit.,  86):  Let  it  be  granted 
that  the  reading  of  the  Folio  is  due  to  the  printer,  who  dropped  a  line,  as  suggested 
by  Spedding.  Then,  to  pass  over  the  circumstance  that  Dorset,  the  youngest 
and  the  least  considerable  of  the  party,  is  most  conspicuously  addressed,  and, 
notwithstanding,  makes  no  reply,  is  it  not  clear  from  the  manner  of  the  King’s 
presently  turning  to  Dorset  and  Buckingham,  that  they  were  not  included  in  the 
former  exhortation:  ‘Madam  yourself  are  not  exempt  in  this,  Nor  your  son,  Dorset; 
Buckingham,  nor  you’?  It  is  indeed  so  difficult  to  suppose  that  anybody  could 
be  stupid  enough  to  alter  deliberately  the  Quarto  to  the  present  reading  that  I 
am  disposed  to  accept  Spedding’s  suggestion  as  to  the  correction  which  was  really 
intended:  but  even  this  displays  such  a  want  of  congruity  with  the  whole  context, 
as  I  have  endeavored  to  show,  that  I  find  in  it  unmistakable  marks  of  some  reviser 
who  was  not  the  author. — Wright:  The  Folio  reading  is  obviously  wrong,  for 
these  were  nephew  and  uncle,  and,  of  course,  of  the  queen’s  party. — Marshall: 
According  to  More,  it  should  be  Dorset  and  Hastings.  But  as  Fj  gives  the  next 
speech  to  Rivers  and  the  following  one  to  Hastings,  we  must  presume  that  the 
reading  of  the  Qq  is  the  right  one. 


1 5o  THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  II,  sc.  i. 

Diffemble  not  your  hatred,  Sweare  your  loue.  13 

RiuRy  heauen,my  foule  is  purg’d  from  grudging  hate 
And  with  my  hand  I  feale  my  true  hearts  Loue.  1 5 

Haji.  So  thriue  I,  as  I  truly  fweare  the  like. 

King.  Take  heed  you  dally  not  before  your  King, 

Left  he  that  is  the  fupreme  King  of  Kings 
Confound  your  hidden  falfhood,and  award 

Either  of  you  to  be  the  others  end.  20 

Haji.  So  profper  I,  as  I  fweare  perfefl  loue. 

Ri.  And  I,  as  I  loue  Hajlings  with  my  heart, 

King.  Madam,  your  felfe  is  not  exempt  from  this  : 

Nor  you  Sonne  Dorfet ,  Buckingham  nor  you  ; 

You  haue  bene  fadtious  one  againft  the  other.  25 

Wife,  loue  Lord  Hajlings,  let  him  kiffe  your  hand, 

And  what  you  do,  do  it  vnfeignedly. 

Qu.  There  Hajlings,  I  will  neuer  more  remember 
Our  former  hatred,  fo  thriue  I,  and  mine. 

King.  Dorjet ,  imbrace  him  :  30 

Hajlings,  loue  Lord  Marqueffe. 

Dor.  This  interchange  of  loue,  I  heere  proteft 
Vpon  my  part,  fhall  be  inuiolable.  33 


14.  foule ]  heart  Qq. 

16.  truly]  Om.  Q3_g. 

17.  your]  the  Rowe  ii. 

23.  is. ..from]  are... in  Qq,  Cap.  Var. 
’78,  ’85,  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Coll. 
Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 


24.  you]  your  Qq,  Pope,  + ,  Cap.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt  i,  Cam. +  ,  Rife. 
28.  There]  Here  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

30,  31.  YJ\n<g... Marqueffe]  Om.  Qq. 
One  line,  Rowe  ii  et  seq. 

32.  This]  Thus  Q^. 

33.  inuiolable]  vnuiolable  Qq,  Cam.  + . 


13.  Dissemble]  Steevens:  That  is,  do  not  gloss  it  over. — Malone:  I  suppose 
he  means,  divest  yourselves  of  that  concealed  hatred  which  you  have  heretofore 
secretly  borne  to  each  other.  Do  not  merely,  says  Edward,  conceal  and  cover 
over  your  secret  ill-will  to  each  other  by  a  show  of  love,  but  eradicate  hatred 
altogether  from  your  bosoms. 

16,  21,  29.  So  ...  So  .  .  .  so]  Abbott  (§  133):  Here  ‘so’  means  on  condi¬ 
tion  of  my  speaking  the  truth.  Compare  Rich.  II:  I,  iii,  34:  ‘So  defend  thee, 
Heaven.’ 

20.  Either  of  you  .  .  .  end]  Webb:  King  Edward’s  warning  is  well  founded. 
Despite  their  hollow  professions  of  friendship,  we  read  later  how  Rivers  is  led  to 
the  block,  with  his  last  breath  praying  that  the  same  fate  may  befall  Hastings 
(III,  iii).  While  the  latter  hears  the  news  of  his  rival’s  punishment  with  every 
sign  of  satisfaction,  himself  soon  to  tread  the  road  to  the  scaffold. 

25.  factious]  Compare  I,  iii,  137. 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


151 

Hajl .  And  fo  fweare  I. 

King .  Now  Princely  Buckingham,  feale  y  this  league  35 
With  thy  embracements  to  my  wiues  Allies, 

And  make  me  happy  in  your  vnity. 

Buc.  When  euer  Buckingham  doth  turne  his  hate 
Vpon  your  Grace,  but  with  all  dutious  loue, 

Doth  cherifh  you,  and  yours,  God  punifh  me  40 

With  hate  in  thofe  where  I  expefl  moft  loue, 

When  I  haue  moft  need  to  imploy  a  Friend, 

And  moft  affured  that  he  is  a  Friend, 

Deepe,  hollow,  treacherous,  and  full  of  guile, 

Be  he  vnto  me  :  This  do  I  begge  of  heauen,  45 

When  I  am  cold  in  loue,  to  you,  or  yours.  Embrace 

King.  A  pleafing  Cordiall,  Princely  Buckingham , 

Is  this  thy  Vow,  vnto  my  fickely  heart : 

There  wanteth  now  our  Brother  Glofter  heere, 

To  make  the  blefled  period  of  this  peace.  50 

Buc.  And  in  good  time, 


34.  fweare  /.]  fweare  I  my  Lord  Qq, 
Cam.  + . 

/.]  /.  [they  embrace.  Cap. 

35.  y]  up  Q7Q g.  thou  Ff  et  seq. 

36.  embracements ]  embracement 

QA- 

37.  your']  his  Q7<  this  Qg. 

38.  Buc.  When ]  Buck,  [to  the  Queen] 
When  Rowe,  + ,  Dyce,  Cam. 

39.  Vpon  your  Grace ]  On  you ,  or 
yours ,  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  On  you,  or  yours, 
[to  the  Queen]  Globe, +  . 


39.  but  with  all  ]  and  not  with  Pope, 
+  (-Var.’73). 

45-  vnto ]  to  Pope, +  . 
heauen ]  God  Qq. 

46.  loue ]  zeale  Qq,  Pope, +  ,  Sta.  Cam. 
+  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

Embrace]  Om.  Qq.  Embracing 
Rivers,  &c.  Rowe  et  seq.  (subs.) 

50.  blejfed ]  perfetfl  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +  , 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

51,  52.  And. ..Duke]  Ff,  Rowe,  Wh.  i. 
One  line,  reading  And. ..comes  the  noble 
Duke.  Qq  et  cet. 


38-40.  When  .  .  .  but  .  .  .  yours]  Here  the  text  of  the  Folio  is,  I  think,  to  be 
preferred  to  that  of  the  Quartos,  making  the  clause,  ‘but  with  all  duteous  loue 
Doth  cherish  you,’  parenthetical,  thus:  ‘Whenever  Buckingham  doth  turn  his 
hate  Upon  your  Grace  (but  with  all  duteous  love  Doth  cherish  you)  ....  and 
yours,  God  punish  me.’  Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  159)  prefers  the  Folio  text, 
since  it  marks  a  gradation  in  Buckingham’s  statement  which  is  wanting  in  the  Qq. 
With  either  text  ‘but’  is  here  equivalent  to  without  or  instead  of,  or,  as  Wright 
interprets  it,  and  doth  not.  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  But  C.):  1.  In  a  simple 
sentence;  introducing  a  word  or  phrase  (rarely  a  clause)  which  is  excepted  from 
the  general  statement:  Without,  with  the  exception  of,  except,  save. — Ed. 

49.  wanteth]  Abbott  (§  293):  Similarly,  Milton  ( Areopagitica )  uses:  ‘what 
wants  there?’  for,  what  is  needed?  and  this  use  still  exists  in  conversation. 


X52  THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  II,  sc.  i. 

Heere  comes  Sir  Richard  Ratcliffe ,  and  the  Duke.  52 

Enter  Ratcliff e ,  and  Glojler. 

Rich.G ood  morrow  to  my  Soueraigne  King  &  Queen 
And  Princely  Peeres,a  happy  time  of  day.  55 

King ,  Happy  indeed,  as  we  haue  fpent  the  day  : 

Glofter,  we  haue  done  deeds  of  Charity, 

Made  peace  of  enmity,  faire  loue  of  hate,  58 

53.  Enter...]  After  1.  50,  Qq.  57.  Glojler]  Brother  Qq,  Pope,  +  , 

Ratcliffe,  and]  Ff, +  .  Om.  Qq,  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam. +  , 

Var.  ’73  et  cet.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

54.  Good]  O  ood  Q3. 

52.  Heere  .  .  .  Duke]  R.  G.  White:  ‘Sir  Richard  Ratcliff’  being  added  in 
the  Folio,  and  a  hemistich  being  made  to  admit  it,  and  noble  being  stricken  out, 
with  stage-directions  to  conform  to  the  change,  there  appears  to  be  no  sufficient 
reason  for  disregarding  such  marked  and  purposed  modifications,  and  we  must 
accept  them  unless  we  claim  the  right  to  make  up  a  text  according  to  our  own 
taste  from  the  Folio  and  any  and  all  the  Qq.  Ratcliff,  it  is  true,  says  nothing; 
but  the  poet  was  also  a  dramatist,  and  may  have  had  a  purpose  in  showing  this 
agent  of  the  usurper  in  his  company  at  this  interview. — Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii, 
157)  also  thinks  that  Ratcliffe  is  purposely  introduced  in  the  Folio,  that  the 
audience  may  see  in  him  Richard’s  confidant  and  accomplice,  and,  on  Ratcliffe’s 
next  appearance  (III,  ii),  recognise  the  fitness  of  his  being  chosen  as  the  one  to  see 
carried  out  Richard’s  orders  for  the  execution  of  the  Queen’s  kindred. — Spedding 
( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  i875-’76;  p.  15):  Ratcliffe’s  name  has  not  been  mentioned 
before:  he  comes  only  as  an  attendant  of  the  Duke:  he  does  not  come  to  say 
anything:  and  why  should  his  name  be  put  first?  Only  for  the  verse  probably. 
I  believe  the  corrector  intended  the  text  of  the  Quarto  to  remain  as  it  is;  and  the 
stage-direction  to  be,  ‘Enter  Gloster  and  Sir  Richard  Ratcliffe.’ — Pickersgill 
{op.  cit.,  p.  87):  I  agree  with  Spedding  in  attributing  to  Shakspere  the  stage- 
direction  of  the  Folio  in  this  line;  but  I  regard  it  as  part  of  the  original  MS,  not 
as  a  subsequent  emendation.  There  is  not  any  difficulty  in  accounting  for  the 
omission  of  Ratcliffe’s  name  upon  the  supposition  that,  in  the  Quarto,  we  have 
the  stage-copy  of  the  play:  .  .  .  the  company,  I  suppose,  was  not  strong  in  point  of 
number,  and,  therefore,  as  Ratcliffe  had  nothing  to  say  or  do  in  this  scene,  his 
presence  was  dispensed  with.  Of  course,  the  alteration  of  the  text  cannot  be 
Shakespeare’s;  [had  the  alteration  been  due  to  either  printer  or  transcriber,  as  sug¬ 
gested  by  Spedding],  we  ought  to  have  the  following  reading:  ‘Here  comes  Ratcliffe, 
and  the  noble  Duke.’  Of  course,  it  may  be  said  that  the  line  was  altered  for  the 
sake  of  the  metre;  but  Elizabethan  printers  do  not  commonly  work  in  this  way. 
I  have  no  doubt  whatever  in  my  own  mind  that  the  alteration  was  deliberately 
made  by  the  corrector,  who,  finding  Ratcliffe’s  name  in  the  stage-direction  of  the 
copy  which  he  was  revising,  judged  that  it  ought  not  to  be  omitted  from  the  text. 

58.  of .  .  .  of]  Abbott  says  (§  171):  ‘“Of”  with  verbs  of  construction,  from 
out  of,  sometimes  assumes  the  meaning  of  instead  of,  ’  and  quotes  the  present  line. 
Schmidt  (Lex.)  also  quotes  this  line  among  several  others  as  an  illustration  of  the 
use  of  ‘of’  ‘denoting  the  material  constituting  the  thing.’ — Ed. 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


153 


Betweene  thefe  fwelling  wrong  incenfed  Peeres. 

Rich.  A  bleffed  labour  my  mod:  Soueraigne  Lord:  60 

Among  this  Princely  heape,  if  any  heere 
By  falfe  intelligence,  or  wrong  furmize 
Hold  me  a  Foe  :  If  I  vnwillingly,  or  in  my  rage, 

Haue  ought  committed  that  is  hardly  borne, 

To  any  in  this  prefence,  I  defire  65 

To  reconcile  me  to  his  Friendly  peace : 

’Tis  death  to  me  to  be  at  enmitie  : 

I  hate  it,  and  defire  all  good  mens  loue, 

Firft  Madam,  I  intreate  true  peace  of  you, 

Which  I  will  purchafe  with  my  dutious  feruice.  70 

Of  you  my  Noble  Cofin  Buckingham, 


59.  wrong  incenfed]  wrong-incensed 
Rowe  ii  et  seq. 

60.  my ]  Om.  Q3^. 

Lord  ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  Sing. 
Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Rife,  liege  Qq  et  cet. 

61.  Among ]  Amongfl  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

63.  Hold... or  in]  One  line,  Ktly. 

Two  lines,  ending  Foe. ..rage. 
Mai.  et  seq. 

vnwillingly]  Ff,  Rowe,  vnwit- 


tingly  Qq  et  cet. 

63.  or... rage]  Om.  Pope,  +  >  Cap.  Varr. 
Ran. 

64.  ought]  aught  Theob.  ii  et  seq. 

65.  To]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  i.  By  Qq 
et  cet. 

66.  his]  this  Q2. 

68.  loue,]  loue.  Qq. 

69.  Firfl]  Fird  F2. 
true]  Om.  Q^. 


59.  swelling]  For  other  examples  of  ‘swelling,’  meaning  inflated  with  anger, 
see  Schmidt  {Lex.  s.  v.  swell,  d). 

61.  heape]  Murray  {N.  E.  D.  s.  v.)  3.  A  great  company  (especially  of  persons); 
a  multitude,  a  host.  [The  present  line  quoted.] 

64.  hardly  borne]  Craik  (p.  184)  notes  that  this  phrase  occurs  thrice  in  Jul. 
Cces.,  I,  ii,  317;  II,  i,  215;  III,  i,  357,  and  adds:  ‘It  is  remarkable  that  the 
expression,  meeting  us  so  often  in  this  one  play,  should  be  found  nowhere  else  in 
Shakespeare.  Nor  have  the  commentators  been  able  to  refer  to  an  instance  of  its 
occurrence  in  any  other  writer.’  Murray  {N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  Bear):  f  16.  To  bear 
hard,  heavy,  or  heavily:  to  endure  with  a  grudge,  take  (a  thing)  ill  of  amiss, 
have  ill  will  to,  have  a  resentment  against.  Circa  1400.  Apol.  Loll.  Intro.  10: 
‘Many  beren  heuy  that  freris  ben  clepid  pseudo  or  ypocritis.’ — Shakespeare,  Jul. 
Coes.,  II,  i,  215  [cited  by  Craik].  1602.  Life  T.  Cromwell,  IV,  ii,  112:  ‘you  bear 
me  hard  about  the  abbey  lands.’  The  use  of  the  phrase  in  the  present  con¬ 
nection  was,  possibly,  suggested  to  Shakespeare  by  Holinshed,  in  whose  very 
account  of  this  reconciliation  occurs  the  following,  in  regard  to  Lord  Hastings: 
‘Hir  [the  Queen’s]  kinred  also  bare  him  sore,  as  well  for  that  the  king  had  made 
him  capteine  of  Calis  ...  as  for  diuerse  other  great  gifts  which  he  receiued, 
that  they  looked  for,’  iii,  713;  More,  p.  13. — Ed. 

66.  me]  For  other  examples  of  ‘me’  used  for  myself,  see  Shakespeare  passim. 

71.  Cosin  Buckingham]  See  Dram.  Person.,  Buckingham,  note  by  Wright. 


154 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ii,  sc.  i. 


If  euer  any  grudge  were  lodg’d  betweene  vs.  72 

Of  you  and  you,  Lord  Riuers  and  of  Dorfet , 

That  all  without  defert  haue  frown’d  on  me : 

Of  you  Lord  Wooduill ,  and  Lord  Scales  of  you,  75 


72.  grudge ]  gruge  Q4. 

73.  and  you . . . Dorfet]  Lord  Riuers 
and  Lord  Gray  of  you  Qq,  Cap.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam.  + .  ( my  Lord 
Riuers  Q5_8. )  Lord  Rivers ,  and ,  Dorset, 


of  you  Wh.  conj.  [to  Grey]  and  you... 
Dorset  Spedding. 

75-  Of  you. ..of  you]  Om.  Qq,  Cap. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam. +  . 


74.  all  without  desert]  Pickersgill  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875;  p.  87):  There  can 
be  little  doubt  that  ‘all’  is  here  used  adverbially,  in  the  sense  of  altogether,  abso¬ 
lutely.  This  use  of  the  word  is  not  uncommon  in  Shakespeare,  for  example,  Rich. 
II:  II,  ii,  124:  ‘For  us  to  levy  power  Proportionable  to  the  enemy  Is  all  unpos¬ 
sible.’  Some  confirmation  of  this  view  may  be  found  in  the  circumstance  that 
we  have  ‘all’  in  its  more  ordinary  sense  in  1.  76;  whereas  if  it  had  been  used  in 
that  sense  only  two  lines  before,  its  recurrence  here  would  be  decidedly  weak  and 
objectionable. 

75.  Lord  Wooduill  .  .  .  Lord  Scales]  Malone:  The  eldest  son  of  Earl  Rivers 
was  Lord  Scales;  but  there  was  no  such  person  as  Lord  Woodville. — Daniel  {Intro., 
p.  xvi):  Why  was  this  line  wanting  in  the  Quarto?  Here  we  have  good  proof, 
I  think,  that  when  the  play  was  shortened  for  the  Quarto,  it  was  also  revised.  Wood¬ 
ville  was  the  ‘Lord  Rivers’  addressed  in  1.  73;  he  was  also  ‘Lord  Scales’  in  right 
of  his  wife,  the  ‘  heir  and  daughter  of  Lord  Scales.  ’  .  .  .  This  mistake  in  making 
Rivers  three  separate  persons  was  evidently  corrected  when  the  play  was  revised, 
the  ‘Woodville’  line  struck  out  altogether,  and  its  form  given  as  we  find  it  in  the 
Quartos,  Gray,  being  substituted  for  ‘Dorset’  because  he  was,  in  history  as  in 
the  play,  associated  in  death  with  his  uncle  Rivers.  [Shakespeare  was,  possibly, 
misled  by  Hall,  who  says  (p.  347):  ‘The  gouernaunce  of  this  younge  Prince  was 
committed  too  lord  Antony  Wooduile  erle  Ryuers  and  lord  Scales,  brother  to  the 
quene,’  &c.  To  one  not  remembering  that  Woodville  bore  both  titles  the  last 
words  ‘brother  to  the  quene’  might  seem  to  apply  to  Lord  Scales  as  a  separate 
individual. — Ed.]  Thompson  {Arden  Shakespeare;  Appendix,  ii)  proposes  the 
following  re-arrangement  of  stops  in  the  passage  as  it  appears  in  the  Qq:  ‘Of 
you,  Lord  Rivers  and  Lord  Grey;  of  you  That  all  without  desert  have  frown’d 
on  me,  Dukes,  earls,  lords,  gentlemen;  indeed  of  all’;  in  order  to  surmount  the 
difficulty  of  taking  the  word  ‘all’  in  the  second  line  as  referring  to  two  people 
only.  In  regard  to  the  omission  of  the  extra  line  inserted  in  the  Folio,  1.  75, 
Thompson  adds:  ‘The  position  of  the  line  is  awkward,  whether  we  take  it  as  it 
stands,  or  assume  that  the  printer  has  transposed  it  with  the  line  before.  Its 
meaning  and  point  are  doubtful  and  unsatisfactory.  My  own  conclusion  is  that 
the  editor  of  Fj  found,  in  the  margin  of  the  MS  which  he  used,  some  notes 
intended  as  the  beginning  of  an  alteration  of  1.  75;  that  the  words  ‘Woodville’ 
and  ‘Scales’  were  among  them;  and  that,  wishing  to  preserve  as  much  of  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  text  as  could  be  recovered,  he  assumed  that  a  line  had  been  dropped,  and 
so  worked  in  a  new  line  composed  of  these  fragments.  The  difficulty  of  ‘all’ 
was  thus  settled;  but  the  printer,  working  with  an  interlined  copy  of  the  Q.,  made 
a  mistake  as  to  the  order  of  the  lines,  and  so  perpetuated  the  state  of  things  which 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


155 


Dukes,  Earles,  Lords,  Gentlemen,  indeed  of  all.  76 

I  do  not  know  that  Englifhman  aliue, 

With  whom  my  foule  is  any  iot  at  oddes, 

More  then  the  Infant  that  is  borne  to  night: 

I  thanke  my  God  for  my  Humility.  80 

Qu .  A  holy  day  fhall  this  be  kept  heereafter : 

I  would  to  God  all  ftrifes  were  well  compounded. 

My  Soueraigne  Lord,  I  do  befeech  your  Highneffe 
To  take  our  Brother  Clarence  to  your  Grace. 

Rich.  Why  Madam,  haue  I  offred  loue  for  this,  85 

To  be  fo  flowted  in  this  Royall  prefence? 

Who  knowes  not  that  the  gentle  Duke  is  dead?  They 
You  do  him  iniurie  to  fcorne  his  Coarfe.  all Jlart.  88 


81.  holy  day]  'Holy-day  Pope,  + ,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Varr.  Knt,  Ktly.  holyday 
Steev.  holiday  Dyce,  Huds. 

82.  Jlrifes]  Jlrife  Q?Q8. 

83.  My]  Ny  Fa. 

Lord  ]  liege  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 
Highneffe ]  Maiejlie  Qq,  Sta. 


Cam.  + . 

85.  offred ]  offered  F^. 

86.  fo  flowted]  thus  f corned  Qq. 
(. fcomde  Q5Q6.) 

87.  gentle]  noble  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

They  all  ftart.]  Om.  Qq. 

88.  Coarfe]  corfe  QtQg.  courfe  Qa. 


the  new  line  was  intended  to  remove.  [This  excellent  edition  was  not  published 
until  my  work  on  this  play  was  far  advanced.  The  present  is  the  earliest  line 
at  which  it  was  available. — Ed.] 

77.  I  do  not  know]  Steevens:  Milton,  in  his  Eikonoklastes,  has  this  observa¬ 
tion:  ‘The  poets  also,  and  some  English,  have  been  in  this  point  [that  the  deepest 
policy  of  a  tyrant  hath  ever  been  to  counterfeit  religious]  so  mindful  of  decorum, 
as  to  put  never  more  pious  words  in  the  mouth  of  any  person,  than  of  a  tyrant. 
I  shall  not  instance  an  abstruse  author,  wherein  the  king  might  be  less  conversant, 
but  one  whom  we  well  know  was  the  closest  companion  of  these  his  solitudes, 
William  Shakespeare;  who  introduces  the  person  of  Richard  the  Third,  speaking 
in  as  high  a  strain  of  piety  and  mortification  as  is  uttered  in  any  passage  of  this 
book,  and  sometimes  to  the  same  sense  and  purpose  with  some  words  in  this  place: 
“I  intended,”  saith  he  [the  king],  “not  only  to  oblige  my  friends,  but  my  enemies.” 
The  like  saith  Richard,  Act  ii,  Scene  1 :  “  I  do  not  know  that  Englishman  alive,  ’  ’ 
etc.  Other  stuff  of  this  sort  may  be  read  throughout  the  whole  tragedy,  wherein 
the  poet  used  not  much  licence  in  departing  from  the  truth  of  history,  which  delivers 
him  a  deep  dissembler,  not  of  his  affections  only,  but  of  religion.’  [vol.  i,  p.  326, 
ed.  St.  John.  The  foot-note  on  this  passage  in  Eikonoklastes,  by  the  editor — 
too  long  for  quotation  here — is  worthy  the  attention  of  students  both  of  Milton 
and  of  Shakespeare. — Ed.] 

80.  Humility]  Halliwell,  in  a  note  on  ‘Plant  in  Tyrants  mild  humility,’ 
Love’s  Labour’s  Lost,  iv,  iii,  349,  quotes  Huloet’s  Abecedarium,  1552:  ‘Humilitie 
is  a  gentlenes  of  the  mynde,  or  a  gentle  patience  withoute  all  angre  or  wrathe.’ 
This  is,  I  think,  the  sense  in  which  the  word  is  here  used;  not  in  the  more  modern 
one,  as  given  by  Murray,  s.  v.:  ‘i.  The  quality  of  being  humble,  or  having  a 
lowly  opinion  of  oneself.’ — Ed. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ii,  sc.  i. 


156 

King.  Who  knowes  not  he  is  dead  ? 

Who  knowes  he  is  ?  90 

Qu.  All-feeing  heauen,  what  a  world  is  this  ? 

Buc.  Looke  I  fo  pale  Lord  Dorfet ,  as  the  reft? 

Dor.  I  my  good  Lord,  and  no  man  in  the  prefence, 

But  his  red  colour  hath  forfooke  his  cheekes. 

King.  Is  Clarence  dead  ?  The  Order  was  reuerft.  95 

Rich.  But  he  (poore  man)  by  your  firft  order  dyed, 

And  that  a  winged  Mercurie  did  beare : 

Some  tardie  Cripple  bare  the  Countermand, 

That  came  too  lagge  to  fee  him  buried.  99 


89.  King.]  Riu.  Qq  (subs.),  Cam.  +  . 
89,  90.  Who  knowes. ..he  is?]  Ff, 
Rowe.  One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

91.  All  feeing]  All  feeing  Qq. 

93.  man]  one  Q,^,  Sta.  Cam.  + ,  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Huds. 

the]  this  Qq,  Cam.  + ,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 

Huds. 

95.  dead?]  dead,  Q,_4. 

reuerft]  reverf't  F3<  reverf'd  F4 


et  seq. 

96.  ( poore  man)]  poore  foule  Qt,  Sta. 
Cam.  +.  ( poore  foule )  Q2-5. 

your]  our  Q?Q8. 

97.  winged]  wingled  Q,. 

98.  bare]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Rife. 
had  Pope,  + .  bore  Qq  et  cet. 

99.  came]  come  Ff. 

lagge]  Q3-8,F2F3.  lagg  F^  lag 
Q,  et  cet. 


89,  90.  King.  Who  ...  is]  Here  the  Folio  has,  I  think,  the  better  distribution 
of  speeches.  Is  it  probable  that  Rivers  is  so  deeply  interested  in  the  fate  of  Clarence 
as  thus  to  exclaim  in  advance  of  the  King,  the  one  chiefly  concerned?  There 
is,  moreover,  a  certain  awkwardness  in  King  Edward’s  keeping  silent  through 
the  following  three  speeches;  silence  on  the  part  of  Rivers  might  easily  pass  un¬ 
noticed. — Ed. 

92,  94.  Looke  I  .  .  .  cheekes]  Seymour  (i,  380):  Compare  Paradise  Lost, 
Bk,  ii,  1.  421 — ‘each  In  other’s  countenance  read  his  own  dismay  Astonish’d.’ 
[This  comparison  gains,  I  think,  additional  significance  when  it  is  recollected  that 
Steevens  calls  attention  to  Milton’s  use  of  a  quotation  from  this  present  scene, 
see  1.  77. — Ed.] — Thompson:  Buckingham’s  remark  on  the  sudden  pallor  of 
Dorset  himself  and  his  relations  is  malicious.  They  are  Buckingham’s  enemies; 
and  he  wishes  to  fasten  the  stigma  of  guilt  upon  them,  see  11.  146,  147. 

95.  Order  was  reuerst]  Courtenay  (ii,  p.  75):  I  know  of  no  authority  for 
these  contradictory  orders.  [Is  not  William  Shakespeare  sufficient  ?] 

97,  98.  winged  Mercurie  .  .  .  tardie  Cripple]  Steevens:  This  is  an  allusion 
to  a  proverbial  expression  which  Drayton  has  versified  in  The  Barron's  Warres: 
‘Ill  newes  hath  wings,  and  with  the  winde  doth  goe,  Comfort’s  a  Cripple,  and 
comes  euer  slow.’ — Canto  ii  [verse  27,  Spenser  Soc.,  Reprint.  Steevens’s 
reference  to  a  ‘proverbial  expression’  is  difficult  of  verification.  Ray  (p.  107) 
gives:  ‘Ill  news  comes  a-pace.’  Milton  has  somewhat  the  same  idea  as  in  the 
foregoing  lines  from  Drayton,  ‘For  evil  news  rides  post,  while  good  news  baits.’ 
— Samson  Agonistes,  1.  1538. — Ed.] 

99.  la&ge]  Bradley  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v .):  B.  1.  Last,  hindmost;  In  early  instances 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


I  57 


God  grant,  that  fome  leffe  Noble,  and  leffe  Loyall,  100 

Neerer  in  bloody  thoughts,  and  not  in  blood, 

Deferue  not  worfe  then  wretched  Clarence  did, 

And  yet  go  currant  from  Sufpition. 

Enter  Earle  of  Derby. 

Der.  A  boone  my  Soueraigne  for  my  feruice  done.  105 

King.  I  prethee  peace,  my  foule  is  full  of  forrow. 

Der.  I  will  not  rife,  vnleffe  your  Highnes  heare  me. 

King.  Then  fay  at  once,  what  is  it  thou  requefts. 

Der.  The  forfeit  (Soueraigne)  of  my  feruants  life, 

Who  flew  to  day  a  Riotous  Gentleman,  1 10 

Lately  attendant  on  the  Duke  of  Norfolke. 

King.  Haue  I  a  tongue  to  doome  my  Brothers  deathf 
And  fhall  that  tongue  giue  pardon  to  a  flaue  ?  1 13 


101.  and ]  but  Qq,  Var.  ’21,  Sta.  Cam. 
+  ,  Coll.  iii. 

not]  no  F3F4. 
blood ]  blond  Qt. 

104.  Earle  of  Derby]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Wh.  i.  Darby  Qt.  Darbie  Qq.  Derby 
Cam. +,  Ktly.  Lord  Stanley  Theob.  et 
cet. 

105.  my  Soueraigne ]  (my  foueraigne) 
Q3Q4Q  s‘ 

106.  prethee]  pray  thee  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 
prithee  F4,  Rowe,  Knt,  Dyce.  pr'ythee 
Pope  et  cet. 


107.  heare  me]  grant  QJt  Sta.  Cam.  + . 
graunt  Q6Q,.  graunt  Qq. 

108.  fay]  f peake  Qq,  Cam. +  . 
is  it  ]  it  is  Q6. 

requefts.]  demaundfl.  Q,Q2,  Sta. 
Cam.  ■+ .  demaundfl  ?  Q3Q4Q$.  de- 
maundefl  ?  Q6.  requefl  'ft  F3F4  et  cet. 

109.  Der.]  Om.  Q3. 

111.  attendant  on]  attending  one  Q?. 
attending  on  Qg. 

1 12.  1 13.  death  ?  . . .flaue  ?]  Ff,  +  . 
death,  ...flaue ;  Q4QS-  death,  ...flaue  ? 
Q,  et  cet. 

1 13.  that  tongue]  the  fame  Qq. 


only  absolute  or  predicative,  and  hence  hardly  distinguishable  from  the  substantive. 
(To  come)  lag  of:  short  of,  too  late  for,  or  in  arrear  of.  [The  present  line  quoted.] 

99.  buried]  To  be  pronounced,  metri  gratia,  as  a  trisyllable;  see  note  by  Wright, 
I,  73- 

roi.  Neerer  .  .  .  blood]  Steevens:  Compare  Macbeth,  II,  iii,  146,  147:  ‘ — the 
near  in  blood.  The  nearer  bloody.’ — Wright:  Richard,  of  course,  refers  to  the 
Queen’s  kindred. 

108.  requests]  See  I,  iv,  204:  ‘unripst.  ’ 

109.  forfeit]  Johnson:  That  is,  the  remission  of  the  forfeit. — Delius:  Perhaps 
the  meaning  is  that  the  King,  to  whom  the  servant’s  life  is  due,  will  transfer  this 
forfeit  to  Stanley. 

1 1 2.  Haue  I  a  tongue  ...  death  ?]  Johnson:  This  lamentation  is  very 
tender  and  pathetic.  The  recollection  of  the  good  qualities  of  the  dead  is  very 
natural,  and  no  less  naturally  does  the  king  endeavour  to  communicate  the  crime 
to  others. — Booth:  The  king  very  feebly  begins  now  to  rally — breaking  down  and 
sinking  exhausted  into  his  chair  at  the  end  of  the  speech. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ii,  SC.  i. 


I58 

My  Brother  kill’d  no  man,  his  fault  was  Thought, 

And  yet  his  punifhment  was  bitter  death.  1 15 

Who  fued  to  me  for  him  ?  Who  (in  my  wrath) 

Kneel’d  and  my  feet,  and  bid  me  be  aduis’d  ? 

Who  fpoke  of  Brother-hood?  who  fpoke  of  loue  ? 

Who  told  me  how  the  poore  foule  did  forfake 

The  mighty  Warwicke,  and  did  fight  for  me?  120 

Who  told  me  in  the  field  at  Tewkesbury, 

When  Oxford  had  me  downe,  he  refcued  me : 

And  faid  deare  Brother  liue,  and  be  a  King  ? 

Who  told  me,  when  we  both  lay  in  the  Field, 

Frozen(almoft)to  death,  how  he  did  lap  me  125 

Euen  in  his  Garments,  and  did  giue  himfelfe 


1 14.  kill'd ]  flew  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 
{flue  Qa.) 

Thought  ]  naught  Qg. 

1 15.  bitter]  cruell  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +. 

1 1 7.  and ]  F,. 

bid ]  Ff,  Rowe,  +  ,  Cap.  Var.  ’78, 
’85,  Ran.  bad  Q.Q^s-  bade  Qa  et  cet. 

118.  /poke']  flpake  Qq,  Cam. +. 
Brother-hood]  Q4_«,Ff.  brother¬ 
hood  Q,  et  cet. 


1 1 8.  fpoke  of  loue]  who  of  loue  Qq. 
fpoke  in  love  Ff,  Rowe,  spake  of  love 
Cam.  + .  spake  to  me  of  love  Anon,  ap 
Cam. 

1 19.  told]  tould  Q4> 

1 2 1.  at]  by  Qt-<s,  Sta.  Cam. +. 

Tewkesbury]  Teuxburie  Qq. 
(  Teuxbery  Q,.)  Tewksbury  F^  et  seq. 

125.  did  lap]  lappe  Q  .  lapt  Qg. 

126.  his  Garments]  his  owne garments 
Qq.  his  owne  armes  Q6Q,Q8. 


1 16.  Who  sued  .  .  .  him]  See  Appendix:  Source  of  Plot. 

1 1 7.  aduis’d]  That  is,  be  deliberate,  consider. 

122.  When  Oxford,  etc.]  Wright:  This  is  a  touch  which  history  did  not 
supply.  Although  in  3  Hen.  VI.,  Oxford  is  represented  as  being  present  at 
Tewkesbury,  yet,  according  to  Hall,  he  fled  after  the  battle  of  Barnet  into  Wales, 
and  afterwards  took  St  Michael’s  Mount  in  Cornwall,  which  he  held  for  the  queen. 

125.  lap]  Bradley  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.):  3.  To  enfold  in  a  wrap  or  wraps,  to 
enwrap,  swathe;  hence  to  clothe,  to  bind  up,  tie  round. 

126.  Euen  .  .  .  himselfe]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875;  p.  41):  Here  is  a 
metrical  irregularity  which  in  some  circumstances  is  used  with  good  effect,  but  in 
this  place  has  only  the  effect  of  a  stumble;  and  was  so  felt  by  the  corrector  of  the 
Quarto.  [See  Text.  Notes.] — Duport  (i,  p.  350,  Note  B):  These  reminiscences 
perhaps  suggested  to  Schiller  one  of  the  most  touching  passages  of  Wallenstein; 
wherein  the  rebel  general,  seeking  to  retain  the  young  Max  Piccolomini  in  the 
ranks,  recalls  to  him  how  at  a  former  time,  when  Max  was  but  a  child,  finding 
him  abandoned  in  the  middle  of  a  march  and  unable  to  follow  the  army,  almost 
perished  from  cold,  he  took  the  same  care  of  him  as  a  tender  mother,  wrapping 
him  in  his  own  mantle,  to  call  back  the  vital  warmth  into  the  child’s  feeble  frame. 

126.  did  giue  himselfe]  Compare  Hen.  V:  I,  ii,  270:  ‘did  give  ourself 
To  barbarous  license’;  also  Merry  Wives,  V,  v,  156. 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


159 

(All  thin  and  naked)  to  the  numbe  cold  night?  127 

All  this  from  my  Remembrance,  brutifh  wrath 
Sinfully  pluckt,  and  not  a  man  of  you 

Had  fo  much  grace  to  put  it  in  my  minde.  1 30 

But  when  your  Carters,  or  your  wayting  Vaffalls 
Haue  done  a  drunken  Slaughter,  and  defac’d 
The  precious  Image  of  our  deere  Redeemer, 

You  ftraight  are  on  your  knees  for  Pardon,  pardon, 

And  I  fvniuftly  too)  muft  grant  it  you.  135 

But  for  my  Brother,  not  a  man  would  fpeake, 

Nor  I  (vngracious)  fpeake  vnto  my  felfe 

For  him  poore  Soule.  The  proudeft  of  you  all, 

Haue  bin  beholding  to  him  in  his  life : 

Yet  none  of  you,  would  onee  begge  for  his  life.  *  140 

0  God !  I  feare  thy  iuftice  will  take  hold 
On  me,  and  you;  and  mine,  and  yours  for  this. 

Come  Hajiings  helpe  me  to  my  Cloffet.  143 


127.  and]  and  and  Qa. 

numbe  cold]  Ff,  Pope,  4- ,  Cam. 
+  (subs.)  numbcold  Q,Q2.  num  cold 
Rowe,  numb-cold  Cap.  et  cet. 

129.  pluckt]  pukl  Qj. 

131.  wayting  Vaffalls]  waighting  vaf- 
fals  Qq.  waiting  vassals  Rowe,  + ,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  waiting-vassals  Steev.  et  seq. 

132.  defac'd]  defajle  Qx_3. 

133.  deere]  dearejl  Qg. 

136.  man]  ntafl  Q3-5. 


139.  beholding]  beholden  Q4Q8,  Pope, 
+  ,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt, 
Ktly,  Rife. 

140.  onee]  Fx. 

begge]  plead  Qq,  Pope, +,  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 

143,  144.  Come. ..Ah]  One  line,  Pope, 
+  ,  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

Come... Clarence]  One  line,  Qq, 
Cap.  Coll.  Hal.  Sta.  Cam. +. 

143.  Haftings]  [to  Hast.]  Cap. 


132.  drunken  Slaughter]  Tawney:  That  is,  committed  a  murder  under  the 
influence  of  intoxication.  Probably  this  is  suggested  by  Stanley’s  phrase,  ‘riotous 
gentleman.’  [Compare  ‘drunken  prophecies,’  I,  i,  38.] 

139.  beholding]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.) :  The  sense  [under  obligation,  obliged], 
evidently  originated  in  an  error  for  beholden,  either  through  confusion  of  the  endings 
(c/.  especially  the  15th  century  spelling  -yne  for  - en ),  or,  more  probably,  after 
beholden  was  shortened  to  beholde,  behold,  and  its  grammatical  character  obscured; 
the  general  acceptance  of  ‘beholding’  may  have  been  due  to  a  notion  that  it  meant 
looking  (e.  g.,  with  respect,  or  dependence),  or  to  association  with  the  idea  of  holding 
0}  or  from  a  feudal  superior.  (It  was  exceedingly  common  in  the  17th  century, 
for  which  no  fewer  than  ninety-seven  instances  have  been  sent  in  by  our  readers.) 

143.  Come  .  .  .  Closset]  Collier  {Emend.,  328):  An  unimportant  word  is  here 
added  [by  the  MS  Corrector]  to  complete  the  defective  line,  which  is  not  found 
in  any  known  impression  of  the  play — ‘  Come  Hastings,  prithee,  help,  ’  etc.  Mod¬ 
ern  editors  have  generally  finished  this  line  by  adding  to  it,  ‘Ah!  poor  Clarence!’ 


i6o 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ii,  sc.  i. 


Ah  poore  Clarence.  Exeunt  fome  with  K.&  Qneen. 

Rich.  This  is  the  fruits  of  rafhnes:  Markt  you  not,  145 

How  that  the  guilty  Kindred  of  the  Queene 
Look’d  pale,  when  they  did  heare  of  Clarence  death. 

O!  they  did  vrge  it  ftill  vnto  the  King, 

God  will  reuenge  it.  Come  Lords  will  you  go, 

To  comfort  Edward  with  our  company.  150 

Buc.  We  wait  vpon  your  Grace.  exeunt. 


144.  Ah ]  Ok  Qq,  Cam.  +  .  O  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 

Exeunt. ..Qneen.]  Exit.  Qq. 

145.  This  m]  These  are  Pope,+ ,  Varr. 
Ran. 

fruits ]  Ff, +,  Varr.  Ran.  fruit 
Qq  et  cet. 

rafhnes ]  rawnes  Q^s. 

146.  guilty ]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe. 


146.  Kindred  ]  kinred  Qa. 

147.  Clarence]  QqFaF3.  Clarence's 
F^,  Rowe.  Clarence'  Pope  et  cet. 

death.~\  QaQ3Qs,Ff,  Rowe,  death  f 
Q,Q4  cet. 

149.  Come...go~\  But  come  lets  in  Qq, 
Sta.  But  come  let  us  in  Cam.  + . 

1 5 1 .  Buc.  We...  Grace]  Om.  Qq,  Sta. 


a  hemistich  spoken  by  the  King  just  before  he  goes  out,  which  renders  the  line  as 
redundant  as  it  was  before  deficient. — Singer  (Sh.  Vind.,  p.  168):  Does  Collier 
really  think  this  interpolation  necessary?  or  that  the  reading  of  the  old  copy  was 
not  quite  intelligible.  Among  the  modern  editors  who  without  reason  added  the 
hemistich  to  the  line,  we  must  number  Collier. 

143.  Hastings]  Malone:  Hastings  was  Lord  Chamberlain  to  King  Edward  IV. 

144.  Ah  .  .  .  Clarence]  Seymour  (i,  380):  The  unhappy  fate  of  Clarence 
resembles  strongly  that  of  Posthumus  Agrippa,  as  related  by  Tacitus,  not  only  in 
the  manner  of  their  being  taken  off,  but  in  the  compunction  and  reconcilement  of 
Edward  and  Augustus,  and  the  insidious  and  callous  policy  that  actuated  both 
Richard  and  Tiberius. — Oechelhauser  {Essay,  etc.,  51):  Directly  following  the 
death  of  Edward  IV.,  at  that  point  where  Holinshed  discards  his  former  authority, 
and  bases  his  work  on  that  of  Sir  Thomas  More,  the  representation  of  Richard  is 
altered.  He  is  now,  for  the  first  time,  a  monster  both  in  body  and  in  soul,  sinful 
deeds  and  long-cherished  designs  on  the  throne  are  imputed  to  him,  of  which  no 
mention  had  formerly  been  made;  now,  moreover,  he  appears  as  the  Shakespearean 
Richard.  If  there  be  actually  thus  two  views  of  the  character  and  actions  of 
Richard  in  Holinshed,  it  is  none  the  less  true  that  Shakespeare  chose  the  darker 
one  based  on  that  of  Sir  Thomas  More;  he  has  not,  as  has  been  frequently 
asserted,  exaggerated  this,  but  he  has  even  softened  it,  and  has  strengthened  the 
bonds  which  unite  a  monstrosity  to  humanity,  instead  of  loosening  them  utterly. 
[See  also  Churchill  in  Appendix:  Source  oj  Plot.\ 

146.  How  that,  etc.]  Boas  (p.  152):  In  this  faculty  of  turning  every  opportun¬ 
ity  to  instant  account,  of  wasting  no  resource,  we  see  again  the  tact  of  the  con¬ 
summate  craftsman  in  evil. 

147.  Clarence  death]  Compare  I,  iv,  184;  also  III,  i,  161;  or  see,  if  needful, 
Abbott,  §§  217,  471. 


ACT  II,  SC.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


161 


* 

Scena  Secunda. 


Enter  the  old  Dutcheffe  of  Yorke,  with  the  two 
children  of  Clarence. 

Edw.  Good  Grandam  tell  vs,  is  our  Father  dead  ? 
Dutch.  No  Boy. 

Daugh.  Why  do  weepe  fo  oft?  And  beate  your  Breft? 
And  cry,  O  Clareiice ,  my  vnhappy  Sonne. 

Boy.  Why  do  you  looke  on  vs,  and  fhake  your  head, 
And  call  vs  Orphans,  Wretches,  Caftawayes, 


i.  Scena  Secunda.]  Scene  continued, 
Qq. 

The  Same.  Cap.  et  seq.  (subs. ) 

2,3.  ...the two.. .Clarence.]  ...Dutches 
of  Yorke,  with  Clarence  children.  Qq. 

4.  Edw.]  Ff.  Boy.  Qq,  Cam. +. 
Son.  Rowe  et  cet. 

Good. ..vs]  Tell  me  good  Granam 
Qq,  Sta. 


6.  Daugh.]  Boy.  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

weepe  fo  oft  ?]  you  wring  your 
hands,  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + .  weep  so,  and 
oft  Coll.  MS.  you  weepe  fo  oft  Ff  el  cet. 

8.  Boy.]  Girle.  Qq,  Cam.  +  .  (Gerl  Qt 

Q,-) 

9.  Orphans,  Wretches]  rvretches ,  or- 
phanes  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +.  ( wretched ,  or- 
phanes  Q?Q8.) 


1.  Scena  Secunda.]  Churchill  (p.  507):  This  scene  should  be  carefully 
compared  with  that  in  the  True  Tragedie  of  Richard  III.,  wherein  the  Queen 
appears  in  sorrow  after  the  death  of  Edward,  and  is  comforted  by  her  children, 
Elizabeth  and  the  Duke  of  York.  [See  Appendix:  The  True  Tragedie,  p.  522.] 
In  both  scenes  the  children  implore  the  sorrowing  mother  to  reveal  the  cause  of 
her  grief.  In  each  case  the  reply  is  that  she  is  not  sorrowing  for  the  death  of  the 
children’s  father,  but  for  another  cause.  Especial  resemblance  exists  between 
The  True  Tragedie’ s  ‘What  tho  our  Father  be  dead,  yet  behold  his  children,  the 
image  of  him  selfe,  ’  and  the  words  of  the  Duchess  of  York  in  Shakespeare’s  scene: 
‘I  have  bewept  a  worthy  husband’s  death,  And  liv’d  by  looking  on  his  images’ 
[11.  54,  55].  And  between  The  True  Tragedie’ s  ‘Good  mother,  expect  the  living 
and  forget  the  dead,  ’  and  the  words  of  Rivers  to  the  Queen  in  Shakespeare:  ‘ Drown 
desperate  sorrow  in  dead  Edward’s  grave,  And  plant  your  joys  in  living  Edward’s 
throne’  [11.  103,  104].  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that  for  neither  scene  is 
there  any  chronicle  authority. — Brooke  (p.  hi):  The  main  scope  of  the  play  is 
not  lost  sight  of  in  this  scene  between  the  children  and  their  aunt  and  grandam — 
a  quiet  moment  in  this  tempest  of  crime.  The  fate  of  the  young  princes  is  shadowed 
forth  in  the  talk  of  their  cousins.  The  fate  which  overglooms  the  play  is  heard 
in  the  grief  of  the  women.  The  gloom  is  deepened  when  the  Queen  enters  wailing 
her  husband’s  death,  and  she  and  the  Duchess  (who,  with  Margaret,  serve  the 
uses,  in  some  sort,  of  the  Greek  chorus)  toss  their  sorrow  to  and  fro  with  the  chil¬ 
dren  of  Clarence,  till  the  whole  world  seems  full  of  weeping.  Then  Gloucester, 

.  .  .  mocking  inwardly  the  sorrow  he  has  caused,  adds  poignancy  to  the  tragic  pain 
the  audience  feels. 

9.  Castawayes]  Wordsworth  ( Sh .  Knowledge,  etc.,  p.  33)  notes  that  this 


11 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


162 


If  that  our  Noble  Father  were  aliue  ?  IO 

Dut.  My  pretty  Cofins,  you  miftake  me  both, 

I  do  lament  the  fickneffe  of  the  King, 

As  loath  to  lofe  him,  not  your  Fathers  death: 

It  were  loft  forrow  to  waile  one  that’s  loft. 

Boy.  Then  you  conclude,  (my  Grandam)  he  is  dead  :  1 5 

The  King  mine  Vnckle  is  too  blame  for  it. 

God  will  reuenge  it,  whom  I  will  importune 
With  earneft  prayers,  all  to  that  effect. 

Daugh.  And  fo  will  I. 

Dut. Peace  children  peace,  the  King  doth  loueyou  wel.  20 
Incapeable,  and  fhallow  Innocents, 

You  cannot  gueffe  who  caus’d  your  Fathers  death.  22 


10.  were']  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  Wh.  i, 
Hal.  be  Qq  et  cet. 

1 1 .  both]  muck  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

13.  not. ..death]  now  your  father's 
dead  Q6Q7Q8. 

14.  forrow  to  waile]  labor  to  weepe 
for  ( labour ,  Q,QJ. 

15.  you...  (my  Grandam )]  Granam 
you  conclude  that  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + 
(subs.) 


16.  mine]  my  Qq,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev. 
Varr.  Knt,  Cam.  + ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 
too]  to  Ff  et  seq. 

it]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Rife. 
this  Qq  et  cet. 

18.  earnefl]  daily  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 
daily  earnest  Pope,  +  (  —  Var.  ’  73 ) . 

all...effedl]  Om.  Pope,  +  (  —  Var. 

’73)- 

19.  Daugh.  And. ..!.]  Om.  Qq. 


word,  in  the  sense  of  ‘a  person  lost  or  abandoned  by  Providence,  occurs  once  in 
the  Bible,  1  Cor.  ix,  17:  “I  myself  should  be  a  castaway,  ”  and  twice  in  Shakespeare.’ 
But  has  not  Wordsworth  overlooked  the  fact  that  besides  the  present  passage  this 
word  occurs  in  two  others — Tit.  And.:  ‘Like  a  forlorn  and  wretched  castaway,’ 
v,  iii,  75;  and  Ant.  &•  Cleo.:  ‘That  ever  I  should  call  thee  castaway,’  III,  vi,  40? 
Murray  gives  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  B.)  three  examples  of  ‘castaway’  in  the  foregoing 
sense,  before  quoting  the  present  line  and  the  passage  from  1  Cor.  mentioned 
by  Wordsworth. — Ed. 

ii.  Cosins]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.):  1.  A  collateral  relative  more  distant 
than  a  brother  or  sister;  a  kinsman  or  kinswoman,  a  relative;  formerly  very  fre¬ 
quently  applied  to  a  nephew  or  niece. 

16.  too  blame]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.)  6.  The  dative  infinitive  ‘to  blame' 
is  much  used  as  the  predicate  after  be.  In  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries 
the  to  was  misunderstood  as  ‘too,’  and  ‘blame’  taken  as  an  adjective  equivalent 
to  blameworthy,  culpable.  [The  present  line  quoted.]  1596.  1  Hen.  IV:  III, 
i,  177:  ‘In  faith,  my  Lord,  you  are  too  wilfull  blame.’  [Abbott  compares  (§  73) 
Othello,  III,  iii,  21 1,  282,  where,  in  the  Folio,  to  blame  is  printed  as  here.] 

18.  prayers]  Abbott  (§479):  Even  where  ‘prayer’  presents  the  appearance 
of  a  monosyllable,  the  second  syllable  was  probably  slightly  sounded. 

21.  Incapeable]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v .):  5.  absol.  Destitute  of,  or  deficient 
in,  ordinary  capacity  or  natural  ability;  incompetent;  without  natural  qualification. 
[The  present  line  quoted.] 


act  II,  SC.  ii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  163 

Boy.  Grandam  we  can:  for  my  good  Vnkle  Glofter  23 

Told  me, the  King  prouok’d  to  it  by  the  Queene, 

Deuis’d  impeachments  to  imprifon  him  ;  25 

And  when  my  Vnckle  told  me  fo,  he  wept, 

And  pittied  me,  and  kindly  kift  my  cheeke : 

Bad  me  rely  on  him,  as  on  my  Father, 

And  he  would  loue  me  deerely  as  a  childe. 

Dut.  Ah!  that  Deceit  fhould  fteale  fuch  gentle  fhape,  30 


23.  Grandam]  Granam  Qq. 

24.  prouok' d  to  it]  provoked  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.  + .  provok'd  to  7  Pope,  + ,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Kut. 

26.  my  Vnckle ]  he  Qq. 

27.  pittied  me]  hugd  me  in  his  arme 
Qq,  Cam. +  . 

kindly ]  Om.  Cam.  conj. 
cheeke]  cheekes  Q^Q^Qg. 


28.  Bad]  And  bad  Qq. 
on  my]  in  my  Qx. 

29.  a]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Hal. 
his  Qq  et  cet. 

30.  Ah!]  Oh,  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

Jhape]  Jhapes  Qq,  Cap.  Var.  ’78, 
’85,  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Sta.  Cam.  +  , 
Huds. 


27.  And  pittied  .  .  .  cheeke]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  41)  thinks 
that  the  change  of  this  line  from  an  alexandrine,  as  it  is  in  the  Quartos,  to  the 
present  form  is  an  evidence  of  Shakespeare’s  correction;  and  instances  the  fact 
that  in  the  Quarto  of  Rom.  &  Jul.,  printed  in  1597,  the  same  year  as  Rich.  III., 
there  are  ninety-two  alexandrines,  while  in  that  of  1599  there  are  but  six.  He 
adds:  ‘I  do  not  know  how  to  avoid  the  inference  that  the  weeding  out  of  alexan¬ 
drines  was,  at  that  time,  characteristic  of  Shakespeare’s  own  correcting  hand.’ — 
Daniel  ( Introd .,  xix):  [The  extraordinary  line  in  the  Quarto],  although  a  strong 
point  with  those  who  believe  the  Folio  to  be  a  weak  revision  of  the  Quarto,  sacri¬ 
ficing  vigour  of  expression  to  smoothness  of  verse,  really  affords  proof  that  the 
Folio  gives  us  the  original  version  of  the  lines,  the  Quarto  a  corruption  of  a  proposed 
emendation.  See  I,  iv,  243,  244:  ‘It  cannot  be,  for  he  bewept  my  fortune  And 
hugg'd  me  in  his  armes,  and  swore  with  sobs  that  he  would  labour  my  deliuery.’ 
The  audience  had  witnessed  this  parting,  and  this  account  of  it  would  strike  them 
as  fanciful,  to  say  the  least;  it  was  therefore  probably  proposed  to  take  some  part  of 
Clarence’s  speech  and  give  it  to  his  son,  in  whose  mouth  it  would  be  more  appro¬ 
priate.  Clarence’s  speech  had  already  been  once  altered,  and  in  the  Quarto  it 
reads:  ‘It  cannot  be  for  when  I  parted  with  him  He  hugg’d  me,’  etc.  The  transfer 
to  his  son  of  the  words  ‘  hugg’d  me  in  his  arms  ’  was  probably  a  later  suggestion, 
but  not  carried  out,  at  least  not  in  the  copy  from  which  the  Quarto  was  printed; 
a  copy  which  may  be  shrewdly  suspected  of  containing  many  such  half-realized 
emendations  .  .  .  Only  from  a  copy  in  this  chaotic  condition  can  I  imagine 
the  Quarto  to  have  been  printed. — Vaughan  suggests  (iii,  52)  that  the  Quarto 
line  be  retained  but  that  the  words  ‘me  in  his’  be  pronounced  ‘m-yins.’  For 
those  who  like  that  sort  of  scansion  this  is  just  the  sort  of  scansion  they  will  like. 
—Ed. 

30.  Ah!  that  Deceit  .  .  .  shape]  Compare  Mer.  0}  Ven.,  I,  iii,  103:  ‘O,  what 
a  goodly  outside  falsehood  hath.’ 


164 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  11,  sc.  ii. 


And  with  a  vertuous  Vizor  hide  deepe  vice.  3 1 

He  is  my  forme,  I,  and  therein  my  fhame, 

Yet  from  my  dugges,  he  drew  not  this  deceit. 

Boy.  Thinke  you  my  Vnkle  did  diffemble  Grandam? 

Dut.  I  Boy.  35 

Boy.  I  cannot  thinke  it.  Hearke,  what  noife  is  this  ? 

Enter  the  Qneene  with  her  haire  about  her  ears, 

Riuers  &  Dorfet  after  her. 

Qu.  Ah1  who  fhall  hinder  me  to  waile  and  weepe  ? 

To  chide  my  Fortune,  and  torment  my  Selfe.  40 

lie  ioyne  with  blacke  difpaire  againft  my  Soule, 

And  to  my  felfe,  become  an  enemie. 

Dut.  What  meanes  this  Scene  of  rude  impatience  ?  43 


31.  Vizor\  vizard  Qq,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Cam. +.  ( vi/ard  Q,Q2.) 

deepe  vice ]  foule  guile  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.  +  . 

32.  /]  yea  Qq.  ay  Rowe  et  seq. 

34.  Grandam~\  Granam  Qq. 

35.  /]  Ay  Rowe  et  seq. 

36.  it.  Hearke~\  it,  hark  Qq. 

37.  38.  with. ..after  her]  Om.  Qq.  dis¬ 
tractedly  ;  Rivers  and  Dorset,  following 


her.  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Sta. 
Huds.  Rife. 

39.  Ah!  who\  Oh,  who  QjQ2Q4,  Cam. 
+  ,  Huds.  Wh  who  Q$.  Whoy  Qs. 
Who,  who  Sta. 

39,40.  weepe  ? ...my  Selfe.']  Ff.  weep, 
...my  felfe  ?  Qs,  Coll.  Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Hal. 
Sta.  Cam. +  .  weep  ?  ...my  felfe?  Q,  et 
cet. 

41.  Soule~\  felfe  Q$. 


31.  Vizor]  Wright:  That  is,  a  mask.  Properly  speaking,  it  was  the  front 
part  of  a  helmet  which  protected  the  upper  part  of  the  face,  and  was  pierced  with 
holes  for  the  wearer  to  see  through.  Hence  its  name,  which  is  derived  from  the 
French  visiere,  defined  by  Cotgrave  as  ‘  the  viser,  or  sight  of  an  helmet.’ 

34.  dissemble]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.) :  4.  To  conceal  one’s  intentions, 
opinions,  etc.,  under  a  feigned  guise;  ‘to  use  false  professions,  to  play  the  hypo¬ 
crite’  (J.). 

36.  I  cannot  ...  it]  Cowden-Clarke  ( Sh .  Char.,  p.  462):  In  Shakespeare’s 
abundance  of  individualising  various  characters  of  similar  semblance,  he  has 
placed  in  juxtaposition  with  little  York  the  young  son  of  Clarence,  whose  innocent 
simplicity  is  no  less  natural  than  the  other’s  innocent  shrewdness.  The  sweet 
credulity  which  can  perceive  no  guile  beneath  kindly  demonstration,  and  the 
boyish  quickness  which  instinctively  discerns  evil,  without  power  to  ward  off  its 
sinister  approach,  are  equally  touching  exemplifications  of  childhood  nature. 
How  the  pure,  bright  honesty  of  childish  feeling  shows  in  these  few  words  of  Clar¬ 
ence’s  young  son,  when  .  .  .  his  grandam  drops  a  hint  of  Richard’s  deceit,  the  boy 
exclaims  .  .  .  with  the  confidence  of  a  clear  young  spirit,  ‘I  cannot  think  it.’  This 
comes  with  bright  effect  against  the  sharp-witted  precocity  of  little  York’s  colloquy 
with  his  mother  and  grandmother  in  scene  iv  of  this  Act. 

43.  impatience]  Wright:  Here  to  be  pronounced  as  a  quadrisyllable.  This 
play  contains  many  such  expedients  for  eking  out  the  metre. 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


165 


Qu.  To  make  an  a6l  of  Tragicke  violence. 
Edward  my  Lord,  thy  Sonne,  our  King  is  dead. 
Why  grow  the  Branches,  when  the  Roote  is  gone? 
Why  wither  not  the  leaues  that  want  their  fap  ? 

If  you  will  liue,  Lament :  if  dye,  be  breefe, 

That  our  fwift-winged  Soules  may  catch  the  Kings, 
Or  like  obedient  Subiedls  follow  him, 

To  his  new  Kingdome  of  nere-changing  night. 

Dut.  Ah  fo  much  intereft  haue  in  thy  forrow, 
As  I  had  Title  in  thy  Noble  Husband  : 


44.  violence .]  violence ,  Qs. 

45.  thy]  your  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 

46.  when. ..gone]  now ...withred  Qq, 
Cam. -t-.  (wit herd  Q,Q2  j 

47.  that. ..fap]  the  fap  being  gone  Qq, 
Cam.  -f . 

49.  fwift-winged]  fwiftwinged  Q,. 
fwift  winged  Qq,  Fs. 


51.  nere-changing  night]  ne'  re-chang¬ 
ing  night  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  Sing. 
Dyce  i,  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Ktly,  Rife,  ne're 
changing  light  Coll. (MS),  perpetuall 
refl  Qq  et  cet.  perpetual  light  Ktly  conj. 

52.  haue]  haue  I  QqFf  et  seq. 

53.  in]  to  F3F4,  Rowe,+  (— Var. 

’73). 


44.  To  .  .  .  violence]  Tawney:  That  is,  its  intention  is  to  bring  about  a  deed 
of  sad  cruelty  to  (myself).  When  Elizabeth  spoke  of  turning  enemy  to  herself 
p.  42]  we  must  suppose  that  she  contemplated  suicide. 

51.  nere-changing  night]  Singer  ( Sh .  Vind.,  p.  168):  Nothing  can  be  more 
certain  than  that  Shakespeare  wrote:  ‘ne’re  changing  night.’  [See  Text.  Notes.] 
For  in  Clarence’s  narration  of  his  dream  we  have  it  again:  ‘Unto  the  kingdom 
of  perpetual  night.’ — Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  p.  154):  The  Quarto  reading  is  not 
only  more  trivial  than  that  of  the  Folio,  but  also  seems,  in  the  present  mental 
state  of  the  Queen,  to  harmonise  only  slightly  with  the  context.  In  her  desolation 
and  despair  she  would  hardly  seek  a  consolatory  image,  but  rather  one  full  of  melan¬ 
choly  and  terror,  such  as  that  suggested  by  a  realm  of  shadows,  which  here  clearly 
presented  itself  to  the  mind  of  the  poet. — Spedding  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875;  p.  17): 
I  do  not  myself  see  why  this  change  should  have  been  made.  But  if  it  was  to  avoid 
a  too  common-place  expression,  the  need  was  more  likely  to  be  felt  by  Shakespeare 
himself  than  a  corrector. — Pickersgill  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  89):  I  do 
not  deny  that  the  reading  of  the  Folio  is  more  lofty  than  that  of  the  Quarto,  but — 
is  it  appropriate?  The  speaker  is  Queen  Elizabeth  lamenting  her  husband’s 
decease,  which  (for  the  time  at  least)  has  taken  from  life  all  its  value  in  her  eyes, 
and  divested  Death  of  all  his  terrors.  This  is  the  whole  tenour  of  her  speech. 
How  extremely  unnatural  then,  how  utterly  opposite  to  Shakespeare’s  manner, 
that  here  she  should  refer  to  death  in  its  gloomy  aspect,  as  a  ‘ne’er  changing 
night.’  .  .  .  On  the  other  hand,  perpetual  rest  is  just  the  idea  of  death  which 
would  most  naturally  occur  to  one  in  Queen  Elizabeth’s  present  frame  of  mind. 
But  I  can  well  understand  that  this  view  might  not  commend  itself  to  the  cor¬ 
rector,  and  so  without  regard  to  the  context  he  substituted  this  tall  phrase — a  sort 
of  stock  phrase,  it  seems  to  my  ear,  ‘ne’er  changing  night.’ — Wright:  It  is 
hard  to  say  which  is  the  worse  phrase. 

52,  53.  so  .  .  .  As]  Compare  II,  i,  92;  or,  if  needful,  see  Abbott,  §  275. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


1 66 


I  haue  bewept  a  worthy  Husbands  death, 

And  liu’d  with  looking  on  his  Images:  55 

But  now  two  Mirrors  of  his  Princely  femblance, 

Are  crack’d  in  pieces,  by  malignant  death, 

And  I  for  comfort,  haue  but  one  falfe  Glaffe, 

That  greeues  me,  when  I  fee  my  fhame  in  him. 

Thou  art  a  Widdow:  yet  thou  art  a  Mother,  60 

And  haft  the  comfort  of  thy  Children  left, 

But  death  hath  fnatch’d  my  Husband  from  mine  Armes, 

And  pluckt  two  Crutches  from  my  feeble  hands, 

Clarence,  and  Edward .  O,  what  caufe  haue  I, 

(Thine  being  but  a  moity  of  my  moane  J  65 

To  ouer-go  thy  woes,  and  drowne  thy  cries. 

Boy.  Ah  Aunt!  you  wept  not  for  our  Fathers  death : 

How  can  we  ayde  you  with  our  Kindred  teares  ? 

Daugh.  Our  fatherleffe  diftreffe  was  left  vnmoan’d, 

Your  widdow-dolour,  likewife  be  vnwept.  7° 


55.  with]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Hal. 
Sta.  Rife,  by  Qq  et  cet. 

59.  That ]  Which  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +. 

61.  left,]  left  thee ,  Qq,  Cap.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Cam. +,  Huds. 

62.  Husband]  children  Qq. 

63.  hands]  limmes  Qq.  limbs  Cam.  4- . 

64.  Clarence,  and  Edward]  Edward 
and  Clarence  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

64,  65.  /,  ( Thine]  I  then ,  Thine 
Vaughan. 

65.  Thine]  Then  Qq. 

a  moity]  moity  Q,_s  (subs.)  motitie 
QeQ7-  a  moiety  Rowe  et  seq. 


65.  moane]  grief e  Qi-5,  Pope, +  ,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Cam. +  ,  Huds. 

ftlft  Q6Q7Q8- 

66.  ouer-go  thy  woes]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 
Coll.  Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Rife,  ouergo 
thy  plaints  Qq  et  cet. 

thy  cries]  the  cries  Qs.  my  cries  Ff. 
cries.]  cries  ?  Qq. 

67.  Ah]  Good  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

68.  Kindred]  kindreds  Qq. 

69.  Daugh.]  Gerl  Qq.  Girl  Cam. +  . 

70.  widdow-dolour]  widdowes  dolours 
Qq.  widow  dolour  Rowe,  Cap.  Varr. 
Ran.  widow  dolours  Pope,  +  . 


55.  Images]  Johnson:  That  is,  the  children  by  whom  he  was  represented. 

56,  57.  Mirrors  .  .  .  crack’d  .  .  .  death]  Malone:  Compare  Rape  of  Luc.: 
‘Poor  broken  glass,  I  often  did  behold  In  thy  sweet  semblance  my  old  age  new 
born;  But  now,  that  fair  fresh  mirror,  dim  and  old,  Shows  me  a  bare-bon’d  death 
by  time  out-worn  ’  [11.  1758-1761].  Also:  ‘Thou  art  thy  mother’s  glass,’  Sonn.  iii. 
— Wright:  Two  glasses  reflecting  his  likeness,  Edward  and  Clarence.  The 
Duchess  has  forgotten  Rutland.  [The  ‘one  false  Glasse’  is,  of  course,  Richard, 
who  is  but  a  distorted  image  of  his  father. — Ed.] 

65.  moity  of  my  moane]  Marshall:  In  spite  of  the  alliteration  we  prefer 
the  reading  of  the  Folio.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  whole  of  the  next  twenty 
or  thirty  lines  are  full  of  affectation,  and  therefore  this  alliteration  was  probably 
intentional. 

65.  moity]  See  I,  ii,  276,  and  note. 

70.  widdow-dolour]  Webb:  That  is,  grief  as  a  widow.  The  phrases  put  into 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


1 67 

71 


Qu.  Giue  me  no  helpe  in  Lamentation, 

I  am  not  barren  to  bring  forth  complaints: 

All  Springs  reduce  their  currents  to  mine  eyes, 

That  I  being  gouern’d  by  the  waterie  Moone, 

May  fend  forth  plenteous  teares  to  drowne  the  World.  75 

Ah,  for  my  Husband,  for  my  deere  Lord  Edward. 


72.  complaints ]  laments  Qq,  Cap.  Var. 
’78,  ’85,  Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 

73-75.  In  margin.  Pope,  Han. 

74.  waterie]  QqFf.  watery  Dyce,  Wh. 
i,  Cam. +  ,  Huds.  watry  Rowe  et  cet. 


74.  Moone]  moane  Q,_s. 

76,  77.  Ah]  Oh  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

76.  deere]  eire  Qt.  eyre  Qt.  heire 
Q3-s.  dear  F3F4  et  seq. 


the  mouths  of  the  two  children  are  harsh  and  artificial;  indeed,  the  whole  scene  is 
not  written  in  Shakespeare’s  best  manner:  it  is  rather  in  the  style  of  his  contem¬ 
poraries,  the  influence  of  which  can  be  traced  in  his  more  immature  work. 

73-75.  All  Springs  reduce  their  currents  .  .  .  drowne  the  World]  Johnson: 
That  I  may  live  hereafter  under  the  influence  of  the  moon,  which  governs  the 
tides,  and  by  the  help  of  that  influence  drown  the  world.  The  introduction  of 
the  moon  is  not  very  natural. — Steevens:  The  same  thought  has  already  occurred 
in  1  Hen.  IV:  ‘being  governed,  as  the  sea  is,  by  our  noble  and  chaste  mistress 
the  moon.  ’  P,  ii,  32.  The  First  Quarto  of  1  Hen.  IV.  is  dated  1598,  one  year 
later  than  the  present  play.  In  the  Folio,  of  course,  1  Hen.  IV.  precedes  Rich.  III.; 
it  was  doubtless  this  which  caused  this  venial  error  on  the  part  of  Steevens.— Ed.] — 
Wright:  The  figure  is  extravagant  enough;  .  .  .  and  the  introduction  of  the  moon 
does  not  help  [it]  at  all,  unless  we  suppose  that  the  Queen  desires  to  find  a  period 
to  her  sorrows  in  madness,  when,  like  the  sea  to  which  she  compares  herself,  she 
would  be  subject  to  the  influence  of  the  moon. — Vaughan  (iii,  p.  55):  Queen 
Elizabeth  says:  ‘All  streams  empty  themselves  into  the  ocean  of  mine  eyes,  so 
that,  as  I  am  under  the  government  of  the  moon,  the  moon  converts  this  body  of 
water  into  tides  which  deluge  the  world.’  This  assertion  is  always  mistaken  for 
a  prayer. — Wordsworth  (Hist.  Plays,  p.  328):  This  passage  is  one  which  I 
have  allowed  to  remain  in  the  text,  but  not,  I  must  confess,  without  reluctance. 
The  bombast  is  excessive.  If  this  play  had  been  subjected  to  the  author’s  revision, 
it  is  inconceivable  that  he  should  have  suffered  these  three  lines  to  remain  as  they 
stand.  [Both  Marshall  and  Tawney  think  that  the  phrase,  ‘governed  by  the 
watery  moon,’  does  not  refer  merely  to  the  fact  that  the  moon  governs  the  tides, 
but  quote  several  passages  from  other  plays  of  Shakespeare  wherein  the  watery 
nature  of  the  moon  is  mentioned.  May  we  not  ascribe,  however,  to  the  Queen’s 
words  an  astrological  reference?  Lilly  says  (p.  50),  Chapter  xi:  ‘Of  the  Moon, 
her  properties  and  significations — She  is  a  feminine,  nocturnal  planet;  cold,  moist 
and  phlegmatic  .  .  .  She  signifies  queens,  countesses,  ladies,  all  manner  of  women,' 
etc.  It  is  not  possible  to  assert  that  Shakespeare  had  in  mind  this  latter  signifi¬ 
cation  in  regard  to  Queens,  countesses,  etc.,  but  who  can  say?  For  a  somewhat 
similar  figure  compare  Watson,  Hecatompathia,  Sonnet  Ixi:  ‘  If  Neptunes  waues 
were  all  dride  vp  and  gone,  My  weeping  eyes  so  many  teares  distill,  That  greater 
Seas  might  grow  by  them  alone.’ — Arber’s  Reprint,  p.  97. — Ed.] 

76-84.  Ah,  for  my  ...  a  losse]  Halliwell:  This  dialogue  may  be  compared 
with  the  following,  in  the  play,  Soliman  and  Perseda,  1592:  ‘  Lucina.  My  friend 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


l68 


Chil.  Ah  for  our  Father,  for  our  deere  Lord  Clarence.  77 
Dut.  Alas  for  both,  both  mine  Edward  and  Clarence. 

Qu.  What  ftay  had  I  but  Edward ,  and  hee’s  gone  ? 

Chil.  What  ftay  had  we  but  Clarence ?  and  he’s  gone.  80 

Dut.  What  ftayes  had  I,  but  they  ?  and  they  are  gone. 

Qu.  Was  neuer  widdow  had  fo  deere  a  Ioffe . 

Chil.  Were  neuer  Orphans  had  fo  deere  a  Ioffe. 

Dut.  Was  neuer  Mother  had  fo  deere  a  Ioffe. 

Alas!  I  am  the  Mother  of  thefe  Greefes,  85 

Their  woes  are  parceled,  mine  is  generall. 

She  for  an  Edward  weepes,  and  fo  do  I : 

I  for  a  Clarence  weepes,  fo  doth  not  fhee  :  88 


77,  80,  83.  Chil.]  Ambo.  Qq  (subs.) 

78,  Clarence]  my  Clarence  Long  MS 
ap.  Cam. 

79,  80.  kee' s...he’ r]  he  is. ..he  is  Qq. 
(w  he  Q6Q7). 

79.  gone .?]  gone  :  Qs- 

80.  Clarence?  ...gone.]  Clarence,... 
gone  ?  Qq. 

81.  they  ? ...gone. ]  they ,  ...gone  ?  Qq. 

82.  neuer]  euer  Q4> 


83.  Were]  Was  Qq. 
neuer]  euer  Q2-g. 

fo  deere  a]  a  dearer  Q,_6. 

84.  neuer]  euer  Q^. 

fo  deere  a]  a  dearer  Qq. 

85.  Greefes]  mones  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 
Griefs  F3F4  et  cet. 

86.  w]  Ff,  Rowe,  are  Qq  et  cet. 

87.  an]  Om.  Qq. 


is  gone  and  I  am  desolate.  Perseda.  My  friend  is  gone  and  I  am  desolate: — 
Return  him  back,  fair  stars,  or  let  me  die.  Lucina.  Return  him  back,  fair  heav’ns, 
or  let  me  die;  For  what  was  he  but  comfort  of  my  life?  Perseda.  For  what  was 
he  but  comfort  of  my  life?’  [Striking  as  is  the  parallelism  of  the  foregoing  lines  to 
the  present  dialogue,  further  transcription — there  are  eight  lines  more  in  the  same 
form — is,  I  think,  unnecessary.  Gervinus  (i,  359)  says:  ‘In  the  scenes  where 
the  lamentation  of  the  women  (II,  ii;  and  IV,  iii)  alternates  like  a  chorus,  dramatic 
truth  is  sacrificed  to  the  lyric  or  epic  form,  and  to  conceits  in  the  style  of  the  pastoral 
Italian  poetry.  These  scenes  call  to  mind  the  passages  in  3  Hen.  VI:  II,  v,  where 
the  murderers  of  father  and  son  lament  over  the  slain.  The  form  of  these  scenes, 
stichomythia,  is  borrowed  from  the  ancient  drama,  of  which  the  early  plays  of 
Shakespeare  repeatedly  remind  us.’ — Ed.] 

85.  the  Mother  of  these  Greefes]  Moulton  (p.  112):  The  Duchess  of  York 
is,  by  her  years  and  position,  the  representative  of  the  whole  house;  the  factions 
who,  in  the  play,  successively  triumph  and  fall  are  all  descended  from  herself. 

86.  Their  woes  are  parcell’d]  Wright:  That  is,  divided  among  them  severally; 
mine  are  general  and  include  them  all.  There  is  a  reference  to  the  old  division  of 
land,  part  of  which  was  ‘parcelled’  out  among  individuals,  and  the  rest  was  held 
in  common  by  the  community.  The  same  idea  occurs  in  Macbeth:  ‘What  concern 
they  ?  The  general  cause  ?  or  is  it  a  fee  grief  Due  to  some  single  breast,  ’  IV,  iii, 
196.  [Compare  also  Chapman’s  Homer,  Odyssey:  ‘And  what,  my  young  Ulyssean 
heroe  Provok’d  thee  on  thee  broad  back  of  the  sea,  To  visit  Lacedaemon  the  divine  ? 
Speak  truth  some  public  good  or  only  thine?’ — Bk,  iv,  11  420-424. — Ed.] 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


169 


Thefe  Babes  for  Clarence  weepe,  *  and  fo  do  I : 

*  I  for  an  Edward  weepe  *,  fo  do  not  they.  90 

Alas  !  you  three,  on  me  threefold  diftreft : 

Power  all  your  teares,  I  am  your  forrowes  Nurfe, 

And  I  will  pamper  it  with  Lamentation. 

Dor.  Comfort  deere  Mother,  God  is  much  difpleas’d, 

That  you  take  with  vnthankfulneffe  his  doing.  95 

In  common  worldly  things,  ’tis  call’d  vngratefull, 

With  dull  vnwillingneffe  to  repay  a  debt, 

Which  with  a  bounteous  hand  was  kindly  lent : 

Much  more  to  be  thus  oppofite  with  heauen,  99 


89,90.  *  and  fo... weepe*]  Qq,  Var. 
’78  et  seq.  Om.  FtFf,  Rowe. 

90.  I  for. ..not  they]  Om.  Pope,  +  . 
weepe]  Om.  Q4. 

fo  do  not ]  fo  doe  Q2Q3Q5-  and 
fo  do  Q4. 

91.  threefold diflrejl]  threefold-distrest 
Theob.  ii,  Warb.  Johns. 


92.  Power]  Proue  Q2.  Pour  F3F4. 
your  teares ]  yours  teares  F2. 

93.  Lamentation ]  lamentations  Qq, 
Pope, +  ,  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt, 
Cam. +,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

94-105.  Dor.  Comfort. ..Throne]  Om. 
Qq. 


89,  90.  These  Babes  ...  so  do  not  they]  Malone:  [See  Text.  Notes.]  In 
the  MS  from  which  the  Folio  was  printed,  or  in  a  corrected  Quarto  copy,  these 
two  lines  undoubtedly  were  right;  but  the  compositor’s  eye  passing  over  two  half 
lines,  the  passage  was  thus  printed  in  the  Folio  in  one  line.  .  .  .  [This]  confirms  an 
observation  that  I  have  more  than  once  had  occasion  to  make  in  revising  these 
plays:  that  there  is  reason  to  suspect  that  many  of  the  difficulties  in  our  author’s 
works  have  arisen  from  the  omission  of  either  single  words,  single  lines,  or  the 
latter  half  of  one  line  with  the  half  of  the  next;  a  solution  which  readers  are  very 
slow  to  admit,  and  generally  consider  as  chimerical.  One  week’s  acquaintance 
with  the  business  of  the  press  (without  those  proofs  which  a  collation  of  the  Quartos 
with  each  other  and  with  the  first  Folio  affords)  would  soon  convince  them  that 
my  supposition  is  not  a  mere  offspring  of  the  imagination.  In  the  plays  of  which 
there  is  no  authentic  copy  but  the  first  Folio,  there  is  no  means  of  proving  such 
omissions  to  have  happened;  but  the  present  and  other  proofs  of  their  having 
actually  happened  in  the  other  plays  lay  surely  a  reasonable  ground  for  conjecturing 
that  similar  errors  have  happened  in  those  pieces  of  which  there  is  only  a  single 
ancient  copy  extant,  and  entitle  such  conjectures  to  indulgence.  [An  error  similar 
to  that  in  the  present  line  in  the  Folio  occurs  in  Macbeth,  I,  vii.  The  first  Folio 
thus  prints  the  lines:  ‘ — we  but  teach  Bloody  Instructions,  which  being  taught 
returne  To  plague  th’  Inuenter,  This  euenhanded  Iustice  Commends  th’  Ingre- 
dience  of  our  poyson’d  Challice  To  our  owne  lips.’  The  Second  Folio  omits  the 
words  ‘th’  Inuenter,  This  euenhanded  Iustice  Commends,’  and  this  error  is 
repeated  by  the  other  Folios  and  by  Rowe. — Ed.] 

94-105.  Dor.  Comfort  .  .  .  Throne]  Wright:  These  two  speeches  are  found 
in  the  Folios  only.  They  could  well  be  spared,  even  in  this  scene.  [See  Appendix: 
Pickersgill  on  the  Text.] 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


170 

For  it  requires  the  Royall  debt  it  lent  you.  100 

Riuers.  Madam,  bethinke  you  like  a  carefull  Mother 
Of  the  young  Prince  your  fonne:  fend  ftraight  for  him, 

Let  him  be  Crown’d,  in  him  your  comfort  hues. 

Drowne  defperate  forrow  in  dead  Edwards  graue, 

And  plant  your  ioyes  in  liuing  Edwards  Throne.  105 

Enter  Richard,  Buckingham ,  Derbie,  Ha- 
Jlings,  and  Ratcliff e. 

Rich.  Sifter  haue  comfort,  all  of  vs  haue  caufe 
To  waile  the  dimming  of  our  fhining  Starre  : 

But  none  can  helpe  our  harmes  by  wayling  them.  no 

Madam,  my  Mother,  I  do  cry  you  mercie, 

I  did  not  fee  your  Grace.  Humbly  on  my  knee, 

I  craue  your  BlefTmg.  1 13 


95-  you...vnthankfulneJfe]  with  un¬ 
thankfulness  you  take  Pope, +  . 

104,  105.  Edwards]  Edward’s  F3F4. 

105,  106.  Throne.  Enter...]  throne. 
Scene  iii.  Enter...  Pope,  Han.  Warb. 
Johns. 

106,  107.  ...  Richard  ...  Ratcliffe.] 

Glofter  with  others.  (Gloceft.  Q,Q2.) 


106.  Derbie]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Cam. + 
(subs.)  Stanley  Theob.  et  cet. 

108.  Sifter]  Madame  Qq,  Cam. +. 
no.  helpe  our ]  cure  their  Qq,  Cap. 
Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Dyce, 
Sta.  Cam.  +. 

1 1 2.  your  Grace.  Humbly ]  your 
Grace,  hujnbly  Qq.  you  :  Humbly  Cap. 


108.  Sister]  Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  p.  151):  Gloucester  thus  addresses  his 
sister-in-law  for  the  first  time  since  the  death  of  her  husband,  in  order,  by  this  hypo¬ 
critical  mask  of  friendship,  to  inspire  her  with  a  confidence  in  his  pretended  change 
of  feeling.  But  the  anonymous  corrector  of  the  Quarto  has  quite  missed  this 
point  in  making  him  here  use  the  prosaic  address,  Madam. — Wright:  The  Folios 
make  Gloucester  fulfil  his  promise  to  Clarence  of  calling  her  ‘sister.’  See  I,  i,  118. 
The  appearance  of  Gloucester  in  this  scene  is  unhistorical.  He  was  in  the  north 
when  he  received  the  news  of  his  brother’s  death.  See  Hall’s  Chronicle,  Edward  V., 
P-  347- 

no.  helpe]  For  other  examples  of  ‘help’  in  the  sense  of  to  remedy,  to  change 
for  the  better,  see  Schmidt  {Lex.  s.  v.  2). 

112,  113.  Humbly  .  .  .  Blessing]  Wordsworth  ( Sh .  Knowledge,  etc.,  p.  171): 
I  doubt  not  that  the  pious  practice  of  children  receiving  benedictions  from  their 
parents — a  practice  common  in  our  poet’s  time — was  observed  in  his  own  family. 
That  such  must  have  been  the  case  we  may  not  unreasonably  infer  from  his  fre¬ 
quent  mention  of  it,  and  from  the  easy  natural  manner  in  which  it  is  introduced. 
Let  me  produce  a  few  examples  in  illustration  of  the  custom  from  other  sources. 
In  the  Life  of  Sir  Thomas  More,  published  in  the  late  Dr  Wordsworth’s  Ecclesias¬ 
tical  Biography,  we  read:  ‘Towards  his  father  he  gave  many  proofs  of  his  natural 
affection  and  lowly  mind.  Whensoever  he  passed  through  Westminster  to  his 
place  in  the  Chancery  ...  he  would  go  to  him  [in  the  Court  of  King’s  Bench] 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


171 

Dut.  God  bleffe  thee,  and  put  meeknes  in  thy  breaft, 

Loue  Charity,  Obedience,  and  true  Dutie.  115 

Rich.  Amen,  and  make  me  die  a  good  old  man, 

That  is  the  butt-end  of  a  Mothers  bleffing  ; 

I  maruell  that  her  Grace  did  leaue  it  out.  1 1 8 


1 14.  tneeknes~\  meekenes  Q,QaQ4- 
meekness  F3F4  et  seq. 

breajl]  mind  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

116— 118.  Amen,... it  out]  Aside.  Han. 
Cap.  Knt,  Cam.  +  ,  Ktly. 

and  make... it  out ]  Aside.  Coll. 
Sta.  Wh.  i. 

1 16.  and  make  me  die]  make  me  die 


Qr  snake  me  to  die  Q7Qa. 

117,  Il8.  That  is... it  out-]  Aside.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Dyce. 

1 1 7.  That  is]  Thats  Qq. 
butt-end  ]  butt  end  Qq,  Rowe,  + 
a]  my  Q2_8. 

1 1 8.  that  ]  why  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 
out.]  out  ?  Q*-8. 


and  reverently  kneeling  down  in  sight  of  all,  ask  him  his  blessing.  This  virtuous 
custom  he  always  solemnly  observed;  tho’  then  men  after  their  marriages  thought 
themselves  not  bound  to  these  duties  of  younger  folks.’  Stapleton,  in  his  Tres 
Thomee  ( Eccl .  Biog.,  ii,  73)  bears  witness  to  the  same  fact,  and  in  recording  it 
speaks  of  the  practice  as  peculiar  to  the  English  people.  We  are  told  of  Nicholas 
Ferrar,  born  1592,  that  when  he  was  twenty-seven  years  old,  and  his  mother 
came  to  visit  him  at  Little  Gidding,  ‘though  he  was  of  that  age,  and  had  been  engaged 
in  many  public  concerns  of  great  importance  ...  at  first  approaching  his  mother, 
he  knelt  upon  the  ground  to  receive  her  blessing’;  and  he  kept  up  the  same  practice 
in  his  own  family;  as  did  also  Philip  Henry,  who  died  in  1696:  so  that  we  have 
evidence  of  the  existence  of  the  custom  during  two  centuries  (op.  cit.,  iv,  173,  181). 
Bishop  Sanderson,  1657,  mentions  it  (Works,  ii,  35)  as  one  of  the  observances  which, 
in  that  disordered  and  distempered  time,  were  cried  down  as  ‘rags  of  popery.’ 
And  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  during  the  Cromwellian  usurpation  our  old  English 
manners  suffered  not  a  little,  and  ‘many  practices  which  were  themselves  part 
and  instruments  of  piety,  were  exploded  and  lost  by  being  branded  under  that 
odious  name  ’  (Eccl.  Biog.,  iv,  180).  [As  other  examples,  in  Shakespeare,  where 
a  blessing  is  asked  of  a  parent,  Wordsworth  quotes,  with  comments,  the  following: 
Coriol.,  II,  i,  184-188;  Cymb.,  IV,  iv,  43,  44;  V,  v,  266;  Tit.  And.,  I,  i,  161-164; 
Lear,  III,  ii,  12;  IV,  vii,  57,  58;  V,  iii,  10,  11;  Two  Gent.,  II,  iii,  27;  Hamlet,  III,  iv, 
1 70-1 72.] — Gairdner  (p.  238)  quotes  a  letter  from  Richard  to  the  Duchess  of 
York,  dated  from  Pomfret,  June  3d,  1484,  in  which,  among  other  things,  Richard 
says:  ‘I  recommend  me  to  you  as  heartily  as  is  to  me  possible.  Beseeching  you 
in  my  most  humble  and  affectuous  wise  of  your  daily  blessing,  to  my  singular  com¬ 
fort  and  defence  in  my  need.’  Gairdner  then  adds:  ‘The  apologists  of  Richard 
have  called  attention  to  the  “respectful  terms”  in  which  this  letter  is  couched,  and 
have  found  evidence  therein  of  “filial  deference,”  “confiding  tenderness,”  and  other 
qualities  quite  inconceivable  in  one  who  defamed  his  mother  for  his  own  selfish 
purposes.  As  well  might  the  subscription  “your  humble  servant”  in  the  present 
day  be  quoted  in  proof  of  the  deep  Christian  humility  of  the  writer.  Filial  respect 
was  quite  as  conventional  a  thing  in  the  fifteenth  century  as  taking  off  one’s  hat 
to  a  lady  in  the  street.  The  terms  used  were  strictly  prescribed  by  custom.  The 
demand  for  the  parent’s  blessing  was  a  simple  matter  of  course,  which  every  son, 
in  writing  to  his  father  or  mother,  expressed  in  precisely  similar  terms.’ 


172 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


Buc.  You  clowdy-Princes,  &  hart-forowing-Peeres, 

That  beare  this  heauie  mutuall  loade  of  Moane,  120 

Now  cheere  each  other,  in  each  others  Loue : 

Though  we  haue  fpent  our  Harueft  of  this  King, 

We  are  to  reape  the  Harueft  of  his  Sonne. 

The  broken  rancour  of  your  high-fwolne  hates, 

But  lately  fplinter’d,  knit,  and  ioyn’d  together,  125 

Muft  gently  be  preferuM,  cherifht.  and  kept  : 


1 19.  dowdy- Princes]  F2F3>  cloudy- 
- Prince/s  F4.  cloudy  princes  Qq  et  cet. 

hart-forowing-Peeres ]  hart for- 
rowing  peeres  Q3-8.  heart-sorrowing 
peers  Rowe  et  seq. 

120.  heauie  mutuall ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 
Coll.  Dyce  i,  Wh.  i,  Rife.  mutuall 
heauie  Qq  et  cet. 

122.  of]  for  Qs-s. 

124.  rancour]  concord  Bailey. 


124.  high-fwolne  hates]  Ff,  +  ,  Knt, 
Coll.  Hal.  high  fwolne  hearts  Qq  et  cet. 
(subs. ) 

125.  lately]  laflly  Q,Qg. 

f plinter' d]  Rowe, +  ,  Knt,  Coll. 
Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Huds.  fplinterd  Q,. 
fplintred  FaF3.  fplintr’d  F4.  fplinted 
Qs-g  et  cet. 

126.  gently]  greatly  Qa-g. 


116,  117.  die  a  good  old  man  .  .  .  butt-end  of  a  Mothers  blessing]  Can  total 
depravity  be  conveyed  more  completely  than  by  this  bitter,  bitter  sneer  at — that 
than  which  what  is  holier? — a  mother’s  prayer?  Nothing  that  Richard  ever  does 
or  ever  says  seems  to  me  so  utterly  base  as  this.  The  contempt  involved  in  *  butt- 
end’  is  the  crowning  cynicism  which  would  fain  smirch  the  very  memories  of 
bed-time  prayers  at  a  mother’s  knee. — Ed. 

1 19.  dowdy]  For  other  examples  of  this  figurative  use  of  ‘cloudy’  for  sullen, 
moody,  see  Schmidt  (Lex.). 

124-126.  The  broken  rancour  .  .  .  cherisht.  and  kept]  M.  Mason:  As  this 
passage  stands,  it  is  the  rancour  of  their  hearts  that  is  to  be  preserved  and  cherished. 
But  we  must  not  attempt  to  amend  this  mistake,  as  it  seems  to  proceed  from  the 
inadvertency  of  Shakespeare  himself. — Malone:  Their  broken  rancour  recently 
splinted  and  knit,  the  poet  considers  as  a  new  league  of  amity  and  concord;  and  this 
it  is  that  Buckingham  exhorts  them  to  preserve. — Wright:  ‘The  broken  rancour' 
must  properly  mean  the  breach  caused  by  ‘rancour.’ — R.  G.  White  (ed.  ii):  Con¬ 
fusion  and  nonsense,  resulting  from  reckless  writing.  The  meaning  is  that  good 
will,  the  result  of  the  breaking  of  the  rancour,  must  be  preserved. — Vaughan 
(iii,  56):  No  explanation  of  the  Quarto  reading  is  satisfactory,  nor  does  the  Folio 
amendment  cure  the  difficulty,  for  if  the  breaking-up  of  the  ‘hates’  is  to  be  pre¬ 
served,  then  the  splinting  and  knitting  together  of  such  breaking-up  is  quite  out  of 
place,  tending  as  it  does  to  counteract  that  breaking-up.  Besides  this,  ‘broken 
rancour  ’  is  in  the  very  next  speech  called  ‘  the  wound  of  malice,  ’  which  ought  not 
to  break  out.  I  would  interpret  the  Quarto  lines  thus:  The  broken  and  rancorous 
place  in  your  swoln  hearts,  made  such  by  the  rupture  between  you,  and  but  recently 
closed  up  and  splinted  by  your  reconciliation,  is  to  be  kept  most  studiously  in  its 
present  knit  and  united  condition.  .  .  .  ‘Rancour’  and  not  ‘hearts’  is  assuredly  the 
subject  of  ‘must  be  preserved.’ — Dyce:  Richardson  (Diet.  s.  v.  Splint )  remarks 
that  in  the  present  line  ‘splinter’d  is  by  more  [most?]  editors  altered  to  splinted ’; 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


173 

Me  feemeth  good,  that  with  fome  little  Traine,  127 

Forthwith  from  Ludlow,  the  young  Prince  be  fet 
Hither  to  London,  to  be  crown’d  our  King. 

Riuers.  Why  with  fome  little  Traine,  130 

My  Lord  ofBuckingham  ? 

Buc.  Marrie  my  Lord,  leaft  by  a  multitude, 

The  new-heal’d  wound  of  Malice  fhould  breake  out, 

Which  would  be  fo  much  the  more  dangerous,  134 

128.  fet]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  130-148.  Riuers.  Why. ..fay  /.]  Om. 

Wh.  i.  fetcht  Qq,  Pope,  Theob.  i.  Qq. 

fetch 'd  Theob.  ii  et  cet.  130,  131.  As  one  line,  Pope  et  seq. 


but  they  had  the  authority  of  the  Qq  for  the  alteration.  I  adhere  to  the  spelling 
of  the  Folio,  because  in  Othello,  II,  iii,  we  have:  ‘This  broken  joint,  between 
you  and  her  husband,  entreat  her  to  splinter.’ 

128.  Ludlow,  the  young  Prince]  ‘As  sone  as  the  king  was  departed,  the  noble 
prince  his  sonne  drew  toward  London,  which  at  the  time  of  his  decease,  kept  his 
hous-hold  at  Ludlow  in  wales.  Which  countrey  being  far  of  from  the  law  and 
recourse  to  iustice,  was  begon  to  be  farre  oute  of  good  wyll  and  waxen  wild,  rob¬ 
bers  and  riuers  walking  at  libertie  vn corrected.  And  for  this  encheason  the  prince 
was  in  the  life  of  his  father  sente  thither,  to  the  end  that  the  authoritie  of  his 
presence,  should  refraine  euill  disposed  parsons  fro  the  boldnes  of  their  formar 
outrages,  to  the  gouernaunce  and  ordering  of  this  yong  prince  at  his  sending 
thyther,  was  there  appointed  sir  Antony  Woduile  Lord  Riuers,’  More,  p.  18. 
[Ludlow  Castle  must  ever  hold  a  cherished  place  in  memory;  who  can  ever  forget 
that  there  Comus  had  its  first  representation? — Ed.] 

128.  fet]  Wright:  “Fet’  is  the  form  both  of  the  past  tense  and  past  participle 
in  Early  English.  In  the  Authorised  Version  of  16 11  ‘fet’  occurs  several  times, 
but  always  for  the  preterite.  For  instance,  in  2  Samuel,  ix,  5:  ‘Then  King  David 
sent,  and  fet  him  out  of  the  house  of  Machir.’  In  the  Geneva  Version  of  Deuter¬ 
onomy,  xix,  12,  it  is  found  for  the  infinitive:  ‘Then  the  Elders  of  his  citie  shall 
send  and  fet  him  thence.’  Shakespeare  again  uses  it  for  the  participle  in  Hen.  V: 
III,  i,  18:  ‘Whose  blood  is  fet  from  fathers  of  war-proof.’ 

130-148.  Why  with  ...  I]  Staunton:  These  following  eighteen  lines,  and 
some  others  omitted  in  the  Quartos,  are  invariably  assumed  to  be  additions  made 
to  the  play  subsequent  to  the  publication  of  the  early  quartos.  We  must  express 
our  dissent  to  this  postulate;  and  must  add  that,  in  the  present  instance,  as  in  another, 
— IV,  iv,  where,  in  one  speech,  there  are  no  less  than  fifty-five  lines  not  found  in 
the  Quartos, — not  only  is  there  no  indication  whatever  of  interpolation,  but  the 
lines  supposed  to  be  added  appear,  to  us  at  least,  absolutely  essential  to  the  integrity 
of  the  dialogue. — Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  135):  This  omission  by  the  anonymous 
corrector  of  the  Quarto  is  inexplicable.  The  bystanders,  as  well  as  the  audience, 
would  assuredly  desire  to  know  why  the  young  king  should  be  so  meanly  attended. 
The  Quarto,  by  making  Richard  reply,  ‘Then  be  it  so,’  renders  Buckingham’s 
speech  merely  the  statement  of  a  self-evident  fact.  [See  Appendix,  Pickersgill, 
on  the  Text\ 


174 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


By  how  much  the  eftate  is  greene,  and  yet  vngouern’d.  135 
Where  euery  Horfe  beares  his  commanding  Reine, 

And  may  direct  his  courfe  as  pleafe  himfelfe, 

As  well  the  feare  of  harme,  as  harme  apparent, 

In  my  opinion,  ought  to  be  preuented. 

Rich.  I  hope  the  King  made  peace  with  all  of  vs,  140 

And  the  compa6t  is  firme,  and  true  in  me. 

Riu.  And  fo  in  me,  and  fo  ( I  thinke  )  in  all. 

Yet  fince  it  is  but  greene,  it  fhould  be  put  143 


135.  ejiate  tr]  state's  Walker  (Crit. 
iii,  72),  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Marshall. 

greene ,  and  ]  Om.  Pope,  + ,  Cap. 
137.  pleafe]  it  please  Ktly. 

137,  138.  himfelfe,  As]  himself.  As 


Vaughan  (iii,  58). 

140.  Rich.]  Riv.  Long  MS  ap.  Cam. 
142.  Riu.]  Stan.  Hanmer.  Has. 
Capell,  Hudson.  Rich.  Long  MS  ap. 
Cam. 


135.  the  estate  is  greene,  and  yet  vngouern’d]  For  a  similar  use  of  this 
phrase  compare:  ‘The  King  was  green  in  his  estate;  and,  contrary  to  his  own 
opinion  and  desert  both,  was  not  without  much  hatred  throughout  the  realm/ 
Bacon,  History  of  King  Henry  VII.,  p.  21,  Works,  vol.  v. — Ed. 

137.  as  please  himselfe]  For  other  examples  of  ‘please’  used  impersonally 
see  Walker,  Crit.,  i,  206.  Abbott  (§  367)  regards  ‘please’  here  as  the  subjunctive 
used  indefinitely  after  the  relative. 

138.  harme  apparant]  Abbott  (§  419  (4).):  Though  it  may  be  generally 
said  that  when  the  noun  is  unemphatic,  and  the  adjective  is  not  a  mere  epithet 
but  essential  to  the  sense,  the  transposition  of  the  adjective  may  be  expected,  yet 
it  is  probable  that  the  influence  of  the  French  idiom  made  this  transposition  espe¬ 
cially  common  in  the  case  of  some  words  derived  from  the  French.  Compare: 
‘Of  antres  vast  and  deserts  idle,’  Othello,  I,  iii,  140;  ‘By  Providence  divine,’ 
Tempest ,  I,  ii,  158. 

141.  compact]  Wright:  Accented  on  the  last  syllable,  as  it  is  everywhere 
else  in  Shakespeare  except  1  Hen.  VI:  V,  iv,  163:  ‘And  therefore  take  this  com¬ 
pact  of  a  truce.’ 

142.  Riu.  And  .  .  .  me]  Capell  (ii,  179):  This  speech,  with  some  others  on 
each  side  of  it,  appear’d  first  in  the  Folio,  whose  printer  has  most  unquestionably 
committed  an  error  in  prefixing  ‘  Riu.'  to  ’t;  and  another  as  plain  as  that  in  the 
next  speech,  to  which  he  prefixes  'Hast.'  The  first  speech  cannot  belong  to  any 
but  one  of  Richard’s  confederates:  two  are  upon  the  scene — Hastings  and  Bucking¬ 
ham;  and  a  third  who  was  more  his  friend  than  the  Queen’s:  the  speaker  takes  up 
Buckingham’s  argument,  and  unites  with  him  actively;  the  other  faintly  assents  in 
the  speech  following:  now  if  those  characters  be  consider’d  to  whom  the  speeches 
are  now  given  [Hastings;  Stanley,  see  Text.  Notes],  it  will  appear  that  Hastings 
has  most  pretensions  to  that  which  is  most  active,  and  not  the  tamer  character 
Stanley. — Marshall:  Perhaps  the  dramatist  was  right  in  allowing  one  of  the 
Queen’s  party  to  consent  to  the  arrangement  proposed  by  Gloucester,  as,  of  course, 
they  were  not  supposed  to  have  any  suspicion  that  an  attack  was  going  to  be  made 
on  the  prince. 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


175 


To  no  apparant  likely-hood  of  breach, 

Which  haply  by  much  company  might  be  vrg’d  :  145 

Therefore  I  fay  with  Noble  Buckingham, 

That  it  is  meete  fo  few  fhould  fetch  the  Prince. 

Ha/l.  And  fo  fay  I. 

Rich.  Then  be  it  fo,  and  go  we  to  determine 
Who  they  fhall  be  that  ftrait  fhall  pofte  to  London.  1 50 

Madam,  and  you  my  Sifter,  will  you  go 
To  giue  your  cenfures  in  this  bufineffe.  Exeunt. 

Manet  Buckingham ,  a?id  Richard.  153 


147.  go]  but  Han. 

148.  Haft.]  Sta.  Capell,  Hudson. 

150.  162.  London^  Ff,  Rowe.  Ludlow 
Qq  et  cet 

1 5 1.  Sijler\  mother  Qq,  Cap.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

152.  bugcnegfe .]  waightie  bufinegfe. 
Anf.  With  all  our  hearts.  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. 


+  (subs.)  vjeighty  business ?  Pope,  +  , 
Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Sing. 
Hal. 

152,  153.  Exeunt. ..Richard.]  Exeunt 
all  but  Buckingham  and  Gloster.  Mai.  et 
seq. 

153.  Manet]  Manent  Ff. 


144,  145.  likely-hood  .  .  .  Which  haply  .  .  .  might  be  vrg’d]  Schmidt  (Lex. 
s.  v.  urge,  b .)  :  That  is,  might  be  spoken  of  in  consequence  of  too  great  an  atten¬ 
dance.  [Schmidt  gives  numerous  examples  of  ‘urge,’  in  the  sense  of  to  speak  of, 
to  mention.  The  present  play  alone  furnishes  eight. — Ed.] — Tawney:  ‘Which,’ 
of  course,  refers  to  ‘likelihood.’  Rivers  means  to  say  that,  if  too  large  a  number 
accompanied  the  prince,  those  who  made  the  arrangements  would  lay  themselves 
open  to  the  charge  of  having  done  the  very  thing  most  likely  to  bring  about  a  breach 
of  the  peace. 

151.  Madam,  and  you  my  Sister]  Dyce  here  prefers  the  Quarto  reading 
(see  Text.  Notes)  since,  ‘throughout  the  present  scene  at  least,  Gloucester  evidently 
keeps  up  towards  the  Queen  an  appearance  of  due  respect, — which  would  be  not 
a  little  violated  if  here  he  addressed  his  mother  first.' — Marshall:  There  is  no 
disrespect  to  the  Queen  (who  was  not,  be  it  remembered,  queen  regnant)  in  Glouces¬ 
ter  addressing  his  mother,  who  was  much  the  older  lady,  first;  and  the  use  of  the 
term  ‘sister’  seems  to  be  intentional,  Richard’s  object  being  to  inspire  Elizabeth 
with  confidence  by  seeming  to  treat  her  with  a  brother’s  affection,  and  not  cere¬ 
moniously  as  a  subject.  [See  note  on  *  sister,’  1.  108,  above. — Ed.] 

152.  censures]  That  is,  opinions,  counsels. 

152.  businesse]  Here  to  be  pronounced,  for  the  sake  of  the  metre,  as  a  tri¬ 
syllable. — Spedding  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  18):  [The  omission,  in  the 
Folio,  of  the  Quarto  half  line,  ‘With  all  our  hearts,’  is]  by  oversight,  I  presume. 
It  cannot  have  been  meant  for  correction. — Pickersgill  (op.  cit.,  p.  89):  One 
instance  out  of  many  of  the  Corrector’s  abhorrence  of  half  lines.  As  the  com¬ 
pletion  of  them  would  involve  too-  large  a  draft  upon  his  inventive  genius,  he 
cuts  the  Gordian  knot  by  leaving  them  out  altogether. — Marshall:  ‘Ansi  [in 
the  Quarto]  might  have  been  a  misprint  for  Ambo;  but,  dramatically  speaking, 
it  is  much  better  that  the  Queen  and  Duchess  should  make  their  exit  without  say¬ 
ing  anything. 


!^6  THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  ii,  sc.  iii. 

Buc.  My  Lord,  who  euer  iournies  to  the  Prince, 

For  God  fake  let  not  vs  two  ftay  at  home  :  155 

For  by  the  way,  lie  fort  occafion, 

As  Index  to  the  ftory  we  late  talk’d  of, 

To  part  the  Queenes  proud  Kindred  from  the  Prince. 

Rich.  My  other  felfe,  my  Counfailes  Confiftory, 

My  Oracle,  My  Prophet,  my  deere  Cofin,  160 

I,  as  a  childe,  will  go  by  thy  direction, 

Toward  London  then,  for  wee’l  not  ftay  behinde.  Exeunt  162 


Scena  Tertia. 


154-162.  Aside,  Cap. 

155.  God ]  Gods  QqF2.  God's  F3F4 
et  seq. 

ftay  at  home}  ftay  behinde  Q„ 
Cam.  + .  be  behinde  Q2-8,  Sta. 

157.  late ]  lately  Qz-s.F^  Rowe. 

158.  Queenes~\  Queen' s  F3F4  et  seq. 
Prince}  king  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

160,  161.  Prophet ,  my  ...direction,} 
prophet ! — my . . .  direction.  Theob.  W arb. 


et  seq. 

1 61.  I,  as}  I  like  Qq.  I,  like  Cam.  + . 

162.  wee'  l }  we  will  Qq. 

Exeunt.]  Exeunt  Ric.  and  Buc. 
last.  Cap. 

I.  Scena  Tertia.]  Scene  continued, 
Qq.  Scene  iv.  Pope,  Han.  Warb.  Johns. 

A  Street  near  the  Palace.  Theob.  et 
seq.  (subs.) 

1-54.  Om.  Coll.  (MS). 


157.  Index]  That  is,  introduction,  prelude.  Compare  IV,  iii,  88;  and  for  other 
examples,  see  Schmidt  {Lex.). 

158.  the  Prince]  Delius  {Jahrbuch,  vii,  p.  151):  Here  again  the  anonymous 
corrector  of  the  Quarto  has  seen  fit  to  change  the  words  of  the  poet.  [See  Text. 
Notes.}  But  Buckingham  would  have  been  the  last  to  apply  the  royal  title  to  the 
son  of  Edward  who  has  heretofore  been  designated  as  ‘  the  Prince  ’  only,  inasmuch 
as  he  had  not  yet  been  proclaimed  King,  or  crowned. 

159.  Consistory]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.) :  -f-  r.  A  place  where  councillors  meet, 
a  council-chamber.  (Almost  always  as  a  translation  of  the  corresponding  French 
or  Latin  word,  and  never  applied  to  anything  English.)  [The  present  line  quoted.] 
— Delius:  In  the  poem  The  Ghost  of  Richard  III.  Richard  says:  ‘My  working 
head,  my  counsel’s  consistory  Debates  how  I  might  reign,  the  princes  living.’ 
[Shakspere  Soc.  Reprint,  p.  33.] 

16 1.  I,  as  a  childe,  will  go  by  thy  direction]  The  Cowden-Clarkes:  This 
from  that  arch-schemer,  Richard,  shows  his  subtle  mode  of  making  men’s  weaknesses 
subservient  to  his  own  views,  since  he  affects  to  be  guided  by  Buckingham’s  superior 
ability  in  craft  and  strategy,  of  which  he  knew  him  to  be  proud.  See  Buckingham’s 
first  speech  in  the  dialogue  between  himself  and  Richard,  Act  III,  sc.  v. 

1.  Scena  Tertia.]  Cowden-Clarke  {Sh.  Char.,  p.  469):  Some  of  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  most  insignificant  scenes  abound  with  notable  axioms  and  aphoristic 
wisdom.  For  example,  lines  39-50.  In  this  short  and  apparently  unimportant 
scene  the  serene  piety  and  resignation  coming  in  contrast  with  the  treasons  and 
cruelty  with  which  the  whole  argument  of  the  drama  is  fraught,  is  conceived  in  the 


ACT  II,  SC.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


1 77 


Enter  one  Citizen  at  one  doorc,  and  another  at  2 

the  other. 


\.Cit.  Good  morrow  Neighbour,  whether  away  fo 

faft  ? 

2.Cit.  I  promife  you,  I  fcarfely  know  my  felfe : 

Heare  you  the  newes  abroad  ? 

1.  Yes,  that  the  King  is  dead. 

2.  Ill  newes  byrlady,  feldome  comes  the  better : 


2,  3.  one  Citizen... the  other.]  two 
Citizens.  Qq.  two  Citizens,  meeting. 
Cap.  et  seq.  (subs.) 

4.  Good... Neighbour"]  Neighbor  well 
met  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

6.  fcarfely]  hardly  Ff,  Rowe,  + ,  Cap. 
Varr.  Ran. 

7.  Heare]  I  Heare  Qq,  Sta. 


8.  1.  Yes]  2  I  Qq.  2  Cit.  Ay  Sta. 
Cam.  + . 

that]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  +  . 

9.  2.  Ill]  I  Bad  Qq.  I  Cit.  Bad  Sta. 
Sec.  Cit.  Bad  Cam.  +  . 

byrlady]  birlady  Qq.  by' r  lady 
F4  et  seq. 

the  better]  better  Q,Q8.  a  better 
Pope, +  ,  Cap.  Varr.  Ran. 


full  spirit  of  Shakespeare’s  prevailing  philosophy.— Irving  arranges  certain  lines 
from  this  scene  to  follow  continuously  the  dialogue  in  II,  i,  and  changes  the  inter¬ 
locutors  from  First,  Second,  and  Third  Citizens  to  Hastings,  Stanley,  Buckingham, 
and  Gloucester,  thus:  'Hast.  I  fear  the  king  will  die!  Stan.  God  help  the  while. 
Buck.  Woe  to  the  land  that’s  govern’d  by  a  child!  Glo.  Come,  come,  we  fear  the 
worst:  all  will  be  well.  Buck.  All  may  be  well;  but  if  Heaven  sort  it  so,  ’Tis  more 
than  I  expect.  Glo.  Come,  let  us  go,  To  comfort  Edward  with  our  company. 
[Exeunt.  Enter  Catesby,  meeting  Cardinal.]  Cate.  Whither  away?  Card.  The 
King  is  dead.  Cate.  God  help  the  while.’  Criticism  of  an  arrangement  by  one 
who  has  shown  himself  such  a  master  in  stage-management,  must  be  offered  with 
hesitation;  but  it  may  be  questioned  whether  this  complete  change  in  construction 
has  not  destroyed  the  only  necessity  for  any  of  the  dialogue  ?  As  shown  in  the 
foregoing  note  by  Cowden-Clarke,  this  whole  scene  is  intended  to  reflect  the 
attitude  of  the  common  people  towards  the  death  of  the  king,  and  the  consequent 
changes.  The  speeches  assigned  to  el  ch  of  these  three  Citizens,  as  Webb  justly 
points  out,  are  characteristic  of  three  typ 's  of  men :  ‘  the  First,’  he  says,  ‘  is  of  a  hopeful 
temperament,  while  the  Third  is  just  as  sure  that  trouble  is  at  hand.  The  Second 
knows  not  what  to  think.  He  hopes  for  the  best  but  has  his  doubts.’  The  hopeful 
tone  of  the  First  Citizen’s  remarks  is,  I  think,  an  indication  that  Shakespeare 
intended  him  to  be  a  young  man;  the  Second’s  doubtful  utterances  are,  possibly, 
those  of  middle  age,  while  the  Third  is  an  old  man  full  of  wise  saws  and  modern 
instances.  To  the  last  are  assigned  the  longer  speeches,  and  it  is  the  second  begin¬ 
ning:  ‘ When  clouds  are  seen,’  etc.,  that  silences  completely  the  First  Citizen,  at 
the  same  time  winning  the  Second  to  the  older  man’s  view  of  evil  times  at  hand. 
— Ed. 

9.  seldome  comes  the  better]  Reed:  A  proverbial  saying,  taken  notice  of  in 
the  English  Courtier  and  Country  Gentleman,  1586,  sign,  B:  * — as  the  proverbe 
sayth,  seldome  come  the  better.  Val.  That  proverb  indeed  is  auncient,  and 
for  the  most  part  true.’ — Malone:  This  passage,  quoted  by  Reed,  proves  that  there 


jyg  THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  n,  sc.  iii. 

I  feare,  I  feare,  ’twill  proue  a  giddy  world.  IO 

Enter  another  Citizen. 

3.  Neighbours,  God  fpeed. 

1.  Giue  you  good  morrow  fir. 

3.  Doth  the  newes  hold  of  good  king  Edwards  death? 

2.  I  fir,  it  is  too  true,  God  helpe  the  while.  I 5 

3.  Then  Matters  looke  to  fee  a  troublous  world. 

1.  No,  no,  by  Gods  good  grace,  his  Son  fhall  reigne. 

3.  Woe  to  that  Land  that’s  gouern’d  by  a  Childe. 

2.  In  him  there  is  a  hope  of  Gouernment, 

Which  in  his  nonage,  counfell  vnder  him,  20 


10.  giddy]  troublous  Qt,  Cam. +  . 
troublefome  Q^. 

12, 13.  Neighbours . .  fr]  Good  morrow 
neighbors  Qq,  Sta. 

14.  the]  this  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 

15.  2.  I  fir... while.  ]  I  It  doth  Qq. 
1  Cit.  Ay,  sir... while.  Sta. 


16.  troublous]  troublefome  Qg. 

17.  good]  Om.  Qj-g. 

20.  Which ]  Ff,  +  ,  Dyce,  Sta.  Huds. 
Ktly.  With  Coll.  (MS).  That  Qq  et 
cet. 

nonage]  Non-age  F4,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Theob.  Han.  Warb. 


is  no  corruption  in  the  text;  and  shows  how  very  dangerous  it  is  to  disturb  our 
author’s  phraseology  merely  because  it  is  not  familiar  to  our  ears  at  present.  [See 
Text.  Notes] — Wright:  This  proverbial  expression  occurs  in  Heywood’s  Three 
Hundred  Epigrammes,vpon  three  hundred  prouerbes,  1562, 111  ( Spens .  Soc.,  p.  144): 
•  The  better  cumth  seldome.  Seeldome  cumth  the  better,  come  or  go  who  will,  One 
nayle  driueth  out  an  other,  wee  se  still.’  [It  is  also  given  in  Ray’s  Proverbs,  p. 
130.  For  the  use  of  ‘better’  used  as  a  noun,  and  opposed  to  the  worse,  Abbott 
(§  92)  compares  the  French  proverb,  ‘Le  mieux  est  l’ennemi  du  bien.’ — Ed.] 

15.  God  helpe  the  while]  For  other  examples  of  this  use  of  ‘while,’  see 
Abbott,  §  137. 

18.  Woe  .  .  .  Childe]  Steevens:  ‘Woe  to  thee,  O  land,  when  thy  king  is  a 
child.’— Ecclesiastes,  x,  16. — Wordsworth  (Sh.’s  Knowledge,  etc.):  That  it  is  an 
unhappy  thing  for  a  country  when  its  king  is  under  age  is  a  thought  which  might 
occur  to  many  minds;  but  that  the  thought  should  be  expressed  in  words  so  precisely 
parallel  could  not  have  happened  without  actual  contact  of  the  mind  of  the  one 
writer  with  the  mind  of  the  other.  Among  the  countless  marvels  of  Shakespeare’e 
mind  it  is  not  the  least  remarkable  that  he  appears  equally  at  home  in  regard  to 
matters  that  must  have  been  alien  from  his  own  experience  and  to  those  that  came 
within  it. — Wright:  This  text  is  quoted  again  by  Buckingham  in  his  speech  at 
the  Guildhall,  ‘Wo  to  that  realme  whose  kyng  is  a  child’  (Hall,  p.  371),  and  in 
his  conversation  with  Morton,  Bishop  of  Ely,  ‘I  remembred  an  olde  prouerbe 
worthy  of  memorye,  that  often  ruithe  the  realme,  where  chyldren  rule,  and  women 
gouerne’  {ibid.,  p.  386).  [Is  it  not  possible  that  the  use  of  this  phrase  by  the 
Chronicler  prompted  Shakespeare  to  its  present  application  quite  as  much  as  the 
verse  in  Ecclesiastes? — Ed.] 

20-22.  Which  in  his  nonage  .  .  .  till  then  gouerne  well]  Johnson:  The  word 
which’  has  no  antecedent,  nor  can  the  sense  or  connection  be  restored  by  any 


ACT  II,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


1 79 


And  in  his  full  and  ripened  yeares,  himfelfe  21 

No  doubt  fhall  then,  and  till  then  gouerne  well. 

I.  So  flood  the  State,  when  Henry  the  fixt 
Was  crown’d  in  Paris,  but  at  nine  months  old. 

3.  Stood  the  State  fo  ?  No,  no,  good  friends,  God  wot  25 
For  then  this  Land  was  famoufly  enrich’d 
With  politike  graue  Counfell ;  then  the  King 
Had  vertuous  Vnkles  to  prote<5l  his  Grace. 

1.  Why  fo  hath  this,  both  by  his  Father  and  Mother. 

3.  Better  it  were  they  all  came  by  his  Father  :  30 

Or  by  his  Father  there  were  none  at  all  : 

For  emulation,  who  fhall  now  be  neerefl, 

Will  touch  vs  all  too  neere,  if  God  preuent  not. 

O  full  of  danger  is  the  Duke  of  Gloufler,  34 


23.  Henry]  Harry  Qq.  Henery  Ktly. 

24.  in]  at  Qq. 

nine]  ix.  Q,.  x i.  Q2. 

25.  No,  no. ..wot]  no  good  my  friend 
not  fo,  Qq. 

26.  this]  our  Qg. 

27.  With]  Which  F4. 


29.  1.  Why  fo]  2  So  Qq. 

29>  3°)  31-  Am]  the  Qq,  Cam.  +. 

32.  who  fhall  now]  now,  who  fhall 
Qq,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Dyce, 
Sta.  Cam.  + ,  Ktly,  Huds. 

33.  Will ]  Which  Q^. 


change.  I  believe  a  line  to  be  lost,  in  which  some  mention  was  made  of  the  land,  or 
the  people. — Malone:  I  suspect  that  one  was  rather  omitted  after  this  line.  Neither 
Folio  nor  Quarto  reading  affords  a  very  clear  sense. — Boswell:  I  see  no  difficulty. 
We  may  hope  well  of  his  government  under  all  circumstances:  we  may  hope  this 
of  his  council  while  he  is  in  his  nonage,  and  of  himself  in  his  riper  years. — Spedding 
( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875—’ 76;  p.  18):  ‘Which  in  his  non-age  counsel  under  him 
[May  execute  by  his  authority:]  would  make  the  sentence  intelligible  and  gram¬ 
matical;  though  it  does  not,  to  my  ear,  quite  suit  the  turn  of  the  words.  The 
‘and  till  then’  in  line  22  stands  in  the  way. — Pickersgill  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875- 
’76;  p.  90V  Why  should  it  be  supposed  that  a  line  is  omitted  here?  The  construc¬ 
tion  is  awkward  certainly,  but  it  is  complete,  and  quite  Shakespearean.  .  .  .  The 
corrector,  however,  by  changing  that  to  ‘which,’  showed  that  he  did  not  under¬ 
stand  the  construction  of  the  passage,  and  betrayed  himself  to  be  not  the  author. 
[Pickersgill  adopts  the  foregoing  explanation  by  Boswell.] 

20.  nonage]  Wright:  That  is,  minority.  Cotgrave  has:  ‘ Pupilarite:  f.  Non- 
nage.’ 

23,  24.  Henry  the  sixt  ...  at  nine  months  old]  Webb:  During  the  long 
minority  of  Henry  VI.  England  was,  through  the  Royal  Council,  governed  by  the 
Bishop  of  Winchester,  an  uncle  of  the  late  king:  while  the  French  conquests  and 
the  prosecution  of  the  war,  .  .  .  were  vested  in  the  hands  of  the  child-king’s  uncles, 
the  Dukes  of  Bedford  and  Gloucester,  the  ‘virtuous  uncles’  of  1.  28. 

23.  Henry]  Wright:  ‘Henry’ must  here  be  a  trisyllable. 


i8o 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  II,  sc.  iii. 


And  the  Queenes  Sons,  and  Brothers,  haught  and  proud  :  35 

And  were  they  to  be  rul’d,  and  not  to  rule, 

This  fickly  Land,  might  folace  as  before. 

1.  Come,  come,  we  feare  the  worft  :  all  will  be  well. 

3.  When  Clouds  are  feen,  wifemen  put  on  their  clokes; 

When  great  leaues  fall,  then  Winter  is  at  hand  ;  40 

When  the  Sun  fets,  who  doth  not  looke  for.  night  ? 

Vntimely  ftormes,  makes  men  expe6t  a  Dearth : 

All  may  be  well ;  but  if  God  fort  it  fo, 

’Tis  more  then  we  deferue,  or  I  expefl. 

2.  Truly,  the  hearts  of  men  are  full  of  feare:  45 

You  cannot  reafon  ( almoft)with  a  man, 

That  lookes  not  heauily,  and  full  of  dread. 

3.  Before  the  dayes  of  Change,  ftill  is  it  fo, 

By  a  diuine  inftin<5t,  mens  mindes  miftruft  49 


35.  Sons,  and  Brothers,  haught  and] 
kindred  hautie  and  Qq.  sons  and  brothers 
haughty  Pope,  + .  sons  and  brothers 
haughty  and  Var. ’73.  kindred  hautie 
are  and  Cap.  conj. 

36.  to  rule]  rule  Q6Q? Qg. 

38.  1.  Come]  2.  Come  Cap.  conj. 
will  be]  fliall  be  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

{Jhalbe  Q,Q2. ) 

39.  are feen]  appear e  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

40.  then]  the  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

42.  makes]  make  Q^.Ff. 


42.  Dearth]  darth  Qf. 

43.  may]  men  Q6Q7Qs. 

45.  2.]  I  Qq. 

hearts]  foules  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 
feare]  bread  Q,Q2.  dread  Qq, 
Sta.  Cam. +  . 

46.  You]  Ye  Qq,  Cam.  + .  (  Yea  Q?Qg. ) 
reafon  ( almofl )]  almofl  reafon  Qq, 

Cam.  + . 

47.  heauily]  heauy  Q?Q8. 

dread  ]  feare  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  4- . 

48.  dayes]  times  Qih5,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 


35.  haught]  Wright:  That  is,  haughty.  Compare  ‘Clifford  and  the  haught 
Northumberland,’  3  Hen.  VI:  II,  i,  169.  [Also  Rich.  II:  IV,  i,  254:  ‘No  Lord 
of  thine,  thou  haught,  insulting  man.’] 

36.  And  were  they  to  be  rul’d]  Abbott  (§  105):  Here,  at  first  sight,  but 
seems  required  instead  of  ‘and.’  But  ‘and  were  they’  means  if  indeed  they  were. 
(Compare  ‘And  if  they  live  I  hope  I  need  not  fear,’  III,  ii,  165.) 

37.  solace]  That  is,  be  happy,  take  delight;  compare  ‘One  thing  to  rejoice, 
and  solace  in,’  Rom.  &  Jul.,  IV,  v,  47;  also  Cymb.,  I,  vi,  86. 

42.  makes]  For  other  examples  of  the  third  person  plural  in  j,  see  Shakespeare 
passim. 

46.  You  cannot  reason  (almost)]  Compare  ‘Would  you  imagine  or  almost 
believe,  ’  III,  v,  40. 

46.  reason]  See  I,  iv,  157. 

49.  instindt]  To  be  pronounced,  through  Latin  influence,  with  the  accent  on 
the  second  syllable;  compare  ‘Hath,  by  instinct,  knowledge  from  other’s  eyes.’ 
— 2  Hen.  IV:  I,  i,  86,  or  see  Abbott,  §  49a 


act  ii,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


181 


Purfuing  danger  :  as  by  proofe  we  fee  50 

The  Water  fwell  before  a  boyfProus  ftorme  : 

But  leaue  it  all  to  God.  Whither  away  ? 

2  Marry  we  were  fent  for  to  the  Iuftices. 

3  And  fo  was  I  :  lie  beare  you  company.  Exeunt .  54 


50.  Purfuing  danger]  Ff,  Rowe, Coll. 
Ktly.  Enfuing  dangers  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 
Ensuing  danger  Pope  et  cet. 

51.  Water ]  waters  Qq,  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  Var.  ’73,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 


52.  God.]  God :  Qq.  God ,  Ff. 

53.  Marry  we  were. ..Iuftices]  We  are 
...luflice.  Qq.  Marry  we  were... justice’s 
Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

54-  He]  Tie  F4. 


49-51.  mens  mindes  mistrust  .  .  .  before  a  boyst’rous  storme]  Tollet 
notes  that  this  simile  is  taken  from  Holinshed:  ‘ — before  such  great  things,  mens 
hearts  of  a  secret  instinct  of  nature  misgiue  them;  as  the  sea  without  wind  swelleth 
of  himselfe  sometime  before  a  tempest.’ — iii,  p.  271.  This  passage,  Wright 
remarks,  is  not  original  with  Holinshed,  but  is  taken  almost  verbatim  from  More’s 
Richard  the  Third  (p.  66);  Hall  also  copies  this  passage,  but  instead  of  ‘the  sea 
without  wind’  he  substitutes  ‘the  south  wynde.’  Tawney  refers  to  Bacon:  ‘And 
as  there  are  certain  hollow  blasts  of  wind  and  secret  swellings  of  seas  before  a 
tempest,  so  are  there  in  states.’ — Essay  xv,  O)  Seditions  and  Troubles.  As  this 
Essay  first  appeared  in  the  edition  of  1625  it  is  possible  that  this  simile  was  sug¬ 
gested  by  the  present  passage  in  Shakespeare.  Bacon  ( Historia  Ventorum,  pub¬ 
lished  in  1622)  says:  ‘Si  mare  silentio  intumescat,  et  intra  portum  altius  solito  insur- 
gat,  aut  aestus  ad  littora  celerius  solito  accedat,  ventos  praenunciat.’ — Prognos- 
tica  Ventorum ,  §  63.  Thus  showing  that  this  peculiar  action  of  the  sea  was  a  matter 
of  not  unfamiliar  observation.  As  regards  the  passage  from  Holinshed  and  More, 
referred  to  by  Toilet  and  by  Wright,  Cunleffe  (p.  77)  compares  it  to:  ‘Mittet 
luctus  signa  futuri  Mens  ante,  sui  prsesaga  mali.  Instat  nautis  fera  tempestas, 
Cum  sine  vento  tranquilla  tument.’ — Seneca,  Thyestes,  961-4.  This  passage  Jas¬ 
per  Heywood  thus  translates:  ‘For  sorrow  sendes  (in  signe  that  woes  draw  nie). 
The  mind  that  wots  before  of  after  yll.  The  sturdy  storms  the  shipmen  over 
lye,  When  voyd  of  wynd  thasswaged  seas  do  rest.’ — Seneca,  his  Tenne  Tragedies, 
etc.,  1581,  p.  36,  verso.  Churchill  (p.  127)  justly  remarks  that  whatever  Senecan 
influence  there  is,  it  is  exerted  on  More  not  Shakespeare. — Ed. 

50.  Pursuing]  Wright:  The  Folios  read  ‘pursuing  danger,’  although  in  Fj  the 
catchword  on  the  previous  page  is  ‘ensuing.’ 

52.  But  leaue  it  all  to  God]  Mrs  Griffiths  (p.  315):  Nothing  can  demon¬ 
strate  the  investigating  faculties  of  Shakespeare  more  than  [the  foregoing  scene]. 
He  never  lived  in  any  times  of  commotion  himself,  therefore  the  particular  knowl¬ 
edge  he  there  show's,  in  the  general  nature  of  such  a  crisis,  must  be  owing  more  to 
philosophy  than  experience;  rather  to  his  own  reflection,  than  any  knowledge  of 
history.  I  speak  with  regard  to  the  English  writers  only  on  such  subjects;  who 
were  all,  before  his  time,  most  barren  of  observation  and  maxim.  And  as  to  the 
Greek  and  Roman  historiographers,  who  were  rich  in  both,  the  invidious  Commen¬ 
tators  of  our  Poet  have  denied  him  any  manner  of  acquaintance  with  such  out¬ 
landish  literati;  and  I  .  .  .  have  joined  issue  with  them  in  this  particular.  For 
learning  gives  no  talents,  but  only  supplies  the  faculty  of  showing  them;  and  this 
he  could  do,  without  any  foreign  assistance. 


i82 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ii,  sc.  iv. 


Scena  Quarta. 


Enter  Arch-bijhop  pyong  Yorke ,  the  Queene , 
and  the  DntcheJJe. 

Arch.  Laft  night  I  heard  they  lay  at  Stony  Stratford, 
And  at  Northampton  they  do  reft  to  night : 


1.  Scena  Quarta.]  Scene  continued, 
Qq.  Scene  v.  Pope,  +  ( —  Var.  ’73). 

The  Same.  A  Room  in  the  Palace. 
Cap. 

2,  3.  Arch-biihop...Dutchefle.]  Car- 
dinall,  Dutches  of  Yorke,  Qu.  young 
Yorke.  Qq.  (Quee,  Q,Q2).  the  Arch¬ 
bishop  of  York,  the  young  Duke  of  York, 
Queen  Elizabeth,  and  the  Duchess  of 
York.  Cam. +  . 

4.  Arch.]  Car.  Qq  (throughout). 


5 

4.  Lafl...lay]  I  heard  they  lay  the 
last  night  Pope,  + . 

heard  ]  heare  Q,Q2,  Cap.  Mai.  Var. 
’21,  Cam.-K 

lay]  rested  Cap. 

4,  5.  Stony  Stratford... And... North¬ 
ampton]  Northampton...  Stoniflratford 
Qq.  Northampton  ...  Stony -Stratford 
Pope,  +,  Cap.  Mai.  Var.  ’21,  Dyce,  Sta. 
Cam.  +,  Huds. 

3.  they  do  refl]  will  they  be  Qq,  Cam. 
+ .  they  do  lye  Cap. 


2.  Arch-bishop]  See  Dram.  Person. 

4.  lay  at  Stony  Stratford]  Wright:  The  house  is  still  shown  where,  tradition 
says,  the  young  King  lodged. 

4,  5.  Stony  Stratford  .  .  .  Northampton]  Malone:  An  anonymous  remarker, 
who  appears  not  to  have  inspected  a  single  Quarto  copy  of  any  of  these  plays,  is 
much  surprised  that  editors  should  presume  to  make  such  changes  in  the  text 
[as  in  the  Quarto],  without  authority,  as  he  intimates,  and  assures  us  the  Folio 
reading  is  right,  the  fact  being  that  ‘  the  prince  and  his  company  did  in  their  way 
to  London  actually  lye  at  Stony-Stratford  one  night,  and  were  the  next  morning 
taken  back  by  the  Duke  of  Glocester  to  Northampton,  where  they  lay  the  following 
night.  See  Hall,  Edw.  V.,  fol.  6.’  Shakespeare,  it  is  clear,  either  forgot  this 
circumstance,  or  did  not  think  it  worth  attending  to.  According  to  the  original 
copy  in  Quarto,  at  the  time  the  Archbishop  is  speaking,  the  King  had  not  reached 
Stony-Stratford,  and  consequently  his  being  taken  back  to  Northampton  on  the 
morning  after  he  had  been  at  Stratford,  could  not  be  in  the  author’s  contemplation. 
Shakespeare  well  knew  that  Stony-Stratford  was  nearer  to  London  than  North¬ 
ampton;  therefore  in  the  Quarto  the  young  king  is  made  to  sleep  on  one  night  at 
Northampton,  and  the  Archbishop  very  naturally  supposes  that  on  the  next  night, 
that  is,  on  the  night  of  the  day  on  which  he  is  speaking,  the  king  would  reach  Stony- 
Stratford.  It  is  highly  improbable  that  the  editor  of  the  Folio  should  have  been 
apprized  of  the  historical  fact  above  stated;  and  much  more  likely  that  he  made  the 
alteration  for  the  sake  of  improving  the  metre,  regardless  of  any  other  circum¬ 
stance.  How  little  he  attended  to  topography  appears  from  a  preceding  scene,  in 
which  he  makes  Gloucester,  though  in  London,  talk  of  sending  a  messenger  to  that 
town,  instead  of  Ludlow.  [See  II,  ii,  149,  161.]  By  neither  reading  can  the  truth 
of  history  be  preserved,  and  therefore  we  may  be  sure  that  Shakespeare  did  not 
mean,  in  this  instance,  to  adhere  to  it.  According  to  the  Quarto  reading,  the  scene 


ACT  II,  SC.  iv.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


183 


[4,  5.  Stony  Stratford  .  .  .  Northampton] 

is  on  the  day  on  which  the  King  was  journeying  from  Northampton  to  Stratford; 
and  of  course  the  Messenger’s  account  of  the  peers  being  seized  [lines  48-50],  which 
was  after  the  King  had  lain  at  Stratford,  is  inaccurate.  If  the  Folio  reading  be 
adopted,  the  scene  is,  indeed,  placed  on  the  day  on  which  the  King  was  seized; 
but  the  Archbishop  is  supposed  to  be  apprized  of  a  fact  which,  before  the  entry  of 
the  Messenger ,  he  manifestly  does  not  know,  and  which  Shakespeare  did  not  intend 
he  should  appear  to  know;  namely,  the  Duke  of  Gloucester’s  coming  to  Stratford 
the  morning  after  the  King  had  lain  there,  taking  him  forcibly  back  to  Northamp¬ 
ton,  and  seizing  the  Lords  Rivers,  Grey,  [and  Sir  Thomas  Vaughan].  The  truth 
is,  that  the  Queen  herself,  the  person  most  materially  interested  in  the  welfare  of 
her  son,  did  not  hear  of  the  King’s  being  carried  back  from  Stratford  to  Northamp¬ 
ton  till  about  midnight  of  the  day  on  which  this  violence  was  offered  him  by  his 
uncle.  (See  Hall,  Edward  V .,  fol.  6.)  Historical  truth  being  thus  deviated  from, 
we  have  a  right  to  presume  that  Shakespeare,  in  this  instance,  did  not  mean  to 
pay  any  attention  to  it,  and  that  the  reading  furnished  by  the  Quarto  was  that 
which  came  from  his  pen:  nor  is  it  possible  that  he  could  have  made  the  alteration 
which  the  Folio  exhibits,  it  being  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  whole  tenour  and 
scope  of  the  present  scene.  If  the  Archbishop  had  known  that  the  young  King 
was  carried  back  to  Northampton,  he  must  also  have  known  that  the  lords  who 
accompanied  him  were  sent  to  prison;  and,  instead  of  eagerly  asking  the  Messenger, 
‘  What  is  thy  news  ?  ’  1.  47  might  have  informed  him  of  the  whole  transaction. — 
Steevens:  Shakespeare  does  not  always  attend  to  the  propriety  of  his  own  alter¬ 
ations.  As  historical  truth  must  be  violated  whichever  reading  be  chosen,  I  am 
content  with  such  an  arrangement  as  renders  the  versification  smoothest.  Where 
sense  cannot  claim  a  preference,  a  casting  vote  may  be  safely  given  in  favour  of  sound. 
— Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875 — ’76;  p.  19):  As  the  Prince  was  on  his  way  from 
Ludlow  to  London,  and  Stony-Stratford  is  nearer  to  London  than  Northampton, 
the  alteration  has  certainly  very  much  the  appearance  of  a  correction  made  for  the 
sake  of  the  metre  without  consideration  of  the  sense.  .  .  .  [The  scene]  is  evidently 
derived,  either  directly,  or  indirectly  through  Hall,  or  Stowe  from  More.  According 
to  which,  the  Archbishop  had  been  roused  ‘not  long  after  midnight’  by  a  messenger 
from  Lord  Hastings;  ‘oj  whom  he  heard  that  these  Dukes  were  gone  back  with  the 
king’s  grace  from  Stony  Stratford  unto  Northampton.’  Upon  which,  he  roused  and 
armed  his  household,  and  taking  the  Great  Seal  with  him,  ‘came  yet  before  day 
unto  the  Queen.’  What  he  had  ‘heard’  was  what  he  had  been  told  by  Hastings’s 
messenger:  it  was  exactly  what  he  said:  and  it  was  true.  The  Prince  had  lain  at 
Stratford  last  night,  and  to-night  (that  is,  the  night  not  yet  past,  in  which  they 
were  speaking)  he  was  to  rest  at  Northampton.  In  this  case,  therefore,  the  correc¬ 
tion  is  clearly  right,  and  the  Quarto  wrong.  For  it  was  not  true  either  that  they 
did  lie  at  Northampton  the  night  before,  or  that  they  were  to  be  at  Stony-Stratford 
that  night,  or  that  he  had  heard  news  to  that  effect;  and  it  may  be  reasonably 
suspected  that  some  one  unto  whose  hands  the  MS  of  the  Quarto  passed  on  its 
way  to  the  printer  had  noticed  what  his  topographical  knowledge  assured  him 
was  a  mistake,  and,  not  being  nice  about  metre,  had  introduced  the  correction, 
which  Shakespeare  in  revising  the  play  removed.  The  next  line:  ‘Tomorrow 
or  next  day,  they  will  be  here,’  is  quite  consistent.  They  were  on  their  way  to 
London;  and  though  they  had  gone  twelve  miles  back,  and  would  therefore  be  so 
much  later  in  arriving,  there  was  no  difficulty  that  need  trouble  a  playgoer  in 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ii,  sc.  iv. 


184 


To  morrow,  or  next  day,  they  will  be  heere.  6 

Dut.  I  long  with  all  my  heart  to  fee  the  Prince  : 

I  hope  he  is  much  growne  fince  laft  I  faw  him. 

Qu.  But  I  heare  no,  they  fay  my  fonne  of  Yorke 
Ha’s  almoft  ouertane  him  in  his  growth.  10 

Yorke.  I  Mother,  but  I  would  not  haue  it  fo. 

Dut.  Why  my  good  Cofin,  it  is  good  to  grow.  1 2 


6.  they  will  ]  will  they  Q7QS- 

9.  no]  not  Pope,  +  (  —  Var.  ’73). 

10.  Ha's]  Fa.  Has  F3F4, +,  Varr. 
Ran.  Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13.  Hath  Qq  et 
cet. 

alrnojl]  Om.  Q6-8. 


10.  ouertane]  overtaken  Rowe,  over- 
-ta'en  Pope  et  seq.  (subs.) 
his]  Om.  QjQa- 

12.  good]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Knt. 
young  Qq  et  cet.  (subs.) 

Cojin,]  Cousin  ?  Cap. 


supposing  that  they  might  arrive  within  two  days. — Pickersgill  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans., 
x 8 7 5  — ’ 7 6 ;  p.  90):  I  do  not  think  that  the  coincidence  of  the  Folio  with  the  state¬ 
ment  in  Hall’s  Chronicle  can  fairly  be  regarded  as  accidental.  I  should  say  that 
Shakespeare,  following  Hall  or  More,  gave  these  facts  as  he  found  them  there; 
but  it  is  clear  that  he  did  not  remember  at  the  moment  that  Stony  Stratford  is 
nearer  to  London  than  Northampton  is,  or  he  would  certainly  not  have  made  the 
Archbishop  announce  the  retrograde  movement  of  the  King’s  escort  .  .  .  without 
any  explanation  whatever.  .  .  .  [According  to  Spedding’s  view]  the  Archbishop 
announces  the  intelligence  before  he  has  himself  received  it!  for  the  .  .  .  Messenger 
arrives  considerably  later  in  the  scene.  The  fact  is,  Shakespeare  deviates  a  little 
from  historical  truth  in  order  to  attain  dramatic  effect:  he  makes  the  messenger 
arrive  during  the  Archbishop’s  interview  with  the  Queen,  whereas,  actually,  it  was 
the  news  the  Messenger  brought  that  led  to  the  interview.  It  is  necessary,  there¬ 
fore,  to  suppose  that  the  Archbishop  had  obtained  jrom  some  other  source  the 
intelligence  which  he  announces  at  the  outset.  Then  the  drama  is  perfectly  con¬ 
sistent  with  itself,  although  it  is  not  consistent  with  history.  My  view  with  regard 
to  the  relation  between  the  Folio  and  the  Quarto  here  is  this:  the  reading  of  the 
Folio  is  substantially  what  Shakespeare  wrote,  and  it  was  the  reading  of  the  copy 
which  the  corrector  revised:  the  latter  may  have  altered  an  unimportant  word  or 
two,  but  he  left  the  passage  essentially  as  he  found  it.  In  the  Quarto  we  have  a 
deliberate  alteration  of  the  original  reading,  made,  no  doubt,  to  obviate  the  difficulty 
arising  from  the  respective  positions  of  Northampton  and  Stony  Stratford  with 
regard  to  London;  but  whether  this  alteration  was  made  by  Shakespeare,  or  by 
some  one  else,  .  .  .  there  is  not  any  evidence  to  show.  Upon  the  whole,  I  regard 
this  example  as  neutral,  so  far  as  concerns  the  question,  was  Shakespeare  the  cor¬ 
rector  of  the  play? — Daniel  (p.  xvii):  The  transposition  of  localities  [as  in  the 
Quarto]  has  the  additional  advantage  of  agreement  with  the  intention  of  the  author 
as  expressed  in  1.  6;  and,  whether  it  appear  paradoxical  or  not,  I  should  say  that 
the  slight  sacrifice  of  rhythm  involved  in  the  change  is  another  proof  of  the  revision 
itself.  Note,  that  we  have  here  in  the  Folio,  in  1.  4,  one  of  the  numerous  proofs 
that  one  of  the  later  Quartos  was  used  in  preparing  the  Folio  version  for  the 
press.  The  ‘  tell-tale  ’  word  ‘  heard  ’  was  derived  from  one  of  the  [Qs-e] — from 
of  course,  according  to  my  theory.  [See  Appendix:  Daniel,  on  the  Text.] 

12.  good  Cosin  .  .  .  good  to  grow]  This  rather  awkward  repetition  of  ‘good/ 


ACT  II,  SC.  iv.] 


RlChARD  THE  THIRD 


185 

Yor.  Grandam,  one  night  as  we  did  fit  at  Supper,  1 3 

My  Vnkle  Riuers  talk’d  how  I  did  grow 

More  then  my  Brother.  I,  quoth  my  Vnkle  Gloufter,  15 

Small  Herbes  haue  grace,  great  Weeds  do  grow  apace. 

And  fince,  me  thinkes  I  would  not  grow  fo  fall, 

Becaufe  fweet  Flowres  are  flow,  and  Weeds  make  haft. 

Dut.  Good  faith,  good  faith,  the  faying  did  not  hold 
In  him  that  did  obiedl  the  fame  to  thee.  20 

He  was  the  wretched’ft  thing  when  he  was  yong, 

So  long  a  growing,  and  fo  leyfurely, 

That  if  his  rule  were  true,  he  fhould  be  gracious. 

Yor.  And  fo  no  doubt  he  is,  my  gracious  Madam. 

Dut.  I  hope  he  is,  but  yet  let  Mothers  doubt.  25 

Yor.  Now  by  my  troth,  if  I  had  beene  remembred, 

I  could  haue  giuen  my  Vnkles  Grace,  a  flout, 

To  touch  his  growth,  neerer  then  he  toucht  mine.  28 


13.  Grandani\  Granam  Q3_g. 

15.  Vnkle']  Nnckle  Q,. 

16.  do]  Om.  Qq. 

17.  me  thinkes]  methinks  F3F^. 

18.  hafl]  hajle  Qq. 

23.  his  rule  were  true]  this  were  a 
true  rule  Q,Q2.  this  were  a  rule  Q3-g, 
Sta.  this  rule  were  true  Cam.  + . 


24.  Yor.]  Ff,  +  .  Car.  Qq.  Arc.  Cap. 
et  cet.  ( subs. ) 

And. ..Madam]  Why  Madame  fo 
no  doubt  he  is  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

25.  he  w]  fo  too  Qq,  Cam.  +. 

28.  To  touch. ..toucht  ]  That  fhould 
haue  neerer  toucht  his  growth  then  he 
did  Qq.  That  should  have  near  touch'd 
h  is  growth  than  he  did  V aughan  ( iii,  62  ) . 


in  the  Folio,  Spedding  considers  due  to  a  ‘careless  printer,’  and  therefore  classifies 
it  as  among  the  ‘  alterations  in  the  Folio  not  intended  by  Shakespeare.’ 

16.  Small  Herbes  .  .  .  grow  apace]  Wright:  Compare  Heywood’s  Proverbs: 
‘Ill  weede  growth  fast,  that  is  showyng  In  the  show  of  thy  fast  growyng.’ — Spens. 
Soc.  reprint,  p.  164.  [Also  Ray’s  Proverbs:  ‘Ill  weeds  grow  apace,’  p.  428.] 

17.  since]  Abbott  (§62):  ‘Since’  is  here  used  for  since  then,  like  our  ever 
since.  Compare  a  transitional  use  of  ‘since’  between  an  adverb  and  conjunction 
in  ‘Waverly;  or,  ’tis  Sixty  Years  since.’  Omit  ‘’tis,’  and  ‘since’  becomes  an 
adverb. 

21.  the  wretched’st  thing]  Johnson:  ‘Wretched’  is  here  used  in  a  sense  yet 
retained  in  familiar  language,  for  paltry,  pitiful,  being  below  expectation. — Ritson  : 
Rather,  the  weakest,  most  puny,  least  thriving. 

24.  gracious  Madam]  Walker  ( Crit .,  i,  289)  considers  this  repetition  in  the 
Folio  to  be  due  to  the  eye  of  the  transcriber  having  caught  the  word  ‘gracious’  in 
the  preceding  line.  He  furnishes  many  examples  of  lines  wherein  a  like  substitu¬ 
tion  may  have  occurred. 

26.  if  I  had  beene  remembred]  For  other  examples  of  this  construction, 
see  Abbott,  §  295,  or  Schmidt,  Lex.,  s.  v.  Remembered. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ii,  sc.  iv. 


1 86 

Dut.  How  my  yong  Yorke, 

I  prythee  let  me  heare  it.  30 

Yor.  Marry  (they  fay)  my  Vnkle  grew  fo  fafl, 

That  he  could  gnaw  a  cruft  at  two  houres  old, 

’Twas  full  two  yeares  ere  I  could  get  a  tooth. 

Grandam,  this  would  haue  beene  a  byting  left. 

Dut.  I  prythee  pretty  Yorke,  who  told  thee  this  ?  35 

Yor.  Grandam,  his  Nurffe. 

Dut.  His  Nurfe  ?  why  fhe  was  dead,  ere  y  waft  borne. 

Yor.  If’twere  not  fhe,  I  cannot  tell  who  told  me. 

Qu.  A  parlous  Boy:go  too,  you  are  too  fhrew’d. 

Dut.  Good  Madam,  be  not  angry  with  the  Childe.  40 


29,  30.  How... if]  Ff,  Rowe.  One  line, 
Qq  et  cet. 

29.  yong]  prettie  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 
Yorke,]  Yorke  ?  Qq. 

30.  prythee]  pray  thee  Qq,  Cam.  + . 
prithee  F4> 

34,  36.  Grandam]  Granam  Qq. 

34.  byting]  biting  Qf.  prettie  Qq. 

35.  prythee]  pray  thee  Qq,  Cam.  + . 
prethee  F3<  prithee  F4. 


35-  tkisf]  fo?  Qq.  (fo.  Q,.) 

37.  His  Nurfe  ?]  Om.  Q^. 
waft]  wert  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

39.  parlous]  perilous  Qq.  per’lous 
Johns.  Var.  ’73. 

you  are]  thou  art  Q,Q8. 

40.  Dut.]  Ff, +  ,  Varr.  Ran.  Steev. 
Var. ’03,  ’13,  Sing.  Ktly.  Car.  Qq.  Arch. 
Cap.  et  cet. 

the]  a  F3F4,  +  (-Var.  ’73). 


32.  he  could  gnaw  a  crust  at  two  houres  old]  ‘It  is  for  trouth  reported  .  .  . 
that  hee  [Richard]  came  into  the  world  with  the  feete  forwarde  .  .  .  and  (as 
the  fame  runneth)  also  not  vntothed.’ — More,  p.  8. 

38.  I  cannot  tell  who  told  me]  Cowden-Clarke  ( Sh .  Char.,  p.  462):  He 
had  heard  his  mother  say  it.  She  rebukes  him  for  being  ‘too  shrewd.’  Here 
is  a  touch  of  caution  in  the  character  of  the  young  York,  the  natural  birth  of 
surrounding  plots  and  machinations.  [See  note  by  Hunter,  1.  40.] — Barnard: 
Apparently  he  had  overheard  it  in  conversation  not  meant  for  his  ears,  but 
archly  puts  his  Grandam  off  by  replying  ‘His  nurse.’ 

39.  parlous]  Murray  (N.  E.  D.):  A  syncopated  form  of  perilous,  .  .  found 
from  fourteenth  century  alongside  of  the  fuller  forms,  but  since  seventeenth  cen¬ 
tury  more  or  less  archaic  in  literary  use;  common  dialectally  from  Durham  to 
Hampshire.  2.  Dangerously  cunning,  clever,  eager,  etc.;  keen,  shrewd.  [The 
present  line  qupted.] 

39.  shrew’d]  Skeat  (Diet.) :  The  older  sense  is  malicious,  mischievous,  scolding 
or  shrew-like,  as  in:  [‘O,  when  she’s  angry,  she  is  keen  and  shrewd.’] — Mid.  N. 
Dream,  III,  ii,  323. 

40.  Dut.  Good  Madam,  be  not  angry]  Hunter  (Illust.,  ii,  87):  This  pas¬ 
sage  affords  another  illustration  of  the  superiority  of  the  text  of  the  Folios  over 
that  of  the  Quartos  in  this  play.  [In  the  Ff  this  line]  is  given  to  the  Duchess  of 
York,  with  whom  it  is  much  more  in  character.  The  poet  seems  to  have  intended 
that  we  should  understand  that  the  boy  had  on  some  occasion  overheard  his  mother 
say  what  he  repeats  concerning  his  unde,  and  she  is  disturbed  to  find  that  what 


ACT  II,  sc.  iv.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


18/ 

41 


Qu.  Pitchers  haue  eares. 


Enter  a  Meffenger. 


Arch. 

Heere  comes  a  Meffenger :  What  Newes  ? 

Mef. 

Such  newes  my  Lord,  as  greeues  me  to  report. 

Qu. 

How  doth  the  Prince  ? 

'  45 

Mef. 

Well  Madam,  and  in  health. 

Dut. 

What  is  thy  Newes  ? 

47 

42.  a  Meffenger]  Dorfet.  Qq,  Sta. 
43-47.  As  four  lines,  ending  Meffenger 

...my  Lord. . .Prince  ? ...Newes  ?  Steev. 
Varr.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly. 

43.  Two  lines,  ending  Meffenger... 
Newes  ?  Cap.  Dyce,  Hud». 

a... Newes  /]  your  fonne ,  Lord 
Marques  Dorfet ,  What  newes  Lord  Alar- 
ques  ?  (as  two  lines,  ending  Dorfet... 
Marques?)  Qq,  Sta.  your  son,  Lord 
Dorset.  What  news,  lord  marquess  ? 


Vaughan  (iii,  63). 

43.  What  Newes  /*]  What  news  with 
you?  Coll,  ii  (MS). 

44.  Mef.]  Dorf.  (throughout)  Qq,  Sta. 
report]  vnfold Qq,  Cap.  Var.  ’78, 

’85,  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam. +. 

45, 46.  As  one  line,  Coll.  Dyce,  Wh.  i, 
Hal.  Sta.  Cam. +,  Huds. 

45.  doth]  fares  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

47.  thy  Newes  ?]  thy  newes  then  Q  , 
Cam.  +  .  the  newes  then  Qj-g,  Sta. 


she  had  said  thus  finds  its  way  to  the  Duchess,  as  it  might  seriously  affect  herself. 
She  excuses  herself  by  saying  that  it  was  not  intended  to  be  heard,  at  least  not  by 
her  son. — Dyce  (ed.  i):  I  cannot  agree  with  Hunter  that  the  prefix  of  the  Folio 
is  the  right  one. 

41.  Pitchers  haue  eares]  Malone:  Shakespeare  has  not  quoted  this  prover¬ 
bial  saying  correctly.  It  appears  from  A  Dialogue  both  Pleasaunt  and  Pietifull, 
by  William  Bulleyn,  1564,  that  the  old  proverb  is  this:  ‘Small  pitchers  have  great 
ears.’ — Ritson:  Compare  ‘Pitchers  have  ears,  and  I  have  many  servants.’ — Tam. 
of  Shr.,  IV,  iv,  52.  [Brewer  (s.  v.  Pitchers)  explains  this  proverbial  saying  as 
referring  to  the  fact  that  ‘the  handles  or  ears  of  small  jugs  are  out  of  proportion 
to  their  size.’] 

42.  Enter  a  Messenger]  Cambridge  Edd.  ( Note  x .):  We  have  followed  the 
Folios  in  reading  ‘a  Messenger ,’  and  in  assigning  the  speeches  that  follow  to  him 
rather  than  to  the  Marquess  Dorset  as  in  the  Quartos.  The  change  must  have 
been  deliberate,  and  as  the  Queen  does  not  greet  the  person  who  brings  the  intelli¬ 
gence,  and  expresses  no  anxiety  for  his  safety  when  she  herself  is  going  to  sanctuary, 
it  seems  more  proper  that  the  messenger  should  be  one  of  inferior  rank  than  one 
so  nearly  connected  with  the  Queen.  His  ignorance  of  the  cause  of  the  arrest  of 
the  nobles  and  the  terms  in  which  he  speaks  of  them  are  in  keeping  with  the  char¬ 
acter  of  a  messenger.  In  IV,  i,  the  Queen  apparently  meets  Dorset  for  the  first 
time  since  Richard’s  designs  were  disclosed,  and  passionately  urges  his  escape. — 
Daniel  (p.  xvii):  For  the  service  of  the  stage  and  to  economize  a  ‘Messenger,’ 
Dorset  is  made  [in  the  Quartos]  to  deliver  this  part,  and  is  thereby  placed  in  a  most 
incongruous  position.  It  is  impossible  to  read  the  part  given  to  him  in  the  Quarto 
without  at  once  perceiving  that  it  was  never  originally  intended  for  him:  the 
‘Messenger’  of  the  Folio  was  clearly  its  first  exponent. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ii,  sc.  iv. 


1 88 


Meff.  Lord  Riuers,  and  Lord  Grey,  48 

Are  fent  to  Pomfret,  and  with  them, 

Sir  Thomas  Vaughan ,  Prifoners.  50 

Dut.  Who  hath  committed  them  ? 

Mef.  The  mighty  Dukes,  Gloujier  and  Buckingham. 

Arch.  For  what  offence  ? 

Mef.  The  fumme  of  .all  I  can,  I  haue  difclosM  : 

Why,  or  for  what,  the  Nobles  were  committed,  55 

Is  all  vnknowne  to  me,  my  gracious  Lord. 

Qu.  Aye  me!  I  fee  the  ruine  of  my  Houfe  :  57 


48-50.  Lord...  Prifoners]  Ff,  Rowe, 
Cap.  Varr.  Ran.  Two  lines,  ending  Pom- 
fret...  Prifoners  Qq  et  cet. 

49,  50.  Pomfret  ...Vaughan,  Prif¬ 
oners]  Pomfret ,  prisoners;  and  with 
them...  Vaughan,  Cap.  Varr.  Ran. 

49.  and ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Varr.  Ran. 
Knt,  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Om.  Qq  et  cet. 

51-53.  As  two  lines,  ending  Dukes , ... 
offence  ?  Steev.  et  seq. 

52.  As  two  lines,  ending  Dukes... 
Buckingham.  Pope,  +  (  — Var. ’73). 


52.  Gloufler]  Clocefter  Q3. 

53.  Arch.]  Queen.  Johns.  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Dyce,  Huds. 

offence  ?]  offetice.  Q,. 

55.  for ]  Om.  Q,. 

the]  thefe  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

56.  Lord]  Lady  Qq,  Pope,  +  ,  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Coll.  Dyce,  Cam. +  . 

57.  Aye]  Ah  Rowe,  +  ,  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Hal. 

ruine  of  my]  downefall  of  our  Qq, 
Sta.  Cam.  + . 


48-50.  Lord  Riuers  .  .  .  Prisoners]  See  note  by  Malone,  11.  4,  5,  supra. 

52.  Glouster  and  Buckingham]  Wright:  At  the  time  of  the  king’s  death 
Buckingham  was  on  the  Welsh  Marches  and  Richard  at  York.  They  met  at 
Northampton,  each  with  a  strong  body  of  horse,  on  the  day  that  the  young  king 
left  for  Stony  Stratford. 

53.  Arch.  For  what  offence?]  Johnson:  This  question  is  given  to  the 
Archbishop,  but  the  Messenger  plainly  speaks  to  the  Queen  or  the  Duchess. — - 
Malone:  The  editor  of  the  Folio  altered  lady  [as  in  the  Quarto]  to  ‘lord’  in  1.  56; 
but  it  is  more  probable  that  the  compositor  prefixed  Car.  (the  designation  of  the 
Archbishop  in  the  Quarto)  to  the  words:  ‘For  what  offence?’  instead  of  Qu. 
than  that  lady  should  have  been  printed  in  the  subsequent  speech  instead  of  ‘  lord.’ 
Compositors  always  keep  the  names  of  the  interlocutors  in  each  scene  ready-com¬ 
posed  for  use;  and  hence  mistakes  sometimes  arise. — Dyce  (ed.  i) :  The  messenger 
in  replying  above  to  the  Archbishop,  calls  him  ‘my  Lord’;  later  the  Archbishop 
addresses  the  Queen  as  ‘my  gracious  Lady,’  1.  68. — Marshall:  Setting  aside  the 
fact  that  both  Quartos  and  Folios  have  ‘my  gracious  lady’  in  1.  56,  the  epithet 
‘gracious’  has  been  applied  to  the  Queen,  1.  24,  and  therefore  the  supposition  that 
lady  was  a  misprint  in  the  Folio  for  ‘lord’  can  hardly  be  entertained. 

55.  Why,  or  for  what]  Abbott  (§  75):  A  distinction  seems  here  to  be  drawn 
between  ‘why’  and  ‘for  what.’  ‘Why’  refers,  perhaps,  to  the  past  cause,  ‘for 
what,  ’  to  the  future  object. 

57.  the  ruine  of  my  House]  Delius  (Jahrbuch,  vii,  160):  Here,  partly 
through  carelessness,  partly  through  misunderstanding,  the  anonymous  corrector 
of  the  Quarto  changes  ‘my  house’  to  our  house.  Since  the  message  referred  to 


ACT  II,  SC.  iv.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


189 

The  Tyger  now  hath  feiz’d  the  gentle  Hinde,  58 

Intuiting  Tiranny  beginnes  to  Iutt 

Vpon  the  innocent  and  aweleffe  Throne  :  60 

Welcome  Deftrudlion,  Blood,  and  Maffacre, 

I  fee  (  as  in  a  Map )  the  end  of  all. 

Dut .  Accurfed,  and  vnquiet  wrangling  dayes, 

How  many  of  you  haue  mine  eyes  beheld? 

My  Husband  loft  his  life,  to  get  the  Crowne,  65 

And  often  vp  and  downe  my  fonnes  were  toft 
For  me  to  ioy,  and  weepe,  their  gaine  and  Ioffe. 

And  being  feated,  and  Domefticke  broyles 
Cleane  ouer-blowne,  themfelues  the  Conquerors, 

Make  warre  vpon  themfelues,  Brother  to  Brother;  70 

Blood  to  blood,  felfe  againft  felfe  :  O  prepoftorous 


58.  The. ..Hinde]  In  italics,  F3F4. 
feiz'd  j  ceazd  Qq.  ( feaze  Q?.) 

59.  Iutt]  iet  Qq.  jet  Coll.  Dyce, 
Hal.  Sta.  Cam.  + ,  Huds. 

60.  awelejfe]  lawleffe  Qq. 

61.  Blood]  death  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

66.  And  often]  Too  often  Coll.  MS. 
68,  69.  feated ,  and... broyles ...ouer- 
-blowne,  themfelues  the  Conquerors,] 
Qi-s.  feated  and...  broiles,  ...ouerblowne 


themfelues  the  conquerors  Qt.  feated , 
and ...  broiles  . . .  ouerblowne,  themfelues 
( the  Conquerors ,)  Ff.  feated,  and... 
broiles... ouerblowne,  themfelues,  the  con¬ 
querors,  Rowe  et  seq. 

70,  71.  Brother. ..blood,]  bloud againfl 
bloud  Qq,  Pope,  + . 

71.  againfl]  ’gainst  Steev.  Varr. 
prepojlorous]  most  preposterous 

Pope,  + . 


the  relatives  of  the  Queen  alone,  Elizabeth  would  hardly  speak  of  any  other  than 
her  own  house,  and  not  that  of  York,  which  was  not  directly  concerned. 

59.  Insulting  Tiranny]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  Insult,  v):  * Insultare  may 
be  viewed  either  as  frequentative  of  insilire,  to  leap  upon,  ...  or  as  a  compound  of 
in  -f-  saltare,  frequentative  of  satire.  Cotgrave  has:  “In suiter,  to  insult,  crow, 
vaunt,  or  triumph  over;  to  wrong,  reproach,  affront;  contemne;  also  to  rebound, 
reioyce  at,  leape  for  ioy.”’ — The  phrase  ‘insulting  tyranny’  occurs  also  in  1  Hen. 
VI:  IV,  vii,  19,  where  it  is  applied  to  death. 

59.  Iutt]  Wright:  To  jet  is  commonly  to  strut,  to  walk  proudly,  to  throw  the 
body  about  in  an  affected  manner;  and  hence  it  has  been  supposed  to  have  in 
this  passage  the  secondary  sense  of  to  be  ostentatious.  But  jet  and  ‘jut’  .  .  .  are  the 
same  in  origin,  and  signify  to  stick  out,  project,  and  so  to  encoach  upon.  So  Cot- 
grave  interprets  the  French  Iettee,  ‘a  iettie  or  iuttie,  a  bearing  out  or  leaning  ouer 
in  buildings.’  Compare  ‘  Think  you  not  how  dangerous  It  is  to  jet  upon  a  prince’s 
right?’  Tit.  And.,  II,  i,  64.  And  again  in  the  old  play,  Sir  Thomas  More: 
‘It  is  hard  when  Englishmens  pacience  must  be  thus  jetted  on  by  straungers.’ — 
Sh.  Soc.  reprint,  p.  2. 

71.  O  prepostorous]  Spedding  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875-’ 76;  p.  42):  I  cannot 
help  suspecting  that  the  ‘O’  was  meant  to  be  struck  out.  I  should  indeed  have 
thought  Pope’s  conjecture  of  ‘Omost  preposterous’  the  more  probable;  nor  should 
I  have  objected  to  the  alexandrine  in  this  place,  though  such  alexandrines  belong 


190 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ii,  sc.  iv. 


And  franticke  outrage,  end  thy  damned  fpleene,  72 

Or  let  me  dye,  to  looke  on  earth  no  more. 

Qu.  Come,  come  my  Boy,  we  will  to  San<5tuary. 

Madam,  farwell.  75 

Dut.  Stay,  I  will  go  with  you. 

Qu.  You  haue  no  caufe. 

Arch.  My  gracious  Lady  go, 

And  thether  beare  your  Treafure  and  your  Goodes,  79 


72.  outrage ]  courage  Var.  ’03,  ’13. 
thy\  the  Q8. 

73.  earth ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  death 
Qq  et  cet. 

75-78.  As  two  lines,  ending, you... go, 


Steev.  et  seq. 

75.  Madam,  farwell]  Om.  Qq. 

76.  Slay... go]  lie  go  along  Qq, 
Cam.  + . 

79.  thether]  thither  QqFf. 


rather  to  a  later  stage  in  Shakespeare’s  versification.  But  if  the  error  was  the 
omission  of  a  word  like  most,  it  seems  unlikely  that  it  would  have  been  overlooked 
while  the  correction  was  under  consideration.  [‘Preposterous’  is  not,  I  think, 
here  used,  as  so  frequently  by  Shakespeare,  in  its  derivative  sense;  but  in  the 
sense,  as  contrary  to  nature,  perverted,  etc. — Ed.] 

73.  looke  on  earth  no  more]  Theobald  (ed.  ii):  By  the  reading  of  the 
Quartos  the  thought  is  finely  and  properly  improved.  The  old  Dutchess  had 
no  antipathy  to  the  world,  or  looking  upon  the  earth  in  general:  Her  complaints 
are  restrain’d  to  the  calamitous  Days  she  had  seen,  the  Miseries  and  Slaughters 
of  civil  Wars  at  home:  during  the  Process  of  which  she  had  been  witness  to  so 
many  Murthers,  such  Havock  and  Destruction;  that  she  very  reasonably  wishes  that 
such  Outrage  may  cease,  or  that  she  may  not  live  to  see  any  more  Friends  massacred. 
• — Capell  (ii,  180):  The  thought  of  this  line,  which  wants  no  explaining,  recalls 
another  of  great  singularity  that  makes  the  close  of  a  Sonnet  in  this  Poet’s  collec¬ 
tion  .  .  .  :  ‘So  shalt  thou  feed  on  death,  that  feeds  on  men  And  Death  once  dead, 
there’s  no  more  dying  then.’  [ Sonnet  cxlvi.] — -Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  154):  If  this 
passage  be  taken  in  connection  with  the  rest  of  the  speech  of  the  Duchess,  it  will  be 
seen  that  the  reading  of  the  Folio,  ‘earth,’  though  apparently  commonplace,  is  never¬ 
theless  the  more  correct.  The  many  horrors  of  war,  which,  for  so  many  years, 
have  passed  before  her  eyes,  have  so  wearied  her  that  she  prays  for  death  to  be 
free  from  the  sight  of  her  own  country — the  earth. — Spedding  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans., 
1875—76;  p.  20)  classifies  the  Folio  change,  ‘earth,’  among  the  ‘alterations  not 
intended  by  Shakespeare’;  and  adds:  ‘An  injudicious  correction,  I  should  say, 
but  for  the  origin  of  which  it  is  not  necessary  to  seek  beyond  the  printing-office.’ 

74.  we  will  to  Sanctuary]  Rolfe:  That  is,  the  sanctuary  at  Westminster.  This 
old  building  stood  where  Westminster  Hospital  now  stands  (then  within  the  pre¬ 
cincts  of  the  Abbey),  and  retained  its  privileges  as  a  refuge  for  criminals  until  the 
dissolution  of  the  monastery,  and  for  debtors  until  1602.  This  was  the  second  time 
that  Elizabeth  had  fled  thither;  the  first  having  been  in  1470,  when  with  her  mother 
and  her  three  daughters  she  was  the  guest  of  Abbot  Milling  until  the  birth  of  her 
son  Edward,  Nov.  1  of  that  year. — Wheatley  (iii,  208) :  The  privileges  survived 
the  Reformation,  and  the  bulk  of  the  houses  which  composed  the  precinct  were 
not  taken  down  till  1750. 


ACT  III,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


I9I 

80 


For  my  part,  lie  refigne  vnto  your  Grace 
The  Seale  I  keepe,  and  fo  betide  to  me, 

As  well  I  tender  you,  and  all  of  yours. 

Go,  lie  condu<5l  you  to  the  Sanctuary.  Exeunt  83 


Atlus  Tertius.  SccenaPrima. 


The  Trumpets  found. 

Enter yong  Prince,  the  Dukes  of  Glocejler,  and  Buckingham , 
Lord  Cardinally  with  others. 


81.  betide]  betid  (g. 

to]  it  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  + . 

83.  Go]  Come  Qq,  Cap.  Varr.  Steev. 
Varr.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Huds. 

1.  Adtus...Prima.]  Om.  Qq. 

The  Same.  A  Street.  Cap.  The 
Cloisters.  Westminster  Abbey.  Irving. 

2.  The. ..found.]  Flourish.  Cap. 

3.  yong  Prince,]  QqFf,Cam.  + .  young 
prince  attended,  Cap.  Prince  of  Wales, 


Rowe  et  cet. 

3.  Dukes  ...  Buckingham,]  Richard 
Catesby,  Buckingham, Cap.  etseq.(subs.) 

4.  Lord  Cardinall. .. others.]  Cardinall, 
&c.  Qq.  Archbishop... others.  Rowe,  +  . 
Cardinal  Bouchier... others.  Knt,  Rife. 
Cardinal  Bourchier,  Catesby  and  others. 
Cam. +  .  Cardinal  Bourchier... others. 
Cap.  et  cet. 


80,  81.  lie  resigne  .  .  .  The  Seale]  Steevens:  Afterwards,  however,  this 
obsequious  Archbishop,  to  ingratiate  himself  with  King  Richard  III.,  put  his  maj¬ 
esty’s  badge,  the  Hog,  upon  the  gate  of  the  Public  Library,  Cambridge. 

81.  and  so  betide  to  me]  Abbott  (§  297):  ‘Betide’  may  here  be  used  imper¬ 
sonally.  But  perhaps  ‘so’  is  loosely  used  as  a  demonstrative  for  such  fortune, 
in  the  same  way  in  which  as  assumes  the  force  of  a  relative  [in  ‘  I  have  not  from 
your  eyes  that  gentleness  As  I  was  wont  to  have.’ — Jul.  Cces.,  I,  ii,  33]. 

83.  Go,  lie  condutft  you,  etc.]  Webb:  This  powerful  scene  is  a  fitting  close 
to  the  Second  Act.  It  should  be  observed  that  its  strength  lies,  not  in  the  interest 
of  the  characters,  which  are  in  themselves  relatively  insignificant,  nor  in  any  special 
elevation  of  diction  or  thought,  but  merely  in  the  action,  the  surprising  ‘reversal 
of  fortune,’  the  change  in  the  situation.  The  scene  opens  with  a  company  of 
Lords  and  Ladies  engaged  in  elegant  trifling,  in  witty  comments  on  the  utterances 
of  a  precocious  child.  Suddenly  a  messenger  comes  in  with  his  news  and  all  is 
changed.  In  the  imprisonment  of  Rivers  and  Gray  the  company  are  not  slow 
to  perceive  a  deadly  blow  struck  at  themselves.  The  gloomy  vaticinations  of 
Queen  Elizabeth,  together  with  the  agonized  exclamations  of  the  Duchess,  are  a 
fitting  prelude  to  the  disasters  which  are  soon  to  fall  on  them  and  their  party. 
Moreover,  it  will  be  noticed  that  though  Richard  is  not  himself  present,  his 
influence  is  paramount.  The  scene  opens  with  caustic  allusions  to  his  deformities, 
only  to  close  with  a  remarkable  instance  of  his  power.  Perhaps  no  scene  more 
clearly  shows  how  Richard  III.  is  a  one-man  play. 

4.  Lord  Cardinall]  Churchill  (p.  207) :  In  making  the  Cardinal  of  this  scene 
Cardinal  Bourchier  of  Canterbury  [see  Text.  Notes],  the  editors  must  assume 
that  Shakespeare  followed  Hall — preceded  by  Polydore  Vergil  and  the  Croyland 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ill,  sc.  i. 


192 

Buc.  Welcome  fweete  Prince  to  London,  5 

To  your  Chamber. 

Rich.  Welcome  deere  Cofin,  my  thoughts  Soueraign 
The  wearie  way  hath  made  you  Melancholly. 

Prin.  No  Vnkle,  but  our  croffes  on  the  way, 

Haue  made  it  tedious,  wearifome,  and  heauie.  10 

I  want  more  Vnkles  heere  to  welcome  me. 

Rich.  Sweet  Prince,  the  vntainted  vertue  of  your  yeers 
Hath  not  yet  diu’d  into  the  Worlds  deceit : 

No  more  can  you  diftinguifh  of  a  man, 

Then  of  his  outward  (hew,  which  God  he  knowes,  1 5 

Seldome  or  neuer  iumpeth  with  the  heart. 

Thofe  Vnkles  which  you  want,  were  dangerous  : 

Your  Grace  attended  to  their  Sugred  words, 

But  look’d  not  on  the  poyfon  of  their  hearts  : 

God  keepe  you  from  them,  and  from  fuch  falfe  Friends.  20 

Prin.  God  keepe  me  from  falfe  Friends, 

But  they  were  none. 

Rich .  My  Lord,  the  Maior  of  London  comes  to  greet 
you.  24 


5,  6.  Welcome... Chamber. ]  Ff,  Rowe. 
As  one  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

7.  Soueraign]  foueraigne.  Q3Q4QS- 
Sovereign,  Rowe  et  seq.  (subs.) 

10.  Haue]  Hath  Q8. 

13.  Hath ]  Haue  Qe-g. 

1 4.  No]  Nor  Q,.,,  Sta.  Cam.  + ,  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Huds. 

18.  Sugred ]  suger'd  Rowe,  Pope. 


sugar'd  Theob.  et  seq. 

21,  22.  Prin.  God. ..none"]  Prince. 
[Aside.]  God. ..none.  Cam.  conj.  Mar¬ 
shall. 

God  keepe...  none']  Ff,  Rowe. 
One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

21.  from  falfe ]  fro  fuch  falfe  Q4< 

23, 25, 26.  Maior]  Maire  Q?.  Major 
F2F3.  Mayor  F4  et  seq. 


Continuator — and  not  Holinshed.  The  latter  follows  More,  who  has,  by  a  his¬ 
torical  mistake,  not  found  in  the  Latin  version,  the  Archbishop  of  York. 

6.  Chamber]  Murray  (IV.  E.  D.  s.  t>.):  f  6.  A  province,  city,  etc.,  directly 
subject,  and  yielding  immediate  revenue  to  the  king;  more  loosely:  Capital, 
metropolis,  royal  residence;  ?  royal  port  or  dockyard. 

14,  15.  of  a  man  ...  of  his  outward  shew]  Abbott  (§174):  The  meaning 
here  seems  to  be,  ‘you  can  make  no  distinctions  about  men  more  than,’  i.  e.,  ‘except, 
about  their  appearances.’  Compare  ‘Since  my  dear  soul  was  mistress  of  her 
choice  And  could  of  men  distinguish.’ — Hamlet,  III,  ii,  69. — Webb:  Shakes¬ 
peare  in  this  sentence  expresses  two  separate  ideas:  you  can  only  distinguish 
between  men  by  their  outward  appearance,  and,  you  do  not  see  the  difference 
between  men’s  outward  semblance  and  their  real  inward  thoughts. 

15,  38.  God  he  knowes]  Compare  I,  iii,  221;  or  see  Abbott,  §  243. 

16,  iumpeth]  For  examples  of ‘jump,’  meaning  to  agree,  see  Schmidt  (Lex.  b.). 


ACT  III,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


193 


Enter  Lord  Maior. 

Lo.Maior.  God  bleffe  your  Grace,  with  health  and 
happie  dayes. 

Prin.  I  thanke  you,  good  my  Lord,  and  thank  you  all : 
I  thought  my  Mother,  and  my  Brother  Yorke, 

Would  long,  ere  this,  haue  met  vs  on  the  way. 

Fie,  what  a  Slug  is  Ha/lings,  that  he  comes  not 
To  tell  vs,  whether  they  will  come,  or  no. 

Enter  Lord  Ha/lings. 

Buck.  And  in  good  time,  heere  comes  the  fweating 
Lord. 

Prince.  Welcome,  my  Lord  :  what,  will  our  Mother 
come  ? 

Hajl.  On  what  occafion  God  he  knowes,  not  I ; 

The  Queene  your  Mother,  and  your  Brother  Yorke, 

Haue  taken  Sandtuarie  :  The  tender  Prince 
Would  faine  haue  come  with  me,  to  meet  your  Grace, 
But  by  his  Mother  was  perforce  with-held. 

Buck.  Fie,  what  an  indiredl  and  peeuifh  courfe 
Is  this  of  hers  ?  Lord  Cardinall,  will  your  Grace 


25 


25.  Maior.]  the  Lord  Mayor,  and  his 
Train.  Cap.  et  seq. 

28.  all  :~\  all :  [they  kiss  his  Hand, 
and  retire.  Cap.  Exeunt  Mayor,  &c. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce, 


Hal.  Ktly,  Huds. 

41.  haue ]  Om.  Q2Q3Qg. 
43.  a «]  an  an  F2. 

peeuijh]  peenijh  Q3* 


30 


35 


40 


44 


28.  thank  you  all]  Staunton  objects  to  Capell’s  abrupt  dismissal  of  the 
Lord  Mayor  after  this  line  [see  Text.  Note t],  but  does  not  suggest  a  more  fitting 
period  for  that  official’s  exit.  It  is  hardly  likely  that  Shakespeare  intended  him 
to  be  a  silent  spectator  of  the  whole  of  the  following  discussion  between  Gloucester, 
Buckingham,  and  Hastings. — Ed. 

31.  Slug]  Walker  ( Crit .,  ii,  346):  To  slug,  active  and  neuter,  connected  with 
sluggard.  Slug  for  sluggard;  also  for  anything  that  obstructs  motion  or  progress. 
[The  present  line  quoted.] 

34.  sweating]  Webb  suggests  that  there  is  here  perhaps  a  pun  intended  on 
‘Hastings.’ 

43.  peeuish]  See  I,  iii,  204. 

44.  Lord  Cardinall]  Wright:  In  Holinshed  (p.  717,  col.  i)  it  is  Richard  and 
not  Buckingham  who  suggests  that  the  Cardinal  should  take  upon  him  the  office 
of  persuading  the  Queen  to  give  up  her  son.  ...  In  More’s  narrative,  which 
Holinshed  copies,  it  is  left  uncertain  who  the  ‘Lord  Cardinal’  is,  and  in  the 
sequel  we  find  that  the  Archbishop  of  York  undertakes  the  mission.  [See  note  by 
Churchill,  1.  4,  supra  ;  also  Appendix:  Source  0 }  Plot.] — Daniel  ( Time  Analysis, 
p.  328,  foot-note ):  The  prelate  of  II,  iv,  in  the  Folio  is  an  Archbishop;  in  the  Quarto 


13 


194 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  in,  sc.  i. 


Perfwade  the  Queene,  to  fend  the  Duke  of  Yorke  45 

Vnto  his  Princely  Brother  prefently? 

If  fhe  denie,  Lord  Hajlings  goe  with  him, 

And  from  her  iealous  Armes  pluck  him  perforce. 

Card.  My  Lord  of  Buckingham,  if  my  weake  Oratorie 
Can  from  his  Mother  winne  the  Duke  of  Yorke,  5° 

Anon  expert  him  here  :  but  if  fhe  be  obdurate 
To  milde  entreaties,  God  forbid 
We  fhould  infringe  the  holy  Priuiledge 
Of  bleffed  Sanfluarie  :  not  for  all  this  Land, 

Would  I  be  guiltie  of  fo  great  a  finne.  55 

Buck.  You  are  too  fenceleffe  obftinate,  my  Lord, 


45.  to]  the  Q3>  they  Qs>  she  Anon, 
ap.  Cam. 

47.  denie}  dgnie  Q3. 

goe]  you  goe  F2.  you  go  F3F4,  + , 
Varr.  Ran. 

him]  them  Q5_8. 

49.  Card.]  Arch.  Rowe, +  ,  Cap.  Varr. 
Ran. 

51.  Anon]  Om.  Steev.  conj. 


52.  God  ]  Qj_8,Ff,  + .  God  in  Heauen 

Q,Q2,  Var-  ’73  et  cet* 

54.  blejfed]  Om.  Pope,+  (  — Var.’73). 

55.  great]  deepe  Q,Q2,  Pope,  +  ,  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Sta.  Cam. +  . 

56.  fenceleffe  objlinate,]  QqFf,  Rowe, 
Theob.  i,  Warb.  senseless,  obstinate , 
Pope,  Han.  strict  and  abstinent  Coll,  ii 
(MS),  senseless-obstinate  Theob.  ii  et  cet. 


he  is  a  Cardinal.  The  prelate  of  the  present  scene  is  a  Cardinal  in  both  versions. 
Editors  decide  that  the  first  is  Archbishop  Rotheram  of  York,  and  that  the  second 
is  Cardinal  Bouchier,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury.  It  may  be  doubted  whether 
Shakespeare  intended  to  present  more  than  one  personage.  If  Holinshed  was 
his  authority,  he  certainly  did  not;  for  according  to  Holinshed,  Rotheram  was  at 
that  time  a  Cardinal  and  Lord  Chancellor;  it  was  he  who  conducted  the  Queen 
to  sanctuary,  and  it  was  he  who  afterwards  persuaded  her  to  give  up  the  Duke 
of  York. — Thompson:  In  view  of  the  confusion,  due  to  More,  between  Bourchier 
and  Rotheram,  it  should  be  noted  that,  both  in  More  and  Shakespeare,  the  Car¬ 
dinal  already  has  consented  to  attempt  persuasion,  but  objects  to  force.  It  is  very 
unlikely  that  Rotheram  would  have  undertaken  persuasion  so  readily,  and  very 
improbable  that  the  opportunity  should  have  been  offered  to  him.  See  Appendix 
to  Canon  Leigh-Bennett’s,  Archbishop  Rotheram,  1901,  p.  178. 

49.  Buckingham]  For  examples  where  polysyllabic  names  in  the  middle  of  a 
line  receive  but  one  accent,  see  Abbott,  §  469  (p.  354);  compare  III,  vii,  236. 

54.  SancTtuarie]  Walker  {Vers.  163)  gives  several  examples,  besides  the 
present  line,  wherein  ‘sanctuary’  is,  for  the  sake  of  the  metre,  to  be  pronounced  as 
a  disyllable.  He  adds:  ‘In  old  times  the  words,  like  the  thing  itself,  was  in  fre¬ 
quent  use,  and,  like  other  familiar  terms,  became  shortened  for  convenience  sake. 
In  Sir  Henry  Ellis’s  Letters  Illustrative  of  English  History,  as  quoted,  Athenceum, 
No  973,  p.  625,  col.  3,  letter  from  Lawrence  Stubbs  to  Cardinal  Wolsey,  the 
sanctuary  men  are  called  in  three  places  Sentuary  [sic.]  men.  Santry  still  exists 
as  a  family  name;  so,  by  the  way,  does  “Sanctuary.”’ 

56.  sencelesse  obstinate]  Collier  (ed.  ii):  The  old  reading  makes  the 


act  iii,  sc.  i.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

Too  ceremonious,  and  traditionall. 

Weigh  it  but  with  the  groffeneffe  of  this  Age, 

58.  groffeneffe  of  this\  greatneffe  of  of  his  Coll,  ii  (MS). 
this  Q6.  greatneffe  of  his  Q7Qg.  green-  Cartwright. 
ness  of  his  Warb.  Han.  Cap.  goodness 


Duke  of  Buckingham  quite  abusive  in  his  language  to  the  Cardinal.  He  would 
hardly  have  addressed  such  terms  to  an  inferior,  much  less  to  Cardinal  Bourchier: 
the  printer  misread  abstinent  ‘obstinate,’  and  conformed  the  other  epithet  [strict], 
perhaps  not  very  clearly  written,  to  that  word  [see  Text.  Notes]-,  but  who  before 
ever  heard  of  such  a  compound  as  ‘  senseless-obstinate  ’  ? 

57.  ceremonious,  and  traditionall]  Warburton:  ‘Ceremonious’  for  super¬ 
stitious;  ‘  traditional  ’  for  adherent  to  old  customs.  [Is  not  the  scansion  of  this  line 
difficult,  or  almost  impossible,  unless  Walker’s  rule  ( Crit .,  ii,  73),  of  the  elision 
of  the  middle  e  in  ‘ceremonious,’  be  adopted?  It  would  then  read:  Too  cer  | 
’moni  |  ous  and  |  tradi  |  tional.  And  yet  even  this  is  harsh.  In  making  a 
quadrisyllable  of  ‘ceremonious,’  a  contraction  of  the  last  two  syllables  -ious 
occurs  almost  instinctively. — Ed.] 

58.  the  grossenesse  of  this  Age]  Warburton:  But  the  more  ‘gross,’  that  is, 
the  more  superstitious,  the  age  was,  the  stronger  would  be  the  imputation  of  violated 
sanctuary.  The  speaker  resolves  this  question  in  the  negative,  because  it  could 
be  claimed  by  those  only  whose  actions  necessitated  them  to  fly  thither;  or  by  those 
who  had  an  understanding  to  demand  it,  neither  of  which  could  be  an  infant’s  case: 
the  first  line,  then,  should  be  read:  ‘ the  greenness  of  his  age,’  that  is,  the  Duke  of 
York’s.  The  corrupted  reading  of  the  old  Quarto  is  something  nearer  the  true: 
‘the  greatness  of  his  age.’ — Johnson:  War  burton’s  emendation  is  very  plausible, 
yet  the  common  reading  may  stand:  That  is,  compare  the  act  of  seizing  him  with 
the  ‘gross’  and  licentious  practices  of  these  times,  it  will  not  be  considered  as  a 
violation  of  sanctuary,  for  you  may  give  such  reasons  as  men  are  now  used  to 
admit. — Heath  (p.  294):  A  mistake  in  the  pointing  of  the  former  editions  misled 
Warburton  to  misunderstand  the  construction,  and  in  consequence  the  meaning, 
of  this  passage,  and  occasioned  his  having  recourse  to  his  emendation.  This  is 
evident  from  his  own  reasoning  in  support  of  it.  Put  but  a  semicolon  at  the  end 
of  the  preceding  line,  and  a  full  stop  at  the  end  of  this,  and  then  we  may  fairly 
reinstate  the  common  reading  clear  of  all  objection.  That  is,  you  consider  it 
onlv  according  to  that  gross  undistinguishing  superstition  which  prevails  in  the 
present  age. — Capell  (ii,  181):  The  address’d  person  is  charg’d  in  the  speech’s 
entry  with  being  senseless-obstinate  in  his  attachment  to  church  forms  and  matters 
of  meer  traditional  establishment,  such  as  (it  is  insinuated)  are  rights  of  sanctuary 
generally:  the  extension  of  that  right  in  the  present  case  is  the  next  topic;  and 
he  is  told,  in  this  line  and  the  next,  that  it  does  not  extend  to  children,  persons  of 
green  years;  and  the  reasons  why  it  extends  not  are  set  forth  in  the  lines  that  follow: 
This  is  the  speech’s  chain;  and  so  natural  and  consequential  that  the  editor  cannot 
persuade  himself — there  will  be  a  person  in  future  who  shall  look  on  what  has 
obtain’d  in  many  copies  other  than  as  itself  a  corruption  likewise  transmitted 
down  from  the  first. — Malone:  Warburton  is  not  accurate.  The  original  Quarto, 
1597  and  the  two  subsequent  Quartos,  as  well  as  the  Folio,  all  read  ‘grossness.’ 
Greatness  is  the  corrupt  reading  of  a  late  Quarto  of  no  authority,  printed  in  1622 


195 
5  7 

looseness  of  this 


196 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ill,  sc.  i. 


You  breake  not  San<5tuarie,  in  feizing  him  : 

The  benefit  thereof  is  alwayes  granted 
To  thofe,  whofe  dealings  haue  deferu’d  the  place, 
And  thofe  who  haue  the  wit  to  clayme  the  place : 
This  Prince  hath  neyther  claym’d  it,  nor  deferu’d  it, 


60 


63 


63.  neyther]  never  F4,  Rowe. 


[QJ. — Anon.  (Qu.  Lettsom?  Blackwood's  Maga.,  Aug.,  1853,  p.  316):  This  may 
be  paraphrased,  do  not  go  to  your  Traditions,  but  take  into  account  the  unrefining 
character,  and  somewhat  licentious  practise  of  this  age,  and  you  will  perceive  that 
you  break  not  sanctuary  in  seizing  him;  for  common  sense  declares  that  youth  of 
his  years  cannot  claim  this  privilege.  This  interpretation  renders  Collier’s  MS 
Corrector’s  inept  substitution,  goodness  of  his  age,  quite  unnecessary.  Strict 
and  abstinent  [for  1  senseless-obstinate’]  is  still  worse. — Hunter  ( Illust .,  ii,  88):  If 
for  ‘this  age’  we  read  his  age,  we  should  have  all  the  effect  of  War  burton’s  admir¬ 
able  suggestion,  with  less  disturbance  of  the  text,  ‘grossness’  being  taken  as  equiva¬ 
lent  to  greatness  in  its  comparative  sense,  when  used  as  equivalent  to  size  or  extent. — 
R.  G.  White:  That  is  (and  very  clearly  to  my  apprehension)  weigh  it  but  with 
the  gross  judgement,  the  blunted  perception  of  this  age. — The  Cowden-Clarkes: 
This  may  mean,  if  the  lawlessness  of  those  who  usually  claim  sanctuary  be  compared 
with  the  young  prince’s  innocence,  which  needs  no  such  protection,  then  there 
can  be  no  breaking  of  sanctuary  in  taking  him  thence.  In  the  account  given  in 
Hall’s  Chronicle,  whence  Shakespeare  probably  derived  the  groundwork  for  the 
present  scene,  Buckingham  enlarges  upon  the  vices  of  those  who  require  the  safety 
of  sanctuary  in  contradistinction  to  the  royal  child’s  immaculacy,  so  as  to  give 
colour  to  the  above  interpretation.— Lettsom  (ap.  Dyce  ii)  :  The  context  seems 
to  require  a  word  like  cunning  or  knowledge;  for  the  meaning  is  apparently,  examine 
the  matter  well,  the  superior  knowledge  and  cleverness  of  the  present  age,  and 
you  will  find  you  can  seize  the  child  without  breaking  sanctuary. — Wright: 
J  ohnson  in  reality  gives  two  interpretations,  which  turn  upon  the  different  meanings 
of  which  ‘weigh  with’  is  capable:  weigh  this  act  against  the  violent  practises  of 
these  times,  and  so,  compare  it  with  them;  or,  weigh  it  as  such  actions  are  weighed 
in  this  gross  age,  and  so,  estimate  it  by  that  standard. — Vaughan  (iii,  69):  [In 
III,  vi,  the]  Scrivener  says,  in  pointing  out  the  inconsistency  between  the  time 
apparently  given  to  the  preparation  of  the  indictment  against  Hastings,  and  the 
time  actually  required  for  it:  ‘Who  so  gross  That  seeth  not  this  palpable  device?’ 
Where  Holinshed  says:  ‘  Every  child  might  well  perceive  that  it  was  prepared  before.’ 
It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  in  Shakespeare’s  terminology  ‘grossness’  is  characteristic 
of  childhood,  and  an  equivalent  of  childishness.  ‘Grossness,’  therefore,  applies 
here  to  the  child’s  age,  and  not  to  the  world’s  age.  [Schmidt  (Lex.)  gives  numer¬ 
ous  passages  wherein  ‘grossness’  does  not  necessarily  mean  childishness,  but 
rather  dullness,  stupidity.  Because  Shakespeare  elsewhere  paraphrases  a  certain 
word  in  Holinshed,  in  a  certain  way,  is  it  quite  justifiable  to  apply  that  para¬ 
phrase  to  the  word  when  used  by  him  in  a  wholly  different  connection? — Ed.] 
— Webb:  The  obvious  meaning  of  this  seems  to  be,  the  times  are  grown  so  bad 
that  strong  measures  must  be  taken;  the  privilege  of  sanctuary  has  been  abused 
and  must  be  suspended  with  a  high  hand,  if  wrongdoers  are  to  be  brought  to 


justice. 


ACT  III,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


19  7 


And  therefore,  in  mine  opinion,  cannot  haue  it. 

Then  taking  him  from  thence,  that  is  not  there, 

You  breake  no  Priuiledge,  nor  Charter  there : 

Oft  haue  I  heard  of  Sandluarie  men, 

But  San6luarie  children,  ne’re  till  now. 

Card.  My  Lord,  you  fhall  oTe-rule  my  mind  for  once. 
Come  on,  Lord  Hajlings ,  will  you  goe  with  me  ? 

Haft.  I  goe,  my  Lord.  Exit :  Cardinall  and  Hajiings. 
Prince.Good  Lords,  make  all  the  fpeedie  haft  you  may. 
Say,  Vnckle  Glocejier ,  if  our  Brother  come, 

Where  fhall  we  foiourne,  till  our  Coronation  ? 

Glo. Where  it  think’ft  beft  vnto  your  Royall  felfe. 


64.  And]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  +  , 
Cap.  Varr.  Ran.  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

65.  taking]  take  Q6Q7Qg. 
thence ]  hence  Dyce  i. 

that... there]  to  do  him  goodVi ords- 
worth  conj. 

there ]  worthy  Bailey  (ii,  288). 


68.  ne' re]  neuer  Qq. 

69.  o' re-rule]  ouerrule  Qq. 

71.  Exit...Haftings.]  Om.  Q,Q2. 

72.  Good  Lords]  My  Lords  Cap.  (cor¬ 
rected  in  Errata). 

75.  think'Jl]  Q^Ff,  Wh.  i.  thinks 
"Walker  (Vers.  284).  feemes  Q,Q2  et  cet. 


64.  And  therefore]  Dyce  (ed.  ii)  upholds  the  omission  of  this  ‘and’  in  the 
Second  Folio,  saying  that  the  ‘eye  of  the  transcriber,  or  of  the  original  compositor, 
had  caught  the  word  from  the  second  line  above.’  Was  this  roving  eye  also  respon¬ 
sible  for  other  repetitions  in  the  lines  preceding  and  following  this?  Lines  61, 
62,  both  end  with  ‘the  place’;  lines  63,  64,  with  ‘it’;  lines  65,  66,  with  ‘there.’ 
Is  it  not  possible  that  the  editor  of  the  Second  Folio  omitted  ‘and’  for  the  sake 
of  the  metre  ? — Ed. 

65.  taking  him  from  thence,  that  is  not  there]  The  Cowden-Clarkes:  The 
effect  of  this  paradoxical  sentence  is  most  characteristic;  it  is  in  keeping  with  the 
sophistry  used  by  Buckingham,  and  with  the  crooked  policy  of  his  casuistry. 
[Shakespeare  is  here,  I  think,  paraphrasing  the  speech  of  the  Duke  of  Bucking¬ 
ham  as  given  by  More  and  copied  by  Hall  and  Holinshed :  ‘  [reason]  is  not  fullye 
so  farreforth,  as  may  serue  to  lette  vs  of  the  fetchynge  foorth  of  this  noble  manne 
to  hys  honoure  and  wealthe,  oute  of  that  place  in  whiche  he  neither  is,  nor  canne 
be  a  Saynctuary  manne.’ — p.  46. — Ed.] 

68.  Sandtuarie  children]  See  Appendix:  Source  of  Plot,  for  origin  of  this 
speech. — Besant  (p.  155):  The  following  note  by  Machyn,  [the  City  Chronicler 
of  the  Tudor  period],  presents  one  of  the  last  appearances  of  the  old  Sanctuary 
customs:  ‘The  vi  day  of  December  the  abbot  of  Westminster  went  a  procession 
with  his  convent;  before  him  went  all  the  sanctuary  men  with  crosse  keys  upon 
their  garments,  and  after  whent  iij  for  murder:  one  was  the  Lord  Dacre’s  sone 
of  the  Northe  .  .  .  and  a  boy  that  kyld  a  byge  boye  that  sold  papers  and  pryntyd 
bokes,  .  .  .  the  boy  was  one  of  the  chylderyn  that  was  at  the  sckoll  ther  in  the 
abbey.’ — Diary,  p.  121.  [According  to  the  foregoing,  ‘sanctuary  children’ — 
though  spoken  of  by  More  as  almost  unknown — were  perhaps  not  so  unusual  a 
sight  to  the  Londoner  of  Shakespeare’s  time. — Ed.] 

75.  it  think’st]  Wright  (note  on  think' st  thee,  Hamlet,  V,  ii,  63):  The  word 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  i. 


198 

If  I  may  counfaile  you,  fome  day  or  two  76 

Your  Highneffe  fhall  repofe  you  at  the  Tower : 

Then  where  you  pleafe,  and  fhall  be  thought  moft  fit 
For  your  beft  health,  and  recreation. 

Prince.  I  doe  not  like  the  Tower,  of  any  place  :  80 

Did  Iulius  Ccefar  build  that  place,  my  Lord  ? 

76.  may]  my  Q3.  7^-  ftall  be ]  JJialbe  Qq. 

78.  and ]  as  Q7Q8. 

‘  think  ’  in  this  passage  is  not  the  same  in  origin  as  think  used  personally,  but  comes 
from  the  Anglo-Saxon  thincan,  to  seem,  appear,  which  is  used  impersonally  with 
all  personal  pronouns.  The  other  word  is  thencan,  to  think,  and  the  distinction 
is  maintained  in  the  German  diinken  and  denken. 

76.  some  day  or  two]  For  other  examples  of  ‘some’  used  with  a  numeral 
adjective,  qualifying  a  singular  noun  of  time,  see  Abbott,  §  21. 

77.  Your  Highnesse  ...  at  the  Tower]  Legge  (i,  210):  To  modern  ears 
the  very  name  of  the  Tower  is  ominous;  but  it  was  otherwise  in  the  fifteenth  cen¬ 
tury,  when  it  was  a  royal  palace,  the  state  apartments  of  which  continued  to  be 
occupied  by  the  sovereign  until  the  days  of  Elizabeth.  Edward  IV.  had  been 
lodged  there  before  his  coronation,  and  had  frequently  kept  his  Court  there  with 
great  magnificence.  The  Tower  had  been  selected  because  the  Prince  would 
there  be  less  accessible  to  the  influences  from  which  it  was  deemed  important  to 
separate  him.  So  far  from  its  being  intended  to  make  it  a  place  of  captivity,  the 
Croyland  Chronicler  informs  us  that  ‘a  discussion  took  place  in  the  Council’ 
(‘in  Senatu, ’  by  which,  as  elsewhere,  he  doubtless  means  in  the  Council,  and 
not,  as  has  been  invariably  represented,  in  Parliament),  ‘about  removing  the 
King  to  some  place  where  fewer  restrictions  would  be  imposed  upon  him.’  It 
had  long  been  the  custom  for  the  sovereigns  to  take  up  their  residence  at  the  Tower 
for  a  short  time  previous  to  their  coronation,  ‘and  thence  they  generally  proceeded 
in  state  through  the  city  to  be  crowned  at  Westminister.’  All  authorities  are  agreed 
in  representing  Richard  as  acting  with  the  tenderness  which  his  nephew’s  tem¬ 
perament  and  circumstances  demanded.  He  is  even  said  to  have  besought  him 
on  his  knees  to  banish  fear,  to  confide  in  his  affection,  and  rely  on  the  necessity  of 
those  summary  measures  which  occasioned  him  such  painful  forebodings.  The 
removal  to  the  Tower  seems  to  have  taken  place  about  the  19th  of  May,  and  the 
preparations  for  the  coronation  were  hurried  forward. 

80.  of  any  place]  Abbott  (§  409):  This  (which  is  a  thoroughly  Greek  idiom, 
though  independent  in  English)  is  illustrated  by  Milton’s  famous  line:  ‘The 
fairest  of  her  daughters  Eve.’  The  line  is  a  confusion  of  two  constructions:  ‘Eve 
fairer  than  all  her  daughters,’  and  ‘Eve  fairest  0}  all  women.’  So  ‘I  dislike  the 
tower  more  than  any  place’  and  ‘ most  of  all  places’  becomes,  ‘of  any  place.’ — 
Wright:  Compare,  for  this  construction,  ‘Of  all  men  else  I  have  avoided  thee.’ — 
Macbeth,  V,  viii,  4;  and  ‘That  York  is  most  unmeet  of  any  man.’ — 2  Hen.  VI: 
I,  iii,  167. 

81.  Did  Iulius  Caesar  build  that  place]  Wheatley  (iii,  392):  There  is  no 
authority  to  confirm  tradition  in  the  remote  antiquity  assigned  to  the  Tower.  No 
part  of  the  existing  structure  is  of  a  date  anterior  to  the  keep,  or  the  great  square 


ACT  III,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


199 

82 


Buck.  He  did,  my  gracious  Lord,  begin  that  place, 

Which  fince,  fucceeding  Ages  haue  re-edify’d. 

Prince.  Is  it  vpon  record  ?  or  elfe  reported 
Succefiiuely  from  age  to  age,  he  built  it?  85 

Buck .  Vpon  record,  my  gracious  Lord. 

Prince.  But  fay,  my  Lord,  it  were  not  regiftred, 

Me  thinkes  the  truth  fhould  Hue  from  age  to  age, 

As  ’twere  retayl’d  to  all  pofteritie, 

Euen  to  the  generall  ending  day.  90 

Glo.  So  wife,  fo  young,  they  fay  doe  neuer  Hue  long. 


82.  Buck.]  Glo.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev. 
Varr.  Knt,  Sta. 

82.  83.  He  did...fince~]  As  one  line, 
omitting  gracious,  Steev.  conj. 

83.  re-edify' d]  rebuilt  Han. 

84.  record  record ,  Qq. 

86.  Vpon]  It  is  upon  Cap. 


89.  retayl' d]  intail' d  Warb. 
pofleritie~\  pofteritie  Qs> 

90.  ending ]  Q^g.Ff.  Rowe,  Pope,Wh. 

i.  all-ending  QI  et  cet. 

91.  neuer]  ne'er  Pope, +  ,  Cap.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Hal.  Sta.  Dyce 

ii,  iii,  Huds.  Ktly,  Coll.  iii. 


tower  in  the  centre,  called  the  White  Tower,  and  this,  it  is  well  known,  was  built 
by  William  the  Conqueror,  circ.  1078.  During  excavations  made  for  building 
purposes  in  1772  and  1777  some  ruins  of  an  old  stone  wall  nine  feet  in  thickness, 
and  of  which  the  cement  was  exceedingly  hard,  were  found  near  the  White  Tower, 
and  these  were  either  the  remains  of  an  earlier  edifice,  or  a  portion  of  the  bulwarks 
of  the  old  wall.  Some  old  Roman  coins  were  also  found  at  the  same  time. 

82.  my  gracious  Lord]  Marshall  objects  to  the  omission  of  the  epithet  ‘gra¬ 
cious,’  proposed  by  Steevens  [see  Text.  Notes],  since  ‘Buckingham  does  not  else¬ 
where  address  Edward,  the  titular  King,  simply  as  “my  Lord.”  Gloucester  so 
does,  but  he,  as  prince  of  the  blood,  was  entitled  so  to  do.’ 

83.  re-edify’d]  Wright:  This  word  only  occurs  again  in  Tit.  And.,  I,  i.  351: 
‘This  monument  five  hundred  years  hath  stood,  Which  I  have  sumptuously  re- 
edified.’  Compare:  ‘The  ruin’d  wals  he  did  reaedifye,’  Spenser,  Faerie  Queene, 
II,  x,  46.  ‘Edify’  was  formerly  not  infrequently  used  in  its  literal  sense  as  equiva¬ 
lent  to  build.  So  in  Faerie  Queene:  ‘There  was  an  holy  chappell  edifyde,’  I,  i,  34. 
[Craigie  (N.  E.  D.)  gives  numerous  examples  of  ‘re-edify,’  in  the  sense  to  re¬ 
build,  extending  over  a  period  from  1420  to  1680.] 

89.  retayl’d  to  all  posteritie]  Warburton:  And  so  it  is;  and,  by  that  means, 
like  so  many  ‘retailed’  things,  becomes  adulterated.  We  should  read  1  intail' d 
to  all  posterity’;  which  is  finely  and  sensibly  expressed,  as  if  the  truth  was  the 
natural  inheritance  of  our  children;  which  it  is  impiety  to  deprive  them  of. — 
Johnson:  ‘Retail’d’  may  signify  diffused,  dispersed. — M.  Mason:  ‘Retailed’ 
means  handed  down  from  one  to  another.  Richard  uses  the  word  ‘retailed’  in  the 
same  sense  in  IV,  iii,  352,  where,  speaking  to  the  Queen  of  her  daughter,  he  says: 
‘To  whom  I  will  retail  my  conquest  won.’ 

90.  generall  ending]  Marshall:  The  omission  of  all  [in  the  Folios,  and  all 
the  Quartos  but  the  First]  very  likely  arose  from  the  transcriber  mistaking  it  for 
the  final  syllable  of  ‘general.’ 

91.  So  wise  .  .  .  neuer  liue  long]  Steevens:  A  proverbial  line:  ‘Is  cadit 


200 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iii,  sc.  i. 


Prince.  What  fay  you,  Vnckle  ?  92 

Glo.  I  fay,  without  Charadters,  Fame  hues  long. 

Thus,  like  the  formall  Vice,  Iniquitie, 

I  morallize  two  meanings  in  one  word.  95 


93.  lines']  ne'er  lives  Mason,  Ran. 

94, 95.  Thus. ..word.]  Aside.  Ff  et  seq. 

94.  formall  Vice,  Iniquitie ]  formal 
wise  antiquary  Han.  i.  formal-wise 
antiquity  Warb.  Han.  ii.  formal  vice 


hypocrisy  Long  MS  ap.  Cam. 

95.  morallize  two ]  moralize:  two 
Warb.  conj.  Johns.  Var.  ’73.  moralize, 
— two  Cap.  Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Ran. 


ante  senem,  qui  sapit  ante  diem.’ — Reed:  Bright  says  ( Treatise  on  Melancholy, 
1586,  p.  52):  ‘I  have  knowne  children  languishing  of  the  splene,  obstructed 
and  altered  in  temper,  talke  with  gravitie  and  wisdome,  surpassing  those  tender 
yeares,  and  their  judgement  carrying  a  marvellous  imitation  of  the  wisdome  of 
the  ancient,  having  after  a  sorte  attained  that  by  disease,  which  other  have  by 
course  of  yeares;  whereon  I  take  it  the  proverbe  ariseth,  that  they  be  of  short  life 
who  are  of  wit  so  pregnant.’ — Wright:  This  sentiment  is  attributed  by  Pliny  to 
Cato  the  Censor.  ‘  For  Cato  that  famous  Censor,  writing  to  his  sonne  as  touching 
this  argument,  hath  delivered,  as  it  were  out  of  an  Oracle,  that  there  is  an  observa¬ 
tion  of  death  to  be  collected  even  in  them  that  are  in  perfect  health.  For  (saith  he) 
youth  resembling  age,  is  an  undoubted  signe  of  untimely  death,  or  short  life.’ — 
Nat.  Hist.,  vii,  51,  Holland’s  translation. 

93.  Characters]  Wright:  The  noun  has  here  the  accent  on  the  second  syllable 
only  in  this  passage  in  Shakespeare.  In  Hamlet,  I,  iii,  59,  the  verb  has  the  same 
accent:  ‘And  these  few  precepts  in  thy  memory  See  thou  character.’ 

94,  95.  like  the  formall  Vice,  Iniquitie  .  .  .  two  meanings  in  one  word] 
Theobald  was  the  earliest  to  note  that  *  vice  ’  signified  ‘  not  a  quality  but  a  per¬ 
son,'  and  at  times,  under  this  name,  certain  sins,  such  as  Iniquity,  Covetousness, 
etc.  were  personated.  This  truthful  assertion  Warburton  denied,  and,  after  a 
useless  parade  of  learning,  involving  references  to  a  Grecian  idea  of  antiquity 
and  quotations  from  Ben  Jonson,  propounded  an  emendation,  which  no  editor, 
except  Hanmer,  has  ever  honoured  by  adopting,  as  follows:  ‘Thus  like  the 
formal-wise  Antiquity,  I  moralize:  Two  meanings,’  etc. — Johnson:  To  what 
equivocation  does  Richard  refer?  The  position  immediately  preceding,  that 
fame  lives  long  without  characters,  that  is,  without  the  help  of  letters,  seems  to 
have  no  ambiguity.  He  must  allude  to  the  former  line:  ‘So  young  so  wise,  they 
say,  do  ne’er  live  long,’  in  which  he  conceals,  under  a  proverb,  his  design  of  has¬ 
tening  the  Prince’s  death. — Capell  (ii,  181):  Richard’s  double-meaning  word  is 
‘  characters,  ’  which,  as  he  accents  it,  signifies  letters;  and  so  taken  his  answer  con¬ 
firms  the  Prince’s  opinions,  that  fame,  the  renown  of  things,  might  live,  though 
not  register'd:  another  way,  his  line’s  meaning  may  be — that  fame  might  live  long 
without  desert  from  great  actions;  intimating  that  his  own  actions,  which  he  did  not 
mean  should  be  great  or  good  either,  would  operate  as  well  as  better  [sic.]  that  way. 
— M.  Mason:  The  Prince  having  caught  some  parts  of  the  former  line,  asks 
Richard  what  he  says,  who,  in  order  to  deceive  him,  preserves  in  his  reply  the 
latter  words  of  the  line,  but  substitutes  other  words  at  the  beginning  of  it,  of  a 
different  import  from  those  he  had  uttered.  This  is  the  equivocation  that  Gloster 


ACT  III,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


201 


[94,  95.  like  the  formall  Vice,  .  .  .  two  meanings  in  one  word] 
really  made  use  of,  though  it  does  not  correspond  with  his  own  description  of  it. 
‘Word’  is  not  here  taken  in  its  literal  sense,  but  means  a  saying,  a  short  sentence. 
— Heath  (p.  297):  Richard  doth  not,  in  this  passage,  seriously  moralize  at  all, 
or  even  dream  of  so  doing.  .  .  .  The  term  moralize  is  only  introduced  in  allusion 
to  the  title  of  our  old  dramatic  pieces,  which  were  commonly  called  moralities, 
in  which  the  Vice  was  always  one  of  the  shining  characters. — Steevens:  From 
the  following  stage  direction,  in  Histriomastix,  or  The  Player  Whipt,  1610,  it 
appears  that  ‘the  Vice’  and  ‘Iniquity’  were  sometimes  distinct  personages:  ‘Enter 
a  roaring  devil,  with  the  Vice  on  his  back,  Iniquity  in  one  hand,  and  Juventus 
in  the  other.  Devil.  Ho,  ho,  ho!  these  babes  mine  are  all,  The  Vice,  Iniquite, 
and  Child  Prodigal.’  [1.  281,  et  seq.,  ed.  Simpson.]  The  following  part  of  this  note 
was  obligingly  communicated  by  the  Rev.  Mr  Bowie,  of  Idmestone  near  Salisbury. 
I  know  no  writer  who  gives  so  complete  an  account  of  this  obsolete  character  as 
Archbishop  Harsnet,  in  his  Declaration  of  Popish  Impostures,  p.  114,  Lond.,  1608: 
‘It  was  a  pretty  part  (he  tells  us)  in  the  old  church-playes,  when  the  nimble  Vice 
would  skip  up  nimbly  like  a  jackanapes  into  the  devil’s  necke,  and  ride  the  devil 
a  course,  and  belabour  him  with  his  wooden  dagger,  till  he  made  him  roare,  whereat 
the  people  would  laugh  to  see  the  devil  so  vice-haunted.’ — Upton  ( Var .  ’21, 
Appendix,  248):  The  allusion  here  is  to  the  Vice,  a  droll  character  in  our  old 
plays,  accoutred  with  a  long  coat  [see  Collier,  post\,  a  cap  with  a  pair  of  ass’s 
ears,  and  a  dagger  of  lath.  Shakespeare  alludes  to  his  buffoon  appearance  in 
Twelfth  Night:  ‘In  a  trice,  like  to  the  old  Vice; — Who  with  dagger  of  lath,  in 
his  rage  and  his  wrath,  Cries,  ah,  ah!  to  the  Devil,’  IV,  ii,  134.  In  2  Henry  IV: 
III,  ii,  343,  Falstaff  compares  Shallow  to  a  Vice’s  dagger  of  Lath.  In  Hamlet, 
III,  iv,  98,  Hamlet  calls  his  uncle  ‘A  vice  of  kings,’  i.  e.,  a  ridiculous  represen¬ 
tation  of  majesty.  The  iniquity  was  often  the  Vice  in  our  moralities;  and  is  intro¬ 
duced  in  Ben  Jonson’s  The  Devil’s  an  yljj,  and  likewise  mentioned  in  his  Epigr. 
cxv:  ‘Being  no  vitious  person,  but  the  Vice  About  the  town,  .  .  .  Acts  old  Iniquity, 
and  in  the  fit  Of  miming,  gets  th’  opinion  of  a  wit.  ’  But  a  passage  cited  from  his 
play  [p.  10,  ed.  Gifford]  will  make  the  following  observations  more  plain:  Pug  asks 
the  devil  ‘to  lend  him  a  Vice.’  ‘Satan.  What  Vice?  .  .  .  Pug.  Why  any:  Fraud, 
Or  Covetousness,  or  lady  Vanity,  Or  old  Iniquity.  Sat.  I’ll  call  him  hither.  Enter 
Iniquity.  Ini.  What  is  he  calls  upon  me,  and  would  seem  to  lack  a  Vice  ?  Ere  his 
words  be  half  spoken,  I  am  with  him  in  a  trice.’  Again  in  /  Henry  IV:  II,  iv,  499, 
where  Hal,  humourously  characterizing  Falstaff,  calls  him,  ‘That  reverend  Vice,  that 
great  Iniquity,  that  father  Ruffian,  that  Vanity  of  years,’  in  allusion  to  this  buffoon 
character. — Malone:  ‘Moralize’  as  a  verb  active  occurs  in  Rape  of  Luc.:  ‘Nor 
could  she  moralize  his  wanton  sight,  More  than  his  eyes  were  open  to  the  light,’ 
11.  104,  105.  Where  it  means,  to  interpret,  or  investigate  the  latent  meaning  of  his 
wanton  looks,  as  in  the  present  passage,  it  signifies  either,  to  extract  the  double 
and  latent  meaning  of  one  word  or  sentence,  or  to  couch  two  meanings  under  one 
word  or  sentence.  So  ‘moral’  is  used  in  Much  Ado  for  a  secret  meaning:  ‘You 
have  some  moral  in  this  Benedictus,’  III,  iv,  77.  The  word  which  Richard  uses 
in  a  double  sense  is  ‘live,’  which  in  his  former  speech  he  had  used  literally,  and 
in  the  present  is  used  metaphorically.  [Mason’s  argument,  that  ‘word’  may  here 
signify  a  whole  sentence],  is  defective.  Though  in  tournaments  the  motto  on  a 
knight’s  shield  was  formerly  called  The  word,  it  never  at  any  period  was  called 
'One  word.’  .  .  .  ‘The  formal  Vice’  perhaps  means  the  shrewd,  the  sensible  Vice. 


202 


The  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  i. 


[94,  95.  like  the  formall  Vice,  .  .  .  two  meanings  in  one  word] 

In  The  Com.  of  Err.,  V,  i,  105,  ‘a  formal  man’  seems  to  mean,  one  in  his  senses;  a 
rational  man.  Again,  in  Twelfth  Night,  ‘ — this  is  evident  to  any  formal  capacity,’ 
II,  v,  128. — Rann:  The  double  meaning  expression  here  is — ‘ne’er  lives  long,’ 
as  applied  privately  to  the  Prince,  openly  to  fame. — Knight:  The  equivocation 
which  Richard  uses  consists  in  the  repetition  of  the  words  ‘live  long,’  which  the 
Prince  has  caught,  but  with  a  different  ‘meaning.’  He  has  ‘moralized  two  mean¬ 
ings’  by  retaining  the  same  conclusion  of  his  sentence,  or  ‘word.’ — Douce  (i,  468): 
When  the  vicious  qualities  annexed  to  the  names  of  this  singular  theatrical  per¬ 
sonage  in  our  old  dramas,  together  with  the  mischievous  nature  of  his  general 
conduct  and  deportment,  be  considered,  there  will  scarcely  remain  a  doubt  that 
the  word  ‘Vice’  must  be  taken  in  its  literal  and  common  acceptation.  It  may  be 
worth  while  just  to  state  some  of  these  curious  appellations,  such  as  shift,  ambi¬ 
dexter,  sin,  fraud,  vanity,  covetousness,  iniquity,  prodigality,  infidelity,  inclination, 
and  many  others  that  are  entirely  lost,  or  still  lurk  amidst  the  impenetrable  stores 
of  our  ancient  dramatic  compositions. — -Collier  (Hist.  Dram.  Poet.,  ii,  266): 
The  Vice  was  wholly  unknown  in  our  ‘religious  plays,’  which  have  hitherto 
gone  by  the  name  of  Mysteries,  and  to  which  Gifford,  Malone,  and  Theobald 
refer.  The  Life  and  Repentance  of  Mary  Magdalen  and  King  Darius,  which 
both  contain  the  character  of  ‘the  Vice,’  were  not  written  until  the  reign  of 
Mary.  The  same  remark  will  apply  to  the  Interlude  of  Queen  Hester,  1561, 
which  differs  from  other  religious  plays,  inasmuch  as  ‘the  Vice’  there  is  a  court 
Jester  and  servant,  and  is  named  Hardy-dardy.  ...  In  the  most  ancient  Moral- 
plays  characters  of  gross  buffoonery  and  vicious  propensities  were  inserted  for 
the  amusement  and  instruction  of  the  audience:  but,  although  we  hear  of  ‘the 
fool’  in  Medwell’s  interlude  performed  before  Henry  VIII.  in  1516,  such  a  char¬ 
acter  seems  very  rarely  to  have  been  specifically  called  ‘the  Vice’  anterior  to  the 
Reformation.  .  .  .  He  did  not  by  any  means  constantly  wear  the  parti-coloured 
habilaments  of  a  fool:  he  was  sometimes  required  to  act  a  gallant,  and  now  and 
then  to  assume  the  disguise  of  virtues  it  suited  his  purpose  to  personate.  In  The 
Life  and  Repentance  of  Mary  Magdalen  he  several  times  changes  his  apparel  for 
the  sake  of  deception.  In  The  Trial  of  Treasure,  1567,  he  was  not  only  provided, 
as  was  customary,  with  his  wooden  dagger,  but  in  order  to  render  him  more  ridicu¬ 
lous,  with  a  pair  of  spectacles  (no  doubt  of  preposterous  size),  which  he  is  desired 
by  one  of  the  characters  to  put  on.  The  ‘long  coat’  worn  by  ‘the  Vice,’  alluded 
to  in  Ben  Jonson’s  Devil  is  an  .<4js,  I,  i,  was  doubtless  that  dress  which,  Douce 
informs  us,  belonged  ‘  to  the  Idiot  or  natural  fool,’  often  of  a  mischievous  or  malig¬ 
nant  disposition;  and  it  affords  another  link  of  connection  between  the  Vice  and  the 
domestic  fool.  The  same  observation  may,  perhaps,  be  made  upon  the  ‘false  skirts’ 
mentioned  by  Jonson  in  his  Staple  of  News;  and  the  ‘juggler’s  jerkin’  in  the  same 
passage  might  be  the  sort  of  dress  worn  by  the  Vice  in  the  interlude  of  Jack  Juggler. 
— Ward  (i,  60):  As  there  is  in  the  old  French  moralities  no  character  similar  to 
‘the  Vice,’  he  must  be  assumed  to  have  been  of  native  English  origin.  ...  It  is 
impossible  not  to  admire  the  ingenuity  of  this  invention,  which  counterbalanced 
the  dead  weight  of  the  abstractions  constituting  the  main  agents  of  the  morality.  It 
was  the  character  of  ‘  the  Vice’  which  helped  to  make  possible  the  growth  of  comedy 
out  of  the  moralities. — Staunton:  May  [Richard]  not  refer  to  the  double  sense  of 
the  word  ‘characters’  [see  Capell],  which  signifies  both  the  signs  by  which  we  com¬ 
municate  ideas,  and  the  good  or  evil  qualities  which  distinguish  us? — Wright: 


act  hi,  sc.  i.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


203 


Prince .  That  Iulius  Ccefar  was  a  famous  man, 
With  what  his  Valour  did  enrich  his  Wit, 

His  Wit  fet  downe,  to  make  his  Valour  Hue  : 
Death  makes  no  Conqueft  of  his  Conqueror, 


99 


96 


99.  makes ]  made  Han. 


99.  his ]  Q2-8,  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Coll. 


Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly.  this  Q,  et  cet. 


‘Formal’  appears  to  be  here  used  very  much  as  we  now  use  conventional  to  describe 
that  which  was  regular  and  in  accordance  with  ordinary  rule  and  custom.  The 
Vice  of  the  Stage  was  a  familiar  figure  to  the  audience,  and  they  were  thoroughly 
accustomed  to  his  proceedings.  ...  It  would  appear  from  the  present  passage  that 
one  of  his  devices  for  [making  the  audience  laugh]  was  to  play  upon  the  double 
meanings  of  words.  In  Holland’s  Pliny,  vii,  48,  ‘vice’  is  the  rendering  of  the  Latin 
mima :  ‘Luceia  a  common  vice  in  a  play,  followed  the  stage  and  acted  thereupon 
100  yeeres.’  As  the  moral  of  any  circumstance  or  narrative  is  the  meaning  which 
lies  hidden  in  it,  to  ‘  moralize  ’  signifies  to  draw  out  or  interpret  this  meaning.  Com¬ 
pare:  ‘Did  he  not  moralize  this  spectacle,’ — As  You  Like  It,  II,  i,  44, — that  is, 
deduce  from  it  some  moral  sense.  And  hence  to  expound  generally.  .  .  .  Richard  is 
afraid  that  his  villainy  should  not  be  sufficiently  apparent,  and  in  his  ‘Asides’  to 
the  audience  becomes  his  own  expositor. — Vaughan  (iii,  72):  The  word  to  which 
Gloucester  describes  himself  as  giving  two  meanings  I  take  to  be  the  one  word 
‘say.’  ...  ‘I  say’  in  Gloucester’s  reply  is  the  antithesis  to  ‘they  say’  in  1.  91.  .  .  . 
The  two  meanings  [which  he  moralises  ‘in  one  word’]  are — the  one,  speak  or  utter; 
the  other,  lay  down  as  a  maxim  or  opinion.  This  equivocation  with  this  one  word 
makes  his  whole  answer  both  a  truth  and  a  lie — a  truth  to  the  ear,  a  lie  to  the 
understanding.  The  two  words  ‘live  long’  were,  perhaps,  repeated  by  Gloucester 
in  order  to  facilitate  the  acceptance  of  his  statement,  as  the  words  had  probably 
been  overheard,  but  they  did  not  constitute  the  equivocation  of  that  statement. — 
Marshall:  It  would  seem  that  ‘formal’  does  not  here  mean  precise,  pedantic,  or, 
as  it  is  generally  explained,  conventional,  because  ‘the  Vice’  was  conventional  in 
his  dress,  demeanour,  and  his  jokes;  but  it  would  seem  rather  to  have  the  sense 
of  common,  ordinary,  as  it  is  used  in:  ‘Thou  shouldst  come  like  a  Fury  crown’d 
with  snakes  Not  like  a  formal  man.’ — Ant.  dr  Cleo.,  II,  v,  40,  41.  [Marshall 
asserts  that  ‘formal’  does  not  mean  conventional,  but  what  is  common,  ordinary. 
Is  not  this  the  very  meaning  given,  and  justly,  by  Wright,  to  ‘conventional’? 
Possibly  this  is  Richard’s  most  triumphant  equivocation.  Could  he  have  achieved 
greater  success  than  by  the  bewilderment  of  the  critics,  who  in  turn  have  decided 
that  his  equivocating  words  are:  ‘so  wise,  so  young’;  ‘characters’;  ‘I  say  without 
characters’;  ‘live’;  ‘ne’er  live  long’;  and  ‘say’?  When  my  betters  are  so  dis¬ 
traught  would  it  not  verge  on  impudency  either  to  decide  or  to  suggest? — Ed.] 

97.  With  what]  Abbott  (§  252)  calls  attention  to  this  curious  use  of  ‘what,’ 
meaning  here,  that  with  which. 

99.  his  Conqueror]  Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  149):  Death  has  not  conquered 
J  ulius  Caesar,  who  may,  much  rather,  be  said  to  have  conquered  death,  inasmuch 
as  he  still  lives,  at  least,  in  fame.  This  fine  thought  the  anonymous  corrector  of 
the  Quarto  so  little  understood  that  he  altered  ‘his’  to  this.  [That  the  Folio 
reading,  although  having  so  few  advocates,  is  nevertheless  to  be  preferred  for  the 
reasons  given  by  Delius,  is  the  opinion  of  the  present  Ed.] 


204 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  i. 


For  now  he  Hues  in  Fame,  though  not  in  Life.  ioo 

lie  tell  you  what,  my  Coufin  Buckingham. 

Buck.  What,  my  gracious  Lord  ? 

Prince.  And  if  I  Hue  vntill  I  be  a  man, 
lie  win  our  ancient  Right  in  France  againe, 

Or  dye  a  Souldier,  as  I  liu’d  a  King.  105 

Glo.  Short  Summers  lightly  haue  a  forward  Spring. 


100.  now]  yet  Cap. 

101.  my]  Om.  F3F4> 

102.  gracious]  good  Cap. 

103.  And]  An  Theob.  et  seq. 

106.  Short... Spring.]  In  Italics,  F3F4. 


Aside.  Johns.  Cap. 

106.  Summers  ...haue]  summers  ...has 
Popei.  summer  ...has  Pope  ii,  +  (  —  Var. 

’73)- 

lightly]  likely  Qg.  mostly  Gould. 


100.  For  now  .  .  .  not  in  Life]  Cowden-Clarke  ( Sh .  Char.,  p.  463):  Shakes¬ 
peare  not  infrequently  makes  his  children  talk  beyond  their  years,  and  at  times 
almost  greatly  ;  nevertheless  they  still  wear  the  childlike  air  and  manner — so 
completely  did  he  invest  himself  for  the  time  in  the  spiritual  garment  of  each  char¬ 
acter  as  he  summoned  it  to  the  scene.  The  questions  the  little  king  puts  to  his 
uncle  respecting  Julius  Caesar,  and  his  precocious  reflection  upon  the  character 
of  that  great  Roman,  strictly  harmonise  with  his  forced  maturity  of  mind,  and 
yet  the  manner  of  his  speech  is  youthful.  Although  here  is  sound  philosophy,  and 
that  it  is  somewhat  precocious  in  reflection,  yet  how  perfectly  is  the  language  in 
which  it  is  expressed  that  of  a  superior-minded  child! 

103-105.  And  if  I  liue  ...  as  I  liu’d  a  King]  Churchill  (p.  505):  The  young 
King  [in  The  True  Tragedy]  gives  evidence  of  a  maturity  for  which  the  chronicle 
offers  no  hint.  This  may  find  its  source  in  J  Hen.  VI.  The  same  ripeness  is 
still  more  extensively  shown  by  the  Prince  in  Shakespeare.  That  The  True  Tragedy 
may  have  been  partly  responsible  for  this  is  suggested  not  only  by  its  precedence 
in  the  conception,  but  by  the  likeness  in  the  following  passages:  ‘King.  Ah  gods, 
if  I  do  live  my  fathers  yeares  as  God  forbid  but  I  may,  I  will  so  roote  out  this 
malice  &  enuie  sowne  among  the  nobilitie,  that  I  will  make  them  weary  that  were 
the  first  beginners  of  these  mischiefes.  Gray.  Worthily  well  spoken  of  your 
princely  Maiestie,  Which  no  doubt  sheweth  a  king-like  resolution.’ 

103.  And  if]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  And.  C.  conj.  conditional  =  If.) :  This 
was  a  common  use  of  Middle  High  German  unde;  ...  It  may  have  originated 
from  ellipsis,  as  in  the  analogous  use  of  so,  e.  g.,  ‘I’ll  cross  the  sea,  so  it  please 
my  lord’  (Shakespeare);  cf.  ‘and  it  please’;  or  it  may  be  connected  with  the  intro¬ 
ductory  and  in  ‘And  you  are  going?’  A  direct  development  from  the  original 
prepositional  sense,  though  a  priori  plausible,  is  on  historical  grounds  improbable. 
Modern  writers,  chiefly  since  Horne  Tooke,  have  treated  this  as  a  distinct  word, 
writing  it  an,  a  spelling  occasionally  found  circa  1600,  especially  in  an ’  ’/,  equivalent 
to  and  it. 

106.  lightly]  Bradley  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.) :  J  6.  b.  As  is  apt  to  happen;  commonly, 
often.  [Schmidt  {Lex.)  quotes  the  present  line  as  the  only  example  of  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  use  of  the  word  ‘lightly’  in  the  foregoing  sense.  Between  the  several 
subdivisions  of  meaning  given  by  Bradley,  e.  g.,  ‘4.  Easily,  readily;  5.  Quickly, 
swiftly;  6.  As  may  easily  happen.  -J-  6.  b.  As  is  apt  to  happen’;  besides  the  use 


ACT  III,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


205 

107 


Enter  young  Yorke,  Hajlings ,  and  Cardinall. 

Buck.  Now  in  good  time,  heere  comes  the  Duke  of 
Yorke. 

Prince .  Richard  of  Yorke,  how  fares  our  Noble  Bro-  no 
ther  ? 

Yorke.  Well,  my  deare  Lord,  fo  muft  I  call  you  now. 

Prince.  I,  Brother,  to  our  griefe,  as  it  is  yours  : 

Too  late  he  dy’d,  that  might  haue  kept  that  Title, 

Which  by  his  death  hath  loft  much  Maieftie.  115 


107.  young]  Om.  Rowe,  +  ,Cap.  Dyce. 
and]  Om.  Qq. 

Cardinal!.]  Archbishop.  Rowe, 
+  .  the  Cardinal.  Cap.  et  seq. 

no.  Noble']  lotting  Q,Q2,  Cap.  Var. 
’78,  ’85,  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam, +  , 


Ktly,  Huds. 

1 1 2.  deare]  Q^Ff,  Rowe,  dread  Qt 
Q2  et  cet. 

1 14.  Too  late]  Too  soon  Han.  So  late 
Vaughan  (iii,  74). 


of  ‘lightly’  in  1.  137,  the  exact  shade  of  meaning  is  in  the  present  line  not  lightly 
discriminated. — Ed.] 

107.  Enter  young  Yorke]  Weight:  In  the  history,  the  young  Duke  was 
brought  to  his  uncle  in  the  Star  Chamber  and  afterwards  taken  to  join  his  brother 
at  the  Bishop  of  London’s  palace  at  St.  Paul’s. 

1 1 2.  deare  Lord]  Knight:  The  epithet  dread  [of  QjQ2]  requires  to  be  retained, 
for  ‘dear  Lord’  would  not  mark  the  new  title  by  which  York  addresses  his  brother— 
llord'  being  the  title  by  which  York  is  himself  subsequently  named. — R.  G.  White: 
[ Dread  Lord  was  a  royal  title,  and]  it  is  selected  with  noticeable  tact,  as  the  one 
which  marks  most  strongly  the  change  of  relation  between  the  little  playfellows. 
‘Great  and  manifold  were  the  blessings,  Most  Dread  Sovereign’ — are  the  words  in 
which  the  translators  of  our  Bible  began  their  Dedication  to  King  James. — Delius 
{Jahrbuch,  vii,  155):  The  formality  in  the  speech  of  the  prince  to  his  younger 
brother  is  intended  to  be  slightly  jocose,  and  with  the  same  spirit  of  jocosity  the 
younger  prince  replies,  addressing  his  brother  indeed  as  his  Lord,  but  yet  qual¬ 
ifying  his  address  with  the  familiar  ‘dear.’  The  anonymous  corrector  of  the 
Quarto  has  completely  destroyed  the  delicate  formality  of  the  first  line,  as  well  as 
the  familiarity  of  the  second,  since  he  changes  ‘  noble  ’  to  loving  and  ‘  dear  ’  to  dread. 
[That  the  Quarto  reading  dread  is  the  more  fitting  is  shown,  I  think,  by  the 
reply  of  the  young  king:  ‘Too  late  he  died  that  might  have  kept  that  title  Which 
by  his  death  hath  lost  much  majesty.’  The  title  which  has  lost  majesty  in  its  new 
representative  is  presumably  the  royal  one,  and  not  that  of  ‘dear  Lord.’  The 
use  of  ‘our’  in  the  preceding  line  seems  to  indicate  also  the  remembrance  by 
the  young  king  of  his  royal  position. — Ed.] 

1 14.  Too  late  he  dy’d]  Warbueton:  That  is,  too  lately,  the  loss  is  too  fresh 
in  our  memory.  [Schmidt  {Lex.  s.  v.  adv.  3)  furnishes  many  examples  of  late 
used  in  this  sense.  Keightley  suggests  that  the  words  should  be  too  soon  [see 
Text.  Notes],  or  too  early,  and  adds:  ‘This  may  perhaps  be  regarded  as  an 
instance  of  the  substitution  of  a  contrary  term.’  See  Expositor,  p.  62,  §  10,  where 
a  remarkable  number  of  similar  typographical  errors  is  given. — Ed.] 


206 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  i. 


Glo.  How  fares  our  Coufin,  Noble  Lord  of  Yorke?  116 
Yorke.  I  thanke  you,  gentle  Vnckle.  O  my  Lord, 

You  faid,  that  idle  Weeds  are  faft  in  growth  : 

The  Prince,  my  Brother,  hath  out-growne  me  farre. 

Glo.  He  hath,  my  Lord.  120 

Yorke.  And  therefore  is  he  idle  ? 

Glo.  Oh  my  faire  Coufin,  I  muft  not  fay  fo. 

Yorke.  Then  he  is  more  beholding  to  you,  then  I. 

Glo.  He  may  command  me  as  my  Soueraigne, 

But  you  haue  power  in  me,  as  in  a  Kinfman.  1 25 

Yorke.  I  pray  you, Vnckle,  giue  me  this  Dagger. 

Glo.  My  Dagger,  little  Coufin?  with  all  my  heart. 

Prince.  A  Begger,  Brother  ?  1 28 


1 1 9.  out-growne ]  ouergrowne  Qs. 

120.  121.  As  one  line,  Steev.  et  seq. 

1 2 1 .  idle  ?]  idle.  F3F^. 

123.  he  is]  is  he  Theob.  ii,  +  ,  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 

beholding ]  beholden  Rowe,  + , 
Cap.  Varr.  Ran.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Sta. 


125.  in  me]  o' er  me  Coll.  MS. 

126.  Vnckle ,  giue]  uncle  then,  give 
Han.  Steev.  Var. ’03,  ’  13.  gentle  uncle, 
give  Ktly.  uncle  give  to  Ibid.  conj.  (Exp. 

263). 

this]  this  your  Theob.  ii,  Warb. 

Johns. 


1 18.  You  said,  that  idle  Weeds,  etc.]  Courtenay  {Comment.,  ii,  82)  remarks 
that  he  can  ‘find  no  warrant  in  the  Chronicles'  for  this  ‘pert  conversation  of  the 
Duke  of  York.’  But  then  the  Chronicles  are  also  silent  in  regard  to  the  scene 
between  Clarence  and  the  Murderers;  and  also  to  the  main  part  of  the  remorse 
of  Edward  for  the  death  of  his  brother. — Ed. 

123.  beholding]  See  II,  i,  139,  and  note. 

126.  giue  me  this  Dagger]  Abbott  (p.  449)  cites  this  line  as  an  example  of 
dramatic  irony. — Marshall:  The  emendation  which  we  have  ventured  to  print 
is  a  very  simple  one.  [Thus:  ‘I  pray  you,  uncle,  give  me  this — {playing  with 
Gloucester' s  sword-belt — then  touching  the  dagger )  this  dagger.’]  It  is  probable 
that,  if  our  conjecture  is  right,  the  transcriber  might  have  overlooked  the  repetition 
of  this.  It  is  pretty  certain,  whether  we  insert  the  word  this  or  not,  that  the  speaker 
was  intended  to  pause  before  naming  his  request;  and  it  would  seem,  from  the 
context,  that  Gloucester  had  no  idea  of  what  the  little  prince  was  going  to  ask  for, 
and  that  he  was  rather  relieved  when  he  found  that  his  request  was  a  comparatively 
trifling  one. — Barnard  {Notes  &  Queries,  23d  May,  1896,  p.  402):  This  may 
simply  be  meant  to  represent  a  natural  request  on  the  part  of  a  pert,  forward  boy, 
or  it  may  also  involve  an  intimation  that  it  were  well  that  Gloucester  should  be 
rendered  harmless  by  being  disarmed.  May  it,  however,  further  imply  the  dis¬ 
arming  of  Gloucester  in  another  sense  as  well  ?  For  one  of  the  most  familiar  amu¬ 
lets  against  the  evil  eye  was  a  model  of  a  sword  or  dagger;  and  there  would  be  a 
touch  of  Shakespearean  irony  in  thus  proposing  that  Richard  should  provide  his 
intended  victim  with  a  counter-charm  against  his  own  malignity.  [See  note  by 
Barnard,  I,  ii,  50.] 


act  hi,  sc.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


207 


Yorke.  Of  my  kind  Vnckle,  that  I  know  will  giue, 

And  being  but  a  Toy, which  is  no  griefe  to  giue.  130 

Glo.  A  greater  gift  then  that,  lie  giue  my  Coufin. 

Yorke.  A  greater  gift  ?  O,  that’s  the  Sword  to  it. 

Glo.  I,  gentle  Coufin,  were  it  light  enough. 

Yorke.  O  then  I  fee,  you  will  part  but  with  light  gifts, 

In  weightier  things  you’le  fay  a  Begger  nay.  135 

Glo.  It  is  too  weightie  for  your  Grace  to  weare. 

Yorke.  I  weigh  it  lightly,  were  it  heauier. 

Glo.  What,  would  you  haue  my  Weapon,  little  Lord  ? 

Yorke.  I  would  that  I  might  thanke  you,  as,  as,  you  139 


129.  Of  3  Ay,  a  beggar,  brother ,  of 
Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

that  ...will giue]  that. ..will give' t 
Lettsom  ap.  Dyce  ii.  who  will  give' t,  I 
know  Marshall  conj. 

130.  And  ]  Om.  Lettsom  ap.  Dyce  ii. 
being  but]  being  Ff.  but  Anon. 

ap.  Cam. 

which  ij]  it  is  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Theob.  Han.Warb.  Cap.  Om.  Steev.conj. 
griefe ]  gift  QM,  Johns.  Varr. 

Ran. 

to  giue.]  to  lack.  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 


to.  Vaughan,  doubtfully  (iii,  75). 

132.  to]  too  Qs< 

134.  you  will]  you'll  Pope,  +  ,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i, 
Hal.  Sta.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Ktly,  Huds. 
gifts]  gift  Rowe. 

136.  weightie]  heauy  Qz,  Cam. +. 

137.  I  weigh]  I'd  weigh  Han.  I'd 
wear  Lettsom  ap.  Dyce  ii. 

139.  thanke]  thitike  Qg. 

as,  <7r,]  as  as  Q3>  as — as — 
Walker  (Crit.  iii,  173),  Huds.  as  QqFf 
et  cet. 


130.  being]  For  other  examples  of  a  ‘contraction  in  words,  wherein  a  light 
vowel  is  preceded  by  a  heavy  vowel  or  diphthong,  ’  see  Abbott,  §  470.  Such  a 
contraction,  Abbott  remarks,  will  explain  this  apparent  Alexandrine. 

137.  I  weigh  it  lightly]  Warburton:  That  is,  I  should  still  esteem  it  but  a 
trifling  gift,  were  it  heavier. 

138.  my  Weapon]  Marshall:  Note  the  emphasis  [on  ‘my’];  Gloucester  asks 
contemptuously:  ‘Would  you,  child  as  you  are,  have  my  weapon,  the  sword  with 
which  I  have  done  such  mighty  deeds?’  [This  is  Marshall’s  own  emphasis,  and 
probably  correct,  but  it  is  not  the  rhythmical  emphasis.  Is  it  possible  to  read 
the  line  with  its  due  iambics,  and  make  the  ictus  fall  on  ‘my’? — Ed.] 

139.  140.  as,  as,  you  call  me]  Pickersgill  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  i875-’76;  p.  92): 
There  can  be  very  little  doubt,  I  think,  that  in  this  scene  the  corrector  of  the 
Folio,  for  some  reason  or  other,  had  recourse  to  one  of  the  Quartos;  [the  present 
line]  appears  to  make  it  almost  certain  that  the  particular  Quarto  was  Qs.  Now 
it  will  be  observed  that  the  misprints  .  .  .  are  not  such  as  any  one  might  correct; 
but  if  the  corrector  had  been  the  author,  would  he  not  certainly  have  restored 
the  true  reading?  .  .  .  The  commas  which  are  inserted  after  each  ‘as’  in  the 
Folio,  show  how  desperately  the  corrector  had  tried  to  extract  a  meaning  out 
of  the  mere  printer’s  blunder  in  Q3,  the  copy  which  he  had  then  before  him. — 
Wright:  [This  repetition  of  ‘as’],  apparently  to  indicate  a  hesitation  on  the  part 
of  the  speaker,  makes  the  verse  redundant.  [If  this  be  a  misprint,  it  is  certainly 
felicitous;  and  rightly  interpreted  by  Walker,  see  Text.  Notes. — Ed.] 


208 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  i. 

140 


call  me. 

Glo.  How? 

Yorke.  Little. 

Prince.  My  Lord  of  Yorke  will  ftill  be  croffe  in  talke  : 
Vnckle,your  Grace  knowes  how  to  beare  with  him. 

Yorke.  You  meane  to  beare  me,  not  to  beare  with  me  :  145 

Vnckle,  my  Brother  mockes  both  you  and  me, 

Becaufe  that  I  am  little,  like  an  Ape, 

He  thinkes  that  you  fhould  beare  me  on  your  fhoulders. 

Buck.  With  what  a  fharpe  prouided  wit  he  reafons  :  149 

143.  JHW\  euer  F3F4,  Rowe.  149-152.  [Aside  to  Hastings.  Cap. 

149.  Buck.]  Card,  or  Hast.  Anon.  ap.  149.  Jharpe prouided ]  sharp-provided 

Cam.  Theob.  et  seq. 


143.  crosse  in  talke]  Murray  (AT.  E.  D.  s.  v.  Cross,  adj.):  5  f  a.  Of  persons, 
their  dispositions,  actions,  etc.  Given  to  opposition;  inclined  to  quarrel  or  disagree; 
perverse,  froward,  contrarious.  [The  present  line  quoted.] 

147,  148.  Ape,  .  .  .  you  should  beare  me]  Johnson:  The  reproach  seems 
to  consist  in  this:  at  country  shows  it  was  common  to  set  the  monkey  on  the  back 
of  some  other  animal,  as  a  bear.  The  Duke,  therefore,  in  calling  himself  ‘ape,’ 
calls  his  uncle  bear. — Steevens:  Compare:  ‘ — Thou  hast  an  excellent  back  to 
carry  my  lord’s  ape,’  First  Part  of  the  Eighth  Liberal  Science ,  entituled  Ars  Adu- 
landi,  He.  by  Ulpian  Fulwel,  1576.  See  likewise  Hogarth’s  Humours  of  an  Election , 
plate  iv.  York  also  alludes  to  the  protuberance  on  Gloucester’s  back,  which  was 
commodious  for  carrying  burdens,  as  it  supplied  the  place  of  a  porter’s  knot. — 
M.  Mason:  I  do  not  believe  that  the  reproach  is  what  Johnson  supposes,  or  that 
York  meant  to  call  his  uncle  a  bear.  He  merely  alludes  to  Richard’s  deformity, 
his  high  shoulder,  or  hump-back,  as  it  is  called.  That  was  ‘the  scorn’  he  meant 
to  ‘give  his  uncle.’ — Douce  (ii,  35):  There  is  a  fine  picture,  by  Holbein,  of  Henry 
VIII.  and  some  of  his  family.  In  it  is  an  admirable  portrait  of  Will  Somers,  the 
king’s  fool,  with  a  monkey  clinging  to  his  neck  and  apparently  rendering  his 
friend  William  a  very  essential  piece  of  service,  wherein  this  animal  is  remarkably 
dexterous.  .  .  .  York  may  therefore  mean  to  call  his  uncle  a  fool ,  and  this,  after 
all,  may  be  the  scorn  that  Buckingham  afterwards  refers  to. 

149.  sharpe  prouided  wit]  Collier  (Notes,  etc.,  p.  330):  The  MS  Corrector 
assures  us  that,  although  the  intention  of  the  dramatist  is  evident,  a  decided  mis¬ 
print  has  crept  into  the  line:  he  reads,  ‘ sharply  pointed  wit.’ — Singer  ( Sh . 
Vind.,  1 71):  ‘Sharp  provided’  could  never  be  a  misprint  for  sharply  pointed,  nor 
do  they  resemble  in  sound.  The  old  reading,  according  to  Baret,  may  well  be 
continued:  ‘provided  of  those  things  which  he  should  saie.’  Interference,  and 
especially  such  a  violent  change  as  the  correctors  propose,  is  entirely  unnecessary. 
— Cowden-Clarke  (Sh.  Char.,  p.  468):  The  little  York’s  pert  and  sly  taunts  to 
his  uncle  Gloucester,  in  the  presence  of  the  young  king,  are  most  naturally  managed, 
and  as  skilfully  contrasted  with  the  sweet,  gentle  sketch  of  his  brother,  whose 
premature  thought  has  taken  the  character  of  pensive  care  and  unnaturally  early 
wisdom. 


ACT  III,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


209 

To  mittigate  the  fcorne  he  giues  his  Vnckle,  150 

He  prettily  and  aptly  taunts  himfelfe  : 

So  cunning,  and  fo  young,  is  wonderfull. 

Glo.  My  Lord,  wilt  pleafe  you  paffe  along  ? 

My  felfe,and  my  good  Coufin  Buckingham , 

Will  to  your  Mother,  to  entreat  of  her  155 

To  meet  you  at  the  Tower,  and  welcome  you. 

Yorke.  What,  will  you  goe  vnto  the  Tower,  my  Lord? 

Prince.  My  Lord  Proteftor  will  haue  it  fo. 

Yorke.  I  fhall  not  fleepe  in  quiet  at  the  Tower. 

Glo.  Why,  what  fhould  you  feare  ?  160 


150.  giues]  giue  Q3Q$. 

1 5 1 .  prettily ]  pretely  Qq. 

153.  Lord  ]  gracious  Lord  Han.  Mai. 
Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13. 

wilt  ]  QqFf,  Rowe,  will  it  Ktly. 
will't  Pope  et  cet. 

you]  your  highness  Cap.  your 


grace  to  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS),  you  to 
Ktly. 

154.  Coufin]  Coofen  Qz.  couzen  Q4> 
158.  will]  Q2_8,If,  Rowe,  Pope,  here 
will  Han.  Cap.  needes  will  Q,  et  cet. 

160.  what]  Sir,  what  Han.  Cap. 
Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’  13. 


155.  Will  to  your  Mother]  Compare:  ‘I’ll  to  the  king  and  signify  to  him,’  I, 
iv,  101. — Oechelhauser  (Essay,  etc.,  p.  100):  The  opinion  advanced  by  Rotscher, 
and  later  adopted  by  other  aesthetic  critics,  for  example,  Mezi^res,  that  Richard’s 
design  of  murdering  his  nephews  first  came  to  maturity  during  this  conversation 
with  the  prince,  cannot,  in  my  opinion,  be  maintained  consistently  **nth  the  whole 
tenour  of  the  play,  and  especially  with  Richard’s  character.  Had  he  U.*  fall  those 
grim  asides — so  portentous  of  an  approaching  end — on  the  occasion  of  the  cocking 
gibes  of  the  precocious  little  Duke  of  York,  it  would  be  a  more  plausible  gi  mnd 
for  the  foregoing  opinion  that  he  here  first  contemplated  the  murder.  But  Richard 
uttered  both  those  asides  in  conversation  with  the  elder  of  the  two  princes.  Is  it 
in  accordance  with  the  present  events  and  characters  to  conceive  that  the  innocent 
remarks  on  the  founding  of  the  tower  by  Caesar,  and  the  sensible  remark:  ‘Me- 
thinks  the  truth  should  live  from  age  to  age,’  etc.,  first  suggested  to  Richard  the 
thought  of  murdering  both  nephews?  The  removal  itself,  no  matter  whether 
Prince  Edward  appeared  witty  or  not,  was  a  natural  consequence  of  the  first  step. 
Imprisonment  in  that  wild  time  of  party-discord  was  so  insufficient  that,  in  order 
to  remain  in  undisturbed  possession  of  the  throne,  this  bloody  deed  must  have 
been  of  necessity  included  in  Richard’s  original  idea. 

158.  will  haue  it  so]  The  reading  ‘ e'en  will  have  it  so,’  which  is  that  of 
Collier’s  MS,  was  not  adopted  by  him  either  in  his  edition  ii,  or  in  his  Mono¬ 
volume. — Ed. 

160.  Why,  what  should  you  feare]  Steevens:  Without  Hanmer’s  addition  of 
sir,  this  half  line  is  harsh  and  quite  unmetrical. — Malone:  Certainly  unmetrical, 
and  why  not?  Here  Steevens  again  falls  into  the  error  which  I  have  so  often  had 
occasion  to  mention — that  every  word,  and  every  short  address  of  three  or  four 
words,  are  to  be  considered  as  parts  of  metrical  verses,  a  notion  which  has  again 
and  again  been  confuted.  But  if  any  were  to  be  made  to  this  line,  a  more  improper 


14 


210 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  iii,  sc.  i. 


Yorke.  Marry,  my  Vnckle  Clarence  angry  Ghoft :  161 

My  Grandam  told  me  he  was  murther’d  there. 

Prince.  I  feare  no  Vnckles  dead. 

Glo.  Nor  none  that  liue,  I  hope. 

Prince.  And  if  they  liue,  I  hope  I  need  not  feare.  165 

But  come  my  Lord  :  and  with  a  heauie  heart, 

Thinking  on  them,  goe  I  vnto  the  Tower. 

A  Senet.  Exeunt  Prince ,  Yorke ,  Ha/lings,  and  Dorfet. 


Manet  Richard ,  Buckingham ,  and  Catesby. 


Buck.  Thinke  you,  my  Lord,  this  little  prating  Yorke  170 
Was  not  incenfed  by  his  fubtile  Mother, 


162.  Grandant]  Granatn  Qq. 

163,  164.  As  one  line,  Ktly. 

165.  And~\  An  Theob.  et  seq. 

166.  and ]  Om.  Qq. 

168.  A  Senet.]  Om.  QqFf,  Rowe,  +  , 
Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Ktly. 
Dorfet.]  Archbishop.  Han. 


169.  Manet ...  Catesby.]  Manent... 
Catesby.  F2F4,  Rowe.  Om.  Cap.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce, 
Wh.  i,  Hal.  Sta.  Exeunt  all  but  Richard 
...Catesby.  Cam.  +  .  Scene  1 1.  Manent 
...Catesby.  Pope,  +  (  — Var. ’73). 


word  than  sir  could  scarcely  be  found.  Hanmer  should  seem  to  have  been  thinking 
of  the  court  of  George  II.  In  our  days  we  address  the  princes  of  the  blood  by  the 
title  of  sir;  but  I  have  found  no  instance  of  such  an  address  being  used  to  a  prince 
in  the  time  of  Shakespeare. 

161.  Clarence  angry  Ghost]  Compare:  ‘The  bitter  sentence  of  poor  Clarence 
death,’  I,  iv,  184. 

165.  And  if]  See  1.  103  supra. 

165.  And  if  they  liue  .  .  .  feare]  Vaughan  (iii,  75):  If  ‘they’  be  referred  to 
the  uncles  that  live  of  Gloucester’s  answer  [there  is  an  absurdity] ;  but  there  is 
perfect  propriety  and  sense  if  ‘they’  be  referred  to  the  ‘uncles’  of  the  prince’s 
observation.  In  this  case  we  must  take  the  two  speeches  of  the  prince  together 
as  meaning  this:  ‘I  fear  not  my  uncles  if  they  are  dead,  and  I  hope  I  need  not 
fear  at  all  if  my  uncles  are  alive.’  The  prince  is  desirous  to  avoid  any  statement 
that  he  is  not  afraid  of  his  living  uncle  Richard,  and  he  frames  his  language 
accordingly,  so  as  to  answer  Gloucester’s  question  in  form,  without  giving  him 
the  assurance  for  which' the  question  was  asked.  .  .  .  That  the  words,  ‘And  if 
they  live,  ’  do  refer  to  the  ‘  uncles  dead  ’  of  the  prince ’s  speech,  is  evinced  by  what 
follows:  ‘And  with  a  heavy  heart  Thinking  on  them  go  I  unto  the  Tower’;  where 
‘them’  cannot  possibly  relate  to  any  but  uncles,  who,  as  he  supposed,  might  be 
dead. 

171.  incensed]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.):  v.2  f  4-  To  incite  to  some  action;  to  urge, 
instigate,  stir  up,  ‘set  on.’  Coverdale:  Erasmus  Par.  i,  Pet.  7:  ‘The  Profession  .  .  . 
whereunto  they  ought  rather  to  be  encensed  and  allured  by  your  honest  behauiour.’ 
— Nares:  To  put  sense  into,  to  instruct,  inform.  A  provincial  expression  still 
quite  current  in  Staffordshire,  and  probably  Warwickshire,  whence  we  may  sup- 


ACT  III,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


2 1 1 


To  taunt  and  fcorne  you  thus  opprobrioufly  ?  172 

Glo.  No  doubt,  no  doubt :  Oh  ’tis  a  perillous  Boy, 

Bold,  quicke,  ingenious,  forward,  capable  : 

Hee  is  all  the  Mothers,  from  the  top  to  toe.  175 

Buck.  Well,  let  them  reft :  Come  hither  Catesby , 

Thou  art  fworne  as  deepely  to  effect  what  we  intend, 

As  clofely  to  conceale  what  we  impart : 

Thou  know’ft  our  reafons  vrg’d  vpon  the  way. 

What  think’ft  thou  ?  is  it  not  an  eafie  matter,  180 

To  make  William  Lord  Hajlings  of  our  minde, 

For  the  inftallment  of  this  Noble  Duke 

In  the  Seat  Royall  of  this  famous  lie?  183 


1 73-  perillous ]  Q,Q2,FaF3.  perilous 
Q3-6,  Coll.  Hal.  perlous  Q7Qj.  perilous 
Pope,  + .  parlous  F^  et  cet. 

175.  Mothers ]  Mother's  Rowe  et  seq. 
the  top ]  top  F3F4. 

176,  177.  Well...  Thou\  As  one  line, 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

Well  ...fworne~\  As  one  line 
(omitting  hither},  Pope,  +  .  Ending  lines 
rejl..  fworne  Cap.  Steev.  Varr.  As  one 
line,  Varr.  Mai. 


176.  Catesby]  gentle  Catesby  Cap. 
Steev.  Varr. 

177.  deepely\  deep  Dyce  ii  conj,  Mar¬ 
shall. 

Thou  art  fworne ]  Separate  line, 
Cam.  conj. 

179.  knout Jl~\  knowefl  Qq. 

180.  186.  think y?]  thinkejl  Qq. 

181.  William  Lord ]  Lord  William 
Pope,  +  (  — Var.  *73),  Marshall. 

182.  inflallment ]  inflalement  Q,Qa. 


pose  Shakespeare  had  it.  Buckingham  does  not  mean  provoked,  for  the  child 
had  shown  no  anger;  but  instructed ,  schooled.  [Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  Insense) 
gives  numerous  examples  wherein  the  word  means  to  instruct. — Ed.] — Wright: 
Although  a  meaning  of  ‘incense’  may  be,  to  instruct ,  to  inform ,  the  usual  signifi¬ 
cation  of  the  word  \to  instigate ]  gives  very  good  sense  in  the  present  passage. 

173.  perillous]  See  note  on  ‘parlous,’  II,  iv,  39. 

174.  capable]  That  is,  quick  of  apprehension,  intelligent. 

176.  Catesby]  For  other  examples  of  e  mute,  pronounced,  see  Abbott,  §  487; 
compare  III,  vii,  61;  69;  87;  89,  where  this  name,  although  occurring  in  the  middle 
of  the  line,  must,  for  the  sake  of  the  metre,  be  pronounced  ‘Catesby.’ 

177.  Thou  art  swome]  Wright:  These  words  should  perhaps  be  placed  by 
themselves,  or,  omitting  ‘hither,’  be  read  with  the  previous  line. — Tawney:  Pos¬ 
sibly  ‘deeply’  may  be  taken  with  ‘effect,’  in  the  sense  of  cunningly.  [Would  not 
a  comma  after  ‘deeply’  render  the  sense  of  these  two  lines  somewhat  clearer? 
Thus:  ‘Thou  art  sworn  as  deeply,  to  effect  what  we  intend,  As  closely  to  conceal 
what  we  impart.’  That  is,  You  are  as  deeply  sworn  to  carry  out  our  wishes,  as 
you  are  to  secrecy  in  regard  to  them. — Barnard  offers  as  an  alternative  interpre¬ 
tation  to  the  above:  Thou  art  sworn  both  cunningly  to  effect  what  we  intend  and 
closely  to  conceal  what  we  impart. — Ed.] 

183.  Seat  Royall]  Wright:  Compare:  ‘and  the  morow  after,  he  was  pro- 
claymed  kyng  and  with  solempnite  rode  to  Westminster,  and  there  sate  in  the 
seate  roial.’ — Hall,  Chronicle ,  p.  375. 


212 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ill,  sc.  i. 


Cates.  He  for  his  fathers  fake  fo  loues  the  Prince, 

That  he  will  not  be  wonne  to  ought  againft  him.  185 

Buck.  What  think’ft  thou  then  of  Statileyl  Will 
not  hee  ? 

Cates.  Hee  will  doe  all  in  all  as  Hajlings  doth. 

Buck.  Well  then,  no  more  but  this  : 

Goe  gentle  Catesby,  and  as  it  were  farre  off,  190 

Sound  thou  Lord  Hajlings , 

How  he  doth  ftand  affetted  to  our  purpofe, 

And  fummon  him  to  morrow  to  the  Tower, 

To  fit  about  the  Coronation. 

If  thou  do’ft  finde  him  tractable  to  vs,  195 

Encourage  him,  and  tell  him  all  our  reafons : 

If  he  be  leaden,  ycie,  cold,  vn willing,  197 


185.  ought]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
Cap.  aught  Theob.  et  cet. 

186, 187.  Will  not  hee  ?]  what  will  he  ? 
Qq,  Cam.  +. 

189-191.  rfwo  lines,  ending:  Catesby 
...Haftings,  Pope  et  seq. 

189.  but  ]  than  Rowe  ii. 

190.  farre]  a  farre  Qq.  far  F3F4  et 
seq. 

191, 192.  Sound... affeCled]  One  line, 
Qq. 


191.  thou ]  Q,Q2.  Om.  Q^. 

1 92.  doth  Jland  ]  flands  Qq. 

to  our  ptirpofe]  Vnto  our  purpofe , 
if  he  be  willing ,  as  one  line,  Qq. 
our]  your  Q4. 

I93_I95-  And. ..to  vs]  Om.  Qq. 

196.  tell]  Jhew  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +  , 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

197.  leaden]  laden  F3F4. 

ycie,  cold]  icy-cold  Ingleby,  Cam. 
+ ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 


190,  191.  farre  off,  Sound  thou  Lord  Hastings]  Compare:  ‘It  is  better  to 
sound  a  person  with  whom  one  deals,  afar  off,  than  to  fall  upon  the  point  at  first, 
except  you  mean  to  surprise  him  by  some  short  question.’ — Bacon,  Essay:  Of 
Negotiating.  This  essay  appeared  in  the  edition  of  1597,  the  same  year  as  Q, 
of  the  present  play. — Ed. 

193,  194.  And  summon  him  .  .  .  the  Coronation]  Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  137): 
The  omission  of  these  lines  in  the  Quarto  leaves  it  somewhat  enigmatical  why 
Hastings  should  be  on  the  point  of  departure  for  the  council  as  given  in  the  next 
scene. — Koppel  (p.  19):  From  several  passages  in  the  next  scene  it  is  evident  that 
Hastings  was  to  take  part  in  this  council,  which  is  here  mentioned.  Thus  Stanley 
warns  him  in  regard  to  the  ‘divided  councils,’  to  which  Hastings  replies:  ‘His 
honour  and  myself  are  at  the  one’;  again,  ‘Go  bid  thy  master  rise  and  come  to  me; 
And  we  will  both  together  to  the  tower.*  Moreover,  in  the  following  scene  Catesby 
does  not  carry  out  the  orders  given  here  by  Richard;  he  merely  speaks  of  the  lords 
at  Pomfret,  and  then  quickly  learns  just  how  Hastings  stands  as  regards  the  crown¬ 
ing  of  Richard.  There  is  no  question  of  any  summons  by  Catesby:  such  would 
have  been  utterly  superfluous,  since  Hastings  was  certainly  about  to  depart  for  the 
Tower.  Thus,  in  further  contradiction  of  the  opinion  of  Delius,  the  omission 
of  this  passage  should  rather  be  regarded  as  a  justifiable  and  intelligent  correction. 


ACT  III,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


213 

198 


Be  thou  fo  too,  and  fo  breake  off  the  talke, 

And  giue  vs  notice  of  his  inclination  : 

For  we  to  morrow  hold  diuided  Councels,  200 

Wherein  thy  felfe  fhalt  highly  be  employ’d. 

Rich.  Commend  me  to  Lord  William:  tell  him  Catesby, 

His  ancient  Knot  of  dangerous  Aduerfaries 
To  morrow  are  let  blood  at  Pomfret  Caftle, 

And  bid  my  Lord,  for  ioy  of  this  good  newes,  205 

Giue  Miftreffe  Shore  one  gentle  Kiffe  the  more. 

Buck.  Good  Catesby ,  goe  effe6t  this  bufmeffe  foundly. 

Cates.  My  good  Lords  both,  with  all  the  heed  I  can. 

Rich.  Shall  we  heare  from  you,  Catesby ,  ere  we  fleepe  ? 

Cates.  You  fhall,  my  Lord.  210 

Rich.  At  Crosby  Houfe,  there  fhall  you  find  vs  both. 


198.  the]  your  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +,  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Huds. 

205.  Lord]  friend  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +. 
{friends  Q<^.) 

206.  Miftreffe]  gentle  Miftreffe  Q3_5. 
gentle  Miftris  Q6.  gentile  Mis  Q7< 
gentle  Mis  Qg. 

207.  goe ]  Om.  Qq. 


208.  can ]  may  Qq,  Cam.  +. 

209.  Shall]  Sail  Q4. 

21 1.  Crosby  Houfe]  Ff,  Rowe,  Wh.  i. 
Crofby  place  Qq.  Crosby-Place  Pope  et 
cet. 

fhall  you ]  you  fhall  Rowe, +  , 
Varr.  Ran. 


198.  the  talke]  Wright,  in  referring  to  the  Quarto  reading  your ,  remarks  that 
the  ‘MS  had  probably  “yr”  or  “ye.” ’ 

200.  diuided  Councels]  ‘But  the  protectour  and  the  duke,  after  that,  they 
had  set  the  lord  Cardinall,  the  Archebishoppe  of  Yorke  than  lorde  Chauncellour, 
the  Bishoppe  of  Ely,  the  lord  Stanley  and  the  lord  Hastinges  than  lord  Chamber- 
leine,  with  many  other  noble  men  to  commune  and  deuise  about  the  coronacion 
in  one  place:  as  fast  were  they  in  an  other  place  contryuyng  the  contrary,  and  to 
make  the  protectour  kyng.’ — More,  p.  66. 

203.  Knot]  Compare:  ‘A  knot  you  are  of  damned  blood-suckers,’  III,  iii,  8. 

209,  210.  Shall  we  heare  from  you  .  .  .  You  shall,  my  Lord]  Daniel 
{Introd.,  xix):  With  a  mere  change  of  name,  these  speeches  occur  again  in  IV, 
ii,  ‘Shall  we  heare  from  you  Tirrel,  ere  we  sleepe?  Ye  shall  my  Lord.’  Now 
on  the  first  occurrence  of  these  speeches  it  is  to  be  noted  that  Catesby  does  not 
execute  his  mission  ’till  the  next  morning,  and  it  surely  does  not  require  any  great 
effort  of  the  imagination  to  suppose  that,  in  revision,  these  speeches  were  therefore 
transferred  to  the  Tyrell  scene  where  they  fit  better;  though  through  oversight 
they  were  not  struck  out  in  the  previous  Catesby  scene.  It  could  never  have  been 
intended  that  they  should  appear  in  both  places.  .  .  .  All  such  variations  between 
the  Folio  and  Quarto,  it  seems  to  me,  can  only  be  regarded  as  alterations  of  the 
Folio  version  when  the  Quarto  was  prepared.  Until  evidence  to  the  contrary  is 
forthcoming,  all  the  other  textual  variations  in  the  two  versions  must  be  set  down 
to  the  same  cause,  due  allowance  being,  of  course,  made  for  error  and  corruption. 

211.  Crosby  House]  See  I,  ii,  236,  and  note. 


214 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  i. 


Exit  Catesby.  212 

Buck.  Now,  my  Lord, 

What  (hall  wee  doe,  if  wee  perceiue 

Lord  Hajlings  will  not  yeeld  to  our  Complots?  215 

Rich.  Chop  off  his  Head  : 

Something  wee  will  determine  : 

And  looke  when  I  am  King,  clayme  thou  of  me 

The  Earledome  of  Hereford,  and  all  the  moueables 

Whereof  the  King,  my  Brother,  was  poffeft.  220 


212.  Exit  Catesby]  Om.  Q,Q2. 

213,  214.  Now... perceiue]  Ff,  Rowe. 
One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

213.  Now]  Om.  Pope, +  ,  Cap.  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Huds. 

215.  Lord]  William  Lord  Qq,  Sta. 
Complots]  complot  Q4. 

216,217.  Chop... determine]  Ff,  Rowe. 
One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

216.  Head:]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Knt, 
Wh.  i.  head  man ,  Qq.  heady  man , 
Pope  et  cet. 

217.  Something  ...determine]  Ff,Rowe, 


Cap.  Knt,  Wh.  i.  Somewhat... do  Qq  et 
cet. 

217.  Something]  ’s  somewhat  Vaughan 

(iii,  77)- 

218.  clayme  thou]  thou  claim\ aughan 
(iii,  78). 

219.  Hereford]  Q,Q2.  Herford  Qq. 
( Hertford  Q6.) 

all]  Om.  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Huds. 

220.  was]  flood  Qq,  Pope, +  ,  Sta. 
Cam.  + . 


215.  Complots]  Wright:  Cotgrave  has  ‘  Complot :  m.  A  complot,  conspiracie, 
couin,  confederacie,  packe,  or  compacting  together.’ 

217.  Something  .  .  .  determine]  Knight:  It  is  difficult  not  to  have  a  leaning 
to  the  Quarto  reading,  with  which  we  have  so  long  been  familiar;  but,  on  the  other 
hand,  it  is  impossible  to  believe  that  the  correction  came  from  any  hand  but  that 
of  the  author. — Collier  (Notes,  etc.,  p.  330):  [Since]  Richard’s  answer  to  Buck 
ingham  is  made,  by  the  MS  corrector,  to  conform  precisely  to  the  words  of  the 
Quarto,  we  may  perhaps  conclude  that  the  actor  so  recited  the  line  in  the  time  of 
the  old  corrector,  and  not  as  it  stands  more  tamely  in  the  Folios. — R.  G.  White: 
Aside  from  the  authority  of  the  Folio,  ‘determine,’  in  its  fine  sense,  bring  to  an  end, 
is  much  preferable  to  the  more  vague  and  commonplace  do  [of  the  Quarto]  (Rich¬ 
ard  means  to  have  done  with  vacillation  and  vacillators  in  the  surest  and  quickest 
way),  and  the  change  avoids  the  bald  repetition  of  Buckingham’s  query,  ‘what 
shall  we  do?’  and  also  the  cacophony,  ‘somewhat  we  will.’ — Marshall:  It  is 
not  necessary  to  take  ‘determine’  here  as  equivalent  to  to  put  an  end  to.  It  seems 
to  us  that  the  Qto  reading  is  more  commonplace  than  that  of  the  Ff.  Gloucester 
answers  with  characteristic  promptitude,  ‘Chop  off  his  head,’  so  getting  rid  of 
Hastings;  but  the  next  sentence,  ‘something  we  will  determine,’  is  spoken  in  a 
more  serious  manner,  the  meaning  being,  having  got  rid  of  him,  we  will  determine 
on  some  plan  of  action. 

219.  Earledome  of  Hereford]  Wright:  Buckingham  claimed  the  earldom  of 
Hereford  in  virtue  of  his  descent  from  Thomas  of  Woodstock,  who  married  Eleanor, 
daughter  and  coheiress  of  Humphrey  de  Bohun. 


act  iii,  sc.  i.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  215 

Buck.  lie  clayme  that  promife  at  your  Graces  hand.  221 
Rich.  And  looke  to  haue  it  yeelded  with  all  kindnefie. 

Come,  let  vs  fuppe  betimes,  that  afterwards 
Wee  may  digeft  our  complots  in  fome  forme. 

Exeunt.  225 


221.  Graces ]  Om.  Q?Qg. 

hand  ]  hands  Qq,  Cam.  + . 


222.  all  kindnejfe~\  all  •willingneJJ'e  Qt, 
Sta.  Cam.  + .  •willingneJJ'e  Q2_g. 


22i.  Buck.  lie  clayme  that  promise]  Richardson  (p.  30):  [Buckingham]  pos¬ 
sesses  some  talents,  and  considerable  discernment  of  human  nature:  his  passions 
are  ardent;  he  has  little  zeal  for  the  public  welfare,  or  the  interests  of  virtue  or 
religion;  yet  to  a  certain  degree,  he  possesses  humanity  and  a  sense  of  duty.  He 
is  moved  with  the  love  of  power  and  of  wealth.  He  is  susceptible,  perhaps,  of 
envy  against  those  who  arise  to  such  pre-eminence  as  he  thinks  might  have  suited 
his  own  talents  and  condition.  Possessing  some  political  abilities,  or  at  least  pos¬ 
sessing  that  cunning,  that  power  of  subtile  contrivance,  and  that  habit  of  activity, 
which  sometimes  pass  for  political  abilities,  and  which,  imposing  upon  those  who 
possess  them,  make  them  fancy  themselves  endowed  with  the  powers  of  distinguished 
statesmen;  he  values  himself  for  his  talents,  and  is  desirous  of  displaying  them. 
Indeed,  this  seems  to  be  the  most  striking  feature  in  his  character;  and  the  desire 
of  exhibiting  his  skill  and  dexterity  appears  to  be  the  foremost  of  his  active  prin¬ 
ciples.  Such  a  person  is  Buckingham;  and  the  conduct  of  Richard  is  perfectly 
consonant.  Having  too  much  penetration,  or  too  little  regard  to  the  public  weal, 
to  be  blindfolded  or  imposed  upon,  like  the  Mayor  Richard  treats  him  with  appa¬ 
rent  confidence.  Moved,  perhaps,  with  envy  against  the  kindred  of  the  Queen,  or 
the  hope  of  preeminence  in  consequence  of  their  ruin,  he  concurs  in  the  accom¬ 
plishment  of  their  destruction,  and  in  assisting  the  usurper  to  attain  his  unlawful 
preferment.  But,  above  all,  excessively  vain  of  his  talents,  Richard  borrows  aid 
from  his  counsels,  and  not  only  uses  him  as  the  tool  of  his  designs,  but  seems  to 
share  with  him  in  the  glory  of  their  success.  Knowing,  too,  that  his  sense  of 
virtue  is  faint,  or  of  little  power,  and  that  the  secret  exultation  and  triumph  for 
over-reaching  their  adversaries  will  afford  him  pleasure  sufficient  to  counter¬ 
balance  the  pain  that  may  arise  in  his  breast  from  the  perpetration  of  guilt,  he 
makes  him,  in  a  certain  degree,  the  confident  of  his  crimes.  It  is  also  to  be 
remarked  that  Buckingham,  elated  with  the  hope  of  reward,  and  elated  still 
more  with  vanity  in  the  display  of  his  talents,  appears  more  active  than  the 
usurper  himself;  more  inventive  in  the  contrivance  of  expedients,  and  more  alert 
in  their  execution.  There  are  many  such  persons,  the  instruments  of  designing 
men:  persons  of  some  ability,  of  less  virtue,  who  derive  consequence  to  themselves 
by  fancying  they  are  privy  to  the  vices  or  designs  of  men  whom  they  respect,  and 
who  are  lifted  with  triumph  in  the  fulfilment  of  crafty  projects.  Richard,  however, 
sees  the  slightness  of  Buckingham’s  mind,  and  reveals  no  more  of  his  projects 
and  vices  than  he  reckons  expedient  for  the  accomplishment  of  his  purpose:  for, 
as  some  men,  when  at  variance,  so  restrain  their  resentments  as  to  leave  room 
for  future  reconciliation  and  friendship,  so  Richard  manages  his  seeming  friend¬ 
ships  as  to  leave  room,  without  the  hazard  of  material  injury  to  himself,  foi 
future  hatred  and  animosity. 


2l6 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  ii. 


Scena  Secunda . 


Enter  a  MeJJenger  to  the  Doore  of  Ha/lings. 

Mejf.  My  Lord,  my  Lord. 

Hajl .  Who  knockes  ? 

Mejf.  One  from  the  Lord  Stanley.  5 

Hajl.  What  is’t  a  Clocke  ? 

Mejf.  Vpon  the  ftroke  of  foure. 

Enter  Lord  Hafhngs. 

Hajl.  Cannot  my  Lord  Stanley  fleepe  thefi  tedious 
Nights  ?  10 

Meff.  So  it  appeares,  by  that  I  haue  to  fay : 

Firft,  he  commends  him  to  your  Noble  felfe. 

Hafl.  What  then  ?  1 3 


1.  Scena  Secunda.]  Scene  continued, 
Qq.  Before  Lord  Hastings  House. 
Theob. 

2.  the  Doore  of]  Lord  Qq.  (Lo : 

Q,Q»-) 

3-5.  One  line,  Sing.  Ktly. 

3-7.  Two  lines,  ending:  Stanley... 
foure  Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13. 

3.  My  Lord,]  IVhat  ho  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.  + . 

4.  knockes  ?]  knocks  at  the  doore  ?  Qq, 
Sta.  Cam.  + . 

5.  One]  A  mejfenger  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 
the]  Om.  Pope, +  ,  Cap.  Varr.  Ran. 

6.  What  idt]  Whats  Qq. 

8.  Enter ...  Haftings.]  Om.  Q,Q2. 
Enter  L.  Haft.  Qq  (after  1.  5). 


9.  my]  Om.  Coll.  iii. 

My  Lord  Stanley]  thy  Majler  Q,, 
Theob.  +,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 
Sta.  Cam. +,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  thy 
maijler  Qa-s. 

thefi]  the  Qa-s,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev. 

Varr. 

tedious]  teditous  Q3QS- 

11.  appeares]  fhould  feeme  Qq,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

that]  what  Rowe  ii. 

12.  felfe]  Lordfhip  Qq,  Cap.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam. +. 

13.  What]  And  Qq,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 

13,  14.  One  line,  Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13. 


9.  Cannot  my  Lord,  etc.]  Capell  (ii,  182):  The  superior  ease  of  this  speech 
and  the  three  that  follow  it  will  recommend  them  to  the  comparer,  the  speaker’s 
sense  in  this  first  is — are  the  nights  so  tedious  thy  master  can’t  sleep  in  them? 
and  in  his  second  he  cuts  the  messenger  short,  whose  division  made  him  fear  he 
would  sermonise;  the  levity  of  the  proceeding  is  consonant  to  all  that  comes  from 
him  afterwards. — Spedding  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  21):  The  Folio  reading 
is  a  metrical  irregularity,  such  as  we  find  frequently  in  the  Quarto,  and  generally 
corrected  in  the  Folio.  But  if  the  corrector,  whoever  he  was,  forgot  to  strike  out 
thy,  in  the  Quarto  line,  it  would  easily  be  turned  into  ‘my’  by  the  printer’s  intelli¬ 
gence. — Marshall:  If  we  adopt  the  reading  of  F,  we  must  elide  ‘Cannot’  into 
Can’t.  It  looks  very  much  as  if  the  passage  were  intended  to  be  prose. 


ACT  III,  SC.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


21 7 


MeJJ.  Then  certifies  your  Lordfhip,  that  this  Night 
He  dreamt,  the  Bore  had  rafed  off  his  Helme  :  15 

Befides,  he  fayes  there  are  two  Councels  kept ; 

And  that  may  be  determin’d  at  the  one, 

Which  may  make  you  and  him  to  rue  at  th’ other. 

Therefore  he  fends  to  know  your  Lordfhips  pleafure, 

If  you  will  prefently  take  Horfe  with  him,  20 

And  with  all  fpeed  port  with  him  toward  the  North, 

To  fhun  the  danger  that  his  Soule  diuines. 

Ha/l .  Goe  fellow,  goe,  returne  vnto  thy  Lord, 

Bid  him  not  feare  the  feperated  Councell : 

His  Honor  and  my  felfe  are  at  the  one,  25 

And  at  the  other,  is  my  good  friend  Catesby ; 


14.  15.  Then. ..dreamt]  And  then  he 
fends  you  word  He  dreamt  to  night  (end¬ 
ing  first  line  with  word )  Qq,  Mai.  Cam. 
+  .  And  then  he  sends  you  word ,  my 
Lord  He  dreamt  (ending  first  line  with 
Lord )  Cap.  (Steev.  Varr.  follow  Qq 
ending  first  line  with  dreamt ) . 

15.  Bore ]  beare  Q,-s.  Boar  F^etseq. 
rafed  off  ]  rafle  Qi-4.  cafie  Q5_g 

(subs.)  raifed  off  F3F^.  raz'd  Cap. 
rased  Mai.  razed  Cam.  + . 

16.  kept  ]  held  Qq,  Pope,+ ,  Cap.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 

17.  may  be ]  many  be  Q7Q8- 


18.  at ]  Om.  Taylor  MS  ap.  Cam. 

20.  you  will  prefently ]  prefently  you 
will  Qq,  Cap.  Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Mai.  Steev. 
Varr.  Sing.  Cam.  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Ktly, 
Huds. 

21.  fpeed  ]  fpeedy  Q?. 

with  him  toward  ]  into  Qq.  with 
him  towards  Rowe  ii,  + .  hence  into  Cap. 

23.  Goe]  Good  Q3_8. 

24.  Councell]  Q2-6,F2,  Rowe,  Rife. 
counfell  F3>  councill  P'4<  counfels  Q, 
et  cet.  (subs.) 

26.  good friend  ]  feruant  Qq,  Cam.  + . 


15.  Bore  ...  rased  off  his  Helme]  Steevens  says  this  term  ‘“rased”  or 
r ashed  is  always  given  to  describe  the  violence  inflicted  by  a  boar,’  and  quotes: 
‘In  his  anointed  flesh  rash  boarish  fangs.’ — Lear  (Quarto),  III,  vii,  58;  also  ‘ha, 
cur  avaunt,  the  bore  so  rase  thy  hide.’ — Warner,  Albion's  England,  1602,  bk,  vii, 
ch.  xxxvi.  Craigie  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  Rase,  v.2  to  pull  or  pluck)  gives  the  present 
line  as  an  example,  but  among  the  many  meanings  which  he  also  assigns  to  Rase, 
v1,  that  mentioned  by  Steevens  does  not  appear.  Under  Rash  v1,  3  (to  dash 
things  together,  or  one  thing  through  another),  the  line  from  the  Quarto  Lear  is 
quoted  by  Craigie;  but  a  technical  meaning  as  applied  to  the  injury  by  a  boar  is 
not  assigned  to  it.  By  the  boar  is,  of  course,  meant  Gloucester.  See  I,  iii,  237. 
—Ed. 

16.  two  Councels]  See  III,  i,  200. 

25.  His  Honor]  Malone:  This  was  the  usual  address  to  noblemen  in  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  time.  Compare  ‘I  leave  it  to  your  honourable  survey,  and  your  honour 
to  your  heart’s  content.’ — Ven.  6°  Ad.,  Dedication. 

26.  at  the  other,  is  .  .  .  Catesby]  Malone:  Compare  ‘I  fear’d  the  end; 
my  Catesbies  being  there  Discharg’d  all  doubts:  Him  held  I  most  entire.’ — Mirror 
for  Magistrates;  The  Lord  Hastings,  1575  [p.  420,  ed.  1610]. 


218 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  ii. 


Where  nothing  can  proceede,  that  toucheth  vs,  27 

Whereof  I  fliall  not  haue  intelligence  : 

Tell  him  his  Feares  are  fhallow,  without  inftance. 

And  for  his  Dreames,  I  wonder  hee’s  fo  fimple,  30 

To  trufl  the  mock’ry  of  vnquiet  (lumbers. 

To  flye  the  Bore,  before  the  Bore  purfues, 

Were  to  incenfe  the  Bore  to  follow  vs, 

And  make  purfuit,  where  he  did  meane  no  chafe. 

Goe,  bid  thy  Matter  rife,  and  come  to  me,  35 

And  we  will  both  together  to  the  Tower, 

Where  he  (hall  fee  the  Bore  will  vfe  vs  kindly. 

Meff.  lie  goe,  my  Lord,  and  tell  him  what  you  fay. 

Exit. 

Enter  Catesby.  40 


29.  without  inflance]  wanting  injlance 
Qt,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Ktly, 
Huds.  wanting  injtancie  Q2_g  (subs.) 

30.  hee's  fo  fimple]  he  is  fo  fond  Qq, 
Cam.  +  ,  Coll,  iii  (he  is  fond  Q4).  he's 
so  fond  Pope,  +,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev. 
Varr.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Sta.  Huds. 

31.  mock'  ry]  mockery  Qq. 


32.  purf ues,~\ purfues  vs  purfue 

VS  Q3-6. 

34.  no ]  to  Q4. 

38.  He  goe,  my  Lord ,  and]  My  gra¬ 
cious  Lord  lie  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  ( gratious 

Q.QJ- 

39.  Exit]  Om.  Q,Q2. 

40.  Enter  Catesby.]  Enter  Catef.  Qt. 
Enter  Catefby  to  L.  Haftings.  Qq. 


26.  my  good  friend  Catesby]  Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  155):  Shakespeare  is 
but  following  his  authority — Holinshed — in  thus  making  Hastings  refer  to  Catesby 
as  his  ‘good  friend’;  but  the  anonymous  corrector  of  the  Quarto,  who  does  not 
appear  to  have  read  the  chronicles,  considers  ‘my  good  friend’  in  the  mouth  of  a 
nobleman  as  too  undignified,  and  therefore  substitutes  the  meaningless  phrase, 
my  servant. 

29.  without  instance]  Johnson:  That  is,  wanting  some  example,  or  act  of 
malevolence,  by  which  they  may  be  justified:  or  which,  perhaps,  is  nearer  to  the 
true  reading,  wanting  any  immediate  ground  or  reason. — M.  Mason:  ‘Instance’ 
seems  to  mean  symptom  or  prognostic.  Compare:  ‘Before  the  always  wind- 
obeying  deep  Gave  any  tragic  instance  of  our  harm.’ — Com.  of  Err.,  I,  i,  65. — 
Dyce  (Gloss,  s.  v.  instance):  A  word  used  by  Shakespeare  with  various  shades 
of  meaning  which  it  is  not  always  easy  to  distinguish — motive,  inducement,  cause, 
ground;  symptom,  prognostic;  information,  assurance;  proof,  example,  indication. 
[The  majority  of  editors  have  accepted  Johnson’s  interpretation  of  ‘instance’ 
in  preference  to  that  of  Mason. — Ed.] 

38.  lie  goe,  my  Lord,  etc.]  This  line,  as  it  appears  in  the  Quartos,  is  repeated 
in  III,  vii,  74,  with  but  slight  variation,  thus:  ‘lie  tell  him  what  you  say,  my  Lord’; 
possibly  the  reason  for  the  changes  in  the  Folio  text  in  both  lines  is  that  given 
by  Daniel  in  explanation  of  a  somewhat  similar  repetition  in  III,  i,  209,  210, 
and  IV,  ii,  93. 


ACT  III,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


219 


Cates .  Many  good  morrowes  to  my  Noble  Lord.  41 

Haji.  Good  morrow  Catesby ,  you  are  early  ftirring  : 

What  newes,  what  newes,  in  this  our  tott’ring  State  ? 

Cates.  It  is  a  reeling  World  indeed,  my  Lord  : 

And  I  beleeue  will  neuer  Hand  vpright,  45 

Till  Richard  weare  the  Garland  of  the  Realme. 

Hajl.  How  weare  the  Garland  ? 

Doeft  thou  meane  the  Crowne  ? 

Cates.  I,  my  good  Lord. 

Hajl.  lie  haue  this  Crown  of  mine  cut  fro  my  fhoulders,  50 
Before  lie  fee  the  Crowne  fo  foule  mif-plac’d : 

But  can  ft  thou  gueffe,  that  he  doth  ayme  at  it  ? 

Cates.  I,  on  my  life,  and  hopes  to  find  you  forward, 

Vpon  his  partie,  for  the  gaine  thereof : 

And  thereupon  he  fends  you  this  good  newes,  55 

That  this  fame  very  day  your  enemies, 

The  Kindred  of  the  Queene,  muft  dye  at  Pomfret. 

Hajl.  Indeed  I  am  no  mourner  for  that  newes, 

Becaufe  they  haue  beene  ftill  my  aduerfaries : 

But,  that  He  giue  my  voice  on  Richards  fide,  60 

To  barre  my  Mafters  Heires  in  true  Defcent, 

God  knowes  I  will  not  doe  it,  to  the  death. 

Cates.  God  keepe  your  Lordfhip  in  that  gracious 
minde. 

Hajl.  But  I  fhall  laugh  at  this  a  twelue-month  hence,  65 


43.  Miring]  tottering  Cap.  Varr .  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr. 

45.  will  ]  it  will  Q,Q3.  twill  Qq. 
'twill  Pope,  Cam.  +  . 

47,48.  How. . .  Crowne  ?]  Ff,  Rowe. 
One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

How ]  Howe?  Qj.  How?  Qa. 
Who  Qq. 


47-  weare  the  Garland ]  Om.  Taylor 
MS  ap.  Cam. 

51.  Before  He]  Ere  I  will  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.  + . 

ntif-plac'd]  mifplafle  Qq  (mif- 
pla'Jl  Q4).  misplac'd  Rowe  et  seq. 

53.  /,  on]  Vpon  Qq. 

58.  my  aduerfaries]  mine  enemies  Qq, 
Sta.  Cam. +  . 


46.  the  Garland]  Compare:  ‘In  whose  time  [that  of  Edward  IV.]  and  by  whose 
occasion,  what  about  the  getting  of  the  garland,  keping  it,  lesing  and  winning 
againe,  it  hath  cost  more  englishe  blood  then  twise  the  winning  of  Fraunce.’ — 
More ,  p.  107. 

54.  Vpon  his  partie]  Compare:  ‘To  fight  on  Edwards  party  for  the  crown.’ 
— I,  iii,  147;  also  IV,  iii,  565. 

62.  the  death]  See  I,  ii,  199. 


220 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ill,  sc.  ii. 


That  they  which  brought  me  in  my  Matters  hate, 

I  liue  to  looke  vpon  their  Tragedie. 

Well  Catesby ,  ere  a  fort-night  make  me  older, 
lie  fend  fome  packing,  that  yet  thinke  not  on’t. 

Cates.  ’Tis  a  vile  thing  to  dye,  my  gracious  Lord, 
When  men  are  vnprepar’d,  and  looke  not  for  it. 

Haji.  O  monftrous,  monftrous  !  and  fo  falls  it  out 
With  Riuers ,  Vaughan,  Grey  :  and  fo  ’twill  doe 
With  fome  men  elfe,  that  thinke  themfelues  as  fafe 
As  thou  and  I,  who  (as  thou  know’ft)  are  deare 
To  Princely  Richard,  and  to  Buckingham . 

Cates .  The  Princes  both  make  high  account  of  you, 
For  they  account  his  Head  vpon  the  Bridge. 

Haji.  I  know  they  doe,  and  I  haue  well  deferu’d  it. 


Enter  Lord  Stanley. 


66 


70 


75 


80 


66.  which ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Knt,  Coll. 
Dyce  i,  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Rife,  who  Qq  et  cet. 

68.  Well... ere"]  I  tell  thee  Catefby. 
Cat.  What  my  Lord?  Haft.  Ere...  Qq, 
Sta.  Cam. +  . 

older-]  elder  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

69.  on't ]  on  it  Qq,  Cam.  +  ( one  it 

Q7Q8)- 


72.  falls  it]  it  fals  Q8. 

74.  that  ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Dyce,  Sta. 
who  Qq  et  cet. 

75.  know'Jl]  knowefl  Q,Q2. 

76.  and  to]  and  Ff. 

78.  For  ...Bridge]  Aside.  F4  et  seq. 

79.  it]  i  q3q5. 


66.  in  my  Masters  hate]  For  examples  of  ‘in’  used  for  into ,  see  Shakespeare 
passim. 

68,  69.  Well  Catesby  .  .  .  thinke  not  on’t]  Marshall:  It  is  difficult  to  see 
why  some  editors  should  have  adopted  the  Quarto  reading  here.  The  interpolated 
speech  of  Catesby  is  quite  unnecessary.  Hastings  is  addressing  Catesby  all  through 
the  scene.  If  he  had  been  addressing  any  one  else,  or  if  these  lines  had  referred 
to  some  totally  different  subject,  the  interpolation  of  Q,  would  have  some  meaning; 
as  it  is,  it  only  spoils  the  metre. 

72.  O  monstrous,  monstrous]  Webb:  A  fine  example  of  Shakespearean  irony. 
After  the  preceding  scene  an  audience  would  be  vividly  conscious  of  the  foolish 
confidence  of  Hastings  and  the  treachery  of  his  companion,  in  whom  he  relies. 
Secure,  as  he  thinks,  of  Richard’s  friendship,  he  is  blind  to  his  own  peril,  and 
takes  a  very  human  though  not  malevolent  interest  in  his  enemies’  fate. 

78.  his  Head  vpon  the  Bridge]  Wright:  London  Bridge,  where  the  heads 
of  traitors  were  exposed  on  a  tower  which  stood  at  the  north  end  of  the  drawbridge. 
When  this  was  taken  down  they  were  placed  over  the  gate  at  the  Southwark  end. 
[These  heads,  stuck  on  poles,  appear  like  little  pins  in  the  print  published  by 
the  New  Shakspere  Society,  1881,  and  entitled:  ‘Old  London  Bridge — as  Shak- 
spere  saw  it,  about  1600,  after  1576,  when  the  traitors’  heads  were  remov’d  to 
the  Southwark  Gate.  The  earliest  full  view,  from  a  unique  drawing  in  Pepys’s 
collection,  in  Magdalen  College,  Cambridge.’ — Ed.] 


ACT  III,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


221 


Come  on,  come  on,  where  is  your  Bore-fpeare  man  ?  8 1 

Feare  you  the  Bore,  and  goe  fo  vnprouided  ? 

Stan.  My  Lord  good  morrow,  good  morrow  Catesby  : 

You  may  ieaft  on,  but  by  the  holy  Rood, 

I  doe  not  like  thefe  feuerall  Councels,  I.  85 

Haji.  My  Lord,  I  hold  my  Life  as  deare  as  yours, 


81.  Come  on,  come  on]  What  my  Lo  : 
Q  .  What  my  L.  Q^.  What  my  good 
Lord !  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

82.  goe']  goe  you  Q^. 

83-86.  My  Lord... Lord]  Three  lines, 
ending:  may... doe... Lord  Taylor  MS 
ap.  Cam. 

83.  good  morrow  Catesby]  and  good 


morrow,  Catesby  Pope,  +  ,Cap.Varr.  Ran. 
Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13,  Knt. 

86.  My  Lord]  Separate  line,  Johns. 
Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Cam.  +  . 

yours]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Steev. 
Var. ’03,  ’13,  Knt,  Coll.  Hal.  you  do 
Vaughan  (iii,  80).  you  do  yours  Qq  et  cet. 


83.  Catesby]  See  III,  i,  176. 

84.  the  holy  Rood]  The  following  is  condensed  from  Morris’s  Legends  of 
the  Holy  Rood  ( Early  Eng.  Text  Soc.,  No  46):  When  Adam  was  about  to  die, 
he  sent  his  Son  Seth  to  the  angel  at  the  gate  of  Eden  to  beg  for  the  oil  of  Mercy. 
Seth  was  unsuccessful  in  his  quest  of  the  oil,  but  the  angel  gave  him  three  pippins, 
or  kernels  of  an  apple,  to  place  under  Adam’s  tongue,  as  soon  as  he  was  dead. 
Out  of  these  three  kernels  would  spring  three  trees — cedar,  the  tree  of  height, 
denoting  the  Father;  cypress,  a  tree  of  sweet  savour,  representing  the  Son;  and 
the  pine,  a  fruit-bearing  tree,  the  Holy  Ghost  and  his  gifts.  After  Adam’s  death 
the  kernels,  placed  as  directed,  began  to  grow,  and  three  small  wands  or  trees 
stood  in  Adam’s  mouth  until  the  time  of  Moses.  Each  grew  separately  out  of  the 
same  root  and  was  of  an  ell  in  length.  When  Moses  and  the  Israelites  came  to 
the  Vale  of  Hebron  the  three  rods  were  noticed  by  Moses  as  being  typical  of  the 
trinity,  and  he  drew  them  from  the  earth.  By  means  of  these  rods  he  healed  the 
sick  and  performed  many  miracles.  When  he  knew  that  his  end  was  near,  he 
planted  the  three  rods  near  Mount  Tabor  in  Arabia.  There  they  remained  for  a 
thousand  years  in  the  same  state  until  King  David,  instructed  by  God,  found 
them  and  brought  them  to  Jerusalem.  The  rods  united  into  one  tree  with  three 
branches  at  the  top.  When  Solomon  was  completing  the  Temple,  begun  by 
David,  there  was  needed  a  large  beam,  to  supply  which  Solomon  ordered  the 
rood-tree  to  be  cut  down,  but  by  no  manipulation  could  it  be  made  to  fit,  so  Solomon 
ordered  them  to  make  a  bridge  with  it  across  an  old  ditch.  Thus  the  rood-tree 
remained  until  the  Queen  of  Sheba,  on  her  visit  to  Solomon,  advised  him  not  to 
allow  the  tree  to  rest  in  its  place,  for  a  man  should  die  thereon  who  should  destroy 
the  Mosaic  Law;  so  Solomon  had  it  removed  and  buried.  Above,  there  came  a 
well  the  water  whereof  had  strange  healing  powers;  when  Christ  came  upon  earth 
the  beam  floated;  and  the  Jews,  wanting  a  ‘tree’  whereon  to  hang  our  Lord, 
took  the  floating  beam  and  made  a  cross.  See,  also,  Gayley,  ch.  xviii,  pp.  246- 
259.  The  words  rod  and  rood  are,  according  to  Skeat,  identical  and  formed 
directly  from  the  Anglo-Saxon  rode  =  rod. — Ed. 

86.  I  hold  my  Life  as  deare  as  yours]  Steevens:  The  Quartos  (profoundly 
ignorant  of  Shakespeare’s  elliptical  mode  of  expressing  himself,  and  in  contempt 
of  metre)  have:  ‘as  dear  as  you  do  yours.’ — Malone:  The  printer  of  the  original 


222 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  ii. 


And  neuer  in  my  dayes,  I  doe  proteft,  87 

Was  it  fo  precious  to  me,  as  ’tis  now : 

Thinke  you,  but  that  I  know  our  ftate  fecure, 

I  would  be  fo  triumphant  as  I  am  ?  90 

Sta.  The  Lords  at  Pomfret,  whe  they  rode  from  London, 

Were  iocund,  and  fuppos’d  their  dates  were  fure, 

And  they  indeed  had  no  caufe  to  miftruft : 

But  yet  you  fee,  how  foone  the  Day  o’re-caft. 

This  fudden  dab  of  Rancour  I  mifdoubt :  95 


87.  dayes]  life  Qq,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev. 
Varr.  Sta.  Cam. +  . 

88.  fo...as]  more. ..then  Qq.  more... 
than  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta. 
Cam. +,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

'tis~\  it  is  Qq. 

89.  our  Jlate]  the Jlate  F3F4,  Rowe  i. 
our  stales  Vaughan  (iii,  81). 


92.  Jlates  were ]  Jlates  was  Qq.  stale 
was  Cam .  + .  slates  as  V aughan  ( iii,  8 1 ) . 

93.  they]  Om.  Q3_8. 

94.  o're-cajl]  ouercajl  Q,Qa. 

95.  This ]  The  Rowe  i. 

Jlab]  fcab  Qq.  scape  Vaughan 
(iii,  8l). 


copy  in  Quarto,  it  is  perfectly  true,  knew  nothing  of  these  elliptical  expressions, 
and  merely  contented  himself  with  exhibiting  what  he  found  in  the  manuscript 
before  him.  [The  line  as  in  the  Quarto]  is,  like  many  others,  an  alexandrine.  But 
in  the  Folio  the  line  was  curtailed  to  the  standard  measure,  with  an  entire  dis¬ 
regard  to  the  author’s  sense;  for  the  plain  and  direct  meaning  of  the  words  there 
found  is:  ‘My  Lord,  I  hold  my  life  as  dear  as  your  life;  I  estimate  them  both  at 
the  same  rate’;  which  is  very  different  from  what  Hastings  means  to  say,  ‘I  hold 
my  own  life  as  dear  as  you  do  your  life.’  This  latter  is  the  assertion  which  the 
argument  of  Hastings  requires,  and  no  critical  chymistry  can  extract  such  a  mean¬ 
ing  out  of  the  words  found  in  the  Folio.  Calling  it  an  elliptical  expression  will 
certainly  not  serve  the  purpose. 

87.  dayes]  Knight:  This  is  one  of  the  very  numerous  instances  of  the  minute 
accuracy  with  which  the  text  of  the  Folio  had  been  revised.  ‘Days’  is  evidently 
substituted  for  life,  to  avoid  the  repetition  of  that  word,  which  occurs  in  the  pre¬ 
ceding  line. 

91,  92.  The  Lords  .  .  .  Were  iocund]  The  idea  which  runs  through  this 
whole  scene,  the  ‘lightening  before  death,’  is  thus  alluded  to  by  Ray  (p.  55): 
‘  This  is  generally  observed  of  sick  persons,  that  a  little  before  they  die  their  pains 
leave  them,  and  their  understanding  and  memory  return  to  them;  as  a  candle 
just  before  it  goes  out  gives  a  great  blaze.’  Nares  refers  to  the  ‘superstitious 
notion  of  an  ominous  and  preternatural  mirth,  supposed  to  come  on  at  the  period 
of  death  without  any  ostensible  reason,’  and  quotes:  ‘How  oft  when  men  are  at 
the  point  of  death  Have  they  been  merry?  which  their  keepers  call  A  lightning 
before  death.’ — Rom.  &  Jul.,  V,  iii,  88-90. — Ed. 

91.  London]  Thompson:  Shakespeare  must  have  meant  to  write  Ludlow.  The 
lords  in  question  were  at  Ludlow  with  the  prince,  when  Edward  IV.  died;  and  it 
was  on  the  road  from  Ludlow  to  London  that  the  sudden  overcasting  of  their  happi¬ 
ness  took  place.  Compare  the  Folio  at  II,  ii,  150,  162,  where  the  error  is  more 
conspicuous. 

95.  misdoubt]  That  is,  mistrust,  suspect. 


ACT  III,  SC.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


223 

96 


Pray  God  (I  fay)  I  proue  a  needleffe  Coward. 

What,  fhall  we  toward  the  Tower  ?  the  day  is  fpent. 

Hajl.  Come,  come,  haue  with  you  : 

Wot  you  what,  my  Lord, 

To  day  the  Lords  you  talke  of,  are  beheaded.  IOO 

Sta.They,  for  their  truth,  might  better  wear  their  Heads, 


96.  I fay]  Ora.  Q4. 

97.  What... toward ]  But  come  my  L  : 
shall  we  to  Qq,  Sta. 

the  day  is  /pent]  Om.  Qq,  Sta. 
the  date  is  spent  Bailey  (ii,  289). 

98.  99.  One  line,  Pope  et  seq. 

Come. ..my  Lord ]  I  go:  but 


Jlay ,  he  are  you  not  the  newes  ?  Qq,  Sta. 

98.  you ]  ye  Rowe  i,  Pope,  Theob. 
Han.  Johns.  Var.  ’73.  he  Rowe  ii.  yet 
Warb.  (misprint?) 

100.  To. ..Lords]  This  day  thofe  men 
Qq,  Sta. 

talke ]  talkt  Q,Q2. 


97.  What,  shall  we  .  .  .  the  day  is  spent]  Cambridge  Edd.  ( Note  xii): 
The  reading  of  the  Folios  is  not  satisfactory,  and  looks  like  an  attempt  of  the 
editors  to  amend  the  defective  metre  of  the  Quartos.  The  scene  opens  at  four  in 
the  morning,  and  yet  Stanley  is  made  to  say:  ‘the  day  is  spent.’ — Spedding  (Sh. 
Soc.  Trans.,  x875-’76;  p.  21):  True:  but  I  do  not  understand  him  to  mean  that 
it  is  evening:  only  that  it  is  getting  late — which  it  might  be  at  any  time  of  the  day. — 
Pickersgill  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875-’ 76;  p.  92):  It  is  obvious  that  the  alteration 
[of  this  line  and  the  next  in  the  Folio]  was  made  with  the  object  of  improving  the 
metre.  The  question,  then,  is,  has  the  design  been  carried  out  in  such  a  manner 
that  we  can  fairly  attribute  it  to  Shakespeare?  Surely  not.  In  my  judgement 
‘the  day  is  spent’  has  a  most  painfully  obtrusive  air  of  ‘padding.’  Besides,  how 
can  it  mean  ‘only  that  it  is  getting  late’?  Surely,  in  that  case,  we  should,  at  all 
events,  require  ‘the  day  is  spending.’ — Marshall:  Compare:  “‘The  night  is 
spent.”  “Why  what  of  that?”  quoth  she.  “I  am,”  quoth  he,  “expected  of  my 
friends:  And  now  ’tis  dark,  and  going  I  shall  fall.”  ’ — Ven.  &  Ad.,  717-719.  It 
is  evident  that  in  this  passage  ‘night  is  spent’  does  not  mean  night  is  ended,  or 
even  that  it  is  ending,  because,  from  the  context,  it  was  still  dark. 

98.  haue  with  you]  Johnson:  A  familiar  phrase  in  parting,  as  much  as, 
‘take  something  along  with  you,’  or  ‘I  have  something  to  say  to  you.’ — M.  Mason: 
This  phrase  so  frequently  occurs  in  Shakespeare  that  I  wonder  Johnson  should, 
in  his  fourteenth  volume,  mistake  its  meaning.  It  signifies  merely,  ‘  I  will  go  along 
with  you’;  and  is  an  expression  in  use  at  this  day.  [Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v. 
have.  20)  quotes,  as  the  intransitive  or  absolute  use  of  have,  this  phrase  in  As 
You  Like  It,  I,  ii,  268.] 

101.  They,  for  their  truth]  Johnson:  That  is,  with  respect  to  their  honesty. 

101,  102.  better  wear  their  Heads,  Then  some  .  .  .  weare  their  Hats] 
Barnard  suggests  that  ‘wear  their  hats’  may  be  equivalent  to,  possess  their  free¬ 
dom,  alluding  to  the  ‘headcovering  as  a  sign  of  the  free-man;  slaves  went  bare¬ 
headed.’  [This  interpretation  is,  possibly,  correct;  at  the  same  time  it  is,  I  think, 
well  to  bear  in  mind  that  Stanley  was  a  trimmer,  and  his  remark  is  doubtless  meant 
as  a  sneer  at  both  parties.  Thus,  he  implies,  that  as  far  as  truth  and  honour  are 
concerned,  the  heads  of  the  accused  contain  quite  as  much  thereof  as  do  the  hats  of 
the  accusers:  that  is,  none  at  all.  For  a  use  of  ‘heads’  and  ‘hats’  in  somewhat  the 


224 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  ii. 


Then  fome  that  haue  accus’d  them,  weare  their  Hats.  102 

But  come,  my  Lord,  let’s  away. 

Enter  a  Purfuiuant. 

Haji .  Goe  on  before,  lie  talke  with  this  good  fellow.  105 
Exit  Lord  Stanley,  and  Catesby. 

How  now,  Sirrha  ?  how  goes  the  World  with  thee? 

Purf.  The  better,  that  your  Lordfhip  pleafe  to  aske. 

Hajl.  I  tell  thee  man,  ’tis  better  with  me  now, 

Then  when  thou  met’ft  me  laft,  where  now  we  meet:  IIO 

Then  was  I  going  Prifoner  to  the  Tower, 


102.  Hats ]  hat  Q^s. 

103.  my  Lord~\  Ora.  Cap. 

let’s-]  let  vs  Qq,  Cap.  Var.  ’73, 
Cam.  + .  Om.  Pope,  + . 

104.  Enter  a  Purfuiuant.]  Enter  Haft- 
in  a  Purfsuant.  Qx.  Enter  Haft,  a  Pur- 
fiuant.  Qa.  Enter  Haftings  a  Purfiuant 
(after  1.  105)  Q3-». 

105-107.  Goe. .. Sirrha  ?]  Two  lines, 
ending  :  before ,  ...Sirrha  ?  Cap. 

105.  on.,  .fellow]  you  before ,  lie  follow 
prefently  Qq,  Sta. 


106.  Exit... Catesby]  Om.  Q,Q2.  Exit 
L.  Standley  &  Cat  (after  1.  X03)  Q^. 

107.  How. ..  Sirrha  ?]  Well  met  Hafl- 
ings  Qq.  Sirrah ,  how  now  ?  Pope,  + , 
Varr.  Ran. 

108.  your  Lordfhip  pleafe]  it  pleafe 
your  Lo  :  Q,Qa.  it  pleafe  your  good 
Lordfhip  Q3-8. 

109.  man]  fellow  Qq. 

110.  thou  met'Jl  me]  I  met  thee  Qq, 
Sta.  Cam. +  . 


same  sense,  compare  the  following  from  Churchyarde’s  Farewell  from  the  Courte, 
the  Seconde  Yere  of  the  Queenes  Majesties  Raigne,  in  Churchyarde’s  Charge,  Collier 
reprint,  p.  28:  ‘Me  thinke  you  chuse  your  shopp  not  well  In  court  your  follies 
for  to  sell:  That  shopp  stands  full  within  the  winde,  Or  els  so  muche  in  peoples 
minde  That  if  one  fault  be  in  your  ware  Tenne  thousand  eyes  thereon  doe  stare; 
And  when  thei  finde  a  counterfeite,  Or  see  fine  merchaunts  use  deseite,  Thei  crie 
a  loude,  Wee  smell  a  ratte.  Some  have  more  witte  within  their  hatte  Then  in  their 
hedde;  that  sells  such  stuffe.’  In  other  words,  they  have  no  wit  at  all,  which  is,  I 
think,  the  sense  in  which  Stanley  here  wishes  his  remark  to  be  understood.  Church¬ 
yarde’s  Charge  was  published  in  1580;  though  the  Farewell  was  written  about 
twenty  years  earlier;  it  is  made  up  of  a  number  of  short  sentences  or  aphorisms, 
which  may  have  been  original  with  Churchyarde,  or  simply  well-known  saws  of 
the  period  changed  by  him  into  metrical  form. — Ed. 

104.  Pursuiuant]  Wright:  According  to  More,  the  Pursuivant’s  name  also 
was  Hastings  [see  Text.  Notes].  A  ‘pursuivant’  was  a  messenger,  or  attendant 
upon  a  herald.  Cotgrave  has:  ‘Poursuivant  d’armes.  A  Herauld  extraordinarie, 
or  yong  Herauld,  a  Batcheler  in  the  art  of  Herauldrie;  one  thats  like  to  be  chosen 
when  a  place  falls.’ 

105.  Goe  on  before,  etc.]  Collier  (Notes,  etc.,  p.  330):  What  passes  between 
Hastings,  the  Pursuivant,  the  Priest,  and  Buckingham,  is  erased  [by  the  MS],  per¬ 
haps  as  needless  to  the  very  protracted  performance  of  this  play.  When  Hastings 
alludes  to  it  in  Sc.  iv,  98-102,  on  his  way  to  execution,  the  five  lines  are  also  struck 
through  with  a  pen,  as  well  as  the  Scrivener’s  observations,  in  Sc.  vi,  on  the 
indictment  of  Hastings. 


ACT  III,  SC.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


225 


By  the  fuggeftion  of  the  Queenes  Allyes.  112 

But  now  I  tell  thee  (keepe  it  to  thy  felfe) 

This  day  thofe  Enemies  are  put  to  death, 

And  I  in  better  Bate  then  ere  I  was.  1 15 

Purf.  God  hold  it,  to  your  Honors  good  content. 

Haji.  Gramercie  fellow  :  there,  drinke  that  for  me. 

Throwes  him  his  Purfe. 

Purf.  I  thanke  your  Honor.  Exit  Purfuiuant. 

Enter  a  Prieji. 

Priefi.  Well  met,  my  Lord,  I  am  glad  to  fee  your  Ho¬ 
nor. 

Hajl.  I  thanke  thee,  good  Sir  Iohn ,  with  all  my  heart. 

I  am  in  your  debt,  for  your  laft  Exercife : 

Come  the  next  Sabboth,  and  I  will  content  you. 

Prieji.  lie  wait  vpon  your  Lordfhip. 


120 


125 


115.  ere]  euer  Qq. 

1 17.  fellow...  me]  Hafings,hold fpend 
thou  that  Qq. 

1 1 8.  Throwes]  He  giues  Qq. 

1 19.  I. ..Honor]  God faue your  Lord¬ 
fhip  Qq,  Cam.  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

Exit  Purfuiuant]  Om.  Q,Q2. 
Exit  Pur.  Q^. 

121-123.  Prieft.  Well... heart]  Haft. 
What  fir  Iohn  you  are  well  met  Qq. 

124.  I  am]  /’  m  Pope, +  . 


124.  in  your  debt]  beholding  to  you 
Qq.  beholden  to  you  Sta. 

Exercife]  dayes  exercife  Qq. 
(execife  Q3Q4Q5). 

125.  Sabboth]  F2,  Cap.  Sabaoth  Qt 
Q2.  Sabbath  F3F4  et  cet. 

you.]  you.  [He  whifpers  in  his 
eare.  Qq,  Pope,  +  ,  Cam. +  . 

126.  Prieft.  He. ..Lordfhip]  Om.  Qq, 
Cam.  + . 


1 1 2.  suggestion]  That  is,  prompting,  or  urging;  used  in  a  bad  sense.  Schmidt 
{Lex.)  furnishes  numerous  examples  of  this  use. 

1 19.  I  thanke  ytrur  Honor]  Wright:  This  riding  of  the  Folio,  having  regard 
to  11.  1 16  and  1 2 1,  cannot  be  considered  as  an  instance  of  the  scrupulous  care 
which  the  editor  of  the  Folio  exercised  in  correcting  the  Quartos. 

123.  Sir  Iohn]  Nares  (s.  v.  Sir):  A  title  formerly  applied  to  priests  and  curates 
in  general;  for  this  reason:  dominus,  the  academical  title  of  a  bachelor  of  arts, 
was  usually  rendered  by  sir  in  English,  at  the  Universities;  so  that  a  bachelor, 
who  in  the  books  stood  Dominus  Brown,  was  in  conversation  called  Sir  Brown. 
This  was  in  use  in  some  colleges  even  in  my  memory.  Therefore  as  most  clerical 
persons  had  taken  that  first  degree,  it  became  usual  to  style  them  ‘sir.’  ...  It  is 
to  be  observed  that  in  nearly  all  instances  ‘sir’  is  prefixed  to  the  Christian  name, 
which,  so  far,  differs  from  the  University  custom.  Sirnames  were  little  used  when 
the  practice  began.  [For  a  further  explanation  of  this  use  of  ‘Sir,’  see  note  on 
‘Sir  Oliver  Martext’  in  the  Dram.  Person,  of  As  You  Like  It,  this  edition. — Ed.] 

124.  Exercise]  Bradley  (AT.  E.  D.  s.  v.  10.  c.):  An  act  of  public  worship, 
or  prophesying;  a  discourse.  [The  present  line  quoted.] 

126.  lie  wait  vpon  your  Lordship]  Dyce:  The  same  words  with  which, 


226 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ill,  sc.  ii. 


Enter  Buckingham. 


127 


Buc.  What,  talking  with  a  Prieft,  Lord  Chamberlaine  ? 

Your  friends  at  Pomfret,  they  doe  need  the  Prieft, 

Your  Honor  hath  no  ftiriuing  worke  in  hand.  130 

Hajl.  Good  faith,  and  when  I  met  this  holy  man, 

The  men  you  talke  of,  came  into  my  minde. 

What,  goe  you  toward  the  Tower? 

Buc.  I  doe,  my  Lord,  but  long  I  cannot  ftay  there : 

I  fhall  returne  before  your  Lordfhip,  thence.  135 

Haft.  Nay  like  enough,  for  I  ftay  Dinner  there. 

Buc.  And  Supper  too,  although  thou  know’ft  it  not. 


Come,  will  you  goe  ? 

Hajl.  lie  wait  vpon  your  Lordfhip.  Exeunt.  139 


128.  What ,  ...Chamberlaine  ?]  How 
now  Lord  Chamberlaine ,  what  talking 
with  a  Priejl  Qq  [Lo  :  Q,Q2). 

I30.  Jhriuing]  Jlriuing  Q?Q8. 

132.  The"]  Thofe  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 
133-138.  What... goe  .?]  Five  lines, 

ending:  Lord,  ...returne... enough,  ...too, 
...goe  ?  Anon.  Cap.  am. 

133.  toward  ]  to  Qq,  Sta. 

Tower  ?]  tower  my  Lord?  Qq, 

Sta. 


134.  my  Lord,  but  long]  but  long  Qq. 
but  long,  my  lord,  Sta. 

cannot  Jlay  there ]  Jhall  not  Jlay 
Qq,  Pope,  +  ,  Varr.  Ran.  Sta.  Cam.+. 

136.  Nay ]  Tis  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

137.  [Aside.  Rowe  et  seq. 
know'Jl ]  knowejl  Q,Q2. 

138.  139.  One  line,  Steev.  et  seq. 
will ...  Lordjhip.]  Jhall  we  go 

along  ?  Qq,  Sta. 


according  to  the  Folio,  Hastings  soon  after  addresses  Buckingham.  The  Quartos 
have  them  in  neither  place;  and  to  me  it  is  plain  that  they  were  inserted  in  the 
Folio  twice  by  mistake.  [Thus,  also,  Hudson.]— Marshall:  We  have  rendered 
the  Quarto  stage-direction:  ‘ They  confer  privately  in  whispers .’  It  is  evident 
from  the  first  line  Buckingham  speaks  that  some  such  private  conference  must 
have  been  going  on  when  he  entered. 

127.  Buckingham]  Malone:  From  the  Continuation  of  Harding's  Chronicle, 
1543,  where  the  account,  given  originally  by  More,  is  transcribed  with  some  addi¬ 
tions,  it  appears  that  the  person  who  held  this  conversation  with  Hastings  was  Sir 
Thomas  Howard,  who  is  introduced  in  Act  V.  as  Earl  of  Surrey. 

130.  shriuing]  Skeat  {Diet.  s.  v.  Shrove-tide ):  The  particular  sense  of  the 
verb,  to  shrive,  is  due  to  the  legal  use  of  the  word;  signifying  (i)  to  draw  up  a  law 
[from  Latin  scribere ],  (2)  to  impose  a  legal  obligation  or  penalty,  (3)  to  impose  or 
prescribe  a  sentence. 

131.  and  when  I  met]  Abbott  quotes  (§  98)  the  present  line  as  an  example 
of  ‘and’  used  for  emphasis  ‘after  statements  implied  by  ejaculations,  such  as 
"faith,”  “alas,”  etc.’ 

137,  138.  thou  .  .  .  you]  Abbott  calls  attention  (§  233)  to  the  contempt  implied 
in  the  use  of  ‘thou’  in  this  aside  remark  by  Buckingham. 


ACT  III,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


227 


Scena  Tertia. 


Enter  Sir  Richard  Ratcliff c ,  with  Halberds ,  carrying 
the  Nobles  to  death  at  Pomfret . 

Riuers.  Sir  Richard  Ratcliff c ,  let  me  tell  thee  this, 

To  day  lhalt  thou  behold  a  Subiefl  die,  5 

For  Truth,  for  Dutie,  and  for  Loyaltie. 

Grey.  God  bleffe  the  Prince  from  all  the  Pack  of  you, 

A  Knot  you  are,  of  damned  Blood-fuckers.  8 


1.  Scena  Tertia.]  Scene  continued, 
Qq.  Scene  iv.  Pope.  Han.Warb.  Johns. 

Pomfret  Castle.  Theob.  et  seq.  (subs. ) 

2,  3.  Ratcliffe,  with  Halberds. ..Pom¬ 
fret.]  Ratcliffe  with  the  Lord  Riuers, 
Gray,  and  Vaughan  prifoners.  Qq. 


4.  Riuers.  Sir\  Rati.  Come  bring  forth 
the  prifoners.  Riu.  Sir  Qq,  Pope, +  , 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam. +  . 

7.  blejfe~\  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Coll.  Wh.  i, 
Dyce,  Hal.  Ktly.  keepe  Qq  et  cet. 

8.  Blood-fuckers ]  bloudfuckers  QjQ2. 


2,  3.  Ratcliffe  .  .  .  carrying  the  Nobles  to  death]  Lingard  (iv,  227,  Foot¬ 
note) 1:  More  asserts  repeatedly  that  these  murders  occurred  on  the  same  day  as 
that  of  Lord  Hastings  [J  une  3].  This  may  be  true  of  the  others,  but  is  not  correct 
as  to  Lord  Rivers,  who  was  indeed  put  to  death  at  Pontefract,  but  a  few  days 
later,  and  by  command  of  the  Earl  of  Northumberland  (Rouse,  214).  We  have 
his  will  dated  at  Sheriff  Hutton  on  the  23d  of  June;  a  long  and  elaborate  instru¬ 
ment,  composed  probably  under  the  apprehension,  but  without  any  certain  knowl¬ 
edge,  of  the  fate  which  awaited  him. — Courtenay  (ii,  89):  A  contest  for  power 
between  the  Queen’s  relations  and  those  of  the  late  king  was  a  matter  of  course. 
Whether  the  measures  adopted  or  contemplated  by  the  former  so  far  exceeded  the 
bounds  of  political  contention  as  to  justify  the  brothers  and  friends  of  Edward 
in  treating  them  as  traitors  is  a  question  upon  which  no  sufficient  evidence  exists. 
Shakespeare’s  version,  which  refers  the  executions  to  the  tyranny  and  ambition 
of  Richard,  has  certainly  a  sufficient  foundation  for  a  dramatist;  but  it  must  not 
be  received  as  authentic  history. 

7.  Grey]  Walpole  ( Cata .  of  Noble  Authors,  i,  73,  foot-note ):  Queen  Elizabeth 
Grey  is  deservedly  pitied  for  losing  her  two  sons;  but  the  royalty  of  their  birth 
has  so  engrossed  historians  that  they  never  reckon  among  her  misfortunes  the  loss 
of  this  her  second  son,  Lord  Grey.  It  is  as  remarkable  how  slightly  the  death 
of  our  Earl  Rivers  is  always  mentioned,  though  a  man  invested  with  such  high 
offices  of  trust  and  dignity;  and  how  much  we  dwell  on  the  execution  of  the 
Lord  Chamberlain  Hastings,  a  Man  in  every  light  his  inferior.  In  truth  the 
generality  draw  their  ideas  of  English  history  from  the  tragic  rather  than  the 
historic  authors. 

7.  God  blesse  the  Prince  from  all  .  .  .  of  you]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v. 
Bless  v.1  f  3) :  To  protect  or  guard,  save,  keep  from  (evil) :  said  of  God,  super¬ 
natural  influence,  a  charm  or  prayer;  also  loosely  of  other  things.  [The  present 
line  quoted.  See  Lear,  III,  iv,  57:  ‘Bless  thee  from  whirlwinds,  star  blasting, 
and  taking.] 


228 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  iii. 

Vangh.  You  liue,  that  fhall  cry  woe  for  this  heere- 
after.  IO 

Rat.  Difpatch,  the  limit  of  your  Liues  is  out. 

Riuers.  O  Pomfret,  Pomfret !  O  thou  bloody  Prifon  ! 

Fatall  and  ominous  to  Noble  Peeres : 

Within  the  guiltie  Clofure  of  thy  Walls, 

Richard  the  Second  here  was  hackt  to  death  :  1 5 

And  for  more  flander  to  thy  difmall  Seat, 

Wee  giue  to  thee  our  guiltleffe  blood  to  drinke. 

Grey.  Now  Margarets  Curfe  is  falne  vpon  our  Heads, 

When  fhee  exclaim’d  on  Hastings ,  you,  and  I,  19 


9-1 1.  Vaugh.  You. ..out]  Om.  Qq, 
Pope,  Han. 

13.  ominous]  dominions  Q2Q3.  omin- 
ious  Q4Qs. 

13, 14.  Peeres:...  Walls,] peers.. .walls. 
Vaughan  (iii,  83). 

16.  Seat]  foule  Qq.  soil  Cap.  conj. 
jail  Vaughan  (iii,  83). 


17.  to  thee]  thee  vp  Qq,  Cap.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Huds. 

blood]  blouds  Qq  (subs.),  Cap. 
Var.  ’73. 

18.  Margarets... m]  Margarts...ifQ6. 

19.  When... and  /,]  Om.  Qq,  Pope, 
Han.  Cam.  +  .  When. ..and  me  Coll,  ii, 
iii  (MS). 


9-1 1.  You  liue  ...  is  out]  Theobald:  These  two  lines  Pope  has  thought 
fit  to  suppress  in  his  edition,  for  what  reason  I  can’t  pretend  to  say;  tho’  they  have 
the  authority  both  of  the  old  Folios,  and  are  likewise  in  Rowe,  whom  he  seems 
generally  to  follow.  Without  them,  I  would  observe  that  Vaughan  is  introduced, 
and  led  off  to  dye,  without  a  single  syllable  spoken  by  him.  [This  note,  coupled 
with  the  fact  that  these  lines  are  not  in  the  Quarto  Text,  casts  an  uncomfortable 
doubt  not  on  Theobald’s  honesty,  but — on  his  assertion  that  he  had  carefully 
collated  the  ancient  copies. — Ed.] 

9.  liue]  Vaughan  (iii,  82):  May  not  the  right  line  be:  ‘You  laugh  that  shall 
cry  woe,’  etc.  [In  the  next  scene]  Lord  Hastings  says  in  the  same  spirit:  ‘They 
smile  at  me  who  shortly  shall  be  dead.’  Supposing  the  line  to  have  been  written 
from  recitation,  the  mistake  of  ‘live’  for  laugh  was  not  unnatural.  .  .  .  My  amend¬ 
ment  is  most  strongly  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  one  of  those  specially  referred 
to  in  this  line  must  be  Hastings,  who,  on  receiving  intelligence  of  this  execution, 
is  made  to  exclaim  in  triumph:  ‘I  shall  laugh  at  this  a  twelvemonth  hence,’ 
and  yet  after  receiving  his  own  unexpected  sentence  of  death,  breaks  out:  ‘Woe, 
woe  for  England.’  Thus  as  to  him,  Vaughan’s  prophecy  was  literally  fulfilled  if 
we  read  laugh  for  ‘live.’ 

11.  limit]  See  Schmidt  (Le#.  2). 

14.  Within  the  .  .  .  Closure]  Marshall:  Compare:  ‘Within  the  gentle 

closure  of  my  breast.  ’ — Sonn.  48.  ‘  Into  the  quiet  closure  of  my  breast.  ’ — Ven. 

Ad.,  1.  782.  These  are  the  only  two  other  passages  in  which  Shakespeare 
uses  the  word  in  this  sense. 

15.  Richard  the  Second  .  .  .  hackt  to  death]  See  Rich.  II:  V,  v. 

18,  19.  Margarets  Curse  .  .  .  you,  and  I]  Daniel  ( Introd .,  xviii):  This  is, 
of  course,  a  direct  reference  to  Margaret’s  curse  in  I,  iii,  220-224;  but  Margaret 


ACT  ill,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


For  ftanding  by,  when  Richard  ftab’d  her  Sonne. 

Riucrs.  Then  curs’d  fhee  Richard , 

Then  curs’d  fhee  Buckingham , 

Then  curs’d  fhee  Hastings.  Oh  remember  God, 
To  heare  her  prayer  for  them,  as  now  for  vs  : 

And  for  my  Sifter,  and  her  Princely  Sonnes, 

Be  fatisfy’d,  deare  God,  with  our  true  blood, 
Which,  as  thou  know’ ft,  vniuftly  muft  be  fpilt. 

Rat.  Make  hafle,  the  houre  of  death  is  expiate. 


229 

20 


25 


28 


21.  22.  Then ...  Buckingham,]  Ff, 
Rowe.  One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

21-23.  Richard... HafUngs]  Hajlings 
...Richard  Qq,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev. 
Varr.  Cam. +  .  Richard  too... Hastings 
Marshall. 

22.  Then  curs'd  fhee]  curs'd  she  Pope, 
+ ,  Cap.  Varr.  Ran.  then  she  curs'd  or 
then  curs'd  or  and  then  curs'  d  she  Taylor 
MS  ap.  Cam. 

23.  curs’d]  cus'd  F2. 

24.  prayer]  prayers  Qq,  Mai.  Steev. 


Varr.  Cam. +  . 

25.  And]  As  F4, +  ,  Varr.  Ran. 
Sonnes]  fonne  Qq.  fons  FjF^. 

26.  blood  ]  blouds  Qq.  bloods  Q4,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Ktly. 

27.  knotv' ft]  knowefl  Qq. 

28.  Make... expiate]  Come ,  come ,  dif- 
patch  the  limit  of  your  Hues  is  out  Qq, 
Sta.  (lines  Q,Q2). 

expiate]  now  expir’d  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  +  ,  Varr.  Ran.  expirate  Steev. 
conj.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Huds. 


had  not  there  ‘exclaimed  on’  Grey,  but  on  Rivers,  Dorset,  and  Hastings.  [The 
omission  of  the  Qq]  was,  perhaps,  due  to  some  bungled  attempt  to  conceal  the 
discrepancy;  if  so,  the  reviser  overlooked  a  second  misstatement  in  1.  22:  ‘Then 
curs’d  she  Buckingham.’  Margaret  did  not  then  curse  Buckingham. — Wright: 
It  is  only  when  Buckingham  rejects  her  solemn  warning  that  she  includes  him  in 
a  general  malediction  with  the  rest. 

19.  When  shee  .  .  .  you,  and  I]  Theobald  here  again  remarks  upon  Pope’s 
omission  of  a  line,  without,  as  he  considers,  apparent  reason;  see  note  on  11.  9-1 1, 
supra. — Ed. 

19.  you,  and  I]  Walker  ( Crit .,  iii,  174)  gives  several  other  examples  of  ‘I’ 
used  for  the  object;  and  thereto  Lettsom,  his  editor,  adds  the  following  in  a  foot¬ 
note:  “‘When  a  pronoun  in  an  oblique  case  is  emphatical,  it  is  given  in  its  nomi¬ 
native  shape  instead  of  its  objective  case.” — Dissertation  prefixed  to  Barnes’s 
Poems  in  the  Dorset  Dialect.  The  same  rule  seems  followed  by  our  old  authors, 
with  other  pronouns  as  well  as  /.’  In  the  Grammar  appended  to  Dr  Joseph 
Wright’s  invaluable  English  Dialect  Dictionary  it  is  observed  in  §  402  that 
‘in  all  the  dialects  of  the  south-midland,  eastern,  southern,  and  south-western 
counties  the  nominative  of  the  personal  pronoun  is  used  as  the  emphatic  form 
of  the  objective  case.’ — Ed. 

28.  expiate]  Bradley  ( N .  E.  D.)  quotes  the  present  line  as  the  only  example, 
under  ‘participial  adjective:  Of  an  appointed  time:  Fully  come’;  and  at  v.  7 
he  adds:  ‘To  extinguish  (a  person’s  rage)  by  suffering  it  to  the  full;  to  end  (one’s 
sorrows,  a  suffering  life)  by  death,’  quoting  from  Sonn.  22:  ‘Then  look  I  death 
my  days  should  expiate.’ — Marshall:  Perhaps  ‘expiate’  should  have  somewhat 
of  an  active  sense,  and  may  intentionally  be  used,  with  a  sneer,  by  Ratcliff  in 


230 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  iv. 


Riuers.  Come  Grey,  come  Vaughan ,  let  vs  here  embrace. 
Farewell,  vntill  we  meet  againe  in  Heauen.  30 

Exeunt. 


Sccena  Quarta. 


Enter  Buckingham ,  Darby ,  Hastings ,  Bifhop  of  Ely, 
Norfolke ,  Ratcliff  e,  Louell ,  with  others , 
at  a  Table. 


Hajl.  Now  Noble  Peeres,  the  caufe  why  we  are  met,  5 

Is  to  determine  of  the  Coronation  : 

In  Gods  Name  fpeake, when  is  the  Royall  day? 

Buck.  Is  all  things  ready  for  the  Royall  time  ?  8 


29.  here ]  all Qq,  Pope,  +  ,Sta.  Cam.  + . 

30.  Farewell. ..againe]  And  take  our 
leaue  vntill  we  meete  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

I.  Scaena  Quarta.]  Scene  continued, 
Qq.  Scene  v.  Pope,  Han.  Warb.  Johns. 

The  Tower.  Theob. 

2-4.  Buckingham... Table.]  the  Lords 
to  counfell. Qq.  Stanley,  Hastings,  Buck¬ 
ingham,  Bishop  of  Ely,  and  Others,  dis¬ 
cover’d  sitting  at  a  Table  :  Officers  of  the 


Council  attending.  Cap.  et  seq.  (subs.) 

5.  Now. ..Peeres]  My  Lords  at  once 
Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +. 

Peeres]  Peere  F2.  Peers  F3F4  et 

seq. 

7.  fpeake. ..the]  fay  ...this  Qq,  Sta. 

8.  Is]  Ff,  Marshall.  Are  Qq  et  cet. 
ready]  fitting  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 
the]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Dyce,  Wh.  i, 

Huds.  Hal.  that  Qq  et  cet. 


reference  to  1.  26:  ‘Be  satisfied,  dear  God,  with  our  true  blood.’  This  seems  the 
most  probable  explanation  if  we  accept  the  reading  of  Fr 

2.  Bishop  of  Ely]  See  Dram.  Person. 

8.  Is  all  things  ready]  Spedding  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875-’ 76;  p.  63):  The 
alteration  in  the  Folio  [I  consider]  as  one  which  cannot  have  been  designed  by 
Shakespeare.  While  ‘things'  remained  in  the  plural  I  do  not  think  ‘are’  would 
have  been  deliberately  changed  to  ‘is’  either  by  the  poet  himself  or  by  his  name¬ 
less  corrector.  But  I  am  not  sure  that  all  thing  may  not  have  been  at  one  time 
a  candidate  for  admission  into  the  language  in  the  sense  of  everything:  and  if  this 
is  possible,  I  should  conjecture  that  the  corrector  meant  to  change  ‘things’  to 
thing  at  the  same  time  that  he  changed  are  to  ‘is.’ — Pickersgill  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans., 
1:875— ’76;  P-  93) :  Spedding  .  .  .  attributes  the  change  of  ‘is’  for  are  to  the  printer’s 
mistake.  On  the  contrary,  is  it  not  pretty  clear  that  the  word  was  deliberately 
changed  in  order  to  make  it  tally  with  ‘it  is’  in  the  next  line  [footnote].  Compare: 
‘Is  all  things  well,  According  as  I  gave  directions?  ’Tis,  my  good  lord.’ — 2  Hen. 
VI:  III,  ii,  11.  [In  corroboration  of  Spedding’s  conjecture,  all-thing,  compare:  ‘It 
had  been  as  a  gap  in  our  great  feast  And  all-thing  unbecoming,’  Macbeth,  III,  i, 
13.  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.)  gives  numerous  examples  of  all-thing  used  in  the  sense 
of  everything.  ‘All  things’  in  the  line  from  2  Hen.  VI.,  quoted  by  Pickersgill, 
was  perhaps  influenced  by  the  passage  in  The  First  Part  of  the  Contention,  etc., 
from  which  it  was  taken.  Thus:  ‘Then  see  the  cloathes  laid  smooth  about  him 
still,  That  when  the  King  comes,  he  may  perceiue  No  other,  but  that  he  dide  of 


ACT  III,  sc.  iv.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


231 


Darb.  It  is,  and  wants  but  nomination. 

Ely.  To  morrow  then  I  iudge  a  happie  day.  10 

Buck.VJho  knowes  the  Lord  Protestors  mind  herein? 

Who  is  moft  inward  with  the  Noble  Duke? 

Ely.  Your  Grace,  we  thinke,  fhould  fooneft  know  his 
minde. 

Buck.  We  know  each  others  Faces  :  for  our  Hearts,  15 
He  knowes  no  more  of  mine,  then  I  of  yours, 

Or  I  of  his,  my  Lord,  then  you  of  mine  : 

Lord  Ha/lings ,  you  and  he  are  neere  in  loue. 

Hajl .  I  thanke  his  Grace,  I  know  he  loues  me  well : 

But  for  his  purpofe  in  the  Coronation,  20 

I  haue  not  founded  him,  nor  he  deliuer’d 
His  gracious  pleafure  any  way  therein  : 

But  you,  my  Honorable  Lords,  may  name  the  time, 

And  in  the  Dukes  behalfe  lie  giue  my  Voice,  24 


9.  It  is]  Q,Q2,Ff,  Cam.  + ,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Ktly.  They  are  Rowe  et  cet. 

wants']  let  Q3QS.  lack  Q4.  yet  in 
Q8.  want  Rowe,  +  ,  Mai.  Coll. 

10.  Ely]  Ryu.  Qx.  Riu.  Q2.  Bifh. 

Q3-8- 

iudge]  geffe  Qq. 
day]  time  Qq,  Sta. 

13.  Your. ..thinke,]  Why  you  my  L. 
me  thinks  you  Qq. 

15.  Buck.  We]  Buc.  Who  I  my  Lord? 
We  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 


15-17.  We. ..mine  .•]  Lines  end,  faces: 
...mine,  ...mine  :  Qq,  Sta.  Lines  end, 
faces: ...mine,  ...yours,  ...mine:  Cam.  +  . 
15.  for]  But  for  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  4-. 

17.  Or  /]  Ff,  Rowe,  nor  I  no  more 
Qq.  Nor  I  Pope  et  cet. 

my  Lord]  Om.  Qq,  Sta. 

22.  gracious]  Graces  Qq. 

23.  Honorable  Lords]  Noble  Lo :  Qr 
Q2.  my  L.  Q3-8.  Honorable  Lord  Ff, 
Rowe,  noble  Lord  Pope,  +  ,  Cap.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Van-.  Sta.  noble  Lords  Sing. 
Cam. +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Ktly,  Huds. 


his  owne  accord.  2.  [ Murderer ]  All  things  is  hansome  now  my  Lord.’ — III,  ii, 
3-5  (ed.  Cambridge,  vol.  ix). — Ed.] 

9.  wants  but  nomination]  Steevens:  That  is,  the  only  thing  wanting  is 
appointment  of  a  particular  day  for  the  ceremony. 

12.  inward]  Wright:  That  is,  intimate,  familiar.  Compare:  ‘A  Servant,  or 
a  Favorite,  if  hee  be  inward,  and  no  other  apparant  Cause  of  Esteeme,  is  commonly 
thought  but  a  By-way,  to  close  Corruption,’  Bacon,  Essay  xi,  p.  42  (ed.  Wright). 

24.  in  the  Dukes  behalfe  He  giue  my  Voice]  Dowden  (p.  185):  Hastings 
making  sundry  small  assignations  for  future  days  and  weeks,  goes,  a  murdered 
man,  to  the  conference  at  the  Tower.  Richard,  whose  startling  figure  emerges 
from  the  background  throughout  the  play  with  small  regard  for  versimilitude  and 
always  at  the  most  effective  moment,  is  suddenly  on  the  spot,  just  as  Hastings  is 
about  to  give  his  voice  in  the  conference  as  though  he  were  the  representative  of 
the  absent  Duke.  Richard  is  prepared,  when  the  opportune  instant  has  arrived, 
to  spring  a  mine  under  Hastings’  feet.  But  meanwhile  a  matter  of  equal 


232 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  iv. 


Which  I  prefume  hee’le  take  in  gentle  part. 


25 


Enter  Gloucejler. 

Ely.  In  happie  time,  here  comes  the  Duke  himfelfe. 

Rich.  My  Noble  Lords,  and  Coufins  all,  good  morrow: 

I  haue  beene  long  a  fleeper  :  but  I  truft, 

My  abfence  doth  neglect  no  great  defigne,  30 

Which  by  my  prefence  might  haue  beene  concluded. 

Buck.  Had  you  not  come  vpon  your  Q  my  Lord, 

William ,  Lord  Hajlings ,  had  pronounc’d  your  part ; 

I  meane  your  Voice,  for  Crowning  of  the  King.  34 


25.  hee'le ]  he  will  Qq. 
gentle ]  good  Q^g- 

26.  Enter  Glouceffer.]  After  1.  27,  Qq. 

27.  In  happie ]  Now  in  good  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.  +. 

29.  a  Jleeper\  a  Jleepe  Q^. 

Itrnjl ]  I  hope  Q,,  Cam.  + .  now  / 
hope  Q2-8. 

30.  defigne ]  defignes  Qq,  Cam.  + . 


32.  you  not ]  not  you  Qq,  Cam. +. 

Q ]  Ff.  hew  Qq.  cue  Rowe  et 

seq. 

33.  had  pronounc' d]  had  now  pro- 
nounjl  Qq. 

your ]  you  Q6. 

33,  34.  part ;...  Voice,']  part : ...voice 
Qq.  part , —  ... voice , —  Cap.  et  seq. 
(subs. ) 


importance  concerns  him — my  Lord  of  Ely’s  strawberries:  the  flavour  of  Holborn 
strawberries  is  exquisite,  and  the  fruit  must  be  sent  for.  Richard’s  desire  to  appear 
disengaged  from  sinister  thought  is  less  important  to  note  than  Richard’s  need  of 
indulging  a  cynical  contempt  of  human  life.  The  explosion  takes  place;  Hastings 
is  seized;  and  the  delicacies  are  reserved  until  the  head  of  Richard’s  enemy  is  off. 
There  is  a  wantonness  of  diablerie  in  this  incident. 

29.  I  haue  beene  long  a  sleeper]  Churchill  (p.  508):  Compare  ‘They  say  I 
haue  bin  a  long  sleeper  to-day,’  True  Tragedy,  etc.  [See  Appendix,  p.  524.]  For 
this  More  has  ‘bene  a  slepe  that  day.’  Grafton,  Hall  and  Holinshed  have:  ‘been 
a  sleeper.’  Field  compares  the  council  scene  in  The  True  Tragedy  with  Shakes¬ 
peare’s.  For  myself  I  see  no  resemblances  for  which  the  common  source  will  not 
account. — Webb:  Richard,  by  inferring  that  he  has  overslept  himself  upon  such 
a  momentous  occasion,  wishes  it  to  be  thought  he  has  no  personal  interest  in  the 
coronation. 

32.  vpon  your  Q]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  Cue):  Origin  uncertain.  It  has 
been  taken  as  equivalent  to  French  queue,  tail,  on  the  ground  that  it  is  the  ‘tail’ 
or  ‘ending’  of  the  preceding  speech;  but  no  such  use  of  queue  has  ever  obtained  in 
French  (where  the  ‘cue’  is  called  replique),  and  no  literal  sense  of  queue  or  ‘cue’ 
leading  up  to  this  appears  in  sixteenth  century  English.  On  the  other  hand,  in 
the  sixteenth  and  early  seventeenth  century  it  is  found  written  Q,  q,  q.,  or  qu,  and 
it  was  explained  by  seventeenth  century  writers  as  a  contraction  for  some  Latin 
word  (sc.  qualis,  quando),  said  to  have  been  used  to  mark,  in  actors’  copies  of  plays, 
the  points  at  which  they  were  to  begin.  But  no  evidence  confirming  this  has  been 
found. — Wright:  For  this  use  of  ‘upon,’  compare:  ‘You  come  most  carefully 
upon  your  hour.’ — Hamlet,  I,  i,  6. 

34.  for  Crowning  of  the  King]  Compare:  ‘What  threat  you  me  with  telling 
of  the  king.’ — I,  iii,  119. 


act  in,  sc.  iv.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

Rich. Then  my  Lord  Ha/lings,  no  man  might  be  bolder, 

His  Lordfhip  knowes  me  well,  and  loues  me  well. 

My  Lord  of  Ely,  when  I  was  laft  in  Holborne, 

I  faw  good  Strawberries  in  your  Garden  there, 

36.  well.']  well.  Haft.  /  thanke  your  37.  Ely,  70/ien]  Elie.  Bifti.  My  Lord. 

Grace.  Qq,  Cam.  +  .  Glo.  When...  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

37.  38.  My  Lord  of  Ely  ...  I  saw  good  Strawberries]  Mrs  Griffiths  (ii, 
71):  Could  any  writer  but  Shakespeare  have  ever  thought  of  such  a  circumstance, 
in  the  midst  of  a  deep  tragedy,  as  the  sending  an  old  grave  Bishop  on  an  errand  for 
a  leaf  of  strawberries?  and  this,  in  the  most  formal  scene  of  the  Play  too,  where 
the  lords  are  met  in  council,  to  settle  about  the  day  for  the  coronation?  But  could 
any  writer  but  himself  have  attempted  such  a  whim,  without  setting  the  audience 
a-laughing  at  the  ridiculousness  and  absurdity  of  such  an  incident?  And  yet  he 
contrives,  somehow  or  other,  to  hold  us  in  awe,  all  the  while;  though  he  must  be 
a  very  ingenious  critic,  indeed,  who  can  supply  any  sort  of  reason  for  the  intro¬ 
duction  of  such  a  familiar  and  comic  stroke,  upon  so  serious  an  occasion.  And 
what  renders  the  solution  of  this  passage  still  more  difficult  is  that  the  request 
is  made  by  a  person,  too,  whose  mind  was  deeply  intent  on  murder  and  usurpation, 
at  the  very  time.  None  of  the  editors  have  taken  the  least  notice  of  this  article; 
and  the  first  notion  that  occurred  to  me  upon  it,  was  that  perhaps  Richard  wanted 
to  get  rid  of  old  Ely,  after  any  manner,  however  indecent  or  abrupt,  in  order  to  be  at 
liberty  to  plot  with  Buckingham  in  private;  for  the  moment  the  Bishop  goes  out  on 
his  errand  he  says:  ‘Cousin  of  Buckingham  a  word  with  you.’  But  as  he  did  not 
send  the  rest  of  the  Council-Board  a-packing  after  him,  and  adjourn  them  from  the 
bed  of  justice  to  the  strawberry-bed,  but  retires  immediately  himself  with  his  corn- 
plotter  Buckingham,  we  cannot  suppose  this  idea  to  have  been  the  purpose  intended 
by  so  extraordinary  a  motion.  There  is,  then,  no  other  way  left  us  to  resolve  this 
text  than  to  impute  it  solely  to  the  peculiar  character  that  Shakespeare  has  given 
us  all  along  of  this  extraordinary  personage;  whom  he  has  represented  throughout 
as  preserving  a  facetious  humour,  and  exerting  a  sort  of  careless  ease,  in  the  midst 
of  all  his  crimes.  I  am  sorry  not  to  be  able  to  give  a  better  account  of  this  partic¬ 
ular  than  what  I  have  here  offered;  because,  if  it  is  to  rest  upon  such  a  comment, 
our  author  must,  in  this  instance,  be  thought  to  have  betrayed  a  manifest  ignorance 
in  human  nature,  or  the  nature  of  guilt  at  least;  as  no  vicious  person,  ...  or  deter¬ 
mined  villain,  was  ever  cheerful,  yet,  or  could  possibly  be  able  to  assume  even  the 
semblance  of  carelessness  or  ease,  upon  any  occasion  whatsoever. — Steevens:  The 
reason  why  the  bishop  was  despatched  on  this  errand  is  not  clearer  in  Holinshed, 
from  whom  Shakespeare  adopted  the  circumstance,  than  in  the  present  scene.  It 
may,  however,  have  been  mentioned  by  the  historians  merely  to  show  the  unusual 
affability  and  good  humour  which  the  dissembling  Gloucester  affected  at  the  very 
time  when  he  had  determined  on  the  death  of  Hastings.  The  complaisance  of  the 
reverend  cultivator  of  ‘these  strawberries’  is  likewise  recorded  by  the  author  of 
the  Latin  play,  Ricardus  Tertius.  [Mrs  Griffiths  is,  I  think,  satisfactorily  answered 
by  Steevens.  An  examination  of  the  sources  of  Shakespeare’s  knowledge  of  this 
period  would  have  shown  her  that  the  incident  was  not  his  own  invention,  or 
Holinshed’s  either:  it  appears  for  the  first  time  in  More’s  Life  of  Richard. — Ed.] 

38.  your  Garden]  Wright:  Ely  Place  still  remains  as  evidence  that  the  palace 


233 

35 

38 


234 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  iv. 


I  doe  befeech  you,  fend  for  fome  of  them. 

Ely.  Mary  and  will,  my  Lord,  with  all  my  heart.  40 

Exit  Bijhop. 

Rich.  Coufin  of  Buckingham,  a  word  with  you. 

Catesby  hath  founded  Ha/lings  in  our  bufineffe, 

And  Andes  the  teftie  Gentleman  fo  hot, 

That  he  will  lofe  his  Head,  ere  giue  confent  45 

His  Maflers  Child,  as  worfhipfully  he  tearmes  it, 

Shall  lofe  the  Royaltie  of  Englands  Throne. 

Buck.  Withdraw  your  felfe  a  while,  lie  goe  with  you. 

Exeunt. 

DarbiWe  haue  not  yet  fet  downe  this  day  of  Triumph  :  5° 

To  morrow,  in  my  iudgement,  is  too  fudden, 

For  I  my  felfe  am  not  fo  well  prouided, 

As  elfe  I  would  be,  were  the  day  prolong’d. 

Enter  the  Bijhop  of  Ely. 

Ely.  Where  is  my  Lord,  the  Duke  of  Glofter?  55 


39.  doe]  now  Q4- 

40.  Alary  ...heart]  I  go,  my  Lord  Qq. 

41.  Exit  Bifhop.]  Om.  Qq. 

42.  of]  Om.  Qq. 

44.  teftie]  refty  Q4. 

45.  That]  As  Qq,  Cam. +. 
ere]  eare  Qt.  are  Q$. 

46.  Mafters]  Qf.  maifters  Qq.  Mafter's 

F4* 

Child,  as  worfhipfull)’]  Sonne,  as 
worjhipfull  Qq,  Cam.  +  (subs.)  son,  as 
worshipfully  Pope,  + ,  Sta. 

48.  your  ...you]  you  hence  my  L.  lie 
follow  you  Qq,  Cam.  + ,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 

a  while]  awhile  Cap.  (corrected 


in  Errata.) 

49,  Exeunt.]  Ex.  Glo.  Qq.  Exe.  Glo. 
and  Buck.  Pope  et  seq.  (subs.) 

50.  Darb.]  Stanley  Theob.  et  seq. 
(throughout). 

5  x .  my  iudgement  ]  mine  opinion  Qq, 
Cam.  +. 

fudden]  fodaine  Qt.  foone  Q^g- 

54.  the  Bilhop]  B.  QXQ2. 

55,  56.  Where. ..Strawberries]  One 
line,  Qq.  As  prose,  Cam.  + ,  Ktly. 

Where.. fent]  One  line,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sing. 

55.  Lord,  the. ..Glofter]  Lord  Pro¬ 
tect  or  Qq,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 
Sing.  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 


of  the  Bishops  of  Ely  occupied  its  site.  Sir  Christoper  Hatton  lived  and  died  there, 
and  from  him  what  was  formerly  the  garden  of  the  palace  acquired  the  name  of 
Hatton  Garden. 

40.  Mary  and  will]  Compare:  ‘O,  kill  me  too.  Marry  and  shall.’ — 3  Hen.  VI: 
V,  v,  41,  42;  or  see  Abbott,  §  400. 

51.  my  iudgement]  Marshall:  It  is  really  impossible  to  say  why  any  editor 
should  retain  [the  reading  of  the  Qq,  mine  opinion],  considering  that  it  renders  the 
line  horribly  unrhythmical,  and  possesses  no  force  or  merit  of  any  kind  whatever. 

55.  Gloster]  Walker  (Vers.,  236)  gives  several  passages  wherein  this  name 
is  evidently  considered  as  a  trisyllable  for  the  sake  of  the  metre. 


ACT  III,  SC.  iv.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


235 

56 


I  haue  Tent  for  thefe  Strawberries. 

Ha. His  Grace  looks  chearfully  &  fmooth  this  morning, 

There’s  fome  conceit  or  other  likes  him  well, 

When  that  he  bids  good  morrow  with  fuch  fpirit. 

I  thinke  there’s  neuer  a  man  in  Chriftendome  60 

Can  leffer  hide  his  loue,  or  hate,  then  hee, 

For  by  his  Face  ftraight  fhall  you  know  his  Heart. 

Zter^.What  of  his  Heart  perceiue  you  in  his  Face, 

By  any  liuelyhood  he  fhew’d  to  day  ? 

Hajl.  Mary,  that  with  no  man  here  he  is  offended  :  65 


56.  I  haue... Strawberries]  I've  sent 
far  them  Taylor  MS  ap.  Cam. 

fent]  sent  straitway  Han.  sent 
someone  Marshall  conj. 

thefe]  these  same  Cap. 

57-  this  morning ]  to  day  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

59.  that  he  bids]  he  doth  bid  Qq,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Sta.  Cam. 
+  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Ktly,  Huds. 


59.  fpirit]  a  fpirit  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

60.  there's  neuer ]  there  is  neuer  Qq. 
there' s  ne'  er  Pope,-K 

61.  Can  leffer]  That  can  leffer  Qq. 
That  can  leffe  Q8,  Sta.  Cam.  +  (subs.) 

64.  liuelyhood]  likelihood  Qq,  Pope, 
+  ,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sing. 
Sta.  Cam.  +  . 


57.  chearfully  &  smooth]  Compare  I,  i,  27:  ‘ — lamely  and  unfashionable,’ 
or  see  Abbott,  §  397. 

58.  conceit]  That  is,  thought,  idea,  fancy. 

58.  likes  him  well]  That  is,  pleases  him;  compare  ‘This  likes  me  well.  These 
foils  have  all  a  length?’ — Hamlet,  V,  ii,  276. 

60,  61.  I  thinke  there’s  neuer  a  man  .  .  .  then  hee]  Theobald:  The  character 
here  given  of  Richard  (tho’  very  falsely)  exactly  tallies  with  a  fragment  from  one 
of  Ennius’s  tragedies,  quoted  by  Nonius  Marcellus:  ‘Eo  Ego  ingenio — Natus 
sum,  Amicitiam  atq;  Inimicitiam  in  frontem  promptam  gero.’ 

64.  liuelyhood]  Knight:  The  meaning  is  perfectly  clear,  the  word  being  used 
in  the  same  sense  as  in  All's  Well,  I,  i,  58:  ‘The  tyranny  of  her  sorrows  takes  all 
livelihood  from  her  cheeks.’  Stanley  asks  how  they  interpret  Gloucester’s  ‘liveli¬ 
hood,’  liveliness,  cheerfulness.  And  yet  some  modern  editors  prefer  [see  Text. 
Notes]  the  tame  reading  of  the  Qq,  likelihood,  which  they  interpret  as  appearance, 
and  thus  perpetuate  what  was  no  doubt  a  typographical  error. — Hudson:  It 
seems  to  me  that  the  passage  from  All's  Well,  and  the  present  one,  are  by  no  means 
parallel.  The  sense  of  appearance  or  sign  is  plainly  required  in  the  text;  and 
likelihood  may  very  well  bear  that  sense.  [Bradley  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  livelihood2) 
quotes  many  examples  wherein  this  word  is  used  for  liveliness.] 

65.  Mary]  Walker  {Vers.,  187)  quotes  the  present  line,  among  others,  where 
‘marry’  is  to  be  pronounced  metri  gratia,  as  a  monosyllable. 

65.  with  no  man  here  he  is  offended]  Hazlitt  {Sh.  Char.,  153):  One  of  the 
finest  strokes  in  the  play,  and  which  serves  to  show  as  much  as  anything  the  deep, 
plausible  manners  of  Richard,  is  the  unsuspecting  security  of  Hastings,  at  the 
very  time  when  the  former  is  plotting  his  death,  and  when  that  very  appeal  ance 
of  cordiality  and  good  humour  on  which  Hastings  builds  his  confidence  arises  from 


236 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iii,  sc.  iv. 


For  were  he,  he  had  fhewne  it  in  his  Lookes. 
*Dar.  I  pray  God  he  be  not  I  fay.* 


66 


Enter  Richard ,  and  Buckingham. 

Rich.  I  pray  you  all,  tell  me  what  they  deferue, 

That  doe  confpire  my  death  with  diuellifh  Plots 

Of  damned  Witchcraft,  and  that  haue  preuail’d  70 

Vpon  my  Body  with  their  Hellifh  Charmes. 

Haft.  The  tender  loue  I  beare  your  Grace,  my  Lord, 

Makes  me  moft  forward,  in  this  Princely  prefence, 

To  doome  th’Offendors,  whofoe’re  they  be  : 

I  fay,  my  Lord,  they  haue  deferued  death.  75 

Rich.  Then  be  your  eyes  the  witneffe  of  their  euill. 

Looke  how  I  am  bewitch’d  :  behold,  mine  Arme 
Is  like  a  blafted  Sapling,  wither’d  vp  : 

And  this  is  Edwards  Wife,  that  monflrous  Witch, 

Conforted  with  that  Harlot,  Strumpet  Shore,  80 

That  by  their  Witchcraft  thus  haue  marked  me. 

Haft.  If  they  haue  done  this  deed,  my  Noble  Lord.  82 


66.  were  he,  he  had]  if  he  were  he 
would  haue  Qq,  Sta. 

Jhewne ]  Jhewde  Q?Q8. 

Lookes ]  face  Q^g. 

*Dar.  I  pray...  I fay*]  Sta. 

Cam.  + .  Om.  FItFf  et  cet. 

*Dar.]  Der.  Staunton,  Cam.  +  . 
I  pray]  Ay,  pray  Sta. 

67.  Richard,  and  Buckingham]  Glo- 
cefter  Q,.  Glo.  Q2.  Glofter.  Qq.  ...hastily  ; 
Lovel  and  Ratcliffe,  with  them;  a  guard 
behind.  Cap. 

68.  tell  me  what  ]  what  do  they  Qq. 
deferue]  deserve.  [advancing 

sternly  towards  his  seat.  Cap. 

73.  Princely]  noble  Qq,  Cap.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Sta.  Cam.  + ,  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Ktly,  Huds. 


74.  lh’]  the  Qq. 

Offendors,whofoe're...be  :]  offend¬ 
ers.  Whosoe'er. ..be,  Johns.  Var. ’73. 

whofoe'  re]ivhatfoeuerQq,Ca.m.  + . 

76.  their  euill]  this  ill  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

77.  Looke]  See  Qq,  Cam.-K 
Arme]  arm.  [stripping  and  laying 

it  bare.  Cap. 

78.  wither'd]  withered  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

79.  And  this  is]  This  is  that  Qq, 
Sta. 

80.  Harlot,  Strumpet  ]  harlot  strumpet 
Qq,  Cam.  +  .  harlot-strumpet  Dyce  ii, 
iii.  harlot-woman  Huds. 

81.  Witchcraft]  witchcrafts  Q^. 

82.  deed,  my  Noble]  thing  my  gracious 
Qq,  Cam. +  . 

Lord.]  lord, —  Rowe  et  seq. 


Richard’s  consciousness  of  having  betrayed  him  to  his  ruin.  This,  with  the  whole 
character  of  Hastings,  is  omitted  [in  Cibber’s  version], 

69.  conspire  my  death]  For  other  examples  of  ‘the  omission  of  a  preposition 
after  some  verbs  which  may  be  regarded  as  transitive,’  see  Abbott,  §  200. 

79.  And  this  is  Edwards  Wife]  Vaughan  (iii,  86):  The  reading  of  the  Quarto 
—‘this  is  that  Edward’s  wife’— I  believe  to  be  right.  ‘That’  has  the  Latin  signifi¬ 
cation  of  iste,  according  to  its  frequent  usage  in  our  day,  and  it  refers  not  to  Edward 
but  to  ‘Edward’s  wife.’ 


ACT  III,  SC.  iv.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


237 


Rich.  If?  thou  Prote6lor  of  this  damned  Strumpet,  83 

Talk’ft  thou  to  me  of  Ifs  :  thou  art  a  Traytor, 

Off  with  his  Head  ;  now  by  Saint  Paul  I  fweare,  85 

I  will  not  dine,  vntill  I  fee  the  fame. 

Louell  and  Ratcliffe,  looke  that  it  be  done  :  Exeunt.  87 


83.  84.  If?. ..Ifs:']  If  ...iffes?  Qq. 
If?...Ifts  F2.  If?...Iffs;  F3F4.  If?... 
Iffs  ?  Rowe, +  ,  Knt.  If!...ifs?  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce, 
Wh.  i,  Cam.  +  . 

84.  Talk' fl  thou  to  me ]  Telfl  thou  me 
Qq.  Tellest  thou  vie  Cam.+. 

Ifs ]  ‘  ifs,'  Cam. +  . 


85,  86.  I  fweare... dine]  I  will  not  dine 
to  day  I  fweare  Qq  (as  one  line). 

86,  87.  vntill. .. done :]  One  line,  read¬ 
ing  :  Vntil  I  fee  the fame fome fee  it  done  : 
Qq,  Sta. 

87,  Ratcliffe]  Catesby  Theob. +  ,  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Hal. 

Exeunt.]  After  1.  88,  Qq. 


85.  Off  with  his  Head]  Walpole  (p.  47,  loot-note):  The  death  of  Hastings 
is  the  fact  of  which  we  are  most  sure,  without  knowing  the  immediate  motives: 
we  must  conclude  it  was  determined  on  his  opposing  Richard’s  claim:  farther  we 
do  not  know,  nor  whether  that  opposition  was  made  in  a  legal  or  hostile  manner. 
It  is  impossible  to  believe  that,  an  hour  before  his  death,  he  should  have  exulted 
in  the  deaths  of  their  common  enemies,  and  vaunted,  as  Sir  Thomas  More  asserts, 
his  connection  with  Richard,  if  he  was  then  actually  at  variance  with  him;  nor  that 
Richard  should,  without  provocation,  have  massacred  so  excellent  an  accomplice. 
This  story,  therefore,  must  be  left  in  the  dark,  as  we  find  it. 

85.  by  Saint  Paul]  Wordsworth  ( Sh.’s  Knowledge,  etc.,  p.  84):  Why  this 
oath  should  have  been  assigned  no  less  than  five  times  to  Richard,  but  to  no  one 
else  in  this  play,  and  yet  should  not  be  found  so  much  as  once  in  any  other,  I  am 
unable  to  explain;  nor  am  I  aware  that  the  fact  has  been  noticed  by  any  of  the 
critics.  [‘The  protectour  bade  speede  him  and  shrive  him  apace,  for  by  S.  Paul, 
quoth  he,  I  will  not  to  dinner  till  I  see  thy  head  off.’ — More,  p.  73. — See  I,  i,  149. 
— Ed.] 

87.  Louell  and  Ratcliffe]  Theobald:  The  scene  is  here  in  the  Tower;  and 
Lord  Hastings  was  cut  off  on  that  very  day,  when  Rivers,  Grey,  and  Vaughan 
suffered  at  Pomfret.  How  then  could  Ratcliffe  be  both  in  Yorkshire  and  the 
Tower?  In  sc.  iii  we  find  him  conducting  those  gentlemen  to  the  block.  In 
the  Quarto  we  have:  Exeunt:  Manet  Catesby  with  Hastings.  And  in  the  next 
scene,  before  the  Tower  walls,  we  find  Lovel  and  Catesby  come  back  from  the 
execution,  bringing  the  head  of  Hastings. — Tyrwhitt:  In  the  Quarto  Lovel  does 
not  appear  in  the  next  scene;  but  only  Catesby,  bringing  the  head  of  Hastings. 
The  confusion  seems  to  have  arisen,  when  it  was  thought  necessary  that  Catesby 
should  be  employed  to  fetch  the  Mayor,  who,  in  the  Quarto  is  made  to  come 
without  having  been  sent  for.  As  some  other  person  was  then  wanted  to 
bring  the  head  of  Hastings,  the  poet,  or  the  players,  appointed  Lovel  and  Rat¬ 
cliffe  to  that  office,  without  reflecting  that  the  latter  was  engaged  in  another 
service  on  the  same  day  at  Pomfret. — Knight:  We  must  either,  it  appears  to  us, 
take  the  text  of  the  Quarto  altogether,  in  which  neither  Ratcliff  nor  Lovel  appears, 
or  adopt  the  apparent  absurdity  of  the  Folio.  But  in  truth  this  is  one  of  those 
positions  in  which  Shakespeare  has  trusted  to  the  imagination  of  his  audience, 
rather  than  to  their  topographical  knowledge.  And  by  a  bold  anticipation  of  a 
rate  of  travel,  which  is  now  a  reality,  Ratcliff  is,  without  offence,  at  Pomfret  and 


238 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ill,  sc.  iv. 


The  reft  that  loue  me,  rife,  and  follow  me.  88 

Matiet  Louell  and  Ratcliff c ,  with  the 

Lord  Hajlings.  90 

Hajl.  Woe,  woe  for  England,  not  a  whit  for  me, 


88.  rife\  come  Qq. 

89,90.  Manet.. .Haftings.]  manetCat. 
with  Ha.  Q,Q2.  manet  Ca.  with  Ilaft. 
Qq,  Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Johns,  (subs.) 
Manent... Haftings  F2F4,  Rowe,  Pope. 
Exit  Council  with  Richard  and  Bucking¬ 


ham.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Coll. 
Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly.  Council  rise  in  Con¬ 
fusion  ;  and  exeunt,  with  Ric.  and  Buc. 
Capell.  Exeunt  all,  except  Hastings, 
Catesby,  and  Lovel.  Staunton. 


at  London  on  the  same  day.  We  have  little  doubt  that  Lovel  and  Ratcliff  are 
thus  brought  upon  the  scene  together,  in  the  Folio,  in  association  with  the  rhyme 
by  Collingbourne:  ‘The  Cat,  the  Rat,  and  Lovel  our  dog  Rule  all  England  under 
a  Hog.’  The  audience  were  familiar  with  this  story;  and  it  was  natural  that 
Shakespeare  should  show  Catesby  (the  Cat),  Ratcliff  (the  Rat),  and  Lovel  (the 
Dog),  the  three  most  confidential  ministers  of  his  usurpation.  [See  I,  iii,  237.] — 
Hunter  ( Illust .,  ii,  89):  It  would  have  been  a  not  improper  subject  for  a  note 
that  there  was  here  a  slight  variation  from  the  truth  of  history,  much  slighter, 
however,  than  many  others  in  these  Histories.  But  then,  when  something  else  is 
substituted  which  the  Poet  did  not  write,  care  should  be  taken  that  the  substituted 
word  is  consistent  with  the  other  part  of  the  play,  which  in  this  instance  is  not  the 
case.  That  consistency  requires  that  Catesby  should  enter  in  the  fifth  scene  with 
Lovel,  bringing  the  head  of  Hastings,  whereas  he  is  sent  to  fetch  the  Lord  Mayor. 
.  .  .  In  fact,  it  is  hazardous  to  begin  to  tamper  with  the  text  of  any  great  writer. 
— Cambridge  Edd.  ( Note  xv):  We  have  followed  the  Folios,  for  the  difficulties 
could  not  be  removed  entirely  without  applying  more  violence  to  the  text  than 
an  editor  is  justified  in  using. — Wright:  The  stage-direction  of  the  Quartos  at 
1.  89:  ‘ Exeunt .  manet  Cat.  with  Ha .,’  justifies  Theobald’s  alteration.  But  in 
the  next  scene  Ratcliff  and  Lovel  are  made  to  appear  with  Hastings’s  head,  while 
Catesby  overlooks  the  walls  of  the  Tower.  If  we  imagine  that  Catesby  left  the 
stage  for  this  purpose,  although  there  is  no  exit  marked  in  the  old  copies,  we  may 
explain  the  confusion  by  supposing  that  the  same  player  took  the  parts  both  of 
Ratcliff  and  Catesby. — Marshall:  [The  suggestion]  that  one  of  the  players  may 
have  doubled  Catesby  and  Ratcliff  is  hardly  possible,  as,  in  IV,  iv,  we  have  Ratcliff 
and  Catesby  on  the  stage  at  the  same  time,  and  speaking  to  Richard.  The  fact 
is  that  this  is  one  of  those  slips  on  the  part  of  the  author  which  can  be  easily 
remedied  on  the  stage,  but  not  where  the  text  is  printed  entire. — Daniel  ( Introd ., 
xviii) :  The  substitution  [in  this  scene  and  the  next],  in  the  Quartos,  of  Catesby  for 
the  Lovell  and  Ratcliff  of  the  Folio,  is  a  clear  case  of  ‘revision,’  and  may  be  taken 
as  a  measure  of  the  generally  careless  manner  in  which  that  revision  was  done. 
The  economy  of  the  stage  no  doubt  recommended  the  abolition  of  Lovell  as  a 
separate  part;  but  Catesby  here  leading  Hastings  to  execution  is  in  almost  as 
incongruous  a  position  as  Dorset,  in  II,  iv,  as  the  Messenger.  In  sc.  v,  however, 
his  displacement  of  Lovel  and  Ratcliff  brings  in  a  world  of  confusion :  while  actually 
on  the  stage  with  Richard,  his  double  enters  bearing  the  head  of  Hastings!  Yet 
that  this  office  originally  devolved,  as  in  the  Folio,  on  Ratcliff  and  Lovell,  is 
shown  in  the  Quarto  itself  in  certain  tell-tale  words  in  sc.  v,  1.  59,  where  Richard 
refers  to  the  haste  with  which  ‘these  our  friends’  have  executed  their  commission. 


ACT  III,  SC.  iv.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


239 


For  I,  too  fond,  might  haue  preuented  this  : 

Stanley  did  dreame,  the  Bore  did  rowfe  our  Helmes, 
And  I  did  fcorne  it,  and  difdaine  to  flye  : 

Three  times  to  day  my  Foot-Cloth-Horfe  did  ftumble, 
And  ftarted,  when  he  look'd  vpon  the  Tower, 

As  loth  to  beare  me  to  the  flaughter-houfe. 

O  now  I  need  the  Prieft,  that  fpake  to  me : 

I  now  repent  I  told  the  Purfuiuant, 

As  too  triumphing,  how  mine  Enemies 
To  day  at  Pomfret  bloodily  were  butcher'd, 


93.  rowfe  our  Helmes]  F  .  race  his 
helme  Qq.  rowze  our  Helmes  F3F4.  rase 
our  helms  Rowe,  + .  raze  his  helm  Cap. 
Cam. +.  rase  his  helm  Var.  ’73  et  cet. 

94.  And. .. fcorne  it... difdaine']  But  I 
difdaind  it. ..did  fcorne  Qq,  Cap.  Var. 
’78,  ’85,  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam.  +  , 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

it  ]  Om.  Q4. 

difdaine]  disdain'd  Knt,  Coll. 
Sing.  Ktly. 


95.  Foot-Cloth- Horfe~\footecloth  horfe 
Qq.  foot-cloth  horse  Rowe  et  seq. 

96 .  flatted]  flartled  Qq,  Cap.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Cam. +  ,  Ktly. 

98.  need]  want  Qq,  Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 
Sing.  Cam.  +  ,  Ktly.  (warrant  Q,Q8.) 

100.  too... how]  twere...at  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.  +  . 

1 01.  To  day]  How  they  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.  +  . 


93.  the  Bore  did  rowse  our  Helmes]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76; 
p.  22):  Another  misprint,  I  presume,  as  far  as  ‘rowse’  is  concerned;  for  it  cannot 
have  been  meant  for  a  correction  by  anybody:  ‘our  helms,’  for  his  helm,  may 
perhaps  have  been  intended.  For  though  Stanley’s  message  was  that  he  had 
dreamed  that  ‘the  boar  had  rased  off  his  helm,’  it  was  a  dream  in  which  he  sup¬ 
posed  Hastings  to  have  an  equal  interest;  and  as  it  had  not  come  true  in  his  own 
case,  it  was  only  as  applying  to  them  both  that  it  was  in  point.  The  change  in  the 
wording  of  the  message,  as  recalled  under  the  present  circumstances,  is  legiti¬ 
mate  and  natural.  And  according  to  the  authority  which  Shakespeare  was 
following,  it  was,  in  fact,  the  more  correct.  [Although  Shakespeare  does  not 
make  use  of  the  incident,  the  prophecy  had  been  fulfilled  also  as  regards  Stanley. 
More  says,  p.  73,  ‘  And  a  nother  let  flee  at  the  Lorde  Stanley  which  shronke  at  the 
stroke  and  fel  vnder  the  table,  or  els  his  hed  had  been  clefte  to  the  tethe:  for  as 
shortely  as  he  shranke,  yet  ranne  the  blood  aboute  hys  eares.’ — Ed.] 

95.  Foot-Cloth]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D .):  A  large,  richly  ornamented  cloth  laid 
over  the  back  of  a  horse,  and  hanging  down  to  the  ground  on  each  side.  It  was 
considered  as  a  mark  of  dignity  and  state. — Wright:  One  of  Cade’s  charges 
against  Lord  Say  was  that  he  rode  in  a  ‘  foot-cloth  ’ :  ‘  Say.  What  of  that  ?  Cade. 
Marry  thou  oughtest  not  let  thy  horse  wear  a  cloak,  when  honester  men  than  thou 
go  in  their  hose  and  doublets.’ — 2  Hen.  VI:  IV,  vii,  54. 

95.  Horse  did  stumble]  According  to  More,  the  stumbling  of  a  rider’s  horse 
‘hath  bene  of  an  old  rite  and  custome,  obserued  as  a  token  often  times  notably 
foregoing  some  great  misfortune,’  p.  76. — Ed. 

99-101.  I  now  repent  .  .  .  were  butcher’d]  Spedding  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875- 
’76;  p.  63):  The  alteration  [of  the  Quarto  reading  in  these  lines],  though  slight, 


240 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iii,  sc.  iv. 


And  I  my  felfe  fecure,  in  grace  and  fauour.  102 

Oh  Margaret ,  Margaret ,  now  thy  heauie  Curfe 
Is  lighted  on  poore  Hastings  wretched  Head. 

^.Come,  come,  difpatch,  the  Duke  would  be  at  dinner:  105 

Make  a  fhort  Shrift,  he  longs  to  fee  your  Head. 

Hajl.  O  momentarie  grace  of  mortall  men, 

Which  we  more  hunt  for,  then  the  grace  of  God ! 

Who  builds  his  hope  in  ayre  of  your  good  Lookes,  109 


104.  lighted ]  lightened  Q6Q?.  lightned 

Qs- 

105.  Ra.]  Cat.  Qq,  Theob.  Han.Warb. 
Johns.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta. 

Come... dif pate  hi]  Difpatch,  my 
Lo :  Qq  ( Lord  Q5),  Cap.  Mai.  Steev. 
Varr.  Sing.  Sta.  Cam. +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Kt!y,  Huds. 

107.  grace]  /late  Qq. 

mortall]  worldly  Qq. 


108.  then  the]  QjQ2-  then  for  the 
Q3-8* 

God  !]  heauen  :  Qq. 

109.  hope]  hopes  Qq,  Cam. +. 

ayre]  Fa.  aire  Qi-3QsQ6F3.  aier 
Q  .  the  aire  Q?.  the  ayre  Qg.  th ’  air 
Han.  air  F,  et  cet. 

good]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll,  i,  ii, 
Dyce  i,  Wh.  i,  Hal.  faire  Qq  et  cet. 
Lookes]  looke  Q  . 


is  noticeable  as  an  example  of  the  gradual  change  which  was  taking  place  in  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  management  of  his  blank  verse.  The  monotony  of  the  regularly  recurring 
accent  and  pause  was  beginning  to  be  wearisome,  and  a  variation  of  their  place  in 
the  line  was  the  first  device  by  which  he  endeavoured  to  avoid  it;  an  art,  the  prac¬ 
tice  and  cultivation  of  which  gave  him  a  great  deal  of  work  before  he  assumed  the 
larger  liberties  which  characterised  the  versification  of  his  later  plays,  and  remain 
to  show  (as  used  in  them)  the  noblest  effects  of  which  the  metre  has  yet  been  found 
capable.  These  lines,  as  they  stand  in  the  Quarto,  are  a  good  specimen  of  the 
earlier  style,  and  by  no  means  remarkable  for  monotony:  and  yet  I  see  no  difficulty 
in  understanding  why  Shakespeare — indeed,  the  difficulty  is  less  if  it  were  he  than 
if  it  were  a  nameless  transcriber  writing  before  1623 — altered  them  to  the  form 
[in  which  they  appear  in  the  Folio], 

10 1.  To  day]  Marshall:  The  alteration  of  Qv  How  they,  was  evidently  made 
with  a  view  of  getting  rid  of  the  difficulty  about  Ratcliff  in  1.  87;  but  if  we  refer  to 
sc.  ii,  1.  X14,  we  shall  see  that  Q,  retains  This  day  in  Hastings’s  speech. 

105.  Come,  come,  dispatch]  Webb:  These  curt,  rough  words  do  not  suit 
Catesby  [see  Text.  Notes]  but  seem  an  echo  of  the  Ratcliff  of  scene  iii. 

105,  106.  the  Duke  ...  at  dinner  :  Make  a  short  Shrift]  1 — he  toke  a  priest 
at  aduenture,  and  made  a  short  shrift,  for  a  longer  would  not  be  suffered,  the 
protectour  made  so  much  hast  to  dyner.’ — More,  p.  73. — Ed.  » 

109.  in  ayre  of  your  good  Lookes]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  air,  III,  13): 
Outward  appearance,  apparent  character,  manner,  look,  style.  Especially  in 
phrases  like  ‘an  air  of  absurdity’;  less  commonly  of  a  thing  tangible,  as  the  ‘air 
of  a  mansion.’ — Wint.  Tale,  IV,  iv,  755:  ‘Seest  thou  not  the  air  of  the  court  in 
these  enfoldings.’  [Johnson  quotes  as  a  parallel  figure  ‘Nescius  aura:  fallacis,’ 
Horace,  Odes  [I,  v,  11],  whereon  Vaughan  (iii,  87)  remarks  that  ‘ aura  is  a  breeze ,’ 
and  that  it  ‘suggests  a  nautical  idea,  such  as  was  not  in  the  poet’s  mind.’  Is  it 
not  somewhat  temerarious  to  assert  what  was  or  was  not  in  Shakespeare’s  mind  ? 


ACT  III,  SC.  V.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


241 


Liues  like  a  drunken  Sayler  on  a  Mart,  1 10 

Readie  with  euery  Nod  to  tumble  downe, 

Into  the  fatall  Bowels  of  the  Deepe. 

Lou .  Come,  come,  difpatch,  his  bootleffe  to  exclaime. 

Hajl.  O  bloody  Richard:  miferable  England, 

I  prophecie  the  fearefull’ft  time  to  thee,  1 1 5 

That  euer  wretched  Age  hath  look’d  vpon. 

Come,  lead  me  to  the  Block,  beare  him  my  Head, 

They  fmile  at  me,  who  fhortly  fhall  be  dead. 

Exeunt.  119 

[Scene  y.\ 

Enter  Richard ,  and  Buckingham ,  in  rotten  Armour, 

maruellous  ill-fauoured.  2 


113-116.  Lou.  Come...  vpon. ]  Om.  Qq. 
1 16.  hath~\  hate  Var.  ’21  (misprint). 

1 1 8.  who~\  that  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

[Scene  v.]  Cap.  Scene  continued, 
Ff,  Rowe.  Scene  vi.  Pope,  + . 

The  Tower  Walls.  Theob. 


1,2.  Richard. ..ill-fauoured.]  Duke  of 
Glofter  and  Buckingham  in  armour.  Qq. 
(Glocefter  QI). 

I.  rotten]  Ff,  Knt,  Sing.  Cam. +  . 
rusty  Rowe  et  cet. 


Particularly  as,  in  the  present  case,  the  very  next  line,  in  carrying  on  the  simile, 
refers  to  ‘  a  sailor  on  a  mast.  ’  Vaughan  suggests  that  the  metaphor  of  building 
‘in  air  of  fair  looks’  is  best  appreciated  by  the  passage  in  Macbeth :  ‘ — no  jutty, 
frieze,  Buttress  nor  coign  of  vantage  but  this  bird  hath  made  His  pendent  bed 
and  procreant  cradle,  where  they  Most  breed  and  haunt  I  have  observed  the  air 
is  delicate,’  I,  vi,  6-10.  If,  as  Vaughan  asserts,  there  was  no  nautical  idea  in 
Shakespeare’s  mind,  are  we  to  interpret  that  mind  as  occupied,  in  the  present 
passage,  with  thoughts  of  birds’  nests  and  masonry? — Ed.] 

no.  a  drunken  Sayler  on  a  Mast]  Carter  (p.  139):  Compare:  ‘And  thou 
shalt  be  as  one  that  sleepeth  in  the  mids  of  the  sea,  and  as  he  that  sleepeth  in  the 
top  of  the  mast.’ — Proverbs,  xxiii,  34  [Genevan  Vers.].  The  text  does  not  say  the 
sleeper  is  drunken,  but  a  note  on  the  verse  in  the  Genevan  Version  says:  ‘Though 
drunkenesse  maketh  them  more  insensible  than  beasts,  yet  can  they  not  refraine.’ 
[It  is  well  to  remember  that  the  author  of  the  Proverbs  is  here  speaking  of  those  who 
‘look  upon  the  wine  when  it  is  red.’ — Ed.] 

1,  2.  Enter  Richard  .  .  .  ill-fauoured]  Collier  (Notes,  etc.,  p.  331):  It  is  not 
very  easy  to  understand  how  this  scene  was  acted  of  old:  modern  editors  say  that 
it  took  place  on  ‘the  Tower  walls’;  but  to  the  old  stage-direction  (besides  altering 
‘rotten’  to  rusty )  the  corrector  has  added  these  words,  all  in  haste,  in  the  Tower, 
as  if  Richard  and  Buckingham  were  in  some  confusion  not  on  the  Tower  walls, 
but  in  some  part  of  the  edifice  near  the  draw-bridge,  which  Richard  mentions. 
When  Lovell  and  Ratcliff  enter,  just  afterwards,  with  the  head  of  Hastings,  we 
are  informed  in  manuscript  that  it  was  exhibited  on  a  spear. 

1.  in  rotten  Armour]  ‘ — the  protector  immediatelye  after  diner,  entending  to 
16 


242 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  v. 


Richard.  Come  Coufin,  3 

Canft  thou  quake,  and  change  thy  colour, 

Murther  thy  breath  in  middle  of  a  word,  5 

And  then  againe  begin,  and  ftop  againe, 

As  if  thou  were  diftraught,  and  mad  with  terror/ 

Buck.  Tut,  I  can  counterfeit  the  deepe  Tragedian, 

Speake,  and  looke  backe,  and  prie  on  euery  fide, 

Tremble  and  ftart  at  wagging  of  a  Straw  :  IO 


3,  4.  Come. ..colour]  Ff,  Rowe.  One 
line,  Qq  et  cet. 

5.  Murther]  Smother  Steev.  Reprint 
(footnote). 

middle]  the  middle  Rowe. 

6.  againe  begin]  begin  againe  Qq, 
Cam.  + . 


7.  were]  Ff,  Rowe,  wert  Qq  et  cet. 
dijlraught]  dejlradl  Q8. 

8.  Tut,  ]  Tut  feare  not  me  Qq  (as  one 
line).  Tut,  fear  not  me,  my  lord  of 
Gloucester  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

IO.  Tremble. ..Straw]  Om.  Qq. 

at  wagging]  at  ’ wagging  ed.  conj. 


set  some  colour  vpon  the  matter,  sent  in  al  the  hast  for  many  substauncial  men  out 
of  the  city  into  the  Tower.  And  at  their  comming,  himself  with  the  Duke  of 
Buckingham,  stode  harnesed  in  old  il  faring  briganders,  such  as  no  man  shold 
wene  that  thei  wold  vouchsafe  to  haue  put  vpon  their  backes  except  that  some 
sodaine  necessitie  had  constrained  them.’ — More,  p.  78. — Barnard:  Not  rusty, 
as  usually  explained,  for  the  metal  of  the  brigandines  would  not  show,  since  it 
was  sewn  or  riveted  inside  the  material  (velvet,  leather,  or  quilted  linen)  of  which 
the  brigandine  was  made. 

8.  I  can  counterfeit  the  deepe  Tragedian]  Cowden-Clarke  ( Sh .  Char.,  p. 
468):  Such  a  boast  as  this  made  to  Richard — that  master  in  the  art  of  dissembling! 
The  effect  is  almost  ludicrous  of  the  man’s  blindness  of  self-conceit.  Accordingly, 
Richard,  with  his  humour  of  shrewd  policy,  does  not  fail  to  take  inward-laughing 
advantage  of  it,  and  uses  the  vaunter  as  a  convenient  tool.  Buckingham  is  a  weak 
man,  morally  and  mentally;  and,  like  many  weak  men,  he  instinctively  clings  for 
support  to  a  powerful  intellect  like  that  of  Richard,  while  flattering  himself  that 
he  assists  and  guides  it  by  his  own  aid  and  counsel.  Buckingham  is  lavish  in  pro¬ 
testation — always  the  resource  of  the  weak,  conscious  of  their  own  lack  of  strength 
in  earnest  meaning.  [See  III,  i,  221;  note  by  Richardson.] — Wright:  Bucking¬ 
ham  appears  to  have  had  a  gift  for  what  is  now  called  melodrama. — Marshall: 
This  speech  of  Buckingham  .  .  .  gives  us  some  idea  of  the  conventional  tragic  actor 
of  the  time,  whose  simple  tricks  were  preserved  by  tradition  down  to  the  time  when 
the  Richardsonian  booth  was  a  common  adjunct  to  every  country  fair.  .  .  . 
The  difference  between  Richard  and  Buckingham  was  precisely  that  between 
the  really  great  actor  and  the  ranting  tragedian  of  the  fair-booth.  Buckingham’s 
acting  could  deceive  no  one  but  himself;  but  Richard’s  powers  of  simulation 
deceived  even  his  most  intimate  associates. 

10.  Tremble  and  start  ...  a  Straw]  Capell:  The  position  of  [this  line]  may 
be  very  reasonably  questioned:  The  first  member  of  1.  11  should,  in  natural 
order,  follow  1.  9;  1.  10  interrupts  it,  and  is  a  line  superadded;  whether  the  printer 
has  placed  it  rightly,  and  what  other  place  suits  it,  are  matters  to  be  considered. 


ACT  III,  SC.  V.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


243 


Intending  deepe  fufpition,  gaftly  Lookes  1 1 

Are  at  my  feruice,  like  enforced  Smiles ; 

And  both  are  readie  in  their  Offices, 

At  any  time  to  grace  my  Stratagemes. 

But  what,  is  Catesby  gone  ?  15 

Rich.  He  is,  and  fee  he  brings  the  Maior  along. 

Enter  the  Maior ,  and  Catesby. 

Buck.  Lord  Maior. 

Rich.  Looke  to  the  Draw-Bridge  there. 

Buck.  Hearke,  a  Drumme.  20 

Rich.  Catesby,  o’re-looke  the  Walls. 


II.  deepe]  deere  Q^. 

14.  At  any  time']  Om.  Qq,  Sta. 
15-18.  Rut  -what... Lord  Maior]  Glo. 
Here  comes  the  Maior.  Buck.  Let  me 
alone  to  enlertaine  him.  L.  Maior  Qq, 
Theob.  +  ,Sta.  But  what... gone  ?  Rich. 
He  is... along.  Buck.  Let  me  alone  to 
entertain  him. — Lord  Mayor!  Cap.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 
Coll.  iii. 

17.  Enter... Catesby.]  Enter  Maior. 
Qq  (after  1.  14).  Enter  the  Lord  Mayor 
attended.  Theob. +  . 


18- 20.  As  one  line,  Sing.  Ktly. 

18.  Maior.]  Mayor , —  Rowe  et  seq. 

19.  20.  As  one  line,  Steev.  Varr.  Knt, 
Coll.  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Sta. 

19- 24.  Rich.  Looke. ..guard  vs]  Glo. 
Looke. ..there.  Buc.  The  rea/on  we  haue 
fent  for  you.  Glo.  Catesby  ouerlooke  the 
walls.  Buc.  Hearke  I  he  are  a  drumme. 
Glo.  Looke  backe  defend  thee  here  are 
enemies.  God. ..defend  vs.  Qq,  Sta. 

20.  Hearke]  Hark,  Hark,  Cap.  Steev. 
Varr. 

21.  Catesby]  Someone  Han. 


11.  Intending]  For  other  examples  of  intend  meaning  to  pretend,  see  Schmidt 
(Lex.,  6).  Compare  III,  vii,  46. 

16.  the  Maior]  Wright:  The  Lord  Mayor  of  London  on  this  occasion  was, 
according  to  Hall,  Edmund  Shaa  or  Shaw,  the  brother  of  Dr  Ralph  Shaw,  who 
is  mentioned  at  1.  no,  and  was  chaplain  and  confessor  to  Edward  IV.  [Is  not 
More  the  authority  for  this  name  ?  Hall  is  here  copying  More’s  Life,  etc.,  almost 
verbatim. — Ed.] 

20-24.  Buck.  Hearke,  a  Drumme  .  .  .  defend,  and  guard  vs]  Marshall: 
The  words:  [Let  me  alone  to  entertain  him,  in  the  Quarto],  seem  unnecessary,  and 
may,  not  improbably,  have  been  added  by  one  of  the  actors.  The  object  of  the 
dramatist,  in  this  passage,  seems  to  be  to  represent  as  much  hurry  and  confusion 
as  is  possible.  Richard  is  anxious  to  convey  the  impression  to  the  Lord  Mayor  that 
he  is  under  a  strong  sense  of  personal  danger;  and  I  would  suggest  that  the  words, 
‘Hark  a  drum,’  should  be  given  to  Gloucester  and  not  to  Buckingham.  .  .  .The 
innocence  of  Buckingham  and  Gloucester  would  not  be  a  very  reliable  defence 
against  any  danger. 

21.  Catesby,  o’er-looke  the  Walls]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  i875-’76; 
p.  72):  [This  line  and  the  stage-direction  in  the  Quartos  at  1.  25:  Enter  Catesby 
with  Hasting’s  head],  cannot  have  been  intended.  The  puzzle  is  to  understand  how 
it  came  about.  For  Ratcliffe  was  ready,  and  Catesby  was  wanted  to  go  and  bring 


244 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  v. 


Buck.  Lord  Maior,  the  reafon  we  haue  fent.  22 

Rich.  Looke  back,  defend  thee,  here  are  Enemies. 

Buck.  God  and  our  Innocencie  defend,  and  guard  vs. 

Enter  Louell  and  Ratcliff e,  with  Hajlings  Head.  25 

Rich.  Be  patient,  they  are  friends:  Ratcliff c,  and  Louell. 


22.  fent.~\  Ff.  fent  for  you.  Qq,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.Varr.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 
Coll.  iii.  sent —  Rowe  et  cet. 

23.  thee ]  three  F2.  there  F3F4. 

24.  Innocencie ]  innocettce  Qt. 
and  guard  ]  Om.  Qq. 

szr.]  us.  Glo.  Ot  O,  be  quiet  it  is 
Catesby.  Qq. 

25.  Louell  and  Ratcliffe,]  Catesby  Qq. 
Lovel  and  Catesby,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 


Johns.  After  1.  26,  Cam.  +  .  Lovel  and 
another.  Taylor  MS  ap.  Cam. 

25.  Haftings]  Haft.  Q,Q2. 

26.  Rich.  Be  patient... Louell.]  Om. 
Qq.  Rich.  Be  patient,  Buckinghatti , 
they  are  friends  ;  '  tis  Lovel  Taylor  MS 
ap.  Cam. 

Ratcliffe]  Catesby  Theob.  Han. 
Warb.  Johns. 


the  Lord  Mayor;  and  therefore  it  cannot  be  accounted  for  as  an  alteration  made 
for  the  convenience  of  the  actors.  There  is,  however,  one  reason  for  thinking  that 
it  was  not  Shakespeare’s  original  intention  to  assign  that  office  to  Catesby.  Up  to 
that  morning  Hastings  had  considered  Catesby  as  his  own  confidential  friend 
acting  altogether  in  his  interest.  I  cannot  think  that  Shakespeare  would  have 
made  this  same  Catesby  carry  Hastings  to  the  block  the  same  afternoon,  without 
some  notice  being  taken  on  one  side  or  the  other  of  this  peculiar  relation.  And 
yet  Hastings  is  made  to  treat  him  like  an  ordinary  official  to  whom  he  has  nothing 
to  say,  and  all  that  Catesby  is  made  to  say  to  him  is:  ‘  Dispatch,  my  Lord,  the 
Duke  would  be  at  dinner.’  With  Ratcliffe,  on  the  contrary,  a  man  not  known  to 
Hastings  for  anything  that  appears,  such  language  was  natural,  and  in  accordance 
with  his  traditional  character.  .  .  .  The  substitution,  therefore,  of  Lovell  and 
Ratcliffe,  for  Catesby,  [in  the  stage-direction]  removes  all  difficulties.  When 
Catesby  is  told  to  ‘o’er-look  the  walls’  he  has  just  arrived  within  them,  bringing 
the  Lord  Mayor  with  him:  and  the  enemies,  whom  Richard  pretends  to  be  on  his 
guard  against,  turn  out  friends.  An  objection  has  been  taken  to  the  employment  of 
Ratcliffe  in  this  office,  on  the  ground  that  he  had  been  employed  just  before  in  leading 
Rivers,  Vaughan,  and  Grey  to  execution  at  Pomfret.  [See  III,  iv,  87,  and  notes.] 
.  .  .  But  this  is  to  cramp  the  legitimate  liberty  of  the  theatre.  There  is  nothing  in  the 
previous  scene  to  bring  before  the  spectators’  imagination  the  distance  of  Pomfret 
from  London:  and  all  physical  impossibilities  are  allowable  in  a  play,  which  do 
not  shock  the  imagination. 

24.  Innocencie]  Capell:  Terror  is  better  painted  by  the  stammering  word 
innocency’  than  in  a  modern  perversion  of  it. — Walker  (grit.,  ii,  47):  The 
same  error,  if  I  mistake  not,  has  taken  place  in  /  Hen.  IV:  IV,  iii,  63:  ‘With 
tears  of  innocency  and  terms  of  zeal’;  where  the  Folio  writes  it  innocencie.  .  .  . 
It  seems  possible,  indeed,  that  ‘innocency’  may  have  been  pronounced  as  a  tri¬ 
syllable,  in  the  same  manner  as  innocent  is  frequently  a  dissyllable;  though  in 
Rich.  II:  I,  iii,  84,  it  appears  as  a  quadrisyllable,  ‘Mine  innocency  and  St 
George  to  thrive’  (where,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Folio  has  innocence.— Dyce 
(ed.  ii):  Is  it  not  strange  that  the  Cambridge  Editors,  who  inform  us  that  here 
Qj  reads  innocence,  should  yet  adopt  the  later  lection  ‘ innocency1? 


ACT  III,  SC.  V.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


245 


LouelL  Here  is  the  Head  of  that  ignoble  Traytor, 
The  dangerous  and  vnfufpe£led  Hajiings. 


27 


Rich.  So  deare  I  lou’d  the  man,  that  I  muff  weepe  : 
I  tooke  him  for  the  plaineft  harmeleffe  Creature, 

That  breath’d  vpon  the  Earth,  a  Chriftian. 

Made  him  my  Booke,  wherein  my  Soule  recorded 
The  Hiftorie  of  all  her  fecret  thoughts. 

So  frnooth  he  dawb’d  his  Vice  with  fhew  of  Vertue, 
That  his  apparant  open  Guilt  omitted, 

I  meane,  his  Conuerfation  with  Shores  Wife, 

He  liu’d  from  all  attainder  of  fufpe£ls. 


30 


35 


37 


27.  Louell.]  Cat.  Qq. 

30.  harmeleffe]  harmless1 1  Steev.  Var. 


32.  Made~\  I  made  Qs_g. 

35.  apparant  open ]  apparent-open 


Creature~\  man  Qq,  Sta. 


Walker  (Crit.  i,  33). 

36.  Conuerf ation]  conerfation  Qa. 


31.  the ]  this  Q,_3,Q5_8,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 


Shores]  Shore's  F4. 
37.  lin'd']  laid  Qq. 


That. . .  Chriftian.]  That. . .  Chrifl- 
ian,  Lookeye  my  Lord Maior  :  two  lines, 
ending:  Chriftian. .. Maior :  Qq. 


fufpedl  Qq  et  cet. 


fufpedts]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Wh.  i. 


30.  plainest  harmelesse]  Steevens:  Grammar  requires  harmless' t,  i.  e.,  harm- 
lessest,  a  common  contraction,  as  I  am  assured,  both  in  Leicestershire  and  War¬ 
wickshire.  Compare  ‘couertst,’  1.  38.  [J.  Weight  ( Dialect  Diet.)  gives  no  example 
of  the  use  of  the  superlative  harmlessest,  or  its  contraction  harmlesst. — Ed.] — 
Abbott  (§  398):  Though  the  meaning  here  may  be:  the  plainest,  the  most  harm¬ 
less  creature,  it  is  more  likely  a  compound  word,  ‘plainest-harmless’;  see  §  2. 

31.  That  breath’d  ...  a  Christian]  Marshall:  The  Quarto  insertion  after 
this  line  seems  out  of  place  here.  Gloucester’s  speech  is  evidently  spoken,  not  to 
the  Lord  Mayor,  but  to  Ratcliff,  Lovell,  and  Buckingham.  [See  Text.  Notes, 
11.  39-41-] 

32.  Made  him  my  Booke]  Wright:  Compare  ‘I  have  been  The  book  of  his 
good  acts.’ — Coriol.,  V,  ii,  14.  [Also,  perhaps,  ‘Kind  gentlemen,  your  pains  Are 
register’d  where  every  day  I  turn  The  leaf  to  read  them.’ — Macbeth,  I,  iii,  149. 
—Ed.] 

34.  dawb’d]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  daub),  t  T-  To  cover  with  a  specious 
exterior;  to  whitewash,  cloak,  gloss.  [The  present  line  quoted.] 

36.  Conuersation]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.):  3.  Criminal  conversation.  [The 
present  line  quoted.] 

37.  attainder]  Murray  (N.  E.D.):  The  action  or  process  of  attainting.  .  .  from 
attain  to  catch  or  detect  in  an  offence;  in  later  usage,  the  legal  consequences  of 
judgement  of  death,  or  outlawry,  in  respect  of  treason  or  felony,  viz.,  forfeiture  of 
estate,  real  and  personal,  corruption  of  blood,  so  that  the  condemned  could  neither 
inherit  nor  transmit  by  descent,  and,  generally,  extinction  of  all  civil  rights  and 
capacities.  [By  erroneous  association  with  French  taindre,  to  dye,  stain],  the  second 
of  these  was  looked  upon  as  the  essence  of  attainder,  which  is  defined  by  the  law¬ 
yers  as:  ‘The  stain  or  corruption  of  blood  of  a  criminal  capitally  condemned,  the 


246  THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  v. 

Buck.  Well,  well,  he  was  the  couertft  fheltred  Traytor  38 
That  euer  liu’d. 

Would  you  imagine,  or  almoft  beleeue,  40 

Wert  not,  that  by  great  preferuation 
We  liue  to  tell  it,  that  the  fubtill  Traytor 
This  day  had  plotted,  in  the  Councell-Houfe, 

To  murther  me,  and  my  good  Lord  of  Glofter. 

Maior.  Had  he  done  fo  ?  45 

Rich.  What  ?  thinke  you  we  are  Turkes,  or  Infidels  ? 

Or  that  we  would,  againft  the  forme  of  Law, 

Proceed  thus  rafhly  in  the  Villaines  death, 

But  that  the  extreme  perill  of  the  cafe, 

The  Peace  of  England,  and  our  Perfons  fafetie,  50 


38,  39.  As  two  lines,  ending,  was... 
lin'd  Ktly. 

38.  couertjl  Jheltred~\  covert' st- shel¬ 
tered  Abbott. 

39.  Om.  Pope,+  (  — Var. ’73). 

39-41 .  That... preferuation]  Two  lines, 

ending,  imagined  ...preferuation  Qq. 

39.  lilt'd  ]  liv'd. — Look  you  my  lord 
mayor ,  Cap.  Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Mai.  Steev. 
Varr.  Marshall,  liv'd.  Look  you,  my 
good  Lord  Mayor  Taylor  MS  ap.  Cam. 

40.  imagine ]  haue  imagined  Qq. 

41.  Wert][  Wert  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev. 
Varr.  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce  i.  Wer't  F3F4  et 
cet.  (subs.) 

that  ]  Om.  Qq. 


42.  it,  ]  it  you  ?  Qq.  it  you)  Cap.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce  i.  it 
you.  Cam.  + ,  Dyce  ii,  iii. 

43.  This  day  had~\  Had  this  day  Qq. 

45 .  Had  he  done fo  ?]  What,  had  hefo? 
Qq.  What? had  he  so  ?  Pope,+  (subs.), 
Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Cam.  +  , 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  Ay,  had  he  so  ?  Cap. 
conj. 

46.  What?  thinke. .. Infidels  ?~\  What 
thinke. ..Infidels,  Qq. 

you]  Q,QS.  ye  Qq. 

47-  would  J  fhould  Q7Qg. 
forme]  courfe  Q3-8. 

48.  in]  to  Qq,  Theob.  +  ,  Cam. +  . 

49.  the  extreme]  the  very  extreame  Q4. 


immediate  inseparable  consequence  ...  of  the  sentence  of  death.’  [s.  v.  Ibid. 
2.  b.  Stain  0}  dishonor,  Murray  quotes  the  present  line.  See  III,  vi,  10.] 

39.  That  euer  liu’d]  Capell:  The  words  [‘Look  you,  my  Lord  Mayor,’ 
inserted  after  this  line]  came  from  Qq;  but  in  them  they  follow  ‘Christian,’  1.  31,  in 
form  of  an  hemistich:  replace  them,  and  read  the  passage  deliberately,  the  error 
of  that  position  will  then  appear  to  you  plainly;  and  in  weighing  this  as  consid¬ 
erately,  ’t  will  be  visible  (as  it  is  to  the  editor)  the  present  place  was  intended  for 
them.  Without  them  the  sense  of  Buckingham’s  line  is  imperfect;  and  his  second 
address’d  without  prefacing,  to  one  you  must  study  for:  and  study  may,  indeed, 
help  you;  but  not  reconcile  you  to  such  curtailings,  or  to  a  passage  so  little  easy. 

40.  almost  beleeue]  Wright:  That  is,  even.  Compare  ‘Or  do  you  almost 
think,  although  you  see,  That  you  do  see?’  King  John,  IV,  iii,  48. — Abbott 
(§  29) :  That  is,  Would  you  suppose  without  evidence,  or  (I  may  almost  say)  believe 
upon  evidence? 

49.  extreme]  Wright:  ‘Extreme’  has  here  the  accent  on  the  first  syllable, 
as  it  always  has  in  Shakespeare,  except  Sonnet  cxxix,  4,  10.  See  IV,  iv,  197. 


ACT  III,  SC.  V.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


247 


Enforc’d  vs  to  this  Execution.  5  1 

Maior.  Now  faire  befall  you,  he  deferu’d  his  death, 

And  your  good  Graces  both  haue  well  proceeded, 

To  warne  falfe  Traytors  from  the  like  Attempts. 

Buck.  I  neuer  look’d  for  better  at  his  hands,  55 

After  he  once  fell  in  with  Miftreffe  Shore  : 

Yet  had  we  not  determin’d  he  fhould  dye, 

Vntill  your  Lordfhip  came  to  fee  his  end, 

Which  now  the  louing  hafte  of  thefe  our  friends, 

Something  againft  our  meanings,  haue  preuented ;  60 

Becaufe,  my  Lord,  I  would  haue  had  you  heard 


51.  Enforc'd ]  Inforfl  Qq. 
this ]  that  Q4. 

Execution.  ]  Q,Ff.  execution  ?  Qa 

et  cet. 

53.  your  good  Graces ]  you  my  good 
Lords  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 

55.  Buck.]  Om.  Qq,  Pope,  +  ,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Dyce,  Sta. 
Cam.  +,  Huds. 

57.  Yet ...]  Dat.  Yet...  Q,Q2.  Clo. 
Yet-  Q3Qs-  Glo.  Yet. . .  Q4Q6Q7Q8,  Pope, 
-f ,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Dyce, 
Sta.  Cam. +  ,  Huds. 

we  not  ]  not  we  Qq,  Cam.  + . 


58.  end]  death  Qq,  Cam. +. 

59.  louing]  longing  Qq. 

60.  Something]  Somewhat  Qq,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam. +  , 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

meanings]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Wh.  i, 
Rife,  meaning  Qq  et  cet. 

haue]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll,  i, 
ii,  Sing.  Cam. +  .  hath  Pope  et  cet. 

61.  I]  we  Qq,  Theob. +  ,  Cap.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Sing.  Cam. +  , 
Ktly. 

haue  had  you]  that  you  had  Lett- 
som  ap.  Dyce  ii. 


52.  faire  befall  you]  Abbott  (§  297):  If  ‘befall’  be  treated  as  impersonal, 
‘fair,’  in  that  case,  is  an  adverb.  This  supposition  is  confirmed  by:  ‘Well  be 
(it)  with  you,  gentlemen.’ — Hamlet,  II,  ii,  398. 

55,  56.  Buck.  I  neuer  .  .  .  Mistresse  Shore]  Marshall:  We  have  followed 
the  Folio  in  giving  these  two  lines  to  Buckingham.  They  seem  entirely  out  of 
place  as  spoken  by  the  Lord  Mayor  [see  Text.  Notes],  who  ventures,  throughout 
this  scene,  on  no  particular  condemnation  of  Hastings.  The  next  ten  lines:  ‘Yet 
had  we  not  determin’d,  ’  etc.,  should,  it  seems  to  us,  be  given  to  Gloucester  without 
any  hesitation.  Buckingham  would  hardly  have  dared  to  talk  as  if  he  were,  in 
any  respect,  the  source  of  supreme  authority.  The  Lord  Mayor’s  reply,  11.  67-71, 
seems  certainly  addressed  to  Gloucester,  and  not  to  Buckingham. 

61.  I  would  haue  had  you  heard]  Both  Lettsom  and  Keightley  propose 
‘have  had  you  hear ,’  whereon  the  Cowden-Clarkes  remark:  ‘We  take  “heard” 
to  be  a  somewhat  similar  license  of  grammatical  expression  as  in,  “ — that  monstrous 
rebel  Cade  Who  since  I  heard  to  be  discomfited.” — 2  Hen.  VI:  V,  i,  62.  The 
speaker,  mentioning  a  conditional  period,  uses  the  past  tense,  as  giving  additional 
effect  of  that  which  is  irretrievably  done  and  gone  by.’  Abbott  (§  41 1)  thinks  that 
‘more  probably  the  full  construction  is:  We  would  have  had  you  (to  have)  heard, 
and  to  have  is  omitted  through  dislike  of  repetition.’  He  compares:  ‘He  would 
have  had  me  gone  into  the  steeple-house.’ — Fox,  Journal,  ed.  1765,  p.  57. — Ed. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  v. 


248 

The  Traytor  fpeake,  and  timoroufly  confeffe  62 

The  manner  and  the  purpofe  of  his  Treafons  : 

That  you  might  well  haue  fignify’d  the  fame 

Vnto  the  Citizens,  who  haply  may  65 

Mifconfter  vs  in  him,  and  wayle  his  death. 

Ma. But,  my  good  Lord,  your  Graces  words  fhal  ferue, 

As  well  as  I  had  feene,  and  heard  him  fpeake : 

And  doe  not  doubt,  right  Noble  Princes  both, 

But  lie  acquaint  our  dutious  Citizens  7° 

With  all  your  iuft  proceedings  in  this  cafe. 

Rich.  And  to  that  end  we  wifh’d  your  Lordfhip  here, 

T’auoid  the  Cenfures  of  the  carping  World. 

Buck.  Which  fince  you  come  too  late  of  our  intent, 

Yet  witneffe  what  you  heare  we  did  intend  :  75 

And  fo,  my  good  Lord  Maior,  we  bid  farwell. 

Exit  Maior.  77 


62.  timoroufly]  Umeously  Hutchesson 
MS  ap.  Cam. 

63.  Treafons]  treafoti  Qq,  Cam. +, 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

65.  haply]  happily  Qq. 

66.  Mifconfler]  QI_s,FaF3>  Wh.  i. 
Mifconflure  Q7Q8.  Mifconflrue  Q6  et 
cet. 

67.  But ]  Om.  Q3_8.  Tut!  Han. 
Graces ]  gracious  Q?Q8. 

■words ]  Ff,  Rowe, Coll.  Sing.Wh.  i, 
Hal.  Ktly.  word  Qq  et  cet. 

68.  as  /]  as  if  I Q8. 
and]  or  Qq. 

69.  doe  not  doubt  ]  doubt  you  not  Qq, 


Cam.  + . 

70.  our]  your  Qq. 

71.  cafe]  caufe  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

73.  T’auoid...  World]  To  auoide  the 
carping  fenfures  of  the  world.  Qq, 
Cam.  + . 

World.]  word.  Q3« 

74.  Which]  Ff,  Rowe.  But  Qq  et  cet. 
come]  came  Qq,  Pope,  +  ,  Cap. 

Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt. 
of]  for  Cap. 

intent]  intents  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

75.  76.  you  heare..  farwell.]  We  did 
intend and  fo  my  Lord  adue.  Qq. 

76.  farwell]  farewel  F^. 


70.  dutious]  Compare  II,  i,  39. 

71.  case]  Wright:  In  Bacon’s  Advancement  0)  Learning,  Bk,  ii,  23,  §  5,  p.  220, 
there  is  a  similar  instance  of  the  interchange  of  these  words  [‘  case  ’  and  cause,  see 
Text.  Notes]:  ‘  So  as  there  is  a  wisdom  of  counsel  and  advice  even  in  private  causes, 
arising  out  of  an  universal  insight  into  the  affairs  of  the  world;  which  is  used  indeed 
upon  particular  cases  propounded,  but  is  gathered  by  general  observation  of  cases 
of  like  nature.’  In  the  first  edition  (1605)  ‘cases’  is  the  reading  where  the  word 
first  occurs,  while  the  other  editions  read  causes;  while  on  the  second  occasion  of 
its  occurrence  all  the  early  editions  read  causes. 

74-  Which]  See  Abbott,  §  272,  or  As  You  Like  It,  II,  i,  10;  Lear,  V,  iii,  149, 
this  edition. 

74.  late  of  our  intent]  Steevens:  We  still  say:  to  come  short  of  a  thing,  and 
why  not  come  ‘late  of  an  intent’?  [Abbott  (§  166)  quotes  only  the  present  line  as 
an  example  of  ‘of’  ‘used  with  verbs  and  adjectives  implying  motion  from .’ — Ed.] 


ACT  III,  SC.  V.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


249 

78 


Rich.  Goe  after,  after,  Coufin  Buckingham. 

The  Maior  towards  Guild-Hall  hyes  him  in  all  pofte : 

There,  at  your  meeteft  vantage  of  the  time,  80 

Inferre  the  Baftardie  of  Edwards  Children  : 

Tell  them,  how  Edward  put  to  death  a  Citizen, 

Onely  for  faying,  he  would  make  his  Sonne 
Heire  to  the  Crowne,  meaning  indeed  his  Houfe, 

Which,  by  the  Signe  thereof,  was  tearmed  fo.  85 

Moreouer,  vrge  his  hatefull  Luxurie, 


78.  Goe  after ]  After  Qq.  Go,  after 
Cap.  et  seq. 

7  9.  Guild-Hall. . .  in  all poJle~\  theG uild- 
hall...post  Wordsworth. 


80.  meetejl  vantage ]  meetfl  advantage 
Qx-5,  Sta.  Cam.  +  (subs.).  ( meetejl  ad¬ 
vantage  Q6Q7Q8).  meerest  vantage 
Rowe  ii. 


78.  Goe  after,  after]  The  Cowden-Clarkes:  How  well  the  vicious  eagerness 
of  Richard  is  pictured  in  these  two  words,  ‘after,  after.’  Not  only  their  repetition 
but  their  elliptical  conciseness,  indicates  his  breathless  excitement.  Compare  the 
triple  iteration  of  Hubert’s  name  in  King  John,  III,  iii,  59,  where  the  impression 
of  murderous  eagerness  and  urgency  is  thus  horribly  conveyed. 

79.  in  all  poste]  Wright:  That  is,  in  all  haste,  like  a  post  or  messenger.  Com¬ 
pare  ‘From  the  besieged  Ardea  all  in  post.’ — Lucrece,  1. 

82.  put  to  death  a  Citizen]  Grey:  This  person  was  one  Walker,  a  substan¬ 
tial  citizen  and  grocer  at  the  Crown  in  Cheapside. — Davis  (p.  204) :  The  incident 
here  mentioned  is  often  cited  in  discussing  the  history  of  the  law  of  treason,  in 
which  these  words  were  construed  as  sufficient  to  constitute  the  crime  (4  Black. 
Comm,  marg.,  p.  79).  [Hall  gives  the  name  of  this  unfortunate  citizen  as  Burdet; 
but  Grey  is,  I  think,  right  in  calling  him  Walker.  Stow,  in  his  Annals,  quoted  by 
Churchill  (p.  224),  says:  ‘In  the  first  year  of  Edward’s  reign,  “the  12th  of  March, 
Walter  Walker,  a  Grocer  that  dwelt  in  Cheape  of  London,  for  words  spoken  touch¬ 
ing  King  Edward,  was  suddenly  apprehended,  condemned,  and  beheaded  in 
Smithfield.  This  grocer  is  he  whom  master  Hall  mistaketh  to  be  Burdet,  ”  ’ 
(p.  680).  The  confusion  in  the  names,  possibly,  is  due  to  the  fact  that  Burdet 
suffered  for  a  remark  almost  as  innocent  as  that  which  caused  Walker’s  death. 
King  Edward  shot  a  white  buck  belonging  to  Burdet.  ‘And  therefore  when  he 
vnderstood  thereof,  he  wished  the  buckes  head  in  his  bellie  that  moued  the  king 
to  kill  it.  Which  tale  being  told  to  the  king,  Burdet  was  apprehended  and  accused 
of  treason,  for  wishing  the  buckes  heade  (homes  and  all)  in  the  kings  bellie:  he 
was  condemned  and  .  .  .  beheaded.’ — Holinshed,  iii,  703,  quoted  by  Boswell- 
Stone,  p.  375,  foot-note.  The  reference  to  the  Walker  incident,  by  Hall,  and  its 
omission  by  Holinshed,  Wright  considers  an  indication  that,  here  at  least, 
Shakespeare  consulted  the  older  Chronicler. — See  Churchill  and  Wright  in 
Appendix,  Source  of  Plot. — Ed.] 

86-90.  Moreouer  ...  a  prey]  Blakeway:  All  these  topics  .  .  .  are  dilated  upon 
in  that  most  extraordinary  invective  against  his  person  and  government  contained 
in  the  petition  presented  to  Richard  before  his  accession,  and  afterwards  turned 
into  an  act  of  parliament. — See  Pari.  Hist.,  vol.  ii,  p.  396. 


250 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  111,  sc.  v. 


And  beaftiall  appetite  in  change  of  Luft,  87 

Which  ftretcht  vnto  their  Seruants,  Daughters,  Wiues, 

Euen  where  his  raging  eye,  or  fauage  heart, 

Without  controll,  lufted  to  make  a  prey.  90 

Nay,  for  a  need,  thus  farre  come  neere  my  Perfon  : 

Tell  them,  when  that  my  Mother  went  with  Child 
Of  that  infatiate  Edward ;  Noble  Yorke , 

My  Princely  Father,  then  had  Warres  in  France, 

And  by  true  computation  of  the  time,  95 

Found,  that  the  Iffue  was  not  his  begot : 

Which  well  appeared  in  his  Lineaments, 

Being  nothing  like  the  Noble  Duke,  my  Father : 

Y et  touch  this  fparingly,  as  ’twere  farre  off,  99 


87.  beajliall  ]  Fa.  beaflly  Q8.  bejlial 
Q,  et  cet. 

88.  ftretcht  vnto]  Jlretched  to  Qq, 
Cam.  +  . 

Daughters ]  Daughter  Fa. 

89.  raging]  luflfull  Qq,  Mai.  Var.  ’21, 
Sta.Cam.  + .  ranging  Pope,  +  ,Varr.  Ran. 

90.  tufted  ]  lifted  Qq,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam. +  ,  Huds. 

a]  his  Qq,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev. 


Cam.  +  . 

9 3.  infatiate ]  vnfatiate  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

94.  Warres]  wares  Q6. 

95.  true ]  iuft  Qq,  Pope,  + ,  Cap.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Cam. +  . 

97.  appeared ]  appear’d  F4. 

99.  Yet]  But  Qq,  Cap.  Sta.  Cam. +, 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

’twere]  it  were  Qq. 
farre]  a  farre  Q4. 


92.  Tell  them,  etc.]  Walpole  (p.  38,  foot-note ):  Clarence  is  the  first  who  is  said 
to  have  propagated  this  slander,  and  it  was  much  more  consonant  to  his  levity 
and  indigested  politics,  than  to  the  good  sense  of  Richard.  Who  can  believe  that 
Richard  renewed  this  story,  especially  as  he  must  have  altered  the  dates  of  his 
mother’s  amours,  and  made  them  continue  to  her  conception  of  him,  as  Clarence 
had  made  them  stop  in  his  own  favour?  [p.  39]  But  Richard  had  better  preten¬ 
sions,  and  had  no  occasion  to  start  doubts  even  on  his  own  legitimacy,  which  was  too 
much  connected  with  that  of  his  brothers  to  be  tossed  and  bandied  about  before 
the  multitude.  Clarence  had  been  solemnly  attainted  by  act  of  parliament,  and 
his  children  were  out  of  the  question.  The  doubts  on  the  validity  of  Edward’s 
marriage  were  better  grounds  for  Richard’s  proceedings  than  aspersion  of  his 
mother’s  honor. — Wright:  According  to  Holinshed,  Edward  was  born  29  April, 
1442,  at  Rouen,  ‘his  father  being  the  King’s  lieutenant  in  Normandie,’  p.  623, 
col.  1. — Wessels  (p.  22):  It  has  been  said  that  Dr  Shaw,  at  the  bidding  of 
Richard,  accused  the  Duchess  of  York  of  faithlessness.  It  is  only  possible  to 
explain  this  fact  by  Dr  Shaw’s  acting  without  Richard’s  authorisation,  but  it  is 
more  likely  still  that  the  whole  tale  is  a  myth  invented  by  Richard’s  enemies,  as 
all  contemporary  writers  are  silent  about  it.  More  clears  Richard  of  all  share 
in  the  matter,  and  lays  it  to  the  charge  of  Dr  Shaw.  Polydore  Vergil,  who  dis¬ 
tinctly  says  that  the  whole  sermon  was  on  this  subject,  and  not  on  the  illegitimacy 
of  the  children,  deserves  little  faith  because  he  was  no  contemporary,  and  wrote 
at  the  court  of  Henry  VII.,  where  the  tale  may  have  been  told  only  to  harm  Richard’s 
memory. 


ACT  III,  SC.  V.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


251 


Becaufe,  my  Lord,  you  know  my  Mother  Hues.  100 

Buck.  Doubt  not,  my  Lord,  lie  play  the  Orator, 

As  if  the  Golden  Fee,  for  which  I  plead, 

Were  for  my  felfe  :  and  fo,  my  Lord,  adue. 

Rich.  If  you  thriue  wel,  bring  them  to  Baynards  Caftle, 

Where  you  fhall  finde  me  well  accompanied  105 

With  reuerend  Fathers,  and  well-learned  Bifhops. 

Buck.  I  goe,  and  towards  three  or  foure  a  Clocke 
Looke  for  the  Newes  that  the  Guild-Hall  afifoords. 

Exit  Buckingham. 

Rich.  Goe  Louell  with  all  fpeed  to  Do6tor  Shaw ,  1 10 

Goe  thou  to  Fryer  Peuker ,  bid  them  both 

Meet  me  within  this  houre  at  Baynards  CafUe.  Exit.  112 


100.  my  Lord ,  you  know]  you  know 
my  Lord  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

my  Mother ]  my  brother  Q$.  me 
brother  Q6. 

101.  Doubt]  Feare  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 

103.  and...adue]  Om,  Qq,  Sta. 

107, 108.  I goe...affoords.]  About  three 
or  foure  a  clocke  looke  to  heare  What 
newes  Guild  hall  affordeth ,  and  fo  my 
Lord  farewell.  Qq. 


109.  Exit  Buckingham.]  Exe.  Buck, 
and  Catesby  severally.  Pope,  Han. 

110-112.  Goe  Louell... Cajlle.  Exit.] 
Om.  Qq,  Pope. 

HI.  Goe  thou]  Go  thou  [To  Cat.] 
Cap.  et  seq, 

Peuker]  Reuker  F2.  Beuker  F3 
F4,  Rowe.  Penker  Cap.  et  seq. 

1 1 2.  Exit.]  Exeunt  Lov.  and  Cates, 
severally.  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 


104.  Baynards  Castle]  Stow  says  (p.  88)  that  this  castle  was  so  called  ‘of 
Baynard  a  nobleman,  that  came  in  with  the  Conqueror,  and  then  built  it,  and 
deceased  in  the  reign  of  William  Rufus.’  It  then  passed  into  the  hands  of  the 
Fitzwalters.  Stow  adds:  ‘How  this  honour  of  Baynard’s  Castle,  with  the  appur¬ 
tenances,  fell  from  the  possession  of  the  Fitzwalters,  I  have  not  read;  only  I  find 
that  in  the  year  1428,  the  7th  of  Henry  VI.,  a  great  fire  was  at  Baynard’s  Castle, 
and  that  Humphrey  Duke  of  Gloucester,  built  it  of  new.  By  his  death  and  attain¬ 
der,  in  the  year  1446,  it  came  to  the  hands  of  Henry  VI.,  and  from  him  to  Richard, 
Duke  of  York,  of  whom  we  read  that  in  the  year  1457  he  lodged  there,  as  in  his 
own  house.’  The  Castle  was  situate  on  the  north  bank  of  Thames,  between 
Paul’s  Wharf  and  Blackfriars. 

107.  towards]  Here  pronounced  with  the  accent  on  the  first  syllable;  compare 
IV,  iv,  19,  and  for  other  examples  of  a  similar  change  in  accent  in  certain  words 
see  Abbott,  §  492. 

110-112.  Goe  Louell  ...  at  Baynards  Castle]  Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  136): 
By  the  omission  of  these  three  lines  the  anonymous  corrector  of  the  Quarto  has 
left  the  reader  in  ignorance  as  to  who  were  the  two  clergymen,  between  whom 
Gloucester  appears  in  scene  vii.  Worse  than  this,  the  reader  will  not  notice  that 
Gloucester  himself,  without  waiting  for  any  advice  from  Buckingham,  had  already 
planned  this  piece  of  hypocrisy. 

1x0,  hi.  Dodtor  Shaw  .  .  .  Fryer  Peuker]  ‘Among  these  [spiritual  men] 
had  thei  John  Shaa  clerke  brother  to  the  Maier,  and  freer  Penker  prouincial  of  the 


252 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF 


[act  iii,  sc.  vi. 

113 


Now  will  I  goe  to  take  fome  priuie  order, 

To  draw  the  Brats  of  Clarence  out  of  fight, 

And  to  giue  order,  that  no  manner  perfon  1 1 5 

Haue  any  time  recourfe  vnto  the  Princes.  Exeunt. 

\Scene  VI.\ 

Enter  a  Scriuener. 

Scr.  Here  is  the  Indictment  of  the  good  Lord  HaJlingSy  2 


1 13.  goe]  in  Qq,  Cap.Varr.  Mai.  Steev. 
Varr.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam. +  ,  Huds. 

1 1 5.  order]  notice  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +. 
manner ]  manner  of  Q,Q2Q5,F4, 
Rowe,  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Hal.  Sta. 
Cam.  + .  sort  of  Pope,  + .  man ,  or  Steev. 
conj. 


1 1 6.  Haue  any  time ]  A l  any  time  haue 
Qq,  Cam. +  .  Any  time  have  Vaughan 
(iii,  89). 

[Scene  vi.]  Cap.  et  seq. 

The  Same.  A  Street,  Cap. 

1.  Scriuener.]  Scriuener  with  a  paper 
in  his  hand.  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

2.  Here ]  This  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 


Augustine  freers  both  doctors  of  diuinite,  both  gret  prechars,  both  of  more  learning 
then  vertue,  of  more  fame  then  lerning.’ — More,  p.  88. 

1 13.  take  .  .  .  order]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  Ill,  14):  Disposition  of  meas¬ 
ures  for  the  accomplishment  of  a  purpose;  suitable  action  in  view  of  some  par¬ 
ticular  end;  to  take  measures  or  steps,  to  make  arrangements.  [See  I,  iv,  281, 
Text.  Notes;  IV,  ii,  60;  and  IV,  iv,  577.] 

1 14.  Brats  of  Clarence]  Malone:  Edward  Earl  of  Warwick,  executed  on 
Tower  Hill,  21st  November,  1499.  And  Margaret,  afterwards  married  to  Sir 
Richard  Pole,  the  last  Princess  of  the  house  of  Lancaster,  who  was  put  to  death 
by  Henry  VIII.  in  1540,  in  her  seventieth  year. 

1 15.  no  manner  person]  Blakeway,  in  a  note  on  this  passage,  furnishes  several 
examples  of  this  use  of  ‘manner’;  Bradley  also  (AT.  E.  D.  s.  v.  9.  d)  gives  others, 
thus  showing  that  the  sentence  is  here  no  misprint,  but  a  regular  idiom.  Malone, 
remarking  on  the  note  by  Blakeway,  says:  ‘ — as  the  reading  of  the  original  Quarto 
of  1597  is  no  manner  of  person,  and  is  perfectly  unobjectionable,  I  think  it  ought  to 
be  adhered  to.’  Knight,  on  the  other  hand,  prefers  the  Folio,  since  ‘  “no  manner 
person”  is  probably  the  more  ancient  form,  and  these  minute  archaisms  should  be 
preserved  in  Shakespeare  wherever  we  have  authority  for  them.’ — Ed. 

1.  Enter  a  Scriuener]  Cowden-Clarke  ( Sh .  Char.,  p.  470):  This  slight  pass¬ 
ing  scene  appears  to  me  accurately  suggestive  of  the  smothered  feeling  of  indigna¬ 
tion  that  boils  in  men’s  minds  under  a  tyrannical  dynasty;  and,  indeed,  so  well 
is  this  under-current  of  opinion  depicted  in  the  subordinate  characters  in  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  historical  plays,  that  they  ought  in  nowise  to  be  omitted  in  the  representation, 
since  they  form  part  of  the  perfect  whole  designed  by  the  great  master.  He,  no 
doubt,  intended  that  the  minds  of  the  audience,  while  dazzled  by  the  glare  of  romance 
and  pre-eminence  which  surrounded  the  chief  actors  in  life’s  drama,  should  at  the 
same  time  be  presented  with  the  counterbalancing  reflection  of  the  ill  effects 
produced  upon  the  mass  of  the  people  during  the  transit  of  such  fiery  meteors. 

2.  Here  is  the  Indictment,  etc.]  The  substance  of  this  speech  is  contained 


ACT  III,  SC.  vi.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


253 


Which  in  a  fet  Hand  fairely  is  engrofs’d,  3 

That  it  may  be  to  day  read  o’re  in  Paules. 

And  marke  how  well  the  fequell  hangs  together :  5 

Eleuen  houres  I  haue  fpent  to  write  it  ouer, 

For  yefter-night  by  Calesby  was  it  fent  me, 

The  Precedent  was  full  as  long  a  doing, 

And  yet  within  thefe  flue  houres  Hajiings  liu’d, 

Vntainted,  vnexamin’d,  free,  at  libertie.  10 

Here’s  a  good  World  the  while. 

Who  is  fo  groffe,  that  cannot  fee  this  palpable  deuice  ? 

Yet  who  fo  bold,  but  fayes  he  fees  it  not? 

Bad  is  the  World,  and  all  will  come  to  nought,  14 


4.  to  day]  this  day  Qq,  Sta.  Cara.  +  . 
o' re~\  ouer  Qq. 

6.  I  haue]  /  Qq,  Sta.  Cara. +.  I've 
Pope,  + . 

7.  fent ]  brought  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +. 

8.  Precedent ]  president  Qq. 

9.  Haftings  lin'd ]  lined  Lord  Hajl- 
ings  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

10.  free,]  free  Q  . 

11.  12.  Here' s... groffe]  Ff.  One  line, 
reading,  Why  who's  so  groffe  Qq,  Sta. 


Cam.  + .  One  line,  Rowe  et  cet. 

12.  cannot  fee]  fees  not  Qq.  seeth  not 
Cam.  + . 

palpable]  palpaple  Q3.  palpapale 

Qv 

13.  who]  whoes  Qt.  whofe  Q2.  who's 
Q8,  Cam. +  . 

bold]  blinde  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.+. 
but  ]  that  Qg. 
fayes]  fay  F4> 

14.  nought]  naught  Q,Q2. 


in  Holinshed  and  in  Hall,  who  copied  the  passage  from  More.  The  remark  in 

11.  5-10  in  reference  to  the  shortness  of  the  time  and  the  length  of  the  matter  is  there 
attributed  to  ‘one  that  was  scole  master  of  Poules.’  See  Appendix,  Source  oj  Plot. 
— Ed. 

4.  read  o’re  in  Paules]  Ordish  (p.  65) :  The  scrivener  perceives  the  villainy 
at  work,  and  in  the  succeeding  lines  demonstrates  it  as  grossly  apparent.  Yet 
the  city  has  connived,  and  the  indictment  is  about  to  be  read  in  public,  pre¬ 
sumably  by  the  city’s  recorder.  The  situation  suggested  is  interesting,  historically, 
turning  as  it  does  upon  the  co-existence  of  the  sovereign  power  with  that  of  the 
city  in  the  Tower  of  London,  and  furnishing  an  instance  of  the  use  occasionally 
made  of  the  Cathedral  Church  for  political  purposes. 

10.  Vntainted]  See  note  on  ‘attainder,’  III,  v,  37. 

11.  the  while]  Compare  III,  iii,  15:  ‘God  help  the  while.’ 

12.  grosse]  Bradley  ( N .  E.  D.  s.v.):  Ill,  13.  Lacking  in  delicacy  of  percep¬ 
tion;  dull,  stupid. 

13.  who  so  bold]  Wright,  who  follows  the  Quarto  reading  blind,  interprets 
thus:  who’s  so  blind  to  the  danger  of  observing  it.  Marshall  remarks:  ‘the 
reading  of  F,  seems  to  us  much  preferable;  the  meaning  being:  who  has  courage 
enough  to  admit  that  he  does  see  it.’  [The  antithesis  of  blind,  between  ‘  see’  and 
‘sees,’  is  certainly  alluring. — Ed.] 

14.  nought]  Hudson:  I  am  not  certain  whether  this  word  should  be  ‘nought’ 
or  naught.  With  the  latter,  the  sense  is  about  the  same  as  in  our  phrase  ‘going 
to  the  bad.' 


254  THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  vii. 

When  fuch  ill  dealing  mull  be  feene  in  thought.  Exit .  15 

[Scene  VII] 

Enter  Richard  and  Buckingham  at  feuerall  Doores. 

Rich.  How  now,  how  now,  what  fay  the  Citizens  ? 

Buck.  Now  by  the  holy  Mother  of  our  Lord,  3 


15.  ill]  bad  Qq,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Cam. +  . 

dealing ]  dealings  Q4. 
feene  in]  seen,  or  Coll.  MS. 
[Scene  vii.]  Pope  et  seq.  Scene  con¬ 
tinued,  QqFf,  Rowe.  Act  iv,  scene  i, 
Booth. 


Baynards  Castle.  Theob.  The  Same. 
Court  of  Baynard’s  Castle.  Cap. 

1.  Richard  ...  Doores.]  Glocefter  at 
one  doore,  Buckingham  at  another.  Qq 
(Glofter  QJ. 

2.  How  now,  how  now,]  How  now 
my  Lord  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

fay]  fayes  Q?Q8. 


15.  scene  in  thought]  Johnson:  That  is,  seen  in  silence,  without  notice  or 
detection. — Vaughan  (iii,  90):  Probably  ‘thought’  means  more  than  has  been 
yet  perceived,  and  ‘  seen  in  thought  ’  signifies,  seen  in  silent  distress  of  mind.  Com¬ 
pare:  ‘she  pined  in  thought.’ — Tweljth  Night,  II,  v,  115;  also:  ‘heart  sick  with 
thought.’ — Two  Gent.,  I,  i,  69.  [Also:  ‘Take  no  thought  of  the  morrow.’] 

Scene  vii]  Oechelhauser  {Einjiihrungen,  etc.,  p.  159):  This  scene  by  rights 
should  be  played  in  the  courtyard  of  Baynard’s  Castle  and  Richard  should 
appear  on  a  balcony  between  two  bishops.  [See  Text.  Notes,  stage-direction  by 
Capell.]  This  arrangement,  which  corresponds  with  that  of  the  Elizabethan  stage, 
hampers  Richard  in  his  movements,  compels  the  two  bishops  to  stand  immoveable, 
like  two  pagodas,  on  each  side,  makes  difficult  Buckingham’s  acting,  and,  above  all, 
renders  the  whole  scene  stiff  and  ineffective.  For  this  reason  Dingelstedt  discards 
this  arrangement  and  lays  the  action  of  this  scene  in  a  hall,  with  two  large  folding 
doors  in  the  background;  this  doorway  is  the  entrance  to  a  chapel,  and  at  the  altar 
Richard,  between  the  two  bishops,  is  seen,  when  the  doors  are  opened  by  Catesby. 
I  am  in  favor  of  a  similar  arrangement  with  the  exception  of  the  chapel  and 
altar,  so  that  Richard  may  be  seen,  after  a  curtain  is  drawn  aside,  in  conversation 
with  the  two  clergymen  on  a  raised  platform  (perhaps  in  front  of  a  row  of  columns). 
When  Buckingham  addresses  him,  Richard  steps  into  the  doorway  with  the  two 
bishops;  when  he  comes  down  to  the  deputation  the  two  bishops,  on  a  whispered 
word  from  Richard,  retire  to  the  background;  after  the  Mayor’s  departure  and 
Richard  and  Buckingham  have  expressed  gratification  at  their  success,  they  draw 
the  curtain. 

2.  how  now,  what  say  the  Citizens]  Ordish  (p.  64):  These  are  words  which 
former  owners  of  the  Castle  must  often  have  used.  .  .  The  phrase,  ‘  your  citizens  ’ 
[spoken  by  the  Mayor  to  Richard],  was  reserved  exclusively  for  the  sovereign  of  the 
realm,  and  Richard  has  not  yet  accepted  sovereignty.  Addressed  to  him,  however, 
as  head  and  representative  of  the  House  of  York,  in  Baynard’s  Castle,  the  form 
of  address  was,  perhaps,  not  inappropriate.  It  is  probable  that  in  Shakespeare’s 
time  this  scene,  as  given  on  the  stage,  became  charged  with  satirical  meaning  by 
the  actors,  in  revenge  upon  the  city’s  persistent  persecution  of  the  theatres. 


act  hi,  sc.  vii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


255 


The  Citizens  are  mum,  fay  not  a  word. 

Rich.  Toucht  you  the  Baftardie  of  Edwards  Children  ?  5 

Buck  I  did,  with  his  Contra<5t  with  Lady  Lucy , 

4.  fay  not  a  word]  and  fpeake  not  a  Vaughan  (iii,  89). 
word  Qq,  Cam.  + .  and  speak  not  word  6,  7.  his  Contract. ..France']  Om.  Qq. 

4.  mum]  Wright:  This  word  is  elsewhere  used  in  Shakespeare  as  an  interjection, 
enjoining  silence. 

6.  his  Contrail  with  Lady  Lucy]  Ritson:  The  king  had  been  familiar  with 
this  lady  before  his  marriage,  to  obstruct  which  his  mother  alleged  a  pre-contract 
between  them:  ‘Whereupon,’  says  the  historian,  ‘dame  Elizabeth  Lucye  was 
sente  for,  and  albeit  she  was  by  the  kyng  his  mother,  and  many  other,  put  in  good 
comfort  to  affirme  that  she  was  assured  to  the  kynge,  yet  when  she  was  solempnly 
sworne  to  saye  ye  truth,  she  confessed  she  was  never  ensured.  Howbeit  she  sayd 
his  grace  spake  suche  loving  wordes  to  her,  that  she  verily  hoped  he  would  have 
married  her.’ — Hall,  Edward  V,  fol.  18. — Malone:  Philip  de  Commines,  a  con¬ 
temporary  historian,  says  that  Edward,  previous  to  his  marriage  with  Lady  Grey, 
was  married  to  an  English  lady  by  [Stillington]  the  Bishop  of  Bath,  who  revealed 
the  secret;  and  according  to  the  Chronicle  of  Croyland  this  Lady  was  Lady  Eleanor 
Butler,  widow  of  Lord  Butler  of  Sudley,  and  daughter  of  the  great  earl  of 
Shrewsbury. — Lingard  (iv,  235,  foot-note ):  Was  there  ever  any  such  person 
as  Dame  Eleanor  Butteler,  daughter  of  the  old  Earl  of  Shrewsbury?  We  know 
so  little  about  her,  that  her  existence  has  been  called  in  question.  There 
is,  however,  in  the  possession  of  Lord  Shrewsbury,  an  illuminated  pedigree  by 
Glover  in  1580,  in  which  she  is  named  as  the  first  born  of  the  second  marriage 
of  the  first  earl,  .  .  .  and  as  wife  of  Sir  Thomas  Butler,  Lord  Sudeley.  If  this  be 
correct,  there  must  have  been  the  disparity  of  at  least  fifteen  years  .  .  .  between 
her  age  and  that  of  Edward. — Courtenay  (ii,  92,  footnote ):  Comines  says  (bk.  v, 
ch.  18)  that  the  Bishop  of  Bath  told  Richard  that  he  married  Edward  privately 
to  a  lady  unnamed;  but  he  says  afterwards,  if  I  understand  him  (bk.  vi,  ch.  9), 
that  there  was  no  marriage. — Gairdner  (p.  117):  When  Henry  VII.  became 
king,  and  married  the  daughter  of  Edward  IV.  and  Elizabeth  Woodville,  any  allu¬ 
sion  to  the  pre-contract  was  treated  as  disloyal.  The  petition  to  Richard  to  assume 
the  crown  was  declared  to  be  so  scandalous  that  every  copy  of  it  was  ordered  by 
parliament  to  be  destroyed.  The  allegations  contained  in  it  were  misrepresented; 
the  pre-contract  was  said  to  have  been  with  Elizabeth  Lucy,  one  of  Edward’s 
mistresses,  instead  of  with  Lady  Eleanor  Butler,  and  the  name  of  the  latter  lady 
was  omitted  from  the  story.  Thus,  in  More’s  History,  a  courtesan  of  obscure  birth 
is  made  to  take  the  place  of  an  earl’s  daughter  as  the  person  to  whom  Edward  was 
first  betrothed;  and  such  is  the  version  of  the  story  that  has  been  current  nearly 
ever  since.  It  was  only  after  the  lapse  of  a  century  and  a  quarter  that  Sir  George 
Buck  discovered  the  true  tenor  of  the  parliamentary  petition  in  the  MS  history 
of  Croyland;  and  again,  after  another  like  period  had  passed  away,  the  truth 
received  ample  confirmation  by  the  discovery  of  the  very  Roll  of  Parliament  on 
which  the  petition  was  engrossed,  [p.  1 13.]  The  ecclesiastical  theory  of  pre-contracts 
which  prevailed  before  the  reformation  was  the  source  of  great  abuses.  Marriages 
that  had  been  publicly  acknowledged,  and  treated  for  a  long  time  as  valid,  were 
often  declared  null  on  the  ground  of  some  previous  contract  entered  into  by  one 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  III,  sc.  vii. 


256 

And  his  Contract  by  Deputie  in  France, 
Th’vnfatiate  greedineffe  of  his  defire, 
And  his  enforcement  of  the  Citie  Wiues, 


9 


7 


8.  Th'vnfatiate\  the  infatiate  Qq, 
Cam.  + . 


8.  defir e ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Wh.  i. 


defires  Qq  et  cet. 

9.  And...  IViues ]  Om.  Qq. 


or  other  of  the  parties.  In  this  way  Henry  VIII.,  before  putting  Anne  Boleyn  to 
death,  caused  his  marriage  with  her  to  be  pronounced  invalid  by  reason  of  a  pre¬ 
vious  contract  on  her  part  with  Percy,  Earl  of  Northumberland. — Legge  (i,  266): 
Several  circumstances  lend  probability  to  Bishop  Stillington’s  story.  Prompted 
by  jealousy  and  apprehension,  the  King,  with  his  vacillating  temper,  alternately 
bribed  and  persecuted  the  custodian  of  his  dangerous  secret.  The  brother  of  the 
Earl  of  Warwick  was  put  out  of  the  Chancellorship  that  it  might  be  conferred  on 
Stillington.  Subsequently  he  was  imprisoned,  and  the  arbitrary  sentence  of  the 
King  was  only  commuted  on  payment  of  a  heavy  fine.  And  again,  in  the  reign 
of  Henry  VII.,  it  was  proposed  to  summon  him  to  the  bar  of  Parliament,  to  give 
evidence  upon  an  inquiry  into  all  the  circumstances  of  the  alleged  marriage;  but 
he  obtained  a  ‘pardon’  and  the  inquiry  was  abandoned.  It  is  difficult  to  believe 
that  the  secret  was  confined  to  himself  and  the  Protector  after  the  death  of  Clarence. 
It  was  almost  certainly  known  to  the  Earl  and  Countess  of  Shrewsbury,  and  the 
suggestion  that  the  Duke  of  Clarence’s  participation  in  it  was  a  ground  of  Edward’s 
consent  to  his  death  is  so  far  probable  that  it  constituted  him  heir  apparent  to  the 
throne.  That  the  Duchess  of  York  was  aware  of  the  marriage  or  contract  is 
evident,  for  she  urges  it  as  one  of  several  grounds  of  objection  to  her  son’s  marriage 
with  Elizabeth  Woodville:  ‘It  must  needs  stick  as  a  foul  disparagement  of  the 
sacred  majestie  of  a  Prince  ...  to  be  defiled  with  bigamy  in  his  first  marriage.  ’ — 
Buck,  p.  120. — Marshall:  As  to  Edward’s  being  contracted  ‘by  deputy’  to  the 
Lady  Bona,  daughter  of  the  Duke  of  Savoy,  there  seems  to  have  been  more  truth 
in  this  allegation  [than  in  Stillington’s].  All  the  chroniclers  state  that,  at  the  time 
Edward  was  secretly  married  to  Elizabeth,  Warwick  had  already  succeeded  in 
obtaining  Louis’s  consent  to  the  marriage  of  the  Lady  Bona;  and  that  the  King¬ 
maker  was  justly  offended  at  finding  that  his  royal  master  had  made  a  fool  of 
him  in  that  matter.  [See  3  Hen.  VI:  III,  iii,  where  the  dramatist  has  made  use 
of  this  episode.  The  foregoing  question  of  the  pre-contract,  purely  historical, 
has  given  rise  to  much  discussion.  What  is  here  repeated  is  a  condensation, 
which  it  has  been  deemed  necessary  to  give,  lest  an  oversight  might  be  imputed 
to  the  editor,  who  is  fully  aware  that,  dramatically  considered,  the  question  is  quite 
superfluous.] 

9.  And  his  .  .  .  the  Citie  Wiues]  Marshall:  The  omissions  [in  the  Quarto] 
in  this  speech  are  peculiar,  and  one  is  inclined  to  suspect  that  they  were  made  out 
of  deference  to  the  feelings  of  Elizabeth.  The  allegations  made  against  Edward 
were  very  similar  to  those  made  with  more  truth  against  Henry  VIII.  He  had 
pronounced,  ex  cathedra,  his  own  marriage  with  Anne  Boleyn  to  be  null  and  void 
.  .  .  and  had  thus  bastardized  Elizabeth,  so  that  Shakespeare  would  be  here 
treading  upon  very  delicate  ground.  [Marshall  is,  possibly,  correct  in  his  con¬ 
jecture  concerning  the  censorship  of  certain  lines  in  this  speech;  but  why  did  this 
corrector,  so  solicitous  for  the  feelings  of  the  queen,  pause  here?  Buckingham, 


act  hi,  sc.  vii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


257 


His  Tyrannie  for  Trifles,  his  owne  Baftardie, 
As  being  got,  your  Father  then  in  France, 
And  his  refemblance,  being  not  like  the  Duke. 
Withall,  I  did  inferre  your  Lineaments, 

Being  the  right  Idea  of  your  Father, 

Both  in  your  forme,  and  Nobleneffe  of  Minde  : 


15 


10 


12.  And. ..Duke.]  Om.  Qq. 

his  refemblance]  in  his  semblance 
Bailey  (ii,  290). 


13.  Lineaments]  Qt.  lienaments  Q2-s. 

14.  of]  or  Qa. 

15.  your]  one  Q3 6.  Om.  Q7Q8. 


in  another  speech  in  this  scene,  alludes  to  the  wife  of  Edward,  also  a  queen  Eliz¬ 
abeth,  be  it  remembered,  as  ‘ beauty- waning ’  and  ‘in  the  afternoon  of  her  best 
days,’  11.  194,  195;  an  innuendo  which  might  cause  resentment  on  the  part  of 
many  of  the  courtiers,  to  say  nothing  of  the  Queen  herself,  far  more  than  an 
allusion  to  a  case  somewhat  parallel  with  that  of  the  Queen’s  father. — Ed.] 

12.  his  resemblance]  Collier  (Notes,  etc.,  p.  331):  Buckingham  was  to 
enforce  not  Edward’s  likeness,  but  his  want  of  likeness  to  his  father,  not  ‘his  resem¬ 
blance,’  but  dis-resemblance;  and  precisely  in  this  form  the  corrector  of  the  Folio 
has  put  it.  However  unusual  the  word  dis-resemblance,  it  exactly  suits  the  meaning, 
and  dis  may  easily  have  been  read  ‘his.’  At  a  later  date,  dissemblance  seems  to 
have  been  employed  to  express  want  of  similarity. — Singer  ( Sh .  Vind.,  p.  172): 
There  is  no  authority  for  such  a  word  as  dis-resemblance,  and  dissemblance  is  not, 
that  I  am  aware  of,  ever  used  for  ‘want  of  similarity,’  but  for  feigning.  Shakes¬ 
peare  uses  ‘resemblance’  here  for  semblance,  i.  e.,  appearance,  which  is  his  usual 
word.  Thus,  in  a  former  scene,  the  Duchess  of  York  says:  ‘ — two  mirrors  of  his 
princely  semblance  Are  cracked  in  pieces  by  malignant  death.’ — Murray  ( N .  E. 
D.  s.  v.  dissemblance.  1)  gives,  among  others,  the  following  examples  of  the  use  of 
this  word  in  the  sense  of  want  of  resemblance;  unlikeness;  difference;  dissimilarity. 
1580.  North,  Plutarch  (1676),  980:  ‘As  touching  other  agreements  and  dissem¬ 
blances  which  may  be  noted.  .  .  in  their  life  and  behaviour.’  1658.  Osborne, 
Adv.  Son:  ‘Nor  can  there  be  a  greater  dissemblance  between  one  wise  man  and 
another.’ — Ed. 

14,  15.  the  right  Idea  of  your  Father,  Both  in  your  forme]  Seymour  (i,  383): 
I  do  not  recollect  any  mention,  either  historical  or  poetical,  of  the  Duke  of  York’s 
being  deformed,  as  Gloucester  is  represented  to  be.  [Was  not  the  comparison 
prompted  more  by  a  desire  to  exalt  Richard  than  to  speak  of  the  Duke  of  York  in 
a  derogatory  manner  ? — Ed.] 

14.  the  right  Idea]  Hunter  (Illust.,  ii,  90):  Such  slight  changes  as  this  are 
perhaps  unavoidable  when  writings  two  hundred  and  fifty  years  old  come  to  be 
delivered  from  a  modern  press;  but  surely  something  must  be  allowed  to  be  lost 
when  we  see  how  the  line  stands  in  the  original  copies.  [If  I  understand  Hunter, 
he  is  here  referring  not  to  any  omission  in  the  text,  but  to  a  possible  loss  in  poetic 
meaning  or  emphasis,  by  printing  the  word  ‘idea’  without  its  capital  and  Italics 
as  in  the  Folio.  He  adds:  ‘The  word  “idea”  appears  to  have  been  not  fully  natu¬ 
ralized.  It  is  here  equivalent  to  image.'  The  word  was  evidently  no  stranger  to 
Drayton,  a  contemporary  of  Shakespeare;  he  entitles  a  series  of  sonnets  ‘ Ideas .’ — 
Ed.] — Wright:  Compare  ‘The  idea  of  her  life  shall  sweetly  creep  Into  his  study 
of  imagination.’ — Much  Ado,  IV,  i,  226. 


1 7 


258 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iii,  sc.  vii. 


Layd  open  all  your  Vi6lories  in  Scotland,  16 

Your  Difcipline  in  Warre,  Wifdome  in  Peace, 

Your  Bountie,  Vertue,  faire  Humilitie  : 

Indeed,  left  nothing  fitting  for  your  purpofe, 

Vntoucht,  or  fleightly  handled  in  difcourfe.  20 

And  when  my  Oratorie  drew  toward  end, 

I  bid  them  that  did  loue  their  Countries  good, 

Cry,  God  faue  Richard ,  Englands  Royall  King. 

Rich.  And  did  they  fo  ? 

Buck.  No,  fo  God  helpe  me,  they  fpake  not  a  word,  25 

But  like  dumbe  Statues,  or  breathing  Stones, 


16.  open]  vpon  Q^g. 

Victories ]  vitflorie  Q4> 

19.  your~\  the  Qq,  Pope, +  ,  Cam. +  , 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

21.  my]  tnine  Qq,  Cam. +. 

drew  toward  ]  grew  to  an  Q,Q2Q4, 
Mai.  Steev.Varr.  Cam.  +.  grew  to  Q3Q5- 
grew  toward  F4,  Rowe,  Var.  ’78,  ’85, 
Ran.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly.  grew  tow'rd 
Pope,  + . 

22.  bid ]  Q,.4,Ff, +  ,  Dyce  i,  Cam. +. 
bad  Q5_8,  Cap.  bade  Var.  ’78  et  cet. 


22.  did  loue ]  loues  Q^-g. 

24.  And ]  A,  and  Qq  (A  and  Q2). 
Ah  !  and  Cam.  + . 

25.  they  ...word]  Om.  Qq. 

26.  Statues]  statuas  Steev.  Varr.  Knt, 
Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Sta.  Cam.  i,  +  ,  Huds. 
statues  Ktly,  Cam.  ii. 

or  breathing ]  or  breathlejfe  Q3-s, 
Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13.  or  unbreatking 
Rowe,  +  ,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  unbreathing 
Lettsom. 


16.  your  Victories  in  Scotland]  Richard  commanded  the  army  which  invaded 
Scotland  in  1482,  the  result  of  which  invasion  was  the  capture  of  the  town 
and  fortress  of  Berwick.  Richard’s  services  were  recognised  by  parliament. 
—Ed. 

18.  faire  Humilitie]  In  the  presence  of  Buckingham  Richard,  in  II,  i,  thanks 
God  for  his  ‘humility’;  of  this,  Buckingham  is  perhaps  mindful.'  Faire’  appears 
to  be  here  used  in  the  sense  given  by  Bradley  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  IV,  17):  ‘Open 
to  view,  plainly  to  be  seen,  clear,  distinct.  Now  chiefly  dialectic.’  [See  II,  i,  80.] 
— Ed. 

24.  And]  The  interpretation  of  the  Quarto  reading  A  and  as  Ah  1  and  by  the 
Cambridge  Editors,  with  the  suggestion  of  a  sudden  indrawing  of  the  breath, 
is  certainly  noteworthy. — Ed. 

26.  Statues]  Nares  (s.  v.  Statua ):  This  word  was  long  used  in  English  as  a 
trisyllable,  though  ‘statue’  was  also  employed.  Lord  Bacon  has  it  more  than 
once  in  his  forty-fifth  Essay;  and  also  in  other  places:  ‘It  is  not  possible  to  have 
the  true  pictures  or  statuses  of  Cyrus,  Alexander,  Caesar.’ — Advancement  0}  Learn¬ 
ing,  Bk.  1, 8,  §  6.  He  speaks  afterwards  of  t\\e  statua  oi  Polyphemus.  .  .  .  One  reason 
for  this  might  be  that  the  English  word  statue  was  often  applied  to  a  picture. 
Thus  in  The  City  Madam,  V,  iii:  ‘Your  nieces  .  .  .  crave  humbly  .  .  .  they 
may  take  leave  Of  their  late  suitor’s  statues.’  Presently  the  pictures  are  turned 
into  realities,  though  Sir  John  Frugal  says:  ‘Here’s  nothing  but  A  superficies; 
colours  and  no  substance.’  But  the  lovers  were  concealed  behind  them.  Gifford 


ACT  III,  sc.  vii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


259 

27 


Star'd  each  on  other,  and  look'd  deadly  pale : 

Which  when  I  faw,  I  reprehended  them, 

And  ask'd  the  Maior,  what  meant  this  wilfull  filence  ? 

His  anfwer  was,  the  people  were  not  vfed 
To  be  fpoke  to,  but  by  the  Recorder. 

Then  he  was  vrg'd  to  tell  my  Tale  againe : 

Thus  fayth  the  Duke,  thus  hath  the  Duke  inferr’d, 

But  nothing  fpoke,  in  warrant  from  himfelfe. 

When  he  had  done,  fome  followers  of  mine  owne, 

At  lower  end  of  the  Hall,  hurld  vp  their  Caps, 

And  fome  tenne  voyces  cry’d,  God  faue  King  Richard: 

And  thus  I  tooke  the  vantage  of  thofe  few. 

Thankes  gentle  Citizens,  and  friends,  quoth  I, 

This  generall  applaufe,  and  chearefull  fhowt,  40 


27.  Star’d']  Gazde  Qq.  Gaz'd  Sta. 
Cam.  + . 

each  on]  on  each  Varr.  Mai.  Steev. 

Varr. 

29.  meant]  meanes  Q^g. 

fclence  ?]  silence :  Cap.  et  seq. 
(subs.) 

30.  vfed]  wont  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 

30,  31.  vfed...  Recorder]  Wont... re¬ 
corder  as  one  line,  Vaughan  (iii,  90). 

31.  fpoke  to]  fpoke  too  Q3-5.  spoken 
unto  Ktly. 

but]  except  Pope,  +  (-Var.’73). 
but  only  Ktly  conj. 


31.  the]  their  own  Cap. 

Recorder]  rlc order  Dyce,  Huds. 
34.  fpoke]  fpake  Qq,  Cam.  + ,  Dyce  ii, 
iii,  Huds.  {fpeake  Q6). 

36.  At]  At'  Ed.  conj. 

lower]  the  lower  Qq,  Cam.  + . 
of  the]  o'  th ’  Pope,  +  .  the  Cap. 
o'  the  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Sing. 
Ktly. 

hurld]  hurled  Q-^g.  hurl' d  F4  et 

seq. 

38.  And... few]  Om.  Qq. 

39.  gentle]  louing  Q,^.  noble  Q7Q8. 

40.  chearefull]  louing  Qq,  Cam. +. 


properly  observes  that  ‘Massinger,  like  all  his  contemporaries,  confounds  statue 
with  picture.’  Hence  statua  was  called  in  to  make  a  distinction. — Malone:  I 
adhere  to  the  old  copies.  They  had  breath  and  therefore  could  have  spoken;  but 
were  as  silent  as  if  they  had  been  stones.  [See,  also,  Walker,  Vers.,  p.  295.] 

26.  breathing  Stones]  Shakespeare  possibly  here  got  this  phrase  from  More, 
who,  in  his  account  of  Dr  Shaw’s  sermon,  says:  ‘But  the  people  wer  so  farre  fro 
crying  king  Richard,  that  thei  stode  as  thei  had  bene  turned  into  stones,  for  wonder 
of  this  shamefull  sermon’  (p.  103). 

31.  Recorder]  For  other  examples  of  ‘Recorder’  and  record,  as  substantives, 
see  Walker,  Vers.,  133. — Marshall:  The  pronunciation,  ‘recorder,’  .  .  .  would 
involve  placing  an  accent  on  the  last  syllable  of  that  word,  which  is  very  awkward. 
The  comma  in  the  old  copies  indicates  a  pause,  by  means  of  which  it  will  be  seen 
that  the  verse  can  be  spoken  rhythmically,  preserving  at  the  same  time  the  usual 
pronunciation  of  the  word  .  .  .  The  person  fulfilling  this  office  at  the  time  was 
Thomas  Fitzwilliam.  The  office  of  recorder  is  now  that  of  a  judge;  and  he  must  be 
barrister  of  at  least  five  years  ’  standing. 


26o 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  vii. 


Argues  your  wifdome,  and  your  loue  to  Richard:  41 

And  euen  here  brake  off,  and  came  away. 

Rich.  What  tongue-leffe  Blockes  were  they, 

Would  they  not  fpeake? 

*Buc.  No  by  my  troth  my  Lord. 

Glo.*  Will  not  the  Maior  then,  and  his  Brethren,  come  ?  45 

Buck.  The  Maior  is  here  at  hand :  intend  fome  feare, 

Be  not  you  [poke  with,  but  by  mightie  fuit : 

And  looke  you  get  a  Prayer-Booke  in  your  hand, 

And  (land  betweene  two  Church-men,  good  my  Lord, 

For  on  that  ground  lie  make  a  holy  Defcant :  5° 


41.  wifdome]  wifedomes  Q,Q2.  wife- 
dome  Q3-7.  wifdom  F4.  wisdoms  Cam.  + . 

loue' j  loues  Q3-6. 

42.  euen  here ]  fo  Qq. 

43.  44.  What. . .fpeake  ?]  Ff,  Rowe. 
One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

44.  Would  they ]  they  would  Han. 
*Buc.  No  by  my  troth  my  Lord. 

Glo.*]  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds.  Om.  Fj,  Ff  et  cet. 

46.  Buck.]  Glo.  Q,Qa. 


46.  at  hand  ]  Om.  Q3-8. 

intend  ]  and  intend  Qq.  pretend 

Pope. 

fome']  fomes  Q6. 

47.  you J 'poke  with]fpoken  withall  Qq. 
by]  with  Qq. 

48.  looke  you]  look  you,  Delius  (Jahr- 
buch,  vii,  137). 

49.  betweene]  betwixt  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

50.  make]  build  Qq,  Pope,  +  ,  Sta. 
Cam.  + . 


41.  Argues]  For  examples  of  ‘argue'  in  the  sense  of  to  prove,  to  show,  see 
Schmidt  {Lex.  s.  v.  2). 

46.  intend  some  feare]  Marshall:  The  way  in  which  Buckingham  assumes 
the  lead  here  is  rather  amusing.  He  is  delighted  with  the  success  of  his  powers 
of  acting,  of  which  he  was  so  proud.  We  can  imagine  Gloucester  looking  at  him 
with  a  sly,  sarcastic  smile,  amused  at  his  attempting  to  play  the  leading  spirit,  and 
knowing  well  that  neither  Buckingham,  nor  any  one  else,  could  give  him  lessons  in 
hypocrisy.  At  the  same  time  it  is  quite  possible  that  Gloucester  seriously  resented 
Buckingham’s  want  of  tact,  at  this  point,  in  pretending  to  order  him  about,  and 
in  making  it  appear  as  though  he  were  the  commanding  spirit  and  not  Gloucester. 

46.  intend]  See  III,  v,  11. 

48.  looke  you  get  a  Prayer-Booke  in  your  hand]  Birch  (p.  204):  Shakes¬ 
peare  must  have  thought  the  Puritans  and  religious  people  of  his  day  thus  easily 
won  over  by  the  appearance  of  piety,  and  the  whole  scene  must  have  been  intended 
to  ridicule  them.  It  is  exaggerated,  and  the  actors  are  made  barefaced  hypocrites. 
Still  it  is  true  to  the  nature  of  the  Puritans,  and  turned  out  almost  prophetical 
when  the  really  religious  leader  of  a  religious  party,  who,  raised  to  the  Lord  Protec¬ 
torship,  went  through  this  very  scene  in  word  and  deed,  in  order  to  exchange  that 
title  for  King.  It  was  not  attended  by  the  same  result,  as  Cromwell  saw  it  would 
not  be  politic  to  take  a  crown  which  his  followers  were  not  quite  such  dupes  as  to 
be  willing  to  give  him.  This  would  be  quite  a  specimen  of  what  Shakespeare  in 
2  Henry  IV.  makes  out  prophecy  to  be,  the  knowledge  of  future  from  preceding 
events. 

50.  Descant]  See  I,  i,  32,  and  notes. 


ACT  III,  sc.  vii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


261 


And  be  not  eafily  wonne  to  our  requefts,  5 1 

Play  the  Maids  part,  ftill  anfwer  nay, and  take  it. 

Rich.  I  goe  :  and  if  you  plead  as  well  for  them, 

As  I  can  fay  nay  to  thee  for  my  felfe, 

No  doubt  we  bring  it  to  a  happie  iffue.  55 

Buck.  Go,  go  vp  to  the  Leads,  the  Lord  Maior  knocks. 

Enter  the  Maior ,  and  Citizens. 

Welcome,  my  Lord,  I  dance  attendance  here,  58 


51.  And ]  Om.  Qq. 
eafily']  eafie  Q^. 

51.  requefls ]  requejl  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

52.  fill  anfwer  nay,  and  ]  fay  no,  but 
Qq.  say  no,  and  no,  but  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

53*  I  goe... you]  Feare  slot  me,  if  thou 
canst  Qq. 

54.  felfe,]  felfe?  Qf. 

55.  we]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Dyce  i,  Wh.  i, 
Hal.  Sta.  weele  Qq.  we’ll  Pope  et  cet. 

56.  Go. ..knocks]  You  ftal fee  what  I 


can  do,  get  you  vp  to  the  leades  Qq. 

56.  go  vp]  Ff,  Rowe,  +  ,  Cam. +.  go, 
up  Cap.  et  cet. 

[Exit  or  Ex.  Qq. 

57.  Om.  Qq.  Enter  Lord  Mayor... 
Citizens  F3F^,  + .  Enter  the  Lord  Mayor; 
with  certain  Aldermen,  and  others.  Cap. 
et  seq.  (subs.) 

58.  Welcome,  my  Lord]  Now  my  Lord 
Maior  Qq. 

/]  you  Q7Q8. 


52.  Play  the  Maids  part]  Wright:  The  maid  who  ‘whispering  “I  will  ne’er 
consent”  consented’  [Byron,  Don  Juan,  st.  1 1 7].  Compare:  ‘Have  you  not 
heard  it  said  full  oft,  A  woman’s  nay  doth  stand  for  nought.’ — Pass.  Pilg.,  340. 
[’Tis  true  ’tis  pity,  and  pity  ’tis  ’tis  true,  that  examples  of  this  ungallant  sentiment 
are  to  be  found  not  only  in  Shakespeare,  but  in  other  writers. — Ed.] 

53.  if  you  plead  as  well  for  them]  The  Cowden-Clarkes:  Here  ‘them’ 
refers  to  ‘requests.’  .  .  .  The  manner  in  which  the  word  ‘it’  is  used  at  the  close 
of  this  speech  and  the  previous  one  affords  two  examples  of  Shakespeare’s  manner 
of  employing  a  pronoun  in  reference  to  an  implied  particular.  In  1.  52  ‘it’  refers 
not  to  the  immediate  antecedent  ‘part,’  but  to  that  which  is  offered  the  maid;  and 
in  1.  55  ‘it’  refers  to  the  plan  or  scheme  which  is  being  concerted. 

53,  54.  you  .  .  .  thee]  For  this  apparent  inconsistent  use  of  personal  pronouns 
see  Abbott  (§  234),  who  gives  as  another  example  from  the  present  play  the  lines: 
‘Come  thou  on  my  side,  and  entreat  for  me  As  you  would  beg,  were  you  in  my 
distress.’ — I,  iv.  But  as  this  order  of  these  two  lines  is  not  Shakespeare’s,  but  is 
due  to  a  rearrangement  of  the  passage  by  Tyrwhitt,  followed  by  the  majority  of 
editors,  it  seems  hardly  fair  to  quote  it  as  an  example  of  Shakespearean  usage. — 
Ed. 

54.  As  I  can  say  nay  to  thee]  Johnson:  I  think  it  must  be  read:  ‘As  I 
must  say,  nay  to  them ,  ’  etc. — Steevens:  Perhaps  the  change  is  not  necessary. 
Buckingham  is  to  plead  for  the  citizens;  and  ‘if  (says  Richard)  you  speak  for  them 
as  plausibly  as  I  in  my  own  person,  or  for  my  own  purposes,  shall  seem  to  deny 
your  suit,  there  is  no  doubt  but  we  shall  bring  all  to  a  happy  issue.’ 

58.  I  dance  attendance]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v..  dance,  5):  To  wait  (upon 
a  person)  with  assiduous  attention  and  ready  obsequiousness;  originally,  to  stand 
waiting  or  ‘kicking  one’s  heels’  in  an  antechamber.  1522,  Skelton,  Why  not  to 


262  THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  ill,  SC.  vii. 

I  thinke  the  Duke  will  not  be  [poke  withall. 

Enter  Catesby.  60 

Buck.  Now  Catesby ,  what  fayes  your  Lord  to  my 
requeft  ? 

Catesby.  He  doth  entreat  your  Grace,  my  Noble  Lord, 

To  vifit  him  to  morrow,  or  next  day  : 

He  is  within,  with  two  right  reuerend  Fathers,  65 

Diuinely  bent  to  Meditation, 

And  in  no  Worldly  fuites  would  he  be  mou’d, 

To  draw  him  from  his  holy  Exercife. 

Buck.  Returne,  good  Catesby ,  to  the  gracious  Duke, 

Tell  him,  my  felfe,  the  Maior  and  Aldermen,  70 

In  deepe  defignes,  in  matter  of  great  moment, 


59.  /poke]  fpoken  Q3_8. 

60.  Enter  Catesby.]  Enter,  from  the 
Castle,  Catesby.  Mai. 

61.  62.  Buck.  Now...reque/l]  Here 
comes  his  feruant :  how  now  Catesby  what 
faies  he  ?  Qq,  (ending  line  at  Catesby ) 
Cam.  + . 

61.  Now]  Om.  Pope,  +  (  —  Var.  ’73). 

63.  He ...  Lord]  My  Lord  he  doth 
entreat  your  Grace  Qq,  Cam. +. 

65.  with]  and  Q7Q8,  Steev.  reprint 


(foot-note),  but  with  Han. 

65.  right]  Om.  Q^,  Han. 

67 .fuites]  Ff, +  ,  Knt,  Coll.  Wh.  i, 
Rife,  fute  Qq.  suit  Cap.  et  cet. 

69.  the  gracious  Duke]  thy  Lord 
againe  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

70.  Aldermen]  Cittizens  Q,Qa-  Citi¬ 
zens  Q3-8,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 

71.  in  matter]  and  matters  Qq,  Cam. 
+ ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  in  matters  Coll, 
iii. 


Court ,  626:  ‘And  Syr  ye  must  daunce  attendance  .  .  .  For  my  Lords  Grace,  Hath 
now  no  time  or  space,  To  speke  with  you  as  yet.’  [Compare  also  2  Hen.  VI: 
I,  iii,  174;  Hen.  VIII:  V,  ii,  31.] 

61,  62.  Now  Catesby  ...  to  my  request]  Spedding  ( Sh.Soc .  Trans.,  1875— ’76; 
p.  23):  The  Folio  correction  of  the  Quarto  reading  [‘Here  comes  his  servant. 
How  now  Catesby,  what  says  he?’]  is  one  which  I  cannot  think  that  Shakespeare 
would  have  authorised,  although  those  who  accept  the  first  Folio  as  representing 
him  most  faithfully  can  hardly  say  so.  I  think  he  meant  to  strike  out  ‘Now’  as 
well  as  how. — Pickersgill  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875-’ 76;  p.  93):  Spedding  supposes 
that  the  ‘printer  alone  is  responsible  for  inserting  “now”  in  the  Folio.  This  mis¬ 
take,  however,  does  not  appear  to  me  likely  to  have  occurred;  because  the  corrector, 
whoever  he  was,  having  to  make  so  much  alteration  in  the  line  of  his  copy,  would 
no  doubt  erase  it  all,  and  write  the  new  line  above  or  in  the  margin.  Besides, 
“Catesby  what  says,  etc.,”  would  be  very  abrupt  and  harsh.’  [The  Cambridge 
Editors  record  Spedding’s  proposed  omission  in  the  Quarto  line,  not  the  Folio. 
The  reading  which  Pickersgill  characterises  as  ‘harsh  and  abrupt’  is  due  to  Pope 
[see  Text.  Notes].  The  interpretation  of  Spedding’s  note  by  the  above-mentioned 
Editors  is  that  also  of  the  present  Ed.] 

68.  holy  Exercise]  See  III,  ii,  124. 


ACT  III,  sc.  vii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


263 

No  leffe  importing  then  our  generall  good,  72 

Are  come  to  haue  fome  conference  with  his  Grace. 

Catesby.  lie  fignifie  fo  much  vnto  him  ftraight.  Exit. 

Buck.  Ah  ha,  my  Lord,  this  Prince  is  not  an  Edward ,  7  5 

He  is  not  lulling  on  a  lewd  Loue-Bed, 

But  on  his  Knees,  at  Meditation  : 

Not  dallying  with  a  Brace  of  Curtizans, 

But  meditating  with  two  deepe  Diuines : 

Not  fleeping,  to  engroffe  his  idle  Body,  80 

But  praying,  to  enrich  his  watchfull  Soule. 

Happie  were  England,  would  this  vertuous  Prince 
Take  on  his  Grace  the  Soueraigntie  thereof. 

But  fure  I  feare  we  fhall  not  winne  him  to  it. 

Maior.  Marry  God  defend  his  Grace  fhould  fay  vs  85 
nay. 


74.  Ile...Jlraight~\  lie  tell  him  what 
you  fay  my  Lord  Qq,  Cam.  +  .(05  omits 
tell). 

76.  lulling J  QqFf,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll, 
i,  ii,  Sing.  Ktly.  lolling  Pope  et  cet. 

Loue-Bed']  day  bed Qq,Cap.Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam. +, 
Huds.  (subs.) 

78.  Curtizans]  courtezans  Cap.  et  seq. 


82.  vertuous]  gracious  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

83.  his  Grace]  himfelfe  Qq,  Cam. +. 
thereof]  thereon  Qq. 

84.  fure]  sore  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS),  Sing, 
ii,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Ktly,  Huds. 

not]  neuer  Qq.  ne'er  Cap.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Cam.  +  ,  Ktly. 

85.  defend]  forbid  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 
shield  Pope,  +  (  —  Var.  ’73). 


76.  lulling]  Bradley  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  Loll,  v1  4):  To  lean  idly;  to  recline  or 
rest  in  a  relaxed  attitude,  supporting  oneself  against  something.  [The  present 
line  quoted.] 

76.  Loue-Bed]  Dyce:  I  prefer  the  Quarto  reading  [day-bed,  i.  e.,  a  lounge] 
because  I  feel  convinced  that  the  Folio  alteration  was  not  made  by  the  Poet. 

80,  81.  Not  sleeping,  to  engrosse  .  .  .  But  praying,  to  enrich]  For  other 
examples  of  this  use  of  ‘similarity  of  rhythm’  to  bring  out  the  points  of  contrast, 
see  Guest,  p.  166. 

80.  engrosse]  Bradley  (TV.  E.  D.  s.  v.  Ill) :  9,  fa.  To  make  (the  body)  gross 
or  fat;  to  fatten.  [The  present  line  quoted.] 

84.  sure  I  feare]  Collier  [Notes,  etc.,  p.  331):  ‘Sure’  is  here  a  mere  expletive; 
but  the  MS  Corrector  instructs  us  how  to  raise  it  into  importance,  by  reading  the 
line  as  nobody  has  hitherto  thought  of  reading  it:  ‘But  sore  I  fear.’  Buckingham 
pretended  to  be  much  afraid  that  Richard  would  not  be  brought  to  consent.  This 
is  one  of  the  smaller  emendations  that  may  be  thought  to  need  no  advocacy. 

85.  Maior]  See  III,  v,  16. 

85.  God  defend]  Wright:  Pope  substituted  God  shield  on  account  of  the 
metre,  forgetting  that  ‘Marry’  is  frequently  counted  as  a  monosyllable.  [See  III, 
iv,  65.] 


264 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  111,  sc.  vii. 


Buck.  I  feare  he  will :  here  Catesby  comes  againe.  87 

Enter  Catesby. 

Now  Catesby ,  what  fayes  his  Grace  ? 

Catesby.  He  wonders  to  what  end  you  haue  affembled  90 
Such  troopes  of  Citizens,  to  come  to  him, 

His  Grace  not  being  warn’d  thereof  before : 

He  feares,  my  Lord,  you  meane  no  good  to  him. 

Buck.  Sorry  I  am,  my  Noble  Coufin  fhould 
SufpeCt  me,  that  I  meane  no  good  to  him :  95 

By  Heauen,  we  come  to  him  in  perfit  loue, 

And  fo  once  more  returne,  and  tell  his  Grace.  Exit. 

When  holy  and  deuout  Religious  men 

Are  at  their  Beades,  ’tis  much  to  draw  them  thence, 

So  fweet  is  zealous  Contemplation.  IOO 

Enter  Richard  aloft,  betweene  two  Bi/hops. 


87-90.  /...Catesby.  He  wonders]  I 
...how  now  Catesby,  What  fayes  your 
Lord?  Cat.  My  lord,  he  wonders  (as 
two  lines,  ending  :  Catesby  ...Lord  ?)  Qq. 
I... how  now,  Catesby,  what  says  your 
lord ?  Cates.  My  Lord,  He  wonders  (as 
two  lines,  ending,  will ...  My  Lord,) 
Cam.  + .  I.. .Now  Catesby  what  says  his 
grace  to  our  request?  Cat.  My  lord,  he 
wonders  Taylor  MS  ap.  Cam. 

89.  Now]  Om.  Pope,+  ,  Cap.  Varr. 
Ran. 

Catesby]  Om.  Cap. 
his  Grace]  your  lord  Qq,  Cap. 
Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Ran. 

91.  come  to]  f peake  with  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

91,92.  him,  ...before  :]  him  : ...before. 
Coll. 


93.  He. ..Lord]  My  lord,  he  feares 
Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

96.  we... to  him  in  perfit  loue]  I. ..in 
perfedl  loue  to  him  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

perfit]  perfefi  Qg.  perfect  QqF3 
F4  et  seq. 

97.  Exit.]  Om.  Q7Qg. 

98.  holy]  hollie  Qx. 

99.  their]  there  Q4. 

much]  hard  Qq,  Pope, +  ,  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Cam.-f . 
thence]  hence  Qs-s. 

101.  Scene  vin.  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
Warb.  Johns. 

aloft. ..Bilhops.]  and  twoBifhops 
aloft. Qq  (subs.),  above... Bishops.  Pope, 
above . . .  Bishops.  Catesby  returns.  Theob. 
et  seq.  (subs. ) 


99.  Beades]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.):  The  name  [bead]  was  transferred  from 
‘prayer'  [Anglo-Saxon,  bed]  to  the  small  globular  bodies  used  for  ‘telling  beads,’ 
i.  e.,  counting  prayers  said,  from  which  the  other  senses  naturally  followed. 

101.  Richard  .  .  .  betweene  two  Bishops]  ‘At  the  last  he  came  out  of  his 
chambre,  and  yet  not  doune  to  theim,  but  in  a  galary  ouer  them  with  a  bishop 
on  euery  hand  of  him,  where  they  beneth  might  se  him  and  speke  to  him,  as 
though  he  would  not  yet  come  nere  them  til  he  wist  what  they  meant.’ — Hall, 
p.  372. — Malone:  The  words  ‘with  a  bishop  on  euery  hand  of  him’  are  an  inter¬ 
polation  by  Hall,  or  rather  by  Grafton  (see  his  Continuation  of  Harding's  Chronicle, 
1543,  fol.  75,  and  quarto  1812,  p.  513),  not  being  found  in  More’s  History,  from  which 


act  iii,  sc.  vii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


265 


Maior.  See  where  his  Grace  (lands,  tweene  two  Clergie 
men. 

Buck.  Two  Props  of  Vertue,  for  a  Chriftian  Prince, 

To  (lay  him  from  the  fall  of  Vanitie  : 

And  fee  a  Booke  of  Prayer  in  his  hand, 

True  Ornaments  to  know  a  holy  man. 


102 


105 

107 


102.  his  Grace ]  he  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

tweene ]  Ff.  between  Qq,  Cam.  + . 
'tween  Rowe  et  cet. 

102,  103.  Clergie  men ]  Clergimen  Q  . 
Clergymen  F4> 


106,  107.  And. ..man"]  Om.  Qq. 

106.  Prayer~\ prayers  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

107.  Ornaments ]  ornament  Dyce, 
Hal.  Huds.  Coll,  iii,  Rife. 


the  rest  of  the  sentence  is  transcribed.— Delius  identifies  the  two  bishops  as  Dr  Shaw 
and  Friar  Penker ;  but,  as  W right  points  out,  neither  of  these  was  a  bishop.  Boswell- 
Stone  (p.  383,  footnote)  calls  attention  to  the  omission,  in  the  Quarto,  of  the  passage 
relating  to  Richard’s  request  to  Lovell  to  summon  Shaw  and  Penker;  and  since  the 
stage-direction  in  regard  to  the  two  bishops  is  substantially  the  same  in  both  Quarto 
and  Folio,  either  of  these  remarks  seems  to  destroy  the  identification  by  Delius.  From 
the  fact  that  the  words  ‘  with  a  bishop  on  euery  hand  of  him’  occur  in  Hall’s  account 
alone,  Oechelhauser  (Essay,  etc.,  p.  97,  footnote)  concludes  that  for  this  partic¬ 
ular  scene  Shakespeare  consulted  Hall :  he  adds  that  ‘  with  this  exception  there  is 
no  indication  that  Shakespeare  used  any  other  than  Holinshed  for  the  source  of  his 
drama.’ — See  III,  v,  82;  also  Churchill  and  Wright  in  Appendix:  Source  of  Plot. 

• — Ed. — Brooke  (p.  113):  The  scenes  wherein  Richard  is  induced  to  accept  the 
crown,  as  it  were  by  force,  and  where  he  apparently  persuades  Elizabeth  to  give 
him  her  daughter,  are  weakened  by  their  great  length,  and  almost  trench  on  farce. 
Richard  between  the  two  bishops,  wjth  the  prayer-book  in  his  hand,  is  ridiculous; 
and  the  scene  drags  on  without  Shakespeare’s  crispness,  clearness,  or  concentration 
of  thought.  It  is  a  worse  blot  on  the  play  than  the  scenes  between  Richard  and 
Lady  Anne,  between  Richard  and  Elizabeth.  Richard’s  dissimulation,  in  spite  of  the 
variety  of  the  dramatic  talk,  seems  in  these  scenes  to  pass  the  bounds  of  nature. 
Yet  it  is  difficult  to  find  just  fault  with  Shakespeare.  It  may  be  that  he  desired 
to  mark,  by  their  strained  unnaturalness,  that  weakness  in  the  intellect  which  arises 
from  the  absence  of  love  in  his  character.  Intellectual  power,  without  love,  grows 
abnormal,  unbalanced,  and  weak  through  pride  of  itself.  Nay,  more,  Shakespeare 
felt  that  it  would  not  only  lose  its  power,  but  finally  itself.  It  would  be  sure  to 
make  mistakes  in  dealing  with  mankind  and  with  the  movements  of  the  world;  to 
overdo  its  cunning;  to  end,  like  the  plotting  of  Mephistopheles,  in  folly  and  failure. 
The  common  sense  of  mankind  has  decided  that  long  ago.  In  all  folklore  stories 
the  Devil— intellect  without  love — is  invariably  made  a  hare  of  in  the  end. 

107.  Ornaments]  Dyce:  [‘Ornaments’  is]  a  most  palpable  error  for  ornament. 
In  1.  257  of  this  scene  the  Folio  makes  Richard  call  Buckingham  ‘ Cousins .’ — 
Wright:  The  plural  ‘ornaments’  includes  the  attendant  bishops. — Tawney: 
It  seems  impossible  to  make  the  plural  include  the  attendant  bishops,  as  Wright 
suggests.  If  the  plural  is  retained,  it  must,  it  seems,  be  explained  as  a  common 
colloquialism,  like,  ‘I  am  not  friends  with  him.’  There  is  present  in  the  mind  of 
the  poet  the  idea  that  prayerbooks  are,  as  a  rule,  ‘true  ornaments  to  know  a  holy 
man,’  and  a  confused  construction  is  the  result. 


266 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  vii. 


Famous  Plantagenet ,  mod  gracious  Prince,  108 

Lend  fauourable  eare  to  our  requefts, 

And  pardon  vs  the  interruption  I  io 

Of  thy  Deuotion,  and  right  Chriftian  Zeale. 

Rich.  My  Lord,  there  needes  no  fuch  Apologie  : 

I  doe  befeech  your  Grace  to  pardon  me, 

Who  earneft  in  the  feruice  of  my  God, 

Deferred  the  vifitation  of  my  friends.  1 1 5 

But  leauing  this,  what  is  your  Graces  pleafure? 

Buck.  Euen  that  (I  hope )  which  pleafeth  God  aboue, 

And  all  good  men,  of  this  vngouernM  lie. 

Rich.  I  doe  fufpedl  I  haue  done  fome  offence, 

That  feemes  difgracious  in  the  Cities  eye, 

And  that  you  come  to  reprehend  my  ignorance. 

Buck.  You  haue,  my  Lord  : 

Would  it  might  pleafe  your  Grace, 

On  our  entreaties,  to  amend  your  fault. 

Rich.  Elfe  wherefore  breathe  I  in  a  Chriftian  Land. 

Buck.  Know  then,  it  is  your  fault,  that  you  refigne 
The  Supreme  Seat,  the  Throne  Maiefticall, 

The  Sceptred  Office  of  your  Anceftors, 

Your  State  of  Fortune,  and  your  Deaw  of  Birth, 

The  Lineall  Glory  of  your  Royall  Houfe, 

To  the  corruption  of  a  blemifht  Stock ; 

Whiles  in  the  mildneffe  of  your  fleepie  thoughts, 

Which  here  we  waken  to  our  Countries  good, 


120 

125 

130 

133 


109.  eare ]  eares  Qq,  Cam. +. 
our]  my  Q^. 

requefts]  requejl  Qq,  Cam.  + . 
III.  right  Chrifian]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Cap.  Knt,  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  +  .  right- 
-christian  Theob.  et  cet. 

1 1 3.  I... to]  I  rather  do  befeech  you 
Qq,  Cap.  Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 
Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  + ,  Coll.  iii. 

1 14.  of  my  God]  of  God  F2.  of  th' 
high  God  F3F4,  Rowe. 

1 15.  Def err'd]  Neglect  Qq,  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 

120.  feemes]  feeme  Q5-8- 
eye]  eyes  Qq,  Cam.  + . 


122.  123.  You...  Grace]  Ff,  Rowe. 
One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

123.  might]  Om.  Qq,  Hal. 

124.  On. ..your]  At...thatQq,  Cam.  +  . 

125.  breathe]  breath  Qq. 

126.  Know  then]  Then  know  Qq, 
Cam.  4-. 

128.  Sceptred]  scepter  Q7Q8. 

129.  your. ..Birth]  Om.  Qq. 

Deaw]  Due  F3F4. 

132.  Whiles]  Whilfl  Qjf  Cap.  Var. 
’78,  ’85,  Mai.  Steev.Varr.  Cam.  + ,  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Huds.  Whilejl  Q^.  While  Pope,  + . 
your]  you  Q2. 

*33-  our]  your  Qs_g. 


ACT  III,  sc.  vii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


267 


The  Noble  lie  doth  want  his  proper  Limmes : 

His  Face  defac’d  with  skarres  of  Infamie,  135 

His  Royall  Stock  grafft  with  ignoble  Plants, 

And  almoft  fhouldred  in  the  fwallowing  Gulfe  137 


134.  The]  This  Qq,  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce, 
Wh.  i,  Hal.  Cam. +  ,  Ktly,  Huds. 

134,  135.  his. ..His"]  Qj^,Ff,  Rowe. 
her...  Her  Q,Q2  et  cet. 

135.  skarres]  F2F3.  Jlars  Q2-4.  skars 
F4.  fears  Q,  et  cet. 


136.  His... Plants]  Om.  Qq. 

His]  Her  Pope  et  seq. 

137.  fiouldred  ]  foundered  Anon.  ap. 
Cam. 

in  the]  in  this  Q3-8.  into  th.' 

Han. 


136.  Royall  Stock  grafft  with  ignoble  Plants]  Malone:  Shakespeare  seems 
to  have  recollected  the  text  on  which  Dr  Shaw  preached  his  remarkable  sermon 
at  St  Paul’s  Cross:  ‘Bastard  slips  shall  never  take  deep  root.’  [Shakespeare 
doubtless  remembered  Shaw’s  sermon;  he  read  diligently  the  chronicles  in  which 
it  is  mentioned,  but  beyond  a  certain  agricultural  allusion,  common  both  to  the 
present  line  and  Shaw’s  text,  there  is  but  little  evidence  of  any  such  remembrance. 
The  text  is  from  the  Apocrypha,  The  Wisdom  o)  Solomon,  iv,  3:  ‘And  with  bas¬ 
tard  slips  they  shall  not  strike  deep  root’;  it  is  slightly  misquoted  by  More,  who 
was  therein  followed  by  Hall. — Ed.] 

136.  grafft]  Wright:  The  modern  verb  to  graft  has  been  formed  from  the 
participle  of  the  verb  ‘to  graff, ’  as  hoist  from  hoise. 

137.  shouldred  in  the  swallowing  Gulfe]  Johnson:  What  it  is  to  be  ‘  shoul¬ 
der'd  in  a  gulf,  ’  Hanmer  is  the  only  editor  who  seems  not  to  have  known;  for  the 
rest,  let  it  pass  without  observation.  He  reads:  ‘into  th’.’  I  believe  we  should 
read:  ‘ smouldered  in  the  swallowing  gulf.’  That  is,  almost  smother'd,  covered 
and  lost. — Steevens:  I  suppose  the  old  reading  to  be  the  true  one.  ‘In’  is  used 
for  into.  ‘Shoulder’d’  has  the  same  meaning  as  rudely  thrust  into.  So,  in  a 
curious  ancient  paper  quoted  by  Lysons,  Environs  of  London:  ‘ — lyke  tyraunts  and 
lyke  madde  men  helpynge  to  shulderynge  other  of  the  sayd  banner-men  ynto  the 
dyche, ’  iii,  80,  note  1. — Malone:  ‘Shoulder’d’  is,  I  believe,  the  true  reading: 
not,  thrust  in  by  the  shoulders,  but  immersed  up  to  the  shoulders.  So,  in  Othello: 
‘Steep’d  me  in  poverty  to  the  very  lips.’  .  .  .  This  is  quoted  not  to  support  the 
word  ‘shoulder’d,’  but  to  show  that  the  same  idea  had  been  elsewhere  introduced 
by  Shakespeare;  that,  as  in  Othello,  he  had  spoken  of  being  plunged  in  poverty  to 
the  lips,  so  here  he  might  have  intended  to  describe  the  royal  stock  as  immerged  up 
to  the  shoulders  in  oblivion.  Compare:  ‘Like  as  ye  see  the  wrathful  sea  from 
farre,  .  .  .  Eftsoones  of  thousand  billows  shoulder’d  narre,  Against  a  rock  to 
break  with  dreadful  poyse.’ — Spenser,  Ruins  0}  Rome,  st.  xvi.  However  the  word 
may  have  been  employed  in  the  foregoing  passage,  its  existence  in  our  author’s 
time  is  ascertained  by  it. — Dyce  (ed.  ii):  Johnson’s  conjecture  smoulder'd,  i.  e., 
smothered,  is  a  word  which  nowhere  occurs  in  Shakespeare. — Walker  ( Crit .,  ii, 
243)  and  Wordsworth  (Hist.  Plays,  iii,  332)  both  approve  of  Johnson’s  con¬ 
jecture,  smouldered.  Wordsworth,  in  answer  to  Dyce’s  objection,  that  this  word  is 
not  used  by  Shakespeare,  says:  ‘But  it  is  used,  and  in  the  sense  of  smothered,  by 
Holinshed.  On  the  other  hand,  “shoulder”  as  a  verb  has  also  no  genuine  authority 
in  Shakespeare,  besides  this  doubtful  place,  being  found  only  in  [“This  shouldering 
of  each  other  in  the  court”]  /  Hen.  VI:  IV,  i,  189,  and  there  not  in  a  figurative 


268 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iii,  sc.  vii. 


Of  darke  Forgetfulneffe,  and  deepe  Obliuion.  138 

Which  to  recure,  we  heartily  folicite 

Your  gracious  felfe  to  take  on  you  the  charge  140 

And  Kingly  Gouernment  of  this  your  Land : 

Not  as  Protestor,  Steward,  Subftitute, 

Or  lowly  Factor,  for  anothers  gaine  ; 

But  as  fuccefliuely,  from  Blood  to  Blood, 

Your  Right  of  Birth,  your  Empyrie,  your  owne.  145 

For  this,  comforted  with  the  Citizens, 

Your  very  Worfhipfull  and  louing  friends, 

And  by  their  vehement  inftigation, 

In  this  iuft  Caufe  come  I  to  moue  your  Grace. 

Rich.  I  cannot  tell,  if  to  depart  in  filence,  150 


138.  darke... deepe]  blind. ..darke  Qq, 
Cam.  +  . 

139.  recure]  recouer  Q^8- 

140.  you ]  yon  Qa. 

charge]  foueraigntie  thereof  Qq. 

141.  And. ..Land]  Om.  Qq. 

142.  Steward ]  Stweward  Q3Q4QS. 

143.  Or]  Nor  Q3-g. 
gaine  ,•]  gaine  ?  Q3_g. 


145.  Empyrie]  Empyry  F2.  Emperie 
Qj-j.  Empiry  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope.  Em- 
pery  Qg  et  cet. 

147.  very  Worfhipfull. ..louing]  wor¬ 
fhipfull... very  louing  Q3-g. 

149.  Caufe]  fute  Qq.  suit  Pope,+  , 
Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Dyce,  Sta. 
Cam. +  ,  Coll.  iii. 

150.  I... if]  I  know  not  whether  Q,_4, 
Cam.  4- .  I  know  not  whither  Q?g. 


signification.’  [A  satisfactory  example  wherein  smoulder  is  used  in  the  sense  of 
smother  I  have  found  in  Rastell’s  Pastime  of  People,  1529,  as  follows:  ‘Of  the 
maner  of  the  dethe  of  this  yonge  kynge  [Edward  V.],  and  of  his  brother,  there  were 
dyuers  opinyons;  but  the  most  comyn  opinyon  was,  that  they  were  smolderyd 
betwene  two  fetherbeddes,  and  that,  in  the  doynge,  the  yonger  brother  escaped  from 
vnder  the  fetherbeddes,  and  crept  vnder  the  bedstede,  and  there  lay  naked  awhyle, 
tyll  that  they  had  smolderyd  the  yonge  kyng.  ’ — ed.  181 1,  pp.  292-293  (see  Churchill, 
p.  161).  Johnson  says  {Diet.,  ed.  ii,  s.  v.  Smouldering ):  ‘This  word  seems  a 
participle;  but  I  know  not  whether  the  verb  smoulder  be  in  use:  Saxon,  to  smother.’ 
This  doubt  was  apparently  dispelled  when,  ten  years  later,  Johnson  published 
his  Shakespeare. — Ed.] 

138.  darke  Forgetfulnesse,  and  deepe  Obliuion]  Wright:  If  Shakespeare 
authorised  this  alteration  from  the  Quarto  line  [blind  forgetfulness  and  dark  oblivion] 
it  can  hardly  be  said  that  his  second  thoughts  were  best.  [‘Deep’  as  an  adjective 
is,  however,  used  by  Shakespeare  with  many  varieties  of  shades  of  meaning;  it  is 
a  thoroughly  characteristic  word.  Bartlett  ( Concordance )  gives  over  eighty 
examples  of  its  use. — Ed.] 

139.  recure]  Craigie  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  v.):  b.  To  bring  back  to  a  normal  state 
or  condition;  to  restore  after  loss,  damage,  exhaustion. 

150.  I  cannot  tell,  if  to  depart]  Wright:  This  alteration  [from  the  Quarto 
reading]  fits  more  closely  with  ‘If  not  to  answer,’  in  1.  153.  When  these  lines 
were  struck  out  for  the  purpose  of  shortening  the  play,  the  present  line  was  perhaps 
altered  as  we  find  it  in  the  Quartos. 


ACT  III,  sc.  vii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


269 


Or  bitterly  to  fpeake  in  your  reproofe,  1 5 1 

Belt  fitteth  my  Degree,  or  your  Condition. 

If  not  to  anfwer,  you  might  haply  thinke, 

Tongue-ty’d  Ambition,  not  replying,  yeelded 

To  beare  the  Golden  Yoake  of  Soueraigntie,  155 

Which  fondly  you  would  here  impofe  on  me. 

If  to  reproue  you  for  this  fuit  of  yours, 

So  feafon’d  with  your  faithfull  loue  to  me, 

Then  on  the  other  fide  I  check’d  my  friends. 

Therefore  to  fpeake,  and  to  auoid  the  firft,  160 

And  then  in  fpeaking,  not  to  incurre  the  laft, 

Definitiuely  thus  I  anfwer  you. 

Your  loue  deferues  my  thankes,  but  my  defert 
Vnmeritable,  fhunnes  your  high  requeft. 

Firft,  if  all  Obftacles  were  cut  away,  165 

And  that  my  Path  were  euen  to  the  Crowne, 

As  the  ripe  Reuenue,  and  due  of  Birth  :  167 


152.  fitteth ]  fittefi  Q?.  fits  Qg. 
153-162.  If  not. ..anfwer  you]  Om. 

Qq. 

153.  If]  For  Ff, +,  Cap.  Varr.  Ran. 
If 1  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce 
i,  Hal.  Sta. 


1 61.  not  to]  not  Pope,  + ,  Cap. 

164.  fhunnes]  shames  Walker  ( Crit . 
iii,  174). 

167.  the  ripe]  my  ripe  Q,,  Cam. +. 
my  right  Q2_g,  Ran. 

of]  by  Qq,  Ran.  Cam.  + . 


153-162.  If  not  to  answer  .  .  .  thus  I  answer  you]  See  Appendix — Pickers- 
gill  on  the  Text. — Marshall:  These  lines,  omitted  in  the  Quartos,  are  certainly 
necessary.  They  explain  the  opening  sentences  of  the  speech,  and  give  a  finish 
to  Gloucester’s  hypocrisy.  They  are  lines  which  scarcely  any  actor  would  wish  to 
omit.  [Nevertheless,  Irving  not  only  wished  to  omit,  but  actually  did  omit,  these 
lines,  on  the  showing  of  Marshall  himself — he  marks  them  as  omitted  by  Irving 
in  his  edition  from  which  the  foregoing  note  is  quoted. — Ed.] 

158.  season’d  with  your  faithfull  loue]  That  is,  rendered  suitable  or  palatable 
by  your  love. 

164.  Vnmeritable]  That  is,  undeserving,  void  of  merit.  (See  Walker,  Crit., 
i,  183.) 

167.  ripe  Reuenue]  The  Cowden-Clarkes:  Shakespeare  uses  ‘ripe’  with 
various  shades  of  meaning.  Here  we  take  the  ‘  ripe  revenue  ’  to  be  used  to  express 
that  which  comes  to  me  in  right  of  greater  maturity  in  age  and  judgement;  Gloucester 
thus  comparing  his  own  claims  to  the  crown  with  those  of  the  young  prince,  his 
nephew,  to  whom  he  afterwards  alludes  in  the  words  ‘royal  fruit,’  and  so  con¬ 
tinuing  the  same  figure  of  speech. — Wright:  That  is,  the  possession  ready  for 
me  to  inherit. — Tawney:  Perhaps  Richard  means  dexterously  to  insinuate  an 
argument  in  favour  of  his  own  succession,  and,  if  so,  Cowden-Clarke’s  interpreta¬ 
tion  is  to  be  preferred. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  ill,  sc.  vii. 


270 

Yet  To  much  is  my  pouertie  of  fpirit,  168 

So  mightie,  and  fo  manie  my  defefts, 

That  I  would  rather  hide  me  from  my  Greatneffe,  170 

Being  a  Barke  to  brooke  no  mightie  Sea ; 

Then  in  my  Greatneffe  couet  to  be  hid, 

And  in  the  vapour  of  my  Glory  fmother’d. 

But  God  be  thank’d,  there  is  no  need  of  me, 

And  much  I  need  to  helpe  you,  were  there  need  :  1 75 

The  Royall  Tree  hath  left  vs  Royall  Fruit, 

Which  mellow’d  by  the  ftealing  howres  of  time, 

Will  well  become  the  Seat  of  Maieftie, 

And  make  (no  doubt)  vs  happy  by  his  Reigne. 

On  him  I  lay  that,  you  would  lay  on  me,  1 80 

The  Right  and  Fortune  of  his  happie  Starres, 

Which  God  defend  that  I  fhould  wring  from  him. 

Buck.  My  Lord,  this  argues  Confcience  in  your  Grace, 

But  the  refpe6ts  thereof  are  nice,  and  triuiall, 

All  circumftances  well  confidered.  185 

You  fay,  that  Edward  is  your  Brothers  Sonne, 

So  fay  we  too,  but  not  by  Edwards  Wife  : 

For  firft  was  he  contract  to  Lady  Lucie ,  188 


170.  That  I  would]  As  I  had  Qq, 
Cam.  + . 

1 73.  /mother'd]  /mothered  Q^g. 

174.  thank' d,  there  is]  thanked  theres 
Qq.  thanked,  there' s  Q. am.  +  . 

°Z]  for  Q3-8. 

175-  were. ..need]  i/  need  were  Qq, 
Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Cam. 
+  ,  Ktly. 

177.  mellow'd]  mellowed  Qq. 


179.  {no  doubt )  vs]  no  doubt  vs  Qq. 
vs  {no  doubt )  Ff.  us,  no  doubt ,  Rowe. 
us,  doubtless.  Pope,  +  (—  Var.  ’73). 

180.  that]  what  Qq,  Pope, +  ,  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Cam.  +,  Dyce  ii, 
iii,  Ktly,  Huds. 

lay]  Om.  Q7Qg. 

188.  was  he]  he  was  Qq,  Cap.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Cam. +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Ktly,  Huds. 

contract]  contracted  Q^. 


175.  much  I  need  to  helpe  you]  Johnson:  That  is,  I  want  much  of  the  ability 
requisite  to  give  you  help,  if  help  were  needed. — The  Cowden-Clarkes:  We 
think  it  also  includes  the  meaning,  craftily  implied,  And  much  I  ought  to  help  you 
if  you  need  help. 

184.  the  respecfts  thereof]  Wright:  That  is,  the  consideration  by  which  you 
support  your  argument.  Compare:  ‘There’s  the  respect  That  makes  calamity 
of  so  long  life.’ — Hamlet,  III,  i,  68. — Tawney:  I  suppose  that  ‘thereof’  refers  to 
‘this,’  in  1.  183,  but  should  ‘thereof’  be  held  to  refer  to  ‘conscience,’  ‘the  respects 
thereof’  may  be  taken  to  mean  your  conscientious  scruples. 

188.  contract]  Wright:  This  form  of  the  participle  does  not  occur  again  in 
Shakespeare. 


ACT  III,  sc.  vii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


271 


Your  Mother  Hues  a  Witneffe  to  his  Vow; 
And  afterward  by  fubftitute  betroth’d 
To  Bona ,  Sifter  to  the  King  of  France. 

Thefe  both  put  off,  a  poore  Petitioner, 

A  Care-cras’d  Mother  to  a  many  Sonnes, 

A  Beautie-waining,  and  diftreffed  Widow, 
Euen  in  the  after-noone  of  her  beft  dayes, 
Made  prize  and  purchafe  of  his  wanton  Eye, 
Seduc’d  the  pitch,  and  height  of  his  degree, 


190 


195 

197 


189.  his]  that  Qq,  Pope,  +  ,  Cam. +  . 

190.  afterward  ]  afterwards  Q^8. 
betroth'd ]  betrothed  Qq. 

192.  off,  a ]  by  a  Qq,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Cam. +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

193.  to. ..Sonnes]  of  a  many  children 
Q,,  Pope,+  (  — Var. ’73),  Cam. +,  Dyce 
ii,  iii.  of  many  children  Q^. 


194.  Beautie-waining ]  beauty -wan¬ 
ing  Var.  ’78  et  seq. 

195.  dayes]  day  F4,  Rowe. 

196.  prize]  frife  QI.3QsQ6./riV<r  Q?Qg. 
wanton]  luflfull  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

197.  Seduc'd]  Seduce  QM. 

his  degree]  all  his  thoughts  Qq, 
Pope,  + ,  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Cam.  +. 


189.  Your  Mother  liues  a  WItnesse]  Barnard:  It  was  to  the  marriage-vow 
between  Edward  IV.  and  the  Lady  Eleanor  Butler  that  Gloucester’s  mother  was 
a  witness.  It  is,  of  course,  the  historians  whom  Shakespeare  took  as  authorities 
that  are  responsible  for  the  misstatement. 

190,  191.  betroth’d  To  Bona]  See  1.  7  above. 

192.  a  poore  Petitioner]  For  this  episode,  see  3  Hen.  VI:  III,  ii. 

193.  a  many]  Bradley  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  B.  1):  On  the  analogy  of  a  few,  a 
has  been,  from  the  sixteenth  century,  prefixed  to  many  when  followed  by  a  plural 
substantive  or  used  absolutely  in  plural  sense.  In  such  collocations  many  formally 
admits  of  being  interpreted  as  a  substantive,  meaning  ‘a  great  number.’  This 
interpretation  is  somewhat  strained  when  ‘a  many’  is  immediately  followed  by 
a  plural  substantive,  because  the  ellipsis  of  of,  which  must  be  assumed,  is  abnormal; 
but  in  the  other  cases  it  presents  no  difficulty,  and  it  would  often  be  impossible 
to  determine  whether  in  the  consciousness  of  the  speaker  the  word  is  an  adjective 
used  absolutely  in  the  plural,  or  a  genuine  substantive.  Confusion  with  Meinie, 
of  which  there  are  many  traces  in  the  sixteenth  century,  seems  to  have  contributed 
to  cause  the  word  in  this  use  to  be  apprehended  as  a  substantive. 

193.  Sonnes]  Wright:  Lady  Grey  had  three  children  only,  by  her  first  hus¬ 
band,  a  daughter  and  two  sons.  The  sons  appear  in  the  present  play  as  the  Mar¬ 
quis  of  Dorset  and  Lord  Grey;  the  daughter  probably  died  young. 

194.  A  Beautie-waining,  and  distressed  Widow]  Marshall:  This  per¬ 
sonal  abuse  of  Elizabeth,  on  the  part  of  Buckingham,  is  essentially  mean.  She 
could  not  be  said  to  be  ‘  in  the  afternoon  of  her  best  days,  ’  considering  that  she  was 
only  twenty-seven  when  she  married  Edward,  and  bore  him  no  less  than  seven 
children. 

197.  the  pitch,  and  height]  Wright:  ‘Pitch’  was  a  technical  word  denoting 
the  highest  point  in  the  flight  of  a  hawk,  or  falcon.  Compare  ‘Between  two 
hawks,  which  flies  the  higher  pitch.’ — /  Hen.  VI:  II,  iv,  11. 


272 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  vii. 


To  bafe  declenfion,  and  loath’d  Bigamie.  198 

By  her,  in  his  vnlawfull  Bed,  he  got 

This  Edward ,  whom  our  Manners  call  the  Prince.  200 

More  bitterly  could  I  expoftulate, 

Saue  that  for  reuerence  to  fome  aliue, 

I  giue  a  fparing  limit  to  my  Tongue. 

Then  good,  my  Lord,  take  to  your  Royall  felfe 

This  proffer’d  benefit  of  Dignitie  :  205 

If  not  to  bleffe  vs  and  the  Land  withall, 

Yet  to  draw  forth  your  Noble  Anceftrie 
From  the  corruption  of  abufing  times, 

Vnto  a  Lineali  true  deriued  courfe. 

Maior.  Do  good  my  Lord,  your  Citizens  entreat  you.  210 
Buck .  Refufe  not,  mightie  Lord,  this  proffer’d  loue. 

Catcsb.  O  make  them  ioyfull,  grant  their  lawfull  fuit. 

Rich.  Alas,  why  would  you  heape  this  Care  on  me  ? 

I  am  vnfit  for  State,  and  Maieftie  :  214 


198.  and  loath'd ]  and  loathed 
Cam.  +  .  loathed  Q7Q8. 

199.  his~\  this  Q^-g. 

200.  call  ]  terme  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

201.  I]  Om.  Q6Q7. 

202.  to  fome~\  of  fome  F3F4,  Rowe. 

204.  your~\  you  F  . 

205.  Dignitie  .•]  dignitie  ?  Q5. 

207.  forth  ...A  ncefirie]  out  your  royall 
Jlocke  Qq. 

208.  abufing  times ]  abufing  time  Qq, 
Pope,  +  ,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 
Knt,  Dyce,  Huds.  Coll.  iii.  (a  bufie 


time  Q^,  subs.) 

209.  true  deriued  ]  true,  derived  Pope. 
true-derived  Theob.  et  seq. 

210.  Do  good ]  Qq,F2F3.  Do,  good 
F4  et  seq. 

21 1.  Buck.  Refufe... loue~\  Om.  Qq. 

213.  would ]  fhould  Q7Q8. 

this  Care~\  thefe  cares  Q,Qa,  Pope, 
Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Ran.  Cam. +  .  thofe  cares 
Q3_g,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Dyce, 
Sta.  Ktly,  Huds. 

214.  Maiefiie\  dignitie  Qq. 


198.  loath’d  Bigamie]  Blackstone:  ‘Bigamy,’  by  a  canon  of  the  council  of 
Lyons,  1274  (adopted  in  England  by  a  statute  in  4  Edw.  I.),  was  made  unlawful 
and  infamous.  It  differed  from  polygamy,  or  having  two  wives  at  once;  as  it  con¬ 
sisted  in  either  marrying  two  virgins  successively,  or  once  marrying  a  widow. 
[I  do  not  find  it  anywhere  noticed  that  either  Buckingham  or  the  Mayor  appear 
to  have  remembered  that  the  same  stigma  of  bigamy  attached  to  Gloucester,  who 
had  married  Anne,  the  widow  (in  the  present  play,  at  least)  of  Prince  Edward,  son 
of  Henry  VI. — Ed.] 

201.  expostulate]  Bradley  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.):  2  b.  To  argue  or  debate  (a 
matter)  as  an  aggrieved  person.  Also,  in  wider  sense,  to  debate,  argue  out,  dis¬ 
course  upon. 

202.  reuerence  to  some  aliue]  Malone:  The  Duke  here  hints  at  a  topic 
which  he  had  touched  upon  in  his  address  to  the  citizens,  the  pretended  bastardy 
of  Edward  and  Clarence.  By  ‘some  alive’  is  meant  the  Duchess  of  York. — 
Wright:  Buckingham  remembers  Richard’s  caution,  III,  v,  99,  100. 


ACT  III,  sc.  vii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


273 


I  doe  befeech  you  take  it  not  amiffe,  215 

I  cannot,  nor  I  will  not  yeeld  to  you. 

Buck.  If  you  refute  it,  as  in  loue  and  zeale, 

Loth  to  depofe  the  Child,  your  Brothers  Sonne, 

As  well  we  know  your  tenderneffe  of  heart, 

And  gentle,  kinde,  effeminate  remorfe,  220 

Which  we  haue  noted  in  you  to  your  Kindred, 

And  egally  indeede  to  all  Eftates  : 

Yet  know,  where  you  accept  our  fuit,  or  no, 

Your  Brothers  Sonne  fhall  neuer  reigne  our  King, 

But  we  will  plant  fome  other  in  the  Throne,  225 

To  the  difgrace  and  downe-fall  of  your  Houfe : 

And  in  this  refolution  here  we  leaue  you. 

Come  Citizens,  we  will  entreat  no  more.  Exeunt.  228 


221.  Kindred  ]  kin  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

222.  egally]  egallie  QIQ2Q3-6,  Dyce, 
Cam. +.  equally  Ff  et  cet. 

223.  know ,  where ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope. 
whether  Qq,  Var.  ’73,  Cam. +  ,  Dyce  ii, 
iii,  Huds.  know  whe'r  Theob.  et  cet. 

accept  ]  except  Q6Q7Q8. 

225.  the]  your  Var.  ’21,  Coll,  i,  ii, 
Wh.  i,  Hal. 


226.  downe-fall]  downfall  Qq.  (down¬ 
fall  qj. 

227.  we]  I Q7Q8. 

228.  we  will  ]  zounds  ile  Qq.  'zounds  ! 
1' ll  Cam.  +,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  Coll.  iii. 

more.]  more.  Glo.  O  do  not 
fweare  my  Lord  of  Buckingham.  Qq, 
Cam. +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  Coll.  iii. 

Exeunt]  Om.  Qq.  Exit,  with 
Citizens.  Cap.  et  seq.  (subs.) 


220.  effeminate]  Tawney:  This  seems  to  be  the  only  passage  in  Shakespeare 
in  which  ‘effeminate’  is  used  in  a  good  sense. 

220.  remorse]  That  is,  pity,  compassion. 

222.  egally]  Bradley  ( N .  E.  D.) :  Equally,  evenly;  with  even  judgement 
or  temper.  [The  present  line  quoted.] 

223.  where]  Walker  (Vers.,  104)  gives  several  other  examples  of  this  contracted 
form  of  whether;  see  also  1.  238,  below,  and  Text.  Notes. 

228.  we  will  entreat  no  more]  Collier:  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the 
Quarto  reading  [Zounds,  lie  entreat]  proceeded  from  Shakespeare’s  pen,  on  whatever 
account  the  text  might  be  afterwards  altered.  [Ibid.,  Notes,  etc.,  p.  332.]  It 
was  probably  expunged  by  the  Master  of  the  Revels  before  the  Folio  of  1623  was 
printed  .  .  .  The  MS  corrector  seems  to  have  thought  it  too  striking  and  characteristic 
to  be  omitted;  but  he  most  likely  resorted  to  some  other  authority  than  the  Quartos 
to  supply  the  deficiency,  as  the  words  he  inserts  in  a  vacant  space  are  not  precisely 
the  same  as  are  there  found:  possibly,  he  had  the  addition  from  recitation  on  the 
stage,  at  some  date  when  the  injunction  of  the  Master  of  the  Revels  was  not  attended 
to.  He  gives  Buckingham’s  line  thus:  ‘Zounds!  citizens  we  will  entreat  no 
more’;  and  Richard’s  rebuke  in  these  words:  ‘O!  do  not  swear,  my  cousin  Buck¬ 
ingham.’  Instead  of  making  the  Citizens  retire  with  Buckingham,  Buckingham 
alone  goes  out,  an  arrangement  of  apparent  propriety,  because  it  is  quite  clear  that 
the  four  lines  put  into  the  mouth  of  Richard,  while  Buckingham  was  out  of  the 
18 


274 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  hi,  sc.  vii. 


Catesb. Call  him  againe,  fweet  Prince,  accept  their  fuit : 

If  you  denie  them,  all  the  Land  will  rue  it.  230 

Rich.  Will  you  enforce  me  to  a  world  of  Cares. 

Call  them  againe,  I  am  not  made  of  Stones, 

But  penetrable  to  your  kinde  entreaties,  233 


229.  him]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll,  i,  ii,  Wh.  i. 
them  Qq  et  cet. 

fweet  Prince ,]  my  Lord ,  and  Qq, 
Cam.  + . 

230.  If... will]  Ano.  Do  good  my  Lord, 
leaf  all  the  land  do  Qq,  Cam.  +  .  (An¬ 
other.  Cam.  + . ) 

rue  it]  rue't  Walker  (  Vers.  78), 

Sing. 

231.  Will... Cares.]  Would. .. care :  Q, 
Q3.  Would. ..care  ?  Q3-s,  Cam.  + .  Will 
...Cares?  Ff  et  cet. 


232.  Call]  Well,  call  Qq,  Cap.  Var. 
’78,  ’85,  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Cam. +  ,  Ktly. 

them]  him  Coll,  ii  (MS). 
againe,]  again;  [exit  Catesby. 
Theob.  -(- ,  Cap.  (after  1.  233),  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr. 

Stones]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Cam.  ii. 
stone  Pope  et  cet. 

233.  entreaties]  intreates  Q,Q2.  in¬ 
treats  Q3_,.  interats  Q4.  intents  Qg. 
entreats  Cam.  + ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 


apartment,  were  intended  to  be  heard  by  the  Lord  Mayor,  &c.  In  accordance 
with  this  view  ‘them,’  in  1.  232,  is  changed  to  him  by  the  MS  Corrector.  To 
whose  ‘kind  entreaties'  could  Richard  refer,  if  not  to  those  of  the  Citizens,  who 
had  remained  behind  after  Buckingham  had  flung  away  in  a  pretended  passion 
at  Richard’s  refusal? — R.  G.  White:  It  is  quite  probable  that  the  passage  was 
originally  written  [as  in  the  Quarto],  and  that  the  change  was  made  by  Shakespeare, 
because  it  made  Gloucester  overdo  his  hypocrisy;  for  ‘zounds’  was  a  common 
and  venial  expletive  in  Shakespeare’s  time.  [Without  breaking  1.  228,  and 
thereby  making  the  sense  unintelligible,  it  was  found  impossible  to  incorporate, 
in  the  Folio  text,  this  line:  ‘O  do  not  sweare,’  etc. — Ed.] 

228.  Exeunt]  Marshall  has  the  following  arrangement  of  stage-directions, 
here  and  at  1.  235:  ‘  Exit  Buckingham;  the  Mayor,  Alderman  and  Citizens  are 
following  him.'’  After  ‘Call  them  againe,'  1.  232,  the  following  occurs:  ‘Catesby 
stops  the  Citizens  before  they  have  gone  off;  then  exit  in  search  of  Buckingham  and 
the  others.  Gloucester  ( to  those  of  the  citizens  who  have  not  gone  off),  I  am  not  made 
of  stone.’  In  defence  of  this,  Marshall  has  the  following  note:  1  Were  all  the  citizens 
to  go  off,  and  then  to  return  with  Buckingham  and  Catesby  after  1.  234,  Gloucester 
would  have  no  one  to  speak  to  after  Catesby’s  exit.’ 

232.  Stones]  Walker  ( Crit .,  i,  234):  The  interpolation  of  an  s  at  the  end  of  a 
word — generally,  but  not  always,  a  noun  substantive — is  remarkably  frequent 
in  the  Folio.  Those  who  are  conversant  with  the  MSS  of  the  Elizabethan  Age 
may  perhaps  be  able  to  explain  its  origin.  Were  it  not  for  the  different  degree  of 
frequency  with  which  it  appears  in  different  parts  of  the  Folio,  ...  I  should  be 
inclined  to  think  it  originated  in  some  peculiarity  in  Shakespeare’s  handwriting 
[see  IV,  i,  116]. 

233.  entreaties]  R.  G.  White,  in  his  second  edition,  follows  the  Quarto  reading 
entreats  and  thus  remarks:  ‘As  bad  English  as  your  kind  invite  for  invitation, 
which  it  resembles:  mere  recklessness.’  Was  this  note  inspired  by  White’s  Egeria, 
the  Washer-woman?  (See  White’s  Preface,  vol.  i,  p.  xii,  ed.  ii.) — Bradley 
(TV.  E.  D.  s.  v.  entreat)  quotes  the  following  authorities  for  the  use  of  the  word: 


ACT  III,  sc.  vii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

Albeit  again  ft  my  Confcience  and  my  Soule. 

Enter  Buckingham ,  and  the  rejl. 

Coufin  of  Buckingham,  and  fage  graue  men, 

Since  you  will  buckle  fortune  on  my  back, 

To  beare  her  burthen,  where  I  will  or  no. 

I  muft  haue  patience  to  endure  the  Load : 

But  if  black  Scandall,  or  foule-fac’d  Reproach, 

Attend  the  fequell  of  your  Impofition, 

Your  meere  enforcement  fhall  acquittance  me 
From  all  the  impure  blots  and  ftaynes  thereof ; 

For  God  doth  know,  and  you  may  partly  fee, 

How  farre  I  am  from  the  defire  of  this. 

Maior .  God  bleffe  your  Grace,  wee  fee  it,  and  will 
fay  it. 

Rich.  In  faying  fo,  you  fhall  but  fay  the  truth. 

Buck.  Then  I  falute  you  with  this  Royall  Title, 
Long  Hue  King  Richard ,  Englands  worthie  King. 


275 

235 


240 


245 


250 


235.  Enter... reft.]  Om.  Qq.  Re-enter 
...  Pope  et  seq. 

236.  fage]  you  fage  Qq,  Cam.  + . 
graue]  Om.  F3F+. 

237.  you]  your  Q3. 

238.  her]  the  Q3-8. 

where]  whether  QqFf,  +  ,  Cap. 
Var.  ’21,  Cam.  + .  whe' r  Var.  ’78  et  cet. 

240.  foulefac'd]  foule-fac't  Q,Q2. 
fo  foule-fac't  Q^g.  four-fac' d  F3. 

243.  blots]  plots  Qg. 


244.  doth  know]  he  knows  Qq,  Cap. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam. +  , 
Huds. 

245.  of  this]  thereof  Qq,  Cam.-f. 

249.  this]  the  Q  . 

Royall]  kingly  Qq,  Cam.  +. 

250,  251.  Long  Hue. ..Amen]  As  one 
line,  Vaughan  (iii,  94). 

250.  King  Richard]  Richard  Q,Q3, 
Cam.  + .  great  Richard  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 
worthie]  royall  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 


1568,  T.  Howell,  Arb.  Amitie  (1879),  68:  ‘By  great  entreate  and  humble  sute.’ 
1592  Greene,  Poems  99:  ‘Use  no  entreats,  I  will  relentless  rest.’  1639  G.  Daniel 
Ecclus.  xlv,  4:  ‘At  his  entreat  The  wonders  ceas’d.’  Examples  of  invite  for 
invitation,  bad  as  it  is,  are  also  to  be  found  in  the  N.  E.  D. — Ed. 

236.  Buckingham]  For  this  name  thus  accented  compare  III,  i,  49. 

238.  where]  See  1.  223,  above. 

241.  Imposition]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.):  4.  The  action  of  imposing  or 
laying  as  a  burden,  duty,  charge,  or  task;  the  action  of  inflicting,  levying,  enjoining, 
or  enforcing. 

250.  Englands  worthie  King]  Vaughan  (iii,  94):  The  Folio  editors  I  believe 
to  have  changed  kingly  [1.  249]  to  ‘royal,’  and  royal  to  ‘worthie,’  in  order  to  escape 
from  an  apparent  tautology  involved  in  the  words  royal  king.  But  royal  has  a 
peculiar  meaning  in  Shakespeare  which  excludes  tautology  from  its  combination 
with  king.  It  signifies  not  of  royal  rank,  but  of  royal  descent.  It  is  forcible  and 
necessary  here  in  declaring  that  Richard  was  not  merely  a  de  facto  king,  but  a 
king  royally  descended,  and  owing  his  occupation  of  it  to  title  and  descent.  [Those 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 


276 

All.  Amen.  251 

Buck. To  morrow  may  it  pleafe  you  to  be  Crown’d. 

Rich.  Euen  when  you  pleafe,  for  you  will  haue  it  fo. 

Buck.  To  morrow  then  we  will  attend  your  Grace, 

And  fo  moft  ioyfully  we  take  our  leaue.  255 

Rich.  Come,  let  vs  to  our  holy  Worke  againe. 

Farewell  my  Coufins,  farewell  gentle  friends.  Exeunt.  257 


A 61ms  Quartus.  Scena  Prima. 


Enter  the  Queene,  Anne  DucheJJe  of  Gloucefler ,  the 
Ducheffe  of  Yorke ,  and  Marqueffe  Dorfet. 

Duch.  Yorke.  Who  meetes  vs  heere  ? 

My  Neece  Plantagenet , 


251.  All.]  Mayor  Qq  (subs.).  May. 
and  Cit.  Cam. +. 

252.  may]  will  Qq,  Cam. +. 

253.  pleafe,  for]  will,  fence  Qq.  please , 
since  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Sta.  Cam. 
+  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Ktly,  Huds.  Coll.  iii. 

255.  And. ..leaue]  Om.  Qq. 

[To  the  Clergymen.  Johns. 

256.  Worke]  tafke  Qq,  Cam. +. 

257.  my  Coufins]  good  coofene  Qx. 
good  coufen  Qz-a,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev. 
Varr.  Sing.  Cam. +,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Ktly, 
Huds.  my  cousin  Pope,  + ,  Knt,  Coll. 
Dyce  i,  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Sta. 

Exeunt.]  Om.  Q2. 

I.  A6tus  Quartus.  Scena  Prima.]  Om. 
Qq.  Ill,  viii,  Johns,  conj.  Ran. 


5 

The  Tower.  Pope. 

2,  3.  the  Queene,  ...Dorfet.]  Queene- 
-mother,  Ducheffe  of  Yorke,  Marques 
Dorfet,  at  one  doore,  Ducheffe  of  Glofter 
at  another  doore.  Qq.  (Quee. ...  Qx.) 

2.  Gloucefler]  Gloucester,  leading 
Clarence’s  young  daughter,  Theob.  Han. 
Warb.  Cap.  Gloucester,  leading  Lady 
Margaret  Plantagenet  Clarence’s  young 
daughter,  Johns.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 
Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Sta. 
Cam.  +  ,  Ktly. 

3.  Marqueffe  Dorfet]  Marqueff  of 
Dorfet  F3F4. 

4.  5.  Who. . . Plantagenet]  Ff,  Rowe. 
One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 


who  wish  may  count,  in  Bartlett’s  Concordance,  the  number  of  times  the  word 
‘royal’  occurs, — it  is  well  up  in  the  hundreds, — noting  at  the  same  time  the  manifold 
variety  of  nouns,  which,  as  an  adjective,  it  qualifies.  Schmidt  {Lex.)  gives 
examples  under  four  separate  heads  of  interpretation,  but  does  not  suggest 
Vaughan’s  peculiar  signification  of  royal  descent. — Ed.] 

257.  Exeunt]  Johnson:  To  this  Act  should,  perhaps,  be  added  the  next  scene, 
so  will  the  coronation  pass  between  the  Acts ;  and  there  will  not  only  be  a  proper 
interval  of  action,  but  the  conclusion  will  be  more  forcible. 

2.  Anne  Duchesse  of  Gloucester]  Malone:  We  have  not  seen  this  lady 
since  the  second  scene  of  the  First  Act,  in  which  she  promised  to  meet  Richard  at 
Crosby-Place.  She  was  married  about  the  year  1472.  [This  last  fact  is  per¬ 
haps  a  sufficient  excuse  for  the  lady’s  absence. — Ed.] 

5.  My  Neece  Plantagenet]  Theobald:  Here  is  a  manifest  intimation  that 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


277 

Led  in  the  hand  of  her  kind  Aunt  of  Glofter  ?  6 

Now,  for  my  Life,  fhee’s  wandring  to  the  Tower, 

On  pure  hearts  loue,  to  greet  the  tender  Prince. 

Daughter,  well  met. 

Anne.  God  giue  your  Graces  both,  a  happie  10 

And  a  ioyfull  time  of  day. 

Qu.  As  much  to  you,  good  Sifter:  whither  away  ? 

Anne.  No  farther  then  the  Tower,  and  as  I  gueffe, 

Vpon  the  like  deuotion  as  your  felues,  14 


6-1 1.  Led... day. ]  Om.  Qq,  Sta. 

8.  Prince] princes  Theob.  Han.Warb. 
Johns.  Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Cam.  + ,  Ktly, 
Coll.  iii. 

9-1 1.  Daughter... day]  As  two  lines, 
ending,  both... day.  Pope  et  seq. 


12.  As  ...  away  ?]  Sijler  well  met , 
whether  away  fo  fajl  Qq,  Pope,  + ,  Sta. 
( whither  Q^.) 

13.  Anne]  Duch.  Q,Q2  (subs.).  Dut. 
Glo.  Q3-g. 

farther]  further  Johns. 


the  Duchess  of  Gloster  leads  in  somebody  in  her  hand;  but  there  is  no  direction 
marked  in  any  of  the  copies,  from  which  we  can  learn  who  it  is.  I  have  ventured 
to  guess  it  must  be  Clarence’s  young  daughter.  The  old  Duchess  of  York  calls 
her  ‘niece,’  i.  e.,  grand-daughter;  as  grand-children  are  frequently  called  nephews. 

5.  Neece]  Wright:  Compare  ‘C.  Crispinus  Helarus,  a  gentleman  of  Fesulae, 
came  with  a  solemne  pompe  caried  before  him  into  the  Capitoll,  attended  upon 
with  his  nine  children,  seuen  sonnes  and  two  daughters;  with  seven  and  twentie 
nephewes,  the  sonnes  of  his  children:  and  nine  and  twentie  nephewes  more,  once 
removed,  who  were  his  sonnes  nephewes,  and  twelue  neeces  besides,  that  were 
his  childrens  daughters,  and  with  all  these  solemnly  sacrificed.’ — Holland’s  Pliny, 
vii,  13.  [Singer  calls  attention  to  this  use  of  the  word  for  grand-children,  and 
adds  that  the  word  grand-child  does  not  occur  in  Shakespeare.  Did  not  Singer 
overlook  the  following — ‘My  wife  comes  foremost;  then  the  honour’d  mould 
wherein  this  trunk  was  framed,  and  in  her  hand  the  grandchild  to  her  blood.’ 
— Coriol.,  V,  iii,  24?  This  is  hardly  worth  the  noting,  were  it  not  that  Hudson, 
possibly,  misled  by  Singer,  has  repeated  the  statement  as  to  the  absence  of  the 
word  grandchild. — Ed.] 

6.  Led  in  the  hand]  Wright:  Compare,  ‘Arise,  lift  up  the  lad,  and  hold  him 
in  thine  hand.’ — Genesis,  xxi,  18;  which  does  not  mean  that  Hagar  was  to  carry 
Ishmael  in  her  arms,  but  to  lead  him  by  the  hand. 

6.  Aunt  of  Gloster]  Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  139):  It  is  noteworthy  that  Shakes¬ 
peare,  according  to  his  customary  manner,  does  not  fail  to  call  the  attention  of 
his  audience  to  the  fact  that  Richard  has  married  Anne  in  the  interval  between 
her  two  appearances. 

8.  On  pure  hearts  loue]  Abbott  (§  180):  There  is  here  a  confusion  between 
‘on  an  errand  of  love’  and  ‘out  of  heart's  love.' 

8.  Prince]  Dyce  (ed.  ii):  Let  no  one  object  to  [Theobald’s]  alteration  on  metrical 
grounds;  we  have  had  before:  ‘Have  any  time  recourse  unto  the  princes.’ 

12.  whither]  For  examples  wherein  ‘whither’  is  pronounced  as  a  monosyllable, 
see  Walker,  Vers.,  106. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 


278 

To  gratulate  the  gentle  Princes  there.  15 

Qu.  Kind  Sifter  thank  es,  wee’le  enter  all  together  : 


Enter  the  Lieutenant. 


And  in  good  time,  here  the  Lieutenant  comes. 

Mafter  Lieutenant,  pray  you,  by  your  leaue, 

How  doth  the  Prince,  and  my  young  Sonne  of  Yorke  ?  20 

Lieu.  Right  well,  deare  Madame  :  by  your  patience, 

I  may  not  fuffer  you  to  vifit  them, 

The  King  hath  ftridtly  charg’d  the  contrary. 

Qu.  The  King  ?  who’s  that  ? 

Lieu.  I  meane,  the  Lord  Protestor.  25 


15.  gentle]  tender  Qq,  Sta. 

16.  enter]  never  enter  F4> 

17.  the  Lieutenant.]  Lieutenant.  Q, 
Q  .  the  Lieutenant  of  the  Tower.  Q3-s. 
Brackenbury.  Cap.  et  seq.  After  1.  18, 
Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Sta. 

19.  Majler ]  M.  Qq.  Maijler  Q4F2. 

20.  doth  the  Prince ,  ...Yorke]  fares 
the  Prince  ?  Qq,  Sta. 

21.  25,  34.  Lieu.]  Brack.  Capell  et 
seq. 


21.  Right... patience]  Wei,  Madam, 
and  in  health,  but  by  your  leaue  Qq,  Sta. 

22.  them ]  him  Qq,  Sta. 

23 .  Jlridlly]  Jl  raightlie  Qq,  Sta.  straitly 
Cam.  + ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

the ]  to  the  Q7Q8. 

24.  who's ]  whie,  whofe  Q,Q2.  why, 
who's  Qj.,,  Cam.  + .  why  who  is  Q8. 

25.  I  meane]  I  cry  you  mercie,  I  meane 
Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 


15.  gratulate]  Bradley  (AT.  E.  D.  s.  v.  1):  To  express  joy  at  the  coming, 
or  appearance  of;  to  welcome,  hail;  to  greet,  salute. 

16.  enter]  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  what  could  have  prompted  the  editor  of 
F4  to  change  this  to  never  enter — against  both  sense  and  metre.  Needless  to  say 
he  has  no  followers:  not  even  Rowe,  who  at  times  seems  slavishly  to  follow  that 
copy. — Ed. 

17.  the  Lieutenant]  See  I,  i,  47. 

24,  25.  The  King  ?  who’s  that  ?  I  meane,  the  Lord  Protestor]  Skottowe 
(i,  206)  calls  attention  to  the  similarity  between  this  passage  and  the  following 
from  The  True  Tragedie  0}  Richard  III:  ‘King.  What  was  he  that  walked  with 
thee  in  the  gardeine,  me  thought  he  had  the  keyes  ?  Forest.  My  Lord,  it  was  one 
that  was  appointed  by  the  King  to  be  an  ayde  to  sir  Thomas  Brokenbury.  King. 
Did  the  King,  why  Myles  Forest,  am  not  I  King?  Forest.  I  would  haue  said 
my  Lord  your  vnckle  the  Protector.  King.  Nay  my  kingly  vnckle  he  is  now, 
but  let  him  enjoye  both  Crowne  and  kingdome,  so  my  brother  and  I  may  enjoy 
our  liues  and  libertie.’  (See  Appendix,  p.  530.)  Churchill  (p.  509)  remarks: 
'This  is  a  coincidence  which  cannot  be  explained  away  as  “purely  accidental”; 
nor  is  there  any  direct  chronicle  foundation  for  it.  Hall  (p.  378)  has,  from  More: 
"The  Prince  assone  as  the  Protectoure  toke  vpon  him  to  be  kynge,  and  left  the 
name  of  protectoure,  was  thereof  advertised  and  shewed  that  he  shoulde  not  reigne, 
but  his  vncle  should  haue  the  crowne.  At  which  word  the  prince  sore  abashed 
beganne  to  sighe  and  sayd:  Alas  I  would  myne  vncle  would  let  me  haue  my  life 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


279 

26 


Qu.  The  Lord  prote<5t  him  from  that  Kingly  Title. 

Hath  he  fet  bounds  betweene  their  loue,  and  me  ? 

I  am  their  Mother,  who  fhall  barre  me  from  them  ? 

Duch.Yorke.  I  am  their  Fathers  Mother,  I  will  fee 
them.  30 

Anne. Their  Aunt  I  am  in  law,  in  loue  their  Mother : 

Then  bring  me  to  their  fights,  lie  beare  thy  blame, 

And  take  thy  Office  from  thee,  on  my  perill. 

Lieu.  No,  Madame,  no;  I  may  not  leaue  it  fo  : 

I  am  bound  by  Oath,  and  therefore  pardon  me.  35 

Exit  Lieutenant. 

Enter  Stanley. 

Stanley.  Let  me  but  meet  you  Ladies  one  howre  hence, 

And  lie  falute  your  Grace  of  Yorke  as  Mother, 

And  reuerend  looker  on  of  two  faire  Queenes.  40 

Come  Madame,  you  muft  ftraight  to  Weftminfter, 

There  to  be  crowned  Richards  Royall  Queene.  42 


27.  he]  be  Fa. 
bounds']  bonds  Q7Q8. 

betweene ]  betwixt Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 
their]  there  Q7Qg. 

28.  Jhall  barre]  fhould  keepe  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.  + . 

29.  Duch.Yorke.]  Du.  yor.  Qt.  Om. 
Qj.8.  Duch.  Cam. +  . 

their]  theirs  Q4. 

Fathers  Mother,]  father ,  Mother , 
Qa-g.  father’s  mother  ;  Sta.  Cam. +  . 

I]  and  Qq,  Sta. 

31.  Iam]  am  I  Var.’73,  ’78,  ’85,  Ran. 

32.  Then... fights]  Then  feare  not  thou 
Qq,  Sta. 

34.  No,  ...it  fo]  I  do  befeech  your 


Graces  all  to  pardon  me.  Qq. 

35.  I am]  I'm  Pope,+  (- Var.  ’73). 
and... me]  I  may  not  doe  it  Qq. 

36.  Exit  Lieutenant.]  Om.  Qq. 

37.  Stanley]  L.  Stanlie  Q,02.  Lord 
Stanley  Qj_g. 

38-  you  Ladies]  your  ladies  Q6Q?. 
one]  an  Q,-4.  at  an  Qs-g. 

40.  reuerend]  reuerente  Qq  (subs.) 
looker  on]  looker  one  Q,Qg.  looker¬ 
-on  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt, 
Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Hal. 

41.  Madame]  Madam  [to  Ann.] 
Capell,  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt, 
Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Hal. 

flraigkt]  go  with  me  Qq. 


although  I  lese  my  kyngedome.”  In  The  True  Tragedie,  &c.,  the  Prince  learns  of 
his  uncle’s  intentions  only  by  a  slip  on  the  part  of  Forest — an  artistic  as  well  as  artful 
improvement  upon  the  chronicle.  But  it  is  still  in  connection  with  the  chronicle 
passage.  Shakespeare,  however,  makes  use  of  the  stroke  before  Richard  has 
become  king,  and  the  blow  falls  as  a  warning  upon  the  Queen;  it  does  not  fall  upon 
the  Prince.  The  author  of  The  True  Tragedie,  &c.,  was  therefore  clearly  the 
inventor,  and  Shakespeare  adopted  the  clever  invention.’ 

34.  I  may  not  leaue  it  so]  Johnson:  That  is,  I  may  not  so  resign  my  office, 
which  you  offer  to  take  on  you  at  your  peril. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 


280 

Qu.  Ah,  cut  my  Lace  afunder,  43 

That  my  pent  heart  may  haue  fome  fcope  to  beat, 

Or  elfe  I  fwoone  with  this  dead-killing  newes.  45 

Anne.  Defpightfull  tidings,  O  vnpleafing  newes. 

Dorf.  Be  of  good  cheare  :  Mother,  how  fares  your 
Grace  ? 

Q11.  O  Dorfet ,  fpeake  not  to  me,  get  thee  gone, 

Death  and  Deftrudtion  dogges  thee  at  thy  heeles,  5° 

Thy  Mothers  Name  is  ominous  to  Children. 

If  thou  wilt  out-ftrip  Death,  goe  croffe  the  Seas, 

And  Hue  with  Richmond ,  from  the  reach  of  Hell. 

Goe  hye  thee,  hye  thee  from  this  flaughter-houfe, 

Left  thou  encreafe  the  number  of  the  dead,  55 

And  make  me  dye  the  thrall  of  Margarets  Curfe, 

Nor  Mother,  Wife,  nor  Englands  counted  Queene. 

Stanley. Full  of  wife  care,  is  this  your  counfaile,  Madame: 

Take  all  the  fwift  aduantage  of  the  howres  : 

You  fhall  haue  Letters  from  me  to  my  Sonne,  60 


43-45.  Ah. ..newes]  Lines  end,  heart 
...fwoone,  ...newes.  Qq,  Cap.  Cam.  +  . 
43.  Ah]  O  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

afunder]  in  funder  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

45.  I  fwoone]  I  found  Qq.  ( found 

QaQ4  )  ‘ 

dead-killing]  dead  killing  Qq.  dead 
liking  Q5_8.  dead-striking  Cap.  conj. 

46.  Anne.  Defpightfull... newes]  Om. 
Qq,  Sta. 

47.  Be. ..Mother]  Madaine,  haue  com¬ 
fort,  Qq,  Sta. 

49.  gone]  hence  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 


5°.  dogges]  Fa.  dogge  Qq.  dogs  F3F4, 
Rowe,  Ktly.  dog  Pope  et  cet. 

thy]  the  Qq,  Cap.  Var.  ’78,  ’85, 
Mai.  Steev.Varr.  Dyce,  Hal.  Sta.  Cam. +  . 

51.  ominous]  ominious  Qg. 

Children]  her  children  Coll.  MS 

(monovolume). 

52.  out-flrip]  ouerflrip  Q^. 

53-  reach]  race  Q^_g. 

57.  Nor]  Not  Qg. 

counted]  'counted Coll.Wh.  i,  Hal. 

59.  of]  af  Q?. 

h 070 res]  time  Qq,  Pope,  +  ,  Sta. 

60.  my]  me  Q6. 


45.  swoone]  For  the  pronunciation  of  this  word  and  its  various  forms  of  spelling 
see  note  on  sound,  V,  ii,  437,  Love's  Labour's  Lost,  this  edition. 

45.  dead-killing]  Wright:  Compare  ‘Here  with  a  cockatrice’  dead-killing 
eye  He  rouseth  up  himself  and  makes  a  pause.’ — Lucrece,  l.  540. 

52,  53.  crosse  the  Seas  .  .  .  with  Richmond]  Wright:  ‘Cross’  may  here  be 
either  a  verb  or  a  preposition,  as  in:  ‘I  charge  thee  waft  me  safely  cross  the  channel.’ 
— 2  Hen.  VI:  IV,  i,  114.  Richmond,  after  the  battle  of  Tewkesbury,  fled  with 
his  uncle,  Jasper,  Earl  of  Pembroke,  and  took  refuge  in  Brittany. 

56.  thrall]  Skeat  {Did.):  A  slave.  Formed  from  the  Teutonic  type  Thragila , 
a  runner,  hence  one  who  runs  on  errands;  a  servant. 

56.  Margarets  Curse]  See  I,  iii,  217,  218. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


281 


In  your  behalfe,  to  meet  you  on  the  way  :  61 

Be  not  ta’ne  tardie  by  vnwife  delay. 

Duch.  Yorke.  O  ill  difperfing  Winde  of  Miferie, 

O  my  accurfed  Wombe,  the  Bed  of  Death  : 

A  Cockatrice  haft  thou  hatcht  to  the  World,  65 

Whofe  vnauoided  Eye  is  murtherous. 

Stanley .  Come,  Madame,  come,  I  in  all  hafte  was  fent. 

Anne.  And  I  with  all  vnwillingneffe  will  goe. 

O  would  to  God,  that  the  inclufiue  Verge 

Of  Golden  Mettall,  that  muft  round  my  Brow,  70 

Were  red  hot  Steele,  to  feare  me  to  the  Braines, 


61.  In  your  behalf e]  Om.  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.  + . 

way  :]  way,  and  welcome  you  Qq, 
Sta.  Cam. +  . 

62.  la’ne]  tane  Qs.  taken  Q^. 
delay]  delays  Cap.  conj. 

63.  ill  difperfing]  all  -  dispersing 
Vaughan  (iii,  95).  ill-dispersing  Theob. 
et  seq. 

65.  hafl]  hath  Q?. 

hatcht]  hatch  Qt.  hatch' d  F^. 


66.  murtherous]  murderous  Johns. 

67.  Madame,  ...fent]  Madame,  I  in 
all  haste  was  sent  for  you.  Cap.  conj. 

Madame,  come,]  Madam  Qq. 
fent]  fent  for  Q3_g. 

68.  Anne.]  Duch.  Qq. 

with]  in  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Coll.  iii. 

69.  0]  I  Qq,  Cam. +. 
inclufiue]  idclufiue  Qs> 

71.  Braines]  Ff,  Rowe,  braine  Qq 
et  cet. 


62.  ta’ne]  Schmidt  {Lex.)  gives  numerous  examples  of  the  verb  ‘to  take’  in 
the  sense  of  to  come  upon  unexpectedly,  to  catch  by  surprise,  to  find  at  advantage 
or  disadvantage.  As  examples  of  such  use  of  ‘take’  in  the  present  play  compare 
I,  ii,  258;  V,  iii,  262. — Ed. 

63.  ill  dispersing  Winde]  Capell  (ii,  184):  That  is:  thou  wicked  disperser, 
and  is  meant  of  the  separations  that  are  then  about  to  take  place.  [Does  ‘ill’ 
qualify  ‘wind,’  as  Capell  has  it?  Is  it  not  rather  the  object  itself  of  dis¬ 
persing — that  is:  ‘Wind  of  misery  which  disperses,  or  dispenses,  ill’? — Ed.] 

69.  Verge]  Skeat  {Diet.):  In  the  sense  of  edge,  or  brink,  ‘verge’  is  quite  a 
different  word  from  verge,  to  incline  (from  Latin  vergere).  The  sense  of  edge 
follows  at  once,  from  the  use  of  ‘verge’  as  a  law-term,  to  mean  a  limit  or  circuit, 
hence  a  circle. 

70.  round]  Abbott  (§  405)  cites  the  present  line  as  an  example  of  an  ellipsis 
of  the  verb,  as  in:  ‘I  must  to  Coventry.’ — Rich.  II:  I,  ii,  56.  But  is  not  ‘round’ 
here  the  verb  itself?  as  in:  ‘the  hollow  crown  That  rounds  the  mortal  temples  of 
a  king.’ — Rich.  II:  III,  ii,  161. — Ed. 

71.  red  hot  Steele,  to  seare  me  to  the  Braines]  Steevens:  She  seems  to 
allude  to  the  ancient  mode  of  punishing  a  regicide,  or  any  other  egregious  criminal, 
viz.,  by  placing  a  crown  of  iron,  heated  red  hot,  upon  his  head.  In  The  Tragedy 
of  Hoffman,  1631,  this  punishment  is  also  introduced:  ‘Fix  on  thy  master’s  head 
my  burning  crown.’  [I,  i,  198.]— Ritson:  John  the  son  of  the  Vaivode  Stephen, 
having  defeated  the  army  of  Hungarian  peasants  called  Croisadoes,  in  1514,  caused 
their  general  ‘called  George,  to  be  stript  naked,  upon  whose  head  the  executioner 


282 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  i. 


Anoynted  let  me  be  with  deadly  Venome,  7  2 

And  dye  ere  men  can  fay,  God  faue  the  Queene. 

Qu.  Goe,  goe,  poore  foule,  I  enuie  not  thy  glory, 

To  feed  my  humor,  wifh  thy  felfe  no  harme.  75 

Anne.  No:  why?  When  he  that  is  my  Husband  now, 

Came  to  me,  as  I  follow’d  Henries  Corfe, 

When  fcarce  the  blood  was  well  wafht  from  his  hands, 

Which  iffued  from  my  other  Angell  Husband, 

And  that  deare  Saint,  which  then  I  weeping  follow’d  :  80 

O,  when  I  fay  I  look’d  on  Richards  Face, 

This  was  my  Wifh  :  Be  thou  (  quoth  I )  accurft, 

For  making  me,  fo  young,  fo  old  a  Widow  : 

And  when  thou  wed’ft,  let  forrow  haunt  thy  Bed ; 

And  be  thy  Wife,  if  any  be  fo  mad,  85 


72.  Venome']  poyfon  Qq,  Sta. 

73.  can]  Ora.  F3F4. 

74.  Goe,  goe,]  Alas  Qq,  Sta. 
thy]  the  Q2. 

76.  No:  why}]  No  Qq.  No  why? 
Wh.  i. 

77-  as]  Om.  Q6-8. 

follow'd]  followed  Qq. 

Henries]  Henrie' s  F3<  Henry's 
F4  et  seq. 

Corfe]  courfe  Qq. 


78.  fcarce... well]  the  blood  was  fcarfe 

Q7Q8  (subs-) 

80.  deare]  dead  Qq,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam. +  , 
Ktly,  Coll.  iii. 

which]  whom  Cap.  conj. 

81.  Richards]  Richard’s  F4. 

85.  Wife,  if...fo  mad,]  wife  [if... so 
mad )  Cap.  et  seq.  (subs.),  wife  [if.. .so) 
made  Ferrers,  ap.  Cam. 
mad]  badde  Q3-$. 


set  a  crown  of  hot  burning  iron.’ — Goulart,  Histories,  1607.  This  is  the  fact 
to  which  Goldsmith  alludes:  ‘Luke’s  iron  crown,  and  Damien’s  bed  of  steel' 
[The  Traveller,  1.  436]. 

72.  Anoynted  ...  with  deadly  Venome]  Lingard  (iv,  238,  foot-note ):  In 
the  contemporary  account  of  this  [Richard’s  and  Anne’s]  coronation  we  are  told 
that  the  anointing  was  performed  in  the  following  extraordinary  manner:  ‘Then 
the  kyng  and  the  quene  put  of  ther  robes,  and  there  (at  the  high  altar)  stode  all 
nakyd  from  the  medell  upwards,  and  anone  the  Bushope  anoynted  bothe  the 
kynge  and  the  quyne.’ — Excerpt.  Hist.,  381.  This  statement,  however,  must 
not  be  taken  literally.  The  king  at  his  coronation,  after  he  had  been  disrobed  of 
his  mantle  and  surcoat  by  his  chamberlain,  remained  in  a  close  dress  of  crimson 
satin,  in  which  openings  had  been  already  prepared  for  the  anointments  on  his 
back,  breast,  shoulders,  and  elbows.  The  queen  was  anointed  on  the  forehead 
and  the  chest  only,  so  that  one  opening  sufficed  in  her  dress,  which  was  unlaced 
and  relaced  by  the  lady  in  waiting. 

83.  so  young,  so  old  a  Widow]  Capeld  (ii,  184):  That  is,  old  in  sorrow; 
made  old  by  it.  [Tawney  and  Barnard  both  interpret  Anne’s  words  as  meaning 
that,  in  all  probability,  she  is  doomed  to  a  long  life  of  widowhood.  That  Capell’s 
is,  however,  the  better  interpretation  is  the  opinion  of  the  present  Ed.] 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


283 

86 


More  miferable,  by  the  Life  of  thee, 

Then  thou  haft  made  me,  by  my  deare  Lords  death. 

Loe,  ere  I  can  repeat  this  Curfe  againe, 

Within  fo  fmall  a  time,  my  Womans  heart 
Groffely  grew  captiue  to  his  honey  words,  90 

And  prou’d  the  fubiedt  of  mine  owne  Soules  Curfe, 

Which  hitherto  hath  held  mine  eyes  from  reft : 

For  neuer  yet  one  howre  in  his  Bed 
Did  I  enioy  the  golden  deaw  of  fleepe, 

But  with  his  timorous  Dreames  was  ftill  awak’d.  95 


86, 87.  More ...  Then]  As. ..As  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.  + . 

86.  Life]  death  Qq,  Cam.  ii. 

88.  ere]  eare  Q,.  euen  Q2_8. 

89.  Within. ..time]  Euen  in  fo  fhort  a 
fpace  Qq,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 
Sta.  Cam. +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

90.  Groffely]  Croffelie  Qa.  Crofly  Q3-8. 

91.  fubiedl]  fubiedte  Qt.  fubiedles  Q2. 
fubfedls  Q3-  fubiedls  Q4_,. 

mine]  my  Q,_6,  Cap.  Cam. +  . 

92.  hitherto]  euer  finceQ q,Varr.  Mai. 


Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 

92.  held]  kept  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +. 
mine]  my  Qi-5,  Cap.  Cam.  + . 
reft]  fleepe  Qq  ( fleepe  Qs.) 

94.  Did  I  enioy]  Ilaue  I  enioy ed  Qq. 
Have  I  enjoy’d  Sta.  Cam.  + ,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 

95.  with...awak' d.]  haue beene waked 
by  his  timerous  dreames,  Qq,  (reading, 
timorous')  Sta.  Cam. +,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds.  (a'tf/£(?»Waughan  iii,  97.) 


86.  Life]F.  D.  Matthew  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  77):  The  reason  is,  I  think, 
obvious  why  this  same  correction  [see  Text.  Notes]  of  the  Quarto  text  has  not  been 
made  in  the  corresponding  passage  in  I,  ii,  29,  30.  In  the  Fourth  Act,  Anne  has 
become  Richard’s  wife,  and  knows  that  she  is  more  miserable  by  his  life  than  by 
his  death.  This  appropriate  change  of  expression  is  more  likely  to  have  come 
from  the  writer  when  his  imagination  was  heated  in  composition,  than  to  have 
suggested  itself  to  his  judgement  in  the  quiet  process  of  correction. 

90.  Grossely]  See  III,  vi,  12. 

95.  his  timorous  Dreames]  ‘.  .  .  he  toke  ill  reste  a  nightes,  lay  long  wakyng 
and  musing,  sore  weried  with  care  and  watch,  rather  slumbred  then  slept,  troubled 
wyth  feareful  dreames,  sodainly  sommetyme  sterte  vp,  leape  out  of  his  bed  and 
runne  about  the  chamber.’ — More,  p.  134. — Brooke  (p.  115):  Richard  is  rep¬ 
resented  by  Shakespeare  as  without  a  soul,  being  without  love.  But  this  is 
when  he  is  awake,  and  his  will  at  the  helm  of  his  life.  When  he  is  asleep,  Shakes¬ 
peare,  with  his  belief  that  in  the  far  background  of  an  evil  nature  the  soul  lives, 
but  unknown,  unbelieved  in,  by  its  possessor,  shows  how  it  awakens  at  night  when 
the  will  sleeps,  and  does  its  work  on  the  unconscious  man.  Then,  and  then  only, 
conscience  stirs  in  Richard.  Then,  and  then  only,  fear  besets  him.  The  day- 
result  of  this  work  of  the  soul  at  night  in  Richard  is  plainly  suggested  in  the  dia¬ 
logue.  He  is  represented  at  all  points  as  in  a  state  of  nervous  strain  of  which  he 
does  not  know  the  cause;  and  this  ignorance,  irritating  the  intensity  of  his  wrath 
with  any  obstacle,  throws  not  only  his  intellect,  but  his  management  of  men  and 
events,  out  of  gear.  His  intellect  is  no  longer  clear,  for  body  is  no  longer  sane. 
All  his  powers,  even  his  hypocrisy,  are  decaying.  His  doom  has  begun. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  IV,  sc.  i. 


284 


Befides,  he  hates  me  for  my  Father  Warwicke ,  96 

And  will  (  no  doubt )  fhortly  be  rid  of  me. 

Qu.  Poore  heart  adieu,  I  pittie  thy  complaining. 

Anne.  No  more,  then  with  my  foule  I  mourne  for 
yours.  IOO 

Dorf.  Farewell,  thou  wofull  welcommer  of  glory. 

Anne.  Adieu ,  poore  foule ,  that  tak’ft  thy  leaue 
of  it. 

Du.  KGo  thou  to  Richmond, ,&  good  fortune  guide  thee, 

Go  thou  to  Richard ,  and  good  Angels  tend  thee,  105 

Go  thou  to  Sanftuarie,  and  good  thoughts  poffeffe  thee, 

I  to  my  Graue,  where  peace  and  reft  lye  with  mee. 

Eightie  odde  yeeres  of  forrow  haue  I  feene,  1 08 


96.  Befcdes]  Beside  Johns.  Var. ’73. 

97.  (no  doubt)]  no  doubt  Om.  Q*^. 

98.  Poore. ..complaining]  Alas  poore 
foule ,  I  pittie  thy  complaints  Qq,  Sta. 

99.  with]  from  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 

101.  Dorf.]  Qu.  Q2-8,  Dyce,  Sta. 
Cam.  i,  +  ,  Huds. 

102.  that]  thou  Qq. 

104.  thou]  Om.  F2F3. 

Richmond,]  Richmond,  to  Dor- 


fet  to  Anne  to  the  Queene  FaF3< 

104.  thee,  ]  thee ,  [To  Dorfet.  F4  et  seq. 

105.  tend  ]  garde  Q,Qa.  guard  Q^, 
Cam.  + . 

thee, ]  thee,  [To  Ann.  F4  et  seq. 

106.  and]  Om.  Qq,  Pope,+  (  —  Var. 

’73)- 

thee,  ]  thee,  [To  the  Queen.  F4et 

seq. 

108.  odde]  olde  Qs.  old  Q5^. 


101.  Dors.]  Dyce  (ed.  i):  Possibly  the  player-editors,  or  whoever  else  put 
the  prefix  ‘ Dors .’  to  the  first  speech,  may  have  intended  us  to  understand  the 
second  one  as  addressed  to  Dorset;  they  perhaps  thought  that  because  Dorset 
was  about  to  fly  from  England  to  Richmond  he  might  be  said  to  be  taking  his 
leave  of  glory.  Nor  is  it  improbable  that  they  were  led  to  the  alteration  by  finding 
that  the  immediately  following  speech  of  the  Duchess  of  York  commences  with 
an  address  to  Dorset. 

104-106.  Du.  Y.  Go  thou  .  .  .  possesse  thee]  Cambridge  Edd.  (Note  xvii): 
In  the  second  Folio  there  is  a  curious  mistake  here.  In  the  margin  of  the  first 
Folio,  from  which  the  second  was  printed,  some  one  had  inserted  the  stage- 
directions,  ‘to  Dorset,’  ‘to  Anne,’  ‘to  the  Queene,’  which  the  printer  mistook 
and  gave  as  part  of  the  text  thus:  ‘Due.  Yorke.  Go  to  Richmond,  to  Dorset,  to 
Anne,  to  the  Queene,  and  good  fortune  guide  thee,’  &c.  The  error  is  repeated 
in  the  third  Folio  and,  strange  to  say,  corrected  in  the  fourth,  where  the  stage- 
directions  are  inserted  in  their  proper  places.  It  also  inserts  the  word  ‘thou,’ 
which  had  been  omitted  in  the  second  and  third  Folios. 

106.  Sandtuarie]  For  ‘sanctuary’  pronounced  as  a  disyllable  see  III,  i,  54, 
note  by  Walker. 

108.  Eightie  odde  yeeres]  Malone:  Shakespeare  has  here,  I  believe,  spoken 
at  random.  The  present  scene  is  in  1483.  Richard,  Duke  of  York,  the  husband 
of  this  lady,  had  he  been  then  living,  would  have  been  but  seventy-three  years  old, 
and  we  may  reasonably  suppose  that  his  Duchess  was  younger  than  he  was.  Nor 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


285 


And  each  howres  ioy  wrackt  with  a  weeke  of  teene. 

Qu.  Stay, yet  looke  backe  with  me  vnto  the  Tower.  no 
Pitty,  you  ancient  Stones,  th'ofe  tender  Babes, 

Whom  Enuie  hath  immur’d  within  your  Walls, 

Rough  Cradle  for  fuch  little  prettie  ones, 

Rude  ragged  Nurfe,  old  fullen  Play-fellow,  1 14 


109.  -wrackt  ]  QqF2F3.  wrack' d  F4, 
Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  i,  Wh.  i.  wreak'd 
or  rack'd  Anon.  ap.Cam.  wreck'd  Theob. 
ii  et  cet. 

teene']  anguish  Pope. 


110-117.  Qu.  Stay  ...farewell.  Ex¬ 
eunt.]  Om.  Qq. 

no.  Stay,  yet]  Stay  yet ;  Cap. 

III.  Pitty,  you. ..Stones,]  Pity  your 
...stones  Vaughan  (iii,  98). 


did  she  go  speedily  to  her  grave.  She  lived  till  1495.  [The  Duchess  of  York  was 
the  mother  of  the  late  King  and  grandmother  of  the  present  sovereign,  and  if  she 
was  not  quite  eighty  years  old  she  should  have  been.  Richard  at  the  time  of  the 
present  scene  was  but  a  little  over  thirty  years  old,  yet  who  does  not  think  of  him 
at  this  period  of  his  career  as  a  man  of  almost  middle  age  ?  as,  indeed,  he  probably 
was,  according  to  the  duration  of  life  in  those  days. — Ed.] 

109.  teene]  Skeat  {Did.) :  The  successive  senses  of  ‘  teen ’  are:  making  known, 
public  accusation,  reproach  injury,  vexation. 

110-116.  Stay, yet.  ..  farewell]  Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  139):  In  rewriting 
this  scene  the  poet  must  at  once  have  felt  that  Elizabeth  should  not  depart  in 
silence  from  the  door  of  her  children’s  prison,  entrance  to  which  had  been  denied 
her.  But  by  the  anonymous  corrector  of  the  Quarto,  to  whose  prosaic  taste  this 
pathetic  passage  perhaps  did  not  appeal,  it  might  very  well  have  been  discarded. 
The  personification  of  the  Tower  as  ‘ragged  nurse'  and  ‘sullen  play-fellow’  is 
bold,  but  thoroughly  Shakespearean. 

hi,  1 15.  Babes  .  .  .  Babies]  Though  past  the  actual  days  of  infancy  the  princes, 
to  her  mother-eyes,  are  still  her  ‘babies.’ 

1 1 2.  Enuie]  That  is,  malice,  spite,  hate. 

1 14.  Rude  ragged  Nurse,  old  sullen  Play-fellow]  Johnson:  To  call  the 
Tower  ‘nurse’  and  ‘play-fellow’  is  very  harsh:  perhaps  part  of  this  speech  is 
addressed  to  the  Tower,  and  part  to  the  Lieutenant. — M.  Mason:  The  last  line 
of  this  speech:  ‘So  foolish  sorrow  bids  your  stones  farewell,’  proves  that  the  whole 
of  it  is  addressed  to  the  Tower,  and  apologises  for  the  absurdity  of  that  address 
by  attributing  it  to  sorrow. — Malone:  When  Shakespeare  described  the  Tower 
as  the  ‘nurse’  and  ‘play-fellow’  of  these  children,  he  was  only  thinking  of  the 
circumstance  of  their  being  constrained  to  carry  on  their  daily  pastime,  and  to 
receive  their  daily  nutriment  within  its  walls;  and  hence,  with  his  usual  licentiousness 
of  metaphor,  calls  the  edifice  itself  their  ‘play-fellow’  and  ‘nurse.’  I  may  add  that 
the  poet  never  could  intend  to  apologize  for  a  practice,  of  which  numerous  examples 
are  found  in  his  plays,  and  in  which,  assuredly,  he  perceived  no  impropriety. — 
Rolfe:  Neither  Johnson  nor  Malone  seem  to  have  appreciated  the  maternal 
pathos  and  poetry  of  the  passage.  It  is  not  Shakespeare  who  speaks,  but  the 
mother,  whose  heart  bleeds  at  the  thought  of  the  rough  exchange  for  cradle  and 
nurse,  and  play-fellow  that  is  given  them  in  the  ancient  stones.  How  can  any  one 
read  the  lines  and  not  have  all  the  mother  come  into  his  eyes,  as  it  did  into  the 
poet’s  heart  and  pen  ? 


286 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  ii. 


For  tender  Princes  :  vfe  my  Babies  well;  1 15 

So  foolifh  Sorrowes  bids  your  Stones  farewell. 

Exeunt.  1 1 7 


Scena  Secunda. 


Sound  a  Sennet.  Enter  Richard  in  pompe Buc¬ 
kingham,  Catesby ,  Ratcliff  e,  Louel. 


Rich.  Stand  all  apart. 

1 16.  Sorrowes ]  Sorrow  Rowe  et  seq. 
bids]  bid  F4> 

1.  Scena  Secunda.]  Scene  continued, 
Qq.  V,  i.  Booth.  IV,  i.  Irving. 

The  Court.  Pope.  The  Same.  A 
Room  of  State  in  the  Palace.  Cap. 

2,  3.  Sound... Louel.]  The  Trumpets 
found,  Enter  Richard  crowned,  Buck- 


4 

ingham,  Catesby,  with  other  Nobles.  Qq. 
Flourish  of  Trumpets.  Enter  Gloucester 
as  King,  Buckingham,  Catesby,  Ratcliff, 
and  Lovel.  Rowe,  +  (subs.  ...a  Page  and 
others.  Cap.) 

2.  Sennet.]  Sonnet  Ff.  Om.  Rowe. 
4.  Rich.]  King.  Qq  (throughout). 


Coufin  of  Buckingham. 


1 14.  ragged]  Craigie  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.)a :  Of  a  rough,  irregular,  or  straggling 
form;  having  a  broken  jagged  outline  or  surface;  full  of  rough  or  sharp  projections. 

1 14.  sullen]  Schmidt  {Lex.)  quotes  the  present  line  under  ‘(2)  morose,  peevish, 
waspish  ’;  but  does  not  ‘  sullen  ’  here  mean  sad,  melancholy,  dismal,  which  is  Schmidt’s 
first  division  of  interpretations? 

1 16.  Sorrowes]  See  note  by  Walker  on  ‘Stones,’  III,  vii,  232. 

1.  Scena  Secunda]  Oechelhauser  {Einjuhr ungen,  etc.,  p.  158):  It  has  been 
customary  to  represent  this  scene  on  the  stage  with  Richard  surrounded  by  the 
court  and  seated  on  his  throne,  as  though  the  coronation  ceremony  had  just  been 
concluded.  Such  an  arrangement,  if  historically  correct  in  detail,  is  not  only 
wearisome  as  a  spectacle,  but,  in  view  of  the  conversations  which  occur,  quite  out 
of  place.  The  interviews  with  Buckingham  and  Tyrrel,  with  the  courtiers  grouped 
at  the  back  of  the  scene,  seem  utterly  unnatural.  For  these  reasons  I  suggest 
that  the  scene  be  laid  not  in  the  throne-room,  or  as  at  the  conclusion  of  the  corona¬ 
tion,  but  that  Richard  be  represented  as  returning  from  his  crowning  and  in  his 
own  private  chamber,  in  royal  robes,  but  not  in  the  actual  coronation  regalia;  he 
should  be  accompanied  by  the  leading  nobles  of  his  court,  whom  he  dismisses  soon 
after  his  entrance,  since  the  following  conversations  admit  of  no  witnesses.  The 
mounting  of  the  Play  will  thus  be  much  simplified  and  the  illusion  will  not  be 
destroyed  as  in  the  first  arrangement  described. 

2-  Enter  Richard]  Collier  says  that  in  the  old  theatre  there  were  probably 
no  ‘discoveries,’  as  they  are  now  called  in  theatrical  slang.  Whereupon  White 
remarks:  ‘This,  however,  does  not  justify  us  in  giving  direction  for  a  discovery 
here,  although  under  other  circumstances  it  does.  In  the  Qq  after  1.  6  there  is 
a  direction:  “Here  he  ascendeth  his  throne,”  and  in  Fj  we  find  in  the  same  place 
“Sound.”  Richard  is  plainly  to  enter  in  state,  and  ascend  the  throne  amid  the 
sounding  of  trumpets.’ 


ACT  IV,  sc.  ii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  287 

Buck.  My  gracious  Soueraigne.  5 

Rich.  Giue  me  thy  hand.  Sound. 

Thus  high,  by  thy  aduice,  and  thy  afliftance, 

Is  King  Richard  feated  : 

But  fhall  we  wearethefe  Glories  for  a  day? 

Or  fhall  they  laft,  and  we  reioyce  in  them  ?  10 

Buck.  Still  liue  they,  and  for  euer  let  them  laft. 

Rich.  Ah  Buckingham,  now  doe  I  play  the  Touch,  12 


5,6.  Buck.  My  ...Soueraigne.  Rich.] 
Om.  Qq,  Sta. 

6.  Sound]  Here  he  afcendeth  his 
throne.  Qq  (subs. ) ,  Cam.  + .  Om.  Rowe. 
Richard  ascends  the  throne.  The  trum¬ 
pets  sound.  White  i  (at  1.  5). 

6,  7.  Giue...aduice]  As  one  line,  Rowe 
et  seq. 

7,  8.  and...feated]  Ff.  One  line,  Qq 
et  cet. 

7.  and ]  Add  Q?. 


9.  Glories ]  honours  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +, 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

10.  them  /]  them.  Qf. 
n.  for ]  for  for  Qa. 

let  them ]  may  they  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.  + . 

12,  13.  Ah. ..indeed"]  Aside.  Ed.  conj. 
12.  Ah]  O  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 
doe  I]  I  do  Q3-8. 

play]  ply  Warb.  conj.  Cap.  apply 
Heath. 


9.  shall  we  weare  these  Glories  for  a  day]  Churchill  (p.  334) :  Until  this 
moment  Richard’s  course  is  upward,  and  he  has  no  suspicion  that  the  hand  of  Fate 
is  against  him.  Now  without  warning  fortune  reverses  her  wheel.  Here  lies 
the  dramatic  kernel  of  Shakespeare’s  whole  play.  The  first  part  of  it,  down  to 
Hastings’s  death,  he  found  in  Polydore  Vergil,  adopted  into  all  the  chronicles,  of 
the  course  of  the  struggle  down  to  the  death  of  Edward  IV.  Then  in  the  midst 
of  More’s  story  Vergil’s  application  of  the  same  principle  of  Nemesis  to  Richard 
himself  was  preserved  in  a  passage  inserted  by  Hall,  but  not  copied  by  Holinshed. 
It  is  to  this  conception,  and  doubtless  largely  to  this  passage,  that  we  owe  the  words 
of  Richard,  when  at  the  moment  of  his  coronation  he  forebodes  a  change. 
[The  passage  from  Hall,  to  which  Churchill  refers,  is  as  follows:  ‘And  from 
henceforth  not  onely  all  his  counsailles,  doynges  and  proceedynges,  sodainely 
decayed  and  sorted  to  none  effecte:  But  also  fortune  beganne  to  froune  and  turne 
her  whele  douneward  from  him,  in  so  much  that  he  lost  his  only  begotten  sonne 
called  Edwarde  in  the  iij  moneth  after  he  had  created  hym  prince  of  Wales.’ — 
p.  381.] 

12.  play  the  Touch]  Wright:  That  is,  play  the  part  of  the  touchstone,  which 
was  used  to  test  the  genuineness  of  any  metal  which  had  the  appearance  of  gold. 
In  his  last  will  Bacon  left  to  his  wife  ‘all  tables  of  marble  and  towch.’  [Compare: 
‘Tomorrow  ...  is  a  day  Wherein  the  fortune  of  ten  thousand  men  Must  bide 
the  touch.’ — 1  Hen.  IV:  IV,  iv,  10;  also  ‘O  thou  [gold]  touch  of  hearts.’ — Timon, 
IV,  iii,  390.] — Collier  (Hist.  Dram.  Poetry,  iii,  52,  foot-note ):  Compare:  ‘Now 
is  the  hour  come  To  put  your  love  unto  the  touch,  to  try  If  it  be  current  or  but 
counterfeit.’ — A  Warning  for  Fair  Women,  printed  in  1599,  but  certainly  con¬ 
siderably  older.  .  .  .  But  the  resemblance  is  not  merely  verbal:  the  speeches  of  Anne 
Sanders,  the  repentant  wife,  are  Shakespearean  in  a  much  better  sense.  But 
for  the  extreme  rarity  of  this  tragedy  it  might  ere  now  have  been  attributed  to 


288 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  ii. 


To  trie  if  thou  be  currant  Gold  indeed  :  13 

Young  Edward  Hues,  thinke  now  what  I  would  fpeake. 

Buck.  Say  on  my  louing  Lord.  15 

Rich.  Why  Buckingham ,  I  fay  I  would  be  King. 

Buck.  Why  fo  you  are,  my  thrice-renowned  Lord. 

Rich.  Ha  ?  am  I  King  ?  ’tis  fo  :  but  Edward  Hues. 

Buck  True,  Noble  Prince. 

Rich.  O  bitter  confequence  !  20 


14.  fpeake ]  fay  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 

15.  louing  Lord ]  gralious  foueraigne 
Qq.  gracious  sovereign  Sta.  loving  lord , 
what  t hou  wouldst  say  Vaughan  (iii,  99). 

1 7.  thrice-renowned]  Ff.  thrice  re- 
nowmed  Qa-S.  thrice  renowned  Q,  et 
cet. 


17.  Lord~\  Liege  Qq,  Pope, +  ,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Dyce,  Sta. 
Cam.  + . 

18.  Ha  ?]  Ha  :  Qq. 

King~\  a  king  Pope,  Han. 

19.  True,]  True  Qq. 


Shakespeare. — King  (p.  212):  The  present  touchstone  is  a  black  Jasper  of  a 
somewhat  coarse  grain,  and  the  best  pieces  come  from  India.  The  Italian  gold¬ 
smiths  employ  it  in  the  following  ingenious  manner.  They  have  a  set,  strung  on 
a  ring,  of  twenty-four  needles,  little  bars  of  gold,  each  of  a  known  or  marked  standard 
from  one  carat  up  to  twenty-four  (or  five).  Taking  the  gold  to  be  assayed,  they 
rub  it  on  the  stone;  by  the  side  of  the  streak  it  leaves  they  rub  the  needle  which 
seems  to  the  eye  the  nearest  in  quality.  Next  they  pour  ‘aqua  regia’  on  the  two 
streaks,  and  if  the  solvent  produces  the  same  effect  on  each,  it  proves  that  the  gold 
in  the  piece  and  the  needle  is  of  the  same  standard.  If  there  be  a  difference  per¬ 
ceptible,  they  try  another  needle,  until  an  exact  coincidence  is  obtained. 

15.  my  louing  Lord]  Following  this  line  Cibber  interpolates:  ‘I  tell  thee, 
Cuz,  I’ve  lately  had  two  Spiders  Crawling  upon  my  startled  hopes:  Now  tho’ 
Thy  friendly  hand  has  brush’d  ’em  from  me,  Yet  still  they  crawl  offensive  to  my 
eyes,  I  wou’d  have  some  friend  to  tread  upon  ’em.  I  would  be  King,  my  Cousin.’ 
When  the  delving  editorial  spade  turns  up  material  so  remunerative  in  its  weak¬ 
ness,  may  not  the  words  of  Johnson,  in  his  immortal  Preface,  be  echoed:  ‘Let  us 
hear  no  more  of  the  dull  duty  of  an  editor’  ? — Ed. 

18.  Edward  liues]  Tawney:  There  is  a  striking  similarity  in  this  passage  to 
King  John,  III,  iii,  in  which  John  proposes  to  Hubert  the  murder  of  Arthur. 
[There  is  similarity,  it  is  true,  inasmuch  as  both  passages  are  concerned  with  the 
murder  of  a  prince;  but  Shakespeare’s  treatment  of  the  two  scenes  is  as  dissimilar 
as  are  the  characters  of  John  and  Richard.  The  timid  coward  John  approaches 
Hubert  with  hints  half-whispered,  and  exults  at  Hubert’s  quick  comprehension. 
Richard,  never  a  coward,  is  brutal  in  the  open  declaration  of  his  meaning:  ‘I  wish 
the  bastards  dead’;  and  is  irritated  at  Buckingham’s  hesitation.  He  approaches 
Tyrrel  in  much  the  same  way;  but  his  sole  satisfaction  at  Tyrrel’s  assent  is  in: 
‘Thou  sing’st  sweet  music.’  (See  note  on  I,  iii,  359-370.) — Ed. 

20.  bitter  consequence]  Capell  (ii,  185):  That  is,  bitter  sequel;  videlicet,  to 
the  speaker’s  last  words — ‘Edward  lives’;  his  next  line  explains  it,  in  which  is  to  be 
supplied  an  indefinite  article  following  ‘live.’ 


ACT  IV,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


289 


21 


That  Edward  ftill  fhould  liue  true  Noble  Prince. 
Coufin,  thou  waft  not  wont  to  be  fo  dull. 

Shall  I  be  plaine  ?  I  wifh  the  Baftards  dead, 


21.  liue\  QqFf,  Rowe  ii.  live ,  Rowe 
i,  Pope.  live.  Han.  live!  Cam.  i, +  . 
live —  Theob.  et  cet. 

/rue... Prince. ]  QqFf,  +  .  True, ... 
prince  ?  Han.  true  ! ...prince  !  Varr. 


23 

Ran.  *  True, . .  .prince  !  ’  Cam .  i,  +  .  true 
. .  .prince  !  Cam.  ii.  true, . .  .prince  /  Mai. 
et  cet. 

22.  v)aJT\  uer/Qq,  Pope,  +  ,Sta.  Cam. 
+  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  Coll.  iii. 


21.  That  Edward  still  should  liue  true  Noble  Prince]  Delius:  Richard  sneer- 
ingly  repeats  Buckingham’s  words. — Wright:  Here  I  have  ventured  to  restore 
the  reading  of  the  Qq  and  Ff.  Since  the  time  of  Theobald  the  line  has  always 
been  printed:  ‘That  Edward  still  should  live!  True,  noble  prince!’  making 
Richard  simply  repeat  Buckingham’s  words  in  the  sense  in  which  he  used  them 
himself,  though  in  a  mocking  tone.  But  where  then  is  the  ‘bitter  consequence,’ 
if  we  thus  separate  the  last  words  of  the  line  from  the  preceding?  It  was  not 
Buckingham’s  unsympathetic  reply,  or  the  mere  fact  that  Edward  lived,  but  that 
he  lived  as  the  ‘true  noble  prince’  and  legitimate  heir  to  the  Crown.  Thus  does 
Richard,  ‘  like  the  formal  vice,  Iniquity,  ’  again  ‘  moralize  two  meanings  in  one 
word.’  [Tome  Wright’sinterpretation,  conforming  as  it  does  to  both  Ff  and  Qq,  is 
unquestionably  just. — Ed.] 

23.  I  wish  the  Bastards  dead]  Turner  (iii,  455):  From  the  atrociousness  of 
the  transaction,  it  was  necessarily  so  secretly  planned  and  executed,  that  the  precise 
incidents  could  not  be  publicly  known;  and  the  natural  consequence  of  this  ignor¬ 
ance  was,  that  many  would  never  credit  so  revolting  a  fact;  and  that  few  could 
agree  upon  its  reported  circumstances.  The  only  writers  we  have,  who  were  con¬ 
temporary  with  the  deed,  were  Fabian,  Rous,  and  the  author  of  the  Chronicle  of 
Croyland.  The  first  briefly  mentions  that  ‘the  common  fame  went’  that  King 
Richard  had  within  the  Tower  ‘put  unto  secret  death  the  two  sons  of  his  brother.’ 
Rous  remarks:  ‘it  was  afterwards  known  to  very  few,  by  what  death  they  suffered 
martyrdom.’  The  last  author  declares:  ‘It  was  commonly  reported  that  the 
said  sons  of  Edward  were  dead;  but  by  what  kind  of  violent  death,  it  was  not 
known.’  Polydore  Vergil,  nearly  a  contemporary,  intimates  the  same  uncertainty 
of  the  mode  of  their  destruction.  The  only  detail  we  possess  of  the  fate  of  these 
two  princes  is  transmitted  to  us  by  Sir  Thomas  More,  as  he  had  heard  it  by  such 
men  and  means,  as  it  were  hard  but  it  should  be  true.  He  declares  that  he  learnt 
the  particulars  which  he  narrates,  from  those  who  knew  much,  and  had  little 
cause  to  lie;  and  that  Sir  James  Tyrrell,  who  undertook  the  foul  deed,  and  Dighton, 
one  of  the  murderers,  who  perpetrated  it,  confessed  the  facts  as  he  has  stated 
them. — Gairdner  (p.  152):  Among  all  the  inhumanities  of  the  late  civil  war, 
there  had  been  nothing  so  unnatural  as  this  murder.  To  many  the  tale  seemed 
too  cruel  to  be  true.  They  believed  that  the  princes  must  have  been  sent  abroad 
to  defeat  the  intrigues  of  their  friends.  But  time  passed  away  and  they  never 
appeared  again.  After  many  years,  indeed,  an  impostor  counterfeited  the  younger; 
but  even  he,  to  give  credit  to  his  pretensions,  expressly  admitted  the  murder  of  his 
elder  brother.  Nevertheless,  there  have  been  writers  in  modern  days  who  have 
shown  plausible  grounds  for  doubting  that  the  murder  really  took  place  ...  If 
it  be  not  itself  a  fiction,  and  Dighton’s  confession,  as  has  been  surmised,  a  for- 


19 


290 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  ii. 


And  I  would  haue  it  fuddenly  perform’d. 

What  fay’ft  thou  now?  fpeake  fuddenly, be  briefe.  25 

Buck.  Your  Grace  may  doe  your  pleafure. 

Rich.  Tut,  tut,  thou  art  all  Ice,  thy  kindneffe  freezes  : 

Say,  haue  I  thy  confent,  that  they  (hall  dye  ? 

Buc.Gxwft  me  fome  litle  breath,  fome  pawfe,  deare  Lord, 

Before  I  pofitiuely  fpeake  in  this :  30 

I  will  refolue  you  herein  prefently.  Exit  Buck. 


25.  fay '/l  thou  now]  faifl  thou  now 
Qi-5-  fa^efi  thou  Q6-8-  sayest  thou 
Cam.  +  . 

27.  freezes]  freezeth  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

29.  litle... pawfe]  Ff, Rowe,  Knt, Coll. 
Dyce  i,  Wh.  i,  Hal.  breath,  fome  little 
paufe  Qq  et  cet.  ( fome  little paufe  Om. 

Q7Q8-) 


29.  deare]  my  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + ,  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Huds. 

30.  in  this]  herein  Qq,  Sta. 

3 1 .  you . .  .prefently]  your  grace  imme¬ 
diately  Qq,  Pope, +  ,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam. +,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 

Exit  Buck.]  Exit.  Q,.  Om.  Qa-s- 


gery,  we  should  expect  the  account  given  by  Sir  Thomas  More  to  be  in  the  main 
true,  clear,  and  consistent,  though  Horace  Walpole  and  others  have  maintained 
that  it  is  not  so.  [The  question  whether  or  not  Richard  was  actually  guilty  of  the 
murder  of  his  nephews  is  one  which  more  nearly  concerns  history  than  Shakes¬ 
peare.  The  Richard  of  history  is,  possibly,  a  much  maligned  monarch  and  may 
in  time  be  acquitted.  Not  so  the  Richard  who,  at  present,  is  the  only  Richard 
for  us.  Shakespeare  represents  him  as  guilty,  and  he  is  the  court  of  last  appeal. 
For  those  who  desire  to  examine  the  question  more  fully  from  the  historical  side 
the  following  references  may  prove  of  value:  Sir  George  Buck,  Life  of  Richard 
III.,  ch.  i,  p.  550;  Sharon  Turner,  iii,  pp.  454-465;  Lingard,  iv,  Appendix, 
Note  C.;  Walpole,  pp.  64-70;  Gairdner,  pp.  152-164;  Miss  Halsted,  ch.  xii, 
last  half;  Markham,  pp.  254  et  seq. — Ed.] 

29.  Giue  me  some  . . .  breath]  Canning  (p.  248) :  Perhaps  at  this  moment  of 
temptation  Buckingham  may  have  suddenly  recollected  his  oath  before  King 
Edward  to  be  true  to  his  children,  though  he  had  previously  violated  it  when  assert¬ 
ing  their  illegitimacy  to  the  London  citizens.  Buckingham’s  whole  behaviour  in 
this  scene,  though  natural  for  a  grateful  courtier  in  his  position,  is  strangely 
inconsistent  with  his  previous  conduct,  and  there  seems  to  be  no  historical  foun¬ 
dation  for  it. 

31.  presently]  Here  is,  perhaps,  one  of  the  rare  examples  wherein  ‘presently’ 
is  used,  not,  as  is  usual  in  Shakespeare,  in  the  sense  of  immediately,  at  once,  but  in 
the  modern  sense  of  shortly,  soon.  Schmidt  cites  numerous  passages  wherein 
‘presently’  means  immediately,  and  thirteen  wherein  the  word  has  the  modern 
meaning,  but  does  not  include  the  present.  Dyce  ( Glossary )  gives  not  one  exam¬ 
ple  of  ‘presently’  used  for  soon,  shortly.  Schmidt’s  examples  with  this  meaning 
are  as  follows:  ‘  That  like  a  testy  babe  will  scratch  the  nurse  And  presently  all  humbled 
kiss  the  rod.’ — Two  Gent.,  I,  ii,  59.  (In  taking  ‘presently’  to  mean  shortly,  is  not 
the  force  of  this  passage  weakened?  The  fickleness  consists  in  the  two  actions 
being  almost  simultaneous.)  ‘Is  he  at  Master  Ford’s  already  think’st  thou?  Sure 
he  is  by  this,  or  will  be  presently.’ — Merry  Wives,  IV,  i,  1.  (Schmidt  is  here. 


ACT  IV,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


291 


Catesby.  The  King  is  angry,  fee  he  gnawes  his  Lippe.  32 
Rich.  I  will  conuerfe  with  Iron-witted  Fooles, 

And  vnrefpe<5tiue  Boyes  :  none  are  for  me, 

That  looke  into  me  with  confiderate  eyes,  35 

High-reaching  Buckingham  growes  circumfpe6t. 

Boy.  37 


32.  gnawes  his ]  bites  the  Q^,  Cam. 
+ .  bites  his  Q7Q8,  Sta. 

[to  a  Stander-by.  Capell,  Cam.  + . 

33.  Iron-witted  ]  iron  wittie  Q7Qg 
(subs.) 


33.  [Descends  from  his  throne. 
Malone  et  seq. 

36,  37.  High-reaching . . . circumfpcA. 
Boy~\  Boy,  high  reaching... circumfpedl. 
Qq.  (Boy.  High  reaching. ..circumfpedl. 

Qs) 


I  think,  right  in  interpreting  ‘presently’  to  mean  shortly;  it  could  hardly  mean 
anything  else.)  The  following  eight  examples  cited  by  Schmidt  may,  for  convenience, 
be  considered  together,  since  they  are  all  short  phrases,  such  as  ‘presently  I  will 
be  with  you.’ — Mer.  0}  Ven.,  I,  iii,  177.  ‘Meet  me  presently,’  etc.  In  these 
‘presently’  may  mean  immediately  quite  as  well  as  shortly;  in  fact,  Schmidt  cites 
from  the  present  play:  ‘presently  repair  to  Crosby  Place.’ — I,  ii,  236,  as  an  example 
of  the  use  of  this  word  meaning  immediately.  But  three  then  remain  to  be  con¬ 
sidered:  ‘He  presently  as  greatness  knows  itself  Steps  me  a  little  higher  than  his 
vow.’ — 1  Hen.  IV:  IV,  iii,  74.  (Hotspur  is  speaking  in  indignation  at  Boling- 
broke’s  behaviour  and,  to  any  one  who  reads  the  whole  speech,  it  will,  I  think,  be 
apparent  that  Hotspur  means  by  ‘presently’  to  convey  the  idea  of  the  immediate 
action  on  the  part  of  the  King.)  In  ‘by  and  by  a  fool  and  presently  a  beast.’ — 
Othello,  II,  iii,  315,  it  is  possible  that  ‘presently,’  thus  put  in  contrast  with  ‘by 
and  by,’  means  shortly,  soon.  ‘Cassar  having  made  use  of  him  .  .  .  presently 
denied  him  rivality.’ — Ant.  6-°  Cleo.,  Ill,  v,  8.  Here,  as  in  the  example  from  Two 
Gent.,  the  force  of  the  sentence  is  destroyed  if  ‘presently’  be  not  taken  to  mean 
immediately.  The  rapid  sequence  of  the  two  events  is  what  Eros  considers  worthy 
of  note.  Bartlett  ( Concordance )  gives  one  hundred  and  forty-one  passages 
wherein  the  word  ‘presently’  occurs;  Schmidt  cites  thirteen  of  these  wherein 
‘presently’  means  shortly,  soon.  With  deference  I  submit  that  in  three  out  of 
these  thirteen  ‘presently’  seems  to  require,  from  the  context,  the  meaning  imme¬ 
diately;  in  two,  from  contrast  with  other  words,  it  may  mean  soon,  shortly,  and  in 
eight  it  may  mean  either  immediately  or  soon.  All  this  may  be  splitting  a  hair 
twixt  north  and  northeast  side,  but  in  order  to  comprehend  Shakespeare,  is  any 
labour  useless? — Ed. 

32.  he  gnawes  his  Lippe]  ‘The  whyle  he  was  thinking  of  any  matter,  he 
dyd  contynually  byte  his  nether  lyppe,  as  thowgh  that  crewell  nature  of  his  did  so 
rage  agaynst  yt  self  in  that  lyttle  carkase.’ — Polydore  Vergil,  p.  227. 

34.  vnrespedtiue]  Steevens:  That  is,  inattentive  to  consequences,  inconsider¬ 
ate.  Compare:  ‘When  dissolute  impiety  possesst  Th’  vnrespective  mindes  of 
prince  and  people.’ — Daniel:  Tragedie  0}  Cleopatra,  1599.  [Sig.  G.  recto,  ed.  1602.] 

37.  Boy]  French  (p.  242):  The  Page  is  no  doubt  intended  for  John  Green, 
probably  an  esquire  of  the  body  to  Richard,  and  who  for  the  share  he  had  in  the 
transactions  which  led  to  the  murder  of  the  young  princes  was  appointed  receiver 


292 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iy,  sc.  ii. 


Page.  My  Lord.  *  38 

Rich.  Know’ft  thou  not  any,  whom  corrupting  Gold 
Will  tempt  vnto  a  clofe  exploit  of  Death  ?  40 

Page.  I  know  a  difcontented  Gentleman, 

Whofe  humble  meanes  match  not  his  haughtie  fpirit : 

Gold  were  as  good  as  twentie  Orators, 

And  will  ( no  doubt )  tempt  him  to  any  thing. 

Rich.  What  is  his  Name  ?  45 

Page.  His  Name,  my  Lord,  is  Tirrell. 

Rich.  I  partly  know  the  man  :  goe  call  him  hither, 

Boy.  Exit.  48 


38,  46.  Page.]  Boy.  Qq. 

38.  My  Lord]  Lord.  Q3-3. 

39.  Know' Jl]  Knowejl  Q2. 

40.  Will]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh. 
i,  Ktly.  Would  Qq  et  cet. 

41.  I  know]  My  Lord,  I  know  Qq, 
Cam.  + . 

42.  fpirit  ]  minde  Qq,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Dyce  ii, 


iii,  Huds. 

43.  Gold']  Gould  Q,. 

46.  Tirrell]  Terrill Q6Q,.  Terrel Qg. 
Tyrrel  Cap.  et  seq. 

47,  48.  I  partly...  hither.  Boy.  Exit.] 
Goe  call  him  hither  prefently  Qq,  Sta. 
I  partly... hither.  Exit  Boy.  Pope,  +  , 
Cam.+  (subs.) 


of  the  lordship  of  the  Isle  of  Wight,  and  of  the  lordship  and  castle  of  Porchester. 
John  Green  had  been  employed  to  tamper  with  Brakenbury,  ‘that  he  should  put 
the  two  children  to  death.’ — Wright:  The  page  here  addressed  was  not  John 
Green,  who  had  been  sent  by  Richard  to  sound  Sir  Robert  Brackenbury  about  the 
murder  of  the  princes.  The  two  are  quite  distinct  in  Hall’s  narrative. 

40.  close]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.):  A.  4.  Shut  up  from  observation; 
concealed,  occult,  hidden,  secret;  secluded. 

40.  exploit]  Bradley  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.):  3.  An  act  or  deed;  a  feat;  in  modern 
use,  an  achievement  displaying  a  brilliant  degree  of  bravery  or  skill.  [The  present 
line  quoted.] 

41.  a  discontented  Gentleman]  Walpole  (p.  54):  James  Tirrel,  a  man  in  no 
secret  trust  with  the  king,  and  kept  down  by  Catesby  and  Ratcliffe,  is  recommended 
as  a  proper  person  by  a  nameless  page.  In  the  first  place  Richard  was  crowned  at 
York  (after  this  transaction)  September  8th.  Edward  the  Fourth  had  not  been 
dead  four  months,  and  Richard  in  possession  of  any  power  not  above  two  months, 
and  those  very  bustling  and  active:  Tirrel  must  have  been  impatient,  indeed,  if 
the  page  had  had  time  to  observe  his  discontent  at  the  superior  confidence  of 
Ratcliffe  and  Catesby.  It  happens  unluckily,  too,  that  great  part  of  the  time  Rat¬ 
cliffe  was  absent,  Sir  Thomas  More  telling  us  that  Sir  Richard  Ratcliffe  had  the 
custody  of  the  prisoners  at  Pontefract,  and  presided  at  their  execution  there.  But 
a  much  more  unlucky  circumstance  is,  that  James  Tirrel,  said  to  be  knighted  for 
this  horrid  service,  was  not  only  a  knight  before,  but  a  great  or  very  considerable 
officer  of  the  crown;  and  in  that  situation  had  walked  at  Richard’s  preceding 
coronation. 

47.  hither]  For  other  examples  wherein  hither,  whither,  thither  may  be  pro¬ 
nounced  as  monosyllables,  see  Walker,  Vers.,  106;  compare  III,  vii,  223,  237. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


293 


The  deepe ’reuoluing  wittie  Buckingham , 

No  more  (hall  be  the  neighbor  to  my  counfailes.  50 

Hath  he  fo  long  held  out  with  me,vntyr’d, 

And  (lops  he  now  for  breath  ?  Well,  be  it  fo. 


55 


Enter  Stanley. 

How  now,  Lord  Stanley ,  what’s  the  newes  ? 

Stanley.  Know  my  louing  Lord,  the  Marqueffe  Dorfet 
As  I  heare,  is  fled  to  Richmond , 

In  the  parts  where  he  abides. 


49.  deepe  reuotuing ]  deepe  refoluing 
Q7Qs-  deep-revolving  Pope  et  seq. 

50.  counfailes]  counfell  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.  +  (subs.) 

52.  Well ,  be  it  fo]  Om.  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.  + . 


57 

53.  Stanley.]  Darby.  Qq. 

54.  Lor d... newes  ?]  what  newes  with 
you  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  -f ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

newes]  news  with  you  ?  Coll.  MS. 
57.  [stands  apart.  Cam.  + . 


49.  wittie]  That  is,  judicious,  cunning,  artful. — Cowden-Clarke:  Richard 
is  sneering  at  Buckingham’s  pretensions  to  adroitness  and  skill  in  fraud. 

50.  No  more  shall  be  the  neighbor  to  my  counsailes]  Whately  (p.  63): 
Richard  always  determined,  and  taking  his  determination  himself,  never  waits  to 
be  incited,  nor  ever  idly  accounts  for  his  conduct;  but  fixed  to  his  purpose,  makes 
other  men  only  his  instruments,  not  his  confidants  or  advisers.  Even  Buckingham 
is  no  more:  he  discards  him  as  soon  as  he  begins  to  have  any  judgement  of  his  own. 

54,  55.  How  now  .  .  .  Know  my  louing  Lord]  Steevens:  Surely  we  should 
adopt  Hanmer’s  regulation.  Are  the  omitted  words,  ‘know’  and  ‘loving,’  of  so 
much  value  that  measure  must  continue  to  be  sacrificed  for  their  preservation? 
[The  regulation  to  which  Steevens  refers  is  due  to  Pope,  not  Hanmer;  see  Text. 
Notes. — Ed.] 

54-57.  How  now  .  .  .  abides]  It  is  impossible  to  make  intelligible,  in  the 
Text.  Notes,  the  variations  between  the  Quartos  and  Folio,  and  the  readings  of 
later  editors,  in  this  passage ;  I  therefore  gratefully  avail  myself  of  the  excellent 
statement  of  the  case  by  the  Cambridge  Editors  ( Note  xviii):  ‘The  first  Quarto 
reads:  “Darby.  My  Lord,  I  heare  the  Marques  Dorset  Is  fled  to  Richmond,  in 
those  partes  beyond  the  seas  where  he  abides.”  ...  In  the  seventh  and  eighth 
Quartos  the  second  line  of  Darby’s  speech  is  divided —  “.  .  .  seas  Where  he 
abides.”  .  .  .  Pope  follows  the  Folios  and  Rowe,  except  that  for  “Know,  my 
loving  Lord,”  he  substitutes  “my  Lord,”  ending  the  next  line  at  fled.  [Theobald, 
Hanmer,  Warburton,  Johnson,  and  Capell  follow  Pope.]  Steevens  [Var.  ’73] 
retains  the  reading  of  the  Folios,  but  in  other  respects  adopts  Pope’s  arrange¬ 
ment,  assigning  it,  more  suo,  to  Sir  Thomas  Hanmer.  Staunton  follows  Steevens 
as  regards  Stanley’s  speech,  and  then  reads  with  the  Quartos.’  The  Cambridge 
and  subsequent  editors  follow  the  Quartos,  ending  the  lines  at  fled  .  .  .  sea  .  .  . 
abides.  All  others  follow  Steevens,  Var.  ’73. — Ed. — Spedding  {Sh.  Soc.  Trans., 
1 8  75-’ 76;  p.  24):  I  cannot  believe  that  Shakespeare  intended  the  passage  to  stand 
in  either  the  Quarto  or  Folio  forms.  But  if  he  wrote  directions  in  the  margin,  or 


294 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF 


[act  iv,  sc.  ii. 

Rich.  Come  hither  Catesby ,  rumor  it  abroad,  •  5  8 

.  That  Anne  my  Wife  is  very  grieuous  ficke, 


58.  Come... abroad]  Catesby.  Cat.  My 
Lord.  King.  Rumor  it  abroad  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.  + . 

Catesby,]  Catesby ,  [Stanley  retires. 


Marshall. 

58.  it ]  is  Q?.  this  Qg. 

59.  is... ficke]  is  ficke  and  like  to  die 
Qq,  Pope,  +  (  — Var. ’73),  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 


between  the  lines,  for  regulating  the  metre,  it  is  easy  to  imagine  a  printer  misunder¬ 
standing  them.  .  .  .  His  first  corrections  [in  a  copy  of  the  Quarto],  may  have  been  as 
follows: *  1  King.  How  now,  what  news  with  you?  Stanley.  Know,  loving  Lord,  The 
Marquis  Dorset,  as  I  hear,  is  fled  To  Richmond  in  the  parts  where  he  abides.’ 
Afterwards  he  may  have  thought  it  better  to  introduce  Lord  Stanley’s  name  into 
the  dialogue,  as  the  audience  were  not  very  familiar  with  him;  and  altered  it  again 
thus:  ‘King.  How  now.  Lord  Stanley  what’s  the  news?  Stan.  My  Lord, 
The  Marquis  Dorset,’  etc.  The  printer,  understanding  that  ‘Know  loving’  was 
to  be  put  out,  and  that  ‘my’  was  to  be  put  in  again,  made  it  ‘know  my  loving 
Lord  ’ — not  readable  into  verse  anyhow.  This  would  be  one  of  those  accidents  of 
the  press  which,  though  not  what  can  be  called  ordinary,  yet  will  happen  occasion¬ 
ally.  An  error  so  easily  made  and  so  easily  mended  cannot  justify  any  inference 
as  to  the  capacity  of  the  corrector. — Marshall  has  the  following  arrangement 
of  these  mutilated  lines:  ‘  “How  now!  what  news  with  you?  Stan.  My  lord, 

I  hear  The  Marquess  Dorset’s  fled  beyond  the  seas  To  Richmond,  in  those  parts 
where  he  abides.”’  He  adds:  ‘This  is  made  up  partly  from  Qx  and  Fx,  and  has  the 
advantage  of  avoiding  the  two  broken  lines:  perhaps,  if  anything,  to  make  the 
sense  a  little  clearer.  The  whole  of  the  rest  of  this  scene  is,  from  a  dramatic  point 
of  view,  one  of  the  most  effective  portions  of  the  play.  It  exhibits  the  wonderfully 
versatile  power  of  Richard’s  mind.  Though  he  makes  no  answer  to  Stanley, 
he  hears  perfectly  well  the  message  he  has  brought;  but  he  takes  no  ostensible 
notice  of  it  till  he  repeats  the  substance  of  it  to  Buckingham.  The  course  of  thought 
he  was  before  pursuing — namely,  how  to  get  rid  of  all  other  claimants  to  the  throne, 
and  to  make  his  usurped  position  sure — he  still  continues  in  his  mind,  putting  aside 
the  question  of  Dorset’s  escape  for  after-consideration.  In  the  course  of  the  next 
two  or  three  minutes  he  has  formed  his  plans  by  which  he  proposes  to  secure  his 
throne,  as  he  thinks,  against  every  possible  contingency.  The  concentration  of 
his  mind,  which  enables  him  to  come  to  such  a  rapid  decision,  is  craftily  concealed 
under  the  guise  of  an  abstraction  which  the  unwary  might  mistake  for  inattention 
or  indifference. 

55,  56.  Know  ...  I  heare]  Lettsom  (ap.  Dyce,  ii):  ‘Know’  is  incompatible 
with  the  hesitating  ‘I  hear.’ 

56.  Richmond]  Boas  (p.  154):  Here,  for  the  first  time  in  the  play,  the  name 
of  the  destined  avenger  falls  on  the  new  king’s  ear,  and  the  effect  is  seen  in  the 
brooding  reverie  over  prophecies,  forgotten  till  that  moment,  into  which  Richard 
falls,  and  which  betrays  to  us  that,  like  other  irreligious  natures,  he  is  superstitious 
at  bottom.  [Between  the  mention  of  the  name  of  Richmond  and  mention  of  the 
prophecies  concerning  him,  Richard  has  been  occupied  with  various  other  matters; 
he  has  given  orders  in  regard  to  the  Queen;  he  has  settled  with  Tyrrel  for  the  murder 
of  the  princes.  Furthermore,  is  not  his  reverie  assumed  in  order  to  put  Bucking¬ 
ham  from  his  suit? — Ed.] 


ACT  IV,  sc.  ii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

I  will  take  order  for  her  keeping  clofe. 

Inquire  me  out  fome  meane  poore  Gentleman, 
Whom  I  will  marry  ftraight  to  Clarence  Daughter : 
The  Boy  is  foolifh,  and  I  feare  not  him. 

Looke  how  thou  dream’ft :  I  fay  againe,  giue  out, 
That  A?me,  my  Queene,  is  ficke,  and  like  to  dye. 
About  it,  for  it  Hands  me  much  vpon 
To  Hop  all  hopes,  whofe  growth  may  dammage  me. 
I  muft  be  marryed  to  my  Brothers  Daughter, 


295 

60 


65 


68 


61.  meane  poore ]  meane  borne  Qq. 
mean-born  Pope,  + ,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds.  mean,  poor  Knt. 

64.  dream' Jl]  dreameji  Q8. 


65.  Queene ]  wife  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

67.  me.']  me.  [Exit  Catesby.  Cap.  et 
seq. 

68,  70.  Brothers]  brother  Q7Qg. 

68.  (To  Himselfe)  Coll.  MS  ap.  Cam. 


60.  take  order]  Compare  III,  v,  113. 

62.  Clarence  Daughter]  Compare  I,  iv,  184. 

63.  The  Boy  is  foolish]  Malone:  Shakespeare  has  here  perhaps  anticipated  the 
folly  of  this  youth.  He  was,  at  this  time,  I  believe,  about  ten  years  old,  and  we  are 
not  told  by  any  historian  that  he  had  then  exhibited  any  symptoms  of  folly.  Being 
confined  by  Henry  VII.  immediately  after  the  battle  of  Bosworth,  and  his  education 
being  entirely  neglected,  he  is  described  by  Polydore  Vergil,  at  the  time  of  his  death, 
in  1499,  as  an  idiot;  and  his  account,  which  was  copied  by  Hall  and  Holinshed,  was 
certainly  sufficient  authority  for  Shakespeare’s  representation. — The  Cowden- 
Clarkes:  Shakespeare  has  drawn  this  unfortunate  child,  in  the  sole  scene  in  which 
he  appears,  II,  ii,  as  a  sweet  guileless  lad,  who  discovers  no  sign  of  witlessness;  but 
just  that  innocent  faith  in  goodness  which  is  called  credulity  by  the  vicious;  for  it  is 
he  who  artlessly  asks:  ‘Think  you  my  uncle  did  dissemble,  Grandam?’  and  when 
she  answers:  ‘Ay,  boy,’  simply  and  confidently  replies:  ‘I  cannot  think  it.'  Thus 
harmoniously  with  nature  does  our  dramatist  draw  his  characters  from  first  to 
last,  in  even  the  minutest  particulars. 

66.  it  stands  me  much  vpon]  Abbott  (§  204):  This  phrase  cannot  be 
explained,  though  it  is  influenced,  by  the  custom  of  transposition.  Almost  inex¬ 
tricable  confusion  seems  to  have  been  made  by  the  Elizabethan  writers  between 
two  distinct  idioms:  (1)  ‘it  stands  on’  (adv.),  or  ‘at  hand,’  or  ‘upon’  (cf.  instat, 
npogr/KEL),  i.  e.,  ‘it  is  of  importance/  ‘it  is  a  matter  of  duty’;  and  (2)  ‘I  stand  upon’ 
(adj.),  i.  e.,  ‘  I  in-sist  upon.’  In  (1)  the  full  phrase  would  be,  ‘  it  stands  on,  upon, 
to  me,  ’  but,  owing  to  the  fact 1  to  me'  or  lme'  ( the  dative  inflection )  is  unemphatic,  and 
‘  upon  ’  is  emphatic  and  often  used  at  the  end  of  a  sentence,  the  words  were  trans¬ 
posed  into  ‘it  stands  me  upon.'  ‘Me’  was  thus  naturally  mistaken  for  the  object 
of  upon.  .  .  .  The  Shakespearean  use  of  ‘  me,  ’  as  representing  the  old  dative,  renders 
it  possible,  though  by  no  means  probable,  that  ‘me,’  in  [the  present  passage],  was 
used  as  a  kind  of  dative. — Schmidt  {Lex.  s.  v.  stand  7.  e)  quotes  the  following  exam¬ 
ples:  ‘It  stands  your  grace  upon  to  do  him  right.’ — Rich.  II:  II,  iii,  138;  ‘Does  it 
not,  think’st  thee  stand  me  now  upon.’ — Hamlet,  V,  ii,  63;  ‘It  only  stands  Our  lives 
upon  to  use  our  strongest  hands.’ — Ant.  hr  Cleo.,  II,  i,  50. 

68.  I  must  be  marryed  to  my  Brothers  Daughter]  Walpole  (p.  74):  Let 


296 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  ii. 


[68.  I  must  be  marryed  to  my  Brothers  Daughter] 
us  examine  the  accusation  of  Richard’s  intending  to  marry  his  niece:  one  of  the 
consequences  of  which  intention  is  a  vague  suspicion  of  poisoning  his  wife.  Buck 
says  that  the  queen  was  in  a  languishing  condition,  and  that  the  physicians  declared 
she  could  not  hold  out  till  April;  and  he  affirms  having  seen  in  the  Earl  of  Arundel’s 
library  a  letter  written  in  passionate  strains  of  love  for  her  uncle  by  Elizabeth  to 
the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  in  which  she  expressed  doubts  that  the  month  of  April  would 
never  arrive.  What  is  there  in  this  account  that  looks  like  poison?  Does  it  not 
prove  that  Richard  would  not  hasten  the  death  of  his  queen  ?  The  tales  of  poisoning, 
for  a  time  certain,  are  now  exploded;  nor  is  it  in  nature  to  believe  that  the  princess 
could  be  impatient  to  marry  him,  if  she  knew,  or  thought,  he  had  murdered  her 
brothers.  .  .  .  Had  Richard  been  eager  to  wed  his  niece,  and  had  his  character  been 
as  impetuously  wicked  as  it  is  represented,  he  would  not  have  let  the  forward 
princess  wait  for  the  slow  decay  of  her  rival;  nor  did  he  think  of  it  until  nine 
months  after  the  death  of  his  son;  which  shows  it  was  only  to  prevent  Rich¬ 
mond’s  marrying  her.  ...  I  should  suppose  that  Richard,  learning  the  pro¬ 
jected  marriage  of  Elizabeth  and  the  Earl  of  Richmond,  amused  the  young 
princess  with  the  hopes  of  making  her  his  queen;  and  that  Richard  feared  that 
alliance  is  plain  from  his  sending  her  to  the  castle  of  Sheriff-Hutton  on  the  land¬ 
ing  of  Richmond. — Gairdner  (p.  255):  Whether  the  queen  was  to  be  divorced 
or  murdered,  or  was  expected  to  die  ere  long  in  the  course  of  nature,  there 
seems  to  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  the  project  of  this  marriage  was  con¬ 
ceived  during  her  lifetime.  It  is  stated  by  the  early  Tudor  historians  that  the 
princess  herself  abhorred  the  match,  even  after  the  death  of  the  queen  had  removed 
the  greatest  obstacle  to  it.  But  this  account  of  her  sentiments  does  not  pass  unchal¬ 
lenged.  Nor,  admitting  its  truth,  is  it  by  any  means  inconceivable  that  she  had  at 
one  time  nearly  made  up  her  mind  to  what  she  inwardly  abhorred.  She  was  in 
the  tyrant’s  power,  her  mother  thought  the  match  advisable,  it  offered  her  a  brilliant 
and  captivating  position,  and  her  refusal  would  have  been  construed  as  secret 
enmity  to  the  king.  It  would  have  been  bad  policy,  therefore,  to  exhibit  reluctance, 
even  if  she  really  intended  to  avoid  compliance  in  the  end.  ...  It  is  stated  by  Sir 
George  Buck,  on  the  authority  of  a  document,  not  known  to  be  now  extant,  that 
the  Princess  consulted  the  Queen’s  own  physicians  how  long  her  rival  was  likely  to 
live.  .  .  .  Positive  testimony  like  this,  however  revolting  and  opposed  to  natural 
expectation,  is  not  to  be  lightly  set  aside  as  incredible.  But  it  must  be  owned  there 
are  grounds  of  suspicion  in  the  present  case  which  may  fairly  justify  incredulity. 
Buck  does  not  expressly  say  that  he  had  seen  the  letter  himself  [in  which  the  Princess 
expressed  her  fears  that '  the  queen  would  never  die  ’];  and  we  might,  perhaps,  rather 
infer  the  contrary,  from  the  fact  that  he  only  gives  the  substance  of  it  in  his  own 
words,  whereas  he  has  quoted  at  full  length  documents  of  less  importance.  On 
the  other  hand,  if  it  is  not  clear  that  Buck  saw  it,  there  is  not  a  tittle  of  evidence  to 
show  that  any  one  else  did.  No  reference  is  made  to  it  by  any  of  the  great  antiquaries 
and  historians  of  Buck’s  day — by  Stow,  or  Speed,  or  Holinshed,  or  Camden.  No 
person  seems  to  have  seen  it  before,  no  person  appears  to  have  seen  it  since,  and 
nothing  is  known  of  its  existence  now.  Add  to  this  the  fact  that  Buck  . . .  was  by 
no  means  an  impartial  historian,  but  an  essayist  bent  on  justifying  a  paradox,  and 
that  such  a  letter  was  of  very  great  service  to  his  argument.  Taking  all  these  cir¬ 
cumstances  into  consideration,  ...  we  ought  certainly  to  be  pardoned  for  indulging  a 
belief,  or,  at  all  events,  a  charitable  hope,  that  Elizabeth  was  incapable  of  sentiments 


ACT  IV,  sc.  ii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

Or  elfe  my  Kingdome  (lands  on  brittle  Glaffe : 
Murther  her  Brothers,  and  then  marry  her, 

Vncertaine  way  of  gaine.  But  I  am  in 
So  farre  in  blood,  that  finne  will  pluck  on  finne, 
Teare-falling  Pittie  dwells  not  in  this  Eye. 

Enter  Tyrrel. 

Is  thy  Name  Tyrrell 

Tyr.  lames  Tyrrel ,  and  your  mod  obedient  fubiefl. 
Rich.  Art  thou  indeed  ? 

Tyr.  Proue  me,  my  gracious  Lord. 

Rich.  Dar’fl  thou  refolue  to  kill  a  friend  of  mine  ? 
Tyr.  Pleafe  you  : 

But  I  had  rather  kill  tw6  enemies. 


297 

70 


7  5 


80 


71.  Vncertaine ]  Uncurrent  Vaughan 
(iii,  101). 

72.  will  pluck ]  plucke  Q2_s.  pluckes 
Qe-s  (subs.) 

73.  Teare-falling]  Teare  falling  Q,^. 
Teares  falling  Q6-8. 

74.  Enter...]  Re-enter...  Cap.  et  seq. 

78.  [He  takes  him  aside.  Pope. 

Lord ]  foueraigne  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. 


-f ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

79.  Dar'Jl]  Darejl  Qlf  Cam. +. 

80.  81.  Pleafe. ..enemies]  Ff,  Rowe, 
Dyce.  As  one  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

Pleafe  you]  I  my  Lord  Qq.  Ay, 
my  lord  Cam.  + ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

81.  But  I  had]  I'd  Pope,  +  (  — Var. 

’73). 

enemies]  deepe  enemies  Q-^g. 


so  dishonourable  and  repulsive.  ...  It  would  certainly  appear,  from  the  little  we 
know  of  her  after-life,  that  Elizabeth  of  York  was  not  destitute  of  domestic  feeling; 
and  that  she  could  have  been  eager  to  obtain  the  hand  of  her  brothers’  murderer 
is  really  too  monstrous  to  be  believed.  [For  further  historical  information  con¬ 
cerning  Richard’s  projected  marriage,  see  Buck,  pp.  127-130;  Turner,  iii,  502- 
505;  Lingard,  iv,  252;  Miss  Halsted,  ch.  xxii. — Ed.] 

71,  72.  I  am  in  .  .  .  sinne  will  pluck  on  sinne]  The  lines  in  Macbeth:  ‘I  am  in 
blood  Stepp’d  in  so  far,  that  should  I  wade  no  more  Returning  were  as  tedious 
as  go  o’er.’ — III,  iv,  136,  will  doubtless  suggest  themselves  to  every  reader. 

73.  Teare-falling  Pittie]  That  is,  pity  which  causes  tears  to  fall.  ‘Fall’ 
is  here  used  transitively  as  in  * She  jails  the  sword.' — I,  ii,  205;  ‘when  fools  eyes  fall 
tears.’ — I,  iii,  372;  and  ‘fall  thy  edgeless  sword.’ — V,  iii,  190. — Ed. 

74.  Tyrrel]  Walpole  (p.  127):  It  seems  to  me  to  appear  that,  Sir  James 
Tyrrel  not  being  attainted  on  the  death  of  Richard,  but  having,  on  the  contrary, 
been  employed  in  great  services  by  Henry  the  Seventh,  it  is  not  probable  that  he 
was  one  of  the  murderers.  That  Lord  Bacon,  owning  that  Tyrrel’s  confession  did 
not  please  the  King  so  well  as  Dighton’s;  that  Tyrrel’s  imprisonment  and  execution 
some  years  afterwards  for  a  new  treason,  of  which  we  have  no  evidence,  and  which 
appears  to  have  been  mere  suspicion,  destroy  all  probability  of  his  guilt  in  the 
supposed  murder  of  the  children. 

80,  81.  Please  you:  But . .  .  two  enemies]  Spedding  (Sh.  Soc.,  Trans.,  1875— ’76; 
p.  25):  Here  I  suspect  we  have,  in  the  Folio,  the  result  of  a  misunderstood  direction 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  ii. 


298 

Rich.  Why  then  thou  haft  it :  two  deepe  enemies,  82 

Foes  to  my  Reft,  and  my  fweet  fleepes  difturbers, 

Are  they  that  I  would  haue  thee  deale  vpon  : 

Tyrrel ,  I  meane  thofe  Baftards  in  the  Tower.  85 

Tyr.  Let  me  haue  open  meanes  to  come  to  them, 

And  foone  lie  rid  you  from  the  feare  of  them. 

Rich.  Thou  fing’ft  fweet  Mufique  : 

Hearke,  come  hither  Tyrrel , 

Goe  by  this  token  :  rife,  and  lend  thine  Eare,  Whifpers.  90 
There  is  no  more  but  fo  :  fay  it  is  done, 

And  I  will  loue  thee,  and  preferre  thee  for  it. 

Tyr.  I  will  difpatch  it  ftraight.  Exit. 

*King.  Shall  we  heare  from  thee  Tirreli  ere  we  fleepe  ? 


Enter  Buckingham. 


94 


82.  then']  there  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

82,  83.  two. ..and. .fleepes]  to. ..that... 
Jleepe  Q8. 

83.  and]  that  Q7< 
dijlurbers]  dijlurbs  Qq. 

86.  [Kneeling.  Coll.  MS  ap.  Cam. 
open]  Om.  Q7Q8. 

88,89.  Thou. .. Tyrrel]  Ff,  Rowe.  As 
one  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

Mufique :  Hearke ,  come]  mu- 
ficke.  Come  Qq,  Sta.  music.  Hark,  come 
Cam.  + .  music  to  me.  Come  Anon.  ap. 
Cam. 


90.  this]  that  Qq. 

Whifpers.]  He  whifpers  in  his 
eare.  Qq  (wifpers  QJ. 

91.  There  A]  Tis  Qq. 

it  is]  is  it  QjQ2Q6-8. 

92.  for  it]  too  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 

93.  I  will  ...fir aight]  Tis  done  my 
gracious  Lord.  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.+  (rny 
good  Lord.  Q^g. ) 

Exit.]  Om.  Qq. 

*King.  Shall.,  fleepe  ?]  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam. +  .  Om.  FtFf  et  cet. 

Tirreli]  Om.  Q^g. 


to  the  printer.  Suppose  the  correction  made  thus:  ‘Please  you’  being  written  above 
‘I  my  Lord  but’  of  the  Quarto  line,  if  the  erasing  line  was  not  carried  through 
but,  or  if  the  printer  did  not  observe  that  it  was,  we  should  have  our  present  Folio 
reading.  But  the  corrector  meant,  no  doubt,  to  make  a  verse  of  it. 

84.  deale  vpon]  Murray  (AT.  E.  D.  s.  v.  vb,  I.  18):  To  set  to  work  upon. 
[The  present  line  quoted.] 

91.  There  is  no  more  but  so]  Wright:  That  is,  to  carry  out  Richard’s  whispered 
instructions.  Compare:  ‘If  love  have  touched  you  nought  remains  but  so.’ — Tam. 
oj  Shr.,  I,  i,  167;  and  Hamlet,  I,  iii,  io,  where  Laertes  says  that  Hamlet’s 
passion  for  Ophelia  is  but  ‘The  perfume  and  suppliance  of  a  minute;  No  more.’ 
To  which  Ophelia  asks:  ‘No  more  but  so?’  [Abbott  (§  411)  considers  this  use  of 
‘but  so’  a  confusion  between  the  infinitive  and  imperative.] 

92.  preferre]  That  is,  promote,  advance. 

93.  I  will  dispatch  it]  Collier:  The  same  question,  ‘Shall  we  hear  from  thee 
ere  we  sleep’  [see  Text.  Notes]  had  been  put  to  Catesby  by  Richard  in  III,  i,  210. 
It  was  therefore,  perhaps,  omitted  here  in  the  Folio.  [See  III,  i,  210,  note  by 
Daniel.] 


ACT  IV,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


299 


*Tir.  Ye  fhall  my  Lord.* 

Buck.  My  Lord,  I  haue  conflderM  in  my  minde,  95 

The  late  requeft  that  you  did  found  me  in. 

Rich.  Well,  let  that  reft  :  Dorfet  is  fled  to  Richmond. 

Buck.  I  heare  the  newes,  my  Lord. 

Rich.  Stanley ,  hee  is  your  Wiues  Sonne :  well,  looke 
vnto  it.  100 

Buck.  My  Lord,  I  clayme  the  gift,  my  due  by  promife, 

For  which  your  Honor  and  your  Faith  is  pawn’d, 

Th’Earledome  of  Hertford,  and  the  moueables, 

Which  you  haue  promifed  I  fhall  poffeffe. 

Rich.  Stanley  looke  to  your  Wife  :  if  fhe  conuey  105 

Letters  to  Richmond, yon  fhall  anfwer  it. 

Buck.  What  fayes  your  Highneffe  to  my  iuft  requeft  ?  107 


*  Ye  Jliall  my  Lord .*]  Q,_s,  Sta. 
Cam. +.  Yea,  my  good  Lord.  Q^g-  Om. 

FtFf  et  cet. 

95-  coti/ider1  d~\  confidered Qq,Cam.  + . 

96.  The]  That  Pope,  + ,  Varr.  Ran. 
requeJT\  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sta.  de- 

mautid  Qa_8.  demand  Qt  et  cet. 

97.  refl]paJfeQ<\,  Sta.  Cam.  +  (subs.) 

98.  the']  that  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

99.  Wiues  Sonne ]  wiues  fonnes  Qi-3. 
wife's  son  Rowe  et  seq. 


99.  well,  looke ]  well  look  Knt,  Coll. 
Hal. 

100.  vnto  it]  to  it  Qq,  Pope,  + ,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Dyce,  Sta. 
Cam.  + . 

101.  the]  your  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

103.  Hertford]  Herford  Qq  ( Herfort 
Q4).  Hereford  Ff  et  seq. 

104.  Which... fhall]  The  which  you 
promifed  I  Jhould  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 
{your  QJ. 

107.  requejl]  demand  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 


101.  I  clayme  the  gift]  Malone:  Henry  Stafford,  Duke  of  Buckingham,  was 
lineally  descended  from  Thomas,  Duke  of  Gloster,  .  .  .  who  was  created  Earl  of  Here¬ 
ford  in  1386,  by  King  Richard  II.,  on  which  ground  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  had 
some  pretensions  to  claim  a  new  grant  of  the  title;  but  with  respect  to  the  moiety 
of  the  estate,  he  had  not  a  shadow  of  right  to  it;  for  supposing  that  it  devolved  to 
Edward  IV.  with  the  crown,  it  became,  after  the  murder  of  his  sons,  the  joint  prop¬ 
erty  of  his  daughters.  If  it  did  not  devolve  to  Edward  IV.  it  belonged  to  the  right 
heirs  of  Henry  IV.  [See  III,  i,  219.] 

103.  moueables]  Barnard:  Buckingham  does  not  particularise  the  real  estate 
because  that  would  be  entailed  and  go  with  the  title,  but  the  ‘moveables’  needed 
to  be  specially  mentioned  in  a  grant. 

105.  106.  if  she  conuey  Letters  to  Richmond]  On  this  point  Grafton,  in  his 
continuation  of  More,  the  ultimate  authority,  says  (p.  183,  ed.  Singer):  ‘.  .  .  it 
was  geuen  him  [Lord  Stanley]  in  charge  to  kepe  her  in  some  secret  place  at  home, 
without  hauyng  anye  seruaunt  or  companie,  so  that  from  thence  forth  she  should 
neuer  sende  letter  nor  messenger  to  her  sonne,  nor  any  of  hisfriendes,  or  confederates, 
by  which  the  king  might  be  molested  or  troubled,  or  anye  hurte  or  preiudice  might 
be  attempted  against  his  realm  and  commonaltie.’ — Ed. 


300 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  ii. 


Rich.  I  doe  remember  me,  Henry  the  Sixt  108 

Did  prophecie,  that  Richmond  fhould  be  King, 

When  Richmond  was  a  little  peeuifli  Boy.  iio 

A  King  perhaps. 

*Buck.  My  Lord.  1 1 2 


108.  I. ..me]  As  I  remember  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.  +  . 

ill.  A  King]  A  King ! —  Cap. 

per haps.  ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  per¬ 
haps,  perhaps.  Qq,  Sta.  perhaps ,  per¬ 


haps, —  Cam.  + .  ( perhaps,  Q4) .  perhaps 
—  Pope  et  cet. 

112-131.  *Buck.  My  Lord. ..vein  to 
day.*]  Qq,  Pope  et  seq.  Om.  FjFf, 
Rowe. 


108.  I  doe  remember  me]  Craigie  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  remember,  v.  d.  5.  reflex): 
To  bethink  or  recollect,  to  think  or  reflect  upon  (oneself).  Now  rare. 

108,  109.  Henry  the  Sixt  Did  prophecie,  etc.]  See  3  Hen.  VI:  IV,  vi, 
70-76.  Johnson  says:  ‘The  allusions  to  the  plays  of  Henry  VI.  are  no  weak 
proofs  of  the  authenticity  of  these  disputed  pieces.’  If  Johnson  means  that  such 
allusions  point  to  Shakespeare  as  the  author  of  the  trilogy,  it  is  to  be  feared  that  he 
had  not  compared  the  above  passage  from  3  Hen.  VI.  with  its  corresponding 
passage  in  The  True  Tragedie  of  Richard  Duke  of  Yorke,  which  was  the  basis  of 
Shakespeare’s  3  Hen.  VI.;  the  two  passages  are  almost  identical.  It  is  doubt¬ 
ful  if  Shakespeare  were  more  than  an  adapter  of  the  older  play. — Ed. 

112-131.  My  Lord  .  .  .  giuing  vein  to  day]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875- 
’76;  p.  25):  Though  it  is  not  easy  to  see  why  these  twenty  lines  should  have  been 
struck  out  of  the  Folio,  the  scene  reads  quite  well  without  them.  .  .  .  Perhaps  Shakes¬ 
peare  thought  that  he  had  represented  Richard  as  making  too  many  words  about 
[his  dismissal  of  Buckingham],  and  approaching  it  too  indirectly.  ‘  Thou  troublest 
me:  I  am  not  in  the  vein,’  was  enough. — Daniel  ( Introd .,  p.  ix):  All  the  Qq, 
except  Q4,  repeat  ‘perhaps.’  If  this  repetition  be  the  true  reading,  can  the  omission 
in  F,  have  originated  with  Q4,  or  is  it  merely  an  accidental  coincidence?  It  is 
the  only  instance  of  the  agreement  of  Fj  with  a  reading  peculiar  to  Qt.  I  incline 
to  believe  that  the  repetition  of  ‘perhaps’  was  not  found  in  the  theatrical  MS, 
and  was  therefore  struck  out  of  the  Q.  used  in  the  preparation  of  the  F,  text;  and 
the  more  so  that  Q4  has  little  or  no  claim  to  this  distinction.  It  is  worthy  of  notice, 
however,  that  this  missing  ‘perhaps’  was  the  last  word  which  occurs  before  the 
only  long  Q.  passage  not  found  in  Fv  and  the  omission  of  which  from  the  F.  is  one 
of  the  chief  puzzles  of  the  many  this  play  presents.  I  can  only  account  for  this 
omission  of  this  passage  from  F,  on  the  supposition  that  it  never  was  in  the 
original  draught  of  the  play;  that  it  was,  in  fact,  in  theatrical  parlance,  a  ‘  bit  of 
fat,  ’  inserted  in  the  Q.  version  for  the  benefit  of  the  chief  actor,  when  that  version 
was  put  upon  the  stage.  At  any  rate,  when  ‘copy’  was  being  prepared  for  the 
printers  of  the  Folio,  it  must  have  been  deliberately  struck  out  of  the  Q.  used  for 
that  purpose,  and  could  only  have  been  thus  struck  out  because  it  was  not  in  the 
theatrical  MS,  or  was  there  found  crossed  out:  perhaps  in  striking  it  out  the  scribe 
used  his  pen  too  vigourously,  and  also  struck  out  the  ‘  perhaps,  ’  the  absence  of 
which  occasions  this  elaborate  attempt  to  account  for  its  absence.  I  may  add 
here  that  I  believe  this  passage,  and  perhaps  [the  passage  in  Richard’s  speech  in 
III,  vii,  228,  ‘O  do  not  swear,’  etc.],  are  the  only  passages  that  can  in  any  way  be 
considered  additions  to  the  Q.;  all  the  other  lines  found  in  it,  but  notin  Fj,  are  to  be 


ACT  IV,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


301 


*King.  How  chance  the  Prophet  could  not  at  that  time,  1 1 3 
*Haue  told  me  I  being  by,  that  I  fhould  kill  him. 

*Buck.  My  lord,  your  promife  for  the  Earledome.  1 15 

*King.  Richmond,  when  laft  I  was  at  Exeter, 

*The  Maior  in  curtefie  fhowd  me  the  Caftle, 

*And  called  it  Ruge-mount,  at  which  name  I  ftarted, 

*Becaufe  a  Bard  of  Ireland  told  me  once  119 


1 14.  him.']  him  ?  Pope  et  seq. 

1 15.  Earledome.]  earldom, —  Cap.  et 
seq.  (subs.) 

1 1 6.  Richmond,]  Richmond  ?  Pope  et 
seq.  (subs.) 


1 16.  lajl  I  was]  I  was  last  Pope,  + . 

1 17.  Jhowd]  Jhewed  Q2_g,  Pope,  +  , 
Cap.  Varr.  Mai. 

1 19.  Bard]  Lord  Q8. 


accounted  for  as  accidental  omissions  in  the  Folio. — Pickersgill  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans., 
1:875— ’76;  P-  94) :  Who  that  has  ever  read  the  scene  as  it  is  in  the  Qq  does  not  feel 
that  the  omission  of  these  lines  is  a  real  loss  ?  Of  course,  it  may  be  urged  that  the 
judgement  of  the  poet  is  sometimes  at  variance  with  the  consensus  of  the  critics 
respecting  the  merits  of  his  work.  Is  it  more  incredible,  it  may  be  asked — is  it 
more  incredible  that  Shakespeare  should  blot  out  a  passage  which  every  judicious 
reader  would  be  anxious  to  retain,  than  that  Milton,  for  example,  should  prefer 
the  Paradise  Regained  to  the  Paradise  Lost  ?  I  reply  that,  if  it  were  certain 
that  Shakespeare  had  done  so,  nothing  further  could  be  said;  but  if,  on  the 
other  hand,  it  is  not  certain,  and  if  there  is  offered  an  alternative  supposition 
which  is  more  probable,  surely  it  is  only  reasonable  to  prefer  the  latter.  We 
come  then  to  inquire  whether  the  passage  has  any  characteristics  which 
might  induce  a  corrector  devoid  of  taste  to  expunge  it?  I  think  it  has.  I  find 
that  only  five  lines  out  of  the  whole  passage  are  perfectly  regular  in  metre.  Now,  as 
we  know  otherwise  that  the  corrector  set  his  face  rigidly  against  any  metrical  irreg¬ 
ularity,  it  would  have  been  incumbent  upon  him,  if  he  had  retained  the  passage, 
to  cast  it  afresh;  and  this,  I  think,  was  a  task  above  his  powers,  for  his  metrical 
tinkering,  however  frequent,  seldom  extends  beyond  a  line  at  a  time. 

1 13.  How  chance]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  vb.):  5.  ‘How  chance’  was 
formerly  used  in  questions  for:  how  chances  it  that,  how  is  {was)  it  that.  Here 
‘chance’  takes  no  inflection,  and  almost  assumes  the  character  of  an  adverb. 

114.  I  being  by]  Malone:  The  Duke  of  Gloucester  was  not  by  when*  Henry 
uttered  the  prophecy  (see  3  Hen.  VI:  IV,  vi,  68).  Our  author  seldom  took  the 
trouble  to  turn  to  the  plays  to  which  he  referred. 

1 16.  when  last  I  was  at  Exeter]  ‘And  during  his  abode  here  [Exeter]  he 
went  about  the  citie,  &  viewed  the  seat  of  the  same,  &  at  length  he  came  to  the 
castell;  and,  when  he  vnderstood  that  it  was  Rugemont,  suddenlie  he  fell  into  a 
dumpe,  and  (as  one  astonied)  said:  “Well,  I  see  my  daies  be  not  long.”  He  spake 
this  of  a  prophesie  told  him,  that,  when  he  came  once  to  Richmond,  he  should  not 
longliue  after.’ — Holinshed,  iii,  746. — Capell  (ii,  185)  says:  ‘This  singular  proph¬ 
ecy,  if  real,  shows  that  the  poet  had  some  resources  from  which  he  drew  his 
materials,  that  are  not  descended  to  us,  for  no  chronicle  mentions  it.’ — No  chronicle, 
it  is  true,  before  the  second  edition  of  Holinshed,  mentions  the  prophecy;  and,  a3 
Churchill  (p.  222)  points  out,  this  incident  is  Holinshed’s  only  important  addition 
to  the  story. — Ed. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  ii. 


302 

*1  fhould  not  liue  long  after  I  faw  Richmond.  120 

*Bnck.  My  Lord. 

*  King.  I,  whats  a  clocke? 

*  Buck.  I  am  thus  bold  to  put  your  grace  in  mind 
♦Of  what  you  promifd  me. 

*Ki?ig.  Wei,  but  whats  a  clocke  ?  125 

*Buck.  Vpon  the  ftroke  of  ten. 

*King.  Well,  let  it  ftrike. 

*Buck.  Whie  let  it  ftrike  ? 

*King.  Becaufe  that  like  a  Iacke  thou  keepft  the  ftroke 
♦Betwixt  thy  begging  and  my  meditation,  130 


121-128.  Linesend  :  bold... vie. ..Jlroke 
...Jlrike  ?  Steev.  Var. ’03,  ’13,  Sing.  Ktly. 
Lord  ...clocke...  mind  ...me  ...clocke  ?  ... 
ten . . .Jlrike  ?  Var .  ’  2 1 .  clocke  ?... mind. . . 
clocke... Jlrike... Jlrike  ?  Knt,  Dyce,  Cam. 
+  (subs.),  lord...  clocke... mind... me... 
ten . . .Jlrike  ?  Coll . Wh.  i,  Hal.  clocke  ? ... 
mind  ...me... clocke  ?  . . .Jlrike. . . .Jl rike  ? 
Sta. 


121.  [kneels  and  takes  Richard  by  the 
robe.  Booth. 

122,  125.  a  clocke ]  o'  clock  Theob.  et 
seq. 

125.  Wel~\  Om.  Pope,  +  . 

whats]  what  is' t  Steev.  Var.  ’03, 

’13. 

129.  keepjl ]  keepejl  Q2Q4- 


129.  like  a  Iacke]  Wright:  The  figure  which  in  old  clocks  struck  the  hour 
upon  the  bell.  Compare:  ‘But  my  time  Runs  posting  on  in  Bolingbroke’s  proud 
joy,  While  I  stand  fooling  here,  his  Jack  o’  the  clock.’ — Rich.  II:  V,  v,  60.  Such 
figures  were  formerly  to  be  seen  at  St  Dunstan’s  church  in  Fleet  Street.  Jack 
o’  the  Clock,  or  clockhouse,  came  to  be  the  nickname  for  a  busybody.  ‘  Fretillon: 
m.  A  little  nimble  dwarfe,  or  hop-on-my-thombe;  a  Jacke  of  the  Clocke-house; 
a  little  busie-bodie,  meddlar,  Jacke-stickler;  one  that  hath  an  oare  in  euery  man’s 
Boat,  or  his  hand  in  euery  man’s  dish.’ — Cotgrave.  [Whoso  wishes  may  read  in 
the  Variorum  of  ’21  a  page  made  up  of  passages  selected  by  Malone  and  Steevens, 
in  reference  to  the  ‘Jack  of  the  Clock.’ — Ed.] 

129-130.  thou  keepst  the  stroke,  etc.]  Both  Sir  John  Hawkins  and  Vaughan 
(iii,  103)  consider  explanation  of  this  passage  necessary.  Hawkins  says:  ‘Richard 
resembles  Buckingham  to  one  of  those  automatons  which  struck  the  hours  on  a 
bell,  and  bids  him  not  suspend  the  stroke,  but  strike,  that  the  hour  may  be  past, 
and  himself  be  at  liberty  to  pursue  his  meditations.’  To  which  Vaughan  replies: 
‘This  does  not  explain  how  the  striking  would  put  Richard  at  leisure.  I  presume 
that  the  meditations  enjoined  by  ecclesiastical  authority  as  a  part  of  God’s  service 
were  prescribed  for  certain  hours.  The  striking  then  would  be  the  customary 
signal  for  Richard  to  begin  his  meditations,  and  we  should  interpret  either:  “  because 
thou  suspendest  the  stroke  which  must  be  a  signal  to  close  your  begging,  and  be  a 
signal  to  me  to  commence  my  meditations,”  or,  “because  you  now,  like  the  Jack 
of  a  clock,  have  the  control  over  the  striking,  which  striking  separates  the  time  of 
your  begging  from  the  time  of  my  meditations.”  This  last  is  the  right  interpreta¬ 
tion,  I  believe.’  With  all  respect  to  Hawkins  and  Vaughan,  is  any  elaborate 
explanation  of  Richard’s  meaning  necessary?  Richard  intends  his  rebuff  to  be 


ACT  IV,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


3°3 


*1  am  not  in  the  giuing  vein  to  day.*  131 

Buck.  May  it  pleafe  you  to  refolue  me  in  my  fuit. 

Rich.  Thou  troubleft  me,  I  am  not  in  the  vaine.  Exit. 

Buck.  And  is  it  thus?  repayes  he  my  deepe  feruice 
With  fuch  contempt?  made  I  him  King  for  this?  135 

O  let  me  thinke  on  Ha/lings } and  be  gone 

To  Brecnock,  while  my  fearefull  Head  is  on.  Exit.  137 


132.  May. . .fuit  ]  Why  then  refolue  me 
whether  you  will  or  no  Qq,  Var.  ’73,  *21, 
Knt,  Coll.  Dyce,  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Why 
then  resolve  me  if  you  will  or  no  ?  Pope, 
Han.  Why  then  resolve  me  whe'r  you 
will  or  no  ?  Theob.  Warb.  Cap.  Var.  ’78, 
’85,  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13,  Sta.  Cam. 
+  ,  Ktly. 

133.  Thou]  Tut ,  tut,  thou  Qq,  Sta. 
Reading  Tut,  tut,  as  sep.  line,  Cam.  +  . 

vaine]  vein  Rowe  et  seq. 


133.  Exit.]  Exeunt  Richard,  and 
Train.  Capell.  Exeunt  all  but  Bucking¬ 
ham.  Cam. +.  Exit  angerly.  Coll.  MS. 

134.  And. ..thus]  Is  it  euen  fo,  Q,Q, 
0,0*.  Is  it  euen  fo  t  Q3-6,  Pope,  +  , 
Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Sta.  Cam. +. 

repayes]  rewardfl  Q,.  rewards 
Qa-g,  Cam.  + . 

deepe]  true  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

1 35.  fuch]  fuch  deepe  Qq,  Cam.-K 

137.  Brecnock]  Brecknock  Warb. 


as  offensive  as  possible;  Buckingham,  at  least,  needed  no  elucidation  of  what  the 
King  meant. — Ed. 

133.  Thou  troublest  me]  Richardson  (p.  39):  Richard’s  incautious  behaviour 
after  he  has  arisen  to  supreme  authority  appears  very  striking  in  his  conduct  to 
his  accomplices.  Those  whom  he  formerly  seduced,  or  deceived,  or  flattered,  he 
treats  with  indifference  or  disrespect.  He  conceives  himself  no  longer  in  need  of 
their  aid:  he  has  no  occasion,  as  he  apprehends,  to  assume  disguise.  Men  of 
high  rank,  who  shall  seem  to  give  him  advice  or  assistance,  and  so,  by  their  influence 
with  the  multitude,  reconcile  them  to  his  crimes,  or  bear  a  part  of  his  infamy, 
cease  to  be  reckoned  necessary;  and  he  has  employment  for  none  but  the  desper¬ 
ate  assassin,  or  implicit  menial.  All  this  is  illustrated  in  his  treatment  of  Bucking¬ 
ham. — Hazlitt  ( English  Stage,  p.  9):  When  Richard  says  to  Buckingham,  ‘I 
am  not  in  the  vein,  ’  the  expression  should,  we  imagine,  be  that  of  stifled  hatred 
and  cold  contempt,  instead  of  sarcastic  petulance  [as  Edmund  Kean  gives  it]. — 
Gould  (p.  44):  We  may  note  an  apparent  error  in  J.  B.  Booth’s  manner  of  reply¬ 
ing  to  Buckingham’s  reiterated  demand  for  the  promised  earldom.  He  says: 
‘  Thou  troublest  me.  I’m  not  i’  the  vein,  ’  in  a  tone  of  fretful  anger.  The  passage 
would  seem  rather  to  require  a  tone  of  cool  and  kingly  slight. 

134.  my  deepe  seruice]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  47):  Here, 
judging  from  the  correction  in  the  Folio,  I  should  suppose  that  there  must  have  been 
some  confusion  in  the  MS  from  which  the  Quarto  was  printed.  [See  Text.  Notes.] 
Shakespeare  may  have  written  ‘deep’  in  the  margin,  meaning  it  as  a  substitute  for 
true;  and  the  printer  may  have  thought  that  it  was  meant  to  be  inserted  in  the  next 
line.  With  printers  such  things  are  possible.  But  were  it  not  that  the  Cambridge 
editors  seem  to  have  seen  no  objection  to  ‘deep’  where  it  stands  in  the  Quarto, 
I  should  have  thought  it  certain  that  no  man  with  an  ear  for  metrical  effect  ever 
put  it  there  intentionally. 

137.  Brecnock]  Brecknock  Castle  in  Wales,  where  the  Duke  of  Buckingham’s 
estate  lay. 


304 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  ii. 


[Scene  II/.] 

Enter  Tyrrel.  138 

Tyr .  The  tyrannous  and  bloodie  A6t  is  done, 

The  moft  arch  deed  of  pittious  maffacre  140 

That  euer  yet  this  Land  was  guilty  of : 

Dighton  and  For  reft,  who  I  did  fuborne  142 


Scene  iii.  Pope  et  seq. 

The  Same.  Capell.  The  Ramparts  of 
the  Tower.  Irving. 

138.  Tyrrel]  Sir  Francis  Tirrell  Qq. 
139-160.  Mnemonic,  Pope,  Warb. 


139.  AA]  deed  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +. 

140.  arch  deed ]  arch-art  Qi-3Q5Q6, 
Sta.  arch  art  Q4,  Cam. +  .  arch-acts 
Q7>  arch-deed  Pope. 

142.  who~\  ivhoiti  QqFf  et  seq. 


Scene  iii.]  For  the  convenience  of  students  who  use  the  text  of  the  Cambridge  or 
subsequent  editors,  I  have  here  indicated  by  brackets  the  scene  (with  its  line  num¬ 
bers)  as  it  appears  in  that  edition. — Ed. — Marshall:  The  division  [of  a  new  scene] 
is,  here,  certainly  necessary.  Even  if  we  are  to  include  the  succeeding  events  with 
the  foregoing,  the  time  is  different,  for  in  1.  126  above  it  is  morning,  whereas  1. 
172  shows  the  time  to  be  evening.  It  seems  better  to  suppose  an  interval.  [The 
scene  between  Buckingham  and  Richard  certainly  is  intended  to  take  place  in  the 
morning,  but  ‘soon  and  after  supper,’  1.  172,  might  refer  to  almost  any  time  after 
mid-day. — Ed.] 

139.  The  tyrannous  and  bloodie  Adi]  Horn  (p.  147):  The  only  crime  of 
Richard,  which  Shakespeare  represents  actually  upon  the  scene,  is  the  murder  of 
Clarence,  and  that,  moreover,  in  so  impressive  a  manner  that  we  seem  to  discern 
ever  after,  upon  the  forehead  of  Richard,  the  bloody  mark  of  Cain.  But  great 
as  is  the  horror  inspired  by  this  murder,  the  description  of  the  death  of  the  two  princes 
awakens  an  emotion  equally  deep.  Buckingham,  zealous  in  every  crime,  shrank 
appalled  at  thought  of  such  a  murder;  only  the  bloodiest  of  villains  could  be  bribed 
to  compass  it;  even  they,  after  the  unspeakable  deed,  were  completely  unmanned. 
The  poet  does  not  venture  to  show  them  to  us  in  their  hopeless  remorse. — Churchill 
(p.  204):  No  opportunity  is  lost  [by  Hall]  to  heighten  the  pathos  [of  the  murder  of 
the  two  princes].  They  are  constantly  referred  to  as  ‘innocent  babes,’  ‘sely  and 
little  babes,’  ‘poor  lambs,’  and  the  like;  their  blood  cries  to  God  for  vengeance; 
Ely’s  heart  sobs  to  think  of  them,  Buckingham’s  veins  pant  and  his  body  trembles. 
The  whole  impression  of  pathos  and  of  horror  approaches  the  description  of  the 
murder  as  given  by  Shakespeare,  of  which  description  it  doubtless  forms  the 
germ. — Schelling  (p.  151):  ‘Heywood,  ’  says  Charles  Lamb,  in  a  much-quoted 
passage,  ‘  is  a  sort  of  prose  Shakespeare.  His  scenes  are  to  the  full  as  natural  and 
affecting.  But  we  miss  the  Poet ,  that  which  in  Shakespeare  always  appears  out 
and  above  the  surface  of  the  nature.'  Is  it  too  bold  to  query  whether  the  poet,  in 
Shakespeare’s  Tyrrel,  taken  with  the  beauty  of  ‘the  gentle  babes’  more  than  is  a 
murderer’s  wont — ‘their  Alabaster  innocent  Arms,’  and  lips,  ‘four  red  roses  on  a 
stalk’ — ‘appears  out  and  above  the  surface  of  the  nature'  somewhat  to  that  nature’s 
detriment?  [Compare  Heywood,  2  Edward  IV:  III,  v.] 

142.  Dighton  and  Forrest]  ‘Sir  James  Tirel  deuised  that  thei  shold  be  mur- 
thered  in  their  beddes.  To  the  execution  whereof,  he  appointed  Miles  Forest  one 
of  the  foure  that  kept  them,  a  felowe  fleshed  in  murther  before  time.  To  him  he 


ACT  IV,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


305 


[142.  Dighton  and  Forrest] 

ioyned  one  J ohn  Dighton  his  own  horsekeper,  a  bigbrode  square  strong  knaue  .... 
god  neuer  gaue  this  world  a  more  notable  example,  neither  in  what  vnsuretie  stan- 
deth  this  worldly  wel,  or  what  mischief  worketh  the  prowde  enterprise  of  an  hyghe 
heart,  or  finally  what  wretched  end  ensueth  such  dispiteous  crueltie.  For  first  to 
beginne  with  the  ministers,  Miles  Forest  at  sainct  Martens  pecemele  rotted  away. 
Dighton  in  dede  yet  walketh  on  a  Hue  in  good  possibilitie  to  bee  hanged  ere  he  dye. 
But  sir  James  Tirel  dyed  at  Tower  hill,  beheaded  for  treason.’ — More,  pp.  130,  133. 
— Gairdner  (Eng.  Historical  Review,  July,  1891,  p.  461):  I  believe  nothing  was 
known  of  the  details,  or  of  the  instruments  of  the  murder,  until  the  execution 
of  Sir  James  Tyrell  in  1502.  Men  were  convinced  the  children  had  been  made 
away  with,  they  could  not  tell  why  or  by  whom.  But  when  Tyrell  was  condemned 
to  death  for  a  totally  different  offence,  and  knew  that  he  must  suffer,  it  was  only 
natural  that  he  should  confess  himself  to  a  priest,  to  whom  he  revealed  the  full 
details  of  the  story.  His  confession  implicated  only  one  man  alive,  his  old  servant, 
Dighton,  and  the  matter  being  so  serious,  Dighton  was  examined  about  it,  no  doubt 
under  a  promise  of  pardon,  considering  that  a  knowledge  of  his  guilt  was  only 
obtained  under  seal  of  confession  from  another  man.  This  will  explain  the  state¬ 
ments  of  Sir  Thomas  More,  first,  that  Tyrell  and  Dighton  were  at  that  time  examined 
and  confessed  the  crime,  and,  secondly,  that,  of  its  instruments  at  the  time  he  wrote, 
Dighton  still  remained  alive,  ‘in  good  possibility  to  be  hanged  ere  he  die.’  Now, 
if  this  be  the  way  the  story  really  came  to  light,  Markham  has  no  ground  for  his 
contention  that,  ‘if  the  confessions  had  ever  been  made,  Tyrell  and  Dighton  must 
have  been  tried  and  convicted  for  these  atrocious  murders,  and  duly  punished.’ 
Tyrell  certainly  could  not  be  tried  for  the  murder,  when  he  was  already  under  sen¬ 
tence  of  death  for  another  crime;  and  as  for  his  servant  Dighton,  whose  agency  in 
the  matter,  but  for  his  confession,  would  have  remained  still  a  secret,  there  can  be 
very  little  doubt  that  he  confessed  on  a  promise  of  pardon.  Tyrell’s  confession 
to  the  priest  would  certainly  not  have  been  published;  and  to  publish  Digh- 
ton’s  as  a  formal  statement,  would  have  had  much  the  same  effect.  Moreover, 
the  King’s  pardon  could  hardly  have  protected  him  from  the  fury  of  the  people. — 
Markham  (p.  264):  A  man  named  Dighton  was  made  Baififf  of  the  manor  of 
Ayton  (Harl.  MS  433  fol.  55);  but  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  this  appointment 
was  after  the  murder,  or  that  he  was  Tyrrel’s  horse-keeper,  or  that  Tyrrel  ever  had 
a  groom  of  that  name  ...  A  John  Dighton  was  a  priest,  and  possibly  a  chaplain 
in  the  Tower.  He  may  have  been  only  an  accessory  after  the  fact,  in  connection 
with  the  interments  .  .  .  Miles  Forest  was  a  responsible  old  official  at  Barnard 
Castle,  living  with  his  wife  and  grown-up  sons  in  the  far  north  of  England,  where 
he  died  and  his  family  received  a  pension  for  his  long  service.  We  are  asked  to 
believe  that  he  was,  at  the  same  time,  a  notorious  murderer  who  was  also  a  jailer 
in  the  Tower,  and  that  he  died  in  sanctuary  at  St  Martin’s-le-Grand.  How 
Forest’s  name  got  into  the  story  concocted  from  the  pretended  confession  it  is  not 
possible,  at  this  distance  of  time,  to  surmise  .  .  .  There  was  a  desire  to  give  names 
and  other  details  in  order  to  throw  an  air  of  verisimilitude  over  the  fable.  We  see 
the  same  attempt  in  the  use  of  the  name  of  Dighton.  There  was  a  John  Dighton 
living  at  Calais  when  the  story  was  made  up,  who  was  known  to  be  connected  in 
some  mysterious  way  with  the  disappearance  of  the  Princes.  So  the  author  of  the 
story  hit  upon  his  name  to  do  duty  as  a  strong,  square  knave  who  did  the  deed. 
The  name  of  neither  Dighton  nor  Forest  occurs  in  the  authorised  version  as  given 
20 


3°6 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  ii. 


To  do  this  p  eece  of  ruthfull  Butchery,  [5] 

Albeit  they  were  flefht  Villaines,  bloody  Dogges,  144 

143.  this]  thir  Q3.  Q^.  piece  of  ruthless  Pope  et  cet. 

peece  of  ruthfull]  Ff,  Rowe, Coll.  144.  Albeit]  Although  Qq,  Cam. +. 

Wh.  i,  Hal.  ruthleffe  peece  of  Q,Q9,  bloody]  blooded  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS). 

Sta.  Cam.  +  (subs.),  ruthfull  piece  of 

by  Polydore  Vergil.  It  is  alleged  that  Tyrrel  and  Dighton  both  confessed.  Yet 
Tyrrel  was  beheaded  for  another  offence,  and  Dighton  was  rewarded  with  a  residence 
at  Calais.  These  are  proofs  that  there  was  no  such  confession  as  was  alleged, 
and  was  embodied  in  the  story,  which,  as  it  now  stands,  must  be  a  fabrication. 
For  if  the  confessions  were  ever  made,  Tyrrel  and  Dighton  must  have  been  tried 
and  convicted  for  these  atrocious  murders,  and  duly  punished.  [The  above  extract 
is  considerably  abridged  from  Markham’s  fifth  chapter,  the  whole  aim  of  which 
is  to  clear  Richard  of  the  guilt  of  the  murder  of  the  Princes  and  to  fasten  it  upon 
Henry  VII.  The  principal  points  in  Markham’s  argument  appeared  first  in  the 
English  Hist.  Review,  for  April,  1891;  it  is  to  that  article  that  Gairdner  refers  in 
the  foregoing  note. — Ed.] 

143.  peece  of  ruthfull  Butchery]  R.  G.  White:  The  Folio  gives  a  revised 
version  of  the  line  [as  in  the  later  Qq],  the  position  of  the  adjective  having  been 
changed.  Therefore,  as  the  form  ruthful  was  retained  on  the  revision,  it  should 
not  be  changed  [to  ruthless].  ‘  Ruthful  ’  is  elsewhere  thus  used  by  Shakespeare,  and 
also  by  other  authors  of  his  time,  and  later:  and  we  now  say,  with  the  same  force, 
either  a  shameful  deed  or  a  shameless  deed;  in  one  instance  meaning  that  the  act 
causes  shame  in  the  observer — in  the  other,  that  it  shows  a  lack  of  shame  in  the 
performer. 

144.  flesht]  Bradley  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  vb.  1):  To  reward  (a  hawk  or  hound) 
with  a  portion  of  the  flesh  of  the  game  killed,  in  order  to  excite  his  eagerness  in  the 
chase.  Hence  in  wider  sense,  to  render  (an  animal)  eager  for  prey  by  the  taste  of 
blood.  [Ibid.  (s.  v.  Fleshed  past  part.  act.  2  a)  Inured  to  bloodshed,  hardened. 
[The  present  line  quoted.] 

144.  bloody]  Collier  (Emend.,  p.  333):  The  passage  is  surely  much  improved 
by  the  trifling  alteration  [ blooded ,  by  the  MS  Corrector].  The  two  villains  had  been 
fleshed,  and  were  like  dogs  that  had  been  allowed  the  taste  of  human  blood;  yet 
they  wept,  like  two  children,  while  narrating  the  particulars  of  the  murder  of  the 
princes. — Singer  (Sh.  Vind.,  p.  173):  If  Collier  can  adduce  any  example  of 
‘blooded’  in  the  sense  here  intended  to  it,  it  will  surprise  me  very  much.  All 
authorities  I  am  acquainted  with  are  against  it;  and  I  hold  it  to  be  an  invention  of 
the  ingenious  correctors,  who  do  not  hesitate  at  coining  a  word. 

144.  Dogges]  Tawney  quotes  two  or  three  passages  wherein  dogs  are  taken 
by  Shakespeare  as  symbols  of  inhumanity  and  creatures  lacking  pity.  He  adds: 
‘Shakespeare  appears  to  have  had  a  low  opinion  of  dogs.’  Tawney  might  have 
easily  increased  his  examples;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  Shakespeare  is  one  of  the 
very  few  dramatists  who  has  given  a  prominent  part  to  a  dog  in  one  of  his 
plays  (the  only  other  instance  I  can,  at  present,  recall  is  Puntarvolo’s  dog  in  Jon- 
son’s  Every  Man  out  of  his  Humour)-,  whatever  may  have  been  Shakespeare’s 
private  opinion,  Launce,  although  speaking  of  Crab  as  ‘  the  sourest-natured  dog 
that  lives,  ’  made  of  that  dog  a  companion  and  confidant.  It  is,  perhaps,  not  too 


ACT  IV,  sc.  ii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

Melted  with  tenderneffe,  and  milde  companion, 

Wept  like  to  Children,  in  their  deaths  fad  Story. 

0  thus  ( quoth  Dighton)  lay  the  gentle  Babes  : 

Thus,  thus  (quoth  Forreji )  girdling  one  another 
Within  their  Alablafter  innocent  Armes  : 

Their  lips  were  foure  red  Rofes  on  a  ftalke, 

And  in  their  Summer  Beauty  kill  each  other. 

A  Booke  of  Prayers  on  their  pillow  lay, 

Which  one  (quoth  Forreji. )  almoft  chang’d  my  minde : 
But  oh  the  Diuell,  there  the  Villaine  ftopt : 

When  Dighton  thus  told  on,  we  fmothered 
The  moft  replenifhed  fweet  worke  of  Nature, 

That  from  the  prime  Creation  ere  the  framed. 


307 

145 


[10] 

150 


[IS] 

155 

157 


H5-  Melted ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll,  i,  ii, 
Wh.  i,  Hal.  Rife.  Melting  Qq  et  cet. 

milde ]  kind  Q,_s,  Cam.  +  .  Om. 

Qfc-8- 

146.  to ]  two  Qq,  Pope,  + ,  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Wh.  i,  Sta.  Cam. +,  Ktly. 

deaths ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  death's 
Coll.  Hal.  deaths'  Theob.  et  cet. 

Story]  Jlories  Qq,  Pope,  Han. 

Cam.  +  . 

147.  O]  Lo,  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 

the  gentle ]  thofe  tender  Qi^,  Sta. 
Cam.  + .  thefe  tender  Q^. 

148.  one]  on  Q,Q2. 

149.  Alablafter  innocent]  F2F3,Rowe, 
Cap.  innocent  alablajler  Q,.,,  Warb. 
innocent  alabajler  Qg,  Pope,  + ,  Sta.  Cam. 
+ .  Alabajler  innocent  F4  et  cet. 

150.  were]  Om.  Q2.  like  Q3-8,  Sta. 

1 5 1.  And]  When  Q^.  Which  Q,_s 


et  cet. 

151.  in]  Om.  F3F4. 

15 1.  152.  their.. .Prayers]  there... 
prayer  Q?Q8. 

152.  on]  one  Q?. 

153.  one]  once  QqF4  et  seq. 

154.  Diuell ,  there]  Diuell  their  Qr 
diuel :  their  Qa.  diuel :  or  divell :  there 
Q3Q4.  divel !  there  Qs_g.  devil — there 
Rowe  et  seq.  (subs.) 

155.  When]  Whiljl  Qq,  Cam.  +  , 
(  Whilejl  QJ. 

told  on,  we]  Ff,  Rowe,  told  on 
we  Qj-e-  told,  on  we  Q?.  told,  one  we  Qg. 
told  on  :  ‘  We  Knt,  Coll.  Dyce,  Wh.  i, 
Hal.  Cam.  +  .  told  on — we  Pope  et  cet. 

fmothered]  smothered  there 
Vaughan  (iii,  106). , 

156.  replenifhed  ]  replenisht  Q,Qg. 

157.  ere  Jhe]  euer  he  Qq. 


much  to  say  that  for  one  reader  who  remembers  the  plot  of  the  T wo  Gentlemen  of 
Verona,  there  are  many  who  recall  Launce  and  his  dog  with  pleasure.  Theseus, 
in  Midsummer  Night’s  Dream,  speaks  in  glowing  terms  of  his  hounds  bred 
from  Spartan  stock;  but  he  speaks  as  a  huntsman. — Ed. 

146.  in  their  deaths  sad  Story]  That  is,  in  relating,  or  hearing,  or  remembering. 
This  would  fill  out  the  ellipsis,  and  then  ‘in’  becomes  the  common  in  before  a  verbal 
meaning  during  or  while. — Ed. 

149.  Alablaster]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D .):  From  Greek  alapaarpoq,  properly 
a?.afJaoToc,  said  to  be  from  name  of  a  town  in  Egypt.  The  spelling  in  six¬ 
teenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  is  almost  always  ‘alablaster’;  apparently  due 
to  a  confusion  with  arblaster,  a  cross-bowman,  also  written  alablaster. 


3°8 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  ii. 


Hence  both  are  gone  with  Confcience  and  Remorfe,  [20] 

They  could  not  fpeake,  and  fo  I  left  them  both, 

To  beare  this  tydings  to  the  bloody  King.  160 

Enter  Richard. 

And  heere  he  comes.  All  health  my  Soueraigne  Lord. 

Ric.  Kinde  Tirrell ,  am  I  happy  in  thy  Newes. 

Tir.  If  to  haue  done  the  thing  you  gaue  in  charge,  [25] 
Be  get  your  happineffe,  be  happy  then,  165 

For  it  is  done. 

Rich.  But  did’ft  thou  fee  them  dead. 

Tir.  I  did  my  Lord. 

Rich.  And  buried  gentle  Tirrell. 

Tir.  The  Chaplaine  of  the  Tower  hath  buried  them,  170 


158.  Hence... Remorfe]  Om.  Q3_8. 

gone. ..Remorfe,]  Thus...remorfe 
Q1Q2,  Cam.  +  .  gone ;... remorse  Han. 

160.  beare]  bring  Qq,  Cam. +  . 
this]  thefe  Q^,  Ff,  Rowe,  +  , 

Cap.  Varr.  Ran. 

161.  Richard]  King  Richard  Qq, 

Cam.  + .  (hi.  Q,Q2.) 

162.  comes]  come  Q^. 

158.  both  are  gone  with  Conscience  and  Remorse]  Schmidt  (Note  in 
Trans.):  ‘Gone  with/  in  the  sense  of  being  completely  overcome,  occurs  in  another 
passage  in  Shakespeare.  ‘O  Richard!  York  is  too  far  gone  with  grief.’ — Rich.  II: 
II,  i,  184.  The  words,  ‘and  so  I  left  them  both/  show  that  this  is  the  only  meaning 
here  applicable,  provided  we  read  with  the  Qq  thus,  and  not  with  the  Ff,  ‘hence.’ 
[See,  for  this  use  of  ‘with/  Abbott,  §  193.] 

160.  this  tydings]  Wright:  Compare:  ‘The  tidings  comes  that  they  are  all 
arrived.’ — King  John:  IV,  ii,  1 15;  and:  ‘ But  let  ill  tidings  tell  themselves.’ — Ant. 
&•»  Cleo.,  II,  v,  87. 

163.  Tirrell .  . .  thy  Newes]  Macready,  in  his  account  of  his  first  appearance  as 
Richard  III.,  says  (p.  14 1):  ‘At  the  close  of  the  compunctious  soliloquy  that  Cibber 
has  introduced  Tyrrel  enters:  with  all  the  eagerness  of  fevered  impatience  I  rushed 
to  him,  inquiring  of  him,  in  short  broken  sentences,  the  children’s  fate;  with  rapid 
decision  on  the  mode  of  disposing  of  them,  hastily  gave  him  his  orders,  and  hurrying 
him  away  exclaimed  with  triumphant  exultation:  “Why  then  my  loudest  fears 
are  hushed!”  The  pit  rose  to  a  man,  and  continued  waving  hats  and  handkerchiefs 
in  a  perfect  tempest  of  applause  for  some  minutes.  The  battle  was  won.  The 
excitement  of  the  audience  was  maintained  at  fever-heat  through  the  remainder 
of  the  tragedy.’ 

164.  to  haue  done]  Barnard:  That  is,  to  have  the  thing  done  (performed). 
‘  Have  ’  here  is  not  auxiliary,  but  is  equivalent  to,  to  possess. 


162.  health... Lord]  haile... liege  Qq, 
Sta.  Cam.+. 

163.  am]  and  Q6Q,Q8. 
thy]  the  F3F4. 

Newes.]  Ff.Q^  newes  ?  Qa  et  cet. 

164.  gaue]  giue  Q,Q3. 

166.  done.]  done  my  Lord.  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.  +  . 


ACT  IV,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


309 


But  where  (to  fay  the  truth)  I  do  not  know.  [30] 

Rich .  Come  to  me  Tirrel  foone,  and  after  Supper,  172 


171.  where... truth}]  how  or  in  what 
place  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

172.  Rich.]  Tir.  Q,Qa. 

foone ,  and ]  Ff,  Coll,  i,  ii,  Wh.  i, 


Hal.  foone  after  Q,Q8.  soon,  soon  Rowe, 
+  ,  Ran.  soon  at, —  Var.  ’73.  foone  at 
Qj-$  et  cet. 

172.  after  Supper ]  after-supper  Sta. 


171.  where  ...  I  do  not  know]  Skottowe  (i,  198):  This  assertion  by  Tirrell 
displays  the  poet’s  remembrance  of  one  passage  and  forgetfulness  of  another,  in 
Sir  Thomas  More;  who  first  narrates  that  Tirrell  himself  directed  the  burial  of  the 
children  ‘at  the  stayre  foote,  metely  depe  in  the  grounde  vnder  a  great  heape  of 
stones.’  But,  it  is  added,  they  were  afterwards  taken  up  by  ‘a  prieste  of  Sir  Robert 
Brackenbury,  and  secretly  entered  in  such  place,  as  by  the  occasion  of  his  deathe, 
whiche  onely  knew  it,  could  neuer  synce  come  to  light.  .  .  .  Bothe  Dighton  and 
Tirrell  confessed  the  murther  .  .  .  but  whither  the  bodies  were  remoued  thei 
could  nothing  tel.’ — [pp.  131,  132.] — Dixon  (i,  34):  As  the  priest  would  be  likely 
to  inter  the  princes  in  consecrated  ground,  search  was  made,  not  only  in  the  open 
graveyard  near  St  Peter’s,  but  within  the  church.  To  find  these  relics  would 
have  been  to  render  a  signal  service  to  King  Henry.  No  effort  was  spared;  but 
fate  was  against  the  search;  and  as  the  bodies  could  not  be  found,  the  most  cunning 
princes  of  Europe  affected  to  believe  that  Perkin  Warbeck,  the  Pretender,  was 
King  Edward’s  son.  Two  hundred  years  after  the  deed  was  done  the  mystery 
was  cleared.  In  the  reign  of  Charles  the  Second,  when  the  Keep  (no  longer  used 
as  a  royal  palace)  was  being  filled  with  state-papers,  some  workmen,  in  making  a 
new  staircase  into  the  royal  chapel,  found  under  the  old  stone-steps,  hidden  close 
away,  and  covered  with  earth,  the  bones  of  two  boys,  which  answered  in  every 
way  to  those  which  had  been  sought  so  long.  Deep  public  wonder  was  excited; 
full  inquiry  into  all  the  facts  was  made;  and  a  report  being  sent  to  Charles  that 
these  bones  were  those  of  the  murdered  princes,  the  King  gave  orders  for  their 
removal  to  a  royal  sepulchre  in  Westminster  Abbey.  The  bones  thus  found  now 
lie  in  the  great  chapel  built  by  Henry  the  Seventh,  side  by  side  with  some  of  the 
most  eminent  of  English  kings. — Bayley  (i,  63):  Those  who  have  been  most 
forward  to  blacken  the  memory  of  Richard  have  advanced,  as  an  additional  argu¬ 
ment  against  him,  the  discovery  of  some  bones,  resembling  those  of  two  children, 
at  the  foot  of  the  staircase  leading  to  the  chapel  in  the  White  Tower:  but,  in  fairness, 
little  or  no  reliance  should  be  placed  on  this  circumstance;  for  so  many  and  so 
contradictory  are  the  statements  respecting  the  burial  of  these  young  princes,  that 
bones  found  at  one  time  in  an  uninhabited  turret  were  regarded  as  the  remains  of 
one  of  them;  although  it  afterwards  turned  out  that  they  were  the  limbs  of  an  old 
ape  that  had  clambered  up  there  and  died!  It  is  also  a  very  general  opinion  that 
the  building  called  the  Bloody-T ower  received  its  appellation  from  the  circumstance 
of  the  children  having  been  stifled  in  it;  and  it  is  commonly  and  confidently  asserted 
that  the  bones  were  found  under  a  staircase  there;  yet  both  of  these  stories  seem 
wholly  without  foundation. 

172.  soone]  Arrowsmith  ( Sh.’s  Editors ,  p.  7):  Although  ‘soon’  in  the  west 
of  England  to  this  day  signifies  evening  (Halliwell,  Did.  of  Arch,  and  Prov. 
Words),  yet  elsewhere,  or  to  persons  unversed  in  the  nomenclature  of  the  Tudor- 
Stewart  aera,  such  a  signification  is  unknown,  and  would  be  sought  to  as  little  pur- 


3io 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  ii. 


When  thou  fhalt  tell  the  proceffe  of  their  death.  173 

Meane  time,  but  thinke  how  I  may  do  the  good, 

And  be  inheritor  of  thy  defire.  175 

Farewell  till  then.  [35] 

173.  When ]  And  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  .  175.  defire .]  defire.  [Exit  Tirrell.  Qq. 

thou ]  thou  there  Ff.  1 76.  then]  foone  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

174.  the]  thee  QqFf  et  seq. 

pose  in  the  Minsheus  of  a  prior,  or  a  later  date,  as  in  the  grammar  of  a  Bullokar  or 
a  Murray  would  the  fact  attested  by  a  contemporary  of  Shakespeare,  a  Head-Master 
of  St  Paul’s  School — that  the  use  of  ‘soon’  as  an  adverb,  in  the  familiar  sense  of 
betimes,  by  and  by  or  quickly,  had,  when  he  wrote,  been  eclipsed  with  most  men  by 
an  acceptation  restricted  to  nightfall:  the  statement  of  this  witness  is  worth  quot¬ 
ing  in  his  own  words.  In  the  comparison  of  adverbs,  at  p.  28  of  his  Logonomia 
Anglica,  ed.  1619,  Gil  writes:  ‘Quickly  cito,  sooner  citior  aut  citius,  soonest  citis- 
simus  aut  citissime,  nam  “soon”  hodie  apud  plurimos  significat  ad  primam  ves- 
peram,  olim  cito.’ 

172.  and  after  Supper]  The  majority  of  editors,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  Text. 
Notes,  here  follow  the  Qq,  reading:  soon  at  after  supper,  whereon  Wright  thus 
notes:  ‘It  is  not  quite  certain  how  this  phrase  is  to  be  understood.  We  may  either 
regard  “after  supper”  as  a  compound  word,  equivalent  to  rear-supper,  and  denoting 
the  banquet  which  followed  the  more  substantial  meal,  or  we  may  take  “at  after” 
as  equivalent  to  after,  as  in:  “At  after  souper  goth  this  noble  king.” — Chaucer, 
Cant.  Tales,  106x6  (ed.  Tyrwhitt),  and  again  in:  “They  were  both  left  bente  tyll 
the  nexte  daye  at  after  dyner.” — Ascham,  Toxophilus,  I,  128  (ed.  Arber).  But 
although  “at  after”  in  this  sense  is  not  infrequently  found,  it  does  not  elsewhere 
occur  in  Shakespeare,  while  “soon”  followed  by  “at”  is  very  common.’  [Bartlett, 
Concord.,  gives  nine  examples.] — Spedding  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  i875-’76;  p.  25) 
considers  the  Folio  change  a  mere  misprint. — Pickersgill  (Ibid.,  p.  94)  says: 
‘It  is  obvious  that  the  change  from  at  into  “and”  cannot  be  Shakespeare’s;  for  the 
phrase  is  a  common  one  with  him.  There  are  two  clear  indications  that  the  altera¬ 
tion  was  deliberately  made:  (1)  the  insertion  of  a  comma  after  “soon,”  and 
(2)  the  substitution  of  “when”  for  and  in  the  following  line.’ 

173.  thou  shalt  tell  the  processe  of  their  death]  Kemble  (Remarks,  p.  88): 
The  whole  passage — Is  it  done? — are  they  dead? — are  they  buried? — forcibly  expresses 
the  tyrant’s  fear  lest  the  bloody  work  may  have  been  left  incomplete:  He  is  far 
from  finding  himself  at  ease  on  Tyrrel’s  first  relation  of  the  event;  and  his  solicitude 
to  hear  the  process  of  the  murder  retold  only  discovers  the  anxiety  with  which  he 
labours,  till  he  shall  have  put  the  irrevocable  deed  past  doubt.  By  the  immutable 
law  of  nature,  this  painful  state  of  mind  inevitably  waits  on  the  entrusting  of  dan¬ 
gerous  crimes  to  the  execution  of  mercenary  agents;  and  in  the  case  of  Macbeth 
also,  similar  guilt  produces  similar  torture;  compare — ‘Get  thee  gone:  Tomorrow 
We’ll  hear  ourselves  again.’ — Macbeth,  III,  iv. 

173.  processe]  For  other  examples  of  ‘process’  in  the  sense  of  narrative,  account, 
see  Schmidt,  Lex.  s.  v.  3. 

176.  Farewell  till  then]  If  soon  be  taken  with  the  meaning  evening,  as  given 
by  Arrowsmith  in  a  note  on  1.  172  above,  the  Quarto  reading:  Farewell  till  soon, 
is,  perhaps,  to  be  here  preferred.  Richard  has  just  told  Tirrell  to  meet  him  after 


ACT  IV,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


Tir.  I  humbly  take  my  leaue. 

Rick.  The  Sonne  of  Clarence  haue  I  pent  vp  clofe, 
His  daughter  meanly  haue  I  matcht  in  marriage, 


3il 
1 77 
179 


1 77»  *78.  Hr.  /...Rich.]  Om.  Qq.  178.  pi ;nt~\  pend  Q,Qg.  pen'd  Cap. 

177.  tny\  Om.  Ff.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Hal.  Ktly. 

leaue. ]  leave.  [Exit.  Pope,+  . 


supper,  and  therefore  would  hardly  bid  him  farewell  until  the  time  when  Tirrell 
was  to  be  ‘inheritor  of  his  desire.’ 

176.  Farewell]  Winter  ( Shadows ,  etc.,  i,  313):  Chief  among  the  beauties  in 
Mansfield’s  impersonation  of  Richard  was  imagination.  The  attitude  of  the 
monarch  toward  his  throne — the  infernal  triumph,  and  yet  the  remorseful  agony 
and  withering  fear — in  the  moment  of  ghastly  loneliness  when  he  knows  that  the 
innocent  princes  have  been  murdered  and  that  his  imperial  pathway  is  clear,  made 
up  one  of  the  finest  spectacles  of  dramatic  illumination  that  the  stage  has  afforded. 
You  saw  the  murderer’s  hideous  exultation,  and  then,  in  an  instant,  as  the  single 
ray  of  red  light  from  the  setting  sun  streamed  through  the  Gothic  window  and 
fell  upon  his  evil  head,  you  saw  him  shrink  in  abject  fear,  cowering  in  the 
shadow  of  his  throne;  and  the  dusky  room  was  seemingly  peopled  with  gliding 
spectres.  That  treatment  was  theatrical,  but  in  no  derogatory  sense  theatrical — 
for  it  comports  with  the  great  speech  on  conscience;  not  the  fustian  of  Cibber, 
about  mutton  and  short-lived  pleasure,  but  the  speech  that  Shakespeare  has  put  into 
Richard’s  mouth;  the  speech  that  inspired  Mansfield’s  impersonation — the  brilliant 
embodiment  of  an  intellectual  man,  predisposed  to  evil,  who  yields  to  that  inherent 
impulse,  and  thereafter,  although  intermittently  convulsed  with  remorse,  fights 
with  tremendous  energy  against  the  goodness  that  he  scorns  and  defies,  till  at  last 
he  dashes  himself  to  pieces  against  the  adamant  of  eternal  law. 

178.  The  Sonne  of  Clarence]  See  1.  64  above. 

179.  His  daughter  meanly  .  .  .  matcht]  Ritson:  To  Sir  Richard  Pole, 
Knt.  This  Lady,  at  seventy  years  of  age,  without  any  legal  process,  and  for  no 
crime  but  her  relation  to  the  crown,  was  beheaded  in  the  Tower  by  Henry  VIII. — 
Hunter  ( Illust .,  ii,  91):  It  should  be  observed  that  the  marriage  was  not  so  mean 
as  the  words  would  lead  us  to  suppose,  and  as  is,  I  believe,  generally  supposed  by 
many  persons  who  do  not  take  their  ideas  of  history  from  Shakespeare  only.  The 
mother  of  Sir  Richard  Pole  was  half-sister  to  Margaret,  Countess  of  Richmond.  .  . . 
I  do  not  know  whether  Shakespeare  is  right  in  representing  the  marriage  of  the 
daughter  of  Clarence  with  Sir  Richard  Pole  as  having  taken  place  during  the  reign 
of  Richard;  but  it  was  in  fact  a  union  of  the  houses  of  York  and  Lancaster,  similar 
to  that  in  the  marriage  of  Richmond  and  the  lady  Elizabeth;  .  .  .  and,  if  brought 
about  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VII.,  probably  a  stroke  of  the  same  policy  which  gave 
to  the  new  Lancastrian  sovereign  the  heiress  of  the  rival  house.  .  .  .  Shakespeare’s 
line  has,  I  have  no  doubt,  contributed  much  to  keep  out  of  sight  the  real  quality 
and  condition  of  the  father  of  Cardinal  Pole,  whose  reputation  was  European,  and 
who  was  one  of  the  most  illustrious  characters  of  the  age. — Boswell-Stone  (p. 
396) :  Margaret  Plantagenet  was  about  twelve  years  of  age  at  the  time  of  Richard’s 
death.  .  .  .  The  dramatist  has,  apparently,  confounded  her  with  her  first  cousin.  In 
1485  the  rumour  that  Richard  would  marry  his  niece  was  accompanied  by  a 


312 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  ii. 


The  Sonnes  of  Edward  fleepe  in  Abrahams  bofome,  1 80 

And  Anne  my  wife  hath  bid  this  world  good  night. 

Now  for  I  know  the  Britaine  Richmond  aymes  [40] 

1 8 1 .  this']  the  Qq,  Cap.  Var.  ’78,  ’85,  182.  Britaine]  Fa.  Brittaine  Qq. 

Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  +  .  Brittain  F  .  Britain  F4.  Briton  Rowe, 

good  night  ]  godnight  Q,Qa.  +.  Breton  Cap.  Cam. +.  Bretagne 

Var.  ’73  et  cet. 


report  that  he  meant  also  ‘  to  prefer  the  ladie  Cicilie  hir  sister  to  a  man  found  in  a 
cloud,  and  of  an  vnknowne  linage  and  familie.’ — Holinshed,  iii,  751. 

180.  Abrahams  bosome]  See  Luke  xvi,  22. — Webb:  The  profanity  of  such  a 
phrase  in  Richard’s  mouth  heightens  the  horror  of  his  catalogue  of  crimes.  [Was 
it  not  part  of  Richard’s  scheme  to  ‘clothe  his  naked  villainy  with  odd  old  ends 
stolen  forth  of  holy  writ’? — Ed.] 

181.  Anne  .  .  .  hath  bid  this  world  good  night]  Anne,  Richard’s  Queen, 
died  16  March,  1485. — Legge  (ii,  174):  The  spite  of  Richard’s  enemies  was  such, 
that  reports,  incredible  and  contradictory,  were  circulated  in  anticipation  of  the 
Queen’s  death,  with  the  view  of  bringing  suspicion  to  bear  upon  the  King.  It 
was  said  that  he  had  caused  a  rumour  to  be  circulated,  ‘  but  he  would  not  have  the 
author  known,’  that  the  Queen  was  dead,  the  object  imputed  to  him  being  so  to 
alarm  the  Queen  that  she,  ‘taking  some  conceit  of  this  strange  fame,  should  fall 
into  some  sudden  sickness.’  She  was  represented  as  passionately  demanding 
from  the  King  why  she  should  die?  Richard,  of  course,  was  the  consummate 
hypocrite.  He  ‘answered  her  with  fair  words,  and  with  smiling  and  flattering 
leasings  comforted  her,  bidding  her  to  be  of  good  cheer,  for  to  his  knowledge  she 
should  have  none  other  cause.’ — Grafton,  p.  837.  Defamation  is  commonly  suc¬ 
cessful.  It  was  so  in  the  case  of  Richard  III.  .  .  .  The  Queen  was  known  to  be  in 
delicate  health.  She  had  never  recovered  from  the  shock  occasioned  by  the  sudden 
death  of  her  son,  and  was  now  the  victim  of  consumption.  But  it  was  with  a  shock 
of  surprise,  not  wholly  free  from  suspicion,  that  the  public  heard  of  her  death. 
There  were  not  wanting  those  who  openly  attributed  it  to  poison,  and  the  tears 
which  the  King  shed  at  her  funeral  to  hypocrisy  ....  There  is  not  the  shadow 
of  a  doubt  that  she  died  a  natural  death,  not  the  less  deeply  lamented  by  the  King, 
even  if  for  political  reasons  he  had  contemplated  a  marriage  with  the  Princess 
Elizabeth  when  left  a  widower,  as,  in  the  previous  year,  the  Queen’s  physicians 
had  assured  him  that  he  soon  must  be.  [Is  it  necessary  here  to  call  attention  to 
Shakespeare’s  ‘  conjuring  with  the  time,’  thus  affecting  the  duration  of  the  action  ? 
It  is  scarcely  more  than  a  half  hour  by  actual  count  since  Catesby  was  bid  to  rumour 
it  abroad  that  Anne  was  sick,  and  also  to  inquire  out  some  ‘  mean  poor  gentleman  ’ 
for  Margaret  Plantagenet,  yet  now,  without  any  outside  intelligence,  Richard 
announces  the  death  of  Anne  and  the  accomplished  alliance.  See  Note  by  White, 
1.  192. — Ed.] 

182.  for  I  know]  Compare II,  ii,  100:  ‘For  it  requires  the  royal  debt  it  lent 
you’;  and  see  Abbott,  §  15 1. 

182.  the  Britaine  Richmond]  Malone:  He  thus  denominates  Richmond, 
because  after  the  battle  of  Tewksbury  he  had  taken  refuge  in  the  court  of  Francis  II., 
Duke  of  Bretagne,  where,  by  the  procurement  of  Edward  IV.,  he  was  kept  a  long 
time  in  a  kind  of  honourable  custody.  [Britaine  is  here  unquestionably  an  adjec- 


ACT  IV,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


313 

At  yong  Elizabeth  my  brothers  daughter,  183 

And  by  that  knot  lookes  proudly  on  the  Crowne, 

To  her  go  I,  a  iolly  thriuing  wooer.  185 


Enter  Ratcliff e. 

Rat.  My  Lord. 

Rich.  Good  or  bad  newes,  that  thou  corn’ll  in  fo 
bluntly  ? 

Rat.  Bad  news  my  Lord,  Mourton  is  fled  to  Richmond, 
And  Buckingham  backt  with  the  hardy  Welfhmen 
Is  in  the  field,  and  ftill  his  power  encreafeth. 


[45] 

190 

192 


184.  on]  ore  Qq.  o'er  C am.  +  . 

185.  go  I]  I  go  Qq,  Cam. +. 

186.  Ratcliffe.]  Ff,  Rowe.  Catesby 
in  baste.  Coll,  ii  (MS  monovolume). 
Catesby.  Qq  et  cet. 

187.  190.  Rat.]  Ff,  Rowe.  Cat.  Qq 
et  cet. 


188.  or  bad  newes ]  newes  or  bad  Qq, 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta. 
Cam. +  ,  Ktly,  Coll.  iii. 

coni 'ft]  comejl  Qq. 

«*]  0m-  Q7Qs- 

190.  Mourton]  Ely  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 


tive.  Murray  gives  four  examples  of  this  usage;  but  defines  them  all  as  ‘Ancient 
British,’  which,  if  the  present  passage  be  parallel,  and  I  think  it  is,  cannot  be  appli¬ 
cable.  Under  3.  ‘Of  French  Bretagne;  Breton,’  Murray’s  earliest  quotation  is 
Howell’s  Letters,  1645.  Has  not  the  present  passage,  where  in  some  texts  Breton 
is  adopted,  been  overlooked  ?  Compare  IV,  iii,  560. — Ed.] 

184.  lookes  ...  on  the  Crowne]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  64): 
The  Folio  substitutes  ‘on’  for  the  Quarto  o'er.  I  suppose,  because  the  meaning 
was  that  Richmond  looked  up  to  the  crown;  and  to  look  o'er  did  not  mean  to  look 
up  to. — Pickersgill  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  105):  Surely,  the  Folio  reading 
here  is  a  weak  dilution :  the  Quarto,  on  the  other  hand,  appears  to  me  very  forcible, 
perfectly  intelligible,  and  quite  in  accordance  with  Shakespeare’s  modes  of  elliptical 
expression.  Richmond  no  doubt  looks  up  to  the  crown  at  present,  but  he  looks 
up  to  it  with  the  aspiration  to  place  himself  over  it,  to  become  master  of  it. — Tawney 
follows  the  Quarto  reading  and  thus  explains  it:  ‘That  is,  despises  me  the  wearer 
of  the  crown.’ 

191,  192.  Buckingham  ...  Is  in  the  field]  Turner  (iii,  437):  The  Duke  of 
Buckingham’s  discontent  is  popularly  alleged  to  have  arisen  from  Richard’s 
refusal  to  grant  him  the  Hereford  estate;  but  both  the  refusal  and  the  discontent 
seem  to  be  disproved  by  the  fact,  that  seven  days  after  his  coronation,  Richard 
gave  to  Buckingham  his  letters  patent,  by  which  he  willed  and  granted,  that  in  the 
next  parliament,  the  Duke  should  be  legally  restored,  from  the  preceding  Easter, 
to  all  the  manors,  lordships  and  lands  of  the  Earl  of  Hereford,  specified  in  the 
schedule.  The  crown  could  not  make  a  fuller  grant.  It  only  wanted  the  parli¬ 
amentary  sanction.  But  More  acknowledges,  that  those  who  were  in  the  real 
secrets  of  that  day  denied  these  reports  which  we  have  noticed,  in  order  to  show  that 
they  are  unfounded.  .  .  .  (p.  466)  It  is  manifest  that  the  Duke  himself  began  the 
hostility.  More  says  that  he  accused  the  king  to  Morton,  of  delaying  this  concession. 


314  THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  ii. 

Rich.  Ely  with  Richmond  troubles  me  more  neere, 

Then  Buckingham  and  his  rath  leuied  Strength. 

Come,  I  haue  learn’d,  that  fearfull  commenting 
Is  leaden  feruitor  to  dull  delay. 

Delay  leds  impotent  and  Snaile-pac’d  Beggery : 

Then  fierie  expedition  be  my  wing, 

194.  rajk  leuied  ]  rash-levied  Pope  et  Cam. 
seq.  195-  learn' d ]  heard  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 

Strength ]  armie  Qq,  Pope,  +  197*  leds\  leads  Ff  et  seq. 

(  —  Var.  ’73),  Cam. +  .  arms  Anon.  ap.  198.  be  my  wing ]  be  my  wings  Q3-8. 


[50] 

195 

I98 


This  may  be  true.  The  official  instrument,  may  have  been  yielded  with  a  reluctance, 
as  offensive  to  an  haughty  spirit  as  a  denial;  and  the  terms  of  this  document,  which 
left  it,  in  fact,  to  a  distant  parliament  to  confirm  or  annul,  gave  no  unquestionable 
certainty  that  the  coveted  possessions  would  be  ultimately  enjoyed.  Richard  . .  .  may 
have  intentionally  placed  it  in  this  position,  as  a  cautionary  tie  upon  Buckingham’s 
stability.  The  Duke  may  have  felt  this;  and  have  also  considered  such  a  provisional 
favour  as  little  better  than  a  personal  refusal.  But  Buckingham  also  stated  other 
grievances.  He  declared  that  he  had  been  refused  the  High  Constableship  of 
England,  which  many  of  his  predecessors  had  enjoyed.  This  office  Richard  chose 
to  give  to  Lord  Stanley,  who  walked  in  it  at  the  coronation.  He  complained  also 
that  he  had  thought  the  King  to  be  as  tractable,  and  without  cruelty,  as  he  now  found 
him  to  be  the  contrary.  ...  To  these  avowed  motives  we  may  also  add  that  both 
were  too  fond  of  personal  state  and  popular  admiration  to  be  capable  of  acting 
cordially  together  on  the  high  public  stage  of  courtly  life. — Wessel  (p.  28):  It 
seems  not  improbable  at  all  that  Buckingham  was  proud  and  self-conceited  enough 
to  think  of  getting  the  crown  himself,  but  that  when  he  arrived  at  Brecknock,  and 
when  Bishop  Morton  began  working  upon  his  conscience,  and  represented  to  him 
that  he  could  atone  for  his  crimes  by  helping  to  put  upon  the  throne  the  only 
rightful  heir  existing,  namely,  the  eldest  daughter  of  Edward  IV.,  he  consented 
to  do  all  in  his  power  to  bring  this  about  through  her  union  with  Henry  of  Rich¬ 
mond. — Boswell-Stone  (p.  401):  The  rebellion  of  Buckingham  and  his  adherents 
began  on  October  18,  1483.  This  is  the  date  given  in  the  attainder  of  Buckingham 
and  his  confederates  in  Rotuli  Parliamentorum ,  vi,  245.  But  Norfolk,  writing 
from  London  on  10  October,  1483,  tells  John  Paston:  ‘that  the  Kentysshmen  be 
up  in  the  weld,  and  sey  that  they  wol  come  and  robbe  the  cite,  which  I  shall  lett 
yf  I  may.’ — Paston  Letters,  iii,  308. 

192.  Is  in  the  field]  R.  G.  White  (ed.  ii):  Events  are  hurried,  or  rather 
huddled,  upon  each  other:  it  was  only  at  the  end  of  the  last  scene  that  Buckingham 
saw  that  he  must  leave  Richard  for  his  own  safety.  The  purpose  of  the  dramatist 
was  only  to  get  a  recital  of  the  events  to  the  ears  of  the  audience. 

193.  more  neere]  Craigie  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  12.  b ):  To  come  or  go  near  to,  to 
touch  closely.  1600  Holland,  Livy,  xlii,  xiv,  1123:  ‘In  this  last  speech  he  came 
neere  unto  the  LL  of  the  Senat,  and  touched  them  to  the  quick.’ 

195,  196.  fearfull  commenting  Is  leaden  seruitor]  Johnson:  that  is,  timor¬ 
ous  thought  and  cautious  disquisition  are  the  dull  attendants  on  delay. 

198.  expedition]  Warburton:  ‘Expedition’  is  here  characterized  in  a  very 


act  iv,  sc.  iii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  315 

Ioues  Mercury,  and  Herald  for  a  King  :  [55] 

Go  mufter  men  :  My  counfaile  is  my  Sheeld,  200 

We  muft  be  breefe,  when  Traitors  braue  the  Field. 

Exeunt.  202 


Scena  Tertia. 

\Scene  IV\ 

Enter  old  Queene  Margaret.  2 

199.  Ioues  Mercury ,  and  Her aid  ] 

Qq.  Scene  iv.  Pope  et  seq. 

Jove' s  Mercury's  an  herald  Theob.  conj. 

The  Same.  Before  the  Palace.  Capell. 

(Nichols,  Lit.  Hist,  ii,  456). 

Tower  Hill.  Irving. 

Ioues]  Loue,  Q 

2.  old]  Om.  Rowe  et  seq. 

200.  Go]  Come  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

old... Margaret.]  Queene  Margaret 

I.  Scena  Tertia.]  Scene  continued. 

fola.  Qq. 

sublime  manner.  Which,  in  simple  phrase,  says  no  more  than  that  expedition  is 
the  soul  of  aU  great  undertakings.  Homer  never  taught  an  useful  truth  more  nobly. 
— Hudson:  The  text  is  made  somewhat  obscure  by  the  omission  of  the  relative; 
the  sense  being:  Expedition  who  is  Jove’s  Mercury,  and  so  is  a  king’s  proper 
herald. 

2.  old  Queene  Margaret]  Hunter  ( Illust .,  ii,  98):  There  is,  I  believe,  no 
historical  evidence,  and  the  taste  might  be  questioned  which  led  to  the  introduction 
of  Queen  Margaret  in  this  play.  [See  Dram.  Person.,  Margaret .]  Yet  there  is  some¬ 
thing  striking  in  a  scene  in  which  three  illustrious  ladies  meet  together,  each  of  whom 
has  such  a  tale  to  tell  of  husbands,  children,  brothers,  killed  in  York  and  Lancaster’s 
long  jars.  In  the  hands  of  very  skilful  actors  the  scene  might  be  made  effective. 
We  have  no  directions  for  ‘old  Queen  Margaret’  .  .  .  speaking  aside ,  but  it  is  plain 
that  her  three  first  speeches  are  uttered  aside,  nor  does  she  join  the  others  till  they 
sit  upon  the  ground.  Shakespeare  was  aware  of  the  effect  of  this.  Constance 
assumes  this  attitude;  and  in  Rich.  II.  we  have:  ‘For  God’s  sake  let  us  sit  upon  the 
ground,’  III,  ii,  155. — Dowden  ( Sh .  his  Mind,  etc.,  p.  181):  There  is  a  Blake-like 
terror  and  beauty  in  the  scene  in  which  the  three  women  seat  themselves  upon  the 
ground  in  their  desolation  and  despair,  and  cry  aloud  in  utter  anguish  of  spirit. .  .  . 
Misery  has  made  them  indifferent  to  all  ceremony  of  queenship,  and  for  a  time  to 
their  private  differences;  they  are  seated,  a  rigid  yet  tumultuously  passionate  group, 
in  the  majesty  of  mere  womanhood  and  supreme  calamity.  Readers  acquainted 
with  Blake’s  illustrations  to  the  book  of  Job  will  remember  what  effects,  sublime 
and  appalling,  the  artist  produces  by  animating  a  group  of  figures  with  one  common 
passion,  which  spontaneously  produces  in  each  individual  the  same  extravagant 
movement  of  head  and  limbs. — Wordsworth  {Hist.  Plays,  iii,  p.  334):  This 
appalling  scene,  and  especially  the  speeches  of  Queen  Margaret,  may  be  regarded 
as  introduced  to  afford  a  kind  of  relief  to  the  reader’s  mind  in  contemplating  the 
crimes  of  Richard.  To  read  such  language  creates  a  diversion  from  the  unparalleled 
horror  which  those  crimes  excite,  being  itself  scarcely  less  horrible. — Churchill  (p. 
335) :  At  the  moment  of  success,  when  all  seems  sure,  trouble  comes.  Richard  must 
take  the  field  to  defend  what  he  has  won.  There  follows  the  comment  of  Fate,  from 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


316 

Mar.  So  now  profperity  begins  to  mellow,  3 

And  drop  into  the  rotten  mouth  of  death : 

Heere  in  thefe  Confines  flily  haue  I  lurkt,  5 

To  watch  the  waining  of  mine  enemies. 

A  dire  induction,  am  I  witneffe  to, 

And  will  to  France,  hoping  the  confequence 
Will  proue  as  bitter,  blacke,  and  Tragicall. 

Withdraw  thee  wretched  Margaret ,  who  comes  heere?  10 

Enter  Dutcheffe  and  Qneene. 


5.  Jlily]  Jllie  Q?. 

6.  waining]  wayning  Q6.  waning 
Mai.  et  seq. 

enemies ]  aduerfaries  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

7.  to]  too  Q3Q4Q5. 

9.  bitter ,  blacke ]  bitter-black  Walker 


( Crit .  i,  37)- 

11.  Enter ...  Queene.]  Enter  the 
Queene,  and  the  Dutcheffe  of  Yorke. 
Qq,  Pope,  + .  (Qu.  Q,Q2.)  Enter  the 
Queen,  hastily ;  Dutchess  of  York  fol¬ 
lowing  her.  Capell,  Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Mai. 


the  lips  of  the  figure  in  whom  Shakespeare  personified  his  Nemesis.  It  is  Polydore 
Vergil’s  conception  and  not  More’s.  Not  till  later  in  the  play  appears  the  mental 
anguish  on  which  More  lays  all  the  stress.  And  even  then,  when  Shakespeare  reveals 
that  the  completion  and  perfection  of  the  work  of  Nemesis  lies  not  in  Richard’s 
external  losses,  but  in  Richard’s  own  tortured  soul,  he  adopts  a  view  which  is 
Vergil’s  as  well  as  More’s,  and  one  which  Vergil  insists  upon  most  strongly  in 
connection  with  that  very  dream  wherein,  in  Shakespeare,  Richard  recognises  the 
affliction  of  his  coward  conscience.  Thus,  while  on  More,  as  every  one  has  noticed, 
depends  almost  the  whole  material  fabric  of  Shakespeare’s  play,  as  nobody  seems  to 
have  noticed,  the  ideal  fabric  depends  on  Polydore  Vergil. — Schelling  (p.  93) : 
The  likeness  of  Richard  III.  to  Marlowe’s  work  in  plan  and  conception  ...  is  seen 
in  a  certain  fixity  of  character,  a  coarseness  of  stroke,  violence  of  speech  and 
deed,  and  to  a  lyricism  which  convert  whole  scenes  into  the  expression  of  a  single 
emotion.  Such  are  the  recurrent  soliloquies  of  Richard,  and  such  is  the  all  but 
purely  lyrical  scene  in  which  the  Queens  Margaret  and  Elizabeth  and  the  Duchess 
of  York,  three  wretched  women  bereft  of  husband  and  child,  oblivious  of  former 
rivalry  and  recrimination,  sit  on  the  ground  in  complete  abandonment  to  sorrow 
and  give  themselves  up  to  an  almost  choric  expression  of  hopeless  woe.  It  would 
be  difficult  to  find  in  the  whole  range  of  the  English  drama  a  scene  reproducing  so 
completely  the  nature  and  the  function  of  Greek  choric  ode. 

3,  4.  So  now  prosperity  .  .  .  the  rotten  mouth  of  death]  Steevens:  Com¬ 
pare:  * — now  is  his  fate  grown  mellow  Instant  to  fall  into  the  rotten  jaws  Of 
chap-fall’n  death.’ — Marston,  Antonio  and  Mellida,  1602. — Malone:  Richard  III. 
was  printed  in  1597,  and  therefore  Marston  must  have  copied  from  it. 

7.  induction]  Compare  I,  i,  37. 

11.  Enter  Dutchesse]  Moulton  (p.  112):  Probabilities  are  forced  to  bring 
in  Queen  Margaret,  the  head  and  sole  rallying-point  of  the  ruined  Lancastrians: 
when  the  two  aged  women  are  confronted,  the  whole  civil  war  is  epitomised.  It  is 
hardly  necessary  to  point  out  that  this  enveloping  action  is  itself  a  Nemesis  action. 


ACT  IV,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


3 17 


Qu.  Ah  my  poore  Princes  !  ah  my  tender  Babes  :  12 

My  vnblowed  Flowres,  new  appearing  fweets  : 

If  yet  your  gentle  foules  flye  in  the  Ayre, 

And  be  not  fixt  in  doome  perpetually  15 

Houer  about  me  with  your  ayery  wings, 

And  heare  your  mothers  Lamentation. 

Mar.  Houer  about  her,  fay  that  right  for  right 
Hath  dim’d  your  Infant  morne,  to  Aged  night.  19 


12.  poor e~\  young  QtQa,  Cam. +  .  yong 

Q3-* 

Princes ]  Prince/s  F4< 

13.  vnblowed  ]  vnblowne  QqF2.  un¬ 
blown  F3F4  et  seq. 

Flowres~\Jlower  Q6-8.  Jlowers  F3F4 

et  cet. 


x3-  new  appearing ]  new-appeanng 
Pope  et  seq. 

fweets~\  fweet  Qg. 

16.  about  ]  aboue  Q6-8- 

17.  hearc~\  here  F  . 

Latnentation~\  lamentations  Q7Qg- 

1 8 .  right . . .  right  ]  wrong . . .  wrong 
Warb. 


All  the  rising  and  falling,  the  suffering  and  retaliation,  that  we  actually  see  going 
on  between  the  different  sections  of  the  Yorkist  house,  constitute  a  detail  in  a  wider 
retribution:  the  presence  of  the  Duchess  gives  to  the  incidents  a  unity,  Queen  Mar¬ 
garet’s  function  is  to  point  out  that  this  unity  of  woe  is  only  the  Nemesis  falling 
on  the  House  of  York  for  their  wrongs  to  the  House  of  Lancaster. 

14,  15.  gentle  soules  .  .  .  doome  perpetuall]  Abbott  (§  419):  The  difference 
between  a  mere  epithet  before  the  noun,  and  an  additional  statement  conveyed  by 
an  adjective  after  the  noun,  is  illustrated  by  these  lines.  Compare:  ‘With  eyes 
severe  and  beard  of  formal  cut.’ — As  You  Like  It,  H,  vii,  155. 

18,  19.  Houer  about  her  .  .  .  Aged  night]  Abbott  (§  515):  Rhyme  was 
sometimes  used  to  mark  an  aside,  which  otherwise  the  audience  might  have  great 
difficulty  in  knowing  to  be  an  aside.  Thus,  in  a  scene  where  there  are  no  other 
rhyming  lines,  Margaret  is  evidently  intended  to  utter  11  18,  19,  23,  24  as  asides, 
though  there  is  no  notice  of  it.  One  of  the  lines,  27,  even  rhymes  with  the  line  of 
another  speaker.  Margaret  does  not  show  herself  till  1.  38,  as  also  in  I,  iii,  until 
1.  167,  though  in  the  latter  scene  the  asides  do  not  rhyme.  [Has  not  Abbott 
overlooked  the  rhyming  couplets  1 74-1 79,  206,  207,  in  this  present  scene? — Ed.] 

18.  right  for  right]  Johnson:  This  is  one  of  those  conceits  which  our  author 
may  be  suspected  of  loving  better  than  propriety.  ‘Right  for  right’  is  justice  answer¬ 
ing  to  the  claims  of  justice.  Compare:  ‘Where  ’t  should  be  branded  if  that  right 
were  right.’ — 1.  146  below. — Malone:  In  I,  iii,  Margaret  was  reproached  with  the 
murder  of  young  Rutland,  and  the  death  of  her  husband  and  son  were  imputed 
to  the  divine  vengeance  roused  by  that  wicked  act:  ‘So  just  is  God  to  right  the 
innocent.’  Margaret  now  perhaps  means  to  say,  The  right  of  me  an  injured 
mother,  whose  son  was  slain  at  Tewksbury,  has  now  operated  as  powerfully  as  that 
right  which  the  death  of  Rutland  gave  you  to  divine  justice,  and  has  destroyed 
your  children  in  their  turn. 

19.  Infant  morne  .  .  .  Aged  night]  Tawney:  Perhaps  the  meaning  is:  ‘Death 
which  comes  to  most  human  beings  in  old  age,  has  fallen  upon  them  in  childhood.’ 


2 !  8  THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 

Dut.  So  many  miferies  haue  craz’d  my  voyce,  20 

That  my  woe-wearied  tongue  is  ftill  and  mute. 

Edward  Plantagenet ,  why  art  thou  dead  ? 

Mar.  Plantagenet  doth  quit  Pla?itagenety 
Edward  for  Edward ,  payes  a  dying  debt. 

Qu.  Wilt  thou,  O  God,  flye  from  fuch  gentle  Lambs,  25 
And  throw  them  in  the  intrailes  of  the  Wolfe  ? 

When  didft  thou  fleepe,  when  fuch  a  deed  was  done  ? 

Mar.  When  holy  Harry  dyed,  and  my  fweet  Sonne. 

Dut  Dead  life,  blind  fight,  poore  mortall  liuing  ghoft, 

Woes  Scene,  Worlds  fhame,  Graues  due,  by  life  vfurpt,  30 

Breefe  abftra£l  and  record  of  tedious  dayes, 

Reft  thy  vnreft  on  Englands  lawfull  earth,  32 


20-22.  In  Qq,  these  lines  follow  line 

37- 

20.  haue]  hath  Qg. 

21.  tongue]  toong  Qx. 

Jlill  and  mute']  mute  and  dumbe 
Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

23,  24.  Om.  Qq. 

27.  When  didjl]  Why  didjl  Ff,+ 
(  —  Theob.),  Cap.  Varr.  Ran. 

■when  fuch]  while  such  Lettsom 
ap.  Dyce  ii. 

28.  Harry]  Mary  Q3 8.  Henry  Ff,  +  , 


Sta.  Ktly. 

28.  fweet]  fwee  Fa. 

29-33.  In  margin,  Pope,  Han. 

29.  Dead... fight]  Blind  fight,  dead 
life  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

mortall  liuing]  mortal-living 
Vaughan  (iii,  108). 

30.  due,  by]  due  by  Qq. 

31.  Breefe. ..dayes]  Om.  Qq. 

32.  thy]  they  Qs.  their  Q^. 

[sitting  down  on  it.  Capell  et  seq. 

(subs. ) 


20.  craz’d]  Murray  (TV.  E.  D.  s.  v .):  4.  fig.  To  destroy  the  soundness  of, 
impair,  ruin;  to  ruin  financially,  render  bankrupt.  [Compare,  perhaps,  ‘care- 
cras’d,’  III,  vii,  193.] 

21.  still  and  mute]  Wright:  If  Shakespeare’s  pen  produced  either  [this  or  the 
Quarto  reading],  it  might  be  worth  while  to  enquire  why  one  was  substituted  for 
the  other.  [Is  not  the  reading  of  the  Folio  to  be  preferred?  the  tongue  was  quiet, 
and  the  voice  was  dumb. — Ed.] 

23.  quit]  Craigie  (TV.  E.  D.  s.  v.  II,  ii,  c) :  To  be  return  or  equivalent  for,  to 
balance;  especially  in  phrase,  to  quit  {the)  cost. 

27.  When  didst  thou  sleepe]  Malone:  The  editor  of  Fs  changed  ‘When’  to 
Why,  though  Margaret’s  answer  evidently  refers  to  the  word  found  in  the  original 
copy.— Steevens:  I  am  not  quite  certain  of  the  authenticity  of  this  reading.  The 
reply  of  Margaret  might  have  been  designed  as  an  interogatory  echo  to  the  last 
words  of  the  Queen. — M.  Mason:  This  appears  to  be  the  true  reading,  as  Mar¬ 
garet’s  next  speech  is  an  answer  to  that  question  that  was  not  addressed  to  her. — 
The  Cowden-Clarkes:  This  near  repetition  of  the  word  ‘when’  gives  an  effect 
of  impatient  sorrow  to  the  Queen’s  speech,  in  consonance  with  the  sense  which  it 
bore  as  an  exclamation  of  impatience  in  Shakespeare’s  time. 

31.  record]  For  change  of  accent  in  this  word,  see  Walker,  Vers.,  p.  133. 

32.  Rest  thy  vnrest]  Delius:  Compare:  ‘But  let  her  rest  in  her  unrest  awhile.’ 
— Tit.  And.,  IV,  ii  31. 


ACT  IV,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


319 


Vnlawfully  made  drunke  with  innocent  blood.  33 

Qu.  Ah  that  thou  would’ft  affoone  affoord  a  Graue, 

As  thou  canft  yeeld  a  melancholly  feate  :  35 

Then  would  I  hide  my  bones,  not  reft  them  heere, 

Ah  who  hath  any  caufe  to  mourne  but  wee  ? 

Mar.  If  ancient  forrow  be  moft  reuerent, 

Giue  mine  the  benefit  of  figneurie, 

And  let  my  greefes  frowne  on  the  vpper  hand  40 

If  forrow  can  admit  Society. 

*Tell  ouer  your  woes  againe  by  viewing  mine.* 

I  had  an  Edward,  till  a  Richard  kill’d  him  : 

I  had  a  Husband,  till  a  Richard  kill’d  him  :  43 


33.  Vnlawfully ]  Vnlawfull  Q6Q?. 
innocent  ]  innocents  Qq.  inno¬ 
cents'  Cam. +  . 

34.  Ah ]  O  Qq,  Cam.  -+ . 

affoone]  Fa.  afwel  Q,Q2.  as  well 
Q3-8,  Cam.  + .  as  foon  F3F4  et  cet. 

[Throwing  herself  down  upon  the 
ground.  Hanmer. 

37.  Ah. ..wee]  0...I  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 
[sitting  down  by  her.  Var.  ’73  et 

seq. 

38.  ancient  ]  auncient  Q2Q3.  any  an¬ 
cient  Pope. 

forrow]  Om.  F4. 
reuerent  ]  reverend  Cam.  +  . 

39.  figneurie]  Ff.  figniorie  Q^ 
(subs.),  seigneurie  Rowe  i.  seniority 


Pope,  Han.  seniory  Cam.  + .  fignorie 
Qq  et  cet.  (subs.) 

40.  greefes]  woes  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

40,  41.  hand  If  ...Society.]  Ff.  hand , 
If  ...focietie,  Qq.  hand.  If ...  society. 
Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  hand.  If  ...society, 
Theob.  et  cet. 

40.  [  joining,  and  taking  Seat  between 
them.  Cap.  et  seq.  (subs.) 

*  Tell...  mine.*]  Qq.  Om.  F,Ff, 
Rowe,  Pope,  Ktly. 

*ouer]  o' er  Theob.  et  seq. 

43.  had  a]  had  an  F4. 

Husband]  Richard  Qq.  Henry 
Cap.  conj.  Ran.  Sta.  Harry  Cam. +  . 
Richard]  Ricard  Qf. 


39.  signeurie]  That  is,  seniority. 

40.  let  my  greefes  frowne  on  the  vpper  hand]  Malone:  Compare:  ‘By  this 
starts  Collatine  as  from  a  dream,  And  bids  Lucretius  give  his  sorrow  place.’ — 
Rape  of  Luc.,  1772. 

43.  I  had  a  Husband]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  26):  Here  the 
Quarto  is  undoubtedly  wrong.  For  it  is  Margaret  that  speaks.  The  obvious  error 
might  have  suggested  the  Folio  correction  to  anybody.  ...  I  suspect,  however,  that 
it  was  Shakespeare’s  own  mistake,  and  I  doubt  whether  it  was  his  own  correction. 
The  line  was  evidently  meant  to  correspond  in  form  with  the  next  but  one:  ‘Thou 
hadst  a  Richard,  ’  etc.,  and  no  word  but  ‘  Richard’  will  give  the  proper  effect.  Here, 
therefore,  I  admit  that  we  have  reason  to  suspect  the  intrusion  of  a  non-Shakes- 
pearean  hand. — Pickersgill  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875-76;  p.  94):  As  Spedding  justly 
observes,  the  force  of  the  whole  passage  is  spoiled  by  changing  Richard  into  any 
other  word.  .  .  .  But  has  he  fully  considered  the  consequences,  upon  this  admission, 
on  his  own  theory?  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  Shakespeare  wrote  Richard; 
it  is,  so  to  speak,  one  of  those  ten-barred  gates  which  he  takes  with  such  splendid 
audacity  and  imperturbable  sang-froid.  But  if,  like  Spedding,  I  supposed  that 


320 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


Thou  had’ft  an  Edward ,  till  a  Richard  kill’d  him  : 

Thou  had’ft  a  Richard,  till  a  Richard  kill’d  him.  45 

Dut.  I  had  a  Richard  too,  and  thou  did’ft  kill  him  ; 

I  had  a  Rutland  too,  thou  hop’ft  to  kill  him. 

Mar.  Thou  had’ft  a  Clarence  too, 

And  Richard  kill’d  him. 

From  forth  the  kennell  of  thy  wombe  hath  crept  5° 

A  Hell-hound  that  doth  hunt  vs  all  to  death  : 

That  Dogge,  that  had  his  teeth  before  his  eyes, 

To  worry  Lambes,  and  lap  their  gentle  blood : 

That  foule  defacer  of  Gods  handy  worke  : 

That  reignes  in  gauled  eyes  of  weeping  foules  :  55 

That  excellent  grand  Tyrant  of  the  earth, 


46,  47.  too]  to  Qt. 

46.  did'Jl~\  dijl  Q2. 

47.  thou  hop' 'Jt]  thou  hopjl  Q,Q2.  and 
thou  holpjl  Qj-g.  thou  holp' Jl  Ff  et  seq. 

48.  49.  Thou. ..him]  Ff,  Rowe.  One 
line,  Qq  et  cet. 


49.  And]  till  Qa-g,  Sta. 

53.  blood]  bloods  Qq  ( blouds  QjQj,). 
55,  56.  That. ..foules  :  That  ...earth] 
Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  Hal.  Om.  Qq, 
Pope,  + ,  Sta.  Lines  transposed,  Cap.  et 
cet. 


Shakespeare  had  revised  his  play  with  the  most  minute  and  even  pedantic  care,  I 
should  hold  it  a  thing  incredible  that  he  would  allow  this  gross  inaccuracy  to  stand. 

50.  From  forth  the  kennell]  Rolfe:  Apparently  an  allusion  to  the  myth  of 
Scylla.  [It  is  impossible  to  say  that  there  is  not  here  this  allusion,  but  if  it  be,  is  it 
not  also  combined  with  an  allusion  to  the  fact  set  forth  in  the  lines  in  the  old  play, 
The  Tragedie  of  Richard  Duke  of  Yorke,  upon  which  J  Henry  VI.  was  founded? 
*  — the  midwife  cride  O  J  esus  blesse  vs,  he  is  borne  with  teeth.  And  so  I  was  indeed, 
which  plainelie  signifide  That  I  should  snarle  and  bite,  and  plaie  the  dogge.’ — V, 
vi,  63  ed.  Cam.  These  lines  with  but  slight  change  appear  in  j  Hen.  VI:  V,  vi,  72; 
and  Margaret,  in  the  present  scene,  1.  52,  refers  to  this  fact  in  regard  to  Richard’s 
birth. — Ed.] 

52.  Dogge  .  .  .  his  teeth  before  his  eyes]  The  foregoing  note  on  1.  50  seems 
an  adequate  explanation  of  this  allusion;  Delius,  however,  considers  that  Margaret 
refers  to  the  fact  that  the  child  does  not  see  until  after  birth  and  normally  gets  its 
teeth  much  later. 

54.  handy  worke]  Murray  (AT.  E.  D.  s.  v.):  1.  Work  of  the  hands;  a  thing 
or  collection  of  things  made  by  the  hands  of  any  one.  From  Old  English  hand- 
geweorc.  As  geweorc ,  iwork  did  not  survive  in  Middle  English,  hand-iwerc  was 
naturally  analysed  as  a  compound  of  the  simple  were,  with  handi,  often  written 
separately  and  treated  as  an  adjective. 

55,  56.  That  reignes  .  .  .  the  earth]  Spedding  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p. 
26):  [The  reversal  of  these  two  lines,  inserted  in  the  Folio],  might  easily  have 
occurred  from  printing  from  an  interlined  manuscript,  and  cannot  be  presumed 
to  have  been  intentional. 

55.  reignes]  Is  there,  perchance,  here  a  play  on  the  words  rains  and  ‘weeping’? 
—Ed. 


act  iv,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


321 


Thy  wombe  let  loofe  to  chafe  vs  to  our  graues.  57 

O  vpright,  iuft,  and  true-difpofing  God, 

How  do  I  thanke  thee,  that  this  carnall  Curre 

Prayes  on  the  iffue  of  his  Mothers  body,  60 

And  makes  her  Pue-fellow  with  others  mone. 

Dut.  Oh  Harries  wife,  triumph  not  in  my  woes  : 

God  witneffe  with  me,  I  haue  wept  for  thine. 

Mar.  Beare  with  me  :  I  am  hungry  for  reuenge, 

And  now  I  cloy  me  with  beholding  it.  65 

Thy  Edward  he  is  dead,  that  kill’d  my  Edward , 


57.  chafe\  chafe  Q8. 

58.  true-difpofing~\  true  difpofing  Qq 
F  F  . 

359.  that ]  for  Q7Q8. 

6l.  And... mone. ]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 
makes]  make  Q7Q8. 

Pue-fellow ]  puefellow  Q2.  pew- 


fellow  Qg.  pew-fellow  Steev.  et  seq. 

61.  mone~\  moan  F4  et  seq. 

62.  Harries]  Harry's  Rowe  et  seq. 
wife]  wifes  Qt. 

63.  thine]  thee  Q2_8. 

66.  kill' d]  Jlabd  Qq.  staid  d  Sta. 
Cam.  +  . 


55-  gauled]  Compare:  ‘Ere  yet  the  salt  of  most  unrighteous  tears  Had  left 
the  flushing  in  her  galled  eyes.’ 

56.  excellent]  Bradley  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  1  b)  gives  several  examples  of  ‘excel¬ 
lent’  used  in  a  ‘bad  or  neutral  sense’;  among  them  the  two  following  from  Shakes¬ 
peare:  ‘A  very  excellent  piece  of  villany.’ — Tit.  And.,  II,  iii,  7;  ‘Thisis  the  excellent 
foppery  of  the  world.’ — Lear,  I,  ii,  128. 

58,  59.  O  vpright  .  .  .  God,  How  do  I  thanke  thee]  Compare:  ‘O  wise 
young  Judge,  how  do  I  honour  thee!’ — Mer.  of  Ven.,  IV,  i,  224  (Folio). 

59.  carnall]  Murray  (N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  6)  quotes  the  present  line  as  the  only 
example  of  ‘  carnal  ’  used  in  this  figurative  sense  of  bloody,  murderous. 

61.  Pue-fellow]  Murray  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  pew-fellow ):  One  who  has  a  seat 
in  the  same  pew;  a  fellow  worshipper;  one  of  the  same  persuasion  or  sect;  a  com¬ 
panion;  an  associate. — Birch  (p.  207):  The  mention  of  God  is  accompanied  by 
the  usual  satire  upon  it  in  the  mouth  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  and  by  renewed  invective 
in  that  of  Queen  Margaret.  Margaret,  however,  thanks  God  for  having  revenged 
her  on  her  enemies — as  if  resort  was  made  to  a  pew  in  a  church,  to  utter  cries  of 
anguish,  to  ask  for  vengeance  on  each  other,  and  record  their  thanks  for  its  receipt. 
[Birch  assures  us,  in  his  preface,  that:  ‘ — he  wishes  to  be  considered  merely  as  an 
enquirer,  not  as  a  censor.  He  desires  not  to  judge  Shakespeare  for  his  sentiments, 
but  only  to  exhibit  them.  This,  he  trusts,  he  has  done  truly  and  impartially, 
without  levity  on  the  one  side  or  bigotry  on  the  other.’  Are  neither  bigotry,  nor  a 
certain  levity,  entirely  absent  in  the  above  note  ? — Ed.] 

62.  triumph]  Here  accented,  for  the  sake  of  the  metre  and  for  this  alone, 
‘triumph’;  compare  III,  iv,  100;  or  see  Walker,  Crit.,  iii,  174. 

64.  Beare  with  me]  Warner  {Eng.  Hist,  in  Sh.,  p.  239):  Thus  cries  Margaret, 
not  only  to  Elizabeth,  but  down  the  centuries  it  is  her  frank  appeal  to  the  judgement 
of  history.  There  are  few  instances  of  a  passion  more  detestable  in  the  heart  of 
one  more  excusable  for  nursing  it. 


21 


322 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


The  other  Edward  dead,  to  quit  my  Edward:  67 

Yong  Yorke,  he  is  but  boote,  becaufe  both  they 
Matcht  not  the  high  perfection  of  my  Ioffe. 

Thy  Clarence  he  is  dead,  that  ftab’d  my  Edward ,  70 

And  the  beholders  of  this  franticke  play, 

Th’adu  Iter  ate  Hajlings ,  Riuers, Vaughan, Gray, 

Vntimely  [mother’ d  in  their  dusky  Graues.  73 


67.  The]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Knt. 
Thy  Qq  et  cet. 

quit]  quite  Q6. 

69.  Matcht]  F3.  Match’  dF^FA,  Rowe, 
Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly.  Match  Qq  et  cet. 

70.  fiab'd]  kild  Qq.  kill'd  Sta. 
Cam.  + . 


7 1 .  franticke]  tragicke  Qq,  Pope,  + , 
Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Sta. 
Cam.  +  ,  Ktly. 

play]  scene  Cap.  conj. 

72.  adulterate]  adulterer  Warb. 
Vaughan]  Vaugham  Q$. 


67.  The  other  Edward  dead,  to  quit  my  Edward]  Vaughan  (iii,  no):  It 
is  clear  that  Margaret  needed  revenge  both  for  her  son  and  her  husband,  both  for 
Edward  (Rutland)  and  Henry,  his  father.  As  the  passage  stands,  although  she 
expressly  says  that  she  is  ‘  cloyed  with  beholding  her  revenge,  ’  yet  her  revenge  ought 
not  moderately  to  be  even  satisfied,  for  it  discloses  no  revenge  for  her  Henry,  while 
it  reveals  triple  revenge  for  Edward.  The  same  omission,  therefore,  of  Henry 
which  in  1.  43  spoiled  and  falsified  her  account  of  her  loss,  is  here,  in  truth,  continued 
to  mar  and  falsify  her  story  of  her  satisfied  revenge,  and  needs  precisely  the  same 
remedy,  that  is,  the  substitution  of  his  name.  I  would  read:  ‘Thy  other  Edward 
dead  to  quit  my  Henry.'  [Before  considering  the  necessity  of  the  change  from 
‘Edward’  to  Henry,  suggested  by  Vaughan,  it  may  be  worthy  of  notice  that  one  or 
two  slight  historic  details  seem  to  have  been  forgotten.  Rutland,  whose  name, 
by  the  way,  was  Edmund,  not  Edward,  was  not  the  son  of  Henry  VI.,  but  of  Richard 
Plantaganet,  Duke  of  York;  he  was  elder  brother  to  Gloucester  and  Clarence;  he 
was  not  killed  by  Edward  IV.,  but  by  Clifford.  Vaughan  has  apparently  confused 
him  with  Edward,  Prince  of  Wales,  the  son  of  Henry  VI'.  As  regards  Vaughan’s 
proposed  change,  Margaret  says,  in  effect:  thy  Edward,  i.  e.,  Edward  IV.,  who 
killed  my  son  Edward,  is  dead;  the  other  Edward,  your  son,  is  dead  to  balance  the 
death  of  my  Edward;  young  York’s  death  barely  counts,  because  both  Edward  IV. 
and  Edward  V.  will  not  even  make  up  for  my  one  son.  If  now  we  change  ‘Edward’ 
at  the  end  of  1.  67  to  Henry,  wherein  lies  the  force  of  Margaret’s  remark  that  young 
York  ‘is  but  boot’? — Ed.] 

68.  boote]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  1):  2.  That  which  is  ‘thrown  in,’  or  given 
in  addition,  to  make  up  a  deficiency  of  value;  a  premium,  compensation,  odds. 

71.  beholders  of  this  .  .  .  play]  That  is,  the  murder  of  Edward,  Prince  of 
Wales;  but  here,  as  in  I,  iii,  220,  Margaret  accuses  Rivers  of  having  been  a  witness, 
and  Hall  does  not  give  his  name  among  the  bystanders.  In  the  former  scene 
Margaret  also  mentions  Dorset  instead,  as  here,  of  his  brother  Grey,  but  at  the 
time  of  the  present  scene  Dorset  has  escaped  to  France.  Shakespeare,  possibly, 
did  not  turn  back  to  see  what  he  had  formerly  written;  it  is  equally  possible  that  he 
relied  on  the  fact  that  an  audience’s  memory  for  the  names  of  characters  no  longer 
on  the  scene  is  not  very  tenacious. — Ed. 

73.  Vntimely  smother’d]  Tawney:  The  idea  seems  to  be  that  the  fiery 


ACT  IV,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


323 


Richard  yet  liues,  Hels  blacke  Intelligencer, 

Onely  referu’d  their  Factor,  to  buy  foules,  75 

And  fend  them  thither  :  But  at  hand,  at  hand 
Infues  his  pittious  and  vnpittied  end. 

Earth  gapes,  Hell  burnes,  Fiends  roare,  Saints  pray, 

To  haue  him  fodainly  conuey’d  from  hence  : 

Cancell  his  bond  of  life,  deere  God  I  pray,  80 

That  I  may  liue  and  fay,  The  Dogge  is  dead. 


74.  Intelligencer ]  intelligence  Walker 
( Crit .,  ii,  56). 

75.  their ]  the  Han. 

FaClor ,]  fad  or  Qq. 

76.  them  thither]  then  thither  Fa.  then 
hither  F3. 

at  hand ,  at  hand]  at  hand  at 
handes  Qf.  at  hand ,  Q,Qg. 

78.  Hell  burnes ]  hell  burns,  heaven 
■weeps  Walker  (Crit.,  ii,  15).  heaven 
lowers,  hell  burns  Seymour  ( i,  187 ) . 

Hell  ]  Hels  Q6. 

roare,]  roar  for  him  Cap. 


78.  Saints]  and  saints  Wordsworth. 
pray,]  pray  for  vengeance  Pope,  + 

( —  Var.  ’73). 

79.  To. ..hence]  Om.  Pope  (—Var. 

’73)- 

conuey'd  from  hence]  conueyed 
away  Qq.  convey’ d  away  Cam. +  .  con- 
viyld  hence  (and  inverting  11.  79,  80) 
Seymour  (i,  387). 

80.  bond]  bonds  Q,Q8- 

I  pray]  I  plead  Daniel. 

81.  and]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Wh.  i.  to 
Qq  et  cet. 


energy  of  these  men  was  prematurely  stifled  by  their  being  buried  in  the  earth. 
[Schmidt  (Lex.  s.  v.  adverb  2)  gives  several  examples  wherein  ‘untimely’  is 
‘especially  used  of  a  violent  death,’  the  present  line  among  them. — Ed.] 

74- 76.  Intelligencer,  .  .  .  reseru’d  ...  to  buy  soules,  And  send  them]  Hunter 
( Illust .,  ii,  93):  The  meaning  of  this  would  be  more  clear  were  a  different  punc¬ 
tuation  adopted,  thus:  ‘hell’s  black  intelligencer;  Only  reserved,  their  factor  to 
buy  souls  And  send  them  thither.’  Richard  is  first  the  intelligencer  for  the  fiends 
below,  a  character  odious  and  infamous.  He  is  reserved,  not  yet  taken  to  the 
place  to  which  Hastings,  Rivers,  Vaughan,  and  Grey  are  gone;  and  reserved  only 
for  this  purpose,  that  he  may  act  for  the  fiends  (as  a  factor  for  a  merchant),  buy 
souls,  corrupt  those  who  but  for  him  would  be  fit  for  another  place,  and  send  them 
thither. 

74.  Intelligencer]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.):  One  who  conveys  intelligence 
or  information.  One  employed  to  obtain  secret  information,  an  informer,  a  spy, 
a  secret  agent. 

75-  their]  Many  other  examples  of  the  plural  pronoun,  used  in  reference  to 
both  heaven  and  hell,  will,  doubtless,  suggest  themselves  to  every  reader  of  the 
older  dramatists. 

79.  from  hence]  The  Folio  change  here  seems  an  improvement  on  the  away 
of  the  Qq.  Triplets  are  not  common  in  Shakespeare’s  verse;  besides  the  caesura 
in  1.  81  falling  at  ‘say  ’  gives  almost  the  impression  of  a  fourth  rhyme. — Ed. 

80.  Cancell  his  bond  of  life]  The  lines:  ‘Cancel  and  tear  to  pieces  that  great 
bond  which  keeps  me  pale.’ — Macbeth,  III,  ii,  49,  50,  will,  of  course,  occur  to  every 
reader.  Rolfe  compares  also:  ‘If  you  will  take  this  audit  take  this  life,  And 
cancel  these  cold  bonds.’ — Cymb.,  V,  iv,  27. — Ed. 

81.  The  Dogge  is  dead]  Mrs  Jameson  (ii,  259):  She  should  have  stopped 


324 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


Qu.  O  thou  did’ ft  prophefte,  the  time  would  come,  82 

That  I  fhould  with  for  thee  to  helpe  me  curfe 
That  bottel’d  Spider,  that  foule  bunch-back’d  Toad. 

Mar.  I  call'd  thee  then,  vaine  flourifh  of  my  fortune  :  85 

I  call’d  thee  then,  poore  Shadow,  painted  Queen, 

The  prefentation  of  but  what  I  was  ; 

The  flattering  Index  of  a  direfull  Pageant ; 

One  heau’d  a  high,  to  be  hurl’d  downe  below :  89 


82.  did'JT\  dids  Q4> 

84.  battel' d ]  bloated  Grey  (ii,  63). 
bottled  Var.  ’73  et  seq.  bottle-  Coll.  MS. 

bunch-back' d]  bunch-backt  Qt. 
hunch-backt  Q2_8.  hunch-back' d  Pope. 

85,  86.  call'd]  callQ7. 


87.  prefentation ]  repref entation  F3F4, 
Rowe. 

88.  Pageant ]  page  Warb.  Johns. 

89.  heau' d]  heaued  Q,Q2. 

a  high]  on  high  Pope,  +  .  o'  high 
Coll.  Wh.  i.  a-high  Dyce,  Huds.  Sta. 
Cam.  +  .  a'  high  Hal.  Ktly. 


here;  but  the  effect  thus  powerfully  excited  is  marred  and  weakened  by  so  much 
superfluous  rhetoric  that  we  are  tempted  to  exclaim  with  the  old  Duchess  of  York: 
‘  Why  should  calamity  be  full  of  words  ?  ’  [Shakespeare  was,  doubtless,  fully  aware 
of  the  superfluity;  the  line  quoted  by  the  admirable  critic  shows,  I  think,  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  consciousness  of  this  defect. — Ed.] 

82.  thou  did’st  prophesie]  See  I,  iii,  256. 

84.  bottel’d  Spider]  See  I,  iii,  254. 

87.  presentation]  Wright:  That  is,  the  mere  semblance  without  the  reality. 

87.  of  but  what  I  was]  Marshall  conjectures  that  we  should  here  read: 
‘ but  oj  what  I  was’;  but  does  not  Margaret  mean  that  Elizabeth  is  only  the  semblance 
of  what  she,  Margaret,  is  alone — the  rightful  queen?  Marshall’s  suggested 
inversion  makes  Margaret  speak  of  Elizabeth  as  the  semblance  of  what  Margaret 
formerly  was — a  queen  surrounded  by  friends.  In  I,  iii,  214,  215,  Margaret 
expresses  the  hope  that  Elizabeth  may  live  to  see  another  ‘decked  in  thy  rights 
as  thou  art  stalled  in  mine.’  It  is  to  this,  I  think,  that  she  here  refers. — Ed. 

88.  Index  of  a  direfull  Pageant]  Steevens:  ‘Pageants’  are  dumb-shows, 
and  the  poet  meant  to  allude  to  one  of  these,  the  index  of  which  promised  a  happier 
conclusion.  The  pageants  then  displayed  on  public  occasions  were  generally 
preceded  by  a  brief  account  of  the  order  in  which  the  characters  were  to  walk. 
These  indexes  were  distributed  among  the  spectators,  that  they  might  understand 
the  meaning  of  such  allegorical  stuff  as  was  usually  exhibited. — Wright:  This 
explanation  given  by  Steevens  receives  some  support  from  Ford’s  Lover's  Melancholy, 
III,  iii,  in  which,  before  the  performance  of  The  Masque  of  Melancholy,  Corax 
hands  Palador  a  paper  which  explains  the  dumb-show:  ‘Pray,  my  lord,  Hold,  and 
observe  the  plot:  ’tis  there  express’d  In  kind,  what  shall  be  now  expressed  in  action.’ 
For  ‘Index’  used  in  the  sense  of  prologue  or  introduction,  see  II,  ii,  156.  [For 
a  history  of  the  word  ‘pageant’  see  Murray,  N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  6  b.  Note.] 

89-94.  One  heau’d  a  high  .  .  .  onely  to  fill  the  Scene]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc. 
Trans.,  i875-’76;  p.  26):  I  should  certainly  prefer  the  Quarto  reading  of  this  passage 
to  the  Folio.  But  I  should  prefer  the  following  to  either,  and  I  cannot  but  think 
that  it  was  the  one  intended:  ‘One  heaved  ahigh,  to  be  hurled  down  below: 


act  iv,  sc.  iii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

A  Mother  onely  mockt  with  two  faire  Babes ; 
A  dreame  of  what  thou  waft,  a  garifh  Flagge 
To  be  the  ayme  of  euery  dangerous  Shot ; 

A  figne  of  Dignity,  a  Breath,  a  Bubble  j 
A  Queene  in  ieaft,  onely  to  fill  the  Scene. 


325 

90 


94 


90.  onely  mockt]  one  lie,  mockt  Q, 
faire}  fweete  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +, 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

91-93.  A  dreame  ...a  garifh  Flagge  To 
be... Shot ;  A  figne... a  Bubble j  A  dreame 
of  which  thou  wert,  a  breath,  a  bubble. 


A  figne... a  garifh  fagge,  To  be...fiot, 
Qq.  (wert  Q,Q0.)  A  dream. ..a  bubble, 
A  figne. ..a  garish  fag,  To  be. ..shot.  Sta. 
A  dream  of  what  thou  wert,  ...a  bubble, 
A  sign... a  garish  fag  To  be. ..shot  Cam. 
+  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 


A  sign  of  dignity,  a  garish  flag,  To  be  the  aim  of  every  dangerous  shot:  A  mother 
only  mocked  with  two  fair  babes;  A  dream  of  what  thou  wast,  a  breath,  a  bubble, 
A  queen  in  jest,  only  to  fill  the  scene.’  Perhaps  it  would  be  better  still  to  make  1.  94 
change  places  with  1.  93.  But,  at  any  rate,  I  am  clear  that  the  ‘sign  of  dignity’ 
and  the  ‘garish  flag’  were  not  meant  to  be  separated.  Here,  therefore,  we  have 
evidence  of  an  intentional  alteration  of  some  kind;  and  if  the  reading  of  F,  repre¬ 
sents  the  intention  of  the  alterer,  I  admit  a  difficulty  in  imputing  it  to  Shakes¬ 
peare.  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  his  intention  was  misunderstood  by  the  printer 
or  transcriber,  and  he  meant  only  that  the  lines  which  stand  second  and  third 
should  come  after  those  which  stand  fourth  and  fifth,  I  should  say  that  the  altera¬ 
tion  was  judicious. — Pickersgill  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  95) :  I  do  not  see  any 
reason  to  suppose  that  the  corrector,  whoever  he  was,  intended  any  change  in  the 
arrangement  of  these  lines.  I  think  that  the  reading  of  F,  is  due  merely  to  a  blun¬ 
der  of  the  printer,  whose  eye  caught  the  last  half  of  the  following  line  instead  of 
that  of  the  line  which  he  was  composing— a  sufficiently  common  mistake.  I  dissent, 
however,  from  Spedding’s  opinion  respecting  the  most  judicious  arrangement  of 
the  lines.  Would  not  the  canons  of  criticism  pronounce  that  the  line  which  stands 
third  in  the  Qq  ought  to  come  last  ?  ‘  A  dream  of  what  thou  wert,  a  breath,  a 

bubble.’  Surely  anything  which  follows  ‘a  breath,  a  bubble,’  must  be  of  the 
nature  of  an  anti-climax. 

90.  mockt  with  two  faire  Babes]  That  is,  a  mother  only  deceived  in  thinking 
that  she  has  two  fair  babes.  Compare:  ‘O  my  most  gracious  lord  I  hope  you  will 
not  mock  me  with  a  husband.  Duke.  It  is  your  husband  mocked  you  with  a 
husband.’ — Meas.  jor  Meas.,  V,  i,  421. 

91.  A  dreame  of  what  thou  wast,  a  garish  Flagge]  Though  it  does  not 
become  me  to  dissent  from  many  of  my  betters,  I  cannot  persuade  myself  that 
the  Folio  arrangement  of  this  line  and  the  next  is  not  to  be  preferred  to  that  of  the 
Qq.  The  ‘garish  Flag’  seems  to  be  in  apposition  to  the  ‘dream.’  In  what  way 
can  a  garish  flag  refer  to  her  present  deplorable  state  ?  In  times  past  she  was, 
indeed,  so  brilliant  an  apparition  that  she  might  well  be  the  aim  of  all  the  dan¬ 
gerous  shots  of  envy — but  is  she  so  now  ?  Assuredly  her  present  state  could  not 
be  compared  to  that  of  the  prominent  position  of  a  standard  bearer. — Ed. 

91.  garish]  Bradley  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  1):  Of  dress,  ornament,  ceremonial,  etc.: 
Obtrusively  or  vulgarly  bright  in  colour,  showy,  gaudy.  (The  early  spellings 
gaurish,  gawrish,  suggest  derivation  from  gaure,  to  stare.) 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


326 

Where  is  thy  Husband  now?  Where  be  thy  Brothers?  95 

Where  be  thy  two  Sonnes?  Wherein  doft  thou  Ioy? 

Who  fues,  and  kneeles,  and  fayes,  God  faue  the  Queene  ? 

Where  be  the  bending  Peeres  that  flattered  thee? 

Where  be  the  thronging  Troopes  that  followed  thee? 

Decline  all  this,  and  fee  what  now  thou  art.  100 

For  happy  Wife,  a  moft  diftreffed  Widdow : 

For  ioyfull  Mother,  one  that  wailes  the  name  : 

For  one  being  fued  too,  one  that  humbly  fues  : 

For  Queene,  a  very  Caytiffe,  crown’d  with  care : 

For  fhe  that  fcorn’d  at  me,  now  fcorn’d  of  me  :  105 

For  fhe  being  feared  of  all,  now  fearing  one  : 

For  fhe  commanding  all,  obey’d  of  none. 

Thus  hath  the  courfe  of  Iuftice  whirl’d  about,  108 


96.  be]  are  Q,Q2,  Cam. +. 

two  Sonnes ]  children  Qq,  Pope, 
+  ,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 

97.  and  kneeles ,  and  fayes]  to  thee , 
and  cries  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

98.  flattered  ]  flatter1  d  Pope,  + . 

99.  followed  ]  follordd  Pope,  + . 

103,  104.  For  one  being. ..For  Queene] 
Lines  transposed,  Qq,  Cap.  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 

103.  humbly]  humble  Q?. 

105-107.  For... me :  For.. .one:  For 
...none.]  Line  106  omitted,  and  105  and 


107  transposed,  Qq,  Cap.  Sta.  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 

105.  107.  fhe]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt  i,  Sta. 
one  Qq  et  cet. 

106.  For  fhe]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt  i,  Sta. 
For  one  Pope  et  cet. 

feared]  fear'd  Rowe. 

107.  obey'd  of]  obey'd ,  ofY 4. 

108.  whirl' d]  whe'eld  Qt.  wheel'd 
Qj.8,  Pope,  +  ,  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 
Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Sta.  Cam. +. 


95,  96,  98,  99.  be]  For  other  examples  of  ‘be’  ‘used  to  refer  to  a  number  of 
persons,’  see  Abbott,  §  300.  [Albeit  it  is  possible  to  attribute  the  use  of  this  sub¬ 
junctive  to  other  causes. — Ed.] 

100.  Decline]  Murray  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  verb,  20.  b):  To  say  or  recite  for¬ 
mally  or  in  definite  order.  [The  present  line  quoted.] 

104.  Caytiffe]  Murray  (TV.  E.  D.  s.  v.  A.  2):  A  wretched  miserable  person, 
a  poor  wretch,  one  in  a  piteous  case.  From  Old  Norman  French  caitif,  caitive, 
captive,  weak,  miserable.  The  central  Old  French  form  chaitif,  gave  the  English 
variant  chaitif,  frequent  in  14th  and  15th  centuries,  but  did  not  displace  the 
earlier  Norman  form.  The  transition  of  meaning  has  taken  place,  more  or  less, 
in  most  of  the  Romanic  languages.  [In  spite  of  the  manifestly  French  origin  of 
this  word,  Duport  thus  renders  the  line:  ‘  Qui  n’a  sur  les  autres  hommes  d’autre 
avantage  que  d’etre  plus  accablec  de  maux, 5  which  is  hardly  even  a  paraphrase  of 
the  idea  that,  instead  of  the  golden  crown  of  a  queen,  Elizabeth  has  upon  her  brow 
the  deep  wrinkles  and  whitened  locks  of  care.  Schlegel  is  more  literal:  ‘Statt 
Konigin,  mit  Noth  gekronte  Sclavin,’  reproducing,  to  a  certain  extent,  the  force 
of  the  original  alliteration,  and  the  idea  of  captive  in  the  use  of  the  word  Sclavin. 
—Ed.] 

108.  Iustice  whirl’d  about]  Walker  {Crit.,  iii,  175):  This  might  seem  to  be 


ACT  IV,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


327 


And  left  thee  but  a  very  prey  to  time, 

Hauing  no  more  but  Thought  of  what  thou  waft:.  no 

To  torture  thee  the  more,  being  what  thou  art, 

Thou  didft  vfurpe  my  place,  and  doft  thou  not 
Vfurpe  the  iuft  proportion  of  my  Sorrow? 

Now  thy  proud  Necke,  beares  halfe  my  burthen’d  yoke, 

From  which,  euen  heere  I  flip  my  wearied  head,  115 

And  leaue  the  burthen  of  it  all,  on  thee. 

Farwell  Yorkes  wife,  and  Queene  of  fad  mifchance, 

Thefe  Englifh  woes,  fhall  make  me  fmile  in  France. 

Qu.  O  thou  well  skill'd  in  Curfes,  ftay  a-while,  1 19 


109.  thee ]  me  Q7Qg. 

110.  waft]  wert  QfQa,  Pope,  +  ,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam. +  , 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  art  Q^. 

1 12.  not ]  now  Han. 


1 14.  burthen' d]  bur thenedQt^.  bur¬ 
dened  Qg. 

1 1 5.  wearied  head  ]  weary  necke  Q,_s, 
Sta.  Cam. +  .  wearied  necke  Q^. 

1 18.  woes']  wars  Q^. 

Jhall]  will  Qq,  Cam. +  . 


countenanced  by:  ‘ — thus  the  whirligig  of  time  brings  in  his  revenges.’ — Tweljth 
Night,  V,  i,  385.  But  wheel'd,  seems  much  more  suitable  to  this  place.  [Barnard 
compares,  more  appositely,  I  think,  ‘ — justice  always  whirls  in  equal  measure.’ — 
Love’s  Labour’s,  IV,  iii,  384. — Ed.] 

iio,  iii.  what  thou  wast  .  .  .  what  thou  art]  Compare:  ‘No  greater  grief 
than  to  remember  days  Of  joy  when  misery  is  at  hand.’ — Dante,  Inferno,  canto  v, 
11  1 18,  1 19,  Cary’s  translation,  where  there  is  the  following  note:  ‘Imitated  by 
Chaucer:  “For  of  Fortunes  sharp  adversite  The  worste  kind  of  infortune  is  this, 
A  man  to  have  been  in  prosperite,  And  it  remembir  when  it  passid  is.” — Troilus 
and  Cresseide,  bk.  iii,  1.  1625.  By  Marino:  “Che  non  ha  doglia  il  misero  maggiore, 
Che  ricordar  la  gioia  entro  il  dolore.” — Adone,  canto  xiv,  st.  100.  And  by  Forti- 
guerra:  “Rimembrare  il  ben  perduto  Fa  piu  meschino  lo  presente  stato.” — 
Ricciardetto,  canto  xi,  st.  83.  The  original,  perhaps,  was  in  Boetius:  “In  omni 
adversitate  fortunee  infelicissimum  genus  est  infortunii  fuisse  felicem  et  non  esse.” 
De  Consol.  Philosoph.,  lib.  ii,  par.  4.’ — It  seems,  perhaps,  superfluous  to  call  atten¬ 
tion  to  Tennyson’s  reference  to  Dante:  ‘This  is  truth  the  poet  sings,  That  a  sorrows 
crown  of  sorrow  is  remembering  happier  things.’ — Locksley  Hall,  1.  49.  Compare 
also  what  Margaret  says  in  I,  iii,  269,  270:  ‘O  that  your  young  nobility  could  know 
What  ’tis  to  lose  it  and  be  miserable’;  also  in  1.  122  below:  ‘Compare  dead  happi¬ 
ness  with  living  woe.’ — Ed. 

113.  Vsurpe]  The  use  of  ‘usurp’  applied  to  ‘sorrow’  seems  somewhat  incon¬ 
gruous;  no  one  would  forcibly  take  for  his  own  use  grief  or  pain.  But  as  the  word 
had  been  used  in  regard  to  benefits  in  the  foregoing  line,  its  employment  in  regard 
to  evils  naturally  suggested  itself. — Ed. 

1 14.  my  burthen’d  yoke]  Wright:  That  is,  the  yoke  which  is  a  burden  to 
me.  ‘Burthened’  in  the  sense  of  burdensome  is  formed  from  the  substantive 
burthen,  and  not  from  the  verb.  Compare :  ‘  Or  any  creeping  venom’d  thing,  ’ 
etc.,  I,  ii,  23. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


328 


And  teach  me  how  to  curfe  mine  enemies.  120 

Mar.  Forbeare  to  fleepe  the  night,  and  faft  the  day : 
Compare  dead  happineffe,  with  liuing  woe  : 

Thinke  that  thy  Babes  were  Tweeter  then  they  were, 

And  he  that  flew  them  fowler  then  he  is  : 

BettTing  thy  Ioffe,  makes  the  bad  caufer  worfe,  125 

Reuoluing  this,  will  teach  thee  how  to  Curfe. 

Qu.  My  words  are  dull,  O  quicken  them  with  thine. 

Mar.  Thy  woes  will  make  them  fharpe, 

And  pierce  like  mine.  Exit  Margaret. 

Dut.  Why  fhould  calamity  be  full  of  words?  130 

Qu.  Windy  Atturnies  to  their  Clients  Woes, 


121.  night. ..day']  nights... daies  Q,Q2. 
nights. ..days  Pope,  Han.  Cam. +  . 

122.  dead]  deaths  Q,Q8. 

123.  thy]  Ora.  Q4. 

fweeter]  Ff,  + ,  Wh.  i.  fairer  Qq 

et  cet. 

125.  makes]  make  Q,Q8. 

bad  caufer  worfe]  QqFf,  Rowe, 
+ ,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Cam.  + ,  Ktly.  bad 
caufes  worfe  Q4>  bad  caufe  worfer  Qg. 


bad-caufer  worse  Steev.  et  cet. 

127.  words]  word  Fa. 

128.  129.  Thy  woes... mine]  Ff,  Rowe. 
One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

129.  Margaret]  Mar.  Qq  (after  1.  130). 
1 31.  their  Clients  Woes]  your  client 

woes  Qq.  their  Cliens  woes  Fa.  your 
client' s  woes  Pope,  Theob.  their  client- 
woes  Han.  Warb.  Johns,  their  client 
woes  Cap.  et  seq. 


121.  Forbeare  to  sleepe  .  .  .  and  fast]  Malone:  ‘Fast’  has  no  connection  with 
the  preceding  word  ‘forbear’;  the  meaning  being,  sleep  not  at  night,  and  fast 
during  the  day. 

122.  Compare  dead  happinesse,  etc.]  See  1.  no  above. 

123.  sweeter]  R.  G.  White:  It  is  noteworthy  that  [in  1.  90],  in  Margaret’s 
preceding  speech,  ‘ sweet  babes’  of  the  Qq  was  changed  to  ‘faire  babes’  in  the 
Folio.  This  double  change  in  counterpart  could  not  have  been  accidental;  and, 
indeed,  it  is  far  more  natural  and  touching  to  use  fair  in  the  mere  descriptive 
allusion  to  the  babes,  and  ‘sweet’  in  describing  a  mother’s  memory  of  them.  And 
yet  fairer  has  been  hitherto  retained  ‘as  antithetical  to  “fouler”’  in  the  next  line! 

125.  Bett’ring  thy  losse,  makes,  etc.]  M.  Mason:  We  must  either  read 
this  line:  ‘Bett’ring  thy  loss,  make  the  bad  causer,’  etc.,  which  I  believe  to  be  the 
true  reading,  or  include  it  in  a  parenthesis. — Malone:  ‘Bettering’  is  amplifying , 
magnifying,  thy  loss.  Shakespeare  employed  this  word  for  the  sake  of  an  antithesis, 
in  which  he  delighted,  between  better  and  loss.  [Mason’s  emendation  make  is 
anticipated  by  the  editor  or  compositor  of  Qr — Ed.] 

125.  the  bad  causer  worse]  Vaughan  (iii,  112):  Steevens’s  change,  bad- 
causer,  is,  I  conceive,  of  doubtful  advantage  to  the  sense.  *  Causer  ’  is  sufficiently 
explained  by  the  word  ‘loss’  in  the  same  line,  to  which  it  refers,  as  meaning  the 
causer  of  loss,  and  the  conversion  of  ‘bad’  from  a  simple  epithet  of  ‘causer’  to  a 
substantive  dependent  upon  ‘  causer  ’  mars  both  the  form  and  essence  of  the  apho¬ 
rism,  that  is,  making  good  destroyed  better  than  it  is,  makes  the  bad  man  who 
destroyed  it  worse  than  he  is. 

131-135.  Windy  Atturnies  .  .  .  yet  do  they  ease  the  hart]  Malone:  Com- 


act  iv,  SC.  iii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 
Ayery  fucceeders  of  inteftine  ioyes, 


329 


132 


132.  intejline]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  iniejlate  Qq  et  cet. 


pare:  ‘So  of  concealed  sorrow  may  be  said:  Free  vent  of  words  love’s  fire  doth 
assuage:  But  when  the  heart’s  attorney  once  is  mute,  The  client  breaks  as  desperate 
of  his  suit.’ — Ven.  &•  Ad.,  333-336.  Also:  ‘Give  sorrow  words;  the  grief  that 
does  not  speak,  Whispers  the  o’er-fraught  heart  and  bids  it  break.’ — Macbeth,  IV, 
iii,  208,  209.  [See  Macbeth,  IV,  iii,  245,  this  edition,  for  other  examples  wherein 
somewhat  this  same  thought  is  expressed.] 

I31*  Atturnies]  Murray  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  Attorney ):  From  Old  French  atourner, 
in  sense  of  ‘  one  appointed  or  constituted,  ’  whence  all  the  specific  uses. 

131.  their  Clients  Woes]  Spedding  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  27):  [The 
Folio  is  here]  probably  right  as  to  ‘their,’  but  is  certainly  wrong  as  to  ‘clients.’ 
[See  Text.  Notes.]  ‘Intestine’  in  the  next  line  must  be  a  blunder,  but  need  not  be 
imputed  to  the  reviser,  being  an  ordinary  case  of  a  less  familiar  word  misread  by 
the  printer  for  a  more  familiar  one.  [‘Client’  as  an  adjective  is  unknown  to 
Murray. — Ed.] 

132.  succeeders  of  intestine  ioyes]  Theobald:  As  I  cannot  understand 
this  reading,  I  have  adopted  that  of  the  Quarto,  intestate,  that  is,  words  tun’d  to 
complaints,  succeed  joys  that  are  dead’;  and  unbequeathed  to  them,  to  whom 
they  should  properly  descend. — Capell  (ii,  187):  Intestate  joys  may  be  expressive 
of  joys  so  utterly  exhausted  that,  having  no  part  of  themselves  to  bequeath  to 
others,  they  dy’d  without  a  bequest;  the  line’s  first  part  tells  us  who  were  their  suc¬ 
cessors,  namely,  words  of  complaint. — Malone:  The  metaphor  is  extremely  harsh. 
The  joys  already  possessed  being  all  consumed  and  passed  away,  are  supposed  to 
have  died  intestate,  having  nothing  to  bequeath;  and  mere  verbal  complaints  are 
their  successors,  but  inherit  nothing  but  misery. — Vaughan  (iii,  115):  Theobald’s 
interpretation  is  incongruous;  for  the  person  who  dies  is  never  bequeathed,  and 
the  possession  which  is  bequeathed  is  not  what  dies.  Malone  seems  strangely 
to  interpret  ‘poor  breathing  orators  of  miseries’  as  ‘inheriting  nothing  but  misery.’ 
But  ‘orators’  are  not  heritors  and  ‘orator’  seems  here  to  have  a  purely  forensic 
and  technical  signification,  and  ‘breathing’  has  the  sense  common  in  Shakespeare 
of  speaking.  In  ‘airy’  I  half  suspect  an  equivocation  between  the  words  heir  and 
air,  to  crown  and  emphasize  the  contrast  between  title  by  inheritance  and  title 
by  testament. — Davis  (p.  205) :  This  conceit  could  never  have  occurred  to  a  writer 
whose  knowledge  of  law  was  only  of  that  uncertain  kind  which  every  layman  has, 
or  thinks  he  has,  yet  who  would  be  very  cautious  how  he  used  it  for  such  purposes 
of  illustration  or  personation. — R.  L.  Ashhurst  (MS  note):  If  ‘intestate’  be 
the  right  word,  of  which  I  feel  some  doubt,  I  think  ‘intestate  joys’  must  mean, 
pleasures  in  the  midst  of  which  a  man  is  cut  off  without  having  time  to  make  a 
wall — wills  being  seldom  made  except  almost  in  ‘extremis.’  Thus  succeeders 
would  mean  those  who  received  the  succession  to  the  intestate.  Rather,  perhaps, 
the  civil  law  idea  of  the  next  of  kin  who  accepted  the  succession.  The  joys  I  think 
belong  to  the  original  decedant.  After  the  death,  we  have  only  words,  windy  attor¬ 
neys,  airy  succeeders,  breathing  orators  of  misery.  Orator  is  either  one  who  prays 
or  one  who  speaks.  In  Shakespeare’s  time  it  was  universally  used  in  bills  in  equity 
and  all  chancery  proceedings,  and  is  still  used  in  many  of  our  courts.  The  old 
bills  begin  ‘  Humbly  complaining  prayeth  your  orator.’  But  I  doubt  if  it  mean  in 
the  present  passage  more  than  general  complainants  of  miseries. 


330 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


Poore  breathing  Orators  of  miferies,  133 

Let  them  haue  fcope,  though  what  they  will  impart, 

Helpe  nothing  els,  yet  do  they  eafe  the  hart.  135 

Dut.  If  fo  then,  be  not  Tongue-ty’d  :  go  with  me, 

And  in  the  breath  of  bitter  words,  let’s  [mother 
My  damned  Son,  that  thy  two  fweet  Sonnes  [mother’d. 

The  Trumpet  founds,  be  copious  in  exclaimes. 


Enter  King  Richard,  and  his  Trame.  140 

Rich.  Who  intercepts  me  in  my  Expedition  ? 

Dnt.  O  fhe,  that  might  haue  intercepted  thee 
By  ftrangling  thee  in  her  aceurfed  wombe, 

From  all  the  flaughters(Wretch)that  thou  haft  done. 

Qu.  Hid’fl  thou  that  Forhead  with  a  Golden  Crowne  145 


134.  will  ]  Ff, +,  Wh.  i.  do  Qq  et 
cet. 

135.  nothing  els~\  not  at  all  Qq,  Sta. 
Cam.+  ( not  all  Q,Q8). 

do  they ]  not  doe  they  Q?.  they 
do  Rowe  ii,  +  . 

136.  fo  then ,]  Ff.  fo  then  Q8.  fo , 
then  et  cet. 

Tongue-ty' d  ]  loong-tide  Q,Q2Q3- 
tongue-tide  Q4<  toong  tide  Qs> 

1 37.  f  mother]  wither  Bailey  (ii,  291). 

138.  that  ]  which  Qq,  Cam. +. 

fweet~\  Om.  Q^. 

drum  within.]  Cap. 


139.  The..founds~\  I  heare  his  drum 
Qq,  Pope, +,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev. 
Varr.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 

Scene  v.  Pope,  Han.  Warb. 

Johns. 

140.  and  his  Traine.]  marching  with 
drummes  and  Trumpets.  Qq.  and  his 
train,  marching.  Cap.  et  seq.  (subs.) 

141.  me  in]  Om.  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

142.  0  fhe]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope.  A  fhe , 
Qq.  0,  she  Theob.  et  seq. 

143.  aceurfed]  Fx. 

145.  Hid'Jl]  Had'fl  Q7.  Hajl  Q8. 
Hidest  Rowe,  Pope,  Cam.  +  . 


133.  Poore  breathing]  Wright:  ‘Poor*  is  here  used  as  an  adverb. 

135.  Helpe  nothing  els]  Wright:  That  is,  are  of  no  other  use;  this  change 
from  the  Quarto  reading:  ‘Help  not  at  all,’  appears  to  have  been  due  to  a  mis¬ 
understanding  of  the  word  ‘help,’  which  here  means,  have  no  power  to  cure,  but 
simply  to  relieve  the  heart.  ‘Help’  is  found  frequently  in  this  sense.  Compare: 
‘If  all  the  wine  in  my  bottle  will  recover  him,  I  will  help  his  ague.’ — Temp.,  II,  ii,  97. 
— Vaughan  (iii,  115):  I  am  not  sure  that  ‘help’  in  the  sense  of  cure  is  applicable 
to  this  place,  where  ‘help’  seems  legal  or  diplomatic. — Tawney:  It  seems  better  to 
take  ‘  help’  here  in  the  sense  of  be  of  use,  avail,  as  Schmidt  does.  This  interpretation 
suits  equally  well  either  [Folio  or  Quarto]  reading. 

139.  exclaimes]  See  I,  ii,  58. 

141.  Who  intercepts  me]  It  may,  perhaps,  seem  strange  that  Richard  does 
not  at  once  recognize  his  mother  and  sister-in-law.  But  a  moment’s  reflection  will 
show  that  if  we  perchance  have  forgotten,  Shakespeare  has  not,  that  the  three  women 
are  seated  upon  the  ground;  Margaret  has  withdrawn,  but  the  other  two  are  still 
bowed  in  grief;  at  Richard’s  first  speech  the  Duchess  rises  and  confronts  him — a 
much  more  dramatic  arrangement  than  if  while  standing  she  intercept  him. — Ed. 

142.  O  she]  Vaughan,  the  only  advocate  for  the  Quarto  reading  A  she,  vindi¬ 
cates  it  on  the  ground  that  ‘  Shakespeare  often  thus  designates  a  woman.’ 


act  iv,  sc.  iii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  33 1 

Where’t  fhould  be  branded,  if  that  right  were  right  ?  146 

The  (laughter  of  the  Prince  that  ow’d  that  Crowne, 

And  the  dyre  death  of  my  poore  Sonnes,  and  Brothers. 

Tell  me  thou  Villaine-flaue,  where  are  my  Children  ? 

Dut.  Thou  Toad,  thou  Toade,  150 

Where  is  thy  Brother  Clarence  ? 

And  little  Ned  Plantagenet  his  Sonne  ? 

Qu.  Where  is  the  gentle  Riuers,  Vaughan ,  Gray  P 
Dut.  Where  is  kinde  Hajlings  ? 

Rich.  A  flourifh  Trumpets,  ftrike  Alarum  Drummes  :  155 

Let  not  the  Heauens  heare  thefe  Tell-tale  women 
Raile  on  the  Lords  Annointed.  Strike  I  fay. 

Flcnirifh.  Alarums. 

Either  be  patient,  and  intreat  me  fayre,  159 


146.  Where' t... brand ed]  Ff,  Rowe  i. 
Where... grauen  Qq  (  Where  would  Q4), 
Sta.  Cam. +  .  Where. ..branded  Rowe 

ii  et  cet. 

right  /]  Ff.  right ,  Qq  et  cet. 

147.  The~\  For  Coll.  MS. 

148.  poore]  two  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

149.  Villainejlaue]  villaine  Jlaue  Qq, 
Cam.  + . 


150,  151.  Thou  Toad... Clarence ?] 
Ff,  Rowe.  One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

152.  Plantagenet]  Plantagel  Q3_s. 

153,  154-  Qu.  Where...  HaRings  ?] 
Qu.  Where  is  kinde  Hajlings ,  Riuers , 
Vaughan ,  Gray  ?  Qq,  Pope,  +  (  —  Var. 
’73),  Sta.  Cam.  +. 

158.  Flourifh.  Alarums.]  The  trumpets 
Qx.  The  Trumpets  sound.  Q2.  The 
trumpets  founds.  Q3-5. 


146.  that]  For  other  examples  of  ‘that’  as  a  ‘conjunctional  affix.’  see,  if  needful, 
Abbott,  §  287.  Compare  1.  233. 

148.  Brothers]  See  I,  iii,  42,  and  notes. 

154.  Dut.  Where  is  kinde  Hastings]  Wright:  The  corrector  of  the  Folio 
here  changes  the  Quarto  reading.  [See  Text.  Notes.]  The  Queen  is  not  likely  to 
have  spoken  so  of  Hastings,  who  was  always  opposed  to  her  family.  As  it  appears 
to  me  highly  improbable  that  Shakespeare  wrote  either  the  one  or  the  other,  I  have 
followed  the  reading  of  the  earlier  copies. — Vaughan  (iii,  116):  I  would  restore  the 
single  Quarto  line,  but  make  the  earlier  half  of  it  a  part  of  the  speech  spoken  by  the 
Duchess,  thus:  ‘And  little  Ned  Plantagenet  his  son?  Where  is  kind  Hastings? 
Q.  Eliz.  Rivers?  Vaughan?  Grey?’  There  is  every  reason  for  considering  the 
remembrance  of  Hastings  with  kindness  as  appropriate  to  the  Duchess  of  York; 
and  not  less  natural  is  the  Queen’s  immediate  recurrence  to  the  loss  of  Rivers  and 
his  two  companions. 

155.  A  flourish  Trumpets]  Dowden  (p.  184):  Richard’s  cynicism  and  insolence 
have  in  them  a  kind  of  grim  mirth;  such  a  bonhomie  as  might  be  met  with  among  the 
humourists  of  Pandemonium.  His  brutality  is  a  manner  of  joking  with  a  purpose. 
When  his  mother,  with  Queen  Elizabeth,  comes  by  ‘  copious  in  exclaims,  ’  the  mirth¬ 
ful  Richard  calls  for  a  flourish  of  trumpets  to  drown  these  shrill  female  voices. 

159.  intreat  me  fayre]  Wright  explains  this  as,  ‘use  me  well,’  quoting  in  cor¬ 
roboration:  ‘I’ll  write  unto  them  and  entreat  them  fair.’ — j  Hen.  VI:  I,  i,  271. 


332 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


Or  with  the  clamorous  report  of  Warre,  160 

Thus  will  I  drowne  your  exclamations. 

Dut.  Art  thou  my  Sonne  ? 

Rich.  I,  I  thanke  God,  my  Father,  and  your  felfe. 

Dut.  Then  patiently  heare  my  impatience. 

Rich.  Madam,  I  haue  a  touch  of  your  condition,  165 

That  cannot  brooke  the  accent  of  reproofe. 

Dut.  O  let  me  fpeake. 

Rich.  Do  then,  but  lie  not  heare. 

Dut\  I  will  be  milde,  and  gentle  in  my  words. 

Rich.  And  breefe  fgood  Mother)  for  I  am  in  haft.  170 

Dut.  Art  thou  fo  hafty  ?  I  haue  ftaid  for  thee 
(God  knowes)in  torment  and  in  agony. 

Rich.  And  came  I  not  at  laft  to  comfort  you  ? 

Dut.  No  by  the  holy  Rood,  thou  know’ft  it  well, 

Thou  cam’ft  on  earth,  to  make  the  earth  my  Hell.  175 

A  greeuous  burthen  was  thy  Birth  to  me, 

Tetchy  and  wayward  was  thy  Infancie.  1 77 


160.  clamorous ]  clamour  Q4. 
report~\  reports Q?Q8F3F4,  Rowe i. 

161.  drowne ]  drownd  Q8. 

1 63.  I,  1  ]  Ay,  I  Rowe  et  seq. 

164.  heare]  here  Qs.  hear  F3F4. 
bear  Coll.  MS. 

166.  That]  Which  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 

167,  168.  Dut.  0  let. ..not  heare ]  Om. 
Qq,  Sta. 


169.  words]  fpeech  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +. 

171.  hajly  ?  I]  hajlie  /Qq  {ha/lie,  I 

QJ- 

haue]  once  Coll.  MS. 

172.  torment  and  in]  anguijh ,  paine 
and  Qq,  Pope, +,  Sta.  Cam.-f. 

176.  burthen]  burden  Johns. 

177-180.  Mnemonic,  Warb. 


Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.I.  1)  gives  many  examples  of  the  word  used  in  this  sense, 
which  is  not  to  be  doubted.  But  may  not  Richard  refer  to  the  questions  which 
have  been  so  cruelly  and  justly  put  to  him  ?  And  may  not  his  last,  and  possibly 
most  emphatic,  word,  ‘  exclamations,  ’  refer  rather  to  speech  than  treatment  ? — Ed. 

162.  Art  thou  my  Sonne  ?]  On  which  word  in  this  question  is  the  emphasis 
to  fall — On  ‘  thou,  ’  or  on  ‘  Son  ’  ?  Rhythm  decides  in  favour  of  the  former,  and, 
in  fact,  would  make  both  emphatic. — Ed. 

165.  touch]  Schmidt  (Lex.)  here  interprets  ‘touch’  as,  a  dash,  a  spice,  a  smack. 

166.  accent  of  reproofe]  What  studied  insolence  is  contained  in  this  euphemism 
for  all  the  bitter  names  which  had  been  showered  upon  him. — Ed. 

174.  the  holy  Rood]  See  III,  ii,  84,  and  note. 

176.  A  greeuous  burthen]  There  is,  possibly,  an  allusion  here  to  the  following 
fact  in  regard  to  Richard’s  birth,  mentioned  by  Rous,  p.  215:  ‘ — rex  Ricardus,  qui 
natus  est  apud  Fodringhay  in  comitatu  Northamp tonne,  biennio  matris  utero 
tentus.’ — Ed. 

177.  Tetchy  .  .  .  thy  Infancie]  Bucknill  (Sh.’s  Med.  Knowl.,  p.  186):  The 
Duchess  of  York’s  description  of  her  terrible  son’s  nativity,  infancy,  childhood,  and 


act  iv,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


333 

Thy  School-daies  frightfull,  defp’rate,  wilde,  and  furious,  178 
Thy  prime  of  Manhood,  daring,  bold,  and  venturous  : 

Thy  Age  confirm’d,  proud,  fubtle,  ilye,  and  bloody,  180 

More  milde,  but  yet  more  harmfull  ;  Kinde  in  hatred  : 

What  comfortable  houre  canft  thou  name, 

That  euer  grac’d  me  with  thy  company  ? 

Rich.  Faith  none,  but  Humfrey  Hower^  184 


178.  defp'rate 3  defperate  QqF4> 

179.  Thy  ...venturous]  Om.  Q3_8. 

180.  Jlye ,  and  bloody  ]  bloudie ,  trecher- 
ous  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 
treacherous ,  bloody  Marshall  conj. 

181.  More  milde. ..hatred]  Om.  Qq, 
Pope,  +  (  — Var.  ’73),  Sta. 

harmfull;  Kinde]  Ff.  harmful- 
-kind  Walker,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  harm- 
fill ’,  kinde  Qq  et  cet. 

182.  houre]  hour  Ktly. 


183.  with]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh. 
i,  Ktly.  in  Qq  et  cet. 

184-186.  In  margin,  Pope,  Han. 

184,  185.  Faith...  Grace]  Ff,  Rowe. 
One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

184.  Humfrey]  Humphreys  Qg.  th' 
hungry  Kinnear  (p.  270). 

Hower]  Ff,  Rowe,  Ktly,  Huds. 
Houre  Pope, +  ,  Cap.  Varr.  Ran.  Hour 
Mai.  et  cet. 


manhood  forms  a  graphic  illustration  of  the  maxim  that  no  man  was  ever  suddenly 
very  wicked,  and  may  well  be  commended  to  the  study  of  those  physicians  who  have 
recently  invented  what  they  are  pleased  to  call  ‘  moral  idiotcy.’  On  these  principles 
the  evidence  of  Richard’s  mother  would  have  been  amply  sufficient  to  prove  that 
he  was  a  moral  idiot,  and  utterly  irresponsible  for  the  guilt  of  his  actions.  It 
might  thus  be  urged  that,  with  all  his  apparent  force  of  will,  he  had  no  free  choice, 
but  was  himself  the  puppet  of  organization  and  of  circumstance,  and,  therefore, 
that  all  his  crimes  were  inevitable. 

177.  Tetchy]  Skeat  ( Diet .):  The  sense  of  ‘tetchy’  (better,  techy)  is  full  of 
tetches  or  teches,  that  is,  bad  habits,  freaks,  whims,  vices.  The  adjective  is  formed 
from  Middle  English  tecche  or  tache,  a  habit,  especially  a  bad  habit. 

179.  Thy  prime  of  Manhood]  That  is,  the  springtime  of  thy  manhood.  See 
I,  ii,  274. 

180.  Thy  Age  confirm’d]  R.  G.  White  (ed.  ii):  This  is  quite  preposterous. 
Richard  had  hardly  reached  even  the  ‘prime  of  manhood.’  He  was  only  thirty- 
three  years  old,  and  was  slain  at  Bosworth  field  in  his  thirty-fifth  year. 

181.  more  harmfull;  Kinde  in  hatred]  Walker  ( Crit .,  ii,  175)  suggests  that 
we  here  read  ‘harmful-kind  in  hatred’;  but  are  not  the  words,  ‘kind  in  hatred,’ 
intended  here  as  a  repetition  of  the  idea  contained  in  ‘more  mild  but  yet  more 
harmful  ’  ? — Ed. 

182.  comfortable]  Here  used  causitively;  as  in  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer: 
‘The  most  comfortable  sacrament,’  etc. 

183.  grac’d]  Compare:  ‘ Please ’t  your  highness  To  grace  us  with  your  royal 
company.’ — Macbeth ,  III,  iv,  45. 

184.  Humfrey  Hower]  Steevens:  This  may  probably  be  an  allusion  to  some 
affair  of  gallantry  of  which  the  Duchess  had  been  suspected.  I  cannot  find  the 
name  in  Holinshed.  Surely  the  poet’s  fondness  for  a  quibble  has  not  induced 
him  at  once  to  personify  and  christen  that  ‘hour’  of  the  day  which  summoned  his 
mother  to  break  fast.  Compare:  ‘Gentlemen,  time  makes  us  brief:  our  old 


334 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  CE  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


[184.  Humfrey  Hower] 

mistress,  Houre,  is  at  hand.’ — Wit  in  a  Woman,  1604.  Shakespeare  might  indeed, 
by  this  strange  phrase,  have  designed  to  mark  the  hour  at  which  the  good  Duchess 
was  as  hungry  as  the  followers  of  Duke  Humphrey.  The  common  cant  phrase  of 
‘dining  with  Duke  Humphrey,’  I  have  never  yet  heard  satisfactorily  explained.  It 
appears,  however,  from  The  Guls  Horn-booke,  Dekker,  r6o9,  that  in  the  ancient 
church  of  St  Paul,  one  of  the  aisles  was  called  ‘Duke  Humphrey’s  Walk’;  in  which 
those  who  had  no  means  of  procuring  a  dinner  affected  to  loiter.  For  example:  ‘ — 
sundry  fellowes  in  their  silkes  shall  be  appointed  to  keepe  Duke  Humfrve  company 
in  Poules,  because  they  know  not  where  to  get  their  dinners  abroad.’ — Nash,  A 
Wonderful  Prognostication  for  this  Year,  1591 ;  Again:  ‘ — to  seeke  his  dinner  in 
Poules  with  duke  Humphrey:  to  licke  dishes,  to  be  a  beggar.’ — G.  Harvey,  Foure 
Letters,  etc.,  1592.  [Steevens  quotes  three  other  passages  wherein  this  phrase 
occurs;  all  of  them,  however,  bearing  a  date  subsequent  to  that  of  Qut  of  this  present 
play. — Ed.j — Malone:  I  believe  nothing  more  than  a  quibble  was  meant.  In 
Sonnet  xx  we  find  a  similar  conceit:  a  quibble  between  hues  (colours),  and  Hughes, 
formerly  spelt  (Hews),  the  person  addressed.  [This  note  appears  in  Malone’s 
edition,  1790,  but  is  not  repeated  in  the  Variorum  of  1821,  where  its  place  is  taken 
by  the  following:  “‘Humphrey  Hour”  is  merely  used  in  ludicrous  language  for 
hour,  like  Tom  Truth,  for  truth,  and  twenty  more  such  terms.’] — Wright:  If 
this  phrase  ever  had  any  meaning  it  is  now  completely  lost.  If  Steevens’ s  explana¬ 
tion  be  correct,  it  is  not  clear  how  ‘Humphrey  Hour’  can  mean  the  hour  at  which 
the  Duchess  was  summoned  to  breakfast.  The  spelling  in  the  Qq  Houre  and  in 
the  Ff  ‘Hower’  does  not  throw  much  light  upon  the  question. — Vaughan  (iii,  117): 
‘  Humphrey  Hour,’  on  account  of  that  name,  was  an  ‘  hour  ’ ;  by  virtue  of  the  invitation 
to  the  comfort  of  an  important  meal,  was  a  ‘  comfortable  hour’;  by  reason  of  inviting 
‘her  grace  the  Duchess’  with  proper  address  of  ‘your  grace,’  ‘graced  her’;  and 
as  delivering  an  invitation  which  was  to  take  her  ‘forth  of  Richard’s  company,’ 
necessarily  ‘graced  her’  in  his  company.  This  is  but  one  amongst  several  strokes 
of  equivocation  in  the  conduct  of  dialogue  by  which  Shakespeare  industriously 
touches  in  a  perfect  delineation  of  Richard’s  social  character.  They  have,  how¬ 
ever,  here,  as  I  opine,  and  certainly  in  other  places,  eluded  the  observation  even 
of  the  most  acute  critics,  and  provoked  either  misinterpretation  or  corruption  of 
the  text. — Walsh  (p.  500)  gives,  as  the  origin  of  the  phrase,  ‘to  dine  with  Duke 
Humphrey,’  the  following:  ‘The  Duke  Humphrey,  with  whom  the  dinnerless 
are  facetiously  said  to  dine,  was  Humphrey,  Duke  of  Gloucester  (Henry  V.’s 
brother),  who  was  protector  during  the  minority  of  Henry  VI.  He  was  a 
great  patron  of  literature  and  the  arts  and  famous  for  his  hospitality.  Fuller, 
in  his  Worthies,  says  the  proverb  “hath  altered  the  original  meaning  thereof;  for 
first  it  signified  aliena  vivere  quadra,  to  eat  by  the  bounty  or  feed  by  the  favour  of 
another  man;  for  Humphrey,  Duke  of  Gloucester  (commonly  called  the  good  duke) 
was  so  hospitable  that  every  man  of  fashion,  otherwise  unprovided,  was  welcome  to 
dine  with  him.  But  after  the  death  of  the  good  Duke  Humphrey  (when  many  of 
his  former  almsmen  were  at  a  loss  for  a  meal’s  meat),  this  proverb  did  alter  its 
copy;  to  dine  with  Duke  Humphrey  importing  to  be  dinnerless”  [ii,  345].  A 
more  circumstantial  explanation  of  the  saying  is  that  on  the  Duke’s  death  the 
report  arose  that  his  monument  was  to  be  erected  in  St  Paul’s.  The  report  proved 
untrue.  When  a  wag  had  no  place  to  dine  he  would  hang  around  the  aisles  of 
St  Paul’s,  pretending  to  be  looking  for  the  monument  of  Duke  Humphrey.  This 


ACT  iv,  sc.  iii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

That  call’d  your  Grace 
To  Breakefaft  once,  forth  of  my  company. 

If  I  be  fo  difgracious  in  your  eye, 

Let  me  march  on,  and  not  offend  you  Madam. 

Strike  vp  the  Drumme. 

Dul.  I  pry  thee  heare  me  fpeake. 

Rich.  You  fpeake  too  bitterly. 

Dut.  Heare  me  a  word  : 

For  I  fhall  neuer  fpeake  to  thee  againe. 

Rich.  So. 

Dut.  Either  thou  wilt  dye,  by  Gods  iuft  ordinance  195 

Ere  from  this  warre  thou  turne  a  Conqueror : 

Or  I  with  greefe  and  extreame  Age  fhall  perifh, 

And  neuer  more  behold  thy  face  againe. 

Therefore  take  with  thee  my  moft  greeuous  Curfe,  199 


335 

185 


190 


186.  Breakefafl]  break e  fajl  Qt. 
my]  Om.  Q4. 

187.  If  I]  If  it  Q^(IfQ4). 
difgracious]  gralious  Q3_,.  griei- 

ous  Qg. 

eye ]  fight  Qq,  Pope,  + ,  Cap.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Ktly. 

188.  you  Madam]  your  grace  Qq, 
Pope, +,  Cam. +  . 

189- 192.  As  two  lines,  ending,  fpeake 
...word :  Steev.  et  seq. 

189.  Strike  ...  Drumme~\  Om.  Qq, 
Pope,  Han. 

190- 194.  /  prythee... Rich.  ,&>.]  O 
heare  me  fpeake  for  I  fhall  neuer  fee 
thee  more.  King.  Come,  come  you  are  too 


bitter.  Qq  ( the  more  Q2Q3Q4-  you  art  Q,) 
Sta.  O  hear  me  speak,  for  I  shall  never 
see  thee.  K.  Rich.  Come,  come,  you  are 
too  bitter.  Pope,  Han. 

195.  thou  wilt]  thou' It  Pope,+  (  — 
Var.  ’73),  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

196.  Ere']  Eeare  Q_.  E'er  Rowe. 
E're  Han. 

this ]  his  Q?. 

197.  and]  or  Johns.  (1771)  ap.  Cam. 

198.  more  behold]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 
Wh.  i.  looke  vpon  Qq  et  cet. 

199.  greeuous]  heauie  Qq.  heavy 
Pope,  +  ,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 
Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 


soon  became  known  as  dining  with  Duke  Humphrey,  and  a  monument  (really  that 
of  Sir  John  Beauchamp)  was  pointed  out  as  his,  whom  the  dinnerless  adopted  as 
their  patron.’ — Dyce  (Gloss.):  No  satisfactory  explanation,  as  far  as  I  am  aware, 
has  yet  been  given  of  these  words. 

189.  Strike  vp  the  Drumme]  Wright:  That  is,  strike  aloud.  So  ‘blow  up’ 
signifies  blow  aloud  in  the  expression:  ‘Blow  up  the  trumpet  in  the  new  moon,’ 
Psalm  lxxxi,  3. 

195-  Either]  For  other  examples,  where,  for  metrical  reasons,  ‘either’  is  pro¬ 
nounced  as  a  monosyllable,  see  Walker,  Vers.,  p.  103;  compare  1,  ii,  70. 

195.  thou  wilt  dye]  Marshall:  Pope’s  change,  ‘thou ’It  die,’  is  inadmissible, 
since  the  emphasis  is  on  ‘  thou,  ’  which  is  opposed  to  ‘  I  ’  in  1.  T97. 

199.  take  .  .  .  my  most  greeuous  Curse]  Collins  (p.  81)  remarks  that 
these  following  lines  recall  ‘  with  close  exactness  the  scene  in  which  Oedipus  curses 
Polynices.’  [The  Oxford  translator  thus  renders  the  passage:  ‘But  do  yoy  go 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


336 

Which  in  the  day  of  Battell  tyre  thee  more  200 

Then  all  the  compleat  Armour  that  thou  wear’ft. 

to  ruin,  both  spurned  and  disowned  by  me,  basest  of  the  base,  taking  with  you 
these  curses,  which  on  you  I  invoke,  never  to  gain  possession  of  your  native  land 
by  the  spear,  and  never  to  return  to  hollow  Argos,  but  to  die  by  a  brother’s 
hand,  to  slay  him  by  whom  you  were  driven  out.  Such  curses  I  imprecate, 
and  I  invoke  the  murky  parent  gloom  of  Tartarus  to  receive  you  in  its  mansions: 
and  I  invoke  these  goddesses,  and  I  invoke  Mars,  who  has  inspired  you  with  this 
dire  hatred.’— Oedipus  Coloneus,  1382-93 — Oxford  Trans.,  ed.  Bohn,  p.  98. — Ed.] — 
Oechelhauser  {Essay,  etc.,  p.  105):  Neither  logically  nor  ethically  is  any  other 
conclusion  valid  than  that,  under  the  weight  of  his  mother’s  curse,  Richard  suffers 
a  complete  moral  collapse;  here,  moreover,  the  poet  has  placed  the  turning-point  of 
Richard’s  life  and  fate.  Margaret’s  curse  occurs  where  the  action  is  on  the  increase, 
his  Mother’s  where  it  is  on  the  decrease,  after  the  measure  of  crimes  against  Heaven 
is  complete;  where  the  conscience  of  the  sinner  is  weakened,  and  where  superstitious 
fancies  show  themselves,  all  of  which  would  have  been  unknown  in  the  earlier 
period.  But  the  moral  effect  of  Margaret’s  curse  is  weakened  by  her  character. 
For  every  crime  of  which  she  accused  Richard,  he  could  retort  with  one  of  which 
she  equally  was  guilty.  The  venerable  Duchess,  on  the  other  hand,  does  not 
admit  the  common  subterfuge  that  seeks,  in  the  sins  of  others,  to  find  pardon  for 
one’s  own;  but,  of  unblemished  character,  she  attacks  with  fury  her  degenerate  son. 
He  seeks  in  vain  with  fretful  haste  and  warlike  sounds  to  stem  the  torrent  of  her 
reproaches.  His  very  vacillation  in  departing  shows  how  fraught  with  torment  to 
him  is  the  whole  incident.  In  the  former  scene,  he  not  only  did  not  seek  to  curb 
Margaret’s  bitter  curse,  but  even,  with  an  intellectual  superiority,  turned  it  mock¬ 
ingly  back  upon  her  own  head. — Brooke  (p.  117):  The  scene  closes  when,  on 
Richard’s  head — who  now,  in  fine  dramatic  contrast  to  this  almost  solitary  scene, 
comes  marching  by  with  warlike  sound  and  pomp  on  his  way  to  overthrow  Bucking¬ 
ham — falls  his  mother’s  curse.  And  the  curse  is  a  prophecy,  as  it  were,  of  all  his 
victims  will  say  to  him  the  night  before  Bosworth  field.  It  is  often  Shakespeare’s 
habit  to  anticipate,  in  a  short  passage,  a  scene  which  he  means  to  give  in  full,  a 
sketch  of  the  picture  to  be  completed. 

200-205.  tyre  •  •  •  fight  •  •  •  Whisper  .  .  .  promise]  Abbott  (§  365):  The 
reader  of  Shakespeare  should  always  be  ready  to  recognise  the  subjunctive,  even 
where  the  identity  of  the  subjunctive  with  the  indicative  inflection  renders  distinction 
between  two  moods  impossible,  except  from  the  context.  [As  in  this  passage], 
‘tire,’  necessarily  subjunctive,  impresses  upon  the  reader,  that  the  co-ordinate 
verbs,  ‘fight,’  ‘whisper,’  ‘promise,’  are  also  subjunctive.  But  else,  it  would  be 
possible  for  a  careless  reader  to  take  ‘fight,’  &c.,  as  indicative,  and  ruin  the  passage. 

200,  201.  tyre  thee  more  Then  all  the  compleat  Armour]  Gervintjs  (i, 
385):  Wonderful  use  is  made  of  this  curse  in  the  scene  before  the  battle  of  Bos¬ 
worth,  a  use  worth  more  than  all  the  others,  in  which  the  poet  has  employed  these 
imprecations.  Without  looking  back  to  that  maternal  sentence,  without  Richard 
himself  remembering  it,  his  ‘beaver’  burdens  him  in  the  battle  so  that  he  orders 
it  to  be  made  easier,  and  his  arm  is  weary  with  the  lance,  which  he  exchanges  for 
a  lighter.  This  is  better  than  the  multiplied  impression  of  the  severe  curses,  and 
their  literal  and  ever-repeated  fulfilment;  and,  better  too,  is  the  imprecation  of  the 
mother,  temporarily  irritated,  when  the  occasion  demanded  it,  than  the  steady 


ACT  iv,  SC.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


337 


My  Prayers  on  the  aduerfe  party  fight,  202 

And  there  the  little  foules  of  Edwards  Children, 

Whifper  the  Spirits  of  thine  Enemies, 

And  promife  them  Succeffe  and  Vidlory :  205 

Bloody  thou  art,  bloody  will  be  thy  end  : 

Shame  ferues  thy  life,  and  doth  thy  death  attend.  Exit. 

Qu.Though  far  more  caufe,  yet  much  leffe  fpirit  to  curfe 
Abides  in  me,  I  fay  Amen  to  her. 

Rich.  Stay  Madam,  I  muft  talke  a  word  with  you.  210 

Qu.  I  haue  no  more  fonnes  of  the  Royall  Blood 
For  thee  to  (laughter.  For  my  D  aughter s(Richard)  212 


203.  Edwards]  Edward  Qa.  [Edwards 
Ashbee  Facsimile). 

204.  Spirits']  fpirit  Q  . 

205.  and  Victory]  in  victory  Q,Qg. 

206.  art,]  art,  and  Q^. 
be]  by  Qs. 

209.  her.]  all.  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +. 
[going.  Theob.  +  . 


210.  talke]  fpeake  Qq,  Pope,  +  ,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam. +, 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  Ktly,  Coll.  iii. 

21 1.  more]  moe  Qt,  Cam.  +  . 

212.  Jlatighter.]  murther  Qf.  mur- 
ther,  Qa-s.  murther ;  Cap.  Varr.  Mai. 
murder  :  Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Sta.  Cam.  +  , 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  Ktly. 


excess  of  the  revengeful  curses  of  Margaret.  [Is  not  this  giving  to  the  words  of 
the  Duchess  too  literal  a  meaning?  She  does  not  wish  Richard’s  armour  to  rest 
heavily  upon  him,  but  that  her  curse  may  rest  more  heavily.  Moreover,  it  is  not  during 
the  fight  that  he  complains  of  his  ‘  beaver  ’  and  ‘  staves,  ’  but  the  night  before. — Ed.] 

201.  compleat]  Compare:  ‘That  thou  dead  corse,  again  in  complete  steel.’ 
— Hamlet,  I,  iv,  52. 

210.  Stay  Madam,  etc.]  Johnson:  On  this  dialogue  ’tis  not  necessary  to  bestow 
much  criticism,  part  of  it  is  ridiculous,  and  the  whole  improbable. — M.  Mason: 
I  cannot  agree  with  Johnson’s  opinion.  I  see  nothing  ridiculous  in  any  part  of 
this  dialogue;  and  with  respect  to  probability  it  was  not  unnatural  that  Richard, 
who  by  his  art  and  wheedling  tongue,  had  prevailed  on  Lady  Anne  to  marry  him 
in  her  heart’s  extremest  grief,  should  hope  to  persuade  an  ambitious  and,  as  he 
thought  her,  a  wicked  woman,  to  consent  to  his  marriage  with  her  daughter,  which 
would  make  her  a  queen,  and  aggrandise  her  family. — Wright:  My  own  sympa¬ 
thies,  I  confess,  are  with  Johnson’s  opinion. — Brooke  (p.  118):  This  scene  ...  is 
of  that  cunning  which  overreaches  its  aim.  Richard  thinks  he  has  persuaded 
Elizabeth  to  give  him  her  daughter;  but  it  is  he  who  has  been  deceived,  he  whom 
the  woman  has  played  with.  She  pretends  to  consent,  but  is  already  in  communica¬ 
tion  with  Richmond,  to  whom  she  does  give  her  daughter.  From  this  point  of 
view,  which  I  think  Shakespeare  meant,  the  unnaturalness  of  the  scene  (the  far 
too  great  length  of  which  is  only  excused  by  the  impossible  effort  Richard  makes) 
is  modified;  and  the  weakness  which  has  come  on  Richard’s  intellect  is  more  than 
suggested.  All  is  breaking  down  in  him:  his  self-control,  his  temper,  intelligence, 
his  clear  sight  of  things,  his  foresight,  his  power  to  keep  men  and  subdue  them  to 
his  will.  The  art  is  excellent  with  which  this  is  shown  in  Richard’s  talk  with 
Catesby,  Ratcliffe,  Stanley,  and  the  messengers. 


22 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


338 

They  fhall  be  praying  Nunnes,not  weeping  Queenes :  213 

And  therefore  leuell  not  to  hit  their  Hues. 

Rich.  You  haue  a  daughter  call’d  Elizabeth ,  215 

Vertuous  and  Faire,  Royall  and  Gracious? 

Qu.  And  mull  fhe  dye  for  this?  O  let  her  Hue, 

And  lie  corrupt  her  Manners,  ftaine  her  Beauty, 

Slander  my  Selfe,  as  falfe  to  Edwards  bed : 

Throw  ouer  her  the  vaile  of  Infamy,  220 

So  fhe  may  Hue  vnfcarr’d  of  bleeding  (laughter, 

I  will  confeffe  fhe  was  not  Edwards  daughter. 

Rich.  Wrong  not  her  Byrth,  fhe  is  a  Royall  Princeffe. 

Qu.  To  faue  her  life,  lie  fay  fhe  is  not  fo. 

Rich.  Her  life  is  fafeft  onely  in  her  byrth.  225 

Qu.  And  onely  in  that  fafety,  dyed  her  Brothers. 

Rich.  Loe  at  their  Birth,  good  ftarres  were  oppofite. 

Qu.  No,  to  their  Hues,  ill  friends  were  contrary. 

Rich\  All  vnauoyded  is  the  doome  of  Deftiny.  229 


220.  voile]  vale  Qi-S-  veil  Pope  et 
seq. 

221.  vnfcarr'd  of]  vnskard from  Qr_4. 
vn  f card  from  Qs-  vnfcarde  from  Q6Q, 
Q8  (subs. ).  unscarr'd from  Pope,  + ,  Sta. 

223.  a  Royall  Princeffe ]  Ff,  Rowe, 
Knt,  Coll,  i,  ii,  Wh.  i.  of  royal  blood 
Qq  et  cet. 

225.  fafejl  onely ]  only  fafejl  Qq,  Sta. 


Cam.  + . 

227.  Loe,]  No,  Pope,+  (— Var. ’73). 
Birth]  births  Qq,  Pope,  + ,  Cap. 

Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce, 
Cam.  + ,  Ktly. 

were]  are  Q,Q8. 

228.  ill]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  Wh.  i. 
bad  Qq  et  cet. 

229.  Rich/]  Fx. 


214.  leuell]  That  is,  to  aim;  from  the  technical  use  of  the  word  in  archery. 

215,  216.  Elizabeth  .  .  .  Royall  and  Gracious]  Is  it  not  possible  that  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  audience  would  apply  this  graceful  speech  to  their  own  Virgin  Queen,  to 
whom  the  words  ‘  virtuous  and  fair  ’  would  doubtless  be  especially  gratifying  ? — Ed. 

221.  So  she  may  liue]  That  is,  provided  she  may  live;  for  other  examples, 
see  Abbott,  §  133. 

225.  safest  onely]  Wright:  The  Quarto  arrangement  [only  safest]  is  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  usage  of  the  time.  Compare,  Much  Ado,  III,  i,  23:  ‘That  only 
wounds  by  hearsay’;  that  is,  wounds  by  hearsay  only. 

227.  good  starres  were  opposite]  That  is,  in  an  astrological  sense,  beneficent 
stars  were  in  opposition  to  each  other  and  thus  their  good  effects  were  neutralised. 
Lilly  ( Astrology ,  p.  24)  classes  opposition  among  the  ‘evil  aspects.’ — Ed. 

229.  vnauoyded]  Malone — misled,  possibly,  by  similarity  in  the  form  of  the 
word — quotes  as  a  parallel  use:  ‘Whose  unavoided  eye  is  murderous.’ — IV,  i,  66. 
Schmidt  {Did.)  makes,  I  think,  the  proper  distinction,  that  ‘unavoided’  here 
means  inevitable ,  as  in:  ‘And  unavoided  is  the  danger  now.’ — Rich.  II:  II,  i,  268; 
and  that,  in  the  line  quoted  by  Malone,  it  means  not  avoided,  not  shunned.  Schmidt 
does  not  give  any  other  example  of  its  use  in  this  last  sense.  Wright  compares 


ACT  IV,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


339 


Qu.  True  :  when  auoyded  grace  makes  Deftiny.  230 

My  Babes  were  deftin’d  to  a  fairer  death, 

If  grace  had  bleft  thee  with  a  fairer  life. 

Rich ,  You  fpeake  as  if  that  I  had  flaine  my  Cofins? 

Qu.  Cofins  indeed,  and  by  their  Vnckle  couzend, 

Of  Comfort,  Kingdome,  Kindred,  Freedome,  Life,  235 

Whofe  hand  foeuer  lanch’d  their  tender  hearts, 

Thy  head  (all  indirectly)  gaue  direction. 

No  doubt  the  murd’rous  Knife  was  dull  and  blunt, 

Till  it  was  whetted  on  thy  ftone-hard  heart,  239 


233.  Rich,]  F,. 

233—246.  Rich,  You...bofome.]  Om. 
Qq. 

233.  Cofins  ?]  cousins.  Cap.  et  seq. 
234>  235,  Cofins... Life']  Om.  Pope, 
Han. 


234-  couzend  ]  cozen'd  Rowe  et  seq. 

236.  hand]  QqFf,  Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Cam. 
+  ,  Coll.  iii.  hands  Rowe  et  cet. 

lanch'd]  lanced  Rowe  ii  et  seq. 
238.  murd'rous]  murth'rous  Cap. 
murderous  Var.  ’73  et  seq. 


‘ unvalued  jewels.’ — I,  iv,  29;  there  is,  however,  a  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the 
exact  meaning  of  ‘unvalued’  as  there  used;  see  notes  ad  loc. — Ed. 

233-246.  You  speake  as  if  .  .  .  thy  Rocky  bosome]  Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii, 
140)  thinks  that  these  fourteen  lines,  as  well  as  others  in  this  exceptionally  long 
scene,  were  omitted  in  the  Qq  for  stage  purposes;  and  that  the  Folio  here  gives 
Shakespeare’s  original  writing.  He  points  out,  furthermore,  that,  in  this  particular 
instance,  the  omission  completely  destroys  the  chain  of  reasoning.  As,  for  example, 
according  to  Qx,  Richard  makes  no  reply  to  the  Queen’s  accusation  of  guilt,  turn¬ 
ing  it  aside  with  an  irrelevant  remark:  ‘Madam  so  thrive  I  in  my  enterprise,’ 
etc.,  1.  247 — an  ample  proof,  says  Delius,  that  this  omission  did  not  originate  with 
Shakespeare.  He  suggests  that,  possibly,  the  play  on  words  ‘  cousins’  and  ‘  cozened  ’ 
so  jarred  upon  the  anonymous  corrector  that  he  struck  out  the  whole  of  the  Queen’s 
speech.  [See  Appendix,  Pickersgill  on  The  Teoct.] 

234.  Cosins  .  .  .  couzend]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  cozen):  This  word  has 
usually  been  associated  with  the  substantive  cousin  and  compared  with  French 
cousiner,  explained  by  Cotgrave  as  ‘to  clayme  kindred  or  advantage  for  particular 
ends;  as  he  who  to  saue  charges  in  trauelling  goes  from  house  to  house  as  cosin  to 
the  owner  of  euerie  one.’  From  this  it  is  not  far  to  a  transitive  sense,  ‘to  beguile, 
cheat,  under  pretext  of  cousinship.’  It  is  noteworthy  that  while  in  the  noun  cousin 
the  ending  in  predominates,  this  verb  has  sometimes  on,  most  commonly  en.  In 
view  of  this  difficulty  Mr  Smythe  Palmer  has  suggested  derivation  from  Italian 
cozzonare,  explained  by  Florio  as  ‘to  play  the  horse-breaker,  or  courser  .  .  .  Also 
to  play  the  craftie  knaue.’  But  this  also  presents  difficulties  which  the  extant 
evidence  is  not  sufficient  to  remove. 

236.  lanch’d]  Bradley  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  launch):  To  pierce,  transfix,  wound; 
cut,  slit;  to  make  a  wound  by  piercing. 

237.  indirectly)  gaue  direction]  Steevens:  Compare  ‘By  indirections  find 
directions  out.’ — Hamlet,  II,  i,  66;  also:  ‘though  indirect,  Yet  indirection  thereby 
grows  direct.’ — King  John,  III,  i,  275. 

238.  239.  Knife  .  .  .  whetted  on  thy  stone-hard  heart]  Steevens:  This 


340 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


To  reuell  in  the  Intrailes  of  my  Lambes.  240 

But  that  Bill  vfe  of  greefe,  makes  wilde  greefe  tame, 

My  tongue  ihould  to  thy  eares  not  name  my  Boyes, 

Till  that  my  Nayles  were  anchor’d  in  thine  eyes  : 

And  I  in  fuch  a  defp’rate  Bay  of  death, 

Like  a  poore  Barke,  of  failes  and  tackling  reft,  245 

Rufh  all  to  peeces  on  thy  Rocky  bofome. 

Rich.  Madam,  fo  thriue  I  in  my  enterprize 
And  dangerous  fucceffe  of  bloody  warres, 

As  I  intend  more  good  to  you  and  yours, 

Then  euer  you  and  yours  by  me  were  harm’d.  250 

Qu.  What  good  is  couer’d  with  the  face  of  heauen, 

To  be  difcouered,  that  can  do  me  good.  252 


247,  248.  Madam... warres]  Madam 
fo  thriue  I  in  my  dangerous  attempt  of 
hoflile  armes  Qq  (as  one  line). 

249.  /]  Om.  QgQy. 

and]  or  Vaughan  (iii,  121). 

250.  and]  Ff.Qt-s,  Cap.  Knt,  Dyce  ii, 
iii,  Huds.  or  Qx_s  et  cet. 


250.  by  ...harm' d]  were  by  mewrongd 
Qq,  Sta.  Cam.-K 

251-  with]  'neath  Vaughan. 

252.  difcouered ]  Ff,Q&-g.  difcouerd 
Qj_s  et  cet.  (subs.) 

good.]  good,  Q,.  good?  Q3Q4Ff 

et  seq. 


conceit  seems  to  have  been  a  favorite  of  our  author.  We  meet  with  it  more  than 
once.  Compare:  ‘Thou  hidest  a  thousand  daggers  in  thy  thoughts  which  thou 
hast  whetted  on  thy  stony  heart  To  stab  at  half  an  hour  of  my  life.’ — 2  Hen.  IV: 
IV,  v,  107.  Also:  ‘Not  on  thy  sole,  but  on  thy  soul,  harsh  Jew,  Thou  makest  thy 
knife  keen.’ — Mer.  of  Ven.,  IV,  i,  123. 

241.  still  vse]  That  is,  constant,  continued  use. 

243.  Nayles  .  .  .  anchor’d  in  thine  eyes]  Rolee:  Compare  ‘I  am  not  yet 
so  low  But  that  my  nails  can  reach  into  thine  eyes.’ — Mid.  N.  Dream,  III,  ii,  298; 
and  ‘  Could  I  come  near  your  beauty  with  my  nails  I’d  set  my  ten  commandments 
in  your  face.’ — 2  Hen.  VI:  I,  iii,  144.  In  the  latter  case  it  is  a  duchess,  as  here  a 
queen,  that  speaks.  ‘  Tempora  mutantur,'  etc.  [Compare,  also,  in  Cleopatra’s 
violent  speech  to  Seleucus:  ‘Go  back,  I  warrant  thee;  but  I’ll  catch  thine  eyes, 
though  they  had  wings.’ — V,  ii,  156.] 

245.  reft]  Craigie  (A/-.  E.  D.  s.  v.  reave,  v1):  3.  To  despoil,  rob,  or  forcibly 
deprive  (usually  a  person)  0}  something.  (In  modern  use  chiefly  in  past  participle, 
reft.) 

247-249.  so  thriue  I  .  .  .  As  I  intend]  That  is,  may  the  success  of  my  enter¬ 
prise  be  as  assured,  as  are  my  good  intents  toward  you  and  yours  in  the  future. 

248.  dangerous  successe]  Is  it  possible  that  ‘success’  may  here  mean  succession f 
as  in:  ‘ — our  parents’  noble  names  In  whose  success  we  are  gentle.’ — Wint.  Tale, 
I,  ii,  393;  also:  ‘And  so  success  of  mischief  shall  be  born.’ — 2  Hen.  IV:  IV,  ii,  47; 
these  are  the  only  examples  of  ‘success’  in  this  sense  given  by  Schmidt  (Lex.). 
He  quotes  the  present  line  as  an  example  of  the  meaning  issue,  result. 

252.  discouered]  ‘Discover’  is,  possibly,  here  used  in  the  sense  both  of  to 
uncover  and  also  to  find  what  before  was  hidden. 


act  iv,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


341 


Rich.  Th’aduancement  of  your  children,  gentle  Lady  253 
Qu.  Vp  to  fome  Scaffold,  there  to  lofe  their  heads. 

Rich.  Vnto  the  dignity  and  height  of  Fortune,  255 

The  high  Imperiall  Type  of  this  earths  glory. 

Qu.  Flatter  my  forrow  with  report  of  it : 

Tell  me,  what  State,  what  Dignity,  what  Honor, 

Canft  thou  demife  to  any  childe  of  mine. 

Rich.  Euen  all  I  haue;  I,  and  my  felfe  and  all,  260 

Will  I  withall  indow  a  childe  of  thine : 


So  in  the  Lethe  of  thy  angry  foule, 

Thou  drowne  the  fad  remembrance  of  thofe  wrongs, 
Which  thou  fuppofeft  I  haue  done  to  thee. 


253.  7)4’]  The  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 
gentle]  migktie  Qq. 

254.  lofe}  loofe  Qq. 

255.  Vnto]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  Wb. 
i.  No,  to  Qq  et  cet. 

Fortune]  honor  Qq,  Pope,+ 
(  — Var. ’73),  Coll.  Dyce,  Hal.  Sta. 
Cam. +  ,  Ktly. 

256.  high]  height  Q^.  {hight  Q?.) 


264 

257.  forrow]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Dyce, 
Wh.  i,  Hal.  Huds.  forrowes  Qq.  sorrows 
Pope  et  cet. 

259.  demife]  devife  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han.  Cap.  Sing. 

260.  I,  and  ]  yea  and  Qq.  yea ,  and 
Cam.  4 .  Ay,  and  Rowe  et  cet. 

261.  withall]  Om.  Q?Q8. 

263.  drowne]  drownd  Qg. 


256.  The  high  Imperiall  Type]  M.  Mason:  By  this  Richard  means,  a 
crown. — Malone:  Compare  ‘Thy  father  bears  the  type  of  king  of  Naples.’ — 
3.  Hen.  VI:  I,  iv,  121. — Wright:  Compare  Richard’s  speech  to  his  soldiers,  as 
reported  in  Hall’s  Chronicle  (p.  414):  ‘By  whose  wisedome  and  polecie,  I  haue 
obteyned  the  crowne  &  type  of  this  famous  realm  &  noble  region.’ 

259.  demise]  Davis  (p.  205):  ‘Demise’  is  a  conveyance,  either  in  fee,  for  life, 
or  for  years.  According  to  Chief  Justice  Gibson,  the  word  strictly  denotes  a 
posthumous  grant,  and  no  more  (5  Whart.  278). — Allen  (p.  123):  In  Shakespeare’s 
time  the  words  bequeath,  inherit,  and  perhaps  ‘demise,’  were  not  exclusively  legal 
terms,  and  no  strong  argument  is  to  be  derived  from  their  use  in  a  sense  which  would 
be  technically  inaccurate.  The  word  ‘  demise,  ’  at  least,  seems  to  be  here  used  not 
only  in  an  untechnical,  but  in  an  unusual,  sense.  [Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  2) 
quotes  the  present  line  under:  ‘To  convey,  transmit;  to  lease.’  The  word  does  not 
occur  elsewhere  in  Shakespeare. — Ed.] 

261.  withall]  Abbott  (§  196):  ‘Withal’  is  here  not  placed  at  the  end  of  the 
sentence  on  account  of  the  ‘  all  ’  at  the  end  of  the  previous  verse. 

262,  263.  in  the  Lethe  .  . .  drowne  the  sad  remembrance]  Wright:  [The  river 
Lethe]  the  waters  of  which  produced  forgetfulness.  Hence  it  figures  in  Milton’s 
description  in  Paradise  Lost:  ‘  Far  off  from  these,  a  slow  and  silent  stream,  Lethe, 
the  river  of  oblivion  rolls  Her  watery  labyrinth,  whereof  who  drinks  Forthwith  his 
former  state  and  being  forgets — Forgets  both  joy  and  grief,  pleasure  and  pain.’ — 
Bk,  ii,  582-586.  [See,  also,  Virgil,  Adneid:  ‘Animae,  quibus  altera  fato  Corpora 
debentur  Lethaei,  ad  fluminis  undam  Securos  latices  et  longa  oblivia  potant.’ — 
Bk,  vi,  713-715.— Ed.] 


342 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


Qu.  Be  breefe,  leaft  that  the  proceffe  of  thy  kindneffe  265 
Laft  longer  telling  then  thy  kindneffe  date. 

Rich.  Then  know, 

That  from  my  Soule,  I  loue  thy  Daughter. 

Qu.  My  daughters  Mother  thinkes  it  with  her  foule. 

Rick.  What  do  you  thinke  ?  270 

Qu.  That  thou  dofl  loue  my  daughter  from  thy  loule 
So  from  thy  Soules  loue  didft  thou  loue  her  Brothers, 

And  from  my  hearts  loue,  I  do  thanke  thee  for  it. 

Rich.  Be  not  fo  hafty  to  confound  my  meaning : 

I  meane  that  with  my  Soule  I  loue  thy  daughter,  275 

And  do  intend  to  make  her  Queene  of  England. 


266.  telling ]  a-telling  Abbott  (§372). 
kindneffe ]  kindnes  Q,.  kindness ’ 
Cap.  et  seq. 

date]  doo  Qq.  do  Pope,  4-  ( — Var. 
’73).  doth  Heath,  done  Vaughan  (iii, 
124). 

267, 268.  Then. ..Daughter]  Ff,  Rowe. 


One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

268.  thy]  my  Qg. 

272.  Soules  loue]  foule  Q4-3. 
thou  loue]  thou  Q2-5. 

273.  my]  thy  F^. 
do]  Om.  Q7Qg. 

276.  do  intend  ]  meane  Qq,  Cam.  4- . 


265.  processe]  See  IV,  ii,  173. 

266.  date]  Murray  {N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  substan.  2):  4.  The  time  during  which 
something  lasts;  period,  season;  duration;  term  of  life  or  existence. 

268.  I  loue  thy  Daughter]  Oechelhauser  {Essay,  p.  114):  Richard’s  lan¬ 
guage  throughout  this  whole  dialogue  manifests  a  self-control  in  strong  con¬ 
trast  to  that  of  his  most  hated  enemy — Elizabeth;  he  firmly  and  at  once  represses 
any  anger,  which  may  often  strive  to  blaze  out,  at  her  stubborn  refusals  to  under¬ 
stand,  and  her  deep-drawn  lamentations.  The  hypocrisy  of  his  love  for  Elizabeth’s 
daughter  has  an  earnest  and  an  honourable  appearance — the  king  stands  ever  be¬ 
hind  the  lover.  But  in  this  repetition  of  the  scene  with  Anne,  Shakespeare  should  at 
least  have  omitted  the  threadbare  motive  that  Richard  murdered  his  nephews  and 
wife  through  love  for  Elizabeth’s  daughter,  as  once  he  had  killed  Edward  and 
Henry  through  love  for  Anne.  This  same  reason  repeated  to  any  character  other 
than  Elizabeth  might,  to  the  audience,  be  of  value;  it  would,  moreover,  have 
had  a  strong  effect  on  Anne,  but  certainly  not  on  Elizabeth. 

271.  loue  . . .  from  thy  soule]  The  Cowden-Clarkes:  That  the  Queen  here  uses 
‘from’  with  bitter  sarcasm,  in  the  sense  of  apart  from,  is  made  evident  by  Richard’s 
hastily  changing  ‘from’  to  ‘with,’  in  line  275,  which  word  she  has  previously  used 
in  the  phrase  ‘ thinks  it  with  her  soul.’ — Wright:  A  poor  quibble  but  not  unworthy 
of  the  dialogue.  [Abbott  (§  158)  gives  numerous  examples  of  ‘from’  used  in  the 
sense  of  apart  from.] 

276.  England]  Spedding  {Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875-’ 76;  p.  47):  I  do  not  know 
whether  Shakespeare  ever  pronounced  ‘England’  as  a  trisyllable.  The  corrector 
of  the  Folio  read  it  as  a  disyllable  and  changed  the  metre  [of  the  Quarto  line] 
accordingly.  [For  examples  wherein  ‘England’  is  apparently  pronounced  as  a  tri¬ 
syllable,  see  Walker,  Vers.,  p.  7.] 


act  iv,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


343 


Qu'  Well  then,  who  doft  y  meane  fhallbe  her  King. 
Rich.  Euen  he  that  makes  her  Queene : 

Who  elfe  fhould  bee  ? 

Qi .  What,  thou  ? 

Rich.  Euen  fo:  How  thinke  you  of  it? 

Qu.  How  canft  thou  woo  her  ? 

Rich.  That  I  would  learne  of  you, 

As  one  being  belt  acquainted  with  her  humour. 

Qu.  And  wilt  thou  learne  of  me  ? 

Rich.  Madam, with  all  my  heart. 

Qu.  Send  to  her  by  the  man  that  flew  her  Brothers, 
A  paire  of  bleeding  hearts  :  thereon  ingraue 
Edward  and  Yorke,  then  haply  will  fhe  weepe  : 
Therefore  prefent  to  her,  as  fometime  Margaret 
Did  to  thy  Father,  fteept  in  Rutlands  blood, 


277 


280 


285 


290 


277.  Well]  Say  Qq  ( Saie  QJ,  Sta. 
Cam.  + . 

Ring.]  Ff.  king  ?  Qq  et  cet. 

278.  279.  Euen. .. bee ?]  Ff,  Rowe. 
One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

279.  Who. ..bee ?]  Who  fhould  be  elfe 
Qj,  Cam.+.  Who  fhould  elfe?  Q*# 
(ko7v  fhould  Qs). 

280-283.  As  two  lines,  ending :  it, 
madam  ? ...you  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Coll. 
Sing.  Sta.  Ktly. 

281.  Euen  fo  :  How  ...it  ?~\  I,  euen  /, 
what. ..it,  Madame?  Qq,  Varr.  Mai. 
Dyce,  Cam. +  .  Even  I;  What... it, 
Madam?  Cap.  Even  so:  What... it, 
madam  ?  Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’  13.  Ay,  even 
I,  what... Madame  Mai.  conj. 

283,  284.  As  one  line,  Dyce,  Wh.  i, 
Hal.  Cam. +  . 


283.  That]  Om.  Pope,  +  . 

I  would ]  would  I  Q,Qa,  Cap. 
Sta.  Cam.  +  . 

284.  being]  that  are  Q,Qa,  Cam. +  . 
that  were  Q3-8. 

285.  286.  As  one  line,  .Steev.  Var.  ’03, 
’13,  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 

286.  Madam]  Om.  Pope,  +  ( — Var. 

’73)- 

288.  ingraue]  engraven  Coll,  ii,  iii 
(MS),  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

289.  haply]  happelie  Q,Q2.  happily 
Q3-8- 

will fhe]  fhe  will  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

290.  fometime]  fometimes  Q, Q2Q7Qg. 

291.  thy]  my  Q8. 

29I,  292.  fleept...A  hand-kercheefe] 
a  handkerchepfe  fleept  in  Rutlands  blood 
Qq,  as  one  line. 


285.  And  wilt  thou  learne]  Abbott  (§99):  That  is:  do  you  indeed  wish  to 
learn  of  me?  Hence  Ben  Jonson,  who  quotes  Chaucer:  ‘What?  quod  she, 
and  be  ye  wood?  [ Hous  of  Fame,  Bk.  iii,  1.  623. — Ed.]  adds  that:  ‘And,  in  the 
beginning  of  a  sentence,  serveth  for  admiration.’ — { English  Grammar],  p.  789. 

286.  Madam]  Steevens:  I  suppose  this  word  may  be  safely  omitted,  as  it  violates 
the  metre. — Malone:  No  doubt  that,  or  any  other  word,  may  be  omitted,  but  not 
safely,  unless  it  can  be  shown  that  we  are  at  liberty  to  rewrite  our  author’s  plays, 
and  convert  into  verse  what  he  has  left  us  as  prose. 

291.  steept  in  Rutlands  blood]  See  3  Hen.  VI:  I,  iv,  79-83;  compare  I,  iii, 
186  above. 


344 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


A  hand-kercheefe,  which  fay  to  her  did  dreyne  292 

The  purple  fappe  from  her  fweet  Brothers  body, 

And  bid  her  wipe  her  weeping  eyes  withall. 

If  this  inducement  moue  her  not  to  loue,  295 

Send  her  a  Letter  of  thy  Noble  deeds : 

Tell  her,  thou  mad’ ft  away  her  Vnckle  Clarence , 

Her  Ynckle  Riuers,  I  (and  for  her  fake) 

Mad’ft  quicke  conueyance  with  her  good  Aunt  Anne . 

Rich.  You  mocke  me  Madam,  this  not  the  way  300 

To  win  your  daughter. 

Qu.  There  is  no  other  way, 

Vnleffe  thou  could’ ft  put  on  fome  other  fhape, 

And  not  be  Richard ,  that  hath  done  all  this. 

Ric.  Say  that  I  did  all  this  for  loue  of  her.  305 


292.  hand-kercheefe ]  handkercher  Qt. 
handkercheffe  Q2-8.  Hand-kerchiefe  Fa. 
Hand-kerchiffe  F3>  Hand-kerchief  F4. 
Handkerchief  Rowe  et  seq. 

292.  293.  which... body]  Om.  Qq. 

293.  fappe ]  tide  Pope,  + . 

Brothers  body ]  Ff.  brothers  bod¬ 
ies  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  brothers' 
bodies  Warb.  Johns.  Varr.  Ran.  brother's 
body  Cap.  et  cet. 

294.  wipe]  drie  Qq.  dry  St  a.  Cam.  + . 
withall ]  therewith  Qq,  Pope,  +  , 

Sta.  Cam.  +  . 

295.  moue ]  force  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +  . 


296.  Letter... deeds]  florie...adls  Qq, 
Sta.  Cam. +  . 

298.  I]  yea  Qq,  Sta.  Cam. +.  Ay 
Rowe  et  cet. 

299.  Mad'fl]  Madjl  Qt.  Madejl  Qq, 
Cam.-f.  Hadst  Vaughan  (iii,  125). 

300.  You... Madam]  Come ,  come,  you 
...me ;  Q,Q2,  Cam. +.  Come ,  come ,  ye 
...me  ;  Q3-s. 

this]  this  is  QqFf  et  seq. 

302.  There  *V]  There's  Pope,  +  ( — Var. 

’73). 

305-359.  Ric.  Say. .  .yeares]  Om.  Qq. 
305.  her.]  her  ?  Cap. Varr.  Mai.  Steev. 
Varr.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 


293.  Brothers  body]  Capell  (ii,  188):  Smother’d  bodies,  as  were  the  princes’, 
emit  no  ‘purple  sap’;  therefore  body  is  meant  of  another  ‘brother,’  Lord  Grey, 
who  had  a  death  to  wet  many  ‘handkerchiefs.’ 

299.  conueyance]  Dyce  (Gloss.):  That  is,  juggling  artifice,  secret  management. 

305-359.  Say  that  I  did  .  .  .  tender  yeares]  Staunton:  Is  it  credible  that 
so  accomplished  a  master  of  stage-craft  as  Shakespeare,  after  witnessing  the  repre¬ 
sentation  of  Richard  III.,  would  have  added  above  eighty  lines  to  the  longest  scene 
in  the  play  ?  Is  it  not  more  probable  these  lines — those  touching  the  young  prince’s 
train,  II,  ii,  129-147;  the  nine,  III,  vii,  153-161,  in  Gloucester’s  mock  reply  to  the 
Mayor  and  Buckingham,  and  some  others,  formed  originally  part  of  the  text  and 
were  omitted  to  accelerate  the  action? — Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  141)  thinks  that  a 
motive  for  the  omission  of  these  55  lines  in  the  Qq  may  have  been  that  Richard’s 
words:  ‘Say  that  I  did  all  this  for  love  of  her,’  are  too  close  a  repetition  of  his 
reasons  urged  to  Anne  in  I,  ii,  and  attributes  the  omission  to  an  anonymous  corrector, 
since,  as  in  the  case  of  a  like  omission  in  the  Qq,  lines  233-246,  Shakespeare  would 
not  have  thus  deliberately  destroyed  the  logical  sequence  of  the  dialogue. — See 
note  by  Oechelhauser,  1.  268;  also  Appendix,  Pickersgill  on  The  Text. — Ed. 


ACT  IV,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


345 

Qu.  Nay  then  indeed  the  cannot  choofe  but  hate  thee  306 
Hauing  bought  loue,  with  fuch  a  bloody  fpoyle. 

Rich.  Looke  what  is  done,  cannot  be  now  amended  : 

Men  fhall  deale  vnaduifedly  fometimes, 

Which  after-houres  giues  leyfure  to  repent.  310 

If  I  did  take  the  Kingdome  from  your  Sonnes, 

To  make  amends,  lie  giue  it  to  your  daughter : 

If  I  haue  kill’d  the  iffue  of  your  wombe, 

To  quicken  your  encreafe,  I  will  beget 

Mine  yffue  of  your  blood,  vpon  your  Daughter:  315 

A  Grandams  name  is  little  leffe  in  loue, 

Then  is  the  doting  Title  of  a  Mother ; 

They  are  as  Children  but  one  fteppe  below, 

Euen  of  your  mettall,  of  your  very  blood  :  319 


306.  hate\  have  Mason,  Steev.  Var. 
’03,  *13*  love  Tyrwhitt,  Wh.  i,  Dyce  ii, 
iii,  Ktly,  Huds.  Coll.  iii.  take  Jervis. 

307.  bought  ]  brought  Pope. 

310.  giues\  give  Rowe  et  seq. 

repent ]  repent  of  Rowe,  + 
(-Var. ’73). 

312.  your"]  Om.  Var.  ’21  (misprint). 


314.  your~]  you  Pope  ii. 

315.  Mine ]  More  Vaughan  (iii,  128). 

316.  little  leffe ]  less  little  Theob.  ii, 
Warb. 

319.  mettall ]  mettle  F3,  Var.  ’85,  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Cam. +  .  metal  F^,  Rowe, 
+  ,  Cap.  Var.  ’78,  Sing. 


306.  she  cannot  choose  but]  Wright:  That  is,  she  must  of  necessity.  Com¬ 
pare:  ‘Yond  same  cloud  cannot  choose  but  fall  by  pailfuls.’ — Temp.,  II,  ii,  24; 
and:  ‘That  cannot  choose  but  amaze  him.’ — Merry  Wives,  V,  iii,  18.  [See,  also, 
if  needful,  Abbott,  §  353.] 

306.  hate  thee]  Tyrwhitt:  The  sense  seems  to  require  that  we  should  read 
‘love  thee,’  ironically. — M.  Mason:  I  should  rather  amend  it  by  reading  ‘have 
thee’;  as  the  word  have  is  more  likely  to  have  been  mistaken  for  ‘hate,’  the  traces 
of  the  letters  being  nearly  the  same. — Steevens:  This  conjecture  is,  in  my  opinion, 
at  once  fortunate  and  judicious.  A  somewhat  corresponding  error  appears  in 
Coriol.,  IV,  iv,  23:  ‘My  birth  place  hate  I,’  where  have  was  apparently  given 
instead  of  hate. — Boswell:  It  is  by  no  means  evident  that  this  is  spoken  ironically, 
and,  if  not,  the  old  reading  affords  a  perfectly  clear  meaning.  A  virtuous  woman 
would  hate  the  man  who  thought  to  purchase  her  love  by  the  commission  of  crimes. 

309.  Men  shall  deale]  Abbott  (§3x5):  That  is,  men  cannot  help  making 
mistakes. 

310.  giues]  For  this  interpolation  of  s  at  the  end  of  certain  words  in  the  Folio 
see  note  by  Walker,  IV,  i,  116. 

319.  mettall]  Wright:  No  distinction  is  consistently  made  in  spelling  [in  the 
Folio]  between  the  literal  and  metaphorical  meanings  of  this  word.  Like  the 
Latin  metallum,  from  which  it  is  derived,  it  primarily  denotes  that  which  is  dug 
out  of  a  mine,  and  so,  stuff  or  substance  generally.  Hence  it  is  applied  to  that 
which  forms  the  basis  of  character,  and  so  disposition  or  temper. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


346 

Of  all  one  paine,  faue  for  a  night  of  groanes 
Endur’d  of  her,  for  whom  you  bid  like  forrow. 

Your  Children  were  vexation  to  your  youth, 

But  mine  fhall  be  a  comfort  to  your  Age, 

The  Ioffe  you  haue,  is  but  a  Sonne  being  King, 

And  by  that  Ioffe,  your  Daughter  is  made  Queene. 

I  cannot  make  you  what  amends  I  would, 

Therefore  accept  fuch  kindneffe  as  I  can. 

Dorfet  your  Sonne,  that  with  a  fearfull  foule 
Leads  difcontented  fteppes  in  Forraine  foyle, 

This  faire  Alliance,  quickly  fhall  call  home 
To  high  Promotions,  and  great  Dignity. 

The  King  that  calles  your  beauteous  Daughter  Wife, 
Familiarly  fhall  call  thy  Dorfet ,  Brother  : 

Againe  fhall  you  be  Mother  to  a  King  : 

And  all  the  Ruines  of  diftreffefull  Times, 

Repayr’d  with  double  Riches  of  Content. 

What?  we  haue  many  goodly  dayes  to  fee  : 

The  liquid  drops  of  Teares  that  you  haue  fhed, 

Shall  come  againe,  transform’d  to  Orient  Pearle, 


320 


325 


330 


335 


339 


320.  Of  all  one...faue~\  All  for  no...  329.  Leads ]  Treads  Cap.  conj.  Coll,  ii 

say  Vaughan  (iii,  129).  (MS). 

321.  bid  ]  'bid  Heath,  Cap.  332.  beauteous ]  beautiousY 3. 

320.  Of  all  one  paine]  Capell  (ii,  188):  In  what  sense  are  a  daughter’s 
children  ‘  of  all  one  pain  ’  to  the  grandmother;  that  is,  of  the  same  pain  to  her  that 
they  are  to  the  daughter?  The  exception  [‘save  for  a  night,’  etc.]  directs  us  to  it; 
the  pain  (that  is,  the  solicitude)  of  both  is  one  and  the  same  because  their  love  is 
the  same — the  mother’s  is  only  heightened  by  consideration  of  that  pain  which 
she  underwent  in  their  births. 

321.  bid]  Heath  (p.  300):  We  should  read,  ’bid,  that  is,  abode,  the  praeter 
perfect  tense  of  the  verb  abide.  The  sense  is,  all  proceeding  from  one  and  the 
same  pang  of  child-birth  which  gave  your  daughter  to  the  world,  except  those 
groans  only  which  she  in  her  turn  must  endure,  as  you  have  already  endured 
them  on  her  account. — Johnson:  ‘Bid’  is  in  the  past  tense  from  bide. — Murray 
( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  Abide.  16.  To  endure,  suffer,  bear,  undergo,  sustain.)  gives  two 
examples  of  the  past  tense  abid. 

339.  Orient  Pearle]  Shakespeare  uses  ‘orient’  as  an  adjective  applied  to 
pearls  in  two  other  passages:  Mid.  N.  Dream,  IV,  i,  59;  and  Ant.  Cleo.,  I,  v, 
41.  On  the  foregoing  passage  from  Mid.  N.  Dream  Wright  has  the  following 
note:  ‘Compare:  “Bright  orient  pearl,  alack,  too  timely  shaded.” — Pass.  Pilgrim, 
133.  The  epithet  appears  to  be  originally  applied  to  the  pearl  and  other  gems  as 
coming  from  the  east,  and  to  have  acquired  the  general  sense  of  bright  and  shining, 


act  iv,  sc.  in.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

Aduantaging  their  Loue,with  intereft. 

Of  ten-times  double  gaine  of  happineffe. 

Go  then  (my  Mother)  to  thy  Daughter  go, 

Make  bold  her  bafhfull  yeares,  with  your  experience, 
Prepare  her  eares  to  heare  a  Woers  Tale. 

Put  in  her  tender  heart,  th’afpiring  Flame 
Of  Golden  Soueraignty  :  Acquaint  the  Princeffe 
With  the  fweet  filent  houres  of  Marriage  ioyes  : 

And  when  this  Arme  of  mine  hath  chaftifed 
The  petty  Rebell,  dull-b rain’d  Buckingham, , 

Bound  with  Triumphant  Garlands  will  I  come, 

And  leade  thy  daughter  to  a  Conquerors  bed : 

To  whom  I  will  retaile  my  Conqueft  wonne, 

And  the  lhalbe  foie  Vidtoreffe,  Ccefars  Ccefar. 

Qu.  What  were  I  beft  to  fay,  her  Fathers  Brother 
Would  be  her  Lord  ?  Or  fhall  I  fay  her  Vnkle  ? 

Or  he  that  flew  her  Brothers, and  her  Vnkles  ? 

Vnder  what  Title  fhall  I  woo  for  thee, 

That  God,  the  Law,  my  Honor,  and  her  Loue, 

Can  make  feeme  pleafing  to  her  tender  yeares  ? 


347 

340 


345 


350 


355 


359 


340.  Loue,]  love  F4<  loan  Theob.  et 
seq. 

341.  Ofien-times  double]  Ff.  Often¬ 
times  double  Rowe,  Pope.  Of  ten  times 
double  Theob.  + ,  Varr.  Mai.  Knt,  Cam. 
+ .  Of  ten-times-double  Steev.  et  cet. 

343.  her]  your  Y ^ 


344.  Woers]  Wooers  Ff  et  seq. 

348.  chaffed  ]  chastisld  Dyce,  Huds. 
chdstised  Sta. 

350.  Garlands]  laurels  Cap. 

353.  Vitflorejfe]  Vitflrefs  F4  et  seq. 
356.  Brothers, ]Brothers?  F3F4,  Rowe. 
brothers  Knt,  Dyce,  Cam. +  . 


from  the  objects  which  it  most  commonly  describes.  Compare:  “Ten  thousand 
banners  rise  into  the  air,  With  orient  colours  waving.” — Paradise  Lost,  i,  546.’ — 
Murray  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  Orient,  adject.  B.  2,  b )  gives  examples  of  ‘orient’  used  in 
the  sense  of  lustrous,  shining. — Ed. 

340.  Loue]  Theobald:  My  easy  emendation  [loan]  will  convince  every  reader 
that  ‘love’  and  lone  are  made  out  of  one  another  only  by  a  letter  turned  upside 
down.  Thus:  The  tears  that  you  have  lent  to  your  affections  shall  be  turned  into 
gems;  and  requite  you  by  way  of  interest. 

347.  sweet  silent  houres]  The  turbulent  reign  of  Edward  furnished  but  few 
opportunities  for  Elizabeth  to  enjoy  any  such  hours;  her  first  marriage  with  Sir 
J ohn  Grey  might,  perhaps,  have  afforded  her  some  experience  of  them. — Ed. 

348.  chastised]  Wright:  The  accent  is  here  on  the'  first  syllable,  as  in  all 
other  passages  of  Shakespeare,  except  Tro.  &•  Cress.,  V,  v,  4:  ‘Tell  her  I  have  chas¬ 
tised  the  amorous  Trojan.’ 

352.  retaile]  See  III,  i,  89. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


348 

Rich.  Inferre  faire  Englands  peace  by  this  Alliance.  360 
Qu  Which  fhe  fhall  purchafe  with  ftil  lafting  warre. 

Rich.  Tell  her,  the  King  that  may  command,  intreats. 

Qu.  That  at  her  hands,  which  the  kings  King  forbids. 

Rich.  Say  fhe  fhall  be  a  High  and  Mighty  Queene. 

Qu.  To  vaile  the  Title,  as  her  Mother  doth.  365 

Rich.  Say  I  will  loue  her  euerlaftingly. 

Qu.  But  how  long  fhall  that  title  euer  laft  ? 

Rich.  Sweetly  in  force,  vnto  her  faire  hues  end. 

Qu.  But  how  long  fairely  fhall  her  fweet  life  laft  ? 

Rich.  As  long  as  Heauen  and  Nature  lengthens  it.  370 
Qu.  As  long  as  Hell  and  Richard  likes  of  it. 


360.  this]  his  Qg_g. 

362.  Tell  her...  that]  Say  that. ..which 
Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 

363.  forbids~\  forbid  Q2_8. 

365.  vaile]  Ff,  Rowe,  waile  Qq  et 
cet. 

367.  title  euer]  little  Ever  Roderick. 
euei]  Om.  Q5-  ‘  ever  ’  Dyce, 
Wh.  i,  Cam. +  . 


368.  in  force ]  inforce  Qq. 
lines]  life's  Rowe  et  seq. 

369.  her... life]  that  title  Q3_g. 

37°,  371.  As. ..As]  So. ..So  Qq,  Cam. 
+  .  So... As  Sta. 

370.  lengthens]  lengthen  Pope,  + ,  Hal. 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

371.  likes]  like  Pope,  +  ,  Hal.  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Huds. 


360.  Inferre]  See  III,  v,  81. 

363.  the  kings  King  forbids]  Grey  (i,  64):  Alluding  to  the  prohibition  in  the 
Levitical  law.  See  Leviticus  xviii,  14. — Boswell:  She  rather  means  that  her 
[Qu.  his?]  crimes  would  render  such  a  marriage  offensive  to  Heaven.  This  is 
consistent  with  the  rest  of  the  dialogue.  [The  chapter  and  verse  cited  by  Grey 
refer  to  the  illegality  of  marriage  with  a  father’s  brother,  or  with  a  father’s  brother’s 
wife.  In  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  1549,  there  is,  following  the  Articles  of 
Belief,  a  Table  of  Kindred  and  Affinity,  wherein  whosoever  are  related  are  forbidden 
in  Scripture  and  our  Laws  to  marry  together,  and  therein  ‘Brothers’  daughter’  is 
enumerated  among  the  prohibited  relationships.  Grey’s  reference  to  Leviticus  has 
been  uniformly  followed,  I  believe,  in  all  modern  editions,  but  is  it  not  more  likely 
that  it  is  to  the  foregoing  Table  that  Elizabeth  refers? — Ed. 

365.  vaile]  The  Quarto  reading,  waile,  is  possibly  right;  but  might  not  a 
meaning  be  obtained  from  the  Folio — taking  ‘vail’  in  the  sense  of  lower,  as  in, 
‘Vailing  her  high-top’? — Mer.  of  Ven.,  I,  i,  28;  and,  ‘thy  vailed  lids.’ — Hamlet, 
I,  ii,  70.  By  this  interpretation  the  antithesis  to  ‘high’  in  Richard’s  speech  is 
preserved. — Ed. 

370,  371.  lengthens  . .  .likes]  Wright:  In  the  one  case  ‘heaven  and  nature’ 
are  regarded  as  one  idea,  as  ‘  hell  and  Richard  ’  are  in  the  other.  Compare  IV,  i,  50. 
[Also:  ‘Time  and  the  hour  runs  through  the  roughest  day.’ — Macbeth,  I,  iii,  147.] 

371.  likes  of  it]  Abbott  (§177):  ‘Of’  after  ‘to  like’  is  perhaps  a  result  of  the 
old  impersonal  use  of  the  verb  me  liketh,  which  might  seem  to  disqualify  the  verb 
from  taking  a  direct  object.  Similarly:  it  repents  me  of,  becomes  I  repent  of. 


act  iv,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


349 

Rich.  Say  I  her  Soueraigne,am  her  Subie£l  low.  372 

Qu.  But  the  your  Subieft,  lothes  fuch  Soueraignty. 

Rich.  Be  eloquent  in  my  behalfe  to  her. 

Qu.  An  honeft  tale  fpeeds  beft,  being  plainly  told.  375 

Rich.  Then  plainly  to  her,  tell  my  louing  tale. 

Qu.  Plaine  and  not  honeft,  is  too  harfh  a  ftyle. 

Rich.  Your  Reafons  are  too  (hallow,  and  to  quicke. 

Qu.  O  no,  my  Reafons  are  too  deepe  and  dead, 

Too  deepe  and  dead  (poore  Infants,)  in  their  graues,  380 

Harpe  on  it  ftill  fhall  I,  till  heart-ftrings  breake. 

Rich.  Harpe  not  on  that  firing  Madam,  that  is  paft.  382 


372.  low]  loue  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Huds.  now  Pope,  +  ( — Var.  ’73). 

376.  plainly  ...tell  ]  in  plain  terms  tell 
her  Qq,  Pope,  + ,  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 
Sing.  Sta.  Cam.  + ,  Ktly. 

378.  Your]  Madame  your  Qq,  Sta. 
to  quicke ]  too  quick  QqF3F4  et 

seq. 

379-383.  In  margin,  Pope,  Han. 

379.  my]  your  Ran. 


380.  Too]  Two  F^,  Pope,  + ,  Varr.  To 
Rowe  ii. 

their  graues]  their  graue  Qq, 
Cam.  + .  your  graves  Cap. 

381-383.  Harpe  on. ..breake.  Rich. 
Harpe  not...paJl.  Now]  Ff, +  .  King. 
Harpe  on... breake.  King.  Now  Q*_g. 
King.  Harpe  not  one...paJl.  Qu.  Harpe 
on. ..breake.  King.  iV0wQtetcet. (subs.) 


372.  low]  Walker  ( Crit .,  iii,  175):  ‘Low’  cannot  be  from  Shakespeare’s 
hand. — Spedding  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  28):  Which  [reading,  that  of 
Quarto  or  Folio]  is  right  may  be  questioned;  but  right  or  wrong,  the  change  requires 
no  curious  explanation. — Pickersgill  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875 — ’76;  p.  95):  I  am 
surprised  to  find  that  in  Spedding’s  opinion,  ‘which  reading  is  right  may  be  ques¬ 
tioned.’  Most  readers,  I  think,  will  rather  agree  with  Walker.  Does  not  the 
alteration  bear  upon  the  face  of  it  the  mark  of  an  injudicious  corrector,  in  whose 
eyes  love  in  the  sense  of  lover  was  an  offence? — Wright:  The  Folio  reading  gives 
no  opportunity  for  the  play  on  words  contained  in  ‘loathes’  in  the  next  line. 

376.  Then  plainly  to  her,  etc.]  The  Cowden-Clarkes  :  It  is  worthy  of  observa¬ 
tion  that  the  dialogue  in  this  scene,  like  that  in  I,  ii,  is  in  the  same  style  of  snip-snap 
rejoinder  which  pervades  the  dialogue  in  almost  every  scene  of  Love's  Lab.  Lost. 
It  is  full  of  quibbling  and  word-catching,  ingenious  twisting  of  phrase,  and  wilful 
perversion  of  meanings:  just  the  verbal  fencing  and  adroit  sentential  play  of  fancy 
in  which  a  student-pen,  first  essaying  its  skill,  delights  to  exercise  itself.  [Might 
not  this  be  summed  up  in  the  pedantic  but  convenient  word  stichomythia?  Com¬ 
pare  360-378,  above. — Ed.] 

382.  Harpe  not  on  that  string]  Lowell  (p.  96):  Though  this  had  long  been  a 
common  expression,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  Shakespeare  borrowed  it 
from  More  or  from  Holinshed  .  .  .  More  says:  ‘The  Cardinall  made  a  countin- 
ance  to  the  other  Lord,  that  he  should  harp  no  more  upon  that  string’  [p.  54]. 
These  words  are  spoken  in  the  presence  of  Elizabeth,  but  are  addressed  to  Lord 
Howard. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


350 

Now  by  my  George,  my  Garter,  and  my  Crowne.  383 

Qu.  Prophan’d,  difhonor’d,  and  the  third  vfurpt. 

Rich.  I  fweare.  385 

Qu.  By  nothing,  for  this  is  no  Oath  : 

Thy  George  prophan’d,  hath  loft  his  Lordly  Honor; 

Thy  Garter  blemifh’d,  pawn’d  his  Knightly  Vertue; 

Thy  Crowne  vfurp’d,  difgrac’d  his  Kingly  Glory : 

If  fomething  thou  would’ft  fweare  to  be  beleeu’d,  390 

Sweare  then  by  fomething,  that  thou  haft  not  wrong’d. 

Rich.  Then  by  my  Selfe. 

Qu.  Thy  Selfe,  is  felfe-mifvs’d. 

Rich.  Now  by  the  World.  394 


385,  386.  As  one  line,  Steev.  et  seq. 

385.  fweare.] fweare  by  nothing.  Qq. 
swear —  Rowe  et  seq. 

387,388,  389.  Thy']  The  Qq,  Pope,  +  , 
Varr.  Mai.  Cam.  +  . 

387.  Lordly]  holy  Qq,  Pope,  + ,  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam. +.  saintly 
Marshall  conj. 

388.  Knightly]  Kingly  Ff,  Rowe. 

389.  vfurf  d]  vfurped  Qq. 

Glory]  dignitie  Qq. 

390.  fomething  thou  would1  Jl]  some¬ 
thing  thou  wiltQ,^,  Sta.  Cam.  + .  nothing 
thou  wilt  Q7Q8. 

392-396.  Selfe.  ...  IVorld.  ...  death.] 
self —  ...world —  ...death —  Rowe  et  seq. 


(subs.) 

392-397.  Then  ...  difhonor3 d]  Ff, 
Rowe,  Knt,  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Ktly.  Now  by 
the  World.  Qu.  Tis  ful  of  thy  foule 
wrongs.  King.  My  Fathers  death.  Qu. 
Thy  life  hath  that  difhonord.  King.  Then 
by  my  felfe.  Qu.  Thy  felfe ,  thy  felfe 
myfvfefl.  Qq  et  cet. 

392-399.  As  four  lines,  ending:  wrongs 
...difhonor' d...f elf e-mifvfed... all.  Steev. 
Varr.  Coll.  Dyce,  Hal.  Sta.  Cam. +  .  As 
four  lines,  ending:  felfe-mifvfed. . .  wrongs 
..dfhonor' <A..<7//Knt,  Sing.Wh.  i,  Ktly. 

393.  Thy  Selfe]  Thy  selfe,  Q8. 


383.  my  George]  Courtenay  (Comment.,  ii,  p.  107,  foot-note):  There  is  here 
an  inaccuracy,  when  Richard  swears  by  his  George,  a  badge  not  used  in  his  time. — 
Ashmole  (p.  173,  §  6),  after  describing  the  robes  and  hoods  of  the  Order  of  the 
Garter,  says:  ‘There  remains  now  the  Collar  and  George,  brought  in  by  King  Henry 
VIII.’  Again,  speaking  of  the  collar,  he  says,  p.  174:  ‘ — nor  ought  the  collar  to  be 
adorned  with  precious  stones  (as  the  George  may  be)  such  being  prohibited  by  the 
Law  of  the  Order.  At  the  middle  of  the  Collar  before  pendant  at  the  Table  of 
one  of  the  Garters  in  the  Collar  is  to  be  fix’d  the  image  of  St  George  arm’d  sitting 
on  Horseback,  who  having  thrown  the  Dragon  on  his  Back  encounters  him  with  a 
Tilting-Spear.’ 

387,  388,  389.  his]  For  an  account  of  the  change  of  the  possessive  neuter  from 
‘his’  to  its,  see  Murray:  N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  its. 

387.  Lordly]  Pickersgill  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875-76;  p.  112):  The  Folio, 
probably  to  get  rid  of  the  alliteration,  changes  the  Quarto  reading  holy.  But 
surely  this  involves  a  sacrifice  of  the  proper  epithet,  which  Shakespeare  would  not 
have  made.  To  say  nothing  of  the  sacred  character  of  the  George,  the  word  ‘pro¬ 
faned’  shows  that  holy  is  the  true  reading. 


act  iv,  sc.  iii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

Qu.  ’Tis  full  of  thy  foule  wrongs. 

Rich.  My  fathers  death. 

Qu.  Thy  life  hath  it  difhonor’d. 

Rich.  Why  then,  by  Heauen. 

Qu.  Heanens  wrong  is  moft  of  all : 

If  thou  didd’ft  feare  to  breake  an  Oath  with  him, 
The  vnity  the  King  my  husband  made, 

Thou  had’ft  not  broken,  nor  my  Brothers  died. 
If  thou  had’ft  fear’d  to  breake  an  oath  by  him, 
Th’Imperiall  mettall,  circling  now  thy  head, 

Had  grac’d  the  tender  temples  of  my  Child, 
And  both  the  Princes  had  bene  breathing  heere, 
Which  now  two  tender  Bed-fellowes  for  duft, 


351 

395 


400 


405 

407 


398>  399-  Heauen.  Qu.  Heanens ]  Ff,  + , 
Cap.  Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Ran.  Heaven —  Qu. 
GW’*  Mai.  Var.*2I.  God.  Qu.  Gods  Qq 
et  cet. 

399.  Heanens ]  Ft.  Heaven's  Ff  (subs.) 
Heav'n's  Rowe,  + . 

400.  diddft  feare...with]  Ff,  -f,Varr. 
Ran.  hadft  feard...by  Qq  et  cet.  (subs.) 

him]  keav'n  Pope, +  ,  Varr.  Mai. 

401.  my  husband  ]  my  brother  Q,^. 
thy  brother  Q,Q8,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 
Dyce,  Sta.  Cam. +  ,  Coll.  iii. 

402.  Thou  had'Jl  not  ]  Had  not  beene 
Qq,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta. 
Cam.  +  . 


402.  Brothers  died~\  brother  Jlain  Qq, 
Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Dyce,  Wh.  i, 
Sta.  Cam.-K 

403.  by  him ]  with  heav'n  Pope,  + 
(-Var. ’73). 

404.  thy]  my  Q8. 

head  ]  brow  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

405.  grac'd]  graft  Q^.  grac't  Q^g. 
graced  Cam.  + . 

407.  two  ...for]  too  ...for  Roderick 
Cap.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  are. ..in  Long 
MS  ap.  Cam. 

Bed-fellowes]  play-fellows  Qq, 
Sta.  Cam.  + .  Bed-folowes  Fa. 


399,  400.  Heanens  .  .  .  him]  Malone:  The  editors  of  Fx,  from  the  apprehen¬ 
sion  of  the  penalty  of  the  statute  3  Jac.  I.,  altered  the  Quarto  line,  but  by  this  altera¬ 
tion  made  all  that  follows  in  the  Queen’s  speech  ungrammatical. — Pickersgill  (Sh. 
Soc.  Trans.,  1875 — ’76;  p.  96):  I  hold  the  Folio  text  [in  this  passage]  to  be  decidedly 
wrong,  and  reject  it  in  favor  of  the  Quarto.  To  proceed  only  upon  one  ground, 
the  order  now — then — why  then  appears  much  more  natural  than  then — now — 
why  then.  But  however  this  may  be,  there  is,  at  any  rate,  a  bad  case  of  blundering 
at  the  end  of  this  passage,  where  God  is  changed  to  ‘  Heaven,  ’  and  yet  *  him  ’  is  allowed 
to  stand. 

402.  Brothers]  Earl  Rivers  is  the  only  brother  of  Elizabeth  introduced  in  the 
present  play;  for  an  attempt  to  explain  this  use  of  the  plural,  see  note  by  Daniel, 
I,  iii,  42. 

407.  Bed-fellowes]  R.  G.  White:  ‘Bed-fellows’  for  play-fellows,  the  Quarto 
reading,  is  an  improvement  of  the  poetic  beauty  of  the  line  too  obvious  to  need 
comment.  Variations  such  as  these  are  evidently  the  result  of  the  author’s  revision 
of  the  play.  And  the  addition  of  ‘What  canst  thou  swear  by  now,  ’  making  with  the 
reply  (which  is  found  in  the  Qq)  a  perfect  verse,  shows  at  least  authoritative  restora- 


352 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


Thy  broken  Faith  hath  made  the  prey  for  Wormes.  408 

What  can’ft  thou  fweare  by  now. 

Rich .  The  time  to  come.  410 

Qu.  That  thou  haft  wronged  in  the  time  ore-paft: 

For  I  my  felfe  haue  many  teares  to  wafh 
Heereafter  time,  for  time  paft,  wrong’d  by  thee. 

The  Children  Hue,  whofe  Fathers  thou  haft  (laughter’ d, 
Vngouern’d  youth,  to  waile  it  with  their  age  :  415 

The  Parents  Hue,  whofe  Children  thou  haft  butcher’d, 

Old  barren  Plants,  to  waile  it  with  their  Age.  417 


408.  hath]  had  Qg. 

the  prey  for]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 
Coll.  Wh.  i,  Hal.  a  prey  to  Pope, +  . 
a  prey  for  Qq  et  cet. 

Wormes ]  worme  Q6. 

409.  What... now]  Om.  Qq,  Pope. 

410.  The~\  By  the  Qq,  Mai.  Steev. 
Varr.  By  Pope,  + ,  Varr.  Ran. 

41 1 .  wronged  ]  wrong d  Qq. 
the]  Om.  Qq. 

413.  time,  for  time ]  time,  for  time , 
QiQj.  time  for  titne,  Q3_8. 

pajl,  ... thee ]  by  the pajl  wrong1  d 
Qq.  [thee  pajl  Q5Q6.  ) 


414.  Fathers ]  parents  Qq,  Cap.  Var. 
’78,  ’85,  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Dyce,  Sta. 
Cam.  +. 

f  aughted  d  ]  flaughtered  Qq. 

415.  with  their ]  QsFf,  Rowe,  Cap. 
Coll.  Wh.  i.  with  her  Q^.  in  her 
Steev.  reprint  (foot-note),  in  their  Qx_4 
et  cet. 

416.  butcher' d]  butchered  Q7Qg. 

417.  barren]  withered  Qq,  Cam. +. 
wither1  d  Pope, +  ,  Sta. 

Plants ]  plaints  Qg. 
with]  in  Pope, +  . 


tion. — Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  p.  150) :  The  two  princes,  dust  to  dust  returned,  are 
likewise  become  ‘bedfellows’  of  the  dust.  Since  they  are  now  a  ‘prey  to  worms,’ 
as  is  said  in  the  next  line,  they  can  hardly  be  play-fellows  for  dust,  which  the  Quarto 
reading  makes  them.  The  anonymous  corrector  of  the  Quarto  recalled,  possibly, 
the  line  in  the  closing  speech  of  IV,  i,  which  he  had  stricken  out,  wherein  the  Tower 
is  called:  ‘old  sullen  playfellow  for  tender  princes.’  But  at  that  time  the  princes 
were  living. — Carter  (p.  144):  Compare:  ‘They  shall  sleepe  both  in  the  dust, 
and  the  wormes  shall  cover  them.’ — Job  xxi,  26  (Genevan  Version). 

414.  Fathers]  Barnard  thinks  that  Elizabeth  here  refers  to  the  children  of 
Clarence,  orphaned  by  Richard;  but  Elizabeth  had  no  valid  reason  to  accuse 
Richard  of  this  crime:  Edward,  in  her  presence,  had  assumed  all  responsibility. — Ed. 

417.  waile  it  with  their  Age]  Daniel,  who  seeks  to  establish  a  direct  connection 
between  Q6  and  Fx,  says  [Introd.,  p.  x),  in  regard  to  this  passage:  ‘Here  Q5  puts  in 
its  solitary  claim  to  exclusive  connection  with  F,  [see  Text.  Notes];  but  all  things 
considered,  I  am  disposed  to  think  that,  so  far  from  this  case  telling  against  Qg, 
it  affords  proof  in  its  favour.  In  their  is  clearly  the  right  reading,  and  it  is  quite 
possible  that  the  scribe  who  prepared  the  “copy”  for  Fx,  with  the  theatrical  MS 
before  him  and  working  on  a  copy  Q6,  may,  in  correcting  the  obvious  blunder  her, 
have  overlooked  the  other  correction  of  “with”  to  in  which  he  should  also  have 
made.  This  is  one  of  the  errors  into  which  correctors  for  the  press  are,  I  know 
from  experience,  very  liable  to  fall.’  [For  a  summary  of  Daniel’s  theory  see 
Appendix :  The  Text.] 


act  iv,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


353 

Sweare  not  by  time  to  come,  for  that  thou  haft  418 

Mifvs’d  ere  vs’d,  by  times  ill-vs’d  repaft. 

Rich.  As  I  entend  to  profper,  and  repent :  420 

So  thriue  I  in  my  dangerous  Affayres 
Of  hoftile  Armes :  My  felfe,  my  felfe  confound  : 

Heauen,  and  Fortune  barre  me  happy  houres: 

Day,yeeld  me  not  thy  light;  nor  Night,  thy  reft. 

Be  oppofite  all  Planets  of  good  lucke  425 

To  my  proceeding,  if  with  deere  hearts  loue, 

Immaculate  deuotion,  holy  thoughts, 

I  tender  not  thy  beautious  Princely  daughter. 

In  her,  confifts  my  Happineffe,  and  thine  : 

Without  her,  followes  to  my  felfe,  and  thee ;  430 

Her  felfe,  the  Land,  and  many  a  Chriftian  foule, 

Death,  Defolation,  Ruine,  and  Decay  :  432 


418,  419.  In  margin,  Pope,  Han. 

419.  ere]  eare  Qi-3Qs.  nere  Q4. 
times  ill-vs' d  repaff]  Ff.  time 

mifufed  orepafl  Qq,  Cam.  +  .  times  ill- 
-us’d  o' erpajl  Rowe  et  cet. 

421.  Affayres ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Wh.  i 
(subs.),  attempt  Qq  et  cet. 

423.  Heauen... houres']  Om.  Qq. 
Heauen]  So  heaven  Ktly  conj. 

424.  light;]  light  ?  Ff. 

426.  proceeding] proceedings  Qq,Cam. 
+  . 


426.  deere]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Wh.  i. 
pure  Qq  et  cet. 

427.  Immaculate]  Immaculald  Qa. 
Immactilated  Q3_g. 

428.  tender]  render  Q3QS_,. 

430.  Without  her ,]  Without  her  Qz. 
Without,  her  Qg. 

430,  431.  my  felfe. ..Land,]  this  land 
and  me,  To  thee  her  felfe.  Qq.  this  land 
and  me,  To  thee,  herself,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 
432.  Death ,]  Sad  Qq. 

Defolation]  defolate  Q7Q8. 


420-422.  As  I  entend  .  .  .  Armes]  Tawney:  Richard  begins  as  if  he  were 
going  to  assert  positively  that  his  intentions  are  honourable,  but  after  the  word 
‘arms’  the  construction  is  changed,  and  he  imprecates  various  calamities  on  him¬ 
self  if  they  are  not. 

421.  Affayres]  Verplanck:  The  Quarto  reading  attempts,  as  it  might  here 
imply  not  defensive  war,  but  hostile  aggression,  I  take  to  have  been  changed  by 
the  author. 

425.  opposite]  Rolfe:  That  is,  opposed,  adverse.  Shakespeare  mentions 
‘planets’  nearly  a  score  of  times,  but  always  with  an  astrological  reference. 

428.  tender]  That  is,  regard,  hold  in  high  estimation;  compare  I,  i,  50;  II,  iv,  82. 

430-432.  to  my  selfe,  and  thee  ;  .  .  .  Ruine,  and  Decay]  Delius  ( Jahrhuch , 
vii,  153):  Richard  thus  enumerates  in  logical  sequence  the  evils  which  will  befall 
if  he  be  denied  union  with  the  daughter  of  Flizabeth.  He  thinks  first  of  himself, 
then  of  the  Queen,  whom  he  is  most  anxious  to  influence,  then  of  her  daughter,  and 
last  of  the  land  and  its  inhabitants.  The  anonymous  corrector  of  the  Quarto,  on 
the  contrary,  makes  Richard  think  first  of  the  land,  which  by  this  destructive 
change  is  thus  completely  separated  from  the  clause  belonging  to  it — ‘and  many 
a  Christian  soul.’  More  than  this,  the  unnecessary  epithet  sad,  is  put  in  place  of 


23 


354 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF 


[act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


It  cannot  be  auo  yded,  but  by  this  :  433 

It  will  not  be  auoyded,  but  by  this. 

Therefore  deare  Mother  (I  muft  call  you  fo)  435 

Be  the  Atturney  of  my  loue  to  her : 

Pleade  what  I  will  be,  not  what  I  haue  beene  ; 

Not  my  deferts,  but  what  I  will  deferue  : 

Vrge  the  Neceffity  and  ftate  of  times, 

And  be  not  peeuifh  found,  in  great  Defignes.  440 

Qu .  Shall  I  be  tempted  of  the  Diuel  thus? 

Rich.  I,  if  the  Diuell  tempt  you  to  do  good. 

Qu.  Shall  I  forget  my  felfe,to  be  my  felfe. 

Rich.  I,  if  your  felfes  remembrance  wrong  your  felfe. 

Qu.  Yet  thou  didft  kil  my  Children.  445 

Rich.  But  in  your  daughters  wombe  I  bury  them. 

Where  in  that  Neft  of  Spicery  they  will  breed 

Selues  of  themfelues,  to  your  recomforture.  448 


434.  by ]  Om.  Qt. 

435.  deare}  good  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

438.  my]  by  Qq. 

defects ]  defires  F4,  Rowe. 

439.  of  fate  and]  and  state  of  Coll. 
MS. 

440.  peeuifh  found  ]  pieuifi,fotid  Q,. 
peeuifh ,  fond  Q2.  peeuifh  fond  Q3_8. 
peevish-fond  Mai.  conj.  Hal.  Sta.  Cam. 
+  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  Coll.  iii. 

441.  thus?]  thus.  Qj. 

442.  tempt  you ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Dyce  i,  Hal.  tempts 
thee  Wh.  i,  Rife,  tempt  thee  Qq  et  cet. 

443-  /AR-]  felfe  ?  Q3-s- 

444.  your felfes ]  your felues  Qg.  your 
self's  Rowe  et  seq. 

445.  Yet]  But  Qc\,  Pope,  +  ,  Cap.Varr. 


Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam. +  , 
Ktly. 

445.  Children.]  harmless  children. 
Walker  (Vers.  8).  children ,  didst  thou 
not  ?  Anon.  ap.  Cam.  ii. 

446.  I  bury]  I  buried  Q,Q3-  I  burie 
Q3Ff.  lie  burie  Q4_g.  I'll  bury  Sta. 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  Coll.  iii. 

447.  Where  in]  Wherein  Q?Q8.  Where, 
in  Theob.  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 

Nef  of  Spicery]  See  Herodotus, 
Lib.  ii,  cap.  13  ;  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.,  bk, 
x,  ch.  ii ;  Green,  p.  380. 

they  will]  they  fall  QrQ„,  Pope, 
+  ,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta. 
Cam. +  ,  Ktly.  there  fhall  Q3_g. 

448.  Selues]  Selfes  Qq. 
recomforture]  recomfiture  Qq. 


the  indispensable  word  ‘death,’  1.  432.  Death  threatens  the  persons  named, 
desolation,  ruin,  and  decay,  threaten  the  land  and  its  inhabitants. 

440.  peeuish  found]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875-76;  p.  29):  Here  the 
Folio  is  certainly  wrong.  One  cannot  fancy  Shakespeare  making  that  alteration. 
But  then  it  is  easy  to  fancy  a  printer  or  transcriber  not  understanding  the  effect  of 
the  double  epithet  ( peevish-fond)  and  supposing  fond  a  mistake  for  ‘  found,  ’  which 
makes  very  good  sense. 

447,  448.  Nest  of  Spicery]  Steevens  notes  that  there  is  here  an  allusion  to  the 
phoenix. 

448.  recomforture]  That  is,  renewed  comfort.  Ceaigie  (TV.  E.  D.  s.  v.) 
quotes  the  present  instance  as  the  only  example  of  the  use  of  this  word. — Ed. 


ACT  IV,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


355 


Qu.  Shall  I  go  win  my  daughter  to  thy  will  ? 

Rich.  And  be  a  happy  Mother  by  the  deed.  450 

Qu.  I  go,  write  to  me  very  fhortly, 

And  you  fhal  vnderftand  from  me  her  mind.  Exit  Q. 

Rich.  Beare  her  my  true  loues  kiffe,  and  fo  farewell. 

Relenting  Foole,  and  fhallow-changing  Woman.  454 


450.  by]  in  Q,Q 3. 

451.  me]  me,  Richard,  Coll,  ii,  iii 
(MS). 

very]  Om.  Pope,  +  . 

452.  And. ..mind]  Om.  Qq. 

Exit  Q.]  After  1.  453,  Qq. 


453.  and  fo]  Om.  Qq. 

[Kissing  her.  Johns. 
tallow- changing]  fiallow  chang¬ 
ing  Qq.  shallow,  changing  'I  heob.  Coll. 
Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  + .  shallow,  changing — 
Cap.  Yarr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 


449.  Shall  I  go  win  my  daughter]  Oechelhauser  (Essay,  p.  116):  Here 
we,  who  simply  read  the  drama,  feel  for  the  second  time  in  the  same  scene,  and 
the  second  follows  close  upon  the  first,  that  the  important  psychologic  moment  in 
the  action  does  not  at  once  make  itself  apparent,  but  that,  in  order  to  comprehend 
it,  recourse  must  be  had  to  the  aesthetic  critic;  I  refer  to  Richard’s  behaviour  under 
his  mother’s  curse,  and  here  Elizabeth’s  at  the  close  of  this  wooing  scene.  In  its 
arrangement  for  the  stage  this  is  a  manifest  error  on  Shakespeare’s  part.  In  so 
important  a  period  of  the  action,  the  correct  interpretation  of  the  poet’s  idea 
should  not  be  left  to  the  actor’s  conception  alone,  either  to  distort  or  completely 
destroy.  A  word  or  two  spoken  aside — even  a  stage-direction,  if  need  be — would 
have  been  sufficient  to  dispel  all  doubts  as  to  the  correct  interpretation. 

450.  And  be  a  happy  Mother]  See  1.  285  ante. — Hudson  (Life,  etc.,  p.  166): 
It  appears  somewhat  uncertain  whether  Elizabeth  is  really  beguiled  by  Richard’s 
wizard  rhetoric,  or  whether  she  only  temporizes,  and  feigns  a  reluctant  acquiesence, 
and  so  at  last  fairly  outwits  him.  Most  critics,  I  believe,  have  taken  the  former 
view;  but  I  am  far  from  seeing  it  so:  for  her  daughter’s  hand  is  firmly  pledged  to 
Richmond  already,  and  she  is  in  the  whole  secret  of  the  plot  for  seating  him  on  the 
throne.  So  I  take  it  as  an  instance  of  that  profound  yet  innocent  and  almost 
unconscious  guile  which  women  are  apt  to  use  in  defence  of  those  they  love,  and 
which  so  often  proves  an  overmatch  for  all  the  sources  of  deliberate  craft. 

451.  shortly]  Steevens:  This  adverb,  in  the  present  instance,  is  employed 
as  a  trisyllable. — Walker  (Vers.,  23)  quotes  this  line  as  an  example  wherein 
‘shortly’  seems  to  be  so  pronounced,  and  adds:  ‘But  I  suspect  some  error.’  So 
also  Abbott,  §  477. 

452.  Exit  Q.]  Wright:  At  the  close  of  the  narrative  which  suggested  this 
scene,  Hall  has  the  following  profound  remark:  ‘Surely  the  inconstancie  of  this 
woman  were  muche  to  be  merueled  at,  yf  all  women  had  bene  found  constante, 
but  let  men  speake,  yet  wemen  of  the  verie  bond  of  nature  will  followe  their  awne 
kynde.’ — p.  406. 

454.  Relenting  Foole,  etc.]  Horn  (iii,  144):  We  might  well  think  that  in  a 
scene,  such  as  the  foregoing,  with  its  rumblings  of  thunder,  its  flashes  of  lightning, 
its  sepulchral  horror,  and  clarion-tongued  justice,  that  even  Richard  would  be 
somewhat  daunted,  but  then  we  should  forget  that  which  Richard  ever  held 
steadfast  in  view:  ‘I  am  determined  to  become  a  villain.’  In  everything  which 


356  THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 

How  now,  what  newes  ?  455 


Enter  Ratcliffe. 

Rat.  Moft  mightie  Soueraigne,  on  the  Wefterne  Coaft 
Rideth  a  puiffant  Nauie  :  to  our  Shores 
Throng  many  doubtfull  hollow-hearted  friends, 

Vnarm’d,and  vnrefolu’d  to  beat  them  backe.  460 

’Tis  thought,  that  Richmond  is  their  Admirall : 

And  there  they  hull,  expecting  but  the  aide 
Of  Buckingham ,  to  welcome  them  afhore. 

Rich.  Some  light-foot  friend  port  to  y  Duke  of  Norfolk  ;  464 


455.  How. ..newes  ?]  Om.  Qq,  Pope,  + 
(-Van ’73). 

456.  Scene  VI.  Pope,  Han.  Warb. 
Johns. 

Enter  Ratcliffe.]  After  1.  454, 
Qq.  Enter  Ratcliffe ;  Catesby  following. 
Cap.  et  seq.  (subs. ) 

45  7.  Mojl  mightie ]  My  gracious  Qq, 
Sta.  Cam.  +. 

458.  Rideth]  Rides  F4,  Rowe,  Pope. 


458.  Nauie:  to  our  Shores}  Nauie. 
To  the fhore  Qq,  Cap.  Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  + ,  Huds. 
(subs.) 

459.  hollow- hearted}  hollow  harted 
Qq. 

462.  they}  thy  Qa. 

464.  light-foot  ]  light  foote  Qt. 
Norfolk}  Norff.  Q,_s. 


others  consider  appalling,  he  is  completely  at  home.  Nay,  more,  it  affords  him 
pleasure  thus  to  exercise  his  wit  in  this  thrust-and-parry  form  of  dialogue,  and, 
imperturbable,  to  conquer.  The  pleasing  task  of  supplying  a  scurrilous  comment 
on  Elizabeth  comes  from  his  superabundance  of  ingenuity;  it  is  not  a  very  edifying 
ejaculation:  ‘Relenting  fool,  and  shallow-changing  woman.’ 

454.  shallow-changing]  Walker  ( Crit .,  i,  26),  among  many  other  examples 
of  such  compound  adjectives,  compares:  ‘According  to  my  shallow-simple  skill.’ — 
Two  Gent.,  II,  i,  8;  ‘that  loose  grace  Which  shallow-laughing  hearers  give  to  fools.’ — 
Love's  Labour's,  V,  ii,  870.  But  in  the  present  instance  ‘shallow-changing’  is 
the  reading  of  F,;  and  in  the  two  examples  quoted  by  Walker  the  hyphen  is  his 
own  substitution  for  a  comma,  wherein  he  has  been  followed  by  only  one  or  two 
modern  editors. — Ed. 

462.  hull]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  verb 2):  Of  a  ship:  To  float  or  be  driven 
by  the  force  of  the  wind,  or  current  on  the  hull  alone;  to  drift  to  the  wind  with  sails 
furled;  to  lie  a-hull.  [The  present  line  quoted.] 

464.  Some  light-foot  friend,  etc.]  Johnson:  Richard’s  precipitation  and  con¬ 
fusion  is,  in  this  scene,  very  happily  represented,  by  inconsistent  orders,  and 
sudden  variations  of  opinion. — Churchill  (p.  511):  The  same  purpose  is  apparent 
in  this  scene  between  Richard,  Catesby,  and  Ratcliffe,  as  in  that  between  Richard 
and  Catesby  in  the  True  Tragedy,  wherein  it  is  shown  how  Richard  is  unnerved  by 
Richmond’s  conspiracy  and  by  his  conscience.  He  does  not  know  whether  he  has 
called  Catesby  or  not,  misunderstands  Catesby’s  hope  that  his  troubles  will  be 
overcome  as  a  hope  that  he  himself  will  be  overcome,  and  flies  into  a  passion  when 
Catesby  praises  Richmond.  [See  Appendix:  The  True  Tragedie,  etc.,  p.  533.] 


act  iv,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


35  7 


Ratcliff e  thy  felfe,  or  Catesby,  where  is  hee?  465 

Cat.  Here,  my  good  Lord. 

Rich.  Catesby ,  flye  to  the  Duke. 

Cat.  I  will,  my  Lord,  with  all  conuenient  hafte. 

Rich.  Catesby  come  hither,  pofte  to  Salisbury  : 

When  thou  com’ft  thither:  Dull  vnmindfull  Villaine,  470 

Why  ftay’ft  thou  here, and  go’ft  not  to  the  Duke? 

Cat. Firft,  mighty  Liege,  tell  me  your  Highneffe  pleafure, 

What  from  your  Grace  I  fhall  deliuer  to  him. 

Rich.  O  true,  good  Catesby,  bid  him  leuie  ftraight 
The  greateft  ftrength  and  power  that  he  can  make,  475 

And  meet  me  fuddenly  at  Salisbury. 


466,  467.  As  one  line,  Steev.  et  seq. 
466.  good ]  Om.  Qq,  Cam. +  . 
467-469.  Catesby . . .  Salisbury]  Flie  to 
the  Duke ,  pojl  thou  to  Salisburie  Qq.  Fly 
to  the  Duke.  [To  Ratcliffe]  Post  thou  to 
Salisbury.  Cam.  + . 

469.  Catesby]  Ratcliff  Rowe  et  seq. 

470.  thither]  there  Qq. 

Dull ]  [to  Catesby]  Dull  Rowe 


et  seq. 

47 1 .  flay'fl  thou  here]  JlandJl  thou 
dill?  Qq.  ( flands  Q4Q,.)  Cam. +  . 

472.  Liege... pleafure]  Soueraigne,  let 
me  know  your  minde,  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

473.  to  him]  to  them  Q,Q2.  him  Qq, 
Sta. 

475.  that ]  Om.  Qq,  Pope,  Sta.  Cam.  -I- . 

476.  fuddenly]  prefently  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 


467,  469.  Catesby,  flye  .  .  .  Catesby  come  hither]  Cambridge  Edd.  ( Note 
xx):  We  have  followed  the  reading  of  the  Qq  in  preference  to  that  of  the  Ff. 
The  Folio  reading  seems  to  show  that  the  text  of  the  Qq  has  been  altered  by  no  very 
skilful  hand. — Spedding  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875-’ 76;  p.  29):  To  me  it  seems  to  show 
that  the  Folio  has  been  edited  by  no  very  skilful  hand;  but  the  correction  (first 
suggested  by  Rowe)  which  was  obviously  intended  cannot  surely  be  taken  for  any 
want  of  skill  in  the  alterer.  It  makes  the  meaning  so  clear  that  it  is  scarcely  neces¬ 
sary  to  insert  the  stage-direction  [to  Catesby]  before:  ‘Dull  unmindful  villain.’ 
As  it  appears  by  the  speeches  interchanged  between  Richard  and  Ratcliffe,  a  few 
lines  further  on  (as  they  stand  in  both  Qq  and  Ff),  that  it  was  he  who  had  been  told 
to  post  to  Salisbury,  it  is  certain  that  ‘Catesby,’  in  his  second  speech,  ‘Catesby 
come  hither,'  was  either  a  misprint,  or  a  slip  of  the  pen  for  ‘Ratcliffe.’  This  correc¬ 
tion,  therefore,  must  be  made;  and,  being  made,  it  leaves  everything  clear  and 
consistent. 

469.  Salisbury]  Barnard:  At  Salisbury  Richard  would  be  in  a  position  to 
intercept  the  junction  of  Buckingham  and  Richmond. 

474.  O  true,  good  Catesby]  Hudson  [Life,  etc.,  ii,  15 1):  By  his  bland  apology 
implied  in,  ‘  O  true,  good  Catesby,  ’  which  drops  so  easily  that  it  seems  to  spring 
fresh  from  his  heart,  Richard  instantly  charms  out  the  sting  of  his  former  words, 
and  we  feel  that  the  man  is  knit  closer  to  him  than  ever.  Yet  his  kingly  dignity 
is  not  a  whit  impaired,  nay,  is  even  heightened,  by  the  act,  partly  from  his  gracious¬ 
ness  of  manner,  and  partly  from  his  quick  art  in  putting  the  apology  under  a  sort 
of  transparent  disguise. 


358 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


Cat.  I  goe.  Exit.  4 77 

Rat.  What,  may  it  pleafe  you,  Ihall  I  doe  at  Salis¬ 
bury  ? 

Rich.  Why,  what  would’ft  thou  doe  there,  before  I  480 
goe? 

Rat.  Your  Highneffe  told  me  I  fhould  pofte  before. 

Rich.  My  minde  is  chang’d  : 

Enter  Lord  Stanley. 

Stanley ,  what  newes  with  you  ?  485 

Sto.None,good  my  Liege,  to  pleafe  you  with  y  hearing, 

Nor  none  fo  bad,  but  well  may  be  reported. 

Rich.  Hoyday,a  Riddle, neither  good  nor  bad: 

What  need’ft  thou  runne  fo  many  miles  about, 

When  thou  mayeft  tell  thy  Tale  the  neereft  way  ?  490 

Once  more,  what  newes  ? 

Stan.  Richmond  is  on  the  Seas. 

Rich.  There  let  him  finke,and  be  the  Seas  on  him,  493 


477.  Cat.  I  goe.  Exit.]  Om.  Qq. 

478.  lVhat...I  doe]  What  is  it  your 
highnes  pleafure  I Jhal  do  Q,_v  What 
it  is  your  highnejfe  pleafure  I  Jhall  do 
Q5.  What  is  your  highnefs  pleafure  I 
fhall  do  Q§_g.  What  is' t  your  highness' 
pleafure  I  shall  do  Cam.  +  (as  one  line). 

Salis-bury  ?]  Salis-burie.  Qt. 

483-485.  chang*  d: ...  Stanley]  chang'd 
fir ,  my  minde  is  changd.  How  now  Qq, 
Cam.  +  (subs.) 

484.  Enter  Lord  Stanley.]  Enter 
Darby  Qq.  After  1.  482,  Cap.  et  seq. 

484,485.  As  one  line,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh. 
i,  Sta.  Ktly. 

486.  None ,  good  my  Liege ,]  F2F3, 
Pope.  None  good  my  Lord  Qq.  None 
good,  my  lord ,  Cam.  + .  None  good ,  my 


Liege,  F4  et  cet. 

486.  y\  Om.  Q7Qg.  the  Ff. 

487.  well... reported]  it  may  well  be 
told  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

488.  Hoyday]  Ff,  Rowe,  Dyce,  Sta. 
Cam.  + .  Heyday  Pope  et  cet. 

Riddle ,  neither]  Q,_$F2F3,  Rowe, 
Pope,  riddle  neither  F  .  riddle  !  neither 
Theob.  et  seq. 

489.  what  need'Jl]  Why  doefl  Q,Q2. 
Why  doofl  Qq.  Why  dost  Pope,+  , 
Cam.  + . 

miles]  mile  Qi-6,  Cam. +  . 

490.  mayeft]  maifl  Q,Q2.  mayjl  Qq, 
Cam.  +  (subs.) 

the  neerefl]  a  neerer  Qq,  Cam.  + . 
way  ?]  way.  Q,Q2.  way,  Q3_g. 

491.  492.  As  one  line,  Steev.  et 
seq. 


483.  My  minde  is  chang’d]  Verplanck:  By  the  repetition  of  these  words,  in 
the  Qq,  and  also  those  in  1.  496,  the  author’s  first  intention  may  have  been  to  express 
the  hurry  and  excitement  of  rapid  action;  which,  in  revision,  may  well  have  seemed 
to  him  inconsistent  with  the  cool  self-possession  and  lofty  bearing  of  Richard. 

493.  There  let  him  sinke]  Drake  (p.  443) :  This  reply  is  pointed  with  irony  and 
invective.  There  are  two  causes  in  nature  and  character  for  this:  First,  Richard 


ACT  iv,  sc.  iii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

White-liuer’d  Runnagate,  what  doth  he  there? 

Sian.  I  know  not,  mightie  Soueraigne,  but  by  gueffe. 
Rich.  Well,  as  you  gueffe. 

Stan.  Stirr’d  vp  by  Dorfet ,  Buckingham ,  and  Morton , 
He  makes  for  England,  here  to  clayme  the  Crowne. 

Rich.  Is  the  Chayre  emptie  ?  is  the  Sword  vnfway’d  ? 
Is  the  King  dead  ?  the  Empire  vnpoffeft  ? 


359 

495 


500 


494.  White- liuer3  d  ]  White  liuerd  Qq. 

Runnagate ]  QqF2F3>  Run-a¬ 
gate  F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Runagate 
Theob.  et  cet. 

496.  Well, ... gueffe. Ff,  +  .  Well  sir 
as  you  gueffe  as  you  gueffe.  Q,^.  Well, 
fir,  as  you  gueffe ,  Q7Q8  (subs.)  Well, 


sir,  as  you  guess,  as  you  guess  ?  Cam.  + . 
Well. .  .guess  ?  Cap.  et  cet. 

497.  Stirr'd ]  Sturd  Qq. 

Morton]  Elie  Qq.  Ely  Cam.  + , 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  Coll.  iii. 

498.  here-]  there  Qq,  Cam.  + . 


was  before  informed  of  the  news:  his  passion  was  not  taken  by  surprise,  and  he  was 
enough  at  ease  to  make  a  play  upon  Stanley’s  words — ‘on  the  seas’ — and  retort — 
‘be  the  seas  on  him’;  secondly,  Stanley  was  a  suspected  subject;  Richard  was 
therefore  interested  to  show  a  contempt  of  his  competitor  before  a  man  of  such 
doubtful  allegiance.  In  the  spirit  of  this  impression  he  urges  Stanley  to  give  an 
explicit  answer  to  the  question— Stanley  endeavors  to  evade  by  answering  that  he 
knows  not  ‘but  by  guess.’  The  evasion  only  strengthens  Richard’s  suspicions, 
and  he  again  pushes  him  to  disclose  what  he  only  guesses.  What  a  cluster  of  excel¬ 
lences  are  before  us  in  Richard’s  speech,  beginning,  ‘Is  the  chair  empty?’  All 
these  interrogatories  are  ad  hominem:  they  fit  no  man  but  Stanley;  they  can  be 
uttered  by  Richard;  and  they  can  flow  from  the  conception  of  no  poet  but  the  poet 
of  nature. 

494.  White-liuer’d]  Compare:  ‘Go  prick  thy  face,  and  over’-red  thy  fear 
Thou  lily-liver’d  boy.’ — Macb.,  V,  iii,  14. 

494.  Runnagate]  Skeat  {Did.  s.  v.) :  It  so  happens  that  gate  in  many  English 
dialects  signifies  a  way;  whilst  at  the  same  time  the  Middle  English  verb  rennen 
passed  into  the  form  run,  as  at  present.  Hence  the  Middle  English  renegat,  a 
renegade,  was  popularly  supposed  to  stand  for  renne  a  gate,  that  is,  to  run  on  the 
way,  and  was  turned  into  ‘runagate’  accordingly;  especially  as  we  also  have  the 
word  runaway.  But  it  is  certain  that  the  original  sense  of  Middle  English  renegat 
was  apostate  or  villain;  ‘ Renegat :  a  renegade,  one  that  abjures  his  religion.’ — 
Cotgrave.  It  is  remarkable  that  when  renegate  had  been  corrupted  into  ‘  runagate,  ’ 
we  borrowed  the  word  over  again,  in  the  form  renegade,  from  Spanish  renegado. 
It  is  a  pity  we  could  not  do  without  it  altogether. 

496.  Well,  as  you  guesse]  R.  G.  White  ( Sh.’s  Scholar,  p.  343):  If  there  be 
two  words  for  the  use  of  which,  more  than  any  others,  our  English  cousins  twit  us, 
they  are  ‘well,’  as  an  interrogative  exclamation,  and  ‘guess.’  Milton  uses  both, 
as  Shakespeare  also  frequently  does,  and  exactly  in  the  way  in  which  they  are  used 
in  America;  and  here  we  have  them  both  in  half  a  line.  Like  most  of  those  words 
and  phrases  which  it  pleases  John  Bull  to  call  Americanisms,  they  are  English  of 
the  purest  and  best,  which  have  lived  here  while  they  have  died  out  in  the  mother 
country.  [Is  the  phrase,  ‘as  you  guess,’  as  here  used,  an  Americanism? — Ed.] 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


360 

What  Heire  of  Yorke  is  there  aliue,  but  wee?  501 

And  who  is  Englands  King, but  great  Yorkes  Heire? 

501.  What  Heire  of  Yorke]  Malone:  Richard  asks  this  question  in  the  pleni¬ 
tude  of  power,  and  no  one  dares  to  answer  him.  But  they  whom  he  addresses,  had 
they  not  been  intimidated,  might  have  told  him  that  there  was  a  male  heir  of  the 
house  of  York  alive,  who  had  a  better  claim  to  the  throne  than  he;  Edward,  Earl 
of  Warwick,  the  only  son  of  the  usurper’s  elder  brother,  George,  Duke  of  Clarence; 
and  Elizabeth,  the  eldest  daughter  of  Edward  IV.,  and  all  her  sisters,  had  a  better 
title  than  either  of  them. — Ritson:  The  issue  of  King  Edward  had  been  pro¬ 
nounced  illegitimate  the  Duke  of  Clarence  attainted  of  high  treason, — and  the  usurper 
declared  ‘the  undoubted  heir  of  Richard  duke  of  York,’ — by  act  of  parliament:  so 
that,  as  far  as  such  a  proceeding  can  alter  the  constitution  and  legalize  usurpation 
and  murder,  he  is  perfectly  correct  and  unanswerable. — R.  G.  White,  after  giv¬ 
ing  the  substance  of  the  foregoing  notes  by  Malone  and  Ritson,  adds:  ‘Although 
Edward’s  issue  had  been  pronounced  illegitimate,  and  Clarence  attainted  of  high 
treason,  yet  this  was  unjustly  done  by  procurement  of  Richard  himself.’  [On  the 
question  of  Richard’s  influence  in  procuring  these  acts  of  parliament  opinion  is 
somewhat  divided.  More,  who  was  followed  closely  by  Vergil,  Hall  and  Holinshed, 
says:  ‘Somme  wise  menne  also  weene,  that  his  drifte  couertly  conuayde,  lacked 
not  in  helping  furth  his  brother  of  Clarence  to  his  death:  which  he  resisted  openly, 
howbeit  somewhat  (as  menne  demed)  more  faintly  then  he  that  wer  hartely  minded 
to  his  welth.’ — p.  io.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  account  of  the  proceedings  against 
Clarence  as  given  in  Ingulph’s  Chronicle  of  the  Abbey  of  Croyland  (commonly  called 
the  second  continuation  of  the  Croyland  Chronicle),  written  about  1485,  and  thus 
nearer  to  the  period  of  which  it  treats,  it  is  stated:  ‘ — not  a  single  person  uttered  a 
word  against  the  Duke,  except  the  King;  not  one  individual  made  answer  to  the 
King  except  the  Duke.’ — p.  479.  An  extract  so  pertinent  has  naturally  not  escaped 
the  vigilance  of  both  Legge  and  Churchill.  Buck  says  (p.  82):  ‘it  [Clarence’s  death] 
was  the  King’s  owne  immoveable  and  inexplorable  doome  who  thought  it  justly  and 
necessarily  his  due;  for  Clarence  stood  guilty  of  many  treasons  and  great  ones.’ 
More  directly  accuses  Richard  of  the  slander  on  the  Duchess  of  York,  which  made 
Edward’s  issue  illegitimate:  ‘  But  the  chief  thing  and  the  weighty  of  al  that  inuencion, 
rested  in  this  that  they  should  allege  bastardy,  either  in  King  Edward  himself, 
or  in  his  children  or  both.  So  that  he  should  seme  dishabled  to  inherite  the  crowne 
by  the  duke  of  Yorke,  and  the  prince  by  him.’ — p.  89.  The  Rotuli  Parliamentorum 
contains,  in  full,  the  Act  of  Attainder  against  the  Duke  of  Clarence,  and  that 
Richard  was  not  responsible  for  the  dastardly  act  of  defaming  his  mother  and 
brother  is  shown  by  the  following:  ‘And  overe  this,  the  said  Duke  beyng  in  full 
purpose  to  exalte  hymself  and  his  Heires  to  the  Regallye  and  Corone  of  Englande, 
and  clerely  in  opinion  to  putte  aside  from  the  same  for  ever  the  said  Corone  from 
the  Kyng  and  his  Heirez,  upon  oon  the  falsest  and  moost  unnaturall  coloured  pre¬ 
tense  that  man  myght  imagyne,  falsely  and  untruely  noysed,  published  and  saide, 
that  the  Kynge  oure  Sovereigne  Lorde  was  a  Bastard,  and  not  begotten  to  reigne 
uppon  us.’ — vol.  vi,  p.  194.  Legge  quotes  the  foregoing  from  the  Rolls  of  Parlia¬ 
ment,  but  has  not,  I  think,  gone  to  the  original  source  for  his  extract.  This  some¬ 
what  long  note  should,  perhaps,  be  placed  more  fittingly  among  those  referring  to 
Richard’s  complicity  in  the  death  of  Clarence.  Its  answer  to  White’s  charge,  con¬ 
tained  in  his  note,  must  be  a  justification  for  its  present  position. — Ed.] 


act  iv,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


361 

503 


Then  tell  me,  what  makes  he  vpon  the  Seas  ? 

Stan.  Vnleffe  for  that,  my  Liege,  I  cannot  gueffe. 

Rich.  Vnleffe  for  that  he  comes  to  be  your  Liege,  505 

You  cannot  gueffe  wherefore  the  Welchman  comes. 

Thou  wilt  reuolt,  and  flye  to  him,  I  feare. 

Stan.  No,  my  good  Lord,  therefore  miftruft  me  not. 

Rich.  Where  is  thy  Power  then,  to  beat  him  back  ? 

Where  be  thy  Tenants,  and  thy  followers  ?  510 

Are  they  not  now  vpon  the  Weflerne  Shore, 

Safe-con du fling  the  Rebels  from  their  Shippes?  512 


503.  makes  he]  doth  he  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 
makes  him  Han. 

Seas]  fea  Q,.,,  Pope,  + . 

506.  Welchman]  Wel/hmanQ.  Welch- 
men  Q4Q,Q8. 

comes.]  comes  ?  Sta. 

508.  my  ...Lord]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll. 
Wh.  i.  mightie  liege  Qq.  mighty  liege 
Pope  et  cet. 


509.  then,  ...  back  ?]  theti  ?  ...  backe, 
Qj.  then... backe  ?  Q 3_gF3F4,  Cam.  + . 

then]  now  Q,Q8. 
hint]  them  Qg. 

510.  be]  are  Qq,  Pope,-!-,  Cam. +. 
Tenants,]  tennants  ?  Qt. 

512.  Safe- conducing]  Safe  conduct¬ 
ing  Qq,  V ar.  ’  73.  Conducting  safe  Pope. 


504.  Vnlesse  for  that  ...  I  cannot  guesse]  Hunter  ( Illust .,  ii,  93):  These 
words  convey  no  idea.  They  are,  in  fact,  a  broken  sentence — Richard  interrupts 
him. — Dyce:  Not  so,  surely.  Stanley  has  previously  told  Richard  his  ‘guess’  in  the 
matter;  and  Richard  again  having  put  to  him  the  question,  what  Richmond  ‘  makes 
upon  the  seas,  ’  Stanley  now  replies:  ‘  Unless  for  that  (i.  e.,  the  reason  already  given), 
I  cannot  guess.’  Richard  immediately  catches  up  the  words:  ‘Unless  for  that,’ 
using  ‘for  that ’  in  a  different  sense. 

506,  508.  wherefore  .  .  .  therefore]  Walker  {Vers.,  iii):  In  ‘therefore’  and 
‘wherefore’  the  accent  is  shifted  at  pleasure  from  the  one  syllable  to  the 
other. 

508.  mistrust  me  not]  Ramsay  (ii,  573):  Throughout  the  revolutions  of  the 
last  six  and  twenty  years  the  House  of  Stanley  had  been  singularly  successful  in 
keeping  out  of  hot  water.  Thomas,  the  present  Lord,  had  throughout  supported 
the  Yorkist  cause;  but  without  committing  himself  to  such  an  extent  as  to  involve 
the  active  hostility  of  the  Lancastrians,  when  their  fortunes  were  in  the  ascendant. 
He  had  kept  clear  of  Warwick  and  Clarence  and  their  intrigues.  .  .  .  On  the  list 
of  those  who  had  profited  by  Richard’s  bounty  Stanley’s  name  was  second  only  to 
those  of  Norfolk  and  Northumberland.  Men  wondered  that  Richard  could 
trust  the  Stanleys;  but  if  Richard  were  here  to  explain  his  conduct,  he  would  doubt¬ 
less  tell  us  that  he  could  not  help  himself;  and  that  he  had  to  trust  them  and  hope 
for  the  best. 

509.  Power]  Guest  (p.  40):  The  disyllables  containing  y  and  w  seem  to  have 
been  once  so  numerous  in  our  language  that  many  words,  both  English  and  foreign, 
were  adapted  to  their  pronunciation,  and  thus  gained  a  syllable;  scur,  Anglo-Saxon, 
became  shower,  and  fleur,  French,  became  flower.  Change  of  pronunciation 
has  again  reduced  them  to  their  original  dimensions. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


362 

Stan.  No,  my  good  Lord,  my  friends  are  in  the  513 
North. 

Rich.  Cold  friends  to  me  :  what  do  they  in  the  North,  515 
When  they  fhould  ferue  their  Soueraigne  in  the  Weft  ? 

Stan.  They  haue  not  been  commanded,  mighty  King:  517 

5i5-  me\  Richard  Qq,  Cam.  +.  517.  King]  foueraigne  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

517.  been ]  bin  Q.^Qg. 


513,  514.  in  the  North]  Marshall:  Stanley’s  lands  were  in  Cheshire  and 
Lancashire;  he  had,  too,  considerable  power  in  North  Wales. 

515.  Cold  friends  to  me  ...  in  the  North]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans., 
1875— ’76;  p.  48):  This  [line,  as  in  the  Quarto],  in  any  of  Shakespeare’s  later  plays, 
would  be  a  common  form  of  line:  the  redundant  syllable,  coming  in  the  middle 
of  the  line  immediately  before  a  strong  pause,  drops,  as  it  were,  into  the  pause, 
and  scarcely  disturbs  the  measure  more  than  the  redundant  syllable  at  the  end  of 
the  line.  But  in  the  plays  of  the  second  period  I  think  you  will  find  very  few  such, 
and  at  the  time  when  the  inserted  passages — the  more  considerable  of  them — 
were  composed,  I  doubt  whether  Shakespeare  would  have  admitted  them  at  all. 
To  get  rid  of  it  here,  Richard  is  changed  in  the  Folio  to  ‘me.’ — Pickersgill  (Sh. 
Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  101):  There  is  a  stage-tradition,  I  believe,  that  the  delivery 
of  this  line,  as  in  the  Quarto,  was  one  of  the  finest  ‘points’  in  Edmund  Kean’s 
impersonation  of  Richard;  perhaps,  if  Spedding  had  heard  him,  he  might  have 
been  careful  to  omit  this  passage  from  the  list  of  his  examples  [of  alterations  made 
to  improve  the  metre]. — Wright:  The  Folio  reading  destroys  what  little  force  there 
was  in  the  line. 

516.  When  they.  .  .  in  the  West]  T.  R.  Gould  (p.  46):  This  line  was 
delivered  by  J.  B.  Booth  in  one  continuous  tone  of  commanding  resonance,  in  which 
the  words  were  dropped  like  stones  in  the  current  of  his  speech. 

517-528.  Stan.  They  haue  not  been  .  .  .  but  fraile]  Skottowe  (i,  206): 
The  dialogue  between  Richard  and  Lord  Stanley,  in  the  old  play  [ The  True  Tragedy , 
etc.],  furnishes  these  passages:  ‘King.  Well,  Stanley,  I  fear,  it  will  be  proved  to  the 
contrary,  that  thou  didst  furnish  him  both  with  money  and  munition;  which  if  it 
be,  then  look  for  no  favour  at  my  hands,  but  the  due  deserts  of  a  traitor;  but  let 
this  pass.  What’s  your  repair  to  our  presence?  Stan.  Only  this,  my  lord,  that 
I  may  repair  from  the  court  to  my  house  in  the  country.  King.  Ay,  sir,  that  you 
might  be  in  Cheshire  and  Lancashire,  then  should  your  post  pass  invisible  into 
Britain,  and  you  to  depart  the  realm  at  pleasure;  or  else,  I  to  suffer  an  intolerable 
foe  under  me,  which  I  will  not.  But  Stanley,  to  be  brief,  thou  shalt  not  go.  .  .  . 
Come  hither,  Stanley,  thou  shalt  go,  leaving  me  here  thy  son  and  heir  George 
Stanley  for  a  pledge,  that  he  may  perish  for  thy  fault  if  need  should  be;  if  thou 
likest  this,  go,  if  not — answer  me  briefly  and  say  quickly,  no.’  The  same  leading 
idea  is  expressed  in  Shakespeare. — Churchill  (p.  512):  The  chronicle  basis  for 
this  scene  is  as  follows.  Richard  gave  credence  ‘  least  of  all  to  the  Lord  Stanley, 
because  he  was  joyned  in  matrimony  with  the  lady  Margarete  mother  to  the  erle 
of  Richmond,  as  afterward  apparauntly  ye  maie  perceaue.  For  when  the  sayde 
lord  Stanley  would  haue  departed  into  his  countrey  to  visite  his  familie,  and  to 
recreate  and  refreshe  his  spirites  (as  he  openlye  sayde)  but  the  truth  was  to  the- 


act  iv,  sc.  iii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

Pleafeth  your  Maieftie  to  giue  me  leaue, 

He  mutter  vp  my  friends,  and  meet  your  Grace, 

Where,  and  what  time  your  Maieftie  fhall  pleafe. 

Rich.  I,  thou  would’ft  be  gone,  to  ioyne  with  Richmond: 

But  lie  not  truft  thee. 

Stan.  Molt  mightie  Soueraigne, 

You  haue  no  caufe  to  hold  my  friendftrip  doubtfull, 

I  neuer  was,  nor  neuer  will  be  falfe.  525 

Rich.  Goe  then,  and  mutter  mernbut  leaue  behind 


363 

5i8 

520 


518.  Pleafeth]  Pleafe  it  Qq,  Pope,  +  , 
Cam.  + . 

521.  I,  thou]  Ff.  I,  I>  thou  Qq.  Ay, 
thou  Rowe,  +  ,  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i, 
Hal.  Sta.  Ay,  Ay,  thou  Cap.  et  cet. 

would' '/T\  wouldef  Q,.  would'  st 
fain  Pope,  + . 

522.  But  Ile~\  /  will  Qq,  Cap.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Cam. +  . 

thee.]  you,  fir.  Qq,  Cap.  Varr. 


Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Cam. +  . 

523.  Mof~\  Om.  Pope,+  (  — Var.  ’73). 

525.  nor  neuer ]  nor  ever  Pope,  Han. 

526.  Goe. ..and]  Well,  go  Qq,  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  (Reading  Well  as 
separate  line)  Cam.  + . 

men]  thy  men  Qg,  Cap.  Varr. 

Ran. 

but]  but  heare  you,  Qq,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Cam.  +  . 


intent  to  be  in  perfight  readines  to  receaue  the  erle  of  Richmond  at  his  first  ariuall 
in  England:  the  king  in  no  wise  would  suffre  hym  to  departe  before  that  he  had 
left  as  hostage  in  the  courte  George  Stanley  lorde  Straung  his  first  begotten  sonne  and 
heire.’  The  common  source  will  not  by  any  means  account  for  all  the  resemblances 
in  the  wording,  conception,  and  course  of  the  scene  [as  it  appears  in  The  True 
Tragedy  and  in  the  present  play]. 

518.  Pleaseth  your  Maiestie]  Spedding,  in  his  enumeration  of  alterations  in 
the  Folio  not  intended  by  Shakespeare  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875-76;  p.  30),  quotes 
this  phrase  and  adds:  ‘There  is  at  least  one  other  instance  in  Shakespeare  of  the 
use  of  “pleaseth”  in  this  way,  Com.  of  Err.,  IV,  i,  12.  But,  for  our  present  purpose, 
it  is  needless  to  discuss  it;  for  it  may  as  easily  be  a  misprint  as  a  change  of  con¬ 
struction.’  The  construction  in  Com.  of  Err.,  IV,  i,  12:  ‘  Pleaseth  you  walk  with 
me,’  is  pace  Spedding,  possibly  open  to  question  as  to  its  parallelism  with  the 
present  instance.  But  there  can  be  no  doubt,  I  think,  that  we  have  exactly 
parallel  examples  in  the  following:  ‘Pleaseth  your  lordship  to  meet  his  grace.’ — 
2  Hen.  IV:  IV,  i,  225;  ‘Pleaseth  your  grace  to  answer  him  directly.’ — Ibid.,  IV, 
ii,  52;  ‘Pleaseth  your  grace  to  appoint  some  of  your  council.’ — Hen.  V:  V,  ii,  78. 
It  is,  perhaps,  noteworthy  that  in  these  three  passages  the  Folio  retains  the  Quarto 
reading  ‘pleaseth.’ — Ed. 

521.  I,  thou  would’st  be  gone]  Pickersgill  (Sh.  Soc., Trans.,  1875-76;  p.  97): 
I  should  regard,  the  Folio  reading  here,  as  a  misprint  [see  Text.  Notes],  were  it  not 
that  the  corrector  has  displayed  in  similar  passages  an  inveterate  dislike  of  this 
thoroughly  dramatic  repetition  of  a  word  (a  different  thing  altogether,  it  will  be 
observed,  from  the  recurrence  of  the  same  word).  With  regard  to  the  metre,  the 
line  in  the  Folio,  although  it  will  not  scan,  is  yet  decasyllabic;  which  might,  in  the 
judgement  of  the  corrector,  be  sufficient. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


364 

Your  Sonne  George  Stanley  :  looke  your  heart  be  firme,  527 
Or  elfe  his  Heads  affurance  is  but  fraile. 

Stan.  So  deale  with  him,  as  I  proue  true  to  you. 

Exit  Stanley.  5  30 

Enter  a  MeJJenger. 

Meff.  My  gracious  Soueraigne,  now  in  Deuonlhire, 

As  I  by  friends  am  well  aduertifed, 

Sir  Edzvard  Courtney,  and  the  haughtie  Prelate, 

Bifhop  of  Exeter,  his  elder  Brother,  535 

With  many  moe  Confederates,  are  in  Armes. 

Enter  another  Meffenger. 

Meff.  In  Kent,  my  Liege,  the  Guilfords  are  in  Armes, 

And  euery  houre  more  Competitors 

Flo^ke  to  the  Rebels,  and  their  power  growes  ftrong.  540 


527.  heart]  faith  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

529.  .So]  Om.  Q4. 

530.  Exit  Stanley.]  Om.  Q,Qa.  Exit 
Dar.  Q3_5. 

531.  a  Meffenger]  I.  M.  Cap.  et  seq. 
(subs.) 

533.  aduertifed]  advertis'd 

534.  Edward]  William  Qq.  Edmond 
Pope,  + . 

535.  Exeter]  Exceter  Qt. 

his... Brother]  his  brother  there 
Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

536.  moe]  Qj_$  (subs.),  Cam.  +  .  more 


Q7Q8  et  cet- 

536.  Confederates]  confi derates  Q2-5. 
confed' rates  Pope, +  . 

537.  another  Meffenger]  2.  M.  Cap. 
et  seq.  (subs.) 

538.  In... Liege]  My  Liege,  in  Kent 
Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

539.  more]  Om.  F4,  Rowe,  still  more 
Pope,  Han. 

Competitors]  complices  Han. 

540.  the  Rebels... growes  Jlrong]  their 
aide,  and  Jlill  their  power  bicreafeth  Qq, 
Cam.  + . 


535.  Bishop  of  Exeter]  French  (p.  249):  Peter  Courtenay,  who  became 
Bishop  of  Exeter  in  1478,  was  a  zealous  Lancastrian,  and  had  to  seek  refuge  in 
Brittany,  whence  he  returned  with  the  Earl  of  Richmond. 

536.  moe]  Skeat  {Did.  s.  v.) :  The  modern  English  more  does  duty  for  two 
Middle  English  words  which  were  generally  well  distinguished,  viz.,  mo  and  more, 
the  former  relating  to  number,  the  latter  to  size  ....  ‘Mo  than  thries  ten,’ 
more  than  thirty  in  number;  Chaucer:  Cant.  Tales,  578  .  .  .  The  distinction 
between  mo  and  more  is  not  always  observed  in  old  authors,  but  very  often  it  appears 
clearly  enough. 

538.  the  Guilfords]  Courtenay  (ii,  no):  The  Guildfords  were  a  distin¬ 
guished  family  seated  at  Hempstead  in  Kent.  Sir  Richard  was  K.  G.  under 
Henry  VII.,  and  Sir  Edward,  his  son,  was  father-in-law  to  John  Dudley,  Duke  of 
Northumberland. 

539.  Competitors]  Murray  {N.  E.  D.  s.  v .):  2.  One  associated  with  another 
in  seeking  the  same  common  object;  an  associate,  a  partner.  [The  present  line 
quoted.] 


act  iv,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


365 

541 


Enter  another  Meffenger. 

Meff.  My  Lord,  the  Armie  of  great  Buckingham. 

Rich.  Out  on  ye,  Owles,  nothing  but  Songs  of  Death, 

He  Jlriketh  him. 

There,  take  thou  that,  till  thou  bring  better  newes.  545 

Mejf.  The  newes  I  haue  to  tell  your  Maieftie, 

Is,  that  by  fudden  Floods,  and  fall  of  Waters, 

Buckinghams  Armie  is  difpers’d  and  fcatter’d, 

And  he  himfelfe  wandred  away  alone, 

No  man  knowes  whither.  550 

Rich.  I  cry  thee  mercie  : 


541.  another  Meffenger]  3.  M.  Cap. 
et  seq.  (subs.)  Tyrrel.  Booth,  Irving. 

542.  My]  Om.  Qv 

great  ]  the  Duke  of  Qq,  Pope,  + , 
Cam.  + . 

Buckingham.]  Buckingham — 
Rowe  et  seq. 

543-  yt\  you  Q1-5.  Cam.  + . 

on  off  q,. 

Death ,]  death.  Q^.Ff,  Rowe. 
death  ?  Pope  et  seq. 

544.  He. ..him]  After  1.  542,  Qq. 

545.  There... bring]  Take  that  vntill 
thou  bring  me  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

546.  The  ...  Ma iejl ie , ]  Your  Grace 


miflakes  the  newes  I  bring  is  good,  Qq. 

546.  [kneeling.  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS). 

547.  Is,  that  by ]  My  newes  is,  that  by 
Qq.  My  news  is, — by  Vaughan  (iii,  135). 

Floods ]  Flood,  F^,  Rowe  i. 

Waters ]  water  Qq. 

548.  Buckinghams]  The  Duke  of 
Buckinghams  Qx-5. 

difpers'd ]  difprefl  Q4. 

549>  55°-  And...  whither]  As  one  line, 
reading  :  And  he  himfelfe  fled,  no  man 
knowes  Qq. 

551-  /  cry  thee]  0  I  crie  you  Qq,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Oh  !  I  cry  thee 
Pope,  + . 


543.  Owles  .  .  .  Songs  of  Death]  Pliny  says  (ch.  xii,  p.  276):  ‘The  Scritch- 
Owle  alwaies  betokeneth  some  heauie  newes  and  is  most  execrable  and  accursed, 
and  namely,  in  the  presages  of  public  affaires,  he  keepeth  ever  in  desarts:  and  lou- 
eth  not  only  such  vnpeopled  places,  but  also  that  are  horrible  and  hard  of  accesse. 
In  summer  he  is  the  very  monster  of  the  night,  neither  crying  nor  singing  out 
cleare,  but  vttering  a  heauie  groane  of  doleful  mourning.’  Tawney  refers,  for  a 
further  account  of  the  import  of  the  cry  of  the  Owl,  to  Brand  iii,  206-210. — Ed. 

547.  sudden  Floods,  and  fall  of  Waters]  Barnard:  The  king’s  supporters 
had  broken  down  the  bridges  over  the  Severn,  and  Buckingham  found  it  impossible 
to  unite  his  Welsh  forces  with  the  insurgents  from  Devon,  for  the  whole  country 
between  Gloucester  and  Bristol  was  impassable  owing  to  the  floods.  With  the 
rains  came  the  great  gale  which  drove  back  Richmond’s  ships.  All  this,  together 
with  an  eclipse  of  the  moon,  was  sufficient  to  persuade  Buckingham’s  Keltic  fol¬ 
lowers  that  Heaven  was  against  them,  and  they  dispersed. 

548,  549.  Buckinghams  Armie  .  .  .  away  alone]  Vaughan  (iii,  134):  The 
messenger’s  reply  is  more  natural  in  its  commencement  as  the  Qq  give  it;  and 
faults  are  easily  corrected.  Thus:  ‘The  duke  of  Buckingham’s  army  is  dispers’d 
And  scattr’d,  and  he  himself  fled  no  man  knows  whith’r.’ 

551.  I  cry  thee  mercie]  Compare  I,  iii,  246;  and  V,  iii,  261;  see,  if  needful, 
Abbott,  §  201. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


366 

There  is  my  Purfe,  to  cure  that  Blow  of  thine.  552 

Hath  any  well-aduifed  friend  proclaym’d 
Reward  to  him  that  brings  the  Tray  tor  in  ? 

Mejf.  Such  Proclamation  hath  been  made, my  Lord.  555 


Enter  another  Meffe7iger. 

Meff.  Sir  Thomas  Louell,  and  Lord  Marqueffe  Dorfet , 

’Tis  faid,  my  Liege,  in  Yorkefhire  are  in  Armes  : 

But  this  good  comfort  bring  I  to  your  Highneffe, 

The  Brittaine  Nauie  is  difpers’d  by  Tempeft.  560 

Richmond  in  Dorfetfhire  fent  out  a  Boat 
Vnto  the  fhore,  to  aske  thofe  on  the  Banks, 

If  they  were  his  Affiftants,  yea,  or  no  ?  5^3 


552.  There...  thine]  I  did  mijlake , 
Ratcliffe  reward  him  for  the  blow  I  gave 
him.  Qq.  There. ..thine  [3d  Mess,  rises. 
Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS). 

553.  proclaym' d]  giuen  out  Qq. 

554.  Reward  to  him]  Rewardes  for 
him  Qq. 

the  Tray  tor  in]  in  Buckingham 
Qq. 

555.  been]  bin  Q3_s. 

Lord]  liege  Qq,  Pope,  +  ,  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Sing.  Sta.  Cam. 
+  ,  Ktly. 

556.  another  Meflenger]  4.  M.  Cap.  et 


seq.  (subs.) 

558.  in  Yorkefhire  are]  are  vp  in  Qq. 

559.  But ...  Highneffe]  Yet ...  Grace 
Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

560.  561.  The  Brittaine. ..Dorfetjhire] 
As  one  line,  omitting  by  Tempefl ,  Qq. 

560.  Brittaine]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope. 
Breton  Cap.  Cam.  + .  Bretagne  Theob. 
et  cet. 

561.  Dorfetjhire]  Dorfhire  Q,_s. 

561,  562.  fent... Banks]  Sent  out  a 

boate  to  aske  them  on  the  fhore  As  one 
line,  Qq  ( one  the  Q7Q8). 

563.  no  ?]  no  :  Qq. 


555.  Proclamation  hath  been  made]  Boswell-Stone  (p.  404,  foot-note ): 
[Richard’s  proclamation  is  printed  in]  Rymer’s  Fcedera,  vol.  xii,  p.  204;  it  is  dated 
23  October,  1483. 

557.  Sir  Thomas  Louell]  Wright:  Sir  Thomas  Lovel  was  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer  and  Treasurer  of  the  Household  to  Henry  VII.  and  was  one  of  Lady 
Margaret’s  Executors.  In  the  play  of  Hen.  VIII.  he  appears  as  Constable  of  the 
Tower. 

560.  The  Brittaine  Nauie]  See  IV,  ii,  182. 

563.  yea,  or  no]  The  following  rule  for  the  use  of  yea  and  nay,  and  yes  and 
no,  is  given  by  Sir  T.  More  in  his  Confutacion  0}  Tyndales  Aunswere:  ‘I  woulde 
not  here  note  by  the  way,  that  Tyndal  here  translateth  no  for  nay,  for  it  is  but  a 
trifle  and  mistaking  of  the  englishe  worde  ....  For  the  use  of  those  two  words  in 
aunswering  to  a  question  is  this.  No  aunswereth  the  question  framed  by  the 
affirmative.  As  for  example,  if  a  manne  should  aske  Tindall  hymselfe:  ys  an 
heretike  mete  to  translate  holy  scripture  into  englishe.  So  to  thys  question  if  he 
will  aunswere  trew  englishe,  he  must  aunswere  nay  and  not  no.  But  and  if  the 
question  be  asked  hym  thus  lo:  Is  not  an  heretyque  mete  to  translate  holy  scripture 
into  english.  To  this  question  lo  if  he  will  aunswer  true  english,  he  must  aunswere 


ACT  IV,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


367 


Who  anfwer’d  him,  they  came  from  Buckingham , 

Vpon  his  partie  :  he  miftrufting  them,  565 

Hoys’d  fayle,  and  made  his  courfe  againe  for  Brittaine. 

Rich.  March  on,  march  on,  fince  we  are  vp  in  Armes, 

If  not  to  fight  with  forraine  Enemies, 

Yet  to  beat  downe  thefe  Rebels  here  at  home. 


Enter  Catesby.  570 

Cat.  My  Liege,  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  is  taken, 

That  is  the  beft  newes  :  that  the  Earle  of  Richmond 

Is  with  a  mighty  power  Landed  at  Milford,  573 


564.  anfwer’d ]  anfwered  Qq,  Cam. 

+ . 

566.  Hoys' d~\  Hoifl  Qq.  Hoised 
Cam.  + . 

his  courfe  againe~\  away  Qq. 
Brittaine ]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Pope. 


Brittany  Cam.  + .  Bretagne  Theob.  et 
cet. 

569.  beat\  bare  Qg. 

570.  Enter  Catesby.]  Enter  another 
Messenger.  Cam.  conj. 

572.  That  ?.r]  Thais  Qq. 


no  &  not  nay.  And  a  lyke  difference  is  there  betwene  these  two  adverbes  ye,  and 
yes.  For  if  the  question  bee  framed  vnto  Tindall  by  thaffirmatiue  in  thys  fashion. 
If  an  heretique  falsely  translate  the  newe  testament  into  englishe,  to  make  hys 
false  heresyes  seeme  the  worde  of  Godde,  be  hys  bookes  worthy  to  be  burned:  To 
this  question  asked  in  thys  wyse  yf  he  wil  aunswere  true  englishe  he  must  aunswere 
ye  and  not  yes.  But  no  we  if  the  question  be  asked  hym  thus  lo  by  the  negatiue: 
If  an  heretique  falsely  translate  the  newe  testament  into  englishe,  to  make  hys 
false  heresyes  seme  the  word  of  God,  be  not  his  bokes  well  worthy  to  be  burned. 
To  thys  question  in  thys  fashion  framed  if  he  wyll  aunswer  trew  englishe,  he  maye 
not  aunswere  ye,  but  he  must  aunswere  yes,  and  say  yes  mary  be  they,  bothe  the 
translation  and  the  translatour,  and  al  that  wyll  hold  wyth  them.’ — Workes,  1557, 
p.  448.  It  will  be  noticed  that  More  himself  has  misused  the  word  ‘no/  in  the 
sentence  beginning  ‘No  aunswereth  the  question  framed  by  the  affirmative.’ 
According  to  the  example  that  follows,  this  should  read  ‘ Nay  aunswereth/  etc. 
The  foregoing  extract  from  More  is  quoted  in  the  Century  Dictionary,  s.  v.  yea; 
where  the  editors  have  noted  the  error  in  the  word  ‘No.’ — Ed. 

565.  Vpon  his  partie]  Compare  I,  iii,  147;  and  III,  ii,  54,  for  other  exam¬ 
ples  of  this  phrase. 

566.  Hoys’d]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  verb  1):  To  raise  aloft  by  means  of  a 
rope  or  pulley  and  tackle,  or  by  other  mechanical  appliances,  (a)  Originally 
nautical,  and  chiefly  to  hoise  sail;  often  with  up.  It  is  to  be  noticed  that  the  word 
appears  early  as  an  interjection,  being  the  actual  cry  of  sailors  in  hauling. 

573.  Landed  at  Milford]  Gairdner  (p.  269):  On  the  First  of  August,  Rich¬ 
mond  embarked  at  Harfleur,  with  all  his  English  followers.  .  .  .  He  had  a  prosperous 
wind,  and  arrived  at  Milford  Haven  on  the  7th  or  8th. — Wright:  A  gap  of  two 
years  in  the  history  is  here  bridged  over  by  the  dramatist.  Richmond  embarked 
on  his  first  fruitless  expedition  to  join  Buckingham  on  12  October,  1483,  but  his 
actual  landing  at  Milford  did  not  take  place  until  August,  1485. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


368 

Is  colder  Newes,  but  yet  they  mud  be  told. 

Rich.  Away  towards  Salsbury,  while  we  reafon  here,  575 
A  Royall  batteil  might  be  wonne  and  loft: 

Some  one  take  order  Buckingham  be  brought 

To  Salsbury,  the  reft  march  on  with  me.  Florifk. Exeunt  578 


Scena  Quarta. 


Enter  Derby  ,and  Sir  Chrijlopher. 


2 


5 74.  Neuies, but]  tidings Q1-5, Cam.  + , 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  Coll.  iii. 

they]  it  Rowe, +  ,  Cap.  Varr. 

Ran. 

576.  batteil]  batteil  QqFf,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Theob.  i.  battle  Theob.  ii  et 
seq. 

578.  Florilh.  Exeunt]  Exeunt.  Q,Ff. 
Om.  Qj-s. 

1-23.  Scena  Quarta. ..Exeunt]  Om. 


Coll.  MS. 

1.  Scena  Quarta.]  Scene  continued, 
Qq.  Scene  vii.  Pope,  Han.  Warb. 
Johns.  Scene  v.  Cap.  et  seq. 

Lord  Stanley’s  House.  Theobald.  Lord 
Derby’s  House.  Cam.  +. 

2.  Derby]  Lord  Stanley,  Pope,  +  . 
and]  Om.  Qq. 

Sir  Chriftopher]  Sir  Christopher 
Urswick.  Theobald. 


574.  colder]  Murray  (iV.  E.  D.  s.  v.  cold.  9,  10):  Said  of  things  which 
chill  or  depress  the  vital  emotions,  and  of  the  feelings  thus  produced.  Felt  as  cold 
by  the  receiver,  chilling,  damping,  the  reverse  of  encouraging;  as  in  cold  comfort , 
cold  counsel,  cold  news,  cold  rede.  [The  present  line  quoted.] 

x.  Scena  Quarta]  Wright:  The  scene  is  probably  at  Knowsley  in  Lancashire, 
where  the  Lady  Margaret  was  living  when  Morton  first  opened  negotiations  with 
her  for  the  return  of  her  son.  But  it  is  a  little  uncertain,  because  when  the  queen 
proposed  the  marriage  of  Richmond  with  the  Princess  Elizabeth,  the  Lady  Margaret 
was  at  her  husband’s  house  in  London,  afterwards  Derby  House,  the  site  of  which 
is  occupied  by  the  Herald’s  College. — Boswell-Stone  (p.  409):  The  historic 
date  of  this  scene  must  be  August,  1485,  but  Stanley  gives  Urswick  a  message 
relating  to  a  matter  which  had  been  settled  in  1483.  When  the  marriage  between 
Richmond  and  the  Princess  Elizabeth  had  been  arranged,  ‘the  countesse  of  Rich¬ 
mond  tooke  into  hir  seruice  Christopher  Urswike,  an  honest  and  wise  priest  .  .  . 
So  the  mother,  studious  for  the  prosperitie  of  hir  son  appointed  this  Christopher 
Urswike  to  saile  into  Britaine  to  the  earle  of  Richmond,  and  to  declare  and  reueale 
to  him  all  pacts  and  agreements  betweene  hir  &  the  queene  agreed  and  concluded.’ — 
Holinshed,  iii,  742. — W.  Strunk,  Jr.  (MS  note):  This  scene  has  a  close  parallel 
(at  exactly  the  same  place  in  the  play)  in  1  Hen.  IV:  IV,  iv,  in  which,  on  the  eve 
of  battle  the  Archbishop  of  York  entrusts  his  chaplain,  Sir  Michael,  with  letters. 

2.  Sir]  Wright:  The  title  ‘Sir’  which  is  here  given  to  Urswick  is  out  of  place, 
for  he  was  at  this  time  LL.  D.  and  master  of  King’s  Hall,  Cambridge  (1483-1488). 
[For  this  title  ‘Sir’  given  to  priests,  see  III,  ii,  123.] 

2.  Sir  Christopher]  See  Dram.  Person. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


369 

3 


Der.  Sir  Chri/lopher ,  tell  Richmond  this  from  me, 

That  in  the  ftye  of  the  moft  deadly  Bore, 

My  Sonne  George  Stanley  is  frankt  vp  in  hold :  5 

If  I  reuolt,  off  goes  yong  Georges  head, 

The  feare  of  that,  holds  off  my  prefent  ayde. 

So  get  thee  gone  :  commend  me  to  thy  Lord. 

Withall  fay,  that  the  Queene  hath  heartily  confented 
He  fhould  efpoufe  Elizabeth  hir  daughter.  10 

But  tell  me,  where  is  Princely  Richmond  now  ? 

Chri.  At  Penbroke,  or  at  Hertford  Weft  in  Wales. 

Der.  What  men  of  Name  refort  to  him. 

Chriy  Sir  Walter  Herbert ,  a  renowned  Souldier,  14 


4.  the  ...deadly]  Ff,  Rowe,  Dyce,  Wh. 
i,  Huds.  the. ..bloody  Coll.  Hal.  this... 
deadly  Sing.  Ktly.  this . .  .bloudie  Qq  et 
cet.  (subs.) 

7.  holds  off  ]  Ff,  +  ,  Knt,  Coll.  Dyce  i, 
Wh.  i.  wit  holds  Qq  et  cet. 

8-10.  Transposed  to  follow  1.  20.  Qq, 
Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Cam.  + , 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

8 .  So... Lord ]  Returne  vnto  thy  L ord, 
commend  me  to  him,  Qx,  Var.  ’73,  Cam. 
+ ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  {...vnto  my  Lord 
Q^s). 

9.  Withall  fay ,  that]  Tell  him  Qq, 
Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam. 
+  ,  Dyceii,  iii,  Huds.  Say  that  Marshall. 


io.  fhould]  fhall  Qq,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Cam.  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 

12.  Penbroke]  Pembrooke  Q3-s.  Pen- 
brook  Fj.  Pembrook  F4,  Rowe.  Pem¬ 
broke  Pope  et  seq. 

Hertford  Wef]  Harford-wefl  Qx. 
Herford-wefl  Q2QS-  Hertford-wefl  Q3Q4- 
Hertford,  wefl  Qg,  Pope.  Hav'  rford- 
West  Han.  Ha'rford -  West  Cap.  et  seq. 

13.  Name]  name  and  mark  Coll.  MS. 
note  and  name  Walker  (Crit.,  ii,  265). 

refort  to  him.]  refort  to  him  ?  Qq 
F4.  have  made  resort  to  him.  Anon.  ap. 
Cam.  resort  unto  him  there  Wordsworth. 

14.  renowned]  renowmed  Q*-s. 


5.  frankt]  See  note  on  I,  iii,  328. 

5.  in  hold]  Murray  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  hold  subst .):  4.  Custody,  confinement, 
imprisonment.  Chiefly  in  phrases,  in  hold  {in  holds,  at,  to  hold). 

8-10.  So  get  thee  gone  .  .  .  hir  daughter]  Marshall:  The  Folio  arrange¬ 
ment  is,  on  the  whole,  the  best  [see  Text.  Notes],  Urswick  wants  Stanley  to 
declare  for  Richmond.  Stanley  answers  that  he  cannot  do  so  openly  at  present,  and 
then,  before  sending  him  off,  communicates  the  important  news  of  Elizabeth’s 
consent  to  the  proposed  marriage  of  her  daughter  to  Richmond.  This  announce¬ 
ment  comes  much  more  properly  at  the  beginning  of  the  scene  than  thrust  in,  as 
a  mere  after-thought,  at  the  end. 

13-17.  Der.  What  men  .  .  .  Chri,  Sir  Walter  Herbert  ...  a  valiant  Crew] 

Booth  arranges  these  lines  as  the  opening  speeches  of  V,  iii,  and  there  assigns 
them  to  Norfolk  and  Catesby. 

14.  Sir  Walter  Herbert]  French  (p.  238):  Sir  Walter  was  the  second  son 
of  Sir  William  Herbert,  a  staunch  Yorkist,  created  by  Edward  IV.  Baron  Herbert, 
and  later  Earl  of  Pembroke,  and  who  is,  no  doubt,  the  nobleman  of  that  title  in 
3  Hen.  VI. 


24 


370 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


Sir  Gilbert  Talbot ,  Sir  William  Stanley ,  1 5 

Oxford ,  redoubted  Pembroke ,  Sir  lames  Blunt , 

And  Rice  ap  Thomas ,  with  a  valiant  Crew, 

And  many  other  of  great  name  and  worth: 

And  towards  London  do  they  bend  their  power, 

If  by  the  way  they  be  not  fought  withall.  20 

Der.  Well  hye  thee  to  thy  Lord  :  I  kiffe  his  hand, 


15.  Sir  William]  and  Sir  William 
Pope,  +  ,  Cap.  Varr.  Ran. 

16.  redoubted  ]  doubted  Q4. 

17.  And]  Om.  Qq. 

Rice]  ’rice  Cap. 
ap]  vp  Qq. 

18.  And]  With  Qq. 

many  ...name]  many  moe  of  noble 
fame  Qq,  Cam.  +  .  many  more  of  noble 
fame  Q7Q8,  Sta.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 


18.  other]  others  Warb.  John;".  Var. 

*73- 

19.  do... power]  they  do  bend  their 
courfe  Qq,  Cam.  + ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 
do  they  bend  their  course  Cap.  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr. 

21.  Well ...  Lord ...  hand]  Om.  Qq, 
Var.  ’73.  Well... Lord. ..commend  me  to 
him  Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Mai. 
thy]  my  Q^. 


15.  Sir  Gilbert  .  .  .  Stanley]  Abbott  (§  469):  It  may  be  remarked  that  great 
license  is  taken  with  the  metre  wherever  a  list  of  names  occurs.  In  the  present  line, 
and  in  some  others,  the  pause  between  two  names  seems  to  license  either  the 
insertion  or  omission  of  a  syllable. 

15.  Sir  Gilbert  Talbot]  Wright:  Sir  Gilbert  Talbot,  called  Sir  George  here 
by  Hall,  but  afterwards  Sir  Gilbert,  joined  Henry  at  Newport.  He  was  uncle 
to  the  young  Earl  of  Shrewsbury. 

16.  redoubted  Pembroke]  French  (p.  250):  This  is  Jaspar  Tudor,  uncle  of 
the  Earl  of  Richmond.  After  the  victory  at  Bosworth,  to  which  he  so  greatly 
contributed,  he  was  created  Duke  of  Bedford,  and  obtained  from  Henry  VII. 
many  high  appointments  and  valuable  grants. 

17.  Rice  ap  Thomas]  Fuller  (iii,  522)  says:  ‘Sir  Rice  ap  Thomas  was  never 
more  than  a  knight,  yet  little  less  than  a  prince  in  this  his  native  county  [Carmar¬ 
thenshire],  if  the  author  of  Proelia  Anglorum  may  not  be  believed — ‘Ricius  Thomas 
flos  Cambro-Brittanum.’  King  Henry  the  Seventh  will  himself  witness  his 
worth.  To  him,  lately  landed  at  Milford  Haven  with  contemptible  forces,  this 
Sir  Rice  repaired  with  a  considerable  accession  of  choice  soldiers,  marching  with 
them  to  Bosworth  field,  where  he  right  valiantly  behaved  himself.  That  thrifty 
King,  according  to  his  cheap  course  of  remuneration  (rewarding  gownsmen  in 
orders,  by  him  most  employed,  with  church  livings,  and  swordsmen  with  honour) 
afterwards  made  Sir  Rice  knight  of  the  order;  and  well  might  he  give  him  a  garter, 
by  whose  effectual  help  he  recovered  a  crown.’  [French  also  quotes  a  portion  of 
the  above  passage  from  Fuller. — Ed.] 

17.  Crew]  Steevens  says  this  expression  ‘sounds  but  meanly  in  modern  ears.’ 
According  to  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  I.  i)  it  was  originally  applied  almost 
exclusively  to  ‘military  reinforcements’;  his  earliest  quotation  of  ‘crew’  used  in 
this  sense  is  from  Rolls  of  Parliament,  1455.  That  the  word  was  later  used  deroga- 
tively  is  shown  by  many  examples  (Ibid.,  s.  v.  4),  the  earliest  dated  1570.  Shakes¬ 
peare  appears  to  have  used  ‘crew’  in  both  senses;  but  here  it  is,  I  think,  used 
for  military  reinforcements. — Ed. 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


371 


My  Letter  will  refolue  him  of  my  minde. 

Farewell.  Exeunt  23 


Aftus  Quintus .  Scena  Prima. 


Enter  Buckingham  with  Halberds ,  led 
to  Execution. 

Buc.  Will  not  King  Richard  let  me  fpeake  with  him?  4 


22.  My  Letter ]  Thefe  letters  Qq,  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam.  + ,  Dyce  ii, 
iii.  Those  letters  Cap. 

I.  Adlus  Quintus.  Scena  Prima.] 
Scene  continued,  Qq.  Act  IV.  Scene  vi. 
Johns,  conj.  Ran. 


Salisbury.  Pope.  An  open  Place.  Cap. 
The  Market  Place.  White. 

2,  3.  Enter... led]  Enter  Buckingham 
Qq.  Enter  the  Sheriff,  and  Guard,  with 
Buckingham  led.  Malone.  Enter  the 
Sheriff,  and  Buckingham,  with  halberds, 
led  Cam. +  . 


1.  Adtus  Quintus.  Scena  Prima.]  Johnson:  This  scene  should,  in  my  opinion, 
be  added  to  the  foregoing  Act,  so  the  Fourth  Act  will  have  a  more  full  and  striking 
conclusion,  and  the  Fifth  Act  will  comprise  the  business  of  the  important  day, 
which  put  an  end  to  the  competition  of  York  and  Lancaster.  Some  of  the  Quarto 
editions  are  not  divided  into  Acts,  and  it  is  probable,  that  this  and  many  other 
plays  were  left  by  the  author  in  one  unbroken  continuity,  and  afterwards  distributed 
by  chance,  or  by  what  seems  to  have  been  a  guide  very  little  better,  by  the  judge¬ 
ment  or  caprice  of  the  first  editors. — Malone:  In  of  this  play  there  is  no 
division  into  Acts  and  scenes.  It  is  highly  probable  that  the  divisions  in  the  Folio 
were  made  merely  to  suit  the  convenience  of  exhibition.  The  fourth  scene  of  the 
present  Act,  being,  I  believe,  the  largest  scene  in  any  of  these  plays,  it  was  perhaps 
thought  expedient,  on  that  account,  not  to  lengthen  the  Act  still  farther;  and  hence 
the  short  scene  between  Shirley  [Qu.  Stanley?]  and  Sir  Christopher  was  thrown 
into  the  Fourth  Act.  [In  the  Folio  the  present  Act  is  divided  into  but  two 
scenes;  the  first  ending  with  the  exit  of  Buckingham  to  execution.  This  note  by 
Malone  appears  for  the  first  time  in  the  Variorum  of  1821;  it  is  therefore  pos¬ 
sible  that  the  misprint  is  due  to  Boswell  and  not  to  Malone. — Marshall,  rather 
than  adopt  Johnson’s  suggestion  of  any  addition  to  Act  IV  suggests  that:  ‘It 
would  be  better  to  have  ended  the  Act  before  the  entrance  of  Ratcliffe  in  scene  iii, 
line  436.’ — We  may  learn  from  1.  13  that  the  date  of  the  present  scene  is  All  Soul’s 
Day,  that  is,  November  2;  the  year  is,  of  course,  1483. — Ed.] 

2,  3.  Buckingham  .  .  .  led  to  Execution]  Blakeway:  There  is  great  reason 
to  believe  that  Buckingham’s  execution  took  place  at  Shrewsbury;  but  this  is 
not  the  place  for  such  a  discussion. 

4.  Will  not  .  .  .  speake  with  him]  Buckingham  ‘made  earnest  sute  to  haue 
come  into  the  presence  of  the  same  king  Richard:  which  sute  if  he  might  haue 
obteined,  he  hauing  a  knife  secretlie  about  him,  would  have  thrust  it  into  the  bodie 
of  king  Richard,  as  he  had  made  semblance  to  kneele  downe  before  him.’ — Holin- 
shed:  Henry  VIII.  iii,  864.  Boswell-Stone,  p.  439.  Steevens  quotes  (under  the 
present  line)  the  passage  from  Hen.  VIII:  I,  ii,  194-199,  which  is  based  upon  the 
foregoing  account  in  Holinshed. — Ed. 


372 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  i. 


Sher.  No  my  good  Lord,  therefore  be  patient.  5 

Buc.  Hajiings ,  and  Edwards  children, Gray  &  Riuers , 

Holy  King  Henry ,  and  thy  faire  Sonne  Edward , 

Vaughan ,  and  all  that  haue  mifcarried 
By  vnder-hand  corrupted  foule  iniuftice, 

If  that  your  moody  difcontented  foules,  10 

Do  through  the  clowds  behold  this  prefent  houre , 

Euen  for  reuenge  mocke  my  deftrudlion. 

This  is  All-foules  day  (Fellow)is  it  not?  13 


5,  14.  Sher.]  Rat.  Qq. 

5  •  my  good  ~\  my  Qq.  good  my  Rowe,  + . 

6.  Gray  6°  Riuers]  Ff,  +  ,  Knt,  Coll. 
Dyce  i,  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Riuers ,  Gray  Qq 
et  cet. 


9.  vnder-hand~\  Ff, +  .  vnderhand Qq 
et  cet. 

13.  Fellow\  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  Sing. 
Wh.  i,  Hal.  fellowes  Qq  et  cet. 


5.  Sher.]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  i875~’76;  p.  71):  Another  difference 
[will  be  here  found]  between  the  stage-directions  of  the  Quarto  and  Folio  in  which, 
if  either  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  players,  it  must  be  that  of  the  Quarto.  From 
Buckingham’s  addressing  his  conductor  as  ‘fellow,’  1.  12,  I  should  infer  that  the 
reading  of  the  Folio  was  the  original:  for  considering  Buckingham’s  relations  with 
Ratcliffe,  he  would  have  called  him  by  his  name,  but  the  company  had  Ratcliffe 
ready  and  could  not  spare  another  man,  and  the  stage-direction  represented  the 
stage  arrangement. 

7.  Holy  King  Henry]  Douce  (ii,  38):  This  epithet  is  not  applied  without 
good  reason,  King  Henry  the  Sixth,  though  never  actually  canonised,  was  regarded 
as  a  saint,  and  miracles  were  supposed  to  have  been  performed  by  him.  In  some 
of  our  church  service  books  before  the  Reformation  there  are  prayers  which  are 
said  to  have  been  of  his  composition,  and  one  in  particular,  that  is  addressed  to 
him  is  entitled:  ‘A  prayer  to  holy  king  Henry.’ — Wright,  after  quoting  a  portion 
of  the  foregoing  note  by  Douce,  adds:  ‘Henry  VII.  found  the  expense  of  canonisa¬ 
tion  too  great.’ 

8.  miscarried]  Schmidt  (Lex.  s.  v.  2)  gives  many  examples  of  ‘miscarry’ 
used  in  the  sense  to  die,  to  perish;  compare  I,  iii,  20. 

12.  for  reuenge  mocke  my  destruction]  Vaughan  (iii,  136):  This  is  a  strange 
prayer,  both  as  regards  those  invoked  and  the  speaker  of  it  himself.  The  thought 
of  ‘holy  King  Henry’  mocking  a  sufferer  from  the  clouds  is  incongruous.  Nor 
is  such  a  request  of  such  a  sufferer  to  be  mocked  in  his  last  agonies  verisimilar. 
Neither  had  Buckingham  any  hand  in  King  Henry’s  or  his  fair  son’s  deaths.  He 
had  refused  consent  to  those  of  Edward’s  children.  Why  then  ‘revenge’?  Why 
even  ‘for  revenge’?  For  what  else  could  it  be,  but  for  revenge,  if  they  mocked 
at  all?  The  poet  wrote:  ‘ — for  revenge  mark  my  destruction.’  That  the  victim 
should  in  his  solitude,  invoke  spirits  to  mark  that  they  might  testify  to  the  cruel 
end  inflicted  on  him,  is  most  natural;  and  that  he  should  add  ‘even  for  revenge,’ 
particularly  if  he  meant  revenge  on  Richard,  is  natural.  But  that  excludes  ‘mock’ 
and  admits  mark. 

I3 •  Fellow]  Dyce:  In  the  Qq  the  word  fellows  is  addressed  by  the  Duke  to 
the  Guard  generally.  It  seems  rather  odd  that,  in  the  Folio,  Buckingham  should 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


373 


Sher.  It  is. 

Buc.  Why  then  Al-foules  day,  is  my  bodies  doomfday  1 5 
This  is  the  day,  which  in  King  Edwards  time 
I  wifh’d  might  fall  on  me,  when  I  was  found 
Falfe  to  his  Children,  and  his  Wiues  Allies. 

This  is  the  day,  wherein  I  wifht  to  fall 

By  the  falfe  Faith  of  him  whom  mod  I  trufted.  20 

This,  this  All-foules  day  to  my  fearfull  Soule, 

Is  the  determin’d  refpit  of  my  wrongs : 

That  high  All-feer, which  I  dallied  with, 

Hath  turn’d  my  fained  Prayer  on  my  head, 

And  giuen  in  earneft,what  I  begg’d  in  ieft.  25 

Thus  doth  he  force  the  fwords  of  wicked  men 
To  turne  their  owne  points  in  their  Mailers  bofomes. 

Thus  Margarets  curfe  falles  heauy  on  my  necke :  28 


14.  It  m.]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Sing.Wh.  i, 
Hal.  It  is  my  Lord  Qq  et  cet. 

15.  Why...doomfday]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

1 6.  which ]  that  Qq,  Cam.  + . 

17.  on ]  one  Q?. 

18.  and]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Ktly.  or 
Qi-j  et  cet. 

Wiues]  wife' s  Rowe  et  seq. 

20.  whom...truJled]  I  trujied  mojl 
Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

21.  This ,  this]  This  is  Q7Q8. 

21,  22.  this  All-foules... Is]  Om.  Pope, 
Han. 

22.  refpit]  defpite Q7Q8-  respect  Warb. 


23.  That]  What  Q2. 

All-feer]  al-feerQtQa.  all feer  Q4. 
which]  that  Qq,  Cam. +.  whom 
Cap.  Varr.  Ran. 

26.  fwords]  fword  Q3_8.  (fowrd  Q6). 

27.  owne]  Om.  Q3_s. 

in]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Wh.  i.  on  Qq 

et  cet. 

bofomes]  bofome  Qq,  Sta. 

28.  Thus]  How  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 
falles... necke]  is  fallen  vpon  my 

head  Qq,  Cam.  + .  falls. ..head  Pope,  + 
(-Var.’73). 


call  the  Sheriff  ‘fellow’;  and  as  odd  that  the  Sheriff,  in  his  next  speech,  should 
reply  so  curtly. — Marshall:  There  seems  no  reason  why  Buckingham  should 
address  the  question  to  all  the  guard.  ‘Fellow’  is  generally  used  by  a  superior 
to  an  inferior.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  Sheriff  might  resent  that  mode  of 
address;  in  which  case,  in  answering,  he  would  not  give  Buckingham  his  title. 

16.  This  is  the  day]  See  II,  i,  38-46. 

22.  the  determin’d  respit  of  my  wrongs]  Wright:  That  is,  the  fixed  period 
to  which  the  punishment  of  my  wrong-doing  is  postponed. 

,22.  respit]  Skeat  (Did.  s.  v.)  quotes  Cotgrave,  ‘respit,  a  respit,  a  delay,  a 
time  or  term  of  forbearance;  a  protection  of  one,  three,  or  five  years  granted  by  the 
prince  unto  a  debtor.’  He  then  adds:  ‘The  true  original  sense  is  regard,  respect 
had  to  suit  on  the  part  of  a  prince  or  judge,  and  it  is  mere  doublet  of  respect.’ 

22.  wrongs]  Johnson:  ‘Wrongs’  here  means,  wrongs  done,  or  injurious  practices. 

26,  27.  Thus  doth  he  .  .  .  Masters  bosomes]  Plumptre  (p.  159):  An  allusion 
to  Psalm  xxxvii,  15:  ‘Their  sword  shall  go  through  their  own  heart.’ 

28.  Margarets  curse]  See  I,  iff,  313-315. 


374 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  ii. 


When  he  (  quoth  fhe )  fhall  fplit  thy  heart  with  forrow, 
Remember  Margaret  was  a  Propheteffe  :  30 

Come  leade  me  Officers  to  the  blocke  of  ffiame, 

Wrong  hath  but  wrong,  and  blame  the  due  of  blame. 

Exeunt  Buckingham  with  Officers.  33 


Scena  Secunda. 


Enter  Richmond ,  Oxford ,  Blunt ,  Herbert ,  and 
others ,  with  drum  and  colours . 

Richm  Fellowes  in  Armes,  and  my  moft  louing  Frends 
Bruis’d  vnderneath  the  yoake  of  Tyranny,  5 

Thus  farre  into  the  bowels  of  the  Land, 

Haue  we  marcht  on  without  impediment ; 

And  heere  receiue  we  from  our  Father  Stanley 
Lines  of  faire  comfort  and  encouragement : 

The  wretched,  bloody,  and  vfurping  Boare,  10 


29.  fitall]  will  F3F4,  Rowe. 

31.  leade  me  Officers']  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 
Coll.  Sing.Wh.  i,  Hal.  Ktly.  firs ,  conuey 
me  Qq  et  cet. 

33.  Exeunt. ..Officers]  Om.  Qq. 

I.  Scena  Secunda.]  Scene  continued, 
Qq.  V,  i.  Ran. 

The  Camp.  Pope.  The  Camp  near 
Tamworth.  Han.  On  the  Borders  of 


Leicestershire.  A  Camp.  Theob. 

2.  3.  Oxford,  Blunt,  Herbert,  and 
others,]  Om.  Qq. 

3.  colours.]  trumpets.  Qq. 

4.  Fellowes]  Fellowe  Qs> 

10.  wretched]  recklesse  Coll,  ii,  iii 
(MS),  raged  Anon.  ap.  Cam.  wretchless 
Anon.  (Fraser’s  Maga.,  March,  1853  ;  p. 
252).  ruthless  Kinnear. 


6.  bowels  of  the  Land]  Murray  (TV.  E.  D.  s.  v.  Bowel,  4)  gives  examples 
of  this  word  used  for  ‘the  interior  of  anything;  heart,  centre.’ 

10.  wretched]  Walker  ( Crit .,  iii,  175)  marks  this  word  as  ‘palpably  wrong’; 
but  offers  no  emendation. — Dyce  (Gloss.,  s.  v.  wretched).  That  is,  vile,  hateful, 
utterly  bad.  ‘A  wretched  fellow,  Deplorate  malus.’ — Coles’s  Lat.  and  Eng.  Diet. — 
Collier  ( Notes  and  Emend.,  p.  335):  ‘Wretched’  is  an  epithet  that  has  little  com¬ 
parative  appropriateness,  while  the  word  recommended  in  manuscript  [ reckless ]  is 
especially  adapted  to  the  character  of  Richard,  and  we  may  readily  believe  it  to  have 
been  that  of  the  poet.  Reckless  was  of  old  frequently  spelt  wreckless,  and  hence,  per¬ 
haps,  the  misprint. — Singer  ( Sh .  Vind.,  176):  That  ‘wretched’  is  the  word  of  the 
poet,  and  therefore  the  most  ‘appropriate’  and  undoubted,  will  appear  from  the  use 
of  it  by  Roderigo  in  Othello,  v,  i,  41,  when  he  receives  his  death- wound  and  exclaims: 
‘Oh  wretched  villain.’ — Kinnear  (p.  271):  This  [defence  by  Singer]  is  a  mis¬ 
apprehension.  Roderigo  exclaims:  ‘O  villain  that  I  am,’  V,  i,  29,  and  later 
‘O  wretched  villain’ — the  dying  confessions  of  his  own  guilt,  and  that  his  miserable 
end  is  deserved:  this  was  before  Iago  stabbed  him;  he  was  only  wounded  by  Cassio, 


ACT  v,  sc.  ii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


375 


(That  fpoyl’d  your  Summer  Fields,  and  fruitfull  Vines )  1 1 

Swilles  your  warm  blood  like  wafh,  &  makes  his  trough 
In  your  embowel’d  bofomes  :  This  foule  Swine 
Is  now  euen  in  the  Centry  of  this  Ifle, 

Ne’re  to  the  Towne  of  Leicefter,  as  we  learne  :  15 

From  Tamworth  thither,  is  but  one  dayes  march. 

In  Gods  name  cheerely  on,  couragious  Friends, 

To  reape  the  Harueft  of  perpetuall  peace,  18 


11.  fpoyl' d]  spoils  Cap. 

Summer  Fields ]  Ff,  Cam.  + . 
fomerfieldes  Q,.  fommer-fields  Q3Q4- 
fommer  fields  Qs.  fummerfields  Qa  et 
cet. 

12.  Swilles... dr* makes]  Swill' d... and 
made  Pope,  Han. 


13.  embowel' d]  inboweld  Qq. 
bo/omes]  bofome  Q  Q8. 

14.  Is]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Hal. 
Lies  Qq  et  cet. 

euen]  e'en  Theob. +  . 

17.  cheerely]  cheere  Qa.  cheare  Q3_g. 
cheerly  Ff  et  seq. 


whom  he  knew  to  be  innocent. — Schmidt  (Lex.,  s.  v.  3),  hateful,  abominable, 
quotes  the  present  line  and  also:  ‘Such  wretched  hands  such  wretched  blood 
should  spill.’ — Lucrece,  999;  where  both  the  ‘hands’  and  the  ‘blood’  are  Tarquin’s. 
[Although  ‘  wretched  ’  may  be  open  to  criticism,  it  does  not  seem  to  be  so  far  astray 
as  to  demand  a  change  of  text. — Ed.] 

ii,  1?.  spoyl’d  .  .  .  Swilles]  Malone:  For  a  like  sudden  change  of  tense  com¬ 
pare:  ‘The  same  night  he  treacherously  stealeth  into  her  chamber,  violently 
ravished  her,’  etc. — Lucrece,  Argument. — Wright  compares  also:  ‘She  lifted  the 
princess  from  the  earth,  and  so  locks  her  in  embracing.’ — Wint.  Tale,  V,  ii,  83. 

13.  embowel’d]  Johnson:  That  is,  exenterated,  ripped  up,  alluding,  perhaps, 
to  the  Promethean  vulture:  or,  more  probably,  to  the  sentence  pronounced  in  the 
English  courts  against  traitors  by  which  they  are  condemned  to  be  hanged,  drawn, 
that  is,  ‘  embowelled,  ’  and  quartered.  [Both  Tollet  and  Blackstone  find  fault 
with  Johnson’s  use  of  this  word  drawn:  Tollet,  on  the  ground  that:  ‘Drawn  in  the 
sentence  pronounced  upon  traitors  only  signifies  to  be  drawn  by  the  heels  or  on 
a  hurdle  from  the  prison  to  the  place  of  execution.’  Blackstone  objects,  on  the 
ground  that  ‘ Drawn  in  the  sense  of  ‘embowelled’  is  never  used  but  in  speaking 
of  a  fowl.'  Murray  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  Draw  III,  50):  ‘To  draw  out  the  viscera 
or  intestines  of;  to  disembowel  (a  fowl,  etc.,  before  cooking,  a  traitor  or  other  criminal 
after  hanging.’  A  note  is  added:  ‘  In  many  cases  of  executions  it  is  uncertain  whether 
this  or  sense  4  [namely:  to  drag  (a  criminal)  at  a  horse’s  tail  to  the  place  of  exe¬ 
cution]  is  meant.  The  presumption  is  that  where  drawn  is  mentioned  after  hanged, 
the  sense  is  as  here,’  i.  e.,  embowelled. — Ed.] 

14.  Is]  Wright:  The  Quarto  reading  lies,  suits  better  with  the  figure  of  the 
boar. 

14.  Centry]  This  is,  possibly,  not  a  mere  misprint  for  centre;  Murray  ( N .  E. 
D.  s.  v.  Centry,  1.)  quotes,  beside  the  present  line,  one  other  example  of  this  word: 
‘This  country  is  scituate  as  it  were  in  the  centrie  or  midst  of  others. — Stubbs,  1583, 
Anatomy  of  Abuses,  II,  5.’  It  is,  perhaps,  noteworthy  that  in  both  passages  it  is 
used  to  designate  a  geographical  position. — Ed. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  SC.  ii. 


376 

By  this  one  bloody  tryall  of  fharpe  Warre. 

Oxf.  Euery  mans  Confcience  is  a  thoufand  men,  20 

To  fight  againft  this  guilty  Homicide. 

Her.  I  doubt  not  but  his  Friends  will  turne  to  vs. 

Blunt.Wz  hath  no  friends,  but  what  are  friends  for  fear, 

Which  in  his  deereft  neede  will  flye  from  him. 

Richm. All  for  pur  vantage,  then  in  Gods  name  march,  25 
True  Hope  is  fwift,  and  flyes  with  Swallowes  wings, 

Kings  it  makes  Gods,  and  meaner  creatures  Kings. 

Exeunt  Omnes.  28 

23.  what]  who  Qi-,,  Pope,-f,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Cam.  +  , 
Ktly. 

24.  deerejl]  greatejl  Qq,  Pope,  Han. 
flye]  Jhrinke  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 

25.  vantage, ]  aduantage ,  Q  Qg.  van¬ 
tage.  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 

26.  27.  True  Hope ...  Kings]  Om. 
Wordsworth. 

27.  makes]  make  Q,_s. 

28.  Exeunt  Omnes.]  Exit.  Qs.  Om. 

Qa-8- 


20.  Oxf.]  I.  Lor.  Qq.  Dorset.  Booth. 
men]  fwordes  Qq,  Pope,  + ,  Cap. 

Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Dyce,  Sta.  Cam. 
+  ,  Huds. 

21.  this  guilty}  that  bloudie  Qq.  that 
bloody  Pope,  +  ,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev. 
Varr.  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Cam. +.  that  guilty 
Sing.  Ktly. 

22.  Her.]  2.  Lor.  Qq. 

turne]  flie  Qq  {file  Q4).  fly 
Pope,  +  ,  Cam. +. 

23.  Blunt.]  3.  Lor.  Qq.  Ely.  Booth. 


22.  doubt  not  but]  Abbott  (§  122):  The  variable  nature  of  ‘but’  is  illustrated 
by  the  fact  that  ‘believe  not  but’  and  ‘doubt  not  but’  are  used  in  the  same  signifi¬ 
cation.  Compare:  ‘I’ll  not  believe  but  they  ascend  the  sky,’  I,  iii,  300. 

23.  24.  He  hath  no  friends  .  .  .  will  flye  from  him]  Boswell-Stone  (p. 
410):  Holinshed  copied  Halle’s  mention  of  some  who  joined  Richmond  during 
the  march  between  Lichfield  and  Tamworth,  but  altered  the  sense  of  the  next 
passage.  I  quote  this  latter  passage  as  it  stands  in  Holinshed  (iii,  754,  Halle, 
413):  ‘Diuerse  other  noble  personages,  which  inwardlie  hated  king  Richard 
woorse  than  a  tode  or  a  serpent,  did  likewise  resort  to  him  with  all  their  power  and 
strength,  wishing  and  working  his  destruction;  who  otherwise  would  haue  beene 
the  instrument  of  their  casting  away.’ — ‘Diverse  .  .  .  strength,’  is  Halle’s  trans¬ 
lation  of  Polydore  Vergil  (561).  Holinshed,  not  perceiving  that,  ‘did  .  .  . 
resort  to  him’  refers  to  Richmond,  added  the  words:  ‘wishing  and  working  .  .  . 
away.’  [Compare,  for  the  same  idea:  ‘Those  he  commands  move  only  in  com¬ 
mand,  Nothing  in  love.’ — Macbeth,  V,  ii,  19,  20;  also:  ‘And  none  serve  with  him 
but  constrained  things  Whose  hearts  are  absent  too.’ — Ibid..,  V,  iv,  13,  14.  The 
Fifth  Act  of  Macbeth,  from  the  second  scene  to  the  climax,  may,  in  general  arrange¬ 
ment  and  situation,  be  compared  to  this  earlier  treatment  of  the  subject  of  a  usurper 
conquered  by  a  foreign  invader. — Ed.] 

24.  deerest]  For  examples  of  ‘dear’  used  in  the  sense  of  extreme,  urgent,  see 
Shakespeare  passim. 


ACT  V,  SC.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


377 


[Scene  III.] 

Enter  King  Richard  in  Amies ,  with  Norfolke ,  Ratcliff e , 
and  the  Earle  of  Surrey. 

Rich. Here  pitch  our  Tent,  euen  here  in  Bofworth  field, 
My  Lord  of  Surrey,  why  looke  you  fo  fad  ? 

Sur.  My  heart  is  ten  times  lighter  then  my  lookes. 
Rich.  My  Lord  of  Norfolke. 

Nor.  Heere  moft  gracious  Liege. 

Rich.  Norfolke,  we  muft  haue  knockes  : 

Ha,  muft  we  not  ? 


Scene  continued,  QqFf.  Scene  ii. 
Ran.  Scene  hi.  Pope  et  cet. 

Bosworth  Field.  Pope. 

1.  in  Armes,  with]  Om.  Qq. 

2.  and... Surrey.]  Catesbie  with  others. 
Qq.  and  Catesby.  Pope,  Han. 

3.  Tent~\  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll,  i,  ii. 
tents  Qq  et  cet. 

Bofworth  field  ]  Bofworth-fdd  F^, 

Rowe,  Dyce. 

4.  My  ...yoii\  Whie,  how  now  Catesby, 
whie  lookfl  thou  Q,,  Pope,  Han.  ( lookefl 


Qa-s)- 

4.  fad~\  bad  QI# 

5.  Sur.]  Cat.  Qq,  Pope,  Han. 

6.  7.  As  one  line,  Steev.  et  seq. 

6.  My  ...  Norfolke~\  Norffolke ,  come 
hither  Qq  ( hether  Qf). 

Norfolke .]  Ff.  Norfolk!  Han.  Knt. 
Norfolk —  Theob.  et  cet. 

7,  8.  Nor.  Heere. ..Liege.  Rich.]  Om. 
Qq. 

8,9.  Norfolke...not  ? ]  Ff,  Rowe.  One 
line,  Qq  et  cet. 


Scene  iii]  The  Cowden-Clarkes  ( Sh .  Key,  p.  157):  We  take  occasion  to  point 
out  the  artistic  manner  in  which  Dramatic  Time  is  conducted  throughout  [this 
scene]  which  commences  with  allusion  to  the  setting  sun,  goes  on  with  sequential 
references  to  *  supper  time  ’  and  ‘  nine  oclock,  ’  to  the  stealing  on  of  the  hours  to  the 
approach  of  night,  to  the  reaching  ‘midnight,’  intermingled  with  frequent  anticipa¬ 
tions  of  to-morrow;  then  to  the  announcement  of  dawn  and  cock-crow  time,  with 
the  advance  of  morning;  and  finally  to  the  setting  in  of  day,  bringing  on  that  animated 
summons  to  immediate  attack:  all  together  conducing  to  impress  the  imagination 
with  the  thorough  naturalness  whereby  the  time  has  sped  from  overnight  to  next 
day  before  the  very  eyes  of  the  spectator. 

2.  Earle  of  Surrey]  See  Daniel  on  Text,  in  Appendix. 

3.  Tent]  Dyce:  The  Qq  here  have  tents,  and  rightly,  it  would  seem;  Richard 
speaking  of  the  tents  for  himself  and  his  officers.  Presently  he  speaks  of  his  own 
particular  tent;  ‘  Up  with  my  tent,’  1.  ii,  and  ‘  Up  with  the  tent,’  1.  18. 

4.  My  Lord  of  Surrey]  Capell  (ii,  190):  For  a  good  entrance  upon  their 
critical  office  in  it,  by  two  of  the  moderns  [Pope  and  Hanmer],  the  second  line  of 
the  scene  has  a  change  in  their  copies,  fetch’d  from  Quarto’s,  which  debases  Rich¬ 
ard’s  majesty  something,  in  making  him  address  a  dependant  too  familiarly:  the 
motive  seems  to  have  been,  to  purge  the  play  of  a  character  that  has  but  one 
single  line  in  it,  a  motive  most  insufficient:  nor  have  they  effected  their  purpose  if 
that  were  it,  for  the  character  stands  in  their  Dramatis  Personce. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


378 

Nor.  We  muft  both  giue  and  take  my  louing  Lord.  10 

Rich.  Vp  with  my  Tent,  heere  wil  I  lye  to  night, 

But  where  to  morrow  ?  Well,  all’s  one  for  that. 

Who  hath  defcried  the  number  of  the  Traitors  ? 

Nor.  Six  or  feuen  thoufand  is  their  vtmoft  power. 

Rich.  Why  our  Battalia  trebbles  that  account :  15 


10.  louing]  gracious  Qq,  Pope, +  , 
Cam.  + . 

11.  Tent,]  tent  there  Q,_6,  Cam. +  . 
[Tent  set  up.  Cap. 

12.  all’s]  all  is  Qq. 

[Aside.  Coll.  MS. 

13-  Traitors]  foe  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 


1 4.  vtmojl power]  greatejl  number  Qq. 

15.  Battalia]  battalion  Q,Q4Q,s» 
Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Var.  ’73,  Cam. +  . 
battailon  Q2Q3QS.  battalion  Q?Qa.  bat- 
tail  ion  Pope,  Han. 

trebbles]  trebels  Qq.  trebble  FjF^. 


12  to  morrow?  Well,  all’s  one  for  that]  Horn  (iii,  157):  How  differently 
does  the  word  ‘tomorrow  ’ — so  full  of  gloom — affect  the  deeper  nature  of  Macbeth! 
Both  rulers  had  need  to  dread  it;  the  fact  alone  that  Richard  begins  to  ask:  ‘But 
where  tomorrow?’  shows  that  he  is  half  lost,  there  remains  for  him  nothing  more 
than  the  present  moment,  torn  into  a  single  fragment  and  only  thus  to  be  enjoyed. 
That  alone  must  suffice  him.  But  the  words:  ‘all’s  one  for  that,’  with  which  he 
silences  his  own  speech,  are  paralysing — nay,  deadly  for  him.  His  complete  mental 
vigor  is  essential  to  his  existence  now,  and  a  single  moment  of  relaxation,  in  which 
he  is  not  complete  master  of  himself,  is  for  him  almost  ghastly  in  its  effect,  and 
can  lead  only  to  an  utter  loss  of  self-control. 

13.  descried]  Murray  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  iii):  6.  To  catch  sight  of,  especially 
from  a  distance,  as  the  scout  or  watchman  who  is  ready  to  announce  the  enemy’s 
approach;  to  espy. 

15.  Battalia]  Murray  (AT.  E.  D.  s.  v.):  2.  A  large  body  of  men  in  battle  array, 
a  marshalled  force  or  host,  whether  constituting  the  whole  of  an  army,  or  one  of 
its  great  divisions  or  battalions.  [The  present  line  quoted  as  the  earliest  use  of 
this  word.] — Pickersgill  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  113):  If  this  word  is  the 
plural,  can  any  one  suppose  that  Shakespeare  would  have  used  this  pedantic  form 
[see  Text.  Notes]?  If  any  one  can,  let  him  refer  to  Hamlet,  IV,  v,  78,  where  he 
will  find  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  Shakespeare  preferred  the  plural  in  s:  ‘When 
sorrows  come,  they  come  not  single  spies,  But  in  batallions.’ — Wright:  In  Hamlet, 
IV,  v,  79,  Fj  has:  ‘But  in  Battaliaes.’  [From  the  fact  that  ‘battalia’  is  here  used 
with  the  verb  in  the  singular,  and  Wright’s  reference  to  Hamlet,  may  we  not  hazard 
the  conjecture  that  Shakespeare  thought  ‘battalia’  was  the  singular  form  of  the 
word  ? — Ed.] 

15.  trebbles  that  account]  Malone:  Richmond’s  forces  are  said  to  have 
been  only  five  thousand;  and  Richard’s  army  consisted  of  about  twelve  thousand 
men.  But  Lord  Stanley  lay  at  a  small  distance  with  three  thousand  men,  and 
Richard  may  be  supposed  to  have  reckoned  on  them  as  his  friends,  though  the 
event  proved  otherwise. — Churchill  (p.  514):  In  The  True  Tragedy,  Richmond 
asks  Stanley:  ‘What  number  do  you  thinke  the  kings  power  to  be?’  to  which 
Stanley  replies:  ‘Mary  some  twentie  thousand  .  .  .  Richmond.  And  we  hardly 
fiue  thousand  ’  etc  ...  .  The  passages  may  well  be  entirely  independent  of 


act  v,  sc.  iii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

Befides,  the  Kings  name  is  a  Tower  of  flrength, 

Which  they  vpon  the  aduerfe  Fadtion  want. 

Vp  with  the  Tent  :  Come  Noble  Gentlemen, 

Let  vs  furuey  the  vantage  of  the  ground. 

Call  for  fome  men  of  found  direction  : 

Let’s  lacke  no  Difcipline,  make  no  delay, 

^or  Lords,  to  morrow  is  a  bufie  day.  Exeunt 

Enter  Richmond ,  Sir  William  Brandon,  Ox-  23 


379 

16 


20 


16.  the]  that  a  Q7Q8. 

1 7.  Fadlion]  partie  Qq,  Cam.  + ,  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Huds. 

18.  the  ...Noble]  my  tent  there,  valiant 
Qq.  my  tent  there  !  Valiant  Sta.  Cam.  +  . 

19.  of]  or  Qg. 


19.  ground  ]  field  Qq,  Sta.  Cam.  + . 
21.  lacke]  want  Qq,  Pope, +  ,  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam. +. 

22, 23.  Exeunt  Enter. . .  ]  Scene  changes 
to  another  part  of  Bos  worth  Field .  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns. 


each  other,  yet  it  is  not  without  some  significance  that  both  authors  have  given 
dramatic  value  to  the  bald  statement  of  their  source  by  making  it  reveal  the  natures 
of  the  leaders.  As  Shakespeare  gives  the  passage  to  Richard,  its  artistic  value  is 
heightened  by  the  ‘  dramatic  irony  ’  by  which  he  is  represented  as  thinking  his  name 
a  name  to  conjure  with. 

16.  the  Kings  name  is  a  Tower  of  strength]  Douce  (ii,  39) :  Borrowed  from 
Proverbs  xviii,  io:  ‘The  name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower.’ 

20.  sound  direction]  Johnson:  That  is,  true  judgment,  sound  military  skill. 

23.  Enter  Richmond]  R.  G.  White:  It  should  be  remembered  that  the  field 
was  represented  by  a  platform  about  as  large  as  the  floor  of  a  drawing-room  in  a 
modern  full-sized  house.  The  representatives  of  Richard  and  Richmond  were 
actually  within  easy  conversational  distance  of  each  other,  and  could  almost  have 
shaken  hands;  and  the  tents,  of  course,  occupied  the  same  relative  positions.  Such 
were  the  arrangements  of  our  primitive  stage.  We  now,  by  the  aid  of  scene- 
painters  and  carpenters,  and  at  the  sound  of  the  prompter’s  whistle,  separate  the 
representatives  of  York  and  Lancaster  by  certain  yards  of  coloured  canvas,  and 
our  stage  ghosts  address  themselves  to  Richard  only;  and  there  are  those  who, 
forgetting  that  the  stage  does  not,  never  can,  and  should  not  if  it  could,  represent 
the  facts  of  real  life,  think  that  we  have  gained  greatly  by  the  change.— Marshall: 
Grant  White’s  note  seems  to  us  a  very  foolish  one.  Certainly  the  effect  of  the 
modern  stage  arrangement  is  that  the  ghosts  ‘address  themselves  to  Richard  only’; 
but  we  believe  Shakespeare  would  have  been  the  first  to  recognise  the  fact  that 
the  dramatic  force  of  the  situation  is  thereby  increased,  and  that  his  poetry  only 
suffered  by  being  spoken  amid  surroundings  which  distracted,  by  their  ridiculous 
incongruity,  the  minds  of  the  audience  from  the  language  of  the  characters,  and 
the  incidents  represented.  It  would  be  just  as  sensible  to  regret  the  time  when 
perspective  was  unknown,  and  when  painters  necessarily  represented  objects, 
whether  near  or  distant,  in  the  same  plane,  as  to  affect  to  sigh  over  the  times  when 
the  want  of  any  stage  machinery  prevented  the  dramatist  from  having  appropriate 
scenes  for  the  action  of  his  play. 


380 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


ford, ,  and  Dorfet. 

Richni.  The  weary  Sunne,  hath  made  a  Golden  fet,  25 

And  by  the  bright  Tra<5l  of  his  fiery  Carre, 

Giues  token  of  a  goodly  day  to  morrow 

Sir  William  Brandon ,  you  fhall  beare  my  Standard : 

Giue  me  fome  Inke  and  Paper  in  my  Tent : 

lie  draw  the  Forme  and  Modell  of  our  Battaile,  30 


23,  24.  Sir  William. ..Dorfet.]  with  the 
Lordes,  &c.  Q,Q2.  with  the  Lords.  Qq. 
Drums.  Enter  on  the  other  Side  of  the 
Field,  Soldiers  of  Richmond’ s  Army,  and 
set  up  his  tent :  Then  enter  Henry,  Blunt, 
Oxford,  Herbert,  Sir  William  Brandon, 
and  Others.  Capell. 

25.  fet]  fete  QJt  feate  or  feat  Qq. 

26.  Tratfl]  Ff,  + .  tracke  Qq  et  cet. 

27.  token]  fignall  Qq,  Pope,  4-, 
Cam.  + . 

28.  Sir. ..you]  Where  is  Sir. ..he  Qq. 
In  Qq  Lines  29-32,  preceded  by: 

Farewell  good  Blunt,  are  transposed  to 
follow  1.  48;  lines  33,  34,  49-51  are 
omitted.  Rowe  follows  Ff.  Pope,  Theob. 


Han.  Warb.  Johns,  follow  the  Qq,  omit¬ 
ting  line  Farewell,  etc.  Varr.  Ran.  Mai. 
follow  Qq  in  transposing  these  four  lines, 
but  retain  11  33,  34,  49-51,  reading  these 
last  three  as  two  lines,  ending,  night... 
Gentlemen.  Steev.  Varr.  follow  Ff,  but 
read  11 49-51  as  two  lines,  ending,  night 
...  Getitlemen.  This  last  is  substantially 
the  reading  of  the  modern  edd,  with 
the  exception  of  Sta.,  who  transposes 
lines  29-34  to  follow  1.  5°- 

29,  30.  Paper. ..  Tent :  He]  paper;... 
tent  I'll  Pope, +  . 

30.  Battaile]  Ff.  battel  Rowe,  Pope, 
Theob.  i.  battle  Theob.  ii  et  seq. 


24.  Dorset]  Malone:  This  is  one  of  the  numerous  proofs  that  many  of  the 
alterations  in  Ft  were  made  by  the  players  and  not  by  Shakespeare  [see  Text.  Notes]’, 
for  Shakespeare  had  been  informed  by  Holinshed  that  Dorset  was  not  at  the  battle 
of  Bosworth:  Richmond  before  his  leaving  Paris  having  borrowed  a  sum  of  money 
from  the  French  King,  Charles  VIII.,  and  having  left  the  Marquis  of  Dorset  and 
Sir  John  Bouchier  as  hostages  for  the  payment. — Daniel  ( Introd .,  p.  xix)  after 
giving  the  substance  of  the  foregoing  note  by  Malone,  adds:  ‘I  should  suppose 
Dorset’s  name  to  be  struck  out  when  the  Qto  was  prepared.  All  these  variations, 
it  seems  to  me,  can  only  be  regarded  as  alterations  of  the  Folio  version,  and  there¬ 
fore,  till  evidence  to  the  contrary  is  forthcoming,  all  the  other  textual  variations  in 
the  two  versions  must  be  set  down  to  the  same  cause,  due  allowance  being,  of 
course,  made  for  error  and  corruption.’  [See  note  by  Daniel,  III,  i,  209.] 

26.  Tradt]  Skeat  {Did.  s.  v.  Track):  Confused  with  ‘tract’  in  old  authors;  also 
with  trace,  both  in  old  and  modern  authors.  Minsheu  has:  ‘A  trace  or  tracke; 
Cotgrave  explains  French  trac  by  ‘a  track,  tract,  or  trace.’  In  Rich.  II:  III,  iii,  66 
[and  also  in  the  present  line]  the  Ff  have  ‘tract’  for  track;  and  in  Timon,  I,  i,  50,  the 
word  ‘tract’  is  used  in  the  sense  of  trace.  These  words  require  peculiar  care, 
because  trace  and  ‘tract’  are  really  connected,  but  track  is  not  of  Latin  origin  at 
all,  and  therefore  quite  distinct  from  the  other  two  words.  From  French  trac, 
‘a  track,  tract,  or  trace,  a  beaten  way  or  path,  a  trade  or  course.’  The  sense  of 
‘beaten  track’  is  the  right  one,:  we  still  use  that  very  phrase. 

29-32.  Giue  me  .  .  .  our  small  Power]  Pope:  I  have  placed  these  lines  as 
they  stand  in  the  Qq  [See  Text.  Notes].  I  think  them  more  naturally  introduced 
when  he  is  retiring  to  his  tent;  and  considering  what  he  has  to  do  that  night. — 


ACT  V,  SC.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


381 

31 


Limit  each  Leader  to  his  feuerall  Charge, 

And  part  in  iuft  proportion  our  fmall  Power. 

My  Lord  of  Oxford,  you  Sir  William  Brandon , 

And  your  Sir  Walter  Herbert  ftay  with  me  : 

The  Earle  of  Pembroke  keepes  his  Regiment ; 

Good  Captaine  Blimt ,  beare  my  goodnight  to  him, 

And  by  the  fecond  houre  in  the  Morning, 

Defire  the  Earle  to  fee  me  in  my  Tent : 

Yet  one  thing  more  (good  Captaine )  do  for  me : 

Where  is  Lord  Stanley  quarter’d,  do  you  know  ?  40 

Blunt.  Vnleffe  I  haue  miftane  his  Colours  much, 

(Which  well  I  am  affur’d  I  haue  not  done) 

His  Regiment  lies  halfe  a  Mile  at  leaf! 

South,  from  the  mighty  Power  of  the  King. 

Richm.  If  without  perill  it  be  poffible,  45 

Sweet  Blunt ,  make  fome  good  meanes  to  fpeak  with  him 


32.  Power]  Jlrength  Qq,  Pope,  +  , 
Cam.  + . 

34.  your ]  you  QqFf. 

35.  Pembroke ]  Pembrooke  F3F4,Rowe. 
keepes]  keepe  Qq,  Pope,  + ,  Sta. 

39.  Captaine... me]  Blunt,  before  thou 
go'Jl  Qq,  Pope,  + ,  Sta. 


40.  do  you ]  doefl  thou  Qq,  Pope,  +  , 
Cam.+  (subs.) 

know?]  know.  Q  . 

41.  Colours ]  quarters  Warb. 

43.  lies]  liet  Q3Qs.  lieth  Q4Q6-s. 

46.  Sweet]  Good  captaine  Qq. 

make. ..with]  beare  my  good  night 
to  Qq,  Cam.  +  . 


Steevens:  The  Folio  is  by  far  the  most  correct  copy  of  this  play.  I  do  not  find 
myself  much  influenced  by  Pope’s  remark.— Dyce  (ed.  ii):  If  we  here  follow  the 
Qq  exactly,  we  lose  two  lines  [33,  34]  which  seem  to  form  a  necessary  portion  of 
this  speech;  and  if  we  only  so  far  follow  the  Qq  as  to  place  these  four  lines  lower 
down,  that  arrangement  involves  the  awkwardness  of  the  line:  ‘Sir  William  Bran¬ 
don,  you  shall  bear  my  standard,  ’  being  immediately  succeeded  by  ‘  My  Lord  of 
Oxford, — you  Sir  William  Brandon.’  I  have  therefore  adhered  to  the  Folio. 

31.  Limit]  That  is,  assign,  appoint. 

35.  Earle  of  Pembroke]  See  IV,  iv,  16. 

35.  keepes]  Murray  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  II.  33) :  To  stay  or  remain  in,  on,  or  at 
(a  place);  not  to  leave;  especially  in,  to  keep  one's  bed;  to  keep  the  house. 

35.  Regiment]  R.  G.  White:  ‘Regiment’  was  used  in  Shakespeare’s  time  to 
mean  any  considerable  body  of  men,  under  the  regiment  or  command  of  one  leader, 
and  without  reference  to  the  number  or  organization  of  the  troops  that  composed 
it. — Craigie  (TV.  E.  D.  s.  v.) :  A  considerable  body  of  troops,  more  or  less  per¬ 
manently  organized  under  the  command  of  a  superior  officer,  and  forming  a  defi¬ 
nite  unit  of  an  army  or  military  force;  since  the  seventeenth  century  the  specific 
name  of  the  largest  permanent  unit  of  the  cavalry,  infantry,  and  foot-guards  of 
the  British  Army. 

46.  Sweet  Blunt]  R.  G.  White:  This  affords  a  marked  instance  of  the  warm 


382 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


And  giue  him  from  me,  this  moft  needfull  Note.  47 

Blunt .  Vpon  my  life,  my  Lord,  lie  vndertake  it, 

And  fo  God  giue  you  quiet  reft  to  night. 

Richm.  Good  night  good  Captaine  Blunt :  50 

Come  Gentlemen, 

Let  vs  confult  vpon  to  morrowes  Bufineffe ; 

Into  my  Tent,  the  Dew  is  rawe  and  cold. 

They  withdraw  into  the  Tent. 


55 


Enter  Richard ,  Ratcliff e,  Norfolke ,  &  Cates  by. 
Rich.  What  is’t  a  Clocke  ? 

Cat.  It’s  Supper  time  my  Lord,  it's  nine  a  clocke. 


47.  Note]  fcrowle  Qq.  scroll  Sta. 
Cam.  4- . 

48.  life]  felfe  Ff,  Rowe. 

51.  [Exit  Blu.  Capell. 

52.  Let  vs]  Come  let  us  Qq. 

53.  Into  my~\  In  to  our  Q,_s,  Pope,  4-, 
Cam.  +  .  Into  our  Q6Q?.  in  our  Qg. 
In  to  my  Cap.  et  cet. 

Dew ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  Wh.  i, 
Hal.  aire  Qq  et  cet. 

54.  They. ..Tent.]  Om.  Qq. 

Act  v.  Scene  ii.  Irving. 

55.  Enter  Richard]  Enter  King  Rich¬ 
ard  Qq.  Scene  changes  back  to  King 
Richards  Tent.  Enter... Theobald.  Enter, 


57 

to  his  tent,  King  Richard  Capell. 

55.  Norfolke]  Norff.  Qq. 

&  Catesby]  Catesbie,  &c.  Qq. 
56—58.  As  two  lines,  ending:  Lord... 
night  Pope, +,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev. 
Var.  ’03,  ’13,  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh.  i, 
Sta.  Cam.  4- . 

56.  idt]  is  Qq. 

56,  57.  a  Clocke ]  o'clock  Theob.  et 
seq. 

57.  It’s  Supper. ..clocke"]  It  is  fixe  of 
the  clocke,  full /upper  time.  Qq.  {of  clocke 
Q,Q2 ) .  It  is  six  o’  clock  :  full  supper  time. 
Var.  ’21. 

nine]  sixe  Qq,  Dyce  i,  Sta. 


simplicity  of  phrase  with  which  men  addressed  each  other  in  Shakespeare’s  time 
Lieutenant  General  Scott,  with  all  his  courtesy,  did  not  probably  address  Genera. 
Worth  as  ‘  Sweet  Worth,’  on  the  eve  of  the  Battle  of  Churubusco;  and  this  difference 
in  manners  must  be  constantly  borne  in  mind  in  reading  Shakespeare’s  works — 
especially  his  Sonnets. 

46.  make  .  .  .  meanes]  Bradley  {N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  mean.  II.  10.  c):  To  take 
steps,  use  efforts.  [Compare  1.  287,  below.] 

53.  the  Dew  is  rawe  and  cold]  R.  G.  White:  To  well-informed  readers  the 
reading  of  the  Qq  [aire]  may  seem  preferable  on  account  of  its  conformity  to  the 
facts  of  nature;  but  such  conformity  is  not  to  be  sought  against  authority,  and 
in  disregard  of  the  belief  of  Shakespeare’s  time.  Even  now-a-days  there  are  many 
people  that  would  be  offended  if  they  were  called  ignorant,  and  who  consider  that 
the  danger  of  exposure  to  the  night-air  is  caused  by  the  falling  dews. 

57.  Supper  time  .  .  .  it’s  nine  a  clocke]  Steevens:  I  think  we  ought  to  read — 
six  instead  of  ‘nine.’  A  supper  at  so  late  an  hour  as  nine  o’clock,  in  the  year  1485, 
would  have  been  a  prodigy. — Douce  (ii,  39):  It  certainly  would,  and  even  at 
the  time  when  this  play  was  written,  the  period  to  which  the  criticism  more  justly 
belongs.  In  either  instance  there  was  a  reason  for  preferring  the  text  of  the  Qq, 
and  yet  the  unnecessary  alteration  is  retained. — Verplanck:  Harrison  tells  us 


act  v,  sc.  in.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


383 

58 


King.  I  will  not  fup  to  night, 

Giue  me  fome  Inke  and  Paper : 

What,  is  my  Beauer  eafier  then  it  was  ? 


60 


58.  59-  I  will. ..Paper]  One  line,  Qq. 

59.  Om.  Pope,  Han.  Cap. 


60.  What,]  What  ?  Q,.  What  Q?Q, 
Beauer]  Beuer  Qq. 


(Preface  to  Holinshed),  ‘the  nobilitie,  gentrie,  and  students  doo  ordinarilie  go 
to  dinner  at  eleven  before  noone,  and  to  supper  at  five,  or  betweene  five  and 
six,  at  afternoone.’  [Bk,  ii,  ch.  vi;  p.  166,  ed.  Furnivall.]  From  this  reason, 
Ido  not  doubt  that  the  Poet  wrote  originally ‘six  o’clock.’  But  on  revision 
he  saw  that  the  hour  would  not  agree  with  the  context.  The  Earls  of  North¬ 
umberland  and  Surrey  are  said  [1.  80]  to  have  gone  through  the  army  at  twi¬ 
light,  which  in  August,  in  that  part  of  England,  when  the  sunset  is  after  seven, 
would  be  much  later  than  the  time  assigned  for  this  scene.  Besides,  in  1.  25  above, 
the  ‘weary  sun’  had  already  ‘made  a  golden  set’;  and  this  scene  therefore  is  long 
after  six.  It  seems  then  that  the  Poet,  perceiving  that  the  whole  conduct  of  this 
scene  required  a  later  hour,  and  wishing  to  preserve  the  incident  of  Richard’s 
refusing  to  sup,  altered  the  time  to  what — though  not  the  common  supper-hour 
of  domestic  life — might  well  be  that  of  an  army,  which  had  just  encamped  after 
a  march.  The  insertion  of  six  confuses  the  time  of  all  this  act. — R.  G.  White: 
It  must  be  observed  that  the  speech  in  the  Folio  is  not  merely  that  of  the  Quarto 
with  ‘nine’  substituted  for  six:  it  shows  that  it  was  remoulded  on  the  revision  of 
the  play.  I  think,  with  Verplanck,  that  the  poet  wrote  originally  six  and  that  on 
revision  he  perceived  that  this  hour  would  not  agree  with  the  context  and  the 
situation.  [So  radical  a  change  as  six  to  ‘nine’  is  not  easily  explained;  Verplanck 
is  doubtless  right  that  ‘six  confuses  the  time  of  all  this  act.’  With  all  deference  I 
suggest  that  the  change  is  perhaps  due  to  an  interlinear  alteration  in  the  Quarto; 
thus:  Assuming  that  the  copy  for  the  Folio  was  prepared  from  a  printed  copy  of 
the  Quarto,  the  hour  in  the  former,  which  now  erroneously  appears  as  ‘nine,’ 
may  have  been  written  fix,  and  the  last  two  letters  may  have  been  mistaken  by 
the  copyist  for  the  Roman  numeral  ix,  and  enlarged  to  ‘nine.’  Furthermore,  as 
aiding  the  copyist’s  mistake,  and  somewhat  accounting  for  the  confusion,  we  have 
an  s  preceding  the  ix  in  the  j  of  ‘it’s.’  That  numbers  were  sometimes  thus 
printed  is  seen  in  a  passage  of  the  present  play:  II,  iii,  24,  where  ‘nine  months’ 
is  printed  in  the  Qq  ‘ix  months.’ — Ed.] 

59.  Giue  me  some  Inke  and  Paper]  Capell  (ii,  190) :  Words  proceeding  from 
printers  in  all  likelihood,  from  having  their  eye  caught  by  line  opposite:  useless 
they  are,  undoubtedly,  to  say  no  more  of  them;  for  the  matters  spoke  of  in  them 
are  enquir’d  for  afterwards,  in  fitter  place,  and  with  fitter  expressions. 

60.  Beauer]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  2):  The  lower  portion  of  the  face-guard 
of  a  helmet,  when  worn  with  a  visor;  but  occasionally  serving  the  purpose  of  both 
[derived  from  Old  French  baviere,  a  child’s  bib,  from  have,  saliva].  ‘In  the  four¬ 
teenth  century  applied  to  the  moveable  face-guard  of  the  basinet,  otherwise  called 
viziere,  ventaile,  or  aventaile.  In  the  early  part  of  the  fifteenth  century  the  beaver 
appears  formed  of  overlapping  plates,  which  can  be  raised  or  depressed  to  any 
degree  desired  by  the  wearer.  In  the  sixteenth  century  it  again  became  confounded 
with  the  visor,  and  could  be  pushed  up  entirely  over  the  top  of  the  helmet,  and 
drawn  down  at  pleasure.’ — Planche. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


384 

And  all  my  Armour  laid  into  my  Tent?  61 

Cat.  It  is  my  Liege  :  and  all  things  are  in  readineffe. 

Rich.  Good  Norfolke,  hye  thee  to  thy  charge, 

Vfe  carefull  Watch,  choofe  trufty  Centinels, 

Nor.  I  go  my  Lord.  65 

Rich.  Stir  with  the  Larke  to  morrow,  gentle  Norfolk. 

Nor.  I  warrant  you  my  Lord.  Exit 

Rich.  Ratcliffc. 

Rat.  My  Lord. 

Rich.  Send  out  a  Purfuiuant  at  Armes  70 

To  Stanleys  Regiment  :  bid  him  bring  his  power 
Before  Sun-rifing,  leaft  his  Sonne  George  fall 
Into  the  blinde  Caue  of  eternall  night. 

Fill  me  a  Bowie  of  Wine  :  Giue  me  a  Watch,  74 


63-  charged]  charge,  away  Cap.  proper 
charge.  Wordsworth. 

64.  Centinels\  centinell  Qq. 

68-70.  As  one  line,  Ktly. 

68.  Ratcliffe]  Catesbie  Qq,  Pope, +  , 
Cam.  +  ,  Coll.  iii. 


69,  70.  As  one  line,  Steev.  et  seq. 

70.  Purfuiuant~\  Purfiuant Qt.  Pur- 
feuant  Q^. 

73.  [Exit  Catesby.  Cam. +. 

74.  Watch ]  watch-light  Ktly. 

[To  Ratcliff.  Pope,  to  Cat.  Capell. 


60.  easier  then  it  was]  See  note  by  Gervinus,  IV,  iii,  200. 

68-70.  Ratcliffe  .  .  .  Send  out  a  Pursuiuant]  R.  G.  White:  Whoever  was 
commanded  by  the  King  to  ‘send  out  a  pursuivant,’  most  certainly  went  out 
and  did  it  immediately;  and  we  know  from  Richard’s  speeches  afterwards,  both 
in  Qq  and  Ff,  that  Ratcliffe  remained  behind.  Both  Qq  and  Ff  too,  have  the  stage- 
direction,  when  the  King  retires:  'Exit  Ratcliffe , ’  only.  It  was  Catesby,  therefore, 
whom  Richard  sent  out  for  a  pursuivant;  and  the  Quarto  gives  us  the  correct 
reading.  The  error  was  caused  by  a  trifling  error  in  the  Qq,  in  which  the  abbre¬ 
viated  names  used  as  prefixes  to  the  speeches  of  these  characters  are  Cat.  and  Rat., 
so  that  the  printing  of  R  for  C  gave  the  reply  to  Ratcliffe.  To  correspond  with 
this,  some  one  who  had  to  do  with  the  Folio,  either  in  the  printing-office  or  before 
it  went  there,  made  the  King  call  Ratcliff. — Spedding  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76; 
p.  31)  explains  the  discrepancy  in  the  Qq,  and  its  apparent  correction  in  the 
Folio,  in  much  the  same  way  as  does  White. — Pickersgill  {Op.  cit.  p.  97),  after 
quoting  part  of  Spedding’s  remark,  adds:  ‘It  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  suppose 
that  Shakespeare  would  amend  the  error  of  the  Quarto  as  it  is  amended  in  the 
Folio;  but  there  is  no  difficulty  whatever  in  believing  that  a  corrector  other  than 
Shakespeare  might  do  so,  when  we  observe  that  so  judicious  an  editor  as  Malone 
adopts  without  comment  the  reading  of  the  Folio.  I  cannot  think  that  the  printer 
of  the  Folio,  not  one  of  the  most  intelligent  of  his  class  (as  we  know  from  other 
evidence),  would  attempt  an  emendation  of  a  reading  which  had  passed  muster 
with  all  the  printers  of  the  Qq.’ 

73.  blinde]  Murray  {N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  Ill):  6.  Enveloped  in  darkness;  dark, 
obscure. 

74.  Giue  me  a  Watch]  Johnson:  A  ‘watch’  has  many  significations,  but  I 


act  v,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


385 

75 


Saddle  white  Surrey  for  the  Field  to  morrow  : 

Look  that  my  Staues  be  found,  &  not  too  heauy.  Ratcliff. 

Rat.  My  Lord. 

Rich.  Saw’ft  the  melancholly  Lord  Northumberland  ?  78 

76.  Ratcliff  ]  Ratliff  Qq  (throughout).  78.  Saw' JF\  Ff,  Rowe.  Sawjl  thou 

As  separate  line,  Rowe  ii  et  seq.  Qx.  Sawejl  thou  Q^.  Saw' st  thou  Pope 

et  seq. 

should  believe  that  it  means  in  this  place  not  a  sentinel,  which  would  be  regularly 
placed  at  the  king’s  tent;  nor  an  instrument  to  measure  time,  which  was  not  used 
in  that  age;  but  a  watch-light,  a  candle  to  burn  by  him;  the  light  that  afterwards 
‘burnt  blue’;  yet  a  few  lines  after,  he  says:  ‘Bid  my  guard  watch,’  which  leaves 
it  doubtful  whether  ‘watch’  is  not  here  a  sentinel.  [Johnson  does  not  include  this 
signification  of  ‘watch,’  i.  e.,  a  watch-candle,  among  others  in  his  Dictionary  pub¬ 
lished  in  1755,  about  ten  years  before  the  notes  on  the  present  play. — Ed.] — 
Steevens:  The  word  ‘give’  shows,  I  think,  that  a  watch-light  was  intended. 
I  have  seen  these  candles  represented  with  great  nicety  in  some  of  the  pictures  of 
Albert  Diirer.  The  candle  being  marked  out  into  sections,  each  of  which  was  a 
certain  portion  of  time  in  burning,  it  supplied  the  place  of  the  more  modern  instru¬ 
ment  by  which  we  measure  the  hours.  Barett  ( Alvearie ,  1580)  mentions  watching 
lights  or  candles.  [Steevens  adds  four  quotations,  but  they  are  all  of  a  date  later 
than  1600,  and  in  each  example  the  words  are  ‘watching-light’  and  not  ‘watch/ 
That  Richard’s  camp-outfit  included  a  clock  which  struck  the  hours,  we  are  posi¬ 
tively  assured  in  1.  316;  does  it  not  seem,  therefore,  somewhat  superfluous  for  him 
to  ask  for  so  primitive  an  instrument  as  a  candle  wherewith  to  measure  the  pas¬ 
sage  of  the  time?  Johnson’s  second  thought  seems  to  me  more  just,  that  ‘watch’ 
here  means  a  sentinel. — Ed.] 

75.  white  Surrey]  ‘Richard,  (inuironed  with  his  gard)  with  a  frowning  counte¬ 
nance  and  cruell  visage,  mounted  on  a  great  white  courser,  .  .  .  entered  the  towne 
of  Leicester  after  the  sunne  set.’ — Holinshed. — W.  Strunk,  Jr.  (MS  note):  White 
steeds  have  sacred  associations  (Tacitus,  Germania,  ch.  10),  are  reserved  for  royalty, 
and  are  the  best  of  three  colors  in  times  of  need:  see  Lady  Maisry  (Child,  iii,  p.  1 16), 
and  Fair  Mary  of  Livingston  {Ibid.,  20-22).  Tam  Lin,  a  favourite  of  the  queen, 
too,  rides,  not  the  black  nor  the  brown,  but,  a  milk-white  steed:  27-28.  ‘Dem 
Pabst  is  gesetzt’  ran  an  old  regulation,  ‘dass  er  reyte  auf  einem  blanckem  Pferde.’ 
For  a  deeper  glimpse,  see  Hehn:  Kulturpflanzen  und  Haustiere,  pp.  44  f.,  478. — 
Gummere,  Old  English  Ballads,  p.  351,  note. 

75.  Surrey]  Brewer  {Diet,  of  Phrase ,  &c.,  s.  v.):  Surrey  is  the  Syrian  horse, 
as  Roan  Barbary  in  Richard  II.  is  the  Barbary  horse  or  barb. 

76.  Staues]  Johnson:  That  is,  the  wood  of  the  lances. — Steevens:  As  it  was 
usual  to  carry  more  lances  than  one  into  the  field,  the  lightness  of  them  was  an  object 
of  some  consequence.  Hall  says  that,  at  the  marriage  of  Mary  Tudor  with  the 
King  of  France,  ‘a  gentleman  called  Anthony  Bownarme  which  came  into  the 
feld  all  armed,  and  on  his  body  brought  in  sight,  x.  speres,  that  is  to  wyt.  iii.  speres 
set  in  every  styroppe  forward,  and  vnder  euery  thygh.  ii.  speres  vpwarde,  and 
vnder  his  lefte  arme  was  on  spere  backeward,  and  the.  x.  in  his  hand.’  [ — p.  573, 
ed.  1809.] 

78.  melancholly  Lord  Northumberland]  Malone:  Richard  thus  calls  him 

25 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


386 

Rat.  Thomas  the  Earle  of  Surrey,  and  himfelfe, 

Much  about  Cockfhut  time,  from  Troope  to  Troope  80 

Went  through  the  Army,  chearing  vp  the  Souldiers. 

King.  So,  I  am  fatisfied  :  Giue  me  a  Bowie  of  Wine, 

I  haue  not  that  Alacrity  of  Spirit, 

Nor  cheere  of  Minde  that  I  was  wont  to  haue. 

Set  it  downe.  Is  Inke  and  Paper  ready?  85 

80.  about  ]  like  Q^g.  84.  cheere]  cleare  Q,Q8. 

82.  So,  I  am ]  I' m  Pope,  Han.  I  am  [Wine  brought.  Cap. 

Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  85.  Set]  There,  set  Pope, +  .  So,  set 

Steev.  Varr.  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13. 

Bowie ]  boule  Qr. 


because  he  did  not  join  heartily  in  his  cause. — The  Cowden-Clarkes:  Richard’s 
calling  Northumberland  ‘melancholy,’  and  his  previously  asking  Surrey  ‘Why 
look  you  so  sad?’  conduce  to  show  the  downcast,  unalert  countenances  of  those 
around;  who  served  him  reluctantly,  and  because  they  were  compelled  to  do  so. — 
Marshall:  Malone’s  explanation  is  not  satisfactory.  No  similar  use  of  the  word 
occurs  anywhere  else.  It  looks  very  much  as  if  it  was  not  the  epithet  the  author 
really  used.  It  may  possibly  mean  suspicious.  [Bradley  (IV.  E.  D .)  does  not 
give  any  example  wherein  ‘melancholy’  means  suspicious. — Ed.] 

80.  Cockshut  time]  Murray  (IV.  E.  D  s.  v.)  1.  Twilight.  Perhaps  the  time 
when  poultry  go  to  roost,  and  are  shut  up;  though  some  think  it  is  equivalent  to 
cockshoot,  and  refers  to  the  time  when  wood-cocks  ‘shoot’  or  fly. — Ibid.  (s.  v.  cock- 
shoot.  A  broad  way,  or  glade  in  a  wood,  through  which  woodcocks,  etc.,  might 
dart  or  ‘ shoot, ’so  as  to  be  caught  by  nets  stretched  across  the  opening.  The 
statements  that  the  net  itself  was  the  cockshoot,  and  that  the  proper  spelling  is 
cockshut,  appear  to  be  dictionary  blunders,  founded  on  a  misunderstanding  of  the 
word  as  something  to  ‘  shut  ’  in  or  enclose  the  birds.  [Whatever  be  the  derivation, 
it  is  evident  that  ‘  cockshut  time  ’  here  means  twilight. — Ed.] 

82.  So,  I  am  .  .  .  Bowie  of  Wine]  Malone:  In  speeches  of  this  description, 
where  minute  orders  are  given  about  trifles,  the  poet  appears  to  have  paid  little 
attention  to  metre,  and  to  have  interposed  sentences  of  mere  prose,  of  which  I  have 
given  several  examples  in  the  course  of  this  tragedy.  [That  Shakespeare  again 
and  again  has  disjointed  lines  we  all  know;  but  that  they  are  ‘mere  prose’  is 
not  so  evident.  They  are  not  invariably,  but  very  frequently,  disjointed  rhythmic 
prose,  as  here:  ‘So  I7  |  am  sat  |  isfied,’  Then  there  is  a  pause,  a  mora  vacua, 
and  there  follows:  ‘Give  me  |  a  bowl  |  of  wine.’ — Ed.] 

83.  I  haue  not  that  Alacrity  of  Spirit]  ‘ — he  pronosticated  before  the  doubt- 
full  chaunce  of  the  battayle  to  come,  not  vsing  the  cheerefulnesse  and  mirth 
of  minde,  and  of  countenance  as  he  was  accustomed  to  doe  before  he  came  towarde 
the  battayle.’ — Grafton,  ap.  More,  p.  219.  This  depression  on  the  part  of  Richard 
is,  however,  mentioned  as  following,  not  preceding,  his  ‘dreadfull’  and  ‘terrible 
dreame.’  Booth  (p.  94)  gives,  after  this  line,  the  following  stage-direction:  ‘  The 
drum-roll  and  trumpets  cease  gradually:  tremulo  music  pianissimo  begins  and  is 
kept  up  through  the  dream.  After  a  few  vivid  flashes  0}  light  the  scene  becomes 
illuminated  and  shows  the  ghosts  and  the  distant  tents  of  Richmond.' — Ed. 


act  v,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


387 

86 


Rat.  It  is  my  Lord. 

Rich.  Bid  my  Guard  watch.  Leaue  me. 

Ratcliffe,  about  the  mid  of  night  come  to  my  Tent 
And  helpe  to  arme  me.  Leaue  me  I  fay.  Exit  Ratclif. 

Enter  Derby  to  Richmond  in  his  Tent.  go 

Der .  Fortune,  and  Vi6tory  fit  on  thy  Helme. 

Rich.  All  comfort  that  the  darke  night  can  affoord, 

Be  to  thy  Perfon,  Noble  Father  in  Law.  93 


87,88.  Bid... Ratcliffe]  One  line,  Dyce, 
Cam. +  ,  Huds. 

87.  Leaue]  and  leave  Pope,  +  ,  Cap. 
Var.  ’78,  ’85,  Ran.  Now  leave  me  Ktly. 
So  leave  me  Ktly  conj. 

88.  Ratcliffe]  Om.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr. 

89.  arme  me]  arme  F3F^  (subs. )  anti 
me,  Ratcliff  Cap.  Var. ’78,  ’85,  Ran. 

Leaue  me]  Leave  me  now  Pope,  + . 
Exit  Ratclif.]  King  Richard  re¬ 
tires  into  his  Tent.  Exeunt  Ratcliff  and 
Catesby.  Malone.  Exeunt  Ratcliff  and 
the  other  attendants.  Cam.  + . 


Scene  iii.  Pope  i.  Scene  iv.  Rich¬ 
mond’s  Tent.  Pope  ii,+  (  —  Var. ’73). 
Richard  lies  down  and  sleeps.  Enter... 
(couch).  Coll.  (MS). 

90.  Enter. ..Tent.]  Richmond’s  Tent 
opens;  discovering  him,  and  his  friends 
conferring :  to  them  Stanley.  Capell  et 
seq.  (subs.) 

Derby]  Stanley  Pope,  -I-  ,Cap.  Var. 

Mai. 

91.  Jit]  RtQt- 

93.  Father  in  Law]  Father-in-Law 


87.  Bid  my  Guard  watch]  Rolfe:  If  this  is  not  the  order  for  the  guard,  it  is 
a  message  to  the  guard  that  would  be  set  at  the  royal  tent,  as  a  matter  of  course, 
admonishing  them  to  be  vigilant. 

89.  Leaue  me  I  say]  Hazlitt  ( Sh .  Char.,  p.  150):  Kean’s  manner  of  bidding 
his  friends  ‘Good  night,’  after  pausing  with  the  point  of  his  sword,  drawn  slowly 
backward  and  forward  on  the  ground,  as  if  considering  the  plan  of  the  battle  next 
day,  is  a  particularly  happy  and  natural  thought. 

92,  93.  All  comfort  ...  Be  to  thy  Person]  Steevens:  Compare:  ‘The  best 
and  wholesomest  spirits  of  the  night  Envelop  you.’ — Meas.  for  Meas.,  IV,  ii,  76. 

93.  Father  in  Law]  French  (p.  230):  Shakespeare,  who  like  other  writers 
was  not  particular  in  applying  correct  terms  of  relationship,  makes  Richmond 
speak  of  Stanley  as  his  ‘father-in-law,’  whereas  he  was  step-son  to  him,  and 
became  son-in-law  to  Edward  IV.  at  his  marriage  with  Elizabeth  of  York.  [Shakes¬ 
peare  is,  however,  in  this  respect  no  more  careless  than  many  writers  both  of  his 
time  and  later.  According  to  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  father-in-law),  this  term 
was  used  equally  to  designate  the  father  of  a  husband  or  wife,  and  the  relationship 
resulting  from  marriage  of  a  mother,  known  as  step-father.  Compare,  for  example, 
in  the  present  play,  where  Clarence  speaks  of  Warwick  as  his  ‘great  father-in-law’ 
(I,  iv,  50).  ‘The  step-  in  stepson  and  the  like  is  the  adjective  stedp,  “destitute,” 
“bereaved,”  so  that  stepson  or  stepchild,  is  the  same  as  orphan,  which  comes  from 
the  Greek  for  “bereaved.”  Stepfather  and  stepmother  are  therefore  terms  which 
could  only  have  arisen  after  the  step-  had  lost  its  proper  sense.’ — Greenough  & 
Kittridge  (p.  21 1). — Ed.] 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


388 

Tell  me,  how  fares  our  Noble  Mother? 

Der.  I  by  Attourney,  bleffe  thee  from  thy  Mother,  95 

Who  prayes  continually  for  Richmonds  good  : 

So  much  for  that.  The  filent  houres  fteale  on, 

And  flakie  darkeneffe  breakes  within  the  Eaft. 

In  breefe,  for  fo  the  feafon  bids  vs  be, 

Prepare  thy  Battell  early  in  the  Morning,  100 


94.  how  fares ]  how  fares  it  with  Han. 
Cap.  I pray  how  fares  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS). 
how  now  fares  Vaughan  (iii,  144). 

Noble']  Q3-8,  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt. 
louing  QiQ2  et  cet. 

Mother  l]  mother  now  ?  Ktly  conj. 


97.  that.  The]  that  the  Q,Q2.  that: 
the  Q3-8  (that,  the  QJ.  that — The  Pope, 
+  ,Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Coll.  Dyce, 
Wh.  i,  Plal.  Sta.  (subs.) 

9S.  And]  A  Q,Q8. 


94.  Tell  me  .  .  .  Noble  Mother]  Churchill  (p.  514):  In  The  True  Tragedy, 
‘Enters  a  Messenger’  from  the  ‘mother  queene’  with  a  letter  from  Richmond’s 
mother,  Margaret.  Richmond’s  first  words  are:  ‘Welcome  my  friend,  how  fares 
our  mother  &  the  rest?’  Is  it  mere  chance  that  makes  Richmond’s  greeting  in 
Richard  III:  ‘Tell  me,’  etc.?  There  is  nothing  in  the  chronicle  story  to  hint  at 
this  solicitude  on  Richmond’s  part  for  his  mother. 

97.  The  silent  houres  steale  on]  The  Cowden-Clarkes:  This  is  one  of 
Shakespeare’s  expedients  for  marking  dramatic  time.  The  present  allusion  to 
approaching  dawn,  just  between  Richard’s  late  words:  ‘about  the  mid  of  night,’ 
and  Richmond’s  subsequent  words:  ‘lest  leaden  slumber  peize  me  down  tomorrow’ 
serves  to  prepare  the  spectator’s  imagination  for  the  supposed  passing  of  the  period, 
during  this  scene,  from  sunset  to  sunrise. 

98.  flakie  darkenesse  breakes  within  the  East]  Marshall:  The  accuracy 
of  this  description  will  be  recognised  by  any  one  who  has  ever  watched  the  break  of 
dawn,  in  the  country,  long  before  the  sun  rises  above  the  horizon  after  a  starless 
night.  The  mass  of  darkness  begins  to  break  into  irregular  pieces  shaped  like 
snow-flakes. — [It  is,  perhaps,  interesting  to  compare  other  descriptions  of  sunrise, 
by  Shakespeare:  ‘look,  the  gentle  day  Before  the  wheels  of  Phoebus  round  about 
Dapples  the  drowsy  east  with  spots  of  grey.’ — Much  Ado,  V,  iii,  25;  ‘The  grey-eyed 
morn  smiles  on  the  frowning  night,  Chequering  the  eastern  clouds  with  streaks  of 
light,  And  fleckeld  [Qq.]  darkness  like  a  drunkard  reels  From  forth  day’s  path 
and  Titan’s  fiery  wheels.’ — Rom.  Jul.,  II,  iii,  1;  ‘look,  love,  what  envious  streaks 
Do  lace  the  severing  clouds  in  yonder  east:  Night’s  candles  are  burnt  out,  and 
jocund  day  Stands  tiptoe  on  the  misty  mountain  tops.’ — Ibid.,  Ill,  v,  7;  ‘yon  gray 
lines  That  fret  the  clouds  are  messengers  of  day.’ — Jul.  Cces.,  II,  i,  103;  ‘look,  the 
morn,  in  russet  mantle  clad,  Walks  o’er  the  dew  of  yon  high  eastward  hill.’ — 
Hamlet,  I,  i,  166;  ‘Full  many  a  glorious  morning  have  I  seen  Flatter  the  mountain 
tops  with  sovereign  eye,  Kissing  with  golden  face  the  meadows  green,  Gilding 
pale  streams  with  heavenly  alchemy;  Anon  permit  the  basest  clouds  to  ride  With 
ugly  rack  on  his  celestial  face,  And  from  the  forlorn  world  his  visage  hide,  Stealing 
unseen  to  west  with  this  disgrace.’ — Sonnet,  xxxiii.  ‘The  sun  ariseth  in  his  majesty; 
Who  doth  the  world  so  gloriously  behold  That  cedar-tops  and  hills  seem  burnish’d 
gold.’ — Ven.  &  Ad.,  I  856. — Ed.] 


act  v,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


389 


And  put  thy  Fortune  to  th’Arbitrement  101 

Of  bloody  ftroakes,  and  mortall  flaring  Warre  : 

I,  as  I  may,  that  which  I  would.  I  cannot, 

With  beft  aduantage  will  deceiue  thet  ime, 

And  ayde  thee  in  this  doubtfull  fhocke  of  Armes.  105 

But  on  thy  fide  I  may  not  be  too  forward, 

Leaft  being  feene,  thy  Brother,  tender  George 
Be  executed  in  his  Fathers  fight. 

Farewell  :  the  leyfure,  and  the  fearfull  time 

Cuts  off  the  ceremonious  Vowes  of  Loue,  1 10 

And  ample  enterchange  of  fweet  Difcourfe, 

Which  fo  long  fundred  Friends  fhould  dwell  vpon: 

God  giue  vs  leyfure  for  thefe  rites  of  Loue. 

Once  more  Adieu,  be  valiant,  and  fpeed  well. 

Rickm.  Good  Lords  conduct  him  to  his  Regiment:  115 

lie  ftriue  with  troubled  noife,  to  take  a  Nap, 


101.  t/i’]  Ff,  +  ,  Cap.  the  Qq  et  cet. 
A rbitrement  ]  arbritrement  Q3_s. 

arbiterment  Q^g. 

102.  mortall flaring]  Ff,  +  ,Varr.  Mai. 
mortal-fearing  Cap.  mortal-scaring  Mai. 
conj.  mortal-stabbing  Sta.  conj.  mortal- 
-daring  Anon.  ap.  Cam.  mortal-baring 
Cartwright,  mortal-staring  Steev.  et  cet. 

103.  /,  «j]  I  as  Qq. 

107.  Brother ,  lender]  brother  tender 
Q,-s.  tender  brother  Q6Q,Q8. 

108.  his  Fathers  fight]  thy  fathers 

fight  Q4- 

109.  the  leyfure]  The  lack  of  leisure 


Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

1 12.  fo  long  fundred]  Ff,Q7Q8,  Rowe. 
fo  long f undried  Q,Q2-  fo  long fundired 
Q3Q4.  so  long-sundred  Pope,  Han.Warb. 
so-long-sundred  Theob.  Johns.  Var.  ’73, 
Dyce,  Huds.  fo  long  funder ed  Q5Q6  et 
cet.  (subs.) 

113.  vs.,  for]  on,., of  Q,Q8* 
rites]  rights  Qq. 

1 15.  Lords]  Lord  Q4. 

1 16.  7 vith  troubled  noife]  Ff,  Rowe. 
troubled  Tvith  noise  Wh.  i.  Tjuith  busied 
thoughts  Kinnear.  with  troubled  thoughts 
Qq  et  cet. 


X02.  mortall  staring]  Steevens:  I  suppose  by  this  is  meant:  war  that  looks 
big  or  stares  fatally  on  its  victims. — The  Cowden-Clarkes :  ‘Mortal-staring 
war’  includes  the  effect  of  War  staring  or  glaring  fatally  upon  its  victims,  and  of 
their  deadly  stare  when  killed. 

104.  With  best  aduantage  will  deceiue  the  time]  Johnson:  I  will  take 
the  best  opportunity  to  elude  the  dangers  of  this  conjuncture. — Vaughan  (iii,  146): 
Lady  Macbeth  says  to  her  husband:  ‘To  beguile  the  time  Look  like  the  time.’ — 
I,  v,  64;  that  is:  to  deceive  everybody  about  you,  look  as  everybody  about  you  looks. 
The  expression  here  ‘deceive  the  time,’  then  is,  possibly:  I  will,  on  the  first  oppor¬ 
tunity,  trick  those  who  are  about  me,  and  give  you  my  help. 

107.  tender  George]  Wright:  ‘Tender  George’  was  at  this  time  a  married  man, 
and  had  been  summoned  to  Parliament  since  1482.  But  the  dramatist  followed  the 
chroniclers;  for  Hall,  and  Holinshed  after  him,  both  speak  of  Lord  Strange  as  a  child. 

109,  1 13.  leysure]  Bradley  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  2  b):  Duration  of  opportunity; 
time  allowed  before  it  is  too  late.  [Compare  1.  277  below.] 

1 16.  lie  striue  with  troubled  noise]  R.  G.  White:  The  reading  of  the  Qq  has 


390 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


Left  leaden  flumber  peize  me  downe  to  morrow,  1 17 

When  I  fhould  mount  with  wings  of  Vidtory  : 

Once  more,  good  night  kinde  Lords  and  Gentlemen. 

Exeunt .  Manet  Richmond .  1 20 

O  thou,  whofe  Captaine  I  account  my  felfe, 


1 17.  peize]  F2.  poize  F3F4,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Warb.  Johns,  poise  Han.  peife 
Qq  et  cet. 

1 19.  Gentlemen]  gentilemen  Q?. 


120.  Exeunt.]  Exunt.  Q,Q,. 

Manet  Richmond.]  Om.  Qq. 

1 21.  [going  towards  a  couch  and 
kneeling.  Capell. 


hitherto  been  given  in  all  modern  editions  as  poetically  preferable;  but  we  need  not 
be  very  careful  about  the  poetic  diction  of  a  man  who  announces  his  intention  to 
‘take  a  nap.’  A  dramatic  poet  must,  however,  preserve  the  consistency  of  his  char¬ 
acters;  and  if  Shakespeare  first  wrote  ‘troubled  thoughts, ’  which  is  possible,  he  seems 
to  have  remembered,  on  the  revision  of  the  play,  that  he  had  represented  Richmond 
as  entirely  untroubled  in  mind,  and  sure  of  victory  from  the  time  when  he  first 
appears  upon  the  scene,  (see  his  principal  speeches  in  Sc.  ii,  and  the  early  part 
of  this  scene),  being  on  this  point  consistent  with  the  chroniclers.  The  contrast 
between  Richmond’s  assurance  and  calm  confidence  in  his  right,  and  Richard’s 
anxious  and  even  nervous  solicitude,  is  of  high  dramatic  value;  and  this  would  be, 
in  a  great  measure,  destroyed  if  Richmond,  on  his  own  confession,  retired  to  rest 
with  troubled  thoughts.  The  transposition  in  the  Folio  [see  Text.  Notes]  is  the 
mere  result  of  a  misplacement,  or  perhaps  the  omission  of  the  caret  for  ‘noise,’  on  the 
revision.  [This  sentence  is  literally  transcribed;  but  I  cannot  say  I  quite  comprehend 
it.— Ed.] — Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  p.  163)  agrees  with  White  that  troubled  thoughts  is 
not  in  keeping  with  Richmond’s  present  state  of  mind;  in  corroboration,  Delius  calls 
attention  to  that  which  the  Ghost  of  Hastings  says  to  Richmond:  ‘  Quiet  untroubled 
soul,  awake,  awake,’  and  adds:  ‘In  the  manuscript,  the  “with”  may  have  been 
inserted  in  the  wrong  place,  so  that  the  Anonymous  corrector  of  the  Quarto  was 
induced  to  change  the  meaningless  “with  troubled  noise”  to  with  troubled  thoughts.'' 
[Compare  1.  212  supra.] — Pickersgill  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875—’ 76 ;  p.  98):  The 
Folio  change  seems  at  all  events  deliberate,  and  I  think  it  may  have  been  made  in 
consequence  of  a  fancy  of  the  corrector  that  something  of  dramatic  contrast  was 
sacrificed  by  attributing  to  Richmond  ‘troubled  thoughts’  which  were  proper  only 
to  Richard.  This  idea  would  not  be  inconsistent  with  that  pedantic  over-carefulness 
which  is  characteristic  of  him. — Vaughan  (iii,  147):  I  think  this  line  to  have  been 
universally  misinterpreted.  It  means,  I  will  strive  against  the  entertainment  of 
troubled  thoughts,  so  as  to  take  a  nap;  not,  as  the  punctuation  now  prescribes, 
I  will  endeavor  to  take  a  nap,  although  entertaining  troublesome  thoughts.  I 
would  punctuate  thus:  ‘I’ll  strive  with  troubled  thoughts,  to  take  a  nap.’  [In 
this  punctuation  Vaughan  has  been  anticipated  by  Fr — Ed.] 

1 17.  leaden  slumber]  Malone  compares:  ‘Now  leaden  slumber  with  life’s 
strength  doth  fight.’ — Rape  of  Luc.,  1.  124;  and  Wright  adds:  ‘O  murderous  slum¬ 
ber  Lay’st  thou  thy  leaden  mace  upon  my  boy?’ — Jul.  Cces.,  IV,  iii,  268. 

1 17.  peize]  Murray  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  Peise):  4.  To  put  a  weight  upon,  add 
weight  to;  to  weight,  load,  burden;  to  weigh  down;  to  oppress;  to  furnish  with 
weights.  [The  present  line  quoted.] 

121.  O  thou,  whose  Captaine]  Horn  (iii,  158):  Words  can  hardly  be  more 


act  v,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


391 


Looke  on  my  Forces  with  a  gracious  eye :  122 

Put  in  their  hands  thy  bruiting  Irons  of  wrath, 

That  they  may  crufh  downe  with  a  heauy  fall, 

Th’vfurping  Helmets  of  our  Aduerfaries  :  125 

Make  vs  thy  minifters  of  Chafticement, 

That  we  may  praife  thee  in  thy  vi£lory : 

To  thee  I  do  commend  my  watchfull  foule, 

Ere  I  let  fall  the  windowes  of  mine  eyes  :  129 


122.  on]  one  Q?. 

Fo  rces  ...a. ..eye]  force...  thy  ...eyes 

q7q8- 

124.  a]  Om.  Q7Q8. 

125.  Th']  Ff,  +  ,  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Hal. 


Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  The  Qq,  Var.  ’73  et 
cet. 

125.  Helmets]  helmet  Q5-3. 

127.  thy]  the  Q,Qa,  Cap.  Cam.  + ,  Dyce 
ii,  iii,  Huds. 


powerful  or  more  tender  than  in  this  passage.  It  is  thus  heralded  that  the  Ghosts 
should  appear,  bringing  blessings  and  curses;  when  we  behold  all  of  Richard’s 
victims:  Edward,  Henry,  Clarence,  Rivers,  Grey,  the  two  princes,  Anne,  and 
Buckingham,  the  whole  dread  tragedy  is  once  more  enacted  before  our  eyes.  For 
the  very  purpose  that  every  fear  may  be  exalted  to  the  supreme  idea  of  love  and 
justice. 

123.  bruising  Irons  of  wrath]  Tawney:  Compare  Psalm ,  ii,  9:  ‘Thou  shalt 
bruise  them  with  a  rod  of  iron,  and  break  them  in  pieces  like  a  potters  vessel.’ 

127.  thy  vidtory]  Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  155):  Richmond  has  already  called 
himself  God’s  ‘captain,’  and  even  as  the  final  overthrow  of  the  enemy  is  to  be 
regarded  as  divine  justice,  in  the  same  degree  Richmond’s  victory  is  God’s  victory. 
The  anonymous  corrector  of  the  Quarto  has  quite  misunderstood  this  when  he 
alters  ‘thy’  to  the. 

129.  the  windowes  of  mine  eyes]  Vaughan  (iii,  148):  The  ancient  ‘window’ 
was  primarily  the  fence  to  exclude  wind,  not  the  transparency  to  admit  light,  and 
this  fence  excluded  light  because  it  was  opaque.  So  Richmond  calls  his  eyelids, 
which  exclude  light,  ‘windows.’  [Neither  Skeat  (Did.)  nor  Whitney  (Cent. 
Did.)  record  such  a  restricted  use  of  the  word  ‘window’;  Skeat  gives  as  its  deriva¬ 
tion,  ‘ wind-eye,  the  hole  or  aperture  through  which  wind  and  air  were  admitted’; 
the  direct  opposite  of  Vaughan’s  explanation.  Shakespeare  uses  the  word  appar¬ 
ently  indiscriminately  for  both  the  shutter  and  the  aperture  itself,  as  thus:  ‘these 
windows  that  let  forth  thy  life.’ — I,  ii,  15;  ‘It  [the  soul]  would  not  out  at  windows 
nor  at  doors.’ — King  John,  V,  vii,  29.  In  these  examples,  which  might  easily  be 
multiplied  by  reference  to  Barlett,  ‘window’  can  mean  only  an  opening;  just  as 
in  the  two  following  it  seems  to  designate  the  shutter :  ‘  Shuts  up  his  window,  locks 
fair  daylight  out.’ — Rom.  &  Jul.,  I,  i,  145;  ‘Pluck  down  forms,  windows,  anything.’ 
— Jul.  Cces.,  Ill,  ii,  264.  Shakespeare  also  uses  ‘window’  metaphorically  both  for 
the  eyelid  and  the  eye  itself.  As  an  example  of  the  former  use  compare:  ‘thy  eyes 
windows  fall  Like  death  when  he  shuts  up  the  day  of  life.’ — Rom.  &  Jul.,  IV,  i,ioo; 
which  is  also  quoted  by  Steevens  as  parallel  to  the  present  line.  Compare  also: 
‘the  enclosed  lights,  now  canopied  Under  these  windows,  [the  lids].’ — Cymb., 
II,  ii,  22.  And  for  ‘window’  used  for  the  eye  itself  compare:  ‘the  window  of  my 


392 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


Sleeping,  and  waking,  oh  defend  me  ftill.  Sleeps.  130 

Enter  the  Ghojl  of  Prince  Edward ,  Sonne  to 


130.  Sleeps.]  Om.  Qq. 

Scene  iv.  Between  the  Tents  of 
Richard  and  Richmond  :  They  sleeping. 
Enter.. .sixth.  Pope  i.  Scene  v.  Pope 
ii,+ .  throws  himself  upon  the  couch  and 
sleeps.  Lightning  and  Hollow  Sounds. 


Suddenly  is  seen  rising  between  the  Tents 
the  Ghost... sixth.  Cap. 

13 1 .  Prince]  young  Prince  Q,.  yoong 
Prince  Qa. 

131,  132.  to  Henry]  Harry  Q,. 


heart,  mine  eye.’ — Love’s  Labour’s  Lost,  V,  ii,  848,  and  ‘thine  [eyes]  for  me  are 
windows  to  my  breast.’ — Sonn.,  xxiv,  io. — Ed. 

131.  Enter  the  Ghost]  Steevens:  This  circumstance  is  likewise  found  in 
Nichols’s  Legend  of  King  Richard  III.  (inserted  in  the  Mirrour  for  Magistrates, 
ed.  1610),  and  was  apparently  imitated  from  Shakespeare:  ‘As  in  my  tent  on 
slumbering  bed  I  lie  Horrid  aspects  appear’d  unto  mine  eye:  I  thought  that  all 
those  murder’d  ghosts,  whom  I  By  death  had  sent  to  their  untimely  grave,  With 
baleful  noise  about  my  tent  did  crye,  And  of  the  heavens,  with  sad  complaint  did 
crave  That  they  on  guilty  wretch  might  vengeance  have.’  His  terror  on  waking 
is  likewise  very  forcibly  described.  Drayton  may  likewise  have  borrowed  from 
our  author:  ‘Where  to  the  guilty  King,  that  black  fore-running  night,  Appear  the 
dreadful  ghosts  of  Henry  and  his  son,  Of  his  own  brother  George,  and  his  two 
nephews  done  Most  cruelly  to  death;  and  of  his  wife,  and  friend  Lord  Hastings, 
with  pale  hands  prepar’d  as  they  would  rend  Him  piece-meal;  at  which  oft  he 
roareth  in  his  sleep.’ — Polyolbion,  Song  xxii.  [11.  1420-1425.  The  foregoing  note  is 
from  the  Variorum  of  1821.  In  a  former  edition  Steevens  added  a  remark  about 
tracing  the  growth  of  a  poetic  idea,  and  how,  in  the  present  instance,  Nichols  had 
but  sketched  the  incident  of  the  ghosts,  Drayton  had  added  to  that  sketch,  and 
finally  Shakespeare  gave  us  the  finished  picture.  This  drew  from  Malone  a  note 
in  which  he  showed  that  Steevens’s  train  of  poetic  suggestion  should  be  reversed; 
since  both  Nichols  and  Drayton  must  have  been  indebted  to  Shakespeare,  as 
Nichols’s  account  was  written  thirteen  years  after,  and  Drayton’s  twenty-second 
song  twenty-five  years  after  the  date  of  Richard  III. — Ed.] — Capell  (ii,  191): 
Nothing  is  found  in  any  edition  to  impress  a  reader  with  awfulness,  and  introduce 
properly  the  train  of  spectres  that  follow:  Enter  the  Ghost  of  this  person,  and 
Enter  that  of  another,  is  all  we  are  favour’d  with;  and  after  much  the  same  sort 
runs  every  stage-direction  in  general,  from  one  end  of  the  poet’s  work  to  the  other, 
and  that  in  every  edition:  he  himself  either  pay’d  no  attention  to  this  most  necessary 
article,  or  thought  it  wrongly  within  a  manager’s  province:  but  ’twas  equally 
within  his  own,  and  that  of  subsequent  setters-out  of  his  plays  in  print;  what  they 
suffer  upon  the  stage  and  in  reading  by  this  neglect  of  himself  and  of  others  after 
him  judges  will  apprehend  without  much  enforcing.  Exclusive  of  the  direction 
which  occasion’d  this  note,  the  rising  should  be  supposed  instantaneous,  and  the 
phenomena  of  some  duration. — Mrs  Griffith  (p.  320):  The  ghosts  here  are  not 
to  be  taken  literally;  they  are  to  be  understood  only  as  an  allegorical  representation 
of  those  images  or  ideas  which  naturally  occur  to  the  minds  of  men  during  their 
sleep,  referring  to  the  actions  of  their  lives,  whether  good  or  bad.  That  this  is  the 
sense  in  which  our  Poet  meant  this  scene  to  be  accepted  is  fully  evident  from  his 
representing  both  Richard  and  Richmond  to  have  been  asleep  during  the  apparition, 


act  v,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


393 


[131.  Enter  the  Ghost] 

and  therefore  capable  of  receiving  those  notices  in  the  ‘mind’s  eye’  only;  which 
entirely  removes  the  seeming  absurdity  of  such  an  exhibition. — Hazlitt  (Sh. 
Char.,  p.  154):  The  introduction  of  the  ghosts  through  the  trap-doors  of  the  stage 
should  be  altogether  omitted.  The  speeches  which  they  address  to  Richard  might 
be  delivered  just  as  well  from  behind  the  scenes.  These  sort  of  exhibitions  might 
have  been  very  proper  for  a  superstitious  age,  but  in  an  age  not  superstitious  they 
excite  ridicule  instead  of  terror. — Duport  (i,  347):  The  appearances  of  all  these 
ghosts  is  not  so  unaccountable  as  that  two  individuals  should  experience  the  same 
dream  at  the  same  time. — Hartley  Coleridge  (ii,  175):  There  is  an  apparent 
absurdity  in  either  painting  or  acting  a  dream,  which  no  beauty  of  execution  can 
conceal.  Jacob’s  dream  has  been  painted  by  Rembrandt  and  by  Alston — beau¬ 
tifully,  I  dare  say,  by  both;  but  both  make  the  mistake,  as  it  appears  to  me,  of 
introducing  the  sleeping  Jacob  in  a  corner.  Who  has  not  seen  Joseph’s  dream 
and  his  sheaves?  I  am  not  forgetful  that,  according  to  the  speculations  of  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  day,  separate  spirits  did  converse  with  souls  in  sleep — indeed,  the  opinion 
is  older  than  Homer — must  have  been  as  old  as  the  belief  in  prophetic  dreams; 
but  then  the  spirits  wTere  not  supposed  to  be  visible  or  audible  to  men  awake.  The 
best  defence  that  can  be  made  for  Shakespeare  in  this  case  is  that  the  audience 
are  to  be  identified  with  the  personages  of  the  drama;  to  know,  and  feel,  and  see, 
whatever  is  known,  or  felt,  or  seen  by  any  one  whom  the  poet  introduces,  and 
should  always  sink  their  own  presence  and  existence.  Thus  does  Campbell,  in 
his  life  of  Mrs  Siddons,  justify  the  actual  appearance  of  Banquo’s  ghost  on  the 
stage  when  none  but  Macbeth  is  supposed  to  behold  it.  But  the  cases  are  not 
exactly  similar.  Ghosts  were,  in  popular  faith,  objective  existences  whose  visibility 
depended  on  their  own  volition.  Not  so  dreams. — Verplanck:  ‘Enter’  is  the  stage 
direction  in  Qq  and  Ff,  though  Collier  informs  us  that  at  that  date  there  were 
trap-doors  in  the  stage  by  which  spirits  and  fiends  sometimes  ascended.  Modern 
editors,  without  authority,  make  the  ghosts  severally  rise,  according  to  the  custom 
of  the  stage,  which,  I  believe,  the  reform  of  Macready  has  here  altered  to  the  old 
mode. — Snider  (ii,  441):  This  scene  will  aid  us  in  arriving  at  a  judgement  con¬ 
cerning  Shakespeare’s  employment  of  ghosts  and  supernatural  appearances. 
The  conscious  intention  of  the  Poet  is  here  so  manifest  that  nobody  can  deny  it, 
for  the  ghosts  only  reiterate  what  has  been  fully  given  in  the  play  without  this 
unreal  form.  Richard’s  overthrow  and  Richmond’s  victory  have  been  amply 
motived;  here  it  is  cast  into  the  unconscious  presentiment  of  both  leaders.  In 
sleep  the  foreboding  of  the  soul  moulds  itself  into  the  distinct  image,  and  there 
results  the  dream.  The  subjective  nature  of  both  men  is  thus  shown — one  buoyed 
up  with  a  just  cause,  the  other  weighed  down  with  his  crimes.  What  Richard 
really  is,  comes  out  in  the  vision;  he  might  be  able  to  suppress  himself  when  awake. 
Now  he  is  for  the  first  time  frightened;  the  dream  has  fully  revealed,  not  merely  his 
character  to  himself, — that  he  knew  before, — but  the  certainty  of  his  punishment. 
It  is  the  revelation  of  his  own  soul  concerning  his  destiny,  for  Richard  hitherto 
had  no  faith  in  retribution;  his  belief  was  in  successful  villainy.  Hence  his  terror. — 
O.  T.  Perkins  (p.  208,  Note):  A  word  of  explanation  is  necessary  as  to  the  reasons 
why  the  visions  in  Richard  III.  and  Cymb.  have  been  excluded  from  the  category 
of  Ghosts  proper.  As  to  their  genuineness  I  say  nothing,  though  very  likely  a 
strong  case  might  be  made  out  against  them,  both  on  the  general  evidence  of  style — 
misleading  as  it  often  is — and  on  the  general  disposition  to  foist  in  sensational 


394 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


Henry  the  fixt .  132 

Gh.to  Ri.  Let  me  fit  heauy  on  thy  foule  to  morrow  : 


132.  the  fixt.]  the  fixt,  to  Ri.  QjQa.  Qq.  Edw.  Capell.  Ghost.  Rowe  et  cet. 

133.  Gh.  to  Ri.]  Ff.  Ghoft  to  K.  Ri.  133.  [To  K.  Rich.  Rowe  et  seq. 


matter  for  stage  effect.  It  is  sufficient  for  the  present  purpose  to  point  out  two 
things.  In  the  first  place  the  ghosts  in  both  plays  are  dreams;  they  have  no  waking 
existence.  Richard’s:  ‘Methought  the  souls  of  all  that  I  had  murdered  came  to 
my  tent’;  Posthumus’s  ‘Sleep  thou  hast  been  a  grandsire,’  are  very  different  from 
Macbeth’s:  ‘As  I  live  I  saw  him’;  Hamlet’s:  ‘My  father  in  his  habit  as  he  lived.’ 
And  secondly,  in  both  cases  their  appearances  might  be  expunged  from  the  play 
without  plot,  or  interest,  or  dramatic  action  suffering  in  the  slightest  degree.  Beyond 
this  the  Cymbeline  Ghosts  essentially  differ  from  the  rest  in  that,  firstly,  they  are 
ghosts  to  cheer,  not  to  appal;  while,  secondly,  in  large  part  they  are  no  ghosts,  but 
simply  an  adaptation  of  the  pagan  mythology  for  miraculous  purposes. — Oechel- 
hauser  ( Einjiihrungen ,  etc.,  p.  160):  In  regard  to  the  appearance  of  the  ghosts, 
I  recommend  the  following  arrangement,  which  corresponds  in  part  with  that 
adopted  by  Dingelstedt.  The  stage  shows  the  interior  of  Richard’s  tent,  which 
should  not  be  of  great  depth;  wherever  possible,  the  sides  and  top  should  be  closed, 
in  fashion  of  a  tent.  Richard  lies  to  the  left  on  a  couch  placed  somewhat  at  an 
angle,  the  head  towards  the  audience,  the  foot  almost  touching  the  back  wall  of 
the  tent.  The  first  vision  consists  of  those  ghosts  who  prophecy  destruction  to 
Richard.  They  appear  in  three  groups,  each  of  which  has  its  own  spokesman;  the 
speeches  are  substantially  shortened.  On  the  abrupt  disappearance  of  the  first 
vision,  a  second  should  at  once  appear  behind  another  part  of  the  tent.  In  the 
deeper  part  of  the  stage,  perhaps  at  a  slight  elevation,  Richmond  is  seen  sleeping 
in  his  open  tent.  The  ghosts  are  grouped  around  the  head  of  the  couch,  King 
Henry  in  the  middle,  holding  out  his  hand  in  the  act  of  blessing  the  sleeper  (perhaps 
holding  also  a  laurel- wreath),  Anne  and  the  princes  kneeling  and  praying  at  the 
side,  the  other  ghosts  with  countenances  and  bearings  expressive  of  felicitations  are 
ranged  round  these.  As  this  group  is  quickly  and  easily  arranged  there  need  be 
but  a  short  interval  between  the  disappearance  of  the  first  vision  and  the  appearance 
of  the  second.  In  regard  to  the  costumes,  it  seems  to  me  that  all  the  ghosts  should 
wear  the  same  costumes  as  they  wore  in  the  play,  but  at  the  same  time  enveloped 
in  long  white  or  gray  mantles.  The  outward  signs  of  murder,  such  as  wounds, 
blood,  etc.,  should  be  visible  and  in  the  first  vision  could  be  made  more  marked 
than  in  the  second. — B.  Warner  (p.  237):  These  ghosts  truly  represent  the  moral 
attitude  of  the  two  leaders  in  the  last  struggle  between  the  houses  of  York  and 
Lancaster.  No  use  of  soliloquies  could  here  accomplish  the  end  aimed  at,  to  place 
the  moral  strength  and  weakness  of  this  struggle  before  us.  The  speech  beginning: 
‘Give  me  another  horse,’  is  wretched  as  compared  with  former  soliloquies.  It 
seems  a  poor  bit  of  actor’s  fustian.  The  ghosts,  on  the  other  hand,  may  be  inartistic, 
as  is  often  objected,  but  they  are  powerful  dramatic  auxiliaries.  Through  their 
wailing  moans  we  hear  the  last  note  of  cold  despair  beginning  to  sweep  across  the 
soul  of  Richard. 

133.  sit  heauy  on  thy  soule]  Steevens:  Compare:  ‘Be  Mowbray’s  sins  so 
heavy  in  his  breast.’ — Rich.  II:  I,  ii,  50. 


act  v,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


395 


Thinke  how  thou  ftab’ft  me  in  my  prime  of  youth 
At  Teukesbury  :  Difpaire  therefore,  and  dye.  135 

Ghoji  to  Richm.  Be  chearefull  Richmond, 

For  the  wronged  Soules 

Of  butcher'd  Princes,  fight  in  thy  behalfe  : 

King  Henries  iffue  Richmond  comforts  thee. 

Enter  the  Ghoji  of  Henry  the  Jixt.  140 

Ghoji .  When  I  was  mortall,  my  Annointed  body 
By  thee  was  punched  full  of  holes  ;  142 


134.  Jlab'fl]  QqF,.  Jlabb'Jl  F/4. 
stabb'dst  Rowe,  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh.  i, 
Sta.  stab'd'st  Theob.  et  cet.  (subs.) 

my]  the  F3 F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  +  , 
Varr.  Ran. 

135.  Teukesbury]  Tewksbury  F3F4. 
Difpaire  therefore]  therefore  des¬ 
pair  Pope,  + . 

therefore~\  Om.  Q,Qg. 

136.  Ghoft]  Ff.  Om.  Qq  et  cet. 


136,  137.  Be... Soules']  Ff,  Rowe.  One 
line,  Qq  et  cet. 

138.  butcher'd]  butchredQy-s.  butch- 
ered  Q.Q^Qs-s- 

140.  Enter]  rises  Cap.  and  throughout. 

141.  Gholt]  Ghoft  to  Ri.  QiQa.  Ghoft 
to  K.  Ri.  Qq  et  seq.  (subs.) 

142.  holes]  Q^Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  dead- 
lie  holes  Q,  et  cet. 


134.  prime  of  youth]  Compare  I,  ii,  274. 

135.  therefore]  For  examples  of  this  word  accented  ‘therefore,’  see  Walker 
(Vers.,  1 1 2). 

136.  Ghost  to  Richm.]  Bathurst  (p.  31):  I  cannot  but  think  that  all  the 
encouraging  and  blessing  of  Richmond  by  the  ghosts  would  never  have  been  thought 
of  if  it  had  not  been  an  object  to  exalt  the  Tudor  family.  It  is  dull,  it  breaks  the 
spirited  scene,  and  the  effect  of  it  upon  Richard:  and  the  ghosts  after  all,  have 
nothing  to  do  with  Richmond. 

142.  punched]  Steevens:  This  word,  which  sounds  but  meanly  in  our  ears, 
is  also  employed  by  Chapman:  ‘ — with  a  goad  he  punch’d  each  furious  dame.’ — 
Iliad,  vi  [1.  126]. — Marshall:  This  line  is  one  of  the  worst  in  all  Shakespeare. 
One  can  scarcely  believe  he  ever  wrote  it;  for  even  admitting  that  ‘punched’  did 
not  bear,  at  that  time,  the  more  vulgar  sense  that  it  has  now,  the  whole  expression 
is  strikingly  unpoetical.  [Skeat  (Diet.  s.  v.  punch,  2.)  states  that  this  word  in 
the  phrase  ‘to  punch  one’s  head,’  is  ‘a  mere  abbreviation  of  punish.’  Under 
‘punch’  (1),  to  pierce,  or  perforate,  he  quotes  the  present  line  and  adds:  ‘This 
verb  is  a  mere  coinage  from  the  older  substantive  punction  or  punchon,  spelt 
punchon  in  Prompt.  Parv.,  denoting  the  kind  of  awl  used  for  punching  or  per¬ 
forating.’  Marshall  says,  in  continuing  his  note,  ‘The  only  instances  that 
seem  to  have  been  found  of  a  similar  use  of  this  word  are  in  Chapman’s  Homer, 
Iliad  [as  quoted  by  Steevens];  also  in  Marston’s  Antonio’s  Revenge:  “The 
ox’s  breast  seem’d  fresh  pauncht  with  bleeding  wounds.” — I,  iii,  Works,  i,  p.  80. 
Barett  (Alvearie,  s.v.  punch)  gives  “see  To  punish.”  Palsgrave:  “I  punche.  Je 
boulle,  je  pousse,  prim.  conj.  Whye  punchest  thou  me  with  thy  fyste  on  this  facyon  ?”  ’ 
Is  it  not  somewhat  strange  that  Marshall  should  have  failed  to  notice  that  in 
these  quotations,  from  Barett  and  from  Palsgrave,  the  word  ‘  punch  ’  bears  a  meaning 
quite  different  from  that  in  the  present  line? — Ed.] 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


396 

Thinke  on  the  Tower,  and  me  :  Difpaire,and  dye,  143 

Harry  the  fixt,  bids  thee  difpaire,  and  dye. 

To  Richtn.  Vertuous  and  holy  be  thou  Conqueror:  145 

Harry  that  prophefied  thou  fhould’ft  be  King, 

Doth  comfort  thee  in  fleepe  :  Liue,  and  flourifh. 

Enter  the  Ghoji  of  Clarence. 

Ghojl.  Let  me  fit  heauy  in  thy  foule  to  morrow. 

I  that  was  wafh’d  to  death  with  Fulfome  Wine  :  150 

Poore  Clarence  by  thy  guile  betray’d  to  death  : 

To  morrow  in  the  battell  thinke  on  me, 

And  fall  thy  edgeleffe  Sword,  difpaire  and  dye.  153 


144.  Harry]  Henry  Ff,  Rowe, +  ,  Cap. 
Varr.  Ran. 

147.  Doth... in  Jleepe]  Thee  in  thy 
sleep  doth  comfort  Marshall. 

in  Jleepe  :  Liue]  in  thy  Jleepe  liue 
Qt.  in  thy  Jleepe ,  liue  Q2_8,  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Sing.  Sta.  in  sleep ; 
live  thou  Rowe  ii,+  ( —  Var.  ’73),  Cap. 
Coll.  (MS),  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  in  thy 
sleep;  live  Cam.  +  .  in  sleep  now ;  live 


Ktly.  in  sleep  live,  live  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 
in  slumber;  live  or  in  thy  sleep ;  now 
live  Ktly  (Exp.,  p.  265). 

148.  Ghoft]  Ghoaft  Q,Q2. 

149.  fit]  Jet  Q,. 

149,  158.  in]  Q,-4,Ff.  one  Q?.  on 
Qs  et  cet. 

150.  to  death]  in  death  Dyce  conj. 
with]  in  F3F4,  Rowe,+  (  —  Var. 

’73). 


142.  full  of  holes]  Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  32):  The  Folio, 
and  all  Qq,  except  the  first,  omit  the  word  deadly.  From  this  we  may  gather  that 
one  of  the  later  Qq  was  used  for  copy  [from  which  the  Folio  was  printed]. 

146.  Harry  that  prophesied]  For  this  incident,  see  3  Hen.  VI:  IV,  vi,  70-76. 
150.  wash’d  to  death  with  .  .  .  Wine]  Steevens:  Shakespeare  seems  to 
have  forgot  himself.  The  Duke  was  killed  before  he  was  thrown  into  the  Malmsey 
butt,  and  consequently  could  not  be  ‘washed  to  death.’  See  I,  iv,  270. — The 
Cowden-Clarkes:  If  the  scene  here  referred  to  by  Steevens  be  carefully  perused, 
it  will  be  seen  that  the  Murderer  stabs  Clarence  twice,  saying:  ‘If  all  this  will  not 
do,  I’ll  drown  you  in  the  malmsey  butt  within’;  and  immediately  carries  off  his 
victim.  Therefore,  if  we  are  to  scan  these  points  thus  literally,  it  may  be  supposed 
that  the  dying  man  hears  these  words,  and  is  flung  into  the  wine  to  be  finally  ‘  wash’d 
to  death.’  But  surely  the  traditional  incident  of  Clarence’s  being  thrown  into  a 
malmsey-butt  sufficed  as  a  warrant  for  the  poetical  words  here  put  into  his  ghost’s 
mouth.  [Compare  IV,  iii,  138,  where  the  Duchess  of  York  is  made  to  mention  the 
manner  of  the  death  of  the  two  Princes,  which  she  could  not  possibly  have  known, 
as  it  was  not  divulged  until  after  Richard’s  death.  The  audience,  however,  knew 
that  they  had  been  smothered,  and  also  that  Clarence  had  been  1  washed  to  death  ’ 
in  malmsey,  and  this  was  all  sufficient. — Ed.] 

150.  Fulsome]  Bradley  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  3  b)  [Of  food]:  Having  a  sickly  or 
sickening  taste;  tending  to  cause  nausea. 

153,  190.  fall]  Compare  I,  ii,  202,  stage  direction;  and  I,  iii,  371.  Abbott 
suggests  (§  291)  that  in  the  present  line  ‘fall’  may  be  the  subjunctive.  It  will  be 
noticed,  on  referring  to  the  above  section,  that  Abbott  quotes  this  line  thus:  ‘Think 


act  v,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


397 


To  Richrn.  Thou  off-fpring  of  the  houfe  of  Lancafter 
The  wronged  heyres  of  Yorke  do  pray  for  thee,  155 

Good  Angels  guard  thy  battell,  Liue  and  Flourifh. 

Enter  the  Ghojis  of  Riuers, Gray,  and  Vaughan. 

Riu.  Let  me  fit  heauy  in  thy  foule  to  morrow, 

Riuers,  that  dy’de  at  Pomfret  :  difpaire,  and  dye. 

Grey.  Thinke  vpon  Grey ,  and  let  thy  foule  difpaire.  160 

Vaugh.  Thinke  vpon  Vaughan,  and  with  guilty  feare 
Let  fall  thy  Lance,  difpaire  and  dye. 

All  to  Richm.  Awake, 

And  thinke  our  wrongs  in  Richards  Bofome,  164 


*54-  offspring ]  offpring  Q,Q3Q4. 
offpring  Qa.  offspring  Qs< 

155.  heyres\  Heirs  F4. 

157-  and]  Om.  Qq. 

158.  Riu.]  King.  QIQa. 

162.  Lance~\  hurtless  lance  Cap.  point¬ 
less  lance  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS),  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 


162.  diSpaire~\  Richard,  despair  Pope, 

+ . 

163, 164.  Awake, ...BoSome~\  Ff,  Rowe. 

One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

164.  our ]  out  Q4> 

Richards]  Ri.  Q^.  Ric.  Qfi. 

Rich.  Q  .  Richard’s  F  F  . 

'-7  34 


on  me,  and  fall  thy  edgeless  axe’;  a  variation  in  text,  hitherto  unrecorded.  Ali- 
quando  dormitat,  etc.  Franz  (§  476  c)  explains  this  conversion  of  transitive  to 
intransitive,  by  detecting  in  the  verb  a  causative  force.  See,  also,  Ant.  6°  Cleo., 
Ill,  xi,  78,  this  ed. — Ed. 

162.  Let  fall  thy  Lance]  Singer  ( Sh .  Vind.,  p.  176):  The  interpolation  of 
pointless  [by  Collier’s  MS  corrector]  is  gratuitous  interference.  Why  pointless 
lance?  Lines  of  eight  syllables  are  frequent  in  the  poet,  to  vary  the  measure. 
[A  partial  answer  to  Singer’s  query  may  perhaps  be  found  in  the  use  of  ‘edgeless’ 
applied  to  a  sword  in  lines  153  and  190.  Walker  (grit.,  iii,  176)  calls  attention 
to  the  lack  of  an  epithet  before  ‘lance’  to  correspond  with  ‘edgeless  sword,’  but 
makes  no  suggestion. — Ed.] — R.  G.  White:  It  is  highly  probable  that  an  epithet 
before  ‘lance’  has  been  accidentally  dropped;  and  equally  so  that  this  line  was 
written  as  a  counterpart  to  1.  153.  [Collier’s  MS  correction]  is  so  obvious  that  it 
must  have  occurred  to  every  intelligent  and  sufficiently  observant  reader  of  Shakes¬ 
peare  on  the  perusal  of  this  passage. — Marshall:  It  is  possible  that  this  line,  as 
well  as  1.  168,  is  intentionally  defective.  These  lines  are  the  last  lines  spoken  by 
the  ghosts  to  Richard  before  turning  to  Richmond.  It  will  be  also  noticed  that 
the  words  ‘  despair,  and  die  ’  are  repeated  by  every  ghost  as  the  last  words  said  to 
Richard.  These  would  be  preceded  or  accompanied,  doubtless,  by  a  solemn  and 
menacing  gesture,  which  would  serve  to  fill  up  the  hiatus  in  the  line — as  a  rest  in 
music.  It  is  in  favour  of  the  theory  that  the  omission  of  the  epithet  was  inten¬ 
tional,  that  neither  the  Qq  nor  Ff  should  have  attempted  to  supply  it.  There  is 
another  way  in  which  the  line  might  be  rendered  complete,  viz.,  by  the  repetition 
of  the  word  ‘despair.’  [See,  if  needful,  Abbott,  §  508;  for  examples  of  omission  of 
a  foot  or  syllable  where  there  is  a  ‘  marked  pause  arising  from  emotion,  antithesis, 
or  parenthesis.’] 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


398 

Will  conquer  him.  Awake,  and  win  the  day.  165 

Enter  the  Ghojl  of  Lord  Hajlings. 

Gho.  Bloody  and  guilty  :  guiltily  awake, 

And  in  a  bloody  Battell  end  thy  dayes. 

Thinke  on  Lord  Haftings  :  difpaire,  and  dye. 

Hafl.  to  Rich.  Quiet  vntroubled  foule,  1 70 

Awake,  awake : 

Arme,  fight,  and  conquer,  for  faire  Englands  fake. 

Enter  the  Ghofls  of  the  two  yong  Princes. 

Ghofls.  Dreame  on  thy  Coufins 
Smothered  in  the  Tower  :  >75 

Let  vs  be  laid  within  thy  bofome  Richard , 


165.  Will ]  Wei  Q,. 
him]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe. 

166-172.  Transposed  in  Q,Qa  to  fol¬ 
low  1.  183. 

166.  Lord  Haftings.]  Ff,  Rowe.  L. 
Haftings.  Q3_8.  Haftings  Q,Q2  et  cet. 

167.  guiltily ]  guilty  Ff,  Rowe. 

169.  difpaire]  and  despair  Pope,+  , 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt.  So  despair 
Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS),  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

170.  Haft,  to  Rich.]  To  Richm.  (after 
foule )  Rowe,+  (subs.) 


170,  171.  Quiet... awake  .•]  Ff,  Rowe. 
One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

173.  Ghofts]  ghoafts  Q2. 

Enter. ..Princes.]  The  Ghosts  of 
the  two  young  Princes  rise.  Cap.  et  seq. 
(subs.) 

174, 175.  Dreame...  Tower]  Ff,  Rowe. 
One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

175.  Smothered]  fmoothred  Q3QS* 
fmothred Q4.  fmoothered 04.  /mother'd 

FV 

176.  laid]  Q2_8,Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Knt 
lay' d  Cap.  lead  Q,  et  cet. 


166.  Enter  the  Ghost  of  Lord  Hastings]  Cambridge  Edd  {Note  xxiv): 
In  Qj  and  Q,  the  Ghosts  of  the  two  young  Princes  enter  and  speak,  before  the 
Ghost  of  Hastings.  The  Ff  and  other  Qq  make  the  Ghost  of  Hastings  enter 
first.  As  a  chronological  order  is  observed  in  the  appearance  of  the  other  Ghosts, 
we  have  thought  it  best,  in  this  case,  to  follow  the  latter  authorities.  This  dis¬ 
crepancy  between  the  two  earliest  editions  and  the  rest  seems  to  have  escaped  the 
notice  of  Capell  and  of  all  other  editors.  [For  a  somewhat  similar  change,  10m- 
pare  I,  ii,  201-203.] 

174,  178.  Cousins  .  .  .  Nephewes]  For  ‘  Cousins,  ’  used  in  the  sense  of  kinsmen , 
see  II,  ii,  n,  and  notes. 

176.  Let  vs  be  laid]  Theobald:  This  is  a  poor,  feeble  reading.  The  line  as  in 
Qj,  ‘Let  us  be  lead, ’  corresponds  with  what  is  said  in  the  next  line.  [Compare,  also, 
what  both  the  ghosts  of  Clarence  and  Rivers  say:  ‘Let  me  sit  heavy  in  thy  soul 
tomorrow.’ — Ed.] — Marshall:  No  doubt  instances  occur  in  Shakespeare  of  the 
use  of  lead  in  a  similarly  figurative  sense.  .  .  .  But  still  there  is  something  common¬ 
place  in  the  expression  here;  and  though  it  may  seem  a  very  fanciful  idea,  one  cannot 
help  remembering  that  the  question  of  where  the  bodies  of  the  young  princes  were 
‘laid’  remained  a  mystery  for  some  time  after  their  deaths.  Surely  the  wish  that 
their  murderer  might  be  compelled  to  bear  the  burdens  of  their  murdered  bodies 
in  his  bosom,  the  moral  weight  of  which  would  weigh  him  ‘down  to  ruin,  shame, 


ACT  V,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


399 

And  weigh  thee  downe  to  ruine,  fhame,  and  death,  177 

Thy  Nephewes  foule  bids  thee  difpaire  and  dye. 

Ghojls  to  Richm.  Sleepe  Richmond, 

Sleepe  in  Peace,  and  wake  in  Ioy,  180 

Good  Angels  guard  thee  from  the  Boares  annoy, 

Liue,  and  beget  a  happy  race  of  Kings, 

Edwards  vnhappy  Sonnes,  do  bid  thee  flourifh. 

Enter  the  Ghoji  of  Anne ,  his  Wife. 

Ghofl  to  Rich.  Richard ,  thy  Wife,  1 85 

That  wretched  Anne  thy  Wife, 

That  neuer  flept  a  quiet  houre  with  thee, 

Now  filles  thy  fleepe  with  perturbations, 

To  morrow  in  the  Battaile,  thinke  on  me, 

And  fall  thy  edgeleffe  Sword,  difpaire  and  dye :  190 

Ghoji  to  Richm.  Thou  quiet  foule, 


177.  thee']  the  Q6F3. 

1 78.  foule  bids]  foules  bid QqF4  et  seq. 

179.  Ghofls]  Om.  Qq,  Rowe. 

179,  180.  Sleepe... Ioy]  Ff,  Rowe. 
One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

184.  Enter. ..Anne,  his  Wife.]  Ff,  +  . 
Enter. ..Ladie  Anne,  his  wife.  Q,Q2,  Cam. 
+ .  Enter. ..Queene  Anne  his  wife.  Qs_*. 
Ghost  of  Lady  Anne  rises.  Cap.  Mai. 
Enter. ..Lady  Anne.  Var. ’78,  ’85,  Ran. 
The  Ghost  of  Queen  Anne  rises.  Steev. 


et  cet. 

185.  Ghofl  to  Rich.]  Om.  Qq. 

185,  186.  Richard. ..Anne  thy  Wife] 
Ff,  Rowe.  One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

188.  perturbations]  preturbations  Q  . 

190.  fall  thy  edgeleffe  Sword]  fall  thy 
powerless  arm  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS). 

191.  Ghofl  to  Richm.]  to  Richm. 
(after  foule )  Rowe  et  seq.  (subs.) 

191,  192.  Thou... fleepe]  Ff,  RoWe. 
One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 


and  death’  is  at  least  as  poetical  as  that  they  might  turn  to  a  lump  of  lead,  which 
is  suggestive  rather  more  of  indigestion  than  of  remorse.  Lead  seems  to  be  exactly 
one  of  those  corrections  which  a  too  hasty  emendator  might  make.  [The  confusion 
between  ‘laid’  and  lead  may  have  arisen  from  the  compositor’s  inability  to  distin¬ 
guish  any  difference  when  the  word  was  pronounced  by  the  reader  in  the  printing- 
office.  Ellis  (iii,  981)  gives  the  pronunciation  of  ea,  in  Shakespeare’s  time,  as 
that  of  a  in  mare ,  Mary,  and  rarely  as  that  of  e  in  met;  of  ai,  he  says,  that  it  is 
equivalent  to  ey  in  eye,  and  rarely  as  a  in  mare. — Ed.] 

181.  annoy]  Murray  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  Annoy,  subst .):  2.  That  which  causes 
discomfort;  a  troubling  thing,  circumstance,  or  action;  annoyance.  [The  present 
line  quoted.] 

187.  That  neuer  slept,  etc.]  See  IV,  i,  95,  and  note. 

190.  edgelesse  Sword]  Collier  {Emend.,  p.  337):  This  emendation  [powerless 
arm,  see  Text.  Notes]  ...  avoids  the  strong  objection  to  making  the  Ghosts  of 
Clarence  and  Anne  use  precisely  the  same  form  of  imprecation  when  threatening 
Richard. — Lettsom  (ap.  Walker,  Crit.,  iii,  176,  foot-note ):  Here  two  lines  appear 
to  have  been  lost,  and  their  place  supplied  by  two  that  had  done  duty  in  a  former 
speech.  In  such  a  case  it  was  futile  in  the  MS  Corrector  to  alter  two  words.  He 
should  have  written  two  new  lines  or  done  nothing. 


400 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


Sleepe  thou  a  quiet  fleepe : 

192 

Dreame  of  Succeffe,  and  Happy  Vi£tory, 

Thy  aduerfaries  Wife  doth  pray  for  thee. 

Enter  the  Ghojl  oj  Buckingham. 

195 

Ghojl  to  Rich.  The  firft  was  I 
That  help’d  thee  to  the  Crowne  : 

The  laft  was  I  that  felt  thy  Tyranny. 

O,  in  the  Battaile  think  on  Buckingham, 

And  dye  in  terror  of  thy  guiltineffe.  200 

Dreame  on,  dreame  on,  of  bloody  deeds  and  death, 

Fainting  difpaire  ;  difpairing  yeeld  thy  breath. 

Ghojl  to  Richrn.  I  dyed  for  hope  203 


195.  Enter... Buckingham.]  TheGhost 
of  Buckingham  rises.  Cap.  et  seq.  (subs.) 

Ghoft]  Ghosts  Fa. 

196.  Ghoft  to  Rich.]  Om.  Qq. 

196,  197.  The  firfl ...  Crowne ]  Ff, 
Rowe.  One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 


198.  thy]  the  Q?. 

203,  204.  I  dyed...Ayde]  Ff,  Rowe. 
One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

203.  for  hope]  for  holpe  Theob.  forsoke 
Han.  forsook  Cap.  foredone  Tyrwhitt. 
my  hope  Cartwright. 


194.  Thy  Aduersaries  Wife  doth  pray  for  thee]  Marshall:  This  is  not 
a  happy  line.  If  Anne  had  been  alive,  her  natural  anxiety  to  become  a  widow 
would  have  given  it  greater  point. 

203.  I  dyed  for  hope]  Theobald:  I  restore,  with  the  addition  of  a  single 
letter:  ‘I  dy’d  for  holpe,’  i.  e.,  I  perish’d  for  that  Help,  which  I  had  intended  and 
was  preparing  to  lend  Thee;  tho  I  could  not  effectually  give  Thee  any  assistance. 
— Hanmer,  in  support  of  his  conjecture,  forsoke,  says:  ‘This,  as  appears  from 
history,  was  the  case  of  the  Duke  of  Buckingham:  that,  being  stopped  upon  the 
banks  of  Severn,  he  was  deserted  by  his  soldiers,  .  .  .  who  disbanded  themselves 
and  fled.’ — Warburton:  That  is,  I  died  for  wishing  well  to  you.  But  Theobald’s 
conjecture  gives  a  fine  sense  to  the  line. — Steevens:  May  not  the  meaning  be:  I 
died  for  only  having  hoped  to  give  you  that  assistance  which  I  never  had  it  in  my 
power  to  afford  you  in  reality.  [Steevens  also  suggests  that  we  should  read:  ‘I 
died  forholpe,’  and  gives  the  meaning  of  this  new  word  as  deserted,  unhelped,  on  the 
principle  that  forbid,  accursed,  is  the  opposite  of  bid,  blest;  but,  I  believe,  an  exam¬ 
ple  of  the  word  forholpe  has  yet  to  be  found. — Ed.] — Malone:  Buckingham’s  hopes 
of  aiding  Richmond  induced  him  to  take  up  arms;  but  being  unsuccessful,  he  lost 
his  life  in  consequence  of  the  hope  which  led  him  to  engage  in  the  enterprise. — 
Dyce  {Few  Notes,  p.  104):  The  reading  ‘died  for  hope,’  has  been  questioned: 
but  (however  we  are  to  understand  it)  the  following  in  Greene’s  James  the  Fourth 
seems  to  determine  that  it  is  right:  ‘Warre  then  will  cease,  when  dead  ones  are 
reuiued;  Some  then  will  yeelde,  when  I  am  dead  for  hope.’  [V,  vi,  1.  2220,  ed. 
Collins.] — R.  G.  White:  In  my  opinion,  the  passage  has  been  misunderstood  only 
because  explanation  has  been  sought  too  remotely.  Does  it  not  clearly  mean,  both 
here  and  in  the  passage  from  Greene,  quoted  by  Dyce,  I  died  to  hope?  ‘to’  and 
‘for,’  as  the  sign  of  the  dative,  having  been  used  almost  interchangeably.  (Com¬ 
pare:  ‘no  pity  to  myself,’  1.  235).  An  examination  of  the  context  in  Greene’s  play 


ACT  V,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


401 


Ere  I  could  lend  thee  Ayde ; 

But  cheere  thy  heart,  and  be  thou  not  difmayde :  205 

God,  and  good  Angels  fight  on  Richmonds  fide, 

And  Richard  fall  in  height  of  all  his  pride. 

Richard  Jlarts  out  of  Jus  dreanie. 

Rich.  Giue  me  another  Horfe,  bind  vp  my  Wounds  :  209 


206.  Richmonds']  Richmons  Qx.  Rich¬ 
mond's  F+. 

207.  fall]  Ff,  Rowe  ii,  Knt,  Coll. 
Wh.  i,  Sta.  fals  Qq.  falls  Rowe  i  et 
cet. 

[lightning,  and  the  Ghosts  van¬ 
ish.  Cap.  The  Ghosts  vanish  Rowe  et 


cet. 

208.  Richard  ftarts  ...  his]  Richard 
ftarteth  vp...a  Q,Q2.  King  Richard 
ftarteth...a  Q^.  Richard  ftarted...his 
Q7Qg.  starting  wildly  out  of  his  sleep. 
Cap.  K.  Richard  starts... his  Rowe  et 
cet. 


and  of  the  situation  of  the  speaker  justifies  a  similar  interpretation  of  that  passage. 
The  King  sees  that  when  his  case  becomes  hopeless,  then  war  will  cease. — Kinnear 
(p.  272):  That  is,  I  died  jor  hope  in  your  cause,  jor  hope  in  you.  Buckingham 
refers  to  Henry’s  prophecy:  ‘Come  hither  England’s  hope.’ — -J  Hen.  VI;  IV,  vi, 
68.  So  Somerset  says:  ‘As  Henry’s  late  presaging  prophecy  Did  glad  my  heart 
with  hope  of  this  young  Richmond.’ — Ibid.,  line  92.  ‘For  hope’ — like  this — Buck¬ 
ingham  says,  ‘I  died’;  not  ‘jor  loyalty — for  England’s  hope  was  not  yet  her  king; 
Richmond,  as  yet,  had  but,  as  Macbeth,  ‘great  prediction  of  noble  having,  and 
of  royal  hope’  (I,  iii,  56).  The  meaning  is  the  same  as  in  3  Hen.  VI;  V,  iv,  55: 
‘And  he  that  will  not  fight  for  such  a  hope,’  i.  e.,  conquer  or  die  jor. — Wright: 
‘For  hope,’  that  is,  as  regards  hope;  and  hence  it  is  almost  equivalent  to  for  want 
of  hope.  Compare:  ‘almost  dead  for  breath.’ — Macbeth,  I,  v,  38;  also,  ‘faints 
for  succor.’ — As  You  Like  It,  II,  iv,  75;  and:  ‘I  die  for  food.’ — Ibid.,  II,  vi,  2. — 
Franz  (§328):  The  causal  ‘for’  takes  the  meaning  jor  want  of,  when  the  condition 
of  want  or  grief,  expressed  in  the  predicate,  is  represented  as  consequent  on  the 
cause  connected  with  ‘for,’  which  is  at  the  same  time  the  object  of  desire;  e.  g., 
‘to  faint  for  succour’  means  to  faint  for  want  of  succour.  This  pregnant  use  of 
the  preposition  leads,  at  times,  to  a  very  bold  style  of  expression,  like  ‘dead  for 
breath.’  To  die  for  was  a  stereotyped  phrase  for  yearn,  languish;  it  still  survives 
in  a  more  restricted  sense  in  modern  speech  ( she  dies  for  him  means  ‘she  is  over 
head  and  ears  in  love  with  him’).  [See  note  on  ‘Weeping-ripe  for  a  good  word.’ 
— Love's  Labour’s  Lost,  V,  ii,  307,  this  edition. — Ed.] 

206,  207.  fight  .  .  .  fall]  Walker  ( Crit .,  iii,  176):  I  think  falls  [the  Quarto 
reading]  is  more  in  the  manner  of  the  later  English  poetry  than  of  that  of  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  time.  Fj  has  ‘fall’ — I  think  rightly;  pugnent — cadat.  [Without  wishing  to 
criticise  my  betters,  may  not  ‘fall’  here  be  used  causatively  as  in  line  153  and  line 
190?  the  sense  would  then  be:  May  God  and  good  angels  fight  on  Richmond’s  side, 
and  cause  Richard  to  fall  in  height,  etc.  With  the  Quarto  reading  falls,  as  Kinnear, 
remarks,  p.  273,  the  passage  becomes  ‘a  prophecy  and  not  a  prayer,’  as  in  the  case 
of  the  other  speeches. — Ed.] 

209.  Giue  me  another  Horse,  etc.]  Capell  (ii,  192):  The  genuineness  of 
these  lines  is  but  too  well  proved  by  many  others  their  fellows:  Nor  are  all  of  them 
faulty — indeed,  few;  the  shortness  and  the  abruptness  in  most  of  them  paint  dis- 


26 


402 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


Haue  mercy  Iefu.  Soft,  I  did  but  dreame.  210 

0  coward  Confcience  !  how  doft  thou  afflidt  me  ? 

2 1 1 .  doJl~\  doejl  Qq. 

traction,  and  are  images  of  a  mind  scarcely  settl’d;  this  abruptness  goes  off  as  the 
speech  advances,  and  its  owner  settles  through  time. — Johnson:  There  is  in  this, 
as  in  many  of  our  author’s  speeches  of  passion,  something  very  trifling,  and  some¬ 
thing  very  striking.  Richard’s  debate,  whether  he  should  quarrel  with  himself, 
is  too  long  continued,  but  the  subsequent  exaggeration  of  his  crimes  is  truly  tragical. 
— Skottowe  (ii,  202) :  The  first  six  lines  of  this  soliloquy  are  deeply  expressive  of 
the  terrors  of  a  guilty  conscience;  but  the  conceits  and  quibbles  which  disfigure 
the  remainder,  completely  destroy  the  moral  impression. — Rotscher  (p.  46): 
Shakespeare  here  shows  us  the  marked  contrast  between  these  two  leaders:  Richard, 
the  tyrant,  utterly  broken  and  unstrung,  and  Richmond,  upon  whom  there  seems 
to  us  to  shine  the  hope  of  better  days.  This  contrast  should  also  attain  its  fullest 
counterpart  in  the  tones  of  the  voice  of  each.  Richard  flings  out  only  hoarse 
words — even  his  orders  only  make  upon  us  the  impression  of  a  dull  despair,  which 
strives  but  half-heartedly  not  to  recognise  itself  as  such.  The  timbre  of  the  voice 
is  cracked;  the  voice  itself,  upon  which  Richard  once  could  call  for  the  expression 
of  every  effect,  is  now  powerless;  there  remains  but  a  toneless  sound  as  the  reflection 
of  a  spirit  broken  down  and  approaching  utter  chaos.  In  the  ringing  tones  from 
the  courageous  soul  of  Richmond,  we  must  on  the  other  hand,  recognise  the  reflec¬ 
tion  of  a  confidence  founded  upon  the  justice  of  his  cause.  His  voice  cannot  ring 
too  clearly,  because  in  it  there  should  be  for  us  the  full  rhythm  of  an  inspired  soul 
striving  for  the  right. — Horn  (iii,  159):  Even  the  dullest  and  most  inert  auditor 
can  hardly  fail  to  be  roused  and  stirred  by  the  weird  and  tragic  force  of  this  soliloquy; 
at  the  same  time  it  is  so  thoroughly  complete  that  we  can  only  get  the  full  benefit 
of  it  by  paying  the  strictest  attention  to  the  force  of  every  word.  That,  however, 
I  do  not  intend  to  do;  it  is  sufficient  to  call  attention  to  the  main  point:  for  the  last 
time  there  is  here  put  in  words  that  fearsome  duality  which  Richard  made  use  of 
in  daily  life,  and  wherein  he  portrayed  himself  to  himself;  but  that  witty  manner 
of  consoling,  whereof  he  had  heretofore  made  use,  is  now  lacking.  It  no  longer 
helps  Richard  that  Richard  loves  Richard,  and  the  mystical  sense  wherein  ‘I  am 
myself  alone  ’  is  now  powerless  to  bring  solace,  since  this  single  loveless  7  no  longer 
pities  itself. — Lloyd:  Each  Ghost  threatens  as  it  rises,  and  Richard  afterwards 
recalls  their  threats;  but  as  he  suddenly  wakes,  his  exclamation,  true  to  the  nature 
of  dreams,  shows  him  already  transported  into  the  heady  fight.  But  deep  as  the 
apprehension  of  the  predicted  defeat  may  be,  it  is  overmastered  for  the  time  by 
the  still  deeper  sense  of  misery,  hatefulness,  and  desolation.  The  horrors  of  his 
soul  and  the  bitterness  of  his  punishment  are  heightened,  or  rather  weakened,  by 
no  vulgar  resort  to  furies  and  torments,  which  prey  on  the  spirits  of  the  weaker 
and  meaner  culprit,  Clarence.  Guilty  condition  of  being  is  to  Richard  the  present 
hell  that  Clarence  looks  forward  to  with  terror  as  a  consequence. — Hudson: 
In  this  strange  speech  there  are  some  ten  lines  in  or  near  the  Poet’s  best  style; 
the  others  are  in  his  worst;  so  inferior,  indeed,  that  it  is  not  easy  to  understand  how 
Shakespeare  could  have  written  them  at  all. 

211.  coward  Conscience]  Warburton:  Conscience  takes  advantage  of  his 
sleep  and  frights  him  in  his  dreams.  Therefore  he  is  made  to  call  it  ‘coward 
conscience,  ’  which  dares  not  encounter  him  while  he  is  himself  awake.  [With 


act  v,  sc.  iii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  403 

The  Lights  burne  blew.  It  is  not  dead  midnight.  212 

Cold  fearefull  drops  ftand  on  my  trembling  flefh. 

What?  do  I  feare  my  Selfe?  There’s  none  elfe  by,  214 


212.  It  is  not]  QzSyFf,  Rowe  i.  Is  it 
not  Rowe  ii,  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  It  is  now 
Qj  et  cet. 

dead]  dread  Ktly  (Exp.  265. — 
misprint?) 

213.  Jland]  Jlands  Qs. 

214.  What?  do  I  feare  my  Selfe?] 


What  do  I  feare?  my  felfe  ?  Qx,  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Coll.  Hal.  Cam. +  , 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  Ktly.  What  do  I 
feare  my  felfe  ?  Q^,  Knt,  Dyce  i,  Wh.  i, 
Sta. 

214-223.  What?  do  I  feare...  I  am 
not]  Om.  Coll.  (MS). 


Cibber’s  reading]  ‘  tyrant  conscience ’  not  only  a  great  beauty  is  lost,  but  a  great 
blunder  committed.  For  Richard  had  entirely  got  the  better  of  his  Conscience; 
which  could,  on  no  account,  therefore,  be  said  to  play  the  tyrant  with  him. — 
M.  Mason  (p.  231):  I  cannot  think  that  Shakespeare  had  any  of  those  refined 
ideas  in  his  head  when  he  wrote  this  passage,  which  Warburton  gives  him  credit 
for.  Richard  calls  his  conscience  ‘coward,’  because  it  inspired  him  with  fear; 
considering  it  as  a  part  of  himself,  not  as  a  distinct  personage,  whom  he  was  to 
encounter.  It  is  plain  from  the  lines:  ‘My  conscience  hath  a  thousand  several 
tongues,’  etc.  (225  et  seq.),  that  Richard  had  not  entirely  got  the  better  of  his 
conscience,  even  in  his  waking  thoughts:  nor  do  I  believe  that  any  bad  man  ever 
did.  [See  I,  iv,  134,  and  note.] 

212.  The  Lights  burne  blew]  Steevens:  Compare  Lyly,  Galathea,  1592:  ‘I 
thought  there  was  some  spirit  in  it  [brimstone]  because  it  burnt  so  blew.  For 
my  mother  would  often  tell  mee  when  the  candle  burnt  blew,  there  was  some  ill 
Spirit  in  the  house.’  [ — II,  iii,  63,  ed.  Bond.] — Wright:  So  when  the  Ghost  of 
Caesar  appears  Brutus  exclaims:  ‘How  ill  this  taper  burns!’ — Jul.  Cces.,  IV,  iii,  275. 

212.  It  is  not  dead  midnight]  Malone  refers  to  the  reading  ‘Is  it  not  dead 
midnight?’  which  he  assigns  to  F,,  and  observes:  'This  reading  has  been  followed 
by  all  subsequent  editors.  And  here  we  have  a  decisive  proof  of  the  progress 
of  corruption,  and  of  the  licentious  and  arbitrary  manner  in  which  emendations 
were  made,  even  in  Fj,  when  a  passage  in  the  Q.  that  was  printed  from,  appeared 
corrupt.  Some  idle  conjecture  was  formed  and  adopted,  instead  of  resorting  to 
the  original  copy,  where  the  true  reading  would  have  been  found.’  Malone  has 
not  followed  his  own  instructions  in  resorting  to  the  original  copies.  Had  he 
done  so,  he  would  have  seen  that  the  reading  he  decries  appears  first,  not  in  the  Ff, 
but  in  Rowe’s  edition  ii. — Ed. — Steevens:  The  reading  of  Q1(  could  it  be  sup¬ 
posed  to  need  support,  might  meet  with  it  in:  ‘Tis  now  the  very  witching  time  of 
night.’ — Hamlet,  III,  ii,  406. — Thompson:  This  is  one  of  several  cases  where  the 
editor  of  Fj  seems,  at  this  point  in  the  play,  to  have  been  without  MS  guidance, 
and  to  have  relied  on  the  later  Qq  alone.  Another  example  follows  at  1.  214: 
‘what  do  I  feare.’  In  these  cases  supplies  us  with  the  right  reading.  Pope 
was  perhaps  justified  in  rejecting  the  feeble  line  [215]  to  the  margin.  But  the 
words:  ‘I  am  I’  bring  out  in  Richard’s  extremity  his  unfailing  belief  in  the  doc¬ 
trine  ‘I  am  myself  alone,’  already  enunciated  in  3  Hen.  VI:  V,  vi,  83. — Mar¬ 
shall:  It  is  interesting  to  compare  with  this  speech  that  of  the  King  in  Hamlet, 
III,  iii,  11  51-56  and  64-72.  Of  course,  there  is  not  any  absolute  resemblance 
between  the  two  speeches;  but,  in  each  case,  it  is  a  guilty  man  communing  with 
his  own  conscience,  while  suffering  from  a  momentary  paroxysm  of  remorse. 


404 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


Richard  loues  Richard,  that  is,  I  am  I.  215 

Is  there  a  Murtherer  heere?  No ;  Yes,  I  am  : 

Then  flye ;  What  from  my  Selfe  ?  Great  reafon  :  why  ? 

Left  I  Reuenge.  What  ?  my  Selfe  vpon  my  Selfe  ? 

Alacke,  I  loue  my  Selfe.  Wherefore  ?  For  any  good 

That  I  my  Selfe,  haue  done  vnto  my  Selfe  ?  220 

O  no.  Alas,  I  rather  hate  my  Selfe, 

For  hatefull  Deeds  committed  by  my  Selfe. 

I  am  a  Vlllaine  :  yet  I  Lye,  I  am  not. 

Foole,  of  thy  Selfe  fpeake  well  :  Foole,  do  not  flatter. 

My  Confcience  hath  a  thoufand  feuerall  Tongues,  225 

And  euery  Tongue  brings  in  a  feuerall  Tale, 

And  euerie  Tale  condemnes  me  for  a  Villaine ; 

Periurie,  in  the  high’ft  Degree, 

Murther,  fterne  murther,  in  the  dyr’ft  degree, 

All  feuerall  finnes,  all  vs’d  in  each  degree,  230 


215.  Richard.../]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 
am]  and  Qx. 

2x7-223.  In  margin,  Pope,  Han. 

217.  flye  ;]flie,  Qq.  flye?  Ff,  Rowe. 

reafon  :  -why  ?]  reafon  whie  ?  Qt 
Qa.  reafon  why ,  Q3^.  reason;  why 
Pope, +  .  reason;  Why?  Varr.  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Sta.  Cam.  + .  reason  why, — 
Dyce.  reason.  Why  Ktly. 

218.  Reuenge.  What... Selfe?]  revenge 
myself  ...myself.  Lettsom,  Dyce  ii,  iii, 
Huds. 

What?]  What  Qq.  Om.  Cap. 
What,  Cam. +  . 

vpon]  on  Pope,  +  ,  Steev.  Varr. 

219.  Alacke]  Om.  Pope,  + ,  Cap.  Varr. 


Ran.  Steev.  Var.  ’03,  ’13. 

220.  /]  Om.  Q^. 

haue]  hath  Q7Qg. 
vnto]  ufon  F3F4,  Rowe  i. 

223.  yet]  yea  Q8. 

224.  fpeake  well:]  speak — «W/Rowe  i. 

228.  Periurie,]  Q3-8,Ff,  Rowe.  Peri¬ 
urie,  periurie  Q,Q2.  Perjury,  foul  per¬ 
jury  Coll,  ii  (MS).  Perjury ,  perjury 
Pope  et  cet. 

the]  Om.  Pope, -I-  ( — Var. ’73)* 
high' fl]  highefl  Qq,  Cap.  Varr. 

Mai. 

229.  Murther  ...murther ,]  Murder... 
murder,  Q^. 

dydfl]  dyrefl  Qq. 


215.  I  am  I]  Malone:  I  am  not  sure  that  the  reading  of  Qx,  I  and  I,  is  not 
right. — Von  Friesen  (ii,  136):  I  cannot  consider  it  as  the  chance  work  of  a  lucky 
inspiration  that  the  very  same  thoughts  upon  which  Richard  based  his  whole 
course  of  action  are  again  heard  in  this  monologue;  but  in  opposition  to  a  dar¬ 
ing  design  of  an  insolence  devoid  of  conscience  they  now  obtrude  as  the  most 
overwhelming  reproof  of  that  conscience  itself.  Thus  the  words:  ‘Richard  loves 
Richard,  that  is  I  am  I,'  belong  here.  Even  more  noteworthy  are  the  other 
words:  ‘I  am  a  villain.'  It  is  as  though  in  the  former  we  should  recognise:  ‘I 
am  myself  alone’;  in  the  latter:  ‘I  am  determined  to  become  a  villain’;  and 
therein  comprehend  that  the  consciousness  of  having  attained  his  goal  is  to  be 
used  by  his  conscience  as  the  flaming  sword  of  justice  for  the  annihilation  of  this 
accomplished  villain,  who  had  based  his  life  on  the  power  of  the  Ego. 


ACT  V,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


405 


Throng  all  to’th’Barre,  crying  all,  Guilty,  Guilty.  23 1 

I  fhall  difpaire,  there  is  no  Creature  loues  me ; 

And  if  I  die,  no  foule  fhall  pittie  me. 

Nay,  wherefore  fhould  they  ?  Since  that  I  my  Selfe, 

Finde  in  my  Selfe,  no  pittie  to  my  Selfe.  235 

Me  thought,  the  Soules  of  all  that  I  had  murther’ d 

Came  to  my  Tent,  and  euery  one  did  threat 

To  morrowes  vengeance  on  the  head  of  Richard .  238 


231.  all ]  Q^Ff,  Rowe.  Om.  QxQa 
et  cet. 

th']  Ff,  Rowe,  Wh.  i,  Sta.  the 
Qq  et  cet. 

Barre]  barrre  Q6.  Boare  Qg. 
crying  all  ]  all  crying  Pope,  + . 

232.  fhall]  will  Pope. 

Creature ]  crealuees  Fa.  creatures 

F3- 

233.  fhall]  will  Q,Q2,  Pope,  Mai. 
Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Ktly. 

234.  235.  In  margin,  Pope,  Han. 

234.  Nay]  And  Qq. 

they?. ..my  Selfe,]  they,  ...my 


felfe.  Qj.  they  ?...my  felfe.  Q^.  they, — 
... myself  ?  Dyce.  they,  ...myself?  Cam. 
+  .  they  ? ...myself .  Rowe  et  cet. 

236-238.  Transposed  to  follow  1.  245. 
Mason,  Ran.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

236.  had  murther3  d]  had  murtherd 
Q,.  murtherd  Q3.  murthred  Q3_5.  mur- 
thered  Qg.  haue  murthered  Q?.  haue 
murdred  Qg.  had  murder'd  Johns.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Cam. 
+  ,  Ktly.  have  murther' d  Cap. 

237.  Came]  Came  all  Q^. 
and]  Om.  F4. 

one]  on  Q4. 


231.  Barre]  Murray  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  Ill):  22.  The  barrier  or  wooden  rail 
marking  off  the  immediate  precinct  of  the  judge’s  seat,  at  which  prisoners  are 
stationed  for  arraignment,  trial,  or  sentence.  (b)  A  tribunal,  e.  g.,  that  of  reason, 
public  opinion,  conscience.  [The  present  line  quoted.  In  Hogarth’s  Industry 
and  Idleness,  plate  x,  there  is  a  good  representation  of  the  ‘bar’  with  prisoners 
and  witnesses  thronging  to  it. — Ed.] 

232.  there  is  no  Creature  loues  me]  Boas  (p.  155):  As  Richard  starts  from 
his  slumber,  there  is  wrung  at  last  from  his  lips  the  agonized  cry  of  homage  to  the 
might  of  moral  law.  The  horror  of  his  isolation  from  humanity  falls  upon  him, 
echoing,  as  it  were,  the  grim  burden  of  the  spectral  chorus;  he  shrieks  aloud:  ‘There 
is  no  creature  loves  me.’  He  to  whom  love  had  been  only  foolishness  clutches  at 
it  convulsively  as  he  hangs  over  the  darkness  of  the  abyss,  and  with  the  imploring 
cry  for  pity  from  his  fellows,  his  scheme  of  self-centred  life  crumbles  into  the  dust. 
That  is  the  ‘true  tragedy’  of  Richard  III,  the  real  and  significant  Nemesis  of  which 
his  death  in  battle  at  the  hands  of  Richmond,  God’s  representative,  is  only  the  out¬ 
ward,  though  dramatically  and  historically  imperative,  confirmation. 

233.  no  soule  shall  pittie  me]  Compare:  ‘Men  shall  deal  unadvisedly  some¬ 
times,’  etc.,  IV,  iii,  309;  or  see,  if  needful,  Abbott,  §  315. 

236-238.  Me  thought  .  .  .  the  head  of  Richard]  Johnson:  These  lines  stand 
with  so  little  propriety  at  the  end  of  this  speech,  that  I  cannot  but  suspect  them  to 
be  misplaced.  Perhaps  they  should  be  inserted  after:  ‘Fool  do  not  flatter,’  1.  224. — 
M.  Mason  (p.  231):  In  my  opinion  these  lines  might  be  introduced  with  the  most 
propriety  after:  ‘O  Ratcliffe,  I  fear,  I  fear,’  1.  248.  And  then  Ratcliff’s  reply: 

Nay,  good  my  Lord,  be  not  afraid  of  shadows,’  would  be  natural;  whereas,  as 


406 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


Enter  Ratcliffe. 

Rat.  My  Lord.  240 

King.  Who’s  there  ? 

239.  Ratcliffe.]  Catesby.  Irving.  Cam.+. 

241.  Who's]  Zoundes ,  who  is  Q,Qa.  241.  [starting.  Cap. 

’Zouns,  who  is  Cap.  ’  Zounds  !  who  is  there]  heare  Q4> 

the  text  is  now  regulated,  Ratcliff  bids  him  not  to  be  afraid  of  shadows,  without 
knowing  that  he  had  been  haunted  by  them:  unless  we  suppose  that  the  idea  of 
shadows  is  included  in  what  Richard  calls  a  ‘fearful  dream,’  1.  245. — Ritson: 
Either  lines  214-235  are  not  Shakespeare’s,  or  are  so  unworthy  of  him  that  it  were 
to  be  wished  they  could  with  propriety  be  degraded  to  the  margin.  I  wonder  that 
Johnson,  who  thought  the  three  lines  following  misplaced,  did  not  perceive  that 
their  connection  with  the  preceding  part  of  the  soliloquy,  ending  at  ‘trembling 
flesh,  ’  was  interrupted  solely  by  this  apparent  interpolation,  which  is  in  the  highest 
degree  childish  and  unnatural. — Steevens:  I  rather  suppose  the  lines,  referred  to 
by  Ritson,  though  genuine,  to  have  been  crossed  out  of  the  stage  manuscript  by 
Shakespeare  himself,  and  afterwards  restored  by  the  original,  but  tasteless,  editor 
of  this  play. — R.  G.  White:  Were  I  to  print  a  Shakespeare  for  myself  alone,  I 
should  adopt  Mason’s  emendation  without  a  doubt.  But  as  the  passage  in  question 
stands  in  all  the  old  editions,  and  we  know  that  the  Quarto  version  was  carefully 
revised,  such  a  change  would  be  altogether  beyond  the  proper  limits  of  editorial 
prerogative.  . .  .  The  twenty-two  lines,  mentioned  by  Ritson,  are  surely  very  much 
inferior  to  the  rest  of  the  play,  and — what  is  of  more  consequence — not  in  the 
style  in  which  Shakespeare  wrote  at  any  period  of  his  life. — The  Cowden-Clarkes: 
We  think  that  Ratcliff’s  word  ‘shadows,’  1.  249,  is  used  in  reference  to  Richard’s 
half-expressed  ‘fear’  lest  his  apparent  ‘friends’  should  not  ‘prove  all  true’;  which 
fear  Ratcliff  treats  as  unsubstantial  and  unreal:  while  Richard’s  consciousness 
starts  at  the  word  ‘shadows,’  and  he  uses  it  in  his  rejoinder,  with  reference  to  the 
apparitions  which  have  crowded  his  dreams.  To  make  these  three  lines  in  question 
uttered  after  the  entrance  of  Ratcliff  appears  to  us  sheer  misapprehension  of  the 
Poet’s  meaning.  As  if  Richard  would  have  spoken  to  another  of  ‘the  souls  of  all 
that  I  had  murdered.’  But  at  the  close  of  the  soliloquy  the  lines  come  in  thorough 
consonance  with  Shakespeare’s  principles  of  dramatic  art:  giving  emphasis  to  the 
vision  just  beheld,  marking  vividly  its  impression  on  the  mind  of  the  speaker,  and 
giving  reason  for  the  previous  words,  ‘I  myself  find  in  myself  no  pity  to  myself.’ 
Moreover,  they  perfectly  consist  with  the  tone  of  Richard’s  former  soliloquies, 
where  he  freely  canvasses  with  himself  his  own  villanies. — Vaughan  (iii,  153) 
suggests  that  these  three  lines  be  inserted  between  the  lines:  ‘O  Ratcliff  I  have 
had  a  fearful  dream,’  and  ‘What  thinkest  thou?  will  all  our  friends  prove  true?’ 

237,  238.  euery  one  did  threat  .  .  .  vengeance]  Skottowe  (i,  207):  From 
the  old  play,  The  True  Tragedie,  etc.,  Shakespeare  got  the  idea  of  the  ghosts: 
‘Sleep  I,  wake  I,  or  whatsoever  I  do,  Mee  thinkes  their  ghosts  come  gaping  for 
revenge  Whom  I  have  slain  in  reaching  for  a  crown:  Clarence  complains  and 
crieth  for  revenge,  My  nephews  bloods  revenge,  revenge  doth  cry:  The  headless 
peers  comes  pressing  for  revenge;  And  every  one  cries,  let  the  tyrant  die.’  [Ver- 
planck,  Lloyd,  and  Barron  Field  also  call  attention  to  this  similarity;  see  for 
a  further  comparison,  Churchill,  on  The  True  Tragedie,  in  Appendix.'] 


act  v,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


407 


Rat .  Ratcliff e  my  Lord/tis  I  :  the  early  Village  Cock  242 
Hath  twice  done  falutation  to  the  Morne, 

Your  Friends  are  vp,  and  buckle  on  their  Armour. 

*Kwg.  O  Ratclifife  I  haue  dreamd  a  fearfull  Dreame.  245 
*What  thinkft  thou  will  our  friends  proue  all  true. 

*Rat.  No  doubt,  my  Lord.* 

King.  O  Ratcliff c ,  I  feare,  I  feare. 

Rat.  Nay  good  my  Lord,  be  not  affraid  of  Shadows. 

King.  By  the  Apoftle  Paul,  fhadowes  to  night  250 

Haue  ftroke  more  terror  to  the  foule  of  Richard , 

Then  can  the  fubliance  of  ten  thoufand  Souldiers  252 


242.  Ratcliffe]  Om.  Q,Q8,  Thompson. 
'tis  /]  Om.  Pope,  +  (  —  Var.  ’73). 

243.  twice]  thrice  Q7Qg. 

245.  0]  Om.  Cap. 

245-247.  *King.  O ...my  Lord.*]  Om. 
Fx,Ff,+. 

246.  thinkjl]  thinkest  Cap.  et  seq. 


248.  O]  Om.  Pope,  + ,  Cap.  Varr.  Steev. 
Varr.  Knt. 

I  feare,  I  feared]  I  have  dream' d 
a  fearful  dream  Coll.  (MS). 

feare.]feare,  Q,Q8.  fear —  Rowe 
et  seq.  (subs.) 

251.  flroke]flrooke  Qq.  Jlruck  F4. 


242,  243.  Cock  .  .  .  done  salutation  to  the  Morne]  Harrison  ( Description 
of  England )  says:  ‘ — for  the  night  we  have  none  other  parts  than  the  twilight, 
darkenight,  midnight,  and  cocks  crowing.’ — Bk,  iii,  ch.  xiv:  Time  and  its  Parts, 
p.  89,  Ed.  Furnivall.  Compare  also:  ‘The  country  cocks  do  crow,  the  clocks  do 
toll  And  the  third  hour  of  drowsy  morning  name.’ — Hen.  V:  IV,  Prol.  15,  16. — Ed. 

245-247.  O  Ratcliffe  .  .  .  my  Lord]  Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  168):  Objection 
has  been  made  to  the  omission  of  these  lines  in  Fj,  since  Ratcliffe’s  reply:  ‘ — be 
not  afraid  of  shadows,’  is  thus  made  irrelevant,  but  in  the  bare  mention  of  ‘a  fearful 
dream,’  as  in  the  Qq,  there  is  actually  no  direct  reference  to  the  shadows,  which 
had  appeared  to  the  king.  It  is  much  better  to  imagine  that  Ratcliffe  overheard 
the  three  last  lines  of  Richard’s  monologue:  ‘Methought  the  souls,’  etc.,  before  he 
addressed  him  with:  ‘My  Lord.’  There  is  reasonable  likelihood  that  the  anony¬ 
mous  corrector  of  the  Quarto  missed  the  connection  of  Ratcliffe’s  line:  ‘Nay,  good 
my  Lord,’  etc.,  with  some  speech  of  Richard’s  in  the  original  text,  and  filled  up  the 
gap  with  these  three  lines  of  his  own  composition.  He  has  dealt  unfairly  with 
the  design  of  the  poet,  who  later  makes  Richard  say,  in  no  uncertain  words,  that 
his  fear  is  not  the  fear  of  the  strength  of  his  foes,  or  the  desertion  of  his  friends, 
but  fear  of  ‘  shadows.’  The  thought  of  spying  upon  his  soldiers  to  ascertain  whether 
they  were  faithful  was  an  after  thought,  which  the  line,  supplied  by  the  anonymous 
corrector,  ‘  What  think’st  thou,  will  our  friends  prove  all  true,  ’  unnecessarily  antici¬ 
pates. — Spedding  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  32):  Here  we  have  a  considerable 
error  peculiar  to  Fj,  but  still  it  is  one  with  which  no  corrector  had  anything  to  do. 
These  lines  are  omitted,  no  doubt,  by  one  of  the  most  ordinary  accidents  of  the 
press  Of  the  two  lines  beginning:  ‘King.  O  Ratcliffe,’  the  compositor’s  eye  had 
lighted  on  the  last.  Or  it  may  have  been  the  transcriber’s  mistake.  Every  prac¬ 
tised  transcriber  knows  how  easily  such  an  accident  may  occur. 

250.  By  the  Apostle  Paul]  Compare  I,  ii,  40,  46;  and  III,  iv,  85. 


408 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


Armed  in  proofe,  and  led  by  (hallow  Richmond.  253 

’Tis  not  yet  neere  day.  Come  go  with  me, 

Vnder  our  Tents  lie  play  the  Eafe-dropper,  255 

To  heare  if  any  meane  to  ihrinke  from  me. 

Exeunt  Richard  &  Ratliff e, 


Enter  the  Lords  to  Richmond  fitting 
in  his  Tent. 

Richm.  Good  morrow  Richmond.  260 

Rich.  Cry  mercy  Lords,  and  watchfull  Gentlemen, 

That  you  haue  tane  a  tardie  (luggard  heere  ? 

Lords.  How  haue  you  flept  my  Lord  ? 

Rich.  The  fweeteft  (leepe, 

And  faireft  boading  Dreames,  265 

That  euer  entred  in  a  drowfie  head, 

Haue  I  fince  your  departure  had  my  Lords. 

Me  thought  their  Soules,  whofe  bodies  ifo/z.murther’d,  268 


254.  ’  Tis]  It  is  Pope,  + ,  Cap.  Varr. 
Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh. 
i,  Hal.  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

254,255-  me, ...  Tents  lie ]  me,  ...tents ; 
Tie  Ff.  me. ..tents;  I'll  Han.  Cap. 

255.  Eafe-dropper]  eafe  dropper  Qx. 
ewfe  dropper  Q2Q3.  eawfe-dropper  Q4. 
ewe f e-dropper  Qs-s.  Eaves-dropper  F4  et 
seq. 

256.  heare]  fee  Q,Q2,  Cam. +  . 
meane  to Jhrinke]  means  to Jhrink 

Q4.  man  Jhrink  F3F4,  Rowe  i. 

257-259.  Exeunt. ..Enter. ..Tent.]  Ex¬ 
eunt.  Enter  the  Lords  to  Richmond.  Qq. 
Scene  v.  Pope  i.  Scene  iv.  [Misprint 
for  vi.]  Pope  ii.  Scene  vi.  Han.  Warb. 
Johns.  Exeunt ...  Richmond  wakes. 
Enter  Oxford,  and  others  to  him.  Capell 


et  seq.  (subs.) 

260.  Richm.]  Lords.  QqFf. 

261.  Cry]  Cry  you  Ff,  Rowe.  I  cry 
you  Pope.  ’  Cry  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Sing. 
Ktly.  I  cry  your  Han. 

262.  a]  Om.  Q4. 

heen r ?]  Ff  (subs.)  here.  Qq  et 

cet. 

263.  my  Lord  my  Lord  ?  Since  we 
did  leave  you  Vaughan  (iii,  155). 

264.  265.  The. ..Dreames~\  Ff,  Rowe. 
One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

265.  fairejl  boading ]  fairest-boding 
Theob.  et  seq. 

268.  bodies]  body  Q,Qg. 

Rich.]  Richard  Rowe. 
murthed d]  murthered  Qj 8. 


253.  Armed  in  proofe]  That  is,  in  armour;  Schmidt  furnishes  several  examples. 

254.  ’Tis  not  yet  neere  day]  Wright:  With  this  reading  ‘near’  is  a  disyllable, 
like  fire,  hour,  year,  and  other  words. 

255.  Ease-dropper]  Bradley  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  Eaves-drop,  noun):  The  space  of 
ground  which  is  liable  to  receive  the  rain-water  thrown  off  by  the  eaves  of  a  building. 
— Ibid.  (5.  v.  Eavesdrop,  verb):  To  stand  within  the  ‘eavesdrop’  of  a  house  in  order 
to  listen  to  secrets;  hence,  to  listen  secretly  to  private  conversation. 

261.  Cry  mercy]  Marshall:  ‘I  cry  you  mercy’  occurs  frequently  in  Shakes¬ 
peare;  but  this  is  the  only  instance  of  the  omission  of  the  objective  case.  [Possibly 
the  you  or  ye  is  elided  by  absorption  with  the  y  of  ‘cry’;  and  in  a  modern  text 
ought  perhaps  to  be  represented  by  an  apostrophe,  thus,  ‘  Cry  ’mercy.’ — Ed. 


act  v,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


409 


Came  to  my  Tent,  and  cried  on  Vi<5lory : 

I  promife  you  my  Heart  is  very  iocond,  270 

In  the  remembrance  of  fo  faire  a  dreame, 

How  farre  into  the  Morning  is  it  Lords  ? 

Lor .  Vpon  the  ftroke  of  foure. 

Rich.  Why  then  ’tis  time  to  Arme,  and  giue  direction. 

His  Oration  to  his  Souldiers.  275 

More  then  I  haue  faid,  louing  Countrymen, 

The  leyfure  and  inforcement  of  the  time 
Forbids  to  dwell  vpon  :  yet  remember  this, 

God,  and  our  good  caufe,  fight  vpon  our  fide, 

The  Prayers  of  holy  Saints  and  wronged  foules,  280 

Like  high  rear’d  Bulwarkes,  ftand  before  our  Faces, 

{Richard  except)  thofe  whom  we  fight  againft, 

Had  rather  haue  vs  win,  then  him  they  follow. 

For,  what  is  he  they  follow?  Truly  Gentlemen, 

A  bloudy  Tyrant,  and  a  Homicide :  285 

One  rais’d  in  blood,  and  one  in  blood  eftablifh’d  ; 

One  that  made  meanes  to  come  by  what  he  hath, 

And  flaughter’d  thofe  that  were  the  meanes  to  help  him  : 

A  bafe  foule  Stone,  made  precious  by  the  foyle  289 


269.  on]  out  Pope,  Han.  On  /  Warb. 
Johns.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Coll. 
Sing.  Hal. 

270.  Heart]  foule  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

272.  Morning ]  mourning  Q8. 

274.  [arms  and  comes  forth.  Cap. 

275.  His... Souldiers.]  Om.  Rowe,  +  . 
[to  his  Troops ;  who  now  gather  about 
the  Tent.  Capell.  He  advances  to  the 
troops.  Var. ’78  et  seq.  (subs.) 

278.  vpon]  on  Pope,  +  (—Var. ’73), 


Steev.  Varr.  Coll.  Hal. 

281.  high  rear'd  ]  high  read  QA. 

282.  (Richard  except]]  Ff.  Richard , 
except  Q,Q2.  Richard  except ,  Q  et 
cet. 

286.  e/lablijh'd]  ejlablijhed  Qq. 

287.  what  ]  that  Q7Q8. 

288.  /laughter'  d~\Jlandered  Q^.faugh- 
tered  Qq  (_/ laugtered  Q3). 

289.  foyle]  foile  Q,Q2.  foile  Q3.5.  foyl 
F4.  foil  Rowe  et  seq. 


269.  cried  on  Victory]  Dyce,  quotes  Warburton’s  punctuation  of  this  pas¬ 
sage  [see  Text.  Notes]  and  adds:  ‘But  compare,’  for  the  expression,  ‘This  quarry 
cries  on  havoc.’ — Hamlet,  V,  ii,  375;  and:  ‘whose  noise  is  this  that  cries  on 
murder.’  —Othello,  V,  i,  47. 

277.  leysure]  Compare  11  109,  113,  above. 

282,  283.  (Richard  except) . . .  then  him  they  follow]  The  Cowden-Clarkes: 
These  two  lines  partake  of  the  nature  of  an  Irish  bull:  strictly  scanned,  they  state 
that  which  is  not;  taken  with  latitude  they  convey  a  just  idea.  Compare  III,  i,  65: 

Then  taking  him  from  thence  that  is  not  there.’ 

287.  made  meanes]  See  1.  46,  above. 

289.  soyle]  Bradley  (IV.  E.  D.  s.  v.  foil;  subst.1):  5.  A  thin  leaf  of  some  metal 


4io 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


Of  Englands  Chaire,  where  he  is  falfely  fet  .*  290 

One  that  hath  euer  beene  Gods  Enemy. 

Then  if  you  fight  againft  Gods  Enemy, 

God  will  in  iuftice  ward  you  as  his  Soldiers. 

If  you  do  fweare  to  put  a  Tyrant  downe, 

You  fleepe  in  peace,  the  Tyrant  being  flaine  :  295 

If  you  do  fight  againft  your  Countries  Foes, 

Your  Countries  Fat  fhall  pay  your  paines  the  hyre. 

If  you  do  fight  in  fafegard  of  your  wiues,  • 

Your  wiues  fhall  welcome  home  the  Conquerors. 

If  you  do  free  your  Children  from  the  Sword,  300 

Your  Childrens  Children  quits  it  in  your  Age. 

Then  in  the  name  of  God  and  all  thefe  rights, 

Aduance  your  Standards,  draw  your  willing  Swords. 

For  me,  the  ranfome  of  my  bold  attempt, 

Shall  be  this  cold  Corpes  on  the  earth’s  cold  face.  305 

But  if  I  thriue,  the  gaine  of  my  attempt, 

The  leaft  of  you  fhall  fhare  his  part  thereof.  307 

293.  ward ]  reward  Q8.  297.  Fat  ]  fate  Long  MS  ap.  Cam. 

294.  do]  Om.  Qg_8.  298.  do]  Jloe  Fa.  doe  F3. 

fweare]  Q3-8,Ff,  Rowe,  fweate  301.  quits]  QqFf,  Rowe,  quit  Pope 

Q1Q2  et  cet-  et  se(F 

295.  You]  You' ll  Han. 


placed  under  a  precious  stone  to  increase  its  brilliancy,  or  under  some  transparent 
substance  to  give  it  the  appearance  of  a  precious  stone.  [Compare  Rich.  II:  I, 
iii,  265:  ‘The  sullen  passage  of  thy  weary  steps  Esteem  as  foil  wherein  thou  art 
to  set  The  precious  jewel  of  thy  home  return.’  Also:  1  Hen.  IV:  I,  ii,  237:  ‘My 
reformation,  glittering  o’er  my  fault,  Shall  show  more  goodly  and  attract  more 
eyes  Than  that  which  hath  no  foil  to  set  it  off.’] 

294.  sweare]  Although  the  reading  of  QjQ,,  sweate,  has  been  followed  by  all 
editors  except  Rowe,  it  is  questionable  whether  this  reading  of  the  Ff  and  the 
other  Qq  be  not  preferable  poetically. — Ed. 

297.  Countries  Fat]  Compare:  ‘Most  subject  is  the  fattest  soil  to  weeds.’ — 
2  Hen.  IV:  IV,  iv,  54;  and:  ‘  By  heaven’s  fair  sun  that  breeds  the  fat  earth’s  store.’ — 
Rape  of  Luc.,  1837. 

301.  quits]  Wright:  Only  a  printer’s  error,  and  not  a  plural  in  s.  See  IV, 
iii,  23,  67. 

304.  ransome]  Craigie  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  3):  The  action  or  means  of  freeing 
oneself  from  a  penalty;  a  sum  of  money  paid  to  obtain  pardon  for  an  offence;  a 
fine,  mulct.  Obsolete. — Skeat  {Diet.)  derives  it  from  the  Latin  redemptio. 

305-307.  this  cold  Corpes  .  .  .  his  part  thereof]  ‘And  this  one  thing  I  assure 
you,  that  in  so  just  and  good  a  cause  and  so  notable  a  quarrel,  you  shall  find  me 


act  v,  sc.  iii.J 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


41 1 

Sound  Drummes  and  Trumpets  boldly,  and  cheerefully,  308 
God,  and  Saint  George ,  Richmond ,  and  Victory. 

Enter  King  Richard ,  Ratcliff e ,  and  Catesby.  310 

A'.What  faid  Northumberland  as  touching  Richmond  ? 

Rat.  That  he  was  neuer  trained  vp  in  Armes. 

King.  He  faid  the  truth  :  and  what  faid  Surrey  then  ? 

Rat.  He  fmil’d  and  faid,  the  better  for  our  purpofe. 

King.  He  was  in  the  right,  and  fo  indeed  it  is.  315 

308.  Trumpets ]  Trumpet  F2. 
boldly ,  and]  boldly  Pope,  4- 

(  —  Var.  ’73),  Cap.  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 
bold,  and  Sta. 

309.  [Shouts,  &c.  and  Exeunt.  Cap. 

Exeunt.  Rowe  et  cet.  (Om.  QqFf ). 

310.  Scene  vi.  Pope  i.  Scene  vxi. 

Pope  ii,  + . 


310.  Enter... Catesby.]  Re-enter  Rich¬ 
ard,  and  Ratcliff ;  Attendants,  and  Forces, 
with  them.  Capell. 

Ratcliffe]  Rat.  &c.  Qq. 

313.  truth]  trueth  Qt. 
then  ?]  then.  F4. 

3x5.  in  the]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Dyce, 
Cam. +.  i’th’  Pope,  +  .  i'the  Cap.  et 
cet. 


this  day  rather  a  dead  carrion  on  the  cold  ground,  than  a  free  prisoner  on  a  carpet 
in  a  lady’s  chamber.  .  .  .  This  is  the  day  of  gain,  and  this  is  the  time  of  loss;  get 
this  day  victory,  and  be  conquerors;  and  lose  this  day’s  battle,  and  be  villains; 
and,  therefore,  in  the  name  of  God  and  Saint  George,  let  every  man  courageously 
advance  forth  his  standard.’ — Proclamation  of  Richmond  on  the  Eve  of  the  Battle 
of  Bosworth. — Halliwell,  Letters,  etc.,  i,  169. 

306,  307.  the  gaine  of  my  attempt  .  .  .  his  part  thereof]  Walker  ( Crit .,  i, 
55)  gives  many  examples  of  this  ‘striving  after  a  natural  arrangement  of  words, 
inconsistent  with  modern  English  grammar,  but  authorized  by  that  of  the  Eliza¬ 
bethan  age.’ 

309.  God,  and  Saint  George]  Warton:  ‘Saint  George’  was  the  common  cry 
of  the  English  soldiers  when  they  charged  the  enemy.  Compare:  'Item,  that  all 
souldiers  entring  into  battaile,  assault,  skirmish,  or  other  faction  of  armes,  shall 
have  for  their  common  cry  and  word,  Saint  George,  forward,  or  upon  them,  Saint 
George,  whereby  the  souldier  is  much  comforted,  and  the  enemy  dismaied  by 
calling  to  minde  the  ancient  valour  of  England,  which  with  that  name  has  so  often 
been  victorious.’ — Arte  of  Warre  (latter  end  of  Elizabeth’s  reign),  p.  84.  [Com¬ 
pare  also:  ‘Cry  “God  for  Harry,  England,  and  Saint  George!”’ — Henry  V:  III, 
»>  34-] 

31 1.  What  said  Northumberland]  Macdonald:  When  Richard  and  Ratcliff 
return,  they  are  discussing  a  remark  they  had  overheard  during  their  eves-dropping. 
They  had  been  listening  to  the  conversation  of  Northumberland,  whose  loyalty 
was  suspected.  [Possibly;  but  Northumberland  and  Surrey  had  also  gone  among 
the  soldiers  with  encouraging  words,  see  11  78-81,  and  Richard  is  perhaps  here 
referring  to  what  had  been  said  by  them. — Ed.] 


412 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


Tell  the  clocke  there.  Clocke  Jlrikes.  316 

Giue  me  a  Kalender  :  Who  faw  the  Sunne  to  day  ? 

Rat.  Not  I  my  Lord. 

King.  Then  he  difdaines  to  fhine  :  for  by  the  Booke 
He  fhould  haue  brau’d  the  Eaft  an  houre  ago,  320 

316,  317.  Tell...Kalender\  One  line,  316.  ftrikes]  ftriketh  Qq,  Cam. +  . 

Pope  et  seq.  317.  [A  Calendar  brought.  Coll,  ii,  iii 

316.  Clocke]  The  clock  Qq.  Clockes  (MS). 

K _ 

316.  Clocke  strikes]  Portable  striking  clocks  were  not  made  until  1530. 
See  Haydn,  Did.  of  Dates,  s.  v.  Clock. — Ed.  In  an  article  in  the  Edinburgh 
Review  (April,  1871,  p.  377)  on  the  ‘  Chorizantes,  ’  the  writer  observes  that 
‘Shakespeare  could  not  have  made  any  of  his  characters  speak  of  tobacco  with¬ 
out  being  grossly  anachronistic,  the  incidents  in  all  his  plays  having  occurred  at 
remote  periods,  or,  at  any  rate,  much  anterior  to  the  introduction  of  tobacco 
into  Europe,  whereas  Ben  Jonson  [who  does  mention  tobacco]  laid  the  plot  of 
many  a  play  in  his  own  time  when  tobacco  was  familiar  to  all.’  This  statement 
having  been  criticised  by  Dr  Hayman,  the  editor  of  the  Odyssey ,  the  author  of  the 
article  replied  ( Athenaeum ,  6  Sept.,  1873),  and  admirably  defines  the  distinction 
between  anachronisms  that  might  be  termed  permissible  and  those  that  are  too 
‘gross’  to  be  ever  tolerated.  After  referring  to  the  mention  by  Shakespeare  of 
‘cannon,’  in  King  John,  a  ‘clock  striking,’  in  Julius  Casar,  and  ‘billards,’  in  Ant. 
&•  Cleo.,  the  writer  continues,  ‘but  no  dramatic  author  to  produce  a  scenic  effect 
would  shrink  from  such  anachronisms,  because  they  are  not  “gross,”  not  so 
“gross”  as  to  be  detected  in  an  instant,  by  a  theatrical  audience  which  knows 
nothing  whatever  of  or  about  the  origin  of  cannon,  clocks,  and  billiards.  But  all 
Shakespeare’s  contemporaries,  even  the  most  ignorant,  knowing  that  tobacco  had 
been  introduced  into  the  old  world  during  their  lives,  would  have  derided  the  great 
dramatist  had  he  represented  Sir  John  Falstaff  consoling  himself  at  Dame  Quickly’s, 
in  the  reign  of  Henry  the  Fourth,  with  a  pipe  of  tobacco  ....  So  a  dramatist  of 
our  age  could  not  speak  of  William  the  Conqueror  travelling  by  an  express  train, 
or  sending  a  message  by  the  electric  telegraph;  the  anachronism  would  be  gross; 
it  would  come  immediately  within  the  cognizance  of  the  audience,  who  know  what 
is  going  on  in  their  own  generation,  with  some  knowing  what  went  on  in  the  genera¬ 
tion  immediately  preceding;  and,  thinking  the  mistake  ridiculous,  they  would  burst 
into  excessive  merriment.  .  .  .  But  the  anachronism  would  not  be  discovered  by 
anybody  in  his  audience,  if  a  dramatic  author  were  to  represent  the  Egyptian 
Pharaoh  Cheops  going  in  a  pair  of  boots  to  witness  the  progress  of  the  building 
of  the  Great  Pyramid,  or  the  J  ews  returning  in  hats  and  shoes  from  their  Babylonish 
captivity.  For  where  can  the  theatrical  audience  be  found  that  knows  anything 
about  the  history  of  boots,  hats,  and  shoes,  when  it  does  not  comprise,  peradventure, 
one  man  possessing  sound  learning  and  extensive  information.’  [Note  on  ‘Let 
us  to  billiards.’ — Ant.  &•  Cleo.,  II,  v,  6,  this  edition.] 

317.  Who  saw]  Wright:  Compare:  ‘And  I  said,  Surely  he  is  torn  in  pieces; 
and  I  saw  him  not  since.’ — Genesis  xliv,  28. 

320.  brau’d]  Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  brave,  vb):  5.  To  make  splendid;  to 
deck  out,  adorn.  [The  present  line  quoted.  And  yet  Stanley  said,  some  time 
before  this,  that:  ‘Flaky  darkness  breaks  within  the  east,’  1.  98,  above. — Ed.] 


act  v,  sc.  iii.]  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

A  blacke  day  will  it  be  to  fomebody.  Ratcliffe. 
Rat.  My  Lord. 

King.  The  Sun  will  not  be  feene  to  day, 

The  sky  doth  frowne,  and  lowre  vpon  our  Army. 

I  would  thefe  dewy  teares  were  from  the  ground. 
Not  fhine  to  day  ?  Why,  what  is  that  to  me 
More  then  to  Richmond  ?  For  the  felfe-fame  Heauen 
That  frownes  on  me,  lookes  fadly  vpon  him. 


413 

321 


325 


Enter  Norfolke. 

Nor.  Arme,  arme,  my  Lord  :  the  foe  vaunts  in  the  field. 
King.  Come,  buftle,  buftle.  Caparifon  my  horfe. 


321.  will  it]  it  will  Rowe  ii, +  ,  Varr. 
Ran. 

fomebody.  Ratcliffe.]  fome  bodie 
Rat.  Qj_6.  fome  body ,  Q?.  fome  body. 
Qg.  somebody,  Ratcliff.  Rowe,  Pope, 
Theob.  Han.  Warb.  somebody. — Rat¬ 
cliff  e, —  Cap. 


321.  Ratcliffe.]  As  separate  line,  Johns, 
et  seq. 

322.  Lord.~\  Lord?  Pope  et  seq. 

324.  lowre]  QqFf, +.  lower  Dye e  i. 

lour  Cap.  et  cet. 

330.  foe  vaunts']  foe  vants  Q4.  foes 
vaunt  Rowe  i. 


325.  I  would  these  dewy  teares  were  from  the  ground]  Marshall:  The 
meaning  of  this  line  is  not  quite  clear.  Does  Richard  mean  that  it  was  drizzling, 
or  that  there  was  a  damp  mist;  or  does  he  mean  that  he  wishes  there  was  not  so 
much  dew  on  the  ground,  ‘from’  being  equivalent  to  away  jrom  ?  The  battle  of 
Bosworth  was  fought  on  the  2  2d  of  August,  at  which  time  of  the  year  it  was 
likely  that,  on  marshy  ground,  there  would  be  a  mist  rising  in  the  morning. — 
Barnard:  That  is,  I  would  this  wet  were  dew,  and  not  rain. 

326.  Not  shine  to  day]  Churchill  (p.  521):  That  Shakespeare  drew  his 
passage  from  The  True  Tragedie  there  can  be  little  doubt,  when  it  is  observed  that 
the  chronicle  account  gives  an  entirely  different  description  of  the  day.  According 
to  it  the  sun  was  shining:  ‘Richmond  left  [the  marryse]  on  his  right  hand  .  .  . 
and  in  so  doyng  he  had  the  sonne  at  his  backe  and  in  the  faces  of  his  enemies.’ — 
Hall,  p.  418.  [See  The  True  Tragedie  in  App.,  p.  544.] 

328.  frownes  on  me  .  .  .  sadly  vpon  him]  Wordsworth  ( Sh.’s  Knowledge, 
etc.,  p.  91):  It  was  easy  for  a  mind  of  Shakespeare’s  versatility  to  make  a  wicked 
man  apply  conversely  the  doctrine  of  God’s  goodness  in  His  general  providence, 
as  does  Richard  here — the  doctrine,  I  mean,  which  we  read  in  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount,  that  our  Heavenly  Father  ‘maketh  His  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil,  and  on  the 
good,  and  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust.’ 

330.  vaunts]  Skeat  {Did.  s.  v.) :  To  boast.  ‘I  vaunte,  I  boste,  or  crake,  Je 
me  vante,  ’  Palsgrave.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  Middle  English  form  was  avaunten, 
with  a  prefixed,  unoriginal  a,  not  found,  I  think,  in  French,  and  perhaps  due  to 
confusion  with  French  avant,  before.  This  Middle  English  avaunten  occurs  in 
Chaucer,  Cant.  Tales,  5985,  and  translation  of  Boethius.  The  prefix  is,  however, 
to  be  neglected. 

331.  Caparison]  Murray  {N.  E.  D.  s.  v.):  According  to  Littr£,  an  augmentation 


414 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEATH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


Call  vp  Lord  Stanley ,  bid  him  bring  his  power,  332 

I  will  leade  forth  my  Soldiers  to  the  plaine, 

And  thus  my  Battell  fhal  be  ordred. 

My  Foreward  fhall  be  drawne  in  length,  335 

Confining  equally  of  Horfe  and  Foot : 

Our  Archers  fhall  be  placed  in  the  mid’ft; 

Iolin  Duke  of  Norfolke,  Thomas  Earle  of  Surrey, 

Shall  haue  the  leading  of  the  Foot  and  Horfe. 

They  thus  directed,  we  will  fllow  34° 

In  the  maine  Battell,  whofe  puiffance  on  either  fide 
Shall  be  well-winged  with  our  cheefeft  Horfe  : 

This,  and  Saint  George  to  boote. 

What  think’ft  thou  Norfolke. 

Nor.  A  good  direction  warlike  Soueraigne,  345 


332.  Stanley]  Standlie  Qx. 

335.  Foreward  ]  foreward  battel  Han. 
forward  ranks  Coll.  (MS). 

drawne]  Q2-8,  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han.  drawen  out  all  Qx.  drawn  out 
all  Theob.  et  cet. 

339.  the  Foot]  this  foote  Q,Q2,  Cap. 
Varr.  Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Dyce,  Cam. +  . 

340,  341.  They  thus. ..In']  One  line, 
Vaughan. 

340.  we]  we  ourself  Pope,  +  ,  Cap. 
Var.  ’73,  ’78,  ’85,  Ran.  Steev.  Var.  ’03, 
’13- 

fllow]  Fx.  follow  them  Coll,  ii, 


iii  (MS),  follow  then  Ktly.  follow  after, 
ox  follow  on  (omitting  on,  1.  341)  W.  A. 
Wright  conj.  follow  Fs  et  cet. 

341.  whofe  puiffance]  which  Pope,  + 

( -Var. ’73),  Cap. 

343,344.  This... Norfolke]  Ff,  Rowe. 
One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

343.  boote]  bootes  Q,Q2. 

344.  think' fl]  Qr  thinkejl  Qq  ( thinkfl 
QJ.  think  Rowe  ii. 

Norfolke]  Nor.  Q2-5.  not.  Qg 

Q7Qs- 

345.  [He  fheweth  him  a  paper.  Qq, 
Cam.  + . 


of  mediaeval  Latin,  caparo,  chaperon  (a  sort  of  cape  worn  by  old  women).  ( b ) 
A  kind  of  defensive  armour  for  a  horse,  (verb,  transitive )  To  put  trappings  on; 
to  trap,  deck,  harness.  [The  present  line  quoted.] 

340,  341.  They  thus  directed  ...  on  either  side]  Abbott  (§  505):  The  sec¬ 
ond  line  is  harsh,  and  perhaps  part  of  it  ought  to  be  combined  with  the  first  in 
some  way.  ‘  Puissance  ’  is  a  disyllable  generally  in  Shakespeare,  except  at  the  end 
oj  the  line.  I  know  no  instance  in  Shakespeare  where,  as  in  Chaucer,  ‘battle’  is 
accented  on  the  last.  Remembering  that  ed  is  often  not  pronounced  after  t  and  d, 
we  might  scan  the  first  line  thus:  ‘They  thus  |  direct  (ed),  |  we’ll  follow.’  | 

343.  This,  and  Saint  George  to  boote]  Johnson:  That  is,  this  is  the  order 
of  our  battle,  which  promises  success;  and  over  and  above  this,  is  the  protection  of 
our  patron  saint. — Murray  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  Boot.  I,  7.  c.)  ‘  In  apprecatory  phrases: 
as,  Saint  George  to  boot!  Grace  to  boot!  i.  e.,  to  our  help,’  quotes  the  present  line; 
but  is  not  ‘to  boot’  here  used,  not  in  an  apprecatory  sense,  but  in  that  as  given  by 
Murray  (Id.  s.v.  1, 1.):  ‘“to  the  good,”  to  advantage,  into  the  bargain,  in  addi¬ 
tion  ’  ? — Ed. 


ACT  V,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


415 

346 


This  found  I  on  my  Tent  this  Morning. 

Iockey  of  Norfolke ,  be  not  fo  bold. 

For  Dickon  thy  maijler  is  bought  and  fold. 

King.  A  thing  deuifed  by  the  Enemy. 

Go  Gentlemen,  euery  man  to  his  Charge,  350 

Let  not  our  babling  Dreames  affright  our  foules  : 

For  Confcience  is  a  word  that  Cowards  vfe,  352 


346.  This ]  This  paper  Pope,  + ,  Cap. 
[Giving  a  scrowl.  Rowe  et  seq. 

(subs.) 

347-349.  Iockey... King.  A...]  Ric. 
[reads]fochey...A ...  Cap.  etseq.  (subs.) 

347.  fo]  too  Cap.  Varr.  Mai.  Steev. 
Varr.  Coll.  Sta.  Cam.  + . 

348.  maifter]  majler  Q,Q2F3F4  et  seq. 
[throws  it  away.  Cap. 


350.  euery  man  to]  Ff,  Rowe,  Coll. 
Sing.  Wh.  i,  Hal.  go  each  man  to 
Pope,  + .  euery  man  vnto  Qq  et  cet. 

352.  For ]  Om.  Qq,  Pope,  +  ,  Sing. 
Dyce,  Sta.  Cam.  + ,  Ktly,  Coll.  iii. 

Confcience  tr]  Q3.8,Ff,  Rowe, 
Cap.  Knt,  Coll.  Wh.  i,  Hal.  Confcience 
is  but  QjQ2  et  cet. 


347,  348.  Iockey  of  Norfolke  .  .  .  bought  and  sold]  Dyce:  This  couplet  is 
not  marked  in  the  old  copies  as  read  by  Richard:  but  the  stage-direction  in  the 
Qq  [see  Text.  Notes ]  would  be  alone  sufficient  to  prove  that  the  king,  not  Norfolk, 
reads  it.  [When  Dyce  thus  remarks,  the  inference  is,  that  he  adopted  the  Qto 
stage-direction;  where  Norfolk  ‘ sheweth ’  the  paper.  Does  ‘shewing’  a  paper 
prove  that  he  to  whom  it  is  ‘  shewn,’  reads  it  ?  May  not  a  man  shew  a  paper 
and  then  proceed  to  read  it  himself?  But  Dyce  did  not  adopt  this  Qto  direc¬ 
tion  but  followed  Rowe,  who  directs  Norfolk  to  ‘give’  the  paper;  of  course  this 
giving  implies  that  Richard  takes  it  and  himself  reads  it;  whoever  adopts  Rowe’s 
stage-direction  has  no  need  to  insert  reads  after  Richard’s  name, — it  is  super¬ 
fluous.  Did  not  Dyce  here  mistake  Rowe’s  ‘  gives ’  for  the  Qto  ‘  sheweth  ’  ? — Ed.] 

347.  be  not  so  bold]  Malone:  In  both  Hall  and  Holinshed  these  words  are 
given:  ‘too  bold.’  [See  Text.  Notes.] — R.  G.  White:  We  are  not  to  take  it  for 
granted  that  Shakespeare  always  followed  the  Chronicles  word  for  word.  On 
the  contrary,  we  know  that  often  he  did  not;  and  that  in  such  cases  as  this  he  was 
sometimes  even  inconsistent  with  himself. 

348.  Dickon]  Tawney:  A  hillock  on  the  battle-field  called  ‘Dickon’s  Nook’ 
is  supposed  to  represent  the  spot  where  Richard  delivered  the  speech  that  follows. 

348.  bought  and  sold]  Murray  {N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  Buy  11.  b):  Often  used  figura¬ 
tively,  chiefly  in  sense  To  be  betrayed  for  a  bribe.  [The  present  line  quoted.] 

351-356.  Let  not  ...  to  Hell]  Tyr whitt:  I  suspect  these  six  lines  to  be 
an  interpolation;  but  if  Shakespeare  was  really  guilty  of  them  in  his  first  draught, 
he  probably  intended  to  leave  them  out  when  he  substituted  the  much  more  proper 
harangue  that  follows. — Mason  ( Further  Obs.,  p.  46):  I  should  suppose  these 
lines  were  spoken  by  Richard  to  himself,  and  not  addressed  to  his  officers. 

352.  Conscience  is  a  word,  etc.]  Birch  (p.  209):  Shakespeare  did  not  introduce 
this  piece  of  philosophy  for  nothing;  ‘conscience’  is  synonymous  with  the  poet  for 
religion,  and  seems  here  used  in  that  sense,  as  he  speaks  of  the  influence  of  dreams 
and  supernatural  circumstances.  In  giving  this  origin  and  history  of  religion,  he 
leaves  it  to  be  inferred  how  little  it  had  served  to  check  the  strong,  but  rather  had 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


416 

DeuisM  at  firft  to  keepe  the  ftrong  in  awe,  353 

Our  ftrong  armes  be  our  Confidence,  Swords  our  Law. 

March  on,  ioyne  brauely,  let  vs  too’t  pell  mell,  355 

If  not  to  heauen,  then  hand  in  hand  to  Hell. 

What  fihall  I  fay  more  then  I  haue  inferr’d  ? 

Remember  whom  you  are  to  cope  withall,  358 


354.  Confcience,~]  confcience  Qx.  con- 
fciences,  Q?. 

Swords ]  f  words ,  Q,.  our  f  words 

Q7Qs- 


355.  too’t]  to  it  QjQj.  too  it  Q3-7.  to' t 
F4  et  seq. 

357.  [His  Oration  to  his  Annie.  Qq, 
Cam.  +  .  turning  to  his  Troops.  Capell. 

358.  whotn...to~\  who. ..in  Q?Q8. 


been  used  by  them  as  a  means  of  oppressing  the  innocent.  In  the  same  sense 
as  the  above  Hamlet  says:  ‘conscience,  or  the  thoughts  of  an  hereafter,  doth  make 
cowards  of  us  all’;  but  it  does  not  turn  the  resolution  of  Richard,  who  says,  jeeringly, 
‘if  they  do  not  go  to  heaven  they  must  go  to  hell’;  which,  even  in  the  mouth  of  a 
Richard  III.  must  deserve  the  censure  of  a  serious  critic. — Brandes  (i,  161): 
Most  admirable  is  the  way  in  which  Richard  summons  up  his  manhood  and  restores 
the  courage  of  those  around  him.  These  are  the  accents  of  one  who  will  give 
despair  no  footing  in  his  soul;  and  there  is  in  his  harangue  to  the  soldiers  an  irresis¬ 
tible  roll  of  fierce  and  spirit-stirring,  martial  music;  it  is  constructed  like  the  strophes 
of  the  Marseillaise: 

‘Remember  whom  you  are  to  cope  withal; — 

A  sort  of  vagabonds,  rascals,  runaways. 

( Que  veut  cette  horde  d’esclaves ?) 

You  having  lands,  and  bless’d  with  beauteous  wives, 

They  would  restrain  the  one,  distain  the  other. 

( Egorger  vos  fils,  vos  compagnes.) 

Let’s  whip  these  stragglers  o’er  the  seas  again.’ 

But  there  is  a  ferocity,  a  scorn,  a  popular  eloquence  in  Richard’s  words,  in  com¬ 
parison  with  which  the  rhetoric  of  the  Marseillaise  seems  declamatory,  even 
academic. — S.  Brooke  (p.  122):  This  speech  is  a  masterpiece  of  bold  mockery 
of  the  foe,  and  of  appeal  to  the  pride  of  England;  the  words  of  a  fighting  partisan, 
of  a  king  at  bay.  As  we  read  it,  we  should  sit  in  his  soul,  below  the  words.  I  wonder 
if  Shakespeare  meant  the  overstrain  I  seem  to  detect  in  it  to  express  the  hungry 
despair  which  so  lately  had  clutched  his  heart,  and  which  he  strove  by  passionate 
words  to  beat  under.  He  bluffs  himself.  It  is  impossible  not  to  sympathise  with 
his  self-conquest  and  courage;  and  Shakespeare  meant  us  to  do  so.  Since  justice 
is  done,  pity  may  steal  in;  and  circumstance  has  made  Richard  its  victim,  as  well 
as  his  own  will.  He  goes  to  battle  with  a  joyful  courage,  as  to  a  banquet.  Mac¬ 
beth’s  courage  was  intermingled  with  the  despondencies  of  crime  and  of  loss  of 
honour,  for  he  had  loved  and  sorrowed,  and  of  old  had  resisted  evil.  Richard’s 
courage  has  no  tenderness,  no  sense  of  violated  honour  to  trouble  it,  for  he  has 
never  loved.  It  has  no  despondency,  no  philosophising  on  life  and  death,  when  the 
crisis  comes.  There  is  a  physical  rapture  in  it- 


act  v,  sc.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


417 


A  fort  of  Vagabonds,  Rafcals,  and  Run-awayes, 

A  fcum  of  Brittaines,  and  bafe  Lackey  Pezants,  360 

Whom  their  o’re-cloyed  Country  vomits  forth 
To  defperate  Aduentures,  and  affur’d  Deftrudtion. 

You  deeping  fafe,  they  bring  you  to  vnreft : 

You  hauing  Lands,  and  bleft  with  beauteous  wiues, 

They  would  reftraine  the  one,  diftaine  the  other,  365 

And  who  doth  leade  them,  but  a  paltry  Fellow  ? 


359.  Rafcals]  rafcols  Qi-3Qs-8-  Of 
rascals  Pope,  + . 

and ]  Om,  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, +, 

Cap. 

360.  Brittaines]  QqFf  (subs.)  Britons 
Pope,  +  ,  Mai.  Bretons  Cap.  Cam. +  . 
Bretagnes  Var.  ’73  et  cet. 

Lackey  Pezants ]  Lackey-Pezants 
F3F4,  Rowe,  lackey-peasants  Pope, +  . 

362.  Aduentures]  'ventures  Cap.  Var. 
’78,  ’85,  Ran.  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Coll,  ii, 
iii,  Sta.  Cam.  + ,  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 


362.  allur'd ]  Om.  Pope,  +  ( — Var. 
’73),  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

363.  you  to]  to  you  Q2,  Sta.  Cam.  +  , 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

364.  wiues ]  wipes  Qt. 

36s-  rejlraine]  distrain  Warb.  Han. 
Johns.  Cap.  Varr.  Ran.  Sing.  Coll,  ii,  iii 
(MS),  Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds. 

366,  367-369.  Fellow?  ...  cojl ,  ... 

Snow  fellow,  ...cost  ? ...snow  ?  Cap.  et 
seq. 


359.  A  sort  of  Vagabonds]  Kemble  (p.  118):  Macbeth  in  like  manner  speaks 
with  contempt  of  his  enemies  and  revolted  nobles:  ‘Fly,  false  Thanes,  And 
mingle  with  the  English  epicures’;  but  this  is  not  a  proof  of  Richard’s  intrepidity; 
for  it  does  not  express  the  tyrant’s  real  opinion  of  Richmond’s  followers.  The 
inferiority  of  the  foe  is  a  topic  on  which  generals,  for  the  encouragement  of 
their  own  troops,  are,  by  poets  and  historians,  customarily  made  to  dwell,  even 
to  ostentation;  but  it  is  impossible  to  believe  that  Richard  seriously  despises 
an  enemy,  against  whom  he  thinks  it  necessary  to  make  the  most  active  prep¬ 
arations. 

359.  sort]  Schmidt  (Lex.  s.  v.):  4.  Set,  company  (in  a  bad  sense). 

365.  restraine]  Warburton,  in  explanation  of  his  change  in  the  text,  says: 
‘To  distrain  is  to  seize  upon.’  Whereupon  Malone  replies:  ‘But  to  distrain  is 
not  to  seize  generally,  but  to  seize  goods,  cattle,  &c.,  for  non-payment  of  rent,  or 
for  the  purpose  of  enforcing  the  process  of  courts.  The  restrictions,  implied  in  the 
word  “restrain,”  likely  to  be  imposed  by  a  conquering  enemy  on  lands,  are  imposts, 
contributions,  &c.,  or  absolute  confiscation.  “And  if  he  shoulde  atcheve  his  fals 
entent  and  purpose,  every  man  is  lif,  livelod,  and  goddes  shoulde  be  in  his  hands, 
liberte,  and  disposicion,  wherby  sholde  ensue  the  disheretyng  and  distruccion  of 
all  the  noble  and  worshipfull  blode  of  this  Realme  for  ever.’” — Proclamation 
against  Henry  Tudor:  Paston  Letters  [iii,  318,  ed.  Gairdner.] — Lettsom  (ap. 
Walker,  Crit.,  ii,  242,  foot-note ):  Shakespeare  has  twice  used  this  word  [distrain] 
elsewhere,  both  times  in  the  sense  of  seize,  with  no  reference  whatever  to  rent. 
Malone’s  note  is  a  jumble  of  error  and  contradiction. 

365.  distaine]  Murray  (AT.  E.  D.  s.  v.) :  2.  To  defile,  bring  a  blot  or  stain  upon; 
to  sully,  dishonour.  [The  present  line  quoted.] 


27 


418 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


Long  kept  in  Britaine  at  our  Mothers  coft,  367 

A  Milke-fop,  one  that  neuer  in  his  life 
Felt  fo  much  cold,  as  ouer  fhooes  in  Snow : 

Let’s  whip  thefe  ftraglers  o’re  the  Seas  againe,  370 

Lafh  hence  thefe  ouer- weening  Ragges  of  France, 

Thefe  famifh’d  Beggers,  weary  of  their  hues, 

Who  (but  for  dreaming  on  this  fond  exploit)  373 


367.  Britaine]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Brittaine  Qq. 
Bretagne  Han.  et  cet. 

our  Mothers ]  his  mother's  Pope 


ii,  +  .  our  brother's  Cap.  Var. ’78,  ’85, 
Ran. 

368.  Milke-/op]milkefoptQl.s.  milke- 
fope  Q*. 


367.  kept  ...  at  our  Mothers  cost]  Theobald:  Richard  and  Henry,  Earl 
of  Richmond,  were  far  from  having  any  common  mother  but  England:  and 
the  Earl  was  not  subsisted  abroad  at  the  nation’s  public  charge.  During  the 
greatest  part  of  his  residence  abroad  he  was  watched  and  restrained  almost  like 
a  captive;  and  subsisted  by  supplies  conveyed  from  the  Countess  of  Richmond, 
his  mother.  It  seems  probable,  therefore,  that  we  must  read:  ‘ his  mother’s  cost.’ 
— Farmer:  Shakespeare  is  here  following  Holinshed,  who  copies  verbatim  from 
his  brother  chronicler  Hall,  but  his  printer  has  given  us  by  accident  the  word 
moother  instead  of  brother:  ‘And  to  begin  with  the  erle  of  Richmond,  captaine  of 
this  rebellion,  he  is  a  Welch  milksop — brought  up  by  my  moother’s  meanes  and 
mine,  like  a  captive  in  a  close  cage  in  the  court  of  Francis,  Duke  of  Britaine.’ — 
Malone:  Henry  was  long  confined  in  the  court  of  the  Duke  of  Britaine,  and 
supported  there  by  Charles  Duke  of  Burgundy,  who  was  brother-in-law  to  King 
Richard  ...  In  all  other  places  where  Shakespeare  had  been  led  into  errors  by 
mistakes  of  the  press,  or  by  false  translations,  his  text  has  been  very  properly 
exhibited  as  he  wrote  it;  for  it  is  not  the  business  of  an  editor  to  new-write  his 
author’s  works.  Thus,  in  Ant.  &  Cleo.:  ‘Let  the  old  ruffian  know,  I  have  many 
other  ways  to  die.’ — IV,  i,  4;  though  we  know  the  sense  of  the  passage  in  Plutarch 
there  copied  is,  that  ‘ he  hath  many  other  ways  to  die.’  [See  Ant.  &  Cleo.,  IV, 
i,  7,  this  ed.]  Again  in  Jul.  Coes.,  Antony  is  still  permitted  to  say  that  Caesar  had 
left  the  Roman  people  his  arbours  and  orchards  ‘on  this  side  Tyber,’  though  it 
ought  to  be  ‘on  that  side  Tyber’:  both  which  mistakes  Shakespeare  was  led 
into  by  the  ambiguity  of  the  old  translation  of  Plutarch.  For  all  such  inaccuracies, 
the  poet,  and  not  his  editor,  is  responsible:  and  in  the  passage  now  under  con¬ 
sideration  more  particularly  the  text  ought  not  to  be  disturbed,  because  it  ascertains 
a  point  of  some  moment;  namely,  that  Holinshed  and  not  Hall  was  the  historian 
Shakespeare  followed. — Dotjce:  In  the  first  edition  of  Holinshed  the  word  is 
rightly  printed  brother.  It  is  not  otherwise  worth  while  to  mention  this  fact,  than 
that  it  points  out  the  particular  edition  of  the  above  historian  which  Shakespeare 
followed.  [For  further  discussion  on  this  point,  see  Appendix:  Source  of  Plot.] 

368.  A  Milke-sop]  Wright:  Richard  expresses  as  much  contempt  for  Rich¬ 
mond  as  Iago  did  for  Cassio.  Compare  Othello,  I,  i,  20-27.  [As  will  be  seen 
by  the  extract  from  Holinshed,  quoted  above  by  Farmer,  Shakespeare  here  closely 
follows  the  chronicle  in  the  use  of  this  epithet.] 

371.  Ragges  of  France]  Compare:  ‘Ragge  of  Honour,’  I,  iii,  243. 


ACT  V,  SC.  iii.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


419 


For  want  of  meanes  (poore  Rats)  had  hang’d  themfelues. 

I  f  we  be  conquered,  let  men  conquer  vs,  375 

And  not  thefe  baftard  Britaines,  whom  our  Fathers 
Haue  in  their  owne  Land  beaten,  bobb’d,  and  thump’d, 

And  on  Record,  left  them  the  heires  of  fhame. 

Shall  thefe  enioy  our  Lands?  lye  with  our  Wiues? 

Rauifh  our  daughters  ?  Drum  afarre  off  380 

Hearke,  I  heare  their  Drumme, 

Right  Gentlemen  of  England,  fight  boldly  yeomen, 

Draw  Archers  draw  your  Arrowes  to  the  head, 

Spurre  your  proud  Horfes  hard,  and  ride  in  blood, 

Amaze  the  welkin  with  your  broken  ftaues.  385 

Enter  a  Meffenger. 

What  fayes  Lord  Stanley ,  will  he  bring  his  power  f 

Mef.  My  Lord,  he  doth  deny  to  come.  388 


375.  conquered ]  conquer'd  Rowe  et 
seq. 

376.  thefe]  those  Rowe,  +  . 
bajlard Britaines ]  Fa,  Ktly,  Var. 

’78,  ’85.  Baflard-Britains  F3F4,  Rowe. 
bastard- Britons  Pope,  +  .  bastard  Bre¬ 
tons  Cap.  Cam.  + .  bastard  Bretagnes 
Var.  ’73,  Steev.  Varr.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing. 
Dyce,  Wh.  i,  Hal. 

378.  on]  in  Q,Q2,  Cam.  +  . 
heires]  heire  Q?. 

379.  Lands]  land  Qg. 


380,  381.  Raui/h  ...  Drumme]  Ff, 
Rowe.  One  line,  Qq  et  cet. 

380.  daughters  ?]  daughters ,  Qq. 
Drum... off.]  Om.  Qq. 


afarre]  afar  F3F4. 

382.  Right]  Qj^jFf,  Rowe.  Fight 
Q,  et  cet. 

boldly]  Q2_8,Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.  bold 
Q,  et  cet. 

383.  your]  you  Q?. 

386.  Enter  a  Meffenger]  Om.  Qq. 
388.  come.]  come  to  you.  Cap. 


377.  bobb’d]  Murray  (N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  Bob,  verb'2')-.  Of  uncertain  origin;  perhaps 
onomatopoeic,  expressing  the  effect  of  a  smart,  but  not  very  weighty,  blow. 

384.  Spurre  your  proud  Horses  hard]  Boaden  (ii,  280):  The  temper  of 
G.  F.  Cooke  was  critical  and  sarcastic,  and  it  led  him  to  subtle  distinctions,  that 
looked  like  thought,  but  were  frequently  anything  but  reasonable.  ...  An  example 
of  this  was  his  attempt  to  dismount  the  archers  from  the  horses,  which,  without 
his  new  emphasis,  he  conceived  it  must  be  inferred  they  bestrid :  *  Spur  your  proud 
horses,’  addressed  to  the  cavalry;  having  already  ordered  the  foot  soldiery,  the 
English  bowmen.  As  if  the  two  directions  were  not  already  as  clear  as  sense  could 
make  them,  and  a  turn  of  the  head  sufficing  to  show  that  they  were  applied  to 
different  divisions  of  his  force.  The  best  of  the  joke  is,  that  the  new  emphasis, 
if  it  did  not  leave  the  foot  on  horseback,  ordered  particular  men  to  spur  at  least 
their  coursers  hard,  whatever  others  who  had  horses  might  do,  mounted  or  dis¬ 
mounted. 

385.  Amaze  the  welkin]  Johnson:  That  is,  fright  the  skies  with  the  shivers 
of  your  lances. 


420 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  iii. 


King.  Off  with  his  fonne  Georges  head. 

Nor.  My  Lord,  the  Enemy  is  paft  the  Marfh :  390 

After  the  battaile,  let  George  Stanley  dye. 

King.  A  thoufand  hearts  are  great  within  my  bofom. 

Aduance  our  Standards,  fet  vpon  our  Foes, 

Our  Ancient  word  of  Courage,  faire  S.  George 

Infpire  vs  with  the  fpleene  of  fiery  Dragons  :  395 

Vpon  them,  Vidtorie  fits  on  our  helpes. 


389.  Off  with  his  fonne]  Off  instantly 
with  his  son  Han.  Steev.  Var. ’03,  ’13. 
Off  with  his  son's  (omitting  Georges) 
Marshall.  Off  with  his  or  Off  with  young 
or,  Off  with  son...  Id.  conj. 


394.  5.]  Saint  Qq. 

396.  on]  one  Q?. 

helpes]  helmes  QjQjQ^Qg-  helps 
F3F4<  helms  Rowe  et  seq. 


389.  Off  with  his  sonne  Georges  head]  T.  R.  Gould  (p.  47)  thus  describes 
J.  B.  Booth’s  acting  on  the  delivery  of  this  line:  ‘At  this  moment  his  ear  catches 
the  sound  of  distant  music,  and  his  whole  manner  instantly  changes.  He  listens, 
leaning  on  the  air  with  keen  looks  and  parted  lips,  and  an  expression  of  eager  and 
confident  expectation.’ 

389.  Georges  head]  Walker  (Vers.,  243):  The  plurals  of  substantives,  ending 
in  s;  in  se,  ss,  ce,  and  sometimes  ge;  are  found  without  the  usual  addition  of  s  or  es — 
in  pronunciation  at  least,  although  in  many  instances  the  plural  affix  is  added  in 
printing,  where  the  metre  shows  it  is  not  to  be  pronounced.  [Walker  (p.  251) 
applies  the  foregoing  rule  to  the  genitive  singular;  and  on  p.  258  after  quoting: 
4 — one  that  was  the  prince  of  Orange  fencer.’ — Jonson,  New  Inn,  II,  ii;  p.  362 
ed.  Gifford  adds:  ‘This  would  restore  the  metre  in  the  [present]  line;  but  I  much 
prefer:  “Off  with' s  son,”  &c.’ 

390.  the  Enemy  is  past  the  Marsh]  ‘Betweene  both  armies  was  a  great 
marish  .  .  .  which  the  earle  of  Richmond  left  on  his  right  hand.’ — Holinshed; 
see  1.  323,  note  by  Churchill. 

391.  392.  After  the  battaile  .  .  .  great  within  my  bosom]  Boaden  (ii,  280): 
At  this  juncture  Richard’s  decision  as  to  young  George  Stanley  is  a  thing  of  the 
instant;  either  his  li/e  or  death  are  of  little  moment;  they  are  as  grains  of  sand 
whirled  from  a  chariot- wheel  in  rapid  rotation.  G.  F.  Cooke  fastened  upon  this 
precise  point  of  time  to  affect  deliberation,  and  stood  swaying  his  body  backwards 
and  forwards,  till  he  settled  the  fate  of  young  George.  The  very  next  line,  ‘A 
thousand  hearts,’  etc.,  the  reader  sees,  makes  it  impossible  that  Richard  could 
have  been  deliberating  about  a  thing  so  trifling.  If  Cooke  said  ‘ my  bosom’ 
(I  think  he  did),  he  was  wrong  again.  Richard  does  not  mean  to  indulge  his 
vanity  by  an  insult  to  other  natures:  he  hoped,  perhaps  believed,  his  followers  to 
be  as  brave  as  himself.  He  merely  expresses  the  expanding  energy  and  thick 
palpitation  of  the  heart,  by  words  that  mean:  I  feel  as  if  I  had  a  thousand  hearts 
within  me. 

395.  spleene  of  fiery  Dragons]  Wright:  Compare:  ‘With  ladies  faces  and 
fierce  dragon’s  spleens.’ — King  John,  II,  i,  68.  The  spleen  was  supposed  to  be 
the  seat  of  anger,  and  hence  it  was  used  figuratively  to  denote  that  passion. 


ACT  v,  sc.  iv.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


421 


[Scene  IK] 

Alarum, excursions.  Enter  Catesby.  1 


Cat.  Refcue  my  Lord  of  Norfolke, 
Refcue,  Refcue : 

The  King  ena£ls  more  wonders  then  a  man, 
Daring  an  oppofite  to  euery  danger  : 

His  horfe  is  flaine,  and  all  on  foot  he  fights, 
Seeking  for  Richmond  in  the  throat  of  death 
Refcue  faire  Lord  ,  or  elfe  the  day  is  loft. 
Alarums. 


Enter  Richard.  IO 

Rich.  A  Horfe,  a  Horfe,  my  Kingdome  for  a  Horfe. 


Scene  vii.  Pope  i,  Han.  Scene  viii. 
Pope  ii,  Warb.  Johns.  Scene  xv.  Cap. 
et  seq. 

Another  part  of  the  Field.  Cap.  et  seq. 
( subs. ) 

I.  Alarum... Catesby. ]  Alarums,  as 
of  a  battle  join’d.  Excursions.  Enter  Nor¬ 
folk  and  forces,  fighting ;  to  him,  Catesby. 


Cap. 

2,3.  Refcue  ...Refcue:]  Ff,  Rowe.  One 
line,  Qq  et  cet. 

5.  Daring  an  oppofite ]  Daring  and 
oppofite  Q8,  Cap.  A  daring  opposite 
Warb.  conj.  Daring  all  opposite  or 
opposites  Vaughan  (iii,  160). 

9.  Alarums.]  Om.  Qq. 


5.  an  opposite  to  euery  danger]  Wright:  That  is,  Richard  is  everywhere 
challenging  an  opponent  to  every  danger  in  the  chances  of  battle. — Murray 
{N.  E.  D.  s.  v.  Opposite):  B.  3.  A  person  who  stands  in  a  relation  of  opposition 
to  another;  an  antagonist,  adversary,  opponent.  (Very  common  in  17th  century: 
now  rare  or  obsolete.). 

11.  A  Horse  ...  for  a  Horse]  Steevens:  In  The  Battle  of  Alcazar ,  1594,  the 
Moor  calls  out  in  the  same  manner:  ‘A  horse,  a  horse,  villain  a  horse!  That 
I  may  take  the  river  straight  and  fly!’  This  passage  appears  to  have  been  imitated 
by  several  other  writers,  if  not  stolen.  Compare  Heywood,  2  Iron  Age,  1632: 
* — a  horse,  a  horse!  Ten  kingdoms  for  a  horse  to  enter  Troy.’  [Act  I,  p.  369;  ed. 
Pearson.] — Malone:  Marston  has  imitated  this  line  in  his  Satires,  1599:  ‘A  man, 
a  man,  a  kingdom  for  a  man!’  [5a/.  vii,  1.  1;  ed.  Bullen.] — Reed:  This  line  is 
also  introduced  into  Marston’s  What  You  Will,  1607:  ‘A  horse!  a  horse!  my 
kindome  for  a  horse!  Looke  thee  I  speake  play  scraps.’ — II,  i. — Boswell  (?): 
It  is  thus  given  in  The  True  Tragedies  ‘A  horse!  a  horse!  a  fresh  horse.’  [Appen¬ 
dix,  p.  544.] — Skottowe  (i,  208):  The  origin  of  the  phrase  is  to  be  traced  to  this 
older  play. — Halliwell  ( Introd .):  With  the  possible  exception  of  one  line  in  The 
True  Tragedie,  where  the  King  calls  for  ‘a  fresh  horse’  there  does  not  appear  to 
be  grounds  for  supposing  that  Shakespeare  derived  a  single  hint  from  his  pre¬ 
decessor. — Oechelhauser  {Essay,  etc.,  p.  134,  foot-note):  It  is  much  easier  to 
take  into  consideration  the  similarity  of  the  line  in  The  Battle  oj  Alcazar  [quoted 
by  Steevens]  than  to  derive  Shakespeare’s  line  from  The  True  Tragedie.  Thus 
every  proof  that  Shakespeare  either  knew  or  made  use  of  the  latter  play  fails. — 
Churchill  (p.  520):  It  is  not  at  all  certain  that  The  Battle  of  Alcazar  may  not  have 


422 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  v. 


Cates.  Withdraw  my  Lord,  lie  helpe  you  to  a  Horfe  12 
Rich.  Slaue,  I  haue  fet  my  life  vpon  a  caft, 

And  I  will  Hand  the  hazard  of  the  Dye  : 

I  thinke  there  be  fixe  Richmonds  in  the  field,  15 


14.  Dye\  Day  Q4. 


followed  The  True  Tragedie,  as  the  earliest  date  for  its  production  is,  so  far  as 
known,  1591.  If  it  preceded,  it  is  entirely  possible  that  the  passage  in  The  True 
Tragedie  imitated  The  Battle  of  Alcazar ,  with  which  it  has  much  in  common.  .  .  . 
Those  who  prefer  to  think  that  Shakespeare  too  borrowed  from  The  Battle  of  Alcazar 
are  forced  to  face  the  fact  that  Shakespeare’s  play  shows  no  other  trace  of  connection 
with  this  play,  and  to  believe  in  the  likelihood  that  he,  entirely  independent  of  a  play 
that  had  appeared  some  time  before  his  own,  and  which  .  .  .  would  naturally  have 
attracted  his  attention,  not  only  likewise  thought  of  a  line  in  The  Battle  of  Alcazar , 
but  changed  the  passage  of  his  chronicle  authority  to  a  conception  not  that  of 
The  Battle  of  Alcazar,  but  exactly  the  same  as  that  of  The  True  Tragedie,  and  wrote 
lines  that  closely  correspond.  The  likelihood  is  all  the  other  way. — Horn  (iii,  160, 
foot-note ):  Richard’s  well-known  line:  ‘A  horse,  a  horse,’  etc.,  uttered  during  a 
decisive  moment  of  the  battle  when  all  seemed  lost,  is  to  be  regarded  as  no  other 
than  a  cry  of  utter  desperation.  He  is  so  accustomed  to  fight  as  a  horseman, 
that  if  it  be  decreed  that  he  is  to  die,  then  let  death  come  to  him  while  he  is  mounted. 
Flight  is  far  from  his  thoughts — in  a  former  scene  he  expressly  orders  his  horse  to 
be  saddled  for  the  fight,  and  even  after  that  fearful  dream,  his  first  words  are: 
‘Give  me  another  horse’ — then:  ‘bind  up  my  wounds!’  and  then,  for  the  first 
time:  ‘Have  mercy,  Jesu!’ — Rotscher  (p.  48):  The  actor  here  has  no  need 
whatever  to  resort  to  that  last  extremity,  a  noisy  straining  of  the  voice;  wild  cries 
can  never  produce  artistic  effects.  But  the  utter  exhaustion  of  spirit  which  collects 
itself  for  one  last  effort  fraught  with  despair,  regardless  of  consequence,  ought 
to  be  heard  in  this  cry  as  the  presage  of  doom. — Marshall  adds  the  following 
quotations  to  those  already  given,  wherein  this  line  is  apparently  imitated:  ‘A 
foole,  a  foole,  a  foole,  my  coxcombe  for  a  foole!’ — Marston,  The  Fawne,  1606; 
sig.  H  3  verso;  ‘A  staff e,  a  staff e!  A  thousand  crownes  for  a  staff!’ — Heywood, 
2  Edward  IV.  Works  vol.  i,  p.  143. — Nemo  ( Notes  fir*  Queries,  11  Feb,  1893): 
I  read  the  phrase,  ‘My  kingdom  for  a  horse!’  as  a  bitter  reflection,  ironically 
expressed,  which  may  be  thus  colloquially  paraphrased:  ‘“The  pity  of  it!”  Only 
to  think;  here  am  I  about  to  lose  a  realm  for  the  want  of  such  a  paltry,  yet  indis¬ 
pensable  instrument  for  achieving  a  victory  as  an  ordinary  horse!  Fancy  losing 
“my  kingdom  for  a  horse!”’ 

13,  14.  I  haue  set  my  life  .  .  .  hazard  of  the  Dye]  Wright:  Compare,  but 
rather  for  the  sake  of  contrast:  ‘They  have  tied  me  to  a  stake:  I  cannot  fly, 
But,  bear-like,  I  must  fight  the  course.’ — Macbeth,  V,  vii,  1,  2.  The  Folio  reading 
‘dye’  is  the  true  one,  as  is  shown  by  the  word  ‘cast’  in  1.  13. 

15.  sixe  Richmonds]  Steevens:  Shakespeare  had  employed  this  incident 
with  historical  propriety  in  /  Henry  IV:  V,  iii.  [The  date  of  the  first  Quarto  of 
1  Henry  IV  is  one  year  later  than  that  of  Ql  of  the  present  play. — Ed.] — C.  E. 
Dana  ( Glimpses ,  etc.,  i,  234):  It  was  not  uncommon  for  a  King  to  have  several 
of  his  knights  dress  like  him.  ...  It  was  a  precaution,  as  the  death  of  the  leader  gen- 


ACT  V,  SC.  V.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


423 
1 6 


Fiue  haue  I  flame  to  day,  in  ftead  of  him  : 

A  Horfe,  a  Horfe,  my  Kingdome  for  a  Horfe. 

[Scene  K] 

Alatum ,  Enter  Richard  and  Richmond they  fight,  Richard 

is  fiaine. 

Retreat , and  Flourifh.  Enter  Richmond,  Derby  bearing  the 

Crow7ie ,  with  diuers  other  Lords.  4 


17.  Exeunt.  Theob.  et  seq.  Exeunt, 
fighting.  Other  long  Alarums :  after¬ 
wards,  a  Retreat.  Cap. 

Scene  continued,  QqFf,  Rowe,  Theob. 
Scene  ix.  Pope,  Warb.  Johns.  Scene 
vii.  Han.  Scene  v.  Dyce  et  seq. 

I.  Alatum,]  Ft. 

3,  4.  Retreat,  and  Flourifh. ..Lords.] 


then  retrait  being  founded... Lords.  Qq. 
Shouts  ;  and  enter  Richmond  victorious, 
his  sword  bloody;  Stanley  with  Rich¬ 
ard’s  crown  in  his  hand ;  other  Lords 
and  forces.  Capell. 

3.  Derby]  Stanley  Pope,  + ,  Cap. 

4.  Lords.]  Lords,  &c.  Q,Q2. 


erally  meant  defeat;  it  was  not  likely  that  all  the  Kings,  true  and  false,  would  be 
killed. 

1-4.  Enter  Richard  and  Richmond  .  .  .  Derby  bearing  the  Crowne] 

Knight:  It  is  important  to  preserve  the  old  stage-direction  here,  as  showing  the 
course  of  the  dramatic  action. — Dyce  (ed.  i):  How  Knight  understands  the  ‘dram¬ 
atic  action’  to  be  carried  on  here  I  cannot  conceive.  If,  after  Richard  is  killed  in 
the  sight  of  the  audience,  Stanley  enters  bearing  the  crown  which  he  has  plucked 
off  from  his  ‘  dead  temples,  ’  there  must  have  been  two  Richards  in  the  field.  The 
fact  is,  that  here,  as  frequently  elsewhere,  in  the  old  copies  the  stage-direction  is 
a  piece  of  mere  confusion:  Richard  and  Richmond  were  evidently  intended  by 
the  author  to  go  oft  the  stage ,  fighting.  Towards  the  end  of  Macbeth,  the  Folio 
has:  ‘ Exeunt  fighting ’;  then,  immediately  after,  ‘Enter  Fighting,  and  Macbeth 
slaine’;  and  presently,  ‘ Enter  Macdufte,  with  Macbeth’s  head.’  It  seems  strange 
that  the  modern  editors  should  have  neglected  to  mark  a  change  of  scene  here; 
which  the  audience  of  Shakespeare’s  days  were  evidently  intended  to  imagine. 
R.  G.  White:  Although  it  seems  improbable  that  Richmond,  Stanley,  and  the 
others  should  return,  after  Richard  was  slain,  to  the  very  place  where  the  latter 
cried:  ‘A  horse!  a  horse!’  yet,  dramatically,  nothing  is  gained  by  the  change 
of  scene,  and,  as  far  as  reference  to  the  text  is  concerned,  much  is  lost. — Cam¬ 
bridge  Edd  {Note  xxvii):  We  have  retained  the  stage-direction  of  the  Qq  and 
Ff  because  it  is  probable,  from  1.  n,  ‘ this  bloody  wretch,’  that  Richard’s  body 
is  lying  where  he  fell,  in  view  of  the  audience. — Dyce,  in  his  second  edition, 
gives  the  foregoing  note  by  the  Cambridge  Edd  and  adds:  *  It  is  not  to  be  doubted 
that  for  the  most  part  of  the  stage-directions  in  our  old  plays  the  actors,  not  the 
authors,  were  responsible:  and,  indeed,  even  now-a-days  there  is  nothing  unusual 
in  dramatic  poets  leaving  the  stage-directions  to  be  inserted  by  others. ...  Nor  is 
any  stress  to  be  laid  on  the  expression:  ‘ this  bloody  wretch’:  Richard,  though  not 
present,  is  called:  ‘ this  foul  swine,’  V,  ii,  13:  ‘this  guilty  homicide,’  V,  ii,  21. — 
Marshall  divides  this  stage-direction,  between  the  ending  of  scene  iv  and  scene  v, 


424 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  v. 


Richnt.  God,  and  your  Armes  $ 

Be  prais’d  Victorious  Friends  ; 

The  day  is  ours,  the  bloudy  Dogge  is  dead. 

Der.  Couragious  Richmond, 

Well  haft  thou  acquit  thee  :  Loe, 

Heere  thefe  long  vfurped  Royalties,  io 


5,  6.  God. ..Friends']  Ff.  One  line, 
Qq  et  cet. 

5.  Armes]  arme  Q?. 

8-10.  Couragious ...  Royalties]  Ff.  As 
two  lines,  ending,  thee...roialties  Qq  et 
cet. 


10.  thefe]  Ff,  +  ,  Cap.  Steev.  Var. ’03, 
’13.  Knt.  this  Qq  et  cet. 

Royalties]  roialtie  Q,.  royalty  Cap. 
Mai.  Var. ’21,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  i,  Hal. 
Sta.  Cam.  +  ,  Ktly. 


thus:  ‘  .  .  .  my  kingdom  for  a  horse!  \Exeunt.  Alarums.  Re-enter  King  Richard 
driving  Richmond  before  him,  attacking  him  with  fury;  they  fight;  King  Richard 
jails.  Retreat  and  flourish.  Exit  Richmond.  Scene  V.  Another  part  of  the 
field.  Enter  Richmond,  with  Stanley  bearing  the  crown,  and  divers  others  Lords, 
and  forces]. — Hazlitt  (Sh.  Char.,  p.  150):  [In  Edmund  Kean’s  performance] 
the  concluding  scene  in  which  he  is  killed  by  Richmond  is  the  most  brilliant  of  the 
whole.  He  fights  at  last  like  one  drunk  with  wounds;  and  the  attitude  in  which 
he  stands,  with  his  hands  stretched  out,  after  his  sword  is  wrested  from  him,  has  a 
preternatural  and  terrific  grandeur,  as  if  his  will  could  not  be  disarmed,  and  the 
very  phantoms  of  his  despair  had  withering  power  to  kill. — Ibid.  ( Table-Talk ,  pt.  ii, 
p.  89):  When  Kean  was  so  much  praised  for  this  action  of  Richard  in  his  last 
struggle  ...  he  said  that  he  borrowed  it  from  seeing  the  last  efforts  of  Painter  in  his 
fight  with  Oliver.  This  assuredly  did  not  lessen  the  merit  of  it.  Thus  it  ever  is 
with  the  man  of  real  genius.  He  has  the  feeling  of  truth  already  shrined  in  his  own 
breast,  and  his  eye  is  still  bent  on  nature  to  see  how  she  expresses  herself. — Lloyd: 
According  to  the  old  stage-direction  Richard  dies  on  the  stage,  and  it  is  remarkable 
that  Shakespeare  has  given  him  no  dying  words,  and  doubtless  the  omission  is 
designed  as  it  is  characteristic.  It  is  left  to  the  actor  to  give  the  last  expression 
to  the  state  of  mind  which  is  the  true  retribution  of  Richard,  in  the  spirit  and  char¬ 
acter  of  his  combat  and  his  fall.  Burbage,  the  first  and  celebrated  representative 
of  Richard,  had  no  doubt  the  poet’s  own  instructions  for  this  great  conclusion, 
and  certain  glimmerings  of  true  stage-tradition  we  may  hope  did  not  die  out 
with  Kean.  The  reader  of  the  play  may  pause  to  bring  back  in  thought  the  impres¬ 
sion  of  the  interval  before  the  closing  speeches.  [Kean  did  not,  however,  act 
Shakespeare’s  Richard  III.,  but  Cibber’s  version,  with  an  interpolated  dying 
speech. — Ed.] 

9.  acquit]  Walker  ( Crit .,  ii,  324)  furnishes  numerous  examples  wherein  the 
form  of  the  present  is  retained  in  the  ‘past  tenses,  and  participles,  from  verbs 
ending  in  t,  and  also  in  d.’ 

10.  these  long  vsurped  Royalties]  Polydore  Vergil  says  (p.  225)  that 
Richard  ‘  came  to  the  fielde  with  the  crowne  uppon  his  head,  that  therby  he  might 
ether  make  a  beginning  or  ende  of  his  raigne.’ — Ed. — ‘Polydore’s  may  as  well  be 
a  reason  of  Richard’s  wearing  the  crowne  three  daies  before  at  Leicester,  when  he 
rode  from  thence  to  Bosworth.  But  doubtlesse,  by  it  he  intended  chiefly,  that 


ACT  V,  SC.  V.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


425 


From  the  dead  Temples  of  this  bloudy  Wretch,  II 

Haue  I  pluck’d  off,  to  grace  thy  Browes  withall. 

Weare  it,  and  make  much  of  it. 

Richm.  Great  God  of  Heauen,  fay  Amen  to  all : 

But  tell  me,  is  yong  George  Stanley  liuing?  15 

Der.  He  is  my  Lord,  and  fafe  in  Leicefter  Towne, 

Whither  (if  you  pleafe)  we  may  withdraw  vs. 

Richm.  What  men  of  name  are  flaine  on  either  fide?  1 8 


13.  [sets  it  upon  his  Head.  Shouts. 
Cap. 

Weare  it,]  Q3-8,Ff,  Rowe.  Weare 
it,  enioy  it  Q,Q2  et  cet. 

much]  use  Rowe,  +  (  — Theob.), 
Varr.  Ran. 

15.  me ]  me  first  Pope,  +  .  vie  now 
Dyce  ii,  iii,  Huds.  me  pray  Ktly. 

yong]  your  son  Cap.  the  young 


Marshall. 

17.  Whither ]  Whether  QiQjQtF3. 

if  you  pleafe]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 
Coll,  i,  Hal.  if  you  so  please  Pope,  +  . 
if  it  pleafe  you  Qq  ( ift  Qg)  et  cet. 

may ]  may  now  Qq,  Cap.  Varr. 
Mai.  Steev.  Varr.  Sing.  Dyce,  Coll,  ii, 
iii,  Sta.  Cam.+,  Ktly.  will  Ktly  conj. 

18.  name]  note  F3F4,  Pope,  Han. 


the  people  might  see  and  know  him  to  be  their  King:  and  those  that  stood  Armed 
against  him,  looking  upon  that  Imperiall  evidence,  where  their  own  hands  and 
voices  had  set  it,  should  by  the  awe  and  Sovereignty  of  it,  consider  how  lately  they 
had  avowed  him  their  Lawfull  King,  and  by  what  Pledges  of  their  Faith  and 
Allegiances,  they  stood  solemnly  bound  to  defend  him  and  his  title  in  it,  against 
all  other:  whatever  was  his  mystery,  it  rendered  him  a  valiant  and  confident 
Master  of  his  Right.’ — Buck ,  p.  60. — Stanley  (i,  89):  Henry  felt  his  true  corona¬ 
tion  to  have  been  when,  on  the  field  of  Bosworth,  the  crown  of  Richard  was  brought 
by  Sir  Reginald  Bray  from  the  Hawthorn  bush  to  Lord  Stanley,  who  placed  it  on 
Henry’s  head,  on  the  height,  still  called  from  the  incident,  Crown  Hill.  As  such 
it  appears  in  the  stained  glass  of  the  chapel  built  for  him  in  the  Abbey,  by  the  very 
same  Sir  Reginald.  And  in  his  will  he  enjoined  that  his  image  on  his  tomb  should 
be  represented  as  holding  the  crown. — Barnard:  A  hawthorn  bush  crowned  was 
granted  either  as  a  badge,  or  as  an  augmentation  to  Sir  Reginald  Bray,  and  the 
representatives  of  de  Braye  still  bear  in  pretence  a  regal  crown  or,  in  a  thorn  proper. 
— C.  E.  Dana  ( English  Coronations,  etc.,  p.  iii):  The  crown,  or,  at  least  a  sort  of 
crown,  was  frequently  worn  by  the  King,  on  the  helmet,  in  actual  battle.  It  is  so 
represented  on  the  great  seals  of  several  sovereigns.  Henry  V.  wore  his  at  Agin- 
court.  From  the  manner  of  finding  the  crown  arose  the  saying,  ‘Cleave  to  the 
crown,  though  it  hang  on  a  bush,  ’  which,  like  many  other  old  sayings,  has  had  its 
point  somewhat  blunted  by  time. 

11.  this  bloudy  Wretch]  Steevens:  It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  that 
Stanley  points  to  the  dead  body  of  Richard  when  he  speaks  of  him.  The  demon- 
trative  pronoun  is  often  thus  used  instead  of  the  prepositive  article.  [See  note  by 
Dyce,  11.  1-4,  above.] 

13.  make  much  of  it]  Warburton:  Without  doubt  Shakespeare  himself  thus 
corrected  it,  to  make  use  of  it.  Which  signifies  don't  abuse  it  like  the  tyrant  you 
have  destroyed;  whereas  the  other  reading  signifies:  be  fond  of  it;  a  verv  ridiculous 
moral  for  the  conclusion  of  the  play. 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  v. 


426 


Der.  Iohn  Duke  of  Norfolke,  Walter  Lord  Ferris, 

Sir  Robert  Brokenbury,  and  Sir  William  Brandon.  20 

Richm.  Interre  their  Bodies,  as  become  their  Births, 
Proclaime  a  pardon  to  the  Soldiers  fled, 

That  in  fubmifsion  will  returne  to  vs, 

And  then  as  we  haue  tane  the  Sacrament, 

We  will  vnite  the  White  Rofe,  and  the  Red.  25 

Smile  Heauen  vpon  this  faire  Coniundlion, 

That  long  haue  frown’d  vpon  their  Enmity : 

What  Traitor  heares  me,  and  fayes  not  Amen  ? 

England  hath  long  beene  mad,  and  fcarr’d  her  felfe ; 

The  Brother  blindely  fhed  the  Brothers  blood ;  30 

The  Father,  rafhly  flaughtered  his  owne  Sonne; 

The  Sonne  compell’d,  beene  Butcher  to  the  Sire; 

All  this  diuided  Yorke  and  Lancafter,  33 


19,  20.  Printed  as  stage  direction  in 
Qq. 

19.  Walter]  Water  Q,-s.  Walter  the 
Pope,  + . 

Ferris ]  Ferrers  Cap.  et  seq. 

20.  Brokenbury]  Brookenbury  QtQa. 
Brakenbury  F4  et  seq. 

and]  Om.  Pope,  +  ( — Var. ’73). 
[reading  out  of  a  Note.  Cap. 

21.  become ]  becomes  Rowe  et  seq. 

23.  fubmifsion']  fumijjion  Q3. 

26.  Smile  Heauen]  Smile,  Heaven , 
Anon.  ap.  Cam.  Smile  Heavens  Walker 
(Crit.  iii,  177). 

27.  haue]  Qi-5)F„F3,  Cam. +  .  hath 
Q^,F4  et  cet. 


29.  fcarr'd]  fcard  Qq.  fear’d  F4, 
Rowe,  Pope. 

31.  rafhly]  madly  Cap. 
flaughtered]  Jlaughterd  Qx. 

flaughter"  d  FjF^  et  seq. 

32.  Sonne  ...Butcher]  Sonnes  or  Sons 
...Butcher  F3F3.  Sons... Butchers  F4,  + 
(-Var.  ’73)- 

the  Sire]  the  father  Qg.  their 
father  Johns. 

33>  34-  In  margin,  Pope,  Han. 

33.  this]  that  Johns,  conj.  Ran.  these 
Vaughan  (iii,  165). 

33,  34.  Lancafler ,  Diuided]  Lan¬ 
caster.  Divided  Wh.  i.  Lancaster  Di¬ 
vided  Perring. 


20.  Sir  William  Brandon]  Boswell-Stone  (p.  419;  foot-note ):  Brandon  was 
not  slain  at  Bosworth.  Polydore  Vergil  merely  says  that  Richard  overthrew 
both  standard  and  standard-bearer.  A  petition  presented  by  Brandon  in  the 
first  Parliament  of  Henry  VII.  (Nov.,  1485)  shows  that  fear  of  Richard  obliged 
him  to  keep  sanctuary  at  Gloucester  from  Michaelmas  1484  until  the  coming  of 
Henry. 

26.  Heauen]  Dyce:  Though  ‘heaven’  is  frequently  used  as  a  plural,  I  doubt  if 
cur  author  would  have  written  it  thus  here.  [See  Text.  Notes;  compare  IV,  iii,  75.] 

31,  32.  The  Father  .  .  .  The  Sonne]  Weight:  In  3  Hen.  VI:  II,  v,  among 
the  characters  introduced  are:  ‘A  Son  that  has  killed  his  father,’  and:  ‘A  Father 
that  has  killed  his  son.’ 

33-37.  All  this  diuided,  etc.]  Johnson:  I  think  the  passage  will  be  somewhat 
improved  by  a  slight  alteration :  ‘  All  that  divided  ’  [and  a  comma  instead  of  a  period 
after  *  division  ’]  that  is  let  Richmond  and  Elizabeth  unite  all  that  York  and  Lancaster 


ACT  V,  SC.  V.] 


RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


427 


Diuided,  in  their  dire  Diuifion. 

O  now,  let  Richmond  and  Elizabeth ,  3  5 

The  true  Succeeders  of  each  Royall  Houfe, 

By  Gods  faire  ordinance,  conioyne  together  / 

And  let  thy  Heires  (God  if  thy  will  be  fo) 

Enrich  the  time  to  come,  with  Smooth-fac’d  Peace, 

With  fmiling  Plenty,  and  faire  Profperous  dayes.  40 

Abate  the  edge  of  Traitors,  Gracious  Lord, 

That  would  reduce  thefe  bloudy  dayes  againe, 

And  make  poore  England  weepe  in  Streames  of  Blood ;  43 


34.  Diuided...Diuifion]  Transposed 
to  follow  1.  36,  Huds. 

Diuided,  in  their ]  Did  usher  in. 
Their  Anon.  ap.  Cam. 

Diuifion.~\  division,  Johns,  conj. 
Ran.  Coll,  ii,  Dyce,  Cam. +  . 

37-  By  Gods ...conioyne~\  Joined  by 
God' s  ordinance  V aughan  (iii,  165). 


38.  thy  Heires~\  Q^Ff,  Rowe  i. 
their  heires  Q,Q2  et  cet. 

thy  will  ]  they  will  Q5-g. 

39.  Smooth-fad  d]  fmooth-fajle  Q,Q2 
Q3Qe.  fmooth-fajl  Q4.  fmooth-fac't 

Q«Q7Q8- 

40.  dayes]  day  Rowe  i. 

41.  Abate]  Rebate  Coll,  ii,  iii  (MS), 
Sing.  Ktly. 


divided. — R.  G.  White:  This  passage  has  hitherto  been  strangely  punctuated; 
with  a  comma  after  ‘  Lancaster,  ’  and  sometimes  a  period  after  division,  thus  making 
‘divided’  refer  to  York  and  Lancaster.  The  construction  is  a  little  involved, 
perhaps,  but  plain  enough.  The  sense  is:  ‘all  this  (i.  e.,  what  has  just  been  related) 
divided  York  and  Lancaster.  O,  now  let  Richmond  and  Elizabeth,  &c.,  who  were 
divided  in  the  dire  division  of  York  and  Lancaster,  by  God’s  fair  ordinance  join 
together.’ — Dyce:  Surely  ‘what  has  just  been  related’  was  not  the  cause  of  the 
division  of  York  and  Lancaster — it  was  the  consequence  of  that  division. — Hudson: 
White,  I  think,  errs  in  taking  ‘divided,’  1.  34,  as  a  verb,  and  not  as  a  participle,  and 
so  making  ‘York  and  Lancaster’  the  objects  of  it.  The  sense  of  that  line  I  take  to 
be:  All  this  division  of  York  and  Lancaster.  [See  Text.  Notes,  1.  34.] — Bristol 
(p.  42):  If  to  portray  reckless,  heartless,  insatiable  ambition,  a  love  of  power 
which  tramples  underfoot  the  laws  of  God  and  society,  if  to  record  with  dramatic 
force  the  diabolical  intrigues,  and  the  final  just  ruin  of  a  royal  assassin,  be  unpatri¬ 
otic,  then  Shakespeare  has  indeed  most  successfully  proven  himself  of  an  unpatriotic 
spirit.  If  patriotism  means  simply  loyalty  to  a  ‘House’  or  an  administration 
rather  than  to  the  country,  then  of  that  narrow  sort  of  patriotism  Shakespeare,  the 
author  of  Richard  III.,  was  not  conspicuously  possessed.  But  that  great  Tragedy 
was  written  by  a  pen  which  had  been  inspired  with  the  loftiest  patriotism — a 
love  of  country  and  the  rights  of  men.  The  spirit  that  wrote  the  play  breathes 
in  this  patriotic  prayer  of  Richmond. 

35,  36.  Richmond  .  .  .  The  true  Succeeders]  See  Dram.  Pers.,  Richmond. 

41.  Abate]  Murray  (AT.  E.  D.  s.  v.  Ill):  8.  To  beat  back  the  edge  or  point 
of  anything;  to  turn  the  edge;  to  blunt.  [The  present  line  quoted.] 

42.  reduce]  Craigie  ( N .  E.  D.  s.  v.  I):  5.  To  bring  back,  restore  (a  con¬ 
dition,  state  of  things,  time,  etc.).  Now  rare.  [The  present  line  quoted.] 


428 


THE  LIFE  AND  DEA  TH  OF  [act  v,  sc.  v. 


Let  them  not  Hue  to  tafte  this  Lands  increafe, 

That  would  with  Treafon,  wound  this  faire  Lands  peace.  45 
Now  Ciuill  wounds  are  ftopp’d,  Peace  Hues  agen ; 

That  (he  may  long  Hue  heere,  God  fay,  Amen.  Exeunt  47 


FINIS. 


44.  tajle ]  tajl  Q,. 

47.  heere]  heare  Qq.  here  Q4QgFf. 


47.  Exeunt]  Om.  Qq. 


APPENDIX 


APPENDIX 


THE  TEXT 

By  way  of  introduction  to  a  discussion  of  the  Quarto  and  Folio  texts  of 
Richard  III.  which  is  to  follow,  it  is  well  to  place  before  the  student  a  transcript 
of  the  several  title-pages  of  the  Qq;  that  of  Q1  is  as  follows: — 

The  Tragedy  of  |  King  Richard  the  third.  |  Containing,  |  His  treacherous  Plots 
against  his  brother  Clarence:  |  the  pittiefull  murther  of  his  innocent  nephewes:  |  his 
tyrannical  vsurpation:  with  the  whole  course  |  of  his  detested  life,  and  most 
deserued  death.  |  As  it  hath  beene  lately  Acted  by  the  |  Right  honourable  the 
Lord  Chamber- 1  laine  his  seruants.  |  At  London  |  Printed  by  Valentine  Sims,  for 
Andrew  Wise,  |  dwelling  in  Paules  Churchyard,  at  the  |  Sign  of  the  Angell. 
I  1597-  I 

The  title-page  of  Q2  is  as  follows: 

The  |  Tragedie  |  of  King  Richard  |  the  third.  |  Conteining  his  treacherous 
Plots  against  his  |  brother  Clarence :  the  pitiful  murther  of  his  innocent  |  Nephewes: 
his  tyrannicall  vsurpation :  with  |  the  whole  course  of  his  detested  life,  and  most  | 
deserued  death.  \  As  it  hath  beene  lately  Acted  by  the  Right  honourable  \  the  Lord 
Chamberlaine  his  servants.  |  By  William  Shake-speare.  |  London  |  Printed  by 
Thomas  Creede,  for  Andrew  Wise,  |  dwelling  in  Paules  Churchyard,  at  the  signe  | 
of  the  Angell.  1598.  | 

The  title-page  of  Qs  is  as  follows: 

The  I  Tragedie  |  of  King  Richard  |  the  third.  |  Conteining  his  treacherous  plots 
against  his  brother  |  Clarence:  the  pittifull  murther  of  his  innocent  Ne  |  phewes: 
his  tyrannical  vsurpation:  with  the  |  whole  course  of  his  detested  life,  and  |  most 
deserued  death.  |  it  hath  beene  lately  Acted  by  the  Right  Honourable  |  the  Lord 
Chamberlaine  his  seruants.  |  Newly  augmented,  |  By  William  Shakespeare.  | 
London  |  Printed  by  Thomas  Creede,  for  Andrew  Wise,  dwelling  |  in  Paules 
Church-yard,  at  the  signe  of  the  j  Angell.  1602. 

Qs  is,  however,  only  a  reprint  of  Q2,  with  perhaps  a  few  additional  misprints. 
The  opportunity  for  speculation,  as  to  why  the  words,  ‘Newly  augmented,’  are 
added  to  the  title-page,  is  as  fertile  as  its  results  are  futile. 

The  title-page  of  Q4  is  as  follows: 

The  I  Tragedie  |  of  King  Richard  |  the  third.  |  Conteining  his  treacherous 
plots  against  his  brother  |  Clarence:  the  pittifull  murther  of  his  innocent  Ne- 1 
phewes:  his  tyrannicall  vsurpation;  with  the  |  whole  course  of  his  detested  life, 
and  |  most  deserued  death.  |  As  it  hath  bin  lately  Acted  by  the  Right  Honourable  \  the 
Lord  Chamberlaine  his  seruants.  Newly  augmented,  |  By  William  Shake-speare.  | 
London,  |  printed  by  Thomas  Creede,  and  are  to  be  sold  by  Mathew  Lawe, 
dwelling  in  Paules  Church-yard,  at  the  Signe  |  of  the  Foxe,  neare  S.  Austins 
gate,  1605  |  . 


43i 


432 


APPENDIX 


The  title-page  of  Q5  is  as  follows: 

The  |  Tragedie  |  of  King  Richard  |  the  third.  |  Containing  his  treacherous 
Plots  against  his  brother  |  Clarence:  the  pittifull  murther  of  his  innocent  Ne-  | 
phewes:  his  tyrannical  vsurpation:  with  the  |  whole  course  of  his  detested  life, 
and  |  most  deserued  death.  |  As  it  hath  bin  lately  acted  by  the  Kings  Maiesties  | 
seruants.  |  Newly  augmented,  |  By  William  Shake-speare.  |  London,  |  Printed 
by  Thomas  Creede,  and  are  to  be  sold  by  Mathew  |  Lawe,  dwelling  in  Pauls 
Church-yard,  at  the  Signe  |  of  the  Foxe,  neare  S.  Austins  gate,  1612.  | 

Concerning  Q^,  published  in  1622,  Collier  (ed.  ii)  says:  ‘An  impression  in 
1622  is  mentioned  in  some  lists,  but  the  existence  of  a  copy  of  that  date  is  doubtful.’ 
The  Cambridge  Editors  give  the  title-page,  from  a  copy  in  the  Capell  collection, 
as  follows: 

The  I  Tragedie  |  OF  |  King  Richard  |  THE  THIRD.  |  Contayning  his 
treacherous  Plots  against  |  his  brother  Clarence:  The  pittifull  murder  of  his  inner 
cent  |  Nephewes:  his  tyrannicall  Vsurpation:  with  the  whole  |  course  of  his  detested 
life,  and  most  |  deserued  death.  |  As  it  hath  been  lately  Acted  by  the  Kings  Maiesties 
Seruants.  |  Newly  augmented.  |  By  William  Shakespeare.  |  London,  |  Printed  by 
Thomas  Pur  foot,  and  are  to  be  sold  by  Mathew  Law,  |  dwelling  in  Pauls  Church¬ 
yard,  at  the  Signe  of  the  Foxe,  neare  |  S.  Austins  gate,  1622. 

In  regard  to  the  two  succeeding  Qq  the  Cambridge  Editors  remark  ( Preface , 
p.  xv) :  ‘  Another  edition  in  Quarto  was  printed  in  1629,  not  from  Fp  but  from  Qfi. 
It  was  printed  by  John  Norton  for  Mathew  Law.  Except  in  the  name  of  the  printer 
and  the  substitution  of  the  word  “tiranous”  for  “tyrannical”  the  title-page  does 
not  differ  from  that  of  Qg.  The  eighth  and  last  Quarto,  copied  from  QT,  was 
printed  by  John  Norton  in  1634.  There  is  no  bookseller’s  name  on  the  title-page, 
if  we  may  trust  that  which  Capell  has  supplied  in  MS  “  from  a  copy  in  the  possession 
of  Messrs  Tonsons  and  Draper.”’ 

Steevens,  in  a  note  on  V,  iii,  29-32,  says:  ‘The  Folio  is  by  far  the  most  correct 
copy  of  this  play.’ 

Malone  (Note  on  I,  iii,  156):  In  this  play  the  variations  between  the  original 
copy  in  Quarto  and  the  Folio  are  more  numerous  than,  I  believe,  in  any  other 
of  our  author’s  pieces.  The  alterations,  it  is  highly  probable,  were  made,  not  by 
Shakespeare,  but  by  the  players,  many  of  them  being  very  injudicious.  The 
[present]  text  has  been  formed  out  of  the  two  copies,  the  Folio  and  the  early  Quarto. 

Collier:  The  fact  that  not  one  of  the  three  quartos  published  after  the  Folio 
contain  any  of  the  passages,  which  the  player-editors  of  the  Folio  inserted  in  their 
volume,  might  show  that  the  publishers  of  the  later  quartos  did  not  know  that 
there  were  any  material  variations  between  the  earlier  quartos  and  the  Folio,  that 
they  did  not  think  them  of  importance,  or  that  the  projectors  of  the  Folio  were 
considered  to  have  some  species  of  copyright  in  the  additions.  It  will  be  found 
that  more  than  one  speech  in  the  Folio  is  unintelligible  without  aid  from  the  quartos; 
and  for  some  characteristic  omissions,  particularly  one  in  IV,  ii,  it  is  not  possible 
to  account.  With  respect  to  the  additions  in  the  Folio,  we  have  no  means  of  ascer¬ 
taining  whether  they  formed  part  of  the  original  play.  Steevens’  [Qu.  ?  Malone’s] 
opinion,  that  the  Quarto  of  1597  contained  a  better  text  than  the  Folio,  is  not  our 
opinion;  for  though  the  Quarto  sets  right  several  doubtful  matters,  it  is  not  well 


THE  TEXT— DYCE—  CAMBRIDGE  EDITORS 


433 


printed,  even  for  a  production  of  that  day,  and  bears  marks  of  having  been  brought 
out  in  haste,  and  from  an  imperfect  manuscript.  The  copy  of  the  ‘history’  in 
the  Folio  was  in  some  places  a  reprint  of  the  Quarto  of  1602,  as  several  obvious 
errors  of  the  press  are  repeated,  right  for  ‘fight,’  helps  for  ‘helms.’  For  the  addi¬ 
tions,  a  manuscript  was  no  doubt  employed,  and  the  variations  in  some  scenes, 
particularly  near  the  middle  of  the  play,  are  so  numerous,  and  the  corrections  so 
frequent,  that  it  is  probable  a  transcript  belonging  to  the  theatre  was  there  con¬ 
sulted. 

Dyce  (ed.  ii):  The  text  of  the  Folio  is,  on  the  whole,  inferior  to  that  of  the 
Quartos.  Accordingly,  I  now  adhere  to  the  latter  in  sundry  places  where  my  first 
edition  exhibited  the  text  of  the  Folio. 

Staunton:  Upon  the  whole,  we  prefer  the  Quarto  text,  though  execrably 
deformed  by  printing-office  blunders,  and  can  by  no  means  acquiesce  in  the  decision 
that  those  passages  found  only  in  the  Folio  are  ‘additions’  made  by  the  poet, 
subsequent  to  the  publication  of  the  earlier  quartos.  On  the  contrary,  we  believe 
those  very  passages  to  have  been  structural  portions  of  the  piece,  and  the  real 
additions  to  be  the  terse  and  vigourous  bits  of  dialogue  peculiar  to  the  Quartos. .  . . 
But  although  in  a  few  instances  the  Folio  copy  appears  to  have  been  an  earlier  one 
than  that  used  by  the  printers  of  the  Quartos,  it  must  be  admitted  that  there  are 
numerous  places  in  which  the  text  of  the  former  has  undergone  minute  and  careful 
correction,  and  where,  both  in  rhythm  and  in  language,  it  is  superior  to  the  previous 
editions. 

R.  G.  White:  The  repetition  of  certain  errors  peculiar  to  the  Quarto  of  1602 
shows  that  the  text  of  the  Folio  was  printed  from  a  copy  of  that  edition;  but  the 
important  additions  to  and  corrections  of  its  text  are  undeniable  evidence  that  the 
copy  in  question  had  been  subjected  to  carefullest  revision  at  the  hands  (it  seems 
to  me  beyond  a  doubt)  of  Shakespeare  himself,  by  which  it  gained  much  smoothness 
and  correctness,  and  lost  no  strength.  In  minute  beauties  of  rhythm,  in  choice  of 
epithets,  and  in  the  avoidance  of  bald  repetition,  (a  fault  unusually  frequent  in  the 
Quarto  text),  the  play  was  greatly  improved  by  this  revision;  and  while  some 
of  the  passages  found  in  the  Folio  and  not  in  the  Quartos  may  have  been  omitted 
from  the  MS  from  which  the  latter  was  printed,  for  the  sake  of  abbreviating  so 
long  a  drama,  many  of  them  are  evidently  from  the  perfecting  hand  of  the  author 
in  the  maturity  of  his  powers.  This  being  the  case,  the  faults,  whether  of  omission 
or  of  commission,  in  the  folio  text  must  be  assumed  as  accidental  only;  and  its 
authority,  although  impaired  in  minute  matters,  must  be  maintained — say,  rather, 
maintains  itself.  It  furnishes  the  true  text,  and  the  best;  though  we  are  fortunate 
in  having  the  Quartos,  especially  that  of  1597,  to  depend  upon  when  the  Folio  is 
corrupt. 

Cambridge  Editors  (ed.  ii,  Preface,  p.  xvi):  The  respective  origin  and  authority 
of  the  first  Quarto  and  first  Folio  texts  of  Richard  III.  is  perhaps  the  most  difficult 
question  which  presents  itself  to  an  editor  of  Shakespeare.  In  the  case  of  most  of  the 
plays  a  brief  survey  leads  him  to  form  a  definite  judgement;  in  this,  the  most  atten¬ 
tive  examination,  scarcely  enables  him  to  propose  with  confidence  a  hypothetical 
conclusion.  Qt  contains  passages  not  found  in  Fj  which  are  essential  to  the  under- 
28 


434 


APPENDIX 


standing  of  the  context:  the  Folio,  on  the  other  hand,  contains  passages  equally 
essential  which  are  not  found  in  the  Quarto.  Again,  passages  which  in  the  Quarto 
are  complete  and  consecutive,  are  amplified  in  the  Folio,  the  expanded  text  being 
quite  in  the  manner  of  Shakespeare.  The  Folio,  too,  contains  passages  not  in 
the  Quartos,  which,  though  not  necessary  to  the  sense,  yet  harmonise  so  well,  in 
sense  and  tone,  with  the  context  that  we  can  have  no  hesitation  in  attributing  them 
to  the  author  himself.  On  the  other  hand,  we  find  in  the  Folio  some  insertions 
and  many  alterations  which  we  may  with  equal  certainty  affirm  not  to  be  due 
to  Shakespeare.  Sometimes  the  alterations  seem  merely  arbitrary,  but  more 
frequently  they  appear  to  have  been  made  in  order  to  avoid  the  recurrence  of  the 
same  word,  even  where  the  recurrence  adds  to  the  force  of  the  passage,  or  to  correct 
a  supposed  defect  of  metre,  although  the  metre  cannot  be  amended  except  by 
spoiling  the  sense.  Occasionally  we  seem  to  find  indications  that  certain  turns 
of  phrase,  uses  of  words,  or  metrical  licences,  familiar  enough  to  Shakespeare  and 
his  earlier  contemporaries,  had  become  obsolete  in  the  time  of  the  corrector,  and 
the  passages  modified  accordingly.  In  short,  Richard  III.  seems,  even  before  the 
publication  of  the  Folio,  to  have  been  tampered  with  by  a  nameless  transcriber 
who  worked  in  the  spirit,  though  not  with  the  audacity,  of  Colley  Cibber.  The 
following  scheme  will  best  explain  the  theory  which  we  submit  as  a  not  impossible 
way  of  accounting  for  the  phenomena  of  the  text: 

Ax  A, 

B,  B, 

Qi  Fi 

Aj  is  the  Author’s  original  MS.  Bj  is  a  transcript  by  another  hand,  with  some 
accidental  omissions  and,  of  course,  slips  of  the  pen.  From  this  transcript  was 
printed  the  Quarto  of  1597,  Qr  A2  is  the  Author’s  original  MS  revised  by  him¬ 
self,  with  corrections  and  additions,  interlinear,  marginal,  and  on  inserted  leaves. 
Bj  is  a  copy  of  this  revised  MS,  made  by  another  hand,  probably  after  the  death 
of  the  Author  and  perhaps  a  very  short  time  before  1623.  As  the  stage  directions 
of  the  Folio,  which  was  printed  from  B2,  are  more  precise  and  ample  as  a  rule,  than 
those  of  the  Quarto,  we  may  infer  that  the  transcript,  B2,  was  made  for  the  library 
of  the  theatre,  perhaps  to  take  the  place  of  the  original,  which  had  become  worn  by 
use,  for  Richard  III.  continued  to  be  a  popular  acting  play.  Some  curious,  though 
not  frequent,  coincidences  between  the  text  of  the  Folio  and  that  of  the  Quarto 
of  1602,  Q3,  lead  us  to  suppose  that  the  writer  of  B2  had  occasionally  recourse  to 
that  Quarto  to  supplement  passages,  which,  by  being  frayed  or  stained,  had  become 
illegible  in  A2.  Assuming  the  truth  of  this  hypothesis,  the  object  of  an  editor 
must  be  to  give  in  the  text  as  near  an  approximation  as  possible  to  A2,  rejecting 
from  Fj  all  that  is  due  to  the  unknown  writer  of  B2,  and  supplying  its  place  from 
Qj,  which,  errors  of  pen  and  press  apart,  certainly  came  from  the  hand  of  Shakes¬ 
peare.  ...  In  conclusion,  we  commend  a  study  of  the  text  of  Richard  III.  to 
those,  if  such  there  be,  who  imagine  that  it  is  possible,  by  the  exercise  of  critical 
skill,  to  restore  with  certainty  what  Shakespeare  actually  wrote. 


THE  TEXT— DELIUS— SCHMIDT 


435 


N.  Delius  ( Jahrbuch ,  vii,  130):  In  our  opinion  the  Folio  gives,  on  the  whole, 
the  real  text  of  Shakespeare’s  Richard  III.,  and  moreover  the  original  text, — not,  as 
considered  by  the  Cambridge  Editors,  a  later  one, — amplified  by  the  poet,  with  revi¬ 
sions  and  additions;  the  Folio  text  seems  to  us  to  be  the  one  always  spoken  on  the 
Shakespearean  stage,  and  afterwards  preserved  in  MS  in  the  library  of  the  theatre; 
from  it  was  printed  the  play  as  it  appears  for  the  first  time  in  the  Folio.  The 
Quarto,  on  the  other  hand,  gives  us  the  text  as  it  was  printed  in  1597  by  Sims,  for 
the  publisher  Andrew  Wise,  from  a  copy,  probably  corrupt,  obtained  without  the 
consent  or  approval  of  Shakespeare  and  his  partners,  and  with  additions  and  alter¬ 
ations  by  some  anonymous  corrector.  Now,  since  this  publication  appeared 
entirely  without  the  consent  of  the  lawful  owners  of  the  play,  the  parties  concerned 
must  have  considered  themselves  completely  exonerated  from  any  regard  to  the 
poet,  whose  name  was  even  omitted  from  the  title-page;  they  must  have  dealt  as 
they  pleased  with  the  text,  and  boldly  undertook  all  such  alterations  of  it  as  arose 
partly  from  the  preference  of  the  anonymous  corrector,  partly  from  a  mere  wanton 
desire  of  change.  The  procedure  of  our  anonymous  corrector  is  distinguished 
from  the  like  procedure  of  that  other  corrector  who,  according  to  the  opinion  of 
approved  Shakespearean  critics,  had  revised  the  first  Quartos  of  Romeo  Juliet 
and  Hamlet,  principally  in  this,  that  before  him  there  lay  a  copy  of  the  original, 
full  and  complete,  barring  a  few  incidental  slips  of  the  pen  and  omissions,  while 
the  first  editors  of  the  two  plays  just  mentioned  were  forced  to  content  themselves 
with  excessively  incomplete  and  careless  manuscripts,  which  they  patched  together 
and  amplified.  Thus  the  editor  of  the  first  Quarto  of  Richard  III.  could  furnish 
a  text,  which,  without  prejudice  to  his  own  arbitrary  alterations,  produced  on  the 
whole  the  impression  of  an  uncorrupted  text  of  Shakespeare,  and  would  probably 
have  produced  such  an  impression  upon  us — if,  perchance,  the  editors  of  the  Folio, 
in  making  their  collected  edition,  had  used  in  this  case,  as  elsewhere,  the  Quarto 
impression  instead  of  the  stage-copy.  [Delius  hereupon  quotes  many  of  the  pas¬ 
sages  wherein  there  is  marked  divergence  between  Qj  and  F1(  and  gives  the  reasons 
for  his  preference  of  the  Folio.  The  majority  of  his  remarks  are  quoted  in  the 
notes  on  the  passages  to  which  he  refers.] 

R.  Koppel  (p.  50):  According  to  our  view,  the  MS  from  which  the  Qto  was 
printed  is  a  transcript  of  the  Tragedy  as  prepared  for  the  stage.  It  is  at  times  cor¬ 
rected  hastily,  at  others  arbitrarily,  but  for  the  most  part  is  a  good  and  careful 
copy.  But  the  handwriting  from  which  the  Folio  was  printed  is  likewise  a  modi¬ 
fied  transcript,  and  indeed  partly  arbitrary,  likewise  in  part  hasty  and  also  authentic, 
according  to  the  longer  and  original  form  of  the  play.  Both  transcripts  have  been 
in  different  ways  of  varied  benefits.  It  may  be  proved,  by  reference  to  various  pas¬ 
sages,  that  the  Folio  was  printed  directly  from  the  Quartos  and  in  special  from  that 
of  1602,  Qs. 

Alexander  Schmidt  ( Jahrbuch ,  xv,  p.  307)  reviews  the  foregoing  article  by 
Delius  and,  in  regard  to  the  hypothesis  of  an  anonymous  corrector,  proposed  by 
Delius,  remarks:  ‘The  MS  certainly  came  to  the  hands  of  the  printer  of  the  Qto 
as  that  of  a  Shakespearean  play,  to  be  printed  “as  it  had  been  lately  acted  by  the 
Lord  Chamberlain  his  servants,”  exactly  as  it  had  been  seen  on  the  stage  and 
greeted  with  much  applause.  Only  under  such  conditions  could  Andrew  Wise 
reckon  safely  as  its  purchaser.  He  himself  was  not  in  the  position  to  undertake 


APPENDIX 


436 

the  editing,  and,  therefore,  without  doubt,  he  called  to  his  aid  some  one  skilled  in 
poesy  and  verse-writing,  but  he  hardly  could  have  given  him  permission,  or  orders, 
to  correct  the  MS  as  though  it  were  a  school-boy’s  exercise,  or  as  far  as  he  was 
able,  to  introduce  changes.  He  was  more  concerned  with  a  passage  here  and 
there  than  with  the  completeness  of  the  work.  But  what  should  have  prompted 
this  anonymous  corrector  to  undertake  so  laborious  a  task,  contrary  to  the  wish 
or  knowledge  of  his  employer,  is  utterly  incomprehensible;  and  so  likewise  must 
be  each  hypothesis,  which  seeks  to  explain  the  cause  of  these  variations  otherwise 
than  as  mere  oversights  due  to  peculiarities  in  the  form  and  manner  of  the  hand¬ 
writing.  It  happens,  therefore,  that  the  theory  of  a  reviser,  such  as  this  anonymous 
one,  suffices  to  explain  a  certain  class  of  variations,  but  for  another  kind  it  is  com¬ 
pletely  inadequate.  If  we  still  wish  to  assign  the  important  omissions  and  additions 
to  the  reviser  of  the  Quarto,  the  numerous  corruptions  of  the  metre  show  that 
they  could  hardly  have  come  from  one  who  has  proved  himself  so  evidently  familiar 
with  iambic  pentameter;  and  to  what  end,  moreover,  would  he  have  disturbed 
the  perfectly  regular  verses  found  in  the  MS?  We  are  obliged  to  take  refuge  in 
theory  after  theory — theories  which  support  the  elaborate  structure  on  one  side, 
but  on  another  topple  it  over.  One  hypothesis  alone  explains  everything  equally 
and  completely:  That  the  origin  of  the  Quarto  is  a  transcript  from  the  performance 
of  the  play.  [Schmidt  then  quotes  at  some  length  those  passages  wherein  there  is 
the  greatest  diversity  between  Qto  and  F,  and  also  those  passages  added  to  the 
Qto,  in  order  to  show  that  such  changes  would  be  more  likely  those  of  the  actors 
than  those  of  a  poet  revising  his  work;  in  regard  to  the  similarity  of  form  and  words 
between  III,  i,  209-210,  ‘Shall  we  heare  from  you  Catesby,  ere  we  sleepe?  You 
shall  my  Lord ’  and  a  passage  inserted  in  the  Qto  in  IV,  ii,  ‘  Shall  we  hear  from  thee 
Tyrrel  ere  we  sleep?  You  shall  my  Lord,’  Schmidt  remarks:  ‘This  line  is  wanting 
in  the  Folio,  and  there  can  be  no  question  but  that  such  weak  tautology  was  not  the 
work  of  the  poet.  Richard  Burbage,  the  original  Richard,  prided  himself,  not 
without  cause,  on  his  great  fame;  the  tone,  bearing,  and  behaviour  wherewith  the 
actor  accompanied  the  speech  to  Catesby,  must  have  been  received  with  such  great 
applause  that  the  actor  could  not  resist  the  temptation  to  produce  a  second  time 
a  like  effect,  and  dismiss  the  murderer  Tyrrel  with  words  almost  the  same.’ 
Schmidt  thus  calls  attention  also  to  the  insertion,  in  IV,  ii,  in  the  Qto  of  the  longer 
passage  in  the  scene  between  Richard  and  Buckingham,  following  the  words, 
‘A  king  perhaps — ’  1.  in:  ‘Three  times  Buckingham  recalls  a  promise  to  the 
king,  and  three  times  the  latter  ignores  him.  One  would  think  this  to  be  sufficient, 
and  that  Buckingham  could  remain  in  no  possible  doubt  as  to  his  standing  with 
the  King.  It  was  not  enough  however  for  the  actor  who  was  here  in  a  prominent 
position  and  wished  to  enjoy  to  the  full  the  applause  of  the  crowd;  therefore  the 
scene  was  lengthened  and  the  scornful  neglect  given  seven  times,  regardless  of  the 
injury  done  thereby  to  our  opinion  of  Buckingham’s  intelligence.’ 

Schmidt  also  agrees  with  Koppel  that  the  Folio  was  probably  printed  from  a 
corrected  copy  of  Qs;  since  there  are  numerous  misprints  which  are  common  to 
both,  but  which  do  not  appear  in  earlier  Qq,  and  in  some  cases  are  in  the  Folio 
and  Q3  alone,  e.  g.,  Ill,  i,  139,  ‘as,  as,  you  call  me’;  V,  iii,  397,  ‘victory  sits  on  our 
helpes.’  He  also  calls  attention  to  the  close  agreement  between  III,  i,  5-185,  as  given 
in  Q3  and  the  Folio;  and  also  the  end  of  the  play  from  V,  iii,  80,  et  seq.  ‘  The  reason 
for  this  was  possibly  that  the  MS  from  which  the  Folio  was  printed  was  here  illegible 
and  recourse  was  had  to  the  Qto  to  make  up  the  deficiencies.’ 


THE  TEXT— SPEEDING 


437 


James  Spedding  ( Shakspere  Soc.  Trans.,  1875-’ 76;  pp.  1-75)  divides  the 
corrections  in  the  Folio  text  of  Rich.  III.  into  the  following  classes:  ‘  (1.)  Alterations 
not  intended  by  Shakspere.  (2.)  Alterations  made  to  improve  the  metre.  (3.) 
Alterations  to  avoid  repetition  of  a  word.  (4.)  Alterations  in  the  stage-directions.’ 
Many  of  Spedding’s  notes  are  quoted  in  the  commentary,  under  the  passages  to 
which  they  refer.  The  following  is  an  abstract  of  the  results  of  his  endeavor  to  dem¬ 
onstrate  that  the  Folio  Text  is  to  be  preferred  to  that  of  the  Quartos:  ‘There  are  one 
hundred  and  ninety-three  lines  in  the  Folio  text,  which  are  not  found  in  any  of  the 
Quartos;  but  these  are  made  up  in  great  part  of  ones  and  twos — out  of  forty-five 
insertions  twenty-two  consist  of  one  line  only,  and  nine  of  only  two — which  being 
scattered  irregularly  through  the  whole  of  the  first  four  Acts,  indicate  not  merely 
the  addition  of  a  scene  or  a  speech  here  and  there,  but  a  general  revision  and  correc¬ 
tion  of  the  entire  composition.  Now,  if  Shakspere  took  so  much  trouble  with  the 
small  additions  and  amplifications,  why  should  we  not  suppose  that  he  took  as 
much  with  the  corrections?  The  only  reason  I  can  imagine  is,  that  the  additions 
are  judged  to  be  worthy  of  him,  and  the  corrections  not.  Some  positive  reason 
of  this  kind  the  Cambridge  Editors  appear  to  have  seen;  for  they  “  find  in  the  Folio” 
(they  say)  “some  insertions  and  many  alterations  which  they  may  with  equal 
certainty  affirm  not  to  be  due  to  Shakspere:”  with  a  certainty  (that  is)  equal 
to  that  with  which  they  affirm  that  the  amplifications,  expansions,  and  additions 
are  due  to  him.  But  when  I  seek  for  the  grounds  of  this  certainty,  I  find  nothing 
more  definite  than  the  following  remarks  in  the  Preface:  “Sometimes  the  altera¬ 
tions  seem  merely  arbitrary,  but  more  frequently  they  appear  to  have  been  made 
in  order  to  avoid  the  recurrence  of  the  same  word,  even  where  the  recurrence  adds 
to  the  force  of  the  passage,  or  to  correct  a  supposed  defect  of  metre,  although  the 
metre  cannot  be  amended  except  by  spoiling  the  sense.  Occasionally  we  seem  to 
find  indications  that  certain  turns  of  phrase,  uses  of  words  or  metrical  licences, 
familiar  enough  to  Shakspere  and  his  earlier  contemporaries,  had  become  obsolete 
in  the  time  of  the  corrector,  and  the  passages  modified  accordingly.” — p.  xvii. 

4  Now,  it  is  plain  that  the  question  whether  we  have  here  good  reasons  for  con¬ 
cluding  that  these  alterations  were  not  due  to  Shakspere,  or  no  reasons  at  all, 
depends  entirely  upon  the  truth  of  the  assertion  implied  in  the  clauses  which  I  have 
printed  in  italic.  Where  the  recurrence  of  the  same  word  adds  force  to  the  passage, 
the  substitution  of  another  in  order  to  avoid  its  recurrence  would  be  a  good  reason 
for  thinking  that  Shakspere  did  not  make  the  alteration.  To  remove  a  defect 
of  metre  at  the  expense  of  the  meaning,  is  a  thing  which  Shakspere  cannot  be 
suspected  of — since  he  was  certainly  capable  of  making  his  metre  perfect  without 
spoiling  his  sense.  But  where  are  these  alterations  of  phrase  or  metre  from  which 
such  effects  follow?  I  have  examined  above  a  thousand  cases,  and  (except  those 
which  I  have  already  discussed)  I  have  not  found  one  in  which  I  can  myself  per¬ 
ceive  them.  It  is  true  that  many  of  the  changes  seem  “arbitrary” — or  I  should 
rather  say  uncalled  for:  that  is,  I  do  not  myself  see  why  any  change  should  have 
been  made.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  Shakspere  could  have  seen  no  reason 
for  it,  and  an  “arbitrary”  change,  he  being  arbiter,  would  probably  be  an  improve¬ 
ment.  It  is  true  that  metrical  irregularities  similar  to  those  which  we  find  in  the 
Quartos  of  Richard  III.  are  frequent  in  the  plays  of  his  earlier  contemporaries, 
and  even  in  his  own  earliest  dramatic  writings:  does  it  follow  that  in  revising  and 
correcting  them  at  a  later  time  he  would  not  have  removed  such  irregularities? 
We  know  that  in  his  writings  of  the  middle  period  he  avoided  them,  and  that  such 


438 


APPENDIX 


irregularities  as  at  a  later  period  he  affected,  and  made  such  rich  use  of,  were  of 
quite  a  different  character.  It  is  true  that  many  words  and  phrases  which  were 
familiar  when  he  began  to  write,  fell  gradually  into  disuse:  does  it  follow  that  in 
revising  and  correcting  he  would  not  change  them  for  the  words  and  phrases  that 
had  come  into  use  instead?  We  know  that  he  never  affected  antiquated  phrase¬ 
ology,  but  wrote  always  in  the  spoken  language  of  his  own  day.  Richard  III., 
being  one  of  his  earliest  works,  and  yet  continuing  to  be  a  popular  acting  play  for 
many  years,  was  the  more  likely  not  only  to  receive  alterations  from  time  to  time, 
but  to  be  thought  worth  re-editing  and  clearing  of  everything  that  from  changes 
in  the  fashion  had  become  unfit,  or  from  changes  in  himself  distasteful.  If  “in 
the  time  of  the  corrector  ”  some  of  the  phraseology  had  grown  so  obsolete  as  to  require 
“modification,”  why  not  in  the  time  of  Shakspere  himself?  Date  the  correction 
as  late  as  you  will,  you  cannot  put  it  more  than  seven  years  after  his  death.  Between 
1616  and  1623  no  sudden  revolution  occurred  in  popular  taste,  and  you  would 
probably  find  evidence  in  his  own  plays  of  the  middle  period  that  the  change  had 
begun  long  before.  Supposing  him  to  have  taken  the  trouble  to  correct  the  play 
at  all,  alterations  of  this  kind  are  precisely  those  which  I  should  have  expected  him 
to  make;  and,  therefore,  unless  it  can  be  shown  that  they  are  made  without  judge¬ 
ment — that  they  spoil  the  sense,  or  weaken  the  force  of  the  passages  in  which  they 
are  introduced — I  cannot  understand  what  pretence  there  is  for  refusing  to  accept 
them  as  his. . . .  The  argument  of  the  Cambridge  Editors  in  favour  of  the  Quarto 
as  preferable  to  the  Folio  rests,  as  I  understand  it,  upon  the  following  consideration: 
— (1)  The  Quarto  contains  passages  which,  though  essential  to  the  understanding 
of  the  context,  are  not  found  in  the  Folio.  The  corrector  therefore  who  removed 
them  cannot  have  been  the  author.  (2)  Many  of  the  alterations  introduced  in 
the  Folio  are  such  as  Shakespeare  would  not  have  made:  there  being  some  in  which 
the  force  of  the  passage  is  sacrificed  only  to  avoid  the  repetition  of  the  same  word 
in  it:  some  in  which  the  sense  is  spoiled,  only  to  remove  a  supposed  defect  of 
metre :  some  in  which  the  change  has  been  made  only  to  get  rid  of  a  word  or  phrase 
that  had  become  unfashionable:  some  in  which  “the  earlier  form  is  more  terse,  and 
therefore  not  likely  to  have  been  altered  by  its  author.”  I  have  collected  all  the 
cases  I  could  find  which  might  seem  to  come  under  any  of  these  heads;  and  I  have 
found  none  which  seem  to  me  to  justify  the  conclusion.  I  have  found  that  the 
passages,  which  though  essential  to  the  understanding  of  the  context,  are  omitted 
in  the  Folio,  have  been  apparently  omitted  through  accidents  over  which  the 
corrector  had  no  control — accidents  such  as  are  either  known  to  happen  frequently, 
or  may  easily  have  happened  in  the  particular  case.  Among  the  alterations  made 
to  avoid  the  repetition  of  the  same  word,  I  have  found  scarcely  one  by  which  any 
force  appears  to  me  to  be  lost — scarcely  one  by  which  a  perceptible  blemish  is  not 
removed.  Among  those  made  to  correct  the  metre,  I  have  not  found  any  which 
spoil  the  sense — scarcely  any  by  which  the  metre  is  not  mended.  Among  those 
made  to  get  rid  of  obsolete  words,  I  have  not  found  any  in  which  the  word  to  be 
got  rid  of  is  not  one  that  may  probably  have  become  distasteful  to  Shakspere 
himself.  Of  cases  in  which  the  terser  form  has  been  exchanged  for  one  less  terse, 
I  have  not  met  with  any  which  I  recognised  as  answering  the  description;  nor 
have  I  been  able  to  perceive  any  other  reason  for  refusing  to  believe  that  the  text 
of  the  Folio  (errors  being  corrected  or  allowed  for)  represents  the  result  of  Shaks- 
pere’s  own  latest  revision,  and  approaches  nearest  to  the  form  in  which  he  wished 
it  to  stand.  Upon  the  whole,  therefore,  I  conclude  that  where  express  reason 


THE  TEX  T — PICKERS  GILL 


439 

cannot  be  shown  to  the  contrary,  the  readings  of  the  Folio  ought  always  to  be 
preferred.’ 

E.  H.  Pickersgill  [Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1875— ’76;  p.  79):  Fashions  of  speech  no 
doubt  may  change;  phrases  and  words  may  grow  obsolete  or  die  out  even  within  the 
limits  of  a  literary  career;  modes  of  thought  or  expression  which  were  dear  to  the 
poet  in  his  youth  may  grow  distasteful  to  him  in  his  maturity;  the  points  of  view  from 
which  he  regards  nature  and  human  life  may  shift,  as  the  years  roll  on;  but  amid 
all  these  elements  of  change,  if  he  should  think  it  worth  while  to  revise  his  earlier 
work,  we  may  be  certain  that  he  will  never  turn  poetry  into  very  weak  and  washy, 
albeit  more  regular  verse.  .  .  .  The  improvements  which  are  essayed  in  the  Folio 
are  altogether  below  what  we  should  expect  from  Shakespeare,  if  we  suppose  him 
assuming  the  character  of  a  reviser  of  his  own  work. 

I  shall  now  endeavor  to  establish  that  the  so-called  ‘inserted  passages’  of  the 
Folio  formed  part  of  the  play  as  it  was  originally  written.  Spedding  gives  the 
number  of  new  lines  printed  in  the  Folio  of  1623  as  one  hundred  and  ninety-three. 
I  do  not  propose  to  give  a  separate  discussion  to  each  of  these.  Single  lines,  or 
even  lines  inserted  by  twos  and  threes,  cannot  help  us  much  towards  a  solution  of 
the  question  at  issue.  Confining  my  attention,  therefore,  to  the  six  longest  of  the 
inserted  passages,  I  shall  quote  each  of  them  at  length,  along  with  its  immediate 
context  as  it  stands  in  the  Quarto.  The  reader  will  thus  be  in  a  position  to  form 
his  own  judgment  upon  two  points:  first,  whether  the  character  of  the  inserted 
passage  is  conformable  with  the  theory  that  it  was  added  by  the  author  upon  a 
revision  of  the  play  several  years  after  it  was  originally  written;  or  whether,  upon  the 
other  hand,  it  rather  tends  to  favour  the  alternative  theory  that  the  passage  formed 
part  of  the  original  play,  but  being  omitted  by  the  actors  in  representation,  was 
consequently  omitted  from  the  Quarto  editions;  and,  secondly,  whether  there  is  a 
marked  metrical  difference  between  the  ‘inserted’  passage  and  its  context,  as  the 
latter  stands  in  the  Quarto.  If  it  does  not  appear  that  there  is  such  a  difference, 
it  will  be  unnecessary  to  discuss  Mr  Spedding’s  opinion  that  the  metrical  charac¬ 
teristics  of  these  passages  correspond  with  those  of  Shakspere’s  work  in  or  about 
the  year  1602.  Note:  the  passages  peculiar  to  the  Folio  are  enclosed  within 
brackets. 


1. 

I,  ii,  168-199: — 

Anne.  Out  of  my  sight,  thou  dost  infect  my  eyes. 
Glou.  Thine  eyes,  sweet  lady,  have  infected  mine. 
Anne.  Would  they  were  basilisks,  to  strike  thee  dead! 
Glou.  I  would  they  were,  that  I  might  die  at  once; 
For  now  they  kill  me  with  a  living  death. 

Those  eyes  of  thine  from  mine  have  drawn  salt  tears, 
Shamed  their  aspect  with  store  of  childish  drops: 

[These  eyes,  which  never  shed  remorseful  tear, 

No,  when  my  father  York  and  Edward  wept, 

To  hear  the  piteous  moan  that  Rutland  made 
When  Black-faced  Clifford  shook  his  sword  at  him; 

Nor  when  thy  warlike  father,  like  a  child, 

Told  the  sad  story  of  my  father’s  death. 


440 


APPENDIX 


And  twenty  times  made  pause  to  sob  and  weep, 

That  all  the  standers-by  had  wet  their  cheeks, 

Like  trees  bedashed  with  rain:  in  that  sad  time 
My  manly  eyes  did  scorn  an  humble  tear; 

And  what  these  sorrows  could  not  thence  exhale, 

Thy  beauty  hath,  and  made  them  blind  with  weeping. 

I  never  sued  to  friend  nor  enemy; 

My  tongue  could  never  learn  sweet  soothing  words; 

But,  now  thy  beauty  is  proposed  my  fee, 

My  proud  heart  sues,  and  prompts  my  tongue  to  speak. 
Teach  not  thy  lips  such  scorn,  for  they  were  made 
For  kissing,  lady,  not  for  such  contempt. 

If  thy  revengeful  heart  cannot  forgive, 

Lo!  here  I  lend  thee  this  sharp-pointed  sword; 

Which  if  thou  please  to  hide  in  this  true  bosom, 

And  let  the  soul  forth  that  adoreth  thee, 

I  lay  it  naked  to  the  deadly  stroke, 

And  humbly  beg  the  death  upon  my  knee. 

Nay,  do  not  pause;  ’twas  I  that  killed  your  husband, 
But  ’twas  thy  beauty  that  provoked  me. 

Nay,  now  despatch;  ’twas  I  that  killed  King  Henry. 

But  ’twas  thy  heavenly  face  that  set  me  on. 


I  think  the  reader  will  agree  with  me  that  the  passage  enclosed  in  brackets  must 
have  formed  part  of  the  original  play;  indeed,  in  the  Quarto,  the  abrupt  conclusion 
of  the  lines, 


Those  eyes  of  thine  from  mine  have  drawn  salt  tears, 

Shamed  their  aspect  with  store  of  childish  drops, 

is  quite  noticeable,  and  suggests  that  something  has  been  omitted.  As  regards 
metre,  my  ear  cannot  detect  any  difference  between  the  lines  which  are,  and  those 
which  are  not,  in  the  Quarto.  Counting,  however,  gives  a  result  partly  in  Mr  Sped- 
ding’s  favour,  partly  against  him.  There  are  twenty-one  old  lines  and  twelve  new; 
in  the  former  there  is  only  one  run-on  line,  in  the  latter  there  are  two  run-on  lines. 
This  result  tells  for  Mr  Spedding.  But,  upon  the  other  hand,  whilst  the  twelve 
new  lines  contain  only  one  line  with  an  extra  syllable,  the  twenty-one  old  lines 
contain  three  such  lines.  This  result  tells  against  Mr  Spedding;  for,  if  it  proved 
anything,  it  would  prove  that  the  passage  peculiar  to  the  Folio  is  earlier  than  the 
rest.  With  regard  to  the  run-on  lines  in  that  passage,  I  may  observe  that  the 
proportion  in  the  Quarto  is  not  unfrequently  even  very  much  greater:  e.  g.,  in 
Gloucester’s  opening  soliloquy,  containing  forty-one  lines,  there  are  twelve 
unstopped,  or  about  one  in  three.  [Foot-note  by  W.  A.  Wright:  Would  Shaks- 
pere,  in  1602,  have  written  these  added  lines?  They  surely  belong  to  his  early 
manner.  I  have  no  doubt  they  were  originally  part  of  the  play,  and  were 
omitted  for  stage  purposes.] 


THE  TEXT— PICKERSG ILL 


441 


2. 

II,  ii,  84-112: — 

Duch.  Was  ever  mother  had  a  dearer  loss! 

Alas,  I  am  the  mother  of  these  moans! 

Their  woes  are  parcell’d,  mine  are  general. 

She  for  Edward  weeps,  and  so  do  I; 

I  for  a  Clarence  weep,  so  doth  not  she: 

These  babes  for  Clarence  weep,  and  so  do  I; 

I  for  an  Edward  weep,  so  do  not  they: 

Alas,  you  three,  on  me  threefold  distressed 
Pour  all  your  tears!  I  am  your  sorrow’s  nurse, 

And  I  will  pamper  it  with  lamentations. 

\_Dor.  Comfort,  dear  mother:  God  is  much  displeased 
That  you  take  with  unthankfulness  his  doing: 

In  common  worldly  things,  ’tis  called  ungrateful, 

With  dull  unwillingness  to  repay  a  debt 
Which  with  a  bounteous  hand  was  kindly  lent; 

Much  more  to  be  thus  opposite  with  heaven, 

For  it  requires  the  royal  debt  it  lent  you. 

Riv.  Madam,  bethink  you,  like  a  careful  mother, 

Of  the  young  prince  your  son:  send  straight  for  him; 

Let  him  be  crown’d;  in  him  your  comfort  lives: 

Drown  desperate  sorrow  in  dead  Edward’s  grave, 

And  plant  your  joys  in  living  Edward’s  throne.] 

Enter  Gloster,  Buckingham,  Stanley,  Hastings,  Ratcliffe,  and  others. 
Glo.  Sister,  have  comfort:  all  of  us  have  cause 
To  wail  the  dimming  of  our  shining  star; 

But  none  can  help  our  harms  by  wailing  them. — 

Madam,  my  mother,  I  do  cry  you  mercy; 

I  did  not  see  your  grace. — Humbly  on  my  knee 
I  crave  your  blessing. 


In  the  first  place,  if  the  passage  in  brackets  were  inserted  on  a  careful  revision 
of  the  play,  one  would  not  expect  to  find  a  phrase  put  into  Dorset’s  mouth — ‘com¬ 
fort,  dear  mother’ — so  closely  resembling  Gloucester’s — ‘Madam,  have  comfort.’ 
Upon  the  other  hand,  what  is  more  probable  than  that  a  slender  company  should 
cut  out  these  two  unimportant  speeches  of  Dorset  and  Rivers,  and  so  set  free  the 
actors  who  personated  them  to  undertake  other  characters  in  this  scene?  As 
regards  the  metre,  there  are  fifteen  old  lines,  and  twelve  new;  the  former  contain 
three  run-on  lines,  and  the  latter  contain  two.  The  old  lines  appear  to  run  more 
smoothly  than  the  new. 


3- 


II,  ii,  118-149: — 

Buck.  You  cloudy  princes,  and  heart-sorrowing  peers 
That  bear  this  heavy  mutual  load  of  moan, 

Now  cheer  each  other  in  each  other’s  love: 

Though  we  have  spent  our  harvest  of  this  king, 

We  are  to  reap  the  harvest  of  his  son. 

The  broken  rancour  of  your  high-swoln  hates, 


442 


APPENDIX 


But  lately  splinter’d,  knit,  and  join’d  together, 

Must  gently  be  preserv’d,  cherish’d,  and  kept: 

Me  seemeth  good,  that,  with  some  little  train, 

Forthwith  from  Ludlow  the  young  prince  be  fet 
Hither  to  London,  to  be  crown’d  our  king. 

\Riv.  Why  with  some  little  train,  my  lord  of  Buckingham? 

Buck.  Marry,  my  lord,  lest,  by  a  multitude, 

The  new-heal’d  wound  of  malice  should  break  out; 

Which  would  be  so  much  the  more  dangerous, 

By  how  much  the  estate  is  green,  and  yet  ungovern’d 
Where  every  horse  bears  his  commanding  rein, 

And  may  direct  his  course  as  please  himself, 

As  well  the  fear  of  harm,  as  harm  apparent, 

In  my  opinion,  ought  to  be  prevented. 

Glo.  I  hope  the  king  made  peace  with  all  of  us; 

And  the  compact  is  firm  and  true  in  me. 

Riv.  And  so  in  me;  and  so,  I  think,  in  all: 

Yet,  since  it  is  but  green,  it  should  be  put 
To  no  apparent  likelihood  of  breach, 

Which,  haply,  by  much  company  might  be  urg’d: 

Therefore,  I  say  with  noble  Buckingham, 

That  it  is  meet  so  few  should  fetch  the  prince. 

Hast.  And  so  say  I.] 

Glo.  Then  be  it  so;  and  go  we  to  determine 
Who  they  shall  be  that  straight  shall  post  to  Ludlow. 

I  think  that  we  have  in  the  Quarto  a  slight  indication  of  the  omitted  passage:  for 
Gloucester’s  words — ‘ Then  be  it  so’ — which  are  very  appropriate  after  the 
genera  discussion  found  in  the  Folio,  appear  to  me  a  litde  inapropos  as  following 
Buckingham’s  unopposed  suggestion.  Observe  also  that  the  cue  is  given  for 
the  omitted  passage  in  Buckingham’s  words — ‘some  little  train* — found  in  the 
Quarto  no  less  than  in  the  Folio.  As  regards  the  metre,  there  is  one  run-on  line 
in  the  passage  peculiar  to  the  Folio,  and  there  are  two  run-on  lines  in  the  rest, 
whilst  the  old  lines  are  certainly  quite  as  smooth  as  the  new, — perhaps  they  are 
even  smoother.  (Notice,  in  particular,  the  uncouth  line  in  the  Folio — 

‘By  how  much  the  estate  is  green  and  yet  ungovern’d.’) 


4* 

III,  vii,  150-182: — 

Glou.  I  know  not  whether  to  depart  in  silence, 
Or  bitterly  to  speak  in  your  reproof, 

Best  fitteth  my  degree  or  your  condition: 

[If  not  to  answer,  you  might  haply  think 
Tongue-tied  ambition,  not  replying,  yielded 
To  bear  the  golden  yoke  of  sovereignty, 

Which  fondly  you  would  here  impose  on  me; 

If  to  reprove  you  for  this  suit  of  yours, 

So  season’d  with  your  faithful  love  to  me, 

Then,  on  the  other  side,  I  cheek’d  my  friends. 


THE  TEXT— PICKERSG ILL 


443 


Therefore,  to  speak,  and  to  avoid  the  first, 

And  then,  in  speaking,  not  to  incur  the  last, 

Definitively  thus  I  answer  you.] 

Your  love  deserves  my  thanks,  but  my  desert 
Unmeritable  shuns  your  high  request. 

First,  if  all  obstacles  were  cut  away 
And  that  my  path  were  even  to  the  crown, 

As  my  ripe  revenue  and  due  by  birth; 

Yet  so  much  is  my  poverty  of  spirit, 

So  mighty  and  so  many  my  defects, 

As  I  had  rather  hide  me  from  my  greatness, 

Being  a  bark  to  brook  no  mighty  sea, 

Than  in  my  greatness  covet  to  be  hid 
And  in  the  vapour  of  my  glory  smother’d. 

But,  God  be  thanked,  there’s  no  need  of  me, 

And  much  I  need  to  help  you,  if  need  were; 

The  royal  tree  hath  left  us  royal  fruit, 

Which,  mellow’d  by  the  stealing  hours  of  time, 

Will  well  become  the  seat  of  majesty, 

And  make,  no  doubt,  us  happy  by  his  reign. 

On  him  I  lay  what  you  would  lay  on  me, 

The  right  and  fortune  of  his  happy  stars; 

Which  God  defend  that  I  should  wring  from  him. 

I  think  the  reader  will  agree  with  me  in  refusing  to  believe  that  Shakspere  would 
have  thought  it  worth  while  deliberately  to  insert  the  ten  lines  in  a  speech  already 
sufficiently  long:  the  more  so,  as  the  matter  which  they  contain  is  really  all  expressed 
in  the  lines  which  follow: — 


Your  love  deserves  my  thanks,  but  my  desert 
Unmeritable  shuns  your  high  request. 


As  regards  metre,  there  are  three  run-on  lines,  and  four  extra-syllable  lines  in  the 
old  portion,  two  run-on  lines,  and  one  extra-syllable  line  in  the  new. 


5- 


IV,  iii,  215-255:— 

K.  Rich.  You  have  a  daughter  call’d  Elizabeth, 
Virtuous  and  fair,  royal  and  gracious. 

Q.  Eliz.  And  must  she  die  for  this?  O!  let  her  live, 
And  I’ll  corrupt  her  manners,  stain  her  beauty; 

Slander  myself  as  false  to  Edward’s  bed; 

Throw  over  her  the  veil  of  infamy: 

So  she  may  live  unscarr’d  of  bleeding  slaughter, 

I  will  confess  she  was  not  Edward’s  daughter. 

K.  Rich.  Wrong  not  her  birth;  she  is  a  royal  princess. 
Q.  Eliz.  To  save  her  life,  I’ll  say  she  is  not  so. 

K.  Rich.  Her  life  is  safest  only  in  her  birth. 

Q.  Eliz.  And  only  in  that  safety  died  her  brothers. 


220 


225 


444 


APPENDIX 


K.  Rich.  Lo!  at  their  birth  good  stars  were  opposite. 

Q.  Eliz.  No,  to  their  lives  ill  friends  were  contrary. 

K.  Rich.  All  unavoided  is  the  doom  of  destiny. 

Q.  Eliz.  True,  when  avoided  grace  makes  destiny.  230 

My  babes  were  destin’d  to  a  fairer  death. 

If  grace  had  bless’d  thee  with  a  fairer  life. 

[*  Rich.  You  speak  as  if  that  I  had  slain  my  cousins. 

Q.  Eliz.  Cousins,  indeed;  and  by  their  uncle  cozen’d 
Of  comfort,  kingdom,  kindred,  freedom,  life.  235 

Whose  hand  soever  lanced  their  tender  hearts, 

Thy  head,  all  indirectly,  gave  direction: 

No  doubt  the  murderous  knife  was  dull  and  blunt 
Till  it  was  whetted  on  thy  stone-hard  heart, 

To  revel  in  the  entrails  of  my  lambs.  240 

But  that  still  use  of  grief  makes  wild  grief  tame, 

My  tongue  should  to  thy  ears  not  name  my  boys 
Till  that  my  nails  were  anchor’d  in  thine  eyes; 

And  I,  in  such  a  desperate  bay  of  death, 

Like  a  poor  bark,  of  sails  and  tackling  reft,  245 

Rush  all  to  pieces  on  thy  rocky  bosom.] 

K.  Rich.  Madam,  so  thrive  I  in  my  dangerous  attempt  of  hostile 
arms, 

As  I  intend  more  good  to  you  and  yours 
Than  ever  you  or  yours  were  by  me  wrong’d  I 

Q.  Eliz.  What  good  is  cover’d  with  the  face  of  heaven,  250 
To  be  discover’d,  that  can  do  me  good? 

K.  Rich.  The  advancement  of  your  children,  gentle  lady. 

Q.  Eliz.  Up  to  some  scaffold,  there  to  lose  their  heads. 

K.  Rich.  No,  to  the  dignity  and  height  of  honour, 

The  high  imperial  type  of  this  earth’s  glory.  255 


As  the  passage  between  brackets  consists  of  one  uninterrupted  speech,  whilst  the 
context  is  mainly  made  up  of  single-line  repartees,  we  can  scarcely  make  a  fair 
comparison  upon  metrical  grounds.  But  examine  the  inserted  lines  from  an 
aesthetic  point  of  view.  Does  not  the  fondness  for  jingles  and  antithesis, — cousins 
and  cozen'd;  hand ,  heart ,  and  head;  indirectly  and  direction;  tongue  and  nails,  ears 
and  eyes — together  with  the  character  of  the  figures,  powerful  indeed,  but  very 
extravagant,  indicate  a  date  of  composition  nearer  to  1597  than  to  1602?  I  may 
just  observe  that  line  247,  as  it  stands  in  the  Quarto,  is  certainly  very  prodigious, 
but  I  think  there  is  something  wrong  in  the  printing,  as  the  line  (reduced  to  regular¬ 
ity)  recurs  at  IV,  iii,  420. 


6. 


IV,  iii,  300-361:— 

“K.  Rich.  Come,  come,  you  mock  me;  this  is  not  the  way 
To  win  your  daughter. 

Q.  Eliz.  There  is  no  other  way; 

Unless  thou  couldst  put  on  some  other  shape, 

And  not  be  Richard  that  hath  done  all  this. 

[A-.  Rich.  Say  that  I  did  all  this  for  love  of  her. 


THE  TEXT— PICKERSG ILL 


445 


Q.  Eliz.  Nay,  then  indeed  she  cannot  choose  but  hate  thee, 
Having  bought  love  with  such  a  bloody  spoil. 

K.  Rich.  Look,  what  is  done  cannot  be  now  amended. 

Men  shall  deal  unadvisedly  sometimes, 

Which  after-hours  give  leisure  to  repent: 

If  I  did  take  the  kingdom  from  your  sons, 

To  make  amends  I’ll  give  it  to  your  daughter. 

If  I  have  kill’d  the  issue  of  your  womb, 

To  quicken  your  increase,  I  will  beget 
Mine  issue  of  your  blood  upon  your  daughter. 

A  grandam’s  name  is  little  less  in  love, 

Than  is  the  doting  title  of  a  mother: 

They  are  as  children,  but  one  step  below, 

Even  of  your  mettle,  of  your  very  blood; 

Of  all  one  pain,  save  for  a  night  of  groans 
Endur’d  of  her,  for  whom  you  bid  like  sorrow. 

Your  children  were  vexation  to  your  youth; 

But  mine  shall  be  a  comfort  to  your  age. 

The  loss  you  have  is  but  a  son,  being  king, 

And  by  that  loss  your  daughter  is  made  queen: 

I  cannot  make  you  what  amends  I  would, 

Therefore,  accept  such  kindness  as  I  can. 

Dorset,  your  son,  that  with  a  fearful  soul 
Treads  discontented  steps  in  foreign  soil, 

This  fair  alliance  quickly  shall  call  home 
To  high  promotions  and  great  dignity: 

The  king,  that  calls  your  beauteous  daughter  wife, 

Familiarly  shall  call  thy  Dorset  brother; 

Again  shall  you  be  mother  to  a  king, 

And  all  the  ruins  of  distressful  times 
Repair’d  with  double  riches  of  content. 

What!  we  have  many  goodly  days  to  see: 

The  liquid  drops  of  tears  that  you  have  shed, 

Shall  come  again  transform’d  to  orient  pearl, 

Advantaging  their  loan  with  interest 
Of  ten-times-double  gain  of  happiness. 

Go  then,  my  mother;  to  thy  daughter  go: 

Make  bold  her  bashful  years  with  your  experience; 

Prepare  her  ears  to  hear  a  wooer’s  tale; 

Put  in  her  tender  heart  th’  aspiring  flame 
Of  golden  sov’reignty;  acquaint  the  princess 
With  the  sweet  silent  hours  of  marriage  joys: 

And  when  this  arm  of  mine  hath  chastised 
The  petty  rebel,  dull-brain’d  Buckingham, 

Bound  with  triumphant  garlands  will  I  come, 

And  lead  thy  daughter  to  a  conqueror’s  bed; 

To  whom  I  will  retail  my  conquest  won, 

And  she  shall  be  sole  victress,  Caesar’s  Caesar. 

Q.  Eliz.  What  were  I  best  to  say?  her  father’s  brother 


446 


APPENDIX 


Would  be  her  lord  ?  Or  shall  I  say,  her  uncle  ? 

Or  he  that  slew  her  brothers,  and  her  uncles? 

Under  what  title  shall  I  woo  for  thee, 

That  God,  the  law,  my  honour,  and  her  love, 

Can  make  seem  pleasing  to  her  tender  years?] 

K.  Rich.  Infer  fair  England’s  peace  by  this  alliance. 

Q.  Eliz.  Which  she  shall  purchase  with  still  lasting  war. 

With  regard  to  this  inserted  passage,  the  lines  themselves  are  certainly  good 
lines, — ‘the  sweet  silent  hours  of  marriage  joys’  is,  I  think,  worthy  of  Shakspere 
at  his  best, — the  metre  is  very  smooth,  and  the  proportion  of  run-on  lines  to  end- 
pause  lines  is  rather  high,  viz.,  about  one  in  four.  But  there  are  passages  of  similar 
length  in  the  Quarto,  of  which  as  much  might  be  said.  Take  Gloucester’s  opening 
soliloquy,  for  example:  there  the  proportion  is  higher  still,  being  about  one  in 
three. 

I  have  now  quoted  all  the  passages  peculiar  to  the  Folio  which  are  of  any  length, 
and  I  think  the  reader  will  agree  with  me,  first,  that  these  passages  have  not  at  all 
the  appearance  of  subsequent  additions,  and  secondly,  that  there  is  not  any  marked 
difference,  aesthetical  or  metrical,  between  them  and  the  context  as  it  stands  in  the 
Quarto,  allowance  of  course  being  made  for  the  ‘dressing  up,’  which  no  doubt 
they  have  undergone  in  common  with  the  rest  of  the  play. 

There  remains  only  one  topic  more  upon  which  I  wish  to  make  a  few  observa¬ 
tions.  According  to  Mr  Spedding’s  statement,  there  are  three  hundred  and  fifty 
divergencies  of  the  Folio  from  the  Quarto  which  the  Cambridge  editors  have 
admitted  (by  implication)  to  be  Shakspere’s;  how  (it  may  be  asked)  do  I  reconcile 
this  fact  with  my  belief  that  Shakspere  never  revised  the  play  ?  In  the  first  place, 
let  me  quote  the  Editors’  own  words  respecting  the  principle  which  has  induced 
them  to  admit  some  of  the  Folio  readings.  ‘We  prefer’  (they  say)  ‘the  risk  of 
putting  in  something  which  Shakspere  did  not  to  that  of  leaving  out  something 
which  he  did  write.’  Again,  in  many  cases  (not  covered  by  the  foregoing  principle) 
the  Cambridge  editors  have,  I  think,  preferred  the  Folio  to  the  Quarto,  when  to 
do  so  was  inconsistent  with  their  own  plan  as  laid  down  in  the  Preface.  These 
two  classes  of  cases  deducted  would,  no  doubt,  reduce  the  total  of  three  hundred 
and  fifty  very  considerably.  In  the  second  place,  I  accept  the  theory  (for  which 
sound  reasons  have,  I  think,  been  suggested  in  the  course  of  this  inquiry)  that  the 
first  Quarto  was  printed  from  a  stage-copy  of  the  play.  Nothing  is  more  probable 
than  that  a  considerable  number  of  variations  from  the  author’s  MS  had  crept 
into  this  copy.  Lastly,  I  appeal  to  the  carelessness  of  the  printer.  The  Quarto- 
text,  says  Mr  Howard  Staunton,  is  *  execrably  deformed  by  printing-office  blunders.’ 
If  in  the  Folio-text,  which  is  printed  with  comparative  accuracy,  there  are  over 
eighty  errors  or  alterations  attributed  by  Mr  Spedding  to  the  printer,  we  shall  be 
quite  safe  in  putting  down  a  vastly  larger  number  to  the  account  of  the  printer  of  the 
Quarto.  Due  allowance  being  made  for  the  operation  of  all  these  causes,  I  do  not 
think  that  the  amount  of  variation  of  the  Quarto  from  what  I  conceive  to  be  the 
true  Shaksperian  text  will  appear  at  all  incredible. 

Let  me  now  briefly  sum  up  the  results  of  my  enquiry:  I  began  with 
an  examination  of  Mr  Spedding’s  Paper.  Of  the  eighty  examples  pronounced 
by  Spedding  to  be  non-Shaksperian,  I  showed  that  about  fifty  cannot  fairly  be 
attributed  to  any  one  but  the  corrector  of  the  play;  hence  it  would  follow  that 


THE  TEXT— WRIGHT 


44  7 


the  corrector  was  not  Shakspere.  Passing  on  to  the  ‘alterations  made  to 
improve  the  metre,  ’  I  showed  that  in  one  instance,  at  least,  there  is  a  clear  sacrifice 
of  the  sense,  pure  and  simple  [III,  ii,  97,  q.  7/.],  and  that  in  a  large  number  of 
instances  the  metrical  improvement  is  attained  by  weakening  the  vigour  and 
marring  the  propriety,  of  the  language.  Coming  next  to  the  ‘alterations  made  to 
avoid  the  recurrence  of  the  same  word,’  I  cited  four  of  them  which  Shakspere 
(in  my  opinion,  at  least)  cannot  be  supposed  to  have  made:  I  added  that  he  may 
have  made  the  others,  but  that  it  did  not  require  a  Shakspere  to  make  them.  With 
regard  to  the  ‘alterations  made  to  avoid  obsolete  phrases,’  I  showed  (1)  that  in 
some  of  the  cases  cited  the  alteration  is  not  made  as  regularly  as  Spedding  supposes, 
and  (2)  that  some  of  the  tabooed  words  occur  in  Shakspere’s  plays  written  about 
the  date  assigned  by  Spedding  to  the  revision  of  Richard  III.  Next,  of  the  nineteen 
examples  cited  as  ‘alterations  made  to  remove  defects  not  apparent  to  the  Cam¬ 
bridge  Editors,  ’  I  gave  reasons  for  believing  three  to  be  non-Shaksperian.  Lastly, 
with  regard  to  the  ‘alterations  in  the  stage-directions,’  I  showed  that  the  stage- 
directions  of  the  Folio  are  more  consistent  with  the  text  of  the  Quarto  than  are 
the  stage-directions  of  the  Quarto  itself;  and  hence  I  inferred  that  the  stage-directions 
of  the  Folio  must  have  formed  part  of  the  play  as  it  was  originally  written.  Having 
dealt  thus  fully  with  Spedding’s  Paper,  I  responded  to  the  challenge  which  he 
offers  to  ‘those  who  agree  with  the  Cambridge  Editors,’  by  quoting  forty-five 
passages  in  which  ‘something  original,  striking,  or  forcible  in  idea,  or  expression 
in  the  Quarto  is  diluted  into  commonplace  in  the  Folio;  or  in  which  a  turn  of  phrase 
thoroughly  Shaksperian  is  diluted  into  commonplace  in  the  Folio;  or  in  which  a 
turn  of  phrase  thoroughly  Shaksperian  is  modified  precisely  as  a  prosaic  reviser 
might  be  expected  to  modify  it.  Next  I  quoted  at  length  all  the  considerable 
passages  peculiar  to  the  Folio,  with  a  view  to  show  that  these  passages  have  not  at 
all  the  appearance  of  subsequent  additions,  and  that  there  is  not  any  marked 
difference,  aesthetical  or  metrical,  between  them  and  the  context  as  it  stands  in  the 
Quarto.  And  lastly,  I  showed  that  the  variations  of  the  Quarto  from  the  Folio 
where  the  latter  has  the  true  Shaksperian  reading  may  be  reasonably  accounted 
for  without  sacrificing  my  theory  that  Shakspere  never  revised  the  play. 

W.  Aldis  Wright  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  i875-’76)  said  that  his  remarks  were, 
to  a  great  extent,  anticipated  by  Mr  Pickersgill.  The  question  was  one  into  which 
individual  taste  very  largely  entered,  and  consequently  it  was  scarcely  possible 
to  expect  unanimity  of  opinion.  Two  theories  were  propounded:  one,  that  the 
text  of  the  Folios  had  been  altered  from  that  of  the  Quartos,  or  Shakspere’s  original 
MS,  by  some  one  who  was  not  Shakspere;  the  other,  that  of  Mr  Spedding,  that  the 
changes  might  have  been  made  by  Shakspere  with  the  assistance  of  the  demons  of 
the  printing  office.  On  the  whole,  Mr  Wright  preferred  to  believe  in  the  former 
theory  as  more  consistent  with  his  reverence  for  the  author.  He  was  unwilling  to 
think  that  Shakspere  at  the  busiest  time  of  his  life  should  have  occupied  himself 
with  such  minute  changes  as  ‘who’  for  ‘which,’  ‘kill’  for  ‘slay,’  ‘between’  for 
‘betwixt,’  ‘while’  for  ‘whilst,’  ‘I’  (i.  e.,  ay)  for  ‘yea,’  and  the  like,  or  that  when 
he  was  engaged  upon  his  greatest  works  he  had  so  fallen  below  himself  in  taste  of 
expression  and  vigour  of  versification  as  to  alter  both  language  and  metre  of  the 
Quartos,  in  most  instances  for  the  worse.  Many  of  the  changes  were  doubtless 
due  to  the  actors,  some  to  the  printers;  and  provided  they  were  not  attributed  to 
Shakspere,  it  was  not  necessary  to  be  careful  about  assigning  them. 


APPENDIX 


448 

J.  Spedding  (Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  i87S-’76;  p.  189)  contributed  the  following  as  a 
postscript  to  his  paper  and  as  a  reply  in  part  to  Pickersgill:  ‘The  relation  between 
the  two  texts  of  this  play  may  be  best  explained  by  supposing — 

‘  1.  That  Shakspere  wrote  Richard  III.  for  the  theatre  when  he  was  a  young 
man,  a  practised  rhymester,  but  new  in  dramatic  blank  verse. 

‘  2.  That  he  wrote  it  not  to  be  printed  and  read,  but  to  be  acted  and  heard,  for 
the  pleasure  of  an  audience  which  was  not  nice  in  literary  criticism,  but  moved 
by  broad  dramatic  effects. 

‘  3.  That  it  was  printed  without  preparation  for  the  press  or  superintendence 
by  himself. 

‘  4.  That  being  thus  put  forward  as  a  book  for  literary  judges  to  read,  he  wished 
to  clear  it  of  defects  which  would  be  felt  by  them,  though  not  by  an  audience. 

‘  5.  That  he  began  accordingly  to  prepare  a  corrected  and  amended  copy. 

‘  6.  That  being  at  the  time  much  occupied  with  new  productions  at  the  theatre, 
he  had  not  leisure  to  complete  his  corrected  copy  of  Richard  III.;  and  for  that,  or 
some  other  reason,  laid  it  by  in  an  unfinished  state. 

‘  7.  That  for  the  purpose  of  this  revision  he  had  used  one  of  the  printed  copies 
(probably  the  3rd  Quarto)  to  make  corrections  in;  and  that  this  copy,  with  such 
corrections  as  he  had  made, — “corrections  and  additions,  interlinear,  marginal, 
and  on  inserted  leaves,” — came  into  the  hands  of  Heminge  and  Condell,  and  was 
used  for  the  Folio  of  1623  as  “the  true  and  original  copy.” 

‘8.  And  therefore  “  that  the  text  of  the  Folio  (errors  being  corrected  or  allowed 
for)  represents  the  result  of  Shakspere’s  own  latest  revision,  and  approaches  nearest 
to  the  form  in  which  he  wished  it  to  stand.”’ 

P.  A.  Daniel  ( Introd .,  iv):  Measured  by  the  Shakespearean  standard  of  excel¬ 
lence,  Richard  III.,  however  popular  and  successful  on  the  stage,  can  only  rank  as 
a  second  or  third  rate  performance;  and  this,  I  make  no  doubt,  is  to  be  attributed 
to  the  fact  that  it  was  not  of  Shakespeare’s  original  composition,  but  the  work  of 
the  author,  or  authors,  of  the  Hen.  VI.  series  of  plays;  his  part  in  this,  as  in  those, 
being  merely  that  of  a  reviser  or  rewriter.  With  the  question  of  authorship,  how¬ 
ever,  I  am  not  concerned;  the  relation  of  the  Qto  and  F  versions  is,  after  all,  the 
most  important  matter  connected  with  the  play,  for  unless  it  can  be  settled  on  some 
reasonably  certain  basis,  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  a  satisfactory  settlement  of 
the  text  itself  are  almost  insuperable.  .  .  .  My  own  conclusions  are  that  the  Folio 
represents  the  play  as  first  set  forth  by  Shakespeare:  the  Q,  a  shortened  and  revised 
copy  of  it.  The  heart  of  the  matter  is  in  this  last  proposition;  for  if  it  can  be  shown 
that  the  Q.  is  anywhere  revised  or  altered  on  the  text  of  the  play  as  given  in  thr 
Folio,  it  follows  almost  as  a  matter  of  course  that  it  is  a  shortened  version,  and, 
till  truth  to  the  contrary  is  forthcoming,  that  the  Folio  must  be  accepted  as  represent¬ 
ing  the  original  play.  The  only  external  hint  affording  any  ground  for  the  theory 
that  the  Folio  at  any  time  underwent  revision,  except  for  the  purpose  of  the  Quarto, 
is  the  announcement  on  the  tide-page  of  QJ(  1602 — ‘  Newly  augmented,  ’ — but 
unless  this  external  evidence  can  be  backed  up  by  internal  evidence  derived  from 
comparison  of  the  texts  themselves,  this  book-seller’s  announcement  may  be  dis¬ 
missed  as  worthless,  or,  at  the  best,  as  meaning  nothing  more  than  that,  when  pre¬ 
paring  for  his  third  edition,  Andrew  Wise  intended  or  hoped  to  be  able  to  give  his 
readers  a  completer  copy  of  the  play  than  he  had  supplied  them  with  in  his  two  first 
editions.  I  do  not  believe  that  any  such  internal  evidence  can  be  produced:  certainly 


THE  TEXT— DANIEL 


449 


I  find  none  in  the  Papers  by  the  Cambridge  Editors,  Delius,  Spedding,  and  Pickers 
gill,  nor  have  I  been  able  to  detect  any  in  the  course  of  my  own  examination :  on  the 
other  hand  I  do  find  in  the  Quarto,  (i)  deliberate  corrections  of  errors  that  appear 
in  the  Folio,  and  (2)  corruption  and  confusion  of  Folio  passages,  evidently  the 
result  of  the  careless  way  in  which  the  revision  or  alteration  for  the  Quarto  was 
made.  Let  us  first  try  to  get  a  clear  notion  of  the  F.  text  as  it  stands.  The 
subject  has  been  complicated  by  the  supposition  that  Q3  is  in  some  way  con¬ 
nected  with  it,  as  having  in  part  supplied  the  printers  of  the  F.  with  their  ‘copy,’ 
or  as  having  been  consulted  by  some  unknown  reviser,  or  even  as  having  formed 
the  actual  foundation  of  an  augmented  and  revised  play.  [See  R.  Koppel 
and  A.  Schmidt,  supra.]  I  can  find  no  proof  of  any  such  connection.  The 
copy,  as  I  hope  to  prove,  supplied  to  the  printers  of  the  Folio  was  a  copy 
of  Qg,  1622,  enlarged,  altered,  and  corrected  in  accordance  with  a  complete  MS 
of  the  play  in  the  possession  of  the  theatre.  That  this  MS  was  in  existence 
when  the  publication  of  the  Folio  was  determined  on  is  certain, — without  it  the 
Folio  version  would  have  been  an  impossibility, — and  though  it  may  seem  strange 
that  with  this  complete  copy  in  their  possession,  Heminge  and  Condell  should  have 
taken  the  trouble  to  provide  a  special  copy  of  it  for  the  printers  of  the  Folio,  it  is 
clear  they  must  have  done  so,  and  in  the  way  I  have  supposed;  it  is  impossible  other¬ 
wise  to  account  for  the  numerous  errors  which  the  Folio  has  derived  from  the 
Quartos,  and  an  examination  of  these  errors  shows  that  Q6  was  the  particular 
Quarto  from  which  they  were  immediately  taken.  Indeed,  this  Quarto  was  almost 
of  necessity  the  one  to  make  use  of;  the  previous  editions  being  exhausted,  dis¬ 
persed,  or  destroyed,  as  was  the  common  fate  of  ‘sixpenny  books  of  the  play.’ 
And  it  may  be  noted  that  this  was  the  course  followed  with  respect  to  the  other 
plays  in  the  Folio,  which  were  printed  from  Quartos:  all  were  printed  from  the 
latest  editions,  with  one  exception:  1  Hen.  IV.  was  printed  from  Q5,  1613,  not 
from  Q*  1622.  Rom.  &  Jul.  may  perhaps  be  another;  it  was  printed  from  Qs, 
1609,  and  there  was  an  undated  Q4,  which  may  possibly  have  been  published 
before  the  Folio.  But  even  with  these  two  plays  we  see  that  it  was  not  the  earlier 
and  more  correct  editions  which  were  chosen  for  the  Folio.  The  scribe  employed  by 
Heminge  and  Condell  altering  and  correcting  the  pages  of  Q6  in  accordance  with 
the  theatrical  MS  would  have  been  more  than  mortal  if  he  had  not  left  some 
traces  of  the  ground  he  was  at  work  on,  in  the  shape  of  uncorrected  errors  of  the 
printed  book,  .  .  .  while  at  the  same  time  he  thoughtlessly  introduced  into  his  copy 
errors  of  the  MS — a  transcript  of  the  author’s  MS,  and  as  such,  having  its  own 
share  of  errors.  .  .  .  Fortunately  for  the  purpose  of  this  enquiry  our  scribe  has  let  us 
into  the  secret  of  the  materials  he  had  to  work  with,  has  enabled  us  to  account 
for  many  of  the  variations  of  Quarto  and  Folio,  and  given  us  the  means  of  forming 
a  reasonably  consistent  theory  as  to  the  relation  of  the  two  versions.  A  very  brief 
examination  of  the  collation  of  Quartos  1  to  6,  as  shown  in  the  Text.  Notes,  estab¬ 
lishes  the  fact  that  in  numerous  places  these  Quartos  differ  among  themselves: 
sometimes  in  the  correction  in  a  later  Quarto  of  an  error  that  had  established 
itself  in  one  of  earlier  date,  but  generally  in  a  progressive  increase  in  error  in  the 
later  editions  as  compared  with  the  earlier.  In  some  four  hundred  and  thirty-five 
cases  the  Folio  is  in  accord  with  one  or  more  of  the  Quartos — its  agreement  with 
the  earlier  ones  is  relatively  greater.  But  this  marks  merely  the  progressive  deterio¬ 
ration  of  the  Quarto’s  and  the  generally  superi  }r  accuracy  of  the  Folio’s  text.  It  is  in 
its  agreement  with  Quarto  errors  that  we  learn  its  part  origin,  and  are  able  to  decide 


29 


450 


APPENDIX 


to  which  Quarto  it  was  indebted.  [Daniel  here  gives  six  examples  of  erroneous 
readings  which  ‘could  only  have  got  into  the  Folio  from  one  of  the  Quartos’;  but 
as  these  may  be  seen  in  the  Text.  Notes,  the  references  will  here  suffice;  they  are  as 
follows:  III,  i,  52;  III,  i,  90;  III,  i,  158;  V,  iii,  176;  V,  iii,  212;  V,  iii,  294;  V,  iii,  383; 
V,  iii,  397.]  These  are  sufficient  for  my  purpose:  it  now  remains  to  show  from 
which  of  the  Qtos  they  were  derived.  Out  of  a  list  of  seventy-two  doubtful  or 
erroneous  readings  I  find  that  the  Folio  shares: 

10  with  Q„  two  exclusively  154  with  Q.,  one  exclusively 

19  “  Q2,  none  “  52  “  Q5,  one 

53  “  Q3.  one  “  56  “  Q6>  twelve  “ 

The  preponderance  of  Q6  in  this  account  of  errors  points  very  decidedly  to  that 
Quarto  as  the  one  used  in  preparing  ‘copy’  for  the  Folio  text.  .  .  No  evidence 
whatever  being  forthcoming  of  any  revision  of  the  MS  subsequent  to  the  publica¬ 
tion  of  the  Quarto,  the  Folio  must,  therefore,  be  accepted  as  the  Play  as  first  set 
forth  by  Shakespeare.  The  Quarto  is,  moreover,  a  copy  of  this  play,  revised  by 
the  author  himself,  though  shortened  and  much  confused  in  its  passage  to  and 
through  the  press. 

F.  G.  Fleay  {Life  and  Work,  etc.,  p.  277):  The  question  of  anteriority  of  the 
Qto  and  F.  versions  of  Richard  III.  has  been  hotly  debated  on  aesthetic  grounds; 
but  the  mere  expurgation  of  oaths  and  metrical  emendations  in  the  F.  are  enough 
to  show  that  it  is  the  later  version,  probably  made  about  1602;  while  the  fact  that 
it  was  preferred  by  the  editors  of  Fj  shows  that  they  considered  it  the  authentic 
copy  of  Shakespeare’s  work.  In  other  instances,  Macbeth,  The  Tempest,  etc., 
they  have  indeed  given  us  abridged  editions;  but  there  is  neither  proof  nor  likelihood 
that  any  other  were  accessible.  We  do  not  know  what  original  copies  were  destroyed 
in  the  Globe  fire  in  1613,  and  should  be  thankful  for  such  versions  as  we  have, 
which  were  probably  the  acting  versions  used  at  Blackfriars.  But  in  this  case 
the  editors  had  at  hand  the  Quartos,  and  unless  they  thought  the  Folio  version 
more  authentic,  I  cannot  see  why  they  preferred  it.  Furthermore,  the  Folio  version 
appears  to  have  been  defective  in  some  places;  for  V,  iii,  60,  end  of  play,  and  III,  i, 
25-184,  are  certainly  printed  from  Q,  (1602).  This  has  been  controverted,  but 
on  very  insufficient  grounds.  [See  Daniel:  supra.]  Now  directly  we  compare  the 
Folio  and  Quarto  versions,  we  meet  with  evidence  that  alteration  and  correction 
have  been  largely  used  in  both  of  them.  For  instance,  Derby  is  found  as  a  character 
in  the  play  in  I,  i;  II,  i,  ii;  IV,  iv,  V,  v,  in  both  versions.  [Is  there  not  here  a 
slight  oversight — Derby  is  not  mentioned  in  I,  i  ? — Ed.]  In  III,  i,  ii;  IV,  i;  V,  ii, 
he  is  called  Stanley.  This  shows  correction  by  a  second  hand.  In  IV,  i,  while 
Stanley  has  been  inserted  in  the  text,  Derby  remains  in  the  prefixes;  V,  iii,  is  only 
partially  corrected,  and  both  names  occur.  The  names  are  not  used  indifferently, 
for  in  IV,  ii,  iv,  we  find  Stanley  in  Fj  but  Derby  in  Q.  This  shows  a  progressive 
correction  in  which  Qj  precedes  F.  It  may  be  noticed  that  Darby  is  the  original 
author’s  spelling.  In  like  manner,  Gloster,  the  original  prefix,  has  in  I,  i,  ii,  iii; 
II,  i,  ii;  III,  iv,  v,  vii,  been  replaced  in  Fj  by  Richard,  but  in  III,  i,  in  the  part 
printed  from  Q3,  and  there  only,  Gloster  remains.  So  again  Margaret  is  indicated 
in  the  older  version  by  Qu.  Mar.,  Qu.  M.,  &c.,  but  never  Mar.  as  in  F.  IV,  iii. 
In  I,  iii,  in  Fj,  we  find  by  side  of  Mar.  a  reminder  of  the  older  form,  Q.  M.  This 


DATE  OF  COMPOSITION— MALONE— CHALMERS 


45  I 

is  not  an  exhaustive  statement,  but  sufficient,  I  think,  to  show  that  alterations  were 
made,  as  I  suggest. 

F.  A.  Marshall  ( Introd .,  p.  6):  We  know  it  to  have  been  Shakespeare’s  custom 
to  revise  his  earliest  plays  when  he  considered  it  worth  his  trouble.  He  revised 
and  made  additions  to  Love’s  Labour’s  Lost ,  Tam.  0}  Shr.,  and  Rom.  Jul.  We 
may  therefore  be  pretty  certain  that,  in  the  case  of  so  popular  a  play  as  Richard  III., 
he  would  revise  and  perhaps  re-revise  it.  Neither  Qj  nor  Fj  represent  the  original 
play;  but  both  represent  amended  versions;  the  alterations  and  additions,  in  both 
cases,  having,  to  a  great  extent,  been  made  by  the  author  himself.  The  publishers 
of  the  various  Quartos  before  1623  could  not  obtain  the  greater  portion  of  the 
amendments  and  alterations  made  from  time  to  time  by  the  author.  These  were 
to  be  found  only  in  the  theatre  copy  of  the  play,  and  F}  was  substantially  tran¬ 
scribed  from  this  last  copy  with  a  few  mistakes  of  the  transcriber  and  of  the  printer. 
The  tattered  condition  into  which  the  play-house  copy  fell,  owing  to  constant  use, 
necessitating  as  it  did  portions  of  the  MS  being  recopied  from  time  to  time,  accounts 
for  some  of  the  errors  in  Fr  .  .  It  is  very  improbable  that  Q,  was  printed  with  the 
sanction,  or  under  the  supervision,  of  the  author,  and  not  from  a  copy  obtained  by 
more  or  less  surreptitious  means.  It  is  evident  that  whatever  else  it  may  be,Qj  could 
not  have  been  the  play  as  it  was  acted  when  Shakespeare  was  one  of  the  leading 
members  of  the  Lord  Chamberlain’s  Company;  that  is  to  say,  it  was  not  the  play  as 
finally  revised  by  him.  It  is  a  very  suspicious  circumstance  that  the  words  ‘  greatly 
augmented’  should  appear  on  the  title-page  of  Qs,  as  there  is  nothing  in  the  text 
to  justify  such  a  description;  and  it  certainly  looks  as  though  the  printer  had  been 
promised  a  copy  of  the  play,  as  revised  by  the  author,  with  the  additions  he  had 
made  in  the  course  of  its  successful  career.  In  the  case  of  Rom.  6^  Jul.  Q2  has 
upon  its  title  page:  ‘Newly  corrected,  augmented,  and  amended’;  and  it,  undoubt¬ 
edly,  contains  Shakespeare’s  own  revisions,  and  is  the  chief  authority  for  the  text 
as  now  recognised.  Also  in  the  case  of  Hamlet,  the  surreptitiously  printed  Quarto 
of  1603  was  more  than  usually  defective;  and  Q2  (1604),  which  is  the  best  and 
fullest  text  of  the  play  we  have,  has  upon  its  title-page  ‘Newly  imprinted  and 
enlarged  to  almost  as  much  again  as  it  was,  according  to  the  true  and  perfect 
coppie.’ 


DATE  OF  COMPOSITION 

Malone  in  his  Chronological  Order  of  Shakespeare’ s  Plays,  first  printed  in  his 
own  edition  of  1790,  places  Richard  III.  thirteenth  in  the  list,  between  Richard 

II.  and  1  Henry  IV.,  with  the  date  1597,  that  of  Qr  This  date  is  retained  in 
the  following  note  at  the  beginning  of  the  play.  ‘  The  Legend  0}  King  Richard 

III.  by  Francis  Seagars,  was  printed  in  the  first  edition  of  The  Mirrour 
for  Magistrates,  1559,  and  in  that  of  1575  and  1587;  but  Shakespeare  does  not 
appear  to  be  indebted  to  it.  In  a  subsequent  edition  of  that  book,  printed  in  1610, 
the  old  legend  was  omitted,  and  a  new  one  inserted  by  Richard  Niccols,  who  has 
very  freely  copied  the  present  play.’  This  note,  with  several  additions,  appears 
also  in  the  Variorum  of  1821,  but  the  date  is  altered  from  1597  to  1593. 

G.  Chalmers  (p.  305):  Shakespeare’s  Tragedy  0}  Richard  III.  .  .  .  was  entered 
in  the  [ Stationers’ ]  Registers’,  on  the  20th  of  October,  1597;  and  it  was  published 


452 


APPENDIX 


in  the  same  year:  But,  it  must  have  been  previously  acted,  and  written,  before 
it  was  published:  Now,  those  considerations,  when  compared  with  the  subsequent 
productions  of  the  same  poet,  fix  the  true  epoch  of  Richard  III.,  in  1595,  and 
not  in  1597. 

J.  P.  Collier  (ed.  i)  places  the  date  somewhat  nearer  the  time  of  publication, 
1597,  than  1593,  the  date  given  by  Malone. 

W.  W.  Lloyd  ( Crit .  Essay ) :  This  play  exhibits  in  every  scene  the  adult  and  vig- 
ourous  mastery  of  language  and  versification,  but  passages  remain  interspersed, 
nevertheless,  which  are  reminiscent  of  metrical  licenses  of  the  anterior  period.  .  .  . 
I  think  there  are  satisfactory  signs  that  the  play  as  it  was  published  in  1597  was 
at  least  the  second  form  that  Shakespeare  had  given  to  it,  and  the  question  remains 
whether  we  can  trace  the  obligations  of  either  version  to  a  still  earlier  author.  In 
one  form  or  other  I  have  no  doubt  that  Shakespeare’s  play  dates  at  least  as  early 
as  1593. 

R.  G.  White:  As  to  the  date  when  Richard  III.  was  written,  we  only  know 
that  it  must  have  been  between  the  time  of  the  transmutation  of  the  The  True 
Tragedy  of  Richard  Duke  of  Yorke  into  3  Henry  VI.  and  1597, — most  probably 
in  1593  or  early  in  1594. 

A.  Dyce  (ed.  ii):  Probably  very  shortly  before  1597. 

T.  Keightley  {Exp.  31):  I  incline  to  regard  the  date  of  composition  as  posterior 
to  King  John  and  Rich.  II.;  for  it  has  no  stanzas  and  no  riming  passages.  It  is 
also  very  free  from  quibbles  and  plays  upon  words,  except  in  the  unfortunate 
soliloquy  of  Richard  in  V,  iii — a  wonderful  instance  of  want  of  taste,  and  even  of 
judgment.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  scenes  between  Richard  and  Lady  Anne 
and  the  Queen. 

G.  G.  Gervinus  (i,  359;  translated  by  Miss  Bunnett):  Richard  III.  is  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  first  tragedy  of  undoubted  personal  authorship;  it  is  written  in  connection 
with  Henry  VI.  as  its  direct  continuation.  The  opening  scene,  in  which  Richard 
reflects  upon  his  past,  is  the  sequel  to  the  similar  soliloquy  in  3  Henry  VI.  (Ill,  ii). 
In  many  touches  of  character  the  poet  refers  to  that  piece;  Richard’s  plan  of  casting 
suspicion  upon  Clarence  is  prepared  there;  the  whole  position  of  the  aged  Margaret 
falls  back  upon  the  curse  which  York  pronounced  against  her  in  3  Henry  VI.  (I,  iv). 
Yet  here,  as  in  Henry  VI.,  the  pure  dramatic  form  is  not  so  universally  adhered  to 
as  in  Richard  II.,  which  immediately  follows.  In  the  scenes  where  the  trilogy  of 
the  common  lamentation  of  the  women  (II,  ii,  and  IV,  i)  changes  like  a  chorus, 
dramatic  truth  is  sacrificed  to  the  lyric  or  epic  form,  and  to  conceits  in  the  style 
of  the  pastoral  Italian  poetry;  these  scenes  call  to  mind  directly  the  passages  in 
Henry  VI.,  where  the  murderers  of  father  and  son  lament  over  the  slain.  The 
form  of  these  scenes  (stichomythy)  is  borrowed  from  the  ancient  drama,  of  which 
the  older  plays  of  Shakespeare  repeatedly  remind  us.  Thus  the  treatment  also 
of  Dira,  of  the  uttered  curse  and  its  fulfilment,  is  quite  in  the  spirit  of  antiquity; 
and  here  again  the  clumsy  amassing  of  the  curses  of  that  fearful  Margaret,  betrays 
the  incipient  tragic  poet.  With  all  this,  Richard  III.  compared  to  Henry  VI. 


DA  TE  OF  COMPOSITION— INGRAM 


453 


shows  extraordinary  progress.  Even  in  his  knowledge  of  the  historical  facts, 
Shakespeare  is  here  more  exact  and  certain  than  his  predecessor  in  Henry  VI., 
upon  whom  in  that  play  he  had  shown  no  improvement  on  this  point;  the  con¬ 
formity  to  the  chronicle  in  all  actions  taken  from  it,  and  comprising  a  time  of 
fourteen  years,  is  extraordinarily  true.  The  poetic  diction,  however  much  it  reminds 
us  of  Henry  VI.,  has  gained  surprisingly  in  finish,  richness,  and  truth;  we  need  only 
compare  with  the  best  parts  of  Henry  VI.,  the  words  of  Anne  at  the  very  beginning 
(I,  ii),  to  find  how  thoroughly  they  are  animated  with  the  breath  of  extreme  passion, 
how  pure  and  natural  is  their  flow,  the  expression  being  but  the  echo  of  the  feeling. 
In  the  design  of  his  characters,  he  has  richly  advanced  in  variety  and  individual 
acuteness;  with  such  scanty  means  to  bring  forward,  in  colours  so  living  and  agree¬ 
able,  such  complete  types  of  character  as  the  two  princes,  Shakespeare  himself 
has  not  often  again  succeeded  in  doing.  But  even  in  this  characterization,  we  still 
meet  with  the  property  peculiar  to  Shakespeare’s  earlier  works,  that  it  is  plain,  open, 
over-evident:  whilst  immediately  afterward  in  Richard  II.  appears  the  inclination 
to  conceal  as  deeply  as  possible  the  key  to  the  characters.  That  which,  in  conclu¬ 
sion,  speaks  most  from  internal  evidence  for  the  comparatively  early  origin  of 
Richard  III.,  is  the  abundance  in  this  tragedy  of  tragic  motives  and  moments, 
the  accumulation  of  bloody  crimes,  which  the  poet  has  imputed  to  the  hero,  partly 
without  the  warrant  of  historical  testimony,  and  the  bitter  severity  with  which  he 
develops  the  historical  circumstances:  how  he  shows  the  dreadful  results  of  civil 
war  on  a  base  and  ruined  house,  and  how  on  its  ruin,  the  most  depraved  among 
the  depraved  elevates  himself,  till  he  too  is  buried  in  the  common  fall. 

Professor  Ingram  in  Sh.  Soc.  Trans.,  1874;  p.  450,  gives  a  table  of  the  Order 
of  Shakespeare’s  Plays  based  on  the  numbers  of  light  endings  (such  as:  am,  art, 
he,  been,  etc.)  and  the  weak  endings  (such  as:  and,  as,  at,  but,  by,  etc.).  He  remarks: 
‘The  cases  in  which  these  words,  though  really  proclitic,  must  not  be  counted,  are 
the  two  following,  which  it  is  easy  to  distinguish,  and  which  form  a  very  small 
proportion  of  the  whole:  1.  When  they  are  emphatic  (which  will  be  found  to  affect 
the  light  endings  only);  and  2.  When  there  is  a  distinctly  appreciable  pause  in  the 
sense  after  them,  which  will  arise  almost  always  from  their  being  followed  by  a 
parenthetic  clause.  ...  In  using  the  lists,  it  will  not  do  simply  to  note  any  instance 
in  which  the  words  enumerated  [under  the  head  of  light  and  weak  endings ]  are 
found  at  the  end  of  a  line,  and  where,  in  (say)  the  Globe  Edition,  which  is  the  one 
I  have  used,  there  is  no  stop  after  it.  .  .  .  Thus,  we  must  not  count  such  cases  as 
the  following,  the  final  words  not  being  proclitic  at  all:  “Is  smother’d  in  surmise, 
and  nothing  is  But  what  is  not.”  “For’t  cannot  be  We  shall  remain  in  friendship.’” 
— Professor  Ingram’s  careful  and  laborious  work  must,  of  course,  always  deserve 
the  fullest  praise;  at  the  same  time  the  question  naturally  rises:  Should  we  not,  in 
discussing  Shakespeare’s  versification,  base  our  investigations  upon  the  earliest 
text  available?  That  of  the  Globe  Edition — excellent  though  it  be — is,  after  all, 
a  text  which  has  gone  through  many  hands,  and  received  many  important  changes, 
both  metrical  and  verbal — Pope,  followed  later  by  Steevens — the  boldest  of  those 
who  rearranged  the  versification— is  credited  with  many  passages  which  now  pass 
as  due  to  Shakespeare.  For  example,  the  lines  from  Macbeth,  quoted  above  by 
Ingram,  are  thus  printed  in  F1(  the  earliest  text  of  that  play:  ‘That  function  is 
smother’d  in  surmise,  And  nothing  is,  but  what  is  not.’  For  the  arrangement  of 
these  lines,  as  in  the  Globe  Edition,  Pope,  followed  by  every  subsequent  editor,  is 


454 


APPENDIX 


responsible;  on  him,  not  Shakespeare,  should  fall  the  blame  of  an  ending  only 
apparently  weak.  I  do  not  forget  that  Professor  Ingram  has  expressly  stated  that 
these  lines  must  not  be  taken  as  examples  of  weak  or  light  endings,  but  since  he  has 
quoted  them  as  possibly  misleading,  it  shows,  I  fear,  that  other  lines  due  to  modern 
editors  may  possibly  have  misled  him.  In  the  list  of  plays,  appended  to  Ingram’s 
article,  Richard  III.  is  placed  seventh,  with  four  light  endings  and  no  weak  endings, 
preceded  by  Richard  II.,  Romeo  &  Juliet,  Midsummer  Night’s  Dream,  Two 
Gentlemen  of  Verona,  Comedy  of  Errors,  and  Love’s  Labour’s  Lost.  ‘From  this 
table,’  says  Professor  Ingram,  ‘the  following  results  seem  deducible:  i.  During 
the  first  three-fourths  (or  thereabouts)  of  Shakespeare’s  poetic  life,  he  used  the 
light  endings  very  sparingly  and  the  weak  endings  scarcely  at  all.  2.  The  last 
fourth  (or  thereabout)  is  obviously  and  unmistakably  distinguished  from  the  earlier 
stages  by  the  very  great  increase  of  the  number  of  light  endings,  and,  still  more, 
by  the  first  appearance,  in  any  appreciable  number,  and  afterwards  the  steady 
growth,  of  the  weak  endings.  ...  9.  As  long  as  the  light  endings  remain  very 
few,  no  conclusion  with  respect  to  the  order  of  the  plays  can  be  based  on  them.’ 

F.  G.  Fleay  (Sh.  Man.,  p.  21):  Locrine,  1595,  edited  by  W.  S.,  contains  allu¬ 
sions  to  passages  from  the  plays  of  Peele,  Greene,  and  Marlowe;  the  so-called  plays 
of  Shakespeare,  Titus  Andronicus,  Henry  VI.,  and  Richard  III.;  Kyd’s  Jeronimo 
and  other  old  dramas.  But  in  no  instance  can  I  trace  any  allusion  to  any  undoubted 
play  of  Shakespeare.  The  wooing  of  Estrild,  IV,  i,  seems  to  be  imitated  from 
Richard  III.,  I,  ii,  and  ‘Methinks  I  see  both  armies  in  the  field,’  echoes:  ‘I  think 
there  be  six  Richmonds  in  the  field.’  If  this  be  so,  Richard  III.  cannot  have  been 
written  later  than  1595— [P.  30]:  I  have  no  doubt  that  it  was  originally  written 
by  George  Peele,  left  unfinished  by  him,  completed  and  partly  corrected  by  Shakes¬ 
peare  as  we  have  it  in  the  Qq,  and  that  Shakespeare  afterward  altered  it  into  the 
shape  in  which  it  was  printed  in  the  Folio.  No  other  hypothesis  can,  I  think, 
account  for  its  similarity  to  much  of  Henry  VI.,  which  is  not  Shakespearean,  and 
also  for  the  unparalleled  differences  between  the  Folio  and  Quarto. — [P.  127]:  In 
general  terms  we  may  expect  to  find,  that  in  Shakespeare’s  development  he  grad¬ 
ually  dropped  the  rhymed  dialogue,  adopted  double  endings,  Alexandrines,  and 
broken  lines;  and  this  is  undoubtedly  true.  ...  A  chronology,  however,  founded 
on  any  of  the  last  three  tests  would  lead  to  the  strangest  results — e.  g.,  the  double 
endings  would  place  Richard  III.  very  late  indeed  and  King  John  very  early; 
the  two  parts  of  Henry  IV.  would  be  widely  separated.  The  Alexandrine  test 
would  make  Meas.  for  Meas.  the  latest  of  the  comedies;  the  test  by  broken  lines 
would  make  Lear  far  the  latest  of  all  the  plays;  the  rhyme  test — and  the  rhyme 
test  only  of  all  that  I  have  as  yet  applied — is  of  use  per  se  for  determining  the 
chronological  arrangement  of  Shakespeare’s  works.  [By  the  application  of  this 
test  Fleay  arranges  the  plays  into  four  divisions:  I.  The  Rhyming  Period;  II. 
The  History  Period;  III.  The  Tragedy  Period;  IV.  The  Final  Period.  Richard 
III.  he  places  in  the  II.  division  preceded  by  Much  Ado,  Merry  Wives,  Tam. 
of  Shrew,  As  You  Like  It,  Twelfth  Night,  Mer.  of  Ven.,  Two  Gentlemen.  On 
p.  132  Fleay  remarks:  ‘A  point  that  distinctly  separates  the  earlier  from  the  later 
historic  plays  is  the  absence  of  prose:  Richard  II.  and  King  John  have  none, 
Richard  III.  only  one  bit,  but  that  reads  like,  and  I  believe  is,  a  portion  of 
Peele’s  work;  and  of  these  earlier  plays  Richard  III.  is  the  only  one  that  is 
absolutely  devoid  of  Comedy.  This  also  marks  its  position.’]— Ibid.  ( Life  of 


DATE  OF  COMPOSITION— tV.  A.  WRIGHT 


455 


Sh.,  p.  176):  Richard  III.  was  no  doubt  acted  in  1594  .  by  the  Chamberlain’s 
men;  just  before  the  old  play  which  had  been  acted  by  the  Queen’s  players  was 
published.  [ The  True  Tragedie  of  Richard  III.;  see  I,  i,  1,  note  by  Malone.]  A 
Richard  is  alluded  to  in  John  Weever’s  Epigrams,  published  in  1599,  when  the 
author  wras  twenty-three,  but  written  when  he  was  not  twenty;  they  must  therefore 
date  at  latest  in  1596  (not  1595  as  usually  stated).  Weever  mentions  Venus 
Adonis,  Lucrece,  Romeo,  and  Richard  as  the  issue  of  honey-tongued  Shakespeare. 
I  believe  the  Richard  referred  to  is  the  Richard  II.  of  1595.  [P.  278]:  There 
can  be  little  doubt  that,  as  in  King  John,  Shakespeare  derived  his  plot  and  part 
of  his  text  from  an  anterior  play,  the  difference  in  the  two  cases  being  that  in  Richard 
III.  he  adopted  much  more  of  his  predecessor’s  text.  I  believe  that  the  anterior 
play  was  Marlowe’s,  partly  written  for  Lord  Strange’s  company  in  1593,  but  left 
unfinished  at  Marlowe’s  death,  and  completed  and  altered  by  Shakespeare  in  1594. 
It  was  no  doubt  on  the  stage  when  The  True  Tragedy  was  entered  on  the  Stationers' 
Registers,  and  acted  by  the  Queen’s  players.  The  unhistorical  but  grandly  classical 
conception  of  Margaret,  the  Cassandra-prophetess,  the  Helen-Atb  of  the  House  of 
Lancaster,  which  binds  the  whole  tetralogy  into  one  work,  is  evidently  due  to 
Marlowe,  and  the  consummate  skill  with  which  he  has  fused  the  heterogeneous 
contributions  of  his  coadjutors  in  the  two  earlier  Henry  VI.  plays  is  no  less  worthy 
of  admiration.  I  do  not  think  it  possible  to  separate  Marlowe’s  work  from  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  in  this  play — it  is  worked  in  with  too  cunning  a  hand;  but  wherever  we 
find  the  name  Darby  for  Stanley;  Qu.  M.  instead  of  Mar.,  Glo.  instead  of  Richard, 
we  may  be  sure  that  some  of  his  handiwork  is  left.  Could  any  critic,  if  the  older 
John  were  destroyed,  tell  us  which  lines  had  been  adopted  in  the  later  play? 

W.  A.  Wright  ( [Introd.,  p.  v):  The  quarto  of  1597  was  entered  at  Stationers’ 
Hall  on  October  20.  We  have  thus  the  inferior  limit  for  the  date  at  which  the 
play  was  written.  How  much  earlier  it  was  composed  is  to  a  great  extent  matter 
of  conjecture.  A  line  in  Weever’s  Epigrammes  (Beloe,  Anecdotes  of  Literature, 
vi.  159),  printed  in  1599,  but  supposed  to  be  written  in  1595,  mentions  Romeo 
and  Richard  as  two  of  Shakespeare’s  well-known  characters:  ‘Romeo,  Richard, 
more  whose  names  I  know  not  ’  [Sh.  Cent,  of  Prayse,  p.  23]  and  presumably 
this  is  Richard  III.  and  not  Richard  II.  If,  therefore,  Weever  wrote  in  1595, 
there  is  evidence  that  Richard  had  by  that  time  become  an  established  favourite 
with  the  public,  and  had  probably  been  out  for  a  year  or  two.  ...  As 
Richard  III.  was  printed  in  1597,  it  is  unnecessary  to  refer  to  the  often- 
quoted  passage  from  Mere’s  Palladis  Tamia,  1598,  in  which  Richard  III. 
is  enumerated  among  the  plays  upon  which  Shakespeare’s  fame  securely 
rested.  The  date  1593  or  1594,  which  may  be  conjecturally  assigned  to  Rich¬ 
ard  III.,  brings  it  close  to  two  other  historical  plays  which  were  written  about 
the  same  time — Richard  II.  and  King  John.  The  metrical  tests  which  have  been 
applied  to  solve  the  question  of  the  date  of  composition  would  place  Richard  III. 
and  King  John  very  close  together,  and  would  make  Richard  II.  earlier  than  either. 
On  such  a  jjoint  I  am  not  careful  to  express  a  confident  opinion,  but  nevertheless 
I  cannot  read  Richard  III.  without  feeling  that  in  point  of  literary  style,  command 
of  language,  flexibility  of  verse,  and  dramatic  skill,  it  is  an  earlier  composition  than 
Richard  II.  and  King  John,  and  separated  by  no  long  interval  from  3  Henry  VI., 
to  which  it  is  the  sequel  and  the  close. 


456 


APPENDIX 


Recapitulation  : 

1790  Malone  (ed.  i) .  1597 

1799  Geo.  Chalmers .  1595 

1817  N.  Drake .  1595 

1821  Malone  (ed.  ii) . . .  1593 

1841  C.  Knight .  between  1591  and  1593 

1843  J.  P.  Collier .  shortly  before  1597 

1847  G.  C.  Verplanck .  1593  or  1594 

1851  H.  Coleridge .  before  1593 

1857  C.  Bathurst .  between  1594  and  1597 

1858  W.  W.  Lloyd  .  1593 

i860  R.  G.  White .  1593  or  early  in  1594 

1866  A.  Dyce  (ed.  ii) .  shortly  before  1597 

1867  T.  Keightley .  after  1596 

1872  N.  Delius .  1594 

1872  H.  N.  Hudson .  1592  or  1593 

1874  J.  K.  Ingram.  .  .  seventh  in  order  of  composition,  preceded  by 

Rich.  II.;  Rom.  &  Jul.;  Mid.  N.  Dream;  Two  Gent.;  Com.  of  Errors; 

Love's  Labour’s  Lost. 

1874  F.  J.  Furnivall . .  1594 

1876  F.  G.  Fleay .  1595 

1878  H.  P.  Stokes .  1594 

1880  W.  A.  Wright .  before  1593 

1884  P.  A.  Daniel .  1596 

1888  F.  A.  Marshall .  shortly  before  1597 

1894  W.  Oechelhauser .  1593 

B.  T.  Strater  .  1594 

n.  d.  The  Cowden-Clarkes  .  between  1590  and  1592 

n.  d.  Geo.  MacDonald.  .  .From  internal  evidence  the  handiwork  of  the 
youthful  Shakespeare. 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 

Sir  Thomas  More’s  Biography  0}  Richard  the  Third  was  the  basis  of  the  account 
of  Richard’s  life  and  reign,  as  given  by  the  chroniclers  Hall  and  Holinshed;  their 
story,  with  a  few  slight  changes,  was  used  by  Shakespeare  for  the  outlines  of  his 
Tragedy.  It  hardly  falls  within  the  scope  of  the  present  work  here  to  discuss  the 
accuracy  or  value  of  More’s  history;  but  since  opinion  on  this  point  is  somewhat 
divided,  the  views  of  one  or  more  writers  favourable  and  otherwise  seem  to  form  a 
fitting  introduction  to  an  account  of  the  Source  of  the  Plot. 

D.  Hume  (ii,  Note  x,  p.  645):  Though  the  circumstances  of  the  wars  between  the 
two  roses  be,  in  general,  involved  in  great  obscurity,  yet  is  there  a  most  luminous 
ray  thrown  on  all  the  transactions  during  the  usurpation  of  Richard,  and  the 
murder  of  the  two  young  princes,  by  the  narrative  of  Sir  Thomas  More,  whose 
singular  magnanimity,  probity,  and  judgment  make  him  an  evidence  beyond  all 
exception.  No  historian,  either  of  ancient  or  modern  times,  can  possibly  have  more 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— SINGER 


45  7 


weight;  he  also  may  be  justly  esteemed  a  contemporary  with  regard  to  the  murder 
of  the  two  princes;  for  though  he  was  but  five  years  of  age  when  that  event  happened, 
he  lived  and  was  educated  among  the  chief  actors  during  the  period  of  Richard; 
and  it  is  plain,  from  his  narrative  itself,  which  is  often  extremely  circumstantial, 
that  he  had  the  particulars  from  the  eye  witnesses  themselves;  his  authority,  there¬ 
fore,  is  irresistible,  and  sufficient  to  overbalance  a  hundred  little  doubts,  and  scruples, 
and  objections.  For  in  reality  his  narrative  is  liable  to  no  solid  objection,  nor  is 
there  any  mistake  detected  in  it.  [Sharon  Turner  and  Lingard  both  quote 
from  More’s  Biography.  They  nowhere  charge  him  with  inaccuracy  or  with  undue 
prejudice  in  his  account  of  the  events  of  Richard’s  reign. — Ed.] 

S.  W.  Singer  ( History  of  Rich.  III.;  Dedication,  p.  vii):  The  materials  from 
which  Sir  Thomas  More  compiled  his  history  have  been  considered  traditionary, 
and  supposed  to  be  obtained  from  conversations  with  Richard’s  cotemporaries. 
It  should,  however,  be  recollected  that  he  was  at  an  early  age  ‘received  into  the 
house  of  the  Cardinal  Morton,’  who  is  said  to  have  been  delighted  with  his  wit, 
and  to  have  predicted  his  future  celebrity.  A  report  too  seems  early  to  have 
obtained  currency,  which  assigns  the  history  to  that  prelate;  for  Sir  John  Harington, 
in  his  Metamorphosis  of  Ajax,  1596,  says:  ‘The  best,  and  best  written  part  of  all 
our  chronicles,  in  all  men’s  opinions,  is  that  of  Richard  the  Third,  written,  as  I 
have  heard,  by  Morton;  but,  as  most  suppose,  by  Sir  Thomas  More.’  .  .  .  That  he 
derived  his  information  from  Morton  can  scarcely  be  doubted,  from  the  minuteness 
with  which  the  particulars  of  transactions  and  conversations,  in  which  the  Bishop 
was  a  participator,  are  related.  This  consideration  will  exculpate  Sir  Thomas 
from  any  intentional  misrepresentation  of  facts;  and  at  the  same  time  will  make 
us  receive  the  hideous  portrait,  here  drawn  of  Richard,  with  some  grains  of  allowance 
for  the  prejudice  of  an  inveterate  and  interested  Lancastrian.  .  .  .  This  history 
appears,  from  the  title  affixed,  to  have  been  written  about  the  year  1513,  when 
More  was  one  of  the  under-sheriffs  of  London,  but  was  first  printed  in  Grafton’s 
Continuation  of  the  metrical  Chronicle  of  John  Hardyng,  in  1543:  it  was  again 
printed  in  the  Chronicles  of  Grafton,  Hall,  and  Holinshed,  and  professes  to  have 
been  ‘conferred  and  corrected  by  his  own  copy’.  ...  A  portion  of  this  history 
also  exists  in  Latin,  and  Mr.  Malcolm  Laing  [in  his  Dissertation,  affixed  to  the 
last  volume  of  Dr.  Henry’s  History ]  conjectures  that  it  may  have  been  first  com¬ 
posed  in  that  language:  there  seems  to  be  little  reason  for  this  supposition;  the 
fragment  is  much  shorter  than  the  English  history,  and  terminates  with  the  corona¬ 
tion  of  Richard.  This  Latin  version  has  also  been  published,  and  was  first  printed 
at  Louvain,  in  1566,  with  the  other  Latin  works  of  More;  the  editor  remarks  that 
it  is  an  unpolished  fragment,  written  without  much  study,  and  apparently  unrevised, 
and  that  it  is  not  to  be  compared  in  point  of  elegance  of  style  to  More’s  other  Latin 
works.  May  not  this  Latin  fragment  be  the  identical  history  which  has  been 
attributed  to  Morton  ?  [A  translation  of  the  Latin  history,  as  well  as  that  in  English, 
is  contained  in  Bishop  White  Kennett’s  Complete  History  of  England,  ed.  ii,  vol.  ii. 
Like  the  Latin,  the  English  history  is  unfinished,  breaking  off  abruptly  in  the 
middle  of  a  conversation  between  Morton  and  Buckingham.  Grafton  has,  however, 
completed  the  story  of  the  reign  of  Richard  ‘with  the  same  minute  particularity’ 
says  Singer,  ‘as  it  had  been  begun  by  Sir  Thomas  More:  the  subsequent  events 
of  the  reign  are  detailed  with  the  same  exactness,  as  if  he  had  received  his  informa¬ 
tion  from  an  eye-witness  of  them.’ — Ed.] 


458 


APPENDIX 


R.  G.  White:  Shakespeare  took  the  Richard  that  he  found  in  chronicle  and 
tradition:  it  was  not  for  him  to  seek  further  than  was  written,  or  to  know  more  than 
was  reported.  But  had  he  searched  for  evidence  and  weighed  it  carefully,  it  is 
difficult  to  believe  that  he  would  have  discovered  any  reasons  for  making  essential 
change  in  the  character  of  his  hero;  and  as  to  a  murder,  more  or  less,  what  was  that 
to  his  purpose,  or  what  is  it  to  ours?  Surely  before  the  Boswellism  of  these  latter 
days  there  was  never  biography  more  worthy  of  belief  than  the  royal  one  written  by 
that  under-sheriff  of  London,  Sir  Thomas  More.  Richard  ascended  the  throne, 
and  the  two  Princes  were  murdered  in  1483:  More  was  born  in  London  in  1480, 
and  wrote  this  biography  about  1513,  when  Dighton,  one  of  the  murderers  of  those 
poor  boys,  was  yet  alive,  *  Dighton,  ’  he  says,  ‘  yet  walketh  on  alive,  in  good  possi¬ 
bility  to  be  hanged  ere  he  die.’  The  Lord  Chancellor  to  be  was  brought  up  in  the 
household  of  the  Bishop  0}  Ely  of  this  play.  He  had  seen  Jane  Shore, — her  very 
self,  though  ancient,  decrepit,  and  forlorn.  Better  opportunity  than  More’s  to 
know  the  truth  about  Richard  there  could  not  be;  unless,  indeed,  he  had  been  of 
that  King’s  own  household,  instead  of  his  chiefly  trusted  ecclesiastical  supporter’s; 
and  even  then  caution  might  have  concealed  that  from  him,  Richard  living,  which, 
Richard  dead,  tradition  truly  told  him.  Add  to  this  his  professional  training  as 
a  sifter  of  evidence,  and  the  calm,  impartial  tone  of  his  narrative,  and  there  can 
hardly  be  conceived  a  higher  degree  of  credibility  than  that  which  attaches  to  his 
work.  Besides,  it  was  received  without  protest  and  adopted  by  Grafton  and  Hall, 
who  both  lived  near  enough  to  Richard’s  time  to  know  if  any  doubt  existed.  Not¬ 
able  unanimity  of  opinion  with  regard  to  Richard  among  all  whom  he  left  behind 
him  forbids  us  to  believe  that  More  wrote  with  malice,  or  prejudice,  or  even  care¬ 
lessness.  Such  universal  condemnation  of  one  man,  and  he  a  king,  is  not  told  of 
in  history.  It  was  a  living  force  in  Shakespeare’s  time,  and  is  to  be  traced  even  in 
the  title-pages  of  the  Quartos  of  this  play.  For  Shakespeare  did  not  write  those; 
and  the  crafty  book-seller  knew  his  public  and  its  feeling  towards  Richard  III., 
when  he  enumerated  ‘his  treacherous  plots  against  his  brother  Clarence:  the 
pittiefull  murther  of  his  innocent  nephews:  his  tyranicall  usurpation:  with  the 
whole  course  of  his  detested  life  and  most  deserved  death.’  Crafty  book-sellers 
did  not  thus  waste  type  in  making  title-pages  without  interest,  and  that  of  approving 
sort,  to  those  to  whom  they  hoped  to  vend  their  wares;  and  the  nine  editions  that 
have  survived  of  this  separate  play  are  witnesses  of  the  approval  with  which  it  was 
read,  as  well  as  seen,  by  Shakespeare’s  contemporaries. 

We  may,  I  think,  decide  that  More’s  opinion  was  not  only  the  popular  one, 
but  also  that  generally  accepted  as  just  by  his  contemporaries.  In  later  times, 
however,  apologists  for  the  character  of  Richard  III.  are  not  lacking.  The  earliest 
of  whom  I  find  any  mention  is  one  discovered  by  Singer  (More’s  Life  of  Richard 
the  Third;  Dedication ,  p.  x).  This  is  a  pamphlet  entitled:  Essayes  of  certaine 
Paradoxes,  1616,  wherein  the  unknown  writer,  according  to  Singer,  vindicated 
King  Richard  and  even  praised  him  for  his  policy;  ‘but  the  author  has  the  judge¬ 
ment  to  conclude  doubtingly,  “yet  for  all  this,  know,  I  hold  it  but  a  paradox.”’ 
The  next  in  point  of  time  is  Sir  George  Buck’s  History  of  the  Life  and  Reigne 
of  Richard  The  Third,  1646.  Of  this  work  the  first  two  divisions  are  devoted  to 
a  general  review  of  the  reign  of  Edward  the  Fourth,  and  the  stormy  times  of  the 
contention  between  the  Yorkists  and  Lancastrians.  As  history,  it  is  neither  more 
nor  less  interesting  than  the  older  chronicles.  At  times  the  excess  of  quotations 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— BUCK 


459 


from  Latin  authors  is  not  only  bewildering,  but  exasperating.  Sir  George  apparently 
belongs  to  that  class  of  writers  to  whom  the  effort  of  recording  their  thick-coming 
fancies  presents  but  slight  difficulty — but  we  all  know  the  proverbial  hardness  of 
easy  writing.  The  first  three  divisions,  or  books,  may  be  regarded  as  merely  intro¬ 
ductory  to  his  History,  in  which  it  is  apparent  that  his  design  is  to  prove  Rich¬ 
ard  guiltless  of  all  crimes  imputed  to  him,  inasmuch  as  little  reliance  is  to  be 
placed  on  the  statements  in  Sir  Thomas  More’s  Biography.  The  great  rarity  of 
Buck’s  volume  must  be  the  apology  for  the  length  of  the  following  extract,  which 
is  a  fair  instance  of  his  style  and  his  matter:  ‘There  is  no  story,  that  shewes  the 
planetary  affections  and  malice  of  the  vulgar  more  truly  than  King  Richard’s:  and 
what  a  tickle  game  Kings  have  to  play  with  them;  though  his  successor  Henr) 
the  seventh  play’d  his  providently  enough  (with  helpe  of  the  standers  by)  yet  even 
those  times  (which  had  promised  the  happiest  example  of  a  State,  and  best  of  a 
King)  both  groaned  and  complained;  but  had  not  the  sting  and  infection  of  King 
Richard's  adversaries  who  did  not  onely  as  the  proverbe  saith,  cum  larvis  luctarc, 
contend  with  his  immortall  parts,  but  raked  his  dust,  to  finde  and  aggravate  excep¬ 
tions  in  his  grave;  having  learnt  their  piety  from  the  Comicall  Parasite,  obsequium 
amicos,  veritas  odium  parit  [Terence,  Andria,  I,  i,  41],  and  finding  it  as  well  guerd- 
onable  as  gratefull,  to  publish  their  Libels  and  scandalous  Pamphlets,  (a  piece  of 
policy  and  service  too)  to  the  times,  (and  an  offence  to  resent  any  thing  good  of 
him)  they  gave  their  pens  more  gall  and  freedome,  having  a  copy  set  by  Doctor 
Morton,  who  had  taken  his  revenge  that  way,  and  written  a  Booke  in  Latine,  against 
King  Richard,  which  came  afterward  to  the  hands  of  Mr  Moore  (sometime  his 
servant)  so  that  here  the  saying  of  Darius,  (which  after  became  a  proverbe)  hath 
place  Hoc  calceamentum  consuit  H istiaus,  induit,  autem  Aristagoras,  Doctor 
Morton  (acting  the  part  of  Histiceus )  made  the  Booke,  and  Master  Moore  like 
Aristagoras  set  it  forth,  amplifying  and  glossing  it,  with  a  purpose  to  have  writ  the 
full  story  of  Richard  the  third  (as  he  intimateth  in  the  title  of  his  Booke;)  but  it 
should  seeme  he  found  the  worke  so  melancholy  and  uncharitable,  as  dul’d  his 
disposition  to  it;  for  he  began  it,  1513,  when  he  was  Under-sheriffe,  or  Clerke  to 
one  of  the  Sheriffes  of  London,  and  had  the  intermission  of  twenty-two  yeares 
(which  time  he  tooke  up  in  studies,  more  naturall  to  his  inclination,  as  law  and 
poetry,  for  in  them  lay  his  greatest  fancy)  to  finish  it,  before  he  died,  (which  was  in 
I535)-  •  •  •  To  know  him  further,  let  me  referre  you  to  the  Ecclesiasticall  History  of 
Master  John  Fox,  in  the  raigne  of  Henry  the  eight,  who  describes  him  graphically; 
for  his  historicall  fragment,  it  shewes  what  great  paines  he  tooke  to  item  the  faults 
and  sad  fortunes  of  King  Richard  the  third;  and  how  industrious  he  was  to  be  a 
time  observer,  it  being  the  most  plausible  theame  his  poeticall  straine  could  fall 
on  in  those  times,  and  could  not  want  acceptance  nor  credit,  well  knowing  in  what 
fame  he  stood,  and  that  the  weaker  Analysts  and  Chroniclers,  (of  meane  learning 
and  lesse  judgement)  would  boldly  take  it  upon  trust  from  his  pen;  who  tanquam 
ignotum  servum  pecus,  have  followed  him  step  by  step  without  consideration, 
or  just  examination  of  their  occurrents  and  consequents.  And  the  reputation  of 
him  and  Doctor  Morton  (being  both  Lord  Chancellours  of  England)  might  easily 
mislead  men  part  blind,  who  have  dealt  with  King  Richard,  as  some  triviall  clawing 
Pampleteers,  and  Historicall  parasites,  with  the  magnificent  Prelate,  Thomas 
Wolsey,  Cardinall  and  Archbishop  of  Yorke,  A  man  of  very  excellent  ingredients 
and  without  Peere  in  his  time;  yet  his  values  had  the  sting  of  much  detraction, 
and  the  worth  of  his  many  glorious  good  workes  interpreted  for  vices  and  excesses; 


460 


APPENDIX 


to  such  it  must  be  said,  quod  ab  ipso  allatum  est,  id  sibi  relation  esse  putant.  And 
if  their  injustice  suffer  under  the  same  lash,  they  must  know  this  doome  hath  the 
credit  of  an  Oracle,  quale  verburn  dixisti  tale  etiam  audies. 

But  so  much  gall  and  envy  is  thrown  upon  King  Richard's  story,  as 
cannot  possibly  fall  into  the  stile  of  an  ingenuous  and  charitable  pen;  all  his 
virtue  is  by  a  malitious  Alchymy  substracted  into  crimes,  and  where  they 
necessarily  fall  into  mention,  either  scornefully  transmitted  or  perverted,  with 
injurious  constructions,  not  allowing  him  the  resemblance  or  goodnesse  of 
merit:  If  his  disposition  be  affable  and  curteous  (as  generally  it  was,  which 
their  owne  relations  cannot  deny)  then  he  insinuates  and  dives  into  the  peoples 
hearts,  so  where  he  expresses  the  bounty  and  magnificence  of  his  minde;  it  is  a 
subtle  trick  to  purchase  friendship;  let  him  concale  the  knowledge  of  his  injuries, 
and  his  patience  is  deepe  hypocrisie;  for  his  mercy  and  clemency  extended  to 
the  highest  offendors,  (as  to  Fogge  the  Atturney,  who  had  made  a  Libell  against 
him,  besides  the  counterfeiting  of  his  hand  and  seale)  they  were  but  palliated,  and 
his  friendship  meerely  a  Court  brow.  They  have  yet  a  more  captious  and  subtle 
calumny,  reproching  the  casting  of  his  eyes,  motions  of  his  fingers,  manner  of  his 
gesture,  and  his  other  naturall  actions.  I  confesse  with  Cicero  that  status,  incessus, 
sessio,  occubatio,  vultus,  oculi,  manuum  motio,  have  a  certaine  kind  of  decorum; 
but  he  makes  it  not  a  vice  to  erre  in  any  of  them,  nor  that  any  errour  committed  in 
them  was  a  vice;  although  it  must  be  so  defined  by  the  Lawes  of  Utopia:  nay,  they 
will  dissect  his  very  sleepes,  to  find  prodigious  dreames  and  bug-beares,  (accidents 
frequent  to  themselves)  which  they  dresse  in  all  the  fright  and  horrour  fiction  and 
the  stage  can  adde,  who  would  have  sung  Peans  to  his  glory,  had  his  sword  brought 
victory  from  Bosworth  field :  but  now,  their  envy  is  borne  with  him  from  his  mother’s 
wombe,  and  delivers  him  into  the  world  with  a  strange  prodigy  of  Teeth;  although 
(I  am  perswaded)  neither  Doctor  Morton,  nor  Sir  Thomas  Moore  ever  spake  with 
the  Dutchesse  his  Mother,  or  her  Midwife  about  the  matter.  But  if  true;  it  importeth 
no  reason  why  those  earely  and  natalatious  teeth  should  presage  such  horrour  and 
guilt  to  his  birth;  when  we  shall  remember  those  many  Noble  and  worthy  men, 
who  have  had  the  like,  (without  any  imputation  of  crime)  as  Marcus  Curius  sir- 
named  thereupon  Dentatus,  Cu.  Papiene,  King  of  the  Epirots  (a  Prince  much 
renowned  for  his  victories  and  virtues)  Monodas  Sonne  of  Prusias,  King  of  Bithynia, 
borne  with  an  intire  semicircular  bone  in  their  mouthes,  instead  of  Teeth;  then 
they  aggravate  the  pangs  of  the  Dutchesse  in  her  travaile  with  him:  which  had  not 
been  sufferable  without  death,  if  so  extreame  and  intolerable,  as  they  would  have 
them  thought  for,  Quod  jerri  potest  leve  est;  quod  non,  breve  est.  But  she  overcame 
them  and  lived  almost  fifty  yeares  after;  others  have  died  in  that  Bed,  yet  the  children 
not  made  guilty  of  murther;  Julia  the  daughter  of  Julius  Caesar,  Wife  to  great 
Pompey,  Juliola  the  deare  daughter  of  Marcus  Cicero,  wife  of  Dolabella,  and  Junia 
Claudilla  the  Empresse,  and  Wife  of  Caligula,  died  all  of  the  difficulties  and 
extremity  of  their  childe-bearing;  so  did  Queene  Elizabeth  Wife  of  King  Henry 
the  seventh;  and  since  the  Mother  of  that  most  towardly  and  hopefull  Prince 
Edward  the  sixth  in  travaile  of  his  birth;  with  many  thousands  more,  whose  deaths 
(much  lesse  their  paines)  were  never  imputed  to  their  children.’ — Bk,  iii,  p.  75.] 

Horace  Walpole  is  the  next  who  came  forward  in  defence  of  Richard.  His 
Historic  Doubts  on  the  Reign  of  King  Richard  the  Third  was  published  in  1768; 
and  at  once  attracted  considerable  attention,  possibly  more  than  the  author  had 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— WALPOLE 


461 


anticipated;  we  find,  p.  xv:  ‘The  attempt  was  mere  matter  of  curiosity  and  specu¬ 
lation.  If  any  man,  as  idle  as  myself,  should  take  the  trouble  to  review  and  canvass 
my  arguments,  I  am  ready  to  yield  so  indifferent  a  point  to  better  reasons.’  Again 
we  find,  before  summing  up  his  results,  on  p.  122:  ‘What  mistakes  I  have  made 
myself,  I  shall  be  willing  to  acknowledge;  what  weak  reasoning,  to  give  up:  but  I 
shall  not  think  that  a  long  chain  of  arguments,  of  proofs  and  probabilities,  is  con¬ 
futed  at  once,  because  some  single  fact  may  be  found  erroneous.  Much  less  shall  I 
be  disposed  to  take  notice  of  detached  or  trifling  cavils.  The  work  itself  is  but  an 
inquiry  into  a  short  portion  of  our  annals.  I  shall  be  content,  if  I  have  informed  or 
amused  my  readers,  or  thrown  any  light  on  so  clouded  a  scene;  but  I  cannot  be  of 
opinion  that  a  period  thus  distant  deserves  to  take  up  more  time  than  I  have  already 
bestowed  upon  it.’  Walpole  follows  much  the  same  method  in  his  defence  as  does 
Buck — perhaps  the  safest  method — this  is,  to  show  that  certain  chroniclers  of 
Richard’s  life  and  reign  make  no  mention  of  the  crimes  with  which  he  has  been 
charged,  and  that  those  who  do  mention  them  are  unworthy  of  belief.  On  p.  122  we 
find:  ‘Fabian  and  the  authors  of  the  Chronicle  of  Croyland,  who  were  contemporaries 
with  Richard,  charge  him  directly  with  none  of  the  crimes  since  imputed  to  him,  and 
disculpate  him  of  others.  John  Rous,  the  third  contemporary,  could  know  the 
facts  he  alleges  but  by  hearsay,  confounds  the  dates  of  them,  dedicated  his  work 
to  Henry  the  Seventh,  and  is  an  author  to  whom  no  credit  is  due,  from  the  lies  and 
fables  with  which  his  work  is  stuffed.  We  have  no  authors,  who  lived  near  the 
time,  but  Lancastrian  authors,  who  wrote  to  flatter  Henry  the  Seventh,  or  who 
spread  the  tales  which  he  invented.  ...  Sir  Thomas  More  and  Lord  Bacon  both 
confess  that  many  doubted  whether  the  two  princes  were  murdered  in  Richard’s 
days  or  not;  and  it  certainly  never  was  proved  that  they  were  murdered  by  Richard’s 
order.  If  Sir  James  Tirrel  and  Dighton  had  really  committed  the  murder  and 
confessed  it,  and  if  Perkin  Warbeck  had  made  a  voluntary,  clear,  and  probable 
confession  of  his  imposture,  there  could  have  remained  no  doubt  of  the  murder  ’ 
[p.  18].  ‘  Buck  ascribes  the  authorities  of  Sir  Thomas  to  the  information  of  Arch¬ 
bishop  Morton;  but  Morton  died  in  1500,  when  Sir  Thomas  was  but  twenty  years 
old,  and  when  he  had  scarce  thought  of  writing  history.  What  materials  he  had 
gathered  from  his  master  were  probably  nothing  more  than  a  general  narrative  of 
the  preceding  times  in  discourse  at  dinner  or  in  a  winter’s  evening,  if  so  raw  a 
youth  can  be  supposed  to  have  been  admitted  to  familiarity  with  a  prelate  of  that 
rank,  and  prime  minister.  But  granting  that  such  pregnant  parts  as  More’s 
had  leaped  the  barrier  of  dignity,  and  insinuated  himself  into  the  prelate’s  favour: 
could  he  have  drawn  from  a  more  corrupted  source  ?  Morton  had  not  only  violated 
his  allegiance  to  Richard,  but  had  been  the  chief  engine  to  dethrone  him  and  place 
a  bastard  scyon  in  the  throne.  Of  all  men  living  there  could  not  be  more  suspicious 
testimony  than  the  prelate’s,  except  the  king’s:  and  had  the  Archbishop  selected 
More  for  the  historian  of  those  dark  scenes,  who  had  so  much  interest  to  blacken 
Richard,  as  the  man  who  had  risen  to  be  prime  minister  to  his  rival?  Take  it, 
therefore,  either  way;  that  the  Archbishop  did,  or  did  not,  pitch  on  a  young  man 
of  twenty  to  write  that  history,  his  authority  was  as  suspicious  as  could  be.  It 
may  be  said,  on  the  other  hand,  that  Sir  Thomas,  who  had  smarted  for  his  boldness 
(for  his  father,  a  judge  of  the  king’s  bench,  had  been  imprisoned  and  fined  for  his 
son’s  offence)  had  little  inducement  to  flatter  the  Lancastrian  cause.  ...  I  take 
the  truth  to  be,  that  Sir  Thomas  wrote  his  reign  of  Edward  the  Fifth  as  he  wrote 
his  Utopia:  to  amuse  his  leisure  and  exercise  his  fancy.  He  took  up  a  paltry  canvas 


462 


APPENDIX 


and  embroidered  it  with  a  flowing  design  as  his  imagination  suggested  the  colours. 
I  should  deal  more  severely  on  his  respected  memory  on  any  other  hypothesis.  He 
has  been  guilty  of  such  palpable  and  material  falsehoods,  as,  while  they  destroy  his 
credit  as  an  historian,  would  reproach  his  veracity  as  a  man,  if  we  could  impute 
them  to  premeditated  perversion  of  truth,  and  not  to  youthful  levity  and  inaccuracy. 
Standing  as  they  do,  the  sole  groundwork  of  that  reign’s  history,  I  am  authorized 
to  pronounce  the  work,  invention  and  romance.’ 

[The  curious  student  who  wishes  to  pursue  this  subject,  hardly  relevant  in 
these  pages,  may  find  in  Allibone’s  Dictionary  0}  Authors,  s.  v.  Horace  Walpole, 
many  references  to  magazines  wherein  appeared  reviews  of  Walpole’s  Historic 
Doubts. — Ed.] 

C.  Knight  ( Historical  Illustrations ):  We  are  not  about  to  enquire  whether 
the  Richard  of  history  has  had  justice  done  to  him,  but  whether  the  Richard  of 
Shakespeare  accords  with  the  Richard  of  the  old  annalists.  We  shall  quote 
invariably  from  Hall,  because  his  narrative  is  more  literally  copied  from  More  and 
the  contemporary  writers  than  that  of  Holinshed,  who  is  never  so  quaint  and 
vigourous;  and,  further,  because  we  wish  to  show  that  the  nonsense  which  has  been 
uttered  by  Malone  and  others,  that  Shakespeare  knew  no  other  historian  than 
Holinshed,  is  disproved  in  the  clearest  manner  by  the  accuracy  with  which  in  some 
scenes  he  follows  the  older  chronicler.  [Here  follow  extracts  from  Hall’s  chronicle 
covering  the  incidents  of  the  whole  drama.] 

W.  A.  Wright  ( Preface ,  p.  vi):  Hall  and  Holinshed  stand  in  the  same  relation 
to  Richard  the  Third  as  North’s  Plutarch  to  Coriolanus  and  the  other  Roman  plays. 
The  play  is  the  historical  narrative  dramatised,  and  the  only  scene  of  importance  for 
which  some  hint  has  not  been  supplied  in  the  history  is  the  second  scene  of  the  first 
Act,  in  which  Richard  wooes  the  widow  of  Prince  Edward.  This  and  the  various 
appearances  of  the  old  Queen  Margaret  are  introduced  in  defiance  of  historic  truth 
and  probability  for  the  simple  purpose  of  stage  effect.  From  this  point  of  view 
they  are  undoubtedly  successful,  and  after  so  decisive  a  victory  in  the  opening  of  his 
campaign  we  are  prepared  to  accept  everything  which  follows,  feeling  that  the 
events  are  in  harmony  with  the  principal  actor  in  the  drama,  and  without  any  nice 
questionings  about  fidelity  to  human  nature  or  to  the  truth  of  history.  In  Richard’s 
world,  the  world  of  the  stage,  there  is  nothing  incongruous,  if  we  once  admit  the 
possibility  of  his  being  what  he  describes  himself  to  be.  What  this  is  it  requires 
no  subtle  analysis  to  discover.  He  takes  us  into  his  confidence  at  every  step,  and 
tells  us  not  only  what  he  is  going  to  do,  but  why  he  intends  to  do  it,  so  that  action 
and  motive  are  obvious  to  the  most  unskilful  observer.  The  Richard  of  the 
3  Henry  VI.  is  also  the  Richard  of  Sir  Thomas  More,  and  it  is  the  continuity  of 
his  character  which  supplies  the  connecting  link  between  the  present  play  and 
its  predecessors.  Already  in  his  soliloquy  at  the  end  of  the  second  scene  of  the 
third  Act  of  3  Henry  VI.  we  have  a  very  explicit  confession  of  his  ambitious  designs 
and  of  the  obstacles  in  his  way  to  the  crown,  to  the  removal  of  which  he  thenceforth 
devotes  himself.  In  Holinshed  there  is  no  hint  of  this;  and  in  the  pages  of  the 
chronicler,  Richard,  during  his  brother’s  lifetime,  only  appears  as  the  gallant 
soldier  and  loyal  partisan  of  the  House  of  York.  Even  when  the  common  rumour 
is  reported  that  he  stabbed  Henry  the  Sixth  in  the  Tower,  the  deed  is  attributed  to 
no  ambitious  designs  of  his  own,  but  to  his  desire  ‘that  his  brother  king  Edward 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— OECHELHAUSER— CHURCHILL  463 

might  reigne  in  more  suertie.’  But  it  can  hardly  be  said  with  justice  that  Holinshed 
is  inconsistent  in  his  treatment  of  Richard’s  character  when  he  represents  him  as 
brave  and  unscrupulous.  [P.  lvii.]:  It  is  evident  that  the  dramatist  must  have 
consulted  the  second  edition  of  Holinshed  (1586-7)  as  well  as  Hall.  To  the  former 
source  we  owe  the  name  of  Friar  Penker  (III,  v)  which  in  Hall  is  Pynkie;  the  story 
of  Richard’s  visit  to  Exeter  (IV,  ii),  and  his  alarm  at  the  ominous  resemblance  of 
Rougemont  to  Richmond;  and  the  statement  in  Richard’s  address  to  his  army 
that  Richmond  had  been  maintained  in  Brittany  ‘at  our  mother's  cost,’  an  error 
which  occurs  in  the  second  edition  of  Holinshed  only.  On  the  other  hand,  Hall 
alone  mentions  Burdet’s  case  (III,  v,  82);  in  his  narrative  alone  Richard  presents 
himself  to  the  Lord  Mayor  in  the  gallery  at  Baynard’s  Castle  with  a  bishop  on 
either  side;  and  in  Hall  the  scene  of  Buckingham’s  execution  is  the  market  place 
at  Salisbury,  while  in  Holinshed  it  was  at  Shrewsbury. — Churchill  (p.  206) :  It  is 
true  that  Holinshed  says  that  the  captured  Buckingham  was  brought  to  Richard 
at  Shrewsbury,  not  Salisbury,  as  in  Hall;  but  in  Holinshed,  as  in  Hall,  Buckingham 
is  executed  ‘  at  Salisburie,  in  the  open  market  place.’  [The  inference,  from  Richard’s 
last  speech  in  IV,  iii,  ‘Some  one  take  order  Buckingham  be  brought  To  Salisbury,’ 
is  that  the  scene  of  the  execution  (V,  i)  is  laid  in  that  town.  But  whether  Shakes¬ 
peare  supposed  the  scene  to  lie  in  Shrewsbury  or  in  Salisbury;  in  other  words, 
whether  he  followed  Hall  or  Holinshed,  there  is,  I  think,  no  possibility  of  decid¬ 
ing.  Neither  in  the  original  text  nor  in  that  text’s  stage  directions  is  there  any 
mention  whatever  of  the  locality.  That  which  apparently  both  Wright  and 
Churchill  overlooked  is  that  the  stage  direction  at  V,  i,  was  first  made  by  Pope, 
who  was  probably  therein  guided  by  the  last  lines  of  IV,  iii,  and  consulted  neither 
Hall  nor  Holinshed  at  all. — Ed.] 

W.  Oechelhauser  (p.  97,  foot-note)  thinks  that,  with  the  exception  of  the  inci¬ 
dent  of  the  Bishops  in  III,  vii,  there  is  no  indication  that  Shakespeare  was  indebted 
to  any  chronicler  other  than  Holinshed.  See  III,  vii,  144. 

G.  B.  Churchill  (p.  155):  Next  to  More’s  Biography,  Polydore  Vergil’s  Historia 
Anglia  is  of  greatest  importance  in  the  development  of  the  Richard  saga.  More’s 
work  covered  only  the  period  from  the  death  of  Edward  IV.  to  the  rebellion  of 
Buckingham:  Vergil’s  included  the  history  of  Richard  from  the  reign  of  Henry  VI. 
to  Richard’s  end  at  Bosworth.  As  More’s  work  was  included  bodily  in  the  succeed¬ 
ing  chronicles,  so  was  Vergil’s  History,  bodily  or  as  a  basis,  adopted  for  that  part  of 
Edward’s  and  Richard’s  reigns  not  touched  upon  by  More.  .  .  According  to  Vergil, 
Richard,  as  commonly  reported,  slew  King  Henry  that  Edward  might  have  no 
enemies  to  fear.  No  share  in  Clarence’s  death  is  ascribed  to  Richard  by  Vergil; 
and  there  is  no  suggestion  in  his  account  of  Edward’s  reign  that  Richard  at  that 
time  cherished  any  designs  upon  the  crown.  Throughout  the  account  Richard 
appears,  as  he  calls  himself  in  Shakespeare’s  play,  ‘a  pack-horse’  in  Edward’s 
great  affairs,  his  devoted  and  faithful  partisan.  Thus  it  is  that  the  later  chronicles, 
following  Vergil’s  account  of  Edward’s  reign,  and  then  copying  More’s  book, 
present  two  views  of  Richard,  which  if  really  less  inconsistent  with  each  other  than 
has  sometimes  been  asserted,  have  nevertheless  a  very  different  coloring.  Shakes¬ 
peare  avoided  all  inconsistency,  as  Oechelhaiiser  pointed  out  [see  II,  i,  144,  note], 
by  adopting  More’s  view  of  Richard’s  character  from  the  beginning,  while  he  used 
the  events  in  Richard’s  early  life  as  found  in  Hall  and  Holinshed.  To  Vergil  is 


464 


APPENDIX 


due  the  anecdote,  according  to  which  Edward  always  called  to  mind,  when  ever 
any  sued  for  a  man’s  life,  that  none  had  sued  for  the  life  of  his  unfortunate 
brother  Clarence.  [II,  i,  1 16.]  ...  To  him,  and  not  to  Rous,  was  due  the  trans¬ 
mission  of  the  famous  prophecy  about  G.  [On  p.  50,  Churchill  says  that 
Rous  was  the  first  to  mention  this  prophecy. — Ed.]  ...  To  the  picture  of 
Gloucester’s  early  career  as  transmitted  by  Vergil,  Hall  makes  most  important 
additions.  It  seems  as  if  he  must  have  been  animated  with  a  desire  to  show 
the  real  strength  of  Richard  and  the  possibilities  that  lay  in  him,  had  not  the 
desire  of  the  throne  warped  his  nature  and  brought  on  his  downfall;  and  such  a 
belief  is  made  stronger  by  the  words  with  which  Hall  closes  his  account  of  Richard’s 
reign.  Had  Richard  been  content  to  remain  protector,  ‘no  doubt  but  the  realm 
had  prospered,  and  he  much  praysed  and  beloued  as  he  is  nowe  abhorred  and 
vilipended.’  Thus  to  Hall  more  than  to  Vergil  is  due  the  apparent  inconsistency 
between  the  two  parts  of  the  chronicles’  accounts  of  Richard’s  career.  .  .  .  [Hall’s 
additions  were  largely  adopted  by  the  succeeding  chroniclers,  including  Holinshed.] 
But  Holinshed,  following  Rastell’s  edition  of  More,  and  not  Hall’s  version,  and 
making  use  of  other  chronicles  to  increase  and  correct  Hall’s  account  of  other 
events,  does  not  have  quite  all  the  material  presented  by  Hall.  Some  of  the  omitted 
matter  is  found  in  Shakespeare’s  play,  and  thus  we  have  the  proof  that  he  used 
in  its  preparation  not  only  Holinshed’s  chronicle,  but  Hall’s  as  well.  .  .  .  To  the 
instances  cited  by  Oechelhaiiser  and  Wright  may  be  added  another.  The  reversal 
of  Richard’s  fortunes  in  IV,  iii,  and  IV  (beginning)  is  evidently  based  on  the  passage 
from  Polydore  Vergil  inserted  by  Hall  in  More’s  story:  ‘And  from  thence  forth 
[the  murder  of  the  princes]  not  onely  all  his  counsailles,  doynges  and  procedynges, 
sodainlye  decayed  and  sorted  to  none  effecte:  But  also  fortune  beganne  to  froune 
and  turne  her  whele  douneward  from  him.’  (P.  381):  In  making  the  Cardinal 
of  III,  i,  Cardinal  Bouchier  of  Canterbury,  the  editors  must  assume  that  Shakes¬ 
peare  followed  Hall  and  not  Holinshed.  The  latter  follows  More,  who  has,  by 
an  historical  mistake,  not  found  in  the  Latin  version,  the  Archbishop  of  York.  .  .  . 
The  account  of  Holinshed  makes  very  little  change  in  the  form  or  content  of  Hall’s. 
Richard’s  character  remains  as  before,  with  its  dark  side  made  ever  so  slightly 
blacker  by  the  omission  of  Hall’s  praise  for  his  conduct  in  the  Scottish  war,  and 
by  an  occasional  additional  phrase  calculated  to  emphasize  his  cruelty  and  wicked¬ 
ness.  .  .  There  is  only  one  important  addition  of  material.  This  is  the  ancedote 
of  Richard’s  visit  to  Exeter,  and  the  gloomy  prophecy  by  which  he  connects  Rouge- 
mont  with  Richmond.  Thus,  though  Shakespeare  may,  in  writing  Richard  III., 
have  based  his  play  almost  wholly  on  the  form  of  the  saga  which  he  found  in  Holins¬ 
hed,  yet  in  the  formation  of  that  saga  Holinshed  is  of  very  slight  importance.  To 
the  proofs,  given  by  Wright,  that  Shakespeare  used  Holinshed,  may  be  added: 
The  reference  in  I,  ii,  62,  to  the  reopening  and  bleeding  of  Henry’s  wounds,  rests 
upon  Holinshed’s  account  of  Henry’s  burial  (derived  from  Warkworth);  there  is 
no  mention  of  the  fact  in  Hall;  also  III,  i,  218-220: 

‘And  look  when  I  am  king,  claim  thou  of  me 
‘Th’  earldom  of  Hereford,  and  the  movables 
‘Whereof  the  king  my  brother  stood  possess’d’: 
rests  upon  a  passage  translated  from  More’s  Latin,  and  therefore  not  in  Hall, 
but  obtained  by  Shakespeare  from  Holinshed  (More,  ed.  Lumby,  p.  43). 

The  consensus  of  opinion  is  in  favour  of  Hall  as  the  Chronicler  from  whom 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— HALL'S  CHRONICLE  465 


Shakespeare  derived  the  historic  material  for  his  play.  Here  and  there  in  the 
commentary  I  have  quoted  from  More  and  Holinshed  in  preference  to  Hall,  fol¬ 
lowing  therein  Boswell-Stone,  who  quotes  from  the  latter  chronicler,  but,  at  the 
same  time  cites  the  corresponding  passage  in  both  Hall  and  More. 

HALL’S  CHRONICLE 

The  following  extracts  are  from  the  Pitifull  Lije  of  Kyng  Edward  the  V;  and 
the  Tragicall  Doynges  of  Kyng  Richarde  the  Tliirde,  as  given  in  Hall’s  Chronicle, 
edition  1809,  pp.  342-421: — 

The  eternall  God  callynge  to  his  merci  the  noble  prince  Kynge  Edward  y®  iiij ' 
of  that  name,  Edward  his  eldest  sonne  (prince  of  Wales)  beganne  his  reygne  the 
ninthe  daye  of  April,  in  the  yere  of  oure  lord  a  thousande  foure  hundred  fourscore 
&  thre.  .  .  Whiche  younge  prince  reigned  a  small  space  &  little  season  ouer  this 
realme,  either  in  pleasure  or  libertie.  For  his  vncle  Richard  duke  of  Gloucester, 
within  thre  monethes  depriued  hym  not  onely  of  his  croune  and  regalitee,  but  also 
vnnaturally  bereft  hym  of  his  naturall  life:  and  for  the  declaracion  by  what  craftie 
engine  he  firste  attempted  his  vngraciouse  purpose  &  by  what  false  colourable  and 
vntrue  allegacions  he  set  furth  openly  his  pretensed  enterprise,  and  finally  by  what 
shamefull,  cruell  and  detestable  act  he  perfourmed  the  same:  Ye  muste  first 
considre  of  whom  he  and  his  brother  dessended,  their  natures,  condicions  and 
inclinacions,  and  then  you  shall  easely  perceiue,  that  there  could  not  bee  a  more 
crueller  tiraunt  apoincted  to  acheue  a  more  abhominable  entreprise. 

Their  father  was  Richard  Plantagenet  duke  of  Yorke,  whiche  began  not  by 
warre,  but  by  lawe  to  calenge  the  crowne  of  Englande.  .  .  .  [and]  was  by  to  muche 
hardinesse  slaine  at  the  battaill  of  Wakefelde,  leuyng  behinde  hym  thre  sonnes, 
Edwarde,  George,  and  Richarde.  All  these  three  as  thei  were  greate  estates  of 
birthe,  so  were  they  greate  and  stately  of  stomacke,  gredy  of  promocions  and 
impaciente  parteners  of  rule  and  autoritee. 

This  Edward  reuenged  his  fathers  death  and  deposed  kyng  Henry  the  sixt, 
and  attained  the  crowne  and  scepter  of  the  realme. 

George  duke  of  Clarence  was  a  goodly  and  well  feautured  prince,  in  all  thynges 
fortunate,  if  either  his  owne  ambicion  had  not  set  hym  against  his  brother  or  thenuy 
of  his  enemies  had  not  set  his  brother  againste  hym:  for  were  it  by  the  quene  or 
nobles  of  her  blud,  whiche  highly  maligned  the  kynges  kynred  (as  women  commely, 
not  of  malice  but  of  nature,  hate  suche  as  their  husbandes  loue)  or  wer  it  a  proud 
appetite  of  the  duke  hym  selfe,  entendynge  to  bee  kynge,  at  the  leaste  wise,  heinous 
treason  was  laied  to  his  charge,  and  finally  were  he  in  faulte  or  wer  he  faultlesse, 
attainted  was  he  by  parliament  and  iudged  to  death,  and  there  vpon  haotely 
drowned  in  a  butte  of  malmesey  within  the  towre  of  London.  Whose 
death  kynge  Edwarde  (although  he  commaunded  it)  when  he  wiste  I,  iv,  270. 
it  was  doen  piteously  he  bewayled  and  sorowfully  repented  it. 

Richard  duke  of  Gloucester  the  third  sonne  (of  whiche  I  must  moste  entreate) 
was  in  witte  and  courage  egall  with  the  other,  but  in  beautee  and  liniametes  of 
nature  far  vnderneth  both,  for  he  was  litle  of  stature,  eiuill  featured  of  limmes, 
croke  backed,  the  left  shulder  muche  higher  than  the  righte,  harde 
fauoured  of  visage,  such  as  in  estates  is  called  a  war-like  visage,  I,  i,  21. 
and  emonge  commen  persones  a  crabbed  face  He  was  malicious, 
wrothfull  and  enuious,  and  as  it  is  reported,  his  mother  the  duches  had  muche  a 


30 


466 


APPENDIX 


dooe  in  her  trauaill,  that  she  could  not  be  deliuered  of  hym  vncut,  and  that  he  came 
into  the  worlde  the  fete  forwarde,  as  menne  bee  borne  outwarde,  and  as  the  fame 
ranne,  not  vntothed:  whether  that  menne  of  hatred  reported  aboue 
II,  iv,  32.  the  truthe,  or  that  nature  chaunged  his  course  in  his  beginnynge, 
whiche  in  his  life  many  thynges  vnnaturally  committed,  this  I  leue 
to  God  his  iudgemente.  He  was  none  euill  capitain  in  warre,  as  to  y®  whyche, 
his  disposicion  was  more  enclined  too,  then  to  peace.  Sondry  victories  he  had  and 
some  ouerthrowes,  but  neuer  for  defaute  of  his  owne  persone,  either  for  lacke  of 
hardinesse  or  politique  order.  Free  he  was  of  his  dispences  and  somwhat  aboue 
his  power  liberall,  with  large  giftes  he  gatte  hym  vnstedfaste  frendship:  for  whiche 
cause  he  was  fain  to  borowe,  pill  and  extort  in  other  places,  whiche  gat  hym  sted- 
faste  hatred.  He  was  close  and  secrete,  a  depe  dissimuler,  lowlye  of  countenaunce, 
arrogante  of  herte,  outwardely  familier  where  he  inwardely  hated,  not  lettynge  to 
kisse  whom  he  thought  to  kill,  despiteous  and  cruell,  not  alwaie  for  eiuill  will,  but 
ofter  for  ambicion  and  too  serue  his  purpose,  frende  and  fooe  were  all  indifferent, 
where  his  auauntage  grewe,  he  spared  no  mannes  deathe  whose  life  withstode  his 
purpose.  He  slewe  in  the  towre  kynge  Henry  the  sixte,  saiynge 
I,  ii,  in.  now  is  there  no  heire  male  of  kynge  Edwarde  the  thirde,  but  wee 
of  the  house  of  Yorke:  whiche  murder  was  doen  without  kyng  Edward 
his  assente,  which  woulde  haue  appointed  that  bocherly  office  too  some  other, 
rather  then  to  his  owne  brother.  Some  wise  menne  also  wene,  that  his  drifte 
lacked  not  in  helpynge  furth  his  owne  brother  of  Clarence  to  his 
I,  i,  37.  death,  which  thyng  in  all  apparaunce  he  resisted,  although  he 
inwardly  mynded  it.  And  the  cause  therof  was,  as  men  notyng  his 
doyngs  and  procedynges  did  marke  (because  that  he  longe  in  kynge  Edwarde  his 
tyme  thought  to  obtaine  the  crowne  in  case  that  the  kynge  his  brother,  whose  life 
he  loked  that  eiuil  diet  woulde  sone  shorten)  shoulde  happen  to  diseace,  as  he  did 
in  dede,  his  chyldren  beynge  younge.  And  then  if  the  duke  of  Clarence 
I,  i,  150.  had  liued,  his  pretenced  purpose  had  been  far  hyndered.  For  yf 
the  duke  of  Clarence  had  kepte  hymself  trewe  to  his  nephewe  the 
younge  king,  or  would  haue  taken  vpon  hym  too  bee  kynge,  euery  one  of  these 
castes  had  been  a  troumpe  in  the  duke  of  Gloucesters  waye:  but  when  he  was 
sure  that  his  brother  of  Clarence  was  ded,  then  he  knewe  that  he  might  worke 
without  that  ieoperdy.  But  of  these  poinctes  there  is  no  certentie,  and  whosoever 
diuineth  or  coniectureth,  may  as  wel  shote  to  fer  as  to  shorte,  but  this  coniecture 
afterwarde  toke  place  (as  fewe  dooe)  as  you  shall  perceiue  hereafter.  [The  following 
refers  to  the  prophecy  in  regard  to  the  letter  G,  and  is  from  Hall’s  account  of  the 
reign  of  Edward  the  Fourth,  p.  326.]  In  y®.  xvij.  yere  of  kyng  Edward,  there  fell 
a  sparcle  of  priuy  malice,  betwene  the  king  &  his  brother  the  duke  of  Clarece 
whether  it  rose  of  olde  grudges  before  time  passed,  or  were  it  newly  kyndeled  and 
set  a  fyre  by  the  Quene,  or  her  bloud  which  were  euer  mistrusting  and  priuely 
barkynge  at  the  kynges  lignage,  or  were  he  desirous  to  reigne  after  his  brother: 
to  men  that  haue  thereof  made  large  inquisicion.  .  .  the  certayntie  therof  was 
hyd,  and  coulde  not  truely  be  disclosed,  but  by  coniectures.  .  .  The  fame  was 
that  the  king  or  the  Quene,  or  bothe  sore  troubled  with  a  folysh  Prophesye,  and 
by  reason  therof  bega  to  stomacke  &  greuously  to  grudge  agaynst 
I,  i,  44.  the  duke.  The  effect  of  which  was,  after  king  Edward  should 
reigne,  one  whose  first  letter  of  hys  name  shoulde  be  a  G.  and  because 
the  deuel  is  wot  with  such  wytchcraftes,  to  wrappe  and  illaqueat  the  myndes  of 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— HALL S  CHRONICLE  467 


men,  which  delyte  in  suche  deuelyshe  fantasyes  they  sayd  afterward  that  the  Proph- 
esie  lost  not  hys  effect,  when  after  kyng  Edward,  Glocester  vsurped  his  kyngdome. 

[After  the  preceding  account  of  Richard’s  plots  against  Clarence,  Hall  thus 
continues]:  But  afore  I  declare  too  you  howe  this  Richarde  duke  of  Gloucester 
began  his  mischeuous  imagined  and  pretenced  enterprice  as  apparatly  shalbee 
opened,  I  muste  a  litle  put  you  in  remembraunce  of  a  louyng  &  charitable 
acte,  no  lesse  profitable  then  amicable  to  the  whole  comminaltie,  if  it  had  been 
so  inwardly  thought  as  it  was  outwardly  dissimulea  which  kynge  Edwarde  did 
liyng  on  his  deathe  bedde  not  longe  before  he  died.  For  in  his  life,  although 
that  the  diuision  emongest  his  frendes  somewhat  greued  and  irked  hym,  yet  in  his 
helthe  he  lesse  regarded  &  tooke  hede  to  it,  by  reason  that  he  thoughte  that  he 
was  hable  in  althynges  to  rule  bothe  parties,  wer  thei  neuer  so  obstinate:  But  in 
his  last  sickenes  (whiche  continued  longer  then  false  and  fantasticall 
tales  haue  vntruely  and  falsely  surmised,  as  I  my  selfe  that  wrote  II,  i,  3. 
tins  pamphlet  truly  knewe)  when  he  perceiued  his  naturall  strength 
was  gone,  and  hoped  litle  of  recouery  by  the  hartes  of  all  his  phisicians  whiche  he 
perceiued  onely  to  prolong  his  life.  Then  he  began  to  consider  the  youthe  of 
his  children,  howe  bee  it,  he  nothyng  lesse  mistrusted  then  that  that  happened, 
yet  he  wisely  forseyng  and  consideryng  that  many  armes  might  ensue  by  the  debate 
of  his  nobles  while  the  youth  of  his  children  should  lacke  discrecion  and  good  coun- 
saill  of  their  frendes,  for  he  knewe  well  that  euery  parte  woulde  woorke  for  their  owne 
commodite,  and  rather  by  pleasaunte  aduise  to  Wynne  theim  selues  fauour,  then  by 
profitable  aduertisement  to  dooe  the  chydren  good :  wherefore  liyng  on  his  deathe 
bed  at  Westminster,  he  called  to  hym  suche  lordes  as  then  were 
aboute  hym,  whome  he  knewe  to  bee  at  variaunce,  in  especiall  the  II,  i,  12. 
lorde  Marques  Dorset  sonne  to  the  queene  and  the  lorde  Hastynges, 
againste  whome  the  quene  especially  grudged  for  the  fauoure  that  the  king  bare 
hym.  .  .  .  And  when  these  lordes  with  diuerse  other  of  bothe  parties  were  come 
vnto  the  kynge  his  presence,  he  caused  hym  self  to  bee  raised  vp  with  pillowes, 
&  as  I  can  gesse,  saied  thus  or  muche  like  in  sentence  to  theim.  [The  death-bed 
oration  put  into  the  mouth  of  Edward  the  Fourth,  by  More  and  copied  by  Hall  is 
well  conceived  and  a  forcible  piece  of  writing,  but  as  Shakespeare  has  not  used  any 
part  of  it  for  incidents  in  the  drama,  it  is  unnecessary  to  repeat  it.  The  following 
paragraph  seems,  however  to  be  the  source  of  Edward’s  speech  in  II,  i,  wherein  he 
expresses  remorse  for  the  death  of  Clarence;  it  is  in  the  account  of  the  ‘xvii  Yere’ 
of  King  Edward  the  Fourth,  p.  326):  .  .  .  Sure  it  is  that  although  kyng  Edward 
were  consentyng  to  his  [Clarence’s]  death  and  destruccion,  yet  he  much  dyd  bothe 
lamente  his  infortunate  chaunce,  and  repent  hys  sodayne  execucion.  Inasmuche, 
that  when  any  person  sued  to  hym  for  Pardon  or  remission,  of  any 
malefactor  condempned  to  the  punishment  of  death,  he  woulde  II,  i,  116. 
accustomably  saye,  &  openly  speke,  O  infortunate  brother,  for 
whose  lyfe  not  one  creature  would  make  intercession,  openlye  spekyng,  and  appar- 
antly  meanynge,  that  by  the  meanes  of  some  of  the  nobilitie,  he  was  circumuented 
and  brought  to  his  confusion.  [Hall  thus  continues]:  And  there  in  his  presence 
(as  by  their  woordes  apeared)  eche  forgaue  other,  and  ioyned  their 
handes  together,  when  as  it  after  appeared  by  their  dedes  their  hartes  II,  i,  13-46. 
were  far  a  sunder.  .  .  .  And  so  this  noble  prince  deceased,  as  you 
haue  hearde  in  that  tyme  when  his  life  was  most  desired,  and  when  his  people  moste 
desired  to  kepe  hym:  Whiche  love  of  his  people  and  their  entiere  affection  towards 


468 


APPENDIX 


hym,  had  been  to  hys  noble  chyldren.  .  .  a  merueilous  fortresse  and  a  sure  armoure, 
yf  the  diuision  and  dissencion  of  their  frendes  had  not  vnarmed  theim  and  left 
theim  destitute  .  .  . 

The  younge  kynge  at  the  deathe  of  his  father  kepte  houshoulde  at  Ludlowe, 
for  his  father  had  sente  hym  thether  for  Iustice  to  be  dooen  in  the 
II,  ii,  128.  Marches  of  Wales,  to  the  ende  that  by  the  autoritee  of  his  presence, 
the  wilde  Welshemenne  and  eiuell  disposed  personnes  should  refrain 
from  their  accustomed  murthers  and  outrages.  The  gouernauce  of  this  younge 
Prince  was  committed  too  lord  Antony  Wooduile  erle  Ryuers  and  lorde  Scales, 
brother  to  the  quene,  a  wise,  hardy  and  honourable  personage,  as  valiaunte  of 
handes  as  pollitique  of  counsaill  and  with  hym  were  associate  other  of  the  same 
partie,  and  in  effect  euery  one  as  he  was  nerer  of  kynne  vnto  the  quene,  so  was  he 
planted  nexte  aboute  the  prince.  That  drift  by  the  quene  semed  to  be  diuised, 
whereby  her  bloudde  mighte  of  righte  in  tender  youthe  bee  so  planted  in  the 
princes  fauoure,  that  afterwarde  it  shoulde  hardely  bee  eradicated  out  of  the 
same. 

The  duke  of  Gloucester  turned  all  this  to  their  distruction,  and  vpo  that  grounde 
set  the  foundacion  of  his  vnhappy  buyldyng:  For  whom  soeuer  he  perceiued  too 
bee  at  variaunce  with  theim,  or  to  beare  toward  hym  selfe  any  fauoure,  he  brake 
vnto  theim,  some  by  mouthe,  some  by  writynge  and  secrete  messengers,  that  it 
was  neither  reason  nor  yet  to  be  suffered  that  the  younge  kynge 
II,  ii,  158.  their  master  and  kynsman  shoulde  bee  in  the  handes  and  custody 
of  his  mothers  kynrede,  sequestered  in  maner  from  their  com- 
paignie  and  attendaunce,  of  whiche  euery  one  oughte  hym  as  faithefull  seruice 
as  they,  and  many  of  theim  of  farre  more  honorable  parte  of  kynne  then  his 
mothers  side,  whose  bloud  quod  the  duke  of  Gloucester  sauyng  the  kyng  his 
pleasure,  was  farre  vnmete  to  bee  matched  with  his,  which  now  to  bee  re- 
moued  from  the  kyng  and  the  leaste  noble  to  bee  lefte  aboute  hym,  is  quod  he 
neither  honourable  to  his  maiestie  nor  too  vs,  and  also  too  hym  lesse  suretie,  to 
haue  the  nobles  and  mightiest  of  his  frendes  from  hym,  &  to  vs  all  no  litle  ieopardie 
to  suffre,  and  specially  our  well  proued  euill  willers  too  growe  into  greate  autoritee 
with  the  kynge  in  youthe,  namely  whiche  is  lighte  of  belefe  and  soone  perswaded. — 
Ye  remembre  that  kyng  Edward  hym  self,  albeit  he  was  bothe  of  age  and  discrecion, 
yet  was  he  ruled  in  many  thynges  by  that  bende,  more  then  stode  either  with  his 
honour  or  our  profite,  or  with  comoditie  of  anye  man  els,  excepte  onely  the  immoder¬ 
ate  anauncemente  of  theim  selues,  which  whether  they  thirsted  sore  after  their 
owne  weale  or  no,  it  were  harde  I  thynke  to  gesse.  And  yf  some  folkes  frendeshipe 
had  not  holden  better  place  with  the  kynge  then  any  respecte 
II,  ii,  134.  of  kynrede,  they  might  peraduenture,  easely  haue  trapped  and 
broughte  to  confusion  some  of  vs  or  this:  and  why  no-  as  easely 
as  thei  haue  dooen  other  or  this  as  nere  of  the  blud  royall,  but  our  lorde  hath 
wroughte  his  will,  and  thanked  bee  his  grace  that  perell  is  paste:  howbeit  as 
greate  is  growyng  if  we  suffre  this  young  kyng  in  his  enemies  handes,  whiche,  with¬ 
out  his  wittyng  might  abuse  the  name  of  his  commaundemente  to  any  of  our 
vndoyng,  whiche  thinges  God  and  good  prouision  forbid,  of  whiche  good  pro- 
uision  none  of  vs  hath  any  thynge  the  lesse  nede  for  the  late  attonemete  made 
in  whiche  ye  kyng  his  pleasure  had  more  place  then  the  parties  hertes  or 
willes,  nor  none  of  vs  is  so  vnwise  or  somuch  ouersene  as  to  trust  a  newfrede  made 
of  an  old  foq  or  to  thinke  that  onely  kindenesse  so  sodenly  contracted  in  an  houre, 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— HALL S  CHRONICLE  469 

continued  scantly  yet  a  fourtnight,  should  be  deper  set  in  our  stomackes,  then  a 
longe  accustomed  malice  many  yeres  rooted. 

With  these  perswasions  and  writinges,  the  duke  of  Gloucester  sette  a  fire  theim 
whiche  were  easie  to  kyndle,  and  in  especial  twain,  Henry  duke  of  Buckyngham, 
and  Willyam  lord  Hastynges,  and  lord  Chamberlain,  bothe  menne  of  honoure  and 
of  greate  power,  the  one  by  longe  succession  from  his  aunceters,  thother  by  his 
offices  and  the  kynge  his  fauoure.  These  two  not  bearynge  eache  to  other  so 
muche  loue,  as  hatred  both  to  ye  quenes  bloud,  accorded  together  with  the  duke 
of  Gloucester  that  thei  would  remoue  from  the  kyng  all  his  mothers  frendes,  vnder 
the  name  of  their  enemies. 

Where  vpon  the  duke  of  Gloucester  beynge  aduertised  that  the  lordes  aboute 
the  kynge  entended  to  brynge  hym  to  London  to  his  coronacion, 
accompaigned  with  suche  a  number  of  their  frendes  that  it  shoulde  II,  ii,  150. 
be  harde  for  hym  to  brynge  his  purpose  to  passe  without  the  assem- 
blyng  and  gatheryng  of  people  &  in  maner  of  open  warre,  wherof  the  ende  he  wyst 
was  doubtfull,  and  in  the  which  the  kyng  beyng  on  the  other  syde,  his  parte  shoulde 
haue  the  name  and  face  of  rebellion. 

He  secretely  therefore  by  diuerse  meanes  caused  the  quene  to  be  perswaded 
that  it  was  neither  nede  &  should  also  be  ieoperdeous  for  y®  kyng  to  come  vp  so 
strong,  for  as  now  euery  lord  loued  other  and  none  other  thyng  studied  for,  but  the 
triumphe  of  his  coronacion  &  honoure  of  the  kyng.  And  the  lordes  about  the 
kyng,  should  assemble  in  the  kynges  name  muche  people,  thei  should  geue  ye 
lordes  betwixt  whom  &  them  ther  had  bene  some  tyme  debate,  an  occasion  to 
feare  and  suspecte  least  they  should  gather  this  people,  not  for  the  kynges  saue 
guard,  whom  no  man  impugned,  but  for  their  destruction,  hauyng  more  regarde 
to  their  olde  variaunce  then  to  their  new  attonement,  for  the  which 
cause  they  on  the  other  parte  might  assemble  men  also  for  their  II,  ii,  140. 
defence,  whose  powres  she  wyst  well  farre  stretched,  and  thus  should 
all  the  realme  fal  in  a  roare,  &  of  the  mischiefe  that  therof  should  ensue  (whiche 
was  likely  to  be  not  a  litle)  y*  moste  harme  was  like  to  fal  where  she  least  woulde, 
&  then  all  the  world  would  put  her  &  her  kynred  in  the  blame,  saiyng  that  they 
had  vnwysely  and  vntruely  broken  the  amytie  and  peace  whiche  the  kynge  her 
husband  had  so  prudently  made  betwene  her  kynred  and  his,  whiche  amyte  his 
kynne  had  alwaies  obserued. 

The  quene  beyng  thus  perswaded,  sent  worde  to  the  kyng  and  to  her  brother, 
that  there  was  no  cause  nor  nede  to  assemble  any  people,  &  also  the  duke  of 
Gloucester  and  other  lordes  of  his  bend,  wrote  vnto  y®  kyng  so  reuerently  and  to 
the  quenes  frendes  there  so  louyngly,  that  they  nothinge  yearthly  mistrustyng, 
brought  the  young  kynge  towarde  London  with  a  sober  compaignie  in 
great  haste  (but  not  in  good  spede)  til  he  came  to  Northampton,  and  II,  iv,  4. 
from  thece  he  remoued  to  Stony  Stratford.  .  .  .  [Here  follows  a 
circumstantial  account  of  the  seizure  of  the  young  king,  which  is,  however,  only 
referred  to  by  Shakespeare.]  The  duke  of  Gloucester  sent  y*  lorde  Ryuers,  the 
lord  Richard  and  sir  Thomas  Vaugham  and  sir  Richarde  Hawte 
into  the  Northparties  into  diuerse  prisons,  but  at  last,  al  came  to  II,  iv,  48. 
Poufret  where  they  all  foure  were  beheaded  without  iudgement. 

In  this  maner  as  you  haue  hard,  the  duke  of  Gloucester  toke  on  him  the  gouern- 
aunce  of  the  yonge  kyng,  whom  with  much  reuerence  he  conueied  towardes  London. 
These  tidynges  came  hastely  to  the  quene  before  mydnighte,  by  a  very  sore  report 


470 


APPENDIX 


that  the  kynge  her  sonne  was  taken  and  that  her  brother  and  her  other  sonne  and 
other  her  frendes  were  arrested,  and  sent,  no  man  wyste  whether.  With  this  heauy 
tidynges  the  quene  bewayled  her  chyldes  ruyne,  her  frendes  mis- 
II,  iv,  57.  chaunce,  and  her  owne  infortune,  curssyng  the  tyme  that  euer  she 
was  perswaded  to  leaue  the  gatherynge  of  people  to  bryng  vp  the 
kynge  with  a  greate  powre,  but  that  was  passed,  and  therefore  nowe  she  toke  her 
younger  sonne  the  duke  of  Yorke  and  her  doughters  and  went  out  of  the  palays 
of  Westminster  into  the  sanctuary,  and  there  lodged  in  the  abbotes 
II,  iv,  74.  place.  .  .  The  same  night  there  came  to  doctor  Rotheram  Arche- 
byshop  of  Yorke  and  lorde  Chancelour,  a  messenger  to  Yorke 
place  besyde  Westminster:  the  messenger  was  brought  to  the  bishoppes  bedsyde 
and  declared  to  him  that  the  dukes  were  gone  backe  with  the  young 
II,  iv,  42.  kyng  to  Northampton,  and  declared  further,  that  the  lorde  Hast- 
ynges  his  maister  sent  him  worde  that  he  shoulde  feare  nothyng 
for  all  should  be  well.  (Wei  quod  the  archebishop)  be  it  as  wel  as  it  wyl,  it  will 
neuer  be  so  wel  as  we  haue  sene  it,  and  then  the  messenger  departed.  Wherupon 
the  bishop  called  vp  all  his  seruauntes  and  toke  writh  hym  the  great  seale  and, 
came  before  day  to  the  quene,  about  whom  he  found  much  heauynesse,  rumble, 
haste,  businesse,  conueighaunce  and  cariage  of  her  stuffe  into  sanctuarye.  .  .  The 
quene  sat  alone  belowe  on  the  rushes  all  desolate  &  dismayde,  who  the  Arche- 
bishoppe  conforted  in  the  best  maner  that  he  coulde,  shewyng  her  that  the  matter 
was  nothyng  so  sore  as  she  tooke  it  for,  and  that  he  was  putte  in  good  hope  and 
oute  of  feare  by  the  message  sent  to  hym  from  the  lorde  Hastynges.  A  wo  worth 
him,  quod  the  quene,  for  it  is  he  that  goeth  about  to  destroy  my  blodde.  Madame 
quod  he,  be  of  good  comforte  and  I  assure  you,  yf  they  crowne  any  other  kynge  then 
your  sonne  whom  they  nowe  haue,  we  shal  on  the  morow  croune  his  brother  whom 
you  haue  here  with  you.  And  here  is  the  great  seale,  which  in  lykewise  as  your 
noble  husband  deliuered  it  to  me,  so  I  deliuer  it  to  you  to  the  vse 
II,  iv,  80.  of  your  sonne  and  therwith  deliuered  her  the  greate  seale,  and  departed 
home  in  the  dawning  of  the  day.  .  .  . 

When  the  kynge  approched  nere  the  cytee,  Edmonde  Shawe  Goldesmythe 
then  Mayre  of  the  cytie  with  the  Aldermenne  and  shreues  in  skarlet, 
HI,  i,  23.  and  fyue  hundreth  commoners  in  murraye  receyued  his  grace  reuer- 
ently  at  Harnesay  Parke,  and  so  conueighed  him  to  the  cytee,  where 
he  entred  the  fourth  day  of  May,  in  the  fyrst  and  last  yere  of  his  reigne,  and  was 
lqdged  in  the  bishoppe  of  Londons  Palayce:  but  y®  duke  of  Gloucester  bare  him 
in  open  sight  so  reuerently,  saying  to  all  me  as  he  rode  behold  your  prince  and 
souereigne  lord,  and  made  such  sembleaunce  of  lowlynes  to  his 

III,  i,  5.  prince,  that  from  the  great  obloquy  that  he  was  in  so  late  before  he 
was  sodenly  fallen  in  so  great  trust  that  at  the  councel  next  assembled 
he  was  made  the  onely  chiefe  ruler,  and  thought  most  mete  to  be  protectoure  of  the 
king  and  his  realme :  so  that,  were  it  destiny  or  were  it  foly,  the  lambe  was  betaken 
to  the  wolfe  to  kepe.  At  whiche  councell  the  Archebishop  of  Yorke  was  sore  blamed 
for  deliueryng  the  great  seale  to  the  quene,  and  the  seale  taken  from  him  and 
deliuered  to  doctor  Ihon  Russel  bishop  of  Lyncolne,  a  wyse  ma  and  a  good  and  of 
much  experience,  and  diuerse  lordes  and  knyghtes  were  appointed  to  diuerse  roumes, 
the  Lord  Chamberlayne  and  some  other  kept  the  roumes  that  they  wer  in  before, 
but  not  many. 

Now  were  it  so  that  the  protectour  (which  alwayes  you  must  take  for  the  duke  of 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— HALL' S  CHRONICLE 


471 


Gloucester)  sore  thristed  for  the  acheuynge  of  his  pretensed  enterpryse  and  thought 
euery  daye  a  yere  tyll  it  were  perfourmed,  yet  durste  he  no  further  attempt  as  long 
as  he  had  but  half  his  pray  in  his  hand,  well  wittyng  that  yf  he  deposed  the  one 
brother,  all  the  realme  woulde  fall  to  the  other,  yf  he  remayned  either  in  sanctuarye 
or  shoulde  happely  be  shortly  conueighed  to  his  fathers  libertie.  Wherfore 
incontinent  at  the  next  metynge  of  the  lordes  in  councel  he  purposed 
to  them  that  it  was  an  heynous  thyng  of  the  quene,  and  procedyng  III,  i,  43. 
of  great  malice  toward  the  kynges  councelers  that  she  shoulde  kepe 
the  kynges  brother  in  sanctuarye  from  him  whose  speciall  pleasure  and  comfort 
were  to  haue  his  brother  with  him,  and  that  to  be  done  by  her  to  none  other  intent, 
but  to  brynge  all  the  lordes  in  an  obloquy  and  murmoure  of  the  people,  as  though 
they  were  not  to  be  trusted  with  the  kynges  brother,  whiche  lordes  wrere  by  the 
whole  assent  of  the  nobles  of  the  realme  appointed  as  the  kynges  nere  frendes  to  the 
tuycion  of  his  royall  person,  the  prosperitee  wherof  (quod  he)  standeth  not  alonely 
in  kepynge  from  enemies  and  euill  dyate,  but  partly  also  in  recreacion  and  & 
moderate  pleasure,  whiche  he  cannot  take  in  his  tendre  youth  in  the  compaignye  of 
old  and  auncient  persones,  but  in  the  familiar  conversacion  of  those  that  be  not 
far  vnder  nor  farre  aboue  his  age,  and  neuerthelesse,  of  estate  conueniente  to 
accompany  his  maiestie,  wherefore  with  whom  rather  then  with  his  owne  brother  ?. . . 
Wherfore  me  thinketh  it  were  not  y*  worst  to  send  to  the  quene  some  honourable 
and  trustie  personage,  such  as  tendreth  the  kings  weale  and  the  honour  of  his 
coucell,  and  is  also  in  credite  and  fauoure  with  her:  for  whiche  consideracions 
none  seemeth  more  metely  to  me  then  the  reuerend  father  my  lorde 
Cardinall  archebishop  of  Cauntorbury,  who  may  in  this  matter  III,  i,  45. 
do  most  good  of  all  men  yf  it  please  him  to  take  the  payne,  whiche 
I  doubt  not  of  his  goodnes  he  will  not  refuse  for  the  kings  sake  and  ours.  .  .  .  And 
yf  she  percase  be  so  obstinate  and  so  precisely  set  in  her  own  will  and  opinion, that 
neither  his  wyse  and  faithfull  aduertisemente  can  move  her  nor  any  mans  reason 
satisfye  her,  then  shall  we  by  myne  aduice  by  the  kynges  authorytee  fetch  hym 
out  of  that  prison  and  brynge  him  to  his  noble  presence,  in  whose 
continuall  compaignye  he  shalbee  so  well  cheryshed  and  so  honorably  III,  i,  47. 
intreated  that  all  the  worlde  shall  to  our  honour  and  her  reproche 
perceiue  that  it  was  onely  malice,  frowardnesse  and  foly,  that  caused  her  to  kepe 
him  there.  .  .  When  the  Protectoure  had  sayde,  all  the  councell  affirmed  that  the 
mocion  was  good  and  reasonable,  and  to  the  king  and  the  duke  his  brother  honour¬ 
able,  and  a  thyng  that  should  ceasse  great  murmoure  in  the  realme,  yf  the  mother 
might  by  good  meanes  be  induced  to  delyuer  him:  whiche  thing  the  Archebishop 
of  Cauntorburye,  whom  they  all  agreed  also  to  be  moost  conuenient  therunto, 
tooke  vpon  hym  to  moue  her,  and  therto  to  do  his  vttermooste  endeuoure.  Howbeit 
yf  she  coulde  in  no  wise  be  intreated  with  her  good  wyll  to  deliuer 
hym,  then  thought  he  and  such  of  the  spiritualitie  as  wer  present  III,  i,  49. 
that  it  were  not  in  any  wyse  too  bee  attempted  to  take  hym  out 
againste  her  wyll,  for  it  woulde  be  a  thyng  that  should  turne  to  the  grudge  of  all 
men  and  high  displeasure  of  God,  yf  the  pryuelege  of  that  place  should  be  broken 
whiche  had  so  many  yeres  beene  kept,  .  .  .  therefore  quod  the  Archebishop,  God 
forbid  that  any  manne  shoulde  for  any  yearthely  enterprise  breake 
the  immunitie  and  libertie  of  that  sacred  sanctuary  that  hath  bene  III,  i,  54. 
the  safegard  of  so  many  a  good  mans  life,  but  I  trust  quod  he,  we 
shall  not  nede  it,  but  for  any  maner  of  nede  I  would  we  should  not  do  it,  I  trust 


472 


APPENDIX 


that  she  with  reason  shalbe  contented  and  all  thing  in  good  maner  obteined.  And 
yf  it  hap  that  I  brynge  it  not  to  passe,  yet  shall  I  further  it  to  my  best  power,  so 
that  you  all  shal  perceyue  my  good  wyll  diligence,  and  indeuoure:  But  the  mothers 
dreade  and  womannishe  feare  shalbe  the  let  yf  any  be. 

Naye  womannishe  frowardnesse  quod  the  Duke  of  Buckyngham,  for  I  dare  take 
it  on  my  solle  that  she  well  knoweth  that  she  nedeth  no  such  thynge  to  feare,  either 
for  her  sonne  or  for  her  self.  ...  A  sanctuarye  euer  seruethe  too  de- 
III,  i,  59-66.  fende  the  body  of  that  manne  that  standeth  in  daunger  abrode,  not  of 
greate  hurte  onely,  but  of  lawfull  hurte:  for  againste  vnlawfull  hurtes 
and  harmes  no  pope  ner  kynge  entended  to  priuilege  any  one  place  wherein  it  is  law- 
full  to  doo  another  manne  wronge.  That  no  manne  vnlawfully  take  hurte  that  liber- 
tie  the  kynge,  the  lawe  and  verie  nature  forbiddeth  in  euery  place  and  maketh  too 
that  regard  for  euery  manne  euery  place  a  sanctuarye:  but  where  a  manne  is  by  law- 
full  means  in  perell,  there  nedeth  he  the  tuicion  of  some  speciall  priuilege,  whiche 
is  the  onely  ground  of  all  sanctuaries,  from  whiche  necessitee  this  noble  prince  is 
far,  whose  loue  to  his  kynge  nature  and  kynred  proueth,  whose  innocence  too  all 
the  worlde,  his  tender  youth  affirmeth,  and  so  sanctuarye  as  for  hym  is  not  necessary, 
ner  none  can  he  haue.  .  .  And  verely  I  haue  harde  of  sanctuarye 
III,  i,  67.  menne,  but  I  neuer  harde  before  of  sanctuary  children,  and  therefore 
as  for  the  conclusion  of  my  mynde,  whosoever  may  deserue  to  have 
nede  of  it,  if  they  thynke  it  for  their  suretee  let  them  kepe  it,  but  he  can  be  no 
sanctuary  manne  that  hath  nother  discrecion  to  desire  it,  ner  malice  to  deserue  it, 
whose  life  ner  libertie  can  by  no  lawfull  processe  stande  in  ieoperdye:  and  he  that 
taketh  one  out  of  sanctuary  to  do  hym  good  I  saie  plainly  he  breaketh  no  sanc¬ 
tuary.  .  .  .  To  auoyd  al  suspicion,  [the  Protectour]  caused  all  the 
III,  i,  200.  lordes  whiche  he  knewe  to  bee  faithfull  to  the  kyng  to  assemble  at 
Baynardes  castle  to  comen  of  the  coronacion,  whyle  he  and  other 
of  his  complices  &  of  his  affinitee  at  crosbies  places  contriued  the  contrary  and 
to  make  the  protectour  kyng:  to  which  counsail  there  were  adhibete  very  fewe, 
and  they  very  secrete.  Then  began  here  &  there  some  maner  of  mutterynge 
emongest  the  people,  as  though  all  thyng  should  not  long  be  well,  though  they 
wyst  not  what  they  feared  nor  wherfore:  were  it,  that  before  suche  greate 
thynges,  mennes  hertes  (of  a  secrete  instinct  of  nature)  misgiueth 

II,  iii,  48-51.  theim,  as  southwynde  sometyme  swelleth  of  hym  selfe  before  a 

tempeste,  or  were  it  that  some  one  manne  happely  somewhat  per- 
eauyng,  filled  many  men  with  suspicio  thoughe  he  shewed  fewe  menne  what  he 
knewe.  . . . 

Thus  many  thynges  comyng  together,  partly  by  chaunce  and  partly  by  purpose, 
caused  at  length  not  comon  people  onely,  whiche  wauer  with  the  wynde,  but  wyse 
men  also  and  some  lordes  to  marke  the  matter  and  muse  ther  vpon: 

III,  ii,  84, 85.  in  so  much  as  the  lorde  Stanley  whiche  afterwarde  was  erle  of  Derby 

wysely  mistrusted  it  and  saied  to  the  lord  Hastynges,  that  he  muche 
misliked  these  two  seuerall  counailes  [sic],  for  while  we  qd  he  talke  of  one  matter 
at  the  one  place,  litle  wote  we  whereof  they  talke  in  the  other:  peace  my  lorde  qd 
the  lorde  Hastynges,  on  my  lyfe  neuer  doubte  you,  for  while  one  man 
III,  ii,  25.  is  there,  which  is  neuer  thence,  neither  can  there  be  any  thing  once 
mynded  that  should  sounde  amisse  towarde  me,  but  it  should  be  in 
myne  eares  or  it  were  well  out  their  mouthes.  This  ment  he  by  Catesby  whiche 
was  nere  of  his  secrete  counsail,  and  whom  he  familierly  vsed  in  his  most  waightie 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— HALL'S  CHRONICLE 


473 


matters,  puttying  no  man  in  so  speciall  truste  as  him  reconyng  him  selfe  to  no  man 
so  liefe  sith  he  wiste  well  there  was  no  man  to  hym  so  much  beholdyng  as  was  this 
Catesby, which  was  a  man  wel  learned  in  the  lawes  of  this  lande,  and  by  the  speciall 
fauoure  of  the  lorde  Hastynges  in  good  aucthoritie  and  muche  rule  bare  in  the 
counties  of  Lecestre  &  Northampton  where  the  lorde  Hastynges  power  laye.  But 
surely  great  pitie  was  it  that  he  had  not  either  more  trueth  or  lesse  wit,  for  hys 
dissimulacion  onely,  kept  all  that  mischief  vp,  in  whom  if  the  lorde  Hastynges  had 
not  put  so  speciall  truste,  the  lorde  Stanley  and  he  with  diuerse  other  lordes  had 
departed  into  their  countrees  and  broken  all  the  daunce,  for  many  euill  signes  that 
he  sawe,  whiche  he  nowe  construed  all  for  the  beste,  so  surely  thought  he  that  there 
could  be  no  harme  towarde  hym  in  that  counsaill  entended  where  Catesbye  was. 
And  of  trueth  the  protectoure  and  the  duke  of  Bukyngham  made  very  good  sem- 
bleaunce  vnto  the  lordes  Hastynges  and  kept  hym  muche  in  their  compaignye. 
And  vndoubtedly,  the  protectour  loued  hym  well,  and  lothe  was  to 
haue  loste  him  sauyng  for  feare  leste  his  lyfe  should  haue  quayled  III,  i,  igo. 
their  purpose,  for  the  whiche  cause  he  moued  Catesby  to  proue  with 
some  wordes  cast  out  a  farre  of,  whether  he  could  thinke  it  possible  to  wynne  the 
lorde  Hastynges  to  their  parte.  But  Catesby,  whether  he  assayed  him  or  assayed 
him  not,  reported  vnto  hym  that  he  found  him  so  fast,  and  herde  him  speake  so 
terrible  wordes  that  he  durst  no  farther  breake:  and  of  a  truth  the  lord  Hastynges 
of  very  truste  shewed  vnto  Catesby  the  mistruste  that  other  began  to  haue  in  the 
matter.  And  therefore,  he  fearyng  leste  their  mocios  might  with  the  lord  Hastynges 
minishe  his  credence,  where  vnto  onely  all  the  matter  leaned,  procured  the  protectour 
hastely  to  ryd  hym  &  much  the  rather,  for  he  trusted  by  hys  death  to  obtayne  muche 
of  the  rule  whiche  the  lord  Hastynges  bare  in  hys  countree,  the  onely  desyre  whereof, 
was  the  thyng  that  enduced  him  to  be  procurer  and  one  of  the  speciallest  contriuers 
of  all  thys  horrible  treason.  Where  vpon  the  lorde  protectour  caused  a  counsaill 
to  be  set  at  the  tower  on  the  fridaye  the  thirtene  daye  of  Iune,  where  was  muche 
commonyng  for  the  honourable  solemnitee  of  the  coronacion,  of  the  whiche  the  tyme 
appoincted  aproched  so  nere,  that  the  pageauntes  were  a  makyng  daye  &  night 
at  Westminster,  and  vitaile  killed  whiche  afterwarde  was  cast  awaye. 

These  lordes  thus  sittyng  comonyng  of  this  matter,  the  protectour  came  in 
emong  theim  about  nyne  of  the  clocke  salutyng  theim  curteously, 
excusyng  him  self  that  he  had  been  from  theim  so  long  saiyng  merely  III,  iv. 
that  he  had  been  a  sleper  that  daye.  And  after  a  litle  talkyng  with 
them  he  sayed  to  the  bishopp  of  Ely,  my  lorde  you  haue  verye  good  strawberies 
in  youre  garden  at  Holborne,  I  require  you  let  vs  haue  a  messe  of 
theim.  Gladly  (my  lord  qd  he)  I  would  I  had  some  better  thing  III,  iv,  28. 
as  redy  to  your  pleasure  as  that,  and  with  that  in  all  hast  he  sente  his  III,  iv,  37. 
seruaunt  for  a  dishe  of  strawberies.  The  protectour  set  the  lordes  faste 
in  comonyng  and  there  vpon  prayed  theim  to  spare  him  alitle,  and  so  he  departed 
and  came  agayn  betwene  .x.  and  eleuen  of  the  clocke  into  the  chambre 
all  chaunged  with  a  sowre  angry  countenaunce  knittyng  the  browes,  III,  iv,  67. 
frownyng  and  fretyng  and  gnawyng  on  his  lips  and  so  set  hym  doune 
in  his  place.  All  the  lordes  were  dismaied  and  sore  marueyled  of  this  maner  and 
sodeyne  chaunge  and  what  thyng  should  hym  ayle.  When  he  had 
sitten  a  whyle,  thus  he  began:  What  were  they  worthy  to  haue  that  III,  iv,  70. 
copasse  and  ymagine  the  destruccion  of  me  beyng  so  neare  of  bloud 
to  the  kyng  &  protectoure  of  this  his  royall  realme:  At  which  question,  all  the 


474 


APPENDIX 


lordes  sate  sore  astonyed,  musyng  muche  by  whom  the  question  should  be  ment, 
of  which  euery  man  knew  him  self  clere. 

Then  the  lorde  Hastynges  as  he  that  for  the  familiaritie  that  was  betwene  theim, 
thought  he  might  be  boldest  with  him,  aunswered  and  sayd  that  they 
III,  iv,  72.  were  worthy  to  be  punished  as  heynous  traytours  what  soeuer  they 
were,  and  all  the  other  affirmed  the  same,  that  is  (qd  he)  yonder 
sorceres  my  brothers  wife  and  other  with  her,  menying  the  quene,  at  these  woordes 
many  of  the  lordes  were  sore  abashed  whiche  fauoured  her,  but  the  lorde  Hastynges 
was  better  content  in  hys  mynde  that  it  was  moued  by  her  then  by  any  other  that 
he  loued  better,  albeit  hys  hart  grudged  that  he  was  not  afore  made  of  counsail  of 
this  matter  as  well  as  he  was  of  the  takyng  of  her  kynred  and  of  their  puttyng  to 
death,  whiche  were  by  hys  assent  before  deuysed  to  be  beheaded  at  Pomfrete,  this 
selfe  same  daye,  in  the  whiche  he  was  not  ware  that  it  was  by  other  deuised  that  he 
hym  selfe  should  the  same  daye  be  beheaded  at  London:  then  sayed  the  protectour 
in  what  wyse  that  sorceresse  and  other  of  her  counsayle,  as  Shores 
III,  iv,  76.  wyfe  with  her  affinitie  haue  by  their  sorcery  and  witchecrafte  this 
wasted  my  body,  and  therwith  plucked  vp  his  doublet  sleue  to  his 
elbowe  on  hys  lefte  arme,  where  he  shewed  a  weryshe  wythered  arme  &  small  as 
it  was  neuer  other.  And  therupon,  euery  mannes  mynde  mysgaue  theim,  well 
perceyuyng  that  this  matter  was  but  a  quarell,  for  well  they  wist  that  the  quene  was 
both  to  wyse  to  go  about  any  such  folye,  &  also  if  she  would,  yet  would  she  of  all 
folke  make  Shores  wyfe  least  of  her  counsaile  whom  of  all  women  she  most  hated 
as  that  cbcubine  whom  the  kyng  her  husband  most  loued. 

Also,  there  was  no  manne  there  but  knewe  that  hys  arme  was  euer  such  sith  the 
day  of  his  birth.  Neuerthelesse  the  lorde  Hastynges,  which  from  the  death  of  kyng 
Edward  kept  Shores  wife,  whom  he  somwhat  doted  in  the  kynges  lyfe,  sauyng  it  is 
sayed  that  he  forbare  her  for  reuerence  towarde  his  kyng,  or  els  of  a  certayne  kynde 
of  fidelitie  towarde  his  frend.  Yet  nowe  his  hart  somewhat  grudged  to  haue  her 
whom  he  loued  so  highly  accused,  and  that  as  he  knewe  well  vntruely,  therefore 
he  aunswered  and  sayed,  certaynly  my  lorde,  yf  they  haue  so  done, 
III,  iv,  82.  they  be  worthy  of  heynous  punishement,  what  qd  the  protectour,  thou 
seruest  me  I  wene  with  yf  and  with  and,  I  tell  the  they  haue  done  it, 
and  that  wyll  I  make  good  on  thy  bodye  traytour.  And  therewith  (as  in  a  great 
anger)  he  clapped  his  fyste  on  the  borde  a  great  rappe,  at  which  token  geue,  one 
cried  treason  without  the  chamber,  and  therwith  a  doore  clapped,  and  in  came 
rushyng  men  in  harneyes  as  many  as  the  chamber  could  hold.  And  anone  the 
protectoure  sayed  to  the  lorde  Hastynges,  I  arrest  the  traytoure,  what  me  my  lord 
qd  he:  yea  the  traytoure  qd  the  protectour.  And  one  let  flye  at  the  lorde  Stanley, 
which  shroncke  at  the  stroacke  and  fell  vnder  the  table,  or  els  hys  head  had  bene 
cleft  to  the  teth,  for  as  shortly  as  he  shrancke,  yet  ranne  the  blood  aboute  his  eares. 
Then  was  the  Archebishop  of  Yorke  and  doctour  Morton  bishopp  of  Ely  &  the 
lorde  Stanley  taken  and  diuers  other  whiche  were  bestowed  in  dyuers  chambers, 
saue  the  lorde  Hastynges  (whom  the  protectour  comaunded  to  spede  and  shryue 
him  apace)  for  by  sainct  Poule  (qd  he)  I  wyll  not  dyne  tyll  I  se  thy 
III,  iv,  85.  head  of,  it  boted  hym  not  to  aske  why,  but  heuily  he  toke  a  priest 
at  auenture  and  made  a  shorte  shrift,  for  a  lenger  woulde  not  be 
suffered,  the  protectour  made  so  much  hast  to  his  dyner,  which  might  not  go  to  it 
tyll  this  murther  were  done,  for  sauyng  of  hys  vngracious  othe.  So  was  he  brought 
furthe  into  the  grene  besyde  the  chapel  within  the  towre,  and  his  head  layed  doune 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— HALL S  CHRONICLE 


475 


on  a  logge  of  tymber  that  lay  there  for  buildyng  of  the  chapel,  &  there  tyrannously 
striken  of,  and  after  his  body  and  head  wer  enterred  at  Wyndesore  by  his  maister 
kyng  Edward  the  forth,  whose  soules  Iesu  pardon.  Amen. 

A  merueilous  case  it  is  to  heare,  either  the  warnynges  that  he  should  haue  voyded, 
or  the  tokens  of  that  he  could  not  voyde.  For  the  next  night  before  his  death,  the 
lorde  Stanley  sent  to  him  a  trusty  messenger  at  midnight  in  all  the 
haste,  requiryng  hym  to  ryse  and  ryde  awaye  with  hym,  for  he  was  dis-  III,  ii,  5. 
posed  vtterly  no  lenger  for  to  abyde,  for  he  had  a  fearfull  deame  in  the 
whiche  he  thought  that  a  bore  with  his  tuskes  so  rased  them  bothe  by  the  heades 
that  the  bloud  ran  aboute  bothe  their  shoulders,  and  for  asmuch  as  the  protectour 
gaue  the  bore  for  his  cognisaunce,  he  ymagined  that  it  should  be  he.  This  dreame 
made  suche  a  fearfull  impression  in  hys  harte,  that  he  was  throughly  determyned 
no  lenger  to  tary  but  had  his  horse  redy,  yf  the  lorde  Hastynges  would  go  with  him. 
So  that  they  would  ryde  so  farre  that  night,  that  they  should  be  out  of  daunger 
by  the  next  day.  A  good  lord  (qd  the  lord  Hastynges)  to  the  mes¬ 
senger,  leaneth  my  lorde  thy  maister  so  much  to  suche  tryfles,  and  III,  ii,  30. 
hath  suche  faithe  in  dreames,  whiche  either  his  awne  feare  phantasieth, 
or  do  ryse  in  the  nightes  rest  by  reason  of  the  dayes  thought.  Tell  him  it  is  playne 
wichcraft  to  beleue  in  such  dreames,  which  if  they  were  tokens  of  thinges  to  come, 
why  thynketh  he  not  that  we  might  as  likely  make  theim  true  by  oure  goyng  yf  we 
were  caught  and  brought  backe,  (as  frendes  fayle  fliers)  for  then  had  the  bore  a 
cause  lykely  to  race  vs  with  his  tuskes,  as  folkes  that  fled  for  some  falshead,  where¬ 
fore  either  is  there  peryll,  nor  none  there  is  deede  [«'c],  or  if  any  be,  it  is  rather  in 
goyng  then  abidyng.  And  if  we  should  nedes  fall  in  peril  one  way  or  other,  yet 
had  I  leauer  that  me  should  se  it  were  by  other  mes  falshed,  then  thynke  it  wrere 
either  our  awne  faute  or  faynte  feble  hart,  and  therefore  go  to  thy  maister  and 
comende  me  to  him,  &  saye  that  I  praye  him  to  be  mery  &  haue  no  feare,  for  I 
assure  hym,  I  am  assured  of  the  man  he  wotteth  of,  as  I  am  sure  of  myne  awne  hand. 
God  send  grace  (qd  the  messenger)  and  so  departed.  Certeyn  it  is  also  that  in 
redyng  toward  the  towre  the  same  mornyng  in  whiche  he  was  beheaded,  hys  horsse 
that  he  accustomed  to  ryde  on  stombled  with  him  twyse  or  thryse 
almost  to  the  fallyng,  which  thyng  although  it  happeth  to  them  dayly  III,  iv,  95. 
to  whom  no  mischauce  is  towarde,  yet  hath  it  bene  as  an  olde  euyll 
token  obserued  as  a  goyng  toward  mischiefe.  Now  this  that  foloweth  was  no 

warning  but  an  enuious  scorne,  the  same  morning  ere  he  were  vp  from  his  bed 

where  Shores  wife  lay  with  him  all  night,  there  came  to  him  sir  Thomas  Haward 
sonne  to  the  lorde  Haward  (whiche  lord  was  one  of  the  priueyest  of  the  lord  pro¬ 
tectors  counsaill  and  dooyng)  as  it  were  of  curtesye  to  accompaignie  hym  to  the 
counsaile,  but  of  truthe  sent  by  the  lorde  protectour  to  hast  hym  thitherward. 

This  sir  Thomas,  while  the  lord  Hastynges  stayed  awhile  commonyng  with  a 
priest  who  he  met  in  the  Towrstrete,  brake  the  lordes  tale,  saiyng  to  him  merely, 

what  my  lord  I  pray  you  come  on,  wherfore  talke  you  so  long 

with  that  priest,  you  haue  no  nede  of  a  priest  yet,  &  laughed  III,  ii,  128. 

vpon  hym,  as  though  he  would  saye,  you  shall  haue  nede  of 

one  sone:  But  lytle  wyst  the  other  what  he  ment  (but  or  night  these  wordes 

were  well  remebred  by  them  that  hard  them)  so  the  true  lord 

Hastynges  litle  mistrusted,  &  was  neuer  merier,  nor  thought  his  III,  ii,  90. 
life  in  more  suertie  in  al  hys  dayes,  which  thyng  is  often  a  signe  of 
chauge:  but  I  shall  rather  let  any  thyng  passe  me  then  the  vayne  surety  of 


476 


APPENDIX 


mans  mynde  so  neare  his  death,  for  vpo  the  very  towre  wharffe,  so  neare  the  place 
where  his  head  was  of,  so  sone  after,  as  a  ma  might  wel  cast  a  balle,  a  pursyuaut 
of  his  awne  called  Hastynges  mette  with  hym,  &  of  their  metyng  in 
HI,  ii,  that  place  he  was  put  in  remebraunce  of  another  tyme,  in  which  it 
104  1 14.  happened  them  to  mete  before  together  in  the  place,  at  which  tyme 
the  lorde  Hastynges  had  bene  accused  to  l:yng  Edward  by  the  lord  Ryuers  the 
quenes  brother,  insomuche  that  he  was  for  a  while  which  lasted  not  long  highly  in 
the  kynges  indignacion  as  he  now  mette  the  same  pursiuaut  in  the  same  place,  the 
ieoperdy  so  well  passed,  it  gaue  him  great  pleasure  t<  talke  with  him  therof,  with 
whom  he  had  talked  in  the  same  place  of  that  matter,  &  therfore  he  sayed,  Ah 
Hastynges,  art  thou  remebred  when  I  mette  the  here  once  with  an  heauy  hart: 
Ye  my  lorde  (qd  he)  that  I  remembre  well,  and  thaked  be  to  God  they  gat  no  good 
ner  you  no  harme  therby,  thou  wouldest  saye  so  (qd  he)  yf  thou  knewest  so  muche 
as  I  do,  whiche  few  knowe  yet,  &  mo  shall  shortly,  that  meant  he  that  therle  Ryuers 
and  the  lord  Richard  &  sir  Thomas  Vaughan  should  that  day  be  beheaded  at 
Pomfrete,  as  thei  were  in  dede,  which  acte  he  wist  wel  should  be  done,  but  nothyng 
ware  that  the  axe  hong  so  nere  his  awne  head.  In  faith  ma  (qd  he)  I  was  neuer 
so  sory  ner  neuer  stode  in  so  greate  daunger  of  my  lyfe  as  I  dyd  when 
III,  ii,  109.  thou  and  I  mette  here,  and  lo  the  worlde  is  turned  nowe,  nowe  stand 
myne  enemies  in  the  daunger  as  thou  maist  happe  to  hear  more  here¬ 
after,  and  I  neuer  in  my  lyfe  merier  nor  neuer  in  so  great  surety,  I  praye  God  it 
proue  so  (qd  Hastynges,  proue  qd  he:  doubtest  thou  that)  nay  nay  I  warraunt  the, 
and  so  in  maner  displeased  he  entered  into  the  Towre,  where  he  was  not  long  on 
lyue  as  you  haue  heard.  .  . 

Nowe  flewe  the  fame  of  thys  lordes  death  through  the  cytie  and  farther  about, 
lyke  a  wynde  in  euery  mans  eare,  but  the  Protectoure  immediately  after  dyner 
(entending  to  set  some  colour  vpo  the  matter)  sent  in  all  the  haste  for  many  substan- 
cial  men  out  of  the  cytie  into  the  Towre,  and  at  their  comyng  him  selfe  with  the 
duke  of  Buckyngham  stode,  harnessed  in  olde  euill  fauored  briganders, 
III,  v,  I.  such  as  no  ma  would  wene  that  they  would  haue  vouchesafed  to 
haue  put  on  their  backes,  excepte  some  sodeyne  necessitie  had  con- 
straigned  them.  Then  the  lord  protector  shewed  them,  that  the  lord  Hastynges 
&  other  of  his  conspiracy  had  contriued  to  haue  sodeynly  destroyed 
III,  v,  40.  hym  and  the  duke  of  Buckyngham  there  the  same  daie  in  counsail, 
and  what  they  entended  farther,  was  not  yet  well  knowen,  of  whiche 
their  treason  he  had  neuer  knowledge  before  x.  of  the  clocke  the  same  forenone, 
which  sodeyn  feare  draue  them  to  put  on  suche  harnesse  as  came  nexte  to  their 
handes  for  their  defence,  and  so  God  holpe  them,  that  the  mischiefe  turned  vpon 
them  that  woulde  haue  done  it,  &  thus  he  required  them  to  report.  Euery  man 
answered  fayre,  as  though  no  man  mistrusted  the  matter,  which  of  trueth  no  ma 
beleued.  Yet  for  the  further  appeasyng  of  the  peoples  myndes,  he  sent  immediatly 
after  dynner  an  Heralde  of  armes  with  a  proclamacion  through  the 
III,  vi,  1.  cytie  of  London  which  was  proclaymed  in  the  kynges  name,  that 
the  lord  Hastynges  with  diuers  other  of  his  trayterous  purpose  had 
before  conspired,  the  same  daye  to  haue  slayne  the  protectour  and  the  duke  of 
Buckyngham  sittyng  in  counsaill,  &  after  to  haue  taken  vpon  them  the  rule  of  the 
kyng  and  the  realme  at  their  pleasure,  and  thereby  to  pill  and  spoyle  whom  they 
lyst  vncomptrolled,  &  muche  matter  was  deuised  in  the  same  proclamacion  to  the 
slaunder  of  the  lord  Hastynges,  as  that  he  was  an  euyll  counsailoure  to  the  kynges 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— HALL S  CHRONICLE 


4  77 


father,  entisyng  hym  to  many  thynges  highly  redoundyng  to  the  diminishvng  of 
his  honoure  and  to  the  vniuersall  hurte  of  his  realme  by  his  euyll  compaignie  and 
sinister  procuryng  and  vngracious  example,  aswell  in  many  other  thynges  as  in 
vicious  liuyng  and  inordinate  abusyon  of  his  body,  bothe  with  many  other  and 
especiall  with  Shores  wyfe  whiche  was  one  of  his  secrete  counsaill  of  this  heynous 
treason,  with  whom  he  laye  nightly,  and  namely  the  night  passed  next  before  his 
death,  so  that  it  was  the  lesse  marueill  yf  vngracious  liuynge  brought  hym  to  an 
vnhappy  ende,  whiche  he  was  now  put  to  by  the  comaundemet  of  the  kyng  his 
highnes  and  of  his  honorable  and  faithfull  counsaile,  bothe  for  his  demerites  beynge 
so  openly  taken  in  his  false  cotriued  treason,  and  also  least  the  delaiyng  of  his 
execucion  might  haue  encoraged  other  mischieuous  persons  parteners  of  hys  con- 
spiracye,  to  gather  and  assemble  them  selues  together  in  makyng  so  great  commocion 
for  hys  deliueraunce,  whose  hope  nowe  beyng  by  his  well  deserued  death  polly- 
tickely  repressed,  all  the  realme  shall  by  Goddes  grace  rest  in  good 
quyet  and  peace.  Nowe  was  thys  proclamacion  made  within  twoo  III,  vi,  5. 
houres  after  he  was  beheaded,  and  it  was  so  curiously  endyted  and  so 
fayre  writen  in  Parchement  in  a  fayre  sette  hande,  and  therewith  of  it  selfe  so  long 
a  processe,  that  euery  chyld  might  perceyue  that  it  was  prepared  and  studyed  before 
(and  as  some  men  thought,  by  Catesby)  for  all  the  tyme  betwene  hys  death  and  the 
proclamacion  proclaimyng,  coulde  skant  haue  suffyced  vnto  the  bare 
wrytyng  alone,  albeit  that  it  had  bene  in  paper  and  scribeled  furthe  III,  vi,  9. 
in  haste  at  aduenture.  So  that  vpon  the  proclaimyng  thereof,  one 
that  was  scolemayster  at  Paules  standyng  by  and  comparyng  the  shortenesse  of 
the  tyme  with  the  length  of  the  matter  sayed  to  theim  that  stoode  aboute  hym, here 
is  a  gaye  goodly  cast,  foule  cast  awaye  for  hast.  .  . 

Now  was  it  deuised  by  the  protectoure  &  his  counsaile,  that  the  same  day  y* 
the  lord  Chamberlayne  was  headed  in  the  towre  of  London  and  about 
the  same  houre  should  be  beheaded  at  Poumfrete  the  earle  Ryuers  III,  iii,  2. 
and  the  lorde  Richarde  the  quenes  sonne,  syr  Thomas  Vaughan  and 
sir  Richard  Haute,  whiche  as  you  heard  were  taken  at  Northampton  and  Stony 
Stratford  by  the  consent  of  the  lord  Hastynges,  whiche  execution  was  done  by  the 
ordre  &  in  the  presence  of  sir  Richard  Ratclif  knight,  whose  seruice  the  protectoure 
specially  vsed  in  the  counsail,  and  in  the  execution  of  suche  lawlesse  enterprises, 
as  a  man  that  had  bene  longe  secrete  with  hym,  hauyng  experiece  of  the  world  & 
shrewed  wytte,  shorte  and  rude  in  speche,  rough  and  boysterous  of  behauour,  bold 
in  mischiefe,  as  farre  from  pytie  as  from  all  feare  of  God. 

This  knight  brought  these  foure  persons  to  the  scaffolde  at  the  daye  apoincted, 
&  shewed  to  all  the  people  that  they  were  traitours,  not  sufferyng  the  lordes  to  speake, 
&  to  declare  their  innocecy,  least  their  wordes  might  haue  enclined  men  to  pytie 
them  and  to  hate  the  protectour  &  his  part  &  so  without  iudgmet  &  processe  of  the 
lawe  caused  them  to  be  beheaded  without  other  yearthly  gylt,  but  onely  y*  they 
were  good  me  and  true  to  the  kyng  &  to  nye  to  the  quene,  insomuch  as  sir  Thomas 
Vaughan  guyng  to  his  death  sayed,  A  wo  worthe  them  y*  toke  the  prophesie  that 
G.  should  destroy  kyng  Edwardes  childre,  meanyng  y*  by  the  duke  of  Clarece 
lord  George  which  for  y'  suspicion  is  now  dead,  but  now  remaineth  Richard  G. 
duke  of  Gloucester,  which  now  I  se  is  he  yt  shall  and  will  accoplishe 
the  prophesie  &  destroye  kynge  Edwardes  children  &  all  their  alyes  III,  iii,  28. 
&  fredes,  as  it  appereth  by  vs  this  day,  who  I  appele  to  the  high 
tribunal  of  God  for  his  wrongful  murther  &  our  true  innocencye.  And  then 


473 


APPENDIX 


Ratcliffe  sayed,  you  haue  well  apeled,  lay  doune  youre  head,  ye  qd  syr  Thomas, 
I  dye  in  right,  beware  you  dye  not  in  wrong,  and  so  that  good  knight  was  beheaded 
and  the  other  three,  and  buryed  naked  in  the  monastery  at  Poumfret. 

When  the  lord  Hastynges  and  these  other  lordes  and  knightes  were  thus  beheaded 
and  ryd  out  of  the  waye,  then  the  protectour  caused  it  to  be  proclaymed  that  the 
coronacion  for  diuers  great  and  vrgent  causes  should  be  deferred  till  the  seconde  daye 
of  Nouember,  for  then  thought  he,  that  whyle  men  mused  what  the  matter  meant, 
and  while  the  lordes  of  the  realme  were  about  him,  out  of  their  awne  strengthes, 
and  whyle  no  man  wyste  what  to  thynke  nor  whom  to  truste,  or  euer  they  should 
haue  tyme  and  space  to  digest  the  matter,  and  make  partes,  it  were  best  hastely  to 
pursue  his  purpose  and  put  hym  self  in  possession  of  the  croune,  or  menne  could 
haue  tyme  to  deuyse  any  wyse  to  resyste.  But  nowe  was  all  the  study,  this  matter 
beyng  of  it  selfe  so  heynous  might  be  first  broken  to  the  people  in  suche  wyse  as  it 
might  well  be  taken.  To  this  counsaile  they  toke  diuerse  such  as  they  thought 
mete  to  be  trusted  and  likely  to  be  enduced  to  that  parte  and  hable  to  stand  theim  in 
steade,  eyther  by  powre  or  by  polycye.  Emong  whom,  they  made  a  counsaile, 
Edmond  Shaa  then  Mayre  of  London,  whiche  vpon  truste  of  hys  awne  auaunce- 
ment,  where  he  was  of  a  proude  harte  highly  desirous,  toke  on  him  to  frame  the 
cytie  to  their  appetite.  Of  spirituall  men  they  toke  suche  as  had  wytte,  and  were 
in  aucthority  emongest  the  people  for  opinion  of  their  learnyng,  and  had  no  scrupu¬ 
lous  conscience.  Emongest  these  had,  they  toke  Raffe  Shaa  clearke 
III,  v,  no.  brother  to  the  Mayre,  &  Freer,  Pynkie  prouinciall  of  the  Augustine 
Freer s,  bothe  doctours  in  diuinitie,  bothe  great  preachers,  bothe  of 
more  learnyng  than  vertue,  of  more  fame  then  learnyng,  &  yet  of  more  learnyng 
then  trueth.  For  they  were  before  greatly  esteemed  emong  the  people,  but  after 
that,  neuer  none  of  these  two  were  regarded.  Shaa  made  a  sermonde  in  prayse 
of  the  Protectour  before  the  coronacion,  and  Pynkye  made  one  after  the  coronacion, 
bothe  so  full  of  tedious  flattery,  that  no  good  mans  cares  coulde  abyde  them,  Pynkye 
in  his  sermonde  so  loste  his  voyce  that  he  was  fayne  to  leaue  of  and  come  doune  in 
the  middest,  Doctoure  Shaa  by  his  sermonde  loste  his  honesty,  and  sone  after  his 
lyfe,  for  very  shame  of  the  worlde,  into  the  whiche  he  durst  neuer  after  so  muche 
come  abroade,  but  the  Freer  forced  for  no  shame,  and  so  it  harmed  hym  the  lesse. 
Howbeit,  some  doubt  and  many  thynke  that  Pynkey  was  not  of  counsaill  before  the 
coronacion,  but  after  the  common  maner  fell  to  flattery  after,  namely  because  his 
sermond  was  not  incontinent  vpon  it,  but  at  sainct  Mary  Spittle  the  Easter  after. 
But  certayne  it  is  that  doctour  Shaa  was  of  cousail  in  the  beginnyng,  in  so  much 
that  they  determyned  that  he  should  fyrst  breake  the  matter  in  a  sermond  at  Poules 
crosse,  in  whiche  he  should  by  the  aucthoritie  of  hys  preachyng  induce  the  people 
to  encline  to  y*  protectours  ghostly  purpose.  But  now  was  all  the  laboure  and  study 
in  the  deuise  of  some  conuenient  pretexte,  for  which  the  people  should  be  content 
to  depose  the  prince  &  accept  the  protectour  for  kyng.  In  which  diuerse  thinges 
they  deuised,  but  the  chief  thyng,  &  the  weight  of  all  that  inuencion 
III,  v,  81.  rested  in  this,  that  they  shoulde  allege  bastardy  in  kyng  Edwarde 
hym  selfe,  or  in  his  chyldren,  or  bothe,  so  that  he  should  seme  disabled 
to  enherite  the  croune  by  the  duke  of  Yorke  and  the  prince  by  him.  To  lay  bastardy 
in  kyng  Edward  sounded  openly  to  the  rebuke  of  the  protectours 
III,  v,  91.  awne  mother,  whiche  was  mother  to  them  bothe.  For  in  that  poinct 
could  be  none  other  coloure,  but  to  pretende  that  his  awne  mother  was 
an  auoutresse,  but  neuerthelesse  he  would  that  poinct  should  be  lesse  and  more 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— HALL S  CHRONICLE 


479 


I.  iii. 
136-139- 


fynely  &  closely  handled,  not  euen  fully  playne  and  directely,  but  touched  a  slope 
craftly,  as  though  men  spared  in  that  poinct  to  speake  all  the  trueth  for  feare  of  his 
displeasure.  But  that  other  poincte  concernyng  the  basterdy  they  deuised  to 
surmysse  in  kyng  Edward  his  chyldren,  that  would  he  should  be  openly  declared 
and  enforced  to  the  vttermost. 

After  kyng  Edwarde  the  fourthe  had  deposed  kyng  Henry  the  sixte  and  was  in 
peaceable  possession  of  the  realme,  determinyng  him  selfe  to  mary  (as  was  requisite) 
bothe  for  hym  selfe  and  for  the  realme,  he  sente  therle  of  Warwike  &  diuerse  other 
noble  men  in  ambassade  to  the  Frenche  kyng  to  entreate  a  mariage  betwenfe  the 
kyng  and  Bona  sister  to  the  Frenche  quene,  then  beyng  in  Fraunce. 

In  which  thyng  therle  of  Warwike  founde  the  parties  so  towarde  and  III,  vii,  7. 
willyng,  that  he  spedely  without  any  difficultie  accordyng  to  his 
instruccions  brought  the  matter  to  a  good  conclusion.  Nowe  happeneth  it  in  the 
meane  season,  there  came  to  make  a  sute  to  the  kyng  by  peticion  dame  Elizabeth 
Grey  (whiche  after  was  his  quene)  then  a  widdowe  borne  of  noble 
bloude,  specially  by  her  mother,  which  was  Duchesse  of  Bedforde,  I,  i,  71. 
and  she  was  maried  to  sir  Richarde  Wooduile  lorde  Riuers,  her 
father.  Howbeat,  this  Elizabeth  beyng  in  seruice  with  quene  Margaret  wife  to 
kyng  Henry  the  sixte, was  maried  to  one  Ihon  Grey  Esquire  whom  kyng  Henry  made 
knight  at  the  laste  battaill  of  sainet  Albones,  but  litle  while  he  enioyed 
his  knighthod,  for  at  the  same  feld  he  was  slain.  .  .  The  duchesse 
[of  York]  deuised  to  disturbe  this  mariage,  and  rather  to  helpe  that 
he  should  mary  one  dame  Elizabet  Lucy,  whom  the  kynge  not  longe  before 
had  gotten  with  chylde,  wherfore  the  kynge  his  mother  obiected  openly  againste 
this  mariage  (as  it  were  in  discharge  of  her  connscience)  that  the  kyng  was  sure 
to  dame  Elizabeth  Lucy  and  her  husband  and  before  God,  by  reason 
of  whiche  wordes  suche  obstacle  was  made  in  that  matter,  that  III,  vii,  6. 
either  the  bishoppe  durste  not,  or  the  kyng  would  not  proceade  to 
the  solemnisacion  of  the  mariage  til  his  fame  were  clerely  purged,  and  the  truth 
well  and  opely  testified.  Where  vpon  dame  Elizabeth  Lucye  was  sente  for,  and 
albeit  she  was  by  the  kyng  his  mother  and  many  other  put  in  good  comfort  to 
affirme  that  she  was  assured  to  the  kynge,  yet  when  she  was  solemply  sworne  to 
saie  the  truth,  she  confessed  she  was  neuer  ensured.  Howbeit  she  saied,  his  grace 
spake  suche  louynge  woordes  to  her,  that  she  verely  hoped  that  he  would  haue 
maried  her.  .  .  .  This  examincion  solemply  taken,  it  was  clerely  proued  that 
there  was  no  impediment  to  let  the  king  to  mary,  wherfore,  he  shortely  after  at 
Grafton  beside  Stonystratforde  maried  the  lady  Elizabeth  Grey  verie  priuely.  . .  . 

Nowe  to  returne  where  I  left,  as  I  beganne  to  shewe  you,  it  was  by  the  protector 
and  his  counsaill  concluded  that  this  doctor  Shaa  should  in  a  sermon  at  Paules 
crosse  signifie  to  the  people  that  neither  king  Edwarde  hym  selfe  nor  the  duke  of 
Clarence  were  lawefully  begotten,  nor  wer  the  very  children  of  the  duke  of  Yorke, 
but  begotten  vnlawefully  by  other  persones  by  aduoutry  of  the  duches  their  mother. 
And  that  dame  Elizabeth  Lucy  was  the  very  wife  of  king  Edward,  and  so  prince 
Edward  and  all  the  children  begotten  on  the  quene  wer  bastardes.  And  accordyng 
to  this  deuise,  doctor  Sha  the  sondaie  after  at  Paules  crosse  in  a  greate  audience 
(as  alwaie  a  great  numbre  assembled  to  his  preaching)  came  into  the  pulpit  takyng 
for  his  Theme,  Spuria  vitulamina  no  dabunt  radices  altos.  Sapien.  iiii.  that  is  to 
saie  bastarde  slippes  shall  neuer  take  depe  rootes:  wherupon  when  he  had  shewed 
the  great  grace  that  God  geueth  &  secretely  infoundeth  in  right  generacion  after 


480 


APPENDIX 


y*  lawes  of  matrimony,  then  declared  he  that  those  children  comenly  lacked  y®  grace 
(  &  for  the  punishment  of  their  parentes)  were  for  y®  most  part  vnhappy  which  wer 
gotten  in  baste,  and  especially  in  aduoutry,  of  which  (though  some  by  the  ignorauncie 
of  the  worlde  and  the  truthe  hid  from  knowlege)  haue  enherited  for  a  season  other 
mennes  landes,  yet  God  alwaie  so  prouideth  that  it  continueth  not  in  their  bloude 
longe,  but  the  truethe  commynge  to  lighte  the  rightefull  enheritoures  be  restored, 
and  the  bastard  slippes  plucked  vp  or  it  can  be  rooted  depe.  And  when  he  had 
laied  for  the  proofe  and  confirmacion  of  this  sentence,  examples  taken  out  of  the 
olde  testamente  and  other  aunciente  histories,  then  began  he  to  discend  to  the 
praise  of  the  lord  Richard  duke  of  Yorke,  callyng  him  father  to  the  protectour  and 
declared  his  title  to  the  croune  bi  inheritaunce  and  also  by  entaile  authorised  by 
parliament  after  y*  death  of  kynge  Henry  the  sixte.  Then  shewed  he  that  the 
lorde  protector,  was  onely  the  righte  heire,  of  his  body  lawfully  begotten.  Then 
declared  he  that  kyng  Edward  was  neuer  lawfully  maried  to  y®  quene,  but  his 
wife  before  God  was  dame  Elizabeth  Lucy,  and  so  his  children  wer  bastardes. 
And  beside  that,  neither  kyng  Edward  hym  selfe  nor  the  duke  of  Clarence  (emongest 
them  that  wer  secrete  in  the  duke  of  Yorkes  houshoulde)  were  neuer  reconed  surely 
to  be  the  children  of  the  noble  duke  as  those  that  by  their  fauoures  more  resembled 
other  knowen  menne  then  hym,  from  whose  verteous  condicions  he  saied  also, 
that  king  Edwarde  was  far  of.  But  the  lord  protector  (quod  he) 
III,  vii,  13.  that  veraye  noble  prince,  the  speciall  patrone  of  knightly  prowes, 
aswell  in  all  princely  behaueour  as  in  the  liniamentes  and  fauour  of 
his  visage  representeth  the  very  face  of  y®  noble  duke  his  father.  This  is  (quod  he) 
the  fathers  awne  figure,  this  is  his  awne  countenaunce,  the  verie  print  of  his  visage, 
the  sure  vndoubted  ymage,  the  playne  expresse  likenesse  of  that  noble  duke.  Now 
was  it  before  deuised  that  in  the  speakynge  of  these  wordes,  the  protector  shoulde 
haue  come  in  emongest  the  people  to  y®  sermond  ward,  to  thende  that  these  wordes 
so  metyng  with  his  presence,  might  haue  been  taken  emongest  the  herers,  as  though 
the  holy  ghost  had  put  theim  in  the  preachers  mouthe,  and  shoulde  haue  moued 
the  people  euen  there  to  haue  cried,  kynge  Richard,  that  it  might  haue  been  after 
sayed  that  he  was  specially  chosen  by  God,  and  in  maner  by  miracle:  but  this 
deuise  quayled,  either  by  the  protectoures  negligence  or  the  preachers  ouer  hasty 
diligence.  For  while  the  protectoure,  founde  by  the  waye  tariynge,  leaste  he 
shoulde  haue  preuented  these  woordes,  the  doctour  fearynge  that  he  shoulde  come 
or  his  sermon  could  come  to  those  woordes  hastynge  his  matter  thereto,  he  was 
come  to  theim  and  paste  theim,  and  entred  into  other  matters  or  the  protectour 
came,  whom  when  he  beheld  commynge,  he  sodainly  lefte  the  matter  whiche  he 
had  in  hand,  and  without  any  deduccyon  thereunto  out  of  all  ordre,  and  out  of  all 
frame  began  to  repete  those  woordes  agayne.  This  is  the  very  noble  prince  the 
especiall  patrone  of  knightely  prowes,  whiche  aswell  in  all  princely  behaueoure  as 
in  the  liniamentes  and  fauour  of  his  visage  representeth  the  veraye  face  of  the  noble 
duke  of  \  orke  his  father.  This  is  the  fathers  awne  figure,  this  is  his  owne  coun¬ 
tenaunce,  the  very  print  of  his  visage  the  sure  vndoubted  image,  the  plain  expresse 
likenesse  of  that  noble  duke,  whose  remembraunce  can  neuer  die  while  he  liueth. 
While  these  wordes  were  in  speakynge,  the  protectour  accompaignied  with  the  duke 
of  Buckyngham,  went  through  the  people  vp  into  the  place  where  the 
III,  vii,  25.  doctors  stand  where  they  harde  oute  the  sermond:  but  the  people  were 
so  far  from  criynge  kynge  Richard  that  they  stoode  as  the’-  had  been 
turned  into  stoones  for  wonder  of  this  shamefull  sermonde:  after  whiche  once 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— HALL'S  CHRONICLE  481 


ended  y®  precher  gat  hym  home  and  neuer  after  durst  loke  out  for  shame  but 
kept  him  out  of  sighte  as  an  owle  and  when  he  asked  any  of  his  old  frendes,  what 
the  people  talked  of  him,  although  that  his  awne  consciece  well  shewed  hym  that 
they  talked  no  good,  yet  when  the  other  answered  hym,  that  there  was  in  euery 
mannes  mouthe  of  hym  muche  shame  spoken  it  so  strake  him  too  the  harte  that  in 
fewe  dayes  after  he  withered  awaie. 

Then  on  the  tuesday  after  next  foloyng  this  sermond,  beyng  the  .xvii.  day  of 
Iune,  there  came  to  the  Guyld  hall  of  London  the  duke  of  Buckyng- 
ham  and  diuerse  lordes  and  knightes  mo  then  happely  knewe  the  III,  v,  79. 
message  that  they  brought.  And  at  the  east  ende  of  the  hal  where 
the  hoystynges  be  kepte,  the  duke  and  the  maire  and  the  other  lordes  sat  downe, 
and  the  aldermen  also,  all  the  commons  of  the  citee  beeynge  assembled  and  stand- 
ynge  before  theim.  After  scilence  commaunded  vpon  a  greate  paine  in  the  pro- 
tectoures  name:  The  duke  stode  vp  and  as  he  was  well  learned  and  of  nature  meruei- 
lously  well  spoken,  he  sayed  to  the  people  with  a  cleare  and  a  lowde  voyce:  Frendes, 
for  the  zeale  and  hertie  fauoure  that  we  beare  you  we  be  come  to  breke  of  a  matter 
righte  greate  and  weightie,  and  no  lesse  weightie  then  pleasyng  to  God  and  profitable 
to  all  the  realme,  nor  to  no  parte  of  the  realme,  more  profitable,  then  to  you  the 
citezens  of  this  noble  citee.  For  why,  the  thynge  that  you  haue  long  lacked  and  as 
we  well  know  sore  longed  for  that  you  woulde  haue  geuen  greate  good  for,  that 
you  would  haue  gone  farre  to  fetche:  that  thynge  be  we  come  hether  to  bryng  you, 
without  your  labour  pain,  coste,  auenture  or  ieoperdye.  What  thynge  is  that? 
Certes  the  surety  of  your  awne  bodies,  the  quiete  of  your  wiues  and  daughters  and 
the  sauegarde  of  your  goodes.  Of  all  whiche  thynges  in  tyme  passed 
you  stoode  in  doubte.  For  who  was  he  of  you  all  that  could  recon  III,  vii,  10. 
hym  selfe  lorde  of  his  awne  good  emongest  so  many  gynnes  and 
trappes  wer  set  therfore  emong  so  much  pyllyng  and  pollynge,emonge  so  many  taxes 
and  talliages,  of  the  which  there  was  neuer  ende,  and  oftymes  no  nede,  or  yf  any 
were,  it  grew  rather  of  riote  or  of  vnreasonable  waste,  then  any  necessary  honourable 
charge,  so  that  there  was  daily  plucked  and  pilled  from  good  and  honeste  menne 
greate  substaunce  of  goodes,  to  be  lashed  out  emong  vnthriftes,  so  far  furthe  that 
fiftenes  suffised  not,  nor  any  vsuall  termes  of  knowen  taxes,  but  vnder  an  easy  name 
of  beneuolence  and  good  will,  the  commissioners  so  much  of  euery  manne  toke,  as 
no  manne  woulde  with  his  good  will  haue  geuen.  As  though  the  name  of  beneuo¬ 
lence  had  signified  that  euery  manne  shoulde  paie,  not  what  he  of  hym  selfe  of  his 
good  will  lust  to  graunte,  but  what  the  king  of  his  good  wil  lust  to  take,  who  neuer 
asked  litle,  but  euery  thing  was  haunsed  aboue  the  measure,  amerciamentes 
turned  into  fines,  fines  into  raunsomes,  small  trespaces  into  mesprison,  mesprision 
into  treason,  where  of  I  thynke  that  no  manne  looketh  that  we  shall  remembre 
you  of  examples  by  name,  as  though  Burdet  were  forgotten  whiche  was  for  a  worde 
spoken,  in  hast  cruelly  behedded.  (This  Burdet  was  a  marchaut  dwellyng  in 
Chepesyd  at  y®  signe  of  y®  croune  which  now  is  y®  signe  of  y®  flowre 
de  luse  ouer  against  soper  lane:  This  man  merely  in  y®  rufflyng  tyme  III,  v,  82. 
of  kyng  Edwarde  ye  .iiij.  his  rage,  saied  to  his  awne  some  [sic]  that 
he  would  make  hym  in  heritor  of  y*  croune,  meanyng  his  awne  house:  but  these 
wordes  king  Edward  made  to  be  mysconstrued,  &  interpreted  that  Burdet  meant 
the  croune  of  the  realme:  wherfore  within  lesse  space  then  .iiij.  houres,  he  was 
apprehended,  iudged,  drawen  and  quartered  in  Chepesyde)  by  the  mysconstruynge 
of  the  lawes  of  the  realme  for  the  princes  pleasure,  with  no  lesse  honoure  to  Merkam 


3i 


482 


APPENDIX 


chiefe  Iustice  then,  which  lost  his  office  rather  then  he  would  assent  to  that  iudge- 
ment:  then  to  the  dishonesty  of  those  that  either  for  feare  or  flattery  gaue  that 
iudgement.  .  .  .  And  in  that  poinct  whiche  in  good  faithe  I  am  sory  to  speake  of, 
sauynge  that  it  is  vain  to  kepe  in  counsaill  that  thynge  that  all  men  knoweth,  y® 
kyng  his  gredy  appetite  was  insaciable,  and  euery  where  ouer  all  the  realme  intoller- 
able.  For  no  worn!  was  there  any  where,  young  or  old,  poore  or 
III,  v,  86.  riche,  whom  he  sette  his  yie  vpo,  whom  he  any  thynge  liked  either 
for  persone  or  beautie,  speche,  pace  or  countenaunce,  but  without 
any  feare  of  God,  or  respecte  of  his  honour,  murmure,  or  grudgyng  of  the  world, 
he  woulde  importunately  pursue  his  appetite  and  haue  her,  to  the  distruction  of 
many  a  good  woman,  and  great  dolour  to  their  husbandes  and  frendes,  whiche 
beynge  honest  people  of  theim  selues,  so  moche  regarded  the  clenesse  of  their  houses, 
the  chastitee  of  their  wiues  and  childre,  that  theim  wer  leuer  to  lose  all  that  thei 
haue  beside,  then  to  haue  suche  a  vilanie  done  to  theim.  And  albeit  that  with 
this  and  other  importable  dealing,  the  realme  was  in  euery  place  anoyed  yet  specially 
you  the  citezens  of  this  nobilite.  .  .  sith  that  nere  here  about  was  his  moste  common 
abidyng.  .  .  It  shall  not,  I  wote  well  nede,  that  I  reherse  vnto  you  again  that  you 
al  redy  haue  hearde  of  hym  that  can  better  tell  it,  and  of  whom  I  am  sure  ye  will 
better  beleue  it  (and  reason  it  is  that  it  so  be)  I  am  not  so  proud  too  looke  therefore 
y‘  you  should  receiue  my  wordes  of  so  great  aucthorite  as  the  preachers  of  the 
word  of  God,  namely  a  man  so  conninge  and  so  wise,  that  no  manne  wotteth  better 
what  he  should  do  and  say.  .  .  whiche  honourable  preacher  ye  well  remembre, 
substancially  declared  to  you  at  Paules  crosse  on  Sondaie  late  paste,  the  right  and 
title  of  the  most  excellent  prince  Richard  duke  of  Gloucester  now  protector  of  this 
his  realme  which  he  hath  vnto  the  croune  of  the  kyngdome  of  the  same.  For  that 
worshipfulman  made  it  perfectly  and  groundely  open  vnto  you.  The  children  of 
kynge  Edward  the  fourth  wer  neuer  laufully  begotten,  for  as  muche 
III,  vii,  5.  as  the  kynge  (liuynge  his  verie  wife  dame  Elizabeth  Lucy)  was  neuer 
laufully  maried  to  the  quene  their  mother  whose  bloud  sauynge  he  set 
his  volupteous  pleasure  before  his  honour,  was  ful  vnmetely  to  be  matched  with  his. 
...  For  lacke  of  which  lawefull  copulacion  and  also  of  other  thynges  whiche  the  saied 
worshipful!  doctor  rather  signified  then  fully  explaned,  and  whiche 
III,  vii,  201.  thyng  shall  not  be  spoken  for  me,  as  the  thyng  that  euery  manne  for- 
beareth  to  saie  that  he  knoweth,  in  auoidyng  the  displeasure  that  my 
noble  lorde  protector  bearyng  as  nature  requireth  a  filial  reuerence  to  the  duches  his 
mother.  For  these  causes  before  remembred  I  saie,  that  for  lake  of  issue  lawfully 
commynge  of  the  late  noble  prince  Richard  duke  of  Yorke,  to  whose  royall  bloud  the 
crounes  of  England  and  of  Fraunce,  are  by  the  high  aucthorite  of  a  parliamet 
entailed,  the  right  and  title  of  the  same  is  by  iuste  course  of  enheritaunce  according  to 
the  common  lawe  of  this  lande,  deuoluted  and  come  vnto  the  moste  excellent  prince 
the  lord  protectoure,  as  to  the  very  lawfull  begotten  sonne  of  the  fore  remembred 
noble  duke  of  Yorke.  Whiche  thynge  well  considred  and  the  knightely  prowesse  with 
many  vertues  whiche  in  his  noble  persone  singulerely  dooe  habounde:  The  nobles 
and  commons  of  this  realme,  and  specially  of  the  North  partes,  not  willing  any 
bastard  bloud  to  haue  the  rule  of  the  land,  nor  the  abusions  in  the  same  before  vsed 
and  exercised  any  longer  too  continue,  haue  fully  condiscended  and  vtterly  deter¬ 
mined  too  make  humble  peticion  vnto  the  puisaunte  prince  the  lorde  protectour, 
that  it  may  like  his  grace  at  our  humble  request,  to  take  vpon  hym  the  guydyng 
and  gouernaunce  of  this  realme.  .  .  .  When  the  duke  had  saied  and  loked  that  the 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— HALL S  CHRONICLE  483 

people  whom  he  hoped  that  the  Maire  had  framed  before,  shoulde  after  this  fiatter- 
ynge  preposicion  made,  haue  cried  kynge  Richarde,  kynge  Richarde,  all  was  still 
and  mute  and  not  one  woorde  answered  to:  wherwith  the  duke 
was  maruelously  abashed,  and  takynge  y*  Maire  nere  to  hym,  with  III,  vii,  25. 
other  that  wer  aboute  hym  priuy  to  the  matter,  saied  vnto  theim 
softely.  What  meaneth  this,  that  the  people  be  so  still  ?  Sir  quod  the  Maire, 
percase  they  perceiue  you  not  well,  that  shall  we  amend  quod  he,  if  he  that  wil 
helpe,  and  therwith  somewhat  lowder  rehersed  the  same  matter  again,  in  other 
ordre  and  other  woordes  so  well  and  ornately,  and  neuerthelesse  so  euidently  and 
plaine  with  voice,  gesture,  &  countenaunce  so  comely  and  so  conuenient,  that 
euery  man  much  marueiled  that  hard  him  and  thought  that  they  neuer  harde  in 
their  Hues  so  euill  a  tale  so  well  told.  But  wer  it  for  wonder  or  feare, 
or  that  eche  loked  that  other  should  speake  firste,  not  one  word  was  III,  vii,  27. 
there  answered  of  all  the  people  that  stoode  before,  but  all  were  as 
still  as  the  midnight  not  so  much  as  rounyng  emong  them,  by  which  they  might 
seme  once  to  common  what  was  best  to  do.  When  the  Maire  sawe  this,  he  with 
other  parteners  of  the  counsaill,  drew  about  the  duke  and  saied  that 
y®  people  had  not  been  accustomed  there  to  be  spoken  to,  but  by  III,  vii,  30. 
the  Recorder,  which  is  the  mouthe  of  the  citee,  and  happely  to  hym 
they  will  answere.  With  that  the  Recorder  called  Thomas  Fitz  Wyllya,  a  sadde 
manne  and  an  honeste,  which  was  but  newly  come  to  the  office,  and  neuer  had 
spoken  to  the  people  before,  and  loth  was  with  that  matter  to  begyn,  notwith¬ 
standing,  there  vnto  commaunded  by  the  Maire,  made  rehersall  to  the  commons 
of  that  which  the  duke  had  twise  purposed  hym  self,  but  the  recorder  so  tepered 
his  tale  that  he  shewed  euery  thyng  as  the  duke  his  woordes  were  and 
no  parte  of  his  owne,  but  all  this  no  chaunge  made  in  the  people,  III,  vii,  34. 
whiche  alway  after  one  stoode  as  they  had  been  amased.  Where 
vpon,  the  duke  rouned  with  the  Maire  and  said,  this  is  a  marueilous  obstinate 
scilence,  and  there  with  turned  too  the  people  again  with  these  woordes.  Deare 
frendes,  we  come  to  moue  you  to  that  thyng  whiche  parauenture  we  so  greately 
neded  not,  but  that  the  lordes  of  this  realme  and  commons  of  other  partes  might 
haue  suffised,  sauying  suche  loue  we  beare  you,  and  so  muche  set  by  you,  that  we 
would  not  gladly  do  without  you,  that  thyng  in  whiche  to  be  parteners  is  youre 
weele  and  honoure,  whiche  as  to  vs  semeth  you  se  not  or  waye  not:  Wherfore  we 
require  you  to  giue  vs  an  answere,  one  or  other,  whether  ye  be  mynded  as  all  the 
nobles  of  the  realme  be,  to  haue  this  noble  prince  now  protector  to  be  your  kyng  ? 
And  at  these  wordes  the  people  began  to  whisper  emong  them  selfes  secretly,  that 
the  voyce  was  neither  loud  nor  base,  but  like  a  swarme  of  bees,  till 
at  the  last,  at  the  nether  ende  of  the  hal  a  bushement  of  the  dukes  III,  vii,  36. 
seruauntes  and  one  Nashfeelde  and  other  belongynge  to  the  pro- 
tectoure  with  some  prentices  and  laddes  that  thrusted  into  the  hall  emongest  the 
preace,  began  sodainly  at  mennes  backes  to  crye  out  as  lowde  as  they  could,  kynge 
Richard,  king  Richard,  and  there  threwe  vp  their  cappes  in  token  of  ioye,  and  they 
that  stoode  before  cast  backe  their  heddes  merueilynge  therat,  but  nothing  the  saied. 
And  when  the  duke  and  the  Maire  saw  this  maner,  they  wisely  turned  it  to  their 
purpose,  and  6aid  it  was  a  goodly  crie  and  a  ioyfull  to  here  euery  man 
with  one  voyce  and  no  man  saiyng  nay.  Wherefore  frendes  (quod  III,  vii,  38- 
the  duke),  sith  we  perceiue  that  it  is  all  your  whole  mindes  to  haue 
this  noble  man  for  your  king,  wherof  we  shall  make  his  grace  so  effectuall  reporte 


484 


APPENDIX 


that  we  doubt  not  but  that  it  shall  redounde  to  your  great  wealth  and  commodite. 
We  therefore  require  you  that  to  morowe  ye  go  with  vs  and  we  with  you  to  his 
noble  grace  to  make  our  humble  peticio  and  request  to  him  in  maner  before  remem- 
bred.  And  therwith  the  lordes  came  doune  and  the  compaignie  dissolued  and 
departed  the  more  part  all  sad,  some  with  glad  semblaunce  that  were  not  very  merie 
and  some  of  them  that  came  with  the  duke  not  hable  to  dissemble  their  sorowe, 
were  fain  euen  at  his  backe  to  turne  their  face  to  the  wall,  while  the  doloure  of  their 
hartes  braste  out  of  their  yies. 

Then  on  the  morowe  the  Maire  and  aldremen  and  chief  commoners  of  the 
citie  in  their  best  maner  appareled,  assemblyng  them  together  at  Paules,  resorted 
to  Baynardes  castle  where  the  protectour  laie,  to  which  place  also 
III,  vii,  46.  accordyng  too  the  appoinctment  repaired  the  duke  of  Buckyng- 
ham,  and  diuerse  nobles  with  hym,  besides  many  knyghtes  and  gentle¬ 
men.  And  there  vpon  the  duke  sent  woorde  to  the  lord  protectoure  of  the  beyng  there 
of  a  greate  honourable  compaignie  to  moue  a  greate  matter  to  his  grace.  Where 
vpon  the  protectoure  made  greate  difficultie  to  come  doune  to  theim, 
III,  vii,  63.  except  he  knewe  some  parte  of  their  errande,  as  though  he  doubted 
and  partely  mistrusted  the  commynge  of  such  a  numbre  to  hym  so 
sodainely,  without  any  warnyng  or  knowlege,  whether  they  came  for  good  or  harme. 
Then  when  the  duke  had  shewed  this  too  the  Mayre  and  other,  that  they  might 
thereby  se  how  litle  the  protectour  loked  for  this  matter,  they  sente  again  by  the 
messenger  suche  louynge  message,  and  there  with  so  humbly  besought  hym  to 
vouchsafe  that  the  might  resort  to  his  presence  to  purpose  their  entent  of  which 
they  would  to  none  other  persone  any  part  disclose.  At  the  last  he 
III,  vii,  101.  came  out  of  his  chambre,  and  yet  not  doune  to  theim,  but  in  a  galary 
over  them  with  a  bishop  on  euery  hand  of  him,  where  they  beneth 
might  se  him  and  speke  to  him,  as  though  he  would  not  yet  come  nere  them  til 
he  wist  what  they  meant.  And  there  vpon,  the  duke  of  Buckingham  first  made 
humble  peticion  to  him  on  the  behalfe  of  theim  all,  that  his  grace  would  pardon 
theim  and  licence  them  to  purpose  vnto  his  grace  the  entent  of  their  commyng 
without  his  displeasure,  without  which  pardon  obteined,  they  durst  not  be  so  bold 
to  moue  him  of  that  matter.  In  which,  albeit  they  meant  as  muche  honour  to  his 
grace  as  wealth  to  all  y*  realm  beside,  yet  were  they  not  sure  how  his  grace  would 
take  it,  whom  they  would  in  no  wise  offend.  Then  the  protectour,  as  he  was  very 
gentle  of  hym  self  and  also  longed  sore  apparantly  to  know  what  they  meant,  gaue 
him  leaue  to  purpose  what  him  liked,  verely  trustynge  for  the  good  mind  that  he 
bare  them  all  none  of  theim  any  thyng  woulde  entende  to  hym  warde,  wherewith 
he  thought  to  be  greued.  When  the  duke  had  this  leaue  and  pardon  to  speake, 
then  wexed  he  bold  to  shew  hym  their  entente  and  purpose,  with  all  the  causes 
mouyng  theim  thereto,  as  ye  before  haue  heard.  And  finally,  to  beseche  his  grace 
that  it  would  like  him  of  his  accustomed  goodnesse  and  zeale  vnto 
the  realm  now  with  his  yie  of  pitie  to  behold  the  long  continued 
distresse  and  decaie  of  the  same,  &  to  set  his  gracious  hand  to  the 
redresse  and  amendemente  thereof  by  takynge  vpon  hym  the  croune  and  gouern- 
aunce  of  the  realme  accordyng  to  his  right  and  title  laufully  discended  vnto  him, 
&  to  the  laud  of  God,  profite  and  surety  of  the  land,  and  vnto  his  grace  so  muche 
the  more  honor  and  lesse  pain,  in  that  y*  neuer  prince  reigned  vpon  any  people  that 
wer  so  glad  to  Hue  vnder  his  obeisauce  as  the  people  of  this  realme  vnder  his. 

When  the  protector  had  heard  the  proposicion,  he  loked  very  strangely  therat 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— HALL S  CHRONICLE  485 


and  made  answer,  that  albeit  he  knewe  partely  the  thynges  by  theim  alleged  to  be 

true,  yet  such  entiere  loue  he  bare  to  kynge  Edward  and  his  children,  and  so  much 

more  regarded  his  honour  in  other  realmes  about,  then  the  croune  of  any  one,  of 

which  he  was  neuer  desyrous,  so  that  he  could  not  find  in  his  harte  in  this  poinct  to 

incline  to  their  desire,  for  in  al  other  nacions  where  the  truth  were  not  wel  knowe, 

it  shoulde  parauenture  be  thought  that  it  were  his  awne  ambicious 

mynde  and  deuise  to  depose  the  prince  and  to  take  hym  selfe  the  III,vii,  153. 

croune,  with  which  infamy  he  would  in  no  wise  haue  his  honour 

steined  for  any  croune,  in  which  he  had  euer  perchaunce  perceyued  much  more 

labour  and  pein,  then  pleasure  to  him  that  so  would  vse  it  as  he  that  would  not  and 

were  not  worthy  to  haue  it.  Notwithstanding,  he  not  onely  pardoned 

them  of  the  mocion  that  they  made  him,  but  also  thanked  them  for  III,  vii,  176. 

the  loue  and  harty  fauour  they  bare  hym,  praiying  them  for  his  sake 

to  beare  the  same  to  the  prince  vnder  whom  he  was  and  would  be  content  to  Hue  and 

with  his  labour  &  counsaill  as  far  as  it  should  like  the  king  to  vse  it,  he  woulde  doo 

his  vttermoste  deuoier  to  sette  the  realme  in  good  estate  which  was  all  redye  in  the 

litle  tyme  of  his  protectourship  (lauded  be  God,)  wel  begon,  in  that  the  malice  of 

such  as  wer  before  y®  occasion  of  the  contrary  and  of  new  entended  to  be,  wer 

now  partely  by  good  policy,  partely  more  by  God  his  speciall  prouidence,  then 

mannes  prouision,  repressed  and  put  vnder. 

Vpon  this  answer  geuen,  the  duke  of  Buckyngham  by  the  protector  his  licence  a 
litle  rounded,  as  well  with  other  noble  men  about  him  as  with  the  maire  and  recorder 
of  London.  And  after  that  (vpon  like  perdo  desired  and  obteined)  he  shewed 
aloude  vnto  the  protectour,  for  a  finall  conclusion  that  the  realme 
was  appointed  that  kynge  Edward  his  line  should  no  longer  reigne  III,  vii,  217. 
vpon  them,  both  that  they  had  so  far  gone  that  it  was  now  no  suretee 
to  retreate  (as  for  that  thei  thought  it  for  y®  weale  vniuersal  to  take  y‘  way,  although 
thei  had  not  yet  begon  it.)  Wherfore  if  it  would  like  his  grace  to  take  the  croune 
vpon  him,  they  would  humbly  beseache  him  therunto,  and  yf  he  would  geue  theim 
a  resolute  answere  to  the  contrary  (which  the  would  be  loth  to  here)  then  must  they 
seke  and  shoulde  not  faill  to  find  some  other  noble  man  that  would.  These  wordes 
much  moued  the  protector,  which  as  euery  man  of  small  intelligence  may  wit  would 
neuer  haue  enclined  thereto:  but  when  he  sawe  there  was  none  other  way  but  that 
he  must  take  it,  or  els  he  and  his  both  to  go  from  it,  he  saied  to  the  lordes  and 
commons,  sithe  it  is  wee  percieue  well  that  all  the  realme  is  so  set  (wherof  we  bee 
very  sory)  that  they  will  not  suffre  in  any  wise  kynge  Edward  his  line  to  gouerne 
theim,  whom  no  man  earthely  can  gouerne  against  their  willes:  And  we  also  perceiue 
that  no  manne  is  there  to  whome  the  crowne  can  by  so  iuste  title 
appertaine  as  to  oure  selfe  as  very  righte  heire  laufully  begotten  of  the  III,  vii,  204. 
body  of  our  most  dread  and  dere  father  Richard  late  duke  of  Yorke 
to  which  title  is  now  ioyned  your  election,  the  nobles  and  commons  of  the  realme, 
which  we  of  all  titles  possible  take  for  mooste  effectual,  we  be  content  and  agree 
fauourably  to  encline  to  your  peticion  &  request,  and  accordynge  to  the  same,  here 
wre  take  vpon  vs  the  royall  estate  of  preheminence  and  kyngdome  of  the  twoo 
noble  realmes  Englande  and  Fraunce,  the  one  from  this  day  forwarde  by  vs  and 
our  heires  to  rule,  gouerne  and  defende,  the  other  by  God  his  grace  and  your 
good  helpe  to  get  again,  subdue  and  establishe  for  euer  in  dewe  obedience  vnto 
this  realme  of  Englande,  the  auauncement  whereof  we  neuer  aske  of  God  longer 
to  Hue  then  we  entende  to  procure  and  sette  furthe.  With  this  there  was  a 


486  APPENDIX 

greate  cry  and  shoute,  criyng  kyng  Richard  and  so  the  lordes  wente  vp  to  the  kynge, 
and  so  he  was  after  that  daie  called.  But  the  people  departed  talkynge 
III,  vii,  250.  diuersely  of  the  matter,  euery  man  as  his  fantasye  gaue  him,  but  much 
they  marueiled  of  this  maner  of  dealing,  that  the  matter  was  on  bothe 
partes  made  so  straunge  as  though  neuer  the  one  parte  had  communed  with  the  other 
parte  therof  before,  when  they  wiste  that  there  was  no  manne  so  dull  that  heard 
theim,  but  he  perceyued  well  ynough  that  all  the  matter  was  made  betweene  them. 
Howbeit,  some  excused  that  again,  saiynge:  all  thing  must  be  done  in  good  ordre, 
and  menne  must  sometym  for  the  maner  sake  not  bee  aknowen  what  they  knowe.  .  . 
Richard  the  third  of  that  name,  vsurped  y®  croune  of  Englad  &  openly  toke 
vpon  hym  to  bee  kyng,  the  nyntene  daie  of  Iune,  in  the  yere  of  our  lord,  a  thousand 
foure  hundred  lxxxiii.  and  in  the  .xxv.  yere  of  Lewes  the  leuenth  then  beeyng  French 
kyng:  and  the  morow  after,  he  was  proclaymed  kyng  and  with  great  solempnite 
rode  to  Westminster,  and  there  sate  in  the  seate  roial.  .  .  On  the 
IV,  ii,  2.  sixt  daie  of  Iuly,  the  kynge  came  toward  his  coronacion  into  West¬ 
minster  hall,  where  his  chapell  and  all  the  prelates  mitred  receiued 
him.  [Here  follows  a  circumstantial  account  of  the  coronation  ceremonies.] 
Nowe  after  this  triumphante  coronacion,  there  fell  mischiefes  thicke  and  thicke,  and 
as  the  thynge  euill  gotten  is  neuer  well  kept,  so  through  all  the  tyme  of  his  vsurped 
reigne,  neuer  ceased  there  cruell  murther,  death  and  slaughter,  till  his  awne  destruc- 
cion  end  edit.  But  as  he  finished  with  the  beste  deathe  and  mooste  rightewyse, 
that  is  to  saie  his  awne,  so  beganne  he  with  the  mooste  piteous  and  wicked,  I  meane 
the  lamentable  murther  of  his  innocente  nephewes,  the  younge  kynge  and  his  tendre 
brother,  whose  death  and  finall  fortune  hath  neuerthelesse  so  far  come  in  question 
that  some  remained  longe  in  doubte  whether  they  were  in  his  daies  destroyed  or 
no.  .  .  Kyng  Richard  after  his  coronacion,  takyng  his  waie  to  Gloucester,  to 
visite  in  his  newe  honour  the  towne,  of  whiche  he  bare  the  name  of  old,  deuised  as 
he  roade  to  fulfill  that  thyng  which  he  before  had  intended.  And  forasmuch  as 
his  mynd  gaue  him  that  his  nephews  liuynge,  men  woulde  not  recon 
IV,  ii,  9.  that  he  coulde  haue  righte  to  the  realme,  he  thoughte  therefore  without 
delaie  to  rid  them,  as  though  the  killynge  of  his  kynsmen  mighte 
ende  his  cause,  and  make  hym  kyndely  kyng.  Where  vpon  he  sent  Ihon  Grene, 
whom  he  specially  trusted,  vnto  sir  Robert  Brakebury  constable  of  the  tower, 
with  a  letter  and  credece  also,  that  the  same  sir  Roberte  in  any  wyse  should  put  the 
two  childre  to  death.  This  Ihon  Grene  dyd  his  errand  to  Brakenbury,  knelynge 
before  oure  lady  in  the  Towre,  who  plainly  answered  that  he  woulde  neuer  put  them 
to  deathe  to  dye  therefore.  With  the  which  answere  Grene  returned,  recomptyng 
the  same  to  kynge  Richard  at  Warwyke  yet  on  his  iourney,  wherwith  he  toke  suche 
displeasure  and  thoughte  that  the  same  night  he  sayde  to  a  secrete  page  of  his: 

Ah,  whom  shall  a  man  truste;  they  that  I  haue  brought  vp  my  selfe, 
IV,  ii,  33.  they  that  I  went  woulde  haue  moost  surely  serued  me,  euen  those 
fayle  me,  and  at  my  commaundemente  wyll  do  nothynge  for  me. 
Syr  quod  the  page,  there  lieth  one  in  the  palet  chambre  with  out  that  I  dare  wel  say, 
to  do  your  grace  pleasure  the  thing  were  right  hard  that  he  would  refuse,  meanyng 
this  by  lames  Tirel,  which  was  a  man  of  goodly  personage,  and  for  the  giftes  of 
nature  worthy  to  haue  serued  a  muche  better  prince,  yf  he  had  well 
IV,  ii,  41.  serued  God,  and  by  grace  obteyned  to  haue  as  muche  trueth  and  good 
wyll,  as  he  had  strength  and  wytt.  The  man  had  an  high  harte  and 
sore  longed  vpwarde,  not  risyng  yet  so  fast  as  he  had  hoped,  beynge  hindered 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— HALLS  CHRONICLE  487 


and  kepte  vnder  by  sir  Richarde  Ratcliffe  and  sir  Willyam  Catesbye,  which 
longyng  for  no  more  parteners  of  the  Princes  fauour,  namely  not  for  him,  whose 
pride  thei  knewe  woulde  beare  no  pere,  kept  him  by  secrete  driftes  out  of  al  secrete 
trust :  which  thynge  this  page  had  well  marked  and  knowen :  wherefore  this  occasion 
offered  of  very  speciall  frendship  spied  his  tyme  to  set  him  forwarde,  and  suche 
wyse  to  do  him  good,  that  all  the  enemies  that  he  had  (except  the  deuil)  could  neuer 
haue  done  him  so  much  hurte  and  shame,  for  vpon  the  pages  woordes,  kyng  Richard 
arose  (for  this  communicacion  had  he  sittyng  on  a  drafte,  a  conuenient  carpet  for 
suche  a  counsail)  and  came  out  into  the  palet  chambre,  where  he  dyd  fynde  in  bed 
the  sayd  lames  Tyrell  and  sir  Thomas  Tyrell  of  persone  like  and  brethren  of  bloude, 
but  nothyng  of  kynne  in  condicions.  Then  sayd  the  kyng  merely  to  them,  what 
syrs,  be  you  in  bed  so  sone:  and  called  vp  lames  Tyrell,  &  brake  to  him  secretely 
his  mynd  in  this  mischeuous  matter,  in  the  which  he  found  him 
nothing  straunge.  Wherfore  on  the  morowe  he  sent  him  to  Brakyn-  IV,  ii,  7g. 
bury  with  a  letter  by  the  which  he  was  commaunded  to  delyuer  to  the 
sayd  lames  all  the  keyes  of  the  Towre  for  a  night,  to  thende  that  he  might  there 
accomplish  the  kynges  pleasure  in  suche  thynges  as  he  there  had  geuen  him  in 
commaundement.  After  which  lettre  deliuered  &  the  keyes  receyued,  lames 
appoincted  y*  next  night  ensuyng  to  destroye  them,  deuisyng  before  and  preparyng 
the  meanes. 

The  prince  assone  as  the  Protectour  toke  vpon  hym  to  be  kynge,  and  left  the 
name  of  protectoure,  was  thereof  aduertised  and  shewed  that  he  should  not  reigne, 
but  his  vncle  should  haue  the  croune.  At  which  word  the  prince  sore  abashed 
beganne  to  sighe  and  sayd:  Alas  I  would  myne  vncle  would  let  me  haue  my  life 
although  I  lese  my  kyngedome.  Then  he  that  tolde  hym  the  tale  vsed  him  with 
good  woordes  and  put  hym  in  the  best  conforte  that  he  coulde,  but  furthewith  he 
and  his  brother  were  bothe  shut  vp,  and  all  other  remoued  from  them,  one  called 
blacke  Wyl,  or  Willyam  Slaughter  onely  except,  which  were  set  to  serue  them, 
and  iiii.  other  to  see  them  sure.  After  whiche  tyme,  the  prince  neuer  tyed  his 
pointes,  nor  any  thyng  roughte  of  hym  selfe,  but  with  that  young  babe  his  brother 
lyngered  in  thoughte  and  heuines,  tyll  this  trayterous  dede  deliuered  them  of  that 
wretchednes. 

For  lames  Tirrel  deuised  that  they  shoulde  be  murthered  in  their  beddes, 
and  no  bloud  shed:  to  the  execution  wherof,  he  appoincted  Myles 
Forest  one  of  the  foure  that  before  kepte  them,  a  felowe  fleshe  IV,  ii,  142. 
bred  in  murther  before  tyme:  and  to  him  he  ioyned  one  Ihon 
Dighton  his  awne  horsekeper  a  bygge  broade  square  and  strong  knaue. 
Then  al  the  other  beyng  remoued  from  them,  this  Miles  Forest  and  Ihon 
Dighton  aboute  mydnight,  the  sely  children  liyng  in  their  beddes,  came  into  y* 
chaubre  and  sodenli  lapped  them  vp  amongest  the  clothes  and  so  bewrrapped  them 
and  entangled  them,  kepyng  doune  by  force  the  fetherbed  and  pillowes  harde 
vnto  their  mouthes,  that  within  a  while  they  smored  &  styfled  them,  and  their 
breathes  failyng,  they  gaue  vp  to  God  their  innocet  solles  into  the-ioyes  of  heauen, 
leauyng  to  the  tourmetours  their  bodies  dead  in  the  bed  which  after  the  wretches 
perceyued,  firste  by  the  strugglyng,  with  the  panges  of  death,  and  after  long  liyng 
styl  to  be  throughly  dead,  they  layd  the  bodies  out  vpon  the  bed,  and  fetched  lames 
Tirrell  to  see  them,  which  when  he  sawe  them  perfightly  dead,  he  caused  the 
murtherers  to  burye  them  at  the  stayre  foote,  metely  depe  in  the  groude  vnder  a 
great  heape  of  stones. 


488 


APPENDIX 


Then  rode  lames  Tirrel  in  great  hast  to  kyng  Richard,  and  shewed  him  all  the 
maner  of  the  murther,  who  gaue  him  great  thankes,  and  as  men  saye, 
IV,  ii,  170.  there  made  hym  knighte,  but  he  allowed  not  their  buriall  in  so  vile 
a  corner,  saiyng,  that  he  would  haue  them  buried  in  a  better  place 
because  they  were  a  kynges  sonnes.  .  .  .  Wherupon  a  priest  of  sir  Robert  Bracken- 
buries  toke  them  vp  &  buried  them  in  such  a  place  secretely  as  by  the  occasion  of 
his  death  (which  was  very  shortely  after)  which  onely  knewe  it,  the  very  trueth 
could  neuer  yet  be  very  wel  and  perfightly  knowen.  .  .  And  for  a  trueth,  when  sir 
lames  Tirrell  was  in  the  Towre  for  treason  committed  to  kynge  Henrye  the  seuen 
the:  bothe  he  and  Dighton  were  examined  together  of  this  poincte,  and  both  they 
confessed  the  murther  to  be  done  in  the  same  maner  as  you  haue 
IV,  ii,  171.  hard,  but  whether  the  bodies  were  remoued,  they  bothe  affirmed  they 
neuer  knewe.  .  .  I  haue  harde  by  credible  reporte  of  suche  as  were 
secrete  with  his  [King  Richard’s]  chamberers  that  after  this  abhominable  deed  done, 
he  neuer  was  quiet  in  his  mynde,  he  neuer  thought  him  selfe  sure  where  he  went 
abroade,  his  body  priuely  feinted,  his  eyen  wherled  aboute,  his  hande  euer  on  his 
dagger,  his  countenaunce  and  maner  like  alwaies  to  stricke  againe,  he  toke  euill 
reste  on  nightes,  laye  long  wakyng  and  musyng,  forweried  with  care 
IV,  i,  95.  and  watche,  rather  slombred  then  slept,  troubled  with  fearefull 
dreames,  sodeinly  somtyme  stert  vp,  leapte  out  of  his  bed  and  loked 
about  the  chambre,  so  was  his  restlesse  harte  continually  tossed  and  tombled  with 
the  tedious  impression  and  stormy  remembraunce  of  his  abhominable  murther 
and  execrable  tyrannye.  .  .  . 

But  when  these  newes  wer  first  brought  to  the  infortunate  mother  of  the  dead 
children  yet  being  in  sanctuary,  no  doubte  but  it  strake  to  her 
IV,  iii,  12.  harte,  like  the  sharpe  darte  of  death:  for  when  she  was  first  enformed 
of  the  murther  of  her  .ii.  sonnes,  she  was  so  sodainly  amasyd  with  the 
greatnes  of  y®  crueltie  that  for  feare  she  sounded  and  fell  doune  to  the  ground,  and 
there  lay  in  a  great  agonye  like  to  a  deade  corps.  And  after  that  she  came  to  her 
memory  and  was  reuyued  agayne,  she  wept  and  sobbyd  and  with  pitefull  scriches  she 
replenished  the  hole  mancion,  her  breste  she  puncted,  her  fayre  here  she  tare  and 
pulled  in  peces  &  being  ouercome  with  sorowe  &  pensiuenes  rather  desyred  death 
then  life,  calling  by  name  diuers  times  her  swete  babes,  accomptyng 
IV,  iii,  12.  herself  more  then  madde  that  she  deluded  by  wyle  and  fraudulente 
promises  delyuered  her  yonger  sonne  out  of  the  sanctuarie  to  hys 
enemye  to  be  put  to  death,  thinkynge  that  next  the  othe  made  to  God  broke,  &  the 
dewtie  of  allegiaunce  toward  her  childre  violated,  she  of  all  creatures  in  that  poyncte 
was  most  seduced  and  disceaued :  After  longe  lamentacion,  when  she  sawe  no  hope 
of  reuengynge  otherwyse,  she  knelyd  downe  and  cried  on  God  to  take  vengeaunce 
for  the  disceaytfull  periurie,  as  who  saide  she  nothyng  mistrusted  but  once  he 
would  remember  it.  What  ys  he  liuyng  that  if  he  remember  and  beholde  these  .ii. 
noble  enfantes  without  deseruing,  so  shamefully  murthered,  that  will  not  abhorre 
the  fact,  ye  &  be  moued  &  tormented  with  pitie  and  mercie.  .  .  From  thence 
forth  not  onely  all  his  counsailles,  doynges  and  procedynges,  sodainlye  decayed 
and  sorted  to  none  effecte:  But  also  fortune  beganne  to  froune  and  turne  her 
whele  douneward  from  him,  in  so  much  that  he  lost  his  onely 
IV,  ii,  1 91.  begotten  sonne  called  Edwarde  in  the  .iij.  moneth  aftter  he  had 
created  hym  prince  of  Wales.  And  shortely  after,  The  .ii.  yere  he 
was  vnquieted  by  a  conspiracye,  or  rather  a  confederacye  betwene  the  duke  of  Buck- 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— HALL S  CHRONICLE  489 

yngham  and  many  other  gentlemen  against  him,  as  ye  shall  heare:  But  y*  occasion 
why  the  duke  and  the  kynge  fell  out,  is  of  diuerse  folke  diuersely  pretended.  .  . 
Some  say  this  occasyon  was,  that  a  litle  before  the  coronacion,  the  duke  required 
the  kynge  amongest  other  thynges  to  be  restored  to  the  erle  of  Her- 
fordes  landes:  And  forasmuche  as  the  tytle  whiche  he  claymed  by  IV,  ii,  101. 
inheritaunce,  was  somewhat  interlaced,  with  the  tytle  of  Lancaster, 
whiche  house  made  a  title  to  the  croune,  and  enioyed  the  same  thre  discentes,  as 
all  men  knewe,  tyll  the  house  of  Yorke  depriued  the  third  kynge,  whiche  was 
Henry  the  sixte,  Kynge  Richarde  some  what  mistrusted  and  conceiued  suche  an 
indignadon,  that  he  reiected  the  dukes  request,  with  many  spitefull  and  minotary 
wordes,  whiche  so  wounded  the  dukes  harte  with  hatred  and  mistrust,  that  he 
could  neuer  after  endure  to  loke  right  on  king  Richard  but  euer  feared  his 
awne  life.  ...  In  the  meane  ceason  the  countesse  of  Richemond  toke  into  her 
seruice  Christopher  Vrswike  an  honest  and  a  wise  priest,  and  after  an  othe  of 
hym  for  to  be  secret  taken  and  sworne  she  vttred  to  him  all  her 
mynde  councell,  adhibityng  to  him  the  more  confidence  and  IV,  iv,  9. 
truth  that  he  al  his  life  had  fauoured  and  taken  part  with  kyng 
Henry  the  .vi.  and  as  a  speciall  iuell  put  to  her  seruice  by  sir  Lewes  her  phy¬ 
sician.  So  the  mother  studious  for  y®  prosperitie  of  her  sonne  appointed  this 
Christopher  Vrswike  to  saile  into  Britayne  to  the  erle  of  Richemond  and  to 
declare  and  to  demonster  to  him  al  pactes  &  agrementes  betwene  her  and  the 
quene  agreed  &  concluded. ...  Sir  Edwarde  Courtney  and  Peter  his 
brother  bishop  of  Exsetter,  reised  an  army  in  deuonshire  and  come-  IV,  iii,  534. 
wall.  In  kente,  Richarde  Guylforde  and  other  gentlemen,  collected 
a  great  companye  of  souldyoures  and  openly  beganne  warre.  But  king  Richard 
which  in  the  meane  tyme  had  gotten  together  a  great  strengthe  and 
puissaunce,  thinkyng  yt  not  moost  for  his  parte  beneficiall  to  disparse  IV,  iii,  538. 
and  deuyde  his  greate  armye  into  small  branches,  and  particulerely  to 
persecute  any  one  of  the  coniuracion  by  hym  selfe,  determined  all  other  beynge 
set  asyde,  with  hys  whole  puyssaunce  to  set  on  the  chiefe  hed 
whiche  was  the  duke  of  Buckyngham.  And  so  remouynge  from  IV,  iii,  476. 
London  he  tooke  his  journey  towarde  Salsburie,  to  thentente  that  in 
his  iourney  he  mighte  set  on  the  dukes  army  yf  he  myghte  knowe  hym  in  any  place 
encamped  or  in  ordre  of  Battayle  araied. 

The  king  was  scace  .ii.  daies  iourney  from  Salsburie  when  the  duke  of  Buckyng¬ 
ham  accompanyed  with  a  greate  power  of  wilde  Weleshmen,  whome  he  beynge  a 
man  of  that  courage  and  sharpe  speche  in  maner  agaynste  their  willes  had  rather 
therto  enforced  and  compelled  by  lordely  and  streite  commaundemente  then  by 
liberall  wayges  and  gentle  reteynoure,  whiche  thinge  was  the  verie  occasion  why 
they  lefte  hym  desolate  and  cowardely  forsoke  hym.  The  duke  with  all  his  power 
mershed  through  the  forest  of  deane  entendyng  to  haue  passed  the  riuer  of  Seuerne 
at  Gloucester,  and  ther  to  haue  ioyned  in  army  with  the  courtneys  and  other  Western- 
men  of  his  confideracy  and  affinite,  which  if  he  had  done  no  doubt  but  kyng  Richard 
had  bene  in  greate  ieopardie  either  of  priuacion  of  his  realme  or  losse  of  his  life  or 
both.  But  se  the  chauce,  before  he  could  attayne  to  Seuerne  side,  by  force  of 
continuall  rayne  and  moysture,  the  ryuer  rose  so  high  that  yt  ouer- 
flowed  all  the  countrey  adioynyng,  in  somuch  that  men  were  drowned  IV,  iii,  547. 
in  their  beddes,  howses  with  the  extreme  violence  were  ouerturned, 
childre  were  caried  aboute  the  feldes,  swimming  in  cradelles,  beastes  were  drowned 


490 


APPENDIX 


on  hilles,  whiche  rage  of  water  lasted  continually  .x.  dayes,  insomuch  that  in  the 
countrey  adioynyng  they  call  yt  to  this  daie,  the  greate  water,  or  the  duke  of  Buck- 
ynghams  greate  water.  By  this  inundacion  the  passages  were  so  closed  that  neither 
the  duke  could  come  ouer  Seuerne  to  his  complices,  nor  they  to  hym,  duryng  the 
whiche  tyme,  the  Welshemen  lyngerynge  ydely  and  without  money,  vitayle,  or 
wages,  sodaynely  scaled  and  departed:  and  for  all  the  dukes  fayre  promyses,  man- 
aces  and  enforcementes,  they  woulde  in  no  wise  neither  goo  farther 
IV,  iii,  549.  nor  abide.  The  duke  thus  abandoned  and  left  almost  post  alone  was 
of  necessite  cbpelled  to  flye,  and  in  his  flight  was  with  this  sodeyne 
of  fortune  maruelousely  dismayed:  and  beinge  vnpurueyed,  what  councell  he 
shoulde  take  and  what  waie  he  shoulde  folowe,  like  a  man  in  despeire  not  knowynge 
what  to  do,  of  verie  truste  and  confidence  conueyghed  him  selfe  into  the  house  of 
Homfrey  Banaster  his  seruaunt  beside  Shrewsburie.  .  .  .  But  when  yt  was  knowen 
to  his  adherentes  whiche  were  readye  to  geue  battayle,  that  his  hoste  was  scaled 
and  had  lefte  hym  almoost  alone,  and  was  fled  and  could  not  be  founde,  they  were 
sodaynely  amased  and  striken  with  a  soden  feare,  that  euery  man  like  persones 
desperate  shifted  for  hym  selfe  and  fled,  some  wente  to  sanctuarye  and  to  solitarie 
places,  some  fled  by  see,  whereof  the  mooste  parte  within  a  fewe  dayes  after  aryued 
sauely  in  the  duchye  of  Britayne.  .  .  .  [King  Richard]  made  proclamacion,  that 
what  person  coulde  shewe  and  reuele  where  the  duke  of  Buckyng- 
IV,  iii,  555.  ham  was,  shoulde  be  highly  rewarded,  yf  he  were  a  bondman  he 
should  be  enfraunchised  and  set  at  libertie,  yf  he  were  of  fre  blood 
he  shoulde  haue  a  generall  perdon  and  be  remunerate  with  a  thousand  poundes. 
.  .  .  Homfrey  Banaster  (were  it  more  for  feare  of  losse  of  lyfe  and  goodes,  or 
attracted  and  prouoked  by  the  auaricious  desire  of  the  thousand  poundes)  he 
bewrayed  his  gest  and  and  master  to  Ihon  Mitton  then  shriefe  of  Shropshire, 
whyche  .  . .  apprehended  the  duke  .  .  .  and  in  greate  hast  and  euill  spede  con- 
ueighed  him  appareled  in  a  pilled  blacke  cloke  to  the  cytie  of  Salsburie  where 
kynge  Richard  then  kepte  his  houshold.  .  .  .  The  duke  beyng  by  certayne  of  the 
kynges  councel  diligently  vpon  interrogatories  examined  .  .  .  declared  frankely 
and  frely  all  the  coniuracion  .  .  .  trustynge  because  he  had  truely  &  playnely 
confessed  all  thinges  that  were  of  hym  required,  that  he  should  haue  lycece  to 
speke  to  y*  kyng  which  (whether  it  wer  to  sue  for  perdon  and 
V,  i,  4.  grace,  or  whether  he  being  brought  to  his  presence  would  haue 
sticked  him  with  a  dagger  as  men  then  iudged)  he  sore  desyred 
and  required.  But  when  he  had  confessed  the  whole  facte  and  conspiracye  vpon 
Allsoulen  day  withoute  arreignemente  or  iudgemente  he  was  at 
V,  i,  13.  Salsburye  in  the  open  merket  place  on  a  newe  skaffolde  behedded 
and  put  to  death.  .  .  . 

While  these  thynges  were  thus  hadeled  and  ordred  in  England,  Henry  Earle 
of  Richemond  prepared  an  army  of  fyue  thousande  manly  Brytons,  and  fortie  wele 
furnyshed  shippes.  When  all  thinges  were  prepared  in  aredynes 
IV,  iii,  460.  and  the  daye  of  departynge  and  settynge  forwarde  was  appoynted, 
whiche  was  the  .xii.  daye  of  the  moneth  of  October  in  the  yere 
of  the  incarnacion  of  oure  redemer  .m.  cccc.  xlviii  [sic]  and  in  the  seconde 
yere  of  kynge  Richardes  reigne,  the  whole  armye  wente  on  shipboorde  and 
halsed  vp  their  sailes,  and  with  a  prosperous  wynde  tooke  the  sea:  but  towarde 
night  the  wynde  chaunged  and  the  wether  tourned,  and  so  houge  and  terrible 
a  tempest  sodaynely  roase,  that  with  the  verie  power  and  strength  of  the  storme, 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— HALL S  CHRONICLE 


49I 


the  shippes  were  disparcled,  seuered  and  separate  a  sondre :  some  by  force  were 
dryuen  into  Normandye,  some  were  compelled  to  retourne  agayne  into  Britayne. 
The  shippe  wherein  the  Earle  of  Rychemonde  was,  associate  onely  with  one  other 
barcke  was  all  nyghte  tossed  and  turmoyled.  In  the  mornynge  after  when  the  rage 
of  the  furious  tempest  was  assuaged,  and  the  Ire  of  the  blusterynge  wynde  was  some 
deale  appeased,  aboute  the  houre  of  none  thesame  daye,  the  erle  approched  to  the 
southe  parte  of  the  realme  of  England  even  at  the  mouthe  of  the  hauen  of  pole  in  the 
countie  of  dorcet,  where  he  mighte  playnely  perceaue  all  the  se  bankes  and  shores 
garnished  and  furnished  with  men  of  warre  and  souldiouers  appoynted  and  deputed 
there  to  defende  his  arryuall  and  landynge  as  before  is  mencioned.  Wherefore 
he  gaue  streyghte  charge  and  sore  commaundemente,  that  no  person  should  once 
presume  to  take  land  and  goo  to  the  shore,  vntill  suche  tyme  as  the  whole  nauye 
were  assembled  and  congregate.  And  while  he  expected  and  lyngered  tariyenge 
for  that  purpose,  he  sente  oute  a  shippe  bote  towarde  the  lande 
side  to  knowe,  whyther  they  whiche  stoode  there  in  suche  a  nom-  IV,  iii,  561. 
bre  and  so  well  furnysshed  in  apparell  defensiue  were  hys  capitall 
foes  and  enemyes  or  elles  his  frendes  fautoures  and  comforters.  They  that  were 
sente  in  exploracion  and  message  were  instantely  desyred  of  the  men  of  warre 
kepynge  the  coast  (whiche  thereof  were  before  instructed  and  admonished)  to 
dissende  and  take  lande,  affirmynge  that  they  were  appoyncted  by  the 
duke  of  Buckyngham  there  to  awayte  and  tarie  for  the  arryuall  and  IV,  iii,  564. 
landyng  of  the  erle  of  Richemond,  and  to  conduicte  sauely  to  the 
campe  where  the  duke  not  far  of  laye  encaped  with  a  populous  army  and  an  host 
of  great  strength  and  vigor,  to  thentent  that  the  duke  and  therle  ioynynge  in  puys- 
saunces  and  forces  together,  mighte  prosecute  and  chace  king  Richard  beyng 
destitute  of  men,  and  in  maner  desperate  and  fugityue,  and  so  by  that  meanes  and 
their  awne  laboures  and  industrie  to  obteine  the  ende  of  their  enterprise  which 
they  had  before  begonne. 

The  erle  of  Richemonde  suspectynge  their  flaterynge  requeste  to  be  but  a  fraud 
(as  yt  was  in  dede)  after  that  he  perceaued  none  of  his  shippes  to  apere  in  sight,  he 
weied  vp  his  ancors  and  halsed  vp  his  sayles  hauynge  a  prosperous  and  strenable 
wynde  and  a  freshe  gale  sente  euen  by  God  to  delyuer  hym  from 
that  perell  and  ieopardie,  arryued  safe  and  in  securitie  in  the  duchy  IV,  iii,  566. 
of  Normandy,  where  he  to  refreshe  and  solace  his  souldyours  and 
people,  tooke  his  recreacion  by  the  space  of  .iii.  dayes,  and  clerely  determyned  with 
parte  of  his  companye  to  passe  all  by  lande  agayne  into  Britayne.  And  in  the 
meane  ceason  he  sent  oratoures  to  the  Frenche  kynge  called  Charles  the  .viii.  .  .  . 
requirynge  hym  of  a  safe  conduicte  and  licence  to  passe  through  his  countrey  of 
Normandye  into  Britayne.  .  .  . 

In  the  meane  ceason  kyng  Richard  was  crediblye  aduertised  what  promyses  and 
othes  the  erle  and  his  cofederates  had  made  and  sworne  together  at  Renes,  and  how 
by  the  erles  meanes  all  thenglishme  were  passed  oute  of  Britayne  into  Fraunce. 
Wherfore  beynge  sore  dysmaied  and  in  maner  desperate,  because  his 
craftie  cheuesaunce  tooke  none  effect  in  Brytayne  ymagened  and  IV,  ii,  68. 
deuysed  how  to  infringe  and  disturbe  the  erles  purpose  by  another 
meane,  so  that  by  the  mariage  of  lady  Elizabeth  his  nece  he  shoulde  pretende  no 
clayme  nor  tytle  to  the  croune.  For  he  thought  if  that  mariage  fayled,  the  erles 
chiefe  combe  had  bene  clerly  cut. . . .  There  came  into  his  vngracious  mynde  a  thinge 
not  onely  detestable  to  be  spoken  of  in  the  remembraunce  of  man,  but  much  more 


APPENDIX 


492 

cruel  and  abhominable  to  be  put  in  execucion.  For  when  he  reuolued  in  his  wauer- 
ynge  mynde  how  greate  a  founteyne  of  mischiefe  towarde  hym 
IV,  ii,  182.  shoulde  sprynge,  yf  the  erle  of  Richmond  should  be  auaunced  to  the 
mariage  of  his  nece,  whiche  thinge  he  hearde  saye  by  the  rumour 
of  the  people  that  no  small  nombre  of  wyse  and  wittye  personages  enterprised  to 
compasse  &  brynge  to  conclusion.  He  clerely  determined  to  reconcile  to  his 
fauoure  his  brothers  wife  quene  Elizabeth  either  by  faire  woordes  or 
IV,  iii,  210.  liberall  promises,  firmely  beleuynge  her  fauoure  once  obteined  that 
she  would  not  sticke  to  commite  and  louyngly  credite  to  him  the 
rule  and  gouernaunce  both  of  her  and  her  daughters,  and  so  by  that  meanes  the 
erle  of  Richemonde  of  the  affinite  of  his  nece  should  be  vtterly  defrauded  and 
beguyled.  And  yf  no  ingenyous  remedye  coulde  be  otherwise  inuented  to  saue  the 
innumerable  mischiefes  whiche  were  euen  at  hand  and  like  to  falle,  yf  it  shoulde 
happen  quene  Anne  his  wife  to  departe  oute  of  this  presente  worlde, 
IV,  ii,  68.  then  he  him  selfe  woulde  rather  take  to  wife  his  cousyn  and  nece  the 
lady  Elizabeth,  then  for  lack  of  that  affinite  the  whole  realme  shoulde 
runne  to  ruyne,  as  who  said,  that  yf  he  once  fell  from  his  estate  and  dignite,  the 
ruyne  of  the  realme  must  nedes  shortely  ensue  &  folowe.  Wherfore  he  sent  to  the 
quene  beynge  in  sanctuarye  diuerse  and  often  messengers,  whiche  firste  shoulde 
excuse  and  purge  him  of  all  thinges  before  againste  her  attempted  or  procured, 
and  after  should  so  largely  promes  promocions  innumerable  and  benefites,  not 
onely  to  her  but  also  to  her  sonne  lord  Thomas  Marques  Dorcett,  that  they 
should  brynge  her  yf  it  were  possible  into  some  wanhope,  or  as  some  men  saie 
into  a  fooles  paradise.  The  messengers  beynge  men  bothe  of  wit  and  grauitie 
so  persuaded  the  quene  with  great  &  pregnaunte  reasons,  then  with  fayre  & 
large  promises,  that  she  began  somewhat  to  relent  &  to  geue  to  theim  no  deffe 
eare,  in  somuche  that  she  faithfully  promised  to  submyt  &  yelde  her  selfe 

fully  and  frankely  to  the  kinges  will  and  pleasure.  .  .  .  Surely 

IV,  iii,  449.  the  inconstancie  of  this  woman  were  muche  to  be  merueled  at, 
yf  all  women  had  bene  founde  constante,  but  let  men  speake, 
yet  wemen  of  the  verie  bonde  of  nature  will  folowe  their  awne  kynde.  After 
that  kynge  Rycharde  had  thus  with  glorious  promyses  and  flatterynge  woordes 
pleased  and  appeased  the  mutable  mynde  of  quene  Elizabeth  which  knewe 
nothing  lesse  then  that  he  moost  entended,  he  caused  all  his  brothers  daughters 
to  be  conueighed  into  his  paleys  with  solempne  receauyng,  as  though  with 

his  newe  familier  and  louyng  entreteinement  they  should  forget,  and  in  their 

myndes  obliterate  the  olde  committed  iniurie  and  late  perpetrate  tyrannye.  Nowe 
nothinge  was  contrariant  and  obstacle  to  his  pernicious  purpose,  but  that  his 
mancion  was  not  voide  of  his  wife,  which  thinge  he  in  anywise  adiudged  necessary 
to  be  done.  But  there  was  one  thing  that  so  muche  feared  and  dragged  him  from 
commyttynge  this  abhominable  murther,  because  as  you  have  hearde  before  he 
beganne  to  countrefaycte  the  ymage  of  a  good  and  well  disposed  person,  and  there¬ 
fore  he  was  afeard  least  ye  sodeine  and  immature  death  of  his  wife  once  openly 
knowen,  he  should  lese  the  good  and  credible  opinion  which  the  people  had  of  him, 
without  deserte  conceaued  and  reported.  But  in  conclusion,  euyll  councell  preuailed 
in  a  witt  lately  mynded  to  mischiefe,  and  tourned  from  all  goodnes.  So  that  his 
vngracious  desyre  ouercame  his  honest  feare.  And  first  to  entre  into  the  gates  of 
his  ymagened  entreprise,  he  abstayned  bothe  from  the  bed  and  companye  of  his 
wife.  After,  he  compleyned  to  dyuerse  noble  men  of  the  realme,  of  the  infortunate 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— HALL' S  CHRONICLE 


493 


sterilite  and  barennes  of  his  wife,  because  she  brought  foorth  no  fruyte  and  genera- 
cion  of  her  bodye.  And  in  especiall  he  accompted  to  Thomas  Rotheram  arche- 
bishop  of  Yorke  (whome  lately  he  had  delyuered  oute  of  warde  and  captiuite) 
these  impedymentes  of  his  quene  and  dyuerse  other,  thinkyng  that  he  woulde  enu¬ 
cleate  and  open  to  her  all  these  thinges,  trustynge  the  sequele  herof  to  take  his  effecte, 
that  she  herynge  this  grudge  of  her  husband,  and  takyng  therefore  an  inwarde 
thought,  woulde  not  longe  lyue  in  this  worlde.  Of  this  the  bishoppe  gathered 
(whiche  well  knewe  the  complexion  and  vsage  of  the  kyng)  that  the  quenes  dayes 
were  short,  and  that  he  declared  to  certeine  of  his  secrete  frendes.  After  this  he 
procured  a  common  rumour  (but  he  woulde  not  haue  the  author 
knowen)  to  be  published  and  spred  abroade  emonge  the  common  IV,  ii,  58. 
people  that  the  quene  was  ded,  to  thentent  that  she  takyng  some 
coceipte  of  this  straung  fame,  should  fall  into  some  sodayne  sicknes  or  greuous 
maladye,  &  to  proue  if  afterward  she  should  fortune  by  y*  or  any  other  waies  to  lese 
her  life,  whyther  y®  people  would  impute  her  death  to  the  thought  or  sicknes,  or 
therof  would  laie  y*  blame  to  him.  Whe  y*  quene  heard  tell  that  so  horrible  a 
rumour  of  her  death  was  sprong  emongest  the  comminaltie,  she  sore  suspected  and 
iuged  y®  world  to  be  almost  at  an  ende  with  her  and  in  that  sorofull  agony,  she  with 
lamentable  countenaunce  and  sorofull  chere,  repaired  to  the  presence  of  the  kyng 
her  husband,  demaundynge  of  hym,  what  it  should  meane  that  he  had  iudged  her 
worthy  to  dye.  The  kyng  aunswered  her  with  fare  woordes,  and  with  dissimulynge 
blandimentes  and  flatteryng  lesynges  comforted  her,  biddynge  her  to  be  of  good 
comforte,  for  to  his  knowledge  she  should  haue  none  other  cause.  But  howsoeuer 
y*  it  fortuned,  either  by  inward  thought  and  pensyuenes  of  hearte,  or  by  intoxicacion 
of  poyson  (which  is  affirmed  to  be  most  likely)  within  a  few  daies  after 
the  quene  departed  oute  of  this  transitorie  lyfe,  and  was  with  dewe  IV,  ii,  i8x. 
solempnite  buried  in  the  churche  of  seint  Peter  at  Westminster. 

This  is  the  same  Anne  one  of  the  daughters  of  y®  erle  of  Warwyk,  which  as  you 
haue  heard  before  at  the  request  of  lewes  y®  French  kyng,  was  maried  to  prince 
Edward  sonne  to  kyng  Henry  the  vi. 

The  kyng  thus  (accordyng  to  his  long  desire)  losed  out  of  the  bSdes  of 
matrimony,  beganne  to  cast  a  foolyshe  phantasie  to  Lady  Elizabeth  his  nece, 
making  much  suite  to  haue  her  ioyned  with  him  in  lawfull  matrimony.  But 
because  all  men,  and  the  mayden  her  selfe  moost  of  all,  detested  and  abhorred 
this  vnlawfull  and  in  maner  vnnaturall  copulacion,  he  determined  to  prolonge 
and  deferre  the  matter  till  he  were  in  a  more  quietnes.  For  all  that  verie 
ceason  he  was  oppressed  with  great  weightie  and  vrgent  causes  and  busynesses 
on  euery  side  considerynge  that  dailye  parte  of  the  nobilite  sailed  into  Fraunce  to 
the  erle  of  Richmond.  .  .  .Emongest  the  noble  men  whome  he  moost  mystrusted, 
these  were  the  principall,  Thomas  lorde  Stanley,  Sir  William  Stanley 
his  brother,  Gylbert  Talbot  and  .vi.  hundred  other,  of  whose  purposes 
although  kyng  Richard  were  ignoraunt,  yet  he  gaue  nether  confidence 
nor  credence  to  any  of  theim,  and  least  of  all  to  the  Lord  Stanley, 
because  he  was  ioyned  in  matrimony  with  the  lady  Margarete  mother 
to  the  erle  of  Richmond,  as  afterward  apparauntly  ye  maie  perceaue. 
the  sayde  lorde  Stanley  woulde  haue  departed  into  his  countrey 
to  visite  his  familie,  and  to  recreate  and  refreshe  his  spirites  (as  he 
openly  sayde)  but  the  truth  was  to  thentent  to  be  in  a  perfight  readines 
to  receaue  the  erle  of  Richmod  at  his  arriuall  in  Englad:  the  kyng  in  no  wise  would 


IV,  iv,  15. 
IV,  iii,  507. 

For  when 

iv,  iii, 

521-528. 


494 


APPENDIX 


suffre  hym  to  departe  before  that  he  had  left  as  an  hostage  in  the  courte  George 
Stanley  lorde  straung  his  first  begotten  sonne  and  heire.  .  .  .  The  Earle  of  Rich- 
monde  because  he  woulde  no  lenger  lynger  and  weery  hys  frendes  lyuynge  con¬ 
tinually  betweene  hope  and  feare,  determyned  in  all  conueniente  hast  to  sett  for- 
warde,  and  caried  to  his  shippes  armoure,  weapons,  vitayle  and  all  other  ordinaunces 
expedient  for  warre.  .  .  After  that  the  erle  had  made  his  humble  peticion,  and 
deuoute  praier  to  allmightie  God,  .  .  .  weyed  vp  his  ancres  and  halsed  vp  his  sailes 
and  in  the  calendes  of  August  he  sailed  from  harflet  with  so  prosperous  a  wynde  that 
the  .vii.  daye  after  his  departure  he  arryued  in  Wales  in  the  euenyng 
IV,  iii,  572.  at  a  Porte  called  Mylford  Hauen,  and  in  cotinet  tooke  lande  and 
came  to  a  place  called  Dalle.  .  .  And  the  earle  at  the  sonne  rysyng 

IV,  iv,  12.  remouec]  [0  harfford  west,  beyng  distant  from  dalle  not  fully  ten 

myle,  where  he  was  applauded  and  receaued  of  the  people  with 
greate  ioye,  ...  he  marched  forward  toward  Shrewsbury,  and  in  his  passynge 
there  met  &  saluted  him  Rice  ap  Thomas  with  a  goodly  bad  of 

IV,  iv,  17.  Welshmen  whiche  makynge  an  othe  and  promyse  to  the  erle,  sub¬ 

mitted  himself  whole  to  his  ordre  and  commaundement.  .  .  And 
thus  his  powre  increasynge  he  arryued  at  the  towne  of  Stafforde  and  there  pawsed. 

To  whome  came  Sir  Wyllyam  Stanley  accompaigned  with  a  fewe 
V,  iii,  90.  persones,  and  after  that  the  Earle  and  he  had  communed  no  longe 
tyme  together,  he  reuerted  to  his  souldioures  which  he  had  congregate 
together  to  serue  the  Earle,  whiche  from  thence  departed  to  Lichefelde  and  laie 
without  the  walles  in  his  camp  all  nyght. 

In  the  mean  ceason  kyng  Richard  (whiche  was  appoynted  nowe  to  finyshe  his 
last  laboure  by  the  very  deuyne  iustice  and  prouidence  of  God,  which  called  him  to 
condigne  punyshemente  for  his  sclelerate  merites  and  myscheueous  desertes) 
marshed  to  a  place  mete  for  twoo  battayles  to  encountre  by  a  village 
V,  iii,  3.  ca^e(i  Bosworth,  not  farre  from  Leycester,  and  there  he  pitched  his 
felde,  refreshed  his  souldioures  and  toke  his  rest.  The  fame  went 
>  »  oo'  that  he  had  the  same  night  a  dreadful  &  a  terrible  dreame,  for  it 

semed  to  hym  beynge  a  slepe  y*  he  sawe  diuerse  ymages  lyke  terrible 
deuelles  whiche  pulled  and  haled  hym,  not  sufferynge  hym  to  take  any  quyet  or 
rest.  The  whiche  straunge  vision  not  so  sodeinly  strake  his  heart  with  a  sodeyne 
feare,  but  it  stuffed  his  hed  and  troubled  his  mynde  with  many  dreadfull  and  busy 
Imaginacions.  For  incontynent  after,  his  heart  beynge  almost  damped,  he  prog¬ 
nosticated  before  the  doubtfull  chaunce  of  the  battaile  to  come,  not 

V,  iii,  83.  vsynge  the  alacrite  and  myrth  of  mynde  and  of  countenaunce  as  he 

was  accustomed  to  do  before  he  came  toward  the  battaile.  And 
least  that  it  might  be  suspected  that  he  was  abasshed  for  feare  of  his  enemyes,  and 
for  that  cause  looked  so  piteously,  he  recyted  and  declared  to  hys  famylyer  frendes 
in  the  morenynge  hys  wonderfull  visyon  and  terrible  dreame.  But  I  thynke  this 
was  no  dreame,  but  a  punccion  and  pricke  of  his  synfull  conscience.  .  .  .  Now  to 
retorne  againe  to  oure  purpose,  y®  next  daie  after,  kyng  Richard  beyng  furnished 
w*  men  &  all  abilmetes  of  warr,  bringyng  all  his  men  out  of  there  camp  into  y® 
plaine,  ordered  his  forward  in  a  marueylous  legth,  in  which  he  appointed  both 
horsemen  &  footmen  to  thentet  to  emprynte  in  y®  hartes  of  the  y* 

V,  iii,  33&  loked  a  farre  of,  a  sodeine  terror  &  deadlie  feare,  for  y®  great  mul¬ 

titude  of  ye  armed  souldiours:  &  in  the  fore  Frount  he  placed  y® 
archers  like  a  strong  fortified  trench  or  bulwarke:  ouer  this  battaile  was  captain 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— HALL S  CHRONICLE 


495 


Ihon  duke  of  Norfolke  with  whom  was  Thomas  erle  of  Surrey  his  sonne.  After 
this  log  vagard  folowed  king  Richard  hi  self,  w1  a  str5g  copaigny  of  chosen  & 
approued  me  of  warr,  hauyng  horsmen  for  wynges  on  both  ye  sides  of  his  battail. 

After  y*  therle  of  Richmond  was  departed  from  y®  communicaciS  of  his  frendes 
as  you  haue  harde  before,  he  began  to  be  of  a  better  stomake  &  of  a  more  valiant 
courage,  &  w'  all  diliges  pitchid  his  feld  iuste  by  ye  cap  of  his  enemies,  &  there  he 
lodged  y*  night.  In  the  morning  be  time  he  caused  his  men  to  put  on  there  armure 
&  appareyl  the  selfes  redy  to  fight  &  geue  battail,  &  sent  to  ye  lord  Stanley  (which 
was  now  come  w*  his  bade  in  a  place  indifferently  betwene  both  ye  armies)  requiryng 
him  wl  his  me  to  approche  nere  to  his  army  &  to  help  to  set  y®  souldiours  in  array, 
he  answered  y‘  therle  should  set  his  awne  me  in  a  good  order  of  battaile,  while  he 
would  array  his  copaigny,  &  come  to  him  in  time  conuenient.  Which  answere 
made  otherwise  then  therle  thought  or  would  haue  iudged,  considering  y®  oportunite 
of  the  time  &  the  waite  of  y®  busines,  &  although  he  was  there  wtall,  a  litle  vexed, 
began  somewhat  to  hang  y®  hedde,  yet  he  w'out  any  time  delaiyng  compelled  by 
necessite,  after  this  maner  instructed  &  ordred  his  men.  He  made  his  forward 
somewhat  single  and  slender,  accordyng  to  y®  small  nober  of  his 
people.  In  y®  Frount  he  placed  the  archers,  of  whome  he  made  V,  iii,  30. 
captain  Iho  erle  of  Oxford:  to  the  right  wyng  of  y*  battaill  he 
appoynted,  sir  Gylbert  Talbott  to  be  y®  leder:  to  ye  left  wing  he  assigned  sir  Ihon 
Sauage,  &  he  w1  y®  aide  of  y*  lord  Staley  accompaignied  with  therle  of  Penbroke 
hauyng  a  good  compaignie  of  horsmen  and  a  small  nomber  of 
footmen:  For  all  his  hole  nober  exceded  not  .v.  thousaide  men  beside  V,  iii,  14, 15. 
the  powr  of  the  Stanleys,  wherof  .iij.  thousande  were  in  the  felde  vnder 
the  stadard  of  sir  William  Stanley:  The  kynges  nomber  was  doble  as  muche  & 
more.  When  bothe  these  armies  were  thus  ordered  &  al  men  redy  to  set  forward, 
kyng  Richard  called  his  Cheuetains  together  &  to  the  sayde.  .  .  . 

You  se  also,  what  a  nober  of  beggerly  Britons  &  faynte  harted  Frenchmen 
be  with  hym  arriued  to  distroy  vs  our  wyfes  and  children.  Which 
Imminent  mischifes  &  apparaunt  incouenientes,  if  we  wil  with-  357-380 
stond  &  refel,  we  must  liue  to  gether  like  brethern,  fight  together 
like  libs,  &  feare  not  to  dye  together  lyke  men.  And  obseruyng  and 
kepyng  this  rule  and  precept,  beleue  me,  the  fearefull  hare  neuer  fled  faster 
before  the  gredy  greyhoud,  nor  y*  sylye  larke  before  y*  sparow  hauke,  nor  the 
symple  shepe  before  the  rauenous  wolfe,  then  your  proud  bragging  aduersaries 
astoned  &  amased  with  y®  only  sight  of  your  manly  visages,  will  flee,  ronne  & 
skyr  out  of  the  felde.  For  yf  yow  consider  and  wisely  ponder  al  things  in  your 
minde,  you  shall  perceyue  that  we  haue  manifeste  causes,  and  apparant  tokens 
of  triumph  and  victorie.  And  to  begyn  with  the  earle  of  Richmond  Captaine  of 
this  rebellion,  he  is  a  Welsh  mylkesoppe,  a  ma  of  small  courage  and 
lesse  experience  in  marcyall  actes  and  feates  of  war,  brought  vp  by  V,  iii,  368. 
my  brothers  meanes  and  myne  like  a  captiue  in  a  close  cage  in  the 
court  of  Fraunces  duke  of  Britaine,  and  neuer  saw  armie,  nor  was  exercised  in 
marcial  affaires,  by  reason  whereof  he  neither  can  nor  is  able  on  his  awne  will  or 
experience  to  guyde  or  rule  an  hoste.  For  in  the  wyt  and  pollicie  of  the  capitaine, 
consisteth  the  chefe  adeption  of  the  victory  and  ouerture  of  the  enemyes.  Second- 
arely  feare  not  and  put  a  way  all  doubtes,  for  when  y®  traitors  &  runagates  of  our 
realme,  shall  see  vs  w*  banner  displaied  come  against  them,  remebryng  there  oth 
promise  &  fidelitie  made  vnto  vs,  as  to  ther  souereigne  lord  &  anoynted  kyng, 


APPENDIX 


496 

they  shal  be  so  pricked  &  stimulate  in  ye  botome  of  there  scrupulous  consciences 
y‘  they  for  very  remorce  &  dread  of  y*  diuine  plage  will  either  shamefully  flye,  or 
humbly  submitte  them  selfes  to  our  grace  and  marcie.  And  as  for  the  Frenshme 
&  Brytons,  there  valiatnes  ys  suche,  y'  our  noble  progenitors  &  your  valiaunt 
paret&s,  haue  them  oftener  vaquished  &  ouercome  in  one  moneth,  then  they  in 
y®  beginnyng  imagened  possible  to  copasse  &  fynishe  in  a  hole  yere.  What  wil 
you  make  of  th£,  braggers  w'out  audacite,  dronkards  w'out  discrescion,  rybaudes 
w'out  reason,  cowardes  w'out  resistyng  &  in  conclusion  y®  most  effeminate  & 
lasciuious  people,  y'  euer  shewed  them  selfes  in  Frunt  of  battaile,  ten  tymes  more 
coragious  to  fly  &  escape  then  ons  to  assaut  y®  brest  of  our  stronge  &  populous 
army.  Wherfore,  consideryng  al  these  auautages,  expell  out  of  your  thoughts  all 
doutes  &  avoide  out  of  your  mindes  al  feare,  &  like  valiaunt  chapions  auauce 
furth  your  standards,  &  assaye  whither  your  enemies  can  decide  &  trie  y*  title  of 
battaile  by  dent  of  swerde,  auaunce  (I  say  againe)  forward  my  captains,  in  whom 
lacketh  neither  pollicie  wisdome  nor  puissaunce.  Euery  one  gyue  but  one  suer 
stripe,  &  suerly  y®  iorney  is  ours.  What  preuayleth  a  hadfull  to  a  hole  realme: 
desiryng  you  for  y®  loue  y'  you  beare  to  me,  &  y®  affeccion  y'  you  haue  to  your 
natiue  and  natural  coutrey,  &  to  y®  sauegard  of  your  prince  &  your  self,  y*  you 
wyll  this  day  take  to  you  your  accustumed  corage,  &  couragious  spirites  for  y® 
defence  &  sauegard  of  vs  all.  And  as  for  me,  I  assure  you,  this  day  I  wil  triuphe 
by  glorious  victorie,  or  suffer  death  for  immortal  fame.  For  thei  be  maihmeed 
&  out  of  y®  palice  of  fame  disgraded,  dieg  w'out  renoune,  which  do  not  as  much 
preferre  &  exalte  y®  perpetual  honor  of  their  natiue  coutrey,  as  ther  awne  mortal  & 
transitorie  life.  Now  sent  George  to  borowe,  let  vs  set  forward,  &  remeber  well 
y1  I  am  he  which  shall  wt  high  auauncementes,  rewarde  &  preferre  ye  valiaunt 
&  hardy  chapions,  &  punishe  and  turment  the  shameful  cowardes  &  dreadfull 
dastardes.  This  exhortacion  encouraged  all  such  as  fauoured  him,  but  suche  as 
were  present  more  for  dreade  then  loue,  kissed  the  openly,  whome  they  inwardly 
hated  .  .  .  other  stode  stil  &  loked  on,  entendynge  to  take  part  w* 
V,  ii,  22-24.  the  victors  and  ouercommers:  So  was  his  people  to  him  vnsure 
and  vnfaithfull  at  his  ende,  as  he  was  to  his  nephewes  vntrew  and 
vnnatural  in  his  beginnyng. 

When  therle  of  Richmond  knew  by  his  forriders  that  the  king  was  so  nere 
embattayled  he  rode  about  his  armye,  from  ranke  to  ranke,  from  wyng  to  wyng, 
geuyng  comfortable  wordes  to  all  men.  .  .  .  And  when  he  had  ouer  loked  hys 
army  ouer  euery  syde,  he  pawsed  a  while,  and  after  with  a  lowde  voyce  and  bolde 
spirite  spake  to  his  compaignions  these  or  lyke  wordes  folowyng.  If  euer  God 
gaue  victorie  to  men  fightynge  in  a  iust  quarrell?.  .  .  No  doubt 
276  309  my  fel°wes  and  frendes,  but  he  of  hys  bountefull  goodnes  wyll  this 
daye  sende  us  triumphaunt  victorye  and  a  luckey  iourney  ouer  our 
prowde  enemyes.  .  .  .  Our  cause  is  so  iuste  that  no  enterprice  can  be  of  more 
vertue,  bothe  by  the  lawes  diuine  and  ciuile,  for  what  can  be  a  more  honest, 
goodly  or  Godly  quarell  then  to  fight  agaynste  a  Capitayne,  beynge  an  homicide 
and  murderer  of  hys  awne  bloude  and  progenye?  An  extreme 
V,  iii,  285.  destroyer  of  hys  nobylytie,  and  to  hys  and  oure  countrey  and  the 
poore  subiectes  of  the  same,  a  deadly  malle,  a  fyrye  brande  and  a 
burden  vntollerable  ?  besyde  hym,  consyder  who  be  of  his  bande  and  compaignye, 
suche  as  by  murther  and  vntreuthe  committed  agaynste  there  awne  kynne  and 
lynage,  ye  agaynste  theyr  Prynce  and  souereygne  Lorde  haue  disheryted  me  and  you 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— HALL S  CHRONICLE 


497 


and  wrongefully  deteyne  and  vsurpe  ouer  lawefull  patrymonye  and  lyneall  inheryt- 
aunce.  For  he  that  calleth  hym  selfe  kynge,  kepeth  from  me  the  Crowne  and  regy- 
mente  of  this  noble  realme  and  countrey  contrarye  to  all  iustice  and  equitie.  Lyke- 
wise,  hys  mates  and  frendes  occupie  your  landes,  cutt  downe  your 
woddes  and  destroy  your  manners,  letting  your  wifes  and  children  V,  ii,  n. 
range  a  brode  for  their  liuyng  .  .  .  besyde  this  I  assure  you  that  there 
be  yonder  in  that  great  battaill,  men  brought  thither  for  feare  and  not  for  loue,  soul- 
diours  by  force  compelled  and  not  w*  good  will  assembled:  persons 
which  desyer  rather  the  destruccion  then  saluacion  of  ther  master  V,  iii,  282. 
and  captayn:  And  fynally  a  multitude:  wherof  the  most  part  will 
be  our  frendes  and  the  lest  part  our  enemies.  .  .  .  Therfore  let  all  feare  be  set  a 
syde  and  lyke  sworne  brethern  let  vs  ioyne  in  one,  for  this  shalbe  thende  of  our 
trauayle  and  the  gaine  of  our  labour  eyther  by  honorable  death  or 
famous  victory.  .  .  .  And  this  one  thyng  I  assure  you,  that  in  so  V,  iii,  305. 
iuste  and  good  a  cause,  and  so  notable  a  quarell,  you  shall  fynde  me 
this  daye,  rather  a  dead  carion  vppon  the  coold  grounde,  then  a  fre  prisoner  on  a 
carpet  in  a  laydes  chamber.  .  .  .  This  is  y*  daie  of  gayne,  &  this  is  ye  time  of 
losse,  get  this  day  victorie  &  be  coquerers,  &  lese  this  daies  battail 
&  be  villains  &  therefore  in  ye  name  of  God  &  saict  George  let  V,  iii,  308. 
euery  ma  coragiously  auauce  forth  his  stadard.  .  .  . 

He  had  scantly  finyshed  his  saienge,  but  the  one  armye  espyed  the  other, 
lord  how  hastely  the  souldioures  buckled  their  healmes,  how  quikly  the 
archers  bent  their  bowes  and  frushed  theire  feathers,  how  redely  y*  byllmen 
shoke  there  bylies  and  proued  there  staues,  redy  to  approche  &  ioyne  when 
the  terrible  trompet  should  sownde  the  bluddy  blast  to  victorie  or  death. 
Betwene  both  armies  ther  was  a  great  marrysse  which  therle  of  Richemonde  left 
on  his  right  hand,  for  this  entent  that  it  should  be  on  that  syde  a  defence  for  his 
part,  and  in  so  doyng  he  had  the  sonne  at  his  backe  and  in  the  faces  of  his  enemies. 
When  kynge  Richard  saw  the  earles  compaignie  was  passed  the  marres^e,  he 
commaunded  with  al  hast  to  sett  vpon  them,  then  the  trompettes 
blew  &  the  souldiours  showted  and  the  kyngs  archers  couragiously  V,  iii,  390. 
let  fly  there  arrowes,  the  erles  bowme  stode  not  still  but  paied  the 
home  againe.  The  terrible  shot  ons  passed,  the  armies  ioyned,  &  came  to  hande 
strokes,  where  nother  swerde  nor  byll  was  spared  at  whiche  encounter  the  lord 
Stanley  ioyned  with  therle.  The  erle  of  Oxforde  in  the  meane  season  feryng  lest 
while  his  cSpaignie  was  fightyng,  they  should  be  compassed  &  circuuented  w*  ye 
multitude  of  his  enemies,  gaue  cdmauemet  in  euery  ranke  y*  no  man  should  be  so 
hardy  as  go  aboue  .x.  fote  from  y*  standard,  whiche  comaundement  ons  knowen, 
they  knit  the  selfes  together,  &  ceased  a  littel  fr5  fightyng:  the  aduersaries  sodainly 
abashed  at  the  matter  and  mystrustynge  some  fraude  or  deceate,  began  also  to 
pause  and  left  strikyng,  and  not  against  the  wylles  of  many  whiche  had  leuer  had 
the  kyng  destroyed  then  saued,  and  therfore  they  fought  very  faintlye  or  stode  stil. 
Therle  of  Oxforde  bringing  all  his  bend  together  on  the  one  part,  set  on  his  ennemies 
freshly,  agayne,  the  aduersaries  perceiuyng  that,  placed  ther  men  slender  and 
thyne  before  and  thicke  and  brode  behynde,  begynnynge  againe  hardely  the  battaill. 
While  the  two  forwardes  thus  mortallye  fought,  eche  entendyng  to  vanquishe  & 
conuince  ye  other,  Kyng  Richard  was  admonished  by  his  explorators  and  espialles, 
y‘  therle  of  Richmod  accompaignied  with  a  small  nomber  of  men  of  armes  was  not 
farre  of,  &  as  he  approched  and  marched  toward  him,  he  perfitely  knew  his  personage 


32 


49s 


APPENDIX 


by  certaine  demonstrations  &  tokens  whiche  he  had  learned  and  knowen  of  other. 
And  being  inflamed  with  ire  and  vexed  w*  outragious  malice,  he  put  his  spurres  to 
his  horse  &  rode  out  of  the  syde  of  ye  range  of  his  battaile,  leuyng  the  auantgardes 
fightyng,  &  like  a  hungery  lion  ran  with  spere  in  rest  toward  him.  Therle  of 
Richemond  perceyued  wel  the  king  furiusly  commyng  toward  him,  and  by  cause  the 
hole  hope  of  his  welth  and  purpose  was  to  be  determined  by  battaill,  he  gladly 
proferred  to  encountre  with  him  body  to  body  and  man  to  man.  Kyng  Richard 
set  on  so  sharpely  at  the  first  Brout  y*  he  ouerthrew  therles  standarde,  and  slew 
Sir  William  Brandon  his  standarde  bearer  (whiche  was  father  to  sir 
V,  iii,  28.  Charles  Brandon  by  kynge  Hery  y*  vm.  created  duke  of  Suffolke) 
and  matched  hand  to  hand  w*  sir  Ihon  Cheinye,  a  man  of  great 
force  &  strength  which  would  haue  resisted  him,  &  the  saied  Ihon  was  by  him 
manfully  ouerthrowen,  and  so  he  making  open  passage  by  dent  of  swerde  as  he  went 
forward,  therle  of  Richmond  with  stode  his  violence  and  kept  him  at  the  swerdes 
poincte  without  auantage  longer  then  his  compaignions  other  thought  or  iudged, 
which  beyng  almost  in  dispaire  of  victorie,  were  sodainly  recomforted  by  Sir  William 
Stanley,  whiche  came  to  succours  with  .iii.  thousand  tall  men,  at  whiche  very 
instant  kynge  Richardes  men  were  dryuen  backe  and  fledde,  and  he  him  selfe  man¬ 
fully  fyghtynge  in  the  mydell  of  his  enemies  was  slayne  and  brought  to  his  death 
as  he  worthely  had  deserued. 

In  the  meane  season  therle  of  Oxforde  with  the  aide  of  the  Lord  Stanley,  after 
no  long  fight  disconfited  the  forward  of  king  Rychard,  whereof  a  greate  nomber 
were  slayne  in  the  chace  and  flight,  but  the  greatest  nomber  whiche  (compelled  by 
feare  of  the  kyng  and  not  of  there  mere  voluntarie  mocion)  came  to  the  feld,  gaue 
neuer  a  stroke,  and  hauing  no  harme  nor  domage  sauely  departed,  whiche  came 
not  thyther  in  hope  to  se  the  kynge  prosper  and  preuaile,  but  to  here  that  he  shoulde 
be  shamefully  confounded  and  brought  to  ruyne. 

In  this  battaile  died  fewe  aboue  the  nomber  of  a  thousande  persons:  And  of  the 
nobilitie  were  slayne  Ihon  Duke  of  Norfolke,  whiche  was  warned  by 
V,  iii,  347.  dyuers  to  refrayne  from  the  felde,  in  so  much  that  the  nyghte  before 
he  shoulde  set  forwarde  towarde  the  kynge,  one  wrote  on  his  gate: 
lack  of  Norffolke  be  not  to  bolde 
For  Dykon  thy  maister  is  bought  and  solde. 

Yet  all  this  notwithstandynge  he  regarded  more  his  othe  his  honour  and  promyse 
made  to  king  Richard,  lyke  a  gentleman  and  a  faythefull  subiecte  to  his  prince 
absented  not  him  selfe  from  his  mayster,  but  as  he  faythefully  lyued  vnder  hym, 
so  he  manfully  dyed  with  hym  to  hys  greate  fame  and  lawde.  There  were  slayne 
besyde  him  Water  lorde  Ferrers  of  Chartley,  Sir  Rychard  Ratclyffe, 
V,  v,  1 9,  20.  and  Robert  Brackenburie  Leutenaunt  of  the  Tower  and  not  many 
gentlemen  mo.  .  .  .  On  therle  of  Richmods  part  were  slaine  scace 
one  hundred  persones,  amongst  whome  the  principall  was  Sir  William  Brandon  his 
standard  bearer.  This  battaill  was  fought  at  Bosworth  in  Leycester  shire  the 
.xxii.  daye  of  August  in  the  yere  of  our  redempcion  a.M.CCCC.lxxxvi.  the  hole 
conflicte  endured  lyttell  aboue  two  howres.  Kyng  Richard  as  the 
V,  iv,  12-14.  fame  went  might  haue  escaped  and  gotten  sauegarde  by  fliynge. 

For  when  they  which  were  next  about  his  person  saw  and  perceyued 
at  the  first  ioynyng  of  the  battaill  the  souldiours  faintly  and  nothing  couragiously 
to  set  on  their  enemies  .  .  .  they  brought  to  hym  a  swyfte  and  a  light  horse  to  con- 
uey  hym  away.  He  which  was  not  ignorant  of  ye  grudge  and  yll  will  y*  the 


SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT— HALL' S  CHRONICLE 


499 


comd  people  bare  toward  him  . .  .  answered  (as  men  saye)  that  on  that  daye  he 
would  make  an  ende  of  all  battailes  or  els  ther  finish  his  lyfe.  .  .  . 

When  therle  had  thus  obteigned  victorie  and  slain  his  mortal  enemie,  he  kneled 
doune  and  rendred  to  almightie  God  his  harty  thakes  w'  deuoute  &  Godly  orisons, 
besechyng  his  goodnes  to  sende  hym  grace  to  auaunce  &  defende  the  catholike 
fayth  &  to  mayntaine  iustice  &  cocorde  amogest  his  subiectes  &  people,  by 
God  now  to  his  gouernauce  comitted  &  assigned:  Which  praier  finyshed,  he 
replenyshed  w1  incomperable  gladnes,  ascended  vp  to  the  top  of  a  litell  mountaine, 
where  he  not  only  praysed  &  lawded  his  valiaunt  souldiours,  but  also  gaue  vnto 
theim  his  harty  thankes,  w*  promyse  of  cfidigne  recompence  for  their  fidelite  & 
valiaut  factes,  willing  &  commaundyng  al  the  hurt  &  wouded  persones  to  be  cured, 
and  the  dead  carcases  to  be  deliuered  to  y*  sepulture.  Then  ye  people  reioysed  & 
clapped  hades  criyng  vp  to  heauen,  kyng  Henry,  kyng  Henry.  When  the  lord 
Stanley  sawe  the  good  will  and  gratuite  of  the  people  he  toke  the 
crowne  of  kynge  Richard  which  was  founde  amongest  the  spoyle  V,  v,  8-13. 
in  the  felde,  and  set  it  on  therles  hed,  as  though  he  had  byne  elected 
king  by  the  voyce  of  the  people  as  in  auncient  tymes  past  in  diuers  realmes  it  hath 
been  accustomed,  and  this  was  the  first  signe  and  token  of  his  good  lucke  and  felicite. 
I  must  put  you  here  in  remembraunce  how  that  kynge  Richarde  puttynge  some 
diffidence  in  the  lord  Stanley,  which  had  w1  hym  as  an  hostage,  the  lorde  straunge 
his  eldest  sonne,  which  lord  Stanley  as  you  haue  hearde  before  ioyned  not  at  the 
firste  with  his  sonne  in  lawes  armye,  for  feare  that  kynge  Richarde  would  haue 
slayne  the  Lorde  Straunge  his  heyre.  When  kynge  Richarde  was  come  to  Bos- 
woorth,  he  sent  a  purseuaut  to  the  lord  Stanley,  commaundyng  hym 
to  auaunce  forward  with  hys  compaignie  and  to  come  to  his  presence, 
whiche  thynge  yf  he  refused  to  do,  he  sware  by  Christes  passion  that 
he  woulde  stryke  of  his  sonnes  hedde  before  he  dined.  The  lorde  Stanley  aunswered 
the  pursiuaunt  that  yf  the  kynge  dyd  so,  he  had  more  sonnes  a  lyue,  and  as  to  come 
to  hym  he  was  not  then  so  determined :  when  kynge  Richarde  harde  this  aunswere 
he  commaunded  the  lorde  Straunge  incontinent  to  be  behedded,  whiche  was  at  that 
very  same  season  when  both  the  armyes  had  sight  eche  of  other.  The  counsaillers 
of  kyng  Richard  pondering  the  time  and  the  cause,  knowynge  also  the  Lorde 
Straunge  to  be  innocente  of  his  fathers  offence,  perswaded  the  kynge  that  it  was 
now  time  to  fight  and  not  time  to  execucion,  aduisynge  him  to  kepe  the  Lorde 
Straunge  as  a  prisoner  till  the  battayll  were  ended,  and  then  at  Leyser  his  pleasure 
might  be  accomplished.  So  as  God  woulde  kyng  Rycharde  enfrynged  hys  holy 
othe,  and  the  Lorde  was  deliuered  to  the  kepers  of  the  kynges  tentes  to  be  kept  as 
a  prisoner,  whyche  when  the  felde  was  done  and  their  master  slayne  and  proclama- 
cion  made  to  knowe  were  the  childe  was,  they  submitted  them  selfes 
as  prysoners  to  the  Lord  Straunge,  and  he  gently  receyued  them  V,v,  15-17. 
and  brought  them  to  the  newe  proclamed  king,  where  of  him  and  of 
his  Father  he  was  receyued  with  greate  ioye  and  gladnes.  After  this  the  hole 
campe  remoued  with  bagg  and  baggage  and  thesame  nyght  in  the  euenyng  kynge 
Henry  with  great  Pompe  came  to  the  towne  of  Leycester.  .  .  .  Thus  ended  this 
prince  his  mortall  life  with  infamie  and  dishonor,  whiche  neuer  preferred  fame  or 
honestie  before  ambicion  tyranny  and  myschiefe. 


V,  iii, 

387-390- 


500 


APPENDIX 


THE  LATIN  TRAGEDY  OF  RICHARDUS  TERTIUS 

The  Latin  Tragedy,  Richardus  Tertius,  was  acted  at  St  John’s  College,  Cam¬ 
bridge,  some  time  before  1588;  two  allusions  to  this  performance,  by  Harrington 
and  by  Heywood,  are  given  in  the  notes  on  I,  i,  1;  to  these  should  be  added  a 
third,  first  mentioned  by  Steevens:  ‘It  appears  from  the  following  passage  in  the 
‘  preface  to  Nashe’s  Have  With  You  to  Saffron  Walden,  1596,  that  a  Latin  tragedy 
*  of  King  Richard  III.  had  been  acted  at  Trinity  [sic]  College,  Cambridge:  “ — or  his 
‘  fellow  codshead  that  in  the  Latine  tragedie  of  King  Richard,  cried — Ad  urbs,  ad 
‘  urbs,  ad  urbs,  when  his  whole  part  was  no  more  than — Urbs,  urbs,  ad  arma,  ad 
‘anna.’”  Of  this  Latin  Tragedy  there  are  two  copies  in  manuscript,  one  in  the 
library  of  Emmanuel  College,  and  the  other  in  the  University  Library,  Cambridge. 
Under  the  editorship  of  Barron  Field,  it  was  printed  from  the  Emmanuel  College 
MS  by  the  Shakespeare  Society,  vol.  v,  1844.  This  was  its  first  appearance  in 
this  form.  The  editor  remarks  that  the  University  Library  MS  alone  gives  the 
following  title:  ‘Thomae  Legge  legum  doctoris  |  Collegii  Caio-goneviliensis  in  | 
Academia  Cantabrigiensi  |  magistri  ac  Rectoris.  |  Richardus  tertius  Tragedia  | 
tri vespa  |  habita  Collegii  Divi  Johnis  |  Evangeliste  |  Comitii  Bacchelaureorum  | 
Anno  Domini  1579  |  Tragedia  in  tres  accones  divisa.  |  ’  Two  contemporary 
allusions  to  the  play  are  given  by  Field,  and  concerning  Dr  Thomas  Legge  he 
says:  ‘The  author.  .  .  probably  wrote  it  for  the  purpose  of  being  performed  before 
‘the  Queen.  In  the  year  1592,  he  was  Vice  Chancellor  of  the  University,  “and,” 
‘says  Mr  Collier,  “in  a  communication  to  Lord  B'urghley,  he  refers  to  some  offence 
‘  given  to  the  Queen,  probably  by  requiring,  in  answer  to  her  wishes  to  see  a  play  at 
‘Cambridge,  time  and  the  use  of  the  Latin  tongue;  and  mentions  that  the  University 
‘  had  sent  some  of  its  body  to  Oxford,  to  witness  the  entertainment  there  given  to 
‘Her  Majesty,  in  order  to  be  better  prepared  hereafter  to  obey  her  directions.” 
‘(Hist,  of  Dram.  Poet.,  i,  296).  Besides  the  play  of  Richardus  Tertius  ...  he 
‘wrote  a  tragedy  called  The  Destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and,  to  use  Fuller’s  words: 
‘“having  at  last  refined  it  to  the  purity  of  the  publique  standard,  some  plageary 
‘  filched  it  from  him,  just  as  it  was  to  be  acted.”  [ Worthies ,  ii,  491;  ed.  1840.]  Fuller 
‘also  informs  us  that  Dr  Palmer,  afterwards  Dean  of  Peterborough,  was  the  original 
‘performer  of  Richard,  and  very  successful  in  Legge’s  other  play.’ — Fuller’s  words 
in  regard  to  Dr  Palmer  are  delightfully  characteristic:  ‘John  Palmer.  .  .  who 
‘acted  King  Richard,  had  his  head  so  possessed  with  a  prince-like  humour,  that 
‘  ever  after  he  did  what  then  he  acted,  in  his  prodigal  expences;  so  that  (the  cost  of 
‘a  sovereign  ill  befitting  the  purse  of  a  subject)  he  died  poor  in  prison,  notwithstand¬ 
ing  his  great  preferment.’ — Worthies,  ii,  491.  Fuller  also  tells  us  that:  ‘Dr  Legge 
‘died  July  12,  1607,  in  the  72nd  year  of  his  age.’  Farmer  and  Tyrwhitt  both 
mention  another  Latin  play  of  the  same  title  as  that  by  Legge;  Farmer  declares  it 
to  be  but  a  ‘childish  imitation’  of  the  older  play  written  by  Henry  Lacy  in  1586, 
Churchill  goes  even  further  and  shows  (p.  395)  that:  *  It  is  in  fact  nothing  less 
‘than  a  transcript  of  Legge’s  play,  made,  as  appears  from  MS  Harl.  6926,  by  Lacy, 
‘for  presentation  at  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  .  .  .  The  establishment  of  this 
‘fact  was  due  to  the  authors  of  the  Athena  Cantabrigiensis,  1861.  cf.  vol.  ii,  p.  41.’ — 
This  accounts,  I  think,  for  the  apparent  error  in  Steeven’s  note  (quoted  above)  as 
to  the  locality  of  the  performance  of  the  Latin  tragedy  referred  to  by  Nash  in 
the  preface  to  Have  With  You,  etc. 


THE  TRUE  TRAGEDIE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  50 1 


In  addition  to  the  Lacy  copy  just  mentioned,  cited  also  at  I,  i,  1.  by  Farmer, 
Field  says  that  there  is  another  copy  in  the  same  collection,  No.  2412,  and  adds: 
‘That  these  “  University  men”  had  acquired  some  reputation  by  their  theatrical 
‘  performances,  is  proved  by  the  well-known  dialogue  in  Nash’s  Return  from  Par- 
‘  nassus,  reprinted  in  Hawkins  [vol.  iii]  in  which  Kemp  and  Burbage  are  seen  in 
*  treaty  with  two  of  them,  called  Philomusus  and  Studioso,  for  engagements  as 
‘  actors,  and  in  which  one  of  them  gives  a  taste  of  his  quality,  by  reciting  the  open¬ 
ing  speech  of  Shakespeare’s  Richard  III.' — [IV,  iii,  1878. — Ed.  Macray.]  An 
elaborate  account  of  Legge’s  play  may  be  found  in  Churchill,  pp.  265-395;  in 
concluding  his  descriptive  analysis  he  remarks:  ‘There  is  not  enough  to  warrant 
‘  the  assertion  of  Legge’s  influence  [on  Shakespeare.]  One  can  only  venture  the 
‘suggestion  that  if,  as  many  critics  think,  Shakespeare’s  play  is  a  revision  of  an 
‘  anterior  play,  especially  if  this  anterior  play  was  Marlowe’s,  it  may  have  been 
‘  subject  to  Legge’s  influence,  and  so  account  for  the  presence  in  Shakespeare’s 
‘  play  of  some  of  the  resemblances.  It  is  difficult  to  compare  the  wooing  scenes 
‘  and  not  cherish  a  suspicion  that  such  was  the  case.’ 


THE  TRUE  TRAGEDIE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 

In  the  Preliminary  Remarks  on  Richard  III.  in  the  Variorum  of  1821,  the  editor, 
Boswell,  says:  ‘I  have  been  favoured  by  Mr  Rhodes,  of  Lyons  Inn,  with  the 
perusal  of  an  ancient  interlude  which  unfortunately  has  lost  the  title  page  and  a 
few  lines  at  the  beginning,  but  which  I  have  not  a  doubt  is  the  very  piece  referred 
to  in  the  Stationers'  Registers  [under  the  name  of  Thomas  Creede,  June  19,  1594]. 
As  it  is  probably  unique,  and  appears  evidently  to  have  been  read  and  used  by 
Shakespeare,  that  gentleman  has  very  liberally  permitted  me  to  reprint  it.’  He 
also  adds  the  following  note  at  the  end  of  the  reprinted  piece:  ‘I  have  not  thought 
it  necessary  to  point  out  the  particular  passages  in  which  a  resemblance  may  be 
traced  between  the  foregoing  drama  and  our  author’s  Richard  III.  ;  but  I  think 
the  reader  will  be  satisfied  that  Shakespeare  must  have  seen  it  when  he  sat  down  to 
the  composition  of  his  own  play.  Who  the  author  was  of  the  original  performance 
is  a  question  of  minor  importance;  but  I  am  inclined  to  think  it  was  the  same  person 
who  wrote  Locrine,  which  has  been  absurdly  ascribed  to  Shakespeare  himself. 
If  the  reader  will  compare  Richard’s  soliloquy,  p.  542,  with  the  following  lines 
from  the  play  I  have  mentioned,  he  will  be  able  to  judge  how  far  I  am  justified 
in  ascribing  both  to  the  same  person: 

‘The  boysterous  Boreas  thundreth  forth  revenge 
The  stonie  rocks  crie  out  on  sharpe  revenge 
Now  Corineus  staie  and  see  revenge.’ 

[Fourth  Folio;  p.  301,  col.  a.] 


Again: 


‘What  said  I  falshood?  I  that  filthie  crime, 
For  Locrine  hath  forsaken  Guendoline. 


502 


APPENDIX 


Behold  the  heavens  do  waile  for  Guendoline. 

The  shining  sunne  doth  blush  for  Guendoline. 

The  liquid  aire  doth  weep  for  Guendoline. 

The  verie  ground  doth  grone  for  Guendoline. 

I.  they  are  milder  then  the  Brittaine  King. 

For  he  rejecteth  lucklesse  Guendoline.’ 

[Fourth  Folio;  p.  300,  col.  b.] 

A.  Skottowe  (i,  206) :  Shakespeare  did  not,  as  on  many  other  occasions,  adopt 
the  plan  of  the  play  before  him,  but  grafted  on  his  own  view  of  the  subject  such 
hints  as  he  deemed  conducive  to  its  improvement.  [Hereupon  follow  four  extracts 
from  the  True  Tragedie  which  are  compared  to  the  following  passages  in  Richard 
III.:  IV,  i,  24,  25;  IV,  iii,  517-528;  V,  iii,  209;  V,  v,  ix;  Skottowe’s  remarks  on  the 
similarity  of  these  are  incorporated  in  the  notes  on  the  above-mentioned  passages, 
q.  v. — Ed.] 

Collier  ( Introd .,  p.  344):  We  cannot  trace  any  resemblances  [between  The 
True  Tragedy  of  Richard  the  Third,  and  Shakespeare’s  play]  but  such  as  were 
probably  purely  accidental,  and  are  merely  trivial.  Two  persons  could  hardly 
take  up  the  same  period  of  our  annals,  as  the  ground-work  of  a  drama,  without 
some  coincidences;  but  there  is  no  point,  either  in  the  conduct  of  the  plot  or  in  the 
language  in  which  it  is  clothed,  where  our  great  dramatist  does  not  show  his  mea¬ 
sureless  superiority.  The  portion  of  the  story  in  which  the  two  plays  make  the 
nearest  approach  to  each  other  is  just  before  the  murder  of  the  princes,  where 
Richard  strangely  takes  a  page  into  his  confidence  respecting  the  fittest  agent  for 
the  purpose.  In  the  Memoirs  of  Edward  Alleyn,  it  is  shown  that  Henslowe’s 
company,  subsequent  to  1599,  was  either  in  possession  of  a  play  upon  the  story 
of  Richard  III.,  or  that  some  of  the  poets  he  employed  were  engaged  upon  such 
a  drama.  From  the  sketch  of  five  scenes  there  inserted,  we  may  judge  that  it  was 
a  distinct  performance  from  the  True  Tragedie  of  Richard  the  Third.  By  an 
entry  in  Henslowe’s  Dairy,  dated  22nd  June,  1602,  we  learn  that  Ben  Jonson 
received  10 1.  in  earnest  of  a  play  called  Richard  Crookback,  and  for  certain  additions 
he  was  to  make  to  Kyd’s  Spanish  Tragedy.  Considering  the  success  of  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  Richard  III.,  and  the  active  contention,  at  certain  periods,  between  the 
company  to  which  Shakespeare  belonged,  and  that  under  the  management  of 
Henslowe,  it  may  be  looked  upon  as  singular  that  the  latter  should  have  been 
without  a  drama  on  that  portion  of  English  history  until  after  1599;  and  it  is  cer¬ 
tainly  not  less  singular  that,  as  late  as  1602,  Ben  Jonson  should  have  been  occupied 
in  writing  a  new  play  upon  the  subject.  Possibly,  about  that  date  Shakespeare’s 
Richard  III.  had  been  revised  with  additions;  and  hence  the  employment  of  Jonson 
on  a  rival  drama,  and  the  publication  of  the  third  edition  of  Shakespeare’s  tragedy 
after  an  interval  of  four  years.  ...  As  in  the  epilogue  [to  the  True  Tragedie ] 
no  allusion  is  made  to  the  Spanish  Armada,  though  other  public  events  of  less 
prominence  are  touched  upon,  we  may  infer  that  the  drama  was  written  before  1588. 
The  style  in  which  it  is  composed  deserves  observation :  it  is  partly  written  in  prose, 
partly  in  heavy  blank  verse  (such  as  was  penned  before  Marlowe  had  introduced 
his  improvements,  and  Shakespeare  had  adopted  and  advanced  them),  partly  in 
ten-syllable  rhyming  couplets  and  stanzas,  and  partly  in  the  long  fourteen  syllable 
metre,  which  seems  to  have  been  popular  even  before  prose  was  employed  upon 


THE  TRUE  TRAGEDIE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


503 


our  stage.  In  every  point  of  view  it  may  be  asserted  that  few  more  curious  dramatic 
relics  exist  in  our  language.  It  is  the  most  ancient  printed  specimen  of  composition 
for  a  public  theatre,  of  which  the  subject  was  derived  from  English  history. 

Barron  Field  ( Introd .,  p.  vi):  Antiquity  and  priority  to  Shakespeare  con¬ 
stituting  the  only  interest  of  this  piece,  I  have  refrained  from  enforcing  the  metre 
and  modernizing  the  spelling.  .  .  and  have  made  it,  with  the  exception  of  palpable 
errors  of  the  press,  a  facsimile  of  the  old  edition,  now  reprinted  through  the  liberality 
of  His  Grace  the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  the  owner  of  the  copy.  ...  I  have  in  the 
notes  pointed  out  several  parallel  ideas.  The  following  line  in  the  battle-scene  is, 
in  my  opinion,  quite  enough  to  show  that  Shakespeare  considered  Nature,  as 
Moliere  said  of  Wit,  as  his  property,  and  that  he  had  a  right  to  seize  it  wherever 
he  found  it.  ‘A  horse,  a  horse,  a  fresh  horse.’  Collier’s  [remark  in  regard  to 
that  ‘portion  of  the  story  in  which  the  twro  plays  make  the  nearest  approach  to 
each  other’]  should  hardly  be  called  strange  in  our  dramatist,  since  it  is  authorized 
in  the  history  by  Sir  Thomas  More.  [In  regard  to  the  authorship,  Field  shows 
that  little  reliance  can  be  placed  upon  the  resemblance  between  the  passages  from 
Locrine  and  the  True  Tragedie,  suggested  by  Boswell,  as  the  repetition  of  a  word 
‘is  one  of  the  commonest  artifices  of  rhetoric,  and  has  been  beautifully  employed 
by  Shakespeare  himself  in  the  Mer.  of  Ven.,  V,  i,  193-202.’] 

Verplanck  considers  that  ‘beyond  such  straggling  hints’  as  the  line  in  the 
True  Tragedie,  ‘A  horse,  a  horse,  a  fresh  horse!’  and  ‘the  substitution  of  the  ghost- 
scene,  in  place  of  Richard’s  dream  of  devils  related  by  Hall,  ’  Shakespeare  was  but 
little  indebted  to  the  older  play. 

W.  W.  Lloyd  ( Introd .  Essay):  On  the  whole,  I  think  it  quite  within  the  range 
of  possibility  that  the  plays  that  are  to  be  assumed  as  the  ground-work  of  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  Henry  VI.  emanated  from  the  same  author  as  this  wild  and  disorderly 
play  of  Richard  III.  That  Shakespeare  knew  this  play  there  can  be  little  doubt, 
partly  from  agreement  in  general  course,  though  that  was  aided  by  common  depen¬ 
dence  on  another  source  and  still  more  from  correspondence  of  terms  and  of  tone 
in  particular  passages.  .  .  .  From  the  custom  of  the  stage  at  the  time,  it  is  probable 
enough  that  this  drama  may  have  been  altered  and  realtered  frequently  and  very 
variously  before  Shakespeare  took  the  subject  in  hand.  With  all  its  defects  it  is 
at  least  free  from  the  affectation  of  classical  allusions,  and,  comparatively  so,  from 
frigid  inflation  and  bombast;  and  the  honest  attempt  of  the  author  to  convey  the 
story  he  had  to  tell  with  some  variety  arid  force,  has  been  worthily  rewarded  by 
some  of  his  thoughts,  here  a  phrase  and  there  a  trait,  being  recollected  by  Shakes¬ 
peare.  As  to  any  further  comparison  of  versification,  characterization,  and  design, 
it  is,  of  course,  out  of  the  question  entirely.  [See  also  note  by  Lloyd  on  I,  iv,  123.] 

C.  Knight  ( Studies ,  etc.;  p.  22):  There  is  not  a  trace  in  the  True  Tragedie  of 
Richard  the  Third,  of  the  character  of  Shakespeare’s  Richard: — in  that  play  he  is 
a  coarse  ruffian  only — an  intellectual  villain.  The  author  has  not  even  had  the 
skill  to  copy  the  dramatic  narrative  of  Sir  Thomas  More  in  the  scene  of  the  arrest 
of  Hastings.  It  is  sufficient  for  him  to  make  Richard  display  the  brute  force  of  the 
tyrant.  The  affected  complacency,  the  mock  passion,  the  bitter  sarcasm  of  the 
Richard  of  the  historian,  were  left  for  Shakespeare  to  imitate  and  improve. 


504 


APPENDIX 


F.  G.  Fleay  {Biog.  Chron.  of  English  Drama ,  ii,  315):  The  True  T ragedie 
was  played  at  court  (see  prayer  at  end),  and  therefore  cannot  date  later  than  1591; 
but  as  it  was  evidently  meant  as  a  continuation  of  the  series  1  Henry  VI.  and  The 
Contention  of  York  and  Lancaster ,  it  cannot  be  much  earlier.  ...  As  to  the  author¬ 
ship,  I  doubt  not  that  the  Induction  is  by  Lodge;  Sc.  x,  3,  4,  8,  xi,  12,  including 
the  death  of  Edward  IV.,  and  the  smothering  of  the  Princes,  seem  to  be  Peele’s; 
Sc.  2,  6,  7,  9,  13,  10,  and  14-20  I  attribute,  as  also  the  Epilogue  to  Lodge.  .  .  . 
Indications  are  not  wanting  that  it  is  founded  on  an  earlier  play  in  which  Kyd  had 
a  hand.  Note  especially  in  Sc.  9  the  phrase:  ‘Blood  is  a  threatener  and  will  have 
revenge’;  Nash,  when  twitting  Kyd  with  his  Seneca  phrases  in  the  address  before 
Menaphon,  quotes  as  one  of  them,  ‘  Blood  is  a  beggar.’ 

G.  B.  Churchill  (p.  398):  As  a  history  play  the  True  Tragedie  is  undoubtedly 
the  first  in  which  the  interest  is  fixed  upon  one  central  and  dominating  figure.  It 
is  not  the  first  to  abandon  the  loose  and  unorganised  method  of  writing  chronicle- 
histories  which  spread  out  the  events  of  a  period  in  their  historical  succession  without 
attempt  at  unity;  for  in  the  Edward  II.  of  Marlowe  these  plays  had  already  advanced 
to  a  point  where  the  historical  events  are  not  detailed  purely  for  their  own  sake, 
but  are  unified  by  their  relation  to  a  central  figure,  and  where  the  history  play 
becomes  in  a  high  degree  a  study  of  character.  .  .  .  The  Richard  of  The  True 
T ragedie  is  not  only  central  but  dominating,  not  merely  attracts  the  chief  interest, 
but  absorbs  practically  all  of  it.  The  play  is  not  the  chronicle-history  of  a  reign, 
it  is  purely  the  history  of  a  character.  [For  an  exhaustive  account  of  the  ‘historical 
position,  nature,  and  style  of  the  True  Tragedie ,’  see  Churchill,  pp.  398-496.] 


THE 


TRUE  TRAGEDIE  OF  RI¬ 

CHARD  THE  THIRD: 


Wherein  is  sliowne  the  death  of  Edward  the 
fourth,  with  the  smothering  of  the  two 
yoong  Princes  in  the  Tower : 

With  a  lamentable  ende  of  Shores  wife ,  an  example 
for  all  wicked  women. 

And  lastly  the  coniunction  and  ioyning  of  the  two  noble 
Houses,  Lancaster  and  Yorke. 

As  it  was  playd  by  the  Queenes  Maiesties 
Players. 


L OND ON 

Printed  by  Thomas  Creede,  and  are  to  be  sold  by 
William  Barley,  at  his  shop  in  Newgate  Market,  neare 
Christ  Church  doore.  1594. 


THE 


TRUE  TRAGEDIE  OF  RI¬ 

CHARD  THE  THIRD 

Enters  Truth  and  Poetrie.  To  them  the  Ghoast  of  George  Duke  of  Clarence. 

Ghost. 

Cresse  cruor  sanguinis,  satietur  sanguine  cresse, 

Quod  spero  scitio.  O  scitio,  scitio,  vendicta. 

Exit • 

Poetrie.  Truth  well  met. 

Truth.  Thankes  Poetrie,  what  makes  thou  vpon  a  stage? 

Poet.  Shadowes. 

Truth.  Then  will  I  adde  bodies  to  the  shadowes, 

Therefore  depart  and  giue  Truth  leaue 
To  shew  her  pageant. 

Poe.  Why  will  Truth  be  a  Player? 

Truth.  No,  but  Tragedia  like  for  to  present 
A  Tragedie  in  England  done  but  late, 

That  will  reuiue  the  hearts  of  drooping  mindes. 

Poe.  Whereof  ? 

T ruth.  Marry  thus. 

Richard  Plantagenet  of  the  House  of  Yorke, 

Claiming  the  Crowne  by  warres,  not  by  dissent, 

Had  as  the  Chronicles  make  manifest, 

In  the  two  and  twentith  yeare  of  Henry  the  sixth, 

By  act  of  Parliament  intailed  to  him 
The  Crowne  and  titles  to  that  dignitie, 

And  to  his  ofspring  lawfully  begotten, 

After  the  decease  of  that  forenamed  King, 

Yet  not  contented  for  to  staie  the  time, 

Made  warres  vpon  King  Henry  then  the  sixth, 

And  by  outrage  suppressed  that  vertuous  King, 

And  wonne  the  Crowne  of  England  to  himselfe, 

But  since  at  Wakefield  in  a  battell  pitcht, 

Outragious  Richard  breathed  his  latest  breath, 

Leauing  behind  three  branches  of  that  line, 

Three  sonnes:  the  first  was  Edward  now  the  King, 

George  of  Clarence,  and  Richard  Glosters  Duke, 

Then  Henry  claiming  after  his  decease 

His  stile,  his  Crowne  and  former  dignitie 

Was  quite  suppressed,  till  this  Edward  the  fourth. 

Poe.  But  tell  me  truth,  of  Henry  what  ensued? 


507 


508 


APPENDIX 


Tru.  Imprisoned  he,  in  the  Tower  of  London  lies, 

By  strict  command,  from  Edward  Englands  King, 

Since  cruelly  murthered,  by  Richard  Glosters  Duke. 

Poe.  Whose  Ghoast  was  that  did  appeare  to  vs? 

Tru.  It  was  the  ghost  of  George  the  duke  of  Clarece, 

Who  was  attected  in  King  Edwards  raigne, 

Falsly  of  Treason  to  his  royaltie, 

Imprisoned  in  the  Tower  was  most  vnnaturally, 

By  his  owne  brother,  shame  to  parents  stocke, 

By  Glosters  Duke  drowned  in  a  but  of  wine. 

Poe.  What  shield  was  that  he  let  fall? 

Tru.  A  shield  conteining  this,  in  full  effect, 

Blood  sprinkled,  springs:  blood  spilt,  craues  due  reuenge: 

Whereupon  he  writes,  Cresse  cruor, 

Sanguis  satietur,  sanguine  cresse, 

Quod  spero  scitio:  O  scitio  scitio,  vendida. 

Poe.  What  manner  of  man  was  this  Richard  Duke  of  Gloster? 

Truth.  A  man  ill  shaped,  crooked  backed,  lame  armed,  withall, 

Valiantly  minded,  but  tyrannous  in  authoritie, 

So  during  the  minoritie  of  the  yoong  Prince, 

He  is  made  Lord  Protector  ouer  the  Realme. 

Gentiles  suppose  that  Edward  now  hath  raigned 
Full  two  and  twentie  yeares,  and  now  like  to  die, 

Hath  summond  all  his  Nobles  to  the  Court, 

To  sweare  alleageance  with  the  Duke  his  brother, 

For  truth  vnto  his  sonne  the  tender  Prince, 

Whose  fathers  soule  is  now  neare  flight  to  God, 

Leauing  behind  two  sonnes  of  tender  age, 

Fiue  daughters  to  comfort  the  haplesse  Queene, 

All  vnder  the  protection  of  the  Duke  of  Gloster: 

Thus  gentles,  excuse  the  length  by  the  matter, 

And  here  begins  Truthes  Pageant,  Poetrie 

Wend  with  me.  Exeunt. 

Enter  Edward  the  fourth,  Lord  Hastings,  Lord  Marcus,  and  Elizabeth.  To  them 

Richard. 

Hastings.  Long  liue  my  soueraigne,  in  all  happinesse. 

Marcus.  An  honourable  age  with  Cressus  wealth, 

Hourely  attend  the  person  of  the  King. 

King.  And  welcome  you  Peeres  of  England  vnto  your  King. 

Hast.  For  our  vnthankfulnesse  the  heauens  hath  throwne  thee  downe. 

Mar.  I  feare  for  our  ingratitude,  our  angry  God  doth  frownfc. 

King.  Why  Nobles,  he  that  laie  me  here 
Can  raise  me  at  his  pleasure. 

By  my  deare  friends  and  kinsmen, 

In  what  estate  I  now  lie  it  is  seene  to  you  all, 

And  I  feel  myselfe  near  the  dreadfull  stroke  of  death. 

And  the  cause  that  I  haue  requested  you  in  friendly  wise 


THE  TRUE  TRAGEDIE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


509 


To  meete  togither  is  this, 

That  where  malice  &  enuy  sowing  sedition  in  the  harts  of  men 
So  would  I  haue  that  admonished  and  friendly  fauours, 

Ouercome  in  the  heart  of  you  Lord  Marcus  and  Lord  Hastings 
Both,  for  how  I  haue  gouerned  these  two  and  twentie  yeares, 

I  leaue  it  to  your  discretions. 

The  malice  hath  still  bene  an  enemy  to  you  both, 

That  in  my  life  time  I  could  neuer  get  any  lege  of  amity  betwixt  you, 
Yet  at  my  death  let  me  intreate  you  to  imbrace  each  other, 

That  at  my  last  departure  you  may  send  my  soule 
To  the  ioyes  celestiall: 

For  leauing  behinde  me  my  yoong  sonne, 

Your  lawfull  King  after  my  decease, 

May  be  by  your  wise  and  graue  counsell  so  gouerned, 

Which  no  doubt  may  bring  comfort 
To  his  famous  realme  of  England. 

But  (what  saith  Lord  Marcus  and  Lord  Hastings) 

What  not  one  word  ?  nay  then  I  see  it  will  not  be, 

For  they  are  resolute  in  their  ambition. 

Elizabeth.  Ah  yeeld  Lord  Hastings, 

And  submit  your  selues  to  each  other: 

And  you  Lord  Marcus,  submit  your  selfe, 

See  here  the  aged  King  my  father, 

How  he  sues  for  peace  betwixt  you  both: 

Consider  Lord  Marcus,  you  are  son  to  my  mother  the  Queene, 

And  therefore  let  me  intreat  you  to  mittigate  your  wrath, 

And  in  friendly  sort,  imbrace  each  other. 

King.  Nay  cease  thy  speech  Elizabeth, 

It  is  but  folly  to  speake  to  them, 

For  they  are  resolute  in  their  ambitious  mindes, 

Therefore  Elizabeth,  I  feele  my  selfe  at  the  last  instant  of  death, 

And  now  must  die  being  thus  tormented  in  minde. 

Hast.  May  it  be  that  thou  Lord  Marcus, 

That  neither  by  intreatie  of  the  Prince, 

Nor  curtuous  word  of  Elizabeth  his  daughter, 

May  withdraw  thy  ambition  from  me. 

Marc.  May  it  be  that  thou  Lord  Hastings, 

Canst  not  perceiue  the  mark  his  grace  aimes  at. 

Hast.  No  I  am  resolute,  except  thou  submit. 

Marc.  If  thou  beest  resolute  giue  vp  the  vpshot, 

And  perhaps  thy  head  may  paie  for  the  losses. 

King.  Ah  Gods,  sith  at  my  death  you  iarre, 

What  will  you  do  to  the  yoong  Prince  after  my  decease? 

For  shame  I  say,  depart  from  my  presence,  and  leaue  me  to  my  self, 
For  these  words  strikes  a  second  dying  to  my  soule: 

Ah  my  Lords  I  thought  I  could  haue  commanded 
A  greater  thing  then  this  at  your  hands, 

But  sith  I  cannot,  I  take  my  leaue  of  you  both, 

And  so  depart  and  trouble  me  no  more. 


5io 


APPENDIX 


Hast.  With  shame  and  like  your  Maiestie  I  submit  therfore, 
Crauing  humble  pardon  on  my  knees, 

And  would  rather  that  my  body  shal  be  a  pray  to  mine  enemy. 
Rather  then  I  will  offend  my  Lord  at  the  houre 
And  instance  of  his  death. 

King.  Ah  thankes  Lord  Hastings. 

Eliza.  Ah  yeeld  Lord  Marcus,  sith  Lord  Hastings 
Is  contented  to  be  vnited. 

King.  Ah  yeeld  Lord  Marcus,  thou  art  too  obstinate. 

Marc.  My  gracious  Lord,  I  am  content, 

And  humbly  craue  your  graces  pardon  on  my  knee, 

For  my  foule  offence, 

And  see  my  Lord  my  brest  opened  to  mine  aduersary, 

That  he  may  take  reuenge,  then  once  it  shall  be  said, 

I  will  offend  my  gratious  suffereinge. 

King.  Now  let  me  see  you  friendly  giue  one  an  other  your  hands. 
Hast.  With  a  good  will  ant  like  your  grace, 

Therefore  Lord  Marcus  take  here  my  hand, 

Which  was  once  vowde  and  sworne  to  be  thy  death, 

But  now  through  intretie  of  my  Prince, 

I  knit  a  league  of  amitie  for  euer. 

Mar.  Well  Lord  Hastings,  not  in  show  but  in  deed, 

Take  thou  here  my  hand,  which  was  once  vowed 
To  a  shiuered  thy  bodie  in  peecemeales, 

That  the  foules  of  the  ayre  should  haue  fed 
Their  yoong  withall, 

But  now  vpon  aleageance  to  my  Prince,  I  vow  perfect  loue, 

And  liue  friendship  for  euer. 

King.  Now  for  confirming  of  it,  here  take  your  oathes. 

Hast.  If  I  Lord  Hastings  falcifie  my  league  of  friendship 
Vowde  to  Lord  Marcus,  I  craue  confusion. 

Marcus.  Like  oath  take  I,  and  craue  confusion. 

King.  Confusion. 

Now  my  Lords,  for  your  yoong  King,  that  lieth  now  at  Ludlo, 
Attended  with  Earle  Riuers,  Lord  Gray,  his  two  vnkles, 

And  the  rest  of  the  Queenes  kindred, 

I  hope  you  will  be  vnto  him  as  you  haue  bene  to  me, 

His  yeares  are  but  young,  thirteene  at  the  most, 

Vnto  whose  gouernment,  I  commit  to  my  brother  the  Protector, 

But  to  thee  Elizabeth  my  daughter, 

I  leaue  thee  in  a  world  of  trouble, 

And  commend  me  to  thy  mother,  to  all  thy  sisters, 

And  especially  I  giue  thee  this  in  charge  vpon  &  at  my  death, 

Be  loyall  to  thy  brother  during  his  authoritie, 

As  they  selfe  art  vertuous,  let  thy  praiers  be  modest, 

Still  be  bountifull  in  deuotion. 

And  thus  leauing  thee  with  a  kisse,  I  take  my  last  farewell, 

For  I  am  so  sleepie,  that  I  must  now  make  an  ende, 

And  here  before  you  all,  I  commit  my  soule  to  almighty  God, 


THE  TRUE  TRAGEDIE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


511 


My  sauiour,  and  sweet  redeemer,  my  bodie  to  the  earth, 

My  Scepter  and  Crowne  to  the  yoong  Prince  my  sonne: 

And  now  Nobles,  draw  the  Curtaines  and  depart, 

He  that  made  me  saue  me, 

Vnto  whose  hands  I  commit  my  spirit. 

The  King  dies  in  his  bed. 

Enters  Shores  wife,  and  Hursly  her  mayde. 

S horse.  O  Fortune,  wherefore  wert  thou  called  Fortune? 

But  that  thou  art  fortunate? 

Those  whom  thou  fauourest  be  famous, 

Meriting  mere  mercie, 

And  fraught  with  mirrors  of  magnanimitie, 

And  Fortune  I  would  thou  hadst  neuer  fauoured  me. 

Hurs.  Why  mistresse,  if  you  exclaime  against  Fortune, 

You  condemne  your  selfe, 

For  who  hath  aduanced  you  but  Fortune? 

Shorse.  I  as  she  hath  aduanced  me, 

So  may  she  throw  me  downe: 

But  Hursly,  doest  not  heare  the  King  is  sicke? 

Hurs.  Yes  mistresse,  but  neuer  heard  that  euerie  sicke  man  died. 
Shore.  Ah  Hursly,  my  minde  presageth 
Some  great  mishaps  vnto  me, 

For  last  time  I  saw  the  King,  me  thought 
Gastly  death  approached  in  his  face, 

For  thou  knowest  this  Hursly,  I  haue  bene  good  to  all, 

And  still  readie  to  preferre  my  friends, 

To  what  preferment  I  could, 

For  what  was  it  his  grace  would  deny  Shores  wife  ? 

Of  any  thing,  yea  were  it  halfe  his  reuenewes, 

I  know  his  grace  would  not  see  me  want, 

And  if  his  grace  should  die, 

As  heauens  forfend  it  should  be  so, 

I  haue  left  me  nothing  now  to  comfort  me  withall, 

And  then  those  that  are  my  foes  will  triumph  at  my  fall, 

And  if  the  King  escape,  as  I  hope  he  will, 

Then  will  I  feather  my  neast, 

That  blow  the  stormie  winter  neuer  so  cold, 

I  will  be  throughly  prouided  for  one: 

But  here  comes  Lodwicke,  seruant  to  Lord  Hastings, 

How  now  Lodwicke,  what  newes? 

Enters  Lodwicke. 

Lod.  Mistresse  Shore,  my  Lord  would  request  you, 

To  come  and  speake  with  him. 

Shore.  I  will  Lodwicke. 

But  tell  me  what  newes,  is  the  King  recouered? 

Lod.  I  mistresse  Shore,  he  hath  recouered 


512 


APPENDIX 


That  he  long  lookt  for. 

Shore.  Lodwicke,  how  long  is  it  since 
He  began  to  mend? 

Lod.  Euen  when  the  greatest  of  his  torments  had  left  him. 

Shore.  But  are  the  nobles  agreed  to  the  contentment  of  the  Prince? 

Lod.  The  Nobles  and  Peeres  are  agreed  as  the  King  would  wish  them. 

Shorse.  Lodwicke  thou  reuiuest  me. 

Lod.  I  but  few  thought  that  the  agreement  and  his  life  would  have  ended 
togither. 

Shore.  Why  Lodwicke  is  he  dead. 

Lod.  In  briefe  mistresse  Shore,  he  hath  changed  his  life. 

Shorse.  His  life,  ah  me  vnhappie  woman, 

Now  is  misery  at  hand, 

Now  will  my  foes  tryumph  at  this  my  fall, 

Those  whom  I  haue  done  most  good,  will  now  forsake  me. 

Ah  Hursly,  when  I  enterteined  thee  first, 

I  was  farre  from  change,  so  was  I  Lodwicke, 

When  I  restored  thee  thy  lands. 

Ah  sweete  Edward,  farewell  my  gracious  Lord  and  souereigne, 

For  now  shall  Shores  wife  be  a  mirrour  and  looking  glasse, 

To  all  her  enemies. 

Thus  shall  I  finde  Lodwicke,  and  haue  cause  to  say, 

That  all  men  are  vnconstant. 

Lod.  Why  mistresse  Shore,  for  the  losse  of  one  friend, 

Will  you  abandon  the  rest  that  wish  you  well? 

Shore.  Ah  Lodwicke  I  must,  for  when  the  tree  decaies 
Whose  fruitfull  branch  haue  flourished  many  a  yeare, 

Then  farewell  those  ioyfull  dayes  and  ofspring  of  my  heart, 

But  say  Lodwicke,  who  hath  the  King  made  Protector, 

During  the  innormitie  of  the  yoong  Prince. 

Lod.  He  hath  made  his  brother  Duke  of  Gloster  Protector. 

Shore.  Ah  me,  then  comes  my  ruine  and  decaie, 

For  he  could  neuer  abide  me  to  the  death, 

No  he  alwaies  hated  me  whom  his  brother  loued  so  well, 

Thus  must  I  lament  and  say,  all  the  world  is  vnconstant. 

Lod.  But  mistresse  Shore,  comfort  your  selfe, 

And  thinke  well  of  my  Lord, 

Who  hath  alway  bene  a  helper  vnto  you. 

Shorse.  Indeed  Lodwicke  to  condemne  his  honour  I  cannot, 

For  he  hath  alway  bene  my  good  Lord, 

For  as  the  world  is  fickle,  so  changeth  the  minds  of  men. 

Lod.  Why  mistresse  Shore,  rather  then  want  should  oppresse 
You,  that  litle  land  which  you  beg’d  for  me  of  the  King, 

Shall  be  at  your  dispose. 

Shorse.  Thanks  good  Lodwicke. 

Enters  a  Citizen  and  Morton  a  seruing  man. 

Citi.  O  maister  Morton,  you  are  very  welcome  met, 

I  hope  you  think  on  me  for  my  mony. 


THE  TRUE  TRACE  DIE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  513 

Mot.  I  pray  sir  beare  with  me,  and  you  shall  haue  it, 

With  thankes  too. 

Citi.  Nay,  I  pray  sir  let  me  haue  my  mony, 

For  I  haue  had  thankes  and  too  much  more  then  I  lookt  for. 

Mor.  In  faith  sir  you  shall  haue  it, 

But  you  must  beare  with  me  a  litle, 

But  sir,  I  marvell  how  you  can  be  so  greedie  for  your  mony, 

When  you  see  sir,  we  are  so  vncertaine  of  our  owne. 

Citi.  How  so  vncertaine  of  mine  owne  ? 

Why  doest  thou  know  any  bodie  wil  come  to  rob  me? 

Mor.  Why  no. 

Citi.  Wilt  thou  come  in  the  night  and  cut  my  throate? 

Mor.  No. 

Citi.  Wilt  thou  and  the  rest  of  thy  companions, 

Come  and  set  my  house  on  fire? 

Mor.  Why  no,  I  tell  thee. 

Citi.  Why  how  should  I  then  be  vncertaine  of  mine  owne? 

Mor.  Why  sir,  by  reason  the  King  is  dead. 

Citi.  O  sir!  is  the  King  dead? 

I  hope  he  hath  giuen  you  no  quittance  for  my  debt. 

Mor.  No  sir,  but  I  pray  staie  a  while,  and  you  shall  haue  it 
Assoone  as  I  can. 

Citi.  Well  I  must  be  content,  where  nothing  is  to  be  had, 

The  King  looseth  his  right  they  say, 

But  who  is  this? 

Mor.  Marry  sir  it  is  mistresse  Shore, 

To  whom  I  am  more  beholding  too  for  my  seruice, 

Then  the  deerest  friend  that  euer  I  had. 

Citi.  And  I  for  my  sonnes  pardon. 

Mor.  Now  mistresse  Shore,  how  fare  you? 

Shore.  Well  Morton,  but  not  so  well  as  thou  hast  knowne  me, 

For  I  thinke  I  shal  be  driuen  to  try  my  friends  one  day. 

Mor.  God  forfend  mistresse  Shore, 

And  happie  be  that  Sunne  shall  shine  vpon  thee, 

For  preseruing  the  life  of  my  sonne. 

Shore.  Gramercies  good  father. 

But  how  doth  thy  sonne,  is  he  well  ? 

Citi.  The  better  that  thou  Hues,  doth  he. 

Shore.  Thankes  father,  I  am  glad  of  it, 

But  come  maister  Lodwicke  shall  we  go? 

And  you  Morton,  youle  beare  vs  company. 

Lod.  I  mistresse  Shore, 

For  my  Lord  thinkes  long  for  our  coming. 

Exit  omnes. 

Citi.  There  there,  huffer,  but  by  your  leaue, 

The  Kings  death  is  a  maime  to  her  credit, 

But  they  say,  there  is  my  Lord  Hastings  in  the  Court, 

He  is  as  good  as  the  Ase  of  hearts  at  maw. 

Well  euen  as  they  brew,  so  let  them  bake  for  me: 


33 


SH 


APPENDIX 


But  I  must  about  the  streets,  to  see  and  I  can  meete 
With  such  cold  customers  as  they  I  met  withall  euen  now, 

Masse  if  I  meete  with  no  better, 

I  am  like  to  keepe  a  bad  hoshold  of  it. 

Exit. 

Enters  Richard,  sir  William  Casbe,  Page  of  his  chamber,  and  his  traine. 
Rich.  My  friends  depart, 

The  Houre  commands  your  absence. 

Leaue  me  and  euery  man  looke  to  his  charge.  Exit  traine. 

Casbie.  Renowned  and  right  worthie  Protector, 

Whose  excelency  far  deserues  the  name  of  King  then  protector, 

Sir  William  Casbie  wisheth  my  Lord, 

That  your  grace  may  so  gouerne  the  yoong  Prince, 

That  the  Crowne  of  England  may  flourish  in  all  happinesse.  Exit  Casbie. 

Rich.  Ah  yoong  Prince,  and  why  not  I? 

Or  who  shall  inherit  Plantagines  but  his  sonne? 

And  who  the  King  deceased,  but  the  brother? 

Shall  law  bridle  nature,  or  authorise  hinder  inheritance? 

No,  I  say  no:  Principalitie  brookes  no  equalitie, 

Much  lesse  superioritie, 

And  the  title  of  a  King,  is  next  vnder  the  degree  of  a  God, 

For  if  he  be  worthie  to  be  called  valiant, 

That  in  his  life  winnes  honour,  and  by  his  sword  winnes  riches, 

Why  now  I  with  renowne  of  a  souldier,  which  is  neuer  sold  but 
By  waight,  nor  changed  but  by  losse  of  life, 

I  reapt  not  the  gaine  but  the  glorie,  and  since  it  becommeth 
A  sonne  to  maintaine  the  honor  of  his  deceased  father, 

Why  should  I  not  hazard  his  dignitie  by  my  brothers  sonnes? 

To  be  baser  than  a  King  I  disdaine, 

And  to  be  more  then  Protector,  the  law  deny, 

Why  my  father  got  the  Crowne,  my  brother  won  the  Crowne, 

And  I  will  weare  the  Crowne, 

Or  ile  make  them  hop  without  their  crownes  that  denies  me: 

Haue  I  remoued  such  logs  out  of  my  sight  as  my  brother  Clarice 
And  King  Henry  the  sixt,  to  suffer  a  child  to  shadow  me, 

Nay  more,  my  nephew  to  disinherit  me, 

Yet  most  of  all,  to  be  released  from  the  yoke  of  my  brother 
As  I  terme  it,  to  become  subiect  to  his  sonne, 

No  death  nor  hell  shall  not  withhold  me,  but  as  I  rule  I  wil  raign, 

And  so  raign  that  the  proudest  enemy  shall  not  abide 

The  sharpest  shoure.  Why  what  are  the  babes  but  a  puffe  of 

Gun-pouder?  a  marke  for  the  soldiers,  food  for  fishes, 

Or  lining  for  beds,  deuices  enough  to  make  them  away, 

Wherein  I  am  resolute,  and  determining,  needs  no  counsell, 

Ho,  whose  within? 

Enters  Page  and  Perciuall. 

Perc.  May  it  please  your  Maiestia 
Richard.  Ha  villaine,  Maiestie. 


THE  TRUE  TR  AG  ED  IE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  515 

Per.  I  speake  but  vpon  that  which  shal  be  my  good  Lord. 

Rich.  But  whats  he  with  thee? 

Page.  A  Messenger  with  a  letter  from  the  right  honourable 
The  Duke  of  Buckingham.  Exit  Page. 

Rich.  Sirra  giue  place. 

Ah  how  this  title  of  Maiestie,  animates  me  to  my  purpose, 

Rise  man,  regard  no  fall,  haply  this  letter  brings  good  lucke, 

May  it  be,  or  is  it  possible, 

Doth  Fortune  so  much  fauour  my  happinesse 
That  I  no  sooner  deuise,  but  she  sets  abroach? 

Or  doth  she  but  to  trie  me,  that  raising  me  aloft, 

My  fall  may  be  the  greater,  well  laugh  on  sweete  change, 

Be  as  be  may,  I  will  neuer  feare  colours  nor  regard  ruth, 

Valour  brings  fame,  and  fame  conquers  death. 

Perciuall. 

Per.  My  Lord. 

Rich.  For  so  thy  letter  declares  thy  name, 

Thy  trust  to  thy  Lord,  is  a  sufficient  warrant 
That  I  vtter  my  minde  fully  vnto  thee, 

And  seeing  thy  Lord  and  I  haue  bene  long  foes, 

And  haue  found  now  so  fit  opportunitie  to  ioyne  league, 

To  alaie  the  proude  enemy,  tell  him  thus  as  a  friend, 

I  do  accept  of  his  grace,  and  will  be  as  readie  to  put  in  practise 
To  the  vttermost  of  my  power,  what  ere  he  shalbe  to  deuise, 

But  whereas  he  hath  writ  that  the  remouing  of  the  yoong 
Prince  from  the  Queenes  friends  might  do  well, 

Tell  him  thus,  it  is  the  only  way  to  our  purpose, 

For  he  shall  shortly  come  vp  to  London  to  his  Coronation, 

At  which  instant,  we  will  be  both  present, 

And  where  by  the  helpe  of  thy  Lord,  I  will  so  plaie  my  part, 

That  ile  be  more  than  I  am,  and  not  much  lesse  then  I  looke  for 
No  nor  a  haire  bredth  from  that  I  am, 

Aiudge  thou  what  it  is  Perciual. 

Perc.  God  send  it  my  Lord,  but  my  Lord  willed  me  to  satisfie  you,  and  to 
tell  you  by  word  of  mouth  that  he  hath  in  readinesse  a  braue  company  of  men. 

Rich.  What  power  hath  he? 

Per.  A  braue  band  of  his  owne. 

Rich.  What  number? 

Per.  My  Lord,  to  the  number  of  five  hundreth  footmen. 

And  horsemen  ayders  vnto  him,  is  my  Lord  Chamberlaine,  and  my  Lord  Hastings. 

Rich.  Sounes,  dares  he  trust  the  Lord  Hastings. 

Per.  I  my  Lord  as  his  owne  life,  he  is  secret  I  warrant  you. 

Rich.  Well  Perciuall,  this  matter  is  waightie  and  must  not  be  slipt,  therefore, 
return  this  answere  to  thy  Lord,  that  to  morrow  I  will  meet  him,  for  to  day  I  cannot, 
for  now  the  funerall  is  past  I  must  set  a  screene  before  the  fire  for  feare  of  suspition : 
again,  I  am  now  to  strengthen  my  selfe  by  the  controuersie  that  is  betwixt  the 
kindred  of  the  King  deceast,  and  the  Queene  thats  liuing,  the  yoong  Prince  is  yet 
in  hucsters  handling,  and  they  not  throughly  friendes,  now  must  I  so  worke,  that 
the  water  that  driues  the  mill  may  drowne  it.  I  climbe  Perciuall,  I  regard  more 


5 16 


APPENDIX 


the  glorie  then  the  gaine,  for  the  very  name  of  a  King  redouble  a  mans  life  with 
fame,  when  death  hath  done  his  worst,  and  so  commend  me  to  thy  Lord,  and 
take  thou  this  for  thy  paines. 

Per.  I  thanke  your  grace,  I  humbly  take  my  leaue.  Exit  Perciual. 

Rich.  Why  so,  now  Fortune  make  me  a  King,  Fortune  giue  me  a  kingdome, 
let  the  world  report  the  Duke  of  Gloster  was  a  King,  therefore,  Fortune  make 
me  King,  if  I  be  but  King  for  a  yeare,  nay  but  halfe  a  yeare,  nay  a  moneth,  a  weeke, 
three  dayes,  one  day,  or  halfe  a  day,  nay  an  houre,  swounes  half  an  houre,  nay 
sweete  Fortune,  clap  but  the  Crowne  on  my  head,  that  the  vassals  may  but  once  say, 
God  saue  King  Richards  life,  it  is  inough.  Sirrha,  who  is  there  ? 

Enters  Page. 

Page.  My  Lord. 

Rich.  What  hearest  thou  about  the  Court? 

Pag.  Ioy  my  Lord  of  your  Proctorship  for  the  most  part, 

Some  murmure,  but  my  Lord  they  be  of  the  baser  sort. 

Rich.  A  mightie  arme  wil  sway  the  baser  sort,  authority  doth  terrifie. 

But  what  other  newes  hearest  thou? 

Pag.  This  my  Lord,  they  say  the  yong  King  is  comming  vp  to  his  coronation, 
attended  on  by  his  two  vnkles,  Earle  Rivers  &  Lord  Gray,  and  the  rest  of  the 
Queenes  kindred. 

Rich.  A  parlous  bone  to  ground  vpon,  and  a  rush  stifly  knit,  which  if  I  could 
finde  a  knot,  I  would  giue  one  halfe  to  the  dogs  and  set  fire  on  the  other. 

Pag.  It  is  reported  my  Lord,  but  I  know  not  whether  it  be  true  or  no,  that 
the  Duke  of  Buckingham  is  vp  in  the  Marches  of  Wales  with  a  band  of  men,  and 
as  they  say,  hee  aimes  at  the  Crowne. 

Rich.  Tush  a  shadow  without  a  substance,  and  a  feare  without  a  cause:  but 
yet  if  my  neighbours  house  bee  on  fire,  let  me  seeke  to  saue  mine  owne,  in  trust 
is  treason,  time  slippth,  it  is  ill  iesting  with  edge  tooles,  or  dallying  with  Princes 
matters,  lie  strike  whillst  the  yron  is  hote,  and  lie  trust  neuer  a  Duke  of  Bucking¬ 
ham,  no  neuer  a  Duke  in  the  world,  further  then  I  see  him.  And  sirrha,  so  follow 
me.  Exit  Richard. 

Page.  I  see  my  Lord  is  fully  resolued  to  climbe,  but  how  hee  climbes  ile  leaue 
that  to  your  iudgements,  but  what  his  fall  will  be  thats  hard  to  say:  But  I  maruell 
that  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  and  he  are  now  become  such  great  friends,  who  had 
wont  to  loue  one  another  so  well  as  the  spider  doth  the  flie :  but  this  I  haue  noted, 
since  he  hath  had  the  charge  of  Proctector,  how  many  noble  men  hath  fled  the 
realme,  first  the  Lord  Marcus  sonne  to  the  Queene,  the  Earle  of  Westmorland  and 
Northumberland,  are  secretly  fled:  how  this  geare  will  cotten  I  know  not.  But 
what  do  I  medling  in  such  matters,  that  should  medle  with  the  vntying  of  my 
Lordes  points,  faith  do  euen  as  a  great  many  do  beside,  medle  with  Princes  matters 
so  long,  til  they  proue  themselues  beggars  in  the  end.  Therefore  I  for  feare  I 
should  be  taken  napping  with  any  words,  Ile  set  a  locke  on  my  lips,  for  feare  my 
tongue  grow  too  wide  for  my  mouth.  Exit  Page. 

Enter  the  yoong  Prince,  his  brother,  Duke  of  Yorke,  Earle  Riuers,  Lord  Gray, 

sir  Hapce,  sir  Thomas  Vaughan. 

King.  Right  louing  vnkles,  and  the  rest  of  this  company,  my  mother  hath 
written,  and  thinks  it  conuenient  that  we  dismisse  our  traine,  for  feare  the  towne 


THE  TRUE  TR  AGED  IE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  517 


of  Northampton  is  not  able  to  receiue  vs:  and  againe  my  vnckle  of  Closter  may 
rather  thinke  we  come  of  malice  against  him  and  his  blood:  therefore,  my  Lords, 
let  me  here  your  opinions,  for  my  words  and  her  letters  are  all  one:  and  besides  I 
myselfe  giue  consent. 

Riuers.  Then  thus  may  it  please  your  grace,  I  will  shewe  my  opinion.  First 
note  the  two  houses  of  Lancaster  and  Yorke,  the  league  of  friendship  is  yet  but 
greene  betwixt  them,  and  little  cause  of  variance  may  cause  it  breake,  and  thereby 
I  thinke  it  not  requisite  to  discharge  the  cSpany  because  of  this.  The  Duke  of 
Buckingham  is  up  in  the  Marches  of  Wales  with  a  great  power,  and  with  him  is 
ioyned  the  Protector,  for  what  cause  I  know  not,  therefore,  my  Lords,  I  haue 
spoken  my  mind  boldly,  but  do  as  your  honours  shall  thinke  good. 

Vaugh.  Why  my  Lord  Riuers,  wherefore  is  he  Protector  but  for  the  Kings 
safetie  ? 

Riu.  I  sir  Thomas  Vaughan,  and  therefore  a  traitor,  because  he  is  Protector. 

Cray.  We  haue  the  Prince  in  charge,  therefore,  we  neede  not  care. 

Riu.  We  haue  the  Prince,  but  they  the  authorise. 

Gray.  Why  take  you  not  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  for  the  Kings  friend  ? 

Riu.  Yes,  and  yet  we  may  misdoubt  the  Duke  of  Gloster  as  a  foe. 

Gray.  Why  then  my  Lord  Riuers,  I  thinke,  it  is  conunient  that  we  leaue  you 
here  behind  vs  at  N orthamton,  for  conference  with  them,  and  if  you  heare  their 
pretence  be  good  towards  the  King,  you  may  in  Gods  name  make  retume  &  come 
with  them,  but  if  not,  leaue  them  and  come  to  vs  with  speed.  For  my  sister  the 
Queene  hath  willed  that  we  should  dismisse  our  companie,  and  the  King  himselfe 
hath  agreed  to  it,  therefore,  we  must  needs  obey. 

Riuers.  If  it  please  your  grace  I  am  content,  and  humbly  take  my  leaue  of 
you  all.  Exit. 

King.  Farewell  good  vnckle,  ah  gods,  if  I  do  liue  my  fathers  yeares  as  God 
forbid  but  I  may,  I  will  so  roote  out  this  malice  &  enuie  sowne  among  the  nobilitie, 
that  I  will  make  them  weary  that  were  the  first  beginners  of  these  mischiefes. 

Gray.  Worthily  well  spoken  of  your  princely  Maiestie, 

Which  no  doubt  sheweth  a  king-like  resolution. 

Vaughon.  A  toward  yoong  Prince,  and  no  doubt  forward  to  all  vertue,  whose 
raigne  God  long  prosper  among  vs. 

King.  But  come  vnckle,  let  vs  forward  of  our  iourny  towards  London. 

Riuers.  We  will  attend  vpon  your  Maiestie.  Exit  omnes. 


Enters  an  old  Inne-keeper,  and  Richards  Page. 

Page.  Come  on  mine  Oste,  what  doest  thou  vnderstand  my  tale  or  no  ? 

Oste.  I  faith  my  guest  you  haue  amazed  mee  alreadie,  and  to  heare  it  again, 
it  wil  mad  me  altogither,  but  because  I  may  think  vpon  it  the  better,  I  pray  you 
let  me  heare  it  once  more. 

Page.  Why  then  thus,  I  serue  the  right  honourable  the  Lord  Protector. 

Oste.  I,  I  know  that  too  well. 

Pag.  Then  this  is  his  graces  pleasure,  that  this  night  he  will  be  lodged  in  thy 
house,  thy  fare  must  be  sumptuous,  thy  lodgings  cleanly,  his  men  vsed  friendly 
and  with  great  curtesie,  and  that  he  may  haue  his  lodging  prepared  as  neare  Lord 
Riuers  as  possible  may  be. 

Oste.  Why  sir  if  this  be  all,  this  is  done  alreadie. 


5i8 


APPENDIX 


Page.  Nay  more. 

Oste.  Nay  sir,  &  you  loue  me  no  more,  heres  too  much  already. 

Page.  Nay,  my  Lords  graces  pleasure  is  further,  that  when  all  thy  guesse  have 
tane  their  chambers,  that  thou  conuey  into  my  Lords  hands  the  keyes  of  euery 
seuerall  chamber,  and  what  my  Lords  pleasure  is  further,  thou  shalt  know  in  the 
morning. 

Oste.  How  locke  in  my  guesse  like  prisoners,  why  doe  you  heare  my  guesse  ? 
mee  thinkes  there  should  be  little  better  then  treason  in  these  words  you  haue  vttered. 

Page.  Treason  villaine,  how  darest  thou  haue  a  thought  of  treason  against 
my  Lord,  therefore,  you  were  best  be  briefe,  and  tell  me  whether  you  will  do  it  or  no  ? 

Oste.  Alasse  what  shall  I  do?  who  were  I  best  to  offend?  shall  I  betraie 
that  good  olde  Earle  that  hath  laine  at  my  house  this  fortie  yeares?  why  and  I 
doe  hee  will  hang  me:  nay  then  on  the  other  side,  if  I  should  not  do  as  my  Lord 
Protector  commands,  he  will  chop  off  my  head,  but  is  there  no  remedie  ? 

Page.  Come  sir  be  briefe,  there  is  no  remedie,  therefore,  be  briefe  and  tell 
me  straight. 

Oste.  Why,  then  sir  heres  my  hand,  tell  my  Lord  Protector  he  shall  haue  it, 
I  will  do  as  he  commands  mee,  but  euen  against  my  will,  God  is  my  witnesse. 

Page.  Why  then  farewell  mine  Oste. 

Oste.  Farewell  euen  the  woorst  guest  that  euer  came  to  my  house.  A  maisters, 
maisters,  what  a  troublesome  vocation  am  I  crept  into,  you  thinke  we  that  be 
In-keepers  get  all  the  world,  but  I  thinke,  I  shall  get  a  faire  halter  to  my  necke, 
but  I  must  go  see  all  things  done  to  my  great  griefe.  Exit. 

Enters  the  mother  Queene,  and  her  daughter,  and  her  sonne,  to  sanctuarie. 

Earle  Riuers  speakes  out  of  his  chamber. 

Ho  mine  Oste,  Chamberlaine  wheres  my  key? 

What  pend  vp  like  a  prisoner?  But  staie,  I  feare  I  am  betraid, 

The  sodain  sight  of  Closters  Duke,  doth  make  me  sore  afraid: 

He  speake  to  him,  and  gently  him  salute, 

Tho  in  my  heart  I  enuie  much  the  man, 

God  morrow  my  Lord  Protector  to  your  grace, 

And  Duke  of  Buckingham  God  morrow  too, 

Thankes  noble  Dukes  for  our  good  cheare,  &  for  your  cdpany. 

Here  enters  Buckingham  and  Gloster,  and  their  traine. 

Rich.  Thou  wretched  Earle,  whose  aged  head  imagine  nought  but  treacherie, 
Like  Iudas  thou  admitted  wast  to  sup  with  vs  last  night 
But  heauens  preuented  thee  our  ils,  and  left  thee  in  this  plight: 

Greeu’st  thou  that  I  the  Gloster  Duke,  shuld  as  Protector  sway? 

And  were  you  he  was  left  behind,  to  make  vs  both  away? 

Wilt  thou  be  ringleader  to  wrog,  &  must  you  guide  the  realme? 

Nay  ouer  boord  al  such  mates  I  hurl,  whilst  I  do  guid  the  helme: 
lie  weed  you  out  by  one  and  one,  He  burne  you  vp  like  chaffe, 

He  rend  your  stock  vp  by  the  rootes,  that  yet  in  triumphs  laffe. 

Riu.  Alas  good  Dukes  for  ought  I  know,  I  neuer  did  offend, 

Except  vnto  my  Prince  vnloyall  I  haue  bene, 

Then  shew  iust  cause,  why  you  exclaime  so  rashly  in  this  sort, 


THE  TRUE  TR AG ED  IE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  519 

So  falsly  thus  me  to  condemme,  vpon  some  false  report: 

But  am  I  here  as  prisoner  kept,  imprisoned  here  by  you? 

Then  know,  I  am  as  true  to  my  Prince,  as  the  proudest  in  thy  crue. 

Buc.  A  brauely  spoke  good  old  Earle,  who  tho  his  lims  be  num. 

He  hath  his  tongue  as  much  at  vse,  as  tho  his  yeares  were  yong. 

Ri.  Speakest  y“  the  truth,  how  darst  y"  speak,  for  iustice  to  apeale? 

When  as  thy  packing  with  thy  Prince,  thy  falshood  do  reueale. 

A  Riuers  blush,  for  shame  to  speake,  like  traitor  as  thou  art. 

Riu.  A  brayd  you  me  as  traitor  to  your  grace: 

No  altho  a  prisoner,  I  returne  defiance  in  thy  face. 

The  Chronicles  I  record,  talk  of  my  fidelitie,  &  of  my  progeny, 

Wher,  as  in  a  glas  yu  maist  behold,  thy  ancestors  &  their  trechery. 

The  wars  in  France,  Irish  coflicts  &  Scotland  knowes  my  trust, 

When  thou  hast  kept  thy  skin  vnscard,  and  let  thine  armor  rust: 

How  thou  vniustly  here  exclaim’st, 

Yea  far  from  loue  or  kin, 

Was  this  the  oath  which  at  our  princes  death, 

With  vs  thou  didst  combine? 

But  time  permits  1  now,  to  tell  thee  all  my  minde: 

For  well  tis  known  that  but  for  fear,  you  neuer  wold  have  clind. 

Let  Commons  now  haue  it  in  hand,  the  matter  is  begun, 

Of  whom  I  feare  the  lesser  sort,  vpon  thy  part  will  run. 

My  Lords,  I  cannot  breath  it  out  in  words  like  to  you:  but  this, 

My  honor,  I  will  set  to  sale,  let  any  comman  man  come  in, 

And  say  Earle  Riuers  faith  vnto  his  Prince  did  quaile, 

Then  will  I  lose  my  lands  and  life,  but  if  none  so  can  doo, 

Then  thou  Protector  iniur’st  me,  and  thy  copartner  too: 

But  since  as  Iudges  here  you  are,  and  taking  no  remorce, 

Spare  me  not,  let  me  haue  law,  in  iustice  do  your  worst. 

Buc.  My  Lord,  lay  down  a  cooling  card,  this  game  is  gone  too  far, 

You  haue  him  fast,  now  cut  him  off,  for  feare  of  ciuill  war. 

Iniurious  Earle  I  hardly  brooke,  this  portion  thou  hast  giuen, 

Thus  with  my  honor  me  to  touch,  but  thy  ruth  shall  begin. 

Ri.  But  as  thou  art  I  leaue  thee  here, 

Vnto  the  officers  custody, 

First  bare  him  to  Pomphret  Castle, 

Charge  them  to  keep  him  secretly: 

And  as  you  heare  from  me  so  deale, 

Let  it  be  done  immediatly: 

Take  from  our  Garrison  one  whole  band, 

To  guard  him  thither  safely. 

Riu.  And  send’st  thou  me  to  common  Iayle? 

Nay  then  I  know  thy  minde: 

God  blesse  these  yoong  and  tender  babes, 

That  I  do  leaue  behinde. 

And  God  aboue  protect  them  day  and  night, 

Those  are  the  marks  thou  aim’st  at,  to  rid  them  from  their  right. 


'  This  should  certainly  be  ‘  permits  not,  ’  as  Mr.  Boswell  suggests. 


520 


APPENDIX 


Farewell  sweet  England  and  my  country  men, 

Earle  Riuers  leades  the  way: 

Yet  would  my  life  might  rid  you  from  this  thrall, 

But  for  my  stock  and  kinred  to  the  Queen,  I  greatly  feare  the  all. 

And  thus  disloyal  Duke  farewell,  when  euer  this  is  knowne, 

The  shame  and  infamy  thereof,  be  sure  will  be  thine  owne.  Exit. 

Rich.  So  now  my  Lord  of  Buckingham,  les  vs  hoyst  vp  saile  while  the  winde 
serues,  this  hot  beginning  must  haue  a  quicke  dispatch,  therefore  I  charge  and 
command  straightly,  that  euerie  high  way  be  laid  close,  that  none  may  be  suffered 
to  carrie  this  newes  before  we  our  selues  come,  for  if  word  come  before  vs,  then  is 
our  pretence  bewraid,  and  all  we  haue  done  to  no  effect.  If  any  aske  the  cause  why 
they  may  not  passe,  vse  my  authoritie,  and  if  he  resist  shoote  him  through.  Now 
my  Lord  of  Buckingham,  let  vs  take  post  horse  to  Stony  Stratford,  where  happily 
ile  say  such  grace  to  the  Princes  dinner,  that  I  will  make  the  devoutest  of  them 
forget  what  meat  they  eate,  and  yet  all  for  the  best  I  hope.  Exit. 

Enter  the  Yoong  Prince,  Lord  Gray,  sir  Thomas  Vaughon,  sir  Richard  Hapc 

and  their  traine. 

Hapc.  Lord  Gray,  you  do  discomfort  the  King  by  reason  of  your  heauinesse. 

Gray.  Alasse  sir  Richard,  how  can  I  be  merry  when  we  haue  so  great  a  charge 
of  his  grace:  and  again  this  makes  me  to  greeue  the  more,  because  wee  cannot 
heare  from  Earle  Riuers,  which  makes  me  think  the  Protector  and  he  haue  bene 
at  some  words. 

King.  Why  good  vnkle  comfort  your  selfe,  no  doubt  my  vnkle  Earle  Riuers 
is  well,  &  is  comming  no  doubt  with  my  vnkle  of  Gloster  to  meete  vs,  else  we 
should  haue  heard  to  the  contrarie.  If  any  haue  cause  to  feare,  it  is  my  selfe, 
therefore  good  vnkle  comfort  your  selfe  and  be  not  sad. 

Gray.  The  sweete  ioyce  of  such  a  grape  would  comfort  a  man  were  he  halfe 
dead,  and  the  sweete  words  of  such  a  Prince  would  make  men  carlesse  of  mishaps, 
how  dangerous  soeuer. 

Hap.  Lord  Gray,  we  heare  now  by  all  likelihoods  the  Protector  not  to  be 
farre,  therefore  wee  are  to  entertaine  him  and  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  with 
curtesie,  both  for  the  Princes  behalfe  and  for  our  owne. 

Gray.  Sir  Richard  Hapc,  I  shall  hardly  shew  the  Protector  or  the  Duke  of 
Buckingham  any  mery  countenance,  considering  how  hardly  I  haue  been  vsed  by 
them  both,  but  yet  for  love  to  my  prince  I  will  bridle  my  affectio,  but  in  good  time 
they  come. 

Enters  Richard,  Duke  of  Buckingham,  and  their  traine. 

Rich.  Long  Hue  my  Princely  Nephew  in  all  happinesse. 

King.  Thankes  vnckle  of  Gloster  for  your  curtesie,  yet  you  haue  made  hast, 
for  we  lookt  not  for  you  as  yet. 

Rich.  Therein  I  shew  my  humble  dutie  to  your  grace,  whose  life  I  wish  to 
redouble  your  deceased  fathers  dayes. 

King.  Thankes  good  vnckle. 

Buc.  Long  Hue  my  gratious  Prince. 

King.  Thankes  Buckingham,  but  vnckle  you  will  beare  vs  company  towards 
London  ? 

Rich.  For  that  cause  we  came. 


THE  TRUE  TR AGED  IE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  521 

Buc.  Gentlemen  on  afore  keep  your  roomes,  how  now  Lord  Gray  doo  you 
iustle  in  the  presence  of  the  King?  This  is  more  then  needs. 

Gray.  My  Lord,  I  scarce  touched  you,  I  hope  it  be  no  offence. 

Rich.  Sir  no  great  offence,  but  inward  enuy  will  burst  out, 

No  Lord  Gray,  you  cannot  hide  your  malice  to  vs  of  the  Kings 
blood. 

King.  Why  good  vnkle  let  me  know  the  cause  of  your  suddaine  quarrell  ? 

Rich.  Marry  thus  noble  Nephew,  the  old  wound  of  enuy,  being  rubbed  by 
Lord  Grayes  venomous  rashnesse,  is  growne  to  such  a  venomous  sore  that  it  is 
incurable,  without  remooue  of  dead  flesh. 

Buc.  Lord  Gray,  I  do  so  much  dislike  thy  abuse,  that  were  it  not  in  presence 
of  the  Prince,  I  would  bid  thee  combate;  but  thus  and  it  shal  like  your  grace,  I 
arest,  &  atache  this  Lord  Gray,  Sir  Thomas  Vaughon,  and  Richard  Hapce,  of 
high  treason  to  your  grace.  And  that  Lord  Gray  hath  conueyed  money  out  of 
the  Tower  to  relieue  our  enemies  the  Scots,  and  now  by  currying  favor  with  your 
maiestie,  he  thinkes  it  to  be  hid. 

Rich.  Only  this  I  adde,  you  gouerne  the  Prince  without  my  authorise,  allowing 
me  no  more  then  the  bare  name  of  Protector,  which  I  wil  haue  in  the  despight  of 
you,  and,  therefore,  as  your  competitor  Earl  Riuers  is  alreadie  imprisoned,  so  shall 
you  be,  till  time  affoord  the  law  to  take  place. 

Gray.  But  whereas  we  are  atacht  as  traytors  to  his  grace,  and  gouerne  him 
without  your  authorise,  why  we  have  authoritie  from  the  mother  Queene.  And  for 
the  deliuery  of  the  mony  to  the  Scots,  it  was  done  by  a  generall  consent  of  you  all, 
and  that  I  haue  your  hands  to  shew  for  my  discharge,  therefore,  your  arest  & 
atachment  is  not  lawfull:  &  yet  as  lawful  as  your  quarell  is  right. 

Rich.  Thy  presumption  condemnes  thee  Lord  Gray,  thy  arest  is  lawfull. 
Therefore,  see  them  speedily  and  secretly  imprisoned,  and  after  the  coronation  they 
shall  answer  it  by  law,  meane  while,  Officers  looke  to  your  charge. 

King.  A  Gods,  and  is  it  iustice  without  my  consent  ?  Am  I  a  King  and  beare 
no  authoritie  ?  My  louing  kindred  committed  to  prison  as  traytors  in  my  presence, 
and  I  stand  to  giue  aime  at  them.  A  Edward,  would  thou  laist  by  thy  fathers  side, 
or  else  he  had  liued  till  thou  hadst  bin  better  able  to  rule.  If  my  neere  kindred 
be  committed  to  prison,  what  remaines  for  me,  a  crowne  ?  A  but  how  ?  so  beset 
with  sorrows,  that  the  care  &  grief  wil  kil  me  ere  I  shall  enioy  my  kingdome. 
Well  since  I  cannot  command,  I  wil  intreat.  Good  vnkle  of  Gloster,  for  all  I  can 
say  little,  but  for  my  vnkle  lord  Gray,  what  need  he  be  a  theef  or  conuey  money 
out  of  the  Tower,  when  he  hath  sufficient  of  his  own?  But  good  vnkle  let  me 
baile  them  all:  If  not,  I  will  baile  my  vnkle  Lord  Gray  if  I  may. 

Rich.  Your  grace  vndertakes  you  know  not  what,  the  matters  are  perillous, 
especially  against  the  Lord  Gray. 

King.  What  perilous  matters,  considering  he  is  a  friend  to  vs? 

Rich.  He  may  be  a  friend  to  win  fauour,  &  so  climbe  to  promotion  in  respect 
of  his  equals.  His  equals,  nay  his  betters. 

King.  I  know  my  vnkle  will  conceale  no  treason,  or  dangerous  secresie  from  vs. 

Ric.  Yes  secrets  that  are  too  subtil  for  babes.  Alasse  my  Lord  you  are  a 
child,  and  they  vse  you  as  a  child :  but  they  consult  and  conclude  of  such  matters, 
as  were  we  not  carefull,  would  proue  preiudiciall  to  your  Maiesties  person.  There¬ 
fore,  let  not  your  grace  feare  any  thing  by  our  determination,  for  as  my  authoritie 
is  onely  vnder  your  grace,  so  shall  my  loyaltie  deserue  hereafter  the  iust  recompence 


522 


APPENDIX 


of  a  true  subiect,  therefore,  I  hauing  charge  frd  my  brother  your  father,  &  our 
late  deceased  king,  during  the  minoritie  of  your  grace,  I  wil  vse  my  authoritie  as 
I  see  good. 

King.  Ay  me  vnhappie  king. 

Gray.  Nay  let  not  your  grace  be  dismaid  for  our  imprisonmet,  but  I  would 
we  could  warrant  your  grace  from  harme,  &  so  we  humbly  take  our  leaues  of  your 
grace,  hoping  that  ere  long  we  shall  answer  by  law  to  the  shame  &  disgrace  of 
you  all.  Exit. 

Rich.  Go,  you  shall  answere  it  by  law. 

Kin.  But  come  vnkle  shal  we  to  Lon.  to  our  vntimely  coranatio? 

Rich.  What  else  and  please  your  maiestie,  where  by  the  way  I  will  appoint 
trustie  Officers  about  you. 

Buc.  Sound  Trumpet  in  this  parley,  God  saue  the  King. 

Rich.  Richard. 

Enter  the  mother  Queene,  and  her  yoong  sonne  the  Duke  of  Yorke,  and  Elizabeth. 

Yorke.  May  it  please  your  grace  to  shew  to  your  children  the  cause  of  your 
heavines,  that  we  knowing  it,  may  be  copartners  of  your  sorrowes. 

Q.  Ay  me  poore  husbandles  queene,  &  you  poore  fatherlesse  princes. 

Eliz.  Good  mother  expect  the  liuing,  and  forget  the  dead.  What  tho  our 
Father  be  dead,  yet  behold  his  children,  the  image  of  himselfe. 

Queene.  Ay  poore  Princes,  my  mourning  is  for  you  and  for  your  brother, 
who  is  gone  vp  to  an  vntimely  crownation. 

Eliz.  Why  mother  he  is  a  Prince,  and  in  handes  of  our  two  vnckles,  Earle 
Riuers,  &  Lord  Gray,  who  wil  no  doubt  be  carefull  of  his  estate. 

Queen.  I  know  they  will,  but  kings  haue  mortall  enemies,  as  well  as  friends 
that  esteeme  and  regard  them.  A  sweet  children,  when  I  am  at  rest  my  nightly 
dreames  are  dreadful.  Me  thinke  as  I  lie  in  my  bed,  I  see  the  league  broken  which 
was  sworne  at  the  death  of  your  kingly  father,  tis  this  my  children  and  many  other 
causes  of  like  importance,  that  makes  your  aged  mother  to  lament  as  she  doth. 

Yorke.  May  it  please  your  grace. 

Queeyie.  A  my  son,  no  more  grace,  for  I  am  so  sore  disgraced,  that  without 
Gods  grace,  I  fall  into  dispaire  with  my  selfe,  but  who  is  this  ? 

Enter  a  Messenger. 

York.  What  art  thou  that  with  thy  gastly  lookes  preaseth  into  sanctuary, 
to  affright  our  mother  Queene. 

Messen.  A  sweet  Princes,  doth  my  countenance  bewray  me? 

My  newes  is  doubtfull  and  heauie. 

Eliz.  Then  vtter  it  to  vs,  that  our  mother  may  not  heare  it. 

Queene.  A  yes  my  friend,  speake  what  ere  it  be. 

Mess.  Then  thus  may  it  please  your  grace,  The  yong  prince  comming  vp  to 
his  coronation,  attended  on  by  his  two  vnckles,  Earle  Riuers,  and  Lord  Gray,  and 
the  rest  of  your  kindred,  was  by  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  and  the  Protector,  met 
at  stonie  Stratford,  where  on  a  suddaine  grew  malice  betweene  the  Duke  of  Bucking¬ 
ham  and  the  Lord  Gray,  but  in  the  end,  the  Duke  of  Buckinghams  malice  grew 
so  great,  that  he  arested  and  attached  all  those  of  your  kindred  of  high  treason. 


THE  TRUE  TRAGEDIE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  523 

whereupon  the  Protector  being  too  rash  in  iudgement,  hath  committed  them  all 
to  Pomphret  Castle. 

Queene.  Where  I  feare  he  will  butcher  them  all,  but  where  is  the  Prince  my 
sonne? 

Messen.  He  remains  at  London  in  the  Bishops  palace,  in  the  hands  of  the 
Protector. 

Queene.  A  traitors,  will  they  laie  hands  on  their  Prince,  and  imprison  his 
Peeres,  which  no  doubt  meanes  well  towards  him:  But  tell  me,  art  not  thou  seruant 
to  the  Arch-Bishop  of  Yorke ? 

Messen.  Yes  and  it  please  your  grace,  for  himselfe  is  here  at  hand  with  Letters 
from  the  Councell,  and  here  he  comes. 

Enter  Cardinal l. 

Queene.  But  here  my  friend,  griefe  had  almost  made  me  forget  thy  reward. 
A  come  my  Lord,  thou  bringest  the  heauie  newes,  come  shoote  thine  arrowr,  and 
hit  this  heart  that  is  almost  dead  with  griefe  alreadie. 

Car.  What  ere  my  newes  be,  haue  patience,  the  Duke  of  Gloster  greets  your 
grace. 

Queene.  Draw  home  my  Lord,  for  now  you  hit  the  marke. 

Car.  The  Prince  your  sonne  doth  greete  your  grace. 

Queene.  A  happie  gale  that  blew  that  arrow  by,  A  let  me  see  the  Letter  that 
he  sent,  perhaps  it  may  prolong  my  life  awhile. 

Yorke.  How  doth  my  brother,  is  he  in  health  my  Lord? 

Card.  In  health  sweete  Prince,  but  longes  to  haue  thy  companie. 

Yorke.  I  am  content,  if  my  mother  will  let  me  go. 

Card.  Content  or  not,  sweete  Prince  it  must  be  so. 

Queene.  Hold,  and  haue  they  persuaded  thee  my  sonne  to  haue  thy  brother 
too  away  from  me,  nay  first  I  will  know  what  shall  become  of  thee,  before  I  send 
my  other  sonne  to  them. 

Card.  Looke  on  this  Letter  and  aduise  yourselfe,  for  thus  the  Councell  hath 
determined. 

Queene.  And  haue  they  chosen  thee  among  the  rest,  for  to  persuade  me  to  this 
enterprise  ?  No  my  Lord,  and  thus  persuade  your  selfe,  I  will  not  send  him  to 
be  butchered. 

Card.  Your  grace  misdoubts  the  worst,  they  send  for  him  only  to  haue  him 
bedfellow  to  the  King,  and  there  to  staie  &  keep  him  company.  And  if  your 
sonne  miscary,  then  let  his  blood  be  laid  vnto  my  charge:  I  know  their  drifts  and 
what  they  do  pretend,  for  they  shall  both  this  night  sleepe  in  the  Tower,  and  to 
morrow  they  shall  come  forth  to  his  happie  cronation.  Vpon  my  honour  this  is 
the  full  effect,  for  see  the  ambusht  nobles  are  at  hand  to  take  the  Prince  away  from 
you  by  force,  if  you  will  not  by  faire  meanes  let  him  go. 

Queene.  Why  my  Lord  will  you  breake  Sanctuary,  and  bring  in  rebels  to 
affright  vs  thus?  No,  you  shall  rather  take  away  my  life  before  you  get  my  boy 
away  from  me. 

Card.  Why  Madame  haue  you  taken  Sanctuary? 

Queene.  I  my  Lord,  and  high  time  too  I  trow. 

Card.  A  heauie  case  when  Princes  flie  for  aide,  where  cut-throates,  rebels, 
and  bankerouts  should  be.  But  Madame  what  answere  do  you  returne,  if  I  could 
persuade  you,  twere  best  to  let  him  go. 


524 


APPENDIX 


Queene.  But  for  I  see  you  counsell  for  the  best,  I  am  content  that  you  shall 
haue  my  son,  in  hope  that  you  will  send  him  safe  to  me,  here  I  deliuer  him  into 
your  hands. 

Farewell  my  boy,  commend  me  to  thy  brother. 

Yorke.  Mother  farewell,  and  farewell  sister  too,  I  will  but  see  my  brother 
and  returne  to  you. 

Queene.  Teares  stops  my  speech.  Come  let  vs  in  my  Lord.  Exit. 

Car.  I  will  attend  vpon  your  grace.  Hold  take  the  Prince,  the  Queen  &  I 
haue  done,  lie  take  my  leaue,  and  after  you  ile  come.  Exit  Car. 

Yorke.  How  now  my  friend,  shall  I  go  to  my  brother  ? 

Cates.  What  else  sweete  Prince,  and  for  that  cause  wee  are  come  to  beare 
you  company.  Exit  omnes. 

Enter  foure  watch-men.  Enter  Richards  Page. 

Pag.  Why  thus  by  keeping  company,  am  I  become  like  vnto  those  with  whom 
I  keepe  company.  As  my  Lorde  hopes  to  weare  the  Crown,  so  I  hope  by  that  means 
to  haue  preferment,  but  in  steed  of  the  Crowne,  the  blood  of  the  headles  light  vpon 
his  head:  he  hath  made  but  a  wrong  match,  for  blood  is  a  threatner  and  will  haue 
reuenge.  He  makes  hauocke  of  all  to  bring  his  purpose  to  passe:  all  those  of  the 
Queens  kinred  that  were  committed  to  Pomphret  Castle,  hee  hath  caused  them  to 
be  secretly  put  to  death  without  iudgemet:  the  like  was  neuer  seen  in  England. 
He  spares  none  whom  he  but  mistrusteth  to  be  a  hinderer  to  his  proceedings,  he 
is  straight  chopt  vp  in  prison.  The  valiant  Earle  of  Oxford  being  but  mistrusted, 
is  kept  close  prisoner  in  Hames  Castle.  Againe  how  well  Doctor  Shaw  hath  pleased 
my  Lord,  that  preached  at  Paules  Crosse  yesterday,  that  proued  the  two  Princes 
to  be  bastards,  whereupon  in  the  after  noone  came  downe  my  Lord  Mayor  and  the 
Aldermen  to  Baynards  Castle,  and  offered  my  Lord  the  whole  estate  vpon  him, 
and  offered  to  make  him  King,  which  he  refused  so  faintly,  that  if  it  had  bene  offered 
once  more,  I  know  he  would  haue  taken  it,  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  is  gone  about 
it,  and  is  now  in  the  Guild  Hall  making  his  Oration.  But  here  comes  my  Lord. 


Enter  Richard  and  Catesby. 

Ric.  Catesby  content  thee,  I  haue  warned  the  Lord  Hastings  to  this  Court, 
and  since  he  is  so  hard  to  be  wonne,  tis  better  to  cut  him  off  then  suffer  him,  he  hath 
bene  all  this  while  partaker  to  our  secrets,  and  if  he  should  but  by  some  mislike 
vtter  it,  then  were  we  all  cast  away. 

Cates.  Nay  my  Lord  do  as  you  will,  yet  I  haue  spoken  what  I  can  in  my  friends 
cause. 

Rich.  Go  to  no  more  ado  Catesby,  they  say  I  haue  bin  a  long  sleeper  to  day, 
but  ile  be  awake  anon  to  some  of  their  costs.  But  sirrha  are  those  men  in  readiness 
that  I  appointed  you  to  get? 

Pag.  I  my  Lord,  &  giue  diligent  attendance  vpon  your  grace. 

Rich.  Go  to,  looke  to  it  then  Catesby,  get  thee  thy  weapons  readie,  for  I  will 
enter  the  Court. 

Cat.  I  will  my  Lord.  Exit. 

Pag.  Doth  my  Lord  say  he  hath  bene  a  long  sleeper  to  day  ?  There  are  those 
of  the  Court  that  are  of  another  opinion,  that  thinks  his  grace  lieth  neuer  log  inough 
a  bed.  Now  there  is  court  held  to  day  by  diuerse  of  the  Councell,  which  I  feare 
me  wil  cost  the  Lord  Hastings  and  the  Lord  Standley  their  best  cappes:  for  my 


THE  TRUE  TRAGEDIE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  525 

Lord  hath  willed  mee  to  get  halfe  a  dozen  ruffians  in  readinesse,  and  when  he 
knocks  with  his  fist  vpon  the  boord,  they  to  rush  in,  and  to  crie,  treason,  treason, 
and  to  laie  hands  vpon  the  Lord  Hastings,  and  the  Lord  Stannley,  which  for  feare 
I  should  let  slip,  I  will  giue  my  diligent  attendance. 


Enter  Richard ,  Catesby,  and  others,  pulling  Lord  Hastings. 

Rich.  Come  bring  him  away,  let  this  suffice,  thou  and  that  accursed  sorceresse 
the  mother  Queene  hath  bewitched  me,  with  assistance  of  that  famous  strumpet 
of  my  brothers,  Shores  wife:  my  withered  arme  is  a  sufficient  testimony,  deny  it 
if  thou  canst:  laie  not  Shores  wife  with  thee  last  night? 

Hast.  That  she  was  in  my  house  my  Lord  I  cannot  deny,  but  not  for  any  such 
matter.  If. 

Rich.  If  villain,  feedest  thou  me  with  Ifs  &  ands,  go  fetch  me  a  Priest,  make 
a  short  shrift,  and  dispatch  him  quickly.  For  by  the  blessed  Saint  Paule  I  sweare, 
I  will  not  dine  till  I  see  the  traytors  head,  away  sir  Thomas,  suffer  him  not  to  speak, 
see  him  executed  straight  &  let  his  copartner  the  Lord  Standly  be  carried  to  prison 
also,  tis  not  his  broke  head  I  haue  giuen  him,  shall  excuse  him. 

Exit  with  Hastings.1 

Catesbie  goe  you  and  see  it  presently  proclaimed  throughout  the  Citie  of  London 
by  a  Herald  of  Armes,  that  the  cause  of  his  death  and  the  rest,  were  for  conspiring 
by  Witchcraft  the  death  of  me  and  the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  that  so  they  might 
gouern  the  King  and  rule  the  realme,  I  thinke  the  proclamation  be  almost  done. 

Cate.  I  my  good  Lord,  and  finished  too. 

Rich.  Well  then  about  it.  But  hearest  thou  Catesbie,  meane  while  I  will 
listen  after  successe  of  the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  who  is  labouring  all  this  while 
with  the  Citizens  of  London  to  make  me  King,  which  I  hope  shall  be  shortly,  for 
thou  seest  our  foes  now  are  fewer,  and  we  neerer  the  marke  then  before,  and  when 
I  haue  it,  looke  thou  for  the  place  of  thy  friend  the  Lord  Hastings,  meane  while 
about  thy  businesse. 

Cat.  I  thanke  your  grace.  Exit  Catesbie. 

Rich.  Now  sirrha  to  thee,  there  is  one  thing  more  vndone,  which  grieues  me 
more  then  all  the  rest,  and  to  say  the  truth,  it  is  of  more  importance  then  all  the  rest. 

Page.  Ah  that  my  Lord  would  vtter  it  to  his  Page,  then  should  I  count  my 
selfe  a  happie  man,  if  I  could  ease  my  Lord  of  that  great  doubt. 

Rich.  I  commend  thy  willingnesse,  but  it  is  too  mightie  and  reacheth  the 
starres. 

Pag.  The  more  waightie  it  is,  the  sooner  shall  I  by  doing  it,  increase  your 
honours  good  liking  toward  me. 

Rich.  Be  assured  of  that,  but  the  matter  is  of  waight  &  great  importance, 
and  doth  concerne  the  state. 

Pag.  Why  my  Lord,  I  will  choake  them  with  gifts  that  shall  performe  it, 
therefore,  good  my  Lord,  trust  me  in  this  cause. 

Rich.  Indeed  thy  trust  I  know  to  be  so  true,  that  I  care  not  to  vtter  it  vnto 
thee.  Come  hither,  &  yet  the  matter  is  too  waightie  for  so  meane  a  man. 

Page.  Yet  good  my  Lord,  vtter  it. 

Rich.  Why  thus  it  is,  I  would  haue  my  two  Nephewes  the  yoong  Prince  and 


1  Compare  Shakespeare’s  play.  Act  III,  sc.  iv. 


526 


APPENDIX 


his  brother  secretly  murthered,  Sownes  villaine  tis  out,  wilt  thou  do  it?  or  wilt 
thou  betray  me? 

Page.  My  Lord  you  shall  see  my  forwardnesse  herein,  I  am  acquainted  with 
one  lames  Terrell,  that  lodgeth  hard  by  your  honors  chamber,  with  him  my  Lord 
will  I  so  worke,  that  soone  at  night  you  shall  speake  with  him. 

Rich.  Of  what  reputation  or  calling  is  that  Terrell,  may  we  trust  him  with 
that  which  once  knowne,  were  the  vtter  confusion  of  me  and  my  friends  for  ever  ? 

Page.  For  his  trust  my  Lord,  I  dare  be  bounde,  onely  this,  a  poore  gentleman 
he  is,  hoping  for  preferment  by  your  grace  and  vpon  my  credit  my  Lord,  he  will 
see  it  done. 

Rich.  Well  in  this  be  verie  circumspect  and  sure  with  thy  diligence,  be  liberall, 
and  looke  for  a  day  to  make  thee  blesse  thy  self,  wherein  thou  seruedst  so  good  a 
Lord.  And  now  that  Shores  wifes  goods  be  confiscate,  goe  from  me  to  the  Bishop 
of  London,  and  see  that  she  receiue  her  open  penance,  let  her  be  turnd  out  of  prison, 
but  so  bare  as  a  wretch  that  worthily  hath  deserued  that  plague:  and  let  there  be 
straight  proclaimation  made  by  my  Lord  the  Mayor,  that  none  shall  releeue  her 
nor  pittle  her,  and  priuie  spies  set  in  euerie  corner  of  the  Citie,  that  they  may  take 
notice  of  them  that  releeues  her:  for  as  her  beginning  was  most  famous  aboue  all, 
so  will  I  haue  her  end  most  imfamous  aboue  all.  Haue  care  now  my  boy,  and 
winne  thy  maisters  heart  for  euer. 

Enter  Shores  wife. 

Shores.  Ah  unfortunate  Shores  wife,  dishonour  to  the  King,  a  shame  to  thy 
countrey,  and  the  onely  blot  of  defame  to  all  thy  kindred.  Ay  why  was  I  made 
faire  that  a  King  should  fauour  me?  But  my  friends  should  haue  preferd  disci¬ 
pline  before  affection:  for  they  know  of  my  folly,  yea  my  owne  husband  knew  of 
my  breach  of  disloyaltie,  and  yet  suffered  me,  by  reason  hee  knew  it  bootlesse  to 
kicke  against  the  pricke.  A  sweet  King  Edward,  little  didst  thou  thinke  Shores 
wife  should  haue  bene  so  hardly  vsed,  thy  vnnaturall  brother  not  concent  with 
my  goods  which  are  yet  confiscate  in  his  custodie,  but  yet  more  to  adde  to  my 
present  miserie,  hath  proclaimed  vpon  great  penaltie,  that  none  whatsoeuer,  shall 
either  aide  or  succour  me,  but  here  being  comfortlesse  to  die  in  the  streets  with 
hunger.  I  am  constrained  to  beg,  but  I  feare  tis  in  vaine,  for  none  will  pittie  me. 
Yet  here  come  one  to  whom  I  haue  done  good,  in  restoring  his  lands  that  were 
lost,  now  will  I  trie  him  to  see  if  he  will  giue  mee  any  thing. 

Enters  Lodowicke. 

Lo.  A  time  how  thou  suffrest  fortune  to  alter  estates,  &  changest  the  mindes 
of  the  good  for  the  worst.  How  many  headlesse  Peeres  sleepe  in  their  graues, 
whose  places  are  furnish  with  their  inferiours?  Such  as  are  neither  nobly  borne, 
nor  vertuously  minded.  My  heart  hardly  bewailes  the  losse  of  the  yoong  King, 
by  the  outrage  of  the  Protector,  who  hath  proclamed  himselfe  King,  by  the  name 
of  Richard  the  third.  The  Commons  murmure  at  it  greatly,  that  the  yoong  King 
and  his  brother  should  be  imprisoned,  but  to  what  end  tis  hard  to  say,  but  many 
thinks  they  shall  neuer  come  forth  againe.  But  God  do  all  for  the  best,  and  that 
the  right  heires  may  not  be  vtterly  ouerthrowne. 

Shore.  A  gods  what  a  griefe  is  it  for  me  to  aske,  where  I  haue  giuen. 

Lod.  A  my  good  Lord  Hastings,  how  innocently  thou  diedst  the  heauens 
beare  witnesses 


THE  TRUE  TRAC  ED  IE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  527 

Shores  wife.  Good  sir,  take  pittie  vppon  mee,  and  releeue  mee. 

Lod.  Indeed  this  pittie  to  see  so  faire  a  face  to  aske  for  almes,  But  tell  me, 
hast  thou  no  friends? 

Shore.  Yes  sir  I  had  many  friends,  but  when  my  chiefest  friend  of  all  died,  the 
rest  then  forsooke  me. 

Lod.  Belike  then  thy  fact  was  notorious,  that  thy  friends  leauing  thee  would 
let  thee  go  as  a  spoyle  for  villaines.  But  hearst  thou  I  prethie  tell  me  the  truth, 
and  as  I  am  a  gentleman,  I  will  pittie  thee. 

Shore.  A  Lodowick,  tell  thee  the  truth,  why  halfe  this  intreatie  serued  thee, 
when  thy  lands  had  bene  cleane  gone  had  it  not  bene  for  Shores  wife,  and  doest 
thou  make  me  so  long  to  begge  for  a  little. 

Lod.  Indeed  my  lands  I  had  restored  me  by  mistresse  Shore,  but  may  this  be 
she? 

Shore.  I  Lodowicke,  I  am  she  that  begged  thy  lands  of  King  Edward  the  fourth, 
therefore,  I  pray  thee  bestow  something  on  me. 

Lod.  A  gods  what  is  this  world,  and  how  vncertaine  are  riches?  Is  this  she 
that  was  in  such  credit  with  the  King?  Nay  more  that  could  command  a  King 
indeed  ?  I  cannot  deny  but  my  lands  she  restored  me,  but  shall  I  by  releeuing  of 
her  hurt  my  selfe,  no:  for  straight  proclamation  is  made  that  none  shall  succour 
her,  therefore,  for  feare  I  should  be  seene  talke  with  her,  I  will  shun  her  company 
and  get  me  to  my  chamber,  and  there  set  downe  in  heroicall  verse,  the  shamefull 
end  of  a  Kings  Concubin,  which  is  no  doubt  as  wonderfull  as  the  desolation  of  a 
kingdome.  Exit. 

Shores.  A  Lodowick  if  thou  wilt  giue  me  nothing,  yet  staie  and  talke  with  me. 
A  no  he  shuns  my  company,  all  my  friends  now  forsake  mee:  In  prosperitie  I  had 
many,  but  in  aduersitie  none.  A  gods  have  I  this  for  my  good  I  haue  done,  for 
when  I  was  in  my  cheefest  pomp,  I  thought  that  day  wel  spent  wherein  I  might 
pleasure  my  friend  by  sutes  to  the  King,  for  if  I  had  spoken,  he  would  not  have 
said  nay.  For  tho  he  was  King,  yet  Shores  wife  swayd  the  swoord.  I  where  neede 
was,  there  was  I  bountifull,  and  mindfull  I  was  still  vppon  the  poore  to  releeue  them, 
and  now  none  will  know  me  nor  succour  me :  therefore,  here  shall  I  die  for  want  of 
sustenance.  Yet  here  comes  another  whom  I  haue  done  good  vnto  in  sauing  the 
life  of  his  sonne,  wel  I  will  trie  him,  to  see  if  he  will  giue  me  any  thing. 


Enter  a  Citizen  and  another. 

Cit.  No  men  no  lawes,  no  Princes  no  orders,  alls  husht  neighbour  now  hees 
king,  but  before  he  was  king  how  was  the  terns  thwackt  with  ruffians?  what 
fraies  had  we  in  the  streets?  Now  he  hath  proclaimed  peace  betweene  Scotland 
and  England  for  sixe  yeares,  to  what  end  I  know  not,  vsupers  had  need  to  be  wise. 

Shores.  A  good  sir  releeue  me,  and  bestow  something  vpon  me. 

Cit.  A  neighbour,  hedges  haue  eyes,  and  high-wayes  haue  eares,  but  who  ist 
a  beggar-woman?  the  streets  are  full  of  them  Ifaith.  But  heeres  thou,  hast  thou 
no  friends  that  thou  goest  a  begging  so? 

Shore.  Yes  sir  I  had  friendes,  but  they  are  all  dead  as  you  are. 

Citi.  Why  am  I  dead  neighbor?  why  thou  arrant  queane  what  meanst  thou 
by  that? 

Shore.  I  meane  they  are  dead  in  charitie.  But  I  pray  sir,  had  not  you  the  life 
of  your  sonne  saued  in  the  time  of  king  Edward  the  fourth  by  one  Shores  wife  ? 


528 


APPENDIX 


Citi.  Yes  marry  had  I,  but  art  thou  a  sprig  of  the  same  bough?  I  promise 
you  neighbor  I  thoght  so,  that  so  idle  a  hus-wife  could  not  be  without  the  acquain¬ 
tance  of  so  noble  a  strumpet:  well  for  her  sake  ile  giue  thee  somewhat. 

Shore.  Nay  then  know,  that  I  am  shee  thatt  saued  the  life  of  thy  condemned 
sonne. 

Citi.  Who  art  thou  Shores  wife?  Lye  still  purse,  neighbour  I  would  not  for 
twentie  pounds  haue  giuen  her  one  farthing,  the  proclamation  is  so  hard  by  king 
Richard.  Why  minion  are  you  she  that  was  the  dishonour  to  the  King?  the 
shame  to  her  husband,  the  discredit  to  the  Citie  ?  Heare  you,  laie  your  fingers  to 
worke,  and  get  thereby  somewhat  to  maintaine  you.  O  neighbour  I  grow  verie 
choloricke,  and  thou  didst  saue  the  life  of  my  sonne,  why  if  thou  hadst  not,  another 
would:  and  for  my  part,  I  would  he  had  bene  hangd  seuen  yeeres  ago,  it  had  saued 
me  a  great  deale  of  mony  then.  But  come  let  vs  go  in,  &  let  the  quean  alone. 

{Exeunt.) 

Shore.  Alasse  thus  am  I  become  an  open  shame  to  the  world,  here  shall  I  die 
in  the  streets  for  want  of  sustenance,  alasse  is  my  fact  so  heinous  that  none  will 
pitie  me?  Yet  heere  comes  another  to  whom  I  haue  done  good,  who  is  least  able 
to  pleasure  me,  yet  I  will  trie  him,  to  see  if  he  will  giue  me  any  thing. 

Enter  Morton,  a  Seruing  man. 

Mort.  Now  sir,  who  but  king  Richard  beares  sway,  and  hath  proclaimed  Iohn 
Earle  of  Lincolne,  heire  aparant  to  the  Crown,  the  yoong  Princes  they  are  in  the 
Tower,  nay  some  saies  more,  they  are  murthered.  But  this  makes  me  to  muse, 
the  Duke  of  Buckingham  and  the  King  is  at  such  variance,  that  did  all  in  all  to 
helpe  him  to  the  Crowne,  but  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  is  rid  downe  to  Breaknock- 
Castle  in  Wales,  and  there  he  meanes  to  raise  vp  a  power  to  pull  down  the  vsurper: 
but  let  them  agree  as  they  will,  for  the  next  faire  winde  ile  ouer  seas. 

Shore.  A  Shores  Wife,  so  neere  driuen,  to  beg  of  a  seruing  man,  I,  necessitie 
hath  no  law,  I  must  needs.  Good  sir  releeue  me,  and  giue  me  something. 

Seru.  Why  what  art  thou? 

Shore.  In  briefe  Morton,  I  am  Shores  wife,  that  haue  done  good  to  all. 

Seru.  A  foole,  and  euer  thy  owne  enemy.  In  troth  mistresse  Shore,  my  store 
is  but  small,  yet  as  it  is,  weele  part  stakes,  but  soft  I  cannot  do  what  I  would,  I 
am  watcht. 

Enters  Page. 

Shore.  Good  Morton  releeue  me. 

Seru.  What  should  I  releeue  my  Kings  enemy? 

Shore.  Why  thou  promist  thou  wouldst. 

Seru.  I  tell  thee  I  wil  not,  &  so  be  answered.  Sownes  I  would  with  all  my 
heart,  but  for  yonder  villaine,  a  plague  on  him.  Exit. 

Page.  An  honest  fellow  I  warrant  him.  How  now  Shores  wife  will  none 
releeue  thee? 

Shore.  No  one  will  releeue  her,  that  hath  bene  good  to  all. 

Page.  Why  twere  pitie  to  do  thee  good,  but  me  thinkes  she  is  fulsome  and 
stinkes. 

Shore.  If  I  be  fulsome  shun  my  company,  for  none  but  thy  Lord  sought  my 
miserie,  and  he  hath  vndone  me. 


THE  TRUE  TRAGEDIE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  529 

Page.  Why  hath  he  vndone  thee?  nay  thy  wicked  and  naughtie  life  hath 
vndone  thee,  but  if  thou  wantest  maintenance,  why  doest  thou  not  fall  to  thy  old 
trade  againe? 

Shore.  Nay  villaine,  I  haue  done  open  penance,  and  am  sorie  for  my  sinnes 
that  are  past. 

Page.  Sownes  is  Shores  wife  become  an  holie  whoore,  nay  then  we  shall  neuer 
haue  done. 

Shore.  Why  hang  thee,  if  thy  faults  were  so  wrritten  in  thy  forehead  as  mine  is, 
it  would  be  as  wrong  with  thee.  But  I  prethie  leaue  me,  and  get  thee  from  me. 

Page.  And  cannot  you  keepe  the  Citie  but  you  must  runne  gadding  to  the 
Court,  and  you  staie  here  a  little  longer,  ile  make  you  be  set  away,  and  for  my  part, 
would  all  whoores  were  so  serued,  then  there  would  be  fewer  in  England  then 
there  be.  And  so  farewell  good  mistresse  Shore.  Exit. 

Shore.  And  all  such  vsurping  kings  as  thy  Lord  is,  may  come  to  a  shamefull 
end,  which  no  doubt  I  may  liue  yet  to  see. 

Therefore,  sweet  God  forgiue  all  my  foule  offence: 

And  though  I  haue  done  wickedly  in  this  world, 

Into  hell  fire,  let  not  my  soule  be  hurld.  Exit. 


Enter  Maister  Terrill,  and  sir  Robert  Brokenbery. 

Broken.  Maister  Terrell,  the  King  hath  written,  that  for  one  night  I  should 
deliuer  you  the  keyes,  and  put  you  in  full  possession.  But  good  M.  Terrell,  may 
I  be  so  bold  to  demand  a  question  without  offence? 

Ter.  Else  God  forbid,  say  on  what  ere  it  be. 

Bro.  Then  this  maister  Terrell,  for  your  comming  I  partly  know  the  cause, 
for  the  king  oftentimes  hath  sent  to  me  to  haue  them  both  dispacht,  but  because 
I  was  a  seruant  to  their  father  being  Edward  the  fourth,  my  heart  would  neuer  giue 
me  to  do  the  deed. 

Ter.  Why  sir  Robert  you  are  beside  the  matter,  what  neede  you  vse  such 
speeches  what  matters  are  betweene  the  King  and  me,  I  pray  you  leaue  it,  and 
deliuer  me  the  keyes. 

Broken.  A  here  with  teares  I  deliuer  you  the  keyes,  and  so  farwell  maister 
Terrell.  Exit. 

Ter.  Alasse  good  sir  Robert,  hee  is  kinde  hearted,  but  it  must  not  preuaile, 
what  I  haue  promised  the  King  I  must  performe.  But  ho  Myles  Forest. 

For.  Here  sir. 

Ter.  Myles  Forest,  haue  you  got  those  men  I  spake  of,  they  must  be  resolute 
and  pittilesse. 

For.  I  warrant  you  sir,  they  are  such  pittilesse  villaines,  that  all  London 
cannot  match  them  for  their  villainie,  one  of  their  names  is  Will  Sluter,  yet  the  most 
part  calles  him  blacke  Will,  the  other  is  lack  Denten,  two  murtherous  villaines 
that  are  resolute. 

Ter.  I  prethie  call  them  in  that  I  may  see  them,  and  speake  with  them. 

Forest.  Ho  Will  and  lack. 

Will.  Here  sir,  we  are  at  hand. 

For.  These  be  they  that  I  told  you  of. 

Ter.  Come  hither  sirs,  to  make  a  long  discourse  were  but  a  folly,  you  seeme 
to  be  resolute  in  this  cause  that  Myles  Forest  hath  deliuered  to  you,  therefore, 


34 


530 


APPENDIX 


you  must  cast  away  pitie,  &  not  so  much  as  thinke  upon  favour,  for  the  more 
stearne  that  you  are,  the  more  shall  you  please  the  King. 

Will.  Zownes  sir,  nere  talke  to  vs  of  fauour,  tis  not  the  first  that  lack  and  I 
haue  gone  about. 

Ter.  Well  said,  but  the  Kings  pleasure  is  this,  that  he  wil  haue  no  blood  shead 
in  the  deed  doing,  therefore,  let  me  heare  your  aduises? 

For.  Why  then  I  thinke  this  maister  Terrell,  that  as  they  sit  at  supper  there 
should  be  two  dags  readie  charged,  and  so  suddeinly  to  shoote  them  both  through. 

T errell.  No,  I  like  not  that  so  well,  what  saiest  thou  Will,  what  is  thy  opinion  ? 

Will.  Tush,  heeres  more  adoo  then  needes,  I  pray  bring  mee  where  they  are, 
and  ile  take  them  by  the  heeles  and  beate  their  braines  against  the  walles. 

Ter.  Nay  that  I  like  not,  for  tis  too  tyrannous. 

Dout.  Then  heare  me  maister  Terrell,  let  Will  take  one,  and  ile  take  another, 
and  by  the  life  of  lack  Douton  weele  cut  both  their  throates. 

Ter.  Nay  sirs,  then  heare  me,  I  will  haue  it  done  in  this  order,  when  they  be 
both  a  bed  and  at  rest,  Myles  Forest  thou  shalt  bring  them  vp  both,  and  betweene 
two  feather  beds  smother  them  both. 

For.  Why  this  is  verie  good,  but  stand  aside,  for  here  comes  the  Princes,  ile 
bring  you  word  when  the  deed  is  done.  Exit  TerriU. 


Enter  the  Princes. 

Yorke.  How  fares  my  noble  Lord  and  louing  brother? 

King.  A  worthie  brother,  Richard  Duke  of  Yorke,  my  cause  of  sorrow  is  not 
for  my  selfe,  but  this  is  it  that  addes  my  sorrow  more,  to  see  our  vnckle  whom  our 
father  left  as  our  Protector  in  minoritie,  should  so  digresse  from  dutie,  loue  and 
reale,  so  vnkindly  thus  to  keepe  vs  vp  prisoners,  and  know  no  sufficient  cause  for  it. 

Yorke.  Why  brother  comfort  your  selfe,  for  tho  he  detaine  vs  a  while,  he  will 
not  keepe  vs  long,  but  at  last  he  will  send  vs  to  our  louing  mother  againe:  whither 
if  it  please  God  to  send  vs,  I  doubt  not  but  our  mother  would  keepe  vs  so  safe,  that 
all  the  Prelates  in  the  worlde  should  not  depriue  her  of  vs  againe:  so  much  I  assure 
myselfe  of.  But  here  comes  Myles  Forest,  I  prethy  Myles  tell  my  kingly  brother 
some  mery  storie  to  passe  away  the  time,  for  thou  seest  he  is  melancholy. 

King.  No  Myles,  tell  me  no  mery  storie,  but  answere  me  to  one  question, 
what  was  he  that  walked  with  thee  in  the  Gardeine,  me  thought  he  had  the  keyes  ? 

For.  My  Lord,  it  was  one  that  was  appointed  by  the  King  to  be  an  ayde  to 
sir  Thomas  Brokenbury. 

King.  Did  the  King,  why  Myles  Forest,  am  not  I  King? 

For.  I  would  have  said  my  Lord  your  vnkle  the  Protector. 

King.  Nay  my  kingly  vnkle  I  know  he  is  now,  but  let  him  enoy  both  Crowne 
and  kingdome,  so  my  brother  and  I  may  but  enjoy  our  liues  and  libertie.  But 
tell  me,  is  sir  Robert  Brokenbery  cleane  discharged? 

For.  No  my  Lord,  he  hath  but  charge  for  a  night  or  two. 

King.  Nay  then,  new  officers,  new  lawes,  would  we  had  kept  the  old  still. 
But  who  are  they  whose  gastly  lookes  doth  present  a  dying  feare  to  my  liuing  bodie. 
I  prethee  tell  me  Myles  what  are  they? 

For.  One  my  Lord  is  called  lack  Denten,  the  other  is  called  Will  Slawter. 
But  why  starts  your  grace? 

King.  Slawter,  I  pray  God  he  come  not  to  slaughter  my  brother  and  me,  for 


THE  TRUE  TRAGEDIE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  531 


from  murther  and  slaughter,  good  Lord  deliver  us.  But  tell  me  Myles  is  our  lodging 
prepared  ? 

For.  I  my  Lord,  if  it  please  your  brother  &  you  to  walke  vp. 

King.  Then  come  brother,  we  will  go  to  bed. 

For.  I  will  attend  vpon  your  grace. 

Yorke.  Come  Myles  Forest  beare  vs  company. 

For.  Sirs  staie  you  two  here,  and  when  they  are  a  sleep  ile  call  you  vp. 

Dent.  I  promise  thee  Will,  it  greeues  mee  to  see  what  mone  these  yoong  Princes 
make,  I  had  rather  then  fortie  pounds  I  had  nere  tane  it  in  hand,  tis  a  dangerous 
matter  to  kill  innocent  princes,  I  like  it  not. 

Will.  Why  you  base  slaue,  are  you  faint  hearted,  a  little  thing  would  make  me 
strike  thee,  I  promise  thee. 

Dent.  Nay  go  forward,  for  now  I  am  resolute:  but  come,  lets  too  it. 

Will.  I  prethee  staie,  heele  call  vs  vp  anon.  But  sirrha  Iacke,  didst  thou 
mark  how  the  King  started  when  he  heard  my  name.  What  will  he  do  when  he 
feeles  me. 

For.  But  ho  sirs,  come  softly,  for  now  they  are  at  rest. 

Will.  Come  we  are  readie,  by  the  masse  they  are  a  sleepe  indeed. 

For.  I  heare  they  sleep,  and  sleepe  sweet  Princes,  neuer  wake  no  more,  for 
you  haue  seene  the  last  light  in  this  world. 

lack.  Come  presse  them  downe,  it  bootes  not  to  cry  againe,  lack  vpon  them 
so  lustily.  But  maister  Forest  now  they  are  dead  what  shall  we  do  with  them? 

For.  Why  goe  and  bury  them  at  the  heape  of  stones  at  the  staire  foote,  while 
I  goe  and  tell  maister  Terrell  that  the  deed  is  done. 

Will.  Well  we  will,  farewell  maister  Forest. 

Enter  Terrell. 

Ter.  How  now  Myles  Forest,  is  this  deed  dispatcht? 

For.  i  sir,  a  bloodie  deed  we  haue  performed. 

Ter.  But  tell  me,  what  hast  thou  done  with  them? 

For.  I  have  conueyd  them  to  the  staires  foote  among  a  heape  of  stones,  and 
anon  ile  carry  them  where  they  shall  be  no  more  founde  againe,  nor  all  the  cronicles 
shall  nere  make  mentio  what  shall  become  of  them:  yet  good  maister  Terrell,  tell 
the  King  my  name  that  he  may  but  reward  me  with  a  kingly  thanks. 

Ter.  I  will  go  certifie  the  King  with  speed,  that  Myles  Forest,  Will  Slawter, 
and  lack  Denten,  they  three  haue  done  the  deed.  And  so  farewell. 

Exeunt  omnes. 


Enter  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  with  his  dagger  drawne. 

Ban.  Ah  good  my  Lord,  saue  my  life. 

Buc.  Ah  villaine,  how  canst  thou  aske  for  mercie,  when  thou  hast  so  vniustly 
betraied  me? 

Ban.  I  desire  your  grace  but  giue  me  leaue  to  speake. 

Buc.  I  speake  thy  last  villain,  that  those  that  heare  it,  may  see  how  vniustly 
thou  hast  betraied  me. 

Ban.  Then  thus  my  Lord.  First,  the  proclamation  was  death  to  him  that 
harboured  your  grace. 


532 


APPENDIX 


Buc.  Ah  villaine,  and  a  thousand  crownes  to  him  that  could  betraie  me. 

Ban.  Ah  my  Lord,  my  obeysance  to  my  Prince  is  more. 

Buc.  Ah  vallain,  thou  betraiedst  me  for  lucre,  and  not  for  dutie  to  thy  Prince, 
why  Banister,  a  good  seruant  thinkes  his  life  well  spent,  that  spends  it  in  the  quarrel 
of  his  maister.  But  villain  make  thyselfe  readie,  and  here  receiue  thy  death. 

Enter  a  Herald. 

Herald.  Henry  Duke  of  Buckingham,  I  arest  thee  in  King  Richards  name  as 
a  traytor. 

Buc.  Well  Herald,  I  will  obey  thy  rest.  But  am  I  arrested  in  King  Richardes 
name,  vsurping  Richard,  that  insatiate  blood  succour,  that  traitor  to  God  &  man. 
Ah  Richard,  did  I  in  Guild  Hall  pleade  the  Orator  for  thee,  and  held  thee  in  all  thy 
she  and  wicked  practises,  and  for  my  reward  doest  thou  alot  me  death?  Ah 
Buckingham,  thou  plaidst  thy  part  and  made  him  King,  and  put  the  lawfull  heires 
besides:  why  then  is  Buckingham  guiltie  now  of  his  death?  yet  had  not  the 
Bishop  of  Ely  fled,  I  had  escaped. 

Enters  sixe  others  to  rescue  the  Duke. 

All.  Come,  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  shall  not  die:  We  will  take  him  away 
by  force. 

Herald.  Why  villaines,  will  you  bee  Tray  tours  to  your  Prince? 

Buckingham.  Nay  good  my  friends  giue  me  leaue  to  speake,  and  let  me  intreate 
you  to  laie  your  weapons  by.  Then  know  this  countrey  men,  the  cause  I  am  arested 
this,  Is  for  bringing  in  your  lawfull  King,  which  is  Henry  Earle  of  Richmond  now 
in  Brittaine ,  and  meanes  ere  long  to  land  at  Milford  Hauen  in  Wales,  where  I  doo 
know  hee  shall  haue  ayde  of  the  cheefest  of  the  Welch,  hee  is  your  lawfull  King, 
and  this  a  wrongfull  vsurper.  When  you  shall  heare  of  him  landed  in  that  place, 
then  take  vp  weapons  and  amaine  to  him,  hee  is  the  man  must  reaue  you  of  this 
yoake,  and  send  the  vsurper  headlesse  to  his  home,  and  poore  Buckingham  praies 
upon  his  knees,  to  blesse  good  Richmond  in  his  enterprise,  and  when  the  conquest 
shall  be  giuen  to  him,  graunt  he  may  match  with  Ladie  Elizabeth,  as  promise  hath 
to  fore  by  him  bene  past,  while  then  my  friendes,  leaue  mee  alone  to  death,  and  let 
me  take  this  punishment  in  peace.  Ah  Buckingham,  was  not  thy  meaning  good 
in  displacing  the  vsurper,  to  raise  a  lawfull  king  ?  Ah  Buckingham  it  was  too  late, 
the  lawfull  heires  were  smothered  in  the  Tower,  sweet  Edward  and  thy  brother, 
I  nere  slept  quiet  thinking  of  their  deaths.  But  vaunt  Buckingham,  thou  wast 
altogither  innocent  of  their  deaths.  But  thou  vilain,  whom  of  a  child  I  nurst  thee 
vp,  and  hast  so  vniustly  betraied  thy  Lorde?  Let  the  curse  of  Buckingham  nere 
depart  from  thee.  Let  vengeance,  mischiefes,  tortures,  light  on  thee  and  thine. 
And  after  death  thou  maist  more  torture  feele,  then  when  Exeon  turnes  the  restlesse 
wheele.  And  banne  thy  soule  where  ere  thou  seeme  to  rest.  But  come  my  friends, 
let  me  away. 

Herald.  My  Lord  we  are  sorie.  But  come  laie  handes  on  Banister. 

Exeunt. 

Enter  King  Richard,  sir  William  Catesbie  and  others. 

King.  The  goale  is  got,  and  golden  Crowne  is  wonne, 

And  well  deseruest  thou  to  weare  the  same, 


THE  TRUE  TRAGEDIE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  533 

That  ventured  hast  thy  bodie  and  thy  soule, 

But  what  bootes  Richard,  now  the  Diademe 
Or  kingdome  got,  by  murther  of  his  friends, 

My  fearefull  shadow  that  still  followes  me, 

Hath  summond  me  before  the  seuere  iudge, 

My  conscience  witnesse  of  the  blood  I  spilt, 

Accuseth  me  as  guiltie  of  the  fact, 

The  fact  a  damned  iudgement  craues, 

Whereas  impartiall  iustice  hath  condemned. 

Meethinkes  the  Crowne  which  I  before  did  weare, 

Inchast  with  Pearle  and  costly  Diamonds 
It  turned  now  into  a  fatall  wreathe, 

Of  fiery  flames,  and  euer  burning  starree, 

And  raging  fiends  hath  past  ther  vgly  shapes, 

In  studient 1  lakes,  adrest  to  tend  on  me, 

If  it  be  thus,  what  wilt  thou  do  in  this  extremitie? 

Nay  what  canst  thou  do  to  purge  thee  of  thy  guilt? 

Euen  repent,  craue  mercie  for  thy  damned  fact, 

Appeale  for  mercy  to  thy  righteous  God, 

Ha  repent,  not  I,  craue  mercy  they  that  list. 

My  God,  is  none  of  mine.  Then  Richard  be  thus  resolu’d, 

To  pace  thy  soule  in  vallence  with  their  blood,2 
Soule  for  soule,  and  bodie  for  bodie,  yea  mary  Richard, 

Thats  good,  Catesbie. 

Cat.  You  cald  my  Lord,  I  thinke. 

King.  It  may  be  so.  But  what  thinkst  thou  Catesbie? 

Cat.  Of  what  my  Lord. 

King.  Why  of  all  these  troubles. 

Cat.  Why  my  Lord,  I  hope  to  see  them  happily  ouercom’d. 

King.  How  villain,  doest  thou  hope  to  see  me  happily  ouercom’d? 

Cat.  Who  you  my  Lord? 

King.  Ay  villaine,  thou  points  at  me,  thou  hopest  to  see  me  ouercom’d. 

Cat.  No  my  good  Lord,  your  enemies  or  else  not. 

King.  Ha  ha,  good  Catesbie,  but  what  hearest  thou  of  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  ? 
Cat.  Why  he  is  dead  my  Lord,  he  was  executed  at  Salisbury  yesterday. 

King.  Why  tis  impossible,  his  friends  hopes  that  he  shall  outliue  me,  to  be 
my  head. 

Cat.  Out-liue  you,  Lord  thats  straunge. 

King.  No  Catesbie,  if  a  do,  it  must  be  in  fames, 

And  since  they  hope  he  shall  out  liue  me,  to  be  my  head, 

He  hops  without  his  head,  &  rests  among  his  fellow  rebels. 

Cat.  Mary  no  force  my  Lord. 

King.  But  Catesbie,  what  hearest  thou  of  Henry  Earle  of  Richmond? 

1  Mr.  Boswell  proposes  stygian  for  this  word;  and  he  may  be  right. 

2  This  line  seems  corrupt.  Archdeacon  Nares  interprets  to  valance,  to  adorn 
with  drapery,  and  quotes  from  Hamlet: — 

“Thy  face  is  valanc’d  (bearded)  since  I  s^w  thee  last.” 

Perhaps  we  should  read  To  place  thy  soul  in  balance? 


534 


APPENDIX 


Cat.  Not  a  word  my  Lord. 

King.  No:  hearest  thou  not  he  Hues  in  Brittaine, 

In  fauour  with  the  Duke. 

Nay  more,  Lady  Margaret  his  mother  conspires  against  vs, 

And  perswades  him  that  hee  is  lineally  descended  from  Henry 
The  fourth,  and  that  he  hath  right  to  the  Crowne, 

Therefore,  tell  me  what  thinkst  thou  of  the  Earle? 

Cat.  My  Lord,  I  thinke  of  the  Earle  as  he  doth  deserue, 

A  most  famous  gentleman. 

King.  Villaine  doest  thou  praise  my  foe,  and  commend  him  to  my  face? 

Cat.  Nay  my  Lord,  I  wish  he  were  as  good  a  friend  as  he  is  a  foe,  else  the  due 
deserts  of  a  traytor. 

King.  Whats  that? 

Cat.  Why  my  Lord,  to  loose  his  head. 

King.  Yea  mary,  I  would  twere  off  quickly,  then. 

But  more  to  the  strengthening  of  his  title, 

She  goes  about  to  marry  him  to  the  Queenes  eldest  daughter, 

Ladie  Elizabeth. 

Cat.  Indeed  my  Lord  that  I  heard  was  concluded, 

By  all  the  nobilitie  of  Brittaine. 

King.  Why  then  there  it  goes, 

The  great  diuell  of  hell  go  with  all. 

A  marriage  begun  in  mischiefe,  shall  end  in  blood: 

I  thinke  that  accursed  sorceresse  the  mother  Queene, 

Doth  nothing  but  bewitch  me,  and  hatcheth  conspiracies, 

And  brings  out  perillous  birds  to  wound 
Their  Countries  weale, 

The  Earle  is  vp  in  Armes, 

And  with  him  many  of  the  Nobilitie, 

He  hath  ayde  in  France, 

He  is  rescued  in  Brittaine , 

And  meaneth  shortly  to  arriue  in  England: 

But  all  this  spites  me  not  so  much, 

As  his  escape  from  Landoyse  the  Dukes  Treasurer, 

Who  if  he  had  bene  prickt  foorth  for  reuenge, 

He  had  ended  all  by  apprehending  of  our  foe, 

But  now  he  is  in  disgrace  with  the  Duke, 

And  we  farther  off  our  purpose  then  to  fore, 

But  the  Earle  hath  not  so  many  byting  dogs  abroad, 

As  we  haue  sleeping  curres  at  home  here, 

Readie  for  rescue. 

Cat.  But  my  Lord,  I  maruell  how  he  should  get  aide  there, 

Considering  he  is  no  friend  to  Brittaine. 

King.  Ay  so  thou  maist  maruell  how  the  Duke  of  Brittaine, 

Durst  wake  such  a  foe  as  England  against  him, 

But  euill  fare  makes  open  warre. 

But  who  comes  there  Catsbie? 

Ha  one  of  our  spurres  to  reuenge: 

The  Lord  Standley,  father  in  law  to  Ladie  Margaret, 


THE  TRUE  TR  AGED  IE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


535 


His  comming  is  to  vs  Catesbie, 

Wert  not  that  his  life  might  serue, 

For  apprehension  against  our  foe, 

He  should  haue  neither  Iudge  nor  Iury, 

But  guiltie  death,  without  any  more  ado. 

Now  Lord  Standley,  what  newes? 

Haue  you  receiued  any  letters  of  your  late  embassage  into  BrUtaine f  What 
answere  have  you  receiued  of  your  letters? 

Enter  Lord  Standley,  and  his  sonne  George. 

Stand.  Why  my  Lord,  for  that  I  sent,  I  haue  receiued. 

King.  And  how  doth  your  sonne  then,  is  he  in  health? 

Standley.  For  his  health  my  Lord,  I  do  not  mistrust. 

King.  Faith  tell  vs,  when  meanes  he  to  arriue  in  England  ? 

And  how  many  of  our  Nobilitie  is  with  him? 

And  what  power  is  with  him  ? 

Standley.  And  please  your  grace, 

His  power  is  unknowne  to  me, 

Nor  willingly  would  not  I  be  priuy  to  such  causes. 

King.  Oh  good  wordes  Lord  Standley,  but  giue  me  leaue  to  gleane  out  of 
your  golden  field  of  eloquence,  how  braue  you  pleade  ignorance,  as  though  you 
knew  not  of  your  sonnes  departure  into  Brittaine  out  of  England. 

Stand.  Not  I  my  Lord. 

King.  Why  is  not  his  mother  thy  wife,  &  dares  he  passe  ouer  without  the 
blessing  of  his  mother,  whose  husband  thou  art? 

Stand.  I  desire  your  maiestie  but  giue  me  leaue  to  speake  ? 

King.  Yea  speak  Standley,  no  doubt  some  fine  coloured  tale. 

Stand.  And  like  your  grace,  whereas  you  mistrust  that  I  knew  of  my  sonnes 
departure,  out  of  England  into  Brittaine,  God  I  take  to  record  it  was  vnknowne 
to  me,  nor  know  not  yet  what  his  pretence  is:  for  at  his  departure,  was  I  one  of  the 
priuy  councell  to  your  brother  King  Edward  the  fourth,  and  that  she  was  able  to 
relieue  him  without  my  helper  I  hope  her  sufficiencie  is  knowne  to  your  grace. 
Therefore,  I  humbly  craue  pardon. 

King.  Well  Standley,  I  feare  it  will  be  proued  to  the  contrarie,  that  thou  didst 
furnish  him  both  with  mony  and  munition,  which  if  it  be,  then  looke  for  no  fauour 
at  my  hands,  but  the  due  deserts  of  a  traitor:  but  let  this  passe.  Whats  your 
repaire  to  our  presence? 

Stan.  Only  this  my  Lord,  that  I  may  repaire  from  the  court,  to  my  house  in 
the  country. 

King.  Ay  sir,  that  you  might  be  in  Cheshire  and  Lancashire,  then  should  your 
Postes  passe  inuisible  into  Brittaine,  and  you  to  depart  the  realme  at  your  pleasure, 
or  else  I  to  suffer  an  intollerable  foe  vnder  me,  which  I  will  not.  But  Standley  to 
be  brief,  thou  shall  not  go.  But  soft  Richard,  but  that  it  were  better  to  be  alone 
then  to  haue  noysome  company,  hee  shall  goe,  leauing  for  his  loyaltie  a  sufficient 
pledge.  Come  hither  Standley,  thou  shalt  goe,  leauing  me  here  thy  sonne  and 
heire  George  Standley  for  a  pledge,  that  hee  may  perish  for  thy  fault  if  neede 
should  be,  if  thou  likest  this,  goe,  If  not,  answere  me  briefly,  and  say  quickly  no.1 


1  See  Shakespeare,  act  IV,  iii,  526. 


APPENDIX 


536 

Stand.  I  am  to  aduise  my  selfe  vppon  a  secret  cause,  and  of  a  matter  that 
concernes  me  neare:  say  that  I  leaue  my  sonne  vnto  the  King,  and  that  I  should 
but  aide  Earle  Richmond,  my  sonne  George  Standley  dies,  but  if  my  faith  be  kept 
unto  my  Prince  George  Standley  hues.  Well  I  will  except  the  Kings  proffer. 

And  please  your  grace  I  am  content,  and  will  leaue  my  sonne  to  pledge. 

King.  Here  come  hither,  and  with  thee  take  this  lesson. 

Thou  art  free  for  our  defence, 

Thou  shalt  vpon  thy  pledge  make  this  promise, 

Not  only  to  staie  the  hinderance  of  the  Earle, 

But  to  preuent  his  purpose  with  thy  power. 

Thou  shalt  not  seeke  by  any  meanes  to  aide  or  rescue  him. 

This  done,  of  my  life  thy  sonne  doth  liue: 

But  otherwise  thy  sonne  dies  and  thou  too,  if  I  catch  thee: 

And  it  shall  go  hard  but  I  will  catch  thee. 

Stand.  And  you  shall  go  apace,  and  yet  go  without  me. 

But  I  humbly  take  my  leaue  of  your  grace.  Farewell  George. 

King.  How  now,  what  do  you  giue  him  letters? 

Stand.  No  my  Lord  I  haue  done: 

The  second  sight  is  sweet,  of  such  a  sonne.  Exit. 

King.  Carry  George  Standley  to  prison. 

George.  Alasse  my  Lord,  shall  I  go  to  prison? 

King.  Shall  you  go  to  prison,  what  a  questions  that? 

So  pricke  the  lambe,  and  wound  the  damme. 

How  likest  thou  this  Catesbie  ? 

Cat.  Oh  my  Lord  so  excellent,  that  you  haue  imprisoned  his  sonne. 

King.  Nay  now  will  we  looke  to  the  rest, 

But  I  sent  the  Lord  Louell  to  the  mother  Queene, 

Concerning  my  sute  to  her  daughter  Elizabeth, 

But  see  in  good  time  here  he  is. 

How  now  Louell,  what  newes? 

What  saith  the  mother  Queene  to  my  sute  ? 

Enters  Louell. 

Lou.  My  Lord  very  strange  she  was  at  the  first. 

But  when  I  had  told  her  the  cause,  she  gaue  concent: 

Desiring  your  maiestie  to  make  the  nobilitie  priuie  to  it. 

King.  God  haue  mercy  Louell,  but  what  said  Lady  Elizabeth? 

Lou.  Why  my  Lord,  straunge,  as  women  will  be  at  the  first, 

But  through  intreatie  of  her  mother,  she  quickly  gaue  consent. 

And  the  Queene  wild  me  to  tel  your  grace,  that  she  meanes  to  leaue  Sanctuary, 
and  to  come  to  the  court  with  al  her  daughters. 

King.  I  marry  Louell  let  no  that  opportunitie  slippe,  looke  to  it  Catesbie, 
be  carefull  for  it  Louell,  for  thereby  hangs  such  a  chance,  that  may  inrich  vs  and 
our  heires  for  euer.  But  sirs  hard  ye  nothing  of  the  Scottish  Nobles  that  met  at 
Nottingham,  to  conferre  about  the  marriage  of  my  Neece. 

Cat.  Not  a  word  my  Lord. 


THE  TRUE  TRAGEDIE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


537 


Enters  Messenger. 

King.  Gods  wounds  who  is  that  ?  search  the  villaine,  has  he  any  dags  about 
him? 

Mess.  No  my  Lord  I  haue  none. 

King.  From  whence  comes  thou? 

Mess.  From  the  Peeres  at  Nottingham  and  Scotland,  &  they  greete  your 
Maiestie. 

Lou.  Sirrha  is  the  marriage  concluded  betweene  the  Scottish  Earle  and  the 
faire  Lady  Rosa? 

Cat.  Prethie  tell  vs,  is  it  concluded? 

Page.  How  saies  thou,  is  it  concluded? 

King.  Nay  will  you  giue  me  leaue  to  tell  you  that?  Why  you  villaines  will 
you  know  the  secrets  of  my  letter  by  interrupting  messengers  that  are  sent  to  me  ? 
Away  I  say,  begone,  it  is  time  to  looke  about:  away  I  say,  what  here  yet  villaines? 

Mess.  My  Lord,  I  haue  some  what  to  say  besides? 

King.  Then  speake  it,  what  hast  thou  to  say? 

Mess.  This  my  Lord,  when  the  Peeres  of  England  and  Scotland  met  at  Notting¬ 
ham  togither,  to  confer  about  the  marriage  of  your  Neese,  it  was  straight  determined 
that  she  shuld  be  married  with  the  Scottish  Earle.  And  further  my  Lord,  the 
Councel  commanded  me  to  deliuer  vnto  your  grace  the  treasons  of  Captain  Blunt, 
who  had  the  Earle  of  Oxford  in  charge  in  Homes  castle,  now  are  they  both  fled, 
and  purposeth  to  ayde  the  Earle  of  Richmond  against  your  grace.  Now  my 
Lord  I  take  my  leaue. 

King.  Messenger  staie,  hath  Blunt  betraied,  doth  Oxford  rebell  and  aide  the 
Earle  Richmond,  may  this  be  true,  what  is  our  prison  so  weake,  our  friends  so 
fickle,  our  Ports  so  ill  lookt  too,  that  they  may  passe  and  repasse  the  seas  at  their 
pleasures,  then  euerie  one  conspires,  spoyles  our  Conflex,  conqueres  our  Castles, 
and  Armes  themselues  with  their  owne  weapons  vnresisted?  O  villaines,  rebels, 
fugetives,  theeues,  how  are  we  betrayd,  when  our  owne  swoordes  shall  beate  vs, 
and  our  owne  subiects  seekes  the  subuertion  of  the  state,  the  fall  of  their  Prince, 
and  sack  of  their  country,  of  his,1  nay  neither  must  nor  shall,  for  I  will  Army 
with  my  friends,  and  cut  off  my  enemies,  &  beard  them  to  their  face  that  dares  me, 
and  but  one,  I  one,  one  beyond  the  seas  that  troubles  me:  wel  his  power  is  weake, 
&  we  are  strong,  therefore  I  wil  meet  him  with  such  melodie,  that  the  singing 
of  a  bullet  shal  send  him  merily  to  his  15gest  home.  Come  follow  me. 

Enter  Earle  Rich.  Earle  Oxford,  P.  Landoys,  &  captain  Blunt. 

Rich.  Welcome  deare  friends  and  louing  country-men 
Welcome  I  say  to  Englands  blisfull  lie, 

Whose  forwardnesse  I  cannot  but  commend, 

That  thus  do  aide  vs  in  our  enterprise, 

My  right  it  is,  and  sole  inheritance, 

And  Richard  but  vsurps  in  my  authoritie, 

For  in  his  tyrannie  he  slaughtered  those 
That  would  not  succour  him  in  his  attempts, 

Whose  guiltlesse  blood  craues  daily  at  Gods  hands, 

1  There  seems  to  be  some  corruption  here. 


I 


538  APPENDIX 

Reuenge  for  outrage  done  to  their  harmlesse  Hues: 

Then  courage  countrymen,  and  neuer  be  dismayd, 

Our  quarels  good,  and  God  will  helpe  the  right, 

For  we  may  know  by  dangers  we  haue  past, 

That  God  no  doubt  will  giue  vs  victorie. 

Ox /.  If  loue  of  gold,  or  feare  of  many  foes, 

Could  once  haue  danted  vs  in  our  attempts, 

Thy  foote  had  neuer  toucht  the  English  shoare, 

And  here  Earle  Oxford  plites  his  faith  to  thee, 

Neuer  to  leaue  in  what  we  haue  vndertane, 

But  follow  still  with  resolution, 

Till  thou  be  crowned  as  conquerer  in  the  field, 

Or  lose  thy  life  in  following  of  thy  right: 

Thy  right  braue  Richmond,  which  we  wil  maintaine 
Maugre  the  proudest  bird  of  Richards  brood. 

Then  cousin  Richmond  being  resolued  thus, 

Let  vs  straight  to  Arms,  &  God  and  S.  George  for  vs. 

Blunt.  As  this  braue  Earle  haue  said,  so  say  we  all. 

We  will  not  leaue  thee  till  the  field  be  wonne, 

Which  if  with  fortunate  successe  we  can  performe, 

Thinke  then  Earle  Richmond  that  I  followed  thee, 

And  that  shall  be  honour  inough  for  mee. 

Lan.  So  saith  Landoyse  that  honors  Richmond  so 
With  loue  vnfeined  for  his  valure  past, 

That  if  your  honour  leade  the  way  to  death, 

Peeter  Landoys  hath  sworne  to  follow  thee. 

For  if  Queen  mother  do  but  keepe  her  word, 

And  what  the  Peeres  haue  promised  be  performed, 

Touching  the  marriage  with  Elizabeth, 

Daughter  to  our  King  Edward  the  fourth, 

And  by  this  marriage  ioyne  in  vnitie 
Those  famous  Houses  Lancashire  and  Yorke, 

Then  England  shall  no  doubt  haue  cause  to  say, 

Edwards  coronation  was  a  ioyfull  day. 

And  this  is  all  Landoys  desires  to  see. 

Richm.  Thanks  Landoys,  and  here  Earle  Richmonds  vows, 
If  their  kinde  promises  take  but  effect, 

That  as  they  haue  promised  I  be  made  King, 

I  will  so  deale  in  gouerning  the  state, 

Which  now  lies  like  a  sauage  shultred  groue, 

Where  brambles,  briars,  and  thornes,  ouer-grow  those  sprigs, 
Which  if  they  might  but  spring  to  their  effect, 

And  not  be  crost  so  by  their  contraries, 

Making  them  subiect  to  these  outrages, 

Would  proue  such  members  of  the  Common -weale, 

That  England  should  in  them  be  honoured, 

As  much  as  euer  was  the  Romane  state, 

When  it  was  gouernd  by  the  Councels  rule, 

And  I  will  draw  my  swoord  braue  country-men, 


THE  TRUE  TR AGED  IE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


539 


And  neuer  leaue  to  follow  my  resolue, 

Till  I  haue  mowed  those  brambles,  briars,  and  thornes 
That  hinder  those  that  long  to  do  vs  good. 

Ox}.  Why  we  have  scapt  the  dangeroust  brunt  of  all, 
Which  was  his  garrison  at  Milford  Hauen, 

Shall  we  dismay,  or  dant  our  friends  to  come  ? 

Because  he  tooke  the  Duke  of  Buckingham? 

No  worthie  friends,  and  louing  country-men, 

Oxford  did  never  beare  so  base  a  minde, 

He  will  not  winke  at  murthers  secretly  put  vp, 

Nor  suffer  vpstarts  to  enioy  our  rightes, 

Nor  Hue  in  England  vnder  an  vsurping  king, 

And  this  is  Oxfords  resolution. 

Rich.  But  Blunt,  looke  whose  that  knocks. 

Blunt.  My  Lord,  tis  a  messenger  from  the  mother  Queene, 
And  the  Ladie  Standley  your  mother,  with  letters. 

Rich.  Admit  him  straight,  now  shall  we  heare  some  newes. 


Enters  Messenger. 

Mess.  Long  liue  Earle  Richmond. 

The  mother  Queene  doth  greet  your  honour. 

Rich.  Welcome  my  friends,  how  fares  our  mother  &  the  rest? 

Mess.  In  health  my  Lord,  and  glad  to  hear  of  your  ariual  safe. 

Rich.  My  friend,  my  mother  hath  written  to  me  of  certaine  that  are  comming 
in  our  aide,  the  report  of  whose  names  are  referd  to  thee  to  deliuer. 

Mess.  First,  theirs  the  Lord  Talbut,  the  Earle  of  Shreuesbury  sonne  and 
heire,  with  a  braue  band  of  his  owne. 

There  is  also  the  Lord  Fitz  Harbart,  the  Earle  of  Pembrookes  sonne  and  heire. 

Of  the  Gentlemen  of  the  Welch,  there  is  sir  Prise  vp  Thomas  and  Sir  Thomas 
vp  Richard,  and  sir  Owen  Williams,  braue  gentlemen  my  Lord.  These  are  the 
chiefe. 

Rich.  Are  these  the  full  number  of  all  that  come? 

Mess.  Only  two  more  my  Lord,  which  I  haue  left  vnnamed,  the  one  is  sir 
Thomas  Denis  a  Westerne  gentleman,  and  ioynd  with  him  one  Arnoll  Butler,  a 
great  many  are  willing,  but  dares  not  as  yet. 

Rich.  Doth  Arnoll  Butler  come,  I  can  hardly  brooke  his  trecherie,  for  hee  it 
was  that  wrought  my  disgrace  with  the  King. 

Oxf.  Well  my  Lord,  wee  are  now  to  strengthen  our  selues  with  friends,  and 
not  to  reape  vp  olde  quarrels,  say  that  Arnoll  Butler  did  iniurie  you  in  the  time  of 
peace,  the  mendes  is  twise  made,  if  he  stand  with  you  in  time  of  warres. 

Rich.  Well  my  friend,  take  this  for  thy  good  newes, 

And  commend  me  to  our  mother  and  the  rest. 

Thus  my  Lords,  you  see  God  still  prouides  for  vs: 

But  now  my  Lords  touching  the  placing  of  our  battell  best, 

And  how  we  may  be  least  indangered, 

Because  I  will  be  foremost  in  this  fight, 

To  incounter  with  that  bloodie  murtherer, 

My  selfe  wil  lead  the  vaward  of  our  troope, 


540 


APPENDIX 


My  Lord  of  Oxford,  you  as  our  second  selfe, 

Shall  haue  the  happie  leading  of  the  reare, 

A  place  I  know  which  you  will  well  deserue, 

And  Captaine  Blunt,  Peter  Landoyse  and  you, 

Shall  by  in  quarters  as  our  battels  scowtes, 

Prouided,  thus  your  bow-men  Captaine  Blunt, 

Must  scatter  here  and  there  to  gaull  their  horse, 

As  also  when  that  our  promised  friends  do  come, 

Then  must  you  hold  hard  skirmish  with  our  foes, 

Till  I  by  cast  of  a  counter  march, 

Haue  ioyned  our  power  with  those  that  come  to  vs, 

Then  casting  close,  as  wings  on  either  side, 

We  will  giue  a  new  prauado  on  the  foe, 

Therefore,  let  vs  towards  Aderstoe  amaine, 

Where  we  this  night  God-willing  will  incampe, 

From  thence  towards  Lichfield,  we  will  march  next  day, 

And  neerer  London,  bid  King  Richard  play.  Exit. 

Enters  the  Page. 

Page.  Where  shall  I  finde  a  place  to  sigh  my  fill, 

And  waile  the  griefe  of  our  sore  troubled  King? 

For  now  he  hath  obtained  the  Diademe, 

But  with  such  great  discomfort  to  his  minde, 

That  he  had  better  liued  a  priuate  man,  his  lookes  are  gastly, 

Hidious  to  behold,  and  from  the  priuie  sentire  of  his  heart, 

There  comes  such  deepe  fetcht  sighes  and  fearefull  cries, 

That  being  with  him  in  his  chamber  oft, 

He  mooues  me  weepe  and  sigh  for  company, 

For  if  he  heare  one  stirre  he  riseth  vp, 

And  claps  his  hand  vpon  his  dagger  straight, 

Readie  to  stab  him,  what  so  ere  he  be, 

But  he  must  thinke  this  is  the  iust  reuenge, 

The  heauens  haue  powred  vpon  him  for  his  sinnes, 

Those  Peeres  which  he  vnkindly  murthered, 

Doth  crie  for  iustice  at  the  hands  of  God, 

And  he  in  iustice  sends  continuall  feare, 

For  to  afright  him  both  at  bed  and  boord, 

But  staie,  what  noyse  is  this,  who  haue  we  here? 

Enters  men  to  go  to  Richmond. 

How  now  sirs,  whither  are  you  going  so  fast? 

Men.  Why  to  Earle  Richmonds  Camp  to  serue  with  him, 

For  we  haue  left  to  serue  King  Richard  now. 

Page.  Why  comes  there  any  more? 

Men.  A  number  more.  Exit. 

Page.  Why  these  are  the  villaines  my  Lord  would  haue  put  his  life  into  their 
hands. 

A  Richard,  now  do  my  eyes  witnesse  that  thy  end  is  at  hand,  For  thy  commons 


THE  TRUE  TR  AGED  IE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD  541 


make  no  more  account  of  thee  then  of  a  priuate  man,  yet  will  I  as  dutie  lindes, 
giue  thee  aduertisements  of  their  vniust  proceedings.  My  maister  hath  lifted 
out  many,  and  yet  hath  left  one  to  lift  him  out  of  all,  not  onely  of  his  Crowne,  but 
also  of  his  life.  But  I  will  in,  to  tell  my  Lord  of  what  is  happened. 

Enters  Richmond,  and  Oxford. 

Rich.  Good  my  Lord  depart,  and  leaue  me  to  myselfe. 

Oxf.  I  pray  my  Lord,  let  me  go  along  with  you. 

Rich.  My  Lord  it  may  not  be,  for  I  haue  promised  my  father  that  none  shall 
come  but  my  selfe,  therfore  good  my  Lord  depart. 

Oxf.  Good  my  Lord  haue  a  care  of  your  selfe,  I  like  not  these  night  walkes 
and  scouting  abroad  in  the  euenings  so  disguised,  for  you  must  not  now  that  you 
are  in  the  vsurpers  dominions,  and  you  are  the  onely  marke  he  aimes  at,  and  your 
last  nightes  absence  bred  such  amazement  in  our  souldiers,  that  they  like  men 
wanting  the  power  to  follow  Armes,  were  on  a  sodaine  more  liker  to  flie  then  to 
fight:  therefore,  good  my  Lorde,  if  I  may  not  stand  neare,  let  me  stand  aloofe  off. 

Rich.  Content  thee  good  Oxford,  and  tho  I  confesse  myself  bound  to  thee  for 
thy  especiall  care,  yet  at  this  time  I  pray  thee  hold  me  excused.  But  farewell  my 
Lord,  here  comes  my  Lord  and  father. 

Enters  Standley  and  another. 

Stan.  Captaine  I  pray  thee  bring  me  word  when  thou  doest  discrie  the  enemy. 
And  so  farewell,  and  leaue  me  for  a  while. 

Rich.  How  fares  my  gratious  Lord  and  father? 

Stan.  In  good  health  my  sonne,  &  the  better  to  see  thee  thus  foreward  in  this 
laudable  enterprise,  but  omitting  vain  circumstances,  and  to  come  briefly  to  the 
purpose,  I  am  now  in  fewe  words  to  deliuer  much  matter.  For  know  this,  when  I 
came  to  craue  leaue  of  the  King  to  depart  from  the  court,  the  king  verie  furiously 
began  to  charge  me  that  I  was  both  acquainted  with  thy  practises  and  drifts,  and 
that  I  knew  of  thy  landing,  and  by  no  meanes  would  grant  me  leaue  to  go,  till  as 
pledge  of  my  loyaltie  and  true  dealing  with  the  king,  I  should  leaue  my  yoong 
sonne  George  Standley.  Thus  haue  I  left  my  son  in  the  hands  of  a  tyrant,  onely 
of  purpose  to  come  and  speake  with  thee. 

Rich.  But  omitting  this,  I  pray  tell  me,  shall  I  looke  for  your  helpe  in  the 
battell  ? 

Stan.  Sonne  I  cannot,  for  as  I  will  not  go  to  the  vsurper,  no  more  I  will  not  come 
to  thee. 

Rich.  Why  then  it  is  bootlesse  for  us  to  staie,  for  all  we  presumed  vpon,  was 
on  your  aide. 

Stan.  Why  sonne,  George  Standlyes  death  would  doo  you  no  pleasure. 

Rich.  Why  the  time  is  too  troublesome,  for  him  to  tend  to  follow  execution. 

Stan.  O  sonne,  tyrants  expect  no  time,  and  George  Standley  being  yoong  and 
a  grissell,  is  the  more  easie  to  be  made  away. 

Rich.  This  newes  goes  to  my  heart,  but  tis  in  vaine  for  mee  to  looke  for  victorie, 
when  with  a  mole-hill,  we  shall  encounter  with  a  mountaine. 

Stand.  Why  sonne,  see  how  contrarie  you  are,  for  I  assure  you,  the  chiefest 
of  his  company  are  liker  to  flie  to  thee,  then  to  fight  against  thee:  and  for  me,  thinke 
me  not  so  simple  but  that  I  can  at  my  pleasure  flie  to  thee,  or  being  with  them, 


542 


APPENDIX 


fight  so  faintly,  that  the  battell  shall  be  wonne  on  thy  part  with  small  incountring. 
And  note  this  besides,  that  the  King  is  now  come  to  Lester,  and  means  to  morrow 
to  bid  thee  battel  in  Bosworth. 

Enters  Messenger. 

Mess.  Come  my  Lord,  I  do  discry  the  enemy. 

Stand.  Why  then  sonne  farewell,  I  can  staie  no  longer. 

Richm.  Yet  good  father,  one  word  more  ere  you  depart, 

What  number  do  you  thinke  the  kings  power  to  be  ? 

Stand.  Mary  some  twentie  thousand.  And  so  farewell. 

Richm.  And  we  hardly  fiue  thousand,  being  beset  with  many  enemies,  hoping 
vpon  a  few  friends,  yet  dispair  not  Richmond,  but  remember  thou  tightest  in  right, 
to  defende  thy  countrey  from  the  tyrannie  of  an  vsurping  tyrant,  therefore,  Rich¬ 
mond  goe  forward,  the  more  dangerous  the  battell  is  in  atteining,  it  prooues  the 
more  honourable  being  obteined.  Then  forward  Richmond,  God  and  Saint 
George,  for  me. 

Quisquam  regna  gaudit,  6  jallex  bonum.1 

Enters  the  King,  and  the  Lord  Louell. 

King.  The  hell  of  life  that  hangs  vpon  the  Crowne, 

The  daily  cares,  the  nightly  dreames, 

The  wretched  crewes,  the  treason  of  the  foe, 

And  horror  of  my  bloodie  practise  past, 

Strikes  such  a  terror  to  my  wounded  conscience, 

That  sleep  I,  wake  I,  or  whatsoeuer  I  do, 

Meethinkes  their  ghoasts  comes  gaping  for  reuenge, 

Whom  I  haue  slaine  in  reaching  for  a  Crowne. 

Clarence  complaines,  and  crieth  for  reuenge, 

My  Nephues  bloods,  Reuenge,  reuenge,  doth  crie. 

The  headlesse  Peeres  come  pressing  for  reuenge. 

And  euery  one  cries,  let  the  tyrant  die. 

The  Sunne  by  day  shines  hotely  for  reuenge. 

The  Moone  by  night  eclipseth  for  reuenge. 

The  Stars  are  turnd  to  Comets  for  reuenge. 

The  Planets  chaunge  their  courses  for  reuenge. 

The  birds  sing  not,  but  sorrow  for  reuenge. 

The  silly  lambes  sits  bleating  for  reuenge. 

The  screeking  Rauen  sits  croking  for  reuenge. 

Whole  heads  of  beasts  comes  bellowing  for  reuenge. 

And  all,  yea  all  the  world  I  thinke, 

Cries  for  reuenge,  and  nothing  but  reuenge. 

But  to  conclude,  I  have  deserued  reuenge. 

In  company  I  dare  not  trust  my  friend, 

Being  alone,  I  dread  the  secret  foe: 

I  doubt  my  foode,  least  poyson  lurke  therein. 

My  bed  is  vncoth,  rest  refraines  my  head. 


1  Read,  Quisquam  regno  gaudet,  o  fallax  bonum! 


THE  TRUE  TR AG  ED  IE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


543 


Then  such  a  life  I  count  far  worse  to  be, 

Then  thousand  deaths  vnto  a  damned  death: 

How  wast  death  I  said?  who  dare  attempt  my  death? 

Nay  who  dare  so  much  as  once  to  thinke  my  death? 

Though  enemies  there  be  that  would  my  body  kill, 

Yet  shall  they  leaue  a  neuer  dying  minde. 

But  you  villaines,  rebels,  traitors  as  you  are 
How  came  the  foe  in,  preasing  so  neare  ? 

Where,  where,  slept  the  garrison  that  should  a  beat  them  back? 

Where  was  our  friends  to  intercept  the  foe? 

All  gone,  quite  fled,  his  loyaltie  quite  laid  a  bed? 

Then  vengeance,  mischiefe,  horror,  with  mischance, 

Wilde-fire,  with  whirlewinds,  light  upon  your  heads, 

That  thus  betrayd  your  Prince  by  your  vntruth. 

King.1  Frantike  man,  what  meanst  thou  by  this  mood? 

Now  he  is  come  more  need  to  beate  him  backe. 

Lou.  Sowre  is  his  sweete  that  sauours  thy  delight,  great  is  his  power  that 
threats  thy  ouerthrow. 

King.  The  bad  rebellion  of  my  foe  is  not  so  much,  as  for  to  see  my  friends  to 
flie  in  flocks  from  me. 

Lou.  May  it  please  your  grace  to  rest  your  selfe  content,  for  you  haue  power 
inough  to  defend  your  land. 

Kin.  Dares  Richmond  set  his  foote  on  land  with  such  a  small  power  of  strag- 
ling  fugatiues? 

Lou.  May  it  please  your  grace  to  participate  the  cause  that  thus  doth  trouble 
you? 

King.  The  cause  Buzard,  what  cause  should  I  participate  to  thee?  My 
friends  are  gone  away,  and  fled  from  me,  keep  silence  villaine,  least  I  by  poste  do 
send  thy  soule  to  hell,  not  one  word  more,  if  thou  doest  loue  thy  life. 

Enters  Catesbie. 

Cat.  My  Lord. 

King.  Yet  againe  vilaine,  6  Catesbie  is  it  thou  ?  What  comes  the  Lord  Stand- 
ley  or  no? 

Cat.  My  Lord,  he  answeres  no. 

King.  Why  didst  not  tell  him  then,  I  would  send  his  sonne  George  Standleys 
head  to  him. 

Cat.  My  Lord  I  did  so,  &  he  answered,  he  had  another  sonne  left  to  make 
Lord  Standley. 

King.  O  vilaine  vilde,  and  breaker  of  his  oath,  the  bastardes  ghoast  shall 
hapt  him  at  the  heeles,  and  crie  reuenge  for  his  vild  fathers  wrongs,  go  Louell, 
Catsbie,  fetch  George  Standly  forth,  him  with  these  handes  will  I  butcher  for  the 
dead,  and  send  his  headlesse  bodie  to  his  sire. 

Catesbie.  Leaue  off  executions  now  the  foe  is  heere  that  threatens  vs  most 
cruelly  of  our  liues. 

1  This  seems  to  be  a  continuation  of  the  King’s  speech,  but  a  change  of  his 
mood,  from  delirium  to  reason.  Compare  Richard’s  dream  in  Shakespeare,  and 
the  whole  of  our  poet’s  act  v.  scene  3,  with  this  scene. 


544 


APPENDIX 


King.  Zownes,  foe  mee  no  foes,  the  fathers  fact  condemnes  the  sonne  to  die. 

Lou.  But  guiltlesse  blood  will  for  reuengement  crie. 

King.  Why  was  not  he  left  for  fathers  loyaltie? 

Lou.  Therein  his  father  greatly  iniured  him. 

King.  Did  not  your  selues  in  presence,  see  the  bondes  sealde  and  assignde? 

Lo.  What  tho  my  Lord,  the  vardits  own,  the  titles  doth  resign. 

King.  The  bond  is  broke  and  I  will  sue  the  fine,  except  you  will  hinder  me, 
what  will  you  haue  it  so? 

Lou.  In  doing  true  iustice,  else  we  answere  no. 

King.  His  trecherous  father  hath  neglect  his  word  and  done  imparshall  past 
by  dint  of  sword,  therefore,  sirrha  go  fetch  him.  Zownes  draw  you  cuts  who  shall 
go,  I  bid  you  go  Catesby.1  A  Richard,  now  maist  thou  see  thy  end  at  hand,  why 
sirs  why  fear  you  thus?  why  we  are  ten  to  one,  if  you  seeke  promotion,  I  am 
Kinge  alreadie  in  possession,  better  able  to  performe  then  he.  Louell,  Catesby,  lets 
ioyne  louingly  and  deuoutly  togither,  and  I  will  diuide  my  whole  kingdome  amongst 
you. 

Both.  We  will  my  Lord. 

King.  We  will  my  Lord,  a  Catesbie,  thou  lookest  like  a  dog,  and  thou  Louell 
too,  but  you  will  runne  away  with  them  that  be  gone,  and  the  diuel  go  with  you  all, 
God  I  hope,  God,  what  talke  I  of  God,  that  haue  serued  the  diuell  all  this  while. 
No,  fortune  and  courage  for  mee,  and  ioyne  England  against  mee  with  England, 
Ioyne  Europe  with  Europe,  come  Christendome,  and  with  Christendome  the 
whole  world,  and  yet  I  will  neuer  yeeld  but  by  death  onely.  By  death,  no  die, 
part  not  childishly  from  thy  Crowne,  but  come  the  diuell  to  claime  it,  strike  him 
down,  &  tho  that  Fortune  hath  decreed,  to  set  reuenge  with  triumphs  on  my 
wretched  head,  yet  death,  sweete  death,  my  latest  friend,  hath  swome  to  make  a 
bargaine  for  my  lasting  fame,  and  this,  I  this  verie  day,  I  hope  with  this  lame  hand 
of  mine,  to  rake  out  that  hateful  heart  of  Richmond,  and  when  I  haue  it,  to  eate  it 
panting  hote  with  salt,  and  drinke  his  blood  luke  warme,  tho  I  be  sure  twil  poyson 
me.  Sirs  you  that  be  resolute  follow  me,  the  rest  go  hang  your  selues. 

Exit. 

The  battell  enters,  Richard  wounded,  with  his  Page. 

King.  A  horse,  a  horse,  a  fresh  horse. 

Page.  A  flie  my  Lord,  and  saue  your  life. 

King.  Flie  villaine,  looke  I  as  tho  I  would  flie,2  no  first  shall  this  dull  and 
senceless  ball  of  earth  receiue  my  bodie  cold  and  void  of  sence,  you  watry  heauens 
rowle  on  my  gloomy  day,  and  darksome  cloudes  close  vp  my  cheerfull  sownde, 
downe  is  thy  sunne  Richard,  neuer  to  shine  againe,  the  birdes  whose  feathers 
should  adorne  my  head,  houers  aloft  &  dares  not  come  in  sight,  yet  faint  not  man, 
for  this  day  if  Fortune  will,  shall  make  thee  King  possest  with  quiet  Crown,  if 
Fates  deny,  this  ground  must  be  my  graue,  yet  golden  thoughts  that  reache  for  a 
Crowne,  danted  before  by  Fortunes  cruell  spight,  are  come  as  comforts  to  my 
drooping  heart,  and  bids  me  keepe  my  Crowne  and  die  a  King.  These  are  my 
last,  what  more  I  haue  to  say,  ile  make  report  among  the  damned  soules. 


1  See  Shakespeare,  act  iv.,  scene  4. 

2  See  Shakespeare,  act  v.,  scene  4. 


Exit. 


THE  TRUE  TR  AGED  IE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


545 


Enters  Richmond  to  battell  againe,  and  kils  Richard. 

Enters  Report  and  the  Page. 

Report.  How  may  I  know  the  certain  true  report  of  this  victorious  battell 
fought  to  day,  my  friend  what  ere  thou  beest,  tel  vnto  mee  the  true  report,  which 
part  hath  wonne  the  victorie,  whether  the  King  or  no  ? 

Page.  A  no  the  King  is  slaine  and  he  hath  lost  the  day,  and  Richmond  he 
hath  wonne  the  field,  and  tryumphs  like  a  valiant  conquerer. 

Report.  But  who  is  slaine  besides  our  Lord  and  soueraigne? 

Page.  Slaine  is  the  worthie  duke  of  Northfolke  he,  &  with  him  Sir  Robart 
Brokenby,  Lieftenant  of  the  Tower,  besides  Louell,  he  made  also  a  partner  in 
this  Tragedie. 

Report.  But  wheres  sir  William  Catsby? 

Page.  Hee  is  this  day  beheaded  on  a  stage  at  Lester,  because  he  tooke  part 
with  my  Lord  the  King.  But  stay  Report,  &  thou  shalt  heare  me  tell  the  briefe 
discourse.  And  how  the  battell  fell  then  knowe  Report,  that  Richard  came  to 
fielde  mounted  on  horsback,  with  as  high  resolue  as  fierce  A  chillis  mongst  the  sturdie 
Greekes,  whom  to  encounter  worthie  Richmond,  came  accompanied  with  many 
followers,  and  then  my  Lord  displayde  his  colours  straight,  and  with  the  charge 
of  Trumpet,  Drum  and  Fyfe,  these  braue  batalians  straight  encountred,  but  in 
the  skirmish  which  cotinued  long,  my  Lord  gan  faint,  which  Richmond  straight 
perceiued,  and  presently  did  sound  a  fresh  alarme,  but  worthie  Richard  that  did 
neuer  flie,  but  followed  honour  to  the  gates  of  death,  straight  spurd  his  horse  to 
encounter  with  the  Earle,  in  which  encountry  Richmond  did  preuaile,  &  taking 
Richard  at  aduantage,  then  he  threw  his  horse  and  him  both  to  the  ground,  and 
there  was  woorthie  Richard  wounded,  so  that  after  that  he  nere  recouered  strength. 
But  to  be  briefe,  my  maister  would  not  yeeld,  but  with  his  losse  of  life  he  lost  the 
field.  Report  farewell. 

Enter  Earle  Richmond,  Earle  Oxford,  L.  Standley,  and  their  traine,  with  the  Crowne. 

Rich.  Now  noble  Peeres  and  woorthie  country-men,  since  God  hath  giuen  vs 
fortune  of  the  day,  let  vs  first  giue  thankes  vnto  his  Deitie,  &  next  with  honors 
fitting  your  deserts,  I  must  be  gratefull  to  my  country  men,  and  woorthie  Oxford 
for  thy  seruice  showne  in  hote  encountring  of  the  enemy,  Earle  Richmond  bindes 
himselfe  in  lasting  bondes  of  faithfull  loue  and  perfect  vnitie.  Sory  I  am  for  those 
that  I  haue  lost  by  our  so  dangerous  encountring  with  the  foe,  but  sorrow  cannot 
bring  the  dead  to  life:  and,  therefore,  are  my  sorrows  spent  in  vaine.  Onely  to 
those  that  liue,  thus  much  I  say,  I  will  maintain  them  with  a  manuall  paie.  And 
louing  father,  lastly  to  your  self,  tho  not  the  least  in  our  expected  aide,  we  giue  more 
thankes  for  your  vnlooked  for  aide,  then  we  haue  power  on  sodaine  to  declare,  but 
for  your  thanks  I  hope  it  shall  suffise  that  I  in  nature  loue  &  honor  you. 

L.  Stan.  Well  spoken  sonne,  and  like  a  man  of  worth,  whose  resolutio  in  this 
battell  past,  hath  made  thee  famous  mongst  thy  enemies.  And  thinke  my  son, 
I  glory  more  to  heare  what  praise  the  common  people  gaue  of  thee,  then  if  the 
Peeres  by  general  full  consent  had  set  me  down  to  weare  the  Diadem.  Then  liue 
my  sonne  thus  loued  of  thy  friends,  and  for  thy  foes  prepare  to  combate  them. 

Oxf.  And  Oxford  vowes  perpetuall  loue  to  thee,  wishing  as  many  honours 
to  Earle  Richmond,  as  Ccesar  had  in  conquering  the  world,  &  I  doubt  not  but  if 
faire  fortune  follow  thee,  to  see  thee  honoured  amongst  thy  country  men,  as  Hector 
was  among  the  Lords  of  Troy  or  Tulley  mongst  the  Romane  Senators. 


35 


APPENDIX 


546 

Rich.  How  fares  our  louely  mother  Queene  ? 

Enters  mother  Queene  and  Elizabeth. 

Queene.  In  health  Earle  Richmond,  glad  to  heare  the  newes  that  God  hath 
giuen  thee  fortune  of  the  day.  But  tell  me  Lords,  where  is  my  sonne  Lord  Mar- 
quesse  Dorset,  that  he  is  not  here?  what  was  he  murthered  in  this  Tragedie? 

Rich.  No  louely  Queene  your  sonne  doth  liue  in  France,  for  being  distrest 
and  driuen  by  force  of  tempest  to  that  shore,  and  many  of  our  men  being  sicke  and 
dead,  we  were  inforst  to  aske  the  King  for  aide,  as  well  for  men  as  for  munition, 
which  then  the  King  did  willingly  supply,  prouided,  that  as  hostage  for  those  men, 
Lord  Marquesse  Dorset  should  be  pledge  with  thl.  But  Madame  now  our  troubled 
warre  is  done,  Lord  Marquesse  Dorset  shall  come  home  againe. 

Queene.  Richmond,  gramercies  for  thy  kinde  good  newes,  which  is  no  little 
comfort  to  thy  friends,  to  see  how  god  hath  beene  thy  happie  guide  in  this  late 
conquest  of  our  enemies.  And  Richmond,  as  thou  art  returned  with  victorie,  so 
we  will  keepe  our  words  effectually. 

Rich.  Then  Madame  for  our  happie  battelles  victorie,  first  thankes  to  heauen, 
next  to  my  foreward  country-men,  but  Madame  pardon  me  tho  I  make  bold  to 
charge  you  with  a  promise  that  you  made,  which  was  confirmed  by  diuerse  of  the 
Peeres,  touching  the  marriage  of  Elizabeth,  and  hauing  ended  what  I  promised 
you,  Madam,  I  looke  and  hope  to  haue  my  due. 

Stand.  Then  know  my  sonne,  the  Peeres  by  full  consent,  in  that  thou  hast 
freed  them  from  a  tyrants  yoke,  haue  by  election  chosen  thee  as  King,  first  in  regard 
they  account  thee  vertuous,  next,  for  that  they  hope  all  forraine  broyles  shall  seace, 
and  thou  wilt  guide  and  gouerne  them  in  peace,  then  sit  thou  downe  my  sonne,  and 
here  receiue  the  Crowne  of  England  as  thy  proper  owne,  sit  downe. 

Ox}.  Henry  the  seuenth,  by  the  grace  of  God,  King  of  England,  France ,  and 
Lord  of  Ireland,  God  saue  the  King. 

All.  Long  liue  Henry  the  seuenth,  King  of  England. 

Rich.  Thanks  louing  friends  and  my  kind  country-men,  and  here  I  vow  in 
presence  of  you  all,  to  root  abuses  from  this  common  welth,  which  now  flowes 
faster  then  the  furious  tyde  that  ouerflowes  beyond  the  bankes  of  Nile.  And 
louing  father,  and  my  other  friends,  whose  ready  forwardnesse  hath  made  me 
fortunate,  Richmond  will  still  in  honourable  loue  count  himselfe  to  be  at  your 
dispose,  nor  do  I  wish  to  enioy  a  longer  life,  then  I  shall  liue  to  think  vpon  your 
loue.  But  what  saith  faire  Elizabeth  to  vs?  for  now  wee  haue  welcommed  our 
other  friends,  I  must  bid  you  welcome  Ladie  amongst  the  rest,  and  in  my  welcome 
craue  to  be  resolued,  how  you  resolve  touching  my  profered  loue  vnto  you,  here 
your  mother  and  the  Peeres  agree,  and  all  is  ended,  if  you  condescend. 

Eliz.  Then  know  my  Lord,  that  if  my  mother  please,  I  must  in  dutie  yeeld  to 
her  command,  for  when  our  aged  father  left  his  life,  he  willed  vs  honour  still  our 
mothers  age:  and,  therefore,  as  my  dutie  doth  command,  I  do  commit  my  self 
to  her  dispose. 

Queene.  Then  here  my  Lord,  receive  thy  royall  spouse,  vertuous  Elizabeth,  for 
both  the  Peeres  and  Commons  do  agree  that  this  faire  Princesse  shall  be  wife  to  thee. 
And  we  pray  all,  that  faire  Elizabeth  may  liue  for  aye,  and  neuer  yeeld  to  death. 

Rich.  And  so  say  I,  thanks  to  you  all  my  Lords,  that  thus  haue  honoured  Rich¬ 
mond  with  a  Crowne,  and  if  I  liue,  then  make  account  my  Lords  I  will  deserue  this 
with  more  then  common  loue. 


THE  TRUE  TRAGEDIE  OF  RICHARD  THE  THIRD 


54  7 


Stan.  And  now  were  but  my  sonne  George  Standley  here, 

How  happie  were  our  present  meeting  then, 

But  he  is  dead,  nor  shall  I  euer  more  see  my  sweete 
Boy  whom  I  do  loue  so  deare,  for  well  I  know  the  vsurper 
In  his  rage  hath  made  a  slaughter  of  my  aged  ioy. 

Rich.  Take  comfort  gentle  father,  for  I  hope  my  brother  George  will  turne 
in  safe  to  vs. 

Stand.  A  no  my  sonne,  for  he  that  ioyes  in  blood,  will  worke  his  furie  on  the 
innocent. 

Enters  two  Messengers  with  George  Standley. 

Stan.  But  how  now  what  noyse  is  this? 

Mess.  Behold  Lord  Standley  we  bring  thy  sonne,  thy  sonne  George  Standley, 
whom  with  great  danger  we  haue  saued  from  furie  of  a  tyrants  doome. 

L.  Stan.  And  liues  George  Standley  ?  Then  happie  that  I  am  to  see  him  freed 
thus  from  a  tyrants  rage.  Welcome  my  sonne,  my  sweete  George  welcome  home. 

George  Stan.  Thanks  my  good  father,  and  George  Standley  ioyes  to  see  you 
ioynd  in  this  assembly.  And  like  a  lambe  kept  by  a  greeide  Woolfe  within  the 
inclosed  sentire  of  the  earth,  expecting  death  without  deliuerie,  euen  from  this 
daunger  is  George  Standley  come,  to  be  a  guest  to  Richmond  &  the  rest:  for 
when  the  bloodie  butcher  heard  your  honour  did  refuse  to  come  to  him,  hee  like  a 
sauage  tygre  then  inraged,  commanded  straight  I  should  be  murdered,  &  sent 
these  two  to  execute  the  deed,  but  they  that  knew  how  innocet  I  was,  did  post  him  off 
with  many  long  delayes,  alleaging  reasons  to  alaie  his  rage,  but  twas  in  vaine,  for 
he  like  to  a  starued  Lionesse  still  called  for  blood,  saying  that  I  should  die.  But 
to  be  briefe,  when  both  the  battels  ioyned,  these  two  and  others,  shifted  me  away. 

Rich.  Now  seeing  that  each  thing  turnes  to  our  content, 

I  will  it  be  proclaimed  presently,  that  traytrous  Richard 
Be  by  our  command,  drawne  through  the  streets  of  Lester, 

Starke  naked  on  a  Colliers  horse  let  him  be  laide 
For  as  of  others  paines  he  had  no  regard, 

So  let  him  haue  a  traytors  due  reward. 

Now  for  our  marriage  and  our  nuptiall  rytes, 

Our  pleasure  is  they  be  solemnized 

In  our  Abby  of  Westminter,  according  to  the  ancient  custom  due, 

The  two  and  twentith  day  of  August  next, 

Set  forwards  then  my  Lords  towards  London  straight, 

There  to  take  further  order  for  the  state. 

Mess.  Thus  Gentles  may  you  heere  behold,  the  ioyning  of  these  Houses  both 
in  one,  by  this  braue  Prince  Henry  the  seauenth,  who  was  for  wit  compared  to 
Salomon ,  his  gouernment  was  vertuous  euery  way,  and  God  did  wonderously 
increase  his  store,  he  did  subdue  a  proud  rebellious  Lord,  that  did  encounter  him 
vpon  blacke  heath.  He  died  when  he  had  raigned  full  three  and  twentie  yeares 
eight  moneths,  and  some  odde  dayes,  and  lies  buried  in  Westminster.  He  died 
&  left  behind  a  sonne. 

Mess.  A  sonne  he  left,  a  Harry  of  that  name,  a  worthie,  valiant  and  victorious 
Prince,  for  on  the  fifth  yeare  of  his  happie  raigne,  hee  entered  France,  and  to  the 
Frenchmens  costs,  hee  wonne  Turwin  and  Turney.  The  Emperor  serued  this 
King  for  common  pay,  and  as  a  mersonary  prince  did  follow  him.  Then  after 
Morle  and  Morles,  conquered  he,  and  still  did  keepe  the  French  men  at  a  bay. 


543 


APPENDIX 


And  lastly  in  this  Kings  decreasing  age  he  conquered  Bullen,  and  after  when  he 
was  turned  home  he  died,  when  he  had  raigned  full  thirtie  eight  yeares,  nine  moneths 
and  some  odde  dayes,  and  was  buried  in  Windsore.  He  died  and  left  three  famous 
sprigs  behinde  him. 

Edward  the  sixt,  he  did  restore  the  Gospell  to  his  light,  and  finished  that  his  father 
left  vndone.  A  wise  yoong  Prince,  giuen  greatly  to  his  booke.  He  brought  the 
English  seruice  first  in  vse,  and  died  when  he  had  raigned  six  yeares,  fiue  moneths 
&  some  odde  dayes,  and  lieth  buried  in  Westminster. 

Eliza}  Next  after  him  a  Mary  did  succeede,  which  married  Philip  King  of 
Spaine,  she  raigned  fiue  yeares,  foure  moneths  and  some  odde  dayes,  and  is  buried 
in  Westminster.  When  she  was  dead,  her  sister  did  succeed. 

Queene}  Worthie  Elizabeth,  a  mirrour  in  her  age,  by  whose  wise  life,  and  ciuill 
gouernment,  her  country  was  defended  from  the  crueltie  of  famine,  fire  and  swoord, 
warres  fearefull  messengers. 

This  is  that  Queene  as  writers  truly  say, 

That  God  had  marked  downe  to  liue  for  aye. 

Then  happie  England  mongst  thy  neighbor  lies, 

For  peace  and  plentie  still  attends  on  thee: 

And  all  the  fauourable  Planets  smiles 
to  see  thee  liue  in  such  prospertie. 

She  is  that  lampe  that  keeps  faire  Englands  light, 

And  through  her  faith  her  country  hues  in  peace: 

And  she  hath  put  proud  Antichrist  to  flight, 

And  bene  the  meanes  that  ciuill  wars  did  cease. 

Then  England  kneele  upon  thy  hairy  knee, 

And  thanke  that  God  that  still  prouides  for  thee. 

The  Turke  admires  to  heare  her  gouernment, 

And  babies  in  Jury,  sound  her  princely  name, 

All  Christian  Princes  to  that  Prince  hath  sent, 

After  her  rule  was  rumord  foorth  by  fame. 

The  Turke  hath  sworne  neuer  to  lift  his  hand, 

To  wrong  the  Princesse  of  this  blessed  land. 

Twere  vaine  to  tell  the  care  this  Queene  hath  had, 

In  helping  those  that  were  opprest  by  warre: 

And  how  her  Maiestie  hath  stil  bene  glad, 

When  she  hath  heard  of  peace  proclaim’d  from  far. 

Ieneua,  France,  and  Flanders  hath  set  downe, 

The  good  she  hath  done,  since  she  came  to  the  Crowne. 

For  which,  if  ere  her  life  be  tane  away, 

God  grant  her  soule  may  liue  in  heauen  for  aye. 

For  if  her  Graces  dayes  be  brought  to  end, 

Your  hope  is  gone,  on  whom  did  peace  depend. 

FINIS. 

1  It  is  so  absurd  that  the  Queen  and  her  daughter  should  take  this  Chorus  out 
of  the  mouths  of  the  two  Messengers,  that  I  at  one  time  thought  that  the  words 
Eliza.,  Queene,  were  misplaced  from  a  marginal  note  in  the  manuscript,  calling 
the  attention  of  the  reader  that  Queen  Elizabeth  was  now  the  subject  of  the  Chorus; 
but  that  King  Richard’s  two  murderers  should  speak  this  Epilogue  is  perhaps 
equally  preposterous. 


ON  THE  CHARACTER  OF  RICHARD 


549 


ON  THE  CHARACTER  OF  RICHARD 
For  Sir  Thomas  More’s  account,  the  earliest,  see  Source  of  the  Plot. 

Polydore  Vergil  (p.  226):  King  Rycherd.  .  .  was  lyttle  of  stature,  deformyd 
of  body,  thone  showlder  being  higher  than  thother,  a  short  and  sowre  cowntenance, 
which  semyd  to  savor  of  mischief,  and  utter  evydently  craft  and  deceyt.  The 
whyle  he  was  thinking  of  any  matter,  he  dyd  contynually  byte  his  nether  lyppe, 
as  thowgh  that  crewell  nature  of  his  did  so  rage  agaynst  yt  self  in  that  lyttle  carkase. 
Also  he  was  woont  to  be  ever  with  his  right  hand  pulling  out  of  the  sheath  to  the 
myddest,  and  putting  in  agane,  the  dagger  which  he  did  alway  were.  Trewly  he 
had  a  sharp  witt,  provydent  and  subtyle,  apt  both  to  counterfayt  and  dissemble; 
his  corage  also  hault  and  fearce,  faylyd  him  not  in  the  very  death,  which,  whan  his 
men  forsooke  him,  he  rather  yealded  to  take  with  the  swoord,  than  by  fowle  flyght 
to  prolong  his  lyfe,  uncertane  what  death  perchance  soon  after  by  sicknes  or  other 
vyolence  to  suffer. 

Sir  George  Buck  (p.  148):  To  give  you  [King  Richard]  in  his  equal  Draught 
and  Composition:  He  was  of  a  mean  or  lowe  compact,  but  without  disproportiS 
&  uneveness  either  in  lineaments  or  parts  (as  his  severall  Pictures  present  him) 
His  aspect  had  most  of  the  Souldier  in  it;  so  his  natural  inclination  (Complexions 
not  uncertainly  expounding  our  Dispositions)  but  what  wants  of  the  Court-Planet, 
effeminate  Censurers  think  must  needs  be  harsh  and  crabbed  (and  Envie  will  pick 
quarrels  with  an  hair,  rather  then  want  Subject.)  The  Judgement  and  Courage 
of  his  Sword-actions,  rendred  him  of  a  full  Honour  and  Experience,  which  Fortune 
gratified  with  many  Victories;  never  any  Overthrows  through  his  own  default,  for 
lack  of  Valour  or  Policie.  At  Court,  and  in  his  general  deportment,  of  an  affable 
respect  and  tractable  cleerenesse.  In  his  dispence,  of  a  magnificent  liberal  hand, 
somewhat  above  his  power  (as  Sir  Tho.  Moor  sets  down.)  And  surely  the  many 
Churches,  with  other  good  works  he  founded,  (more  then  any  one  former  King  did 
in  so  short  a  time)  must  commend  him  charitable  and  religious,  as  the  excellent 
Laws  he  made,  do  his  wisedom  and  strain  of  Government,  which  all  men  confesse 
of  the  best.  So  having  (even  from  those  his  bitterest  times)  the  esteem  of  a  valiant, 
wise,  noble,  charitable  and  religious  Prince,  why  should  ours  deprave  him  so  much 
upon  trust,  &  deny  works  their  character  and  place?  [For  an  account  of  Buck’s 
Life  of  Richard  the  Third,  see  Source  of  Plot.] 

T.  Whately  (p.  9):  Every  Play  of  Shakespeare  abounds  with  instances  of 
his  excellence  in  distinguishing  characters.  It  would  be  difficult  to  determine 
which  is  the  most  striking  of  all  that  he  drew;  but  his  merit  will  appear  most  con¬ 
spicuously  by  comparing  two  opposite  characters,  who  happen  to  be  placed  in  similar 
circumstances: — not  that  on  such  occasions  he  marks  them  more  strongly  than 
others,  but  because  the  contrast  makes  the  distinction  more  apparent;  and  of  these 
none  seem  to  agree  so  much  in  situation,  and  to  differ  so  much  in  disposition,  as 
Richard  the  Third  and  Macbeth.  Both  are  soldiers,  both  usurpers;  both  attain 
the  throne  by  the  same  means,  by  treason  and  murder;  and  both  lose  it  too  in  the 
same  manner,  in  battle  against  the  person  claiming  it  as  lawful  heir.  Perfidy, 
violence,  and  tyranny  are  common  to  both;  and  those  only,  their  obvious  qualities, 


550 


APPENDIX - 


would  have  been  attributed  indiscriminately  to  both  by  an  ordinary  dramatic  writer. 
But  Shakespeare,  in  conformity  to  the  truth  of  history  as  far  as  it  led  him,  and  by 
improving  upon  the  fables  which  have  been  blended  with  it,  has  ascribed  opposite 
principles  and  motives  to  the  same  designs  and  actions,  and  various  effects  to  the 
operation  of  the  same  events  upon  different  tempers.  Richard  and  Macbeth,  as 
represented  by  him,  agree  in  nothing  but  their  fortunes. 

The  periods  of  history,  from  which  the  subjects  are  taken,  are  such  as  at 
the  best  can  be  depended  on  only  for  some  principal  facts;  but  not  for  the 
minute  detail,  by  which  characters  are  unravelled.  That  of  Macbeth  is 
too  distant  to  be  particular;  that  of  Richard,  too  full  of  discord  and  ani¬ 
mosity  to  be  true:  and  antiquity  has  not  feigned  more  circumstances  of 
horror  in  the  one,  than  party  violence  has  given  credit  to  in  the  other.  Fic¬ 
tion  has  even  gone  so  far  as  to  introduce  supernatural  fables  into  both  stories: 
the  usurpation  of  Macbeth  is  said  to  have  been  foretold  by  some  witches; 
and  the  tyranny  of  Richard  by  omens  attending  his  birth.  From  these  fables, 
Shakespeare,  unrestrained  and  indeed  uninformed  by  history,  seems  to  have  taken 
the  hint  of  their  several  characters;  and  he  has  adapted  their  dispositions  so  as  to 
give  to  such  fictions,  in  the  days  he  wrote,  a  show  of  probability.  The  first  thought 
of  acceding  to  the  throne  is  suggested  and  success  in  the  attempt  is  promised,  to 
Macbeth  by  the  witches:  he  is,  therefore,  represented  as  a  man,  whose  natural 
temper  would  have  deterred  him  from  such  a  design,  if  he  had  not  been  immediately 
tempted,  and  strongly  impelled  to  it.  Richard,  on  the  other  hand,  brought  with 
him  into  the  world  the  signs  of  ambition  and  cruelty:  his  disposition,  therefore,  is 
suited  to  those  symptoms;  and  he  is  not  discouraged  from  indulging  it  by  the  improb¬ 
ability  of  succeeding,  or  by  any  difficulties  and  dangers  which  obstruct  his  way. 

Agreeably  to  these  ideas,  Macbeth  appears  to  be  a  man  not  destitute  of  the 
feelings  of  humanity.  .  .  .  His  reluctance  to  commit  the  murther  is  owing  in  a 
great  measure  to  reflexions  which  arise  from  sensibility;  and  giving  way  to  his 
natural  feelings  of  kindred,  hospitality,  and  gratitude,  he  for  a  while  lays  aside  his 
purpose.  A  man  of  such  a  disposition  will  esteem,  as  they  ought  to  be  esteemed, 
all  gentle  and  amiable  qualities  in  another:  and  therefore  Macbeth  is  affected 
by  the  mild  virtues  of  Duncan;  and  reveres  them  in  his  sovereign  when  he 
stifles  them  in  himself.  .  .  .  The  frequent  references  to  the  prophecy  in  favour 
of  Banquo’s  issue,  is  another  symptom  of  the  same  disposition:  for  it  is  not 
always  from  fear,  but  sometimes  from  envy,  that  he  alludes  to  it:  and  being 
himself  very  susceptible  of  those  domestic  affections,  which  raise  a  desire  and 
love  of  posterity,  he  repines  at  the  succession  assured  to  the  family  of  his  rival, 
and  which  in  his  estimation  seems  more  valuable  than  his  own  actual  possession. 
Thus,  in  a  variety  of  instances,  does  the  tenderness  in  his  character  show  itself; 
and  one  who  has  these  feelings,  though  he  may  have  no  principles,  cannot  easily 
be  induced  to  commit  a  murder.  The  intervention  of  a  supernatural  cause  accounts 
for  his  acting  so  contrary  to  his  disposition.  But  that  alone  is  not  sufficient  to 
prevail  entirely  over  his  nature:  the  instigations  of  his  wife  are  also  necessary  to 
keep  him  to  his  purpose.  .  .  The  argument  [she  uses]  is,  that  the  strongest  and 
most  natural  affections  are  to  be  stifled  upon  so  great  an  occasion:  and  such  an 
argument  is  proper  to  persuade  one  who  is  liable  to  be  swayed  by  them;  but  is  no 
incentive  either  to  his  courage  or  his  ambition. 

Richard  is  in  all  these  particulars  the  very  reverse  to  Macbeth.  He  is  totally 
destitute  to  every  softer  feeling:  ‘I  that  have  neither  pity,  love,  nor  fear.’ — 3  Hen, 


ON  THE  CHARA  CTER  OF  RICHARD 


551 


VI;  V,  vii,  68,  is  the  character  he  gives  of  himself,  and  which  he  preserves  through¬ 
out;  insensible  to  his  habitudes  with  a  brother,  to  his  connection  with  a  wife,  to 
the  piety  of  the  king,  and  the  innocence  of  the  babes,  whom  he  murders.  The 
deformity  of  his  body  was  supposed  to  indicate  a  similar  depravity  of  mind;  and 
Shakespeare  makes  great  use  both  of  that,  and  of  the  current  stories  of  the  times 
concerning  the  circumstances  of  his  birth,  to  intimate  that  his  actions  proceeded  not 
from  the  occasion,  but  from  a  savageness  of  nature.  Henry,  therefore,  says  to  him: 
‘Teeth  hadst  thou  in  thy  head  when  thou  wast  born,  To  signify  thou  cam’st  to 
bite  the  world.’ — -3  Hen.  VI;  V,  vii,  53,  which  does  not  affect  Richard  as  a  reproach; 
it  serves  him  only  for  a  pretence  to  commit  the  murder  he  came  resolved  on;  and 
his  answer  while  he  is  killing  Henry  is,  ‘For  this  among  the  rest  was  I  ordained.’ — 
1.  57.  Immediately  afterwards  he  resumes  the  subject  himself;  and,  priding  him¬ 
self  that  the  signs  given  at  his  birth  were  verified  in  his  conduct,  he  says:  ‘Then, 
since  the  Heavens  have  shaped  my  body  so,  Let  Hell  make  crook’d  my  mind  to 
answer  it.’ — 1.  78.  Several  other  passages  to  the  same  effect  imply  that  he  has  a 
natural  propensity  to  evil;  crimes  are  his  delight:  but  Macbeth  is  always  in  an 
agony  when  he  thinks  of  them.  He  is  sensible  of  ‘ — the  heat  oppressed  brain,’  he 
feels  ‘ — the  present  horror  of  the  time  Which  now  suits  with  it,’  and  immediately 
after  he  has  committed  the  murder,  he  is  ‘ — afraid  to  think  what  he  has  done.’ 
He  is  pensive  even  while  he  is  enjoying  the  effect  of  his  crimes;  but  Richard  is  in 
spirits  merely  at  the  prospect  of  committing  them;  and  what  is  effort  in  the  one, 
is  sport  in  the  other.  An  extraordinary  gaiety  of  heart  shows  itself  upon  those 
occasions,  which  to  Macbeth  seem  most  awful;  and  whether  he  forms  or  executes, 
contemplates  the  means,  or  looks  back  on  the  success,  of  the  most  wicked  and 
desperate  designs,  they  are  at  all  times  subjects  to  him  of  merriment.  Upon 
parting  from  his  brother,  he  says:  ‘I  do  love  thee  so  That  I  will  shortly  send  thy 
soul  to  heaven  If  heaven  will  take  the  present  at  our  hands.’  His  amusement, 
when  he  is  meditating  the  murder  of  his  nephews,  is  the  application  of  some  prov¬ 
erbs  to  their  discourse  and  situation:  ‘So  wise  so  young,  they  say,  do  ne’er  live 
long,’  and,  ‘Short  summers  lightly  have  a  forward  spring.’  His  ironical  address 
to  Tirrel,  1  Dar’st  thou  resolve  to  kill  a  friend  of  mine  ?’  is  agreeable  to  the  rest  of 
his  deportment:  and  his  pleasantry  does  not  forsake  him  when  he  considers  some 
of  his  worst  deeds,  after  he  has  committed  them;  for  the  terms  in  which  he  men¬ 
tions  them  are,  that,  ‘The  sons  of  Edward  sleep  in  Abraham’s  bosom;  And  Anne 
my  wife  hath  bid  the  world  good  night.’  But  he  gives  still  a  greater  loose  to  his 
humour,  when  his  deformity,  and  the  omens  attending  his  birth,  are  alluded  to, 
either  by  himself  or  by  others,  as  symptoms  of  the  wickedness  of  his  nature.  His 
joy  at  gaining  the  consent  of  Lady  Anne  to  marry  him,  together  with  his  deter¬ 
mination  to  get  rid  of  her,  are  expressed  in  the  same  wanton  vein.  And  yet,  that 
nothing  might  be  wanting  to  make  him  completely  odious,  Shakespeare  has  very 
artfully  mixed  with  all  this  ridicule,  a  rancorous  envy  of  those  who  have  greater 
advantages  of  figure.  .  .  .  There  is,  besides,  another  subject  on  which  he  sometimes 
exercises  his  wit,  which  is  his  own  hypocrisy.  .  .  .  To  himself  he  laughs  at  the 
sanctified  appearances  which  he  assumes,  and  makes  ridiculous  applications  of 
that  very  language  by  which  he  imposed  on  others.  His  answer  to  his  mother’s 
blessing,  ‘Amen!  and  make  me  die  a  good  old  man!’  is  an  example  both  of  his 
hypocrisy  and  his  humour:  his  application  of  the  story  of  Judas  to  the  affection  he 
had  just  before  expressed  for  Edward’s  family,  ‘To  say  the  truth,  so  Judas  kiss’d 
his  master,’  is  another  instance  of  the  same  kind;  and  there  are  many  more.  But 


552 


APPENDIX 


still  all  this  turn  to  ridicule  does  not  proceed  from  levity;  for  Macbeth,  though 
always  serious,  is  not  so  considerate  and  attentive  in  times  of  action  and  business. 
But  Richard,  when  he  is  indulging  that  wickedness  and  malice  which  he  is  so  prone 
to  and  fond  of,  expresses  his  enjoyment  of  it  by  such  sallies  of  humour;  on  occa¬ 
sions  he  is  alert,  on  these  only  is  he  gay;  and  the  delight  he  takes  in  them  gives  an 
air  to  his  whole  demeanor,  which  induces  Hastings  to  observe  that  as:  ‘His  grace 
looks  cheerfully  and  smooth  today:  There’s  some  conceit  or  other  likes  him  well,’ 
which  observation  is  made  at  the  moment  when  he  is  meditating,  and  but  just 
before  he  accomplished,  the  destruction  of  the  nobleman  who  makes  it.  That 
Macbeth,  on  the  other  hand,  is  constantly  shocked  and  depressed  with  those  cir¬ 
cumstances  which  inspire  Richard  with  extravagant  mirth  and  spirits,  is  so  obvious, 
that  more  quotations  are  unnecessary  to  prove  it. 

The  total  insensibility  to  every  tender  feeling,  which  distinguishes  the  character 
of  Richard,  makes  him  consider  the  mild  virtues  of  Henry  as  so  many  weaknesses, 
and  insult  him  for  them,  at  the  very  moment  when  they  would  have  been  allowed 
all  their  merit,  and  have  attracted  some  compassion  from  any  other  person. 

‘See  how  my  sword  weeps  for  the  poor  king’s  death!’  is  the  taunt  he  utters 
over  his  bloody  corse:  and  when  afterwards  Lady  Anne  aggravates  the  assassination 
of  Henry  by  exclaiming:  ‘O  he  was  gentle,  mild,  and  virtuous!’  His  answer  is: 
‘The  fitter  for  the  King  of  Heaven  that  hath  him.’  Richard  despises  Henry  for  his 
meekness,  and  turns  it  into  a  jest,  when  it  is  urged  against  himself  as  a  matter  of 
reproach.  But  Macbeth  esteems  Duncan  for  the  same  quality;  and  of  himself, 
without  being  reminded,  reflects  upon  it  with  contrition.  It  would  have  been  an 
inconsistency  to  have  attributed  to  Richard  any  of  those  domestic  affections  which 
are  proper  in  Macbeth:  nor  are  they  only  omitted;  but  Shakespeare  has  with  great 
nicety  shown  that  his  zeal  for  his  family  springs  not  from  them,  but  from  his 
ambition,  and  from  that  party-spirit  which  the  contention  between  the  houses  of 
York  and  Lancaster  had  inspired.  His  animosity,  therefore,  is  inveterate  against 
all  ‘  who  wish  the  downfall  of  our  House,  ’  and  he  eagerly  pursues  their  destruction, 
as  the  means  of  his  own  advancement.  But  his  desire  for  the  prosperity  of  his 
family  goes  no  further:  the  execration  he  utters  against  his  brother  Edward,' Would 
he  were  wasted,  marrow,  bones,  and  all !  ’  is  to  the  full  as  bitter  as  any  against  the 
Lancastrians.  The  fear  of  children  from  Edward’s  marriage  provokes  him  to  this 
curse;  yet  not  a  wish  for  posterity  ever  crosses  him:  and  tho’  childless  himself, 
he  does  not  hesitate  to  destroy  the  heirs  of  his  family.  He  would  annihilate  the 
House  he  had  fought  for  all  his  life,  rather  than  be  disappointed  of  the  throne  he 
aspired  to;  and  after  he  had  ascended  it,  he  forgets  the  interests  of  that  House, 
whose  accession  had  opened  the  way  to  his  usurpation.  He  does  not  provide,  he 
does  not  wish,  for  its  continuance;  the  possession,  not  the  descent,  of  the  crown  is 
his  object:  and  when  afterwards  it  is  disputed  with  him,  he  considers  Richmond 
only  as  a  pretender.  The  circumstance  of  his  being  also  a  Lancastrian  does  not 
occur  to  him;  and  he  even,  when  he  seems  to  contemn  him  more,  does  not  hate 
him  so  much  as  he  did  Henry,  though  Richmond  was  far  the  less  amiable,  as  well 
as  the  less  despicable,  of  the  two:  all  which  conduct  tallies  with  the  principle  he 
avows  when  he  declares:  ‘I  have  no  brother,  I  am  like  no  brother:  And  this  word 
love,  which  grey-beards  call  divine,  Be  resident  in  men  like  one  another,  And  not 
in  me:  I  am  myself  alone.’ — j  Hen.  VI;  V,  vii,  80-84.  But  the  characters  of 
Richard  and  Macbeth  are  marked  not  only  by  opposite  qualities,  but  even  the 
same  qualities,  in  each,  differ  so  much  in  the  cause,  the  kind,  and  the  degree, 


ON  THE  CHARACTER  OF  RICHARD 


553 


that  the  distinction  in  them  is  as  evident  as  in  the  others.  Ambition  is  common 
to  both;  but  in  Macbeth  it  proceeds  only  from  vanity,  which  is  flattered  and  satis¬ 
fied  by  the  splendour  of  a  throne:  in  Richard  it  is  founded  upon  pride;  his  ruling 
passion  is  the  lust  of  power,  and  so  great  is  that  joy,  that  enumerates  among  the 
delights  of  war  ‘To  fright  the  souls  of  fearful  adversaries,’  which  is  a  pleasure 
brave  men  do  not  very  sensibly  feel.  But,  in  Richard,  the  sentiments  natural 
to  his  high  courage  are  lost  in  the  greater  satisfaction  of  trampling  on  man¬ 
kind,  and  seeing  even  those  whom  he  despises  crouching  beneath  him:  at  the 
same  time,  to  submit  himself  to  any  authority,  is  incompatible  with  his  eager 
desire  of  ruling  over  all;  nothing  less  than  the  first  place  can  satiate  his  love  of 
dominion.  .  .  He  hardly  ever  mentions  the  crown  except  in  swelling  terms  of 
exultation;  and,  even  after  he  has  obtained  it,  he  calls  it  ‘The  high  imperial  type 
of  this  earth’s  glory.’  But  the  crown  is  not  Macbeth’s  pursuit  through  life:  he 
had  never  thought  of  it  till  it  wras  suggested  to  him  by  the  witches;  he  receives  their 
promise,  and  the  subsequent  earnest  of  the  truth  of  it,  with  calmness.  .  .  .  His 
wife  complains  of  his  moderation;  the  utmost  merit  she  can  allow  him  is  that  he  is 
‘not  without  ambition’;  but  it  is  cold  and  faint,  for  the  subject  of  it  is  that  of  a  weak 
mind;  it  is  only  pre-eminence  of  place,  not  dominion.  He  never  carries  his  idea 
beyond  the  honour  of  the  situation  he  aims  at;  and,  therefore,  he  considers  it  as  a 
situation  which  Lady  Macbeth  will  partake  of  equally  with  him:  and  in  his  letter 
so  tells  her  [in  his  letter  to  her].  But  it  was  his  rank  alone,  not  his  power,  in  which 
she  could  share:  and  that  in  deed  is  all  which  he  afterwards  thinks  he  has  attained 
by  his  usurpation.  He  styles  himself  ‘High-plac’d  Macbeth,’  but  in  no  other 
light  does  he  ever  contemplate  his  advancement  with  satisfaction;  and  when  he 
finds  that  it  is  not  attended  with  that  adulation  and  respect  which  he  had  promised 
himself,  and  which  would  have  soothed  his  vanity,  he  sinks  under  the  disappoint¬ 
ment,  and  complains  that:  * — that  which  should  accompany  old  age  As  honour, 
love,  obedience,  troops  of  friends  I  must  not  look  to  have.’  These  blessings,  so 
desirable  to  him,  are  widely  different  from  the  pursuits  of  Richard.  He  wishes 
not  to  gain  the  affections,  but  to  secure  the  submission  of  his  subjects,  and  is 
happy  to  see  men  shrink  under  his  control.  But  Macbeth,  on  the  contrary,  reckons 
among  the  miseries  of  his  condition,  ‘ — Mouth-honour,  breath,  Which  the  poor 
heart  would  fain  deny,  but  dare  not,  ’  and  pities  the  wretch  who  fears  him. 

The  towering  ambition  of  Richard,  and  the  weakness  of  that  passion  in  Macbeth, 
are  further  instances  wherein  Shakespeare  has  accommodated  their  characters 
to  the  fabulous  parts  of  their  stories.  The  necessity  for  the  most  extraordinary 
incitements  to  stimulate  the  latter  thereby  becomes  apparent;  and  the  meaning  of 
the  omens,  which  attended  the  birth  of  the  former,  is  explained.  Upon  the  same 
principle  a  distinction  still  stronger  is  made  in  the  article  of  courage,  though  both 
are  possessed  of  it  in  an  eminent  degree;  but  in  Richard  it  is  intrepidity,  and  in 
Macbeth  no  more  than  resolution:  in  him  it  proceeds  from  exertion  not  from 
nature;  in  enterprise  he  betrays  a  degree  of  fear,  though  he  is  able,  when  occasion 
requires,  to  stifle  and  subdue  it.  When  he  and  his  wife  are  concerting  the  murder, 
his  doubt,  ‘if  we  should  fail,’  is  a  difficulty  raised  by  apprehension;  and  as  soon 
as  that  is  removed  by  the  contrivance  of  Lady  Macbeth,  he  runs  with  violence 
into  the  other  extreme  of  confidence,  and  cries  out:  ‘Will  it  not  be  received, 
When  we  have  mark’d  with  blood  these  sleepy  two.  .  .  .  That  they  have  done  it?’ 
which  question  he  puts  to  her,  who  but  the  moment  before  had  suggested  the 
thought  of  it;  and  his  asking  it  again  proceed  from  that  extravagance  with  which 


554 


APPENDIX 


a  delivery  from  apprehension  and  doubt  is  always  accompanied.  .  .  .  Nothing 
can  be  conceived  more  directly  opposite  to  the  agitations  of  Macbeth’s  mind,  than 
the  serenity  of  Richard  in  parallel  circumstances.  Upon  the  murder  of  the  Prince 
of  Wales,  he  immediately  resolves  on  the  assassination  of  Henry.  It  is  a  thought 
of  his  own,  which  just  then  occurs  to  him:  he  determines  upon  it  without  hesitation; 
it  requires  no  consideration  and  admits  of  no  delay:  he  is  eager  to  put  it  in  execu¬ 
tion;  but  his  eagerness  proceeds  from  ardor  not  from  anxiety;  and  is  not  hurry, 
but  dispatch.  He  does  not  wait  to  communicate  to  the  king  his  brother;  he  only 
hints  the  thought  as  he  conceived  it,  to  Clarence;  and  supposes  that  the  name  alone 
of  the  Tower  will  sufficiently  indicate  his  business  there.  When  come  thither,  he 
proceeds  directly  without  relenting;  it  is  not  to  him,  as  to  Macbeth,  a  terrible  feat, 
but  only  a  serious  matter:  and  ‘Sir,  leave  us  to  ourselves,  we  must  confer,’  is  all 
the  preparation  he  makes  for  it;  and,  indeed,  with  him  it  is  little  more  than  a  con¬ 
ference  with  an  enemy:  his  animosity  and  his  insolence  are  the  same,  both  before 
and  after  the  assassination;  and  nothing  retards,  staggers,  or  alarms  him.  .  .  . 
The  same  determined  spirit  carries  him  through  the  bloody  business  of  murdering 
his  nephews:  and  when  Buckingham  shows  a  reluctance  to  be  concerned  in  it,  he 
immediately  looks  out  for  another.  Had  Macbeth  been  thus  disappointed  in  the 
person  to  whom  he  had  opened  himself,  it  would  have  disconcerted  any  design  he 
had  formed:  but  Richard  does  not  suffer  such  an  accident  to  delay  his  pursuit 
for  a  moment;  he  only  wonders  at  the  folly  of  the  man.  .  .  .  He  is  able  to  put  on 
a  general  character,  directly  the  reverse  of  his  disposition;  and  it  is  ready  to  him 
upon  every  occasion.  But  Macbeth  cannot  effectually  conceal  his  sensations,  when 
it  is  most  necessary  to  conceal  them;  nor  act  a  part  which  does  not  belong  to  him 
with  any  degree  of  consistency:  and  the  same  weakness  of  mind  which  disquali¬ 
fies  him  from  maintaining  such  a  force  upon  his  nature,  shows  itself  still  further 
in  that  hesitation  and  dullness  to  dare,  which  he  feels  in  himself  and  allows  in  others. 
His  whole  proceeding  in  his  treason  against  Duncan  is  full  of  it.  Against  Banquo 
he  acts  with  more  determination,  and  yet  he  most  unnecessarily  acquaints  the 
murderers  with  the  reasons  of  his  conduct;  and  even  informs  them  of  the  behaviour 
he  proposes  to  observe  afterwards;  this  particularity  and  explanation  to  men  who 
did  not  desire  it;  the  confidence  he  places  in  those  who  could  only  abuse  it;  and  the 
very  needless  caution  of  secrecy  implied  in  his  speech  [to  them],  are  so  many  symp¬ 
toms  of  a  feeble  mind;  which  again  appears,  when,  after  they  had  undertaken  the 
business,  he  bids  them  ‘resolve’  themselves  ‘apart’;  and  thereby  leaves  them  an 
opportunity  to  retract,  if  they  had  not  been  more  determined  than  he  is,  who 
supposes  time  to  be  requisite  for  settling  such  resolutions.  His  sending  a  third 
murderer  to  join  the  others,  just  at  the  moment  of  action,  and  without  any  notice, 
is  a  further  proof  of  the  same  imbecility. 

Richard,  always  determined,  and  taking  his  determination  himself,  never  waits 
to  be  incited,  nor  ever  idly  accounts  for  his  conduct;  but,  fixed  to  his  purpose, 
makes  other  men  only  his  instruments,  not  his  confidants  or  advisers.  Even 
Buckingham  is  no  more;  he  discards  him  as  soon  as  he  begins  to  have  any  judgement 
of  his  own.  .  .  .  Prompt  in  decision,  he  does  not  hesitate  upon  collateral  circum¬ 
stances,  but  attends  to  the  principal  point  only,  and  resolves  upon  it  instantly, 
though  it  be  the  doom  of  death  which  he  pronounces.  .  .  . 

From  the  beginning  of  their  histories  to  their  last  moments  the  characters  of 
Macbeth  and  Richard  are  preserved  entire  and  distinct.  .  .  .  The  picture  of 
Macbeth  is  much  the  more  highly  finished  of  the  two;  for  it  required  a  greater 


ON  THE  CHARACTER  OF  RICHARD 


555 


variety,  and  a  greater  delicacy  of  painting,  to  express  and  to  blend  with  consistency 
all  the  several  properties  which  are  ascribed  to  him.  That  of  Richard  is  marked 
by  more  careless  strokes,  but  they  are,  notwithstanding,  perfectly  just.  Much  bad 
composition  may  indeed  be  found  in  the  part;  it  is  a  fault  from  which  the  best  of 
Shakespeare’s  plays  are  not  exempt,  and  with  which  this  play  particularly  abounds 
.  .  .  After  every  reasonable  allowance,  they  must  still  remain  blemishes  ever  to 
be  lamented;  but  happily,  for  the  most  part,  they  only  obscure,  they  do  not  dis¬ 
figure,  his  draughts  from  nature.  [I  cannot  believe  that  any  student  who  has 
carefully  read  the  foregoing  will  begrudge  the  space  allotted  to  it. — Ed.] 

W.  Richardson  (p.  6) :  The  catastrophe  of  a  good  tragedy  is  only  the  completion 
of  our  pleasure,  and  not  the  chief  cause  of  it.  The  fable,  and  the  view  which  the 
poet  exhibits  of  human  nature,  conducted  through  a  whole  performance,  must 
produce  our  enjoyment.  But  in  the  work  now  before  us  there  is  scarcely  any  fable; 
and  there  is  no  character  of  eminent  importance  but  that  of  Richard.  He  is  the 
principal  agent;  and  the  whole  tragedy  is  an  exhibition  of  guilt,  where  abhorrence 
for  the  criminal  is  much  stronger  than  our  interest  in  the  sufferers,  or  esteem  for 
those  who,  by  accident  rather  than  great  exertion,  promote  his  downfall.  We  are 
pleased  no  doubt  with  his  punishment;  but  the  display  of  his  enormities,  and  their 
progress  to  this  completion,  are  the  chief  objects  of  our  attention.  Thus  Shakes¬ 
peare,  in  order  to  render  the  shocking  vices  of  Richard  an  amusing  spectacle, 
must  have  recourse  to  other  expedients  than  those  usually  practised  in  similar 
situations.  Here,  then,  we  are  led  to  enquire  into  the  nature  of  these  resources  and 
expedients:  for  w'hy  do  we  not  turn  from  the  Richard  of  Shakespeare,  as  we  turn 
from  his  Titus  Andronicus?  Has  he  invested  him  with  any  charm,  or  secured 
him  by  some  secret  talisman  from  disgust  and  aversion?  The  subject  is  curious 
and  deserves  our  attention.  Here,  then,  we  may  observe  in  general  that  the 
appearance  is  produced,  not  by  veiling  or  contrasting  offensive  features  and  colours, 
but  by  so  connecting  them  with  agreeable  qualities  residing  in  the  character  itself, 
that  the  disagreeable  effect  is  entirely  suppressed,  or  by  its  union  with  coalescing 
qualities,  is  converted  into  a  pleasurable  feeling.  In  particular,  though  Richard 
has  no  sense  of  justice,  nor  indeed  of  any  moral  obligation,  he  has  an  abundant 
share  of  those  qualities  which  are  termed  intellectual.  Destitute  of  virtue,  he 
possesses  ability.  He  shows  discernment  of  character;  artful  contrivance  in 
forming  projects;  great  address  in  the  management  of  mankind;  fertility  of  resource; 
a  prudent  command  of  temper;  much  versatility  of  deportment;  and  singular 
dexterity  in  concealing  his  intentions.  He  possesses,  along  with  these,  such  perfect 
consciousness  of  the  superior  powers  of  his  own  understanding  above  those  of  other 
men,  as  leads  him  not  ostentatiously  to  treat  them  with  contempt,  but  to  employ 
them,  while  he  really  contemns  their  weakness,  as  engines  of  his  ambition.  Now, 
though  these  properties  are  not  the  objects  of  moral  approbation,  and  may  be 
employed  as  the  instruments  of  fraud  no  less  than  of  justice,  yet  the  native  and 
unmingled  effect  which  most  of  them  produce  on  the  spectator,  independent  of  the 
principle  that  employs  them,  is  an  emotion  of  pleasure.  The  person  possessing 
them  is  regarded  with  deference,  with  respect,  and  with  admiration.  Thus,  then, 
the  satisfaction  we  receive  in  contemplating  the  character  of  Richard,  in  the  various 
situations  in  which  the  poet  has  shown  him,  arises  from  a  mixed  feeling;  a  feeling 
compounded  of  horror,  on  account  of  his  guilt;  and  of  admiration,  on  account  of 
his  talents.  By  the  concurrence  of  these  two  emotions  the  mind  is  thrown  into  a 


556 


APPENDIX 


state  of  unusual  agitation;  neither  painful  nor  pleasant,  in  the  extremes  of  pain  or 
of  pleasure,  but  strangely  delightful.  Surprise  and  amazement,  excited  by  the 
striking  conjunctures  which  he  himself  very  often  occasions,  and  which  give  exercise 
to  his  talents,  together  with  astonishment  at  the  determined  boldness  and  success 
of  his  guilt,  give  uncommon  force  to  the  general  impression.  .  .  We  may  also 
observe  that  suspense,  wonder,  and  surprise,  occasioned  by  the  operation  of 
great  abilities,  under  the  guidance  of  uncontrolled  inhumanity,  by  their  awful 
effects  and  the  postures  they  assume,  together  with  anxiety  to  see  an  union  so 
unworthy  dissolved,  give  poignancy  to  our  indignation,  and  annex  to  it,  if  I  may 
use  the  expression,  a  certain  wild  and  alarming  delight. 

N.  Drake  (Sh.  and  His  Times,  ii,  37 3):  The  character  of  Richard  the  Third 
...  is  the  picture  of  a  demoniacal  incarnation,  moulding  the  passions  and  foibles 
of  mankind,  with  superhuman  precision,  to  its  own  iniquitous  purposes.  Of  this 
isolated  and  peculiar  state  of  being  Richard  himself  seems  sensible  when  he  declares: 
‘I  am  myself  alone.’  From  a  delineation  like  this  Milton  must  have  caught 
many  of  the  most  striking  features  of  his  Satanic  portrait.  The  same  union  of 
unmitigated  depravity  and  consummate  intellectual  energy  characterises  both, 
and  renders  what  would  otherwise  be  loathsome  and  disgusting,  an  object  of 
sublimity  and  shuddering  admiration.  Richard,  stript  as  he  is  of  all  the  softer 
feelings,  and  all  the  common  charities,  of  humanity,  possessed  of  ‘neither  pity, 
love,  nor  fear,  ’  and  loaded  with  every  dangerous  and  dreadful  vice,  would,  were  it 
not  for  his  unconquerable  powers  of  mind,  be  insufferably  revolting.  But,  though 
insatiate  in  his  ambition,  envious  and  hypocritical  in  his  disposition,  cruel,  bloody, 
and  remorseless  in  all  his  deeds,  he  displays  such  an  extraordinary  share  of  cool  and 
determined  courage,  such  alacrity  and  buoncy  of  spirit,  such  constant  self-possession, 
such  an  intuitive  intimacy  with  the  workings  of  the  human  heart,  and  such  matchless 
skill  in  rendering  them  subservient  to  his  views,  as  so  far  to  subdue  our  detestation 
and  abhorrence  of  his  villainy,  that  we,  at  length,  contemplate  this  fiend  in  human 
shape  with  a  mingled  sensation  of  intense  curiosity  and  grateful  terror.  The 
task,  however,  which  Shakespeare  undertook  was,  in  one  instance,  more  arduous 
than  that  which  Milton  subsequently  attempted;  for,  in  addition  to  the  hateful 
I  constitution  of  Richard’s  moral  character,  he  had  also  to  contend  against  the 
prejudices  arising  from  personal  deformity,  and  yet,  in  spite  of  striking  personal 
defects,  which  were  considered  also,  also,  as  indicatory  of  the  depravity  and  wicked¬ 
ness  of  his  nature,  the  poet  has  contrived,  through  the  medium  of  the  high  mental 
endowments  just  enumerated,  not  only  to  obviate  disgust,  but  to  excite  extraordinary 
admiration.  One  of  the  most  prominent  and  detestable  vices  indeed,  in  Richard’s 
character,  his  hypocrisy,  connected,  as  it  always  is,  in  his  person,  with  the  most 
profound  skill  and  dissimulation,  has,  owing  to  the  various  parts  which  it  induces 
him  to  assume,  most  materially  contributed  to  the  popularity  of  this  play,  both  on 
the  stage,  and  in  the  closet.  He  is  one  who  can  ‘  — frame  his  face  to  all  occasions,  ’ 
and  accordingly  appears,  during  the  course  of  his  career,  under  the  contrasted 
forms  of  a  subject  and  a  monarch,  a  politician  and  a  wit,  a  soldier  and  a  suitor, 
a  sinner  and  a  saint;  and  in  all  with  such  apparent  ease  and  fidelity  to  nature  that 
while  to  the  explorer  of  the  human  mind  he  affords,  by  his  penetration  and  address, 
a  subject  of  peculiar  interest  and  delight,  he  offers  to  the  practised  performer  a 
study  well  calculated  to  call  forth  his  fullest  and  finest  exertions.  He,  therefore, 
whose  histrionic  powers  are  adequate  to  the  just  exhibition  of  this  character,  may 


ON  THE  CHARACTER  OF  RICHARD 


557 


be  said  to  have  attained  the  highest  honours  of  his  profession;  and,  consequently, 
the  popularity  of  Richard  III.,  notwithstanding  the  moral  enormity  of  its  hero, 
may  be  readily  accounted  for,  when  we  recollect  that  the  versatile  and  consummate 
hypocrisy  of  the  tyrant  has  been  embodied  by  the  talents  of  such  masterly  per¬ 
formers  as  Garrick,  Kemble,  Cooke,  and  Kean.  So  overwhelming  and  exclusive 
is  the  character  of  Richard  that  the  comparative  insignificancy  of  the  other  persons 
of  the  drama  may  be  necessarily  inferred;  they  are  reflected  to  us,  as  it  were,  from 
his  mirror,  and  become  more  or  less  important,  and  more  or  less  developed,  as  he 
finds  it  necessary  to  act  upon  them;  so  that  our  estimate  of  their  character  is  entirely 
founded  on  his  relative  conduct,  through  which  we  may  very  correctly  appreciate 
their  strength  or  weakness.  The  only  exception  to  this  remark  is  in  the  person  of 
Queen  Margaret,  who,  apart  from  the  agency  of  Richard,  and  dimly  seen  in  the 
darkest  recesses  of  the  picture,  pours  forth,  in  union  with  the  deep  tone  of  the  tragedy, 
the  most  dreadful  curses  and  imprecations,  with  such  a  wild  and  prophetic  fury, 
indeed,  as  to  involve  the  whole  scene  in  tenfold  gloom  and  horror.  We  have  to 
add  that  the  moral  of  this  play  is  great  and  impressive. 

R.  Cumberland  ( The  Observer,  No.  69) :  It  is  manifest  that  there  is  an  essential 
difference  in  the  development  of  these  characters  [Richard  the  Third  and  Macbeth], 
and  that  in  favour  of  Macbeth:  in  his  soul  cruelty  seems  to  dawn,  it  breaks  out  with 
faint  glimmerings,  like  a  winter  morning,  and  gathers  strength  by  slow  degrees: 
in  Richard  it  flames  forth  at  once,  mounting  like  the  sun  between  the  tropics,  and 
enters  boldly  on  its  career  without  a  herald.  As  the  character  of  Macbeth  has  a 
moral  advantage  in  this  distinction,  so  has  the  drama  of  that  name  a  much  more 
interesting  and  affecting  cast:  the  struggles  of  a  soul,  naturally  virtuous,  whilst 
it  holds  the  guilty  impulse  of  ambition  at  bay,  affords  the  noblest  theme  for  the 
drama,  and  puts  the  creative  fancy  of  our  poet  upon  a  resource,  in  which  he  has 
been  rivalled  only  by  the  great  father  of  tragedy,  ^Tschylus,  in  the  prophetic  effusions 
of  Cassandra,  the  incantations  of  the  persian  Magi  for  raising  the  ghost  of  Darius, 
and  the  imaginary  terrific  forms  of  his  furies;  with  all  which  our  countryman 
probably  had  no  acquaintance,  or  at  most  a  very  obscure  one. 


G.  C.  Verplanck:  The  Poet  has  made  the  usurper  a  nobler  and  loftier  spirit 
than  the  historians  had  done,  while  he  deepened  every  dark  shadow  of  guilt  they 
had  gathered  around  his  mind  or  his  acts.  The  mere  animal  courage  of  the  soldier 
he  has  raised  into  a  kindling  and  animated  spirit  of  daring;  he  has  brought  out 
his  wit,  his  resource,  his  talent,  his  mounting  ambition,  far  more  vividly  than  prior 
history  had  exhibited  them.  His  deeds  of  blood  are  made  to  appear,  not  as  in  the 
Tudor  Chronicles,  as  prompted  by  gratuitous  ferocity  or  envious  malignity,  but  as 
the  means  employed  by  selfish  ambition  for  its  own  ends,  careless  of  the  misery  it 
inflicts,  or  the  moral  obligations  on  which  it  tramples.  The  Richard  of  Shakes¬ 
peare  has  no  communion  with  his  kind — he  feels  himself  at  once  aloof  from  others 
and  above  them — he  is  ‘himself  alone’;  and  he,  therefore,  neither  partakes  in  the 
hatred,  nor  the  love  or  pity,  of  ‘men  like  one  another.’  Accordingly,  everything 
that  gives  the  poetic  cast  and  dramatic  life  and  spirit  to  the  character — everything 
which  elevates  Richard  above  the  cruel,  artful,  cold-blooded  tyrant  of  the  old 
historians — all  that  mingles  a  sort  of  admiring  interest  with  our  abhorrence  of  him, 
and  invests  the  deformity  of  his  nature  with  a  terrible  majesty — is  the  Poet’s 
own  conception;  and  he  produces  these  effects  not  by  the  invention  of  new  incident, 


55» 


APPENDIX 


but  by  the  pervading  spirit  with  which  he  has  animated  the  language  and  senti¬ 
ments,  and  the  vivid  colouring  over  the  old  historical  representation. 


Henry  Reed  (p.  324) :  It  is  not  possible  to  discover,  either  in  the  history  or  the 
drama  of  Richard,  a  single  point  for  even  a  momentary  sympathy  to  rest  on — there 
is  no  room  for  the  least  transient  pity  of  the  misery  of  guilt.  Richard  had  no 
suffering  that  we  can  see — he  is  happy  in  his  crimes,  and  they  make  him  prouder  of 
his  power.  He  has  no  compunctions  of  conscience,  no  remorseful  remembrances; 
and  it  is  in  this  he  is  represented  so  differently  from  the  Scottish  usurper  and  tyrant. 
There  is  scope  for  a  grand  contrast  between  Richard  and  Macbeth,  but  let  me  only 
notice  that  never  from  Richard’s  lips  do  we  hear  the  piteous  utterance  of  the  guilt- 
oppressed  weariness  of  life  that  weighed  down  the  once  guiltless  spirit  of  Macbeth. 
Richard  never  felt  that  he  had  lived  long  enough;  and,  as  to  troops  of  friends,  the 
lonely  hearted  and  proud  man  set  no  value  on  them.  The  tyrant’s  indurated  and 
stony  conscience  seemed  to  sustain  with  ease  the  superstructure  of  his  crimes;  the 
prospect  of  what  he  thought  a  necessity  of  more  and  more  guilt — ‘  sin  plucking  on 
sin’ — disturbs  him  with  no  such  agony  of  ineffectual  reluctance  as  that  which 
appears  in  Macbeth’s  brief  utterance  to  Lady  Macbeth — ‘Oh,  full  of  scorpions  is 
my  mind,  dear  wife!’  When  Richard’s  crimes  are  perpetrated,  he  seems  to  think 
of  them  no  more — by  a  strong  effort  of  the  will  he  dismisses  them  from  his  mind. 
The  guilty  past  is  no  burden  to  him;  there  is  no  such  heart-wasting,  hopeless  memory 
as  appears  in  the  solemn  irony  of  Macbeth’s  words:  ‘Canst  thou  not  minister  to 
mind  diseased?  Pluck  from  the  memory  a  rooted  sorrow.’  The  long-sustained 
obduracy  of  Richard’s  spirit  at  length  breaks  down,  like  that  of  the  strong-willed 
woman,  Lady  Macbeth,  in  the  mysterious  condition  of  perturbed  sleep. 


W.  W.  Lloyd  ( Introd .  Essay):  Richard  is  the  very  personation  of  confidence 
in  self-conduct  and  self-control,  in  his  absolute  command  of  every  form  of  dis¬ 
simulation,  and  still  more  difficult,  of  simulation.  He  is  arrogant  no  less,  on  the 
strength  of  his  superiority  to  any  natural  stirrings  of  love  or  pity,  of  terror  or  remorse. 
Like  Iago  he  believes  in  the  absolute  sway  of  will-wielded  intellect  to  subject  and 
mould  passion  to  its  own  determinations,  while  both  are,  unconsciously  to  them¬ 
selves,  overmastered  and  enslaved  by  a  tyrannous  passion,  that  ever  keeps  out  of 
their  own  sight,  as  if  lurking  and  shifting  place  behind  them.  Richard’s  true  fall 
and  punishment  is  his  humiliation  on  his  point  of  reliance  and  pride;  he  comes 
to  require  friends  when  friends  fail  in  heart  or  in  heartiness,  he  regrets  affection, 
would  fain  be  pitied,  admits  terror,  and  believes  in  the  power  of  conscience  if  he 
endeavours  to  defy  it.  The  involuntary  forces  of  his  being  rise  in  insurrection 
against  the  oppression  of  the  voluntary. 


J.  H.  Jesse  ( Memoirs  of  King  Rich.  III.,  etc.;  p.  242):  If  King  Richard’s 
subjects  still  remembered  and  shuddered  at  the  one  terrible  crime  of  which  he  was 
more  than  suspected  of  having  committed,  they  had,  on  the  other  hand,  every 
reason  to  be  grateful  to  him  for  having  arrested  the  horrors  of  civil  war,  and  for 
having  extended  to  them  a  wise  and  humane  administration.  They  recognised 
in  him,  at  all  events,  an  active,  wise,  temperate,  and  valiant  prince;  a  prince  sen¬ 
sitively  jealous  of  the  honour  of  the  English  nation,  and  an  anxious  well-wisher  for 
its  prosperity.  They  beheld  in  him  a  prince  who  sought  to  win  their  suffrages  and 
their  affections;  not  by  the  low  arts  with  which  those  who  have  suddenly  achieved 


ON  THE  CHARA  CTER  OF  RICHARD 


559 


greatness  too  often  pander  for  popularity,  but  by  reforming  immemorial  abuses, 
by  introducing  laws  calculated  to  secure  the  safety  and  welfare  of  his  subjects;  by 
insisting  on  an  equal  administration  of  justice;  by  taking  measures  for  the  suppres¬ 
sion  of  vice  and  immorality;  by  removing  restrictions  from  trade,  and  encouraging 
commerce  and  the  arts  of  industry  and  peace.  His  patronage  of  learning  and  the 
encouragement  which  he  extended  to  architecture  merit  especial  commendation. 
He  released  the  University  of  Oxford  of  twenty  marks  of  the  fee  due  to  him  in  the 
first  year  of  his  reign;  and  endowed  Queen’s  College,  Cambridge,  with  five  hundred 
marks  a  year.  He  encouraged  the  newly  discovered  art  of  printing,  and,  in  order 
to  extend  learning  in  the  universities,  caused  an  act  to  be  passed  which  was  after¬ 
ward  repealed  by  Henry  VIII.,  permitting  printed  books  to  be  brought  into  and 
sold  by  retail  in  England.  Moreover,  so  far  from  Richard  having  been  the  moody 
and  morose  tyrant,  such  as  the  venal  writers  who  wrote  under  the  Tudor  dynasty 
delight  to  describe  him,  we  have  evidence  from  contemporary  records  that  he 
followed  the  manly  amusements  which  are  popular  with  Englishmen,  and  enjoyed 
those  tastes  which  throw  a  grace  over  human  nature.  His  grants  to  the  master  of 
his  hawks  and  the  keeper  of  his  news  by  Charing  Cross,  and  his  payments  to  the 
keeper  of  his  hart-hounds,  tend  to  the  presumption  that  he  was  no  less  the  keen 
sportsman  than  the  redoubted  warrior  and  accomplished  statesman.  Lastly, 
that  he  delighted  in  music  is  shown  by  the  number  of  minstrels  who  came  to  his 
court  from  foreign  lands,  as  well  as  by  the  annuities  which  he  settled  on  musicians 
born  on  English  soil.  That  Richard’s  nature  .was  originally  a  compassionate 
one  there  seems  to  be  every  reason  for  believing.  His  kindness  to  the  female  sex 
has  been  especially  commented  upon.  To  the  Countess  of  Oxford,  the  wife  of 
his  arch-enemy,  he  granted  a  pension  of  one  hundred  pounds  a  year.  To  the  widow 
of  Earl  Rivers,  he  secured  the  jointure  which  had  been  settled  on  her  in  the  lifetime 
of  her  lord;  and,  notwithstanding  the  ingratitude  which  he  had  encountered  from 
the  late  Duke  of  Buckingham. 

C.  Cowden-Clarke  (Sh.  Characters,  p.  456):  Let  not  English  playgoers 
profess  a  veneration  for  the  genius  of  Shakespeare  while  they  allow  Colley  Cibber’s 
tiger-cat  version  of  Richard  III.  to  keep  possession  of  their  stage,  and  to  have  the 
poet’s  name  affixed  as  being  the  author  of  it.  The  Richard  of  our  poet  is  a  thorough 
man  of  the  world — bold,  practical,  direct,  and  prompt.  He  is  gratuitously  as  well 
as  politically  cruel.  Expediency  with  him  is  law;  it  were  even  his  religion,  if  such 
a  word  could  be  combined  with  such  a  being.  He  will  pause  at  no  obstacle  to 
achieve  a  purpose;  and  at  no  result,  however  revolting,  does  he  ever  relent.  The 
wonderful  elasticity  of  his  genius  carries  him  over  all  barriers.  ‘At  one  slight 
bound,  high  overleaps  all  bound  ’  or  limit  to  his  desire.  The  whole  of  his  career,  to 
its  close — and  most  especially  at  the  close — excites  our  admiration  from  the  wonder¬ 
ful  energy  and  skill  with  which  he  uses  his  resources.  In  our  astonishment  we 
almost  lose  sight  of  the  former  tyrant;  and — so  innate  is  the  love  and  reverence 
of  power,  with  resolution,  in  the  human  mind — we  contemplate  him  as  a  brave 
man  who  has  been  overmastered  and  crushed  by  numbers.  The  leading  charac¬ 
teristics  of  Richard’s  mind  are  scorn,  sarcasm,  and  an  overweening  contempt. 
It  appears  as  if  contempt  for  his  victims — rather  than  active  hatred  and  cruelty — 
were  the  motive  for  murdering  them.  Upon  our  first  meeting  him,  in  the  play 
bearing  his  name,  he  sounds  the  key-note  to  his  whole  character — that  of  contempt — 
in  the  celebrated  apostrophe  to  his  own  person:  ‘I,  that  am  curtail’d  of  this  fair 


560 


APPENDIX 


proportion,  Cheated  of  feature  by  dissembling  nature,  Deform’d,  unfinish’d,  sent 
before  my  time  Into  this  breathing  world  scarce  half  made  up.’  His  ambitious 
nature,  his  bounding,  elastic  intellect,  but,  above  all,  his  want  of  faith  in  good¬ 
ness,  conspire  to  produce  this  tendency  to  despise  and  degrade  every  surrounding 
being  and  object,  even  (as  just  quoted)  his  own  person.  He  is  never  sincere  and 
truly  in  earnest  but  when  he  is  about  to  commit  a  murder.  ‘Then,  since  the 
heavens  have  shap’d  my  body  so,  Let  Hell  make  crook’d  my  mind  to  answer  it.’ 
This  is  his  introduction  to  the  reader;  and  in  his  last  scene  he  indulges  the  bitter¬ 
ness  of  his  soul  in  a  sneer  at  those  visions  which,  but  a  few  moments  since,  have 
so  appalled  him;  and  he  recklessly  attacks  the  very  power  whose  influence  he 
had  just  before  been  compelled  to  acknowledge.  It  is  to  be  observed,  moreover, 
that  the  first  feeling  every  victim  excites  in  him  is  that  of  ‘contempt.’  The  instant 
they  leave  him,  his  first  ejaculation— even  in  the  throb  of  triumph  at  the  success 
obtained  by  his  own  intellect — is  always  one  of  contempt  for  his  dupe.  Upon 
Lady  Anne’s  quitting  him  after  that  keen  encounter  of  their  wits.  .  .  he  breaks 
forth  into  that  demoniacal  sarcasm:  ‘Was  ever  woman  in  this  humour  woo’d? 
Was  ever  woman  in  this  humour  won?’  After  his  scene  with  the  Court,  in  the 
1st  Act,  he  says,  in  all  the  boldness  of  a  contemptuous  supremacy:  ‘I  do  the  wrong; 
and  first  begin  to  brawl.  .  .  .  Clarence, — whom  I  indeed  have  cast  in  darkness, — 
I  do  beweep  to  many  simple  gulls.’  And  the  scene  itself  where  Clarence  is  being 
conducted  by  Brackenbury  and  his  guard  to  the  Tower,  and  his  making  the  ‘sim¬ 
ple  Clarence,’  as  he  sneeringly  calls  him,  believe  that  he  has  been  doomed  to 
prison  through  the  machinations  of  the  queen  and  her  family,  is  another  instance 
of  the  contempt  resulting  from  his  sense  of  intellectual  superiority  over  all  others 
that  come  in  collision  with  him.  .  .  .  When  the  party  have  gone  out,  he  says, 
with  a  diabolical  jeer:  ‘I  do  love  thee  so  That  I  will  shortly  send  thy  soul  to 
heaven,  If  heaven  will  take  the  present  at  our  hands.'  This  should  be  the  very 
triumph  of  insolence  and  contempt,  with  calculating  cruelty.  Again,  when  Queen 
Elizabeth  leaves  him,  after  his  arguments  have  won  her  sanction  to  his  addressing 
her  daughter,  his  contempt  again  breaks  forth:  ‘Relenting  fool,  and  shallow,  chang¬ 
ing  woman!’  Even  upon  slight  and  casual  occasions  the  same  tone  occurs,  and 
thus  the  harmony  of  the  character  is  maintained.  His  muttered  sneer,  upon 
receiving  his  mother’s  benediction:  ‘And  make  me  die  a  good  old  man;  That  is 
the  butt-end  of  a  mother’s  blessing.’  Again,  his  lightly  and  carelessly  sending  the 
Bishop  of  Ely  for  strawberries  from  the  prelate’s  garden  in  Holborn,  in  the  midst 
of  their  conversation.  Here  we  have  an  act  of  insolence  with  contempt.  And,  lastly, 
his  cruelty  and  ingratitude  towards  his  jackal,  Buckingham,  who  wrought  hard  to 
help  him  to  his  bad  eminence;  who  had  performed  for  him  the  ninety-nine  time¬ 
serving  villainies,  but  cannot  do  the  hundredth — that  of  murdering  the  children  in 
the  Tower.  All  these  examples,  I  think,  warrant  our  pronouncing  the  master-key 
in  Richard’s  mind  to  be  ‘  contempt,’  and  which  adds  a  venom  to  his  cruelty.  And 
thus,  again,  the  position  so  often  maintained  in  behalf  of  Shakespeare’s  genius — 
that,  let  us  only  lay  hold  of  a  clue  in  any  of  his  characters,  and  pursue  it  to  the  end, 
we  shall  find  all  to  be  clear,  harmonious,  and  consistent.  In  the  character  of 
Richard  I  am  not  sure  that  the  poet  does  not  mean  to  convey  that  his  cruelty 
towards  his  species,  for  the  purpose  of  achieving  the  end  of  his  ambition,  is  not 
the  result  of  the  great  leading  characteristic  of  his  mind — that  of  ‘contempt.’  In 
all  this  complication  of  high  intellectual  qualities  in  the  character  and  conduct  of 
Richard,  Shakespeare  makes  manifest  his  own  instructive  and  powerful  sagacity  in 


ON  THE  CHARA  CTER  OF  RICHARD 


56l 


selecting,  and  in  his  style  of  fashioning,  such  a  being  for  the  hero  of  a  great 
dramatic  poem.  A  mere  human  tiger,  roused  into  action  only  by  the  smell  of  blood, 
would  have  been  but  the  subject  for  a  third-rate  poet,  and  would  have  made  a  reg¬ 
ular  Sawney  Beane  of  the  character.  But  Shakespeare  has  invested  his  Richard 
with  a  halo  of  accomplishment — he  is  infinitely  superior  to  the  persons  by  whom  he 
is  surrounded.  Speaking  of  his  own  genius,  he  says,  and  with  a  just  appreciation: 
‘Our  aiery  buildeth  in  the  cedar’s  top,  And  dallies  with  the  wind,  and  scorns  the 
sun.’  With  these  qualities  he  has  conjoined  a  wanton  hardness  of  heart;  a  politic 
and,  upon  occasion,  even  a  ribald  cruelty;  and  a  total  defiance  and  scorn  of  all 
faith  in  a  principle  of  goodness.  He  is  as  perfect  an  incarnation  of  evil  as  that 
Satanic  conception  of  the  great  epic  poet. 

C.  Knight  ( Studies ,  etc.,  p.  193):  To  understand  the  character  of  the  Richard 
III.  of  Shakespeare,  we  must  have  traced  its  development  by  the  author  of 
The  Contention .  The  character  was  a  creation  of  the  early  author;  the  unity  was 
preserved  between  the  last  of  these  four  dramas,  which  everybody  admits  to  be  the 
work  of  the  ‘  greatest  name  in  all  literature,  ’  in  an  unbroken  link  with  the  previous 
drama,  which  everybody  has  been  in  the  habit  of  assigning  to  some  obscure  and 
very  inferior  writer.  We  are  taught  to  open  The  Life  and  Death  of  King  Rich¬ 
ard  III.,  and  to  look  upon  the  extraordinary  being  who  utters  the  opening  lines  as 
some  new  creation,  set  before  us  in  the  perfect  completeness  of  self-formed  villainy. 
We  have  not  learnt  to  trace  the  growth  of  the  mind  of  this  bold  bad  man;  to  see 
how  his  bravery  became  gradually  darkened  with  ferocity;  how  his  prodigious 
talents  insensibly  allied  themselves  with  cunning  and  hypocrisy;  how,  in  struggling 
for  his  house,  he  ultimately  proposed  to  struggle  for  himself;  how,  in  fact,  the  bad 
ambition  would  be  naturally  kindled  in  his  mind,  to  seize  upon  the  power  which 
was  sliding  from  the  hands  of  the  voluptuous  Edward,  and  the  ‘simple,  plain 
Clarence.’  He  that  wrote: — ‘I  have  no  brothers,  I  am  like  no  brothers:  And  this 
word  love,  which  greybeards  term  divine,  Be  resident  in  men  like  one  another,  And 
not  in  me;  I  am  myself  alone’ — prepared  the  way  for  the  Richard  that  was  to  tell 
us — ‘If  I  fail  not  in  my  deep  intent,  Clarence  hath  not  another  day  to  live:  Which 
done,  God  take  king  Edward  to  his  mercy,  And  leave  the  world  for  me  to  bustle  in.’ 
The  poet  of  the  Richard  III.  goes  straightforward  to  his  object;  for  he  has  made 
all  the  preparation  in  the  previous  dramas.  No  gradual  development  is  wanting 
of  the  character  which  is  now  to  sway  the  action.  The  struggle  of  the  houses  up 
to  this  point  has  been  one  only  of  violence;  and  it  was  therefore  anarchical.  ‘The 
big-boned’  Warwick,  and  the  fiery  Clifford,  alternately  presided  over  the  confusion. 
The  power  which  changed  the  ‘Dreadful  marches  to  delightful  measures’  seemed 
little  more  than  accident.  But  Richard  proposed  to  himself  to  subject  events  to 
his  domination,  not  by  courage  alone,  or  activity,  or  even  by  the  legitimate  exercise 
of  a  commanding  intellect,  but  by  the  clearest  perception  of  the  strength  which  he 
must  inevitably  possess  who  unites  the  deepest  sagacity  to  the  most  thorough 
unscrupulousness  in  its  exercise,  and  is  an  equal  master  of  the  weapons  of  force 
and  of  craft.  The  character  of  Richard  is  essentially  different  from  any  other 
character  which  Shakespeare  has  drawn.  His  bloody  violence  is  not  that  of  Mac¬ 
beth;  nor  his  subtle  treachery,  that  of  Iago.  It  is  difficult  to  say  whether  he  derives 
a  greater  satisfaction  from  the  success  of  his  crimes,  or  from  the  consciousness  of 
power  which  attends  the  working  of  them.  This  is  a  feature  which  he  holds  in 
common  with  Iago.  But  then  he  does  not  labour  with  a  ‘motiveless  malignity,’ 
36 


562 


APPENDIX 


as  Iago  does.  He  has  no  vague  suspicions,  no  petty  jealousies,  no  remembrance  of 
slight  affronts,  to  stimulate  him  to  a  disproportioned  and  unnatural  vengeance.  He 
does  not  hate  his  victims;  but  they  stand  in  his  way,  and,  as  he  does  not  love  them, 
they  perish.  He  chuckles  in  the  fortitude  which  this  alienation  from  humanity 
confers  upon  him:  ‘Simple  plain  Clarence!  I  do  love  thee  so,  That  I  will  shortly 
send  thy  soul  to  heaven,  If  Heaven  will  take  the  present  at  our  hands.’  Other 
men,  the  most  obdurate,  have  been  wrought  upon  by  a  mother’s  tears  and  a 
mother’s  prayers:  they  are  to  him  a  jest:  ‘Amen;  and  make  me  die  a  good  old 
man!  That  is  the  butt -end  of  a  mother’s  blessing;  I  marvel  that  her  grace  did  leave 
it  out.’ 

Villains  of  the  blackest  dye  disguise  their  crimes  even  from  themselves.  Richard 
shrinks  not  from  their  avowal  to  others,  for  a  purpose.  The  wooing  of  Lady  Anne 
is,  perhaps,  the  boldest  thing  in  the  Shakespearean  drama.  It  is  perpetually  on 
the  verge  of  the  impossible;  yet  the  marvellous  consistency  of  character  with  which 
it  is  conducted  renders  the  whole  of  this  conduct  probable,  if  we  once  get  over  the 
difficulty  which  startles  Richard  himself:  ‘Was  ever  woman  in  the  humour 
woo’d?  Was  ever  woman  in  this  humour  won?’  His  exultation  at  having 
accomplished  his  purpose  by  the  sole  agency  of  ‘the  plain  devil,  and  dis¬ 
sembling  looks’  is  founded  on  his  unbounded  reliance  upon  his  mental  powers; 
and  that  reliance  is  even  strong  enough  to  afford  that  he  should  abate  so  much 
of  his  self-love  as  to  be  joyous  in  the  contemplation  of  his  own  bodily  deform¬ 
ity.  It  is  the  result  of  the  peculiar  organisation  of  Richard’s  mind,  formed  as  it 
had  been  by  circumstances  as  well  as  by  nature,  that  he  invariably  puts  himself  in 
the  attitude  of  one  who  is  playing  a  part.  It  is  this  circumstance  which  makes 
the  character  (clumsy  even  as  it  has  been  made  by  the  joinery  of  Cibber)  such  a 
favourite  on  the  stage.  It  cannot  be  over-acted.  It  was  not  without  a  purpose 
that  the  author  of  The  Contention  put  in  the  mouth  of  Henry:  ‘What  scene  of 
death  hath  Roscius  now  to  act?’.  .  .  This  aptitude  for  subjecting  all  his  real 
thoughts  and  all  his  natural  impulses  to  the  exigencies  of  the  scene  of  life  in  which 
he  was  to  play  the  chief  part,  equally  govern  his  conduct  whether  he  is  wooing 
Lady  Anne — or  denouncing  the  relations  of  the  Queen — or  protesting  before  the 
King:  °Tis  death  to  me  to  be  at  enmity’ — or  mentioning  the  death  of  Clarence  as 
a  thing  of  course — or  begging  the  strawberries  from  the  Bishop  of  Ely  when  he  is 
meditating  the  execution  of  Hastings — or  appearing  on  the  Tower  walls  in  rusty 
armour — or  rejecting  the  crown  which  the  citizens  present  to  him — or  dismissing 
Buckingham  with  ‘Thou  troublest  me,  I  am  not  in  the  vein’ — or  soliciting  the 
mother  of  his  murdered  nephews  to  win  for  him  her  daughter,  ‘  As  I  intend  to  prosper 
and  repent.’  It  is  only  in  the  presence  of  a  powerful  enemy  that  Richard  displays 
any  portion  of  his  natural  character.  His  bravery  required  no  dissimulation  to 
uphold  it.  In  his  last  battle-field  he  puts  forth  all  the  resources  of  his  intellect 
in  a  worthy  direction.  But  the  retribution  is  fast  approaching.  It  was  not  enough 
for  offended  justice  that  he  should  die  as  a  hero:  the  terrible  tortures  of  conscience 
were  to  precede  the  catastrophe.  The  drama  has  exhibited  all  it  could  exhibit — 
the  palpable  images  of  horror  haunting  a  mind  already  anticipating  the  end. 

‘  Ratcliff,  I  fear,  I  fear,  ’  is  the  first  revelation  of  the  true  inward  man  to  a  fellow¬ 
being.  But  the  terror  is  but  momentary:  ‘Let  not  our  babbling  dreams  affright 
our  souls.’  To  the  last  the  poet  exhibits  the  supremacy  of  Richard’s  intellect,  his 
ready  talent  and  his  unwearied  energy.  The  tame  address  of  Richmond  to  his 
soldiers,  and  the  spirited  exhortation  of  Richard,  could  not  have  been  the  result 


ON  THE  CHARA  CTER  OF  RICHARD 


563 


of  accident.  It  appears  to  us,  then,  that  the  complete  development  of  the  character 
of  Richard  was  absolutely  essential  to  the  completion  of  the  great  idea  upon  which 
the  poet  constructed  these  four  dramas.  There  was  a  man  to  be  raised  up  out  of 
the  turbulence  of  the  long  contest — not  cruel,  after  the  mere  fashion  of  Clifford’s 
cruelty — not  revengeful,  according  to  the  passionate  impulses  of  the  revenge  of 
a  Margaret  and  of  an  Edward — not  false  and  perjured,  in  imitation  of  the  irresolute 
weakness  of  a  Clarence — but  one  who  was  cruel,  and  revengeful,  and  treacherous, 
upon  the  deepest  premeditation  and  with  the  most  profound  hypocrisy.  That 
man  was  also  to  be  so  confident  in  his  intellectual  power,  that  no  resolve  was  to  be 
too  daring  to  be  acted  upon,  no  risk  too  great  to  be  encountered.  Fraud  and  force 
were  to  go  hand  in  hand,  and  the  one  was  to  exterminate  what  the  other  could  not 
win.  This  man  was  to  be  an  instrument  of  that  justice  which  was  to  preside  to 
the  end  of  this  ‘sad  eventful  history.’  By  his  agency  was  the  house  of  York  to 
fall,  as  the  house  of  Lancaster  had  fallen.  The  innocent,  by  him,  were  to  be  swept 
away  with  the  guilty.  Last  of  all,  the  Fate  was  to  be  appeased — the  one  great 
criminal  was  to  perish  out  of  the  consequences  of  his  own  enormities. 

H.  Giles  (p.  117):  Richard  the  Third,  like  Iago,  is  a  man  of  mind,  but  of 
mind  that  works  outwardly,  and  on  an  extensive  scale.  He  has  all  the  advantages 
of  high  birth  and  of  imperial  situation.  His  mind  is  vigourous  as  well  as  cunning, 
and  his  purpose  of  invincible  resolve.  He  has  hold  of  that  external  sway  which, 
even  with  a  feeble  understanding,  can  sometimes  make  a  weak  man  feared.  But 
the  interior  energy  of  Richard’s  spirit  reaches  to  the  utmost  exaltation  of  his  oppor¬ 
tunity  and  ambition.  His  is  not  the  pomp  of  force,  but  its  power;  not  the  glowing 
show,  but  the  burning  substance.  This  correspondence  between  energy  in  intellect 
and  energy  in  act  gives  a  certain  grandeur  to  Richard  even  in  his  crimes;  and  in 
mortal  defeat  itself  there  is  a  glory  about  his  end  which  does  not  belong  to  the 
victor  who  conquered  and  who  survived  him.  If  we  compare  Richard  and  Iago, 
Iago  has  the  most  of  mind,  but  is  the  baser  villain.  Richard  destroys  others  to 
raise  himself,  and  destroys  them  with  a  speedy  death.  On  the  contrary,  Iago 
destroys  others  as  if  in  their  destruction  alone  he  had  a  sufficient  end;  he  destroys 
them  carefully,  deliberately,  and  in  every  way  with  malice  aforethought;  he  destroys 
them  slowly  by  the  consuming  torture  of  their  dearest  life  in  bitter  anguish  and  in 
fierce  despair.  It  is  no  wonder  that  Othello,  at  the  last,  should  look  for  some  sign 
of  the  devil  on  him. 

Macbeth,  also,  I  suppose,  we  may  class  among  the  intellectual  men  of  Shakes¬ 
peare.  Intellect  in  Macbeth  is  not,  as  it  is  in  Hamlet,  philosophic;  or  piercing, 
as  it  is  in  Iago;  or  direct,  as  it  is  in  Richard.  .  .  .  He  loves  power:  he  is  aware 
that  only  by  treason,  treachery,  and  murder,  can  he  reach  it;  his  will  is  firm,  but  his 
nerves  are  weak;  he  has  sensibility;  he  has  a  sort  of  moral  sentimentalism,  but  he 
has  no  principle,  no  practical  energy  towards  what  is  right.  .  .  .  Murder  was  to 
Macbeth,  as  it  was  to  Richard,  the  path  to  kingship — murder,  if  possible,  of  grosser 
order  and  of  darker  crime:  to  keep  the  sceptre  which  he  grasped  in  blood,  he  has 
even  to  outstrip  Richard  in  continued  and  multiplied  assassination;  but  by  his 
disposition  he  is  compelled  to  moralize,  when  Richard  is  compelled  only  to  act. 
With  ethics  or  sentiment  Richard  has  no  concern;  and  wherever  he  adopts  the 
phraseology  of  either,  you  see  plainly  that  it  is  for  a  purpose.  .  .  that  it  is  merely 
on  his  lip,  but  in  no  way  native  to  his  life.  Talk  as  he  will  before  others,  he  never 
conceals  his  character  or  his  objects  from  himself;  and  so  in  his  soliloquies  he  is 


564 


APPENDIX 


always  straightforward  and  sincere.  Now,  it  is  in  Macbeth’s  self-communion  that 
we  notice  the  profoundest  self-illusion;  it  is  in  his  soliloquies  that  we  have  things  of 
wisdom,  new  and  old,  brought  from  the  treasury  of  contemplation — the  most 
frequent  generalizations  of  experience  and  philosophy,  all  showing  that  the  inward 
character  of  the  man  is  thoughtful,  introspective,  moody,  and  melancholy.  Rich¬ 
ard’s  fine  or  formal  sayings  are  ‘got  up’ — things  of  art,  reserved  for  show  and 
intended  for  effect.  Macbeth’s  deepest  moral  eloquence  is  natural — seeks  no 
audience — is  uttered  for  no  end — is  excited  by  solitude,  and  is  uttered  when  the 
speaker  is  alone.  With  Richard  death  is  a  political  agency,  murder ,  a  state  necessity; 
and  he  uses  both  strictly  in  reference  to  the  object  which  his  ambition  covets. 
His  motives  and  his  deeds  have  ‘this  extent — no  more.’  But  Macbeth  cannot 
help  but  reflect  on  his  motives  and  his  deeds:  he  must  ‘look  before  and  after’;  he 
has  to  hold  account  in  conscious  thought  with  the  past  and  future.  .  .  .  The 
faculties  of  Richard  are  simply  his  servants;  the  faculties  of  Macbeth  are  his  flatterers 
and  deceivers. 

E.  P.  Whipple  (p.  65):  The  meridian  of  Shakespeare’s  powrer  was  reached 
when  he  created  Othello,  Macbeth,  and  Lear — complex  personalities,  representing 
the  conflict  and  complication  of  the  mightiest  passions  in  colossal  forms  of  human 
character.  .  .  .  The  greatness  of  these  characters,  as  compared  with  his  earlier 
creations,  consists  in  the  greater  intensity  and  amplitude  of  their  natures,  and  the 
wider  variety  of  faculties  and  passions  included  in  the  strict  unity  of  their  natures. 
Richard  III.,  for  example,  is  one  of  his  earlier  characters,  and,  though  excellent  of 
its  kind,  its  excellence  has  been  approached  by  other  dramatists,  as,  for  instance, 
Massinger,  in  Sir  Giles  Overreach.  But  no  other  dramatist  has  been  able  to  grasp 
and  represent  a  character  similar  in  kind  to  Macbeth,  and  the  reason  is  that  Richard 
is  comparatively  a  simple  conception,  while  Macbeth  is  a  complex  one.  There  is 
unity  and  versatility  in  Richard;  there  is  unity  and  variety  in  Macbeth.  Richard 
is  capable  of  being  developed  with  almost  logical  accuracy;  for,  though  there  is 
versatility  in  the  play  of  his  intellect,  there  is  little  variety  in  the  motives  which 
direct  his  intellect.  His  wickedness  is  not  exhibited  in  the  making.  He  is  so  com¬ 
pletely  and  gleefully  a  villain  from  the  first,  that  he  is  not  restrained  from  con¬ 
venient  crime  by  any  scruples  or  relentings.  The  vigour  of  his  will  is  due  to  his 
poverty  of  feeling  and  conscience.  He  is  a  brilliant  and  efficient  criminal  because 
he  is  shorn  of  the  noblest  attributes  of  man.  Put,  if  you  could,  Macbeth’s  heart 
and  imagination  into  him,  and  his  will  would  be  smitten  with  impotence,  and  his 
wit  would  be  turned  to  wailing.  The  intellect  of  Macbeth  is  richer  and  grander 
than  Richard’s,  yet  Richard  is  relatively  a  more  intellectual  character;  for  the 
intellect  of  Macbeth  is  rooted  in  his  moral  nature,  and  is  secondary  in  our  thoughts 
to  the  contending  motives  and  emotions  it  obeys  and  reveals.  In  crime,  as  in  virtue, 
what  a  man  overcomes  should  enter  into  our  estimate  of  the  power  exhibited  in 
what  he  does. 

H.  N.  Hudson  ( Sh .  His  Life,  Art,  etc.;  p.  155):  Richard’s  individuality  can 
abide  no  partner,  either  as  equal,  or  as  second,  or  in  any  other  degree.  There  is 
no  sharing  any  thing  with  him,  in  however  unequal  portions;  no  acting  with  him, 
as  original,  self-moving  agents,  but  only  from  him,  as  the  objects  and  passive 
recipients  of  his  activity.  Such  is  the  form  and  scope  of  his  individuality,  that  other 
men’s  cannot  stand  in  subordination  to  it,  but  must  either  crush  it,  or  fly  from  it, 


ON  THE  CHARACTER  OF  RICHARD  565 

or  be  absorbed  into  it;  and  the  moment  any  one  goes  to  acting  otherwise  than  as 
a  limb  of  his  person,  or  an  organ  of  his  will,  there  is  a  virtual  declaration  of  war 
between  them,  and  the  issue  must  hang  on  a  trial  of  strength  or  of  stratagem.  Hence 
there  is,  properly  speaking,  no  interaction  between  Richard  and  the  other  persons 
of  the  drama.  He  is  the  all-in-all  of  the  scene.  And  herein  is  this  play  chiefly 
distinguished  from  the  others,  and  certainly,  as  a  work  of  art,  not  distinguished 
for  the  better,  that  the  entire  action,  in  all  its  parts  and  stages,  so  far  at  least  as  it 
has  any  human  origin  and  purpose,  both  springs  from  the  hero  as  its  source,  and 
determines  in  him  as  its  end.  .  .  There  being  no  one  to  share  with  the  hero  in  the 
action  and  the  interest  of  the  piece,  this  renders  it  all  the  better  for  theatrical  starring; 
for  which  cause  most  of  the  great  actors  have  naturally  been  fond  of  appearing  in 
it,  and  of  play-goers  of  seeing  them  in  it.  Besides,  the  hero  is  himself  essentially 
an  actor,  though  an  actor  of  many  parts,  sometimes  acting  one  of  them  after  another, 
and  sometimes  several  of  them  together:  and  the  fact  that  his  character  is  much 
of  it  assumed,  and  carried  through  as  a  matter  of  art,  probably  makes  it  somewhat 
easier  for  another  to  assume.  At  all  events,  the  difficulty,  one  would  suppose, 
must  be  much  less  in  proportion  to  the  stage-effect  than  in  reproducing  the  deep 
tragic  passions  of  Lear  and  Othello,  as  these  burst  up  from  the  original  founts  of 
nature.  Richard,  however,  is  not  all  hypocrite:  his  courage  and  his  self-control 
at  least  are  genuine;  nor  is  there  anything  false  or  counterfeit  in  his  acting  of  them. 
And  his  strength  of  will  is  exerted  even  more  in  repressing  his  own  nature  than  in 
oppressing  others.  Here  it  is,  perhaps,  that  we  have  the  most  admirable  feature 
of  the  delineation.  Such  a  vigour  of  self-command,  the  central  force  of  all  great 
characters,  seldom  fails  to  captivate  the  judgement,  or  to  inspire  something  like 
respect;  and,  when  carried  to  such  a  height  as  in  Richard,  it  naturally  touches 
common  people  with  wonder  and  awe,  as  being  well-nigh  superhuman.  In  this 
respect  he  strongly  resembles  Lady  Macbeth,  that  he  does  absolute  violence  to  his 
nature  in  out-wrestling  the  powers  of  conscience.  In  his  waking  moments  he 
never  betrays,  except  in  one  instance,  any  sense  of  guilt,  any  pangs  of  remorse; 
insomuch  that  he  seems  to  have  a  hole  in  his  head,  where  the  moral  faculties  ought 
to  be.  But  such  a  hole  can  nowise  stand  with  judgement  and  true  sagacity,  which 
Richard  certainly  has  in  a  high  degree.  And  it  is  very  much  to  the  point  that,  as 
in  Lady  Macbeth,  his  strength  of  will  is  evidently  over-strained  in  keeping  down 
the  insurgent  moral  forces  of  his  being.  But  this  part  of  his  nature  asserts  itself 
in  his  sleep,  when  his  powers  of  self-repression  are  suspended:  then  his  involuntary 
forces  rise  in  insurrection  against  the  despotism  of  his  voluntary.  In  his  speech 
to  the  army  near  the  close,  he  describes  conscience  as  ‘a  word  that  cowards  use, 
devis’d  at  first  to  keep  the  strong  in  awe’;  and  this  well  shows  how  hard  he  strives 
to  hide  from  others,  and  even  from  himself,  the  workings  of  that  deity  in  his  breast : 
but  the  horrid  dreams  which  infest  his  pillow  and  plague  his  slumbers,  and  which 
are  disclosed  to  us  by  Lady  Anne,  are  a  conclusive  record  of  the  torturing  thoughts 
that  have  long  been  rending  and  harrowing  his  inner  man  in  his  active  career,  and 
of  the  extreme  violence  his  nature  has  suffered  from  the  tyranny  of  will  in  repressing 
all  outward  signs  of  the  work  going  on  within.  That  his  conscience  in  sleep  should 
thus  rouse  itself  and  act  the  fury  in  his  soul,  to  avenge  the  wrongs  of  his  terrible 
self-despotism  when  awake,  this  it  is  that,  more  than  anything  else,  vindicates 
his  partnership  in  humanity,  and  keeps  him  within  the  circle  of  our  human  sympa¬ 
thies.  Richard’s  inexorable  tenacity  of  purpose  and  his  over-bearing  self-mastery 
have  their  strongest  display  in  the  catastrophe.  He  cannot  indeed  prolong  his 


566 


APPENDIX 


life;  but  he  makes  his  death  serve  in  the  highest  degree  the  end  for  which  he  has 
lived,  dying  in  a  perfect  transport  of  heroism,  insomuch  that  we  may  truly  say: 
‘nothing  in  his  life  became  him  like  the  leaving  it.’ 

E.  Dowden  (Sh.  his  Mind  and  Art,  p.  187):  Richard,  like  Edmund,  like  Iago, 
is  solitary;  he  has  no  friend,  no  brother:  ‘I  am  myself  alone’;  and  all  that  Richard 
achieves  tends  to  his  own  supremacy.  Nevertheless,  the  central  characteristic  of 
Richard  is  not  self-seeking  or  ambition.  It  is  the  necessity  of  releasing  and  letting 
loose  upon  the  world  the  force  within  him  (mere  force  in  which  there  is  nothing 
moral),  the  necessity  of  deploying  before  himself  and  others  the  terrible  resources 
of  his  will.  One  human  tie  Shakspere  attributes  to  Richard;  contemptuous  to 
his  mother,  indifferent  to  the  life  or  death  of  Clarence  and  Edward,  except  as  their 
life  or  death  may  serve  his  own  attempt  upon  the  crown,  cynically  loveless  towards 
his  feeble  and  unhappy  wife,  Richard  admires  with  an  enthusiastic  admiration  his 
great  father:  ‘Methinks  ’tis  prize  enough  to  be  his  son.’  And  the  memory  of  his 
father  supplies  him  with  a  family  pride  which,  however,  does  not  imply  attach¬ 
ment  or  loyalty  to  any  member  of  his  house.  ‘  But  I  was  born  so  high;  Our 
aiery  buildeth  in  the  cedar’s  top,  And  dallies  with  the  wind  and  scorns  the  sun.’ 
History  supplied  Shakspere  with  the  character  of  his  Richard.  He  has  been 
accused  of  darkening  the  colours,  and  exaggerating  the  deformity  of  the  character 
of  the  historical  Richard  found  in  More  and  Holinshed.  The  fact  is  precisely  the 
contrary.  The  mythic  Richard  of  history  (and  there  must  have  been  some  appalling 
fact  to  originate  such  a  myth)  is  made  somewhat  less  grim  and  bloody  by  the  drama¬ 
tist.  Essentially,  however,  Shakspere’s  Richard  is  of  the  diabolical  (something 
more  dreadful  than  the  criminal)  class.  He  is  not  weak,  because  he  is  single-hearted 
in  his  devotion  to  evil.  Richard  does  not  serve  two  masters.  He  is  not  like  John, 
a  dastardly  criminal;  he  is  not  like  Macbeth,  joyless  and  faithless  because  he  has 
deserted  loyalty  and  honour.  He  has  a  fierce  joy,  and  he  is  an  intense  believer — 
in  the  creed  of  hell.  And  therefore  he  is  strong.  He  inverts  the  moral  order  of 
things,  and  tries  to  live  in  this  inverted  system.  He  does  not  succeed;  he  dashes 
himself  to  pieces  against  the  laws  of  the  world  which  he  has  outraged.  Yet,  while 
John  is  wholly  despicable,  we  cannot  refrain  from  yielding  a  certain  tribute  of 
admiration  to  the  bolder  malefactor,  who  ventures  on  the  daring  experiment  of 
choosing  evil  for  his  good.  Such  an  experiment,  Shakspere  declares  emphatically, 
as  experience  and  history  declare,  must  in  the  end  fail.  The  ghosts  of  the  usurper’s 
victims  rise  between  the  camps,  and  are  to  Richard  the  Erinnyes,  to  Richmond 
inspirers  of  hope  and  victorious  courage.  At  length  Richard  trembles  on  the  brink 
of  annihilation,  trembles  over  the  loveless  gulf:  ‘I  shall  despair;  there  is  no 
creature  loves  me;  And  if  I  die,  no  soul  shall  pity  me.’  But  the  stir  of  battle 
restores  him  to  resolute  thoughts,  ‘Come,  bustle,  bustle,  caparison  my  horse,’ 
and  he  dies  in  a  fierce  paroxysm  of  action.  Richmond  conquers,  and  he  con¬ 
quers  expressly  as  the  champion  and  representative  of  the  moral  order  of  the 
world,  which  Richard  had  endeavored  to  set  aside. 

T.  Hall  Caine  (p.  42) :  Etymology  is  not  our  idol,  and  it  does  not  come  within 
our  design  to  start  an  abstract  metaphysical  enquiry;  but  it  may  be  observed  that 
the  word  Cruelty  has  been  blended  in  popular  imagination  with  Remorselessness, 
Relentlessness,  and  other  words  of  more  innocent  character.  Briefly,  the  positive 
word,  unlike  the  negative  words,  embraces  in  its  extended  sense  an  abstract  delight 


ON  THE  CHARACTER  OF  RICHARD 


5  67 


in  wickedness,  a  distinct  revelling  in  the  sheer  pains  which  result  upon  deeds  of 
savage  fury.  Thus  Shylock  is  cruel  when  nurturing  the  poisonous  wiles  of  his 
wickedness  without  tangible  purpose  and  against  palpable  interest;  and  thus  Iago 
is  cruel  when,  with  no  further  design  than  that  of  being  equal  with  him, wife  for  wife, 
he  abuses  the  ear  of  the  Moor  and  draws  down  a  world  of  misery.  But,  it  will 
be  observed,  Richard  bears  no  analogy  to  these  persons;  his  futurity  is  ever  pregnant 
with  great  purposes;  and  his  crimes  are  essential  to  their  realization.  He  slaughters 
the  innocent  and  the  guilty,  his  adversaries  and  his  instruments;  he  does  not  stop 
to  relent,  but  neither  does  he  stop  to  rejoice  in  the  mere  pain  he  inflicts.  The 
tenderness  and  mild  compassion  under  which  Forrest  and  Dighton,  the  suborned 
murderers  of  Tyrrell,  melted  do  not  touch  the  king,  but  the  purpose  served,  the 
business  is  at  an  end.  True,  he  says:  ‘  Come  to  me,  Tyrrell,  soon  at  after  supper, 
When  thou  shalt  tell  the  process  of  their  death.’  But,  again,  Macbeth  says  to  the 
murderer  of  Banquo,  ‘  Get  thee  gone;  to-morrow  We’ll  hear,  ourselves,  again.’ 
It  may,  perhaps,  be  at  first  suspected  that  both  Richard  and  Macbeth  have  malicious 
desires  to  revel  in  mere  blood-thirstiness,  but  if  we  look  closely  we  see  that  Richard’s 
anxiety  is  expressed  in  the  line:  ‘  But  did’st  thou  see  them  dead?’  and  that  Mac¬ 
beth’s  distress  lies  in  the  escape  of  Fleance,  whose  death,  indeed,  the  meeting  may 
be  projected  to  arrange. 

The  chief  distinction  in  the  characterization  of  Macbeth  and  Richard  lies  in  the 
circumstance  that  Macbeth  is  assailed  by  remorse  in  the  very  act  of  sin,  and  that 
his  whole  sentient  frame  quivers  with  what  Hamlet  terms  this  thinking  too  precisely 
on  the  event,  whilst  Richard  braces  himself  for  conflict  with  an  inner  and  outer 
world  which  has  nothing  worse  to  revenge  upon  him  than  himself  upon  himself; 
and  as  for  that:  ‘  Richard  loves  Richard;  that  is  I  am  I.’  We  need,  however,  only 
observe  attentively  the  command  the  will  of  Richard  has  over  his  emotions,  to 
refer  the  different  forms  of  outward  bearing  in  Richard  and  Macbeth  to  one  principle 
and  reduce  them  to  a  groundwork  of  character  common  to  both  persons.  Richard 
is  really  eternally  struggling  against  maddening  remorse,  which,  in  the  recession  of 
his  reason,  rises  to  prominence.  .  .  .  Only  once  does  the  spirit  of  the  resolute 
tyrant  yield  itself  to  the  sleep  of  the  reason,  but  the  suspended  mental  and  invig¬ 
orated  moral  nature  is  powerful  enough  to  determine  the  character  of  the  inner¬ 
most  emotion.  Richard  cries:  ‘O  coward  conscience,  how  dost  thou  afflict  me!’ 
.  .  .  ‘  I  shall  despair.  There  is  no  creature  loves  me;  And,  if  I  die,  no  soul  will 
pity  me’;  but  straightway  he  reigns  himself  up  with  the  reflection:  ‘Nay,  where¬ 
fore  should  they?  Since  that  I  myself  Find  in  myself  no  pity  to  myself.’  To 
see  this  scene  enacted  by  Mr  Irving  as  he  clings  convulsively  to  the  crucifix, 
and  the  heart-racking  lines  are  imbued  with  the  soul  of  the  great  actor,  is  at  once 
to  pity  the  awful  isolation  which  is  as  real  to  Richard  as  if  it  were  in  the  nature  of 
things,  and  no  longer  to  doubt  that  Richard  is  deceiving  himself  to  the  very  throat, 
when  he  says  he  is  striving  to  send  the  murderous  Macchiavel  to  school.  Coleridge 
says  that  a  great  philosophical  creation  may  sometimes  be  easiest  studied  in  the 
honest  imitations  that  are  made  of  it.  The  Robbers  of  Schiller  presents  one  char¬ 
acter  of  Shakespeare’s  in  minimis.  The  relentless  Franz  affects  to  resent  the 
obligations  which  devolve  upon  other  men,  and  to  repudiate  the  claims  of  affection 
which  flow  from  the  propinquity  in  blood;  but  when,  under  supernatural  agency, 
the  will  loses  command  of  the  emotions,  the  vision  of  judgement  excites  the  throes 
of  a  despair  which,  through  the  tumultuous  fury  of  the  baffled  years,  has  but  slept 
and  then  awakens  to  the  exercise  of  a  bitter  retribution. 


568 


APPENDIX 


E.  D.  Bewley  (p.  292) :  Shakspere  has  been  accused  of  painting  the  character 
of  Richard  Plantagenet  in  too  unfavourable  colours,  but  how  attractive  he  makes 
him  in  comparison  with  the  monster  presented  by  the  chronicles  can  be  seen  by  the 
most  cursory  examination  of  Holinshed’s  description.  In  the  latter  we  see  nothing 
but  the  brutal,  hypocritical  plotter,  whose  very  nature  leads  him  to  commit  the 
crimes  by  which  he  obtains  his  power;  there  is  no  hint  of  the  really  fine  mental 
qualities  of  Shakspere’s  Richard,  which  fascinate  us  almost  against  our  will.  For 
here,  as  in  the  Merchant  of  Venice,  and  in  even  a  more  marked  degree,  it  is  the 
character  which  may  be  described  as  ‘the  villain  of  the  piece’  that  enlists  all  our 
sympathies,  while  the  remaining  figures  arouse  no  feelings  save  those  of  pity,  and 
even  impatience.  For  in  the  Richard  as  delineated  by  Shakspere  we  find  a  very 
different  personage  to  the  prototype  of  the  chronicle.  Here  we  have  a  mind  that, 
under  more  favourable  physical  conditions,  might  have  produced  a  great  and 
faithful  minister  and  ruler;  but,  by  what  some  would  call  a  freak  of  nature,  this 
mind  is  clogged  by  a  body  that  warps  its  every  better  feeling  and  crushes  every 
noble  thought.  The  man  feels  himself  to  be  different  to  all  those  around  him,  and 
perceives  that  they  are  only  too  ready  to  recognise  the  fact;  and  so  he  is  brave,  but, 
under  the  influence  of  this  conviction,  his  bravery  becomes  mere  brutality;  he  is 
gifted  with  a  quick  and  ready  intellect,  but  it  degenerates  into  hypocritical  cunning; 
and  the  qualities  which  might  have  made  him  a  distinguished  warrior  and  a  success¬ 
ful  diplomatist,  are  only  used  to  gratify  his  revenge  and  to  aid  in  the  fulfilment  of 
an  unworthy  ambition.  But,  distorted  though  it  appears,  there  is  something  in  the 
character  of  Richard  that  cannot  fail  to  attract.  We  recognise  throughout  that 
cunning  and  cruelty  are  no  part  of  the  man’s  true  nature.  Feeling  himself  more 
gifted  than  all  the  selfish  plotters  by  whom  he  is  surrounded,  and  yet  despised  and 
flouted  by  all,  he  sets  before  him  the  crown  as  the  goal  of  his  ambition  and  deter¬ 
mines  that  nothing  shall  stand  in  his  way  towards  the  attainment  of  that  goal. 
Himself  the  object  of  no  human  affection,  he  feels  none,  and  all  impediments  are 
ruthlessly  sacrificed  to  his  design;  brothers,  nephews,  wife,  friends,  without  a 
single  feeling  of  compunction,  he  sees  them  all  go  that  he  may  gain  his  end.  And 
how  adapted  the  man  is  for  the  fulfilment  of  his  schemes!  gifted  with  consummate 
powers  of  speech,  keen  mind,  and  piercing  wit,  and  at  the  same  time  a  brave  and 
skilful  commander.  It  is  at  first  impossible  to  believe  that  the  figure  presented  at 
the  end  of  the  play,  when  we  see  him  ravening  in  blood,  can  be  the  same  keen, 
adroit  man  whom  we  saw  earlier,  deceiving  Clarence  by  his  tears,  Anne  by  his 
flattery,  Buckingham  and  Hastings  by  his  expressions  of  undying  affection  and 
gratitude.  But  the  hypocrisy  and  cunning  form  no  true  part  of  his  nature;  he  only 
consents  to  stoop  that  he  may  attain  the  crown  of  his  ambition,  when  he  need 
stoop  to  none.  Thus  we  are  presented  with  an  extraordinary  mixture  of  genius 
and  dissimulation,  of  suavity  and  recklessness. 

R.  G.  Moulton  (p.  91):  In  the  infancy  of  modern  English  poetry  Drayton 
found  a  poetic  side  to  topography  and  maps,  and  Phineas  Fletcher  idealised 
anatomy;  while  of  the  two  greatest  imaginations  belonging  to  the  modern  world 
Milton  produced  his  masterpiece  in  the  delineation  of  a  fiend,  and  Dante  in  a 
picture  of  hell.  The  final  triumph  of  good  over  evil  seems  to  have  been  already 
anticipated  by  art. 

The  portrait  of  Richard  satisfies  a  first  condition  of  ideality  in  the  scale  of  the 
whole  picture.  The  sphere  in  which  he  is  placed  is  not  private  life,  but  the  world 


ON  THE  CHARACTER  OF  RICHARD 


569 


of  history,  in  which  moral  responsibility  is  the  highest :  if,  therefore,  the  quality  of 
other  villainies  be  as  fine,  here  the  issues  are  deeper.  As  another  element  of  the 
ideal,  the  villainy  of  Richard  is  presented  to  us  fully  developed  and  complete. 
Often  an  artist  of  crime  will  rely — as  notably  in  the  portrait  of  Tito  Malema — 
mainly  on  the  succession  of  steps  by  which  a  character,  starting  from  full  possession 
of  the  reader’s  sympathies,  arrives  by  the  most  natural  gradations  at  a  height  of 
evil  which  shocks.  In  the  present  case  all  idea  of  growth  is  kept  outside  the  field 
of  this  particular  play;  the  opening  soliloquy  announces  a  completed  process: 
‘I  am  determined  to  become  a  villain.’  What  does  appear  of  Richard’s  past,  seen 
through  the  favourable  medium  of  a  mother’s  description,  only  seems  to  extend 
the  completeness  to  earlier  stages:  ‘Tetchy  and  wayward  was  thy  infancy;  Thy 
school-days  frightful,  desperate,  wild,  and  furious.’  So  in  the  details  of  the 
play  there  is  nowhere  a  note  of  the  hesitation  that  betrays  tentative  action. 
When  even  Buckingham  is  puzzled  as  to  what  can  be  done  if  Hastings  should 
resist,  Richard  answers:  ‘Chop  of  his  head,  man;  somewhat  we  will  do.’  His 
choice  is  only  between  different  modes  of  villainy,  never  between  villainy  and 
honesty.  Again,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  there  is  no  suggestion  of  impelling  motive 
or  other  explanation  for  the  villainy  of  Richard.  He  does  not  labour  under  any 
sense  of  personal  injury,  such  as  Iago  felt  in  believing,  however  groundlessly,  that 
his  enemies  had  wronged  him  through  his  wife;  or  Edmund,  whose  soliloquies 
display  him  as  conscious  that  his  birth  has  made  his  whole  life  an  injury.  Nor 
have  we  in  this  case  the  morbid  enjoyment  of  suffering  which  we  associate  with 
Mephistophiles,  and  w’hich  Dickens  has  worked  up  into  one  of  his  most  powerful 
portraits  in  Quilp.  Richard  never  turns  aside  to  gloat  over  the  agonies  of  his 
victims;  it  is  not  so  much  the  details  as  the  grand  schemes  of  villainy,  the  handling 
of  large  combinations  of  crime,  that  have  an  interest  for  him:  he  is  a  strategist  in 
villainy,  not  a  tactician.  Nor  can  we  point  to  ambition  as  a  sufficient  motive.  He 
is  ambitious  in  a  sense  which  belongs  to  all  vigorous  natures;  he  has  the  workman’s 
impulse  to  rise  by  his  work.  But  ambition  as  a  determining  force  in  character 
must  imply  more  than  this;  it  is  a  sort  of  moral  dazzling,  its  symptom  is  a  fascination 
by  ends  which  blinds  to  the  ruinous  means  leading  up  to  these  ends.  Such  an 
ambition  was  Macbeth’s;  but  in  Richard  the  symptoms  are  wanting,  and  in  all  his 
long  soliloquies  he  is  never  found  dwelling  upon  the  prize  in  view.  A  nearer 
approach  to  an  explanation  would  be  Richard’s  sense  of  bodily  deformity.  Not 
only  do  all  who  come  in  contact  with  him  shrink  from  the  ‘  bottled  spider,  ’  but  he 
himself  gives  a  conspicuous  place  in  his  meditations  to  the  thought  of  his  ugliness; 
and  from  the  outset  he  connects  his  criminal  career  with  the  reflection  that  he  is 
‘not  shaped  for  sportive  tricks.’  Still,  it  would  be  going  too  far  to  call  this  the 
motive  of  his  crimes:  the  spirit  of  this  and  similar  passages  is  more  accurately 
expressed  by  saying  that  he  has  a  morbid  pleasure  in  contemplating  physical  ugliness 
analogous  to  his  pleasure  in  contemplating  moral  baseness. 

There  appears,  then,  no  sufficient  explanation  and  motive  for  the  villainy  of 
Richard:  the  general  impression  conveyed  is  that,  to  Richard,  villainy  has  become 
an  end  in  itself  needing  no  special  motive.  This  is  one  of  the  simplest  principles 
of  human  development — that  a  means  to  an  end  tends  in  time  to  become  an  end 
in  itself.  ...  In  previous  plays  Gloucester  may  have  been  impelled  by  ambition 
to  his  crimes:  by  the  time  the  present  play  is  reached,  crime  itself  becomes  to  him 
the  dearer  of  the  two,  and  the  ambitious  end  drops  out  of  sight.  This  leads  directly 
to  one  of  the  two  main  features  of  Shakespeare’s  portrait:  Richard  is  an  artist  in 


570 


APPENDIX 


villainy.  What  form  and  colour  are  to  the  painter,  what  rhythm  and  imagery 
are  to  the  poet,  that  crime  is  to  Richard:  it  is  the  medium  in  which  his  soul  frames 
its  conceptions  of  the  beautiful.  The  gulf  that  separates  between  Shakespeare’s 
Richard  and  the  rest  of  humanity  is  no  gross  perversion  of  sentiment,  nor  the 
development  of  abnormal  passions,  nor  a  notable  surrender  in  the  struggle  between 
interest  and  right.  It  is  that  approaches  villainy  as  a  thing  of  pure  intellect,  a 
religion  of  moral  indifference,  in  which  sentiment  and  passion  have  no  place,  attrac¬ 
tion  to  which  implies  no  more  motive  than  the  simplest  impulse  to  exercise  a  native 
talent  in  its  natural  sphere.  Of  the  various  barriers  that  exist  against  crime,  the 
most  powerful  are  the  checks  that  come  from  human  emotions.  .  .  .  Crime  becomes 
possible  only  because  these  emotions  can  be  counteracted  by  more  powerful  emo¬ 
tions  on  the  other  side,  by  greed,  by  thirst  for  vengeance,  by  inflamed  hatred.  In 
Richard,  however,  when  he  is  surveying  his  works,  we  find  no  such  evil  emotions 
raised,  no  gratified  vengeance  or  triumphant  hatred.  The  reason  is  there  is  in  him 
no  restraining  emotion  to  be  overcome.  Horror  at  the  unnatural  is  not  subdued, 
but  absent;  his  attitude  to  atrocity  is  the  passionless  attitude  of  the  artist  who  recog¬ 
nises  that  the  tyrant’s  cruelty  can  be  set  to  as  good  music  as  the  martyr’s  heroism. 
Readers  are  shocked  at  the  scene  in  which  Richard  wooes  Lady  Anne  beside  the 
bier  of  the  parent  he  has  murdered,  and  wonder  that  so  perfect  an  intriguer  should 
not  choose  a  more  favourable  time.  But  the  repugnance  of  the  reader  has  no 
place  in  Richard’s  feelings:  the  circumstances  of  the  scene  are  so  many  objections , 
to  be  met  by  so  much  skill  of  treatment.  A  single  detail  in  the  play  illustrates 
perfectly  this  neutral  attitude  to  horror.  Tyrrel  comes  to  bring  the  news  of  the 
princes’  murder;  Richard  answers:  ‘  Come  to  me,  Tyrrel,  soon  at  after  supper, 
And  thou  shalt  tell  the  process  of  their  death.’  Quilp  could  not  have  waited 
for  his  gloating  till  after  supper;  other  villains  would  have  put  the  deed  out 
of  sight  when  done;  the  epicure  in  villainy  reserves  his  bonbouche  till  he  has 
leisure  to  do  it  justice.  Callous  to  his  own  emotions,  he  is  equally  callous  to 
the  emotions  he  rouses  in  others.  When  Queen  Margaret  is  pouring  a  flood  of 
curses  which  make  the  innocent  courtiers’  hair  stand  on  end,  and  the  heaviest 
curse  of  all,  which  she  has  reserved  for  Richard  himself,  is  rolling  on  to  its  climax, 
he  adroitly  slips  in  the  word  ‘Margaret’  in  place  of  the  intended  ‘Richard,’ 
and  thus,  with  the  coolness  of  a  school-boy’s  small  joke,  disconcerts  her  tragic 
passion  in  a  way  that  gives  a  moral  wrench  to  the  whole  scene.  His  own  mother’s 
curse  moves  him  not  even  to  anger;  he  caps  its  clauses  with  bantering  repartees, 
until  he  seizes  an  opportunity  for  a  pun  and  begins  to  move  off :  he  treats  her  curse 
as  in  a  previous  scene  he  had  treated  her  blessing,  with  a  sort  of  gentle  impatience, 
as  if  tired  of  a  fond  yet  somewhat  troublesome  parent.*  Finally,  there  is  an  instinct 
which  serves  as  resultant  to  all  the  complex  forces,  emotional  or  rational,  which  sway 
us  between  right  and  wrong:  this  instinct  of  conscience  is  formally  disavowed  by 
Richard:  ‘  Conscience  is  but  a  word  that  cowards  use,  Devised  at  first  to  keep  the 
strong  in  awe.  ’  But,  if  the  natural  heat  of  emotion  is  wanting,  there  is,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  full  intellectual  warmth  of  an  artist’s  enthusiasm,  whenever  Richard  turns 
to  survey  the  game  he  is  playing. . . .  The  great  master  is  known  by  his  appreciation 
of  details,  in  the  least  of  which  he  can  see  the  play  of  great  principles:  so  the  mag¬ 
nificence  of  Richard’s  villainy  does  not  make  him  insensible  to  commonplaces  of 

*  For  a  different  opinion  in  regard  to  Richard’s  behaviour  under  his  mother’s 
curse,  see  note  by  Oechelhaiiser,  IV,  iii,  199. — Ed. 


ON  THE  CHARACTER  OF  RICHARD 


571 


crime. . . .  The  mysterious  irresistibility  of  Richard,  pointed  to  by  the  succession  of 
incidents  in  the  play,  is  assisted  by  the  very  improbability  of  some  of  the  more  diffi¬ 
cult  scenes  in  which  he  is  an  actor.  Intrigue  in  general  is  a  thing  of  reason,  and  its 
probabilities  can  be  readily  analysed;  but  the  genius  of  intrigue  in  Richard  seems  to 
make  him  avoid  the  caution  of  other  intriguers,  and  to  give  him  a  preference  for  feats 
which  seem  impossible.  The  whole  suggests  how  it  is  not  by  calculation  that  he 
works,  but  he  brings  the  touch  of  an  artist  to  his  dealing  with  human  weakness,  and 
follows  whither  his  artist’s  inspiration  leads  him.  If,  then,  there  is  nothing  so  remote 
from  evil  but  Richard  can  make  it  tributary;  if  he  can  endow  crimes  with  a  power  of 
self-multiplying;  if  he  can  pass  through  a  career  of  sin  without  the  taint  of  distortion 
on  his  intellect  and  with  unruffled  calmness  of  innocence;  if  Richard  accomplishes 
feats  no  other  would  attempt  with  a  carelessness  no  other  reputation  would  risk, 
even  slow  reason  may  well  believe  him  irresistible.  When,  further,  such  qualifica¬ 
tions  for  villainy  become,  by  unbroken  success  in  villainy  reflected  in  Richard’s 
very  bearing;  when  the  only  law  explaining  his  motions  to  on-lookers  is  the  lawless¬ 
ness  of  genius  whose  instinct  is  more  unerring  than  the  most  labourious  calculation 
and  planning,  it  becomes  only  natural  that  the  opinion  of  his  irresistibility  should 
become  converted  into  a  mystic  fascination,  making  Richard’s  very  presence  a 
signal  to  his  adversaries  of  defeat,  chilling  with  hopelessness  the  energies  with  which 
they  are  to  face  his  consummate  skill. 

J.  L.  Etty  ( Macmillan's  Maga.,  Nov.,  1900;  p.  21):  At  his  best  Richard  the 
Third  was  a  traitor,  a  murderer,  a  tyrant,  and  a  hypocrite,  and  one  wonders  what 
there  can  have  been  in  such  a  character  which  could  gain  for  him  the  affection  of 
some,  at  least,  of  his  contemporaries  and  inspire  later  writers  with  the  desire  to 
defend  his  memory.  That  he  could  persuade  Anne  Neville,  whose  husband  he 
had  helped  to  murder,  to  marry  him,  that  he  could  wan  and  retain  the  affection  not 
only  of  such  men  as  Hastings  and  Buckingham,  but  also  of  the  citizens  of  York 
and  the  people  on  the  Yorkist  lands  in  that  neighbourhood,  that  he  could  win  over 
Queen  Elizabeth,  to  a  scheme  for  his  marriage  to  her  daughter,  or,  as  some  say, 
to  herself — all  these  facts  argue  a  power  of  attraction  which  is  not  visible  in  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  portrait  of  him,  for  all  that  he  mentions  the  facts  themselves. 

What  was  the  secret  of  this  attraction  ?  It  must  have  been,  I  think,  this,  that 
Richard  of  Gloucester  was  the  strongest  man  of  his  age.  An  abler  statesman  than 
his  brother  Edward,  and  very  little  inferior  to  him  in  military  skill,  his  self-command 
gave  him  a  control  over  men  and  events  which  Edward  never  could  reach.  As 
brave  as  Warwick  and  intellectually  far  his  superior,  he  showed  great  skill  in 
taking  the  place  which  Warwick’s  death  had  left  vacant  and  putting  himself  at 
the  head  of  the  old  nobles  against  the  influence  of  the  Queen’s  relatives.  To  this 
alliance  alone  he  owed  his  crown;  without  Buckingham’s  aid  his  unscrupulous 
cunning  would  have  been  useless.  Had  not  the  daring  of  his  wickedness  exceeded 
all  proportion,  he  would  have  been  as  great,  if  not  greater,  than  Louis  the  Eleventh, 
for  the  task  he  had  set  himself  was  fully  as  hard  as  the  French  king’s.  But  such 
prodigality  of  crime  becomes,  even  in  a  strong  man,  weakness  and,  from  a  purely 
cynical  point  of  view,  can  only  be  excused  by  the  impossibility  of  the  goal  he  was 
seeking.  In  any  case  Richard  of  Gloucester  is  a  less  detestable  figure  than  Louis 
the  Eleventh,  for,  though  we  may  hate  and  fear  him,  he  is  not  the  object  of  a  con¬ 
tempt  which  forbids  pity.  Was  Shakespeare  then  justified  in  ignoring  the  better 
side  of  Richard’s  nature  and  thus  intensifying  the  blackness  of  his  character? 


572 


APPENDIX 


And  again  is  such  a  character  a  fit  subject  for  artistic  treatment  ?  It  is  abundantly 
clear  that,  as  in  the  actual  events,  so  in  Shakespeare’s  account  of  them,  the  last  few 
years  of  the  life  of  Richard  of  Gloucester  form  a  climax,  a  period  into  which  all  the 
evils  of  the  preceding  years  are  crowded.  The  bare,  grim,  crude  nature  of  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  story  of  the  Wars  of  the  Roses  is  intentional  and  appropriate.  His  picture 
of  Richard  the  Third  is  the  natural  sequel.  Even  if  we  were  forced  to  grant  that 
the  fabric  he  has  built  is  founded  on  an  assumption  that  a  wholly  bad  character  is 
possible,  the  logical  results  are  so  well  worked  out  that  the  impossible  becomes 
plausible.  In  the  closing  scenes  of  that  awful  drama,  in  the  story  of  its  climax,  he 
could  not  have  drawn  in  uncertain  outlines  the  man  whom  he  clearly  regarded  as 
the  embodiment  of  all  the  evils  of  the  time.  He  could  not  afford  to  be  tender  with 
Richard’s  character;  he  was  bound  to  make  the  climax  of  such  a  story  monstrous, 
if  he  was  to  avoid  a  bathos.  After  that  grim  frieze  of  murderous  scenes  in  high 
relief  he  could  not  fill  the  last  panel  with  an  accurate  portrait,  giving  each  feature 
its  due,  and  forbearing  to  emphasise  the  sternness  of  the  face.  And  for  some  few, 
even  unqualified  evil  comes  within  the  sphere  of  their  art.  Shakespeare’s  Richard 
the  Third  and  Milton’s  Satan  have  an  atmosphere  of  their  own;  they  are  laws  to 
themselves,  above  and  beyond  the  reach  of  the  law  of  probability.  But  they  may 
not  be  imitated;  the  character  of  Cenci  is  revolting,  unnatural,  impossible.  And, 
after  all,  there  is  an  admirable  grandeur,  a  pathetic  loneliness,  both  in  Richard  the 
Third  and  Satan.  His  fierce  bravery  in  battle  even  in  boyhood  was  such  as  to  win 
the  admiration  of  his  father;  and  at  least  he  died  like  a  hero.  .  .  .  Such  a  death 
was  better  than  that  of  Louis  the  Eleventh,  shut  up  alone  in'  the  Castle  of  Plessis, 
surrounded  by  endless  fortifications,  protected  by  hosts  of  guards,  and  seeking 
vainly  to  prolong  his  life  with  spells,  masses,  and  incantations.  Richard  of 
Gloucester  died  as  he  had  lived,  fighting.  Like  others  cursed  with  a  deformed 
mind  or  body,  he  was  a  gambler,  and  the  stakes  for  which  he  played  were  so  high 
that  life  was  not  too  dear  a  forfeit  on  his  failure.  But  he  had  played  with  courage 
and  skill,  and,  though  he  failed,  he  failed  so  nobly  as  almost  to  atone  for  his  previous 
success.  [The  foregoing  descriptions,  with  the  exception  of  that  by  Jesse,  relate 
to  Shakespeare’s  Richard.  For  analyses  of  the  historic  Richard,  see  S.  Turner, 
iii,  450;  W.  Stubbs,  iii,  225;  Halliwell,  Letters  of  Kings ,  etc.,  i,  153-156;  A.  O. 
Legge,  ii,  117;  Miss  C.  Halsted,  ch  xiii;  C.  R.  Markham,  Pt,  ii,  ch.  ii. — Ed.] 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS  ON  THE  TRAGEDY 


Dr  Johnson:  This  is  one  of  the  most  celebrated  of  our  author’s  performances; 
yet  I  know  not  whether  it  has  not  happened  to  him  as  to  others,  to  be  praised 
most  when  praise  is  not  most  deserved.  That  this  play  has  scenes  noble  in  them¬ 
selves,  and  very  well  contrived  to  strike  in  the  exhibition,  cannot  be  denied.  But 
some  parts  are  trifling,  others  shocking,  and  some  improbable. 

Malone:  I  agree  entirely  with  Dr  Johnson  in  thinking  that  this  play  from  its 
first  exhibition  to  the  present  hour  has  been  estimated  greatly  beyond  its  merit. 
From  the  many  allusions  to  it  in  the  books  of  that  age,  and  the  great  number  of 
editions  it  passed  through,  I  suspect  it  was  more  often  represented  and  more  admired 
than  any  of  our  author’s  tragedies.  Its  popularity  perhaps  in  some  measure  arose 
from  the  detestation  in  which  Richard’s  character  was  justly  held,  which  must 
have  operated  more  strongly  on  those  whose  grandfathers  might  have  lived 
near  his  time;  and  from  its  being  patronized  by  the  Queen  on  the  throne,  who 
probably  was  not  a  little  pleased  at  seeing  King  Henry  VII.  placed  in  the  only 
favourable  light  in  which  he  could  have  been  exhibited  on  the  scene. 

Steevens:  I  most  cordially  join  with  Dr  Johnson  and  Mr  Malone  in  their 
opinions;  and  yet  perhaps  they  have  overlooked  one  cause  of  the  success  of  this 
tragedy.  The  part  of  Richard  is,  perhaps,  beyond  all  others,  variegated,  and 
consequently  favorable  to  a  judicious  performer.  It  comprehends,  indeed,  a  trait 
of  almost  every  species  of  character  on  the  stage.  The  hero,  the  lover,  the  states¬ 
man,  the  buffoon,  the  hypocrite,  the  hardened  and  repenting  sinner,  &c.,  are  to  be 
found  within  its  compass.  No  wonder,  therefore,  that  the  discriminating  powers 
of  a  Burbage,  a  Garrick,  and  a  Henderson,  should  at  different  periods  have  given 
it  a  popularity  beyond  other  dramas  of  the  same  author.  Yet  the  favour  with  which 
this  tragedy  is  now  received  must  also  in  some  measure  be  imputed  to  Cibber’s 
reformation  of  it,  which,  generally  considered,  is  judicious:  for  what  modern 
audience  would  patiently  listen  to  the  narrative  of  Clarence’s  dream,  his  subsequent 
expostulation  with  the  Murderers,  the  prattle  of  his  children,  the  soliloquy  of  the 
Scrivener,  the  tedious  dialogue  of  the  Citizens,  the  ravings  of  Margaret,  the  gross 
terms  thrown  out  by  the  Duchess  of  York  on  Richard,  the  repeated  progress  to 
execution,  the  superfluous  train  of  spectres,  and  other  dramatic  encumbrances, 
which  must  have  prevented  the  more  valuable  parts  of  the  play  from  rising  into 
their  present  effect  and  consequence  ?  The  expulsion  of  languor,  therefore,  must 
atone  for  such  remaining  want  of  probability  as  is  inseparable  from  an  historical 
drama  into  which  the  events  of  fourteen  years  are  irregularly  compressed. 

W.  Richardson  (p.  48):  The  other  excellencies  of  this  tragedy,  besides  the 
character  of  Richard,  are,  indeed  of  an  inferior  nature,  but  not  unworthy  of  Shakes¬ 
peare.  The  characters  of  Buckingham,  Anne,  Hastings,  and  Queen  Margaret 
are  executed  with  lively  colouring  and  striking  features;  but,  excepting  Margaret, 
they  are  exhibited  indirectly;  and  are  more  fully  known  by  the  conduct  of  Richard 
towards  them,  than  by  their  own  demeanor.  They  give  the  sketch  and  outlines 
in  their  own  actions;  but  the  picture  appears  finished  in  the  deportment  of  Richard. 
This,  however,  of  itself  is  a  proof  of  very  singular  skill.  The  conduct  of  the  story 
is  not  inferior  to  that  in  Shakespeare’s  other  historical  tragedies.  It  exhibits  a 

573 


574 


APPENDIX 


natural  progress  of  events,  terminated  by  one  interesting  and  complete  catastrophe. 
Many  of  the  episodes  have  uncommon  excellence.  Of  this  kind  are,  in  general, 
all  the  speeches  of  Margaret.  Their  effect  is  awful;  they  coincide  with  the  style  of 
the  tragedy;  and  by  wearing  the  same  gloomy  complexion,  her  prophecies  and 
imprecations  suit  and  increase  its  horror.  There  was  never  in  any  poem  a  dream 
superior  to  that  of  Clarence.  It  pleases,  like  the  prophecies  of  Margaret,  by  a  sol¬ 
emn  anticipation  of  future  events,  and  by  its  consonance  with  the  general  tone  of 
the  tragedy.  It  pleases,  by  being  so  simple,  so  natural,  and  so  pathetic,  that  every 
reader  seems  to  have  felt  the  same  or  similar  horrors;  and  is  inclined  to  say,  with 
Brackenbury:  ‘No  wonder,  Lord,  that  it  affrighted  you;  I  am  afraid  methinks  to  hear 
you  tell  it.’  This  tragedy,  however,  like  many  works  of  Shakespeare,  has  many 
faults;  and  in  particular,  it  seems  to  have  been  too  hastily  written.  Some  inci¬ 
dents  are  introduced  without  any  apparent  reason,  or  without  apparent  necessity 
in  the  conduct  of  the  performance.  We  are  not,  for  instance,  sufficiently 
informed  of  the  motive  that  prompted  Richard  to  marry  the  widow  of  Prince 
Edward.  .  .  .  The  scene  towards  the  close  of  the  tragedy,  between  the  Queen 
and  Richard,  when  he  solicits  her  consent  to  marry  her  daughter,  seems  no 
other  than  a  copy  [of  the  former  scene  with  Anne].  As  such,  it  is  faulty;  and 
still  more  so,  by  being  executed  with  less  ability.  Yet  this  incident  is  not  liable  to 
the  objection  made  to  the  former.  We  see  a  good,  prudential  reason  for  the 
marriage  of  Richard  with  Elizabeth;  but  none  for  his  marriage  with  Lady  Anne. 
We  almost  wish  that  the  first  courtship  had  been  omitted  and  that  the  dialogue 
between  Richard  and  Anne  had  been  suited  and  appropriated  to  Richard  and  the 
Queen.  Neither  are  we  sufficiently  informed  of  the  motives  that,  on  some  occasions, 
influenced  the  conduct  of  Buckingham.  We  are  not  enough  prepared  for  his 
animosity  against  the  Queen  and  her  kindred;  nor  can  we  pronounce,  without 
hazarding  conjecture,  that  it  proceeded  from  envy  of  their  sudden  greatness,  or 
from  having  his  vanity  flattered  by  the  seeming  deference  of  Richard.  Yet  these 
motives  seem  highly  probable.  The  young  princes  bear  too  great  a  share  in  the 
drama.  It  would  seem  the  poet  intended  to  interest  us  very  much  in  their  mis¬ 
fortunes.  The  representation,  however,  is  not  agreeable.  The  Princes  have 
more  smartness  than  simplicity;  and  we  are  more  affected  with  Tyrrell’s  description 
of  their  death,  than  pleased  with  anything  in  their  own  conversation.  Nor  does 
the  scene  of  the  ghosts,  in  the  last  act,  seem  equal  in  execution  to  the  design  of 
Shakespeare.  There  is  more  delightful  horror  in  the  speech  of  Richard  awakening 
from  his  dream,  than  in  any  of  the  predictions  denounced  against  him.  There 
seems,  indeed,  some  impropriety  in  representing  those  spectres  as  actually  appearing, 
which  were  only  seen  in  a  vision.  Besides,  Richard  might  have  described  them, 
in  the  succeeding  scene,  to  Ratcliff,  so  as  to  have  produced,  at  least  in  the  perusal 
of  the  work,  a  much  stronger  effect.  The  representation  of  ghosts  in  this  passage 
is  by  no  means  so  affecting,  nor  so  awful,  as  the  dream  related  by  Clarence. 
Lastly,  there  is  in  this  performance  too  much  deviation  in  the  dialogue  from  the 
dignity  of  the  buskin;  and  deviations  still  more  blameable,  from  the  language  of 
decent  manners.  Yet,  with  these  imperfections,  this  tragedy  is  a  monument  of 
striking  genius;  and  the  success  of  the  poet,  in  delineating  the  character  of  Rich¬ 
ard,  has  been  as  great  as  the  singular  boldness  of  the  design. 

A.  Skottowe  (i,  208):  The  abrupt  grandeur  of  the  opening  soliloquy,  Richard’s 
successful  personification  of  the  lover,  the  hypocrite,  the  humourist,  and  the  hero. 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS  ON  THE  TRAGEDY 


575 


leave  him  without  the  show  of  a  competitor.  But  still  all  does  not  appear  to  have 
been  done  for  the  character  of  which  it  is  susceptible.  It  is  not  easy  to  conceive 
why  the  display  of  its  excellence  is  principally  confined  to  the  early  scenes  of  the 
play,  since  the  situations  in  the  latter  are  equally  favorable  to  the  purposes  of  a 
dramatic  writer.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  Shakespeare  dwelt  on  less  promising 
materials.  The  introduction  of  Margaret,  the  widowed  queen  of  Henry  the  Sixth, 
is  not  only  unnecessary,  but  improper:  after  the  battle  of  Tewkesbury,  in  which 
she  was  captured  by  the  victorious  Edward,  she  was  ransomed  by  her  father,  and 
never  afterwards  returned  to  England.  The  clamourous  squabbling  in  the  third 
scene  of  the  first  act;  the  tedious  negotiation  between  Richard  and  Elizabeth,  in  the 
third  scene  of  the  fourth  act;  and  the  harangues  of  the  ghosts,  are  all  insufferably 
tedious,  and,  like  other  long  passages  of  dialogue,  tend  to  no  end  but  that  of  unneces¬ 
sarily  protracting  the  catastrophe. 

In  its  general  arrangement,  also,  the  tragedy  is  not  so  excellent  as  most  of  Shakes¬ 
peare’s.  Such  short  scenes  as  that  of  the  Scrivener,  the  one  between  Stanley  and 
Sir  Christopher  Urswick,  and  that  of  Buckingham  led  to  execution,  are  sad  violations 
of  the  continuity  of  the  action.  It  is  a  strong  and  curious  proof  of  Shakespeare’s 
submission  to  the  dramatic  usages  of  his  time,  violating  as  they  did  taste  and 
propriety,  that  he  encamps  Richard  on  one  side  of  the  stage,  and  Richmond  on  the 
other:  neither  of  them  notices,  nor  is,  indeed,  aware  of  the  presence  of  the  other; 
and  the  ghosts  rise  between  the  chieftains’  tents  and  address  them  alternately. 
But  if  Shakespeare  has  passed  with  carelessness  over  some  minor  passages,  with 
what  truth,  and  beauty,  and  feeling,  has  he  distinguished  others?  We  turn  with 
delight  to  the  ease  and  fluency  with  which  the  interview  between  Richard,  Buck¬ 
ingham,  and  the  citizens  is  expressed.  Gloucester’s  reply,  commencing:  ‘I  cannot 
tell,  if  to  depart  in  silence,’  is  remarkable,  in  particular,  for  its  unembarrassed 
expression  of  a  complex  idea  without  the  aid  of  circumlocution.  Is  it  necessary 
to  mention  Tyrrell’s  description  of  the  murder  of  the  Princes?  It  cannot  be: 
yet  who  is  not  pleased  to  have  it  recalled  to  his  recollection  ? 

T.  Campbell  (p.  53):  In  Richard  III.,  Shakespeare  put  forth  a  power  of 
terrific  delineation,  which,  with  the  exception  of  the  death-scene  of  Cardinal  Beaufort 
in  2  Henry  VI.,  he  had  never  before  displayed.  This  tragedy  forms  an  epoch  in 
the  history  of  our  poet,  and  in  that  of  dramatic  poetry.  In  his  preceding  dramas, 
he  showed  rather  the  suppleness  than  the  knotted  strength  of  his  genius;  but  in  the 
subtle  cunning,  the  commanding  courage,  the  lofty  pride  and  ambition,  the  remorse¬ 
lessness  of  the  third  Richard,  and  in  the  whole  sublime  depravity  of  his  character, 
he  reminds  us  of  the  eulogium  passed  by  Fuseli  on  Michael  Angelo,  who  says,  that 
Michael  ‘could  stamp  sublimity  on  the  hump  of  a  dwarf.’  So  complete  was  this 
picture  of  human  guilt,  that  Milton,  in  seeking  for  a  guilty  hero,  was  obliged  to 
descend  to  the  nether  regions.  .  .  .  The  wretched  taste  of  the  public  for  many 
years  neglected  this  sublime  drama.  In  the  days  of  Betterton,  all  the  powers  of 
that  great  actor  could  not  give  stage  popularity  to  Richard  III.  Cibber  at  last 
brought  it  on  the  stage  in  a  patched  state,  containing  a  portion  of  the  original  play, 
but  mixed  up  with  matter  from  other  Shakespearean  plays;  and,  strange  to  say, 
eked  out  with  some  of  Cibber’s  own  stuff.  Yet  with  all  this  stuff,  Cibber’s  edition 
of  Richard  III.  kept  possession  of  the  stage  for  one  hundred  and  twenty  years. 
In  1741,  when  Garrick  came  out  at  Goodman’s  Fields,  his  utterance  of  the  line: 
‘Off  with  his  head!  so  much  for  Buckingham!’  drew  thunders  of  applause,  and 


APPENDIX 


5  76 


these  words  set  the  first  seal  on  Garrick’s  popularity.  That  line,  nevertheless, 
was  not  Shakespeare’s,  but  Cibber’s.  I  have  not  before  me  Cibber’s  misadaptation; 
but  only  that  of  John  Kemble,  and  I  fear  that  Kemble  did  little  to  restore  the 
original;  nay,  it  is  certain  that  he  did  nothing  material.  [Cibber’s  version]  com¬ 
mences  with  Richard  stabbing  Henry  VI.  with  his  own  hand.  This  might  be 
well  enough  for  3  Henry  VI.,  but  it  had  no  right  to  a  place  in  the  tragedy  of  Richard 
III.  Shakespeare’s  object  in  the  latter  piece  was  to  produce  from  Richard’s 
character  an  impression  of  terror,  not  of  disgust;  and  the  Poet,  therefore,  exhibits 
on  the  stage  none  of  the  murders  occasioned  by  Richard,  except  that  of  Clarence, 
whose  previous  guilt  mitigates  our  anger  at  his  fate,  although  he  moves  our  pity. 
Clarence’s  dream,  a  piece  of  poetry  which  Charles  Fox  justly  compared  to  the 
death-scene  of  Alcestis,  in  Euripides,  is  omitted  in  Kemble’s  edtion.  The  com¬ 
plaint  was  that  Shakespeare’s  play  was  too  long,  and  the  remedy  to  which  they 
resorted  was  to  thrust  in  interpolations. 

G.  C.  Verplanck  ( Introd .,  p.  6):  There  is  a  characteristic  of  Richard  III. 
which  I  do  not  recollect  to  have  seen  noticed  by  the  commentators.  It  is  that,  in 
style  and  in  versification,  Richard  III.  has  much  of  the  cast  of  those  portions  of 
Henry  VI.  denied  to  be  Shakespeare’s,  and  comparatively  little — though  it  has 
some — of  those  peculiarities  of  manner  and  rhythm  which  we  now  designate  as 
Shakespearean.  Its  diction  and  its  versification  are  in  a  transition  state  between 
those  of  his  earlier  works  and  those  of  Henry  IV.  and  the  Merchant  0}  Venice. 
From  these  indications,  I  should  not  hesitate  to  pronounce  that  it  was  written  soon 
after  the  two  parts  of  the  Contention,  and  before  Henry  IV.,  King  John,  or  even 
the  first  form  of  Romeo  6°  Juliet.  Thus  we  may  trace  the  varied,  but  nevertheless 
progressive,  development  of  the  Poet’s  mind;  the  three  parts  of  Henry  VI.  suc¬ 
cessively  rising  each  above  the  other,  and  preparing  us  for  the  higher  dramatic 
excellence  of  Richard  III.,  far  superior  to  any  of  them,  yet  superior,  chiefly  in  the 
same  class  and  kind;  while  Richard  III.  again,  in  Clarence’s  dream  and  other 
scattered  passages,  shows  the  dawn  of  that  poetic  splendour,  and  the  early  gushings 
of  that  flood  of  thought,  which  was  thence  forward  to  enrich  all  the  Poet’s  dramatic 
conceptions. 

C.  Bathurst  (p.  30) :  Richard  III.  is  a  curious  play,  singularly  devoid  of  poetical 
richness,  except,  perhaps,  in  the  first  speech.  The  great  spirit  and  truth  (though 
dry  and  often  unpoetical,  and  never  excursive  or  pleasant)  of  most  of  it  is,  perhaps, 
somewhat  cramped  down  by  his  notion  of  following  his  model  in  history.  .  .  There 
is  no  extraneous,  distinct  comic,  any  more  than  in  Richard  II.;  but  the  serious 
itself,  from  the  nature  of  Richard’s  character,  often  affords  it.  I  hope  it  is  not 
a  duty  to  admire  the  scene  with  Lady  Anne.  The  cursing  scene  is  something 
like  Lucrece.  Its  vulgarity  as  applied  to  queens  has  a  parallel  in  King  John; 
where  it  includes  the  part,  afterward  so  dignified,  of  Constance  herself.  The 
introduction  of  such  conversation  on  the  stage  cannot  be  approved;  though  we 
learn,  from  the  Memoirs  of  the  Margravine  of  Bareith,  that  royal  manners  sometimes 
approach  very  nearly  to  those  of  the  lowest  people.  Shakespeare  expressly  tells  us 
that  three  months  intervened  between  the  last  events  in  3  Henry  VI.  and  the 
first  in  this  play  [see  I,  ii,  267];  but  whether  that  is  any  guide  as  to  the  interval 
between  writing  the  plays,  is  quite  another  question. 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS  ON  THE  TRAGEDY 


5  77 


J.  O.  Halliwell  ( Introd .,  p.  330):  Henslowe’s  company  was  engaged  upon 
the  production  of  a  drama  on  Richard  the  Third  about  the  year  1599,  and  in  1602 
Ben  Jonson  was  writing  a  play  on  the  same  subject.  The  first  of  these  included 
the  character  of  Banister,  and  from  two  lines  of  it,  preserved  in  an  anecdote  in  an 
old  jest-book',  it  would  appear,  from  the  circumstance  of  one  of  them  being  borrowed 
from  Shakespeare,  that  use  had  been  made  by  the  writer  or  writers  of  the  great 
poet’s  drama.  Either  this  is  the  case,  or  here  we  have  evidence  that  there  was  yet 
another  old  English  play  of  Richard  the  Third,  one  which  may  have  furnished 
Shakespeare  with  some  of  his  materials.  The  anecdote  occurs  in  a  little  volume 
of  exceeding  rarity,  entitled,  A  New  Booke  0}  Mistakes,  or  Bulls  with  Tales,  and 
Buis  without  Tales,  but  no  lyes  by  any  means,  1637,  and  is  as  follows:  ‘In  the 
‘play  of  Richard  the  Third,  the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  being  betraid  by  his  Servant 
‘Banister,  a  Messenger  comming  hastily  into  the  presence  of  the  King  to  bring 
‘him  word  of  the  Duke’s  surprizall,  Richard  asking  him,  what  newes ?  he  replyed, — 
“‘My  leige,  the  Duke  of  Banester  is  tane,  And  Buckingham  is  come  for  his 
‘“reward.”’ 

As  late  as  the  year  1654,  Gayton  speaks  of  a  play  of  Richard  the  Third  in  which 
the  ghost  of  Jane  Shore  is  introduced;  and  these  two  notices  taken  together,  prove 
that  an  old  drama  on  the  subject  long  continued  popular.  If  this  old  play  was 
anterior  to  Shakespeare’s,  it  may  have  been  used  by  our  author,  whose  Richard  III . 
bears  traces  of  something  which  induces  the  conjecture  that  portions  of  it  are 
alterations  by  an  inferior  hand.  .  .  .  Incidents,  such  as  that  of  the  rising  of  the 
ghosts,  [were]  suggested  probably  by  similar  ones  in  a  more  ancient  composition. 
That  Richard  III.  as  we  now  have  it  is  essentially  Shakespeare’s  cannot  admit  of 
a  doubt.  As  little,  I  believe,  can  it  be  questioned  that  to  the  circumstance  of  some 
older  play  on  the  subject  having  been  used  do  we  owe  some  of  its  turbulent  character, 
and  its  inferiority  to  most  of  the  productions  of  the  great  dramatist.  Nevertheless, 
however,  much  we  may  regret  that  Shakespeare  did  not  here  wholly  exercise  his 
free  invention,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  result  is  effective  as  a  work  of  art. 

J.  A.  Heraud  (p.  130):  I  am  much  struck  by  the  versification  of  this  tragedy. 
It  flows  onward  like  a  mighty  river.  All  its  images  are  grand  and  direct.  It  has 
none  of  the  breaks,  and  stops,  and  word-splitting  that  occur  so  frequently  in  Richard 
II.,  but  all  is  free  and  broad  as  in  the  great  poetical  speeches  of  that  tragedy,  which 
are  clearly  Shakespeare’s  own.  Here  all  is  of  the  same  texture;  the  same  mastery 
of  thought,  imagery,  passion,  and  the  same  command  of  appropriate  diction,  rich, 
varied,  and  suited  to  the  argument  or  the  occasion.  Everywhere  the  opulence  of 
genius,  adorning,  directing,  and  wielding  the  most  intractable  matter  with  an 
apparent  ease,  which,  to  an  adept  in  the  poetic  or  dramatic  art,  is  not  less  than 
astonishing. 

There  is  one  item  in  the  style  in  which  this  tragedy  differs  from  Richard  II. 
The  author  of  that,  with  a  peculiar  neatness,  adopted  an  artifice  for  the  ready 
concentration  of  passion,  of  which  we  find  little  trace  in  the  present  tragedy.  I 
mean  a  rhetorical  interrogation,  for  the  sake  of  an  emotional  answer:  e.  g.,  ‘What 
shall  I  say?  to  safeguard  thine  own  life’;  ‘Why  have  they  dared  to  march  So 
many  miles  upon  her  peaceful  bosom?’;  Comest  thou  because  th’  anointed  king 
is  here?  ‘What  must  the  king  do  now?  Must  he  submit?  The  king  shall  do  it. 
Must  he  be  deposed?’  ...  .  The  instances  are  numerous,  and  where  they  occur 
may  serve  to  denote  the  hand  of  the  playwright,  as  distinguished  from  that  of 


37 


578 


APPENDIX 


Shakespeare,  who  will  be  found  to  interpose  a  long  affirmative  passage;  such  as, 
‘I’ll  give  my  jewels  for  a  set  of  beads,’  &°c.,  which  is  full  of  pictorial  images,  as  is 
the  case  with  other  similar  speeches  which  have  been  added  by  the  great  poet  to  the 
part  of  the  fallen  Richard.  One  curious  example,  however,  of  this  interrogative 
style  occurs  in  Richard  III:  V,  iii,  213-222.  This  passage,  I  think,  stands  alone 
in  the  great  drama  to  which  it  belongs.  The  exception  proves  the  rule.  .  .  . 
Shakespeare  has  followed  in  this  tragedy  the  historical  facts  with  remarkable 
exactitude.  His  great  aim  is  to  present  in  one  great  whole  the  results  of  civil  war; 
in  the  fall  of  a  noble  house,  and  in  the  uprise  of  an  ambitious  individual,  who,  in 
the  general  confusion,  contrives  by  the  basest  means  to  ascend  to  the  surface  of 
things,  but  ultimately  himself  sinks  with  the  rest.  There  is,  accordingly,  through 
the  whole  of  the  tragedy,  the  feeling  of  a  great  upheaving  chaos,  in  which  the  unruly 
passions  are  all  at  war  with  each  other,  and  anarchy  and  destruction  are  the 
appointed  preparations  for  an  emerging  cosmos.  This  is  the  terrible  idea  that 
filled  the  imagination  of  Shakespeare,  and  which  he  has  embodied  in  forms  not  less 
than  titanic.  .  .  .  Indignation  is  wakened  when  we  recollect  that  a  poem  like  this, 
on  which  the  greatest  genius  of  the  world  has  literally  poured  out  the  magnificence 
of  his  soul,  should  have  been  treated  by  sciolists  and  shallow  playwrights  as  a  mere 
chaos,  from  the  matrix  of  which  an  easily  acted  drama  might  be  dug,  and  not  as 
already  a  drama  perfect  in  design  and  finish.  But  such  is  the  case,  and  the  shrunk 
and  supplemented  product  has  usurped  the  stage,  and  engrossed  the  services  of  - 
actors  who  have,  nevertheless,  pretended  loyalty  to  Shakespeare’s  sovereignty.  ^ 

R.  Simpson  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1874;  p.  423):  The  references  in  Richard  III. 
to  the  three  parts  of  Henry  VI.,  are  so  many  as  to  make  it  impossible  to  deny  the 
serial  character  and  unity  of  the  whole  tetralogy,  whatever  questions  may  be  raised 
as  to  the  authorship  of  parts  of  it.  The  whole  exhibits  the  fate  of  virtuous  weakness 
in  the  face  of  unscrupulous  strength,  and  concludes  with  the  fate  of  this  strength 
in  face  of  providence.  Henry  VI.  perishes  by  natural  causes.  The  forces  which 
destroy  Richard  III.  are  wholly  supernatural.  Three  women  are  introduced 
whose  curses  are  inevitable,  like  those  of  the  Eumenides.  Ghosts  prophesy  the  event 
of  a  battle.  Men’s  imprecations  on  themselves  are  literally  fulfilled.  Their  destiny 
is  made  to  depend  more  on  their  words  than  their  actions;  it  is  removed  out  of 
their  hands  and  placed  in  those  of  some  unearthly  power  which  hears  prayer  and 
judges  the  earth.  As  if  the  lesson  of  the  poet  was  that  there  is  human  remedy 
where  there  are  ordinary  human  motives,  but  that  for  power  joined  with  Macchi- 
vellian  policy  the  only  remedy  is  patience  dependent  on  Providence. 

Richard  III.,  like  King  John,  commits  his  last  and  unpardonable  offence  when 
he  slays  the  right  heir.  But  the  poet  treats  the  offences  differently;  he  calls  the 
barons  who  opposed  John,  rebels;  his  moral  judgement  seems  to  approve  of  those 
who  placed  the  first  Tudor  on  the  throne.  The  two  cases  were  placed  on  equal 
footing  by  the  opposition  writers.  ...  It  is  to  be  noted,  too,  that  as  the  poet  places 
his  loudest  denunciations  of  papal  usurpations  in  the  mouth  of  John,  who  was  just 
about  to  become  the  Pope’s  ‘  man,  ’  so  does  he  put  his  most  solemn  warning  against 
traitors  in  the  mouth  of  the  successful  rebel.  But  treason  in  his  mind  is  not  against 
the  crowned  head,  it  is  against  the  country:  ‘Abate  the  edge  of  traitors,  gracious 
Lord,  That  would  reduce  these  bloody  times  again.  .  .  .  That  would  with  treason 
wound  this  fair  land’s  peace.’  In  the  composition  of  this  play  the  dangers  of  a 
disputed  succession  were  before  Shakespeare’s  eyes.  The  third  scene  of  the  second 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS  ON  THE  TRAGEDY 


579 

Act  exhibits  the  evils  incident  on  the  decease  of  a  prince  when  the  succession  is 
,  doubtful  or  belongs  to  a  child. 

In  Richard  III.  also  the  poet  gave  what  he  long  left  as  a  final  picture  of  the 
absolutism  of  the  crown,  as  it  had  been  developed  by  the  civil  wars.  By  the  extinc¬ 
tion  of  the  old  Baronage  it  had  lost  the  counterpoise  which  balanced  it.  Edward  IV. 
surrounded  himself  with  new  peers,  relations  of  his  wife,  through  wrhom  he  governed. 
Richard  III.  cut  all  these  off,  destroyed  what  remained  of  the  older  nobles,  and 
declared  his  intention  of  doing  everything  for  himself,  and  using  nothing  but 
unrespective  boys  for  his  ministers.  He  issues  his  commands  without  the  pretence 
of  legality.  His  merits  as  a  legislator  are  entirely  put  out  of  sight  by  the  poet.  .  .  . 
Absolutism  was,  to  the  eyes  of  politicians  of  those  days,  a  legal  state  of  things. 
Tyranny  was  only  the  vicious  personal  aberration  of  the  rightful  absolute  prince. 

E.  E.  Rose  ( Fraser's  Maga.,  May,  1876;  p.  548):  The  one  great  lesson  that 
[the  historical  plays  of  Shakespeare]  seem  intended  to  teach,  is  patriotism:  and 
it  is  a  thing  to  be  remembered  in  our  time  that  the  most  perfect  genius  England 
ever  produced  loved  his  country,  clearly  as  he  saw  her  faults,  with  a  passion  almost 
bigoted.  Yet  this  single  lesson  seems  an  inadequate  result  of  the  complete  study 
of  a  hundred  years’  history  by  a  mind  so  powerful  and  comprehensive :  one  cannot 
imagine  a  mind  like  Shakespeare’s  minutely  following  out  his  nation’s  life  for  such 
a  period,  without  feeling,  and  teaching,  that  some  laws  must  be  hidden  in  its  con¬ 
fusion  of  battle  and  charter,  oppression,  rebellion,  and  compromise. 

The  answer  is  simply  this:  he  did  not  study  history — he  reproduced  it.  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  one  great  characteristic  is  his  habit  of  taking  things  as  they  are — and  he 
took  the  facts  of  history  without  enquiry,  absolutely  as  Holinshed  gave  them, 
accepting  also  all  Holinshed’s  theories,  deductions,  and  (as  far  as  they  go)  studies 
of  characters:  narrating  the  history  of  each  reign,  literally  as  far  as  he  can  in  the 
historian’s  own  words — omitting  nothing  but  what  was  entirely  undramatic  (and 
it  is  astonishing  how  little  is  allowed  to  be  undramatic  by  Shakespeare) — ‘  adapting  ’ 
him  for  the  theatre,  in  fact,  with  a  fidelity  greater  than  that  of  the  modern  dramatist 
who  makes  a  stage-version  of  a  popular  novel.  Except  in  the  case  of  Jack  Cade, 
we  cannot  at  this  moment  recall  a  single  instance  in  which  the  dramatist  has  differed 
from  the  verdict  of  the  historian  on  a  character,  or  materially  altered  his  version 
of  an  event,  except  so  far  as  was  necessary  to  fit  it  for  the  stage. 

For  this  there  are  two  reasons.  In  the  first  place,  Shakespeare  was  a  dramatist, 
not  a  historian — it  was  no  business  of  his  to  sift  every  fact  presented  to  him,  and 
discover  how  much  it  owed  to  the  exaggeration  of  tradition,  to  prejudice,  or  to 
careless  repetition:  he  knew  that  the  popular  view  of  history  is  almost  sure  to  be 
the  most  picturesque,  and  he  also  knew  that  if  he  contradicted  received  beliefs  he 
would  raise  a  spirit  of  dispute  and  enquiry  in  his  hearers  entirely  opposed  to  that 
in  which  a  work  of  art  ought  to  be  enjoyed,  and  in  which  only  it  can  be  appre¬ 
ciated.  In  the  second  place,  Shakespeare  not  only,  as  we  have  said,  had  a  habit  of 
taking  things  as  they  were — he  prided  himself  upon  it:  he  was  a  narrator,  as 
absolutely  true  as  a  clear  mirror,  and  his  business  was  taking  the  facts  of  the  case, 
however  apparently  contradictory,  to  show  how  it  was  that  they  happened,  to 
reconcile  all  inconsistencies,  to  give  that  life-like  air  of  truth  which  art  must  have 
though  truth  has  it  not;  in  a  word,  to  make  real  life  of  them  by  making  their  actors 
real,  existent  men;  and  he  prided  himself  on  not  lessening  the  difficulty  of  his  task 
by  altering  a  single  detail,  though  his  creative  faculty  added  a  thousand. 


580 


APPENDIX 


For  the  student  of  history,  then,  there  is  not  very  much  to  be  learnt  from  Shakes¬ 
peare  that  careful  thought  will  not  learn  from  Holinshed,  except,  indeed  (and  it  is 
a  great  exception),  how  the  men  whose  doings  he  is  told  of  did  them — their  motives 
and  method  of  work  standing  out  more  fully,  developed,  indeed,  from  a  few  hints, 
sometimes  into  the  complete  synthesis  of  a  human  mind,  but  still  motives  and 
method  implying  an  exact  agreement  with  Holinshed’s  views  of  the  people  depicted: 
they  are  seen  with  the  historian’s  eyes,  not  necessarily  as  the  poet  would  have  seen 
them,  had  he  been  obliged  to  glean  the  materials  of  their  characters  for  himself. 
But  for  the  student  of  Shakespeare  there  is  a  wealth  of  knowledge  in  these  histories: 
to  know  what  was  most  likely  to  arouse  his  enthusiasm,  what  seemed  to  him  the 
prominent  elements  of  history,  especially  of  England’s  history,  what  rulers  he 
admired,  and  what  periods  interested  him — on  the  whole,  what  were  his  politics, 
and  how  much  politics  were  to  him:  all  this  must  teach  us  a  great  deal  about  a 
man,  our  desire  to  whom  is  proportioned  to  the  mystery  which  overhangs  his 
simple  life  and  quiet  English  character. 

F.  J.  Furnivall  ( Introd .  to  Leopold  Sh.,  p.  xxxix.):  Richard  III.  is  written 
on  the  model  of  Shakspere’s  great  rival,  Christopher  Marlowe.  ...  It  was  Mar¬ 
lowe’s  characteristic  to  embody  in  a  character,  and  realise  with  terrific  force,  the 
workings  of  a  single  passion.  ...  In  Richard  III.  Shakspere  embodied  ambition, 
and  sacrificed  his  whole  play  to  this  one  figure.  Gloucester’s  first  declaration  of 
his  motives,  shows  of  course  the  young  dramatist,  as  the  want  of  relief  in  the  play, 
and  the  monotony  of  its  curses,  also  do.  But  Richard’s  hypocrisies,  his  exultation 
in  them,  his  despising  and  insulting  his  victims,  his  grim  humour  and  delight  in 
gulling  fools,  and  in  his  own  villainy,  are  admirably  brought  out,  and  that  no  less 
than  thirteen  times  in  the  play.  i.  With  Clarence.  2.  With  Hastings.  3.  With 
Anne,  widow  of  Prince  Edward.  4.  With  Queen  Elizabeth,  with  Gloster  [Dorset  ?] 
and  Hastings,  and  possibly  in  his  professt  repentance  for  the  wrongs  he  did  Queen 
Margaret  in  murdering  her  son  and  husband  (I  have  always,  tho’,  considered  this 
genuine  repentance,  or  at  least  a  genuine  profession  of  it).  5.  With  Edward  IV. 
on  his  death-bed,  and  his  queen  and  lords,  and  as  to  the  author  of  Clarence’s 
death.  6.  With  his  nephew,  Clarence’s  son.  7.  With  Queen  Elizabeth  and  his 
mother:  ‘Amen!  And  make  me  die  a  good  old  man!’  8.  With  Buckingham:  ‘I  as 
a  child  will  go  by  your  direction.’  9.  With  the  young  prince,  Edward  V.:  ‘God 
keep  you  from  them  and  from  such  false  friends.’  10.  With  Hastings  and  the 
Bishop  of  Ely.  ix.  With  the  Mayor  about  Hastings  and  then  about  taking  the 
crown — (note  Richard’s  utter  brutality  and  baseness  in  his  insinuation  of  his  mother’s 
adultery).  12.  With  Buckingham  about  the  murder  of  the  Princes.  13.  With 
Queen  Elizabeth  when  he  repeats  the  scene  of  his  wooing  with  Anne,  as  the  chal¬ 
lenge  scene  is  repeated  in  Richard  II.  Villain  as  he  is,  he  has  the  villain’s  coolness 
too.  He  never  loses  temper  except  when  he  strikes  the  third  messenger.  As  a 
general  he  is  as  skilful  as  Henry  V.,  and  looks  to  his  sentinels;  while,  like  Henry  IV., 
he  is  up  and  doing  at  the  first  notice  of  danger,  and  takes  the  right  practical  measures. 
Yet  the  conscience  he  ridicules,  he  is  made  to  feel — ‘There  is  no  creature  loves  me, 
‘And  if  I  die  no  soul  will  pity  me.’  But  we  must  note  that  this  is  only  when  his 
will  is  but  half-awake,  half-paralyzed  by  its  weight  of  sleep.  As  soon  as  the  man  is 
himself  again,  neither  conscience  nor  care  for  love  or  pity  troubles  him.  The 
weakest  part  of  the  play  is  the  scene  of  the  citizens’  talk;  and  the  poorness  of  it, 
and  the  monotony  of  the  women’s  curses,  have  given  rise  to  the  theory  that  in 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS  ON  THE  TR AGEEV  581 


Richard  III.  Shakspere  was  only  rewriting  an  old  play,  of  which  he  let  bits  stand. 
But  though  I  once  thought  this  possible,  I  have  since  become  certain  that  it  is  not 
so.  The  wooing  of  Anne  by  Richard  has  stirred  me,  in  reading  it  aloud,  almost 
as  much  as  anything  in  Shakspere.  Note,  too,  how  the  first  lines  of  the  play  lift 
you  out  of  the  mists  and  confusion  of  the  Henry  VI.  plays  into  the  sun  of  Shakspere ’s 
genius. 

A.  C.  Swinburne  (p.  43):  In  the  second  historic  play,  which  can  be  wholly 
ascribed  to  Shakespeare,  we  still  find  the  poetic  or  rhetorical  quality  for  the  most 
part  in  excess  of  the  dramatic;  but  in  Richard  III.  the  bonds  of  rhyme  at  least  are 
fairly  broken.  This  only  of  all  Shakespeare’s  plays  belongs  absolutely  to  the 
school  of  Marlowe.  The  influence  of  the  elder  master,  and  that  influence  alone,  is 
perceptible  from  end  to  end.  Here  at  last  we  can  see  that  Shakespeare  has  decidedly 
chosen  his  side.  It  is  as  fiery  in  passion,  as  single  in  purpose,  as  rhetorical  often, 
though  never  so  inflated  in  expression  as  Tamburlaine  itself.  It  is  doubtless 
a  better  piece  of  work  than  Marlowe  ever  did;  I  dare  not  say,  than  Marlowe  ever 
could  have  done.  It  is  not  for  any  man  to  measure,  above  all  is  it  not  for  any 
workman  in  the  field  of  tragic  poetry  lightly  to  take  on  himself  the  responsibility, 
or  the  authority  to  pronounce,  what  it  is  that  Christopher  Marlowe  could  not  have 
done;  but,  dying  as  he  did  and  when  he  did,  it  is  certain  that  he  has  not  left  us  a 
work  so  generally  and  so  variously  admirable  as  Richard  III.  As  certain  is  it  that 
but  for  him  this  play  could  never  have  been  written.  At  a  later  date  the  subject 
would  have  been  handled  otherwise,  had  the  poet  chosen  to  handle  it  at  all;  and 
in  his  youth  he  could  not  have  treated  it  as  he  has  without  the  guidance  and  example 
of  Marlowe.  Not  only  are  its  highest  qualities  of  energy,  of  exuberance,  of  pure 
and  lofty  style,  of  sonorous  and  successive  harmonies,  the  very  qualities  that  never 
fail  to  distinguish  those  first  dramatic  models  which  were  fashioned  by  his  ardent 
hand;  the  strenuous  and  single-handed  grasp  of  character,  the  motion  and  action 
of  combining  and  contending  powers,  which  here  for  the  first  time  we  find  sustained 
with  equal  and  unfaltering  vigour  throughout  the  length  of  a  whole  play,  we  per¬ 
ceive,  though  imperfectly,  in  the  work  of  Marlowe  before  we  can  trace  them  even 
as  latent  or  infant  forces  in  the  work  of  Shakespeare. 

F.  M.  Bristol  (p.  n):  To  Peter  Bell  and  his  Primrose  Criticism  many  another 
object  of  beauty  in  nature,  art,  and  literature  has  appeared  to  be  but  commonplace, 
though  it  bore  the  impress  of  high  origin,  and  carried  in  upon  other  minds  exquisite 
sentiments  and  edifying  speculations.  The  historical  tragedy  of  Richard  III. 
excites  no  admiration  in  the  common  sense  mind  of  Peter  Bell.  He  fails  to  discover 
its  poetic  and  dramatic  merits,  but,  more  particularly,  seems  to  be  oblivious  to 
those  masterly  touches  of  energy  and  grandeur  which  declare  its  author  to  be 
Shakespeare.  .  .  .  The  Primrose  Criticism  lays  down  the  new  canon  that  whatever 
a  genius  may  do  that  is  unworthy  of  him  shall  not  be  attributed  to  him,  but  shall 
be  branded  as  a  literary  foundling.  .  .  .  But  is  this  common-sense  criticism  ? 
It  is  undoubtedly  Primrose-sense,  and  Peter-Bell-sense  put  to  criticism;  but,  in  the 
name  of  scientific  and  literary  integrity,  let  it  be  hoped  that  it  will  very  long  remain 
very  Uncommon-sense. 

The  arguments  employed  by  the  Primrose  Criticism  in  its  attempt  to  rob  Shakes¬ 
peare  of  Richard  III.  are  not  sound.  One  argument  stands  in  this  shape:  Shakes¬ 
peare  never  wrote  deliberate  nonsense,  nor  knowingly  indulged  in  defective  metre. 


APPENDIX 


582 

Richard  III.  contains  deliberate  nonsense  and  premeditated  defective  metre. 
Ergo:  Shakespeare  never  wrote  the  historical  tragedy  of  Richard  III.  With  all 
due  and  unfeigned  respect  for  him  who  advanced  this  argument,  it  cannot  be 
accepted  as  sound  and  reliable.  It  suggests  itself  to  a  careful  student  of  the  Prim¬ 
rose  method,  that  it  would  take  very  uncommon  sense  at  this  time  to  discover 
whether  Shakespeare’s  nonsense  was  deliberate  or  not,  and  whether  he  indulged  in 
defective  metre  knowingly  or  unknowingly.  The  discussion  of  questions  of  this 
character  is  as  futile  as  it  is  unimportant.  But  if  Primrose  Criticism  affirms  that 
Shakespeare  never  wrote  nonsense  nor  indulged  in  defective  metre  as  a  fact,  there 
shall  be  a  square  issue,  which  may  be  settled  without  resort  to  any  transcendental 
speculations.  Shakespeare  did  write  nonsense,  and  he  indulged  very  frequently 
in  defective  metre.  .  .  .  There  is  not  a  play,  among  all  that  are  attributed  to 
Shakespeare,  which  can  be  said  to  be  absolutely  free  from  nonsense.  Nor  is  there 
a  single  play  that  is  absolutely  free  from  defective  metre.  These  are  the  very 
faults  which  our  poet’s  detractors  have  most  successfully  proven  against  him;  and 
which  his  admirers  have  most  unhesitatingly  admitted.  .  .  .  Attention  is  further 
called  to  the  reasons  laid  down  by  the  Primrose  Criticism  for  robbing  Shakespeare 
of  his  Richard  III. 

It  is  asserted  that  the  tragedy  is  not  written  in  Shakespeare’s  style;  that  it  pro¬ 
ceeds  with  a  different  gait;  that  it  contains  nonsense  and  defective  metre;  that  it 
is  devoid  of  humour  and  eloquence;  and  that  it  contains  whole  scenes  where  the 
author’s  mind  seems  at  dead  low-tide  throughout,  and  lays  bare  all  its  shallows 
and  its  ooze.  With  these  serious  charges  made  against  the  tragedy,  singularly 
enough,  not  a  shadow  of  a  proof,  not  even  an  illustration  or  a  quotation,  is  given 
in  support  of  the  charges.  .  .  .  The  most  characteristic  quality  of  Shakespeare’s 
plays  is  the  wonderful,  unparalleled  delineation  of  character  to  be  found  in  them. 
Shakespeare  was  pre-eminent  in  his  power  ‘to  hold,  as  ’twere,  the  mirror  up  to 
nature’:  It  is  not  the  metre  of  Hamlet  that  distinguishes  it,  and  secures  the  immor¬ 
tality  of  its  popularity,  but  the  delineation  of  the  character  of  Hamlet.  It  is  not  the 
absence  of  ‘  nonsense,’  but  the  character  of  Shylock,  that  keeps  up  the  world’s  interest 
in  the  Merchant  of  Venice.  It  is  not  the  literary  style  of  King  Lear  that  has  placed 
it  above  all  other  modern  tragedies:  that  is  accomplished  by  the  character  of  Lear. 
Neither  the  patriotism  nor  the  ‘humour’  of  Macbeth,  but  the  character  of  Macbeth 
himself,  as  therein  set  forth,  makes  the  tragedy  great  in  literature  and  on  the  stage. 
So  is  it  with  Richard  III.;  it  is  great  because  therein  the  characterization  of  Richard 
is  great.  No  dramatic  person  that  Shakespeare’s  mighty  pen  ever  drew  is  more 
worthy  of  his  genius.  No  character  has  won  greater  fame  or  popularity  on  the 
stage.  No  character,  with  the  possible  exception  of  Lear,  demands  in  its  representa¬ 
tion  the  exercise  of  greater  histrionic  genius.  There  have  been  but  four  great 
Richards  on  the  English  stage,  and  they  are  the  acknowledged  greatest  geniuses  of 
the  stage.  If  another  hand  than  Shakespeare’s  drew  this  wonderful  character, 
then  let  not  Greene,  Marlowe,  J  onson,  or  Fletcher  share  the  fame  of  the  ‘  Bard  of 
Avon,’  but  let  the  unknown  author  and  creator  of  Richard  III.  be  partner  in 
possession  of  the  greatest  fame  in  dramatic  literature. 

Are  we  certain  that  Swift  wrote  the  Tale  of  a  Tub,  and  Scott,  The  Antiquary, 
because  nobody  else  could  do  it  ?  Then  Shakespeare  drew  the  dramatic  character 
of  Richard  III.  because  nobody  else  could  do  it.  Yes,  ‘there  is  a  gait  that  marks 
the  mind  as  well  as  the  body’;  and  if  not  in  the  metre  nor  the  literary  style,  in  the 
great,  impressive,  terrible  character  of  Richard  III.  may  be  detected  the  infallible, 


GERMAN  CRITICISM 


583 


unmistakable  mental  gait  of  Shakespeare.  It  is  submitted  whether  the  Shakes¬ 
pearean  character  of  any  play  in  question  is  not  to  be  determined  rather  from  a 
study  of  the  persons  than  of  the  prosody  of  the  play. 


GERMAN  CRITICISM 

A.  W.  Schlegel  (p.  435) :  I  cannot  help  thinking  there  is  an  injustice  in  considering 
the  three  parts  of  Henry  VI.  as  of  little  value  compared  with  Richard  III.  These 
four  plays  were  undoubtedly  composed  in  succession,  as  is  proved  by  the  style  and 
the  spirit  in  the  handling  of  the  subject :  the  last  is  definitely  announced  in  the  one 
which  precedes  it,  and  is  also  full  of  references  to  it:  the  same  view  runs  through 
the  series;  in  a  word,  the  whole  make  together  only  one  single  work.  Even  the 
deep  characterization  of  Richard  is  by  no  means  the  exclusive  property  of  the  piece 
which  bears  his  name:  his  character  is  very  distinctly  drawn  in  the  two  last  parts 
of  Henry  VI.;  nay,  even  his  first  speeches  lead  us  to  form  the  most  unfavourable 
anticipations  of  his  future  conduct.  He  lowers  obliquely  like  a  dark  thunder¬ 
cloud  on  the  horizon,  which  gradually  approaches  nearer  and  nearer,  and  first 
pours  out  the  devastating  elements  with  which  it  is  charged,  when  it  hangs  over 
the  heads  of  mortals.  Two  of  Richard’s  most  significant  soliloquies  which  enable 
us  to  draw  the  most  important  conclusions  with  regard  to  his  mental  temperament 
are  to  be  found  in  3  Henry  VI.  As  to  the  value  and  the  justice  of  the  actions  to 
which  passion  impels  us,  we  may  be  blind,  but  wickedness  cannot  mistake  its  own 
nature;  Richard,  as  well  as  Iago,  is  a  villain  with  full  consciousness.  That  they 
should  say  this  in  so  many  words  is  not,  perhaps,  in  human  nature:  but  the  poet 
has  the  right  in  soliloquies  to  lend  a  voice  to  the  most  hidden  thoughts,  otherwise 
the  form  of  the  monologue  would,  generally  speaking,  be  censurable.  Richard’s 
deformity  is  the  expression  of  his  internal  malice,  and  perhaps  in  part  the  effect 
of  it:  for  where  is  the  ugliness  that  would  not  be  softened  by  benevolence  and 
openness?  He,  however,  considers  it  as  an  iniquitous  neglect  of  nature,  which 
justifies  him  in  taking  his  revenge  on  that  human  society  from  which  it  is  the  means 
of  excluding  him.  Hence  these  sublime  lines:  ‘And  this  word  love  which  grey¬ 
beards  call  divine,  Be  resident  in  men  like  one  another  And  not  in  me.  I  am 
myself  alone.’  * — 3  Hen.  VI:  V,  v,  81.  .  .  .  Although  Richard  is  thoroughly 
acquainted  with  the  blackness  of  his  mind  and  his  hellish  mission,  he  yet  endeavors 
to  justify  this  to  himself  by  a  sophism:  the  happiness  of  being  beloved  is  denied 
to  him;  what  then  remains  to  him  but  the  happiness  of  ruling  ?  All  that  stands 
in  the  way  of  this  must  be  removed.  This  envy  of  the  enjoyment  of  love  is  so 
much  the  more  natural  in  Richard,  as  his  brother  Edward,  who,  distinguished 
by  the  nobility  and  beauty  of  his  figure,  was  an  almost  irresistible  conqueror  of 
female  hearts.  Notwithstanding  his  pretended  renunciation,  Richard  places  his 
chief  vanity  in  being  able  to  please  and  win  over  the  women,  if  not  by  his  figure, 

*  Franz  Horn  (iii,  145)  remarks  that,  to  a  German  (presumably  Schlegel),  is 
due  the  credit  of  first  detecting  in  these  lines  a  cause  and  indication  of  Richard’s 
misanthropy.  It  will,  however,  be  seen  that  Whately,  whose  Remarks  were  pub¬ 
lished  in  1785,  has  herein  anticipated  the  German  commentator;  see  p.  552 
above. — Ed. 


APPENDIX 


584 

at  least  by  his  insinuating  discourse.  Shakespeare  here  shows  us,  with  his  accus¬ 
tomed  acuteness  of  observation,  that  human  nature,  even  when  it  is  altogether 
decided  in  goodness  or  wickedness,  is  still  subject  to  petty  infirmities.  Richard’s 
favourite  amusement  is  to  ridicule  others,  and  he  possesses  an  eminent,  satirical 
wit.  He  entertains  at  bottom  a  contempt  for  all  mankind:  for  he  is  confident  of 
his  ability  to  deceive  them,  whether  as  his  adversaries  or  his  instruments.  In 
hypocrisy  he  is  particularly  fond  of  using  religious  forms,  as  if  actuated  by  a  desire  of 
profaning  in  the  service  of  hell  the  religion  whose  blessings  he  had  inwardly  abjured. 
[For  Schlegel’s  opinion  of  the  Tragedy  as  a  whole,  see  note  on  I,  i,  1.] 

F.  Kreyssig  (i,  400):  With  such  a  character  as  Richard  for  hero,  a  physical 
and  moral  monster,  the  question  naturally  rises,  How  can  there  be  obeyed  that 
highest  law  of  Tragedy,  which  prescribes  for  the  protagonist,  a  character  not  so 
depraved  as  to  make  pity  turn  to  horror,  or  so  free  from  reproach  that  his  downfall 
can  disturb  the  basis  of  all  spiritual  health — confidence  in  the  high  and  just  guidance 
of  all  human  affairs?  Where,  we  ask  ourselves,  is  the  bond  which  unites  this 
monster  with  humanity  ?  Where  is  the  link  which  makes  possible  an  influence  of  his 
lot  upon  our  feelings,  and  also  that  sympathy,  upon  which  rests  all  the  effectiveness 
of  the  Tragedy,  as  well  as  of  all  other  forms  of  art?.  .  .  The  whole  course  of  the 
action  under  consideration,  while  it  makes  more  easy  for  a  moment  a  backward 
glance  towards  the  preceding  dramas,  2  and  3  Henry  VI.,  brings  home  to  us  that 
we  are  here  concerned  not  with  the  individual  deportment  of  one  man  alone,  in  the 
ordinary  sense.  We  have,  doubtless,  ere  the  present  play  is  reached,  recognised 
in  Richard  the  representative  of  an  epoch  bowed  down  by  a  grievous  malady;  the 
vessel  into  which  the  venom  of  whole  generations  gathered  itself  for  the  most 
awful  and  concentrated  effects,  salutary  for  the  whole,  though  fatal  to  the  individual. 
If  his  utterances  stamp  him  as  a  fit  companion  to  Satan,  the  outcome  of  his  deeds 
shows  him  in  the  light  of  a  scourge  of  God,  an  elected  instrument  of  the  intelligent 
and  infallible  end  of  all  things.  His  recklessness  destroys  an  aristocracy  which 
had  shown  itself  unworthy  of  the  position  which  it  had  hitherto  held;  and  his 
abundant  crimes  awaken  the  sleeping  conscience  of  the  more  healthy  number  of  the 
people.  We  find  ourselves  in  the  midst  of  a  storm  that  bursts  upon  us  after  an 
oppressive  heaviness  of  the  air,  and  pay  little  heed  to  the  falling  trees,  because  of 
the  blessings  and  refreshment  which  the  evening  will  surely  bring. 

In  a  very  remarkable  way  there  is  seen  the  effect  of  that  grand  historical  per¬ 
spective  whereby  Shakespeare’s  historical  plays  tower  above  all  attempts  of  later 
times.  Such  a  character  as  Richard  III.,  confined  within  the  narrow  boundaries 
of  classic  tragedy,  would  justify  the  scornful  remarks  with  which  Frederick  the 
Great  and  Voltaire  turned  aside  from  ‘the  bloody  farces’  of  ‘the  horrible  English 
plays.’  It  would  be  as  though  the  giant  were  dressed  in  the  clothes  of  the  dwarf; 
as  well  could  Niagara  be  used  as  a  waterfall  for  a  French  garden. 

Much  that  was  guilty  in  Richard  III.  may  be  pardoned — and  with  it  there 
disappears  a  part  of  his  greatness,  in  an  aesthetic  and  of  course  not  in  a  moral 
sense — since  we  are  forced  to  consider  him  as  the  son  of  his  time  and  his  country 
and  to  connect  the  lot  of  the  mortal  individual  with  that  of  the  immortal  people. 
This  historic,  virile  conception  renders  possible,  or  at  least  suggests,  a  resolution  of 
dissonances  which,  in  the  life  of  a  single  individual,  could  not  but  jar  upon  us  with 
insupportable  discord — it  makes  it  a  truth  in  the  highest  sense  of  what  Schiller 
declares  to  be  the  task  of  tragic  art: 


GERMAN  CRITICISM 


585 


‘Sie  sieht  den  Menschen  in  des  Lebens  Drang 
Und  walzt  die  gross’re  Halfte  seiner  Schuld 
Den  ungliickseligen  Gestirnen  zu.’ 

[Had  Schiller,  perchance,  in  mind  the  lines  in  King  Lear,  I,  ii,  131,  wherein  Edmund 
says:  ‘We  make  guilty  of  our  disasters  the  sun,  moon,  and  the  stars’? — Ed.] 
Even  the  most  horrible  of  the  crimes  of  the  tyrant,  the  murder  of  the  only  pure, 
innocent  victims  whom  fate  throws  in  the  path  of  his  ambition — the  sons  of  his 
dead  brother  entrusted  to  his  protection — must  serve  the  higher  views  of  the  pro¬ 
tective  divinity  of  Old  England — since  it  alone  makes  possible  the  union  of  both 
roses,  which,  with  the  marriage  of  Richmond  and  Elizabeth,  ends  the  long  civil  war. 
But  all  these  considerations  would  not  yet  explain  the  dramatic  effect  of  this  extra¬ 
ordinary  character,  had  not  Shakespeare  taken  care  to  replace  the  moral  interest, 
which  was  here  lacking,  by  the  only  substitute  possible — a  superabundant  wealth 
of  mental  power.  Richard  would  indeed  be  insupportable  did  he  not  surpass  all 
his  contemporaries  in  cleverness,  genial  power  of  work,  reckless  and  logical  courage, 
as  well  as  in  pitiless  hardness  and  diabolic  selfishness.  This  side  of  his  development 
is  worthy  of  remark.  It  is,  first  of  all,  by  the  most  complete  self-control  that  he 
appears  as  the  genial  higher  power  among  his  surroundings.  By  nature  self-willed, 
sarcastical,  capable  of,  and  inclined  to,  the  rudest  violence,  he  constantly  shows 
himself  as  the  finest,  the  most  enduring  master  of  crafty  hypocrisy,  once  he  has  made 
up  his  mind,  and  with  his  eye  measured  the  way  which  separates  him  from  the 
throne.  His  entrance  among  the  relatives  of  the  queen  shows  well  that  contrast 
between  what  he  is,  and  what  he  sometimes  likes  to  seem :  ‘  Because  I  cannot 
flatter  and  speak  fair,  Smile  in  men’s  faces,  smoothe,  deceive  and  cog.’  It  is  Iago, 
the  valiant  rascal,  whose  smile,  by  the  roughness  of  his  ordinary  character,  has 
established  a  letter  of  credit,  that  it  may  be  worth  legal  money  among  honourable 
people. 

By  this  outward  seeming  he  wins  over  Anne;  by  it  he  entices  the  voluptuous, 
small-minded  Edward  into  the  toils;  by  it  he  ensnares  the  volatile  Clarence,  also 
Hastings,  the  stupidly  foolish  favourite.  ...  It  is  quite  true  that  such  a  character 
as  Richard’s  is  not  created  to  awaken  tragic  sympathy — but  at  the  same  time  it  is 
so  great  as  almost  to  demand  it.  Involuntarily  we  allow  the  eye  to  rest  upon  the 
clever  and  superior  statesman,  the  inflexible  hero,  when  we  would  turn  shuddering 
from  stupid  and  cowardly  villainy.  Strictly  speaking,  we  have  not  here  a  tragic 
figure — but  the  fearful  and  demoniac  executor  of  a  fate  tragic  in  the  highest  degree, 
a  scourge  of  God  upon  a  race  doomed  to  annihilation,  through  the  fault  of  one 
and  in  whose  fall  the  old,  withered  branches,  as  well  as  the  tender,  innocent  sprouts, 
shall  suffer  destruction — and  thus  the  way  be  prepared  for  better  times. 

G.  G.  Gervintjs  (i,  375):  The  poet  has  taken  the  characteristics  from  the 
chronicle,  but  in  the  chief  point  he  has  made  a  thorough  alteration.  The  chronicle 
seems  to  give  hypocrisy  to  Richard  as  his  nature,  and  to  exhibit  cruelty  in  him 
rather  as  a  cold  work  of  policy;  but  the  poet  has  made  the  inclination  to  brutality 
innate  in  him,  and  hypocrisy,  on  the  contrary,  a  chosen  means  for  his  ambition. 
The  decisive  soliloquies  in  Henry  VI.,  and  that  at  the  commencement  of  our  play, 
make  this  indubitable.  The  poet  has  perhaps  intentionally  brought  the  whole 
character  into  a  contrast  of  rare  interest  to  the  lover  of  art,  with  that  of  Henry  V. 
In  his  early  years  Prince  Henry  leads  a  wild,  dissolute  life,  without  reflection,  from 
the  mere  impulse  of  nature,  in  a  manner  involuntary,  not  displacing  his  nobler 


586 


APPENDIX 


nature,  but  concealing  and  veiling  it,  following  his  social  propensity  for  low  pleasures, 
resolving  at  the  same  time  in  clear  consciousness  to  lay  aside  this  character  at  a 
future  period  in  his  kingly  position.  Richard,  on  the  other  hand,  whose  rude  nature 
events  have  first  led  to  the  path,  where,  in  combat  and  fight,  working  for  his  family 
rather  than  for  himself,  he  might  have  become  an  estimable,  if  not  an  amiable,  man, 
Richard  deliberates,  at  the  first  interruption  of  this  life  of  outward  action,  upon  a 
laying  aside  of  his  military  bias,  and  upon  a  wide  scheme  of  diplomacy  and  intrigue, 
which  is  to  bring  him  to  the  throne.  The  most  remarkable  and  opposite  parts 
are  presented  to  the  actor  in  the  two  characters:  in  Henry,  which  will  be  played 
with  all  imaginable  distance  from  anything  of  comedy,  as  a  type  of  plain  human 
nature,  and  in  this  Richard,  who  is  a  Proteus  in  the  arts  of  metamorphosis,  who 
calls  himself  Roscius,  and  with  the  arts  of  an  actor,  obtains  the  crown. 

Once  this  character  is  established  and  its  central  point  perceived,  the  central 
point  and  the  idea  of  the  piece  is  also  apprehended;  for  Richard  fills  this  center 
entirely.  This  exclusively  prominent  position  of  Richard  and  his  highly  tragic 
nature,  has  given  to  this  history  the  character  rather  of  a  pure  tragedy;  just  as  in 
Shakespeare’s  freest  tragedies,  all  the  persons  of  the  piece  are  arranged  with  an 
inner  relation  to  the  principal  figure  and  to  the  principal  idea  of  the  piece,  whilst 
usually  the  peculiarity  of  historical  plays  was,  that  the  events  and  facts  were  dis¬ 
tributed  among  more  extensive  groups  of  acting  characters,  who  stand  not  through¬ 
out  in  that  close  connection  exhibited  by  the  characters  of  pieces  designed  at  will 
and  fettered  by  no  historical  material. 

H.  Ulrici  (ii,  276):  As  in  life,  so  in  the  play,  Richard  in  reality  stands  alone. 
All  the  other  personages  (chiefly  women  and  children  or  single  subjects)  are  in  no 
way  his  equals,  and  are  powerless  against  the  whole  royal  power  which  is  on  his 
side.  The  destructive  force  of  his  tyranny,  the  violence  of  his  unmitigated  selfish¬ 
ness  and  wickedness,  accompanied  as  they  are  by  intellect,  wit,  and  eloquence, 
have  no  organic  counterpoise.  On  the  one  side  we  have  only  power  and  energy, 
on  the  other,  only  submission  and  impotence.  The  principle  of  interaction,  which 
is  so  important  in  life  and  in  history,  retires  far  into  the  background;  not  till  the 
fifth  Act  is  the  tyrant  opposed  by  a  real  and  worthy  adversary  in  the  person  of 
Richmond.  Accordingly,  the  drama  is  wanting  in  drastic  animation;  the  action 
(that  which  is  actually  done  or  which  happens)  proceeds  but  slowly  compared  with 
others  of  Shakespeare’s  plays,  and  what  does  happen  suffers  from  an  internal 
uniformity;  it  is  ever  but  the  consequence  of  the  same  oppressive  tyranny,  ever 
the  same  victory  of  the  same  power,  by  the  same  means. 

However,  on  the  one  hand,  it  must  be  remembered  the  nature  of  tyranny  is 
outward  peace,  i.  e.  rigidity  and  uniformity,  the  unnatural  accumulation  of  all  the 
weight  in  the  one  scale,  want  of  organic  interaction  and  co-operation  in  the  several 
parts,  and  hence  the  highest  stage  of  decay  in  the  organism  of  the  state;  and  this 
was  necessarily  the  consequence  of  a  period  like  that  of  the  reign  of  Henry  VI. 
It  is  the  description  of  the  nature  of  tyranny  that  forms  the  historical  significance 
of  the  whole  drama,  and  here,  as  everywhere,  the  truly  historical  conception  coin¬ 
cides  with  the  truly  poetical  character  of  the  representation.  Therefore,  on  the 
other  hand,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  poet,  by  this  very  artistic  defect,  has  con¬ 
trived  to  render  the  meaning  of  the  whole  the  more  vivid,  the  clearer,  and  the  more 
forcible.  Tyranny  is  the  historico-political  phenomenon  of  selfishness  in  its  worst 
form,  i.  e.,  reckless  love  of  dominion  which  tramples  upon  all  rights  and  all  laws, 


GERMAN  CRITICISM 


5  87 


as  well  as  upon  all  human  ties;  hence  it  is  evil  in  its  highest  possible  consummation. 
The  individual  ego  arrogates  to  itself  the  full  dominion  over  all  the  powers  of  the 
mind,  over  all  worldly  possessions,  and  over  the  weal  and  woe  in  the  life  of  all 
others;  the  individual  man,  with  his  finite  power,  presumes  not  only  to  direct  a 
whole  nation  and  its  fate,  but  to  be  its  fate  himself.  This  is  the  meaning  of  Richard’s 
words:  ‘I  am  myself  alone,’  the  motto  of  the  perfect  tyrant,  and  is  at  the  same 
time  his  full,  clear  consciousness  of  his  own  nature.  Richard  is  quite  aware  that 
he  is  a  tyrant,  he  knows  it,  and  wills  it;  this  was  required  by  Shakespeare’s  view  of 
life,  which  is  far  removed  from  the  thought  that  man  is  a  mere  instrument  in  the 
hand  of  a  higher  power.  This  is  the  reason  and  significance  of  the  reflections 
which  Richard  is  perpetually  making  upon  himself  and  his  own  nature,  and  which 
have  been  censured  as  unnatural.  But  such  soliloquies  essentially  belong  to  the 
character  of  a  tyrant,  according  to  the  conception  of  modern  times;  Richard, 
soliloquises  in  order  to  gain  a  clear  insight  into  his  own  nature,  his  vocation,  his 
aims,  plans,  and  actions,  for,  in  his  weird  loneliness,  he  cannot  hold  communion 
with  others. 

In  fact,  the  character  of  Richard  and  its  development  is,  so  to  say,  but  the 
exposition  of  the  nature  of  tyranny;  we  have  a  direct  representation  of  its  general 
character  in  a  particular  and  individual  form.  The  drama,  accordingly,  opens 
with  Richard  announcing  his  intention  to  acquire  supreme  power,  and  with  the 
account  of  the  means  he  employs,  and  the  paths  he  pursues,  in  order  to  attain  his 
object.  But  this  endeavour  does  not  proceed  only  from  Richard’s  ambition  and 
love  of  dominion,  but  likewise  from  his  demoniacal  desire  to  give  forcible  evidence 
of  his  power  over  mankind  and  circumstances,  it  proceeds  from  the  demoniacal 
pleasure  he  finds  in  proving  it.  The  endeavour  arose  in  the  dark  depths  of  the  fearful 
gulf  by  which  he  feels  himself  separated  from,  and  at  enmity  with,  all  the  rest  of 
humanity.  This  contempt  and  this  pleasure  explain  the  peculiar  irony,  the 
diabolical  humour  with  which  Richard  suns  himself  in  his  own  actions,  and  which 
seasons  his  sarcastic  remarks  on  life  and  mankind.  He  attains  his  object,  partly 
because  the  historical  circumstances  themselves  are  hurrying  towards  tyranny, 
partly  because  he  pursues  it  with  penetrating  shrewdness,  with  the  craftiest  hypoc¬ 
risy  and  deception,  and  with  an  energy  as  great  as  it  is  reckless,  which  heaps  crime 
upon  crime  and  is  undeterred  by  any  consequences.  The  impassable  gulf  between 
him  and  the  rest  of  humanity,  as  it  were,  makes  him  an  absolute  exception,  for 
every  one  commits  crimes  only  among  and  upon  his  equals.  Richard’s  chief 
means  in  accomplishing  his  purpose  is  his  inborn  talent  for  dissembling,  his  skill 
in  concealing  his  endeavours  and  intentions  beneath  the  mask  of  an  honest,  frank, 
conscientious,  and  God-fearing  man,  who  is  indeed  not  always  master  of  his  emo¬ 
tions  and  passions,  yet  who  always  repents  their  outbursts  and  consequences. 
This  skill  in  dissembling,  together  with  its  sister-talent  sophistry,  he  makes  use 
of  in  the  most  masterly  fashion  in  order  to  justify  himself,  and  falsely  to  deceive 
himself — in  this  he  is  again  the  type  of  a  true  tyrant  and  consummate  villain. 
For  the  root  of  all  evil  lies  in  deceiving  the  sophistical  reason,  which  perverts  truth, 
because  the  will  refuses  to  see  it;  moreover,  the  fundamental  form  of  all  evil  is  lying 
and  hypocrisy,  because  evil  cannot  maintain  itself  except  by  the  semblance  and 
mask  of  what  is  good. 

But  the  attainment  of  the  object  at  which  Richard  had  aimed  proves  the  turning 
point  in  his  fortunes;  for  tyranny  cannot  of  course  maintain  anything,  inasmuch  as 
it  is  essentially  destruction  and  annihilation,  and  accordingly  cannot  even  maintain 


588 


APPENDIX 


its  own  existence.  .  .  .  This  process  of  self-destruction,  which  is  represented 
(in  a  personal  form)  in  the  further  development  of  Richard’s  character,  constitutes 
the  further  advance  of  the  dramatic  action.  Richard’s  energy,  his  skill  in  dis¬ 
sembling,  his  self-control  and  his  self-confidence,  diminish  in  the  same  degree  as 
circumstances  become  louder  in  their  demands  upon  his  activity  to  maintain  the 
sovereignty  which  had  been  acquired  by  bloodshed.  This  demand  he  feels  to  be 
beyond  his  power,  and  for  the  first  time  he  is  conscious  of  a  feeling  of  weakness  and 
helplessness,  which  feeling  awakens  his  conscience.  But  the  destroying  process  of 
his  existence  has  herein  reached  a  height  wherein  it  can  no  longer  be  checked. 
Richard  is  Richard  only  without  a  conscience;  upon  its  awakening  he  is  no  longer 
himself — he  has  already  perished.  The  death  which,  in  his  pangs  of  conscience,  he 
seeks  and  finds  in  the  tumult  of  his  victorious  enemies,  is  but  the  outward  sign  of 
his  already  complete  self-destruction. 

Oechelhauser  (Essay,  etc.,  p.  40):  The  drama  of  Richard  III.  stands  as  the 
significant  boundary-stone  which  divides  the  works  of  Shakespeare’s  youth  from 
those  undying  productions  of  the  period  of  his  splendour,  and  it  bears  unmistakably 
that  peculiar  stamp  which  poets  of  all  times  have  impressed  upon  those  works 
belonging  to  their  youth.  The  material,  the  ideas,  already  come  thronging  upon 
him  too  powerfully  to  accommodate  themselves  to  the  laws  of  dramatic  truth  and 
beauty.  They  overflow,  so  to  speak,  those  banks  which  later  easily  restrained  the 
mature  poet.  Neither  form  nor  contents  exhibit  yet  that  harmony  by  which  the 
hand  of  the  real  master  may  be  recognised;  detail  is  too  closely  compressed  into  the 
main  action  of  the  whole  play,  or  too  little  attention  is  given  to  the  cause  for  it. 
A  tendency  to  exaggeration,  to  immoderate  sentiment,  prevails.  Dramatic  arrange¬ 
ment,  that  important  lever  for  the  action,  is  still  defective;  the  greater  weight  of  the 
principal  character  frequently  overwhelms  the  lesser  ones;  the  single  parts  are  not 
symmetrically  developed.  But  in  spite  of  these  and  other  faults — faults  which,  in  the 
form  of  scientific  and  aesthetic  criticism,  cannot  be  disavowed — this  youthful  work 
of  the  Poet  has  ever  exercised  an  irresistible  charm  upon  free  and  healthy  natures. 
The  freshness,  power,  originality  which  permeate  the  whole,  easily  compensate 
for  isolated  faults;  it  is  with  Shakespeare’s  Richard  III.  as  with  Goethe’s  Werther 
and  Gotz,  and  Schiller’s  Die  Raiiber. 


STAGE  HISTORY 


In  The  Historical  Account  of  the  English  Stage  (vol.  iii,  Variorum  of  1821), 
Malone  remarks  (p.  228):  ‘From  the  time  when  Sir  Henry  Herbert  came  into 
‘the  office  of  the  Revels  to  1642,  when  the  theatres  were  shut  up,  his  Manuscript 
‘does  not  furnish  us  with  a  regular  account  of  the  plays  exhibited  at  court  every 
‘year.  Such,  however,  as  he  has  given,  I  shall  now  subjoin,  together  with  a  few 
‘anecdotes  which  he  has  preserved,  relative  to  some  of  the  works  of  our  poet  and 
‘the  dramatick  writers  who  immediately  succeeded  him.  .  .  .  “On  Saterday  the 
‘17th  of  Novemb.  being  the  Queens  birth-day,  Richarde  the  Thirde  was  acted  by 
‘the  K.  players  at  St.  James,  wher  the  king  and  queene  were  present,  it  being  the 
‘first  play  the  queene  sawe  since  her  M.tys  delivery  of  the  Duke  of  York.  1633.’” 
This  date  is,  I  believe,  accepted  as  that  of  the  earliest  recorded  performance  of  the 
play.  Richard  III.  is  not  included  among  the  plays  of  Shakespeare  seen  by 
Pepys.  Genest  tells  us  (ii,  195)  that:  ‘Downes  mentions  Richard  III.  as  one  of 
‘Betterton’s  best  characters — The  English  Princess  [by  Carryl,  wherein  Richard 
‘  is  one  of  the  characters]  might  probably  continue  on  the  acting  list  while  rhyming 
‘  tragedies  were  in  fashion,  but  it  does  not  appear  that  Shakespeare’s  play  or  any 
‘alteration  of  it,  had  been  acted  between  1660  and  1700.’ 

Between  1700  and  1821  Cibber’s  version  was  the  only  form  in  which  the  play 
was  acted;  the  following  dates,  from  Genest,  refer,  therefore,  to  representations  of  it, 
and  not  to  Shakespeare’s  play.  In  one  or  two  instances  Genest’s  critical  remarks 
are  added. — Drury  Lane,  9th  July,  1700;  first  production  of  Cibber’s  version;  when 
Cibber  himself  played  Richard  III. — ‘His  action  in  Tragedy  is  said  in  general  to 
‘  have  been  bad — and  as  it  is  well  known  that  his  voice  was  a  weak  one,  we  need 
‘no  Ghost  come  from  the  grave  to  tell  us  that  he  was  unfit  for  Richard — he  says 
‘himself  that  Sandford  was  peculiarly  qualified  to  have  played  the  part,  and  that 
‘he  acted  it  in  Sandford’s  manner,  and  was  complimented  by  Vanbrugh  on  the 
‘strictness  of  the  imitation.’ — Drury  Lane,  6th  December,  1715:  Cibber  again 
appeared  as  Richard,  with  Wilks  as  King  Henry,  and  Mrs  Porter  as  Queen  Eliza¬ 
beth. — Lincoln’s  Inn  Fields,  nth  March,  1721:  Ryan  as  Richard;  Quin  as  Buck¬ 
ingham. — Drury  Lane,  26th  October,  1734:  Quin  as  Richard;  Cibber,  Jr.,  as 
Richmond.  31  January,  1739.  ‘C.  Cibber  as  Richard,  his  1st  appearance  in  that 
‘character  these  7  years: — Colley  Cibber,  on  his  return  to  the  stage,  was  right  in  all 
‘his  comic  characters,  but  in  Richard  the  3d  he  perceived  his  mistake,  his  usual 
‘strength  and  spirit  failed  him  most  unhappily;  Victor  went  behind  the  scenes  in 
‘  the  3d  Act,  and  asked  him  how  he  found  himself  ?  Cibber  whispered  him  that  he 
‘would  give  50  guineas  to  be  then  sitting  in  his  easy  chair  by  his  own  fireside.’ — 
Goodman’s  Fields,  19th  October,  1741 — Garrick’s  first  appearance — ‘What  is 
‘said  in  the  bill  of  his  having  never  appeared  on  any  stage  is  not  true — he  thought 
‘it  too  hazardous  to  try  his  strength  at  first  in  London,  and  had  gone  through  a 
‘noviciate  at  Ipswich  the  preceding  Summer  in  a  company  under  Giffard  and 
‘Dunstall — his  first  appearance  was  in  Aboan  in  Oronooko.’ — 3d  May,  1742:  Gar¬ 
rick  as  Richard,  Mrs  Woffington  as  Lady  Anne.  [During  this  season  at  Drury  Lane 
Garrick  acted  Richard  eleven  times.] — Covent  Garden,  13th  and  14th  October,  1742: 
Quin  as  Richard;  Mrs  Cibber  as  Lady  Anne. — Covent  Garden,  16th  June,  1746: 
Garrick  as  Richard. — Covent  Garden,  27th  January,  1757:  Barry  as  Richard — his 
1st  appearance  in  that  character: — ‘Barry  acted  Richard  about  four  times,  but  he 

S89 


590 


APPENDIX 


‘was  lamentably  deficient  in  every  point;  which  occasioned  no  little  exultation  to 
‘Garrick.’ — Covent  Garden,  30th  March,  1761:  Smith  as  Richard,  his  benefit;  and 
first  appearance  in  this  character.  22  September,  1774:  Smith  again  as  Richard. 
— Drury  Lane,  27th  May,  1776:  Garrick  as  Richard;  Mrs  Siddons  as  Lady  Anne;  this 
was  her  first  appearance  in  this  part.  On  5th  J une,  Garrick  acted  Richard  for  the 
last  time;  he  retired  on  June  xoth. — Covent  Garden,  1  January,  1776:  R.  B.  Sheridan 
as  Richard. — Drury  Lane,  7th  October,  1777:  Henderson  as  Richard. — Drury  Lane, 
12th  September,  1789:  J.  P.  Kemble  as  Richard. — Covent  Garden,  31st  October, 
1800:  G.  F.  Cooke  as  Richard — his  first  appearance  in  London  in  this  part. — 
Covent  Garden,  1st  April,  1811:  J.  P.  Kemble  as  Richard;  C.  Kemble  as  Richmond. 
— ‘J.  P.  Kemble  revised  Cibber’s  alteration  of  Richard  the  3d — but  “damned 
‘custom  had  braz’d  him  so,  that  he  was  proof  and  bulwark  against  sense” — he 
‘digested  the  cold  mutton,  and  even  the  spider’s  crawling  upon  hopes  did  not 
‘startle  him.’ — Covent  Garden,  5th  June,  1812:  C.  Kemble  as  Richard;  Mrs  Siddons 
as  Queen  Elizabeth. — Drury  Lane,  12th  February,  1814:  E.  Kean  as  Richard — his 
first  appearance  in  London  in  this  part. — Drury  Lane,  15th  August,  1819:  E.  Kean 
as  Richard;  J.  B.  Booth  as  Richmond. — Covent  Garden,  25  October:  Macready 
as  Richard  for  first  time.  The  play  was  acted  nine  times  by  Macready  during  this 
engagement.  On  the  12th  of  March,  1821,  Macready  restored  Shakespeare’s 
play.  In  his  Diary,  under  the  above  date,  Macready  says:  ‘The  experiment  was 
‘partially  successful — only  partially.  To  receive  full  justice,  Shakespeare’s  Life 
‘ and  Death  of  Richard  III.  should  be  given  in  its  perfect  integrity,  whereby  alone 
‘  scope  could  be  afforded  to  the  active  play  of  Richard’s  versatility  and  unscrupulous 
‘persistency.  But.  .  .  our  audiences  were  accustomed  to  the  coarse  jests  and 
‘  ad  captandum  speeches  of  Cibber,  and  would  have  condemned  the  omission  of  such 
‘uncharacteristic  claptraps  as:  “Off  with  his  head!  so  much  for  Buckingham!” 
‘or  such  bombast  as:  “Hence  babbling  dreams:  you  threaten  here  in  vain.  Con- 
“‘ science  avaunt!  Richard’s  himself  again!”  In  deference  to  the  taste  of  the 
‘  times,  the  passages  as  well  as  similar  one  were  retained.’  Genest  gives  as  a  possible 
cause  of  its  failure  the  following:  ‘One  main  cause  of  the  cold  reception  of  Shake- 
‘  speare’s  play  might  be  this — few  persons  like  to  acknowledge  that  they  have  been 
‘applauding,  or  at  least  tolerating,  wretched  stuff  for  ten,  twenty,  or  thirty  years — 
‘the  revival  was  certainly  managed  in  a  bungling  manner — it  ought  to  have  been 
‘  preceded  by  some  observations  in  the  newspapers,  in  which  the  faults  of  Cibber’s 
‘execrable  alteration  should  have  been  pointed  out — these  observations  might  not 
‘have  removed  prejudices,  but  they  could  hardly  have  failed  to  shake  them — 
‘instead  of  which  the  Stage  Manager  was  so  egregiously  absurd  as  to  tell  us  in 
‘  the  bill,  that  Cibber’s  alteration  was  ingenious — if  it  had  been  really  ingenious,  there 
‘would  have  been  no  strong  reason  for  reviving  a  Tragedy,  which  could  not  be  acted 
‘as  Shakespeare  wrote  it,  and  which  stood  in  more  need  of  a  judicious  alteration 
‘than  the  generality  of  Shakespeare’s  plays.’ — Sadler  Wells,  20th  February,  1845; 
S.  Phelps  produced  a  condensed  version  of  Shakespeare’s  play.  It  was  acted 
twenty-one  times. — Lyceum  Theatre,  29th  January,  1877,  Henry  Irving  produced 
a  version  of  the  play  arranged  exclusively  from  Shakespeare’s  text. — Booth’s 
Theatre,  New  York,  7th  January,  1878:  Edwin  Booth  restored  Shakespeare’s  play 
to  the  stage,  with  a  new  arrangement  of  the  text. — Broad  St  Theatre,  Philadelphia, 
4th  November,  1889:  Richard  Mansfield  produced  a  new  arrangement  of  the  play, 
with  several  of  Cibber’s  interpolated  scenes. 


A  CTORS—MAL  ONE.  GENTLEMAN 


ACTORS 

Malone  ( Historical  Account  of  Eng.  Stage,  p.  184):  Richard  Burbadge  is 
introduced  in  person  in  an  old  play  call’d  The  Returne  from  Parnassus  (written 
in  or  about  1602),  and  instructs  a  Cambridge  scholar  how  to  play  the  part  of  King 
Richard  the  Third,  in  which  Burbadge  was  greatly  admired.  [See  Article:  Latin 
Tragedy  of  Richardus  Tertius,  p.  501.]  That  he  represented  this  character,  is 
ascertained  by  Bishop  Corbet,  who,  in  his  Iter  Boreale,  speaking  of  his  host  at 
Leicester,  tells  us:  ‘ — when  he  would  have  said  King  Richard  died,  And  called 
‘ — A  horse!  a  horse! — he,  Burbage  cried.’  [Malone  quotes  but  the  last  two 
lines  of  the  passage;  as  it  has>  however,  been  given  more  fully  by  several  later 
editors,  the  lines  referring  to  this  episode  are  here  transcribed  from  Gilchrist’s 
reprint  of  Corbet’s  Poems,  1807:  ‘Mine  host  was  full  of  ale  and  history;  And 
on  the  morrow  when  hee  brought  us  nigh  Where  the  two  Roses  joyn’d,  you  would 
suppose,  Chaucer  nere  made  the  Romant  of  the  Rose.  Heare  him.  See  yee  yon 
wood?  There  Richard  lay,  With  his  whole  army:  Looke  the  other  way,  And  loe 
where  Richmond  in  a  bed  of  Gorsse  Encampt  himselfe  ore  night,  and  all  his  force: 
Upon  this  hill  they  mett.  Why  he  could  tell  The  inch  where  Richmond  stood, 
where  Richard  fell:  Besides  what  of  his  knowledge  he  could  say,  He  had  authenticke 
notice  from  the  Play;  Which  I  might  guesse,  by’s  mustring  up  the  ghosts,  And 
policyes,  not  incident  to  hosts;  But  chiefly  by  that  one  perspicuous  thing,  Where 
he  mistooke  a  player  for  a  king.  For  when  he  would  have  sayd.  King  Richard 
dyed,  And  call’d — A  horse!  a  horse! — he,  Burbidge  cry’de.’ — pp.  193,  194. — Ed.] — 
As  further  evidence  that  Richard  the  Third  was  one  of  Burbadge’s  favourite  parts, 
J.  P.  Collier  {Mem.  of  Actors  in  Sh.’s  Plays',  p.  21)  calls  attention  to  the  following 
line  in  the  Epitaph  on  Burbadge,  published  in  1618,  ‘And  Crookback  as  befits 
shall  cease  to  live’;  and  adds:  ‘An  anecdote  real  or  imaginary,  respecting  Shake¬ 
speare  and  Burbadge  contained  in  Manningham’s  Diary,  under  date  of  1601, 
confirms  the  statement.’ 

% 

F.  Gentleman  (i,  11):  The  Public  have  set  up  Mr  Garrick  as  a  standard  of 
perfection  in  this  laborious,  difficult  part;  and  if  we  consider  the  essentials,  his 
claim  to  such  distinction  will  immediately  appear  indisputable;  a  very  deformed  per¬ 
son  never  rises  above,  and  seldom  up  to  the  middle  stature;  it  is  generally  attended 
with  an  acuteness  of  features  and  sprightliness  of  eyes;  in  these  three  natural  points 
our  Roscius  stands  unexceptionable;  variations  of  voice,  and  climax  of  expression, 
in  both  which  he  stands  without  an  equal;  graceful  attitudes,  nervous  action,  with 
well-regulated  spirit,  to  animate  within  natural  bounds  every  passage,  even  from 
the  coldest  up  to  the  most  inflamed.  Mr  Garrick  also  preserves  a  happy  medium, 
and  dwindles  neither  into  the  buffoon  or  brute;  one  or  both  of  which  this  character 
is  made  by  most  other  performers:  ’tis  true,  there  are  many  passages  which  have  a 
ludicrous  turn,  yet  we  may  rest  assured  that  he  who  occasions  least  laughter  is 
most  right;  in  respect  of  marking  particular  places  with  peculiar  emphasis,  some 
exceptions  may  be  taken,  or  doubts  raised  against  every  person  I  have  ever  seen  in 
the  part;  however,  tracing  minute  lapses  of  this  kind,  which  after  all  may  be  mere 
matter  of  opinion,  would  occasion  too  great  a  digression;  I  shall  therefore  only 
mention  three  which  strike  me  most;  the  first  is — I  am  myself  alone — which  words  I 
have  heard  expressed  in  a  tone  of  confident  exultation,  as  if  he  was  singularly  above 
the  rest  of  mankind;  whereas  adverting  to  his  own  unhappy  composition,  it  should 


APPENDIX 


be  uttered  with  heartfelt  discontent;  and  indeed  the  three  preceding  lines,  which 
exclude  him  from  all  social  intercourse,  should  be  expressive  of  concern. — The 
second  passage  is,  where  Buckingham  solicits  Richard  for  his  promise,  and  Richard 
meditates  in  these  lines,  ‘I  do  remember  me,  that  Henry  the  sixth  Did  prophesy, 
that  Richmond  should  be  king,  When  Richmond  was  a  little  peevish  boy.  ’Tis 
odd — a  king — perhaps —  ’  The  last  line  is  often  spoke  without  a  tone  of  continua¬ 
tion  to  the  word,  perhaps,  which  is  most  evidently  intended :  the  third  place  is  in  these 
lines,  ‘Hence,  babbling  dreams,  ye  threaten  here  in  vain;  Conscience,  avaunt — 
Richard’s  himself  again.’  It  is  usual  to  speak  this  couplet  in  one  continued 
climax  of  passion;  whereas  the  two  words  marked  in  Italics  should  be  uttered  in 
a  lower  tone,  expressive  of  mental  agony — Conscience  being  the  constant  disturber 
of  his  peace,  and  a  great  bar  to  his  resolution;  the  latter  part  of  the  line  rises  to  a 
kind  of  triumphant  exultation,  which  not  only  varies,  but  gives  force  to  the  expres¬ 
sion. 

A.  Murphy  ( Life  of  Garrick,  p.  16):  The  moment  Garrick  entered  the  scene, 
the  character  he  assumed  was  visible  in  his  countenance;  the  power  of  his  imagina¬ 
tion  was  such  that  he  transformed  himself  into  the  very  man;  the  passions  rose  in 
rapid  succession,  and,  before  he  uttered  a  word,  were  legible  in  every  feature  of  that 
various  face.  His  look,  his  voice,  his  attitude,  changed  with  every  sentiment.  .  .  . 
The  rage  and  rapidity  with  which  he  spoke:  ‘The  North! — what  do  they  in  the 
North,  When  they  should  serve  their  Sovereign  in  the  West?’  made  a  most  aston¬ 
ishing  impression  on  the  audience.  His  soliloquy  in  the  tent-scene  discovered  the 
inward  man.  Everything  he  described  was  almost  reality.  .  .  .  When  he  started 
from  his  dream,  he  was  a  spectacle  of  horror.  He  called  out  in  a  manly  tone:  ‘  Give 
me  another  horse!’  He  paused,  and,  with  a  countenance  of  dismay,  advanced, 
crying  out  in  a  tone  of  distress:  ‘Bind  up  my  wounds’;  and  then,  falling  on  his 
knees,  said  in  the  most  piteous  accent:  ‘Have  mercy  Heaven.’  In  all  this  the 
audience  saw  an  exact  imitation  of  nature.  His  friend  Hogarth  has  left  a  most 
excellent  picture  of  Garrick  in  this  scene.  He  was  then  on  the  eve  of  a  battle,  and, 
in  spite  of  all  the  terrors  of  conscience,  his  courage  mounted  to  a  blaze.  When  in 
Bosworth  field  he  roared  out,  ‘A  horse!  a  horse!  my  kingdom  for  a  horse!’ 
All  was  rage,  fury,  and  almost  reality.  ...  It  is  no  wonder  that  an  actor  thus 
accomplished  made,  on  the  very  first  night,  a  deep  impression  on  the  audience.  .  .  . 
The  great  Mr  Pope  was  drawn  from  his  retreat  at  Twickenham,  and,  we  are 
assured,  Lord  Orrery  was  so  struck  with  the  performance  that  he  said:  ‘I  am 
afraid  the  young  man  will  be  spoiled,  for  he  will  have  no  competitor.’ 

Dr  Doran  (i,  462):  On  the  19th  of  October,  while  Drury  was  giving  As  You 
Like  It,  and  Covent  Garden  was  acting  the  same  piece,  the  little  theatre  in  Ayliffe 
Street,  Goodman’s  Fields,  announced  the  Life  and  Death  of  King  Richard  III., 
‘the  part  of  King  Richard  by  a  gentleman,  who  never  appeared  on  any  stage.’ 

At  last!  the  hour  and  the  man  had  come.  Throughout  this  season  no  new 
piece  was  produced  at  either  of  the  patent  theatres — so  influenced  were  they  by 
the  consequences  of  this  first  appearance  of  a  nameless  actor  at  Goodman’s  Fields. 
Of  course,  the  new  actor  was  David  Garrick.  He  had  selected  the  part  of  Richard 
III.,  for  reasons  which  now  appear  singular.  ‘He  had  often  declared,’  says  Davies, 
‘he  would  never  choose  a  character  that  was  not  suitable  to  his  person;  for,  said  he, 

‘  if  I  should  come  forth  in  a  hero,  or  in  any  part  which  is  generally  acted  by  a  tall 
‘  fellow  I  shall  not  be  offered  a  larger  salary  than  40s.  a  week.  In  this,  ’  adds  the 


A  CTORS — SCO  TT.  LAMB 


593 

biographer,  ‘he  glanced  at  the  follies  of  those  managers  who  used  to  measure  an 
‘actor’s  merit  by  his  size.’ 

On  that  19th  of  October,  1741,  there  was  no  very  great  nor  excitedly  expectant 
audience  at  Goodman’s  Fields.  The  bill  of  the  day  first  promises  a  concert  of 
vocal  and  instrumental  music,  to  begin  exactly  at  six  o’clock;  admission  by  tickets 
‘at  three,  2s.  and  is.’  Between  the  two  parts  of  the  concert,  it  is  further  announced, 
that  the  historical  play  of  the  Life  and  Death  oj  Richard  III.,  with  the  ballad-opera 
of  The  Virgin  Unmasked,  would  be  performed  gratis  by  Persons  for  their  Diversion.’ 
The  part  of  King  Richard,  ‘by  a  gentleman  who  never  appeared  on  any  stage,’ 
is  an  announcement  not  true  to  the  letter;  but  the  select  audience  were  not  troubled 
therewith.  From  the  moment  the  new  actor  appeared  they  were  enthralled. 
They  saw  a  Richard  and  not  an  actor  of  that  personage.  Of  the  audience,  he  seemed 
unconscious,  so  thoroughly  did  he  identify  himself  with  the  character.  He  sur¬ 
rendered  himself  to  all  its  requirements,  was  ready  for  every  phase  of  passion,  every 
change  of  humour,  and  was  as  wonderful  in  quiet  sarcasm  as  he  was  terrific  in  the 
hurricane  of  the  battle-scenes.  Above  all,  his  audience  were  delighted  with  his 
‘nature.’  Since  Betterton’s  death,  actors  had  fallen  into  a  rhythmical, mechanical, 
sing-song  cadence.  The  style  still  lingers  among  conservative  French  tragedians. 
Garrick  spoke  not  as  an  orator,  but  as  King  Richard  himself  might  have  spoken, 
in  like  circumstances.  The  chuckling  exultation  of  his  ‘So  much  for  Buckingham!’ 
was  long  a  tradition  on  the  stage. 

[For  a  criticism  of  J.  P.  Kemble’s  Richard,  by  Sir  Walter  Scott,  see  note  on 

l  i.  35-] 

C.  Lamb  (iii,  11):  Some  few  of  us  remember  to  have  seen,  and  all  of  us  have 
heard  our  feathers  tell,  of  Quin,  and  Garrick,  and  Barry,  and  some  faint  traditional 
notices  are  left  us  of  their  manner  in  particular  scenes,  and  their  stile  of  delivering 
certain  emphatic  sentences.  Hence  our  curiosity  is  excited  when  a  new  Hamlet  or 
a  new  Richard  makes  his  appearance,  in  the  first  place,  to  inquire,  how  he  acted  in 
the  Closet  scene,  in  the  Tent  scene;  how  he  looked,  and  how  he  started,  when  the 
Ghost  came  on,  and  how  he  cried:  ‘Off  with  his  head.  So  much  for  Buckingham.’ 
We  do  not  reprehend  this  minute  spirit  of  comparison.  On  the  contrary,  we  con¬ 
sider  it  as  a  delightful  artifice,  by  which  we  connect  the  recreations  of  the  past 
with  those  of  the  present  generation,  what  pleased  our  fathers  with  what  pleases 
us.  We  love  to  witness  the  obstinate  attachments,  the  unconquerable  prejudices 
(as  they  seem  to  us),  of  the  old  men,  our  seniors,  the  whimsical  gratification  they 
appear  to  derive  from  the  very  refusal  to  be  gratified;  to  hear  them  talk  of  the  good 
old  actors,  whose  race  is  forever  extinct.  With  these  impressions,  we  attended  the 
first  appearance  of  Mr  Cooke,  in  the  character  of  Richard  the  Third,  last  winter. — 
We  thought  that  he  ‘bustled’  through  the  scenes  with  at  least  as  much  spirit  and 
effect  as  any  of  his  predecessors  whom  we  remember  in  the  part,  and  was  not  deficient 
in  the  delivery  of  any  of  those  rememberable  speeches  and  exclamations,  which  old 
prescription  hath  set  up  as  criteria  of  comparison.  Now  that  the  grace  of  freshness 
is  worn  off,  and  Mr  Cooke  is  no  longer  a  novitiate  for  public  favour,  we  propose 
to  enter  into  the  question — whether  that  popular  actor  is  right  or  wrong  in  his 
conception  of  the  great  outlines  of  the  character;  those  strong  essential  differences 
which  separate  Richard  from  all  the  other  creations  of  Shakespeare.  We  say  of 
Shakespeare;  for  though  the  Play,  which  passes  for  his  upon  the  Stage,  materially 
differs  from  that  which  he  wrote  under  the  same  title,  being,  in  fact,  little  better  than 
38 


594 


APPENDIX 


a  compilation  or  cento  of  passages  extracted  from  other  of  his  Plays,  and  applied 
with  gross  violation  of  propriety  (as  we  are  ready  at  any  time  to  point  out),  besides 
some  miserable  additions  which  he  never  could  have  written;  all  together  producing 
an  inevitable  inconsistency  of  character,  sufficient  to  puzzle  and  confound  the  best 
Actor;  yet ,  in  this  chaos  and  perplexity,  we  are  of  opinion  that  it  becomes  an  Actor 
to  shew  his  taste,  by  adhering,  as  much  as  possible,  to  the  spirit  and  intention  of  the 
original  Author,  and  to  consult  his  safety  in  steering  by  the  Light ,  which  Shakespeare 
holds  out  to  him,  as  by  a  great  Leading  Star.  Upon  these  principles  we  presume 
to  censure  Mr  Cooke,  while  we  are  ready  to  acknowledge  that  this  Actor  presents 
us  with  a  very  original  and  very  forcible  portrait  (if  not  of  the  man  Richard,  whom 
Shakespeare  drew,  yet)  of  the  monster  Richard,  as  he  exists  in  the  popular  idea, 
in  his  own  exaggerated  and  witty  self-abuse,  in  the  overstrained  representations  of 
the  parties  who  were  sufferers  by  his  ambition;  and,  above  all,  in  the  impertinent 
and  wretched  scenes,  so  absurdly  foisted  in  by  some,  who  have  thought  themselves 
capable  of  adding  to  what  Shakespeare  wrote. 

But  of  Mr  Cooke’s  Richard: 

ist,  His  predominant  and  masterly  simulation.  ‘He  has  a  tongue  can  wheedle 
with  the  devil.’  It  has  been  the  policy  of  that  ancient  and  grey  simulator,  in  all 
ages,  to  hide  his  horns  and  claws.  The  Richard  of  Mr  Cooke  perpetually  obtrudes 
his.  We  see  the  effect  of  his  conceit  uniformly  successful,  but  we  do  not  compre¬ 
hend  how  it  succeeds.  We  can  put  ourselves,  by  a  very  common  fiction,  into  the 
place  of  the  individuals  upon  whom  it  acts,  and  say,  that,  in  the  like  case,  we  should 
not  have  been  alike  credulous.  The  hypocrisy  is  too  glaring  and  visible.  It 
resembles  more  the  shallow  cunning  of  a  mind  which  is  its  own  dupe,  than  the 
profound  and  practised  art  of  so  powerful  an  intellect  as  Richard’s.  It  is  too 
obstreperous  and  loud,  breaking  out  into  triumphs  and  plaudits  at  its  own  success, 
like  an  unexercised  novitiate  to  tricks.  It  has  none  of  the  silent  confidence  and 
steady  self-command  of  the  experienced  politician;  it  possesses  none  of  that  fine 
address,  which  was  necessary  to  have  betrayed  the  heart  of  Lady  Anne,  or  even  to 
have  imposed  on  the  duller  wits  of  the  Lord  Mayor  and  Citizens. 

2ndly,  His  habitual  jocularity,  the  effect  of  buoyant  spirits,  and  an  elastic  mind, 
rejoicing  in  its  own  powers,  and  in  the  success  of  its  machinations.  This  quality 
of  unrestrained  mirth  accompanies  Richard,  and  is  a  prime  feature  in  his  character. 
It  never  leaves  him;  in  plots,  in  stratagems,  and  in  the  midst  of  his  bloody  devices, 
it  is  perpetually  driving  him  upon  wit,  and  jests,  and  personal  satire,  fanciful  allu¬ 
sions,  and  quaint  felicities  of  phrase.  It  is  one  of  the  chief  artifices  by  which  the 
consummate  master  of  dramatic  effect  has  contrived  to  soften  the  horrors  of  the 
scene,  and  to  make  us  contemplate  a  bloody  and  vicious  character  with  delight. 
Nowhere,  in  any  of  his  plays,  is  to  be  found  so  much  of  sprightly  colloquial  dialogue, 
and  soliloquies  of  genuine  humour,  as  in  Richard.  This  character  of  unlaboured 
mirth  Mr  Cooke  seems  entirely  to  pass  over,  and  substitutes  in  its  stead  the  coarse, 
taunting  humour,  and  clumsy  merriment,  of  a  low-minded  assassin. 

3dly,  His  personal  deformity. — When  the  Richard  of  Mr  Cooke  makes  allusions 
to  his  own  form,  they  seem  accompanied  with  unmixed  distaste  and  pain,  like  some 
obtrusive  and  haunting  idea — But  surely  the  Richard  of  Shakespeare  mingles  in 
these  allusions  a  perpetual  reference  to  his  own  powers  and  capacities,  by  which  he 
is  enabled  to  surmount  these  petty  objections;  and  the  joy  of  a  defect  conquered 
or  turned  into  an  advantage  is  one  cause  of  these  very  allusions,  and  of  the  satis¬ 
faction  with  which  his  mind  turns  to  them.  These  allusions  themselves  are  made 


A  C  T ORS — HUN T.  MA  CREA  D  Y 


595 


in  an  ironical  and  good-humoured  spirit  of  exaggeration — the  most  bitter  of  them 
are  to  be  found  in  his  self  congratulating  soliloquy  spoken  in  the  very  moment  and 
crisis  of  joyful  exultation  on  the  success  of  his  unheard  of  courtship. — No  partial 
excellence  can  satisfy  for  this  absence  of  a  just  general  conception — otherwise  we  are 
inclined  to  admit  that,  in  the  delivery  of  single  sentences,  in  a  new  and  often 
felicitous  light,  thrown  upon  old  and  hitherto  misconstrued  passages,  no  actor  that 
we  have  seen  has  gone  beyond  Mr  Cooke.  He  is  always  alive  to  the  scene  before 
him;  and  by  the  fire  and  novelty  of  his  manner,  he  seems  likely  to  infuse  some 
warm  blood  into  the  frozen  declamatory  stile,  into  which  our  theatres  have  for  some 
time  past  been  degenerating. 

Leigh  Hunt  (217):  I  do  not  think  Cooke  can  be  called  a  great  tragedian, 
though  he  performs  Richard  so  excellently.  Much  of  this  character  is  occupied  by 
the  display  of  a  confident  dissimulation,  which  is  something  very  different  from  the 
dignity  of  tragedy.  If  Cooke  performs  the  more  serious  part  with  success,  if  we 
are  attentive  to  his  misfortunes  as  well  as  to  his  prosperity,  it  is  because  our  attention 
has  been  so  fixed  by  the  fraud  that  produced  them:  we  see  the  punishment  of 
hypocritical  ambition  fallen  upon  its  proper  object.  Kemble  has  more  dignity  in 
the  character,  but  he  entirely  wants  its  artifice,  and  he  has  done  singular  honour 
to  his  judgement  and  forbearance  in  relinquishing  the  crafty  usurper  to  the  most 
crafty  of  actors.  In  the  more  humourous  parts,  however,  of  Cooke’s  Richard,  and 
indeed  in  all  his  hypocritical  humour  except  when  it  soliloquises  or  confesses  itself, 
it  may  be  questioned  whether  he  ought  to  betray  his  deception  to  the  audience  by 
so  manifest  an  hypocrisy  of  countenance.  It  is  evident  that  a  consummate  hypo¬ 
crite  in  real  life  would  attempt  a  look  the  very  reverse  of  apparent  fraud,  otherwise 
he  would  render  himself  liable  to  detection,  and,  in  fact,  be  no  true  hypocrite.  .  .  . 
The  best  excuse,  however,  that  can  be  given  for  the  carelessness  with  which  Cooke’s 
hypocrisy  looks  out  of  his  countenance,  is  the  unconscious  enjoyment  which  deceit¬ 
ful  villainy  cannot  help  expressing  at  the  anticipation  or  attainment  of  success;  and 
it  must  be  confessed  that  any  vice  long  indulged  generally  stamps  its  peculiar  char¬ 
acter  on  the  countenance. — [For  another  account  of  G.  F.  Cooke  as  Richard  III., 
by  an  American  critic,  see  The  Theatre,  vol.  ix,  p.  282.] 

W.  Macready  (p.  69):  There  was  a  solidity  of  deportment  and  manner,  and 
at  the  same  time  a  sort  of  unctuous  enjoyment  of  his  successful  craft,  in  the  solilo¬ 
quizing  stage  villainy  of  Cooke,  which  gave  powerful  and  rich  effect  to  the  sneers 
and  overbearing  retorts  of  Cibber’s  hero,  and  certain  points  traditional  from 
Garrick  were  made  with  consummate  skill,  significance,  and  power. 

Kean’s  conception  was  decidedly  more  Shakespearean.  He  hurried  you  along 
in  his  resolute  course  with  a  spirit  that  brooked  no  delay.  In  inflexibility  of  will 
and  sudden  grasp  of  expedients  he  suggested  the  idea  of  a  feudal  Napoleon.  His 
personation  was  throughout  consistent,  and  he  was  only  inferior  to  Cooke  where 
he  attempted  points  upon  the  same  ground  as  his  distinguished  predecessor.  These 
points  have  often  proved  stumbling-blocks  to  actors  and  false  lights  to  the  discer¬ 
nment  of  audiences.  .  .  .  My  father  and  self  were  betimes  in  our  box.  Pope  was 
the  lachrymose  and  rather  tedious  performer  of  Henry  VI.  But  when  the  scene 
changed,  and  a  little  keenly  visaged  man  rapidly  bustled  across  the  stage,  I  felt 
there  was  meaning  in  the  alertness  of  his  manner  and  the  quickness  of  his  step. 
As  the  play  proceeded  I  became  more  and  more  satisfied  that  there  was  a  mind  of 
no  common  order.  In  his  angry  complaining  of  Nature’s  injustice  to  his  bodily 


APPENDIX 


596 

imperfections,  as  he  uttered  the  line:  ‘To  shrink  my  arm  up  like  a  withered  shrub,’ 
he  remained  looking  on  the  limb  for  some  moments  with  a  sort  of  bitter  discontent, 
and  then  struck  it  back  in  angry  disgust.  My  father,  who  sat  behind  me,  touched 
me,  and  whispered,  ‘It’s  very  poor!’  ‘Oh,  no!’  I  replied,  ‘it  is  no  common  thing,’ 
for  I  found  myself  stretching  over  the  box  to  observe  him.  The  scene  with  Lady 
Anne  was  entered  on  with  evident  confidence,  and  was  well  sustained,  in  the  affected 
earnestness  of  penitence,  to  its  successful  close.  In  tempting  Buckingham  to  the 
murder  of  the  children,  he  did  not  impress  me  as  Cooke  was  wont  to  do,  in  whom 
the  sense  of  the  crime  was  apparent  in  the  gloomy  hesitation  with  which  he  gave 
reluctant  utterance  to  the  deed  of  blood.  Kean’s  manner  was  consistent  with  his 
conception,  proposing  their  death  as  a  political  necessity,  and  sharply  requiring  it 
as  a  business  to  be  done.  The  two  actors  were  equally  effective  in  their  respective 
views  of  the  unscrupulous  tyrant;  but  leaving  to  Cooke  the  more  prosaic  version  of 
Cibber,  it  would  have  been  desirable  to  have  seen  the  energy  and  restless  activity 
of  Kean  giving  life  to  racy  language  and  scenes  of  direct  and  varied  agency  in  the 
genuine  tragedy  with  which  his  whole  manner  and  appearance  were  so  much  more 
in  harmony.  In  his  studied  mode  of  delivering  the  passages:  ‘Well!  as  you  guess’ 
and  ‘Off  with  his  head!  So  much  for  Buckingham!’  he  could  not  approach  the 
searching,  sarcastic  incredulity,  or  the  rich  vindictive  chuckle,  of  Cooke;  but  in  the 
bearing  of  the  man  throughout,  as  the  intriguer,  the  tyrant,  and  the  warrior,  he 
seemed  never  to  relax  the  ardor  of  his  pursuit,  presenting  the  life  of  the  usurper  as 
one  unbroken  whole,  and  closing  it  with  a  death  picturesquely  grand. 

H.  Crabb  Robinson  (7  March,  1814):  At  Drury  Lane  and  saw  Kean  for  the 
first  time.  He  played  Richard,  I  believe,  better  than  any  man  I  ever  saw;  yet  my 
expectations  were  pitched  too  high,  and  I  had  not  the  pleasure  I  expected.  The 
expression  of  malignant  joy  is  the  one  in  which  he  surpasses  all  men  I  have  ever 
seen.  And  his  most  flagrant  defect  is  want  of  dignity.  His  face  is  finely  expres¬ 
sive,  though  his  mouth  is  not  handsome,  and  he  projects  his  lower  lip  ungracefully; 
yet  it  is  finely  suited  to  Richard.  He  gratified  my  eye  more  than  my  ear.  His 
action  was  very  often  that  of  Kemble,  and  this  was  not  the  worst  of  his  performance; 
but  it  detracts  from  his  boasted  originality.  His  declamation  is  very  unpleasant, 
but  my  ear  may  in  time  be  reconciled  to  it,  as  the  palate  is  to  new  cheese  and  tea. 
It  often  reminds  me  of  Blanchard’s.  His  speech  is  not  fluent,  and  his  words  and 
syllables  are  too  distinctly  separated.  His  finest  scene  was  with  Lady  Anne, 
and  his  mode  of  lifting  up  her  veil  to  watch  her  countenance  was  exquisite.  The 
concluding  scene  was  unequal  to  my  expectation,  though  the  fencing  was  elegant, 
and  his  sudden  death  fall  was  shockingly  real.  But  he  should  have  lain  still.  Why 
does  he  rise,  or  awake  rather,  to  repeat  the  spurious  lines?  He  did  not  often 
excite  a  strong  persuasion  of  the  truth  of  his  acting,  and  the  applause  he  received 
was  not  very  great.  ...  I  do  not  think  he  will  retain  all  his  popularity,  but  he 
may  learn  to  deserve  it  better,  though  I  think  he  will  never  be  qualified  for  heroic 
parts.  He  wants  a  commanding  figure  and  a  powerful  voice.  His  greatest  excel¬ 
lences  are  a  fine  pantomimic  face  and  remarkable  agility. 

W.  Hazlitt  (Sh.  Characters,  p.  148):  It  is  possible  to  form  a  higher  conception 
of  the  character  of  Richard  than  that  given  by  Mr.  Kean  (not  from  seeing  any 
other  actor,  but  from  reading  Shakespeare);  but  we  cannot  imagine  any  character 
represented  with  greater  distinctness  and  precision,  more  perfectly  articulated  in 
every  part.  Perhaps,  indeed,  there  is  too  much  of  what  is  called  technically  execu- 


A  CTORS—HA  WKINS 


5  97 


tion.  When  we  first  saw  this  celebrated  actor  in  the  part,  we  thought  he  sometimes 
failed  from  an  exuberance  of  manner,  and  dissipated  the  impression  of  the  character 
by  the  variety  of  his  resources.  To  be  perfect  his  delineation  of  it  should  have 
a  little  more  solidity,  depth,  sustained  and  impassioned  feeling,  with  somewhat  less 
brilliancy,  with  fewer  glancing  lights,  pointed  transitions,  and  pantomimic  evolu¬ 
tions.  ...  If  Mr  Kean  does  not  entirely  succeed  in  concentrating  all  the  lines  of 
the  character,  as  drawn  by  Shakespeare,  he  gives  an  animation,  vigour,  and  relief 
to  the  part  which  we  have  never  seen  surpassed.  He  is  more  refined  than  Cooke; 
more  bold,  varied,  and  original  than  Kemble  in  the  same  character.  In  some  parts 
he  is  deficient  in  dignity,  and,  particularly  in  the  scenes  of  state  business,  he  has 
by  no  means  an  air  of  artificial  authority.  There  is  at  times  a  sort  of  tip-toe  eleva¬ 
tion,  an  enthusiastic  rapture  in  his  expectations  of  attaining  the  crown,  and  at 
others  a  gloating  expression  of  sullen  delight,  as  if  he  already  clenched  the  bauble 
and  held  it  in  his  grasp.  .  .  .  Mr  Kean  has  since  in  a  great  measure  effaced  the 
impression  of  his  Richard  III.  by  the  superior  efforts  of  his  genius  in  Othello  (his 
masterpiece),  the  murder  scene  in  Macbeth,  in  Richard  II.,  in  Sir  Giles  Overreach, 
and  lastly  Oroonoko;  but  we  still  like  to  look  back  to  his  first  performance  of  this 
part,  both  because  it  first  assured  his  admirers  of  his  future  success,  and  because  we 
bore  our  feeble  but,  at  that  time,  not  useless  testimony  to  the  merits  of  this  very 
original  actor,  on  which  the  town  was  considerably  divided  for  no  other  than  because 
they  were  original.  [For  other  remarks  by  Hazlitt  on  Kean’s  interpretation,  see 
notes  on  I,  ii,  171;  V,  iii,  89;  V,  v,  1-4.] 

F.  W.  Hawkins  (i,  159):  Kean  came  out  from  behind  the  scenes  with  a  step  so 
natural  and  so  appropriate  that  the  audience,  accustomed  to  a  fine,  picturesque, 
and  heroic  stride,  were  absolutely  startled;  and  communing  with  his  own  gigantic 
thought,  he  silently  rubbed  his  hands — what  a  daring  innovation! — they  saw  that 
no  common  man  was  before  them.  The  soliloquy  proceeded;  there  was  no  fero¬ 
cious  and  studied  declamation — all  was  easy,  natural,  and  unlaboured;  and  as,  with 
a  beautifully  expressive  action,  he  gave  out  the  line:  ‘The  dogs  bark  at  me  as  I 
halt  by  them!’  the  first  applause  elicited  that  night  broke  out  in  fervent  enthusiasm. 
The  soliloquy  went  on;  the  audience  saw  that  the  actor  had  become  Richard 
himself — there  was  the  devilish  but  calm  calculation,  as  if  solely  occupied  with 
means,  and  not  wasting  a  reflection  on  qualities;  the  terrible  jocundity,  sure  of  his 
purpose,  seeming  to  hug  himself  in  his  very  heart  on  assassination,  enjoying  it 
almost  as  a  joke,  and  exulting  in  it  as  an  advantage.  And  then  came  the  scene 
with  Lady  Anne,  the  nauseousness  of  which  had  been  much  increased  by  Kemble 
and  Cooke;  the  former  whined  it  in  a  way  not  at  all  attractive  to  the  ear;  the  latter 
was  harsh,  coarse,  and  unkingly.  Not  so  Kean.  An  enchanting  smile  played  upon 
his  lips;  a  courteous  humility  bowed  his  head;  his  voice,  though  hoarse  with  cold, 
was  yet  modulated  to  a  tone  which  no  common  female  mind  ever  did,  or  ever  could 
resist. . . .  The  quickness  of  familiar  utterance  with  which  the  actor  said  of  Hastings: 
‘Chop  off  his  head!’  .  .  .  revealed  a  courageous  adoption  of  the  simplicities  of  the 
commonest  every-day  life  and  exhibited  his  superior  understanding,  his  noble 
disdain  of  what  was  little,  and  his  thorough  comprehension  of  the  part.  .  .  . 
Richard,  conscious  of  his  towering  superiority  over  those  by  whom  he  is  surrounded, 
could  feel  nothing  but  contempt  for  the  wavering,  pusillanimous  Hastings,  and 
would  consequently  deliver  the  order  as  Kean  did — in  a  manner  which  showed  that 
he  despised  his  victim  equally  from  the  consequences  that  might  ensue  from  his 


598 


APPENDIX 


execution.  Moreover,  the  king  was  addressing  himself  to  a  friend  in  confidential 
conversation,  and  on  a  subject  that  necessarily  supposed  a  perfect  familiarity  with 
murder.  A  similar  absence  of  all  theatrical  flourish  marked  his  acting  when,  on 
being  taunted  by  the  little  Duke  of  York,  the  expression  of  his  countenance  formed 
a  fine  picture  of  stifled  rage  and  affected  composure.  .  .  .  Nothing  could  have  been 
more  happy,  nothing  more  electric,  in  its  effect  than  the  soliloquy  where  he  debated 
what  course  to  take  with  the  young  princes.  His  apprehensive  mind  kindled  at 
his  casual  mention  of  the  T ower;  it  communicated  itself  in  a  blaze  to  his  ardent  and 
fiery  spirit,  and  in  the  fatal  lightning  of  his  eye.  .  .  the  audience  saw  that  the 
remorseless  deed  he  contemplated  was  already  done!  .  .  .  [Also]  his  interview  with 
Buckingham,  in  which,  entirely  separating  himself  from  the  solemn  pedantry  of 
the  stage,  he  placed  his  hands  carelessly  and  gracefully  behind  him  as  the  Duke 
described  his  reception  by  the  citizens;  and,  above  all,  the  scene  with  the  Lord 
Mayor,  in  which  the  scarcely  subdued  triumph  which  glittered  in  his  eyes  as  he 
refused  the  crown,  the  accession  to  the  pleas  of  his  confederates  with  ‘  Call  him  in 
again,  ’  his  acceptation  of  the  crown,  and  the  triumphant  burst  of  exultation  after 
he  had  dismissed  the  petitioners — all  exhibited  an  originality.  .  .  new  to  the 
audience.  .  .  In  that  withering  interrogatory  [to  Stanley:  ‘What  do  they  in  the 
north,  When  they  should  serve  their  sovereign  in  the  west?’  More  variety,  more 
depth,  more  intensity  of  expression  were  thrown  into  these  words  than  were  ever 
brought  together  in  the  same  space;  rage,  hatred,  sarcasm,  suspicion,  and  contempt 
were  all  expressed  in  the  single  word  ‘north'.  .  .  .  The  power  of  Kean’s  under¬ 
standing  was  nobly  proved  in  the  variety  of  phase  and  world  of  thought  and  signifi¬ 
cance  comprised  in  the  speech  [after  his  dream].  With:  ‘Give  me  another  horse!’ 
he  was  the  courageous  and  valiant  warrior,  oblivious  to  all  but  the  carnage  before 
him;  his  voice,  energetic  and  fearless  a  moment  before,  sank  into  a  plaintive  murmur 
of  physical  distress  as  he  feebly  cried:  ‘  Bind  up  my  wounds.  Have  mercy,  Heaven’ 
.  .  .  .  The  words:  ‘Soft,  soft,  ’twas  but  a  dream,’  marked  the  emancipation  of 
his  fiery  and  unconquerable  soul  from  the  trammels  in  which  for  a  time  it  had  been 
confined.  .  .  .  ‘Who’s  there?’  An  indefinable  terror  seized  him,  and,  snatching 
up  a  sword,  he  placed  himself  in  a  fine  posture  of  defence.  Catesby  entered.  The 
petulant  contempt,  the  snigger  of  self-reproach  for  shaken  fortitude,  were  true  to 
nature.  Plunging  into  the  thickest  of  the  fight,  he  performed  prodigies  of  valour; 
and  under  a  stern  and  fierce  exterior  the  glimpses  which  Kean  afforded  of  his 
internal  torment  portrayed  in  vivid  colours  the  chaos  of  a  tempestuous  and  deeply 
labouring  mind. 

Leigh  Hunt  ( Examiner ,  Oct.  30,  1819;  quoted  in  Macready’s  Reminiscences , 
p.  144) :  A  new  and  unexpected  circumstance  has  taken  place  here  [Covent  Garden], 
which  promises  to  rescue  the  character  of  the  house  from  the  pantomimic  degrada¬ 
tion  into  which  it  was  fast  falling.  Mr  Macready  has  performed  Richard  twice 
in  the  course  of  the  week,  with  the  greatest  applause.  ...  A  critic  on  these  par¬ 
ticular  occasions  is  forced  upon  comparisons.  However,  they  sometimes  enable 
him  to  give  his  readers  a  more  exact  idea  of  a  performance.  Compared  then  with 
Mr  Kean,  we  should  say  that  a  division  of  merits,  usual  enough  with  the  perfor¬ 
mance  of  such  comprehensive  characters  as  Shakespeare’s,  has  taken  place  in  the 
Richards  of  these  two  actors.  Mr  Kean’s  Richard  is  the  more  sombre,  and  perhaps 
deeper  part  of  him;  Mr  Macready’s  the  livelier  and  more  animal  part — a  very 
considerable  one  nevertheless.  Mr  Kean’s  is  the  more  gloomy  and  reflective 


ACTORS— KIRK 


599 


villain,  rendered  so  by  the  united  effect  of  his  deformity  and  subtle-mindedness; 
Mr  Macready’s  is  the  more  ardent  and  bold-faced  one,  borne  up  by  a  temperament 
naturally  high  and  sanguine,  though  pulled  down  by  mortification.  The  one  has 
more  of  the  seriousness  of  conscious  evil  in  it,  the  other  of  the  gayety  of  meditated 
success.  Mr  Kean’s  has  gone  deeper  even  than  the  relief  of  his  conscience — he 
has  found  melancholy  at  the  bottom  of  the  necessity  for  that  relief;  Mr  Macready’s 
is  more  sustained  in  his  troubled  waters  by  constitutional  vigour  and  buoyancy. 
In  short,  Mr  Kean’s  Richard  is  more  like  King  Richard,  darkened  by  the  shadow  of 
his  very  approaching  success,  and  announcing  the  depth  of  his  desperation  when 
it  shall  be  disputed;  Mr  Macready’s  Richard  is  more  like  the  Duke  of  Gloucester, 
brother  to  the  gay  tyrant  Edward  IV.,  and  partaking  as  much  of  his  character 
as  the  contradiction  of  the  family  handsomeness  in  his  person  would  allow.  .  .  . 

At  the  same  time,  when  we  thus  compare  Mr  Macready  with  Mr  Kean,  it  is  to 
be  recollected  that  Mr  Kean  first  gave  us  that  example  of  a  natural  style  of  acting 
on  which  Mr  Macready  has  founded  his  new  rank  in  the  theatrical  world.  Nor 
must  we  omit  that  the  latter  falls  into  some  defects  which  the  former  is  never 
betrayed  into,  and  those  too  of  a  description  inconsistent  with  the  general  style  of 
his  performance.  We  allude  to  some  over-soft  and  pathetic  tones  towards  the  con¬ 
clusion  of  the  part,  where  Richard  is  undergoing  remorse  of  conscience.  Richard 
might  lament,  and  even  be  pathetic;  but  he  would  certainly  never  whine,  or  deal  in 
anything  approaching  to  the  lackadaisical.  We  think  both  performers  occasionally 
too  violent;  but  this  may  be  partly  a  stage  necessity.  Mr  Macready  (and  he  is 
evidently  quite  capable  of  doing  it)  should  reflect  that  all  depth  of  feeling  in  reflecting 
minds  requires  a  proportionate  depth  and  quietness  of  expression.  It  may  be  as 
imaginative  as  he  pleases;  but  it  has  no  taste  or  leisure  for  dallying  with  the  gentilities 
of  grief.  [For  an  account  of  Macready’s  attempt  to  restore  Shakespeare’s  Richard 
III.  to  the  stage,  see  Stage  History,  above,  under  date  12  March,  1821.] 

J.  F.  Kirk  ( Lippincott’s  Maga.,  June,  1884;  p.  608):  When,  on  the  rise  of 
the  curtain,  J.  B.  Booth  stepped  on  the  stage  as  Gloucester  and  began  the  speech: 
‘Now  is  the  winter,’  etc.,  the  critical  scrutiny  which  one  naturally  turns  upon  an 
actor  at  his  first  entrance  was  instantly  checked.  The  stately  but  elastic  tread; 
the  defiant  port  and  sweeping  gesture;  the  kindled  eye,  with  its  changeful  gleams  of 
mockery  and  malignity;  the  smooth  yet  impassioned  flow  of  the  delivery,  with  its 
expressive  variety  of  tones  and  inflections, — all  conspired  to  fix  the  attention  on  the 
scene  itself  and  make  the  spirit  and  meaning  of  it  engross  and  fill  the  mind.  ...  In 
the  scene  transferred  by  Cibber  from  3  Henry  VI.,  Booth’s  attitude,  look,  and  tones 
after  he  had  stabbed  the  grey-haired  king  are  far  more  distinct  and  vivid  in  my 
remembrance  than  anything  I  have  witnessed  at  the  theatre  in  recent  years.  The 
affected  amazement  with  which  he  stooped  over  the  prostrate  body  as  he  uttered 
the  words:  ‘What,  will  the  aspiring  blood  of  Lancaster  Sink  in  the  ground?’ 
changed  to  the  crudest  aspect  of  triumphant  irony  in  the  succeeding  phrase: — ‘I 
thought  it  would  have  MOUNT-ed,  ’ — When  the  hunchbacked  form  towering  erect, 
the  head  with  the  plumed  hat  thrown  back,  the  eyes  following  the  upturned  point 
of  the  raised  and  outstretched  sword,  the  syllable  I  have  marked  as  emphatic  uttered 
not  only  at  the  height  of  the  voice,  but  with  a  swelling  volume  of  sound,  produced 
a  feeling  as  of  some  general  ascent  in  which  one  was  taking  an  involuntary  part. 
The  other  striking  features  of  the  performance — the  rapid  alternations  of  pretended 
humility  and  devotion  and  of  sarcastic  amusement  in  the  scene  with  Lady  Anne; 


6oo 


APPENDIX 


the  tent-scene  with  its  agony  of  fright,  the  dripping  brow  and  shaking  limbs,  and 
the  hoarse  cry  for  succor;  above  all,  the  fiery  death-struggle,  in  which  Kean’s  rapid 
thrust  with  the  disarmed  hand  was  reproduced  with  what  I  can  hardly  believe 
to  have  been  any  diminution  of  the  original  effect — are  equally  strong  in  my 
recollection. 

W.  R.  Alger  (ii,  746):  Forrest  set  aside  the  stereotyped  idea  of  Richard  as 
a  strutting,  ranting,  gloomy  plotter,  forever  cynical  and  sarcastic,  and  parading 
his  crimes.  Not  excluding  these  traits,  Forrest  subordinated  them  to  his  cunning 
hypocrisy,  his  gleaming  intellectuality,  his  jocose  irony,  his  exulting  self-com¬ 
placence  and  fiendish  sportiveness.  He  represented  him  not  only  as  ravenously 
ambitious,  but  also  full  of  a  subtle  pride  and  vanity  which  delighted  him  with  the 
constant  display  of  his  mental  superiority  to  those  about  him.  Above  all,  he  was 
shown  to  be  possessed  of  a  laughing  devil,  a  witty  and  sardonic  genius,  which 
amused  itself  with  playing  on  the  faculties  of  the  weaklings  he  wheedled,  scoffing 
at  what  they  thought  holy,  and  bluntly  utilizing  the  most  sacred  things  for  the  most 
selfish  ends.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  removing  the  conventional  stage 
Richard,  with  this  more  dashing  and  versatile  one,  Forrest  restored  the  genuine 
conception  of  Shakespeare.  .  .  .  Thus  in  the  impersonation  of  him  by  Forrest 
Richard  lost  his  perpetual  scowl,  and  took  on  here  and  there  touches  of  humour 
and  grim  comedy.  He  burst  upon  the  stage,  cloaked  and  capped,  waving  his 
glove  in  triumph  over  the  downfall  of  the  house  of  Lancaster.  Not  in  frowning 
gutturals  or  with  snarling  complaint,  but  merrily  came  the  opening  words, — 
“Now  is  the  winter  of  our  discontent  Made  glorious  summer  by  this  sun  of 
York.” 

Gradually  as  he  came  to  descant  upon  his  own  defects  and  unsuitedness  for 
peace  and  love,  the  tone  passed  from  glee  to  sarcasm,  and  ended  with  dissembling 
and  vindictive  earnestness  in  the  apostrophe, — “Dive,  thoughts,  down  to  my  soul. 
Here  Clarence  comes.” 

The  scene  with  Lady  Anne,  where  he  overcomes  every  conceivable  kind  and 
degree  of  obstacles  to  her  favour  by  the  sheer  fascination  of  his  gifted  tongue,  was  a 
masterpiece  of  nature  and  art.  He  gave  his  pleading  just  enough  semblance  of 
sincerity  to  make  a  plausible  pathway  to  the  feminine  heart,  but  not  enough  to  hide 
the  sinister  charm  of  a  consummate  hypocrisy  availing  itself  of  every  secret  of 
persuasion. 

In  many  places  in  the  play  his  air  of  searching  and  sarcastic  incredulity,  and 
his  rich  vindictive  chuckle  of  self-applause,  were  as  artistically  fine  as  they  were 
morally  repulsive.  As  Kean  had  done  before  him,  he  made  an  effective  point  in 
speaking  the  line,  “To  shrink  my  arm  up  like  a  withered  shrub:”  he  looked  at 
the  limb  for  some  time  with  a  sort  of  bitter  discontent,  and  struck  it  back  with  angry 
disgust.  When  the  queenly  women  widowed  by  his  murderous  intervention  began 
to  upbraid  him  with  his  monstrous  deeds,  the  cool  audacity,  the  immense  aplomb, 
the  half-hidden  enjoyment  of  the  joke,  with  which  he  relieved  himself  from  the 
situation  by  calling  out, — “A  flourish,  trumpets!  strike  alarums,  drums!  Let  not 
the  heavens  hear  these  tell-tale  women  Rail  on  the  Lord’s  Anointed !  ’’—were  a  bit 
of  grotesque  satire,  a  gigantic  and  servicable  absurdity,  worthy  of  Rabelais. 

The  acting  of  Forrest  in  the  tent-scene, where  Richard  in  his  broken  sleep  dreams 
he  sees  the  successive  victims  of  his  murderous  hand  approach  and  threaten  him 
was  original  and  effective  in  the  highest  degree.  He  struggled  on  his  couch  with 


ACTORS— WINTER.  IRVING 


601 


horrible  phantoms.  Ghosts  pursued  him.  Visions  of  battle,  overthrow,  despair, 
and  death  convulsed  him.  Acting  his  dreams  out  he  dealt  his  blows  around  with 
frightful  and  aimless  energy,  and  with  an  intense  expression  of  remorse  and  ven¬ 
geance  on  his  face  fell  apparently  cloven  to  the  earth.  He  then  arose  like  a  man 
coming  out  of  hell,  dragging  his  dream  with  him,  and,  struggling  fiercely  to  awake, 
rushed  to  the  footlights,  sank  on  his  knee,  and  spoke  these  words,  beginning  with 
a  shriek  and  softening  down  to  a  shuddering  whisper:  “Give  me  another  horse! 
Bind  up  my  wounds!  Have  mercy  Jesu!  Soft;  I  did  but  dream.  O  coward 
conscience,  how  dost  thou  afflict  me!  The  lights  bum  blue.  It  is  now  dead  mid¬ 
night.  Cold  fearful  drops  stand  on  my  trembling  flesh.”  .  .  .  Forrest  was  too 
large,  with  too  much  ingrained  justice  and  heavy  grandeur,  to  be  really  suited  for 
this  part.  He  needed,  especially  in  its  scolding  contests  of  wit  and  spiteful 
invective,  to  be  smaller,  lighter,  swifter,  more  vixenish. 

W.  Winter  ( Art  of  Edwin  Booth,  p.  209):  Booth  restored  Shakespeare’s 
Richard  III.  to  the  stage  in  1876-77.  Prior  to  that  time  he  had  always  presented 
the  Cibber  version.  His  first  performance,  in  New  York,  of  Gloucester,  according 
to  the  original  piece,  was  given  at  Booth’s  Theatre,  7  January,  1878.  The  ambitious 
and  wicked  prince  was  made  to  appear,  not  as  a  raging  ruffian,  but  as  a  wily  and 
winning  diplomatist,  a  blunt,  frank  soldier,  an  audacious  man  of  action,  and,  above 
all,  a  human  being  capable  of  remorse,  and  redeemed  from  hellish  depravity  by  that 
capability  of  human  nature.  .  .  . 

Shakespeare,  preserving  the  superficial  peculiarities  of  the  Gloucester  [of  the 
Chronicles]  has  endowed  him  with  a  commanding,  audacious  intellect,  wide  knowl¬ 
edge  of  human  nature  and  affairs,  ample  capacity  as  a  governor,  craftiness  worthy  of 
Louis  XI.,  or  of  Iago,  insight,  an  ardent  temperament,  and  the  fascinating  quality 
of  a  man  of  genius.  That  ideal  was  presented  by  Booth — ambition  being  its 
motive,  and  a  deformed  man’s  rage  against  fate  its  spring  of  endless  bitterness. 
His  method,  full  of  original  prompting  and  informed  by  wise  experience,  was 
singularly  beautiful.  The  transitions — made  with  the  celerity  and  vividness  of 
lightning — showed  Richard’s  subtle  wit  and  devilish  irony,  his  duplicity  and  his 
tremendous  intensity  of  purpose  and  courage,  with  overwhelming  force.  The 
hypocrisy  of  his  ‘  call  him  again,  ’  was  so  astounding  as  to  be  absolutely  ludicrous, 
and  his  auditors  laughed  at  it,  with  a  shiver  of  horror.  The  delirium,  after  the 
dream,  touched  the  height  of  pathos,  in  its  truth  and  its  terrible  prostration.  And  the 
death — as  of  some  malignant  viper — fitly  rounded  a  symmetrical  embodiment. . . . 
Booth’s  dressing  of  the  part  was  particularly  careful  and  rich.  He  wore  the  sump¬ 
tuous  apparel  for  which  Gloucester  was  distinguished — the  long  brown  hair,  the 
ring  upon  the  third  finger  of  the  left  hand,  and  he  had  the  habit  of  sheathing  and 
unsheathing  a  dagger. 

Henry  Irving  restored  Shakespeare’s  play  to  the  stage  on  January  29th,  1877, 
at  the  Lyceum  Theatre,  London.  On  his  reproduction  of  the  play  in  1897,  Sir 
Edward  Russell  contributed  the  following  criticism  to  The  Theatre,  for  May  of 
that  year:  We  have  to  accept  the  theory  of  the  chronicler  and  the  dramatist  that, 
though  Richard’s  remorseless  character  was  pretty  well  known,  he  got  his  way  and 
held  his  own  until  Richmond  beat  him  in  the  field.  The  cue  of  explanation  is 
given  in  the  opening  soliloquy,  where  Irving  buoyantly  expresses  in  the  sunshine 
and  with  a  sunny  face  the  villainy  which  he  means  to  practise,  and  on  that  cue — 
the  cue  of  humourous  enjoyment — he  acts  throughout,  as  cajolement,  treachery, 


602 


APPENDIX 


malignity,  and  barbarous  cruelty  alternate  in  horrible  yet  curiously  entertaining 
variety.  .  .  .  We  shall  mention  three  illustrative  points.  All  playgoers  of  any 
standing  can  remember  the  mechanical  manner  in  which  the  proposal  scene  with 
Lady  Anne  used  to  be  performed.  The  spectator  had  to  take  all  for  granted  and 
to  look  on  at  a  see-saw  of  hate  and  condonation  in  which  it  was  impossible  to  believe. 
Sir  Henry  Irving  makes  the  scene  almost  entirely  credible.  At  all  events,  his  amuse¬ 
ment  at  the  situation,  his  powerful  and  winning  predominance,  make  it  impossible 
wholly  to  disbelieve  in  the  effect  that  is  being  produced.  The  thought  that  there 
may  have  been  such  a  man,  and  that  he  was  capable  of  such  an  achievement,  gets 
into  the  half-amused,  half-horrified  mind,  and  cannot  be  dislodged.  Then,  observe 
how  a  scene,  with  which  Richard  has  comparatively  little  to  do,  is  lit  up  by  Irving’s 
humourous  conception.  .  .  .  He  sits  thoroughly  enjoying  the  railings  of  his  royal 
relatives  at  each  other,  and  at  the  point  where  the  discussion  comes  loudest  and 
nearest  and  most  offensive  to  him  goes  to  a  table  and,  hearing  everything  all  the 
time,  writes  out  a  warrant  of  arrest.  Our  last  point  is  one  of  contrast.  Richard  is 
alone  in  his  tent  the  night  before  Bosworth.  What  has  come  to  him?  He  walks 
the  walk  of  an  old  man.  He  stoops.  He  almost  totters.  He  moves  heavily  and 
feebly,  and  a  helpless  fretfulness  seems  unchecked  to  have  infected  his  very  gait. 
The  reason  ?  He  is  alone;  much  battered,  much  worried,  at  a  troublesome  crisis, 
and — nobody  is  looking.  Thus  in  this  shambling  contrast  there  lives,  as  in  the 
reverse  of  a  medal,  the  full  meaning  of  all  the  high-spirited,  revelling  devilry  which 
he  has  kept  up  before  the  world.  It  is  one  of  the  greatest  things  in  the  impersona¬ 
tion,  and  we  believe  has  never  before  been  thought  of.  Old  play-goers  will 
perhaps  miss,  more  than  they  will  care  to  confess,  the  good  old  melodramatic  points 
of  Cibber;  but  they  will  perceive  a  rare  elevation  of  the  style  and  of  the  theme 
produced  by  returning  to  the  text  of  Shakespeare  under  the  illumination  of  one  of 
the  most  wonderful  pieces  of  acting  of  our,  and  probably  of  all,  time. 

W.  Winter  ( Shadows ,  etc.;  series  i,  p.  304):  Richard  Mansfield’s  version  was 
in  five  acts,  preserving  the  text  of  the  original,  much  condensed,  and  introducing 
a  few  lines  from  Cibber.  It  began  with  a  bright  processional  scene  before  the 
Tower  of  London,  in  which  Elizabeth,  Queen  of  Edward  IV.,  was  conspicuous, 
and  against  that  background  of  ‘glorious  summer’  it  placed  the  dangerous  figure 
of  the  duke  of  Gloucester.  It  comprised  the  murder  of  Henry  VI.,  the  wooing  of 
Lady  Anne,  not  in  a  London  street,  but  in  a  rural  place,  on  the  road  to  Chertsey; 
the  lamentation  for  King  Edward  IV.;  the  episode  of  the  boy  princes;  the  con¬ 
demnation  of  Hastings — a  scene  that  brilliantly  denotes  the  mingled  artifice  and 
savagery  of  Shakespeare’s  Gloucester;  the  Buckingham  plot;  the  priest  and  mayor 
scene;  the  temptation  of  Tyrrell;  the  fall  of  Buckingham;  the  march  to  battle;  the 
episode  of  the  spectres;  and  the  fatal  catastrophe  on  Bosworth  Field.  .  .  .  The 
notable  peculiarity  was  the  assumption  that  there  are  considerable  lapses  of  time 
at  intervals  during  the  continuance  of  the  story.  The  effort  to  reconcile  poetry 
with  history  produced  little  if  any  appreciable  result  on  the  stage, — seeing  that  an 
audience  would  not  think  of  lapses  of  time  unless  those  lapses  were  mentioned  in 
the  play-bill.  An  incessant  continuity  of  action,  a  ceaseless  rush  and  whirl  of  events, 
is  the  essential  life  of  the  play.  No  auditor  can  feel  that  Richard  has  waited  twelve 
years  before  making  any  movement  or  striking  any  blow,  after  his  aspiration  that 
heaven  will  take  King  Edward  and  leave  the  world  for  him  to  ‘bustle  in’.  .  .  .  And, 
furthermore,  there  is  no  development  of  his  character  in  Shakespeare’s  play:  there 


CIBBER'S  VERSION 


603 


is  simply  the  presentation  of  it,  complete  and  rounded  at  the  outset,  and  remaining 
invariably  and  inflexibly  the  same  at  the  close.  Mansfield,  however,  deduced  this 
effect  from  his  consideration  of  the  flight  of  time:  a  contrast  between  Richard  at 
nineteen  and  Richard  at  thirty-three,  a  contrast  strongly  expressive  of  the  reactionary 
influence  that  an  experience  of  evil  deeds  has  produced  upon  a  man  who  at  first  was 
only  a  man  of  evil  thoughts  and  evil  will.  This  imported  into  the  performance  a 
diversity  of  delineation  without,  however,  affecting  the  formidible  weight  of  the 
figure  of  Richard,  or  its  brilliancy,  or  its  final  significance.  The  embodiment  was 
splendid  with  it,  and  would  be  just  as  splendid  without  it.  The  presence  of  heart  and 
conscience  in  that  demoniac  human  creature  is  denoted  by  Shakespeare  and  must  be 
shown  by  the  actor.  Precisely  at  what  point  his  heaven-defying  will  should  begin 
to  waver  is  not  defined.  Mansfield  chose  to  indicate  the  operation  of  remorse  and 
terror  in  Richard’s  soul  as  early  as  the  throne  scene,  and  before  yet  the  King  has 
heard  that  the  royal  boys  have  been  murdered.  The  effect  of  his  action,  equally 
with  the  method  of  it,  was  magnificent.  You  presently  saw  him  possessed  of  the 
throne  for  which  he  had  so  terribly  toiled  and  sinned,  and  alone  upon  it,  bathed  in 
blood-red  light,  the  pitiable  personification  of  gorgeous  but  haunted  evil,  marked 
off  from  among  mankind  and  henceforth  desolate.  ...  In  the  earlier  scenes  his 
mood  and  his  demeanor  had  been  suffused  with  a  cool,  gay  mockery  of  elegant 
cynicism.  He  killed  King  Henry  with  a  smile,  in  a  scene  of  gloomy  mystery  that 
might  have  come  from  the  pencil  of  Gustave  Dore.  He  looked  upon  the  mourning 
Lady  Anne  with  cheerful  irony,  and  he  wooed  her  with  all  the  fervour  that  passion 
and  pathos  can  engender  in  the  behaviour  of  a  hypocrite.  .  .  .  One  of  the  finest  points 
was  the  temptation  of  Buckingham  to  murder  the  princes.  There  and,  indeed,  at 
all  points,  was  observed  the  absence  of  even  the  faintest  reminiscence  of  the  ranting, 
mouthing,  flannel-jawed  king  of  clubs  who  has  so  generally  strutted  and  bellowed 
as  Shakespeare’s  Gloucester.  .  .  . 

With  the  throne-scene  began  the  spiritual  conflict.  At  least  it  then  began  to  be 
disclosed;  and  from  that  moment  onward  the  state  of  Richard  was  seen  to  be  that 
of  Orestes  pursued  by  the  Furies.  But  Mansfield  was  right,  and  was  consistent, 
in  making  the  monarch  faithful  in  his  devotion  to  evil.  Richard’s  presentiments, 
pangs,  and  tremors  are  intermittent.  In  the  great,  empty,  darkening  throne-room, 
with  its  shadowy  nooks  and  dim  corners,  shapeless  and  nameless  spectres  may 
momentarily  come  upon  him,  and  shake  his  strong  spirit  with  the  sinister  menace 
of  hell.  Along  the  dark  plains,  on  the  fateful  night  before  the  battle,  the  sad  ghosts 
may  drift  and  wander,  moaning  and  wailing  in  the  ghastly  gloom;  and  in  that 
hour  of  haunted  desolation  the  doomed  king  may  feel  that,  after  all,  he  is  but  mortal 
man,  and  that  his  pre-ordered  destruction  is  close  at  hand  and  not  to  be  averted; 
but  Richard  never  deceives  himself;  never  palters  with  the  goodness  that  he  has 
scorned.  He  dies  as  he  has  lived — defiant  and  terrible. 


CIBBER’S  VERSION 

Cibber’s  version  of  Richard  III.  is  given  both  in  Mrs  Inchbald’s  and  in 
Oxberry’s  British  Drama.  I  have,  therefore,  thought  it  unnecessary  to  reprint  any 
part  of  it;  the  accompanying  table,  showing  the  various  passages  from  other  plays, 
and  those  contributed  by  Cibber,  will  furnish,  I  trust,  sufficient  information  in 
regard  to  the  composition. 


Number  of  lines  in  The  Globe  Edition  :  3,621. 


604 


APPENDIX 


»■* 

*  »H 

Rich.  II. 

ON 

On 

I  Hen.  IV. 

20 

2  Hen.  IV. 

to 

4^ 

'  •  *  *  m . 

ON . 

Hen.  V. 

v-n 

v«n 

i  Hen.  VI. 

2  Hen.  VI. 

O 

Lk) 

3  Hen.  VI. 

vO 

v-n 

HH  HH  HH 

1-41-H*  tO  H  W  10  MUwO\'  ^OOH^Wh)' 

O\O0  #  ^  OOCO-^  to  VO  4^  *-•  coto  .  WMSVO  ON  , 

Rich.  III. 

H- * 

O 

ON 

NO 

>0  MVstiiMtJ»*-t*ln.^NO00>-'>00  O 

00  M  sj  OOOnOOJ  (v)  00t0N0-f^-t^'-n+.4^OJN0N0+*  00 

Cibber. 

to 

0 

v-n 

LO 

Nn  m  U  N  00W  4^  4^  t4  OO'vl  O  K)  OJ  OOOJ  ^ 

'OUISW  OO  M  W  4nOJVO  14  t4  Onn^n  '-n  O  NO  M  41 

Total 

CIBBER'S  VERSION 


605 


C.  Cibber  ( Apology ,  p.  160)  :  The  Master  of  the  Revels,  who  then,  licens’d 
all  Plays,  for  the  Stage.  .  .  .  would  strike  out  whole  Scenes  of  a  vicious,  or 
immoral  Character,  tho’  it  were  visibly  shown  to  be  reform’d,  or  punish’d. 
A  severe  Instance  of  this  Kind  falling  upon  my  self,  may  be  an  Excuse  for  my 
relating  it.  When  Richard  the  Third  (as  I  alter’d  it  from  Shakespeare )  came 
from  his  Hands,  to  the  Stage,  he  expung’d  the  whole  First  Act,  without  sparing 
a  Line  of  it.  This  extraordinary  Stroke  of  a  Sic  volo,  occasioned  my  applying 
to  him,  for  the  small  Indulgence  of  a  Speech,  or  two,  that  the  other  four  Acts 
might  limp  on,  with  a  little  less  Absurdity.  No,  he  had  not  Leisure  to  consider 
what  might  be  separately  inoffensive.  He  had  an  Objection  to  the  whole  Act, 
and  the  Reason  he  gave  for  it  was,  that  the  Distresses  of  King  Henry  the  Sixth, 
who  is  kill’d  by  Richard  in  the  first  Act,  would  put  weak  People  too  much  in  mind 
of  King  James,  then  living  in  France;  a  notable  Proof  of  his  Zeal  for  the  Govern¬ 
ment!  Those  who  have  read  either  the  Play,  or  the  History,  I  dare  say,  will  think 
he  strain’d  hard  for  the  Parallel.  In  a  word,  we  were  forc’d,  for  some  few  Years, 
to  let  the  Play  take  its  Fate,  with  only  four  Acts  divided  into  five;  by  the  Loss  of  so 
considerable  a  Limb,  may  one  not  modestly  suppose,  it  was  robb’d  of,  at  least,  a 
fifth  part  of  that  Favour,  it  afterwards  met  with?  For  tho’  this  first  Act  was  at 
last  recovered,  and  made  the  Play  whole  agen;  yet  the  Relief  came  too  late,  to  repay 
me  for  the  Pains  I  had  taken  in  it.  Nor  did  I  ever  hear  that  this  zealous  Severity  of 
the  Master  of  the  Revels,  was  afterward  thought  justifiable. 

W.  Hazlitt  (Sh.  Characters,  p.  150):  The  manner  in  which  Shakespeare’s 
plays  have  been  generally  altered,  or  rather  mangled,  by  modern  mechanists,  is  a 
disgrace  to  the  English  Stage.  The  patch-work  Richard  III.,  which  is  acted  under 
the  sanction  of  his  name,  and  which  was  manufactured  by  Cibber,  is  a  striking 
example  of  this  remark.  .  .  .  Some  of  the  most  important  and  striking  passages 
in  the  principal  character  have  been  omitted,  to  make  room  for  idle  and  misplaced 
extracts  from  other  plays;  the  only  intention  of  which  seems  to  have  been  to  make 
the  character  of  Richard  as  odious  and  disgusting  as  possible.  It  is  apparently  for 
no  other  purpose  than  to  make  Gloucester  stab  King  Henry  on  the  stage,  that  the 
fine  abrupt  introduction  of  the  character  in  the  opening  of  the  play  is  lost  in  the 
tedious,  whining  morality  of  the  uxorious  king  (taken  from  another  play);  we  say 
tedious,  because  it  interrupts  the  business  of  the  scene,  and  loses  its  beauty  and 
effect  by  having  no  intelligible  connection  with  the  previous  character  of  the  mild, 
well-meaning  monarch. -  The  passages  that  Henry  has  to  recite  are  beautiful  and 
pathetic  in  themselves,  but  they  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  world  that  Richard 
has  to  ‘bustle  in.’  In  the  same  spirit  of  vulgar  caricature  is  the  scene  between 
Richard  and  Lady  Anne  (when  his  wife)  interpolated  without  any  authority, 
merely  to  gratify  this  favourite  propensity  to  disgust  and  loathing.  With  the  same 
perverse  consistency,  Richard,  after  his  last  fatal  struggle,  is  raised  up  by  some 
galvanic  process,  to  utter  the  imprecation,  without  any  motive  but  pure  malignity, 
which  Shakespeare  has  so  properly  put  into  the  mouth  of  Northumberland  on 
hearing  of  Percy’s  death.  To  make  room  for  these,  worse  than  needless,  additions, 
many  of  the  most  striking  passages  in  the  real  play  have  been  omitted  by  the  foppery 
and  ignorance  of  the  prompt-book  critics.  We  do  not  mean  to  insist  merely  on 
passages  which  are  fine  as  poetry  and  to  the  reader,  such  as  Clarence’s  dream,  etc., 
but  on  those  which  are  important  to  the  understanding  of  the  character  and  pecu¬ 
liarly  adapted  for  stage  effect.  [See,  also,  note  by  Steevens  under  English  Criti- 


6o6 


APPENDIX 


cisms  on  The  Tragedy,  p.  573.  An  analysis  of  Cibber’s  version,  with  critical  com¬ 
ments,  will  be  found  in  Genest,  ii,  195  et  seq.] 


COSTUME 

C.  Knight  ( Introd .):  The  Monk  of  Croyland  informs  us  that  ‘the  new  fashion’ 
Edward  IV.  ‘chose  for  his  last  state  dresses  was  to  have  very  full  hanging  sleeves 
like  a  monk’s,  lined  with  most  sumptuous  furs,  and  so  rolled  over  his  shoulders 
as  to  give  his  tall  person  an  air  of  grandeur.’  This  fashion  was  continued  during 
the  remainder  of  the  century,  and  was  not  altogether  abandoned  in  the  reign  of 
Henry  VIII.  By  a  sumptuary  law,  enacted  in  the  last  year  of  Edward’s  reign,  we 
find  also  that  purple  cloth  of  gold  and  silk  of  a  purple  colour  were  confined  to  the 
use  of  the  royal  family,  while  none  under  the  degree  of  a  duke  might  wear  cloth  of 
gold  of  tissue.  Inferior  noblemen  were  restricted  to  plain  cloth  of  gold,  knights  to 
velvet,  esquires  to  satin,  etc.  Short  gowns  and  upper  dresses  of  various  descrip¬ 
tions  were  worn  at  this  time,  with  long  sleeves,  having  an  opening  in  front  through 
which  the  arm  came,  leaving  the  outer  sleeve  to  hang  as  an  ornament  from  the 
shoulder.  Feathers  became  more  frequent  towards  the  close  of  this  reign,  one  or 
more  being  worn  in  the  cap  behind,  and  jewelled  up  the  stem.  The  hair  was 
worn  in  large  square  masses  on  each  side  of  the  head,  and  low  on  the  forehead. 
There  are  two  portraits  of  Richard  III.,  painted  on  a  board,  in  the  meeting  room  of 
the  Society  of  Antiquaries  at  Somerset  House.  .  .  The  first  has  been  lithographed 
for  the  fifth  volume  of  the  Paston  Letters.  It  represents  the  king  attired  in  a  robe 
of  cloth  of  gold  over  a  close  dress  of  scarlet,  and  a  black  cap  with  a  pearl  ornament. 
His  hair  brown  and  long.  His  right  hand  is  engaged  in  placing  a  ring  upon,  or 
drawing  it  off,  the  third  finger  of  the  left  hand.  [See  Frontispiece  to  this  present 
volume.]  In  the  other  Richard  is  portrayed  with  a  short  sword  or  dagger  in  his  hand, 
dressed  in  a  black  robe,  with  sleeves  of  black  or  crimson,  an  under  dress  of  cloth  of 
gold,  and  a  small  black  cap.  ...  In  the  Warwick  Roll  is  a  drawing  of  Richard’s  queen, 
Anne,  which  presents  us  with  a  peculiar  head-dress,  characterizing  this  period, 
namely,  a  cap  or  caul  of  gold  embroidery,  covered  by  a  veil  of  some  very  transparent 
material,  stiffened  out  in  the  form  of  wings.  .  .  The  livery  colour  of  the  Tudor 
family  was  white  and  green.  One  of  the  standards  of  Henry,  Earl  of  Richmond, 
at  Bosworth  Field  was  a  red  dragon  on  white  and  green  sarcenet.  Another  was 
a  dun  cow  upon  ‘yellow  tarterne’.  .  .  .  Richard’s  favourite  badge  of  cognisance 
[a  white  boar]  was  worn  by  the  higher  order  of  his  partisans  appendant  to  a  collar 
of  roses  and  suns. 

The  following  letter  from  Richard  III.  to  Piers  Courteis,  Keeper  of  his  Ward¬ 
robe,  given  in  Halliwell  ( Letters  of  Kings,  etc.,  i,  152)  casts  an  interesting  light 
upon  the  costumes  required  by  a  King  at  this  period.  The  articles  were  doubtless 
to  be  used  at  the  ceremony  of  Richard’s  second  coronation  at  York,  and  during 
his  triumphal  progress  afterward.  The  list  may  possibly  offer  suggestions  to  the 
actor  or  manager  who  desires  historical  accuracy  in  costume. 

A.  D.  1483 — ‘We  will  and  charge  you  to  deliver  to  the  bringers  hereof  for  us 
the  parcels  following:  that  is  to  say,  one  doublet  of  purple  satin  lined  with  Holland 
cloth  and  interlined  with  busk.  One  doublet  of  tawny  satin  lined  in  likewise;  two  short 
gowns  of  crimson  cloth  of  gold,  the  one  with  drips,  [hanging  tassels]  and  the  other 


COSTUME 


607 


with  nets  lined  with  green  velvet;  one  stomacher  of  purple  satin,  and  one  stomacher 
of  tawny  satin;  one  cloak  with  a  cape  of  velvet  ingrained,  the  bow  lined  with  black 
velvet;  one  gown  of  green  velvet  lined  with  tawny  satin;  one  yard  and  three-quarters 
course  of  silke,  meddled  [mixed]  with  gold,  and  as  much  black  course  of  silk  for 
our  spurs;  two  yards  and  a  half  and  three  nails  of  white  cloth  of  gold,  for  a 
crynetze  [table  cloth?]  for  a  board;  five  yards  of  black  velvet  for  the  lining  of  a 
gown  of  green  satin;  one  placard  made  of  the  said  two  yards;  and  one  half  and  two 
nails  of  white  cloth  of  gold  lined  with  buckram;  three  pair  of  spurs  short,  all  gilt; 
two  pairs  of  spurs  long,  white  parcel  gilt;  two  yards  of  black  buckram  for  amend¬ 
ing  of  the  lining  of  divers  trappers;  one  banner  of  sarsenet  of  our  Lady;  one  banner 
of  the  Trinity;  one  banner  of  Saint  George;  one  banner  of  Saint  Edward;  one  of 
Saint  Cuthbert;  one  of  our  own  arms  all  sarsenet;  three  coats  of  arms  beaten  with 
fine  gold  for  our  own  person;  five  coat  armours  for  heralds  lined  with  buckram; 
forty  trumpet  banners  of  sarsenet;  seven  hundred  and  forty  pensills  [banners];  three 
hundred  and  fifty  pensils  of  tarter;  four  standards  of  sarsenet  with  boars;  thirteen 
thousand  quinysans  [cognisance]  of  fustian  with  boars.  All  these  our  letters,  ’  &c. 

Samuel  French’s  acting  edition  of  Richard  III.,  which  is  Cibber’s  version, 
as  in  Oxberry’s  British  Drama,  contains  the  following  descriptions  of  costumes, 
and  arrangement  of  processions: 

Duke  of  Gloster. — Crimson  velvet  shirt,  edged  with  sable  fur,  gold  waistcoat 
with  black  velvet  sleeves  puffed  with  gold  coming  through  the  hanging  sleeve  of 
the  shirt,  gold  waist-belt  carrying  a  cross-hilted  sword  and  dagger,  purple  stockings, 
order  of  Garter  under  left  knee,  gold  collar  of  suns  and  roses,  black  velvet  cap  with 
jewel,  high  riding  boots  and  spurs,  and  gauntlets.  In  Act  II.  the  same,  with 
crimson  velvet  shoes  with  pointed  toes  instead  of  boots. — Act  IV.  King’s  dress: 
Long  gown  representing  cloth  of  gold  edged  with  ermine,  purple  velvet  robe  edged 
with  ermine,  and  ermine  cape,  crimson  stockings,  purple  velvet  pointed  shoes  with 
cross-bars  of  gold,  gold  chord  and  tassels  round  waist,  jewelled  sword,  diamond 
collar  of  suns  and  roses,  gold  and  richly  jewelled  crown,  without  feathers,  as  worn 
by  Henry  VI.  After  the  Coronation  scene,  instead  of  the  coronation  robe,  a  puce 
velvet  open  robe  with  hanging  sleeves,  and  velvet  cap  edged  with  ermine. — Act  V. 
Suit  of  Complete  armour,  with  a  surcoat  emblazoned  with  the  arms  of  England. 

King  Henry  VI. — Long  black  velvet  gown  with  hanging  sleeves  and  ermine 
cape,  black  velvet  cap  with  jewel,  and  black  velvet  pointed  shoes. 

Prince  of  Wales. — Crimson  velvet  shirt  with  hanging  sleeves,  edged  with  ermine, 
do.  cap,  white  silk  stockings,  order  of  the  Garter,  crimson  velvet  pointed  shoes, 
and  collar  of  suns  and  roses. 

Duke  of  York. — Do.  except  that  the  shirt  is  blue. 

Earl  0}  Richmond. — Suit  of  complete  armour,  white  surcoat  with  red  cross  of 
St.  George. 

Duke  of  Buckingham. — Same  as  Gloster  in  Act  I.  except  that  the  colour  is  blue. 

Duke  of  Norfolk. — In  Coronation  scene,  long  crimson  velvet  gown  with  hanging 
sleeves  edged  with  gold,  pointed  velvet  shoes  trimmed  with  gold. — Second  dress: 
Complete  armour,  surcoat  emblazoned  with  his  arms,  and  emblazoned  shield  hung 
on  his  left  hip. 

Tressel. — Black  velvet  shirt  with  hanging  sleeves  edged  with  white  fur,  under¬ 
waistcoat  of  silver  with  protruding  sleeves  as  in  Gloster’s  dress,  blue  stockings, 
black  velvet  cap  edged  with  fur,  high  riding  boots,  spurs,  and  gauntlets. — Act  II. 
Pointed  velvet  shoes  — Act  V.  Complete  armour. 


6o8 


APPENDIX 


Lord  Stanley. — Long  green  velvet  gown  with  velvet  sleeves,  collar  of  suns  and 
roses,  green  velvet  cap,  black  stockings,  pointed  velvet  shoes. — Second  dress: 
Complete  armour,  with  surcoat  and  shield  emblazoned  with  his  arms. 

Catesby. — Red  velvet  shirt  with  hanging  sleeves,  under  waistcoat,  white  silk 
pantaloons,  velvet  cap,  and  pointed  shoes. 

Ratcliff. — Same  as  Catesby,  but  different  color,  and  order  of  Garter. 

Earl  of  Oxford. — Do.  but  different  color. 

Blunt. — Do. 

Lieutenant  of  the  Tower. — Puce  velvet  shirt  with  hanging  sleeves  trimmed  with 
gold,  velvet  cap,  dark  stockings,  pointed  shoes — Act  V.  Complete  armor. 

Lord  Mayor. — Long  red  cloth  robe  with  collar  of  the  S.  S:  edged  with  dark  fur, 
white  ribbons  on  shoulders,  white  wands — under  dress  as  others. 

Aldermen. — Do.  without  the  fur  on  robe. 

T irrel. — Same  fashion  as  Catesby,  but  plainer  and  of  different  color. 

Forest  and  Dighton.— High  crowned  black  hat  with  narrow  rim,  very  short 
shirt,  with  full  sleeves  at  shoulders  and  tight  at  the  wrists,  waistbelts,  and  high 
boots. 

Garter  King-at-arms. — Dark  shirt,  herald’s  coat  emblazoned  with  arms  of 
England,  white  wand,  dark  stockings,  and  pointed  shoes. 

Officer  (of  the  Royal  Guard). — Red  shirt  edged  with  gold,  and  emblazoned  with 
arms  of  England  on  breast,  red  and  gold  cap,  gold  waistbelt  and  cross-hilted  sword, 
red  stockings,  and  russet  shoes. 

Earl  of  Surrey,  (son  of  Duke  Norfolk,) 


Brandon,  and 
Pembroke, 


Pages. — Red  shirts  edged  with  black  velvet,  blue  under-sleeves,  silver  ball  on 
breast,  black  velvet  cap  with  white  roses,  blue  stockings,  pointed  shoes. 

The  hair  is  in  all  cases  worn  long,  but  neither  beard  nor  moustaches. 

Queen  Elizabeth. — Surcoat  of  cherry-colored  silk  trimmed  with  ermine  and 
silver,  blue  under-dress  with  tight  long  sleeves,  crown,  and  large  veil  spotted 
with  gold.  Second  dress:  Black  and  gold,  crown,  and  black  veil. 

Lady  Anne. — Black  velvet  demi-train  with  hanging  sleeves,  and  tight  blue  shirt 
under  to  the  wrist,  square  body,  with  muslin  chemisette  to  the  throat,  fold  of  linen 
under  chin,  cowl  of  white  linen,  large  black  veil,  square  velvet  head-dress  (shape  of 
that  worn  by  the  Neapolitan  peasantry) — Second  dress:  Surcoat  of  sea-green 
trimmed  with  gold  and  ermine,  under-dress  of  orange-colored  cloth  with  tight 
sleeves,  cowl  of  silver,  and  jewelled  head-dress. 

Duchess  of  Y ork. — Black  velvet  demi-train,  high  to  throat,  with  hanging  sleeves, 
large  square  white  linen  collar,  linen  fold  under  chin,  black  velvet  cap,  and  large 
black  veil. 

Attendants  to  Lady  Anne. — Black  cloth  dress,  high  to  throat,  with  tight  long 
sleeves,  white  linen  collar  with  points  reaching  down  on  breast,  black  velvet 
head-dress,  and  black  veil. 


Order  of  Funeral  Procession 


Two  Officers  of  Royal  Guard,  with  halberts, 
Two  Trumpeters, 

Six  Soldiers  of  Royal  Guard,  with  halberts, 
Four  Incense  Boys,  in  white  gowns, 


COSTUME  609 

Two  Monks  with  long  torches,  and  shields  on  torches  emblazoned  with  arm  of 
England, 

Priests,  dressed  in  white  and  red,  carrying  gold  cross, 

Two  Monks  (as  before), 

Two  Priests  (do.) 

Garter  King-at-Arms, 

Banner  of  Arms  of  England, 

Page, 

Two  Monks  (as  before), 

Banner  of  Arms  of  England,  carried  by  soldier  of  Royal  Guard, 

Coffin  on  Bier,  carried  by  four  men  dressed  in  black,  with  black  caps,  and 
Canopy  of  black  and  gold,  emblazoned  with  shields  of  arms  of  England,  carried 
by  four  men  dressed  in  black,  with  black  caps, 

Pall  Bearers,  Six  Peers  of  England,  in  scarlet  robes  with  ermine  capes,  and 
jewelled  collars  of  suns  and  roses, 

Lady  Anne  and  Four  Ladies, 

Tressel  and  Stanley, 

Six  Nobles, 

Six  Soldiers  of  Royal  Guard. 

Coronation  Scene — discovered 

Two  Officers  and  Sixteen  Soldiers  of  the  Royal  Guard, 

Six  Banners, 

Two  Pages,  holding  Shield  and  Helmet  of  King  Richard, 

Cardinal, 

Three  Bisbops, 

Four  Judges, 

Four  Lawyers, 

Lord  Mayor  and  Six  Aldermen, 

Six  Monks, 

Friar  Penker, 

Dr.  Shaw, 

Eight  Nobles, 

Army  of  King  Richard 

Two  Trumpeters,  with  re"}  shirts,  caps  and  stockings,  russet  shoes,  herald ’s  coats 
with  arms  of  England,  and  trumpets. 

Twelve  Royal  Archers,  with  steel  skull-caps,  crimson  jerkins  reaching  to  hips 
with  gold  stripes  running  downwards,  gold  buttons,  blue  pantaloons,  pointed  russet 
shoes,  quivers  of  arrows  on  left  hips,  and  bows  5  ft.  16  in.  long. 

Two  Officers  of  Royal  Guard,  dressed  as  described  before. 

Sixteen  Soldiers  of  Royal  Guard,  do.  but  with  less  gold  about  them,  with  spears 
about  8  feet  long. 

Six  Banner-Men,  bearing  different  banners,  with  steel  gorgets,  caps,  elbow  and 
knee  pieces. 

Twelve  Cannoneers,  with  breast-plates  and  helmets,  and  short  swords. 

T wo  Pages,  one  carrying  the  helmet,  and  the  other  the  shield  of  Richard  III. 

Six  Knights,  in  complete  armour,  with  blue  surcoats,  white  roses  on  breasts, 
and  shields  with  white  rose  in  centre. 


39 


6io 


APPENDIX 


Army  of  Earl  of  Richmond 

Two  Trumpeters ,  with  white  shirts,  red  roses  on  their  breasts,  white  caps,  blue 
stockings,  and  russet  shoes. 

Officer  and  Eight  Archers  in  green  suits  with  red  roses  on  their  breasts,  steel  caps 
and  gorgets,  maroon  stockings,  russet  shoes,  long-bows,  and  quivers  full  of  arrows. 

Six  Norman  Soldiery,  with  ring-armor  shirts,  orange-colored  overcoats,  very 
short  and  open  at  breasts  so  as  to  show  the  armor,  tight  green  sleeves,  green  stockings, 
black  shoes,  steel  caps,  cross-bows,  and  enormous  shields  on  their  backs,  8  feet 
high. 

Two  Officers  and  Twelve  Soldiers,  with  drab  shirts  and  red  roses  on  breasts, 
black  velvet  waist  belts,  blue  stockings,  russet  shoes,  steel  caps  and  gorgets,  and 
steel  battle-axes. 

Four  Banner-Men,  with  white  shirts,  red  roses  on  them,  and  blue  stockings. 

Six  Knights,  in  complete  armor,  with  white  surcoats  edged  with  gold,  red  roses 
on  breasts,  and  shields  with  red  rose  in  centre. 

G.  R.  French  ( Sh .  Genealogica,  pp.  209-252)  gives  an  accurate  description 
of  the  crests,  coats  of  arms,  etc.,  of  the  various  characters  in  the  play. 


DEFORMITY  OF  RICHARD 

H.  Walpole  ( Historic  Doubts,  etc.,  p.  102):  With  regard  to  the  person  of 
Richard,  it  appears  to  have  been  as  much  misrepresented  as  his  actions.  Philip 
de  Comines,  who  was  very  free  spoken  even  on  his  own  masters,  and  therefore  not 
likely  to  spare  a  foreigner,  mentions  the  beauty  of  Edward  IV.;  but  says  nothing  of 
the  deformity  of  Richard,  though  he  saw  them  together.  This  is  merely  negative. 
The  old  countess  of  Desmond,  who  had  danced  with  Richard,  declared  he  was  the 
handsomest  man  in  the  room  except  his  brother  Edward,  and  was  very  well  made. 
But  what  shall  we  say  to  Dr  Shaw,  who  in  his  sermon  appealed  to  the  people, 
whether  Richard  was  not  the  express  image  of  his  father’s  person,  who  was  neither 
ugly  nor  deformed  ?  Not  all  the  protector’s  power  could  have  kept  the  muscles  of 
the  mob  in  awe  and  prevented  their  laughing  at  so  ridiculous  an  apostrophe,  had 
Richard  been  a  little,  crooked,  withered,  hump-back’d  monster,  as  later  historians 
would  have  us  believe — and  very  idly?  Cannot  a  foul  soul  inhabit  a  fair  body? 

The  truth  I  take  to  have  been  this.  Richard,  who  was  slender  and  not  tall,  had 
one  shoulder  a  little  higher  than  the  other:  a  defect,  by  the  magnifying  glasses  of 
party,  by  distance  of  time,  and  by  the  amplification  of  tradition,  easily  swelled  to 
shocking  deformity;  for  falsehood  itself  generally  pays  so  much  respect  to  truth  as 
to  make  it  the  basis  of  its  superstructures.  I  have  two  reasons  for  believing  Richard 
was  not  well  made  about  the  shoulders.  Among  the  drawings  which  I  purchased 
at  Vertue’s  sale  was  one  of  Richard  and  his  queen,  of  which  nothing  is  expressed 
but  the  outlines.  There  is  no  intimation  from  whence  the  drawing  was  taken;  but 
by  a  collateral  direction  for  the  colour  of  the  robe,  if  not  copied  from  a  picture,  it 
certainly  was  from  some  painted  window;  where  existing  I  do  not  pretend  to  say: 
in  this  whole  work  I  have  not  gone  beyond  my  vouchers.  Richard’s  face  is  very 
comely,  and  corresponds  singularly  with  the  portrait  of  him  in  the  preface  to  the 
Royal  and  Noble  Authors.  He  has  a  sort  of  tippet  of  ermine  doubled  about  his 


THE  CHILDREN  IN  THE  WOOD 


6l  I 

neck,  which  seems  calculated  to  disguise  some  want  of  symmetry  thereabouts. 
[Two  copies  of  this  old  print  are  given  by  Walpole,  one  as  a  frontispiece  to  his  volume 
and  the  other  facing  p.  103.  He  dismisses  the  testimony  of  Rous,  on  the  grounds 
that  he  *  could  know  the  facts  he  alleges  but  by  hearsay,  confounds  the  dates  of  them, 
dedicated  his  work  to  Henry  the  Seventh,  and  is  an  author  to  whom  no  credit  is 
due,  from  the  lies  and  fables  with  which  his  work  is  stuffed.’ — Ed.] 

T.  P.  Courtenay  ( Commentaries ,  ii,  62):  Sir  Thomas  More’s  character  would 
be  a  guaranty  for  his  truth,  if  he  wrote  what  was  within  his  own  knowledge.  He 
was  not  born  until  five  years  before  Richard’s  death,  but  he  is  supposed  to  have 
derived  his  information  from  Archbishop  Morton,  of  whom  we  hear  in  this  play 
as  Bishop  of  Ely.  [See  article,  Source  of  the  Plot,  p.  457.]  .  .  .  John  Rous,  who 
professes  to  have  seen  Richard,  says:  ‘He  was  of  low  stature,  having  a  short  face, 
unequal  shoulders,  the  right  being  higher  than  the  left.’  .  .  .  Nor  is  there,  indeed, 
much  difference  between  Rous  and  More,  though  the  latter  made  the  most  of  the 
distortion.  For  the  excess  of  deformity  which  Richard  is  made  by  Shakespeare 
to  impute  to  himself,  there  is  no  authority.  On  the  other  hand,  I  lay  no  stress  upon 
the  testimony  of  ‘the  old  Countess  of  Desmond  who  had  danced  with  Richard,’ 
because  it  comes  through  too  many  hands. 

G.  B.  Churchill  (p.  50):  In  Rous’s  Historic  Re  gum  Anglice,  [1490]  first  do 
we  find  details  of  Richard’s  person,  weak  of  body,  short  of  stature  and  of  face, 
with  the  right  shoulder  higher  than  the  left — curiously  different  from  the  later 
picture,  in  which  Richard’s  left  shoulder  is  represented  as  higher  than  the  right. 
Here  first  we  begin  to  hear  tales  of  Richard’s  monstrous  birth,  haired  and  toothed, 
having  been  in  his  mother’s  womb  two  years — again  an  interesting  contrast  to 
Shakespeare’s  representation  that  Richard’s  physical  peculiarities  were  due  to  the 
fact  that  he  was  sent  before  his  time  into  this  breathing  world,  unfinished,  scarce 
half  made  up. 


THE  BALLAD  OF  THE  CHILDREN  IN  THE  WOOD 

Sharon  Turner  (iii,  453,  foot-note )  is,  I  believe,  the  first  to  call  attention  to  a 
similarity  in  the  outlines  of  the  story  of  The  Children  in  the  Wood  to  that  of  the  Mur¬ 
der  of  the  Princes  by  Richard  III.  Percy  ( Reliques ,  etc.,  iii,  171)  gives  the  following 
account:  ‘The  subject  of  this  very  popular  Ballad  (which  has  been  set  in  so  favour¬ 
able  a  light  by  the  Spectator,  No  85)  seems  to  be  taken  from  an  old  play,  intitled 
Two  lamentable  Tragedies,  The  one  of  the  murder  of  Maister  Beech,  a  chandler  in 
Thames-streete,  &°c.  The  other  of  a  young  child  murthered  in  a  wood  by  two  ruffins, 
with  the  consent  of  his  unkle.  By  Rob.  Yarrington,  1601.  4to.  Our  ballad  maker 
has  strictly  followed  the  play  in  the  description  of  the  father  and  mother’s  dying 
charge:  in  the  uncle’s  promise  to  take  care  of  their  issue:  his  hiring  two  ruffians 
to  destroy  his  ward,  under  pretence  of  sending  him  to  school:  their  chusing  a  wood  to 
perpetrate  the  murder  in:  one  of  the  ruffians  relenting,  and  a  battle  ensuing,  &c. 
In  other  respects  he  has  departed  from  the  play.  In  the  latter  the  scene  is  laid  in 
Padua:  there  is  but  one  child:  which  is  murdered  by  a  sudden  stab  of  the  unrelent¬ 
ing  ruffian:  he  is  slain  himself  by  his  less  bloody  companion,  but  ere  he  dies  gives  the 


6l2 


APPENDIX 


other  a  mortal  wound:  the  latter  living  just  long  enough  to  impeach  the  uncle; 
who  in  consequence  of  this  impeachment  is  arraigned  and  executed  by  the  hand  of 
justice,  &c.  Whoever  compares  the  play  with  the  ballad,  will  have  no  doubt  but 
the  former  is  the  original:  the  language  is  far  more  obsolete,  and  such  a  vein  of 
simplicity  runs  through  the  whole  that,  had  the  ballad  been  written  first,  there  is 
no  doubt  but  every  circumstance  of  it  would  have  been  received  into  the  drama: 
whereas  this  was  probably  built  on  some  Italian  novel.’ 

For  facility  of  reference,  the  whole  of  the  ballad  is  here  given  as  in  Percy’s 
Reliques,  *  Printed  from  two  ancient  copies,  one  of  them  in  black  letter  in  the  Pepys 
‘Collection.  Its  title  at  large  is:  The  Children  in  the  Wood:  or,  The  Norfolk 
1 Gentleman's  Last  Will  and  Testament:  To  the  tune  of  Roger o,  &fc.’ 

The  Children  in  the  Wood 

Now  ponder  well,  you  parents  deare, 

These  wordes,  which  I  shall  write; 

A  doleful  story  you  shall  heare, 

In  time  brough  forth  to  light: 

A  gentleman  of  good  account  5 

In  Norfolke  dwelt  of  late, 

Who  did  in  honour  far  surmount 
Most  men  of  his  estate. 

Sore  sicke  he  was,  and  like  to  dye, 

No  helpe  his  life  could  save;  10 

His  wife  by  him  as  sicke  did  lye, 

And  both  possest  one  grave. 

No  love  between  these  two  was  lost, 

Each  was  to  other  kinde, 

In  love  they  liv’d,  in  love  they  dyed,  15 

And  left  two  babes  behinde: 

The  one  a  fine  and  pretty  boy, 

Not  passing  three  yeares  olde; 

The  other  a  girl  more  young  than  he, 

And  fram’d  in  beautyes  molde.  20 

The  father  left  his  little  son, 

As  plainlye  doth  appeare, 

When  he  to  perfect  age  should  come, 

Three  hundred  poundes  a  yeare. 

And  to  his  little  daughter  Jane  25 

Five  hundred  poundes  in  gold, 

To  be  paid  downe  on  marriage-day, 

Which  might  not  be  controll’d: 

But  if  the  children  chance  to  dye, 

Ere  they  to  age  should  come, 

Their  uncle  should  possesse  their  wealth; 

For  so  the  wille  did  run. 


3° 


THE  CHILDREN  IN  THE  WOOD 


Now,  brother,  said  the  dying  man, 

Look  to  my  children  deare; 

Be  good  unto  my  boy  and  girl, 

No  friendes  else  have  they  here: 

To  God  and  you  I  recommend 
My  children  deare  this  daye; 

But  little  while  be  sure  we  have 
Within  this  world  to  staye. 

You  must  be  father  and  mother  both, 

And  uncle  all  in  one; 

God  Knowes  what  will  become  of  them, 
When  I  am  dead  and  gone. 

With  that  bespake  their  mother  deare, 

O  brother  kinde,  quoth  shee, 

You  are  the  man  must  bring  our  babes 
To  wealth  or  miserie: 

And  if  you  keep  them  carefully, 

Then  God  will  you  reward; 

But  if  you  otherwise  should  deal, 

God  will  your  deedes  regard. 

With  lippes  as  cold  as  any  stone, 

They  kist  their  children  small: 

God  bless  you  both,  my  children  deare; 
With  that  the  teares  did  fall. 

These  speeches  then  their  brother  spake 
To  this  sicke  couple  there, 

The  keeping  of  your  little  ones 
Sweet  sister,  do  not  feare; 

God  never  prosper  me  nor  mine, 

Nor  aught  else  that  I  have, 

If  I  do  wrong  your  children  deare, 

When  you  are  layd  in  grave. 

The  parents  being  dead  and  gone, 

The  children  home  he  takes, 

And  brings  them  straite  unto  his  house, 
Where  much  of  them  he  makes. 

He  had  not  kept  these  pretty  babes 
A  twelvemonth  and  a  daye, 

But,  for  their  wealth,  he  did  devise 
To  make  them  both  awaye. 

He  bargain’d  with  two  ruffians  strong, 
Which  were  of  furious  mood, 

That  they  should  take  these  children  young, 
And  slaye  them  in  a  wood: 


APPENDIX 


He  told  his  wife  an  artful  tale, 

He  would  the  children  send 
To  be  brought  up  in  faire  London, 

With  one  that  was  his  friend. 

Away  then  went  these  pretty  babes, 
Rejoycing  at  that  tide, 

Rejoycing  with  a  merry  minde, 

They  should  on  cock-horse  ride. 

They  prate  and  prattle  pleasantly, 

As  they  rode  on  the  waye, 

To  those  that  should  their  butchers  be, 
And  work  their  lives  decaye. 

So  that  the  pretty  speeche  they  had, 

Made  Murder’s  heart  relent; 

And  they  that  undertooke  the  deed, 

Full  sore  did  now  repent. 

Yet  one  of  them  more  hard  of  heart, 

Did  vowe  to  do  his  charge, 

Because  the  wretch,  that  hired  him, 

Had  paid  him  very  large. 

The  other  won’t  agree  thereto, 

So  here  they  fall  to  strife; 

With  one  another  they  did  fight, 

About  the  childrens  life: 

And  he  that  was  of  mildest  mood, 

Did  slaye  the  other  there, 

Within  an  unfrequented  wood: 

The  babes  did  quake  for  feare! 

He  took  the  children  by  the  hand, 

Teares  standing  in  their  eye, 

And  bad  them  straitwaye  follow  him, 

And  look  they  did  not  crye: 

And  two  long  miles  he  ledd  them  on, 
While  they  for  food  complaine: 

Staye  here,  quoth  he,  I’ll  bring  you  bread, 
When  I  come  back  againe. 

These  pretty  babes,  with  hand  in  hand, 
Went  wandering  up  and  downe; 

But  never  more  could  see  the  man 
Approaching  from  the  town: 

Their  prettye  lippes  with  black-berries, 
Were  all  besmear’d  and  dyed, 

And  when  they  sawe  the  darksome  night, 
They  sat  them  downe  and  cryed. 


THE  CHILDREN  IN  THE  WOOD—HALSTED 


615 


Thus  wandered  these  poor  innocents, 

Till  deathe  did  end  their  grief, 

In  one  anothers  armes  they  dyed, 

As  wanting  due  relief: 

No  burial  this  pretty  pair  125 

Of  any  man  receives, 

Till  Robin  red-breast  piously 
Did  cover  them  with  leaves. 

And  now  the  heavy  wrathe  of  God 
Upon  their  uncle  fell; 

Yea,  fearfull  fiends  did  haunt  his  house, 

His  conscience  felt  an  hell: 

His  barnes  were  fir’d,  his  goodes  consum’d, 

His  landes  were  barren  made, 

His  cattle  dyed  within  the  field, 

And  nothing  with  him  stayd. 

And  in  a  voyage  to  Portugal 
Two  of  his  sonnes  did  dye; 

And  to  conclude,  himselfe  was  brought 

To  want  and  miserye:  140 

He  pawn’d  and  mortgaged  all  his  land 
Ere  seven  yeares  came  about. 

And  now  at  length  this  wicked  act 
Did  by  this  meanes  come  out: 

The  fellowe,  that  did  take  in  hand  145 

These  children  for  to  kill, 

Was  for  a  robbery  judg’d  to  dye, 

Such  was  Gods  blessed  will; 

Who  did  confess  the  very  truth, 

As  here  hath  been  display’d:  150 

Their  uncle  having  dyed  in  gaol, 

Where  he  for  debt  was  layd. 

You  that  executors  be  made, 

And  overseers  eke 

Of  children  that  be  fatherless,  155 

And  infants  mild  and  meek; 

Take  you  example  by  this  thing, 

And  yield  to  each  his  right, 

Lest  God  with  such  like  miserye 

Your  wicked  minds  requite.  160 

Miss  C.  Halsted  ( Appendix  A)  points  out  the  following  points  of  resemblance 
between  the  stories:  ‘The  children  being  placed  under  the  guardianship  of  their 
uncle  by  their  father;  the  uncle’s  fair  speeches  to  their  mother  when  essaying  to 
give  her  comfort,  and  the  parting  scene  between  the  parent  and  her  children  when 
resigning  them  to  their  uncle,  cannot  fail  to  recall,  almost  word  for  word,  the  cor¬ 
responding  descriptions  of  the  dramatist  and  historian,  allowance  being  made  for 


130 


135 


6i  6 


APPEJVD/X 


the  license  permitted  in  legendary  lore,  and  the  disguise  in  which  these  traditional 
allusions  to  real  events  were  generally  conveyed.  Then,  the  removal  of  the  children 
from  the  abode  of  their  parents  to  one  selected  by  their  guardian;  the  avarice  and 
ambition  that  tempted  the  uncle  to  commit  the  crime,  and  its  being  perpetrated  in 
so  short  a  time  after  their  father’s  decease,  and  utter  disregard  of  his  oath  to  him; 
his  hiring  two  ruffians  for  a  large  sum  of  money  to  destroy  them;  the  compunction 
felt  by  the  two  ruffians,  as  related  by  Shakespeare,  in  very  similar  terms  to  those 
in  the  ballad;  the  completion  of  the  “piteous  massacre,”  yet  the  mystery  attending 
the  manner  in  which  it  was  effected,  typified  in  the  ballad  by  the  wandering  of 
the  children  in  the  wood,  and  so  cautiously  reported  by  [the  Monk  of  Croyland] 
“And  it  was  reported  that  King  Edward’s  children  were  dead,  but  by  what  kind 
of  violent  death  was  unknown,” — p.  568;  the  very  attitude  in  which  the  children 
met  their  death,  corresponding  as  it  does  with  perhaps  the  most  exquisite  description 
in  the  whole  of  Shakespeare’s  tragedy;  the  uncertainty  attending  their  interment; 
their  uncle  possessing  himself  of  their  inheritance,  and  the  wretched  pangs  of 
remorse  which  he  suffered  prior  to  his  death,  together  with  the  retribution  which 
followed  the  crime — the  death  of  his  wife — of  his  sons — and  the  desertion  of  his 
followers — the  confession  eventually  of  the  surviving  ruffian  and  the  premature 
death  of  the  uncle  himself — all  facts  in  a  great  measure  correct  as  regards  the  actual 
fate  of  Richard  III.,  are  very  startling  coincidences,  to  say  the  least,  between  the 
nursery  legend  and  the  reputed  tragedy  which  is  believed  to  have  been  thus  obscurely 
perpetuated.  .  .  .  The  ballad,  if  composed  in  King  Richard’s  life,  became  singularly 
effective  both  in  strengthening  the  tradition  which  Henry  desired  to  have  believed, 
and,  if  followed  up,  in  affording  a  happy  medium  for  that  monarch  to  circulate 
the  facts  of  Tyrrell’s  alleged  confession;  consequently,  after  detailing  the  death 
and  the  judgements  that  befell  the  uncle,  the  legend  concludes  by  saying:  ‘The 
fellow  that  did  take  in  hand  These  children  for  to  kill,  Was  for  a  robbery  judged 
to  dye; — Such  was  God’s  blessed  will.’  Now  Sir  James  Tyrrell,  who  undertook 
to  slay  the  children,  was  arrested  by  King  Henry  VII.,  and  is  asserted  by  More  to 
have  confessed  the  tale.  And  what  cannot  but  be  considered  a  very  remarkable 
point  as  connecting  the  legend  with  graver  authority,  Tyrrell  did  actually,  some 
years  afterwards,  end  his  days  on  the  scaffold  (as  the  old  ballad  states),  and  also 
for  another  offence  than  the  heinous  crime  which  he  is  stated  to  have  confessed. 
The  precise  lapse  of  time,  too,  named  in  the  poem,  corresponds  exactly  with  the 
period  of  Tyrrell’s  arrest;  as  does  also  the  fact  of  that  imprisonment  producing  the 
alleged  confession.  Moreover,  the  previous  death  of  the  guardian  being  mentioned 
in  the  preceding  verse,  completes  the  general  resemblance,  in  all  leading  points, 
between  the  ballad  and  the  event  it  would  seem  to  describe.  .  .  .  Two  very  rude 
wood-cuts  surmount  the  black-letter  copy  [in  the  Pepys  collection]:  one  representing 
the  ruffians  fighting,  with  a  gallows  and  a  man  hanging  in  one  corner,  and  at  the 
side  the  children  murdered;  the  other  is,  apparently,  an  heraldic  emblematical 
device.  .  .  [The  latter]  speaks  more  forcibly  in  favour  of  the  true  nature  and 
design  of  the  ballad  than  all  argument  that  can  be  adduced  by  similarity  of  events 
thus  traditionally  and  historically  reported;  for  it  is  a  rude  representation  of  a  stag. 
Now  the  badge  of  the  unfortunate  Edward  V.  was  a  hind,  or  a  female  stag — one  of  the 
hereditary  badges  of  the  house  of  York;  and  Sandford,  in  describing  that  Prince’s 
shield  of  arms,  states  that  it  is  “supported  on  the  right  side  with  the  Lyon  of  March 
and  on  the  left  with  a  Hind  Argent”.  .  .  .  The  few  points  in  which  the  narrative 
differs  from  history,  such  as  the  youngest  child  being  a  girl,  their  parents  dying  at 


TIME  ANAL  YSIS 


617 


the  same  time,  and  the  uncle  perishing  in  prison,  are  only  such  variations  as  would 
be  intentionally  adopted,  when  the  real  event  alluded  to  was,  for  certain  reasons, 
purposely  disguised,  and  which  may  be  observed  in  all  historical  ballads,  when  they 
are  compared  with  the  facts  on  which  the  traditions  are  based.’ 

F.  J.  Child  (iii,  128)  gives  the  Ballad  as  it  appears  in  Percy’s  Reliques,  but  says 
nothing  in  regard  to  its  supposed  similarity  to  the  story  of  the  Princes.  He  shows, 
however,  that  Percy’s  date,  1601,  is  too  late  as  ‘Ritson  discovered  that  the  ballad 
was  entered  in  the  Stationer’s  Registers  in  1595’;  and  adds:  ‘The  plot  of  the  play 
was  undoubtedly  derived  from  the  Italian,  and  the  author  of  the  ballad  may  have 
taken  a  hint  from  the  same  source.’ 

G.  B.  Churchill  has  collected  and  describes  various  poems  and  plays  (written 
before  the  date  of  Shakespeare’s  tragedy),  which  deal  with  events  in  the  life  of 
Richard  III.  Three  of  these:  Richardus  Tertius,  by  Legge;  Lacy’s  transcript; 
and  The  True  Tragedie,  have  already  been  fully  discussed  (see  pp.  500-504);  the 
historical  student  is  therefore  referred  to  Churchill,  pt,  ii,  pp.  232-539. — Ed. 


TIME  ANALYSIS 


P.  A.  Daniel  ( Sh .  Soc.  Trans.,  1877,  ’79;  p.  336):  Time  of  this  play,  eleven 
days  represented  on  the  stage;  with  intervals.  Total  dramatic  time,  within  one 
month  (  ?). 


Day  1. 


44 


2. 


44 


3- 


44 

44 

44 

44 

44 


4- 

5- 

6. 

7- 

8. 


44 


9- 


44 


IO. 


44 


II. 


Act  I,  sc.  i.  and  ii. 

Interval. 

Act  I.  sc.  iii.  and  iv.  Act  II.  sc.  i.  and  ii. 
Act  II.  sc.  iii. 

Interval. 

Act  II.  sc.  iv. 

Act  III.  sc.  i. 

Act  III.  sc.  ii.-vii. 

Act  IV.  sc.  i. 

Act  IV.  sc.  ii.-v. 

Interval. 

Act  V.  sc.  i. 

Interval. 

Act  V.  sc.  ii.  and  first  half  of  sc.  iii. 

Act  V.  second  half  sc.  iii.  and  sc.  iv.  and  v. 


Historic  Dates. — The  dead  body  of  Henry  VI.  exposed  to  public  view  in  St  Paul’s, 
22nd  May,  1471.  Marriage  of  Richard  with  Anne,  1472.  Death  of  Clarence, 
beginning  of  1478.  Death  of  Edward  IV.,  9th  April,  1483.  Rivers  and  Grey 
arrested,  30th  April,  1483.  Hastings  executed,  13th  June,  1483.  Rivers,  Grey, 
Vaughan,  and  Hawes  executed,  15th  June,  1483.  Buckingham  harangues  the 
Citizens  in  Guildhall,  24th  June,  1483.  Lord  Mayor  and  Citizens  offer  Richard 
the  crown,  25th  June;  he  is  declared  King  at  Westminster  Hall,  26th  June;  and 
crowned,  6th  July,  1483.  [Murder  of  the  Princes,  21st  or  22nd  August,  1483.] 
Buckingham  executed,  October  [2nd  November;  see  V,  i,  13],  1483.  Death  of 
Queen  Anne,  16th  March,  1485.  Henry  VII.  lands  at  Milford  Haven  7th  August, 
1485.  Battle  of  Bosworth  Field,  22nd  August,  1485. 


The  End. 


PLAN  OF  THE  WORK,  Etc. 


In  this  edition  the  attempt  is  made  to  give,  in  the  shape  of  Textual  Notes, 
on  the  same  page  with  the  Text,  all  the  Various  Readings  of  Richard  III.  from  the 
Second  Folio  down  to  the  latest  critical  edition  of  the  play;  then,  as  Commentary, 
follow  the  Notes  which  the  Editor  has  thought  worthy  of  insertion,  not  only  for  the 
purpose  of  elucidating  the  text,  but  at  times  as  illustrations  of  the  History  of  Shakes¬ 
pearian  criticism.  In  the  Appendix  will  be  found  criticisms  and  discussions  which, 
on  the  score  of  length,  could  not  be  conveniently  included  in  the  Commentary. 


LIST  OF  EDITIONS  COLLATED  IN  THE 

TEXTUAL 

NOTES 

The  First  Quarto . 

[Qi] 

1 597 

The  Second  Quarto . 

[QJ 

1598 

The  Third  Quarto . 

CQs] 

1602 

The  Fourth  Quarto . 

[QJ 

1605 

The  Fifth  Quarto . 

[QJ 

1612 

The  Sixth  Quarto . 

[QJ 

1622 

The  First  Folio . 

[FJ 

1623 

The  Seventh  Quarto . . 

[QJ 

1629 

The  Second  Folio . 

[FJ 

1632 

The  Eighth  Quarto . 

[QJ 

1634 

The  Third  Folio . 

[FJ 

1664 

The  Fourth  Folio . 

[FJ 

1685 

N.  Rowe  (First  Edition) . . 

[Rowe  i] 

1709 

N.  Rowe  (Second  Edition) . 

[Rowe  ii] 

1714 

A.  Pope  (First  Edition) . 

[Pope  i] 

1723 

A.  Pope  (Second  Edition) . 

[Pope  ii] 

1728 

L.  Theobald  (First  Edition) . 

[Theob.  i] 

1733 

L.  Theobald  (Second  Edition) . 

[Theob.  ii] 

1740 

Sir  T.  Hanmer . 

[Han.] 

1744 

W.  Warburton . 

[Warb.] 

1747 

E.  Capell . 

[Cap.] 

•  •(?) 

1761 

Dr  Johnson . 

[Johns.] 

1765 

Johnson  and  Steevens . 

[Var.  ’73] 

*773 

Johnson  and  Steevens . 

[Var.  ’78] 

1778 

Johnson  and  Steevens . 

[Var.  ’85] 

1785 

J.  Rann . 

[Ran.] 

00 

w 

E.  Malone . 

[Mai.] 

1790 

Geo.  Steevens . 

[Steev.] 

1793 

Reed’s  Steevens . . 

[Var.  ’03] 

1803 

Reed’s  Steevens . 

[Var.  ’13] 

1813 

Boswell’s  Malone . 

[Var.] 

1821 

S.  W.  Singer  (First  Edition) . 

[Sing,  i] 

1826 

C.  Knight  (First  Edition) . 

[Knt.  i] 

•  •(?) 

1841 

J.  P.  Collier  (First  Edition) . 

[Coll,  i] 

1842 

S.  W.  Singer  (Second  Edition) . 

[Sing,  ii] 

1856 

A.  Dyce  (First  Edition) . 

[Dyce  i] 

1857 

J.  P.  Collier  (Second  Edition) . 

[Coll,  ii] 

1858 

H.  Staunton . 

[Sta.] 

i860 

R.  G.  White  (First  Edition) . 

[Wh.  i] 

1861 

Cambridge  (First  Edition,  W.  G.  Clark  and  W.  A. 

Wright) . 

[Cam.  i] 

.... 

1865 

618 


PLAN  OF  THE  WORK  619 


J.  O.  Halliwell  (Folio  Edition) .  [Hal.]  _  1865 

C.  Knight  (Second  Edition) .  [Kntii]  ....  1865 

T.  Keightley .  [Ktly]  _  1865 

A.  Dyce  (Second  Edition) .  [Dyce  ii]  _  1866 

H.  N.  Hudson  (Second  Edition) .  [Huds.  ii]  ....  1871 

A.  Dyce  (Third  Edition) .  [Dyce  iii]  _  1875 

J.  P.  Collier  (Third  Edition) .  [Coll,  iii]  _  1877 

H.  N.  Hudson  ( School  Shakespeare ) .  [Huds.  iii]  ....  1880 

R.  G.  White  (Second  Edition) .  [Wh.  ii]  _  1883 

Cambridge  (Second  Edition,  W.  A.  Wright) .  [Cam.  ii]  _  1891 


W.  Harness .  ....  1830 

Globe  (Clark  and  Wright) .  [Globe]  _  1864 

N.  Delius .  [Del.]  Elberfeld  1869 

F.  A.  Marshall .  x888 

W.  &  R.  Chambers .  1899 

F.  E.  Webb .  rgox 

C.  H.  Tawney .  1902 

W.  J.  Rolfe  (Revised  Edition) .  [Rife]  ....  1904 

F.  P.  Barnard .  n.  d. 

Israel  Gollancz  (Temple  Edition) .  n.  d. 

G.  Macdonald .  n.  d. 

A.  H.  Thompson  ( Arden  Shakespeare) .  n.  d. 


These  last  twelve  editions  I  have  not  collated  beyond  referring  to  them  in  dis¬ 
puted  passages,  and  recording,  here  and  there  in  the  Commentary,  the  views  of 
their  editors. 

Within  the  last  twenty-five  years — indeed,  since  the  appearance,  in  1864,  of 
the  Globe  Edition — the  text  of  Shakespeare  is  become  so  settled  that  to  collate, 
word  for  word,  the  text  of  editions  which  have  appeared  within  this  term  would 
be  a  fruitless  task.  When,  however,  within  recent  years  an  editor  revises  his  text 
in  a  second  or  a  third  edition,  the  case  is  different;  it  then  becomes  interesting  to 
mark  the  effect  of  maturer  judgement. 

The  present  Text  is  that  of  the  First  Folio  of  1623.  Every  word,  I  might 
say  almost  every  letter,  has  been  collated  with  the  original. 

In  the  Textual  Notes  the  symbol  Ff  indicates  the  agreement  of  the  Second, 
Third,  and  Fourth  Folios.  In  the  enumeration  of  the  Quartos,  instead  of  print¬ 
ing  out  in  full  QjQjQjQ^,  etc.,  the  form  Q1-4  is  used. 

I  have  not  called  attention  to  every  little  misprint  in  the  Folio.  The  Textual 
Notes  will  show,  if  need  be,  that  they  are  misprints  by  the  agreement  of  all  the 
Editors  in  their  corrections. 

Nor  is  notice  taken  of  the  first  editor  who  adopted  the  modern  spelling,  or  who 
substituted  commas  for  parentheses,  or  changed  ?  to  !. 

For  all  readings  from  Qg_s  I  gratefully  acknowledge  my  indebtedness  to  The 
Cambridge  Editors. 


620 


APPENDIX 


The  sign  +  indicates  the  agreement  of  Rowe,  Pope,  Theobald,  Hanmer, 
Warburton,  Johnson,  and  the  Variorum  of  1773. 

When  in  the  Textual  Notes  Warburton  precedes  Hanmer,  it  indicates  that 
Hanmer  has  followed  a  suggestion  of  Warburton. 

The  words  et  cet.  after  any  reading  indicate  that  it  is  the  reading  of  all  other 
editions. 

The  words  et  seq.  indicate  the  agreement  of  all  subsequent  editions. 

The  abbreviation  (subs.)  indicates  that  the  reading  is  substantially  given,  and 
that  immaterial  variations  in  spelling,  punctuation,  or  stage-directions  are  disre¬ 
garded. 

When  Varr.  precedes  Steev.  or  Mai.,  it  includes  the  Variorums  of  1773,  1778,  and 
1785;  when  it  follows  Steev.  or  Mai.,  it  includes  the  Variorums  of  1803,  1813,  and 
1821. 

An  emendation  or  correction  given  in  the  Commentary  is  not  repeated  in  the 
Textual  Notes  unless  it  has  been  adopted  by  an  editor  in  his  text;  nor  is  conj. 
added  in  the  Textual  Notes  to  the  name  of  the  proposer  of  the  conjecture  unless  the 
conjecture  happens  to  be  that  of  an  editor,  in  which  case  its  omission  would  lead  to 
the  inference  that  such  was  the  reading  of  his  text. 

Coll.  MS  refers  to  Collier’s  copy  of  the  Second  Folio,  bearing  in  its  margin 
manuscript  annotations. 

In  citing  plays  or  quoting  from  them,  the  Acts,  Scenes,  and  Lines  of  the  Globe 
Edition  are  followed,  unless  otherwise  noted.  Of  course,  all  references  to  Richard 
III.  refer  to  the  present  text. 


LIST  OF  BOOKS 


To  economise  space  in  the  foregoing  pages,  as  a  general  rule  merely  the  name 
of  an  author  has  been  given,  followed,  in  parentheses,  by  the  number  of  volume 
and  page. 

In  the  following  List,  arranged  alphabetically,  enough  of  the  full  titles  is  set 
forth  to  serve  the  purposes  of  either  identification  or  reference. 

Be  it  understood  that  this  List  does  not  include  those  books  which  have  been 
consulted  or  used  in  verifying  references;  were  these  included,  the  list  would  be 
many  times  longer. 


Abbott,  E.  A.:  Shakespearian  Grammar . 

Alger,  W.  R.:  Life  of  Edwin  Forrest . 

Allen,  C.:  Notes  on  Bacon-Shakespeare  Question  . 

Anonymous:  Scott  and  Shakespeare . 

Arrowsmith,  W.  R. :  Shakespeare' s  Editors  and  Commentators 
Ashmole,  E.:  History  of  Most  Noble  Order  of  the  Garter . . . . 

Bacon,  F.:  Works . 

Bailey,  S. :  The  Received  T ext  of  Shakespeare . 

Baker,  H.  B.:  Cibber  vs  Shakespeare  (Gentlemen’s  Maga., 

March) . 

Baker,  H.  B.:  Our  Old  Actors . 

Baldwin,  T.,  &  Sackville,  R.:  Mirrour  for  Magistrates  (ed. 

Haslewood) . 


London, 

H 

00 

0 

Philadelphia, 

N 

00 

M 

Boston, 

1900 

London, 

183s 

H 

1865 

ll 

1725 

li 

1824 

it 

1862 

U 

1877 

It 

1891 

ti 

1815 

LIST  OF  BOOKS 


621 


Bathurst,  C. :  Differences  of  Shakespeare' s  Versification .  . . 
Bayley,  J.:  History  and,  Antiquities  of  the  Tower  of  London 

Baynes:  Shakespeare  Studies  and  Other  Essays . 

Besant,  Sir  W. :  London  U nder  the  T udors . 

Bewley,  E.  D.:  Richard  III.  ( Nodes  Shaksperiance ,  Win¬ 
chester  College  Shakespere  Society) . 

Birch,  W.  J.:  Inquiry  into  the  Religion  and  Philosophy  of 

Shakespeare . 

Boaden,  J.:  Life  of  J.  P.  Kemble . 

Boas,  F.  S. :  Shakespeare  and  his  Predecessors . 

Bodenstedt,  F.:  Shakspere  Dramatische  Werke . 

Booth,  Edwin:  Prompt-book  to  Richard  III.  (ed.  Winter)  .... 

Brandes,  G. :  William  Shakespeare . 

Brewer,  E.  C.:  Reader's  Hand-book . 

Bristol,  F.  M.:  Primrose  Criticism . 

Brooke,  Stopford:  On  Ten  Plays  of  Shakespeare . 

Buck,  Sir  G. :  Life  of  Richard  the  Third . 

Bucknill,  J.  C. :  Mad-Folk  of  Shakespeare . 

Caine,  Hall  T. :  Richard  III.  and  Macbeth . 

Campbell,  T. :  Life  and  Writings  of  Shakespeare . 

Canning,  A.  S.  G. :  Thoughts  on  Historic  Plays . 

Capell,  E.:  Notes,  etc . 

Carter,  T. :  Shakespeare  and  Holy  Scripture . 

Cartwright,  R. :  N ew  Readings  in  Shakespeare . 

Chalmers,  G. :  Supplemental  Apology . 

Child,  F.  J.:  English  and  Scottish  Ballads . 

Churchill,  G.  B. :  Richard  III.  up  to  Shakespeare . 

Cibber,  C.:  Apology,  etc . 

Coleridge,  H.:  Essays  and  Marginalia . 

Coleridge,  S.  T. :  Notes  and  Lectures  upon  Shakespeare  .. 

Collier,  J.  P. :  History  of  Dramatic  Literature . 

Notes  dr5  Emendations  to  the  Text  of  Shakes¬ 
peare's  Plays . 

Collier,  J.  P.:  Ghost  of  Richard  the  Third  (Shakespeare  Soc.) 

Seven  Lectures  on  Shakespeare  and  Milton, 

by  Coleridge . . 

Collins,  J.  C.:  Studies  in  Shakespeare . 

Courtenay,  T.  P.:  Sh.'s  Historical  Plays,  Historically  Con¬ 
sidered  (Colbourn’s  New  Monthly  Maga.) . 

Courtenay,  T.  P. :  Commentaries  on  the  Historical  Plays  of 

Shakespeare . 

Clarke,  C.  C. :  Shakespeare' s  Characters . 

Clarke,  C.  C.  &  M. :  Shakespeare  Key . 

Craik,  G.  L. :  English  of  Shakespeare  (ed.  Rolfe) . 

Croft,  J.:  Annotations  on  Shakespeare . 

Cumberland,  R.:  The  Observer . 

Dana,  C.  E.:  English  Coronations . 

Glimpses  of  English  History . 

Daniel,  P.  A.:  Introduction  to  Griggs’  Facsimile . 


London,  1857 
“  1821 

“  1896 

1904 

Winchester  & 

London,  1887 


London,  1848 

“  1825 

New  York,  1896 
Leipzig,  1867 
New  York,  1878 
“  »  1900 

Philadelphia,  1888 
Chicago,  1887 
New  York,  1905 
London,  1646 
“  1867 

“  i877 

Philadelphia,  1846 
London,  1884 

“  1779 

New  York,  1905 
London,  1866 


it 


!799 


Boston,  1857 
Berlin,  1900 
London,  740 


it 

a 

it 


1851 

1849 

1831 


New  York,  1853 
London,  1844 


“  1856 

New  York,  1904 


1839 

London,  1840 
“  1863 

“  1879 

Boston,  1872 
York,  1810 
London,  1825 
Philadelphia,  1902 
1904 

London,  1884 


622 


APPENDIX 


Davis,  C.  K.:  Law  in  Shakespeare . 

Delius,  N.:  Shakspere  Werke . 

“  Ueber  der  urspringlichen  Text  Richard  III. 

(Sh.  Jahrbuch,  vol.  vii) . 

Dixon,  W.  H.:  Her  Majesty's  Tower  (ed.  vii) . 

Doran,  Dr:  Their  Majesties  Servants . 

Douce,  F.:  Illustrations  of  Shakespeare . 

Dovvden,  Edward:  Shakespeare:  His  Mind  and  Art . 

Drake,  N. :  Memorials  oj  Shakespeare . 

“  Shakespeare  and  his  Times . 

Dunlap,  W.:  Life  of  George  Cooke . 

Duport,  P.:  Essais  Litteraire  sur  Shakespeare . 

Dyce,  A.:  Few  Notes,  etc . 

“  Remarks  on  Collier’s  and  Knight's  Editions . 

Edwards,  T. :  Canons  of  Criticism  (seventh  edition) . 

Farmer,  R. :  Essay  on  the  Learning  of  Shakespeare . 

Field,  Barron:  The  True  Tragedie  of  Richard  the  Third, 

Shakespeare  Society  Pub . 

Fitzgerald,  P.:  Life  of  David  Garrick . 

Fleay,  F.  G.:  Life  and  Work  of  Shakespeare . 

Chronicle  History  of  the  London  Stage . 

“  Shakespeare  Manual . 

French,  G.  R.:  Shakespeariana  Genealogica . 

Fuller,  T.:  Church  History  of  Britain . 

History  of  the  Worthies  of  England  (ed.  P.  A. 

Nuttall) . . 

Furnivall,  F.  J.:  Introduction  to  Leopold  Shakspere . 

“  Succession  of  Shakespeare’ s  Works . 

Gairdner,  J. :  Life  and  Reign  of  Richard  the  Third . 

Did  Henry  VII.  Murder  the  Princes?  (Eng. 

Hist.  Review,  July) . 

Gardiner,  W.:  Music  of  Nature . 

Gayley,  C.  M.:  Plays  of  Our  Forefathers . 

Gentleman,  F.:  Dramatic  Censor . 

Gervinus,  G.  G.:  Commentaries  (trans.  Bunnett) . 

Giles,  H. :  Human  Life  in  Shakespeare . 

Gould,  T.  R.:  The  Tragedian . 

Green,  H. :  Shakespeare  and  the  Emblem-writers . 

Greenough,  J.  B.,  &  Kittredge,  J.  L.:  Words  and  their 

Ways  in  English  Speech . 

Grey,  Z. :  Critical,  Historical,  and  Explanatory  Notes  on 

Shakespeare . 

Griffiths,  Mrs:  Morality  of  Shakespeare’ s  Dramas . 

Guest,  E. :  History  of  English  Rhythms . 

Guizot,  M.:  (Euvres  Completes  de  Shakespeare . 

Hall:  Chronicles  of  England . 

Hall,  H.  T. :  Shakespeare  Fly-leaves . 

Halliwell,  J.  O. :  Letters  of  Kings  of  England . 

Halliwell-Phillips,  J.  O.:  Outlines  of  Life  of  Shakespeare 


St.  Paul,  18S4 
Elberfeld,  1869 

1872 

London,  1884 
“  1865 

“  1807 

“  1875 

“  1828 

“  1817 

New  York,  1815 
Paris,  1828 
London,  1853 
“  1844 

“  1765 

“  1767 

“  1844 

“  1868 

“  1886 

“  1890 

“  1876 

“  1869 

“  1837 

“  1840 

“  1877 

“  1874 

“  1878 

1891 
Boston,  n.  d. 
New  York,  1907 
London,  1770 
“  1863 

Boston,  1868 
“  1868 

“  1870 

New  York,  1901 

London,  1754 

“  1775 

“  1838 

Paris,  1821 
London,  1809 
Cambridge,  1869 
London,  1848 
Brighton,  1882 


LIST  OF  BOOKS 


623 


Halsted,  Caroline:  Life  of  Richard  III . 

Hare,  J.  C.  &  A.  W.:  Guesses  at  Truth . . 

Hawkins,  F.  W.:  Life  of  Edmund  Kean . 

Hazlitt,  W.  C.:  English  Stage . 

Heath,  B.:  Revisal  of  Sh.’s  Text . 

Heraud,  J.  A.:  Shakespeare' s  Inner  Life . 

Heywood,  T. :  Edward  IV.  (pts.  1  &  2,  ed.  Pearson) . 

Hifferman,  P. :  Dramatic  Genius  of  Shakespeare . 

Holinshed  :  Chronicles . . 

Horn,  F. :  Shakespeare' s  Schauspiele  Erlautert . 

Hudson,  H.  N.:  Shakespeare,  his  Life,  Art,  and  Characters. .  .  . 

Hume,  D.:  History  of  England . 

Hunt,  Leigh:  Critical  Essays  on  the  Performers  of  the 

London  Theatres . 

Hunter,  Joseph:  New  Illustrations  of  Shakespeare . 

Hurdis,  J.:  Cursory  Remarks . 

Ingulph:  Chronicle  of  Croyland  Abbey  (ed.  Riley) . 

Jameson,  Mrs:  Characteristics  of  Women . 

Jesse,  J.  H.:  Memoirs  of  the  City  of  London  and  its 

Celebrities  (new  ed.) . 

Jesse,  J.  H. :  Memoirs  of  the  Life  and  Reign  of  Rich.  III. 

(new  ed.) . 

Keightley,  T.:  Shakespeare  Expositor . 

Kemble,  J.  P. :  Macbeth  and  Richard  III . 

King,  C.  W. :  History  of  Precious  Stones  and  Gems . 

Kinnear,  B.  G.:  Cruces  Shakesperiance . 

Kirk,  J.  F.:  Sh.’s  Tragedies  on  the  Stage  (Lippincott’s 

Maga.,  June) . 

Knight,  C.:  Studies  0}  Shakspere . 

Knight,  Joseph:  David  Garrick . 

“  “  Theatrical  Notes . 

KoPPEL,  R.:  T extkritische  Studien  liber  Sh.'s  Richard  III. 

und  King  Lear . 

Kreyssig,  F. :  V orlesungen  iiber  Shakspeare . 

Legge,  A.  O. :  The  Unpopular  King . 

Lennox,  Mrs  C.:  Shakespeare  Illustrated . 

Lettsom,  W.  N.:  New  Readings  (Blackwood’s  Maga., 

August) . 

Lilly,  W. :  Introduction  to  Astrology . 

Lingard,  J. :  History  of  England . 

Lloyd,  W.  W.:  Essays  on  Shakespeare . 

Lounsbury,  T.  R. :  Shakespeare  and  Voltaire . 

Lowell,  J.  R.:  Prose  Works . 

Macready,  W. :  Reminiscences  (ed.  F.  Pollock) . 

Markham,  Sir  C.  R.:  Richard  III.  (Eng.  Hist.  Review,  April) 
Richard  III.:  his  Life  and  Char¬ 
acter  . . 

Mason,  J.  M.:  Comments  on  the[Var.  1778] . 


Philadelphia,  1844 
Boston,  1861 
London,  1869 
“  1818 

“  1765 

“  1865 

“  1873 

1772 

“  1587 

Leipzig,  1823 
Boston,  1872 
New  York,  1879 

London,  1807 
“  1853 

1792 

“  1854 

“  1833 

Boston,  1902 


1902 

London,  1867 
“  1817 

Boston,  1861 
London,  1883 


1884 

London,  1868 
“  1894 

“  1893 

Dresden,  1877 
Berlin,  1862 
London,  1885 
“  1753 

1853 

London,  1887 
Edinburgh,  1902 
London,  1858 
New  York,  1902 
Boston,  1892 
London,  1875 
1891 

London  & 

New  York,  1906 
London,  1785 


624 


APPENDIX 


Mason,  J.  M.:  Comments  on  the  Plays  of  Beaumont  &  Fletcher 
Mezieres,  A. :  Shakespeare  ses  CEuvres  et  ses  Critiques .... 

Minto,  W.:  Characteristics  of  English  Poets . 

More,  Sir  Thomas:  Life  of  Richard  the  Third  (ed.  Singer) 

More,  Thomas:  Workes . 

Moulton,  Richard:  Shakespeare  as  Dramatic  Artist . 

Murphy,  A.:  Gray’s  Inn  Journal . 

“  Life  of  Garrick . 

Oechelhauser,  W. :  Einjiihrungen  zu  Shakespere’s  Biihnen- 

Dramen . 

Oechelhauser,  W.:  Essay  iiber  Richard  III . 

Ordish,  T.  F.:  Shakespeare’s  London . 

O’Sullivan,  D.:  CEuvres  de  Shakespeare . 

Palliser,  Mrs  Bury:  Historic  Devices,  Badges,  and  War- 
cries  . 

Paston  Letters  (ed.  Gairdner) . 

Percy,  T. :  Reliques  of  English  Poetry . 

Perkins,  O.  T.:  Ghostland  and  Fairyland  ( Nodes  Shakes- 

periance ) . 

Perring,  Sir  P. :  Hard  Knots  in  Shakespeare  (ed.  ii) . 

Petri,  M. :  Zur  Einfiihrung  Shakespeare’ s  in  die  Christliche 

Familie . 

Pickersgill,  E.  H. :  On  the  Quarto  and  Folio  of  Richard  III. 

(Sh.  Soc.  Trans.) . 

Plumptre,  J.:  Discourse  on  the  Stage . 

Ramsay,  J.:  Lancaster  &•  York . 

Reed,  H. :  English  History  Illustrated  by  Shakespeare . 

Rees,  J.:  Life  of  Edwin  Forrest . 

Richardson,  W.:  Essays  on  Shakespeare’s  Dramatic  Char¬ 
acters . 

Riddle,  J.  E.:  Illustrations  of  Aristotle  from  Shakespeare . 

Ritson,  J.:  Cursory  Criticisms . 

Robinson,  H.  Crabb:  Diary ,  Reminiscences,  and  Corres¬ 
pondence . 

Roderick,  R.:  Remarks,  Supplement  to  Edward’s  Canons.  . . . 
Rose,  E. :  Shakespeare  and  History  (Fraser’s  Magazine,  May) 
Rotscher,  H.  T.:  Shakespeare  in  seinem  hochsten  Charakter 

gebilden . 

Rotuli  Parliamentorum . 

Rous,  J.:  Historia  Regum  Anglice  (ed.  T.  Hearnius)  (ed.  ii).. 

Rumelin,  G.:  Shakspere-Studien . 

Schelling,  F.  E.:  English  Chronicle  Play . 

Schlegel,  A.  W.:  Dramatic  Literature,  Lectures  (trans.  by 

J.  Black) . 

Schmidt,  A.:  Vorlesungen,  Shakspere  Werke  (ed.  Ulrici).... 
Schwartzkopf,  A. :  Shakspere’ s  Dramen  auf  Ewigen  Griinde 
Seymour,  E.  H.:  Remarks,  Critical,  Con  jectural,  and  Explan¬ 
atory,  on  Shakespeare . 


London,  1798 
Paris,  i860 
Boston,  1901 
London,  1821 

“  iS57 
Oxford,  1893 
London,  1756 
“  1801 

Minden,  1885 
Berlin,  1894 
London,  1897 
Paris,  1839 

London,  1870 
Birmingham, 

i872-’75 
London,  1775 

“  1887 

“  1886 

Hanover,  1868 

1875-76 

London,  1809 
Oxford,  1892 
Philadelphia,  1855 
“  1874 

London,  1797 
Oxford,  1832 
London,  1792 

Boston,  n.  d. 
London,  1765 
1876 

Berlin,  1844 
London,  1772 
Oxford,  1745 
Stuttgart,  1866 
New  York,  1902 

London,  1815 
Berlin,  1868 
Bremen,  1888 

London,  1805 


LIST  OF  BOOKS 


625 


Simpson,  R.:  Political  Use  of  Historical  Plays  ( Sh.  Soc.Trans.) 

Singer,  S.  W.:  Text  of  Shakespeare  Vindicated . 

Skottowe,  A.:  Life  of  Shakespeare . 

Snider,  D.  J.:  System  of  Shakespeare' s  Dramas . 

Spedding,  J.:  On  the  Quarto  and  Folio  of  Richard  III.  (Sh. 

Soc.  Trans.). . . . . 

Stokes,  H.  P. :  Chronological  Order  of  Shakespeare' s  Plays.  . . 

Stone,  A.  O.  Boswell:  Shakespeare’s  Holinshed . 

Stow,  J.:  Survey  of  London  (ed.  Morley) . 

Strickland,  Miss  A.:  Lives  of  the  Queens  of  England. . . . 

Stubbs,  W. :  Constitutional  History  of  England . 

Swinbourne,  A.  C.:  Study  of  Shakespeare . 

Symmons,  C.:  Life  of  Shakespeare . 

Topsell,  E.:  History  of  Four-footed  Beasts . 

Turner,  Sharon:  History  of  England  during  the  Middle 

Ages  (ed.  iii) . 

Ulrici,  H.:  Shakespeare' s  Dramatic  Art  (trans.  L.  D.  Schmitz) 

Upton,  J.:  Critical  Observations . 

Vaughan,  H.  H.:  New  Readings  and  Renderings  of  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  Tragedies . 

Vergil,  Polydore:  History  0}  England  (ed.  Ellis)  (Camden 

Soc.)  . 

Verplanck,  G.  C.:  Shakespeare' s  Dramas . 

Von  Friesen,  H.  F.:  Shakespeare  Studien . 

Walker,  W.  S.:  Criticisms  on  Shakespeare . 

'  On  Shakespeare' s  Versification . 

Walpole,  H.:  Catalogue  of  the  Royal  and  Noble  Authors  of 

England  (ed.  ii) . 

Walpole,  H. :  Historic  Doubts  about  Richard  III.  (ed.  ii). .  . . 

Walsh,  W.  S.:  Handbook  of  Literary  Curiosities . 

Ward,  A.  W.:  English  Dramatic  Literature . 

Warner,  E.  B. :  English  History  in  Shakespeare' s  Plays. .  . . 

Warner,  R.:  Letter  to  Garrick . 

Wessel,  C.:  Richard  the  Third  of  Shakespeare  and  Rich¬ 
ard  III.  in  History . 

Whately,  T.:  Remarks  on  Some  of  the  Characters  of  Shakes¬ 
peare  . . . 

Wheatley  &  Cunningham:  London  Past  &  Present . 

Whipple,  E.  P.:  Literature  of  Elizabeth . 

White,  R.  G. :  Shakespeare's  Scholar . 

Winter,  W.:  Life  and  Art  of  Edwin  Booth . 

Shadows  of  the  Stage . 

Wordsworth,  C.:  Shakespeare’s  Historical  Plays . 

“  Shakespeare’s  Knowledge  and  Use  of  the 

Bible . . 

Wright,  W.  A.:  Richard  III.  (Clarendon  Press) . 


1874 

London,  1853 
“  1824 

St.  Louis,  1877 

i875-’76 
London,  186? 
“  1896 

“  n.  d. 
London,  1844 
Oxford,  1875 
London,  1880 
1826 

London,  1658 

“  1830 

“  1876 

1746 

“  1888 

London,  1844 
New  York,  1847 
Vienna,  1874 
London,  i860 
“  1854 

1759 
“  1768 

Philadelphia,  1893 
London,  1875 
New  York,  1894 
London,  1768 

Eschwege,  1876 

Oxford,  1785 
London,  1891 
Boston,  1869 
New  York,  1854 
“  1893 

“  1893 

London,  1883 

“  1864 

Oxford,  1893 


40 


' 


■ 


■ 


INDEX 


‘A’  used  pleonastically . 

‘A  horse,  a  horse,’  etc.,  imitations  of, 

A  many . 

Abate=W««/  . 

Abjects . 

Abroach,  set . 

Act  I,  sc.  i,  probable  date  of . 

Act  I,  sc.  i,  scenic  arrangement  of, 

Irving’s . • . 

Act  I,  sc.  i,  scenic  arrangement  of, 
Oechelhaiiser’s  suggestion  for. . . 

Act  I,  sc.  ii,  Gervinus  on . 

Act  I,  sc.  ii,  historic  accuracy  in, 

Capell  on . 

Act  I,  sc.  ii,  Hudson  on . 

Act  I,  sc.  iii,  locality  and  date  of . . 
Act  I,  sc.  iv,  11  257-261,  Tyrwhitt’s 

rearrangement  of . 

Act.  II,  sc.  i,  probably  founded  on 
Act  I,  sc.  i,  of  T rue  T ragedie .... 
Act  III,  sc.  vii,  Dingelstedt’s  scenic 

arrangement  of . 

Act  IV,  sc.  ii,  scenic  arrangement 

of,  by  Oechelhaiiser . 

Act  V,  sc.  iii,  dramatic  time  in . 

Action,  duration  of,  Malone  on. . . . 
“  “  Theobald  on. . 

“  “  Wright  on.... 

Actors . 

Address,  simplicity  of . 

Adjective,  before  and  after  noun.  . . 

Advised=6e  deliberate . 

Adjective,  transposition  of . 

Aery . . . 

Afford . 

Alablaster . 

Alacke . 

Alarum . 

Alexandrine,  apparent,  with  trimeter 
couplet . 


Alexandrines,  weeding  out  of,  a 
characteristic  of  Shakespeare’s 


own  correction .  163 

Alger,  on  Forrest  as  Richard .  600 

All,  use  of  adverbially .  154 

Ambling .  20 

Americanisms,  R.  G.  White  on....  359 

Amourous  looking-glass .  19 

An  end  for  on  end .  109 

Anachronisms,  permissible .  412 

And =t‘/  indeed .  180 

And  if .  204 

And,  used  emphatically .  343 

Anne,  Lady,  Richardson’s  analysis 

of  character  of .  43,  53 

Anne  not  married  to  Edward  Prince 

of  Wales .  9 

Anne,  Richard’s  Queen,  death  of..  31 1 

Annoy = annoyance .  399 

Anointing  at  coronation .  282 

Ape  on  back  of  bear .  208 

Argu 0— prove .  260 

Arms  hung  up  as  monuments .  17 

Arrowsmith,  on  * soon ’ .  309 

Article,  omission  of,  for  emphasis. .  64 

As  .  .  .  as .  91 

‘As,’  repetition  of,  in  III,  i,  139  ...  207 

As,  with  force  of  a  relative .  191 

Aside,  rare  occurrence  of  speech  so 

marked  in  Folio .  iii 

At  charges .  76 

Atonement —reconciliation .  80 

Attainder .  245 

Badge,  armorial,  of  Duke  of  Clar¬ 
ence .  no 

Badge,  armorial,  of  Richard .  no 

Banishment  of  Margaret,  date  of. . .  94 

Bar =tribunal .  405 

Barbed,  or  barded .  18 

627 


117 

421 

271 

427 

37 

iii 

13 

13 

i5 

44 

43 

45 

77 

144 

148 

254 

286 

377 

12 

11 

12 

59i 

382 

3i7 

158 

i74 

104 

75 

3°7 

28 

17 

55 


628 


INDEX 


Barnard,  on  Richard  III.  and  the 

evil  eye . 

Basilisk . 

Bathurst,  on  The  Tragedy . 

Battalia . 

Baynard’s  Castle,  history  of . 

Beads . 

Beaver,  lower  portion  of  helmet . 

Bed-fellows  for  dust . . 

Beholding=tt?wfer  obligation . 

Belike . 

Bend = direct,  aim . 

Betid  z— become . 

Betide,  used  impersonally . 

Bettering=amplifying . 

Bewley,  on  Character  of  Richard. . . 

Bid,  past  tense  of  abide . 

Bigamy  =  marriage  with  widow. . . . 

Bishop  of  Exeter . 

Bishops,  the  two,  an  interpolation 

by  Hall . 

Bishops,  the  two,  Delius  on . 

Black  Bull,  armorial  badge,  of  Duke 

of  Clarence . 

Blake’s  illustrations  to  Job,  com¬ 
parison  to,  by  Dowden . 

Blam  e=blameworthy . 

Blank-verse,  Shakespeare’s  change 

in  management  of . 

Bleeding  of  murdered  body  in  pres¬ 
ence  of  murderer . 

Bless  ivom=keep  from  evil . 

Blessings  from  parents . . 

B\md=obscure . 

B  lood = disposition . 

Boar,  Richard’s  armorial  badge. . . . 
Bona,  Lady,  Edward’s  contract  with 

Bond  of  life . 

Boot =odds .  322, 

Booth,  E.,  as  Richard . 

“  J.  B.,  as  Richard . 

“  “  entrance  of . 

Borne,  hardly . 

Bottled  Spider . 

Bought  and  sold . 

Bourchier,  Cardinal . 

Bowel = centre . 

Bowyer  Tower,  scene  of  Clarence’s 
murder . 


Brackenbury’s  appointment  as  Con¬ 
stable  of  Tower,  date  of .  27 

Brackenbury  or  Keeper .  116 

Brave=<0  adorn .  412 

Breathing  while .  S2 

Brecknock,  Buckingham’s  estate. . .  303 

Britain,  an  adjective .  312,366 

Brooke,  on  Morality  of  Richard  and 

that  of  the  two  Murderers .  125 

Brooke,  on  Queen  Margaret  as  a 

Greek  Conception .  7 

Broken  rancour .  172 

Brothers  for  brother .  80 

Buck,  on  Character  of  Richard  ....  549 

Buck’s  1  Life  of  Richard  III ’ . 458 

Buckingham,  Duke  of,  character 

of .  215 

Buckingham,  Duke  of,  Oechelhaiiser 

on .  2 

Buckingham’s  breach  with  Richard, 

causes  for .  313 

Buckingham’s  intent  to  murder 

Richard .  371 

Bulk  =*trunk  of  the  body.... .  122 

Bunch-backt .  102 

Burbadge  mentioned  in  Corbet’s 

Iter  Boreale .  591 

Burgundy,  Clarence’s  desire  to 

reach .  118 

Burthen’d  yoke .  327 

Business,  a  trisyllable .  175 

But =only .  95 

“  —on  the  other  hand .  125 

“  = otherwise  than .  107 

“  =without,  instead  of .  151 

Butt,  measure  of,  in  time  of  Rich¬ 
ard  III .  135 

Cacodemon .  90 

Caitiff .  326 

Cambridge  Editors,  on  the  Text...  433 

Campbell,  on  The  Tragedy .  575 

Cannot  choose  but .  345 

Capable  —intelligent .  21 1 

Caparison .  413 

Capell,  on  historical  accuracy  in  Act 

I,  sc.  ii .  43 

Cardinal  in  Act  III,  sc.  i,  identity 


of .  19L  *93 


Si 

62 

576 

378 

25i 

264 

383 

35 1 

iS9 

28 

56 

78 

191 

328 

568 

346 

272 

364 

264 

265 

no 

315 

162 

240 

52 

227 

170 

384 

48 

1 10 

256 

323 

414 

601 

599 

15 

i53 

101 

4i5 

3 

374 

”7 


INDEX 


629 


Carnal = bloody .  321 

Case  and  cause ,  interchange  of . . .  .  248 

Castaways .  161 

Catesby,  introduction  of,  in  III,  v.  243 
relationship  of,  to  Justice 

Shallow .  4 

Cause  and  effect .  59 

Cedar  emblematic  of  height .  104 

Censorship  of  Quarto,  Marshall  on.  256 

Censure=0/>twt0w .  175 

Centry .  375 

Ceremonious,  ellision  of  middle  e  in.  195 

Chalmers,  on  Date .  452 

Chamber =royal  residence .  192 

Character,  accent  of .  200 

Characters  of  York  and  Edward  V. 

contrasted .  208 

Chastised,  accent  of .  347 

Chertsey,  situation  of .  49 

Children  in  Shakespeare,  C.  Clarke 

on .  204 

Children  in  the  Wood,  ballad  of, 
and  murder  of  the  Princes,  Miss 

C.  Halsted  on .  615 

Children  in  the  Wood,  ballad,  text  of  612 
Children,  precocious,  short-lived. . .  200 

Churchill,  on  Source  of  Plot .  463 

on  ‘  True  Tragedie' .  504 

Cibber’s  Version,  analysis  of .  604 

“  “  Hazlitt  on .  605 

“  “  omission  of  First 

Act  of,  .  605 

Citizen  put  to  death,  by  Edward  IV., 

identity  of .  249 

Citizens,  the  three,  characters  of,  . .  .  177 
Clarence,  breach  between,  and 

Edward,  cause  of, .  118 

Clarence,  daughter  of, .  277 

“  “  confounded 

with  first  cousin,  Lady  Cicely .  31  x 

Clarence,  daughter  of,  married  to 

Sir  R.  Pole .  311 

Clarence,  desire  of,  to  reach  Bur¬ 
gundy  .  118 

Clarence,  drowning  of,  in  butt  of 
Malmesey,  first  mentioned  by 

Comines .  13 

Clarence,  Duchess  of,  date  of  death 
of .  125 


Clarence,  fate  of,  compared  to  that 

of  P.  Agrippa .  160 

Clarence,  first  to  have  propagated 
slander  against  Duchess  of  York.  250 
Clarence,  George,  Duke  of,  char¬ 
acter  of,  Marshall  on .  1 

Clarence,  imprisonment  of,  dura¬ 
tion  of .  1 1 7 

Clarence,  murder  of,  scene  of,  laid 

in  Bowyer  Tower .  117 

Clarence,  son  of,  compared  to  Duke 

of  York .  164 

Clarence,  son  of,  weak-minded .  295 

Clarke,  Cowden-,  on  Character  of 

Richard . 560 

Clarke,  Cowden-,  on  Scrivener- 

scene .  252 

Classical  knowledge  of  Shakespeare, 

Collins  on .  18 

Clocks,  striking,  portable,  date  of.  . .  412 

Clos e= secret .  292 

Cloudy = sullen .  172 

Cock-crow,  a  division  of  time .  407 

Cockshut  time .  386 

Cog =cozen,  cheat .  81 

Cold = depressing .  368 

Coleridge,  H.,  on  The  Tragedy . ...  12 

Coleridge.  S.  T.,  on  The  Tragedy  .  12 

Collier,  on  The  Text .  432 

“  on  ‘  True  Tragedie ’ .  502 

Collingbourne’s  satirical  rhyme .  .  98,  238 
Collins,  J.  C.,  on  classical  knowl¬ 
edge  of  Shakespeare .  18 

Comfortable,  used  causitively .  333 

Compact,  accent  of .  174 

Comparative,  double .  87 

Competitors=/>0rtM0rs . .  364 

Complete,  accent  of .  337 

Complot=/>/aw .  214 

Compound  adjective .  90 

Conceit = fancy .  235 

Conclude d= decided .  78 

Conscience,  meaning  of,  as  used  by 
Hamlet,  and  by  2.  Murderer. ...  132 
Conscience,  as  used  by  Richard  syn¬ 
onymous  with  religion .  415 

Conscience,  speech  on,  by  2.  Mur¬ 
derer,  compared  to  that  by  Rich¬ 
ard  .  132 


630 


INDEX 


Consistory .  176 

Constable  of  Tower,  Brackenbury’s 

appointment  as,  date  of .  27 

Contract,  as  past  participle .  270 

Con veyance = secret  management . . .  344 
Cooke,  G.  F.,  action  of,  during 

opening  lines  of  play .  16 

Cooke  as  Richard .  593 

Cooke’s  Richard,  Boaden  on. .  419,  420 

Corbet’s  Iter  Boreale .  591 

Costard  applied  to  head .  135 

Costume,  C.  Knight  on .  606 

Councils,  divided,  the .  213 

Countess  Richmond .  79 


Courtenay,  on  Deformity  0}  Richard  61 1 
Courtship  scene  as  acted  by  Kean.  62 
Cousin,  general  term  for  a  rela¬ 


tive .  162,  398 

Coward  conscience .  402 

Cozen =cheat .  339 

Craze=rwiw .  318 

Crew = military  reinforcements .  370 

Crosby  House .  69 

Cross,  a  verb  or  a  preposition .  280 

“  in  talk .  208 

Cross-row .  29 

Crown,  red  hot,  punishment  of 

regicides .  281 

Crown  worn  by  king  in  battle .  425 

Cry  mercy,  omission  of  objective 

case .  4°8 

Cry  thee  mercy .  365 

Cue .  232 

Curse,  power  of,  and  Fate .  108 

Curses,  power  of,  restricted  in  open 
air .  106 

Dagger,  an  amulet  against  evil  eye,  206 

Dance  attendance .  261 

Daniel,  on  Dramatic  Time .  617 

“  on  The  Text .  448 

Darkness,  cast  in .  112 

Dat e=period .  342 

“  of  Composition,  discussion...  451 

T>a.ub=cloak,  gloss .  245 

Daughter  of  Clarence .  277 

Day,  the,  is  spent .  223 

Dead-killing .  280 

Deal  upon .  298 


Dear =hard,  severe .  140 

Deceive  the  time .  389 

Declin e— recite  in  order .  326 

Deformity,  Bacon’s  Essay  on .  23 

of  Richard .  610 

“  Lloyd  on. . . .  20 

Delius,  on  the  Text .  435 

Demise,  used  in  unusual  sense .  341 

Denier .  75 

Derby,  Lord,  see  Stanley,  Lord .  4 

Descant,  a  musical  term .  22,  260 

Devil,  a  monosyllable . 51 

Dew,  danger  of  exposure  to .  382 

Diet —mode  of  life .  40 

Diffused .  54 

Dighton  and  Forrest . 304 

Dingelstedt’s  scenic  arrangement  of 

Act  III,  sc.  vii .  254 

Discontent =ill-feeling  involved  in  a 

state  of  enmity .  15 

‘Discoveries’  in  old  theatres .  286 

Dissemblance=wan/  of  similarity..  257 
Dissemble=C0Mcea7  one’s  intentions.  164 

Dissembling  ^fraudulent .  20,  150 

Distain z— defile .  4x7 

Dogs,  Shakespeare’s  opinion  of . .  . .  306 

Doran,  on  Garrick’s  Richard .  592 

Dorset  as  ‘  Messenger’  in  II,  iv. . . .  187, 

Double  negative .  85 

Doubt  not  but .  376 

Dowden,  on  Character  of  Richard  .  566 
“  on  Shakespeare’ s  portrayal 

of  Edward  IV .  148 

Drake,  on  Character  0}  Richard. .  . .  556 

Dramatic  time  in  V,  iii . 377,  388 

Drawn,  meaning  of,  in  sentence 

against  Traitors .  375 

Dread  Lord,  a  royal  title .  205 

Dream,  a,  of  what  thou  wast .  325 

Drunken  sailor  on  a  mast .  241 

Duchess  of  York .  9 

“  “  age  of .  284 

“  of  York’s  curse,  a  prophecy  336 

Duke  Humphrey,  dining  with .  334 

Dull=dead .  95 

‘Earth,’  reading  of  Folio,  vs  death, 

Quarto  reading .  190 

Eaves-dropper .  4°8 


INDEX 


631 


Edward  IV.  as  portrayed  by  Shakes¬ 
peare,  Dowden  on .  148 

Edward  IV.,  breach  between,  and 

Clarence,  cause  of .  118 

Edward  IV.,  character  of,  Stubbs 

on .  1 

Edward  IV.,  character  of,  Ramsay 

on .  1 

Edward  IV.,  contract  of,  with  Lady 

Bona .  256 

Edward  IV.,  contract  of,  with  Lady 

Lucy .  255 

Effeminate,  in  a  good  sense .  273 

Egally .  273 

Eikonoklastes,  quotation  from .  155 

Either,  a  monosyllable .  52,  335 

Elizabeth,  Queen  to  Edward  IV., 
Oechelhaiiser  on  character  of,  . .  6 

Ellipsis  of  verb  of  motion  before  a 

preposition .  37 

Ellision,  or  softening  of  v .  73 

Elvish  mark’d .  98 

Ely,  Bishop  of,  site  of  palace  of .  233 

Embo welled .  375 

England,  a  trisyllable .  342 

English  Criticisms  on  The  Tragedy.  573 

Engross = fatten . 263 

Entertain =/a£e  into  service. ...  76,  132 

Envy =spile .  285 

Erroneous,  applied  to  person .  139 

Error  of  *  Dorset  ’  for  Hastings .  149 

Etty,  on  Character  of  Richard .  571 

Evidence =£>0dy  0 f  witnesses .  138 

Evil  eye,  Richard  and  the .  51 

Excellent,  in  bad  or  neutral  sense..  321 

Exclaims =exclamations .  51,330 

Executioner  used  in  restricted  sense.  66 

Exercise=a»  act  0}  worship. .  .  225,  262 

Fxha\e—draw  forth .  52,  64 

Expedient = quick .  69 

Expiate .  229 

Exploit=/ea/ .  292 

Expostulate=dz5C0Mrie  upon .  272 

Extreme,  accent  of .  246 

Fabvan,  on  legitimacy  of  Prince 

Edward .  74 

Fair =distinct .  258 

Fair  befall  you .  247 


‘  Fairest  of  her  daughters’  compared 
to  construction  in  ‘Of  any  place'  198 

Faithful = wo/  an  infidel .  117 

Fall  used  transitively .  66,  116,  396 

Father= father-in-law .  42 

Father-in-law=5/e^-/a//ier .  387 

Faulchion .  56 

Feature  applied  to  body .  20 

Fet= fetched .  173 

Field,  on  ‘True  Tragedie ’ .  503 

Filial  respect  in  fifteenth  century. ...  1 7 1 

Fire-new .  103 

Fleay,  on  rhyme  test .  453 

“  on  The  Text .  450 

“  on  ‘  True  Tragedie' .  504 

Fleeting = incon  stant .  124 

Fleshed =hardened .  306 

Flood = river .  122 

Flourish=e7w/>/y  ornament .  100 

Foil =//«'»  leaf  of  metal .  409 

Folio,  alterations  in,  made  by  players  380 
Folio  reading  of  I,  ii,  201,  more 
effective  dramatically  than  that 

of  Qq .  66 

Folio  text,  superiority  of,  illustra¬ 
tion  of .  186 

Foot-cloth-horse .  239 

Fox=because  of .  29 

For,  causal = /or  want  of .  401 

For —instead  of .  127 

Forrest  and  Dighton .  304 

“  as  Richard .  600 

Frank’d  up .  110,369 

French  manners,  English  contempt 

for .  81 

From— apart  from .  342 

Fulsome .  396 

Furnivall,  on  The  Tragedy .  580 

G,  prophecy  in  regard  to  letter .  26 

Gallant-springing .  141 

Galled .  321 

Garish=gaw<2y .  325 

Garland,  used  for  Crown .  219 

Garrick  as  Richard .  591 

Garrick’s  first  appearance,  real  date 

of .  S89 

Garrick’s  Richard,  attitude  of, 
towards  deformity .  15 


632 


INDEX 


Genest,  on  Cibber  as  a  tragedian.  . .  .  589 
Gentleman,  F.,  on  Garrick's  Richard  591 

Gentle = high-born .  93 

George,  badge  of  Order  of  Garter.  . .  350 

German  Criticism .  583 

Gerundial  infinitive .  72 

Gervinus,  on  Act  I,  sc.  ii .  44 

“  on  curse  of  Richard’s 

mother . ’ .  336 

Gervinus,  on  Date .  452 

Ghosts  and  dreams,  H.  Coleridge  on  393 
“  in  Cymbeline  compared  to 

those  in  V,  iii .  394 

Ghosts,  scenic  arrangement  for .  394 

signification  of,  Mrs 

Griffiths  on .  392 

Ghosts,  signification  of,  Warner  on.  394 

Gloucester,  a  trisyllable .  234 

Gone  with= completely  overcome. . .  308 

Gossip .  33 

Govern’d  by  the  watery  moon .  167 

Grandam,  your,  had  a  worser  match  86 

Gratulate=/o  salute .  278 

Grey’s  elevation  to  title  of  Marquis, 

date  of, .  103 

Grey,  Lord,  of  knightly  degree .  3 

“  Sir  John,  killed  in  second 

battle  of  St  Albans .  89 

Grief,  remembrance  of  days  of 

happiness  in, .  327 

Griffiths,  Mrs,  on  learning  of 

Shakespeare . 233 

Griffith,  Mrs,  on  signification  of  the 

Ghosts  in  V,  iii .  392 

Gross =stupid .  253 

Grossness  of  this  age .  195 

‘Guess,’  an  Americanism .  359 

Gn\\= credulous  person .  112 

Halbert .  46,  50 

Hall’s  Chronicle .  465 

“  description  of  Prince  Edward  74 

Hallo well,  on  The  Tragedy .  577 

Halsted,  Miss  C.,  on  ballad  of 
Children  in  Wood,  and  murder  of 

Princes .  615 

Handy  work .  320 

Happiness,  days  of,  remembrance 
of,  in  grief .  327 


Hardly  borne .  15^ 

Hastings,  Lord .  3 

Hatch,  a  part  of  ship .  118 

Haught —haughty .  180 

Have  done .  308 

“  with  you .  223 

Hawkins,  on  Kean  as  Richard .  597 

Hazlitt,  on  Cibber’s  Version .  605 

on  Kean  as  Richard .  596 

He  capers .  18 

He  were  best=i<  were  best  for  him. .  36 

Heads  and  Hats .  223 

Heap— multitude . 153 

Hearken  after= enquire  about .  29 

Heaven  as  a  plural .  97 

Help=<o  remedy .  170 

“  nothing  else .  330 

Helpless  used  in  active  sense .  47 

Henry,  a  trisyllable .  179 

Henry  VI.,  canonisation  of .  372 

Heraud,  on  The  Tragedy .  577 

Herbert,  Sir  Walter .  369 

Hereford,  Earldom  of,  Bucking¬ 
ham’s  claim  on .  214,  299 

Heron,  Robert,  account  of .  101 

Heywood’s  mention  of  play  of  Rich¬ 
ard  III .  11 

Hide— sheathe  as  a  sword .  65 

Historic  date  of  I,  ii,  Malone  on .  73 

“  dates  of  incidents  in  the 

Tragedy .  617 

Historical  accuracy,  violation  of,  in 

II,  iv .  182 

Hither,  a  monosyllable .  292 

Hog,  contemptuous  allusion  to 

Richard’s  armorial  badge .  98 

Hoised  sail .  367 

Holinshed,  proof  of  Shakespeare’s 

use  of .  418 

Holpe .  58 

Homicide,  applied  to  both  act  and 

agent .  60 

Horn,  on  Richmond’s  prayer .  391 

Horse,  stumbling  of,  a  sign  of 

calamity .  239 

How  chanc e=how  was  it .  301 

Hudson,  on  Act  I,  sc.  ii .  45 

on  Character  of  Richard.  .  564 
“  on  opening  soliloquy .  14 


INDEX 


Hudson,  on  relation  of  Margaret  to 

other  characters .  8 

Hull=/0  drift .  356 

Hume,  on  More's  ‘ Biography ’ .  456 

Humility=gen/fe;z€j.y  0}  mind .  155 

Humour,  lack  of,  in  this  play .  129 

Humphrey  Hour .  333 

Hunt,  L.,  on  Cooke  as  Richard .  595 

“  on  Macready  as  Richard .  598 
Hunter,  on  opening  soliloquy .  14 

‘I  am  I,’  a  reminiscence  of  ‘  I  am 

myself  alone’ .  404 

‘I  am  not  in  the  vein,’  Kean’s 

manner  of  delivering .  303 

‘I  call  thee  not,’  Vaughan’s  inter¬ 
pretation  of .  100 

I  died  for  hope .  400 

I  hold  my  life  as  dear  as  yours. ...  221 

‘I’  used  for  object .  229 

I  wis .  86 

I  would  have  had  you  heard .  247 

Idea =image .  257 

Ideal  fabric  of  Shakespeare’s 
tragedy  dependent  on  Polydore 

Vergil .  316 

Idl e= frivolous,  trifling .  24 

Ignoto,  passage  in,  J.  G.  Mathews 

on .  19 

Ill  dispersing  wind .  281 

“  news,  rapid  passage  of,  pro¬ 
verbial .  156 

Impatience,  a  quadrisyllable .  164 

Imposition =laying  on  0}  burden.  . .  275 

In =during .  89,  92,  307 

“  =into .  76 

In  air  of = apparent  character  of .  240 

In  Hold=i«  custody .  369 

Incapabl  e=incompetent .  162 

Incens t— instigate .  210 

Index=introduction,  prelude...  176,324 
Infinitives,  two,  dependent  upon 

auxiliary  verb .  84 

Infranchise .  38 

Ingots  for  ‘Anchors’ .  120 

Ingram,  on  Metrical  Test .  453 

Iniquity,  a  name  of  the  Vice  in  old 

plays .  201 

Innocency .  244 


633 


Insinuate —ingratiate .  134 

Instinct,  accent  of .  180 

Insulting  tyranny .  189 

Intelligencer=iecr^  agent .  323 

Intend  ^pretend .  243 

Intestine,  or  intestate,  joys .  329 

Intreat  me  fair .  331 

Inward —intimate .  231 

Irony,  an  example  of .  142,  220 

Irving  as  Richard .  601 

Irving’s  scenic  arrangement  of  Act 

I,  sc.  i .  13 

Is  all  things  ready .  230 

Jack,  a  name  of  contempt .  82 

“  of  the  Clock .  302 

Jameson,  Mrs,  on  Character  of 

Margaret .  6 

Jelious,  examples  of .  34 

Jesse,  on  Character  0}  Richard. .. .  558 

Jockey  of  Norfolk .  415 

Johnson,  on  dialogue  between  Rich¬ 
ard  and  Elizabeth . .  337 

Johnson,  on  the  Tragedy .  573 

agree .  192 

Jut —encroach  upon .  189 

Kean,  E.,  as  Richard .  595 

Kean’s  action  in  courtship  scene. ...  62 

“  action  in  final  fight .  424 

“  manner  of  bidding  friends 

‘good  night’ .  387 

Kean’s  manner  of  delivering:  ‘  I  am 

not  in  the  vein’ .  303 

Keep —remain  in .  381 

Keeper  or  Brackenbury. . . .  116,  126,  128 

Keightley,  on  Date .  452 

Kemble,  J.  P.,  on  Richard’s  behav¬ 
iour  after  murder  of  Princes....  310 
Kemble’s  Richard,  Scott’s  criticism 

of .  23 

Key-cold .  46 

King,  knights  dressed  as,  a  protec¬ 
tion .  422 

Kings  King  forbids .  348 

Kirk,  on  J.  B.  Booth  as  Richard.  .  599 

Knife  sharpened  on  hard  heart. .  . .  339 
Knight,  C.,  on  Character  of  Rich¬ 
ard .  561 


634 


INDEX 


Knight,  C.,  on  ‘  True  Tragedie' . . . .  503 

on  Source  of  Plot .  462 

¥Laot=crowd .  2x3 

Kreyssig,  on  Richard  as  a  dramatic 
hero .  584 

Labour,  transitive  use  of .  143 

Lacy’s  copy  of  Legge’s  Latin 

tragedy .  11,500 

Lag=/<zrf,  hindmost .  156 

Laid,  or  lead .  398 

Lamb,  on  Cooke  as  Richard .  593 

Lances,  number  of,  carried .  385 

Land  govern’d  by  child,  woe  to...  178 

Launch=/>zerce .  339 

Learning  of  Shakespeare,  Mrs 

Griffiths  on .  18 1 

Led  in  the  hand .  277 

Let  fall  thy  lance .  397 

Lethe,  river  of  oblivion .  341 

Level =aim .  338 

L,ewd=worthless .  83 

Lights  burning  blue  on  appearance 

of  Spirit .  403 

Lightly —commonly .  204 

Like,  impersonal  use  0} .  348 

Limit = assign .  381 

Lines,  disjointed .  386 

Lively  hood  for  likelihood .  235 

Lloyd,  on  Character  of  Richard. . . .  558 
“  on  introduction  of  Margaret .  8 

“  on  Richard's  deformity . .  20 

“  on  ‘True  Tragedie ’ .  503 

Locality  and  Date  of  Act  I,  sc.  iii.  . .  77 

London  Bridge,  traitors’  heads 

on .  220 

Looks  proudly  on  the  crown .  313 

Lovell  and  Ratcliffe,  confusion  in 

regard  to,  in  III,  iv .  237 

Love's  Labour's  Lost ,  similarity  to, 

in  form  of  dialogue .  349 

Lowell,  on  lack  of  humour  in  this 

play .  129 

Lowell’s  Primrose  Criticism .  581 

Lucy,  Lady,  Edward’s  contract 

with .  255 

Ludlow  Castle,  Prince  Edward 

stationed  at .  173 

Lulling .  263 


Macbeth,  Lady,  compared  to  Mar¬ 
garet .  7 

Macbeth,  last  Act  of,  compared  to 

like  scenes  in  Rich.  Ill .  376 

Macready’s  account  of  his  first 

appearance .  308 

Macready,  on  Kean  as  Richard. . . .  596 

“  on  restoration  of  Tragedy  590 

Maid’s  part,  to  play .  261 

Majesty,  a  disyllable .  20,  77 

“  use  of,  as  form  of  address 

to  sovereign .  27 

Mak  e=do .  93 

“  means .  382,  409 

“  prey .  84 

Malapert .  103 

Malmsey,  or  Malvesie,  derivation 

of  name  of .  136 

Malmsey,  price  of,  in  time  of  Henry 

VII .  136 

Malone,  on  Date .  451 

“  on  duration  of  action .  12 

“  on  probable  authorship  of 

True  Tragedy .  12 

Malone,  on  The  Text .  432 

“  on  The  Tragedy .  573 

Mansfield  as  Richard .  602 

“  “  Winter  on...  31 1 

Margaret  as  character  in  the  drama, 

Marshall’s  opinion  of .  7 

Margaret  as  a  Greek  conception, 

Brooke  on .  7 

Margaret  as  Greek  chorus,  Warner 

on .  8 

Margaret  as  Nemesis,  Moulton  on. .  94 

Margaret’s  banishment,  date  of _  93 

Margaret  compared  to  Lady  Mac¬ 
beth .  7 

Margaret’s  imprecations,  Steevens 

on .  92 

Margaret’s  imprecations,  Walpole 

on .  108 

Margaret’s  imprecations,  Warbur- 

ton  on .  92 

Margaret’s  imprecations,  Wright  on  92 
Margaret,  introduction  of,  Lloyd 

on .  8 

Margaret,  Mrs  Jameson  on .  6 

“  Minto  on  character  of.  .  7 


INDEX 


635 


Margaret,  relation  of,  to  other 

characters,  Hudson  on .  8 

Marquis  as  title,  date  of  institution 

of .  103 

Marriage  with  niece,  Richard’s 

intended .  295 

Marry,  a  monosyllable .  235,  263 

Marseillaise,  compared  to  Richard’s 

harangue .  416 

Marshall,  on  character  of  Margaret.  7 

on  The  Text .  451 

Marvellous,  a  disyllabic .  76 

Mathews,  J.  G.,  on  passage  in  poem, 

Ignoto .  19 

May=/o  be  able .  46 

M  e= my  self .  153 

Me  thoughts .  118 

Mean = means .  85 

Measure,  a  solemn  dance .  17 

Meed =reward .  90 

Metal =disposition .  345 

M.ew=enclose . . .  26 

Milk-sop .  418 

Mill-stones,  dropping,  instead  of 

tears .  115 

Milton’s  allegory  of  Sin  and  Death.  .  107 
Minto,  on  character  of  Margaret. .  .  7 

Miscarry=dfe .  372 

Misdoubt=s«s/>ec< .  222 

Mock  my  destruction .  372 

Moe  and  more .  364 

Moity,  a  disyllable .  75,  166 

Moralize,  as  a  verb  active = to  inter¬ 
pret .  201 

More’s  Life  of  Richard,  J.  C.  Col¬ 
lins  on .  2 

Mortal  staring .  389 


Moulton,  on  Character  of  Richard.  568 
on  Margaret  as  Nemesis  94 
on  Richard’s  irresistibility  63 
Murder,  instigation  to,  Shakes¬ 
peare’s  treatment  of .  114,  288 

Murdered  body  bleeding  in  presence 

of  Murderer .  52 

Murderers,  dialogue  between,  com¬ 
pared  to  like  scene  in  True 

Tragedie .  131 

Murderers,  dialogue  between,  an 
interpolation  by  Peele .  129 


Murderers,  the  two,  characters 


of .  127,  139 

Murderers,  the  two,  compared  to 

those  in  tragedy  of  W oodstock .  1 3 1 

Murphy,  on  Garrick's  Richard .  592 

Musical  phrases,  Richard’s  use  of . .  22 

My,  or  her  hatred .  72 

Nails  anchored  in  thine  eyes .  340 

N  amely —particularly .  112 

Names,  list  of,  metrical  license  in. . .  370 
Near,  to  come = to  touch  closely.  . .  314 

Neic e= grand-daughter .  277 

Ne’er-changing  night .  165 

Negative,  double .  85 

Nemesis  action  in  IV,  iii .  316 

Night-walking  Heralds .  32 

No  manner  person .  252 

No  and  nay,  proper  use  of .  366 

No  marvel =z7  is  not  strange .  124 

No  more  but  so .  298 

Noble,  coin,  the  value  of .  85 

‘Noise  of  water’  compared  to 

whelming  tide,  in  Lycidas .  119 

Nonage .  178 

Norfolk,  Duke  of .  3 

Nothing,  accent  of .  73 

Novice=yoM«^  man .  141 

‘  Now,’  possibly  disyllabic .  148 

Obdurate,  change  of  accent  of .  115 


Obsequiously,  applied  to  mourning.  46 
Oechelhaiiser,  on  behaviour  of 


Richard  under  Margaret’s  curse, 

and  that  of  his  mother .  100 

Oechelhaiiser,  on  Character  of  Eliza¬ 
beth  .  6 


Oechelhaiiser,  on  Richardson’s  esti¬ 


mate  of  character  of  Lady  Anne  44 

Oechelhaiiser,  on  Shakespeare’s  use 

of  the  Chronicle .  526 

Oechelhaiiser’s  suggestion  for  scenic 

arrangement  of  Act  I,  sc.  i .  15 

Oechelhaiiser,  on  The  Tragedy .  588 

Of  all  one  pain .  346 

Oi— instead  of .  152 

‘  Of  any  place,  ’  a  Greek  construction  198 
‘  Of’  used  with  verb  implying 
motion  from .  248 


636 


INDEX 


Offer  of  crown  to  Richard  compared 

to  Cromwell’s  attempt .  260 

Omission  of  line,  a  printer’s  error. .  88 

of  I,  ii,  226,  in  Folio .  68 

of  subject  in  relative 

clauses  following  but .  53 

Omissions  in  Folio .  169 

On =in  consequence  of .  83 

Onomatopoeia,  example  of,  in  1  pant¬ 
ing  bulk’ . ,  121 

Opposite=adT/erje .  353 

“  in  astrological  sense .  338 

Orient,  applied  to  pearl .  346 

Ornaments .  265 

Out  as  an  imperative  exclama¬ 
tion .  88 

Owl,  bird  of  ill  omen .  365 


Page,  the,  in  IV,  ii,  identity  of . . . .  291 
‘Panting  bulk,’  an  example  of 

onomatopoeia .  121 

Parallelism  in  style  between  pas¬ 
sages  in  Loves’  Labour’s  Lost  and 

Rich.  Ill .  74 

Parcell’d .  168 

Parlous .  186 

Partake=x/mre .  34 


Participial  termination  -ed  accen¬ 
tuated,  a  peculiarity  of  this  play  53 
Participles,  past,  of  verbs  ending  in 


t  retain  present  form .  138 

Party =side .  90 

Passionate = compassionate .  13 1 

Peevish .  95 

found .  354 

Teize= oppress .  390 

Pembroke,  Earl  of .  370 

Penker,  Friar .  251 

Pew-fellow .  321 

Pickersgill,  on  The  Text .  439 

Piers  Courteis,  letter  to,  in  regard 

to  Costume  accessories .  606 

V\W=plunder .  92 

Witch— highest  point  of  flight .  271 

Pitchers  have  ears .  187 

Plagu  e= torment .  94 

Plainest  harmless .  245 

Plantagenet,  Edward,  son  of  Duke 
of  Clarence .  5 


Plantagenet,  Margaret,  daughter  of 

Clarence .  5 

Play  the  touch .  287 

Please  used  impersonally .  174 

Pleaseth  your  Majesty .  363 

Point  of  wisdome .  129 

Polydore  Vergil’s  contribution  to 
idea  of  Richard’s  mental  state.  ...  316 

Power,  disyllabic  form  of .  361 

“  of  curse  and  Fate .  108 

“  of  curses  restricted  in  open 

air .  106 

Prayers,  a  disyllable .  162 

Prefer= promote .  298 

Preposition,  omission  of,  after  tran¬ 
sitive  verb .  39, 236 

Preposterous =perverted .  190 

Presently —immediately .  69 

“  =shortly,  soon .  290 

Prince  Edward,  Legitimacy  of, 

Fabyan  on .  74 

Princes,  disposal  of  bodies  of .  309 

“  murder  of  the,  and  Ballad 

of  Children  in  Wood .  611 

Process=  narrative .  310,  342 

Prodigious=/>0r/ewtoj« .  49 

Pronoun  used  for  pronominal  adjec¬ 
tive  .  49 

Proof = armour .  408 

Proper =handsome,  well  formed. ...  76 

Prophecy  in  regard  to  letter  G  . . . .  26 

“  in  regard  to  Rich¬ 
mond .  301,  396 

Proportion =form,  shape .  20 

Prose  and  metre,  rules  for  use  of, 

Sharpe  on .  130 

Punch= pierce .  395 

Pursuivant .  224 

Q,  a  contraction  for  quando .  232 

Quarto,  fifth,  connection  of,  -with 

Folio .  352 

Quarto,  third,  used  by  corrector  of 

Folio . 207 

Quest=f«9«tfJ< .  138 

Quit= balance .  318 

Ragged =full  of  rough  projections. .  286 
Rased  off .  217 


INDEX 


637 


Ratcliff  and  Catesby,  confusion  of. .  384 
“  Gloucester’s  letter  to  Neville 

concerning .  4 

Ratcliffe,  introduction  of,  in  II,  i. . .  152 

“  “  in  III,  iii; 

iv .  237 

Reasons  for  omission  of  passage  in 

Folio,  in  IV,  ii .  ....  301 

Recomforture .  354 

Record,  accent  0} .  318 

Recorder,  accent  of .  259 

Reduce —restore .  427 

Reed,  H.,  on  opening  soliloquy  ...  14 

Re-edify = reb  uild .  199 

Reflect=jAi»e .  120 

Regiment,  early  meaning  of .  381 

Remember  me . 300 

Remorse=/>z7y .  130,  273 

Rent,  a  form  of  rend .  60 

Respect = consideration .  270 

Respite = delay .  373 

Restraine  or  distrain .  4x7 

Retail=rc/ate .  199,  347 

Richard  and  Richmond,  contrast 
between,  to  be  shown  by  tones  of 

voice .  402 

Richard  entrapped  by  Eliza¬ 
beth . 337,  355 

Richard  III.  and  the  evil  eye,  Barn¬ 
ard  on .  51 

Richard  III.,  Buck’s  Life  of .  459 

Richard  III.,  likeness  of,  to  Mar¬ 
lowe’s  work .  316 

Richard  III.  only  play  of  Sh.’s  that 

begins  with  soliloquy . .  14 

Richard  III.,  the  Latin  tragedy  by 

Legge .  ii,S°° 

Richard,  character  of,  two  views  of, 

in  Holinshed .  160 

Richard  the  Third,  a  play  of,  men¬ 
tioned  by  Harington .  11 

Richard’s  abnormal  birth. .  186,  320,  332 
age,  at  accession  of  Ed¬ 
ward  IV .  89 

Richard’s  behaviour  after  murder 

of  Princes,  Kemble  on .  310 

Richard’s  behaviour  under  his 
mother’s  curse,  compared  to 
Oedipus  and  Polynices .  335 


Richard’s  behaviour  under  curse  of 
Margaret  and  that  of  his  mother, 

Oechelhaiiser  on .  100,  336 

Richard’s  birth,  date  of .  2 

Richard’s  breach  with  Buckingham, 

causes  for .  313 

Richard’s  character  compared  to 

Macbeth’s,  by  Hall  Caine .  566 

Richard’s  character  compared  to 
Macbeth’s  and  Iago’s,  by  Giles. .  .  563 
Richard’s  character  and  Macbeth’s 

compared  by  Whately .  549 

Richard’s  character  compared  to 

Macbeth’s  by  Whipple .  564 

Richard's  character  and  Macbeth’s 

compared  by  Cumberland .  557 

Richard’s  character  contrasted  with 

Henry  V.’s,  by  Gervinus .  585 

Richard’s  claim  to  throne .  360 

Richard’s  complicity  in  charges 

against  Clarence .  25,1x4,360 

Richard’s  complicity  in  death  of 

queen  Anne . . .  312 

Richard’s  complicity  in  murder  of 

Prince  Edward .  41 

Richard’s  confused  orders  in  IV, 
iii,  and  like  scene  in  True  Tragedie  356 
Richard’s  courage  compared  to 

Macbeth’s .  416 

Richard’s  depression  before  Battle 

of  Bosworth .  386 

Richard’s  design  to  murder  princes, 

when  first  conceived .  209 

Richard’s  determination  to  become 

a  villain,  Brandes  on .  24 

Richard’s  determination  to  become 

a  villain,  J.  C.  Hare  on .  23 

Richard’s  determination  to  become 

a  villain,  Lamb  on .  23 

Richard’s  determination  to  become 

a  villain,  Petri  on .  24 

Richard’s  directions  to  murderers, 
compared  to  like  scene  in  Mar¬ 
lowe’s  Edward  II.;  and  to  scene 


in  True  Tragedie .  114 

Richard’s  form  of  oath. .  39,  51,  237,  407 
Richard's  fortunes,  turning  point 

in,  Churchill  on .  287 

Richard’s  grim  humour .  331 


638 


INDEX 


Richard’s  guilt  in  murder  of  Henry 


VI . . .  57 

Richard’s  guilt  in  murder  of  Princes.  289 
Richard’s  harangue  compared  to 

Marseillaise .  416 

Richard’s  hatred  of  Clarence, 

cause  of,  Walpole  on .  142 

Richard’s  intention  to  marry  his 

niece .  295 

Richard’s  irresistibility,  Moulton  on  63 
Richard’s  moral  solitude  shown  by 
his  opening  play  with  soliloquy.  . .  14 

Richard’s  morality  and  that  of  the 
two  murderers  compared .  125 


Richard’s  object  for  marriage  with 

Anne .  42 

Richard’s  plan  for  overcoming 
Anne’s  resentment,  Richardson  on  58 

Richard’s  pride  of  intellect .  76 

“  request  for  strawberries . .  233 

“  timorous  dreams .  283 

“  use  of  musical  phrases. .  22 

“  victories  in  Scotland. . . .  258 

Richardson,  on  Character  of  Richard  555 
“  on  opening  soliloquy. .  14 

“  on  Richard’s  plan  for 
overcoming  Anne’s  resentment . .  58 

Richardson,  on  The  Tragedy . 573 

Richardson’s  analysis  of  character 

of  Duke  of  Buckingham .  215 

Richardson’s  analysis  of  character 

of  Lady  Anne .  43,  53 

Richardus  Tertius,  Legge’s  Latin 

Tragedy,  account  of .  n,  500 

Richmond’s  army,  size  of,  com¬ 
pared  to  Richard’s .  378 

Richmond’s  landing  at  Milford, 

actual  time  of .  367 

Richmond’s  prayer,  Horn  on .  391 

Richmond,  proclamation  of .  410 

Ripe  revenue .  269 

Rising  to  the  Crowne  of  Richard  the 

Thirde,  Malone  on .  12 

Rivers,  Earl,  death  of,  a  greater  loss 

than  that  of  Hastings .  227 

Rivers  not  executed  on  same  date 

as  Hastings .  227 

Robinson,  H.  C.  on  Kean  as  Rich¬ 
ard .  596 


Rood,  the  holy,  legend  of .  221 

Rose,  on  Shakespeare  and  History.  579 

Royalize .  89 

Runagate .  359 

Russell,  E.,  on  Irving  as  Richard. . .  601 

Ruthful .  306 

Rutland,  Edmund,  Earl  of,  age  of, 
at  time  of  death .  95 

S,  interpolation  of,  at  end  of  word, 

frequency  of,  in  Folio . 274 

S,  plurals  of  substantives  ending  in  420 

St  George,  a  battle  cry .  41 1 

“  to  boot .  414 

1  St  Paul,  ’  Richard’s  form  of 

oath .  39,51,237,407 

Sanctuary,  a  disyllable .  194,  283 

“  at  Westminster .  190 

Sanctuary-children  in  time  of 

Shakespeare .  197 

Scales,  Lord,  another  title  of  Earl 

Rivers .  154 

Scathe .  no 

Scene  between  Richard  and  Lady 
Anne  finer  in  the  acting  than  the 

reading .  59 

Scenic  division  of  Acts  IV  and  V, 

Johnson  on .  371 

Schelling,  on  description  of  death 

of  Princes .  304 

Schlegel,  on  relation  of  Henry  VI. 

trilogy  to  Richard  III .  583 

Schlegel,  on  The  Tragedy .  12 

Schmidt,  A.,  on  The  Text .  435 

Scope  of  the  T ragedy  foreshadowed .  1 6 1 

Scorns =scoffs .  94 

Scott’s  criticism  of  J.  P.  Kemble’s 

Richard .  23 

Scrivener-scene,  C.  Clarke  on .  252 

Sea,  swelling  of,  before  storm .  181 

Secure  or  secured .  32 

Seen  in  thought .  254 

Seldome  comes  the  better .  177 

Senseless  obstinate .  194 

Set  abroach .  hi 

Seven-foot  verse,  Shakespeare' s  use 
of .  35 

Shakespeare’s  patriotism  shown  in 
Richmond’s  final  speech .  427 


INDEX 


639 


Shakespeare’s  treatment  of  instiga¬ 
tion  to  murder . 

Shallow-changing . 

Shamefaced . 

Shar  e=divide . 

Sharpe  on  rules  for  use  of  prose  and 

metre . 

Shortly,  a  trisyllable . 

Shrew’d = scolding . 

Shriving . 

Signory = seniority . 

Simpson,  R.,  on  the  relation  of 
Henry  VI.  trilogy  to  Richard  III. 
Sin  and  Death,  Milton’s  allegory  of. 

Since,  transitional  use  of . 

Singer,  on  More’s  *  Biography’ . .  . . 

Sir,  a  title  applied  to  priests . 

Skottowe,  on  opening  soliloquy. . . 

on  parallel  between  True 

Tragedie  and  Rich.  Ill . 

Skottowe,  on  similarity  of  passage 

in  True  Tragedie . 

Skottowe,  on  The  Tragedy . 

Slav  e= villain,  Walker  on . 

“  of  Nature . 

Slow=jm‘0tt$ . 

Slug=s/wggard . 

So=om  condition  of . 

So,  omission  of,  before  that . 

Solace=6e  happy . 

Some,  used  with  numeral  qualifying 

noun  of  time . 

Smoothing  ^flattering . 

Snow  in  harvest . 

Soliloquies  in  Rich.  III.,  &  dramatic 

necessity . 

Soliloquy,  opening,  Hudson  on ... . 

“  “  Hunter  on . 

“  “  H.  Reed  on.  . . 

“  Richardson  on. 

“  Skottowe  on.  . . 

Something,  accent  of . 

Son  of  Yorke,  Hunter  on . 

Soon=evening,  Arrowsmith  on.  . . . 

Soon  at  after  supper . 

Sort ~set,  company . 

Source  of  the  Plot,  discussion . 

‘ S peakes  to  himself e’ . 

Spedding,  on  The  Text . 437, 


Spedding’s  suggestion  of  interpo¬ 
lated  line  at  II,  i,  12 .  149 

Spleen,  used  figuratively .  420 

Splinter —splint .  172 

Spurn  upon .  50 

Squeak,  descriptive  of  voices  of 

ghosts .  123 

Stage-arrangement  of  Citizens  and 

Buckingham,  by  Marshall .  274 

Stage-direction,  confusion  in .  423 

Stage-directions  in  Q.  and  F., 

difference  between .  372 

Stage,  early,  arrangements  of, 

White  on .  379 

Stage-history .  <589 

Stall’d .  96 

Stanley,  Lord,  erroneously  called 

Derby .  4 

Stanley,  Lord,  Lloyd,  on  character 

of .  5 

Stands  me  upon .  295 

Stanley,  a  suspected  subject .  358 

“  a  trimmer .  361 

Statue,  a  trisyllable .  258 

Staunton,  on  The  Text .  433 

Steevens,  on  Cibber’s  Version .  573 

“  on  entry  in  Stationers’ 

Registers  of  True  Tragedie .  11 

Steevens,  on  Margaret’s  impreca¬ 
tions .  92 

Steevens,  on  The  Tragedy .  573 

Step-father .  387 

Stichomythia,  example  of .  168 

Stony  Stratford  and  Northampton, 

situation  of .  182 

Stowre  suggested  for  ‘  sowre’ .  122 

Straightly =s^rfc#y .  33 

Strike  up  the  drum .  335 

Stripling .  86 

Struck  in  years .  35 

Subject,  omission  of,  in  relative 

clauses  following  but .  53 

Subjunctive  and  Indicative,  distinc¬ 
tion  between  important .  336 

Sudden —quick .  115 

Suggestion,  used  in  bad  sense .  225 

Sullen .  286 

Sun,  as  the  cognisance  of  Edward 
IV .  10 


114 

356 

133 

92 

130 

355 

186 

226 

3i9 

578 

107 

185 

457 

225 

14 

362 

406 

574 

99 

98 

59 

193 

150 

64 

180 

198 

64 

!43 

15 

14 

14 

14 

14 

14 

59 

16 

3°9 

3ID 

4i7 

456 

hi 

448 


640 


INDEX 


Sunrise,  Shakespeare’s  descriptions 


of .  388 

Supernatural,  Shakespeare’s  use 

of,  Snider  on .  373 

Supper,  hour  of .  382 

Surrey —Syrian  horse .  385 

Swelling=itt/fa/ed  with  anger .  153 

“  of  sea  before  storm .  18 1 

Swinburne,  on  The  Tragedy .  581 

Swoone,  or  sound .  280 

T,  verbs  ending  in,  present  form  of, 

retained  in  past  participles .  424 

Tak e.— catch  by  surprise .  281 

“  inflict  as  a  blow .  135 

“  order .  252 

“  the  devil  in  thy  mind .  134 

rT&\\=brave .  135 

Teen .  285 

Tempts,  or  tempers .  30 

Tender=/un>e  regard  for .  27,  353 

Tetchy .  333 

Text,  The,  discussion .  431 

Textual  variations  between  Qto 

and  Fj,  Daniel  on .  213 

That= Latin  iste .  236 

That,  a  conjunctional  affix .  331 

The  death,  used  technically . 65,  219 

The  while .  178,  253 

There,  a  disyllable .  31 

Therefore,  change  0}  accent  in.  .361,  395 
‘This,’  used  for  prepositive  article.  425 

Thomas,  Rice  ap .  370 

‘  Thou’  and  ‘  you,’  use  of .  136 

“  used  contemptuously .  226 

Tidings,  as  singular  noun .  308 

Time  Analysis .  617 

“  rapid  passage  of,  apparent  312,314 

Timeless .  59 

Toad,  poisonous .  62 

That,  omission  of,  after  now .  65 

The  death =judicial  punishment. .  .  65 

This  of  yours .  63 

Thrall=steye .  280 

To=2o  that  end .  no 

‘Tomorrow,’  as  used  by  Macbeth 

and  Richard .  378 

Too  \a.te— too  lately .  205 

Touch,  play  the .  287 


Touch = sensation .  53 

Touchstone,  method  of  using .  288 

To  Wolves,  to  spiders .  48 

Tower  of  London  as  a  royal  resi¬ 
dence  .  198 

Tower  of  London,  antiquity  of .  198 

“  epithets  applied  to .  285 

Tract=/radfe .  380 

Tragedian,  conventional  tricks  of.  . .  242 
Tragical  Report  of  King  Richard 

the  Third,  a  Ballad .  it 

Traitors’  heads  on  London  Bridge. .  220 
Tressel,  a  misprint  for  Trussel. . . .  70 

Triumph,  accent  of .  321 

True,  good  Catesby . 357 

“  noble  prince .  289 


True  Tragedie,  entry  of,  on  Sta¬ 


tioners’  Registers,  Steevens  on...  11 

True  Tragedie  of  Richard  the  Third, 

reprint  of .  505 

True  Tragedie  of  Richard  the  Third, 

discussion  on .  501 

True  Tragedie,  similarity  of  passage 

in,  Skottowe  on .  406 

T rue  T ragedie,  similarity  in  passage 

in,  to  IV,  iii,  517-528 .  362 

True  Tragedie,  passage  in,  compared 

to  IV,  i,  24 .  279 

True  Tragedie,  scene  in,  compared 
to  dialogue  between  the  two 

Murderers .  13 1 

Turning  point  in  Richard’s  fortunes, 

Churchill  on. . .  287 

Type=crou’w .  341 

Tyrrell’s  impatience,  Walpole  on. . .  292 
Tyrwhitt’s  rearrangement  of  I,  iv, 
257-261 .  144 

Ulrici,  on  The  Tragedy .  586 

U na voided = inevitable .  338 

Unfashionable,  an  ellipsis  of  adver¬ 
bial  inflection .  21 

Unhappiness=di5/)05zVf0w  to  mis¬ 
chief .  49 

Unknown=5wc/r  as  must  not  be  told. .  69 

\]n\ookeA= unlooked  for .  97 

Unmeritable==  undeserving .  269 

U nrespecti ve = inconsiderate .  291 

Unrip’st  for  unrippedst .  140 


INDEX 


Untimely  smothered .  322 

Unto = info .  78 

Unvalued .  120 

Upon  his  party .  219 

Urswick,  Sir  Christopher .  5 

Usurp,  incongruous  use  of .  327 


Variations  between  texts  of  Qq, 
and  Fj  in  I,  iv.,  great  number 

of .  1 16 

Vast = waste,  desolate .  121 

Vaughan’s  interpretation  of  *  I  call 

thee  not’ .  100 

Vaunt =<0  boast .  413 

Yenomed=venomous .  48 

Vergil,  P.,  on  Character  of  Richard. .  549 
Verplanck,  on  Character  of  Richard.  557 

“  on  The  Tragedy .  576 

Vice,  the,  account  of .  202 

“  the  formal .  200 

Visor =mask .  164 

Voltaire’s  account  of  tragedy  of 
Rich.  Ill .  45 

Walker  incident,  introduction  of, 
an  indication  of  Shakespeare’s  use 

of  Hall .  249 

Walker  on  ‘  slave  ’=villain .  99 

Wallenstein,  passage  in,  compared 

to  II,  i,  126 .  158 

Walpole,  on  cause  of  Richard’s 

hatred  of  Clarence .  142 

Walpole,  on  death  of  Earl  Rivers. .  227 
Walpole,  H.,on  Deformity  of  Richard  610 


Walpole’s,  H.,  ‘  Historic  Doubts  on 


Reign  of  Richard  III  ’ .  460 

VJant=what  is  needed .  151 

Whately’s  comparison  between  Rich¬ 
ard  III.  and  Macbeth .  549 

Warburton,  on  Margaret’s  impreca¬ 
tions .  92 

Warner,  on  Margaret  as  Greek 

chorus .  8 

Warner,  on  signification  of  Ghosts.  394 

Watch=7 vatch-light .  385 

‘  Watery,’  applied  to  moon  in  astro¬ 
logical  sense .  167 

Way —course,  means .  33 

Wedge=majj  of  metal .  120 


64I 


Well  spoken  days .  23 

Whelming  tide,  in  Lycidas,  com¬ 
pared  to  ‘noise  of  water’ .  119 

Where,  contraction  for  whether  273,  275 

Wherefore,  change  of  accent  in .  361 

White  Friars,  error  for  Black 

Friars .  71 

White,  R.  G.,  on  More’s  ‘  Biogra¬ 
phy’ .  458 

White,  R.  G.,  on  The  Text .  433 

Whither,  a  monosyllable .  277 

‘  Who’  used  as  relative  to  introduce 

fact  about  antecedent .  118 

‘Why’  and  ‘for  what,’  distinction 

between .  188 

Widow,  marriage  -w\\h=bigamy. . .  272 

Window,  applied  both  to  eye  and 

eyelid .  391 

Winter,  on  E.  Booth  as  Richard.  . .  601 
“  on  Mansfield  as  Richard.  .  602 

With  troubled  noise .  389 

“  wha.t= that  with  which .  203 

Without  instanc e=wanting  exam¬ 
ple .  218 

Witty=ar//«/ .  293 

Woodville,  Anthony .  31 

Wooing  scene,  likenesses  to  in  other 

dramas .  71 

Worm  of  conscience .  97 

Worser,  double  comparative .  87 

‘  Wrens,  ’  as  an  allusion  to  Wood- 

villes . 84 

Wretched  ^paltry,  pitiful .  185 

“  vile,  hateful .  374 

Wright,  W.  A.,  on  Date .  455 

“  on  duration  of  action .  12 

“  on  Margaret’s  imprecations  92 

“  on  Source  of  Plot .  462 

“  on  The  Text .  447 

Wrongs=UT0wgj  done .  373 

Yea  and  yes,  proper  use  of .  366 

York,  Archbishop  of .  2 

York,  Duke  of,  compared  to  young 

son  of  Clarence .  164 

‘You,’  and  ‘thee’  apparent  incon¬ 
sistent  use  of .  261 

‘  Your  citizens,’  a  term  used  only  to 
sovereign .  254 


4i 


I  ' 


JH.  -  *  P|;-  ,  ■  •, 


✓ 

-ZZZ 


' 


20679 

Shakespeare 

AUTHOR 

822.3 

Richard  III 

S5xv 

TITLE 

▼  .16 

20679 

~l*\.  \  c  U  c\s^.cL  l  LT ~ 


822.3 

33XV  , 


/  1 


/• 

/ 


/ 


