822.3 
5  5xv 


(  V.  5.} 


/ 


\ 


* 


. 


A  NEW  VARIORUM  EDITION 


OF 


S  H AKESPEARE 

* 

t 


EDITED  BY 

HORACE  HOWARD  FURNESS,  Ph.D.,  LL.D. 

HONORARY  MEMBER  OF  THE  ‘DEUTSCHE  SH  AKESPEARE-GESELLSCH  AFT  '  OF  WEIMAR 


King  Lear 


[TWELFTH  IMPRESSION] 


PHILADELPHIA 
J.  B.  LIPPINCOTT  COMPANY 
LONDON:  16  JOHN  STREET,  ADELPHI 


Copyright,  1SS0,  by  J.  B.  Lippincott  &  Co. 


Copyright,  1908,  by  Horace  Howard  Furness. 


20673 

* 

022-3 

V-  5 


Wbstcott  &  Thomson, 
Stereotypers  and  Electrotypers,  Philada. 


Lippincott’s  Press, 
Philada.,  U.  S.  A. 


TO 

‘THE  NEW  SHAKSPERE  SOCIETY' 

THIS  VOLUME 


RESPECTFULLY  DEDICATED 


BY 


THE  EDITOR 


PREFACE 


Since  these  volumes,  containing  separate  plays,  are  independent 
of  each  other,  it  seems  necessary  that  a,  statement  of  the  plan  on 
which  they  are  edited  should  accompany  each  issue.  This  state¬ 
ment,  however,  in  the  present  instance  shall  be  as  concise  as  pos¬ 
sible;  it  is  to  be  presumed  that  those  who  are  interested  in  this 
edition  are,  by  this  time,  tolerably  familiar  with  its  scope. 

The  attempt  is  here  made  to  present,  on  the  same  page  with  the 
text,  ali  the  various  readings  of  the  different  editions  of  King  Lear, 
from  the  earliest  Quarto  to  the  latest  critical  edition  of  the  play, 
together  with  all  the  notes  and  comments  thereon  which  the  Edi¬ 
tor  has  thought  worthy  of  preservation,  not  only  for  the  purpose  of 
elucidating  the  text,  but  at  times  as  illustrations  of  the  history  of 
Shakespearian  criticism. 

In  the  Appendix  will  be  found  essays  on  The  Text,  The  Date 
of  Composition,  The  Source  of  the  Plot,  Duration  of  the 
Action,  Insanity,  Actors,  Costume,  Tate’s  Version,  selections 
from  English  and  German  Criticisms,  a  list  of  The  Editions 
Collated,  with  the  abbreviations  used  to  denote  them,  the  Bibli¬ 
ography  of  the  Play,  and  an  Index. 

We  have  two  sources  for  the  text  of  Lear,  the  Quartos  and  the 
Folios,  both  from  independent  manuscripts.  Although  we  may  not 
have  in  the  Folio  the  very  text,  ‘absolute  in  its  numbers,’  as  Shake¬ 
speare  *  conceived  it,’  yet  with  all  its  defects  it  is  much  better  than 
that  of  the  Quarto,  which  is  evidently  one  of  those  ‘stolne  and  sur¬ 
reptitious’  copies  denounced  by  Heminge  and  Condell.  Wherefore, 
in  this  edition  the  text  of  the  First  Folio  has  been  virtually  fol- 


v 


VI 


PPEFACE 


lowed,  but  without,  it  is  to  be  trusted,  an  absolute  surrender  to  that 
‘modern  Manicheeism,  the  worship  of  the  Printer’s  devil.'  Where 
the  Folio  is  clearly  defective  the  Quartos  have  been  called  in  aid. 
Moreover,  since  the  Quartos,  ‘  maimed  and  deformed  ’  though  they 
be  *  by  the  frauds  and  stealthes  of  injurious  impostors,'  do  never¬ 
theless  contain  lines,  and  even  a  whole  scene,  which  do  not  appear 
in  the  Folio,  but  are  nevertheless  Shakespeare’s,  it  has  not  been 
deemed  fitting  to  omit  these;  they  have  been  retained  in  the  text 
and  their  presence  indicated  by  asterisks,  a  modification  of  the 
Italic  of  the  old  editors,  which  is  due  to  Dr  Schmidt’s  admirable 
edition. 

Happily,  the  day  is  fast  declining  when  it  is  thought  necessary 
to  modernise  Shakespeare’s  text.  Why  should  it  be  modernised? 
We  do  not  so  treat  Spenser.  Is  Shakespeare’s  text  less  sacred? 
A  step  was  made  when  ‘it’  was  boldly  retained  instead  of  modern¬ 
ising  the  possessive  case  to  its.  In  the  present  edition  such  words 
as  ‘  moe,’  ‘and’  (when  it  is  equivalent  to  if'),  ‘vilde,’  ‘strook,' 
and  others,  have  been  retained  when  found  in  the  Folio.  The  ab¬ 
breviated  ‘th’  has  also  been  copied  from  the  same  edition.  It  is 
a  source  of  regret  that  it  did  not  occur  to  the  Editor,  until  too 
late,  that  the  modern  substitution  of  ‘than,’  for  then  of  the  Folio, 
is  equally  uncalled  for,  a  substitution  which  shall  not  occur  in 
future  volumes  of  this  edition. 

My  thanks  are  gladly  given  to  Mr  Norris  for  the  Bibliography 
of  English  works;  to  my  father,  the  Rev.  Dr  Furness,  for  his 
translations  of  German  Criticisms;  and  to  one  other,  without 
whose  constant  encouragement  even  this  much  of  my  long  and 
at  times  most  weary  task  would  not  have  been  accomplished ;  to 
her  I  am  indebted  for  the  Index.  tr  w  t? 


March,  s88o. 


King  Lear 


DRAMATIS  PERSONS* 


Lear,  king  of  Britain. 

King  of  France. 

Duke  of  Burgundy. 

Duke  of  Cornwall. 

Duke  of  Albany. 

Earl  of  Kent. 

Earl  of  Gloucester. 

Edgar,  son  to  Gloucester. 

Edmund,  bastard  son  to  Gloucester. 
Fool. 

Curan,  a  courtier. 

Old  Man,  tenant  to  Gloucester. 
Doctor. 

Oswald,  steward  to  Goneru. 

A  captain  employed  by  Edmund. 
Gentleman  attendant  on  Cordelia. 
Herald. 

Servants  to  Cornwall. 

Goneril,  'J 

Regan,  V  daughters  to  Lear. 
Cordelia,  J 


$ 


10 


*5 


to 


Knights  of  Lear’s  train,  Captains,  Messengers,  Soldiers,  and 

Attendants. 


Scene  :  Britain. 


*  Dramatis  Personae]  Substantially  by  Malone.  First  given  by  Rowe. 

7.  Gloucester.]  Thus  spelled  by  Staunton;  all  before  him,  Gloster,  or 
Glo’ster. 

14,  iS.  Oswald.. .Cornwall.]  Omitted  by  Rowe  +. 

18.  Capell  reads  thus:  Servants  to  Cornwall,  three.  Officers  in  the  Troop  of 
Albany,  four.  Messengers,  two. 

2 


THE  TRAGEDY 


OF 

King  Lear 


ACT  I 


Scene  1.  King  Lears  palace . 
Enter  Kent,  Gloucester,  and  Edmund. 


Kent.  I  thought  the  king  had  more  affected  the  Duke 
of  Albany  than  Cornwall. 

Gloa.  It  did  always  seem 


Act  i]  Actus  Primus.  Ff. 

Scene  I.]  Sccena  Prima.  Ft.  Scsena 
Prima.  Fa.  Scena  Prima.  F3F4. 

King  Lear’s  palace.]  A  Palace.  Rowe. 
The  King’s  Palace.  Theob.  A  State* 
room  in  King  Lear’s  Palace.  Cap.  Ec. 
Gloucester]  Ft.  GloRer  Q,F4.  Glo- 


so  to  us;  but  now,  in  the 

celler  QaFa.  Gloufter  F3. 

Edmund.]  Edmond.  FjF^.  Ballard. 
Qq. 

2.  Albany']  Albeney  Qa. 

Cornwall]  Cornwell  Qx.  Come * 

wall  Q2.  Cornew  all  F3. 

3.  jo]  Om.  F2F3F4. 


The  Tragedy,  &c.]  ‘Of  all  Shakespeare’s  plays,’  says  Coleridge,  * Macbeth 
is  the  most  rapid,  Hamlet  the  slowest,  in  movement.  Lear  combines  length  with 
rapidity, — like  the  hurricane  and  the  whirlpool,  absorbing  while  it  advances.  It 
begins  as  a  stormy  day  in  summer,  with  brightness;  but  that  brightness  is  lurid, 
and  anticipates  the  tempest.’ 

1-6.  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  13)  would  read  these  as  seven  lines  of  verse,  ending 
tK  duke  .  .  .  always  .  .  .  division  ...  o’  tA’  dukes  .  .  .  pois'd  [sic]  .  .  .  choice 
.  .  .  moiety.  •  After  moiety ,’  he  adds,  4  there  is  a  short  pause  in  the  conversation, 
which  is  resumed  in  prose.  Yet  th'  duke ,  in  this  place,  seems  very  unlike  Sh. ;  and 
equalities  is  perhaps  more  in  place  than  “  qualities.”  ’ 

2.  Albany]  Wricht:  Holinshed  ( Chron .  i,  fol.  39  b;  ed.  1577)  gives  the  fol¬ 
lowing  account  of  the  origin  of  this  name:  ‘The  third  and  last  part  of  the  Island 
he  allotted  vnto  Albanacte  hys  youngest  sonne.  .  .  .  This  later  parcel  at  the  first, 
toke  the  name  of  Albanactus,  who  called  it  Albania.  But  now  a  small  portion 
onely  of  the  Region  (beyng  vnder  the  regiment  of  a  Duke)  reteyneth  the  sayd 

3 


KING  LEAR 


4 


[act  i,  SC.  i. 


division  of  the  kingdom,  it  appears  not  which  of  the  dukes  4 

4.  kingdom']  kingdomes  Qq,  Coll.  i. 


denomination,  the  reast  beyng  called  Scotlande,  of  certayne  Scottes  that  came  ouer 
from  Ireland  to  inhabite  in  those  quarters.  It  is  deuided  from  Loegres  also  by  the 
Humber,  so  that  Albania  as  Brute  left  it,  conteyned  all  the  north  part  of  the  Island 
that  is  to  be  found  beyond  the  aforesayd  streame,  vnto  the  point  of  Cathenesse.’ 

4.  division]  Johnson  :  There  is  something  of  obscurity  or  inaccuracy  in  this 
preparatory  scene.  The  king  has  already  divided  his  kingdom,  and  yet  when  he 
enters  he  examines  his  daughters,  to  discover  in  what  proportion  he  should  divide  it. 
Perhaps  Kent  and  Gloster  only  were  privy  to  his  design,  which  he  still  kept  in  his 
own  hands,  to  be  changed  or  performed  as  subsequent  reasons  should  determine 
him.  Coleridge:  It  was  not  without  forethought,  nor  is  it  without  its  due  signifi 
cance,  that  the  division  of  Lear’s  kingdom  is  in  the  first  six  lines  of  the  play  stated 
as  a  thing  already  determined  in  all  its  particulars,  previously  to  the  trial  of  profes¬ 
sions,  as  to  the  relative  rewards  of  which  the  daughters  were  to  be  made  to  consider 
their  several  portions.  The  strange,  yet  by  no  means  unnatural,  mixture  of  selfish¬ 
ness,  sensibility,  and  habit  of  feeling  derived  from,  and  fostered  by,  the  particular 
rank  and  usages  of  the  individual; — the  intense  desire  of  being  intensely  beloved, — 
selfish,  and  yet  characteristic  of  the  selfishness  of  a  loving  and  kindly  nature  alone;— 
the  self-supportless  leaning  for  all  pleasure  on  another’s  breast ; — the  craving  after 
sympathy  with  a  prodigal  disinterestedness,  frustrated  by  its  own  ostentation,  and  the 
mode  and  nature  of  its  claims; — the  anxiety,  the  distrust,  the  jealousy,  which  more 
or  less  accompany  all  selfish  affections,  and  are  amongst  the  surest  contradistinctions 
of  mere  fondness  from  true  love,  and  which  originate  Lear’s  eager  wish  to  enjoy  his 
daughters’  violent  professions,  whilst  the  inveterate  habits  of  sovereignty  convert 
the  wish  into  claim  and  positive  right,  and  an  incompliance  with  it  into  crime  and 
treason; — these  facts,  these  passions,  these  moral  verities,  on  which  the  whole 
tragedy  is  founded,  are  all  prepared  for,  and  will  to  the  retrospect  be  found  implied, 
in  these  first  four  or  five  lines  of  the  play.  They  let  us  know  that  the  trial  is  but  a 
trick,  and  that  the  grossness  of  the  old  king’s  rage  is  in  part  the  natural  result  of  a 
silly  trick  suddenly  and  most  unexpectedly  baffled  and  disappointed.  It  may  here 
be  worthy  of  notice  that  Lear  is  the  only  serious  performance  of  Shakespeare,  the 
interest  and  situations  of  which  are  derived  from  the  assumption  of  a  gross  improba¬ 
bility;  whereas  Beaumont  and  Fletcher’s  tragedies  are,  almost  all  of  them,  founded 
on  some  out-of-the-way  accident  or  exception  to  the  general  experience  of  mankind. 
But  observe  the  matchless  judgement  of  our  Shakespeare.  First,  improbable  as  the 
conduct  of  Lear  is  in  the  first  scene,  yet  it  was  an  old  story  rooted  in  the  popular 
faith, — a  thing  taken  for  granted  already,  and  consequently  without  any  of  the  effects 
of  improbability.  Secondly,  it  is  merely  the  canvas  for  the  characters  and  passions,— 
a  mere  occasion  for, — and  not,  in  the  manner  of  Beaumont  and  Fletcher,  perpetually 
recurring  as  the  cause  and  sine  qua  non  of, — the  incidents  and  emotions.  Let  the 
first  scene  of  this  play  have  been  lost,  and  let  it  only  be  understood  that  a  fond 
father  had  been  duped  by  hypocritical  professions  of  love  and  duty  on  the  part  of 
two  daughters  to  disinherit  the  third,  previously,  and  deservedly,  more  dear  to  him; 
—and  all  the  rest  of  the  tragedy  would  retain  its  interest  undiminished,  and  be  pet- 
fectly  intelligible.  The  accidental  is  nowhere  the  groundwork  of  the  passions,  but 
that  which  is  catholic,  which  in  all  ages  has  been,  and  ever  will  be,  close  and  native 


KING  LEAR 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


he  values  most ;  for  qualities  are  so  weighed  that  curiosity 
in  neither  can  make  choice  of  either’s  moiety. 

Kent.  Is  not  this  your  son,  my  lord  ? 

Glou.  His  breeding,  sir,  hath  been  at  my  charge ;  I  have 
so  often  blushed  to  acknowledge  him  that  now  I  am  brazed 
to’t. 

Kent.  I  cannot  conceive  you. 

Glou.  Sir,  this  young  fellow’s  mother  could ;  whereupon 
she  grew  round-wombed,  and  had  indeed,  sir,  a  son  for  her 


5 

5 


io 


5.  qualities ]  Ff  + ,  Knt,  White,  Sch.  10.  to  ’/]  F3F4+,  Ec.  Knt,  Dyce,  Sta. 

equalities  Q,Q,  et  cet.  too  ’t  FjFa.  to  it  Qq  et  cet. 

6.  neither]  nature  Q3.  13.  round-wombed]  round  womb' d¥i. 

to  the  heart  of  man, — parental  anguish  from  filial  ingratitude,  the  genuineness  of 
worth,  though  coffined  in  bluntness,  and  the  execrable  vileness  of  a  smooth  iniquity. 
Perhaps  I  ought  to  have  added  the  Merchant  of  Venice ;  but  here  too  the  same 
remarks  apply.  It  was  an  old  tale ;  and  substitute  any  other  danger  than  that  of  the 
pound  of  flesh  (the  circumstance  in  which  the  improbability  lies),  yet  all  the  situa¬ 
tions  and  the  emotions  appertaining  to  them  remain  equally  excellent  and  appropriate. 
Whereas  take  away  from  the  Mad  Lover  of  Beaumont  and  Fletcher  the  fantastic 
hypothesis  of  his  engagement  to  cut  out  his  own  heart,  and  have  it  presented  to  his 
mistress,  and  all  the  main  scenes  must  go  with  it.  Hudson  :  The  opening  thus 
forecasts  Lear’s  madness  by  indicating  that  dotage  has  already  got  the  better  of  his 
reason  and  judgment.  Anon  (cited  by  Haluwell)  thinks  Johnson’s  note  is  need¬ 
less,  because  ‘it  is  clear  that  Lear’s  two  councillors,  Kent  and  Gloucester, are  talking 
of  the  division  he  has  proposed  in  the  secrecy  of  the  council-board,  and  afterwards 
he  opens  his  hidden  (“darker”)  meaning  to  those  whom  it  concerned  (his  sons  and 
daughters),  before  ignorant  of  it.’ 

5.  qualities]  Capell  (Notes,  &c.,  vol.  i,  part  ii,  p.  140):  ‘Qualities’  appears  to 
be  a  printer’s  corruption ;  both  as  suiting  less  with  the  context  and  as  taking  some¬ 
thing  from  the  passage’s  numerousness.  [What  this  *  numerousness  ’  exactly  means 
I  do  not  know.  Capell  does  not  print  the  passage  as  verse.]  Schmidt  (Zur  Text- 
kritik,  p.  12) :  Equalities  cannot  be  right  here ;  at  best  it  can  but  be  equality.  Equal¬ 
ity  cannot  be  predicated  of  a  part  by  itself,  but  only  of  the  relationship  of  parts  to 
each  other;  it  is  therefore  essentially  a  singular  idea.  We  cannot  say:  ‘the  equal¬ 
ities  of  the  three  parts  are  perfect,’  but  only :  ‘  the  equality,’  &c. 

5.  curiosity]  WARBURTON:  ‘  Curiosity  ’  for  exactest  scrutiny.  Steevens:  That 
is,  scrupulousness  or  captiousness.  [For  the  pronunciation,  see  I,  ii,  4.] 

6.  moiety]  Steevens  :  The  strict  sense  of  this  is  half,  one  of  two  equal  parts, 
but  Sh.  commonly  uses  it  for  any  part  or  division.  Thus,  I  Hen.  IV:  III,  i,  96 

*  Methinks  my  moiety  north  from  Burton  here  In  quantity  equals  not  one  of  yours,’ 
and  here  the  division  was  into  three  parts.  Wright:  It  may  be  in  the  present  pas¬ 
sage  the  word  is  used  in  its  literal  sense,  for  it  is  not  clear  that  Gloucester  knew  any¬ 
thing  of  Lear’s  intention  to  include  Cordelia  in  the  distribution  of  the  kingdom. 

7.  your  son]  For  Coleridge’s  fine  remarks  on  Edmund,  see  Appendix,  p.  419. 

9.  brazed]  Compare  Ham.  Ill,  iv,  37. 


KING  LEAR 


6 


[act  i,  sc.  i. 


cradle  ere  she  had  a  husband  for  her  bed.  Do  you  smell 
a  fault ?  IS 

Kent.  I  cannot  wish  the  fault  undone,  the  issue  of  it 
being  so  proper. 

Glou.  But  I  have  a  son,  sir,  by  order  of  law,  some  year 
elder  than  this,  who  yet  is  no  dearer  in  my  account;  though 
this  knave  came  something  saucily  into  the  world  before  he  20 
was  sent  for,  yet  was  his  mother  fair ;  there  was  good  sport 
at  his  making,  and  the  whoreson  must  be  acknowledged. — 

Do  you  know  this  noble  gentleman,  Edmund  ? 

Earn.  No,  my  lord. 

Glou.  My  lord  of  Kent.  Remember  him  hereafter  as  2$ 
my  honourable  friend. 

Edm.  My  services  to  your  lordship. 

Kent.  I  must  love  you,  and  sue  to  know  you  better. 

Edm.  Sir,  I  shall  study  deserving. 

Glou.  He  hath  been  out  nine  years,  and  away  he  shall  30 
again.  [Sennet  within. ]  The  king  is  coming. 


18.  a  son,  sir ]  Ff +  ,  Knt,  Coll.  Del. 
Sing.  Dyce,  Ktly,  Sell,  fir  a  fonneQtQa. 
sir,  a  son  Jen.  et  cet. 

year\  y cares  QJ(  Han. 

19.  Mjj]  this  is  Jen. 

this, .. .account /]  Theob.  this,... 
account ,  Qq,  Cap.  Ec.  this ;... account,  Ff, 
Rowe,  Pope,  this, ...account.  Johns.  Jen. 

20.  so?jiething~\  fiomeivhat F  F4  + ,  Jen. 
Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Del.  Wh. 

into ]  Q,Q2  to  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Theob.  Wavb.  Johns.  Knt,  Sch.  in  Q3. 

21 .  for,...fair\  Jen.  for,...faire,  Qq, 
Han.  Warb.  Johns,  for  :...faire,  Ff, 


Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  for;... 
fair ;  Cap.  Ec.  Wh. 

22.  ■whoreson ]  horfon  F  . 

23.  noble  gentleman ]  Nobleman  FaF_ 

f4  +  . 

24.  Edm.]  Baft.  Qq  (and  through- 
out). 

25,26.  My..friendl\  Two  lines,  the 
first  ending  Kent :  in  Ff  +  . 

29.  deserving ]  your  deserving  Pope 

+  . 

31.  [Sennet  within]  Dyce  ii,  Huds.  ii. 
Trumpets  sound,  within.  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  Jen.  Om.  QqFf. 


17.  proper]  Malone:  Comely,  handsome. 

18.  some  year]  Warburton:  Edmund  afterwards  [I,  ii,  5]  speaks  of  ‘some 
twelve  or  fourteen  moonshines.’  Eccles  :  About  a  year.  [For  other  instances  of 
the  use  of  some  before  singular  substantives  of  time,  see  Schmidt,  Lex.  s.  v.] 

20.  something]  For  instances  of  something,  used  adverbially,  like ‘somewhat,’ 
see  Abbott,  §  68. 

30.  out]  Eccles  :  This  circumstance  serves  to  account  for  Edmund’s  being  un¬ 
acquainted  with  so  distinguished  a  man  at  Lear’s  court  as  Kent;  indeed,  for  their 
mutual  ignorance  of  each  other.  Gloucester  appears  to  introduce  Edmund  to  Kent 
for  the  first  time,  and  that,  probably,  immediately  after  his  return,  either  from  travel 
or  serving  in  the  army.  [See  also  Coleridge’s  note  on  Edmund  in  Appendix, 


7 


ACT  I.  SC.  i.]  KING  LEAR 


Sennet.  Enter  one  bearing  a  coronet.  King  Lear,  CORNWALL,  Albany, 
Goneril,  Regan,  Cordelia,  and  Attendants. 

Lear.  Attend  the  lords  of  France  and  Burgundy,  Glou-  32 
cester. 

Glou.  I  shall,  my  lord.  [Exeunt  Gloucester  and  Edmund. 

Lear.  Meantime  we  shall  express  our  darker  purpose. — 

Give  me  the  map  there. — Know  that  we  have  divided  35 

In  three  our  kingdom ;  and  ’tis  our  fast  intent 


Sennet.]  Ff.  Souijd  a  Sennet,  Q, 
Q2.  Sunday  a  Cornet,  Q3> 

Enter  one  bearing  a  coronet, 
King.. .Attendants.]  Enter  King.. .At¬ 
tendants.  Ff.  Enter  one  bearing  a  Cor¬ 
onet,  then  Lear,  then  the  Dukes  of 
Albany  and  Cornwell,  next  Gonorill, 
Regan,  Cordelia,  with  followers.  Qq. 

32.  Scene  ii.  Pope  +,  Jen. 

the  lords ]  my  Lords  Qq,  Jen. 

Gloucester ]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

33.  my  lord ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Sell,  ledge 
Q,.  liege  Q2  et  cet. 


[Exeunt...]  Cap.  Exit.  Ff.  Om. 
Qq. 

34.  shall]  will  Qq,  Jen. 
purpose]  purpofes  Qq,  Jen. 

35.  Give. ..there.]  The  map  there  ;  Qq, 
Cap.  Mai.  Ec.  Give...here.  F3F4  +  . 

Know  that]  Know  Qq,  Pope+, 
Jen.  Cam.  Wr. 

we  have]  we've  Dyce  ii,  Huds.  ii. 

36.  In]  Into  F4,  Rowe. 

fast]  first  Qq,  Warb.  Om.  Pope, 

Han. 


p.  420.]  Wright  :  Edmund  has  been  seeking  his  fortune  abroad,  there  being  no 
career  for  him  at  home  in  consequence  of  his  illegitimate  birth. 

32.  Burgundy]  Walker  ( Vers.  p.  240)  says  that  the  pronunciation  Burgogne 
(as  it  is  spelled  in  the  last  scene,  in  F,,  in  Hen.  V)  would  restore  harmony  to  this 
line.  But  Dyce,  in  a  note  on  2  Hen.  VI:  I,  i,  7,  says  that  Sh.,  like  other  early  dram¬ 
atists,  considered  himself  at  liberty  occasionally  to  disregard  the  laws  of  metre  in 
the  case  of  proper  names;  e.  g.  a  blank-verse  speech  in  Rich.  II:  II,  i,  284,  con¬ 
tains  the  following  formidable  line:  *  Sir  John  Norberry,  Sir  Robert  Waterton,  and 
Francis  Quoint.’  [It  is  spelled  Borgoyen  in  Paston  Letters ,  iii,  79,  ed.  Arber.] 

32.  Gloucester]  Walker  (  Vers.  236) :  In  the  Folio  this  name  is  printed  Glou- 
cester,  or  Glocesfer,  in  the  stage-directions  and  titles  of  speeches;  Gloster,  sometimes 
Giouster,  in  the  text;  in  either  case,  with  very  few  exceptions.  I  speak  of  all  the 
plays  in  which  the  name  occurs ;  the  distinction  is  least  observed,  perhaps,  in  Lear. 

33.  shall]  For  instances  of  the  use  of  ‘shall’  in  the  sense  of  I  am  bound  to 
and  lam  sure  to,  and  hence  often  used  in  the  replies  of  inferiors  to  superiors,  see 
Abbott,  §315. 

darker]  Warburton:  That  is,  more  secret;  not  indirect f  oblique.  JOHNSON: 
That  is,  we  have  already  made  known  in  some  measure  our  desire  of  parting  the 
kingdom;  we  will  now  discover  what  has  not  been  told  before,  the  reasons  by 
which  we  shall  regulate  the  partition.  This  interpretation  will  justify  or  palliate 
the  exordial  dialogue. 

36.  fast]  Edwards  (Can.  of  Crit.  p.  91,  ed.  1765):  That  is,  determined  resolu¬ 
tion  ;  first  of  the  Qq  must  here  signify  *  chief.'  Staunton  :  *  Fast  intent,’  signify¬ 
ing  fixed,  settled  intent,  is,  like  ‘  darker  purpose’  and  *  constant  will,’  peculiarly  in 
Shakespeare’s  manner. 


8 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  i. 


To  shak®  all  cares  and  business  from  our  age,  37 

Conferring  them  on  younger  strengths,  while  we 
Unburthen’d  crawl  toward  death. — Our  son  of  Cornwall, — 

And  you,  our  no  less  loving  son  of  Albany,  40 

We  have  this  hour  a  constant  will  to  publish 
Our  daughters’  several  dowers,  that  future  strife 
May  be  prevented  now.  The  princes,  France  and  Bur¬ 
gundy, 

Great  rivals  in  our  youngest  daughter’s  love, 

Long  in  our  court  have  made  their  amorous  sojourn,  45 

And  here  are  to  be  answer’d. — Tell  me,  my  daughters, 

Since  now  we  will  divest  us  both  of  rule, 

Interest  of  territory,  cares  of  state, 

Which  of  you  shall  we  say  doth  love  us  most  ? 

That  we  our  largest  bounty  may  extend  50 

Where  nature  doth  with  merit  challenge. — Goneril, 


37.  from  our  age]  of  our  flats  Qq. 

38.  Conferring ]  Confirming  Qq. 
strengths,']  yeares,  Qq. 

38-43.  while  we. ..now]  Om.  Qq. 

42.  daughters']  Cap.  Daughters  F, 
F3,  Rowe  + .  Daughter’s  F^. 

43.  now]  Om.  Han. 

May. ..now.]  One  line,  Coll.  ii. 
The  princes]  The  two  great 
Princes  Qq,  Coll.  ii.  The  Prince  F3F4. 


44.  youngest]  yongefi  F,.  yonger  F2. 
younger  F3F4  +  . 

46.  Tell  me,  my]  Tell  my  F3F4.  Tell 
me,  Pope  +  . 

47.  48.  Since. ..slate,]  Om.  Qq. 

48.  cares]  and  cares  Han. 

51.  Where. ..challenge.]  Where  mens 
doth  mofi  challenge  it :  Qq,  Cap.  Steev. 
Var. 

51,  52.  Goneril. ..first.]  One  line,  Qq. 


40.  Albany]  For  instances  of  polysyllabic  names  receiving  but  one  accent  at 
the  end  of  lines,  see  Abbott,  §469;  and  see  also  ‘  Goneril,’  line  51,  and  ‘Cordelia’ 
III,  i,  46,  and  elsewhere. 

41.  constant  will]  Johnson:  Seems  a  confirmation  of  'fast  intent.’ 

43.  France  and  Burgundy]  Moberly:  King  Lear  lived,  as  the  chronicle  says, 
•  in  the  times  of  Joash,  king  of  Judah.’  In  III,  ii,  95,  Sh.  himself  jokes  at  this  ex¬ 
travagant  antiquity ;  and  here  he  appears  to  imagine  Lear  as  king  in  the  rough  times 
following  Charlemagne,  when  France  and  Burgundy  had  become  separate  nations. 

47.  both]  See  Schmidt’s  Lex.  s.  v.  for  other  instances  of ‘both’  being  used  with 
more  than  two  nouns. 

51.  nature]  Steevens:  That  is,  where  the  claim  of  merit  is  superadded  to  that 
of  nature;  or  where  a  superior  degree  of  natural  filial  affection  is  joined  to  the 
claim  of  other  merits.  Crosby  ( Epitome  of  Literature,  15  May,  1879):  ‘With 
merit  ’  I  take  to  be  an  adverbial  phrase  equivalent  to  ‘  deservedly ;’  and  the  verb  to 
challenge,  in  addition  to  its  sense  of  to  contend,  or  vie  with,  has  an  older  and  less 
common  meaning — viz.,  to  make  title  to,  or  claim  as  due.  Chaucer  thus  uses  it,  in  The 
Frankeleyne' s  Tale  [4S8,  ed.  Morris]  :  ‘  Nat  that  I  chalenge  eny  thing  of  right  Of  yow, 
my  soverayn  lady,  but  youre  grace and  Joye,  Exposicion  of  Daniel,  c.  3  (quoted  by 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


9 


Our  eldest-born,  speak  first  52 

Gon.  Sir, 

I  love  you  more  than  word  can  wield  the  matter, 

you  Far  more... matter  :  love  you  Cap. 

54.  I  love~\  I  do  love  Qq,  Jen.  Cap. 
Steev.  Ec.  Var. 

ivord]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Del.  i,  Sch, 
words  Qq  et  cet. 

■wield  ]  weild  Q,FxFaF3.  yield  Cap 
conj.  (Var.  Read,  p.  20). 

Richardson),  ‘  God  oftentymes  by  clere  examples*and  bodely  delyuerances  chalengeth 
to  himself  the  glorye  of  his  owne  name.’  In  our  own  poet,  too,  cf.  3  Hen.  VI: 
III,  iii,  86:  ‘all  her  perfections  challenge  sovereignty;’  IV,  vi,  6:  ‘Subjects  may 
challenge  nothing  of  their  sovereigns ;’  IV,  viii,  48  :  ‘  These  graces  challenge  grace;’ 
and  Oth.  I,  iii,  188:  ‘So  much  I  challenge  that  I  may  profess  due  to  the  Moor, 
my  lord  ’ — i.  e.  claim  as  my  right.  Giving  then  this  meaning  to  ‘  challenge,’  the 
passage  may  be  properly  paraphrased,  ‘  where  your  natural  relation  to,  and  love  for, 
me  claim  my  bounty,  by  deserving  it;  or,  in  other  words,  ‘that  I  may  extend  my 
largest  bounty  where  your  natural  affection  deservedly  claims  it  as  due.’’  There  is  no 
contention  or  challenge  between  ‘nature’  and  ‘  merit,’  in  which  the  king’s  bounty  is 
to  be  the  prize ;  he  offers  it  solely  to  *  nature,’  claiming  or  demanding  it  on  its  own 
deserts.  Ulrici  (p.  443) :  These  words  cannot  possibly  have  been  meant  seriously; 
for  apart  from  the  circumstance  that  they  contradict  the  facts  adduced,  Lear  himself 
does  not  act  in  accordance  with  them,  but  does  the  very  opposite.  .  .  .  Obviously, 
therefore,  the  whole  demand  was  but  a  freak  of  the  imagination,  which  Lear  did  not 
mean  to  take  into  serious  consideration,  but  which  it  occurred  to  him  to  make  mere¬ 
ly  to  fill  up  the  time  till  the  return  of  Gloucester,  who  had  been  despatched  to  fetch 
the  duke  of  Burgundy  and  the  king  of  France.  The  concealed  motive  of  this  freak, 
and  its  execution,  was  probably  Lear’s  wish, — by  an  open  and  public  assurance  of 
his  daughters’  love  and  piety, — to  convince  himself  that  his  abdication  could  be 
of  no  danger  to  himself,  and  that  doubts  about  its  propriety  were  unfounded. 
Bucknili.  (p.  174):  That  the  trial  is  a  mere  trick  is  unquestionable;  but  is  not 
the  significance  of  this  fact  greater  than  Coleridge  suspected?  Does  it  not  lead 
us  to  conclude  that  from  the  first  the  king’s  mind  is  off  its  balance ;  that  the  parti¬ 
tion  of  his  kingdom,  involving  inevitable  feuds  and  wars,  is  the  first  act  of  his  devel¬ 
oping  insanity;  and  that  the  manner  of  its  partition,  the  mock-trial  of  his  daughters’ 
affections,  and  its  tragical  denouement  is  the  second,  and  but  the  second,  act  of  his 
madness. 

51.  Goneril]  Moberly:  This  name  seems  to  be  derived  from  ‘  Gwenar,’  the 
British  form  of  Vener  (Venus).  Regan  is  probably  of  the  same  origin  as  ‘  Rience,’ 
in  the  Holy  Grail ;  *  reian  ’  meaning  in  the  Cornish  ‘  to  give  bounteously.’ 

53.  Sir]  Collier  [Notes,  &c.,  p.  449) :  This  is  clearly  redundant,  and  Regan 
soon  afterwards  commences  her  speech  without  it.  It  is  erased  in  the  (MS.). 
Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  275)  suggests,  but  thinks  it  sounds  very  harsh  as  one  line :  ‘Our 
eldest-born,  speak  first.  Sir,  I  do  love  you  more,’  &c.  Moberly,  who  follows  the 
QqFf  in  arrangement,  says  that  *  Sir’  is  hypermetric,  and  represents  the  time  taken 
oh  the  stage  for  a  deep  reverence.  Schmidt  ( Zur  Textkritik )  thinks  that  exple- 


53.  Sir, ]  In  a  line  by  itself,  Johns. 
Dyce  ii,  Wh.  Huds.  ii.  Beginning  line 
54,  QqFf  et  cet.  Erased  in  Coll.  (MS.) 

53,  54.  Sir,  I]  As  closing  line  53, 
Steev.  Mai.  Ec. 

Sir,  I... matter, ]  I  love  you  dir. 
Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Sir,  I  do  love 


IO 


KING  LEAR 


[ACT  I,  SC.  i. 

55 


Dearer  than  eye-sight,  space,  and  liberty, 

Beyond  what  can  be  valued,  rich  or  rare, 

No  less  than  life,  with  grace,  health,  beauty,  honour, 

As  much  as  child  e’er  loved  or  father  found ; 

A  love  that  makes  breath  poor  and  speech  unable ; 

Beyond  all  manner  of  so  much  I  love  you.  60 

Cor.  [Aside]  What  shall  Cordelia  speak  ?  Love,  and  be 
silent 

Lear.  Of  all  these  bounds,  even  from  this  line  to  this, 


55.  and]  or  Qq. 

58.  muck  <7j]  much  a  Qq. 

e'er ]  Rowe,  dre  F,F4-  ere  QqFt 
F„. 


58.  found ]  friend  Qq. 

61.  [Aside]  Pope.  Ora.  QqFf. 

speak  ?]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll.  Del. 
do,  Qq.  do  f  Pope  et  cet. 


tives  like  this  are  in  a  large  measure  interpolations  of  the  actors.  Even  at  this 
day,  he  says,  Englishmen  are  fond  of  introducing  what  they  are  about  to  say  with 
such  little  words,  which,  like  tuning-forks,  give  the  key  in  which  they  intend  to 
speak. 

54.  word]  Knight  and  Delius  (ed.  1)  adopt  word  of  Ff,  and  the  latter  justi¬ 
fies  it  by  reference  to  III,  ii,  Si,  ‘more  in  word  than  matter;’  the  note,  however,  is 
omitted  in  his  second  edition.  Dycf.  in  both  of  his  eds.  ascribes  word  to  Collier’s 
first  ed.  It  is  not  so  in  my  copy  of  that  ed.  The  repetition  of  the  same  phrase  in 
the  same  play  ought  to  be  a  sufficient  authority,  I  should  think,  for  adhering  toJ  word 
of  the  Ff,  although,  to  be  sure,  a  taint  of  spuriousness  attaches  to  the  lines  in  III, 
ii,  80.  Under  any  circumstances,  ‘word’  is,  to  me,  more  truly  Shakespearian  than 
words.  Ed. 

55,  space]  Wright  :  The  limits  within  which  motion  is  possible.  Compare  Ant. 
and  Cleop.  I,  i.  34.  -*  Rather,’  says  Schmidt  (ad  loc.),  ‘is  “space,”  space  m  gen¬ 
eral,  the  realm  of  external  appearances,  the  world ;  “eyesight”  is  the  capacity  to 
comprehend  it ;  “  liberty  ”  the  freedom  to  enjoy  it.  The  lack  of  natural  filial  affec¬ 
tion  could  not  be  more  clearly  manifested  than  in  such  exaggerations.  Regan’s 
“square  of  sense,”  line  73,  affords  a  commentary  on  these  words  of  Gonenl.’ 

60.  so  much]  Johnson:  Beyond  all  assignable  quantity ;  I  love  you  beyond  limits, 
and  cannot  say  it  is  so  much ,  for  how  much  soever  I  should  name,  it  would  yet  be 
more.  Wright:  Beyond  all  these  comparisons  by  which  Goneril  sought  to  measure 
her  love.  Schmidt  (ad  loc.)  thinks  the  phrase  would  have  been  clear  at  once  had 
the  old  editions  only  used  quotation-marks :  *  beyond  all  manner  of  “  so  much  ”  I 
love  you.’ 

61.  speak]  Apart  from  authority,  the  choice  of  readings  here  seems  to  me  to 
depend  on  whether  we  take  ‘Love’  and  ‘be  silent’  as  infinitives  or  imperatives. 
If  they  are  infinitives,  we  should  read  ‘  do  ’  with  the  Qq,  but  if  imperatives,  we 
should  follow  the  Ff.  I  think  they  are  imperatives,  and  I  am  supported  by  Schmidt 
(Zur  Textkritik,  p.  12).  Moreover,  Knight  pronounces  do  of  the  Qq  feeble,  be¬ 
cause  it  destroys  the  force  of  the  answer:  *  Love,  and  be  silent .’  White  and  Dyce, 
on  the  other  hand,  assert  that  the  answer  plainly  shows  that  the  Qq  are  right  and  the 
Ff  wrong. 


A.CT  I,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


II 


With  shadowy  forests  and  with  champains  rich’d, 

With  plenteous  rivers  and  wide-skirted  meads. 

We  make  thee  lady.  To  thine  and  Albany’s  issue  6 5 

Be  this  perpetual. — What  says  our  second  daughter, 

Our  dearest  Regan,  wife  of  Cornwall  ? 

Reg.  I  am  made  of  that  self  metal  as  my  sister, 

And  prize  me  at  her  worth.  In  my  true  heart 
I  find  she  names  my  very  deed  of  love  ;  JO 

Only  she  comes  too  short :  that  I  profess 


63.  shadowy]  shady  Qq. 

63,  64.  and  with. ..rivers]  Om.  Qq. 

63.  champains]  Champions  FaF3F4, 
Rowe+. 

64.  wide- skirted]  white-skirted  Stock- 
dale. 

65.  thee  lady ]  the  Lady  F3> 

Albany's ]  A  lb  nines  Q,.  Albanies 

QaFIF2.  Albaenids  Q3-  Albanie's  F,. 
issue ]  iffues  Ft,  Knt,  Sch. 

67.  wife  of  ]  Ff  +  ,  Knt,  Col!.  Dyce  ii, 
Wh.  Sch.  wife  to  Q,Qa  et  cet. 

Cornwall  ?]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Dyce 
i,  Sch.  Cornwell,  f peake  ?  Qx.  Corn¬ 
wall,  f peake.  Qa.  Cornwall }  Speak. 
Pope  et  cet. 

68.  I  am]  Sir  I  am  Qq,  Jen.  Wh. 
I'm  Pope  + .  Sir,  rtn  Dyce  ii  (with 
Sir  in  a  separate  line). 


68.  that  self  metal]  that  felfe-mettle 
F,Fa.  that  felf  metal  F3F4.  the  felfe 
fame  mettall  Q,.  the  felfe-fame  met  lad 

Qa- 

as  my  sister]  that  my  ffler  ts  Qq, 

Jen. 

69.  worth.  In.. .heart]  worth.  In 
... heart ,  Ff.  worth  in. ..heart,  Qq. 
worth,  in. ..heart.  Theob. +  .  worth,  in 
...heart  Tyrwhitt. 

70-72.  I  find...joys]  Two  lines,  the 
first  ending  short,  Qq. 

71.  comes  too  short]  came  Jhort  Qq. 
short:]  Theob.  Jhort,  QqFf, 
Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Coll.  Del.  Wh.  Mob. 
Sch.  short , — Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Sing. 
Dyce,  Sta. 

that]  in  that  Ktly. 


63.  champains]  Wright:  Plains.  Compare  Deut.  xi.  30  (ed.  1611):  ‘the 
Canaanites,  which  dwell  in  the  champion  ouer  against  Gilgal.’  In  Ezekiel  xxxvii. 
2,  the  marginal  note  to  ‘valley’  is  ‘or,  champian.’  See  Twelfth  Night,  II,  v,  174, 
where  it  is  spelt  ‘  champian  ’  in  the  Ff :  *  Daylight  and  champian  discovers  not  more.’ 
In  Florio  we  find,  ‘  Campagna,  a  field  or  a  champaine.’ 

67.  Dyce  :  F,  omits  ‘  Speak ;’  but  Lear  has  concluded  his  address  to  Goneril  with 
‘ speak  first;’  and  he  afterwards  finishes  that  to  Cordelia  with  ‘speak.’ 

68.  self]  Compare  ‘self  mate  and  mate,’  IV,  iii,  34;  and  for  many  other  in¬ 
stances  of  the  use  of  this  word,  meaning  same,  see  Schmidt’s  Lex. 

69.  worth]  Theobald:  Mr.  Bishop  prescribed  the  pointing  of  this  passage  as 
I  have  regulated  it  in  the  text.  [See  Text-notes.]  Regan  would  say  that  in  the 
truth  of  her  heart  and  affection  she  equals  the  worth  of  her  sister.  Without  this 
change  in  the  pointing,  she  makes  a  boast  of  herself  without  any  cause  assigned. 
Tyrwhitt  paraphrases  his  punctuation  :  ‘  And  so  may  you  prize  me  at  her  worth,  as 
in  my  true  heart  I  find,  that  she  names,’  &C.  Mason  (p.  338) :  I  believe  we  should 
read :  *  prize  you  at  her  worth ;’  i.  e.  set  the  same  high  value  on  you  that  she  does. 

70.  deed  of  love]  Eccles:  Describes  that  kind  of  agency  by  which  my  own 
love  operates, — the  same  effects  of  which  it  is  productive.  Delius:  The  formal, 
legal  definition  of  love.  Wright:  That  is,  exactly  describes  my  love. 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  i. 


X2 

Myself  an  enemy  to  all  other  joys  72 

Which  the  most  precious  square  of  sense  professes, 

73.  square]  spirit  Han.  73.  professes ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Sch.  pof- 

square  of  sense ]  quintessence  Bui-  feffe s  Qq  et  cet. 

loch. 

71.  too  short]  Moberly  [see  Text-notes]  :  This  means  simply  short.  Compare 
Homer’s  to  fib  dAAo  t6oov  ipolvii;  rp>, — where  rtxsov  is  in  the  same  way  superfluous. 

71.  that]  For  in  that  or  for  that ,  see  Abbott,  §  284 ;  Ham.  I,  ii,  2 ;  II,  ii,  153  ; 
Mact.  Ill,  ii,  32.  See  also  White’s  note  on  I,  i,  167. 

73.  square  of  sense]  Warburton  thinks  this  refers  to  the  four  nobler  senses, 
sight ,  hearing ,  taste,  and  smell ,  but  Johnson  thinks  it  may  mean  only  compass,  com¬ 
prehension.  Edwards  {Canons  of  Crit.  p.  170):  The  full  complement  of  all  the 
senses.  Holt  {An  Attempts ,  &c.,  1749;  Preface,  p.  v) :  Sh.  evidently  intends  to 
describe  the  utmost  perfection  of  sense  (alluding  to  the  Pythagorean  Tenet,  which 
held  a  square  to  be  the  most  perfect  figure).  Capell  :  ‘  Not  only  the  extravagance 
of  these  sisters’  professions,  but  the  words  they  are  dress’d  in  paint  their  hearts  to 
perfection.  In  Regan’s  we  have  “  felicitate,”  an  affected  expression,  and  before  it  a 
line  that’s  all  affectation;  the  governing  phrase  in  it  is  borrow’d  (as  thinks  the  edi¬ 
tor)  from  some  fantastical  position  of  the  rosycrucians  or  cabalists,  who  use  it  in  the 
sense  the  “ Canons ”  have  put  on  it,  for — “the  complement  of  all  the  senses.’” 
Mr.  Smith  (ap.  Grey’s  Notes,  &c.,  1754,  ii,  102)  thinks  that ‘  sense  ’  should  be  sense', 
because  there  were  two  squares  referred  to  by  Goneril ;  ‘  the  first  was  eye-sight,  space, 
liberty,  and  what  could  be  valued  rich  and  rare;’  *  the  second  square  is  grace,  health, 
beauty,  honour.’  ‘  But  then  Goneril  says  she  loves  the  king  no  less  than  these,  and 
consequently  she  loves  these  as  much  as  she  does  the  king.  And  this  is  the  point 
in  which  Regan  says  she  falls  short  of  her.  The  second  square  is  of  the  superla¬ 
tive  kind  of  joys,  and  Regan  professes  herself  an  enemy  to  three  of  the  joys,  viz. 
health,  beauty,  and  honour;  which  are,  of  all  the  other  joys,  the  most  precious  square 
of  sense  {i.  e.  sense’s  joys)  possesses;  and  declares  that  his  dear  Highness’  love  is 
the  only  joy  of  the  square  which  she  values.  In  this  it  is  plain  that  she  outdoes  her 
sister  Goneril.’  [I  think  that  is  worth  transcribing  as  a  curiosity. — Ed.]  Collier 
{Notes,  &c.,  p.  449) :  The  (MS.)  gives  ‘  sphere  of  sense,’  which  exactly  conveys  the 
meaning  of  Edward’s  explanation.  Regan  loved  her  father  beyond  all  other  joys  in 
the  round,  or  sphere,  of  sense.  SlNGER  reads  sphere,  and  prefixes  spacious  instead 
of  ‘  precious.’  Of  both  these  emendations,  Blackwood's  Maga.  (Oct.  1853)  says  that 
they  are  good  as  modernizations  of  Sh.,  but  that  the  old  text  is  quite  intelligible ; 
•square’  means  compass,  area  [by  which  definition  the  present  editor  cannot  see 
that  any  progress  is  gained].  WHITE  {Sh.  Scholar,  p.423),  while  discarding  sphere 
for  ‘  square,’  thinks  Singer’s  spacious  is  more  plausible,  and  proposes,  if  change  be 
made,  ‘  spacious  square,’  but  finds  ‘  the  original  text  comprehensible,  with  a  smack 
of  Sh.  in  it.’  But  by  the  time  White  published  his  ed.  in  1S61,  the  original  text 
had  become  ‘very  obscure’  to  him,  although  he  was  ‘by  no  means  confident  that  it 
is  corrupt,’  adding  that  *  it  seems  to  mean  the  entire  domain  of  sensation.’  As  he 
does  not  in  his  ed.  .repeat  his  emendation,  *  spacious  square,’  it  is  to  be  presumed  he 
withdrew  it.  Keightley  estimated  it  more  highly;  he  adopted  it.  Bailey  (ii, 
88)  has  ‘  not  much  doubt  ’  that  Sh.  wrote  *  precious  treasure  of  sense,’  because  ‘  pre¬ 
cious  treasure  ’  occurs  in  Rom.  and  Jul.,  I,  i,  239.  Objections  to  this  emendation 


act  r.  sc.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


*3 


And  find  I  am  alone  felicitate 
In  your  dear  highness’  love. 


Cor. 


[Aside]  Then  poor  Cordelia !  75 


And  yet  not  so,  since  I  am  sure  my  love’s 
More  ponderous  than  my  tongue. 


74,  75.  And. ..love]  One  line,  Qq. 

74.  alone ]  all  one  Q3. 

75.  [Aside]  Pope.  Om.  QqFf. 

75,  77-  Then. ..tongue.]  Two  lines,  the 


76.  love's-]  Q,Ff.  loues  Q,. 


77.  ponderous]  Ff  +  ,  Jen,  Ec.  Knt, 
Del.  Cam.  Sch.  richer  Qq  et  cet.  plen¬ 
teous  Coll.  (MS.). 


first  endingy«r<f,  in  Qq. 


my  tongue]  their  tongue  Warb. 


75.  Cordelia]  Cord.  Qx. , 

on  the  score  of  metre  there  can  be  none,  says  Bailey,  because  treasure  is  ‘  on  occa¬ 
sion  condensable  into  a  monosyllable.'  Hudson:  That  is, fulness  or  wealth  of  sen¬ 
sibility  or  capacity  of  joy ;  so  that  the  meaning  seems  to  be :  Which  the  finest  sus¬ 
ceptibility,  or  the  highest  capacity  of  happiness,  can  grasp  or  take  in.  Wrigkt: 
That  is,  which  the  most  delicately  sensitive  part  of  my  nature  is  capable  of  enjoy¬ 
ing.  Moberly:  ‘The  choicest  estimate  of  sense,’  as  in  Tro.  and  Cres.  V,  ii,  132, 
‘to  square  the  general  sex  By  Cressid’s  rule.’  This  definition  by  Moberly,  SCHMIDT 
(Zur  Textkritik,  p.  12)  thinks  is  the  only  one  that  approaches  the  truth.  He  himself 
says,  the  phrase  in  question  means  the  ‘  choicest  symmetry  of  reason,  the  most  nor¬ 
mal  and  intelligent  mode  of  thinking.’  Regan’s  love  is  so  great  that  she  will  know 
nothing  of  all  joys,  which  even  a  pattern  of  reason  professes  to  be  joys,  such  as, 
‘  eye-sight,  space,  liberty,  life,  grace,  health,  beauty,  and  honour,’  which  had  just 
been  extolled  by  her  pattern  sister. 

73.  professes]  Schmidt  ( Zur  Textkritik ,  p.  13) :  To  object  to  a  word  because 
it  occurs  twice  within  two  lines,  appears  to  be,  in  the  interpretation  of  Sh.,  a  custom 
as  ill-grounded  as  it  is  widespread,  but  from  which,  at  all  events,  the  poet  himself 
was  free.  [Whatever  meaning  or  no-meaning  we  may  attach  to  ‘  square  of  sense,’  it 
seems  clear  to  me  that  Regan  refers  to  the  joys  which  that  ‘square’  ‘professes’  to 
bestow ;  I  therefore  follow  the  Ff. — Ed.] 

74.  felicitate]  Wright:  That  is,  made  happy.  For  instances  of  participles 
formed  on  the  model  of  the  Latin  participles  in  -atus,  compare  ‘  consecrate  ’  ( Tit. 
And.  I,  i,  14),  ‘articulate’  (1  Hen.  IV:  V,  i,  72),  ‘suffocate’  ( Tro.  and  Cres.  I,  iii, 
125),  ‘create’  {Mid.  N.  D.  V,  i,  412).  Abbott  (§342)  calls  attention  to  the  fact 
that  this  class  of  words,  being  derived  directly1  from  the  Latin,  stands  on  a  different 
footing  to  those  verbs  ending  in  - te ,  -t,  and  -ed,  which  because  of  their  already  re¬ 
sembling  participles  in  their  terminations,  do  not  add  - ed  in  the  participle.  See 
Walker  ( Crit.  ii,  324) ;  Macb.  Ill,  vi,  38;  Ham.  I,  ii,  20. 

77.  ponderous]  White:  ‘More  ponderous’  of  the  Ff  may  possibly  be  a  mis¬ 
print  for  ‘  mor t precious.'  Wright  thinks  it  ‘  has  the  appearance  of  being  a  player’s 
correction  to  avoid  a  piece  of  imaginary  bad  grammar ;’  but  I  do  not  think  we  should 
desert  a  durior  lectio  but  for  a  reason  ‘  more  ponderous  ’  than  this.  Schmidt  (ad 
loc.)  says,  with  shrewdness,  *  Light  was  the  usual  term  applied  to  a  wanton,  friv¬ 
olous,  and  fickle  love;  “  light  o’  love”  was  a  proverbial  expression.  But  the  oppo¬ 
site  of  this,  heavy ,  could  not  be  here  employed,  because  that  means  uniformly,  in  a 
moral  sense,  melancholy,  sad;  nor  is  weighty  any  better;  therefore  Sh.  chose  “pon¬ 
derous.”  ’ 


14 


KING  LEAR 


[ACT  I,  SC  i. 


Lear.  To  thee  and  thine,  hereditary  ever, 

Remain  this  ample  third  of  our  fair  kingdom. 

No  less  in  space,  validity,  and  pleasure,  80 

Than  that  conferr’d  on  Goneril. — Now,  our  joy, 

Although  our  last  and  least,  to  whose  young  love 


8l.  conferred]  confirm'd  Qq,  Steev. 
Var. 

Now"]  but  novo  Qq. 

8r.  our  last  and~\  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 
Coll,  i,  Del.  i,  Sing.  Wh.  Sch.  our  last , 
net  Pope+,  Jen.  Dyce  ii,  Sta.  Del.  ii, 


Ktly,  Huds.  Coll.  iii.  the  lajl,  not  Qq 
et  cet. 

82.  least,. ..love"]  leaf dove,  Ff.  leaf 
in  our  deere  love,  Qq,  Cap.  least ;  in 
whose  young  love  Han. 

to ]  in  Quincy  (MS.). 


80.  validity]  For  instances  of  *  validity,’  meaning  value ,  see  Schmidt’s  Lex. 
s.  v;  see  also  Ham.  Ill,  ii.  179. 

82.  last  and  least]  In  his  Life  of  Shakespeare  (Var.  ’21,  vol.  ii,  pp.  276-278), 
Malone  gives  many  instances  to  prove  that  last  not  least  was  a  formula  common  in 
Shakespeare’s  time,  and  is  always  applied  to  a  person  highly  valued  by  the  speaker. 
Steevens  refers  to  King  Leir’s  reply  to  Mumford  in  the  old  ante-Shakespearian 
play.  [See  Appendix,  p.  401.]  Malone  adds  from  The  Spanish  Tragedy,  written 
before  1593 :  *  The  third  and  last,  not  least,  in  our  account.’  Dyce  pronounces  the 
reading  of  Ff,  ‘last  and  least,’  a  flagrant  error;  and  Staunton  says  it  can  scarcely 
be  doubted  that  it  is  a  misprint,  and  to  the  examples  already  given  and  referred  to, 
adds  the  following :  ‘  The  last,  not  least,  of  these  brave  brethren  ’ — Peele’s  Poly¬ 
hymnia.  *  Though  I  speak  last,  my  lord,  I  am  not  least  ’ — Middleton’s  Mayor  of 
Queenborough  I,  iii.  And  ‘my  last  is,  and  not  least,’ — Beau.  &  Fl.,  Monsieur 
Thomas  III,  i.  White  [see  Text-notes]  :  Plainly  this  passage  was  rewritten  before 
the  Folio  was  printed.  The  last  part  of  line  82,  as  it  appears  in  the  Qq,  shows  that 
the  figurative  allusion  to  the  king  of  France  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy  could  have 
formed  no  part  of  the  passage  when  that  text  was  printed.  And  in  the  rewriting 
there  was  a  happy  change  made  from  the  commonplace  of  ‘  last  not  least,’  to  an 
allusion  to  the  personal  traits  and  family  position  of  Cordelia.  The  impression  pro¬ 
duced  by  all  the  passages  in  which  she  appears  or  is  referred  to  is,  that  she  was  her 
father’s  little  pet,  while  her  sisters  were  big,  bold,  brazen  beauties.  Afterwards,  in 
this  very  scene,  Lear  says  of  her  to  Burgundy :  *  If  aught  within  that  little  seeming 
substance,  or  all  of  it,  with  our  displeasure  pieced ,*  & c.  When  she  is  dead,  too,  her 
father,  although  an  infirm  old  man,  *  fourscore  and  upward,’  carries  her  body  in  his 
arms.  Cordelia  was  evidently  the  least,  as  well  as  the  youngest  and  best  beloved, 
of  the  old  king’s  daughters;  and  therefore  he  says  to  her,  ‘  Now  our  joy,  what  can 
you  say  to  justify  my  intention  of  giving  you  the  richest  third  of  the  kingdom, 
although  you  are  the  youngest  born  and  the  least  royal  in  your  presence  ?’  The 
poet’s  every  touch  upon  the  figure  of  Cordelia  paints  her  as,  with  all  her  firmness  of 
character,  a  creature  to  nestle  in  a  man’s  bosom, — her  father’s  or  her  husband’s, — 
and  to  be  cherished  almost  like  a  little  child;  and  this  happy  afterthought  brings  the 
picture  into  perfect  keeping,  and  at  the  very  commencement  of  the  drama  impresses 
upon  the  mind  a  characteristic  trait  of  a  personage  who  plays  an  important  part  in 
it,  although  she  is  little  seen.  Hudson:  I  find  it  not  easy  to  stand  out  against 
White’s  argument  in  favour  of  the  Ff;  still,  the  phrase  ‘though  last,  not  least,’  ap¬ 
pears  to  have  been  so  much  a  favorite  with  the  poet,  and  withal  so  good  in  itself, 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


15 

83 


The  vines  of  France  and  milk  of  Burgundy 
Strive  to  be  interess’d,  what  can  you  say  to  draw 


83,  84.  The . interest'd ]  Om.  Qq, 

Cap. 

84.  interest d\  Jen.  inter eji  Ff,  Sch. 
inf  rest  Pope.  Int’ress’d  Theob.  + . 


84,85.  What...opulent\  One  line,  Qq, 
Cap. 

84.  can  you  say\  say  you  Pope  + . 
draw ]  win  Qq,  Cap.  Jen. 


that  I  feel  constrained  to  read  with  the  majority  of  the  editors.  Schmidt  ( Zur 
Textkritik  des  Ring  Lear,  p.  13),  in  following  out  his  theory  that  in  the  Qq  we 
have  merely  a  corrupt  text  taken  down  from  the  stage  representation,  repudiates  the 

*  last,  not  least,’  here,  and  shrewdly  suggests  that  since  the  same  phrase  occurs  in  Jul. 
Cess.  Ill,  i,  189,  the  actor  who  took  the  part  of  Antony  in  that  play  also  acted  Lear, 
and  the  phrase  once  leamfed  by  heart  was  repeated  by  him  in  Lear ,  where  it  does  not 
belong.  ‘  But  let  one  put  himself  in  the  place  of  Lear,  and  there  will  be  felt  in  this 
“  last  and  least  ”  a  tender  touch  of  Nature.  Our  unser  Letztes  und  Kleinstes  gives  the 
meaning  certainly,  but  not  quite  wholly ;  “  least  ”  means  the  youngest  child,  because 
there  had  been  less  of  formal  ado  made  over  her,  because  in  many  a  fSte  and  state 
occasion,  in  which  the  elder  sisters  took  part,  she  had  not  had  any  share,  and  yet 
was  the  joy  and  “  object  ”  of  her  father,  as  the  youngest  child  is  always  the  favorite 
of  the  father,  the  eldest  of  the  mother.’  [If  Hudson  finds  it  not  easy  to  stand  out 
against  White’s  argument,  I  find  it  impossible.  White  is  at  his  happiest  in  detecting 
6ubtle,  delicate  touches,  and  when,  as  in  this  instance,  he  is  in  accord  with  the  Folio, 
I  yield  at  once,  and  will  merely  add  that  if  Malone  and  Staunton  can  prove  that 
‘  last,  not  least,’  was  a  hackneyed  phrase  in  Shakespeare’s  time,  it  is  all  the  more 
reason  why  it  should  not  be  used  here.  Its  very  opposition  to  the  common  use 
and  wont  makes  it  emphatic. — Ed.] 

83.  milk]  Eccles  :  The  pastures  of  Burgundy,  the  effect  for  the  cause.  Mober- 
LY :  In  ascribing  vines  to  France,  and  not  to  Burgundy,  Sh.  may  have  thought  of 
the  pastoral  countries  of  Southern  Belgium  as  forming  part  of  Burgundy  (as  they 
did  till  the  death  of  Charles  the  Bold,  1477),  otherwise  we  should  not  understand 
the  distinction;  as  in  the  French  Burgundy  wine-growing  was  of  very  old  standing; 
the  arms  of  Dijon  and  Beaune  have  a  vine  upon  them,  and  a  great  insurrection  of 
vine-dressers  took  place  there  in  1630. — Michelet,  Hist,  de  France,  ii,  303. 

84.  interess’d]  Steevens  :  So  in  the  Preface  of  Drayton’s  Polyolbion  : *  *  — there 
is  scarce  any  of  the  nobilitie  or  gentry  of  this  land,  but  he  is  in  some  way  or  other 
by  his  blood  interessed  therein.’  Again  in  Jonson’s  Sejanus  III,  i :  ‘  The  dear  re¬ 
public,  our  sacred  laws,  and  just  authority  are  interess’d  therein.’  Wright:  For 
the  form  of  the  word,  see  Cotgrave  (Fr.  Diet.) :  ‘  Interessfi  . .  .  Interessed,  or  touched 
in;  dishonoured,  hurt,  or  hindered  by,’  &c.  See  also  Massinger,  The  Duke  of  Milan, 
I,  i :  *  The  wars  so  long  continued  between  The  emperor  Charles,  and  Francis  the 
French  king,  Have  interess’d  in  either’s  cause  the  most  Of  the  Italian  princes.’  And 
Florio  (Ital.  Diet.)  :  ‘  Interessare,  to  interesse,  to  touch  or  conceme  a  mans  maine 
state  or  jee-simple,  to  conceme  a  mans  reputation ;’  and  *  Interessato,  interessed, 
touched  in  state,  in  honour  or  reputation.’  Again  in  Minsheu  (Span.  Diet.):  ‘In- 
teressado,  m.  interessed,  hauing  right  in.’  For  other  instances  of  verbs  of  which 
the  participial  form  has  become  a  new  verb,  compare  *  graff,’  *  hoise,’  which  appear 
in  modem  speech  as  *  graft,’  *  hoist.*  Schmidt  maintains  that  *  interest  ’  of  the  Ff 
is  the  contracted  past  participle  interested,  formed  on  the  analogy  of  *  felicitate,’  line 
73.  &c.,  and  that  there  is  no  such  verb  as  interesse  or  interest  in  Sh. 


l6 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  L 

85 


A  third  more  opulent  than  your  sisters  ?  Speak. 

Cor.  Nothing,  my  lord. 

Lear.  Nothing  ? 

Cor.  Nothing. 

Lear.  Nothing  will  come  of  nothing.  Speak  again. 

Cor.  Unhappy  that  I  am,  I  cannot  heave  90 

My  heart  into  my  mouth.  I  love  your  majesty 
According  to  my  bond  ;  no  more  nor  less. 


85.  opulent ]  opilent  Ft. 
your]  your  two  Cap. 

Speak]  Om.  Qq,  Cap. 

87,  SS.  Lear.  Nothing?  Cor.  No¬ 
thing. Om.  Qq.  Lear.  How!  Cor. 
Nothing.  Cap. 


89.  Nothing  will]  How,  nothing  can 
Qq.  Nothing  can  Cap.  Jen. 

90-92.  Unhappy. ..less.]  Prose,  Qq. 
00.  heave]  have  Q3F3F4. 

92.  no  more]  Ff  +  ,  Knt,  Sch.  nor 
more  Qq  et  cet. 


86.  Nothing]  Coleridge:  There  is  something  of  disgust  at  the  ruthless  hypoc- 
risy  of  her  sisters,  and  some  little  faulty  admixture  of  pride  and  sullenness  in  Cor* 
delia’s  ‘Nothing;’  and  her  tone  is  well  contrived,  indeed,  to  lessen  the  glaring 
absurdity  of  Lear’s  conduct,  but  answers  the  yet  more  important  purpose  of  forcing 
away  the  attention  from  the  nursery-tale  the  moment  it  has  served  its  end,  that  of 
supplying  the  canvas  for  the  picture.  This  is  also  materially  furthered  by  Kent’s 
opposition,  which  displays  Lear’s  moral  incapability  of  resigning  the  sovereign  power 
in  the  very  act  of  disposing  of  it.  Kent  is,  perhaps,  the  nearest  to  perfect  goodness 
in  all  Shakespeare’s  characters,  and  yet  the  most  individualized.  There  is  an  extra¬ 
ordinary  charm  in  his  bluntness,  which  is  that  only  of  a  nobleman,  arising  from  a 
contempt  of  overstrained  courtesy,  and  combined  with  easy  placability  where  good¬ 
ness  of  heart  is  apparent.  His  passionate  affection  for,  and  fidelity  to,  Lear  act  on 
our  feelings  in  Lear’s  own  favour;  virtue  seems  to  be  in  company  with  him. 

91.  majesty]  A  dissyllable.  See  Mach.  III,iv,  2;  Walker,  Vers.  174;  Abbott, 
§46S. 

92.  W.  W.  Lloyd  :  The  crudity  of  manners  expressed  in  Lear’s  solicitation  of 
flattery  has  its  natural  counterpart  in  the  almost  sullen  and  repulsive  tone  of  the 
virtue  which  preserves  Cordelia  from  the  degradation  he  would  tempt  her  to.  The 
progress  of  the  story  required  a  reply  that  should  provoke  the  indignation  of  her 

father,  and  yet  not  cause  her  to  forfeit  our  esteem . Moreover,  Sh.,  it  appears 

to  me,  designed  to  convey,  by  the  very  terms  and  rhythm  of  the  speeches  of  Cor¬ 
delia,  an  impression  that  her  speech  was  usually  reserved  and  low  and  laconic,  and 
thus  that  the  very  faculty  was  foreign  to  her  that  might  have  enabled  her  to  effect 
the  same  result  for  her  own  dignity  with  milder  method.  Certain  it  is,  and  it  is  suf¬ 
ficiently  declared  in  the  sequel  of  the  scene,  that  she  took  too  little  thought  for  the 
fact  that  her  disinheriting  was  a  greater  misfortune  to  her  father  than  to  herself,  and 
that  to  prevent  it  for  his  sake  were  worth  incurring  some  misconstruction;  this 
thought  necessarily  arises  from  the  terms  in  which  she  commends  her  father,  whose 
weakness  she  had  not  had  the  skill  to  humour  honorably,  to  the  sisters,  whose  natures 
she  knows  too  well  not  to  foresee  their  course,  even  without  the  irritation  which 
the  same  weakness  was  sure  to  give  occasion  and  welcome  pretext  for.  This,  then, 
is  the  incongruity  of  the  social  state  on  which  the  tragic  action  of  the  play  depends; 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


17 


Lear.  How,  how,  Cordelia  ?  mend  your  speech  a  little,  93 
Lest  you  may  mar  your  fortunes. 

Cor.  Good  my  lord. 

You  have  begot  me,  bred  me,  loved  me;  I  95 

Return  those  duties  back  as  are  right  fit, 


93.  How,  how,  Cordelia  f]  Goe  to,goe 
to,  Qt,  Cap.  Go  too,  go  too,  Q3. 

mend"]  mend  me  Cap. 

94.  you ]  Ff  + ,  Knt,  Coll.  Del.  Dyce  i. 


Ktly,  Sch.  it  Qq  et  cet. 

95,  96.  I...fit ,]  One  line 
Rowe. 

96. /;  ]/rQ3. 


m 


QqFf. 


and  when  Lear  enters  mad  in  the  last  scene,  with  Cordelia  dead  in  his  arms,  we  have 
but  the  fulfilment  for  either  of  the  fate  they  equally  provoked ;  we  behold  the  com¬ 
mon  catastrophe  of  affection  too  much  qualified  by  unreasonable  anger  on  one  side, 
and  unaccommodating  rigour  on  the  other.  Rapp  {Einleitung  zur  Uebersetzung, 
Stuttgart,  1843):  The  elder  sisters  are  vulgar,  selfish  natures;  Cordelia  is  not  so 
vulgar,  although  possessed  of  a  pride  and  obstinacy  not  unusual.  When  Diogenes 
marched  up  and  down  in  the  brilliant  rooms  of  Plato,  saying :  *  I  tread  upon  the 
pride  of  Plato,’  ‘Yes,’  replied  Plato,  ‘with  greater  pride.’  That  is  just  the  case 
with  Cordelia.  She  is  proud  of  being  in  the  right,  in  contrast  with  her  vulgar  sis¬ 
ters,  and  this  feeling  she  opposes  to  her  sisters  and  to  her  old  father.  The  weak 
old  father  has  a  right  to  a  few  flattering  expressions  from  a  loving  child,  because 
he  needs  them.  She  offers  him,  on  the  contrary,  what  he  cannot  bear,  the  truth.  A 
woman,  whose  nature  is  love,  and  who  is  straitlaced  for  truth,  is  a  doubly  perverted 
creature.  Truth  and  Love  are  completely  antipodal ;  what  else  is  love  for  an  indi¬ 
vidual  but  the  taking  of  a  finite  object  for  an  infinite,  and  worshipping  it  as  such  ? 
Thus,  love  is  essentially  a  lie,  not  a  truth,  and  Cordelia  misbehaves  like  her  sisters, 
only  in  a  different  way,  by  egoism  and  lovelessness.  One  for  whom  she  cannot  tell 
a  little  lie,  she  does  not  love  as  she  should.  On  this  fine  ground,  which  the  poet  has 
laid  very  close  to  us,  now  rests  the  whole  piece. 

92.  bond]  Eccles  :  What  I  am  bound  to  by  duty. 

94.  et  seq.  Moberly  :  Shi,  with  wonderful  naturalness,  makes  the  shy  and  re» 
served  Cordelia  speak,  when  her  false  position  is  forced  upon  her,  with  a  passion  that 
will  not  stopio  choose  conciliatory  expressions,  and  which  makes  up  by  vehemence, 
and  what  sounds  like  petulance,  for  the  weakness  of  the  argument  which  she  is 
driven  to  use,  as  she  cannot  reveal  the  truth  which  she  knows. 

95.  begot]  Wright:  Sh.  (see  Mer.  of  Ven.  Ill,  ii,  65;  II,  ii,  37)  uses  both 
forms  of  the  participle  ‘  begot  ’  and  ‘  begotten.’  In  the  Authorized  Version  the  lat¬ 
ter  only  occurs. 

96.  those  .  .  .  as]  Abbott,  §  384,  cites  this  line  as  containing  an  ellipsis,  simi¬ 
lar  to  that  in  Macb.  Ill,  iv,  138:  ‘  Returning  were  as  tedious  as  (to)  go  o’er,’  and 
gives  it  thus,  in  full :  *  Return  those  duties  back  as  (they)  are  right  fit  (to  be  returned),’ 
adding, 1  As  can  scarcely  be  [here]  taken  for  which?  It  appears  to  me,  neverthe¬ 
less,  that  it  may  be  here  readily  taken  for  which,  and  so  become  an  apposite  instance 
under  Abbott’s  §  280,  and  parallel  with  Lear  I,  iv,  56 :  ‘  with  that  ceremonious  affec¬ 
tion  as  you  were  wont.’  Thus :  ‘  Return  those  duties  back  [which]  are  right  fit— 
viz :  Obey,’  &c.  Wright  is  also,  apparently,  of  this  opinion ;  but  Moberly  says 
that  the  plural  ‘  are  ’  is  used  by  attraction  to  the  word  ‘  duties,’  as  in  Hen.  V:  V,  ii, 

2*  B 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  SC.  L 


18 


Obey  you,  love  you,  and  most  honour  you.  97 

Why  have  my  sisters  husbands,  if  they  say 
They  love  you  all  ?  Haply,  when  I  shall  wed, 

That  lord  whose  hand  must  take  my  plight  shall  carry  IOO 
Half  my  love  with  him,  half  my  care  and  duty. 

Sure,  I  shall  never  marry  like  my  sisters, 

*  To  love  my  father  all.  * 

Lear.  But  goes  thy  heart  with  this  ? 

Cor.  Ay,  my  good  lord. 

Lear.  So  young,  and  so  untender?  1 05 

Cor.  So  young,  my  lord,  and  true. 

Lear.  Let  it  be  so ;  thy  truth  then  be  thy  dower ; 

For,  by  the  -sacred  radiance  of  the  sun, 


98,  99.  Why...all  ?]  One  line,  Qq. 

98-102.  Why . never]  Four  lines, 

ending  all,.. .hand. ..him,...neuer  Qq. 

99.  Haply ]  Happely  Q,.  Happily  Ff. 
wed,]  wed.  FSF3. 

102.  marry]  Mary  Qt. 

i»c,  103.  marry . ell.]  Pope.  One 

line,  Qq. 

103.  To. ..all.]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Sch. 


Hereafter,  lines  thus  included  between 
asterisks  are  found  only  in  the  Qq. 

104.  thy  heart  with  this  ?]  this  with 
thy  heart  ?  Qq,  Mai.  Steev.  Bos.  Coll. 

Ay,  my  good]  I  my  good  Ff  + , 
Cap.  Jen.  Knt,  Coll.  Del.  Wh.  Ktly,  Sch. 
I  rood  my  Qq.  Ay,  good  my  Mai.  et  cet. 
107.  Let]  Well  lei  Qq. 

thy  truth]  the  truth  F3F4,  Rowe. 


18;  and  that  the  phrase  should  be  *  as  is  right  fit,’  as,  indeed,  Keightley  had  already 
so  printed  it  in  his  text. 

104,  et  seq.  Seymour  here  and  in  many  other  places  amends  the  rhythm,  which 
he  finds  harsh.  I  do  not  record  his  suggestions,  which  are  put  forth  with  assurance, 
and  consist  mainly  in  a  free  excision  of  Shakespeare’s  words  and  in  a  free  insertion 
of  his  own.  Some  commentators  seem  to  think  that  Shakespeare  could  write  neither 
poetry  nor  sense. — Ed. 

107.  Bucknill  (p.  176) :  [This  curse]  is  madness,  or  it  is  nothing.  Not  indeed 
raving,  incoherent,  formed  mania,  as  it  subsequently  displays  itself,  but  exaggerated 
passion,  perverted  affection,  enfeebled  judgment,  combining  to  form  a  state  of  men* 
tal  disease — incipient,  indeed,  but  still  disease — in  which  man,  though  he  may  be 
paying  for  past  errors,  is  during  the  present  irresponsible. 

108.  sun]  Capell  :  The  oaths  given  to  Lear  are  admirable  for  their  solemnity, 
and  are  taken  from  out  the  creed  of  his  times  as  fables  have  given  it;  he  is  made 
the  builder  of  -Leicester  (Leir  Cestre,  Saxonicl),  and  a  temple  of  his  erection  is 
talk’d  of  to  yanus  B  if r otis ;  so  that  as  well  his  ‘Hecate’  here,  as  his  Apollo  and 
Jupiter  afterwards,  are  consonant  to  his  imputed  religion,  whatever  comes  of  his 
true ;  to  which,  in  likelihood,  his  address  before  *  Hecate  ’  has  a  nearer  affinity.  Mo* 
BERLY:  The  Druidical  gods  are,  according  to  Caesar  {Bell.  Gall,  vi,  17),  Apollo, 
Mars,  Jove,  and  Minerva.  Lear’s  two  oaths,  by  Apollo  and  Jupiter,  are  therefore 
historically  accurate;  so  is  his  swearing  by  Night,  as  (c.  18)  ‘Gall!  se  omnes  ab 
Dite  patre  prognatos  predicant,’  and  by  Hecate,  as  a  temple  of  Diana  once  occu* 
pied  the  place  of  the  present  St.  Paul's  in  London.  (Palgrave’s  Anglo-Saxons,  p.  51.) 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


19 


The  mysteries  of  Hecate,  and  the  night ; 

By  all  the  operation  of  the  orbs  1 10 

From  whom  we  do  exist  and  cease  to  be; 

Here  I  disclaim  all  my  paternal  care, 

Propinquity,  and  property  of  blood, 

And  as  a  stranger  to  my  heart  and  me 

Hold  thee  from  this  for  ever.  The  barbarous  Scythian,  115 
Or  he  that  makes  his  generation  messes 
To  gorge  his  appetite,  shall  to  my  bosom 
Be  as  well  neighbour’d,  pitied,  and  relieved, 

As  thou  my  sometime  daughter. 

Kent.  Good  my  liege, — 

Lear.  Peace,  Kent!  120 


109.  mysteries]  miJlrcJJ'eQ q.  tniferies 

F,- 

Hecate ]  Heccat  QqF,.  HecatF,. 
night]  might  Qq. 

110.  operation]  operations  F3F3F4+, 
Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Huds. 

1 15.  Hold]  Hould  Qx. 

ever.  The]  ever,  the  Qq. 


11 6,  1 17.  Or.. ...appetite,]  Two  lines, 
the  first'  ending  generation,  Qq. 

1 17,  1 18.  shall  to  my  bosom  Be]  Shall 
bee  Qq. 

1 1 9.  liege, — ]  liege — Rowe.  Liege. 
QqFf. 

120,  121.  Peace...wrath.]  One  line, 
Qq. 


109.  Hecate]  Wright:  This  word  is  a  dissyllable  in  Mid.  N.  D.  V,  i,  391; 
Mach.  II,  i,  52 ;  III,  ii,  41 ;  III,  v,  I ;  and  Ham.  Ill,  ii,  246.  It  is  a  trisyllable 
only  in  1  Hen.  VI:  III,  ii,  64,  a  significant  fact  as  regards  Shakespeare’s  share  in 
that  play. 

no.  operation]  Delius:  The  effect  upon  the  life  or  death  of  mortals.  Wright. 
This>  belief  in  planetary  influence  is  in  keeping  with  the  speech  of  Edmund  in  the 
next  scene. 

1 13.  property]  Delius:  A  stronger  expression  of  the  idea  contained  in  ‘propin¬ 
quity.’  Wright  :  Rising,  as  it  were,  to  identity  of  blood.  Schmidt  calls  attention 
to  this  solitary  instance  in  Sh.  of  this  word  in  the  sense  of  ownership  and  also  of 
*  propinquity.’ 

1 15.  from  this]  Steevens:  That  is,  from  this  time. 

1 15.  barbarous]  See  Abbott,  §468,  for  the  contraction  of  this  and  similar 
words  in  pronunciation;  likewise  ‘nursery,’  in  line  122. 

1 15.  Scythian]  Wright:  Purchas,  in  his  Pilgrimage  (ed.  1614,  p.  396),  says, 
after  describing  the  cruelties  of  the  Scythians :  ‘  These  customes  were  generall  to  the 
Scythians  in  Europe  and  Asia  (for  which  cause  Scytharum  facinora  patrare,  grew 
into  a  prouerbe  of  immane  crueltie,  and  their  Land  was  iustly  called  Barbarous) ; 
others  were  more  speciall  and  peculiar  to  particular  Nations  Scythian.’ 

1 16.  generation]  Capell:  His  children,  what  he  has  generated.  Wright: 
The  word  in  this  sense  of  offspring  is  familiar  from  Matthew,  iii.  7 :  ‘  O  generation 
of  vipers.’ 

1 19.  sometime]  For  instances  of  the  use  of  this  in  the  sense  of  ‘  formerly,’  see 
Schmidt,  Lex.  s.  v 


20 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  i. 


Come  not  between  the  dragon  and  his  wrath.  12 1 

I  loved  her  most,  and  thought  to  set  my  rest 

On  her  kind  nursery. — Hence,  and  avoid  my  sight ! — 

So  be  my  grave  my  peace,  as  here  I  give 

123.  and]  Om.  Pope+. 

[To  Cor.  Rowe  +,  Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Wh.  Hal. 

121.  dragon]  Moberly:  A  natural  trope  for  Lear  to  use,  as,  like  Arthur,  he 
would  wear  a  helmet  ( Idylls  of  the  King,  p.  256) :  ‘  On  which  for  crest  the  golden 
dragon  clung  For  Britain.’  [See  Godwin  on  helmets,  Appendix,  p.  449.] 

121.  wrath]  Capell:  His  wrath’s  object. 

122.  set  my  rest]  Wright:  A  phrase  from  the  game  of  cards  called  primero, 
used  in  a  double  sense.  Metaphorically, * * *  4  to  set  one’s  rest  ’  is  to  stake  one’s  all. 
Literally  in  the  game  of  primero  it  signifies  ‘  to  stand  upon  the  cards  in  one’s  hand.’ 
For  an  example  of  the  metaphorical  sense,  see  Bacon’s  Essay  xxix,  p.  12S  (ed. 
Wright) :  *  There  be  many  Examples,  where  Sea-Fights  have  beene  Finall  to  the 
warre ;  But  this  is,  when  Princes  or  States,  have  set  up  their  Rest,  vpon  Battailes.’ 
[See  the  notes,  in  this  edition,  on  Rom.  6°  Jul.  IV,  v,  6.  Elsewhere  in  Sh.  the 
phrase  is  uniformly,  I  think,  4  to  set  up.’ — Ed.] 

123.  Hence,  etc.]  Heath:  These  words  are  undoubtedly  addressed  to  Kent; 
for  in  the  next  words  Lear  sends  for  France  and  Burgundy,  in  order  to  tender  to 
them  his  youngest  daughter.  At  such  a  time,  therefore,  to  drive  her  out  of  his  pres¬ 
ence  would  be  a  contradiction  to  his  declared  intention.  Jennens  ably  maintains 
Jhat  this  is  addressed  to  Cordelia,  in  so  far  as  she  had  just  raised  her  father’s  anger 
Jo  the  highest  pitch,  while  Kent,  the  extent  of  whose  opposition  was  thus  far  quite 
unknown,  had  been  simply  warned  not  to  come  between  the  dragon  and  his  wrath. 
When  Kent  interposed  a  second  time,  Lear  warned  him  a  second  time  to  make  from 
the  shaft.  Kent  emboldened,  then  uses  rougher  language;  Lear  passionately  ad¬ 
jures  him,  4  on  thy  life,  no  more  ;’  Kent  persists,  and  Lear  bids  him  for  the  first  time 

4  out  of  my  sight.’  Kent  further  entreats,  Lear  swears  ;  Kent  returns  the  oath,  and 
then  Lear  banishes  him.  This-  natural  gradation  in  Lear’s  anger  towards  Kent,  thus 
contrasted  with  his  instant  rage  against  Cordelia,  whom  he  loved  so  deeply  and  who 
had  wounded  him  so  bitterly,  Jennens  thinks  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  in  all 
Shakespeare.  Malone  thinks  that  the  inconsistency  noted  by  Heath  is  perfectly 
suited  to  Lear’s  character,  and  therefore  that  this  sentence  is  addressed  to  Cordelia. 
Delius  adopts  Heath’s  reasons  for  believing  these  words  were  addressed  to  Kent, 
and  adds  that  Cordelia,  both  before  and  after  them,  is  spoken  of  in  the  third  person. 
White:  These  words  most  probably  are  addressed  to  Cordelia;  yet  it  may  be  rea¬ 
sonably  urged  that  Cordelia  does  not  go  out,  as  she  would  be  likely  to  do  upon  such 
a  command ;  and  that  although  Kent  has  merely  broken  in  with  4  Good,  my  liege, — * 
Lear  is  choleric  and  unreasonable  enough  to  hound  him  from  his  presence  upon 
such  slight  provocation.  HUDSON  :  Perhaps  the  true  explanation  is,  that  Lear  an¬ 
ticipates  remonstrance  from  Kent,  and,  in  his  excited  mood,  flares  up  at  any  offer  of 
that  kind.  Wright:  After  the  king,  in  reply  to  Kent’s  interruption,  had  justified  his 
conduct,  he  could  scarcely  order  him  from  his  sight.  [If  any  critic  of  less  weight 
than  Heath  had  started  this  question,  1  doubt  if  it  would  have  been  ever  discussed.— 
Ed.] 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


21 


Her  father’s  heart  from  her! — Call  France.  Who  stirs?  125 
Call  Burgundy. — Cornwall  and  Albany, 

With  my  two  daughters’  dowers  digest  the  third 
Let  pride,  which  she  calls  plainness,  marry  her. 

I  do  invest  you  jointly  with  my  power, 

Pre-eminence  and  all  the  large  effects  130 

That  troop  with  majesty.  Ourself,  by  monthly  course, 

With  reservation  of  an  hundred  knights 

By  you  to  be  sustain’d,  shall  our  abode 

Make  with  you  by  due  turn.  Only  we  shall  retain 

The  name  and  all  th’ addition  to  a  king;  135 


125.  her! — Call  France. ]  Coll,  her ; 
call  France,  Q2Ff  +.  her ,  call  France 
Qt.  her.  Call  France ;  Cap. 

126.  Burgundy.— ]  Theob.  Burgun¬ 
dy — Rowe,  Pope.  Burgundy,  QqFf. 

[  Exit  an  Att.  Cap.  Exit  Edmund. 
Cap.  conj.  (MS.).* 

127.  daughter d  dowers]  Warb. 
Daughters  Dowres  F,F3F<.  daughters 
( lower  Qq.  Daughters ,  Dowres  Fa. 
daughters  dowers  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob. 
Han. 

the]  Ff  + ,  Bos.  Knt,  Coll.  Del. 
Dyce  i,  Wh..  Sch.  this  Qq  et  cet. 

129.  with]  in  Qq. 

130.  Pre-eminence]  Jen.  Prehemi- 


nence  QqFf +,  Cap.  Steev.  Ec. 

1 34.  turn]  F3F4,  Rowe,  Knt,  Del.  Sch. 
turne  F,Fa.  tumes  Qq  et  cet. 

we  shall]  Ff,  Rowe,  Steev.  Ec. 
Knt,  Del.  Sch.  Om.  Pope+.  we  Cap. 
we  Jlill  Qq  et  cet. 

135,  136.  The  name. ..rest,]  The  first 
line  ends  /way,  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap. 

*35*  name  and. ..king ;...of  the  rest] 
name ;  but... king,  office,  Theob.  (Nich¬ 
ols’s  Lit.  Hist,  ii,  369)  conj.  (with¬ 
drawn). 

and  all]  Om.  Cap. 

addition]  Ff +,  Cap.  Steev.  Sing-. 
Ktly,  Sch.  additions  Qq  et  cet. 


125.  Who  stirs?]  Delius  interprets  this  as  a  threat,  to  terrify  into  silence  any 
chance  opposition  on  the  part  of  the  bystanders.  Moberly  :  The  courtiers  seem 
unwilling  to  obey  a  command  so  reckless.  [May  it  not  be  that  the  circle  of  cour¬ 
tiers  are  so  horror-struck  at  Lear’s  outburst  of  fury,  and  at  Cordelia’s  sudden  and 
impending  doom,  that  they  stand  motionless  and  forget  to  move  ?  This  is  one  of 
Shakespeare’s  touches,  like  old  Capulet’s  calling  Juliet ‘you  tallow-face,’ to  be  in¬ 
terpreted  by  reading  between  the  lines. — Ed.] 

128.  marry]  Delius  :  That  is,  provide  a  husband  for  her. 

129.  138.  W.  W.  Lloyd:  It  is  apparent  that  Lear  must  long  have  put  the  sin- 
cerest  affection  to  the  sorest  trials,  and  tasked  the  endurance  even  of  sordid  self- 
interest,  and  now  he  manifests  undiminished  appetite  for  the  coarser  luxury  of  sway 
at  the  very  moment  he  releases  unwilling  purveyors  from  their  bondage.  The  re¬ 
served  train  of  one  hundred  knights,  and  the  alternate  visits  he  proposes,  prove  that 
in  a  most  important  respect  he  contemplates  no  abdication  at  all,  but  expects  to  ob¬ 
tain  still,  on  the  strength  of  obligation,  more  than  all  he  had  exacted  so  gallingly  by 
the  force  of  his  regal  power  and  dignity. 

130.  effects]  Wright:  Used,  apparently,  of  the  outward  attributes  of  royalty, 
everything  that  follows  in  its  train.  See  II,  iv,  176. 


22 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  i. 
136 


The  sway,  revenue,  execution  of  the  rest, 

Beloved  sons,  be  yours ;  which  to  confirm, 

This  coronet  part  between  you. 

Kent.  Royal  Lear, 

Whom  I  have  ever  honour’d  as  my  king, 

Loved  as  my  father,  as  my  master  follow’d,  140 

As  my  great  patron  thought  on  in  my  prayers, — 

Lear.  The  bow  is  bent  and  drawn ;  make  from  the  shaft. 
Kent.  Let  it  fall  rather,  though  the  fork  invade 
The  region  of  my  heart !  Be  Kent  unmannerly, 

When  Lear  is  mad.  What  wouldst  thou  do,  old  man?  145 


136.  The  sway ]  Separate  line,  Steev. 
Bos.  Knt,  Dyce. 

of  the  rest ]  Om.  Pope,  Theob. 
Han.  and  the  rest  Cap.  [offers  it.  (a 
stage  direction)  Anon.* 

1 38.  between j  betwixt  Qq,  Glo,  -f , 
Mob. 

[Giving  the  crown.  Pope  +. 
[in  Adlion  of  preventing  him. 
Cap.  Ec. 

139.  my  king]  a  king  F4,  Rowe,  Pope. 

140.  master ]  maifler  Q,. 
follow1  d] followed  Qq. 


141.  As  my  great ]  As  my  F3F3>4. 
And  as  my  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
Warb.  Coll.  (MS.). 

prayers , — ]  prayers — Rowe  +. 
prayers.  Q,F3F4.  praiers.  Q3F,F3. 

142.  drawn ]  drawen  Qf. 

143-153.  Let  it hollowness ]  Lines 

end  rat her,. ..heart, ...mad,. ..duty. ..bowes, 

folly , . confideration life, leaf!,.... 

found. ...hollownes  Qq. 

145.  mad ]  man  Q,. 

wouldst ]  wouldefl  F,F3F3>  wilt 
Qq. 


133.  shall]  Wright:  Here  used  in  the  ordinary  future  sense,  as  if  it  had  been 
preceded  by  *  we,’  with  perhaps  something  of  the  idea  of  fixed  intention. 

135.  addition]  External  observance.  See  II,  ii,  22;  Macb,  I,  iii,  106;  III,  i,  99; 
Ham.  I,  iv,  20. 

136.  of  the  rest]  Warburton  reads  ‘of  th’  Hest,’  because  Hest  is  an  old  word 
for  regal  command.  Heath  proposed  to  substitute  interest,  which  will  signify  the 
legal  right  and  property.  Jennens  :  It  is  most  likely  Sh.  wrote  all  the  rest.  JOHN¬ 
SON  :  The  phrase  means,  I  suppose,  the  execution  of  all  the  other  business. 

138.  coronet]  Delius  thinks  that  this  does  not  refer  to  Lear’s  own  crown,  that 
is  among  the  things  which  he  retains,  but  he  delivers  to  his  sons-in-law,  who  remain 
dukes  after  as  well  as  before  this  transaction,  a  smaller  ducal  crown.  Elsewhere 
Sh.  accurately  distinguishes  between  a  crown  and  a  coronet,  see  Temp.  I,  ii,  114; 
Hen.  V:  II,  Chor.  io.  Wright  thinks  that  there  can  be  no  such  distinction  here; 
while  Schmidt  agrees  with  Delius. 

143.  fork]  Wright:  Ascham  says,  in  his  Toxophilus  (p.  135,  ed.  Arber),  that 
Pollux  describes  two  kinds  of  arrow-heads:  ‘  The  one  he  calleth  bynLvoq,  descrybynge 
it  thus,  hauyng  two  poyntes  or  barbes,  lookyng  backewarde  to  the  stele  and  the 
fethers,  which  surely  we  call  in  Englishe  a  brode  arrowe  head  or  a  swalowe  tayle. 
The  other  he  calleth  hauyng  .ii.  poyntes  stretchyng  forwarde,  and  this  Eng- 

lysh  men  do  call  a  forkehead.’ 

145.  What]  Capf.ll:  This  is  spoke  on  seeing  his  master  put  his  hand  to  bis 
sword. 


4CT  I,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


n 


Think’st  thou  that  duty  shall  have  dread  to  speak,  146 

When  power  to  flatteiy  bows?  To  plainness  honour’s 
bound, 

When  majesty  falls  to  folly.  Reserve  thy  state. 


147.  When . bound, ]  Johns.  Two 

lines,  Ff,  Rowe.  When. ..honour,  one 
line,  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

honour's ]  honours  Qq.  honour 
Is  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

I47-149.  Lines  end  honour.,  falls ... 
check  Pope,  Theob.  Han.'Warb. 

148.  falls  to  folly ]  Ff.  ( fall  F3)  Rowe, 


Johns.  Jen.  Knt,  Del.  Dyce,  Sch.  to 
folly  falls  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb 
floops  to  folly  Qq  et  cet. 

148.  folly."]  Johns,  folly;  Rowe. 
folly,  QqFf. 

Reserve  thy  state]  Ff  +,  Knt, 
Del.  Sing.  Dyce  i,  Sch.  Reuerfe  thy 
doome  Qq  et  cet. 


147.  A  trimeter  couplet,  see  A3BOTT,  §501. 

148.  majesty]  A  dissyllable.  See  I,  i,  90. 

148.  Reserve  thy  state]  Johnson  :  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  Reverse  thy  doom 
was  Shakespeare’s  first  reading,  as  more  apposite  to  the  present  occasion,  and  that  he 
changed  it  afterwards  to  *  Reserve  thy  state,’  which  conduces  more  to  the  progress  of 
the  action.  Delius  defends  the  Ff,  because  Lear’s  surrender  of  his  royalty  proved 
subsequently  more  fatal  to  him  than  the  unjust  doom  pronounced  on  Cordelia. 
White  cannot  regard  the  text  of  the  Ff  as  other  than  *  an  accidental  variation,  be¬ 
cause  Kent  makes  no  attempt  to  induce  Lear  to  abandon  his  design  of  dividing  his 
kingdom  and  abdicating  his  throne;  he  simply  pleads  for  Cordelia.  Between  re¬ 
verse  and  “  reserve,”  the  difference  is  only  the  transposition  of  two  letters ;  and  that 
change  once  made  by  accident,  the  other  would  naturally  follow  by  design.’  In  N. 
&=  Qu.  5th  Ser.  v,  444,  W.  A.  B.  Coolidge  argues  against  interpreting  *  doom  ’  by 
destiny  [which  I  think  no  one  but  the  critic  himself  ever  did  so  interpret.  Kent  is 
such  a  noble  fellow,  that  we  who  know  Cordelia’s  truthfulness  and  honesty,  and 
have  heard  her  words  spoken  aside,  cannot  but  think  that  he  is  here  pleading  hei 
cause.  But  I  am  afraid  we  are  too  hasty.  Kent  is  pleading  not  for  Cordelia,  but 
for  Lear  himself ;  he  has  not  as  yet  made  the  slightest  allusion  to  Cordelia.  When 
Lear  denounces  her,  Kent,  who  sees  that  Lear  is  crushing"  the  only  chance  of  future 
happiness,  starts  forward  with  *  Good  my  liege but  before  he  can  utter  another  word 
Lear  interrupts  him,  and  interprets  his  exclamation  as  an  intercession  for  Cordelia; 
and  we  fall  into  the  same  error,  so  that  when  Kent  speaks  again  we  keep  up  the 
same  illusion,  whereas  all  that  he  now  says  breathes  devotion  to  the  king,  and  to  no 
one  else.  The  folly  to  which  majesty  falls  is  not  the  casting  off  of  a  daughter, — that 
is  no  more  foolish  in  a  king  than  in  a  subject, — but  it  is  the  surrendering  of  revenue, 
of  sway,  and  of  the  crown  itself, — this  is  hideous  rashness,  this  is  power  bowing  to 
flattery.  Hence,  Kent  entreats  Lear  *  to  reserve  his  state.’  And  to  show  still  more 
conclusively  that  Lear,  and  not  Cordelia,  is  chiefly  in  his  thoughts,  in  his  very  next 
speech  he  says  that  the  motive  for  which  he  now  risks  his  life  is  the  safety  of  the 
king.  Furthermore,  when  Lear  has  been  turned  out  of  doors  and  his  daughters 
have  usurped  all  his  powers,  Gloucester  (III,  iv,  156)  says,  ‘  Ah  that  good  Kent  l  He 
said  it  would  be  thus,’  which  cannot  well  refer  to  any  other  passage  than  the  present. 
Moreover,  had  Kent  been  so  devoted  to  Cordelia  as  to  suffer  banishment  for  her 
sake,  would  he  not  have  followed  her  to  France  rather  than  followed  as  a  servant 


24 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  i. 


And  in  thy  best  consideration  check 

This  hideous  rashness.  Answer  my  life  my  judgement,  150 
Thy  youngest  daughter  does  not  love  thee  least; 

Nor  are  those  empty-hearted  whose  low  sound 
Reverbs  no  hollowness. 

Lear.  Kent,  on  thy  life,  no  more  1 

Kent.  My  life  I  never  held  but  as  a  pawn 
To  wage  against  thine  enemies,  nor  fear  to  lose  it,  155 

Thy  safety  being  the  motive. 

Lear.  Out  of  my  sight ! 

Kent.  See  better,  Lear,  and  let  me  still  remain 
The  true  blank  of  thine  eye. 

Lear.  Now,  by  Apollo, — 

Kent.  Now,  by  Apollo,  king, 


149.  And. ..consideration]  with  better 
judg?nent  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

150.  answer...  .judgement']  with  my  life 
I  answer  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

152.  153.  sound  Reverbs]  founds  Re- 
uerbe  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly,  Sch. 

153.  thy  life]  my  life  F3F4. 

1 54.  as  a]  as  F,. 

*5 5.  thine]  thy(jp\,  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
Warb.  Cap.  Cam.  Wr. 

enemies]  foes  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 


Warb. 

155.  nor]nere  F,Fa.  ne're  F3<  ne’e* 
F4,  Rowe,  Knt,  Del.  Sta.  Sch. 

fear  to]  fear'd  to  Ed.  conj. 

156.  the  motive]  motive  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 
Sch. 

159,  160.  Kent.  Now.... vain.]  One 
line,  Qq. 

159.  Apollo, — ]Appo!lo,Qt.  Apollo— 
Q3.  Apollo,  Fx.  Apollo.  FaF3F4. 


his  great  patron  whom  he  had  thought  on  in  his  prayers  ?  It  need  scarcely  be  added 
that  ‘reserve  thy  state*  means  ‘  retain  thy  royal  dignity  and  power.’ — Ed.] 

150.  Answer]  Johnson:  That  is,  Let  my  life  be  answerable  for  my  judgement, 
or  I  will  stake  my  life  on  my  opinion.  [For  other  instances  of  the  subjunctive  used 
optatively  or  imperatively,  see  Abbott,  §  364;  also  see  Macb.  V,  vi,  7.] 

153.  Reverbs]  Steevens  :  Perhaps  a  word  of  Shakespeare’s  own  making,  mean¬ 
ing  the  same  as  reverberates. 

154.  pawn]  Steevens:  That  is,  a  pledge.  Capell,  followed  by  Henley, 
strangely  thinks  that  this  refers  to  the  pawn  in  a  game  of  chess. 

155.  wage]  Dyce  (Gloss.):  That  is,  to  stake  in  wager. 

158.  blank]  Johnson:  The  ‘blank’  is  the  white  or  exact  mark  at  which  the 
arrow  is  shot.  ‘  See  better,’  says  Kent,  ‘  and  keep  me  always  in  your  view.* 

159.  Apollo]  Malone:  Bladud,  Lear’s  father,  according  to  Geoffrey  of  Mon. 
mouth,  attempting  to  fly,  fell  on  the  temple  of  Apollo,  and  was  killed.  This  cir¬ 
cumstance  our  author  must  have  noticed,  both  in  Holinshed’s  Chronicle  and  The 
Mirrour  for  Magistrates.  Steevens:  Are  we  to  understand,  from  this  circum¬ 
stance,  that  the  son  swears  by  Apollo,  because  the  father  broke  his  neck  on  the 
temple  of  that  deity?  Malone:  We  are  to  understand  that  Sh.  learned  from  hence 
that  Apollo  was  worshipped  by  our  British  ancestors,  which  will  obviate  Dr.  John- 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


25 


$  1 

^  >  Dear  sir,  forbear. 


Thou  swear’st  thy  gods  in  vain. 

Lear.  O  vassal !  miscreant ! 

Alb. 

Com. 

Kent.  Kill  thy  physician,  and  thy  fee  bestow 
Upon  the  foul  disease.  Revoke  thy  gift  ; 

Or,  whilst  I  can  vent  clamour  from  my  throat. 

I’ll  tell  thee  thou  dost  evil. 

Lear.  Hear  me,  recreant! 

On  thine  allegiance,  hear  me ! 

That  thou  hast  sought  to  make  us  break  our  vow, 


160 


165 


160.  swear* sf]  swearefl  Qt. 

O  vassal!  miscreant /]  V a  fall, 
recreant.  Qq.  O,  vassal!  recreant !  Coll. 

-[Laying  his  hand  on  his  sword. 
Rowe.  In  Acftion  of  drawing  his  Sword- 
Cap. 

1 61.  Alb.  Corn.  Dear  sir,  forbear.] 
Om.  Qq. 

[interposing,  Cap. 

162.  Kill]  Ff  +  ,  Knt,  Sta.  Sch.  Doe , 
kill  Qq  et  cet.  Reading  Do  as  a  sepa¬ 
rate  line,  Steev.  ’93.  Bos.  ColL  Del. 
Sing.  Dyce,  Wh.  Ktly,  Glo.  +  . 

162-165.  Kill. . evil.]  Lines  end, 

phyficion,...dif eafe,...  clamour.  ..c«t//Qq. 


162.  thy  fee]  Ff  +  ,  Jen.  Ec.  Knt,  Sch. 
the  fee  Qq  et  cet. 

163.  Upon  the]  Upon  thy  Cap. 

thy  gift]  Fa.  thy  guift  Ff.  the 
gift  F3F4,  Rowe,  thy  doome  Qq,  Pope 
+ ,  Glo. + ,  Mob. 

165,  166.  Hear....mef]  As  in  Cap. 
One  line,  QqFf,  Rowe,  Jen.  Del.  Sing. 
Ktly,  Sch. 

165.  recreant]  Om.  Qq. 

166.  On  thy. ..me!]  Om.  Pope+. 
thine]  thy  Qq,  Cam. 

167.  Thai]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Wh.  Sch. 
Since  Qq  et  cet. 

vow]  vowes  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sch. 


son’s  objection,  in  a  subsequent  note,  to  Shakespeare’s  making  Lear  too  much  a 
mythologist. 

160.  swear’st]  Abbott  (§  200) :  Tire  preposition  is  omitted  after  some  verbs 
which  can  easily  be  regarded  as  transitive.  See  also  ‘smile  you  my  speeches,’  II, 
ii,  77.  Wright:  Sh.  frequently  uses  the  verb  in  a  transitive  sense  when  it  has  a 
person  for  its  object,  as  in  Jul.  Cces.  II,  i,  129;  but  in  the  sense  of  appealing  to  a 
deity  by  an  oath,  it  is  not  common. 

160.  miscreant]  Delius  says  that  Kent  is  a  ‘miscreant’  in  regard  to  Apollo  and 
the  gods,  whom  he  has  contemptuously  termed  ‘  thy  gods and  that  recreant,  of  the 
Qq,  he  is  in  regard  to  Lear.  But,  as  Schmidt  says,  Sh.  uses  ‘  miscreant  ’  very  fre¬ 
quently  in  the  sense  of  moral  worthlessness. 

164.  clamour]  Walker  has  a  section  ( Crit.  i,  156)  devoted  to  the  meaning  of 
this  word,  which  he  seems  to  think  expresses  an  idea  of  wailing  or  lamentation. 
The  present  passage  can  with  difficulty  be  said  to  support  this  theory. 

167.  That]  To  White,  ‘That’  of  the  Ff  seems  more  in  keeping  with  the  style 
of  this  play.  *  Of  old  that  had,  as  it  still  has  among  our  best  writers,  the  sense  of 
for  that,  seeing  that,  assuming .’  So,  Schmidt  also  says,  that  the  causative  since  of 
the  Qq  is  less  in  the  tone  of  suppressed  passion  which  characterizes  the  speech,  and 
leads,  grammatically,  less  directly  than  *  that  ’  to  the  main  point :  *  take  thy  reward.’ 
See  I,  i,  70. 

3 


26 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  i. 


Which  we  durst  never  yet,  and  with  strain’d  pride 
To  come  betwixt  our  sentence  and  our  power, 

Which  nor  our  nature  nor  our  place  can  bear,  1 70 

Our  potency  made  good,  take  thy  reward. 

Five  days  we  do  allot  thee,  for  provision 
To  shield  thee  from  diseases  of  the  world, 

And  on  the  sixth  to  turn  thy  hated  back 


1 68.  strain'd]  flraied  Qq. 

169.  betwixt ]  betweene  Qq,  Cap.  Jen. 
Ec.  Glo. +  ,  Mob. 

sentence ]  fentences  F,,  Knt  i, 

Del.  i. 

1 7 1.  Our.. .made"]  Nor. ..make  Heath. 


Or. ..make  Johns,  conj. 

1 7 1.  made]  w/j^Qj.Pope,  Warb.  Bos. 

172.  Five]  Fcure  Qq,  Jen. 

173.  diseases]  difajlers  Ff  +  ,Cap.  Ec. 
Knt,  Del.  Dyce  i,  Wh. 

174.  sixth]  fixt  F^Fj.  fift  Qq. 


169.  power]  Edwards:  That  is,  our  power  to  execute  it. 

170.  Wright:  This  line  gives  the  key  to  Lear’s  hasty  and  impetuous  character. 

170.  nor . . .  nor]  Wright  :  For  neither  . . .  *  nor,*  compare  Oth.  Ill,  iv,  116, 1 17. 

1 7 1 .  made  good,]  Johnson:  'As  thou  hast  come  with  unreasonable  pride  be¬ 
tween  the  sentence  which  I  had  passed,  and  the  power  by  which  I  shall  execute  it, 
take  thy  reward  in  another  sentence  which  shall  make  good,  shall  establish,  shall 
maintain,  that  power.'  Mr.  Davies  thinks,  that  ‘  our  potency  made  good,’  relates  only 
to  our  place.  Which  our  nature  cannot  bear,  nor  our  place,  without  departure  from 
the  potency  of  that  place.  This  is  easy  and  clear.  Lear,  who  is  characterized 
as  hot,  heady,  and  violent,  is,  with  very  just  observation  of  life,  made  to  entangle 
himself  with  vows,  upon  any  sudden  provocation  to  vow  revenge,  and  then  to  plead 
the  obligation  of  a  vow  in  defence  of  implacability.  Steevens  :  In  my  opinion, 
4  made '  is  right.  Lear  had  just  delegated  his  power  to  Albany  and  Cornwall,  con¬ 
tenting  himself  with  only  the  name  and  all  the  additions  of  a  king.  He  could,  there¬ 
fore,  have  no  power  to  inflict  on  Kent  the  punishment  which  he  thought  he  deserved. 
‘Our  potency  made  good’  seems  to  me  only  this:  They  to  whom  I  have  yielded  my 
power  and  authority,  yielding  me  the  ability  to  dispense  it  in  this  instance,  take  thy 
reward.  Malone:  The  meaning,  I  think  is:  As  a  proof  that  I  am  not  a  mere 
threatener,  that  I  have  power  as  well  as  will  to  punish,  take  the  due  reward  of  thy 
demerits;  hear  thy  sentence.  The  words  ‘our  potency  made  good’  are  in  the  ab¬ 
solute  case.  Wright:  Lear  still  speaks  as  king,  although  he  had  announced  his 
intention  of  abdicating.  It  is  difficult,  therefore,  to  understand  why  Steevens  should 
have  stumbled  at  this  passage.  The  reading  of  Q,  can  only  mean  *  make  good  or 
establish  our  power  by  taking  thy  punishment  as  an  acknowledgement  of  it.’  Mo- 
Berly:  Sh.  ingeniously  makes  Lear  forget  that  he  is  giving  up  his  power  on  that 
very  day,  and  pronounce  a  sentence  on  Kent  to  take  effect  in  ten  days. 

173.  diseases]  Malone:  The  alteration  of  the  Ff  was  made  by  the  printer  in 
consequence  of  his  not  knowing  the  meaning  of  the  original  word.  ‘Diseases,’  in 
old  language,  meant  the  slighter  inconveniences,  troubles,  or  distresses  of  the  world. 
The  provision  that  Kent  could  make  in  five  days  might,  in  some  measure,  guard  him 
against  the  *  diseases'  of  the  world,  but  could  not  shield  him  from  its  disasters.  [See 
note  in  Macb.  V,  iii,  21. — Ed.] 


A.CT  I,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


27 

175 


Upon  our  kingdom.  If  on  the  tenth  day  following 
Thy  banish’d  trunk  be  found  in  our  dominions, 

The  moment  is  thy  death.  Away  I  By  Jupiter, 

This  shall  not  be  revoked. 

Kent.  Fare  thee  well,  king ;  sith  thus  thou  wilt  appear, 
Freedom  lives  hence,  and  banishment  is  here. —  180 

The  gods  to  their  dear  shelter  take  thee,  maid, 

That  justly  think’st  and  hast  most  rightly  said ! — 

And  your  large  speeches  may  your  deeds  approve, 

That  good  effedts  may  spring  from  words  of  love.— 

Thus  Kent,  O  princes,  bids  you  all  adieu ;  1 85 

He’ll  shape  his  old  course  in  a  country  new.  [Exit. 


175.  on]  Om.  FaF3F4+. 

177.  death.  Away  l  By]  Johns. 
death  :  away.  By  Pope,  death,  away, 
by  Qq.  death,  away.  By  Ff, 

X77, 178.  By. ...revoked]  One  line,  Qa. 

179.  Fare]  Why  fare  Qq,  Jen.  Ec. 
Var. 

sith  thus]  Jince  thus  Qx,  Jen.  Ec. 
Steev.  Var.  Coll,  i,  Del.  Sing.  Wh.  Ktly. 
fence  Qa. 

180.  Freedom]  Friendship  Qq,  Jen. 


181.  [To  Cordelia,  Han. 

dear  shelter]  protection  Qq. 
thee,  maid]  thee  maid  F,FaF3. 
the  maide  Qt.  the  maid  Qa. 

182.  justly. ...rightly]  rightly....juflly 
Qq,  Jen. 

think' st]  thinksQJ?^  thinkes  Qa. 
hast]  hath  Qa. 

183.  [To  Gon.  and  Regan.  Han. 
your  large  speeches]  you,  large 

speechers.  Cap. 


175.  tenth]  Collier  (ed.  2)  adopts  the  (MS.)  emendation  of  seventh,  but  returns 
to  the  old  text  in  his  ed.  3,  presumably  for  metrical  reasons.  Daniel  {Notes,  &c., 
p.  76) :  Read  se'nth  ;  the  sense  of  the  passage  requires  this  alteration.  If  we  may 
contract *  *  sevennights  ’  to  se'nnights,  why  not  *  seventh  ’  to  se'nth  ? 

177.  Jupiter]  Johnson:  Sh.  makes  his  Lear  too  much  a  mythologist;  he  had 

*  Hecate  ’  and  ‘  Apollo  *  before. 

Bucknill  (p.  176) :  Lear’s  treatment  of  Kent;  his  ready  threat  in  reply  to  Kent’s 
deferential  address ;  his  passionate  interruptions  and  reproaches ;  his  attempted  vio¬ 
lence,  checked  by  Albany  and  Cornwall ;  and,  finally,  the  cruel  sentence  of  banish¬ 
ment,  cruelly  expressed, — all  these  are  the  acts  of  a  man  in  whom  passion  has  be¬ 
come  disease. 

179.  Fare  thee]  For  instances  of  the  use,  for  euphonic  reasons,  probably  oi 

*  thee  ’  for  thou,  see  Abbott,  §  212. 

179.  sith]  Here,  as  in  Ham.  II,  ii,  6,  the  Ff  and  Qq  differ  in  the  use  of  ‘  sith  ’  and 

*  since,’  showing,  as  Clarendon  points  out,  that  Sh.  did  not  uniformly  observe  the 
distinction  laid  down  by  Marsh.  See  notes  on  the  passage  in  Ham. 

180.  Freedom]  Jennens:  ‘Friendship,’  of  the  Qq,  seems  more  properly  opposed 
to  ‘banishment;’  for  what  is  ‘banishment*  but  the  being  driven  away  from  our 
friends  and  countrymen? 

183.  Capell  affirms  that  his  ‘emendation  will  not  appear  an  unfit  one  to  such  as 
mark  the  ill-construction  of  the  line,  and  it’s  ill  connection  with  the  line  that  comes 
after,  in  their  old  reading.’ 


28 


KING  LEAR 


[act  I,  SC.  u 


Flourish.  Re-enter  GLOUCESTER,  -with  FRANCE,  BURGUNDY,  and  Attendants. 


Glou.  Here’s  France  and  Burgundy,  my  noble  lord.  187 
Lear.  My  lord  of  Burgundy, 

We  first  address  toward  you,  who  with  this  king 

Hath  rivall’d  for  our  daughter;  what,  in  the  least,  190 

Will  you  require  in  present  dower  with  her, 

Or  cease  your  quest  of  love  ? 

Bur.  Most  royal  majesty, 

I  crave  no  more  than  hath  your  highness  offer’d, 

Nor  will  you  tender  less. 

Lear.  Right  noble  Burgundy, 


Flourish.]  Om.  QqF2F3F+. 

P*e-enter...]  Cap.  Enter  France  and 
Burgundie  with  Glofter.  Qq  (Burgundy 
Q2.  Glocester  Q2).  Enter  Glofter  with 
France,  and  Burgundy  Attendants.  Ff  +  . 

187.  Scene  in.  Pope,  Han.  Johns.  Jen. 
Glou.]  Glo.  or  Gloft.  Qq.  Cor. 

Ff,  Rowe,  Pope. 

188-192.  My. ..love ?]  Four  lines,  end- 
'.r\g you,... daughter, ...prefent...loue  ?  Qq. 

188.  lord ]  L.  Q,. 

°f]  or  Qr 

189.  toward ]  Ff  +  ,  Jen.  Knt,  Coll. 
Del.  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Wh.  Ktly,  Sch. 


towards  Qq  et  cet. 

189.  this]  a  Qq. 

190.  Hath]  Have  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Ec. 
in  the  least ]  at  least  Pope, 

Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

192.  Most ]  Om.  Qq. 

192-194.  royal. ..less.~\  Two  lines,  the 
first  ending  what,  Qq. 

193.  hath]  whatQffffffe^  +  ,  Jen.  Ktly, 
Cam. 

offer'd ]  offered  Qq. 

194.  less.]  leffe?  QqFtF2.  le/s?  F3. 
194-198.  Right. ..pieced,]  Four  lines, 

ending  vs,. .  f alien  ;... little. ..peec'Jl,  Qq. 


186.  Johnson:  He  will  follow  his  old  maxims;  he  will  continue  to  act  upon  the 
same  principles.  Steevens  quotes :  *  St.  George  for  England !  and  Ireland  now 
adieu,  For  here  Tom  Stukely  shapes  his  course  anew.’ — Peele’s  Battle  off  Alcazar, 
1594,  p.  1 1 7 ;  ed.  Dyce.  As  You  Like  It  [Gent.  Maga.,  lx,  p.  402)  conjectures 
corse  for  *  course,’  and  explains  that  Kent  means  that  *  he’ll  conform  his  old  body, 
approaching  towards  a  corse,  to  the  customs  of  a  new  country.’  Wright  so  far 
agrees  with  this  anonymous  critic  as  to  think  that  there  is  ‘  evidently  a  play  intended 
upon  the  words  “  course  ”  and  “  corse.”  ’  [The  antithesis  is  so  marked  between  *  old’ 
and  *  new  ’  that,  to  me,  the  simpler  the  interpretation  the  better :  Kent’s  old  age  must 
be  finished  in  a  new  country.  The  jingle  between  ‘  course’  and  *  corse  ’  is  certainly 
Shakespearian,  but  I  cannot  see  that  it  is  called  for  here ;  the  situation  is  not  so 
tragic  that  it  needs  the  relief  of  a  smile,  and,  moreover,  *  to  shape  a  corse  ’  is  well- 
nigh  unintelligible. — Ed.] 

187.  Here’s]  See  III,  iii,  17;  Ham.  Ill,  iv,  202;  IV,  v,  5;  Macb.  II,  iii,  137; 
and  Abbott,  §  335. 

190.  Hath]  For  instances  of  the  relative  followed  by  a  singular  verb,  though  tne 
antecedent  be  plural,  see  Abbott,  §  247. 

190.  rivall’d]  Schmidt:  The  only  instance  in  Sh.  of  its  use  as  a  veib. 

190.  in  the  least]  Wright  :  At  least.  So  ‘  in  the  best  ’  for  *  at  best  ’  in  Ham.  I, 
v,  27.  Schmidt  :  Here  alone  in  Sh.  thus  used. 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


29 


When  she  was  dear  to  us,  we  did  hold  her  so ;  1 95 

But  now  her  price  is  fall’n.  Sir,  there  she  stands. 

If  aught  within  that  little-seeming  substance, 

Or  all  of  it,  with  our  displeasure  pieced, 

And  nothing  more,  may  fitly  like  your  grace, 

She’s  there,  and  she  is  yours. 

Bur.  I  know  no  answer.  200 

Lear.  Will  you,  with  those  infirmities  she  owes, 

Unfriended,  new-adopted  to  our  hate, 

Dower’d  with  our  curse  and  stranger’d  with  our  oath, 

Take  her,  or  leave  h&r  ? 

Bur.  Pardon  me,  royal  sir ; 


195.  did  hold ]  held  F2F3F4  +,  Jen. 

196.  price]  prife  Qt. 

fall  n]  fallen  QqF1FJ 

197.  little-seeming ]  Coll,  iii,  Walker. 
little ,  seeming ,  Cap.  little,  seeming  Steev. 
’78,  Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Sing,  little  feeming 
QqFf  et  cet. 

198.  piece<f\  piedd  Ff.  peedjl  Qq. 
pierc'd  Pope. 

199.  more ]  elfe  Qq. 

200.  she  w]  Om.  Voss. 


201.  Will]  Sir  will  Qs.  Sir,  will  Q2, 
Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Ec.  Var.  Sing.  (Sir, 
in  a  separate  line,  Steev.  Bos.  Sing.) 

202.  new-adopted]  Hyphen  by  Pope. 

203.  Dower’d]  Dow’rd  Fx.  Down’d 
F2FjF4-  Couered  QIQ2. 

204.  Take  her ,]  Take  leave,  F3F4. 
her  l]  Rowe.  her.  QqFf. 

204,  205.  Pardon. ..conditions.]  The 
first  line  ends  at  vp,  Qq. 

204.  me]  Ora.  Pope  +  . 


195.  so]  Capell:  Speaking  indefinitely,  as  one  un%villing  to  say  how  much  she 
was  dear  to  him ;  and  giving  *  so  ’  the  force  of  — so  and  so,  or  at  such  and  such  price, 
as  men  sometimes  express  themselves.  Eccles,  Malone,  and  Moberly  think  that 
it  means  ‘  worthy  of  that  high  dowry,’  in  which  opinion  the  present  Editor  agrees, 
but  Wright  thinks  that  it  means  simply  dear. 

197.  seeming]  Johnson:  Beautiful.  Steevens  :  Specious.  Wright:  That 
substance  which  is  but  little  in  appearance.  Moberly  :  Her  nature  that  seems  so 
slight  and  shallow.  Lear  speaks  in  the  next  line  of  her  *  infirmities,’  her  want  of 
established  principle  as  compared  with  her  decided  and  outspoken  sisters.  SCHMIDT 
thinks  that  all  these  definitions  fail  to  take  into  account  Shakespeare’s  use  of  the  word 
‘  substance,’  whereby  he  commonly  expresses  reality  in  opposition  to  shadow ;  ‘  seem¬ 
ing  substance  ’  means,  therefore,  something  which  pretends  to  be  that  which  it  is  not. 
Perhaps,  he  adds,  ‘seeming’  is  to  be  taken  as  a  gerund,  and  ‘seeming  substance’ 
may  then  mean  a  creature  whose  reality  is  mere  show  or  seeming. 

198.  pieced]  Wright:  See  III,  vi,  2. 

199.  like]  See  Ham.  II,  ii,  80. 

201.  owes]  Owns. 

203.  stranger’d]  See  Abbott,  §  294,  for  a  list  of  over  thirty  passive  verbs, 
formed  from  adjectives  and  nouns,  found  mostly  in  the  participle;  in  Lear  are  the 
following:  ‘  faith’d,’  II,  i,  70;  ‘window’d,’  III,  iv,  31;  ‘H^  childed  as  I  father’d,’ 
III,  vi,  108;  ‘  nighted,’  IV,  v,  13;  ‘the  death-practised  duke,’  IV,  vi,  275. 

3* 


30 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  i. 


Election  makes  not  up  in  such  conditions.  205 

Lear.  Then  leave  her,  sir ;  for,  by  the  power  that  made' 
me, 

I  tell  you  all  her  wealth. — [To  France ]  For  you,  great  king, 

I  would  not  from  your  love  make  such  a  stray, 

To  match  you  where  I  hate ;  therefore  beseech  you 

T’  avert  your  liking  a  more  worthier  way  210 

Than  on  a  wretch  whom  nature  is  ashamed 

Almost  t’  acknowledge  hers. 

France.  This  is  most  strange. 


205.  up  in]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sch.  up 
on  Qq  et  cet. 

207.  [To  France]  Pope.  Om.  QqFf. 
210.  worthier]  worthy  Pope  + . 


2 1 2-2 1 S.  This . degree]  Six  lines, 

cni\cgnozv....praife,....deerefl,...thing,... 
favour, ...degree,  Qq. 


205.  makes  not  up]  Johnson  :  To  make  up,  in  familiar  language,  is  neutrally, 
to  come  forward,  to  make  advances,  which  I  think  is  meant  here.  Malone-;  Elec¬ 
tion  comes  not  to  a  decision.  Knight:  The  choice  of  Burgundy  refuses  to  come  to 
a  decision,  in  such  circumstances,  or  on  such  terms.  Mason  thinks  that *  *  up  ’  and 

*  on  ’  should  be  read  as  one  word,  in  order  to  make  the  sense  evident.  But  Wright’s 
note  is  conclusive ;  ‘  Election  makes  not  its  choice,  comes  to  no  decision,  resolves 
not.  We  still  say  “  to  make  up  one’s  mind,”  and  the  phrase  is  here  used  elliptically 
in  the  same  sense.’ 

205.  in  such  conditions]  Schmidt  (Zur  Texlkrilik,  See.,  p.  14) ;  If  *  condi¬ 
tions  ’  be  here  taken  in  its  ordinary  sense,  it  requires,  even  according  to  Shake¬ 
speare’s  own  mode  of  speaking,  on  before  it,  instead  of  *  in ;’  but  it  is  not  *  condi¬ 
tions  ’  that  are  spoken  of  in  what  precedes :  *  Will  you,  with  those  infirmities  she 
owes.  Unfriended,  new-adopted  to  our  hate,  Dower’d  with  our  curse,  and  stranger’d 
with  our  oath,’  Sec.  It  is  qualities  that  are  here  enumerated,  and  it  is  in  just  this 
sense  of  qualify  that  Shakespeare  very  often  uses  ‘  condition.’  Meas.  for  Meas.  I,  i, 
54 :  *  our  haste  from  hence  is  of  so  quick  condition  that  it  prefers  itself,’  &c.  Mer. 
of  Ven.  V,  i,  74:  ‘unhandled  colts,  fetching  mad  bounds  .  .  .  which  is  the  hot  con¬ 
dition  of  their  blood.’  Hen.  V :  IV,  i,  108:  ‘all  his  senses  have  but  human  condi¬ 
tions.’  Much  Ado,  III,  ii,  68 :  ‘  one  that  knows  him,  and  his  ill  conditions,’  Sec. 
That  the  word  in  this  sense  may  also  have  the  preposition  in  before  it  can  be  shown 
by  abundant  examples.  As  You  Like  it,  I,  >,  47  :  ‘  I  know  you  are  my  eldest  brother, 
and  in  the  gentle  condition  of  blood  you  should  so 'know  me.’  Rich.  II:  II,  iii,  107 : 

*  in  conditions  of  the  worst  degree,  in  gross  rebellion,’  Sec. 

208.  209.  such  ...  To]  For  instances  of  the  omission  of  as  after  such,  so,  see 
Abbott,  §  281,  and  line  216. 

209.  beseech]  For  instances  of  the  omission  of  the  nominative,  see  Abbott, 
§401. 

210.  avert]  Schmidt:  Not  elsewhere  in  Sh.  as  a  verb. 

210,  215.  more  worthier  .  ...  Most  best]  For  instances  of  double  comparatives 
and  superlatives,  see  Abbott,  §  i  i. 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


31 


That  she,  who  even  but  now  was  your  best  ob$e<5fc. 

The  argument  of  your  praise,  balm  of  your  age, 

The  best,  the  dearest,  should  in  this  trice  of  time  2 1 5 

Commit  a  thing  so  monstrous,  to  dismantle 

So  many  folds  of  favour.  Sure,  her  offence 

Must  be  of  such  unnatural  degree 

That  monsters  it,  or  your  fore-vouch’d  affe6lion 


>•13.  she,  who]  fiie  whom  F,,  Sing. 
fie,  that  Q,,  Mai.  Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Glo. 
+  ,  Mob.  Jhe  that  Qa. 

best]  Om.  F,.  blest  Coll.  (MS.). 

214.  The. ..praise]  Your  praise's  ar¬ 
gument  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

215.  The  best,  the]  Ff,  Rowe,  Johns, 
Cap.  Steev.  Ec.  Knt,  Sing.  Wh.  Sch. 
Mof  bef,  mof  Qq  et  cet. 

Most. ..dearest]  Dearest  and  best 
Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb.  And  dearest. 


best  Quincy  (MS.). 

217.  folds]  fouls  Qj. 

her  offence]  tk'  offenceVo  pe,  Han. 

219.  That  monsters  it]  As  monstrous 
is  Rowe,  Pope.  As  monsters  it  Han. 

or]  ere  Theob.  conj.  (with¬ 
drawn). 

your  fore-vouch' d]  your  fore - 
voucht  Ff.  you  for  voucht  Qq,  Jen. 
affedlion]  affedlions  Qq,  Jen. 


213.  best]  Collier  (ed.  3):  The  compositor  [instead  of  blest]  caught  ‘best* * 
from  the  next  line  but  one. 

213.  object]  Schmidt  ( Zur  Textkritik,  &c.,  p.  14) :  Sh.  uses  this  word,  without 
an  adjective,  in  an  expanded  sense,  equivalent  to  that  which  one  has  always  in  his 
eye,  or  seeks  out  with  his  eye,  the  delight  of  his  eye.  Thus,  V.  and  A.,  255: 

*  The  time  is  spent,  her  object  will  away,’  &c. ;  lb.,  822 :  ‘  So  did  the  merciless  and 
pitchy  night  Fold  in  the  object  that  did  feed  her  sight;’  Mid.  N.  D.  IV,  i,  174: 

*  the  object  and  the  pleasure  of  mine  eye  is  only  Helena;’  Cymb.  V,  iv,  55 :  ‘  fruit¬ 
ful  object  be  In  eye  of  Imogen.’  Where  Timon,  IV,  iii,  122,  tells  Alcibiades  to 
‘swear  against  objects,’  he  means  ‘pour  out  curses,  when  whatever  touches  the  heart 
of  man  presents  itself  to  the  eye.’  The  interpolated  *  best,’  in  the  present  passage, 
while  it  makes  the  phrase  more  generally  understood,  weakens  insteads  of  strengthens 
the  passage.  [The  omission  of  the  adjective  throws  the  accent  on  the  last  syllable  of 
'  object,’  which  may  be  correct,  but  I  can  find  no  other  similar  accentuation  of  this 
noun  in  Sh. — Ed.] 

219.  monsters  it]  Wright:  That  is,  makes  it  monstrous. 

219,  220.  or  .  .  .  taint]  Johnson  interprets  thus:  ‘her  offence  must  be  prodig¬ 
ious,  or  you  must  fall  into  reproach  for  having  vouch'd  affection  which  you  did  not 
feel.’  By  changing  ‘  Fall,’  of  the  Ff,  into  Falls,  he  says  the  same  sense  is  produced, 
and  adds ‘another  possible  sense.  “Or”  signifies  before;  the  meaning  of  the  Ff 
may  therefore  be  :  “  Sure  her  crime  must  be  monstrous  before  your  affection  can  be 
affected  with  hatred.”  ’  Jennens,  the  sturdy  champion  of  the  Qq,  enclosing  the 
whole  phrase  in  parentheses,  thus  defends  and  interprets  their  text :  The  best  way 
to  make  sense  [of  the  Qq  text]  will  be  to  consider  what  was  the  real  cause  of  the 
estrangement  of  Lear’s  love  from  Cordelia;  it  was  the  vouch’d  affections  of  his  three 
daughters ;  the  two  eldest  vouch’d  such  affection  to  him  as  was  beyond  all  nature 
and  possibility  to  a  father;  but  Cordelia  vouched  only  such  an  affection  as  was  natural 
and  reasonable  for  a  daughter  to  feel  for  her  father.  Now,  Lear  was  fallen  into 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc,  i. 


32 

FaHrn  into  taint ;  which  to  believe  of  her,  220 

Must  be  a  faith  that  reason,  without  miracle, 

Should  never  plant  in  me. 

Cor.  I  yet  beseech  your  majesty, 

(If  for  I  want  that  glib  and  oily  art, 

To  speak  and  purpose  not,  since  what  I  well  intend, 

I’ll  do’t  before  I  speak,)  that  you  make  known  225 


220.  FalTn]  Falne  Q,Q2.  Fall  Ff, 
Steev.  Ec.  Knt,  Del.  Sing.  Dyce  i,  Sta. 
Ktly,  Sch.  Could  not  fall  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han. 

220.  221.  of  her... without]  One  line, 
Han. 

221.  faith  that. ...miracle]  faith. ...A? 
miracle ,  Han. 

222.  Should]  Ff  +  ,  Ec.  Knt,  Dyce, 
Sta.  Wh.  Sch.  Could  Qq  et  cet. 

plant]  plaint  Q2. 


222.  snajesty,]  Maiefly.  Ft. 

222,  223.  I  yet... (If  for]  One  line, 
Han. 

223.  (If  for]  Theob.  If  (for  Pope, 
Johns,  Jen.  No  parenthesis,  QqFf.  (if 
so  Han. 

If  for]  Seeing  Cap.  c.onj. 

223.  224.  I.. .speak]  One  line,  Han. 

224.  well]  will  Ff,  Rowe,  Del.  i,  Sch. 

225.  make  known]  may  know  Qq,  Jen. 
[To  France.  Jen. 


taint,  i.  e.  his  judgement  was  corrupted,  in  preferring  the  extravagant  and  lying 
protestations  of  his  eldest  daughters  to  the  sincere  and  just  ones  of  his  youngest. 
And  if  we  .ruminate  a  little,  this  is  the  only  second  reason  for  Lear’s  rejecting  Corde¬ 
lia  that  can  with  any  probability  be  supposed  to  be  guessed  at  by  France ;  for  it  would 
be  rude  in  France  to  charge  Lear  with  vouching  the  dearest  affections  to  one  he  did 
not  really  love ;  and  it  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  so  great  a  love  should  change  to 
hate,  without  she  had  committed  some  very  great  crime,  and  which  France  could 
not  be  brought  to  believe ;  therefore,  this  second  guess  becomes  the  only  one,  and  the 
true  one,  viz :  that  Regan  and  Goneril  had,  by  their  superior  art  in  coaxing,  won  all 
Lear’s  love  from  Cordelia.  Malone  held  to  this  interpretation  until  he  *  recollected 
that  France  had  not  heard  the  extravagant  professions  made  by  Regan  and  Goneril.’ 
Then  he  gives  what  seems  to  me  the  true  construction  of  the  passage ;  *  Either  her 
offence  must.be  monstrous,  or,  if  she  has  not  committed  any  such  offence,  the  affection 
which  you  always  professed  to  have  for  her  must  be  tainted  and  decayed’  [that 
is,  ‘  must  be  ’  is  to  be  understood  before  *  Fall’n.’  It  is  easy  to  see  how  the  text 
of  the  Ff  arose.  The  last  syllable  of  Fallen  was  absorbed  by  the  first  syllable  of 
♦  into,’  so  that  even  were  Fall  of  the  Ff  to  be  adopted,  I  think  it  should  be  printed 
Fall.— Ed.] 

222.  majesty]  A  dissyllable. 

223.  If  for]  Abbott,  §  387,  supposes  an  ellipsis  after  *  If’  of  it  is,  and  takes  ‘  for’ 
as  equivalent  to  because.  Jennens  and  Eccles  suppose  that  it  is  a  broken  speech, 
expressing  the  modest  fear  and  bashful  diffidence  of  Cordelia,  heightened  by  her 
concern  under  her  pitiable  circumstances.  For  instances  of  ‘  for,’  meaning  because , 
see  Schmidt,  Lex.  s.  v. 

225-227.  that . . .  step]  Jennens,  true  to  the  Qq,  and  adopting  their  text  here, 
believes  that  this  is  addressed  to  France ;  then,  without  making  a  period,  Cordelia 
turns  again  to  the  king. 


act  I,  sc.  i.]  KING  LEAR 

It  is  no  vicious  blot,  nor  other  foulness. 


33 

226 


226.  nor  ether)  Coll.  (MS),  Sing.  ii.  Sch.  murder,  or  Q3  et  cet.  no  slur,  a* 
murder  or  Q,.  murther ,  or  Ff,  Wh.  Cartwright. 


226.  nor  other]  Collier  [Notes,  &c.,  p.  451):  Murder  or  murther,  of  the  Ff, 
seems  entirely  out  of  place;  Cordelia  could  never  contemplate  that  anybody  would 
suspect  her  of  murder  as  the  ground  of  her  father’s  displeasure ;  she  is  referring  to 
‘  vicious  blots  ’  and  *  foulness  ’  in  respect  to  virtue.  The  copyist  or  the  compositor 
miswrote  or  misread  nor  other  ‘  murther.’  Blackwood' s  Maga.  (Oct.  1853,  p.  464) : 
France  has  just  before  said:  ‘Sure  her  offence  must  be  of  such  unnatural  degree 
That  monsters  it’ — that  is,  it  can  be  nothing  short  of  some  crime  of  the  deepest  dye, 
and  therefore  ‘murder’  does'  not  seem  to  be  so  much  out  of  place  in  the  mouth  of 
Cordelia.  .White  pronounces  this  emendation  *  only  specious ;  for  “vicious  blot’* 
is  altogether  too  general  a  term  to  be  put  in  the  alternative  with  “  foulness,”  almost 
as  general,  and  of  like  meaning.  I  do  not  doubt  that  Sh.  wrote  “murther.”’  [In 
his  Shakespeare' s  Scholar ,  White  gave  in  his  adherence  to  Collier’s  emendation, 
saying  that  ‘mur^<?r  is  an  easy  and  undeniable  mistake  for  nor  other'  and  that 
‘murder’  has  no  proper  place  in  the  category  of  blemishes  enumerated  by  Cor. 
delia.]  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  275):  What  has  murder  to  do  here?  Read  umber. 
Malone  on  ‘  umber'd  face,’  Hen.  V :  IV,  Chorus :  *  Umber  is  a  dark  yellow  earth 
brought  from  Umbria  in  Italy,  which,  being  mixed  with  water,  produces  such  a  dusky 
yellow  colour  as  the  gleam  of  fire  by  night  gives  to  the  countenance.  Our  author’s 
profession  probably  furnished  him  with  this  epithet ;  for,  from  an  old  MS  play,  en¬ 
titled  The  Telltale,  it  appears  that  umber  was  used  in  the  stage  exhibitions  of  his 
time.  In  that  piece,  one  of  the  marginal  directions  is :  “  He  umbers  her  face.”  ’ 
Dyce  (ed.  2) :  Undoubtedly  the  original  reading  is  a  very  suspicious  one.  Hal- 
LIWELL:  Most  readers  will  agree  with  Dyce.  Bailey  (ii,  89)  proposes  burden, 
because  [Heaven  save  the  mark!]  the  ‘burden  of  guilt,  the  burden  of  dishonour, 
the  burden  of  sorrow,  are  all  Shakespearian  expressions.’  Staunton  :  Collier’s  (MS) 
emendation  is  certainly  a  very  plausible  substitution.  Keightley  :  How  could  the 
pure  and  gentle  Cordelia  suppose  herself  to  be  suspected  of  murder  ?  which,  more¬ 
over,  accords  not  with  the  other  charges  she  enumerates.  I  feel  strongly  persuaded  that 
Sh.’s  word  was  misdeed,  which,  if  a  little  effaced,  might  easily  be  taken  for  ‘  murder.’ 
Hudson  :  Murder  seems  a  strange  word  to  be  used  here,  and  Collier’s  reading  has 
some  claims  to  preference ;  but  I  suspect  Cordelia  purposely  uses  murder  out  of  place, 
as  a  glance  at  the  hyperbolical  absurdity  of  denouncing  her  as  ‘  a  wretch  whom  Na¬ 
ture  is  ashamed  to  acknowledge.’  Mobekly  :  There  seems  good  reason  for  adopting 
Collier’s  reading:  the  gradation  ‘vicious  blot,  murder,  foulness  ’  would  not  be  happy. 
Moreover,  from  the  parallel  expression,  *  vicious  mole  of  nature,’  in  Ham.  I,  iv,  24, 
we  may  conclude  that  in  this  line  Cordelia  refers  to  natural  defects,  which  Lear  might 
be  supposed  to  have  just  discovered ;  but  in  the  next  line :  *  No  unchaste  action,’  &c. 
to  evil  actions,  from  all  suspicions  of  which  she  wishes  to  be  cleared.  [If  ever 
emendation  be  necessary,  here  seems  to  be  the  occasion.  Rather  than  suppose  that 
Cordelia  could  be  accused  of  murder,  I  would  adopt  Walkers  far-fetched  ‘  umber  ’ 
or  Keightley’s  prosaic  *  misdeed.’  Instead,  we  have  what  is  to  me  an  emendatio 
eertissima,  restoring  the  rhythm,  according  with  the  ductus  literarum,  and  offering 
no  violence  to  the  consistency  of  Cordelia’s  character.  To  White’s  objection,  which 
seems  to  me  the  only  serious  one,  that  there  is  not  enough  of  an  alternative  between 

c 


34 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  i. 


No  unchaste  a£lion,  or  dishonour’d  step,  227 

That  hath  deprived  me  of  your  grace  and  favour; 

But  even  for  want  of  that  for  which  I  am  richer, 

A  still-soliciting  eye,  and  such  a  tongue  230 

That  I  am  glad  I  have  not,  though  not  to  have  it 
Hath  lost  me  in  your  liking. 

Lear.  Better  thou 

Hadst  not  been  born  than  not  t’  have  pleased  me  better. 


227.  unchaste ]  vncleane  Qq. 
dishonour’d]  diskonord  Q,.  dis¬ 
honored  Fa.  difhonoured  QaF,F  F . 

step ]  stoop  Coll.  iii.  (MS). 

228.  [To  Lear.  Jen. 

grace  and]  grace's  Anon.* * 

229.  for  want]  the  want  Han.  Cap. 
Ec.  Huds. 

lam]  Pm  Pope  +  ,Jen.Dyceii. 
richer]  rich  Qq. 

230.  still-soliciting]  Hyphen,  Theob. 


231.  That]  As  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Coll,  ii, 
Glo.  +  ,  Dyce  ii,  Mob.  Huds. 

I  have  not]  Pve  net  Pope  + . 

232.  Better]  Coe  to,  goe  to,  better  Qq 
(subs.),  Jen. 

232,  233.  Better. ..better.]  Pope.  The 
first  line  ends  borne,  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  At 
hadjl,  Ff,  Rowe. 

233.  /’  have]  t  have  F,.  to  haue  Qq. 
have  Pope  + . 


‘blot  ’  and  *  foulness,’  may  there  not  be  opposed  that  Cordelia’s  distress  might  make 
her  verge  on  incoherence  ?  As  Moberly  truly  says,  ‘  the  gradation  from  a  vicious  blot 
to  murder,  and  then  to  foulness,  is  not  happy.’  This  alone  is  so  un-Shakespearian  that 
of  itself  it  would  taint  the  line.  Murder  may  have  been  a  much  less  heinous  crime 
in  Shakespeare’s  days  than  at  present,  and  Lady  Capulet  may  have  thought  to  cheer 
Juliet’s  drooping  spirits  with  the  contemplation  of  Romeo’s  assassination,  but  that  it 
could  ever  have  been  of  less  degree  than  foulness  demands  a  faith  that  reason  with* 
out  miracle  can  never  plant  in  me.  Can  a  parallel  instance  of  anticlimax  be  found 
in  Sh.  ?  And  mark  how  admirably  the  lines  are  balanced :  ‘  vicious  blot  or  foul¬ 
ness,  unchaste  action  or  dishonour’d  step.’ — Ed.] 

229.  But . . .  richer]  Wright:  The  construction  is  imperfect,  though  the  sense 
is  clear.  We  should  have  expected  ‘  even  the  want,’  as  Hanmer  reads,  but  Sh.  was 
probably  guided  by  what  he  had  written  in  the  line  preceding,  and  mentally  supplied 
‘  I  am  deprived.’  There  is  an  obscurity  about  ‘  for  which.’  It  would  naturally  mean 

*  for  having  which,’  but  here  it  must  signify  *  for  wanting  which.’ 

230.  still]  Constantly.  See  Ham.  I,  i,  122. 

231.  I  have]  Moberly  :  Pronounce  *  I’ve  not.’ 

232.  in  your  liking]  Wright:  The  ‘  in’  denotes  the  amount  of  the  loss, — as  tn 
the  phrases,  *  they  shall  amerce  him  in  an  hundred  shekels  of  silver’ — Deut.  xxii,  19 ; 
‘condemned  the  land  in  an  hundred  talents  of  silver,’  &c. — 2  Chron.  xxxvi,  3;  and 
the  common  expression  ‘  to  stand  one  in,’  for  *  to  cost.’  The  phrase  may  also  be  ex- 
plained,  *  hath  caused  me  loss  in  respect  of  your  love.’ 

232.  Better,  &c.]  Bucknill  (p.  177):  All  this  is  exaggerated  passion,  perverted 
affection,  weakened  judgement;  all  the  elements,  in  fact,  of  madness,  except  inco¬ 
herence  and  delusion.  These  are  added  later,  but  they  are  not  essential  to  mad¬ 
ness  ;  and,  as  we  read  the  play,  the  mind  of  Lear  is,  from  the  first,  in  a  state  of 
actual  unsoundness,  or,  to  speak  more  precisely,  of  disease. 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


35 


France.  Is  it  but  this  ?  a  tardiness  in  nature 
Which  often  leaves  the  history  unspoke  235 

That  it  intends  to  do  ? — My  lord  of  Burgundy, 

What  say  you  to  the  lady  ?  Love’s  not  love 
When  it  is  mingled  with  regards  that  stands 
Aloof  from  th’  entire  point  Will  you  have  her? 

She  is  herself  a  dowry. 

Bur.  Royal  Lear,  240 

Give  but  that  portion  which  yourself  proposed, 

And  here  I  take  Cordelia  by  the  hand, 

Duchess  of  Burgundy. 

Lear.  Nothing.  I  have  sworn ;  I  am  firm. 

Bur.  I  am  sorry  then  you  have  so  lost  a  father  245 

That  you  must  lose  a  husband. 

Cor.  Peace  be  with  Burgundy  1 

Since  that  respedls  of  fortune  are  his  love, 


234.  but  this  f]  no  more  but  this,  Qq, 
Jen.  Var. 

235.  Which]  That  Qq,  Jen. 
leaves]  loves  Q3. 

235-238.  Which. ..stands]  Three  lines, 
ending  do,. ..Lady  ?...Jlands,  Qq. 

237.  Love’s]  Love  is  Qq,  Jen.  Steev. 
Ec.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly. 

238.  regards  that  stands]  Sch.-  re¬ 
gards,  that  stands  Ff,  Rowe,  refpects 
that  Jlands  Qq.  respects  that  stand  Mai. 
Steev.  Bos.  Coll.  Sing.  Sta.  Ktly.  re¬ 
gards,  and  stands  Cap.  regards  :  that 
stands  Jen.  regards  that  stand  Pope  et  cet. 

239.  th']  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Sing.  Wh.  Sch. 
the  Qq  et  cet. 

point.  Will]  Steev.  point  wil 
Q,.  point,  will  QaFf,  Rowe,  point.  Say 
will  Pope  +,  Cap.  Jen. 


240.  a  dowry]  and  dowre  Q,.  and 
dower  Qa,  Jen. 

240-243.  Royal. ..Burgundy.]  Three 
lines,  ending  Cordelia... Bur- 

gundie,  Q, ;  ending  portion...take... Bur- 

gunty.Q,- 

240.  Lear]  Qa.  Leir  Qx.  King  Ff  + , 
Knt,  Dyce  i,  Wh.  Sch. 

241.  yostrself]  you yourself  Bos.  (mis¬ 
print  ?) 

244.  I  have  sworn;  I  am  firm.]  1 
haue  fiworn ,  Lam  firm.  Ff.  I  haue 
fiwome.  Qq,  Jen.  I've  sworn.  Pope  +  . 

245.  Lam]  R m  Pope -t- ,  Dyce  ii,  Muds. 
246-248.  Peace. ...wife.]  Two  lines, 

the  first  ending  refpeCls ,  Qq. 

246.  Burgundy]  Burguny  Fa. 

247.  respeds  of  fortune]  refpeCt  and 
fortunes  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Sch. 


235.  history]  Schmidt  :  Frequently  used  for  what  passes  in  the  inner  life  of 
man.  Cf.  Son.  xciii;  Meas.for  Meas.  I,  i,  29;  Rich.  Ill:  III,  v,  28. 

235.  unspoke]  Wright:  Sh.  uses  both  forms  of  the  participle  of  the  verb  speak. 
See  Temp.  IV,  i,  31.  In  the  A.  V.  of  the  Bible  the  form  ‘spoken’  alone  occurs. 
237.  Love's  not  love]  Compare  Son.  xcvi. 

237.  regards]  Knight:  Considerations. 

238.  entire]  Johnson:  Single,  unmixed  with  other  considerations.  Moberly: 
The  main  point  of  affection. 

247.  Since  that]  See  Macb.  IV,  iii,  106,  or  Abbott,  §  287. 

247.  respects  of  fortune]  If  we  adopt  this  reading,  ‘respects’  is  used  like  ‘re- 


36 


KING  LEAR 


[act  I,  sc.  1 


I  shall  not  be  his  wife. 

France.  Fairest  Cordelia,  that  art  most  rich  being  poor. 

Most  choice  forsaken,  and  most  loved  despised,  250 

Thee  and  thy  virtues  here  I  seize  upon. 

Be  it  lawful  I  take  up  what’s  cast  away. 

Gods,  gods !  ’tis  strange  that  from  their  cold’st  negledt 
My  love  should  kindle  to  inflamed  respedl. — 

Thy  dowerless  daughter,  king,  thrown  to  my  chance,  255 

Is  queen  of  us,  of  ours,  and  our  fair  France. 

Not  all  the  dukes  of  waterish  Burgundy 
Can  buy  this  unprized  precious  maid  of  me. — 

Bid  them  farewell,  Cordelia,  though  unkind 

Thou  losest  here,  a  better  where  to  find.  260 


249.  that]  thou  Han. 

251.  seize]  ceaze  Qx. 

252.  Be  if]  Be  7  Pope  +,  Dyce  ii. 

253.  cold' st]  couldjl  Qt. 

255.  my  chance]  thy  chance  Qq. 
257-  of]  in  Qq,  Jen. 


258.  Can]  Shall  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Ec. 
Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Sta.  Del.  Ktly,  Huds. 

259.  260.  unkind ;  Thou]  Theob.  un¬ 
kind 'e,  Thou  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  vnkind 
Thou  Qq. 

260.  letter  where]  better-where  Sta. 


gards,’  in  line  238,  or  in  Ham.  II,  ii,  79,  and,  of  course,  with  the  same  meaning  as 
in  Ham.  Ill,  i,  68.  But  it  is  doubtful  if  the  reading  of  the  Ff  be  not  better ;  it 
means  the  same,  and  the  turn  of  the  phrase  is  certainly  Shakespearian.  Schmidt 
(Zur  Textkrilik,  p.  15),  in  reference  to  this  passage,  has  given'  several  instances 
of  hendiadys  in  this  very  play,  e.  g.  I,  ii,  45 :  ‘  This  policy  and  reverence  of  age,’ 
equivalent  to  ‘this  policy  of  revering  age;’  I,  ii,  165  :  ‘nothing  like  the  image  and 
horror  of  it,’  equivalent  to  ‘the  horrible  image  of  it;’  I,  iv,  336: *  *  This'  milky  gen¬ 
tleness  and  course  of  yours,’  equivalent  to  ‘  gentle  course II,  ii,  74 :  ‘  With  every 
gale  and  vary  of  their  masters,’  equivalent  to  ‘  every  varying  gale.’ 

257.  waterish]- Wright:  Used  with  a  notion  of  contempt.  See  Oth.  Ill,  iii,  15. 
Burgundy  was  the  best  watered  district  of  France.  See  Heylyn  (A  Little  Descrip¬ 
tion  of  the  Great  World ,  ed.  1633,  p.  22) :  ‘That  which  Queene  Katharine  was  wont 

*0  say,  that  France  had  more  rivers  than  all  Europe  beside;  may  in  like  manner  be 
said  of  this  Province  in  respect  of  France.’ 

258.  unprized]  Abbott,  §375:  This  may  mean  ‘unprized  by  others,  but  pre¬ 
cious  to  me.’  Wright  :  Or  it  may  mean  priceless,  as  ‘  unvalued,’  in  Rich.  Ill :  I, 
iv,  27,  signifies  invaluable. 

259.  unkind]  Staunton  :  It  here  signifies  unnatural,  unless  France  is  intended 
to  mean,  though  unkinn'd,  i.  e.  though  forsaken  by  your  kindred. 

260.  here  . . .  where]  Johnson  :  These  have  the  power  of  nouns.  Wright  s 
Compare  the  Preface  of  the  Translators  to  the  Reader  prefixed  to  the  Authorized 
Version  of  the  Bible:  *  As  for  example,  if  we  translate  the  Hebrew  or  Greek  word 
once  by  Purpose,  neuer  to  call  it  Intent;  if  one  where  Iourneying,  neuer  Traueil- 
ing ;  if  one  where  Thinke,  neuer  Suppose ;  if  one  where  Paine,  neuer  Ache,’  &c. 


act  I,  SC.  i.]  KING  LEAR 


37 


Lear.  Thou  hast  her,  France.  Let  her  be  thine,  for  we  261 
Have  no  such  daughter,  nor  shall  ever  see 
That  face  of  hers  again. — Therefore  be  gone 
Without  our  grace,  our  love,  our  benison. — 

Come,  noble  Burgundy.  265 

[ Flourish .  Exeunt  all  but  France ,  Goneril, 

Regan,  and  Cordetia. 

France.  Bid  farewell  to  your  sisters. 

Cor.  Ye  jewels  of  our  father,  with  wash’d  eyes 
Cordelia  leaves  you.  ,  I  know  you  what  you  are ; 

And,  like  a  sister,  am  most  loath  to  call 

Your  faults  as  they  are  named.  Love  well  our  father.  270 
To  your  professed  bosoms  I  commit  him ; 

But  yet,  alas,  stood  I  within  his  grace, 


261,  262.  for  we. ..see]  One  line,  Qq. 

263,  264.  Therefore . benison ]  Cap. 

was  the  first  to  indicate,  by  dashes,  that 
this  is  addressed  to  Cordelia. 

264,  265.  Without... Burgundy. ]  One 
line,  Qq. 

264.  our  love"]  without  our  love  Johns, 
(misprint  ?) 

265.  [Flourish.]  Om.  Qq. 

Exeunt...]  Exit  Lear  and  Bur¬ 
gundy.  Qq.  Exeunt.  Ff.  Exeunt  Lear, 
Burgundy,  Cornwal,  Albany,  Gloster, 
and  Attendants.  Cap. 


266.  Scene  iv.  Pope  +,  Jen. 
sisters.-]  sisters  ?  Qt. 

267.  Ye  jewels]  Rowe  ii+,  Quincy 
(MS),  Cap.  Dyce  ii,  Wh.  Hal.  Huds. 
Coll.  iii.  The  jewels  QqFf  et  cet. 

267-270.  The.,  father :]  Four  lines, 
ending  Father,. ...are,. ...faults. ...Father, 
Qq. 

268.  you  what]  what  Rowe  ii  + ,  Cap. 

270.  Love]  Ff  +  ,  Jen.  Knt,  Coll.  Del. 
Dyce,  Wh.  Huds.  Sch.  Ufe  Qq  et  cet. 

271.  professed  ]  professing  Pope  + , 
Quincy  (MS),  Cap.  Ec. 


Other  instances  of  adverbs  used  as  nouns. are  *  upward,’  V,  iii,  137  j  ‘inward,’  Son. 
cxxviii,  6  :  *  outward,’  Son.  lxix,  5  ;  and  *  backward,’  Temp.  I,  ii,  50. 

257.  Ye  jewels]  Steevens:  It  is  frequently  impossible  in  ancient  MS  to  distin¬ 
guish  The  from  its  customary  abbreviation.  Walker  (Crit.  iii,  276)  supports  the  The 
of  the  QqFf  by  quotations  from  Browne  and  Spenser,  but,  as  Dyce  says,  they  are 
not  parallel  to  the  present  passage.  MoberlY:  ‘You  who  are  naturally  dear  and 
precious  to  him.’  Halliwell:  The  old  reading  makes  sense,  but  The  and  Ye 
being  constantly  written  the  same  in  MSS,  there  can  be  little  hesitation  in  adopting 
the  latter  reading,  which  seems  to  improve  the  sentence.  Schmidt  gives  several  in¬ 
stances  of  the  use  of  The  before  the  vocative :  Cor.  I,  vi,  6 ;  Jul.  Cces.  V,  iii,  99 ; 
Per.  Ill,  i,  1 ;  but  of  these  the  first  alone  is  parallel,  and  the  last  is  generally  printed 
4  Thou  ’  instead  of  The. 

267.  wash’d]  For  instances  of  the  use  of  this  word  as  applied  to  tears,  see 
Schmidt,  Lex.  s.  v. 

268.  know  you]  For  instances  of  the  redundant  object,  see  Walker,  Crit.  i,  68  ; 
or  Abbott,  §  414. 

271.  professed]  Delius:  Cordelia  commits  her  father  to  the  love  which  her 
sisters  had  •professed,  not  to  that  which  they  really  feel. 


33 


KING  LEAR 


[ACT  I,  SC.  1, 


I  would  prefer  him  to  a  better  place.  273 

So  farewell  to  you  both. 

Reg.  Prescribe  not  ’  us  our  duty. 

Gon.  Let  your  study  275 

Be  to  content  your  lord,  who  hath  received  you 
At  fortune’s  alms.  You  have  obedience  scanted, 

And  well  are  worth  the  want  that  you  have  wanted. 

Cor.  Time  shall  unfold  what  plighted  cunning  hides; 


273.  prefer ]  perfer  Fa. 

274.  both.]  both  f  Qt. 

275.  Reg....Gon.]  Gonorill.... Regan. 
Qq. 

not']  Ed.  not  QqFf  et  cet. 
duty.]  Ff  (dutie  F,)  + ,  Coll.  Del. 
Dyce  i,  Wh.  Sch.  duties  ?  Q,.  duties. 
Q2  et  cet. 

275-277.  Let. ..scanted,]  Three  lines. 


ending  Lord, ...almes,... fcanted,  Qq. 

277.  At]  As  Cap.  Ec.  Hal. 

278.  'worth... wanted]  worth  the  worth 
that  you  haue  wanted  Qq.  worthy  to 
want  that  you  have  wanted  Han. 

2 79.  plighted]  pleated  Q,Q3.  pleeted 
Q3.  plaited  Pope  ii  + ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 
Ec.  Var.  Glo.  +  ,  Mob. 


273.  prefer]  Schmidt  :  That  is,  address,  direct,  or,  better,  recommend. 

275.  not’  us]  In  the  belief  that  the  to,  in  the  full  phrase *  *  prescribe  not  to  us,’  is 
absorbed  in  the  final  t  of  ‘  not’  I  have  printed  the  text  as  above.  See  II,  ii,  1 16. — Ed. 

278.  worth  .  . .  wanted]  Theobald  :  ‘  You  well  deserve  to  meet  with  that  want 
of  love  from  your  husband,  which  you  have  profess’d  to  want  for  our  Father.’  War- 
BURTON  s  This  nonsense  mus^  be  corrected  thus :  ‘  worth  ....  vaunted ,’  i.  e.  that 
disherison,  which  you  so  much  glory  in,  you  deserve.  Heath  :  Sh.  might  have 
written :  ‘  the  want  that  you  have  wasted ,*  i.  e.  you  will  deserve  to  want  that  which 
you  have  yourself  so  wastefully  and  unnecessarily  thrown  away.  Tollet  :  ‘  You  are 
well  deserving  of  the  want  of  dower  that  you  are  without.’  Jennens  :  The  old 
reading  is  not  elegant,  indeed,  but  it  is  intelligible, — it  is  like  *  seeding  seed  ’ — Gen. 
i.  29.  Capkll:  The  Qq  reading,  with  this  addition,  viz:  ‘are  worth  to  want  the 
worth  that  you  have  wanted  ’  has  a  plain  sense,  and  one  worthy  the  utterer,  and  gives 
a  roundness  to  the  jingle.  Eccles  :  It  might  be  read :  *  worth  to  want  that  ypu  have 
wanted,’ — *  that  ’  taken  demonstratively,  and  not  relatively, — or  else,  *  the  want  of 
that  you've  wanted.’  Wright  :  Dr.  Badham  combined  the  texts  of  Ff  and  Qq  thus : 

*  And  well  are  worthy  want  that  worth  have  wanted.’  The  difficulty  seems  to  arise 
from  the  imperfect  connection  of  the  relative  with  its  antecedent.  The  use  of  the 
word  ‘  want  ’  has,  apparently,  the  effect  of  always  making  Shakespeare’s  construc¬ 
tions  obscure.  See  line  229*  Goneril  says,  *  you  have  come  short  in  your  obedience, 
and  well  deserve  the  want  of  that  affection  in  which  you  yourself  have  been  want¬ 
ing.’  Otherwise  [with  Jennens],  we  must  regard  ‘  the  want  that  you  have  wanted  ’ 
as  an  instance  of  the  combination  of  a  verb  with  its  cognate  accusative  [which  is 
the  view  Schmidt  takes].  Moberly:  The  text  of  the  Qq  might  be  emended  thus  j 
‘  Which  well  were  worth  the  word  that  you  have  wanted,’  i.  e.  yet  obedience  might 
have  claimed  from  you  the  one  word  which  you  would  not  say. 

279.  plighted]  Theobald  (Sh.  Rest.,  p.  17 1)  suggested  pleached,  i.  e.  twisted, 
entangled,  but  preferred  plaited,  i.  e.  wrapt  in  folds,  which  Pope  adopted  in  his  ed.  2. 
Malone  once  thought  it  should  be  plated,  as  in  IV,  vi,  169,  but  was  afterwards  con- 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


39 


Who  cover  faults,  at  last  shame  them  derides.  280 

Well  may  you  prosper ! 

France.  Come,  my  fair  Cordelia. 

[Exeunt  France  and  Cordelia. 
Gon.  Sister,  it  is  not  little  I  have  to  say  of  what  most 
nearly  appertains  to  us  both.  I  think  our  father  will  hence 
to-night. 


2S0.  cover"]  Jen.  covers  QqFf  +  ,  Ec. 
K.nt,  Del.  i,Ktly,  Sch.  cover'd  Han.  Cap. 

shame  them  derides ]  with  Jhame 
derides  Ff  4-,  Cap.  Ec.  Knt,  Del.  i,  Sing, 
ii,  Sch.  their  shame  derides  Anon.* 

281.  my]  Om.  Qq. 

[Exeunt...]  Exit...QqFIFa. 

2 82.  Scene  v.  Pope  +,  Jen. 


282-284.  Sister. . to-night .]  Cap. 

Three  lines,  ending  fay,...both,..to-night, 
QqFf  +  ,  Jen. 

282.  little  I  have ]  a  little  I  have  Qq, 
Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly, 
GI0.  +  ,  Huds.  Mob.  little  I've  Pope  +. 

283.  hence ]  go  hence  Rowe  +. 


vinced,  by  the  word  *  unfold,’  that  plaited  of  the  Qq  was  the  true  reading.  Knight  : 
To  *  plight  ’  and  to  plait  equally  mean  *  to  fold.’  In  Milton’s  Hist,  of  England , 
Boadicea  wears  ‘  a  plighted  garment  of  divers  colours.’  In  the  exquisite  passage  in 
Comus :  1 1  took  it  for  a  fairy  vision  Of  some  gay  creatures  of  the  element,  That  in 
the  colours  of  the  rainbow  live,  And  play  i’  th’  plighted  clouds  ’ — the  epithet  has 
the  same  meaning.  Staunton  :  ‘  Plighted  ’  means  involved,  complicated.  Wright'S 
For  the  Folio  spelling,  see  Spenser,  Faery  Queene,  ii,  3,  §  26:  ‘All  in  a  silken  Camus 
lilly  whight,  Purfled  upon  with  many  a  folded  plight.’  Cotgrave  gives,  ‘  Pli :  m.  A 
plait,  fould,  lay ;  bought ;  wrinkle,  crumple.’ 

280.  cover]  Mason  :  The  Ff  are  right,  with  the  change  of  a  single  letter :  covert 
instead  of  *  covers.’  Thus,  *  Who  covert  faults  at  last  with  shame  derides.’  ‘  Who  ’ 
referring  to  ‘time.’  [This  reading  was  followed  by  Rann.]  Henley:  Cordelia 
alludes  to  Prov.  xxviii,  13 :  ‘  He  that  covereth  his  sins  shall  not  prosper ,'  &c.  Singer. 
(ed.  2) :  I  have  no  doubt  we  should  read  mvr-faults,  i.  e.  dissemblers,  and  that  the 
meaning  is :  ‘  Time  shall  unfold  what  cunning  duplicity  hides,  who  (Time)  at  last 
derides  such  dissemblers  with  shame,  by  unmasking  them.’  [And  this  compound 
Singer  adopted  into  the  text  of  Sh.,  for  whose  purity,  as  against  Collier’s  (MS) 
emendations,  he  had  contended  so  vehemently,  and,  it  should  be  added,  so  intem- 
perately. — Ed.]  Dyce:  I  adhere  to  the  Qq,  because  I  feel  convinced  that ‘Who’ 
refers  to  people  in  general, — ‘  Those  who,’  &c.  As  to  the  with  of  the  Folio  (which, 
by  the  by,  Mr.  Collier’s  (MS)  changes  to  them),  I  can  no  more  account  for  it,  than 
for  hundreds  of  other  strange  things  which  the  Folio  exhibits.-  Schmidt  refers 
4  Who  ’  to  ‘  time,’  and  says  that  ‘  faults  ’  is  the  object  of  both  *  covers  ’  and  *  derides.’ 
[I  cannot  but  agree  with  Dyce’s  interpretation. — Ed.] 

2S2.  most]  Capell  thinks  that  this  ‘  word  is  crept  into  Goneril’s  speech  out  of 
her  sister’s  that  follows,  which  makes  a  part  of  it  verse :  “  most,”  therefore,  should  be 
discarded.’ 

283.  hence]  Eccles  :  There  is  not,  I  think,  throughout  the  play,  the  least  hint 
given  as  to  the  particular  part  of  the  realm  in  which  any  scene  lies,  till  we  are  intro¬ 
duced  towards  the  conclusion  into  the  neighborhood  of  Dover ;  nor  are  we  informed 
whether  it  be  intended  that  either  of  the  sisters  should  make  the  palace  of  Lear  her 


40  KING  LEAR  [act  I,  sc.  i. 

Reg.  That’s  most  certain,  and  with  you;  next  month  285 
with  us. 

Gon.  You  see  how  full  of  changes  his  age  is;  the  obser¬ 
vation  we  have  made  of  it  hath  not  been  little ;  he  always 
loved  our  sister  most;  and  with  what  poor  judgement  he 
hath  now  cast  her  off  appears  too  grossly.  290 

Reg.  ’Tis  the  infirmity  of  his  age ;  yet  he  hath  ever  but 
slenderly  known  himself. 

Gon.  The  best  and  soundest  of  his  time  hath  been  but 
rash  ;  then  must  we  look  from  his  age  to  receive,  not  alone 
the  imperfections  of  long-ingraffed  condition,  but  therewithal  295 
the  unruly  waywardness  that  infirm  and  choleric  years  bring 
with  them. 

Reg.  Such  unconstant  starts  are  we  like  to  have  from 
him  as  this  of  Kent’s  banishment. 

Gon.  There  is  further  compliment  of  leave-taking  be-  300 


285.  most j  Om.  Pope+. 

287.  is;  the]  is  the  Qr 

288.  hath  not  been]  hath  beene  Ff, 
Rowe,  Knt,  Del.  i,  Sch. 

290.  too]  too  too  F2F3F4,  Rowe. 
grossly]  groffe  Qq. 

294.  from  his  age  to  receive]  Ff  +  , 
Jen.  Knt,  Wh.  Sch.  to  receive  from  his 
age  Qq  et  cet. 

295.  imperfections]  imperfection  Qq. 


295.  long-ingraffed]  Hyphen,  Pope. 
ingraffed]  engraffed  F3F4,  Knt, 

Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  Mob.  ingrafted  Qq, 
Cap.  Jen.  Cam.  Wr.  engrafted  Pope  +  , 
Steev.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh. 

296.  the]  Om.  Qq. 

298.  starts]  stars  Qa. 

300.  There  ij]  Then  his  Anon.* 

compliment]  Johns,  complement 

>QqFf. 


future  residence.  All  we  know  is,  that  he  was  to  abide  alternately  with  them  in 
whatsoever  part  they  held  their  court. 

For  ellipsis  of  the  verb  of  motion  after  will  and  is,  see  Abbott,  §  405. 

288.  hath  not  been]  Dyce  says  that  the  reading  of  the  Ff  defies  common  sense. 
Schmidt,  while  acknowledging  that  the  *  not  ’  may  have  dropped  by  mischance 
from  the  line  of  the  Ff,  thinks  that  a  good  sense  may  yet  be  extracted  from  that 
line  by  making  ‘have’  emphatic.  Thus:  All  our  observation  in  the  past  is  little  in 
comparison  with  what  we  may  expect  in  the  future,  to  judge  from  Lear’s  treatment 
of  Cordelia. 

291.  age]  Moberly:  These  women  come  of  themselves,  and  at  once,  to  the  feel- 
ing  which  it  requires  all  Iago’s  art  to  instil  into  Othello;  on  whom  it  is  at  length 
urged  that  Desdemona  must  be  irregular  in  mind,  or  she  would  not  have  preferred 
him  to  the  ‘  curled  darlings  ’  of  Venice. 

293.  time]  Wricht:  That  is,  his  best  and  soundest  years.  See  I,  ii,  46. 

295.  ingraffed]  Wright:  This  spelling,  and  that  in  the  Qq,  are  both  used  by 
Sh.,  though  the  former  is  the  more  correct,  the  word  being  derived  from  the  Fr. 
greffer.  In  Lucrece,  1062,  we  find  the  substantive  ‘graff.’ 

295.  condition]  Malone  :  That  is,  the  qualities  of  mind,  confirmed  by  long  habit. 


ACT  I,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


41 


tween  France  and  him.  Pray  you,  let  us  hit  together;  if  301 
our  father  carry  authority  with  such  disposition  as  he  bears, 
this  last  surrender  of  his  will  but  offend  us. 

Reg.  We  shall  further  think  of  it 

Gon.  We  must  do  something,  and  i’  th’  heat  [Exeunt.  305 


301.  France ]  Burgundy  Han. 

Pray  you]  pray  Qq. 

let  us  hit]  Theob.  lets  hit  Qq, 
Glo.  +  ,  Mob.  let  us  fit  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han.  Cap.  Ec.  Knt,  Sch. 

302.  authority  with]  authority ,  with 


Han. 

302.  disposition]  Ff  +  ,  Sch.  difpoje • 
tions  Qq  et  cet. 

304.  of  it]  on't  Qq,  Cap.  Glo.  + . 

305.  V  th’]  it’h  Qq. 


301.  hit]  Steevens:  That  is,  let  us  agree.  Hudson:  The  meaning  of  what 
follows  probably  is,  if  the  king  continue  in  the  same  rash,  headstrong,  and  incon¬ 
stant  temper,  as  he  has  just  shown,  in  snatching  back  his  authority  the  moment  his 
will  is  crossed,  we  shall  be  the  worse  off  for  his  surrender  of  the  kingdom  to  us. 
Schmidt  ( Zur  Texthritik,  p.  15)  earnestly  contends,  but  I  am  afraid  in  vain,  for 

*  sit  ’  of  the  Ff. *  *  To  strike  together,’  he  says,  *  or  to  act  in  harmony,  as  it  is  expressed 
by  “  to  hit  together,”  is  not  a  matter  of  free  will,  but  proceeds  directly  from  the  nature 
of  things,  and  is  not  something  to  which  one  can  be  invited.  .  .  .  Whereas,  the  phrase 
“  sit  together,”  has  the  plain  and  manifest  meaning — to  hold  a  session,  to  take  counsel 
together.  Goneril  would  forthwith  see  a  common  plan  agreed  upon,  and  to  Regan’s 
dilatory  answer :  “  We  shall  think  further  of  it,”  replies :  “  We  must  do  something, 
and  i’  th’  heat,”  and  for  this  an  agreement  is  of  course  essential,  and  an  agreement 
she  demands  in  the  words  “  let  us  sit  together.”  ’  Schmidt  then  adduces  the  fol¬ 
lowing  instances  in  proof :  Twelfth  Night,  I,  v,  143 ;  Ham.  V,  i,  4 ;  Hen.  V:  V,  ii. 
So;  Rich.  Ill:  III,  i,  173;  Cor.  V,  ii,  74;  lb.  V,  iii,  131 ;  Per.  II,  iii,  92.  But  in 
all  these  instances,  except,  perhaps,  the  last,  there  is  reference  to  a  judicial  assembly 
or  a  session  more  or  less  formal  and  solemn,  and  a  meaning  is  conveyed  which  I 
cannot  but  think  strained  when  applied  to  an  agreement  between  two  sisters. — Ed. 

302.  disposition]  Dyce:  As  to  ‘dispositions’  or  disposition, — either  reading  may 
stand;  we  have  afterwards  both  forms  from  the  mouth  of  the  present  speaker.  See 
I,  iv,  215  and  286. 

305.  heat]  Steevens  :  That  is,  we  must  strike  while  the  iron  is  hot 


42 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Scene  II.  The  Earl  of  Gloucester's  castle. 

Enter  Edmund,  with  a  letter. 


Edm.  Thou,  Nature,  art  my  goddess ;  to  thy  law  i 

IMy  services  are  bound.  Wherefore  should  I 


Scene  ii.]  Om.  Rowe.  Scene  vi. 
Pope  +,  Jen. 

The. ..castle.]  A  Castle  belonging  to 
the  Earl  of  Glo’ster.  Pope.  A  Hall  in 
the  Earl  of  Gloster’s  Castle.  Cap. 


Enter.. .letter.]  Rowe  (subs.).  Enter 
Ballard  folus.  Qq  (felas  Q3.)  Enter 
Baftard.  Ff. 

1-26.  Thou. ..news  Prose,  Qq. 


ECCLES  disapproves  of  this  order  of  the  scenes;  in  his  judgement  the  accusation 
01  Edgar  by  Edmund  labours  under  a  weight  of  improbability,  which  is  increased 
the  longer  that  Edgar  remains  concealed  without  taking  any  steps  to  vindicate  him¬ 
self  ;  that  he  should  lie  thus  quiet,  during  all  the  time  that  passes  from  the  opening 
day  of  the  tragedy  to  Lear’s  stormy  departure  for  Gloster’s  castle,  is  *  an  outrage 
upon  common  sense  too  gross  to  be  admitted,’  thinks  Eccles,  who,  therefore,  trans¬ 
poses  this  scene  to  the  beginning  of  Act  II,  bringing  it  immediately  before  the  scene 
where  Edmund  persuades  Edgar  to  fly,  and  pretends  that  he  has  been  wounded. 
Thus,  the  two  scenes  are  *  brought  within  the  compass  of  the  same  day,  and  a  few 
hours  only,  or  less,  may  be  conceived  to  intervene  between  them.’  This  consum¬ 
mation,  however,  is  not  attained  without  loss ;  for  Sh.  clearly  intended  that  this  scene 
should  be  where  he  put  it,  as  the  second  of  the  tragedy:  Gloster  enters  sadly,  mut¬ 
tering  :  ‘  Kent  banished  thus,  And  France  in  choler  parted  ?  And  the  king  gone  to¬ 
night?  subscribed  his  power?  Confined  to  exhibition?  All  this  done  upon  the  gad!’ 
(lines  23-26).  But  Eccles  says  that  Sh.  was  liable  to  ‘unhappy  oversights’  of  dra¬ 
matic  probability,  and  this  must  be  one ;  ‘  these  obnoxious  lines,’  therefore,  he  cuts 
out  and  ‘degrades’  to  the  bottom  of  the  page,  begging  forgiveness  for  the  act,  on 
the  ground  that  he  is  ‘  in  pursuit  of  a  favorite  object  which  is  essential  to  the  rea¬ 
sonableness  and  consistency  of  this  admirable  drama;  more  especially  as  the  lines 
in  themselves  are  of  small  importance,  and  the  only  ones  so  treated’  by  him. 

I.  Nature]  Warburton  :  Sh.  makes  this  bastard  an  atheist.  Italian  atheism  had 
much  infected  the  English  court.  Steevens:  Edmund  speaks  of  ‘nature’  in  oppo¬ 
sition  to  ‘  custom,’  and  not  to  the  existence  of  a  God.  Edmund  means  only,  that  as 
he  came  not  into  the  world  as  ‘  custom  ’  or  law  had  prescribed,  so  he  had  nothing  to 
do  but  to  follow  ‘  nature  ’  and  her  laws,  which  make  no  difference  between  legitimacy 
and  illegitimacy,  between  the  eldest  and  the  youngest.  To  contradict  Warburton’s 
assertion  yet  more  strongly,  Edmund  concludes  this  very  speech  by  an  invocation  to 
heaven.  Mason:  Edmund  calls  ‘nature’  his ‘goddess’  for  the  same  reason  that 
we  call  a  bastard  a  natural  son, — one  who,  according  to  the  law  of  nature,  is  the 
child  of  his  father,  but  according  to  that  of  civil  society  is  nullius  filius.  COLE¬ 
RIDGE:  In  this  speech  of  Edmund  you  see  as  soon  as  a  man  cannot  reconcile  him¬ 
self  to  reason,  how  his  conscience  flies  off  by  way  of  appeal  to  Nature,  who  is  sure 
upon  such  occasions  never  to  find  fault,  and  also  how  shame  sharpens  a  predisposi¬ 
tion  in  the  heart  to  evil.  For  it  is  a  profound  moral,  that  shame  will  naturally  gene¬ 
rate  guilt;  the  oppressed  will  be  vindictive,  like  Shylock,  and  in  the  anguish  of 
undeserved  ignominy  the  delusion  secretly  springs  up,  of  getting  over  the  moral 
quality  of  an  action  by  fixing  the  mind  on  the  mere  physical  act  alone. 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


43 


Stand  in  the  plague  of  custom,  and  permit 
The  curiosity  of  nations  to  deprive  me, 

For  that  I  am  some  twelve  or  fourteen  moonshines  5 

Lag  of  a  brother?  Why  bastard  ?  wherefore  base  ? 


3.  in ]  to  Han.  on  Quincy  (MS). 
plague"]  plage  Warb.  place  Simp¬ 
son.  tyranny  Mrs.  Griffiths. 

4.  curiosity]  nicety  Pope,  curtesie 
Theob.  Warb.  courtesy  Han.  Johns. 


Cap.  Jen. 

4.  deprive]  despise  Quincy  (MS). 
me,]  me  ?  Ff. 

6.  Why. ..base?]  and  why  bastard? 
base?  Han. 


3.  plague]  Warburton:  An  absurd  expression.  Read  plage,  i.  e.  the  place,  the 
country,  the  boundary  of  custom.  Plage  is  in  common  use  amongst  the  old  English 
writers.  Capell  :  The  speaker  calls  ‘  custom  ’  a  ‘  plague  ’  or  vexation,  and  asks  why 
he  should *  *  stand  in  it,’  meaning  be  exposed  to  it.  Johnson  :  I  can  scarcely  think 

*  plague  ’  right.  STAUNTON :  ‘  Plague  ’  may  here  possibly  signify  place,  or  boundary 
from  plaga ;  but  it  is  a  very  suspicious  word.  Wright:  I  cannot  help  thinking 
that  Sh.  had  in  his  mind  a  passage  in  the  Prayer-book  Version  of  Psalm  xxxviii,  17, 

*  And  I  truly  am  set  in  the  plague ;*  where  ‘  plague  ’  is  used  in  a  sense  for  which  I 
have  found  no  parallel.  The  version  evidently  follows  the  Latin  of  Jerome’s  transla¬ 
tion,  •  Quia  ego  ad  plagam  paratus  sum.’  Halliwell  :  Edmund  cites  for  a  reason  of 
the  contempt  of  the  world  not  merely  his  illegitimacy,  but  his  juniority,  so  that  the 
plague  is  here  also  the  infectious  rule  of  custom,  that  bids  the  younger  yield  to  the 
elder,  a  decree  he  determines  wickedly  to  evade  by  becoming  the  only  son. 

4.  curiosity]  Theobald:  This  should  be  curtesie,  as  in  As  You  Like  It,  I,  i,  49. 
Nor  must  we  forget  that  tenure  in  our  laws,  whereby  some  lands  are  held  by  the 

*  curtesie  of  England.’  And  I  ought  to  take  notice  that  I  had  the  concurrence  of 
the  ingenious  Dr.  Thirlby,  who  hinted  to  me  this  very  emendation  before  he  knew  I 
made  it.  Heath  :  It  is  not  suitable  to  Edmund’s  character  to  term  that  a  curtesy 
which  he  endeavors  to  expose  as  a  folly,  and  in  virtue  of  which  he  was  to  be  him¬ 
self  so  great  a  sufferer.  Mason  :  By  *  curiosity  ’  Edmund  means  the  nicety,  the 
strictness,  of  civil  institutions.  White:  ‘Curiosity*  is  what  Johnson  would  have 
called  scrupulosity.  Walker  (  Vers.  201)  :  The  i  in  -ity  is  almost  uniformly  dropt 
in  pronunciation.  I  believe  that  Sh.  pronounced  curious' ty ;  for,  according  to 
our  common  pronunciation,  this  verse  is  a  verse  only  in  name.  The  Bible  Word¬ 
book  cites,  ‘  The  Scripture  then  being  acknowledged  to  bee  so  full  and  so  perfect, 
how  can  wee  excuse  our  selues  of  negligence,  if  we  doe  not  studie  them,  of  curiositie, 
if  we  be  not  content  with  them,’ — The  Translators  to  the  Reader.  Also :  ‘  Now,  as 
concerning  the  funerals  and  enterring  of  her,  I  pray  you,  let  the  same  be  performed 
without  all  curiositie  and  superstition.’ — Holland’s  Plutarch,  Morals,  p.  533.  [Cot- 
grave:  Curiosity :  daintinesse,  nicenesse  ;  affectation.  See  I,  i,  5,  and  I,  iv,  66. — Ed.] 

4.  deprive]  Steevens:  Synonymous  in  Shakespeare’s  time  with  disinherit. 
Wright:  Compare  Baret’s  Alvearie  [s.  v.  to  deprive]'.  ‘To  cast  bis  sonne  out 
of  his  house,  to  depriue  or  put  him  from  the  hope  of  succession,  or  inheritance, 
for  some  misdeede :  to  abastardize  him.* 

6.  Lag]  In  Bell’s  Shakespeare's  Puck,  iii,  94,  there  is  a  suggestion,  founded  on  a 
misapprehension  of  the  passage,  that  this  word  may  have  been  originally  the  same 
as  the  word  law  as  found  in  the  hunting  phrase  of  *  giving  a  stag  so  much  law  before 
the  dogs  are  let  loose.’ 


44 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


When  my  dimensions  are  as  well  compact,  7 

My  mind  as  generous  and  my  shape  as  true, 

As  honest  madam’s  issue  ?  Why  brand  they  us 

With  base  ?  with  baseness  ?  bastardy  ?  base,  base  ?  10 

Who  in  the  lusty  stealth  of  nature  take 

More  composition  and  fierce  quality 

Than  doth,  within  a  dull,  stale,  tired  bed, 

Go  to  th’  creating  a  whole  tribe  of  fops, 

Got  ’tween  asleep  and  wake  ?  Well  then,  5 

Legitimate  Edgar,  I  must  have  your  land. 

Our  father’s  love  is  to  the  bastard  Edmund 
As  to  the  legitimate;  fine  word,  ‘legitimate! 

Well,  my  legitimate,  if  this  letter  speed 

And  my  invention  thrive,  Edmund  the  base  20 


7.  dimensions ]  dementions  Qq. 

9.  As. ..issue]  One  line,  Jen. 

10.  With. .. base  ? ]  With  Bafe  ?  With 
bafenes  Barjladie  ?  Bafe,  Bafe  f  F, 
(same  punctuation  FaF  FJ.  -with  bafe , 
bafe  baflardie  ?  Qq,  Jen. 

13.  dull ,  stale]  fl ale  dull  Qq. 
tired]  tyred  Yi.  lyed  Q  .  lied  Q„. 

14.  Go  to]  Go  F3F4. 

th'  creating]  the  creating  of  Qq, 


Jen.  Mai.  creating  Pope + ,  Ec. 

15.  asleep]  Cap.  a-sleep  Pope  +  .  a 
fleepe  Q,Fj Fa.  a  flecp  F3F4,  Rowe. 

Jleepe  Qa. 

then]  the  Qq.  then,  good  brother , 

Han. 

18.  fine  word,'  legitimate  P]  Om.  Qq. 
20.  the  base]  thee  base  Ktly  (mis¬ 
print  ?). 


6.  bastard]  Hanmer:  Edmund  inveighs  against  the  tyranny  of  custom,  both  in 
respect  to  younger  brothers  and  to  bastards.  But  he  must  not  be  understood,  in  the 
former,  to  mean  himself ;  the  argument  becomes  general  by  implying  more  than  is 
said :  ‘  Wherefore  should  I  or  any  man,’  &c.  BOSWELL:  Why  should  he  not  mean 
himself  in  both  instances?  He  was  a  younger  brother.  Moberly:  The  word  is 
from  the  Celtic  ‘bas-tardh’  (low  birth).  The  Welsh,  however,  only  learned  very 
unwillingly  in  Edward  I’s  time  to  adopt  the  English  ‘  curiosity ’  as  regards  illegiti¬ 
mate  children.  [Can.  we  not  infer  from  this  line  and  line  10  that  the  pronunciation 
in  Shakespeare’s  time  was  base-tard  ?] 

9.  madam’s]  Delius:  As  is  frequently  the  case  in  Sh.  it  is  here  used  ironically. 

14.  the  creating]  Abbott,  §  93.  Although  this  is  a  noun,  and  therefore  pre¬ 
ceded  by  ‘  the,’  yet  it  is  so  far  confused  with  the  gerund  as  to  be  allowed  the  privilege 
of  governing  a  direct  object.  See  Macb.  I,  iv,  8. 

14.  fops]  According  to  Schmidt  this  does  not  mean  fools  or  dandies,  as  it  does 
now,  but  dupes, — that  is,  men  who  are  destined  to  be  duped  or  deceived  by  men  of 
‘more  composition  and  fierce  quality.’  Furthermore,  this  original  meaning  of  the 
word  is  found  in  all  the  instances*  of  its  use  by  Sh.  Compare  4  This  is  the  excellent 
foppery  of  the  world,’  line  112;  that  is,  dupery. 

15.  ’tween]  Dodd:  I  think  the  passage  originally  stood  4 atween  sleep  and  wake.’ 
The  a  might  very  easily  have  been  so  transposed. 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


45 


Shall  top  the  legitimate.  I  grow;  I  prosper;  21 

Now,  gods,  stand  up  for  bastards  ! 


Enter  Gloucester. 


Glou .  Kent  banish’d  thus  ?  and  France  in  choler  parted  ? 
And  the  king  gone  to-night  ?  subscribed  his  power  ? 


21.  top  the ]  Cap.  tooth '  Qq  ( too  h  Q3) . 
to'  th ’  FjFj,.  to  th'  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope  i. 
be  th.'  Pope  ii+.  toe  th'  Han.  Mai.  foe 
the  Mason,  to  the  Del.  Ktly. 

legitimate.']  Johns,  legitimate : 
QqFf,  Han.  legitimate —  Rowe,  Pope, 
Del.  Ktly. 


21.  I  grmv  ;  I  prosper]  Ay, grow  ;  ay , 
p  rosper  Sch.  conj. 

23.  Scene  vn.  Pope  +  ,Jen. 

24.  subscribed]  fubferibd  Qt.  fub • 
ferib'd  Qa.  Prefcrib'd  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 
Sch. 


21.  top]  Hanmer  :  As  ‘the  treading  upon  another’s  heels’  is  an  expression  used 
to  signify  the  being  not  far  behind  him,  so  to  toe  another  means  to  come  up  to  and 
be  on  even  ground  with  him.  Warburton  :  Here  the  Oxford  editor  would  show 
us  that  he  is  as  good  at  coining  phrases  as  his  author,  and  so  alters  the  text  thus: 

•  Shall  toe  the  legitimate,’  i.  e.  says  he, *  *  stand  on  even  ground  with  him ;’  as  he  would 
do  with  his  author.  Edwards  ( Canons  of  Crit.,  p.  221,  ed.  7) :  Poor  Sir  Thomas! 
Woe  be  to  you,  if  you  invade  Mr.  Warburton’s  prerogative  of  coining  words  for  Sh. ! 
One  may  fairly  say  here  that  ‘  the  toe  of  the  peasant  comes  so  near  the  heel  of  our 
courtier  that  it  galls  his  kibe.’  But  Mr.  Warburton  ought  to  have  taken  notice  that 
the  old  reading  is  ‘  shall  TO  th’  legitimate,’  which,  though  it  misled  Sir  Thomas,  may 
perhaps  direct  to  the  right  word  :  ‘Shall  top  the,’  &c.,  which  he  would  do  if  he  got 
the  inheritance  from  him,  though  that  could  not  make  him  be  the  legitimate.  [These 
notes  are  given  as  instances  of  the  amenities  that  help  to  make  the  early  comments 
on  Sh.  so  full  of  ‘sweetness  and  light.’ — Ed.]  Capell,  referring  to  this  emendation 
of  Edwards,  says,  that  ‘it  appear’d  in  the  Canons,  into  which  it  was  receiv’d  from 
this  editor  (together  with  other  communications  concerning  readings  of  copies)  by 
♦hat  ingenious  work’s  writer :  This  emendation  will  have  no  impugners  or  doubters, 
if  that  corruption  be  look’d  upon  out  of  which  it  arose ;  if  it’s  opposition  to  “  base  ”  be 
consider’d,  and  (which  is  yet  a  stronger  matter  than  either)  it’s  connection  with 
“  grow,”  which  has  no  natural  introduction  unless  preceded  by  “  top.”  ’  Jennens  :  If 
conjecture  be  made  without  any  regard  to  the  traces  of  the  letters,  out  or  rout  are 
better  than  be.  Malone  :  In  Devonshire,  as  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  informs  me,  *  to 
toe  a  thing  up  is  to  tear  it  up  by  the  roots ;  in  which  sense  the  word  is  perhaps  used 
here,  for  Edmund  immediately  adds  ‘‘I  grow,  I  prosper.”  ’  Delius  thus  vindicates 
Rowe’s  reading,  which  he  follows :  *  The  Bastard,  if  his  plan  succeed,  will  to  the 
legitimate —  What  he  will  inflict  upon  him  he  does  not  say ;  he  is  interrupted  by  the 
entrance  of  his  father,  at  the  mere  sight  of  whom  he  exclaims,  in  tones  of  assured 
victory,  “  I  grow,  I  prosper.”  ’  [For  other  instances  of  the  use  of  this  word  in  the 
same  sense  see  Schmidt’s  Lex.]  Nichols  {Notes,  &c.,  No.  2,  p.  9)  follows  the  Ff, 
and  interprets :  ‘  Shall  advance  to,  or  take  the  place  of,  the  legitimate.’ 

24.  subscribed]  Johnson  :  To  ‘  subscribe  ’  is  to  transfer  by  signing  or  subscrib¬ 
ing  a  writing  of  testimony.  Malone:  In  Sh.  it  means  to  yield,  or  surrender.  So 
afterwards  III,  ii,  18;  also  Tro.  and  Cres.  IV,  v,  105.  White:  That  is,  yielded. 
This  seems  to  be  a  perversion  of  the  figurative  use  of  ‘  subscribe  ’  in  the  sense  of 


6 


KING  LEAR 


[act  I,  sc.  ii. 


Confined  to  exhibition?  All  this  dene  25 

Upon  the  gad ! — Edmund,  how  now !  what  news  ? 

Edm.  So  please  your  lordship,  none. 

Glou.  Why  so  earnestly  seek  you  to  put  up  that  letter  ? 

Edm.  I  know  no  news,  my  lord. 

Glou.  What  paper  were  you  reading  ?  30 

Edm.  Nothing,  my  lord. 

Glou.  No  ?  What  needed  then  that  terrible  dispatch  of 


25.  this  done]  this  donne  QJt  this  gone 
F5F3F4,  Rowe,  is  gone  Pope,  Theob. 
Han.  Warb. 

27.  [Putting  up  the  letter — Rowe  et 


cet.  Om.  QqFf. 

28.  Why]  Whe  Fa. 

32.  needed 'j  needes  Qt.  needs  Qa. 
terrible ]  terribe  Q,. 


submit ,  to  which  yield  is  a  synonyme,  though  not  in  a  transitive  sense;  e.g.  Tam. 
Shr.  I,  i,  81.  Prescribe  of  the  Folio  might  be  accepted  in  the  sense  of  limited,  cir¬ 
cumscrib'd  his  power,  were  it  not  that  the  king  is  manifestly  the  nominative  under¬ 
stood.  Schmidt  (Zur  Textkritik ,  &c.,  p.  16)  prefers  prescribed ,  which  he  says 
means *  *  his  power  is  restricted,  limited,  confined  in  its  exercise.  The  expression  is 
not  exactly  what  might  have  been  expected  from  Gloucester;  we  might  wish  for  a 
word  a  little  less  tame  when  applied  to  an  event  which  so  greatly  excites  him,  but 
it  is  perfectly  intelligible.’  From  the  expression  ‘  Prescribe  not  us  our  duties,’  I,  i, 
275,  Schmidt  infers  that  ‘prescribe’  need  not  of  necessity  be  followed  by  ‘to,’  and 
thus  Sh.  might  have  used  the  passive  form  ‘  we  are  prescribed  our  duties.’  If  this 
be  so,  then  he  conjectures  that  we  might  punctuate  these  lines  differently:  ‘And  the 
king  gone  to-night  ?  prescribed  ?  his  power  Confined  to  exhibition  ?’  [Dr.  Schmidt 
failed  to  note  that  the  ‘  to’  is  not  really  absent  in  ‘  Prescribe  not  us  our  duties,’  but 
is  simply  absorbed  in  the  preceding  ‘  not.’  In  his  edition  of  this  play  he  goes  even 
further,  and  says  that  we  are  nowhere  justified  (not  even  in  III,  vii,  64)  in  inter¬ 
preting  ‘to  subscribe’  by  to  yield ’  to  surrender ,  or  to  submit.  To  me  Dr.  Johnson’s 
interpretation  is  satisfactory.  Sh.  may  have  intended,  by  this  one  word,  to  convey 
the  idea  that  there  had  been  a  formal  abdication. — Ed.] 

25.  exhibition]  Johnson  :  That  is,  allowance.  The  term  is  yet  used  in  the  uni¬ 
versities.  Steevens:  So  in  Two  Gent.  I,  iii,  69.  Nares:  Also  Jonson,  Silent 
Woman,  III,  i,  ‘Behave  yourself  distinctly  and  with  good  morality;  or,  I  protest 
I’ll  take  away  your  exhibition.’  Moberly:  Restricted  to  a  mere  maintenance ;  as 
in  Roman  law,  ‘  si  liberi  ali  desiderent,  ut  a  parente  exhibeantur.’  So  we  have 

*  exhibere  viam  ’  for  ‘  to  keep  up  a  road.’ 

26.  gad]  Johnson  :  Upon  the  sudden  stimulation  of  caprice,  as  cattle  run  mad¬ 
ding  when  they  are  stung  by  the  gadfly.  Ritson:  Done  suddenly,  or  as  before, 
while  ‘  the  iron  is  hot.’  A  ‘gad’  is  an  iron  bar.  The  Statute  of  2  and  3  Eliza.  6, 
c.  27,  is  a  ‘  Bill  against  false  forging  of  iron  gadds,  instead  of  gadds  of  steel.* 
Collier:  Upon  the  spur;  in  Tit.  And.  IV,  103,  the  hero  wishes  to  engrave  on 
brass  with  ‘  a  gad  of  steel,’  i.  e.  a  point  of  steel.  Moberly  strangely  defines  it  as 

*  at  haphazard.’ 

32.  terrible]  White:  This  is  not  the  mere  meaningless  expletive  so  often  used 
by  uncultivated  people.  Edmund  hides  the  letter  away  in  haste  and  terror.  Schmidt 
calls  attention  to  the  active  meaning  which  adjectives  in  -ble  had  in  Shakespeare’s 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


47 


it  into  your  pocket  ?  the  quality  of  nothing  hath  not  such 
need  to  hide  itself.  Let’s  see;  come,  if  it  be  nothing,  I  shall 
not  need  spectacles.  35 

Edm.  I  beseech  you,  sir,  pardon  me ;  it  is  a  letter  from 
my  brother,  that  I  have  not  all  o’er-read ;  and  for  so  much 
as  I  have  perused,  I  find  it  not  fit  for  your  o’er-looking. 

Gloit.  Give  me  the  letter,  sir. 

Edm.  I  shall  offend,  either  to  detain  or  give  it.  The  con-  40 
tents,  as  in  part  I  understand  them,  are  to  blame. 

Glou.  Let’s  see,  let’s  see. 

Edm.  I  hope,  for  my  brother’s  justification,  he  wrote  this 
but  as  an  essay  or  taste  of  my  virtue. 

Glou.  [Reads]  ‘  This  policy  and  reverence  of  age  makes  45 
the  ivorld  bitter  to  the  best  of  our  times ;  keeps  our  fortunes 


36.  Edm.]  Baft.  QaFf.  Ba.  Qt. 

37.  and]  Om.  Qq. 

38.  o'er- tooling]  likingQ q.  overlook¬ 
ing  Warb.  Johns.  Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var. 

40,  41.  I.. .blame]  Three  lines,  ending 
it :... them. ..blame,  in  Ff. 

41.  to  blame]  too  blame  QtQa FjFj. 


44.  taste]  lest  Coll.  iii. 

45.  [Reads]  A  Letter.  Qq. 

and  reverence]  Om.  Qq.  in  rev¬ 
erence  Han. 

age]  ages  Pope  ii,  Theob.  Warb. 

46.  to  the  best]  to  bejl  F3F3F4> 
times  /]  times  F4. 


time.  Thus,  ‘audible’  in  Coriolanus  means  hearing  well ;  ‘contemptible’  means 
contemptuous  ;  ‘  unmeritable,*  undeserving ,’  &c. 

41.  to  blame]  For  instances  of  the  infinitive  active  for  the  infinitive  passive,  see 
Abbott,  §  359  and  §  405,  also  Ham.  IV,  iv,  44. 

44.  essay  or  taste]  Johnson:  Though  ‘taste’  may  stand  here,  yet  I  believe  we 
should  read,  ‘assay  or  test p  they  are  both  metallurgical  terms  and  properly  joined. 
Steevens:  Both  are  terms  from  royal  tables.  See  V,  iii,  144.  Singer:  Thus  Baret, 
Alvearie  :  ‘  to  Assay  or  rather  Essay  of  the  French  woorde  Essayer ,’  and  afterwards : 
‘To  tast  or  assay  before.  Pralibo.'  Wright:  Proof  or  trial.  The  two  words 
‘  fcssay  ’  and  *  assay  ’  are  etymologically  the  same.  In  I  Samuel,  xvii,  39,  it  is  said 
of  David  in  Saul’s  armour  that  he  ‘  assayed  to  go,’  that  is,  tried  or  attempted  to  go. 
‘Taste’  occurs  both  as  a  noun  and  verb  as  synonymous  with  ‘test.’  Compare  I 
Hen.  IV:  IV,  i,  119.  Cotgrave  has, ‘Essay:  m.  An  essay,  proofe  .  .  .  also,  the 
tast,  or  Essay  taken  of  Princes  meat,  or  drinke.’  [See  Ham.  II,  ii,  411 :  ‘a  taste 
of  your  quality.’] 

45.  policy]  Capell:  The  beginning  of  Edgar’s  letter  is  darken’d  by  a  remov’^ 
sense  of  *  policy,’  and  our  imagin’d  connection  of  it  with  *  age  ’  or  old  age ;  ‘  policy  ’ 
has  here  the  sense  of —police,  political  regiment,  the  world’s  evil  [?  civil]  ordering ; 
and  it  is  of  this  ‘  policy,’  and  the  reverence  establish’d  by  it,  that  he  is  made  to  com¬ 
plain.  Schmidt  considers  ‘policy  and  reverence’  as  a  hendiadys  for  ‘policy  of 
tiolding  in  reverence,’  *  like  respect  and  fortunes  *  in  I,  i,  247. 

46.  the  best  of  our  times]  Wright:  The  best  periods  of  our  lives.  See  I, 
293- 


48 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


from  us  till  our  oldness  cannot  relish  them.  I  begin  to  find  47 
an  idle  and  fond  bondage  in  the  oppression  of  aged  tyranny  ; 
who  sways,  not  as  it  hath  power,  but  as  it  is  suffered.  Come 
to  me,  that  of  tins  I  may  speak  more.  If  our  father  would  50 
sleep  till  I  waked  him,  you  should  enjoy  half  his  revenue  for 
ever,  and  live  the  beloved  of  your  brother,  Edgar. 

Hum!  Conspiracy? — Sleep  till  I  waked  him ,  you  should 
enjoy  half  Jus  revenue! — My  son  Edgar!  Had  he  a  hand 
to  write  this?  a  heart  and  brain  to  breed  it  in? — When  55 
came  this  to  you  ?  who  brought  it  ? 

Edm.  It  was  not  brought  me,  my  lord ;  there’s  the  cun¬ 
ning  of  it ;  I  found  it  thrown  in  at  the  casement  of  my  closet. 

Glou.  You  know  the  charadler  to  be  your  brother’s  ? 

Edm.  If  the  matter  were  good,  my  lord,  I  durst  swear  60 
it  were  his ;  but,  in  respedl  of  that,  I  would  fain  think  it 
were  not. 

Glou.  It  is  his. 

Edm.  It  is  his  hand,  my  lord ;  but  I  hope  his  heart  is 
not  in  the  contents.  65 

Glou.  Has  he  never  before  sounded  you  in  this  busi¬ 
ness  ? 

Edm.  Never,  my  lord ;  but  I  have  heard  him  oft  main- 


49.  who ]  which  Rowe+,  Cap. 
51,54,71.  revenue']  reuenew  Qq.  Rcu- 
ennew  FjFj. 

52.  brother ,]  Steev.  brother  Qq, 
Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Jen.  brother. 
Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

53.  Sleep]  flcpt  Qq. 

waked]  wakt  Qq.  wake  Ff  +  , 

Sch. 

55.  brain]  a  brain  Rowe. 

56.  this  to  you]  you  to  this  F,FS,  Sch. 
61.  his. ..respcCt  of]  his  but  in  respect. 


< fQv 

63.  It  is  his.  ]  It  is  his  ?  Q,.  Is  it  hist 

Q.- 

64.  but]  Om.  FaF3F4  +  . 

66.  Has]  Ff  +  ,  Knt.  i,  Dyce,  Del.  ii, 
Sch.  Hath  Qq  et  cet. 

before]  Ff  +  ,  Knt  i,  Sing.  Dyce, 
Del.  ii,  Ktly,  Huds.  Sch.  heretofore 
Qq  et  cet. 

68.  heard  him  oft]  Ff  +,  Cap.  Knt, 
Dyce,  Sta.  Glo. +  ,  Sch.  often  heard 
him  Qq  et  cet. 


47.  oldness]  Schmidt:  Not  elsewhere  used  in  Sh. 

48.  idle  and  fond]  Johnson:  Weak  and  foolish. 

49.  who]  Wright:  For  which,  the  antecedent  really  being  the  persons  implied 
in  ‘  tyranny.’  See  Abbott,  §  264. 

58.  closet]  Private  apartment.  See  III,  iii,  io,  and  also  Ham.  II,  i,  77. 

59.  character]  It  is  almost  needless  to  remark  that  this  word  is  always  used  by 
Sh.  in  the  sense  of  writing  or  handwriting.  See  Ham.  I,  iii,  59. 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


49 


tain  it  to  be  fit,  that,  sons  at  perfect  age,  and  fathers  de¬ 
clined,  the  father  should  be  as  ward  to  the  son,  and  the  son  70 
manage  his  revenue. 

Glon.  O  villain,  villain !  His  very  opinion  in  the  letter ! 
Abhorred  villain !  Unnatural,  detested,  brutish  villain ! 
worse  than  brutish ! — Go,  sirrah,  seek  him ;  I’ll  apprehend 
him ;  abominable  villain  !  Where  is  he  ?  75 

Edm.  I  do  not  well  know,  my  lord.  If  it  shall  please 
you  to  suspend  your  indignation  against  my  brother  till  you 
can  derive  from  him  better  testimony  of  his  intent,  you 
should  run  a  certain  course ;  where,  if  you  violently  proceed 
against  him,  mistaking  his  purpose,  it  would  make  a  great  80 
gap  in  your  own  honour  and  shake  in  pieces  the  heart  of 
his  obedience.  I  dare  pawn  down  my  life  for  him  that  he 
hath  writ  this  to  feel  my  affeftion  to  your  honour  and  to  no 
other  pretence  of  danger. 

Glou.  Think  you  so  ?  85 

Edm.  If  your  honour  judge  it  meet,  I  will  place  you 
where  you  shall  hear  us  confer  of  this,  and  by  an  auricular 


69.  at]  being  at  Han. 
perfect!]  perfit  Qq. 

declined ]  FXF3F4,  Rowe,  Knt, 
Coll.  Del.  Wh.  Sch.  declind  Fa.  de¬ 
clining  Qq  et  cet. 

70.  the  father]  his  father  Qq. 

as  ward]  as  a  Ward  Q3,  Pope  +. 

71.  Ins']  the  Qq. 

73.  Abhorred]  Abhorrid  Qa. 

73,  74.  brutish]  bruitijh  QaF3F4, 
Rowe,  Pope. 

74.  sirrah]  fir  Qq. 

I’ll]  Rowe.  lie  FxFa.  Fie  F3F4. 
1 Q,.  I,  Qa.  ay.  Cam.  Wr. 


76.  lord]  L.  FIFa. 

78.  his]  this  Qq. 

79.  should]  Q,Ff  (fhold  Fx)4*,  Cap 
Jen.  Ec.  Knt,  Cam.  Sch.  Jhal  Qa.  fiali 
Q3  et  cet. 

81.  own]  Om.  FaF3F4,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han. 

82.  that]  Om.  Qq. 

83.  writ]  wrote  Qq,  Glo. +  ,  Mob. 

84.  other]  further  Qq,  Glo.  + ,  Mob. 
87.  confer  of  this]  confer  this  F3F4, 

Rowe. 

auricular]  aurigular  Qq. 


69.  sons  at  perfect  age]  For  instances  of  the  participle  being  implied,  in  the 
case  of  a  simple  word,  such  as  being,  see  Abbott,  §  3S1. 

79.  where]  For  instances  of  the  use  of  *  where  ’  for  whereas,  see  Abbott,  §  134. 

83.  your  honour]  Malone  :  The  usual  address  to  a  lord  in  Shakespeare’s  time. 

84.  pretence]  Johnson  :  That  is,  design,  purpose.  So  afterwards,  I,  iv,  67. 
Steevens  :  I  can  venture  to  assert,  with  some  degree  of  confidence,  that  Sh.  never 
uses  this  word  in  any  other  sense.  Schmidt  (Lex.)  gives  five  instances  (of  which 
one,  viz :  Cymb.  Ill,  iv,  106,  is,  I  think,  doubtful)  where  it  means  pretext.  Dyce, 
in  his  Gloss.,  gives  no  other  definition  than  Johnson’s,  and  cites  none  of  these  five 
instances  given  by  Schmidt. 

5 


D 


50 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  u. 


assurance  have  your  satisfaction,  and  that  without  any  fur¬ 
ther  delay  than  this  very  evening. 

Glou.  He  cannot  be  such  a  monster —  90 

*  Edm.  Nor  is  not,  sure. 

*  Glou.  To  his  father,  that  so  tenderly  and.  entirely  loves 

*  him.  Heaven  and  earth  !  *  Edmund,  seek  him  out ,  wind 
me  into  him,  I  pray  you ;  frame  the  business  after  your  own 
wisdom.  I  would  unstate  myself,  to  be  in  a  due  resolution.  95 

90.  monster — ]  Dyce,  Del.  ii,  Huds.  94.  him,  I  pray  you  :  frame]  him,  / 

Glo.  +  ,  Mob.  monster.  QqFf  et  cet.  pray  yens  frame  Qq. 

91-93.  Edm.  Nor. ..earth  /]  Qq.  Om.  the]  your  Qq. 

Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Sch. 


91,  93.  Nor  .  .  .  earth]  Schmidt  ( Zur  Textkritik,  &c.,  p.  18)  makes  a  strong 
point  in  favour  of  omitting  these  words,  as  is  done  in  the  Ff.  ‘  Were  there  any 
reproach,’  he  says,  ‘against  which  it  would  be  hard  to  defend  Sh.,  it  would  be 
the  relation  between  Gloster  and  Edgar.  A  father  “  that  so  tenderly  and  entirely 
loves”  his  son,  but,  like  Gloucester,  condemns  him  unheard,  and  drives  him  forth 
to  misery,  is  a  miscreant  in  the  drama  as  well  as  in  real  life.  ...  If  there  be  any 'sin¬ 
gle  trait  which  is  characteristic  of  this  scene,  as  well  as  of  the  similar  first  scene  of 
the  second  Act,  it  is  that  not  a  word  of  sympathy  and  warmth  for  his  sons  falls  from 
the  lips  of  Gloucester.  His  levity,  when  talking  with  Kent  in  the  very  first  scene 
of  the  play,  sufficiently  betrays  the  superficial  sense  of  his  marital  and  parental 
duties.  Only  when  Edgar  is  as  though  dead  to  him,  and  the  fate  of  Lear  begins  to 
cast  its  dark  shadow  over  himself  (III,  vi),  does  something  of  fatherly  feeling 
awaken  at  the  thought  of  his  son,  hunted  through  the  land.  Hitherto,  he  is  indif¬ 
ferent  and  heartless.  Evidently  his  sons  have  never  stood  near  to  his  heart;  he 
knows  them  not, — nor  what  might  be  expected  from  either  the  one  or  the  other. 
That  Edmund,  before  the  time  when  the  action  of  the  play  begins,  has  been  “out” 
nine  years  in  foreign  parts  is  expressly  mentioned,  and  in  one  way  or  another  Edgar 
has  been  equally  a  stranger  ....  and  is  no  more  to  him  than  Edmund, — “  no  dearer 
in  my  account,”  i.  e.  is  of  as  little  account.  Fie  has  sons  and  they  must  be  acknow¬ 
ledged,  and  therein  he  has  done  his  part.  Such  and  no  other  is  the  idea  that  Sh. 
•would  have  us  form  of  Gloucester,  and  therefore  he  could  never  have  written  the 
words:  “To  his  father  that  so  tenderly  and  entirely  loves  him.”  They  stand  in 
contradiction  to  all  that  precedes  and  follows.  They  are  doubtless  an  addition  made 
by  some  sensational  actor,  and  they  crept  into  the  Qq  through  some  copyist  or  re¬ 
porter.’ 

93.  wind  me]  Johnson:  I  once  thought  it  should  be  read:  ‘wind  you;'  but, 
perhaps,  it  is  a  familiar  phrase,  like  ‘  do  me  this.’  [For  other  instances  of  this  eth¬ 
ical  dative,  see  Abbott,  §  220,  or  Macb.  Ill,  vi,  41.] 

95.  unstate]  Heath  :  That  is,  I  would  give  even  my  rank  and  fortune  to  be 
resolved  on  this  point.  Capell:  The  state  that  Gloster  would  lay  aside,  if  he  could, 
on  this  occasion  is,  his  parental  state,  the  state  of  father,  which  endangered  his 
judging  rightly,  two  ways — by  acting  upon  his  affections  as  a  kind  father,  or  on  his 
resentments  as  an  injured  one.  Johnson  thus  paraphrases :  ‘  Do  you  frame  the  bus* 


act  i,  sc.  ii.]  KING  LEAR 


51 


Edm.  I  will  seek  him,  sir,  presently,  convey  the  business  96 
as  I  shall  find  means,  and  acquaint  you  withal. 

Glou.  These  late  eclipses  in  the  sun  and  moon  portend 
no  good  to  us ;  though  the  wisdom  of  nature  can  reason  it 
thus  and  thus,  yet  nature  finds  itself  scourged  by  the  se-  IOO 
quent  effects ;  love  cools,  friendship  falls  off,  brothers  di¬ 
vide  :  in  cities,  mutinies ;  in  countries,  discord  ;  in  palaces, 


96.  will]  fhall  Qq. 

97.  find]  fee  Qq,  Jen. 

98.  134.  eclipses]  Elipfes  Fg. 

98.  moon]  the  moon  Cap.  conj. 

99.  nature]  mankind  Han. 


99.  it]  Om.  Qq. 

IOO.  sequent]  frequent  Theob.  i. 
102.  discord]  dif cords  Qq,  Jen. 
in  palaces]  Pallaces  Q1Q,. 


iness  who  can  act  with  less  emotion;  I  would  unstate  myself;  it  would  be  in  me  a 
departure  from  the  paternal  character,  to  be  in  a  due  resolution,  to  be  settled  and  com¬ 
posed  on  such  an  occasion.’  Tyrwhitt  :  It  means  simply : *  *  I  would  give  my  estate’ 
(including  rank  as  well  as  fortune).  [There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Heath  and  Tyr¬ 
whitt  give  the  correct  interpretation.] 

95.  resolution]  Dyce  ( Gloss.) :  Conviction,  assurance. 

96.  convey]  Johnson:  To  manage  artfully.  [See  Macb.  IV,  iii,  71.] 

98.  These  late  eclipses]  Capell:  This  descant  upon  what  were  then  esteemed 
natural  prodigies  is  a  weakness  which  serves  admirably  to  give  a  requisite  degree  of 
the  probable  to  Gloucester’s  incredulity.  Moberly  :  As  to  current  belief  in  astrology, 
we  may  remember  that,  at  the  time  when  this  play  was  written,  Dr  Dee,  the  cele¬ 
brated  adept,  was  grieving  for  his  lost  patroness,  Queen  Elizabeth ;  that  the  profligate 
court  of  James  I.  was  in  1618  frightened  by  the  appearance  of  a  comet  into  a  tern, 
porary.fit  of  gravity;  and  that  even  Charles  I.  sent  ^500  as  a  fee  to  William  Lilly 
for  consulting  the  stars  as  to  his  flight  from  Hampton  Court  in  1647.  [See  Appendix, 
*  Date  of  the  Composition,’  p.  379.] 

99.  wisdom  of  nature]  Johnson  :  Though  natural  philosophy  can  give  account 
of  eclipses,  yet  we  feel  their  consequences.  Walker  (Crit.  i,  287)  marked  '  nature  ’ 
as  * possibly  wrong.*  Lettsom  (in  a  foot-note  to  Walker) :  I  think  man  would  be 
better  [than  mankind  of  Hanmer]  ;  but  perhaps  *  nature  ’  crept  in  from  below  with¬ 
out  displacing  any  word ;  the  or  y*  was  a  mistake  for  and  of  was  purposely  in¬ 
serted  to  make  some  sense  of  ‘the  wisdom  nature.’  Sh.  perhaps  wrote  merely 

* your  wisdom,”  as  *  your  excellent  sherris.’  Keightley  reads  ‘  wisdom  of  man  ’ 
in  his  text.  [‘  Wisdom  of  nature  ’  means :  wisdom  concerning  nature,  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  natural  laws. — Ed.]  Moberly  :  This  curious  view  is  repeated,  with  re¬ 
markable  force  of  language,  by  Sir  T.  Browne,  even  ii>  the  less  credulous  times 
(Buckle,  i,  p.  336)  when  he  wrote  his  Treatise  on  Vulgar  Errors  :  *  That  two  suns 
or  moons  should  appear,  is  not  worth  the  wonder.  But  that  the  same  should  fall  out 
at  the  point  of  some  decisive  action,  that  these  two  should  make  but  one  line  in  the 
book  of  fate,  and  stand  together  in  the  great  Ephemerides  of  God,  besides  the  phil¬ 
osophical  assignment  of  the  cause,  it  may  admit  a  Christian  apprehension  in  the  sig- 
nality  ’  (i,  2).  We  learn  also  from  Bishop  Burnet  that  Lord  Shaftesbury  believed  in 
astrology,  and  thought  that  the  souls  of  men  live  in  the  stars. 


52 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  iL 


treason ;  and  the  bond  cracked  ’twixt  son  and  father.  This 
villain  of  mine  comes  under  the  prediftion;  there’s  son 
against  father;  the  king  falls  from  bias  of  nature;  there’s  105 
father  against  child.  We  have  seen  the  best  of  our  time ; 
machinations,  hollowness,  treachery  and  all  ruinous  dis¬ 
orders  follow  us  disquietly  to  our  graves.  Find  out  this 
villain,  Edmund;  it  shall  lose  thee  nothing;  do  it  carefully. 

And  the  noble  and  true-hearted  Kent  banished !  his  offence,  1 10 
honesty !  ’Tis  strange.  [Exit. 

Edm.  This  is  the  excellent  foppery  of  the  world,  that 


103.  and  the  bond]  the  bond  Qq. 

’ twixt ]  betweene  Qq,  Cap.  Mai. 
Steev.  Bos.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  Ktly. 

103-10S.  This  villain. ..graves.]  Om. 
Qq. 

105.  bias]  by  as  FXF3.  by  as  Fa.  biafs 


111.  honesty]  konejl  Qq. 

’  Tis  strange.]  Jlrange Jhange  l 
Qt.  yi range,  Jlra?ige !  Qx,  Cap.  Steev. 
Ec.  Var.  Sing. 

[Exit.]  Om.  Qq. 

112.  Scene  vm.  Pope  +  ,Jen. 


10S.  disquietly]  Delius  :  This  is  used  causatively. 

109.  lose  thee]  Note  the  change  to  the  more  affectionate  « thee.’  See  also  IV, 
vi,  30. — Ed. 

1 12.  Warburton;  In  Shakespeare’s  best  plays,  besides  the  vices  that  arise  from 
the  subject,  there  is  generally  some  peculiar  prevailing  folly,  principally  ridiculed, 
that  runs  through  the  whole  piece.  Thus,  in  The  Tenipest,  the  lying  disposition  of 
travellers,  and  in  As  You  Like  It,  the  fantastick  humour  of  courtiers  are  exposed  and 
satirized  with  infinite  pleasantry.  In  like  manner,  in  this  play  of  Lear,  the  dotages 
cf  judicial  astrology  ate  severely  ridiculed.  I  fancy,  was  the  date  of  its  first  per¬ 
formance  well  considered,  it  would  be  found  that  something  or  other  happened  at 
that  time  which  gave  a  more  than  ordinary  run  to  this  deceit,  as  these  words  seem  to 
intimate  :  ‘  I  am  thinking,  brother,  of  a  prediction  I  read  this  other  day,  what  should 
follow  these  eclipses.’  However  this  be,  an  impious  cheat,  which  had  so  little  foun¬ 
dation  in  nature  or  reason,  so  detestable  an  original,  and  such  fatal  consequences  on 
the  manners  of  the  people,  who  were  at  that  time  strangely  besotted  with  it,  cer¬ 
tainly  deserved  the  severest  lash  of  satire.  It  was  a  fundamental  in  this  noble  science, 
that  whatever  seeds  of  good  dispositions  the  infant  unborn  might  be  endowed  with, 
either  from  nature,  or  traductively  from  its  parents,  yet  if,  at  the  time  of  its  birth, 
the  delivery  was  by  any  casualty  so  accelerated  or  retarded  as  to  fall  in  with  the 
predominancy  of  a  malignant  constellation,  that  momentary  influence  would  entirely 
change  its  nature,  and  bias  it  to  all  the  contrary  ill  qualities.  So  wretched  and  mon¬ 
strous  an  opinion  did  it  set  out  with.  But  the  Italians,  to  whom  we  owe  this,  as 
well  as  most  other  unnatural  crimes  and  follies  of  these  latter  ages,  fomented  its 
original  impiety  to  the  most  detestable  height  of  extravagance.  Petrus  Aponensis, 
an  Italian  physician  of  the  13th  century,  assures  us  that  those  prayers  which  are 
made  to  God  when  .the  moon  is  in  conjunction  with  Jupiter  in  the  Dragon’s  tail,  are 
infallibly  heard.  .  . .  The  great  Milton,  with  a  just  indignation  of  this  impiety,  hath,  in 
his  Paradise  Regained  (Book  IV,  383),  satirized  it  in  a  very  beautiful  manner,  by 


ACT  I,  sc.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


53 


when  we  are  sick  in  fortune, — often  the  surfeit  of  our  own 
behaviour, — we  make  guilty  of  our  disasters  the  sun,  the 
moon,  and  stars;  as  if  we  were  villains  on  necessity,  fools  ilj> 

1 1 3.  surfeit]  Qr  furfet  Qa.  furfets  the  stars  Qq  et  cet.  Starres  F,F  F  . 
F,F2F3.  furfeits  F4,  Rowe+,  Sch.  115.  on]  Ff+,  Cap.  Knt, Sch.  byQ q 

1 15.  stars']  F4,  Rowe+,  Knt,  Sch.  et  cet. 


putting  these  reveries  into  the  mouth  of  the  devil. . . .  Nor  could  the  licentious  Rabelais 
himself  forbear  to  ridicule  this  impious  dotage,  which  he  does  with  exquisite  address 
and  humour,  where  in  the  fable  which  he  so  agreeably  tells  from  Hisop  of  the  man 
who  applied  to  Jupiter  for  the  loss  of  his  hatchet,  he  makes  those  who,  on  the  poor 
man’s  good  success,  had  projected  to  trick  Jupiter  by  the  same  petition,  a  kind  of 
astrologic  atheists,  who  ascribed  this  good  fortune  that  they  imagined  they  were  now 
all  going  to  partake  of,  to  the  influence  of  some  rare  conjunction  and  configuration 
of  the  stars.  ‘  Hen,  hen,  dirent  ilz — Et  doncques  telle  est  au  temps  present  la 
revolution  des  Cieulx,  la  constellation  des  Astres,  et  aspect  des  Planetes,  que  qui- 
conques  coingn£e  perdra  soubdain  deuiendra  ainsi  riche?’ — Nou.  Prol.  du  IV 
Livre. — But  to  return  to  Sh.  So  blasphemous  a  delusion,  therefore,  it  became  the 
honesty  of  our  poet  to  expose.  But  it  was  a  tender  point,  and  required  managing. 
For  this  impious  juggle  had  in  his  time  a  kind  of  religious  reverence  paid  to  it.  It 
was  therefore  to  be  done  obliquely;  and  the  circumstances  of  the  scene  furnished 
him  as  good  an  opportunity  as  he  could  wish.  The  persons  in  the  drama  are  all 
Pagans,  so  that  as,  in  compliance  to  custom,  his  good  characters  were  not  to  speak 
ill  of  judicial  astrology,  they  could  on  account  of  their  religion  give  no  reputation 
to  it.  But  in  order  to  expose  it  the  more,  he  with  great  judgement  makes  these 
Pagans  fatalists,  as  appears  by  these  words  of  Lear,  ‘  By  all  the  operations  of  the 
orbs,  From  whom  we  do  exist  and  cease  to  be/  For  the  doctrine  of  fate  is  the  true 
foundation  of  judicial  astrology.  Having  thus  discredited  it  by  the  very  commen¬ 
dations  given  to  it,  he  was  in  no  danger  of  having  his  direct  satire  against  it  mis¬ 
taken,  by  its  being  put  (as  he  was  obliged,  both  in  paying  regard  to  custom  and  in 
following  nature)  into  the  mouth  of  the  villain  and  atheist,  especially  when  he  has 
added  .such  force  of  reason  to  his  ridicule,  in  the  words  referred  to  in  the  beginning 
of  the  note.  COLERIDGE :  Thus  scorn  and  misanthropy  are  often  the  anticipations 
and  mouthpieces  of  wisdom  in  the  detection  of  superstitions.  Both  individuals  and 
nations  may  be  free  from  such  prejudices  by  being  below  them,  as  well  as  by  rising 
above  them. 

1 1 2.  foppery]  See  note  on  ‘fops,’  line  14. 

1 13.  surfeit]  Collier:  Is  there  not  room  to  suspect  that  Sh.  may  have  written 
forfeit — i.  e.  the  penalty  of  our  own  misconduct.  Schmidt  {Zur  Textkritik,  See., 
p.  19)  follows  the  plural  of  the  Ff,  and  thinks  that  only  a  blind  prejudice  in  favour 
of  the  Qq  can  give  preference  to  the  singular.  In  his  ed.  Schmidt  refers  to  the 
similar  passage  in  Rich.  II:  II,  ii,  84, « Now  comes  the  sick  hour  that  his  surfeit 
made.’ 

1 15.  stars]  I  prefer  the  reading  of  the  Ff,  because  particular  stars  are  referred 
to,  not  *  the  stars  ’  in  general. — Ed. 

1 15.  on  necessity]  Schmidt  {Zur  Textkritik ,  &c.,  p.  19):  Usage  is  in  favour 
of  by,  but  ‘  on  ’  is  Shakespearian.  ‘  On  necessity  ’  occurs  twice  in  close  succession 
in  Love's  Lab.  L.  I,  i,  149,  155;  *  by  necessity’  is  found  nowhere  else  in  Sh.  He 

5* 


54 


KING  LEAR 


[act  r.  ac.  ii. 


by  heavenly  compulsion,  knaves,  thieves,  and  treacners.  by  Ji6 
spherical  predominance,  drunkards,  liars,  and  adulterers,  by 
an  enforced  obedience  of  planetary  influence  ,  and  all  that 
we  are  evil  in,  by  a  divine  thrusting  on.  An  admirable 
evasion  of  whoremaster  man,  to  lay  his  goatish  dispo-  120 
sition  to  the  charge  of  a  star !  My  father  compounded 
with  my  mother  under  the  dragon's  tail,  and  my  nativity 
was  under  Ursa  major;  so  that  it  follows  1  am  rough  and 
lecherous.  Tut,  I  should  have  been  that  I  am,  had  the 
maidenliest  star  in  the  firmament  twinkled  on  my  bastard-  125 
izing.  Edgar — 


1 1 6.  treat  hers"]  trecherers  Qq.  treach¬ 
erous  Pope  4  .  trechers  Cap. 

1 1 7.  spherical ]  Sphericall  F,.  Sphceri- 
call  Fa.  fpirituall  Qq. 

120,  121.  lay. .. star]  Iry  his  polish  dif- 
pofion  to  the  charg  of  hars  Q3- 

disposition  to']  difpofition  on  Ff  4- , 
Knt,  Del.  Sta.  Sch. 

121.  charge]  change  Warb. 

a  star]Jlars  Qs,  Cap.  Jen.  Coll.  i. 
Starres  Qz. 

124.  lecherous]  treacherous  Theob. 
conj.  (withdrawn). 

Tut]  Jen.  Fut  Qq.  Ora.  Ff  + , 
Cap.  Knt,  Sch. 

that]  what  Pope  4 


125.  maidenliest]  maidenlejl  QqF,Ft 
in]  of  Qq. 

bastardizing]  bajlardy  Qq 

126,  127.  Edgar — ...And  pat]  Jen. 
(subs.)  Edgar ,  Enter  Edgar.  dr»  out 
Q2  Edgar ;  and  out  (Enter  Edgar,  in 
margin)  Qt.  Enter  Edgar.  Pat:  Ff4, 
Knt,  Del.  Dyce  i.  Sch.  Enter  Edgar, 
Edgar  !  Pat;  Cap.  Edgar —  Enter  Ed¬ 
gar.  Pat! —  Steev  ’73.  Edgar !  pat 
Dyce  ii. 

Enter...]  After  Bedlam,  line  129, 
Dyce  ii,  Sta.  Huds. 

126-129.  Edgar — ...divisions!]  As 

*  Aside’  by  Cap. 

126.  Scene  ix.  Pope  4- 


has  an  unmistakable  preference  for  the  prepositions  •  on  ’  and  ‘  upon  ’  to  express  that 
which  gives  the  motive  or  impulse  to  anything.  Thus,  in  the  following  examples, 
where  in  popular  speech  other  prepositions  would  be  used :  R.  of  Z.,  186,  *  he  doth 
debate  What  following  sorrow,  may  on  this  arise.’  Meas.for  Meas.  IV,  i,  72 :  ‘hus¬ 
band  on  a  pre-contract.’  King  fohn,  V,  i,  28  :  ‘  it  should  be  on  constraint.’  Rich. 
II  *  I,  i,  9  :  *  If  he  appeal  the  duke  on  ancient  malice,  or  ...  on  some  known  ground 
of  treachery.’  Rich.  Ill :  IV,  i,  4;  Ham.  V,  ii,  406  [Glo.  ed.]  ;  Ant.  &•  Cleop.  Ill, 
xi,  68  ;  Mer.  of  Ven.  IV,  i,  104:  I  Hen.  IV:  II,  iv,  331. 

1 16.  treachers]  Dyce  (Gloss.):  Traitors. 

418.  influence]  Schmidt:  Used  by  Sh.  only  in  the  sense  of  planetary  influence. 

121.  to  the  charge]  Schmidt  adheres  to  the  Ff,  although,  as  he  .confesses,  ‘on 
the  charge  ’  is  contrary  not  only  to  present  usage,  but  also  to  Shakespearian.  •  ‘  But 
this  is  no  reason  why  we  should  prefer  “  to ”  of  the  Qq.  “To  lay  something  on  one  ” 
is  a  very  common  expression  in  Sh.,  and  we  have  in  the  present  passage  a  confusion 
of  construction  which  is  not  unusual.  In  Mer.  of  Ven.  Ill,  iv,  66  :  “  I’ll  speak  be¬ 
tween  the  change  of  man  and  boy” — i.  e.  as  if  I  were  between  man  and  boy.’ 

124.  Tut]  Dyce:  Fut  of  the  Qq  seems  to  be  a  misprint  for  ‘  Tut,’  rather  than 
intended  for  Foot  or  ’  Sfoot. 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


55 


Enter  Edgar. 

And  pat  he  comes  like  the  catastrophe  of  the  old  comedy.  1 27 
My  cue  is  villanous  melancholy,  with  a  sigh  like  Tom  o’ 
Bedlam.  Oh,  these  eclipses  do  portend  these  divisions!  fa, 
sol,  la,  mi.  130 

Edg.  How,  now,  brother  Edmund!  what  serious  con¬ 
templation  are  you  in? 

Edm.  I  am  thinking,  brother,  of  a  predi£tion  I  read  this 
other  day,  what  should  follow  these  eclipses. 

« 

128.  My  cue]  mine  Qq.  129,  130.  fa,.. .mi.]  Fa, — Sol,  La,  Me. 

sigh]  fighe  Ft.  fdh  Qf.  Ff.  Om.  Qq. 

Tom  o']  them  of  Qq.  130.  [Humming.  Han. 

129.  do  portend]  portend  Pope  +  . 


127.  catastrophe]  Heath:  That  is,  just  as  the  circumstance  which  decides  the 
catastrophe  of  a  play  intervenes  on  the  very  nick  of  time,  when  the  action  is  wound 
up  to  its  crisis,  and  the  audience  are  impatiently  expecting  it. 

128.  cue]  Bolton  Corney  ( N .  &  Qu.  5  Aug.  1865)  cites  the  following  dehnt* 
tion  of  this  word  from  Butler’s  English  Grammar,  1634:  ‘  Q.  A  note  of  entrance 
for  actors,  because  it  is  the  first  letter  of  quando  —  when,  shewing  when  to  enter  and 
speak.’  Wedgwood  adopts  this  definition,  but  also  cites  Minsheu:  *  A  qu,  a  term 
used  among  stage-players,  a  Lat.  qualis  i.  e.  at  what  manner  of  word  the  actors  are 
to  begin  to  speak,  one  after  another  has  done  his  speech.’  The  Fr.  term  is  replique . 
Wright  apparently  derives  it  from  Fr.  queue,  a  tail. 

129.  fa,  sol,  la,  mi]  Dr  Burney:  Sh.  shows  by  the  context  that  he  was  well 
acquainted  with  the  property  of  these  syllables  in  solmization,  which  imply  a  series 
of  sounds  so  unnatural  that  ancient  musicians  prohibited  their  use.  The  monkish 
writers  on  music  say :  mi  contra  fa  est  diabolus  :  the  interval  fa  mi,  including  a 
tritonus,  or  sharp  4th,  consisting  of  three  tones  without  the  intervention  of  a  semi¬ 
tone,  expressed  in  the  modem  scale  by  the  letters  F  G  A  B,  would  form  a  musical/ 
phrase  extremely  disagreeable  to  the  ear.  Edmund,  speaking  of  eclipses  as  portents 
and  prodigies,  compares  the  dislocation  of  events,  the  times  being  out  of  joint,  to 
the  unnatural  and  offensive  sounds,  *  fa  sol  la  mi.’  White  :  According  to  modem 
Italian  solmization,  fa  sol  la  si;  i.  e.  a  progression  through  the  interval  of  a  fourth, 
ending  upon  the  seventh  or  leading  note  of  the  scale;  which,  unless  followed  by  the 
tonic,  or  used  for  some  very  special  effect,  is  a  most  distracting  figure,  based  upon 
the  most  poignant  of  discords.  In  Shakespeare’s  time,  and  until  a  comparatively 
recent  date,  the  syllables  for  solmization,  instead  of  do  re  mi  fa  sol  la  si,  were  fa  sol 
la  fa  sol  la  mi.  Sh.  often  shows  that  he  was  a  musician  as  well  as  a  lover  of  music. 
Wright  :  For  Dr  Burney’s  note,  Mr  Chappell  assures  me,  there  is  not  the  slightest 
foundation.  Edmund  is  merely  singing  to  himself  in  order  not  to  seem  to  observe 
Edgar’s  approach.  [Just  as  Mistress  Quickly  sings  *  And  down,  down,  adown-a  ’  in 
Merry  Wives,  I,  iii,  44,  when  Doctor  Caius  is  approaching. — Ed.]  Moberly  :  The 
true  explanation  probably  is  that  the  sequence  ‘  fa  sol  la  mi  ’  (with  *  mi  ’  descending) 
is  like  a  deep  sigh,  as  may  be  easily  heard  by  trial. 


5& 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  ii. 


Edg.  Do  you  busy  yourself  with  that?  135 

Edm.  I  promise  you,  the  effects  he  writes  of  succeed 
unhappily ; *  *  as  of  unnaturalness  between  the  child  and  the 

*  parent;  death,  dearth,  dissolutions  of  ancient  amities ;  di- 

*  visions  in  state,  menaces  and  malediflions  against  king  and 

*  nobles;  needless  diffidences,  banishment  of  friends,  dissi-  140 

*  pation  of  cohorts,  nuptial  breaches,  and  I  know  not  what. 

*  Edg.  How  long  have  you  been  a  sedtary  astronomical  ? 

*  Edm.  Come,  come,*  when  saw  you  my  father  last  ? 

Edg.  The  night  gone  by. 

Edm.  Spake  you  with  him  ?  145 

Edg.  Ay,  two  hours  together 

Edm.  Parted  you  in  good  terms?  Found  you  no  dis¬ 
pleasure  in  him  by  word  nor  countenance? 

Edg.  None  at  all. 

Edm.  Bethink  yourself  wherein  you  may  have  offended  150 
him;  and  at  my  entreaty  forbear  his  presence  until  some 


135.  with]  about Qq,  Jen.  Glo + ,  Mob. 

136.  you]  Om.  FsF3F4. 

writes]  writ  Qq,  Jan.  Cam.  Wr. 
1 37-143.  as  of. ..Come,  come;]  Om. 
Ff+,  Cap. 

138.  amities]  Q,.  armies  Q2. 

141.  cohorts]  courts  Johns.  Steev.  ’73, 
Coll.  iii.  co?nforts  Jen. 

144.  The]  Ff+ ,  Cap.  Knt,  Coll.  Dyce, 


Sta.  Wh.  Huds.  Sch.  IVky  the  Qx. 
Why,  the  Q,  et  cet. 

146.  Ay,]  /,  Ff.  Om.  Qq. 

148.  nor]  Ff,  Rowe,  Dyce,  Sta.  Sch. 
or  Qq  et  cet. 

150.  may]  Om.  F3F4+ 

151.  until ]  Ff  +  ,  Jen.  Ec.  Sta.  Sch. 
till  Qq  et  cet. 


136.  Johnson  :  In  this  speech  Edmund,  with  the  common  craft  of  fortune-tellers, 
mingles  the  past  and  future,  and  tells  of  the  future  only  what  he  already  foreknows 
by  confederacy,  or  can  attain  by  probable  conjecture. 

136.  succeed]  Wright:  In  Elizabethan  English  the  ‘success’  of  an  action  was 
the  issue  or  consequence,  good  or  bad.  Hence  the  word  was  used  with  a  qualifying 
adjective.  See  Joshua,  i,  8  :  ‘  Then  thou  shalt  have  good  success.’ 

137-143.  As  an  additional  proof  of  the  spuriousness  of  these  lines  SCHMIDT  says 
that  there  are  found  in  them  no  less  than  six  hapax  legomena,  that  is,  wards  nowhere 
else  to  be  found  in  Sh. — e.  g.  1  unnaturalness,’  ‘  menace  ’  (as  a  noun),  ‘  malediction,’ 

*  dissipation,’  ‘  cohort,’  and  ‘  astronomical.’ 

140.  diffidences]  Wright:  This  now  means  distrust  of  one’s  self.  Here  it  sig¬ 
nifies  distrust  of  others.  Compare  King  John,  I,  i,  65. 

141.  cohorts]  Johnson,  by  a  misprint  in  his  foot-note,  says,  that  the  Quarto  reads 
lourts.  Moberly  :  As  neither  of  these  words,  *  dissipation  of  cohorts,’  are  [sic, 
the  effect  of  a  constant  study  of  Sh.  ? — Ed.]  elsewhere  used  by  Sh.,  we  may  sus¬ 
pect  corruption.  Perhaps  the  original  may  have  been  disproportion  of  thoughts, 
that  is,  *  unnatural  thoughts,’  as  in  Olh.  Ill,  iii.  Schmidt  :  This  cannot  be  ex¬ 
plained  by  anything  in  Sh. 


KING  LEAR 


ACT  I,  SC.  ii.] 


57 


little  time  hath  qualified  the  heat  of  his  displeasure,  which  1 52 
at  this  instant  so  rageth  in  him  that  with  the  mischief  of 
your  person  it  would  scarcely  allay. 

Edg.  Some  villain  hath  done  me  wrong.  155 

Edm.  That’s  my  fear.  I  pray  you,  have  a  continent 
forbearance  till  the  speed  of  his  rage  goes  slower  and,  as  I 
say,  retire  with  me  to  my  lodging,  from  whence  I  will  fitly 
bring  you  to  hear  my  lord  speak ;  pray  ye,  go ;  there’s  my 
key;  if  you  do  stir  abroad,  go  armed.  160 

Edg ,  Armed,  brother  ? 

Edm.  Brother,  I  advise  you  to  the  best;  go  armed;  I 
am  no  honest  man  if  there  be  any  good  meaning  toward 
you.  I  have  told  you  what  I  have  seen  and  heard;  but 
faintly,  nothing  like  the  image  and  horror  of  it;  pray  you,  165 
away. 

Edg.  Shall  I  hear  from  you  anon  ? 

Edm.  I  do  serve  you  in  this  business. —  [ Exit  Edgar. 

A  credulous  father,  and  a  brother  noble, 

Whose  nature  is  so  far  from  doing  harms  170 

That  he  suspefls  none ;  on  whose  foolish  honesty 
My  practices  ride  easy.  I  see  the  business. 


153.  with]  without  Han.  Cap. 

1 54.  person ]  parfon  Qx. 

scarcely ]  fcarce  Q,.  fcarfe  Qt. 
156-162.  f ear. ..Br  other, )f care  broth - 
er,  Qq. 

156,  162.  /...Edm.]  Om.  Qq. 

1 59.  pray  ye]  Ff,  Dyce  ii,  Sta.  Glo.  +  , 
Mob.  Huds.  Sch.  pray  you  Rowe  et 
cet. 

160,  1 61.  armed]  arm'd  Ff +  ,  Cap. 
Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Ec.  Sing.  Wh.  Ktly, 
Huds. 

162.  go  armed]  Om.  Ff+,  Knt,  Coll. 
Del.  Dyce,  Wh.  Ktly,  Sch. 


163.  toward]  Ff+,  Jen.  Knt,  Dyce, 
Sta.  Coll,  iii,  Sch.  towards  Qq.  et  cet. 

164.  165.  heard ;  but  faintly ,]  Glo. +  , 
Mob.  heard,  but  faintly,  Qq.  heard  but 
faintly,  Dyce.  heard :  But  faintly.  Ff. 
heard;  but  faintly  ;  Rowe,  heard,  but 
faintly ;  Pope  et  cet. 

165.  it;]  it,  Ff. 

168.  Scene  x.  Pope,  Han.  Warb. 
Johns.  Jen. 

I  do]  I  Pope  Han. 

[Exit  Edgar.]  After  line  167, 
QaFf,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 


153.  with  the  mischief]  Capell  (reading  without)'.  For  what  has  Edgar  to 
apprehepd  beyond  a  ‘  harm  of  his  person  *  ? — yet  ‘  with  ’  implies  a  harm  beyond  that, 
which  is  not  of  easy  conception.  JOHNSON:  I  believe  the  phrase  should  be  ‘that 
but  with  the,’  &c. 

168.  I  do]  Heath  :  If  we  read  I'll,  it  will  be  an  answer  to  the  question  Edgar 
asks  just  before  his  leaving  the  stage. 

172.  practices]  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  Contrivance,  artifice,  stratagem,  treachery,  con¬ 
spiracy. 


58 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  iii. 


Let  me,  if  not  by  birth,  have  lands  by  wit; 
All  with  me’s  meet  that  I  can  fashion  fit 


*73 

l Exit , 


Scene  III.  The  Duke  of  Albany's  palace. 


Writer  Goner  IL  and  Oswald,  her  steward. 


Gon.  Did  my  father  strike  my  gentleman  for  chiding  of 
his  Fool? 

Oszu.  Ay,  madam. 

Gon.  By  day  and  night  he  wrongs  me ,  every  hour 
He  flashes  into  one  gross  crime  or  other,  5 

That  sets  us  all  at  odds.  I’ll  not  endure  it. 

His  knights  grow  riotous,  and  himself  upbraids  us 
On  every  trifle.  When  he  returns  from  hunting, 

I  will  not  speak  with  him ;  say  I  am  sick. 

If  you  come  slack  of  former  services,  10 

You  shall  do  well;  the  fault  of  it  I’ll  answer. 

Oszu.  He’s  coming,  madam ;  I  hear  him. 

Gon.  Put  on  what  weary  negligence  you  please. 


174.  All  with  me' s']  All's  with  me 
Cap.  conj. 

Scene  iii.]  Scena  Tertia.  Ff  (Scaena 
Fs).  Scene  ii.  Rowe,  Ec.  Scene  xi. 
Pope  + ,  Jen. 

.The...]  Rowe.  A  room  in  the... 

Cap. 

Oswald,  her  Steward]  Coll.  Gentle¬ 
man.  Qt.  a  Gentleman.  Q2.  Steward.  Ff. 

3,  &c.  Osw.]  Coll.  Gent.  Qq.  Ste. 
or  Stew.  Ff. 

3.  Ay]  Rowe.  /  Ff.  Yes  Qq,  Jen. 


Glo.  +  ,  Mob. 

4.  night ]  night,  Ff,  Rowe,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Dyce.  night  l  Cap.  Steev. 
Var. 

me;]  me,  QqF,Fa. 

4,  5.  every. ..other,]  One  line,  Qq. 

7  upbraids]  obrayds  Q,.  uprabidi  Q3. 
8.  trifle.  IVhen]  trifle  when  Qq  (/«'• 

Q,). 

12.  [Horns  within.  Cap. 

13-16.  Put  on... one,]  Prose,  Qq. 


I.  of]  For  instances  of  ‘of’  following  verbal  nouns,  see  ABBOTT,- §  178. 

3.  Oswald]  Coleridge:  The  steward  should  be  placed  in  exact  antithesis  to 
Kent,  as  the  only  character  of  utter  irredeemable  baseness  in  Sh.  Even  in  this,  the 
judgement  and  invention  of  the  poet  are  very  observable; — for  what  else  could  the 
willing  tool  of  a  Goneril  be?  Not  a  vice  but  this  of  baseness  was  left  open  to  him. 

4.  By  day  and  night]  Malone  cites  Ham.  I,  v,  164:  ‘O  day  and  night,  but 
this  is  wondrous  strange  !’  in  support  of  the  exclamation-mark  introduced  by  Capell ; 
but  Whalley  and  Steevens  rightly  interpret  these  words  in  their  ordinary  sense, 
signifying  always,  every  way,  as  appears,  says  Wright,  from  ‘every  hour’  which 
follows. 

13.  weary]  As  You  Like  It  {Gent.  Mag.  lx,  p.  402) :  It  is  extremely  probable 
that  Sh.  wrote  ‘  wary  negligence.’ 


ACT  I,  SC.  iii.] 


KING  LEAR 


59 


You  and  your  fellows;  I’d  have  it  come  to  question. 

If  he  distaste  it,  let  him  to  my  sister,  1 5 

Whose  mind  and  mine,  I  know,  in  that  are  one, 

*  Not  to  be  over-ruled.  Idle  old  man, 

*  That  still  would  manage  those  authorities 

*  That  he  hath  given  away !  Now,  by  my  life, 

*  Old  fools  are  babes  again,  and  must  be  used  20 

*  With  checks  as  flatteries,  when  they  are  seen  abused.* 


14.  fellows ]  fellow  foments  Qt.  fel- 

low-femanls  Qa.  * 

Pd]  Pde  FtFa.  i'de  Qt.  IdeQ^. 

to]  in  Qq. 

15.  distaste]  di/like  Qq,  Cap.  Steev. 
Ec.  Var.  Glo.  Mob. 

my]  our  Qq,  Glo.  + ,  Mob. 

I"-2i.  Not  to  be..xibused.]  Verse  first 
by  Theob.  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

20.  fools]  folks  Warb.  Jen. 

21.  checks. ..abused]  Qq.  checks ,  like 
fatt'rers  yohen  they're  seen  t'  abuse  us 
Theob.  checks,  as  flatteries  when  they're 
seen  abus'd  Johns.  Ec.  checks,  not  flat¬ 


teries  when  they  are  seen  abus'd  Cap. 
checks,  by  flatteries  when  they're  seen 
abused  Jen.  checks,  as  flatteries, — when 
they  are  seen  abused  Mai.  Steev.  Bos. 
Knt,  Del.  Sing,  checks ;  as  flatteries , 
when  they  are  seen ,  abused  Coll.  Wh. 
checks  as  flatteries,  —  when  they  are 
[1 they're  Dyce  ii,  Huds.]  seen  abused 
Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  Huds.  checks  ;  as flat • 
teries,  when  they  are  seen,  are  abus'd 
Ktly.  checks,  when  flatteries  are  seen 
abused  Sch.  conj.  checks  of  flatteries 
when  they're  seen  abused  Badham.* 


15.  let  him  to]  For  instances  of  the  omission  of  the  verb  of  motion  see  Abbott, 
§§  3°,  4°5»  and  I,  i>  283 ;  also  Ham.  I,  i.  26  and  III,  iii,  4. 

17-21.  That  these  lines,  which  are  printed  as  prose  in  the  Qq,  may  be  easily 
arranged  metrically  is  a  warrant,  says  Schmidt,  of  their  correctness. 

17.  Idle]  Schmidt  (Lex.)  :  Wanting  becoming  seriousness  and  gravity,  thought¬ 
less,  silly,  absurd,  foolish. 

20,  21.  Old . . .  abused]  Theobald  (Nichols’s  Lit.  Hist,  ii,  371)  suggests  abuses, 
but  did  not  repeat  the  suggestion  in  his  ed.  WarburtoN:  Common  sense  tells 
us  Sh.  must  have  wrote :  ‘  Old  Folks  are  . . .  With  checks,  not  flatt'ries  when  . . . 
abus’d’ — i.  e.,  old  folks  being  grown  children  again,  they  should' be  used  as  we 
use  children,  with  ‘checks’  when  we  find  the  little  *  flatteries’  we  employ  to  quiet 
them  are  ‘abus’d’  by  their  becoming  more  peevish  by  indulgence.  Johnson: 
Old  men  must  be  treated  with  checks,  when  as  they  are  seen  to  be  deceived  with 
flatteries ;  or,  when  they  are  once  weak  enough  to  be  seen  abused  by  flatteries,  they 
are  then  weak  enough  to  be  used  with  checks.  There  is  a  play  of  the  words  used  and 
abused.  To  abuse  is,  in  our  author,  very  frequently  the  same  as  to  deceive.  This 
construction  is  harsh  and  ungrammatical ;  Sh.  perhaps  thought  it  vicious,  and  chose 
to  throw  away  the  lines  rather  than  correct  them,  nor  would  now  thank  the  officious¬ 
ness  of  his  editors,  who  restore  what  they  do  not  understand.  Tyrwhitt:  Old 
fools — must  be  used  with  checks,  as  well  as  flatteries,  when  they  (i.e.  flatteries)  are 
seen  to  be  abused.  Dyce  ( Remarks ,  &c.,  p.  222) :  ‘As’  meaning  as  well  as.  Hal- 
LIWELL:  The  rest  of  the.line,  after  the  word  ‘checks,’  loses  its  reference  to  the  child, 
and  merely  alludes  to  the  Old  man  as  king  used  to  be  flattered,  which  flatteries,  being 
felt  by  him,  are  abused,  I  have  very  little  doubt,  however,  but  that  here  there  is 


6o 


KING  LEAR 


[ACT  I,  sc.  iv. 


Remember  what  I  have  said. 

Osw.  Well,  madahi.  22 

Gon.  And  let  his  knights  have  colder  looks  among  you ; 
What  grows  of  it,  no  matter;  advise  your  fellows  so. 

*  I  would  breed  from  hence  occasions,  and  I  shall,  25 

*  That  I  may  speak.* *  I’ll  write  straight  to  my  sister, 

To  hold  my  very  course.  Prepare  for  dinner.  [Exeunt . 


Scene  IV.  A  hall  in  the  same. 

Enter  Kent,  disguised. 

Kent.  If  but  as  well  I  other  accents  borrow, 
That  can  my  speech  defuse,  my  good  intent 


22.  have  said]  tel! you  Qq,  Jen.  Glo.  + , 
Mob.  have  said  to  you  Ktly. 

Well]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Knt,  Coll. 
Del.  Sing.  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Wh.  Ktly,  Glo. 
Mob.  Sch.  Very  well  Qq  et  cet. 

23,  24.  And  let. ...so.]  As  in  Cap. 
Verse  first  by  Han.  Prose,  QqFf+, 
Jen.  Knt. 

24.  ddvise]  arid  advise  Han.,  ending 
the  line  with  advise. 

25,  26.  I  would. ..speak.]  As  in  Cap. 
Prose,  Qq.  Om.  Ff  +  ,  Jen.  Knt. 

26,  27.  P  ll... dinner.]  As  in  Han. 
Prose,  QqFf. 

27.  very]  Qq.  Om.  Ff +, Knt, Coll. i, 
Del.  Sing.  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Wh.  Ktly,  Sch. 

Prepare]  goe  prepare  Qq,  Jen. 
Go  and  prepare  Han. 


27.  dinner]  dinner  now  Ktly. 

[Exeunt.]  Exit.  Qq. 

Scene  iv.]  Scena  Quarta.  Ff  (Serena 
F,).  Om.  Qq,  Rowe.  Scene  xii.  Pope, 
Han.  Scene  iii.  Ec. 

A  hall  in  the  same.]  Mai.  An 
outer  Hall  in  the  same.  Cap.  An  open 
Place  before  the  Palace.  Theob. 

Enter  Kent,  disguised.]  Rowe.  Enter 
Kent.  QqFf.. 

1-7.  Prose,  Qq. 

1.  well]  will  Fx. 

2.  That. ..defuse]  QqFf,  Glo.  + ,  Mob. 
Sch.  And. ..disuse  Rowe,  Pope,  Johns. 
And. ..diffuse  Theob.  Han.  Warb.  That 
...deface  Cap.  That. ..diffuse  Jen.  et  cet. 
That. ..disguise  Jen.  conj.  That. ..defect 
Anon.* 


either  an  omission  or  a  gross  corruption.  Moberly:  ‘When  they  are  seen  abused’ 
<=  when  they  are  so  plainly  misguided.  If  ‘  checks  as  flatteries’  is  the  right  reading, 
the  meaning  must  be  *  checks  as  well  as  flatteries.*  But  may  not  Sh.  have  written 

*  with  checks  as  flatly ’  ? — i.  e.  *  as  decidedly  as  we  restrain  children.’  This  would 
easily  corrupt  into  *  flattery.’ 

23-27.  Knight:  This  speech  has  been  arranged  metrically;  but  so  regulated,  it 
reads  very  harshly. 

24.  Moberly  :  The  vixenish  tone  of  Goneril  makes  the  line  defy  scanning. 

25,  26.  Schmidt  says  these  lines  were  struck  out  in  the  Ff  because  they  merely 
repeat  the  idea  contained  in  line  14;  but  that  they  are  Shakespeare’s  is  clear  from 
the  metre,  notwithstanding  that  the  Qq  print  them  as  prose. 

2.  defuse]  Theobald  was  the  first  to  restore  *  defuse,’  but  he  spelled  it  diffuse , 
and  it  is  not  clear  from  his  note  that  he  had  a  correct  notion  of  its  meaning.  He 


ACT  1,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


61 


May  carry  through  itself  to  that  full  issue 

For  which  I  razed  my  likeness.  Now,  banish’d  Kent, 

If  thou  canst  serve  where  thou  dost  stand  condemn’d,  5 

So  may  it  come,  thy  master,  whom  thou  lovest. 

Shall  find  thee  full  of  labours. 


Horns  within.  Enter  Lear,  Knights,  and  Attendants. 


Lear.  Let  me  not  stay  a  jot  for  dinner;  go  get  it  ready. — 
{Exit  an  Attendant .]  „  How  now !  what  art  thou  ? 

Kent.  A  man,  sir. 


4.  rased]  raz'd  Qx.  rated  Q2.  raiz'd 
F.F  .  rais'd  FF. 

12  3  4 

Now ]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

6.  So... come,]  Om.  Qq. 

come,  thy]  coma.  Thy  Johns,  come! 
thy  Cap.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Coll.  Del.  Wh. 
fitly,  Huds.  come  thy  Knt. 

7.  thee  full ]  the  full  Qq. 
labours]  labour  Qq. 


10 

Horns  within.]  Om.  Qq. 

Knights,  and  Attendants.]  Rowe, 
and  Attendants.  Ff.  Om.  Qq.  Gentle¬ 
man,  Knights,  and  Attendants.  Cap. 

9.  Exit  an  Attendant.]  Mai.  To  an 
Attendant,  who  goes  out.  Cap.  Om. 
QqFf. 

[To  Kent.  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 


apparently  thinks  that  Kent  will  disguise  his  speech  by  diffusing — i.  e.  by  spreading 
it  out.  Hanmer  adopted  Theobald’s  spelling,  and  gives  the  true  definition :  *  to 
disguise.’  This  interpretation  and  spelling  make  Capell  indignant,  and  he  urges 
his  emendation  deface ,  thus :  ‘  If  I  can  but  deface  my  speech  by  a  strange  accent  as 
effectually  as  I  have  defac’d  my  person  by  a  strange  attire,  then  my  good  intent  may 
do  so  and  so :  now  for  this  deface  and  defac'd  substitute  diffuse  and  diffus'd ,  and  see 
how  you  like  it;  and  if  diffuse  would  have  suited  in  this  respect,  it  had  not  been 
given  to  Kent,  whose  language  is  more  natural.’  Steevens  :  We  must  suppose  that 
Kent  advances  looking  on  his  disguise.  To  diffuse  speech  signifies  to  disorder  it, 
and  so  to  disguise  it.  It  may,  however,  mean  to  speak  broad  with  a  clownish  accent. 
Dyce  {Rem.  223)  cites  ‘  Dyffuse  harde  to  be  vnderstande,  diffuse.' — Palsgrave’s 
Lesclar.  de  la  Lang.  Fr.,  1530.  ‘  But  oft  by  it  [logick]  a  thing  playne,  bright  and 
pure,  Is  made  diffuse,  vnknowen,  harde,  and  obscure.’ — Barclay’s  Ship  of  Fooles,  ed. 
1570.  ‘  Kent  does  not  wish  to  render  his  speech  difficult  to  be  understood,  but  merely 
to  disorder  it,  to  disguise  it,  as  he  had  disguised  his  person.*  Wright  cites  instances 
of  the  use  of  ‘defuse’  from  Lyiy’s  Euphues  (ed.  Arber),  p.  64;  and  Annin’s  Nest  of 
Ninnies,  p.  6  (Shaksp.  Soc.  ed.).  For  other  instances  from  Sh.,  see  Concordance 
or  Schmidt’s  Lex. 

6.  So  .  .  .  come,]  To  Capell  this  appeared  to  be  a  wish  and  parenthetical. 

7.  labours]  Capell  :  His  master  will  find  him  ready  for  any  hard  services,  and 
any  number  of  them.  Walker  {Crit.  i,  255) :  Perhaps  labour  of  the  Qq  is  right. 

7.  Lear]  Coleridge  :  In  Lear  old  age  is  itself  a  character, — its  natural  imper¬ 
fections  being  increased  by  lifelong  habits  of  receiving  a  prompt  obedience.  Any 
addition  of  individuality  would  have  Seen  unnecessary  and  painful;  for  the  relations 
of  others  to  him,  of  wondrous  fidelity  and  of  frightful  ingratitude,  alone  sufficiently 
distinguish  him.  Thus  Lear  becomes  the  open  and  ample  play-room  of  nature’s 
passions. 

6 


62 


KING  LEAF 


fACT  I,  SC.  iv. 


Lear.  What  dost  thou  profess?  What  wouldst  thou  IX 
with  us? 

Kent.  I  do  profess  to  be  no  less  than  I  seem ;  to  serve 
him  truly  that  will  put  me  in  trust ;  to  love  him  that  is  hon¬ 
est;  to  converse  with  him  that  is  wise  and  says  little;  to  fear  IS 
judgement;  to  fight  when  I  cannot  choose;  and  to  eat  no  fish. 

Lear.  What  art  thou  ? 

Kent.  A  very  honest-hearted  fellow,  and  as  poor  as  the 
king. 

Lear.  If  thou  be’st  as  poor  for  a  subject  as  he’s  for  a  20 
king,  thou  art  poor  enough.  What  wouldst  thou? 

Kent.  Service. 

Lear.  Who  wouldst  thou  serve  ? 

Kent.  You. 

Lear.  Dost  thou  know  me,  fellow  ?  25 


15.  and  says]  to  say  Warb.  Han.  and 
say  Steev.  ’S5. 

1 7.  art]  ere  Fa. 

20.  be' st ]  Ff  {bejl  Fa)  +  ,  Knt,  Dyce  i, 
Sta.  Sch.  be  Qq  et  cet. 


20.  he’s]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Knt,  Dyce 
i,  Sch.  he  is  Qq  et  cet. 

21.  thou  art ]  thar't  Qa. 

23.  Who]  Whom  F,F  F  +,  Cap.  Jen. 
Ec.  Coll.  Del.  Wh. 


II,  13.  profess]  Delius:  Lear  uses  this  in  the  sense  of  trade  or  calling.  Kent 
replies  in  the  sense  of  assertion. 

15.  converse]  Johnson:  This  signifies  immediately  and  properly  to  keep  com • 
pany,  not  to  discourse  or  talk. 

16.  judgement]  Capell  thinks  this  refers  simply  to  coming  before  a  judge; 
Eccles  and  Moberly  that  it  refers  to  the  last  Judgement. 

16.  eat  no  fish.]  Warburton:  In  Queen  Elizabeth’s  time  the  Papists  were 
esteemed,  and  with  good  reason,  enemies  to  the  government.  Hence  the  proverbial 
phrase  of,  *  He’s  an  honest  man,  and  eats  no  fish,'  to  signify  he’s  a  friend  to  the 
government  and  a  Protestant.  The  eating  fish,  on  a  religious  account,  being  then 
esteemed  such  a  badge  of  popery,  that  when  it  was  enjoined  for  a  season  by  act  of 
parliament,  for  the  encouragement  of  the  fish-towns,  it  was  thought  necessary  to 
declare  the  reason ;  hence  it  was  called  *  Cecil’s  fast.’  To  this  disgraceful  badge 
of  popery  Fletcher  alludes  in  his  Woman-Hater  [IV,  ii],  who  makes  the  courtezan 
say,  when  Lazarillo,  in  search  of  the  umbrana’s  head,  was  seized  at  her  house  by  the 
intelligencers  for  a  traitor:  ‘Gentlemen,  I  am  glad  you  have  discovered  him;  he 
should  not  have  eaten  under  my  roof  for  twenty  pounds ;  and  surely  I  did  not  like 
him  when  he  called  for  fish.’  And  Marston’s  Dutch  Courtezan  [I,  ii]  :  ‘I  trust  I 
am  none  of  the  wicked  that  eate  fish  a  Fridaies.’  [Dyce,  in  his  ed.  of  the  Woman- 
Hater,  cites  this  note  by  Warburton,  and  adds :  *  Perhaps  Warburton  is  right.’] 
Capell  thinks  that  this  means  simply  that  Kent  was  a  jolly  fellow,  and  no  lover 
of  such  meagre  diet  as  fish. 

23.  Who]  For  other  instances  of  ‘  who  ’  for  whom,  see  Abbott,  §  274. 


act  I,  sc.  iv.]  KING  LEAR  63 

Kent.  No,  sir;  but  you  have  that  in  your  countenance  26 
which  I  would  fain  call  master. 

Lear.  What’s  that  ? 

Kent.  Authority. 

Lear.  What  services  canst  thou  do  ?  30 

Kent.  I  can  keep  honest  counsel,  ride,  run,  mar  a  curi¬ 
ous  tale  in  telling  it,  and  deliver  a  plain  message  bluntly ; 
that  which  ordinary  men  are  fit  for,  I  am  qualified  in,  and 
the  best  of  me  is  diligence. 

Lear ;  How  old  art  thou  ?  35 

Kent.  Not  so  young,  sir,  to  love  a  woman  for  singing, 
nor  so  old  to  dote  on  her  for  any  thing ;  I  have  years  on  my 
back  forty-eight. 

Lear.  Follow  me;  thou  shalt  serve  me;  if  I  like  thee  no 
worse  after  dinner,  I  will  not  part  from  thee  yet. — Dinner,  40 
ho,  dinner !  Where’s  my  knave  ?  my  Fool  ? — Go  you,  and 
call  my  Fool  hither. —  [Exit  an  Attendant. 


Enter  Oswald, 

You,  you,  sirrah,  where’s  my  daughter? 
Osw.  So  please  you, — 


30.  thou]  Om.  Qr 

31.  counsel]  coun/aile  QqF,.  coun¬ 
fail  es  Fa.  counfels  F3F4  +  . 

34.  is  diligence ]  is,— diligence  Sta. 

36.  sir]  Om.  Qq. 

singing]  sighing  Anon.* 

39.  thou]  that  Fa. 

39,  40.  me ;  if... dinner,  /]  me,  if... 
dinner,  I  QqFf.  me,  if. ..dinner.  /Jen. 
Ec.  Sta.  me,  if  ...dinner ;  Sing. 

40,  61.  from. .. dinner !]  from  thee. 
Yet  no  dinner  ho  ?  dinner — Han. 


[Exit. 

42.  hither]  hether  Qq. 

[To  an  Attendant.  Cap. 

[Exit...]  Dyce. 

Enter  Oswald]  As  in  Cap.  En- 
ter  Steward  (after  datighter  ?)  QqFf+. 
Enter  Steward  (after  Fool?)  Johns.  Jen. 

43.  You,  you,]  You  you  F,Fa.  you 
Qq. 

44.  Osw.]  Coll.  Steward.  Qq.  Ste. 
or  Stew.  Ff. 

you,—]  you — QaFf.  you,  QI. 
[Exit.]  Om.  Qq 


31.  curious]  Schmidt:  Elegant,  nice.  Wright:  Elaborate. 

34.  diligence]  Particularly,  says  Schmidt,  applied  to  menial  services.  Compare 
Tam.  of  Sh.,  Ind.  i,  70.  Prospero  calls  Ariel  *  my  diligence  ’  because  he  has  so 
tealously  carried  .out  his  commands. 

36.  so  . .  .  to]  See  II,  iv,  11,  12;  Ham.  V,  ii,  16 ;  Macb.  II,  iii,  47;  III,  i,  87; 
and  Abbott,  §  281. 

42.  Davies  ( Dram .  Misc.  ii,  176)  gives  what  was  the  stage  business  in  his  time: 
‘He  [Oswald]  generally  enters  the  stage  in  a  careless,  disengaged  manner,  hum¬ 
ming  a  tune,  as  if  on  purpose  to  give  umbrage  to  the  king  by  his  neglect  of  him.* 


64 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  iv. 


Lear.  What  says  the  fellow  there?  Call  the  clotpoll  45 
back. — [Exit  a  Knight. ]  Where’s  my  Fool,  ho  ?  I  think 
the  world’s  asleep. — [Re-enter  Knighti]  How  now !  where’s 
that  mongrel  ? 

Knight.  He  says,  my  lord,  your  daughter  is  not  well. 

Lear.  Why  came  not  the  slave  back  to  me  when  I  called  50 
him? 

Knight.  Sir,  he  answered  me  in  the  roundest  manner, 
he  would  not. 

Lear.  He  would  not ! 

Knight.  My  lord,  I  know  not  what  the  matter  is ;  but,  5  5 
to  my  judgement,  your  highness  is  not  entertained  with  that 
ceremonious  affection  as  you  were  wont;  there’s  a  great 
abatement  of  kindness  appears  as  well  in  the  general  de¬ 
pendants  as  in  the  duke  himself  also  and  your  daughter. 

Lear.  Ha !  sayest  thou  so  ?  60 

Knight.  I  beseech  you,  pardon  me,  my  lord,  if  I  be 
mistaken ;  for  my  duty  cannot  be  silent  when  I  think  your 
highness  wronged. 

Lear.  Thou  but  rememberest  me  of  mine  own  concep¬ 
tion.  I  have  perceived  a  most  faint  negledt  of  late ;  which  65 


45.  clotpoir\  Steev.  Clotpole Ff+,Cap. 
Jen.  Mai.  Ec.  clat-pole  Qq.  clodpoll 
Johns.  Dyce. 

46.  [Exita  Knight.]  Dyce.  Om.QqFf. 
Fool,  ho  ?]  foole,  ho  Q,.  foole  ?  ho, 

Q2.  Foole?  Ho,  Ff,  Cap.  fool?  Ho! 
Rowe,  Jen.  fool?  Ho?  Pope,  Han. 

47.  [Re-enter  Knight.]  Dyce.  Om. 
QqFf. 

49.  Knight.]  Knigh.  F,F3F .  Kent. 
Qq. 


49.  daughter ]  Daughters  FXF3. 

52,  55,  61.  Knight.]  Seruant.  Qq. 

52.  vie]  Om.  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han, 
54.  He]  A  Qx. 

58.  of  kindness ]  Om.  Qq. 

dependants ]  dependance  Walker 
(Crit.  iii,  277). 

63.  wronged]  is  wrong’d  Q3F3F4  +  , 
Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

64.  mine]  my  F3F4+,  Jen. 


56.  that . . .  as]  See  I,  i,  95,  and  Abbott,  §  280. 

58.  appears]  For  the  omission  of  the  relative,  see  Abbott,  §  244. 

64.  conception]  Always  used  by  Sh.,  says  Schmidt,  in  a  bad  sense,  especially 
of  suspicious  or  jealous  thoughts. 

65.  faint]  Schmidt  says  this  does  not  mean  ‘slight/  as  Wright  interprets  it,  but 

*  dull/ *  *  languid/  ‘  cold/  *  without  zeal/  and  refers  to  Mid.  N.  D.  :  1 A  barren  sister, 
chanting  faint  hymns  to  the  cold  fruitless  moon  /  and  to  *  faint  deeds  ’  in  Timon, 
which  means  indifferent,  mechanical  actions,  devoid  of  thought.  [Despite  the  au* 
thority,  almost  without  a  rival,  which  Schmidt  wields  in  a  question  concerning 
Shakespeare’s  use  of  words,  I  cannot  but  think  that  he  is  in  error  here,  and  makes 


ACT  I,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


65 

66 


I  have  rather  blamed  as  mine  own  jealous  curiosity  than  as 
a  very  pretence  and  purpose  of  unkindness.  I  will  look 
further  into’t  But  where’s  my  Fool?  I  have  not  seen 
him  this  two  days. 

Knight.  Since  my  young  lady’s  going  into  France,  sir,  70 
the  Fool  hath  much  pined  away. 

Lear.  No  more  of  that;  I  have  noted  it  well. — Go  you, 
and  tell  my  daughter  I  would  speak  with  her. — Go  you,  call 
hither  my  Fool. — [ Re-enter  Oswald.]  O,  you  sir,  you,  come 
you  hither,  sir.  Who  am  I,  sir  ?  75 

Osw.  My  lady’s  father. 

Lear.  *  My  lady’s  father?’  my  lord’s  knave.  You  whore¬ 
son  dog !  you  slave  !  you  cur ! 

66.  mine  own ]  my  own  F4+,  Jen. 

67.  purpose]  purport  Qq. 

6S.  into't ]  into  it  Qa.  inico't  Ft. 

my]  this  Qq. 

69.  this]  these  Pope+,  Jen.  Ec. 

70.  Knight.]  Servant.  Qq. 

72.  well]  Om.  Qq,  Cap. 

[To  one  Attendant.  Cap.  Ec. 

73.  [Exit  an  Attendant.  Dyce. 

74.  [to  Another.  Cap. 

[Exit  an  attendant.  Dyce. 


74.  Re-enter  Oswald.]  As  in  Johns, 
(subs.)  Re-enter  Steward,  brought  back 
by  an  Attendant,  [after  O,  line  74]  C$p. 
Enter  Steward,  [after  sir?  line  75]  Ff^ 
Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Om, 
Qq. 

74>  75*  you>  come. ..sir]  you  fir,  come 
you  hither  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Ec. 
Var.  Coll.  Del.  Sing.  Wh.  Ktly.  come 
...sir  F3F4+. 


Lear  say  the  very  opposite  to  what  Sh.  intended.  At  this  stage  of  the  play  Lear 
is  not  the  man  to  stand  *  most  cold  neglect/  as  we  see  by  his  instantaneous  wrath 
at  Oswald  a  few  lines  further  on. — Ed.] 

66.  jealous  curiosity]  Steevens:  A  punctilious  jealousy,  resulting  from  a  scru- 
pulous  watchfulness  of  his  own  dignity. 

67.  pretence]  Steevens:  Design,  Seel,  ii,  84.  Hudson:  The  passage  is  rather 
curious,  as  discovering  a  sort, of  double  consciousness  in  the  old  king. 

69.  this  two  days]  Wright:  In  such  cases  Sh.  uses  indifferently  ‘this*  and 

*  these.’  See  IVint.  Tale ,  V,  ii,  147,  Per.  V,  i,  24. 

70.  into]  Schmidt:  Very  commonly  used  by  Sh.  before  the  names  of  countries: 

*  to  go  into  England,’  ‘  into  Flanders,’  *  into  Mauritania.’ 

71.  Hudson:  This  aptly  touches  the  key-note  of  the  Fool’s  character.  Cole¬ 
ridge:  The  Fool  is  no  comic  buffoon  to  make  the  groundlings  laugh, — no  forced, 
condescension  of  Shakespeare’s  genius  to  the  taste  of  his  audience.  Accordingly, 
the  poet  prepares  for  his  introduction,  which  he  never  does  with  any  of  his  common 
clowns  and  fools,  by  bringing  him  into  living  connection  with  the  pathos  of  the  play. 
He  is  as  wonderful  a  creation  as  Caliban ; — his  wild  babblings  and  inspired  idiocy 
articulate  and  gauge  the  horrors  of  the  scene. 

73.  Go  you,  call]  Schmidt  follows  the  QqFf  in  omitting  the  comma  here,  be¬ 
cause  the  infinitive  very  commonly  omits  to  in  construction  with  go. 

A*  F. 


66 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  iv 


Osiv .  I  am  none  of  these,  my  lord;  I  beseech  your 
pardon.  80 

Lear.  Do  you  bandy  looks  with  me,  you  rascal  ? 

Osw.  I’ll  not  be  strucken,  my  lord. 

Kent.  Nor  tripped  neither,  you  base  foot-ball  player ! 

Lear.  I  thank  thee,  fellow ;  thou  servest  me,  and  I’ll  love 
thee.  85 

Kent.  Come,  sir,  arise,  away !  I’ll  teach  you  differences : 
away,  away !  If  you  will  measure  your  lubber’s  length  again, 
tarry;  but  away!  go  to;  have  you  wisdom?  so. 

Lear.  Now,  my  friendly  knave,  I  thank  thee.  There’s 
earnest  of  thy  service.  90 


Enter  Fool. 

Fool.  Let  me  hire  him  too. — Here’s  my  coxcomb. 


79,  80.  I  am. ..pardon."]  Two  lines,  Ff. 
79.  these]  this  Qq,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev. 
Bos.  Sing.  Ktly. 

79,  80.  your  pardon]  you  pardon  me 
Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Sing. 

81.  [Striking  him.  Rowe. 

82.  strucken]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  \Vh. 
Sch.  Jlrucke  Qa.  Jlruck  Q,  et  cet. 

[in  Posture  of  defending  himself. 

Cap. 

83.  player !]  player?  Han. 

[Tripping  up  his  heels.  Rowe. 

84.  85.  /...thee.]  Two  lines,  Ff,  Rowe. 
86.  arise,  away]  Om.  Qq. 


88.  tarry]  tarry  again  Theob.  ii, 
Warb.  Johns. 

go  to]  Om  Qq. 

have  you  wisdom?  so.]  Theob. 
haue  you  wifedome,  fo.  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Sch.  you  haue  wifedome.  Qq. 

[Pushes  the  Steward  out.  Theob. 

89.  my]  Om.  Qq. 
there’s]  their’ s  Qf. 

90.  [Giving  money.  Johns. 

91.  Scene  xiii.  Pope,  Han.  Warb. 
Johns.  Jen. 

[Giving  his  cap.  Rowe. 


81.  bandy]  Steevens:  A  metaphor  from  tennis.  [Cotgrave:  louer  d  bander 
<fb°  d  racier  conire.  To  bandy  against,  at  Tennis ;  and  (by  metaphor)  to  pursue  with 
all  insolencie,  rigour,  extremitie.] 

88.  have  you  wisdom  ?]  Schmidt  plausibly  urges  that  this  is  not  a  question, 
but  an  imperative.  The  superfluous  you  or  thou  after  an  imperative  is  almost  too 
common  in  Sh.  to  be  noted.  Schmidt  refers  to  lines  138  (which  is  scarcely  par¬ 
allel)  and  331  of  this  scene,  and  also  to  I,  v,  I;  II,  iv,  154;  III,  iii,  7,  13;  III.  vii, 
6;  IV,  vi,  137  of  this  play. 

90.  earnest]  Schmidt  cites  Two  Gent.  II,  x,  163,  and  Com.  of  Err.  II,  ii,  24,  as 
instances  of  quibbles,  where  this  word  is  used  in  both  of  its  meanings :  handsel  and 
serious. 

91.  Enter  Fool.]  C.  A.  Brown  {Shakespeare' s  Autobiographical  Poems,  p.  292, 
1838) :  *  Now,  our  joy,  though  last,  not  least,’  my  dearest  of  all  Fools,  Lear’s  Fool! 
Ah,  what  a  noble  heart,  a  gentle  and  a  loving  one,  lies  beneath  that  parti-coloured 
jerkin!  Thou  hast  been  cruelly  treated.  Regan  and  Goneril  could  but  hang  thee, 
while  the  unfeeling  players  did  worse ;  for  they  tainted  thy  character,  and  at  last 


act  r,  sc.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


67 


[91.  Enter  Fool.] 

thrust  thee  from  the  stage,  as  one  unfit  to  appear  in  their  worshipful  company.  Re¬ 
gardless  of  that  warning  voice  forbidding  them  to  *  speak  more  than  is  set  down  for 
them/  they  have  put  into  thy  mouth  words  so  foreign  to  thy  nature,  that  they  might, 
with  as  much  propriety,  be  given  to  Cardinal  Wolsey.  But  let  me  take  thee,  with¬ 
out  addition  or  diminution,  from  the  hands  of  Sh.,  and  then  art  thou  one  of  his 
perfect  creations.  Look  at  him !  It  maybe  your  eyes  see  him  not  as  mine  do, but  he 
appears  to  me  of  a  light  delicate  frame,  every  feature  expressive  of  sensibility  even 
to  pain,  with  eyes  lustrously  intelligent,  a  mouth  blandly  beautiful,  and  withal  a 
hectic  flush  upon  his  cheek.  Oh  that  I  were  a  painter!  Oh  that  I  could  describe  him 
as  I  knew  him  in  my  boyhood,  when  the  Fool  made  me  shed  tears,  while  Lear  did 
but  terrify  me !  .  .  .  When  the  Fool  enters,-  throwing  his  coxcomb  at  Kent,  and 
instantly  follows  it  up  with  allusions  to  the  miserable  rashness  of  Lear,  we  ought 
to  understand  him  from  that  moment  to  the  last.  Throughout  this  scene  his  wit, 
however  varied,  still  aims  at  the  same  point,  and  in  spite  of  threats,  and  regardless 
how  his  words  may  be  construed  by  Goneril’s  creatures,  with  the  eagerness  of  a 
filial  love  he  prompts  the  old  king  to  *  resume  the  shape  which  he  had  cast  off.’ 
*  This  is  not  altogether  fool,  my  lord/  But,  alas !  it  is  too  late ;  and  when  driven 
from  the  scene  by  Goneril,  he  turns  upon  her  with  an  indignation  that  knows  no  fear 
of  the  *  halter  ’  for  himself :  *  A  fox  when  one  has  caught  her,  And  such  a  daughter. 
Should  sure  to  the  slaughter,  If  my  cap  would  buy  a  halter.’  That  such  a  character 
should  be  distorted  by  players,  printers,  and  commentators !  Observe  every  word 
he  speaks;  his  meaning,  one  would  imagine,  could  not  be  misinterpreted;  and  when 
at  length,  finding  his  covert  reproaches  can  avail  nothing,  he  changes  his  discourse 
to  simple  mirth,  in  order  to  distract  the  sorrows  of  his  master.  When  Lear  is  in 
the  storm,  who  is  with  him?  None — not  even  Kent — ‘None  but  the  Fool;  who 
labours  to  outjest  His  heart-struck  injuries.’  The  tremendous  agony  of  Lear’s 
mind  would  be  too  painful,  and  even  deficient  in  pathos,  without  this  poor  faithful 
servant  at  his. side.  It  is  he  that  touches  our  hearts  with  pity,  while  Lear  fills  the 
imagination  to  aching.  .  .  .  But  it  is  acted  otherwise, — no,  it  is  Tate  that  is  acted. 
Let  them,  if  they  choose,  bring  this  tragedy  on  the  stage ;  but,  by  all  means,  let  us 
not  be  without  the  Fool.  I  can  imagine  an  actor  in  this  part,  with  despair  in  his 
face,  and  a  tongue  for  ever  struggling  with  a  jest,  who  should  thrill  every  bosom. 
What !  banish  him  from  the  tragedy,  when  Lear  says,  ‘  I  have  one  part  in  my  heart 
that’s  sorry  yet  for  thee ;’  and  when  he  so  feelingly  addresses  him  with,  ‘  Come  on,  my 
boy ;  how  dost,  my  boy  ?  Art  cold?  I  am  cold  myself.’  At  that  pitch  of  rage, ‘Off! 
off,  you  lendings !  Come,  unbutton  here !’  could  we  but  see  the  Fool  throw  himself 
into  his  master’s  arms,  to  stay  their  fury,  looking  up  in  his  countenance  with  eyes  that 
would  fain  appear  as  if  they  wept  not,  and  hear  his  pathetic  entreaty,  4  Pr’ythee, 
nuncle,  be  contented ;’ — pshaw !  these  players  know  nothing  of  their  trade. 

In  Macready’S  Diary  is  the  following:  4th  [January,  1S38]. — Went  to  the  the¬ 
atre,  where  I  went  on  a  first  rehearsal  of  King  Lear.  My  opinion  of  the  introduc¬ 
tion  of  the  Fool  is  that,  like  many  such  terrible  contrasts  in  poetry  and  painting, 
in  acting- representation  it  will  fail  of  effect;  it  will  either  weary  and  annoy  or  dis¬ 
tract  the  spectator.  I  have  no  hope  of  it,  and  think  that  at  the  last  we  shall  be 
obliged  to  dispense  with  it.  5th. — Speaking  to  Willmott  and  Bartley  about  the  part 
of  the  Fool  in  Lear ,  and  mentioning  my  apprehensions  that,  with  Meadows,  we 
6hould  be  obliged  to  omit  the  part,  I  described  the  sort  of  fragile,  hectic,  beautiful- 


63 


KING  LEAR 


[act  I,  sc.  iv. 


[91.  Enter  Fool.] 

faced  boy  that  he  should  be,  and  stated  my  belief  that  it  never  could  be  acted.  Bart¬ 
ley  observed  that  a  woman  should  play  it.  I  caught  at  the  idea,  and  instantly  ex¬ 
claimed,  ‘  Miss  P.  Horton  is  the  very  person.'  I  was  delighted  at  the  thought. 

C.  Cowden  CLARKE  ( Gent.  Mag.  No.  LVIII,  p.  397) :  Lear’s  Fool  is  a  youth, 
not  a  grown  man;  a  petted  lad,  to  whom  his  royal  master  looks  for  quaint  say¬ 
ings  and  whimsical  sentences  when  vexed  and  irritable ;  a  favoured  fellow,  whose 
wayward  speeches  are  tolerated,  and  even  liked,  when  graver  cares  press  hard  on 
the  old  monarch,  and  to  whose  playful  sallies  he  turns  when  desiring  to  fill  a  vacant 
half  hour  or  beguile  a  leisure  interval.  ,  .  ,  The  personal  and  affectionate  interest 
taken  by  Lear  in  the  lad  is  denoted  at  the  very  outset.  He  not  only  asks  eagerly 
and  repeatedly  for  him,  but  when  told  that  since  Cordelia’s  going  into  France  ‘the 
Fool  hath  much  pined  away,’  Lear  answers  hurriedly:  ‘No  more  of  that;  I  have- 
noted  it  -well /’  and  when  the  Fool  himself  appears  on  the  scene,  his  old  master 
accosts  him  with :  *  How  now,  my  pretty  knave,  how  dost  thou  /’  The  very  expres¬ 
sion,  ‘  My  pretty  knave,’  serves  to  paint  the  Fool’s  boyish  years,  and  to  depict  the 
fondling  regard  of  Lear  for  him.  .  .  .  This  kind  of  gentle  feeling  is  shown  by  others 
as  well  as  the  king  towards  the  stripling  fool-jester;  for  Kent — who,  disguised  as 
Caius,  affects  much  bluntness  of  speech — on  more  than  one  occasion  speaks  favour- 
ingly  of  and  to  the  lad.  When  the  Fool  is  sportively  and  keenly  rebuking  Lear  for 
having  so  unwisely  cast  all  power  into  his  unworthy  daughter’s  hands,  Kent  observes : 

*  This  is  not  altogether  fool,  my  lord.’  Afterwards,  also,  in  the  storm,  when  the  boy, 
scared  at  finding  the  Bedlam  beggar  in  the  hovel, runs  out  again, exclaiming:  ‘Come 
not  in  here,  nuncle ;  here’s  a  spirit.  Help  me,  help  me !’  Kent  encouragingly  says : 

*  Give  me  thy  hand.  Who’s  there  ?’  And  still  further  on,  at  the  close  of  that  wild 
night-scene,  when  the  poor  old  king,  worn  out,  has  fallen  into  weary  slumber,  Kent, 
preparing  to  bear  him  away  to  safer  quarters,  says  to  the  faithful  Fool :  *  Come,  help 
to  bear  thy  master;  thou  must  not  stay  behind.’  This  tenderness  with  which  the  boy 
is  treated  partly  arises  from  his  delicacy  of  frame,  which  is  indicated  by  some  slight 
but  significant  side-touches  in  the  course  of  the  play.  First,  there  is  his  ‘  pining 
away  ’  on  his  young  mistress’s  departure  from  England,  above  alluded  to.  Then, 
there  is  his  sensitiveness  to  churlish  weather  and  sharp  night  air,  betokened  by  his 
words  during  the  storm :  ‘  O  nuncle,  court  holy  water,’  &c.  Again :  ‘  This  cold 
night  will  turn  us  all  to  fools  and  madmen.’  Lastly,  there  is  his  withdrawal  from 
the  play.  It  is  silently  effected,  the  dramatist  giving  no  express  mention  of  the  Fool 
after  his  assisting  to  bear  his  old  master  away  to  the  litter  prepared  for  conveying  the 
king  to  Dover ;  but,  to  my  mind,  Sh.  evidently  meant  to  infer  that  the  fragile  lad — 
weakly  in  frame,  susceptible  in  temperament,  and  rendered  doubly  so  by  the  delicacy 
of  his  nurture  in  the  court  household  as  the  petted  boy-jester  of  his  royal  employer— 
never  recovered  from  the  rigours  and  terrors  of  that  tempestuous  night;  that  he  sick¬ 
ened  and  died  soon  after,  fulfilling  actually,  as  well  as  poetically,  his  own  last  uttered 
words :  *  And  I’ll  go  to  bed  at  noon.’  In  this  noontide  of  his  youth  and  fidelity,  Lear’s 
Fool  goes  to  his  deathbed,  when  his  old  master  no  longer  needs  him  by  his  side.' 

W.  W.  Lloyd:  It  is  indicated  that  the  Fool  is  a  boy,  a  pretty  knave,  young 
that  is,  and  of  pleasant  aspect,  and  the  boundaries  of  his  intelligence  lie  somewhere 
between  innocence  and  acuteness,  but  whereabouts  is  undefinable ;  it  is  only  when 
the  king  is  conscious  of  the  full  extent  of  his  injustice  and  his  misery,  that  the  Fool 
desists  from  probing  the  wounds,  and  torturing  by  truth  told  jestingly, — and  now 


ACT  I,  sc.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


6g 


Lear.  How  now,  my  pretty  knave !  how  dost  thou?  92 

Fool.  Sirrah,  you  were  best  take  my  coxcomb. 

Kent.  Why,  Fool? 

Fool.  Why?  for  taking  one’s  part  that’s  out  of  favour.  95 
Nay,  and  thou  canst  not  smile  as  the  wind  sits,  thou’lt  catch 


94.  Kent.  Why]  Qq.  Lear.  Why 
F,Fa,  Knt,  Coll,  i,  Del.  i,  Sch. 

Fool]  my  Boy  Ff+,  Knt,  Coll. 
Del.  Sch. 

95.  Why  ?  for ]  Ff  + ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 
Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Del.  .Sing.  Wh. 
Ktly,  Sch.  Why  for  Qq.  Why,  for 


Dyce  et  cet. 

95.  one's']  on's  Q,. 

that's]  that  is  F  +,  Steev.  Ec. 

Var. 

96.  and]  QqF2F3F4,  Rowe,  Sch.  <Sr* 
F,.  as  Warb.  an  Pope  et  cet. 

thou' It]  thou't  Qq. 


‘labours  to  outjest  his  heart-struck  injuries.’  [After  these  long  and  good  notes  by 
my  betters,  I  wish  merely  to  record  humbly  but  firmly  my  conviction  that  the  Fool, 
one  of  Shakespeare’s  most  wonderful  characters,  is  not  a  boy,  but  a  man — one  of  the 
shrewdest,  tenderest  of  men,  whom  long  life  had  made  shrewd,  and  whom  afflictions 
had  made  tender ;  his  wisdom  is  too  deep  for  any  boy,  and  could  be  found  only  in  a 
man,  removed  by  not  more  than  a  score  of  years  from  the  king’s  own  age;  he  had 
been  Lear’s  companion  from  the  days  of  Lear’s  early  manhood.  See  also  White’s 
note  on  line  123. — Ed.] 

93.  you  were  best]  Abbott,  §  230 :  The  old  *  ( to )  me  {it)  were  better,’  being 
misunderstood,  was  sometimes  replaced  by  ‘  I  w;ere  better.’  When  the  old  idiom  is 
retained,  it  is  generally  in  instances  like  the  present,  where  *  you  ’  may  represent 
either  nominative  or  dative,  but  was  almost  certainly  used  by  Sh.  as  a  nominative. 
See  III,  iv,  99. 

93.  coxcomb]  Minsheu  (s.  v.  cockes-conibe,  ed.  1617):  Englishmen  use  to  call 
vaine  and  proud  braggers,  and  men  of  meane  discretion  and  judgement  Coxcombes. 
Because  naturall  Idiots  and  Fooles  haue,  and  still  doe  accustome  themselues  to  weare 
in  their  Cappes,  cock’s  feathers,  or  a  hat  with  a  necke  and  head  of  a  cocke  on  the 
top  and  a  bell  thereon,  &c.,  and  thinke  themselues  finely  fitted  and  proudly  attired 
therewith,  so  we  compare  a  presumptuous  bragging  fellow,  and  wanting  all  true 
Iudgement  and  discretion,  to  such  an  Idiote  foole,  and  call  him  also  Coxecombe. 
[Cited  in  part  by  Steevens.] 

94.  Why,  Fool]  Knight:  The  text  of  the  Folio  [see  Textual  Notes]  clearly 
shows  that  the  speech  was  intended  for  Lear,  and  that,  however  it  might  have  been 
written  originally,  Sh.  in  his  amended  copy  would  not  permit  Kent,  in  his  character 
of  serving-man,  so  soon  to  begin  bandying  questions  with  Lear’s  favorite.  White: 
The  Folio  is  clearly  wrong,  as  the  Fool’s  reply  shows.  Lear  had  taken  *  no  one’s  part 
that’s  out  of  favour,’  but  Kent  had.  The  mistake  seems  to  be  due  to  the  fact  that 
both  Lear  and  Kent  reply  interrogatively  to  the  Fool’s  remark  about  his  coxcomb. 
Dyce:  The  eye  of  the  transcriber  or  compositor  most  probably  caught  the  next 
speech  but  one.  It  is  plain  that  the  Fool  addresses  the  king  for  the  first  time  when 
he  says :  ‘  How  now,  nuncle,’  &c.  Schmidt  silently  follows  FIF2,  which  are  to  me 
unquestionably  wrong. 

95.  one’s]  Abbott,  §  Si :  We  never  use  the  possessive  inflection  of  the  unem* 
phatic  one  as  an  antecedent. 

96.  and]  Abbott,  §  101 :  Equivalent  to  if.  This  particle  has  been  derived 


70 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  iv. 


cold  shortly.  There,  take  my  coxcomb;  why,  this  fellow  97 
has  banished  two  on’s  daughters,  and  did  the  third  a  bless¬ 
ing  against  his  will ;  if  thou  follow  him,  thou  must  needs 
wear  my  coxcomb. — How  now,  nuncle  ?  Would  I  had  two  100 
coxcombs  and  two  daughters  ! 

Lear.  Why,  my  boy  ? 

Fool.  If  I  gave  them  all  my  living,  I  ’Id  keep  my  cox¬ 
combs  myself.  There’s  mine ;  beg  another  of  thy  daughters. 

Lear.  Take  heed,  sirrah ;  the  whip.  105 


q8.  has]  hath  Qq,  Cam.  ha's  Fx. 
on’s']  of  his  Q2,  Pope+,  Steev. 
Mai.  Ec.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly. 
did]  done  Qq,  Cam. 

101.  and  two]  an’  two  (i.  e.  if  two) 
Farmer. 


103.  gave]  give  F3F4+. 
all  my]  any  Qq. 

I'ld]  I'll  Rowe+. 
coxcombs]  Qs.  Coxcombes  F,. 
coxcombe  Q2F2.  Coxcomb  F3F4,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 


from  an,  the  imperative  of  unnan ,  to  grant.  This  plausible  but  false  derivation 
was  originated  by  Horne  Tooke,  and  has  been  adopted  by  the  edd.  of  the  Cam.  Sh. 
But  the  word  is  often  written  ‘and’  in  Early  English .(Stratmann),  as  well  as  in 
Elizabethan  authors.  So  almost  always  in  the  Folio. 

96.  catch  cold]  Farmer  :  That  is,  be  turned  out  of  doors  and  exposed  to  the 
inclemency  of  the  weather. 

98.  banished]  Capell:  This  means  that  he  had  lost  them  as  daughters,  lost 
their  love  and  obedience,  and  by  an  act  of  his  own.  Eccles  thinks  that  these 
words  are  spoken  in  the  wanton  levity  of  the  character,  as  being  the  contrary  cf 
those  favours  Lear  had  conferred  upon  them.  Moberly  :  Lear  has,  by  blessing 
them,  made  Goneril  and  Regan  no  longer  his  daughters,  and  also  made  Cordelia 
queen  of  France  by  cursing  her. 

98.  on’s]  Abbott,  §  182:  ‘On’  was  frequently  used  for  the  possessive  of,  par¬ 
ticularly,  in  rapid  speech,  before  a  contracted  pronoun.  The  explanation  of  this 
change  of  of  to  ‘  on  ’  appears  to  be  as  follows :  Of  when  rapidly  pronounced  before 
a  consonant  became  o' ;  but  when  o'  came  before  a  vowel  it  was  forced  to  assume  a 
euphonic  n.  See  I,  v,  19. 

98.  did]  For  instances  of  the  transitive  use  of  this  word,  see  Abbott,  §  303. 

100.  nuncle]  Nares:  A  familiar  contraction  of  mine  uncle.  It  seems  to  have 
been  the  customary  appellation  of  the  licensed  fool  to  his  superiors.  In  the  same 
style  the  fools  called  each  other  cousin.  In  Beaumont  and  Fletcher’s  Pilgrim,  when 
Alinda  assumes  the  character  of  a  fool,  she  uses  the  same  language.  She  meets 
Alphonso,  and  calls  him  nuncle ;  to  which  he  replies  by  calling  her  naunt.  WRIGHT: 
So  in  Whetstone’s.  Promos  and  Cassandra,  iv,  7,  we  find  ‘  my  nown  good  harte  roote.’ 
In  Littrd’s  Did.,  under  the  word  ‘Tante,’  it  is  stated  that  ‘  nante’  is  a  form  of  the 
word  in  Picardy,  and  in  justification  of  the  derivation  of  tante  from  la  ante,  refer¬ 
ence  is  made  to  the  Wallon  dialect,  in  which  mononk,  matante,  and  similar  forms 
are  used,  the  possessive  pronoun  having  no  force  whatever.  If  the  origin  of  *  nuncle  ’ 
is  not  analogous,  it  must  be  referred  to  the  principle  by  which  Noll,  Ned,  Nan,  Nell, 
Numps  are  formed  from  Oliver,  Edward,  Anne,  Ellen  and  Humphrey. 


ACT  I.  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


7* 


Fool.  Truth’s  a  dog  must  to  kennel;  he  must  be  whip-  106 
ped  out,  when  Lady,  the  brach,  may  stand  by  th’  fire  and 
stink. 

Lear.  A  pestilent  gall  to  me ! 

Fool.  Sirrah,  I’ll  teach  thee  a  speech.  1 10 

Lear.  Do. 

Fool.  Mark  it,  nuncle : 

Have  more  than  thou  showest, 

Speak  less  than  thou  knowest, 

Lend  Jess  than  thou  owest,  IIS 

Ride  more  than  thou  goest, 

Learn  more  than  thou  trowest, 

Set  less  than  thou  throwest ; 


106.  Truth's  a ]  Truth  is  a  Q,.  Truth 
is,  a  Qa. 

must  to]  that  ntitjl  to  Qq,  Jen. 
Steev.  Mai.  Ec.  Bos.  Sing.  Ktly. 

107.  Lady,  the  brack,]  Steev.  Mai. 
GIo. +  ,  Mob.  Ladie  oth'e  brach  Qq. 
(Lady  Qa.)  the  Lady  Brach  Ff+,  Cap. 
Jen.  Ec.  Knt,  Coll.  Del.  Dyce,  Sta.  Wh. 
Huds.  Sch. 


107.  by  th' fire]  F3F4+,  Jen.  Wh.  Sch. 
by'  th'  fire  F,Fa. 

109.  gall]  gull  Qq. 
no.  [To  Kent.  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Ec. 
Sirrah]  Sirha  F,Fa. 

111.  Lear.]  Ken.  Cap. 

1 1 2.  nuncle]  vncle  Q,.  Vnckle  Qa. 
Vuckle,  Q3. 

1 13-122.  Have..jcore.]  Prose,  Qq. 


107.  brach]  Steevens:  A  bitch  of  the  hunting  kind.  Dr  Letherland,  on  the 
margin  of  Warburton’s  ed.,  proposed *  * lady's  brach,’  i.  e.  favoured  animal.  ‘  Lady’ 
is  still  a  common  name  for  a  hound.  So  Hotspur,  in  I  Ken.  IV:  III,  i,  240.  ToL-i 
LET  [Note  in  III,  vi,  67]  :  The  females  of  all  dogs  were  once  called  braches.  Uli* 
tius  upon  Gratius  observes:  *  Racha  Saxonibus  canem  significabat  unde  Scoti  hodie 
Rache  pro  cane  foemina  habent,  quod  Anglis  est  Brache.'  A[rchibald]  S[mith] 
(N.  and  Qu.  2  Ser.,  voi.  v,  p.  202,  185S) :  Here  is  a  curious  opposition  between 
‘truth’  and  ‘lady,’  where  one  would  have  expected  the  opposition  to  be  between 

*  truth  ’  and  lie.  May  it  not  be  that  Sh.  wrote  ‘  lye  the  brach,’  and  that  the  printers 
thought  ‘  lye  ’  a  contraction  for  ‘  lady,’  instead  of  the  whole  of  the  opposite  of  truth  ? 
Wright:  Florio  has,  ‘  Bracca,  a  brache,  or  a  bitch,  a  beagle;’  Cotgrave:  ‘  Braque: 
m.  A  kind  of  short-tayled  setting  dog;  ordinarily  spotted,  or  partie-coloured.’  Baret 
gives  *  a  Brache  or  biche.  Canicula.’  The  word  is  found  in  German  Brache,  and 
in  Dutch  Brak. 

109.  pestilent  gall]  Moberly:  A  passionate  remembrance  of  Oswald’s  inso¬ 
lence.  [This  does  not  satisfy  me,  but  I  can  offer  nothing  better. — Ed.] 

1 1 5.  owest]  For  ‘owe,’  meaning  to  possess,  see  Sh. passim. 

1 1 7.  trowest]  WARBURTON  gives  to  this  the  meaning  of  to  believe,  to  think,  to 
conceive,  and  he  has  been  followed  by  all  other  editors  since  his  time  except  Capell, 
who  says  it  means  to  kntw,  and  cites  in  confirmation,  I,  iv,  207,  where  the  Qq  have 
trow  instead  of  ‘  know  ’  of  the  Ff.  Capell’s  interpretation  seems  the  better  of  the 


7  2 


KING  LEAR 


[act,  i,  sc.  iv. 


Leave  thy  drink  and  thy  whore, 

And  keep  in-a-door,  120 

And  thou  shalt  have  more 
Than  two  tens  to  a  score. 

Kent.  This  is  nothing,  Fool. 

Fool.  Then  ’tis  like  the  breath  of  an  unfee’d  lawyer,  you 
gave  me  nothing  for’t. — Can  you  make  no  use  of  nothing,  125 
nuncle  ? 


120.  in-a-door ]  Cap.  in  a  doors  Qq. 
tn  a  dore  FXF9.  in  dore  F3-  in  Door 
F4,  Rowe,  -within  door  Pope+. 

123.  Kent.]  Lear.  Qq,  Mai.  Steev. 
Eos.  Coll.  Sta. 


124.  V£r]  Om.  Qq.  it  is  F4,  Rowe+, 
Ec. 

125.  gave ]  give  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope. 
for't]  for  it  Q2. 

1 26.  nuncle"]  Vncle  Qq. 


two  in  this  passage,  despite  the  fact  that  Warburton  pronounces  the  line,  as  he  inter¬ 
prets  it, *  *  an  admirable  precept.’ 

11S.  Set]  Mrs  Griffiths:  That  is,  never  set  equal  to  the  stake  you  throw  for. 
Schmidt  :  The  sense  varies  according  to  the  way  in  which  we  understand  ‘  less,’ 
whether  as  an  adjective  or  as  an  adverb.  If  it  is  an  adjective,  then  the  meaning  is : 

*  Set  a  less  sum  than  thou  hast  won  by  thy  last  throw if  an  adverb :  ‘  Keep  on 
throwing,  but  set  nothing.’ 

123.  Kent]  Knight:  The  Ff  properly  gives  this  speech  to  Kent,  in  reply  to  the 
Fool’s  address  to  him,  ‘  Sirrah,  I’ll  teach  thee  a  speech.’  White  also  upholds  the 
Ff,  because :  *  it  should  be  observed,  that  in  addressing  this  poor,  faithful  follower, 
the  king  never  calls  him  Fool.  In  speaking  of  him,  he  gives  him  his  official  title; 
but  in  speaking  to  him,  he  always  uses  some  term  of  familiar  and  pitiful  endear¬ 
ment, — generally,  “  my  boy,” — although  the  poor  fellow  had  plainly  had  many  years’ 
sad  experience  of  the  world.  It  seems  a  deteriorating  misapprehension  of  this  phrase 
that  has  led  an  eminent  actor  [Macready]  to  represent  the  Fool  as  a  boy  in  years ! 
I  cannot  believe  that  on  this  solitary  occasion  Sh.  was  indifferent  to  the  touching 
nature  of  the  relations  which  he  had  established  between  Lear  and  his  humble  coun¬ 
sellor;  and  I  accept  the  evidence  of  the  Folio  that  this  speech  is  one  of  Kent’s  many 
characteristic  interruptions  ’ 

124.  unfee’d  lawyer]  Lord  Campbell  {Shakespeare1  s  Legal  Acquirements ,  p. 
97,  Am.  ed.) :  This  seems  to  show  that  Sh.  had  frequently  been  present  at  trials  in 
courts  of  justice,  and  now  speaks  from  his  own  recollection.  There  is  no  trace  of 
such  a  proverbial  saying  as  ‘  like  the  breath  of  an  unfee’d  lawyer,’  while  all  the  world 
knows  the  proverb :  ‘  Whosoever  is  his  own  counsel  has  a  fool  for  his  client.’  How 
unfee’d  lawyers  may  have  comported  themselves  in  Shakespeare’s  time  I  know  not ; 
but  I  am  bound  to  say,  in  vindication  of  ‘  my  order,’  that  in  my  time  there  has  been 
no  ground  for  the  Fool’s  sarcasm  upon  the  bar.  The  two  occasions  when  ‘  the  breath 
of  an  unfee’d  lawyer’  attracts  notice  in  this  generation,  are  when  he  pleads  for  a 
party  suing  in  formh  pauperis ,  or  when  he  defends  a  person  prosecuted  by  the  Crown 
for  high  treason.  It  is  contrary  to  etiquette  to  take  a  fee  in  the  one  case  as  in  the 
other;  and  on  all  such  occasions  counsel,  from  a  regard  to  their  own  credit,  as  well 
as  from  conscientious  motives,  uniformly  exert  themselves  with  extraordinary  zeal, 
and  put  forth  all  their  learning  and  eloquence. 


act  i.  sc.  iv.]  KING  LEAR 


73 


Lear.  Why,  no,  boy;  nothing  can  be  made  oat  of  127 
nothing. 

Fool.  [To  Kent ]  Prithee,  tell  him,  so  much  the  rent  of 
his  land  comes  to;  he  will  not  believe  a  Fool.  130 

Lear.  A  bitter  Fool ! 

Fool.  Dost  thou  know  the  difference,  my  boy,  between  a 
bitter  fool  and  a  sweet  one  ? 

Lear.  No,  lad ;  teach  me. 

Fool.  *  That  lord  that  counseled  thee  1 35 

*  To  give  away  thy  land, 

Come  place  him  here  by  me ; 

Do  thou  for  him  stand : 

The  sweet  and  bitter  fool 

Will  presently  appear ;  140 

The  one  in  motley  here, 

The  other  found  out  there. 

Lear.  Dost  thou  call  me  fool,  boy  ? 

Fool.  All  thy  other  titles  thou  hast  given  away ;  that 
*thou  wast  born  with.  145 


127, 128.  nothing. ..nothing]  Separate 
line,  Ff,  Rowe. 

129.  [To  Kent]  Rowe.  Om.  QqFf, 

1 3 1- 1 34.  In  the  margin,  Pope. 
131-142.  In  the  margin,  Han. 

132.  Dost  thou]  Doo'Jl  Q,. 
my  boy]  nuncle  Cap. 

133.  sweet  one]  Ff+,  Knt,  Coll.  Del. 
Dyce  i,  Sta.  Wh.  Huds.  Sch.  fweete  fool 
Qq  et  cet. 

135.  [Sings.  Anon.* 


135-1 50.  That  lord. ..snatching.]  Om. 
Ff,  Rowe. 

135-142.  Om.  Pope.  In  the  margin, 
Han. 

That  lord. ..there.]  As  in  gap. 
Four  lines,  Qq,  Theob.-i-,  Jen.  Knt, 
Sch. 

138.  Do]  Or  do  Han.  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 
Mai.  Ec.  Dos.  Sta.  Huds.  Sch. 

142.  [Pointing  to  Lear.  Coll.  iii. 

143.  boy]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 


135-150.  Johnson:  These  lines  were  omitted  in  the  Ff,  perhaps  for  political 
reasons,  as  they  seemed  to  censure  the  monopolies. 

138.  Do]  Jennens  adopts  Hanmer’s  change  ‘Or do,'  and  asserts  that  the  measure 
points  out  that  a  word  is  lost  here  [which  is  true],  and  that  the  sense  shows  it  to  be 
Or  [which  is  doubtful].  White  is  equally  sure  that  the  missing  word  is  And;  his 
text  reads  *  And  do  thou  '  and  in  his  note  he  says  that  this  And  the  rhythm  so  imper¬ 
atively  demands  that  ‘  it  could  not  possibly  have  been  omitted  in  a  rhyme  like  this, 
even  if  it  were  as  superfluous  as  it  is  appropriate  to  the  sense.  It  was  doubtless 
omitted  by  accident.*  The  Cambridge  Editors  suggest  an  emendation  which  is, 
perhaps,  the  happiest  of  any  yet  offered :  ‘  Do  thou  there  for  him  stand.’  The  an¬ 
tithesis  with  the  preceding  line  is  emphasized,  and  the  similarity  of  the  *  thou  ’  and 
the  there  in  MS  might  well  have  been  the  cause,  through  oversight,  of  the  omission 
of  the  latter  word  by  the  compositor. 

142.  there]  Delius:  Pointing  to  the  king. 

7 


74 


KING  LEAR 


[act  I,  sc.  Iv. 


*  Kent.  This  is  not  altogether  fool,  my  lord.  146 

*  Fool.  No,  faith,  lords  and  great  men  will  not  let  me; 

*  if  I  had  a  monopoly  out,  they  would  have  part  on’t;  and 

*  ladies  too,  they  will  not  let  me  have  all  the  fool  to  myself; 

*  they’ll  be  snatching.*  Nuncle,  give  me  an  egg,  and  I’ll  150 
give  thee  two  crowns. 

Lear.  What  two  crowns  shall  they  be  ? 

Foot  Why,  after  I  have  cut  the  egg  i’  th’  middle  and 
eat  up  the  meat,  the  two  crowns  of  the  egg.  When  thou 
clovest  thy  crown  i’  th’  middle  and  gavest  away  both  parts,  155 
thou  borest  thine  ass  on  thy  back  o’er  the  dirt;  thou  hadst 
little  wit  in  thy  bald  crown  when  thou  gavest  thy  golden 
one  away.  If  I  speak  like  myself  in  this,  let  him  be  whipped 
that  first  finds  it  so. 


148.  out]  <?«7Pope+. 

148.  149.  on't;  and  ladies  loo,]  an' t, 
and  Ladies  loo,  Q,,  Jen.  on't,  and  lodes 
too,  Q2.  on't ;  nay  the  ladies  too,  Pope 
+  .  on't ;  and  the  ladies  too,  Steev.  ’73. 
on't,  and  loads  too :  Coll,  i,  ii,  Del.  i, 
Dyce  i,  Wh.  Ktly. 

149.  they  will]  they'll  Pope  +  ,  Cap. 
all  the  fool]  Qx,  Jen.  Cam.  Wr. 

Sch.  all  foole  Q2  et  cet. 

to  myself]  myself  Pope,  Han. 

150.  Nuncle,  give  me  an  egg]  Ff, 
Rowe,  Knt,  Dyce  i,  Sch.  Give. ..egg. 


Nuncle  Qq  et  cet. 

153.  V  th’]  ith'  F2.  in  the  Qq,  Cam. 
*55*  crown]  crownes  Ft. 

*  ’  th']  ith'  Fa.  it' h  Qt.  in  the 
Qs,  Cap. 

156.  borest]  boadfl  F,F2F3.  bor’fl  F^. 
thine  err]  thr  affe  Qq,  GIo.  Wr. 

Mob. 

on  thy]  at' h  Q,. 

o'er]  over  Cap.  Steev.  Ec.  Var. 

158.  one]  crown  Johns. 

159.  so]  sooth  Warb. 


146.  altogether  fool]  The  concrete  for  the  abstract.  For  other  instances,  see 
Schmidt,  Lex.,  p.  1423,  §  12;  see  also  II,  iv,  145,  where  we  have  the  abstract  for 
the  concrete. 

148.  out]  Jennens:  That  is,  a  patent  out  of  court  for  being  sole  fool.  War- 
burton  :  A  satire  on  the  gross  abuses  of  monopolies  at  that  time,  and  the  corrup¬ 
tion  and  avarice  of  the  courtiers,  who  commonly  went  shares  with  the  patentee. 
Steevens:  Monopolies  in  Shakespeare’s  time  were  common  objects  of  satire. 

149.  ladies]  Collier,  in  his  ed.  i  and  ii,  justifies  his  adoption  of  lodes  of  the  Qq, 
saying  that  all  the  fool  means  is  that,  if  he  had  a  monopoly  of  folly,  great  men  would 
have  part  of  it,  and  a  large  part,  too.  Dyce,  in  his  ed.  ii,  after  quoting  Collier’s  note, 
adds:  ‘But  mark  the  ridiculous  inconsistency  of  expression  in  the  passage,  if  the 
Fool  be  speaking  of  lords  only, — “  they  would  have  part  on’t  ” — “  and  loads  too  ” — 
“  they’ll  be  snatching."  ’  Dyce  gives  no  intimation  that  in  his  ed.  i,  he  adopted  Col¬ 
lier’s  reading  with  silent  approval.  In  his  ed.  iii,  Collier  reads  as  in  the  text. 

158,  159.  If  .  .  .  so]  Eccles:  Possibly  he  means  to  say  that  he  will  deserve  to  be 
whipped  who  does  not,  or  cannot,  discover  that  in  this  instance,  at  least,  he  speaks 
good  sense.  Perhaps,  better  thus :  The  Fool  was  accustomed  to  speak  bitter  ar.d 


ACT  I.  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


75 


Fools  had  ne'er  less  grace  in  a  year ;  160 

For  wise  men  are  grown  foppish , 

And  know  not  how  their  wits  to  wear. 

Their  manners  are  so  apish. 

Lear.  When  were  you  wont  to  be  so  full  of  songs,  sirrah? 

Fool.  I  have  used  it,  nuncle,  e’er  since  thou  madest  thy  165 
daughters  thy  mothers  ;  for  when  thou  gavest  them  the  rod 
and  puttedst  down  thine  own  breeches, 

Then  they  for  sudden  joy  did  weep , 

And '/  for  sorrow  sung , 

That  such  a  king  should  play  bo-peep ,  1 70 

And  go  the  fools  among. 

Prithee,  nuncle,  keep  a  schoolmaster  that  can  teach  thy 
Fool  to  lie.  I  would  fain  learn  to  lie. 


160  and  168.  Singing  Rowe. 

160.  had  ne’er]  ne'er  had  Pope  +  ,Ec. 

grace ]  ivit  Qq,  Glo.  + ,  Mob. 
162.  And]  They  Qq,  Glo.  Wr.  Mob. 
know  not  how]  well  may  fear 
Coll.  (MS). 

to]  doe  Qt.  do  Qa. 

164.  When]  Since  when  Han. 

165.  e'er]  Rowe  +,  Jen.  Knt,  Dyce, 
Sch.  ere  F,F2.  e' re  F3F4.  euer  Qq 
et  cet. 

1 66.  mothers]  mother  Qq,  Mai.  Steev. 


Bos.  Sing,  Ktly,  Cam.  Wr. 

167.  puttedst]  Dyce  ii,  Coll,  iii ,  put' ft 
or  putfl  or  putlest  QqFf  et  cet. 

thine ]  thy  Theob.  ii,  Warb. 
Johns.  Jen. 

168.  Then  they]  As  part  of  the  song, 
Theob.  Prose,  Ff. 

168-171.  for . among]  Verse,  Ff. 

Prose,  Qq. 

1 7 1.  fools]  Foote  FjF?,  Cap.  Knt. 

172.  Prithee]  prethe  Qf.  prethee  Qa. 
Pry' thy  Ff.  Prethy  F,.  Prythee  T f  ^ 


unpalatable  truths,  and  had  sometimes  been  chastised  for  so  doing.  *  If  then,’  he 
says,  1 1  speak  on  this  occasion  like  myself' — i.  e.  like  a  fool,  foolishly — *  let  not  me  be 
whipped,  but  him  who  first  finds  it  to  be  as  I  have  said’ — i.e.  the  king  himself,  who 
was  likely  to  be  soonest  sensible  of  the  truth  and  justness  of  the  sarcasm,  and  who, 
he  insinuates,  deserved  whipping  for  the  silly  part  he  had  acted. 

160.  Fools  .  .  .  year;]  Johnson:  There  never  was  a  time  when  fools  were  less 
in  favour;  and  the  reason  is,  that  they  were  never  so  little  wanted,  for  wise  men  now 
supply  their  place.  Capell  discovered  that  this  line,  somewhat  changed,  is  to  be 
found  in  Lyly’s  Mother  Bombie,  1594:  ‘I  thinke  Gentlemen  had  never  lesse  wit  in 
a  yeere.’  See  Capell’s  School  of  Sh.,  p.  24. 

161,  163.  foppish  .  .  .  apish]  See,  for  the  rhyme,  II,  iii,  20. 

168,  169.  Then  .  .  .  sung]  Steevens:  Compare  Heywood’s  Rape  of  Lucrece , 
1608:  ‘When  Tarquin  first  in  court  began,  And  was  approved  king,  Some  men  for 
sudden  joy  gan  weep,  But  I  for  sorrow  sing.’ 

171.  among]  For  other  instances  of  the  transposition  of  prepositions,  see  Abbott, 
§  203. 


76 


KING  LEAR 


[act  j,  sc.  iv. 


Lear.  And  you  lie,  sirrah,  we’ll  have  you  whipped. 

Fool.  I  marvel  what  kin  thou  and  thy  daughters  are;  175 
they’ll  have  me  whipped  for  speaking  true,  thou’lt  have  me 
whipped  for  lying,  and  sometimes  I  am  whipped  for  holding 
my  peace.  I  had  rather  be  any  kind  o’  thing  than  a  Fool ; 
and  yet  I  would  not  be  thee,  nuncle ;  thou  hast  pared  thy 
wit  o’  both  sides  and  left  nothing  i’  th’  middle.  Here  comes  180 
one  o’  the  parings. 

Enter  Goneril. 

Lear.  How  now,  daughter?  what  makes  that  frontlet  on? 
Methinks  you  are  too  much  of  late  i’  th’  frown. 


174.  An<f\  Qf,  Ff,  Rowe,  Sch.  If 
Q3,  Pope  +,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Ec. 
Bos.  An  Knt  et  cet. 

sirrah ]  Om.  Qq. 

176.  thou' It]  thou  wilt  Qq,  Jen. 

177.  sometimes]  fometime  Qq. 

178.  o’]  o/Q q,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai. 
Ec.  Bos.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly. 

180.  0 ’  both]  a  both  Qq. 

I  th’]  in  the  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai. 
Ec.  Bos.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly. 


180.  Here]  he  are  F2. 

1 81.  o’  the]  of  the  Qq,  Cap. 

182.  Scene  xiv.  Pope  +,  Jen. 

182,  183.  How. ...frown]  Prose,  Ff. 
Two  lines,  Qq,  Coll,  i,  Sing.  Wh.  Sta. 
Ktly,  Sch. 

182.  daughter]  our  daughter  Ktly. 
on  ?]  on,  Qq. 

183.  Methinks]  Ora.  Ff,  Rowe  + ,  Jen. 
of  late]  alate  Qq. 


179.  thee]  Abbott,  §213:  ‘Thee’  for  thou  is  found  after  the  verb  to  be  not 
merely  here  in  the  Fool’s  mouth,  but  also  in  Tim.  IV,  iii,  277,  and  in  2  Hen.  VI: 
IV,  i,  1 1 7.  In  these  cases  ‘thee’  represents  a  person  not  regarded  as  acting,  but 
about  whom  something  is  predicated. 

181.  Goneril]  Coleridge:  The  monster  Goneril  prepares  what  is  necessary, 
while  the  character  of  Albany  renders  a  still  more  maddening  grievance  possible — 
namely,  Regan  and  Cornwall  in  perfect  sympathy  of  monstrosity.  Not  a  sentiment, 
not  an  image,  which  can  give  pleasure  on  its  own  account,  is  admitted.  Whenever 
these 'creatures  are  introduced,  and  they  are  brought  forward  as  little  as  possible, 
pure  horror  reigns  throughout.  In  this  scene,  and  in  all  the  early  speeches  of  Lear, 
the  one  general  sentiment  of  filial  ingratitude  prevails  as  the  main-spring  of  the 
feelings; — in  this  early  stage  the  outward  object  causing  the  pressure  on  the  mind, 
which  is  not  yet  sufficiently  familiarized  with  the  anguish  for  the  imagination  to  work 
upon  it. 

182.  frontlet]  Steevens:  Compare  the  following  in  The  Four  P’s,  1569  [vol.  i, 
p.  70,  ed.  Dodsley;  the  Pardoner  has  asked  why  women  are  so  long  dressing  after 
they  get  up  in  the  morning,  and  the  Pedler  replies,  with  a  play  upon  the  word  let, 
meaning  hindrance]  :  *  Forsoth,  women  have  many  lettes.  And  they  be  masked  in 
many  nettes:  As  frontlettes,  fyllettes,  partlettes,  and  bracelettes;  And  then  theyi 
bonettes,  and  theyr  poynettes.  By  these  lettes  and  nettes,  the  lette  is  suche,  That 
spede  is  small,  whan  haste  is  muche.’  And  more  appositely,  in  Zepheria ,  a  collec¬ 
tion  of  Sonnets,  1594  [Canzon.  27. — Wright]  :  *  But  now  my  sunne  it  fits  thou  take 
thy  set,  And  vayle  thy  face  with  frownes  as  with  a  frontlet.’  Malone:  A  *  frontlet* 


ACT  T,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


77 


Fool.  Thou  wast  a  pretty  fellow  when  thou  hadst  no 
need  to  care  for  her  frowning;  now  thou  art  an  O  with-  1S5 
out  a  figure;  I  am  better  than  thou  art  now;  I  am  a  Fool, 
thou  art  nothing. — Yes,  forsooth,  I  will  hold  my  tongue ; 
so  your  face  bids  me,  though  you  say  nothing.  Mum, 
mum ; 

He  that  keeps  nor  crust  nor  crumby  1 90 

Weary  of  allt  shall  want  some. — 

That’s  a  shealed  peascod. 


1S5.  frowning ]  frowne  Qq.  Jen. 

187.  [To  Gon.  Pope. 

188.  Mum,  mum;~\  Separate  line. 
Cam. 

[Singing.  Rowe  +,  Coll. 

188,  190.  Mum... crumb]  Cap.  One 
line,  QqFf  +,  Jen.  Sch. 

I90.  nor  crust]  neither  crufl  Qq,  Jen. 


190.  nor  crumb]  not  crumb  F,FJ. 

192.  [Pointingto  Lear.  Johns.  Speak¬ 
ing  to  Lear.  Warb.  To  Kent,  shewing 
Lear.  Cap. 

That' s]  Thou  art  Warb. 
shealeef]  shelf  d Cap.  Wh.  Coll.  iii. 
peascod ]  Pope  ii.  Pefcod  QqFf. 


was  a  forehead  cloth,  used  formerly  by  ladies  at  night  to  render  that  part  smooth.  So 
in  Lyly’s  Euphues  [p.  286,  ed.  Arber] :  *  The  next  daye  I  comming  to  the  gallery 
where  she  was  solitaryly  walking,  with  her  frowning  cloth,  as  sick  lately  of  the 
solens,’  &c.  Staunton  :  The  very  remarkable  effect  of  this  band,  in  the  contrac¬ 
tion  of  the  brows,  may  be  observed  in  some  of  the  monumental  effigies  of  the  four¬ 
teenth  century,  and  especially  in  those  small  figures  usually  called  ‘  Weepers'  which 
are  found  standing  in  tabernacles,  on  the  sides  of  rich  altar-tombs  of  the  same  period. 
Lear,  however,  may  be  supposed  to  speak  metaphorically.  Wright:  Compare 
I  Hen.  IV:  I,  iii,  19:  ‘And  majesty  might  never  yet  endure  The  moody  frontier 
of  a  servant  brow,’  where  *  frontier*  is  apparently  used  with  some  reference  to  tire 
or  head-dress. 

188.  bids  me]  Moberly  gathers  from  this  ‘  that  the  Fool  is  really  mad,  so  far  that 
he  cannot  control  his  gibes ;  for  he  goes  on  again  directly  in  spite  of  his  manifest 
dread  of  Goneril’s  wrath.’  [To  the  present  editor  this  inference  is  incomprehen¬ 
sible,  unless  *  really  mad’  be  taken  in  the  Yankee  sense  of  ‘  real  mad.’] 

190,  191.  He  .  .  .  some]  Dyce  agrees  with  Collier  in  thinking  that  these  and 
lines  208,  209  are  fragments  of  some  satirical  ballad. 

192.  That’s  .  .  .  peascod]  Warburton  was  the  first  to  insert  a  stage-direction 
here,  directly  referring  this  sentence  to  Lear,  and  he  ’has  been  followed,  I  think,  by 
all  edd.  except  Delius.  As  though  the  point  were  not  made  thereby  sufficiently 
clear,  Warburton  changed  *  That’s  ’  to  Thou  art.  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  stage- 
directions  like  these  are  in  general  needless,  not  to  say  obtrusive.  If  the  action  is 
so  clear  that  the  humblest  intellect  can  perceive  it,  surely  a  stage-direction  is  super¬ 
fluous;  for  instance,  when  the  Fool  says  to  Kent,  *  Here’s  my  coxcomb,’  does  any 
one  require  to  be  told  that  he  here  offers  Kent  his  cap  ?  When  Lear  says  ‘  There’s 
earnest  of  thy  service,’  may  not  an  editor  assume  that  a  reader  has  some  intelligence, 
and  needs  not  to  be  told  that  Lear  here  ‘  gives  Kent  money  ’  ?  In  the  present  in¬ 
stance  the  application  is  sufficiently  clear  without  any  indication  with  the  finger.— 
Ed. 

7* 


73 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  iv. 


Gon.  Not  only,  sir,  this  your  all-licensed  Fool, 

But  other  of  your  insolent  retinue 

Do  hourly  carp  and  quarrel,  breaking  forth  1 95 

In  rank  and  not  to  be  endured  riots.  Sir, 

I  had  thought,  by  making  this  well  known  unto  you, 

To  have  found  a  safe  redress ;  but  now  grow  fearful, 

By  what  yourself  too  late  have  spoke  and  done, 

That  you  protect  this  course  and  put  it  on  200 

By  your  allowance ;  which  if  you  should,  the  fault 
Would  not  ’scape  censure,  nor  the  redresses  sleep, 


193-206]  Prose,  Qq. 

193.  this]  thus  Johns. 

194.  other ]  others  Johns. 

196.  not.. .riots.  Sir,']  Pointed  as  by 
Cap.  [not. ..indured riots,)  Sir  Q,.  [not 
... riots )  Sir,  Q2.  [not.. .endur’d)  riots 
Sir.  Ff  (subs.),  Sch.  not. ..riots.  Sir 
Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Jen. 

•Sir]  Ora.  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 


Separate  line,  Wh.  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

197.  had]  Om.  Pope  +  . 
known]  know  F4. 
unto]  to  Quincy  (MS). 

200.  put  it  on]  put  on  Qq. 

201.  which]  Om.  Pope+,  Jen. 

202.  redresses]  redrejfe,  Qt.  redrejft 

Qa- 


Cotgrave  has,  *  Goussepilli .-  .  .  .  vnhusked,  shaled,  vn cased,  stripped.’  Johnson 
explains  the  phrase  (if  explanation  be  needed),  ‘  The  outside  of  a  king  remains,  but 
all  the  intrinsic  parts  of  royalty  are  gone.’ 

Tollet  (who  has  been  followed  by  many  an  editor  without  credit  accorded  to 
him),  on  the  authority  of  Camden’s  Remains ,  states  that  Richard  IPs  effigy  in  West¬ 
minster  Abbey  is  wrought  with  peascods  open  and  the  peas  out ;  *  perhaps,’  adds 
Tollet,  *  an  allusion  to  his  being  once  in  full  possession  of  sovereignty,  but  soon 
reduced  to  an  empty  title.’  But  Toilet’s  interpretation  of  this  monumental  symbolism 
is  itself  converted  to  a  ‘shealed  peascod’  by  Wright’s  discovery  that  the  peascods 
in  question  ‘  are  the  pods  of  the  planta  genista,  or  broom  plant,  the  badge  of  the 
Plantagenets.  Moreover,  although  the  pods  are  open,  the  seeds  are  indicated.’ 

194.  other]  For  other  instances  of  the  use  of  this  word  as  a  plural  pronoun,  see 
Abbott,  §  12,  p.  24. 

196.  Sir]  Walker  ( Vers.  269) :  Perhaps,  metri  gratia,,  this  word  should  be 
placed  by  itself,  in  a  separate  line.  [See  Textual  Notes.] 

198.  To  have  found]  See  Ham.  V,  i,  233,  or  Abbott,  §  360. 

200.  put  it  on]  Steevens  :  Promote  it.  So  Macb.  IV,  iii,  239. 

201.  allowance]  Malone:  Approbation.  Moberly:  The  rest  of  the  sentence 
labours  under  a  plethora  of  relatives.  The  meaning,  however,  is  simple :  *  If  you 
instigate  your  men  to  riot  I  will  check  it,  even  though  it  offends  you ;  as  that  offence, 
wnich  would  otherwise  be  a  shame,  would  be  proved  by  the  necessity  to  be  a  discreet 
proceeding.’  ‘  Yes,’  replies  the  Fool,  *  and  so  the  young  cuckoo,  wanting  the  nest 
to  itself,  was  under  the  regrettable  necessity  of  biting  off  the  head  of  its  foster-mother 
the  sparrow ;  which,  under  the  circumstances,  was  not  a  shame,  but  an  act  of  dis¬ 
cretion.’ 


ACT  I,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


79 


Which,  in  the  tender  of  a  wholesome  weal, 

Might  in  their  working  do  you  that  offence, 

Which  else  were  shame,  that  then  necessity  20$ 

Will  call  discreet  proceeding. 

Fool.  For,  you  know,  nuncle, 

The  hedge-sparroiv  fed  the  cuckoo  so  long, 

That  it's  had  it  head  bit  off  by  it  young. 

So  out  went  the  candle,  and  we  were  left  darkling.  210 


205.  Wh ich ]  that  Qq. 

206.  Wilt]  mujl  Qq.  , 
proceeding ]  proceedings  Qq. 

207.  know ]  trow  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai. 
Ec.  Bos.  Coll.  Del.  Sing.  Dyce  i,  Sta. 
Ktly,  Glo.  Mob. 

208.  [Singing.  Coll.  (MS). 

208-209.  The.. .young.]  Verse,  Pope. 

Prose,  QqFf. 


209.  it’s  had  it  head]  F,,  Sta.  Glo. 
Sch.  it  had  it  head  Qq,  Wh.  Ktly,  Cam. 
Del.  ii,  Wr.  it  had  it's  head  F3F4, 
Pope,  Cap.  it's  had  its  head  Mob.  it 
had  its  head  F„  et  cet. 

by  it]  F,F2,  Sta.  Wh.  Ktly,  Glo  + , 
Del.  ii,  Mob.  Sch.  beit  Qq.  by  it's 
F3F4,  Pope,  Cap.  by  its  Rowe  et  cet. 


203.  tender  .  .  .  weal]  Wright:  That  is,  in  caring  for  a  sound  or  healthily  or¬ 
ganized  commonwealth.  For  ‘tender’  as  a  verb  in  this  sense  compare  Hen.  V:  II, 
ii,  175.  And  for  a  play  upon  its  other  senses  see  Ham.  I,  iii,  106-109.  For  ‘  whole¬ 
some’  in  the  sense  of  ‘healthy’  compare  Ham.  Ill,  iv,  65.  ‘Weal’  for  ‘common¬ 
wealth’  occurs  in  Macb.  Ill,  iv,  76. 

209.  it  head]  See  notes  on  Ham.  I,  ii,  216.  White  thinks  that  *  it's  had’  of 
the  Folio  is  a  mere  misprint,  and  not  an  abbreviation  of  ‘  it  has  had ;’  but  STAUNTON, 
Wright,  and  the  present  Editor  think  that  it  is  an  abbreviation.  So  also  does 
Schmidt.  Tiessen  ( Archiv.f ’.  d.  n.  Spr.  lviii,  pt.  ii,  p.  160)  suggests  that  *  it’  here 
is  baby  talk,  like  ‘  it  grandam  ’  in  King  yohn.  See  also  IV,  ii,  32. 

210.  So  . . .  darkling]  Steevens  :  Farmer  concurs  with  me  in  supposing  that  this  is 
a  fragment  of  some  old  song.  Malone  :  In  a  very  old  comedy  called  The  Longer  Thou 
Livest  the  more  Foote  Thou  Arte,  about  1580,  we  find  the  following  stage-direction  : 
‘  Entreth  Moros,  counterfaiting  a  vaine  gesture  and  a  foolish  countenance,  synging 
the  foote  of  many  songs,  as  fools  were  wont.’  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  :  Shakespeare’s 
fools  are  certainly  copied  from  the  life.  The  originals  whom  he  copied  were  no 
doubt  men  of  quick  parts ;  lively  and  sarcastic.  Though  they  were  licensed  to  say 
any  thing,  it  was  still  necessary,  to  prevent  giving  offence,  that  everything  they  said 
should  have  a  playful  air;  we  may  suppose,  therefore,  that  they  had  a  custom  of 
taking  off  the  edge  of  too  sharp  a  speech  by  covering  it  hastily  with  the  end  of  an 
old  song,  or  any  glib  nonsense  that  came  into  the  mind.  I  know  no  other  way  of 
accounting  for  the  incoherent  words  with  which  Sh.  often  finishes  this  Fool’s  speeches. 
Knight  [after  quoting  this  note  by  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  continues]  :  But  the  words 
before  us  are  not  incoherent  words.  The  expression  ‘  so  out  went  the  candle,’  &c., 
may  have  been  proverbial  to  signify  the  desertion  of  a  man  by  his  mercenary  friends 
when  he  is  become  a  ‘sheal’d  peascod.’  But  Sh.  found  the  almost  identical  image 
applied  to  the  story  of  Lear  as  related  by  Spenser :  ‘  But  true  it  is,  that,  when  the  oil 
is  spent,  The  light  goes  out  and  wick  is  thrown  away ;  So  when  he  had  resign’d  his 

egiment.  His  daughter  ’gan  despise  his  drooping  day.’ 


8o 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  iv. 


Lear.  Are  you  our  daughter  ?  211 

Gon.  Come,  sir, 

I  would  you  would  make  use  of  that  good  wisdom 
Whereof  I  know  you  are  fraught,  and  put  away 
These  dispositions  which  of  late  transport  you  215 

From  what  you  rightly  are. 

Fool.  May  not  an  ass  know  when  the  cart  draws  the 
horse  ?  Whoop ,  Jug,  I  love  thee. 


212.  Come,  sir,"]  Om.  Ff  + ,  Knt,  Coll. 
Del.  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Wh.  Ktlv,  Sch. 

213-216.  Prose,  Qq,  Mai.  Steev.  Bos. 

213.  that']  your  Ff+,  Knt,  Coll.  Del. 
Dyce  i,  Wh.  Sch. 

214.  Whereof]  Wherewith  Jen.  conj. 

215.  which . transport]  Ff+,Cap. 

Knt,  Del.  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Sch.  which 


...transform  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Ec.  Bos. 
Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  Ktly.  tkat...transforme 
Qq  et  cet. 

21S.  Whoop..thee]  Italics,  Ed.  Sepa- 
rate  line,  Ff. 

Jug>]  Iug  Q<1-  IuSSe  F,F, 

7“g  F3F4- 


210.  darkling]  Staunton:  This  word  which,  like  the  Scotch  darklitis,  implied 
in  the  dark,  is  found  in  the  ancient  comedy  of  Roister  Doister,  III,  iii.  [p.  41,  ed. 
Sh.  Soc.]  :  *  He  will  go  darklyng  to  his  grave.’  See  also  Mid.  N.  D.  II,  ii,  S6. 
Wright:  For  the  adverbial  termination  ‘-ling,’  or  ‘-long,’  see  Morris,  English 
Accidence,  p.  194,  and  compare  ‘flatlong,’  Temp.  II,  i,  181.  ‘  Hedlynge’  and  ‘hed- 
lynges  ’  are  found  in  the  Glossary  to  the  Wicliffite  versions. 

214.  fraught]  Schmidt:  Equivalent  to  freighted;  usually  followed  by  with  ;  only 
in  this  passage  by  ‘  of.’ 

215.  dispositions]  Compare  ‘antic  disposition,’  Ham.  I,  v,  172,  and  Mach.  Ill, 
iv,  1 13. 

215.  transport]  In  support  of  the  Ff,  Schmidt  cites  ‘  Being  transported  by  my 
jealousies  to  bloody  thoughts.’ — Wint.  Tale,  III,  ii,  159.  ‘You  are  transported  by 
calamity.’ — Cor.  I,  i,  77. 

218.  Whoop  .  .  .  thee]  Steevens:  This  is,  as  I  am  informed,  a  quotation  from 
the  burthen  of  an  old  song.  Halliwell:  ‘Jug’  was  the  old  nickname  for  Joan, 
and  it  was  also  a  term  of  endearment.  Edward  Alleyn,  the  player,  writing  to  his 
Wife  in  1593,  says:  ‘And,  Jug,  I  pray  you  lett  my  orayng-tawny  stokins  of  wolen  be 
dyed  a  newe  good  blak  against  I  com  horn,  to  wear  in  winter.’  So  also,  ‘  If  I  be  I, 
and  thou  be’st  one,  Tell  me,  sweet  Jugge,  how  spell'st  thou  Jone.’ — Cotgrave’s  Win 
Interpreter ,  1671,  p.  116.  Moberly:  He  seems  to  mean,  ‘As  things  have  got  the 
wrong  way  forward,  I  know  what  fair  lady  I  must  pay  my  court  to  now.’  ‘Jug’  is 
a  vulgar  form  of  ‘Jane,’  and  he  expresses  the  idea  present  to  his  mind  in  the  first 
grotesquely  similar  form  which  his  memory  suggests.  [At  the  end  of  the  edition 
of  Heywood’s  Rape  of  Lucrece,  printed  in  1638,  a  song  is  given  which  begins: 
‘Arise,  arise,  my  Juggie,  my  Puggie,’  and  Juggie  replies  in  the  next  verse,  *  Begon, 
begon,  my  Willie,  my  Billie.’  In  a  note  on  the  present  passage,  in  his  translation  of 
Lear,  Jordan  says  that  *  Whoop  ’  may  mean  either  a  shout  or  a  bird,  the  hoopoo ; 
and  that  ‘Jug’  may  mean,  first,  the  nickname  for  Joan;  secondly,  a  pool  or  puddle 
[where  did  he  find  this  meaning?]  ;  and  thirdly,  it  may  be  an  imperative  of  a  verb 
to  jug,  which  he  informs  us  means  to  entice  like  a  bird,  especially  to  imitate  the  note 


ACT  I,  SC.  iv.J 


KING  LEAR 


81 


Lear.  Does  any  here  know  me  ?  This  is  not  Lear. 

Does  Lear  walk  thus?  speak  thus?  Where  are  his  eyes?  220 
Either  his  notion  weakens,  his  discernings 
Are  lethargied — Ha !  waking  ?  'tis  not  so. 

Who  is  it  that  can  tell  me  who  I  am  ? 


219-224.  Does. ..shadow.']  Prose,  Qq, 
Mai.  Steev.  Bos.  Coll.  Sing. 

219,  220.  Does]  Do's  FjF3F4.  Dos 
F3.  Doth  Qq,  Glo.  +,  Dyce  ii. 

219.  Does. .. Lear :]  Rowe.  Twolines, 

Ff. 

This]  why  this  Qq,  Jen.  Steev. 
Mai.  Ec.  Bos.  Coll.  Sing.  Dyce  ii,  Ktly. 

221.  notion  weakens]  notion,  weaknes 
Q,.  notion,  weakneffe,  Q2. 

his  discernings]  Ff  +,  Cap.  Knt, 
Del.  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Glo.  +,  Mob.  Sch.  or 
his  difcernings  Qq  et  cet. 

222-223.  Are. ...am?]  Three  lines, 


ending  Ha  !...me...am  ?  Ktly  (adopting 
the  Qq). 

222.  lethargied — ]  Rowe.  Lethar¬ 
gied.  Ff,  Knt,  Del.  lelhergie,  Qt.  leth- 

ergy>  Q2- 

Ha  !  waking?] /keeping  or  wak¬ 
ing  ;  ha!  Jure  Qq,  Mai.  Steev.  Bos. 
Coll.  Sing.  Ktly. 

’tis]  sure  'tis  Wh.  (adopting  the 

Ff). 

223-227.  Who. ..daughters]  Four  lines, 

ending  shadow  ? . marks . reason.... 

daughters.  Steev.  ’78,  ’85. 


of  a  nightingale.  These  three  meanings  yield  three  interpretations :  first,  the  usual 
one,  as  the  refrain  of  a  ballad;  second,  as  the  answer  to  the  foregoing  question 
‘May  not  an  ass  know  when  the  cart  draws  the  horse?’  and  to  be  paraphrased; 
‘Gee-up,  puddle!  I  love  thee!’  and  supposed  to  be  addressed  by  the  cart  to  the 
mud-hole  into  which  it  rolls  back,  thus  drawing  the  horse  after  it;  and  lastly,  we 
have  the  interpretation  adopted  by  the  translator  himself,  with  this  explanation : 
Goneril  having  shown  in  her  first  speech  to  her  father  how  foul  her  thoughts  are, 
changes  her  tone  when  she  next  speaks  to  him,  and  cloaks  her  reproaches  under  the 
garb  of  filial  love;  but  the  Fool  detects  her,  and,  designating  her  as  a  hoopoo,  which 
is  supposed  to  be  a  filthy  bird,  says  to  her:  Sing,  hoopoo,  like  a  nightingale,  the 
words  ‘  I  love  thee,’  or,  as  in  the  translation  :  ‘  Sing,  Dreckhahn,  wie  ’ne  Nachtigall : 
Ich  liebe  dich.’ — Ed.] 

219-228.  Does  .  .  .  father]  Whether  it  be  due  to  the  incoherence  of  Lear's, 
passion  or  to  the  sophistications  of  the  compositor,  these  lines  have  given  rise  to 
much  discussion  among  the  early  commentators.  The  later  editors  have  been  con¬ 
cerned  chiefly  with  the  metrical  arrangement,  and  have  little  or  nothing  to  say  about 
the  meaning  of  the  passage.  Roderick  (Can.  of  Crit.,  p.  267,  1765,  ed.  vii)  holds 
Lear’s  first  speech  (lines  219-223)  to  be  ironical.  Goneril  has  told  him  that  he  is 
transported  beyond  himself,  and  he  ironically  assents  to  it.  To  support  this  view,. 
Roderick  changes  ‘  Ha !  waking?’  into  ‘or  waking;’  that  is,  ‘  This  is  not  Lear, — 
whether  in  lethargy  or  waking — it  is  not  Lear.’  He  would  also  change  ‘  Who  is  it 
that  can  tell  me?’  into  ‘Who  is  it  then  can  tell  me?’  Here  the  irony  ceases  and 
serious  resentment  begins.  *  If  I  were  to  be  persuaded  by  the  marks  of  (i.  e.  the 
distinction  and  respect  due  to)  my  sovereignty  (as  king),  my  knowledge  (as  an  old 
man,  of  long  experience)  or  my  reason  (as  a  man,  one  of  the  superior  sex)  that  I 
had  daughters,  it  would  appear  that  I  was  falsely  so  persuaded.  You  are  therefore 
a  stranger,  and  I  demand  your  name.’  This  interpretation  of  Roderick’s  needs  no 
refutation.  Heath  denounces  it  as  unnatural  to  a  person  in  Lear’s  situation,  just 

F 


82 


KING  LEAR 


[act  I.  SC.  IV. 


[219-228.  Does  .  .  .  father] 

then  transported  to  the  highest  pitch  of  astonishment,  and  not  yet  sufficiently  familiar¬ 
ised  to  his  misfortunes,  nor  cool  enough,  to  treat  the  author  of  them  ironically.  Heath 
himself  interprets  lines  221,  222 :  *  Either  his  apprehension  is  decayed,  his  faculty  of 
discernment  is  buried  under  a  lethargic  sleep,  or  — here  he  was  about  to  go  on  to  the 
other  alternative — viz :  he  is  in  his  sober  senses  and  broad  awake,  when  the  sudden 
whirl  of  passion  on  the  bare  imagination  that  what  had  passed  is  real,  so  overwhelms 
him  that  he  breaks  off:  ‘Hat  what!  that  it  should  be  possible  that  I  am  now 
awake  ?  It  cannot  be,  ’tis  impossible.’  Warburton  aroused  the  critics  by  his  dog¬ 
matic  assertion  that  we  should  read  ‘  sovereignty  of  knowledge’ — i.  e.  the  under¬ 
standing,  like  *  sovereignty  of  reason’  in  Ham.,  because  his  sovereignty  or  kingship 
would  not  enable  Lear  to  judge  whether  or  not  these  were  his  daughters.  Heath 
as  usual  flouts  and  routs  Warburton,  but  without  giving  a  much  better  interpretation 
of  the  phrase.  He  defines ‘sovereignty  ’  as  that  self-command  which  distinguishes 
the  man  in  his  senses  from  a  lunatic  or  idiot :  *  If  I  should  give  credit  to  those 
marks  I  perceive  in  myself  of  being  in  my  right  senses,  and  endued  with  knowledge 
and  reason,  I  should  be  persuaded  I  had  daughters,’  &c.  Tyrwhitt  says  that  the 
difficulty  is  ‘  to  conceive  how  “  the  marks  of  sovereignty,  of  knowledge,  and  of 
reason”  should  be  of  any  use  to  persuade  Lear  that  he  had  or  had  not  daughters. 
No  logic  could  draw  such  a  conclusion  from  such  premises.  This  difficulty  may  be 
entirely  removed  by  only  pointing  the  passage  thus :  “  for  by  the  marks  of  sovereignty, 
knowledge,  and  reason,  I  should  be  false  persuaded. — I  had  daughters. — Your  name, 
fair  gentlewoman?”  The  chain  of  Lear’s  speech  being  thus  untangled,  we  can 
clearly  trace  the  succession  and  connection  of  his  ideas.  The  undutiful  behaviour 
of  his  daughter  so  disconcerts  him  that  he  doubts  by  turns  whether  she  is  Goneril 
and  whether  he  himself  is  Lear.  Upon  her  first  speech,  he  only  exclaims,  “Are  you 
our  daughter  ?”  Upon  her  going  on  in  the  same  style,  he  begins  to  question  his 
own  sanity,  and  even  his  personal  identity.  He  appeals  to  the  bystanders,  “  Who  is 
it  that  can  tell  me  who  I  am?”  I  should  be  glad  to  be  told.  For  (if  I  was  to  judge 
myself)  by  the  marks  of  sovereignty,  of  knowledge,  and  of  reason  (which  once  dis¬ 
tinguished  Lear,  but  which  I  have  now  lost),  I  should  be  false  (against  my  own 
consciousness)  persuaded  (that  I  am  not  Lear).  He  then  slides  to  the  examina¬ 
tion  of  another  distinguishing  mark  of  Lear:  “I  had  daughters.”  But  not  able, 
as  it  should  seem,  to  dwell  upon  so  tender  a  subject,  he  hastily  recurs  to  his  first 
doubt  concerning  Goneril:  “Your  name,  fair  gentlewoman?”’  Of  this  note  by 
Tyrwhitt,  Johnson  says  that  it  is  *  written  with  confidence  disproportionate  to  the 
conviction  which  it  can  bring.  Lear  might  as  well  know  by  the  marks  and  token3 
arising  from  sovereignty,  knowledge,  and  reason,  that  he  had  or  had  not  daughters, 
as  he  could  know  by  anything  else.  But,  says  he,  if  I  judge  by  these  tokens,  I  find 
the  persuasion  false  by  which  I  long  thought  myself  the  father  of  daughters.’  Mason 
says  that  by  the  marks  of  sovereignty  Lear  means  those  tokens  of  royalty  which  his 
daughters  then  enjoyed  as  derived  from  him.  But  Malone  replies :  ‘  Lear  had  not 
parted  with  all  the  marks  of  sovereignty.  In  the  midst  of  his  prodigality  to  his 
children,  he  reserved  to  himself  the  name  and  all  the  additions  to  a  king.*  Staun¬ 
ton  says  that  this  passage  is  ‘  certainly  obscure.  Possibly  the  meaning  may  be 
restored  by  simply  omitting  the  comma  after  “sovereignty,”  “ — by  the  marks  of 
sovereignty  knowledge  and  reason” — i.e.  of  supreme  or  sovereign  knowledge,  &c.’ 
Knicht  puts  dashes,  to  indicate  continued  speech,  after  Lear’s  question,  ‘  Who  is  it 


ACT  I,  sc.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


83 


Fool.  Lear’s  shadow. 

*  Lear.  I  would  learn  that ;  for,  by  the  marks  of  sover-  225 

*  eignty,  knowledge,  and  reason,  I  should  be  false  per- 

*  suaded  I  had  daughters. 

*  Fool.  Which  they  will  make  an  obedient  father.* 

Lear.  Your  name,  fair  gentlewoman  ? 


224- 227.  Lear's daughters ]  Con¬ 
tinued  to  Lear,  Qq,  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
Warb.  Jen.  Steev.  ’78,  ’85,  ’93,  Mai.  Ec. 
Bos.  Coll.  i.  Three  lines,  ending  marks 
...reason. ..daughters  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
Warb.  Jen.  Ec.  Prose,  Qq  et  cet. 

224.  shadow. ]  fhadow?  Qq,  Pope, 
Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Jen.  Steev.  Mai. 
Ec.  Bos.  Coll.  i.  shadow , —  Sing. 

Fool.  Lears  shadow .]  Thus  in 
Ff.  Om.  Rann. 

225- 228.  Lear.  I  would.... ..father.} 

Steev.  ’73  (subs.)  I  would. ..father.  Qq. 
Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Johns.  Cap.  Sch. 

225-227.  I. ..daughters}  Three  lines, 
ending  marks. ..reason. ..daughters  Steev. 
’73.  Ending  sovereignly... reason... daztgh- 


ters  Dyce  i.  Ending  by... reason. ..daugh¬ 
ters  Ktly.  Ending  sovereignty . .per¬ 

suaded. ..daughters  Dyce  ii. 

225.  that}  Om.  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
Warb.  Ec. 

sovereignty}  substantiality  Jen. 

225-226.  sovereignty . . reason,}  Of 

sovereignty ,  of  knowledge ,  and  of  reason, 
Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Ec.  Of  sovereignty 
of  knowledge ,  and  of  reaso7i,  Warb. 

226.  false}  fast  Jen. 

227.  daughters.}  daughters —  Knt. 
228-229.  Fool.  Which.,  father.  Lear.] 

Om.  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Ec. 

228.  Which  they  will}  Q3.  Which 
they ,  will  Q,Q2.  Which  of  thee  7oill  Jen. 


that  can  tell  me  who  I  am? — after  the  Fool’s  answer,  ‘Lear’s  shadow. — and 
after  ‘  I  should  be  false  persuaded  I  had  daughters — ’,  and  defends  his  punctuation 
on  the  ground  that  the  Fool  interrupts  Lear  with  the  answer,  *  Lear’s  shadow,’  and 
that  Lear  continues  to  speak  without  reference  to  the  Fool’s  interposition,  and  that 
the  Fool  in  the  same  way  continues  the  thread  of  his  comment :  ‘  Which  they  will 
make  an  obedient  father.*  Here  *  which’  refers  to  *  shadow.’  In  this  interpretation 
Knight  follows  Douce  (ii,  147).  A  passage'  of  such  defective  metre  as  this  could 
not  escape  Walker;  accordingly  {jCrit.  i,  4)  he  gives,  line  221,  ‘Either  his  motion 
[sic.  Probably  a  misprint.]  weakens,  or  *s  discernings  ;*  and,  following  the  Qq  in 
lines  222-227,  he  thus  arranges,  and  changes:  ‘ — Sleeping  or  waking? — Ha!  |]  Sure 
’tis  not  so.  ||  Who  is’t  [omitting  that}  can  tell  me  who  I  am  ? — Lear’s  shadow  ? — 1| 
I  would  learn  that;  for  by  the  marks  of  sov’reignty,  ||  Knowledge  and  reason,  I 
should  be  false  persuaded  ||  [That]  I  had  daughters.’  Lettsom,  Walker’s  admirable 
editor,  referring  to  Walker’s  adoption  of  the  text  of  the  Qq,  says :  ‘  It  appears  to  me 
that  just  here  the  Qq  give  an  unsophisticated  text,  though  one  disfigured  by  some 
palpable  blunders,  while  in  the  Folio  we  have  a  text  derived  from  a  good  original, 
but  sophisticated  in  a  blundering  way  for  the  sake  of  the  metre.’  Schmidt:  Per¬ 
haps  there  is  here  a  real  gap  in  the  Ff,  but  the  lines  which  the  Qq  offer  in  its  place 
are  too  questionable  to  be  adopted  in  the  text. 

228.  Which]  Steevens  :  This  is  used  with  two  deviations  from  present  language : 
it  is  referred  to  the  pronoun  /,  and  it  is  employed  for  whom.  Douce,  as  we  have 
seen  in  the  preceding  note,  followed  by  Knicht,  Sincer,  and  Hudson,  refers 
‘  which  ’  to  ‘  shadow.’  Moberly,  with  more  probability,  explains  it  as  an  instance 
of  the  relative  as  the  commonest  connective  used  improperly. 


84 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  iv. 


Gon.  This  admiration,  sir,  is  much  o’  th’  savour  230 

Of  other  your  new  pranks.  I  do  beseech  you 
To  understand  my  purposes  aright ; 

As  you  are  old  and  reverend,  you  should  be  wise. 

Here  do  you  keep  a  hundred  knights  and  squires ; 

Men  so  disorder’d,  so  debosh’d,  and  bold,  235 

That  this  our  court,  infefted  with  their  manners. 

Shows  like  a  riotous  inn ;  epicurism  and  lust 

Makes  it  more  like  a  tavern  or  a  brothel 

Than  a  graced  palace.  The  shame  itself  doth  speak 


230-248.  Prose,  Qq. 

230.  This  admiratioti,  sir,]  Come  fir , 
this  admiration  Qq.  Come ,  sir;  This 
admiration  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Bos. 
o'  th’]  of  the  Qq,  Jen. 
savour]  favour  Q3,  Cap.  Steev. 
Mai.  Ec.  Bos.  Coll,  i,  ii,  Dyce  i,  Del.  i. 
Sta.  Wh.  Glo.  Mob. 

232.  To]  Om.  Qq. 

233.  As. ..you  should]  Qa.  As  you 
are  old  and  reuerend,  Jhould  Q,.  As  you 
are  Old,  and  Reuerend,  fiould  Ff,  Knt, 
Coll.  Del.  Dyce,  Wh.  Sch.  You,  as  you 
are  old  and  reverend,  should  Rowe,  Cap. 
You,  as  you're  old  and  rev' rend,  should 


Pope+. 

233.  you  should]  Om.  Steev.  conj. 

234.  a  hundred]  a  1 00.  Q,.  one  hun¬ 
dred  Qa. 

235.  debosh’d]  deboyjl  Qq.  debauch'd 
Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Ec.  Bos.  Coll. 
Del.  i,  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

237.  riotous]  Om.  Steev.  conj. 

238.  Makes  it  more]  Ff,  Sch.  make 
more  Qq.  Make  it  more  Rowe  et  cet. 

a  brothel]  brothell  Qq. 

239.  graced]  grac’d  Ff.  great  Qq. 
The]  Om.  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 

Warb. 


230.  admiration]  Astonishment.  See  Ham.  I,  ii,  192:  *  Season  your  admiration 
for  a  while.’ 

230.  savour]  Capei.l:  ‘Whether  the  word  of  some  old  editions  be  favour  or 
favour  is  hard  pronouncing;  nor  is  there  much  choice  between  them  in  this  place.’ 
If  favour  be  adopted,  Steevens  rightly  explains  it  as  complexion.  Schmidt  deserts 
the  Ff  and  follows  Jane  Bell’s  Quarto!  Because,  as  he  says,  savour  bears  no  other 
meaning  in  Sh.  than  smell.  But  this  is  an  assertion  which  I  am  afraid  it  would  be 
hard  to  prove,  so  great  is  the  confusion  arising  between  the  long  f  and  f.  In  all 
the  passages  where  the  word  is  used,  there  is,  as  Capell  says  of  the  present,  not 
much  choice  between  favour  and  favour ,  and  probably  a  master  of  fence,  like 
Schmidt,  could  successfully  uphold  either. 

233 .  you  should]  The  omission  of  ‘you’  in  the  Ff  cannot  be  justified,  says 
Schmidt,  by  other  examples  in  Sh.,  but  its  insertion  lames  the  metre. 

235.  debosh’d]  The  old  spelling  of  debauched,  of  which  word,  WEDGWOOD  says 
that  the  radical  idea  seems  to  be  to  throw  out  of  course,  from  bauche,  a  row,  rank, 
or  course  of  stones,  or  bricks,  in  building. 

237-238.  epicurism  .  .  .  lust,  .  .  .  tavern  .  .  .  brothel]  An  instance  of  what 
Corson  calls  a  respective  construction.  The  first  word  refers  to  the  third  and  the 
second  to  the  fourth. v  See  Ham.  IV,  vii,  82. 

239.  graced]  WaRburton:  A  palace  graced  by  the  presence  of  a  sovereign. 
But  Schmidt  [lex.)  interprets  it  better  as  ‘full  of  grace,  dignified,  honourable.’ 


ACT  I,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


85 

240 


For  instant  remedy.  Be  then  desired 
By  her,  that  else  will  take  the  thing  she  begs, 

A  little  to  disquantity  your  train, 

And  the  remainder,  that  shall  still  depend, 

To  be  such  men  as  may  besort  your  age, 

Which  know  themselves  and  you. 

Lear.  Darkness  and  devils ! — 


240.  then]  thou  Qq. 

242.  A  little ]  Of  fifty  Pope  + ,  Jen. 

243.  remainder ]  remainders  Ff+, 
Sch. 

245.  WhicK\  Ff,-  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll. 


245 

Del.  Dyce,  Sta.  Wh.  Cam.  Huds.  Sch. 
that  Qt.  and  Q2  et  cet. 

245.  devils ]  Deuils  Q,.  Diuels  Q2F,. 
Divels  F3. 


242.  A  little]  Pope  changed  this  to  Of  fifty,  on  the  ground  that  Lear  shortly 
afterwards  specifies  this  as  the  number  that  was  to  be  cut  of,  and  yet  Goneril  had  no¬ 
where  specified  it.  Steevens  explains  the  difficulty  that  Pope  finds  (of  course,  not 
without  a  sneer  at  Pope)  by  assuming  that  some  one  tells  Lear  how  many  of  his 
followers  he  is  to  lose,  in  the  few  minutes  that  Lear  is  absent  from  the  scene  between 
lines  2S3  and  287. *  *  Goneril,’  adds  Steevens,  *  with  great  art,  is  made  to  avoid  men¬ 
tioning  the  limited  number,  and  leaves  her  father  to  be  informed  of  it  by  accident^ 
which  she  knew  would  be  the  case  as  soon  as  he  left  her  presence.’  [Surely,  a  sim¬ 
ple  oversight  on  Shakespeare’s  part,  or  a  trick  his  memory  played  him.  In  the  old 
play  of-  King  Leir ,  Gonorill  says  she  has  *  restrained  halfe  his  portion.’  See  Ap¬ 
pendix. — Ed.] 

242.  disquantity]  Delius  :  Compare  ‘  denatured,’  in  line  277  of  this  scene. 
[And  other  instances  of  similar  words  in  Abbott,  §  439.] 

243-244.  the  remainder  ...  to  be]  For  similar  instances,  where  the  noun  and 
infinitive  are  used  as  subject  or  object,  see  Abbott,  §  354.  Schmidt  supports  the 
Folio  text  by  citing  Cymb.  I,  i,  129:  ‘  The  gods  protect  you!  And  bless  the  good 
remainders  of  the  court.’ 

243.  depend]  Warburton  interprets  ‘  continue  in  service ;’  or,  as  Wright  says, 

*  that  shall  still  remain  dependents,’  but  Schmidt  denies  this  meaning,  and  maintains 
with  Delius  that  the  phrase  signifies :  *  this  shall  still  be  one  of  the  conditions,  that 
they  are  men  as  may  besort  your  age,’  &c.  *  Even  if  dependant  means  a  retainer,  a 
servant,  the  verb  depend,  used  absolutely,  never  means  to  serve,  to  be  a  in  a  person's 
service,  but  it  indicates  the  opposite  of  personal  freedom,  the  position  of  a  subject 
and  bondman.  “  A  life  so  stinkingly  depending,”  in  Meas.  for  Meas.  Ill,  ii,  28, 
means,  a  life  which  is  the  slave  of  disgusting  coarseness.  The  remark  “  you  depend 
upon  Lord  Paris,”  in  Tro.  and  Ores.,  which,  of  course,  means  you  are  one  of  the 
servants  of  Lord  Paris, — a  simple  menial  perverts  by  the  reply,  “  I  depend  upon  the 
lord.”  If  “that,”  in  the  present  passage,  be  a  relative,  the  phrase  can  only  mean: 
that  shall  continue  to  remain  servants,  not  their  own  masters.’  [Which  is  exactly 
what  Wright  says  it  means;  and  is  not  only  the  simpler  explanation  of  the  two, 
but  wholly  avoids  any  grammatical  difficulty.  According  to  Schmidt’s  interpreta¬ 
tion  the  sentence  is  an  anacoluthon, — there  is  no  verb  for  *  remainder,’  and  he  has 
to  suggest  that,  grammatically,  ‘  To  be  such  men,’  should  be  *  On  their  being  such 
men.’ — Ed.] 

8 


86 


KING  LEAR 


[act  sc.  iv. 
246 


Saddle  my  horses !  call  my  train  together  ! — 

Degenerate  bastard !  I’ll  not  trouble  thee. 

Yet  have  I  left  a  daughter. 

Gon.  You  strike  my  people,  and  your  disorder’d  rabble 
Make  servants  of  their  betters.  250 


Enter  ALBANY. 

Lear.  Woe,  that  too  late  repents, — O,  sir,  are  you  come  ? 

Is  it  your  will  ?  Speak,  sir. — Prepare  my  horses. — 

Ingratitude,  thou  marble-hearted  fiend, 

More  hideous  when  thou  show’st  thee  in  a  child 
Than  the  sea-monster ! 

Alb  Pray,  sir,  be  patient.  255 

Lear.  Detested  kite !  thou  liest. 

My  train  are  men  of  choice  and  rarest  parts, 


249-250.  You. ..betters."]  Verse,  Rowe 
ii.  Prose,  QqFf. 

250.  Enter  Albany.]  Enter  Duke.  Qq. 

251.  Scene  xv.  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  The 
rest  of  the  Scene,  except  lines  340,  341, 
is  prose  in  Qq. 

Woe, ...repents, — ]  Cap.  Woe  !... 
repents — Rowe-f.  Woe, .. .repents  :  Ff. 
We  that  too  late  repent's,  Q,.  We  that 
too  late  repent's  vs  ;  Qa.  Fool !  that  too 
late  repent' st —  Jen.  Woe's  him  that  too 
late  repents —  Ktly. 

[To  Alb.  Rowe. 


251.  O,  sir. ..come?]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Sch. 

252.  vuill ?... Prepare  my]  Johns,  will, 
J 'peak ,  Sir?  Prepare  my  Ff+.  will 
that  wee  prepare  any  Qq. 

255- 256.  Alb.  Pray,  sir,  be  patient. 
Lear.]  Om.  Qq. 

255.  sir]  you,  sir  Han. 

256.  [To  Gon.  Rowe. 

256- 257.  liest.  My  train  are]  lift  my 
traine,  and  Q,.  lejfen  my  trains  and 

Q»* 


254.  thee]  For  other  instances  of  the  use  of  *  thee’  for  thyself,  see  Abbott,  §  223. 

255.  sea-monster]  Upton  ( Crit .  Obs.,  p.  203,  ed.  ii)  observes  that  this  is  the 
hippopotamus,  the  hieroglyphical  symbol  of  impiety  and  ingratitude;  and  suggests: 

Than  V  th'  sea-monster.’  Hudson:  But  that  beast  never  lives  in  the  sea;  it  is  a 
r:Vrr-monster.  If  the  poet  had  any  particular  animal  in  view,  I  suspect  it  was  the  one 
that  behaved  so  ungently  at  old  Troy, — alluded  to  in  Mer.  of  Yen.  Ill,  ii,  57.  Wright 
[who  gives  a  fuller  quotation  than  Upton  from  Sandys]  :  Sandys  ( 'Travels ,  p.  105, 
ed.  1637)  gives  a  picture  said  to  be  portrayed  in  the  porch  of  the  temple  of  Minerva 
at  Sais,  in  which  is  the  figure  of  a  river-horse,  denoting  ‘  murder,  impudence,  vio¬ 
lence,  and  injustice ;  for  they  say  that  he  killeth  his  Sire,  and  ravisheth  his  owne 
dam.’  His  account  is  evidently  taken  from  Plutarch’s  Isis  and  Osiris,  and  Sh.  may 
have  read  it  in  Holland’s  translation,  p.  1300;  but  why  he  should  call  the  river-horse 
a  ‘  sea-monster’  is  not  clear.  It  is  more  likely  that  by  the  sea-monster  he  meant  the 
whale.  See  IV,  ii,  49,  50 ;  All's  Well,  IV,  iii,  249;  Tro.  and  Ores.  V,  v,  23. 

257.  choice  and  rarest]  Wright  thinks  that  the  superlative  termination  belongs 
to  both  adjectives,  and  refers  to  Abbott,  §  398. 


ACT  I,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


87 


That  all  particulars  of  duty  know, 

And  in  the  most  exadt  regard  support 

The  worships  of  their  name. — O  most  small  fault,  260 

How  ugly  didst  thou  in  Cordelia  show ! 

Which,  like  an  engine,  wrench’d  my  frame  of  nature 
From  the  fix’d  place ;  drew  from  my  heart  all  love 
And  added  to  the  gall.  O  Lear,  Lear,  Lear ! 

Beat  at  this  gate,  that  let  thy  folly  in  265 

And  thy  dear  judgement  out! — Go,  go,  my  people. 

Alb.  My  lord,  I  am  guiltless,  as  I  am  ignorant 
Of  what  hath  moved  you. 

Lear.  It  may  be  so,  my  lord. — 


260.  The]  Their  F/,. 

name]  names  Rowe  + . 

262.  Which]  iiiat  Qq,  Glo.  +  ,  Mob. 

264.  Lear,  Lear,  Lear  !]  Lear,  Lear  t 
Qq.  Han.  Jen. 

265.  [Striking  his  head.  Pope. 

266.  dear]  clear  Anon.* 

Go. ..people.]  goe,goe,  my  people? 
Qq.  Go,  go  ;  my  people  !  Qr  Go,  go 


my  people  !  Mai.  conj. 

267.  I  am... I  am]  rm...rm  Pope+, 
Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

268.  Of  wkat...you.]  Om.  Qq. 
lord.]  Lord,  Qq,  FaF3F4>  lord — 

Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Knt. 

268-271.  II. .. fruitful :]  Three  lines, 
ending  nature ,  hear ; ...if ...fruitful l  Mai. 
Steev.  Bos.  Coll.  iii. 


260.  worships]  Dyce:  (Qy)  ‘The  worships  of  their  names,'  or  ‘The  worship  of 
their  name.’  ?  Hudson  :  Worship  [which  is  Hudson’s  reading  and  an  emendation 
of  Collier’s  (MS)]  was  often  used  in  much  the  same  sense  as  honour.  One  of  the 
commonest  misprints  in  the  old  copies  is  that  of  the  plural  for  the  singular.  [I  can¬ 
not  think  that  the  plural  is  a  misprint  here.  See  ‘  As  needful  in  our  loves,’  Ham.  I, 
i,  173,  and  Clarendon’s  note  there  cited. — Ed.] 

262.  engine]  Edwards  [Can.  of  Crit.,  p.  202,  ed.  vii) :  Alluding  to  the  rack. 
Steevens  :  Compare  Beau,  and  FI.,  The  Night  Waller,  IV,  v :  *  Their  souls  shot 
through  with  adders,  torn  on  engines.’  Wright  :  Chaucer  has  *  engined  ’  for  ‘  rack¬ 
ed,’  Nonne  Prestes  Tale,  16546:  ‘And  right  anoon  the  mynistres  of  that  toun  Han 
hent  the  carter,  and  so  sore  him  pyned,  And  eek  the  hostiller  so  sore  engyned.’  In 
Temp.  II,  i,  161,  the  word  is  used  of  a  warlike  machine. 

266.  dear]  This  word,  which  here  means  choice,  precious,  is  used  by  Sh.  to  sig¬ 
nify  qualities  the  very  opposite  of  dear,  beloved,  heartsome,  such  as  ‘  dearest  foe,’ 
Ham.  I,  ii.  182;  ‘my  father  hated  his  [Orlando’s]  father  dearly,’  As  You  Lihe  It, 
I,  iii,  34 ;  ‘in  terms  so  bloody  and  so  dear,’  Twel.  N.  V,  i,  74 ;  ‘  dearest  groans  of  a 
mother,’  All's  Well,  IV,  v,  II;  ‘dear  guiltiness,’  Love's  Lab.  V,  ii,  801,  &c.  &c. 
Craik  (in  a  note  on  ‘  dearer  than  thy  death,’  Jul.  Cees.  Ill,  i,  196)  supposes  that  the 
notion  of  love  properly  involved  in  ‘  dear,’  having  become  generalized  into  that  of 
a  strong  affection  of  any  kind,  then  passed  into  that  of  such  an  emotion  the  very 
reverse  of  love.  In  such  phrases  as  ‘  dearest  foe  ’  and  *  hating  dearly  ’  the  word 
need  not  be  understood  as  implying  more  than  strong  or  passionate  emotion.  This 
explanation  of  Craik’s  led  the  way  to  the  concise  definition  given  in  the  Clarendon 
edition  of  Ham.  :  that  ‘  dear  ’  is  used  of  whatever  touches  us  nearly  in  love  or  hate. 


88 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  iv. 


Hear,  Nature,  hear;  dear  goddess,  hear! 
Suspend  thy  purpose,  if  thou  didst  intend 


269.  Hear]  Heare  FtF2.  harke  Qq. 
Nature,.. .goddess]  Nature  !  hear, 
dear  goddess  Cap.  Wh. 

hear ;  dear]  Theob.  heare  dcere 
QqFxF2.  hear  dear  F3.  hear,  dear  F4, 


270 

Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Sch. 

269.  hear!]  Om.  Qq.  hear  a  father! 
Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Cap.  Ec. 

269,  275.  Lines  end  Suspend. ..make 
...convey. ..organs. ..never. ..teem,  Ktly. 


joy  or  sorrow.  To  which,  I  think,  may  be  added  Singer’s  observation  that  it 
imports  in  general  the  excess,  the  utmost,  the  superlative  of  that,  whatever  it  may 
be,  to  which  it  is  applied. — Ed. 

269.  Davies  [Dram.  Misc.  ii,  180) :  I  have  heard  certain  critics  complain  that,  in 
pronouncing  this  denunciation,  Garrick  was  too  deliberate,  and  not  so  quick  in  the 
emission  of  his  words  as  he  ought  to  have  been ;  that  he  did  not  yield  to  that  im¬ 
petuosity  which  the  situation  required.  .  .  .  Garrick  rendered  the  curse  so  terribly 
affecting  to  the  audience,  that,  during  his  utterance  of  it,  they  seemed  to  shrink 
from  it  as  from  a  blast  of  lightning.  His  preparation  for  it  was  extremely  affecting; 
his  throwing  away  his  crutch,  kneeling  on  one  knee,  clasping  his  hands  together,  and 
lifting  his  eyes  toward  heaven,  presented  a  picture  worthy  the  pencil  of  Raphael. 

.  .  .  Dr  Franklin  [the  translator  of  Sophocles]  thinks  nothing  can  exceed  the  bit¬ 
terness  of  CEdipus’s  execration  of  his  two  sons,  except  perhaps  this  curse  of  Lear. 
Boaden  ( Life  of  Kemble,  i,  378) :  In  January  [17S3]  Kemble  acted  Lear  [in  Tate’s 
version,  to  the  Cordelia  of  Mrs.  Siddons].  I  have  seen  him  since  in  the  character, 
but  he  never  again  achieved  the  excellence  of  that  night.  Subsequently  he  was  too 
elaborately  aged,  and  quenched  with  infirmity  the  insane  fire  of  the  injured  father. 
The  curse,  as  he  then  uttered  it,  harrowed  up  the  soul ;  the  gathering  himself  together, 
with  hands  convulsively  clasped,  the  increasing  fervour  and  rapidity,  and  the  suffoca¬ 
tion  of  the  concluding  words,  all  evinced  consummate  skill  and  original  invention. 
The  countenance,  too,  was  finely  made  up,  and  in  grandeur  approached  the  most 
awful  impersonation  of  Michael  Angelo.  Scott  ( On  Boaden' s  Life  of  Kemble, 
Quarterly  Review,  April,  1826):  There  was  visible  in  Kemble’s  manner,  at  times, 
a  sacrifice  of  energy  of  action  to  grace.  We  remember  this  observation  being 
made  by  Mrs  Siddons  herself,  who  admired  her  brother  in  general  as  much  as  she 
loved  him.  Nor  shall  we  easily  forget  the  mode  in  which  she  illustrated  her  mean¬ 
ing.  She  arose  and  placed  herself  in  the  attitude  of  one  of  the  old  Egyptian 
statues;  the  knees  joined  together,  and  the  feet  turned  a  little  inwards.  She  placed 
her  elbows  close  to  her  sides,  folded  her  hands,  and  held  them  upright,  with  the  palms 
pressed  to  each  other.  Having  made  us  observe  that  she  had  assumed  one  of  the 
most  constrained,  and,  therefore,  most  ungraceful  positions  possible,  she  proceeded  to 
recite  the  curse  of  King  Lear  on  his  undutiful  offspring  in  a  manner  which  made 
hair  rise  and  flesh  creep,  and  then  called  on  us  to  remark  the  additional  effect  which 
was  gained  by  the  concentrated  energy  which  the  unusual  and  ungraceful  position 
in  itself  implied.  T.  R.  Gould  ( The  Tragedian,  an  Essay  on  the  Histrionic  Genius 
of  Junius  Brutus  Booth ,  p.  142,  New  York,  1868):  It  is  customary  to  call  this  im¬ 
precation  on  Goneril  ‘  the  curse.’  This  word  roughens  the  sense  of  it  unnecessarily. 
It  is  in  substance  a  pagan  prayer  that  she  may  be  childless ;  but  *  if  she  must  teem/ 
that  her  child  may  be  a  ‘  thwart  disnatured  torment  to  her ;’  that  she  may  suffer  the 
same  kind  and  quality  of  anguish  which  she  is  now  inflicting  on  her  father.  The 


ACT  I,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


89 


To  make  this  creature  fruitful ; 

Into  her  womb  convey  sterility ; 

Dry  up  in  her  the  organs  of  increase, 

And  from  her  derogate  body  never  spring 
A  babe  to  honour  her !  If  she  must  teem, 

Create  her  child  of  spleen,  that  it  may  live 
And  be  a  thwart  disnatured  torment  to  her. 

Let  it  stamp  wrinkles  in  her  brow  of  youth ; 

277.  thwart']  thourt  Qq. 

disnatured]  difnatud d  Ff.  difueiur'd  Qq.  difventudd  Q3> 


principle  of  the  prayer  is  ‘an  eye  for  an  eye.’  Putting  ‘  Jehovah  ’  instead  of  ‘  Nature, 
a  Jew  might  have  uttered  it.  Booth  began  it  as  a  solemn  adjuration  to  the  unseen 
power  of  Nature.  The  indignant  bitterness  in  the  terms  of  imprecation  seemed  as 
if  it  was  converted  out  of  sweetest  images  of  what  a  child  should  be,  that  lay  in  the 
core  of  his  fatherly  heart.  This  double  action  of  his  mind,  in  the  agony  which  it 
involved,  swayed  and  shook  the  kneeling  figure,  and  lent  his  voice  a  wild  vibration 
that  drew  involuntary  sympathy  and  awe.  The  heart  followed  him  as  he  arose  and 
ran  out  with  extended  arms.  .  .  .  [When  he  re-enters,  on  the  word  ‘  resume,’  line  303] 
he  cast  the  whole  energy  of  his  royal  will,  with  a  volumed,  prolonged,  and  ringing 
intonation.  His  very  figure  seemed  to  dilate  with  majesty. 

269.  Nature  .  .  .  goddess]  White  thinks  that  the  arrangement  in  the  present 
text,  in  comparison  with  his  (see  Textual  Notes),  loses  in  freedom,  force,  and 
rhythm. 

274.  derogate]  Warburton:  Unnatural.  Heath:  Here,  it  means  whatever 
deviates  from  the  course  of  nature.  Edwards  (apud  Eccles) :  Degenerate.  John¬ 
son  :  Rather,  degraded  [Thus,  Dyce,  Gloss.],  blasted.  Malone:  Shrunk,  wasted. 
See  Bullokar’s  Eng.  Expositor ,  1621,  ‘  Derogate.  To  empaire,  diminish,  or  take 
away.’  Delius  :  Dishonored,  in  opposition  to  the  following  ‘  honour  her,’  Like 
many  adjectives  in  -ate  it  stands  for  derogated.  Schmidt  (Lex.) :  Depraved,  cor¬ 
rupt.  Wright:  Dishonoured,  degraded.  Todd,  in  his  edition  of  Johnson’s  Dic¬ 
tionary,  quotes  from  Sir  Thomas  Elyot’s  Governor  (1565),  fol.  102 :  ‘  That  he  shoulde 
obteyne,  yf  he  mought,  of  the  kyng  his  father  his  gracious  pardon,  whereby  no  lawe 
or  iustice  should  be  derogate.’  [Bullokar’s  definition  applies  to  this  use  of  ‘  derogate  ’ 
in  Elyot’s  Governor.] 

277.  thwart]  Henderson  :  This  word  is  found,  as  an  adjective,  in  Promos  and 
’Cassandra,  1578 :  ‘  Sith  fortune  thwart  doth  crosse  my  joys  with  care.’  Eccles  refers 
to  Milton,  Par.  Lost,  viii,  132,  and  x,  1075,  as  instances  of  its  use  as  an  adjective. 
Schmidt  :  As  an  adj.  nowhere  else  in  Sh. 

277.  disnatured]  Steevens  :  Wanting  in  natural  affection.  So  Daniel,  Hymen's 
Triumph  [II,  iv,  p.  291,  ed.  1623 — Wright]  :  ‘  I  am  not  so  disnatured  a  man,  or  so 
ill  borne  to  disesteeme  her  loue.’  Henderson,  from  the  text  of  QjQ3,  conjectured 
disfeatudd. 

278.  brow  of  youth]  Wright:  Youthful  brow.  Compare  ‘mind  of  love’  for 
‘loving  mind’  in  Mer.  of  Ven.  II,  viii,  42.  Similarly  ‘  brow  of  justice,’  I  Hen.  IV; 
IV,  iii,  83 ;  ‘  Mind  of  honour,’  Meas.  for  Mcas.  II,  iv,  179;  ‘thieves  of  mercy,’  Ham. 

8  * 


271 

275 


9o 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc,  iv. 


With  cadent  tears  fret  channels  in  her  cheeks ; 

Turn  all  her  mother’s  pains  and  benefits 
To  laughter  and  contempt ;  that  she  may  feel 
How  sharper  than  a  serpent’s  tooth  it  is 
To  have  a  thankless  child ! — Away,  away !  [Exit. 

Alb.  Now,  gods  that  we  adore,  whereof  comes  this  ? 
Gon.  Never  affli<5t  yourself  to  know  the  cause, 

But  let  his  disposition  have  that  scope 
That  dotage  gives  it. 


28c 


285 


Re-enter  Lear. 

Lear.  What,  fifty  of  my  followers  at  a  clap  ? 

Within  a  fortnight  ? 

Alb.  What’s  the  matter,  sir  ?  289 


279.  cadent ]  accent  Qq.  candent 
Theob.  Warb.  acrid  or  ardent  Anon.* 
281.  feel}  feelet  that  Jhe  may  feele,  Qt. 
283.  Away,  away  /]  gce,goe,  my  peo¬ 
ple  ?  Qq,  Pope  +  . 

[Exit.]  Om.  Qq. 

2S4.  Now... this  ?}  Two  lines,  Ff, 
Rowe. 

whereof ]  wherefore  Johns. 


285.  the  cause ]  more  of  it  F,,  Johns. 
Knt.  Del.  Dyce.  i,  Sch.  of  it  Yfefe^ 
Rowe+.  of  what  Han. 

287.  That ]  As  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
Knt,  Coll,  i,  Del.  Dyce  i,  Sch. 

Re-enter  Lear.]  Jen.  Enter 
Lear.  Ff.  Om.  Qq. 

289.  IVhat's}  IVhat  is  Qq. 


IV,  vi,  19;  ‘time  of  scorn,’  Oth.  IV,  ii,  54;  ‘mole  of  nature,*  Nam.  I,  iv,  24; 
‘  spirit  of  health,’  Ham.  I,  iv,  40.  [And  many  other  instances  in  Abbott,  §  423.] 

279.  cadent]  Steevens:  Falling.  Moberly:  The  effect  of  an  unusual  word 
formed  from  the  Latin  or  Greek  is  often  very  great  in  poetry.  Thus,  Milton  speaks 
of  the  ‘glassy,  cool,  translucent  wave,’  and  Wordsworth  of  the  river,  ‘diaphanous 
because- it  travels  slowly,’  both  words  being  far  more  effective  than  the  common 
word  ‘  transparent.’ 

2S0.  her  mother’s  pains  and  benefits]  Roderick  (Can.  of  Crit.  p.  268,  ed.  vii) 
interprets  this  as  referring  to  the  pains  of  childbirth,  and  to  the  benefits  both  of 
nursing  aDd  instruction;  and  believes  that  *  a  most  exquisite  stroke  of  nature  ’  is  lost 
unless  we  perceive,  by  the  use  of  ‘  one  little  syllable, — her,’  that  Sh.  talks  of  the 
supposed  child  as  a  Daughter,  not  a  son.  Malone  very  properly  says  that  *  mother’s 
pains  ’  refer  to  maternal  cares,  and  that  ‘  benefits  ’  means  good  offices,  her  kind  and 
beneficent  attention  to  the  education  of  her  offspring,  and  that  ‘  her  ’  refers  to  Goneril 
herself. 

282.  How  sharper,  &c.]  Malone:  So  Psalms,  cxl,  3:  ‘They  have  sharpened 
their  tongues  like  a  serpent ;  adders’  poison  is  under  their  lips.’  Moberly  :  We 
should  have  to  go  to  the  book  of  Deuteronomy  to  find  a  parallel  for  the  concentrated 
force  of  this  curse.  Can  it  be  Lear  who  so  sternly  and  simply  stabs  to  the  very 
inward  heart  of  woman’s  blessedness,  leaving  his  wicked  daughter  blasted  and 
scathed  for  ever  by  his  withering  words  ? 

2S9.  Within  a  fortnight]  Eccles  conjectures  that  this  may  refer  to  that  portion 


ACT  I,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


91 


Lear.  I’ll  tell  thee. — Life  and  death  !  I  am  ashamed  290 
That  thou  hast  power  to  shake  my  manhood  thus ; 

That  these  hot  tears,  which  break  from  me  perforce, 

Should  make  thee  worth  them.  Blasts  and  fogs  upon  thee ! 

Th’  untented  woundings  of  a  father’s  curse 

Pierce  every  sense  about  thee !  Old  fond  eyes,  295 

Beweep  this  cause  again,  I’ll  pluck  ye  out 

And  cast  you  with  the  waters  that  you  lose, 

To  temper  clay.  Ha !  *  is  it  come  to  this  ?  * 

Let  it  be  so.  I  have  another  daughter, 


290.  r ll....ashamed]  Rowe.  Two 
lines,  Ff. 

[To  Gon.  Theob. 

292.  which]  that  Qq. 

293.  Should. . true  /]  Rowe.  Two 

lines,  Ff. 

thee  worth  them.  Blasts']  Cap. 
thee  worth  them ,  Blastes  Ff.  the  worjl 
blafs  Qq. 

293.  294.  upon  thee  !  Th?  untented] 
Theob.  vpon  thee  :  Th'  vntenled  Ff.  vpon 
the  vntented  Qf.  vpon  the  vntender  Qa. 

294.  untented]  untender  Pope. 

295.  Pierce]  perufe  Qa. 

sense ]  fence  Warb. 

thee!  Old]  Theob.  thee.  Old 
Ff.  the  old  Qt.  the  olde  Qa. 

296.  this  cause]  thee  once  FaF3F4.  her 


once  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

296.  ye]  you  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Ec. 
Bos.  Coll.  Del.  i,  Dyce  i,  Wh.  Ktly. 

297.  cast  you]  you  cafl  Qq. 

lose]  loofe  FxFa,  Sta.  make  Qq,  Jen. 

298.  To  temper  clay]  Separate  line, 
Sing.  Ktly,  Sch. 

Hal . this]  Pope.  Ha?  Ff, 

Rowe,  Knt,  Coll,  i,  Del.  i,  Dyce  i,  Wh. 
Sing.  Ktly,  Sch.  yea,  i'fl  come  to  this  ?  Qt. 
yea ,  is  it  come  to  this  ?  Qa,  Glo.  + ,  Mob. 

298,  299.  To. ..so]  Pope.  One  line, 
Ff,  Rowe,  Knt. 

299.  Let  it  be  J0.]  Om.  Qq. 

I  have  another]  yet  haue  I  left  u 
Qq,  Mai.  Steev.  Bos.  Glo.  +  ,  Mob.  Del. 
ii,  Coll.  iii.  yet  I  have  left  a  Steev.  ’78, 
*85,  Ec. 


only  of  the  current  month  in  which  Lear  has  been  staying  with  Albany  and  Goneril, 
and  that  he  may  have  already  taken  up  his  abode  many  times  alternately  with  both 
of  his  daughters ;  or  else,  these  words  might  have  reference  to  a  future  period,  at 
the  end  of  which  such  a  number  of  his  knights  were  to  be  dismissed.  Some  such 
explanations  as  these  Eccles  deems  necessary  in  order  to  avoid  the  absurdity  of  sup¬ 
posing  that  the  news  of  Lear’s  brutal  treatment  could  have  reached  Cordelia,  and 
that  she  could  have  invaded  England  with  a  large  army  within  a  fortnight  after  her 
dismissal  from  her  father’s  presence.  [See  Appendix,  Daniel’s  Time-Analysis ,  p.  410.] 

294.  untented]  Theobald  :  A  wounding  of  such  a  sharp,  inveterate  nature  that 
nothing  shall  be  able  to  tent  it — i.  e.  search  the  bottom,  and  help  in  the  cure  of  it. 
Steevens  :  It  may  possibly  signify  here  such  wounds  as  will  not  admit  of  having  a 
tent  put  into  them.  [For  ‘tent,’  see  Ham.  II,  ii,  573.] 

296.  beweep]  For  instances  when  the  prefix  be  is  used  to  give  a  transitive  signifi¬ 
cation  to, verbs  that,  without  this  prefix,  must  require  prepositions,  see  Abbott,  §438. 

297.  lose]  STAUNTON  justifies  loose  of  Fx  as  meaning  to  discharge ,  and  I  am  by 
no  means  sure  that  this  reading  is  not  to  be  preferred. 

299.  Walker  {Crit.  ii,  284)  interprets  yet  of  the  Qq  as  meaning  as  yet,  and  cites 
similar  instances. 


92 


KING  LEAR 


[act  I,  SC.  iv. 

300 


Who,  I  am  sure,  is  kind  and  comfortable. 

When  she  shall  hear  this  of  thee,  with  her  nails 
She’ll  flay  thy  wolvish  visage.  Thou  shalt  find 
That  I’ll  resume  the  shape  which  thou  dost  think 
I  have  cast  off  for  ever.  *  Thou  shalt,  I  warrant  thee.* 

[ Exeunt  Lear,  Kent,  and  Attendants. 

Gon.  Do  you  mark  that,  my  lord  ?  305 

Alb.  I  cannot  be  so  partial,  Goneril, 

To  the  great  love  I  bear  you, — 

Gon.  Pray  you,  content. — What,  Oswald,  ho  ! — 

You,  sir,  more  knave  than  fool,  after  your  master. 

Fool.  Nuncle  Lear*  nuncle  Lear,  tarry;  take  the  Fool  310 
with  thee. — 

A  fox,  when  one  has  caught  her. 

And  such  a  daughter. 


300.  Who]  whom  Qq. 

302.  flay]  Jen.  Jlea  Q.Ff.  fley  Qa. 

304.  Thou. ...thee.']  Om.  Ff+,  Knt, 
Coll.  Sing.  Dyce  i,  Del.  Wh. 

[Exeunt...]  Exeunt  Lear,  Kent, 
Gen.  and  Att.  Capell.  Om.  Qz.  Exit. 
QaFf.  Exit  Lear  and  attendants.  Rowe. 

305.  Scene  xvi.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

my  lord]  Om.  Ff  +,  Knt,  Sing, 
Dyce  i,  Del.  ii,  Ktly,  Sch. 

307-309.  To  the. ..master.]  As  in  Ff» 
The  lines  end  content. . ..ho !.... master. 
Cap.  content. — ...fool, ...master.  Walker. 

307.  you, — ]  Theob.  you,  Qx.  you. 

Q,Ff. 


308,  309.  Pray. ..more]  Come  fir  no 
more,  you,  more  Qf.  Come  fir,  no  more  ; 
you,  more  Qs. 

What. ..master]  One  line,  Ktly. 

308.  content]  be  content  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 
Ktly. 

309.  [To  the  Fool.  Johns. 

310.  Nuncle . Lear]  Separate  line, 

Ff,  Rowe. 

take]  and  take  Qq,  Jen.  Steev. 
Mai.  Ec.  Bos.  Coll.  Del.  Sing.  Dyce  i, 
Sta.  Wh.  Glo.  Ktly,  Wr. 

31 1.  312.  with  thee.  A  fox]  with  a 
fox  Qq. 


300.  comfortable]  Walker  ( Crit .  i,  98) :  This  word,  and  in  like  manner  uncom¬ 
fortable  and  discomfortable,  are  uniformly  applied  to  a  person,  or  to  a  thing  per¬ 
sonified,  the  idea  of  will  and  purpose  being  always  implied  in  them.  [See  also 
Walker  {Crit.  i,  183);  Abbott,  §3;  Ham.  I,  i,  57;  Macb.  II,  i,  36;  Rom.  6- 
ful.W,  iii,  148.]  Wright:  Compare  also  the  expression  in  the  Communion 
Service :  *  The  most  comfortable  sacrament  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ.’ 

304.  warrant]  Walker  ( Vers.  65) :  This  is  usually  a  monosyllable.  Compare 
Ham.  I,  ii,  242.  [See  also  Abbott,  §  463.] 

305.  Coleridge:  Observe  the  baffled  endeavor  of  Goneril  to  act  on  the  fears  of 
Albany,  and  yet  his  passiveness,  his  inertia;  he  is  not  convinced,  and  yet  he  is  afraid 
of  looking  into  the  thing.  Such  characters  always  yield  to  those  who  will  take  the 
trouble  of  governing  them,  or  for  them.  Perhaps  the  influence  of  a  princess,  whose 
choice  of  him  had  royalized  his  state,  may  be  some  little  excuse  for  Albany’s 
weakness. 

312-316.  In  reference  to  the  rhymes  in  this  jingle  of  the  Fool,  Ellis  (p.  963) 


ACT  I,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR  93 

Should  sure  to  the  slaughter, 

If  my  cap  would  buy  a  halter.  315 

So  the  Fool  follows  after.  [Exit. 

Gort.  This  man  hath  had  good  counsel!  A  hundred 
knights ! 

’Tis  politic  and  safe  to  let  him  keep 

At  point  a  hundred  knights !  Yes,  that  on  every  dream. 

Each  buzz,  each  fancy,  each  complaint,  dislike,  320 

He  may  enguard  his  dotage  with  their  powers 
And  hold  our  lives  in -mercy. — Oswald,  I  say! 
ilb.  Well,  you  may  fear  too  far. 

Gon.  Safer  than  trust  too  far. 

Let  me  still  take  away  the  harms  I  fear, 

Not  fear  still  to  be  taken.  I  know  his  heart  32$ 

What  he  hath  utter’d  I  have  writ  my  sister ; 

If  she  sustain  him  and  his  hundred  knights. 


315.  buy]  by  Fa. 

316.  [Exit.]  Om.  Qq. 

317-328.  This. ..unfitness]  Om.  Qq. 

317.  This. ... knights  /]  Rowe.  Two 
lines,  Ff. 

318.  ’  Tis]  Is't  Han. 

319.  At  point ]  Om.  Pope,  Theob. 
Kan.  Warb. 

322.  in  mercy ]  at  mercy  Pope  +, 


Jen.  Ec. 

323.  fear  too  farl\  fear  too  far;  F3F4. 
fear  too  far; —  Rowe  +  ( fear  too  fear 
Rowe  i). 

trust  too  far]  trust;  Steev.  ’93. 
325.  taken]  harm'd  Pope,  Theob. 
Han.  Warb.  Sing.  ii. 

327.  she]  she'll  F3F4+. 


says  that  the  last  three  are  very  remarkable,  especially  the  last,  including  the  word 
‘halter.’  When  this  rhyme  occurs  in  modern  ludicrous  verse  it  is  usual  to  say  arter, 
darter.  [I  cannot  reproduce  these  words  in  Glossic,  and  therefore  roughly  indicate 
the  sounds. — Ed.]  Whether  any  such  ludicrous  pronunciation  then  prevailed  is  not 
clear,  but  aater  would  save  every  case,  as  ‘  halter’  might  well  sink  to  haater.  [In 
two  other  instances :  Tam.  the  Shr.  I,  i,  245,246;  and  Wint.  Tale,  IV,  i,  Chorus,  27, 
28,  Sh.,  according  to  Ellis,  rhymes  daughter  and  after.  In  the  former  of  these  two, 
the  rhyme,  as  here  in  Lear,  may  be  meant  to  be  ludicrous.  See  also  I,  v,  48,  49.] 

319.  At  point]  Schmidt  (Lex.)  :  Completely,  in  full  preparation  for  any  emer¬ 
gency.  [See  III,  i,  33,  and  Macb.  IV,  iii,  135,  and  notes.] 

320.  buzz]  Compare  *  buzzers,’  Ham.  IV,  v,  86. 

321.  enguard]  Abbott,  §440:  This  is  here  used  in  its  proper  sense  of  en¬ 
closing. 

322.  in  mercy]  Malone:  In  misericordia  is  the  legal  phrase. 

325.  taken]  Capell:  This  imports — taken  with  harm,  i.  e.  o’er-taken.  Moberly: 
*  Not  have  constantly  to  fear  being  overtaken  myself.’  Singer  (ed.  ii)  :  It  is  evident 
that  the  context  requires  harm'd.  The  compositor’s  eye  glancing  on  the  preceding 
line,  he  has  put  *  taken’  for  the  proper  word. 


[act  i,  sc.  iv. 


94  KING  LEAR 

When  I  have  show’d  th’  unfitness, — [ Re-enter  Qswaldl] 

How  now,  Oswald ! 

What,  have  you  writ  that  letter  to  my  sister  ? 

Osiv.  Ay,  madam.  330 

Gon.  Take  you  some  company,  and  away  to  horse ; 

Inform  her  full  of  my  particular  fear. 

And  thereto  add  such  reasons  of  your  own 
As  may  compa6l  it  more.  Get  you  gone ; 

And  hasten  your  return. — [ Exit  Oswald .]  No,  no,  my  lord,  335 
This  milky  gentleness  and  course  of  yours 
Though  I  condemn  not,  yet,  under  pardon, 


328.  unfitness, — ]  unftness —  Rowe. 
unfit neffe.  Ff. 

[Re-enter  Oswald.]  Coll.  Enter 
Steward.  Ff.  Om.  Qq. 

328.  329.  How  noin,  Oswald !  What] 
Gon.  What  Ofwald,  ho.  Ofwald.  Heere 
Madam.  Gon.  What  Qq. 

329.  that]  this  Qq. 

330.  Ay]  I  Ff.  Yes  Qq,  Jen.  Glo+, 
Mob. 

331.  and]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

332.  fear]  feares  Qq.  fears  Q3,  Pope, 
Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Jen. 

334.  Get]  So  get  Pope  -f ,  Cap.  Ec. 


Go,  get  Jen. 

335.  And  hasten.. .lord]  And  hafen 
your  relume:  no,  no,  my  Lord  Ff.  &* 
hafen  your  returne  now  my  Lord  Q,. 
and  after  your  returne — now  my  Lord 

Q,* 

[Exit  Oswald.]  Exit  Steward. 
Rowe.  Om.  QqFf. 

336.  milky]  milkie  Q,.  mildie  Q2. 
gentleness  and]  gentle,  easy  Jen. 

337.  condemn  not]  difike  not  Qq. 
condemn  it  not  Pope  + ,  Cap.  Steev.  Ec. 
Bos.  Knt  i,  Coll,  ii,  Del.  i,  Ktly,  Dyce  ii. 

pardon]  your  pardon  Jen. 


332.  particular]  Capell  interprets  this  as  referring  to  4  the  business  threaten’d 
by  Lear;’  but  Delius  and  Moberly  (less  correctly,  I  think)  suppose  that  it  means 
the  4  particulars  of  my  fear.’  Schmidt  says  that  it  is  equivalent  to  personal,  indi¬ 
vidual,  private ,  and  refers  to  II,  iv,  289,  and  V,  i,  30. 

334.  compact]  Johnson:  Unite  one  circumstance  with  another  so  as  to  make  a 
consistent  account.  Wright:  Elsewhere  used  by  Sh.  only  as  a  substantive  or 
participle. 

334.  more]  Malone:  A  dissyllable.  So  also  Abbott,  §480.  To  avoid  this 
dissyllabic  pronunciation  of  ‘  more,’  Jennens  inserted  Go  before  ‘  Get  you  gone’ — an 
emendation  which  was  afterwards  proposed  by  both  Steevens  and  Walker.  Dyce 
thinks  most  probably  a  word  has  dropped  out  of  the  line,  ‘  though  our  old  poets  seem 
occasionally  to  have  used  4  more  ’  as  a  dissyllable.  [See  V,  iii,  169.] 

336.  milky  gentleness  and  course]  Schmidt  :  That  is,  this  milky  gentleness 
of  your  course.  See  I,  i,  247. 

337-  yet]  Abbott,  §  4S3 :  A  conjunction  like  4  yet  ’  or  4  but,’  implying  hesitation, 
may  naturally  require  a  pause  immediately  after  it;  and  this  pause  may  excuse  the 
absence  of  an  unaccented  syllable,  additional  stress  being  laid  on  the  monosyllable. 
[Would  it  not  be  better  courageously  to  insert  an  4  it’  in  this  line,  as  so  many  editors 
have  done,  including  the  conservative  Dyce? — Ed.] 


ACT  X,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


95 


You  are  much  more  at  task  for  want  of  wisdom 
Than  praised  for  harmful  mildness. 

Alb.  How  far  your  eyes  may  pierce  I  cannot  tell ; 
Striving  to  better,  ofl  we  mar  what’s  well. 

Gon.  Nay,  then — 

Alb.  Well,  well ;  th’  event.  {Exeunt. 


338.  You  are ]  Your  are  F,.  fare  Qq.- 
at  task  for ]  F,F3F4+,  Cap.  Jen. 

Ec.  Sch.  at  taske  for  Fa.  attaskt  for 
Qj.  alapt  Q2.  attask'd  for  Mai.  et  cet. 

339.  praised  J  praife  Qq.  . 
harmful J  harmless  Rowe  ii. 

Pope,  Han.  Jen. 

340.  341.  How...well.}  Prose  in  Qt. 


341.  better,  oft]  better  ought,  Qq. 

342.  then — j  then.  Qt. 

343.  well;}  Sieev.  well,  QqFf,  Rowe 
+  ,  Cap.  Jen. 

th’  event.}  the  euent,  Qz.  the 
'vent.  Ff,  Rowe  i. 

[Exeunt.]  Exit.  Q3. 


338.  at  task]  Johnson:  It  is  a  common  phrase  now  with  parents  and  gover¬ 
nesses:  ‘I’ll  take  you  to  task,’  i.  e.  I  will  reprehend  and  correct  you.  To  be  ‘at 
task,’  therefore,  is  to  be  liable  to  reprehension  and  correction.  Mason  :  Frequently 
used  by  Sh.  in  the  sense  of  tax.  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  May  we  not  speculate  that  after 
all  the  poet’s  word  was  attack'd ?  Halliwell  :  My  copies  of  Qt  and  Qa  both 
read  alapt.  Attask'd,  that  is,  taxed.  If  the  word  alapt  be  correct,  it  probably 
agrees  with  the  context  if  explained  in  the  same  way  as  attask'd;  and  the  term 
alapat,  in  the  following  passage,  seems  used  in  a  similar  sense :  *  And  because  the 
secret  and  privy  boosome  vices  of  nature  are  most  offensive,  and  though  least  seene, 
yet  most  undermining  enemies,  you  must  redouble  your  endeavor,  not  with  a  wand 
to  alapat  and  strike  them,  onely  as  lovers,  loath  to  hurt,  so  as  like  a  snake  they  may 
growe  together,  and  gette  greater  strength  againe.’ — Melton’s  Sixefold  Politician, 
p.  125.  [Collier  ( Poet.  Decameron,  ii,  305)  thinks  that  this  Sixefold  Politician 
was  written  not  by  Melton,  but  by  John  Milton,  the  poet’s  father. — Ed.]  Abbott, 
§  437 :  At-  perhaps  represents  the  Old  English  intensive  prefix  *  of,’  which  is  some¬ 
times  changed  into  ‘an-,’  ‘on-,’  or  ‘a-.’  But  the  word  [‘attask’d’  of  Q,]  is  more 
probably  a  sort  of  imitation  of  the  similar  words,  *  attach  ’  and  ‘  attack.’  Moberly  : 
Both  ‘  task  ’  and  *  tax  ’  are  really  the  same,  as  we  may  see  from  Wedgwood’s  quota¬ 
tion  :  *  Every  ploughland  was  tasked  at  three  shillings.’  Cambridge  Editors  :  In 
the  imperfect  copy  of  Qa  [i.  e.  Qt — Ed.]  in  the  British  Museum,  ‘attaskt  for’  was 
the  original  reading,  but  the  first  two  letters  of  the  word  have  been  erased.  In 
II,  i,  123, ‘lest,’  the  original  reading,  has  been  altered  to  ‘best.’  [As  Schmidt 
says,  there  is  no  reason  why  attask'd  of  Q,  should  be  preferred  to  the  Folio.  Dr 
Johnson’s  explanation,  if  any  be  needed,  is  ample.] 

341.  Malone:  Compare  Son.  ciii,  lines  9,  10. 

343.  event]  Hudson  :  Albany  shrinks  from  a  word-storm  with  his  helpmate, 
and  so  tells  her,  in  effect:  ‘Well,  let  us  not  quarrel  about  it,  but  wait  and  see  how 
your  course  works.’ 


96 


KING  LEAR 


[ACT  I,  SC.  V. 


Scene  V.  Court  before  the  same. 


Enter  Lear,  Kent,  and  Fool. 


Lear.  Go  you  before  to  Gloucester  with  these  letters. 
Acquaint  my  daughter  no  further  with  any  thing  you  know 
than  comes  from  her  demand  out  of  the  letter.  If  your  dili¬ 
gence  be  not  speedy,  I  shall  be  there  afore  you. 

Kent.  I  will  not  sleep,  my  lord,  till  I  have  delivered  your  5 
letter. 

Fool.  If  a  man’s  brains  were  in’s  heels,  were’t  not  in 
danger  of  kibes  ? 

Lear.  Ay,  boy. 

Fool.  Then,  I  prithee,  be  merry;  thy  wit  shall  not  go  10 
slip-shod. 


Scene  v.]  Scena  Quinta  Ff  (Scsena 
Fa).  Scene  xvii.  Pope +  ,  Jen.  Scene 
iv.  Ec. 

Court...]  Cap.  A  court-yard  be¬ 
longing  to  the  Duke  of  Albany’s  Palace. 
Theob. 

Enter  Lear,  Kent,  and  Fool.]  Enter 
Lear.  Qx.  Enter  Lear,  Kent,  Gentleman, 
and  Foole.  Ff. 

4.  afore~\  before  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Mai. 


Ec.  Bos.  Coll.  Del.  Ktly. 

7.  brains']  brain  Pope  +  *i 
were]  where  Qt. 

in's]  Fx,  Cap.  Coll.  Dyce,  Wh 
Glo.  +  ,  Sch.  ins  Fa.  in  his  QqF3F4 
et  cet. 

were’t]  Rowe,  wert  QqFf. 

10.  prithee]  Knt.  prelhe  Qt.  frethee 
Qa*V  PrytheeF,F3F4. 

not]nereQq.  ne'er  G lo.  +  . 


I.  Go  you]  Jennens  holds  that  this  is  addressed  to  the  Gentleman  whose  en¬ 
trance  with  Lear  is  marked  in  the  Ff.  ‘  It  is  plain,’  he  argues,  *  that  the  letter  to 
Regan  was  sent  by  Kent ;  those  to  Glo’ster  by  another ;  the  order  to  Kent  was  left 
out,’ — his  text  accordingly  reads :  ‘  Lear,  [to  a  Gentleman]  Go  you  before  to  Glo’ster 
with  these  letters. — You  with  this  to  my  daughter  Regan,  [to  Kent]  Acquaint,’  &c. 

I.  Gloucester]  Capell,  followed  by  the  subsequent  editors,  has  removed  this 
difficulty,  expressed  by  Jennens  in  the  preceding  note,  by  supposing  that  this  name 
refers  to  the  city  of  Gloucester,  ‘as  is  evident  from  the  “there”  [in  line  4];  it  is 
made  the  residence  of  Regan  and  Cornwall  to  give  likelihood’  to  their  evening  visit 
to  Gloucester,  II,  iv,  whose  castle  is  in  the  neighborhood;  ‘earls,  in  old  time,  had 
some  dominion  in  the  counties  that  gave  them  their  titles,  and  resided  there  usually.’ 

7.  brains]  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  256):  Brain,  surely.  Wright:  Sh.  uses  both 
‘brains’  and  ‘brain’  indiscriminately,  except  in  such  phrases  as  *  to  beat  out  the 
brains.’  Here  it  is  a  singular,  of  which  there  is  another,  though  doubtful,  instance 
in  Ham.  Ill,  i,  174,  and  a  more  certain  one  in  Alps  Well,  III,  ii,  16:  ‘The  brains 
of  my  Cupid’s  knocked  out.’  Moberly  :  The  fool  laughs  at  Kent’s  promise  of 
rapidity,  and  says,  first,  ‘  that  when  men’s  brains  are  in  their  heels  ’  (that  is,  when 
they  have  no  more  wit  than  is  needed  to  go  fast)  *  they  may  get  brain-chilblains 
and  secondly,  *  that  as  Lear  has  no  brains,  he  is  in  no  such  danger.’ 

II.  slip-shod]  Eccles:  The  customary  resource  of  those  who  are  afflicted  with 


A  Cl  i.  SC.  V.] 


KING  LEAR 


97 


Lear.  Ha,  ha,  ha!  12 

Fool.  Shalt  see,  thy  other  daughter  will  use  thee  kindly ; 
for  though  she’s  as  like  this  as  a  crab’s  like  an  apple,  yet  I 
can  tell  what  I  can  tell.  .  1 5 

Lear.  What  canst  tell,  boy  ? 

Fool.  She  will  taste  as  like  this  as  a  crab  does  to  a 
crab.  Thou  canst  tell  why  one’s  nose  stands  i*  th’  middle 
on’s  face? 

Lear.  No.,  20 

Fool.  Why,,  to  keep  one’s  eyes  of  either  side’s  nose,  that 
what  a  man  cannot  smell  out  he  may  spy  into. 

Lear.  I  did  her  wrong — 

Fool.  Canst  tell  how  an  oyster  makes  his  shell  ? 


14.  she's"]  Jhces  Q,.  Jhe  is  Q2.  sites  Fa. 
crab's]  crab  is  Qx,  Cap.  Steev. 
Mai.  Ec.  Bos.  Coll.  Del.  crabbe  is  Qa. 
*5-  can  tell  what]  con,  what  Qq. 

16.  What  canst]  Why,  what  canji  thou 
Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly,  Glo.-h, 
Mob. 

boy]  my  boy  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Var. 
Sing.  Ktly,  Glo.  Wr.  Mob. 

1 7.  She  will ]  Sheel  Q,.  S/tee' l  Q2. 
does]  do’s  Ff.  doth  Qq. 

18.  Thou  canst]  Thou  canji  not  Qq, 
Jen.  Sing,  canji  thou  + . 

stands]  siande  Qt. 
i'  th']  in  the  Qq. 


19.  on’s]  of  his  Qq,  Mai.  Steev.  Bos. 
Sing,  of  one's  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Ec. 
Knt.  on  his  Ktly. 

21.  one’s]  onesFi.  his  Qq,  Mai.  Steev. 
Bos.  Sing.  Ktly. 

of]  on  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Ec.  Var 
Sing.  Ktly. 

side's]  fide  his  Q2,  Mai.  Steev. 
Bos.  Sing.  Ktly.  side  one's  Rowe+, 
Cap.  Jen.  Ec.  Knt. 

22.  he]  a  Qx. 

23.  wrong — ]  Theob.  wrong.  Q,F1. 
wrong!  Q2. 

24.  shell?]  f tell.  Qq. 


kibes.  Singer  paraphrases :  For  you  show  you  have  no  wit  in  undertaking  your 
present  journey. 

13.  kindly]  Mason:  Here  it  means  both  affectionately  and  like  the  rest  of  her 
kind. 

14.  crab]  Wright:  Compare  Lyly,  Euphues,  p.  120  (ed.  Arber):  ‘The  sower 
Crabbe  hath  the  shew  of  an  Apple  as  well  as  the  sweet  Pippin.’ 

15.  can]  Collier  suggests  that  con  of  the  Qq  [i.  e.  blow)  may  be  the  right  reading. 

19.  on’s]  See  I,  iv,  98. 

21.  of]  Abbott,  §  175:  ‘Of,’  signifying  proximity  of  any  kind,  is  sometimes 
used  locally  in  the  sense  of  on. 

23.  I  did  her  wrong]  Weiss  (p.  281):  The  beautiful  soul  of  Cordelia,  that  is 
little  talked  of  by  herself,  and  is  but  stingily  set  forth  by  circumstance,  engrosses  our 
feeling  in  scenes  from  whose  threshold 'her  filial  piety  is  banished.  We  know  what 
Lear  is  so  pathetically  remembering ;  the  sisters  tell  us  in  their  cruellest  momerits;  it 
mingles  with  the  midnight  storm  a  sigh  of  the  daughterhood  that  was  repulsed.  In 
the  pining  of  the  Fool  we  detect  it.  Through  every  wail  or  gust  of  this  awful  sym¬ 
phony  of  madness,  ingratitude,  and  irony,  we  feel  a  woman’s  breath. 

9  G. 


KING  LEAR 


[act  i,  sc.  v. 


9s 


Lear.*  No.  2$ 

Fool.  Nor  I  neither;  but  I  can  tell  why  a  snail  has  a 
house. 

Lear.  Why  ? 

Fool.  Why,  to  put ’s  head  in ;  not  to  give  it  away  to  his 
daughters,  and  leave  his  horns  without  a  case.  30 

Lear.  I  will  forget  my  nature.  So  kind  a  father! — Be 
my  horses  ready  ? 

Fool.  Thy  asses  are  gone  about  ’em.  The  reason  why 
the  seven  stars  are  no  moe  than  seven  is  a  pretty  reason. 

Lear.  Because  they  are  not  eight  ?  35 

Fool.  Yes,  indeed  ;  thou  wouldst  make  a  good  Fool. 

Lear.  To  take 't  again  perforce !  Monster  ingratitude ! 

Fool.  If  thou  wert  my  Fool,  nuncle,  I’ld  have  thee  beaten 
for  being  old  before  thy  time. 

Lear.  How’s  that?  40 

Fool.  Thou  shouldst  not  have  been  old  till  thou  hadst 
been  wise. 


29.  put's]  Ff+,  Jen.  Wh.  Cam.  Sch. 
put  his  Qq  et  cet. 

to  his ]  vnto  his  Qa. 

30.  daughters ]  daughter  Qq. 

31.  father  /]  Rowe,  father ;  Qq.  Fa¬ 
ther  ?  Ff,  Sch. 

33.  'em]  them  Qq,  Jen. 

34.  moe]  F3.  mo  F,Fa,  Sch.  more 
QqF4  et  cet. 


35.  eight?]  Cap.  eight.  QqFf  +  ,Jen. 
Sch. 

36.  indeed]  Om.  Qq. 

37.  take  V]  take  it  Cap.  Steev.  Ec.  Var. 
Knt,  Coll.  Del. 

Monster]  Monfler ,  Qq. 

38.  thou  wert]  you  wert  Fa.  you  were 
F3F4  +  .  thou  were  Han. 

41.  till]  before  Qq,  Jen. 


31.  Be]  Abbott,  §  299:  As  a  rale,  it  will  be  found  that  ‘be’  is  used  with  some 
notion  of  doubt,  question,  thought,  &c. ;  for  instance,  in  questions  [as  here],  and 
after  verbs  of  thinking. 

34.  seven  stars]  Both  Delius  and  Wright  refer  this  phrase  to  the  Pleiades,  a 
constellation  which  assuredly  is  known  by  the  name  of  The  Seven  Stars ;  may  it  not, 
however,  refer  to  the  Great  Bear,  whose  seven  stars  are  the  most  conspicuous  group 
in  the  circle  of  perpetual  apparition  in  the  Norther.n  Hemisphere  ? — so  conspicuous, 
indeed,  that  the  Latin  word  for  ‘  North  ’  was  derived  from  them.  We  call  this  con¬ 
stellation  *  The  Dipper,’  from  its  fancied  resemblance  to  the  utensil  of  that  name ;  a 
name,  I  believe,  scarcely  known  in  England. — Ed. 

37.  perforce]  Johnson:  He  is  meditating  on  his  resumption  of  royalty.  Steevens: 
Rather  he  is  meditating  on  his  daughter’s  having  in  so  violent  a  manner  deprived 
him  of  those  privileges  which  before  she  had  agreed  to  grant  him.  Delius  thinks  that 
Johnson’s  interpretation  is  the  more  plausible,  although  ‘  Monster  ingratitude  ’  is  more 
in  the  train  of  thought  suggested  by  Steevens.  Wright  also  agrees  with  Johnson’s 
interpretation,  as  more  in  keeping  with  what  Lear  says  in  line  31 :  ‘I  will  forget  my 
nature.’ 


ACT  I,  SC.  V.] 


KING  LEAR 


99 


Lear.  Oh,  let  me  not  be  mad,  not  mad,  sweet  heaven  1 
Keep  me  in  temper ;  I  would  not  be  mad ! — [ Enter  Gentle¬ 
man .]  How  now !  are  the  horses  ready  ?  45 

Gent.  Ready,  my  lord. 

Lear.  Come,  boy. 

Fool.  She  that’s  a  maid  now  and  laughs  at  my  departure 
Shall  not  be  a  maid  long,  unless  things  be  cut  shorter. 

[ Exeunt . 


43,  44.  Oh,  let...madl]  Pope.  Prose, 
QqFf,  Rowe,  \Vh.  Ktly. 

43.  not  mail]  Om.  Qq. 

mad,  sweet  heaven  /]  mad.  Sweet 
heaven ,  Johns. 

heaven  /]  heauen  !  I  would  not  be 
mad,  Qq  {bee  QJ. 

44.  [Enter  Gentleman.]  Theob.  Om. 

QqFf. 


45.  How  now  !]  Om.  Qq. 

46.  Gent.]  Seruant.  Qq. 

47.  [Exit.  Qq.  Exeunt  Lear,  and  Gen¬ 
tleman.  Cap. 

48.  that's  a]  that  is  Qq,  Mai.  Steev 
Bos.  Sing.  Ktly.  that  is  a  Cap. 

49.  sinless]  except  Qq. 

[Exeunt.]  Exit.  Qq.  To  the  Au¬ 
dience,  as  he  goes  out.  Cap. 


43.  Coleridge  :  The  deepest  tragic  notes  are  often  struck  by  a  half  sense  of  an 
impending  blow. 

13.  mad]  Bucknill  (p.  183):  This  self-consciousness  of  gathering  madness  is 
common  in  various  forms  of  the  disease.  ...  A  most  remarkable  instance  of  this  was 
presented  in  the  case  of  a  patient,  whose  passionate,  but  generous,  temper  became 
morbidly  exaggerated  after  a  blow  upon  the  head.  His  constantly  expressed  fear 
was  that  of  impending  madness ;  and  when  the  calamity  he  so  much  dreaded  had 
actually  arrived,  and  he  raved  incessantly  and  incoherently,  one  frequently  heard  the 
very  words  of  Lear  proceeding  from  his  lips :  *  Oh,  let  me  not  be  mad !’ 

48,  49.  Eccles  :  This  concluding  rhyme  seems  to  intimate  that  the  Fool  expects 
to  return  soon,  because  of  the  ill  treatment  which  he  will  probably  receive  where  he 
is  going.  Steevens  :  This  idle  couplet  is  apparently  addressed  to  the  females  present 
at  the  performance  of  the  play ;  and,  not  improbably,  crept  into  the  playhouse  copy 
from  the  mouth  of  some  buffoon  actor,  who  ‘spoke  more  than  was  set  down  for  him.’ 
It  should  seem,  from  Shakespeare’s  speaking  in  this  strong  manner,  that  he  suffered 
the  injury  he  describes.  Indecent  jokes,  which  the  applause  of  the  groundlings 
might  occasion  to  be  repeated,  would  at  last  find  their  way  into  the  prompters’  books, 
&c.  I  am  aware  that  such  liberties  were  exercised  by  the  authors  of  Locrine,  &c  , 
but  can  such  another  offensive  and  extraneous  address  to  the  audience  be  pointed  out 
among  all  the  dramas  of  Shakespeare?  Coleridge:  The  Fool’s  conclusion  of  this 
Act,  by  a  grotesque  prattling,  seems  to  indicate  the  dislocation  of  feeling  that  has 
begun  and  is  to  be  continued.  C.  A.  Brown  (p.  292) :  There  are  three  passages, 
foisted  in  by  the  players,  and  adopted  by  the  printers,  which  ought  to  be  for  ever 
expunged  from  the  text :  The  couplet  at  the  end  of  Act  I ;  the  whole  of  Merlin’s 
prophecy,  III,  ii,  79-95,  as  the  Fool  should  go  out  with  Lear,  and  those  brutal  words : 
‘  And  I'll  go  to  bed  at  noon,’  III,  vi,  83,  when  the  old  king  sinks  into  sleep.  Such 
contradictions  puzzled  me  for  a  long  time,  till  looking  among  the  Annotations,  a 
profitable  task  once  in  a  hundred  times,  I  discovered  that  none  of  these  three  pas¬ 
sages  are  in  the  Qq,  printed  eight  years  before  Shakespeare’s  death,  but  are  intro- 


IOO 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ii,  sc.  L 


ACT  II 


Scene  I.  The  Earl  of  Gloucester' s  Castle. 


Enter  Edmund  and  CURAN,  meeting. 

Edm.  Save  thee,  Curan. 

Cur.  And  you,  sir.  I  have  been  with  your  father,  and 
given  him  notice  that  the  Duke  of  Cornwall  and  Regan,  his 
duchess,  will  be  here  with  him  this  night. 

Edm.  How  comes  that  ?  5 

Cur.  Nay,  I  know  not.  You  have  heard  of  the  news 
abroad,  I  mean  the  whispered  ones,  for  they  are  yet  but 
ear-kissing  arguments  ? 


Act  ii.  Scene  i.]  Actus  Secundus. 
Scena  Prima  Ff  (Scsena  FJ.  On.  Qq. 
Act  ii.  Scene  ii.  Ec. 

The.. .castle.]  A  Castle  belonging 
to  the  Earl  of  Gloster.  Rowe.  A  Room 
in  Gloster’s  Castle.  Cap.  A  court  within 
the  castle  of  the  earl  of  Gloster.  Mai. 

Enter . meeting.]  Enter  Bail,  and 

Curan  meeting.  Q,.  Enter  Bailard,  and 
Curan  meetes  him.  Q2.  Enter  Baflard, 
and  Curan,  feverally.  Ff. 


1.  5,  &c.  Edm.]  Baft.  QqFf. 

2-4.  And... night. ]  Prose,  Qq.  Four 
lines,  ending  bin....notice....DuckeJJ‘e.... 
night.  Ff. 

2.  you ]  your  F,. 

3.  Regan]  Om.  Qq. 

4.  this  night ]  to  night  Qq,  Cap.  SteeV. 
Ec.  Var.  Coll.  Del.  Sing.  Ktly. 

7.  they]  there  Qq. 

5.  ear-hissing ]  eare-bujjing  Qq,  Coll, 
iii. 


duced  into  the  Ft,  printed  seven  years  after  it.  This,  together  with  their  absurdity, 
makes  it  plain  that  they  arc  not  Shakespeare’s.  [The  present  passage  is  not  omitted 
in  the  Qq.]  Singer:  She  who  thinks  that  this  journey  we  are  now  starting  on  will 
better  us,  and  bring  us  mirth,  is  such  a  simpleton  that,  if  she  is  a  maid  now,  she  will 
be  cheated  before  long  of  her  claim  to  that  title.  White  :  Steevens’s  opinion  that 
this  is  an  interpolation  appears  to  be  well  founded.  The  indecency  is  entirely  gra¬ 
tuitous  ;  it  is  *  dragged  in  by  the  head  and  shoulders,’  which  is  not  in  Shakespeare’s 
manner.  The  jest,  if  we  must  call  it  such,  is  of  the  most  miserable  sort,  and  one 
which  Sh.  would  hardly  suffer  in  the  mouth  of  this,  the  most  thoughtful  and  subtly 
whimsical  of  all  his  thoughtful  and  subtle  Fools.  [See  also  note  on  the  Merlin 
prophecy,  III,  ii,  81.]  Ellis  (p.  200)  refers  to  lists  of  words  given  by  Cooper, 
1685,  shewing  that  Cooper  pronounced  the  final  -ture  in  lecture,  nature,  picture, 
scripture,  See.  as  -ter/  the  present  rhyme  shows  that  *  departure  ’  was  so  pronounced 
in  Shakespeare’s  day.  White  (vol.  xii,  p.  437)  says  that  -tire  final  was  generally,  if 
not  universally,  pronounced  -er  among  even  the  most  polite  and  literate  of  our  Eliza¬ 
bethan  ancestors.  Ellis,  after  quoting  this  observation  by  White,  says  (p.  973), 
that  this  usage  was  not  general  or  confirmed  till  the  XVIIth  century.  [For  the 
rhyme,  see  also  II,  iii,  20.] 

8.  ear-kissing]  Steevens  :  That  is,  they  are  yet  in  reality  only  whispered  ones. 
Collier  (ed.  ii.)  suggests  that  a  play  is  probable  upon  bussing  of  the  Qq  and  buz- 
ting. 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


IOI 


Edm.  Not  I.  Pray  you,  what  are  they  ? 

Cur.  Have  you  heard  of  no  likely  wars  toward,  ’twixt  10 
the  Dukes  of  Cornwall  and  Albany? 

Edm.  Not  a  word. 

Cur.  You  may  do  then  in  time.  Fare  you  well,  sir. 

[Exit. 

Edm.  The  duke  be  here  to-night  ?  The  better !  best ! 

This  weaves  itself  perforce  into  my  business.  15 

My  father  hath  set  guard  to  take  my  brother ; 

And  I  have  one  thing,,  of  a  queasy  question, 

Which  I  must  a£t.  Briefness  and  fortune,  work  !— 

Brother,  a  word ;  descend !  Brother,  I  say ! 


Enter  Edgar. 

My  father  watches !  O  sir,  fly  this  place !  20 

Intelligence  is  given  where  you  are  hid ! 

You  have  now  the  good  advantage  of  the  night. 

Have  you  not  spoken  ’gainst  the  Duke  of  Cornwall  ? 

He’s  coming  hither,  now,  i’  th’  night,  i’  th’  haste, 


9.  Not  I.  Pray]  Not,  I  pray  Qq. 
10-12.  Cur.  Have...word.]  Om.  Q2. 

10.  Nave. ..toward,']  Separate  line,  Ff, 
Rowe. 

toward]  towards  Qx. 

11.  the 3  the  two  Qx,  Jen. 

13.  Two  lines,  Ff. 

do]  Om.  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var. 
Dyce  i. 

[Exit.]  Om.  Qx. 

14.  Scene  ii.  Pope,  Han.  Warb. 
14-97.  Verse,  Ff.  Prose,  Qq. 

14.  better l  best!]  Pope,  better  bejl, 
QqFf.  better,  best,  Rowe,  Ktly. 

1 7.  queasy]  quefe  Qq.  queazie  FXF3. 
queazy  F^F^. 


iS.  Which. ..work]  Which  mufl  afke 
breefnes  and  fortune  helpe  Qq  ( breefe - 
neffe  QJ- 

19.  Enter  Edgar.]  To  him,  enter 
Edgar.  Pope.  After  which,  line  18,  in 
Qx.  In  margin  opposite  itself  in  line  15 
in  Qx ;  after  line  iS,  in  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope. 

20.  sir]  Om.  Qq. 

22.  You  have]  You've  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  il. 

23.  ’ gainst ]  gainfl  Qx.  againfl  Q,. 
Cornwall /]  Cornwall  ought,  Qq. 

Cornwall  aught  Jen. 

24.  hither]  hether  Qq. 

i'  th'  night]  in  the  night  Qq. 
i'  .th.'  haste]  haste  Pope,  in  haste 

Han. 


10.  toward]  At  hand.  See  III,  iii,  17;  IV,  vi,  209;  Ham.  I,  i,  77;  V,  ii,  352. 

17.  queasy]  Steevens:  Delicate,  unsettled,  requiring  to  be  handled  nicely. 
[Steevens  called  attention  to  the  use  of  this  word  in  The  Paston  Letters ,  where  it  is 
spelled  ‘ qweysye '  (iii,  98,  ed.  Gairdner),  and  Wright  to  another  passage  where  it  is 
spelled  ‘  coysy '  (i,  497,  ib.).  In  both  instances  it  is  applied  to  *  the  world  *  in  the  sense 
of  unsettled,  troublous.]  Knight  :  Ticklish  perhaps  gives  the  meaning  more  clearly. 

24.  th’  haste]  For  instances  of  the  use  of  the  definite  article  in  adverbial  phrases, 
see  Abbott,  §91. 

9* 


102 


KING  LEAR 


[act  II,  sc.  i. 


And  Regan  with  him ;  have  you  nothing  said  25 

Upon  his  party  'gainst  the  Duke  of  Albany? 

Advise  yourself. 

Edg .  I  am  sure  on’t,  not  a  word. 

Edm .  I  hear  my  father  coming !  Pardon  me ; 

In  cunning  I  must  draw  my  sword  upon  you. 

Draw;  seem  to  defend  yourself;  now  quit  you  well.  30 

Yield !  come  before  my  father  ! — Light,  ho,  here ! — 

Fly,  brother ! — Torches,  torches !  {Exit  Edgar.] — So  farewell. 
Some  blood  drawn  on  me  would  beget  opinion 
Of  my  more  fierce  endeavour. '  I  have  seen  drunkards 


26.  'gainst]  againfl  Qq. 

27.  yourself.]  your —  Qq. 

I  am]  I'm  Pope+,  Jen.  Dyce  ii. 

28.  29.  me :  In  cunning]  me  in  cran¬ 
ing  Qq. 

30.  Draw ; ]  Om.  Qq. 

Draw. ..well.]  Cap.  Two  lines, 
the  first  ending  your  selfe ,  Ff  +  ,  Jen. 
quit]  ’ quit  Wb. 


31.  ho,]  hoa,  Ff+,  Knt.  here ,  Qt. 
heere ,  Qa. 

32.  brother]  brother  fie  Qq. 

Torches,  torches]  Torches  FaF 

F4+* 

[Exit  Edgar.]  Om.  Qq. 

33.  [Wounds  his  arm.  Rowe. 

34.  I  have]  I've  Pope  + ,  Dyce  ii. 


26.  Upon  his  party]  Delius  was  the  first  to  interpret  rightly  these  two  ques¬ 
tions  of  Edmund’s.  In  order  to  confuse  his  brother  and  urge  him  to  a  more  speedy 
flight,  by  giving  him  the  idea  that  he  is  surrounded  by  perils,  Edmund  asks  Edgar  first, 
whether  he  has  not  spoken  ’gainst  the  Duke  of  Cornwall,  and  then,  reversing  the 
question,  asks  whether  he  has  not  said  something  on  the  side  of  Cornwall  ’gainst  the 
Duke  of  Albany.  Schmidt  gives  seven  instances,  besides  the  present,  where  ‘  upon 
the  party’  means  ‘upon  the  side  of.’  Before  Delius,  Hanmer’s  interpretation  ob¬ 
tained,  by  which  line  26  was  regarded  as  only  another  way  of  putting  the  same 
question  as  that  in  line  23 ;  thus :  Have  you  said  nothing  upon  the  party  formed 
by -him  against  the  Duke  of  Albany?  Capell  added  that  we  must  supply  the  word 
‘reflecting’  before  ‘upon.’  The  passage  so  puzzled  Johnson  that  he  believed  it  to 
be  corrupt,  and  proposed  the  reading:  Against  his  party,  for  the  Duke  of  Albany  ? 
Eccles  noted  how  Edmund  grasped  at  every  motive,  however  trivial  or  insignificant, 
that  would  enforce  Edgar’s  departure.  Moberly  gives  an  ingenious  interpretation 
of  this  second  question  of  Edmund’s  :  the  war  being  only  *  toward,'  and  having  not 
yet  broken  out,  ‘Albany  would  be  in  a  position  to  demand  the  punishment  of  any  one 
who  spoke  against  him,  and  Cornwall  not  unlikely  to  concede  it,  as  Elizabeth  might 
have  done,  if  his  warlike  preparations  were  not  sufficiently  advanced  to  make  it  safe 
to  throw  down  the  gauntlet.* 

27.  Advise]  Steevens:  Consider,  recollect  yourself.  Wright:  See  I  Chron. 
xxi,  12:  ‘Now,  therefore,  advise  thyself  what  word  I  shall  bring  again  to  him  that 
sent  me.’ 

31.  Yield  .  .  .  father]  Delius:  Edmund  speaks  these  words  loud  so  as  to  be 
heard  outside. 


ACT  II,  SC.  l.J 


KING  LEAR 


103 


Do  more  than  this  in  sport. — Father,  father! —  35 

Stop,  stop ! — No  help  ? 


Enter  Gloucester,  and  Servants  with  torches. 

Glou .  Now,  Edmund,  where’s  the  villain  ? 

Edm.  Here  stood  he  in  the  dark,  his  sharp  sword  out, 
Mumbling  of  wicked  charms,  conjuring  the  moon 
To  stand  auspicious  mistress. 

Glou.  But  where  is  he  ?  40 

Edm.  Look,  sir,  I  bleed ! 

Glou.  Where  is  the  villain,  Edmund  ? 

Edm.  Fled  this  way,  sir,  when  by  no  means  he  could — 

Glou.  Pursue  him,  ho!  Go  after.  —  ‘By  no  means’ 
what  ? 

Edm.  Persuade  me  to  the  murder  of  your  lordship; 


35.  Father ,  father]  Why ,  father , 
father  Cap.  Father ,  father ,  father 
Ktly. 

36.  and. ..torches.]  Om.  Qq. 

37.  Scene  hi.  Pope,  Han.  Warb.  Jen. 
where's']  where  is  Qt. 

39.  Mumbling ]  warbling  Qq. 

40.  stand ]  fand's  Q,,  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  Cam.  Wr.  fund  his  Q2F3F4, 
Rowe,  Pope,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var. 
Knt,  Sing.  Ktly. 

mistress .]  mistress  : — Cap.  Steev. 
Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Sing,  mistress, —  Dyce, 


Glo.  Mob.  Sch. 

41.  villain ,  Edmund]  villaine  Ed¬ 
mund  Qt. 

42.  sir,  when ]  QqFf +  ,  Jen.  sir. 
When  Cap.  et  cet. 

could — ]  could.  Fj.  could  Fa. 

43.  ho]  Om.  Qq. 

after. — ‘By]  after.  By  Ff.  after, 

by  Qq* 

[Exeunt  some  Servants.  Dyce. 
Exit  Servant.  Cap. 

44.  to  the]  to  F3F k. 


35.  sport]  Steevens:  So  in  Marston’s  Dutch  Courtezan  (iv,  i) :  * — if  I  have 
not  as  religiously  vowd  my  hart  to  you, — been  drunke  to  your  health,  swalowd  flap- 
dragons,  eate  glasses,  drunke  urine,  stabd  armes,  and  don  all  the  offices  of  protested 
gallantrie  for  your  sake.’  Halliwell,  in  his  note  on  this  passage  in  Marston,  gives 
other  instances  of  this  same  practice  from  Greene’s  Tu  Quoque  and  Dekkar’s  Honest 
Whore.  As  Collier  says,  many  passages  might  be  produced  to  show  that  young 
gallants  sometimes  stabbed  their  arms  in  order  to  be  able  to  drink  the  healths  of 
their  mistresses  in  blood. 

39.  Mumbling  of]  Abbott,  §  178 :  We  should  be  inclined  to  treat  the  verbal  as 
a  present  participle,  because  there  is  no  preposition  before  it :  *  ^-mumbling  of.’  The 
verbal  here  means  *  in  the  act  of.’  See  Ham.  I,  v,  175,  and  II,  i,  92. 

39.  charms]  Warburton:  This  was  a  proper  circumstance  to  urge  to  Glou¬ 
cester,  who  appears  by  a  previous  scene  to  be  superstitious  with  regard  to  this 
matter. 

42.  this  way]  Capell  :  A  wrong  way  should  be  pointed  to. 


ic>4 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ii,  sc.  L 


But  that  I  told  him  the  revenging  gods  45 

'Gainst  parricides  did  all  the  thunder  bend, 

Spoke  with  how  manifold  and  strong  a  bond 
The  child  was  bound  to  th’  father;  sir,  in  fine, 

Seeing  how  loathly  opposite  I  stood 

To  his  unnatural  purpose,  in  fell  motion  50 

With  his  prepared  sword  he  charges  home 
My  unprovided  body,  lanced  mine  arm ; 

But  whe’r  he  saw  my  best  alarum’d  spirits 


45.  revenging]  reuengiue  Qq. 

46.  the  thunder]  Ff+,  Knt,  Del.  Wh. 
Sch.  their  thunder  Johns.  Heath,  their 
thunders  Qq  et  cet. 

47.  manifold]  many  fo-uld  Qq. 

48.  to  th’]  to’  th'  F,Fa.  tcth  Fj.  to 
the  Qq. 

in  fine]  in  a  fine  Qq. 

50.  in]  with  Qq. 


52.  lcnced]Theob.  lanchfQt.  launch/ 
Q2,  Rowe,  latch'd  Ff.  launch'd  Pope, 
Han.  Knt.  lancked  Sch. 

mine]  my  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 

53.  But  whe’r]  Sta.conj.  But  whether 
Coll,  ii  (MS).  And  when  Ff-f,Knt, 
Sch.  but  when  Qq  et  cet. 

alarum’d]  alarumd  Qq.  alarm'd 
F . .  alarmed  Rowe + . 

4 


45.  that]  This,  after  ‘When,’  in  line  41,  completes  the  conjunction  ‘When  that.’ 
See  Clarendon’s  note  on  Ham.  IV,  vii,  160. 

45.  revenging]  Wright  :  With  the  Qq  reading,  compare  *  responsive,’  equiv¬ 
alent  to  corresponding ,  in  Ham.  V,  ii,  146. 

46.  the]  Dyce  calls  this  reading  of  the  Ff  ‘a  vile  reading.’  [‘ All  the  thunder’ 
appears  to  be  a  stronger  and  more  comprehensive  expression  than  the  thunder  of 
the  revenging  gods  alone. — Ed.] 

50.  motion]  Schmidt  {Lex.) :  An  attack  in  fencing  opposed  to  guard,  or  parry¬ 
ing.  See  Twel.  N.  Ill,  iv,  304 ;  Ham.  FV,  vii,  102  and  158.  [See  Vincentio  Saviolo, 
his  Practise ,  1595:  ‘hold  your  dagger  firm,  marking  (as  it  were)  with  one  eye  the 
motion  of  your  aduersarie,’ — sig.  ***,  p..  I,  line  4. — Ed.] 

52.  lanced]  Knight  prefers  launch ,  and  cites  instances  from  Spenser,  Fairy 
Queen ,  i,  4,  and  Dryden,  Georgies ,  iii.  Undoubtedly  launch  would  be  preferable 
if  there  were  any  difference  in  signification  between  it  and  lance,  and  if  elsewhere 
Isaac  Jaggard  and  the  printers  of  the  Qq  had  not  used  the  words  indifferently. 
Wright  :  Compare  Hollyband  {Fr.  Diet.  1 593) :  ‘  Poindre,  to  pricke,  to  sticke,  to 
lanch.’  Schmidt  pronounces  ‘  latch’d  ’  a  misprint. 

53.  whe’r]  This  suggestion  of  Staunton’s  of  ‘  whe’r  ’  (*.  e.  whether )  fer  when 
.of  the  QqFf  seems  to  me  an  emendatio  certissima.  It  restores  the  construction,  which 
with  when  is  irregular,  and  to  be  explained  only  on  the  ground  of  Edmund’s  per¬ 
turbation.  For  many  illustrations  of  the  monosyllabic  pronunciation  of  whether , 
from  Chaucer  downwards,  see  Walker,  Vers.  103,  or  Abbott,  §  466,  or  Macb.  I, 
iii,  in,  ox  Ham.  II,  ii,  17;  III,  ii,  193.  Schmidt  prefers  And  when  of  the  Ff, 
because  *  but  *  of  the  Qq  would  indicate  that  the  result  of  the  scene  was  something 
unexpected. 

53.  best  alarum’d  spirits]  Delius  interprets  this :  *  my  best  spirits  alarum’d’; 
but  Schmidt  says  that  ‘  best  ’  is  used  adverbially,  and  here  means  in  the  best  way. 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


105 


Bold  in  the  quarrel’s  right,  roused  to  th’  encounter, 

Or  whether  gasted  by  the  noise  I  made,  55 

Full  suddenly  he  fled. 

Glou.  Let  him  fly  far ; 

Not  in  this  land  shall  he  remain  uncaught ; 

And  found — dispatch.  The  noble  duke  my  master. 


54.  quamls  right ]  quarrels ,  rights 


ghasted  Knt,  Del.  Sch. 

56.  Full ]  but  Qq,  Cap.  ' 


58, 59.  uncaught;... — dispatch.")  Steev. 
uncaught  and  found ;  difpatch,  QqFf 
{found,  QJ.Rowe.  uncaught  and found; 


dispatch —  Pope,  Theob.  uncaughl ; 
And  for  dispatch  Han.  uncaught ;  And 
found. — Dispatch.  Johns,  uncaught; 
And,  found,  dispatch'd.  Cap.  Coll.  iii. 
uncaught ;  And found — Dispatch — Jen. 
uncaught,  And  found — dispatch  Sing. 
Ktly,  Sch. 


55.  gasted]  Wright:  Frightened.  Steevens  quotes  from  Beau,  and  FI.  Wit  at 
Several  Weapons,  II,  iii,  but  the  word  there  in  the  original  copies  is  ‘  gaster’d  ’ : 
‘  Either  the  sight  of  the  Lady  has  gaster’d  him,  or  else  he’s  drunk.’  This  is  still  an 
Essex  word.  ‘  Gast  ’  as  a  participle  occurs  in  Cursor  Mundi  (MS  Trin.  Coll.  Cam* * 
bridge,  fol.  31,  quoted  in  Halliwell’s  Diet.),  p.  291  (E.  E.  Text  Soc.,  ed.  Morris): 

*  His  wille  was  but  to  make  hem  gast.’  The  other  three  printed  texts  of  the  poem 
have  *  agast,’  *  agaste,’  and  *  a-gast.’  Sh.  uses  *  gastness  ’  in  the  sense  of  terror-stricken 
look  in  Oth.  V,  i,  106 :  ‘  Do  you  perceive  the  gastness  of  her  eye  ?’  And  Spenser 
has  ‘gastfull’  in  the  sense  of  ‘awful’  in  Shepherd's  Calendar,  August,  170:  ‘Here 
will  I  dwell  apart  In  gastfull  grove  therefore.’  Both  these  last-mentioned  words 
appear  to  have  been  used  as  if  they  were  etymologically  connected  with  ‘  ghost.* 
For  this  derivation  there  is  no  foundation.  Cotgrave  gives,  ‘  Espoventable :  com. 
Dreadfull,  frightfull,  fearefull;  horrible,  gastfull,  horride.’  The  form  ‘gaster’  is 
found  in  Harsnet’s  Declaration  of  Popish  Imposture  (1603),  p.  73  :  ‘  Did  euer  the  God- 
gastring  Giants,  whom  Iupiter  overwhelmed  with  Pelion  and  Ossa,  so  complaine 
of  theyr  Ioade  ?’  Mr  Skeat  has  pointed  out  to  me  an  excellent  example-  of  ‘  gast  ’  in 
The  Vision  of  Piers  Plowman ,  Text  A,  Passus  vii,  1,129:  •  Bo>e  to  sowen  and  to 
setten  •  and  saued  his  til>e,  Gaste  Crowen  from  his  Com  •  and  kepen  his  Beestes.’ 

58.  dispatch]  Warburton:  This  nonsense  should  be  read  and  pointed  thus: 

*  And  found,  dispatch’d.’ — i.  e.  as  soon  as  he  is  found  he  shall  be  dispatch’d  or 
executed.  Johnson  :  The  sense  is  interrupted.  He  shall  be  caught — and  found, 
he  shall  be  punished.  Despatch.  Singer  (N.  dr*  Qu.  1st  Ser.  vol.  vi,  p.  6,  1852)  : 
The  context  plainly  shows  that  we  should  read,  preserving  the  punctuation  of  the 
Folio:  ‘f7«found;  dispatch.’  [This  conjecture  Singer  afterwards  withdrew  in  his 
Text  of  Sh.  Vindicated,  &c.,  p.  270.]  A.  E.  B[rae]  [A7!  dr*  Qu.  1st  Ser.  vol.  vi,  p. 
82,  1852) :  -There  is  an  expressive  pause  after  ‘  found,’  as  though  the  punishment 
consequent  upon  Edgar’s  capture  were  too  terrible  and  indeterminate  for  immediate 
utterance.  ‘  Dispatch  ’  is  addressed  to  Edmund,  and  simply  means,  ‘  Get  on  with 
your  story,’  which  in  fact  he  does  at  the  conclusion  of  Gloucester’s  speech.  Collier 
(ed.  ii.) :  ‘  Despatch’d  ’  is  the  correction  in  the  (MS),  and  the  context,  where  Glou* 
cester  adds  that ‘the  murderous  coward’  shall  be  brought ‘to  the  stake,’  entirely 
confirms  it.  Staunton  :  The  old  text  [that  is,  as  Staunton  gives  it :  *  And  found — 


106 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ii,  sc.  !. 


My  worthy  arch  and  patron,  comes  to-night ; 

By  his  authority  I  will  proclaim  it,  60 

That  he  which  finds  him  shall  deserve  our  thanks. 

Bringing  the  murderous  coward  to  the  stake ; 

He  that  conceals  him,  death. 

Edm.  When  I  dissuaded  him  from  his  intent 
And  found  him  pight  to  do  it  with  curst  speech,  65 

I  threaten'd  to  discover  him ;  he  replied  : 

‘  Thou  unpossessing  bastard  !  dost  thou  think, 

If  I  would  stand  against  thee,  would  the  reposal 
Of  any  trust,  virtue,  or  worth,  in  thee 

Make  thy  words  faith’d  ?  No ;  what  I  should  deny, —  70 

As  this  I  would ;  ay,  though  thou  didst  produce 
My  very  charafter,— I’ld  turn  it  all 


59.  worthy ]  worth  F4. 

arch  and patron J  and  arch-patron 
Theob.  Han. 

61.  which~\  who  Theob.  ii,  Warb. 
Johns. 

62.  coward  J  caytife  Q,.  caytiffe  Qa. 
caitiff  Jen.  Cam.  Wr. 

68.  would  the  reposal]  could  the  re- 
pofure  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Cam,  Wr. 


68-70.  would  the  reposal... Make]  the 
reposal...  Would  make  Han. 

70.  what  I  should]  what  Jhould  I  Ff. 
by  what  I  should  Rowe,  Pope,  what 
rd  Han.  when  I  should  Warb.  Johns. 
what ,  should  I  Sch. 

71.  ay,  though]  I  though  Qq.  though 
Ff.  although  Rowe  ii+. 

72.  I'ld]  ril  F4.  would  Han.  Cap. 


dispatch  !’]  is  right.  Thus  in  Blurt,  Master  Constable,  v,  i :  ‘  There  to  find  Fonti- 
nelle :  found,  to  kill  him.* *  JDyce  :  I  cannot  see  that  Staunton’s  quotation  supports 
the  old  reading. 

59.  arch]  Steevens  :  Chief.  So  in  Heywood’s  If  you  Kncnv  not  Me  you  Know 
Nobody  (p.  48,  ed.  Sh.  Soc.) :  *  Poole,  that  arch,  for  truth  and  honesty.’  Wright 
cites  Steevens’s  quotation,  and  adds,  *  but  it  is  not  a  good  instance  of  the  word.’ 
White:  That  is,  chief; — to  Odd  Fellows  and  Masons  a  superfluous  explanation. 

65.  pight  .  .  .  curst]  Johnson  :  *  Pight  ’  is  pitched ,  fixed,  settled.  *  Curst  ’  is 
severe,  harsh,  vehemently  angry.  Moberly  :  ‘  Pight  ’  comes  from  pitched ,  as  dight 
comes  from  deck,  or  right  from  reach. 

67.  unpossessing]  Moberly  :  Incapable  of  inheriting.  *  For,’  says  Blackstone, 

*  [a  bastard]  is  looked  upon  as  “  nullius  filius,”  and  therefore  of  kin  to  nobody,  and 
he  has  no  ancestor  from  whom  any  inheritable  blood  can  be  derived.’  COLERIDGE : 
Thus  the  secret  poison  of  Edmund’s  own  heart  steals  forth  ;  and  then  observe  poor 
Gloucester’s  ‘  Loyal  and  natural  boy !’  as  if  praising  the  crime  of  Edmund’s  birth. 

6S.  I  would]  For  instances  where  *  would  ’  is  not  used  for  should,  see  Abbott,  §  331. 

68,  69.  reposal  .  .  .  thee]  Delius  says  that  *  virtue  or  worth  in  thee  ’  does  not, 
like  *  trust,’  depend  on  « reposal,’  but  is  co-ordinate  with  it,  and  any  is  to  be  under¬ 
stood  before  it ;  or,  as  Wright  states  it,  *  the  reposure  of  any  trust,  (or  the  belief  in 
any)  virtue  or  worth,  in  thee.’ 

70.  faith’d]  That  is,  believed.  See  I,  i,  203. 

72,  character]  See  I,  ii,  59. 


act  II,  SC.  i.]  KING  LEAR  107 

To  thy  suggestion,  plot,  and  damned  practice ;  73 

And  thou  must  make  a  dullard  of  the  world, 

If  they  not  thought  the  profits  of  my  death  75 

Were  very  pregnant  and  potential  spurs 

73.  practice]  pradlife  F,F3.  pretence  76.  spurs ]  fpurres  Qq.  fpirits  Ff, 
Qq.  Rowe,  Del.  i,  Sch. 


73.  suggestion]  Nares  :  Temptation,  seduction.  Hunter.  (Note  on  Mach.  I, 
iii,  134) :  ‘  Suggestion’  is  a  theological  word,  one  of  the  three  ‘  procurators  or  tempters’ 
of  sin.  Delight  and  Consent  being  the  others. 

73.  practice]  Collier  (ed.  ii.) :  The  accent  seems  to  show  that  pretence  of  the 
Qq  is  not  the  right  word,  unless  we  read  ‘  damn'd  pretence.’  Wright  :  *  Practice  * 
is  more  in  keeping  with  *  plot  ’  and  *  suggestion.’ 

75.  not  thought]  For  instances  of  the  omission  of  the  auxiliary  in  negative  sen¬ 
tences,  or  for  the  transposition  of  the  negative,  see  Abbott,  §  305. 

75.  death]  Moberly  :  This  skilful  suggestion,  that  Edmund  should  be  put  into 
Edgar’s  place,  is  acted  upon  at  once  by  Gloucester;  yet  it  is  so  indirect  that  Glou¬ 
cester  imagines  the  thought  to  have  come  from  himself.  Lord  Bacon,  in  his  essay 
on  Cunning ,  speaks  of  the  trick  of  *  turning  cat  in  pan that  is,  making  a  suggestion 
in  such  a  way  that  the  hearer  supposes  it  to  be  his  own.  This  may  be  done  either 
coarsely — ‘  as  you  said,  and  wisely  was  it  said,’  was  Polonius’s  way  of  impressing  his 
own  thoughts  on  the  king — or,  in  a  more  skilful  way,  as  here.* 

76.  pregnant]  In  Meas.  for  Meas.  I,  i,  12,  Johnson  first  defined  this  word  by 
'  ready,’  and  this  definition  has  been  adopted  as  its  general  meaning  in  Sh.  down  to 
the  present  day;  certainly  it  is  generally  thus  interpreted  in.  the  present  passage. 
Wright  goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  it  ‘is  used  by  Sh.,  without  any  reference  to  its 
literal  meaning,  in  the  sense  of  “  ready ;”  ’  he  afterwards  defines  it  as  *  manifest, 
obvious,’  in  certain  passages  which  he  cites.  Schmidt  gives  no  intimation  that  it  is 
used  in  its  ‘  literal  meaning ;’  the  fourteen  instances  of  its  use  that  he  cites  he  divides 
under  three  heads :  1st,  expert,  clever,  ingenious,  artful ;  2d,  disposed,  ready,  prompt 
(under  this  head  the  present  passage  is  cited) ;  3d,  probable  in  the  highest  degree, 
clear,  evident.  Now,  on  the  other  hand,  I  cannot  but  think  that  Nares  came  nearer 
the  truth  when  he  said  that  the  ruling  sense  of  this  word  is  that  of  ‘being  full  or  pro¬ 
ductive  of  something.’  Out  of  Schmidt’s  fourteen  instances  eleven  appear  to  me  to 
come  under  Nares’s  definition.  Three  instances  ( Lear  IV,  vi,  222;  Wint.  Tale,  V, 
ii,  34;  and  Ant.  and  Cleop.  II,  i,  45)  are  used  in  so  metaphorical  a  sense  that  one 
may  give  to  them  almost  any  meaning  that  his  mother  wit  suggests  as  applicable  to 
the  passage.  My  interpretation  of  the  ‘pregnant  hinges  of  the  knee*  in  Ham.  Ill, 
ii,  56,  is  there  recorded;  the  present  passage  seems  to  me  exactly  parallel,  and  may 
be  paraphrased  thus :  *  So  great  are  the  profits  of  my  death  that  the  spurs  to  make 
thee  seek  it  are  most  powerful,  and  teem  with  incitements  thereto.’  Schmidt  in 
his  edition  repeats  his  definitions  of  ‘  pregnant,’  and  doubts  if,  thus  defined,  Sh.  ever 
could  have  applied  it  to  ‘spurs,’  and, while  faithful  to  the  Folio,  confesses  that  spirits 
form  but  a  poor  predicate  to  ‘  profits,’  yet  in  the  sense  of  evil  spirits  that  it  is  at  least 
as  probable  a  reading  as  ‘  spurs.*  In  my  opinion  the  reading  of  the  Folio  is  a  mis¬ 
print  for  4  spurs  ’  of  the  Quarto.  *  Pregnant  ’  is  quite  as  appropriate  to  *  spurs  ’  as  to 
‘  hinges/ — Ed. 


io8 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ii,  sc.  i. 


To  make  thee  seek  it.’ 

Glou.  O  strange  and  fasten’d  villain !  77 

Would  he  deny  his  letter  ? *  *  I  never  got  him.* 

[  Tucket  within. 

Hark,  the  duke’s  trumpets !  I  know  not  why  he  comes. 

All  ports  I’ll  bar ;  the  villain  shall  not  ’scape ;  80 

The  duke  must  grant  me  that.  Besides,  his  picture 
I  will  send  far  and  near,  that  all  the  kingdom 
May  have  due  note  of  him ;  and  of  my  land, 

Loyal  and  natural  boy,  I’ll  work  the  means 

To  make  thee  capable.  8$ 


77.  0 strange  and fasten'd]  Ff,  Rowe, 
Knt,  Del.  i,  Sell.  Strong  and  faflned 
Qx.  Strong  and  faflened  Qa.  O  strange, 
fasten'd  Fope  +  ,  Ec.  Strange ,  and 
fasten'd  Cap.  (MS).*  O  strong  and 
fasten'd  Dyce  i,  Ktly.  Strong  and 
fasten'd  Cap.  et  cet. 

villain']  Viliaine  F3. 

73.  I  never  get  him.]  said  he?  Ff, 
Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Sob.  said  he? 


hark  /  Han.  Sch.  said  he  ?  I  never  got 
him.  Cap.  Knt. 

78.  [Tucket  within.]  Ff  (after  seek  it, 
line  77).  After  villain  Cap.  After  him 
Mai.  Om.  Qq.  Trumpets  within.  Rowe. 
Trumpets  without.  Sta. 

79.  why ]  v/her  Fx,  where  FaF  F.. 
whed  Knt. 

83.  due]  Om.  Qq. 

85.  [Flourish.  Cap. 


77.  strange]  As  Schmidt  says,  Sh.  uses  this  sometimes  in  the  sense  of  enormous, 
unheard  of  r  ‘  this  most  foul,  strange,  and  unnatural  [murder]  ’ — Ham.  I,  v,  28 ; 

*  All  strange  and  terrible  events  are  welcome  ’ — Ant.  and  Chop.  IV,  xv,  3. 

78.  This  line  in  the  Ff  is  manifestly  imperfect ;  I  have  followed  the  majority  of 
editors  in  adopting  a  sentence  from  the  Qq  which  seems  in  keeping  with  Glou¬ 
cester’s  agitation. — Ed. 

78.  Tucket]  Nares  :  A  particular  set  of  notes  on  the  trumpet,  used  as  a  signal 
for  a  march.  From  toccata,  which  Florio  defines :  *  A  pneludium  that  cunning  mu- 
sitions  use  to  play,  as  it  were,  voluntary  before  any  set  lesson.’ 

81.  picture]  Lord  Campbell:  One  would  suppose  that  photography,  by  which 
this  mode  of  catching  criminals  is  now  practised,  had  been  invented  in  the  reign  of 
King  Lear.  [We  have  merely  called  in  photography  to  our  aid  in  continuing  a 
practice  common  in  Shakespeare’s  time,  as  this  present  passage  shows,  and  of  which 
we  have  a  corroboration  in  the  old  play  of  Nobody  and  Somebody,  1606  (Privately 
reprinted  by  Mr  Alexander  Smith  of  Glasgow,  1S77)  :  *  Let  him  be  straight  im¬ 
printed  to  the  life :  His  picture  shall  be  set  on  euery  stall,  And  proclamation  made, 
that  he  that  takes  him.  Shall  haue  a  hundred  pounds  cf  Somebody .’  Sig.  D4.  For 
this  reference  I  am  indebted  to  the  Preface  of  the  Reprint. — Ed.] 

84.  natural]  Hudson  :  This  word  is  here  used  with  great  art,  in  the  double  sense 
of  illegitimate  and  as  opposed  to  unnatural,  which  latter  epithet  is  implied  upon  Edgar. 

85.  capable]  Lord  Campbell:  In  forensic  discussions  respecting  legitimacy,  the 
question  is  put,  whether  the  individual  whose  status  is  to  be  determined  is  *  capable,’ 
i.  e.  capable  of  inheriting ;  but  it  is  only  a  lawyer  who  would  express  the  idea  of  legiti¬ 
mising  a  natural  son  by  simply  saying,  ‘  I’ll  work  the  means  To  make  him  capable.’ 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


109 


Enter  Cornwall,  Regan,  and  Attendants. 

Com.  How  now,  my  noble  friend !  since  I  came  hither,  86 
Which  I  can  call  but  now,  I  have  heard  strangb  news. 

Reg-.  If  it  be  true,  all  vengeance  comes  too  short 
Which  can  pursue  the  offender.  How  dost,  my  lord  ? 

Clou.  Oh,  madam,  my  old  heart  is  crack’d, — it’s  crack’d!  90 
Reg".  What,  did  my  father’s  godson  seek  your  life  ? 

He  whom  my  father  named?  your  Edgar? 

Clou.  Oh,  lady,  lady,  shame  would  have  it  hid ! 


86.  Scene  iv.  Pope +  ,  Jen. 

Enter...]  Enter  the  Duke  of  Corn¬ 
wall.  Qq. 

87.  strange  news)  Jlrange  news  Qq. 
flrangeneffe  F,Fa.  flrangenefs  F3F4. 

8S.  too  short)  to  Jkort  F3. 

89.  dost)  does  FaF3F4 -(- ,  Cap.  Ten.  Ec. 
docst  Sch. 

90.  Oh)  Om.  Qq. 


90.  it's)  is  Qq,  Cap.  Steev,  Ec.  Var. 
Cam.  Wr. 

92.  named?  your  Edgar?)  nam'd , 
your  Edgar  ?  Ff.  named  your  Edgar  ? 
Qq.  nam'd ,  your  Edgar  ?  He  ?  Han. 
nam'd?  your  heir ,  your  Edgar?  Coll, 
iii  (MS). 

93.  Oh)  I  Qq.  Ay  Anon.* 


£9.  dost]  The  fact  that  Regan  at  no  other  time  addresses  Gloucester  in  the  second 
person  makes  me  think  that  we  should  here  read  :  *  How  does  my  lord?’  For  the 
omission  of  the  nominative  after  ‘  dost,’  see  Abbott,  §§  241,  399,  400. — Ed. 

91.  Coleridge:  Compare  Regan’s  ‘did  my  father's  godson  seek  your  life?  He 
whom  my  father  named  ?  ’  with  the  unfeminine  violence  of  her  ‘  All  vengeance 
comes  too  short,’  &c.,  and  yet  no  reference  to  the  guilt,  but  only  to  the  accident, 
which  she  uses  as  an  occasion  for  sneering  at  her  father.  Regan  is  not,  in  fact,  a 
greater  monster  than  Goneril,  but  she  has  the  power  of  casting  more  venom. 

92.  This  line  Abbott,  §  478,  scans  in  two  ways :  First,  by  pronouncing  the  last 
syllable  in  it  *  with  a  kind  of  “  burr,”  which  produced  the  effect  of  an  additional 
syllable ;’  and  as  he  cites  ‘  sirrah  ’  as  an  instance  of  this  ‘  burr,’  the  best  way,  prob¬ 
ably,  of  conveying  his  idea  in  spelling  would  be  ‘  Ed-garrah.’  Or,  secondly,  Abbott 
queries  whether  it  might  not  be  scanned,  by  pronouncing  *  your  ’  dissoluli,  thus : 
‘najmed?  you|r  Edgar?’  Of  these  two  methods,  the  latter  seems  preferable. 
Walker  ( Crit .  ii,  145)  suggests,  in  his  chapter  on  the  omission  of  repeated  words, 
that  Gloucester  says  :  *  O !  O  lady,’  and  that  the  first  ‘  O  !  ’  which  closed  this  line  had 
been  omitted.  Lettsom,  in  a  foot-note,  queries  “‘your  Edgar,  Gloster ?”  Gloster 
may  have  been  left  out  at  the  end  of  the  line  in  consequence  of  Glo.  occurring  at 
the  beginning  of  the  next.’  For  Collier’s  (MS)  emendation,  see  Textual  Notes; 
Moberly,  referring  to  this  emendation,  says :  ‘  Probably  the  intense  tone  of  astonish¬ 
ment  would  give  a  prolonging  accentuation  to  several  of  the  syllables  as  the  line 
stands,  and  make  it  in  reality  long  enough  without  the  addition.  If  the  reading, 
however,  was  invented,  its  inventor  had  a  good  notion  of  the  way  in  which  conso¬ 
nants  fall  out  of  the  body  of  a  word.  There  would  be  the  same  kind  of  identity 
between  ‘  heir  ’  and  ‘  Edgar  ’  as  between  *  Audrey  ’  and  *  Ethelreda,’  ‘  Maude  ’  and 
4  Matilda ;  ’  and  his  theory  would  be  that,  from  the  similarity  of  the  two  words,  one 
had  got  dropped.’ 

10 


no 


KING  LEAR 


[act  it,  sc.  i. 


Reg.  Was  lie  not  companion  with  the  riotous  knights 
That  tend  upon  my  father  ?  95 

Glon.  I  know  not,  madam. — ’Tis  too  bad,  too  bad. 

Edm.  Yes,  madam,  he  was  of  that  consort. 

Reg.  No  marvel  then,  though  he  were  ill  affected; 

’Tis  they  have  put  him  on  the  old  man’s  death, 

To  have  th’  expense  and  waste  of  his  revenues.  IOO 

I  have  this  present  evening  from  my  sister 

Been  well  inform’d  of  them,  and  with  such  cautions 

That  if  they  come  to  sojourn  at  my  house, 

I’ll  not  be  there. 

Com.  Nor  I,  assure  thee,  Regan. — 


94.  not]  Om.  Coll.  (MS). 

95.  tend  upon]  Theob.  tends  vpon 
Qq.  tended  upon  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Knt, 
Ktly.  tended  on  Han. 

95-97.  That. ..was"]  Two  lines,  ending 
madam. ..was,  and  omitting  of  that  con¬ 
sort.  Cap.  Steev.  ’93,  Bos. 

96.  ’  Tis  too  bad,  too  bad.]  Separate 
line,  Steev.  ’85,  Mai.  Ec. 

’  Tis]  it  is  Cap.  Steev.  ’85,  ’93, 
Var.  Ec. 

97.  madam]  madam, yes  Coll,  ii  (MS). 


97.  of  that  consort]  Om.  Qq,  Cap. 
Steev.  ’93,  Bos.  one  of  that  consort 
Dyce  conj. 

100.  th *  expense  and  waste  of  his]  the 
waft  and  fpoyle  of  his  Q,,  Jen.  Mai. 

Steev.  Bos.  Sta.  Cam.  Wr.  tkefe - and 

wafle  of  this  his  Qa.  th'  expence  and 
waft  of  FaF3F4. 

103,  104.  That. ..there.]  One  line,  Qq. 
104-106.  Nor...ofp.ce.)  Prose,  Qq. 

104.  assure]  I  assure  Theob.  ii,  Warb. 
Johns. 


95.  tend]  Abbott,  §  472,  gives  this  word,  in  the  Ff,  as  an  instance  of  the  fact 
that  -ed,  when  following  d  or  t,  is  often  not  written,  and,  even  when  written,  is  often 
not  pronounced. 

97.  madam]  Walker  (  Vers.  173)  :  This  is  usually  a  monosyllable. 

97.  consort]  Dyce  [Gloss.) :  A  fellowship,  a  fraternity.  See  Abbott,  §  490,  for 
a  list  of  words  in  Sh.  where  the  accent  is  nearer  the  end  than  with  us.  [As  this 
word  thus  accented  meant  also  a  company  of  musicians  (see  Rorrl.  <5r»  ful.  Ill,  i,  41, 
where  Mercutio  conceives  himself  insulted  by  being  classed  among  minstrels),  it  is 
probably  here  used  as  a  strongly  contemptuous  term. — Ed.] 

98.  were]  Abbott,  §  301 :  The  meaning  is :  *  It  is  no  wonder,  then,  that  he  was 
a  traitor,’  and  no  doubt  or  future  meaning  is  implied. 

99.  'Tis  they]  Clarke:  Regan  seeks  to  associate  the  accused  man,  Edgar,  with 
the  knights  of  her  father’s  train,  upon  whom  she  is  determined  to  fasten  blame  as  an 
excuse  for  her  refusal  to  receive  and  entertain  them. 

99.  put  him  on]  See  I,  iv,  200. 

100.  expense  and  waste]  Malone  supposed  that  these  of  Qa  was  a  misprint  for 
the  use.  Wright  thinks  that  the  reading  of  the  Ff  is  apparently  a  conjectural  emen¬ 
dation  of  the  reading  of  the  incorrect  Qq.  [It  seems  probable  that  the  dash  in 
Qj  indicates  the  haste  and  carelessness  with  which  these  editions  were  printed. 
Either  the  stenographer  misheard  the  word  and  put  a  dash,  which  he  afterwards 
hoped  to  fill  up,  but  did  not,  and  the  compositor  repeated  it  in  type,  or  the  com- 


ACT  II,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


III 


Edmund,  I  hear  that  you  have  shown  your  father  105 

A  child-like  office. 

Edm.  ’Twas  my  duty,  sir. 

Glon .  He  did  bewray  his  pra£tice,  and-received 
This  hurt  you  see,  striving  to  apprehend  him. 

Com.  Is  he  pursued  ? 

Glou.  Ay,  my  good  lord. 

Com.  If  he  be  taken,  he  shall  never  more  *10 

Be  fear’d  of  doing  harm.  Make  your  own  purpose, 

How  in  my  strength  you  please. — For  you,  Edmund, 

Whose  virtue  and  obedience  doth  this  instant 
So  much  commend  itself,  you  shall  be  ours. 

Natures  of  such  deep  trust  we  shall  much  need;  115 

You  we  first  seize  on. 

Edm.  I  shall  serve  you,  sir, 

Truly,  however  else. 

Glou.  For  him  I  thank  your  grace. 


105.  hear]  heard  Qq. 

106.  ’  Twas]  Twas  Qq.  It  was  F,F3, 
Knt.  It  is  F3F4,  Rowe.  It’s  Pope, 
Han. 

107.  bewray]  betray  Qq. 

109.  lord]  lord ,  he  is  Han. 

HO-116.  If  he. ..seize  on.]  Prose,  Qq. 

112.  For]  as  for  F2F3F4  +  ,  Jen. 
Edmund]  good  Edmund  Ktly. 

113.  doth  this  instant]  in  this  instance . 

Warb.  Johns,  doth ,  in  this  instance 


Heath,  Jen. 

1 14.  commend ]  commends  Warb. 

Johns. 

itself]  themselves  Ec.  conj. 

1x5,  116.  need ;  You  we]  need  you, 
we  Qj.  need ,  you  we  Qa. 

1 1 6,  1 1 7.  I  shall.. .else.]  As  by  Pope. 
One  line,  QqFf. 

1 16.  sir]  Om.  Qq,  Jen. 

117.  Truly]  At  end  of  116,  Jen.  Sta. 
For  him]  Om.  Pope  + . 


positor  was  baffled  by  the  text  of  his  copy,  and  left  a  dash  to  be  filled  up  by  the 
proof-reader,  which  was  not  done.  See  Appendix,  p.  362.] 

107.  bewray]  Wright:  From  A. S.  wregan,  or  wreian,  to  accuse.  See  Matthew, 
xxvi,  73 :  ‘  thy  speech  bewrayeth  thee  1*  ‘  Bewray  ’  and  ‘  betray  ’  are  used  almost 

interchangeably,  but  in  the  former  there  is  no  notion  of  treachery  inherent. 

107.  practice]  Steevens  :  Always  used  by  Sh.  for  insidious  mischief.  See 
tine  73. 

in.  fear’d  of]  For  a  long  list  of  instances  where  of  means  *  concerning,’  *  about,’ 
see  Abbott,  §  174,  or  Ham.  II,  ii,  27. 

1 12.  For  you]  Abbott,  §483,  for  the  sake  of  metre  prolongs  ‘you’  into  a  dis¬ 
syllable. 

1 13.  virtue  . .  .  doth]  Capell:  ‘Virtue  and  obedience’  is  put  figuratively  for 
virtuous  obedience ;  and  hence  it  is  that ‘itself’  is  predicated  of  it,  and ‘doth*  fol¬ 
lows  it;  and  did  at  follow  ‘doth,’  the  next  expression  were  neater,  but  it  may  do 
without.  [For  instances  of  a  verb  in  the  singular  after  two  nominatives,  see  Ham. 
Ill,  ii,  157,  and  Sh.  fassim.] 


I  12 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ii,  sc.  i 


Corn.  You  know  not  why  we  came  to  visit  you  ?  nS 

Reg.  Thus  out  of  season,  threading  dark-eyed  night ; 
Occasions,  noble  Gloucester,  of  some  poise,  120 

Wherein  we  must  have  use  of  your  advice. 

Our  father  he  hath  writ,  so  hath  our  sister, 

Of  differences,  which  I  best  thought  it  fit 


1 1 8.  came\  come  Cap.  conj. 

you  ?]  QqFIFa,  Sch.  you.  F3F4, 
Coll,  i,  Del.  Wh.  you  (continuing  the 
next  line  to  ‘  Com.’),  Rowe  ii,  Pope,  Han. 
Ktly.  you —  or  you, —  Rowe  i  et  cet. 

1 19.  threading]  ihredding  Ff.  threat - 
ning  Qq. 

flight ;]  night,  QqFf.  night? 
Rowe,  Pope,  night!  Sch. 

120.  poise]  poyfe  Qj.  prize  QaFf, 


Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Johns.  Ec. 
Sch.  price  Johns,  conj.  Cap. 

1 21.  advice.  ]  advice —  Rowe,  Pope. 
adui/e,  Q,.  aduice,  Qa.  advices  :  Cap. 

123.  differences ]  difer cnees  Qt.  de¬ 
fences  Qa. 

best]  left  Qs.  least  Cam.  Wr. 
thought  it]  though  it  F,.  thought 

Sch. 


1 19.  Regan]  Jennens:  Regan  may  be  here  supposed  officiously  to  complete 
Cornwall’s  sentence.  Hudson  :  Regan’s  snatching  the  speech  out  of  her  husband’s 
mouth  is  rightly  in  character.  These  two  strong-minded  ladies  think  nobody  else 
can  do  anything  so  well  as  they.  [Although  Regan  does  certainly  take  up  and  con¬ 
tinue  her  husband’s  speech,  yet  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  comma  and  dash  at 
the  end  of  Cornwall’s  speech,  line  118,  are  due  only  to  Rowe. — Ed.] 

1 19.  threading]  Theobald:  I  have  great  suspicion  that  it  should  be  treading , 
i.  e.  travelling.  The  text  as  it  stands  carries  too  obscure  and  mean  an  allusion.  It 
must  either  be  borrowed  from  the  cant  phrase  of  threading  of  alleys,  i.  e.  going 
through  by-passages;  or  to  threading  a  needle  in  the  dark.  Heath:  That  is, 
slipping  through  the  night,  as  if  afraid  of  being  discovered.  Steevens  :  The  same 
phrase  is  used  in  Cor.  Ill,  i,  124.  Wright:  Compare  for  the  figure  of  speech. 
King  John,  V,  iv,  1 1. 

120.  poise]  Malone:  Weight  or  moment.  Henley:  Sh.  having  elsewhere 
used  to  peize  for  to  balance  or  weigh,  and  the  letter  r  in  his  own  autograph  being 
made  more  like  an  e,  I  conclude  that  peize  was  the  original  word,  and  signified 
deliberation.  SCHMIDT  upholds  the  Ff,  to  whose  reading  he  gives  the  meaning :  *  ot 
some  account;  ’  thus,  in  Cym.  Ill,  vi,  77,  Imogen,  when  wishing  that  Guiderius  and 
Arviragus  had  been  her  brothers,  says,  ‘  then  had  my  prize  Been  less,  and  so  more 
equal  ballasting  To  thee,  Posthumus  ;’  and  in  Ant.  &■>  Cleop.  V,  ii,  183,  Caesar  says  to 
Cleopatra  :  *  Caesar’s  no  merchant,  to  make  prize  with  you  Of  things  that  merchants 
sold.’  [I  should  agree  with  Schmidt  in  preferring  the  Folio,  did  not  Sh.  elsewhere 
use  *  poise  ’  in  phrases  similar  to  the  present.  Even  on  Schmidt’s  own  theory,  in 
which  I  agree  with  him,  that  the  Qq  are  surreptitious  copies  taken  down  from  stage- 
representation,  it  is  likely  that  ‘  poise  '  was  Shakespeare’s  own  word  when  the  play 
was  first  acted  ;  it  is  a  less  likely  word  to  occur  to  an  actor  than  prize. — Ed.] 

121.  advice]  Keightley:  There  is  evidently  a  line  lost  after  this.  We  might 
read  :  *  Have  been  the  cause  of  this  our  sudden  visit.’ 

123.  which]  Delius  :  This  does  not  refer  to  *  differences,’  but  to  *  writ.’ 

123.  thought  it  fit]  Schmidt  thinks  that  the  misprint  of  the  Folio  is  more  likely 


ACT  II,  SC.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


ir3 


To  answer  from  our  home ;  the  several  messengers 
From  hence  attend  dispatch.  Our  good  old  friend,  1 25 

Lay  comforts  to  your  bosom  and  bestow 
Your  needful  counsel  to  our  businesses, 

Which  craves  the  instant  use. 

Glon.  I  serve  you,  madam. — 

Your  graces  are  right  welcome.  [ Flourish .  Exeunt.  129 


Scene  II.  Before  Gloucester’s  castle. 


Enter  Kent  and  Oswald,  severally. 


Oszv.  Good  dawning  to  thee, 
Kent.  Ay. 

124.  home 3  hand  Q2. 

126-128.  Lay... use. ]  Two  lines,  the 
first  ending  counsell ,  Qq. 

127.  businesses']  Ff  +  ,  Ec.  Knt,  Del. 
Dyce  i,  Sch.  businejjfe  Qq  et  cet. 

128.  craves]  crave  Rowe+,  Ec.  Knt, 
Del.  Dyce  i. 

[Exeunt.  Q2.  Exit.  Q2. 

128, 129.  I  serve. ..welcome.]  One  line, 
Qq. 

129.  [Flourish.  Exeunt.]  Exeunt. 
Flourifh.  F,.  Exeunt.  F2F3F4.  Om.  Qq. 

Scene  ii.]  Scena  Secunda  Ff  (Scmna 


friend ;  art  of  this  house  ? 


F2).  Scene  v.  Pope +,  Jen.  The  Scene 
continued  by  Rowe,  Theob.  Scene  iii. 
Ec. 

Before...]  Before  the  Castle.  Cap. 

Enter . ]  Coll.  Enter  Kent,  and 

Steward  feverally.  Ff,  Sch.  Enter  Kent, 
and  Steward.  Qq. 

1,  3,  &c.  Osw.]  Coll.  Steward,  or 
Stew.  QqFf,  Sch. 

I.  dawning]  eticn  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Eft 
evening  Pope,  Theob. 

this]  the  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Mai.  Steev. 
Bos.  Sing.  Ktly. 


10  stand  for  thought  fit  than  for  *  thought  it  fit.’  [The  space  is  suspiciously  large  be¬ 
tween  *  though*  and  *  it,’  and  looks  to  me  as  though  a  letter  had  dropped  out.  The 
presence  or  absence  of  ‘it’  need  not  affect  the  scansion. — Ed.] 

124.  from  our  home]  Johnson  :  Not  at  home,  but  at  some  other  place.  [Com¬ 
pare  *  From  thence,*  Macb.  Ill,  iv,  36,  or  see  Abbott,  §  41.  This  meaning  the 
phrase  does  not  bear  if  Wright’s  reading  of  least  from  Qt  be  adopted. — Ed.] 

124.  messengers]  Walker  [Vers.  200) :  This  is  frequently  a  quasi-dissyllable. 
See  also  Abbott,  §  468. 

127.  businesses]  If  business  of  the  Qq  be  adopted,  it  must  be  pronounced  as  a 
trisyllable,  for  which  authority  will  be  found  in  Walker  [Vers.  171)  pr  Abbott, 
§479- 

1.  dawning]  Warburton:  The  time  is  apparently  night.  We  should  read, 
‘Good  downing ,’  i.  e.  good  rest,  the  common  evening  salutation  of  that  time. 
Capell:  And  here  [line  28]  we  see  the  time  of  this  scene — that  ’tis  night;  but  late 
in  it,  and  drawing  towards  morning.  Mason:  Lines  129  and  130  of  this  scene 
show  that  the  time  was  very  early  in  the  morning.  Malone:  It  is  clear  that  the 
morning  is  just  beginning  to  dawn,  though  the  moon  is  still  up,  and  though  Kent, 
10*  II 


KING  LEAR 


I  ACT  II,  sc.  ii. 

•» 


114 

Osw.  Where  may  we  set  our  horses  ?  3 

Kent.  I’  th’  mire. 

Osw.  Prithee,  if  thou  lovest  me,  tell  me.  5 

Kent.  I  love  thee  not 

Osw.  Why  then  I  care  not  for  thee. 

Kent  If  I  had  thee  in  Lipsbury  pinfold,  I  would  make 
thee  care  for  me. 

Osw.  Why  dost  thou  use  me  thus?  I  know  thee  not  10 
Kent.  Fellow,  I  know  thee. 

Osw.  What  dost  thou  know  me  for  ? 

Kent.  A  knave ;  a  rascal ;  an  eater  of  broken  meats ; 


4.  r  th'].  It'h  Q,.  I  th'  FaF3F4. 
In  the  Qa. 

5.  Prithee]  Prythee  FtF3F4.  Preihee 
QqFa. 

lovest]  lov'Jl  Ff.  lone  Qq,  Cap. 
Steev.  Mai.  Ec.  Bos.  Coll. 


8.  Lipsbury -]  Lipfburie  Qt.  Ledbury 
Jen.  conj.  Finsbury  Coll,  iii  (MS). 

I  would]  Corrected  to  I'd  by  Cap. 
{Notes,  i,  230.) 

9.  [Striking  him.  Coll.  iii. 


early  in  the  scene,  calls  it  still  night.  Towards  the  close  of  it  he  wishes  Gloucestex 
good  morrow,  and  immediately  after  calls  on  the  sun  to  shine  that  he  may  read  a 
letter.  Delius  :  It  is  night,  and  as,  in  Sh.,  that  time  of  day  which  is  approaching 
is  given  by  way  of  greeting,  and  not  that  which  is  then  present,  Oswald  wishes 
Kent,  whom  he  does  not  recognize  in  the  dark,  a  good  dawning. 

5.  if  thou  lovest  me]  Delius  :  A  conventional  phrase  before  a  question  cr  re¬ 
quest,  but  which  Kent  here  takes  literally. 

8.  Lipsbury  pinfold]  What  Capell  said  a  hundred  years  ago  is  still  true  :  ‘  It 
is  not  come  to  knowledge,  where  that  Lipsbury  is,’  but  what  he  adds  is  question¬ 
able  :  *  This  we  may  know,  and  with  certainty,  that  it  was  some  village  or  other, 
fam’d  for  boxing;  that  the  boxers  fought  in  a  ring  or  enclos’d  circle,  and  that  this 
ring  was  call’d — “  Lipsbury  pinfold.”  *  Farmer  suggests  that  it  may  be  a  cant 
phrase  with  some  corruption,  taken  from  a  place  where  the  fines  were  arbitrary. 
Steevens  surmised  that  it  might  import  the  same  as  Lob's  Pound ;  with  which  it 
seems  to  have  no  more  connection  than  that  *  pinfold  ’  means  *  Pound  ’  and  *  Lob  ’ 
and  ‘  Lipsbury  ’  begin  with  the  same  letter.  *  Lob’s  Pound,’  as  is  well  known,  means 
a  place  of  confinement,  whether  a  prison  or  the  stocks.  NarEs’s  guess  is  perhaps 
as  happy  as  any :  *  It  may  be,’  he  says,  ‘  a  coined  name,  and  it  is  just  possible  that  it 
might  mean  the  teeth,  as  being  the  pinfold  within  the  lips.'  Collier’s  MS  gives  Fins¬ 
bury,  where,  says  that  editor,  there  must  have  been  a  pinfold,  well  known  to  Shake¬ 
speare’s  audiences ;  and  this  word,  through  mishearing  or  misprinting,  was  corrupted 
to  ‘  Lipsbury.’  Halliwell  simply  cites  Nares;  and  Dyce  says  merely:  *  A  pinfold 
is  a  pound ;  but  what  the  commentators  have  written  about  the  name  Lipsbury  is  too 
unsatisfactory  to  be  cited.’  Wright  thinks  Nares’s  explanation  the  most  probable 
which  has  yet  been  given,  and  adds :  Similar  names  of  places,  which  may  or  may 
not  have  any  local  existence,  occur  in  proverbial  phrases,  such,  for  instance,  as 
•Needham’s  Shore,’  *  Weeping  Cross.’ 


KING  LEAR 


act  ir,  sc.  ii.] 


1 15 


a  base,  proud,  shallow,  beggarly,  three-suited,  hundred-  14 

14.  three-suited]  thread-suited  Anon.*  fuited- hundred  pound  F,.  three-fuited , 

three  -  suited ,  hundred  -  pound]  hundred  pound  FaFjF4  (thre  F3). 

three  Jhewted  hundred pound  Qq.  three - 


14.  three-suited]  Farmer:  This  should  be  third-suited ,  wearing  clothes  at 
third  hand.  Steevens  :  This  might  mean,  one  who  had  no  greater  change  of  rai¬ 
ment  than  three  suits  would  furnish  him  with.  So  in  Jonson’s  Silent  Woman  [IV,  ii, 
p.  447,  ed.  Gifford]  :  *  thou  wert  a  pitiful  poor  fellow, .  .  .  and  hadst  nothing  but  three 
suits  of  apparel ;’  or  it  may  signify  a  fellow  thrice-sued  at  law,  who  has  three  suits 
for  debt  standing  out  against  him.  Delius  :  This  cannot  refer  to  his  poverty,  but, 
rather,  like  *  glass-gazing,’  signifies  foppishness,  changing  his  suits  that  many  times, 
or  else  wearing  them  all  at  the  same  time.  When  Edgar  describes  his  former 
wealthy  state,  he  says  of  himself  [III,  iv,  129],  ‘who  hath  had  three  suits  to  his 
back.’  Wright:  If  the  terms  of  agreement  between  master  and  servant  in 
Shakespeare’s  time  were  known,  they  would  probably  throw  light  upon  the  phrase. 
It  is  probable  that  three  suits  of  clothes  a  year  were  part  of  a  servant’s  allowance. 
In  Jonson’s  Silent  Woman,  III,  i,  Mrs  Otter,  scolding  her  husband,  whom  she  treats 
as  a  dependant,  says,  ‘  Who  gives  you  your  maintenance,  I  pray  you  ?  Who  allows 
you  your  horse-meat  and  man’s-meat,  your  three  suits  of  apparel  a  year  ?  your  four 
pair  of  stockings,  one  silk,  three  worsted?’  [According  to  the  Cambridge. Editors, 
*  Qa,  Bodl.  1,’  has  the  misprint  snyted,  which  is  corrected  in  the  other  Qq  to  shewted. 
From  this  circumstance,  Wright  inferred  not  only  that  the  enumeration  of  the  Qq  in 
the  Cam.  ed.  was  wrong,  and  that  what  he  and  his  fellow-editor  had  there  called  Qa 
was  in  reality  the  earliest  impression  of  all,  but  that  ‘  suit  ’  in  Shakespeare’s  day  was 
pronounced  shoot.  He  supposes  that  while  the  *  edition  was  in  course  of  printing  the 
error,  snyted,  was  discovered,  and  the  correction  communicated  verbally  to  the  com¬ 
positor,  who  inserted  it  according  to  his  own  notions  of  spelling.’ — Ellis’s  E.  E.  Pro¬ 
nunciation,  p.  217.  This  hypothesis  (which  is  certainly  as  old  as  Steevens),  in  regard 
to  the  pronunciation  of  suit,  Wright  thinks  is  strengthened  by  the  puns  on  suitor  and 
shooter  in  Lovds  Lab,  Lost,  IV,  i,  109,  &c.,  and  also  in  Rowley’s  Match  in  the  Dark 
O633).  II,  i;  but  Ellis  (p.217)  doubts  whether  these  instances  are  enough  to  decide 
the  point  with  certainty.  ‘  Hurried  corrections,  whether  of  print  or  manuscript,  fre¬ 
quently  introduce  additional  errors,  and  hence  there  is  no  guarantee  that  the  compositor 
who  substituted  shewted  for  snyted  did  not  himself  put  shewted  when  he  meant  to  have 
inserted  sewted ,’  *  which  would  be  a  legitimate  orthography  for  suited, .’  *  In  the  present 
day  we  have  a  joke  of  an  Irish  shopman  telling  his  customer  to  shoot  himself,  meaning 
suit  himself.  The  Irish  pronunciation,  however,  only  shows  an  English  pronuncia¬ 
tion  of  the  XVIIth  century.  In  England  at  the  present  day,  shoot  for  suit  would  be 
vulgar,  but  the  joke  would  be  readily  understood,  though  few  persons  use,  or  have 
even  heard,  the  pronunciation.  Might  not  this  have  been  the  case  in  Shakespeare’s 
time  ?  At  any  rate,  there  is  no  authority  for  supposing  that  such  a  pronunciation 
could  have  been  used  seriously  by  Sh.  himself.’  In  his  essay  on  English  Pronun¬ 
ciation  in  the  Elizabethan  Era  (Sh.  Works,  xii,  p.  430),  White  says :  *  S  before  a 
vowel  had  often  the  sound  of  sh,  as  it  now  has  in  sugar  and-  sure.  Such  was  its 
sound  in  sue,  suit,  and  its  Compounds,  and  I  believe  in  super  and  its  compounds,  and 
in  supine  and  supreme.  .  .  .  S  was  also  sometimes  aspirated  before  0  and  i ;  of  which, 
and  of  the  0  sound  of  ew,  see  phonographic  evidence  in  the  pronunciation  of  sewer , 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ii,  sc.  iL 


1 1 0 


pound,  filthy,  worsted-stocking  knave;  a  lily-livered,  aftion-  15 
taking,  whoreson,  glass-gazing,  superserviceable,  finical 
rogue;  one-trunk-inheriting  slave;  one  that  wouldst  be  a 
bawd  in  way  of  good  service,  and  art  nothing  but  the  com¬ 
position  of  a  knave,  beggar,  coward,  pandar,  and  the  son 


15.  worsted-stocking ]  worfied-fiocken 
Qq.  woofied-fiocking  F,FBF3.  woojled 
/locking  F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

lily-livered ,  action-taking ]  No 
hyphens,  Qq. 

15,  16.  action-taking ,  whoreson ]  Ff, 
Rowe,  Pope,  Han,  Knt,  Dyce,  Sta.  Sch. 


aeflion  taking  knave ,  a  whorfon  Qq  et 
cet. 

16.  superserviceable,  finical ]  fiupe- 
finicall  Qq. 

*7-  one-trunk-inheriting']  one  Trunkc 
inheriting  FxFa.  No  hyphen,  Qq, 


which  was  pronounced  shore  in  the  Elizabethan  era,  and  thence  down  to  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  the  present  century.  .  .  .  Hence,  too,  shekels  was  spelled  sickels.  Both  spell¬ 
ings  expressed  the  same  sound.’] 

14.  hundred-pound]  Steevens:  A  term  of  reproach;  see  Middleton’s  Phoenix 
[IV,  iii,  p.  393,  ed.  Dyce]  :  *  How’s  this  ?  am  I  used  like  a  hundred-pound  gentle¬ 
man  ?  ’  Delius  suggests  that  it  may  mean  one  who  weighs  only  a  hundred  pounds, 
and  is  therefore  tolerably  light;  but  the  quotation  from  Middleton,  cited  also  by 
Delius,  seems  conclusive. 

15.  worsted-stocking]  Steevens:  The  stockings  in  England  in  the  reign  of 
Queen  Elizabeth  were  remarkably  expensive,  and  scarce  any  other  kind  than  silk 
were  worn,  even,  as  says  Stubbes  in  his  Anatomic  of  Abuses  [p.  57,  ed.  Furaivall], 
by  those  who  had  not  above  forty  shillings  a  year  wages.  So  in  Tailor’s  The  Hog  hath 
Lost  his  Pearl  [I.  i]  :  ‘  Good  parts,  without  habiliments  of  gallantry,  are  no  more  set 
by  in  these  times  than  a  good  leg  in  a  woollen  stocking.’  Again  in  Beau,  and  Fl.’s 

The  Captain  [III,  iii]  :  ‘serving-men  with - woollen  stockings.*  Malone:  See 

also  Middleton’s  Phcenix  [IV,  ii,  p.  389,  ed.  Dyce]  :  ‘  Metreza  Auriola  keeps  her 
love  with  half  the  cost  I  am  at :  her  friend  can  go  a’  foot  like  a  good  husband,  walk 
in  worsted  stockings,  and  inquire  for  the  six-penny  ordinary.’ 

15.  lily-livered]  See  JlPacb.Y,  iii,  15.  Wright:  Compare  2  Hen.  IV:  IV, 
iii,  1 1 1 :  ‘  The  second  property  of  your  excellent  sherris  is,  the  warming  of  the  blood ; 
which,  before  cold  and  settled,  left  the  liver  white  and  pale,  which  is  the  badge  of 
pusillanimity  and  cowardice.’ 

15.  action-taking]  Mason:  A  fellow  who,  if  you  beat  him,  would  bring  an 
action  for  the  assault,  instead  of  resenting  it  like  a  man  of  courage. 

16.  glass-gazing]  Eccles  :  One  who  wastes  his  time  in  gazing  at  his  own  person 
in  a  looking-glass. 

16.  superserviceable]  Johnson:  Over-officious.  Wright:  It  must  also  sig¬ 
nify  one  who  was  above  his  work.  See  Oswald’s  character  as  drawn  by  Edgar, 
IV,  vi,  251. 

17.  one-trunk-inheriting]  JOHNSON,  supposing  that  ‘trunk’  here  refers  to 
trunk-hose,  explains  this  as  a  ‘  wearer  of  old  cast-off  clothes,  an  inheritor  of  tom 
breeches.’  Steevens  defines  it  as  a  fellow  the  whole  of  whose  possessions  are 
confined  to  one  coffer ,  and  that  too  inherited  from  his  father.  Schmidt  sustains 
Steevens’s  definition,  but  qualif.es  it  by  showing  that  ‘  inherit  ’  also  means  simple 
possession,  as  in  IV,  vi,  125 :  ‘  But  to  the  girdle  do  the  gods  inherit.’ 


ACT  II,  SC.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


ii  7 


and  heir  of  a  mongrel  bitch;  one  whom  I  will  beat  into  20 
clamorous  whining,  if  thou  deniest  the  least  syllable  of  thy 
addition. 

Oszv.  Why,  what  a  monstrous  fellow  art  thou,  thus  to 
rail  on  one  that  is  neither  known  of  thee  nor  knows  thee ! 

Kent.  What  a  brazen-faced  varlet  art  thou,  to  deny  25 
thou  knowest  me !  Is  it  two  days  since  I  tripped  up  thy 
heels  and  beat  thee  before  the  king?  Draw,  you  rogue! 
for,  though  it  be  night,  yet  the  moon  shines ;  I’ll  make  a 
sop  o’  th’  moonshine  of  you,  you  whoreson  cullionly  bar¬ 
ber-monger,  draw.  30 


20.  one]  Om.  Qq. 

21.  clamorous ]  clamours  FJF2,  Rowe. 
deniest]  deny'fl  Ff.  denie  Qx. 

deny  Qa. 

thy ]  the  Qq. 

23.  Why ]  Om.  Qq. 

24.  on  one ]  against  one  Cap.  MS.* * 
that  zV]  that's  Qq. 

26.  days ]  days  ago  Qq,  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Ktly,  Glo.  +  , 
Mob. 

26,  27.  tripped. ..thee]  beat  thee  and 
tript  vp  thy  keeles  Qq. 

28.  yet]  Om.  Qq,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev. 


Bos.  Sing.  Ktly. 

29.  sop ]  fop  Theob.  conj.  (with¬ 
drawn). 

o'  th' ]  oth'  FjFj,.  of  the  Qq. 
of  you]  a.'  you  Qq. 
you  whoreson]  Ff+,  Knt,  Sch. 
draw ,  you  whorfon  Qq  et  cet. 

cullionly]  cully  only  Qq.  Cully  enly 
F,Fa.  cully  only  Q3>  Culleinly  F3F4, 
Rowe,  Pope. 

barber-]  Barbar -  FJF  F  . 

.  3  3  4 

30.  [Drawing  his  sword.  Rowe. 
barber  -  monger]  barber- munger 

Qq. 


22.  addition]  Title;  see  Macb.  I,  iii,  106;  Ham.  I,  iv,  20;  II,  i,  47. 

29.  sop  o’  th’  moonshine]  Capell:  A  ludicrous  phrase,  importing  that  he 
would  lay  [Oswald]  upon  his  back  on  the  earth,  like  a  ‘sop’  in  a  dripping-pan,  for 
the  moonbeams  to  baste  him.  Farmer  j  Perhaps  here  an  equivoque  was  intended. 
In  The  Old  Shepherd's  Kalendar ,  among  the  dishes  recommended  for  Prymetyne, 

*  One  is  egges  in  moneshine.’  Nares  :  This  probably  alludes  to  some  dish  so  called. 
There  was  a  way  of  dressing  eggs,  called  ‘  eggs  in  moonshine.’  [Nares  here 
gives  a  receipt  from  May’s  Accompl.  Cook,  p.  437,  to  which  I  refer  the  enthusiastic 
student.  It  is  sufficient  to  say  that  the  eggs  are  fried  in  ‘  oyl  or  butter,’  covered  with 
slices  of  onions  and  seasoned  with  verjuice,  nutmeg  and  salt;  to  be  eaten  with 
what  appetite  you  may.  A  simpler  receipt  is  given  in  N.  Qu.  4th  S.,  xii,  19  July, 
1873;  and,  in  the  same  volume,  on  p.  84,  Royle  Entwisle  says  that  Nares’s 
explanation  is  *  as  constrained  and  shallow  as  his  resort  to  a  cookery-book  ’  *  is 
ridiculous  and  unnecessary ;  and  it  was  evidently  arrived  at  without  a  thought  being 
expended  on  Shakespeare’s  ideal  knowledge  of  the  orb  of  night,  as  revealed  in  his 
Other  allusions  to  it,  notably  in  Macb.  Ill,  v,  23,  24.’  ‘  Plainly,  Kent’s  intention  is 
to  make  a  “sop  ”  of  him  in  the  sense  of  steeping  him,  in  his  own  blood,  by  the  con¬ 
senting  light  of  the  moon.’] 

29.  cullionly]  Wright  :  Florio  gives,  *  Coglione,  a  cuglion,  a  gull,  a  meacocke ;  ’ 
and  in  his  Worlde  of  Wordes,  ‘  Coglione,  a  noddie,  a  foole,  a  patch,  a  dolt,  a  meacock.’ 

30.  barber-monger]  Farmer  :  This  may  mean  a  dealer  in  the  lower  tradesmen  j 


KING  LEAR 


1 1 8 


[act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


Osw.  Away !  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  thee.  3 1 

Kent.  Draw,  you  rascal.  You  come  with  letters  against 
the  king,  and  take  vanity  the  puppet’s  part  against  the 
royalty  of  her  father.  Draw,  you  rogue,  or  I'll  so  carbonado 
your  shanks !  Draw,  you  rascal ;  come  your  ways.  35 

Osw.  Help,  ho!  murder.! .help ! 

Kent.  Strike,  you  slave !  -stand,  rogue,  stand ;  you  neat 
slave,  strike ! 

Osw.  Help,  ho !  murder !  murder ! 


32.  come  with ]  bring  Qq. 

34.  royalty  of  her]  royalty,  her  Cap. 

35.  shanks  1]  Sta.  Jhankes,  QqFf. 
shanks —  Rowe  + .  shanks  :  Cap.  et  cet. 

37.  rogue ,  stand;  you]  Jen.  rogue, 
fiandyouQqYi,  Rowe,  rogue, stand, you 


Pope-f,  Sch.  rogue;  stand,  you  Cap. 
Knt,  Cam.  Wr. 

37.  slave,]  slave ;  Knt. 

38.  [Beating  him.  Rowe. 

39.  murder l  murder /]  murther,  mur- 
ther.  Ff.  murther,  helpe.  Qq. 


a  slur  upon  the  steward,  as  taking  fees  for  a  recommendation  to  the  business  of  the 
family.  Mason  :  A  fop  who  deals  much  with  barbers,  to  adjust  his  hair  and  beard. 
Moberly  :  A  contemptuous  extension  of  the  word  *  barber.' 

33.  vanity]  Johnson:  Alluding  to  the  old  Moralities  or  allegorical  plays,  in 
which  Vanity,  Iniquity,  and  other  vices  were  personified. 

33.  puppet]  Singer  :  A  mere  term  of  contempt  for  a  female. 

34.  carbonado]  Dyce  (  Gloss.) :  To  cut  cross-wise  for  broiling. 

37.  neat]  Johnson,  who  defines  this  by  ‘you  mere  slave,  you  very  slave,’  comes 
nearer  to  the  true  meaning,  I  think,  than  Steevens,  although  the  latter  has  been  fol¬ 
lowed  by  Dyce,  Schmidt,  Wright,  and  Moberly.  Steevens  thinks  that  ‘  it  means 
no  more  than  you  finical  rascal,  you  are  an  assemblage  of  foppery  and  poverty.’ 
Then,  by  way  of  proof,  Steevens  cites  Jonson  in  The  Poetaster  [IV,  i] :  ‘By  thy 
leave,  my  neat  scoundrel.’  But  we  must  remember  that  this  is  spoken  by  Tucca,  a 
blustering  captain,  whose  speech  is  full  of  absurd  epithets,  and  that  it  is  addressed 
to  Gallus,  who,  we  know,  is  not  a  ‘  scoundrel,’  and  are  not  led  to  suppose  that  he  is 
‘neat’  in  the  sense  of  finical.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  more  likely  that  Tucca  uses 
‘neat’  in  the  sense  which  Walker  {Crit.  ii,  352)  ascribes  to  it  here,  viz:  that  of 
pure,  unmixed ;  still  used  in  the  phrase  neat  wine,  &c.  Singer  suggests  that  it  may 
mean  ‘  you  base  cowherd.’  Staunton  has  the  following  note :  *  The  sting  in  this 
epithet  has  been  quite  misunderstood  by  the  commentators,  who  suppose  it  to 
mean  mere  or  finical.  For  the  real  allusion,  see  Winl.  Tale,  I,  ii,  123:  “We 
must  be  neat;  not  neat,  but  cleanly,  captain,  And  yet  the  steer,  the  heifer,  and  the  calf. 
Are  all  call’d  neat.’’  See  also  Taylor  the  Water  Poet’s  Epigram  on  the  Husband  of 
Mrs  Parnell;  “  Neate  can  he  talke,  and  feede,  and  neatly  tread,  Neate  are  his  feete,  but 
most  neate  is  his  head.”  ’  But,  as  Wright  says,  this  play  on  the  word  ‘  neat  ’  would 
have  no  especial  point  as  addressed  to  Oswald.  Walker’s  interpretation  is,  I  think, 
the  true  one.  Rusiiton  (Sh.  Illust.  by  Old  Authors,  p.  63)  :  ‘  Because  Leontes  ia 
Wint.  Tale  uses  the  word  ‘neat’  in  a  sense  implying  the  uncleanliness  which  is 
common  to  cattle,  or  those  who  tend  them,  therefore  I  have  thought  it  probable  that 


ACT  II,  SC.  li.] 


KING  LEAR 


ng 


Enter  Edmund,  with  his  rapier  drawn. 

Edm.  How  now !  What’s  the  matter  ?  {Parting  them.  40 
Kent.  With  you,  goodman  boy,  if  you  please ;  come,  I’ll 
flesh  ye ,  come  on,  young  master. 

Enter  Cornwall,  Regan,  Gloucester,  and  Servants. 

Glou.  Weapons  ?  arms  ?  What’s  the  matter  here  ? 

Com.  Keep  peace,  upon  your  lives  1 
He  dies  that  strikes  again !  What  is  the  matter?  45 

Keg.  The  messengers  from  our  sister  and  the  king  ? 


Enter.. .]Ed.  Enter  Edmund  with 
his  Rapier  drawne,  Glocefter,  the  Duke 
and  Dutchefle.  Qq,  Cap.  (subs.),  Glo.  +  . 
Enter  Baftard,  Cornewall,  Regan,  Glo- 
fter,  Servants.  Ff  (Servant.  FaF3F4). 
Enter  Edmund.  Dyce  i,  conj.  Sta.  Dyce 
ii,  Del. 

40.  Scene  vi.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

40,  &c.  Edm.]  Baft.  QqFf. 

40.  [Parting  them.]  Dyce  conj.  Wh. 
(subs.),  Glo.-t-.  Fart —  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 
Coll.  ii.  Part.  Ff  et  cet.  Om.  Qq,  Del. 

4 1.  if]  and  Qq.  an  Sta.  Glo.-f ,  Mob. 
please  ;  come]  Theob.  pleafe  come, 

Qq.  pleafe ,  come ,  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope. 


42.  flesh]  fteagh  Qq. 

ye]  Ff  +  ,  Glo.  Dyce  ii,  Wr.  Sch, 
you  Qq  et  cet. 

Enter  Cornwall,...] Sta.  Del.  En- 
ter  Gloster.  Dyce  ii. 

43.  Weapons  ? arms  P]  Weapons,  armes, 
Qq.  Weapons!  arms  !  Cap. 

Enter  Cornwall,  Regan,  and  Ser¬ 
vants.  Dyce  ii. 

44.  45.  Keep...matter  P]  Cap.  Prose, 
QqFf  +  ,  Jen. 

45.  What  w]  what's  Qq,  Pope +  ,  Jen. 

46.  messengers]  messenger  Wh. 
king  P]  King.  Qq. 


Kent  may  mean  that  Oswald  was  like  a  tenant  of  neat  land  ( terra  villanorum)  ;  that 
is,  a  base,  dirty  fellow.’ 

40.  Parting  them]  Dyce  ( Remarks ,  &c.  p.  225) :  Part  of  the  Ff  is  undoubtedly 
a  stage-direction.  This  is  clear  from  its  interfering  with  the  dialogue :  Edmund 
asks  ‘What’s  the  matter?’  and  Kent  immediately  replies,  ‘  With  you  [*.  e.  ‘the  matter 
is  with  you,  I  will  deal  with  you’],  goodman  boy,’  &c.  That  such  a  stage-direction 
is  common  in  old  plays,  hardly  perhaps  requires  to  be  shown ;  one  instance,  however, 
may  be  given :  ‘  Rich.  Art  thou  content  to  breath  ?  \_Fight  &■*  part  once  or  twise.' — 
A  Pleasant  Commodie,  called  Looke  about  you,  1600.  SCHMIDT  maintains  that  ‘  With 
you  ’  in  Kent’s  reply  does  not  refer  to  *  What’s  the  matter,’  but  to  Part  of  the  Folio, 
which  is  legitimately  a  portion  of  the  text  and  no  stage-direction.  *  Part  in  Sh.  means 
not  only  to  separate,  but  also  to  go  away,  to  depart.  Edmund  means  it  in  the  former 
sense,  and  Kent  understands  in  the  latter,  and  asks  “  With  you  ?”  That  Sh.,  in  spite 
of  a  possible  misapprehension,  uses  to  part  with  in  the  sense  of  to  go  away  with  some¬ 
thing,  a  passage  in  Com.  of  Err.  Ill,  i,  66,  proves :  “  Ang .  Here  is  neither  cheer,  sir, 
nor  welcome  :  we  would  fain  have  either.  Pal.  In  debating  which  was  best  we  shall 
part  with  neither.”  ’  [This  is  very  ingenious,  but,  I  fear,  not  convincing. — Ed.] 

42.  flesh]  Schmidt  (Lex.) :  To  feed  with  flesh  for  the  first  time,  to  initiate.  [See 
line  1 18.] 

46.  messengers]  Dyce  :  Oswald  is  the  messenger  ‘  from  our  sister,’  Kent  the 
messenger  from  ‘  the  king.’ 


120 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


Corn.  What  is  your  difference  ?  speak.  47 

Oszv.  I  am  scarce  in  breath,  my  lord. 

Kent.  No  marvel,  you  have  so  bestirred  your  valour. 

You  cowardly  rascal, nature  disclaims  in  thee;  a  tailor  made  50 
thee. 

Com.  Thou  art  a  strange  fellow ;  a  tailor  make  a  man  ? 

Kent.  Ay,  a  tailor,  sir;  a  stone-cutter  or  a  painter 
could  not  have  made  him  so  ill,  though  they  had  been  but 
two  hours  o’  th’  trade.  55 

Corn.  Speak  yet,  how  grew  your  quarrel  ? 

Oszu.  This  ancient  ruffian,  sir,  whose  life  I  have  spared 
at  suit  of  his  gray  beard, — 

Kent.  Thou  whoreson  zed!  thou  unnecessary  letter! — 


47.  What  Whats  Q,.  What's  Q2. 
difference?  speak. ]  Rowe,  dif¬ 
ference,  f  peake  ?  QqFf. 

49-52.  No. ..man  ?]  Prose, QqFf.  Four 
lines,  ending  valour, ...in  thee  .‘...fellow  ; 
...man  ?  Cap.  Ec. 

50.  in]  all  share  in  Rowe  + ,  Jen. 

52.  man  ?]  jnan.  Qq. 

53.  Ay,]  /,  Qq,  Theob.  Warb.  Om. 
Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Knt,  Sch. 

sir  ;]  fr,  Q2F4.  sir  ?  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han.  sir.  Sch. 

54.  they ]  hee  Q,.  he  Q2,  Glo  +  . 


55.  hours]  houres  Qq.  yeares  FIF2F;J. 
years  F4,  Rowe,  Cap.  Sch. 

o'  th']  F3F4  +  ,  Cap,  Dyce,  Wh. 
Sch.  oih'  FjFa.  at  the  Qq  et  cet. 

56.  yet]  you  Pope,  Han.  Jen. 

57.  This. ..spared]  Prose,  QqFf.  One 
line  of  verse,  Cap.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt, 
Coll.  Del.  Sing.  Sta.  Wh.  Ktly,  Sch. 

This]  The  F3F4,  Rowe. 
ruffian]  ruffen  Qt. 

58.  gray  beard, — ]  gray-beard.  QqFf 
F2.  gray  beard.  Fff* *. 

59.  zed!]  Zedd  Q,.  Cl  Johns  conj. 


50.  disclaims  in]  In  a  note  on  Jonson’s  Volpone,  III,  vi  (p.  264,  ed.  Gifford, 
1816),  where  this  same  phrase  occurs,  Gifford  says  that  this  expression  is  very  com¬ 
mon  in  our  old  writers  [it  occurs  again  on  p.  284  of  the  same  play]  ;  it  seems,  how¬ 
ever,  to  have  been  wearing  out  about  this  time,  since  it  is  found  far  less  frequently 
in  the  second  than  in  the  first  impression  of  Jonson’s  plays;  two  instances  of 
disclaim  in  occur  in  the  Qto  ed.  of  Every  Man  in  his  Humour,  both  of  which  in 
the  Folio  are  simplified  into  disclaim.  Schmidt  :  This  is  the  only  instance  in  Sh. 
of  *  disclaim  in? 

50.  a  tailor  made  thee]  Schmidt:  Because  the  best  of  you  is  your  clothes. 
Compare  Cym.  IV,  ii,  81 :  ‘thy  tailor,  Who  is  thy  grandfather;  he  made  those 
clothes.  Which,  as  it  seems,  made  thee.’  Thus  also  in  the  same  play.  III,  iv,  51 

*  Some  jay  of  Italy  Whose  mother  was  her  painting.’ 

55.  two  hours]  Schmidt  prefers  the  ‘two  years’  of  the  Ff,  which  is  assuredly, 
he  says,  a  term  of  apprenticeship  all  too  short  for  a  sculptor  or  a  painter.  *  But  the 
Editors  appear  to  have  had  a  different  experience,  and  prefer  the  “  two  hours  ”  of 
the  Qq.  An  exaggeration  of  wit  will  sometimes  ruin  it.’ 

56.  yet]  There  is  plausibility  in  Pope’s  emendation  you. — Ed. 

59.  zed]  Steevens  :  Baret  in  his  Alvearie  omits  this  letter,  as  the  author  affirms 


ACT  II,  SC.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


I  21 


My  lord,  if  you  will  give  me  leave,  I  will  tread  this  un-  60 
bolted  villain  into  mortar,  and  daub  the  wall  of  a  jakes 
with  him. — Spare  my  gray  beard,  you  wagtail  ? 

Corn.  Peace,  sirrah  ! — 

You  beastly  knave,  know  you  no  reverence? 

Kent .  Yes,  sir;  but  anger  hath  a  privilege.  05 

Com.  Why  art  thou  angry  ? 

Kent.  That  such  a  slave  as  this  should  wear  a  sword, 

Who  wears  no  honesty.  Such  smiling  rogues  as  these, 

Like  rats,  oft  bite  the  .holy  cords  a-twain 

Which  are  too  intrinse  t’  unloose;  smooth  every  passion  70 


60.  you  wilf\  you' l  Q,. 

I  will ]  Corrected  to  I'll  in  Capell’s 
Errata. 

61.  wait]  walks  Qj.  wals  Qa.  walls 
Cam.  VVr, 

of  a  jakes]  of  a  iaques  Qt.  of  a 
Iaques  Qa.  of  a  lakes  F,Fa.  of  a  fakes 

F3F4* * 

62.  gray  beard]  gray-beard  QaFf. 

63.  64.  Peace. ..reverence  /]  One  line, 
Qq. 

63.  sirrah]  fir  Qq. 

[To  Osw.  Ed.  conj. 

64.  know  you  no  reverence  ?]  you  kaue 
no  reuerence.  Qq. 

65.  hath]  has Qq.Cap.  Mai.  Steev.  Bos. 
63.  Who]  That  Qq. 


68,  69,  as. ..a-twain]  One  line,  Pope. 

68.  as  these]  Om.  Han. 

69.  the  holy]  thofe  Qq,  Pope,  those 
holy  Jen. 

a-twain]  atwaine  F,Fa.  in  twaine 
Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Steev.  Mai.  Ec. 

70.  • Which  are  too  intrinse]  Mai. 
Which  are  t'  intrince,  FJt  Which  art 
t'  intrince ,  FaF3F4,  Rowe.  Which  are 
to  intrench ,  Qq.  Too  intricate  Pope, 
Jen.  Too  ' intrinsicate  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  Ec.  Too  intrinsick  Han.  Which 
are  too  intrince  Cap.  Too  intresse  or 
Too  intrigue  Sing.  conj. 

f  unloose ;]  to  inloofe  Qq.  to  un¬ 
loose  ;  Cap.  Cam. 

smooth]  sootk  Pope  + ,  Cap. 


it  to  be  rather  a  syllable  than  a  letter.  [I  have  searched  in  vain  for  any  such  affirma¬ 
tion  there.  We  are  led  to  infer  that  Baret  has  omitted  it  because  it  is,  like  x,  a  com¬ 
pound  letter,  and  therefore  unnecessary. — Ed.]  Farmer  :  This  is  taken  from  the 
grammarians  of  the  time.  Mulcaster  says,  ‘  Z  is  much  harder  amongst  us,  and  seldom 
seen : — S  is  become  its  lieutenant-general.  It  is  lightlie  expressed  in  English,  saving 
in  foren  enfranchisements.’  Wright :  Ben  Jonson  in  his  English  Grammar  says: 

*  Z  is  a  letter  often  heard  among  us,  but  seldom  seen.’ 

61.  unbolted]  Warburton:  Unrefined  by  education.  Tollet:  ‘  Unbolted  mor¬ 
tar  ’  is  mortar  made  of  unsifted  lime,  and  to  break  the  lumps  it  is  necessary  to  tread 
it  by  men  in  wooden  shoes.  *  Unbolted,’  therefore,  here  means  coarse. 

62.  Spare,  &c.]  Staunton:  An  acute  stroke  of  nature:  Kent  in  his  rage  forgets 
it  was  his  life,  not  his  beard,  which  the  fellow  pretended  to  have  spared. 

69.  holy  cords]  Warburton  :  By  these  ‘  holy  cords  ’  Sh.  means  the  natural  union 
between  parents  and  children.  The  metaphor  is  taken  from  the  cords  of  the  sanc¬ 
tuary  ;  and  the  fomenters  of  family  differences  are  compared  to  those  sacrilegious  rats. 

69.  a-twain]  For  instances  of  adverbs  with  the  prefix  a.-,  see  Abbott,  §  24. 

70.  intrinse]  Theobald,  having  found  the  word  intrinsecate  in  Ant.  and  Cleop, 

11 


122 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ir,  sc.  ii. 


That  in  the  natures  of  their  lords  rebel;  71 

Being  oil  to  fire,  snow  to  the  colder  moods; 

Renege,  affirm,  and  turn  their  halcyon  beaks 


71.  natures ]  nature  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Ec. 
rebel ]  QqFf,  Rowe,  Jen.  Dyce, 

Ktly,  Glo.  +  ,  Sch.  rebels  Pope  et  cet. 

72.  Being ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Sch.  Bring 
Qq  et  cet. 


72.  / re ]  Jlir  Qq. 

the J  Ff,  Cap.  Sta.  Sch.  their  Qq 

et  cet. 

73.  Renege]  FbF3F4.  Reneag  Qq,  Wh. 
Reuenge  F  . 


V,  ii,  307,  and  in  Jenson’s  Cynthia' s  Revels,  V,  ii  (p.  327,  ed.  Gifford,  1 8 1 6),  adopted 
it  here,  and,  deriving  it  from  the  Latin  intrinsecus,  ingeniously  paraphrased  it  by 
'inward,  hidden,  perplext,  as  a  knot  hard  to  be  unravelled.’  Upton  (p.  363) 
was  the  first  to  discover  the  modern  reading  under  the  disguise  of  the  Ff,  and, 
believing  it  to  be  a  shorter  form  of  intrinsecate ,  cited,  as  a  parallel  elision, '  reverbs ' 
for  reverberate  in  I,  i,  145.  Malone  added  ‘  attent  ’  for  attentive  in  Ham.  I,  ii,  193, 
and  proposed  to  read,  metrically,  4  Like  rats,  oft  bite  those  cords  in  twain,  which 
are  Too,’  & c.  '  The  word  4  inlrinsicate,'  he  adds, 4  was  but  newly  introduced  into 
our  language  when  this  play  was  written.  See  Marston’s  Scourge  of  Villanie  [vol. 
iii,  p.  245,  ed.  Halliwell]  :  44  new-minted  epithets  (as  reall,  intrinsecate  Delphicke).”  ’ 
Wright  says  it  is  4  difficult  to  6ay  how  intrinsecate  is  formed.  It  seems  to  be  a  com¬ 
pound  of  intrinsic  and  intricate ,’  which  latter  word  is  the  definition  Dyce  (Gloss.) 
gives  of  4  intrinse.’  Wright  says  ‘too  intrinse’  means  ‘too  tightly  drawn.’ 

70.  smooth]  Flatter;  see  Rom.  &  Jul.  Ill,  ii,  98,  and  notes. 

71.  rebel]  This  may  be  either  the  plural  by  attraction  (by  the  word  4  lords’),  as 
Wright  says;  or  it  may  be  that  ‘every’  is  used  as  a  plural,  according  to  Abbott, 
§12.  For  the  plural  by  attraction,  see  Ham .  I,  ii,  38,  and  notes. 

73.  Renege]  Nares  :  Deny,  renounce;  renego,  Lat.  [whence  renegado.— 
Wright].  The  g  is  pronounced  hard.  See  Ant..  <2^  Cleop.  I,  i,  8,  and  Sylvester’s 
Du  Bartas  The  Battail  of  Yury  [p.  551,  ed.  1633]  :  4  All  Europe  nigh  (all  sorts  of 
Rights  reneg’d)  Against  the  Truth  and  Thee,  un-holy  Leagu'd.'  [As  an  additional 
proof  that  the  g  is  pronounced  hard,  Dyce  calls  attention  to  the  spelling  in  the  Qq. 
The  word  (with  g  hard)  is  still  common  enough  among  whist-players,  in  the  sense 
of  revoke. — Ed.] 

73.  halcyon]  Steevens:  This  is  the  king-fisher.  The  vulgar  opinion  was  that 
this  bird,  if  hung  up,  would  vary  with  the  wind,  and  by  that  means  show  from  what 
point  it  blew.  So,  in  Marlowe’s  few  of  Malta,  I,  i :  4  But  how  now  stands  the 
wind?  Into  what  corner  peers  my  halcyon’s  bill?’  Again,  in  Storer’s  Life  and 
Death  of  Thomas  Wolsey,  Cardinal l,  a  poem,  1 599:  4  Or  as  a  halcyon  with  her 
turning  breast,  Demonstrates  wind  from  wind,  and  east  from  west.’  Again,  in  The 
Tenth  Booke  of  Notable  Things,  by  Thomas  Lupton,  4  A  lytle  byrde  called  the 
Kings  Fysher,  being  hanged  up  in  the  ayre  by  the  neck,  his  nebbe  or  byll  wyll  be 
alwayes  dyrect  or  strayght  against  ye  winde.’  [In  Peck’s  New  Memoirs  of  Milton, 
1740,  p.  251,  an  extract  is  given  from  Sir  Thomas  Browne,  in  which  the  truth  of  this 
4  conceit  ’  is  disproved  by  4  reason  ’  and  4  experience.'  By  reason,  because 4  it  seemeth 
very  repugnant  that  a  carcase  or  body  disanimated  should  be  so  affected  with  every 
wind  as  to  carry  a  conformable  respect  and  constant  habitude  thereto.’  By  experience, 
because  4  if  a  single  kings-fisher  be  hanged  up  with  untwisted  silk  in  an  open  roome, 


ACT  II,  sc.  ii.]' 


KING  LEAR 


i*3 

With  every  gale  and  vary  of  their  masters, 

Knowing  nought,  like  dogs,  but  following.  75 

A  plague  upon  your  epileptic  visage ! 

Smile  you  my  speeches,  as  I  were  a  fool  ? 

Goose,  if  I  had  you  upon  Sarum  plain, 

I  ’Id  drive  ye  cackling  home  to  Camelot 


74-  gale]  gall  Ft. 

vary]  varry  F,.  veering  Allen 
conj.  MS. 

75- 77.  Knowing.. .fool  Two  lines, 

the  first  ending  epeliptick ,  in  Qt. 

75.  Knowing ]  As  knowing  Pope  +  , 
Cap.  Steev.  Ec.  Bos.  Sing.  Ktly.  And 
knowing  Coll,  iii  (MS).  Knowing  of 
Anon.* 


75.  nought]  naught  F,F  F  .  Dyce, 
Wh. 

dogs']  dayes  Qt.  daies  Qa. 

77.  Smile  you]  fmoyle  you  Qt.  Smoil • 
you  QaF,FaF3. 

78.  if]  and  Q,. 

79.  drive  ye]  f end  you  Qq.  drive  you 
Cap. 

Camelot]  Camulet  Qq. 


&  where  the  aire  is  free,  it  observes  not  a  constant  respect  unto  the  mouth  of  the 
wind ;  but,  variously  converting,  doth  seldom  breast  it  right.  If  two  be  suspended 
in  the  same  roome,  they  will  not  regularly  conform  their  breasts ;  but  oft-times 
respect  the  opposite  points  of  heaven.’]  Dyce  ( Gloss.)  cites  from  Charlotte  Smith’s 
Natural  Hist,  of  Birds>  p.  88,  in  proof  that  the  belief  in  a  connection  between  the 
Halcyon  and  the  vyind  still  lingered  in  the  cottages  of  England  in  1807. 

74.  vary]  For  instances  of  substantives  of  similar  formation,  see  Ham.  I,  i,  57,  or 
Abbott,  §  451.  Delius  says,  that  it  is  connected  in  thought  with  ‘gale,’  and  is 
equivalent  to  ‘varying  gale;’  wherein  Schmidt  agrees  with  him,  and  notes  that 
‘  vary  ’  as  a  noun  in  Sh.  is  found  only  here. 

76.  epileptic]  Johnson  :  The  frighted  countenance  of  a  man  ready  to  fall  in  a 
fit.  Capell  :  This  epithet  is  given  to  ‘  visage,’  as  if  smiles  had  as  much  distorted  it 
as  such  a  fit  would  have  done.  Dyce  ( Gloss.) :  The  context  shows  that  it  means 
a  *  visage  distorted  by  grinning.’ 

77.  smile]  The  reading  of  all  the  Qq  and  Ff  (exdcpt  F4)  is  so  uniform,  that 
it  is  hard  not  to  believe  that  there  is  some  corruption  here,  especially  since,  as 
Wright  says,  ‘  Sh.  uses  “smile”  more  than  once  with  a  direct  object,  but  never  in 
this  sense.’  If  the  word  here  be  really  ‘  smile,’  it  is  difficult  to  understand  why  so 
plain  a  word  should  have  been  persistently  misspelled.  It  is  spelled  correctly  in  all 
the  Qq  and  Ff  in  the  last  line  of  this  very  scene.  Collier’s  (MS)  corrects  to 
‘  smile  at,’  and  Keightley  reads  ‘  smile  you  at .’  If  the  present  text  be  right  it 
comes  under  Abbott’s  §  200,  where  instances  are  given  of  the  omission  of  prepo¬ 
sitions  after  some  verbs  which  can  be  regarded  as  transitive,  as  in  *  Thou  swear’ st 
thy  gods,’  I,  i,  163. — Ed. 

77.  as]  Equivalent  to  as  if.  For  similar  instances,  see  Ham.  I,  ii,  217 ;  II,  i, 
91 ;  III,  iv,  135  ;  IV,  v,  99. 

79.  cackling]  Oswald’s  forced  laughter  suggests  to  Kent  the  cackling  of  a 
goose. — Ed. 

79.  Camelot]  Hanmer  :  In  Somersetshire,  near  Camelot,  there  are  many  large 
moors,  upon  which  great  numbers  of  geese-are  bred,  so  that  many  other  places  in 
England  are  from  thence  supplied  with  quills  and  feathers.  Warburton  :  This  was 


124 


KING  LEAR 


[act  n,  sc.  ii. 

30 


Com .  What,  art  thou  mad,  old  fellow  ? 

Glou.  How  fell  you  out  ?  say  that. 

Kent.  No  contraries  hold  more  antipathy 
Than  I  and  such  a  knave. 

Com.  Why  dost  thou  call  him  knave?  What  is  his 
fault  ? 

Kent.  His  countenance  likes  me  not.  85 


So,  Sr.  What,. .. .out  ?~\  As  one  line, 
Steev.  Bos.  Knt,  Sing. 

81.  out?  say  that.]  Pope,  out,  fay 
that ?  QqFf,  Rowe. 


S4.  Two  lines,  Ff. 

What  is  his  fault\  Ff+,  Cap. 
Knt,  Sing.  Dyce  i,  Ktly,  Cam.  Sch. 
What's  his  offence  Qq  et  cet. 


the  place  where  the  romances  say  King  Arthur  kept  his  court ;  so  this  alludes  to 
some  proverbial  speech  in  those  romances.  Steevens  :  Thus  in  Drayton’s  Polyol- 
bion,  The  Third  Song  [p.  252,  ed.  174S]  :  *  Like  Camelot,  what  place  was  ever  yet 
renown’d  ?  Where,  as  at  Caerleon  oft,  he  kept  the  table  round  ?’  [Besides  these 
two  places  mentioned  in  this  extract  from  Drayton,  Camelot  and  Caerleon,  there  was 
a  third  place,  Winchester,  *  where,’  as  Selden  says  in  his  Illustrations  to  Drayton’s 
Fourth  Song,  p.  259,  ‘Arthur’s  table  is  yet  suppos’d  to  be,  but  that  seems  of  later 
date.’  Capell  apparently  confounded  these  three,  and  maintained  that  Camelot 
was  Winchester,  and  thence  he  inferred  that  the  allusion  in  the  text  is  to  a  ‘  Win¬ 
chester  goose,’  a  cant  name  for  a  disgraceful  ailment,  mentioned  in  I  Hen.  VI: 
I,  iii,  53  and  Tro.  dr>  Cres.  V,  x,  55.  According  to  Selden,  in  another  note  on 
p.  254 :  *  By  South-cadbury  is  that  Camelot ;  a  hill  of  a  mile  compass  at  the  top, 
four  trenches  circling  it,’  &c.  .  .  .  Antique  report  makes  this  one  of  Arthur’s 
places  of  his  Round  Table.’  Staunton  explains  the  confusion  concerning  the 
different  localities  of  Arthur’s  Round  Table  by  showing  that  ‘  The  History  of  King 
Arthur  was  so  long  in  the  completion  that,  while  in  one  chapter  (xxvi)  Camelot  is 
located  in  the  west  of  England  ( Somersetshire ),  in  another  (xliv)  it  is  stated  that 
“ — Camelot  is,  in  English,  Winchester.”  At  a  still  later  period,  when  Caxton 
finished  the  printing  of  the  Mort  d' Arthur  in  1485,  he  says  of  the  hero:  “And 
yet  of  record  remain,  in  witness  of  him  in  Wales,  in  the  town  of  Camelot,  the  great 
stones,”  ’  &c.  Staunton  thinks  it  unnecessary  to  imagine  with  Warburton  that  there 
is  any  allusion  to  a  proverbial  saying  in  the  old  romances,  but  concludes  with  the 
following  explanation  of  the  present  passage  :  *  In  chapter  xlix  of  Arthur’s  History 
the  Quest  of  the  White  Hart  is  undertaken  by  three  knights,  at  the  wedding-feast  of 
the  king  with  the  princess  Guenever,  which  was  held  at  Camelot.  This  adventure 
was  encountered  by  Sir  Gawayne,  Sir  Tor,  and  King  Pellinore,  and,  whenever  they 
had  overcome  the  knights  whom  they  engaged,  the  vanquished  combatants  were  always 
sent  “  unto  King  Arthur,  and  yielded  them  unto  his  grace.”  ’  Dyce  ( Gloss.)  thinks 
that  there  is  here  perhaps  a  double  allusion,  to  the  geese  of  Somersetshire,  and  to 
vanquished  knights ;  thus  both  Hanmer  and  Staunton  are  right.  Halliwell  does 
not  believe  that  there  is  in  the  text  •  the  slightest  allusion  to  the  birds  called  geese, 
excepting  of  course  a  metaphorical  one.’  It  is  doubtful  whether  a  knowledge  of  the 
exact  location  of  Camelot,  upon  which  Staunton  and  others  lay  stress,  would  thrqw 
much  light  on  this  obscure  passage. — Ed.] 


act  ii,  sc.  ii.l  KING  LEAR  1 25 

Com.  No  more  perchance  does  mine,  nor  his,  nor  hers.  86 

Kent.  Sir,  'tis  my  occupation  to  be  plain. 

I  have  seen  better  faces  in  my  time 
Than  stands  on  any  shoulder  that  I  see 
Before  me  at  this  instant. 

Com.  This  is  some  fellow,  9° 

Who,  having  been  praised  for  bluntness,  doth  affedl 
A  saucy  roughness,  and  constrains  the  garb 
Quite  from  his  nature;  he  cannot  flatter,  he, — 

An  honest  mind  and  plain, — he  must  speak  truth  ! 

And  they  will  take  it,  so ;  if  not,  he’s  plain.  95 

These  kind  of  knaves  I  know,  which  in  this  plainness 
Harbour  more  craft  and  more  corrupter  ends 
Than  twenty  silly-ducking  observants 


86.  does']  do's  Ff.  doth  Q2 

nor. ..nor]  or. ..or  Qq,  Jen.  Steev. 
Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly. 

89.  Than]  That  Q,. 

Stands]  stand  Pope  +  ,  Ec. 
shoulder]  shoulders  Han.  Ec. 

Cam. 

90-99.  This. ..nicely.]  Nine  lines,  end¬ 
ing  /  raifd. . .  ruff.  nes,...  nature, . .  .plaine, . . . 
fo,  ...know,  ...craft, ...ducking...  nicely; Qq. 

90.  some]  a  Qq. 

92.  roughness]  ruffnes  Qq. 

93.  cannot]  can't  Fope  + . 


94.  An... .plain]  he  mujl  he  plaine 
Qq. 

95.  And]  Ff.  Sch.  and  Qq.  An 
Pope  et  cet. 

take  it,  fo]  Rowe,  take  it  fo  Q2 
Ff.  tak't fo  Q,. 

96.  plainness]  plainnefs.  F2F3F4. 

97.  more  conupter]  far  corrupter 
Pope,  Han. 

98.  silly-]  silky  Warb.  Han.  Jen. 
silly-ducking]  Ff,  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

filly  ducking  Qq  et  cet. 


92.  garb]  Johnson  :  Forces  his  outside,  or  his  appearance,  to  something  totally 
different  from  his  natural  disposition.  STAUNTON,  by  supposing  that  ‘  his  nature ’  in 
the  next  line  means  ‘  its  nature,’  gives  a  different  meaning  to  this  sentence,  a  mean¬ 
ing  which  the  Clarkes  also  see  in  it,  and  thus  interpret :  *  Cornwall  implies,  in  what 
he  says  of  Kent,  that  he  distorts  the  style  of  straightforward  speaking  quite  from  its 
nature,  which  is  sincerity ;  whereas  he  makes  it  a  cloak  for  craft.’  Wright  :  ‘  Garb  ’ 
denotes  the  outward  address  and  manner,  especially  of  speech.  Compare  Hen.  V: 
V,  i,  80;  Cor.  IV,  vii,  44;  Ham.  II,  ii,  354.  And  Jonson,  Every  Man  out  of  his 
Humour,  IV,  iv:  ‘And  there,  his  seniors  give  him  good  slight  looks,  After  their 
garb,  smile,  and  salute  in  French,’  &c. 

96.  These  kind  of  knaves]  Abbott,  §  412  :  The  two  nouns  together  connected 
by  ‘of’  seem  regarded  as  a  compound  noun  with  plural  termination. 

97.  more  corrupter]  For  instances  of  double  comparatives,  see  Ham.  II,  i,  1 1, 
and  note.  See  also  below,  line  143;  II,  iii,  7;  II,  iv,  106;  III,  ii,  64;  Abbott, 
§  II,  or  Shakespeare  passim. 

98.  silly-ducking]  Walker  ( Crit .  i,  26)  gives  this  as  an  instance  where  a  com 
pound  epithet  has  been  resolved,  by  the  majority  of  edd.,  into  two  simple  epithets. 

Ii* 


126 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ii.  sc.  iL 


That  stretch  their  duties  nicely. 

Kent.  Sir,  in  good  faith,  in  sincere  verity,  100 

Under  th’  allowance  of  your  great  aspe£t, 

Whose  influence,  like  the  wreath  of  radiant  fire 
On  flickering  Phoebus’  front, — 

Com.  What  mean’st  by  this  ? 

Kent.  To  go  out  of  my  dialect,  which  you  discommend 
so  much.  I  know,  sir,  I  am  no  flatterer ;  he  that  beguiled  105 
you  in  a  plain  accent  was  a  plain  knave;  which,-  for  my 
part,  I  will  not  be,  though  I  should  win  your  displeasure  to 
entreat  me  to’t. 


100.  faith,  in]  fcolk,  or  in  Qq,  Jen. 
Mai.  Ec.  sooth,  in  Steev/93,  Bos.  Coll. 
Del.  Sing.  Sta.  Wh.  Ktly,  Glo.  Wr. 

101.  great]  grand  Qa,  Pope  +  ,  Cap. 
Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Coll.  Sta.  graund 

Qi- 

103.  On]  In  Qq.  Or  Rowe,  Pope. 
flickering]  Pope.  Jlitkering  Qq. 
flicking  Ff. 

front, — ]  front —  Rowe,  front. 


QqFf. 

10 3.  by]  thou  by  Qq,  Jen.  Mai.  Ec. 

104.  dial  ell]  dialogue  Qq. 

X05.  he]  but  he  Han. 

beguiled]  beguil'd  F  F  .  beguild 

107, 10S.  to  entreat]  that  entreat  Bad* * 
ham.* 

105.  io't]too't  Q,F,Fa.  to  it  Qa,  Cap. 
Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly. 


9S.  observants]  Walker  ( Crit.  ii,  34S) :  To  observe  is  used  in  the  strict  sense  of 
ebservare ;  whence  observance.  Schmidt  (Lex.)  gives,  among  the  meanings  of 

*  observe/  to  reverence,  to  show  respect  to,  to  do  homage;  see  2  Hen.  IV:  IV,  iv,  30; 
Tif/ion,  IV,  iii,  212.  Wright  :  In  Ham.  Ill,  i,  162,  *  The  observed  of  all  observers  ’ 
means  he  to  whom  all  courtiers  pay  court.  Hence  *  observance  ’  is  used  for  ceremony, 
as  in  Mer.  of  Ven.  II,  ii,  204. 

99.  nicely]  Malone:  With  the  utmost  exactness.  Coleridge:  In  thus  placing 
these  profound  truths  in  the  mouths  of  such  men  as  Cornwall,  Edmund,  Iago,  &c., 
Sh.  at  once  gives  them  utterance,  and  yet  shows  how  indefinite  their  application  is. 
Hudson  :  I  may  add  that  an  inferior  dramatist,  instead  of  making  his  villains  use 
any  such  vein  of  original  and  profound  remark,  would  probably  fill  their  mouths 
with  something  either  shocking  or  absurd,  which  is  just  what  real  villains,  if  they 
have  any  wit,  never  do. 

101.  great]  Knight:  The  change  from  the  Qq  to  the  Ff  was  not  made  without 
reason.  Although  Kent  meant  to  go  out  of  his  dialect,  the  word  grand  sounded 
ironically,  and  was  calculated  to  offend  more  than  was  needful. 

101.  aspect]  Nares:  Always  accented  on  the  last  syllable  in  Sh.  Delius:  Here 
used  in  a  secondary  astrological  sense,  like  « influence’  in  the  following  line. 

106.  accent]  Schmidt:  Not  seldom,  as  here,  equivalent  to  speech,  language. 

107,  108.  though  . .  .  to’t]  Johnson:  Though  I  should  win  you,  displeased  as 
you  now  are,  to  like  me  so  well  as  to  entreat  me  to  be  a  knave.  Delius  suggests 
that  *  win  your  displeasure  ’  is  Kent’s  stilted  phraseology  for  ‘  win  you  in  your  dis* 
pleasure.’  Wright  compares  it  to  the  somewhat  similar  phrase  ‘  some  discretion,’ 


ACT  II.  SC.  ii.7 


KING  LEAR 


127 


Corn.  What  was  th’  offence  you  gave  him  ? 

Os-cV.  I  never  gave  him  any.  HO 

It  pleased  the  king  his  master  very  late 
To  strike  at  me,  upon  his  misconstru&ion ; 

When  he,  compa£l,  and  flattering  his  displeasure, 

Tripp’d  me  behind;  being  down,  insulted,  rail’d. 

And  put  upon  him  such  a  deal  of  man,  115 

That’  worthied  him,  got  praises  of  the  king 
For  him  attempting  who  was  self-subdued ; 

And  in  the  fleshment  of  this  dread  exploit 
Drew  on  me  here-again. 

Kent.  None  of  these  rogues  and  cowards  1 20 


109.  What  was]  What's  Qq. 
no.  /...any]  Never  any  Han.  Steev. 
’93- 

110-112.  I. ..misconstruction  ;]  Two 
lines,  the  first  ending  master ,  Qq. 

III.  /ate']  lately  Rowe,+ 

113.  compart]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Coll. 
Del.  Sing.  Dyce  i,  Wh.  Ktly,  Sch.  con • 
ittnrt,  Qq  et  cet. 


115,  1 16.  man ,  That']  Ed.  man, that 
That  Qa,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen.  Mai. 
man ,  that,  That  Q,.  man,  That  Ff  et  cet. 
man  That' t  Anon.* * 

1 18.  fleshment ]  flechuent  Qq. 
dread ]  dead  Ff,  Rowe. 

1 19.  again]  Om.  Steev.  ’93. 

120.  121.  None. ..fool]  One  line,  Qq. 


II,  iv,  145.  Schmidt  considers  *  your  displeasure  ’  as  the  opposite  to  the  usual  style 
of  address,  ‘  your  grace.’ 

1 13.  compact]  Collier:  Whether  ‘compact’  or  ‘conjunct,’  it  means  in  concert 
with.  >  Schmidt:  Perhaps  the  word  pack,  a  troop,  a  band,  was  not  without  its  in¬ 
fluence  in  the  use  of  this  word;  ‘  compact  ’  might  suggest  compacked. 

1 14.  down,  insulted]  For  the  omission  of  the  noun  before  a  participle — i.  e.  *  / 
being  down,’  see  Abbott,  §  378,  and  for  the  omission  of  the  nominative — i.  e.  he 
insulted,’  see  §  400.  [In  this  latter  instance,  we  might  perhaps  explain  the  absence 
of  the  nominative  he  by  its  absorption  in  the  first  syllable  if  ‘  insulted.’ — Ed.] 

1 15.  1 16.  such  .  .  .  That]  For  similar  instances,  see  Abbott,  §279,  or  Mach. 
IV,  iii,  222. 

1 16.  That’  worthied]  This  is  an  instance  of  that  absorption  of  it  in  the  final  t 
of  ‘  That,’  first  pointed  out  by  Allen  in  this  edition  of  Rom.  and  Jnl,  p.  429,  and 
virtually  suggested  in  this  line  by  Anon.,  whose  conjecture  is  recorded  in  the  Cam¬ 
bridge  edition.  To  the  instances  there  given,  add:  ‘at’  height,’  Ham.  I,  iv,  21; 

*  with’  blood,’  Ih.  I,  v,  63 ;  see  also  ‘  Prescribe  not’  us,’  Lear,  I,  i,  275.  For  a  long 
list  of  transitive  verbs  formed  from  nouns  and  adjectives,  such  as  ‘worthied,’  see 
Abbott,  §  290. — Ed. 

1 17.  him  attempting]  Delius:  That  is,  *  For  attempting  him  who,’  &c. 

xiS.  fleshment]  Henley:  A  young  soldier  is  said  to  flesk  his  sword  the  first 
time  he  draws  blood  with  it.  ‘  Fleshment,’  therefore,  is  here  metaphorically  applied 
to  the  first  act  of  service,  which  Kent,  in  his  new  capacity,  had  performed  for  his 
master;  and,  at  the  same  time,  in  a  sarcastic  sense,  as  though  he  had  esteemed  it  an 
heroic  exploit  to  trip  a  man  behind  that  was  actually  falling. 


128 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ii,  sc.  ii 


But  Ajax  is  their  fool. 

Com.  Fetch  forth  the  stocks ! —  121 

You  stubborn,  ancient  knave,  you  reverend  braggart. 

We’ll  teach  you — 

Kent.  Sir,  I  am  too  old  to  learn ; 

Call  not  your  stocks  for  me.  I  serve  the  king, 

On  whose  employment  I  was  sent  to  you.  1 25 

You  shall  do  small  respedts,  show  too  bold  maiice 
Against  the  grace  and  person  of  my  master, 

Stocking  his  messenger. 

Com.  Fetch  forth  the  stocks  1  As  I  have  life  and  honour, 


121.  Ajax']  A’ lax  Qq.  Aiax  F,. 
their ]  there  F,. 

fool]  foil  Warb.  Han. 

Fetch. ..stocks  /]  Fetch. ..Slocks  ? 
Ff  (Stockes ?  Fa).  Bring. ..Jlockes  ho? 
Qq.  Jen.  Fetch. ..slocks,  ho  i  Steev.  Ec. 
Var.  Sing.  Sta.  Ktly. 

122.  stubborn ,  ancient]  stubborn-an¬ 
cient,  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  27). 

ancient]  mifereant  Qq. 
reverend]  rev' rend  Pope,  rever¬ 
ent  Q,Ff,  Rowe,  Knt.  vnreuerenl  Qa, 
Cap. 

123.  you — ]  Theob.  you.  QqFf,  Del. 
Sch. 

Sir]  Om.  Qq. 


1 23-1 25.  Sir,  I  am... you]  Two  lines, 
the  first  ending  me,  Qq. 

125.  employment]  imployment  Ff, 
Rowe +,  Jen.  imployments  Q,.  imploi • 
ments  Qa. 

126.  shall]  should  Qq. 

respects]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sch. 
refpect  Qq  et  cet. 

128.  Stocking]  Stopping  Qq. 

129,  130.  Fetch . noon.]  As  in  Qq, 

Dyce,  Glo.-f .  Two  lines,  the  first  end* 
ing  flocks  ;  in  Ff  et  cet. 

129.  stocks /]  Jlockes?  Qx.  Jlockes; 
QaFa.  Stocks;  F,F3F4. 

As  I  have]  As  I've  Sing. 

and  honour]  Om.  Han. 


121.  Ajax]  Heath:  Such  a  plain,  blunt,  brave  fellow  as  Ajax  was,  is  the  per¬ 
son  these  rascals  always  choose  to  make  their  butt,  and  put  their  tricks  upon.  Ca* 
pell  :  Ajax  is  a  fool  to  them,  videlicet  in  bragging.  [I  much  prefer  Capell’s  inter¬ 
pretation,  although  Schmidt  queries  if  Heath  be  not  right.  The  a  in  ‘  Ajax,’  was 
pronounced  long,  Sir  John  Harington  in  the  Prologue  to  his  Metamorphosis  of 
Ajax  says,  that  ‘  it  agrees  fully  in  pronunciation  ’  with  *  age  akes  ’ — i.  e.  aches,  and 
Ben  Jonson  (vol.  viii,  p.  248,  ed.  Gifford)  makes  it  rhyme  with  ‘  sakes.’ — Ed.] 

123.  Sir]  For  instances  of  what  Abbott  calls  *  a  kind  of  “  burr,”  which  produced 
the  effect  of  an  additional  syllable,’  see  §478,  and  also  II,  i,  92. 

126.  shall]  For  instances  of  *  shall’  for  will,  see  Abbott,  §315,  Macb.  Ill,  iv, 
57 ;  Ham.  I,  ii,  120;  I,  iv,  35.  Also  Lear  I,  i,  34. 

126.  respects]  If  the  text  of  the  Qq  was  written  down  during  a  stage  perform¬ 
ance,  the  ear  probably  confounded  the  final  s  in  *  respects,’  with  the  following  s  in 
*  show,’  although  to  do  respect  is  quite  as  Shakespearian  as  to  do  respects.  The  best 
reason  for  adopting  the  Qq  text  here,  would  be  the  omission  of  an  s  in  a  line  which 
is  quite  full  of  then. — Ed. 

228.  Stocking]  Compare  ‘  worthied,’  line  Il5. 


act  ir,  sc.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


129 


There  shall  he  sit  till  noon.  1 30 

Reg.  ‘  Till  noon !  ’  till  night,  my  lord,  and  all  night  too  f 
Kent.  Why,  madam,  if  I  were  vour  father’s  dog 
You  should  not  use  me  so. 

Reg.  Sir,  being  his  knave,  I  will. 

Corn.  This  is  a  fellow  of  the  self-same  colour 
Our  sister  speaks  of. — Come,  bring  away  the  stocks !  135 

[Stocks  brought  out. 

Glou.  Let  me  beseech  your  grace  not  to  do  so ; 

*  His  fault  is  much,  and  the  good  king  his  master 

*  Will  check  him  for’t.  Your  purposed  low  correftion 

*  Is  such  as  basest  and  contemned’st  wretches 

*  For  pilferings  and  most  common  trespasses  140 

*  Are  punish'd  with ;  *  the  king  must  take  it  ill. 

That  he.  so  slightly  valued  in  his  messenger, 


*3*-  noon  f]  noone  ?  Ff.  noone,  Qq. 

132.  133.  Why,.. jo.]  Prose,  Qq. 

133.  should ]  could  Qq,  Pope  + ,  Jen. 

134.  selfsame  colour ]  fame  nature 
Q2.  felfe  fame  nature  QI#  Pope  + ,  Jen. 

135.  speaks  of ']  fpeake  of  Q,.  f peakes 

Q.*' 

Come ]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

[Stocks  brought  out.]  As  in 
Dyce,  Wh.  Glo.  +.  After  line  132  in 
Ff  et  cet.  Om.  Qq. 

137-141,  His... with /]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe. 


13S.  purposed ]  purpofl  Qt. 

139.  contemned’  st]  Cap.  temnefl  Qq, 
the  meanest  Pope  + . 

13^-141.  Is...witk\  Two  lines,  ch« 
first  ending  pilf rings.  Qq. 

141.  the  king  must]  The  King  hi* 
Mafler,  needs  mufl  Ff,  Rowe. 

142,  143.  he,  so. ...Should]  he  fo.„. 
Should  F,FZ.  hue’s  fo...fhould  Qq.  he's 
fo... Should  F3F4,  Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Sta. 
Glo.  he'»  so...  To  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 


131.  Cowden  Clarke:  Very  artfully  is  this  speech  thrown  in.  Not  only  does 
it  serve  to  paint  the  vindictive  disposition  of  Regan,  it  also  serves  to  regulate  dra¬ 
matic  time  by  making  the  subsequent  scene  where  Lear  arrives  before  Gloucester’s 
castle  and  finds  his  faithful  messenger  in  the  stocks,  appear  sufficiently  advanced  in 
the  morning  to  allow  of  that  same  scene  closing  with  the  actual  approach  of  *  night/ 
without  disturbing  the  sense  of  probability.  Sh.  makes  a  whole  day  pass  before  our 
eyes  during  a  single  scene  and  dialogue,  yet  all  seems  consistent  and  natural  in  the 
course  of  progression. 

135.  .bring  away]  Schmidt  :  Sh.  frequently  uses  *  bring  away  *  and  *  come 
away  *  as  equivalent  to  *  bring  here  ’  and  *  come  here/  As  in  the  well-known  song, 
‘  Come  away,  come  away,  death/ 

135.  Stocks  brought  out]  Dyce:  In  the  Folio  this  stage-direction  is  placed 
two  lines  earlier,  and  it  no  doubt  stood  so  in  the  prompter’s  book,  that  the  stocks 
might  be  in  readiness.  Farmer  :  Formerly  in  great  houses,  as  still  in  some  col¬ 
leges,  there  were  moveable  stocks  for  the  correction  of  servants. 

137.  much]  For  instances  of  this  as  an  adjective,  see  Schmidt  [Lex.  I.) 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


130 

Should  have  him  thus  restrain’d. 

Com .  I’ll  answer  that.  143 

Reg.  My  sister  may  receive  it  much  more  worse, 

To  have  her  gentleman  abused,  assaulted,  145 

*  For  following  her  affairs. — Put  in  his  legs.* 

Corn.  Come,  my  lord,  away.  [Exeunt  all  but  Gloucester 

and  Kent. 

Clou.  I  am  sorry  for  thee,  friend ;  ’tis  the  duke’s  pleasure, 
Whose  disposition,  all  the  world  well  knows, 

Will  not  be  rubb’d  nor  stopp’d.  I’ll  entreat  for  thee.  150 

Kent.  Pray,  do  not,  sir.  I  have  watch’d  and  travell’d 
hard ; 

Some  time  I  shall  sleep  out,  the  rest  I’ll  whistle. 

A  good  man’s  fortune  may  grow  out  at  heels ; 

Give  you  good  morrow ! 

144.  muck  more]  yet  much  Han. 

145.  gentleman ]  Gentlemen  Qt. 

146.  For.. .legs]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe. 

Put  in  his  A  stage-direc¬ 
tion.  Seymour. 

[Kent  is  put  in  the  stocks.  Pope. 

After  line  142,  Rowe. 

147.  Corn.  Come]  Ff,  Rowe,  Sell. 

Continued  to  Reg.  Qq  et  cet. 

lord]  good  lord  Qx,  Jen.  Steev. 

Ec.  Var.  Sta.  Glo.  +  ,  Dyce  ii.  lord,  let's 
Cap.  conj.  MS.* 

[Exeunt..;]  Dyce.  Exit.  Q2Ff. 

Om.  Q,. 


14S.  Scene  vi.  Pope,  Han.  Scene 
VII.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 

I  am]  I'm  Pope+,  Dyce  ii. 

Muds. 

duke's]  Duke  F,. 

150.  rttbb'd]  rubd  Qq.  rub'd  F,. 
ruled  Anon.* 

1 5 1.  Pray]  Pray  you  Qq. 

I  have]  I've  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Dyce 
ii,  Iluds. 

travell'd]  travel 'd  F3F4.  Ira* 
tiaild  Qq.  trauail'd  FIFa. 

152.  Some  time]  Sometime  Qx,  Jen. 
cut]  ont  Q,. 


143.  Should]  Abbott,  §  399,  following  the  text  of  F3F4  in  the  preceding  line, 
supposes  that  there  is  here  an  ellipsis  of  the  nominative :  ‘  ( That  he  or  you)  should.’ 

144.  more  worse]  See  line  97. 

150.  rubb’d]  Warburton:  A  metaphor  from  bowling.  [See  Mach.  Ill,  i,  133, 
and  note.] 

153.  at  heels]  Eccles:  Perhaps  he  intends  to  say  that  to  a  good  man  may  arise 
prosperity  and  advantage  from  circumstances  seemingly  ignominious ;  or  ‘  at  heels  ’ 
may  relate  to  the  disgraceful  punishment  which  he  is  undergoing.  Hudson  :  I  am 
not  certain  as  to  the  meaning  of  this.  A  man  set  in  the  stocks  was  said  to  be  *  pun¬ 
ished  by  the  heels and  Kent  probably  alludes  to  this.  But  what  I  am  in  doubt 
about  is,  whethor  he  means  that  a  good  man  may  build  his  fortune  on  such  an  event, 
or  that  the  fortune  even  of  a  good  man  may  have  holes  in  the  heel  of  its  shoes;  as 
v.  e  say  ‘  out  at  the  toes,’  or  *  out  at  the  elbows.’  [Is  it  not  likely  that  Kent  jocosely 
means  that  what  is  usually  but  a  metaphor  is  with  him  a  reality  ? — Ed.] 

154.  Give  you]  Schmidt:  A  greeting  used  only  by  common  people. 


ACT  II,  SC.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


131 


Glou.  [Aside.]  The  duke’s  to  blame  in  this ;  ’twill  be  ill 

taken.  [Exit.  155 

Kent.  Good  king,  that  must  approve  the  common  saw. 

Thou  out  of  heaven’s  benedidlion  comest 
To  the  warm  sun ! 

155.  [Aside.]  Sta.  Om.  QqFf,  et 
cet. 

The...takenl\  Two  lines,  Ff. 
to  blame\  too  blame 
'twill... taken. [to  Edm.]  ’ twill 


156.  common  saw,  &c.]  Hanmer:  An  old  proverbial  saying  applied  to  those 
who  are  turned  out  of  house  and  home,  deprived  of  all  the  comforts  of  life  excepting 
the  common  benefits  of  the  air  and  sun.  JOHNSON :  It  was  perhaps  used  of  men 
dismissed  from  an  hospital,  or  house  of  charity,  such  as  was  erected  formerly  in  many 
places  for  travellers.  Those  houses  had  names  properly  enough  alluded  to  by  heaven's 
benediction.  Capell  :  This  saw  occurs  in  one  capital  passage  of  Holinshed,  and  is 
there  applied  to  such  persons  as,  going  about  to  make  matters  better,  make  them  worse, 
and  that  is  Kent’s  application  of  it: — Lear,  says  that  speaker,  who  thinks  to  mend 
his  condition  by  leaving  his  eldest  daughter  and  coming  to  Regan,  will  find  himself 
in  that  person’s  error  who  foregoes  the  benediction  of  heaven  for  the  common  and 
weak  blessing  of  the  warm  sun;  such  opinion  had  he  now  entertained  of  Regan’s 
superiority  in  badness.  [This  ‘  capital  passage  ’  from  Holinshed  Capell  gives  in  his 
Notes ,  vol.  iii,  p.  40:  ‘This  Augustine  after  his  arrivall  converted  the  Saxons  indeede 
from  Paganisme,  but  as  the  Proverb  sayth,  bringing  them  out  of  Goddes  blessing  into 
the  warme  sunne,  he  also  imbued  them  wyth  no  lesse  hurtfull  supersticion  then  they 
did  knowe  before.’]  Tyr WHITT:  This  ‘  saw*  is  in  Heywood’s  Dialogues  on  Prov¬ 
erbs,  Book  ii,  chap,  v:  ‘In  your  rennying  from  hym  to  me,  ye  runne  Out  of  gods 
blessing  into  the  warme  sunne.’  [This  quotation  from  Heywood  is  given  by  Capell 
also  {Notes,  vol.  iii,  p.493),  whose  text  I  have  followed. — Ed.]  Malone:  See 
also  Howell’s  Collection  of  English  Proverbs,  in  his  Dictionary,  1660:  ‘  He  goes  out 
of  God’s  blessing  to  the  warm  sun,  viz.  from  good  to  worse.’  Wright  :  Compare 
also  Lyly’s  Euphues  and  his  England  (ed.  Arber,  p.  320) :  *  Thou  forsakest  Gods 
blessing  to  sit  in  a  warm  Sunne.’  The  proverb  is  reversed  in  the  Letters  of  Euphues 
(ibid.  p.  196) :  ‘Therefore  if  thou  wilt  follow  my  aduice,  and  prosecute  thine  owne 
determination,  thou  shalt  come  out  of  a  warme  Sunne  into  Gods  blessing.*  Both 
Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  277)  and  Dyce  (Gloss.)  note  the  use  of  the  proverb  as  late  as 
Swift.  [See  Ham.  I,  ii,  67,  where  some  notes  in  reference  to  this  ‘saw’  will  be 
found.  I  think  Hunter’s  zeal  carries  him  too  far  when  he  proposes  the  same 
origin  to  this  proverb  and  to  Beatrice’s  ‘sunburnt’  in  Muck  Ado,  II,  i,  331.  His 
theory  is  that  *  the  first  and  original  use  of  this  phrase  [‘  sunburnt’]  denoted  the  state 
of  being  unmarried;  thus  Beatrice  uses  it.  It  then  expanded  so  as  to  include  the 
state  of  those  who  were  without  family  connections  of  any  kind ;  thus  Hamlet  uses 
it.  It  expanded  still  wider  and  included  the  state  of  those  who  have  no  home,  and 
thus  it  is  used  in  Lear?  But  this  is  mere  theory,  ingenious,  but  unsupported  by 
proof ;  no  attempt  is  made  to  explain,  by  examples,  the  change  of  application  from 
unchurched  women  to  homeless  men.  Moreover,  Lear  is  not  yet  homeless. — Ed.] 


be  ill  taken.  Cap.  conj.  MS.  (with¬ 
drawn).* 

135.  taken 1  tooke  Qq. 

[Exit.]  Om.  Qx. 

157.  Thoti\  That  Johns. 


I32 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


Approach,  thou  beacon  to  this  under  globe, 

That  by  thy  comfortable  beams  I  may  160 

Peruse  this  letter!  Nothing  almost  sees  miracles 
Rut  misery.  I  know  ’tis  from  Cordelia, 


159-166.  Approach remedies .]  In 

the  margin,  Han. 

159.  under  globe ]  vnder  gloabe  Q,. 
vnder-globe  Q2,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 

[Looking  up  to  the  moon. 
Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

161.  miracles']  my  wracke  Qq. 


162.  misery.  /  know]  miferie.  / 
know  Ff,  Rowe  +  ,  Ktly,  Sch.  miserie, 
I  know  Qq.  misery ,  I  know. —  Jen. 
misery  : — /  know  or  misery  ; — I  know 
Cap.  et  cet. 

[Reading  the  letter.  Johns. 
Opening  the  letter.  Jen. 


161,  162.  Nothing.  .  .  misery]  Capell:  Kent  breaks  out  into  a  reflection, 
rising  from  his  condition, — that  people  born  to  ill-fortune,  like  himself,  and  living 
under  her  frown,  are  the  only  persons  almost  who  can  be  said  to  see  miracles ,  so 
wonderful  are  the  situations,  sometimes,  which  she  is  pleased  to  reduce  them  to. 
Hudson  :  I  am  very  much  in  the  dark  as  to  what  the  text  means.  Of  course  the 
literal  sense  is, *  *  hardly  anything  but  misery  sees  miracles ;  ’  but  the  question  is,  what 
are  the  particulars  referred  to,  or  what  are  the  miraculous  things  to  be  seen  in  this 
case  ?  and  why  is  misery  said  to  see  them  ?  I  suspect  that  ‘  see  ’  is  used  in  the  sense 
of  experience ;  a  sense  it  often  bears.  In  that  case  the  meaning  may  be,  *  miracles 
are  hardly  ever  wrought  but  in  behalf  of  the  wretched.’  And  upon  this  thought 
Kent  seems  to  be  building  a  hope  of  better  times,  both  for  himself  and  the  old  king; 
while,  on  the  other  hand,  nothing  short  of  a  miraculous  providence  seems  able  to 
turn  their  course  of  misfortune.  Delius  :  That  Cordelia  should  have  thought  of 
him,  or  that  her  letter  should  have  reached  him,  seems  to  him  such  a  miracle  as  only 
those  in  misery  experience. 

162-166.  Cordelia  .  .  .  remedies]  Johnson:  The  passage  is  very  obscure,  if  not 
corrupt.  Perhaps  it  may  be  read  thus : 

* - Cordelia - has  been - informed 

Of  my  obscured  course,  and  shall  find  time  — 

From  this  enormous  state-seeking,  to  give 
Losses  their  remedies.’ 

Cordelia  is  informed  of  our  affairs,  and  when  the  enormous  care  of  seeking  her  for * 
tune  will  allow  her  time,  she  will  employ  it  in  remedying  losses.  Jennens  was  the 
first  to  suggest  that  Kent  reads  fragments  of  Cordelia’s  letter.  His  text  reads  thus  • 

* - 'Tis  from  Cordelia,  \Opening  the  letter. 

Who  has  most  fortunately  been  inform'd 

Of  my  obscure  course - and  shall  find  time  [ Reading  parts  0/  the  Utter. 

From  this  enormous  state - seeking  to  give 

Losses  their  remedies. - All  weary  and  o’er-watched,’  &c. 

Capell:  Kent  expatiates  upon  his  letter;  tells  you  he  knows  it  is  from  Cordelia  by 
some  circumstances  of  it’s  delivery ;  and  it’s  coming  from  her  is  to  him  a  plain  proof 
that  she  has  (as  he  words  it)  been  fortunately  informed  of  his  obscured  course  :  And 
here  a  shorter  pause  follows;  and  after  it*  a  sentence  not  perfected,  of  which  ‘  who’ 

is  the  substantive,  and - to  raise  us  (viz.  the  king  and  himself)  words  wanting  to 

it’s  completion :  words  that  may  be  collected,  and  put  in  after  *  time,’  though  drop’d 
by  one  in  search  of  conciseness,  and  bury’d  in  ruminating.  Steevens  thus  adopt* 


ACT  II,  SC.  il] 


KING  LEAR 


‘33 


Who  hath  most  fortunately  been  inform’d  163 

Of  my  obscured  course ;  and  shall  find  time 


164.  eourse ;  and]  course.  And  Ff, 
Wh.  Sch.  courfe ,  and  Qq,  Johns.  Jen. 
course.  1  Rowe  +  . 

1 64-166.  and. ..time From.. .state, seek¬ 
ing. ...remedies.]  QqFf  ( remedies ,  Qq), 
Johns.  Cap.  Glo. +  ,  Dyce  ii,  Mob.  I... 
time  For.... Slate,  and  seek....remedies. 
Rowe.  I. ..time  From. ..state,  and  seek... 
remedies.  Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  and... 
time  From. ..state — seeking. ..remedies.— 
Jen.  (in  italics  with  the  stage-direction 
[Reading  parts  of  the  letter).  Steev.  ’78, 
’85  (but  without  the  stage*direction), 
White  (subs,  but  with  quotation-marks 


instead  of  italics).  Huds.  (subs,  follow* 
ing  Wh.).  and. .-..time  From. ...state, — 
seeking. ..remedies  :  Mai.  Steev.  ’93,  Ec. 
Bos.  Knt,  Coll.  Del.  Dyce  i  ( remedies . 
Coll,  remedies —  Del.  Dyce  i).  and... 
time  From ....  state, — seeking, — ....  rem  e - 
dies.  Sing,  and  she'll  find  time  From... 

state-seeking . remedies.  Sta.  and .... 

time, — From.,  .state, — seeking. . .  remedies. 
Ktly.  And. ..time — From.. .state — seek¬ 
ing. ..remedies - .  Sch. 

164,  165.  shall. ...From]  she'll. ...For 
Daniel. 


and  amplifies  Jennens’s  suggestion  (without,  however,  any  acknowledgement  of  in¬ 
debtedness)  :  I  confess  I  do  not  understand  this  passage,  unless  it  may  be  consid¬ 
ered  as  divided  parts  of  Cordelia’s  letter,  which  he  is  reading  to  himself  by  moon¬ 
light  :  it  certainly  conveys  the  sense  of  what  she  would  have  said.  In  reading  a 
letter,  it  is  natural  enough  to  dwell  Qn  those  circumstances  in  it  that  promise  the 
change  in  our  affairs  which  we  most  wish  for;  and  Kent,  having  read  Cordelia’s 
assurances  that  she  will  find  a  time  to  free  the  injured  from  the  enormous  misrule  of 
Regan,  is  willing  to  go  to  sleep  with  that  pleasing  reflection  uppermost  in  his  mind. 
But  this  is  mere  conjecture.  Malone  does  not  think  that  any  part  of  Cordelia’s 
letter  is,  or  can  be,  read  by  Kent.  ‘  He  wishes,’  so  Malone  continues,  ‘  for  the  rising 
of  the  sun  that  he  may  read  it.’  I  suspect  that  two  half  lines  have  been  lost  between 
the  words  ‘state’  and  ‘seeking.’  This  ‘enormous  state’  means,  I  think,  the  confu¬ 
sion  subsisting  in  the  state  in  consequence  of  the  discord  which  had  arisen  between 
the  Dukes  of  Albany  and  Cornwall;  of  which  Kent  hopes  Cordelia  will  avail  her¬ 
self.  Mason  thus  paraphrases  it:  ‘I  know  that  the  letter  is  from  Cordelia,  (who 
hath  been  informed  of  my  obscured  course,)  and  shall  gain  time,  by  this  strange 
disguise  and  situation,  which  I  shall  employ  in  seeking  to  remedy  our  present  losses.’ 
Tieck  (vol.  ix,  p.  366)  thinks  that  the  poet  wishes  here  only  to  call  Cordelia  to 
mind,  and  give  us  a  hint  that  wholly  new  events  are  about  to  happen.  When 
Kent  says  only  misery  sees  miracles,  he  means  that  he,  disguised  as  a  common  man, 
has  already  witnessed  the  wickedness  of  Goneril,  the  unhappy  condition  of  the  king, 
he  himself,  a  nobleman,  has  been  stocked  like  a  low,  common  rogue,  and  yet  it  is 
possible  for  him  to  exchange  letters  with  Cordelia.  At  the  word  ‘  remedies,’  sleep 
overpowers  him,  and  the  sentence  is  not  completed.  Collier  :  We  are  to  recollect 
that  Kent,  having  a  letter  from  Cordelia  in  his  hand,  is  endeavoring  to  make  out  its 
contents  by  the  imperfect  light;  he  is  unable  to  see  distinctly,  and  hence,  perhaps, 
part  of  the  obscurity  of  the  passage.  He  can  only  make  out  some  words,  and  those 
not  decisively,  but  sufficiently  to  enable  the  audience  to  judge  of  the  general  tenor 
of  what  he  is  trying  to  read.  Singer  says  that  Keht  finds  he  cannot  follow  his  train 
of  thought  for  weariness,  and  so  breaks  off  and  settles  himself  to  sleep.  White 
follows  Jennens  in  thinking  that  Kent  here  drowsily  reads  disjointed  fragments  of 
Cordelia’s  letter.  White  also  follows  the  Ff  in  putting  a  period  after  course,  line  <64. 

12 


134 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ii,  sc.  ii. 


From  this  enormous  state,  seeking  to  give  165 

Losses  their  remedies.  All  weary  and  o’er- watch’d. 

Take  vantage,  heavy  eyes,  not  to  behold 
This  shameful  lodging. 

Fortune,  good  night;  smile  once  more;  turn  thy  wheel ! 

[ Sleeps . 


165.  enormous ]  enormious  Qq. 

166.  o'er-watch'd ]  o' re-watch' d  Ff. 
ouerwatck  Q,.  ouer-watcht  Q2.  o'er- 
watch'd!  Walker. 

168.  This. ...lodging]  Separate  line, 
Pope. 

168,  169.  This. ..night]  One  line,  Qq 


Ff,  Rowe,  Coll,  i,  Wh. 

169.  smile.. .turn]  Johns.  Smile  once 
more ,  turn  Ff,  Rowe+,  Cap.  Smile, 
once  more  turne  Qq.  Smile  ;  once  more 
turn  Coll.  ii. 

[Sleeps.]  fleepes.Qj.  Hefleepe3. 
Qa.  Om.  Ff. 


Delius  suggests  that  ‘  to  deliver  us,’  or  some  similar  phrase,  is  to  be  supplied  after 
•state.’  Staunton  thinks  that  no  part  of  the  letter  is  read,  but  amends  the  text  thus : 

'  Of  my  obscured  course,  and  she’ll  find  time 
From  this  enormous  state-seeking,  to  give,’  &c. 

‘  The  slight  change  of  she'll  for  44  shall  ”  appears  to  remove  much  of  the  difficulty ; 
that  occasioned  by  the  corrupt  words  44  enormous  state-seeking  ”  will  some  day  prob¬ 
ably  find  an  equally  facile  remedy.’  Cowden  Clarke  thinks  that  the  speech  is 
made  purposely  confused  to  indicate  the  situation  of  Kent,  that  4  who,’  having  been 
once  expressed  before  *  hath,’  is  understood  before  4  shall,’  and  that  this  portion  of 
the  speech  is  a  series  of  disjointed  sentences  imperfectly  uttered  by  the  speaker,  the 
breaks  in  them  indicating  that  he  is  dropping  off  to  sleep.  Dycf.  :  Of  this  obscure 
and,  it  may  be,  corrupted  passage,  no  satisfactory  explanation  or  emendation  has  yet 
been  given. 

164.  time]  Bailey  (ii,  90)  proposes  to  read  4  shall  find  balm  For  this  enormous 
state,’  and  offers  instances  to  show  4  Shakespeare’s  familiarity’  with  the  word  balm 
at  the  time  he  was  writing  this  tragedy.  It  is  but  just  to  add,  that  Bailey  does  not 
consider  this  emendation  as  4  more  than  fairly  probable.’ 

165.  enormous]  Johnson  :  Unwonted,  out  of  rule,  out  of  the  ordinary  course 
of  things.  Bulloch  (p.  242)  suggests  endormoused. 

169.  smile]  Collier  (ed.  2) :  Kent  does  not  mean  to  ask  Fortune  to  smile  once 
more;  but  to  smile,  and  when  smiling,  to  turn  her  wheel  once  more. 

169.  Dowden  (p.  271) :  Kent  possesses  no  vision,  like  that  which  gladdens  Ed¬ 
gar,  of  a  divine  providence.  His  loyalty  to  right  has  something  in  it  of  a  desperate 
instinct,  which  persists  in  spite  of  the  appearances  presented  by  the  world.  Sh. 
would  have  us  know  that  there  is  not  any  devotion  to  truth,  to  justice,  to  charity 
more  intense  and  real  than  that  of  the  man  who  is  faithful  to  them,  out  of  the  sheer 
spirit  of  loyalty,  unstimulated  and  unsupported  by  any  faith  which  can  be  called 
theological.  Kent,  who  has  seen  the  vicissitude  of  things,  knows  of  no  higher 
power  presiding  over  the  events  of  the  world  than  fortune.  Therefore,  all  the 
more,  Kent  clings  to  the  passionate  instinct  of  right-doing,  and  to  the  hardy  temper, 
the  fohitude  which  makes  evil,  when  it  happens  to  come,  endurable.  The  4  mira¬ 
cle’  that  Kent  sees  in  his  distress  is  the  approaching  succour  from  France,  and  the 
loyalty  of  Cordelia’s  spirit.  ...  It  is  Kent  who,  characteristically  making  the  best  of  an 


A.CT  II,  SC.  iii.] 


KING  LEAR 


135 


Scene  III.  The  same. 

Enter  Edgar. 

Edg.  I  heard  myself  proclaim’d ;  1 

And  by  the  happy  hollow  of  a  tree 
Escaped  the  hunt.  No  port  is  free ;  no  place, 

That  guard  and  most  unusual  vigilance 

Does  not  attend  my  taking.  Whiles  I  may ’scape'  5 

I  will  preserve  myself ;  and  am  bethought 
To  take  the  basest.and  most  poorest  shape 


Scene  iii.]  Steev.  Scene  vii.  Pope, 
Han.  Scene  viii.  Johns.  Scene  iv. 
Ec.  The  scene  continued,  QqFf,  Rowe, 
Warb.  Cap. 

The  same.]  Sch.  A  part  of  a 
Heath.  Theob.  A  part  of  the  neigh¬ 
bouring  country.  Ec.  The  open  country. 
Dyce.  A  wood.  Sta. 

Enter  Edgar.]  Enter  Edgar,  at  a  Dis¬ 


tance.  Cap. 

I.  I  heard ]  I  heare  Qq.  /  have 
heard  F  ,  Rowe.  I've  heard  Pope  + ,  Fo 

4.  unusual^  tinufall  Q,FjF3. 

5.  Does ]  Do's  Ff.  Doji  Qq. 
taking  taking  Qq. 

Whiles’]  While  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Ec 
Var.  Coll.  Del.  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh.  Ktly. 
7.  most]  the  Pope  +  . 


unlucky  chance,  exclaims,  as  he  settles  himself  to  sleep  in  the  stocks :  *  Fortune, 
good-night ;  smile  once  more,  turn  thy  wheel.’ 

156-169.  Of  this  soliloquy  Birch  (p.  414)  whose  volume,  written  to  prove  that 
Sh.  was  an  atheist,  is  a  rare  tissue  of  perverted  ingenuity,  says  that,  though  it  is 
rather  unintelligible  when  taken  in  an  ordinary  sense,  it  is  comprehensible  enough 
taken  as  a  medium  for  Sh.  to  express  his  impiety.  Instead  of  those  religious  senti¬ 
ments  so  commonly  recurred  to,  at  the  coming  of  night,  and  in  the  midst  of  mis¬ 
fortune,  Kent  shows  a  neglect  of  Providence.  [Birch  forgets  that  Kent  couldn't- 
say, 4  Now  I  lay  me’  when  he  was  in  the  stocks.  See  Prov.  xxvi,  5. — Ed.] 

Scene  III.]  Schmidt  follows  this  division  of  scenes, ‘"which  dates  merely  from 
Pope,  under  protest;  it  is  only  on  account  of  the  confusion  that  would  ensue  in 
references  to  scenes  and  lines  were  his  edition  different  from  all  other  modern  edi* 
tions.  In  the  Ff,  Scenes  ii,  iii,  and  iv  of  this  act  form  but  one:  Scene  ii;  and  this 
indicates  the  ancient  usage.  Only  with  the  departure  of  all  the  characters  did.  tho 
scenes  change.  Therefore,  continues  Schmidt,  since  Kent  remains  asleep  on  the 
stage,  the  monologue  which  now  follows  was  preceded  merely  by  4  Enter  Edgar,’ 
and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  Edgar,  contemplating  flight,  entered  in  the  twilight 
on  the  same  scene  where  Kent  was  lying  in  the  stocks — namely,  before  Gloucester's 
castle. 

4.  That]  Wright  :  Loosely  used  for  4  Where,’  the  preposition  4  in  ’  being  omitted 
at  the  end  of  the  sentence.  Compare  1  Hen.  VI:  III,  ii,  25 :  4  No  way  to  that,  for 
weakness,  which  she  enter’d  ’ ;  that  is,  by  which  she  entered.  SCHMIDT  says  that  if 
stands  for  but  that,  or  simply  but. 

6.  am  bethought]  Schmidt  :  Only  here,  in  Sh. ;  elsewhere,  have  bethought . 

7.  most  poorest]  See  II,  ii,  97. 


136 


KING  LEAH 


[act  ii,  sc.  iii 


That  ever  penury  in  contempt  of  man 

Brought  near  to  beast;  my  face  I’ll  grime  with  filth, 

Blanket  my  loins,  elf  all  my  hair  in  knots,  IO 

And  with  presented  nakedness  out-face 
The  winds  and  persecutions  of  the  sky, 

The  country  gives  me  proof  and  precedent 
Of  Bedlam  beggars,  who  with  roaring  voices 


8.  ever ]  every  Rowe,  Han.  Bos. 

IO.  elf]  elfe  F,.  elfe  QqFa.  pul  F3F4. 
//air]  J/aire  Qq.  haires  F,Fa. 
hairs  F3. 

in]  with  Qq,  Cap. 


12.  winds]  windes  FtFa.  wind  Qa. 
winde  Qa. 

persecutions]  perfecution  Qq. 

13.  precedent]  Johns,  prefdent  QqFf. 


8.  in  contempt]  Moberly  :  *  Wishing  to  degrade  a  man.’  So  Milton’s  ‘  in  spite 
of  sorrow  ’  means  ‘  in  order  to  spite  sorrow.’ 

10.  elf]  Matted  or  tangled  hair  was  supposed  to  be  the  work  of  fairies  in  the 
night.  See  Rom.  Jttl.  I,  iv,  90. 

14.  Bedlam  beggars]  Many  passages  from  old  authors  are  cited  by  modem 
editors  to  show  what  these  *  Bedlam  beggars  ’  were,  and  many  more  might  be  cited ; 
and  yet,  after  all,  none  of  them  contain  so  good  a  description  of  Bedlamites  as 
that  given  in  these  few  lines  of  Edgar’s  speech.  That  ‘  poor  Tom  ’  was  their  uni¬ 
versal  name  is  shown  in  the  first  paragraph  of  Awdeley’s  Fraternitye  of  Vaca - 
bondes,  1565:  ‘An  Abraham  man  is  he  that  walketh  bare  armed,  and  bare  legged, 
and  fayneth  hym  selfe  mad,  and  caryeth  a  packe  of  wool,  or  a  stycke  with  baken 
on  it,  or  such  lyke  toy,  and  nameth  himselfe  poore  Tom.’ — ed.  Early  Eng.  Text 
Soc.  p.  3.  The  great  authority  in  regard  to  ‘  Vagabones’  is  Harman’s  * Caueat  or 
Warening  for  Commen  Cvrsetors,’  ed.  ii,  1567,  also  reprinted  by  the  E.  E.  Text  Soc. 
Dekker  in  his  Belman  of  Londoti  ‘conveyed’  largely  from  Harman;  one  passage, 
cited  by  Steevens,  so  strongly  corroborates  Shakespeare’s  description  that  it  may 
perhaps  be  worth  the  while  to  reprint  it  here  (three  editions  of  this  Belman  appeared 
in  1608,  the  year  in  which  Lear  was  first  printed):  ‘  Of  all  the  mad  rascalls  (that 
are  of  this  wing)  the  Abraham-man  is  the  most  phantastick :  The  fellow  (quoth  the 
old  Lady  of  the  Lake  vnto  me)  that  sat  halfe  naked  (at  table  to-day)  from  the 
girdle  vpward,  is  the  best  Abraham-man  that  euer  came  to  my  house,  the  notablest 
villaine :  he  sweares  he  hath  bin  in  Bedlam,  and  will  talke  franticldy  of  purpose : 
you  see  pinnes  stuck  in  sundry  places  of  his  native  flesh,  especially  in  his  armes, 
which  paine  hee  gladly  puts  himselfe  to  (beeing  indeede  no  torment  at  all,  his  skin 
is  either  so  dead  with  some  fowle  disease,  .or  so  hardned  with  weather)  onely  to 
make  you  beleeue  he  is  out  of  his  wits :  he  calls  himselfe  by  the  name  of  Poore 
Tom,  and  comming  neere  any  body,  cryes  out,  Poore  Tom  is  a  cold.  Of  these  Abra- 
ham-men  some  be  exceeding  mery,  and  doe  nothing  but  sing  songs,  fashioned  out 
of  their  owne  braines ;  some  will  dance,  other  will  do  nothing  but  laugh  or  weepe ; 
others  are  dogged  and  so  sullen  both  in  looke  and  speech,  that  spying  but  small 
company  in  a  house,  they  boldly  and  bluntly  enter,  compelling  the  seruants  through 
feare  to  giue  them  what  they  demaund,  which  is  commonly  bacon,  or  something  that 
will  yeelde  ready  mony.  The  Vpright-man  and  the  Rogue  are  not  terribler  ene¬ 
mies  to  poultry  ware  than  Poore  Tom  is.’ 


act  ii,  sc.  iii.] 


KING  LEAR 


*37 


Stick  in  their  numb’d  and  mortified  bare  arms  15 

Pins,  wooden  pricks,  nails,  sprigs  of  rosemary ; 

And  with  this  horrible  object,  from  low  farms, 

Poor  pelting  villages,  sheep-cotes  and  mills, 

Sometimes  with  lunatic  bans,  sometime  with  prayers, 

Enforce  their  charity.  Poor  Turlygod !  poor  Tom !  20 

That’s  something  yet ;  Edgar  I  nothing  am.  [Exit. 


1 5.  Stick]  Walker.  Strike  QqFf  et 

cet. 

bare ]  Om.  Ff,  Kowe,  Sch. 

16.  zvooden ]  wodden  Q1FIF9. 

17.  farms]  feruice  Qq. 

18.  sheep-cotes]  fieep-coates  Qq.  Sheeps- 
Coates  Fj.  Skeepes-Coates  Fa.  Sheep's- 
Coats  F3.  Sheeps- Coats  F4. 


19.  Sometimes]  Ff+,  Jen, Sch.  Some¬ 
time  Qq  et  cet. 

sometime]  fometimes  FaF3F4+, 

Jen. 

20.  their]  reer  Warb.  conj. 

Turlygod]  Turlygood  Theob. 

Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Coll. 
Del.  Sta.  Dyce  ii,  Huds.  Turluril  Han. 


15.  Stick]  Dyce,  who,  with  all  other  editors,  reads  Strike  in,  says  that  it  is 
‘equivalent  to  Strike  into ;  but  Walker  ( Crit.  ii,  36)  proposes,  with  great  proba¬ 
bility,  “  Stick  in.”  ’  The  probability  is  so  great  that  I  have  adopted  it. — Ed. 

15.  mortified]  Deadened,  hardened.  See  the  quotation  above  from  Dekker’s 
Belman. 

16.  pricks]  Mason:  The  Euonymous ,  of  which  the  best  skewers  are  made,  is 
called  prick-wood. 

18.  pelting]  Nares:  A  very  common  epithet,  with  our  old  writers,  to  signify 
paltry  or  contemptible. 

19.  bans]  Wright  r  In  Med.  Latin  bannum  was  used  to  denote,  first,  an  edict  or 
proclamation,  hence,  a  summons,  or  an  interdict.  The  original  sense  in  English 
only'remains  in  the  publication  of  the  ‘banns  of  marriage,’  and  the  word* has  most 
commonly  the  secondary  meaning  of  the  curse  pronounced  against  the  violation  of 
an  interdict. 

20.  Turlygod]  Warburton  :  We  should  read  Turlupin.  In  the  fourteenth  cen¬ 
tury  there  was  a  new  species  of  gipsies,  called  Turlupins,  a  fraternity  of  naked  beg¬ 
gars,  which  ran  up  and  down  Europe.  However,  the  Church  of  Rome  hath  dignified 
them  with  the  name  of  Hereticks,  and-  actually  burned  some  of  them  at  Paris.  [In 
regard  to  their  religion  Littr£  says:  ils  soutenaient  qu’on  ne  doit  avoir  honte  de 
rien  de  ce  qui  est  naturel.]  Plainly,  says  Warburton,  nothing  but  a  band  of  Tom- 
o’-bedlams.  Douce  :  There  is  a  better  reason  for  rejecting  Warburton’s  Turlupin 
and  Hanmer’s  Turluril  than  for  preferring  either,  viz:  that  ‘Turlygood’  is  the  cor¬ 
rupted  word  in  our  language.  The  Turlupins  were  first  known  by  the  names  Beg- 
hards ,  or  Beghins,  and  brothers  and  sisters  of  the  free  spirit.  The  common  people 
alone  called  them  Turlupins ,  a  name  which  seems  obviously  to  be  connected  with 
the  wolvish  bowlings  which  these  people,  in  all  probability,  would  make  in  their  re¬ 
ligious  ravings.  Their  subsequent  name  of  the  fraternity  of  poor  men  might  have 
been  the  cause  why  the  wandering  rogues,  called  Bedlam  beggars,  assumed  or  ob¬ 
tained  the  title  of  Turlupins  or  Turlygoods,  especially  if  their  mode  of  asking  alms 
was  accompanied  by  the  gesticulations  of  madmen.  Turlupino  and  Turluru  are  old 


133 


KING  LEAR 


[act  II,  sc.  iv 


Scene  IV.  The  same. 

Enter  Lear,  Fool,  end  Gentleman, 


Lear.  ’Tis  strange  that  they  should  so  depart  from  home,  I 
And  not  send  back  my  messenger. 

Gent.  As  I  learn’d, 

The  night  before  there  was  no  purpose  in  them 
Of  this  remove. 

Kent.  Hail  to  thee,  noble  master ! 

Lear.  Ha  ?  5 


Scene  iv.]  Steev.  Scene  viii.  Pope, 
Han.  Scene  ix.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 
Scene  v.  Ec.  The  Scene  continued  in 
QqFf,  Rowe,  Cap. 

The  same.]  Sch.  Changes  again 
to  the  Earl  of  Glo’ster’s  Castle.  Pope. 
Before  Gloucester’s  castle.  Mai.  Dyce 
adds  Kent  in  the  stocks. 

Enter...]  Enter  King,  and  a  Knight. 
Q3.  Enter  King  Qt. 

I.  home ]  hence  Qq. 


2.  messenger ]  Meffengers  FtFa. 

2-4.  As. ..remove."]  Two  lines,  the  first 
ending  ? vas,  Qq. 

3.  in  them ]  Om.  Qq. 

4.  this]  his  Qq. 

Kent.]  Kent.  [Waking.]  Sta. 

5.  Ha  ?]  Ha,  F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
How ,  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var. 

5,6.  Ha  ?... pastime  ?]  Steev. ’93.  One 
line,  QqFf,  Sta. 


Italian  terms  for  a  fool  or  madman ;  and  the  Flemings  had  a  proverb,  ‘ As  unfortunate 
as  Turlupin  and  his  children .’  Nares:  Seemingly  a  name  for  a  sort  of  beggar  de¬ 
scribed  in  the  preceding  lines.  I  cannot  persuade  myself  that  this  word,  however 
similar  in  meaning,  has  any  real  connection  with  turlupin,  notwithstanding  the  au¬ 
thority  of  Warburton  and  Douce.  It  seems  to  be  an  original  English  term,  being 
too  remote  in  form  from  the  other  to  be  a  corruption  from  it.  Collier  (ed.  1)  t 
Perhaps  ‘  Turlygood  ’  is  a  corruption  of  Thoroughlygood.  We  know  nothing  of  any 
Turlupins  (at  least  by  that  name)  in  England. 

20,  21.  Tom!  .  .  .  am.]  Walker  {Git.  iii,  277):  So  Rich.  II:  V,  i,  92,  93, 
‘short’ — ‘heart.’  What  extent  of  license  did  Sh.  allow  himself  in  his  rhymes? 
[This  question  has  been  answered  by  Ellis  ( Early  Eng.  Pronunciation,  iii,  953) 
in  a  list  of  Shakespeare’s  rhymes  and  assonances.  In  this  list  there  are  eleven  in- 
stances  (of  which  four  are  in  this  play)  of  short  a  rhyming  with  short  0,  viz :  the  present 
instance,  and  foppish,  apish,  I,  iv,  161,  163;  corn,  harm,  III,  vi,  41,  43 ;  departure, 
shorter,  I,  v,  48,  49 ;  dally,  folly,  R.  of  L,  554;  man,  on,  Mid.  N.  D.  II,  i,  263,  also 
III,  ii,  348;  crab,  bob,  lb.  II,  i,  48;  pap,  hop,  lb.  V,  i,  303;  cough,  laugh,  lb.  II,  i, 
54;  heart,  short,  part.  Love's  Lab.  V,  ii,  55.] 

21.  am]  Ritson:  In  assuming  this  character,  I  may  preserve  myself;  as  Edgar 
I  am  inevitably  gone. 

The  same.]  See  Schmidt’s  note,  II,  iii,  and  Capell’s  note  on  I,  v,  l. 

3.  night  before]  Cowden  Clarke  calls  attention  to  the  effect  of  advancing  day 
which  is  given  by  this  allusion,  thereby  allowing  ‘  the  progress  of  dramatic  time  to 
take  place  with  sufficient  rapidity  for  the  spectators  to  be  beguiled  into  easy  cre¬ 
dence,  when,  at  the  close  of  the  present  long  scene,  Gloucester  says,  “The  night 
comes  on,”  and  Cornwall  soon  after  observes,  “  Tis  a  wild  night.” ' 


ACT  II,  sc.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


139 


Makest  thou  this  shame  thy  pastime  ? 

Kent.  No,  my  lord.  6 

Fool.,  Ha,  ha !  he  wears  cruel  garters.  Horses  are  tied 
by  the  heads,  dogs  and  bears  by  th’  neck,  monkeys  by  th’ 
loins,  and  men  by  th’  legs;  when  a  man’s  over-lusty  at’ 
legs,  then  he  wears  wooden  nether-stocks.  IO 

Lear.  What’s  he  that  hath  so  much  thy  place  mistook 
To  set  thee  here  ? 

Kent.  It  is  both  he  and  she : 

Your  son  and  daughter. 

Lear.  No. 

Kent.  Yes. 

Lear.  No,  I  say. 

6.  this]  Om.  Pope,  Han.  thy  Theob. 

Warb.  Johns. 

thy]  ahy  F,. 

Kent.  No,  my  lord.]  Om.  Qq. 

7-10.  Ha, ...nether-stocks.]  Five  lines, 
ending  garters,. ...beares....men„. .legs,.... 

Jlockes.  Qq. 

7.  Ha ,  ha  /]  Hah ,  ha,  F,. 
he]  Ff  +  ,  Knt,  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.+, 

Sch.  look,  he  Qq  et  cet. 

cruel]  Cruell  FtFa.  crcwell  Qq. 
crewel  F3F4,  Rowe,  Cap. 
tied]  tide  tide  Fa. 

8.  heads]  heeles  Qq.  head  Bos.  Coll. 


IS 


Del.  Dyce,  Wh. 

8,  9.  by  th' ]  F3F4+,  Jen.  Wh.  Sch. 
byt'h  Qt.  by'  th'  F,Fa.  by  the  Qa  et  cet. 

9.  man's]  Qa,  Jen.  Dyce,  Glo.  +  . 
mans  QI.  man  Ft.  man  is  FaF3F4  et 
cet. 

at']  Ed.  at  QqFf  et  cet. 

10.  wooden]  wodden  F,Fa. 
nether-stocks]  neatherjlockes  Qt. 

neather-Jlockes  Qa.  nether  socks  Heath. 

11,  12,  What' s...here  /]  Rowe.  Prose, 
Qq.  Three  lines,  ending  he,...miJlook 
...heere  ?  Ff. 

12,13.  It. ..daughter.]  One  line,  Qq. 


7.  cruel]  The  similarity  in  sound  between  this  word  and  cresvel  is,  as  Collier 
says,  a  fruitful  theme  for  jokes  in  the  old  dramatists.  Would  it  not  be  better  to  print 
crewel  in  the  text  ?  Halliwell  :  This  word  was  obvious  to  the  punster,  and  is  un¬ 
mercifully  used  by  the  older  dramatists.  A  pun  similar  to  that  in  the  text  is  in  one 
of  L’Estrange’s  anecdotes: — A  greate  zelote  for  the  Cause  would  not  allow  the  Par¬ 
liament’s  army  to  be  beaten  in,  a  certaine  fight,  but  confest  he  did  beleeve  they  might 
be  worsted.  To  which  linsy-wolsey  expression,  a  merry  cavaleere  reply’d,  ‘  Take 
heede  of  that,  for  worsted  is  a  cruell  peece  of  stuffe.’ 

8.  by  the  heads]  Both  in  the  Ff  and  in  Qt  the  ‘the’  before  ‘heads’  and  heeles 
is  not  contracted,  while  it  is  contracted  in  every  other  instance  in  this  speech.  Can 
any  inference  be  drawn  from  this  that  the  h  was  not  aspirated? — Ed. 

9.  at*  legs]  An  absorption  of  the  definite  article;  see  II,  ii,  1 16. 

10.  nether-stocks]  Steevens  :  The  old  word  for  stockings.  Breeches  were  called 
overstockes,  according  to  Baret’s  Alvearie  [r.  v.  Breeches ;  also  called  upper  stockes, 
as  in  the  following  quotation].  Heywood,  among  his  Epigrams  [p.  204,  ed.  Spen¬ 
ser  Soc. — Wright],  has  these  lines :  ‘  Thy  vpper  stocks  be  they  stufte  with  sylke  or 
flocks,  Neuer  become  the  lyke  a  nether  payre  of  stocks.’ 

11.  12.  so  .  .  .  To]  See  I,  iv,  36. 


140 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ii,  sc*  iv. 


Kent.  I  say,  yea.  *7 

*  Lear.  No,  no,  they  would  not. 

*  Kent.  Yes,  they  have.* 

Lear.  By  J  upiter,  I  swear,  no  1  20 

Kent.  By  Juno,  I  swear,  ay! 

Lear.  They  durst  not  do’t; 

They  could  not,  would  not  do’t ;  ’tis  worse  than  murder, 

To  do  upon  respect  such  violent  outrage; 

Resolve  me  with  all  modest  haste  which  way 

Thou  mightst  deserve,  or  they  impose,  this  usage,  25 

Coming  from  us. 

Kent.  My  lord,  when  at  their  home 

I  did  commend  your  highness’  letters  to  them, 

Ere  I  was  risen  from  the  place  that  show’d 
My  duty  kneeling,  came  there  a  reeking  post, 

Stew’d  in  his  haste,  half  breathless,  panting  forth  30 

From  Goneril  his  mistress  salutations; 

Deliver’d  letters,  spite  of  intermission, 


17.  I  say,  yea.]  But  /  say,  yea. 
Han.  Cap. 

18,  19.  Lear.  No. ..have.]  Om.  Ff  +  , 
Cap. 

21.  Kent.  By. ..ay.  Lear.]  Om.  Qq. 

21,  22.  do't...do't]  do  it. ..do  it  Qa. 

22.  could. ..-would]  would...could  Qq, 
Jen. 

25.  mightst ]  may' Jl  Qt.  maijl  Qg. 


25.  impose]  purpofe  Qq. 

28.  should]  skew'd  Pope.  Jhewed 
QqFf,  Rowe,  showed  Coll,  iii,  Sch. 

29.  came  there]  came  Pope  + .  there 
came  Jen.  (a  misprint  ?) 

30.  panting]  painting  F  . 

31.  salutations]  falutation  FgF3F4  +, 
Cap. 

32.  Deliver’d]  Deliuered  Qq. 


23.  upon  respect]  Singer  was  the  first  to  give  the  true  explanation  of  this 
phrase :  *  deliberately  or  upon  consideration l  Edwards,  Heath,  and  Johnson  all 
interpreted  it  as  referring  it  to  the  *  respect  ’  or  reverence  due  to  the  king’s  mes¬ 
senger.  Malone  supposed  that  *  respect  ’  was  personified.  Singer  referred  to 
Ham.  Ill,  i,  68.  Wright  agrees  with  Singer,  and  cites  a  convincing  passage  from 
King  John,  IV,  ii,  214 :  *  To  know  the  meaning  Of  dangerous  majesty,  when  per¬ 
chance  it  frowns  More  upon  humour  than  advised  respect.’  *  That  is,  rather  capri¬ 
ciously  than  deliberately.  Bacon  frequently  uses  **  upon  ”  in  similar  phrases.  See 
Glossary  to  the  Essays,  ed.  Wright.* 

24.  modest]  Schmidt  {Lex.) :  Filling  up  the  measure,  neither  going  beyond, 
nor  falling  short  of  what  is  required,  satisfactory,  becoming.  As  much  haste  as  may 
consist  with  telling  the  full  truth.  See  also  IV,  vii,  5. 

25.  26.  Thou  .  .  .  Coming]  Abbott,  §  377  :  That  is,  *  since  thou  comest.’  The 
participle  is  sometimes  so  separated  from  the  verb  that  it  seems  to  be  used  absolutely. 

25.  usage]  According  to  Schmidt,  only*used  by  Sh.  in  the  sense  of  treatment. 

32.  intermission]  Cabell  :  Message  intermediate.  Though  he  saw  me  then 


ACT  II,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


141 


Which  presently  they  read ;  on  whose  contents  33 

They  summon’d  up  their  meiny,  straight  took  horse ; 
Commanded  me  to  follow  and  attend  35 

The  leisure  of  their  answer;  gave  me  cold  looks. 

And  meeting  here  the  other  messenger, 

Whose  welcome,  I  perceived,  had  poison’d  mine — 

Being  the  very  fellow  which  of  late 

Display’d  so  saucily  against  your  highness —  40 

Having  more  man  than  wit  about  me,  drew ; 

He  raised  the  house  with  loud  and  coward  cries. 

Your  son  and  daughter  found  this,  trespass  worth 
The  shame  which  here  it  suffers. 

Fool.  Winter’s  not  gone  yet,  if  the  wild  geese  fly  that  way.  45 
Fathers  that  wear  rags 


33.  whose]  thofe  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han.  Knt. 

34.  meiny]  meineyT^F*.  men  Qq,  Jen. 
37.  And]  I,  Jen. 

39.  which]  that  Qq,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev. 
Eos.  Sing.  Ktly,  Glo.  +  . 


41.  drew]  I  drew  Rowe  +,  Cap.  Ec. 

44.  The  shame]  This  fliame  Qq. 

45- 53.  Om.  Qq. 

45.  Winter's]  Winters  F,Fa. 
wild]  zvild  Fx. 

46- 51.  Three  lines,  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt. 


in  the  action  of  presenting  a  prior  letter.  Steevens  :  Without  pause,  without  suffer¬ 
ing  time  to  intervene ;  so  in  Macb.  IV,  iii,  232.  Cowden  Clarke  :  ‘  In  defiance  of 
pause  required,’  for  him  to  take  breath  or  for  me  to  rise  from  my  knee  and  receive  my 
answer.  We  think  this  interpretation  is  borne  out  by  the  only  three  other  passages 
in  which  Sh.  uses  this  word.  Mer.  of  Ven.  Ill,  ii,  201,  As  You  Like  It,  II,  vii,  32, 
and  Macb.  Schmidt  :  Though  my  business  was  thus  interrupted  and  the  answer 
delayed  which  I  was  to  receive.  [In  colloquial  phrase,  *  in  spite  of  “  first  come,  first 
served.”  ’ — Ed.] 

33.  presently]  Immediately.  See  Sh.  passim. 

34.  meiny]  Pope:  People.  Mason:  The  word  menial,  which  is  derived  from 
it,  is  still  in  use.  Knight:  In  the  old  translation  of  the  Bible  we  find:  ‘And 
Abraham  saddled  his  ass,  and  took  two  of  his  meyny  with  him,  and  Isaac  his  son.’ 
In  our  present  translation,  we  have  young  men  in  place  of  « meyny.’  Wright  : 
Cotgrave  gives :  ‘  Mesnie :  f.  A  meynie,  familie,  household,  household  companie,  or 
seruants.’  Moberly  :  Nares  quotes  the  French  proverb,  ‘  de  tel  seigneur  telle 
mesnie.’  It  is  supposed  to  occur  in  the  late  Latin  forms  *  mainada,’  *  mainata  * 
(familise  piratarum  quse  mainatae  dicuntur),  and  this  may  be  true  if,  as  Diez  sup¬ 
poses,  it  is  connected  with  the  low  Latin  ‘  mansionata.’  It  should  however  be  re¬ 
marked  that  ‘  meyny  ’  means  *  within  ’  in  old  Cornish ;  whence  4  mayn,’  a  friend, 
plural  *  mayny.’  [For  its  use  in  Chaucer  and  Spenser  see  Corson’s  note  on  line 
1057  in  his  ed.  of  The  Legende  of  Goode  Women.] 

41.  drew]  Abbott,  §  399  :  Where  there  can  be  no  doubt  what  the  nominative  is, 
it  is  sometimes  omitted.  But  (§401)  a  nominative  in  the  second  person  plural,  or 
first  person  (as  here,  ‘(I)  drew’),  is  less  commonly  omitted.  See  also  II,  ii,  1 14. 


142 


KING  LEAR 


[ACT  II,  SC.  iv, 


Do  make  their  children  blind.  47 

But  fathers  that  bear  bags 
Shall  see  their  children  kind. 

Fortune,  that  arrant  whore,  50 

Ne’er  turns  the  key  to  th’  poor. — 

Eut,  for  all  this,  thou  shalt  have  as  many  dolours  for  thy 
daughters  as  thou  canst  tell  in  a  year. 

Lear .  O,  how  this  mother  swells  up  toward  my  heart ! 
Hysterica  passio,  down,  thou  climbing  sorrow,  55 

Thy  element’s  below ! — Where  is  this  daughter  ? 

Kent  With  the  earl,  sir,  here  within. 


52,  £3.  this, ...daughters']  this,  it  fol¬ 
lows . daughters  dear  Coll,  ii  (MS), 

reading  52,  53  as  four  lines  of  rhyme. 

52.  dolours]  Dolors  FxFaF3. 

52.  for  thy]  for  thy  deare  Fa.  for 
thy  dear  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  from  thy 
dear  Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Cap.  Jen.  Ec. 
from  thy  Sing.  Ktly. 


54.  up  toward]  up  to  Jen. 

55.  Hysterica]  Hiftorica  Qq,  F,Fa. 
Hyftorica  F3. 

57,  58.  With. ..not;]  One  line,  Steev. 
’93,  Bos.  Knt,  Coll.  Del.  Sing.  Dyce, 
Wh.  Ktly,  Glo. 

57.  here]  Om.  Qq. 


52.  dolours]  Steevens:  The  same  quibble  on  ‘dolours’  and  dollars  occurs  in 
Temp.  II,  i,  18,  and  Meas.  for  Meas.  I,  ii,  50. 

52.  for]  For  other  instances  of  ‘  for  ’  equivalent  to  *  on  account  of,’  see  Macb. 
Ill,  i,  120,  or  Abbott,  §  150. 

53.  tell]  Wright  :  Count  or  recount,  according  to  the  sense  in  which  *  dolours’ 
is  understood. 

54.  mother]  Percy:  Lear  here  affects  to  pass  off  the  swelling  of  his  heart,  ready 
to  burst  with  grief  and  indignation,  for  the  disease  called  the  Mother,  or  Hysterica 
Passio,  which,  in  our  author’s  time,  was  not  thought  peculiar  to  women  only.  In 
Harsnet’s  Declaration  of  Popish  Impostures,  Richard  Mainy,  Gent,  one  of  the  pre* 
tended  demoniacs,  deposes,  p.  263,  that  the  first  night  that  he  came  to  Denham,  the 
seat  of  Mr.  Peckham,  where  these  impostures  were  managed,  he  was  somewhat  evill 
at  ease,  and  he  grew  wdrse  and  worse  with  an  old  disease  that  he  had,  and  which 
the  priests-  persuaded  him  was  from  the  possession  of  the  Devil,  viz.  ‘  The  disease 
I  spake  of  was  a  spice  of  the  Mother,  wherewith  I  had  bene  troubled  .  .  .  before  my 
going  into  Fraunce:  whether  I  doe  rightly  term  it  the  Mother  or  no,  I  know  not.  .  .  . 
When  I  was  sicke  of  this  disease  in  Fraunce,  a  Scottish  doctor  of  physick  then  in 
Paris,  called  it,  as  I  remember,  Vertiginem  Capitis.  It  riseth  ...  of  a  winde  in  the 
bottome  of  the  belly,  and  proceeding  with  a  great  swelling,  causeth  a  very  painful 
collicke  in  the  stomack,  and  an  extraordinary  giddines  in  the  head.’  It  is  at  least 
very  probable,  that  Sh.  would  not  have  thought  of  making  Lear  affect  to  have  the 
Hysterick  Passion,  or  Mother,  if  this  passage  in  Harsnet’s  pamphlet  had  not  suggested 
it  to  him,  when  he  was  selecting  the  other  particulars  from  it,  in  order  to  furnish  out  his 
character  of  Tom  of  Bedlam,  to  whom  this  demoniacal  gibberish  is  admirably  adapted. 
Ritson  :  In  p.  25  of  the  above  pamphlet  it  is  said,  *  Ma :  Maynie  had  a  spice  of  the 
Hysterica  passio,  as  seems,  from  his  youth,  he  himselfe  termes  it  the  Moother .’ 


ACT  II,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


143 


Lear.  Follow  me  not;  stay  here.  \Exit.  58 

Gent.  Made  you  no  more  offence  but  what  you  speak  of? 
Kent.  None.-  60 

How  chance  the  king  comes  with  so  small  a  number  ? 

Fool.  And  thou  hadst  been  set  i’  th’  stocks  for  that 
question,  thou’dst  well  deserved  it. 

Kent.  Why,  Fool  ? 

Fool.  We’ll  set  thee  to  school  to  an  ant,  to  teach  thee  65 
there’s  no  labouring  i’  th’  winter.  Ail  that  follow  their 


58.  here.]  there?  Qr.,‘  there.  Q„. 
[Exit.]  Om.  Qq. 

59.  Made. ..of?]  Two  lines,  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

but]  then  Qq. 

60.  61.  N one... numb er  ?]  None :  How 
...number?  Ff +,  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce  i, 
Ktly,  Sch.  No,  how...traine  ?  Qq  et  cet. 

61.  chance  the]  ckanceth  the  Anon. 


62.  And]  Q,Ff,  Rowe,  Sch.  If  Q^ 
An  Pope  et  cet. 

62,  66,83.  i’  th']  F,F3F4+,  Jen.  Wh. 
Sch.  ith'  F3.  in  the  Qq.  i’  the  Cap. 
et  cet. 

63.  thou'dst]  Ff+,  Jen.  Sing.  Wu„ 
Ktly,  Sch.  thou  hadft  Qq  et  cet. 

deserved]  deserve  Pope. 


61.  chance]  The  conclusion  that  Abbott,  §37,  draws  from  many  instances  is 
that,  perhaps,  Sh.  used  ‘  chance  ’  as  an  adverb,  but  unconsciously  retained  the  order 
of  words,  which  shows  that,  strictly  speaking,  it  is  to  be  considered  as  a  verb. 

65.  We’ll  set,  &c.]  Malone :  ‘Go  to  the  ant,  thou  sluggard,’  says  Solomon, 
'  consider  her  ways,  and  be  wise ;  which  having  no  guide,  overseer,  or  ruler,  pro- 
videth  her  meat  in  the  summer,  and  gathereth  her  food  in  the  harvest.’  [ Proverbs ,  vi, 
6-8.]  If,  says  the  Fool,  you  had  been  schooled  by  the  ant,  you  would  have  known 
that  the  king’s  train,  like  that  sagacious  animal,  prefer  the  summer  of  prosperity  to 
the  colder  season  of  adversity,  from  which  no  profit  can  be  derived.  Schmidt: 
Elsewhere  Sh.  uses  *  to  set  to  school  ’  in  the  sense  of  to  teach. 

66.  All  that  follow,  &c.]  Johnson  :  There  is  in  this  sentence  no  clear  series 
of  thought.  If  he  that  follows  his.  nose  is  led  or  guided  by  his  eyes,  he  wants  no 
information  from  his  nose.  I  persuade  myself,  but  know  not  whether  I  can  persuade 
others,  that  Sh.  wrote :  ‘All  men  are  led  by  their  eyes  but  blind  men,  and  they  follow 
their  noses,  and  there’s  not  a  nose  among  twenty  but  can  smell  him  that’s  stinking.’ 
Here  is  a  succession  of  reasoning.  You  ask  why  the  king  has  no  more  train?  Why, 
because  men  who  are  led  by  their  eyes  see  that  he  is  ruined,  and  if  there  were  any 
blind  among  them,  who,  for  want  of  eyes,  followed  their  noses,  they  might  by  their 
noses  discover  that  it  was  no  longer  fit  to  follow  the  king.  STEEVENS  :  ‘  Twenty  ’ 
refers  to  the  ‘  noses  ’  of  the  *  blind  men,’  and  not  to  the  men  in  general.  The  passage, 
thus  considered,  bears  clearly  the  very  sense  which  the  above  note  endeavors  to 
establish  by  alteration.  For  ‘stinking,’  Mason  maintained  that  we  should  read 
sinking ,  because  *  it  would  be  nothing  extraordinary  that  a  nose  should  smell  out  a 
person  that  was  “  stinking.”  What  the  Fool  wants  to  describe  is  the  sagacity  of 
mankind  in  finding  out  the  man  whose  fortunes  are  declining.’  Malone,  however, 
vindicated  the  present  text  by  showing  that  the  same  simile  is  applied  to  fallen  for¬ 
tunes  in  All's  Well ,  V,  ii,  5 :  Mankind,  says  the  Fool,  may  be  divided  into  those 


144 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ir,  sc.  iv. 


noses  are  led  by  their  eyes  but  blind  men;  and  there’s  not  67 
a  nose  among  twenty  but  can  smell  him  that’s  stinking.  Let 
go  thy  hold  when  a  great  wheel  runs  down  a  hill,  lest  it 
break  thy  neck  with  following  it.  But  the  great  one  that  70 
goes  upward,  let  him  draw  thee  after.  When  a  wise  man 
gives  thee  better  counsel,  give  me  mine  again ;  I  would  have 
none  but  knaves  follow  it,  since  a  Fool  gives  it 

That  sir  which  serves  and  seeks  for  gain. 

And  follows  but  for  form,  75 

Will  pack  when  it  begins  to  rain, 

And  leave  thee  in  the  storm. 

But  I  will  tarry ;  the  Fool  will  stay. 

And  let  the  wise  man  fly ; 

The  knave  turns  fool  that  runs  away ;  So 

The  Fool  no  knave,  perdy. 


68.  twenty]  a  100  Qx.  a  hundred  Qa. 

70.  follenving it.]  following.  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han.  Knt,  Sch. 

71.  upward]  Ff+,  Cap.  Knt,  Wh. 
Sch.  vp  the  hill  Qq  et  cet. 

him]  it  Han. 

72.  thee]  Om.  Jen. 
have]  haufe  F,. 

74.  That  sir]  That ,  Sir,  F4,  Rowe, 
Johns.  Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Sing. 
Wh.  That  Sir,  FtFaF3,  Theob.  Cap. 
Coll.  Del.  Ktly. 

which]  that  Qq. 


74.  and  seeks]  Om.  Qq,  Pope+,  Cap. 
74-Si.  That.. ..perdy.]  Italics  in  Qa, 
Roman  in  Q,Ff. 

76.  begins]  begin  Qt 

begins  to  rain]  ’ gins  rain  Cap. 

77.  the  storm]  a  Jlorm  F4,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han. 

78.  But]  And  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han. 

79*  wise  man]  wifeman  F,FaF3,  Sch. 
81.  [Enter  Lear,  and  Gloster.  Ff. 
(Glower.  Fa.) 


who  can  see  and  those  who  are  blind.  All  men,  but  blind  men,  though  they  follow 
their  noses,  are  led  by  their  eyes ;  and  this  class  of  mankind,  seeing  the  king  ruined, 
have  all  deserted  him.  With  respect  to  the  other  class,  the  blind,  who  have  nothing 
but  their  noses  to  guide  them,  they  also  fly  equally  from  a  king  whose  fortunes  are 
declining;  for,  of  the  noses  of  twenty  blind  men,  there  is  not  one  but  can  smell  him 
who,  ‘  being  muddied  in  fortune’s  mood,  smells  somewhat  strong  of  her  strong  dis¬ 
pleasure.’  Halliwell  :  The  word  *  twenty  ’  does  not,  I  think,  refer  solely  to  the 
noses  of  the  blind  men.  The  Fool  says  Kent  deserves  to  be  put  in  the  stocks  for  his 
silly  question,  for  not  looking  which  way  the  wind  blows,  for  being  too  simple.  He 
says  that  all  men  who  follow  their  noses  are  led  by  their  eyes,  blind  men  excepted. 
Kent,  according  to  his  notion,  has  not  used  his  eyes,  and  therefore  he  deserved  the 
stocks.  Not  a  nose  of  any  kind  but  smells  him  that’s  stinking ;  and  he  infers  that 
Kent  had  neither  used  his  eyes  to  see,  nor  his  nose  to  smell ;  in  short,  had  not  made 
use  of  his  senses. 

74.  sir]  For  many  other  instances  of  the  use  of  ‘sir’  as  a  substantive,  see 
Schmidt  (Lex.). 

80, 81.  The  .  .  .  perdy]  Johnson  :  The  sense  will  be  mended  if  we  read :  *  The 


ACT  II,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


US 

82 


Kent.  Where  learned  you  this,  Fool  ? 
Fool.  Not  i’  th’  stocks,  fool ! 


Re-enter  Lear,  with  Gloucester. 


Lear.  Deny  to  speak  with 
are  weary  ? 

83.  fool ]  Om.  Qq. 

Re-enter...]  Cap.  Enter  Lear  and 
Glofter.  Qq. 

Scene  ix.  Pope,  Han.  Scene  x. 
Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 

84.  Deny. .; weary  ?]  Two  lines,  Ff. 


me?  They  are  sick?  they 


84.  They  are....ikey  are~\  th ’  are... 
tR  are  Qq.  they' re. ..they' re  Pope  +  , 
Jen.  Dyce  ii,  Huds 

sick  f... weary  /'J  Johns,  fcke,... 
weary,  QqFf+,  Cap. 


fool  turns  knave,  that  runs  away  The  knave  no  fool - .’  That  I  stay  with  th© 

king  is  a  proof  that  I  am  a  fool,  the  wise  men  are  deserting  him.  There  is  knavery 
in  this  desertion,  but  there  is  no  folly.  Collier  (ed.  ii)  adopted  this  change  by 
Johnson  (which  is  also  found  in  his  Folio  MS),  and  upholds  it  thus:  ‘In  the  old 
editions  the  very  contrary  of  what  Sh.  intended  is  expressed.  The  reasoning  in  the 
earlier  part  of  the  rhyme  is  that,  when  it  begins  to  rain,  wise  men  fly  to  shelter,  but 
fools  stay;  and  it  ought  to  be  followed  up  by  the  statement  that,  if  the  fool  runs 
away,  he  turns  knave,  and  that  the  knave,  being  no  fool,  will  not  be  so  silly  as  to 
remain  in  the  wet.’  But  Collier,  in  his  Third  edition,  returns  to  the  old  read¬ 
ing.  Both  Heath  and  Capell  adopted  Johnson’s  change  in  the  first  of  these 
two  lines;  and  in  the  second,  Heath  suggested  ‘The  fool's  no  knave,  perdy.’ 
White:  No  transposition  is  necessary,  if,  as  I  believe,  ‘knave’  in  line  80  is  used  ia 
the  sense  of  servant,  in  line  Si  of  rogue,  while  ‘  fool,’  in  line  80,  has  the  reproachful 
sense  it  has  in  the  Bible,  and  in  line  81  is  but  the  official  title.  Hudson  :  The  Fool 
seems  here  to  be  using  the  trick  of  suggesting  a  thing  by  saying  the  opposite. 
Clarke  :  Sh.,  in  his  own  noble  philosophy,  here  affirms  that  the  cunning  rogue  who. 
deserts  his  benefactor  in  the  time  of  reverse,  from  motives  of  prudence,  shows  him¬ 
self  fool  as  well  as  knave,  moral  miscalculator  as  well  as  moral  coward.  Moberly:. 
The  touching  faith  of  the  Fool  to  his  master  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  points  of  the- 
play.  The  history  of  court-fools  does  not  offer  anything  quite  like  it.  It,  however,, 
took  six  strong  men  to  drag  away  Patch,  Cardinal  Wolsey’s  Fool,  from  his  disgraced' 
master,  who  wished  to  send  him  as  a  propitiatory  offering  to  Henry  VIII.  Wright  i 
The  text  requires  no  alteration.  The  Fool  points  out  who  the  real  fools  in  the  world 
are.  Coleridge  said  a  knave  is  a  fool  with  a  circumbendibus.  [I  think  the  meaning 
is  made  clearer  by  showing  the  difference,  by  means  of  capital  letters,  as  White 
does,  between  the  generic  fool  and  the  specific  Fool. — Ed.] 

81.  perdy]  The  corruption  of  par  Dien.  See  Ham.  Ill,  ii,  282. 

83.  Not  i’  th’  stocks,  fool]  Schmidt  thinks  that  this  ‘  fool  ’  is  not  a  mere  retort, 
but  is  really  meant,  according  to  the  song,  as  a  title  of  respect,  which  Kent  has 
earned  by  his  fidelity  to  the  king. 

84.  Deny]  Schmidt  (Lex.) :  To  refuse.  Compare  Rom.  &  Jul.  I,  v,  16 :  ‘which 
of  you  all  Will  now  deny  to  dance  ?’ 

13 


K 


146 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ii,  sc,  iv. 


They  have  travell’d  all  the  night  ?  Mere  fetches,  85 

The  images  of  revolt  and  flying  off. 

Fetch  me  a  better  answer 

Glou.  My  dear  lord. 

You  know  the  fiery  quality  of  the  duke; 

IIow  unremoveable  and  fix’d  he  is 

In  his  own  course.  90 

Lear.  Vengeance!  plague!  death!  confusion! 

*  Fiery  ?  ’  what  *  quality  ?  ’  Why,  Gloucester,  Gloucester, 

I’ld  speak  with  the  Duke  of  Cornwall  and  his  wife. 

Glou.  Well,  my  good  lord,  I  have  inform’d  them  so. 

Lear.  *  Inform’d’  them  ?  Dost  thou  understand  me,  man  ?  95 
Glou.  Ay,  my  good  lord. 

Lear.  The  king  would  speak  with  Cornwall.  The  dear 
father 

Would  with  his  daughter  speak,  commands  her  service. 


85.  have  iravell'd]  hane  trauail'd 
F,Fa.  have  travel' d  F3.  traneled  Qx. 
traueld  Qa. 

all  the]  hard  to  Qq,  Steev.  Ec. 
Var.  Coll.  Sing. 

85,  86.  fetches ,  The]  Ff+,  Jen.  Coll. 
Wh.  Sch.  Iuflice ,  I  the  Qq.  fetches ; 
ay,  The  Cap.  conj.  (Notes,  i,  Var. 
Read.  p.  29.)  fetches  all — The  Steev. 
conj.  fetches  these :  7'he  Ktly.  fetches; 
The  Cap.  et  cet. 

87.  Fetch ]  Fet  F„F4.  Bring  Pope  +  . 
87-93.  My  dear. ..wife.']  Prose,  Qq. 

9 1 .  plague !  death!]  Plague ,  Death , 


Ff.  death,  plague,  Qq. 

92.  ‘  Fiery  ?  ’  what  ‘  quality  ?  ’}  what 
fery  quality;  Qq.  Jen.  Ec.  Fiery  9 
what  fiery  quality  ?  Pope  + . 

Gloucester ,  Gloucester]—  Glofier, 
Glofier  QqFf.  Glo' ster  Pope  +  . 

94,  95-  Om-  Qq- 

97.  the  dear  father]  Separate  line,  Ff 

98.  commands  her  service]  Qq.  com 
mands,  tends,  fervice  Ff,  Knt.  com¬ 
mands  tends  service  Rowe  i.  commands, 
tends  service  Rowe  ii.  commands,  'tends 
service  Sch. 


85.  fetches]  Wright:  Devices,  cunning  contrivances,  pretexts.  S tz  Ham.  II, 
i,  38.  Compare  2  Samuel,  xiv,  20,  where  the  verb  ‘  fetch  about  ’  occurs  in  the  sense 
of  bringing  about  by  artifice :  *  To  fetch  about  this  form  of  speech  hath  thy  servant 
Joab  done  this  thing.’ 

86.  images]  Walker  ( Vers.  255),  on  the  score  of  metre,  suggests  that  this  is 
the  singular,  and  would  print  it  image'.  For  similar  instances,  see  ‘horses,’  Macb. 
II,  iv,  14;  ‘sense  is,’  lb.  V,  i,  22;  ‘message,’  Ham.  I,  ii,  22;  Abbott,  §471. 

88.  quality]  Wright:  Nature,  character.  See  below,  line  133.  MoberlY; 
For  a  man  so  passionate  as  Lear  to  be  asked  to  humour  the  vehement  temper  of  one 
whom  he  still  considers  his  inferior,  is  the  most  stinging  request  that  can  possibly 
be  made. 

98.  Schmidt  thus  justifies  his  reading,  which  is  virtually  that  of  .the  Ff :  The 
majority  of  the  Qq  read  •  commands  her  service,’  and  this  convenient  reading  has 
been  adopted,  without  more  ado,  by  the  modem  editors.  But  they  failed  to  note 


ACT  II,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


147 


Are  they  ‘  inform’d  ’  of  this  ?  My  breath  and  blood ! 

‘  Fiery  ?  ’  ‘  the  fiery  duke  ?  ’  Tell  the  hot  duke  that —  IOO 

No,  but  not  yet ;  may  be  he  is  not  well ; 

Infirmity  doth  still  negle6t  all  office 

Whereto  our  health  is  bound ;  we  are  not  ourselves 

When  nature  being  oppress’d  commands  the  mind 

To  suffer  with  the  body.  I’ll  forbear;  105 

And  am  fall’n  out  with  my  more  headier  will. 

To  take  the  indisposed  and  sickly  fit 


99.  Om.  Qq. 

100.  1  Fiery  ?' ...that — ]  Fierie  duke, 
tell  l he  hot  duke  that  Lear,  Qq. 

that — ]  that — [Glocester  offers 
to  go.  Johns. 

102-105.  Infirmity. .. forbear  ;]  Three 
lines,  the  first  two  ending  health. ..op- 
pref  Qq. 

103.  Whereto]  where  to  Qq. 

we  are ]  we're  Pope  +,  Jen. 


Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

104.  commands ]  Comand  Qz. 

106.  fall  n]  fallen  Qq,  FZF2.  Cap. 
(changed  to  falln  in  Errata),  Jen.  Steev. 
Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Del.  Sing.  Wh.  Ktly, 
Sch. 

headier ]  hedier  Qt.  heady  Pope, 

Han. 

107-110.  To. ..her]  Three  lines,  the 
first  two  ending  man, .. .here  ?  Qq. 


that  one  Quarto,  and  probably  the  oldest  [see  Q2  (Bodl.  1)  in  Appendix,  p.  374], 
reads  come  and  tends  service,  of  course,  nonsense,  but  yet  containing  nearly  the  same 
letters  as  the  Folio ;  also  that  Lear  demands  service  not  only  from  Regan,  but  also 
from  Cornwall,  and  that  the  circumstances,  at  least,  would  require :  commands  them 
service,  which  would  come  nearer  to  the  ductus  literarum  of  the  true  reading.  As 
concerns  this  latter,  it  must  be  granted  that  tend,  which  is  elsewhere  so  often 
identical  with  attend,  is  used  by  Sh.  nowhere  in  the  sense  of  await,  in  which  sense 
he  frequently  uses  attend  (see  II,  i,  125).  But  this  is  of  no  material  weight.  Just 
as  the  prefix  a  is  found  before  numberless  verbs  without  changing  their  essential 
meaning  {abate,  abide,  accursed,  advantage,  adventure,  affright,  affront,  apper¬ 
tain,  & c.),  so,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  older  language  the  prefix  a  (whatever  may 
be  its  origin)  is  often  omitted  at  will.  In  II,  i,  30,  we  have  had  *  quit  thyself’  as  a 
hapax  legomenon  for  acquit  thyself.  So  also  in  IV,  i,  49,  ‘  parel  ’  for  apparel.  Other 
hapax  legomena  are  *  lege  ’  for  allege ,  *  noyance  ’  for  annoyance,  ‘  paritor  ’  for 
apparitor,  ‘rest’  (only  in  Com.  of  Err.)  for  arrest,  ‘say’  for  assay,  ‘stonish’  for 
astonish ,  ‘void’  {Cor.  IV,  v,  88)  for  avoid.  The  occurrence  of  the  shortened  form 
is  not  therefore  conclusive  against  the  use  of  tend  in  a  sense  with  which  attend  does 
not  seem  hitherto  to  have  had  anything  in  common,  especially  since  the  meanings 
of  the  two  words  in  other  passages  coincide  in  the  majority  of  cases,  and  also  since 
tendance  is  equivalent  in  Sh.  to  attendance. 

101.  well]  Coleridge:  The  strong  interest  now  felt  by  Lear,  to  try  to  find  ex¬ 
cuses  for  his  daughter,  is  most  pathetic. 

102.  still]  Constantly.  See  Rom.  cr»  Jul.  V,  iii,  106;  Macb.  V,  viii,  14;  Ham. 
I,  i,  122;  IV,  vii,  1 17;  Abeott,  §69;  and  Sh  .passim. 

106.  more  headier]  See  II,  ii,  97.  Schmidt:  Heady  is  not  headstrong,  but 
headlong,  impetuous.  *  Will  ’  occurs  frequently  in  Sh.,  as  the  blind  impulse  in  oppo¬ 
sition  to  wit  or  reason. 


1 48 


KING  LEAR 


[ACT  II,  SC.  iv 


For  the  sound  man. — Death  on  my  state !  wherefore  108 

Should  he  sit  here  ?  This  a£l  persuades  me 
That  this  remotion  of  the  duke  and  her  1 10 

Is  practice  only.  Give  me  my  servant  forth. 

Go  tell  the  duke  and ’s  wife  I  ’Id  speak  with  them, 

Now,  presently;  bid  them  come  forth  and  hear  me, 

Or  at  their  chamber-door  I  ’ll  beat  the  drum 
Till  it  cry  sleep  to  death.  1 1 5 

Glou.  I  would  have  all  well  betwixt  you,  [Exit^ 

Lear.  O  me,  my  heart,  my  rising  heart !  But  down  ! 

Pool.  Cry  to  it,  nuncle,  as  the  cockney  did  to  the  eels 


108.  [Looking  on  Kent.  Johns. 

on  my]  Changed  to  o'  my  by 
Cap.  in  Errata. 

•wherefore ]  but  wherefore  Pope  + . 

108,  109.  wherefore. ...me]  One  line, 
Jen. 

109.  art]  very  all  Ktly. 

pe rsuades]  persuadeth  Han.  al¬ 
most  persuades  Steev.  conj. 

III.  practice  only.  Give]  pradlife 
only.  Giue  Ft.  pradlife,  onely giue  Qq. 
pradlife  onely ,  Give  Fa.  pradlice  onely , 
Give  F3.  pradlice  only ,  give  F4. 


1 12.  Go  tell]  Tell  Qq. 

and  \r]  and  his  Cap.  Steev.  Ec. 
Var.  Knt,  Del.  Ktly. 

I'ld]  Fa.  1 I'd  F,FaF3.  lie  Qq. 

1 15.  sleep  to  death]  In  Italics,  Johns. 
Cap.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Coll,  (with  quo¬ 
tation-marks),  Del.  death  to  sleep  Mason. 

1 16.  I  would]  I'd  Cap.  Steev.  Bos. 
Ktly. 

[Exit.]  Om.  Qq. 

1 17.  0....down !]  O  my  heart ,  my 
heart.  Qf.  O  my  heart !  my  heart  Qa. 

1 1 8.  cockney]  Cokney  Qf. 


108.  wherefore]  Walker  (  Vers.  1 1 1 )  cites  this  passage  among  many  others  of  the 
stronger  accent  falling  on  the  last  syllable.  Abbott,  §  490,  would  make  ‘  Death  on 
my  state !’  a  separate  line,  and  begin  the  next  line  with  ‘  Wherefore,’  thus  retaining 
its  usual  accent. 

109.  persuades]  Schmidt  :  Perhaps  persuadeth,  unless  it  is  to  be  assumed  that 
the  s  of  the  third  person  prolongs  the  word  by  a  syllable. 

1 10.  remotion]  Malone:  From  their  own  house  to  Gloucester’s  castle.  Schmidt 
in  his  Lex.  adopted  this  interpretation  by  Malone,  but  in  his  edition  he  revokes  it,  and. 
says  that  the  word  here  means  holding  one’s  self  at  a  distance,  non-appearance ;  and  that 
it  bears  the  same  meaning  in  the  only  other  passage  where  Sh.  uses  it :  Tim.  IV,  iii,  346, 

111.  practice]  See  I,  ii,  172. 

115.  Till.. .death]  Steevens  :  That  is,  till  it  cries  out,  ‘Let  them  awake  no 
more;’  *  Let  their  present  sleep  be  their  last.’  Knight:  Tieck  suggested  the  true 
explanation:  till  the  noise  of  the  drum  has  been  the  death  of  sleep, — has  destroyed 
sleep, — has  forced  them  to  awaken.  Staunton  adopts  Tieck’s  explanation,  but  ad¬ 
mits  that  Steevens’s  is  ‘very  possibly  the  poet’s  idea.’  As  Wright  says,  it  is  diffi¬ 
cult  to  see  how  such  an  interpretation  as  that  of  Steevens  could  be  appropriate. 

1 18.  cockney]  Tyrwhitt  (in  a  note  on  Chaucer’s  Reve's  Tale,  4205:  ‘And 
whan  this  jape  is  tald  another  day,  I  shal  be  halden  a  daffe  or  a  cokenay  ’)  :  That 
this  is  a  term  of  contempt,  borrowed  from  the  kitchen,  is  very  probable :  A  Cook, 
in  the  base  Latinity,  was  called  Coquinator  and  Coquinarius,  from  either  of  which 
Cokenay  might  be  easily  derived.  In  Piers  the  Plowman,  ‘  And  yut  ich  sey,  by  my 


rN. 


( 


149 


ACT  II,  SC.  iv.]  KING  LEAR 

when  she  put  ’em  i’  th’  paste  alive;  she  knapped  ’em  o’  th’  119 


1 19.  hee  Fa.  he  F3F4,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han. 

put  'em  t  th'J  FxF9F3,  Sch.  put 
them  f  th,'  F4,  Rowe  +,  Jen.  Wh.  put 
vm  it  'h  Qt.  put  them  vp  V  th  Qa.  put 
them  V  the  Steev.  put  'em  t  the  Dyce. 
paste]  pdst  Q,.  pasty  Pope  + . 


1 19.  she ]  he  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

knapped  ’em]  knapt  'em  Ff.  rapt 
vm  Qq.  rapt  'em  Pope  +,  Jen.  Steev. 
Ec.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  Ktly.  wrapt 
'em  Han. 

o'  th']  Ff  + ,  Cap.  Jen.  Wh.  Sch. 
ath  Qq.  o'  the  Steev.  et  cet. 


saule  ich  haue  no  salt-bacon ;  Nouht  a  cokeney,  by  cryst,  colhoppes  to  make  ’  [Pass. 
IX,  309,  C.  Text,  ed.  Skeat],  It  seems  to  signify  a  Cook.  And  so,  perhaps,  in 
The  Turnament  of  Tottenham  [Percy’s  Reliques,  ii,  p.  24,  ed.  1765].  ‘At  that 
feast  were  they  served  in  rich  aray;  Every  five  and  five  had  a  cokeney.’  That  is,  I 
suppose,  a  cook  or  scullion ,  to  attend  them.  In  those  rhymes  ascribed  to  Hugh 
Bigot,  which  Camden  has  published :  ‘  Were  I  in  my  castle  of  Bungey  upon  the 
river  of  Waveney,  I  would  ne  care  for  the  King  of  Cockeney.’  The  author,  in 
calling  London  Cockeney,  might  possibly  allude  to  that  imaginary  country  of  idle¬ 
ness  and  luxury  which  was  anciently  known  by  the  name  of  Cokaigne.  Nares  also 
believes  that  it  is  derived  from  cookery,  and  that  here  in  Lear  it  means  a  cook,  be¬ 
cause  she  is  *  making  a  pie.’  In  the  passages  cited  by  Tyrwhitt,  Whalley  and 
Malone  think  that  it  refers  to  some  dish,  while  Douce  maintains  that  it  signifies  a 
little  cock.  Halliwell,  in  his  Archaic  Diet.,  says  that  he  can  find  no  certain  au¬ 
thority  for  any  such  interpretation  as  Tyrwhitt  gives  it,  but  in  his  Folio  edition  ol 
Sh.  he  says  that  the  word  ‘  cockney  is  used  in  various  senses,  amongst  others  in  that 
of  a  cook,  which  may  be  its  meaning  here,  although  I  rather  incline  to  the  belief  that 
the  reference  is  to  some  absurd  tale  of  a  London  cockney  well  known  in  Shake¬ 
speare’s  time.’  In  which  belief  Dyce  agrees  with  him.  Way  (note  on  Coknay  in 
Prompt.  Parv.) :  The  term  coknay  appears  in  the  Promptorium  to  imply  simply  a 
child  spoiled  by  too  much  indulgence;  thus  likewise  in  the  Medulla:  ‘ Mammo- 
trophies,  qui  diu  sugit.  Mammotrophus  mammam  longo  qui  tempore  servat  Kokenay 
dicalur,  noster  sic  sermo  notatur.'  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  word  is  to  be 
traced  to  the  imaginary  region  ‘  ihote  Cokaygne,’  described  in  the  curious  poem 
given  by  Hickes,  Gramm.  A  Sax.,  p.  231,  and  apparently  translated  from  the  French. 
Compare  ‘  le  Fabliaus  de  Coquaigne.'  Fabl.  Barbazan  et  M6on.  iv,  1 75.  Palsgrave 
gives  the  verb  ‘To  bring  uplyke  a  cocknaye,  mignotter and  Elyot  renders  * delicias 
facere,  to  play  the  cockney.’  ‘  Dodeliner,  to  bring  vp  wantonly  as  a  cockney.’ — Hol- 
lyband’s  Treasune.  See  also  Baret’s  Alvearie.  Chaucer  uses  the  word  as  a  term 
of  contempt,  and  it  occasionally  signifies  a  little  cook,  coquinator.  See  Brand’s  Pop. 
Ant.,  notes  on  Shrove  Tuesday.  Cotgrave  gives  Coquine:  A  beggar-woman;  also 
a  cockney,  simperdecockit,  nice  thing.  Wedgwood:  The  original  meaning  of 
*  cockney  ’  is  a  child  too  tenderly  or  delicately  nurtured,  one  kept  in  the  house  and 
not  hardened  by  out-of-doors  life ;  hence  applied  to  citizens,  as  opposed  to  the  hard¬ 
ier  inhabitants  of  the  country,  and  in  modern  times  confined  to  the  citizens  of 
London.  [Does  not  this  definition  lack  an  allusion  to  the  meaning  in  which  Sh. 
here  uses  it,  which  is  undoubtedly  that  of  a  cook  ?  Minsheu’s  derivation  from  the 
neigh  of  a  cock,  is  too  familiar  to  be  more  than  referred  to. — Ed.]  Badham  ( Cam. 
Essays,  1856,  p.  284) :  ‘Cockney’  is  perfectly  out  of  place  here  in  Lear ,  and  must 
have  supplanted  either  cook-maid  or  a  similar  word. 

S 19.  knapped]  Steevens  maintained  that  rapp'd  of  the  Qq  was  the  true  reading, 
13* 


*50 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ii,  sc.  iv. 


coxcombs  with  a  stick,  and  cried  ‘  Down,  wantons,  down !  120 
'Twas  her  brother  that,  in  pure  kindness  to  his  horse,  but¬ 
tered  his  hay. 

Re-enter  Gloucester,  with  Cornwall,  Regan,  and  Servants. 

Lear.  Good  morrow  to  you  both. 

Corn.  Hail  to  your  grace ! 

\_Kent  is  set  at  liberty. 

Reg.  I  am  glad  to  see  your  highness. 

Lear.  Regan,  I  think  you  are  ;  I  know  what  reason  125 
I  have  to  think  so ;  if  thou  shouldst  not  be  glad, 

I  would  divorce  me  from  thy  mother’s  tomb, 

Sepulchring  an  adultress. — Oh,  are  you  free  ? 

Some  other  time  for  that. — Beloved  Regan, 

Thy  sister’s  naught.  O  Regan,  she  hath  tied  130 

Sharp-tooth’d  unkindness,  like  a  vulture,  here ! 


1 20.  cried  *  Down]  cryed  dewn  Q3. 

12 1.  her]  his  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

122.  hay]  Hey  F2F,. 

Re-enter....]  Cap.  Enter  Duke 

and  Regan.  Qq.  Enter  Cornewall,  Re¬ 
gan,  Glofter,  Seruants.  Ff. 

123.  Scene  x.  Pope,  Han.  Scene 
XI.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 

[Kent  is  set....]  Rowe.  Kent 
here  fet  at  liberty.  Ff.  (libery  F2).  Om. 
Qq. 

125.  you]  your  Fx. 


1 26.  shouldst  not  be]  wert  not  Pope  + . 

127.  mother’s]  Mother  Fx. 

128.  [To  Kent.  Rowe. 

0]  yea  Qq. 

130.  sister's]  ftjlers  FtF2.  ffler  is 
Qq. 

131.  here!]  Sta.  heere.  Q3,  Coll.  Del. 
Wh.  Ktly.  heare,  Qt.  heere ,  or  here, 
Ff,  Cap.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Sing. 
Dyce.  here;  or  here;  Rowe  et  cct. 

[Points  to  his  heart.  Pope. 


because  the  only  sense  of  the  verb  to  ‘  knap  ’  is  to  snap,  or  break  asunder.  Wright 
(who  defines  ‘knapped’  by  cracked ,  and  cites  Mer.  of  Ven.  Ill,  i,  10;  and  the 
Prayer-Book  version  of  Psalm  xlvi,  9 :  *  He  knappeth  the  spear  in  sunder’)  replies 
to  Steevens  by  saying:  ‘We  use  crack  in  both  senses  [i.  e.  rap  and  snap],  and 
“knap”  and  crack  are  both  imitative  words,  representing  the  sound  which  is  made 
either  by  a  blow  or  by  breaking  anything  in  halves.’ 

128.  Sepulchring]  Steevens:  This  word  is  accented  in  the  same  manner  [on 
the  penult]  by  Milton,  Ode  on  Shakespeare,  15 :  ‘And  so  sepulcher’d  in  such  pomp 
dost  lie;’  and  by  Fairfax  [as  a  substantive]  :  ‘As  if  his  work  should  his  sepulcher 
be.’ — c.  i,  st.  25.  Schmidt  (Lex.)  gives  the  two  following  additional  instances  of 
this  verb  with  this  same  accent:  Lucr.  805;  Two  Gent.  IV,  ii,  1 18;  and  Rich.  II ; 
I,  iii,  196,  of  the  substantive  also  thus  accented. 

130.  tied]  Heath  quotes  with  approval  the  change  of  ‘  tied  ’  to  tir'd  suggested  by 
Sympson,  in  a  note  on  Beau,  and  FI.  Love's  Pilgrimage  [III,  ii]  :  an  eagle  or  hawk 
is  said  to  tire  on  its  prey  when  it  pulled  at  and  tore  it  to  pieces.  *  It  seems  most 
probable  that  “  sharp-tooth’d  unkindness  ”  is  the  vulture  which  Goncril  has  tired  on 


ACT  II,  SC.  IV.] 


KING  LEAR 


151 

I  can  scarce  speak  to  tnee ;  thou  ’It  not  believe  132 

With  how  depraved  a  quality — O  Regan ! 

Reg.  I  pray  you,  sir,  take  patience.  I  have  hope 
You  less  know  how  to  value  her  desert  135 

Than  she  to  scant  her  duty. 

Lear, ,  Say,  how  is  that? 


132.  thou' It]  thout  Qj.  thou't  Q2. 
133*  With  how  depraved ]  Of  how  de- 
priued  Qq.  Of  how  deprav'd  Johns. 
Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Sing.  Dyce  ii, 
Ktly,  Huds. 

quality — ]  Rowe,  qualitie,  Qq. 
quality.  Ff. 


134.  you]  Om.  Qq. 

136.  scant]  Jlacke  Qq.  scan  Han 
Jen. 

136-141.  Lear.  Say, ...blame.]  Om. 
Qq. 

136.  Say,  how  :V]  How  is  Pope,  Han 
Cap.  Ha  !  how's  Cap.  conj. 


the  heart  of  Lear.'  Roderick  ( Canons  of  Cr it.  p.  270,  ed.  vii)  also  adopted  tired, 
and  would  read:  ‘She  hath  tired  (sharp-tooth’d  unkindness!)  like  a  vulture — here.* 
135,  136.  You  .  .  .  duty]  This  passage,  as  Wright  truly  remarks,  ‘  is  one  of 
many  passages  in  Sh.  of  which  the  sense  is  clear,  but  which  it  is  almost  impossible 
to  paraphrase.’  Johnson,  on  the  ground  that  ‘scant’  is  directly  contrary  to  the 
sense  intended,  advocated  Hanmer’s  change  to  scan  in  the  sense  of  measure  or  pro¬ 
portion.  Steevens  says,  ‘  Surely  no  alteration  is  necessary,’  and  then  gives  what  he 
says  is  ‘the  intended  meaning  of  the  passage’:  “‘You  less  know  how  to  value  her 
desert,  than  she  (knows)  to  scant  her  duty,”  i.  e.  than  she  can  be  capable  of  being 
wanting  in  her  duty.’  Capell  :  Had  [line  135]  been  conceiv’d  in  these  words,  *  You 
more  know  how  to  lessen  her  desert,’  then  had  those  expressions  been  proper  that  suc¬ 
ceed  in  the  next  line ;  as  it  is,  ‘  scant  ’  cannot  have  been  the  word  in  that  place ;  and 
scan  .  .  .  bids  fair  to  be  the  Poet’s  intended  term  in  it’s  room,  spoil’d  by  printers. 
Malone:  The  inaccuracy  of  the  expression  will  clearly  appear  from  inverting  the 
sentence  without  changing  a  word :  ‘  I  have  hope,  says  Regan,  that  she  knows  more 
(or  better)  how  to  scant  her  duty  than  you.know  how  to  value  her  desert ;’  i.  e.  I  have 
hope  that  she  is  more  perfect  in  the  non-performance  of  her  duty  than  you  are  perfect, 
or  accurate,  in  the  estimation  of  her  merit.  If  Lear  is  less  knowing  in  the  valuation 
of  Goneril’s  desert  than  she  is  in  scanting  her  duty,  then  she  knows  better  how  to  scant 
or  be  deficient  in  her  duty,  than  he  knows  how  to  appreciate  her  desert.  If  Sh.  had 
written  ‘  I  have  hope  that  you  rather  know  how  to  make  her  desert  less  than  it  is,  (to 
underrate  it  in  your  estimation)  than  that  she  knows  how  to  scant  her  duty,’  all  would 
have  been  clear,  but  by  placing  ‘  less  ’  before  ‘  know  ’  this  meaning  is  destroyed.  In 
IVint.  Tale,  III,  ii,  55,  we  meet  with  a  similar  inaccuracy :  ‘  — I  ne’er  heard  yet  That 
any  of  these  bolder  vices  wanted  Less  impudence  to  gainsay  what  they  did  Than  to 
perform  it  first,’  where,  as  Johnson  justly  observed,  ‘  wanted  should  be  had  or  less  should 
be  more.'  Again  in  Macb.  Ill,  vi,  S.  Schmidt  (Lex.  p.  1420,  9)  gives  many  similar 
instances  of  what  he  calls  the  ‘  duplication  of  negative  words,’  as  here  *  less  know  ’ 
and  *  scant  ’ ;  e.  g.  Mer.  of  Ven.  IV,  i,  162 :  ‘  Let  his  lack  of  years  be  no  impediment 
to  let  him  lack  a  reverend  estimation,’  equivalent  to  either:  no  motive  to  let  him 
lack,  or,  no  impediment  to  let  him  have.  Again,  Tro.  and  Ores.  I,  i,  28  ;  Cor.  I,  iv, 
14,  See.  ‘  All  such  irregularities,’  adds  Schmidt,  *  may  be  easily  accounted  for.  The 
idea  of  negation  was  so  strong  in  the  poet's  mind,  that  he  expressed  it  in  more  than 


*52 


KING  LEAR 


[ACT  II,  SC.  iv. 


Reg.  I  cannot  think  my  sister  in  the  least  1 37 

Would  fail  her  obligation.  If,  sir,  perchance 
She  have  restrain’d  the  riots  of  your  followers, 

’Tis  on  such  ground  and  to  such  wholesome  end  140 

As  clears  her  from  all  blame. 

Lear.  My  curses  on  her ! 

Reg.  Oh,  sir,  you  are  old ; 

Nature  in  you  stands  on  the  very  verge 

Of  her  confine.  You  should  be  ruled  and  led 

By  some  discretion  that  discerns  your  state  145 

Better  than  you  yourself.  Therefore  I  pray  you 

That  to  our  sister  you  do  make  return ; 

Say  you  have  wrong’d  her,  sir. 

Lear.  Ask  her  forgiveness  ? 

Do  you  but  mark  how  this  becomes  the  house: 


138.  sir,]  Om.  Pope+ 

I43-147.  Nature, . return;]  Four 

lines,  the  first  three  ending  confine,... 
difcreiion,...your  felfe,  Qq. 

X43.  in  you]  on  you  Qq. 

144.  her]  his  F,. 

146.  you]  Om.  Qq. 

148.  her,  sir.]  her  Sir  ?  Qj.  her  fir. 


Q2.  her.  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Ivtly,  Sea, 
14S.  Ask  her]  Ask  of  her  Ktly. 

149.  but]  Om.  Qq. 

becomes  the  house  .•]  becometh  v* : 
Hun.  becometh — thus.  Johns,  conj. 

the  house:]  the  houfe,  Q,.  the 
koufe  ?  QaFf.  the  Use  ?  Theob.  me  now: 
Jen. 


one  place,  unmindful  of  his  canon  that  ‘  your  four  negatives  make  your  two  affirma¬ 
tives.’  Had  he  taken  the  pains  to  revise  and  prepare  his  plays  for  the  press,  he 
would  perhaps  have  corrected  all  these  passages.  But  he  did  not  write  them  to  be 
read  and  dwelt  on  by  the  eye,  but  to  be  heard  by  a  sympathetic  audience.  [Is  the 
levity  ill-timed  that  suggests  that  perhaps  Regpm’s  speech  puzzles  poor  old  Lear  him¬ 
self,  quite  as  much  as  his  commentators,  and  he  has  to  ask  her  to  explain :  ‘  Say, 
how  is  that?’ — Ed.] 

136.  Say  .  .  ,  that?]  Coleridge:  Nothing  is  so  heart-cutting  as  a  cold,  unex¬ 
pected  defence  or  palliation  of  a  cruelty  passionately  complained  of,  or  so  expressive 
of  thorough  hard-heartedness.  And  feel  the  excessive  horror  of  Regan’s  *  Oh,  Sir, 
you  are  old!’ — and  then  her  drawing  from  that  universal  object  of  reverence  and  in¬ 
dulgence  the  very  reason  for  her  frightful  conclusion — ‘  Say  you  have  wrong’d  her.’ 
All  Lear’s  faults  increase  our  pity  for  him.  We  refuse  to  know  them  otherwise  than 
as  means  of  his  sufferings  and  aggravations  of  his  daughters’  ingratitude. 

144.  confine]  Add  this  instance  to  those  noted  in  Nam.  I,  i,  155. 

145.  discretion]  The  abstract  for  the  concrete,  like  ‘you  houseless  poverty,’  III. 
iv,  26,  or  ‘speculations,’  III,  i,  24.  See  I,  iv,  146. 

149.  house]  Theobald  suggested  and  adopted  use,  i.  e.  the  established  rule  and 
custom  of  nature.  Warburton  interpreted  it  as  meaning  the  order  of  families,  the 
duties  of  relation;  and  Steevens  cites  from  Chapman’s  Blind  Beggar  of  Alexandria, 
1598 :  *  Come  up  to  supper;  it  will  become  the  house  wonderfull  welL’  But  Capell 


ACT  II,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


*53 


*  Dear  daughter,  I  confess  that  I  am  old;  1 50 

Age  is  unnecessary.  On  my  knees  I  beg 

That  you’ll  vouchsafe  me  raiment,  bed  and  food.’ 

Reg.  Good  sir,  no  more ;  these  are  unsightly  tricks. 

Return  you  to  my  sister. 

Lear.  Never,  Regan. 

She  hath  abated  me  of  half  my  train  ;  155 

Look’d  black  upon  me ;  strook  me  with  her  tongue. 

Most  serpent-like,  upon  the  very  heart. 

All  the  stored  vengeances  of  heaven  fall 


150.  [The  King  kneeling.  Han. 
Kneeling.  Johns.,  after  line  151. 

154.  [Rising.  Coll.  (MS). 

Never]  No  Qq. 

156.  black]  backe  Q2.  blank  Theob. 


156.  strook]  Cap.  Knt,  Sch.  Jlrooke 
Q,Ff.  Jlroke  Qa.  struck  Rowe  et  cet. 

15S— 160.  All.. .lameness.]  Two  lines, 
the  first  ending  top  [  Qq. 


takes  it  in  a  more  restricted  sense : *  *  fathers  are  not  the  heads  only  of  a  house  or  a 
family,  but  it’s  representatives ;  they  are  the  house,  what  affects  them  affects  the  rest 
of  it’s  body;  Regan,  therefore,  is  call’d  upon  to  observe  an  action  in  which  she  is 
concern’d,  and  then  say  her  opinion  of  it;  and  she  does  accordingly  shew  herself 
hurt  by  it,  and  declares  it  “unsightly,”  unbecoming  her  and  her  father,  i.  e.  the 
house.'  Whereupon  Dyce  ( Closs.)  remarks :  I  suspect  that  Lear  is  now  thinking 
much  more  of  himself  as  head  of  the  house  than  of  Regan  as  a  member  of  it,  and 
that,  though  she  chides  him  for  such  1  unsightly  tricks,’  she  is  not  of  a  nature  to  be 

*  hurt  ’  by  them.  COLLIER :  The  (MS)  tells  us  to  read  mouth,  i.  e.  the  mouth  of 
Lear.  We  feel  reluctant  to  adopt  the  emendation,  inasmuch  as,  according  to  War- 
burton,  the  sense  is  pretty  clear;  but  still  it  is  extremely  probable  that  the  copyist,  or 
the  compositor,  misheard  the  word,  and  that  Lear  intends  to  call  attention  to  the 
manner  in  which  such  terms  of  abject  submission  to  a  child  misbeseem  a  father’s 
mouth.  Schmidt  :  Compare  Coriolanus’s  horror  when  his  mother  kneels  to  him, 
V,  iii,  56. 

150.  Knight  doubts  the  propriety  of  the  stage-direction  which  is  usually  inserted 
here.  *  Lear  is  not  addressing  these  words  to  Regan,  but  is  repeating  what  he  would 
say  to  Goneril  if  he  should  ask  her  forgiveness.  Collier  :  Both  ‘  Kneeling’  here 
and  ‘  Rising’  below  are  inserted  in  the  (MS),  so  that  there  can  be  no  dispute  as  to 
what  was  the  practice  of  the  ancient  stage  in  this  respect.  These  are  wha't  Regan 
means  by  *  unsightly  tricks.’  Davies  (Dram.  Afisc.  ii,  190):  Garrick  threw  him¬ 
self  on  both  knees,  with  his  hands  clasped,  and  in  a  supplicating  tone  repeated  this 
touching,  though  ironical,  petition. 

1 5 1 .  unnecessary]  Johnson:  Old  age  has  few  wants.  Steevens  :  It  seems 
unnecessary  to  children  that  the  lives  of  their  parents  should  be  prolonged.  The 
phrase  may  mean,  old  people  are  useless.  So  in  Massinger’s  Old  La-u  [II,  i]  : 

*  Your  laws  extend  not  to  desert  But  to  unnecessary  years.’  Tyrwhitt  :  In  want 
of  necessaries,  unable  to  procure  them.  Wright:  Lear  is  merely  apologizing  ironi¬ 
cally  for  his  useless  existence.  [For  the  scansion  of  this  line,  see  Walker  (  Vers. 
275)  and  Abbott,  §  45S,  where  it  is  held  that  the  last  two  syllables  of  this  word  are 
extra  syllables,  and  that  the  line  has  but  five  accents.] 


154 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ii,  sc.  iv. 


On  her  ingrateful  top !  Strike  her  young  bones,  1 59 

You  taking  airs,  with  lameness! 

Corn.  Fie,  sir,  fie !  160 

Lear .  You  nimble  lightnings,  dart  your  blinding  flames 
Into  her  scornful  eyes  !  Infe<51  her  beauty. 

You  fen-suck’d  fogs,  drawn  by  the  powerful  sun, 

To  fall  and  blast  her  pride ! 


159.  top]  head  Pope,  Han. 

160.  You  taking"]  In  felling  Pope. 

Fie,  sir, fie]  Fie,  fie  fir  Qa.  Fie 

fie fir  Qt.  Fye,  fye,  fye  Stee v.  ’93,  Bos. 

1 61.  Lear.]  Om  Q,. 

163, 164.  sun,  To]  Swine  To  FaF.F^, 


Cam. 

164.  Tc  fall ]  Do,  fall  Johns,  conj. 
O,  fall  Cap. 

and  blast  her  pride.]  Qq.  and 
blificr.  Ff,  Rowe,  Ktit.  and  blast  her. 
Walker. 


159.  young  bones]  JOURDAIN  (Trans.  Philological  Soc.  1 860-1,  p.  141):  That 

is,  infants  just  born,  which  fairies  then  had  power  over,  but  not  afterwards.  By 
‘young  bones’  the  following  quotations  will,  I  think,  prove  the  meaning:  ‘ — poore 
soule,  she  breeds  yong  bones,  And  that  is  it  makes  her  so  tutchy  sure.  Con.  What, 
breeds  young  bones  already !’  — Hist,  of  King  Leir  [See  Appendix,  p.  397].  ‘  These 

dead  men’s  bones  lie  heere  of  purpose  to  Inuite  vs  to  supply' the  number  of  The 
liuing.  Come;  we’l  get  young  bones.’ — The  Atheist's  Tragedy,  Act  IV,  by  Cyril 
Tourneur,  1612.  For  ‘you  taking  airs'  read  ‘  you  taking  fair’es,'  that  is ,  fairies. 
I  am  not  sure  whether  the  elision  would  be  the  two  letters  ie ;  if  only  i  the  omission 
is  simply  the  f.  John  Addis,  jun.  (N.  &>  Qu.  1S67,  3d  Ser.  vol.  xi,  251)  suggests, 
what  is  undoubtedly  correct,  that  *  young  bones  ’  means,  not  ‘  infants  just  born,’  but 
infants  ‘  unborn,’  and  cites  Ford’s  Broken  Heart,  II,  i :  *  What  think  you,  If  your 
fresh  lady  breed  young  bones,  my  lord  ?  Would  not  a  chopping  boy  do  you  good 
at  heart?’  [The  phrase  also  occurs  with  the  same  meaning  in  Brome’s  Jovial  Crew, 
III,  i,  vol.  x,  p.  326,  Dodsley’s  Old  Plays,  1S26. — Ed.] 

160.  taking]  Malignant,  bewitching.  See  III,  iv,  58,  and  Ham.  I,  i,  163. 

164.  To  fall]  Malone  says  that  this  verb  is  here  used  actively,  meaning  to  humble 
or  pull  down.  *  Infect  her  beauty  so  as  to  fall  and  blast  (*.  e.  humble  and  destroy) 
her  pride.’  M/YSON,  on  the  other  hand,  thinks  that  it  is  intransitive;  ‘You  fen- 
sucked  fogs,  drawn  up  by  the  sun  in  order  to  fall  down  again  and  blast  her  pride.’ 
[The  majority  of  editors  incline  to  Malone’s  view  that  it  is  here  transitive  (Dyce 
enumerates  fourteen  instances  in  Sh.  of  the  use  of  ‘  fall  ’  as  a  transitive  verb ;  this-, 
however,  is  not  among  them),  but  one  of  the  latest  and  best,  Wright,  says  that, 
although  in  either  case  it  would  yield  a  good  sense  to  this  passage,  yet  it  seems  pre¬ 
ferable,  on  the  whole,  to  regard  it  as  intransitive,  ‘  as  more  in  keeping  with  “  drawn,” 
which  precedes,  and  “blast,”  which  follows/  Schmidt  suggests  that  ‘pride’  has 
accidentally  been  omitted  at  the  end  of  the  line  in  the  Ff,  and  that  the  true  reading 
is  ‘To  fall  and  blister  pride.’  ‘To  fall  ’  would  be  intransitive,  and  *  pride  ’  used  as 
frequently  in  Sh.  in  the  sense  of  ‘  braggart  beauty.’  Compare  ‘  a  southwest  blow 
on  ye  And  blister  ye  all  o’er.’  Temp.  I,  ii,  324;  ‘  Takes  off  the  rose  From  the  fail 
forehead  of  an  innocent  love,  And  sets  a  blister  there.’  Ham.  Ill,  iv,  42.] 

164.  and  blast  her]  Nichols  (Notes,  &c.,  No.  2,  p.  1)  upholds  the  Ff,  because 


ACT  II,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


155 

165 


Reg.  O  the  blest  gods !  so  will  you  wish  on  me, 

When  the  rash  mood  is  on. 

Lear.  No,  Regan,  thou  shalt  never  have  my  curse  ; 

Thy  tender-hefted  nature  shall  not  give 
Thee  o’er  to  harshness.  Her  eyes  are  fierce,  but  thine 
Do  comfort  and  not  burn.  ’Tis  not  in  thee  1 7° 

To  grudge  my  pleasures,  to  cut  off  my  train, 


165,166.  0...on]  As  in  Qq,  Del.  Dyce, 
Sing,  ii,  Glo.  +  .  The  first  line  ends 
Gods!  Ff  et  cet.  . 

166.  mood  is  on]  mood —  Qq.  mood's 
on.  Steev.  ’93,  Knt. 

I6S.  Thy]  The  Qq. 

lender-hefted]  Uder  hejled  Qx. 


tender  hefled  Qa.  tender-hearted  Rowe  ii. 
Pope,  Coll.  (MS),  Sing  Ktly. 

168-171.  Thy . train,]  Three  lines, 

the  first  two  ending  ore.  .burn.  Qq. 

169.  Thee]  the  Qt. 

harshness]  rashness  Johns. 


the  foggy  state  of  the  atmosphere  in  England  is  extremely  productive  of  erysipelas, 
which  attacks  the  face,  *  “  infecting  its  beauty,”  and  covering  it  over  with  extensive 
vesications  or  “  blisters.”  ’ 

16S.  tender-hefted]  Steevens:  Hefted  seems  to  mean  the  same  as  heaved. 
‘Tender-hefted,’  i.  e.  whose  bosom  is  agitated  by  tender  passions.  Sh  uses  ‘hefts’ 
for  heavings  in  Wint.  Tale ,  II,  i,  45.  The  Qq,  however,  read,  ‘  tender-hested 
nature,’  which  may  mean  a  nature  which  is  governed  by  gentle  dispositions.  ‘  Hest’ 
is  an  old  word,  signifying  command.  Davies  :  I  suppose  the  expression  was  in¬ 
tended  to  signify  smooth ,  or  soft-handled ,  consequently  put  here  [ox  gentleness  of  dis¬ 
position.  Knight:  We  doubt  Steevens’s  explanation.  Heft, — haft, — is  that  which 
is  haved, — held;  and  thus,  ‘  thy  tender-hefted  nature  ’  may  be  thy  nature  which  may 
be  held  by  tenderness.  White:  Although  I  fail  to  see  the  appropriateness  of  any 
sense  that  may  be  extracted  from  either  text  of  the  Ff  or  Qq,  I  shrink  from  adopting 
the  very  specious  reading  of  the  earlier  editors :  tender -hearted.  EDINBURGH  RE¬ 
VIEW  (July,  1869,  p.  106) :  ‘  Heft’  is  a  well-known  older  English  word  for  handle, 
that  which  holds  or  contains,  and  ‘  tender-hefted  ’  is  simply  delicately-housed,  dain¬ 
tily-bodied,  finely-sheathed.  ‘  Heft  ’  was  in  this  way  applied  proverbially  to  the  body, 
and  Howel  has  a  phrase  quoted  by  Halliwell:  loose  in  the  heft,  to  designate  an  ill 
habit  of  body,  a  person  of  dissipated  ways.  Schmidt  (Lex.)  quotes  this  extract, 
and  adds :  But  is  haft  or  heft,  i.  e.  handle,  indeed  that  which  holds  or  contains,  or 
not  rather  that  by  which  a  thing  is  held  ?  Loose  in  the  handle,  applied  to  a  person, 
could  not  possibly  mean  any  thing  else  than  what  loose  in  the  heft  is  said  to  have 
designated.  Perhaps  *  tender-hefted,’  i.  e.  tender-handled,  is  equivalent  to  tender, 
gentle,  to  touch  or  to  approach ;  of  an  easy  and  winning  address,  affable.  Wright  : 
A  heft  or  haft  is  a  handle,  and  a  nature  tender-hefted  is  one  which  is  set  in  a  tender 
handle  or  delicate  bodily  frame.  Regan  was  less  masculine  than  Goneril.  Cotgrave 
has,  ‘  Emmanch6 :  m.  £e :  f.  Helued ;  set  into  a  haft,  or  handle.  Lasche  emmanch6. 
Lazie,  idle,  slothfull,  weake,  feeble,  loose  ioynted,  faint-hearted.’  Prompt.  Parv. 
•  Heftyde,  manubriatus.’ 

170.  bum]  Malone:  So  in  Timon,  V,  i,  134:  ‘Thou  sun,  that  comfort’st, 
burn !  * 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ii,  sc.  iv. 


156 

To  bandy  hasty  words,  to  scant  my  sizes,  172 

And  in  conclusion  to  oppose  the  bolt 

Against  my  coming  in ;  thou  better  know’st 

The  offices  of  nature,  bond  of  childhood,  175 

Effects  of  courtesy,  dues  of  gratitude  ; 

Thy  half  o’  th’  kingdom  hast  thou  not  forgot, 

Wherein  I  thee  endow’d. 

Reg.  Good  sir,  to  th’  purpose. 

Lear.  Who  put  my  man  i’  th’  stocks  ?  [Tucket  within. 

Corn.  What  trumpet’s  that  ? 

Reg.  I  know’t, — my  sister’s.  This  approves  her  letter,  180 
That  she  would  soon  be  here. — [Enter  Oswald. ]  Is  your 
lady  come  ? 

Lear.  This  is  a  slave  whose  easy-borrow’d  pride 
Dwells  in  the  fickle  grace  of  her  he  follows. — 


174.  know'st]  knowejl  Qq. 

176.  dues ]  and  dues  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han. 

177.  hast  thou]  thou  hast  Rowe  ii+, 
Jen.  Ec. 

178.  endow'd]  indow'd  Qx.  endowed 

q2- 

to  th’]  too'th  Qx.  to  the  Qz.  to' 

th'  fxf,f3. 

179.  [Tucket  within.]  Coll.  After 
line  178,  Ff.  Trumpets  within.  Rowe. 

1  So.  know't, — my]  Dyce.  know' t  my 
QqF2F3,  Sta.  know't ;  my  Cam.  Wr. 


know't,  my  FXF4  et  cet. 

180.  letter]  letters  Qq. 

181.  [Enter  Oswald.]  Dyce.  Enter 
Steward,  (after  that?  line  179),  Qq. 
(after  stocks?  line  179),  Ff.  Enter  Os¬ 
wald.  (after  line  179),  Coll. 

182.  easy-borrow'd]  Cap.  eafte  bor¬ 
rowed  QqFf.  easy-borrowed  Theob.  +  , 
Sch. 

1  S3,  fickle]  fickly  FXFS.  fickly  F3F4, 
Rowe. 

her  he]  her,  a  Qx. 


172.  sizes]  Johnson:  To  contract  my  allowances.  Delius:  The  same  as 
‘exhibition,’  I,  ii,  25.  Wright:  The  words  ‘sizar’  and  ‘sizing’  are  still  well 
known  in  Cambridge;  the  former  originally  denoting  a  poor  student,  so  called  from 
the  ‘ sizes’  or  allowances  made  to  him  by  the  college  to  which  he  belonged. 

179.  Tucket]  See  II,  i,  78. 

1S0.  I  know’t]  Steevens:  Thus  in  Oth.  II,  i,  179:  ‘The  Moor!  I  know  his 
trumpet.’  It  should  seem,  from  both  these  passages,  and  others  that  might  be  quoted, 
that  the  approach  of  great  personages  was  announced  by  some  distinguishing  note  or 
tune  appropriately  used  by  their  own  trumpeters.  Cornwall  knows  not  the  present 
sound ;  but  to  Regan,  who  had  often  heard  her  sister’s  trumpet,  the  first  flourish  of 
it  was  as  familiar  as  was  that  of  the  Moor  to  the  ears  of  Iago.  Delius  considers 
Steevens’s  supposition  as  unlikely,  because  it  was  through  the  letter  that  Regan 
knew  of  Goneril’s  approach.  Delius  evidently  takes  *  this*  as  the  object  of  *  approves.* 

1S2.  easy-borrow’d]  Eccles:  Pride  that  requires  no  cause  of  importance  to 
produce  it,  derived  from  an  insignificant  source,  depends  upon  uncertain  favour. 
Moberly  :  Borrowed  without  the  trouble  of  doing  anything  to  justify  it. 


ACT  II,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


157 


Out,  varlet,  from  my  sight ! 

Com.  What  means  your  grace  ? 

Lear.  Who  stock’d  my  servant  ? — Regan,  I  have  good 

hope  1 S5 

Thou  didst  not  know  on’t. — Who  comes  here  ? 


Enter  Goneril. 

O  heavens. 

If  you  do  love  old  men,  if  your  sweet  sway 
Allow  obedience,  if  yourselves  are  old, 

Make  it  your  cause.;  send  down,  and  take  my  part ! — 

Art  not  ashamed  to  look  upon  this  beard  ? —  190 

O  Regan,  will  you  take  her  by  the  hand  ? 

Gon.  Why  not  by  th’  hand,  sir  ?  How  have  I  offended  ? 

All’s  not  offence  that  indiscretion  finds 
And  dotage  terms  so. 

Lear.  O  sides,  you  are  too  tough  ; 

Will  you  yet  hold  ? — How  came  my  man  i’  th’  stocks  ?  195 

Com.  I  set  him  there,  sir ;  but  his  own  disorders 
Deserved  much  less  advancement. 

Lear.  You  !  did  you  f 

Reg'.  I  pray  you,  father,  being  weak,  seem  so. 


1S5.  Scene  xi.  Pope,  Han.  Scene 
Xll.  Warb.  Jen. 

Lear.]  Gon.  Qq. 

stock'd)  firuck  Qf.  Jlrucke  Q2. 

I  have ]  I've  Pope  + . 

186.  Thou... .heavens, ]  Pope.  Two 
lines,  the  first  ending  a?it  or  on't,  QqFf. 

on'f\  ar.t  Qq.  oft  Mai.  Steev. 

Bos. 

Who ]  Lear.  Who  Qq. 

Scene  xii.  Johns,  (after  here?'). 
Enter  Goneril]  Johns.  After 
grace?  (line  1S4)  in  QqFf. 

1S7-189.  If  ...part !)  Three  lines,  the 
first  two  ending  alow...caufe,  Qq. 

187.  your ]  you  Qq. 


1S8.  Allow)  alow  Q2.  Hallow  Warb. 
Theob.  Han. 

if  2  if  you  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sing. 
Ktly,  Sch. 

190.  [To  Gon.  Johns. 

191.  will  you)  Ff+,  Sta.  Sch.  will 
thou  Qq  et  cet. 

193.  fads']  fines  Warb.  conj. 

194.  I95-  O...hold?2  One  line,  Rowe. 

195.  Will. . .stocks  ?2  Two  lines,  Ff. 
yet  hold  ?)  hold  yet  ?  Cap.  conj. 

196.  sir)  Om.  Q2. 

197.  much  less2  no  less  Han.  much 
more  Johns,  conj 

198.  weak ]  ’ wake  Han.  Jen. 
seem  so)  deem't  so  Warb. 


1S8.  Allow]  Upton  ( Pref.  ix) :  To  be  well  pleased  with,  approve  of.  Com¬ 
pare  Psalm  xi,  6 :  The  Lord  alloweth  the  righteous.  Steevens  :  Warburton  might 
have  found  his  emendation  [see  Textual  Notes]  in  Tate’s  version. 

197.  less  advancement]  Percy:  A  still  worse,  or  more  disgraceful,  situation/ 
a  situation  not  so  reputable.  .Schmidt  :  An  undisguised  sneer 

14 


158 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ii,  sc.  iv. 


If,  till  the  expiration  of  your  month, 

You  will  return  and  sojourn  with  my  sister,  200 

Dismissing  half  your  train,  come  then  to  me; 

I  am  now  from  home  and  out  of  that  provision 
Which  shall  be  needful  for  your  entertainment. 

Lear.  Return  to  her?  and  fifty  men  dismiss’d? 

No,  rather  I  abjure  all  roofs,  and  choose  205 

To  wage  against  the  enmity  o’  th’  air, 

To  be  a  comrade  with  the  wolf,  and  howl 
Necessity’s  sharp  pinch!  Return  with  her? 


199.  month']  moneth  QqF,F3F3. 

202.  Iam]  I'm  Pope  + ,  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 
204.  her  ?]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob. 
Han.  Coll.  Del.  Wh.  Sch.  her  !  Sing. 
Ktly.  her,  Qq  et  cet. 

206.  o'  th']  oth'  F,F9.  of  the  Qq.  Cap. 


Ktly. 

207.  comrade]  Comerade  F^. 

howl]  Coll,  ii,  iii,  (MS),  owl,  or 
Owle,  QqFf.  owl ;  Theob.  Johns,  owl, 
or  owl, —  Rowe  et  cet. 


206,  207.  To  wage  .  .  .  howl]  Theobald  (followed  by  Hanmer)  transposed 
these  lines  so  as  to  make  ‘Necessity’s  sharp  pinch,’  the  object  of  ‘wage.’  This 
Jennens  pronounces  nonsense,  because  ‘it  is  that  “pinch”  which  forces  a  man  to 
“wage;”  war  is  understood,  or  perhaps  it  is  the  very  word  instead  of  “wage.” 
“  Necessity’s  sharp  pinch”  is  in  apposition  to  “  To  be  a  comrade,”  ’  &c.  Capell: 
‘  To  wage,’  is  to  wage  combat  or  battle.  Steevens  says,  that  wage  is  often  used 
thus,  intransitively,  but  the  only  instance  that  he  cites  is  in  I,  i,  154,  where  ‘  wage’ 
means  to  wager.  According  to  Schmidt  (Lex.],  this  is  the  only  instance  of  its  use 
in  Sh.  Keightly  inserts  war  in  the  text. 

207.  howl]  This  change  from  owl  of  the  QqFf  to  ‘howl’  is  due  to  Collier’s 
(MS),  and,  to  my  mind,  carries  conviction.  In  the  old  reading,  which  renders 
‘  Necessity’s  sharp  pinch  ’  parenthetical,  there  is  a  tameness  out  of  place  at  the  close 
of  Lear’s  wild  outburst,  which  is,  it  seems  to  me,  thoroughly  un-Shakespearian.  In 
the  present  text  there  is  a  climax,  terrible  in  its  wildness :  roofs  are  to  be  abjured, 
storms  braved,  and  famine  howled  forth  among  wolves.  What  companionship  is 
there  between  wolves  and  owls,  beyond  the  fact  that  they  are  both  nocturnal  ?  Yet 
what  grates  me  in  the  old  reading  is,  not  so  much  the  association  of  the  wolf  and 
owl,  but  the  un-Shakespearian  feebleness  of  bringing  in  ‘  Necessity’s  sharp  pinch  ’  as 
an  explanation  of  what  it  is  to  abjure  roofs  and  to  be  a  comrade  with  wolves.  As  if 
Lear  would  stop  to  explain  that  people  did  not  usually  prefer  such  houseless  poverty 
or  such  companionship,  but  that  it  was  only  the  sharp  pinch  of  necessity  that  drove 
them  to  it.  In  the  old  text  there  is  no  crest  to  the  wave  of  Lear’s  passion;  it  surges 
up  wild  and  threatening,  and  then  when  it  should  ‘thunder  on  the  beach’  it  subsides 
into  a  gentle  apologetic  ripple.  Theobald’s  transposition  of  the  lines,  or  any  change 
that  will  avoid  putting  ‘  Necessity’s  sharp  pinch  ’  in  apposition  with  the  rest  of  the 
sentence,  is  better  than  the  old  text.  Schmidt  must  have  felt  this,  although  he  does 
not  say  so;  he  puts  a  full  stop  after  ‘  owl,’  and  makes  *  Necessity’s  sharp  pinch  ’  an 
anacoluthon.  Furthermore,  Schmidt  says  the  circumstances  enumerated  in  lines 
205,  206,  and  207  are  those  under  which  the  sharp  pinch  of  necessity  is  felt,  but  they 


ACT  II.  SC.  iv.l 


KING  LEAR 


159 


Why,  the  hot-blooded  France,  that  dowerless  took 
Our  youngest  born,  I  could  as  well  be  brought  210 

To  knee  his  throne,  and,  squire-like,  pension  beg 
To  keep  base  life  afoot.  Return  with  her  ? 

Persuade  me  rather  to  be  slave  and  sumpter 
To  this  detested  groom. 

Gon.  At  your  choice,  sir. 


209.  Why,  the]  Why  the  QqF,F2. 
Whv  ?  the  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope. 

hot-blooded ]  Pope,  hot-bloodied 
Ff.  ( bloudied  F3).  hot  blood  in  Qq. 
(bloud  QJ. 


209.  210.  took . brought ]  One  line, 

Qq. 

21 1.  beg]  bag  Q,. 

214.  [Lookingonthe  Steward.  Johns. 


are  not  the  sharp  pinch  itself.  If  it  be  objected  that  to  howl  a  pinch  is  a  violent 
metaphor,  I  reply  that  it  is  not  more  violent  than  to  take  up  arms  against  a  sea.  As 
far  as  concerns  the  addition  or  the  omission  of  h  in  Shakespeare’s  day,  I  can  only 
urge  the  exceeding  difficulty,  if  riot  impossibility,  of  deciding  what  words  were  as¬ 
pirated  and  what  were  not;  in  the  old  MSS,  especially  of  the  XHIth  century,  the  use 
of  the  h  is  very  ‘uncertain  and  confused’  ( — Ellis,  p.  598).  In  process  of  time  the 
number  of  words  in  which  it  was  customary  to  drop  the  h  diminished,  until  now,  as 
Ellis  says  (p.  221),  there  are  but  five:  heir,  honest,  honour,  hostler,  and  hour  [qy. 
herb  P],  which  it  is  ‘social  suicide  to  aspirate.’  Wherefore  the  absence  of  the  h,  in 
the  present  passage,  is  not  fatal  to  the  emendation;  the  only  instance  in  the  Folio 
where  *  owlet  ’  is  used,  it  is  spelled  Howlet.  Note  too,  as  a  slight  corroboration  of  the 
present  reading,  that  in  III,  i,  13  occurs  the  phrase  ‘the  belly-/i«c^<?(f  wolf' ;  and 
the  howling  of  the  wolf  is  again  referred  to  in  III,  vii,  62.  But  whether  or  not  the 
old  pronunciation  was  owl  or  howl,  and  whether  or  not  all  the  old  texts  have  owl,  I 
adhere  to  the  maxim  of  the  great  Bentley :  sana  ratio  vel  centum  codicibus  potior. 
Dyce’s  opinion  ( Strictures ,  &c.,  p.  6)  should  be  recorded  here,  so  emphatic  is  his 
condemnation  of  the  present  text :  *  the  glaring  absurdity  of  “  the  old  corrector’s 
aspirate  ”...  will  inevitably  be  treated  by  every  future  editor  with  the  intense  con¬ 
tempt  it  deserves.’  Moberly,  although  he  does  not  adept  it;  pronounces  *  howl  * 
‘another  instance  of  improvement  in  the  text,  suggested’  by  Collier’s  (MS),  and 
adds  that,  when  thus  read,  the  lines  become  ‘  convincingly  forcible.’ — Ed. 

209.  hot-blooded  France]  For  instances  of  nouns  which  express  the  subject  of 
the  thought  without  any  grammatical  connection  with  a  verb,  see  IV,  vi,  77  :  ‘That 
thing  you  speak  of,  I  took  at  for  a  man  ;’  Ham.  I,  v,  53 ;  and  Abbott,  §  417. 

21 1.  knee]  From  the  only  other  use  of  this  word  in  Sh.  as  a  verb  (Cor.  V,  i,  5), 
Schmidt  infers,  very  erroneously  I  think,  that  this  does  not  here  mean  to  kneel  down 
before  France’s  throne,  but  to  travel  thither  on  the  knees.  The  passage  in  Cor.  is 
not  parallel. 

213.  sumpter]  Cotgrave,  cited  by  Wright,  sufficiently  defines  this :  ‘  Sommier : 
m.  A  Sumpter-horse;  (and  generally  any  toyling,  and  load  carrying,  drudge,  or 
groome).’ 

214.  groom]  For  the  sake  of  scansion  Abbott,  §484,  would  pronounce  this  as  a 
dissyllable. 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ii,  sc.  iv. 


160 


Lear.  I  prithee,  daughter,  do  not  make  me  mad.  215 

I  will  net  trouble  thee,  my  child ;  farewell. 

We’ll  no  more  meet,  no  more  see  one  another. 

But  yet  thou  art  my  flesh,  my  blood,  my  daughter; 

Or  rather  a  disease  that’s  in  my  flesh, 

Which  I  must  needs  call  mine ;  thou  art  a  boil,  220 

A  plague-sore,  an  embossed  carbuncle, 

In  my  corrupted  blood.  But  I’ll  not  chide  thee; 

Let  shame  come  when  it  will,  I  do  not  call  it ; 

I  do  not  bid  the  thunder-bearer  shoot, 

Nor  tell  tales  of  thee  to  high-judging  Jove.  225 

Mend  when  thou  canst ;  be  better  at  thy  leisure. 

I  can  be  patient ;  I  can  stay  with  Regan, 

I  and  my  hundred  knights. 

Reg.  Not  altogether  so; 

I  look’d  not  for  you  yet,  nor  am  provided 

For  your  fit  welcome.  Give  ear,  sir,  to  my  sister;  230 

For  those  that  mingle  reason  with  your  passion 


215.  I]  Now  I  Qq,  Jen.  Mai.  Ec. 

216.  thee,  my]  thee.  My  Johns. 

219.  that's  in]  that  lies  within  Qq. 

220.  boil  J  Mai.  Bile  QXF3F4+ ,  Cap. 
Jen.  Del.  Sch.  Byle  QaFxFa. 

221.  222.  A. ..In  my J  One  line,  Qq. 
221.  plague-sore ]  Hyphens,  F3F4. 

an]  or  Ff  + ,  Knt,  Sch. 
embossed]  Cap.  imbojfed  Qq 
Ff  +  ,  Jen. 

224.  thunder-bearer]  thunder-beater 
Warb.  (misprint,  corrected  in  Errata). 


225.  tales]  tailes  Qr 

high-judging]  Hyphen,  FxFaF3. 

22S.  I]  Ay  Anon. 

228-231.  Not... passion]  Four  lines, 
ending  yet,... .welcome,. ...thofe....pafion, 
Qq. 

228.  altogether  ro]  altogether  fo  fir 
Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  all  to • 
gether  Pope,  Han. 

229.  look'd]  looke  Qq. 

230.  sir]  Om.  Qa,  Pope+. 

231.  your]  you  Fa. 


220.  boil]  Malone  first  changed  the  spelling  of  this  word,  of  which  the  spelling 
in  the  Prompt.  Part/.,  Cotgrave,  QqFf,  &c.  betokens  a  uniform  pronunciation.  Cot- 
grave  (s.  v.  Posse)  gives  it  as  a  synonym  of  « plague-sore.’ 

221.  embossed]  This  word  is  used  by  Sh.  in  two  different  senses,  and  has  conse¬ 
quently  given  rise  to  some  discussion,  chiefly  carried  on  in  the  pages  of  Notes  &* 
Queries ;  (references  to  all  the  communications  will  be  found  in  the  Bibliography.) 
Furnivall  (N.  &•  Qu.  4th  Ser.  xi,  507)  at  last  showed  that  there  was  here  a  con¬ 
fusion  of  two  different  words.  One  is  from  the  French  embosser,  defined  by  Cot- 
grave  :  *  To  swell,  or  arise  in  bunches,  hulches,  knobs ;  to  grow  knottie,  or  knurrie.* 
In  this  sense  it  is  used  here.  The  other  is  from  the  Old  French  :  *  emboser,  emboiter, 
ench&sser  une  chose  dans  une  autre. — Ducange,  v.  imbotare.1 — Hippeau.  This  is 
Cotgrave’s  ‘  Ernboister:  To  imbox,  inclose,  insert,  fasten,  put,  or  shut  vp,  as  within 
a  box,’  and  is  Shakespeare’s  word  in  Alls  Well,  III,  vi,  107. 


ACT  II,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


Must  he  content  to  think  you  old,  and  so — 

But  she  knows  what  she  does. 

Lear.  Is  this  well  spoken  ? 

Reg.  I  dare  avouch  it,  sir.  What,  fifty  followers  ? 

Is  it  not  well  ?  What  should  you  need  of  more  ? 

Yea,  or  so  many,  sith  that  both  charge  and  danger 
Speak  ’gainst  so  great  a  number  ?  How  in  one  house 
Should  many  people  under  two  commands 
Hold  amity?  ’Tis  hard;  almost  impossible. 

Gon.  Why  might  not  you,  my  lord,  receive  attendance  240 
From  those  that  she  calls  servants  or  from  mine? 

Reg.  Why  not,  my  lord?  If  then  they  chanced  to 
slack  ye, 

We  could  control  them.  If  you  will  come  to  me, 

For  now  I  spy  a  danger,  I  entreat  you 

To  bring  but  five  and  twenty ;  to  no  more  245 

Will  I  give  place  or  notice. 

Lear.  I  gave  you  all — 

Reg.  And  in  good  time  you  gave  it. 

Lear.  — Made  you  my  guardians,  my  depositaries ; 

But  kept  a  reservation  to  be  follow’d 


IOI 

232 

235 


232.  you  old ]  you  art  old  Qq. 
so — ]  Rowe,  fo,  QqFf. 

233.  spoken]  fpoken  now  Qq,  Jen. 
Steev.  Ec.  Var. 

234.  What,  fifty]  Rowe,  c chat  fifty 
QqFf. 

236.  sith  that ]  since  Pope  + . 

237.  Speak ]  Speakes  Qq. 
one  house]  a  houfe  Qq. 

242.  Why...ye,]  Two  lines,  Ff. 

chanced ]  chanc'd  Ff.  chanc'Jl 


Q,.  chancjl  Q2. 

242.  ye~\  Ff  + ,  Jen.  Sta.  Sch.  you 
Qq  et  cet. 

243.  you  will]  you'll  Pope  +  . 

244.  For... .danger, ]  In  parenthesis, 
Q,Ff. 

245.  but]  Om.  F3F4. 

247.  ell- — ]  Rowe.  all.  QqFf. 

249.  kcpt~]  keep  F3F4,  Rowe. 

follow'd ]  Pope,  followed  Qq 
Ff,  Rowe,  Sch. 


236.  sith]  See  I,  i,  179. 

246.  give  .  .  .  notice]  Wright  :  Recognize. 

247.  And  ...  it]  Hudson  :  Observe  what  a  compact  wolfishness  of  heart  is  ex 
pressed  in  these  few  cold  words  !  It  is  chiefly  in  this  readiness  of  envenomed  sar 
casm  that  Regan  is  discriminated  from  Goneril ;  otherwise  they  seem  almost  too 
much  like  mere  repetitions  of  each  other  to  come  fairly  within  the  circle  of  Nature, 
who  never  repeats  herself. 

248.  guardians]  Moberly  :  The  guardians  under  me  of  my  realms.  So  in  the 
Bible  *  Jeroboam’s  nursing  father,’  means  he  to  whom  Jeroboam  gives  his  children 
to  nurse. 

* 


*4 


L 


162 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ii,  sc.  IV. 


With  such  a  number.  What,  must  I  come  to  you  250 

With  five  and  twenty  ?  Regan,  said  you  so  ? 

Reg .  And  speak ’t  again,  my  lord  ;  no  more  with  me. 

Lear.  Those  wicked  creatures  yet  do  look  well-favour’d, 
When  others  are  more  wicked ;  not  being  the  worst 
Stands  in  some  rank  of  praise. — [To  Gon7\  I’ll  go  with  thee.  255 
Thy  fifty  yet  doth  double  five  and  twenty, 

And  thou  art  twice  her  love. 

Gon.  Hear  me,  my  lord : 

What  need  you  five  and  twenty,  ten,  or  five, 

To  follow,  in  a  house  where  twice  so  many 
Have  a  command  to  tend  you  ? 

Reg.  What  need  one  ?  260 

Lear.  Oh,  reason  not  the  need ;  our  basest  beggars 
Are  in  the  poorest  thing  superfluous. 

Allow  not  nature  more  than  nature  needs, 


250.  number I\  number  ?  Ff. 

W). iat]  Om.  Pope+. 

251.  twenty  ?  Regan, ]  twenty ,  Re¬ 
gan,  Q2.  twentie,  Regan  Q,.  twenty, 
Regan  ?  Cap.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Dyce, 
Glo.  +  ,  Mob.  Huds. 

252.  speak  7]  speak  it  Cap.  Steev.  Ec. 
Var. 

253.  254. favour' d,.. .wicked ;]  Theob. 

favor'd. . wicked,  QqFf  ( favor’d ,  F  ) 

Rowe,  favour  d„ ...wicked.  Pope.  Han. 


Johns.  Jen.  favoured. ..wicked .*  Sch. 

253,  254.  wicked.. .wicked']  wrinkled 
...wrinkled  Warb. 

253.  look]feem  Qt,  Jen.  feeme  Q3. 

254.  the ]  Om.  Pope  +  . 

255.  [To  Gon.]  Han. 

257.  art]  hast  Pope,  Han. 

260.  need]  needs  Q2,  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 
r.eedes  Qt. 

261.  need]  deed  Qq. 


253, 255.  Those  . . .  praise.]  Capf.ll,  whose  punctuation  is  substantially  followed 
by  Knight,  Delius,  and  Moberly,  puts  a  stop  after  ‘  well-favour’d,’  and  a  comma 
after  ‘wicked,’  thus  preserving,  as  he  claims,  ‘a  natural  and  just  thought  full  of 
dramatic  beauty.’  The  objection  to  the  present  text  he  finds  in  ‘  Those,’  which,  he 
says,  makes  the  sentence  ‘  particular,  confining  it  to  some  persons  then  present,  which 
are  Regan  and  Goneril.’  His  interpretation  of  line  253  is  that  ‘  it  is  expressive  of 
the  speaker’s  astonishment  that  the  judgement  of  heaven  is  not  fallen  upon  his 
daughters  for  their  wickedness;  that  they  are  still  “  well-favour’d,”  and  their  beauty 
not  blasted,  as  he  had  particularly  imprecated  upon  one  of  them  a  few  pages  before. 
The  line  should  be  spoken  with  bitterness,  a  contracted  brow,  and  surveying  them 
from  head  to  foot,  and  a  great  pause  made  between  that  and  the  next  line.’  Steevens  : 
A  similar  thought  appears  in  Cym.  V,  v,  2 1 5-2 1 7,  ‘  It  is  I  that  all  the  abhorred  things 
of  the  earth  amend  By  being  worse  than  they.’ 

261.  Oh,  reason,  &c.]  Coleridge:  Observe  that  the  tranquillity  which  follows 
the  first  stunning  of  the  blow  permits  Lear  to  reason. 

262.  superfluous]  Moberly:  Have  in  their  deepest  poverty  some  very  poor 
thing  which  may  be  called  superfluous. 


ACT  II,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


163 

Man’s  life  is  cheap  as  beast’s.  Thou  art  a  lady ; 

If  only  to  go  warm  were  gorgeous,  265 

Why,  nature  needs  not  what  thou  gorgeous  wear'st, 

Which  scarcely  keeps  thee  warm.  But  for  true  need,— 

You  heavens,  give  me  that  patience,  patience  I  need! 

You  see  me  here,  you  gods,  a  poor  old  man. 

As  full  of  grief  as  age ;  wretched  in  both.  2/0 

If  it  be  you  that  stirs  these  daughters’  hearts 
Against  their  father,  fool  me  not  so  much 
To  bear  it  tamely ;  .touch  me  with  noble  anger, 


264.  life  tr]  life  as  Qt.  life's  as  Q,, 
Jen.  Glo.  +  ,  Mob. 

least' s~\  Cap.  leafs  QqF3F4. 
Beafes  FXF9.  leasts'  Han.  Sch. 

266.  wear’st]  weayef  Qq. 

267.  warm.  But . need, — ]  Steev. 

warms ,  lut . need ,  QqFf  (need:  F^. 

warm ;  lut. ..need,  Rowe  + ,  Jen.  warm. 
But.. .need !  Johns,  warm. — But. ..need. 
Cap. 


26S.  that  patience,  patience]  that  pa¬ 
tience  which  Pope  +  .  that:  patience, 
patience  Jen.  Sch.  lut  patience,  pa¬ 
tience  Coll.  iii.  your  patience  that  Nich¬ 
olson.* * 

269.  man]  fellow  Qq. 

271.  stirs]  F4,  Ktly,  Cam.  Wr.  Sch. 
firres  QqFxF2F3.  stir  Rowe  et  cet. 

272.  so]  to  Qr.  too  Q2. 

273.  tamely]  lamely  Qq. 


265.  gorgeous]  Walker  (Vers.  178)  doubts  if-this  word  be  the  correct  one. 

*  Note  “  gorgeous  ”  in  the  next  line,  and  see  Shakespeare  as  to  such  repetitions.’ 

267.  need, — ]  Moberly:  To  imagine  how  Shakespeare  would  have  ended  this 
sentence,  one  must  be  a  Shakespeare.  The  poor  king  stops  short  in  his  definition ; 
it  is  too  plain  that  his  true  need  is  patience. 

268.  that . .  .  need!]  Capell:  The  repetition  of  ‘patience’  is  energetical,  and 

*  that  ’  a  word  -of  great  force ;  importing — that  patience  which  is  seen  in  you, 
‘  heavens,’  that  patience  which  none  but  you  can  bestow  on  one.  in  my  situation. 
Mason:  The  passage  should  run  thus:  ‘but  for  true  need.  You  heavens!  give  me 
patience : — patience  I  need.’  Nature  needs  not  the  gorgeous  habits  you  wear,  but 
to  supply  a  real  need,  you  heavens!  give  me  patience — patience  I  need  indeed. 
Hudson  follows  Mason’s  reading  of  this  line.  Jervis  gives  what  is  essentially  the 
same  reading.  Malone:  I  believe  the  word  ‘patience’  was  repeated  inadvertently 
by  the  compositor.  White  and  Keightley  adopted  this  conjecture  of  Malone’s. 
Ritson  :  The  compositor  has  repeated  the  wrong  word.  -  Read  :  ‘  give  me  that  pa¬ 
tience  that  I  need.’  Or,  still  better,  perhaps :  ‘  give  me  patience ! — that  I  need.’ 
Collier  (ed.  ii) :  Instead  of  ‘that  patience  ’  the  (MS)  has  *  lut  patience.’  We  may 
doubt  whether  the  line  did  not  originally  run :  ‘  give  me  but  patience  that  I  need.’ 
Dyce  :  I  would  not  assert,  with  Capell,  that  the  old  text  is  uncorrupted.  Walker 
(  Crit.  iii,  278)  prefers  either  Malone’s  conj.  or  Ritson’s  second  suggestion.  Wright: 
If  any  change  be  made  Mason’s  seems. best.  Abbott,  §476,  would  make  ‘give 
.  .  .  need  ’  a  separate  line,  pronouncing  the  second  ‘  patience  ’  as  a  trisyllable. 

271.  that  stirs]  For  instances  of  the  relative  with  a  plural  antecedent  followed 
by  a  singular  verb,  see  Abbott,  §  247. 

272,  273.  so  . . .  To]  See  I,  iv,  36. 


•  •  • 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ii,  sc.  iv. 


I64 


And  let  not  women’s  weapons,  water-drops, 

Stain  my  man’s  cheeks  ! — No,  you  unnatural  hags,  275 

I  will  have  such  revenges  on  you  both 

That  all  the  world  shall — I  will  do  such  things, — 

What  they  are,  yet  I  know  not ;  but  they  shall  be 
The  terrors  of  the  earth.  You  think  I’ll  weep; 

No,  I’ll  not  weep.  [Storm  and  tempest,  280 

I  have  full  cause  of  weeping ;  but  this  heart 
Shall  break  into  a  hundred  thousand  flaws. 

Or  ere  I’ll  weep. — O  Fool,  I  shall  go  mad ! 

[Exeunt  Lear ,  Gloucester ,  Kent ,  and  Fool. 

Com.  Let  us  withdraw ;  ’twill  be  a  storm. 

Reg.  This  house  is  little ;  the  old  man  and’s  people  285 
Cannot  be  well  bestow’d. 

Gen.  ’Tis  his  own  blame ;  ’  hath  put  himself  from  rest, 


274.  And  let ]  Ff,  Knt,  Dyce,  Sta. 
Glo.  +  ,  Sch.  O  let  Qq  et  cet. 

277.  shall — ]fhall ,  Qx. 

things, — ]  Han.  things,  QqFf+. 
279.  earth.']  Johns.  earth ,  Q,F4. 
earth  ;  Q2F3.  earth  ?  F,Fa. 

[Storm  and  tempest.]  Ff,  after 
weeping,  line  281.  After  storm,  line  284, 
Pope.  Om.  Qq.  Storm  heard  at  a  Dis- 
ance.  (after  heart,  line  281),  Coll. 

2S0-2S2.  No. ..flaws,]  Jen.  Two  lines, 
the  first  ending  weeping,  QqFf +  ,  Cap. 
2S1.  I  have]  Though  I  have  Han. 
but  this]  This  Popc  +  . 

282.  into  a  hundred  thousand]  in  a 
IOO  tkoufand  Qr.  in  a  thoufar.d  Q2. 
into  a  thousand  Pope  +  ,  Cap. 

flaws]  flowes  Qq. 

283.  Or  ere]  Ere  Qa.  Or  e'er 
Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Dyce  ii. 

TIP]  He  Qq.  lie  Fx.  /FaF3F4+, 

Jen. 


[Exeunt.. .Fool.]  Qa  (subs).  Ex¬ 
eunt  Lear,  Leifter,  Kent...  Qt.  Exeunt. 
Ff. 

Scene  xii.  Pope,  Han.  Scene 
XIII.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 

284.  Corn.]  Duke  Qq. 

withdraw  ;  'twill]  withdraw  us ; 
it  will  Ktly. 

284-2SS.  Let. ....folly.]  QqFf.  Lines 
end  house. ..cannot. ..put. ..folly,  in  Cap. 
Steev.  ’93,  Ec.  Lines  end  house. ..can- 
not. .. bestow' d... rest,. .folly.  Bos.  Lines 
end  storm... people... blame  ; ...folly .  Ktly. 

285.  little]  small  Pope,  Han. 
and’s]  FaF3F4,  Rowe,  Coll.  Sing. 

Wh.  Sch.  an'ds  Ft.  and  his  Qq  et  cet. 

286.  bestow'd]  bestowed  Qq,  Sch. 
2S7.  blame;  'hath]  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

blame  hath  QqFf+,  Coll.  Sta.  Wh. 
blame,  he'ath  Han.  Jen.  blame;  he 
hath  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Ec.  Ktly.  blame  ; 
hath  Bos.  et  cet. 


282.  flaws]  Malone  :  A  *  flaw  ’  signifies  a  crack,  but  is  here  used  for  a  small 
broken  particle.  Singer:  This  word,  as  Bailey  observes,  wa s  *  especially  applied  to 
the  breaking  off  of  shivers  or  thin  pieces  from  precious  stones.’ 

283.  Or  ere]  See  Ham.  I,  ii,  147.  Hazlitt  :  If  there  is  anything  or  any  author 
like  the  yearning  of  the  heart  [in  this  scene],  these  throes  of  tenderness,  this  pro¬ 
found  expression  of  all  that  can  be  thought  and  felt  in  the  most  heart-rending  situa¬ 
tions  that  it  exhibits,  we  are  glad  of  it;  but  it  is  in  some  author  we  have  not  read. 

2S7.  blame;  ’hath]  Collier,  following  the  QqFf,  says  that  ‘blame’  is  the 


ACT  II,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


165 

And  must  needs  taste  his  folly.  288 

Reg.  For  his  particular,  I’ll  receive  him  gladly. 

But  not  one  follower. 

Gon.  So  am  I  purposed. —  290 

Where  is  my  lord  of  Gloucester  ? 

Corn.  Follow’d  the  old  man  forth ;  he  is  return’d. 

Re-enter  GLOUCESTER. 

Glou.  The  king  is  in  high  rage. 

Com.  Whither  is  he  going  ? 

Glou.  He  calls  to  horse ;  but  will  I  know  not  whither. 

Com.  ’Tis  best  to  give  him  way ;  he  leads  himself.  295 
Gon.  My  lord,  entreat  him  by  no  means  to  stay. 

Glou.  Alack !  the  night  comes  on,  and  the  high  winds 
Do  sorely  ruffle ;  for  many  miles  about 
There’s  scarce  a  bush. 

Reg.  Oh,  sir,  to  wilful  men 

The  injuries  that  they  themselves  procure  300 

Must  be  their  schoolmasters.  Shut  up  your  doors. 

He  is  attended  with  a  desperate  train ; 


283.  And]  He  Coll.  (MS). 

290.  Gon.]  Duke.  Qq. 

purposed ]  pufpos'd  Qt. 

290,291.  So. ..  Gloucester  ?]  One  line, 
Qq. 

292.  Com.]  Reg.  Qq. 

Follow'd ]  Pope.  Followed  Qq 
Ff,  Sch. 

Re-enter...]  As  in  Dyce.  Enter... 
(after  line  291),  QqFf.  Re-enter...  (after 
line  291),  Cap. 

293,  294.  rage. ..but  will ]  rage,  and 


will  Qq,  Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 

293.  Whither ]  Whether  F^F,. 

294.  whither ]  whether  Qq,  F,F2. 

295.  Com.]  Re.  Q,.  Reg.  Q2. 
best ]  good  Qq. 

297 .  high ]  Ff+,  Cap.  Knt,  Coll. 
Dyce  i,  Sch.  bleak  Qq  et  cet. 

298, 299.  Do. ..bush.]  One  line,  Qq. 

298.  ruffle]  rufflel  Qx.  rufflell  Q3. 
russle  Pope,  Han.  Jen.  rustle  Cap.  Ec. 

299.  scarce]  not  Qq,  Jen. 


nominative  to  ‘hath  put.’  Dyce  (ed.  ii)  marks  the  absorption  of  he  in  ‘hath’  by  an 
apostrophe.  See  II,  ii,  114. 

289.  particular]  Wright  :  For  himself,  for  his  own  sake.  Compare  Ant.  and 
Cleop.  IV,  ix,  20;  where  ‘in  thine  own  particular’  means  as  far  as  you  yourself  are 
concerned.  See,  also,  All's  Well,  II,  v,  66. 

296.  stay]  Halliwell  :  *  Storme  begins  ’  is  here  a  MS  stage- direction  in  a  copy 
of  the  first  edition  of  1608,  in  the  handwriting  of  one  contemporary,  or  nearly  so, 
with  Sh. 

302.  train]  Eccles  :  We  are  led  to  imagine,  from  a  passage  in  Act  III,  that 
Lear’s  attendant  knights  had  not  yet  arrived.  Clarke  :  Regan’s  barefaced  pre. 
tence, — insisting  on  speaking  of  her  old  father  as  still  attended  by  a  large  train  of 


KING  LEAR 


[ACT  III,  SC.  L 


1 66 

And  what  they  may  incense  him  to,  being  apt  303 

To  have  his  ear  abused,  wisdom  bids  fear. 

Com.  Shut  up  your  doors,  my  lord  ;  ’tis  a  wild  night ;  305 

My  Regan  counsels  well.  Come  out  o’  th’  storm. 

[Exeunt.^ 


ACT  III 


Scene  I.  A  heath. 

Storm  still.  Enter  Kent  and  a  Gentleman,  severally. 

Kent.  Who’s  there,  besides  foul  weather  ?  I 

Gent.  One  minded  like  the  weather,  most  unquietly. 

Kent.  I  know  you.  Where’s  the  king  ? 

Gent.  Contending  with  the  fretful  elements ; 

Bids  the  wind  blow  the  earth  into  the  sea,  5 

Or  swell  the  curled  waters  ’bove  the  main. 


303.  to]  too  Q?FX. 

305.  wild ]  wil'd  FxFa. 

306.  Regan]  Reg  Qx. 

o'  t/i’]  oth'  FxFa.  at  'h  Qt.  ath 

Qr 

[Exeunt.]  Exeunt  omnes.  Qa. 

A  heath.]  Rowe. 

Storm  still.]  Om.  Qq.  A  Storm  is 
heard,  with  Thunder  and  Lightning. 
Rowe. 


severally]  Ff.  at  feuerall  doores.  Qq. 
meeting.  Cap. 

I.  V/ho's  there]  Whais  here  Qt. 
What's  heere  Qa.  What’s  here  Cap. 
Jen.  Who's  here  Mai.  Steev.  Bos.  Coll. 
Sing.  Wh.  Ktly. 

besides]  beftde  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 
Ec.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly. 

4.  elements]  element  Qq,  Cap.  Steev. 
Var. 


followers,  both  in  this  speech  and  the  one  a  little  before,  where  she  talks  of  there  not 

being  room  for  ‘  the  old  man  and  his  people,’  while  in  reality  he  has  with  him  only 

his  faithfu;  Kent  and  Fool, — is  thoroughly  in  character  with  her  brassy  nature. 

4.  element,,  j  Elet  :*nt  of  the  Qq  is,  as  Capell  says,  the  air  alone.  That  the 
Ff  are  right,  see  III,  ii,  10. 

5.  Bids]  See  II,  iv,  287. 

6.  main]  Capell  :  This  is  put,  as  every  one  sees,  for — the  land ;  it  is  still  a  sea- 
term  for  it,  and  often  us’d  in  that  sense  by  old  voyage-writers,  from  whom  Sh.  had  it ; 
the  sound  pleas’d  him;  and  he  made  no  scruple  of  using  it,  well  knowing  it  could 
not  be  mistaken.  Wright  :  Steevens  quotes  from  Bacon’s  Considerations  touching  a 
War  with  Spain  ( Life  and  Letters,  ed.  Spedding,  vii,  490)  :  ‘  In  the  year  that  fol¬ 
lowed,  of  1589,  we  gave  the  Spaniards  no  rest,  but  turned  challengers,  and  invaded 
the  main  of  Spain ;  ’  where  the  context  shows  that  he  is  not  speaking  of  what  was 
technically  known  as * * *  4 5 6  the  Spanish  main,’  but  of  the  landing  an  army  on  the  coast 
of  Spain  itself.  In  the  very  next  page  Bacon  says :  4  In  the  year  1596  was  the  second 
invasion  that  we  made  upon  the  main  territories  of  Spain,’  which  shows  clearly  what 


KING  LEAR 


ACT  III,  SC.  i.] 


I67 


That  things  might  change  or  cease; *  *  tears  his  white  hair,  7 

*  Which  the  impetuous  blasts,  with  eyeless  rage, 

*  Catch  in  their  fury,  and  make  nothing  of; 

*  Strives  in  his  little  world  of  man  to  out-scorn  10 

*  The  to-and-fro-confli6ling  wind  and  rain. 

*  This  night,  wherein  the  cub-drawn  bear  would  couch, 


7-iS.  tears. ..all.]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe.  Cap. 

10,  11.  Om.  Pope,  Han.  12.  wherein]  in  which  Pope,  Han. 

11.  to-and-fro-conjli fling]  Hyphens, 


was  meant  by  ‘the  main’  in  the  former  passage.  Delius  doubts  that  this  means  the 
land ;  the  sense  being  rather  that  the  curled  waters  swell  above  their  own  especial 
domain,  the  sea,  and  overflow  the  land.  Jennens:  Though  all  the  editions  have 

*  main,’  it  is  very  likely  Sh.  wrote  moon,  which  is  much  better,  because  it  more 
strongly  expresses  (according  to  Shakespeare’s  custom)  the  confusion  which  Lear  in 
bis  rage  would  have  introduced  into  nature ;  besides,  ‘  main  ’  is  ambiguous,  appli¬ 
cable  to  sea  or  land.  The  effect  of  overflowing  the  land  is  not  so  great  nor  so  certain 
confusion;  the  sea  often  does  that  and  returns  to  its  usual  bounds;  whereas  the 
swelling  of  the  waters  above  the  moon  is  entirely  preternatural,  and  best  answers  the 
madness  of  bidding  the  wind  blow  the  earth  into  the  sea.  According  to  Schmidt 
(Lex.),  Sh.  uses  ‘  main  ’  more  frequently  for  the  sea  than  for  the  land,  but  here  clearly 
for  the  latter. 

8,  9.  Which  .  .  .  of]  Heath:  Which  the  impetuous  blasts,  with  undiscerning 
rage,  catch  in  their  fury,  and  scatter  or  disperse  to  nothing  as  fast  as  he  tears  it  off. 
Delius,  more  correctly,  interprets  *  make  nothing  of’  as  meaning  to  treat  with 
irreverence ;  as  Schmidt  says,  it  is  the  opposite  to  ‘  make  much  of.’ 

10.  little  world  of  man]  There  may  be  a  reference  here  to  the  phraseology  of 
the  early  astrologers,  who  were  wont  to  call  Man  the  microcosm,  or  *  the  little  world/ 
as  containing  in  miniature  the  elements  of  the  macrocosm,  which  is  the  universe, 
terrestrial  and  heavenly.  See  Cornelius  Agrippa  Magische  IVerke,  ii,  cap.  27 ;  or 
Paracelsus  Sagacis  Philosophies,  1658,  Lib.  i,  p.  532,  a.  In  vol.  ix  of  Dodsley’s  Old 
Plays  there  is  A  Morall  Maske  by  Thomas  Nabbes,  called  Microcosmus,  1637;  in 
the  commendatory  verses  both  by  Rich.  Broome  and  Will.  Cufaude,  ‘  man  ’  is  spoken 
of  as  ‘  the  little  world.’  I  am  not  sure  that  the  macrocosm  is  not  referred  to  by 
Gloucester  in  IV,  vi,  133 :  ‘  O  ruin’d  piece  of  nature !  This  great  world  shall  so  wear 
out  to  nought,’  perhaps  alluding  to  the  bond  which,  as  astrologers  maintain,  exists 
between  the  little  world  and  the  great  world.  In  reference  to  the  macrocosm,  see 
notes  on  Faust,  either  in  Hayward’s  or  Taylor’s  translation. — Ed. 

10.  out-scorn]  Steevens:  I  suspect  we  should  read  ‘out -storm?  Compare 

Lovers'  Complaint,  7  :  ‘  Storming  her  world  with  sorrow’s  wind  and  rain.’ 

12.  cub-drawn]  Pope:  A  bear  drawn  by  nature  to  its  young.  Upton  (p.  31 1, 
ed.  i) :  That  is,  having  her  cubs  drawn  from  her,  being  robbed  of  her  cubs.  War- 
burton  :  That  is,  a  bear  whose  dugs  have  been  drawn  dry  by  its  young.  Even 
hunger  and  the  support  of  its  young,  would  not  force  the  bear  to  leave  her  den  oa 
such  a  night.  Steevens  notes  the  recurrence  of  the  same  idea  in  As  You  Like  it, 
IV,  ii,  1 15  and  127. 


KING  LEAR 


[ACT  III,  SC.  1. 


1 68 


*  The  lion  and  the  belly-pinched  wolf  1 3 

*  Keep  their  fur  dry,  unbonneted  he  runs, 

*  And  bids  what  will  take  all.* * 

Kent.  But  who  is  with  him?  15 

Gent.  None  but  the  Fool ;  who  labours  to  out-jest 
His  heart-strook  injuries. 

Kent.  Sir,  I  do  know  you ; 

And  dare,  upon  the  warrant  of  my  note, 

Commend  a  dear  thing  to  you.  There  is  division. 

Although  as  yet  the  face  of  it  is  cover’d  20 

With  mutual  cunning,  ’twixt  Albany  and  Cornwall ; 

Who  have — as  who  have  not,  that  their  great  stars 
Throned  and  set  high  ? — servants,  who  seem  no  less, 

Which  are  to  France  the  spies  and  speculations 


13.  belly-pinched ]  Hyphen,  Pope. 

17.  heart-strook ]  F3F4,  Cap.  Knt,  Sch. 
heart-Jlrooke  F,Fa.  heart  Jlrooke  Qq. 
heart-struck  Rowe  et  cet. 

18.  nets']  Arte  or  art  Qq,  Cap.  Mai. 
Steev.  Bos. 

19.  There  is]  There's  Pope  + ,  Dyce  ii. 

20.  w]  Ff  + ,  Cap.  Sch.  be  Qq  et  cet. 

21.  cunning]  craft  Pope,  Han. 


22-29.  Mho  have . .furnishings  ;] 

Om.  Qq.  In  the  margin.  Pope,  Han. 

22.  that]  -whom  Rowe  ii  +  . 
stars]  Stars  have  Ktly. 

23.  Throned]  Thron'd  Ff.  Throne 
Theob.  ii,  Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Ec.  Dyce  ii, 
Kuds.  Coil.  iii. 

high? — ]  high ?  Rowe  ii.  high; 
Ff.  hi s^h,  Rowe  i. 


15.  take  all]  Schmidt:  An  exclamation  of  despair,  like  *  Lucifer  take  all’;  ‘a 
shame  take  all,’  &c. ;  also,  apparently,  by  players  when  staking  all  on  a  single  card. 

*  Wouldst  thou  fight  well  ?’  asks  Anthony  of  Enobarbus,  and  the  latter  replies  ‘  I’ll 
strike,  and  cry  Take  all.’  French  Va  tout ! 

18.  rny  note]  Johnson  :  My  observation.  Cafell  (who  here  followed  the  Qq) 
explains  art  as  the  *  art  of  manners  and  face-judging,  skill  in  knowledge  of  men.’ 
Malone  quotes  as  in  favour  of  the  Qq,  Macb.  I,  iv,  11,  12.  Hudson  :  But  it  ap¬ 
pears  Kent  *  knows  ’  his  man,  and  therefore  has  no  occasion  to  use  the  art  or  skill 
in  question. 

19.  dear]  See  I,  iv,  266. 

23.  who  seem  no  less]  Capell  supposes  that  this  means  servants  that  seem 
as  great  as  themselves,  servants  in  high  place.  Delius,  however,  interprets  it  as 
servants  who  seem  to  be  no  less,  or  no  other,  than  what  they  are — namely,  servants. 

24.  speculations]  Johnson  {Diet.)  :  Examiner,  spy.  The  word  is  found  no¬ 

where  else,  and  is  probably  here  misprinted  for  speculators.  [This  conj.  was 
adopted  by  Singer  (ed.  ii),  and  Hudson.]  Collier  (ed.  ii) :  Spectators  is  the 
word  substituted  by  the  (MS).  *  Speculations  ’  cannot  well  on  any  account  be  right, 

while  spectators  completes  both  meaning  and  metre ;  of  course,  the  emphasis  in  spec¬ 
tators  must  not  here  be  placed  on  the  second  syllable.  See  Schmidt  {Lex.),  p.  I42r, 
for  a  list  of  over  sixty  instances  in  Sh.  of  the  use  of  the  abstract  for  the  concrete,  to 
which  *  discretion,’  II,  iv,  145,  may  be  added. 


ACT  III,  SC.  i.] 

KING  LEAR 

169 

Intelligent  of  our  state. 

What  hath  been  seen, 

25 

Either  in  snuffs  and  packings  of  the  dukes, 

Or  the  hard  rein  which  both  of  them  have  borne 
Against  the  old  kind  king,  or  something  deeper. 

Whereof  perchance  these  are  but  furnishings ; 

*  But  true  it  is,  from  France  there  comes  a  power  30 

*  Into  this  scatter’d  kingdom ;  who  already, 

*  Wise  in  our  negligence,  have  secret  feet 

*  In  some  of  our  best  ports,  and  are  at  point 


25.  state."]  Ff+,Sch.  state;  Stcev. 
cet. 

hath]  have  Pope  ii. 

27.  have]  hath  Ft. 

29.  furnishings ;]  Cap.  furnishings — - 
Rovve+.  fumijhings.  Ff,  Johns,  flour - 
ishings.  Coll.  (MS). 

30-42.  But. ..you.]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe. 

30.  But]  And  Han. 


31-35.  Into... far]  As  in  Pope.  Four 
lines,  ending  negligence. ..Ports, ...banner 
...fame  in  Qq. 

31.  scatter’d]  fcattered  Q,.  fcatterd 
Q2.  shatter'd  Han.  scathed  Warb. 

32.  have]  hath  Jen. 

feet]  fee  Qa,  Johns.  Jen.  see  Q3. 
sea  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  seize  Warb.  foot 
Cap.  Ec. 


25.  Intelligent]  Johnson  (Bid.):  Giving  information.  Steevens:  What  fol¬ 
lows  are  the  circumstances  in  the  state  of  the  kingdom,  of  which  he  supposes  the 
spies  gave  France  the  intelligence.  Schmidt  cites  also  III,  v,  9,  and  III, 
vii,  11. 

25-29.  What  hath  .  .  .  furnishings]  Schmidt  :  Whether  these  incomplete  sen¬ 
tences  are  due  to  the  poet,  or  to  the  style  in  which  the  scene  has  been  transmitted  to 
us,  cannot  be  decided ;  lines  22-29  are  lacking  in  the  Qq,  and  from  30-42  in  the 
Ff,  and  it  is  easily  conceivable  that  between  29  and  30  there  were  other  lines  which 
have  been  omitted  in  both  texts. 

26.  snuffs]  Wright  :  Quarrels.  Nares  :  To  take  in  snuff  is  to  be  angry,  to 
take  offence. 

26.  packings]  Steevens:  Underhand  contrivances.  [See  Ham.  Ill,  iv,  21 1.] 

29.  furnishings]  Johnson  :  What  we  now  call  colours,  external  pretenses. 
Steevens  :  A  furnish  anciently  signified  a  sample.  So  in  the  Epistle  before 
Greene’s  Groats-worth  of  Witte  :  *  For  to  lend  the  world  a  furnish  of  witte  she  layes 
her  owne  to  pawne.’  Staunton  :  Steevens’s  illustration  from  Greene  is  not  con¬ 
clusive.  Hudson  :  That  is,  whereof  these  things  are  but  the  trimmings  or  append¬ 
ages,  not  the  thing  itself,  but  only  the  circumstances  or  furniture  of  the  thing. 
Wright  :  In  Scotland  the  trimmings  of  a  lady’s  dress  are  called  ‘  furnishings.’ 

31.  scatter’d]  Johnson:  Divided, unsettled, disunited.  Schmidt:  Sh.  does  not 
elsewhere  use  the  word  in  this  sense.  Perhaps  Hanmer’s  shattered  is  right. 

32.  feet]  Upton  (p.  195,  ed.  ii)  suggests  seat — that  is,  secretly  situated,  or  lodged, 
or  perhaps  see  for  the  Latin  sedes,  which  is  used  by  Douglas  in  his  version  of  Virgil, 
and  by  Chaucer,  and  which  still  survives  in  ‘  a  Bishop’s  see.’  Schmidt  :  This  ex¬ 
pression  is  akin  to  the  language  of  the  time,  when  footed  meant  the  same  as 
landed. 

33.  at  point]  See  I,  iv,  319. 

IS 


170 


KING  LEAR 


[act  hi,  sc.  i. 


*  To  show  their  open  banner.  Now  to  you ; 

*  If  on  my  credit  you  dare  build  so  far  35 

*  To  make  your  speed  to  Dover,  you  shall  find 

*  Some  that  will  thank  you,  making  just  report 

*  Of  how  unnatural  and  bemadding  sorrow 

*  The  king  hath  cause  to  plain. 

*  I  am  a  gentleman  of  blood  and  breeding,  40 

*  And  from  some  knowledge  and  assurance  offer 

*  This  office  to  you.* 

Gent.  I  will  talk  further  with  you. 

Kent.  No-,  do  not. 

For  confirmation  that  I  am  much  more 

Than  my  out-wall,  open  this  purse  and  take  45 

What  it  contains.  If  you  shall  see  Cordelia, — 

As  fear  not  but  you  shall, — show  her  this  ring, 

And  she  will  tell  you  who  that  fellow  is 
That  yet  you  do  not  know.  Fie  on  this  storm  1 
I  will  go  seek  the  king. 

Gent.  Give  me  your  hand ;  50 

Have  you  no  more  to  say  ? 

Kent.  Few  words,  but,  to  effedt,  more  than  all  yet ; 


35.  credit ]  credite  Q2. 

38.  bemadding ]  madding  Pope,  Han. 

39-42.  The. ..you.]  Lines  end  gentle¬ 
man, ...knowledge  and... you.  Cap. 

41,  42.  And... you.]  As  in  Jen.  The 
first  line  ends  affurance  Qq. 

assurance,. ...you.]  assurance  of 
you ,  Offer  this  office.  Pope  +  .  Assur¬ 
ance  of  you,  offer  this  office  to  you.  Cap. 

43.  I  will]  I'll  Pope  +  . 


43.  further]  farther  Qq. 

44.  I  am]  /Qq. 

47.  fear]  doubt  Qa. 
this]  that  Rowe+. 

48.  that]  Ff,  Jen.  Knt,  Coll.  Del.  Wh. 
Ktly,  Sch.  this  Rowe + .  yowrQqetcet. 

50,51.  Give. ..say  ?]  One  line,  Qq. 
52-55.  Four  lines,  ending  to... found 
...this — ...other.  Sch. 


35,  36.  so  .  .  .  To]  See  I,  iv,  36;  II,  iv,  11. 

43.  I  .  .  .  you]  Delius  :  This  implies  a  courteous  postponement  or  dismissal  of 
a  request ;  this  explains  Kent’s  reply. 

48.  fellow]  Schmidt  :  That  is,  companion.  It  is  only  by  its  use  in  this  sense 
that  we  can  understand  Malvolio’s  blunder  :  *  let  this  fellow  be  looked  to :  fellow ! 
not  Malvolio,  nor  after  my  degree,  but  fellow.’  As  a  general  rule  this  word  is  found 
in  this  sense  joined  to  a  possessive  pronoun,  and  therefore  many  editors  prefer  * your 
fellow  ’  of  the  Qq. 

52.  to  effect]  Abbott,  §  186 :  The  use  of  to  meaning  ‘  with  a  view  to,  *  for  an 
end,’  &.C.,  is  of  course  still  common  before  verbs,  but  the  Elizabethans  used  to  in 
this  sense  before  nouns. 


KING  LEAR 


ACT  in,  sc.  ii.] 


171 


That  when  we  have  found  the  king, — in  which  your  pain  53 

That  way,  I’ll  this, — he  that  first  lights  on  him 

Holla  the  other.  [ Exeunt  severally .  5  5 


Scene  II.  Another  part  of  the  heath.  Storm  still. 

Enter  Lear  and  Fool. 

Lear.  Blow,  winds,  and  crack  your  cheeks !  rage !  blow  I 
You  cataradts  and  hurricanoes,  spout 
Till  you  have  drench’d  our  steeples,  drown’d  the  cocks  1 
You  sulphurous  and  thought-executing  fires, 

Vaunt-couriers  of  oak-cleaving  thunderbolts, 


53-55.  Three  lines,  ending  King,... 
lights. ..ether.  Qq. 

53.  54.  in. ..this,']  Ff.  lie  this  way, 
you  that  Qq,  Jen.  in  which  you  take 
That  way,  I  this  Pope,  Theob.  Warb. 
for  which  you  take  That  way  I  this 
Han.  Johns. 

54.  way,]  way ;  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt. 

55.  Holla ]  hollow  QqF4.  Halloo 
Warb.  Johns. 

[Exeunt  severally.]  Theob.  Ex¬ 
eunt.  QqFf. 

Scene  ii.]  Scena  Secunda.  Ff.  (Scsena 
Fa).  Scene  continued  by  Rowe,  Theob. 

Another  part...]  Cap. 

Storm  still.]  Om.  Qq. 

I.  winds ]  windes  F,Fa.  wind  Qq, 
Jen.  Mai.  Steev.  Bos.  Sing. 

rage l  blow!]  blow!  rage!  and 


5 

blow  !  Cap.  conj.  (in  Corrigenda,  vol.  x). 

2-9.  Eight  lines,  ending  drencht... 
and.  ..to. ..head,.  ..flat. . . .  natures....  make . .. 
man.  Qq. 

2.  cataradls]  cater ickes  Q,.  carterickes 

Q,. 

hurricanoes ]  Hyrncano' s  F,.  Hur~ 
ricano's  FaF3F4>  Ilircanios  Qq. 

3.  our]  Ff.  The  Qq,  Jen. 
drown'd]  drownd  Qa.  drown  Ft 

F3F4,  Rowe,  drowne  Fa. 

4.  sulphurous]  Cap.  fulpherous  Qq. 
Sulph'rous  Ff+,  Sch. 

thought-executing]  No  hyphen,  Qq. 

5.  Vaunt-couriers]  Pope.  vaunt - 
currers  Qq.  Vaunt-curriors  Ff.  Vant- 
couriers  Cap. 

of]  Ff-f,  Cap.  Dyce  i,  Sch.  to 
Qq  et  cet. 


53,  54.  in  .  .  .  this]  Wright:  In  which  your  pain  (lies)  That  way,  I’ll  (go)  this. 

Scene  II]  This  scene  is  quoted  at  length,  with  comments  of  admiration,  in 
Smith’s  Longinus,  p.  108. 

2.  cataracts]  Moberly:  Probably  in  the  sense  in  which  we  have  naraplaKTOi 
bpfjpog  in  Greek. 

2.  hurricanoes]  Dyce:  Water-spouts.  See  Tro.  and  Cres.  V,  ii,  172. 

4.  thought-executing]  Johnson:  Doing  execution  with  rapidity  equal  to 
thought.  Moberly  :  This  idea  seems  rather  to  be  involved  in  the  compound  than 
expressed  by  it;  as  ‘  thought-executing’  must  mean  ‘executing  tljp  thought  of  Him 
who  casts  you.* 

5.  Vaunt-couriers]  Steevens:  It  originally  meant  the  foremost  scouts  of  an 
army.  In  Jarvis  Markham’s  English  Arcadia,  1607 :  ‘As  soon  as  the  first  vancurrer 
encountered  him  face  to  face.’  Malone  :  Compare  ‘  Jove’s  lightnings,  the  precursors 
o’  the  dreadful  thunder-claps.’ — Temp.  I,  ii,  201.  Hunter  (ii,  270)  calls  attention 


172 


KING  LEAR 


[act  ill,  SC.  iL 


Singe  my  white  head !  And  thou,  all-shaking  thunder,  6 

Strike  flat  the  thick  rotundity  o’  th’  world ! 

Crack  nature’s  moulds,  all  germens  spill  at  once 
That  make  ingrateful  man  ! 

Fool.  O  nuncle,  court  holy-water  in  a  dry  house  is  10 
better  than  this  rain-water  out  o’  door.  Good  nuncle,  in ; 
ask  thy  daughters’  blessing;  here’s  a  night  pities  neither 
wise  men  nor  fools. 


6.  Singe]  fngQ2.  Sindge  Ff. 
all-shaking']  No  hyphen,  Qq. 

7.  Strike]  finite  Qq,  Glo  +  ,  Mob, 
o'  th']  of  the  Qq. 

8.  moulds]  Mold  Qq,  Pope-1- ,  Jen.  Ec. 
germens]  Cap.  Germains .  Qq, 

Rowe,  Pope,  germaines  F,Fa.  ger • 
manes  F3F4.  germins  Theob.  +  ,  Coll. 
Wh.  Cam. 

9.  make]  makes  Ff,  Rowe,  Ktly,  Sch. 
10-13.  Four  lines,  ending  koufe.... 

door...bleffmg..foole.  in  Qq. 

10.  court  holy-water]  courl-holy-water 
Rowe  + . 


10.  11.  hcly-water....rain-water]  No 
hyphens,  Qq. 

11.  this  rain-water]  the  Rain-water 
F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope  i,  Han.  the  rain¬ 
waters  Pope  ii  +  . 

o'  door]  a  doore  Qq. 

12.  ask]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Plan,  Cap. 
Knt,  Dyce  i,  Sch.  and  aske  Qq  et  cet. 

daughters']  Daughter1  F3. 

pities]  that  pities  Pope  + . 
neither]  nether  Qt.  neyther  Qa. 

13.  men  nor  fools]  man  nor  foole  Qq, 
Jen.  Glo. +  ,  Mob. 


to  the  use  of  this  ‘  very  rare  word  ’  in  Harsnet,  where  one  of  the  Peckhams  is  called 

*  the  harbinger,  the  host,  the  steward,  the  vaunt-courier,  the  sacrist,  and  the  pander  ’ 
to  the  priests.  Wright:  Cotgrave  gives,  ‘Avant-coureur:  m.  A  forerunner,  Auant 
curror.’ 

7.  rotundity]  Delius  :  This,  in  connection  with  what  follows,  suggests  not  only 
the  sphere  of  the  globe,  but  the  rcundness  of  gestation. 

8.  Crack  .  .  .  once]  Theobald  :  Crack  nature’s  mould  and  spill  all  the  seeds  of 
matter  that  are  hoarded  within  it.  See  the  same  thought  in  Wint,  Tale ,  IV,  iv,  4S9. 
For  ‘  germens,’  i.  e.  seeds,  see  Macb.  IV,  i,  59. 

8.  spill]  Steevens  :  To  destroy.  [See  Ham .  IV,  v,  20.] 

10.  court  holy-water]  Steevens:  Ray,  among  his  proverbial  phrases,  p.  184, 
mentions  ‘  court  holy-water'  to  mean  fair  words .  The  French  have  the  same  phrase : 
Eau  benite  de  cour.  Malone:  Cotgrave  has  1  Eau  beniste  de  Cour.  Court  holy 
water;  complements,  faire  words,  flattering  speeches,  glosing,  soothing,  palpable 
cogging.’  Florio  gives  ‘ Mantellizzare,  to  flatter,  to  faune,  to  claw,  to  sooth  vp,  to 
cog  and  foist  with,  to  giue  one  court  holie  water.’  Singer  cites  Florio : *  *  Gonfiare 
alcuno,  to  soothe  or  flatter  one,  to  set  one  a  gogge  or  with  faire  words  bring  him  into 
a  fooles  Paradise,  to  fill  one  with  hopes,  or  Court-holy-water.’  [Wright  follows 
Singer  in  giving  this  definition  from  Florio,  but  neither  of  them  mentions  the  date 
of  the  edition.  In  the  edition  of  1598  the  definition  does  not  give  ‘court  holy- 
water;’  instead  it  reads  ‘to  perswade  one  that  the  moone  is  made  of  greene 
cheese;’  Dare  I'allodola  is  there  defined  ‘to  giue  one  court-hollie  water,  to  giue  a 
gudgeon.’ — Ed.] 

12.  pities]  Although  the  omission  of  the  relative  is  common  enough  (see  Abbott. 


act  hi,  sc.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


*73 


Lear.  Rumble  thy  bellyful !  Spit,  fire !  spout,  ram  I 
Nor  rain,  wind,  thunder,  fire,  are  my  daughters.  15 

I  tax  not  you,  you  elements,  with  unkindness ; 

I  never  gave  you  kingdom,  call’d  you  children, 

You  owe  me  no  subscription;  then  let  fall 
Your  horrible  pleasure;  here  I  stand,  your  slave, 

A  poor,  infirm,  weak  and  despised  old  man.  20 

But  yet  I  call  you  servile  ministers, 

That  will  with  two  pernicious  daughters  join 
Your  high-engender’d  battles  'gainst  a  head 
So  old  and  white  as  this.  Oh  !  Oh  !  'tis  foul  i 

Fool.  He  that  has  a  house  to  put’s  head  in  has  a  good  25 
head-piece. 

The  cod-piece  that  will  house 
Before  the  head  has  any , 

The  head  and  he  shall  louse  ; 


14.  bellyful]  Mai.  belly  full  QqFf. 
Spit,  fire  l  spout,  rain  /]  Cap. 
/pit  fire,  fpout  raine ,  QqFf  ( fpowt 

16.  tax ]  tafke  Qq. 

17.  kingdom]  kingdoms  Johns. 

18-24.  Lines  end  horrible... and. ..fer - 

tiile. . . ioin' d. . .white. .  foule,  in  Qq. 

18.  subscription]  submission  Pope, 
Han. 

then]  why  then  Qq,  Jen.  Steev. 
Ec.  Var. 

22.  will. ..join]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Knt, 
Coil,  i,  Del.  Sing.  Dyce  i,  Wh.  Ktly, 


Sch.  haue. .Join'd  Qq  et  cet. 

23.  high-engender  d]  high  engendered 

em¬ 
battles]  Battailes  F,F2.  Battels 
F3.  battel  Qr.  battell  Q2. 

24.  Oh  l  Oh  l]  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Jen.  Ktly.  O,  ho!  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han.  Sch.  O  Qq.  O,  0,  Cap.  et  cet. 

25.  put's]  put  his  Qq,  Mai.  Steev.  Bos. 
Knt,  Del.  Sing.  Ktly. 

26.  [Sings.  Cap. 

27-34.  As  in  Johns.  Four  lines,  Ff. 
Prose,  Qq. 

28.  head  has  any,]  head,  has  any  Qq. 


§  244),  in  dignified  speech,  yet  here  in  the  Fool’s  speeches  this  and  many  other  col¬ 
loquialisms  are  to  be  expected. 

16.  Moberly  calls  attention  to  the  similarity  of  thought  in  the  song,  ‘  Blow,  blow, 
thou  winter  wind,’  in  As  You  Like  It. 

18.  subscription]  UrTON  (p.  292):  Allegiance,  submission.  See  I,  ii,  24. 
Schmidt  :  Used  nowhere  else  in  Sh.  On  the  other  hand,  the  verb  is  frequently 
found  meaning  to  yield,  to  pay  respect,  to  submit  to  something. 

19.  slave]  Warburton,  insensible  to  the  drift  of  these  lines,  changed  this  to 

*  Brave.’ *  *  That  is,  I  defy  your  worst  rage,  as  he  had  said  just  before.’  Heath,  in 
exposing  the  folly  of  this  change,  thus  paraphrases:  ‘Here  I  stand,  submitting  to 
every  indignity  you  can  put  upon  me.  Do  with  me  what  you  please.  For  I  am  “  a 
poor,  infirm,  weak  and  despised  old  man.”  But  yet,  notwithstanding  my  submission 
to  your  power,  I  have  a  right  to  expostulate  and  to  call  you  servile  ministers.’ 

27.  cod-piece]  Dyce  (Gloss.) :  An  ostentatiously  indelicate  part  of  the  male 
IS* 


174 


KING  LEAR 


[ACT  III,  SC.  ii. 


So  beggars  marry  many.  30 

The  man  that  makes  his  toe 
What  he  his  heart  should  make 
Shall  of  a  corn  cry  woe, 

And  turn  his  sleep  to  wake. 

For  there  was  never  yet  fair  woman  but  she  made  mouths  35 
in  a  glass. 

Lear.  No,  I  will  be  the  pattern  of  all  patience. 

I  will  say  nothing. 

Enter  Kent. 

Kent.  Who’s  there  ? 


31.  The  man]  That  man  F3F4  + . 

33.  Shall  of]  fiall  haue  Qq,  Jen. 

37.  pattern ]  patience  F3F4. 

Scene  hi.  Pope+,Jen. 

Enter  Kent.]  As  in  Q2,  Dyce, 


Sta.  GIo.  +  ,  Coll,  iii,  Sch.  After  /a* 
tience,  line  37,  Qx.  After  glafs,  line  36, 
Ff  et  cet. 

39.  lVho's~\  Whofe  Qt. 


dress,  which  was  put  to  several  uses, — to  stick  pins  in,  to  carry  the  purse  in,  Sec.  &c. 
[See  line  40.] 

30.  many]  Johnson:  That  is,  a  beggar  marries  a  wife  and  lice.  Mason:  Rather, 
so  many  beggars  marry. 

31,  32.  The  . . .  make]  Capell:  By  making  a ‘toe*  of  one’s ‘heart’  is  signify’ d — 
the  making  that  our  last  object  which  should  be  our  first,  and  under  it  is  shadow’d  the 
king’s  folly  in  surrend’ring  his  power;  and  this  folly  he  pins  upon  him  still  faster  by 
observing — that  he  surrender’d  it  to  women .  Eccles  thinks  that  these  lines  are  but 
a  repetition  of  the  same  *  immodest  allusion  ’  as  is  contained  in  the  first  quatrain, 

‘  which  turns  upon  the  idea  of  housing .’  But  he  thinks  *  a  greater  consistency  of 
meaning  ’  will  be  attained  by  reading  head  instead  of  ‘  heart.’  White  :  Unless  the 
Fool  means  that  the  man  who  keeps  his  toe  as  close  as  he  should  keep  his  counsel 
or  the  thoughts  of  his  heart,  I  do  not  know  what  he  means.  [The  meaning,  if  it  be 
worth  a  search,  seems  to  be  this :  A  man  who  prefers  or  cherishes  a  mean  member 
in  place  of  a  vital  one  shall  suffer  enduring  pain  where  others  would  suffer  merely  a 
twinge.  Lear  had  preferred  Regan  and  Goneril  to  Cordelia. — Ed.] 

35.  Eccles  hazards  the  remarkable  conjecture  that  this  line  is  ‘  descriptive  of  that 
sort  of  treachery  which  the  power  of  beauty  enables  a  woman  more  readily  to  prac¬ 
tise,  and  which  is  shewn  by  her  first  addressing  a  man  with  kind  speeches  and 
expressions  of  regard,  and  then  turning  suddenly  round  and  making  mouths  at  his 
figure  represented  in  a  looking-glass. — Possibly  an  allusion  might  be  designed  to  an 
affected  disrelish  of  the  liquor  contained  in  a  drinking-glass,  while  inwardly,  and  in 
reality,  to  use  a  common  expression,  she  takes  it  to  heart,  supposing  falsehood  and 
deceit  to  be  the  general  concomitant  of  beauty.’  Moberly  :  For  women,  daughters 
included,  are  apt  to  have  little  faulty  ways.  [This  is  the  Fool’s  way  of  diverting 
attention  after  he  has  said  something  a  little  too  pointed ;  the  idea  of  a  very  pretty 
woman  making  faces  in  a  looking-glass  raises  a  smile.  For  the  expression  4  making 
mouths,’  see  Ham.  II,  ii,  347 ;  IV,  iv,  50. — Ed.] 

37,  38.  Steevens  :  So  Perillus,  in  the  old  play,  speaking  of  Leir :  *  But  he,  the 


ACT  III,  SC.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


l7  5 


Fool.  Marry,  here’s  grace  and  a  cod-piece;  that’s  a  40 
wise  man  and  a  fool. 

Kent.  Alas,  sir,  are  you  here  ?  Things  that  love  night 
Love  not  such  nights  as  these ;  the  wrathful  skies 
Gallow  the  very  wanderers  of  the  dark, 

And  make  them  keep  their  caves ;  since  I  was  man,  45 

Such  sheets  of  fire,  such  bursts  of  horrid  thunder, 

Such  groans  of  roaring  wind  and  rain,  I  never 
Remember  to  have  heard.  Man’s  nature  cannot  carry 
Th’  afflidtion  nor  the  fear. 

Lear.  ‘  Let  the  great  gods, 


40.  cod-piece ]  codpis  Qq 

41.  wise  man]  wife  man  QqFxFa,  Sch. 
Wife-man  FjF^. 

42-60.  Alas . sinning .]  Lines  end 

keere  ?....thefe ;.. .of  the. ..canes,. ..fire.... 
gron es  of. .. .remember. ...cary....fo rce.. . . 
dreadfull....now,..  .thee...  Iustice,...  and.... 

incefl  ions, . couert life , . centers, . 

grace,.. .finning,  Qq. 


42.  are  you]  fit  you  Qq,  Jen. 

44.  Gallow  the]  gallow,  the  Qq.  Gaily 
the  Jen. 

wanderers]  wanderer  Qq. 

45.  make]  makes  Qq. 

47.  never]  ne're  Qt.  nere  Qs. 

49.  fear]  force  Qq,  Pope,  Theob. 
Han.  Warb. 


myrrour  of  mild  patience,  Puts  up  all  wrongs,  and  never  gives  reply.’  [See  Ap¬ 
pendix,  p.  396.] 

40.  grace]  Steevens  :  In  Shakespeare’s  time,  *  the  king’s  grace  ’  was  the  usual 
expression. 

40.  cod-piece]  Douce:  Sh.  has  with  some  humour  applied  this  name  to  the 
Fool,  who,  for  obvious  reasons,  was  usually  provided  with  this  unseemly  part  of 
dress  in  a  more  remarkable  manner  than  other  persons. 

42.  are  you  here]  Jennens,  following  the  Qq,  says  that  the  reading  of  the  Ff 
seems  to  be  ‘  an  alteration  made  for  the  ease  of  the  actors,  that  he  who  acted  Lear 
might  not  have  the  trouble  of  sitting  down  on  the  ground,  and  rising  again;  but  if 
propriety  of  action  take  place,  what  can  be  more  proper  than  Lear’s  seating  himself, 
after  his  last  speech  ?’  Jennens  inserts  a  stage-direction  to  that  effect. 

44.  Gallow]  Wright  :  That  is,  terrify.  *  Gaily  ’  in  the  same  sense  is  still  used 
as  a  provincialism.  See  Jennings  on  the  Dialects  in  the  West  of  England.  In  the 
Glossary  to  Palmer’s  Devonshire  Dialogue,  *  Galled  ’  is  explained  as  *  frightened.’ 
In  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica  (eighth  ed.),  art.  Mammalia,  p.  232,  col.  2,  we  read 
of  the  sperm  whale  that  ‘  when  frightened  it  is  said  by  the  sailors  to  be  “  gallied,” 
probably  galled.’  But  this  is  an  error.  Huntley  (Glossary  of  the  Cotswold  Dialect), 
gives  ‘  Gallow.  To  alarm;  to  frighten.’  There  is  an  Anglo-Saxon  word  gcelan,  to 
terrify,  from  which  it  is  probably  derived.  Herbert  Coleridge  ( Philological  Soc. 
Trans.,  1858,  p.  123)  gives  a  derivation,  proposed  by  M.  Metivier  of  Guernsey,  from 
the  dialect  of  that  island — viz.  Egaluair,  signifying  to  dazzle,  =  Iblouir,  a  meaning 
which,  as  Coleridge  says,  hardly  applies  to  the  present  passage.  Venables  ( Athenaeum , 
13  Nov.  ’75)  says  this  word  is  still  used  in  the  Isle  of  Wight. 

49.  affliction  .  .  .  fear]  Hudson  :  *  Affliction’  for  infiction  ;  the  two  being  then 


176 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iii,  sc.  il 


That  keep  this  dreadful  pudder  o’er  our  heads,  50 

Find  out  their  enemies  now.  Tremble,  thou  wretch, 

That  hast  within  thee  undivulged  crimes, 

Unwhipp’d  of  justice.  Hide  thee,  thou  bloody  hand; 

Thou  perjured,  and  thou  simular  of  virtue 

That  art  incestuous.  Caitiff,  to  pieces  shake,  *  55 

That  under  covert  and  convenient  seeming 

Has  pradtised  on  man’s  life.  Close  pent-up  guilts, 

Rive  your  concealing  continents  and  cry 
These  dreadful  summoners  grace.  I  am  a  man 


50.  pudder~[  Ff,  Rowe,  Theob.  Warb. 
Knt,  Del.  Sing.  Ktly.  Fowther  Q,. 
Thundring  Qa,  Pope,  Han.  Cap.  po¬ 
ther  Johns,  et  cet. 

54.  perjured ]  perjure  Theob.  Han. 
Warb.  Johns.  Coll.  iii. 

and  thou~\  thou  Warb. 
simular ]  fimular  matt  Qq,  Pope, 
Cap.  Glo. +  ,  Mob. 

55.  incestuous ]  incejlious  Qq. 


55.  to  pieces  shake]  in  peeces  fiake 
Qq.  shake  to  pieces  Pope  +  . 

56.  covert  and  convenient J  cover  of 
convivial  Warb.  conj. 

57.  Has ]  Ff  ( Ha's  F,),  Rowe,  Sch. 
Hajl  Qq  et  cet. 

58.  concealing  continents ]  concealed 
centers  Qq. 

cry  J  ask  Pope  +  . 


equivalent.  Man’s  nature  cannot  endure  the  infliction,  nor  even  the  fear  of  it.  So, 
in  the  Prayer-Book,  *  Defend  us  from  all  dangers  and  mischiefs,  and  from  the  fear 
of  them.’ 

50.  pudder]  Steevens:  So  in  Beau,  and  Fl.’s  Scornful  Lady  [II,  ii,  p.  35,  ed. 
Dyce]  :  ‘  Some  fellows  would  have  cried  now,  and  have  curs’d  thee,  And  fain  out 
with  their  meat,  and  kept  a  pudder.’  [It  is  to  me  a  sufficient  reason  for  preferring 
« pudder  ’  to  pother ,  that  Charles  Lamb  preferred  it ;  in  his  remarks  on  this  play  it  is 
the  word  ha  uses. — Ed.] 

54.  perjured]  Theobald,  with  much  probability,  amended  this  to  perjure  on  the 
analogy  of  its  use  in  Love's  Lab.  Lost,  IV,  iii,  47  :  •  he  comes  in  like  a  perjure  wear 
ing  papers,’  and  also  in  The  Troublesome  Reigti  of  King  John  :  ‘  But,  now  black- 
spotted  Perjure  as  he  is.’  It  is  also  the  reading  of  Collier’s  (MS).  Where  the 
QqFf  all  agree,  and  the  sense  is  clear,  change  seems  needless,  although  perjure  with 
‘  simular’  gives  greater  symmetry  to  the  line. 

54.  simular]  Collier:  A  ‘simular’  is  a  simulator;  possibly  v/e  ought  to  spell 
it  sitnuler. 

56.  convenient  seeming]  Johnson:  That  is,  appearance  such  as  may  promote  his 
purpose  to  destroy.  Delius  dissents,  and  thinks  it  means  rather  befitting  hypocrisy. 

57.  practised]  Dyce  :  To  use  arts  or  strategems,  to  plot. 

58.  continents]  Johnson  :  That  which  contains  or  encloses.  [See  Ham.  IV, 
iv,  64.] 

59.  summoners]  Steevens:  The  officers  that  summon  offenders  before  a  tribunal. 

59,  60.  I  .  .  .  sinning]  Tyrwhitt:  CEdipus,  in  Sophocles,  represents  himself  in 

the  same  light:  ‘rd  /  ipya  fiov  Tier ovOid  iart  paThav  i)  bebpa^dra.’ — Colon,  [line 
266,  ed.  Dindorf.] 


ACT  III,  SC.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


1 77 


More  sinn’d  against  than  sinning. 

Kent.  Alack,  bare-headed  ?  60 

Gracious  my  lord,  hard  by  here  is  a  hovel ; 

Some  friendship  will  it  lend  you  'gainst  the  tempest ; 

Repose  you  there ;  while  I  to  this  hard  house — 

More  harder  than  the  stones  whereof  'tis  raised ; 

Which  even  but  now,  demanding  after  you,  65 

Denied  rpe  to  come  in — return,  and  force 
Their  scanted  courtesy. 

Lear.  My  wits  begin  to  turn. — 

Come  on,  my  boy; ‘how  dost,  my  boy?  art  cold? 

I  am  cold  myself. — Where  is  this  straw,  my  fellow  ? — 

The  art  of  our  necessities  is  strange,  70 


60.  sitin' d]  find  Qq. 
than]  their  Qq. 

60-67.  Alack... courtesy. ]  Prose,  Qq. 

63.  while ]  whilf  Qq. 

64-66.  More. ..in]  Parenthesis,  Ff. 

64.  harder. ..stones]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 
Del.  Dyce,  Sta.  Ktly,  Glo.  + ,  Mob.  Sch. 


kard  then  is  the  flone  Qq  et  cet. 

65.  you]  me  Qq. 

67.  wits  begin]  wit  begins  Qq. 

69.  Iam]  I'm  Pope +  ,  Jen.  Dyce  il 
this]  the  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
70-72.  Lines  end  can. ..poore, ...heart 
Qq. 


61.  Gracious  my  lord]  See  Abbott,  §  13. 

65.  even  but  now]  Abbott,  §  38 :  Even  now  with  us  is  applied  to  an  action  that 
has  been  going  on  for  some  long  time  and  still  continues,  the  emphasis  being  laid  on 

*  now.’  In  Sh.  the  emphasis  is  often  to  be  laid  on *  *  even,’  and  *  even  now  ’  means 

•  exactly  or  only  now.’ 

65.  demanding]  Wright:  ‘Demand’  and  ‘require’  are  both  used  formerly  in 
the  simple  sense  of  ‘  ask,’  without  the  further  idea  which  the  words  have  now  ac¬ 
quired  of  asking  with  authority.  See  Temp.  I,  ii,  139;  Cym.  Ill,  vi,  92. 

67-73.  Bucknill  (p.  195):  The  import  of  this  must  be  weighed  with  IV,  vi, 
100-104,  when  Lear  is  incoherent  and  full  of  delusion.  Insanity  arising  from  mental 
and  moral  causes  often  continues  in  a  certain  state  of  imperfect  developement ;  .  .  .  a 
state  of  exaggerated  and  perverted  emotion,  accompanied  by  violent  and  irregular 
conduct,  but  unconnected  with  intellectual  aberration ;  until  some  physical  shock  is 
incurred, — bodily  illness,  or  accident,  or  exposure  to  physical  suffering;  and  then 
the  imperfect  type  of  mental  disease  is  converted  into  perfect  lunacy,  characterised 
by  more  or  less  profound  affection  of  the  intellect,  by  delusion  or  incoherence.  This 
is  evidently  the  case  in  Lear,  and  although  we  have  never  seen  the  point  referred  to 
by  any  writer,  and  have  again  and  again  read  the  play  without  perceiving  it,  we 
cannot  doubt  from  these  passages,  and  especially  from  the  second,  in  which  the  poor 
madman’s  imperfect  memory  refers  to  his  suffering  in  the  storm,  that  Sh.  contem¬ 
plated  this  exposure  and  physical  suffering  as  the  cause  of  the  first  crisis  in  the  mal¬ 
ady.  Our  wonder  at  his  profound  knowledge  of  mental  disease  increases,  the  more 
carefully  we  study  his  works ;  here  and  elsewhere  he  displays  with  prolific  careless¬ 
ness  a  knowledge  of  principles,  half  of  which  would  make  the  reputation  pf  a  mod¬ 
em  psychologist. 


M 


>73 


KING  LEAR 


[ACT  III,  SC.  11. 


And  can  make  vilde  things  precious. — Come,  your  hovel. —  yi 
Poor  Fool  and  knave,  I  have  one  part  in  my  heart 
That’s  sorry  yet  for  thee. 

Fool.  He  that  has  and  a  little  tiny  wit, 

With  heigh-ho ,  the  zvind  and  the  rain,  75 

Must  make  conte7it  with  his  fortunes  fit, 

Though  the  rain  it  raineth  every  day. 

Lear.  True,  boy. — Come,  bring  us  to  this  hovel. 

[Exeunt  Lear  and  Kent. 

Fool.  This  is  a  brave  night  to  cool  a  courtezan.  I  ’ll  speak 
a  prophecy  ere  I  go :  80 

When  priests  are  more  in  word  than  matter ; 

When  brewers  mar  their  malt  with  water ; 


71.  And]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sta.  Sch. 
That  Qq  et  cet. 

vilde]  Q2F,F„  Jen.  vild  Q.F^, 
Rowe,  Sch.  vile  Pope  et  cet. 

71.  72.  your  hovel.  Poor  Fool]  your 
houel;  Poore Foole,  Ff.  you  houell poore, 
Foole  Qq. 

72.  I  have  one  part  in]  I  haue  one 
part  of  Qq.  Pve  one  thing  in  Fope. 
Pve  one  string  in  Han.  Warb.  Fve 
one  part  in  Theob.  Johns.  Jen.  Dyce  ii. 

73.  That's  sorry]  That f or r owes  Qq. 

74.  [Sings.  Cap. 

74-77.  Prose  in  Qq. 

74.  and]  Om.  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 
Ec.  Var.  Coll.  Del.  Wh.  an  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns. 

little  tiny]  little  tynie  Pope,  little 
tine  Qq.  little-tyne  Ff.  little  tyne  Rowe. 


75.  heigh-ho]  hey  ho  Qq.  height-ho 
F2F3F4<  a  heigh ,  ho,  Cap.  conj.  MS.* 
rain]  rain  in  his  way  Johns,  conj., 

77.  Though]  Ff  +,  Jen.  Knt,  Del. 
Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  Ktly,  Sch.  for  Qq 
et  cet. 

78.  boy]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Dyce  i,  Sta. 
Sch.  my  good  boy  Qq  et  cet. 

hovel.]  houell?  Qf. 

[Exeunt...]  Cap.  Exit.  Ff.  Om. 
Qq. 

79-95.  Om.  Qq. 

79,80.  This. .go:]  Mai.  Two  lines, 
Ff  +  ,  Cap. 

79.  This  zs]  ’  Tis  Pope  +  . 
courtezan]  Curtizan  Ff. 

So.  ere]  or  ere  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
or  two  ere  Warb. 

81.  word]  words  F3F4  +  . 


73.  sorry]  White  :  The  reading  of  the  Qq  is  certainly  not  inferior. 

74.  Steevens  :  See  the  song  in  Twelfth  Night,  V,  i,  398.  [This  may  have  been 
the  same  song,  but  changed  by  the  Fool  to  suit  the  occasion;  the  music  of  the 
Twelfth  Night  song  will  be  found  in  Chappell  i,  225.  Will  it  be  believed  that  Gif¬ 
ford  (Jonson’s  Worhs,  vi,  266)  called  this  Twelfth  Night  song  *  silly  trash’  ? — Ed.] 

74.  and]  According  to  Abbott,  §§  95,  96,  this  is  used  emphatically,  with  and 
without  participles,  for  also,  even,  and  that  too.  *  We  still  use  and  that  to  give  em¬ 
phasis  and  call  attention  to  an  additional  circumstance — e.  g.  “  He  was  condemned 
end  that  unheard.”  Here  it  means  “  a  little  and  that  a  very  little  ”  ’ 

81,  et  seq.]  White:  I  believe  this  is  an  interpolation.  This  loving,  faithful  crea¬ 
ture  would  not  let  his  old  master  go  off  half-crazed  in  that  storm,  that  he  might  stop 
and  utter  such  pointless  and  uncalled-for  imitation  of  Chaucer.  The  absence  of  this 
prophecy  from  the  edition  of  1608,  is  corroborative  evidence  that  it  is  an  interpolation; 


ACT  III,  SC.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


179 


When  nobles  are  their  tailors’  tutors ;  83 

No  heretics  bum’d,  but  wenches’  suitors ; 

When  every  case  in  law  is  right ;  85 


for  the  passage  is  one  which,  if  it  had  been  spoken  at  the  time  when  the  copy  for  that 
edition  was  obtained,  whether  surreptitiously  or  not,  would  hardly  have  been  omitted. 
Cowden  Clarke  :  This  prophecy  is  clearly  a  scrap  of  ribaldry  tacked  on,  by  the  actor 
who  played  the  Fool,  to  please  ‘the  barren  spectators’;  just  one  of  those  instances 
of  irrelevant  and  extemporaneous  jesting  to  which  Sh.  himself,  through  his  character 
of  Hamlet,  so  strongly  objects.  The  fact  of  the  Fool’s  present  speech  occurring 
after  Lear  has  left  the  stage  alone  serves  to  condemn  it  as  spurious.  Koppel  (p.  79), 
on  the  other  hand,  thinks  Jhat  this  speech  was  added  by  Sh.  after  the  text  which  we 
have  in  the  Qq  was  written ;  *  the  poet  was  generous  to  this,  the  most  amiable  of  all 
his  Fools,  and  even  added  somewhat  to  his  part.’  Warburton  discerned  not  one, 
but  two,  prophecies  here :  *  the  first,  a  satyrical  description  of  the  present  manners  as 
future;  and  the  second,  a  satyrical  description  of  future  manners,  which  the  corrup¬ 
tion  of  the  present  would  prevert  from  ever  happening.  Each  of  these  prophecies 
has  its  proper  inference  or  deduction ;  yet  by  an  unaccountable  stupidity,  the  first 
editors  took  the  whole  to  be  one  prophecy,, and  so  jumbled  the  two  contrary  in¬ 
ferences  together.’  Accordingly,  Warburton  transposed  lines  93,  94  to  follow  line 
84 ;  that  concludes  the  first  prophecy,  and  Warburton  points  the  allusion  to  the  pres¬ 
ent  time  by  adding  parenthetically  after  them,  *  i.  e.  Now.’  The  remaining  lines 
compose  the  second  prophecy,  and  at  the  end  of  the  last  line  Warburton  adds,  ‘  i.  e. 
Never.’  Warburton’s  change  was  followed  in  the  text  by  Hanmer,  Johnson,  Jen- 
NENS,  and  Eccles.  Capell  grants  Warburton’s  conclusions,  but  denounces  the 
transposition  of  the  lines  as  *  destructive  of  humour,  and  of  the  speaker’s  wild  cha¬ 
racter  which  disclaims  regularity.’  Capell’s  explanation  is  that  Sh.  wrote  two  speeches 
for  the  Fool,  *  one  comprising  the  whole  of  that  prophecy  which  relates  to  things 
present ;  it’s  conclusion  a  waggery  [:.  e.,  I  suppose,  the  line:  ‘No  heretics  bum’d, 
&c.],  at  which  the  speaker  might  face  about  and  be  going,  but  return  to  speak  the 
lines  about  Merlin,  which  lines  belong  with  equal  propriety  to  the  prophecy  about 
things  that  will  not  be ...  it  is  conceiv’d,  further,  that  these  seperale  [jzr]  prophecies 
were  at  first  spoken  seperately,  or  on  seperate  nights ;  or  one  drop’d  for  the  other,  and 
we  judge  the  drop’d  one  the  first;  that  both  were  found  in  his  manuscripts,  standing 
irregularly ;  and  took  their  form  from  the  players,  who  might  even  present  them  so 
after  their  author’s  death’  Steevens  refers  to  Puttenham’s  Arte  of  Poesie,  1589,  as 
containing  these  lines.  [See  p.  232,  ed.  Arber.  *  Sir  Geffrey  Chaucer ,  father  of  our 
English  Poets,  hath  these  verses  following  the  distributor  [a  rhetorical  term]  :  When 
faith  failes  in  Priestes  sawes,  And  Lords  hestes  are  holden  for  lawes,  And  robberie 
is  tane  for  purchase,  And  lechery  for  solace,  Then  shall  the  Realme  of  Albion  Be 
brought  to  great  confusion.’  The  original,  which  is  called  Chaucer’s  Prophecy ,  may 
be  found  in  vol.  vi,  p.  307,  ed.  Morris.  See  Brown’s  note,  I,  iv,  91. — Ed.] 

83.  tutors]  Warburton  :  That  is,  invent  fashions  for  them.  Delius  queries  if 
it  should  not  be  taken  in  the  larger  meaning  of  taking  care  of  their  tailors,  and  not 
ruining  them  by  failing  to  pay  their  bills.  Schmidt  says  it  merely  means :  When 
nobles  arc  the  teachers  of  their  tailors,  and  better  understand  the  handicraft. 

84.  No  .  .  .  suitors]  JOHNSON:  The  disease  to  which  wenches’  suitors  are  par¬ 
ticularly  exposed  was  called,  in  Shakespeare’s  time,  the  brenning  or  burning. 


i8o 


KING  LEAR 


[act  III,  SC.  iii. 

86 


No  squire  in  debt,  no  poor  knight ; 

When  slanders  do  not  live  in  tongues. 

Nor  cutpurses  come  not  to  throngs ; 

When  usurers  tell  their  gold  i’  th’  field, 

And  bawds  and  whores  do  churches  build, 

Then  shall  the  realm  of  Albion 
Come  to  great  confusion. 

Then  comes  the  time,  who  lives  to  see’t, 

That  going  shall  be  used  with  feet 
This  prophecy  Merlin  shall  make ;  for  I  live  before  his  time.  95 

\Exit. 


Scene  III.  A  Room  in  Gloucester's  Castle. 

Enter  Gloucester  and  Edmund. 

Glou.  Alack,  alack,  Edmund,  I  like  not  this  unnatural 
dealing.  When  I  desired  their  leave  that  I  might  pity  him, 
they  took  from  me  the  use  of  mine  own  house;  charged 
me,  on  pain  of  perpetual  displeasure,  neither  to  speak  of 
him,  entreat  for  him,  or  any  way  sustain  him.  5 

Edm.  Most  savage  and  unnatural ! 

Glou.  Go  to;  say  you  nothing.  There  is  division  be¬ 
tween  the  dukes,  and  a  worse  matter  than  that :  I  have  re¬ 
ceived  a  letter  this  night ;  ’tis  dangerous  to  be  spoken ;  I 
have  locked  the  letter  in  my  closet;  these  injuries  the  king  10 


86.  nor  no]  and  no  Warb.  Johns. 

87.  not  live]  nor  live  F2. 

88.  Nor]  And  Pope  +  . 

91,  92.  As  in  Pope.  One  line,  Ff. 

93,  94.  Then . .feet.]  Transferred  to 

follow  line  84,  by  Warb.  Han.  Johns. 
Jen.  Ec. 

93.  see  V]  see  it  Mai. 

95.  I  live]  I  do  live  (reading  line  95 
as  two  lines)  F3F4+,  Cap. 

Scene  iii.]  Scaena  Tertia  Ff  (Sceua 
F3FJ.  Scene  ii.  Rowe.  Scene  iv. 
Pope  +  ,  Jen. 


A  Room...]  Cap.  An  Apartment 
in  Gloster’s  Castle.  Rowe. 

Enter...]  Enter  Glofler,  and  the  Bollard 
with  lights,  Qq  (Glocefler  Q,). 

1-18.  Prose,  Ff.  Twenty  lines,  Qq. 

3.  took]  took  me  Q[f 

4.  perpetual]  Ff  + ,  Cap.  Knt,  Dyce  i, 
Del.  ii,  Sch.  their  Qq.  their  perpetual 
Jen.  et  cet. 

5.  or]  Ff  + ,  Knt,  Sch.  nor  Qq  et  cet. 

6.  and]  Om.  Rowe  ii. 

7.  There  jj]  there's  a  Qq,  Jen.  Glo.  +  . 
between]  betwixt  Qq,  Glo.  + . 


95.  before  his  time]  Moberly:  As,  according  to  the  legend.  King  Lear  was 
contemporary  with  Joash,  King  of  Judah.  [See  Holinshed,  in  Appendix,  p.  3S4.] 

5.  or]  Schmidt:  Compare  71 teas,  for  Meas.  IV,  ii,  108:  ‘neither  in  time,  matter,  or 
other  circumstance ;  ’  I  Hen.  VI:  I,  iii,  78 :  ‘  not  to  wear,  handle,  or  use  any  sword.' 


ACT  III,  EC.  iii.] 


KING  LEAR 


181 


now  bears  will  be  revenged  home ;  there  is  part  of  a  power  1 1 
already  footed;  we  must  incline  to  the  king.  I  will  look 
him,  and  privily  relieve  him ;  go  you,  and  maintain  talk 
with  the  duke,  that  my  charity  be  not  of  him  perceived ;  if 
he  ask  for  me,  I  am  ill  and  gone  to  bed.  If  I  die  for  it,  15 
as  no  less  is  threatened  me,  the  king,  my  old  master,  must 
be  relieved.  There  is  strange  things  toward,  Edmund ;  pray 
you,  be  careful.  -  [Exit. 

Edm.  This  courtesy,  forbid  thee,  shall  the  duke 
Instantly  know,  and,  of  that  letter  too.  20 

This  seems  a  fair  deserving,  and  must  draw  me 
That  which  my  father  loses ;  no  less  than  all. 

The  younger  rises  when  the  old  doth  fall.  [Exit. 


11.  there  if]  ther  is  F,.  There's  Qa, 
Glo.  Wr.  Mob.  The  As  Q,. 

12.  footed ]  landed  Qq,  Pope. 

look]  Ff,  Knt,  Dyce  i,  Del.  ii, 
Sch.  look  for  Pope  + .  feeke  Qq  et  cet. 

15.  bed.  If]  Johns,  bed,  ifF(,  Rowe  i. 
bed;  if  Rowe  ii  + ,  Cap.  bed,  though  Qq. 
bed.  Though  Glo.  + ,  Dyce  ii,  Huds.  Mob. 
for  it]  for  7  Qt. 

17.  is  strange  things]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 
Dyce  i,  Sta.  Sch.  are  strange  things 
Pope  + ,  Jen.  is  fome  flrange  thing  Qq 


et  cet. 

19-23.  Lines  end  know,...def eruing, 
...lejfe...fall,  in  Qq. 

19.  courtesy,  forbid  thee,]  Theob.  cur- 
tefie  forbid  thee,  QqFf.  courtesie  forbid 
thee  Pope,  Han.  courtesy ,  forbid  thee! 
Huds. 

21.  draw  me]  draw  to  me  Qa. 

22.  loses]  loofes  QIFIFaF3. 

23.  The]  then  Qq. 
doth]  doe  Qx.  do  Qa. 


12.  footed]  Schmidt:  Equivalent  to  landed,  as  the  Qqread;  compare  III,  vii, 
44 ;  unless  it  mean  on  foot,  as  other  editors  explain  it. 

12.  look]  Schmidt:  Compare  Mer.  IVives,  IV,  ii,  83:  ‘I  will  look  some  linen 
for  your  head  ’ ;  As  You  Like  It,  II,  v,  34 :  «  He  hath  been  all  this  day  to  look  you.’ 

17.  toward]  See  II,  i,  10. 

19.  forbid]  This  is,  as  Wright  says,  ‘forbidden;’  the  sentence  means:  This 
courtesy  or  charity  which  you  are  going  to  show  the  king,  and  which  has  been  for¬ 
bidden  to  you,  the  duke  shall  instantly  know.  Hudson  finds  great  difficulty  in 
understanding  the  meaning  of  the  phrase *  *  forbid  thee,’  which  he  interprets  (using 

*  forbid  ’  in  the  sense  of  *  He  shall  live  a  man  forbid  ’  in  Macbeth,  I,  iii,  21)  as  equiv¬ 
alent  to  a  curse  upon  thee  !  [Since  the  foregoing  was  written  Hudson’s  separate  edi¬ 
tion  of  Lear  has  appeared,  in  which,  while  adhering  to  his  earlier  interpretation  and 
text,  he  concedes  the  possibility  of  the  correctness  of  the  present  interpretation,  but 
asks,  ‘  does  not  this  make  the  sense  too  tame  ?  ’ — Ed.] 

16 


182 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iii,  sc.  iv 


Scene  IV.  The  heath.  Before  a  hovel. 

Enter  Lear,  Kent,  and  Fool. 

Kent.  Here  is  the  place,  my  lord;  good  my  lord,  enter; 

The  tyranny  of  the  open  night’s  too  rough 
For  nature  to  endure.  [Storm  still. 

Lear.  Let  me  alone. 

Kent.  Good  my  lord,  enter  here. 

Lear.  Wilt  break  my  heart  ? 

Kent.  I  had  rather  break  mine  own.  Good  my  lord,  enter.  5 
Lear.  Thou  think’st  ’tis  much  that  this  contentious  storm 
Invades  us  to  the  skin ;  so  ’tis  to  thee ; 

But  where  the  greater  malady  is  fix’d 

The  lesser  is  scarce  felt.  Thou’dst  shun  a  bear, 


Scene  iv.]  Scena  Quarta  Ff  (Serena 
Fa).  Scene  iii.  Rowe.  Scene  v. 
Pope  +  ,Jen.  Scene  vi.  Ec.  (misprint). 

The  heath...]  Glo.  Part  of  the 
Heath  with  a  Hovel.  Rowe. 

1-3.  Here... endure.]  Prose,  Qq. 

2.  of  the ]  of  Pope. 
night's]  nights  Q.. 

3.  [Storm  still.]  Om.  Qq.  At  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  the  Scene,  Cap.  Dyce,  Wh. 

3, 4.  Lear.  Let. ..here.]  Repeated  by 
Johns.  Steev.  ’73  (misprint). 


4.  here"]  Om.  Qq. 

Wilt]  Wiirt  Theob.  ii,  Warb. 
Johns. 

5.  Two  lines  in  Ff. 

I  had]  QqFf,  Cap.  Dyce,  Wh.  Sta. 
Glo. +,  Huds.  Sch.  I'd  Pope  et  cet. 

6.  contentious]  tempeflious  Qx.  cru- 
lentious  Qa. 

7.  skin;  so  Vw]  Rowe  ii.  skin,  fo 
tis  Qq.  skin,  fo  :  'tis  Ff  ( skinfo  F.). 

9.  Thou'dst]  thoud'fl  Qx.  thou 
wouldfl  Q2. 


Scene  IV.]  Coleridge  :  O,  what  a  world’s  convention  of  agonies  is  here  !  All 
external  nature  in  a  storm,  all  moral  nature  convulsed, — the  real  madness  of  Lear, 
the  feigned  madness  of  Edgar,  the  babbling  of  the  Fool,  the  desperate  fidelity  of 
Kent, — surely  such  a  scene  was  never  conceived,  before  or  since  1  Take  it  but  as  a 
picture  for  the  eye  only,  it  is  more  terrific  than  any  which  a  Michael  Angelo,  inspired 
by  a  Dante,  could  have  conceived,  and  which  none  but  a  Michael  Angelo  could  have 
executed.  Or  let  it  have  been  uttered  to  the  blind,  the  howlings  of  nature  would 
seem  converted  into  the  voice  of  conscious  humanity.  This  scene  ends  with  the  first 
symptoms  of  positive  derangement ;  and  the  intervention  of  the  fifth  scene  is  particu¬ 
larly  judicious, — the  interruption  allowing  an  interval  for  Lear  to  appear  in  full  mad¬ 
ness  in  the  sixth  scene. 

2.  the  open]  Walker  ( Vers .  75)  suggests  that  the  e  in  ‘the’  be  omitted  before 
‘open.’ 

4.  heart  ?]  Steevens  :  I  believe  that  Lear  does  not  address  this  question  to  Kent, 
but  to  his  own  bosom.  Perhaps,  therefore,  we  should  point  the  passage  thus :  « Wilt 
break,  my  heart  ?  ’  The  tenderness  of  Kent,  indeed,  induces  him  to  reply,  as  to  an 
interrogation  that  seemed  to  reflect  on  his  own  humanity. 


KING  LEAR 


183 


act  in,  sc.  rv'.j 

But  if  thy  flight  lay  toward  the  roaring  sea  10 

Thou’dst  meet  the  bear  i’  th’  mouth.  When  the  mind’s  free 
The  body ’s  delicate ;  the  tempest  in  my  mind 
Doth  from*  my  senses  take  all  feeling  else 
Save  what  beats  there.  Filial  ingratitude ! 

Is  it  not  as  this  mouth  should  tear  this  hand  15 

For  lifting  food  to’t  ?  But  I  will  punish  home. 

No,  I  will  weep  no  more.  In  such  a  night 
To  shut  me  out  ?  Pour  on ;  I  will  endure. 

In  such  a  night  as  this?  O  Regan,  Goneril ! 

Your  old  kind  father,  whose  frank  heart  gave  all, —  20 

Oh,  that  way  madness  lies;  let  me  shun  that; 

No  more  of  that ! 

Kent.  Good  my  lord,  enter  here. 

Lear.  Prithee,  go  in  thyself;  seek  thine  own  ease; 

This  tempest  will  not  give  me  leave  to  ponder 

On  things  would  hurt  me  more.  But  I’ll  go  in. —  25 


10.  thy]  they  F.. 

lay ]  light  F4,  Rowe,  Pope. 
roaring]  raring  Qt.  raging  Q2, 
Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Vai.  Sing.  Ktly, 
Gio. +  ,  Mob. 

11.  Thou'dst]  Thoud'Jl  Qq. 
mind's]  minds  FaF3. 

12.  body's]  Rowe,  bodies  QqFf. 
the]  this  Q,. 

14.  beats]  beares  Qa. 

there.  Filial  ingratitude  f]  Rowe. 
there.  Filial  ingratitude ,  F.F^.  their 
filiall  ingratitude,  Qq.  there,  Filiall 
ingratitude,  F,Fa.  there  :  filial  ingrati¬ 
tude.  Del.  Sch.  there, —filial  ingrati¬ 
tude  l  Sing.  ii. 


15,  this  hand]  his  hand  F3F4,  Rowe. 

16,  to't]  to  it  Qa. 

I  will]  I'll  Pope+. 
home]  fure  Qq. 

17,  IS.  In  sue h... endure :]  Om.  Qq, 
ending  the  lines  fure  ;... this  {..father... 
lies, ...that. 

18, 19.  out  ?... this  ?]  out  t... this  l  Cap. 
20.  gave]gaue you  Qq,  Jen.  Mai.  Bos. 
Cam.  Wr. 

all, — ]  all—  Rowe,  all,  QqFf. 

22.  that  /]  that, —  Sing,  it 
enter  here.]  enter.  Qq. 

23.  thine  own]  thy  one  Qx.  thy  owne 

Qv 


12.  delicate]  Abbott,  §468:  Any  unaccented  syllable  of  a  polysyllable  (whether 
containing  i  or  any  other  vowel)  may  sometimes  be  softened  and  almost  ignored. 
Compare  I,  i,  90,  1 14,  122;  or  II,  i,  124,  &c.  &c. 

14.  Filial  ingratitude]  Delius:  In  apposition  to  *  what  beats  there.’ 

15.  as]  As  if.  See  V,  iii,  202,  and  Nam.  I,  ii,  217,  with  the  instances  there 
cited.  But  Abbott,  §  107,  says  {hat  *  as  ’  is  equivalent  to  as  if  only  in  appearance, 
that  the  if  is  implied  in  the  subjunctive.  See  also  Matzner,  ii,  128,  where  it  is  said 
that,  although  the  abridged  sentence  may  be  explained  by  the  complete  form,  as  if, 
Lat.  quasi,  yet  we  must  not  assume  that  a  primitive  if  has  been  lost. 

25.  would]  As  another  instance  of  the  omission  of  the  relative,  see  I,  iv,  58. 


184 


KING  LEAR 


[act  hi,  sc.  iv 
2(5 


In,  boy;  go  first. — You  houseless  poverty, — 

Nay,  get  thee  in.  I’ll  pray,  and  then  I’ll  sleep. — 

[Fool  goes  in. 

Poor  naked  wretches,  wheresoe’er  you  are, 

That  bide  the  pelting  of  this  pitiless  storm, 

How  shall  your  houseless  heads  and  unfed  sides,  30 

Your  loop’d  and  window’d  raggedness,  defend  you 
From  seasons  such  as  these?  Oh,  I  have  ta’en 
Too  little  care  of  this !  Take  physic,  pomp ; 

Expose  thyself  to  feel  what  wretches  feel, 

That  thou  mayst  shake  the  superflux  to  them  35 

And  show  the  heavens  more  just. 

Edg.  [Within.]  Fathom  and  half,  fathom  and  half! 

Poor  Tom !  [The  Fool  runs  out  from  the  hovel. 


26.  [To  the  Fool  Johns. 

26, 27.  Ona.  Qq. 

26.  poverty, — ]  poverty —  Rowe,  pou- 
ertie,  F,.  poverty,  FaF3F4. 

27.  [Fool  goes  in.]  Johns.  Exit, 
(after  line  26),  Ff.  Om.  Qq.  Exit 
Fool,  (after  line  26),  Rowe.  Exit  Fool, 
(after  in,  line  27),  Cap. 

29.  storm ]  night  Qq.  Jen. 

31.  loop'd ]  Pope,  loept  Qq.  lop'd 
Ff,  Rowe,  looped  Sch. 

window'd]  windowed  Qq. 


32.  ta’en]  tane  QqFf. 

36.  [Enter  Edgar,  and  Foole.  Ff. 
Enter  Edgar  disguised  like  a  Madman 
and  Fool.  Rowe  +  . 

37.  Scene  vi.  Pope. 

37,  3S.  Om.  Qq. 

37.  Edg.  [Within]  Theob.  Edg.  Ff. 

Fathom]  Ff.  fadom  Wh. 

3S.  The  Fool...hovel.]  Theob.  after 
line  40.  Transferred  by  Cap.  Om. 
QqFf. 


26.  first]  Johnson:  This  injunction  represents  that  humility,  or  tenderness,  or 
neglect  of  forms,  which  affliction  forces  on  the  mind. 

31.  loop’d]  Schmidt:  ‘Loop’  in  Sh.  does  not  mean  a  loop-hole,  but  simply  a 
hole,  an  opening. 

32.  33.  O  .  .  .  this  !]  Vehse  (i,  292)  finds  in  these  words  the  key  to  the  tragedy. 

33.  Take,  &c.]  Jacox  (Colburn’s  New  Monthly  Mag.,  1  July,  1S67)  has  gathered  an 
entertaining  collection  of  passages,  parallel  to  this,  from  English  and  French  literature. 

34.  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  292)  cites  this  line  with  a  ‘  Qu.’  because  of  the  repetition 
of  the  word  *  feel.’  But  Dyce  sees  no  reason  for  supposing  it  to  be  corrupt. 

35.  superflux]  Schmidt  :  A  hapax  legomenon  in  Sh. 

37.  Coleridge  :  Edgar’s  assumed  madness  serves  the  great  purpose  of  taking  off 
part  of  the  shock  which  would  otherwise  be  caused  by  the  true  madness  of  Lear, 
and  further  displays  the  profound  difference  between  the  two.  In  every  attempt  at 
representing  madness  throughout  the  whole  range  of  dramatic  literature,  with  the 
single  exception  of  Lear,  it  is  mere  lightheadedness,  as  especially  in  Otway.  In 
Edgar’s  ravings,  Sh.  all  the  while  lets  you  see  a  fixed  purpose,  a  practical  end  in 
view ; — in  Lear’s  there  is  only  the  brooding  of  the  one  anguish,  an  eddy  without 
progression. 

37.  fathom  and  half]  Cafell :  These  words  allude  to  his  being  bury’d  in  straw. 


ACT  III,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


■85 


Fool.  Come  not  in  here,  nuncle,  here ’s  a  spirit  Help 
me,  help  me !  40 

Kent.  Give  me  thy  hand. — Who’s  there  ? 

Fool.  A  spirit,  a  spirit;  he  says  his  name’s  poor  Tom. 

Kent.  What  art  thou  that  dost  grumble  there  i’  th’  straw  ? 
Come  forth. 

/Enter  Edgar  disguised  as  a  madman. 

Edg.  Away!  the  foul  fiend  follows  me!  Through  the  45 
sharp  hawthorn  blow  the  winds.  Hum!  go  to  thy  bed 
and  warm  thee. 

39, 40.  Prose,  QqFf.  Verse,  the  first 
line  ending  spirit ,  Johns.  Mai.  Knt. 

41.  Who's  there  ?]  whofe  there.  Qt. 

42.  A  spirit,  a  spirit ,]  A  fpirit  Qq. 
name's ]  nam's  Qt.  name  is  Q2. 

43,44.  Prose,  QqFf.  Verse,  dividing 
at  straw  ?  Johns.  Cap.  Steev.  Ec.  Bos. 

Knt,  Coll.  Del.  Sing.  Wh.  Ktly,  Sch. 

43.  i  ’  th']  in  the  Qq. 

44.  forth.]  forth  ?  Q2. 

Enter.. .madman.]  Theob.  Om. 

QqFf. 

45.  Scene  VI.  Han.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 

45-47.  Prose,  QqFf.  Verse,  ending 

me  !... wind. ..thee.  Johns.  Cap.  Steev. 

Steevens  :  He  gives  the  sign  used  by  those  who  are  sounding  the  depth  at  sea. 
Collier  doubts  if  Steevens’s  explanation  be  correct. 

45, 46.  Through  .  .  .  winds]  Capell  :  This  has  the  air  of  a  quotation  from 
some  lost  poem.  Schmidt  :  The  majority  of  editors  prefer  the  reading  of  the  Qq 
because  it  is  more  like  line  95,  and  like  a  line  in  The  Friar  of  Orders  Gray  :  *  See 
through  the  hawthorn  blows  the  cold  wind,  and  drizzly  rain  doth  fall.’  For  a  similar 
reason  they  adopt  ‘  go  to  thy  cold  bed  and  warm  thee.’ 

47.  thee]  This  phrase  occurs  again  in  the  Ind.  to  Tam.  the  Shr.,  and  in  a  note 
on  it  there  Theobald  thinks  that,  because  there  is  just  before  it  a  clear  allusion  to 
a  phrase  in  Kyd’s  Spanish  Tragedy ,  this  must  also  be  ‘  a  Banter  upon  another  verse 
in  that  play,’  viz :  *  What  outcries  pluck  me  from  my  naked  bed  ?’  But  Capell  is 
probably  right  in  thinking  this  latter  allusion  more  than  doubtful,  for,  as  Staunton 
says,  ‘to  an  audience  of  Shakespeare’s  age  there  was  nothing  risible’  either  in  this 
phrase  in  Lear  or  in  The  Spanish  Tragedy.  *  The  phrase,’  continues  Staunton,  ‘  “  to 
go  to  a  cold  bed  ”  meant  only  to  go  cold  to  bed ;  “  to  rise  from  a  naked  bed  ”  sig¬ 
nified  to  get  up  naked  from  bed,  and  to  say  one  “lay  on  a  sick  bed”  (a  form  of 
expression  far  from  uncommon  even  now)  implied  merely  that  he  was  lying  sick 
a-bed.’  Delius  in  his  first  edition  conjectured  that  the  omission  of  •  cold’  in  the  Ff 
was  due  to  Shakespeare’s  having  struck  it  out  in  order  to  avoid  the  comic  effect  which 
it  produced.  This  conjecture  was  not  repeated  in  his  second  edition.  But  Dyce, 
commenting  on  it,  says  that  Sh.  *  has  studiously  made  the  assumed  madness  of  Edgar 
16* 


Ec.  Var.  Coll.  Del.  Sing.  Dyce  i,  Wh. 
Ktly,  Glo.  Huds.  Wr. 

45.  Through]  thorough  Qz. 

45,  46.  Through... wind.]  As  a  quota¬ 
tion,  Sta.  Dyce  ii,  Cam. 

46.  hawthorn]  hathorne  Qq.  Hau- 
thome  FjF^.  Hauthorn  F3< 

blow  the  winds]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 
Del,  Sch.  blozves  the  cold  wind  Qq  et 
cet. 

Hum  !]  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  + ,  Mob. 
Sch.  Humh ,  Ff.  Om.  Qq.  Humph, 
Rowe  et  cet. 

bed]  Ff+,  Knt,  Del.  Sch.  cold 
bed  Qq  et  cet. 


iS6 


KING  LEAR 


fACT  III,  SC.  IV. 


Lear.  Didst  thou  give  all  to  thy  daughters?  and  art  48 
thou  come  to  this? 

Edg.  Who  gives  any  thing  to  poor  Tom?  whom  the  50 
foul  fiend  hath  led  through  fire  and  through  flame,  through 
ford  and  whirlpool,  o’er  bog  and  quagmire ;  that  hath  laid 
knives  under  his  pillow  and  halters  in  his  pew;  set  rnts- 


4S,  49.  Prose,  QqFf.  Verse,  Steev/78, 
Coll.  Del.  Ktly. 

48.  Didst... thy]  Ff  + ,  Cap.  Ec.  Knt, 
Del.  Dyce,  Sch.  Didst  thou  give  all  to 
thy  two  Sing.  Wh.  Coll.  iii.  Hajl  thou 
giuen  all  to  thy  two  Qq  et  cet. 
thou ]  thou  too  Ktly. 
daughters ]  Daughters  F4. 

51.  through  fire']  though  Fire  F,. 
through  flame,]  Om.  Qq. 
through  ford]  throgh  foord  Qa. 


52.  ford]  foord  Qq.  Sword  Ff, 
Rowe,  swamp  Coll.  (MS).  swara 
Anon.*  food  Anon.* 

whirlpool]  whirli-poole  Qq. 
Whirle  Poole  FtFaF3.  whirlepoole  F4. 
through  whirlpool  Johns,  whirlpool 
Glo.  Wr.  Mob. 

hath]  has  Qq. 

53.  prw]  Pope  ii.  pue  QqFf. 
ratsbane]  Rate-bane  Fa. 


somewhat  akin  to  the  comic,  that  it  might  contrast  the  better  with  the  real  insanity 
of  Lear.’ '  Convden  Clarke  thinks  that  the  marked  frequency  of  the  word  *  cold  * 
during  this  scene  was  probably  intentional,  in  order  to  sustain  the  impression  of  the 
inclemency  of  the  season. 

53.  knives  under  his  pillow]  To  Theobald  is  due  the  credit  of  discovering 
that  here,  and  throughout  Edgar’s  feigned  madness,  allusions  are  made  to  Harsnet’s 
Declaration,  Sec.  Thus :  ‘  While  the  Spaniards  were  preparing  their  Armado  against 
England,  the  Jesuits  were  here  busily  at  work  to  promote  the  success  by  making  con¬ 
verts.  One  method  they  used,  to  do  this,  was  to  dispossess  pretended  demoniacks  of 
their  own  church ;  by  which  artifice  they  made  several  hundred  converts  among  the 
common  people,  and  grew  so  elate  upon  their  success  as  to  publish  an  account  of 
their  exploits  in  this  wonderful  talent  of  exorcising.  A  main  scene  of  their  business, 
in  this  seeming-holy  discipline,  lay  in  the  family  of  one  Mr.  Edmund  Peckham; 
where  Marwood,  a  servant  of  Antony  Babington’s,  Trayford,  an  attendant  upon  Mr. 
Peckham,  and  Sarah  and  Friswood  Williams,  and  Anne  Smith  (three  chambermaids 
in  that  family),  were  supposed  to  be  possessed  by  devils,  and  came  under  the  hands 
of  the  priests  for  their  cure.  The  parties  either  so  little  liked  the  discipline,  or  the 
Jesuits  behaved  with  such  ill  address,  that  the  consequence  was,  the  imposture  was 
discovered;  the  demoniacs  were  examined;  and  their  confessions  taken  upon  oath 
before  the  Privy  Council.  The  whole  matter  being  blown  up,  the  criminals  brought 
to  the  stake,  and  the  trick  of  Devil-hunting  brought  into  ridicule,  Dr.  Harsnet  (who 
was  chaplain  to  Archbishop  Bancroft,  and  himself  afterwards  Archbishop  of  York) 
wrote  a  smart  narrative  of  this  whole  proceeding  under  the  following  title:  “A 
Declaration  of  egregious  Popish  Impostures,  to  withdraw  the  harts  of  her  Majesties 
Subjects  from  their  allegeance,  and  from  the  truth  of  Christian  Religion  professed  in 
England,  under  the  pretence  of  casting  out  devils.  Practised  by  Edmunds,  alias 
Weston  a  Jesuit,  and  divers  Romish  priests  his  wicked  associates.  Whereunto  are 
annexed  the  Copies  of  the  Confessions,  and  Examinations  of  the  parties  themselves, 
which  were  pretended  to  be  possessed,  and  dispossessed,  taken  upon  oath  before  her 
Majesties  Commissioners  for  causes  Ecclesiasticall.  At  London  Printed  by  James 


ACT  III,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


i37 


bane  by  his  porridge ;  made  him  proud  of  heart,  to  ride  on 
a  bay  trotting-horse  over  four-inched  bridges,  to  course  his  55 
own  shadow  for  a  traitor.  Bless  thy  five  wits !  Tom ’s 
a-cold.  O,  do,  de,  do,  de,  do,  de.  Bless  thee  from  whirl- 


54.  porridge]  Porredge  Ff.  pottage 

Qq. 

55.  trotting-horse ]  Steev.  trotting 
horfe  QqFf. 

four-inched]  Cap.  foure  incht 
QqFj.  foure  archt  Fa.  four  arch'd 


F3F4,  Rowe. 

56,57.  Bless]  blejje  Qq.  Bliffe  F, 
F,F3.  Blifs  F4. 

57.  O  do,...de.]  Ff+,Cap.  Jen.  Om. 
Qq.  O,  do  de,  do  de,  do  de.  Johns,  et 
cet. 


* 

Roberts,  dwelling  in  Barbican  1603.”  .  .  .  The  greatest  part  of  Edgar’s  dissembled 
lunacy,  the  names  of  his  devils,  and  the  descriptive  circumstances  he  alludes  to  in 
his  own  case,  are  all  drawn  from  this  pamphlet,  and  the  confessions  of  the  poor 
deluded  wretches.’  In  this  mention  of  ‘  knives  ’  and  ‘  halters  ’  there  seems  to  be  an 
allusion  to  the  following  passage  from  Harsnet  (which  is  here  given  as  printed  by 
Staunton)  :  ‘  This  examinant  further  saith,  that  one  Alexander  an  apothecarie, 
having  brought  with  him  from  London  to  Denham  on  a  time  a  new  halter,  and  two 
blades  of  knives,  did  leave  the  same  upon  the  gallerie  floare  in  her  Maister’s  house. 
The  next  morning  he  tooke  occasion  to  goe  with  this  examinant  into  the  said  gal¬ 
lerie,  where  she  espying  the  said  halter  and  blades,  asked  Ma:  Alexander  what 
they  did  there:  Hee  making  the  matter  strange,  aunswered,  that  he  saw  them  not, 
though  hee  looked  fully  upon  them  :  she  her  selfe  pointing  to  them  with  her  finger, 
where  they  lay  within  a  yard  of  them,  where  they  stoode  both  together.  Now  (quoth 
this  examinant)  doe  you  not  see  them  ?  and  so  taking  them  up,  said,  looke  you  heere : 
Ah  (quoth  hee)  now  I  see  them  indeed,  but  before  I  could  not  see  them :  And  there¬ 
fore  saith  he,  I  perceave  that  the  devil  hath  layd  them  heere,  to  worke  some  mischiefe 
upon  you,  that  are  possessed.  Hereupon  ...  a  great  search  was  made  in  the  house, 
to  know  how  the  said  halter  and  knife  blades  came  thether:  but  it  could  not  in  any 
wise  be  found  out,  as  it  was  pretended,  till  Ma :  Mainy  in  his  next  fit  said,  as  it  was 
reported,  that  the  devil  layd  them  in  the  Gallery,  that  some  of  those  who  were  pos¬ 
sessed,  might  either  hang  themselves  with  the  halter,  or  kil  themselves  with  the 
blades.’ — Examination  of  Friswood  Williams,  p.  219. 

53.  pew]  Delius  suggests  that  this  is  to  indicate  that  not  even  the  most  sacred 
places  were  exempt  from  the  temptation  to  commit  suicide. 

56.  five  wits]  Johnson  (note  on  Much  Ado,  I,  i,  66) :  *  The  wits  seem  to  have 
been  reckoned  five,  by  analogy  of  the  five  senses,  or  the  five  inlets  of  ideas.’  In  a 
note  on  Twelfth  Night ,  IV,  ii,  92,  Malone  quotes  from  Stephen  Hawes’s  poem 
called  Graunde  Amoure,  1554,  to  show  that  the  ‘five  wits’  were:  ‘common  wit, 
imagination,  fantasy,  estimation,  and  memory.’  That  the  five  wits  were  confounded 
with  the  five  senses,  Collier  shows  by  a  quotation  from  ‘  the  interlude  of  The  Worlde 
end  the  Chylde,  printed  by  Wynkyn  de  Worde  in  1 522,  and  introduced  into  vol.  xit, 
p.  334,  of  Dodsley’s  Old  Plays :  “  Age.  Of  the  .v.  wittes  I  wolde  have  knowynge. 
Perseuerance.  Forsoth,  syr,  herynge,  seynge,  and  smellynge.  The  remenaunte 
tastynge,  and  felynge :  These  ben  the  .v.  wittes  bodely.”  ’  Malone  :  Sh.,  however, 
in  his  141st  Sonnet,  considered  the  ‘  five  wits  ’  as  distinct  from  the  five  senses. 

57.  a-cold]  Abbott,  §  24 :  That  is,  ‘  a-kale,’  E.  E.  ‘  in  a  chill.’  [See  II,  ii,  69.] 

57.  do,  de]  Eccles  :  This  seems  intended  to  express  the  sound  uttered  by  per- 


KING  LEAR 


[act  hi,  sc.  iv 


1 88 


winds,  star-blasting,  and  taking!  Do  poor  Tom  some  58 
charity,  whom  the  foul  fiend  vexes.  There  could  I  have  him 
now,  and  there,  and  there  again,  and  there.  [Storm  still.  60 
Lear.  What,  have  his  daughters  brought  him  to  this 
pass  ? — 

Couldst  thou  save  nothing  ?  Wouldst  thou  give  ’em  all  ? 

Fool.  Nay,  he  reserved  a  blanket,  else  we  had  been  all 
shamed. 

Lear.  Now,  all  the  plagues  that  in  the  pendulous  air  65 
Hang  fated  o’er  men’s  faults  light  on  thy  daughters ! 

Kent.  He  hath  no  daughters,  sir. 

Lear.  Death,  traitor !  nothing  could  have  subdued  nature 
To  such  a  lowness  but  his  unkind  daughters. 

Is  it  the  fashion  that  discarded  fathers  70 

Should  have  thus  little  mercy  on  their  flesh  ? 

Judicious  punishment!  ’twas  this  flesh  begot 


58.  star-blasting]  Jlarre-bluJling  Qq. 

60.  there  again]  here  again  F,  +  . 
and  there.]  Om.  Qq. 

[Storm  still.]  Om.  Qq. 

61.  What,  have  his]  Theob.  What , 
his  Qq.  Ha's  his  F,.  Has  his  F3F3, 
Ktly.  Have  his  F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Knt. 

pass]  ajfe  F4> 


62.  Wouldst.. ..yem]  Ff,  Rowe,  Wb. 
Sch.  Didst. ...'em  Pope+,  Jen.  Sta. 
Dyce  ii.  Wouldst. ..them  Knt.  Didjl... 
them  Qq  et  cet. 

64.  shamed]  ashamed  Ktly. 

66.  light]  fall  Qq. 

72,  73.  begot. ....daughters.]  One  line, 
Qq. 


sons  who  shiver  with  extreme  cold,  [Cotgrave  gives  ;  *  Friller.  To  shiuer,  chatter, 
or  didder  for  cold.’ — Ed.] 

58.  taking]  See  II,  iv,  160. 

65,  66.  Boswell:  Compare  Timon,  IV,  iii,  108-110:  ‘Be  as  a  planetary  plague, 
when  Jove  Will  o’er  some  high-viced  city  hang  his  poison  In  the  sick  air.’  Schmidt  : 
In  The  Birth  of  Merlin ,  which  has  been  attributed  to  Sh.,  we  find :  *  knowest  thou 
what  pendulous  mischief  roofs  thy  head  ?’ 

69.  unkind]  Walker  (Crit.  i,  87)  calls  attention  to  the  accent  ‘finkind.’ 

71.  flesh]  Delius  refers  this  to  the  sticking  of  pins  in  the  mortified  bare  arms, 
Clarke  to  the  exposure  of  poor  Tom’s  body  to  the  storm.  In  Edwin  Booth’s 
Prompt  Book  there  is  the  following  stage-direction :  « Draws  a  thorn,  or  wooden 
spike,  from  Edgar’s  arm,  and  tries  to  thrust  it  into  his  own.’  After  line  73 :  ‘  Edgar 
seizes  Lear’s  hand  and  takes  away  the  thorn.’ 

72.  Judicious]  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  64)  cites  this  word,  which  he  says  is  here  used 
for  judicial,  among  other  instances  of  an  *  inaccurate  use  of  words  in  Sh.,  some  of 
them  owing  to  his  imperfect  scholarship  (imperfect,  I  say,  for  he  was  not  an  ignorant 
man  even  on  this  point),  and  others  common  to  him  with  his  contemporaries.*  See 
4  eternal,’  Ham.  I,  v,  21. 

72.  punishment]  Walker  ( Vers.  66)  and  Aebott,  §  467.  cite  this  as  a  dissylla¬ 
ble  here. 


act  in,  sc.  iv.]  KING  LEAR 

189 

Those  pelican  daughters. 

73 

Elg.  Pillicock  sat  on  Pillicock-hill, 

Alow :  alow,  loo,  loo ! 

75 

Fool.  This  cold  night  will  turn  us  all  to  fools  and 
madmen. 


Edg.  Take  heed  o’  th’  foul  fiend ;  obey  thy  parents ; 
keep  thy  word  justly;  swear  not;  commit  not  with  man’s 
sworn  spouse;  set  not  thy  sweet  heart  on  proud  array.  80 
Tom’s  a-cold. 


73.  daughters ]  Daughter  F2. 

74,75.  Pillicock...loo !]  As  in  Johns. 

One  line,  QqFf. 

74.  Pillicock-hill]  Hyphen,  Rowe. 
pclieocks  hill  Qq.  pelicacks  hill  Q3. 
Pillicocks-hill  Mai.  Steev.  Bos.  Sing. 
Ktly. 

75.  A  low...  loo  /]  a  lo  lo  lo.  Qq.  Haloo, 
loo,  loo.  Cap.  Halloo,  halloo,  loo,  loo! 
Theob  ii. 


73.  o'  th']  oth'  FaF3F4.  at'h  Q,.  of 
the  Q2,  Cap. 

79.  'word  justly]  Pope,  words  iuflly 
Qq.  words  Tufliee  Fx.  word,  jujlice 
FaF3F  .  word,  do  justice  Rowe,  word's 
justice  Knt,  Del.  i.  "words'  justice  Sch. 

So.  set  not ]  fet  on  F3F4. 

sweet  heart]  fwcet-heart  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Theob.  i.  sweetheart  Sing. 


73.  pelican]  See  Ham.  IV,  v,  142.  Wright:  See  Batman  vppon  Bartholome 
(ed.  15S2),  fol.  1S6  b :  ‘  The  Pellican  loueth  too  much  her  children.  For  when  the 
children  bee  haught,  and  begin  to  waxe  hoare,  they  smite  the  father  and  the  mother 
in  the  face,  wherfore  the  mother  smiteth  them  againe  and  slaieth  them.  And  the 
thirde  daye  the  mother  smiteth  her  selfe  in  her  side  that  the  bloud  runneth  out,  and 
sheddeth  that  hot  bloud  vppon  the  bodies  of  her  children.  And  by  virtue  of  the 
bloud  the  birdes  that  were  before  dead,  quicken  againe.’ 

74.  Pillicock]  Capell:  This  was  suggested  by  the  word  ‘pelican.’  Collier  :  It 
is  thus  mentioned  in  Ritson’s  Gammer  Gurton's  Garland : — ‘  Pillycock,  Pillycock 
sat  on  a  hill ;  If  he's  not  gone,  he  sits  there  still.*  Dyce  ( Gloss.) :  Frequently  used 
as  a  term  of  endearment.  Florio  gives :  ‘Pinchino,  a  prime-cocke,  a  pillicockc,  a 
darlin,  a  beloued  lad.’  Cotgravehas:  ‘  Turelureau.  Mon  fur.  My  pillicockc,  my 
prettie  knaue.’  But  it  had  another  meaning;  see  Florio  in  Piuiolo,  or  Puga.  [It  is 
not  unlikely  that  the  next  line  wras  meant  to  imitate  the  crowing  of  a  cock.  I  see  no 
reason  why  in  nondescript  words  we  should  desert  the  spelling  of  the  original  texts, 
and  change  *  alow  ’  into  Halloo.  In  such  words  it  is  more  likely  than  not  that  the 
compositors  ‘  followed  copy.’ — Ed.] 

79.  word  justly]  Schmidt  suggests,  as  the  meaning  of  the  Ff,  ‘be  as  just  in 
deeds  as  in  words.’ 

79.  commit]  Malone  (Note  on  Oth.  IV,  ii,  72) :  This  -word  in  Shakespeare’s 
time,  besides  its  general  signification,  seems  to  have  been  applied  particularly  to  un¬ 
lawful  acts  of  love. 

80.  set]  Schmidt  :  *  Set,’  when  followed  by  *  on,’  is  equivalent  to  incite,  to  make 
desirous  of  anything. 

Si.  a-cold]  George  Ross,  M.  D.  ( Studies ,  &c.,  p.  37) :  Lear,  the  genuine  lunatic, 
is  insensible  to  cold,  and  complains  of  it  only  when  reason  returns ;  on  the  other 


190 


KING  LEAR 


[act  hi,  sc.  iv. 


Lear.  What  hast  thou  been  ?  82 

Edg.  A  serving-man,  proud  in  heart  and  mind;  that 
curled  my  hair ;  wore  gloves  in  my  cap ;  served  the  lust  of 
my  mistress’s  heart  and  did  the  aft  of  darkness  with  her.  85 
Swore  as  many  oaths  as  I  spake  words  and  broke  them  in 
the  sweet  face  of  heaven.  One  that  slept  in  the  contriving  of 
lust  and  waked  to  do  it  Wine  loved  I  deeply,  dice  dearly ; 


83.  serving-man, ]  Seruingman?  F,F2. 
85.  mistress's']  Rowe  ii.  mijlris  QqFf. 
mistress'  Jen.  Dyce,  Sta.  Ktly,  Glo.  Cam. 
87.  in. ..of]  in  the  contriving  Pope  + . 


on  the  contriving  Han.  on  the  contriv • 
ing  of  Cap. 

88.  deeply ]  deepdy  Qa.  deerely  F,Fa. 
dearly  F3F4,  Rowe,  Knt. 


hand,  the  mock  madman  makes  his  sensitiveness  to  external  influences  the  constant 
burden  of  his  lamentations.  [‘  Tom’s  a-cold*  appears  to  have  been  the  peculiar  cry 
of  Bedlam  beggars  at  all  seasons.  See  II,  iii,  14. — Ed.] 

83.  serving-man]  Knight  :  This  is  not  a  menial,  but  a  servant  in  the  sense  in 
which  it  is  used  in  Tvjo  Gent.  II,  iv,  106.  Schmidt  denies  this,  and  affirms  that,  in 
jocose  style,  where  the  meaning  can  be  clearly  gathered  from  the  context,  a  cavaliers 
servente  is  undoubtedly  called  a  servant,  but  never  a  *  serving-man,’  which  here  bears 
its  ordinary  meaning. 

84.  curled  my  hair]  Malone  cites  from  Harsnet :  ‘  Then  Ma.  Mainy,  by  the  in¬ 
stigation  of  the  first  of  the  seaven  [spirits],  began  to  set  his  hands  unto  his  side, 
curled  his  hair,  and  used  such  gestures  as  Ma.  Edmunds  [the  exorcist]  presently 
affirmed  that  that  spirit  was  Pride.  Herewith  he  began  to  curse  and  banne,  saying. 
What  a  poxe  do  I  here  ?  I  will  stay  no  longer  amongst  a  company  of  rascal  priests, 
but  goe  to  the  court,  and  brave  it  amongst  my  fellows,  the  noblemen  there  assem¬ 
bled.  .  .  .  Shortly  after  they  [the  seven  spirits]  were  all  cast  forth,  and  in  such  man¬ 
ner  as  Ma.  Edmunds  directed  them,  which  was,  that  every  devil  should  depart  in 
some  certaine  forme  representing  cither  a  beast  or  some  other  creature,  that  had  the 
resemblance  of  that  sinne  whereof  he  was  the  chief  author :  whereupon  the  spirit 
of  pride  departed  in  the  form  of  a  peacock ;  the  spirit  of  sloth  in  the  likeness  of  an 
asset  the  spirit  of  envie  in'  the  similitude  of  a  dog ;  the  spirit  of  gluttony  in  the 
forme  of  a  voolfe,  and  the  other  devils  had  also  in  their  departure  their  particular 
likenesses  agreeable  to  their  natures.’  RUSHTON  {Euphuism,  p.  47)  cites  from 
Euphues,  *  Be  not  curious  to  curie  thy  haire,'  &c.  [This  may,  perhaps,  refer  to 
the  ‘love-locks’  that  were  worn  by  gallants  in  Shakespeare’s  day. — Ed.] 

84.  gloves]  Theobald  thinks  it  but  justice  to  mention  an  emendation  which  a 
learned  gentleman  suggested  to  him,  viz.  that  we  should  read  ‘  wore  cloves  in  my 
cap,’  alluding  to  the  fashion  then  in  vogue  of  quilting  spices  and  perfumes  into  the 
linings  of  hats.  Theobald,  of  course,  dissents,  and  adds  that  it  was  ‘  the  custom  to 
wear  gloves  in  the  hat  upon  three  different  motives:  as  the  favour  of  a  mistress;  in 
honour  of  some  other  respected  friend ;  or  as  a  mark  to  be  challeng’d  by  an  adver¬ 
sary  where  a  duel  was  impending.’  Steevens  :  Portia,  in  her  assumed  character, 
asks  Bassanio  for  his  gloves,  which  she  says  she  will  wear  for  his  sake ;  and  Henry 
V  gives  the  pretended  glove  of  Alcn^on  to  Fluellen,  which  afterwards  occasions  his 
quarrel  with  the  English  soldier. 


ACT  III,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


191 


and  in  woman  out-paramoured  the  Turk.  False  of  heart, 
light  of  ear,  bloody  of  hand ;  hog  in  sloth,  fox  in  stealth,  90 
wolf  in  greediness,  dog  in  madness,  lion  in  prey.  Let  not 
the  creaking  of  shoes  nor  the  rustling  of  silks  betray  thy 
poor  heart  to  woman.  Keep  thy  foot  out  of  brothels,  thy 
hand  out  of  plackets,  thy  pen  from  lenders’  books,  and  defy 


89.  out-paramoured ]  cm  paromcrd 

Qx- 

90.  of  hand]  hand  F3.  handed 
Rowe. 

91 * *-  prey]  pray  Qr. 

92.  rustling ]  ruflngs  Q,.  rujlings  Qa. 


rustlings  Jen. 

93.  ■woman]  women  Qq,  Jen.  Steev. 
Vac.  Sing.  Ktly,  Huds. 

brothels ]  brothell  Qq,  Jen. 

94.  plackets ]  placket  Qq,  Jep. 
books ]  booke  Qq,  Jen. 


90.  ear]  Johnson:  Credulous  of  evil,  ready  to  receive  malicious  reports. 

90-91.  hog  .  .  .  prey]  Wright:  Mr  Skeat  has  pointed  out  to  me  that  in  the 
Ancren  Riwle,  p.  198,  the  seven  deadly  sins  are  typified  by  seven  wild  animals ;  the 
lion  being  the  type  of  pride,  the  serpent  of  envy,  the  unicorn  of  wrath,  the  bear  of 
sloth,  the  fox  of  covetousness,  the  swine  of  greediness,  and  the  scorpion  of  lust. 

94.  plackets]  When  Steevens  wished  to  treat  an  indelicate  subject  in  an  in¬ 
delicate  way,  yet  with  a  show  of  learning,  he  not  infrequently  signed  his  notes  Am- 
NER,  the  name  of  a  guileless,  dissenting  clergyman  settled  not  far  from  Steevens’s 
home  at  Hampstead.  There  is  such  a  note  so  signed  on  this  word.  Nares  defines 
4  placket  ’  as  4  a  petticoat,  generally  an  underpetticoat.  .  .  .  Bailey  says  it  was  the  fore' 
part  of  the  shift  or  petticoat,  but  it  was  neither.  It  is  sometimes  used  for  a  female, 
the  wearer  of  a  placket,  as  petticoat  now  is.’  Florio  gives :  4  Torace,  .  .  .  also  a 
placket  or  a  stomacher,  a  brestplate  or  corselet  for  the  body.’  This  led  Singer  and 
others  to  define  it  simply  as  4 a  stomacher.’  Dyce  ( Gloss.)  has  the  following  note: 

4  Whether  or  not 44  placket  ”  had  originally  an  indelicate  meaning  is  more  than  I  cah 
determine.  It  has  been  very  variously  explained :  a  petticoat,  an  underpetticoat,  a 
pocket  attached  to  a  petticoat,  the  slit  or  opening  in  a  petticoat,  and  a  stomacher; 
and  it  certainly  was  occasionally  used  to  signify  a  female  as  petticoat  is  now.  44  The 
term  placket  is  still  in  use  in  England  and  America  for  a  petticoat,  and,  in  some  of 
the  provinces  for  a  shift,  a  slit  in  the  petticoat,  a  pocket,  &c.” — Halliwell.  44  As  to  the 
word  placket ,  in  4  An  exact  Chronologie  of  memorable  things  ’  in  Wit's  Interpreter ,  3d 
ed.  1671,  it  is  said  to  be  4  sixty-six  years  since  maids  began  to  wear  plackets.’  Ac¬ 
cording  to  Middleton,  the  placket  is  4  the  open  part  ’  of  a  petticoat ;  and  the  word  is 
not  altogether  obsolete,  since  the  opening  in  the  petticoats  of  the  present  day  is  still 
called  4  the  placket  hole,’  in  contradistinction  to  the  pocket  hole.” — Chapell’s  Pop¬ 
ular  Music  of  the  Olden  Time ,  ii,  518.’  The  student  who  wishes  to  pursue  the 
subject  further  will  find  a  note  on  it  by  White  on  the  present  passage,  and  also 
on  Love's  Lab.  Ill,  i,  186.  Schmidt  (Lex.)  gives  the  other  instances  of  its  use  in 
Sh.,  and  in  addition  see  Marston’s  What  You  Will ,  III,  i,  p.  267,  ed.  Halliwell : 
4  apple  squiers,  basket  bearers,  or  pages  of  the  placket.’  Middleton’s  Roaring  Girl, 
III,  iii,  p.  497,  ed.  Dyce.  Middleton’s  Any  Thing  for  a  Quiet  Life,  II,  ii,  p.  447, 
ed.  Dyce:  4 — the  open  part  [of  a  petticoat]  which  is  now  called  the  placket. 
Franklin ,  fun.  Why,  was  it  ever  called  otherwise  ?  Geo.  Yes ;  while  the  word  re¬ 
mained  pure  in  his  original,  the  Latin  tongue,  who  have  no  K’s,  it  was  called  tho 


192 


KING  LEAR 


[act  hi,  sc.  iv. 


the  foul  fiend.  Still  through  the  hawthorn  blows  the  cold  95 
wind.  Says  suum,  mint,  nonny .  Dolphin  my  boy,  boy,  scssal 
let  him  trot  by.  [Storm  still. 


95-97.  Still.. .by]  As  in  QqFf.  Three 
lines,  Glo.  +  ,  Dyce  ii. 

95.  Still... nonny.]  In  Italics,  Sta. 
the  hawthorn]  thy  Hawthorn  F3 

*Y 

hawthorn]  hathome  Qq.  Hau- 
thorne  F,Fa. 

96.  Says.... nonny]  Ff  +  ,  Jen.  Knt, 
Dyce.  Sch.  hay  no  on  ny  Qq-  Ha ! 
nenni ;  Cap.  Hey  no  nonny, — Ec.  says 
suum,  mttn ,  ha  no  nonny  Steev.  et  cet. 

Dolphin.. .by]  Mai.  (subs.)  Dol¬ 


phin  my  Boy,  Boy  Seffey :  let  him  trot 
by.  Ff  (Sefey  F,,  Knt),  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 
Knt.  Dolphin  my  boy,  my  boy,  cea/e  let 
him  trot  by.  Qq  {cae/e  Q,),  also  Ec.  Ktly 
(both  in  Italics,  and  in  two  lines;  Ktly 
reads  cessi).  dolphin,  my  boy ,  my  boy, 
sesse ;  let  him  trot  by.  Cap. 

96.  my  boy,  boy]  Ff  + ,  Sch.  my  boy, 
my  boy  Qq  et  cet. 

trot  by]  trot  my  F3F4< 

[Storm  still.]  Om.  Qq. 


placet ;  a  placendo,  a  thing  or  place  to  please.’  Middleton’s  The  Honest  Whore t 
Part  2,  V,  ii,  p.  241,  ed.  Dyce.  Beau,  and  Fl.’s  Love's  Cure,  I,  ii,  p.  1 16,  ed.  Dyce. 
Beau,  and  Fl.’s  Humourous  Lieutenant,  IV,  iv,  p.  508,  ed.  Dyce.  White  well 
sums  up  the  discussion :  *  It  is  clear  at  least  that  the  placket,  in  Shakespeare’s  time 
and  after,  was  an  article  of  female  apparel  so  secret  as  not  to  admit  description,  and 
so  common  as  not  to  require  it ;  and  that,  consequently,  the  thing  having  passed  out 
of  use,  the  word  si  at  nominis  umbra.' 

94.  lenders’  books]  Steevens:  So  in  Chapman’s  All  Fools,  1605:  ‘If  I  but 
write  my  name  in  mercers’  books,  I  am  as  sure  to  have  at  six  months  end  A  rascal 
at  my  elbow  with  his  mace,’  &c. 

96.  suum,  mun]  Steevens  :  These  words  were  probably  added  by  the  players, 
who,  together  with  the  compositors,  were  likely  enough  to  corrupt  what  they  did  not 
understand,  or  to  add  more  of  their  own  to  what  they  already  concluded  to  be  non¬ 
sense.  [See  Knight’s  interpretation,  in  the  next  note.  For  ‘nonny,’  see  Ham. 
IV,  v,  161.] 

96,  97.  Dolphin  .  .  .  by]  Capell  supposes  that  Edgar  ‘  feigns  himself  one  who 
is  surveying  his  horses,  and  marking  their  paces ;  that  his  ‘  boy  ’  whom  he  calls 
‘  dolphin  ’  (or  dauphin)  is  about  to  stop  one  of  them,  and  cries  out  to  that  boy  in- 
wild  language:  ‘ Ha!  no,  leave  to  do  it;  let  him  trot,  by:'  if  any  one,  upon  the 
score  of  this  dolphin,  will  say — he  feigns  himself  Neptune,  he  shall  not  be  oppos’d 
in  it.’  Johnson  :  Of  interpreting  this  there  is  not  much  hope  or  much  need.  But 
anything  may  be  tried.  The  madman,  now  counterfeiting  a  proud  fit,  supposes  him¬ 
self  met  on  the  road  by  some  one  that  disputes  the  way,  and  cries  ‘  Hey! — No — * 
but  altering  his  mind  condescends  to  let  him  pass,  and  calls  to  his  boy  Dolphin 
(Rodolph)  not  to  contend  with  him.  ‘On — Dolphin,  my  boy,  cease.  Let  him 
trot  by.’  Steevens  gives  the  following  stanza:  ‘Dolphin, .my  boy,  my  boy,  Cease, 
let  him  trot  by;  It  seemeth  not  that  such  a  foe  From  me  or  you  would  fly,’  and  adds 
that  it  is  from  ‘  a  very  old  ballad  written  on  some  battle  fought  in  France,  during 
which  the  King,  unwilling  to  put  the  suspected  valour  of  his  son  the  Dauphin — i.  e. 
Dolphin  (so  called  and  spelt  at  those  times)  to  the  trial,  is  represented  as  desirous  to 
restrain  him  from  any  attempt  to  establish  an  opinion  of  his  courage  on  an  adversary 
who  wears  the  least  appearance  of  strength ;  and  at  last  assists  in  propping  up  a  dead 
body  against  a  tree  for  him  to  try  his  manhood  upon.  Therefore,  as  different  cham- 


act  I II,  sc.  iv.]  KING  LEAR 


193 


Lear.  Thou  wert  better  in  thy  grave  than  to  answer  9S 
with  thy  uncovered  body  this  extremity  of  the  skies.  Is 
man  no  more  than  this  ?  Consider  him  well.  Thou  owest  IOO 
the  worm  no  silk,  the  beast  no  hide,  the  sheep  no  wool,  the 
cat  no  perfume.  Ha?  here’s  three  on’s  are  sophisticated. 
Thou  art  the  thing  itself;  unaccommodated  man  is  no  more 
but  such  a  poor,  bare,  forked  animal  as  thou  art.  Off  off, 
you  lendings!  come,  unbutton  here.  105 


98.  Thou]  Ff  + ,  Cap.  Sch.  Why , 
thou  Qq  et  cet. 

wort]  were  Sing.  Sta. 
thy  grave ]  a  Graue  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han.  Knt,  Sch. 

98-105.  Thou. ..here.')  Nine  lines,  end¬ 
ing  answer. ..skies. ..well  :...hide,. ..Ha  /... 
art. ..is, ...animal. ..here.  Ktly. 

IOO.  than]  but  Qq,  Jen. 

more. ..Consider]  more,  but  this 
cdfider  Q,. 


102.  Ha  ?]  Om.  Qq. 

here's ]  beds  Qx.  he'rs  Qa. 
on's ]  ons  QiF2.  ones  Qy  of  us 
Pope+,  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Del. 

sophisticated ]  fo  phiflicated  Q,. 
105.  lendings ]  leadings  Qa. 

come,  unbutton  here. ]  come  on 
Q,.  come  on  be  true.  Q3. 

[Tearing  off  his  clothes.  Rowe. 
Tearing...;  Kent  and  the  Fool  strive  to 
hinder  him.  Cap. 


pions  are  supposed  to  cross  the  field,  the  King  always  discovers  some  objection  to 
his  attacking  each  of  them,  and  repeats  these  two  lines  as  every  fresh  personage  is 
introduced.  The  song  I  have  never  seen,  but  had  this  account  from  an  old  gentle¬ 
man,  who  was  only  able  to  repeat  part  of  it,  and  died  before  I  could  have  supposed 
the  discovery  would  have  been  of  the  least  importance  to  me.’  [It  may  perhaps  be 
well  to  remember  that  Steevens’s  *  black-letter  volumes  ’  of  unknown  titles  and  dates, 
together  with  his  *  ballads  ’  rehearsed  from  memory,  are  to  be  received  with  cau¬ 
tion. — Ed.]  Farmer  cites  :  ‘Od’s  my  life!  I  am  not  allied  to  the  sculler  yet;  he 
shall  be  Dauphin  my  boy.’ — Jonson’s  Bartholomew  Fair  [V,  iii,  p.  522,  ed.  Gifford, 
where  Gifford  says,  ‘  Dauphin  my  boy ,  is  the  burden  of  a  ridiculous  old  song,  of 
which  mention  is  made  by  Steevens  in  King  Lear'  Note  that  Gifford  was  too  cau¬ 
tious  to  allude  to  the  interesting  little  history  that  Steevens  gives  of  the  ballad. — 
Ed.]  Knight  :  We  are  inclined  to  think,  if  there  be  any  meaning,  some  of  the 
words  are  meant  as  an  imitation  of  the  sound  of  the  rushing  wind,  and  that  *  let  him 
go  by  ’  has  the  same  reference. 

96.  sessa !]  Malone  :  I  have  printed  ‘  Sessa,’  because  the  same  cant  word  oc¬ 
curs  in  the  Induction  to  Tam.  the  Sh.  Johnson  (note  on  III,  vi,  72) :  This  I  take 
to  be  the  French  word  cessez,  pronounced  cessey,  which  was,  I  suppose,  like  some 
other  of  common  use  among  us.  It  is  an  interjection  enforcing  cessation  of  any 
action,  like,  be  quiet,  have  done.  Collier  :  It  may  be  doubted  whether  it  be  not  a 
mere  interjection. 

98.  thou  wert]  See  I,  iv,  93. 

102.  cat]  That  is,  the  civet-cat. 

102.  sophisticated]  Schmidt:  Not  elsewhere  in  Sh. 

103.  unaccommodated]  Wright:  That  is,  unfurnished  with  what  is  necessary, 
especially  with  dress.  Compare  IV,  vi,  81,  where  Edgar  says,  after  seeing  Lear 
•fantastically  dressed  with  wild  flowers,’  ‘The  safer  sense  will  ne’er  accommodate 

17  N 


i94 


KING  LEAR 


[act  in,  sc.  iv. 


Fool.  Prithee,  nuncle,  be  contented ;  ’tis  a  naughty  night  106 
to  swim  in.  Now  a  little  fire  in  a  wide  field  were  like  an 
old  lecher’s  heart,  a  small  spark,  all  the  rest  on’s  body  cold. 
Look,  here  comes  a  walking  fire. 

Edg.  This  is  the  foul  Flibbertigibbet;  he  begins  at  IIO 
curfew  and  walks  at  first  cock ;  he  gives  the  web  and 


106.  Prithee']  Pri/heQ t.  Pry  thee  Ft. 
Prethee  FaF3F4. 

contented ]  content  Qq,  Jen. 

107.  wide]  Jen.  Walker.  wildeQaYl Fa. 
•wild  Q,F3F4  et  cet. 

108.  all ]  and  all  Q3,  Rowe  +  . 
on’s]  in  Qq.  of’s  Cap.  of  his 

Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt. 

HO.  foul]  Ff+,  Sch.  fotil  fiesid  Qq 


et  cet. 

IIO.  Flibbertigibbet]  fliberdegibek  Qf. 
Sirberdegibit  Qa. 

in.  at]  Ff,  Rowe,  Sch.  till  the  Qq 
et  cet. 

gives]  gins  Qa. 

111,112.  and  the  pin ,  squints]  Ff. 
&•  the  pin,  fquemes  Qt.  the  pinqueuer 
Qa.  the  pinquever  Q3. 


His  master  thus.’  In  Shakespeare’s  time  the  word  *  accommodate  ’  had  begun  to  be 
abused.  See  2  Hen.  IV:  III,  ii,  72,  &c.  From  the  word  ‘  lendings,’  which  occurs 
here,  it  would  seem  that  *  accommodate  ’  had  even  then  acquired  the  modern  sense 
of  *  to  furnish  with  money.’ 

105.  unbutton  here]  It  has  been  suggested  to  me  by  an  eminent  novelist  and 
dramatist  in  London,  that  these  words  are  properly  a  stage-direction. — Ed. 

107.  wide]  Jennf.ns  first  suggested  this  change,  on  the  ground  that  ‘“wide”  is 
better  opposed  to  “  little;  ”  ’  it  was  confirmed,  as  I  think,  by  WALKER  ( Crit .  iii,  279), 
who  says  that  ‘  wild  is  in  the  manner  of  modern,  not  Elizabethan  poetry,’  and  he  gives 
instances,  not  alone  from  Sh.,  but  from  contemporary  authors,  where  the  same  mis¬ 
print  of  wild  for  ‘  wide  ’  occurs. 

109.  here  comes]  Although  this  evidently  refers  to  Gloucester  with  his  torch, 
yet  I  think  it  somewhat  premature  to  mark  Gloucester’s  entrance  here  as  the  Cam. 
editors,  following  the  Qq,  have  done.  In  the  Qq,  if  they  were  printed  from  an  acting 
copy,  the  stage-directions  are  rather  directions  to  the  actors  to  be  ready  to  go  on 
than  indications  of  their  actual  entrance.  It  is  not  easy  to  conceive,  in  the  restricted 
space  of  the  Shakespearian  stage,  how  Gloucester  could  have  remained  unnoticed 
by  Lear  throughout  Edgar’s  speech  from  line  109  to  119. — Ed. 

no.  Flibbertigibbet]  Steevens  :  This  fiend  is  mentioned  by  Latimer  in  his 
sermons  [‘And  when  these  flatterers,  and  flybbergybes  an  other  daye  shall  come  and 
clawe  you  by  the  backe  and  say.’ — Second  Sermon,  1549,  p.  69,  ed.  Arber. — Ed.], 
and  Heywood,  in  his  Proverbs  and  Epigrams,  has  the  following :  ‘  Thou  Flebergibet, 
Flebergibet,  thou  wretch  1  ’  Percy  :  ‘  Frateretto,  Fleberdigibet,  Hoberdidance, 
Tocobatto,  were  four  deuils  of  the  round,  or  Morrice,  whom  Sara  in  her  fits,  tuned 
together,  in  measure  and  sweet  cadence.’ — Harsnet,  p.  49.  Cotgrave:  Coquette: 
f.  A  pratling,  or  proud  gossip;  a  fisking,  or  fiiperous  minx,  a  cocket,  or  tatlinghous- 
wife;  a  titifill,  a  flebergebit.  Bell  (Sh.  Puck,  &c.  iii,  104)  gives  a  fanciful  deriva¬ 
tion  of  this  word,  which,  he  says,  is  Galgenmannchen  personified. 

iii.  walks  at  first  cock]  Schmidt:  Not  unfrequently  in  Sh.  ‘to  walk’  is 
equivalent  to  go  away.  Thus  in  Cym.  I,  i,  176:  ‘  Queen .  Pray,  walk  awhile.  Im¬ 
ogen.  About  some  half-hour  hence,  I  pray  you,  speak  with  me  .  . .  for  this  time 


ACT  III,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


195 


the  pin,  squints  the  eye,  and  makes  the  hare-lip;  mildews  1 12 
the  white  wheat  and  hurts  the  poor  creature  of  earth. 
Swithold  footed  thrice  the  old ; 


112.  harelip]  Hare-lippe  FjF2.  Hair - 
Up  F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Jen. .  hare  lip  Q,.  hart  lip  Q2. 

X13.  creature ]  creatures  Han. 

earth}  the  earth  F^F4  + ,  Jen.  Ec. 
114-118.  Swithold... aroint  thee  /]  As 
by  Cap.  Four  lines,  Ff.  Prose,  Qq. 


1 14.  Swithold ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Knt, 
Del.  Dyce,  Sch.  fwithald  Qq.  St. 
Withold  Theob.  i.  S.  Withold  Glo.  Wr, 
Saint  Withold  Theob.  ii  et  cet. 

old}  Q,,  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Knt, 
Dyce,  Glo.  Wr.  Sch.  olde  Qa.  ’ old 
Cam.  wold  Theob.  et  cet. 


leave  me.’  That  to  walk  is  used  technically  of  spirits  does  not  interfere  with  the 
present  modified  meaning.  See  IV,  vii,  83.  [For  the  effect  of  the  cock-crow  upon 
‘extravagant  and  erring  spirits,’  see  Ham.  I,  i,  150.] 

1 12.  web  and  pin]  Malone  :  See  Florio,  who  gives *  * Cateratta .  Also  a  disease  in 
the  eies  called  a  pin  and  a  web.’  [Thus,  in  the  edition  of  1598.]  Wright  gives  as 
Florio’s  definition,  *  A  purculleis. . . .  Also  a  dimnesseof  sight  occasioned  byhumores 
hardned  in  the  eies  called  a  Cataract  or  a  pin  and  a  web.’ 

*114-118.  Swithold  ...  thee !]  Warburton:  We  should  read  it  thus:  Saint 
Withold  footed  thrice  the  wold,  He  met  the  night-mare,  and  her  name  told ,  Bid  her 
alight,  and  her  troth  plight,  And  aroynt  thee,  witch,  aroynt  thee  right ;  i.  e.  Saint 
Withold,  traversing  the  wold  or  downs ,  met  the  night-mare ;  who,  having  told  her 
name,  he  obliged  her  to  alight  from  those  persons  whom  she  rides,  and  plight  her 
troth  to  do  no  more  mischief.  This  is  taken  from  a  story  of  him  in  his  legend. 
Hence  he  was  invoked  as  the  patron  saint  against  that  distemper.  And  these  verses 
were  no  other  than  a  popular  charm,  or  night-spell  against  the  Epialtes.  The  last 
line  is  the  formal  execration,  or  apostrophe  of  the  speaker,  of  the  charm  to  the  witch, 
aroynt  thee  right ,  i.  e.  depart  forthwith.  Bedlams ,  gipsies,  and  such-like  vagabonds, 
used  to  sell  these  kinds  of  spells  or  charms  to  the  people.  They  were  of  various 
kinds  for  various  disorders,  and  addressed  to  various  saints.  We  have  another  of 
them  in  B.  and  Fl.’s  Monsieur  Thomas,  IV,  vi,  which  is  expressly  called  a  night-spell, 
as  follows :  *  St.  George,  St.  George,  our  Lady’s  knight,  He  walks  by  day,  so  does  he 
by  night;  And  when  he  had  her  found,  He  her  beat,  and  her  bound.  Until  to  him 
her  troth  she  plight,  She  would  not  stir  from  him  that  night.’  This,  says  Steevens, 
is  likewise  one  of  the  ‘  magical  cures  ’  for  the  incubus,  quoted,  with  little  variation, 
by  Reginald  Scott  in  his  Discovery  of  Witchcraft,  1584.  Theobald:  My  ingenious 
friend  Mr  Bishop  saw  that  ‘  old  ’  must  be  wold,  which  signifies  a  down,  or  champion 
ground,  hilly  and  void  of  wood.  And  as  to  St.  Withold,  we  find  him  again  men¬ 
tioned  in  our  author’s  Troublesome  Raigne  of  King  John  [p.  256,  ed.  Nichols] : 
‘Sweet  S.  Withold  of  thy  lenitie,  defend  us  from  extremitie.’  Tyrwhitt:  I  cannot 
find  this  adventure  in  the  common  legends  of  St.  Vitalis,  who,  I  suppose,  is  here 
called  ‘  St.  Withold.’  Farmer  :  Olds  is  the  same  word  as  wolds.  Spelman  writes. 
Burton  upon  olds ;  the  provincial  pronunciation  is  still  the  oles,  and  that,  being  the 
vulgar  orthography,  may  be  the  correct  one  here.  In  a  book  called  The  Actor, 
ascribed  to  Dr  Hill,  it  is  quoted  ‘the  cold ’  [‘the  reading  of  Tate’s  version.’— 
Steevens].  Mr  Colman  has  it,  in  his  alteration  of  Lear,  *  the  world.'  [To  this 
note  Colman  replied  that  world  in  his  edition  was  an  error  of  the  press.] 


196 


KING  LEAR 


[act  in,  SC.  iv, 


He  met  the  night-mare  and  her  nine-fold;  II $ 

Bid  her  alight, 

And  her  troth  plight, 

And  aroint  thee,  witch,  aroint  thee  1 

Kent.  How  fares  your  grace  ? 

Enter  Gloucester,  with  a  torch. 

Lear.  What’s  he?  120 

Kent.  Who 's  there  ?  What  is ’t  you  seek  ? 

Glou.  What  are  you  there ?  Your  names? 

Edg.  Poor  Tom,  that  eats  the  swimming  frog,  the  toad, 


1 15.  Hemet  the  night-mare ]  he  met 
the  night  mare  Qf.  anelthu  night  Moore 
Qa.  anelthunight  Moor  Q3. 

nine-fold ]  ninefold  FaF3F4<  nine 
fold  Qq.  name  told  Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 

1 16.  her  alight  ]  her  a- light  Ff.  her, 
O  light  Qq. 

1 1 7.  troth  plight ]  troth-plight  Ff. 

1 1 8.  aroint... aroint"]  aroynt....aroynt 
Ff.  arint...arint  Qq. 


1 18.  thee,  witch,"]  thee ,  witch  Qf. 
thee  Witch  F,Fa.  the  witch,  F3F4.  thee, 
with  Qa. 

thee  /]  thee  right.  Warb. 

Enter.. .torch.]  Ff,  after  line  lo'5. 
Transferred  by  Pope.  Enter  Glofter. 
Qq  (Glocefter.  Qa),  after  line  109.  Af* 
ter  line  109,  Cap.  Glo. +  . 

120.  Scene  vii.  Pope  +  ,Jen. 

121.  Who's]  Whofe  Qq. 


115.  nine-fold]  Capell:  That  is, her  nine  imps, or  familiars.  Tyrwhitt:  Put, 
for  the  sake  of  rhyme,  instead  of  nine  foals. 

1 1 8.  aroint]  See  Macb.  I,  iii,  6,  and  notes.  Since  those  derivations,  all  of  them 
unsatisfactory,  were  there  collected,  another,  which  unfortunately  must  be  placed  in 
the  same  category,  has  been  contributed  by  F.  J.  V.  in  Notes  and  Qu.,  15  March, 
1873.  He  proposes  the  French  Ireinte-toi;  that  is,  ‘break  thy  back  or  reins,  used 
as  an  imprecation.'  In  the  notes  on  Macb.  credit  is  not  given,  as  it  should  have 
been,  to  Capell  for  the  derivation  in  his  Glossary:  ‘Avaunt!  Hell  take  thee  I 
Lat.  Dii  te  averruncent !  ’  Nares  cites  it,  without  giving  its  author,  and  to  Nares 
it  has  been  frequently  attributed.  The  following  derivation,  which  seems  highly 
probable,  appeared  in  The  Academy,  28  Dec.  1878:  Mr  F.  D.  Matthew,  of  the 
New  Shakespeare  Society's  Committee,  who  is  editing  the  unprinted  English  Works 
of  Wiclif  for  the  Early  English  Text  Soc.,  has  come  across  two  instances  of  what 
must  surely  be  Shakespeare’s  aroint — the  verb  arunte,  avoid — in  a  Wycliffite  tract 
in  the  MS  C.  v.  6,  Trinity  Coll.,  Dublin,  lately  lent  to  him  by  the  College :  “  And 
here  sculd  mew  aruwt  feynt  penytauwsers,  cowfessours  and  o\>er  prestis  hut  assoylen 
for  money”  (Leaf  157,  back).  “And  here  schul  men  arunte  J>e  feend  )>at  stirij) 
mew  to  last  >«  his  erroure”  (Leaf  159,  back).  “I  think,”  says  Mr  Matthew, 
“  there  is  no  doubt  that  ‘  arunte,’  which  here  evidently  means  ‘  avoid  or  shun,’  is 
the  ‘aroint’  of  Macb.  I,  iii,  6,  and  Lear,  III,  iv,  118,  which  has  hitherto  not  been 
met  with  out  of  Sh.”  The  change  from  u  to  oi  is  not  easy,  but  has  surely  taken 
place  here.’ 


ACT  III,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


197 


the  tadpole,  the  wall-newt  and  the  water ;  that  in  the  fury 
of  his  heart,  when  the  foul  fiend  rages,  eats  cow-dung  for  125 
sallets ;  swallows  the  old  rat  and  the  ditch-dog ;  drinks  the 
green  mantle  of  the  standing  pool;  who  is  whipped  from 
tithing  to  tithing,  and  stocked,  punished,  and  imprisoned ; 
who  hath  three  suits  to  his  back,  six  shirts  to  his  body; 

Horse  to  ride  and  weapon  to  wear ;  130 

But  mice  and  rats  and  such  small  deer 
Have  been  Tom’s  food  for  seven  long  year. 


124.  tadpole ]  Johns,  tod  pole  Qt. 
toade  pold  Q2.  Tod-pole  F,F2,  Pope+, 
Sch.  Tod-pool  F,F4<  tod-pol  Rowe. 

wall-newt  ]  Qx.  wall-Neut  Ff. 
wall-wort  Q2 

water ]  water-neut  Rowe  + ,  Cap. 
Jen.  Ec. 

fury ]  fruite  Qa. 

126.  sallets]  sallads  Jen.  sallet  Cap. 
conj. 

128.  stocked,  punished ]  Jlockt,  pun- 


ijh'd  Ff.  Jlock-puniJht  Qq,  Pope  + ,  Cap. 
Jen.  Glo.  +  ,  Dyce  ii. 

129.  hath)  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Sch. 
hath  had  Qq  et  cet. 

130.  Horse. .. wear  ;)  Verse,  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Theob.  Johns.  Jen.  Sch.  Prose, 
Qq  et  cet. 

13 1.  deer]  JDeare  FxFa.  Dear  F3F4. 
geer  Han.  Warb.  cheer  Grey. 

132.  Have ]  Hath  Qq. 


124.  tadpole]  Wright:  The  modem  spelling  was  in  use  in  Shakespeare's  time. 
Cotgrave  gives :  *  Gyrine :  the  frog  tearmed,  a  Tadpole.’ 

124.  wall-newt]  Wright:  That  is,  lizard.  ‘Newt’  is  from  A. S .  efete.  Early 
English  euete,  and  then  eft,  the  initial  *  n  ’  having  been  acquired  from  the  final  letter 
of  the  article,  so  that  ‘  an  evet  ’  or  *  an  eft  ’  became  *  a  newt.’ 

124.  water]  That  is,  the  water-newt.  F<?r  many  similar  constructions,  see 
Schmidt  (Lex.),  p.  1419. 

126.  sallets]  Wright:  Cotgrave:  * Salade ;  f.  A  salade.  Helmet,  Head-peece; 
also  a  Sallet  of  hearbes.’  It  is  still  used  in  Sussex.  See  Ham.  II,  ii,  420. 

126.  ditch-dog]  Delius:  The  dead  dogs  thrown  into  ditches. 

128.  tithing]  Steevens:  A  district;  the  same  in  the  country  as  award  in  the 
city.  In  the  Stat.  39  Eliz.  ch.  4,  it  is  enacted  that  every  vagabond,  &c.  shall  be 
publickly  whipped  and  sent  from  parish  to  parish.  [For  a  description  of  the  treat¬ 
ment  of  ‘roges,’  and  of  how  they  must  be  ‘  greeuouslie  whipped  and  burned  through 
the  gristle  of  the  right  eare,  with  an  hot  iron  of  the  compasse  of  an  inch  about,’  see 
Harrison’s  Description  of  England,  Bk.  ii,  chap,  x,  p.  219,  ed.  New  Sh.  Soc.] 

129.  hath  three  suits]  Schmidt:  The  ‘hath  had  three  suits’  of  the  Qq  prob¬ 
ably  accords  with  the  fact,  but  what  have  facts  to  do  with  madness  ?  Tom  hath  three 
suits  and  six  shirts ; — where  are  they  ?  who  has  taken  them  from  him  ? 

131, 132.  Capell:  These  are  two  lines  of  quotation  (but  not  exact)  from  an  old 
metrical  romance  of  the  Life  of  Sir  Bevis  :  *  Rattes  and  myse  and  suche  smal  dere 
Was  his  meate  that  seven  yere.’  *  Dere,’  says  Malone,  was  used  for  animals  in 
general.  So  Barclay  in  his  Eclogues,  1570 :  *  Everie  sorte  of  dere  Shrunk  under 
shadowes  abating  all  their  chere.’  Schmidt  :  Not  exactly  animals  in  general,  but 
game. 

17* 


KING  LEAR 


[act  III,  sc.  iv. 


198 

Beware  my  follower. — Peace,  Smulkin!  peace,  thou  fiend!  133 
Glou.  What,  hath  your  grace  no  better  company  ? 

Edg.  The  prince  of  darkness  is  a  gentleman;  Modo  135 
he’s  call’d,  and  Mahu. 


133.  Smulkin"]  fnulbug  Qq.  Sin  oh 
kin  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Steev.  Ec. 
Var.  Knt. 

135,  136.  The. ...Mahu.]  Prose,  Qq 
Ff+,  Jen.  Glo.  +  ,  Sch.  Verse,  Cap.  et 


cet.  As  a  quotation,  Dyce  ii. 

135.  Modo]  Mohu  Johns. 

136.  he's]  Changed  to  he  is  by  Cap. 
in  Errata. 

Mahu]  Ff.  ma  hu —  Qq. 


133,  135,  136.  Smulkin.  .  .  .  Modo  . .  .  Mahu]  Staunton;  If  the  subjoined 
extracts  from  Harsnet’s  Declaration  do  not  prove  undisputably  that  Sh.  was  indebted 
to  that  popular  book  for  the  titles  of  Tom  o’  Bedlam’s  infernal  spirits,  we  may  infer 
that  these  fantastic  names  were  quite  familiar  to  an  auditory  of  his  time  :  ‘  It  seemes 
not  incongruent  that  I  relate  unto  you  the  names  of  the  devils  whom  in  this  glorious 
pageant  they  did  dispossesse.  .  .  .  First,  then,  to  marshall  them  in  as  good  order  as 
such  disorderly  cattell  will  be  brought  into,  you  are  to  understand,  that  there  were  in 
our  possessed  5  Captaines,  or  Commaunders  above  the  rest ;  Captaine  Pippin,  Mar- 
wood’s  devil,  Captaine  Philpot,  Trayfords  devil,  Captaine  Maho,  Saras  devil,  Cap¬ 
taine  Modu,  Maynies  devil,  and  Captaine  Soforce,  Anne  Smiths  devil.  These  were 
not  all  of  equall  authoritie,  and  place,  but  some  had  more,  some  fewer  under  theyr 
commaund.  .  .  .  The  names  of  the  punie  spirits  cast  out  of  Trayford  were  these, 
Hilco,  Smolkin,  Hillio,  Hiaclito,  and  Lustie  huffe-cap :  this  last  seemes  some  swag¬ 
gering  punie  devill,  dropt  out  of  a  Tinkers  budget.  .  .  .  Modo,  Master  Maynies  devill, 
was  a  graund  Commaunder,  Muster-maister  over  the  Captaines  of  the  seaven  deadly 
sinnes :  Cliton,  Bernon,  Hilo,  Motubizanto,  and  the  rest,  himselfe  a  Generali  of  a 
kind  and  curteous  disposition :  so  saith  Sara  Williams,  touching  this  devils  acquaint¬ 
ance  with  Mistres  Plater,  and  her  sister  Fid.  Sara  Williams  had  in  her  at  a  bare 
word,  all  the  devils  in  hell.  The  Exorcist  asks  Maho,  Saras  devil,  what  company 
he  had  with  him,  and  the  devil  makes  no  bones,  but  tels  him  in  flat  termes,  all  the 
devils  in  hell.  .  .  .  And  if  I  misse  not  my  markes,  this  Dictator  Modu  saith,  hee  had 
beene  in  Sara  by  the  space  of  two  yeeres,  then  so  long  hell  was  cleere,  and  had  not 
a  devill  to  cast  at  a  mad  dogge.  And  sooth  I  cannot  much  blame  the  devils  for 
staying  so  long  abroade,  they  had  taken  up  an  Inne,  much  sweeter  then  hell ;  and  an 
hostesse  that  wanted  neither  wit,  nor  mirth,  to  give  them  kind  welcome.  Heere,  if 
you  please,  you  may  take  a  survay  of  the  whole  regiment  of  hell :  at  least  the  chiefe 
Leaders,  and  officers  as  we  finde  them  enrolled  by  theyr  names.  First,  Killico,  Hob, 
and  a  third  anonymos,  are  booked  downe  for  three  graund  Commaunders,  every  one 
having  under  him  300  attendants.  .  .  .  Maho  was  generall  Dictator  of  hell;  and  yet 
for  good  manners  sake,  hee  was  contented  of  his  good  nature  to  make  shew,  that 
himselfe  was  under  the  check  of  Modu,  the  graund  devil  in  Master  Maynie.  These 
were  all  in  poor  Sara  at  a  chop,  with  these  the  poore  soule  travailed  up  and  downe 
full  two  yeeres  together;  so  as  during  these  two  yeeres,  it  had  beene  all  one  to  say, 
one  is  gone  to  hell,  or  hee  is  gone  to  Sara  Williams ;  for  shee  poore  wench  had  all 
hell  in  her  belly.’ — Cap.  x,  pp.  45,  50. 

135,  136.  The  .  .  .  Mahu]  Reed:  In  The  Goblins, by  Sir  John  Suckling,  a  catch 
is  introduced  which  concludes  with  these  two  lines :  ‘  The  prince  of  darkness  is  a 


ACT  III,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


199 


Glou.  Our  flesh  and  blood,  my  lord,  is  grown  so  vilde  137 
That  it  doth  hate  what  gets  it. 

Edg.  Poor  Tom ’s  a-cold. 

Glou.  Go  in  with  me ;  my  duty  cannot  suffer  1 40 

T’  obey  in  all  your  daughters’  hard  commands ; 

Though  their  injunction  be  to  bar  my  doors 
And  let  this  tyrannous  night  take  hold  upon  you, 

Yet  have  I  ventured  to  come  seek  you  out 

And  bring  you  where  both  fire  and  food  is  ready.  145 

Lear.  First  let  me  talk  with  this  philosopher. — ■ 

What  is  the  cauS'e  of  thunder  ? 

Kent.  Good  my  lord,  take  his  offer ;  go  into  th’  house. 


1 37, 138.  Our.. .gels  it.]  Verse,  Pope. 
Prose,  QqFf,  Rowe. 

137.  my  lord... .vilde]  is  growne  fo 
vild  my  Lord  Qq  ( vilde  QJ,  Glo.  +  , 
Mob. 

138.  gets  if]  it  gets  F3F4,  Rowe. 

139.  Poor]  Om.  Pope  + . 

139, 165.  a-cold]  Hyphen,  Rowe. 


140-145.  Prose,  Qq. 

142.  Though]  Though  all  F3F4. 

144.  ventured]  venter' d  Qq. 

145.  fire  and  food]  food  and fire  Qq. 
w]  are  Han.  Coll.  iii. 

148.  Good. ..housed]  Two  lines,  Ff. 
Good  my]  My  good  Qq,  Pope  +  , 
Jen.  Mai.  Ec. 


gentleman,  Mahu,  Mahu  is  his  name.’  I  am  inclined  to  think  this  catch  not  to  be 
the  production  of  Suckling,  but  the  original  referred  to  by  Edgar’s  speech.  Wright  : 
But  as  Suckling  in  other  parts  of  his  play  is  constantly  alluding  to  Sh.,  it  is  more 
likely  that  in  this  he  is  only  quoting  from  Lear.  Steevens  :  Edgar  says  this  in 
resentment  at  what  Gloucester  had  just  asked:  ‘Hath  your  grace  no  better  com¬ 
pany  ?  * 

137,  138.  Cowden  Clarke  :  One  of  Shakespeare’s  subtle  touches.  Some  tone 
or  inflection  in  Edgar’s  voice  has  reached  the  father’s  heart,  and  bitterly  recalls  the 
supposed  unfilial  conduct  of  his  elder  son,  and  he  links  it  with  that  of  Lear's  daugh¬ 
ters.  Edgar,  instinctively  feeling  this,  perseveres  with  his  Bedlam  cry,  to  drown 
the  betrayed  sound  of  his  own  voice,  and  maintain  the  impression  of  his  assumed 
character. 

141.  T’  obey]  Mason  :  That  is,  *  my  duty  will  not  suffer  me  to  obey,’  &c.  Wright  : 
But  it  is  not  certain  whether  the  sense  is  not,  *  My  duty  to  you  must  not  suffer  by  my 
obeying  your  daughters’  commands.’  For  this  use  of  the  infinitive,  see  Abbott, 
§356  [or  III,  v,  8;  Macb.  IV,  ii,  69;  Ham.  Ill,  iii,  85;  IV,  ii,  12]. 

141.  T’  obey  in]  Wright:  The  construction  would  be  familiar  if  it  were  ‘to 
obey  your  daughters  in  all  their  hard  commands.’ 

145.  fire  and  food  is]  See  II,  i,  113. 

147.  thunder]  Moberly:  Being  so  *  unsophisticated.’ — having  so  completely  re¬ 
duced  mankind  to  their  elements,  surely  this  man  must  have  a  spontaneous  insight 
into  the  nature  of  things,  such  as  would  at  least  tell  him  what  is  the  cause  of  thunder. 
Like  the  celebrated  German  poet  and  physicist,  he  will  have  ‘  a  pure  sense  of  nature, 
tebelling  against  the  barbarism  of  reflection.’ 


200 


KING  LEAR 


[act  hi,  sc.  iv 


Lear.  I  ’ll  talk  a  word  with  this  same  learned  Theban. — 

What  is  your  study?  150 

Edg.  How  to  prevent  the  fiend  and  to  kill  vermin. 

Lear.  Let  me  ask  you  one  word  in  private. 

Kent.  Importune  him  once  more  to  go,  my  lord  ; 

His  wits  begin  t’  unsettle. 

Glou.  Canst  thou  blame  him  ?  [Storm  still. 

His  daughters  seek  his  death.  Ah,  that  good  Kent !  155 

He  said  it  would  be  thus,  poor  banish’d  man  ! 

Thou  say’st  the  king  grows  mad ;  I  ’ll  tell  thee,  friend, 

I  am  almost  mad  myself.  I  had  a  son, 

Now  outlaw’d  from  my  blood;  he  sought  my  life, 

But  lately,  very  late ;  I  loved  him,  friend,  160 

No  father  his  son  dearer;  true  to  tell  thee, 

The  grief  hath  crazed  my  wits.  What  a  night ’s  this ! — 


149,  150.  Prose,  Qq. 

149.  ialk~\  take  F3F4. 
same]  mojl  Qq,  Jen. 

150.  What. ..study]  Given  to  Kent  by 
Ktly. 

152.  me]  us  F3F4+. 

private]  private ,  friend.  Ktly. 

153,  154.  Importune. ...unsettled]  One 
line,  Qq. 

153.  once  more]  Om.  Qq,  Pope,  Han. 
Jen. 

154..  [Storm  still.]  Om.  Qq,  Cap. 
Transferred  to  line  161,  Mai.  Steev.  Bos. 


Knt,  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  Ktly.  To  line 
162,  Coll.  Del.  Wh. 

155.  Ak]  O  Qq. 

157.  say'st]faifi  Qa.  fayejl  QrFf. 

158.  Iam]  I'm  Pope+,  Dyce  ii. 

159.  outlaw'd]  out-lawed  Qq. 
he  sought]  a  fought  Qx. 

161.  true]  truth  Q3,  Glo.+  ,  Mob. 

162.  hath]  has  Qa. 
night's]  flights  Q,FaF3. 

162,  163.  The. ..grace]  Two  lines,  the 
first  ending  wits.  Qq. 


15 1.  prevent]  Wright:  Here  used  with  something  of  its  original  sense  of  an* 
ticipating,  being  beforehand  with,  as  well  as  the  more  common  meaning  which  now 
belongs  to  the  word.  [See  Ham.  II,  ii,  286 :  *  My  anticipations  prevent  your  dis¬ 
covery.’] 

154.  Steevens  cites  a  note  by  Horace  Walpole,  in  the  postscript  to  his  Mysterious 
Mother ,  where  he  observes  that  when  *  Belvidera  talks  of  “  Lutes,  laurels,  seas  of 
milk,  and  ships  of  amber,”  she  is  not  mad,  but  light-headed.  When  madness  has 
taken  possession  of  a  person,  such  character  ceases  to  be  fit  for  the  stage,  or,  at  least, 
should  appear  there  but  for  a  short  time;  it  being  the  business  of  the  theatre  to  ex¬ 
hibit  passions,  not  distempers.  The  finest  picture  ever  drawn,  of  a  h.ead  discomposed 
by  misfortune,  is  that  of  King  Lear.  His  thoughts  dwell  on  the  ingratitude  of  his 
daughters,  and  every  sentence  that  falls  from  his  wildness  excites  reflection  and  pity. 
Had  frenzy  entirely  seized  him,  our  compassion  would  abate :  we  should  conclude 
that  he  no  longer  felt  unhappiness.  Shakespeare  wrote  as  a  philosopher,  Otway  as  a 
poet.’ 


ACT  III,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


201 


1  do  beseech  your  grace, — 

Lear.  Oh,  cry  you  mercy,  sir. —  163 

Noble  philosopher,  your  company. 

Edg.  Tom ’s  a-cold.  165 

Glou.  In,  fellow,  there,  into  th’  hovel ;  keep  thee  warm. 

Lear.  Come,  let’s  in  all. 

Kent.  This  way,  my  lord. 

Lear.  With  him ; 

I  will  keep  still  with  my  philosopher. 

Kent.  Good  my  lord,  soothe  him ;  let  him  take  the  fellow. 
Glou.  Take  him  you  on.  170 

Kent.  Sirrah,  come  on ;  go  along  with  us. 

Lear.  Come,  good  Athenian. 

Glou.  No  words,  no  words !  Hush. 

Edg.  Child  Rowland  to  the  dark  tower  came. 

His  word  was  still  *  Fie,  / 'oh,  and  fum ,  175 

I  smell  the  blood  of  a  British  man!  [ Exeunt . 


163.  grace, — ]  Cap.  grace.  QqFf+. 
grace ,  Warb. 

sir']  Om,  Qq,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev. 
Bos.  Sing.  Ktly. 

163, 164.  O... company.]  One  line,  Qq. 

165.  a-cold]  Rowe,  a  cold  QqFf. 

166.  there,  into  th']  there,  in ' t  Qr  into 
th'  Pope  + .  there,  to  the  Cap.  Steev.  Ec. 
Bos.  there,  in,  to  the  Mai. 

167.  168.  With . philosopher.]  One 

line,  Qq. 

168.  him  ;  /]  him  I  Qq. 


169.  Good...felloiu.]  Two  lines,  Ff. 

1 7 1 .  Sirrah. ..us.]  Sirrah,  come  on; 
along  with  us.  Pope  + .  On,  sirrah  :  go 
with  us.  Cap. 

173.  Hush]  Separate  line,  Steev.  Bos. 
Knt,  Coll.  Del.  Sing.  Dyce  i,  Wh.  Ktly. 

174.  tower]  Ff.  towne  Q,Q2. 
came]  Ff.  come  Qq,  Cap. 

175.  Fie.. .fum]  Ff.  (fumme  FJ.  fy 
fo  and  fum  Qt.  fye,fo,  and  fum  Qa. 

X76.  British]  Brittifh  Ff. 

[Exeunt.]  Om.  Qq. 


163.  your  grace, — ]  Cowden  Clarke  :  Here  Gloucester  attempts  to  lead  Lear 
towards  the  shelter  he  has  provided  in  the  farm-house  adjoining  the  castle ;  but  the 
king  will  not  hear  of  quitting  his  *  philosopher.’  Gloucester  then  induces  the  Bed¬ 
lam-fellow  to  go  into  the  hovel,  that  he  may  be  out  of  Lear’s  sight ;  but  Lear  pro¬ 
poses  to  follow  him  thither,  saying  ‘  Let’s  in  all.’  Kent  endeavours  to  draw  Lear 
away,  but,  finding  him  resolved  to  ‘  keep  still  with  ’  his  ‘  philosopher,’  begs  Gloucester 
to  humour  the  king,  and  ‘  let  him  take  the  fellow  ’  with  him.  Gloucester  accedes, 
and  bids  Kent  himself  take  the  fellow  with  them  in  the  direction  they  desire  to  go ; 
aiid  this  is  done.  We  point  out  these  details,  because,  if  it  be  not  specially  observed, 
the  distinction  between  the  *  hovel  ’  and  the  ‘  farm-house  ’  would  hardly  be  under¬ 
stood.  The  mention  of  ‘cushions’  and  a  ‘joint-stool’  in  Scene  vi  shows  it  to  be 
some  place  of  better  accommodation  than  the  ‘  hovel ;’  and  probably  some  cottage 
or  farm-house  belonging  to  one  of  Gloucester’s  tenants. 

174.  Child  Rowland]  Capell:  Every  observing  reader  of  Spenser,  and  of  the 
writers  of  his  class,  knows  that  ‘  Child  ’  is  a  common  appellative  of  the  knight  in 
romances;  deriv’d  from  the  first  gross  importers  of  them  into  our  language  from  out 


202 


KING  LEAR 


[act  hi,  sc.  iv. 


[174.  Child  Rowland.] 

the  Spanish  and  French,  in  which  he  is  call’d  enfant,  and  infante ;  and  all  know 
that  ‘  Rowland’  is  only  Roland  pronounc’d  rustically,  and  Roland  a  contraction  of 
Orlando,  so  that  ‘  Child  Rowland  ’  is  the  knight  Sir  Orlando.  Percy  (note  on  Child 
Waters,  vol.  iii,  p.  58,  1765)  cites  with  approval  Warburton’s  note  on  this  passage, 
to  the  effect  that  *  in  the  old  times  of  chivalry  the  noble  youth  who  were  candidates 
for  knighthood,  during  the  time  of  their  probation,  were  called  Infans,  Varlets,  Da- 
moysels,  Bacheliers .  The  most  noble  of  the  youth  were  particularly  called  Inf  ms.’ 
Steevens:  Beau,  and  FI.  in  The  Woman’s  Prize  [II,  i]  refer  to  this:  ‘a  mere 
hobby-horse  She  made  Child  Rowland.’  Nares  :  Childe  Harold  has  lately  made 
the  term  veiy  familiar. 

174,  176.  Capell,  despite  the  fact  that  it  is  an  assumed  madman  who  speaks 
these  lines,  maintained  that  we  should  not  only  make  sense  of  them,  but  show  1  their 
particular  propriety.’  He  was  convinced  that  ‘  never  any  Orlando  ’  said  ‘  Fie,  foil, 
fum.’  Therefore  a  line  must  have  been  omitted,  and  in  that  line  ‘the  smeller-out’ 
of  Child  Rowland  must  have  been  mentioned.  Accordingly,  he  *  perfected  ’  the 
stanza,  and,  although  he  thought  it  presumptuous  to  insert  his  own  line  in  Shake¬ 
speare’s  text,  yet  ‘  the  world  may  not  be  displeas’d  to  see  it  done  in  a  note,  and  that 
.in  sense  and  rime  too,  as  follows  :  [it  should  be  premised  that  he  adopted,  instead 
of  ‘  came  ’  of  the  Ff,  come  of  the  Qq,  i.  e.  being  come]  “  Child  Rowland  to  the  dark 
tower  come,  The  giant  roar’d,  and  out  he  ran;  His  word  was,”  ’  &c.  Having  thus 
settled  the  ‘  sense  ’  of  the  passage,  Capell  reveals  ‘  its  propriety,’  by  explaining  that 
‘  “  Child  Rowland”  is  Edgar  himself;  the  “  dark  tower,”  his  hovel;  and  the  fiefo- 
fum  giant,  his  father  Gloster ;  who,  he  fears,  might  have  the  giant’s  sagacity,  and  accost 
him  in  no  less  dreadful  a  manner.’  Keightley  proposed, '  The  Giant  saw  him,  and 
out  he  ran.’  Ritson  thought  that  the  first  line  was  a  translation  of  some  French  or 
Spanish  ballad,  but  that  the  last  two  lines  belonged  to  a  different  subject.  Dyck, 
however,  in  his  Few  Notes,  p.  146,  speaks  of  all  three  lines  as  one  ballad,  of  which 

*  (probably  with  some  variations  from  the  original)  fragments  of  a  Scottish  version 
have  been  preserved  by  Jamieson  in  Illustr.  of  Northern  Antiquities,  &c.  1814.  He 
gives  (p.  402) :  “With  fi,  fi,  fo,  and  fum!  I  smell  the  blood  of  a  Christian  man! 
Be  he  dead,  be  he  living,  wi’  my  brand  I’ll  clash  his  harns  frae  his  harn-pan  ’  ”  (t.  e. 
I’ll  knock  his  brains  out  of  his  skull).’  Halliwell  believes  [with  Ritson]  that 

*  Edgar  quotes  from  two  different  compositions,  the  first  line  from  a  ballad  on  Rowland, 
the  second  from  Jack  and  the  Giants  ;  the  original  source  of  the  popular  words  Fie, 
foh,  and  fum  is  unknown.  They  are  alluded  to  in  Peele’s  Old  Wives  Tale,  1595,— 
“  Fee,  fa,  fum, — Here  is  the  Englishman, — Conquer  him  that  can.”  Again,  in  Nash’s 
Have  With  You  to  Saffron  Walden,  1596, — “  O,  ’tis  a  precious  apothegmaticall  pedant, 
who  will  finde  matter  inough  to  dilate  a  whole  daye  of  the  first  invention  of  Fy,fa, 
fum,  I  smell  the  bloud  of  an  Englishman.”  The  probability  is  that  the  distich  quoted 
by  Nash  and  Sh.  belongs  to  some  early  version  of  the  tale  of  Jack  and  the  Giants. 
[Halliwell  thinks  that  the  earliest  known  edition  of  this  story  is  1771,  or  possibly 
1741.  Halliwell  also  gives  the  story  of  Child  Rowland  from  Jamieson’s  Illustr.  of 
North.  Antiquities,  p.  397 ;  it  is  also  given  in  Child’s  admirable  Eng.  and  Scottish 
Ballads,  i,  416.]  WRIGHT:  The  substitution  of  ‘Britishman’  for  Englishman  points 
to  the  time  when,  under  James  I,  the  name  of  England  was  merged  in  the  more 
general  title  of  Great  Britain.  See  IV,  vi,  249  [where  Ff  have  ‘  English’  and  the 
Qq  have  British.  See  also  Appendix,  p,  377.] 


ACT  III,  SC.  V.] 


KING  LEAR 


203 


Scene  V.  Gloucester's  castle. 

Enter  Cornwall  and  Edmund 

Com.  I  will  have  my  revenge  ere  I  depart  his  house. 

Edm.  How,  my  lord,  I  may  be  censured,  that  nature 
thus  gives  way  to  loyalty,  something  fears  me  to  think  of. 

Com.  I  now  perceive,  it  was  not  altogether  your  brother’s 
evil  disposition  made  him  seek  his  death,  but  a  provoking  5 
merit,  set  a-work  by  a  reproveable  badness  in  himself. 


Scene  V.]  Scena  Quinta  Ff  (Scaena 
FJ.  Scene  iv.  Rowe.  Scene  viii. 
Pope-f ,  Jen. 

Gloucester’s  castle.]  Rowe.  A 
Room  in  Gloster’s  Castle.  Cap. 

Enter.. ..Edmund.]  Enter..  ..Baftard. 
Qq.  Om.  Johns. 


I.  my\  Om.  F3F4+. 

his]  the  Qq.  this  Han. 

5,6.  provoking  merit]  provoked  spirit 
Han.  Jen. 

6.  a-work ]  a  worke  QqFs.  a  work 
F3F4* 

himself  ]  him  Han. 


2.  censured]  For  *  censure  ’  meaning  opinion,  see  Ham.  I,  iii,  69 ;  I,  iv,  35  ;  III, 
ii,  25 ;  III,  ii,  82.  Wright:  See  the  Dedication  to  V.  and  A.,  ‘  I  know  not  how  I 
shall  offend  in  dedicating  my  unpolished  lines  to  your  lordship,  nor  how  the  world 
will  censure  me  for  chosing  so  strong  a  prop  to  support  so  weak  a  burden.’ 

3.  fears]  For  instances  of  this  verb  meaning  to  terrify,  to  frighten,  see 
Schmidt,  s.  v. 

5.  provoking  merit]  Warburton:  That  is,  a  merit  which,  being  neglected  by 
the  father,  was  provoked  to  an  extravagant  act.  Mason  :  Provoking  here  means 
stimulating ;  a  merit  he  felt  in  himself,  which  irritated  him  against  a  father  that  had 
none.  Malone:  Cornwall,  I  suppose,  means  the  merit  of  Edmund,  which,  being 
noticed  by  Gloucester,  provoked  or  instigated  Edgar  to  seek  his  father’s  death. 
Warburton  conceived  that  the  merit  spoken  of  was  that  of  Edgar.  But  how  is  this 
consistent  with  the  rest  of  the  sentence  ?  Hudson  :  Cornwall  means,  apparently,  a 
virtue  apt  to  be  provoked  or  stirred  into  act ;  which  virtue  was  set  to  work  by  some 
flagrant  evil  in  Gloucester  himself.  ‘Provoking’  for  provocable ;  the  active  form 
with  the  passive  sense.  Cowden  Clarke  :  *  An  inciting  desert.’  This  probably 
refers  to  what  the  speaker  considers  the  discovered  turpitude  of  Gloucester,  which 
deserves  punishment,  and  incites  Edgar  to  seek  his  death,  putting  into  activity  the 
latter’s  blameable  badness  of  character.  The  difficulty  here  arises  from  the  uncer¬ 
tainty  as  to  whom  the  pronouns  ‘him,’ ‘his,’  and  ‘himself’  refer.  Wright:  A 
consciousness  of  his  own  worth  which  urged  him  on.  Moberly  :  Probably  *  an 
anticipative  merit ;  ’  that  is,  a  meritorious  forestalling  of  crime  by  its  punishment. 
Nichols  [Notes,  &c.,  No.  2,  p.  12)  paraphrases :  ‘  It  was  not  altogether  your  brother’s 
evil  disposition  that  made  him  seek  his  death — the  old  man  deserved  it.  There  was 
a  merit,  a  deserving  on  his  part,  “  set  a-work  by  a  reproveable  badness  in  himself,” 
that  provoked  your  brother  to  the  act.  “  The  provoking  merit  ”  was  in  Gloucester 
himself.’ 

6.  a-work]  See  II,  ii,  69 ;  III,  iv,  57 ;  Ham.  II,  ii,  466 ;  I,  v,  19,  or  Abbott,  §  24. 


204 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iii,  sc.  v. 


Edm.  How  malicious  is  my  fortune,  that  I  must  repent  7 
to  be  just!  This  is  the  letter  he  spoke  of,  which  approves 
him  an  intelligent  party  to  the  advantages  of  France.  0 
heavens  !  that  this  treason  were  not,  or  not  I  the  deteflor  1  10 

Com.  Go  with  me  to  the  duchess. 

Edm.  If  the  matter  of  this  paper  be  certain,  you  have 
mighty  business  in  hand. 

Com.  True  or  false,  it  hath  made  thee  earl  of  Gloucester. 

Seek  out  where  thy  father  is.  that  he  may  be  ready  for  our  1 5 
apprehension. 

Edm.  [Aside]  If  I  find  him  comforting  the  king,  it  will 
stuff  his  suspicion  more  fully. — I  will  persever  in  my  course 
of  loyalty,  though  the  confli£t  be  sore  between  that  and  my 
blood.  20 

Com.  I  will  lay  trust  upon  thee,  and  thou  shalt  find  a 
dearer  father  in  my  love.  [ Exeunt . 


8.  letter ]  letter  which  Ff+,  Jen.  Ec. 
Knt,  Coll.  Del.  Wh.  Sch. 

9.  advantages ]  advances  Anon.* 

10.  this  treason  were  not]  his  treafon 
were  Qq. 

17.  [Aside]  Theob.  Om.  QqFf. 


18.  persever ]  FjF^,  Del.  Dyce,  Sta. 
Cam.  Wr.  Sch.  perfeuere  QqF4  et  cet. 

22.  dearer]  Qq.  deere  F,Fa.  dear 
F3F4,  Rowe,  Sch. 

[Exeunt.]  Exit.  Qq. 


8.  to  be  just]  See  III,  iv,  141 ;  or  Abbott,  §  356. 

9.  intelligent  party]  For  the  position  of  the  adjective,  compare  IV,  i,  3;  or 
‘our  suffering  country  Under  a  hand  accurst.’ — Macb.  Ill,  vi,  48.  Schmidt,  how¬ 
ever,  says  that  ‘  to  ’  does  not  depend  on  *  intelligent,’  but  on  ‘  party.’ 

17.  comforting]  Johnson:  This  word  is  used  in  the  juridical  sense  for  support¬ 
ing ,  helping.  Lord  Campbell  :  The  indictment  against  an  accessory  after  the  fact* 
for  treason,  charges  that  the  accessory  *  comforted  ’  the  principal  traitor  after  know¬ 
ledge  of  the  treason. 

18.  persever]  Wright:  This  represents  the  older  pronunciation  of  the  word, 
which  in  Sh.  has  uniformly  the  accent  on  the  second  syllable.  [See  Ham.  I,  ii,  92.] 

20.  blood]  Wright:  Natural  temperament.  Sec  Nam.  Ill,  ii,  64.  [AlsoZ^r, 
IV,  ii,  64.] 


ACT  III,  SC.  VI.] 


KING  LEAR 


205 


Scene  VI.  A  chamber  in  a  farmhouse  adjoining  the  castle. 

Enter  Kent  and  Gloucester. 

Glou.  Here  is  better  than  the  open  air;  take  it  thank¬ 
fully.  I  will  piece  out  the  comfort  with  what  addition  I 
can;  I  will  not  be  long  from  you. 

Kent.  All  the  power  of  his  wits  have  given  way  to  his 
impatience.  The  gods  reward  your  kindness !  5 

[Exit  Gloucester. 

« 

Enter  Lear,  Edgar,  and  Fool. 

Edg.  Frateretto  calls  me,  and  tells  me  Nero  is  an 
angler  in  the  lake  of  darkness. — Pray,  innocent,  and  beware 
the  foul  fiend. 

Fool.  Prithee,  nuncle,  tell  me  whether  a  madman  be  a 
gentleman  or  a  yeoman.  10 

Lear.  A  king,  a  king ! 

Fool.  No,  he’s  a  yeoman  that  has  a  gentleman  to  his 


Scene  vi.]  Scena  Sexta  Ff  (Scaena 
FJ.  Scene  v.  Rowe.  Scene  ix. 
Pope. 

A  chamber castle.]  Mai.  A 

Chamber.  Rowe.  A  Chamber,  in  a 
Farm-house.  Theob.  A  Room  in  some 
of  the  out-buildings  of  the  Castle.  Cap. 

Enter...]  Ff.  Enter.. .and  Lear,  Foole, 
and  Tom.  Qq. 

4.  have]  QqFf,  Jen.  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo  +  , 
Sch.  hath  Cap.  has  Pope  et  cet. 
to  his]  to  Qq. 


5.  reward']  defence  Qq.  preserve 
Cap.  conj. 

[Exit  Gloucester.]  As  in  Cap.  Af- 
ter  line  3,  Ff  +  ,  Jen.  Sch.  Om.  Qq. 

[Enter.. .Fool.]  Ff  +  ,Jen.  Sch. 

6.  Frateretto]  Fretereto  Qq.  Frater- 
retto  Ff  (Fraterreto  F4). 

7.  and]  Om.  Qq. 

9.  be]  may  bee  Qa. 

jo.  gentleman]  Gentlemen  Fa. 

12-15.  Fool.  No. ...him.  Lear.]  Om 
Qq. 


4.  power  .  .  .  have]  A  plural  by  attraction,  or,  as  Abbott,  §412,  terms  it,  by 
proximity.  See  Ham.  I,  ii,  38. 

6.  Frateretto]  See  Percy’s  note,  III,  iv,  111. 

6.  Nero]  Upton  ( Crit .  Obs.  p.  235,  ed.  ii)  :  Nero  was  a  fiddler  [or  rather,  played 
on  a  hurdy-gurdy:  ‘Neron  estoyt  vielleux.’ — Ed.]  in  hell,  as  Rabelais  tells  us, 
ii,  xxx.  And  Trajan  was  an  angler  [for  frogs].  .  .  But  players  and  editors,  not 
willing  that  so  good  a  prince  as  Trajan  should  have  such  a  vile  employment,  substi¬ 
tuted  Nero  in  his  room,  without  any  sense  or  allusion  at  all.  From  Rabelais,  there¬ 
fore,  the  passage  should  be  thus  corrected :  ‘  Trajan  is  an  angler,’  &c.  Ritson  : 
The  History  of  Gargantua  had  appeared  in  English  before  1575. 

7.  innocent]  Steevens:  He  is  here  addressing  the  Fool.  Fools  were  anciently 
called  innocents.  See  All's  Well,  IV,  iii,  13.  Capell,  however,  supposed  it  to 
mean  :  '  Be  innocent  when  you  pray.’ 

18 


206 


KING  LEAR 


[act  hi,  sc.  vi. 


Son,  for  he ’s  a  mad  yeoman  that  sees  his  son  a  gentleman ,  1 3 
before  him 

Lear.  To  have  a  thousand  with  red  burning  spits  15 

Come  hizzing  in  upon  ’em, — 

*  Edg.  The  foul  fiend  bites  my  back. 

*  Fool.  He’s  mad  that  trusts  in  the  tameness  of  a  wolf, 

*  a  horse’s  health,  a  boy’s  love,  or  a  whore’s  oath. 

*  Lear.  It  shall  be  done ;  I  will  arraign  them  straight. —  20 

*  Come,  sit  thou  here,  most  learned  justicer. — 


13.  mad]  Om.  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han. 

15, 16.  To  have...'em, — ]  Prose,  Qq, 
Jen. 

16.  hizzing]  Ff.  hifzing  Qt.  hiffing 
Qa,  Jen.  Knt,  Del.  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta. 
Glo.  +  ,  Sch.  whizzing  Mai.  conj.  Bos. 
Coll.  Wh.  Ktly. 

'em, — ]  'em —  Theob.  'em.  Ff. 
them.  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt, 
Coll.  Del. 

17-54.  Om.  Ff,  Rowe. 


19.  a  horse's  health]  the  heels  of  a 
horse  Warb.  a  horse's  heels  Sing  ii, 
Ktly. 

a  horse' s....oath]  the  health  of  a 
horse,  the  love  of  a  boy,  or  the  oath  of  a 
whore.  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 

20.  them]  'em  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
Warb. 

21.  [To  the  Fool.  Han.  To  Edgar. 
Cap. 

justicer]  Theob.  tuflice  Qq,  Pope, 

Jen. 


13, 14.  he’s  .  .  .  him]  Collier:  This  seems  to  have  been  a  proverbial  expres¬ 
sion.  Hudson  :  A  rather  curious  commentary  on  some  of  the  Poet’s  own  doings ; 
who  obtained  from  the  Herald’s  College  a  coat-of-arms  in  his  father’s  name;  thus 
getting  his  yeoman  father  dubbed  a  gentleman,  in  order,  no  doubt,  that  he  himself 
might  inherit  his  rank.  Schmidt  also  alludes  to  this  grant  of  arms  to  Shakespeare’s 
father,  which  took  place  not  long  before  the  composition  of  Lear,  and  asks  :  Does 
the  present  passage  refer  to  this  incident  ?  If  it  do,  might  there  not  he  a  play  upon 
words  concealed  in  *  a  mad  yeoman,’  that  is  *  a  made  yeoman,’  a  yeoman  whose  luck 
is  made,  or,  since  it  is  not  necessary  to  be  too  precise  in  dealing  with  the  Fool’s  wit, 
a  complete,  thorough  yeoman  ? 

18,  19.  Schmidt  asks  why  the  Fool  says  this?  *  Does  he  wish  merely  to  distract 
Lear,  or  to  say  that,  in  fact,  the  whole  world  is  mad  ?’ 

19.  horse’s  health]  Warburton:  Read,  ‘  horse’s  heels,'  i.  e.  to  stand  behind 
him.  Johnson:  Sh.  is  here  speaking  not  of  things  maliciously  treacherous,  but  of 
things  uncertain  and  not  durable.  A  horse  is  above  all  other  animals  subject  to 
diseases.  Ritson  :  Heels  is  certainly  right.  ‘Trust  not  a  horse’s  heel  nor  a  dog’s 
tooth  '  is  a  proverb  in  Ray’s  Collection  ;  as  ancient,  at  least,  as  the  time  of  Edward 
II :  Et  ideo  Babio  in  comoediis  insinuat,  dicens :  *  In  fide,  dente,  pede,  mulieris,  equi, 
canis,  est  fraus.’  Hoc  sic  vulgariter  est  dici :  ‘  Till  horsis  foote  thou  never  traist, 
Till  hondis  toth,  no  woman’s  faith.’ — Forduni  Scotichronicon,  1.  xiv,  c.  xxxii.  That 
in  the  text  is  probably  from  the  Italian. 

21.  justicer]  Boswell:  Thus  Lambard’s  Eirenarcha  :  ‘And  of  this  it  commeth 
that  M.  FLtzherbert  (in  his  treatise  of  the  Justices  of  Peace)  calleth  them  justicers 
(contractly  for  justiciars),  and  not  justices,  as  we  commonly,  and  not  altogether  un- 
properly,  doe  name  them.’ 


ACT  III,  SC.  vi.] 


KING  LEAR 


207 


*  Thou,  sapient  sir,  sit  here. — Now,  you  she-foxes !  22 

*  Edg.  Look,  where  he  stands  and  glares !  Wantest 

*  thou  eyes  at  trial,  madam  ? 

*  Come  o'er  the  bourn,  Bessy ,  to  me .  25 

*  Fool.  Her  boot  hath  a  leak , 


22.  [To  Edgar.  Han.  To  the  Fool, 
Cap. 

here. — Now,  yoii\  here,  no  you  Qt. 
he  ere,  now  you  Qa.  here.  Now  ye  Pope  + , 
Jen.  Knt. 

foxes  /]  foxes.  Pope.  Foxes —  Qq. 
23-28.  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

'23-25.  Look... me.]  Cap.  Prose,  Qq. 
Verse,  the  first  line  ending  eyes,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  ( — Corrigenda,  vol. 
x),  Jen.  Ec.  First  line  ending  glares ! 
Bos.  Coll.  Del.  Sing.  Wh.  Ktly. 

23.  he~\  she  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 
Knt,  Sing. 


23.  glares J  glars  Qq. 

IVantest]  Theob.  wanflQ,.  wantfl 
Q2.  wanton' st  Seward,  Jen.  wantonest 
Knt,  Sing. 

24.  trial,  madam  tral  madam  Q,. 
triall  madam,  Qa. 

25.  [Sings.  Sta.  conj. 

bourn]  boorne  Cap.  broome  Qq, 
Theob.  Warb.  Johns,  brook  Johns,  conj. 
Jen. 

26.  [Sings.  Cam.  Edd.  conj. 

26,  27.  Her.. .speak]  Cap.  One  line, 
Qq. 


22.  sapient]  Schmidt  :  Not  elsewhere  used  by  Sh. 

23.  Wantest]  Steevens:  This  appears  to  be  a  question  addressed  to  the  vision¬ 
ary  Goneril,  or  some  other  abandon’d  female,  and  may  signify,  *  Do  you  want  to 
attract  admiration,  even  while  you  stand  at  the  bar  of  justice?’  Seward  proposes 
to  read  wanton' st  instead  of  *  wantest.’  Tieck  :  Possibly,  Kent  covers  his  face  for 
a  moment  to  conceal  his  anguish  or  his  tears,  or  the  Fool  does  so.  Staunton 
( Library  ed.),  in  place  of  Seward’s  ‘plausible’  conjecture,  prefers  * Wantonizelh 
thou,’  etc.  Hudson  :  It  is  addressed  to  some  visionary  person  who  is  supposed, 
apparently,  to  be  on  trial,  but  does  not  see  the  spectre.  Cowden  Clarke:  This 
signifies :  ‘  Look  where  the  fiend  stands  and  glares !  Do  you  want  eyes  to  gaze  at 
and  admire  you  during  trial,  madam  ?  The  fiends  are  there  to  serve  your  purpose.’ 

24.  eyes]  Bell  (Sh.  Puck,  iii,  in)  says  this  is  the  crier’s  proclamation  at  the 
opening  of  court :  Oyez,  commonly  pronounced  0  Yes. 

24.  at  trial]  Johnson  :  It  may  be  observed  that  Edgar,  being  supposed  to  be 
found  by  chance,  and  therefore  to  have  no  knowledge  of  the  rest,  connects  not  his 
ideas  with  those  of  Lear,  but  pursues  his  own  train  of  delirious  or  fantastick  thought. 
To  these  words,  *  At  trial,  madam  ?  ’  I  think  the  name  of  Lear  should  be  put.  The 
process  of  the  dialogue  will  support  this  conjecture.  [Rann  adopted  this  emenda¬ 
tion.]  Eccles  suggests  that  the  whole  speech  be  given  to  Lear,  after  changing  *  he’ 
to  she,  according  to  Theobald’s  text. 

25.  Capell  was  the  first  to  change  broome  of  the  Qq  to  *  boorne ;’  this  he  did  on 
the  authority  of  the  original  song,  which  he  printed,  in  his  School,  &c.,  p.  73,  from 
a  black  letter  Qto,  n.  d.,  by  W.  Wager,  called  The  longer  thou  liv'st,  the  more  Fool 
thou  art,  thus :  ‘  Here  entreth  Moros,  counterfaiting  a  vaine  gesture,  and  a  foolish 
countenance,  Synging  the  foote  [z.  e.  the  burden]  of  many  Songes,  as  fooles  were  wont. 
.  .  .  Com’  over  the  Boorne  Besse,  My  little  pretie  Besse  Com  over  the  Boorne  besse 
to  me.’  Steevens  says  this  song  was  entered  on  the  Stationers’  Registers  in  1564. 
But  an  earlier  instance  of  this  song  was  discovered  by  Collier  This  and  what  follows 


208 


KING  LEAR 


[act  in,  sc.  vi. 


*  And  she  must  not  speak  2 7 

*  Why  she  dares  not  come  over  to  thee. 

*  Edg.  The  foul  fiend  haunts  poor  Tom  in  the  voice  of  a 

*  nightingale.  Hoppedance  cries  in  Tom’s  belly  for  two  white  30 

*  herring.  Croak  not,  black  angel ;  I  have  no  food  for  thee. 


30.  Hoppedance^  Qq.  IIcpydanceQ.^.  Ec.  Knt. 

Hopdance  Pope  et  cet.  31.  Croak. ..thee}  Separate  line,  Qq. 

31.  herring ]  herrings  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 


from  the  Fool  are  certainly  parts  of  an  old  song,  which  was  imitated  by  W.  Birch  in 
his  ‘  Dialogue  between  Elizabeth  and  England  ’  (printed  by  W.  Pickering  without 
date),  which  thus  commences:  ‘  Come  over  the  bourn,  Bessy,  come  over  the  bourn, 
Bessy,  Sweet  Bessy,  come  over  to  me;  And  I  shall  thee  take,  And  my  dear  lady  make 
Before  all  that  ever  I  see.’  It  is  in  the  same  measure  as  the  addition  by  the  Fool. 
See  also  Old  Ballads ,  &c.}  Percy  Society,  1840.  Wright  says  the  date  of  Birch’s 
song  is  1558,  and  that  it  is  printed  in  full  in  the  Harleian  Misc.  x,  260.  White 
refers  to  the  curious  fact  that  in  the  Merry  Wives  Master  Brook’s  name  is  invariably 
spelled  Broome  in  the  Folio,  which  Collier’s  (MS)  revealed  to  be  a  misprint  for 
Bourne.  Malone:  There  is  a  peculiar  propriety  in  this  address,  that  has  not,  I  be¬ 
lieve,  been  hitherto  observed.  *  Bessy’  and  ‘poor  Tom,’  it  seems,  usually  travelled 
together.  The  author  of  the  The  Court  of  Conscience,  or  Dick  Whippets  Sessions, 
1607,  describing  beggars,  idle  rogues,  and  counterfeit  madmen,  thus  speaks  of  these 
associates:  ‘Another  sort  there  is  among  you;  they  Do  yage  with  furie  as  if  they 
were  so  frantique  They  knew  not  what  they  did,  but  every  day  Make  sport  with  stick 
and  flowers  like  an  antique;  Stowt  roge  and  harlot  counterfeited  gomme;  One  calls 
herself  poor  Besse  the  other  Tom?  Halliwell  gives  the  music  of  this  song  from 
a  sixteenth-century  MS  in  the  Brit.  Mus.  This  music  seems  to  have  escaped  Chap¬ 
pell,  although  he  refers  to  the  song  on  p.  505  of  his  Popular  Music. 

27,  28.  Schmidt  :  Perhaps  we  should  read :  ‘  And  she  must  not  speak  ;  Why,  she 
dares,’  &c. 

30.  nightingale]  Wright:  Apparently  suggested  by  the  Fool’s  singing.  Percy 
refers  to  a  passage  in  Harsnet’s  Declaration,  which  seems  to  have  no  further  con¬ 
nection  with  this  than  that  a  nightingale  is  mentioned  in  both  places. 

30.  Hoppedance]  This  spelling  may  indicate  the  pronunciation ;  see  IV,  i,  58. 
At  all  events,  there  is  no  reason  why  we  should  not  follow  our  sole  text  in  these 
monstrous  names.  See  Percy’s  note  on  III,  iv,  in. — Ed. 

31.  white  herring]  Steevens  :  That  is,  pickled  herring.  As  You  Like  It  (Gent. 
Mag.  lx,  402) :  There  is  no  occasion  to  pickle  the  herring,  whilst  ‘white  herring’  is 
provincial  for  fresh  herring. 

31.  Croak]  Steevens:  In  Harsnet’s  book,  p.  194,  195,  Sarah  Williams  (one  of 
the  pretended  demoniacks)  deposeth,  *  — that  if  at  any  time  she  .  .  .  was  troubled 
with  a  wind  in  her  stomacke,  the  priests  would  say  at  such  times,  that  then  the  spirit 
6egan  to  rise  in  her.  And  ‘  as  she  saith,  if  they  heard  any  croaking  ir  her  belly 
. .  .  then  they  would  make  a  wonderful  matter  of  that.’  Malone:  *  One  time  shee 
remembereth,  that  shee  having  the  said  croaking  in  her  belly,  they  said  it  was  the 
devil  that  was  about  the  bed,  that  spake  with  the  voice  of  a  toad.’ — Ibid. 


ACT  III,  SC-  Vi.] 


KING  LEAR 


209 


*  Kent.  How  do  you,  sir  ?  Stand  you  not  so  amazed.  32 

*  Will  you  lie  down  and  rest  upon  the  cushions  ? 

*  Lear.  I’ll  see  their  trial  first. — Bring  in  their  evidence.— 

*  Thou  robed  man  of  justice  take  thy  place. —  35 

*  And  thou,  his  yoke-fellow  of  equity, 

*  Bench  by  his  side. — You  are  o’  th’  commission 

*  Sit  you  too. 

*  Edg.  Let  us  deal  justly. 

*  Steepest  or  wakest  thou,  jolly  shepherd?  40 

*  Thy  sheep  be  in  the  corn  ; 

*  And  for  one  blast  of  thy  minikin  mouth , 


32, 33.  Kent.  How. ..cushions?]  Theob. 
Prose,  Qq.  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

33.  cushions ]  cushings  Q,. 

34-38.  I'll. ..too]  Pope.  Prase,  Qq. 

34.  trial  first.  Bring]  Cap.  (subs.) 
trial l  first ,  bring  Qq.  trial,  bring  me 
Pope,  Han.  trial first ,  bring  me  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 

35.  [To  Edgar.  Cap. 
robed]  Pope,  robbed  Qq. 


36.  [To  the  Fool.  Cap. 

37.  [To  Kent.  Cap. 

Bench. ..side]  Separate  line,  Del. 

Sch. 

o'  th']  of  the  Han.  Cap.  Steev. 

Var. 

39- 45.  Edg.  Let.. .gray.  Lear.]  Om. 
Pope,  Han. 

40- 43.  Sleepest...harm.]  Theob.  Prose, 
Qq. 


34.  trial]  Lord  Campbell  :  This  imaginary  trial  is  conducted  in  a  manner  showing 
perfect  familiarity  with  criminal  procedure.  Lear  places  the  two  judges  on  the  bench. 
Mad  Tom  and  the  Fool.  He  properly  addresses  the  former  as  ‘  the  robed  man  of 
justice,’  but,  although  both  were  *  of  the  commission,’  I  do  not  quite  understand 
why  the  latter  is  called  his  ‘  yoke-fellow  of  equity,’  unless  this  might  be  supposed  to 
be  a  special  commission,  like  that  which  sat  on  Mary,  Queen  of  Scots,  including 
Lord  Chancellor  Audley. 

34.  their  evidence]  Thus  in  the  Qq,  which  Pope,  followed  by  all  editors,  except 
Schmidt,  needlessly  changed  to  ‘the  evidence.’  As  Wright  suggests,  ‘their  evi¬ 
dence  ’  means  the  evidence  of  witnesses  against  them. 

40.  Sleepest,  &c.]  Johnson:  This  seems  to  be  a  stanza  of  some  pastoral  song. 
Dyce:  No  doubt  it  is.  Steevens:  In  The  Interlude  of  the  Four  Elements,  1519, 
Ignorance  sings  a  song  composed  of  the  scraps  of  several  others;  among  them  is 
the  following:  * Sleepyst  thou,  wakyst  thou,  Geffery  Coke.’  Halliwell:  Compare 
also  the  poem  of  King  Arthur  and  the  King  of  Cornwall,  printed  from  the  Percy  MS 
by  Sir  F.  Madden :  [ Percy's  Folio  MS,  i,  70]  *  And  when  he  came  to  the  Kings 
chamber,  he  cold  of  his  curtesie,  says,  ‘  sleepe  you,  wake  you,  noble  King  Arthur  ? 
&  euer  Jesus  waken  yee !  ’  Staunton  ;  As  *  the  foul  fiend  haunts  poor  Tom  in  the 
voice  of  a  nightingale,’  the  representative  of  Edgar  was  surely  intended  by  Sh.  to 
sing  these  fragments  of  old  ballads,  and  not  tamely  recite  them  after  the  manner  of 
the  modern  stage. 

41.  43.  corn,  harm]  See  note  on  Shakespeare’s  rhymes,  II,  iii,  20,  21. 

42.  blast]  Collier  (ed.  3) :  Probably  taste. 

42.  minikin]  Steevens  :  Baret’s  Alvearie  has  [s.  v.  Feat] :  ‘  Proper,  feat,  well- 
18*  O 


210 


KING  LEAR 


[ACT  III,  sc.  vi. 


*  Thy  sheep  shall  take  no  harm. 

*  Pur !  the  cat  is  gray. 

*  Lear.  Arraign  her  first;  ’tis  Goneril.  I  here  take  my  45 

*  oath  before  this  honourable  assembly,  she  kicked  the  poor 

*  king  her  father. 

*  Fool.  Come  hither,  mistress.  Is  your  name  Goneril  ? 

*  Lear.  She  cannot  deny  it. 

*  Fool.  Cry  you  mercy,  I  took  you  for  a  joint-stool.  50 

*  Lear.  And  here’s  another,  whose  warp’d  looks  proclaim 

*  What  store  her  heart  is  made  on. — Stop  her  there ! 

•*  Arms,  arms,  sword,  fire !  Corruption  in  the  place ! 

*  False  justicer,  why  hast  thou  let  her  ’scape  ?  * 

Edg.  Bless  thy  five  wits !  55 

Kent.  O  pity ! — Sir,  where  is  the  patience  now, 

That  you  so  oft  have  boasted  to  retain  ? 

Edg.  My  tears  begin  to  take  his  part  so  much, 

They  mar  my  counterfeiting 


45-47.  I. ..father]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 
46.  she]  Om.  Q,. 

49.  cannot']  can't  Han. 

50.  joint-stool]  Pope,  ioyne  Jloole  Q,. 
ioynt Jloole  Qa.  join'd  stool  Wh. 

51.  52.  And. ..there  /]  Om.  Pope. 

52.  made  on]  Cap.  Ec.  Coll.  Sing. 
Glo  +  ,  Sch.  made  an  Qq.  made  of 
Theob.  et  cet. 


53.  Corruption]  corruption' s  Han. 
place]  palace  Wh. 

57.  retain]  remain  F3F4,  Rowe. 

58.  [Aside.  Rowe  et  cet. 

59.  They]  Ff+,Seh.  TheileQ,.  They' l 
Q3.  They'll  Cap.  et  cet. 

counterfeiting]  counterfeting  Q3 
counterfeiting  F,F2. 


fashioned,  minikin,  handsome.’  Wright  cites  from  the  same  *  Elegant :  neate,  fresh, 
feate,  gorgeous,  gay,  pretie,  fine,  minikin,  tricke  and  trimme.’ 

44.  Pur]  Malone  :  This  may  be  only  an  imitation  of  a  cat.  Purre  is,  however, 
one  of  the  devils  mentioned  by  Harsnet,  p.  50. 

50.  joint-stool]  Steevens  :  This  proverbial  expression  occurs  in  Lilly’s  Mother 
Eombie,  1 594  [IV,  ii ;  ed.  Fairholt,  vol.  ii,  p.  121 :  ‘I  crie  you  mercy,  I  took  you  for 
a  joynt  stoole.’ — Wright].  Halliwell:  A  common  old  proverbial  phrase,  the 
exact  meaning  of  which  has  not  been  satisfactorily  explained,  but  which  may  per¬ 
haps  be  gathered  from  the  following  example:  ‘Ante  hoc  te  cornua  habere  putabam, 
I  cry  you  mercy,  I  tooke  you  for  a  joynd  stoole.’ — Withals’  Dictionary,  ed.  1634, 
P-  553- 

52  store]  Theobald  (Nichols’s  Illust.  ii,  376)  suggested  stone,  which  Collier 
and  Keightley  adopted.  Jennens  conjectured  stuff,  as  did  Jervis.  Schmidt 
thinks  that  ‘store’  is  surely  wrong,  and  that  Jennens’s  emendation  is  probable. 

54.  ’scape]  Moberly  :  Probably  in  Lear’s  delirium  the  ideas  succeed  one  another 
so  rapidly  that  he  cannot  long  hold  the  thought  that  he  has  Regan  before  him ;  con¬ 
sequently  the  vanishing  of  the  image  seems  to  him  like  an  actual  escape  of  his 
daughter. 


ACT  III,  SC.  VI.] 


KING  LEAR 


211 


Lear.  The  little  dogs  and  all,  60 

Tray,  Blanch,  and  Sweet-heart,  see,  they  bark  at  me. 

Edg.  Tom  will  throw  his  head  at  them. — Avaunt,  you 
curs ! 

Be  thy  mouth  or  black  or  white. 

Tooth  that  poisons  if  it  bite ;  65 

Mastiff,  greyhound,  mongrel  grim. 

Hound  or  spaniel,  brach  or  lym, 

Or  bobtail  tike  or  trundle-tail, 

Tom  will  make  him  weep  and  wail ; 

For,  with  throwing  thus  my  head,  70 

Dogs  leaped  the  hatch,  and  all  are  fled. 


61.  Tray]  Trey  QqFt F2F3< 

62-71.  Tom..Jled]  Rowe.  Verse,  the 
first  line  ending  you.  Ff.  Tom...curs,  a 
separate  line,  the  rest  prose,  Qq. 

66,67.  mongrel  grim.  Hound']  Rowe 
(subs.).  Mongrill,  Grim ,  Hound  Ff 
( Mungril  F .).  tnungril,  grim-hoiid  Q,. 
Mungrel,  Grim-hound  Q2. 

67.  lym]  Han.  him  Qx.  Him  Q2. 


Hym  Ff  + . 

6S.  Or  bobtail  tike]  Bobtaile  tike  Qq. 
Or  Bobtaile  tight  FtF2F3  ( Bobtail  F3). 

trundle-tail ]  trudletaile  Qx.  Troudle 
taile  F,F2.  Troudle  tail  F3F4. 

69.  him]  Ff+,  Jen.  Ec.  Knt,  Wh. 
Scb.  them  Qq  et  cet.  you  Ec.  conj. 

71.  leaped]  leapt  Ff,  Sch.  leape  Qq 
et  cet. 


61.  bark]  Moeerly:  Not  so  much  because  they  are  set  on  me,  as  because  they 
spontaneously  catch  the  hard  hearted  temper  of  their  masters. 

67.  brach]  See  I,  iv,  107. 

67.  lym]  Steevens:  In  Jonson’s  Bartholomew  Fair  [T,  i]  :  ‘  all  the  lime  hounds 
o’  the  city  should  have  drawn  after  you  by  the  scent.’  A  limmer  or  learner,  a  dog 
of  the  chase,  was  so  called  from  the  learn  or  leash  in  which  he  was  held  till  he  was 
let  slip.  I  have  this  information  from  Caius  de  Canibus  Bntannicis.  So  in  the  book 
of  Antient  Tenures  by  T.  B.,  1679,  the  words  ‘canes  domini  regis  lesos’  are  trans¬ 
lated  ‘  Leash  hounds,  such  as  draw  after  a  hurt  deer,  in  a  leash  or  liaml  Again,  in 
The  Muses  Elysium,  by  Drayton :  ‘  My  dog-hook  at  my  belt,  to  which  my  lyam’s 
ty’d.’  Again :  ‘  My  hound  then  in  my  lyam,’  &c.  Capell  derives  it  from  the 
French  hmier ,  which  Cotgrave  defines:  ‘a  Bloud  hound,  or  Lime-hound.’ 
Ritson  (p.  170):  A ‘lym*  seems  to  have  been  a  large  dog  of  the  spaniel  kind. 
‘His  cosin  had  a  Lyme  hound  argent  white.’ — Harrington’s  Orlando  Furioso,  xli, 
30.  Again  :  ‘  His  Lyme  laid  on  his  back,  he  crouching  down.’  The  word,  differ¬ 
ently  spelled, occurs. again,  p.  349:  ‘Oliuero  whose  deuise  is  the  Spaniell,  or  lyam 
hound.’ 

68.  tike]  Nares  :  A  northern  word  for  a  common  sort  of  dog,  and  still  a  frequent 
term  of  reproach  in  Lancashire  and  Yorkshire  [and  in  New  England. — Ed.]. 

68.  trundle-tail]  Steevens:  See  Hey  wood’s  Woman  Killed  with  Kindness 
[Works,  ii,  99. — Wright]  :  ‘  I,  and  your  Dogges  are  trindle-tailes  and  curs.’ 

70.  After  this  line  in  Edwin  Booth’s  Prompt  Book  there  is  the  stage-direction : 
*  Throws  straw  crown  to  left.’ 


KING  LEAR 


212 

Do,  de,  de,  de.  Sessa !  Come, 
and  market-towns.  Poor  Tom, 

72,  73.  Do...dry.~\  Two  lines,  the  first 
ending  Fayres,  in  Ff+,  Jen.  Ec. 

72.  Do... Sessa  /]  Mai.  Do,  de,  de,  de  : 
fefe :  Ff,  Rowe,  loudla  doodla,  Qq. 
j Do,  do,  de,  de,  6 -v.  [singing.  Cap. 


[act  hi,  sc.  vi. 

march  to  wakes  and  fairs  72 
thy  horn  is  dry. 

72.  Sessa  !  Come ]  Sessey,  come  Pope + , 
Jen.  Bessy,  come  Anon.  ap.  Rann  conj. 
see,  seel  Come  Coll.  Wh.  Ktly. 

73-  dry. ]  dry,  Ft.  dry.  Exit.  FaF3F4. 
Poor. ..dry]  As  an  Aside,  Cap. 


72.  Sessa !]  See  III,  iv,  96.  Steevens  :  It  is  difficult  in  this  place  to  say  what  is 
meant  by  this  word.  It  should  be  remembered,  that  just  before,  Edgar  had  been  calling 
on  Bessy  to  come  to  him ;  and  he  may  now,  with  equal  propriety,  invite  Sessy  (per¬ 
haps  a  female  name  corrupted  from  Cecilia)  to  attend  him  to  ‘wakes  and  fairs.’  Nor 
is  it  impossible  but  that  this  may  be  a  part  of  some  old  song,  and  originally  stood 

thus :  ‘  Sissy,  come  march  to  wakes,  And  fairs,  and  market  towns - .’  [The  jingle 

into  which  the  words  naturally  fall  adds  probability  to  this  conjecture. — Ed.]  As 
You  Like  It  ( Gent .  Mag.  lx,  402)  conjectures  that  this  is  an  address  to  an  imagi¬ 
nary  dog :  *  Sessy,  or  cesse,  is  still  used  in  some  counties  to  encourage  dogs  to  come 
out  of  kennel,’  &c.,  ‘so  here  it  may  mean  to  encourage  a  dog  to  follow  him  to 
wakes,’  &c.,  for  the  sake  of  the  good  provisions  to  be  found  there.  Moberly  :  It  is 
probably  like  ‘sa,  sa’  below,  a  word  used  in  following  the  hunt;  being  the  name 
for  a  note  played  on  the  horn. 

73.  horn]  Steevens:  I  suppose  Edgar  to  speak  these  words  aside.  [See  Text. 
Notes.]  Being  quite  weary  of  his  Tom  o’  Bedlam’s  part,  and  finding  himself  unable 

to  support  it  any  longer,  he  says,  privately:  * - I  can  no  more;  all  my  materials 

for  sustaining  the  character  of  Poor  Tom  are  now  exhausted;  my  horn  is  dry /’  i.  e. 
has  nothing  more  in  it;  and  accordingly  we  have  no  more  of  his  dissembled  madness 
till  he  meets  his  father  in  the  next  act,  when  he  resumes  it  for  a  speech  or  two,  but 
not  without  expressing  the  same  dislike  of  it  that  he  expresses  here :  ‘  I  cannot  daub 
it  further.’  Malone  :  A  ‘  horn  ’  was  usually  carried  about  by  every  Tom  of  Bedlam, 
to  receive  such  drink  as  the  charitable  might  afford  him,  with  whatever  scraps  of  food 
they  might  give  him.  When,  therefore,  Edgar  says  his  horn  is  dry,  or  empty,  I  con¬ 
ceive  he  merely  means,  in  the  language  of  the  character  he  assumes,  to  supplicate  that 
it  may  be  filled  with  drink.  See  a  Pleasant  Dispute  between  Coach  and  Sedan,  1636 : 
‘  Tom-a  Bedlam  may  sooner  eate  his  horn,  than  get  it  filled  with  small  drinke ;  and 
for  his  old  almes  of  bacon  there  is  no  hope  in  the  world.’  A  horn  so  commonly 
meant  a  drinking~cup  that  Coles’s  first  explanation  of  it  is  in  that  sense :  *  A  horn  : 
Vas  corneum.’  Douce:  An  opportunity  here  presents  itself  of  suggesting  a  more 
correct  mode  of  exhibiting  the  theatrical  dress  of  Poor  Tom  than  we  usually  see,  on 
the  authority  of  Randle  Holme  in  The  Academy  of  Armory,  iii,  161,  where  he  says 
that  the  Bedlam  has  *  a  long  staff  and  a  cow  or  ox-horn  by  his  side ;  his  cloathing 
fantastic  and  ridiculous;  for,  being  a  madman,  he  is  madly  decked  and  dressed  all 
over  with  rubins,  feathers,  cuttings  of  cloth,  and  what  not,  to  make  him  seem  a  mad¬ 
man  or  one  distracted,  when  he  is  no  other  than  a  dissembling  knave.’  Dyce  ( Gloss. 
s.  v.  Tom  o'  Bedlam) :  The  following  account  from  Aubrey’s  unpublished  Natural 
History  of  Wiltshire  was,  I  believe,  first  cited  by  D’lsraeli  in  his  Curiosities  of 
Literature.  I  now  give  it  as  quoted  by  Mr  Halliwcll  from  Royal  Soc.  Ms:  ‘Till 
the  breaking  out  of  the  Civill  Warres,  Tom  $  Bedlams  did  trauell  about  the  countery. 
They  had  been  poore  distracted  men  that  had  been  putt  into  Bedlam,  where  recov* 


ACT  III,  SC.  Vi.] 


KING  LEAR 


213 


Lear.  Then  let  them  anatomize  Regan ;  see  what 
breeds  about  her  heart.  Is  there  any  cause  in  nature  75 
that  makes  these  hard  hearts?  —  You,  sir,  I  entertain 
for  one  of  my  hundred;  only  I  do  not  like  the  fashion 
of  your  garments.  You  will  say  they  are  Persian;  but 
let  them  be  changed. 

Kent.  Now,  good  my  lord,  lie  here  and  rest  awhile.  80 

Lear.  Make  no  noise,  make  no  noise;  draw  the  cur¬ 
tains;  so,  so.  We’ll  go  to  supper  i’  th’  morning. 


74-79.  Prose,  Ff.'  Fiv.e  lines,  Qq. 
Six  lines,  Ktly. 

74.  anatomize ]  anotomize  Qq. 

75>  her  heart.  her  Hart  is  Q,. 
her ,  Hart  is  Q2. 

76.  makes']  make  Ff,  Rowe,  Sch. 
these  hard  hearts  ?]  Rowe,  thefe 

hard-hearts.  F,F2.  this  hardnes,  Q,. 
this  hardneffe  ;  Q2. 

[To  Edgar.  Cap. 

77.  for ]  you  for  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Ec. 
Var.  Coll.  Del.  Sing.  Wh.  Ktly. 

78.  garments.  You  will  say]  garments 
youle  fay ,  Q,.  garment ;  you' l  fay  Q2. 


78.  Persian ]  Ff+,  Cap.  Knt,  Dycei, 
Sta.  Sch.  Perfian  attire  Qq  et  cet. 

79.  [Enter  Glofter.  Ff.  Re-enter... 
Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

80.  and  rest]  Om.  Qq. 

[pointing  to  a  mean  Couch.  Cap. 

81* *82.  Prose,  QqFf.  Verse  (ending 
first  line,  curtains ),  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Ec. ; 
(ending  first  line  so,  so.)  Ktly. 

82.  so,  jo.]  Ff+,  Knt,  Dycei,  Ktly, 
Sch.  fo,  fo,  fo.  Qq  et  cet.. 

V  the]  in  the  Q2. 

morning.]  Ff + ,  Knt,  Dyce  i,  Ktly, 
Sch.  morning,  fo,  fo,  fo.  Qq  et  cet. 


ering  to  some  sobernesse,  they  were  licentiated  to  goe  a  begging.  E.  G.  they  had  on 
their  left  arm  an  armilla  of  tinn,  printed  in  some  workes,  about  four  inches  long  ^ 
they  could  not  get  it  off :  they  wore  about  their  necks  a  great  horn  of  an  oxe  in  a 
string  or  bawdric,  which,  when  they  came  to  an  house  for  almes,  they  did  wind ;  and 
they  did  putt  the  drink  given  them  into  this  horn,  whereto  they  did  putt  a  stopple  ’ 
[See  also  II,  iii,  14.] 

76.  that  makes]  Schmidt  upholds .  make  of  the  Ff,  maintaining  that  in  Shake¬ 
spearian  language  it  is  a  not  uncommon  subjunctive,  and  cites  from  Abbott,  §367  : 

*  in  her  youth  There  is  a  prone  and  speechless  dialect  Such  as  move  men.’ — Mens,  for 
Meas.  I,  ii,  188.  Also,  *  No  matter  who  see  it.’ — Rich.  II :  V,  ii,  58;  ‘  I  care  not  who 
know  it.’ — Hen.  V:  IV,  vii,  1 1 7,  See. 

7S.  Persian  attire]  Wright:  The  allusion  is  to  the  gorgeous  robes  of  the  East. 
So  in  Latin,  *  Persicus  ’  was  a  synonym  for  splendid,  as  in  the  ‘  Persicos  apparatus  * 
of  Horace,  and  the  ‘Ornatum  Persicum’  of  Cicero  (Be  Scncct.  59).  Moberly:  A 
Persian  embassy  had  been  sent  to  England  early  in  James  I.  reign,  and  a  tombstone 
still  remains  in  the  churchyard  of  St.  Botolph’s,  Bishopsgate  Street,  erected  to  the 
memory  of  the  secretary  of  this  embassy,  with  the  following  inscription :  *  If  any 
Persian  come  here,  let  him  read  this  and  pray  for  his  soul.  The  Lord  receive  his 
soul;  for  here  lieth  Maghmote  (Mohammed)  Shaughsware,  who  was  born  in  the 
town  Noroy  in  Persia.’  The  joke  on  outlandish  dress  arises  probably  from  the 
presence  of  these  Persians  in  London. 

82.  so,  so]  Bucknill  (p.  207) :  Lear  is  comparatively  tranquil  in  conduct  and 
language  during  the  whole  period  of  Edgar’s  mad  companionship.  It  is  only  after 


214 


KING  LEAR 


£aCT  III,  SC.  vL 

83 


Fool.  And  I  ’ll  go  to  bed  at  noon. 

Re-enter  Gloucester. 

Glou.  Come  hither,  friend ;  where  is  the  king  my  master  ? 
Kent.  Here,  sir ;  but  trouble  him  not ;  his  wits  are  gone.  85 
Glou.  Good  friend,  I  prithee,  take  him  in  thy  arms  ; 

I  have  o’erheard  a  plot  of,  death  upon  him. 

There  is  a  litter  ready;  lay  him  in’t, 

And  drive  toward  Dover,  friend,  where  thou  shalt  meet 

Both  welcome  and  prote6lion.  Take  up  thy  master.  90 

If  thou  shouldst  dally  half  an  hour,  his  life, 

With  thine  and  all  that  offer  to  defend  him, 

Stand  in  assured  loss.  Take  up,  take  up, 

And  follow  me,  that  will  to  some  provision 


83,  Fool.  And. ..noon."]  Om.  Qq. 
Re-enter...]  Cap.  Enter  Glofter. 

Qq  (Glocefler  Q2). 

84.  Two  lines,  Ff. 

8S-94.  There. ..provision]  As  in  Ff. 
Five  lines,  ending  friend \..„mafler,... 


thine,.. .Ioffe, ..prouifion,  Qq. 

8S.  (»’/]  in  it  Q2. 

89.  toward ]  towards  Qq. 

91.  shouldst  ]  should  Johns. 

93.  Take  up,  take  up ]  Take  vp  Che 
King  Qt.  Take  vp  to  keepe  Qa. 


the  Fool  has  disappeared,  and  Edgar  has  left  to  be  the  guide  of  his  blind  father,  that 
the  king  becomes  absolutely  wild  and  incoherent.  The  singular  and  undoubted  fact 
is,  that  few  things  tranquillize  the  insane  more  than  the  companionship  of  the  insane. 
It  is  a  fact  not  easily  explicable,  but  it  is  one  of  which,  either  by  the  intuition  of 
genius,  or  by  the  information  of  experience,  Sh.  appears  to  be  aware. 

83.-  noon]  Capell  :  This  facetious  speech  of  the  Fool  is  meant  as  a  preparation 
for  losing  him ;  for  ’tis  towards  ‘  noon  ’  with  the  play  (that  is,  towards  the  middle 
of  it)  when  he  takes  his  leave  of  us  in  that  speech.  Cowden  Clarke:  This  speech 
is  greatly  significant,  though  apparently  so  trivial.  It  seems  but  a  playful  rejoinder 
to  his  poor  old  royal  master’s  witless  words  of  exhaustion,  but  it  is,  in  fact,  a  dis¬ 
missal  of  himself  from  the  scene  of  the  tragedy  and  from  his  own.  short  day  of  life. 
The  dramatist  indeed  has  added  one  slight  passing  touch  of  tender  mention  (Kent’s 
saying,  ‘Come,  help  to  bear  thy  master;  thou  must  not  stay  behind’)  ere  he  withdraws 
him  from  the  drama  altogether;  but  he  seems  by  this  last  speech  to  let  us  know  that 
the  gentle-hearted  fellow  who  ‘  much  pined  away  ’  at  Cordelia’s  going  into  France, 
and  who  has  since  been  subjected  to  still  severer  fret  at  his  dear  master’s  miseries, 
has  sunk  beneath  the  accumulated  burden,  and  ha§  gone  to  his  eternal  rest  even  in 
the  very  ‘  noon  ’  of  his  existence.  Moeerly  :  The  poor  creature’s  fate  was  sure  to 
be  hard  when  he  was  separated  from  his  master,  under  whose  shelter  he  had  offended 
so  many  powerful  persons.  [See  C.  A.  Brown’s  note,  I,  iv,  91.] 

87.  upon]  See  Macb.  Ill,  i,  16;  V,  iii,  7. 

93.  assured  loss]  Delius  :  Equivalent  to  ‘  assurance  of  loss,’  a  bold  construc¬ 
tion,  similar  to  that  in  Oth.  II,  i,  5 1 :  ‘ my  hopes  .  .  .  stand  in  bold  cure:’  and  again, 
as  it  is  in  line  98  of  this  scene,  ‘stand  in  hard  cure.’ 


ACT  III,  SC.  vi.] 


KING  LEAR 


215 


Give  thee  quick  conduct. 

*  Kent.  Oppress’d  nature  sleeps.  95 

*  This  rest  might  yet  have  balm’d  thy  broken  sinews, 

*  Which,  if  convenience  will  not  allow, 

*  Stand  in  hard  cure. — Come,  help  to  bear  thy  mastei , 

*  Thou  must  not  stay  behind. 

*  Glou.*  Come,  come,  away. 

\Exeunt  Kent ,  Gloucester,  and  the  Fool,  bearing  off  the  King. 

*  Edg.  When  we  our  betters  see  bearing  our  woes,  100 

*  We  scarcely  think  our  miseries  our  foes. 


95-99.  Kent.  Oppress'd. . behind. 

Glou.]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

95.  Oppress'd ]  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Cap.  Steev.  Bos.  Coll.  Dyce,  Wh.  Op- 
preffed  Qq  et  cet. 

96.  balm'd]  Theob.  balmed  Qq. 
sinews ]  Qq,  Del.  Dyce,  Wh.  Cam. 

Wr.  Sch.  senses  Theob.  et  cet. 

97-99.  Which. ..behind.]  Theob.  Two 
lines,  the  first  ending  cure ,  Qq. 

97.  convenience ]  conveniency  Theob. 


Warb.  Johns. 

98.  [To  the  Fool.  Theob. 

99.  Come ,  come,]  Come,  away,  Pope. 

[Exeunt...]  Cap.  Exit.  Qq.  Ex¬ 
eunt.  Ff.  Exeunt,  bearing  off  the  King. 
Manet  Edgar.  Theob.  Exeunt  all  but 
Edgar.  Glo.  +  ,  Sch. 

100-113.  Om.  Ff. 

100.  101.  When . foes]  As  in  Qa, 

Prose,  Q,. 


95.  Oppress’d  nature  sleeps]  Schmidt:  What  follows  would  be  better  intro¬ 
duced  by  *  oppressed  nature,  sleep !  ’  *  Thy  ’  in  the  next  line  is  more  appropriate  if 

we  suppose  it  to  be  addressed  to  ‘  nature’  rather  than  to  Lear. 

96.  sinews]  Theobald  (Nichols’s  Illust.  ii,  377)  suggested  senses,  and  after¬ 
wards  adopted  it  in  his  text.  Malone  supported  the  emendation  by  a  reference  to 
‘innocent  sleep  . . .  Balm  of  hurt  minds*  mMacb.  II,  ii,  39,  and  to  ‘Th’  untun’d  and 
jarring  senses’  in  this  play,  IV,  vii,  16.  But  Delius  thinks  the  emendation  need¬ 
less,  because  ‘sinews’  is  used  elsewhere  by  Sh.  as  equivalent  to  nerves,  and,  more¬ 
over,  in  connection  with  this  very  verb  *  break,’  as  in  Twelfth  Night,  II,  v,,  83  :  *  we 
break  the  sinews  of  our  plot.’  Schmidt  (Lex.)  gives  what  is  perhaps  a  more  appo¬ 
site  instance:  ‘a  second  fear  through  all  her  sinews  spread.’ — Ven.  and  Ad.  903. 
Halliwell  (reading  ‘  sinews  ’)  asks :  But  is  the  verb  to  balm,  or  soothe,  likely  to  be 
applied  to  ‘  sinews  ?  ’  Hudson,  on  the  other  Band,  says  that  Theobald’s  change  ‘  is 
most  certainly  right.  Why,  Lear  has  no  broken  sinews ;  he  is  out  of  his  senses; 
that  is,  his  wits  are  broken.  Moreover,  sleep  does  not  heal  broken  sinews;  but  it 
has  great  healing  efficacy  upon  such  “  perturbations  of  the  brain  v  as  the  poor  old 
king  is  racked  with.’  Wright  agrees  with  Delius  that  the  change  is  not  ‘  absolutely 
necessary,  for  Lear  had  received  a  great  physical  as  well  as  mental  shock.’ 

100,  1 13.  Theobald:  This  soliloquy  is  extremely  fine,  and  the  sentiments  of  it 
are  drawn  equally  from  nature  and  the  subject.  Johnson  :  The  omission  of  these 
lines  in  the  Folio  is  certainly  faulty;  yet  I  believe  the  Folio  is  printed  from  Shake¬ 
speare’s  last  revision,  carelessly  and  hastily  performed,  with  more  thought  of  short¬ 
ening  the  scenes  than  of  continuing  the  action.  Cambridge  Editors  :  Every  editor 
from  Theobald  downwards,  except  Hanmer,  has  reprinted  this  speech  from  the  Q<J 


216 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iii,  sc.  vi. 


*  Who  alone  suffers,  suffers  most  i’  th’  mind,  102 

*  Leaving  free  things  and  happy  shows  behind. 

*  But  then  the  mind  much  sufferance  doth  o’erskip, 

*  When  grief  hath  mates,  and  bearing,  fellowship.  105 

*  How  light  and  portable  my  pain  seems  now, 

*  When  that  which  makes  me  bend  makes  the  king  bow, 

*  He  childed  as  I  father’d !  Tom,  away! 

*  Mark  the  high  noises,  and  thyself  bewray 


102.  suffers ,  suffers  most]  Theob. 
fuffers fuffers,  moft  Qf.  fuffers,  mojl  Q2. 
104.  doth]  does  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
xoS.  father'd  ! ]  Theob.  fathered,  Qt. 


fatherd,  Q2. 

109.  After  bewray.  Warb.  marks  an 
omission. 

thyself ']  then  thy  felfe  Q3. 


In  deference  to  this  consensus  of  authority  we  have-  retained  it,  though,  as  it  seems 
to  us,  internal  evidence  is  conclusive  against  the  supposition  that  the  lines  were 
written  by  Sh,  Delius  ( New  Sh.  Soc.  Trans.  1S75-6,  p.  143)  :  If  we  oppose  this 
view  [of  the  Cam.  Edd.J,  it  is  because  we  cannot  comprehend  how  a  spurious  passage 
appeared  in  the  Qq ;  for  we  can  hardly  ascribe  the  authorship  of  the  supposed  in¬ 
terpolation  to  the  publisher,  considering  what  we  know  of  him  and  his  method  of 
work.  Neither  can  we  suppose  that  he  would  attempt  to  amplify  and  improve  the 
MS  before  him  of  King  Lear ,  as  it  was  then  performed.  But  even  the  internal 
evidence,  from  which  the  Cam.  Edd.  might  be  inclined  to  condemn  Edgar’s  mono¬ 
logue,  fails  to  convince  us  of  its  spuriousness.  We  readily  admit  that  the  style  is 
not  that  of  the  rest  of  the  drama;  but  this  difference  may  be  explained  in  two  ways, 
partly  by  the  form,  and  partly  by  the  matter.  Sh.  is  fond  of  introducing  such  rhyming 
lines,  formed  of  a  number  of  pointed,  epigrammatic,  antithetical  sentences.  They 
stand  out  from  the  surrounding  blank  verse,  and  point  the  moral  of  the  preceding 
situation,  and  the  actions  of  the  various  characters.  The  second  explanation  is,  that 
the  poet  lays  great  stress  on  the  parallelism  existing  between  the  families  of  Lear  and 
Gloucester,  and  takes  this  opportunity  of  impressing  it  again  upon  his  audience.  A 
mere  interpolator  would  hardly  have  known  of  this  peculiar  tendency  of  the  poet,  or 
have  carried  it  out  so  thoroughly,  and  in  so  pregnant  a  manner,  as  in  the  few  but 
thoroughly  Shaksperian  words :  *  He  childed  as  I  father’d.’  For  the  same  reason 
it  is  more  than  improbable  that  Sh.  should  have  cut  out  this  passage  [Delius  is 
arguing  that  the  omissions  in  the  Ff  were  not  by  Sh.,  but  by  the  actors],  thereby 
thwarting  his  own  purpose. 

103.  free  things]  Heath  :  Things  free  from  suffering. 

105.  bearing]  Delius:  .A  substantive.  Schmidt:  ‘Bearing,’  used  thus  abso. 
lutely  for  suffering,  is  very  unusual ;  we  may,  therefore,  suppose  that  *  bearing  fellow¬ 
ship  ’  is  equivalent  to  companionship-in-suffering ;  in  this  case  ‘  bearing  ’  refers  to 
*  grief.’ 

108.  childed,  father’d]  For  similar  instances  of  passive  verbs,  see  I,  i,  203. 

109.  high  noises]  Capell:  The  present  signal  disturbances  among  the  high  and 
great.  Steevens  :  The  loud  tumults  of  approaching  war.  Johnson  :  Attend  to  the 
great  events  that  are  approaching,- and  make  thyself  known  when  that  ‘  false  opinion' 


ACT  m.  SC.  vii.] 


KING  LEAR 


217 


*  When  false  opinion,  whose  wrong  thoughts  defile  thee,  HO 

*  In  thy  just  proof  repeals  and  reconciles  thee. 

*  What  will  hap  more  to-night,  safe  ’scape  the  king ! 

*  Lurk,  lurk.  *  [Exit. 


Scene  VII.  Gloucester s  castle. 

Enter  Cornwall,  Regan,  Goneril,  Edmund,  and  Servants. 

Com.  [To  GoneriC]  Post  speedily  to  my  lord  your  hus¬ 
band;  show  him  this  letter;  the  army  of  France  is  landed. 

— Seek  out  the  traitor  Gloucester.  [Exeunt  some  of  the  Servants . 

Reg.  Hang  him  'instantly. 

Gon.  Pluck  out  his  eyes.  5 

Com.  Leave  him  to  my  displeasure. — Edmund,  keep  you 
our  sister  company.  The  revenges  we  are  bound  to  take 
upon  your  traitorous  father  are  not  fit  for  your  beholding. 


I IO.  thoughts  defile~\  Qq,  Jen.  Walker, 
Dyce  ii,  Ktly,  Sch.  thought  defiles 
Theob.  et  cet. 

1 1 2.  What  will  hap ]  What  will ,  hap 
Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 

What. to-night, ]  What. to¬ 
night  ?  Cap. 

1 13.  [Exit.]  Om.  Qq. 

Scene  vii.]  Scena  Septima  Ff  (Scaena 
F2).  Scene  vi.  Rowe.  Scene  x.  Pope+, 
Jen. 

Gloucester’s  castle.]  Rowe.  A 
Room  in  the  Castle.  Cap. 


Regan]  and  Regan,  and  Qt.  Om. 

F  F 

r3r4* 

Edmund,  and  Servants.]  Theob. 
Baftard,  and  Seruants.  Ff.  and  Baftard. 
Qq. 

1.  [To  Goneril]  Ed.  Om.  QqFf  et  cet. 
1-3.  Two  lines,  the  first  ending  Letter , 
in  Qq. 

3.  traitor ]  villains  or  vilaine  Qq,  Cap. 
Mai.  Steev.  Bos.  Glo.  Wr. 

[Exeunt...]  Cap.  Om.  QqFf. 
6-10.  Leave. ..libel]  Four  lines,  Q,. 

7.  revenges ]  reuenge  Qq. 


now  prevailing  against  thee  shall,  in  consequence  of  ‘just  proof’  of  thy  integrity, 
revoke  its  erroneous  sentence,  and  recall  thee  to  honour  and  reconciliation. 

1 10.  thoughts  defile]  For  the  sake  of  rhyme  Theobald  changed  this  to  thought 
defiles ;  but  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  143),  in  his  Article  on  ‘occasional  licenses  of  rhyme 
in  Sh,  and  his  contemporaries,’  shows,  by  many  instances,  how  common  such  an 
imperfect  rhyme,  as  this,  is. 

1 1 2.  What]  Abbott,  §  254:  Equivalent  to  whatever.  The  construction  may  be 
‘  Happen  what  will,’  a  comma  being  placed  after  ‘will,’  or  ‘Whatever  is  about  to 
happen.’  Probably  the  former  is  correct,  and  *  will  ’  is  emphatic,  ‘  hap  ’  being  optative. 

2.  letter]  Delius  :  The  letter  that  Edmund  gave  to  Cornwall  in  III,  v,  8. 

6.  displeasure]  Collier  (ed.  2) :  The  (MS)  has  dispostire  ;  but,  though  it  may 
have  been  the  actor’s,  or  possibly  the  poet’s,  word,  we  make  no  alteration,  the  mean 
ing  being  evident. 

19 


KING  LEAR 


[act  III,  SC.  vj'u 


21 3 


Advise  the  duke,  where  you  are  going,  to  a  most  festinate 
preparation;  we  are  bound  to  the  like.  Our  posts  shall  10 
be  swift  and  intelligent  betwixt  us. — Farewell,  dear  sister  — 
Farewell,  my  lord  of  Gloucester. — \_Enter  Oswald.]  How 
now,  where’s  the  king? 

Osw .  My  lord  of  Gloucester  hath  convey’d  him  hence. 
Some  five  or  six  and  thirty  of  his  knights,  1 5 

Hot  questrists  after  him,  met  him  at’  gate ; 

Who,  with  some  other  of  the  lord’s  dependants, 


9.  Advise ]  Aduice  F,. 

1 where ]  when  Steev.  ’78,  ’85. 
festinate ]  fefluant  Qq.  fefliuate  F, 
10-12.  Our. ..Gloucester.]  Two  lines, 
Qq. 

ic.  posts ]  post  Qf.  poste  Q,. 

11.  and  intelligent ]  and  intelligence 
Qq.  in  intelligence  Cap.  (withdrawn 
in  MS*). 

12.  Enter  Oswald.]  Coll.  EnterStew- 


ard.  Ff.  After  king  ?  line  13,  Qq. 
15-19.  Some.,  friends.]  Prose,  Qq. 

1 6.  questrists]  qucflrits  Qq.  questers 
Pope,  Han. 

after  him]  after  Han.  (misprint  ?). 
at']  Ed.  at  QqFf  et  cet. 

17.  lord's]  Pope.  Lords  QqYf,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  +  ,  Huds. 
Sch. 


9.  festinate]  Capell:  Speedy.  Delius:  Sh.  uses  ‘  festinately  ’  as  an  affected 
word  in  Love's  Lab.  Ill,  i,  6.  Schmidt:  Not  elsewhere  used  by  Sh. 

10.  bound]  DELIUS:  This  does  not  mean  obliged,  but  rather  ready,  prepared. 
Wright:  As  in  Ham.  I,  v,  6  :  *  Speak;  I  am  bound  to  hear.’ 

11.  intelligent]  See  III,  i,  25. 

12.  Gloucester]  Johnson:  Meaning  Edmund,  newly  invested  with  his  father's 
titles.  [See  III,  v,  14.]  Oswald,  speaking  immediately  after,  mentions  the  old  earl 
by  the  same  title. 

16.  questrists]  Capell:  An  inquirer  or  quester;  French,  questeur.  Heath: 
If  we  would,  read  English,  we  must  read  quesiists.  Eccles  calls  attention  to  a  Dublin 
edition  of  Sh.  published  by  Ewing,  wherein  Heath’s  conjecture  is  printed  querist. 
Wright:  A  word  of  Shakespeare's  coinage. 

16.  at’  gate]  The  apostrophe  indicates  the  absorption  of  the  definite  article. 
See  II,  ii,  116. — Ed. 

17.  lord’s  dependants]  Hudson:  Some  other  of  the  dependant  lords ,  or,  as  we 
should  say,  the  lords  dependant ;  meaning  lords  of  the  king’s  retinue,  and  dependant 
on  him.  It  is  sometimes  printed  *  lord's  dependants,’  which  gives  a  wrong  sense, 
making  the  men  in  question  Gloucester' s  dependants.  [I  fear  I  must  dissent.  In  my 
opinion  it  is  precisely  Gloucester’s  dependants  who  are  meant.  We  have  heard  ot 
no  lords  who  were  dependent  on  the  king.  He  had  certain  knights,  and  of  these 
five  or  six  and  thirty  had  come  to  seek  him,  and,  under  the  guidance  of  some  of 
Gloucester’s  followers,  they  had  all  hurried  off  to  Dover  If  it  were  Lear’s  own 
knights  and  his  own  lords  dependent  who  had  him  in  charge,  what  do  Cornwall 
and  Regan  mean  by  asking  Gloucester  to  whom  he  had  sent  the  lunatic  king,  and 
whither  he  had  sent  him  ?  I  cannot  but  think  that  these  questions  must  refer  to 
Gloucester’s  agency  in  the  matter  implied  by  his  having  dispatched  the  king  under 
the  escort  of  some  of  his  own  followers. — Ed.]  Schmidt  says  that  they  were 


ACT  III,  SC.  vii.] 


KING  LEAR 


219 


Are  gone  with  him  toward  Dover;  where  they  boast  18 

To  have  well-armed  friends. 

Com.  Get  horses  for  your  mistress. 

Gon.  Farewell,  sweet  lord,  and  sister.  20 

Com.  Edmund,  farewell. — 

[ Exeunt  Goneril ,  Edmund,  and  Oswald ’ 

Go  seek  the  traitor  Gloucester. 
Pinion  him  like  a  thief,  bring  him  before  us. — 

[ Exeunt  other  Servants. 
Though  well  we  may  not  pass  upon  his  life 
Without  the  form  of  justice,  yet  our  power 
Shall  do  a  courtesy  to  our  wrath,  which  men  25 

May  blame  but  not  control. — Who ’s  there  ?  the  traitor  ? 


Enter  Gloucester,  brought  in  by  two  or  three. 


Reg.  Ingrateful  fox !  ’tis  he. 
Com.  Bind  fast  his  corky  arms. 

18.  toward]  t07vards  Qq,  Cap.  Steev. 

Ec.  Var.  Coll.  Del.  Dyce  ii,  Wh. 

19.  well-armed ]  Hyphen.  Pope. 

[Exit  Oswald.  Sta. 

21.  [Exeunt.. .Oswald.]  Dyce.  Exit 
Gon.  and  Baft,  (after  line  20),  Qq.  Exit. 

(after  line  20),  Ff.  Exeunt.... Steward. 

(after  line  20),  Cap. 

22.  [Exeunt  other  Servants.]  Cap. 

Om.  QqFf. 


23.  well]  Om.  Qq. 

25,  26.  Shall. ..blame]  One  line,  Qq. 

25.  courtesy ]  curtefie  Qq.  curt 'fa 
Ff+,  Wh. 

26.  Scene  xi.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

Who's]  Whofe  Qt. 

Enter.. .three.]  Qq.  Enter  Glou* 
cefter,  and  Seruants.  Ff.  (after  comp- 
troll). 


vassals  of  Cornwall  who  had  declared  for  Lear  and  betaken  themselves  to  the 
French  army. 

23.  pass  upon]  Johnson:  That  is,  pass  a  judicial  sentence.  Steevens:  The 
origin  of  the  phrase  may  be  traced  to  Magna  Charta :  ‘  nec  super  eum  ibimus,  nisi 
per  legale  judicium  parium  suorum.’  It  is  common  to  most  of  our  early  writers.  In 
Jf  This  be  not  a  Good  Play,  the  Devil  is  in  it,  1612,  we  have:  *  A  jury  of  brokers, 
impanel’d,  and  deeply  sworn  to  passe  on  all  villains  in  hell.’  Wright:  In  Sped- 
ding’s  Letters  and  Life  of  Bacon,  ii,  283,  there  is  a  list  of  *  The  Names  of  the  Peers 
that  passed  upon  the  trial  of  the  two  Earls’  of  Essex  and  Southampton.  [It  is  still 
in  every-day  use  at  the  Bar  and  among  conveyancers. — Ed.]  Moberly  :  Magna 
Charta  prevailed,  it  appears,  in  England  even  in  the  days  of  Joash,  king  of  Judah. 

25.  courtesy]  Johnson  :  That  is,  to  gratify,  to  comply  with.  Steevens  :  I 
believe  it  means  simply,  bend  to  our  wrath,  as  a  courtesy  is  made  by  bending  the 
body.  Schmidt  (Lex.) :  That  is,  obey.  Compare  ‘  Bidding  the  law  make  court’sy 
to  their  will,’  Meas.  for  Meas.  II,  iv,  175.  Wright  :  To  yield,  give  way  to.  Com¬ 
pare  Hen.  V :  V,  ii,  293  :  ‘  nice  customs  curtsy  to  great  kings.’ 

28.  corky]  Johnson:  Dry,  withered,  husky.  Percy:  It  was  probably  suggested 


220 


KING  LEAR  [act  iii,  sc.  vii. 


Glou .  What  means  your  graces?  Good  my  friends,  29 
consider 

You  are  my  guests;  do  me  no  foul  play,  friends.  3° 

Com.  Bind  him,  I  say. 

Reg.  Hard,  hard. — O  filthy  traitor ! 

Glou.  Unmerciful  lady  as  you  are,  I ’m  none. 

Com.  To  this  chair  bind  him. — Villain,  thou  shalt  find — 
Glou.  By  the  kind  gods,  ’tis  most  ignobly  done 
To  pluck  me  by  the  beard.  35 

Reg.  So  white,  and  such  a  traitor ! 

Glou.  Naughty  lady, 

These  hairs  which  thou  dost  ravish  from  my  chin 
Will  quicken  and  accuse  thee.  I  am  your  host; 

With  robbers’  hands  my  hospitable  favours 

You  should  not  ruffle  thus.  What  will  you  do  ?  40 


29,  30.  What.,  friends. ]  Three  lines, 
the  first  two  ending  Graces  ?...Ghefis,  in 

Ff. 

29.  means']  F3,  Sch.  meanes  QqFJF2. 
mean  F4  et  cet. 

friends ]  friends  [to  the  Ser.  Cap. 
MS*  (?  after  line  30). 

31.  [They  bind  him.  Rowe. 

32.  Pm  none ]  Pme  none  F3.  Ime 
none  Fa.  I  am  none  Cap.  Steev.  Ec. 
Var.  Coll.  Del.  Wh.  /  am  true  Qq. 

33.  Two  lines,  Ff. 


3 i-find—]  Qq.  finde.  FIF3.  find. 
F  F 

r3r4* 

[Regan  plucks  his  beard.]  Johns. 

34,  35-  Prose>  Qq- 

36, 37.  Naughty... chin]  One  line,  Qq. 
33.  lam]  Pm  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  ii. 

39.  robbers']  Theob.  ii.  robbers  QqFf. 
robber's  Fope. 

favours]  favour  Han.  Warb. 
Johns.  Ktly. 

40.  ruffle]  ruffell  Qq. 

do  P]  doe.  Qj.  doe  F2.  do  F3> 


by  a  passage  in  Harsnet’s  Declaration :  ‘  It  would  (I  feare  me)  pose  all  the  cunning 
Exorcists,  that  are  this  day  to  be  found,  to  teach  an  old  corkie  woman  to  writhe, 
tumble,  curuet,  &  fetch  her  Morice  gamboles,  as  Martha  Drossier  did’  [p.  23, 
according  to  Wright,  from  whom  I  have  quoted  it,  as  presumably  more  correct  than 
Percy. — Ed.]. 

29.  means]  As  Abbott,  §33$,  says,  a  singular  verb  (or,  more  correctly,  an 
apparently  singular  verb),  when  it  precedes  the  plural  subject,  may  almost  be  regarded 
as  the  normal  inflection.  See  Macb.  II.  iii,  137 ;  Ilam.  Ill,  iv,  202,  and  the  numerous 
examples  collected  by  Abbott. 

34.  kind  gods]  Warburton,  with  superfluous  refinement,  supposed  that  the  dii 
hospitales  were  here  alluded  to.  Capell  agrees  with  him. 

39.  hospitable  favours]  Both  Jennens  and  Capell  think  that  ‘favours’  refers 
to  Gloucester’s  silver  hairs.  But  Steevens  shows  that  it  means  the  ‘  features,  i.  e.  the 
different  parts  of  which  a.  face  is  composed.  So  in  Drayton’s  epistle  from  Matilda 
to  King  John  [p.  87,  ed.  1748.]  :  “  Within  the  compass  of  man’s  face  we  see,  How 
many  sorts  of  several  favours  be.”  ’  Schmidt  (Lex.)  gives  from  I  Hen.  IV:  III.  ii, 
136 ;  ‘  And  stain  my  favours  in  a  bloody  mask.’ 


ACT  III,  sc.  vii.] 


KING  LEAR 


221 


Com.  Come, sir,  what  letters  had  you  late  from  France?  41 

Reg.  Be  simple-answer’d,  for  we  know  the  truth. 

Com.  And  what  confederacy  have  you  with  the  traitors 
Late  footed  in  the  kingdom  ? 

Reg.  To  whose  hands  have  you  sent  the  lunatic  king?  45 
Speak. 

Glou.  I  have  a  letter  guessingly  set  down, 

Which  came  from  one  that’s  of  a  neutral  heart 
And  not  from  one  opposed. 

Com.,  Cunning. 

Reg.  And  false. 

Com.  Where  hast  thou  sent  the  king  ? 

Glou.  To  Dover.  50 

Reg.  Wherefore  to  Dover  ?  Wast  thou  not  charged  at 
peril — 

Com.  Wherefore  to  Dover? — Let  him  answer  that. 

Glou.  I  am  tied  to  th’  stake,  and  I  must  stand  the  course. 

Reg.  Wherefore  to  Dover  ? 

Glou.  Because  I  would  not  see  thy  cruel  nails  55 

Pluck  out  his  poor  old  eyes,  nor  thy  fierce  sister 
In  his  anointed  flesh  stick  boarish  fangs. 

The  sea,  with  such  a  storm  as  his  bare  head 


41.  Come,  sir,']  Separate  line,  Ff. 

42.  simple- answer' d]  Han.  fimple 
anfwer’d  Ff,  Rowe,  Sing,  fimple  an- 
fwerer  Qq,  Glo.  +  ,  Mob. 

43.  44.  And  what. ..kingdom  ?]  Rowe. 
Prose,  QqFf. 

44.  Late]  lately  Q2. 

45,46.  To. ..Speak.]  Han.  One  line,  Qq, 
Ktly.  Two, the  first  ending  hands,  Ff,  Sch. 

45.  have  you  sent]  you  haue  fent  Q,, 
Ff,  Rowe,  Sch. 

47.  I  have]  /'w  Han. 

49.  Cunning.]  Cunning —  Rowe+, 
Jen. 

50.  Dover]  Dover,  sir  Han. 


51.  Two  lines,  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap.  Jen. 
Sch. 

to  Dover  ?... peril]  One  line,  Steev. 
Bos.  Coll.  Wh. 

peril — ]  perill.  FIF3FJ.  peril? 
F4,  Rowe,  Cap.  thy  peril  Steev. 

52.  answer]  firjl  anfwer  Qq.  Theoli. 
Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Jen.  Sta.  Glo.  +  . 

53.  Two  lines,  Ff. 

54.  Dover?]  Dover,  fir  Qq,  Jen. 
Glo. +  ,  Mob. 

57.  anointed]  aurynted  Q3. 

stick]  rafi  Qq,  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly. 

58.  as  his  bare]  on  his  lowd  Qt.  of 
his  lou'd  Qa. 


53.  course]  See  Macb.  V,  vii,  1,  2. 

57.  stick]  Steevens:  Rash  of  the  Qq  is  the  old  hunting  terra  for  the  stroke 
made  by  a  wild  boar  with  his  tusks.  It  occurs  in  Spenser,  Faerie  Queene,  b.  IV, 
c.  ii :  *  And  shields  did  share,  and  mailes  did  rash,  and  helmes  did  hew.’  Again  in 
b.  V,  c.  iii :  1  Rashing  off  helmes,  and  ryving  plates  asunder.’  Dyce  ( Remarks ,  &c. 
p.  229)  quotes  the  following  note  by  Gifford:  ‘To  rash  (a  verb  which  we  have 
19* 


222 


KING  LEAR 


[act  hi,  sc.  vii. 


In  hell-black  night  endured,  would  have  buoy’d  up, 

And  quench’d  the  stelled  fires ;  60 

Yet,  poor  old  heart,  he  holp  the  heavens  to  rain. 


If  wolves  had  at  thy  gate  howl’d 
Thou  shouldst  have  said :  ‘  Good 
All  cruels  else  subscribe.’  But  I 

59.  hell-black  night]  Pope.  Hell- 
blacke-night  Ff.  hell  blacke  night  Qq. 

buoy'd]  bod  Q,.  .  laid  Qa.  boil'd 
Warb.  Coll.  (MS),  Quincy  (MS). 

60,  61.  And. ..heart,]  One  line,  Qq. 

60.  stelled]  Jleeled  Q3Q3,  Rowe,  Pope. 
stellar  Han.  Jen.  Ec. 

61.  holp]  holpt  Qq,  Jen.  help'd 
Pope  + . 

rain]  rage  Qq,  Cap. 


that  stern  time, 
porter,  turn  the  key, 
shall  see 

62.  howl'd  that  stern]  heard  that 
dearne  Qq.  howl'd  that  dearn  Cap. 
Sing.  Ktly. 

63.  4  Good. ..key]  As  a  quotation,  Johns, 
and  all  edd.  since. 

63,  64.  4  Good. ..subscribe']  As  a  quo¬ 
tation,  Ed. 

63.  Good]  go,  Theob.  ii,  Warb.  Johns. 

64.  subscribe]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
Jen.  Sch.  fubfcrib'd  Qq  et  cet. 


improvidently  suffered  to  grow  obsolete)  is  to  strike  obliquely  with  violence,  as  a 
wild  boar  does  with  his  tusk.  It  is  observable  with  what  accuracy  Sh.  has  corrected 
the  old  Quarto  of  King  Lear ,  where,  instead  of  rash ,  he  has  properly  given  4  stick.’— 
Note  on  4  Sir,  I  mist  my  purpose  in  his  arm,  rash’d  his  doublet  sleeve,’  &c. — Jonson’s 
Every  Man  Out  of  his  Humour ,  IV,  iv.  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  2S0)  cites  from  Chap¬ 
man’s  Iliad,  V,  p.  63  [old  fol.]  :  4  Then  rush’d  he  out  a  lance  at  him,’  See.  Lettsom 
in  a  foot-note  says :  4  Gifford  speaks  of  Shakespeare’s  correcting  the  Quarto,  as  if  that 
were  an  ascertained  fact,  whereas  it  is  only  the  doubtful  supposition  of  certain  editors. 
Chapman’s  rush  seems  only  another  form  of  rash.  Both  seem  applied  to  the  weapon 
inflicting  the  injury.’ 

59.  hell-black]  Capell:  This  bold  epithet  is  deriv’d  probably  from  Hakluyt, 
who  in  his  third  volume,  p.  849,  has  the  compound  4  hell-darke.’  [Is  it  not  high 
time  that  we  should  desist  from  our  groundless  admiration  of  a  plagiarist  like  Shake¬ 
speare  ? — Ed.] 

59.  buoy’d  up]  Heath:  Used  here  as  the  middle  voice  in  Greek,  signifying 
to  buoy,  or  lift,  itself  up.  White  considers  ‘boil’d’  a  very  plausible  reading. 
Schmidt:  The  verb  is  found  in  Sh.  only  here;  the  noun,  in  its  ordinary  significa¬ 
tion,  only  in  IV,  vi,  19.  The  verb  is  here  transitive,  and  the  phrase  means:  the 
sea  would  have  lifted  up  the  fixed  fires  and  extinguished  them. 

60.  stelled]  Theobald:  An  adjective  coined  from  Stella.  In  Latin  we  have 
Doth  stellans  and  stellatus.  Schmidt  :  But  Sh.  uses  a  verb  to  stell,  i.  e.  to  place ,  to 
fix :  4  Mine  eye  hath  played  the  painter,  and  hath  stell’d  Thy  beauty’s  form  in 
table  of  my  heart.’ — Son.  xxiv.  [So  also  4  To  this  well-painted  piece  is  Lucrece 
come,  To  find  a  face  where  all  distress  is  stell’d.’ — R.  of  L.  14.44. — Ed.] 

62.  stern]  Steevens  :  Dearne  of  the  Qq  means  lonely,  solitary,  obscure,  melan¬ 
choly,  &c.  See  Per.  Ill,  i,  15.  ‘Stern,’  however,  is  countenanced  by  a  passage 
in  Chapman’s  Homer ,  Iliad,  xxiv :  4  In  this  so  sterne  a  time  Of  night  and  danger.* 
Collier  suggests  that  dearn  was  Shakespeare’s  word,  but  was  misheard  4  stern.’ 

64.  cruels  else  subscribe]  Johnson  :  Yielded,  submitted  to  the  necessity  of  the 
occasion.  Heath  :  That  is,  submitted  their  cruelty  to  the  compassion  they  felt  at 


ACT  111,  SC.  vii.] 


KING  LEAR 


223 


[64.  All  cruels  else  subscribe] 

the  sight  of  his  wretchedness.  Capell:  That  is,  subscrib’d  to  pity,  subscrib’d  or 
assented  to  it’s  being  exercis’d  here.  Collier,  Dyce,  and  Singer  adopt  Johnson’s 
interpretation.  Knight,  Staunton,  and  White  are  silent.  Cowden  Clarice  says 
‘cruels’  is  used  for  cruelties ,  as  does  also  Wright,  who  refers  to  Abbott,  §9, 
for  adjectives  used  as  nouns.  Abbott,  §433,:  That  is,  ‘All  cruel  acts  to  the  con¬ 
trary  being  yielded  up,  forgiven.’  Compare  for  the  meaning,  IV,  vii,  36,  and  For 
‘subscribe,’  Tro.  and  Cress.  IV,  v,  105.  Another  explanation  is,  ‘all  other  cruel 
animals  being  allowed  entrance.’  Jervis  (p.  23)  conjectures  quarrels.  Moberly: 
All  harshness  otherwise  natural  being  forborne  or  yielded  from  the  necessity  of  the 
time.  Schmidt:  ‘All  cruels’  can  mean  nothing  else  but  all  cruel  creatures.  In 
turning  adjectives  intq  nouns,  the  old  language  went  very  far,  but  in  no  instance 
farther  than  Sh.  went  in  this  phrase.  In  the  singular,  *  cruel  ’  is  found  in  Son. 
cxlix  :  ‘  Canst  thou,  O  cruel,  say  I  love  thee  not  ?  ’  The  examples  adduced  by  Abbott 
refer  also  to  the  singular.  At  all  events  it  is  proved  by  them  (as  well  as  by  the 
passages  cited  in  the  present  writer’s  Lexicon ,  p.  1415)  that  the  cruel,  as  a  sub¬ 
stantive,  can  only  mean  the  cruel  person  or  thing,  not  cruelty ;  as  little  can  the  old 
mean  old  age,  or  the  young  mean  youth.  All  interpretations,  therefore,  which  involve 
this  abstract  idea  are  inadmissible.  Even  those  editors  who  interpret  ‘cruels’  cor¬ 
rectly  adopt  subscribed  of  the  Qq,  and  hold  it  to  be  the  imperfect  tense.  It  is  far 
better  to  follow  the  Folio  and  to  interpret  the  sentence  thus :  *  Everything,  which  is  at 
other  times  cruel,  shows  feeling  or  regard;  you  alone  have  not  done  so.’  Sh.  uses 
the  phrase  to  subscribe  to  something  in  the  sense  of  declaring  one’s  self  conquered 
by  something,  of  yielding,  complying.  It  is  used  exactly  in  the  same  sense  as  here, 
in  Tro.  and  Cress.  IV,  v,  105:  ‘For  Hector  in  his  blaze  of  wrath  subscribes  To 
tender  objects,’  that  is,  Hector  yields  if  he  is  brought  face  to  face  with  anything 
touching  or  tender;  he  is  sensible  to  tender  impressions.  [This  is  to  me  the  most 
puzzling  phrase  in  this  play,  more  puzzling  even  than  ‘runaways’  eyes’  or  ‘the 
dram  of  eale  ’ ;  the  multitude  <5f  emendations  proposed  for  these  latter  show  how  easily 
the  idea  of  the  phrase  is  grasped  ;  anybody,  and  everybody,  is  ready  with  an  emenda¬ 
tion  there;  here  it  is  different.  None  of  the  interpretations  are,  to  my  mind,  satis¬ 
factory.  The  latest,  Mr  Joseph  Crosby’s  ( Epitome  of  Lit.,  1  June,  1S79),  refers 
‘cruels’  to  feelings,  (which  is,  to  me,  ‘far  wide,’)  and  emphasizes  ‘else.’  He  thus 
paraphrases:  ‘  All  thy  feelings,  no  matter  how  cruel  or  inhuman  “  else,”  i.  e.  at  any 
other  time,  or  under  any  other  circumstances,  having  “  subscribed,”  i.  e.  succumbed, 
to  the  terrors  of  that  storm,  and  yielded  to  the  pity  for  the  old  king,  thy  father.’  In 
a  case  as  puzzling  as  this,  anything,  as  Dr  Johnson  says  elsewhere,  may  be  tried;  my 
attempt  is  seen  in  the  text.  Not  unnaturally,  I  think  it  is  the  true  reading;  it  adheres 
to  the  venerable  authority  of  the  First  Folio,  making  ‘  subscribe  ’  an  imperative  like 
•turn.’  The  drift  of  the  whole  passage  is  the  contrast  between  the  treatment  which 
Regan’s  father  had  received  and  that  which  would  have  been  dealt,  in  that  stern  time, 
to  wolves  and  other  animals,  howsoever  cruel.  ‘Thou  shouldst  have  said:  Good 
porter,  open  the  gates,  acknowledge  the  claims  of  all  creatures,  however  cruel  they 
may  be  at  other  times; ’  or,  perhaps :  ‘ open  the  gates;  give  up  all  cruel  things  else,' 
i.  e.  forget  that  they  are  cruel.  As  in  I,  ii,  24,  Lear  ‘  subscribed  ’  his  powers,  so  here 
the  porter  should  *  subscribe  all  cruels,’  i.  e.  he  should  surrender,  yield,  give  up  what¬ 
soever  was  cruel  in  the  poor  beasts,  and  see  only  their  claim  to  his  compassion.  An 
exactly  parallel  use  of  ‘subscribe’  cannot  perhaps  be  found  in  Sh.;  and  if  this  be 


224 


KING  LEAR 


[act  hi,  sc.  vii 


The  winged  vengeance  overtake  such  children.  65 

Com.  See’t  shalt  thou  never ! — Fellows,  hold  the  chair  ! — 
Upon  these  eyes  of  thine  I  ’ll  set  my  foot. 

67.  these]  thofe  Qq,  Jen.  Gloster  is  held  down  in  his  Chair,  while 

[Gloster  is  held  down  while  Corn-  Cornwal  plucks  out  one  his  Eyes,  and 

wall  treads  out  one  of  his  Eyes.  Rowe.  stamps  on  it.  Cap. 


deemed  fatal  to  my  interpretation,  I  can  only  express  my  regret,  and  meekly  suggest 
that  the  present  instance  may  be  a  hapax  legomenon. — Ed.] 

66.  Capell  :  The  barbarity  exercis’d  upon  Gloucester  is  indeed  a  part  of  the  story 
that  was  the  source  of  this  episode,  for  that  ‘  Paphlagonian  king’s  ’  eyes  were  put  out 
by  a  son;  but  the  putting-out  of  poor  Gloucester’s  seems  to  be  more  immediately 
copy’d  from  Selimus.  Steevens  :  In  Selimus,  Etnperor  of  the  Turks,  one  of  the 
sons  of  Bajazet  pulls  out  the  eyes  of  an  Aga  on  the  stage,  and  says :  *  Yes  thou  shalt 
live,  but  never  see  that  day.  Wanting  the  tapers  that  should  give  thee  light.  [ Pulls 
out  his  eyes.’  Immediately  after,  his  hands  are  cut  off.  I  have  introduced  this 
passage  to  show  that  Shakespeare’s  drama  was  not  more  sanguinary  than  that  of  his 
contemporaries.  Malone:  In  Marston’s  Antonio's  Revenge,  1602,  Piero’s  tongue  is 
torn  out  on  the  stage.  Davies  (Dram.  Misc.  ii,  197)  :  After  all,  Sh.  might  possibly 
contrive  not  to  execute  this  horrible  deed  upon  the  stage,  though  it  is  so  quoted  in 
the  book.  ...  At  the  present,  the  sufferer  is  forced  into  some  adjoining  room;  and 
the  ears  of  the  audience  are  more  hurt  by  his  cries  than  their  eyes  can  be  when  he 
is  afterwards  led  on  the  stage.  The  gold-beaters’  skin,  applied  to  the  sockets,  as  if  to 
staunch  the  bleeding,  abates  something  perhaps  of  the  hideousness  of  the  spectacle. 
Coleridge  :  *  What  can  I  say  of  this  scene  ? — There  is  my  reluctance  to  think  Shake¬ 
speare  wrong,  and  yet  — — Elsewhere  Coleridge  says :  *  I  will  not  disguise  my 
conviction  that  in  this  one  point  the  tragic  in  this  play  has  been  urged  beyond  the 
outermost  mark  and  ne  plus  ultra  of  the  dramatic.’  TlECK  (vol.  ix,  p.  368,  ed. 
1833)  1  This  scene,  which  is  manifestly  too  horrible,  and  shocks  our  very  senses,  is 
rendered  still  worse  by  the  explanation  and  the  scenery  that  are  intruded.  Almost 
always  when,  now-a-days,  such  a  scenic  representation  is  attempted,  false  methods 
are  employed,  because  the  architecture  and  arrangements  of  the  old  theatre  are  not 
kept  in  mind,  but  confounded  with  our  modern  constructions. . . .  The  chair,  in  which 
Gloster  is  bound,  is  the  same  from  which,  elevated  in  the  centre  of  the  scene,  Lear 
first  speaks..  This  lesser  stage,  in  the  centre,  when  not  used  was  hidden  by  a  cur¬ 
tain,  that  was  drawn  aside  whenever  it  was  necessary.  Thus  Sh.,  like  all  the  dra¬ 
matists  of  the  time,  often  had  two  scenes  at  once.  The  nobles  in  Henry  VIII  are 
standing  in  the  ante-chamber,  the  curtain  is  drawn,  and  we  are  directly  in  the  chamber 
of  the  king.  So  also,  when  Cranmer  has  to  wait  in  the  ante-chamber,  the  council 
room  opens.  Thus  there  was  this  advantage,  that  through  the  pillars,  which  sep¬ 
arated  this  little  stage  in  the  centre  from  the  proscenium  or  stage  proper,  there  could 
be  represented  not  only  a  double  action,  but  also  at  the  same  time  it  might  be  half  or 
partly  hidden,  and  so  two  scenes  might  be  represented  which  were  perfectly  intelligible, 
although  not  everything  on  the  lesser  stage  was  visible.  Thus  Gloster  sate,  probably 
out  of  sight,  while  Cornwall,  near  him,  was  seen,  Regan  standing  in  the  fore-stage, 
lower  than  Cornwall,  but  close  by  him,  with  the  attendants  on  the  stage  itself.  Corn¬ 
wall,  horribly  enough,  tears  out  Gloster’s  eye,  but  the  act  is  not  positively  seen;  soma 


ACT  III,  SC.  vii.] 


KING  LEAR 


225 


[66.  The  blinding  of  Gloucester.] 

of  the  servants,  holding  the  chair,  stand  in  the  way,  and  the  curtain  on  one  side  (for 
it  was  divided  into  two)  was  drawn  before  the  spectator.  The  expression  that  Com* 
wall  uses,  ‘  Upon  these  eyes  of  thine  I’ll  set  my  foot,’  is  not  to  be  taken  literally;  it 
certainly  is  not  so  intended.  During  the  speech  of  Cornwall’s,  one  of  the  servants 
rushes  up  to  the  higher  stage  and  wounds  him;  Regan,  who  is  below,  snatches  a  sword 
from  another  attendant  and  stabs  the  servant  from  behind.  The  groups  are  all  in 
motion,  and,  while  attention  is  distracted,  Gloster  loses  his  ether  eye.  His  cry  is 
heard,  but  he  is  not  seen.  He  disappears,  for  there  was  egress  from  the  lesser  stage 
also.  Cornwall  and  Regan  come  forward  and  retire  by  the  side  scene,  and  the  scene 
ends  with  the  talk  of  some  of  the  attendants.  It  is  in  this  way,  which  some, 
what  lessens  its  horror,  that  the  scene  pictures  itself  to  my  mind.  The  Poet 
trusted,  indeed,  to  the  strong  minds  of  his  friends  who  were  to  be  so  much  moved  by 
the  general  horrors  of  the  representation,  as  not  to  linger  over  the  bloody  particulars. 
Ulrici  (p.  458) :  To  have  the  scene  where  Cornwall  puts  out  Gloster’s  eyes  repre¬ 
sented  directly  on  the  stage,  can  only  arouse  a  feeling  of  disgust,  which  has  nothing 
in  common  with  the  idea  of  beauty,  nor  with  that  of  grandeur,  power,  or  sublimity, 
and  which,  consequently,  can  only  impair  the  effect  of  the  tragedy.  Whether  or  not 
the  nerves  of  Shakespeare’s  public  may  have  been  of  a  stronger  fibre  than  those  of 
the  present  generation, — it  is  not  the  business  of  art  to  consider  strong  or  weak  nerves, 
but  to  aim  only  at  the  strengthening,  the  refreshing,  and  elevating  of  the  mind  and 
feelings,  and  such  scenes  do  not  effect  this  even  in  the  case  of  the  strongest  nerves, 
Heraud  ( Inner  Life  of  Sh.  p.  304) :  In  this  scene  Pity  and  Terror,  the  especial 
elements  of  the  Tragic,  are  urged  to  their  utmost  limits.  Of  course  there  was  danger 
of  excess.  But  Sh.  was  on  his  guard.  He  might  have  justified  the  act  by  the  sup- 
posed  barbarity  of  the  legendary  age  whose  manners  he  was  tracing,  and  urged 
that  their  familiarity  with  such  acts  prevented  the  actors  in  them  from  recognising 
the  horrible.  No  such  thing.  By  inserting  in  the  group  a  servant  who  did  recognise 
its  intrinsic  horror,  and  compassionated  the  sufferer,  he  converted  disgust  into  pity 
The  other  servants  also  compassionate  the  blind  old  man,  and  lead  him  out  to  help 
him,  to  heal  his  wounds,  and  to  place  him  in  safe  custody.  The  entire  current  of 
feeling  is  turned  in  the  direction  of  pity  by  the  force  of  sympathy.  Thus  the  horrot 
in  the  ‘horrid  act’  is  mitigated,  and  reduced  to  the  level  of  terror,  which  feeling  is 
enforced  by  ‘the  fparful  looking-for’  of  a  coming  vengeance,  of  which  an  instalment 
is  secured  even  in  the  moment  of  crime.  And  this  sentiment,  too,  is  expressed  by 
the  servants  who  act  as  chorus  to  the  scene.  W.  W.  Lloyd:  The  horrors,  like  the 
indelicacies  that  are  met  with  in  Shakespeare’s  plays,  are  never  admitted  for  their 
own  sakes,  never  but  when  absolutely  indispensable  for  his  great  aim  and  purpose, 
the  defining  of  character,  and  that  complete  exhibition  of  nature  with  which, — 
recognising  in  art  the  same  rigour  that  is  challenged  by  science, — he  allowed  nothing 
to  interfere.  The  mere  convenience  of  stage-management,  it  might  be  said,  would 
dictate  that  Gloucester  should  sit  in  the  chair  with  his  back  to  the  audience,  and  it 
is  not  even  then  very  apparent  why  the  deed  of  mutilation  should  be  so  much  more 
shocking  than  the  smothering  and  the  death  agonies  of  Desdemona;  it  is  not  worth 
denying,  however,  that  if  only  by  usage  of  theatrical  associations  it  would  be  so, 
and  if,  as  I  believe,  the  painfulness  and  the  horror  would  not  be  utterly  insupportable, 
it  must  be  from  a  different  cause.  The  cruel  act  is  revolting  to  think  of,  and  much 
more  to  behold,  and  yet  is  the  revolting  cruelty  less  heinous  than  the  treatment  of 


22  6 


KING  LEAR 


[act  hi,  sc.  vii. 

68 


Glou.  He  that  will  think  to  live  till  he  be  old, 

Give  me  some  help ! — O  cruel !  O  you  gods ! 

Reg.  One  side  will  mock  another ;  th’  other  too.  70 

Com.  If  you  see  vengeance — 

First  Serv.  Hold  your  hand,  my  lord ! 

I  have  served  you  ever  since  I  was  a  child ; 

But  better  service  have  I  never  done  you 
Than  now  to  bid  you  hold. 

Reg.  How  now,  you  dog? 

First  Serv.  If  you  did  wear  a  beard  upon  your  chin.  75 
1  'Id  shake  it  on  this  quarrel.  What  do  you  mean  ? 

Com.  My  villain  ?  {They  draw  and  fight. 


68.  old,"]  old  Q,.  old —  Qa. 

69.  help  /]  help. — F,.  help , —  FaF3F4. 
help.  Qq. 

you]  Ff+ ,  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.  + ,  Sch. 
ye  Qq  et  cet. 

70.  th ’  other  too ]  tother  to  Qq. 

71.  vengeance — ]  vengeance.  Ff." 

First  Serv.]  I.  S.  Cap.  Seruant. 

Qq.  Seru.  Ff. 

lord !]  Lord Qt.  Lord,  Qa.  Lord: 


Fj.  lord?  FaF3F4. 

72.  /  have ]  I've  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  ii, 
Huds. 

you ]  Om.  QI# 

73,  74.  But. ..hold!]  One  line,  Qq. 

75.  76.  If  ...mean?]  Prose,  Qq. 

76.  on  this]  in  this  Cap.  conj. 

77.  [They  draw...]  Draw  and  fight. 
Qq.  Orn.  Ff.  Fight,  in  the  scuffle  Corn¬ 
wall  is  wounded.  Rowe  + . 


Lear,  though  there  the  physical  injury  was  comparatively  slight, — the  exposure  of  age 
and  weakness  to  a  pitiless  storm, — and  in  itself,  however  well  the  storm  might  be 
imitated,  less  harrowing  to  the  feelings.  But  Sh.  evidently  relied  upon  the  response 
of  the  sympathies  of  his  audience  to  the  appeal  of  his  art,  and  he  had  confidence  in 
his  power  to  depict  the  mental  anguish,  and  sufferings,  and  injuries  of  the  king  with 
such  force  that  no  inferior  infliction  could  supersede  it  in  our  interest.  If  the  heart 
is  touched  as  it  should  be  by  the  great  scene  of  the  storm,  and  then  by  the  pitiable 
spectacle  of  the  wit-wrecked  monarch  in  the  indoors  scene,  mingling  the  fantastic 
freaks  of  lunacy  with  the  majesty  of  sorrow,  we  shall  be  aware  that  the  mere  narra¬ 
tion  of  any  physical  suffering  or  cruelty  whatever  must  have  failed  to  rouse  another 
start  of  indignation.  To  any  other  excitement  the  sensibilities  might  well  seem 
lulled  or  seared,  and  the  exhibition  of  the  act  was  therefore  necessary  if  it  was  to 
take  place  at  all,  and  was  therefore  possible;  and  the  poet  daringly  and  successfully 
availed  himself  of  the  opportunity  to  cast  the  last  disgrace  upon  filial  ingratitude,  by 
exposing  its  surpassing  hatefulness  in  comparison  with  the  direst  crime,  acted  under 
our  eyes  with  every  detail  of  horror. 

76.  quarrel]  Delius  explains  this  as  referring  to  Regan’s  having  called  him  a  *  dog.’ 

76.  What  .  .  .  mean]  Should  not  this  be  given  to  Cornwall  ?  I  doubt  Delius’s 
explanation  of  *  quarrel.’ — Ed. 

77.  villain]  Steevens:  Here  used  in  its  original  sense  of  one  in  servitude. 
Moberly  :  As  a  villain  could  hold  no  property  but  by  his  master’s  sufferance,  had 
no  legal  rights  as  against  his  lord,  and  was  (perhaps)  incapable  of  bearing  witness 
against  freemen,  that  one  should  raise  his  sword  against  his  master  would  be  un- 


act  in,  sc.  vii.]  KING  LEAR 


22  7 


First  Sent.  Nay,  then,  come  on,  and  take  the  chance  of  78 
anger. 

Reg.  Give  me  thy  sword. — A  peasant  stand  up  thus  ? 

[Takes  a  sword  and  runs  at  him  b eland. 

First  Serv.  Oh,  I  am  slain ! — My  lord,  you  have  one  eye 

left  80 

To  see  some  mischief  on  him.— Oh !  [Dies. 

Com.  Lest  it  see  more,  prevent  it. — Out,  vilde  jelly  1 
Where  is  thy  lustre  now  ? 

Glon.  All  dark  and  comfortless.  Where's  my  son  Ed¬ 
mund  ? — 

Edmund,  enkindle  all  the  sparks  of  nature,  85 

To  quit  this  horrid  a6t ! 

Reg.  Out,  treacherous  villain ! 

Thou  call’st  on  him  that  hates  thee ;  it  was  he 
That  made  the  overture  of  thy  treasons  to  us ; 


78.  Nay]  Why  Qq,  Jen. 

79.  Reg.]  Reg.  [to  another  servant. 
Johns.  Jen. 

thus  ?]  thus.  Qq. 

Takes...]  She  takes...  Qq.  Killes 
him.  Ff.  Snatches  a  Sword  from  an 
Att :  and  stabs  him.  Cap. 

80.  Si.  Oh. ..Oh!]  Prose,  Qq. 

80.  slain!  My  lord,]  Jlaine :  my 
Lord,  Ff.  Jlaine  my  Lord,  Qq. 

you  have]  yet  ha  tie  you  Qq,  Jen. 
Mai.  Ec.  yet  you  have  Steev.  *85. 

81.  hint]  them  Dyce  ii,  Huds.  'em 
Dyce  i,  conj. 

[Dies.]  He  dies.  Qa.  Om.  Q,Ff. 


82.  vilde]  QjFjFj,  Jen.  Del.  i.  vild 
Q,F3F4,  Rowe,  Sch.  vile  Pope  et  cet. 

83.  [Treads  out  the  other  Eye.  Rowe  +  . 
Dashing  Gloster’s  other  Eye  to  the 
Ground.  Cap. 

84.  Two  lines,  in  Ff. 
comfortless.]  comfortles,  Qq.  com- 

fortleffe ?Ff.  comfortless — Rowe  +  ,Jen. 

85.  86.  Edmund. ..all.]  Prose,  Qq. 

85.  enkindle]  vnbridle  Qq. 

86-89.  Out. ..thee.]  Prose,  Qq. 

86.  treacherous]  Om.  Qq. 

88.  overture]  overture  Walker  ( Crit. 
i,  86). 


heard-of  presumption,  for  which  any  punishment  would  be  admissible.  The  lord’s 
making  war  against  his  superior  lord  would  entail  no  such  consequences.  Schmidt 
says  the  stress  should  be  laid  on  *  My.' 

79.  Give  . . .  sword]  Collier  :  This  may  have  been  addressed  to  the  wounded 
Cornwall. 

Si.  on  him]  Dyce:  The  servant  is  evidently  speaking  of  Cornwall  and  Regan ; 
and  them  (and  'em)  [see  Textual  Notes]  are  often  confounded  with  ‘him’  by  tran¬ 
scribers  and  printers ;  so  afterwards,  V,  iii,  278,  the  Folio  has  erroneously  ‘  I  would 
have  made  him  (the  Qq  rightly  ‘them’)  skip,’  &c.  And  compare  what  the  othei 
servants  say  at  the  close  of  the  present  scene,  *  If  this  man  come  to  good  ’ — *  If  she 
live  long,’  &c.  [I  am  afraid  Dyce  would  have  been  severe  on  any  editor  who  had  ven¬ 
tured  to  make  such  a  change.  What  ‘  mischief’  had  the  Servant  done  on  Regan  ? — Ed.] 

88.  overture]  Malone  :  The  opening  or  discovery. 


228 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iii,  sc.  viu 


Who  is  too  good  to  pity  thee. 

Glou.  Oh,  my  follies !  Then  Edgar  was  abused.  90 

Kind  gods,  forgive  me  that,  and  prosper  him ! 

Reg.  Go  thrust  him  out  at '  gates,  and  let  him  smell 
His  way  to  Dover. — [ Exit  one  with  Gloucester .]  How  is’t, 
my  lord  ?  how  look  you  ? 

Com.  I  have  received  a  hurt ;  follow  me,  lady. — 

Turn  out  that  eyeless  villain ;  throw  this  slave  95 

Upon  the  dunghill. — Regan,  I  bleed  apace ; 

Untimely  comes  this  hurt.  Give  me  your  arm. 

[Exit  Cornwall,  led  by  Regan. 

*  Sec.  Serv.  I  ’ll  never  care  what  wickedness  I  do, 

*  If  this  man  come  to  good. 

*  Third  Serv.  If  she  live  long, 

*  And  in  the  end  meet  the  old  course  of  death,  100 

*  Women  will  all  turn  monsters. 


89-93.  tVho...youf 3  Five  lines,  end¬ 
ing  follies  ! ...forgive..,out.. .Dover. ..you  f 
Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

90.  Then. ..abused.]  Separate  line,  Cap. 
Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Del.  Sing.  Dyce, 
ICtly,  Sch. 

92,  93.  Go. ..you  ?]  As  in  Cap.  Three 
lines,  ending  fmell...Douer...you  t  Ff. 
Prose,  Qq. 

92.  at'  gates]  Ed.  At  th'  gates  Han. 
at  gates  QqFf  et  cet. 

93.  [Exit...]  Exit  with  Gloufter.  Ff. 
Om.  Qq. 

look ]  do  Jen. 


95-97.  Lines  end  vpon...vntimely... 
arme.  Qq. 

96.  dunghill]  dungell  Qx. 

97.  [Exit...]  Theob.  Exit.  Qq.  Ex¬ 
eunt.  Ff.  Exeunt  Cormval,  and  Regan. 
Servants  unbind  Gloster,  and  lead  him 
out.  Cap. 

98- 106.  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

98.  Sec.  Serv.]  2.  S.  Cap.  Seruant. 
Qq.  1st  Serv.  Theob. 

99.  Third  Serv.]  3.  S.  Cap.  2.  Seruant. 
Qq. 

99- 101.  If  ...monsters.]  As  in  Theob. 
Prose,  Qq. 


90.  Oh]  For  instances  of  monosyllabic  exclamations  taking  the  place  of  a  foot,  see 
IV,  ii,  26,  or  Abbott,  §  482.  Wright  :  Gloucester’s  last  comfort  fails  him  when  his 
physical  sufferings  are  greatest.  [‘  Sign-post  criticism  ’  ? — El3.] 

93.  look  you]  Jennens  [see  Textual  Notes]  :  She  could  never  ask  how  he  look’d: 
she  saw  that.  Eccles  :  *  How  look  you’  is  how  you  look.' 

98,  &c.  Theobald  :  This  short  dialogue  is  full  of  nature.  Servants,  in  any  house, 
could  hardly  see  such  a  barbarity  committed  on  their  master  without  reflections  of 
pity.  Johnson:  It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  them  servants  of  Gloucester,  for 
Cornwall  was  opposed  to  extremity  by  his  own  servant. 

100.  old  course]  MALONE:  That  is,  die  a  natural  death.  WORDSWORTH  ( Sh . 
Knowledge  and  Use  of  the  Bible,  p.  72,  ed.  ii)  :  We  find  the  same  idea  in  the  mouth 
of  Moses  with  reference  to  the  fate  of  the  rebels  Korah  and  his  company :  *  If  these 
men  die  the  common  death  of  all  men.’  he..— Numb,  xvu  «g. 


&CT  III.  SC.  vii.]  KING  LEAR 


229 


*  Sec.  Serv.  Let’s  follow  the  old  earl,  and  get  the  Bedlam  102 

*  To  lead  him  where  he  would ;  his  roguish  madness 

*  Allows  itself  to  any  thing. 

*  Third  Serv.  Go  thou.  I’ll  fetch  some  flax  and  whites 


of  eggs 

*  To  apply  to  his  bleeding  face. 


102.  Sec.  Serv.]  2.  S.  Cap.  1  Ser.  Qq. 
Bedlam\  bedlom  Qx. 

103.  roguish']  Om.  Qx. 

105.  Third  Serv.]  3.  S.  Cap.  2  Ser. 
Qq. 

105,  106.  As  in  Theob.  Prose,  Qq. 


105 

Now,  heaven  help  him ! 

[Exeunt  severally.  * 

106.  To. ..his]  T'  apply  to’s  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Jens.  To  apply  to' s  Sta. 
T'  apply  to  his  Dyce  ii. 

[Exeunt  severally.]  Theob.  Exit. 

Qq. 


102.  Bedlam]  Eccles  doubts  if  this  refer  to  Edgar,  who  had  assumed  his  dis¬ 
guise  but  the  preceding  evening.  He  therefore  supposes  that  it  was  some  genuine 
Bedlam  who  frequented  the  neighborhood.  Possibly,  he  thinks,  it  may  after  all  be 
Edgar,  who  had  been  seen  in  Gloucester’s  company.  At  any  rate,  he  concludes,  the 
servant  does  not  succeed  in  his  intention,  since  the  meeting  between  Gloucester  and 
his  son  afterwards,  appears  to  be  the  result  of  accident. 

105.  flax  and  whites  of  eggs]  Steevens:  This  passage  is  ridiculed  by  Jonson 
in  The  Case  is  Altered,  1609,  II,  iv.  Malone:  The  Case  is  Altered  was  written 
before  the  end  of  the  year  1599,  but  Jonson  might  have  inserted  this  sneer  at  our 
author  between  the  time  of  Lear’s  appearance  and  the  publication  of  his  own  play 
in  1609.  [Of  course  this  attack  on  Jonson  aroused  all  Gifford’s  bitterness,  and  in 
a  note  on  the  passage  in  The  Case  is  Altered,  after  quoting  these  notes  by  Steeven3 
and  Malone  just  given,  he  says:  *  Malone  exposes  Steevens’s  dishonesty  with  respect 
to  the  priority  of  the  present  drama,  but,  unwilling  to  lose  a  charge  against  Jonson, 
seeks  to  bolster  up  his.  crazy  accusation  by  a  supposition  as  full  of  malice  as  the 
other  is  of  falsehood.  .  .  And  all  this  grovelling  in  baseness  (for  it  is  no  better)  is 
founded  on  a  harmless  allusion  to  a  method  of  cure  common,  in  Jonson’s  time,  to 
every  barber-surgeon  and  old  woman  in  the  kingdom.’  Boswell,.  Malone’s  cordial 
friend,  says  plaintively :  *  I  wish  Gifford  had  not  expressed  his  dissent  in  such  strong 
language.’ — Ed.] 

20 


230 


KING  LEAR 


[ACT  IV,  sc.  t 


ACT  IV 

Scene  I.  The  heath. 

Enter  Edgar. 

i 

Edg.  Vet  better  thus,  and  known  to  be  contemn’d, 

Than  still  contemn’d  and  flatter’d.  To  be  worst, 

The  lowest  and  most  deje&ed  thing  of  fortune, 

Stands  still  in  esperance,  lives  not  in  fear. 

The  lamentable  change  is  from  the  best ;  $ 

The  worst  returns  to  laughter.  Welcome  then, 

Thou  unsubstantial  air  that  I  embrace ! 


The  heath.]  Cap.  An  open  Country. 
Rowe. 

Act  IV  Scene  I.]  Actus  Quartus. 
Scena  Prima.  Ff  (Scmna  F„). 

2.  flatter'd.  To  be  -worst ,]  Pope,  flat¬ 
tered  to  be  worfl,  Qq.  flatter'd ,  to  be 


worfl :  Ff,  Rowe. 

3.  and]  Om.  Pope  +  ,  Cap. 
dejesfled  ]  dejedl  F2F3F4,  Rowe. 

4.  esperance]  experience  Qq. 

6.  laughter.]  laughter ,  Qq. 

6-9.  Welcome. ..But]  Om.  Qq. 


1.  Yet .  .  .  and  known]  Johnson:  The  meaning  is,  ‘  ’Tis  better  to  be  thus  con* 
temned  and  known  to  yourself  to  be  contemned.'  Or,  perhaps,  there  is  an  error, 
which  may  be  rectified  thus:  ‘Yet  better  thus  unknown  to  be  contemned.’  When 
a  man  divests  himself  of  his  real  character  he  feels  no  pain  from  contempt,  because 
he  supposes  it  incurred  only  by  a  voluntary  disguise  which  he  can  threw  off  at 
pleasure.  I  do  not  think  any  correction  necessary.  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  :  The 
meaning  seems  to  be  this :  *  Y et  it  is  better  to  be  thus  in  this  fixed  and  acknowledged 
contemptible  state,  than,  living  in  affluence,  to  be  flattered  and  despised  at  the  same 
time.’  He  who  is  placed  in  the  worst  and  lowest  state  has  this  advantage :  he  lives 
in  hope,  and  not  in  fear,  of  a  reverse  of  fortune.  The  lamentable  change  is  from 
affluence  to  beggary.  He  laughs  at  the  idea  of  changing  for  the  worse  who  is 
already  as  low  as  possible.  Collier  :  ‘  Unknown,’  which  is  from  the  (MS),  accords 
with  Johnson’s  suggestion,  and  is  certainly  right.  ‘Yes’  for  Yet  maybe  doubted, 
but  we  feel  authorized  to  insert  it  by  the  excellence  of  the  ensuing,  and  more  im¬ 
portant  emendation.  Edgar  enters,  giving  his  assent  to  some  proposition  he  has 
stated  to  himself  before  he  came  upon  the  stage.  Singer  (in  N.  6°  Qu.  1  Ser.  vi, 
6,  1852)  expressed  his  approval  of  Johnson’s  emendation,  but  afterwards,  in  his  ed. 
2,  withdrew  it.  Schmidt  :  ‘  Known  to  be  contemned  ’  means  here  conscious  of,  and 
familiar  with,  contempt. 

2.  worst]  Tyrwhitt,  adopting  Johnson’s  emendation,  thought  this  line  should 
read :  *  Than  still  contemned  and  flatter’d  to  be  worse.' 

3.  dejected  thing]  Wright:  That  is,  thing  dejected  by  fortune.  For  this  posi¬ 
tion  of  the  participle,  see  Abbott,  5419  a  [or  Walker,  Crit.  i,  160]. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


231 


The  wretch  that  thou  hast  blown  unto  the  worst  8 

Owes  nothing  to  thy  blasts. — But  who  comes  here? 


Enter  Gloucester,  led  by  an  Old  Man. 

My  father,  poorly  led  ? — World,  world,  O  world !  10 

But  that  thy  strange  mutations  make  us  hate  thee, 

Life  would  not  yield  to  age. 

Old  Man.  O  my  good  lord, 

I  have  been  your  tenant,  and  your  father’s  tenant, 

These  fourscore  years. 


9.  thy]  my  Rowe. 

who... here ?~\  Who's  here,  Qq. 

9,  10.  But. .. .world  !]  Divided  as  in 
Pope.  Two  lines,  the  first  ending  led  ? 
Ff.  One  line,  Qq. 

9.  Enter  Gloucester,  led  by  an  Old 
Man.]  After  age ,  line  12,  Qq ;  after 
blafls,  line  9,  F^F4.  Enter  Gloufter,  and 
an  Oldman.  F,F3  (after  blafls). 

10.  poorly  led  l]  parti,  eyd,  Qx.  poorely 


led i  Q2. 

12.  Life  would  not]  Life  would  ill 
or  Loath  should  we  or  Life  would  not 
but  reludlant  Han,  conj.  MS.* * 

12, 14.  O.... years]  As  in  Johns.  Jen. 
Ec.  Walker,  Ktly,  Dyce  ii.  Two  lines, 
the  first  ending  your  Tenant ,  in  Ff. 
Prose,  Qq  et  cet. 

14.  these  fourscore  years]  this  fore • 
feore —  Qx.  this  fotirefcore —  Qa. 


9.  Owes  nothing]  Hudson:  They  have  done  their  worst  upon  him,  and  so 
absolved  him  from  all  obligations  of  gratitude. 

10.  12.  World  . .  .  age]  Theobald  ( Sh .  Rest.  p.  172) :  My  late  ingenious  friend, 
Dr  Sewell,  gave  me  this  conjecture,  *  make  us  bate  thee/  i.  e.  if  the  many  changes 
in  life  did  not  induce  us  to  abate  front,  and  make  allowances  for,  some  of  the  bad 
casualties,  we  should  never  endure  to  live  to  old  age.  My  explanation  is :  If  the 
number  of  changes  and  vicissitudes  which  happen  in  life  did  not  make  us  wait,  and 
hope  for  some  turn  of  fortune  for  the  better,  we  could  never  support  the  thought  of 
living  to  be  old  on  any  other  terms.  [He  reads,  therefore,  ‘make  us  wait  thee.’] 
Capell  [adopting  Theobald’s  wait] :  Life  has  often  such  evils,  and  man  sees 
himself  in  such  situations,  that  nothing  but  the  hopes  of  their  changing,  that 

*  esperance  ’  which  Edgar  talks  of  before,  prevents  his  putting  an  end  to,  it  at  any 
part  of  it’s  course,  and  before  age ;  he  would  not  stay  to  see  age,  age  would  not  be 
his  finisher.  Malone  :  O  world  1  if  reverses  of  fortune  and  changes  such  as  I  now 
see  and  feel,  from  ease  and  affluence  to  poverty  and  misery,  did  not  show  us  the 
little  value  of  life,  we  should  never  submit  with  any  kind  of  resignation  to  the 
weight  of  years,  and  its  necessary  consequence,  infirmity  and  death. 

11.  hate]  Nichols  (Notes,  &c.,  No.  2,  p.  6)  finds  here  a  confirmation  of  his 
belief  that  *  hatred  is  a  conservative  passion,  and  supplies  us  with  powers  of  endur¬ 
ance  little  short,  of  those  supplied  by  piety  itself/  and  announces  that  Shakespeare 
herein  shows  himself  ‘  to  have  been  no  mean  psychologist/ 

14.  tenant]  Cowden  Clarke  :  We  imagine  the  old  man  who  here  speaks  to  be 
the  occupant  of  the  farm-house  in  which  Gloucester  placed  Lear  for  shelter,  and  that 
the  servants  who  propose  to  ‘  get  the  Bedlam  to  lead  the  old  earl/  not  finding  the 
supposed  beggar,  have  left  the  blind  nobleman  in  charge  of  his  faithful  tenant. 


232 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  sc.  i 


Glou.  Away,  get  thee  awaj^ ;  good  friehd,  be  gone ;  1 5 

Thy  comforts  can  do  me  no  good  at  all ; 

Thee  they  may  hurt. 

Old  Man .  You  cannot  see  your  way. 

Glou.  I  have  no  way  and  therefore  want  no  eyes ; 

I  stumbled  when  I  saw.  Full  oft  ’tis  seen, 

Our  means  secure  us,  and  our  mere  defeats  20 

18.  You]  Alack  fir,  you  Qq,  Jen.  fecure  QqF,Fa.  Our  mean  secure s 

Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Coll.  Wh.  Ktly,  Glo  +  .  Pope +  ,  Cap.  Steev.  Mai.  Ec.  Coll.  Our 

20.  Our  means  secure J  Our  meanes  harms  secure  Jervis. 


20.  means  secure  us]  Warburton  :  That  is,  our  moderate,  mediocre  condition. 
Jennens:  ‘  Means’  may  perhaps  be  understood  to  be  mean  things  (using  the  adjec 
tive  substantively),  i.  e.  adversce  res.  Capell  :  Mean  is  mean  or  middle  condition ; 
and  the  maxim  seems  to  arise  from  this  reflection  in  Gloucester, — that,  had  he  been 
a  man  in  that  station,  he  had  ’scap’d  these  calamities ;  his  ‘  defects  ’  (his  want  of 
fortune  and  title)  had  screen’d  him  from  the  machinations  of  wickedness,  and  so 
prov’d  his  commodities.  Knight  [the  first,  I  think,  to  give  .the  true  interpretation]  : 

*  Means  ’  is  here  used  only  in  the  common  sense  of  resources,  powers,  capacities. 
The  means,  such  as  we  possess,  are  our  securities,  and  further,  our  mere  defects 
prove  advantages.  Rankin  {Philosophhy  of  Sk.,  1S41,  p.  178):  Our  abilities  and 
powers  make  us  rash  and  unwary.  Delius  agrees  substantially  with  Knight.  F.  W.  J. 
(N.  6^  Qu.,  I  Ser.  viii,  4,  1853)  [following  Knight’s  interpretation,  paraphrases]  : 
4  When  I  had  eyes  I  walked  carelessly ;  when  I  had  the  “  means  ”  of  seeing  and 
avoiding  stumbling-blocks,  I  stumbled  and  fell,  because  I  walked  without  care  and 
watchfulness.  Our  deficiencies,  our  weaknesses  (the  sense  of  them),  make  us  use 
such  care  and  exertions  as  to  prove  advantages  to  us.’  As  parallel,  the  following 
passages  in  the  Bible  are  cited:  I  Cor.  x,  12;  Ps.  x,  6;  2  Cor.  xii,  9,  16.  Also, 
‘Secure  thy  heart.’ — Timon  II,  ii,  184.  [The  following  excellent  illustration  is 
given]  : *  *  The  means  of  the  hare  (i.  e.  her  swiftness)  secured  her;  the  defects  of  the 
tortoise  (her  slowness)  proved  her  commodity.’  To  the  same  effect  Wordsworth 
(Sh.  Knowledge  of  the  Bible,  24S) :  *  Means,’  in  Gloucester’s  case,  is  his  sight. 
W.  R.  Arrowsmith  (N.  &>  Qu.,  I  Ser.  xii,  p.  1855)  contends  that  *  means  ’  here 
bears  the  same  meaning  that  it  does  in  common  parlance.  ‘  If  man’s  power  were 
equal  to  his  will,  into  what  excesses  might  he  not  be  betrayed,  ruinous  to  himself,  as 
well  as  hurtful  to  others ;  but  happily  for  him  an  over-ruling  Providence  so  orders 
matters  that  man’s  means,  his  circumscribed  and  limited  means,  become  his  security, 
keep  him  safe.’  White:  ‘Secure’  here  means  to  render  careless, — a  radical 
sense, — as  it  does  in  Timon,  II,  ii,  184.  Halliwell:  The  term  ‘means’  is  here 
used  for  the  want  of  means,  the  low  state  of  our  means.  This  usage  is  not  unusual 
in  writers  of  the  time.  Wright  ;  Things  we  think  meanly  of,  our  mean  or  moderate 
condition,  are  our  security.  Although  as  an  adjective  ‘  secure  ’  often  means  ‘  care- 
less,’  I  know  of  no  instance  of  the  verb  meaning  *  to  render  careless.’  MOBERLY : 

*  Secure  us  ’  means  ‘  make  us  over-secure,’  as  we  have  ‘  a  secure  fool,’  ‘  not  jealous 
nor  secure,’  &c.  &c.  The  antithesis  then  becomes  ‘  while  we  are  made  careless  by 
the  advantages  on  which  we  reckoned,  we  are  saved  by  something  which  seemed  a 
weak  point.’  The  allusion  may  be  to  the  fable  of  the  stag,  endangered  by  the  horns 


ACT  IV,  sc.  i.] 

KING  LEAR 

233 

Prove  our  commodities.- 

-Oh,  dear  son  Edgar, 

21 

The  food  of  thy  abused  father’s  wrath, 

Might  I  but  live  to  see  thee  in  my  touch, 

21.  OIi\  Ff+,  Dyce,  Sta.  0  Sch.  ah  Qq  et  cet. 

which  he  admired,  and  saved  by  the  legs  which  he  despised.  Schmidt  gives  two 
instances  of  the  use  of  ‘secure’  as  a  verb  meaning  to  render  careless ;  one  is  the 
passage  in  Tim.  II,  ii,  184,  already  cited  by  F.  W.  J.  and  White;  and  the  other  is 
Oth.  I,  iii,  10:  ‘  I  do  not  so  secure  me  in  the  error.’  Furthermore,  Schmidt  says 
that  the  signification  of  *  means  ’  as  ‘  moderate  condition’  is  unknown  in  Sh.,  and  per¬ 
haps  in  the  whole  range  of  the  English  language.  [The  various  emendations  that  have 
been  proposed  are  as  .follows :]  Theobald  (5/i.  Rest.  p.  177)  conjectured  ‘  Our  means 
ensnare  us  ’ ;  but  did  not  afterwards  repeat  it  in  his  edition.  Hanmer’s  text  reads : 
*  Meanness  secures  us.’  Johnson  :  I  do  not  remember  that  mean  is  ever  used  as  a 
substantive  for  low  fortune,  which  is  the  sense  here  required,  nor  for  mediocrity,  except 
in  the  phrase,  the  ‘  golden  mean.’  I  suspect  the  passage  of  corruption,  and  would  read : 
‘  Our  means  seduce  us,’  or  ‘  Our  maims  secure  us.’  That  hurt  or  deprivation  which 
makes  us  defenceless  proves  our  safeguard,  This  is  very  proper  in  Gloucester,  newly 
maimed  by  the  evulsion  of  his  eyes.  Hunter  {Nev)  Must.  ii,  272)  proposed,  without 
comment  other  than  that  the  passage  as  it  now  stands  cannot  be  right,  *  Our  meanness 
succours  us.’  Anon.  {Gent.  Mag.,  Aug.  1845,  p.  117) :  Does  the  exact  point  of  cor¬ 
ruption  in  the  text  lie  in  ‘  means  ’  or  ‘  our  ?  ’  Can  it  be  ‘  Poor  means  secure  us,’  See.  ? 
A.  E.  B[rae]  (Ar.  dr’  Qu.  1  Ser.  vii,  592, 1853) :  There  are  two  verbs,  one  in  every-day 
use,  the  other  obsolete,  which,  although  of  nearly  opposite  significations,  and  of  very 
dissimilar  sound,  nevertheless  differ  only  in  the  mutual  exchange  of  place  in  two 
letters:  these  verbs  are  secure  and  ^ecuje;  the  first  implying  assurance ;  the  second, 
xuant  of  asstirance,  or  refusal.  Hence  any  sentence  would  receive  an  opposite 
meaning  from  one  of  these  verbs  to  what  it  would  from  the  other.  In  the  present 
passage  one  would  suppose  that  the  obvious  opposition  between  means  and  defects 
would  have  preserved  these  words  from  being  tampered  with ;  and  that,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  absence  of  opposition  between  secure  and  commodious  would  have  directed 
attention  to  the  real  error.  But  no :  all  the  worritting  has  been  about  vieans.  Read, 
therefore,  ‘  Our  means  recuse  us,’  &c.  Singer  (ed.  2)  :  Meanes  of  the  old  copy  is 
possibly  a  typographical  error  for  needes ;  the  words  being  easily  confounded  in  old 
MSS.  The  context  shows  that  needs  was  probably  what  Sh.  wrote.  [‘  Needs’  is  in 
Singer’s  text.]  Collier  (ed.  2) :  Meanes  is  corrected  to  wants  in  the  (MS),  and  so 
we  print  with  confidence ;  the  context  shows  that  the  emendation  is  required,  how¬ 
ever  much  misplaced  ingenuity  may  insist  that  the  old  text  ought  to  be  preserved. 
Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  281) :  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Johnson’s  maims  is  the  right 
reading.  One  of  the  numberless  passages  which  illustrate  the  old  pronunciation  of  ea. 
Lettsom  [Foot-note  to  the  foregoing]  :  Hooker’s  Ecclesiastical  Polity,  b.v,  sect,  lxv: 
‘  If  men  of  so  good  experience  and  insight  in  the  maims  of  our  weak  flesh,  have 
thought,’  Sic.  b.  v,  sect,  xxiv,  3 :  ‘In  a  minister,  ignorance  and  disability  to  teach 
is  a  maim.’  Greene,  fames  the  Fourth ,  Dyce,  vol.  ii,  p.  145 :  ‘But,  sir  Divine  to 
you;  look  on  your  maims,  Divisions,  sects,  your  simonies,  and  bribes,’  &c.  Hudson 
adopts  maims. 

23.  see  thee  in]  Keichtley:  The  proper  word  of  course  is  feel,  not  ‘see’ ;  but 
the  text  may  be  right.  W e  might  also  read  by  for  4  in.’ 


234 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  sc.  L 


I  ’Id  say  I  had  eyes  again ! 

Old  Man.  How  now!  Who’s  there?  24 

Edg.  [Aside]  O  gods!  Who  is’t  can  say  ‘I  am  at  the 

worst  ’  ?  25 

I  am  worse  than  e’er  I  was. 

Old  Man.  ’Tis  poor  mad  Tom. 

Edg.  [Aside]  And  worse  I  may  be  yet ;  the  worst  is  not 
So  long  as  we  can  say  ‘  This  is  the  worst.’ 

Old  Man.  Fellow,  where  goest  ? 

Glon.  Is  it  a  beggar-man  ? 

Old  Man .  Madman  and  beggar  too.  %0 

Glou.  He  has  some  reason,  else  he  could  not  beg. 

I’  th’  last  night’s  storm  I  such  a  fellow  saw, 

Which  made  me  think  a  man  a  worm.  My  son 

Came  then  into  my  mind,  and  yet  my  mind 

Was  then  scarce  friends  v/ith  him.  I  have  heard  more  since.  35 

As  flies  to  wanton  boys,  are  we  to  th’  gods ; 

They  kill  us  for  their  sport. 

Edg.  [Aside]  How  should  this  be  ? 

Bad  is  the  trade  that  must  play  fool  to  sorrow, 


24.  Who's]  Whcfe  Q,. 

25.  27,  37, 51,  53.  [Aside]  Johns. 

25.  I  am  at  the]  I  am  at  Fa.  I'm 
at  the  Pope-*-,  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

26.  I  am]  I'm  Pope  + ,  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 
e'er]  Rowe,  ere  QqFf. 

28.  So  long]  As  long  Qq. 

31.  He]  A  Q,. 

32,  I'  th']  In  the  Qq. 

35.  Two  lines,  Ff. 

I  have]  I've  Pope+,  Dyce  ii, 


Huds. 

36.  to  vianton]  are  toth'  wanton  Qx. 
are  to'th  wanton  Qa.  to  th'  wanton  F3F4, 
Rowe. 

37.  kill]  bitt  Qx.  bit  Q=. 

37-39.  How. .. master  !]  Prose,  Qq 

37.  this]  their  F2. 

38.  that  must  play  fool  to]  that  mujl 
play  the  foole  to  Qq,  F3F4,  Rowe,  Jen. 
Steev.  Mai.  that  mujl  play  to  foole  Fa. 
must  play  the  fool  to  Pope  + ,  Ec.  Bos. 


28.  worst]  Moberly  :  If  we  could  truly  say  *  this  is  the  worst,’  our  capacities 
for  suffering  would  be  finite ;  but  this  is  not  so,  there  is  always  ‘  in  lowest  depth  a 
lower  deep  ’  of  possible  suffering. 

33.  worm]  Compare  fob,  xxv,  6:  ‘  How  much  less  man,  that  is  a  worm?  and 
the  son  of  man  which  is  a  worm  ?  ’ — Dr  Krauth,  MS. 

37.  kill]  Delius  :  Bit  of  the  Qq  is  probably  a  misprint  for  hit.  Wordsworth 
(Sh.  Knowledge  of  the  Bible ,  &c.  p.  1 14]  :  I  very  much  doubt  whether  Sh.  would 
have  allowed  any  but  a  Heathen  character  to  utter  this  sentiment. 

37.  How,  &c.]  Moberly:  ‘Can  this  be  the  truth?  It  is  a  poor  trade  to  draw 
out  of  sorrow  aphorisms  based,  like  those  of  fools,  on  the  first  aspect  of  things,  and 
tending  to  recklessness  and  despair.’  [Dees  not  Edgar’s  exclamation,  ‘  How  should 
this  be  ?  ’  refer  to  his  father’s  blindness  ? — Ed.] 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


235 


Angering  itself  and  others. — Bless  thee,  master ! 

Glon.  Is  that  the  naked  fellow  ? 

Old  Man.  Ay,  my  lord.  40 

Glou.  Then,  prithee,  get  thee  gone.  If  for  my  sake 
Thou  wilt  o’ertake  us  hence  a  mile  or  twain 
I’  th’  way  toward  Dover,  do  it  for  ancient  love; 

And  bring  some  covering  for  this  naked  soul, 

Which  I  ’ll  entreat  to  lead  me. 

Old  Man.  Alack,  sir,  he  is  mad.  45 

Glou.  ’Tis  the  times’  plague,  when  madmen  lead  the 
blind. 

Do  as  I  bid  thee,  or  rather  do  thy  pleasure  ; 

Above  the  rest,  be  gone. 

Old  Man.  I  ’ll  bring  him  the  best  ’parel  that  I  have, 

Come  on’t  what  will.  [Exit. 

Glou.  Sirrah,  naked  fellow.  50 

Edg.  Poor  Tom’s  a-cold. — [Aside]  I  cannot  daub  it 
further. 


39.  Angering  itself]  Anguishing't 
self  Han.  Anguishing  itself  Warb. 

41.  Then. ..gone]  Get  thee  away  Ff+, 
Knt,  Del.  Sch. 

42.  hence]  here  Qq. 

43.  toward]  to  Q2,  Steev.  Ec.  Var. 
Sing.  Sta.  Ktly.  towards  Cap. 

44.  this]  his  Rowe  ii. 

45.  Which]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Dyce, 
Coll,  iii,  Sch.  Who  Qq,  Sta.  Glo.-f . 
Whom,  Pope  et  cet. 

46.  Two  lines,  Ff. 

times'1]  Cap.  times  QqFf.  time's 


Rowe  + , Jen.  Del.  Sing.  Ktly,  Huds.  Sch. 

47.  thee]  Ora.  Pope  +  . 

49.  'parel]  'Parrel  Rowe,  parrell 
QqFlFsF3.  Parrel  F4. 

[Exit.]  Om.  Qq. 

50.  Sirrah,]  Sirrah,  you  Han.  Sir¬ 
rah,  thou  Ktly. 

fellow.]  fellow, —  Cap.  Dyce,  Sta. 
Glo.  +  ,  Mob.  Sch. 

51.  daub  it]  dance  it  Qq.Pope.  dally 
Han. 

further]  farther  Qq,  Coll.  Del. 

Wh. 


39.  Angering]  Heath  :  He  at  the  same  time  displeases  himself  and  the  person 
he  endeavors  to  amuse. 

46.  times’]  Dyce  shows  by  several  examples  [which  Schmidt’s  Lex.  will  supply] 
that  this  is  the  plural.  Moberly  :  When  enthusiasts  madden  the  ignorant.  The  ele¬ 
ments  were  already  working  in  England  which  produced  the  Fifth  Monarchy  and  the 
Blackfriars’  fanatics,  Naylor,  General  Harrison,  and  the  like. 

49.  ’parel]  For  a  long  list  of  words  in  which  the  prefix  is  dropped,  see  Abbott, 
§460.  We  have  *  ’filed’  for  defied  in  Macb.  Ill,  i,  65,  which  is  not  in  Abbott’s 
list.  Wright:  No  doubt  ‘paraille’  was  an  earlier  form  of  this  word,  but  it  was 
not  used  in  Shakespeare’s  time. 

50  on’t]  See  ‘two  on’s  daughters,’  I,  iv,  98,  148;  I,  v,  19. 

51.  daub  it]  Warburton:  Disguise.  Steevens:  So  in  Rich.  Ill ;  III,  v,  29: 
•So  smooth  he  daub’d  his  vice  with  show  of  virtue.’  Again  in  the  Paston  Letters i 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  sc.  i 


236 


Glou.  Come  hither,  fellow.  52 

Edg.  [Aside]  And  yet  I  must — Bless  thy  sweet  eyes, 
they  bleed. 

Glou.  Know’st  thou  the  way  to  Dover  ? 

Edg.  Both  stile  and  gate,  horse- way  and  foot-path.  Poor  55 
Tom  hath  been  scared  out  of  his  good  wits.  Bless  thee,  good 
man’s  son,  from  the  foul  fiend !  *  Five  fiends  have  been  in  poor 

*  Tom  at  once ;  of  lust,  as  Obidicut ;  Hobbididence,  prince  of 

*  dumbness;  Mahu,  of  stealing;  Modo,  of  murder;  Stiber- 

*  digebit,  of  mopping  and  mowing,  who  since  possesses  60 

*  chambermaids  and  waiting-women.  So.  bless  thee,  master  !* 


53.  And  yet  I  must.]  Om.  Qq. 

And. ..bleed.]  One  line,  Cap.  Two 
lines,  Ff. 

55-57.  Both...fie7id /]  Prose,  Ff.  Three 
lines,  Qq. 

56.  scared]  f card  Qq.  fcarr'd  F,Fa. 
fear'd  F3F4.  scarred  Sch. 

56,  57.  thee ,  good  man's  son,]  the  good 
man  Qq,  Mai.  Steev.  Bos.  thee ,  good 
man,  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

57-61.  Five. .. master  !]  Prose,  Pope. 
Five  lines,  Qq.  Om.  Ff,  Rowe. 

58.  at  once]  in  once  Cap.  (corrected 
in  Corrigenda,  vol.  x). 

cf  lust,  as  Obidicut;]  Om.  Pope. 
Hobbididence]  Hobbididcn  Pope  + . 


Hobbididdance  Cap. 

59.  dumbness]  darkness  Cap.  (cor¬ 
rected  in  Errata). 

Modo]  Mohu  Pope+. 

Stiberdigcbit]  Qq.  and  Flibber¬ 
tigibbet  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Steev.  Ec. 
Var.  Coll.  Del.  Sta.  Dyce  ii,  Wh.  Flib¬ 
bertigibbet  Pope  et  cet. 

60.  mopping  and  mowing,]  Theob. 
(subs.).  Mobing,  dr1  Mohing  Qt.  Mo- 
bin  g,  and  Mohing  Qa.  moping,  and 
Mowing  Pope  ( Mowing  in  italics,  as  the 
name  of  the  fifth  fiend.  See  Textual 
Note,  line  60).  mobbing  and  mowing ; 
Jen. 

62.  So. ..master /]  Om.  Pope+. 


‘  her  moder  hath  seyd  to  her  .  .  .  that  she  hath  no  fantesy  therinne,  but  that  it  shall 
com  to  a  jape;  and  seyth  to  her  that  there  is  gode  crafte  in  dawbyng’  [vol.  i, 
p.  269,  ed.  Gairdner].  For  the  indefinite  use  of  *  it,’  see  Ham.  II,  i,  12,  or  Abbott, 
§  226. 

53.  thy]  See  IV,  vi,  30. 

58.  of  lust,  as  Obidicut]  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  249):  Qu.,  f  as  Obidicut,  of  lust ; 
H.  of  dumbness,’  &c.  ‘As’  in  the  Elizabethan  sense  of  namely,  to  wit. 

50.  Stiberdigebit]  I  can  see  no  reason  for  deserting  the  original  text  here. — Ed. 

60.  mopping]  Capell  (Gloss.)  :  To  drop,  duck,  or  dance  oddly.  Nares,  Dyce, 
and  Schmidt  define  it  by  ‘making  grimaces.*  Malone  quotes  from  Harsnet’s 
Declaration  :  *  —Make  antike  faces,  grinne,  mow  and  mop  like  an  ape.’ 

60.  mowing]  Moberly  :  Wedgwood  compares  the  French  *  faire  la  inoue,* 
Italian  ‘far  la  mocca,’  and  the  Swiss-German  ‘miipfen’  and  ‘muhelen’  for  ‘to 
make  faces.’  In  all  these  cases  the  words  are  coined  to  express  protrusion  of  the 
lips, 

61.  chambermaids]  This  is  generally  supposed  to  have  been  suggested  by  the 
three  chambermaids  in  the  family  of  Mr  Edmund  Peckham,  mentioned  in  Harsnet’s 
Declaration,  but  Moberly  gives  it  a  general  reference  to  chambermaids  ‘  who  per¬ 
form  these  antics  before  their  mistress’  dressing-glass.’ 


ACT  IV,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


2  37 


Glou.  Here,  take  this  pui;se,  thou  whom  the  heavens’ 

plagues  62 

Have  humbled  to  all  strokes ;  that  I  am  wretched 
Makes  thee  the  happier.  Heavens,  deal  so  still ! 

Let  the  superfluous  and  lust-dieted  man,  65 

That  slaves  your  ordinance,  that  will  not  see 
Because  he  does  not  feel,  feel  your  power  quickly ; 

So  distribution  should  undo  excess 


62.  thou]  QqFaF3F4.  y"  Ft.  you  Knt. 
heavens'  ]  heaven's  Han. 
plagues ]  plagues.  Q,. 

63, 64.  Have. ..thee]  One  line,  Qq. 

65.  and ]  and  the  Rowe. 

lust-dieted ]  lust-dieting  Cap. 


66.  slaves]  Jlands  Qq.  braves  Warb. 
Han.  Jen.  Sing.  Coll.  ii.  (MS). 

67.  does ]  Qt,  Johns.  Jen.  Knt,  Sch. 
do's  Ff  + .  doth  Qa  et  cet. 

68.  undo ]  vndoo  Fx.  undoe  F2.  vn- 
der  Qq. 


63, 64.  that . . .  happier]  Wordsworth  (p.  216) :  That  is,  because  my  wretch¬ 
edness  now  teaches  me  to  compassionate  those  who  are  in  distress. 

65.  superfluous]  Johnson:  Lear  has  before  uttered  the  same  sentiment,  which 
indeed  cannot  be  too  strongly  impressed,  though  it  may  be  too  often  repeated. 
Eccles  :  Sentiments  like  these  can  no  more  be  too  often  repeated  than  too  strongly 
impressed,  when  recommended  by  such  varied  elegance  and  beauty  of  expression. 

66.  slaves]  Warburton:  Gloucester  is  speaking  of  such  who  by  an  uninter¬ 
rupted  course  of  prosperity  are  grown  wanton,  and  callous  to  the  misfortunes  of 
others ;  such  as  those  who,  fearing  no  reverse,  slight  and  neglect,  and  therefore  may 
be  said  to  brave ,  the  ordinance  of  heaven.  Which  is  certainly  the  right  reading. 
Heath  :  The  meaning  is,  Who,  instead  of  paying  the  deference  and  submission  due 
to  your  ordinance,  treats  it  as  his  slave,  by  making  it  subservient  to  his  views  of 
pleasure  or  interest.  Johnson  :  To  slave  or  beslave  another  is  to  treat  him  with 
indignity ;  in  a  kindred  sense,  to  *  slave  the  ordinance  ’  may  be  to  slight  or  ridicule 
it.  [In  support  of  Heath’s  interpretation,  which  is  undoubtedly  the  true  one,] 
Steevens  cites  Heywood’s  Brazen  Age :  ‘  none  Could  slave  him  like  the  Lydian 
Omphale.’  Massinger’s  A  New  Way  to  Pay  Old  Debts ,  IV,  iii :  *  the  smooth  brow 
Of  a  pleased  sire,  that  slaves  me  to  his  will.’  Malone:  See  Webster’s  Malcon¬ 
tent,  VI,  \\  ‘O  powerful  blood!  how  dost  thou  slave  their  soul.’  Wright:  Com¬ 
pare  B.  and  FI.  The  False  One,  V,  iv:  ‘  Nay,  grant  they  had  slav’d  my  body,  my 
free  mind,’  &c.;  and  Middleton,  The  Roaring  Girl  (Works,  ii,  445,  ed.  Dyce) . 
‘  Fortune,  who  slaves  men,  was  my  slave.’ 

66.  ordinance]  Moberly  :  The  ordinance  meant  is  probably  what  the  parable 
of  Dives  and  Lazarus  expresses,  that  ignorance  of  the  sufferings  of  those  near  us  is 
itself  a  crime.  Schmidt  :  Here  it  must  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  the  established 
order  of  things,  law  of  nature.  Bailey  (ii,  96) :  ‘  Read:  “that  slanders  your  ordi¬ 
nance,”  i.  e.  that  disparages  it,  casts  reproach  or  contumely  upon  it,  discredits  it.’ 
To  meet  the  objection  to  slander  on  the  score  of  metre,  Bailey  cites  Walker’s  Vers.  69, 
where  this  word  is  given  among  the  dissyllables  which  Chaucer  uses  metrically  as 
monosyllables,  and  thinks  that  ‘the  objection  is  more  than  countervailed  by  the  apt¬ 
ness  of  the  term  for  the  place.’ 


238 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  sc.  i. 


And  each  man  have  enough.  Dost  thou  know  Dover  ? 

Edg.  Ay,  master.  "0 

Glon.  There  is  a  cliff  whose  high  and  bending  head 
Looks  fearfully  in  the  confined  deep ; 

Bring  me  but  to  the  very  brim  of  it, 

And  I’ll  repair  the  misery  thou  dost  bear 

With  something  rich  about  me ;  from  that  place  7 5 

I  shall  no  leading  need. 

Edg.  Give  me  thy  arm ; 

Poor  Tom  shall  lead  thee,  [Exeunt. 


72.  fearfully ]  firmely  Qq. 

in\  on  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Ec. 

75,  76.  With...need.]  First  line  ends 
me,  Qq. 


76.  /  shall ]  fhall  I  Q2. 

leading']  lending  F3F<)  Rowe, 

76,  77.  Give. ..thee.]  One  line,  Qq. 

77.  [Exeunt.]  Om.  Qq. 


71.  There  is,  &c.]  Moberly:  It  is  remarkable  that  Gloucester  goes  to  Dover, 
not,  as  Regan  laughingly  says,  that  he  may  now  do  his  worst  in  treason,  but  simply 
that  he  may  throw  himself  from  the  cliff  in  utter  despair.  The  fact  is,  that  this 
interpolated  part  of  the  plot  is  one  of  the  many  instances  of  Shakespeare’s  homage 
to  Sir  Philip  Sidney;  to  pay  which  he  does  not  hesitate  to  make  a  certain  sacrifice 
of  probability.  In  the  Arcadia  (p.  160)  we  have  *a  prince  of  Paphlagonia,  who, 
being  ill-treated  by  his  son,  goes  to  the  top  of  a  high  rock  to  cast  himself  down.’ 
(But  how  slight  is  the  hint  in  the  romance  compared  with  the  magnificent  use  which 
Shakespeare  makes  of  it !)  So  in  Pericles ,  i,  I,  we  have  taken  from  Sidney’s  Arcadia 
(p.  149)  the  expression,  ‘  The  Senate-house  of  planets  all  did  sit,  To  knit  in  her  their 
best  perfections.’  And  in  As  You  Like  It,  the  celebrated  passage  about  *  tongues  in 
trees,’  &c.,  is  an  adaptation  from  Sidney’s  Astropkel. 

72.  Looks  fearfully]  Moberly  :  The  beetling  top  of  the  cliff  seems  to  be  look* 
ing  down  with  alarm  over  the  sea  which  it  hems  in.  This  description  seems  as  if 
no  particular  Dover  cliff  were  meant,  as  the  cliffs  there  are  not  really  perpendicular. 

72.  in]  Malone:  Sh.  considered  the  sea  as  a  mirrour.  To  look  in  a  glass  is  yet 
our  colloquial  phraseology.  Wright  says  ‘  in’  is  here  equivalent  to  into,  and  cites 
Rich.  Ill:  I,  ii,  261 :  ‘  But  first  I’ll  turn  yon  fellow  in  his  g*-ave.’  [For  similar 
instances,  see  Abbott,  §  159.]  Schmidt  agrees  with  Malone. 

72.  confined]  Capeua.  ;  Pent  in  straits. 

N 


87 


ACT  XV.  sc.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


239 


Scene  II.  Before  the  Duke  of  Albany's  palace 

Enter  GoNERIL  and  EDMUND. 

Gon.  Welcome,  my  lord ;  I  marvel  our  mild  husband 
Not  met  us  on  the  way. — [Enter  Oswald.]  Now,  where’s 
your  master? 

Osw.  Madam,  within  ;  but  never  man  so  changed. 

I  told  him  of  the  army  that  was  landed ; 

He  smiled  at  it.  I  told  him  you  were  coming ;  5 

His  answer  was :  ‘  The  worse of  Gloucester’s  treachery 
And  of  the  loyaTservice  of  his  son 
When  I  inform’d  him,  then  he  call’d  me  *  sot,’ 

And  told  me  I  had  turn’d  the  wrong  side  out. 

What  most  he  should  dislike  seems  pleasant  to  him ;  10 

What  like,  offensive. 

Gon.  [To  Edml\  Then  shall  you  go  no  further. 

It  is  the  cowish  terror  of  his  spirit, 

That  dares  not  undertake ;  he  ’ll  not  feel  wrongs, 

Which  tie  him  to  an  answer.  Our  wishes  on  the  way 


Scene  ii.]  Scena  Secunda  Ff  (Scaena 

F,)- 

Before...]  Cap.  (subs.)  The  Duke  of 
Albany’s  Palace.  Rowe.  A  Courtyard 
of...  Eccles  conj. 

Enter...]  Theob.  Enter  Gonorill  and 
Baflard.  Qq.  Enter  Gonerill,  Ballard, 
and  Steward.  Ff.  Enter  Goneril,  and 
Edmund ;  Steward  meeting  them.  Cap. 
2.  Enter  Oswald]  Enter  Steward. 


Qq  (after  master  ?). 

3-1  r.  Madam. ..offensive.]  Prose,  Qq. 

10.  most. ..dislike]  kee  Jhould  mojl  de¬ 
fire  Qq. 

11.  [To  Edm.]  Han. 

shall  you]  thou  shall  Jen. 

12.  terror]  terrer  Qf.  cur  re  Q2. 

14,  IS-  answer. ..Edmund,  to]  ansioer, 
that  our  wishes  On  th'  way  may  prove 
effetfls ,  back,  to  Han. 


I.  Welcome]  Delius:  She  welcomes  him  to  her  house  after  she  has  reached  it 
in  his  company. 

1.  mild]  Johnson  :  It  must  be  remembered  that  Albany,  the  husband  of  Goneril, 
disliked,  at  the  end  of  the  first  Act,  the  scheme  of  oppression  and  ingratitude. 

2.  Not  met]  For  instances  of  the  omission  of  the  auxiliary  ‘do’  before  ‘not,’ see 
II,  1,  75,  or  Abbott,  §  305. 

11.  What  like,  offensive]  Abbott,  §  395 :  Antithetical  sentences  frequently  do 
not  repeat  pronouns,  verbs,  &c.  See  IV,  vi,  261 ;  IV,  vii,  4. 

12.  cowish]  Wright  :  Not  found  elsewhere.  Perhaps  the  true  reading  is  ‘  currish 
terror.’ 

14.  answer]  Moberly  :  Which  makes  it  necessary  that  he  should  reply  to  them 
as  a  man. 

14,  15.  Our  wishes  .  .  .  effects]  Steevens:  *  What  we  wish,  before  our  march 
is  at  an  end,  may  be  brought  to  happen,’  i.  e.  the  murder  or  dispatch  of  her  husband. 
‘On  the  way,’  however,  may  be  equivalent  to  the  expression  we  now  use :  By  the 


240 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv.  sc.  iL 


May  prove  effe£ls.  Back,  Edmund,  to  my  brother;  15 

Hasten  his  musters  and  conduct  his  powers. 

I  must  change  arms  at  home  and  give  the  distaff 
Into  my  husband’s  hands.  This  trusty  servant 
Shall  pass  between  us ;  ere  long  you  are  like  to  hear. 

If  you  dare  venture  in  your  own  behalf,  20 

A  mistress’s  command.  Wear  this ;  spare  speech ; 

Decline  your  head.  This  kiss,  if  it  durst  speak, 

Would  stretch  thy  spirits  up  into  the  air. 

Conceive,  and  fare  thee  well. 

Edm.  Yours  in  the  ranks  of  death. 

Gon.  My  most  dear  Gloucester!  25 

[ Exit  Edmund 

Oh,  the  difference  of  man  and  man ! 

To  thee  a  woman’s  services  are  due. 

My  fool  usurps  my  body. 

Osw.  Madam,  here  comes  my  lord.  [Exit. 


15.  Edmund]  Edgar  Qx. 

1 7.  arms ]  names  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Del. 
i,  Wh.  Sch. 

19.  ere.. .hear]  you  ere  long  shall  hear 
Pope  +  . 

you  are ]  you  ’ re  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

20.  venture]  venter  Q2. 

21.  command]  coward  Q2. 

this  ;  spare]  this, /pare  Qx.  this 
fpare  Qs. 

[Giving  a  favour.  Johns.  G.ves 
him  a  ring.  Han. 

24.  fare  thee  well]  far  you  well  Qx 
faryewell  Q„. 

25,  26.  My. ..man  /]  One  line,  Ktly. 

25.  [Exit  Edmund.]  Exit  Bastard. 


Rowe.  Exit.  FxFa  (after  death).  Om 

<Wv 

25.  27.  My. ..due]  One  line,  Qq  (omit¬ 
ting  Oh...man  /). 

26.  Oh,]  Separate  line,  Steev.  Walker, 
Huds.  But  O,  (transposing  26,  27) 
Anon.* 

difference]  strange  difference 
Pope  +  ,  Cap. 

26-28.  Oh. ..lord.]  Lines  end  thee. ..fool 
...lord.  Steev.  Walker,  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

27.  a]  Om.  Q,. 

28.  My  fool. ..body.]  A  foole....bed.  Q,, 
My  foote...head.  Qa.  My  fool. ...bed.  Mai. 
Steev.  Ec.  Bos.  Huds. 

Exit.]  Exit  Steward.  Qq.  Om.Ff 


way,  or  By  the  by,  i.  e.  en  passant.  Mason  and  Malone  rightly  interpret  *on  the 
way  ’  by  *  on  our  journey  hither.’ 

22.  Decline]  Steevens  thinks  that  Goneril  bids  Edmund  decline  his  head  that  she 
might,  while  giving  him  a  kiss,  appear  to  Oswald  merely  to  be  whispering  to  him. 
But  this,  Wright  says,  is  giving  Goneril  ‘  credit  for  too  much  delicacy,  and  Oswald 
was  “a  serviceable  villain.”’  Delius  suggests  that  perhaps  she  wishes  to  put  a 
chain  around  his  neck. 

22,  23.  your  .  .  .  thy]  Abbott,  §  235,  suggests  that  it  is  the  kiss  which  induces 
the  change  from  the  formal  you  to  the  endearing  thou. 

26.  Oh]  For  the  rhythm,  see  III,  .vii,  90. 

28.  body]  White  inclines  to  accept  Qx  as  the  true  reading.  Wright:  For  the 
reading  foot  might  be  compared  Temp.  I,  ii,  469 :  ‘  My  foot  my  tutor.’ 


ACT  IV,  sc.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


241 


Enter  Albany. 

Gon.  I  have  been  worth  the  whistle. 

Alb .  O  Goneril ! 

You  are  not  worth  the  dust  which  the  rude  wind  30 

Blows  in  your  face.  *  I  fear  your  disposition; 

*  That  nature  which  contemns  it  origin 

*  Cannot  be  border’d  certain  in  itself ; 

*  She  that  herself  will  sliver  and  disbranch 

*  From  her  material  sap,  perforce  must  wither  35 

*  And  come  to  deadly  use. 

« 

€ 

Enter  Albany.]  Enter  the  Duke 
of  Albeney.  (after  whistle)  Qa.  Om.  Qr 

29.  whistle ]  whirling  Qx. 

29,  30.  0...wind]  One  line,  Qq. 

30.  rude']  Om.  Qa 

31-50.  I  fear. ..deep.]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe. 

32.  it]  Qa,  Wh.  Wr.  ith  Qx.  its  Q3 

29.  I  .  .  .  whistle]  Johnson  strangely  interprets  this  as  an  allusion  to  Edmund’3 
love :  ‘  though  you  disregard  me  thus,  I  have  found  one  who  thinks  me  worth  calling.’ 
Steevens:  This  expression  is  in  Heywood’s  Proverbs:  ‘A  poore  dogge  that  is  not 
woorth  the  whystlyng.’ 

31.  fear]  Equivalent  to  fear  for ;  see  Ham.  I,  iii,  51. 

32,  33.  That  .  .  .  itself]  Heath  :  That  nature  which  is  arrived  to  such  a  pitch 
of  unnatural  degeneracy,  as  to  contemn  its  origin,  cannot  from  thenceforth  be  re¬ 
strained  within  any  certain  bounds  whatever,  but  is  prepared  to  break  out  into  the 
most  monstrous  excesses  every  way,  as  occasion  or  temptation  may  offer.  Cowden 
Clarke:  ‘Cannot  be  border’d  certain  in  itself’  means,  cannot  comprise  reliable 
component  substance  in  itself.  Schmidt:  ‘  Certain  ’  is  equivalent  to  fixed,  firm. 

32.  it]  See  I,  iv,  209. 

33.  border’d]  Bailey  (ii,  97) :  Surely  we  ought  to  read  here  order'd  in  the  sense 
of  regulated.  The  blunder  seems  to  have  arisen  from  the  preceding  ‘  be.’ 

35.  material  sap]  Warburton  :  That  whereby  a  branch  is  nourished,  and  in¬ 
creases  in  bulk  by  fresh  accession  of  matter.  [After  criticising  Theobald’s  suggestion 
of  ‘  maternal  sap,’  Warburton  cites  an  instance  in  Theobald’s  favour,  where,  in  the 
title  of  an  old  book,  ‘  material  ’  is  apparently  equivalent  to  maternal :  *  Sir  John 
Froissart’s  Chronicle  translated  out  of  Frenche  into  our  material  English  Tongue 
by  John  Bouchier,  printed  1525.’]  Jennens:  The  force  of  Albany’s  argument  to 
prove  that  a  branch  torn  from  a  tree  must  infallibly  wither  and  die,  lies  in  this,  that  it 
is  separated  from  a  communication  with  that  which  supplies  it  with  the  very  identical 
matter  by  which  it  (the  branch)  lives,  and  of  which  it  is  composed.  COLLIER  (ed.  2) : 
Might  not  natural,  in  spite  of  the  irregularity  of  the  rhythm,  be  the  word  of  the  poet? 
Schmidt:  From  Shakespeare’s  use  of  ‘  material’  elsewhere,  in  the  sense  of  full  of 
matter,  and  hence  of  importance,  it  is  not  easy  to  explain  it  here.  Theobald’s  sug¬ 
gestion  is  appropriate  and  ingenious,  but  unfortunately  Sh.  knows  not  the  word. 

36.  deadly]  Warburton  :  Alluding  to  the  use  that  witches  and  enchanters  are 

21  Q 


et  cet. 

33.  border'd]  Pope,  bordered Sch. 

34.  sliver]  shiver  Pope,  silver  Jen. 
Knt,  (misprints?) 

35.  material]  maternal  Theob.  Han. 
Johns.  Ec. 


242 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  SC.  ii. 


*  Gon.  No  more ;  the  text  is  foolish.  37 

*  Alb.  Wisdom  and  goodness  to  the  vilde  seem  vilde; 

*  Filths  savour  but  themselves.  What  have  you  done? 

*  Tigers,  not  daughters,  what  have  you  perform’d  ?  4-0 

*  A  father,  and  a  gracious  aged  man, 

*  Whose  reverence  e’en  the  head-lugg’d  bear  would  lick, 

*  Most  barbarous,  most  degenerate !  have  you  madded. 

*  Could  my  good  brother  suffer  you  to  do  it  ? 

*  A  man,  a  prince,  by  him  so  benefited !  45 

*  If  that  the  heavens  do  not  their  visible  spirits 

*  Send  quickly  down  to  tame  these  vilde  offences, 

*  It  will  come, 


37.  the  text  is]  its  Pope-K 

38.  47.  vilde]  Q9.  vi Id  Q,,  Del.  i, 
Sch.  vile  Pope  et  cet. 

39.  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

42.  Om.  Pope  +  . 

reverence...bear]  reverend  head  the 
ragged  bear  Cap. 

e’en]  Ed.  euen  Q,.  Om.  Q9,  Cap. 
Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Del.  Dyce, 
Wh.  Ktly,  Huds. 

45.  benefited]  benifited  Qt.  benefiitfled 

q2- 

47,  48.  Send.. .come,]  As  in  Mai.  Steev. 
Ec.  Knt,  Coll,  i,  Del.  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh. 


Glo.  +  ,  Huds.  One  line,  Qq. 

47.  these  vilde]  Ed.  this  vild  Qx.  the 
vilde  Q2,  Sch.  the  vile  Pope  4-,  Cap, 
these  wild  Coll.  ii.  these  vile  Heath  et  cet. 

48.  It  will  come,]  Om.  Pope  + ,  Cap. 
’ Twill  come,  Jen.  Steev. ’93,  Bos.  Knt, 
Sta.  Mob. 

48,  49.  It  will. ..on]  'Twill. ..on  (one 
line)  Jen. 

It  will. ...on  itself]  >Twi!l....on 
'tself  (one  line)  Sta. 

It  will  come... perforce]  One  line. 
Coll;  ii.  It  will  come  that. ..perforce  (one 
line)  Ktly. 


said  to  make  of  wither’d  branches  in  their  charms.  A  fine  insinuation  in  the  speaker, 
that  she  was  ready  for  the  most  unnatural  mischief,  and  a  preparative  of  the  poet  to 
her  plotting  with  the  bastard  against  her  husband’s  life.  Moberly  :  To  the  use 
which  belongs  to  a  dead  thing ;  burning,  that  is.  Warburton’s  reference  to  witch¬ 
craft  is  unnecessary. 

39.  savour]  Eccles  :  To  have  a  proper  taste  or  relish  for. 

42.  head-luggrd]  Wright:  Compare  Harsnet,  p.  107:  ‘As  men  leade  Beares 
by  the  nose,  or  Jack  an  Apes  on  a  string.*  So  a  ‘  lugged  bear,’  1  Hen.  IV:  I,  ii,  S2. 

43.  madded]  Wright:  That  is,  maddened,  which  Sh.  does  not  use. 

45.  Warburton  :  After  this  line,  I  suspect  a  line  or  two  to  be  wanting,  which  up¬ 
braids  her  for  her  sister’s  cruelty  to  Gloucester.  And  my  reason  is,  that  in  her  an¬ 
swer  we  find :  *  Fools  do  these  villains  pity  who  are  punished  Ere  they  have  done 
their  mischief,’  which  evidently  alludes  to  Gloucester.  Now,  I  cannot  conceive  that 
she  should  here  apologise  for  what  was  not  objected  to  her. 

47.  tame]  Schmidt:  A  suspicious  word  on  account  cf  its  weakness.  After 
•  visible  spirits  ’  we  should  expect  rather  to  doom  or  to  damn.  Perhaps  Sh.  wrote 
to  take  the  vild  offenders. 

47.  vilde]  Collier  (ed.  2):  ‘Tame’  and  wild  are  opposed,  and  this  seems  one 
of  the  cases  in  which  the  old  spelling  vilde  has  introduced  confusion. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


243 


*  Humanity  must  perforce  prey  on  itself, 

*  Like  monsters  of  the  deep.* 

Gon.  Milk-liver’ d  man!  5° 

That  bear’st  a  cheek  for  blows,  a  head  for  wrongs ; 

Who  hast  not  in  thy  brows  an  eye  discerning 
Thine  honour  from  thy  suffering;  *  that  not  know’st 

*  Fools  do  those  villains  pity  who  are  punish’d 

*  Ere  they  have  done  their  mischief, — where’s  thy  drum  ?  55 


49,  50.  Humanity. . .deep.]  As  in  Pope. 
One  line,  Qq. 

49.  Humanity ]  Humanly  Q2. 

perforce]  Om.  Mob., reading  ’  Twill 
...itself  as  one  line. 
prey]  pray  Qr. 

51.  bear’st']  bearefl  Qq,  Sch. 

for  wrongs]  of  wrongs  F3F4,  Rowe. 

52,  53.  Who... honour]  One  line,  Qq. 
52.  eye  discerning]  Rowe,  eye-dif- 

cerning  Ff.  eye  deferuing  Qt.  eie  dif- 


eruring  Q2. 

53-59.  that. ..so  ?]  As  by  Theob.  The 
first  three  lines  end  pitty...mifchiefe,... 
land,  in  Q,.  End  pity....mifchiefe,.... 
noifekffe ,  in  Q2.  Om.  Ff. 

53.  not]  now  Wh. 

53,54.  blow' st  Fools  do]  Han.  know'fl , 
fools  do  Qj.  know'fl  fooles,  do  Q2. 

54.  those]  ihefe  Q2,  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns. 


54,  55.  Fools  .  .  .  mischief]  Warburton,  as  is  noted  above,  refers  this  to 
Gloucester,  but  Capell  contends  that  it  could  not  apply  to  him,  because  *  he  had 
done  the  harm  he  was  punish’d  for,  he  had  reliev’d  Lear,  and  sent  him  away ;  but, 
horrid  as  it  may  seem,  her  father  is  the  “  villain,”  who,  according  to  this  lady,  is  to 
be  pity'd  of  none  but  “  fools he,  indeed,  is  “  punish’d”  ere  any  mischief  is  done  by 
him.’  Eccles  :  Possibly,  she  means  that  persons  who  harbour  evil  intentions,  but, 
through  irresolution,  or  dread  of  consequences,  delay  the  execution  of  them  till  dis¬ 
appointment  or  punishment  overtake  them,  obtain  pity  from  none  but  *  fools,’  as  men 
of  sense  generally  discern  the  disposition  of  their  hearts.  This  also  serves  as  an 
apology  for  her  own  precipitation,  and  a  censure  upon  the  pusillanimity  in  her  hus¬ 
band.  It  may  indeed  be  objected  to  this  interpretation  that  she  appears  thereby  to 
stamp  villainy  upon  her  own  conduct,  but  her  words  may  imply:  ‘  We  have  mischief 
in  hand,  which  it  is  expedient  to  effect ;  if  so,  the  more  speedily  it  is  accomplished 
the  better ;  for,  even  if  our  proceeding  merited  your  imputation,  still  it  is  to  be  con¬ 
sidered  that  only  “  Fools  do  these  villains  pity,”  ’  &c.  Malone  :  It  is  not  clear 
whether  this  fiend  means  her  father  or  the  King  of  France.  If  her  words  have  a 
retrospect  to  Albany’s  speech,  which  the  word  *  pity  ’  might  lead  us  to  suppose,  Lear 
must  be  referred  to ;  if  they  are  considered  as  connected  with  what  follows,  ‘Where’s 
thy  drum?  ’  &c.,  the  other  interpretation  must  be  adopted.  The  latter  appears  to  me 
the  true  one,  and  perhaps  the  punctuation  of  the  Qq,  in  which  there  is  only  a  comma 
after  ‘  mischief,’  ought  to  have  been  preferred.  Singer  :  Surely  there  cannot  be  a 
doubt  that  she  refers  to  her  father,  and  to  the  ‘pity  ’  for  his  sufferings  expressed  by 
Albany,  whom  she  means  indirectly  to  call  a  ‘  fool  ’  for  expressing  it.  [She  cannot 
refer  to  Gloucester,  because  Albany  is  ignorant  of  what  had  been  done  to  him,  and 
she  herself  had  left  Gloucester’s  castle  before  the  blinding  was  accomplished.  It  is 
difficult  to  believe  that  she  refers  to  Lear;  may  it  not  be  that  she  refers  to  Albany 
himself?  She  has  told  him  that  his  preachment  about  her  father  was  foolish,  and 


244 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  sc.  il. 

5« 


*  France  spreads  his  banners  in  our  noiseless  land, 

*  With  plumed  helm  thy  state  begins  to  threat, 

*  Whilst  thou,  a  moral  fool,  sit’st  still  and  criest 

*  *  Alack,  why  does  he  so  ?’  * 

Alb.  See  thyself,  devil ! 

Proper  deformity  seems  not  in  the  fiend  60 

So  horrid  as  in  woman. 

Gon.  O  vain  fool ! 


57.  thy  state  begins  to  threat ]  Jen. 
Sta.  Cam.  Wr.  Mob.  Sch.  thy  Jlate  be¬ 
gins  thereat  Qt.  thy  slayer  begins  his 
threats  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Ktly. 
the  slayer  begins  his  threats  Han.  Ec. 
this  Lear  begins  threats  Leo  {N.  &  Qu. 
5,  Ser.  vii,  p.  3).  thy Jlaier  begins  threats 
Q2  et  cet. 


58.  Whilst']  Whiles  Q,.  Dyce,  Sta. 
Glo.  +  ,  Sch.  While  Cap. 

58.  moral]  mortall  Q3> 

sit' st. ..criest]  Coll,  sit' st...cry‘ st 
Theob.  fits. ..cries  Qq. 

59-61.  See. ..woman.]  Prose,  Qq. 

60.  deformity]  deformiry  Q2. 
seems]  Jhewes  Qx,  Wr.  Sch. 


that  he  should  drop  the  subject.  Is  it  likely  that  she  would  resume  it?  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  she  wishes,  as  soon  as  possible,  to  turn  the  tables,  and  put  him  to  his  defence, 
therefore  she  launches  into  bitter  railing  against  his  supineness;  he  is  ‘milk  liver’d,’ 
with  no  sense  of  honour,  &c.  &c.,  and  is  ignorant  that  none  but  fools  will  have  any 
pity  for  villains,  like  himself,  who  are  punished  before  they  have  struck  a  blow. 
Thus  interpreted,  the  taunting  question,  ‘  where’s  thy  drum  ?  ’  follows  keen,  like  the 
lash  to  a  whip.  I  have  not,  therefore,  put  a  period  after  *  mischief,’  as  is  done  in 
every  other  edition  since  Hanmer’s,  but  have  adhered  to  the  Qq,  which  have  merely 
a  comma. — Ed.] 

57.  thy  .  .  .  threat]  This  is  Jennens’s  emendation  and  text,  erroneously  attributed 
in  the  Cam.  ed.  to  Eccles.  Through  some  oversight  Jennens’s  edition  seems  to  have 
been  somewhat  slighted  by  the  Cam.  Edd. ;  many  of  the  readings  attributed  in  their 
textual  notes  to  ‘Steevens  1778’  should  be  given  to  Jennens.  In  fact  Jennens’s  text, 
in  this  play,  owing  to  a  preference  for  the  Qq,  which  he  shares  to  a  certain  extent 
with  the  Cam.  Edd.,  agrees,  in  disputed  passages,  as  closely  perhaps  as  any  other, 
except  Dyce’s,  in  his  first  edition,  with  that  of  the  Cambridge  edition. — Ed. 

58.  a  moral]  Delius:  That  is,  a  moralizing.  Compare  Much  Ado,  V,  i,  30. 
Schmidt  {Lex.)  adds.  As  You  Like  It,  II,  vii,  29. 

60.  Proper  deformity]  Warburton  :  Diabolic  qualities  appear  not  so  horrid  m 
the  devil,  to  whom  they  belong,  &c.  White  :  That  is,  deformity  which,  in  the  words 
of  Albany’s  next  speech,  be-monsters  the  ‘  feature  ’  or  peculiar  characteristic  personal 
traits.  Delius  :  That  is,  a  deformity  which  conceals  itself  under  a  pleasing,  fair 
outside,  and  which  appears  all  the  more  horrid  from  its  internal  contrast.  Compare 
Twelfth  Night,  II,  ii,  30:  ‘proper-false,’  i.  e.  externally  fair,  internally  false. 
[Although  this  explanation  of  Delius’s  is  ingenious,  and  one  which  none  but  a 
Shakespeare-scholar  would  have  made,  yet  it  is,  I  fear,  somewhat  too  refined.  As 
Wright  says  in  reference  to  it:  ‘This  interpretation  would  require  some  such  word 
as  *  specious  ’  instead  of  ‘  horrid  ’  in  the  next  line.’ — Ed.]  Wright  refers  to  2  Hetu 
IV:  IV.  i,  37. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


245 


*  Alb .  Thou  changed  and  self-cover’d  thing,  for  shame,  62 


62-69.  Thou. ..news  /]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe, 


62.  self  cover'd']  felfe-couerd  Qq.  self- 
converted.  Theob.  Warb.  Cap.  sex-cover' d 
Crosby,  Huds.  iii. 


Pope,  Han. 

62.  changed ]  chang’d  Qa. 


62.  self-cover’d]  Johnson  :  I  cannot  but  think  that  this  means,  thou  that  hast 
disguised  nature  by  wickedness ;  thou  that  hast  hid  the  woman  under  the  fiend. 
Henley:  Goneril,  having  thrown  off  the  convenient  seeming  of  female  gentleness, 
now  no  longer  played  the  hypocrite,  but  exhibited  in  her  face  the  self-same  passions 
she  had  covered  in  her  heart.  Malone  :  Thou  who  hast  put  a  covering  on  thyself 
which  nature  did  not  give  thee.  The  covering  which  Albany  means  is,  the  semblance 
and  appearance  of  a  fiend.  SteEvens:  Perhaps  there  is  an  allusion  to  the  envelope 
which  the  maggots  of  some  insects  furnish  to  themselves.  Voss  (iii,  643,  Leipzig, 
1819)  suggests  fell- cover’d:  *  Albany  refers  to  the  expression  of  satanic  unwor..an- 
liness  which  covers  her  face  like  a  dark  cloud.’  Hudson:  An  obscure  expression, 
but  probably  meaning,  thou  who  hast  hid  the  woman  in  the  fiend,  or  who  hast 
changed  from  what  thou  rightly  art,  and  covered  or  lost  thy  proper  self  under 
an  usurped  monstrosity:  Cartwright  :  Read  *  chang’d  and  discover’d  thing,’  &c. 
She  has  just  openly  exposed  her  character.  Delius  :  That  is,  a  thing  whose  genuine 
self  (in  this  case,  therefore,  whose  fiendish  self)  is  concealed,  covered.  Cowden 
Clarke  :  Thou  perverted  creature,  who  hast  covered  thyself  with  the  hideousness 
only  proper  to  a  fiend.  Singer  (ed.  2) :  This  is  evidently  a  misprint  for  falfe-couedd. 
What  follows  clearly  shows  it :  *  Howe’er  thou  art  a  fiend,  A  woman’s  shape  doth  shield 
thee.’  Collier  (ed.  2) :  The  (MS)  offers  no  emendation;  but  we  may  express  our 
confidence  that  Shakespeare’s  word  was  *  self -govern'd}  which  was  misheard  by  the 
scribe,  or  by  the  compositor,  ‘self-cover’d’ — a  compound  out  of  which  it  is  only  just 
possible  to  extract  a  consistent  meaning.  Albany  complains  of  the  changed  and  self- 
willed  disposition  of  Goneril.  J.  Beale  [N.  Qu.  5th  Ser.  vol.  vi,  p.  303,  1876) 
suggests  ‘  devil-cover' d.*  John  Bulloch  (IS id.) :  The  proper  reading  is  a  term 
connected  with  the  law  of  marriage:  ‘self -covert.'  Schmidt  (Lex.)  :  Dressed  in  one’s 
native  semblance.  Goneril  must  be  supposed  to  have,  by  changing  countenance,  be¬ 
trayed  all  her  wickedness.  Wright  :  Who  hast  disguised  thyself  in  this  unnatural 
and  fiendlike  shape.  Moberly  [reading,  ‘  self -coloured'] :  A  creature  whose  vile 
appearance  is  self-assumed.  It  seems  allowable  to  read  coloured  instead  of  *  cover’d,’ 
in  which  it  is  hard  to  see  any  sense.  Collier  (ed.  3) :  Possibly  ‘self -lower'd  thing.’ 
Crosby  (Lit.  World, 22  November,  Boston,  1879)  considers  ‘  changed’  as  equivalent 
to  bewitched,  as  in  Mid.  N.  D.  Ill,  i,  1 17,  and  for  ‘self-cover’d’  proposes  sex-cover’ d 
and  urges  in  proof  of  its  propriety :  *  First,  it  furnishes  the  ground  for  Albany’s  taunt 
of  shame :  Thou  be-devilled  creature,  covered  as  thou  art  with  all  the  lineaments 
of  a  woman,  and  yet  guilty  of  such  monstrous,  unwomanly  cruelty,  “  for  shame  1  ” 
Secondly,  the  reason  why  he  cannot  obey  the  promptings  of  his  passion,  and  put  her 
to  instant  death,  is  to  be  found  in  the.  next  sentence  :  “  Were ’t,”  &c.,  i.  e.  “  were  it 
becoming  me,  as  a  tnan,  to  lay  violent  hands  upon  a  woman,”  and  in  “  A  woman’s 
shape  doth  shield  thee,”  which  exactly  paraphrases  sex-covered.  Lastly,  it  supplies 
the  antithetic  point  in  Goneril’s  reply:  “  Marry,  your  manhood,  now  1”  ’  Further¬ 
more,  Crosby  finds  in  the  word  *  feature  ’  another  meaning  besides  its  usual  one  (see 
the  next  note),  viz :  sex  or  womanhood.  This,  he  says,  is  in  *  full  unison  with  its 
etymology  from  the  Lat.  facerej  and  refers  to  that  ‘  which  distinguished  Goneril’s 


246 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  sc.  ii. 

63 


*  I3e-monster  not  thy  feature.  Were’t  my  fitness 

*  To  let  these  hands  obey  my  blood, 

*  They  are  apt  enough  to  dislocate  and  tear  65 

*  Thy  flesh  and  bones.  Howe’er  thou  art  a  fiend, 

*  A  woman’s  shape  doth  shield  thee. 

*  Gon.  Marry,  your  manhood  now — * 


Enter  a  Messenger, 

*  Alb.  What  news  ?  * 

Mess.  Oh,  my  good  lord,  the  Duke  of  Cornwall’s  dead,  70 
Slain  by  his  servant,  going  to  put  out 
The  other  eye  of  Gloucester. 

Alb.  Gloucester’s  eyes ! 


63.  Be-monster....  feature]  Separate 
line,  Ktly. 

Were't)  Were  it  Cap.  Steev.  Ec. 
Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Del.  Wh.  Ktly. 

64.  To]  As  man  to  Anon.* 

hands ]  hands  of  mine  Steev.  conj. 
blood]  boiling  blood  Theob.  Warb. 
Cap.  blood's  behest  Anon.* 

65.  They  are"]  They're  Theob. Warb. 
Johns.  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 


65.  dislocate']  dijlecate  Qq. 

66.  heave' er ]  Theob.  how  ere  Qq. 
68.  manhood  now — ]  manhood  mew— 

Q,.  manhood  mew.  Cam.  Wr.  man - 
hood  now  !  Theob.  Sch. 

Enter  a  Messenger.]  Ff  (after 
foole ,  line  61).  Enter  a  Gentleman. 
Qq.  (after  nr.vs?  Qt). 

70,  &c.  Mess.]  Mes.  Ff.  Gent.  Qq. 
70-72.  Oh. ..Gloucester.]  Prose,  Qq. 


making  from  that  of  a  man.’  ‘  Be-monster  not  thy  feature  ’  therefore  ‘  means  “  Make 
not  a  monster  of  thy  sex,”  “  change  not  thy  woman’s  form  into  a  devil.  Albany 
having  just  said,  “  Proper  deformity  seems  not  in  the  Fiend  So  horrid  as  in  Woman.” 
.  .  .  As  a  woman  Goneril’s  “shape’  covers,  i.  e.  protects,  her  from  her  husband’s  im¬ 
mediate  fury.’  [This  emendation  Crosby  proposed  in  N.  Qu.  5th  Ser.  vi,  225, 
1876,  and  no  one,  I  think,  can  fail  to  be  struck  with  its  ingenuity,  ‘and  yet — .’  Is  it 
over-refinement  to  suppose  that  this  revelation  to  Albany  of  his  wife’s  fiendlike  cha¬ 
racter  transforms,  in  his  eyes,  even  her  person?  She  is  changed,  her  true  self  has 
been  covered ;  now  that  she  stands  revealed,  her  whole  outward  shape  is  be-mon- 
stered.  No  woman,  least  of  all  Goneril,  could  remain  unmoved  under  such  scathing 
words  from  her  husband.  Goneril’s  *  feature  ’  is  quivering  and  her  face  distorted 
with  passion.  Then  it  is  that  Albany  tells  her  not  to  let  her  evil  self,  hitherto  cov¬ 
ered  and  concealed,  betray  itself  in  all  its  hideousness  in  her  outward  shape. — Ed.] 

63.  feature]  See  Schmidt’s  Lex.  for  proof  that  this  invariably  means  in  Sh.  the 
shape,  exterior,  the  whole  turn  or  cast  of  the  body. 

64.  blood]  Dyce  ( Gloss.) :  Disposition,  inclination,  temperament,  impulse.  [See 
III,  v,  20.]  This  line  Abbott,  §  508,  does  not  consider  defective  in  metre,  but 
supposes  that  a  foot  may  be  omitted  where  there  is  any  marked  pause  arising  from 
emotion,  as  here,  at  the  end  of  the  line. 

68.  manhood  now — ]  Delius  :  She  had  just  before  taunted  him  with  being 
‘  milk-liver’d.’  Wright  explains  his  reading  as  ‘to  keep  in,  to  restrain’  your 
manhood. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  ll.J 


KING  LEAR 


247 


Mess.  A  servant  that  he  bred,  thrill’d  with  remorse,  73 

Opposed  against  the  a£t,  bending  his  sword 
To  his  great  master ;  who  thereat  enraged  75 

Flew  on  him  and  amongst  them  fell’d  him  dead, 

But  not  without  that  harmful  stroke  which  since 
Hath  pluck’d  him  after. 

Alb.  This  shows  you  are  above, 

You  justicers,  that  these  our  nqjther  crimes 

So  speedily  can  venge. — But,  O  poor  Gloucester !  80 

Lost  he  his  other  eye  ? 

Mess.  '  Both,  both,  my  lord. — 

This  letter,  madam,  craves  a  speedy  answer ; 

’Tis  from  your  sister. 

Gon.  [Aside]  One  way  I  like  this  well ; 

But  being  wTidow,  and  my  Gloucester  with  her, 

May  all  the  building  in  my  fancy  pluck  85 


73.  thrill' d]  thrald  Qq. 

75.  thereat  enraged ]  threat-enrag' d 

F,- 

76.  and  amoKgst]  they  amongst  Han. 
fell'd  him]  fell  he  Cap.  conj. 

77-  not]  now  Warb.  (a  misprint  ?) 

77.  78.  vfiick... after.)  One  line  in  Q2. 

78- 81.  This. .. eye  ?]  Three  lines,  end¬ 
ing  Iuflifers  (or  Iujlices)..: venge. ..eye  ? 
in  Qq. 

78, 79.  above ,  You  justicers]  Cap.  conj. 


Steev.  ’78.  aboue  you  Iuflifers  Qt. 
aboue  your  Iujlices  Qa.  aboue  You 
Iujlices  Ff.  above,  you  Justices,  Rowe  + , 
Cap.  Jen.  Sch. 

79.  nether]  neather  Q,Ft. 

81-83.  Both. ..sister.]  Two  lines,  Qq, 
the  first  ending  answer  in  Q,,  and  fpeedy 

in  Qa. 

83.  [Aside]  Johns. 

84.  being]  she  being  Ktly. 

85.  in]  on  Qq,  Wh.  of  Cap.  conj. 


73.  remorse]  Dyce  ( Gloss.) :  Compassion,  tenderness  of  heart. 

74.  75.  bending  .  .  .  master]  Eccles:  The  sense  would  be  improved  by  reading 
*  bending  the  sword  Of  his  great  master,’  that  is,  turning  it  aside  to  prevent  the  exe¬ 
cution  of  the  threatened  mischief-  Or  suppose  it  were :  ‘  bending  aside  the  sword  Of 
his,’  &c.  Schmidt  {Lex.) :  That  is,  directing,  turning,  his  sword  against  his  master. 

75.  thereat  enraged]  Collier  :  The  reading  of  Fr  is  not  inappropriate,  and 
might  be  right  if  the  Qq  did  not  contradict  it  and  if  the  verse  were  not  thereby 
injured. 

76.  amongst  them]  Moberly:  The  messenger  does  not  mention  that  the  blow 
came  from  Regan’s  hand. 

76.  fell’d]  Abbott,  §  399 :  Where  there  can  be  no  doubt  what  is  the  nominative, 
it  is  sometimes  omitted.  See  II,  ii,  114;  II,  iv,  41 ;  and  Ham.  II,  ii,  67. 

79.  justicers]  See  III,  vi,  21. 

83.  well ;]  Mason  :  Goneril  s  plan  was  to  poison  her  sister, — to  marry  Edmund,— 
to  murder  Albany, — and  to  get  possession  of  the  whole  kingdom.  As  the  death  of 
Cornwall  facilitated  the  last  part  of  her  scheme,  she  was  pleased  at  it;  but  disliked 
it,  as  it  put  it  in  the  power  of  her  sister  to  marry  Edmund. 

85.  building  in  my  fancy]  Steevens:  Compare  Cor.  II,  i,  216:  ‘the  building9 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv.  sc.  il. 


248 

Upon  my  hateful  life.  Another  way,  86 

The  news  is  not  so  tart. — I  ’ll  read,  and  answer.  [Exit. 

Alb.  Where  was  his  son  when  they  did  take  his  eyes  ? 

Mess.  Come  with  my  lady  hither. 

Alb.  He  is  not  here. 

Mess.  No,  my  good  lord ;  I  met  him  back  again.  90 

Alb.  Knows  he  the  wickedness  ? 

Mess.  Ay,  my  good  lord;  'twas  he  inform’d  against 
him, 

And  quit  the  house  on  purpose,  that  their  punishment 
Might  have  the  freer  course. 

Alb.  Gloucester,  I  live 

To  thank  thee  for  the  love  thou  show’dst  the  king,  95 

And  to  revenge  thine  eyes. — Come  hither,  friend ; 

Tell  me  what  more  thou  know’st.  [Exeunt. 


86.  87.  Upon. ..tart.]  Vpon...tooke,  Qq 
(in  one  line). 

87.  tart. — I'll]  tart  [To  him]  I'll 
Coll.  Del.  Wh. 

[Exit.]  Om.  Ff. 

88.  Two  lines  in  Ff. 

89.  He  m]  He's  Pope  + ,  Cap.  Dyce  ii. 
Huds. 

93.  on  purpose ]  of  purpofe  F3F4+ 
their]  there  Q,. 


94-96.  Gloucester. ..eyes.]  As  ‘  Aside,’ 
Johns.  Jen.  Ec. 

94-97.  Gloucester. ... .know'  st]  Three 
lines  in  Qq,  the  first  two  ending  Xing,... 
friena,  in  Q;,  and  loue...eyes ;  in  Qa. 

95.  show'dst]  Steev.  Jhew'dJl  F,F3F4 
JhewdJl  Fa.  JhewedJl  Qq.  showedst  Scb 

96.  thine"]  thy  Qq. 

97.  know’st]  knowjl  Fa.  knowefl  Qq. 
[Exeunt.]  Exit.  Qq. 


of  my  fancy.’  White  :  The  ‘in’  of  the  Ff  is  a  mere  misprint  for  on;  that  is,  the 
building  of  my  fancy,  a  use  of  on  common  enough. 

86.  Another  way]  Wright  ;  In  contrast  with  what  she  has  just  been  saying. 
She  really  takes  the  same  view  of  the  position  as  in  the  first  line  of  her  speech. 

90.  back  again]  Wright:  That  is,  on  his  way  back. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  in.] 


KING  LEAR 


249 


*  Scene  III.  The  French  camp  near  Dover. 

*  Enter  Kent  and  a  Gentleman. 

*  Kent.  Why  the  King  of  France  is  so  suddenly  gone  1 

*  back  know  you  the  reason  ? 


Scene  hi.]  Pope.  This  Scene  is 
omitted  in  Ff,  Rowe.  For  this  scene 
Ec.  substitutes  Scene  V,  and  calls  this. 
Scene  iv. 

The  French...]  Steev.  Om.  Pope. 
French  Camp  under  Dover.  Cap.  Dover. 
Theob. 


I,  2.  Why. ..back]  The  King  of  France 
so  suddenly  gone  back  !  Pope  + ,  Cap. 

Why. ...reason  ?]  Two  lines,  the 
iacst  ending  backe,  in  Qa,  Pope  +  ,  Cap. 
Jen. 

1.  France]  Frounce  Qx. 

2.  the]  no  Qx. 


Scene  III]  Johnson  :  This  scene  seems  to  have  been  left  out  of  the  Folio  only 
to  shorten  the  play.  [See  Appendix,  The  Text.] 

As  will  be  seen  by  the  Textual  Notes,  Eccles  again  makes  a  transposition  of 
scenes.  Between  the  preceding  scene  and  this  present  one,  he  inserts  Scene  V,  call¬ 
ing  it  Scene  III.  Wherefore  our  Scenes  III  and  IV  are  his  Scenes  IV  and  V.  The 
object  of  this  change  is  to  bring  closer  together  all  those  scenes  which  represent  the 
transactions  in  the  neighborhood  of  Dover,  and  to  render  unnecessary  the  supposi¬ 
tion  that  Lear  passes  a  night  in  the  open  fields.  Eccles  says :  The  distance  probably 
imagined  between  the  place  where  Regan  has  that  conference  with  the  Steward, 
which  makes  the  subject  of  the  Scene  now  before  us  [Eccles's  Scene  III,  our  Scene  V], 
and  the  vicinity  of  Dover,  seems  to  be  such  as  requires  the  notion  of  a  night  inter¬ 
vening  before  he  arrives  at  the  latter,  and,  consequently,  the  same  space  of  time 
must  elapse  between  any  scene  which  precedes  that  just  mentioned  and  any  other 
wherein  he  appears  to  have  arrived  near  Dover,  as  he  does  in  the  sixth  scene.  It 
follows,  then,  that  between  the  fourth  and  sixth,  as  hitherto  numbered,  a  night  must 
pass ;  but  the  solicitude  to  find  the  King,  expressed  by  Cordelia  in  the  former  of 
these,  makes  it  probable  that  her  efforts  were  attended  with  success  before  the  coming 
on  of  night.  Let,  therefore,  scene  the  fifth  of  the  ancient  distribution  stand  as  the 
third  in  this  place,  and  suppose  it  to  pass  on  the  evening  of  the  third  day  since  that, 
inclusively  taken,  on  the  morning  of  which  Lear,  attended  by  certain  of  his  knights, 
began  to  be  conveyed  from  the  castle  of  Gloucester  on  his  route  towards  Dover,  and 
that,  in  some  former  part  of  the  same,  Edmund  had  departed  from  Regan  upon  the 
business  which  she  here  mentions  as  the  motive  of  his  expedition.  ...  It  appears 
that  the  Steward,  not  finding  Edmund  as  he  expected,  sets  out  towards  Dover  with¬ 
out  loss  of  time  in  pursuit  of  him.  I  suppose  the  troops  of  Albany  to  have  begun 
their  march  towards  Dover,  but  in  another  direction,  about  the  time  of  the  Steward’s 
departure  from  home  charged  with  the  execution  of  Goneril’s  commission.  That 
might  be  either  some  part  of  the.  same  day  on  which  she  had  reached  her  own  habi¬ 
tation  accompanied  by  Edmund,  or  the  morning  of  the  succeeding  one,  so  as  to 
allow  time  for  the  Steward  to  arrive  at  his  destination  in  the  evening,  as  there  is 
some  reason  for  supposing  he  had  done  by  Regan’s  exhortation  in  this  scene  [our 
Scene  V]  to  wait  the  safe  conduct  of  her  forces  on  the  morrow,  and  her  hint  respect- 


250 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


*  Gent.  Something  he  left  imperfefl  in  the  state  which 

*  since  his  coming  forth  is  thought  of,  which  imports  to  the 

*  kingdom  so  much  fear  and  danger  that  his  personal  return  5 

*  was  most  required  and  necessary. 

*  Kent.  Who  hath  he  left  behind  him  General  ? 

*  Gent.  The  Marshal  of  France,  Monsieur  La  Far. 


3-6,  Something . necessary"]  Four 

lines,  ending  state. ..which. ..danger,... 
necessary,  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Mai.  Ec. 
Ktly.  Ending  state. ..which. ..danger... 
requir'd  Steev.  Bos.  Coll.  Wh.  Ktly. 

4.  to ]  Om,  Pope  +  . 
s.  personal]  Om.  Pope, Theob.  Han. 
Warb.  Cap. 

6.  and  necessary ]  Om.  Voss. 


7.  Who]  Whom  Warb.  Johns.  Ec. 
Coll.  Wh.  Ktly. 

8.  Marshal ]  Qq,  Dyce,  Wh.  Glo. +  , 
Huds.  Col.  iii.  Maresckal  Pope  et  cet. 

Monsieur ]  Monfier  Qt.  Moun - 

fieur  Q2. 

La  Far]  la  Far  Qq.  le  /hr  Pope  + , 
Jen.  Knt,  Sta.  le  Fer.  Cap.  Steev.  Ec. 
Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Ktly. 


ing  the  insecurity  of  travelling.  [See  Appendix  :  The  Duration  of  the  Action  p.  409.] 
When  Eccles  comes  to  this  present  scene,  which  he  calls  Scene  IV,  he  says :  Let 
the  period  of  this  scene  be  supposed  the  fourth  morning  from  that  (both,  however, 
inclusively)  whereon  Lear,  with  Kent  and  the  rest  of  his  attendants,  began  his  prog¬ 
ress  from  Gloucester’s  castle,  Goneril  and  Edmund  from  the  same  set  out  for  the 
palace  of  Albany,  and,  later  in  the  day,  the  sightless  Gloucester,  conducted  by  the 
Old  Man,  began  to  go  to  Dover.  The  Gentleman  who  enters,  conversing  with  Kent, 
is  the  same  who  was  deputed  by  him  as  a  messenger  to  Dover  on  the  night  of  the 
storm.  From  their  conversation  we  infer  that  this  meeting  has  but  a  very  little 
while  before  taken  place.  Kent  appears  to  be  but  newly  arrived.  The  Gentle¬ 
man,  though  he  could  not  have  set  out  many  hours  before  the  King  and  his  party, 
yet,  having  travelled  with  more  expedition,  may  reasonably  be  thought  to  have 
been  long  enough  arrived  to  have  had  an  opportunity  for  the  conference  with 
Cordelia. 

Gentleman]  Johnson  :  The  same  whom  he  had  sent  with  letters  to  Cordelia. 

2.  reason]  Steevens  :  The  King  of  France  being  no  longer  a  necessary  person¬ 
age,  it  was  fit  that  some  pretext  for  getting  rid  of  him  should  be  formed  before  the 
play  was  too  near  advanced  towards  a  conclusion.  Decency  required  that  a  monarch 
should  not  be  silently  shuffled  into  the  pack  of  insignificant  characters;  and  there 
fore  his  dismission  (which  could  be  effected  only  by  a  sudden  recall  to  his  own 
dominions)  was  to  be  accounted  for  before  the  audience.  For  this  purpose,  among 
others,  the  present  scene  was  introduced.  It  is  difficult  indeed  to  say  what  use  could 
have  been  made  of  the  king,  had  he  appeared  at  the  head  of  his  own  armament,  and 
survived  the  murder  of  his  queen.  His  conjugal  concern  on  the  occasion  might  have 
weakened  the  effect  of  Lear’s  parental  sorrow ;  and,  being  an  object  of  respect  as 
well  as  pity,  he  would  naturally  have  divided  the  spectators’  attention,  and  thereby 
diminished  the  consequence  of  Albany,  Edgar,  and  Kent,  whose  exemplary  virtues 
deserved  to  be  ultimately  placed  in  the  most  'conspicuous  point  of  view. 

7.  Who]  For  instances  of  the  neglect  of  the  inflection  of  who,  see  V,  iii,  249: 
Macb.  Ill,  i,  122;  III,  iv,  42;  IV,  iii,  171 ;  Ham.  II,  ii,  193,  and  Abbott,  §274. 


ACT  iv,  sc.  iii.] 


KING  LEAR 


25* 


*  Kent .  Did  your  letters  pierce  the  queen  to  any  de- 

*monstration  of  grief?  10 

*  Gent.  Ay,  sir ;  she  took  them,  read  them  in  my  presence, 

*  And  now  and  then  an  ample  tear  trill’d  down 

*  Her  delicate  cheek.  It  seem’d  she  was  a  queen 

*  Over  her  passion,  who  most  rebel-like 

*  Sought  to  be  king  o’er  her. 

*  Kent.  Oh,  then  it  moved  her.  15 

*  Gent.  Not  to  a  rage ;  patience  and  sorrow  strove 

*  Who  should  express  her  goodliest.  You  have  seen 

*  Sunshine  and  rdin  at  once ;  her  smiles  and  tears 

*  Were  like  a  better  way ;  those  happy  smilets 


9.  Did. ..any J  Separate  line,  Ktly. 

9, 10.  Did. ...of  grief  ?]  Well ;  say, 
sir,  did. ..of  her  grief  ?  Cap.,  as  verse, 
the  first  line  ending  queen. 

II.  Ay,  sir;"]  Johns.  I,  sir,  Theob.  +  , 
I  fay  Qq,  Pope. 

them. ..them"]  'em. ..'em  Pope  +  . 

13-15.  Her... her. ]  As  in  Pope.  Two 
lines,  the  first  ending  pajfion,  Qq. 

14.  Over]  ouer  Qt.  ore  Q2. 
who]  which  Pope  + 

16-24.  Not. . it]  No  punctuation 

throughout,  but  commas,  in  Qq,  except 
dropt ;  line  22  in  Q2. 

1 6.  Not  ta  a  rage ]  But  not  to  rage 
Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 


1 6.  strove ]  Pope.  Jlreme  Qq. 

17  Who]  Which  Pope  +  . 

18,19.  her... way.]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 
19.  like  a  better  way.]  like  a  better 
way  Qf.  like  a  better  way,  Qa.  like  a 
wetter  May.  Warb.  Theob.  Johns.  Cap. 
Jen.  like  a  better  day.  Theob.  Steev. 
Knt,  Dyce,  Sta.  like  a  better  May 
Toilet,  Mai.  Ec.  Bos.  Coll.  Wh.  a 
chequer'd  day  Dodd,  like  a  bitter  May 
Lloyd.*  like  'em  ; — a  better  way  Ktly. 
happy]  happiest  Pope  ii,  Theob. 

Warb. 

smilets]  smiles  Pope  + .  Cap.  Steev. 
Ec.  Var. 


12.  trill’d]  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  282)  gives  other  instances  of  the  use  of  this  word 
from  Jonson’s  Every  Man  out  of  his  Humour,  III,  ii;  Browne’s  Britannia's  Pas¬ 
torals,  b.  ii,  song  iv;  and  b.  i,  song  v.  Wright:  Cotgrave  has  ‘  Transcouler,  To 
glide,  slide,  slip,  runne,  trill,  or  trickle  (also,  to  straine)  through.’ 

14,  17.  who]  For  other  instances  of ‘who’  personifying  irrational  antecedents,  see 
Abbott,  §  264. 

18.  Sunshine  and  rain]  Moberly:  It  is  the  triumph  of  a  poet  thus  to  make 
two  feelings  work  at  once  in  one  mind.  Thus  Homer  makes  the  women’s  tears  for 
Patroclus  turn  to  tears  for  their  own  bondage  (llaTpiidov  irp6<pa<nv  c<pov  cP  avruv 
idibd  iKbarrj-);  the  dying  Dido  in  Virgil  struggles  for  the  light,  but  hates  it  when 
found  (quaesivit  cselo  lucem  ingemuitque  reperta).  But  no  poet  ever  ventures,  as  Sh. 
does  here,  to  imagine  a  grief,  the  most  powerful  of  which  human  nature  is  capable, 
thus  controlled  by  the  tranquil  graciousness  of  a  calm  nature,  which  cannot  do  other¬ 
wise  than  hold  its  own  amid  all  disturbance,  and  is  incapable  of  losing  its  balance ; 
the  inward  perfection  thus  giving  lovely  mildness  to  the  accidental  and  temporary 
emotion  which  still  remains  entire  and  undestroyed. 

19.  like  a  better  way]  Warburton  proposed  ‘a  wetter  May,  i.  e.  a  spring 
season  wetter  than  ordinaiy ;  *  and  Theobald  supported  the  conjecture  by  citing 


252 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


[19.  like  a  better  way.] 

Shakespeare’s  ‘May  of  youth.’ — Much  Ado,  V,  i,  76;  ‘sweet  May.’ — Rich.  II: 
V,  i,  79;  ‘rose  of  May.’ — Ham.  IV,  v,  153;  &c.  Heath  proposed  ‘an  April  day,' 
because  the  ‘joint  appearance  of  rain  and  sunshine’  was  more  characteristic  of  that 
month  than  of  May.  In  Theobald’s  second  edition,  although  Warburton’s  change 
is  still  retained  in  the  text,  yet  the  phrase  is  cited  in  the  note  as  *  a  better  day.'  This 
emendation  was  adopted,  without  credit,  by  Steevens  in  his  edition  of  1773;  in  his 
edition  of  1778  he  says  :  A  better  day  is  the  best  day,  and  the  best  day  is  a  day  most 
favourable  to  the  productions  of  the  earth.  Such  are  the  days  in  which  there  is  a 
due  admixture  of  rain  and  sunshine.  The  comparative  is  used  by  Milton  and  others, 
instead  of  the  positive  and  superlative,  as  well  as  by  Sh.  himself  in  the  play  before 
us:  ‘The  safer  sense,’  &c.  IV,  vi,  81;  ‘better  part  of  man.’ — Macb.  V,  viii,  18. 
The  thought  is  taken  from  Sidney’s  Arcadia,  p.  244:  ‘Her  tears  came  dropping 
down  like  rain  in  sunshine.’  Cordelia’s  behaviour  is  apparently  copied  from  Philo- 
clea’s.  The  same  book,  in  another  place,  says :  ‘  her  tears  followed  one  another  like 
a  precious  rope  of  pearl.’  In  this  same  edition  of  Steevens  in  1778  a  note  is  given 
by  Tollet  in  which  he  suggests  that  ‘a  better  day'  or  ‘a  better  May'  is  better 
than  Warburton’s  alteration,  because  it  implies  that  sunshine  prevails  over  rain, 
whereas  Warburton’s  *  wetter  May  ’  implies  that  Cordelia’s  sorrow  excelled  her 
patience.  Malone  adopted  Toilet’s  emendation,  without  credit,  in  the  following 
note :  If  a  better  day  means  either  a  good  day,  or  the  best  day,  it  cannot  represent 
Cordelia’s  smiles  and  tears ;  for  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  necessarily  implies  rain, 
without  which  there  is  nothing  to  correspond  with  her  tears ;  nor  can  a  rainy  day, 
occasionally  brightened  by  sunshine,  with  any  propriety  be  called  a  good  or  the  best 
day.  We  are  compelled,  therefore,  to  make  some  other  change.  A  better  May,  on 
the  other  hand,  whether  we  understand  by  it  a  good  May,  or  a  May  better  than  ordi¬ 
nary,  corresponds  exactly  with  the  preceding  image ;  for  in  every  May,  rain  may  be 
expected,  and  in  a  good,  or  better  May  than  ordinary,  the  sunshine,  like  Cordelia’s 
smiles,  will  predominate.  Mr  Steevens  has  quoted  a  passage  from  Sidney’s  Arcadia. 
Perhaps  the  following  passage  in  the  same  book,  p.  163,  ed.  1593,  bears  a  still  nearer 
resemblance  to  that  before  us:  ‘  And  with  that  she  prettily  smiled,  which  mingled 
with  her  tears,  one  could  not  tell  whether  it  were  a  mourning  pleasure  or  a  delightful 
sorrow ;  but  like  when  a  few  April  drops  are  scattered  by  a  gentle  zephyrus  among 
fine-coloured  flowers.’  [To  the  citations  which  he  had  previously  given]  Steevens 
afterwards  added  the  following :  Again  in  A  Courtlie  Controversie  of  Cupid's  Cautels, 
&c.,  translated  from  the  French,  &c.  by  H.  W.  [Henry  Wotton],  1578,  p.  289: 
‘  Who  hath  viewed  in  the  spring  time,  raine  and  sunne-shine  in  one  moment,  might 
beholde  the  troubled  countenance  of  the  gentlewoman,  after  she  had  read  and  over- 
read  the  letters  of  her  Floradin  with  an  eye  now  smyling,  then  bathed  in  teares.’ 
Singer,  in  his  first  edition,  gives  a  note,  with  which  he  ‘had  been  favoured  by  Mr 
Boaden’s  “‘  Her  smiles  and  tears  Were  like ;  a  better  way.”  That  is,  Cordelia’s 
smiles  and  tears  were  like  the  conjunction  of  sunshine  and  rain,  in  a  better  -way  or 
manner.  Now,  in  what  did  this  better  way  consist?  Why,  simply  in  the  smiles 
seeming  unconscious  of  the  tears ;  whereas  the  sunshine  has  a  watery  look  through 
the  falling  drops  of  rain — “Those  happy  smiles  .  .  .  seem’d  not  to  know  What  guests 
were  in  her  eyes.”  The  passages  cited  by  Steevens  and  Malone  prove  that  the  point 
of  comparison  was  neither  a  “  better  day  ”  nor  a  “  wetter  May.”  I  may  just  observe, 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iii.] 


KING  LEAR 


253 


*  That  play’d  on  her  ripe  lip  seem’d  not  to  know  20 

*  What  guests  were  in  her  eyes ;  which  parted  thence 

*  As  pearls  from  diamonds  dropp’d.  In  brief, 

*  Sorrow  would  be  a  rarity  most  beloved, 

*  If  all  could  so  become  it. 

*  Kent.  Made  she  no  verbal  question  ? 

20.  seem'd ]  Pope,  feeme  Qq.  22.  In  brief]  In  brief  sir.  Cap. 

22-24.  As  pearls. ..*V.]  Lines  end  sor-  24.  question ]  quests  Han.  quest 

row. ..all. ..it.  Cap.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Warb. 

Coll.  Sing.  Dyce,  Wh.  Ktly. 

as  perhaps  an  illustration,  that  the  belter  way  of  charity  is  that  the  right  hand  should 
not  know  what  the  left  hand  giveth.’  Singer  adopted  this  punctuation  in  both  of  his 
editions.  White:  Here  ‘  better’  is  used,  not  by  way  of  comparing  the  May  of  Cor¬ 
delia’s  smiles  and  tears  in  degree  to  another  and  inferior  encounter  of  sunshine  and 
showers,  but  as  an  epithet  implying  eminence  (which  in  its  very  essence  is  compara¬ 
tive)  to  which,  in  kind,  her  emotional  struggle  is  likened.  This  elegant  use  of  the 
comparative  form  is  not  uncommon  with  our  best  writers.  Hudson  [reading  ‘  Were 
like :  a  better  way, — ’]  :  The  sense  is  clearly  completed  at  ‘  like,’  and  should  there 
be  cut  off  from  what  follows:  ‘You  have  seen  sunshine  and  rain  at  once;  her  smiles 
and  tears  were  like ;  ’  that  is,  were  like  ‘  sunshine  and  rain  at  once.’  Then  begins 
another  thought,  or  another  mode  of  illustration :  to  speak  it  in  a  better  way,  to 
express  it  in  a  better  form  of  words,  ‘  those  happy  smilets,’  &c.  And  I  insist  upon 
it  that  the  passage  so  read  is  better  poetry,  as  well  as  better  sense  and  better  logic, 
than  with  *  way  ’  turned  into  *  May  ’  or  *  day,’  and  made  an  adjunct  or  tag  to  *  like.’ 
Delius  follows  Boaden  in  taking  the  phrase  adverbially,  but  does  not  follow  Boaden’s 
punctuation.  His  text  is  the  same  as  ours.  Cowden  Clarke  :  It  means  that  her 
mingled  ‘smiles  and  tears*  expressed  her  feelings  in  ‘a  better  way’  than  either 
« patience  or  sorrow  ’  could  do  separately ;  each  of  which  ‘  strove  who  should  express 
her  goodliest.’  The  words  ‘  her  smiles  and  tears  were  like  a  better  way,’  moreover, 
include  comparison  with  the  opening  phrase  of  the  speech,  *  Not  to  a  rage ;  ’  showing 
that  her  emotion  vented  itself  in  nothing  like  rage,  but  (‘a  better  way’)  in  gentle 
‘  smiles  and  tears,’  compounded  of  both  *  patience  and  sorrow.’  Wright  :  It  is  not 
clear  what  sense  can  be  made  of  it.  The  emendations  which  have  been  proposed 
are  none  of  them  perfectly  satisfactory.  The  substitution  of  May  for  ‘  way  ’  would 
be  well  enough  but  for  the  adjective  ‘  better’  which  accompanies  it.  Moberly:  The 
meaning  may  be  ‘  a  better  course  of  nature,’  something  better  than  nature  knows, 
Bulloch  (p.  246)  proposes  ‘  link’d  in  bright  array.’ 

22.  dropp’d]  Steevens  :  For  the  sake  of  rhythm  we  might  read  dropping.  This 
idea  might  have  been  taken  from  the  ornaments  of  the  ancient  carcanet  or  necklace, 
which  frequently  consisted  of  table  diamonds  with  pearls  appended  to  them,  or,  in 
the  jeweler’s  phrase,  dropping  from  them.  Pendants  for  the  ear  are  still  called 
drops.  A  similar  thought  occurs  in  Middleton’s  A  Game  at  Chess  [I,  i]  :  *  The  holy 
dew  of  prayer  lies  like  pearl  Dropt  from  the  opening  eye-lids  of  the  morn  Upon  the 
bashful  rose.’  Milton  has  translated  this  image  into  his  Lycidas  :  *  Under  the  open¬ 
ing  eye-lids  of  the  morn.’ 

24-  question]  Steevens  :  Did  she  enter  into  no  conversation  with  you  ?  In  this 
22 


[act  iv,  sc.  iii. 


254  KING  LEAR 

*  Gent.  Faith,  once  or  twice  she  heaved  the  name  of 

‘father'  25 

*  Pantingly  forth,  as  if  it  press’d  her  heart ; 

*  Cried  ‘  Sisters  !  sisters !  Shame  of  ladies !  sisters ! 

*  Kent !  father !  sisters !  What,  i’  th’  storm  ?  i’  th’  night  ? 

*  Let  pity  not  be  believed  !  ’  There  she  shook 

*  The  holy  water  from  her  heavenly  eyes,  30 

*  And  clamour  moisten’d ;  then  away  she  started 


25.  Faith,"]  Om.  Pope.  K\f,Theob.  +  , 
Cap. 

25-32.  Faith... alone]  In  Qq  no  punc¬ 
tuation  throughout  but  commas,  except 
Ladies  fijlers  ;  in  QI(  and  Ladies  fijlers  ; 
and  night?  Q2.  Kent  is  in  italics,  as 
though  he  were  the  speaker  of  what  fol¬ 
lows,  with  a  comma  after  it  in  Q  ,  and  a 
full  stop  in  Qa ;  but  no  indenture  in  either 
case. 

25.  she. ..father^  One  line,  Pope. 

7,  28.  Shame. ..f ather  !  sisters  /]  Om. 
Pope,  Han. 

storm  ?  V  th'  night]  Jlorme  ith 


night  Qq.  storm  of  night  Pope,  Han. 

29.  pity  not  be  believed]  pitie  not  be 
beleeft  Q,.  pi  tty  not  be  beleeu'd  Q2.  pity 
ne'er  believe  it  Pope  + .  it  not  be  believed 
Cap.  pity  not  believe  it  Jen. 

There]  Then  Pope. 

31.  And  clamour  moisten'd;]  Cap. 
And  clamour  moifened  her,  Qq,  Johns. 
Jen.  Om.  Pope,  Han.  And,  clamour - 
motion'd,  Theob.  Warb.  And  clamour 
soften'd :  Cartwright. 

31,  32.  then  away  she  started. ..alone] 
And  then  retir’d.. .alone  (reading  And 
...alone  as  one  line),  Pope,  Han. 


sense  Sh.  frequently  uses  this  word,  and  not  simply  as  the  act  of  interrogation.  Did 
she  give  you  to  understand  her  meaning  by  words  as  well  as  by  the  foregoing  external 
testimonies  of  sorrow  ? 

28.  Kent  !J  Capell  [led  by  the  text  of  Q2,  supposed  that  Kent  here  interrupts 
with  the  exclamation,  ‘  Father  !  sisters  1  ’  and  so  printed  his  text,  and  was  followed 
by  Eccles]  :  Any  mention  of  Kent,  by  ejaculation  or  otherwise,  was  not  probable 
to  come  from  Cordelia ;  and  most  unfit  for  this  place, — to  rank  with  ‘  father  ’  and 

*  sisters ’  (indeed,  take  the  lead  of  them)  in  the  sorrows  of  that  lady ;  as  repetitions, 
and  in  a  tone  of  admiring  approaching  something  to  sarcasm,  the  words  have  pro¬ 
priety;  for  this  is  convey’d  by  them, — ‘  Father  indeed ;  And  what  sisters  l '  they  are 
heard  by  the  Gentleman,  but  don’t  interrupt  him ;  pass  with  him  for  an  hemistich, 
and  he  goes  on  in  another. 

29.  believed !]  Steevens  :  Let  not  such  a  thing  as  pity  be  supposed  to  exist ! 
Schmidt  :  Verse  and  sense  are  improved  [by  Capell’s  reading  of]  it  for *  *  pity.’ 

31.  clamour  moisten’d]  Warburton:  Though  ‘clamour’  may  distort  the 
mouth,  it  is  not  wont  to  moisten  the  eyes.  Read  *  clamour -motion'd.'  She  bore  her 
grief  hitherto,  says  the  relater,  in  silence ;  but  being  no  longer  able  to  contain  it,  she 
flies  away,  and  retires  to  her  closet  to  deal  with  it  in  private.  This  he  finely  calls 

*  clamour-motion’d,’  or  provoked  to  a  loud  expression  of  her  sorrow,  which  drives 
her  from  company.  Theobald:  It  is  not  impossible,  but  Sh.  may  have  form’d  this 
fine  picture  of  Cordelia’s  agony  from  Holy  Writ,  in  the  conduct  of  Joseph,  who, 
being  no  longer  able  to  restrain  the  vehemence  of  his  affection,  commanded  all  his 
retinue  from  his  presence,  and  then  wept  aloud,  and  discovered  himself  to  His 
brethren.  Johnson  :  The  sense  is  good  of  the  old  reading,  ‘  Clamour  moistened 


ACT  IV,  sc.  iii.] 


KING  LEAR 


255 


*  To  deal  with  grief  alone. 

*  Kent.  It  is  the  stars,  32 

*  The  stars  above  us,  govern  our  conditions ; 

*  Else  one  self  mate  and  mate  could  not  beget 

*  Such  different  issues.  You  spoke  not  with  her  since  ?  35 

32.  It  is  the  stars,"]  Om.  Pope,  Han.  34.  and  mate"]  and  make  Q,. 

32.  33.  It. .. conditions  Theob.  One  35.  You  spoke  not]  Speke  you  Pope  + .' 

line,  Qq.  since  /*]  fines.  Qt. 

34.  self  mate ]  self-male  Pope  + . 

her,’  that  is,  her  outcries  were  accompanied  with  tears.  Heath  :  The  hyphen  should 
be  omitted,  and  *  clamour  moisten’d  ’  pronounced  and  considered  as  two  distinct  words. 
Cordelia  had  at  first  broke  out  into  exclamations ;  then  followed  the  tears,  with  which, 
when  she  had  moistened  these  exclamations  (for  the  words  under  consideration  are 
an  ablative  absolute),  she  retired  to  the  farther  indulgence  of  her  grief  in  private. 
Capell  :  ‘  Clamour  ’  may  stand  for  the  exclamations  preceding,  which  Cordelia 
‘moistens’  with  the  tears  which  followed  them  instantly;  or  it  maybe  put  with  more 
boldness  for  a  grief  ready  to  burst  out  into  ‘clamour,’  taken  strictly  and  properly; 
which  she  ‘  moisten’d,’  allayed  by  moistening,  with  the  tears  that  then  broke  from 
her, as  winds  are  by  rain.  White  [reading  ‘And, clamour-moisten’d,  then’]  :  That 
is,  plainly  enough,  ‘And  with  her  cheeks  wet  with  her  outburst  of  sorrow,  away  she 
started,’  &c.  So  in  this  play,  V,  iii,  205  :  ‘  This  would  have  seem’d  a  period  To  such 
as  love  not  sorrow.  .  .  .  Whilst  I  was  big  in  clamour,  came  there  a  man.’  The 
reader  will  not  wonder  at  a  Note  on  this  passage,  when  he  sees  it  in  all  recent  editions 
hitherto  with  this  astounding  punctuation :  ‘  And  clamour  moisten’d :  then,’  and  the 
explanation  that  ‘she’  is  the  nominative  to  ‘moisten’d,’  and  that  Cordelia  moistened 
her  clamour !  Hudson  [adopting  White’s  text] :  I  cannot  say  that  the  reading  here 
given  altogether  satisfies  me ;  but  it  seems,  on  the  whole,  the  best  both  in  sense  and 
in  language.  The  meaning  of  ‘  clamour-moisten’d  ’  is,  her  voice  being  smothered  with 
weeping,  or  her  crying  drenched  with  tears.  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  157) :  Write  ‘  —  her 
heavenly  eyes,  And  clamour-moisten’d.’  ( luctu  madentes.)  *  Clamour  ’  here  signifies 
wailing.  Compare  V,  iii,  205.  [Cited  by  White.]  Delius  :  ‘  Moisten’d  ’  is  here 
used  intransitively:  clamour  became  moist.  Schmidt  (Lex.)  gives  examples  of 
‘  clamour  *  bearing  the  following  meanings  :  outcry,  vociferation ;  loud  wailing  (the 
present  passage  cited);  the  sound  of  bells;  of  cannon  ;  of  the  thunder;  of  trumpets 
and  drums;  of  tempests;  of  the  noise  of  a  chase,  a  battle,  &c.  Wright:  The 
.objection  to  Walker’s  interpretation  is,  that  *  clamour  ’  is  the  outcry,  and  not  the  tears 
by  which  it  was  accompanied,  but  perhaps  the  clamour  is  the  indirect  cause  of  the 
tears.  [Assuredly. — Ed.]  For  the  construction,  compare  Hen.  V:  II,  ii,  139 :  ‘  the 
full  fraught  man  and  best  endued.’  There  is  probably  some  corruption.  Moberly: 
Shed  tears  upon  her  cry  of  sorrow.  [Of  this  corrupt  phrase  in  this  corrupt  scene 
(perhaps  the  most  corrupt  throughout  Shakespeare’s  plays),  I  can  see  but  two  note¬ 
worthy  explanations:  Capell’s,  viz :  she  moisten’d  her  clamour;  and  Walker’s,  viz : 
her  eyes  that  were  heavenly  and  wet  with  wailing.  Of  the  two  I  much  prefer  the 
latter. — Ed.] 

33.  conditions]  Malone  :  Disposition,  temper,  quality. 

34.  self  mate  and  mate]  Johnson:  The  same  husband  and  the  same  wife. 
[See  ‘that  self  metal,’  I,  i,  68.] 


256 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  sc.  iii. 

36 


*  Gent.  No. 

*  Kent.  Was  this  before  the  king  return’d  ? 

*  Gent.  No,  since. 

*  Kent.  Well,  sir,  the  poor  distressed  Lear’s  i’  th’  town ; 

*  Who  sometime  in  his  better  tune  remembers 

*  What  we  are  come  about,  and  by  no  means  40 

*  Will  yield  to  see  his  daughter. 

*  Gent.  Why,  good  sir  ? 

*  Kent.  A  sovereign  shame  so  elbows  him  ;  his  own  un- 

*  kindness 

*  That  stripp’d  her  from  his  benedidlion,  turn’d  her 

*  To  foreign  casualties,  gave  her  dear  rights 

*  To  his  dog-hearted  daughters  ;  these  things  sting  45 

*  His  mind  so  venomously  that  burning  shame 

*  Detains  him  from  Cordelia. 

*  Gent.  Alack,  poor  gentleman ! 

*  Kent.  Of  Albany’s  and  Cornwall’s  powers  you  heard  not  ? 

*  Gent.  ’Tis  so  they  are  afoot 


38.  Well,  sir,]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 
Lear’s  V-  th']  Lear's  ith  Qq.  Lear's 

in  Pope  + .  Lear  is  in  Han.  Lear  is  V 
theC ap.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Del.  Glo.-K 

39.  sometime ]  fome  time  Q,.  some¬ 
times  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Ec.  Knt. 

40,41.  What. ..daughter.]  As  by  Pope. 
One  line,  Qq. 

42.  so  elbows  him  ;  his  own]  fo  elbows 
him  his  own  Q,.  fo  elbowes  him,  his  own 
Q2.  so  bows  him,  his  Pope,  so  bows  him  ; 
his  Theob.  Han.  Warb.  so  bows  him. 


His  Johns,  so  bows  him  :  his  own  Cap. 

45-47.  To. ..Cordelia.']  Johns.  Two 
lines,  the  first  ending  mind,  Qq.  Lines 
end  him. ..him. ..Cordelia  Pope  +  . 

45,  46.  sting  His  mind]  sting  him 
Pope,  Theob,  Han.  Warb. 

47.  from]  From  his  Pope  Theob. 
Han.  Warb. 

48.  not?]  not.  Q,. 

49.  ro]  Qq,  Johns,  Coll.  Dyce,  Wh. 
said  Warb.  Ktly.  so;  Cap.  Steev.  Ec. 
Var.  Knt,  Cam.  so.  Pope  et  cet. 


42.  so  elbows  him]  To  Bailey  (ii,  99)  the  best  emendation  appears  to  be  ‘  sole 
bars  him,  i.  e.  alone  prevents  him;  ’  and,  furthermore,  he  thinks  that  it  will  be  no¬ 
ticed  that  ‘the  verbal  change  is  not  great:  sole  bars,  so  elbows.'  Badham  [Cam. 
Essays,  1856,  p.  282) :  A  more  incongruous  figure  of  speech  than  this  it  would  be 
difficult  to  imagine.  Sovereigns  *  elbow  ’  no  one,  and  such  an  expression  as  ‘  sov¬ 
ereign  shame’  is  either  beautiful  or  the  reverse,  as  the  epithet  is  borne  out  by  the 
action  or  effect  attributed  to  ‘  shame.’  There  is  also  something  careless  in  having  two 
subjects  to  the  verb  *  sting  ’ ;  first  unkindness,  and  then  the  conditions  of  which  the 
unkindness  was  the  cause.  I  therefore  propose  to  read:  ‘so  embows  his  own  unkin  J- 
ness.’  Wright:  So  stands  at  his  elbow  and  reminds  him  of  the  past.  Compare 
2  Hen.  IV:  I,  ii,  81.  Moberly  :  A  prevailing  shame  seems  to  buffet  him.  Schmidt; 
Perhaps  it  means  so  pushes  him  aside. 

49.  ’Tis  so]  Johnson  :  So  it  is  that  they  are  on  foot.  Malone  :  That  is,  I  have 
beard  of  them ;  they  do  not  exist  in  report  only ;  they  are  actually  on  foot. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.l 


KING  LEAR 


257 


*  Kent.  Well,  sir,  I  ’ll  bring  you  to  our  master  Lear,  50 

*  And  leave  you  to  attend  him.  Some  dear  cause 

*  Will  in  concealment  wrap  me  up  awhile  ; 

*  When  I  am  known  aright,  you  shall  not  grieve 

*  Lending  me  this  acquaintance.  I  pray  you,  go 

*  Along  with  me.  [ Exeunt  *  5  5 


Scene  IV.  The  same.  .A  tent. 


Enter ,  with  drum  and  colours ,  Cordelia,  Dodtor,  and  Soldiers. 

Cor.  Alack,  ’tis  he.  Why,  he  was  met  even  now 
As  mad  as  the  vex’d  sea;  singing  aloud ; 

Crown’d  with  rank  fumiter  and  furrow-weeds. 


54,  55.  Lending...me.]  Jen.  One  line, 
Qq,  Pope+,  Cap.  Two  lines,  the  first 
ending  acquaintance,  Del. 

54.  I.. .go]  Pray  Pope  +  .  Pray  you. 
Cap. 

55.  [Exeunt.]  Pope.  Exit.  Qq. 
Scene  iv.]  Pope.  Scena  Tenia.  Ff 

(Scaena  FJ.  Rowe.  Scene  V.  Ec. 

The  same.  A  tent.]  Cap.  A 
Camp.  Rowe. 

Enter...]  Enter.. .Cordelia,  Gentlemen, 


and  Souldiours.  Ff.  Enter  Cordelia 
Docftor,  and  others.  Qq.  Enter  Cor 
delia.  Physician,  and  Soldiers.  Pope. 

2.  mad  <zr]  made  F3F4,  Rowe. 
vex'd  ]  vext  P'f.  vent  Qq. 

3.  fumiter]  femiter  Qq.  fumtier * 
Theob.  -I- ,  Cap.  Jen.  Fenitar  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  fumitory  Han. 

furrow-weeds]  farrow  weeds  Bou 

cher. 


51.  dear  cause]  See  I,  iv,  266. 

3,  &c.  Farren  ( Essays  on  Mania ,  1833,  p.  73)  calls  attention  to  the  character  of 
all  these  plants,  that  they  are  of  ‘  bitter,  biting,  poisonous,  pungent,  lurid,  and  dis¬ 
tracting  properties.  Thus  Lear’s  crown  is  admirably  descriptive  or  emblematic  of 
the  sources  and  variety  of  the  disease  under  which  he  labours.  The  mixture  of  such 
flowers  and  plants  could  not  be  the  effect  of  chance.’  He  justifies  his  assertion 
by  showing  that  ‘  the  leaves  of  “  Fumitory  ”  'are  of  a  bitter  taste,  and  the  juice  was 
formerly  employed  for  its  bitterness  in  hypochondrism  and  black  jaundice  by  Hoff¬ 
man  and  others.’  *  Harlock ,  the  wild  mustard  of  our  cornfields,  is  called  indifferently 
charlock ,  garlock,  warlock ,  and  by  Fitzherbert,  and  other  old  English  writers,  hedlock. 
The  seeds  of  this  plant  form  the  pungent  Durham  mustard,  as  those  of  Sinapis  alba 
form  the  white  mustard,  and  those  of  Sinapis  nigra  the  common  mustard.  The 
plant  rises  with  a  stem  of  about  nine  inches,  thickly  set  with  hairs  or  bristles.  Hence 
the  proper  name  should  be  probably  hair- lock,  as  in  Danish  they  call  the  “  darnell  ” 
hey  re  and  heyre grass.  As  the  bitter  pungency  is  referred  to  in  the  former  case,  the 
biting  pungency  is  referred  to  here.  “  Hemlock  ”  is  generally  known  to  be  poisonous. 
“  Nettles,”  called  Urtica  wens  from  its  well-known  irritating  power  of  stinging  and 
burning.  “  Cuckoo-flowers.”  Cardamine pratensis,  Linn.  The  flowers,  the  sysym- 
trrium  of  Dioscorides,  were  employed  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans  for  almost  all 
a.2*  -R. 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  sc.  iv. 


258 


With  burdocks,  hemlock,  nettles,  cuckoo-flowers, 


4.  burdocks']  Han.  Johns.  Cap.  Jen. 
Sta.  \Vh.  Glo.  Cam.  Dyce  ii,  Coll.  iii. 
hor-docks  Qq.  Hardokes  F,Fa.  Har • 
docks  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Warb. 
Sch.  harlocks  Farmer,  Steev.  Ec.  Var. 


4 

Knt,  Sing,  hoar-docks  Coll,  i,  Del.  Dyce 
i,  Ktly,  Huds.  hor-docks  Wr.  hediokes 
Nicholson.* 

4.  nettles ]  nettle  Johns. 

cuckoo ]  cookozo  Qt.  coockozv  Qa. 


affections  of  the  head.  They  hold  at  present  a  place  in  the  Pharmacopoeia  as  a 
remedy  for  convulsions,  epilepsy,  and.  other  diseases  of  the  brain  or  intellect. 
“  Darnel.”  Lolium  temulentum ,  Linn.  Called  temulentitm  from  its  intoxicating  or 
narcotic  powers,  when  taken  alone,  or  mixed  with  malt.  From  this  deleterious  prop¬ 
erty  it  is  termed  by  Virgil  infelix  lolium ,  lurid  lolium,  and  by  the  French  ivraie, 
whence  our  own  vulgar  name  for  it  of  wray-grass,  or  drunkard -grass.* 

3.  fumiter]  Ellacombe  (p.  75) :  Of  Fumitories  we  have  five  species  in  England, 
all  of  them  weeds  in  cultivated  grounds  and  in  hedge-rows.  None  of  them  can  be 
considered  garden  plants,  but  they  are  closely  allied  to  the  Corydalis,  of  which  there 
are  several  pretty  species,  and  to  the  very  handsome  Dielytras,  of  which  one  species, 
D.  spectabilis ,  ranks  among  the  very  handsomest  of  our  hardy  herbaceous  plants. 
How  the  plant  acquired  its  name  of  Fumitory,  fumeterre,  earth-smoke,  is  not  very 
satisfactorily  explained,  though  many  explanations  have  been  given ;  but  that  the 
name  was  an  ancient  one,  we  know  from  the  interesting  Stockholm  manuscript  of 
the  eleventh  century  published  by  Mr  J.  Pettigrew,  and  of  which  a  few  lines  are 
worth  quoting:  ‘  Fumiter  is  erbe,  I  say,  Yt  spryngyth  i  April  et  in  May.  In  feld,  in 
town,  in  yard,  et  gate,  Yer  lond  is  fat  and  good  in  state,  Dun  red  is  his  flour  Ye  erbe 
smek  lik  in  colowur.’ 

4.  burdocks]  Farmer  :  Hardocks  should  be  harlocks.  Thus  Drayton,  in  one  of 
his  Eclogues:  ‘The  honeysuckle,  the  harlocke.  The  lily,  and  the  lady-smocke.’ 
Steevens  :  The  Qq  supply  what  is  perhaps  the  true  reading,  though  misspelt.  The 
hoar-dock  is  the  dock  with  whitish,  woolly  leaves.  Laertes  [Gent.  Mag.  lvi,  214) : 
It  is  very  probaDle  that  charlock  was  the  word  intended  by  Sh.  It  is  called  charlock 
by  husbandmen,  and  grows  in  great  quantity  amongst  the  barley.  Corn  charlock 
(Raphanus  Raphanistrum.  Linn.).  White,  or  yellow-flowered  charlock  ( Raphanus 
sylvestris). — Geiard,  1597,  p.  240.  Wright:  I  find  ‘hardhake’  is  given  as  the 
equivalent  of  Jacea  nigra  (or  knapweed)  in  a  MS  herbal  in  the  library  of  Trinity 
College,  Cambridge  (R.  14,  32)  ;  and  in  John  Russell’s  Boke  of  Nurture  (Early  Eng¬ 
lish  Text  Society,  1S68),  p.  183,  is  mentioned  *  yardehok,’  which  is  apparently  a  kind 
of  hock  or  mallow.  If  the  botanists  could  identify  the  plants  mentioned  under  these 
names,  either  of  them  could  easily  be  corrupted  into  *  Hardokes,’  or  ‘  hor-docks.’ 
[It  is  unfortunate  that  both  Beisly  and  Ellacombe  suppose  Farmer’s  conjecture 
of  harlocks  to  be  the  original  word;  they  have,  therefore,  given  us  nothing  new  on 
the  subject,  and  do  not  mention  *  burdocks.’ — Ed.] 

4.  hemlock]  Ellacombe  (91) :  One  of  the  most  poisonous  of  a  suspicious  family 
(the  Umbelliferce),  *  the  great  Hemlocke  doubtlesse  is  not  possessed  of  any  one  good 
facultie,  as  appeareth  by  his  lothsome  smell  and  other  apparent  signes,’  and  with  this 
evil  character  the  Hemlocke  was  considered  to  be  only  fit  for  the  ingredient  of 
witches’  broth — ‘  I  have  been  plucking,  plants  among,  Hemlock,  henbane,  adder’s- 
tongue,  Night-shade,  moonwort,  lippard’s-bane.’ — Jonson  [  The  Masque  of  Queens ]. 
Yet  the  Hemlock  adds  largely  to  the  beauty  of  our  hedge-rows;  its  spotted  tall  stems 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


259 


[4.  nettles,  cuckoo-flowers] 

and  its  finely  cut  leaves  make  it  a  handsome  weed,  and  the  dead  stems  and  dried 
umbels  are  marked  features  in  the  winter  appearance  of  the  hedges.  As  a  poison 
it  has  an  evil  notoriety,  as  being  the  poison  by  which  Socrates  was  put  to  death, 
though  this  is  not  quite  certain.  It  is  not,  however,  altogether  a  useless  plant.  ‘  It 
is  a  valuable  medicinal  plant,  and  in  autumn  the  ripened  stem  is  cut  into  pieces  to 
make  reels  for  worsted  thread.’ — Johnstone. 

4.  nettles]  Ellacombe:  The  Nettle  needs  no  introduction;  we  are  all  too  well 
acquainted  with  it,  yet  it  is  not  altogether  a  weed  to  be  despised.  We  have  two 
■native  species  ( Urtica  urens  and  U.  dioica),  with  sufficiently  strong  qualities,  but  we 
have  a  third  (U.  pilulifera),  very  curious  in  its  manner  of  bearing  its  female  flowers 
in  clusters  of  compact  little  balls,  which  is  far  more  virulent  than  either  of  our 
native  species,  and  is  said  by  Camden  to  have  been  introduced  by  the  Romans  to 
chafe  their  bodies  when  frozen  by  the  cold  of  Britain.  The  story  is  probably  apocryphal, 
but  the  plant  is  an  alien,  and  only  grows  in  a  few  places.  Both  the  Latin  and  Eng¬ 
lish  names  of  the  plant  record  its  qualities.  Urtica  is  from  uro ,  to  bum ;  and  Nettle 
is  etymologically  the  same  word  as  needle,  and  the  plant  is  so  named,  not  for  its 
stinging  qualities,  but  because  at  one  time  the  Nettle  supplied  the  chief  instrument 
of  sewing;  not  the  instrument  which  holds  the  thread,  and  to  which  we  now  confine 
the  word  needle,  but  the  thread  itself,  and  very  good  linen  it  made.  The  poet 
Campbell  says  in  one  of  his  letters :  *  I  have  slept  in  Nettle  sheets,  and  dined  off  a 
Nettle  table-cloth,  and  I  have  heard  my  mother  say  that  she  thought  Nettle  cloth 
more  durable  than  any  other  linen.’  It  has  also  been  used  for  making  paper,  and, 
for  both  these  purposes,  as  well  as  for  rope-making,  the  Rhea  fibre  of  the  Himalaya, 
which  is  simply  a  gigantic  Nettle  ( Urtica  or  Bohmeria  nivea),  is  very  largely  culti¬ 
vated.  Nor  is  the  Nettle  to  be  despised  as  an  article  of  food.  In  many  parts  of 
England  the  young  shoots  are  boiled  and  much  relished.  In  February,  1661,  Pepys 
made  the  entry  in  his  diary :  ‘  We  did  eat  some  Nettle  porridge  which  was  made  on 
purpose  to-day  for  some  of  their  coming,  and  was  very  good.’  Gipsies  are  said  to 
cook  it  as  an  excellent  vegetable,  and  M.  Soyer  tried  hard,  but  almost  in  vain,  to 
recommend  it  as  a  most  dainty  dish.  Having  so  many  uses,  we  are  not  surprised  to 
find  that  it  has  at  times  been  regularly  cultivated  as  a  garden  crop,  so  that  I  have 
somewhere  seen  an  account  of  tithe  of  Nettles  being  taken,  and  in  the  old  church¬ 
wardens’  account  of  St.  Michael’s,  Bath,  is  the  entry  in  the  year  1400:  ‘Pro  urticis 
venditis  ad  Lawrencium  Bebbe,  2d.’  In  other  points  the  Nettle  is  a  most  interesting 
plant.  Microscopists  find  in  it  most  beautiful  objects  for  the  microscope ;  entomol¬ 
ogists  value  it,  for  it  is  such  a  favourite  of  butterflies  and  other  insects  that  in  Britain 
alone  upwards  of  thirty  insects  feed  solely  on  the  Nettle  plant,  and  it  is  one  of  those 
curious  plants  which  mark  the  progress  of  civilization  by  following  man  wherever  he 
goes.  But  as  a  garden-plant  the  only  advice  to  be  given  is  to  keep  it  out  of  the  gar¬ 
den  by  every  means.  In  good  cultivated  ground  it  becomes  a  sad  weed  if  once 
allowed  a  settlement.  The  Himalayan  Bohmerias,  however,  are  handsome,  but  only 
for  their  foliage,  and  though  we  cannot,  perhaps,  admit  our  roadside  Dead  Nettles, 
which,  however,  are  much  handsomer  than  many  foreign  flowers  which  we  carefully 
tend  and  prize,  yet  the  Austrian  Dead  Nettle  ( Lamium  orvala ,  Bot.  Mag.  v,  172) 
may  be  well  admitted  as  a  handsome  garden-plant. 

4.  cuckoo-flowers]  Beisly:  The  Lychnis flos-aiculi,  Ragged  Robin,  a  well-known 
meadow  and  marsh  plant,  with  rose-coloured  flowers  and  deeply-cut  narrow  segments; 


260 


KING  LEAR 


[act  rv,  sc.  iv. 


Darnel,  and  all  the  idle  weeds  that  grow  5 

In  our  sustaining  corn. — A  century  send  forth ; 

Search  every  acre  in  the  high-grown  field, 

And  bring  him  to  our  eye.  [ Exit  an  Officer!] — What  can 
man’s  wisdom 

In  the  restoring  his  bereaved  sense  ? 

He  that  helps  him  take  all  my  outward  worth.  10 


6.  sustain ing corn.]f uflayn ing,  come , 
Q.  fujlaining ,  Come ,  Qa. 

A...  forth  ;]  Send  forth  a  cenfry: 
Pope,  Theob,  Han.  Warb. 

century ]  centurie  Qx.  Cenlery  FIFJ. 
senary  Johns. 

send]  is  fent  Qq.  is  fet  Q3. 

8-xo.  And. ..worth.]  Pope.  End  wif 
dome....helpe  him. ...worth  in  Q  .  The 
lines  end  wifedotne  do....helpe  him.... 
worth,  Q2.  End  wifedome...helpes  him... 


worth,  Ff.  End  eye. ..restoring. ..him,... 
worth,  Cap. 

8.  [Exit...]  Mai.  To  an  Officer,  who 
goes  out.  Cap.  Om.  QqFf. 

8,  9.  What. ..sense  ?]  Do,  what  man's 
wisdom  can,  In. ..sense.  Bos.  conj. 

8.  wisdom]  wifedome  do  Qa,  Cap. 

9.  his]  Of  his  Cap. 

sense t]  fence,  Q,.  fence?  Qa. 
Senfe:  Ff. 

10.  helps]  can  helpe  Qq. 


it  blossoms  at  the  time  the  cuckoo  comes, hence  one  of  its  names.  Wright:  Called 
also,  according  to  Gerarde,  ladies’  smocks  and  wild  watercress  {Card amine pratensis). 
They  ‘  flower  for  the  most  part  in  Aprill  and  Maie,  when  the  Cuckowe  doth  begin  to 
sing  her  pleasant  notes  without  stammering.’ — Herball,  p.  203. 

5.  Darnel]  Ellacombe  :  Virgil,  in  his  Fifth  Eclogue,  says :  *  Grandia  saepe  quibus 
mandavimus  hordea  sulcis  Infelix  lolium  et  steriles  nascuntur  avenae.’  Thus  trans¬ 
lated  by  Thomas  Newton,  1587  :  ‘  Sometimes  there  sproutes  abundant  store  Of  bag¬ 
gage,  noisome  weeds,  Burres,  Brembles,  Darnel,  Cockle,  Dawke,  Wild  Oates,  and 
choaking  seedes.’  And  the  same  is  repeated  in  the  first  Georgic,  and  in  both  places 
lolium  is  always  translated  Darnel,  and  so  by  common  consent  Darnel  is  identified 
with  the  Lolium  temulentum,  or  wild  rye  grass.  But  in  Shakespeare’s  time  Darnel, 
like  Cockle,  was  the  general  name  for  any  hurtful  weed.  In  the  old  translation  of 
the  Bible,  the  Zizania,  which  is  now  translated  Tares,  was  sometimes  translated 
Cockle,  and  Newton,  writing  in  Shakespeare’s  time,  says:  ‘Under  the  name  of 
Cockle  and  Darnel  is  comprehended  all  vicious,  noisom  and  unprofitable  graine,  en- 
combring  and  hindring  good  corne.’ — Herball  to  the  Bible.  The  Darnel  is  not  only 
injurious  from  choking  the  corn,  but  its  seeds  become  mixed  with  the  true  Wheat,  and 
so  in  Dorsetshire,  and  perhaps  in  other  parts,  it  has  the  name  of  ‘  Cheat  ’  (Barnes’s 
Glossary ),  from  its  false  likeness  to  Wheat.  It  was  this  false  likeness  that  got  for  it 
its  bad  character.  « Darnell,  or  Juray,’  says  Lyte,  Herbal,  1578,  ‘is  a  vitious  graine 
that  combereth  or  anoyeth  corne,  especially  Wheat,  and  in  his  knotten  straw,  blades, 
or  leaves  is  like  unto  Wheate.’ 

5.  idle]  Unproductive,  unprofitable,  in  opposition  to  ‘ sustaining  corn.’  See  ‘idle 
pebble,’  IV,  vi,  21. — Ed. 

8.  can]  Compare  Ham.  IV,  vii,  85  :  ‘  they  can  well  on  horseback.’ 

9.  the  restoring]  For  instances  of  the  definite  article  preceding  a  verbal  that  is 
followed  by  an  object,  see  Abbott,  §  93,  or  Macb.  I,  iv,  S. 

10.  helps]  For  other  instances,  meaning  to  cure,  see  SCHMIDT  ( Lex .). 


ACT  IV,  SC.  iv.] 


KING  LEAR 


26l 


Dotfi.  There  is  means,  madam ;  II 

Our  foster-nurse  of  nature  is  repose, 

The  which  he  lacks ;  that  to  provoke  in  him, 

Are  many  simples  operative,  whose  power 
Will  close  the  eye  of  anguish. 

Cor.  All  blest  secrets,  15 

All  you  unpublish’d  virtues  of  the  earth, 

Spring  with  my  tears !  be  aidant  and  remediate 
In  the  good  man’s  distress !  Seek,  seek  for  him; 

Lest  his  ungovern’d  rage  dissolve  the  life 
That  wants  the  means  to  lead  it. 


Enter  a  Messenger. 

Mess.  News,  madam.  20 

The  British  powers  are  marching  hitherward. 

Cor.  ’Tis  known  before ;  our  preparation  stands 
In  expectation  of  them. — O  dear  father, 


11.  Do<5h]  Gent.  Ff. 

tr]  are  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 

12.  foster-nurse]  Hyphen,  Steev. 

13.  lacks;  that]  lackes  that  Q,.  lackes, 
that  Qa. 

15, 16.  All. ..earth,"]  One  line,  Qq. 

17.  remediate]  remediant  Johns. 


18.  good  man's]  Goodmans  F,Fa. 
distress]  dejires  FIFaF3.  dejlre  F4, 

Rowe. 

20,21.  News... hitherward.]  One  line, 
Qq. 

23,  25.  hi. ...France]  Two  lines,  the 
first  ending  it  is,  Ktly. 


II.  Kellogg  (Sh.’s  Delineation  of  Insanity,  p.  26)  :  The  reply  of  the  Physician 
is  significant,  and  worthy  of  careful  attention,  as  embracing  a  brief  summary  of 
almost  the  only  true  principles  recognized  by  modem  science,  and  now  carried  out 
by  the  most  eminent  physicians  in  the  treatment  of  the  Insane.  We  find  here  no 
allusion  to  the  scourgings,  the  charms,  the  invocation  of  saints,  &c.,  employed  by  the 
most  eminent  physicians  of  the  time  of  Sh. ;  neither  have  we  any  allusion  to  the 
rotary  chairs,  the  vomitings,  the  purgings  by  hellebore,  the  showerings,  the  bleed¬ 
ings,  scalp-shavings,  and  blisterings,  which,  even  down  to  our  own  times,  have  been 
inflicted  upon  these  unfortunates  by  ‘science  falsely  so  called,’  and  which  stand 
recorded  as  imperishable  monuments  of  medical  folly ;  but  in  place  of  all  this,  Sh., 
speaking  through  the  mouth  of  the  Physician,  gives  us  the  principle,  simple,  truthful, 
and  universally  applicable. 

15.  anguish]  Wright:  Generally  used  in  Sh.  of  physical  pain.  See  IV,  vi, 6. 

17.  remediate]  Wright:  A  word  of  Shakespeare’s  coinage,  which  he  seems  to 
have  formed  on  the  model  of  immediate. 

19.  ungoverned]  Delius:  That  is,  ungovernable.  Adjectives  formed  from  par¬ 
ticiples,  with  the  negative  un-,  not  unfrequently  admit  of  this  modification  of  their 
Original  meaning.  [See  I,  iv,  294;  IV,  vi,  21 ;  or  Abbott,  §  375.] 

20.  means]  Johnson  :  The  reason  which  should  guide  it. 


262 


KING  LEAR 


[ACT  IV,  SC.  V. 


It  is  thy  business  that  I  go  about ; 

Therefore  great  France  2 5 

My  mourning  and  important  tears  hath  pitied. 

No  blown  ambition  doth  our  arms  incite, 

But  love,  dear  love,  and  our  aged  father’s  right; 

Soon  may  I  hear  and  see  him  !  {Exeunt. 


Scene  V.  Gloucester' s  castle. 

Enter  Regan  and  Oswald. 

Reg.  But  are  my  brother’s  powers  set  forth  ? 

Osw.  Ay,  madam. 

Reg.  Himself  in  person  there  ? 

Osw.  Madam,  with  much  ado. 

Your  sister  is  the  better  soldier. 

Reg.  Lord  Edmund  spake  not  with  your  lord  at  home  ? 


24,  25.  Il...France]  Johns.  One  line, 
QqFf. 

26.  mourning  and]  Om,  Han.  (read¬ 
ing  Therefore. ..pitied  as  one  line). 

important]  importun'd  Ff,  Rowe, 
Sch.  importunate  Cap. 

27.  No]  Novj  F3F4. 

incite]  in  fight  Q  .  infte  Q  . 

28.  right]  Rite  F,Fa. 

29.  [Exeunt.]  Exit.  Qq.  Om.  Jen. 
Scene  v.]  Pope.  Scena  Quarta.  Ff 

(Sctena  FJ.  Scene  iii.  Ec. 


Gloucester’s  castle.]  Cap.  (subs.). 
Regan’s  Palace.  Rowe. 

Oswald.]  Steward.  QqFf. 

1, 2.  But. ..Himself]  One  line.  Cap. 
Steev.  Bos.  Knt,  Sing. 

2.  there]  Om.  Qq. 

Madam  I]  Om.  Pope  +  . 
ado.]  ado ,  Qq.  ado :  F,.  adot 
FFF. 

2  3  4  *  t 

2.  3.  Madam. ..soldier.]  One  line,  Qq. 

3.  sister  «]  fifed  s  Q2. 

4.  lord]  Lady  Qq,  Pope  +  . 


26.  important]  Johnson  :  For  unfortunate.  Schmidt  (Lex.)  gives  the  follow* 
ing  parallel  instances:  Com.  of  Err.  V,  138;  Much  Ado,  II,  i,  74;  All's  Well,  III, 
vii,  21 ;  to  which  perhaps  might  be  added  Ham.  I,  ii,  23.  Moberly:  So  the  Fron- 
deur  party  under  the  Duke  of  Beaufort  was  called  by  the  court  of  Anne  of  Austria, 
‘  Les  Importans.’  Schmidt:  Undoubtedly  Sh.  uses  ‘important’  for  importunate, 
urgent,  pressing,  but  importuned  cm  be  justified  quite  as  fully  in  the  same  meaning. 

28.  aged]  Abbott,  §  497 :  A  monosyllable. 

4.  lord]  Ritson:  The  Ff  are  right.  Goneril  not  only  converses  with  Lord  Ed¬ 
mund,  in  the  Steward’s  presence,  but  prevents  him  from  speaking  to,  or  even  seeing, 
her  husband.  Malone:  In  the  MSS  from  which  the  Qq  were  printed  an  L  only 
was  probably  set  down,  according  to  the  mode  of  that  time.  It  could  be  of  no  con¬ 
sequence  to  Regan  whether  Edmund  spoke  with  Goneril  at  home,  as  they  had 
travelled  together  from  the  Earl  of  Gloucester’s  castle  to  the  Duke  of  Albany’s 
palace,  and  had  on  the  road  sufficient  opportunities  for  laying  those  plans  of  which 
Regan  was  apprehensive.  On  the  other  hand,  Edmund's  abrupt  departure  without 
even  speaking  to  the  Duke,  to  whom  he  was  sent  on  a  commission,  could  not  but 
appear  mysterious  and  excite  her  jealousy.  [Essentially,  Capell’s  note. — Ed.] 


ACT  IV,  SC.  V.] 


KING  LEAR 


263 

Osiv .  No,  madam.  5 

Reg.  What  might  import  my  sister’s  letter  to  him  ? 

Osw.  I  know  not,  lady. 

Reg.  Faith,  he  is  posted  hence  on  serious  matter. 

It  was  great  ignorance,  Gloucester’s  eyes  being  out, 

To  let  him  live ;  where  he  arrives  he  moves  10 

All  hearts  against  us ;  Edmund,  I  think,  is  gone. 

In  pity  of  his  misery,  to  dispatch 
His  nighted  life;  moreover,  to  descry 
The  strength  o’  th’  enemy. 

Osw.  I  must  needs  after  him,  madam,  with  my  letter.  15 
Reg.  Our  troops  set  forth  to-morrow ;  stay  with  us. 

The  ways  are  dangerous. 

Osw.  I  may  not,  madam. 

My  lady  charged  my  duty  in  this  business. 

Reg.  Why  should  she  write  to  Edmund  ?  Might  not  you. 
Transport  her  purposes  by  word  ?  Belike,  20 

Some  things, — I  know  not  what.  I  ’ll  love  thee  much,— 

Let  me  unseal  the  letter. 

Osw.  Madam,  I  had  rather — 


6.  letter]  letters  Qt. 

8.  serious]  a  ferious  Q2. 

II.  Edmund]  and  now  Qq. 

12-14.  Two  lines,  the  first  ending  life , 

Qq- 

14.  o'  th ’  enemy]  oth'  Enemy  F2F3F4< 
at’ A  army  Q,.  of  the  Army  Q2. 

15.  madam]  Om.  Qq. 
letter]  Letters  Qq. 

16.  troops  set]  Ircope  fets  Qq. 


17,  18.  I  may. ..business.]  Prose,  Qq. 

19.  20.  Might. ..Belike^]  As  in  Qq. 
One  line,  Ff. 

20.  by  word  ?  Belike,]  by  word,  belike 
Qq.  by  word  ?  Pope,  by  word  of  mouth  f 
Han. 

21.  Some  things,]  Ff,  Rowe,  Sch. 
Something  Qq.  Some  thing —  Pope  et  cet. 

22.  I  had]  J’de  Qt.  Ide  Q2. 


22.  rather]  Johnson  :  I  know  not  well  why  Sh.  gives  to  Oswald,  who  is  a  mere 
factor  of  wickedness,  so  much  fidelity.  He  now  refuses  the  letter;  and  afterwards, 
when  he  is  dying,  thinks  only  how  it  may  be  safely  delivered.  Verplanck  :  Sh.  has 
here  incidentally  painted,  without  the  formality  of  a  regular  moral  lesson,  one  of  the 
very  strange  and  very  common  self-contradictions  of  our  enigmatical  nature.  Zealous, 
honourable,  even  self-sacrificing  fidelity, — sometimes  to  a  chief  or  leader,  sometimes 
to  a  party,  a  faction,  or  a  gang, — appears  to  be  so  little  dependent  on  any  principle 
of  virtuous  duty,  that  it  is  often  found  strongest  among  those  who  have  thrown  off 
the  common  restraints  of  morality.  It  would  seem  that  when  man’s  obligations  to 
his  God  or  his  kind  are  rejected  or  forgotten,  the  most  abandoned  mind  still  craves 
something  for  the  exercise  of  its  natural  social  sympathies,  and  as  it  loses  sight  of 
nobler  and  truer  duties  becomes,  like  the  Steward,  more  and  more  ‘  duteous  to  the 
vices  ’  of  its  self-chosen  masters.  This  is  one  of  the  moral  phenomena  of  artificial 


264 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  sc.  v 


Reg.  I  know  your  lady  does  not  love  her  husband ;  23 

I  am  sure  of  that ;  and  at  her  late  being  here 
She  gave  strange  oeiliads  and  most  speaking  looks  25 

To  noble  Edmund.  I  know  you  are  of  her  bosom. 

Osw.  I,  madam? 

Reg.  1  speak  in  understanding;  y’are;  I  know’t. 

Therefore  I  do  advise  you,  take  this  note : 

My  lord  is  dead ;  Edmund  and  I  have  talk’d ;  30 

And  more  convenient  is  he  for  my  hand 
Than  for  your  lady’s ;  you  may  gather  more. 

If  you  do  find  him,  pray  you,  give  him  this ; 

And  when  your  mistress  hears  thus  much  from  you, 

I  pray,  desire  her  call  her  wisdom  to  her.  35 


24.  lam']  I'm  Pope +  ,  Jen.  Sta.  Dyce 
ii,  Huds. 

25.  gave  strange]  gave  Warb.  (in  text). 
gave  him  Warb.  (in  note). 

ceiliads]  Rowe,  aliads  Qq.  Eliads 
Ft,  Sch.  Iliads  FaF3F4.  oeiliads  Jen. 
oeillades  Cap.  eyeliads  Dyce  i.  eyliads 
Del.  oeillades  Glo.+,  Mob.  ceilliads 
Dyce  ii. 

26.  you  are ]  you're  Pope  +  ,  Huds. 

-27.  madam  ?]  Madam.  Qq. 


28.  y'  are  ;  I  know' t]  Ff  (subs.),  Jen. 
for  I  know't  Qq.  You're ;  I  know't 
Rowe  i.  you  are,  I  know  it  Cap.  Steev. 
Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Del.  Sing.  Ktly.  y'  are, 
I  know  it  Coll.  Wh.  you  are ,  I  knovdi 
Dyce,  Sta.  y'  are,  I  know't  Sch.  you 
are ;  I  know' t  Rowe  ii  et  cet. 

32.  lady's ]  Rowe.  Ladies  QqFf. 

35,  36.  One  line,  Qq,  Pope,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 


society,  so  much  within  the  range  of  Johnson’s  observation,  as  an  acute  observer  of 
life,  that  it  is  strange  that  he  should  not  have  recognized  its  truth  in  Oswald’s  cha* 
racter. 

25.  ceiliads]  Wright:  See  Cotgrave:  ‘Oeillade:  An  amorous  looke,  affectionate 
winke,  wanton  aspect,  lustfull  iert,  or  passionate  cast,  of  the  eye;  a  Sheepes  eye.’ 

26.  bosom]  Wright:  In  her  confidence.  Compare  Jul.  Cass.  V,  i,  7:  ‘  I  am  in 
their  bosoms.’  And  Beau,  and  FI.  A  King  and  No  King,  I,  i :  *  should  I  chuse  a 
companion  ...  for  honesty  to  interchange  my  bosom  with,  it  should  be  you.’ 

29.  note]  Johnson:  This  is  not  a  letter,  but  a  remark.  Therefore  observe  what 
I  am  saying.  Delius,  however,  maintains  that  it  is  a  letter,  the  same  which  he 
thinks  is  referred  to  farther  on,  in  line  33.  In  justification  he  cites,  ‘take  thou  this 
note,’  V,  iii,  28. 

33.  this]  Capell  suggested  that  she  here  gives  him  a  ring,  but  Grey  (or  *  Mr 
Smith,’  apud  Grey,  ii,  114),  reading  in  line  29  ‘take  note  of  this,’  says  that  it 
means:  ‘  This  answer  by  word  of  mouth,’  maintaining  that  it  could  not  have  been  a 
letter,  because  when  Oswald  was  afterwards  killed  by  Edgar,  and  his  pockets  rifled, 
only  one  letter  was  found,  and  that  was  Goneril’s;  see  IV,  vi,  248.  White:  That 
is,  this  information,  but,  possibly,  some  token. 

35.  to  her]  Hudson  :  Regan’s  cold,  shrewd,  penetrating  virulence  is  well  shown 
in  this.  *  Desire  her  call  her  wisdom  to  her  ’  means,  in  plain  English,  *  Tell  her  to 


ACT  IV,  SC.  Vi.] 


KING  LEAR 


265 

3^ 


So,  fare  you  well. 

If  you  do  chance  to  hear  of  that  blind  traitor, 

Preferment  falls  on  him  that  cuts  him  off. 

Osw.  Would  I  could  meet  him,  madam !  I  should  show 
What  party  I  do  follow. 

Reg.  Fare  thee  well.  [Exeunt.  40 


Scene  VI.  Fields  near  Dover. 

Enter  Gloucester,  and  Edgar  dressed  like  a  peasant. 

€ 

Glou.  When  shall  I  come  to  th’  top  of  that  same  hill  ? 

Eag.  You  do  climb  up  it  now.  Look,  how  we  labour. 

Glou.  Methinks  the  ground  is  even. 

Edg.  Horrible  steep. 

Hark,  do  you  hear  the  sea  ? 

Glou.  No,  truly. 

Edg.  Why  then  your  other  senses  grow  imperfe6t  5 


36.  So,  fare  you  well]  fo  farewell  Qq, 
Pope+,Jen.  Om.  Han. 

39.  him]  Om.  Ft. 

should ]  Ff  + ,  Dyce  i,  Glo.  + ,  Sch. 
\ would  Qq  et  cet. 

40.  party ]  lady  Qq,  Pope. 

[Exeunt.]  Exit.  Qq. 

Scene  vi.]  Pope.  Scena  Quinta.  Ff 
(Scsena  F2). 

Fields...]  Cap.  The  Country. 
Rowe.  The  Country,  near  Dover. 
Theob. 

Enter...]  Theob.  (subs.)  Enter  Glou- 


cefter,  and  Edgar.  Ff.  Enter  Glolter 
and  Edmund.  Qq. 

1.  /]  we  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var. 
Knt,  Glo.  +  . 

2.  up  it]  it  vp  Qq. 

labour. ]  labour  ?  Qq. 

3.  even ]  eeuen  FJF2. 

Horrible']  Horribly  Coll.  (MS). 

3,  4.  Horrible. ..sea  ?]  One  line,  Qq, 
Jen.  Ktly. 

4.  Hark,  do  you]  Hark,  hark  ;  do  you 
not  Cap. 

No,  truly.]  No  truly,  not  Han. 


help  herself,  if  she  can,  and  be  hanged.’  Moberly  :  And  give  up  all  thought  of 
Edmund. 

Scene  VI.]  JOHNSON :  This  scene,  and  the  stratagem  by  which  Gloucester  is  cured 
of  his  desperation,  are  wholly  borrowed  from  Sidney’s  Arcadia.  [See  Hunter’s 
note,  IV,  vi,  66,  and  Appendix,  p.  386.] 

1.  hill]  Delius:  The  cliff  referred  to  by  Gloucester  at  the  end  of  IV,  i. 

2.  climb  up  it]  Wright:  For  the  transposition  of  the  preposition  in  the  Qq,  see 
North’s  Plutarch,  Pelopidas,  p.  324  (ed.  1631) :  *  Notwithstanding,  when  they  came  to 
the  hills,  they  sought  forcibly  to  clime  them  vp.’  And  Isaiah ,  xv,  5,  *  with  weeping 
shall  they  go  it  up.’ 

3.  Horrible]  Collier:  The  (MS)  pedantically  alters  this  to  horribly.  Abbott, 
§  1,  gives  many  instances  of  the  use  of  adjectives  as  adverbs.  See  Ham.  I,  iii,  Il6, 

how  prodigal  the  soul  ’ ;  II,  i,  3, 4  marvellous  wisely.’ 
aa 


266 


KING  LEAR 


[act  IV,  SC.  Vl. 


By  your  eyes’  anguish. 

Glou.  So  may  it  be  indeed ;  6 

Methinks  thy  voice  is  alter’d,  and  thou  speak’st 
In  better  phrase  and  matter  than  thou  didst. 

Edg.  Y’  are  much  deceived.  In  nothing  am  I  changed 
But  in  my  garments. 

Glou.  Methinks  y’ are  better  spoken.  10 

Edg.  Come  on,  sir;  here’s  the  place.  Stand  still.  How 
fearful 


6.  eyes’]  eye's  Johns. 

7.  alter'd ]  altered  Qq,  Sch. 
speak' st]  speakejl  Qx. 

8.  In]  With  Qq. 

9.  Y’  are]  QaFf,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  Ktly, 
Sch.  Y’ar  Qt.  You  are  Steev.  Ec. 
Var.  Knt,  Del.  You're  Rowe  et  cet. 


10.  Methinks]  Sure  Pope  +  . 

y'  are]  QaFf,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh. 
Ktly,  Sch.  y'  ar  Qt.  yore  are  Cap. 
Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Del.  you're 
Rowe  et  cet. 

11.  Two  lines,  the  first  ending  fir,  in 
Ff,  Rowe. 


7.  alter’d]  Johnson:  Edgar  alters  his  voice  in  order  to  pass  afterwards  for  a 
malignant  spirit. 

II.  How  fearful,  &c.]  Johnson:  This  description  has  been  much  admired  since 
the  time  of  Addison,  who  has  remarked,  with  a  poor  attempt  at  pleasantry,  that  ‘  he 
who  can  read  it  without  being  giddy  has  a  very  good  head,  or  a  very  bad  one.’  The 
description  is  certainly  not  mean,  but  I  am  far  from  thinking  it  wrought  to  the  utmost 
excellence  of  poetry.  He  that  looks  from  a  precipice  finds  himself  assailed  by  one 
great  and  dreadful  image  of  irresistible  destruction.  But  this  overwhelming  idea  is 
dissipated  and  enfeebled  from  the  instant  that  the  mind  can  restore  itself  to  the  obser¬ 
vation  of  particulars,  and  diffuse  its  attention  to  distinct  objects.  The  enumeration 
of  the  choughs  and  crows,  the  samphire-man  and  the  fishers,  counteracts  the  great 
effect  of  the  prospect,  as  it  peoples  the  desert  of  intermediate  vacuity,  and  stops  the 
mind  in  the  rapidity  of  its  descent  through  emptiness  and  horror.  Mason  :  It  is  to 
be  considered  that  Edgar  is  describing  an  imaginary  precipice,  and  is  not  therefore 
supposed  to  be  so  strongly  impressed  with  the  dreadful  prospect  of  inevitable  destruc¬ 
tion  as  a  person  would  be  who  really  found  himself  on  the  brink  of  one.  Eccles  : 
The  purpose  of  Edgar  was,  by  a  minute  and  faithful  detail  of  such  circumstances,  to 
give  the  highest  possible  air  of  probability  to  the  imposition  which  he  designed  to 
practise  on  his  father.  Knight  :  In  Dr  Johnson’s  criticism  we  detect  much  of  the 
peculiar'  character  of  his  mind,  as  well  as  of  the  poetical  taste  of  the  age  in  which  he 
lived.  Wordsworth,  in  the  preface  to  the  second  edition  of  his  Poems,  has  shown 
clearly  upon  what  false  foundations  that  criticism  is  built  which  would  prefer  high- 
sounding  words,  conveying  only  indeterminate  ideas,  and  call  these  the  only  proper 
language  of  poetry,  in  opposition ' to  the  simple  and  distinct  language,  ‘however 
naturally  arranged,  and  according  to  the  strict  laws  of  metre,’  which  by  such  criti¬ 
cism  is  denominated  prosaic.  Johnson  was  thoroughly  consistent  in  his  dislike  of 
the  *  observation  of  particulars  ’  and  the  *  attention  to  distinct  objects.’  In  Boswell’s 
Life  we  have  a  more  detailed  account  of  his  poetical  creed,  with  reference  to  this 
very  description  of  Dover  Cliff:  ‘Johnson  said  that  the  description  of  the  temple,  in 


ACT  IV,  SC.  Vi,] 


KING  LEAR 


267 


[11.  Dover  Cliff.] 

The  Mourning  Bride,  was  the  finest  poetical  passage  he  had  ever  read;  he  recol¬ 
lected  none  in  Sh.  equal  to  it, — 

“  How  reverend  is  the  face  of  this  tall  pile. 

Whose  ancient  pillars  rear. their  marble  heads. 

To  bear  aloft  its  arch’d  and  pond’rous  roof; 

By  its  own  weight  made  steadfast  and  immoveable, 

Looking  tranquillity  1  It  strikes  an  awe 
And  terror  on  my  aching  sight.  The  tombs 
And  monumental  caves  of  death  look  cold. 

And  shoot  a  chilliness  to  my  trembling  heart  1’* 

“  But,”  said  Garrick,  all  alarmed  for  the  god  of  his  idolatry,  “  we  know  not  the 
-extent  and  variety  of  his  powers.  We  are  to  suppose  there  are  such  passages  in  his 
works;  Sh.  must  not  suffer  for  the  badness  of  our  memories.”  Johnson,  diverted  by 
this  enthusiastic  jealousy,  went  on  with  great  ardour — “  No,  sir;  Congreve  has  nature ” 
(smiling  on  the  tragic  eagerness  of  Garrick) ;  but,  composing  himself,  he  added, 
“  Sir,  this  is  not  comparing  Congreve  on  the  whole  with  Sh.  on  the  whole,  but  only 
maintaining  that  Congreve  has  one  finer  passage  than  any  that  can  be  found  in  Sh. 
.  .  .  What  I  mean  is,  that  you  can  show  me  no  passage  where  there  is  simply  a 
description  of  material  objects,  without  any  intermixture  of  moral  notions,  which 
produces  such  an  effect.”  Mr  Murphy  mentioned  Shakespeare’s  description  of  the 
night  before  the  battle  of  Agincourt;  but  it  was  observed  it  had  men  in  it.  Mr 
Davies  suggested  the  speech  of  Juliet,  in  which  she  figures  herself  awaking  in  the 
tomb  of  her  ancestors.  Some  one  mentioned  the  description  of  Dover  Cliff.  John* 
son — “No,  sir;  it  should  be  all  precipice, — all  vacuum.  The  crows  impede  your 
fall.  The  diminished  appearance  of  the  boats,  and  other  circumstances,  are  all  very 
good  description,  but  do  not  impress  the  mind  at  once  with  the  horrible  idea  of 
immense  height.  The  impression  is  divided ;  you  pass  on,  by  computation,  from  one 
stage  of  the  tremendous  space  to  another.  Had  the  girl  in  The  Mourning  Bride 
Said  she  could  not  cast  her  shoe  to  the  top  of  one  of  the  pillars  in  the  temple,  it 
would  not  have  aided  the  idea,  but  weakened  it.”  ’  Taken  as  pieces  of  pure  descrip¬ 
tion,  there  is  only  one  way  of  testing  the  different  value  of  the  passages  in  Sh.  and 
Congreve — that  is,  by  considering  what  ideas  the  mind  receives  from  the  different 
modes  adopted  to  convey  ideas.  But  the  criticism  of  Johnson,  even  if  it  could  have 
established  that  the  passage  of  Congreve,  taken  apart,  was  ‘  finer’  than  that  of  Sh., 
utterly  overlooks  the  dramatic  propriety  of  each  passage.  The  ‘  girl  ’  in  The  Mourn¬ 
ing  Bride  is  soliloquizing, — uttering  a  piece  of  versification,  harmonious  enough, 
indeed,  but  without  any  dramatic  purpose.  The  mode  in  which  Edgar  describes  the 
cliff  is  for  the  special  information  of  the  blind  Gloucester, — one  who  could  not  look 
from  a  precipice.  The  crows  and  choughs,  the  samphire-gatherer,  the  fisherman,  the 
bark,  the  surge  that  is  seen  but  not  heard, — each  of  these,  incidental  to  the  place,  is 
selected  as  a  standard  by  which  Gloucester  can’  measure  the  altitude  of  the  cliff. 
Transpose  the  description  into  the  generalities  of  Congreve’s  description  of  the 
cathedral,  and  the  dramatic  propriety  at  least  is  utterly  destroyed.  The  height  of 
the  cliff  is  then  only  presented  as  an  image  to  Gloucester’s  mind  upon  the  vague 
assertion  of  his  conductor.  Let  the  description  begin,  for  example,  something  after 
the  fashion  of  Congreve:  ‘ How  fearful  is  the  edge  of  this  high  cliff!  ’  and  Continue 
with  a  proper  assortment  of  chalky  crags  and  gulfs  below.  Of  what  worth  then 
would  be  Edgar's  concluding  lines:  ‘I’ll  look  no  more,’  See.?  The  mind  of 


268 


KING  LEAR 


[act  IV,  sc.  vi. 


And  dizzy  ’tis  to  cast  one’s  eyes  so  low!  12 

The  crows  and  choughs  that  wing  the  midway  air 

Show  scarce  so  gross  as  beetles.  Half  way  down 

Hangs  one  that  gathers  sampire,  dreadful  trade !  15 

12.  dizzy]  dizi  Q,.  dizy  QaF3Q3.  15.  sampire']  QqFf,  Cap.  Sch.  sam * 
dizie  Fx.  phire  Rowe  et  cet. 


Gloucester  might  have  thus  received  some  *  idea  of  immense  height,’  but  not  an  idea 
that  he  could  appreciate  ‘by  computation.’  The  very  defects  which  Johnson  imputes 
to  Shakespeare’s  description  constitute  its  dramatic  merit.  We  have  no  hesitation  in 
saying  further,  that  they  constitute  its  surpassing  poetical  beauty,  apart  from  its 
dramatic  propriety.  [Knight  quotes  a  correspondent’s  assertion  that  the  height  of 
the  Cliff  is  313  feet  above  high-water  mark.]  Lessing,  in  the  Supplement  to  his 
Laocoon ,  compares  this  description  of  Dover  Cliff  with  Milton’s  description  of  the 
height  whence  the  King  of  Glory  beholds  Chaos :  *  On  heavenly  ground  they  stood, 
and  from  the  shore  They  view’d  the  vast  immeasurable  abyss  Outrageous  as  a  sea, 
dark,  wasteful,  wild,  Up  from  the  bottom  turn’d  by  furious  winds  And  surging  waves, 
as  mountains,  to  assault  Heaven’s  highth,  and  with  the  centre  mix  the  pole.’ — Para * 
dise  Lost,  vii,  210.  ‘  This  depth,’  says  Lessing,  ‘  is  far  greater  than  Dover  Cliff,  and 

yet  the  description  of  it  produces  no  effect,  because  there  is  nothing  visible  to  make 
it  real  to  us,  whereas  in  Sh.  this  is  so  admirably  managed  by  the  gradual  lessening 
of  the  various  objects.’ 

15.  sampire]  Tollet:  * Samphire  grows  in  great  plenty  on  most  of  the  sea- 
cliffs  in  this  country;  it  is  terrible  to  see  how  people  gather  it,  hanging  by  a  rope 
several  fathom  from  the  top  of  the  impending  rocks,  as  it  were  in  the  air.’ — Smith’s 
History  of  Waterford ,  1774,  p. 315.  Malone:  This  personage  is  not  a  mere  crea¬ 
ture  of  Shakespeare’s  imagination,  for  the  gathering  of  samphire  was  literally  a  trade 
or  common  occupation  in  his  time,  it  being  carried  and  cried  about  the  streets,  and 
much  used  as  a  pickle.  So,  in  a  song  in  Heywood’s  Pape  of  Lucrece ,  in  which  the 
cries  of  London  are  enumerated  under  the  title  of  the  cries  of  Rome :  ‘  I  ha  Rock* 
sampier,  Rock-sampier ;  Thus  go  the  cries  in  Rome  faire  towne,’  &c.  Again,  in 
Venner’s  Via  Recta,  &c.  1622 :  ‘  Samphire  is  in  like  manner  preserved  in  pickle,  and 
eaten  with  meates.  It  is  a  very  pleasant  and  familiar  sauce,  and  agreeing  with  man’s 
body.’  Dover  Cliff  was  particularly  resorted  to  for  this  plant.  See  Drayton’s 
Polyolbion,  The  Eighteenth  Song :  ‘  Rob  Dover’s  neighbouring  cleeves  of  sampyre, 
to  excite  His  dull  and  sickly  taste,  and  stir  up  appetite.’  Wright:  Gerarde  gives  as 
one  of  its  Italian  names,  *  Herba  di  San  Pietro .’  He  says  [Her bait,  p.  428) :  ‘  Rocke 
Sampier  groweth  on  the  rocky  cliffes  at  Douer.’  Cotgrave  has  ‘  Herbe  de  S.  Pierre. 
Sampire,  Crestmarin.’  Moberly:  This  samphire -gatherer  is  the  realizing  touch  in 
the  description ;  it  seems  a  thing  th^t  could  not  be  imagined.  Beisly:  Crithmum 
maritimum,  commonly  called  St.  Peter’s  Herb  and  Sea-fennel,  is  abundant  on  rocks 
by  the  sea,  flowers  dull  yellow,  with  long,  glaucous,  fleshy  leaflets.  The  plant  is 
aromatic,  and  the  young  leaves  are  gathered,  preserved  in  vinegar,  and  eaten  as  a 
pickle.  It  flowers  in  July,  August,  and  September.  Dr  W.  Turner  says  of  it :  *  That 
in  Italian  it  is  Santi  Petri  herba,  from  whence  we  have  the  name  sampere .’  Evelyn 
in  his  Acetaria  has  a  receipt  for  pickling  sampier,  called  the  Dover  receipt.  The 
plants  do  not  grow  on  any  place  which  the  sea  covers ;  and  Sh.  noticed  this  fact  in 


ACT  IV,  sc.  vi.] 


KING  LEAR 


269 

l6 


Methinks  he  seems  no  bigger  than  his  head. 

The  fishermen  that  walk  upon  the  beach 
Appear  like  mice ;  and  yond  tall  anchoring  bark 
Diminish’d  to  her  cock ;  her  cock,  a  buoy 
Almost  too  small  for  sight.  The  murmuring  surge  20 

That  on  th’  unnumber’d  idle  pebble  chafes 
Cannot  be  heard  so  high.  I  ’ll  look  no  more, 

Lest  my  brain  turn  and  the  deficient  sight 
Topple  down  headlong. 

Glou.  Set  me  where  you  stand. 


17.  walk]  walk'd  Ff. 
beach]  beake  Q2. 

18.  yond]  yon  Qq.  yon'  Cap.  Steev. 
Ec.  Var.  Knt. 

19.  a  buoy]  a  boui  Q,.  aboue  Qa. 

21.  pebble  chafes]  Ff,  Rowe,  Cap. 


Ktly,  Sch.  peeble  chafes  Q,.  peebles 
chafe  Qa.  pebbles  chafes  Pope  et  cet. 

22.  heard.....!' II]  heard. ..lie  FfFe. 
heard. ..I'  le  F3.  heard,  its  fa  hie  He  Q,. 
heard  ':  it  is  fo  hie  lie  Qa. 


describing  it  as  growing  half  way  down  the  cliff.  Ellacombe  :  Being  found  only  on 
rocks,  it  was  naturally  associated  with  Saint  Peter.  In  our  time  the  quantity  suf¬ 
ficient  to  supply  the  market  can  be  gathered  without  much  danger;  it  grows  in  places 
perfectly  accessible ;  in  some  localities  it  grows  away  from  the  cliffs,  so  that  ‘  the 
fields  about  Porth  Gwylan,  in  Carnarvonshire,  are  covered  with  it.’  It  may  be  grown 
even  in  the  garden,  especially  in  gardens  near  the  sea,  and  makes  a  pretty  plant  for 
rock-work.  [I  think  the  old  spelling  should  be  retained;  it  shows  the  old  pronun¬ 
ciation  and  the  derivation ;  thus  spelled,  and  pronounced  sampeer,  all  who  are  familiar 
with  the  sandy  beaches  of  New  Jersey  will  recognize  in  it  an  old  friend. — Ed.] 

19.  cock]  JOHNSON:  Her  cock-boat.  Steevens:  So  in  Chettle’s  Tragedy  of 
Hoffman  [I,  ii] :  ‘I  caused  my  lord  to  leap  into  the  cock.  .  .  .  “  Rouse,”  quoth 
the  ship  against  the  rocks;  “roomer,”  cry  I  .in  the  cock,’  &c.  Hence  the  term 

*  cockswain.' 

21.  unnumber’d]  Delius:  That  is,  innumerable.  Compare  ‘ungovem’d’  for 
ungovernable,  IV,  iv,  19.  Wright:  Compare *  *  untented’  for  that  which  cannot 
be  tented,  I,  iv,  294.  Abbott,  §  375 :  The  passive  participle  is  often  used  to  signify, 
not  that  which  was  and  is,  but  that  which  was,  and  therefore  can  be  hereafter.  In 
other  words,  -ed  is  used  for  -able. 

21.  idle]  Warburton:  Barren,  uncultivated.  Eccles:  Perhaps  trifling,  insignifi¬ 
cant  ;  moved  by  a  kind  of  continual  and  frivolous  agitation  to  no  purpose  or  effect. 
[See  f  idle  weeds,’  IV,  iv,  5.] 

21.  pebble  chafes]  Lettsom  (  Walker's  Vers.  268) :  Perhaps  pebbles  chafe  is  the 
true  reading,  and  *  surge,’  consequently,  a  plural.  The  ordinary  reading,  pebbles 
chafes ,  which  sounds  awkward  even  .to  modern  ears,  would  have  been  still  more 
offensive  to  those  of  our  ancestors.  [Whether  we  follow  the  Qq  or  Ff,  we  are  nearer 
to  Sh.  than  when  we  follow  Pope  with  his  harsh  sibilants  in  a  line  of  exquisite 
beauty. — Ed.] 

23.  deficient]  Delius:  In  the  only  other  instance  of  Shakespeare’s  use  of  this 
word,  Oth.  I,  iii,  63,  it  refers,  as  here,  to  a  defect  of  the  senses. 

23  * 


270 


KING  LEAR  [act  iv.  sc.  vi 


Edg.  Give  me  your  hand.  You  are  now  within  a  foot  25 
Of  th’  extreme  verge.  For  all  beneath  the  moon 
Would  I  not  leap  upright. 

Gloit.  Let  go  my  hand. 

Here,  friend,  ’s  another  purse;  in  it  a  jewel 

Well  worth  a  poor  man’s  taking.  Fairies  and  gods 

Prosper  it  with  thee!  Go  thou  further  off;  30 

Bid  me  farewell,  and  let  me  hear  thee  going. 

Edg.  Now  fare  ye  well,  good  sir. 

Glou.  With  all  my  heart. 

Edg.  Aside.Ji  Why  I  do  trifle  thus  with  his  despair 
Is  done  to  cure  it. 


25-27.  Give. ..upright.]  Three  lines, 
ending  hand :...  Verge  :... upright,  Ff. 

25.  You  are ]  you're  Pope  +  ,  Dyce  ii, 
Finds. 

26.  beneath ]  below  Pope  +  . 

27.  upright ]  outright  Warb.  Han. 
Johns.  Cap. 

28.  friend,  V]  friends,  F2F3F4.  friend 
is  Steev,  Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Del.  Sing. 
Ktly. 

29.  fairies ]  fairiegs  Q3> 

29,  30.  gods off  ]  One  line,  Sch. 

reading  prosper't. 


30.  further ]  farther  Qq,  Cap.  Coll. 
Del.  Wh.  Glo.  +  . 

32.  ye ]  Ff,  Rowe +  ,  Sch.  you  Qq  et 
cet. 

[Seems  to  go.  Rowe-K 

33.  [Aside.]  Cap.  Ktly,  Dyce  ii,  Col. 
iii.  Om.  QqFf  et  cet. 

33,34.  Why  I  do. ...despair  Is]  Why 
I  do....difpaire,  tis  Q2.  Why  do  /.... 
defpair,  ’  Tis  FjF^  Why  do  I. ..despair! 
’  Tis  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Cap. 

Why... it.]  One  line,  Qq. 


27.  upright]  Warburton:  But  what  danger  in  leaping  *  upright  *  or  upwards  ? 
Fie  who  leaps  thus  must  needs  fall  again  on  his  feet  upon  the  place  whence  he  rose. 
We  should  read  outright,  i.  e.  forward;  and  then, being  on  the  verge  of  a  precipice, 
he  must  needs  fall  headlong.  Heath:  The  spot  is  represented  as  so  extremely 
near  the  edge  of  the  precipice,  even  within  a  foot  of  it,  that  there  was  the  utmost 
hazard  in  leaping  even  upright  upon  it.  Mason:  A  man’s  saying  on  the  brink  of  a 
precipice  that  ‘  he  would  not  leap  forward  for  all  beneath  the  moon’  conveys  no 
extraordinary  idea  of  the  danger  itself,  or  of  the  apprehensions  it  occasioned;  it  is 
merely  saying,  in  other  words,  that  ‘  he  would  not. for  all  the  world  devote  himself  to 
certain  destruction.’  But  Edgar  goes  farther,  and  says  he  would  not  *  leap  upright,’ 
which  did  not  necessarily  imply  his  falling  down  the  precipice.  Malone:  If  War- 
burton  had  tried  such  a  leap  within  a  foot  of  the  edge  of  a  precipice,  before  he 
undertook  the  revision  of  these  plays,  the  world  would,  I  fear,  have  been  deprived 
of  his  labours. 

30, 32, 41.  thee  .  .  .  ye  . . .  thee]  Abbott,  §  232,  cites  this  passage  as  an  illus¬ 
tration  of  the  use  of  thou  to  servants  and  inferiors,  and  of  the  more  respectful  you 
to  masters  and  superiors.  ‘  It  may  seem  an  exception  that  in  IV,  i,  Edgar  uses  thou 
to  Gloucester,  but  this  is  only  because  he  is  in  the  height  of  his  assumed  madness, 
and  cannot  be  supposed  to  distinguish  persons.  Afterwards  in  Scene  vi,  he  invari¬ 
ably  uses  you,  a  change  which,  together  with  other  changes  in  his  language,  makes 


ACT  rv,  sc.  vi.] 


KING  LEAR 


271 


Glou.  [Kneeling]  O  you  mighty  gods ! 

This  world  I  do  renounce,  and  in  your  sights  35 

Shake  patiently  my  great  affliction  off ; 

If  I  could  bear  it  longer  and  not  fall 
To  quarrel  with  your  great  opposeless  wills, 

My  snuff  and  loathed  part  of  nature  should 

Burn  itself  out.  If  Edgar  live,  oh  bless  him ! —  40 

Now,  fellow,  fare  thee  well. 

Edg.  Gone,  sir ;  farewell.  [He  falls. 

[Aside]  And  yet  I  know  not  how  conceit  may  rob 
The  treasury  of  life,  when  life  itself 
Yields  to  the  theft.  Had  he  been  where  he  thought, 

By  this  had  thought  been  past.  Alive  or  dead  ? —  45 

Ho,  you  sir!  friend!  Hear  you,  sir!  speak! — 


34.  [Kneeling]  He  kneeles.  Qq.  Om. 
Ff.- 

39.  snug]  snurff  Qt. 

40.  him]  Om.  Qq. 

41-48.  Gone. ... sir  ?]  Prose,  Qq. 

41.  Gone,  sir ,*]  Coll.  Gon  fr,  Qq. 
Gone  Sir,  F,.  Good  Sir,  F2F3F^+,  Cap. 
Gone,  sir  ?  Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Gone, 
sir.  Knt. 

[He  falls.]  Qq.  Om.  Ff.  He 
leaps  and  falls  along.  Rowe.  After 
farewell  Jackson,  Knt,  Sing.  Dyce, 
Coll,  ii,  Sta.  Wh.  Ktly.  After  fare  thee 


1 well  Qq  et  cet. 

42-45.  And  yet. ...past.]  As  ‘Aside,’ 
Cap.  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

42.  may ]  my  Qt. 

43.  treasury ]  treafure  Rowe. 

45.  had  thought]  thought  had  Qx,  Cap. 

46.  Ho,. .  .speak  /]  Hoa,  you,  hear  you, 
friend!  Sir!  Sir!  speak!  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Ho,  you  sir,  you  sir, 
friend !  Hear  you,  sir  ?  Speak:  Cap. 

friend ]  Om.  Qq. 

Hear ]  here  FaF3F4,  Rowe,  Pope. 
speak ]  speak ,  speak  Ktly. 


Gloucester  say:  “  Thou  speak’st  In  better  phrase  and  manner  than  thou  didst.”  It 
may  be  partly  this  increased  respect  for  Edgar,  and  partly  euphony,  which  makes 
Gloucester  use  you  in  lines  10  and  24.’ 

33»  34-  Why  ...  it]  Abbott,  §411:  This  sentence  combines  ‘  Why  I  trifle  is  to 
cure!  and  ‘  My  trifling  is  done  to  cure.’  In  itself  it  is  illogical.  Thus  also  V,  i,  67. 

38.  opposeless]  Abbott,  §446:  The  suffix  - less  is  used  for  ‘not  able  to  be.’ 
Here  it  is  ‘  not  able  to  be  opposed,’  i.  e.  irresistible.  It  is  commonly  used  with  words 
of  Latin  or  Greek  origin. 

41.  Gone,  sir]  Knight:  This  is  ordinarily  printed,  ‘Gone,  sir?’  as  if  Edgar 
asked  Gloucester  if  he  had  gone;  whereas  Gloucester  has  previously  told  him,  ‘  Go 
thou  farther  off;’  and,  when  Gloucester  again  speaks  to  him,  he  says,  ‘Gone,  sir.’ 
Dyce:  Gloucester  certainly  does  not  ‘leap’  till  after  Edgar  has  said,  ‘Gone,  sir; 
farewell.’  White:  Perhaps  we  should  read  ‘  Going,  sir,’  or  ‘Good  sir.’ 

44.  theft]  Johnson:  When  life  is  willing  to  be  destroyed.  Hudson:  I  suspect 
that  ‘how*  in  line  42  has  about  the  force  of  whether,  or  but  that.  ‘When  one  is 
thus  longing  to  die,  I  do  not  know  but  that  even  the  imagination  of  such  a  leap,  or 
such  a  fall,  might  not  be  the  death  of  him,  sure  enough.’  This  interpretation  agrees 


272 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  sc.  vi. 


[Aside]  Thus  might  he  pass  indeed ;  yet  he  revives. —  47 

What  are  you,  sir  ? 

Glou.  Away,  and  let  me  die. 

Edg.  Hadst  thou  been  aught  but  gossamer,  feathers,  air, 

So  many  fathom  down  precipitating,  50 

Thou’dst  shiver’d  like  an  egg;  but  thou  dost  breathe; 

Hast  heavy  substance ;  bleed’stnot;  speak’st;  art  sound. 

Ten  masts  at  each  make  not  the  altitude 
Which  thou  hast  perpendicularly  fell ; 

Thy  life 's  a  miracle.  Speak  yet  again.  55 


47.  As  ‘Aside,’  Cap.  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

49.  Two  lines,  Ff. 

gossamer ]  gofmore  Qq.  Gozemore 
Ff,  Rowe,  goss'mer  Pope,  gossemeer 
Cap. 

feathers ,]  feathers  and  FaF3F4, 
Rowe. 

50.  fathom ]  fathome  F,FaF4.  fadome 
Qq. 

51.  Thou’dst)  Thoud'flY ft 3F 4.  Thou 
hadfi  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt. 


52.  not;)  not?  Jen. 

speak' st)fpeahefl  Qt.  fpeakfl  Qa. 
fpeak  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  Han, 
Warb.  Jen. 

sound.)  found?  F  ,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Jen. 

53.  at  each)  at  least  Rowe,  atfaeht 
Pope,  Han.  Warb.  Cap.  Ec.  at  length 
Jervis. 

54.  fell)  fallen  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Ec. 

55-  Thy)  The  F4. 


well  with  what  Edgar  says  afterwards:  *  Thus  might  he  pass  indeed.’  How  is  often 
used  in  a  similar  way;  as  when  we  say,  I  know  not  ho\v  such  or  such  a  thing  may 
work;  that  is,  I  know  not  whether  it  may  work  well  or  ill;  or  I  know  not  but  that 
it  may  operate  the  reverse  of  what  I  propose. 

47.  pass]  Johnson  :  Thus  might  he  die  in  reality.  We  still  use  the  word  ‘ passing 
bell.’ 

49.  gossamer]  See  Rom.  &*  Jul.  II,  vi,  18. 

53.  at  each]  Theobald  :  ’Tis  certain  ’tis  a  bold  phrase,  but  I  dare  warrant  it  was 
our  author’s,  and  means,  ten  masts  placed  at  the  extremity  of  each  other.  War- 
burton  :  Mr  Theobald  restores  the  old  nonsense.  Johnson  :  We  may  say  ‘  ten 
masts  on  end?  Jennens:  We  might  offer  another  conjecture,  a-stretch ;  but  the 
old  reading  is  intelligible  enough.  Steevens:  Perhaps  we  should  read,  ‘at  reach 
i.  e.  extent.  Singer  reads  ateche,  which  he  derives  from  the  Anglosaxon  eacan,  to  add, 
and  defines  as  ‘drawn  out  at  length,  or  each  added  to  the  other.’  He  also  cites  the 
other  instances  of  the  use  of  eche  in  Shakespeare,  viz :  ‘  ech  ’  of  Qa  of  Mer.  of  Ven. 
Ill,  ii,  23 ;  Per.  III,  Prol.  13 ;  ‘  eech  ’  of  F,  of  Hen.  V;  III,  Chor.  35.  [The  rhyme 
in  Per.  demands  *  eche,’  but  in  the  other  cases  it  has  been  generally  spelled  eke. — Ed.] 
White  :  Might  we  not  read  ‘  at  eke?  i.  e.  added  to  each  other  ?  Dyce  :  I  believe  it 
means,  ‘Ten  masts  joined  each  to  the  other.’  It  has  given  rise  to  sundry  bad  con¬ 
jectural  emendations.  Schmidt:  Compare  the  passage  in  Son.  viii,  where  the 
poet  anticipates  Helmholtz’s  theory  of  the  sympathetic  vibration  of  cords :  *  Maik 
how  one  string,  sweet  husband  to  another,  Strikes  each  in  each  by  mutual  ordering.’ 

54.  fell]  For  other  irregular  participial  formations,  see  Abbott,  §  344. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  vi.J 


KING  LEAR 


2  73 
56 


Glou.  But  have  I  fall’n,  or  no  ? 

Edg.  From  the  dread  summit  of  this  chalky  bourn! 

Look  up  a-height ;  the  shrill-gorged  lark  so  far 
Cannot  be  seen  or  heard ;  do  but  look  up, 

Glou.  Alack,  I  have  no  eyes.  60 

Is  wretchedness  deprived  that  benefit, 

To  end  itself  by  death  ?  ’Twas  yet  some  comfort, 

When  misery  could  beguile  the  tyrant’s  rage 
And  frustrate  his  proud  will. 

Edg.  Give  me  your  arm. 

Up;  so.  Howis’t?.  Feel  you  your  legs  ?  You  stand.  65 
Glou.  Too  well,  too  well. 

Edg.  This  is  above  all  strangeness. 


56.  no  ?]  no  l  Qx. 

57-  summit ]  Roweii.  Summet  F2F3F4> 
Somnet  Fx.  fommons  Qx.  fummons  Qa. 

bourn  /]  Pope.  Bourn  F3F4. 
Bourne  FxFa.  borne ,  Qq. 

58.  a-height ]  Hyphen,  Theob.  ii. 
shrill-gorged ]  Jhrill-gorg'' d  Fx. 


Jhrill  gorg’d  Qq.  Jhrill-goA  d  FaF3< 
Jlirill gor'd  F4,  Rowe. 

59.  up.]  vp?  Qx. 

62.  death  f  *  Rivas’]  death  twas  Qx. 

64.  arm.]  arme  ?  Qx. 

65.  How  is't?  Feel]  how  feele  Qq. 


57.  bourn]  Knight  :  In  a  previous  passage,  ‘ Come  o’er  the  bourn,  Bessy,  to  me, 
‘bourn’  signifies  a  river;  and  so  in  the  Faerie  Queene  (ii.  Canto  vi,  Stanza  10) :  ‘My 
little  boat  can  safely  pass  this  perilous  bourne.’  In  Milton’s  Comus  we  have,  ‘  And 
every  bosky  bourn  from  side  to  side,’  Here,  as  Warton  well  explains  the  word, 
‘  bourn  ’  is  a  winding,  deep,  and  narrow  valley,  with  a  rivulet  at  the  bottom.  Such 
a  spot  is  a  bourn  because  it  is  a  boundary,  a  natural  division ;  and  this  is  the  sense 
in  which  a  river  is  called  a  ‘  bourn.’  The  *  chalky  bourn  ’  is,  in  the  same  way,  the 
chalky  boundary  of  England  towards  France. 

58.  a-height]  Sec  *  a-twain,’  II,  ii,  69 ;  ‘  a-work,’  III,  v,  6,  or  Abbott,  §  24,  who 
after  this  present  example  adds :  *  perhaps.’ 

66.  strangeness]  Hunter  (ii,  273) :  The  incident  of  the  cliff  is  so  extravagantly 
improbable  that  there  is  no  defending  it,  and  we  tolerate  it  only  as  having  given  oc¬ 
casion  to  Shakespeare’s  only  great  attempt  at  describing  a  particular  piece  of  scenery, 
lie  had  probably  been  at  Dover,  and  sketched  the  scene  upon  the  place.  He  evi¬ 
dently  prepares  the  reader  for  the  passage  by  several  allusions  to  Dover  in  the  earlier 
parts  of  the  play,  and,  except  for  the  sake  of  introducing  these  descriptive  lines,  one 
cannot  see  why  Gloucester  should  be  led  so  far  as  Dover,  when  he  might  so  easily 
have  executed  his  purpose  elsewhere.  There  is  an  obscurity  thrown  (purposely,  I 
think)  over  the  topography  of  this  play.  Dr  Johnson  says,  that  this  scene  and  the 
stratagem  are  wholly  borrowed  from  Sidney’s  Arcadia ;  but  this  is, a  mistake.  It  is 
true  we  have  a  blind  king,  who  seeks  the  brow  of  a  rock  with  the  intention  of  throw¬ 
ing  himself  headlong.  He  asks  his  son  to  conduct  him  thither.  So  far  the  stories 
are  coincident,  but  the  improbable  part  is  not  yet  entered  upon ;  and,  so  far  from  Sh. 
having  here  followed  Sidney,  or  having  any  countenance  from  a  more  cautious  writer 

S 


274 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  sc.  vi. 

67 


Upon  the  crown  o’  tn’  cliff,  what  thing  was  that 
Which  parted  from  you  ? 

G/ou.  A  poor  unfortunate  beggar. 

Edg.  As  I  stood  here  below,  methought  his  eyes 
Were  two  full  moons;  he  had  a  thousand  noses,  70 

Horns  whelk’d  and  waved  like  the  enridged  sea. 

It  was  some  fiend ;  therefore,  thou  happy  father, 

Think  that  the  clearest  gods,  who  make  them  honours 


67.  o'  th']  oth'  FaF3F4<  of  the  Qq. 
cliff,  ■what']  cliff e  what  Qx.  cliffe, 

what  Qa.  Cliff e.  What  Ff. 

68.  unfortunate]  unfortune  Fa. 
beggar]  bagger  Q,. 

69.  methought ]  me  thoughts  Q,.  me 
thought  Ff. 

70.  he  had ]  a  had  Qq. 


71.  whelk'd]  Han.  welk't  Q,  welkt 
Qa.  wealk'd  F,Fa.  waWV  F3F4,  Rowe. 
welh’d  Pope  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Mai.  Ec.  Sing. 
enridged]  enraged  Ff,  Rowe,  Sch. 
73.  clearest]  cleerefl  QqF,Fa.  dearest 
Pope. 

make  them]  made  their  Qq. 


of  fiction,  the  son  in  th t  Arcadia  even  refuses  to  conduct  his  father  to  the  spot.  Sh., 
as  far  as  our  knowledge  at  present  goes,  must  be  answerable  in  his  own  proper  per¬ 
son,  and  alone,  for  what  is  too  improbable  to  give  as  an  incident  any  degree  of  plea¬ 
sure.  At  the  same  time,  he  may  have  owed  the  conception  of  that  particular  mode 
of  suicide  to  Sidney,  since  the  passage  occurs  in  that  part  of  the  Arcadia  to  which 
he  owed,  according  to  Steevens,  the  episodical  incidents  of  Gloucester,  Edmund,  and 
Edgar.  But  there  actually  occurred  in  Shakespeare’s  time  the  incident  of  a  London 
merchant  committing  suicide  by  throwing  himself  headlong  from  the  tower  of  one 
of  the  churches.  [I  cannot  think  that  Hunter  is  at  his  happiest  in  this  note.  His 
Illustrations  generally  are  among  the  best  that  have  been  written. — Ed.] 

68.  unfortunate]  According  to  Abbott,  §468,  the  unaccented  syllable  in  this 
word  may  be  softened  or  almost  ignored  in  scanning.  Compare  ‘majesty,’  I,  i,  91 ; 
‘messengers,’  II,  i,  124;  ‘delicate,’  III,  iv,  12,  See. 

71.  whelk’d]  Hanmer  (Gloss.) :  A  whelk  is  such  a  rising  tumour  upon  the  skin  as 
the  lash  of  a  switch  or  whip  leaves  behind  it.  Steevens  :  So  in  Hen.  V:  III,  vi,  108. 
Fluellen,  speaking  of  Bardolph,  says :  ‘  his  face  is  all  bubukles,  and  whelks,  and 
knobs,’  &c.  Malone:  Twisted,  convolved.  A  welk,  or  whilk,  is  a  small  shell  fish. 
Wright:  In  Sherwood’s  English-French  Dictionary,  which  forms  the  supplement  to 
Cotgrave’s  second  edition, *  *  whelke  ’  is  given  as  synonymous  with  ‘  wheale,’  a  blister 
or  pustule.  In  Chaucer  (Pardoneres  Tale ,  14153,  ed.  T.  Wright),  we  have:  ‘For 
which  ful  pale  and  welkid  is  my  face,’  where  ‘  welkid  ’  is  explained  by  Tyrwhitt  as 

*  withered,’  but  seems  to  mean  swollen  with  weeping,  as  in  the  following  passage  from 
Sackville’s  Induction,  80 :  ‘  Her  wealked  face  with  woful  teares  besprent.’ 

71.  enridged]  Abbott,  §  440 :  This  word  and  *  the  ^wchafed  flood,’  Oth.  II,  i,  17, 
are,  perhaps,  preferred  by  Sh.  merely  because  in  participles  he  likes  some  kind  of 
prefix  as  a  substitute  for  the  old  participial  prefix.  [Between  ‘  enridged’  and  enraged 
there  is  to  me  small  hesitation  on  the  score  of  pictorial  beauty,  however  great  may 
be  the  reluctance  to  desert  the  Ff. — Ed.] 

73.  clearest]  Theobald:  That  is,  open  and  righteous  in  their  dealing.  So  in 
fimon,  IV,  iii,  27,  '  Ye  clear  Heavens.’  Johnson  :  The  purest;  the  most  free  from 


ACT  IV,  SC.  vi.] 


KING  LEAR 


275 


Of  men’s  impossibilities,  have  preserved  thee. 

Glou.  I  do  remember  now.  Henceforth  I  ’ll  bear  75 

Affliction  till  it  do  cry  out  itself 
*  Enough,  enough/  and  die.  That  thing  you  speak  of, 

I  took  it  for  a  man ;  often  'twould  say 
‘  The  fiend,  the  fiend ;  *  he  led  me  to  that  place. 

Edg.  Bear  free  and  patient  thoughts. — But  who  comes 

here  ?  So 


Enter  Lear,  fantastically  dressed  with  wild  flowers. 

The  safer-sense  will  ne’er  accommodate 


77.  * Enough... die .]  Enough,  enough, 
and  die.  Cap.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Sing.  Del. 
ii.  (dye.  Cap.)  In  quotation-marks, 
Del.  i. 

die.  That ]  die  that  Q,. 

78.  'twould]  would  it  Qx,  Jen.  would 
he  Qa. 

79.  *  The  fiend ,  the  fiend ;  *  he]  Cap. 
The  fiend ,  the  fiend — he  Rowe  + .  The 
fiend  the  fiend ,  he  Qx.  The  fiend ,  the 
fiend,  he  Q2Ff. 


80.  Two  lines,  Ff. 

Bear  free ]  Bare  free  Qt.  Bare, 

free,  Q2- 

Enter  Lear...]  Cap.  (subs.)  En¬ 
ter  Lear  mad.  (after  thus,  line  82)  Qq. 
Enter  Lear,  (after  thoughts )  Ff+,  Jen. 
Enter  Lear,  drest  madly  with  Flowers. 
Theob. 

81.  Scene  vii.  Pope+,Jen. 

81,  82.  The. ..thus.]  One  line,  Qq. 

81.  will]  would  Han. 


evil.  Capell  :  It  may  have  the  sense  of  clear-sighted,  given  with  some  reference  to 
the  imposition  on  Gloucester,  his  weak  belief  of  his  bastard.  White  :  The  sense 
of  the  context,  and  the  great  similarity  in  manuscript  between  cl  and  d,  make  it  more 
than  possible  that  the  correct  reading  here  is  dearest.  Yet,  by  such  a  change,  we 
should  lose  the  fine  opposition  of  *  clearest  ’  and  ‘  impossibilities.’  Schmidt  says 
that  bright,  pure,  glorious  are  all  contained  in  the  word  *  clear.’ 

74.  impossibilities]  Capell  :  Who  derive  to  themselves  honour  and  reverence 
from  man,  by  doing  things  which  he  reckons  impossible.  [Compare  Luke  xviii,  27: 
‘  The  things  which  are  impossible  with  men  are  possible  with  God.’] 

77.  That  thing]  See  II,  iv,  209. 

50.  free]  Johnson  :  To  be  melancholy  is  to  have  the  mind  chained  down  to  one 
painful  idea;  there  is,  therefore,  great  propriety  in  exhorting  Gloucester  to  free 
thoughts,  to  an  emancipation  of  his  soul  from  grief  and  despair.  Schmidt  (Lex.)  : 
That  is,  not  affected  with  any  disease  or  distress  of  the  body  or  mind ;  sound,  happy, 
careless,  unconcerned,  as  in  III,  iv,  1 1 ;  III,  vi,  103. 

80.  Enter  Lear,  &c.]  We  must  remember  that  these  ‘  flowers  ’  are  an  addition 
oy  Theobald,  who  was  undoubtedly  induced  to  add  them  from  Cordelia’s  descrip¬ 
tion  in  IV,  iv,  and  also,  as  suggests  Schmidt,  from  Edgar’s  speech  at  the  sight  of 
Lear :  ‘  The  safer  sense,’  &c. — Ed. 

51.  safer]  Warburton:  Without  doubt  Sh.  wrote' sober,  i.  e.  while  the  under¬ 
standing  is-  in  a  right  frame  it  will  never  thus  accommodate  its  owner ;  alluding  to 
Lear’s  extravagant  dress.  Thence  he  concludes  him  to  be  mad.  Capell:  That 
is,  sounder.  Johnson:  I  read  saner.  Jennens:  I  read,  with  all  the  old  copies, 
‘safer;  ’  *  Nor  do  I  think  the  man  of  safe  discretion,  That  does  affect  ’  to  alter  it.— 


276 


KING  LEAR 


[ACT  IV,  sc.  vi 


His  master  thus.  82 

Lear.  No,  they  cannot  touch  me  for  coining.  I  am  the 
king  himself. 

Edg.  O  thou  side-piercing  sight !  85 

Lear.  Nature’s  above  art  in  that  respect. — There’s  your 
press-money. — That  fellow  handles  his  bow  like  a  crow- 
keeper. — Draw  me  a  clothier’s  yard. — Look,  look,  a  mouse ! 
Peace,  peace ;  this  piece  of  toasted  cheese  will  do  ’t. — 
There’s  my  gauntlet;  I’ll  prove- it  on  a  giant. — Bring  up  90 
the  brown  bills. — Oh,  well  flown,  bird !  i’  th’  clout,  i’  th’ 
clout !  hewgh ! — Give  the  word. 


83.  coining ]  coyning  Qq.  crying  Ff. 

85.  As  *  Aside,’  by  Cap.  Ec.  Dyce  ii. 
side-piercing ]  Hyphen,  Ff. 

86.  Nature  ’j]  Nature  is  Qq.  Natures 

Wv 

87.  88.  crow-keeper ]  cow-keeper  Rowe 
ii,  Pope. 

89.  piece  of]  Om.  Qq. 


90.  do' t]  do  it  Qq. 

91.  92.  bird !  i'  th'  clout,  i'  th'  clout  /] 
Bird :  i'  th'  clout,  i'  th'  clout :  Ff  [ith' 
F2F3F4).  bird  in  the  ayre,  Qq  ( birde 
QJ.  barb!  i'  th'  clout,  i’  th'  clout: 
Warb.  Theob.  Han. 

92.  hewgh]  Hagk  Qq.  hewgh  /— 
[Whistling]  Coll.  iii. 


Pleas,  for  Meas.  I,  i,  72.  Blakeway:  The  ‘safer  sense’  seems  to  me  to  mean  the 
eye-sight,  which,  says  Edgar,  will  never  more  serve  the  unfortunate  Lear  so  well  as 
those  senses  which  Gloucester  has  remaining  will  serve  him,  who  is  now  returned  to 
his  right  mind.  The  eye-sight  is  probably  the  *  safer  sense,’  in  allusion  to  our  vulgar 
proverb:  ‘  Seeing  is  believing.’  Horace  terms  the  eyes  ‘ oculi  fideles.’  Gloucester 
afterwards  laments  the  *  stiffness  of  his  vile  sense.’ 

81.  accommodate]  See  ‘unaccommodated,’  III,  iv,  103. 

86,  et  seq.  Capell  :  Lear’s  ravings  rise  chiefly  from  the  exercises  that  he  as  king 
had  been  used  to,  namely,  war,  and  war’s  appendages  then ;  in  some  he  is  listing, 
engag’d  in  battle  in  others,  in  others  training  his  bowmen  and  seeing  them  exercise; 
it  was  once  thought  that  falconry  (a  kingly  amusement)  had  a  place  in  these  ravings, 
and  that  ‘bird’  [line  91]  was  meant  of  the  hawk;  but  ’tis  better  understood  of  the 
arrow,  which  he  calls  ‘  well-flown  ’  from  its  being  lay’d  in  the  .*  clout.’ 

86.  Nature’s  above  art,  &c.]  SCHMIDT:  That  is,  a  born  king  can  never  lose  his 
natural  rights. 

87.  press-money]  Douce:  The  money  paid  to  soldiers  when  they  were  retained 
in  the  king’s  service.  [See  Ham.  I,  i,  75,  ‘  impress  ’  and  notes.] 

87.  crow-keeper]  One  who  keeps  off  crows  from  a  field.  [See  Rom.  Jul.  I 
iv,  6,  and  notes.]  Douce  :  The  notes  on  this  word  serve  only  to  identify  the  character 
of  a  ‘  crow-keeper;’  the  comparison  remains  to  be  explained.  In  speaking  of  awk¬ 
ward  shooters  Ascham  [  Toxophilus,  p.  145,  ed.  Arber]  says :  ‘  An  other  coureth 
downe,  and  layeth  out  his  buttockes,  as  though  he  shoulde  shoote  at  crowes.’ 

88.  clothier’s  yard]  Many  editors,  from  Steevens  down,  refer  to  the  ‘  arrow  of 
a  cloth  yard  long  ’  in  Chevy- Chace. 

91.  brown  bills]  A  kind  of  halberd  used  by  foot-soldiers;  see  Rom.  6r  Jul.  I,  i,  66. 
Wright  :  They  were  browned  like  the  old  Brown  Bess  to  keep  them  from  rust. 

91.  bird]  Warburton:  Lear  is  raving  of  archery,  and  shooting  at  butts,  as  is 


ACT  IV,  SC.  Vi.] 


KING  LEAR 


2  77 


Edg.  Sweet  marjoram.  93 

Lear.  Pass. 

Glou.  I  know  that  voice.  95 

Lear.  Ha!  Goneril, — with  a  white  beard! — They  flat¬ 
tered  me  like  a  dog,  and  told  me  I  had  white  hairs  in  my 
beard  ere  the  black  ones  were  there.  To  say  *  ay  ’  and  ‘  no  ’ 
to  every  thing  that  I  said !  ‘  Ay  ’  and  ‘  no  ’  too  was  no  good 


96.  'with...  They"]  Dyce.  with  a  white 
beard?  They  Ff.  ha  Regan,  they  Qq. 
hah  !  Regan  /  they  Pppe,  Theob.  Han. 
Warb.  Jen. 

97.  white J  the  white  Ff,  Sch. 


99.  every  thing  that ]  euery  thing  Q,. 

allQ,. 

said!. ..too  was ]  /aide,  I  and  no 
toe,  was  Qx.  /aide  :  I  and  no  too  was 
Q3.  /aid:  I,  and  no  too,  was  Ff. 


plain  by  the  words  *  i’  the  clout,’  so  that  we  must  read  ‘  O  well-flown,  Barb  1  ’  i.  e. 
the  barbed,  or  bearded  arrow.  Heath  and  Capell  (see  above,  line  83)  think  that 
‘bird’  metaphorically  means  the  arrow.  Eccles:  ‘Well-flown’  may  be  understood 
as  a  compound  epithet  of  ‘  bird.’  DOUCE :  Lear  certainly  refers  to  falconry.  In  an 
old  song  on  Hawking,  set  for  four  voices  by  Thomas  Ravenscroft,  *  O  well  flown  ’  is 
a  frequent  address  to  the  hawk.  Steevens:  *  Well-flown  bird’  was  the  falconer’s 
expression  when  the  hawk  was  successful  in  her  flight,  and  is  so  used  in  A  Woman 
Killed  with  Kindness  [p.  103,  ed.  Sh.  Soc.]. 

91.  clout]  Nares:  The  mark  fixed  in  the  centre  of  the  butts,  at  which  archers 
shot  for  practice.  Clouette,  Fr.  Literally,  the  nail,  or  pin.  The  best  shot  was  that 
which  clove  or  split  the  clout,  or  pin,  itself.  [See  *  pin,’  Rom.  &  Jul.  II,  iv,  15,  and 
notes. — Ed.] 

92.  word]  Johnson:  Lear  supposes  himself  in  a  garrison,  and,  before  he  lets 
Edgar  pass,  requires  the  watch-word. 

96.  beard]  Halliwell:  It  is  hardly  requisite  to  fill  up  the  context  of  a  dis¬ 
jointed  raving.  Ha !  Goneril ! — to  be  so  unfilial  to  a  father  with  a  white  beard,  to 
an  aged  father,  the  age  of  the  parent  aggravating  the  crime  of  the  daughter.  In  a 
former  part  of  the  tragedy  he  says  to  Goneril :  ‘  art  not  ashamed  to  look  upon  this 
beard,’  meaning  his  venerable  white  beard.  MOBERLY :  I  suppose  you  are  Goneril, 
though  your  white  beard  seems  against  it. 

98.  black  ones]  Capell:  He  was  told  he  had  the  wisdom  of  age  before  he  had 
reach’d  to  that  of  a  youth. 

99.  ‘  Ay  *  and  ‘  no  *  too]  Pye  (p.  295) :  It  does  not  appear  how  it  could  be  flattery 
to  dissent  from,  as  well  as  to  assent  to,  every  thing  he  said.  The  following  reading 
was  suggested  to  me  by  an  ingenious  friend,  by  only  a  change  in  the  pointing  and 
the  omission  of  a  single  letter :  *  To  say  ay  and  no  to  every  thing  I  said  ay 
and  no  to,  was  no  good  divinity.*  [White  adopted  this  reading.]  Singer  :  It 
may,  however,  mean  that  they  said  ‘  ay  ’  or  *  no  ’  as  he  said  *  ay  ’  or  ‘  no,’  but  more 
probably  that  they  had  double  thoughts,  and  said  *  ay  ’  to  flatter  him,  when  they  said 
‘  no  ’  to  themselves,  and  vice  versa.  Delius  :  That  is,  in  contradiction  to  the  Biblica 
injunction  to  *  let  your  speech  be  yea,  yea  and  nay,  nay.’  Cowden  Clarke  :  Lea. 
first  exclaims  indignantly :  ‘  To  say  “  ay  and  “  no  ”  to  every  thing  I  said !  ’  recollect 
ing  the  facility  with  which  his  courtiers  veered  about  in  their  answers  to  suit  his 
varying  moods,  just  as  Osric  does  to  Hamlet ;  and  then  he  goes  on  to  say  that  this 

24 


278 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  sc.  vi. 


divinity.  When  the  rain  came  to  wet  me  once  and  the  wind  100 
to  make  me  chatter ;  when  the  thunder  would  not  peace  at 
my  bidding ;  there  I  found  ’em,  there  I  smelt  ’em  out.  Go 
to,  they  are  not  men  o’  their  words;  they  told  me  I  was 
everything ;  ’tis  a  lie,  I  am  not  ague-proof. 

GIou.  The  trick  of  that  voice  I  do  well  remember.  105 

Is ’t  not  the  king. 

Lear.  Ay,  every  inch  a  king. 

When  I  do  stare,  see  how  the  subjedt  quakes.-^- 
I  pardon  that  man’s  life. — What  was  thy  cause  ? 

Adultery? 

Thou  shalt  not  die;  die  for  adultery  ?  No;  110 

The  wren  goes  to 't,  and  the  small  gilded  fly 
Does  lecher  in  my  sight. 

Let  copulation  thiive;  for  Gloucester’s  bastard  son 


100.  the  wind]  wind  FaF3F4,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han. 

102.  'em. ..’em"]  them. ..them  Qq,  Cap. 
Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly. 

103.  men ]  women  Upton. 

o'  their ]  of  their  Qq,  Cap. 

104.  ague-proof]  argue-proofe  Qq. 
Agu-proofe  F,Fa.  Agu-proof  F3. 

105.  106.  The. .. king  ?]  Prose,  QqF4, 
Rowe. 

106-116.  Ay. ..soldiers]  Prose,  Qq. 

106.  every]  euer  Qx. 

108,  L09.  I  pardon. ..Adultery  ?]  What 
was  the  cause  ?  Adultery.  I  pardon  that 


man's  life.  Ec.  conj. 

10S.  thy]  the  Theob.  ii,  Warb.  Johns. 
Cap. 

109-1 16.  Adultery  ? ...soldiers!)  Johns. 
Six  lines,  ending  for  Adultery?. ..Fly... 
thriue  :... Father, ...fheets...Souldiers.  Ff, 
Rowe. 

109-130.  Adultery? . thee]  Prose, 

Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 

I IO.  die  :  die  for]  die  for  Qt.  dye  for 

Q,- 

112.  Does]  doe  Qt.  do  Q2. 

112-115.  Lines  end  thrive. .father..,' 
sheets.  Cap.  Mai.  Ec. 


kind  of  *ay’  and  ‘no’  too  is  no  good  divinity.  In  proof  that  *ay'  and  ‘no’  was 
used  by  Sh.  with  some  degree  of  latitude,  as  a  phrase  signifying  alternate  reply,  and 
not  merely  in  strictness  *  yes  and  no,’  compared  You  Like  It,  III,  ii,  231-240,  where, 
if  the  questions  Rosalind  asks  be  examined,  it  will  be  perceived  that  neither ‘ay’ 
nor  <  no  ’  will  do  as  answers  to  any  of  them,  except  to  ‘  Did  he  ask  for  me?  ’  MOBERLY: 
In  *  no  good  divinity  ’  the  reference  is  to  2  Corinthians,  i,  18 :  ‘  Our  word  to  you  was 
not  yea  and  nay.’ 

105.  trick]  Hanmer  (Gloss.) :  Frequently  used  for  the  air,  or  that  peculiarity  in  a 
face,  voice,  or  gesture  which  distinguishes  it  from  others.  [See  Ham.  IV,  vii,  189.] 

107.  subject  quakes]  Walker  ( Crit.  i,  246) :  ‘If  ‘quakes’  be  right,  ‘subject’ 
must  refer  to  Gloucester  alone.  But  I  think  Sh.  wrote  quake.  *  Subject,’  more prisco , 
meaning  not  subjectus,  but  subjecti,  as  we  say  the  elect,  the  reprobate.  Old  writers 
passim ;  indeed  the  usage  occurs  as  late  as  Burke.  [There  is  great  probability  in 
this  suggestion  by  Walker.  Compare  *  ’twas  caviare  to  the  general.’ — Ham.  II,  ii, 
416. — Ed.] 


ACT  IV,  SC.  vi.] 


KING  LEAR 


279 


Was  kinder  to  his  father  than  my  daughters 

Got ’tween  the  lawful  sheets.  IIS 

To ’t,  luxury,  pell-mell !  for  I  lack  soldiers. 

Behold  yond  simpering  dame, 

Whose  face  between  her  forks  presages  snow. 

That  minces  virtue  and  does  shake  the  head 

To  hear  of  pleasure’s  name, —  120 

The  fitchew,  nor  the  soiled  horse,  goes  to ’t 

With  a  more  riotous  appetite. 

Down  from  the.  waist  they  are  Centaurs, 

Though  women  all  above ; 

But  to  the  girdle  do  the  gods  inherit,  125 


1 14.  than]  Than  were  Cap. 

1 1 5.  sheets.]  sheets,  were  unto  me.  Ktly. 

1 1 6.  lack]  want  Qa. 

1 17-125.  As  in  Johns. 

117-130.  Prose,  QqFf. 

1 17.  yond]  yon  QqF3<  yon'  Cap. 
Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt.  you  F4. 

1 18.  between]  'tween  Pope,  Theob. 
Han.  Warb. 

presages]  presageth  Qq. 

1 19.  does]  do  Qq. 


120.  To  hear]  heare  Qq. 

1 20-1 24.  Three  lines,  ending  nor... 
appetite. ..above.  Ktly  (reading  soil’d). 

120,  1 21.  name, —  The]  name.  The 
Ff+,Jen.  name  to  Qq. 

121.  soiled]  foyled  QqFf.  stalled  Warb. 
spoiled  Daniel. 

123.  waist]  wajl  Qt.  wajle  Q2Ff. 
they  are]  tha’re  Qx.  they’re 

Johns. 

1 23-130.  Prose,  Knt. 


1 16.  luxury]  Lewdness.  See  Ham.  I,  v,  83. 

1 1 8.  forks]  Warburton:  That  is,  her  hand  held  before  her  face  in  sign  of  mod¬ 
esty,  with  the  fingers  spread  out,  forky.  W.  C.  JoURDAlN  ( Philological  Soc.  Trans. 
p.  134,  1857)  gives  the  same  interpretation  [which  I  think  unwarranted,  but  have 
no  inclination  to  emphasize  an  unsavory  question  by  discussing  it.  See  III,  iv, 
104. — Ed.]. 

1 18.  snow]  Edwards:  In  construction  the  phrase  ‘between  her  forks’  follows- 

*  snow.’  So  in  Tim.  IV,  iii,  386 : *  *  the  consecrated  snow  That  lies  on  Dian’s  lap.’ 

1 19.  minces]  Staunton  :  That  affects  the  coy  timidity  of  virtue.  Singer:  Thus 
Cotgrave,  ‘  Mineux  ;  m  .  euse :  f...also  squeamish,  quaint,  coy,  that  minces  it  exceed¬ 
ingly,’  &c.  Also  *  Fair.e  la  sadinelte.  To  mince  it,  nicefie  it,  make  it  daintie,  be 
verie  squeamish,  backward,  or  coy.*  Collier  :  ‘  Minces  ’  cannot  be  right,  since 
mincing  means  to  cut  anything  into  small  pieces,  and,  figuratively,  to  take  small 
steps ;  whereas  to  mimic  [the  reading  of  the  (MS)  and  of  Collier’s  text]  is  to  coun¬ 
terfeit,  which  is  exactly  what  Lear  intends  to  convey ;  the  ‘  simpering  dame '  coun¬ 
terfeited  or  mimicked  virtue,  and  shook  her  head  at  the  mere  name  of  pleasure. 

121.  fitchew]  Dyce  (Gloss.)  :  A  polecat,  and  here  a  cant  term  for  a  strumpet. 

121.  soiled]  Heath:  This  is  the  term  used  for  a  horse  that  is  turned  out  in 
the  spring  to  take  the  first  flush  of  grass.  This  at  once  cleanses  the  animal,  and  fills 
him  with  blood. 

.125.  But]  Merely.  See  Ham.  II,  ii,  272,451.  Dr  Ingleby  has  sent  me  the  fol¬ 
lowing:  ‘Among  the  Heresies  (August,  de  Heres.)  that  arose  very  early  in  the 
Church,  there  started  out  a  Sect,  called  [the  Paterniani],  possibly  the  spawn  of  the 


280 


KING  LEAR 


[ACT  iv,  sc.  vi. 


Beneath  is  all  the  fiends’ ; 

There’s  hell,  there’s  darkness,  there’s  the  sulphurous  pit,  127 
Burning,  scalding,  stench,  consumption;  fie,  fie,  fie!  pah, 
pah!  —  Give  me  an  ounce  of  civet;  good  apothecary, 
sweeten  my  imagination;  there’s  money  for  thee.  130 

Glou.  Oh,  let  me  kiss  that  hand ! 

Lear.  Let  me  wipe  it  first ;  it  smells  of  mortality. 

Glou.  O  ruin’d  piece  of  nature !  This  great  world 
Shall  so  wear  out  to  nought. — Dost  thou  know  me  ? 

Lear.  I  remember  thine  eyes  well  enough.  Dost  thou  135 


126, 127.  Beneath...pit,]  As  in  Glo.+, 
Sch.  Prose  in  QqFf+,  Mai.  Knt,  Coll. 
Del.  Sing.  Sta.  Wh. 

Beneath . darkness ]  One  line, 

Johns.  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Bos.  Dyce. 

126-130.  Beneath...thee]  Four  lines, 
ending  darkness. ...pah  ;.. ..apothecary.... 
thee.  Johns.  Jen.  Five  lines,  ending 
darkness. .  ..stench.,  .pah!....  apothecary. ... 
thee.  Ec.  Five  and  a  half  lines,  ending 

darkness . stench . me. .-. .  apothecary... 

There' s...thee.  Ktly. 

126.  is  all]  it  is  all  Warb. 
fiends']  Cap.  yff^a’rQqFf.  fiend's 

Johns. 

127.  there's  the  sulphurous]  Ktly, 
Cam.  Dyce  ii,  Huds.  Sch.  tier's  the 
fulphury  Qq  (theres  QJ.  there  is  the 


fiulphurous  Ff  et  cet. 

128.  consumption ]  confumation  Q,. 
confiummation  Qa. 

129, 130.  civet ;... sweeten]  Rowe,  Knt, 
Sch.  duel ;  good  Apothecary  f wee  ten 
Ff.  duet,  good  Apothecarie ,  to  fweeten 
Qq  et  cet. 

132.  Let  me. . . mortality. ]  Here. ..mor- 
talitie.  Qq.  Two  lines,  Ff. 

1 33, 134.  0...me  ?]  Rowe.  Three  lines, 
ending  world. ..naught. ..me  ?  Ff.  Prose, 
Qq. 

134.  Shall]  Jhould  Qa.  Jhold  Qa. 
nought]  naught  QqFf,  Rowe, 

Pope,  Theob. 

Dost  thou]  do  you  Qq.  Jen. 

135.  thine]  thy  Qq. 


filthy  Gnosticks ;  whose  opinion  was  that  the  upper  Parts  of  a  man’s  Body  were  made 
indeed  by  God,  but  the  lower  Parts  from  the  Girdle,  they  held  was  made  by  the 
devil ;  and  very  fond  they  grew  of  their  fancy,  which  they  thought  gave  them  a 
Liberty  to  do  with  the  devil’s  part  what  they  pleas’d,  so  long  as  they  reserv’d  the 
rest  unto  God.’ — England's  Vanity  :  or  the.  Voice  of  God  against .  .  .  Pride  in  Dress, 
&c.,  1683,  p.  59. 

1 26.  Malone  and  Knight  doubt  whether  any  part  of  this  speech  were  intended 
for  metre.  Singer:  It  is  too  rhythmical  to  be  left  as  mere  prose,  yet  is  rather 
lyric  than  heroic  metre.  White:  Not  improbably  the  remainder  of  this  speech  is 
mutilated  blank  verse.  With  very  slight  alteration  it  might  be  presented  in  perfect 
lines  of  five  accents.  Abbott,  §511:  The  highest  passion  of  all  expresses  itself  in 
prose,  as  here,  and  in  the  fearful  frenzy  of  Oth.  IV,  i,  34-44. 

133.  piece  of  nature]  Schmidt:  Sh.  frequently  uses  piece  with  of  where  we 
should  expect  some  such  word  as  model ,  or  master-piece,  especially  a  *  piece  of  virtue’ 
for  a  pattern  of  virtue.  An  expression  in  Ant.  6°  Cleo.  V,  ii,  99,  comes  the  nearest 
to  the  present  phrase,  where  Cleopatra  says,  ‘  to  imagine  An  Antony,  were  nature’s 
piece  ’gainst  fancy.’ 

133.  This  great  world]  See  note  on  ‘little  world  of  man,’  III,  i,  10. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  Vl.J 


KING  LEAR 


281 


squiny  at  me  ?  No,  do  thy  worst,  blind  Cupid ;  I  ’ll  not  love.  136 
Read  thou  this  challenge ;  mark  but  the  penning  of  it. 

Glou.  Were  all  thy  letters  suns,  I  could  not  see. 

Edg.  [Aside]  I  would  not  take  this  from  report;  it  is, 

And  my  heart  breaks  at  it  1 40 

Lear.  Read. 

Glou.  What,  with  the  case  or  eyes :» 

Lear.  Oh  ho,  are  you  there  with  me  ?  No  eyes  in  youi 
head,  nor  no  money  in  your  purse?  Your  eyes  are  in  a 
heavy  case,  your«  purse  in  a  light;  yet  you  see  how  this  145 
world  goes. 

136.  squiny ]  /quint  Q3,  Pope,  Han. 
at  me]  on  me  Qq. 

137.  this]  that  Qq. 
but]  Om.  Qq. 

of  it]  oft  Qt.  on't  Qa,  Jen,  Cam. 

Wr.  _ 

138.  thy  letters]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sch. 
the  letters  Qq  et  cet. 

see]  FiF2,  Knt,  Sta.  Sch.  fee 
one  QqF3F4  et  cet. 

139, 140.  I  would. ....at  it. ]  Theob. 

136.  squiny]  Malone:  To  look  asquint.  The  word  is  used  by  Armin,  Shake- 
speare’s  fellow-comedian,  in  his  Nest  of  Ninnies  [p.  6,  ed.  Sh.  Soc.]  :  *  The  World, 
queasie  stomackt,  .  .  .  squinies  at  this,  and  lookes  as  one  scorning.’  Wright  adds 
that  it  is  still  used  in  Suffolk,  [and  an  American  can  add  that  it  is  still  used  here]. 

139.  report]  Staunton  :  There  is  some  obscurity  here.  What  is  it  Edgar  would 
not  take  from  report  ?  He  must  have  been  aware  of  his  father’s  deprivation  of  sight ; 
because  it  is  mentioned  in  the  previous  scene.  We  are,  perhaps,  to  suppose  that  the 
poor  king  exhibits  the  proclamation  for  the  killing  of  Gloucester.  Cowden  Clarke: 
That  which  Edgar  would  not  believe  without  witnessing  is  the  extremity  of  pathos  in 
the  meeting  between  his  blind  father  and  the  distracted  king.  Delius  thinks  it 
refers  to  Lear’s  condition. 

139.  is]  Wright:  Emphatic;  as  in  Mach.  I,  iii,  141. 

142.  the  case]  Jennens:  Having  lost  my  eyes,  would  you  have  me  read  with 
the  sockets.  Steevens:  That  is,  the  socket  of  either  eye.  So  in  Wint.  Tale , 
V,  ii,  14:  ‘tear  the  cases  of  their  eyes.’  Malone:  Also  in  Per.  V,  i,  112:  ‘her 
eyes  as  jewel-like  and  cased  as  richly,’  and  lb.  Ill,  ii,  99 :  ‘  her  eyelids,  cases  to 
those  heavenly  jewels.’  *  This  case  of  eyes’  could  not  have  been  Shakespeare’s 
phrase,  because,  in  the  language  of  that  day,  it  would  mean  ‘  this  pair  of  eyes,’  a 
sense  directly  opposite  to  that  intended  to  be  conveyed.  White:  But  still  I  must 
regard  Rowe’s  reading  (i.  e.  with  such  a  pair  of  eyes  as  this,  i.  e.  none  at  all)  as 
being  the  true  text. 

143.  are  you  there  with  me  ?]  Wright:  That  is,  is  that  what  you  mean?  So 
in  As  You  Like  It,  V,  ii,  32:  ‘Oh,  I  know  where  you  are;’  i.  e.  what  you  mean. 
[Compare  ‘  take  me  with  you,’  Rom.  S*  Jul.  Ill,  v,  140.] 

24* 


Prose,  Qq.  Two  lines,  the  first  ending 
report,  Ff.  As  *  Aside,’  Han.  Cap.  Ec. 
Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

142.  the  case]  this  case  Rowe  +  ,  Cap. 
Ec.  Wh.  Ktly. 

144.  nor  no]  nor  Q2,  Pope,  Han. 

144.  145.  a  heavy]  heavy  F3F4,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han. 

145.  light]  light  one  Ktly. 

146.  goes.]  goes?  Qa. 


282 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  sc.  VI. 


Glou.  I  see  it  feelingly.  147 

Lear.  What,  art  mad  ?  A  man  may  see  how  this  world 
goes  with  no  eyes.  Look  with  thine  ears ;  see  how  yond 
justice  rails  upon  yond  simple  thief.  Hark,  in  thine  ear  ;  150 
change  places,  and,  handy-dandy,  which  is  the  justice,  which 
is  the  thief?  Thou  hast  seen  a  farmer’s  dog  bark  at  a 
beggar  ? 

Glou.  Ay,  sir. 

Lear.  And  the  creature  run  from  the  cur?  There  thou  155 
mightst  behold  the  great  image  of  authority;  a  dog’s  obeyed 
in  office. — 

Thou  rascal  beadle,  hold  thy  bloody  hand  ! 

Why  dost  thou  lash  that  whore  ?  Strip  thine  own  back ; 

Thou  hotly  lusts  to  use  her  in  that  kind  160 


148.  this]  the  Qq. 

149.  thine ]  thy  Qq. 

I49, 150.  yond. ..yond]  yon. ...yon  Qq. 
yon'  Cap.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Sing. 

1 50.  thine ]  thy  Qq. 

1 5 1.  change  places,  and]  Om.  Qq. 
handy-dandy]  handy,  dandy,  Qx. 

handy-dendy  F3. 

151, 152.  justice. ...thief]  theefe...Ius - 
lice  Qq. 


154.  Ay,]  I  QqF.F,.  Om.  F_F4. 

1 55-1 72.  Prose,  QqFf. 

156 .  dog's  obeyed]  dogge,fo  bade  Qx. 
dogge,  fo  bad  Qa. 

158-161.  As  in  Pope. 

159.  thine]  thy  Ff-K 

160.  Thou  hotly  lusts]  Ff,  Sch.  thy 
bloud  hotly  lufls  Qq  ( blood  Qa).  Thou 
hotly  lust'st  Rowe  et  cet. 


147.  feelingly]  Moberly:  In  an  inward  and  heartfelt  way.  Lear  takes  the 
word  to  mean  ‘  only  by  feeling  as  I  have  no  eyes.’ *  *  What  do  you  want  with  eyes,’ 
he  rejoins,  ‘  to  know  how  the  world  goes  ?’ 

15 1.  handy-dandy]  Malone:  This  is  a  play  among  children,  in  which  some¬ 
thing  is  shaken  between  the  hands,  and  then  a  guess  is  made  in  which  hand  it  is 
retained.  SeeFlorio:  *  Bazzicchiare.  To  shake  betweene  two  hands,  to  play  handy- 
dandy.’  Coles  ( Latin  Diet.,  1679)  renders  ‘  to  play  handy-dandy,’  by  digitis  micare ; 
and  he  is  followed  by  Ainsworth ;  but  they  appear  to  have  been  mistaken,  as  is  Dr 
Johnson  in  his  definition,  in  his  Dictionary,  which  seems  to  have  been  formed  on  the 
passage  before  us,  misunderstood.  He  says,  Handy-dandy  is  *a  play  in  which  chil¬ 
dren  change  hands  and  places.’  Douce  :  This  explanation  is  confirmed  by  the  fol¬ 
lowing  extract  from  A  free  discotcrse  touching  the  murmur ers  of  the  lymes ,  MS: 

*  They  .  .  .  play  with  your  majestie  as  men  play  with  little  children  at  handye  dandye, 
which  hand  will  you  have,  when  they  are  disposed  to  keep  any  thinge  from  them.* 
Halliwell  says  this  is  one  of  the  oldest  games  in  existence,  not  only  alluded  to  by 
Piers  Plowman,  but,  according  to  Pope  in  his  Memoirs  of  Martinus  Scriblerus,  by 
Plato.  ‘  Sometimes-  the  game  is  played  by  a  sort  of  sleight  of  hand,  changing  the 
article  rapidly  from  one  hand  to  another.  .  .  .  This  is  what  Sh.  alludes  to  by  changing 
places.’ 

160.  lusts]  This  is  an  instance  cited  by  Walker  (Crit.  ii,  128)  of  the  substitu¬ 
tion  in  the  Folio  of  s  for  st  in  the  second  person  singular  of  the  verb.  *  Queere, 


ACT  iv,  sc.  vi.]  KING  LEAR  283 

For  which  thou  whip’st  her. — The  usurer  hangs  the  cozener.  161 
Through  tatter’d  clothes  great  vices  do  appear ; 

Robes  and  furr’d  gowns  hide  all.  Plate  sin  with  gold, 

And  the  strong  lance  of  justice  hurtless  breaks; 

Arm  it  in  rags,  a  pigmy’s  straw  does  pierce  it.  165 

None  does  offend,  none,  I  say,  none ;  I  ’ll  able  ’em ; 

Take  that  of  me,  my  friend,  who  have  the  power 
To  seal  th’  accuser’s  lips.  Get  thee  glass  eyes, 

And,  like  a  scurvy  politician,  seem 

To  see  the  things  thou  dost  not. — Now,  now,  now,  now.  170 
Pull  off  my  boots ;  harder,  harder,  so. 


161.  cozener]  cofloner  Qx. 

162- 170.  As  in  Rowe. 

162.  Through ]  Thorough  Ff,  Rowe. 
tatter’d ]  tottered  Qt.  tattered 

Qa,  Sch.  and  tatter'd  F3F4. 

clothes]  raggs  Qt.  ragges  Qa. 
great J  Ff,  Rowe,  Sch.  ftnal  Qt. 
f 'mall  Qa  et  cet. 

163.  furr’d  gowns]  furd-gownes  Qq. 
hide]  hides  Qq. 

163- 168.  Plate. ..lips.]  Om.  Qq. 

163.  Plate]  Theob.  ii.  Place  Ff. 

sin]  Theob.  ii.  fnnes  FtFa. 
Ji 'nns  F3.  Jins  F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  i, 


Han.  Cap.  Sch. 

165.  in  rags]  with  rags  Jen.  (?  mis¬ 
print). 

a]  and  Rowe. 

does]  do's  Fx.  doth  F3F4+,  Jen. 
Steev.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Sing. 

166.  offend,  none,]  offend,  Han. 
able]  absolve  Han. 

170,  1 7 1.  To... so.]  Cap.  Now... so. 

One  line,  Pope  ii  + ,  Jen.Wr. ;  prose,  Cam. 

Now,  now,  now,  now]  no  now  Qt. 
No,  now  Qa. 

17 1.  harder,  harder]  pull  harder , 
harder  Ktly. 


asks  Walker,  ‘  in  cases  where  st  would  produce  extreme  harshness,  and  where  at 
the  same  time  the  old  copies  have  s,  whether  we  ought  not  to  write  the  latter.  (In 
the  north  of  England,  and  in  Scotland  (see,  for  example,  Bums,  passim),  s  for  st 
in  the  second  person  seems  to  be  the  rule.)’  [To  return  to  the  usage  of  the  QqFf  in 
this  instance  is  hardly  more  violent  than  to  adopt  it  in  place  of  its.  Can  harshness 
farther  go  than  in  *  hotly  lust’st  to’  ?  I  regret  that  I  did  not  soften  a  line  correspond¬ 
ingly  harsh  in  modem  editions,  and  print  in  Nam.  I,  ii,  53 :  *  Revisits  thus  the  glimpses 
of  the  moon.’ — Ed.] 

162.  great  vices]  I  cannot  but  think  that  the  Ff  are  right  here,  and  that  the 
meaning  is,  ‘  When  looked  at  through  tattered  clothes,  all  vices  are  great.’ — Ed. 

163.  hide  all]  Malone:  Ini?,  of  L.,  93, ‘  Hiding  base  sin  in  plaits  of  majesty.7 

163.  Plate]  Cowden  Clarke:  That  is,  clothe  in  plate  armour. 

163.  sin]  Sins  of  the  Ff  is  to  be  preferred,  were  it  not  for  the  ‘it’  in  line 
165.— Ed. 

166.  I’ll  able  em]  Warburton:  I’ll  qualify  or  uphold  them.  So  Scogan,  con¬ 
temporary  with  Chaucer :  ‘  Set  all  my  life  after  thyne  ordinaunce  And  able  me  to 
mercie  or  thou  deme.’  Heath  :  I  will  take  off  all  legal  disabilities  which  they  may 
have  incurred  by  their  crimes.  Steevens  :  Chapman’s  Widow's  Tears  :  1  Admitted! 
Ay,  into  her  heart,  and  I  ’ll  able  it.’  Again,  in  his  version  of  the  Iliad,  xxiii :  *  I  ’ll 
able  this  For  five  revolved  years.’ 


284 


KING  LEAR 


[ACT  IV,  sc.  vi 


Edg.  [Aside."]  Oh,  matter  and  impertinency  mix’d !  172 

Reason  in  madness ! 

Lear .  If  thou  wilt  weep  my  fortunes,  take  my  eyes. 

I  know  thee  well  enough ;  thy  name  is  Gloucester.  175 

Thou  must  be  patient;  we  came  crying  hither. 

Thou  know’st,  the  first  time  that  we  smell  the  air, 

We  wawl  and  cry.  I  will  preach  to  thee;  mark. 

Glon.  Alack,  alack  the  day ! 

Lear.  When  we  are  born,  we  cry  that  we  are  come  180 
To  this  great  stage  of  fools.  This  *  a  good  block. 


172,  173.  Oh. .. madness  /]  One  line 
Qq.  As  ‘Aside,’  Cap.  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

172.  impertinency  mix'd /]  impertin¬ 
ency  mixt,  Ff.  impertinencie  mixt  Q,. 
impertinency ,  mixt  Qa. 

174-206.  Prose,  in  Qq. 

1 74.  fortunes ]  fortune  Qq. 

177.  know'st]  knowefl  Qx,  Sch. 

•178.  wazof]  wawle  Ff,  way l  Q,. 
waile  Q2,  Cap. 


178.  mark .]  Ff,  Knt,  Dyce.Glo.  + ,  Sch. 
mark —  Rowe  + .  mar  he  me.  Qq  et  cet. 

181.  This'  a  good  block.']  Sing,  ii,  Dyce, 
Glo.  Wr.  ( block  ?  Sing  ii).  this  a  good 
blocke.  Qq.  This  a  good  blocke:  FXF3. 
This  a  good  block  :  F3F^,  Sch.  This  a 
good  block! —  Rowe  +  ,  Ec.  Knt,  Del. 
Sta.  Ktly.  This  a  good  block  ?  Cap.  Jen. 
Steev. ’78,  Var.  Coll.  i.  This's  a  good 
block.  Cam.  This,  a  good  plot  Coll.  iii. 


-I72.  impertinency]  Douce:  That  is,  something  not  belonging  to  the  subject. 
Thus  an.  old  collection  of  domestic  recipes,  &c.,  entitled  The  treasurie  of  com¬ 
modious  conceits,  1594,  is  said  to  be  ‘not  impertinent  for  every  good  huswife  to  use 
in  her  house  amongst  her  own  familie.’  This  word  does  not  seem  to  have  been  used 
in  the  sense  of  rude  or  unmannerly  till  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  nor 
in  that  of  saucy  till  a  considerable  time  afterwards. 

178.  wawl]  Wright:  Cotgravehas:  ‘Houaller.  To  yawle,  wawle,  or  cry  out  aloud/ 

1 81.  This  ’]  Walker  (  Vers.  80)  :  This  is  is  not  unfrequently, — like  that  is,  &c.— 
contracted  into  a  monosyllable.  See  Lear,  V,  iii,  283;  Tam.  Shr.  I,  ii,  45,  ‘Why 
this*  a  heavy  chance  ’twixt  him  and  you.’  Wright:  See  Meas. for  Meas.  V,i,  131, 
‘this’  a  good  Fryer  belike.’  See  ABBOTT,  §461;  also  II,  ii,  1 16,  of  this  play. 
Ritson  needlessly  suggested  *’Tis.’ 

181.  block]  Johnson  would  read  *a  good  flock,'  that  is,  a  flock  of  wool.  ‘Lear 
picks  up  a  flock,  and  immediately  thinks  to  surprise  his  enemies  by  a  troop  of  horse 
shod  with  flocks  or  felt.  Yet  ‘block’  may  stand,  if  we  suppose  that  the  sight  of  a 
block  put  him  in  mind  of  mounting  his  horse.  Capell  :  The  mode  of  Lear’s  mad. 
ness  is  chang’d;  it  is  calm,  and  shews  some  sparks  of  reason;  he  knows  Gloucester, 
and  his  condition;  tells  him  he  must  be  patient;  .  .  .  says  he  will  * preach’  to  him ; 
upon  this  he  puts  himself  in  posture  of  one  who  would  preach,  and  pulls  off  his  hat : 
Scarce  has  he  utter’d  a  few  words  when  some  fumes  of  a  wilder  nature  fly  up;  the 
hat  catches  his  eye,  and  sets  fire  to  another  train  of  ideas ;  the  words  *  This  a  good 
block  ?  ’  are  spoke  looking  upon  the  hat ;  and  this  is  follow’d  by  a  second  conceit, 
which  has  it’s  rise  from  the  same  circumstance,  about  ‘  felt,’  and  the  use  it  might 
be  put  to.  Steevens  :  ‘  Block  ’  anciently  signified  the  head  part  of  the  hat,  or  the 
thing  on  which  a  hat  is  formed,  and  sometimes  the  hat  itself.  Thus  Much  Ado,  I,  i. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  Vi.] 


KING  LEAR 


285 

182 


It  were  a  delicate  stratagem,  to  shoe 
A  troop  of  horse  with  felt.  I  ’ll  put ’t  in  proof; 

182.  shoe]  Jhoo  F,.  Jhooe  F3F3F4.  183.  r  11... proof  /]  Om.  Qq. 

(hoot  Qq.  suit  Anon.*  put  7]  put  it  Cap.  Steev.  Ec. 

183.  felt]  fell  Qq.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Del.  i,  Sing.  Wh.  Ktly. 

75 :  *  He  wears  his  faith  but  as  the  fashion  of  his  hat :  it  ever  changes  with  the  next 
block.’  Again,  in  Beau,  and  FI.  Wit  at  Several  Weapons  [IV,  i] :  ‘I  am  so  haunted 
with  this  broad  brim’d  hat  Of  the  last  progress  block,  with  the  young  hatband.’ 
Again,  in  The  Two  Merry  Milkmaids,  1620:  * — my  haberdasher  has  a  new  block, 
and  will  find  me  and  all  my  generation  in  beavers ,’  &c.  Again,  in  Decker’s  Gul's 
Hornbook,  1609:  ‘ — that  cannot  observe  the  time  of  his  hatband,  nor  know  what 
fashioned  block  is  most  kin  to  his  head ;  for  in  my  opinion,  the  braine  that  cannot 
chuse  his  felt  well,’  &c.  Again,  in  The  Seven  Deadly  Sinnes  of  London,  by  Decker, 
1606:  ‘ — The  blocke  for  his.  head  alters  faster  than  the  felt-maker  can  fitte  him.’ 
To  the  same  effect  Rushton  ( Euphuism ,  p.  52)  cites  instances  from  Lily’s  Euphues. 
Collier  :  *  Block  ’  implies  that  Lear  is  referring  to  the  shape  of  his  hat,  when  ho 
probably  had  none  upon  his  head,  being,  as  we  are  told,  ‘  fantastically  dressed  with 
straw  and  wild  flowers.’  Few  things  can  be  clearer  than  that  *  block  ’  was  mis¬ 
heard  for  plot  as  it  stands  in  the  (MS),  and  that  the  ‘good  plot ’  was  to  shoe,  &c. 
[Capell’s  explanation  is,  to  me,  scarcely  satisfactory,  although  it  is  adopted  by  every 
editor  but  Collier,  and  is  amply  supported,  as  far  as  the  peculiar  use  of  the  word 
1  block’  is  concerned,  by  Steevens’s  and  Rushton’s  citations.  The  image  of  that  dis¬ 
traught  head  covered  by  a  felt  hat  is  not  pleasing,  to  say  the  least.  I  can  offer 
nothing  better,  unless  it  be  that  ‘  block  ’  is  used  in  its  ordinary  sense,  and  that  Lear 
mounts  one  to  deliver  his  preachment  from.  Since  writing  this  I  have  found  the  fol¬ 
lowing  in  Tieck  (iii,  241):  *  Brockmann  at  these  words  mounted  the  stump  of  a 
tree,’  For  this  Tieck  finds  fault  with  him;  ‘the  action  was  neither  necessary  nor 
did  it  impart  any  beauty  to  the  passage.  Schroder  aftenvards,  on  the  same  stage  in 
Vienna,  represented  himself  so  weak  and  worn  out  that  he  could  not  raise  his  trem¬ 
bling  foot  high  enough  to  mount  upon  the  stump ;  this  he  did  apparently  to  show  that 
his  predecessor  had  acted  what  was  not  true  to  nature.’  Tieck  adds,  that  ‘  Schroder, 
with  his  keen  intelligence,  would  probably  confess  in  cooler  moments  that  he  was 
even  more  sophistical  than  Brockmann;  an  old  man  who  was  as  weak  as  this 
could  certainly  not  have  stormed  about  the  open  fields,  and  made  his  pursuers  run 
hard  to  catch  him.’  In  Edwin  Booth’s  Prompt  Book  there  is  here  the  stage-direc¬ 
tion  :  *  Lear  takes  Curan’s  hat.’  This  is  certainly  better  than  to  suppose  that  he  took 
his  own. — Ed.] 

183.  felt]  Steevens  :  This  stratagem  might  have  been  adopted  from  the  following 
passage  in  Fenton’s  Tragicall  Discourses,  1567:  * — he  attyreth  himselfe  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  in  a  night  gowne  girt  to  hym,  with  a  paire  of  shoes  of  felt,  Leaste  the  noyse  of 
his  feete  shoulde  discover  his  goinge.’  Malone:  This  ‘delicate  stratagem’  had  ac¬ 
tually  been  put  in  practice  fifty  years  before  Sh.  was  born,  as  we  learn  from  Lord 
Herbert’s  Life  of  Henry  the  Eighth,  p.  41 :  *  the  ladye  Margaret, .  .  .  caused  there  a 
juste  to  be  held  in  an  extraordinary  manner ;  the  place  being  a  fore-room  raised  high 
from  the  ground  by  many  steps,  and  paved  with  black  square  stones  like  marble ; 
while  the  horses,  to  prevent  sliding,  were  shod  with  felt  or  flocks  (the  Latin  words 
are  feltro  sive  tomento ) ;  after  which  the  ladies  danced  all  night.’ 


236 


KING  LEAR 


[act  rv,  sc.  vi. 


And  when  I  have  stol’n  upon  these  sons-in-law, 

Then,  kill,  kill,  kill,  kill,  kill,  kill !  185 


Enter  a  Gentleman,  with  Attendants. 

Gent.  Oh,  here  he  is ;  lay  hand  upon  him. — Sir, 

Your  most  dear  daughter — 

Lear.  No  rescue?  What,  a  prisoner ?  I  am  even 
The  natural  fool  of  fortune.  Use  me  well ; 

You  shall  have  ransom.  Let  me  have  surgeons ;  190 

I  am  cut  to  thJ  brains. 

Gejit.  You  shall  have  anything. 

Lear.  No  seconds  ?  all  myself? 


184.  I  have"]  I've  Pope+,  Dyce  ii, 
Huds. 

stoV  n]Jl  ole  Qq. 

sons-in-law]  fonne  in  /awes  Qt. 
fonnes  in  law  Qa.  Son  in  Lawes  Fx, 
Rowe,  Cap.  Sonnes  in  Lawes  Fa.  Sons 
in  Laws  F3.  Sons-in-Laws  F4. 

185.  Enter.. .Attendants.]  Rowe.  En¬ 
ter  three  Gentlemen.  Qq.  Enter  a  Gen¬ 
tleman.  Ff.  Enter  Gentleman,  and  At¬ 
tendants  of  Cordelia ;  and  Guard.  Cap. 

186.  Scene  vni.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

hand]  hands  Qq,  Jen. 


1S6.  him.  Sir,]  Johns,  him  firs,  Q,. 
him  firs.  Q„.  him  :  sir,  Rowe,  him. 
Sir.  Ff. 

1 87.  Your. ..daughter — ]  Om.  Qa.  your 
most  deere  (reading  0...deere  as  one  line) 

Qi- 

1 88.  even]  eene  Qq. 

190.  ransom]  a  ranfom  Qa. 
surgeons]  Ff +  ,  Knt,  Dyce  l, 

Sta.  Glo.  Wr.  Sch.  a  churgion  Qt.  a 
Chirurgeon  Qa.  a  surgeon  Cap.  et  cet. 

1 9 1 .  lam]  I'm  Huds. 
to  ih’]  to  the  Qr. 


185.  kill,  kill]  Malone:  This  was  formerly  the  word  given  in  the  English  army 
when  an  onset  was  made.  So  in  Ven.  dr  Ad.  652 :  *  in  a  peaceful  hour  doth  cry 
“  kill,  kill.”  ’  Again,  in  The  Mirrour  for  Magistrates,  1610,  p.  315  :  *  Our  English¬ 
men  came  boldly  forth  at  night,  Crying  Saint  George,  Salisbury,  kill,  kill.’ 

189.  fool  of  fortune]  Steevens  :  Compare  *  I  am  fortune’s  fool,’  Rom.  dr  Jul. 
Ill,  i,  129.  Walker  ( Crit .  ii,  309) :  Here  *  natural  fool  ’  means  one  born  to  be  the 
sport  of  fortune.  Bacon  speaks  of  ‘  natural  Spaniards,’  i.  e.  native.  Massinger,  in 
The  Renegado,  II,  iv,  has  ‘  a  natural  Venetian.’ 

191.  cut  to  th’  brains]  Cowden  Clarke:  This,  one  of  the  most  powerfully,  yet 
briefly  expressed,  utterances  of  mingled  bodily  pain  and  consciousness  of  mental  in¬ 
firmity  ever  penned,  is  not  the  only  subtle  indication  in  this  scene  that  Lear  not 
merely  feels  himself  to  be  insane,  but  also  feels  acute  physical  suffering.  *  I  am  not 
ague-proof’  tells  how  severely  shaken  his  poor  old  frame  has  been  by  exposure  through¬ 
out  that  tempestuous  night;  ‘pull  off  my  boots;  harder,  harder,’  gives  evidence  of  a 
sensation  of  pressure  and  impeded  circulation  in  the  feet,  so  closely  connected 
with  injury  to  the  brain;  and  ‘I  am  cut  to  the  brains’  conveys  the  impression  of 
wounded  writhing  within  the  head,  that  touches  us  with  deepest  sympathy.  Yet,  at 
the  same  time,  there  are  the  gay  irrationality  and  the  incoherency  that  mark  this 
stage  of  mania. 


ACT  IV,  SC.  Vi.] 


KING  LEAP. 


287 


Why,  this  would  make  a  man  a  man  of  salt,  193 

To  use  his  eyes  for  garden  water-pots, 

*  Ay,  and  laying  autumn’s  dust.  195 

*  Gent.  Good  sir, — * 

Lear.  I  will  die  bravely,  like  a  smug  bridegroom.  What ! 

I  will  be  jovial.  Come,  come;  I  am  a  king, 

My  masters,  know  you  that? 

Gent.  You  are  a  royal  one,  and  we  obey  you.  200 

Lear.  Then  there ’s  life  in ’t.  Come,  and  you  get  it,  you 
shall  get  it  by  running.  Sa,  sa,  sa,  sa. 

[ Exit  running  ;  Attendants  follow. 
Gent.  A  sight  most  pitiful  in  the  meanest  wretch, 

Past  speaking  of  in  a  king !  Thou  hast  one  daughter, 

Who  redeems  nature  from  the  general  curse  205 

Which  twain  have  brought  her  to. 

Edg.  Hail,  gentle  sir. 

Gent.  Sir,  speed  you ;  what's  your  will  ? 


193.  a  man  a  man]  a  man  Qq. 
194-199.  To. ..that]  As  in  Jen.  Three 
lines,  ending  brauely...Iouiall  :....that  ? 
Ff  +  ,  Cap.  ( Come ,  come  separate  line, 
Cap.) 

195,  196.  Ay... sir]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe. 

195.  Ay, and]  landQ q.  And Fope  + , 
Cap.  Ay,  and  for  Steev.  Bos.  Knt,  Coll. 

196.  Gent.  Good  sir]  Ora  Ql(  Pope +, 
Cap. 

197-199.  I. ..that  /]  Two  and  a  half 
lines,  ending  bravely. .  jovial. . .that  ?  Coll. 
Del.  Wh.  Ktly. 

197.  smug]  Om.  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Ec. 
Var.  Sta.  Glo. 

198.  199.  king.  My  masters]  King, 
Maflers  F,.  King.  Maflers  FaF3F4, 
Rowe.  king.  My  tnasters  Pope,  Theob. 


Han.  Warb.  king ;  masters  Sch. 

199.  that  .<’]  that.  Q,,  Dyce,  Glo.  +  . 
that !  Sta.  Huds. 

201,  202.  Then...sa.]  Two  lines,  the 
find  ending^  it,  Ff +  . 

201.  Come,  and]  Ff,  Rowe,  Sch. 
Come,  an  Pope,  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 
Knt,  Sing.  Come,  an'  Johns,  nay  and 
Q,.  nay  tfQ0.  Nay,  come,  an  Jen.  Ec. 
Nay,  if  Glo.  +  .  Nay,  an  Cap.  et  cet. 

202.  by]  with  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Glo.  Wr. 
Sa,  sa,  sa,  sa.]  Om.  Qq. 

[Exit...]  Exit,  running;  Attend¬ 
ants  and  Guard  follow.  Cap.  Exit  King 
running  Qq.  Exit.  Ff. 

204.  one]  a  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
Knt,  Sch. 

206.  have]  hath  Qq.  had  Anon.* 


193.  salt]  Malone:  That  is,  a  man  of  tears.  Wright:  Compare  Chapman, 
Widow's  Tears,  IV,  i :  ‘lie  not  turn  Salt-peeter  in  this  vault  for  neuer  a  mans  com- 
panie  liuing.’ 

201.  life  in’t]  Johnson:  The  case  is  not  yet  desperate. 

202.  Sa,  sa]  Boswei.l  :  Does  not  this  seem  to  prove  that  *  Sessa,’  III,  iv,  96, 
means  the  very  reverse  of  cessez  ?  Hudson  :  It  is  probably  meant  to  express  Lear’s 
panting  as  he  runs.  Stark  (Eine psychiatrische  Sh.-Studie,  p.  80)  interprets  this  as 
singing,  and  says :  ‘  Lear  skips  away  carolling  and  dancing.’ 


283 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  sc.  vi. 


Edg.  Do  you  hear  aught,  sir,  of  a  battle  toward  ?  208 

Gent.  Most  sure  and  vulgar;  every  one  hears  that, 

Which  can  distinguish  sound. 

Edg.  But,  by  your  favour,  2 10 

How  near ’s  the  other  army? 

Gent.  Near  and  on  speedy  foot;  the  main  descry 
Stands  on  the  hourly  thought. 

Edg.  I  thank  you,  sir;  that’s  all. 

Gent.  Though  that  the  queen  on  special  cause  is  here, 

Her  army  is  moved  on. 

Edg.  I  thank  you,  sir.  [Exit  Gent.  215 

Glou.  You  ever-gentle  gods,  take  my  breath  from  me; 

Let  not  my  worser  spirit  tempt  me  again 
To  die  before  you  please ! 

Edg.  Well  pray  you,  father. 

Glou.  Now,  good  sir,  what  are  you  ? 

Edg.  A  most  poor  man,  made  tame  to  fortune’s  blows ;  220 


208.  aught']  Theob.  ii.  ought  QqFf. 
sir,]  Om.  Qq. 

209,210.  Most. ...sound.]  As  in  Qt. 
The  first  line  ends  heares ,  Qa;  at  vulgar , 
Ff,  Rowe. 

209.  one]  ones  Q2. 

hears  that]  here's  that  Q,.  heares 
That  Qa. 

210.  Which...sound]  That. ..fence  Qx. 
That..fenfe  Q2. 

210,  211.  But.. . army  ?]  One  line,  Qq. 
212.  speedy  foot] /peed  fort  Qx.  fpeed 


for't  Q2. 

212.  descry]  deferyes  Q,.  def cries  Q2. 

213.  Stands]  Standfl  Qr 
thought ]  thoughts  Qq. 
that 's  all]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

215.  Her]  Hir  Qx.  His  Q2. 

Edg.  I... sir.]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 
[Exit  Gent.]  Johns.  Exit.  Qq. 
Exit,  (after  on),  Ff. 

216.  ever-gentle]  Hyphen,  Cap. 

218.  Well  pray]  Well,  pray  Q,F4. 
220.  tame  to]  lame  by  Qq,  Mai.  Bos. 


209.  vulgar]  Compare  Ham.  I,  ii,  99 :  ‘  any  the  most  vulgar  thing  to  sense.’ 

212.  213.  main  descry  .  .  .  thought]  Johnson  :  The  main  body  is  expected  to 
be  descried  every  hour.  The  expression  is  harsh.  Staunton  :  The  expression  is 
as  harsh  and  disagreeable  as  the  speaker’s  ‘  Most  sure  and  vulgar  ’  just  before. 
Moberly:  The  substantive  ‘descry’  is  like  ‘more  impediments  than  twenty  times 
your  stop,’  Oth.  V,  ii,  263. 

213.  that ’s  all]  Both  Jennens  and  The  Cambridge  Editors  note  these  words  as 
omitted  in  Q2,  the  ‘  N.  Butter*  Quarto.  They  are  present  in  my  copy,  in  Steevens’s 
Reprint,  and  in  Ashbee’s  Facsimile.  I  note  this  simply  as  an  indication  of  the  dif¬ 
ferences  in  different  copies  of  the  same  edition. — Ed. 

214.  Though  that]  See  Macb.  IV,  iii,  106:  Abbott,  §287. 

218.  father]  Hudson:  As  this  was  a  customary  address  from  the  young  to  the 
old,  Edgar  keeps  addressing  Gloucester  so  without  being  recognized  as  his  son. 

220.  tame]  Malone  adhered  to  the  text  of  the  Qq,  because  of  the  parallelism 
with  .Sb«..xxxvii:  ‘  So  I,  made  lame  by  fortune’s  dearest  spight.’ 


ACT  IV,  SC.  VI.] 


KING  LEAR 


2  $9 


Who,  by  the  art  of  known  and  feeling  sorrows,  22 1 

Am  pregnant  to  good  pity.  Give  me  your  hand, 

I  ’ll  lead  you  to  some  biding. 

Glou.  Hearty  thanks ; 

The  bounty  and  the  benison  of  heaven 
To  boot,  and  boot ! 

Enter  Oswald. 

Osw.  A  proclaim’d  prize !  Most  happy !  225 

That  eyeless  head  of  thine  was  first  framed  flesh 
To  raise  my  fortunes. — Thou  old  unhappy  traitor, 

Briefly  thyself  remember ;  the  sword  is  out 
That  must  destroy  thee. 

Glou .  Now  let  thy  friendly  hand 

Put  strength  enough  to ’t. 

Osw.  Wherefore,  bold  peasant,  230 


221.  known]  knowing  Han.  Ktly. 

223-225.  Hearty. .. boot  /]  Prose,  Qq. 

224,225.  The  bounty . boot  /]  One 

line,  Pope,  Jen. 

224.  bounty-]  hornet  Qt. 

the  benison]  beniz  Q,. 

225.  To  boot,  and  boot]  to  fane  thee 
Q,.  to  boot,  to  bool  Q2.  to  boot  Pope, 
Han.  Jen.  (  To  boot  Han.,  as  a  separate 
line.) 

Enter  Oswald.]  Coll.  Enter 
Steward.  QqFf. 

Scene  ix.  Pope+,Jen. 


225,  &c.  Osw.]  Stew.  QqFf. 
225-233.  A. ..arm.]  Prose,  Qq. 

225.  Most]  this  is  most  Han. 
happy  /]  happy,  Qt .  happy  ;  Qa. 

happie  Fr,  happy:  F3F3F4. 

226.  first]  Om.  Q1# 

227.  Thou]  Om.  Pope+. 
old]  mofi  Qq. 

229.  Now]  Om.  Pope  +  . 

230.  to  V]  QqF3F4,  Jen.  Glo.4-,  Sch. 
too  V  F,F2.  to  it  Kan.  et  cet. 

Edgar  opposes.]  Johns.  Edgar 
interposes.  Coll. 


221.  known  and  feeling]  Warburton:  Sorrows  past  and  present.  Malone: 
I  doubt  whether  feeling  is  not  used  for  felt.  Sorrows  known,  not  by  relation,  but 
by  experience.  Eccles  :  *  Feeling  sorrows  *  are  such  as,  by  awakening  sympathy, 
make  us  feel  for  others.  Cowden  Clarke:  *  Feeling’  is  here  used  in  both  senses 
of  ‘personally  felt’  and  ‘deeply  moving.’  Compare  Wint.  Tale,  IV,  ii,  8:  ‘To 
whose  feeling  sorrows  I  might  be  some  allay.’  Abbott,  §  372,  seems  to  adopt 
Malone’s  view;  he  explains  ‘Feeling’  as  ‘known,’  passively,  ‘known  and  realized 
sorrows.’  Schmidt:  ‘Feeling’  is  here  not  a  participle  but  a  gerund,  and  ‘feeling 
sorrows’  is  equivalent  to  heartfelt  sorrows.  It  is  essentially  the  same  gerund  as  in 
dying  speech,  writing  book,  washing  tub ,  &c. 

222.  pregnant]  Schmidt  :  Disposed,  prompt,  ready.  [See  II,  i,  76.] 

228.  remember]  Warburton  :  Recollect  the  past  offences  of  thy  life  and  recom¬ 
mend  thyself  to  heaven. 

229,  230.  Nov/  .  .  .  to’t]  Cowden  Clarke  understands  this  as  a  call  to  Edgar 
to  defend  him.  With  all  deference  I  cannot  but  think  that  it  is  addressed  to  Oswald, 
begging  him  to  put  strength  enough  to  his  destroying  sword  to  make  sure  work 
with  it. — Ed. 

25 


T 


290 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  sc.  vi. 


Dar’st  thou  support  a  publish’d  traitor?  Hence!  231 

Lest  that  th’  infection  of  his  fortune  take 
Like  hold  on  thee.  Let  go  his  arm. 

Edg.  Chill  not  let  go,  zir,  without  vurther  ’casion. 

Oszu.  Let  go,  slave,  or  thou  diest !  235 

Edg.  Good  gentleman,  go  your  gait,  and  let  poor  volk 
pass.  And’  chud  ha'  bin  zwagger’d  out  of  my  life,  ’twould 
not  ha’  bin  zo  long  as  ’tis  by  a  vortnight.  Nay,  come  not 


231.  Ear’s/]  durjl  Qf,  darjl  Q2. 
Darjl  F2F3F4. 

232.  that  th’]  that  Knt. 
that]  Om.  Qq,  Cap. 

233, 234.  Like. ..not]  One  line,  Cap. 
234.  Chill...’ casion.]  Two  lines,  Ff. 
zir]  fir  Qq. 

vurther]  Ora.  Qq.  further  Jen. 
V art  her  Coll. 

’casion]  cagion  Qq. 

236.  and]  Om.  Qq. 

volk]  voke  Qx.  volke  Q2FXF2. 

237.  And’  chud]  Ff+,Jen.  and  chud 


Qq,  Sch.  an  ch'ttd  Cap.  \Vh.  an  chud 
Dyce,  Glo.  +  .  and  ch'ud  Steev.  et  cet. 

237>  238.  ha’  bin]  F,F2F3.  haue  beene 
Qq.  ha'  been  F4. 

237.  zwagger’d]  zwaggerd  Ft.  fwag * 
gar'd  Qx.  zwaggar'd  Q2.  zwagged  F2 
F  F 

r3rV 

’ twould ]  it  would  Qj.  it  wold  Q2. 
23S.  not  ha’]  ha’  F3F4. 

z°\f°  Qt- 

as  ’tis]  Om.  Qq. 
vortnight]  fortnight  Qf. 


234.  Chill,  &c.]  Steevens:  When  our  ancient  writers  introduce  a  rustic  they 
commonly  allot  him  this  Somersetshire  dialect.  Mercury,  in  the  second  book  of 
Ovid’s  Metamorphoses,  assumes  the  appearance  of  a  clown,  and  Golding  has  made 
him  speak  with  the  provinciality  of  Shakespeare’s  Edgar  [p.  26,  *  And  I  chill  gethee 
vor  thy  paine  an  Hecfar  an  hir  match.’  The  pleonastic  *  I  chill’  is  probably  an  over¬ 
sight  on  Golding’s  part ;  a  line  or  two  farther  on  there  is  no  ‘  I  ’  before  ‘  Cham  zure.* 
Capell’s  spelling  ch'ill,  and  ch'ud  in  line  237,  is  probably  the  most  correct,  but,  in  a 
matter  so  trifling  and  so  vague,  we  might  as  well  follow  the  Ff,  even  in  their  mis¬ 
spellings.  I  have,  therefore,  printed  ‘bin’  and  ‘whither,’  which  may  be,  in  reality, 
indications  of  the  pronunciation. — Ed.]  Ellis  ( E .  E.  Pronunciation,  p.  293) : 
The  contractions  cham,  chas,  chil  (tsham,  tshas,  tslnl)  for  ich  am,  ich  was,  ich  will, 
are  mentioned  by  Gill  ( Logonomia ,  p.  17)  as  a  Southern  pronunciation,  in  Rev.  W. 
Barnes’s  edition  of  the  Glossary  of  the  Dialect  of  Forth  and  Bargy,  and  in  the 
Glossary  to  his  Poems  in  the  Dorset  dialect,  1858,  p.  150.  The  dialectic  pronun¬ 
ciations  Ise,  'ch  are  preserved  [here  in  Lear].  About  thirty  years  ago  utchy  was 
in  use  for  /  in  the  eastern  border  of  Devonshire  and  in  Dorset,  and  examples  of 
chant,  chould  =  I  am,  I  would,  occur  in  the  Exmoor  Scolding,  which  dates  from 
the  beginning  of  the  last  century.  Wright:  I  will,  contracted  from  *  ich  will,’  just 
as  ‘  chud’  is  for  ‘  ich  would  ’  or  ‘  ich  should.’  In  Grose’s  Provincial  Glossary  ‘  chell  ’ 
is  said  to  be  used  for  ‘I  shall’  in  Somerset  and  Devon,  and  ‘cham’  for  ‘I  am’  in 
Somerset.  In  Whetstone’s  Promos  and  Cassandra  we  find  ‘  cham,’  *  chy,’  ‘  chaue,’ 
•  chub’ 

236.  gait]  Steevens  :  In  the  last  rebellion,  when  the  Scotch  soldiers  had  finished 
their  exercise,  instead  of  our  term  of  dismission,  their  phrase  was  ‘gang  your  gaits.’ 


ACT  IV,  SC.  Vi.] 


KING  LEAR 


291 


near  th’  old  man ;  keep  out,  che  vor’  ye,  or  ice  try  whither 
your  costard  or  my  hallow  be  the  harder;  chill  be  plain  24.0 
with  you. 

Osw.  Out,  dunghill !  [They  fight. 

Edg.  Chill  pick  your  teeth,  zir ;  come ;  no  matter  vor 
your  foins. 

Osw.  Slave,  thou  hast  slain  me.  Villain,  take  my  purse ;  245 
If  ever  thou  wilt  thrive,  bury  my  body; 

And  give  the  letters  which  thou  find’st  about  me 
To  Edmund  earl  of  Gloucester;  seek  him  out 


239.  th’]  the  Qq. 

che  vor'  ye]  cheuore  ye  Qq.  che 
’ vore  ye  Cap. 

ice]  Ff+ ,  Jen.  ile  Qq.  iz  Cap. 
Ise  or  ise  Johns,  et  cet. 

whither']  FT.  whether  Qq  et  cet. 
24.0.  costard ]  cojler  Q,. 

ballozu]  bat  Q2,  Pope  + ,  Cap.  Jen. 
Steev.  Ec.  Var.  baltero  Qt. 


240.  chill]  ile  Qt. 

242.  [They  fight.]  Qq.  Om.  Ff. 

243.  Chill]  Child  F4. 

Chill. ..come]  One  line,  Cap. 

zir]frQx. 

vor]  for  Qq. 

244.  [Edgar  knocks  him  down.  Rowe. 
Oswald  falls.  Cam. 

248,249.  To. ..out  Upon]  One  line,  Qq. 


239.  che  vor’  ye]  Johnson:  I  warn  you.  Wright:  Capell  quotes  from  an  old 
comedy  called  The  Contention  between  Liberality  and  Prodigality  (1602) :  ‘  Yoo  by 
gisse  sir  tis  high  time  che  vore  ye  Cham  averd  another  will  ha’te  afore  me.’ 

239.  ice]  Abbott,  §§  315,  461 :  Provincial  for ‘ I  shall.’  Delius  reads  *  ise,’  and 
considers  it  equivalent  to  else.  Wright:  In  Somersetshire  west  of  the  Parret,  ‘  Ise’ 
is  used  still  for  ‘  I,’  and  pronounced  like  *  ice.’ 

240.  costard]  The  name  of  an  apple,  and  hence,  according  to  Gifford  (Note  on 
the  Alchemist,  IV,  i),  humourously  applied  to  the  head.  Whence  *  coster-monger.’ 

240.  hallow]  Knight:  Grose  ( Provincial  Gloss.)  gives  ‘.his  as  a  North- country 
word  for  pole.  Collier  :  Balo  means  a  beam  in  Norfolk.  Battero  of  Q,  is  perhaps 
a  corruption  of  the  true  word,  as  it  is  in  the  Folio. 

244.  foins]  Dyce  ( Gloss.)  :  Pushes,  thrusts.  Cotgrave:  * Estoquer .  To  thrust,  or 
foyne  at.’ 

247.  letters]  Here,  and  in  line  255,  Mr  Smith  thinks  we  should  read  letter,  be¬ 
cause  only  one  letter  is  produced  and  read.  '•  Had  there  been  one  from  Regan  too, 
the  audience  no  doubt  should  have  heard  it  as  well  as  GoneriPs.’  See  IV,  v,  33. 
[Eccles,  Malone,  and  The  Cambridge  Editors  attribute  this  note  to  ‘Mr  Smith;’ 
it  is  found  in  Grey’s  Aroles,  &c.,  vol.  ii,  p.  1 14,  and,  although  it  is  not  always  perfectly 
clear  where  Grey’s  own  notes  end,  and  ‘  Mr  Smith’s  ’  notes,  that  he  quotes,  begin,  yet 
I  think  that  they  are  correct  in  this  instance.  When  I  compiled  the  note  on  IV,  v, 
33,  I  thought  that  to  ‘  Mr  Smith’  belonged  only  the  note  on  ‘  undistinguish’d  space 
of  woman’s  will,’  and  that  what  I  have  quoted  above  was  Grey’s.  *  Mr  Smith  of 
Harleston  in  Norfolk’  Grey  pronounces  ‘the  most  friendly  and  communicative  man 
living,’  and  adds,  that  he  was  *  greatly  assistant  to  Sir  Thomas  Hanmer  in  his  edition 
of  Shakespeare.’ — Ed.]  Malone  shows  that  *  letters  ’  was  used  like  epistolce,  when 
only  one  was  intended.  In  I,  v,  1,  Lear  tells  Kent  to  go  before  with  these  ‘letters,’ 
and  Kent  replies  that  he  would  deliver  the  ‘  letter.’ 


2Q2 


KING  LEAR 


[ACT  IV,  SC.  VI. 


Upon  the  English  party.  Oh,  untimely  death ! 

Death !  [Dies.  250 

Edg.  I  know  thee  well ;  a  serviceable  villain, 

As  duteous  to  the  vices  of  thy  mistress 
As  badness  would  desire. 

Glou.  What,  is  he  d6ad  ? 

Edg.  Sit  you  down,  father ;  rest  you. — 

Let ’s  see  these  pockets ;  the  letters  that  he  speaks  of  25  5 

May  be  my  friends.  He’s  dead ;  I  am  only  sorry 
He  had  no  other  deathsman.  Let  us  see. 

Leave,  gentle  wax ;  and,  manners,  blame  us  not. 

To  know  our  enemies’  minds,  we  rip  their  hearts ; 

Their  papers,  is  more  lawful.  260 

[Reads']  Let  otir  reciprocal  vows  be  remembered  You  have 


249.  Upon  the  English]  Upon  the 
Britijh  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Mai.  Steev.  Bos. 
Coll.  Sing.  Sta.  Wh.  Ktly,  Glo.  +  .  On 
th'  English  Han. 

249,  250.  Upon. ..death  /]  As  two  half¬ 
lines,  Cap. 

death!  Death!]  Cam.  Wr. 
death!  death.  Qq.  death ,  death.  Ff. 
death,  death —  Rowe,  death, —  Pope, 
Han.  death  ! — death  l  Jen.  death  ! 
Theob.  et  cet. 

250.  [Dies.]  He  dies.  Qq  (subs.). 
Om.  Ff. 

252,  253.  As  duteous...desire.]  One 
line,  Q, 

254-258.  Four  lines,  ending  pockets, 
...  friends, ...deathfman.. .not,  Qq,  Jen. 

254,  255.  you. — Let's]  you  lets  Qx. 
you,  lets  Q2. 


254.  [seating  him  at  a  Distance.  Cap. 

255.  these. ..the]  Ff +  ,  Cap.  Knt,  Dyce 
i,  Glo.  +  ,  Sch.  his...thefe  Qq  et  cet. 

256.  lam]  Em  Pope +  ,  Jen.  Dyce  ii, 
Huds. 

sorry]  forrow  Qt. 

258.  Leave]  By  your  leave  Rowe+. 
manners,  blame]  manners  blame 
Qq.  manners :  blame  Ff.  manners- 
blame  Rowe,  manners.  Blame  Johns. 

258.  259.  not.  To]  not  To  Q,Ff.  not. 
To  Qa,  Rowe,  not :  To  Pope  et  cet. 

259.  we]  Ff  +  ,  Coll.  Del.  Sta.  Wh. 
wee' d  Qq.  we' Id  Cap.  et  cet. 

260.  w]  are  FaF3F4  + . 

261.  [Reads]  Reads  the  Letter.  Ff. 

Letter.  Qa.  Om.  Qt. 

261-267.  Seven  lines,  in  italics,  Qa. 

261.  our]  your  Qq. 


249.  English]  See  III,  iv,  176.  Knight:  This  slight  difference  between  the  Qq 
and  Ff  proves  one  of  two  things:  Either  that  upon  the  publication  of  the  Folio  the 
distinction  between  British  and  English,  which  was  meant  as  a  mark  of  compliment 
to  James,  had  ceased  to  be  regarded;  or  that  the  passage, having  been  written  before 
his  accession,  had  not  been  changed  in  the  copy  from  which  the  Folio  was  printed, 
as  it  was  changed  in  the  copy  of  the  play  acted  before  the  king  in  1606.  White: 
*  English’  is  a  sophistication  doubtless.  Sh.  must  have  known  well  enough  that  in 
Lear’s  time  there  were  no  more  Englishmen  in  Britain  than  in  America.  [Sec  Ap¬ 
pendix,  p.  379.]  - 

252.  duteous]  Schmidt:  Constantly  in  Sh.  equivalent  to  obsequious,  obedient. 

257.  deathsman]  Schmidt:  Edgar  is  sorry  that  he  anticipated  the  hangman. 

260.  Their  .  .  .  lawful]  Malone:  The  construction  is:  To  rip  their  papers  is 
more  lawful.  [See  Abbott,  §§  337,  395,  and  IV,  ii,  11.] 


ACT  IV,  SC.  Vi.] 


KING  LEAR 


293 


many  opportunities  to  cut  him  off  ;  if  your  will  want  not,  time  262 
and  place  will  be  fruitfully  offered.  There  is  nothing  done,  if 
he  return  the  conqueror ;  then  am  I  the  prisoner,  and  his  bed 
my  gaol ;  from  the  loathed  warmth  whereof  deliver  me,  and  265 
supply  the  place  for  your  labour. 

Your — wife,  so  I  would  say — affectionate  servant, 

Goneril. 

O  indistinguish’d  space  of  woman’s  will ! 


263.  done,  if 1  done,  If  Q,.  done  :  If 
Qa.  done.  IfFi,  Ro\ye. 

264.  conqueror ;  then]  conquerbur, 
then  QqFf.  conqueror.  Then  Pope  +  , 
Jen. 

265.  gaol]  Gaole  Fa.  Goale  Fa.  Goal 

f3-  g«yk  Q,-  Iayle  Q3- 

266.  for  your]  of  our  F3F4,  Rowe. 

267.  — wife. ..say — ]  In  parentheses, 
Ff.  wife  (fo...say)  your  Qx.  wife  (fo... 


say )  your  Qa,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev.  Ec. 

Bos. 

267.  servant,]  seruant  and for  you  her 
owne  for  Venter,  Qx. 

269.  G]  OAF,.  Of  FaF3F4. 

indistinguish' d]  F4,  Rowe,  Wr. 
Sch.  Indifinguijht  Qz.  vndi/linguijht 
Qa.  indinguifh'd  FjF3F3.  undistin¬ 
guish'd  Pope  et  cet.  1 

will]  wit  Qq,  Pope. 


263.  fruitfully]  Wright:  Fully,  plentifully.  See  AlFs  Well,  II,  ii,  73:  ‘ Count. 
You  understand  me  ?  Clo.  Most  fruitfully.’  But  this,  in  the  mouth  of  the  Clown, 
may  have  been  an  intentional  blunder. 

267.  servant]  White:  Are  we  to  conclude  from  [the  text  of  QJ  that  Goneril 
makes  an  allusion  to  what  Mr  Weller  would  call  her  second  wenter,  or,  still  more 
prospectively,  uses  a  technical  term  better  suited  to  the  lips  of  Sergeant  Buzfuz  ? 

267.  Mitford  (Gent.  Mag.  p.  469,  1844)  says  that  ‘and  for  you  her  owne  for 
Venter’  of  Qt  is  only  a  corruption  of  and  your e  owne  for  ever. 

269.  space]  Theobald  in  his  correspondence  with  Warburton  (Nichols’s  Illus. 
ii,  382),  asks :  ‘  Does  [*  space’]  mean,  What  a  scope  more  than  we  can  discover,  do 
women  give  themselves  in  pursuits  of  vice!’  This  conjecture  was  not  repeated  in 
his  edition.  Singer  (Sh.  Vindicated,  &c.  p.  275)  suggests  *  “  undisguised  scope  of 
woman’s  will.”  If  we  adopt  wit  of  the  Qq,  we  might  read  “  undisguised  scape  of 
woman’s  wit.”  ’  Whereupon  Dyce  (ed.  i)  remarks :  ‘  Mr  Singer  offers  a  brace  of 
conjectures,  which  I  must  take  the  liberty  of  saying  he  ought  to  have  suppressed.’ 
The  *  brace  ’  failed  to  appear  in  Singer’s  subsequent  edition.  Voss  conjectures  pace, 
that  is,  *  How  trifling,  insignificant,  is  the  step  between  a  woman’s  different  wills  l  ’ 
Bailey  (i,  no)  thinks  ‘we  have  only  to  reflect  on  what  a  man  in  Edgar’s  position 
would  be  likely  to  say  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  right  reading.’  This  simple  process 
leads  Bailey  to  the  belief  that  maze  is  the  true  word  here. 

269.  Theobald  :  The  reading  [of  the  Ff :  ‘  will,’  instead  of  wit  of  the  Qq]  gives 
us,  as  Mr  Warburton  observes  to  me,  a  most  elegant  Expression  and  most  satirical 
Thought ;  more  delicate  than  the  *  varium  et  mutabile  semper  femina  ’  of  Virgil.  ’Tis 
not  the  Extravagance,  but  the  Mutability,  of  a  Woman’s  Will  that  is  here  satiriz’d. 
The  Change  of  which  (our  Author  would  be  understood  to  say,)  is  so  speedy,  that 
there  is  no  Space  of  time,  no  Distance,  between  the  present  Will  and  the  next;  but 
it  is  an  undistinguish’d  Space.  This  Sentiment  may  not  be  ill  explain’d  further  from 
what  honest  Sane  ho,  in  Don  Quixote,  with  infinite  Humour  says  upon  the  subject. 
25* 


294 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  sc.  vi. 


A  plot  upon  her  virtuous  husband’s  life ;  270 

And  the  exchange,  my  brother ! — Here,  in  the  sands, 

Thee  I  ’ll  rake  up,  the  post  unsandtified 
Of  murderous  lechers ;  and  in  the  mature  time 

271.  in  the]  in  rhe  Ft.  i’  tti  Pope  +  ,  273.  lechers]  trenchers  Clarke. 

Jen.  the  mature]  mature  Pope,  Han. 

272.  the  post]  thou  post  Ed.  conj. 


Entre  el  Si  y  el  No  de  la  muger,  no  me  atreveria  yo  d  poner  una  punta  d'AIfiler. 
Betwixt  a  Woman’s  Yea,  and  No,  I  would  not  undertake  to  thrust  a  Pin’s  Point. 
Davies  A  vicious  woman  sets  no  bounds  to  her  appetites.  Steevens  :  O  undis¬ 
tinguishing  licentiousness  of  a  woman’s  inclinations  !  Collier:  Here,  according  to 
the  (MS),  we  have  a  remarkable  proof  of  mishearing.  .  .  .  The  fact  is  that  ‘  undis¬ 
tinguish’d’  ought  to  be  unextinguish' d,  and  ‘space’  blaze;  thus  taking  ‘will’  for 
disposition,  the  clear  intention  of  the  poet  is  to  make  Edgar  exclaim  against  the 
unextinguishable  fire  or  blaze  of  the  appetite  of  woman,  as  illustrated  by  the  letter 
and  conduct  of  Goneril.  Dyce  :  ‘  Undistinguish’d  space  ’  means  space  whose  limits 
are  not  to  be  distinguished.  White:  That  is,  O,  unmarked,  boundless  reach  of 
woman’s  will !  Hudson  :  *  Undistinguish’d  ’  for  undistinguishable,  like  *  unnum¬ 
bered’  for  innumerable.  Woman’s  will  has  no  distinguishable  bounds  or  no  assign¬ 
able  limits ;  there  is  no  telling  what  she  will  do  or  where  she  will  stop.  Staunton  : 
Whatever  may  have  been  the  original  lection,  it  was  plainly  an  exclamation  against 
the  indiscriminate  caprice  of  woman  as  exhibited  by  Goneril  in  plotting  against  a 
virtuous  husband’s  life  merely  to  gain  a  villain  like  Edmund.  We  should  perhaps 
read :  *  undistinguishable  sense  of  woman’s  will.’  Wright  :  So  wide-reaching  [is 
a  woman’s  will]  that  its  workings  cannot  be  discovered.  .  .  .  Without  calling  in  ques¬ 
tion  the  absolute  truth  of  Sancho’s  profound  observation  [as  quoted  by  Theobald],  it 
is  at  least  allowable  to  doubt  the  propriety  of  applying  it  in  the  present  case.  Edgar’s 
astonishment  is  not  at  the  fickleness  and  caprice  of  Goneril,  but  at  the  enormous 
wickedness  of  the  plot  which  her  letter  revealed.  Moberly  :  The  passage  may  be 
a  reminiscence  of  Horace’s :  ‘  Cum  fas  atque  nefas  exiguo  fine  libidinum  Discernunt 
avidi  ’  ( Odes,  I,  xviii),  which  Mr  Wickham  renders :  ‘  While  in  their  greedy  haste  they 
divide  right  and  wrong  by  the  slender  line  of  their  own  appetite  j’  i.e.  ‘when  the 
only  distinction  which  they  place  between  right  and  wrong  is,  that  they  desire  the 
thing  or  not.’  So  here  Shakespeare’s  idea  seems  to  be  that  a  woman’s  will  knows 
no  limits  between  good  and  evil.  Schmidt  :  That  is,  *  Oh  undistinguishable  range 
of  the  female  appetite !  ’  Edgar  is  astonished  that  a  woman  can  be  found  to  prefer 
Edmund  to  the  noble  Albany. 

272.  rake  up]  Johnson  :  I  ’ll  cover  thee.  In  Staffordshire  to  rahe  the  fire  is  te» 
cover  it  with  fuel  for  the  night.  ‘So  ’tis  in  New  England.’ — Hudson.  Wricht: 
See  Heywood’s  Proverbs  ( Spenser  Soc.  ed.,  p.  48) :  ‘  We  parted,  and  this  within  a 
daie  or  twayne,  Was  raakt  vp  in  thashes,  and  coucrd  agayne.’ 

272.  unsanctified]  Steevens:  Referring  to  his  lack  of  burial  in  consecrated 
ground.  Schmidt;  As  ‘sanctified’  means  holy,  so  ‘  unsanctified ’  means  profane, 
wicked. 

273.  .mature]  Abbott,  §  492 :  Apparently  the  accent  is  *  mature.’  ‘  This  is  like 
nature,  but  I  know  of  no  other  instance  of  “  mature  ”  ’ 


ACT  IV,  SC.  vi.] 


KING  LEAR 


295 


With  this  ungracious  paper  strike  the  sight 

Of  the  death-pra£lised  duke.  For  him  'tis  well  275 

That  of  thy  death  and  business  I  can  tell. 

Glou.  The  king  is  mad.  How  stiff  is  my  vilde  sense, 

That  I  stand  up,  and  have  ingenious  feeling 
Of  my  huge  sorrows !  Better  I  were  distraft ; 

So  should  my  thoughts  be  sever’d  from  my  griefs,  280 

And  woes  by  wrong  imaginations  lose 

The  knowledge  of  themselves.  \_Dnan  afar  off. 

Edg.  Give  me  your  hand ; 

Far  off,  methinks,  I  hear  the  beaten  drum ; 

Come,  father,  I  ’ll  bestow  you  with  a  friend.  [Exeunt. 


275.  deathpradlised ]  Hyphen,  Ff. 

276.  thy\  his  Qa. 

[Exit  Edgar,  dragging  out  the 
Body.  Cap.  Buries  Oswald  Wh. 

277.  Two  lines,  Ff. 

vilde]  QaF,F3F3.  vild  Q,f  Del.  i, 
Sch.  vile  F4  et  cet. 

280.  sever'd ]  fenced  Qq,  Jen. 

281.  imaginations ]  imagination  Johns. 


282.  [Re-enter  Edgar.  Cap. 

[Drum  afar  off.]  A  drum  a  farre 
off.  Qq  (subs.)  Drum  afarre  off.  (after 
line  280),  Ff+,  Jen.  After  hand  Dyce. 
2S2, 283.  Give. ..drum  ;]  One  line, 
284.  Come,  father, ]  Come  further. 
Johns. 

[Exeunt.]  Exit.  Qq. 


275.  death-practised]  Johnson  :  The  duke  of  Albany,  whose  death  is  machi¬ 
nated  by  practice. 

278.  ingenious]  Warburton:  That  is,  a  feeling  from  an  understanding  not 
disturbed  or  disordered,  but  which,  representing  things  as  they  are,  makes  the  sense 
of  pain  the  more  exquisite.  Singer  :  Bullokar  gives,  *  Ingenious.  Witty  :  quicke 
conceited,’  i.  e.  acute.  Schmidt  :  ‘  Ingenious  *  exactly  corresponds  to  conscious. 

279.  distract]  The  -ed  is  omitted.  See  Ham.  IV,  v,  2. 


296 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  sc  viu 


Scene  VII.  A  tent  in  the  French  camp.  Lear  on  a  bed 
asleep ,  soft  music  playing ;  Gentleman,  and  others -at¬ 
tending. 

Enter  Cordelia,  Kent,  and  Doctor. 

Cor.  O  thou  good  Kent,  how  shall  I  live  and  work, 

To  match  thy  goodness?  My  life  will  be  too  short, 

And  every  measure  fail  me. 

Kent.  To  be  acknowledged,  madam,  is  o’erpaid. 

All  my  reports  go  with  the  modest  truth,  5 

Nor  more  nor  clipp’d,  but  so. 

Cor.  Be  better  suited ; 

These  weeds  are  memories  of  those  worser  hours ; 


Scene  vii.]  Sccena  Septima  Ff  (Scena 
F3F4).  Scene  vi.  Rowe.  Scene  x 
Pope+. 

A  tent.. .camp.]  Steev.,  aftei  Cap. 
A  Chamber.  Rowe. 

Lear... asleep,]  Steev.,  after  Cap. 
soft  music  playing,]  Cap.  conj., 
Dyce,  Sta.  Glo+. 

Gentleman...]  Glo.  Physician, 
Gentleman,...  Cap. 

Enter.. .and  Do<5tor.]  Enter.. .and  Gen¬ 


tleman.  Ff.  Enter  Cordelia  and  Kent. 
Cap. 

1-3.  O . me.]  As  in  Rowe.  Two 

lines,  the  first  ending  goodne's,  Q,.  Three 
lines,  ending  Kent,....goodneffe,....me,  in 
Qa,  Cap.  Five  lines,  ending  Kent,... 
worke. . .goodneff ■;  ?...Jhort,...niet  Ff. 

2.  My  life]  Life  Pope  +  . 

6-8.  Be. ...off.]  Two  lines,,  the  first 
ending  tkofe,  in  Qr. 


Enter  .  .  .  Doctor]  Malone  :  In  the  Ff  all  the  speeches  are  given  to  *  the  Gen¬ 
tleman’  which  in  the  Qq  are  divided  between  *  the  Physician’  and  ‘  Gentleman.-’  I 
suppose  from  a  penury  of  actors  it  was  found  convenient  to  unite  the  two  characters, 
which  were  originally  distinct.  Collier  :  It  is  singular  that  at  this  earlier  date  [of 
the  Qq]  the  more  expensive  course  [1.  e.  of  having  two  actors,  one  for  the  Doctor 
and  the  other  for  the  Gentleman]  should  have  been  pursued. 

3.  measure]  Johnson.:  All  good  which  I  shall  allot  thee,  or  measure  out  to  thee, 
will  be  scanty.  Becket  ( Concordance )  :  It  here  means  effort,  endeavour. 

4.  is  o’erpaid]  Eccles  :  Perhaps  it  should  be  read *  V/r  o’erpaid,’  that  is,  ‘  in 
being  acknowledged,  it  is  overpaid.’  Abbott,  §  395  :  That  is,  ‘is  (to be)  o’erpaid.’ 
See  IV,  ii,  n. 

5.  modest]  See  II,  iv,  24. 

6.  suited]  Steevens:  That  is,  be  better  dressed. 

7.  weeds]  Wright:  This  dress.  A.  S.  t odd,  clothing.  [Peck  ( Memoirs  of 
Milton,  p.  228) :  Sir  James  Melvil  (‘  Scots  ambassador  to  Q.  Elizabeth’)  says  of 
that  Queen’s  clothes:  ‘One  day  she  had  the  English  weed,  another  the  French,’ &c.] 

7.  memories]  Steevens:  Memorials.  Compare  ‘O  you  memory  Of  old  Sit 
Rowland,’  As  You  Like  It,  II,  iii,  3.  Malone  :  Thus  in  Stowe’s  Survey,  &c.,  1618 
*A  printed  memorie  hanging  up  in  a  table  at  the  entrance  into  the  church  door.’ 


ACT  IV,  SC.  vii.] 


KING  LEAR 


297 

I  prithee,  put  them  off. 

Kent.  Pardon,  dear  madam ;  8 

Yet  to  be  known  shortens  my  made  intent ; 

My  boon  I  make  it,  that  you  know  me  not  10 

Till  time  and  I  think  meet. 

Cor.  Then  be’t  so,  my  good  lord. — How  does  the  king? 
DoS?.  Madam,  sleeps  still. 

Cor.  O  you  kind  gods, 

Cure  this  great  breach  in  his  abused  nature !  15 

Th’  untuned  and  jarring  senses,  oh,  wind  up 
Of  this  child-changed  father ! 

Doft.  So  please  your  majesty 


8.  Pardon ]  Pardon  mt  Qq,  Jen.  Steev. 
Ec.  Var.  Coll.  Del.  Sing.  Wh.  Ktly, 
GIo+. 

11,12.  Till. ....sol  One  line,  Pope, 
Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Till. ..lord.  One 
line,  Rowe,  Johns.  Cap.  Jen.  Mai.  Ktly. 
Two  lines,  Ff. 

12.  be't\  beet  Qt.  be  it  Qa,  Pope  +  , 
Cap.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly. 

so,  my  good  lord. — How]  fo  my 
good  Lord :  How  Ff.  fo,  my  good 
Lord  how  Q,  fo :  my  Lord  how  Q2. 
so.  My  lord,  how  Pope  i.  so  My  lord- 
how  Pope  ii.  so,  My  lord. — How  Theob. 


Han.  Warb.  Cap. 

12.  [To  the  Physician.  Theob. 
[Going  towards  the  Bed.  Cap. 

13,  17.  Dodl.J  Gent.  Ff. 

13.  sleeps ]  he  sleeps  Ktly. 

14.  O  you  kind]  Kind  Cap. 

14,  15.  One  line,  Qt. 

16.  and  jarring ]  and  hurrying  Qq. 

17.  child-changed ]  child  changed  Q,. 
So  please ]  Please  Pope  + . 
majesty ]  Maiejly ,  Fr.  Majefly. 

Wv 

17,  18.  So. ..king.? J  One  line,  Qq. 


9.  made  intent]  Warburton  :  There  is  a  dissonancy  in  terms  in *  *  made  intent  ’ ; 
one  implying  the  idea  of  a  thing  done ;  the  other,  undone.  I  suppose  Sh.  wrote 

*  laid  intent,’  i.e.  projected.  [Thus  Warburton’s  text.]  Johnson:  An  intent  made 
is  an  intent  formed.  So  we  say,  in  common  language,  to  make  a  design,  and  to  make 
a  resolution.  Collier:  This  is  altered  to  *  main  intent’  in  the  (MS);  that  is,  my 
chief  purpose.  There  can  be  no  doubt  of  its  fitness,  since  all  that  could  be  extracted 
from  *  made  intent  ’  was,  that  it  was  an  intent  formed.  Kent  says  that  he  cannot 
change  his  dress,  since  he  must,  in  that  case,  be  known,  which  would  defeat  his  chief 
purpose.  [Thus  Collier’s  text.]  Staunton  :  Collier’s  (MS)  proposes  a  very 
plausible  change. 

17.  child-changed]  Steevens  :  That  is,  changed  to  a  child  by  his  years  and  his 
wrongs ;  or,  perhaps,  reduced  to  this  condition  by  his  children.  Henley  :  Lear  is 
become  insane,  and  this  is  the  change  referred  to.  Insanity  is  not  the  property  of 
second  childhood,  but  dotage.  Malone  :  Changed  by  his  children.  So  care-craz' d, 
wave-worn,  &c.  Delius  conjectures  that  it  may  mean  that  he  has  exchanged  chil¬ 
dren  ;  that  is,  that  he  has  left  Regan  and  Goneril  and  come  to  Cordelia.  Hal* 
LIWELL :  A  father  changed  by  the  conduct  of  his  children.  Cordelia  offers  the  kind¬ 
ness  of  another  child,  to  make  restoration  to  what  he  was  before  he  was  altered  by 
her  sisters.  Abbott,  §  430,  adopts  Steevens’s  view ;  that  is,  ‘  changed  to  a  child.’ 


298 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  sc.  vii. 


That  we  may  wake  the  king?  he  hath  slept  long.  18 

Cor.  Be  govern’d  by  your  knowledge,  and  proceed 
I’  th’  sway  of  your  own  will. — Is  he  array’d  ?  20 

Gent.  Ay,  madam ;  in  the  heaviness  of  ’  sleep 
We  put  fresh  garments  on  him. 

Doft.  Be  by,  good  madam,  when  we  do  awake  him ; 

I  doubt  not  of  his  temperance. 

*  Cor.  Very  well. 

*  Doct .  Please  you,  draw  near. — Louder  the  music  there  !* *  25 


18.  That]  Om.  Qs. 

king?  he. ..long!]  Han.  king,  He 
...long.  Qt.  King  He. ..long.  Q2.  King , 
he. ..long?  Ff. 

20.  array'd  /]  arayd,  Q,. 

[Soft,  music.  Wh. 

[Enter  Lear  in  a  chaire  carried 
by  Seruants.  Ff,  Del.  Sch.  Om.  Qq. 

21.  Gent.]  Dodt.  Qq,  Coll.  Del.  Sing. 
Ktly,  Sch.  Phys.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

of  ’sleep]  Ed.  of  sleepe  Ff.  Rowe  + , 


Cap.  Ec.  Knt,  Del.  Dyce,  Sta.  Sch.  of 
his  fleepe  Qq  et  cet. 

23.  Dodt.]  Cap.  (subs.),Wh.  Glo.  +  . 
Gent.  Q,.  Kent.  Q2,  Coll.  Del.  Sing. 
Ktly.  Continued  to  Gent,  or  Phys.  or 
Doct.  Ff+,  Jen.  Sch. 

Be  by, good  madam ]  Good  Madam 
be  by  Qq,  Coll.  Sing. 

24.  not ]  Om.  FtFa. 

24,  25.  Got. ...there /]  Om,  Ff+. 


20.  Is  he  array’d  ?]  From  this  question  Delius  infers  that  the  stage-direction  of 
the  Ff  is  correct,  and  that  Lear  is  not  on  the  stage  at  the  opening  of  the  scene.  [But, 
if  Lear  be  represented  on  or  in  a  bed,  Cordelia’s  question  is  not  inappropriate,  or, 
if  he  be  asleep,  in  a  chair,  swathed  round  with  robes,  the  question  might  still  be 
asked. — Ed.] 

21.  of  ’sleep]  I  think  this  is,  probably,  an  instance  of  the  absorption  of  his. — Ed. 

25.  Louder  .  .  .  there  !]  Capell  :  A  noble  thought  of  the  poet’s  in  this  editor’s 

judgement  [i.  e.  Capell’s]  ;  what  he  gathers  [from  these  words]  is  this :  that  a  soft 

*  music  ’  should  be  heard  at  the  scene’s  opening,  and  behind  the  bed,  which  is  dis¬ 
tant  ;  that  this  music  had  been  Lear’s  composer,  and  (together  with  his  composure) 
his  cure;  that  it  is  now  call’d-to  by  the  Doctor  for  the  purpose  of  waking  him,  by 
such  strains  as  were  proper,  rising  gradually;  which  is  not  a  noble  thought  only,  but 
just,  and  of  good  effect  on  the  scene. 

25.  music]  Bucknill  (p.  222) :  This  seems  a  bold  experiment,  and  one  not  un- 
fraught  with  danger.  The  idea  that  the  insane  mind  is  beneficially  influenced  by 
music  is,  indeed,  an  ancient  and  general  one ;  but  that  the  medicated  sleep  of  insanity 
•should  be  interrupted  by  it,  and  that  the  first  object  presented  to  the  consciousness 
should  be  the  very  person  most  likely  to  excite  profound  emotion,  appear  to  be  ex¬ 
pedients  little  calculated  to  promote  that  tranquillity  of  the  mental  functions  which  is, 
undoubtedly,  the  safest  state  to  induce,  after  the  excitement  of  mania.  A  suspicion 
of  this  may  have  crossed  Shakespeare’s  mind,  for  he  represents  Lear  in  imminent 
danger  of  passing  into  a  new" form  of  delusion.  The  earliest  note  of  the  employ¬ 
ment  of  music  in  the  treatment  of  thfe  insane  is  in  the  'Bible  (1  Sam.  xvi)  where 
David  calmed  Saul.  .  .  .  Modern  physicians  appear  to  “have  little  faith  in  its  effects 
when  simply  listened  to.  Esquirol  says,  *  I  have  often  employed  music,  but  very 
rarely  obtained  any  success  thereby.  It  calms  and  composes  the  mind,  but  does  not 


KING  LEAR 


299 


act  rv,  sc.  vii.J 

Cor.  O  my  dear  father,  restoration  hang-  2 6 

Thy  medicine  on  my  lips,  and  let  this  kiss 
Repair  those  violent  harms  that  my  two  sisters 
Have  in  thy  reverence  made ! 

Kent.  Kind  and  dear  princess ! 

Cor.  Had  you  not  been  their  father,  these  white  flakes  30 
Did  challenge  pity  of  them.  Was  this  a  face 
To  be  opposed  against  the  warring  winds  ? 

*  To  stand  against  the  deep  dread-bolted  thunder? 

*  In  the  most  terrible  and  nimble  stroke 

*  Of  quick,  cross  lightning?  to  watch,  poor  perdu  !  35 


26-29.  0...made /]  Three  lines,  end¬ 
ing  lips,.. ftflers,.. .made .  Q,.  Four  lines, 
father,...lippes,...harmes...made.  Q2. 

26  father ,  restoration ]  Ff  {reftaura- 
tian  FJ,  Huds.  Sch.  father  refloratib 
Q,.  father.  Ref  oration  Qa.  father! 
Restoration  Pope  et  cet. 

restoration  hang ]  Restauration, 
hang  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Jen. 
Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Sta.  Wh. 
Ktly. 

27.  Thy ]  Her  Han.  Its  So  quoted 
by  Mrs  Jameson. 

[Kisses  him.  Johns. 

29.  dear]  dearest  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 

31.  Did  challenge]  Ff+,  Cap.  Sch. 


Had  challengd  Qr.  Had  challeng'd  Qa 
et  cet. 

31.  a  face]  face  F3F4,  Ro-.ve,  Pope, 
Han.  Jen. 

32.  opposed]  expofd  Qq,  Pope-f ,  Jen, 
Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Coll,  i.  Sing.  Ktly. 

warring]  iarring  Ft.  jarring 
F2F3F4,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sch. 

33-36.  To. ..helm  ?]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han. 

33.  dread-bolted]  Hyphen,  Theob. 

35.  lightning  ?  to]  As  in  Theob.  light¬ 
ning  to  Qx.  lightning,  to  Qa. 

watch,  poor  perdu  J]  Warb. 
watch  poore  Per  du,  Qq.  watch  poor 
Perdue :  Theob. 


cure.  I  have  seen  insane  persons  whom  music  rendered  furious ;  .  .  .  I  believe  the 
ancients  exaggerated  the  effects  of  music,  while  the  facts  recorded  by  modern  writers 
are  not  sufficiently  numerous  to  determine  under  what  circumstances  it  possibly  may 
be  of  benefit.  This  means  of  treatment,  however,  is  precious,  especially  in  con¬ 
valescence,  and  ought  not  to  be  neglected,  however  indeterminate  may  be  the  prin¬ 
ciples  of  its  application,  and  however  uncertain  may  be  its  efficacy.’ 

26.  restoration,  &c.J  Warburton  :  This  is  fine.  She  invokes  the  goddess  of 
health,  Hygieia,  under  the  name  of  *  Restoration,’  to  make  her  the  minister  of  her  rites, 
in  this  holy  office  of  recovering  her  father’s  lost  senses.  SteeveNS :  ‘  Restoration’ 
is  no  more  than  recovery  personified.  Delius  :  The  construction  is  lLet  restoration 
hang,’  See.  ‘Thy  medicine’  is  Lear’s  medicine,  the  medicine  which  is  to  restore 
him.  [This  is  also  Hudson’s  explanation,  and  clearly  the  true  one. — Ed.] 

33.  dread-bolted]  Cowden  Clarke  calls  attention  to  the  number  of  compound 
words  in  this  play. 

35.  lightning]  Walker  (  Vers.  17) :  Is  not  ‘lightning’  a  trisyllable?  Pronounce, 
I  think,  ‘p£rdu;’  the  flow  of  the  verse  shows  this;  and  the  instances  I  have  met 
with  of  the  use  of  the  word  mostly  agree  with  this  supposition.  [Here  follow  many 
instances  of  perdue  (among  them  the  line  from  The  Little  French  Lawyer  quote 


KING  LEAR 


[aqt  iv,  sc.  vil. 


300 

*  With  this  thin  helm  ?* *  Mine  enemy’s  dog,  36 

Though  he  had  bit  me,  should  have  stood  that  night 
Against  my  fire ;  and  wast  thou  fain,  poor  father, 

To  hovel  thee  with  swine  and  rogues  forlorn. 


36.  helm  ?  Aline']  helme  mine  Qx. 

36-38.  Aline. ..father^]  Three  lines, 
ending  me, ...fre,... father),  Ff.  Ending 
should. ..fire  .-...father.  Pope. 

36.  Aline  enemy's]  Pope.  Aline  Ene¬ 
mies  Ff.  mine  iniurious  Qq.  My  very 


enemy's  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Mine  in¬ 
jure  As  Cap. 

36.  dog]  dog,  even  Ktly. 

36-42.  Aline. ..him,]  Lines  end  shou'a 
...wast. ..swine.. .straw  ?...wits,.. .wakes, . . . 
him.  Han.  (reading  Alack  !  only  once) 


below)  and  of  ‘lightning’  as  a  trisyllable.  See  also  to  the  same  effect  Abbott. 
§  477.  Keightley’s  text  reads  ‘  lightening.’] 

35.  perdu]  Reed:  In  Polemon’s  Collection  of  Battels,  bl.  1.  p.  98,  an  account  of 
the  battle  of  Marignano  is  translated  from  Jovius,  in  which  is  the  following  passage : 

*  They  were  very  chosen  fellowes  taken  out  of  all  the  Cantons,  men  in  the  prime  of 
youth,  and  of  singular  forwardenesse :  who  by  a  very  auntient  order  of  that  country,  that 
by  dooyng  some  deede  of  passyng  prowesse  they  may  obtaine  rare  honour  of  warrefare 
before  they  be  growen  in  yeares,  doe  of  themselves  request  all  perillous  and  harde’ 
pieces  of  service,  and  often  use  with  deadlye  praise  to  runne  unto  proposed  death.. 
These  men  do  they  call,  of  their  immoderate  fortitude  and  stoutnesse,  the  desperats 
forlorne  hopen,  and  the  Frenchmen  enfans perdus :  and  it  is  lawfull  for  them,  by  the 
prerogative  of  their  prowesse,  to  beare  an  ensigne,tohave  conducte  and  double  wages 
all  their  life  long.  Neyther,  are  the  forlorne  knowen  from  the  rest  by  anye  other 
marke  and  cognisance  than  the  plumes  of  white  feathers,  the  which,  after  the  manner 
of  captaines,  they  doe  tourn  behinde,  waveryng  over  theyr  shoulder  with  a  brave  kynde 
of  riot.’  Again,  in  Bacon’s  Apology  touching  the  late  Earl  of  Essex,  1651,  p.  105 : 
‘  — you  have  put  me  like  one  of  those  that  the  Frenchmen  call  Enfans  perdus  that 
serve  on  foot  before  horsemen.’-  Whalley:  Amongst  other  desperate  services  in 
which  the  forlorn  hope,  or  enfans  perdus,  were  engaged,  the  night-watches  seem  to 
have  been  a  common  one.  So  in  Beau,  and  FI. :  *  These  are  trim  things.  I  am  set 
here  like  a  perdu.  To  watch  a  fellow  that  has  wrong’d  my  mistress.’ — Little  French 
Lawyer,  II,  iii.  Wright  :  Cotgrave  says,  *  Enfans  perdus.  Perdus;  or  the  forlorne 
hope,  of  a  campe  (are  commonly  Gentlemen  of  Companies).’  Moberl'y:  The  mean¬ 
ing  may  be  simply  ‘  poor  lost  one.’  [The  Cambridge  Edition  records  pour  perdu 
as  a  conjecture  by  Pye,  but  I  think  it  is  merely  a  misprint  in  the  latter’s  volume. — Ed.] 

36.  dog]  Collier  :  The  misprint  of  the  Qq :  injurious  for  ‘  enemy’s  ’  is  quite  as 
extraordinary  as  that  of  ‘runaways’  for  enemies  in  Rom.  Lf  ful.  Mitford  (Cent. 
Alag.  p.  469,  1844)  conjectures  that  the  Qq  lead  to  the  word  that  will  supply  the 
line,  ‘  Mine  enemy’s  furious  dog.*  Verplanck  :  The  late  J.  W.  Jarvis,  the  artist,, 
used  often  to  quote  these  lines  as  accumulating  in  the  shortest  compass  the  greatest 
causes  of  dislike  to  be  overcome  by  good-natured  pity.  It  is  not  merely  the  personal 
enemy,  for  whom  there  might  be  human  sympathy,  that  is  admitted  to  the  family 
fireside,  but  his  dog,  and  that  a  dog  who  had  himself  inflicted  his  own  share  of 
personal  injury,  and  that  too  upon  a  gentle  being  from  whom  it  was  not  possible  that 
he  could  have  received  any  provocation. 

39.  rogues]  Walker,  in  his  article. ‘On  Slave ’  ( Crit.  ii,  30S),  cites  this  in  proof 


ACT  IV,  SC.  vii.] 


KING  LEAR 


301 


In  short  and  musty  straw?  Alack,  alack !  40 

Tis  wonder  that  thy  life  and  wits  at  once 

Had  not  concluded  all. — He  wakes ;  speak  to  him. 

Dofi.  Madam,  do  you ;  ’tis  fittest. 

Cor.  How  does  my  royal  lord?  How  fares  your  ma¬ 
jesty? 

Lear.  You  do  me  wrong  to  take  me  out  o’  th’  grave;  45 
Thou  art  a  soul  in  bliss ;  but  I  am  bound 
Upon  a  wheel  of  fire,  that  mine  own  tears 
Do  scald  like  molten  lead. 

Cor.  •  Sir,  do  you  know  me  ? 


41.  thy]  my  F3F4. 

42.  concluded  all, — He]  concluded  all, 
he  Qr.  concluded. — Ah  t  he  Warb. 

43.  Doft.]  Gen.  Fx.  Gent.  F2F3F4> 
do  you;"]  do  you  speak,  Han. 


44.  Two  lines,  Ff. 

45.  o'  th ’]  ath  Qt.  a'th  Q2. 

48.  scald]  fcal'd  Ft. 

do  you  know  me  ?]  know  me.  Qf. 
know  ye  me?  Q2. 


that  ‘  rogue,’  like  slave  and  villain ,  was  not  originally  an  opprobrious  term,  but  sig¬ 
nified  properly  vagrant. 

40.  short]  Moberly  :  If  the  reading  is  correct,  ‘  short  ’  must  mean  insufficient. 
But  may  not  dirt  have  been  the  original  ?  [It  is  difficult  to  attach  any  meaning  to 

*  short *  *  that  seems  appropriate  here ;  the  word  must  be  a  misprint.  Moberly’s  con¬ 
jecture  occurred  independently  to  the  present  Ed.] 

41.  wonder]  Wright:  Used  for  wonderful,  just  as  in  Bacon  frequently  we 
find  ‘reason’  for  ‘reasonable.’  See,  for  instance,  Essay  xi,  p.  39:  ‘Nay,  retire 
Men  cannot,  when  they  would;  neither  will  they,  when  it  were  Reason.’  It 
occurs  in  Chaucer,  Squyeres  Tale  (1.  10562,  ed.  T.  Wright) ;  *  Tho  speeken  they 
of  Canacees  ryng,  And  seyden  alle,  that  such  a  wonder  thing  Of  craft  of  rynges 
herd  they  never  noon.’  Again,  in  the  Knightes  Tale,  1.  2075  (ed.  Tyrwhitt) : 
‘  Ther  saw  I  many  another  wonder  storie.’  Compare  *  it  is  danger,’  1.  79,  for  ‘  it 
is  dangerous.’ 

42.  all]  For  other  instances  of  this  adverbial  use,  see  Schmidt  s.  v. 

47.  fire]  Moberly  :  It  would  almost  seem  as  if  Sh.  had  borrowed  the  description 
of  Lear’s  reviving  senses  from  what  he  had  seen  or  known  of  in  some  one  recov¬ 
ered  from  drowning.  At  any  rate,  the  feelings  of  one  thus  returning  to  life,  as 
described  by  Sir  F.  Beaufort,  have  striking  points  of  resemblance:  ‘A  helpless 
anxiety  seemed  to  press  on  every  sense,  and  to  prevent  the  formation  of  any  dis¬ 
tinct  thought;  and  it  was  with  difficulty  that  I  became  convinced  I  was  really 
alive.  Again,  instead  of  being  free  from  bodily  pain,  as  in  my  drowning  state,  I 
was  now  tortured  with  pain  all  over  me;  and  though  I  have  often  been  wounded, 
and  had  to  submit  to  severe  surgical  discipline,  yet  my  sufferings  at  that  time  were 
far  greater,  at  least  in  general  distress.’ — Martineau,  Biog.  Sketches ,  p.  221.  [Does 
Lear  refer  to  physical  pain? — Ed.] 

47.  that]  For  ‘that’  equivalent  to  so  that,  see  Ilam.  IV,  vi,  21 1,  and  IV, 
Vii,  148. 


26 


KING  LEAR 


[act  rv,  sc.  vii. 


302 

Lear.  You  are  a  spirit,  I  know;  when  did  you  die? 

Cor.  Still,  still,  far  wide !  50 

Doct.  He’s  scarce  awake;  let  him  alone  awhile. 

Lear.  Where  have  I  been  ?  Where  am  I  ?  Fair  day¬ 
light  ? 

I  am  mightily  abused.  I  should  e’en  die  with  pity, 

To  see  another  thus.  I  know  not  what  to  say. 

I  will  not  swear  these  are  my  hands.  Let’s  see;  55 

I  feel  this  pin  prick.  Would  I  were  assured 
Of  my  condition ! 

Cor.  Oh,  look  upon  me,  sir, 

And  hold  your  hands  in  benediftion  o’er  me. 

*  No,  sir,* *  you  must  not  kneel. 

Lear.  Tray,  do  not  mock  me ; 

I  am  a  very  foolish,  fond,  old  man,  60 


49.  You  are]  Yar  Qt.  Y'are  Q2. 

when ]  where  QjFjF.,,  Coll,  i,  Sch. 
51.  Do<5h]  Gen.  or  Gent.  Ff. 

51,  52.  Four  lines,  Ff. 

53.  I  am]  I'm  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Sta. 
Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

mightily]  much  Han. 
e'en]  ene  Qq.  eu'n  FIFa,  Sch. 
even  F3F4,  Rowe,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
Cap.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Coll.  Del.  Sing. 


Wh.  Ktly, 

54.  what  to  say]  what  Han. 

56.  57.  I  feel. ...condition]  One  line, 
Qq. 

57-59.  Oh,.. .kneel.]  Prose,  Q„. 

57.  upon]  on  Han. 

58.  hands]  hand  Ff+,  Knt,  Sch. 

59.  No,  sir,]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe. 
me]  Om.  Qr. 

60.  old  man]  old-man  Ktly. 


49.  when]  Dyce  {Remarks,  231)  :  Where  is  all  but  nonsense.  Collier:  It  may 
appear  to  others  no  greater  nonsense  to  ask  a  spirit  ‘  Where  did  you  die  ?  ’  than 

*  When  did  you  die  ?  ’  It  is,  as  Cordelia  says,  ‘  Still,  still  far  wide.’ 

53.  abused]  Johnson:  I  am  strangely  imposed  on  by  appearances ;  I  am  in  a 
strange  mist  of  uncertainty.  [See  Ham.  II,  ii,  579 :  *  Abuses  me  to  damn  me.’] 

58.  benediction]  Hudson:  A  parent’s  curse  was  a  dreadful  thing  among  our 
foolish  ancestors ;  and  so  Cordelia  longs  first  of  all  to  have  her  father  revoke  the 
curse  he  pronounced  upon  her  in  the  opening  of  the  play.  She  had  not  learned  to 
act  as  if  ‘  a  man  were  author  of  himself,  and  knew  no  other  kin.' 

59.  kneel]  Steevens  :  This  circumstance  I  find  in  the  old  play  of  King  Leir. 
As  it  is  always  difficult  to  say  whether  such  accidental  resemblances  proceed  from 
imitation,  or  a  similarity  of  thinking  on  the  same  occasion,  I  can  only  point  out  this 
to  the  reader,  to  whose  determination  I  leave  the  question.  [See  Appendix,  p.  400.] 

60-75.  Kay  (p.  500)  :  A  more  faithful  picture  of  the  mind,  at  the  moment  when 
it  is  emerging  from  the  darkness  of  disease  into  the  clear  atmosphere  of  health 
restored,  was  never  executed  than  this  of  Lear’s  recovery.  Generally,  recovery  from 
acute  mania  is  gradual,  one  delusion  after  another  giving  away,  until,  after  a  series 
of  struggles,  which  may  occupy  weeks  or  months,  between  the  convictions  of  reason 
ar.d  the  suggestions  of  disease,  the  patient  comes  out  a  sound,  rational  man.  In  a 


ACT  IV.  SC.  vii.] 


KING  LEAR 


303 

61 


Fourscore  and  upward,  not  anjiour  more  nor  less; 

And,  to  deal  plainly, 

I  fear  I  am  not  in  my.  perfect  mind. 

Methinks  I  should  kno\y  you  and  know  this  man ; 

Yet  I  am  doubtful;  for  I  am  mainly  ignorant  65 

What  place  this  is.  and  all  the  skill  I  have 
Remembers  not  these  garments,  nor  I  know  not 
Where  I  did  lodge  last  night  Do  not  laugh-at  me; 

For,  as  I  am  a  man,  I  think  this  lady 
To  be  my  child  Cordelia. 

Cor.  ‘  And  so  I  am :  I  am.  70 

Lear.  Be  your  tears  wet  ?  yes,  faith.  Fpray,  weep  not 


61, 62.  Fourscore. ..plainly]  As  in  Knt. 
Three  lines,  Ff.  Two  lines,  ending  up - 
•ward. ...plainly,  Rowe,  Cap.  Del.  Sing. 
Sch. 

61.  Fourscore ]  Fourscore  years  Ktly, 
reading  the  rest  as  Qq. 

not. .. dess  ;]  Om.  (reading  Four- 
f core. ..plainly  as  one  line),Qq,  Pope  +  , 
Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Ktly. 

62.  plainly ]  plainly  with  you  Han. 

63.  in  my  perfect ]  p  erf  eft  in  my  Q2. 


65.  for  I  am]  for  Frn  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 
Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

67.  nor  I]  nay  /  Pope +. 

68.  not ]  no  Q2. 

70.  Iam:  lam.]  F,.  lam'.Q q.  lam: 
I  am,  F2F3F+.  I  am  ;  I  am —  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han.  I  am;  I  am. —  Theob, 
Warb.  Johns.  Jen.  I  am,  I  am.  Cap. 
et  cet. 

71.  Be. ..wet]  One  line,  Ff. 
pray]  pray  you  Rowe  +  ,  Jen. 


small  proportion  of  cases,-  however,  this  change  takes  place  very  rapidly.  Within 
the  space  of  a  few  hours  or  a  day  he  recognizes  his  true  condition,  abandons  his 
delusions,  and  contemplates  all  his  relations  in  an  entirely  different  light. 

61.  not  .  .  .  less]  Steevens:  The  authenticity  of  this  passage  Sir  Joshua  Rey¬ 
nolds  justly  suspects.  It  was  probably  the  interpolation  of  some  player,  and  is  better 
omitted,  both  in  regard  to  sense  and  versification.  Ritson  agrees  with.  Steevens,  and 
adds  ‘ foolish’ before  ‘player.’  Malone  says  that  the  Folio’s  ‘absurd’  addition 
means  ‘  not  an  hour  more  or  less  than  an  indeterminate  number,  for  such  is  fourscore 
.and  upward .’  Knight  denounces  the  omission  of  this  phrase  as  a  sacrilege  not  less- 
than  the  breaking  off  of  a  limb  from  an  ancient  statue.  ‘  Why/  who  is  speaking  ? 
One  who  speaks  logically  and  connectedly  ?  No !  one  who  immediately  after  says, 
“  I  fear  I  am  not  in  my  perfect  mind.”  It  was  the  half-consciousness  of  the  “  fool¬ 
ish,  fond  old  man”  which  Sh.  meant  to  express  by  the  mixture  of  a  determinate  and 
an  indeterminate  idea.’  Walker  (Vers.  156) :  The  words  are  nonsense,  it  is  true, 
but  are  they  out  of  place  in  the  mouth  of  Lear?  Hudson:  The  nonsense  of  them, 
indicating,  as  it  does,  some  remains  of  Lear’s  disorder,  is  the  very  reason  why  they 
should  be  retained. 

70.  I  am :  I  am.]  Cowden  Clarke  :  Never  surely  was  the  passionate  weeping 
of  a  reticent  woman  more  perfectly  expressed  in  brief  written  words  than  these  and 
the  ‘No  cause,  no  cause’  that  follow.  They  so  admirably  portray  the  suppressed 
weeping  natural  to  such  a  character  as  Cordelia’s;  concentrated  and  undemonstra¬ 
tive,  yet  intensely  loving  and  earnest. 


304 


KING  LEAR 


[act  iv,  sc.  vii. 


If  you  have  poison  for  me,  I  will  drink  it.  72 

I  know  you  do  not  love  me ;  for  your  sisters 
Have,  as  I  do  remember,  done  me  wrong ; 

You  have  some  cause,  they  have  not 

Cor.  No  cause,  no  cause.  75 

Lear ;  Am  I  in  France? 

Kent.  In  your  own  kingdom,  sir. 

Lear.  Do  not  abuse  me. 

Do  ft.  Be  comforted,  good  madam ;  the  great  rage, 

You  see,  is  kill’d  in  him;  *and  yet  ’tis  danger 
*  To  make  him  even  o’er  the  time  he  has  lost.*  80 

Desire  him  to  go  in ;  trouble  him  no  more 
Till  further  settling. 


74.  me]  we  F2. 

75.  not]  none  Han. 

77.  me.]  me?  Qx. 

78.  Dodt.]  Gent.  Ff. 

78-82.  Be. ..settling.]  Theob.  Prose, 
Qq.  Three  lines,  ending  rage. ..go  in,... 
fetling.  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

79.  kill'd  in  him]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt, 
Del.  Dyce,  Sta.  Glo.+,  Coll,  iii,  Sch. 


cur’d  Han.  cured  in  him  Qq  et  cet. 

79,  80.  and. ..lost.]  Om.  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han. 

79.  'tis]  Jen.  Ktly,  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 
Sch.  'twere  Theob.  Warb.  Johns,  it  is 
Qq  et  cet. 

80.  even]  even  go  Ktly. 

he  has]  h'as  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 

81.  trouble]  And  trouble  Pope,  Han. 


79.  kill’d]  Collier  :  Quell'd  was  perhaps  the  poet’s  word,  and  quell'd  and  ‘  kill’d,’ 
in  most  systems  of  short-hand,  would  be  spelt  with  the  same  letters. 

80.  even  o’er]  Warburton  :  That  is,  to  reconcile  it  to  his  apprehension.  Stee- 
vens  :  I  believe  Warburton’s  explanation  is  just.  The  poor  old  king  had  nothing  to 
tell,  though  he  had  much  to  hear.  The  speaker’s  meaning,  therefore,  I  conceive  to 
be — it  is  dangeVous  to  render  all  that  passed  during  the  interval  of  his  insanity,  even 
(*.  e.  plain  or  level)  to  his  understanding,  while  it  continues  in  its  present  state  of 
uncertainty.  Collier:  We  may  suspect  some  corruption,  but  the  meaning  is  evi« 
dent,  and  no  alteration  absolutely  required.  Hudson  :  This  means,  try  to  account  for 
the  time,  or  to  make  the  last  day  of  his  remembering  tally  or  fit  with  the  present. 
Delius  prefers  to  consider  *  even  ’  as  an  adjective  rather  than  as  a  verb.  Schmidt 
(Lex.  s.  v.  even,  adj.  7)  :  That  is,  to  give  a  full  insight  into,  a  clear  perception  of. 
Wright:  To  smooth  over,  render  what  had  passed  unbroken  in  his  recollection. 
The  sense  is  the  same  [whether  it  be  taken  as  an  adj.  or  as  a  verb],  but  it  seems  pre¬ 
ferable  to  consider  it  as  a  verb.  The  danger  consisted  rather  in  allowing  Lear’s 
mind  to  exert  itself  in  recalling  the  past  than  in  telling  him  what  had  happened. 
Schmidt  :  A  verb  to  even  equivalent  to  to  smooth  is  not  to  be  found  in  Sh. 

82.  settling]  Brigham  {Am.  Jour,  of  Insanity,  July,  1844):  We  confess,  almost 
with  shame,  that,  although  near  two  centuries  and  a  half  have  passed  since  Sh.  thus 
wrote,  we  have  very  little  to  add  to  his  method  of  treating  the  insane  as  thus  pointed 
out.  To  produce  sleep,  and  to  quiet  the  mind  by  medical  and  moral  treatment,  to 
avoid  all  unkindness,  and,  when  patients  begin  to  convalesce,  to  guard,  as  he  directs, 


ACT  IV,  SC.  vil.] 


KING  LEAR 


305 

83 


Cor.  Will ’t  please  your  highness  walk  ? 

Lear.  You  must  bear  with  me.  Pray  you  now,  forget 
and  forgive;  I  am  old  and  foolish.  85 

[ Exeunt  all  but  Kent  and  Gentleman. 

*  Gent.  Holds  it  true,  sir,  that  the  Duke  of  Cornwall 
*was  so  slain? 

*  Kent.  Most  certain,  sir. 

*  Gent.  Who  is  condu&or  of  his  people  ? 

*  Kent.  As  ’tis  said,  the  bastard  son  of  Gloucester.  9^ 

*  Gent.  They  say  Edgar,  his  banished  son,  is  with  the 

*  Earl  of  Kent  in  Germany. 

*  Kent.  Report  is  changeable.  ’Tis  time  to  look  about ; 

*  the  powers  of  the  kingdom  approach  apace. 

*  Gent.  The  arbitrement  is  like  to  be  bloody.  Fare  you  95 

*  well,  sir.  [Exit. 

*  Kent.  My  point  and  period  will  be  throughly  wrought, 

*  Or  well  or  ill,  as  this  day’s  battle’s  fought.  [Exit* 


83.  Will  V]  Rowe.  Wilt  QqFf,  Cap. 
(corrected  in  Errata). 

your]  you  Fa. 

84.  Pray  you]  Pray  Qq. 

84,  85.  You. .[foolish.']  Prose,  Qt,  Cam. 
Wr.  Three  lines,  ending  me  :...forgiue, 
... foolijh ,  in  QaFf+,  Jen.  Two  lines, 
the  first  ending  me  :  Cap.  et  cet. 

85.  Iam ]  I'm  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 
[Exeunt...]  Exeunt.  Manet  Kent 

and  Gent.  Qq  (subs.)  Exeunt.  Ff. 
86-98.  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 
86-96.  Holds. ..sir.]  Lines  end  sir,... 
sir. ...said,.. .Edgar,. ..Kent,.. ..changeable 

. kingdom . arbitrement . sir.  Cap. 

Lines  end  sir,. ...sir. ..said,.... Edgar,.... 


Kent,. ...changeable . kingdom....apace.... 

bloody. .Hr.  Steev.  Bos.  Knt,  Sing. 

86.  that]  Om.  Cap. 

90.  As  'tis]  ’  Tis  Cap.  As  it  is  Mai, 
Ec. 

93-96.  Lines  end  about, ...apace... fir. 
Qq. 

95.  The ]  And  the  Cap. 

bloody]  most  bloody  Cap.  a  bloody 
Steev.  Bos. 

96.  [Exit.]  Exit  Gent.  Theob.  Om. 

Qq- 

97.  throughly]  thoroughly  Wh. 

98.  battle's]  Theob.  battels  Qq. 
[Exit.]  Exit  Kent.  Theob.  Om. 

Qa- 


against  anything  likely  to  disturb  their  minds  and  to  cause  a  relapse,  is  now  consid* 
ered  the  best  and  nearly  the  only  essential  treatment. 

83.  walk]  Schmidt:  That  is,  go,  withdraw.  [See  III,  iv,  in.] 

85.  Coleridge:  How  beautifully  the  affecting  return  of  Lear  to  reason,  and  the 
mild  pathos  of  his  speeches,  prepare  the  mind  for  the  last  sad,  yet  sweet,  consolation 
of  the  aged  sufferer’s  death  !- 

86-98.  Johnson  :  What  is  omitted  in  the  Ff  is  at  least  proper,  if  not  necessary ; 
and  it  was  omitted  by  the  author,  I  suppose,,  for  no  other  reason  than  to  shorten  the 
representation.  Malone:  It  is  much  more  probable  that  it  was  omitted  by  the 
players,  after  the  author’s  departure  from  the  stage,  without  consulting  him.  [See 
Appendix,  The  Text.] 

26* 


U 


306 


KING  LEAR 


[act  v,  sc.  L 


ACT  V 

Scene  I.  The  British  camp  near  Dover. 


Enter ,  with  drum  and  colours ,  Edmund,  Regan,  Gentlemen,  and  Soldiers. 

Edm.  Know  of  the  duke  if  his  last  purpose  hold, 

Or  whether  since  he  is  advised  by  aught 
To  change  the  course.  He’s  full  of  alteration 
And  self-reproving.  Bring  his  constant  pleasure. 

[To  a  Gentleman ,  who  goes  out . 

Reg.  Our  sister’s  man  is  certainly  miscarried.  5 

Edm.  ’Tis  to  be  doubted,  madam. 

Reg.  Now,  sweet  lord, 

You  know  the  goodness  I  intend  upon  you ; 

Tell  me, — but  truly, — but  then  speak  the  truth, 

Do  you  not  love  my  sister  ? 

Edm.  In  honour’d  love. 

Reg.  But  have  you  never  found  my  brother’s  way  10 

To  the  forfended  place  ? 

*  Edm.  That  thought  abuses  you. 

*  Reg.  I  am  doubtful  that  you  have  been  conjundt 

*  And  bosom’d  with  her,  as  far  as  we  call  hers.* 


Act  V,  Scene  i.]  Actus  Quintus. 
Scena  Prima  Ff  (Serena  Fa). 

The  British...]  Cap.  (subs.)  A 
Camp.  Rowe. 

Enter...]  Ff.  Enter  Edmund,  Regan, 
and  their  powers.  Qq.  Enter  Bastard, 
Regan,  Gentlemen,  and  Soldiers.  P.owe. 
Enter  Edmund,  Regan,  Gentleman  and 
Soldiers.  Warb. 

2.  aught ]  Theob.  ought  QqFf. 

3.  course.}  Coll,  ccur/e,  QqFf.  course? 
Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

He's}  he  is  Q2. 
alteration}  abdication  Q,. 

4.  self-reproving}  Hyphened  in  Q,r 


fefereprouing  Fs. 

4.  self-reproving.  Bring ]  self  reprov¬ 
ing  brings  Pope. 

[To...]  Glo.  To  an  Officer;  who 
bows,  and  goes  out.  Cap.  Om.  QqFf. 

8.  me, — but  truly, — ]  Johns,  me  but 
truly,  Q,Ff+.  me  truly  Qa.  me,  but 
truly,  Cap. 

9.  In}  /,  Q,.  7Q2.  Ay,  in  Anon.* 

10- 14.  Om.  Johns. 

1 1 .  forfended  ]  fore-fended  Ff. 

11- 13.  Edm....^m.]  Om.  Ff+. 

12,  13.  I  am. ..hers.}  Prose,  Q,. 

12- 14,  I... madam}  Om.  Cap. 


4.  constant  pleasure]  Johnson:  His  settled  resolution.  See  ‘constant  will,’ 
I,  i,  41* 

6.  doubted]  Schmidt  (Lex.) :  That  is,  feared,  suspected.  [So  also  ‘doubtful,' 
line  12.] 


ACT  V,  SC.  1] 


KING  LEAR 


307 


Edm.  No,  by  mine  honour,  madam. 

Reg.  I  never  shall  endure  her.  Dear  my  lord,  1 5 

Be  not  familiar  with  her. 

Edm.  Fear  me  not.— 

She  and  the  duke  her  husband ! 


Enter,  with  drum  and  colour s,  Albany,  Goneril,  and  Soldiers. 

*  Gon.  [Aside]  I  had  rather  lose  the  battle  than  that  sister 

*  Should  loosen  him  and  me.* * 

Alb.  Our  very  loving  sister,  well  be-met —  20 

Sir,  this  I  hear:  the  king  is  come  to  his  daughtei, 

With  others  whom  the  rigour  of  our  state 
Forced  to  cry  out  *  Where  I  could  not  be  honest, 

*  I  never  yet  was  valiant ;  for  this  business, 


14.  madam ]  Om.  Pope,  Han. 

15,16.  I  never...hcr.~\  Prose,  Q,.  Two 
lines,  the  first  ending  endure  her  in  Qa. 

16,  17.  Fear....husband]  Cap.  One 
line,  QqFf+,  Jen. 

16.  me]  Om.  Ff+. 

17.  husband!]  Del.  Dyce,  Glo.  +  , 
Huds.  husband.  QqFf,  Sing.  Sch.  hus¬ 
band —  Rowe  et  cet. 

Enter...and  Soldiers.]  Enter...Sol- 
diers.  Ff.  Enter  Albany  and  Gonorill 
with  troupes.  Qq. 

18.  19.  Gon.  I... me.]  Theob.  Prose, 
Qj.  Two  lines,  the  first  ending  battel! , 


in  Om.  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

IS.  [Aside]  First  by  Theob. 

I  had]  I'd  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 
lose]  Theob.  loofe  Qq. 
sister]  my  sister  Ktly. 

19.  loosen]  cofm  Q3. 

20.  be-met]  be  met  Q3F4,  Rowe + ,  Cap. 
Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt. 

21.  Sir ,  this  I  heard]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han.  Knt,  Dyce  i,  Sch.  For  this  I 
heare  Qq.  Sir,  this  I  hear  Theob.  et 
cet.  'Fore  this,  I  hear,  Mai.  conj. 

23-2S.  Where. ..nobly.]  Om.  Ff. 

24.  for]  'fere  Theob. 


15.  endure]  Delius  :  That  is,  I  never  shall  suffer  her  to  be  so  intimate  with  you. 

20.  be-met]  Abbott,  §  438 :  In  participles,  be-,  like  other  prefixes,  is  often  redun¬ 
dant,  and  seems  to  indicate  an  unconscious  want  of  some  substitute  for  the  old 
participial  prefix.  Wright:  The  prefix  here  has  apparently  no  force  whatever. 
Schmidt  :  Only  found  here,  and  perhaps  coined  by  Sh. 

24-27.  for  . . .  oppose]  Theobald  (followed  by  Warburtcn  and  Johnson) 
represents  this  speech  as  broken  off  by  Edmund’s  interruption,  and  therefore  has 
merely  a  comma  and  a  dash  after  ‘oppose.’  He  also  supposes  that  ‘for’  is  a  con¬ 
traction  of  before,  and  prints  it  'fore,  and  thus  paraphrases  the  whole  sentence': 

*  Before  We  fight  this  Battle,  Sir,  it  concerns  me,  (tho’  not  the  King,  and  the  discon¬ 
tented  Party;)  to  question  about  your  Interest  in  our  Sister,  and  the  Event  of  the 
War.’  He  adds :  *  And  Regan  and  Gonerill,  in  their  Replies,  both  seem  apprehen¬ 
sive  that  this.  Subject  was  coming  into  Debate.’  Warburton  pronounces  it  *  a  very 
plain  speech,’  and  gives  the  meaning  thus :  This  quarrel  is  just  in  one  sense  and 
unjust  in  another.  As  France  invades  our  land,  I  am  concerned  to  repel  him,  but  as 
be  holds,  entertains  and  supports  the  king,  and  others  "whom  I  fear  many  just  and 


KING  LEAR 


[act  v,  sc.  L 


308 


*  It  toucheth  us,  as  France  invades  our  land,  25 

*  Not  bolds  the  king,  with  others,  whom,  I  fear, 

*  Most  just  and  heavy  causes  make  oppose. 

*  Edm.  Sir,  you  speak  nobly.* * 

Reg .  Why  is  this  reason’d  ? 

Gon.  Combine  together  ’gainst  the  enemy  ; 

For  these  domestic  and  particular  broils  30 


25.  toucheth ]  touches  Q,. 

26.  Not. ....others']  Not  the  old  king 
with  others ,  or  Not  holds  with  the  king , 
and  others  or  Upholds  the  king  and 
others  Mason. 

26, 27.  Not....oppose]  In  parenthesis, 
Theob. 

26.  bolds]  holds  Pope  + ,  Jen.  holds 
to  Han.  holds  for  Cap.  Ec. 

king,]  king;  Mai.  Steev.  Bos.  Knt. 


26.  27.  with...oppose]  Om.  Sing.  Ktly. 

27.  oppose.]  oppose , —  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns. 

28.  Edm.  Sir,. ...nobly.]  Om.  Pope, 
Han. 

nobly]  odly  or  coldly  Mason. 

30.  and  particular  broils]  dore  par • 
ticulars  Q,.  doore  particulars,  Qa. 
particular]  particurlar  F,. 


heavy  causes  make,  or  compel,  as  it  were,  to  oppose  us,  I  esteem  it  unjust  to  engage 
against  them.  Capell  thus  paraphrases:  *  As  for  this  business, — it  toucheth  us  as 
France  invades  our  kingdom,  not  as  he  holds  for  the  king,  in  conjunction  with  the 
others  whom,’  &c.  Steevens:  This  business  touches  us  as  France  invades  our 
land,  not  as  it  ‘  bolds  the  king,’  i.  e.  emboldens  him  to  assert  his  former  title.  Thus 
in  the  ancient  interlude  of  Hycke  Scomer :  ‘  Alas,  that  I  had  not  one  to  bold  me  1  ’ 
Again,  in  Hall’s  trans.  of  the  Fourth  Iliad,  1581 :  *  And  Pallas  bolds  the  Greeks,’  &c. 
[As  Wright  observes,  Steevens  is  wrong  herej  it  is  not  ‘this  business’  that  ‘bolds 
the  king,’  but  *  France,’  as  Warburton  and  Capell  have  justly  interpreted  it.  For  a 
long  list  of  verbs  like  ‘bolds’  formed  from  nouns  and  adjectives,  see  Abbott, 
§  290. — Ed.]  Cambridge  Editors  :  *  Not  bolds  the  king  ’  is  usually  interpreted  as 
an  elliptical  phrase  for  *  Not  as  it  emboldens  the  king.’  This  is,  however,  a  very 
harsh  construction,  and  'the  word  *  bolds  ’  occurs  nowhere  else  in  Sh.  with  this 
meaning,  though  we  have,  according  to  the  most  probable  reading,  *  dear’d  ’  for 

*  endear’d '  in  Ant.  &■>  Cleop.  I,  iv,  44.  Possibly  these  words  are  corrupt  and  a  line 
has  dropped  out  before  them.  Albany  ought  to  say  something  of  this  kind :  *  I 
should  be  ready  to  resist  any  mere  invader,  but  the  presence  in  the  invader’s  camp 
of  the  king  and  other  Britons,  who  have  a  just  cause  of  enmity  to  us,  dashes  my 
courage.’ 

28.  nobly]  Capell:  Edmund’s  reply  is  irony,  and  his  ‘nobly’  a  trisyllable. 
Walker  (Vers.  12)  says  that  ‘nobly’  is  not  a  fair  instance  of  the  expansion  of  a 
dissyllable  into  a  trisyllable,  like  ‘angry,’  ‘children,’  &c.,  because  ‘nobly’  is  con¬ 
tracted  from  noblely.  Abbott,  §  477,  cites  it  under  that  head. 

30.  particular]  Malone  :  Doore  or  dore  of  the  Qq  was  probably  a  misprint  for 
dear,  i.  e.  important.  Steevens:  ‘  Door  particulars’  signify,  I  believe,  particulars 
at  our  very  doors,  close  to  us,  and  consequently  fitter  to  be  settled  at  home.  Collier  : 
The  text  of  the  Qq  is  impossible  to  strain  to  a  meaning  unless  we  suppose  door  mis¬ 
printed  for  poor.  MlTFORD  (Cent.  Afaga.  p.  469,  1844) :  In  ‘doore  particulars’  of 
the  Qq  the  d  is  only  a  p  reversed.  Read  then,  ‘  these  domestic  poore  particulars.’ 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


309 


Are  not  the  question  here. 

Alb.  Let ’s  then  determine  31 

With  th’  ancient  of  war  on  our  proceeding. 

*  Edm.  I  shall  attend  you  presently  at  your  tent.* 

Reg.  Sister,  you  ’ll  go  with  us  ? 

Gon.  No.  35 

Reg..  Tis  most  convenient;  pray  you,  go  with  us. 

Gon.  [Aside]  Oh,  ho,  I  know  the  riddle. — I  will  go. 

As  they  are  going  out,  enter  Edgar  disguised. 

« 

Edg.  If  e’er  your  grace  had  speech  with  man  so  poor, 

Hear  me  one  word. 

Alb.  I  ’ll  overtake  you. — 

[Exeunt  all  but  Albany  and  Edgar. 
Speak. 

Edg.  Before  you  fight  the  battle,  ope  this  letter.  40 

If  you  have  victory,  let  the  trumpet  sound 
For  him  that  brought  it;  wretched  though  I  seem, 

I  can  produce  a  champion  that  will  prove 


31.  the]  to  Qq,  Cap.  Steev.  Var.  Sing. 
Ktly. 

Let's]  Let  vs  Qq,  Steev.  Var.  Coll. 
Del.Wh. 

31.  32.  Let's. ..proceeding!]  Prose,  Qx. 
First  line  ends  warre,  Ff+,  Knt. 

32.  th'  ancient]  Ff+ .  the  auntient 
Q,.  the  Ancient  Q3.  th'  ancients  Han. 
the  ancient  Cap.  et  cet. 

proceeding]  Ff+,  Cap.  Knt,  Del. 
Wh.  Sch.  proceedings  Qq  et  cet. 

33.  Edm.  I  shall... ..tent.]  Om.  Ff, 
Rowe,  Pope.  Transferred  to  follow 
here,  line  31,  Theob.  Warb. 

36.  pray  you]  pray  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope, 


Han.  Sch. 

37.  Oh. ..riddle]  As  *  Aside  ’  by  Cap. 
The  whole  line  as  ‘Aside,’  Han.  Johns. 

As.. ..disguised.]  Theob.  Enter 
Edgar.  Q,.  Exit.  Enter  Edgar.  Q2. 
Exeunt  both  the  Armies.  Enter  Edgar. 
Ff.  Exeunt.  Scene  ii.  Manet  Albany. 
Enter  Edgar.  Pope +  ,  Jen.  As  they  are 
going  out,  and  Albany  last,  Enter  Ed¬ 
gar.  Cap. 

38.  man]  one  Qa. 

39.  [Exeunt....]  Exeunt  Edm.  Reg. 
Gon.  and  Attendants.  Theob.  Exeunt, 
(after  word),  Q,.  Om.  Q2Ff. 

42.  wretched]  wretch  FaF3F4. 


32.  ancient  of  war]  Eccles  :  With  such  as  are  grown  old  in  the  practice  of  the 
military  art.  Walker  {Crit.  iii,  2S3) :  Possibly  ‘  th’  ancient  men  of  war.’  [Schmidt 
suggests  the  same.]  Abbott,  §  479,  thus  scans  :  ‘With  th’  an|ci6nt|of  w&r|on  6ur| 
proceedings.’  Wright  :  The  line  is  metrically  defective  and  may  be  corrupt.  Mo- 
berly  :  As  we  should  say  with  the  Adjutant-General.  The  word  is  derived  from 
the  Italian  ‘anziano,’  but  seems  to  have  got  confused  in  English  with  ‘  ensign,’  as  a 
Yorkshireman  speaks  of  *  the  ancient  of  yon  vessel.’ 

37.  riddle]  Moberly  :  You  want  me  with  you  only  that  you  may  keep  watch 
over  all  my  dealings  with  Edmund. 


31  o 


KING  LEAR 


[act  v,  sc.  i. 


What  is  avouched  there.  If  you  miscarry, 

Your  business  of  the  world  hath  so  an  end,  45 

And  machination  ceases.  Fortune  love  you  ! 

Alb.  Stay  till  I  have  read  the  letter. 

Edg.  I  was  forbid  it. 

When  time  shall  serve,'  let  but  the  herald  cry, 

And  I’ll  appear  again. 

Alb.  Why,  fare  thee  well.  I  will  o’erlook  thy  paper.  50 

[Exit  Edgar. 

Re-enter  Edmund. 

Edm.  The  enemy’s  in  view;  draw  up  your  powers. 

Here  is  the  guess  of  their  true  strength  and  forces 
By  diligent  discovery ;  but  your  haste 
Is  now  urged  on  you. 

Alb.  We  will  greet  the  time.  [Exit. 

Edm.  To  both  these  sisters  have  I  sworn  my  love;  55 

Each  jealous  of  the  other,  as  the  stung 


46.  And.. .ceases."]  Om.  Qq, 
love]  hues  Ff,  Rowe. 

47.  I  have]  I've  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Sta. 
Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

47-49.  I  was.. .again.]  Prose,  Q,. 

<50.  I.. .paper]  Separate  line,' Walker 
( Crit .  iii,  283). 

o'er  look]  looke-  ore  Qa. 
thy]  the  Qq. 

[Exit  Edgar.]  Dyce.  Exit,  (after 
again,  line  49),  QqFf. 

Re-enter..]  Theob.  Enter..  QqFf. 

51.  enemy's]  enemies  Qx.  Enemy' es 
F,. 


52,  Here]  Hard  Qq,  Pope+. 
guess]  qucjfe  Qt. 

true]  great  Qq,  Jen. 

53.  54-  By... you.]  One  line,  Oq. 

53.  haste]  hajl  QqFf. 

[giving  a  paper,  (after  discovery ), 
Jen.  Showing  a  paper,.  Coll.  iii. 

54.  [Exit.]  Om.  Qa. 

55.  Scene  iii.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 
sisters]  fijler  Q,. 

56-58.  Each...enjoy'dt]  Two  lines,  the 
first  ending  Adder,  Qx.  Three  lines,  end¬ 
ing  Adder, ...  one.  ..enioy'd,  Q„. 

56.  stung]  /ling  Qq. 


45.  of]  For  instances  of  ‘of’  in  the  sense  of *  *  as  regards,’  see  Abbott,  §  173,  or 

*  pf  pur  demands  Most  free  in  his  reply,’  Ham .  Ill,  i,  13. 

46.  machination]  Johnson  :  All  designs  against  your  life  will  have  an  end. 

53.  discovery]  Wright:  Reconnoitring.  Compare  Maeb.  V,  iv,  6, 1  make  dis¬ 
covery  Err  in  report  of  us,’  and  Ant.  dr*  Chop.  IV,  xii,  2. 

53,  54.  but .  .  .  you]  Heath:  But  the  urgency  of  the  present  exigence  will  allow 
you  but  a  short  time  for  the  perusal  of  it..  Collier:  It  appears  from  the  (MS)  that 
Edmund  did  not  give,  but  showed,  a  paper  to  Albany.  Schmidt  paraphrases :  the 
need,  that  you  be  not  dilatory  now  falls  to  you.  Hitherto  you  have  let  me  do  every¬ 
thing  (witness  the  reconnoitring  just  finished),  now  you  yourself  must  act. 

.54.  time]  Johnson:  We  will  be  ready  to  greet  the  occasion. 

56.  jealous]  Delius:  Suspicious.  Wright:  Cotgrave gives  ‘Ialoux:  m. ouse;  f. 
Jealous;  mistrustful,  suspicious.’  In  Lowland  Scotch  ‘to  jalouse’  is  ‘to  suspect.’ 


ACT  V,  SC.  i.] 


KING  LEAR 


311 

Are  of  the  adder  Which  of  them  shall  I  take?  57 

Both  ?  one  ?  or  neither  ?  Neither  can  be  enjoy’d, 

If  both  remain  alive.  To  take  the  widow 

Exasperates,  makes  mad  her  sister  Goneril ;  60 

And  hardly  shall  I  carry  out  my  side, 

Her  husband  being  alive.  Now  then  we’ll  use 
His  countenance  for  the  battle ;  which  being  done, 

Let  her  who  would  be  rid  of  him  devise 

His  speedy  taking  off.  As  for  the  mercy  65 

Which  he  intends  to  Lear  and  to  Cordelia, — 

The  battle  done,  and  they  within  our  power, 

Shall  never  see  his  pardon ;  for  my  state 

58.  Both  ?  one  ?]  both  one  Qq.  66.  intends']  enlends  Qt.  extends  Q,. 

64.  •who]  that  Qq.  68.  Shall  never]  They  shall  ne'er 

65.  the]  his  Qq.  Han.  They  shall  never  Ktly. 

61.  side]  Mason  : *  *  I  shall  scarcely  be  able  to  make  out  my  game.’  The  allusion 
is  to  a  party  at  cards,  and  he  is  afraid  that  he  shall  not  be  able  to  make  his  side  suc¬ 
cessful.  Thus,  in  Massinger’s  Unnatural  Combat  [II,  i]  Belgarde  says,  *  if  now.  At 
this  downright  game,  I  may  but  hold  your  cards,  I’ll  not  pull  down  the  side.’  Again, 
in  the  The  Maid's  Tragedy  [II,  i]  :  tEvad.  Aspatia  take  her  part.  Dula.  I  will 
refuse  it ;  she  will  pluck  down  a  side  ;  she  does  not  use  it.’  But  the  phrase  is  still 
more  clearly  explained  in  Massinger’s  Great  Duke  of  Florence  [IV,  ii]  :  ‘  If  I  hold 
your  cards,  I  shall  pull  down  the  side ;  I  am  not  good  at  the  game.’  Gifford,  in  a 
note  on  the  passage  in  The  Unnatural  Combat ,  says :  The  allusion  is  to  a  party  at 
cards ;  to  set  up  a  side  was  to  become  partners  in  a  game ;  to  pull ,  or  pluck  down  a 
side  (for  both  these  terms  are  found  in  our  old  plays),  was  to  occasion  its  loss  by 
ignorance  or  treachery.  To  this  Dyce  (Gloss.)  adds :  *  and  to  carry  out  a  side  was 
to  carry  out  the  game  with  success.’  White  :  The  phrase  should  hardly  need  ex¬ 
planation  as  long  as  people  take  sides  in  games  and  in  earnest.  To  Walker  ( Crit. 
iii,  283)  this  phrase,  strangely  enough,  seems  to  have  been  unfamiliar;  he  terms 

*  side  ’  nonsense,  adding  ‘  suite,  I  suppose.*  Lettsom,  in  a  foot-note,  says :  *  If  Walker 
is  right,  “carry  out”  is  used  almost  in  the  new-fangled  sense  common  of  late  years. 
It  seems  to  have  nearly  the  same  meaning  in  the  passage  quoted  by  Steevens  from 
The  Honest  Man's  Fortune,  IV,  ii  [Beau,  and  FI.  p.  424,  ed.  Dyce],  ‘  thy  greatness 
may  .  . .  carry  out  A  world  of  evils  with  thy  title.’ 

67.  Abbott,  §411,  thinks  this  a  confusion  of  two  constructions  (like  IV,  vi,  33), 
viz :  *  let  the  battle  be  done,  and  they  ’  and  *  the  battle  (being)  done,  they.’  But 
Wright  gives  a  simpler  explanation,  that  the  nominative  to  *  shall  ’  is  omitted,  as  is 
frequently  the  case  in  sentences  where  the  omission  causes  no  obscurity.  Of  this 
omission  there  are  numberless  instances  in  Sh.  See  Lear  II,  ii,  114;  II,  iv,  41; 
Ham.  II,  ii,  67 ;  III,  i,  8. 

68.  for  my  state]  Johnson :  I  do  not  think  that  ‘for’  stands  here  as  a  word  of 
inference  or  causality.  The  meaning  is  rather:  as  for  my  state,  it  requires  now,  not 
deliberation,  but  defence  and  support.  Wright  thinks  *  for’  can  be  taken  in  either 


sense. 


312 


KING  LEAR 


[act  v,  sc.  ii 
[Exit. 


Stands  on  me  to  defend,  not  to  debate. 


Scene  II.  A  field  between  the  two  camps. 

Alarum  within.  Enter ,  with  drum  and  colours,  Lear,  Cordelia,  and  Soldiers, 

over  the  stage  ;  and  exeunt. 

Enter  Edgar  and  Gloucester. 

Edg.  Here,  father,  take  the  shadow  of  this  tree 
For  your  good  host;  pray  that  the  right  may  thrive; 

If  ever  I  return  to  you  again, 

I  ’ll  bring  you  comfort. 

Glou.  Grace  go  with  you,  sir !  [ Exit  Edgar. 


Alarum  and  retreat  within.  Re-enter  Edgar. 


Edg.  Away,  old  man ;  give  me  thy  hand ;  away !  5 

King  Lear  hath  lost,  he  and  his  daughter  ta’en. 

Give  me  thy  hand ;  come  on. 


Scene  ii.]  Scena  Secunda  Ff  (Scaena 
Fa).  Scene  iv.  Pope+,  Jen. 

A  field...]  Cap.  (subs.)  A  Field. 
Rowe.  Another  open  Field.  Theob. 

Alarum  within.  Enter...]  Alarum. 
Enter  the  powers  of  France  ouer  the 
Rage,  Cordelia  with  her  father  in  her 
hand.  Qq. 

1.  tree ]  bujh  Qq,  Jen. 


3,  4.  If..co?nfort.]  One  line,  Qz. 

4.  go]  be  F ^F4  4- . 

[Exit  Edgar.]  Pope.  Exit.  QqFf 
(after  comfort  Qq). 

Alarum...]  Alarum  and  retreat. 
Qq. 

Re-enter...]  Theob.  Enter...  Qa 
Ff.  Qm.  Qt. 


69.  defend]  RusHTON  ( Lex  Scripla,  p.  77)  thinks  that  this  is  used  in  the  old 
sense  of  ‘  to  command.' 

4.  Exit  Edgar]  Spedding  ( New  Sh.  Soc.  Trans.  Part  I,  p.  15,  1S77-79):  Sus¬ 
picious  as  I  am  of  all  criticisms  which  suppose  a  want  of  art  in  Shakespeare,  I  could 
not  but  think  that  there  are  faults  in  King  Lear.  I  could  not  but  think  that  in  the 
last  two  Acts  the  interest  is  not  well  sustained ;  that  Lear’s  passion  rises  to  its  full 
height  too  early,  and  his  decay  is  too  long  drawn  out.  I  saw  that  in  Shakespeare’s 
other  tragedies  we  are  never  called  on  to  sympathise  long  with  fortunes  which  are 
desperate.  As  soon  as  all  hope  for  the  hero  is  over,  the  general  end  follows  rapidly. 
The  interest  rises  through  the  first  four  Acts  towards  some  great  crisis;  in  the  fifth 
it  pauses  for  a  moment,  crests,  and  breaks ;  then  falls  away  in  a  few  short,  sad  scenes, 
like  the  sigh  of  a  spent  wave.  But  it  was  not  so  in  Lear.  The  passion  seemed  to 
be  at  its  height,  and  hope  to  be  over,  in  the  third  Act.  After  that,  his  prospects  are 
too  forlorn  to  sustain  an  interest  sufficiently  animating ;  the  sympathy  which  attends 
him  too  dreary  and  depressing  to  occupy  the  mind  properly  for  half  the  play.  I  felt 


ACT  V,  sc.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


3*3 


[4.  Spedding’s  Division  of  Acts.] 

tbe  want  of  some  coming  event,  some  crisis  of  expectation,  the  hope  or  dread  of 
some  approaching  catastrophe,  on  the  turn  of  which  his  fortunes  were  yet  to  depend. 
There  was  plenty  of  action  and  incident,  but  nothing  which  seemed  to  connect  itself 
sufficiently  with  him.  The  fate  of  Edgar  or  Edmund  was  not  interesting  enough ; 
it  seemed  a  separate  thing,  almost  an  intrusion  upon  the  proper  business  of  the  play 
I  cared  only  about  Lear  But,  though  this  seemed  to  be  a  great  defect,  I  was  aware 
that  the  error  might  be  in  me ;  I  might  have  caught  the  play  in  a  wrong  aspect,  and 
I  waited  in  the  hope  of  finding  some  new  point  of  view  round  which  the  action 
would  revolve  more  harmoniously.  In  the  mean  time,  there  was  another  defect,  of 
less  moment,  as  I  then  thought,  but  so  striking  that  I  could  not  be  mistaken  in  pro¬ 
nouncing  it  indefensible  upon  any  just  principle  of  criticism.  This  was  the  battle  in 
the  fifth  Act ;  a  most  momentous  battle,  yet  so  carelessly  hurried  over  that  it  comes 
to  nothing,  leaves  no  impression  on  the  imagination,  shocks  the  sense  of  probability, 
and  by  its  own  unimpressiveness  makes  everything  insignificant  that  has  reference 
to  it.  It  is  a  mere  blank,  and,  though  we  are  told  that  a  battle  has  been  fought  and 
lost,  the  mind  refuses  to  take  in  the  idea.  How  peculiarly  important  it  was  to  avoid 
such  a  defect  in  this  particular  instance,  I  had  not  then  observed ;  I  was  struck  only 
with  the  harshness,  unexampled  in  Shakespeare,  of  the  effect  upon  the  eye  of  a  spec¬ 
tator  In  other  cases  a  few  skilful  touches  bring  the  whole  battle  before  us — a  few 
rapid  shiftings  from  one  part  of  the  field  to  another,  a  few  hurried  greetings  of  friend 
or  foe,  a  few  short  passages  of  struggle,  pursuit,  or  escape,  give  us  token  of  the 
conflict  which  is  raging  on  all  sides ;  and,  when  the  hero  falls,  we  feel  that  his  army 
is  defeated.  A  page  or  two  does  it,  but  it  is  done.  As  a  contrast  with  all  other 
battles  in  Shakespeare,  observe  that  of  which  I  am  speaking.  Here  is  the  whole 
scene  as  it  stands  in  the  modern  editions.  [The  first  seven  lines  of  this  scene  quoted, 
with  all  the  stage-directions.]  This  is  literally  the  whole  battle.  The  army  so  long 
looked  for,  and  on  which  everything  depends,  passes  over  the  stage,  and  all  our  hopes 
and  sympathies  go  with  it.  Four  lines  are  spoken.  The  scene  does  not  change ;  but 
*  alarums  *  are  heard,  and  ‘  afterwards  a  retreat,’  and  on  the  same  field  over  which 
that  great  army  has  this  .moment  passed,  fresh  and  full  of  hope,  reappears,  with 
tidings  that  all  is  lost,  the  same  man  who  last  left  the  stage  to  follow  and  fight  in  it. 
That  Shakespeare  meant  the  scene  to  stand  thus,  no  one  who  has  the  true  faith  will 
believe.  Still  less  will  he  believe  that,  as  it  stands,  it  can  admit  of  any  reasonable 
defence  When  Mr  Macready  brought  out  the  play  at  Covent  Garden,  in  1839,  he 
endeavored  to  soften  the  harshness  of  the  effect  by  two  deviations  from  the  text. 
The  French  army  did  not  pass  over  the  stage,  and  so  some  room  was  left  for  imag¬ 
ining  the  battle  already  begun;  and,  during  the  absence  of  Edgar,  five  or  six  lines, 
transferred  from  a  former  scene,  were  put  in  the  mouth  of  Gloster,  by  which  some 
little  time  was  given  for  its  disastrous  issue.  Both  these  alterations  are  improvements 
on  the  text  as  it  now  stands,  so  far  as  they  go,  but  they  certainly  go  a  very  little  way ; 
and  I  think  nobody  can  have  seen  the  play,  as  then  acted,  without  feeling  that  the 
effect  of  that  scene  was  decidedly  bad.  When  I  saw  it  myself,  the  unaccountable 
awkwardness  of  this  passage  struck  me  so  forcibly  that  I  tried  to  persuade  myself 
(all  other  appearances  notwithstanding)  that  the  play  must  have  been  left  in  an  un¬ 
finished  state.  I  had  almost  succeeded,  when  it  suddenly  occurred  to  me  that,  by  a 
very  simple  change  in  the  stage-arrangement,  the  whole  difficulty  might  be  made  to 
disappear.  Upon  careful  examination  I  found  that  every  other  difficulty  disappeared 
27 


KING  LEAR 


[act  v,  sc.  ii. 


314 


[4.  Spedding’s  Division  of  Acts.] 

along  with  it;  and  I  am  now  quite  satisfied  that  it  was  the  true  arrangement  which 
Shakespeare  contemplated.  My  suggestion  has  this  peculiar  advantage  and  presump¬ 
tion  in  its  favour,  that  it  does  not  involve  the  change  of  a  single  letter  in  the  original 
text.  It  is  simply  to  alter  the  division  of  the  Acts ;  to  make  the  fourth  Act  close  a 
scene  and  a  half  further  on,  with  the  exit  of  Edgar  in  the  passage  just  quoted,  and  the 
fifth  commence  with  his  re-entrance.  Thus  the  battle  takes  place  between  the  Acts, 
and,  the  imagination  having  leisure  to  fill  with  anxiety  for  the  issue,  it  rises  into  its 
proper  importance  as  one  of  the  great  periods  and  passages  of  the  story,  and  a  final 
crisis  in  the  fortunes  of  Lear.  The  first  Act  closes,  as  the  first  burst  of  Lear’s  rage  is 
over,  with  the  final  renunciation  of  Goneril.  The  second  leaves  him  in  utter  desola¬ 
tion,  turned  forth  into  the  night,  the  storm  gathering,  madness  coming  on  apace.  At 
the  conclusion  of  the  third,  the  double  tempest  of  the  mind  and  of  the  elements  has 
spent  its  fury,  and  the  curtain  falls  upon  the  doubtful  rumour  of  a  new  hope,  and 
distant  promise  of  retribution.  At  the  point  where  I  think  the  fourth  was  meant  to 
end,  suspense  has  reached  its  highest  pitch ;  the  rumours  have  grown  into  certainties; 
the  French  forces  have  landed;  Lear’s  phrenzy  has  abated,  and,  if  the  battle  be  won, 
he  may  yet  be  restored ;  *  the  powers  cf  the  kingdom  approach  apace ;’  the  armies 
are  now  within  sight  of  each  other,  and  *  the  arbitrement  is  like  to  be  bloody.’  Last 
of  all,  *  Enter  ’  (to  take  the  stage- direction  as  it  stands  in  the  old  Quarto,  in  which 
the  divisions  of  the  Acts  are  not  marked )  ‘  Enter  the  powers  of  France  over  the  stage ; 
Cordelia  with  her  father  in  her  hand  I  Gloster  alone  remains  to  ‘  pray  that  the  right 
may  thrive,’  and,  as  the  curtain  falls,  we  feel  that  the  ‘  bloody  arbitrement  ’  is  even 
now  begun,  and  that  all  our  hopes  hang  on  the  event.  Rising  again,  it  discloses 
*  alarums  and  a  retreat.’  The  battle  has  been  fought.  *  King  Lear  hath  lost ;  he  and 
his  daughter  ta’en;’  and  the  business  of  the  last  Act  is  only  to  gather  up  the  issues  of 
those  unnatural  divisions,  and  to  close  the  eyes  of  the  victims.  As  there  is  nothing 
in  Shakespeare  so  defective  in  point  of  art  as  the  battle-scene  under  the  present 
stage-arrangement,  so,  with  the  single  change  which  I  have  suggested,  there  is  not 
one  of  his  dramas  conducted  from  beginning  to  end  with  more  complicated  and  in¬ 
evitable  skill.  Under  the  existing  arrangement,  the  pause  at  the  end  of  the  fourth 
Act  is  doubly  faulty,  both  as  interrupting  the  march  and  hurry  of  preparation  before 
it  has  gathered  to  a  head,  and  as  making,  by  the  interposition  of  that  needless  delay, 
the  weakness  and  disappointing  effect  of  the  result  still  more  palpable.  Under  that 
which  I  propose,  the  pause  falls  precisely  where  it  ought,  and  is  big  with  anxiety  and 
expectation.  Let  the  march  of  the  French  army  over  the  stage  be  presented  with 
military  pomp  and  circumstance,  ‘Cordelia  with  her  father  in  her  hand’  following 
(for  thus  the  dependence  of  Lear  and  his  fortunes  upon  the  issue  is  brought  full 
before  the  eye),  and  let  the  interval  between  the  Acts  be  filled  with  some  great  battle- 
piece  of  Handel,  and  nothing  more,  I  think,  could  be  hoped  or  wished.  On  review¬ 
ing  this  paper,  which  was  first  written  in  1839, 1  find  nothing  to  add,  except  that  the 
stage-direction  in  the  Folio,  which  follows  the  exit  of  Edgar,  and  which  I  had  over¬ 
looked,  seems  to  point  at  an  arrangement  much  like  that  which  I  have  suggested. 
After  both  the  English  armies  have  appeared  on  the  scene  with  drums  and  colours, 
arid  gone  out,  Edmund  returns  to  report  to  Albany  that  the  *  enemy  is  in  view,’  and 
to  hasten  his  preparations  for  battle.  Then  follows :  *  Alarum  within.  Enter,  with 
drum  and  colours,  Lear,  Cordelia,  and  Soldiers,  over  the  stage  and  exeunt .’  Edgar, 
following,  leaves  Gloster  behind  the  tree,  and,  promising  to  return  if  he  survive,  exit. 


ACT  V,  SC.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


315 


Glou.  No  further,  sir ;  a  man  may  rot  even  here.  8 

Edg.  What,  in  ill  thoughts  again  ?  Men  must  endure 
Their  going  hence,  even  as  their  coming  hither;  10 

Ripeness  is  all.  Come  on. 

Glou.  And  that’s  true  too.  [Exeunt. 


8.  further ]  farther  Qq,  Cap.  Coll. 
Del.  Wh.  Glo.  +  . 

9.  Two  lines,  Ff. 

again  ?  Men ]  againe  men  Q,. 

10.  even]  ev'ti  Pope+. 


II.  all.  Come~\  all;  come  Rowe  ii. 
all,  come  F2F3F4.  all  come  QqFx. 

Glou.  AnJ...to.']  Om.  Qq. 
[Exeunt.]  Orn.  Qx.  Exit.  Q2. 


Then  we  have :  ‘  Alarum  and  Retreat  within and  then  ‘  enter  Edgar  *  with  news 
of  the  battle  lost,  and  the  capture  of  Lear  and  Cordelia.  These  are  no  ‘  excursions, 
and,  therefore,  it  is  plain  that,  though  all  three  armies  appeared  on  the  stage  with 
drums  and  colours  immediately  before  the  battle,  no  part  of  the  battle  was  exhibited 
even  in  dumb  show.  It  was  to  be  made  known  only  by  the  noise  *  within during 
which  the  stage  was  empty.  Whether  any  curtain  was  to  be  drawn,  I  do  not  know 
enough  of  the  scenic  arrangements  of  that  time  to  say.  But  such  an  interval  of  sus¬ 
pended  action,  so  accompanied  with  noises  of  battle  in  the  distance,  would  have  the 
same  effect  as  a  modern  inter-act,  with  an  orchestra  playing  appropriate  music ;  pro¬ 
vided  only  that  it  were  understood  to  represent  a  period  of  indefinite  duration.  Con¬ 
sidering,  however,  that  immediately  after  the  exeunt  of  Cordelia,  Kent,  the  Doctor, 
and  servants  carrying  Lear  out  in  his  chair,  the  stage  had  to  be  ready  for  three  armies 
to  pass  over  with  drums  and  colours,  it  is  easy  to  believe  that  the  stage-manager  found 
it  more  convenient  to  make  the  next  scene  the  beginning  of  a  new  Act,  and  to  use 
the  interval  for  drawing  up  his  troops. 

11.  Ripeness]  Steevens:  Compare  Ham.  V,  ii,  2ro:  ‘the  readiness  is  all.’ 
Wordsworth  (p.  292) :  In  order  that  it  may  be  really  *  well  ’  with  us  when  we 
come  to  die,  Sh.  will  tell  us,  no  man  better,  what  is  the  one  thing  needful.  And 
with  what  a  lightning-flash  of  condensed  thought  aud  language  does  he  teach  the 
lesson  !  Birch  (p.  425)  sees  in  this  nothing  but  materialism,  likening  man  to  fruit 
which  must  fall.  [Birch  has  been  already  quoted  once  before,  and  he  might  have 
been  quoted  much  more  frequently;  he  goes  laboriously  through  the  tragedy,  find¬ 
ing  throughout  rank  atheism  and  materialism.  Two  quotations  are  quite  enough,  I 
think ;  perhaps  two  too  many.— -Ed.] 


3i  6 


KING  LEAR 


[act  v,  SC.  iiL 


Scene  III.  The  British  camp  near  Dover. 


Enter,  in  conquest,  with  drum  and  colours,  Edmund;  Lear  and  CORDELIA,  as. 

prisoners ;  Captain,  Soldiers. 


Edm.  Some  officers  take  them  away ;  good  guard. 

Until  their  greater  pleasures  first  be  known 
That  are  to  censure  them. 

Cor.  We  are  not  the  first 

Who  with  best  meaning  have  incurr’d  the  worst. 

For  thee,  oppressed  king,  I  am  cast  down ;  5 

Myself  could  else  out-frown  false  fortune’s  frown. 

Shall  we  not  see  these  daughters  and  these  sisters  ? 

Lear.  No,  no,  no,  no.  Come,  let’s  away  to  prison ; 

We  two  alone  will  sing  like  birds  i’  th’  cage. 

When  thou  dost  ask  me  blessing,  I  ’ll  kneel  down  10 

And  ask  of  thee  forgiveness.  So  we  ’ll  live, 

And  pray,  and  sing,  and  tell  old  tales,  and  laugh 
At  gilded  butterflies,  and  hear  poor  rogues 


Scene  iii.]  Scena  Tertia.  Ff  (Soena 
F2).  Scene  v.  Pope +  .  The  Scene  con¬ 
tinued.  Theob. 

The  British.. .near...]  Mai.  The 
British. ..under...  Cap.  A  Camp.  .Rowe. 
Om.  QqFf. 

Enter.. .Captain,  Soldiers.]  Ff  (subs.) 
Enter  Edmund,  with  Lear  and  Cordelia 
prifoners.  Qq. 

2.  first]  bejl  Qq. 

3-5.  We...down ,•]  Two  lines,  the  first 


ending  incurd,  Q,. 

3.  We  are]  We're  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Sta. 
Huds. 

5.  / am]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Scb. 
am  I  Qq  et  cet. 

6.  out-frown]  outfro-wne  Q,. 

8.  No,  no,  no,  no]  No,  no  Qq. 

12.  and  sing]  Om.  Qa. 

13.  hear  poor  rogues]  heare  ( poore 
Rogues)  Ft.  hear— poor  rogues  ! —  Scb. 


2,  3.  their  .  .  .  That]  For  instances  of  ‘their’  standing  as  the  antecedent  to  the 
relative,  see  Abbott,  §  218.  Compare  lines  51,  52  of  this  Scene. 

2.  greater]  Hudson  :  That  is,  the  greater  persons. 

3.  censure]  Steevens:  That  is,  pass  sentence  or  judgement  upon  them.  See 
III,  v,  2. 

6.  out-frown]  The  Cambridge  Editors  record  an  Anonymous  conjecture  of 
cnitface  for  ‘  out-frown,’  which  is  happy. — Ed. 

7.  sisters]  Cowden  Clarke:  A  bitter  sarcasm  in  simplest  .words,  thoroughly 
characteristic  in  the  woman  of  quiet  expression  with  intense  feeling. 

8.  No,  no,  no,  no.]  Capell’s  learning  at  times  so  distorts  his  vision  that  he  sees 
in  these  words  the  refrain  of  a  song  by  Sir  Philip  Sidney  (vol.  i,  p.  79,  ed.  Grosart), 
which  ‘  should  be  deliver’d  by  Lear,  not  perhaps  absolutely  singing,  but  with  a  levity 
something  approaching  towards  it ;  as  is  evident  from  the  line  immediately  after, 
which  owes  it’s  birth  to  that  circumstance,’ 

13.  Schmidt  thinks  that  the  parenthetical  ‘(poor  rogues)’  of  the  Ff  is  more 


ACT  V,  SC.  iii.] 


KING  LEAR 


317 


Talk  of  court  news ;  and  we  ’ll  talk  with  them  too, 

Who  loses  and  who  wins,  who’s  in,  who’s  out;  15 

And  take  upon ’s  the  mystery  of  things, 

As  if  we  were  God’s  spies.  And  we  ’ll  wear  out, 

In  a  wall’d  prison,  packs  and  sedts  of  great  ones 
That  ebb  and  flow  by  th’  moon. 

Edm.  Take  them  away. 

Lear.  Upon  such  sacrifices,  my  Cordelia,  20 

The  gods  themselves  throw  incense.  Have  I  caught  thee  ? 

He  that  parts  us  shall  bring  a  brand  from  heaven, 


14.  we'll  talk]  we'll  talkd  F3. 
too]  to  Qx. 

15.  loses]  loofes  QqFxF2F3. 

who's. ...who's]  whofe...whofe  Qq. 
whos...whos  F„. 


16.  upon's ]  upon  us  Cap.  Steev.  Ec. 
Var.  Knt,  Del.  Sing.  Ktly. 

19.  by  th’]  bith'  Qx. 

21.  Two  lines,  Ff. 


characteristic.  [But  the  ‘them’  in  the  next  line  shows,  I  think,  the  erroneous  pun©- 
tuation  of  the  Ff. — Ed.] 

17.  spies]  Warburton  interprets  this  as  ‘spies  placed  over  God  Almighty,  to 
watch  his  motions.”  Heatk  [and  everybody  else]  understands  it  as  ‘spies  com¬ 
missioned  and  enabled  by  God  to  pry  into  most  hidden  secrets.’  Johnson  :  As  if 
we  were  angels  commissioned  to  survey  and  report  the  lives  of  men,  and  were  con¬ 
sequently  endowed  with  the  power  of  prying  into  the  original  motives  of  action  and 
the  mysteries  of  conduct. 

18.  packs  and  sects]  JOHNSON:  ‘Packs’  is  used  for  combinations  or  collections , 
as  in  a  pack  of  cards.  For  ‘  sects,’  I  think  sets  might  be  more  commodiously  read. 
So  we  say,  *  affairs  are  now  managed  by  a  new  set.’  ‘  Sects,’  however,  may  well 
stand.  Moberly  :  Sh.  had  seen  the  fall  and  death  of  the  Earl  of  Essex,  which 
was  probably  in  his  mind  here. 

20-25.  Bucknill  (p.  230) :  This  is  not  mania,  but  neither  is  it  sound  mind.  It 
is  the  emotional  excitability  often  seen  in  extreme  age,  as  it  is  depicted  in  the  early 
scenes  of  the  drama,  and  it  is  precisely  true  to  the  probabilities  of  the  mind’s  history, 
that  this  should  be  the  phase  of  infirmity  displaying  itself  at  this  moment.  Any  other 
dramatist  than  Sh.  would  have  represented  the  poor  old  king  quite  restored  to  the 
balance  and  control  of  his  faculties.  The  complete  efficiency  of  filial  love  would 
have  been  made  to  triumph  over  the  laws  of  mental  function.  But  Sh.  has  repre¬ 
sented  the  exact  degree  of  improvement  which  was  probable  under  the  circum¬ 
stances,  namely,  restoration  from  the  intellectual  mania  which  resulted  from  the 
combined  influence  of  physical  and  moral  shock,  with  persistence  of  the  emotional 
excitement  and  disturbance  which  is  the  incurable  and  unalterable  result  of  passion 
exaggerated  by  long  habitude  and  by  the  malign  influence  of  extreme  age. 

21.  incense]  Warburton:  The  thought  is  extremely  noble,  and  expressed  in  a 
sublime  of  imagery  that  Seneca  fell  short  of  on  a  like  occasion :  *  Ecce  spectaculum 
dignum  ad  quod  respiciat  intentus  operi  suodeus;  ecce  par  deo  dignum,  vir  fortis 
cum  mala  fortuna  compositus.’ 

27  * 


3>8 


KING  LEAR 


[act  v,  sc.  iii. 


And  fire  us  hence  like  foxes.  Wipe  thine  eyes ;  23 

The  good-years  shall  devour  them,  flesh  and  fell, 

Ere  they  shall  make  us  weep ;  we  ’ll  see  ’em  starv’d  first.  25 
Come.  \Exeunt  Lear  and  Cordelia ,  guarded. 


23.  e yes]  eye  F2F3F4+. 

24.  good-years']  Glo.  4- ,  Mob.  Sch.  good 
yeares  F,.  good  yeeres  Fa.  good  years 
F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Knt.  good  Qq.  good- 
jers  Theob.  goujeres  Han.  Warb.  Cap. 
Jen.  goujesrs  Johns  et  cet. 

them]  em  Qq. 
f-esh]  f.each  Qq. 

25,26.  Ere. ..Come.]  Pope.  One  line, 
Q,.  Two,  the  first  ending  7veepe  ?  Ff, 
Rowe. 


25.  weep  ,•]  Pope.  weepe  ?  QqFf. 
weep ,  Rowe  ii. 

’em]  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  i, 
Han,  Jen.  Sing.  Dyce,  Sta.  Wh.  Ktly, 
Glo.  +  ,  Huds.  Sch.  vm  Qt.  em  Qa. 
e’m  FjFa.  them  Theob.  ii  et  cet. 

starv’d]  Ff+,  Sch.  Jiarue  Qq  et 
cet. 

26.  Come.]  Om.  Q2. 

[Exeunt . ]  Theob.  Om.  Q1, 

Exit.  Q,Ff. 


23.  foxes]  Upton  {Crit.  05s.  p.  218)  imagined  that  there  is  here  an  allusion  to 
Samson’s  foxes,  but  I  believe  no  one  since  Upton’s  time  has  discovered  the  point  of 
similarity.  Heath:  An  allusion  to  the  practice  of  forcing  foxes  out  of  their  holds 
by  fire.  Capell  : 1  But  why  a  •  brand  from  heaven  ’  to  force  him  and  his  daughter 
out  of  their  holds  ?  This  implies,  in  the  first  place,  that  parting  them  should  be  a 
work  of  no  mortal,  and  secondly,  the  expressions  are  ominous,  like  those  that  drop 
from  poor  Gloucester  [III,  vi,  3] ;  a  brand  of  heaven’s  ordaining  does  part  them 
within  a  few  minutes  after.  Steevens  :  Compare  Harrington’s  trans.  of  Ariosto, 
B.  xxvii,  st.  17  :  ‘  Ev’n  as  a  Foxe,  whom  smoke  and  fire  doth  fright,  So  as  he  dare 
not  in  the  ground  remaine,  Bolts  out,  and  through  smoke  and  fires  he  flieth  Into  the 
Tarier’s  mouth,  and  there  he  dieth.’ 

24.  good-years]  Hanmer  :  The  French  disease,  from  the  French  word  Gouje , 
which  signifies  a  common  camp-trull.  The  words  Gouje  and  Goujer  were  used  as 
common  terms  of  reproach  among  the  vulgar,  and  the  name  of  the  disease  was  the 
Goujeres.  Farmer  :  Resolute  John  Florio  has  sadly  mistaken  these  goujeers.  He 
writes,  ‘With  a  good  yeare  to  thee !  *  and  gives  it  in  Italian,  ‘  II  mal  anno  che  dio  ti 
dia.’  Steevens  :  Golding  in  his  Ovid ,  lib.  iii,  has  fallen  into  the  same  error,  or 
rather  the  same  mis-spelling.  ‘  Perfici  quid  enim  toties  per  jurgia?  dixit.’  which  is 
thus  Anglicized :  *  And  what  a  goodyeare  haue  I  woon  by  scolding  erst  ?  (she  sed )  ’ — 
p.  34.  Croft  (p.  20)  interprets  it  as  gougers,  i.  e.  men  who  gouge  out  eyes.  Dyck 
(Gloss.) :  Cotgrave  gives,  *  Gouge  ...  a  Souldiors  Pug  or  Punke;  a  Whore  that  fol- 
lowes  the  Camp.’  C.  E.  H.  Morwenstow  (N.  dr  Qu.  vol.  v,  p.  607,  1852) :  The 
usage  of  this  word  by  Sh.  is  another  proof  that  he  took  refuge  in  Cornwall,  when  he 
fled  from  the  scene  of  his  deer-stalking  danger.  The  Goujere  is  the  old  Cornish 
name  of  the  Fiend,  or  the  Devil;  and  is  still  in  use  among  the  folk-words  of  the 
West.  [See  also  to  the  same  effect,  John  Davies  (N.  dr  Qu.,  ii  Mar.  1876).] 
Halluvell:  ‘Goodyears’  is  an  ignorant  perversion,  such  as  I  do  not  think  was 
penned  by  Sh.  Wright  :  With  the  corruption  of  spelling,  the  word  early  lost  its 
real  meaning,  and  it  is  consequently  found  in  passages  where  a  sense  opposite  to  the 
true  one  is  intended. 


ACT  V.  SC.  iii.] 


KING  LEAR 


319 

Edm.  Come  hither,  captain ;  hark.  27 

Take  thou  this  note ;  go  follow  them  to  prison. 

One  step  I  have  advanced  thee ;  if  thou  dost 

As  this  instru6ts  thee,  thou  dost  make  thy  way  30 

To  noble  fortunes ;  know  thou  this,  that  men 

Are  as  the  time  is ;  to  be  tender-minded 

Does  not  become  a  sword ;  thy  great  employment 

Will  not  bear  question ;  either  say  thou ’It  do ’t, 

Or  thrive  by  other  means. 

Capt.  I’ll  do ’t,  my  lord.  35 

Edm .  About  it^  and  write  happy  when  th* *  hast  done 
Mark, — I  say,  instantly ;  and  carry  it  so 
As  I  have  set  it  down. 

*  Capt.  I  cannot  draw  a  cart,  nor  eat  dried  oats ; 

*  If 't  be  man’s  work,  I  ’ll  do ’t.*  [Exit,  40 


27.  Come  hither ]  Come  thou  hither 

Han. 

[Whispering.  Rowe. 

28.  [Giving  a  paper.  Mai. 

29.  One  step  I]  And  pep,  I  Qt. 
29-35.  One... means. ]  Six  lines,  end¬ 
ing  injlructs  thee,.. .  fortunes  :... .is ;.... 
fword,...quejlion,...meanes.  in  Qa. 

32.  tender-minded]  Hyphen, Rowe  ii. 

33.  thy']  my  Theob.  Han. 

34.  thou  'It]  thout  Qq. 

36.  About. ..th']  About;  and  write , 
when  happy  thou  Voss  conj. 

write  happy]  write  hasty  Eschen- 
burg  conj. 


36.  th'  hap]  FIFa.  th'ap  F3F4,  Wh. 
thou' st  Rowe  +  ,  Jen.  Sing.  Ktly,  Huds. 
Sch.  thou  hap  Qq  et  cet. 

37.  Mark, — F]  Cap.  Mark,  7Rowe  +  , 
Jen,  Glo,  Sch.  Marke  I  QqFf.  Mark; 
I  Cam.  Wr. 

39,  40.  Om.  Ff  +  ,  Cap. 

40.  If  V... man's]  But  if  it  be  a  man's 
Ktly. 

If't]  Walker,  Dyce  ii,  Huds.  If 
it  Qq  et  cet. 

I'll]  Qq,  Dyce  ii,  Glo.  +  ,  Huds 
Sch.  I  will  Steev.  et  cet. 

[Exit.]  Exit  Captaine.  (after doiun, 
line  38)  Ff.  Om.  Qq. 


28.  note]  Malone  :  This  was  a  warrant,  signed  by  the  Bastard  and  Goneril,  for 
the  execution  of  Lear  and  Cordelia.  See  lines  246,  247,  and  253. 

34.  question]  Warburton:  By  ‘great  employment’  was  meant  the  commission 
given  him  for  the  murder ;  and  this,  the  Bastard  tells  us  afterwards,  was  signed  by 
Goneril  and  himself.  Which  was  sufficient  to  make  this  captain  unaccountable  for 
the  execution.  Malone:  The  important  business  which  is  now  entrusted  to  your 
management  does  not  admit  of  debate ;  you  must  instantly  resolve  to  do  it,  or  not. 

*  Question  ’  here,  as  in  many  other  places,  signifies  discourse,  conversation.  Steevens  : 
So,  in  Mer.  of  Ven.  IV,  i,  73 :  ‘  You  may  as  well  use  question  with  the  wolf.’ 

36.  write  happy]  Wright:  That  is,  describe  yourself  as  fortunate.  Compare 
2  Hen.  IV:  I,  ii,  30,  ‘Writ  man’;  and  Alls  Well,  II,  iii,  67,  ‘And  writ  as  little 
beard.’  And  in  the  same  play,  III,  v,  69,  F,  reads,  *  I  write  good  creature.’ 

38.  down]  Moberly:  That  is,  so  that  it  may  appear  that  Cordelia  slew 
herself. 


320 


KING  LEAR 


[act  v,  sc.  iii. 


Flourish.  Enter  Albany,  Goneril,  Regan,  Captain,  Soldiers. 

Alb.  Sir,  you  have  show’d  to-day  your  valiant  strain,  41 
And  fortune  led  you  well ;  you  have  the  captives 
Who  were  the  opposites  of  this  day’s  strife. 

I  do  require  them  of  you,  so  to  use  them 

As  we  shall  find  their  merits  and  our  safety  45 

May  equally  determine. 

Edm.  Sir,  I  thought  it  fit 

To  send  the  old  and  miserable  king 
To  some  retention  *  and  appointed  guard ;  * 

Whose  age  had  charms  in  it,  whose  title  more. 

To  pluck  the  common  bosom  on  his  side,  50 

And  turn  our  impress’d  lances  in  our  eyes 

Which  do  command  them.  With  him  I  sent  the  queen. 

My  reason  all  the  same ;  and  they  are  ready 


Flourish.]  Om.  QqF2F3F4. 
Enter...]  Elnter  Albany,  Goneril, 
Regan,  Soldiers.  Ff.  Enter  Duke,  the 
two  Ladies,  and  others.  Qq  (Enter  the 
Duke  Q2). 

41.  Scene  vi.  Pope +,  Jen. 
show’d']  Ff  +  ,  Jen.  Dyce  i,  Wh. 

Ktly,  Sch.  Jliewed  Q,.  Jhewne  Q2. 
shown  Cap.  et  cet. 

42.  well ;  you]  well  you  Qx. 
the]  them  Ktly. 

43.  Who]  That  Qq,  Glo.  +  . 

44.  I]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Sch. 
We  Qq  et  cet. 

require  them]  require  then  Qq, 

Pope. 

46.  Sir... fit]  I  thought fit  Pope,  Han. 


Sir,  I  thought  fit  Cap. 

47,  48.  To  send. ..retention]  One  lino 
in  Qx,  Ff,  Rowe. 

47.  send]  fiaue  Qx. 

48.  and  appointed  guard]  Om.  Q,Ff, 
Rowe. 

49.  had]  Ff,  Rowe,  Sch.  has  Qq 
et  cet. 

50.  common  bosom]  common  bofiome 
FxF2F3.  coren  bojfiotn  Qx.  common 
blojfomes  Q2.  common  bosoms  Pope+. 

on]  of  Qq. 

his  side]  this  fide  F3F4,  Rowe. 

52,  53.  queen.  My  reason  all]  queen 
My  reafion ,  all  Qt. 

53-55.  My... session.]  Lines  end  to 
morrow,. ..hold,  Qq. 


41.  strain]  Wright:  Race,  descent;  A.  S.  strpnd,  from  strpnan,  to  beget.  See 
Much  Ado,  II,  i,  394. 

43.  opposites]  See  Ham.  V,  ii,  62. 

48.  retention]  Delius  :  Confinement,  custody ;  not  elsewhere  used  by  Sh.  in  this 
sense. 

50.  bosom]  Cafell  :  The  affection  of  all  men  generally. 

51.  impress’d  lances]  Steevens:  That  is,  turn  the  lancemen  whom  we  have 
hired  by  giving  them  press-money. 

51.  in]  For  instances  of  ‘  in  ’  with  verbs  of  motion,  see  *  come  In  evil,’  Ham.  V* 
ii,  70;  Abbott,  §  159. 

51,  52.  our  eyes  Which]  For  the  construction,  see  lines  2,  3,  of  this  Scene. 


ACT  V,  SC.  iii.] 


KING  LEAR 


321 


To-morrow  or  at  further  space  t’  appear 

Where  you  shall  hold  your  session.  *  At  this  time  55 

*  We  sweat  and  bleed ;  the  friend  hath  lost  his  friend ; 

*  And  the  best  quarrels,  in  the  heat,  are  cursed 

*  By  those  that  feel  their  sharpness. 

*  The  question  of  Cordelia  and  her  father 

*  Requires  a  fitter  place.* 

Alb.  Sir,  by  your  patience,  60 

I  hold  you  but  a  subject  of  this  war, 

Not  as  a  brother. 

Reg.  That’s  as  we  list  to  grace  him. 

Methinks  our  pleasure  might  have  been  demanded, 

Ere  you  had  spoke  so  far.  He  led  our  powers, 

Bore  the  commission  of  my  place  and  person ;  65 

The  which  immediacy  may  well  stand  up 
And  call  itself  your  brother. 

Gon.  Not  so  hot; 

In  his  own  grace  he  doth  exalt  himself 
More  than  in  your  addition. 

Reg.  In  my  rights 

By  me  invested,  he  compeers  the  best.  70 

Alb.  That  were  the  most,  if  he  should  husband  you. 


54.  further ]  a  further  Q2,  Jen.  Mai. 
Ec. 

55.  you. ..your]  we. ..our  Han. 

55,  56.  session. ..time  We]  Theob. 
feffion  at  this  time,  mee  Qt.  Seffion  at 
this  time :  we  Q2. 

55-60.  At... place.]  Theob.  Lines  end 

bleed, . quarrels . , .  .fiarpcs. , ,  .father . 

place.  Qq.  ( fharpenejfc  Q2).  Om.  Ff, 
Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

58.  sharpness]  Jharpes  Q, 

61,  62.  I  hold.,  .brother.]  One  line,  Qq. 


^3-  might]  fhould  Q q. 

66.  immediacy]  immediacie  F(.  im¬ 
mediate  Qq,  Pope,  Han. 

67-69.  Not . addition.]  Prose,  Qt. 

Two  lines,  the  first  ending  himfelfe ,  in 

Qa- 

69.  addition]  aduancement  Qq, Pope  + , 
Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 
69,  70.  In. ..best.]  One  line,  Qq. 

69.  rights]  right  Qq,  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

71.  Alb.]  Ff+,  Jen.  Ec.  Del.  Sch. 
Gon.  Qq  et  cet. 


64.  so  far]  I  cannot  think  that  this  is  the  same  phrase  as  ‘You  speak  him  far,* 1 

i.  e.  you  praise  him  much,  in  Cymb.  I,  ij  24,  although  both  Delius  and  Schmidt 
seem  to  consider  the  two  phrases  as  equivalent. 

66.  immediacy]  Johnson:  That  is,  supremacy  in  opposition  to  subordination, 
which  has  quiddam  medium  between  itself  and  power.  Malone  .  Compare  *  most 
immediate  to  our  throne,’  Ham.  I,  ii,  109. 

69.  addition]  Title.  See  II,  ii,  22;  Ham.  II,  i,  47;  and  Sh .passim. 

71.  [See  Textual  Notes.]  Capell:  This  speech  suits  Goneril,  who  might  want  to 


322 


KING  LEAR 


[act  v,  sc.  iii. 


Reg.  Jesters  do  oft  prove  prophets 

Gon.  Holla,  holla!  72 

That  eye  that  told  you  so  look’d  but  a-squint. 

Reg.  Lady,  I  am  not  well ;  else  I  should  answer 
From  a  full-flowing  stomach. — General,  75 

Take  thou  my  soldiers,  prisoners,  patrimony; 

Dispose  of  them,  of  me  ;  the  walls  are  thine. 

Witness  the  world,  that  I  create  thee  here 
My  lord  and  master. 

Gon.  Mean  you  to  enjoy  him  ? 

Alb.  The  let-alone  lies  not  in  your  good  will.  80 

Edm.  Nor  in  thine,  lord. 

.  Alb.  Half-blooded  fellow,  yes. 


72.  Holla,  holla]  Hola,  kola  QqFt, 
Cap. 

72,  73.  Holla. ..asquint.]  One  line, 
Qq. 

73.  asquint ]  Rowe,  a  /quint  QqFf. 
75.  full-flowing ]  Hyphen,  q'heob. 


77.  Om.  Qq. 

the  walls  are]  the  walls  is  Ft.  the 
whole  is  Anon.*  the  laws  are  Anon.* 

79.  him]  him  then  Qq. 

80.  let-alone]  Hyphen,  Cap. 


know  the  whole  of  her  sister’s  intention;  and  Albany’s  standing  by,  and  enjoying 
their  wrangling,  seems  better  than  mixing  with  it.  [I  really  cannot  see  any  sufficient 
reason  here  for  deserting  the  Folio.  Eleven  lines  further  on,  no  one  but  Pope  has 
ever  thought  of  adopting  the  text  of  the  Qq. — Ed.] 

73.  a-squint]  Steevens  :  ‘  Love  being  jealous  makes  a  good  eye  look  a-squint.* 
— Ray’s  Eng.  Prov. 

75.  stomach]  Schmidt:  Wrath,  passion. 

77.  walls]  Theobald  (Nichols’s  Lit.  Hist,  ii,  384) :  The  walls  of  what?  Of  her 
soldiers, her  prisoners, and  her  patrimony?  Besides  Regan  is  here  in  an  open  camp; 
had  she  been  in  an  [mV]  house,  and  given  the  Bastard  the  keys  of  the  fore  and  back 
gate,  she  might  with  some  propriety  have  told  him  the  walls  were  his.  But  as  the 
case  is  otherwise,  I  suspect  she  would  say :  *  they  all  are  thine.’  [This  reading 
Hanmer  adopted.]  Warburton:  A  metaphorical  phrase  taken  from  the  camp, 
and  signifying  to  surrender  at  discretion.  Jennens  :  The  reading  most  agreeable  to 
the  context,  and  to  the  traces  of  the  letters  in  F,,  seems  to  be  this  :  thy  will  is  mine. 
Dyce  quotes  Lettsom  :  ‘  Has  not  the  editor  of  F2  altered  this  improperly  ?  and  may 
we  not  read  “  Yea,  all  is  thine?”’  Wright:  The  words  refer  to  Regan’s  castle 
mentioned  below  in  line  246.  Schmidt  :  Assuredly  this  refers  to  Regan’s  person, 
which  surrenders  itself  like  a  vanquished  fortress,  a  very  common  metaphor  in  Sh. 
‘  Rude  ram,  to  batter  such  an  ivory  wall.’ — P.  of  L.  464.  *  The  heavens  hold  firm 

The  walls  of  thy  dear  honour.’ — Cymb.  II,  i,  67.  *  Painting  thy  outward  walls  so 

costly  gay.’ — Son.  cxlvi. 

80.  let-alone]  Johnson  :  Whether  he  shall  not  or  shall,  depends  not  on  your 
choice.  Ritson  (p.  172)  pronounces  this  paraphrase  by  Johnson  ‘  absolutely  unin¬ 
telligible.’  •  Albany,’  he  says,  *  means  to  tell  his  wife,  that,  however  she  might  want 
the  power,  she  evidently  did  not  want  the  inclination,  to  prevent  the  match.’  [Ritson 


act  v.  sc.  iii.] 


KING  LEAR 


323 


Reg  [To  Edmund']  Let  the  drum  strike,  and  prove  my 

title  thine.  82 

Alb.  Stay  yet ;  hear  reason. — Edmund,  I  arrest  thee 
On  capital  treason ;  and  in  thy  arrest,  [pointing  to  Gonl\ 

This  gilded  serpent. — For  your  claim,  fair  sister,  85 

I  bar  it  in  the  interest  of  my  wife ; 

’Tis  she  is  sub-contra&ed  to  this  lord, 

And  I,  her  husband,  contradict  your  bans. 

If  you  will  marry,  make  your  loves  to  me; 

My  lady  is  bespoke. 

Gon.  .An  interlude!  90 


82.  Reg.]  Baft.  Qq,  Pope. 

[To  Edmund]  Mai  Om.  QqFf 
To  the  Bast.  They  offer  to  go  out.  Han. 
thine ]  good  Qq,  Pope. 

83.  Stay  yet ;  hear  reason]  Stay  :  hear 
my  reason:  Hart. 

84.  thy  arrest ]  thine  attaint  Qq,  Jen. 
Sing.  Sta.  Ktly,  Glo.+ 

[pointing  to  Gon.]  Johns. 

85.  sister]  Sijlers  Ff 

86.  bar ]  Rowe  ii.  bare  QqFf. 


87.  this]  her  Q2. 

88.  your  bans]  Mai.  your  Banes  Ff+, 
Cap.  Jen.  Ec.  the  banes  Qq. 

89.  loves]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob. 
Han.  Warb.  Cap.  Knt,  Dyce,  Glo. +  , 
Coll,  iii,  Sch.  loue  Qq  et  cet. 

90,91.  Gon.  An  interlude !  Alb.] 
Om.  Qq,  reading  My  lady...GloJler  as 
one  line. 

yO.  interlude]  Steev.  enterlude  Ff. 


does  not  put  a  hyphen  in  ‘let-alone,’  and  evidently  takes  *  let’  in  the  sense  of  hin¬ 
drance. — Ed.]  Delius  thinks  that  *  your  ’  in  this  line  is  emphatic ;  that  not  she,  but 
he,  will  prevent  Regan’s  marriage. 

82.  [See  Textual  Notes.]  Capell.  Edmund’s  passions  are  not  rais’d  so  high,  nor 
he  so  fix’d  in  his  ‘  title,’  that  he  should  want  to  *  prove  ’  it  by  arms;  ’tis  the  enflam’d 
Regan,  who  is  ignorant  of  her  forces’  dismission,  that  is  pushing  him  to  it,  and  to  an 
exit  for  that  purpose,  which  is  prevented  by  Albany.  [It  is  doubtful  whether  *  Stay,’ 
in  the  next  line,  refers  to  Regan’s  departure,  as  Hanmer  and  Capell  evidently  sup¬ 
pose  ;  it  may  refer  to  Regan’s  order  to  the  drum  to  strike. — Ed.] 

84.  thy  arrest]  As  far  as  I  know,  Wright  is  the  only  editor  who  has  attempted 
to  explain  attaint  of  the  Qq ;  his  note  is  simply :  ‘  in  convicting  thee.’  But,  I  fear, 
this  interpretation  is  doubtful;  it  seems  to  defer  the  checking  of  Goneril  until  after 
the  result  of  the  combat  has  proved  Edmund’s  treason;  whereas  Albany’s  object 
was  to  unmask  his  wife  on  the  spot.  This  passage  is  the  only  one  cited  by  Schmidt 
(Lex.)  under  the  head  of  ‘conviction,  impeachment;’  there  is,  therefore,  presuma¬ 
bly  no  parallel  instance,  to  guide  us,  of  its  use  in  this  sense.  The  chiefest  objection 
that  would  be  urged,  to  ‘arrest’  of  the  Ff,  is,  I  suppose,  its  presence  in  the  pre¬ 
ceding  line.  But  the  argument  is  wearisome  that  Sh.  never  could  have  used  the 
same  word  twice  within  the  compass  of  a  few  lines.  If  it  be  true,  Sh.  is  unlike  any 
writer  that  ever  lived  in  the  tide  of  time  (which  in  one  sense  is  true,  but  not  in  the 
sense  here  meant).  In  arresting  Edmund,  Albany  arrests  Goneril,  not  *  on  capital 
treason,’  but  in  her  matrimonial  plans.  Even  without  the  authority  of  the  Ff,  ‘  arrest  ’ 
seems  preferable  to  attaint.  Since  writing  this,  Schmidt’s  edition  has  reached  me, 
and  in  it  he  says,  ‘  Sh.  does  not  use  the  noun  attaint  in  the  sense  of  accusation ,  and 


324 


KING  LEAR  [act  v,  sc.  iii 


Alb.  Thou  art  arm’d,  Gloucester;  let  the  trumpet  sound.  91 
If  none  appear  to  prove  upon  thy  person 
Thy  heinous,  manifest,  and  many  treasons, 

There  is  my  pledge.  I  ’ll  prove  it  on  thy  heart, 

Ere  I  taste  bread,  thou  art  in  nothing  less  95 

Than  I  have  here  proclaim’d  thee. 

Reg.  Sick,  oh,  sick ! 

Gon.  [Aside]  If  not,  I  ’ll  ne’er  trust  medicine. 

Edm.  There’s  my  exchange.  What  in  the  world  he  is 
That  names  me  traitor,  villain-like  he  lies. 

Call  by  the  trumpet ;  he  that  dares  approach,  IOO 

On  him,  on  you, — who  not  ? — I  will  maintain 
My  truth  and  honour  firmly. 

Alb.  A  herald,  ho ! 

*  Edm.  A  herald,  ho,  a  herald ! *  * 

Alb.  Trust  to  thy  single  virtue ;  for  thy  soldiers. 

All  levied  in  my  name,  have  in  my  name  105 

Took  their  discharge. 

Reg.  My  sickness  grows  upon  me ! 

Alb.  She  is  not  well. — Convey  her  to  my  tent. — 

[Exit  Regan,  led. 


Ql.  One  line,  Rowe.  Two  in  Ff. 
arm'd ]  afmed  Ff,  Rowe,  Sch. 
Let.. .sound .*]  Om.  Qq. 

92.  person ]  head  Qq,  Jen.  Sing.  Ktly, 
Glo.  Wr. 

94, 98.  [throwing  down  a  glove.]  Mai. 
94.  prove  it]  ma  ke  it  Fx.  make  it  Fa 
F3F4,  Rowe,  Knt,  Del.  Dyce  i,  Sta.  Sch. 
mark  it  Anon.*  make  good  Coll.  (MS). 

96.  sick  f]  sick —  Rowe+,  Jen. 

97.  [Aside]  First  by  Rowe. 
medicine ]  Ff,  Johns.  Knt,  Del. 

Dyce,  Glo.  + ,  Sch.  poyfon  Qq  et  cet. 


98.  he  tr]  hes  Fx. 

100.  the ]  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope,  Han.  Knt, 
Sch.  thy  Qq  et  cet. 

101.  who']  whom  Han.  Ec. 

103.  Edm.  A. .. herald /]  Om.  Ff+. 

104.  virtue]  virtues  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Han. 

105.  106.  All. ..discharge.]  One  line, 
Qq. 

106.  My]  This  Qq,  Theob.  Warb. 
Johns.  Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

107.  [Exit  Regan,  led.]  Theob.  Om 
QqFf.  Exit  Reg.  Rowe. 


the  verb  in  his  plays  is  equivalent  to  convict  of  high  treason,  not  to  accuse  of  it.  There 
can  be  no  reference  to  a  conviction  in  the  present  passage.’ — Ed.] 

94.  prove]  Delius  upholds  make  by  supposing  that,  according  to  a  not  uncom¬ 
mon  construction  in  Sh.,  the  noun,  proof,  is  to  be  supplied  from  the  preceding  verb, 

•  prove ;  ’  and  Schmidt  refers  to  I,  i,  58,  where  love  is  to  be  similarly  supplied ;  he 
also  suggests  that  make  may  stand  for  do,  of  which  usage  there  are  examples  in  Sh. 
98.  what]  Abbott,  §  254  :  Equivalent  to  whoever.  Compare  III,  vi,  112. 

104.  virtue]  Steevens:  That  is,  valour;  a  Roman  sense  of  the  word.  Thus 
Raleigh :  *  The  conquest  of  Palestine  with  singular  virtue  they  performed  ’ 


ACT  V,  SC.  iii.] 


KING  LEAR 


325 


Enter  a  Herald. 

Come  hither,  herald, — Let  the  trumpet  sound, —  108 

And  read  out  this. 

*  Capt.  Sound,  trumpet  !*  [A  trumpet  sounds,  no 

Her.  [Reads]  If  any  man  of  quality  or  degree  within 
the  lists  of  the  army  will  maintain  upon  Edmund ,  supposed 
Earl  of  Gloucester ,  that  he  is  a  manifold  traitor ,  let  him 
appear  by  the  third  sound  of  the  trumpet ;  he  is  bold  in  Ids 
defence .  1 1 5 

*  Edm.  Sound !  *  [First  trumpet. 

Her.  Again !  [Second  trumpet. 

Her.  Again !  [Third  trumpet. 

[Trumpet  answers  within. 


Enter  Edgar,  at  the  third  sound,  armed,  with  a  Trumpet  before  him. 

Alb.  Ask  him  his  purposes,  why  he  appears 
Upon  this  call  o’  th’  trumpet. 

Her.  What  are  you  ?  120 


108.  Enter  a  Herald.]  As  in  Han. 
Om.  Qq.  After  firmly,  line  102,  Ff, 
Rowe,  Pope.  After  ho  /  line  103,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  After  me,  line  106,  Cap. 
Mai.  Steev.  Bos.  Sing.  Ktly.  After 
herald  l  line  103,  Jen.  Ec. 

Scene  vii.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

108,  109.  Come.. .this."]  One  line,  Qa. 
108.  herald, — Let. ....sound, — ]  Cap. 
herald,  let. ..found,  QqFf. 

trumpet ]  Trumper  Fx. 
no.  Capt.  Sound,  trumpet /]  Om. 
Ff+. 

[A  trumpet  sounds.]  Om.  Qq. 
ill.  Her.  \_Reads~\  Herald  reads.  Ff. 
Her.  Qq. 

ill,  1 1 2.  within  the  lists]  in  the 
hoaft  Qq. 

113.  he  is]  he’s  Qq. 

1 14.  by]  at  Qq,  Jen.  Mai.  Steev.  Bos. 
Coll.  Del.  Sing.  Sta.  Wh.  Ktly,  Huds, 


1 16.  Edm.  Sound /]  Cap.  Baft.  Sound? 
Qx.  Baft.  Sound  Qa.  Om.  Ff+. 

1 1 6,  1 17,  1 18.  [First,  Second,  Third] 
I,  2,  3  Ff. 

1 16-1 18.  Sound  !...  Again]  Continued 
to  Her.  by  Jen. 

1 16.  [First  trumpet.]  Om.  Qq. 

1 1 7.  Her.  Again  /]  Againe  ?  Qx. 
Againe.  Q2. 

[Second  trumpet.]  Om.  Qq. 

1 18.  Her.  Again  l  [Third  trumpet. 
Om.  Qq. 

[Trumpet  answers  within.]  Ff 
(him  within  F3F4).  Om.  Qq.  After  a 
pause  a  trumpet...  Sta. 

Enter...him.]  Enter  Edgar  at  the 
third  found,  with  a  trumpet  before  him. 
Qq.  (with  Om.  QJ.  Enter  Edgar 
armed.  Ff. 

120-122.  What . summons f]  Two 

lines,  the  first  ending  quality  ?  Qq. 


1 16.  Sound]  Jennens:  The  Qq  are  wrong  in  giving  this  to  the  Bastard.  It  was 
the  Herald’s  business.  Capell:  The  spirit  of  Edmund’s  character  is  here  kept  up; 
he  anticipates  the  Herald,  whose  office  he  discharges  himself. 

119.  Ask  him]  Blakeway  :  This  is  according  to  the  ceremonials  of  the  trial  by 
combat  in  cases  criminal.  *  The  Appellant  and  his  procurator  first  come  to  the  gate 
28 


326 


KING  LEAR 


[act  V,  SC.  in. 


Your  name?  your  quality?  and  why  you  answer  121 

This  present  summons  ? 

Edg.  Know,  my  name  is  lost ; 

By  treason’s  tooth  bare-gnawn  and  canker-bit ; 

Yet  am  I  noble  as  the  adversary 
I  come  to  cope. 

Alb.  Which  is  that  adversary?  125 

Edg.  What’s  he  that  speaks  for  Edmund,  Earl  of 
Gloucester  ? 

Edm.  Himself.  What  say’st  thou  to  him  ? 

Edg.  Draw  thy  sword 

That,  if  my  speech  offend  a  noble  heart. 

Thy  arm  may  do  thee  justice;  here  is  mine. 

Behold,  it  is  the  privilege  of  mine  honours,  130 


12 1.  your  quality ]  and  qualiiie  Q,. 
and  quality  Q2,  Jen. 

"why  you]  why  do  you  Ktly. 

122.  Know]  O  know  Qq. 

122-125.  Know. ..coped]  The  lines  end 

tooth. .. .mod t... .all.  in  Qr.  Three  lines, 
ending  tooth .  ...canker-bit. ..all t  in  Q2. 

122,  123.  lost ;  By . tooth']  Theob. 

lojl  by  treafons  tooth.  Qt.  lojl  by  Trea - 
fons  tooth:  Q2,  Ff,  Rowe,  Pope. 

124.  Yet  am  I  noble  as]  yet  are  1 
mou't  Where  is  Qt.  Where  is  Q2. 

125.  cope.]  cope  with  all.  Q,.  cope 
with  all?  Q2.  cope  withal  Cap.  Jen. 


Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Coll.  Del.  Sing. 
Ktly. 

125.  Which]  What  Q2. 

128,129.  That...arm.]  One  line,  Qq. 

130.  the. ..honours]  Pope,  the priui - 
ledge  of  my  tongue  Qq,  Cap.  my  priui- 
ledge,  The  priuiledge  of  mine  honours 
(reading  line  130  as  two  lines),  Ff,  Rowe 
Knt,  Del.  Following  the  Ff,  but  read 
ing  line  130  as  one  line,  Coll.  Sing.  Wh. 
Ktly.  Following  the  Ff,  but  reading  as 
three  lines,  ending  my  privilege... ..pro- 
fession... protest.  Johns. 


.  .  .  The  Constable  and  Marshall  demand  by  voice  of  herald,  what  he  is,  and  why 
he  comes  so  arrayed.’ — Selden’s  Duello. 

121,122.  Your  .  .  .  summons?]  Abbott,  §382,  removes  the  interrogation- 
marks,  and  considers  ‘I  ask’  as  understood  before  the  whole  sentence. 

125.  cope]  For  other  instances  of  ‘cope’  as  a  transitive  verb,  signifying  to  en¬ 
counter ■,  see  Schmidt  (Lex.). 

126.  What’s]  See  Abbott,  §254. 

130.  privilege]  Warburton  1  The  charge  he  is  going  to  bring  against  the  Bas¬ 
tard,  he  calls  the  ‘privilege,’  &c.  To  understand  which  phraseology,  we  must 
consider  that  the  old  rites  of  knighthood  are  here  alluded  to;  whose  oath  and  pro¬ 
fession  required  him  to  discover  all  treasons,  and  whose  privilege  it  was  to  have  his 
challenge  accepted,  or  otherwise  to  have  his  charge  taken  pro  confesso.  For  if  one 
who  was  no  knight  accused  another  who  was,  that  other  was  under  no  obligation  to 
accept  the  challenge.  On  this  account  it  was  necessary,  as  Edgar  came  disguised,  to 
tell  the  Bastard  he  was  a  knight.  Johnson  :  The  *  privilege  of  this  *  oath  ’  means  the 
privilege  gained  by  taking  the  oath  administered  in  the  regular  initiation  of  a  knight 
professed.  Malone’s  interpretation  seems  the  best:  Edgar  says :  *  Here  I  draw  my 


ACT  v,  SC.  iii.] 


KING  LEAR 


32  7 


My  oath,  and  my.  profession,  I  protest, —  131 

Maugre  thy  strength,  place,  youth,  and  eminence, 

Despite  thy  vi<5tor  sword  and  fire-new  fortune, 

Thy  valour  and  thy  heart,— thou  art  a  traitor, 

False  to  thy  gods,  thy  brother  and  thy  father,  2 35 

Conspirant  ’gainst  this  high  illustrious  prince, 

And,  from  the  extremest  upward  of  thy  head 
To  the  descent  and  dust  below  thy  foot, 

A  most  toad-spotted  traitor.  Say  thou  *  No/ 

This  sword,  this  arm,  and  my  best  spirits  are  bent  1 40 

To  prove  upon  thy*  heart,  whereto  I  speak, 

Thou  liest. 

Edm.  In  wisdom  I  should  ask  thy  name ; 

But,  since  thy  outside  looks  so  fair  and  warlike, 


132.  Maugre ]  Maugure  Q,. 

place ,  youth]  Ff+,  Knt,  Sing. 
Ktly,  Sch.  youth,  place  Qq  et  cet.  skill, 
youth  Coll.  (MS). 

133.  Despite ]  Defpight  Qq.  Defpife 
Ff.  Spite  of  Pope + . 

viflor  sword]  Cap.  vitflor- 
Sword  Ff+,  Jen.  Ktly,  Sch.  vi/lor, 
fword  Qq. 

fire-new  fortune ]  Rowe,  fire 
new  Fortune  Ff.  fire  new  fortun'd  Qq. 

135.  thy  gods]  the  gods  Q2,  Cap. 


136.  Conspirant]  Confpicuate  Qq. 
Conspirate  Cap. 

illustrious]  illufiirous  F,. 

138.  below]  beneath  Qq,  Jen.  Steev. 
Ec.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly,  Huds. 

foot]  feet  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Ec. 
Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly. 

139.  traitor.  Say]  traytor fay  Qf. 
140-142.  This. ..liest.]  Two  lines,  the 

first  ending  fpirits,  Qq. 

140.  are]  As  Q,.  Is  Q3. 

142.  should]  fitolud  QI# 


sword.  Behold  it  is  the  privilege  or  right  of  my  profession  to  draw  it  against  a 
traitor.  I  protest,  therefore,’  &c.  It  is  not  the  charge  itself  (as  Warburton  has 
erroneously  stated),  but  the  right  of  bringing  the  charge  and  maintaining  it  with  his 
sword,  which  Edgar  calls  the  privilege  of  his  profession.  Moberly  :  The  words 
which  begin  the  line  seem  corrupt.  Perhaps  the  true  reading  may  be,  *  I  hold  it  as 
the  privilege  of  mine  honour.  My  oath,  and  my  profession ;  ’  that  is,  ‘  I  hold  here  my 
sword,  to  which  I  am  entitled  by  honourable  birth,  as  well  as  by  my  oath  and  pro¬ 
fession  of  knighthood.’ 

132.  Maugre]  Wright:  In  spite  of.  See  Twelfth  Night,  III,  i,  163.  Cotgrave 
has,  ‘  Maulgrd  eux.  Mauger  their  teeth,  in  spight  of  their  hearts,  against  their  wills, 
whether  they  will  or  no.’ 

132.  It  is  not  easy  to  see  why  the  Qq  should  be  here  preferred;  the  imme¬ 
diate  recurrence  of  the  similar  sounds  is  somewhat  harsh :  streng/A,  you th,  place, 
eminence. — Ed. 

142.  wisdom]  Malone  :  Because,  if  his  adversary  was  not  of  equal  rank,  Ed¬ 
mund  might  have  declined  the  combat.  Hence  the  herald  proclaimed :  4  If  any 
man  of  quality  or  degree,’  &c.  So  Goneril  afterwards  says :  *  By  the  law  of  arms 
thou  wast  not  bound  to  answer  An  unknown  opposite.’ 


328 


KING  LEAR 


[act  v,  sc.  iii. 


And  that  thy  tongue  some  say  of  breeding  breathes, 

What  safe  and  nicely  I  might  well  delay  1 45 

By  rule  of  knighthood  I  disdain  and  spurn. 

Back  do  I  toss  these  treasons  to  thy  head ; 

With  the  hell-hated  lie  o’envhelm  thy  heart ; 

Which,  for  they  yet  glance  by  and  scarcely  bruise, 

This  sword  of  mine  shall  give  them  instant  way,  150 

Where  they  shall  rest  for  ever. — Trumpets,  speak ! 

[  Alarums .  They  fight.  Edmund  falls . 

Alb.  Save  him,  save  him ! 

Gon.  This  is  pradtice,  Gloucester ; 


144.  tongue"]  being  Qq. 

some  say]  Qq,  Mai.  Knt,  Del. 
Dyce,  Glo.  + ,  Sch.  {fome fay )  Ff.  some 
’ say  Pope  et  cet. 

145.  Om.  Qq. 

146.  By  rule]  By  right  Qq. 

147.  Back. .. head ;]  Heere  do  I  toffe 
thofe  treafons  to  thy  head.  Qt.  Ocn.  Q2. 

148.  hell-hated  lie]  hell  hatedly  Qq. 
o'erwhelm]  oreturnd  Qx.  ore- 

turn'd  Qa* * 

149.  Which. ..and  scarcely  bruise]  To 
which. ..scarcely  bruising  Han. 

scarcely]  fcarely  Fx. 

15 1,  they  shall]  thou  shall  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns. 


[Alarums.  They  fight.  Edmund 
falls.]  Han.  (subs.)  Alarums.  Fights, 
(after  him  !  line  1 52)  Ff,  Rowe.  Om.  Qq. 

152.  Alb.  Save... Gon.  This]  Gon. 
O,  save  him,  save  him ;  This  Theob. 
Warb.  Huds.  Gon.  Save  him,  O  save 
him ;  this  Han.  Gon.  Save  him,  save 
him;  this  Jen. 

Save  him,]  Save  him ,  sir,  Cap. 
O  save  him,  Steev.  Bos.  Coll.  Del.  Wh. 
Ktly. 

152-155.  This. ..beguiled.]  Three  lines, 
ending  armes...oppofite,...beguild,  Qq. 

152.  practice]  meerepradlifeQc\.  mere 
practice  Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var  Coll.  Del. 
Sing.  Wh.  Ktly. 


144.  say]  Proof.  See  Macb.  IV,  iii,  143,  and  note. 

145.  What  .  .  .  delay]  Eccles:  What  was  that  but  the  combat?  And  how  can 
he  be  said  to  ‘  disdain  and  spurn  ’  that  which,  without  delay,  he  determines  to  under¬ 
take  ?  I  propose  the  alteration  of  one  word,  and  to  consider  *  delay  ’  as  a  noun  in¬ 
stead  of  a  verb :  ‘  What  safe  and  nicely  I  might  claim,  delay,’  &c.  Perhaps,  do  may 
be  understood  after  *  might  well,’  and  ‘  delay  ’  be  construed  as  an  infinitive.  Possibly 

*  disdain  and  spurn  ’  may  be  supposed,  as  well  as  the  following  verb,  to  have  a  rela¬ 
tion  to  ‘  those  treasons  ’  in  the  accusative ;  in  this  way  a  slight  change  would  render 
the  expression  more  natural :  ‘And  back  do  toss  these,’  &c.  [Again,  in  line  148,]  the 
sense  would  receive  some  improvement  from  reading  ‘May  the  hell-hated  lie,’  &c. 
Malone  :  I  suppose  the  meaning  is,  *  That  delay  which  by  the  law  of  knighthood  I 
might  make,  I  scorn  to  make.’  ‘Nicely’  is  punctiliously;  if  I  stood  on  minute 
forms.  Schmidt:  ‘Delay’  is  equivalent  to  keep  back,  refuse.  Compare  As  You 
Like  It,  III,  ii,  221 :  ‘  Let  me  stay  the  growth  of  his  beard,  if  thou  delay  me  not 
the  knowledge  of  his  chin.’ 

149.  Which]  For  instances  where  ‘  which  ’  is  equivalent  to  as  to  which,  see 
Abbott,  §  272. 

151.  Where]  Capell:  ‘Where’  is  To  where,  and  the  place  meant  is  his  ‘heart.’ 

152.  Alb.]  Theobald  (Nichols’s  Lit.  Illust.  ii,  384)  thought  that  this  was  ‘cer- 


ACT  V,  SC.  iii.] 


KING  LEAR 


329 


By  tn*  law  of  arms  thou  wast  not  bound  to  answer  153 

An  unknown  opposite ;  thou  art  not  vanquish’d, 

But  cozen’d  and  beguiled. 

Alb.  Shut  your  mouth,  dame,  155 

Or  with  this  paper  shall  I  stop  it. — Hold,  sir ; 

Thou  worse  than  any  name,  read  thine  own  evil.— 

No  tearing,  lady ;  I  perceive  you  know  it. 

Gon.  Say,  if  I  do,  the  laws  are  mine,  not  thine. 


153.  arms]  armcs  Qq,  IVarre  Ff-f, 
Knt,  Del.  Sch. 

wast]  art  Qq. 
answer]  offer  Q2. 

I55-I58-  Shut. ..know  it.]  Prose,  Qq. 

155.  Shut]  Stop  Qq. 

156.  stop]  Jiople  Qr. 

stop  it.]  stop  it?  Colt  Del.  Wh. 
Hold ,  sir]  Om.  Qq,  Pope,  Theob. 
Han.  Warb.  Given  to  ‘  Gon.’  by  Jen. 
[To  Edg.  Wh.  Cap.  MS.* 


157.  name]  thing  Qq,  Pope,  Theoo. 
Han.  Warb. 

158.  No]  nay  no  Qf.  Nay,  no  Q2, 
Jen 

No  tearing,  lady ,-]  No  tearing. 
— Lady ,  Johns. 

know  it]  know’t  Qq. 

[Gives  the  letter  to  Edmund. 

Johns. 

159.  160.  Say..for>t?]  One  line,  Q 
Prose  in  Qa. 


tainly  a  corruption  either  from  A  mb.  or  Lad.,  to  signify  both  the  women,  or  ladies.' 
Afterwards,  in  his  edition,  he  gave  this  speech  to  Goneril.  *  ’Tis  absurd,’  he  says, 
‘that  Albany,  who  knew  Edmund’s  Treasons  and  his  own  Wife’s  Passion  for  him, 
should  be  sollicitous  to  have  his  Life  sav’d.’  Johnson  :  Albany  desires  that  Ed¬ 
mund’s  life  might  be  spared  at  present,  only  to  obtain  his  confession,  and  to  convict 
him  openly  by  his  own  letter.  Walker  ( Crit.  ii,  185):  Theobald  was  right  in 
giving  the  words, ‘O  save  him,  save  him’  (as  he  properly  read),  also  to  Goneril. 
Halliwell  :  It  strikes  me  that  the  exclamations  are  too  passionate  to  be  spoken  by 
any  but  Goneril.  She  cries  out  when  she  sees  him  fall, — O  save  him,  save  him ! — 
and  then,  turning  to  Gloucester  (Edmund),  tells  him  that  he  is  not  to  consider  this  a 
legal  victory,  for  the  reasons  that  follow. 

156.  Hold,  sir;]  Capell:  Albany  sees  Edgar’s  resentments  carrying  him  to  a 
present  dispatch ;  which  it  behov’d  him  to  hinder,  as  well  for  punishing  Edmund 
with  a  death  of  more  infamy  as  for  getting  out  of  him  by  torture  or  otherwise  the 
whole  iniquitous  business  in  which  he  had  been  actor.  Delius,  in  his  first  edition, 
followed  Capell’s  interpretation,  but  in  his  second  he  adopted  the  correct  view, 
pointed  out  by  Dyce,  who  says :  *  Hold,  sir  ’  is  spoken  to  Edmund,  ‘  Hold  ’  being 
formerly  a  word  commonly  used  when  any  one  presented  anything  to  another 
Compare  ‘Hold,  therefore,  Angelo,’  &cc.,Meas. for Meas.  I,  i, 43 ;  ‘Hold,  my  hand,’ 
&c.,  Jul.  Coes.  I,  iii,  1 17 ;  ‘But,  hold  thee,  take  this  garland,’  &c.,  Ib.  V,  iii,  85. 
[For  many  other  instances, -see  Schmidt  (Lex.  s.  v. /.)  where,  howeyer,  this  present 
one  from  Lear  is  not  cited.]  Schmidt,  in  his  edition,  compares  it  to  the  French,  tenez, 
and  adds  that  *  from  the  manner  in  which  the  letter  came  into  Albany’s  hands,  Albany 
could  not  know  whether  Edmund  was  acquainted  with  its  contents  or  not.  Those 
editors  who  follow  the  Qq  in  line  161  should  follow  them  Imre,  and  omit  “  Hold,  sir.”  ’ 

158.  No  tearing,  &c.]  For  a  somewhat  similar  incident,  see  King  Leir,  in  Ap¬ 
pendix,  p.  401. 

28  * 


330 


KING  LEAR 


[act  v.  sc.  iil 


Who  can  arraign  me  for ’t  ?  \Exit. 

Alb.  Most  monstrous !  Oh!-  160 

Know’st  thou  this  paper  ? 

Edm.  Ask  me  not  what  I  know. 

Alb.  Go  after  her ;  she’s  desperate ;  govern  her. 

Edm.  What  you  have  charged  me  with,  that  have  I  done; 

And  more,  much  more;  the  time  will  bring  it  out. 

Tis  past,  and  so  am  I. — But  what  art  thou  165 

That  hast  this  fortune  on  me  ?  If  thou  ’rt  noble,  „ 


160.  can]  Jhal  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 
Ec.  Var.  Sing.  Sta.  Ktly. 
for't]  for  it  Qa. 

[Exit.]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Sing. 
Sta.  Ktly,  Huds.  Sch.  Exit  Gonorill. 
(after  know  line  16 1)  Qq  et  cet. 

160,161.  Most. .. paper  f]  Cap.  One 
line,  QqFf+,  Jen.  Del.  Huds. 

Most  monstrous  /  Oh  / — 
Knows't]  Glo.  Wr.  Mob.  Sch.  Mofl 
monflrous  !  O,  know'Jl  Ff,  Rowe,  Huds. 
Mofl  monflrous  know'Jl  Q,.  Alonfler , 
knowfl  Q2,  Pope  +  ,  Jen.  Most  monster - 
ous  /  know'st  Cap.  Ec.  Ktly.  Most  mon¬ 
strous/  know'st  Steev.  et  cet. 


161.  Edm.]  Baft,  or  Edm.  Ff,  Rowe, 
Knt,  Del.  i,  Sing.  Sta.  Ktly,  Huds.  Sch. 
Gon.  Qq  et  cet. 

know']  do  know  Han. 

162.  [To  ati  Officer,  who  goes  out 
after  her.  Cap. 

163.  Scene  viii.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

Two  lines,  the  first  ending  with, 
Ff. 

have  /]  I  have  Rowe  ii  +  . 

165-167.  ’  Tis. ..thee.]  Prose,  in  Qa. 

166.  thou' rt]  thou  bee'flQ^  thoubeejl 
Q2.  thou  art  Cap.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt, 
Del.  Sing.  Ktly. 


161.  Edm.  Ask,  &c.]  Knight:  Whyshould  Albany  address  the  question  ‘Know’st 
thou  this  paper  ?  ’  to  Goneril,  when  he  had  previously  said  to  her :  *  No  tearing,  lady; 
I  perceive  you  know  it  ’  ?  Dyce  :  These  words  are  manifestly  those  of  Goneril  in  hei 
desperation,  and  proved  by  Edmund’s  next  speech  not  to  belong  to  him.  White: 
These  words  are  manifestly  uttered  by  Goneril.  Hudson  [following  the  Ff  ]  :  Albany 
might  well  ask  Edmund,  ‘  Know’st  thou  this  paper?’  for,  in  fact, Goneril’s  letter  did 
not  reach  Edmund;  he  had  not  seen  it.  Edmund,  with  some  spirit  of  manhood, 
refuses  to  make  any  answers  that  will  criminate  or  blacken  a  woman  by  whom  he  is 
beloved;  and  then  proceeds,  consistently,  to  answer  Edgar’s  charges.  Cowden 
Clarke:  We  think  that  Albany’s  words,  ‘Go  after  her;  she’s  desperate,’  show 
that  he  is  intended  to  say  them  immediately  upon  Goneril’s  uttering  this  refusal  to 
be  questioned,  and  then  rushing  out.  [It  seems  to  me,  Knight’s  question  is  unan¬ 
swerable.  Albany  has  distinctly  said  to  Goneril,  ‘  I  perceive  you  know  it,’  and  Gon¬ 
eril  has  brazened  it  out,  eliciting  Albany’s  horrorstruck  ‘  Most  monstrous !  ’  Is  it 
likely  that  he  asks  her  a  second  time  whether  she  knows  it  ?  and  that  she  should  an¬ 
swer  evasively  to  this  second  question  after  having  already  virtually  confessed  her 
knowledge  ?  ‘  Know’st  thou  this  paper  ?  ’  is  clearly  addressed  to  Edmund,  who 

refuses  to  know  anything  of  the  letter,  but  confesses  that  what  he  has  been  openly 
charged  with,  that  he  has  done.  The  groan  that  breaks  from  Albany  in  line  160,  at 
the  revelation  of  his  wife’s  abandoned  effrontery,  should  not  be  omitted ;  it  is  as 
needful  to  the  character  as  it  is  to  the  rhythm. — Ed.] 

166.  on]  Wright  refers  to  *  upon,’  III,  vi,  87. 


ACT  V,  SC.  iii.] 


KING  LEAR 


331 


I  do  forgive  thee. 

Edg.  Let’s  exchange  charity.  167 

I  am  no  less  in  blood  than  thou  art,  Edmund; 

If  more,  the  more  th’  hast  wrong’d  me. 

My  name  is  Edgar,  and  thy  father’s  son.  170 

The  gods  are  just,  and  of  our  pleasant  vices 
Make  instruments  to  plague  us. 

The  dark  and  vicious  place  where  thee  he  got 
Cost  him  his  eyes. 

Edm.  Th’  hast  spoken  right ;  'tis  true ; 

The  wheel  is  come'full  circle;  I  am  here.  175 

Alb.  Methought  thy  very  gait  did  prophesy 
A  royal  nobleness.  I  must  embrace  thee ; 

Let  sorrow  split  my  heart,  if  ever  I 


167.  Let's ]  Let  us  Cap.  Jen.  Mai.  Ec. 
Ktly. 

charity']  our  charity  Pope,  Han. 
169.  th'  hast]  Ff.  thou'st  Rowe+. 
thou  hast  Qq  et  cet. 

17 1,  pleasant ]  several  Mrs  Griffith. 
vices]  ver/ues.  Q,.  vertues  Q2. 

172-174.  Make. ..eyes.]  Two  lines,  Qq 
(the  first  ending  vitious,  Qx;  the  first 
ending  place ,  QJ. 

172.  plague  us]  J courge  vs  Qq,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var. 
Sing,  plague  and punish  us  Han.  plague 
us  ir  their  time  Ktly. 


173.  thee  he]  he  thee  Q2. 

174,  175.  Th' ...here.]  Prose,  Q,. 

174.  Th' hast]  Ff,  Sch.  Thou'st 
Rowe +  ,  Sing.  Wh.  Ktly,  Huds.  Thou 
hajt  Qq  et  cet. 

right ;  'tis  true]  Ed.  truth  Qq. 
right,  'tis  true  Ff  et  cet. 

175.  circle]  circled  Q,.  circkled  Q2 

176.  [To  Edgar.  Han. 
gait]  Johns,  gate  QqFf. 

178,  179.  Let. ... .father !]  One  line. 
Qq. 

ever  I  Did]  I  did  euer  Qq. 


167.  charity]  Johnson:  Our  author,  by  negligence,  gives  his  heathens  the  senti¬ 
ments  and  practices  of  Christianity.  In  Hamlet  there  is  the  same  solemn  act  of  final 
reconciliation,  but  with  exact  propriety,  for  the  personages  are  Christians:  ‘Exchange 
forgiveness  with  me,  noble  Hamlet,’  &c.  Cowden  Clarke  :  Can  we  believe  that 
the  most  careful  dramatist  that  ever  wrote  set  down  anything  ‘  by  negligence  ’  ?  Is 
not  the  virtue  of  a  magnanimous  generosity  proper  to  human  nature  in  all  ages  and 
in  all  creeds? 

169.  the  more]  According  to  Abbott,  §480,  the  emphasis  on  this  ‘more’  causes 
it,  in  scansion,  to  be  prolonged.  Abbott  thus  quotes  and  divides  the  line :  ‘  If 
m6re  |  the  mo  |  re  hast  |  thou  wrdng’d  |  (6d)  m6.’  See  I,  iv,  334.  White  :  I  am 
inclined  to  think  that  this  imperfect  line  is  corrupted,  and  that  it  was  written:  ‘  If 
more,  the  more  thou  then  hast  wronged  me.’  [I  have  preferred  to  print  the  line 
exactly  as  it  stands  in  the  Ff. — Ed.] 

171.  Wordsworth  (p.  113):  The  same  sentiment  is  in  the  Apocryphal  Book 
of  Wisdom,  xi,  1 6 :  ‘wherewithal  a  man  sinneth,  by  the  same  also  shall  he  be 
punished.’ 


332 


KING  LEAR 


[act  v,  SC.  iii. 


Did  hate  thee  or  thy  father ! 

Edg.  Worthy  prince, 

I  know’t. 

Alb.  Where  have  you  hid  yourself?  180 

How  have  you  known  the  miseries  of  your  father? 

Edg.  By  nursing  them,  my  lord.  List  a  brief  tale; 

And  when  ’tis  told,  oh,  that  my  heart  would  burst ! 

The  bloody  proclamation  to  escape 

That  follow'd  me  so  near, — oh,  our  lives’  sweetness  1  185 

That  we  the  pain  of  death  would  hourly  die 

Rather  than  die  at  once ! — taught  me  to  shift 

Into  a  madman’s  rags,  t’  assume  a  semblance 

That  very  dogs  disdain’d ;  and  in  this  habit 

Met  I  my  father  with  his  bleeding  rings,  190 

Their  precious  stones  new  lost ;  became  his  guide, 

Led  him,  begg’d  for  him,  saved  him  from  despair; 

Never — O  fault ! — reveal’d  myself  unto  him, 


179.  I  know't]  I  know  it  Q2,  Mai.  Ec. 
Sch.  I  know  it  well  Han.  Cap.  Steev. 
At  beginning  of  line  180,  Han.  Cap. 
Steev.  Walker,  Dyce  ii,  Huds.  Sch.  At 
end  of  line  179,  QqFf  et  cet. 

182-190.  The  lines  end  Lord, ...told... 
proclamation.. .  .neere,. . .  .deaths. ..once.... 
rags. ..dif doin' d .'...rings,  Qq. 

183,  184.  burst  l  The ]  burjl  the  Q,. 

185.  follow'd ]  followed  Qq,  Sch. 

186.  we. ..would']  with. ...Would  Qq. 


with. ...we'd  Jen.  Mai.  Steev.  Ec.  Bos. 
Coll.  Sing.  Ktly,  Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

186.  hourly  die]  hourly  bear  Pope-r, 
hourly  fly  Jervis. 

1 89.  That]  The  Pope  + . 

1 91.  Their]  The  Qq. 

stones]  gems  Pope  + . 
new  lost]  new-lost  Ktly, 
lost ;  became]  lofl  became  Qx. 
193.  0  fault! — ]  ( O  fault )  Ff,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Han.  ( O  Father)  Qq. 


180.  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  283):  Arrange, — ‘I  know’t.  |  Alb.  Where  have  you 
hid  yourself?  how  have  you  known  |  The  miseries  of  your  father?’  Or  rather, per* 
haps, —  |  ‘  I  know’t.  Alb.  Where  have  you  hid  yourself?  howknown,’  |  &c. 

182.  List]  Although  this  is  often  used  transitively,  as  here,  may  not  to  be  here 
absorbed  in  the  final  t  of  *  List’  ? — Ed. 

186.  If  the  text  of  the  Qq  be  preferred,  Jennens’s  clever  emendation,  which  has 
been  adopted  by  many  editors,  follows  naturally.  Dyce,  who  was  conservative,  to 
timidity,  in  his  first  edition,  adopted  it  in  his  second,  when  he  was  under  the  freer 
influence  of  Lettsom  and  Walker.  (He  was  mistaken,  however,  in  attributing  it 
to  Malone.)  But  the  text  of  the  Ff  is  intelligible,  as  Boswell,  Delius,  and 
Wright  say,  and  change  is  needless.  Delius  remarks  that  in  the  text  of  the  Qq 
the  antecedent  to  *  That’  is  to  be  eliminated  from  the  ‘  our’  in  the  preceding  lines. 

1S6.  die]  Bailey  (ii,  99)  thinks  this  is  ‘surely  harsh  language’  [j.  e.  Jennens’s 
text],  and  proposes  vie  in  the  sense  of  contend,  strive,  struggle. 

193.  fault]  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  Delius  is  right  here  in  giving  this  the 


ACT  V,  SC.  iii.] 


KING  LEAR 


333 


Until  some  half-hour  past,  when  I  was  arm'd ; 

Not  sure,  though  hoping,  of  this  good  success,  I95 

I  ask’d  his  blessing,  and  from  first  to  last 
Told  him  our  pilgrimage ;  but  his  flaw’d  heart, 

Alack,  too  weak  the  conflift  to  support ! 

'Twixt  two  extremes  of  passion,  joy  and  grief, 

Burst  smilingly. 

Edm.  This  speech  of  yours  hath  moved  me,  200 

And  shall  perchance  do  good ;  but  speak  you  on ; 

You  look  as  you  had  something  more  to  say. 

Alb.  If  there  be.  more,  more  woful,  hold  it  in ; 

For  I  am  almost  ready  to  dissolve, 

Hearing  of  this. 

*  Edg.  This  would  have  seem’d  a  period  205 


194.  arm'd ]  armed  Q,,  Sch. 

197.  our]  Ff,  Rowe,  Knt,  Wh.  Sch. 
my  Qq  et  cet. 

his]  this  F4. 
flaw'd]  flawed  Sch. 

203.  more,  more]  any  more  more  Q2. 

204,  205.  For. ..this]  One  line,  Qx. 


205.  Hearing  of  this]  Om.  Q2. 
205-222.  Edg.  This. ..slave.]  Om.  Ff, 
Rowe,  Pope,  Han. 

205-208.  This. ...extremity.]  Theob. 
Three  lines,  ending  fuch...too  much,... 
extremitie  Qq.  Ending  such...sorrow... 
extremity  Warb. 


meaning  of  misfortune,  a  meaning  which  it  sometimes  bears,  although  this  instance 
is  not  cited  by  either  Dyce  or  Schmidt  in  their  Glossaries. 

198, 199.  support !  ’Twixt]  Walker  ( Crit.  iii,  284) :  Point  rather  ‘the  conflict 
to  support  Twixt  two  extremes,’  &c. 

202.  as]  As  if.  See  III,  iv,  15. 

205.  Hearing  of]  Abbott,  §  178 :  A  verbal  noun.  *  Hearing  of'  does  not  mean, 
as  with  us,  ‘  hearing  about.'  Compare  II,  i,  39. 

205-208.  Warburton  :  This  is  corrupted  into  miserable  nonsense.  We  should 
read  it  thus :  *  This  would  have  seem’d  a  period.  But  such  |  As  love  to  amplify 
another’s  sorrow,  J  To  much,  would  make  much  more,  and  top  extremity.’  Dodd 
(ii,  134)  ingeniously  perverts  this  into  a  reproach  on  Edmund:  ‘  The  bastard,  whose 
savage  nature  is  well  display’d  by  it,  desires  to  hear  more ;  the  gentle  Albany,  touch’d 
at  the  sad  tale,  begs  him  no  more  to  melt  his  heart ;  upon  which,  Edgar  observes, 
sensibly  affected  by  Edmund’s  inhumanity,  “  One  should  have  imagined,  this  would 
have  seem’d  a  period,  a  sufficient  end  of  woe,  to  such  as  love  not  sorrow,  who  are 
not  pleased  to  hear  of  the  distresses  of  others ;  but  another  (a  person  of  another  and 
more  cruel  temper)  to  amplify  too  much,  (to  augment  and  aggravate  that  which  is 
already  too  great)  would  still  make  much  more  (would  still  increase  it),  and  top 
extremity  itself,”  &c.  Nothing  can  be  plainer  than  this.’  Heath  understands 
*  another  ’  as  referring  to  ‘  Kent,  concerning  whom  the  narration  is  immediately  after 
continued.’  *  But  another  (i.  e.  Kent)  to  amplify  what  was  already  too  much,  would 
make  that  much  still  more,’  &c.  Capell’s  text  reads:  ‘but,  another; — |  (To 
amplify  too-much,  to  make  much  more,  |  And  top  extremity,)  ’  |  Capell’s  note  on 


33  4 


KING  LEAR 


[act  v,  sc.  iii. 
20  6 


*  To  such  as  love  not  sorrow;  but  another, 

*  To  amplify  too  much,  would  make  much  more, 

*  And  top  extremity. 

*  Whilst  I  was  big  in  clamour,  came  there  in  a  man, 

*  Who,  having  seen  me  in  my  worst  estate,  210 

*Shunn’d  my  abhorr’d  society;  but  then,  finding 

*  Who  ’twas  that  so  endured,  with  his  strong  arms 

*  He  fasten’d  on  my  neck,  and  bellow’d  out 


207.  too  much']  too-much  Cap.  Steev. 
Ec.  Yar.  Coll.  Del.  Dyce,  Huds. 

make  much  more,]  tnake  much , 
more,  Johns.  Jen.  Sta. 

209.  came  there  in]  came  there  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Cap.  Coll.  Del.  Sing. 
Dyce,  Wh.  Ktly,  Huds. 


210.  worst  estate]  worser  state  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns,  worse  estate  Knt. 

2ir.  then]  now  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 

212.  that]  had  Theob.  Warb.  Johns. 

213.  fasten'd]  Theob.  faflened  Qq. 
bellow'd]  bellowed  Q,. 


the  passage  I  transcribe  for  the  benefit  of  the  reader,  who  is  doubtless  quite  as  com¬ 
petent  as  I  am,  *  to  endow  its  purposes  with  words  ’ :  ‘  The  verses’  form  was  most 
easy;  the  change  of  “would”  into  “to”  presented  sense,  and  points  follow’d  the 
sense,  “much”  and  “too  much”  are  put  substantively;  and  “another”  is — take 
another,  indicated  by  the  tone  and  the  pause :  by  which  tone  too,  we  may  conceive 
of  what  is  put  in  parenthesis  the  sense  following ; — since  you  will  f>ut  me  upon 
amplifying  what  is  already  too  much,  upon  making  much  more,  and  topping  ex* 
tremity,  take  another  relation :  The  period  contains  a  proper  reproof  of  Edmund’s 
unfeelingness.’  Steevens  thus  paraphrases :  ‘  This  would  have  seemed  a  period  to 
such  as  love  not  sorrow ;  but — another,  *.  e.  but  I  must  add  another,  i.  e.  another 
period,  another  kind  of  conclusion  to  my  story,  such  as  will  increase  the  horrors  of 
what  has  been  already  told.’  Malone  inclines  to  Dodd’s  view :  *  This,  says  Edgar, 
would  have  seemed  the  utmost  completion  of  woe,  to  such  as  do  hot  delight  in 
sorrow;  but  another,  of  a  different  disposition,  to  amplify  misery,  would  “give  more 
strength  to  that  which  hath  too  much.”  Edgar’s  words,  however,  may  have  no  refer¬ 
ence  to  what  Edmund  has  said,  and  he  may  only  allude  to  the  relation  he  is  about 
to  give  of  Kent’s  adding  a  new  sorrow  to  what  Edgar  already  suffered,  by  recounting 
the  miseries  which  the  old  king  and  his  faithful  follower  had  endured.  Steevens: 
Malone’s  explanation  may  be  just;  and  yet  it  is  probable  that  we  are  struggling  with 
a  passage,  the  obscurity  of  which  is  derived  from  its  corruption.  Collier:  The 
disputed  meaning  seems  to  be:  ‘but  I  have  yet  another  misfortune  to  relate,  which 
will  make  the  rest  too  much,’  &c.  MlTFORD  (Gent.  Mag., p.  469,  1844)  thinks  that 
a  slight  transposition  will  cure  line  207,  and  proposes :  ‘  To  amplify,  would  make 
much  more  too  much.'  [411  commentators,  whether  they  understand. ‘another’ as 
referring  to  man  or  to  misfortune,  have  taken  ‘  but  ’  in  an  adversative  sense ;  but 
Wright  gives  what  seems  the  true  explanation ;  he  says :]  *  It  seems  better  to  take 
it  as  qualifying  “  another,”  as  if  [Edgar]  said  “  one  more  such  circumstance  only,  by 
amplifying  what  is  already  too  much,  would  add  to  it,  and  so  exceed  what  seemed 
to  be  the  limit  of  sorrow.”  For  this  gerundial  use  of  the  infinitive,  see  III,  v,  8.* 
[The  unaided  Qq  text  is  synonymous  with  obscurity  in  almost  every  sentence. — Ed.] 
209  big]  Delius:  Loud 


ACT  V,  SC.  in.] 


KING  LEAR 


335 


*  As  he  ’Id  burst  heaven ;  threw  him  on  my  father ; 

*  Told  the  most  piteous  tale  of  Lear  and  him  215 

*  That  ever  ear  received ;  which  in  recounting 

*  His  grief  grew  puissant,  and  the  strings  of  life 

*  Began  to  crack.  Twice  then  the  trumpets  sounded, 

*  And  there  I  left  him  tranced. 

*  Alb.  But  who  was  this  ? 

*  Edg.  Kent,  sir,  the  banish’d  Kent ;  who  in  disguise  220 

*  Follow’d  his  enemy  king,  and  did  him  service 

*  Improper  for  a  slave.* 

Enter  a  Gentleman,  with  a  bloody  knife. 


Gent.  Help,  help,  oh,  help ! 

Edg.  What  kind  of  help  ? 

Alb.  Speak,  man ! 

Edg.  What  means  this  bloody  knife  ? 

Gent.  ’Tis  hot,  it  smokes ! 


214.  threw  him ]  Theob.  threw  me 
Qq,  Mai.  Bos.  Coll,  i,  Wh. 

215.  Told  the  most]  And  told  the  Q2. 
217.  puissant ]  piersant  Walker  ( Crit. 

iii,  284). 

2x8.  crack.  Twice']  Theob.  cracke 
twice ,  Qq. 

trumpets]  trumpet  Johns.  Cap. 
Ten.  Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Ktly. 

221.  Follow'd]  Theob.  Followed  Qq. 

222.  Enter...]  Enter  one  with  a bloudie 
knife.  Qq.  Enter  a  Gentleman.  Ff.  Re¬ 
enter  Officer  hastily,  with  a  bloody  knife. 
Cap. 


223,  &c.  Gent.]  Off.  Cap. 

223.  Scene  ix.  Pope  +  ,Jen. 

ok,  kelp !]  Om.  Qq,  Pope-)-. 

223,224.  Edg.  What  kind... knife  ? J 
Alb.  What  kinde  of  helpe,  .what  meanes 
that bloudy  knife  /’Qq. 

224.  this  bloody]  Ff+ ,  Knt,  Cam.  Sch. 
that  bloudy  Qq  et  cet. 

’  Tis]  Its  Qq.  It's  Cap. 

224,  225.  ’  Tis. .. dead l]  As  in  Steev  ’85 
after  Cap.  One  line,  ending  of—  Qq. 
Prose,  Ff.  First  line  ends  heart.  Rowe  -I- , 
Jen. 


214.  him]  (See  Textual  Notes.)  Steevens:  There  is  tragic  propriety  in  Kent’s 
throwing  himself  on  the  body  of  a  deceased  friend ;  but  this  propriety  is  lost  in  the 
act  of  clumsily  tumbling  a  son  over  the  lifeless  remains  of  his  father.  Malone  : 
Kent,  in  his  transport  of  joy  at  meeting  Edgar,  embraced  him  with  such  violence  as 
to  throw  him  on  the  dead  body  of  Gloucester.  Dyce  ( Remarks ,  p.  232) :  Kent’s 
tumbling  down  Edgar  on  the  dead  body  of  his  father  is  an  incident  more  suited  to  a 
comic  pantomime  than  to  a  serious  narrative  in  a  tragedy.  The  progress  of  the  error 
here  is  plain :  *  him  ’ — ‘  ’em  ’ — ‘  me.’  Other  corruptions  may  be  traced  in  the  same  way ; 
for  instance,  we  sometimes  find  ‘  thou  ’  where  the  sense  positively  requires  ‘  yon,’ — 
the  progress  of  that  error  having  been — fyon ’ — ‘you’ — ‘thou.’  White:  Does 
Edgar  mean,  *  Threw  himself  on  my  father  ’  ?  the  expression  being  like  ‘  Ascends 
me  into  the  brain.’ 

223.  What  kind  of  help  ?]  W.  W.  Lloyd:  I  find  something  very  expressive  of 
the  versatile  and  vigilant  character  of  Edgar  in  this  inquiry. 


33« 


KING  LEAR 


[act  v,  SC.  iii. 

225 


It  came  even  from  the  heart  of — Oh,  she’s  dead ! 

Alb.  Who  dead  ?  speak,  man ! 

Gent.  Your  lady,  sir,  your  lady!  and  her  sister 
By  her  is  poisoned ;  she  confesses  it. 

Edm.  I  was  contracted  to  them  both  ;  all  three 
Now  marry  in  an  instant. 

Edg.  Here  comes  Kent.  230 

Alb.  Produce  the  bodies,  be  they  alive  or  dead. 

[Exit  Gentleman. 

This  judgement  of  the  heavens,  that  makes  us  tremble. 

Touches  us  not  with  pity.  [Enter  Kent.] — Oh,  is  this  he? 

The  time  will  not  allow  the  compliment 
Which  very  manners  urges. 

Kent.  I  am  come  235 

To  bid  my  king  and  master  aye  good  night 
Is  he  not  here  ? 

Alb.  Great  thing  of  us  forgot 


225.  It  came ]  came  F2F3F4> 

Oh,  she's  dead  /]  Om.  Qq.  Cap. 
Mai.  Steev.  ’93,  Bos.  Sing.  Ktly. 

226.  Who  dead  ?  speak,  man  t]  Who 
man,  f peake  ?  Q,.  Who  man  ?  f peake, 
Q2,  Cap.  Mai.  Steev.  Ec.  Bos.  Sing.  Ktly. 
Who's  dead  ?  Speak  man.  F4  + . 

228.  poison'd ]  Q2Ff+,  Cap.  Steev. 
Var.  Knt,  Del.  Dyce  i,  Wh.  Sta.  poyfcned 
Q,  et  cet. 

confesses"]  Ff+,  Cap.  Steev.  Knt, 
Del.  Sch.  has  confejl  Q2.  hath  confefl 
Q,  et  cet. 

230.  Edg.. ..Kent.]  Edg  ....Kent  sir. 
(after  pity,  line  233),  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Ec. 
Var.  Coll.  Sing.  Wh.  Ktly. 

Kent.]  Kent,  sir.  Qq,  Cap.  Jen. 
Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

231.  the ]  their  Qq,  Jen. 

alive]  live  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope, 

Han. 

dead.]  dead,  Q,.  dead:  Qa. 
dead ;  Ft.  dead  i  F2. 

[Exit  Gentleman.]  Cam.  Exit 
Gent,  (after  pity,  line  233),  Mai.  et  cet. 


Om.  QqFf. 

232.  judgement]  Iuflice  Qq,  Jen. 
tremble,]  tremble.  Ff. 

233.  us]  Om.  Q2. 

Enter  Kent.]  Q2.  After  Kent, 
line  230,  Ff+,  Cap.  After  allow,  line 
234,  Q,. 

Oh,  is  this  he  ?]  Alb.  0  tis  he,  Qq, 
Mai.  O  is  this  flu  ?  F2F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope. 
Alb.  O  f  it  is  he.  Steev.  Bos.  Coll.  Sing. 
Wh.  Ktly.  Alb.  O,  is  this  he  ?  Jen.  Ec. 
Coll.  iii. 

233-235.  Oh, ...urges.]  Two  lines,  the 
first  ending  allow,  Qq,  Johns.  Jen.  Ec. 

234.  [To  Kent.  Han. 

235.  Which]  that  Qq,  Cap. 

urges]  urge  F4,  Rowe  + ,  Jen.  Ec. 
235,  236.  I. .night.]  One  line,  Qq. 
235.  lam]  Sir,  lam  Han. 

237  (and  throughout  the  rest  of  the 
Scene).  Alb.]  Duke.  Q,. 

237-239.  Great. .. Kent  ?]  Prose,  Q,. 
237.  thing]  things  Qa. 

forgot!]  Pope,  forgot,  Q^Ff. 
forgot.  Q2. 


232,  233.  Tyrwhitt  :  If  Sh.  had  studied  Aristotle  all  his  life,  he  would  not  perhaps 
have  been  able  to  mark  with  more  precision  the  distinct  operations  of  terror  and  pity. 

235.  manners]  Wright:  Used  as  a  singular  in  Rom.  6°  Jul.  V,  iii,  213 :  « What 
manners  is  in  this  ? ' 


KING  LEAR 


ACT  V,  SC.  iii.] 


337 


Speak,  Edmund,  where’s  the  king?  and  where’s  Cordelia? —  238 
See’st  thou  this  objedt,  Kent? 

\The  bodies  of  Goneril  and  Regan  are  brought  in. 

Kent.  Alack,  why  thus  ? 

Edm.  Yet  Edmund  was  beloved;  240 

The  one  the  other  poison’d  for  my  sake, 

And  after  slew  herself. 

Alb.  Even  so. — Cover  their  faces. 

Edm.  I  pant  for  life ;  some  good  I  mean  to  do. 

Despite  of  mine  own  nature. — Quickly  send,  245 

Be  brief  in  it,  to  th’'  castle  !  for  my  writ 
Is  on  the  life  of  Lear  and  on  Cordelia. 

Nay,  send  in  time ! 

Alb.  Run,  run,  oh,  run ! 

Edg.  To  who,  my  lord? — Who  has  the  office  ?  send 
Thy  token  of  reprieve.  250 

Edm.  Well  thought  on.  Take  my  sword. 

Give  it  the  captain. 

Alb.  Haste  thee,  for  thy  life !  [Exit  Edgar. 


239.  [Pointing  to  the  dead  bodies. 
Han. 

[The...in.]  Qq.  (After  line  238) 
Dyce,  Sta.  Huds.  Gonerill  and  Regans 
bodies  brought  out.  (after  dead,  line  231) 

Ff+. 

240-242.  Yet. ..herself]  Prose,  Q2, 
241.  poison'd]  poyfoncd  Qx. 

244-24S.  I  pant.  ..time.]  Prose.  Q3, 

245.  mine]  my  Qq. 

246.  Be  brief  in  it,  to  the]  ( Be  briefe 
in  it)  to ’  th'  Ff.  Be  briefe,  int  toth'  Qx. 
bee  briefe,  into  the  Q2,  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

cas.le  !  for  my  writ]  Theob.(subs.) 
Caflle,for  my  Writ  Ft.  cafile  for  my 
writ,  Qq.  Chaflle  for  my  Writ  F3. 
Cafile  for  my  Writ 

247.  Is]  tis  Qa„ 


247.  and  on]  and  Rowe,  Han.  Jen. 

248.  oh,  run!]  0  run,  snake  haste 
Han. 

249.  To. ..office  ?]  One  line,  QaFf 
Rowe,  Pope,  Theob.  i,  Han. 

To  who]  To  whom  F2F3F4  +  , 
Jen.  Ec.  Coll.  Del.  Wh.  Ktly,  Huds. 
has]  hath  Qq,  Glo.+ 

251,  252.  Well.. .captain.]  One  line, 

Q3" 

sword,  Give]  fword  the  Captaine, 
Give  Qj,  Jen. 

252.  Alb.]  Edg.  Ff+,  Jen.  Steev.  ’78, 
Sch. 

[Exit  Edgar.]  Mai.  Exeunt  Ed¬ 
gar,  and  Others.  Cap.  Exit  Messenger. 
Theob.  Exit  a  Captain.  Sch.  Ora. 
QqFf. 


246.  brief]  Wright:  Generally  used  of  a  narrative,  and  not  of  an  action.  Com¬ 
pare  Rich.  Ill :  II,  ii,  43  :  ‘If  you  will  live,  lament ;  if  die,  be  brief.’ 

249.  To  who]  See  IV,  iii,  7. 

251, 252.  Noteworthy  is  the  dramatic  reading  of  Qt,  followed  by  Jennens  :  ‘  Take 
my  sword.  The  Captain — give  it  the  captain.’— Ed. 

29  W 


338 


KING  LEAR 


[act  v,  sc.  iiL 


Edm.  He  hath  commission  from  thy  wife  and  me  253 

To  hang  Cordelia  in  the  prison,  and 

To  lay  the  blame  upon  her  own  despair,  255 

That  she  fordid  herself. 

Alb.  The  gods  defend  her ! — Bear  him  hence  awhile. 

Re-cnier  Lear,  with  Cordelia  dead  in  his  arms ;  Edgar,  Captain,  and  olhen 

following. 

Lear.  Howl,  howl,  howl !  Oh,  you  are  men  of  stones  S 
Had  I  your  tongues  and  eyes,  I  ’Id  use  them  so 
That  heaven’s  vault  should  crack !  She’s  gone  for  ever  1  260 

I  know  when  one  is  dead  and  when  one  lives. 

She’s  dead  as  earth !  Lend  me  a  looking-glass ; 

If  that  her  breath  will  mist  or  stain  the  stone. 


253-256.  Prose,  Qa.  Four  lines,  end¬ 
ing  me,...lay...defpaire...hcr  felfe,  Q,. 

256.  Om.  Qa,  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
Warb.  Cap.  Mai. 

257.  [Edmund  is  borne  off.  Theob. 

Re-enter...]  Dyce.  Enter...  QqFf. 

Lear...]  Lear  with  Cordelia  in 
his  armes.  QqFf. 

dead]  Rowe. 

Edgar...following.]  Edgar,  and 
the  rest,  return.  Cap.  Edgar,  Officer, 
and  Others.  Mai.  Om.  QqFf. 


258.  Scene  x.  Pope  +  ,  Jen. 

Howl,']  Three  times  in  Ff,  Rowe, 

Knt,  Del.  Four  times,  Qq  et  cet. 
you]  your  F,Fa. 

slones]  slone  Pope+,  Dyce  il, 
Huds.  Coll.  iii. 

259.  I 'Id]  I  would  Qq. 

260.  5^Pi]  O,  Jhe  is  Qa,  Cap.  Jen. 
Steev.  Ec.  Var. 

263,  264.  If  .dives.]  One  line  in  Q^. 

•  263.  or]  and  Qa,  Jen. 


256.  fordid]  Destroyed.  See  Ham.  II,  i,  103;  V,  i,  209. 

258.  stones]  Walker  ( Crit .  i,  237)  cites  this  passage,  in  his  Article  xxxviii:  On 
the  frequent  interpolation  and  omission  of  the  final  s  in  F, ;  so  frequent,  indeed,  is 
this  addition  of  the  final  s,  that  Walker *  *  would  incline  to  think  it  originated  in  some 
peculiarity  of  Shakespeare’s  handwriting,  were  it  not  that  its  frequency  varies  in 
different  parts  of  the  Folio,  being  comparatively  rare  in  the  Comedies  (except,  per¬ 
haps,  in  the  Winter’s  Tale],  more  common  in  the  Histories,  and  quite  common  in 
the  Tragedies.’  The  following  occur  in  the  present  tragedy,  as  noted  by  Walker : 

*  Place  sinnes  with  Gold  .  .  .  Arme  it  in  ragges,’  IV,  vi,  163 ;  ‘To  come  betwixt  our 
sentences  and  our  power,’  I,  i,  169;  ‘  Since  that  respect  and  Fortunes  are  his  love,’ 
I,  i,  247;  ‘He  saies  my  Lord,  your  Daughters  is  not  well,’  I,  iv,  49;  ‘And  machi 
nation  ceases,  Fortune  hues  you,’  V,  i,  46 ;  ‘  For  your  claime  faire  Sisters ,’  V,  iii, 
$5 ;  and  this  present  passage,  to  which  a  similar  phrase  occurs  Mer.  of  Ven.  IV,  i,  31 : 
«  From  brassie  bosomes,  and  rough  hearts  of  finis!  So  too  in  Rich  III :  III,  vi,  224 : 

*  Call  them  againe,I  am  not  made  of  Stones .’  Of  this  error  in  the  spelling  of  stones 
Walker  candidly  says  that  its  *  being  so  often  repeated  leads  me  to  doubt  whether  it 
is  an  error  at  all.’ 

263.  stone]  Collier  :  This  is  altered  to  shine  by  the  (MS)  with  great  appear¬ 
ance  of  fitness,  but  we  adhere  to  the  old  text  as  intelligible.  *  Stone  ’  and  shine 


ACT  V,  SC.  iii.] 


KING  LEAR 


339 


Why,  then  she  lives ! 

Kent.  Is  this  the  promised  end  ?  264 

264.  Why,  then  she~\Jhe  then  Qa. 


might  be  confounded  by  the  old  printer,  and  it  was  certainly  the  shine  of  the  glass 
that  was  to  be  misted,  or  stained,  by  the  breath  of  Cordelia.  We  relinquish  shine 
unwillingly.  Delius  :  Lear  refers  to  a  crystal  mirror.  [Both  COLLIER  and  Singer 
withdrew  their  conjectures  of  steel  and  same  respectively.] 

264,  265.  Is  . .  .  horror?]  Capell  was  the  first  to  point  out  that  ‘the  “horror” 
of  which  this  sight  was  the  image,  according  to  Edgar,  is — the  horror  of  the  last  day, 
or  day  of  judgement,  called  emphatically — that  horror.’  Steevens  at  first  thought 
that  Kent  meant  to  ask :  Is  this  conclusion  such  as  the  present  turn  of  affairs  seemed 
to  promise?  Or  is  it  only,  as  Edgar  replied,  a  representation  of  that  horror  which 
we  suppose  to  be  real  ?  but  Steevens  afterwards  acknowledged  the  excellence  of  the 
following  explanation  by  Mason  :  By  the  ‘  promised  end  ’  Kent  does  not  mean 
that  conclusion  which  the  state  of  their  affairs  seemed  to  promise,  but  the  end  of 
the  world.  In  St.  Mark's  Gospel,  when  Christ  foretells  to  his  disciples  the  end  of 
the  world,  and  is  describing  to  them  the  signs  that  were  to  precede,  and  mark  the 
approach  of,  our  final  dissolution,  he  says :  ‘  For  in  those  days  shall  be  affliction  such 
as  was  not  from  the  beginning  of  the  creation  which  God  created,  unto  this  time, 
neither  shall  be;  ’  and  afterwards  he  says,  ‘  Now  the  brother  shall  betray  the  brother 
to  death,  and  the  father  the  son ;  and  the  children  shall  rise  up  against  their  parents, 
and  shall  cause  them  to  be  put  to  death.’  Kent,  in  contemplating  the  unexampled 
scene  of  exquisite  affliction  which  was  then  before  him,  and  the  unnatural  attempt 
of  Goneril  and  Regan  against  their  father’s  life,  recollects  these  passages,  and  asks, 
whether  that  was  the  end  of  the  world  that  had  been  foretold  to  us.  To  which 
Edgar  adds.  Or  only  a  representation  or  resemblance  of  that  horror  ?  So  Macbeth, 
when  he  calls  upon  Banquo,  Malcolm, &c.  to  view  Duncan  murdered,  says:  * — up, 
up,  and  see  The  great  doom’s  image !  ’  There  is  evidently  an  allusion  to  the  same 
passage  in  Scripture  in  a  speech  of  Gloster’s  which  he  makes,  I,  ii,  98,  &c.  If  any 
critick  should  urge  it  as  an  objection  to  this  explanation,  that  the  persons  of  the  drama 
are  pagans,  and,  of  consequence,  unacquainted  with  the  Scriptures,  they  give  Sh. 
credit  for  more  accuracy  than  I  fear  he  possessed.  Steevens:  This  note  de¬ 
serves  the  highest  praise,  and  is  inserted  with  the  utmost  degree  of  gratitude  to  its 
author.  [Although  Mason’s  view,  for  which  a  hint  may  have  been  supplied  by 
Capell,  is  probably  correct,  yet  the  following  note  by  Henley  deserves  consideration  :] 
Docs  not  this  exclamation  refer  to  the  confidence  expressed  in  her  letter  to  himself, 
*  that — seeking  to  give  losses  their  remedies — she  should  find  time  amidst  the  enor¬ 
mities  of  the  state,  to  obtain  the  full  effect  of  her  purpose  ?  ’  As  these  words  (sup¬ 
posing  this  to  be  their  reference  in  the  mouth  of  Kent)  were  not  addressed  to  Edgar, 
there  is  no  necessity  for  considering  them  as  understood  by  him  in  their  proper  sense ; 
his  resumption,  therefore,  or  rather  adaptation  of  them,  may  not  only  admit,  but 
even  require,  a  different  interpretation.  Mason’s  is  an  ingenious,  and  maybe  the  true 
one ;  for,  though  the  passage  of  St.  Mark,  which  he  cites,  does  not  refer  to  the  ‘end 
of  the  world  ’  (as  he  might  have  learned  from  the  30th  verse  of  the  same  chapter)* 
but  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  Jewish  state,  yet  the  prediction  itself  is 
vulgarly  received  in  the  sense  in  which  he  applies  it.  Halliwell  :  The  reference 


340 


KING  LEAR 


[act  v,  sc.  iii. 


Edg.  Or  image  of  that  horror  ? 

Alb.  Fall  and  cease.  265 

Lear.  This  feather  stirs !  she  lives !  If  it  be  so, 

It  is  a  chance  which  does  redeem  all  sorrows 

265.  Edg.  Or. ...cease  ]  Om.  Pope,  266-268.  This... felt.]  Prose,  Q4. 
Theob.  Han.  Warb.  267.  which]  that  Q2,  Cap.  Ten.  Steev. 

Or. ... horror  ?]  Or. . .horror.  Q,Ff.  Ec.  Var.  Sing.  Ktly,  Huds. 

Or. ..horror —  Johns.  O.. .horror  !  Cap. 


is  to  the  unexpected  catastrophe,  so  unlooked  for  just  at  the  moment  when  every¬ 
thing  seemed  to  promise  a  happy  termination  to  the  innocent  and  injured  parties  in 
the  drama. 

265.  Fall  and  cease]  Capell:  These  words  were  made  very  intelligible  by  the 
action  accompanying;  the  wide  display  of  his  hands,  and  the  lifting-up  of  his  eye, 
both  directed  towards  the  heavens,  would  shew  plain  enough  that  it  is  they  who  are 
call’d  upon  to  fall,  and  crush  a  world  that  is  such  a  scene  of  calamity  .  .  .  [The 
words  mean]  Fall,  heaven !  and  let  things  cease!’  Jennens  tells  us,  ‘till  a  better 
emendation  is  proposed/  to  read  as  in  his  text :  Edg.  O  image  of  true  honour ! 
Alb.  Fair  and  chaste.’  ‘Which/  adds  Jennens,  ‘is  a  very  natural  exclamation  on 
the  murder  of  so  amiable  a  creature.’  Steevens  :  Albany  is  looking  with  attention 
on  the  pains  employed  by  Lear  to  recover  his  child,  and  knows  to  what  miseries  he 
must  survive  when  he  finds  them  to  be  ineffectual.  Having  these  images  present  to 
his  eyes  and  imagination,  he  cries  out :  ‘  Rather  fall,  and  cease  to  be  at  once,  than 
continue  in  existence  only  to  be  wretched.’  So  in  All's  Well,  to  cease  is  used  for  to 
die ;  and  in  Ham.  the  death  of  Majesty  is  called  “the  cease  of  majesty.”  See  III, 

i,  7.  Malone  :  I  doubt  whether  this  speech  is  addressed  to  Lear.  Mason  :  Pos¬ 
sibly  this  might  be  an  allusion  to  the  theatre,  and  Albany  may  mean  to  say,  *  Let 
fall  the  curtain,  and  end  the  horrid  scene.’  Davies  (Dram.  Misc.  ii,  212) :  Perhaps 
Albany  means,  ‘  Lower  your  voice,  and  cease  all  exclamation,  lest  you  interrupt  the 
dying  king.’  This  is  notunlike  to  the  word  ‘quietness’  in  Ant.  dr  Cleop.:  Char- 
mian,  on  the  Queen’s  fainting,  whispers  to  Iras,  ‘  O  quietness !  ’  Delius  supposes 
that  Edgar  and  Albany  continue  Kent’s  train  of  thought.  Kent  asks :  Is  this  the 
promised  end  of  the  world?  Or  the  image  of  that  horror?  asks  Edgar.  Of  that 
fall  and  cease?  continues  Albany.  *  Fall  and  cease’  are,  therefore,  to  be  considered 
substantives,  and  in  apposition  to  ‘  that  horror.’  In  his  text  Delius  puts  an  interroga¬ 
tion-mark  after  ‘  cease.’  Moeerly  seems  to  adopt  Delius’s  view :  *  “  Yes,”  replies 
Albany,  “of  the  general  fall  and  cessation  of  all  things.”  ’  [Would  not  the  gaze  of 
every  spectator  be  riveted  horrorstruck  upon  Lear  and  Cordelia  ?  and  is  it  likely  that 
Albany’s  attention  would  be  so  far  diverted  from  the  sight  as  to  reply  to  Edgar’s 
question,  which  really  needed  no  answer  ?  If  ‘  Fall  and  cease  ’  be  addressed  to  Lear, 
there  is  a  curt  harshness  in  the  words  which  is  scarcely  in  keeping  with  Albany’s 
character.  I  have  tried  in  vain  to  find  authority  for  interpreting  *  Fall  ’  in  the  sense 
of  ‘  Fall  back/  ‘  Give  way.’  Then  the  sentence  might  be  addressed  to  Kent  and 
Edgar,  and  equivalent  to *  1  Make  room,  and  hush.’  After  all,  Capell’s  interpretation 
may  be  the  true  one ;  and  yet,  an  address  to  the  Heavens,  unaccompanied  by  any 
invocation,  is  unusual,  to  say  the  least. — Ed.] 

266.  feather]  Whalley:  Compare  2  Hen.  IV:  IV,  v,  31,  32:  ‘By  his  gates  of 
breath  There  lies  a  downy  feather  which  stirs  not.’ 


ACT  V,  sc.  iii.] 


KING  LEAR 


341 


That  ever  I  have  felt. 

Kent.  O  my  good  master !  268 

Lear.  Prithee,  away ! 

Edg.  ’Tis  noble  Kent,  your  friend. 

Lear.  A  plague  upon  you,  murderers,  traitors  all !  270 

I  might  have  saved  her !  now  she ’s  gone  for  ever ! — 

Cordelia,  Cordelia !  stay  a  little.  Ha ! 

What  is’t  thou  say’st? — Her  voice  was  ever  soft, 

Gentle  and  low,  an  excellent  thing  in  woman. — 

I  kill’d  the  slave  that  was  a-hanging  thee.  275 

Capt.  ’Tis  true,  my  lords,  he  did. 

Lear.  Did  I  not,  fellow? 

I  have  seen  the  day,  with  my  good  biting  falchion 
I  would  have  made  them  skip.  I  am  old  now, 


268.  0  my]  A  my  Qq.  Ah  l  my  Jen. 

[Kneeling.  Theob. 

270-275.  Prose,  Q2. 

270.  you,]  your  Q,. 

murderers ,]  Murderors,  F,.  mur- 
therers,  F2F3F4>  murderous  Q,.  mur - 
drous  Q2,  Johns.  Jen. 

272.  Ha!]  Ora.  Q2.  (Begins  line 

273),  Cap. 

273.  say' st]  fayejl  Q,.  fayjl  Q2.  faijl 
Ff. 

274.  woman]  women  Qq.  Jen. 


275.  a-hanging J  Hyphen,  Dyce. 

276.  Capt.]  Gent.  Ff. 

276-280.  Did.... straight.]  Lines  end 
day, ...would. ..now... .you  ?.,.Jlraight.  Qt. 
Prose,  Q2. 

277.  I  have]  I  ha  Qa.  I've  Pope-f, 
Dyce  ii,  Huds. 

with  my  good]  that  with  my  Q2. 
falchion]  Fauchon  Qx,  Fauchion 
Q2.  Faulchion  Ff. 

278.  them]  him  Ff,  Rowe,  Sch. 


270.  murderers]  Moberly:  They  have  distracted  his  attention  for  a  moment, 
and  in  that  moment  he  might  have  saved  his  child. 

271.  I  might  have,  &c.]  Schmidt  adopts  in  his  text  an  emendation,  which,  he 
says,  was  proposed  by  Emil  Palleske :  ‘  Ye  might  have,’  &c.  ‘This  emendation,’ 
Schmidt  adds,  *is  so  obvious  and  simple  as  to  need  no  vindication.’  [Does  not 
the  preceding  note  by  Moberly  reveal  that  change  is  needless? — Ed.] 

273.  voice]  Moberly  :  This  wonderfully  quiet  touch  seems  to  complete  the  per¬ 
fection  of  Cordelia’s  character,  evidently  the  poet’s  best  loved  creation,  his  type  of 
the  ideal  Englishwoman.  Her  voice  was  the  outward  signature  of  her  graciously- 
tempered  nature.  Burke’s  description  of  his  wife  is  a  master’s  variation  on  Shake¬ 
speare’s  theme:  ‘Her  eyes  have  a  mild  light,  but  they  awe  you  when  she  pleases; 
they  command,  like  a  good  man  out  of  office,  not  by  authority,  but  by  virtue.  Her 
smiles  are  inexpressible.  Her  voice  is  a  soft,  low  music,  not  formed  to  rule  in  public 
assemblies,  but  to  charm  those  who  can  distinguish  a  company  from  a  crowd.  It  has 
this  advantage,  you  must  be  close  to  her  to  hear  it.’ 

275.  a-hanging]  See  Abbott,  §  24. 

277.  falchion]  Wright:  Properly  a  curved  sword,  a  scimetar.  In  the  Author* 
teed  Version  of  Judith,  xiii,  6,  it  is  spelled  ‘fauchin.’ 


342 


KING  LEAR 


[act  v,  sc.  iii. 


And  these  same  crosses  spoil  me. — Who  are  you  ? 

Mine  eyes  are  not  o’  th’  best;  I’ll  tell  you  straight.  280 

Kent.  If  fortune  brag  of  two  she  loved  and  hated, 

One  of  them  we  behold. 

Lear.  This  ’  a  dull  sight. — Are  you  not  Kent  ? 

Kent.  The  same, 

Your  servant  Kent.  Where  is  your  servant  Caius  ? 


280.  not  o'  th']  not  otke  Qx.  none 
o'th  Q„  Rowe  +  ,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev.  Var. 
Sing.  Ktly.  o'th  Fa.  o'  th'  F3F4. 

281.  brag]  bragd  Qq. 
and]  or  Qq. 

282.  we]  you  Jen. 

283.  This '  a  dull  sight]  Walker,  Sch. 
This  is  a  dull  light  Jen.  Wh.  Huds. 


Coll,  iii  (’Tis  Huds.).  Om.  Qq,  Pope, 
Theob.  Han.  Warb.  This  is  a  dull fight 
Ff  et  cet. 

283.  you  not]  not  you  Qq. 

283,284.  The  same... .Caius  f]  Asm 
Cap.  One  line,  Qq.  Two,  the  first 
ending  Kent ,  in  Ff+,  Jen.  Mai.  Sch. 


281,  282.  If .  .  .  behold]  Cafell:  In  Kent’s  speech  the  two  objects  of  fortune’s 
love  and  her  hate  are, — himself,  and  his  master;  they  had  both  felt  them,  and  both 
in  extremity,  hence  the  making  her  *  brag  ’  of  what  had  afforded  her  so  notable  a 
display  of  her  power :  of  these  two,  says  the  speaker,  you  (the  person  spoke  to) 
‘behold’  one,  and  I  another.  Eccles:  I  think  Kent  speaks  of  the  object  of  her 
‘love’  indefinitely,  without  intending  any  particular  person,  but  considers  himself  as 
the  object  of  her  ‘hate.’  Malone:  Kent  may  be  only  thinking  of  Lear,  the  object 
cf  her  hate.  Mason  is  non-committal,  and  tells  us  that  *  the  latter,’  whom  we  now 
behold,  is  the  object  of  fortune’s  hate,  but  he  does  not  tell  us  whether  ‘the  latter’  is 
Lear  or  Kent.  Delius  thinks  it  refers  to  Lear,  as  does  also  Moberly,  ‘  if  the  reading 
is  correct.’  [Justice  has  scarcely  been  done,  I  think,  to  Jennens’s  reading  here ; 
which  might  be  improved,  perhaps,  by  changing,  as  more  in  accordance  with  the 
ductus  literarum,  you  to  ye.  Thus  read,  Kent  refers  to  himself,  in  answer  to  Lear’s 
question,  ‘  Who  are  you  ?  ’ — Ed.] 

283.  This  .  .  .  sight]  Cafell  changed  this  phrase  to  ‘  This  sight  of  mine  |  Is  a 
dull  sight,’  and  remarks  in  his  notes :  ‘  The  language  of  the  addition  is  so  natural, 
and  the  addition  so  necessary,  it  will  probably  have  the  suffrage  of  all  persons  of 
candour  as  a  good  and  certain  amendment.’  Jennens:  The  context  seems  to  require 
we  should  read  light.  Collier  (ed.  2)  pronounces  this  change  of  ‘sight’  to  light, 
which  is  also  found  in  the  (MS),  a  very  happy  literal  improvement.  White  does 
not  hesitate  to  adopt  it,  considering  the  case  with  which  the  old  long  f  and  the  l 
might  be  mistaken  for  each  other.  *  Lear’s  evil  day  draws  to  its  close,  and  “  those 
that  look  out  of  the  windows  are  darkened.”  ’  Walker  ( Vers.  80)  would  divide 
the  lines  thus :  One  of  them  we  behold.  This  ’  a  dull  sight :  |  Are  you  not  Kent  ? 
The  same;  your  servant  Kent.  |  Hudson  :  ‘  Sight’  can  have  no  fitness  here,  unless 
as  referring  to  Lear’s  eyesight.  He  is  dying  of  heart-break;  and,  as  often  happens 
on  the  approach  of  death,  he  mistakes  the  sudden  dimming  of  his  eyes  for  a  defect 
of  light.  Goethe’s  last  words  are  said  to  have  been  *  More  light !  ’  Abbott,  §  461 : 
We  ought  to  scan  ‘This  is  a  |  dull  sight  |  Ar6  you  |  not  K6nt?  |  The  same.’  Col¬ 
lier  (ed.  3)  :  Lear  has  just  before  said  that  his  ‘  eyes  are  not  of  the  best,’  and  here 
he  complains  of  the  want  of  light,  and  does  not  mean  to  make  the  mere  observation, 


act  y,  sc.  iii.] 


KING  LEAR 


343 


Lear.  He’s  a  good  fellow,  I  can  tell  you  that;  285 

He’ll  strike,  and  quickly  too.  He’s  dead  and  rotten. 

Kent.  No,  my  good  lord ;  I  am  the  very  man — 

Lear.  I  ’ll  see  that  straight. 

Kent.  That  from  your  first  of  difference  and  decay 
Have  follow’d  your  sad  steps — 

Lear.  You  are  welcome  hither.  290 

Kent.  Nor  no  man  else.  All ’s  cheerless,  dark  and  deadly. 
Your  eldest  daughters  have  fordone  themselves. 


2S5.  He's  a]  He's  F2.  'Twas  a 
Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Johns.  Jen. 
you]  Om.  Qq. 

286.  He  'll ]  He  'd  Theob.  Han.  Warb. 
Johns.  Jen. 

287.  man— ]  Pope.  man.  QqFf,  Sch. 
2S8.  [Looking  at  him  more  closely. 

Col.  iii. 

289.  first ]  life  Qq,  Pope. 

290.  Have ]  Ham  F2. 
follow'd J  followed  Qq. 

steps — ]  Rowe,  Pope,  Theob. 
Warb.  Johns.  Jen.  Del.  Ktly,  Wr.  steps. 
QqFf  et  cet. 


290.  You  are]  You'rQt.  Your  are  F,. 
You  're  Pope+,  Cap.  Dyce  ii. 

hither ]  hether  Q2. 

291.  Nor]  'Twas  Pope,  Han. 

Nor. ..deadly.]  Two  lines,  Ff. 
else.]  Johns.  Jen.  Del.  Clarke. 

else; —  Theob.  Warb.  elfe  :  QqFf  et  cet. 
All's]  als  Qx. 

deadly]  dead  Theob.  Warb*, 

Johns. 

292.  fordone]  fore-done  Ff.  fore - 
doome  Qz.  foredoom'd  Q2,  Cap.  Steev. 
Ec.  Var.  Sing.  Coll,  ii,  Ktly. 


‘This  is  a  dull  sight-,'  the  poor  old  king  would  hardly  call  the  corpse  of  his  darling 
daughter  *  a  dull  sight ' ;  he  is  looking  at  Kent,  whom  he  hardly  recognizes,  and  com¬ 
plains  of  the  bad  light  which  prevents  him  from  seeing  clearly.  [In  the  text,  for  the 
sake  of  the  metre,  I  have  followed  Walker,  who  (  Vers.  30)  suggested  that  This  is 
of  the  Ff  should  be  contracted  into  a  monosyllable,  as  it  is  in  *  This ’  a  good  block/ 
IV,  vi,  1 8 1. —Ed.] 

289.  first  of  difference]  Schmidt:  Compare  ‘That  from  my  first  have  been 
inclined  to  thrift.’ — Tim.  I,  i,  1 18;  ‘their  first  of  manhood.’ — Macb.  V,  ii,  10. 

291.  Nor  no  man  else]  Capell:  The  true  force  of  these  words  is:  Welcome, 
alas !  here ’s  no  welcome  for  me  or  any  one.  [This  interpretation  is  hardly  satis¬ 
factory,  and  yet  it  is  apparently  almost  the  only  one  which  the  punctuation  of  the 
QqFf  will  yield.  Rowe's  punctuation  after  *  steps/  which  is  followed  above,  in  the 
text,  seems  better.  Kent  says,  in  effect,  *  I  am  the  very  man,  and  no  one  else,  that 
has  followed  your  sad  steps/  He  does  not  catch  either  of  Lear’s  low  apathetic 
replies :  *  I  ’ll  see  that  straight  ’  and  ‘  You  are  welcome  hither/  This  is  also  the  view 
of  Delius  and  of  Clarke.  But  Ulrici  objects  to  it,  and  says  that  not  only  does  it 
leave  *  nor  ’  unaccounted  for,  but  it  is  false  in  fact,  since  the  Fool  as  well  as  Kent 
accompanied  from  the  first  Lear’s  sad  steps,  and  that,  moreover,  ‘else ’is  unex¬ 
plained.  Instead  of  the  present  text,  Ulrici  proposes  to  transpose  the  ‘  Nor’  and  the 
*  no  ’ :  *  “  No,  nor  man  else,”  that  is,  “  No,  neither  I  nor  any  other  man  is  welcome 
here ;  here  all ’s  cheerless,  dark,”  ’  &c.  This  agrees  substantially  with  Capell,  and 
with  Moberly,  who  paraphrases:  ‘  Who  can  be  “  welcome”  to  such  a  scene  as  this?  ’] 

292.  fordone]  Capell  :  The  propriety  of  fore-dootn'd  strikes  at  first  thought ;  the 


344 


KING  LEAR 


[act  v,  sc.  Hi. 


And  desperately  are  dead. 

Lear.  Ay,  so  I  think.  293 

Alb.  He  knows  not  what  he  says,  and  vain  is  it 
That  we  present  us  to  him. 

Edg.  Very  bootless.  295 


Enter  a  Captain. 

Capt.  Edmund  is  dead,  my  lord. 

Alb.  That’s  but  a  trifle  here. — 

You  lords  and  noble  friends,  know  our  intent: 

What  comfort  to  this  great  decay  may  come 
Shall  be  applied.  For  us,  we  will  resign, 

During  the  life  of  this  old  majesty,  300 

To  him  our  absolute  power. — \To  Edgar  and  Kent]  You,  to 
your  rights ; 

With  boot,  and  such  addition  as  your  honours 
Have  more  than  merited.  All  friends  shall  taste 


293.  Ay,  so  I  think.]  So  thinke  I  to. 
Q,.  So  I  thinke  too.  Q3. 

294.  says]  faies  F,.  /ayes  F2F3F4. 
fees  Qq,  Jen.  Sing.  Ktly. 

is  it]  it  is  Qq,  Cap.  Jen.  Steev. 
Ec.  Var.  Knt,  Sing.  Sta.  Ktly,  Glo.  Wr. 

295.  Enter....]  Enter  Captaine.  Qq. 
Enter  a  Meffenger.  (after  him),  Ff, 
Rowe. 

296.  Capt.]  Mefs.  or  Mes.  Ff. 
296-310.  That's... sir.]  Prose,  Qq. 


296.  here]  Om.  Pope,  Theob.  Han. 
Warb. 

298.  great]  Om.  Qq. 

301.  [To  Edgar  and  Kent]  Mai.  To 
Edg.  Rowe.  Om.  QqFf. 

You,  to  your]  to  you,  your  Pope  + , 

Jen. 

302.  honours]  honor  Qx. 

303-305.  All. ..see  /]  As  in  Pope.  The 

first  line  ends  /hall  in  Ff. 


sense  of  ‘  fordone’  is  imply’d  in  the  words  of  the  next  line,  and  therefore  useless  in 
this.  Collier:  Only  Goneril  has  *  fordone’  or  destroyed  herself. 

293.  desperately]  Schmidt:  That  is,  in  despair,  so  that  their  souls  are  lost,  with¬ 
out  hope  of  salvation.  The  phrase  is  thus  applied  to  Barnardine  in  Meas.  for  Meas. 
IV,  ii,  152:  ‘insensible  of  mortality  and  desperately  mortal,’  i.  e.  devoted  to  death 
without  hope  of  salvation. 

294.  says]  (See  Textual  Notes.)  Jennens:  The  sense  is,  he  won’t  know  us  when 
he  sees  us,  therefore  ’tis  in  vain  to  present  ourselves  to  him. 

298.  great  decay]  Capell  :  *  Decay  ’  stands  for — decay’d  person  or  thing,  by  the 
same  figure  that  makes  ‘majesty’  the  person  of  majesty.  SteevenS:  This  means 
Lear,  as  if  he  had  said,  ‘  this  piece  of  decay’d  royalty,’  *  this  ruin’d  majesty.’  Delius, 
I  think,  is  right  in  referring  it  not  to  Lear,  of  whom  Albany  speaks  afterwards  as 
•  this  old  majesty,’  but  to  the  collective  misfortunes  which  this  scene  reveals. 

302.  honours]  Mason:  These  lines  are  addressed  to  Kent  as  well  as  Edgar; 
else  the  word  ‘  honours’  would  not  have  been  in  the  plural. 


ACT  V,  SC.  iii.] 


KING  LEAR 


345 


The  wages  of  their  virtue,  and  all  foes 

The  cup  of  their  deservings. — Oh,  see,  see !  3°5 

Lear.  And  my  poor  fool  is  hang’d !  No,  no,  no  life! 

Why  should  a  dog,  a  horse,  a  rat,  have  life, 

And  thou  no  breath  at  all  ?  Thou’lt  come  no  more, 

Never,  never,  never,  never,  never ! — 

305.  Oh,  see,  see  f]  Given  to  Lear  by  308.  Thou’lt]  0  thou  wilt  Qq,  Cap. 

Han.  Jen.  Steev.  Ec.  Var. 

306.  No,  no,  no]  no,  no  Qq.  309.  Never]  Three  times  in  Qq,  Jen. 

307.  have]  of  Qt.  Six  times  in  Ktly. 

* 

305.  Oh,  see,  see  !]  Capell:  These  words  are  occasion’d  by  seeing  Lear  exert 
himself  to  embrace  the  body  he  lay  upon  once  more,  and  pour  his  agonies  over  it. 

306.  my  poor  fool]  STEEVENS :  This  is  an  expression  of  tenderness  for  his  dead 
Cordelia  (not  his  Fool,  as  some  have  thought),  on  whose  lips  he  is  still  intent,  and 
dies  away  while  he  is  searching  there  for  indications  of  life.  ‘  Poor  fool,’  in  the  age 
of  Sh.,  was  an  expression  of  endearment.  I  may  add,  that  the  Fool  of  Lear  was 
long  ago  forgotten.  Having  filled  the  space  allotted  him  in  the  arrangement  of  the 
play,  he  appears  to  have  been  silently  withdrawn,  III,  vi.  That  the  thoughts  of  a 
father,  in  the  bitterest  of  all  moments,  while  his  favourite  child  lay  dead  in  his  arms, 
should  recur  to  the  antick  who  had  formerly  diverted  him,  has  somewhat  in  it  that  I 
cannot  reconcile  to  the  idea  of  genuine  sorrow  and  despair.  Besides  this,  Cordelia 
was  recently  hanged ;  but  we  know  not  that  the  Fool  had  suffered  in  the  same  man¬ 
ner,  nor  can  imagine  why  he  should.  The  party  adverse  to  Lear  was  little  interested 
in  the  fate  of  his  jester.  The  only  use  of  him  was  to  contrast  and  alleviate  the  sor¬ 
rows  of  his  master ;  and,  that  purpose  being  fully  answered,  the  poet’s  solicitude  about 
him  was  at  an  end.  The  term  *  poor  fool  ’  might  indeed  have  misbecome  the  mouth 
of  a  vassal  commiserating  the  untimely  end  of  a  princess,  but  has  no  impropriety 
when  used  by  a  weak,  old,  distracted  king,  in  whose  mind  the  distinctions  of  nature 
only  survive,  while  he  is  uttering  his  last  frantic  exclamations  over  a  murdered 
daughter.  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  :  I  confess  I  am  one  of  those  who  have  thought 
that  Lear  means  his  Fool,  and  not  Cordelia.  If  he  means  Cordelia,  then  what  I 
have  always  considered  as  a  beauty,  is  of  the  same  kind  as  the  accidental  stroke  of 
the  pencil  that  produced  the  foam.  Lear’s  affectionate  remembrance  of  the  Fool,  in 
this  place,  I  used  to  think,  was  one  of  those  strokes  of  genius,  or  of  nature,  which 
are  so  often  found  in  Sh.,  and  in  him  only.  Lear  appears  to  have  a  particular  affec¬ 
tion  for  this  Fool,  whose  fidelity  in  attending  him,  and  endeavouring  to  divert  him 
in  his  distress,  seems  to  deserve  all  his  kindness.  ‘  Poor  fool  and  knave,’  says  he,  in 
the  midst  of  the  thunder-storm,  *  I  have  one  part  in  my  heart  that’s  sorry  yet  for 
thee.’  It  does  not,  therefore,  appear  to  me,  to  be  allowing  too  much  consequence  to 
the  Fool,  in  making  Lear  bestow  a  thought  on  him,  even  when  in  still  greater  distress. 
Lear  is  represented  as  a  good-natured,  passionate,  and  rather  weak,  old  man ;  it  is  the 
old  age  of  a  cockered  spoilt  boy.  There  is  no  impropriety  in  giving  to  such  a  cha¬ 
racter  those  tender  domestic  affections  which  would  ill  become  a  more  heroic  cha¬ 
racter,  such  as  Othello,  Macbeth,  or  Richard  III.  The  words,  ‘  No,  no,  no  life,’  I 
suppose  to  be  spoken,  not  tenderly,  but  with  passion :  Let  nothing  now  live ; — let 
there  be  universal  destruction ; — ‘  Why  should  a  dog,  a  horse,  a  rat,  have  life,  and 


346 


KING  LEAR 


[act  v,  sc.  Hi. 


[305.  ray  poor  fool.] 

thou  no  breath  at  all  ?  ’  It  may  be  observed,  that  as  there  was  a  necessity,  the  neces- 
sity  of  propriety  at  least,  that  this  Fool,  the  favourite  of  the  author,  of  Lear,  and 
consequently  of  the  audience,  should  not  be  lost  or  forgot,  it  ought  to  be  known  what 
became  of  him.  However,  it  must  be  acknowledged,  that  we  cannot  infer  much 
from  thence ;  Sh.  is  not  always  attentive  to  finish  the  figures  of  his  groups.  I  have 
only  to  add,  that  if  an  actor,  by  adopting  the  interpretation  mentioned  above,  should 
apply  the  words  ‘  poor  fool  ’  to  Cordelia,  the  audience  would,  I  should  imagine,  think 
it  a  strange  mode  of  expressing  the  grief  and  affection  of  a  father  for  his  dead  daugh¬ 
ter,  and  that  daughter  a  queen.  The  words  *  poor  fool  ’  are  undoubtedly  expressive 
of  endearment,  and  Sh.  himself,  in  another  place,  speaking  of  a  dying  animal,  calls 
it  ‘  poor  dappled  fool,’  but  it  never  is,  nor  never  can  be,  used  with  any  degree  of 
propriety,  but  to  commiserate  some  very  inferior  object,  which  may  be  loved,  without 
much  esteem  or  respect.  Malone  :  I  have  not  the  smallest  doubt  that  Mr  Steevens’s 
interpretation  of  these  words  is  the  true  one.  The  passage,  indeed,  before  us  appears 
to  me  so  clear,  and  so  inapplicable  to  any  person  but  Cordelia,  that  I  fear  the  reader 
may  think  any  further  comment  on  it  altogether  superfluous.  It  is  observable  that 
Lear,  from  the  time  of  his  entrance  in  this  scene  to  his  uttering  these  words,  and 
from  thence  to  his  death,  is  wholly  occupied  by  the  loss  of  his  daughter.  He  is 
diverted,  indeed,  from  it  for  a  moment  by  the  intrusion  of  Kent,  who  forces  himself 
on  his  notice;  but  he  instantly  returns  to  his  beloved  Cordelia,  over  whose  dead  body 
he  continues  to  hang.  He  is  now  himself  in  the  agony  of  death ;  and  surely  at  such 
a  time,  when  his  heart  is  just  breaking,  it  would  be  highly  unnatural  that  he  should 
think  of  his  Fool.  But  the  great  and  decisive  objection  to  such  a  supposition  is  that 
which  Mr  Steevens  has  mentioned — that  Lear  had  just  seen  his  daughter  hanged , 
having  unfortunately  been  admitted  too  late  to  preserve  her  life,  though  time  enough  to 
punish  the  perpetrator  of  the  act ;  but  we  have  no  authority  whatsoever  for  supposing 
his  Fool  hanged  also.  Whether  the  expression  ‘poor  fool’  can  be  applied  with  pro¬ 
priety  only  to  1  inferior  objects,  for  whom  we  have  not  much  respect  or  esteem,’  is 
not,  I  conceive,  the  question.  Sh.  does  not  always  use  his  terms  with  strict  propriety, 
but  he  is  always  the  best  commentator  on  himself,  and  he  certainly  has  applied  this 
term  in  another  place  to  the  young ,  the  beautiful,  and  innocent  Adonis,  the  object 
of  somewhat  more  than  the  esteem  of  a  goddess:  ‘For  pity  now  she  can  no  more 
detain  him ;  The  poor  fool  prays  her  that  he  may  depart.’  In  Old  English  a  fool 
and  an  innocent  were  synonymous  terms.  Hence,  probably,  the  peculiar  use  of  the 
expression  ‘  poor  fool.’  In  the  passage  before  us.  Lear,  I  conceive,  means  by  it  dear, 
tender,  helpless  innocence !  Rann  :  My  hapless,  innocent  Cordelia.  As  You  Like 
It  [Gent.  Mag.  lx,  402)  imagines  *  poor  soul  ’  to  be  the  original  phrase.  Knight  : 
‘  Poor  fool  ’  might  indeed  be  here  employed  something  like  the  ‘  excellent  wretch  ’ 
of  Othello ;  but  we  cannot  avoid  thinking  that  Sh.,  in  this  place,  meant  to  express 
a  peculiar  tenderness,  derived  from  Lear’s  confused  recollection  of  his  regard  for  his 
poor  follower,  the  Fool.  In  the  depth  of  his  distress  during  the  storm  Lear  says : 
*  Poor  fool  and  knave,  I  have  one  part  in  my  heart  that’s  sorry  yet  for  thee.*  And 
now,  when  the  last  and  deepest  calamity  has  fallen  upon  him,  his  expressions  shape 
themselves  out  of  the  indistinctness  with  which  he  views  the  present  and  the  past, 
and  Cordelia  is  his  ‘poor  fool.’  Collier:  It  may  be  urged  that,  as  Cordelia  had 
been  hanged,  the  poet  would  have  probably  chosen  some  other  dea’h  for  the  Fool, 
in  order  to  render  the  matter  quite  clear,  supposing  Lear  to  have  allowed  his  thoughts 


ACT  V,  SC.  ii.] 


KING  LEAR 


347 


Pray  you,  undo  this  button.  Thank  you,  sir.  310 

Do  you  see  this  ?  Look  on  her, — look, — her  lips, — 


310.  Pray  you]  pray  Q3. 

3 1 0-3 1 2.  sir.  Do. ..there  f]  fir,  O,  0, 
0,  0.  Qx.  fir,  O,  0,  0,  0,  0.  Q2. 

31 1.  on  her,]  on  her  ?  F,. 


31 1.  look, — her  lips, — ]  Johns,  (subs.) 
Looke  her  lips,  Ft.  looke  on  her  lipst 
F3.  look  on  her  lips,  F3F4,  Rowe,  Pope, 
Theob.  Han.  Warb.  Cap.  Ec. 


thus  to  wander  from  his  daughter,  lying  dead  before  him.  On  the  other  hand,  if  Sh. 
did  not  mean  to  revert  to  the  Fool,  he  has  certainly  omitted  to  account  for  a  promi¬ 
nent  and  interesting  character.  Verplanck  :  With  this  customary  and  familiar  use 
of  the  phrase,  when  the  whole  interest  of  the  scene  is  fixed  on  Cordelia’s  death,  and 
Lear  himself,  in  the  same  b'reath  addressing  her  (*  And  thou  no  breath  at  all  ?  Thou’lt 
come  no  more’),  it  seems  to  me  evident  that  it  is  to  Cordelia  alone  that  the  phrase 
can  allude.  Hudson  :  These  words  refer,  not  to  the  Fool,  but  to  Cordelia,  on  whose 
lips  the  old  king  is  still  intent,  and  dies  while  he  is  searching  there  for  indications 
of  life.  W.  W.  Lloyd:  I  have  no  doubt  that  Sh.  intended  the  Fool  should  be  re¬ 
membered  in  Lear’s  last  exclamation,  though  no  more  may  be  meant  than  that  in  his 
wandering  state  he  confuses  the  image  of  the  Fool  with  that  of  his  daughter  in  his 
arms.  Kalliwell  :  *  Poor  fool  ’  was  formerly  a  common  phrase  of  endearment. 
So  Julia,  speaking  of  Proteus,  says:  ‘Alas,  poor  fool!  why  do  I  pity  him?’  The 
expression  occurs  as  one  of  endearment,  applied  to  a  woman,  in  Cokain’s  Trappolin 
Suppos'd  a  Prince ,  1658:  * — You  saw  how  I  was  employ’d;  I  could  not  leave  the 
poor  fool, — your  lordship  sees  she  loves  me,  and  protest  her  labour  is  not  lost.’  The 
old  king  is  evidently  thinking  of  his  daughter,  and  knows  the  manner  of  her  death, 
nay,  kills  the  slave  that  did  it,  and  here  he  exclaims  immediately  after  calling  her 
poor  fool,  unbutton  here,  look  on  her,  &c.  I  do  not  think  that  it  is  even  necessary 
to  allow  for  the  broken  thought  and  incoherent  expression  of  a  madman,  and  imagine 
that  his  ideas  of  who  is  the  victim,  his  daughter  or  his  Fool,  are  confused  in  his 
crushed  intellect.  Delius  :  Cordelia  is  here  referred  to.  Chambers  :  Not  the  Fool, 
but  Cordelia.  CoWDEN  Clarke:  A  term  of  endearment  applied  by  Lear  to  his 
dead  daughter.  We  do  not  believe  that  Sh.  would  have  made  the  bereaved  father 
recur  for  even  one  moment  to  any  thought  of  other  loss  than  the  one  before  him — 
his  murdered  daughter.  Furthermore,  if  Sh.  had  intended  to  denote  a  tender  remi¬ 
niscence  of  the  Fool  on  the  part  of  his  old  master,  and  to  take  an  opportunity  of 
definitely  stating  the  mode  of  the  Fool’s  death,  we  do  not  think  that  he  would  have 
made  this  the  opportunity,  or  hanging  the  means  by  which  the  lad  came  to  his  end; 
he  would  not  have  reserved  Lear’s  mention  of  the  faithful  jester  until  a  time  when 
the  father’s  whole  soul  is  engrossed  with  but  one  idea,  nor  would  he  have  committed 
the  dramatic  tautology,  as  well  as  the  dramatic  injury  to  tragic  effect,  of  making  the 
Fool,  as  well  as  Cordelia,  ‘bang’d.’  Moberly  :  *  My  poor  darling.’  Pie  means  Cor¬ 
delia,  as  the  next  words  plainly  show.  Wright:  Cordelia;  not  the  Fool.  See 
Much  Ado,  II,  i,  326 :  *  I  thank  it,  poor  fool,  it  keeps  on  the  windy  side  of  care.’ 
Dyce  ( Gloss.)  :  That  is,  Cordelia.  White  and  Staunton  are  silent.  [Very  reluc¬ 
tantly  I  have  come  to  the  conviction  that  this  refers  to  Cordelia. — Ed.] 

310.  button]  The  Quarterly  Review  (April,  1833,  p.  197) :  Scarcely  have  the 
spectators  of  this  anguish  had  time  to  mark  and  express  to  each  other  their  convic¬ 
tion  of  the  extinction  of  his  mind,  when  some  physical  alteration,  made  dreadfully 


KING  LEAR 


[act  v,  sc.  iii. 


34^ 

Look  there ! — look  there !  [Dies. 

Edg.  He  faints. — My  lord,  my  lord !  312 

Kent.  Break,  heart ;  I  prithee,  break ! 

Edg.  Look  up,  my  lord. 

Kent.  Vex  not  his  ghost.  Oh,  let  him  pass !  he  hates  him 
That  would  upon  the  rack  of  this  tough  world  3 1 5 


312.  [Dies.]  H  edis.  F„.  He  dyes. 
Fa.  He  dies.  F3F4.  Om.  Qq. 

faints."]  Johns,  faints ,  Q,Ff+. 
faints  Q2. 

My  lord ,  my  lord  /]  my  lord. 

fa+. 

313.  Kent.]  Lear.  Qq. 

up,]  vp  QqFj.  to  F2F3F4,  Rowe, 


Pope. 

314-316.  Vex  ...Longer.]  Lines  end 
page, ...wracke,.. .longer.  Qq. 

314.  hates  him]  hates  him  much  Qa, 
Glo.  Wr. 

315.  rack]  wracke  QqF^.  wrackY 
tough]  rough  Q3Q3,  Pope +,  Cap. 


visible,  urges  Albany  to  cry  out,  *  Oh  see,  see !  ’  The  intense  excitement  which  Lear 
had  undergone,  and  which  lent  for  a  time  a  supposititious  life  to  his  enfeebled  frame, 
gives  place  to  the  exhaustion  of  despair.  But  even  here,  where  any  other  mind 
would  have  confined  itself  to  the  single  passion  of  parental  despair,  Sh.  contrives  to 
indicate  by  a  gesture  the  very  train  of  internal  physical  changes  which  are  causing 
death.  The  blood  gathering  about  the  heart  can  no  longer  be  propelled  by  its 
enfeebled  impulse.  Lear,  too  weak  to  relieve  the  impediments  of  his  dress, 
which  he  imagines  cause  the  sense  of  suffocation,  asks  a  bystander  to  ‘  undo  this 
button.’ 

313.  Break  .  .  .  break!]  (See  Textual  Notes.)  White:  I  am  not  sure  that  this 
speech  does  not  belong  to  Lear.  The  stage-direction  ‘  He  dies,’  at  the  end  of  Lear’s 
foregoing  speech,  may  be  only  a  timely  warning  to  the  prompter,  such  as  is  con¬ 
stantly  to  be  found  in  our  old  dramas.  Possibly  Lear  was  supposed  to  expire  during 
Kent’s  next  speech. 

315.  tough]  Dyce  (Rem.  p.  232):  Read,  by  all  means,  as  Pope  did,  ‘rough.’ 
[Which  Dyce,  by  no  means,  read  when  he  came  to  print  his  edition.]  Collier  (ed. 
2) :  ‘  Tough  ’  does  not  so  much  apply  to  the  *  world’  as  to  the  *  rack,’  on  which  Lear 
was  not  to  be  stretched  out  longer.  White:  I  am  almost  sure  that  Sh.  wrote  ‘  rough 
world.’  Cambridge  Editors  :  Capell  reads  rough  in  his  text,  believing  that  he 
had  the  authority  of  the  first  Quarto  [Qa]  for  it  j  but  in  his  own  copy,  and  that  of 
the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  the  reading  is  plainly  ‘tough,’  though  the  * t ’  is  broken. 
[My  copy  of  Qa  once  belonged  to  Capell,  and  was  apparently  his  working  copy,  for 
it  bears  throughout,  in  Capell’s  painfully  neat  and  painfully  illegible  handwriting,  a 
tolerably  thorough  collation  with  Qt.  Now,  singularly  enough,  in  this  copy  the  first 
letter  in  ‘tough’  is  so  much  like  an  r  (albeit  a  thick,  clumsy  one)  that  it  would  not 
occur  to  any  one,  at  first  sight,  that  the  word  was  other  than  rough.  It  is  only  after 
close  scrutiny,  and  a  comparison  with  other  imperfect  letters,  that  it  would  enter  any 
one’s  imagination  that  perhaps  the  word  might  be  *  tough.’  Capell  evidently  read  it 
rough,  and  so  did  the  printer  of  Jane  Bell’s  Quarto,  who  followed  this  edition  and 
not  Qt;  I  have,  therefore,  felt  justified  in  recording  it  as  such  in  the  Textual  Notes, 
— Ed.J 


ACT  v,  sc.  iii.] 


KING  LEAR 


349 


Stretch  him  out  longer. 

Edg.  He  is  gone  indeed.  316 

Kent.  The  wonder  is  he  hath  endured  so  long ; 

He  but  usurp’d  his  life. 

Alb.  Bear  them  from  hence. — Our  present  business 
Is  general  woe. — [To  Kent  and  Edgar\  Friends  of  my  soul, 

you  twain  3 20 

Rule  in  this  realm  and  the  gored  state  sustain. 

Kent.  I  have  a  journey,  sir,  shortly  to  go ; 

My  master  calls  me,  I  must  not  say  no. 

Edg.  The  weight  of  this  sad  time  we  must  obey, 

Speak  what  we  feel,  not  what  we  ought  to  say.  325 


316.  He]  0  he  Qq,  Jen.  Steev.  Ec. 
Var.  Sing.  Ktly. 

319.  Alb.]  Duke.  Qq. 

320.  Is]  Is  to  Qq. 

[To  Kent  and  Edgar]  Johns. 

321.  realm]  kingdome  Qq. 

gored]  gor'd  Ff.  goardQt.  good 


Qa* 

323.  calls  me,  /]  cals,  and  I  Qq,  Jen. 
Steev.  Ec.  Var.  Sing  Ktly. 

[Dyes.  Fa.  Dies.  F3F4,  Rowe, 
Pope,  Theob.  Warb.  Johns.  Om.  QqF,. 

324.  Edg.]  Ff,  Rowe,  Del.  Sch. 
Duke.  Qq.  Alb.  Pope  et  cet. 


321.  sustain]  Jennens:  The  play  would  end  best  here. 

322,323.  Jennens:  Kent  only  declines  the  share  in  the  government  on  account 
of  his  age.  How  unexpectedly  and  awkwardly  would  he  die,  after  saying  only,  he 
had  a  journey  shortly  to  go,  and  without  bidding  farewell,  or  discovering  any  symp¬ 
toms  of  death.  Malone  :  Kent  on  his  entrance  in  this  scene  says :  ‘  I  am  come  To 
bid  my  king  ancftnaster  aye  good  night,’  but  this,  like  the  present  speech,  only  marks 
the  despondency  of  tha  speaker.  The  word  ‘shortly’  decisively  proves  that  Sh.  did 
not  mean  to  make  him  die  on  the  stage.  Collier  :  The  stage-direction  in  Fa  is 
struck  out  by  the  (MS).  Moberly:  ‘A  journey’  to  another  world.  So  Horatio 
wishes  to  drink  the  remainder  of  the  poison  until  hindered  by  the  dying  Hamlet. 
Kent,  like  Horatio,  has  ‘much  of  the  Roman  in  him.’  Collier  (ed.  3) :  The  con¬ 
cluding  Scene  of  this  noble  tragedy  is  most  imperfectly  given  in  all  impressions, 
whether  Quarto  or  Folio.  Possibly  it  was  acted  differently  at  different  times  and 
theatres;  but,  of  course,  this  is  only  conjecture.  Schmidt:  ‘My  master’ is  Lear. 
It  would  be  hard  to  find  in  Sh.  a  reference  to  God  as  *  master.’ 

324.  Edg.]  Theobald:  This  speech  is  given, in  the  Ff,  to  Edgar.  Being  a  more 
favourite  actor  than  he  who  performed  Albany,  in  spite  of  decorum  it  was  thought 
proper  he  should  have  the  last  word.  Walker  ( Crit .  ii,  185) :  It  seems  to  me  just 
possible, — yet  hardly  so, — that  the  Folio  maybe  right.  Halliwell:  This  speech  is 
rightly  assigned  in  the  Qq  to  Albany,  not  to  Edgar,  as  in  the  Ff,  Albany  being  the 
person  of  greatest  authority  in  the  scene.  It  likewise  appears  to  be  intended  as  a 
gentle  reproof  to  Kent’s  despairing  speech,  telling  him  that  ‘  the  weight  of  this  sad 
time  we  must  obey.’  Had  Kent  died,  some  sensation  would  have  been  created,  and 
his  death  not  passed  over  as  a  piece  of  stage-show  that  is  expected ;  and  the  speech 
of  Albany  would  have  lost  its  pertinence.  Schmidt  :  This  speech  clearly  belongs 


350 


KING  LEAR 


[act  v,  sc.  iii. 
326 


The  oldest  hath  borne  most.  We  that  are  young 
Shall  never  see  so  much,  nor  live  so  long. 

[ Exeunt ,  with  a  dead  march. 


326.  hath']  haue  Qq. 

borne]  born  F^.  bomue  Q3. 


327.  nor  live]  live  e’er  Han. 

[Exeunt.. .march.]  Om.  Qq. 


to  Edgar,  from  whom  a  reply  to  Albany  is  due.  Moreover,  the  substance  of  what 
he  says,  viz.  that  for  the  moment  he  is  incapable  of  saying  what  he  ought,  by  no 
means  befits  Albany,  who,  during  this  last  tragic  scene,  has  not  for  a  moment  lost 
sight  of  public  interests.  On  the  other  hand,  the  last  two  lines  are  in  character  if 
spoken  by  the  Duke,  to  whom  dramatic  etiquette  gives  the  last  word.  Perhaps  the 
true  order  might  be  restored  by  dividing  these  last  few  lines  between  them. 

326,  327.  Jennens  :  The  two  last  [«V]  lines,  as  they  stand,  are  silly  and  false ; 
and  are  only  inserted  that  any  one  may  alter  them  for  the  better  if  they  can.  Hanmer 
has  not  made  them  a  jot  better.  Capell  thinks  that  Albany  intimates  that  his  life 
will  be  shortened  by  the  terrible  scenes  he  has  lived  through.  Eccles  :  The  sense 
of  this  seemingly  childish  sentence  would  be  somewhat  mended  by  reading  « and 
live  so  long.’  Dyce  (ed.  2) :  The  last  line  of  this  speech  is  certainly  obscure  in 
meaning. 

327.  Moberly:  Age  and  fulness  of  sorrows  have  been  the  same  thing  to  the 
unhappy  Lear ;  his  life  has  been  prolonged  into  times  so  dark  in  their  misery  and  so 
fierce  in  their  unparalleKl  ingratitude  and  reckless  passion,  that  even  if  we  live  as 
long  as  he  has  (which  will  hardly  be),  our  existence  will  never  light  on  days  as  evil 
as  those  which  he  has  seen. 


APPENDIX 


APPENDIX 


THE  TEXT 


In  the  Registers  of  the  Stationers  Company,*  for  the  year  1594,  we  find  the  fol¬ 
lowing  entry :  • 

riiijti*  foie  iUatj. 

Adam  Infill  Entred  alfoe  for  his  Copie  vnder  th  andes  of  bothe  the  wardens 
Edward  White.],  a  booke  entituled  |  The  tnc/le  famous  Chronicle  hijlorye  of  Leirr 
hinge  of  England  and  his  Three  Daughters  ,  .  .  vjd  C.j. 


Of  this  book  no  copy  is  known  to  be  extant;  this  is  the  only  trace  we  have  of 
it.  Possibly  but  few  copies  were  issued;  Edward  White  was  not,  at  that  time,  a 
prominent  stationer.  If  we  were  certain  that  this  ‘  booke  ’  was  a  drama  we  should 
be  at  liberty  to  conjecture  that  it  is  the  original  on  which  Shakespeare  founded  his 
tragedy,  and  that  it  has  eluded  our  search  out  of  the  sheer  perversity  of  that  *  nature 
of  things  ’  which  Porson  was  wont  to  damn,  and  which  seems  to  envelope  in  a  thick 
■mist  everything  pertaining  to  Shakespeare.  But  we  know  nothing  more  about  it 
than  is  contained  in  the  foregoing  entry,  and  in  this  ignorance  we  get  what  comfort 
we  may  from  the  supposition  that  it  is  not  really  lost,  but  re-appears  in  the  follow 
ing  entries :  f 

8  maij  [1605] 

Simon  Stafford  Entred  for  his  Copie  vnder  th  andes  of  the  Wardens  A  booke 
called  ‘ the  Tragecall  hijlorie  of  hinge  leir  and  his  Three 
Daughters  dr  cl  As  it  zvas  latelie  A  died  , . vjd 


John  Wright  |  Entred  for  his  Copie  by  aflignement  from  Simon  Stafford  and 
by  confent  of  Matter  Leake,  The  Tragicall  hiflory  of  hinge 
le /re  and  his  Three  Daughters  \  Provided  that  Simon  Staf¬ 
ford  fhall  haue  the  printinge  of  this  booke  1 1  .  .  .  .  vjd 

[It  is  evident  that  King  Lear  was  printed  by  S.  Stafford  before 
the  8th  May,  1605,  though  not  entered  until  it  was  assigned  on 
that  date. — Arber.] 

A  few  copies  of  this  ‘  booke  ’  are  extant.  It  is  perhaps  worth  noting  that  the 
title  which  they  now  bear  does  not  correspond  exactly  with  that  in  the  registered 
entry.  The  present  title,  as  given  by  Capell  (vol.  i,  p.  55),  is  as  follows:  ‘  The  j 
True  Chronicle  Hi-  |  (lory  of  King  Leir,  and  his  three  |  daughters,  Gonorill,  Ra¬ 
gan,  |  and  Cordelia.  |  As  it  hath  bene  divers  and  fundry  |  times  lately  adted.  |  Lon¬ 
don,  |  Printed  by  Simon  Stafford  for  John  |  Wright,  and  are  to  bee  fold  at  his  fhop 
at  |  Chrifles  Church  dore,  next  Newgate-  |  Market,  1605/ 


*  Arber’s  Transcript,  ii,  649. 

30* 


X 


f  Ibid.,  iii,  289. 

353 


354 


APPENDIX 


In  the  Stationers’  Registers  it  is  styled  ‘  The  Tragicall  hiftory;’  on  its  published 
title-page,  it  is  called  ‘  The  True  Chronicle  Hiftory.’  Now  although  the  entries  in 
the  Register  do  not  assume  to  give  complete  or  exact  titles  (enough  merely  of  the 
titles  was  recorded  to  identify  the  source  whence  came  the  various  sums  of  money 
which  were  received  by  the  Wardens),  yet  the  use  of  the  word  ‘  Tragicall’  seems 
not  altogether  purposeless,  especially  when  the  assertion  is  added  :  ‘  As  it  was  lately 

*  acted.’  It  may  be  that  Stafford  looked  more  to  the  body  of  the  drama  than  to 
the  mere  ending,  in  which  case  he  was  certainly  justified  in  calling  it  a  ‘  tragicall 
hiftory,’  and  as  he  was  under  no  obligation  to  adhere  afterward  to  the  description 
given  to  the  Warden,  he  may  have  described  it,  at  the  moment,  according  to  its 
most  characteristic  feature  Still  Malone  and  others  scent  fraud  here,  and  Stafford 
has  been  accused  of  double-dealing,  in  that  he  called  his  ‘booke’  one  thing  on  the 
eighth  of  May,  and  another  thing  when  it  was  actually  presented  to  the  public ;  in 
other  words,  as  though  his  first  intention  were  to  deceive  the  public  by  calling  that 
a  tragedy  which  was  no  tragedy,  but  a  comedy  of  a  rarely  felicitous  ending,  and 
that  afterward  that  deception  was  abandoned  as  too  palpable.  Now  if  at  this  very 
time,  the  eighth  of  May,  1605,  another  play  was  acting,  whose  hero  was  Lear,  one 
which  was  highly  popular  and  at  the  same  time  a  genuine  tragedy,  a  desire  on  the 
part  of  Stafford  to  beguile  purchasers  into  the  belief  that  his  ‘booke’  was  the 
popular  tragedy  would  perhaps  explain  his  use  of  the  word  ‘  tragical  ’  and  the  refer¬ 
ence  to  its  being  *  lately  acted.’  If  this  conjecture,  hardly  more  than  ‘gracious  fool- 

*  ing  ’  at  the  best,  be  worth  anything,  we  may  get  a  hint  from  it  of  the  date  of  the 
composition  of  Shakespeare’s  Lear. 

Two  years  and  a  half  after  the  date  of  this  entry  of  King  Leir,  we  find  the  follow¬ 
ing  in  the  Stationers’  Registers:* 

26  tbncmbris  [1607] 

Nathaniel  Butter  Entred  for  their  copie  vnder  th  andes  of  Sir  George  Buck 
John  Busby  knight  and  Th  wardens  A  booke  called.  Mailer  William 

Shakespeare  his  *  hiftory e  of  Kinge  leak'  as  yt  was  played 
before  the  hinges  maieflie  at  Whitehall  vppon  Sained  Stephens 
night  [26  December]  at  Chrijimas  Lafl  by  his  maieflies  fer- 
vantes  playinge  vfually  at  the  *  Globe  ’  on  the  Bankfyde .  vjd 

Here,  then,  we  have  our  first  genuine  Quarto  edition  of  King  Lear.  In  passing, 
it  may  be  remarked  that  this  entry,  like  the  generality  of  entries  at  about  this  same 
time,  is  fuller  in  its  description  than  those  during  Queen  Elizabeth’s  reign,  an  indi¬ 
cation,  according  to  Arber,  of  the  stricter  censorship  of  the  press;  in  confirmation 
whereof,  we  see  that  it  was  necessary  to  cite  the  authority  for  the  license  not  only  of 
the  Wardens,  but  also  of  Sir  George  Buck,  the  Master  of  the  Revels. 

When  the  Quarto  was  published,  in  the  next  year,  it  bore  the  following  title: 

M,  William  Shak-fpeare :  |  HIS  |  True  Chronicle  Hiftorie  of  the  life  and  |  death 
of  King  LEAR  and  his  three  |  Daughters.  |  With  the  vnfortunate  life  of  Edgar, 
fonne  |  and  heire  to  the  Earle  of  Glofter,  and  his  |  fullen  and  affumed  humor 
of  |  Tom  of  Bedlam :  |  As  it  was  played  before  the  Kings  Maieflie  at  Whitehall 
zpon  |  S.  Stephans  night  in  Chrijbnas  Hollidayes.  |  By  his  Maiefties  feruants 
playing  vfually  at  the  Gloabe  |  on  the  Bancke-fide.  J  LONDON.  |  Printed  for 
Nathaniel  Butter ,  and  are  to  be  fold  at  his  fhop  in  Pauls  |  Church-yard  at  the 
figne  of  the  Pide  Bull  neere  |  S'.  Aufins  Gate.  1608.  | 


*  Akber’s  Transcript,  iii,  366. 


THE  TEXT 


3oo 

In  the  original  title-page  *  M.  William  Shak-fpeare’  is  in  much  larger  type  than 
my  other  words  on  the  page;  ‘moreover,’  says  Collier,  ‘we  have  it  again  at  the 
‘head  of  the  leaf  on  which  the  tragedy  commences,  “ M.  William  Shake-fpeare,  his 
‘hiftory  of  King  Lear.”  This  peculiarity  has  never  attracted  sufficient  attention, 
‘  and  it  belongs  not  only  to  no  other  of  Shakespeare’s  plays,  but  to  no  other  pro- 

*  duction  of  any  kind  of  that  period  which  we  recollect.  It  was  clearly  intended  to 
‘enable  purchasers  to  make  sure  that  they  were  buying  the  drama  which  “  M.  Wil- 
4liam  Shake-fpeare”  had  written  upon  the  popular  story  of  King  Lear.’ 

Were  it  not  for  the  entry  in  the  Stationers’  Registers  we  should  be  unable  to  fix 
the  date  of  ‘  S.  Stephans  night  in  Chriftmas  Hollidayes ;’  as  it  is,  however,  we  know 
that  it  was  the  twenty-sixth  of  December,  1606, — a  date  which  should  be  borne 
in  mind. 

This,  however,  is  not  the  only  edition  published  by  N.  Butter.  In  this  very  same 
year,  1608,  he  issued  a  second  edition,  with  the  following  title: 

M.  William  Shake-fpeare,  |  HIS  j  True  Chronicle  Hiftory  of  the  life  |  and  death 
of  King  Lear ,  and  his  |  three  Daughters.  \  With  the  vnfortunate  life  of  Ed¬ 
gar,  |  fonne  and  heire  to  the  Earle  of  Glocefler,  and  |  his  fullen  and  affumed 
humour  of  TOM  |  of  Bedlam.  |  As  it  was  plaid  before  the  Kings  Maiejly  at 
White-Hall,  vp-  |  pon  S.  Stephens  night,  in  Chrijlmas  Hollidaies.  |  By  his  Mai- 
efties  Seruants,  playing  vfually  at  the  |  Globe  on  the  Banck-fide.  |  Printed  for 
Nathaniel  Butter.  |  1608.  | 

As  will  be  seen,  the  titles  of  these  two  editions  are  almost  identical;  the  only  difler- 
ence,  omitting  varieties  in  type,  lies  in  the  imprint.  In  the  second  edition  there  is 
no  allusion  to  the  shop  at  the  sign  of  the  ‘  Pide  Bull.’ 

When  we  turn  to  the  contents,  we  find  that  it  is  not  alone  on  the  title-pages  that 
these  two  editions  vary.  There  are  throughout  such  differences  of  spelling,  punc¬ 
tuation,  pagination,  and  of  text,  as  suffice  to  make  them  two  distinct  editions. 

For  the  sake  of  convenience  I  shall  refer  to  the  former  as  the  Pide  Bull  edition, 
or  ;  to  the  latter,  as  the  N.  Butter  edition,  or  Qs.  And  yet  the  precedence  of  one 
over  the  other,  in  point  of  time,  is  inferential  merely ;  the  evidence  is  only  circum¬ 
stantial,  direct  evidence  there  is  none ;  and  so  shifting  are  the  grounds  on  which  we 
have  to  decide,  that  those  keen  and  practised  critics,  Messrs  Clark  and  Wright, 
at  the  conclusion  of  the  collation  of  the  two  texts,  as  recorded  in  the  Cambridge 
Edition ,  confess,  in  their  Preface,  that  they  believe,  after  all,  that  edition  to  be 
the  later,  which  throughout  their  foot-notes  they  had  cited  as  the  earlier.  In  fact, 
I  think  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  in  all  Bibliography  a  puzzle  greater  than  that 
which  Nathaniel  Butter  has  bequeathed  to  us.  What  complicates  the  puzzle  and 
makes  it  almost  *  too  intrinse  to  unloose,’  is  that  we  have  to  choose  not  between  two 
well-defined  and  separate  editions,  but  between  all  the  copies  of  the  two  editions. 
Mr  Halliwell-Phillipps  says,  that  no  two  of  the  twelve  copies  of  the  Pide  Bull 
edition  that  survive  are  exactly  alike !  Two  copies  of  the  same  edition  will  be  found 
to  vary,  errors  in  one  will  be  corrected  in  the  other,  and  errors  in  the  latter  corrected 
in  the  former.  This  confusion  is  well  illustrated  in  the  following  extract  from  the 
Preface  of  the  Cambridge  Edition .  Be  it  remembered  that  *  Qt’  of  the  Cambridge 
Editors  is  what  I  have  called  Q,,  or  the  N.  Butter  edition ;  their  *  Qa’  is  my  Q,,  or 
Pide  Bull  edition. 

*  The  differences  in  various  copies  of  Qa  are  accounted  for  by  supposing  that  the 

•  corrections  were  made  before  the  sheets  were  all  worked  off,  and  that  the  corrected 


356 


APPENDIX 


4  and  uncorredled  sheets  were  bound  up  indiscriminately.  It  will  be  observed  that 

*  the  readings  of  the  uncorredled  sheets  of  Qa  agree  for  the  most  part  with  those  of 

*  Qt,  and  this  led  us  to  the  conclusion  which  had  previously  been  arrived  at  by  Ca* 

‘  pell  and  also  by  J.  P.  Kemble,  that  the  edition  which  we  have  called  Qt  was  the 
‘  earlier  of  the  two  printed  in  the  same  year.  But  upon  collating  a  copy  of  Qa  in 
‘the  Bodleian,  which  we  have  called  Qa  (Bodl.  i),  we  found  evidence  which  points 
‘to  an  opposite  conclusion.  In  Kent’s  soliloquy  (II,  ii,  160)  that  copy,  as  will  be 
‘  seen  in  our  notes,  reads, 

nothing  almost  sees  my  ruckles 
But  miserie,  &c. 

1  which  of  course  is  an  accidental  corruption,  by  displacement  of  the  type,  of  “  my- 

*  rackles  ”  (*.  e.  “  miracles  ”),  the  true  reading.  In  the  corre<5ted  copies  of  Qa  this  is 
‘  altered,  apparently  by  the  printer’s  conjecture,  to  “  my  wracke,”  which  is  also  the 
‘  reading  of  Qt.  Throughout  the  sheet  in  which  this  occurs  the  readings  of  Qt 

*  agree  with  the  corrected  copies  of  Qa,  and  had  it  not  been  for  the  instance  quoted, 
‘  we  might  have  supposed  that  the  corrections  in  the  latter  were  made  from  Qx. 
‘But  the  corruption  “my  rackles”  for  “miracles”  must  have  come  from  the  orig- 

*  inal  MS,  and  “  my  wracke  ”  is  only  a  conjectural  emendation,  so  that  the  order  of 

*  succession  in  this  sheet,  at  least,  appears  to  be  the  following :  First  the  uncorrected 

*  copy  of  Qa,  then  the  same  corrected,  and  lastly  Qx.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  re- 
‘  markable  that  Qt,  if  printed  from  Qa  at  all,  must  have  been  printed  from  a  copy 
‘made  up,  with  the  exception  just  mentioned  from  II,  i,  128  to  II,  iv,  133,  and  an- 
‘  other  containing  from  IV,  vi,  224  to  V,  iii,  64,  of  uncorrected  sheets.  Another 

*  hypothesis  which  might  be  made,  is  that  Qx  and  Qa  were  printed  from  the  same 

*  manuscript,  and  that  the  printer  of  Qx  corrupted  “miracles”  into  “  my  wracke,” 
‘  while  the  printer  of  Qa  made  it  “  my  rackles,”  which  was  afterwards  altered  by  a 

*  reference  to  Qx.’ 

In  Ellis’s  Early  English  Pronunciation  (i,  217,  foot-note),  a  communication  from 
Mr  Aldis  Wright  is  quoted,  which  states  quite  as  conclusively  the  conviction  of  the 
Cambridge  Editors,  that  they  had  been  misled  in  their  chronological  order  of  the 
Qq:  ‘We  are  now  convinced  that  this  edition  [the  Pide  Bull  edition,  which  is  cited 
‘as  Qa  in  the  foot-notes  of  the  Cam.  ed.J  was  earlier  than  the  one  in  the  same  year, 
‘  which  we  have  called  Qt.  These  copies  of  Qa  (so-called)  differ  from  each  other  in 

*  having  some  of  them  been  corrected  while  passing  through  the  press.  The  earliest 
‘  of  these  which  we  have  met  with  is  one  of  the  two  copies  in  the  Bodleian,  and  we 
‘call  it  for  distinction  sake  Qa  (Bodl.  1).  This  has  the  reading  three  snyted :  but 

*  all  the  other  copies  of  the  same  edition  read  three  shewtcd.  I  suppose,  therefore, 
4  that  while  the  edition  was  in  course  of  printing  the  error  was  discovered,  and  the 
‘  correction  communicated  verbally  to  the  compositor,  who  inserted  it  according  to 
‘his  own  notions  of  spelling.  It  is  not  a  question  between  the  readings  of  two  dif¬ 
ferent  editions,  but  between  an  uncorrected  copy  and  a  corrected  copy  of  the  same 
‘  edition.  The  later  Quartos  follow  the  corrected  copy,  but  their  testimony  is  of  no 
‘  value,  because  their  reading  is  merely  a  reprint.’  [See  also  II,  ii,  14.] 

I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  true  solution  of  the  puzzle  is  to  be  found,  as  has 
been  suggested,  in  the  blunders  not  of  the  printer  but  of  the  binder.  The  text  of 
these  Quarto  editions  was  evidently  set  up  piecemeal.  For  some  reason  or  other 
‘Master  N.  Butter’  was  in  a  hurry  to  publish  his  4  booke,’  and  he,  therefore,  sent 
out  the  4  copy,’  divided  into  several  parts  to  several  compositors,  and  these  different 
parts,  when  printed,  were  dispatched  to  a  binder  to  be  stitched  (it  is  not  probablethat 


THE  TEXT 


357 


any  of  the  Shakespearian  Quartos  were  more  than  merely  stitched,  or  had  other  than 
paper  covers).  We  learn  from  Arber’s  invaluable  Transcript,  ii,  881-2,  that  the 
binding  was  not  done  by  the  printers,  and  as  there  were  nearly  fifty  freemen  binders 
at  that  time  in  London,  there  must  have  been  among  them  various  degrees  of  excel¬ 
lence;  as  ill-luck  would  have  it,  the  several  portions  of  this  tragedy  of  Lear  fell  to 
the  charge  of  a  careless  binder,  and  the  signatures,  corrected  and  uncorrected,  from 
the  different  printers,  were  mixed  up,  to  the  confusing  extent  in  which  the  few  conies 
that  survive  have  come  down  to  us. 

That  these  Quartos  were  set  up  piecemeal  is,  I  think,  clear.  On  the  forty-sixth 
page  of  what  I  have  called  Q2,  or  the  N.  Butter  edition,  the  lines  do  not  *  run  on  ;’ 
the  sentence  stops  in  the  middle  and  the  rest  of  the  line  is  left  blank,  thus  * 

toade  pold,  the  wall-wort,  and  the  water,  that  in  the  fruite  of  his 
heart,  when  the  foule  fiend  rages, 

Eates  cowdung  for  fallets,  fwallowes  the  old  rat,  and  the  ditch- 

And  as  though  the  compositor  'were  careless  at  the  close  of  his  task,  some  of  the 
grossest  misprints  occur  in  these  closing  lines  of  his  stint :  not  to  mention  fruite  in 
the  foregoing  lines  for  ‘  fury,’  or  wall-wort  for  *  wall-newt,’  we  have  * pinqueuer  the 

*  eye,'  4  hart  lip,'  4  olde  anelthu  night  Moore?  See. 

Another  similar  break  occurs  on  the  fifty-first  page  of  this  same  Quarto. 

An  indication  that  the  Pide  Bull  edition  was  also  set  up  by  piecework  is  found 
at  V,  iii,  236,  where  Alb.  is  changed  to  Duke,  and  Duke  it  continues  throughout  the 
rest  of  the  play. 

It  may  be  that  the  mere  announcement  on  the  title-page  that  the  book  is  *  printed 

*  for’  Nathaniel  Butter,  indicates  that  it  was  done  by  more  than  one  printer;  had  it 
been  the  work  of  one  sole  printer  it  would  perhaps  have  been  so  stated,  as  is  not 
unfrequently  the  case  in  other  Quartos. 

The  Cambridge  Editors  say  that  ‘  the  printer’s  device  ’  on  Q2,  or  the  N.  Butter 
edition,  *  is  that  of  J.  Roberts.’  It  is  a  matter  of  small  moment,  but  I  must  confess 
that  I  mistrust  any  inferences  drawn  from  the  devices  on  the  title-pages  of  the  Shake¬ 
spearian  Quartos.  Undoubtedly,  at  times,  these  vignettes  were  the  devices  of  the 
printers :  Thomas  Creede,  for  instance,  has  his  initials  inserted  in  his  device.  But 
different  printers  sometimes  used  the  same  device,  as,  for  instance,  John  Danter  in 
Romeo  and  Juliet,  1597,  and  S[imon]  Stafford]  in  Henry  IV,  1599.  Sometimes 
the  device  is  clearly  that  of  the  stationer,  and  not  that  of  the  printer  at  all ;  Nicholas 
Ling  in  Hamlet,  1604,  displays  a  fish,  and  Thomas  Fisher  in  Midsummer  Night's 
Dream  has  a  Kingfisher.  If,  however,  any  conclusion  may  be  drawn  from  these 
vignettes  or  devices,  then,  perhaps,  Nicholas]  0[akes],  whose  vignette  in  Othello, 
1622,  is  repeated  on  the  title-page  of  the  Pide  Bull  edition/was  the  printer  of  the 
latter  also. 

The  different  readings  in  the  different  copies  of  the  same  Quarto  gave  rise  to  the 
assertion  that  there  was  a  Third  Quarto,  also  published  in  1608.  This  assertion, 
instead  of  being  a  proof  of  the  diligence  and  thoroughness  with  which  the  work  of 
collation  had  been  executed,  unfortunately  proves  the  opposite.  Had  the  editors, 
who  asserted  this,  been  only  a  little  more  thorough,  they  would  have  been  led  prob¬ 
ably  to  maintain  not  that  there  were  three  editions  merely,  but  three  times  three. 

It  was  reserved  for  the  Cambridge  Editors  to  disprove  the  existence  of  this  Third 
Quarto.  In  their  Preface  they  say : 

4  It  has  been  supposed,  in  consequence  of  statements  made  by  Malone  and  Bos- 


358 


APPENDIX 


'well,  that  a  third  edition  of  King  Lear  was  published  in  i6c3.  We  shall  show 
‘that  there  is  no  evidence  for  this.  In  the  Variorum  Shakespeare  (ii,  652),  edited 
‘by  Boswell  in  1821,  three  Quartos  are  described,  which  are  distinguished  in  the 
‘  notes  to  the  play  by  the  letters  A,  B,  C,  respectively.  The  first  of  these  is  a  copy 
‘  of  Qa,*  quoted  by  us  as  Qa  (Bodl.  1) ;  the  second  is  a  copy  of  Q, ;  and  the  third, 
‘  which  is  in  reality  another  copy  of  Qa  and  is  quoted  by  us  as  Qa  (Bodl.  2),  is  de- 

*  scribed  as  follows : 

“  Title  the  same  as  the  two  former,  except  that  like  the  first  it  begins  at  signature 
B  :  and  like  the  second,  has  no  reference  to  the  place  of  sale.” 

‘  This  statement  of  Boswell’s  is  taken  from  a  note  in  Malone’s  handwriting  pre- 
‘  fixed  to  the  copy  in  question,  which  we  transcribe. 

“This  copy  of  King  Lear  differs  in  some  particulars  from  the  two  others  in 
Vol.  IV. 

“  The  title-page  of  it  is  the  same  as  the  second  of  those  copies,  that  is,  it  has  no 
direction  to  the  place  of  sale,  and  the  first  signat.  is  B, — notwithstanding  which 
there  are  minute  diversities;  thus,  in  this  copy  in  H3  verso,  we  have  ‘A  foole 
vsurps  my  bed’ ;  in  the  other,  whose  first  signature  is  also  B,  we  find — ‘My  foote 
usurps  my  body  ’,  and  in  the  copy  without  any  direction  to  the  place  of  sale  (whose 
first  signature  is  A)  *  My  foote  usurps  my  head’."- 

*  Now  it  is  a  little  remarkable  that  at  present  the  copy  has  no  title-page  at  all,  and 

*  there  is  no  trace  of  the  title-page  having  been  removed  since  the  volume  has  been 

*  in  its  present  condition.  The  probability  is  that  the  title  was  originally  wanting, 

*  and  that  one  had  been  supplied  from  a  copy  of  before  it  came  into  Malone’s 
‘  hands,  and  that  while  it  w'as  in  this  condition  he  wrote  the  above  note  upon  it.  It 

*  was  then  sent  to  be  bound  in  a  volume  with  other  quartos,  and  the  title  may  have 
‘  been  lost  at  the  binder’s,  or  may  have  been  intentionally  removed  as  not  belonging 
‘  to  the  book.  That  alterations  were  made  by  the  binder  is  evident  from  the  fadt 
‘  that  the  copy  to  which  Malone  refers  as  the  second  of  those  in  Vol.  IV  is  in  reality 
‘  the  first.  Malone,  writing  his  note  when  Vol.  IV  was  arranged  for  binding,  de- 

*  scribed  the  then  order  of  the  plays,  which  must  afterwards  have  been  altered.  In 
‘  any  case,  however  Malone’s  statement  is  to  be  accounted  for,  it  is  quite  clear  that 
‘  Boswell  must  have  described  the  Quarto  after  it  was  bound,  when  the  title  could 

*  not  have  existed. 

*  We  have  said  that  Boswell  quotes  the  three  Quartos  of  Lear,  now  in  the  Bod- 
‘  leian,  by  the  letters  A,  B,  C,  respectively.  In  doing  so,  however,  he  is  not  con- 
‘  sistent.  We  record  his  mistakes,  that  others  may  not  be  misled  by  them.  Bearing 
‘in  mind,  therefore,  that  A  =  Qa  (Bodl.  1),  B  =  Q{,  and  C  =  Qa  (Bodl.  2),  we  find  in 

*  Adi  II,  Scene  2  (vol.  x,  p.  97)  “  Quarto  B,  ausrent ;  Quarto  A,  reads  unreverent." 
‘Here  B  and  A  should  change  places.  In  Adi  III,  Scene  7  (p.  1S8),  “Quarto  A 
‘omits  roguish:"  for  A  read  C.  In  Adi  IV,  Scene  2  (p.  199),  for  “Quartos  B  and 
‘  C,  the  'whistling,"  read  “  Quarto  C”  alone.  In  ACl  IV,  Scene  6  (p.  220),  B  and  A 
‘should  again  be  interchanged.  In  Adi  v.  Scene  3  (p.  277),  “  Quarto  A  omits  this 
‘line  ”  ;  for  A  read  B.  It  will  be  seen  from  these  instances,  that  A  has  been  in  turn 

*  made  to  represent  three  different  copies.’ 

A  genuine  second  edition  of  the  N.  Butter  Quarto  (QJ  appeared  in  1655;  it  was 

*  Printed  by  fane  Bell,  and  are  to  be  fold  at  the  Eafl-end  of  Christ- Chur  chi  Amer¬ 
ican  gallantry  suggests  commendation  of  this  edition,  but  candour  hushes  every  syl- 


*  Let  me  again  remind  the  student  that,  in  the  Cambridge  Edition,  Qa  refers  to  what  I  ha  re  called 
Qi,  or  Pide  Bull  edition;  and  that  their  Qi  is  my  Qa,  or  N.  Butter  edition. — Ed. 


THE  TEXT 


359 


[able  of  praise.  It  is  a  reprint,  page  for  page,  of  Q3,  and  has  almost  reached  the 
limit  of  incorrect  typography.  Here  and  there,  in  the  earlier  scenes,  I  have  re¬ 
corded  in  the  foot-notes,  some  of  its  grossest  misprints;  but,  generally  I  have 
omitted  all  reference  to  it. 

As  Rovte’s  ill-luck  put  the  Fourth  and  poorest  Folio  under  his  pillow,  so  here,  1 
think,  the  same  ill-luck  may,  perhaps,  have  put  Jane  Bell’s  Quarto  in  his  pew,  and 
led  him  to  peep  into  it  now  and  then.  See  III,  iv,  108,  or  III,  vii,  60. 

Davies  ( Dramatic  Misc.  ii,  p.  167)  ‘cannot  help  suspecting’  that  Lear  was  not 
popular,  because  only  tWo  Quarto  editions  appeared  before  it  was  reprinted  in  the 
Folio.  Knight  pronounces  Davies’s  ‘  argument  worthless,’  ‘  for  it  must  be  remem- 

*  bered  that  other  of  Shakspere’s  most  perfect  efforts,  such  as  Macbeth ,  were  not  pub- 
‘  lished  at  all  till  they  were  collected  in  the  Folio.’  *  In  all  likelihood,  the  Quarto 
1  editions  were  piratical  and  were  probably  suppressed.  .  .  .  Butter  was  undoubtedly 

*  not  a  publisher  authorised  by  Shakspere,  for  he  printed,  in  1605,  The  London 
‘  Prodigal,  one  of  the  plays  fraudulently  ascribed  to  our  poet.*  Collier,  on  tfye 
other  hand,  thinks  that  Lear  was  extremely  popular,  because  it  required  more  thdn 
one  edition  in  one  year  to  satisfy  the  public  demand.  ‘  Why,  however,’  he  says,  ‘  it 
‘  was  never  republished  in  quarto  in  the  interval  [between  1608  and  1623J  must  be 

*  matter  of  speculation ;  but  such  was  not  an  unusual  occurrence  with  the  works  of 
‘our  great  dramatist;  his  Midsummer  Night's  Dream,  Merchant  of  Venice,  and 

*  Troilus  and  Cressida,  were  each  twice  printed,  the  first  two  in  1600,  and  the  Jast 
‘in  1609,  and  they  were  not  again  seen  in  type  until  they  were  inserted  in  the 

*  Folio ;  there  was  also  no  second  quarto  of  Much  Ado  about  Nothing,  nor  of  Love's 
‘ Labour's  Lost' 

So  much  for  the  Quartos,  with  their  puzzling,  interlaced  texts.  It  is  comforting 
to  reflect  that  to  decide  upon  the  precedence,  in  point  of  time,  of  these  editions,  or, 
in  other  words,  which  is  Qt  and  which  is  Q2,  belongs  wholly  to  the  province  of 
Bibliography;  it  has  no  bearing  whatever  on  the  elucidation  of  the  text  of  this 
tragedy. 

In  the  Folio,  King  Lear  appears  in  the  division  of  Tragedies,  and  among  them 
shares  with  Macbeth,  Othello,  and  Cymbeline,  the  distinction  of  being  divided  into 
Acts  and  Scenes.  I  believe  there  is'  no  dissenting  voice  to  the  opinion,  that  we 
have  here  a  text  much  superior,  in  general,  to  that  of  the  Quartos,  and  one  that  was 
printed  from  an  independent  manuscript.  And  yet  in  spite  of  this  superiority,  there 
are,  as  Collier  says,  few  of  Shakespeare’s  plays  which  are  more  indebted  than  this, 
to  the  Quartos,  for  the  completeness  of  their  text.  This  arises  from  the  remarkable 
difference  in  length  between  the  Folios  and  the  Quartos.  The  Quartos  exceed  the 
Folios  by  about  a  hundred  and  seventy-five  lines.  There  are  about  two  hundred 
and  twenty  lines  in  the  Quartos  that  are  not  in  the  Folios,  and  the  Folios  contain 
fifty  lines  not  to  be  found  in  the  Quartos.  This  discrepancy,  with  its  abridgement 
on  the  one  hand  and  its  amplification  on  the  other,  presents  a  highly  interesting 
field  of  investigation.  By  whom  were  these  excisions  made  when  the  text  of  the 
Folio  came  to  be  printed,  amounting  in  one  instance  to  the  omission  of  an  entire 
scene?  By  the  master  himself,  or  by  the  actors?  Are  they  made  in  accordance 
with  a  plan,  or  at  hap-hazard  ?  Was  the  object  to  shorten  the  play,  or  to  emphasise 
dramatic  effects  ?  Such  are  some  of  the  questions  which  this  very  important  fact 
suggests,  and  their  answers  have  received  more  attention  from  German  than  from 
English  scholars. 


360 


APPENDIX 


Dr  Johnson  expressed  the  belief  that  the  Folio  was  printed  from  Shakespeare’s 
last  revision,  carelessly  and  hastily  performed,  with  more  thought  of  shortening  the 
scenes  than  of  continuing  the  action.  See  note  on  III,  vi,  100-113. 

Tieck  (ix,  370)  suggests  that  some  of  these  omissions  in  the  Folio  may  be  due 
to  a  deference  to  the  censorship  of  the  press,  which  after  the  death  of  James  became 
more  strict ;  or  again  some  of  them  may  be  due  to  the  obscurity  which  speedily  falls 
on  local  allusions,  or  allusions  to  passing  events,  of  which  no  play  of  Shakespeare 
contains  more;  or  again  the  Third  Scene  of  Act  Fourth  may  have  been  omitted,  be¬ 
cause  of  the  lack  of  an  actor  who  could  adequately  represent  it ;  or  its  omission  may 
have  been  due  to  a  desire  to'  simplify  the  plot,  and  to  avoid  complications  which, 
as  it  stands,  it  unquestionably  creates. 

Knight,  who  appears  to  have  bestowed  more  thought  upon  the  subject  than  other 
English  editors,  says :  *  Speech  after  speech,  and  scene  after  scene,  which  in  the 
'  genuine  copy  of  the  Folio  are  metrically  correct,  are,  in  the  Quarto,  either  printed 

*  as  prose,  or  the  lines  are  so  mixed  together,  without  any  apparent  knowledge  in 
‘the  editor  of  the  metrical  laws  by  which  they  were  constructed,  that  it  would 

*  have  been  almost  impossible,  from  this  text  alone,  to  have  reduced  them  to  any- 
‘  thing  like  the  form  in  which  they  were  written  by  the  author.  This  circumstance 
‘appears  to  us  conclusive,  that  these  copies  could  not  have  been  printed  from  the 
‘author’s  manuscript;  and  yet  they  might  have  been  printed  from  a  genuine  play* 
‘  house  copy.’ 

After  mentioning  the  large  omissions  in  the  Folio  of  passages  to  be  found  in  the 
Quarto,  Knight  goes  on  to  say,  that  it  would  be  very  easy  to  assume  that  these  omis¬ 
sions  were  made  by  the  editors  of  the  Folio  for  the  purpose  of  cutting  the  play  down 
for  representation;  but  this  theory  requires  us  to  assume  that  the  additions  also,  in  the 
Folio,  were  made  by  the  editors,  and  these  comprise  several  such  minute  touches  as 
none  but  the  hand  of  the  master  could  have  added.  He  then  examines  the  sub¬ 
ject  more  in  detail :  ‘  In  the  First  and  Second  Acts  the  omissions  are  very  slight. 

*  In  the  opening  of  Act  III  we  lose  a  spirited  description  of  Lear  in  the  storm— 
‘“tears  his  white  hair,”  etc.  But  mark — it  is  description ;  and  the  judgement  of 
‘Shakespeare  in  omitting  it  is  unquestionable,  for  he  subsequently  shows  Lear  in 
‘  action  under  precisely  the  same  circumstances.  In  the  sixth  scene  of  the  same 
‘  act  is  omitted  the  imaginary  trial  of  Regan  and  Goneril,  “  I  will  arraign  them 
‘  straight.”  Was.  this  a  passage  that  an  author  would  have  thrust  out  carelessly 
‘  and  hastily  ?  It  is  impossible,  as  it  would  be  presumptuous  were  it  possible,  un* 
‘  hesitatingly  to  assign  a  motive  for  this  omission.  The  physical  exertion  that  would 
‘  be  necessary  for  any  actor  (even  for  Burbage,  who  we  know  played  Lear)  to  carry 

*  through  the  whole  of  the  third  act  might  have  been  so  extreme  as  to  render  it  ex- 

*  pedient  to  make  this  abridgement ;  or,  what  is  more  probable,  as  Kent  previous  to 
‘this  passage  had  said,  “All  po\Ver  of  his  wits  has  given  way  to  his  impatience,” 
‘the  imaginary  arraignment  might  have  been  rejected  by  the  poet,  as  exhibiting  too 

*  much  method  in  the  madness.  The  rhyming  soliloquy  of  Edgar,  with  which  this 

*  scene  closes,  might  have  been  spared  by  the  poet  without  much  compunction.  The 

*  second  scene  of  the  fourth  act,  in  which  Albany  so  bitterly  reproaches  Goneril,  is 
‘  greatly  abridged.  In  its  amplified  state  it  does  not  advance  the  progress  of  the 
‘  action,  nor  contribute  to  the  developement  of  the  characters.  The  whole  of  the 
‘third  scene  of  that  act  is  also  omitted.  It  is  one  of  the  most  beautifully  written 

*  of  the  play ;  and  we  should  indeed  regret  had  it  not  been  preserved  to  us  in  the 
'  Quartos.  But  let  it  be  borne  in  mind,  that  the  greater  part  of  the  scene  is  purely 


THE  TEXT 


361 


*  descriptive  ;  and,  exquisite  as  the  description  is,  particularly  in  those  parts  which 

*  make  us  better  understand  the  surpassing  loveliness  of  Cordelia’s  character,  we 
‘  cannot  avoid  believing  that  the  poet  sternly  resolved  to  let  the  effect  of  this  won- 
‘  derful  drama  entirely  depend  upon  its  action.  .  .  .  The  subsequent  omissions,  to  the 
‘  end  of  the  drama,  are  few  and  unimportant.’ 

Staunton  says,  that  a  ‘  careful  comparison  of  the  Quarto  and  Folio  texts  con- 

*  vinces  us  that,  unlike  that  of  Richard  III,  the  text  of  Lear  in  the  Folio  is  taken 
‘  from  a  later  and  revised  copy  of  the  play.  Whether  the  curtailment  is  the  work 
‘of  the  author,  it  is  impossible  now  to  determine;  it  is  not  always  judicious,  and 
‘  some  of  the  substitutions  are  inferior  to  the  language  they  displace ;  yet,  on  the 

*  other  hand,  the  additions  that  we  meet  with  in  the  Folio  bear  the  undoubted  mark 
‘  of  Shakespeare’s  mint;  and  while  the  metrical  arrangement  of  the  speeches  in  that 

*  edition  has  been  carefully  regarded,  the  text  of  the  Quartos  is  printed  in  parts 

*  without  any  observance  of  prosodial  construction.’ 

Hitherto,  as  we  have  seen,  the  omissions  in  the  Folio  have  been  supposed  to  be 
abridgements  made  by  Shakespeare  himself. 

Dr  Delius,*  however,  denies  this,  not  only  with  regard  to  the  omissions  in  the 
Folio,  but  to  the  omissions  in  the  Quartos  also. 

Before  entering  on  the  discussion,  the  learned  German  premises  that  the  texts  of 
the  two  Quartos  are  to  be  considered  as  practically  identical.  There  are,  in  effect, 
but  two  texts,  that  of  the  Folios  and  that  of  the  Quartos;  and  the  question  is,  are  the 
variations  in  them  due  to  the  hand  of  Shakespeare  ?  To  answer  this,  Delius  sub¬ 
jects  the  two  texts  to  a  minute  comparison,  and  begins  with  a  list  of  the  varies  lec- 
tiones  in  the  Quartos,  which  may  be  considered  as  errors  either  of  the  copyist  or  of 
the  compositor,  either  of  the  pen  or  of  the  eye;  according,  as  we  think  that  they 
were  to  be  found  in  the  original  MS,  or  were  wrongly  read  by  the  printer — a  dilem¬ 
ma  hard  to  determine.  This  list,  which  I  here  reprint  as  a  proof,  if  any  were  needed, 
that  the  conclusions  at  which  Delius  has  arrived,  were  not  reached  without  great  care, 
contains  several  instances  of  what  I  cannot  but  think  are  not  mere  misprints,  but 
words  or  phrases,  which,  making  sense  with  the  context,  rise  to  the  dignity  of 
‘  readings ;’  these  I  have  marked  with  an  asterisk.  The  text  of  the  Quartos  is  in 
Italic;  that  of  the  Folios  in  Roman. 

I,  i,  T,6,frst  intent* — fast  intent;  38,  Conferring * — Confirming;  10 8,  mistresse 
— mysteries;  173,  diseases* — disasters;  180,  friendship* — freedom;  219,  you  fot 
voucht  affections* — your  fore-vouch’d  affections. 

I,  ii,  38,  for  your  liking* — for  your  o’er-looking;  1 17,  spirituall  predominance  * 
— spherical  predominance;  128,  mine — my  cue;  128,  them  of  Bedlam  * — Tom  o’ 
Bedlam. 

I,  iv,  109,  pestilent  gull — pestilent  gall;  221,  Either  his  notion  weaknesse,  or  his 
discernings  are  lethargy — Either  his  notion  weakens,  or  his  discernings  are  leth- 
argied  ;  239,  a  great  palace  * — a  graced  palace  ;  256,  thou  lessen  my  traine  and — 
thou  liest.  My  train  are ;  277,  thourt  disnatur'd — thwart  disnatur’d ;  293,  should 
make  the  worst  blasts — should  make  thee  worth  them ;  293,  tipon  the  untender— 
upon  thee!  The  untented;  341,  better  ought* — better  oft. 

II,  i,  18,  Which  must  ask  breefenesse  and  fortune  helpe* — Which  I  must  act. 
Briefness  and  fortune  work!  39,  warbling — mumbling;  1 19,  threatning — threading. 

♦See  Ueber  den  ursprtinglichen  Text  des  King  Lear.  Shakespeare  Year  Book,  x,  50.  Re¬ 
printed  in  Abhandlungen  zu  Shakspere,  p.  359  ;  Translated  in  Trans,  of  the  New  Shakspere  Soc.t 
1875-6,  p.  123. 

31 


362 


APPENDIX 


II,  ii,  70,  to  intrench  to  inloose — too  intrinse  to  unloose:  104,  dialogue — dialect; 

127,  stopping — stocking. 

II,  iii,  17 ,  service — farmes.  ‘That  the  compositor  here  followed  the  ductus  lite 

*  rarum  is  clear,  when  we  remember  that  service  was  written  fervice.' 

II,  iv,  1,  hence * — home;  8,  heelcs * — heads;  85,  rneere  Justice — mere  fetches; 
156,  look'd  backe — look’d  black;  261,  not  the  deed — not  the  need;  273,  lamely — 
tamely. 

III,  i,  18,  warrant  of  my  arte — warrant  of  my  note. 

Ill,  ii,  2,  carterickes  and  Hircanios — cataracts  and  hurricanoes ;  58,  concealend 
centers — concealing  continents ;  60,  more  sinned  against  their  sinning — more  sinned 
against  than  sinning. 

Ill,  iv,  14,  Save  what  beates  their  Jiliall  ingratitude — Save  what  beats  there. 
Filial  ingratitude !  175,  to  the  dark  towne — to  the  dark  tower. 

III,  vii,  32,  I  am  true * — I  am  none;  85,  Unbridle  all  the  sparks — enkindle  all 
the  sparks. 

IV,  i,  4,  Stands  still  in  experience — stands  still  in  esperance ;  53,  /  cannot  dance 
it * — I  cannot  daub  it  [dance  can  be  tortured  into  a  meaning;  Pope  found  enough  in 
it  to  adopt  it  in  his  text. — Ed.]  ;  68,  Stands  your  ordinance  * — Slaves  your  ordinance ; 
70,  under — undo ;  74,  Looks  firmely  * — Looks  fearfully. 

IV,  ii,  21,  A  mistress  coward — A  mistress’s  command;  52,  an  eye  discerving — an 
eye  discerning ;  85,  not  so  tooke — not  so  tart. 

IV,  vi,  19,  her  cock  above — her  cock  a  buoy;  57,  dread  summons — dread  summit; 

128,  consu?nmation — consumption  ;  156,  a  dogge  so  bade  in  office — a  dog’s  obeyed  in 
office  [Decidedly  an  error  of  the  ear. — Ed.]  ;  189,  to  shoot  a  troop  of  horse  with  fell 
— to  shoe  a  troop  of  horse  with  felt;  2S2 ,  fenced from  my  griefs* — sever’d  from  my 
griefs.  Compare  above,  II,  iii,  17,  service — farmes. 

IV,  vii,  36,  Mine  iniurious  dog — Mine  enemy’s  dog 

V,  i,  52,  Hard  is  the  guess* — Here  is  the  guess. 

V,  iii,  66,  The  which  immediate — The  which  immediacy;  136,  Conspicuote — Con- 
spirant;  193,  ( 0 father )  * — O  fault ! 

The  conclusion  which  Delius  draws  from  an  examination  of  this  list  of  misprints, 

*  which  could  be  readily  increased,’  is,  ‘  that  the  hand  of  the  poet  could  have  had 
‘nothing  to  do  with  them.  In  other  words,  Sh.  wrote  only  what  stands  in  the 

*  Folio.*  A  similar  conclusion,  he  thinks,  is  also  to  be  drawn  from  another  class  of 
readings  in  the  Quartos,  where  evident  misprints  in  one  copy  are  corrected  in  an¬ 
other,  such  as  II,  ii,  121,  where  for  the  genuine  ‘ancient’  we  have  ausrent,  changed 
to  miscreant ;  also  II,  ii,  160,  ‘miracles’;  II,  i,  100,  ‘To  have  th’  expence,*  where, 
‘instead  of  “th*  expence”  which  cannot  have  been  very  clearly  written  in  the  MS, 

‘the  compositor  of  the  Quarto  first  substituted  “these  - ;”  which,  in  some 

‘copies,  was  afterwards  filled  up  from  pure  conjecture,  as  “wast  and  spoyle’”, 
‘III,  iv,  ‘Contentious’;  III,  vi,  94,  95,  ‘Take  up’;  IV,  ii,  56,  57,  France- 

« threats.’  [For  all  these  instances  reference  to  the  Textual  Notes  will  supply 
the  various  changes  to  be  found  in  the  Quartos.]  Delius  then  examines  a  third 
class  of  errors,  where  the  changes  seem  to  be  purely  arbitrary,  such  as  will  for 
‘shall,’  space  or  liberty  for  ‘space  and  liberty,”  That  for  ‘Which,’  &c.  &c.  Then 
again  there  are  certain  differences  where  synonymous  words  are  used — e.  g.,  I,  i, 
stoops  to  folly  for  ‘  falls  to  folly  ’ ;  lb.  respects  for  *  regards  ’ ;  I,  iii,  dislike  for  ‘  dis- 

*  taste  ’ ;  II,  i,  caitiff  for  *  coward,’  &c.  In  view  of  all  these  different  readings,  De¬ 
lius  makes  the  following  strong  point :  *  Is  it  at  all  probable,  that  Shakespeare,  even 


THE  TEXT 


363 


'granting  that  he  revised  the  text,  would  have  undertaken  such  superfluous  trouble, 
•  as,  we  cannot  say  to  improve,  but  merely  to  change  the  text  in  these  innumerable, 
'  and  minute,  and  insignificant  particulars ;  and  for  no  conceivable  reason  withal,  in- 
4  stead  of  taking  in  hand  some  real  incisive  improvement  ?  Or  is  it  not  more  likely 
4  that  a  simple  transcriber,  attaching  but  slight  importance  to  Shakespeare’s  words  as 
4  such,  in  the  hurry  of  his  work  substituted  heedlessly  or  purposely,  any  phrase  that 
4  occurred  to  him  for  another,  one  particle  for  another,  one  mood  or  number  for 
4  another  ?’ 

In  the  substitution  of  prose  for  verse,  of  verse  for  prose,  and  in  the  omissions  of 
words,  phrases,  and  lines,  in  the  Quartos,  Delius  sees  the  proof  also  that  no  trace 
of  Shakespeare’s  revising  hand  can  be  detected.  He  then  returns  to  the  text  of 
the  Folio,  with  its  note-worthy  omission  of  4  220  lines,’  that  are  in  the  Quartos.  All 
these  omissions,  he  concludes,  were  made  by  the  players,  for  the  purpose  of  short¬ 
ening  the  time  of  representation,  not  by  Shakespeare.  In  the  Quartos  we  have  the 
play  as  it  was  originally  performed  before  King  James,  and  before  the  audience  at 
the  Globe,  but  sadly  marred  by  misprints,  printers’  sophistications,  and  omissions, 
perhaps  due  to  an  imperfect  and  illegible  MS.  In  the  Folio  we  have  a  later  MS, 
belonging  to  the  Theatre,  and  more  nearly  identical  with  what  Shakespeare  wrote. 
The  omissions  of  the  Quartos  are  the  blunders  of  the  printers ;  the  omissions  of  the 
Folios  are  the  abridgements  of  the  actors.  4  From  the  very  nature  of  the  case,’  says 
Delius,  4  it  seems  far  more  natural  that  the  Poet,  who  was  also  an  actor,  should  have 
4  been  himself  the  one  to  mark  the  omissions  in  his  own  drama.  But  on  the  other 
4  hand,  if  v/e  remember  with  what  careless  indifference  Shakespeare  committed  his 
4  plays  to  the  care  of  the  Theatre  for  which  he  wrote  them,  without  troubling  himself 
4  about  their  fate  or  literary  future ;  it  will  seem  highly  probable,  that  in  the  present 
4  instance  he  gave  himself  no  further  personal  care  about  its  representation,  but  left 
4  all  that  to  those  whom  it  most  concerned — the  actors  of  the  Globe,  the  owners  of 
4  the  MS.’  Moreover,  in  1608,  when  the  Quartos  were  published,  and  the  unabridged 
play  may  be  presumed  to  have  held  the  stage,  Shakespeare  was  living  at  Stratford. 
4  Is  it  to  be  supposed  then,’  asks  Delius,  4  that  at  that  time  or  later — for  the  play  may 
4  have  been  abridged  later — the  actors  would  have  applied  to  the  absent,  far-distant 
4  poet,  to  modify  his  drama  for  the  stage,  when  such  a  task  would  seem  to  them,  ac- 
4  customed  as  they  were  to  matters  of  routine,  an  affair  of  such  every-day  occurrence, 
‘that  they  themselves  could  just  as  easily  do  it  for  themselves?’  Furthennore,  De¬ 
lius  thinks,  that  if  Shakespeare  himself  had  really  revised  this  drama,  we  should 
have  found  more  emphatic  traces  of  his  revision  than  mere  omissions  of  certain  pas¬ 
sages.  In  the  general  character  of  these  omissions,  Delius  sees  a  desire  to  spare  to 
the  utmost,  and  to  strike  out  such  passages  only,  which  contain  amplified  descrip¬ 
tions  ;  or  which,  at  least,  are  not  essential  to  the  developement  of  the  dramatic  treat¬ 
ment  or  of  the  characters.  This  point  is  emphasised,  because  in  his  Introduction  to 
the  play  Delius  had  been  led  by  these  very  considerations  to  an  opposite  conclusion 
— viz.,  that  none  but  Shakespeare  could  have  discriminated  between  the  needful 
and  the  useless.  Delius  then  proceeds  to  examine  these  omissions  of  the  Folio,  in 
detail.  Some  of  his  remarks  I  have  incorporated  in  the  commentary  under  the  pas¬ 
sages  in  the  text  where  they  apply ;  for  the  others,  it  may  be  said,  that  in  any  drama 
by  Shakespeare,  it  is  much  more  easy  to  say  why  a  certain  passage  should  not  be 
omitted,  than  to  give  a  reason  why  it  should.  The  presence  of  any  passage  in  a 
play  of  Shakespeare’s,  is  presumptive  evidence  that  it  is  required ;  and  to  prove  that 
it  is  not,  lies  upon  those  who  approve  of  its  excision.  So  perfect  and  so  unerring  a 


364 


APPENDIX 


master  was  Shakespeare,  that  any  abridgement  of  his  plays  is  likely  to  be  clumsy  ; 
it  is  easier  to  maintain,  that  a  piece  of  clumsy  work  was  done  by  any  one  rather 
than  by  Shakespeare.  As  Delius,  in  this  very  Essay  (p.  67),  truly  says :  ♦  assuredly, 

♦  Shakespeare  did  not  himself  think  any  passage  in  his  King  Lear  superfluous,  other- 
‘wise  he  would  scarcely  have  inserted  that  which  his  editors  might  deem  needless.’ 

Delius  sums  up  as  follows :  *  Having  traced  the  variations  between  the  Quarto 
♦and  the  Folio  to  their  true  source,  we  are  led  to  the  conclusion : — That  there  is  no 
♦evidence  for  the  supposition  that  Shakspere  himself  revised  this  drama.’ 

Dr  Koppel  ( Textkriiische  Stndien  iiber  Shakespeare' $  Richard  III  and  King 
Lear,  Dresden,  1877)  comes  to  a  conclusion  directly  opposed  to  Delius,  and  main* 
tains  that  it  was  Shakespeare’s  own  hand  that  cut  out  many  of  the  passages  both  in 
the  Quarto  text  and  the  Folio  text.  The  larger  portion  of  his  Essay  is  devoted  to 
attacking  Delius’s  position,  and  as  destructive  criticism  does  not  come  within  my 
scope,  I  simply  allude  to  his  opposition  without  repeating  his  arguments.  Koppel  has 
evidently  studied  the  notes  in  the  Cambridge  edition  most  thoroughly,  and  comes  to 
the  same  conclusion  as  that  to  which  the  Cambridge  Editors  themselves  had  arrived 
before  him — namely,  that  the  N.  Butter  edition  has  been  erroneously  supposed  to  be 
Q. ;  that  the  real  Qs  is  that  which  in  the  notes  to  the  Cambridge  edition  is  called  Q2. 
He  maintains  with  vigor  and  plausibility,  that  there  are  many  corrected  passages  in 
Q„  (2'.  e.  the  Pide  Bull),  in  *  some  of  which  it  is  clear  beyond  a  peradventure,  and 

♦  in  others  it  is  highly  probable,  that  resort  was  had  to  the  original  MS.  For  in* 

♦  stance,  in  I,  iv,  294  untender  becomes  “  untented,”  peruse,  in  the  next  line,  be- 

♦  comes  “ pierce;”  in  line  336  mildie  gentleness  is  corrected  to  “  milkie  gentleness.” 

♦  Such  corrections  as  these  would  never  have  been  made  by  a  compositor  out  of 
♦hand;  with  “mildie  gentleness”  before  him  a  compositor  would  never  have 

♦  thought  of  changing  it  to  the  poetic  form  of  “  milkie  gentleness,”  but  would  have 
♦corrected  it  simply  to  “mild  gentleness;”  moreover,  to  suppose  that  in  every  case 
« the  compositor  could  have  hit  upon  the  correct  word  or  phrase  as  we  find  them  in 

♦  the  Folio,  is  simply  incredible.’  In  those  instances  where  some  copies  of  the  Pide 
Bull  edition  have  one  reading,  and  other  copies  of  the  same  edition  have  different 
ones  (such  as  ausrent,  my  rackles,  crulentious  in  some  copies,  and  miscreant ,  my 
Wrack,  tempestious  in  others),  Koppel  infers  that  the  MS  must  have  been  illegible. 

But,  as  has  been  before  remarked,  however  interesting  the  discussion  may  be  of 
the  succession  in  time  of  these  different  Quartos,  the  question  in  reality  is  merely 
bibliographical;  and  Koppel  acknowledges  that  all  this  collation  is  unimportant  in 
comparison  with  the  variation  between  the  Quartos  and  Folios :  according  to  the 
enumeration  of  the  lines  in  the  Cambridge  edition,  he  finds  two  hundred  and  eighty- 
seven  more  lines  in  the  Quarto  than  in  the  Folio,  and  one  hundred  and  ten  lines  in 
the  Folio  which  are  wanting  in  the  Quarto.  As  to  whether  the  omissions  in  the 
Folio  were  due  to  Shakespeare  or  not,  Koppel  says,  that  however  indifferent  the 
poet  may  have  been  to  the  literary  fate  of  his  dramas,  it  is  inconceivable  that  Shake¬ 
speare,  the  Actor,  Manager,  Dramatist,  and  Theatre-poet,  should  have  taken  no  care 
for  the  representation  of  his  pieces,  or  for  their  adaptation  to  the  stage,  or  for  their 
needful  abbreviations  or  amplifications.  ♦  Is  it  to  be  inferred  that  he  took  no  per- 

♦  sonal  interest  in  the  reproduction  on  the  stage  of  his  pieces,  because  he  took  no 
‘  thought  for  their  publication  in  print ?  Far  more  likely  is  it  that  the  literary  future 

♦  of  his  dramas  pressed  lightly  on  him,  because  the  present  practical  interest  in  their 

♦  representation,  their  scenic  success,  pressed  upon  him  so  heavily.’  No  inference, 
Koppel  thinks,  as  to  the  state  of  the  text  can  be  drawn  from  the  date  of  the  Quartos, 


THE  TEXT 


365 


nor  from  the  statement  on  their  title-pages,  *  as  it  was  plaid  ...  at  Whitehall,’  which 
was  merely  a  bookseller’s  putt,  and  designed  to  show  the  difference  between  this  edi¬ 
tion  and  the  older  play  of  King  Leir,  with  no  intention  of  more  accurately  specifying 
the  very  text  which  was  given  before  his  Majesty.  *  It  is  very  possible  that,  when  the 
‘  First  Quarto  (Q,  of  the  Cambridge  edition)  appeared,  the  version  which  is  the  basis 
‘of  the  Folio  text  had  existed  long  before,  and  was  used  in  public,  notwithstanding 
‘  that  the  MS  which  the  publisher  of  the  Quartos  managed  to  procure,  contained  the 
‘  earlier  and  discarded  text;  and  perhaps  it  was  for  this  very  reason,  because  it  was 

*  discarded,  that  it  could  be  handed  over  to  the  publisher  merely,  perhaps,  for  the 
‘  preparation  of  a  transcript’  (p.  72).  Wherefore,  the  mere  publication  alone  of  the 
Quartos  in  1608  does  not  hinder  us  from  supposing  that  the  version  which  the  Folio 
follows  belongs  to  an  earlier  year,  when  Shakespeare  was  in  London  and  not  in  Strat¬ 
ford.  In  view  of  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  if  we  cannot  regard  the  additions 
of  the  Folio  as  original  portions  of  the  text,  Dr  Koppel  thinks  that  the  following  may 
be  supposed  as  possible:  ‘The  original  form  was,  essentially,  that  of  the  Quarto,  then 
‘  followed  a  longer  form,  with  the  additions  in  the  Folio ,  as  substantially  our  modern 
* editions  have  again  restored  them  ;  then  the  shortest  form,  as  it  is  preserved  for  us 

*  in  the  Folio’  (p.  74). 

*  Although  in  general  the  omissions  in  the  Quarto  may  be  attributed  to  Shakespeare, 

*  yet  we  must  be  prepared  to  find  several  of  them  unworthy  of  the  Poet ;  such  for 
‘instance  is  I,  i,  38-43.  The  next  omission  in  the  Quartos,  I,  i,  47,  48,  may  very 
‘possibly  be  a  later  addition  in  the  Folio.  But  it  is  not  essential,  its  gist  has  been 
‘already  given  in  lines  35-38,  and  it  may  be  considered  as  a  skilful  abridgement  in 

*  the  Quartos.’  [Space  will  not  permit  me  to  follow  Dr  Koppel  in  his  criticisms  and 
explanations  of  all  the  omissions  or  additions  of  the  Quartos  and  Folios ;  to  a  student 
interested  in  such  matters  of  collation,  it  will  not  be  a  tedious  task  to  examine  this 
subject  thoroughly  for  himself  at  first  hand;  it  will  cost  him  but  little  more  trouble 
to  do  so  than  to  look  up  all  the  references  to  act,  scene,  and  line,  which  would  be 
all  that  I  could  possibly  give  him  here,  were  I  to  reproduce  all  of  Dr  Koppel’s  essay, 
of  which,  however,  I  will  give  those  passages  that  seem  to  me  the  most  striking, 
wherein  he  assumes  the  task  of  proving  that  Shakespeare  himself,  with  cause,  added 
or  omitted  certain  passages.  The  italics  are  Dr  Koppel’s.] 

At  the  conclusion  of  his  examination  of  all  the  important  passages  omitted  in  the 
Quartos,  Dr  Koppel  finds  (p.  82),  *  with  the  trifling  exception  of  only  two  passages,  I, 

*  i,  38-43  and  III,  vi,  12-15,  tLat  nothing  forbids  their  being  regarded  as  later  addi- 

*  tions  by  the  Poet .  That  they  really  are  so,  it  is  obviously  impossible  to  prove.  It 

*  would  have  to  be  assumed  that  these  additions  to  the  text  of  the  tragedy,  made 
‘  perhaps,  not  all  at  the  same  time,  gradually  so  increased  that  at  last  a  reduction 
‘  proved  to  be  necessary.  The  abridged  form,  rendered  essentially  shorter  than  the 
‘ piece  originally  was,  would  then  be  necessarily  regarded  as  transmitted  to  us  in  the 

*  Folio.  If  we  have  thus  shown  that  the  passages  wanting  in  the  Quartos  did  not 

*  necessarily  form  a  part  of  the  original  text,  it  is,  on  the  other  hand,  at  the  same 
‘  time  shown,  that  these  omissions  were  made  at  fitting  places,  and  had  the  same 
'  practical  design  of  abridgement  as  in  the  later  form  of  the  piece,  which  was  pre- 
• pared  for  the  stage,  and  which  is  the  basis  of  the  Folio.’  .  .  .  [P.  87.]  Of  the  pas¬ 
sage,  III,  i,  7-15,  omitted  in  the  Folios,  it  may  be  ‘said  that  Shakespeare,  after- 

*  wards,  and  partly  before,  partly  in  this  scene,  partly  in  what  precedes,  and  in  what 

*  follows,  has  enlarged  sufficiently  upon  these  things,  the  white  uncovered  head,  the 

*  rain,  the  storm,  the  fearful  night,  and  Lear’s  mad  defiance,  and  could  when  abridge- 

31  * 


366 


APPENDIX 


‘ment  were  the  object,  very  well  dispense  with  this  passage.  .  . .  Besides  we  may 

*  see  here  the  artist’s  hand  in  the  choice  of  passages  to  be  erased,  expunging  a  grand 

*  description  of  the  King  in  the  stormy  night,  which  might  weaken  the  impression 
‘  of  his  actual  appearance  when  he  comes  before  us  in  the  next  scene.*  .  .  .  [P.  88.] 
The  notable  omission  in  the  Folios  of  III,  i,  30-42,  Koppel  justifies:  ‘The  suffer- 
‘  ings  of  Lear  being  known  in  France  (in  the  Quartos,  merely  the  quarrel  between 
‘  the  British  Dukes,  of  which  advantage  was  to  be  taken  by  the  enemy,  appears  as 

*  the  occasion  for  the  French  invasion),  the  sending  of  the  nobleman  to  Dover  to 

*  Cordelia  is  rendered  superfluous,  aimless.  Hence,  from  the  text  of  the  Folio,  we 
‘  gather  from  this  mission  merely  a  cheering  assurance  of  the  approaching  deliver- 

*  ance  of  Lear,  which  Kent  gives  to  the  nobleman,  although  only  by  hints.  For  he 
‘  tells  him  only  that  from  France,  where  Lear’s  sufferings  are  known,  war  is  com- 

*  ing,  and  that  he  will  soon  get  to  see  Cordelia.  The  declaration,  that  French  troops 
'have  already  landed  at  Dover,  is  stricken  out.  This  cheering  intimation,  which, 
‘as  well  aS  the  material  compensation  (Kent’s  purse  and  ring),  was  well  earned  by 
‘  the  good  faith  of  the  knight,  fits  well  into  this  preparatory  scene,  which  thus  pos- 
‘sesses  the' effect  of  a  soothing  pause  in  the  rapid  progress  of  the  tragic  action.’ 
Koppel’s  hardest  task  lies  in  justifying  the  omission  of  the  entire  Third  Scene  of 
Act  IV ;  while  granting  the  justice  of  the  general  opinion  that  this  scene  is  necessary 
for  the  reawakening  of  interest  in  Cordelia,  who  has  not  been  seen  since  the  intro¬ 
ductory  scene,  ‘yet,’  he  urges,  *  perhaps,  for  the  expunging  of  this  full  poetic  descrip- 

*  tion,  preceding  the  personal  appearance  of  Cordelia,  there  was  the  same  reason  as 

*  for  the  omission,  mentioned  above,  of  the  description  of  Lear  before  he  himself 

*  appears  in  the  stormy  night. 

*  When  then,  with  this  scene,  the  necessary  reason  for  the  non-appearance  of  the 
‘French  King  in  the  subsequent  warlike  scenes  is  also  left  out,  it  does  not  prove 

*  the  impossibility  of  Shakespeare’s  having  made  these  erasures..  How  often  Shake- 
‘speare  was  careless  in  regard  to  secondary  incidents,  how  often  he  even  con- 

*  tradicts  himself  in  such  matters,  is  sufficiently  known.  Instances,  more  or  less 

*  striking,  may  be  found  everywhere.  For  example,  in  this  very  scene  in  the  orig- 
‘  inal  longer  form  of  the  tragedy,  the  Gentleman  and  Kent  speak  of  a  letter  of 

*  Kent’s  (‘  Did  your  letters  pierce,’  &c.  &c.),  which  the  former  was  to  hand  to  Cor. 
‘delia;  while,  according,  to  an  earlier  scene  of  the  Third  Act,  only  an  oral  mes- 
*sage  had  been  entrusted  to  the  Gentleman.  So  likewise  in  that  scene,  Kent  and 

*  the  Gentleman  are  to  seek  the  King  in  different  directions,  and  he  who  first  lights 

*  on  him  was  to  holla  the  other ;  the  Poet  causes  this  arrangement  to  be  made  in  de- 
‘  tail,  without  any  mention  being  made  afterwards  of  its  having  been  carried  out,  in 

*  the  tragic  scene  where  Lear  is  found  by  Kent.  Kent  does  not  trouble  himself  about 
‘  his  fellow-seeker,  and  consequently  as  little  do  we  know  where  he  has  gone.  Only 

*  in  Dover  do  we  find  him  again.  Just  so,  in  that  scene,  Kent  gives  to  the  same 

*  gentleman  a  ring  which  he  is  to  show  to  Cordelia,  and  learn  from  her  who  *  your 

*  fellow  is  That  yet  you  do  not  know.’  Notwithstanding,  we  find  that  when  the 

*  gentleman  has  delivered  his  message  to  Cordelia  and  reports  the  fact  to  Kent,  he 
‘still  does  not  know  that  it  is  Kent  with  whom  he  is  speaking;  for  Kent  says: 

*  ‘  some  dear  cause  Will  in  concealment  wrap  me  up  awhile ;  When  I  am  known 

*  aright,  you  shall  not  grieve  Lending  me  this  acquaintance ;’  and  when  the  gentle- 
•man  is  speaking  again  (IV,  vii,  91)  with  Kent,  he  tells  him,  as  a  report  which  he 

*  himself  believes,  that  Kent  is  in  Germany  with  Edgar.’  [It  is  only  an  inference 
of  Koppel’s,  that  the  ‘  gentleman  ’  in  this  scene  is  same  as  Kent’s  messenger  in  the 


THE  TEXT 


-357 

former  scene.  The  stage  directions  give  simply  *  gentleman,’  and  it  may  well  have 
been  two  different  men. — Ed.]  ‘  Finally,  a  similar  instance  of  carelessness  is  to  be 
‘found  in  IV,  iii,  where  it  is  said,  that  the  French  king  must  for  urgent  reasons  re- 
*turn  to  France,  and  that  he  has  left  Monsieur  La  Far  ‘behind  him,  general’.  And 
‘yet  the  Poet  forgot  this  entirely.  This  La  Far  is  never  afterwards  alluded  to.  Cor- 
‘  delia  alone  represents  the  French  military  power.  It  may  well  be  supposed,  that 
‘  if  it  were  the  Poet  who  struck  out  this  scene,  the  opportunity  of  getting  rid  of  the 

*  strange  gentleman  induced  him,  at  the  same  time,  to  erase  the  more  important  men¬ 
tion  of  the  king  of  France,  closely  connected  therewith,  together  with  the  whole 

*  scene ;  which,  on  the  whole,  could  be  dispensed  with.  Moreover,  it  is  not  impos¬ 
sible,  that,  by  the  insertion  of  some  brief  passage,  the  hiatus  thus  made  was  filled 
‘  up,  and  this  passage  was  afterward  forgotten  in  the  MS  of  the  Folio,  or  in  the 
4  printed  edition.’ 

4  [P*  93-]  The  last  eight  lines  of  Act  III,  which  are  omitted  in  the  Folio,  contain, 
‘  in  the  Quartos,  a  contradiction  between  them  and  the  opening  scene  of  the  next  act; 

*  which,  of  itself,  would  lead  us  to  suspect  the  genuineness  of  the  Quartos.  The 
4  Second  Servant  says :  ‘  Let’s  follow  the  old  earl,  and  get  the  Bedlam  To  lead  him,’ 
*&c.  But.  in  the  next  scene,  Gloucester  is  led  by  an  ‘Old  Man,’  and  apparently 
‘  meets  the  Bedlam  by  accident,  and  it  is  Gloucester  himself  who  asks  the  Bedlam  to 

*  lead  him.  This  is,  after  all,  only  one  of  the  many  little  things  in  Shakespeare  in 

*  which,  as  we  have  shown  above,  especially  in  King  Lear ,  inconsistencies  and  con- 
4  tradictions  may  be  discovered,  that  do  not  authorise  any  haphazard  assumption, 

*  that  the  passage  in  the  Quartos  is  not  genuine.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  this  causes 
‘  the  omission  in  the  Folio  to  appear  all  the  more  explicable  and  fitting. 

‘  [P.  94.]  In  IV,  i,  the  passage  in  Edgar’s  speech  about  *  Obidicut,’  *  Hobbidi* 

*  ‘  dance,’  and  ‘  Mahu,’  is  omitted.  The  reference  to  Harsnet’s  book,  in  this  Tragedy, 
4  was  desirable  only  so  long  as  the  book  was  fresh  in  men’s  memories.’ 

On  page  96  Dr  Koppel  sums  up  his  conclusion:  ‘Thus  it  appears  that  these 
4  omissions,  with  some  exceptions  quite  immaterial ,  are  of  such  a  kind  that  they  might 
4  very  zvell  have  been  made  by  the  poet  hitnself ;  in  many  cases,  this  possibility  has 
4  more  probability,  in  others  less ;  and,  furthermore,  it  is  also  possible ,  that  different 
‘passages  were  stricken  Out  at  different  times,  and  in  part  also  by  different  hands.’ 

Dr  Schmidt,  at  whose  hands  we  have  all  received  that  valuable  gift,  The  Shake • 
speare  Lexicon,  has  written  an  Essay  on  the  Text  of  King  Lear,  of  which  only  a 
portion,  at  this  date,  has  appeared  in  type ;  and  even  of  this  portion,  I  can  give  only 
an  abridgement. 

In  all  cases,  where  two  texts  exist,  the  Quartos  and  the  Folios,  the  first  thing  to  be 
done,  according  to  Dr  Schmidt,  is  to  decide  which  of  the  two  is  authentic.  4  May  we 
4  assume,  that  Shakespeare  had  such  an  interest  in  the  publication  of  the  Quartos  as 
4  to  give  them  an  authority  higher  than  that  of  the  Folio,  which  appeared  after  his 
4  death  ?  Or,  on  the  other  hand,  shall  we  pin  our  faith  exclusively  to  that  form  of 
4  the  text  whose  lawful  origin  is  undoubted  ?  Are  the  different  texts  different  remod- 
4  ellings,  and  if  so,  are  the  changes  in  the  later,  due  to  the  hand  of  the  Poet,  or  to 
4  that  of  another  ?  To  these  questions  there  can  be  but  one  true  answer,  and  until 
1  that  answer  be  found,  all  genuine  textual  criticism  is  merely  a  groping  in  the  dark. 
4  In  England,  it  is  customary  to  accord  ‘  equivalent  validity’  to  the  Quartos  and  Folios; 
4  and  to  decide  at  one  time  for  one,  and  at  another  time  for  another,  according  to  indi- 

*  vidual  bias;  and  the  result  is  an  eclectic  text.  When  the  editor  is  a  man  of  taste,  the 


368 


APPENDIX 


*  reader,  perhaps,  does  not  fare  so  badly;  but  such  dealing  cannot  be  termed  critical. 

4  Even  in  the  case  where  we  have  to  deal  with  two  different  versions  from  the  hand 
4  of  a  Poet  himself,  one  of  the  two  must  be  laid  aside;  no  matter,  whether  we  prefer 
‘  that  version  which  gives  us  the  first  hurried  sketch,  or  that  which  has  received  the 
4  improvements  of  maturer  judgement.  To  weld  both  into  one,  yields  a  result,  which 
‘  never  had  any  existence  for  the  Poet  himself  even  ....  The  universal  acknowledge- 
‘  ment,  that  the  Romeo  and  Juliet  of  1597,  the  Hamlet  of  1603,  and  the  Quartos  of 
‘  Henry  V,  and  the  2d  and  3d  Parts  of  Henry  VI,  and  of  The  Merry  Wives,  are  mete 
4  compilations,  hastily  made  up  from  copies  taken  down  from  performances  on  the  stage, 

*  and  from  untrustworthy  recollections, — this  acknowledgement  can  be  but  a  question 

*  of  time.  .  .  .  Shakespeare’s  indifference  to  the  fate  of  his  dramas,  has  been  praised  by 
4  some  and  blamed  by  others,  and  all  have  perceived  in  it,  the  poet’s  unconsciousness 
4  of  his  own  greatness ;  whereas  it  may  have  been  the  natural  result  of  the  highest 
4  intellectual  power,  which  finds  in  the  joy  of  creating  its  fullest  and  completest 
‘reward,  and  in  the  prospect  of  the  future  loses  all  interest  in  the  present  and  the 
4  past.  .  .  .  Every  doubt  as  to  the  unlawful  character  of  these  Quartos  ought  to  be 
4  reasonably  laid,  when  we  have  in  the  Preface  to  the  Folio,  such  a  decided,  unam- 
4  biguous  proof.  4  Where  before  you  were  abused,’  so  we  read  there,  4  with  divers 
“stolen  and  surreptitious  copies,  maimed  and  deformed  by  the  frauds  and  stealths 
“of  injurious  imposters  that  exposed  them,  even  those  are  now  offered  to  your  view 
4  4  cured  and  perfect  of  their  limbs,’  &c.  It  is  remarkable,  how  completely  this  famil- 
4  iar  announcement  has  been  lost  sight  of,  and  discarded,  by  almost  every  Shakespeare 
4  student.  Perhaps,  it  is  thought,  that  editor  against  editor  and  publisher  against  pub- 
4  lisher,  are  not  competent  witnesses.  And,  moreover,  the  judge  is  not  uncorrupted. 
4  The  short-comings  of  the  Folio,  the  sole  authorised  edition,  give  to  the  Quartos, 
‘spite  of  their  lack  of  authenticity,  such  a  disproportionate  importance,  that  the  mod- 
4  ern  critic  is  in  duty  bound  to  thank  them  at  every  step;  and  cannot  refrain  from  hold- 
4  ing  them  in  high  honour.  Their  present  relative  importance,  induces  a  very  natural 
4  delusion  as  to  their  absolute  worth.  It  has  been  thought,  that  the  foregoing  sentence 
4  from  the  Preface  in  the  Folio  referred  only  to  the  six  Quartos  mentioned  above,  and 
4  that  we  were,  therefore,  justified  in  dividing  the  Quartos  into  authentic  and  spurious 
4  Quartos.  In  fact,  several  of  them  afford  a  text  -essentially  complete  and  worthy  of 
4  the  poet,  nay,  some  even  appear  to  be  set  forth  with  greater  care  than  the  Folio. 
4  But  this,  by  no  means,  proves  that  there  is  no  difference  between  a  lawful  and  an 
4  unlawful  edition;  but  at  best  only  between  more  adroit  and  less  adroit  sophistications, 
4  and  gives  us  no  right  to  restrict,  just  as  we  please,  the  general  assertion  of  the  Folio, 
4  and  to  draw  the  line  at  a  boundary  which  our  own  needs  have  set  up.  When  this 
4  or  that  Quarto  is  termed  authentic,  it  is  not  absolutely  meant,  that  it  must  have  been 
‘published  in  an  authorised  manner  by  the  direct  or  indirect  means  of  the  lawful 
‘owner  of  the  MS.  But  this  expression  implies  rather,  that  authentic  copies,  by 
4  some  means  or  other,  must  have  come  into  the  possession  of  the  publisher.  Of 
4  course,  this  would  not  be  impossible,  but  it  would  be  very  difficult.  .  .  .  The  com- 
‘plete  MS,  be  it  remembered,  was  in  the  possession  of  the  managers  alone,  among 
4  whom  it  is  not  likely  that  a  traitor  to  their  own  monopoly  would  be  found;  the  indi- 

*  vidual  actors  knew  nothing  more  than  their  own  parts,  and  it  would,  therefore,  require 
4  an  organised  complicity  of  all  of  them,  in  a  plot  to  place  their  collected  rdles  in  the 
‘hands  of  an  outside  purchaser.  On  the  other  hand,  it  could  not  have  been  difficult, 
4  where  neither  pains  nor  cost  were  spared,  to  procure  by  copyists  in  the  Theatre  a 
4  passable,  nay,  even  a  complete  and  correct  printer’s  copy.  If  it  proved  too  much  for 


THE  TEXT 


369 


4  one  short-hand  writer,  two  or  three  could  accomplish  it,  by  relieving  each  other ;  and 
•if  it  could  not  be  finished  at  the  first  performance,  it  could  certainly  be  done  at  the 
‘second  01  third.  Here  is  hypothesis  against  hypothesis,  possibility  against  possi¬ 
bility,  and  it  will  need  a  series  of  minute  investigations  to  turn  the  scale.  The  fol- 
4  lowing  pages  will  be  devoted  to  the  task  of  proving,  that  one  of  the  so-called  authentic 
•Quartos  could  have  had  its  origin  only  in  copies  made  at  a  performance  on  the  stage, 
4  and  that  its  various  readings  merit  no  regard  in  comparison  with  the  text  of  the  Folio; 
•which  has,  at  least,  an  indirect  connection  with  the  handwriting  of  the  poet}  and 
4  when,  moreover,  the  Folio  is  not  marred  by  manifest  misprints.  .  .  . 

4  [P.  5.]  The  omissions  in  the  Folio  are  not  of  vital  importance,  owing  to  the  firm 
•structure  of  the  drama,  which  does  not  permit  much  to  be  removed  without  danger 
4  to  the  whole;  and  they  have  been  made  by  no  unskilful  hand.  We  may,  therefore, 
4  assume,  that  we  have  here  the  piece  in  that  shape  in  which  it  was  presented  on  the 
4  Shakespearian  stage  in  the  years  just  preceding  its  appearance  in  type,  and  it  is 
4  manifest  that  it  has  suffered  no  material  injury  by  its  abridgements.  These  abridge- 
4  ments  might  have  occurred  all  the  more  easily,  if  we  suppose  that  the  original  MS 
4  had  been  neglected,  mislaid,  and  finally  lost.  The  greater  completeness  of  the 
4  Quartos,  however,  by  no  means  proves,  that  they  represent  a  more  complete  MS 
‘than  the  Folio;  but  only  that  they  appeared,  or  were  prepared,  at  a  time,  when  the 
4  drama  was  acted  in  its  unabridged  form,  owing  to  a  lack  of  sufficient  experience  of 
4  the  needs  of  the  stage. 

4  [P.  6.]  It  would  be  unfair  to  deny  that  a  number  of  Quarto  readings  correct  some 
4  unmistakeable  misprints  of  the  Folio.  Thus  I,  i,  173, 4  diseases  ’  for  disasters ;  II,  i, 
4  89, 4  strange  news  ’  for  strangeness  ;  II,  ii,  130, 4  dread  ’  for  dead ;  II,  iv,  34, 4  whose  * 
‘for  those;  II,  iv,  170,  4  blast  her  pride ’  for  blister;  183, 4  fickle  ’  for  fickly ;  III,  iv, 
4  53,  ‘ford’  for  sword;  III,  vi,  73,  4 tike*  for  tight;  IV,  ii,  75,  ‘thereat’  [ox  threat} 
4 IV,  iv,  18,  ‘distress*  for  desires;  IV,  vi,  17, 4  walk’  for  walked ;  83,  ‘coining’  for 
4  crying ;  265, 4  we’ld’  for  we.  But  from  all  these  we  are  not  to  conclude  that  the 
4  Quartos  were  genuine,  that  is,  that  they  were  derived  from  authentic  MSS;  but  the 
4  inference  to  be  drawn,  with  the  greater  assurance  from  such  separate  instances,  is 
4  that  the  actors  during  a  performance  pronounced  these  words  or  phrases  rightly  and 
4  clearly,  which  the  compositor  of  the  Folio  read  wrongly. 

‘These  thirteen, or  at  most  fifteen, instances  in  which  the  Folio  is  corrected  by  the 
4  Quartos,  are  offset  by  numberless,  utterly  senseless,  readings  in  the  latter.  When  they 
4  read  I,  i,  39,  first  for  4  fast  ’ ;  37,  of  our  state  for  4  from  our  age  ’ ;  38,  confirming  for 
4  4  conferring  ’,  &c.  & c ;  it  has  never  occurred  to  any  modern  editor  to  allow  his  previous 
‘preference  for  the  Quartos  to  have  sway  here.  Nevertheless,  it  must  be  conceded, 
4  that  such  instances  of  carelessness  as  these  have  no  bearing  on  the  main  question. 

4  More  remarkable  and  significant  is  a  third  class  of  discrepancies,  which  give 
4  editors  the  most  embarrassment — e.  g.,  in  the  Quartos,  I,  i,  33,  4 my  liege’  for  my 
4  lord ;  34, 4  we  shall  ’  for  we  will ;  38,  years  for 4  strengths 51,  merit  doth  most  chal¬ 
lenge  it  for  ‘nature  doth  with  merit  challenge;’  147, ‘stoops  to  folly’  for  falls  to 
4  folly ;  iSr,  protection  for  4  dear  shelter ' ;  II,  ii,  84,  What's  his  offence  for  4  What  is 
4  4  his  fault  ’ ;  II,  iv,  297,  bleak  winds  for  4  high  winds  ’,  &c.  &c ;  and  when  we  find  in 
4  round  numbers,  a  hundred  more  similar  variations,  it  is  obvious  enough,  that  the 
‘  fault  is  not  to  be  laid  to  illegible  MS,  or  to  mere  typographical  errors. 

4  The  prevailing  opinion  is,  that  there  are  two  different  versions  of  the  tragedy,  that 
‘the  Quartos  contain  the  earlier  and  original,  and  the  Folio  the  second  and  revised 
version.  We  cannot  find  the  least  historical  support  for  a  theory,  that  Shakespeare 

Y 


370 


APPENDIX 


‘himself  had  any  hand  in  such  a  revision.  The  editors  of  the  Folio  mention,  as  his 
‘characteristic,  that  *vve  have  scarce  received  from  him  a  blot  in  his  papers,’  and 

*  Ben  Jonson  quotes  the  same  from  the  mouth  of  his  fellow-actors.  It  may  be  granted 

*  that  genuine  changes,  such  as  Schiller  introduced  into  his  Robbers ,  or  Goethe  into 

*  his  Cotz,  would  not  preclude  in  consequence  thereof,  the  complete  re-writing  of  his 
‘pieces,  if,  on  other  grounds,  we  had  reason  to  believe  that  such  changes  there  were. 
‘  But  absolutely  excluded  are  all  trifling  corrections,  changes  in  words  and  phrases 

*  that  change  nothing,  which  are  Utterly  unimportant  to  the  piece  as  a  whole,  and 

*  even  to  the  impression  in  detail.  It  would  be  impossible  to  recognize  in  such  trifles 

*  the  hand  of  the  poet,  even  if  we  knew  nothing  of  his  *  unblotted  papers;’  especially 
of  a  poet,  who  was  by  profession  an  actor. 

‘The  only  result  from  such  a  revision  would  have  been  vexation  and  confusion  to 
the  actors,  who  having  once  stamped  upon  their  memories  a  certain  phrase,  would 
have  to  unlearn  all  their  rfiles  for  such  bagatelles  as  these.  It  is  very  doubtful,  if 

*  Ben  Jonson  would  have  had  the  chance  to  report  Shakespeare’s  praise  in  the  mouth 
of  his  fellow-players,  if  he  had  ever  set  them  such  a  task  as  this.  .  .  .  Everything 

‘  becomes  clear,  as  soon  as  we  suppose  that  the  MS  for  the  Quartos  was  prepared  by 

*  taking  it  down  during  a  performance  on  the  stage.  Actors  have  now  and  then  an 
‘unsure  memory,  or  perhaps,  they  are  not  conscientious  enough  to  use  the  precise 
‘word  of  the  poet.  It  makes  little  difference  to  them,  v/hether  they  say  ‘stoops  to 
'  *  folly  ’  or  *  falls  to  folly  ’,  ‘  protection  *  or  ‘  dear  shelter  ’,  &c.  &c.  Copyists  writing 
‘  rapidly  use  abbreviations  {c.g.  my  l.  for  ‘  my  lord’,  but  which  the  compositor  makes 
“my  liege’) ;  and  they  leave  gaps  which  they  afterwards  fill  out  erroneously  from 
‘memory  ( e .  g.  ‘bleak  winds’  for  ‘high  winds’),  they  mis-hear  much  and  mis-write 

much.  A  complete  and  exhaustive  explanation,  of  all  the  changes  in  the  Quarto 
‘Text,  is  to  be  found  in  the  broad  path,  at  every  fresh  station  exposed  to  fresh  dan- 

*  gers,  which  the  words  of  the  poet  travel,  through  the  mouth  of  the  actor,  the  ear  of 

*  the  spectator,  the  hand* of  the  copyist,  and  the  eye  of  the  compositor.’  [Dr  Schmidt 
brings  forward  certain  classes  of  errors,  to  prove  his  position.  I  can  give  only  the 
headings:]  ‘  I.  The  Quartos  make  no  distinction  between  verse  and  prose;  not  even 
‘where  the  lines  rhyme  at  the  end  of  a  scene.  2.  Many  errors  of  the  Quartos  are 

*  mistakes  of  the  ear,  not  of  the  eye.  3.  Capriciousness  of  the  actors’  diction  is 
« noticeable  in  the  use  of  expletives,  like  ‘  come,’  ‘  do,’  ‘  go  to,’  ‘  how,’  ‘  sir,’  &c.  In 

*  common  life  Englishmen  are  fond  of  beginning  their  sentences  with  such  little  words, 
‘  which,  like  tuning-forks,  give  the  key  in  which  they  intend  to  speak.  4.  The  omissions 
‘  in  the  Quartos  are  evidently  due  to  the  actors,  occurring  as  they  do  in  the  middle  of 

*  speeches,  where  care  is  taken  merely  to  preserve  the  cue,  &c.  &c.’  [Dr  Schmidt 
sums  up  as  follows :]  ‘  Such  are  the  reasons  in  general  and  in  particular,  which  prove 

*  that  the  Quarto-Text  of  Xing  Lear  lacks  authority,  and  that  its  various  readings  are  to 
‘be  expunged  for  our  editions;  excepting,  in  those  few  instances,  where  they  serve  to 
‘  correct  indubitable  errors  in  the  Folio.  At  how  early,  or  at  how  late,  a  day  this  con- 
‘  viction  will  take  root  and  bear  fruit,  cannot  from  past  experience  be  approximately 

*  reckoned.  It  is  not  every-one’s  business  to  let  himself  be  convinced,  and  it  is  not 

*  every-one’s  business  to  follow  his  convictions.’  [Nearly  all  the  remainder  of  Dr 
Schmidt’s  remarks  will  be  found  in  the  commentary  to  the  text.  Unfortunately,  his 
essay  is  only  a  fragment.  It  does  not  extend  beyond  the  second  Scene  of  the  first  Act. 

Since  the  foregoing  was  written  an  article  has  appeared  in  Robinson's  Epitome  of 
Literature ,  I  August,  1S79,  by  the  Rev.  Mr  Fleay,  on  The  Date  and  The  Text  of 


THE  TEXT 


371 


this  play.  The  portion  that  relates  to  the  Text  is  substantially  as  follows :]  4  In  the 
4 Quarto  we  have  the  version  of  the  play  as  it  was  performed  on  the  26th  of  Decem- 
« ber,  1606,  before  the  King.  I  am  unable  to  trace  any  revivals  of  it,  but  the  fact  that 
‘  the  Folio  is  divided  into  Acts  and  Scenes,  and  the  numerous  omissions  in  it,  prove 
4 that  version  to  be  an  abridgement  for  stage  purposes,  most  likely  made  after  Shake- 
‘speare’s  retirement,  and  probably  circa  1616-22. 

‘  I  will  now  proceed  to  examine  some  peculiarities  in  the  versions.  We  must  re- 

*  member  that  in  1605,  when  the  original  version  (which  we  call  ‘O’)  was  produced, 
‘the  Queen  had  recently  (in  October,  1604)  been  consulting  astrologers  and  firmly 
‘ believed  in  them;  that  James  I.  was  popularly  supposed  to  be  on  anything  but  good 
‘  terms  with  Prince  Henry ;  that  his  wholesale  creation  of  knights  had  been  satirised 
‘abundantly  on  the  boards;  and  that  England  and  Scotland  had  been  merged  in 
‘Great  Britain  by  proclamation  (October  20,  1604).  Again,  in  1606,  December  26, 
‘  when  the  revival  took  place,  the  Gunpowder  Plot  had  disturbed  the  Court  and  people. 

‘  Now  turn  to  I,  ii,  103,  seq.,\t  is  clear  that  a  passage,  innocent  perhaps  originally, 

*  but  liable  to  misconstruction  by  the  Court,  has  been  carefully  left  out  in  the  Quarto. 
‘  *  This  villain  of  mine  comes  under  the  prediction ;  there’s  son  against  father :  the 
4  King  falls  from  bias  of  nature,  there's  father  against  child.  We  have  seen  the  best 
‘  of  our  time,’  &c. 

‘  On  the  other  hand,  1. 91  seq.,  137  seq.,  which  were  inserted  in  the  Quarto  in  place 

*  of  this,  speak  of  a  ‘  father  that  so  tenderly  and  entirely  loves  him ;’  ‘  menaces  and 
‘maledictions  against  king  and  nobles;’  (Gunpowder  Plot;)  ‘nuptial  breaches;* 
4  (Lady  Essex;)  and  the  like,  none  of  which  allusions  would  be  disagreeable  to  the 

*  King. 

‘  Again,  in  I,  iv,  345,  seq.,  this  passage  was  omitted : 

*  ‘  This  man  hath  had  good  counsel :  a  hundred  knights, 

*  'Tis  politic  and  safe  to  let  him  keep 

*  At  point  a  hundred  knights ;  yes,  that,  on  every  dream 

*  Each  buzz,  each  fancy,  each  complaint,  dislike, 

*  He  may  enguard  his  dotage  with  their goivers, 

'  And  hold  our  lives  in  mercy/ 

4  But  the  strongest  instance  of  this  kind  is  in  III,  i,  22-42,  where  22-29  (from  the 

*  Folio)  are  clearly  alternative  with  30-42  (from  the  Quarto).  In  the  Folio  we  read : 

*  ‘  Who  have,  as  who  have  not,  that  their  great  stars 
‘Throned  and  set  high?  servants,  who  seem  no  less, 

*  Which  are  to  France  the  spies  and  speculations 

*  Intelligent  of  our  state ;  what  hath  been  seen, 

*  »  *  **;n*  *  *  *  something  deeper, 

*  Whereof,  perchance,  these  are  but  furnishings.' 

*  But  in  the  Quarto  we  are  only  told  of  *  secret  feet  in  some  of  our  best  ports.* 
‘Is  it  not  clear  that  the  former  passage  would,  in  the  winter  of  1604-5,  when  the 
‘peace  with  Spain  was  not  six  months  old — a  peace  procured  by  the  bribery  of  Suf- 
4  folk,  Northampton,  Pembroke,  Southampton,  Dirleton,  &c.,  &c. — be  taken  by  the 
4  populace  as  a  direct  allusion  to  this  scandalous  corruption,  and  is  it  not  also  clear 

*  that  the  Court  could  not  allow  the  play  to  be  acted  before  them  without  the  clever 
4  reformations  introduced  by  Shakespeare  in  this  Quarto  version  ? 

*  Another  omission  of  the  same  kind  is  that  of  the  Merlin  prophecy  at  the  end  of 

*  III,  ii.  James  would  not  have  tolerated  even  so  distant  a  prospect  of  a  time  when 

*  the  realm  of  Albion  should  come  to  great  confusion,  and  any  allusion  to  the  cut* 


372 


APPENDIX 


purse  who  *  came  to  the  throng  *  during  his  first  progress  is  known  to  have  been 
very  obnoxious  to  him. 

‘  1^  is  clear  then  that  the  Quarto  is,  as  stated  on  the  title-page,  the  version  1  played 
before  the  King’s  Majesty.’  It  is,  however,  a  scandalously  incorrect  and  surrepti¬ 
tious  copy  of  that  version,  taken  from  a  wretchedly  written  MS. 

‘  Taking  it  then  that  the  Quarto  is  a  somewhat  altered  version  of  *  O  ’  for  Court 
performance,  but  very  carelessly  copied  and  erroneously  printed,  we  have  yet  to 
examine  the  Folio.  In  this  case,  fortunately,  as  in  the  corresponding  cases  of 
Othello  and  Hamlet ,  we  have  two  versions,  one  abridged  considerably.  It  is  not 
then  possible  for  ingenuous  editors  to  sneer  at  the  very  notion  of  abridgement  as 
they  do  when  it  is  suggested  that  The  Tempest  or  Julius  Ccesar  have  been  curtailed 
for  theatrical  purposes.  But  they  all  agree  that  in  this  instance  the  alteration  was 
made  by  Shakespeare  himself.  In  spite  of  the  recorded  facts  that  Shirley,  Massin¬ 
ger,  &c.  did  rewrite  great  portions  of  Beaumont  and  Fletcher  (who  were  then, 
1616-40,  esteemed  above  Shakespeare) ;  in  spite  of  the  probability  that  portions, 
if  not  all,  of  his  MSS  were  burnt  with  the  Globe  Theatre;  in  spite  of  the  palpable 
fact  that  Timon  was  so  remodelled  before  1623,  and  Macbeth ,  The  Tempest,  &c. 
afterwards,  by  D’Avenant  and  Pryden ;  in  spite  of  the  persistence  to  our  own  time 
of  managers  in  playing  Richard  III,  Macbeth,  & c.  in  their  altered  forms,  we  are 
required  to  believe  that  Shakespeare,  who  left  his  plays  to  take  care  of  themselves, 
and  did  not  collect  them  like  Jonson,  was  regarded  as  too  sacred  to  be  remodelled 
until  his  plays  were  published  in  1623,  but  after  that  they  were  open  to  any  one  to 
refashion  as  he  pleased;  in  other  words,  the  very  thing  which  preserved  Jonson’ s 
plays  from  being  altered  was  the  beginning  of  the  corruption  of  Shakespeare’s.  I 
believe,  on  the  contrary,  that  this  process  began  immediately  after  his  death,  and 
that  nearly  every  play  revived  was,  at  the  revival,  revised  also;  abridged,  *  re¬ 
formed’  of  oaths,  &c.,  corrected  by  alteration  of  obsolete  words,  and  ‘emended’ 
in  metre  as  well  as  diction.  In  some  cases  I  believe  also  interpolations  were  intro¬ 
duced, — not,  however,  in  this  play  of  Lear,  to  which  I  return. 

*  Besides  the  alterations  I  have  noted  from  ‘  O  ’  to  the  Quarto,  there  are  omissions 
in  the  Folio,  especially  in  the  later  part  of  the  play.  Besides  shorter  ones  of  a  line 
or  so,  which  may  be  due  to  the  careless  copy,  or  of  single  words,  which  may  be 
due  to  the  printer,  I  may  notice  the  following:  I,  iii,  16-23;  iv,  154-169;  I,  iv» 
252-257 ;  II,  ii,  148-152  (clearly  a  purposed  omission,  not  accidental,  the  metre 
being  set  right  by  inserting,  ‘need’);  III,  vi,  18-59;  III,  vi,  109-122  (omitted 
because,  as  Heywood  tells  us,  rhyme  had  become  unfashionable) ;  III,  vii,  98-107 ; 
IV,  i,  60-66;  IV,  i,  31-50;  IV,  i,  53-58;  IV,  i,  62-69.  The  whole  of  IV,  iii 
(intentional,  for  the  scenes  are  renumbered  Tertia  for  Quarta,  etc.,  up  to  Septima , 
which  remains  unaltered) ;  IV,  vii,  86-97;  V,  i,  23-28;  V,  iii,  54-59;  V,  iii,  203-221. 

‘  Now  I  cannot  believe  that  these  omissions  were  made  by  Shakespeare ;  the  last 
one,  for  instance,  narrating  the  meeting  of  Edgar  and  Kent,  is  necessary  to  the  plot. 
See  how  abrupt  line  229  (‘  Here  comes  Kent  ’)  becomes  without  it.  But  on  this 
point,  and  on  the  incorrectness  of  the  Quarto  I  need  not  enlarge.  Four  years  since 
Prof.  Delius,  in  an  able  paper,  displayed  his  views  on  them,  with  which  I  entirely 
coincide.  The  portions  of  this  article  which  I  claim  as  original  are  the  fixing  the 
date  of  production  in  1605,  not  1606  [see  Date  of  the  Composition,  p.  381],  and  the 
hypothesis  that  the  Quarto  version  was  one  altered  by  Shakespeare  from  ‘  O  ’  for 
production  at  Court. 

*  While  the  very  numerous  irregularities  of  metre  in  the  Quarto  are  due  entirely  to 


THE  TEXT 


373 


'the  misreading  of  the  badly  written  MS  by  a  careless  printer,  the  many  broken  lines 
*  of  less  than  five  feet  in  the  Folio  are  due  to  the  omission  of  passages  cut  out  to 
‘shorten  the  representation.  I  pointed  this  out  in  the  case  of  Julius  Ccesar,  in  1S75. 
'  I  now  say  that  it  applies  to  all  the  shortened  plays  of  Shakespeare,  and  that  in  re- 
'  gard  to  his  works,  and  Fletcher’s,  or  to  any  of  the  great  dramatists,  we  can  always 
'  tell  if  any  play  has  been  abridged  by  examination  of  this  one  peculiarity.’ 


A  LIST  OF  VARIOUS  READINGS  IN  CERTAIN  QUARTOS,  COLLATED 
BY  THE  CAMBRIDGE  EDITORS,  AND  RECORDED  BY  THEM  IN 
THE  FOOT-NOTES  OF  THEIR  EDITION. 

The  following  collation  is  wholly  the  work  of  Messrs  Clark  and  Wright.  I 
have  not  incorporated  it  in  my  own  collation,  as  recorded  in  the  foregoing  Textual 
notes.  The  discrepancies  hardly  rise  to  the  dignity  of  varies  lectiones,  in  the  strict 
sense  in  which  the  phrase  is  used  among  schoolmen ;  they  are  little  else  than  gross 
typographical  blunders,  and  are  interesting  mainly  for  bibliographical  purposes,  in 
deciding  the  priority  in  printing  among  several  copies,  or  even  portions  of  copies, 
of  Quartos  of  the  same  date.  Interest  too  may  be  found  in  deciding  whether  the 
various  readings  are  errors  of  the  eye  or  of  the  ear. 

It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind,  that  I  have  here  reprinted  the  collation  exactly  as  it  is 
recorded  in  the  Cambridge  Edition,  except  in  some  cases  where  the  reading  is  iden¬ 
tical  with  the  received  text,  there  it  seemed  superfluous;  and  that  'Qa*  of  the  Cam¬ 
bridge  Edition  is  Qt  of  this,  viz:  the  Fide  Bull  edition. 

In  their  Preface  the  Cambridge  Editors  give  the  following  explanation  of  the  sym¬ 
bols  which  they  have  used  : 

'  Qa  (Cap.).  The  copy  in  Capell’s  collection. 

'  Q2  (Dev.).  The  copy  in  the  Library  of  the  Duke  of  Devonshire. 

'  Qa  (Mus.  per.).  A  perfect  copy  in  the  British  Museum.  (C.  34,  K.  18).  [Ash- 
bee’s  Facsimile  agrees  with  this. — Ed.] 

‘  Qa  (Mus.  imp.).  An  imperfect  copy  (wanting  title)  in  the  British  Museum  (C.  34, 
K.  17) ;  formerly  in  the  possession  of  Mr  Halliwell. 

*Qa  (Bodl.  1).  A  copy  in  the  Bodleian  Library  (Malone  35),  with  the  title,  but 
wanting  the  last  leaf. 

'  Qa  (Bodl.  2).  A  copy  in  the  Bodleian  Library  (Malone  37),  wanting  title,  but 
having  the  last  leaf.’ 

I,  i,  95.  You  have  begot ]  bgot  Q,  (Cap.). 

I,  i,  102.  Sure,  I  shall  never  marry ]  Matry  Qa  (Cap.). 

I,  ii,  36.  Edm.]  Bast.  Q,FfQ3.  Ba.  Qa  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  I,  2). 
Om.  Qa  (Mus.  imp.). 

I,  iv,  87.  If  you  will  measure  your  lubber's  length ]  lubbers  length  Qa  (Cap,  St 
Dev.),  lubbers ,  length  Qa  (Mus.  per.  &  imp.  &  Bodl.  1,  2). 

I,  iv,  148.  They  would  have  part  on't ;  and  ladies  too,]  on’t,  and  lodes  too,  Q,Q3. 

an't,  and  lodes  too,  Qa  (Cap.  &  Dev.),  an’t,  and  Ladies  too,  Q2 
(Bodl.  1,  2,  Mus.  per.  &  imp.). 

I,  iv,  173.  I  would  fain  learn  to  lie]  learne  to  lye  Qa  (Bodl.  I,  2,  Mus.  per.  Si 
imp.),  learne  lye  Qa  (Cap.  &  Dev.). 


32 


374  APPENDIX 

I,  iv,  185.  now  thou  art  an  O]  now  thou  Qa  (Bcdl.  I,  2,  Mus.  per.  Sc  imp.)  Ff. 
thou ,  thou  Q,Qa  (Cap.  &  Dev.). 

I,  iv,  293.  Blasts  and  fogs  upon  thee !  The  intended]  upon  the  untender  Q,Q2 
(Cap.  &  Dev.),  upon  the  untented  Qa  (Bodl.  I,  2,  Mus.  per.  & 
imp.). 

I,  iv,  295.  Pierce  every  sense  about  thee !]  peruse  Q,Qa  (Cap.  Sc  Dev.). 

I,  iv,  335.  And  hasten  your  return.  No,  no,  my  lord.]  and  after  your  returne 
-—now  my  lord  Qx.  and  after  your  returne  now  my  lord  Qa 
(Cap.  &  Dev.).  <S°  hasten  your  returne  now  my  lord  Q2  (Bodl. 
I,  2,  Mus.  per.  &  imp.). 

I,  iv,  336.  This  milky  gentleness]  milkie  Qa  (Bodl.  1,  2,  Mus.  per.  Sc  imp.). 
mildie  QsQa  (Cap.  &  Dev.). 

I,  iv,  33S  You  are  much  more  attack’d  for  want  of  wisdom]  attaskt  for  Q2 

(Bodl.  1,  2,  Mas.  per.  &  imp.),  alapt  QtQa  (Cap.  &  Dev.). 

II,  i,  IOO.  To  have  the  waste  and  spoil  of  his  revenues]  the  wast  and  spoyle  of  his 

Qs  (Bodl.  I,  2,  Mus.  per.  &  imp.),  these — and  wast  of  this  his 
Q3  (Cap.  Sc  Dev.). 

II,  i,  iso.  Occasions,  noble  Gloucester,  of  some  poise ]  poyse  Qa  (Bodl.  1, 2,  Mus. 
per.  Sc  imp.),  prise  Q2  (Cap.  &  Dev.). 

II,  i,  122.  Our  father  he  hatlx  writ,  so  hath  our  sister  Of  differences ]  diferences  Qa 
(Bodl.  1,  2,  Mus.  per.  Sc  imp.),  defences  Q,Q2  (Cap.  Sc  Dev.). 
II,  i,  123.  which  I  best  thought  it  fit]  lest  Qa  (Bodl.  1,  2,  Mus.  per.  8c  imp.). 

II,  i,  124.  To  answer  from  our  home.]  hand  Q,Q2  (Cap.  Sc  Dev.). 

II,  ii,  I.  Good  dawning]  detects  Q;!  (Bodl.  1). 

II,  ii,  14.  three-suited]  three  snyted  Qa  (Bodl.  1). 

II,  ii,  15.  worsted-stocking]  wasted  stocken  Qa  (Bodl.  1). 

II,  ii,  I2X.  You  stubborn  ancient  knave]  ausrent  Q2  (Bodl.  I). 

II,  ii,  138.  basest  and  contemned' st  wretches]  belest  and  contaned  Qa  (Bodl.  1), 
II,  ii,  160.  Nothing  almost  see  miracles]  my  wrack e  Q,Qa  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per. 

Sc  imp.  &  Bodl.  2).  my  rackles  Qa  (Bodl.  1). 

II,  ii,  162.  Who  hath  most]  not  Qa  (Bodl.  1). 

II,  ii,  166.  Take]  Late  Qa  (Bodl.  l). 

II,  iii,  XJ.  numb’d  and  mortified]  and  is  omitted  in  Qa  (Bodl.  I). 

II,  iii,  16.  Pins]  Pies  Qa  (Bodl.  1). 

II,  iii,  17.  from  low  farms]  frame  Qa  (Bodl.  1). 

II,  iii,  20.  Turlygod]  Tuelygod  Qa  (Bodl.  1). 

II,  iv,  97.  father  Would  with  his]  fate  .  .  .  with  the  Qa  (Bodl.  1). 

II,  iv,  98.  commends  her  service]  come  and  tends  seruise  Qa  (Bodl.  1). 

II,  iv,  100.  *  Fiery'  ?  *  the  fiery  duke?’  Tell]  The  fierie  duke ,  tell  Qa  (Bodl.  1). 
II,  iv,  101.  No]  Mo  Q2  (Bodl.  1). 

II,  iv,  1 18.  cockney]  cokney  Qa  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  &  imp.  &  Bodl.  2).  cok- 
ttay  Q2  (Bodl.  1). 

II,  iv,  1 1 9.  paste]  phst  Qa  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  &  imp.  Sc  Bodl.  2).  pad  Q2 
(Bodl.  1). 

II,  iv,  127.  divorce  me  from  thy  mother’s  tomb]  deuose  .  .  .fruit  Q.  (Bodl.  1). 

II,  iv,,i33.  depraved]  deptotied  Q2  (Bodl.  1). 

II,  iv,  188.  Allow]  alow  QXQ2.  allow  Q2  (Cap.). 

II,  iv,  223.  call  it]  eallit  Qa  (Dev.). 

HI,  b,  35*  fa*]  kut  Qj  (Dev.). 


THE  TEXT 


375 


III,  iv,  6.  Contentious  storm]  e rulenlious  storm  Qa  (Mus  imp.  &  Bodl.  i). 

tempestious  storm  Q2  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  2). 

Ill,  iv,  10.  raging]  roring  Q2  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  2). 

Ill,  iv,  14.  Save  what  beats  there.]  beates  Q2  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  2). 

beares  Q,Qa  (Mus.  imp.  &  Bodl.  1). 

Ill,  iv,  106.  lendings ]  leadings  Q,Q2  (Mus.  imp.  &  Bodl.  1). 

Ill,  iv,  106.  Come,  unbutton  here.]  Come  on  bee  true .  Q2  (Mus.  imp.  &  Bodl.  l). 

Come  on  Q2  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  2). 

Ill,  iv,  III.  Flibbertigibbet ]  Sriberdegibit  Q2  (Mus.  imp.  &  Bodl.  1).  Fliberde * 
Q2  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  2). 

Ill,  iv,  1 12.  gives']  gins  Q2  (Mus.  imp.  &  Bodl.  1). 

Ill,  iv,  1 12,  1 13.  and  the  pin,  squints]  the  pin-queues  Q2  (Mus.  imp.  &  Bodl.  l). 

6°  the  pin ,  squemes  Q2  (Cap.  Dev.  &  Mus.  per.). 

Ill,  iv,  1 13.  hare-lip]  hare  lip  Q2  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  2).  harte  lip  Q2 
(Mus.  imp.  &  Bodl.  1). 

Ill,  iv,  1 16.  He  met  the  night-mare]  a  nellthu  night  more  Q2  (Mus.  imp.  & 
Bodl.  1).  he  met  the  night  mare  Q2  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  & 
Bodl.  2). 

Ill,  iv,  1 19.  thee,  witch,]  thee,  witch  Q2  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  2).  thee% 
with  Q2  (Mus.  imp.  &  Bodl.  1). 

Ill,  iv,  125.  tadpole]  tode  pold  Q2  (Mus.  imp.  &  Bodl.  1).  tod  pole  Q2  (Cap.  Dev. 
Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  2), 

III,  iv,  125.  wall-newt]  wall-wort  Q2  (Mus.  imp.  &  Bodl.  1). 

Ill,  vi,  94.  Take  up,  take  up]  Take  up  to  keepe  Q2  (Mus.  imp.  &  Bodl.  1).  Take 
tip  the  King  Q2  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  2). 

Ill,  vii,  57.  anointed]  annoynted  Q2  (Mus.  per.  and  Bodl.  2).  attrynfed  Q2  (Cap.  _ 
Dev.  Mus.  imp.  &  Bodl.  1). 

Ill,  vii,  58.  as  his  bare  head]  of  his  lou'd  head  Q2  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  imp.  &  Bodl. 

i).  on  his  lowd  head  Q2  (Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  2). 

Ill,  vii,  59.  buoy'd]  layd  Q2  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  imp.  Sc  Bodl.  1).  bod  Q2  (Mus, 
per.  &  Bodl.  2). 

Ill,  vii,  60.  stelled]  steeled  Q2  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  imp.  Sc  Bodl.  l). 

III,  vii,  103.  roguish]  Om.  Q2  (Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  2). 

IV,  i,  10.  poorly  led?]  poorlie,  leed,  Q2  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  imp.  81  Bodl.  l). 

parti,  eyd,  Q2  (Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  2). 

IV,  ii,  12.  terror]  terrer  Q2  (Mus.  per.  Sc  Bodl.  2).  ctirre  Q2  (Cap.  Dev. 
Mus.  imp.  8c  Bodl.  1). 

IV,  ii,  21.  A  mistress’s  command]  coward  Qa  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  .imp,  & 
Bodl.  1). 

IV,  ii,  21.  Wear  this;  spare  speech]  this,  spare  Q2  (Mus.  per.  8c  Bodl.  2).  this- 
spare  Q2  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  imp.  8c  Bodl.  1). 

IV,  ii,  27.  a  woman’s]  a  is  omitted  in  Q2  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  imp.  8c  Bodl.  1) 

IV,  ii,  28.  My  fool  usurps  my  body]  My  f bo  te  .  .  .  body  (f  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  imp. 

&  Bodl.  1).  A  foole  .  .  .  bed  Q2  (Mus.  per.  Sc  Bodl.  2). 

IV,  ii,  29.  worth  the  whistle]  whistling  Q2  (Mus.  per.  8c  Bodl.  2). 

IV,  ii,  32.  its  origin]  it  Q2  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  imp.  8c  Bodl.  1).  ith  Q2  (Mus.  per. 
&  Bodl.  2). 

IV,  ii,  45.  by  him  so  benefited]  benifted  Q2  (Mus.  per.  Sc  Bodl.  2).  benificted  Q, 
(Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  imp.  8c  Bodl.  1). 


376 


APPENDIX 


IV,  ii,  47.  these  vile  offences]  this  vild  Qa  (Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  2).  the  vild  Q, 
(Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  imp.  &  Bodl.  1). 

IV,  ii,  49.  Humanity']  Humanly  Qa  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  imp.  &  Bodl.  I). 

IV,  ii,  53.  not  know'st  Fools  do]  know'st  fools,  do  Qa  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  imp.  & 
Bodl.  1).  know'st,  fools  do  Qa  (Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  2). 

IV,  ii,  56.  in  our  noiseless  land]  noy sties  Qa  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  imp.  &  Bodl.  1). 
noyseles  Qa  (Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  2). 

IV,  ii,  57.  thy  state  begins  to  threat]  thy  state  begins  thereat  Qa  (Mus.  per.  & 
Bodl.  2).  thy  slayer  begin  threats  Qa  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  imp.  Sc 
Bodl.  1). 

IV,  ii,  58.  Whiles  thou,]  Whil's  Qa  (Cap. Dev. Mus.  imp.Sc  Bodl.  1).  Whil'si 
Qa  (Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  2). 

IV,  ii,  60.  Proper  deformity  seems  not]  shewes  Qa  (Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  2). 

IV,  ii,  68.  Marry,  your  manhood  now — ]  manhood  mew — Qa  (Mus.  per.  & 
Bodl.  2).  manhood  now — Qa  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  imp.  &  Bodl.  l). 

IV,  ii,  78.  above.  You  justicers,]  above  you  lustisers  Qa  (Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  2). 
above  your  lustices  Q„  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  imp.  Sc  Bodl.  1). 

IV,  vi,  225.  The  bounty  and  the  benison  of  heaven.]  The  botnet  and  bents  Q, 
(Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  1,  2). 

IV,  vi,  226.  To  boot,  and  boot]  to  boot,  to  boot  Qa  (Mus.  imp.),  to  saue  thee 
Qa  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  Sc  Bodl.  I,  2). 

IV,  vi,  227.  first]  Om.  Qa  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  I,  2). 

IV,  vi,  239.  vortnight]  fortnight  Qa  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  I,  2). 

IV,  vi,  241.  your  costard  or  my  ballow]  your  coster  or  my  battero  Qs  (Cap.  Dev, 
Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  1,  2).  your  costerd  or  my  bat  Qa  (Mus.  imp.). 

IV,  vi,  255.  rest  you.  Let's  see]  you,  lets  Qa  (Mus.  imp.),  you  lets  Qa  (Cap.  Dev. 
Mus.  per.  Sc  Bodl.  I,  2). 

IV,  vi,  256.  he  speaks  of  May  be]  of  may  Q  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per  &  Eodl.  I, 
2).  of,  may  Qa  (Mus.  imp.). 

IV,  vi,  262.  Reads]  A  Letter  Qa  (Mus.  imp.).  Om;  Qa  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  Sc 

Bodl.  1,  2). 

V,  i,  3.  alteration]  abdication  Q^  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  Sc  Bodl.  I,  2). 

V,  iii,  29.  One  step]  And  Qa  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  &  Bodl.  1,  2). 

V,  iii,  48.  and  appointed  guard]  Om.  Q,  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  Sc  Bodl.  I,  2). 

V,  iii,  50.  common  besom]  common  bossome  Qa  (Mus.  imp.),  coren  bossom  Qa 
(Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  Sc  Bodl.  1,  2). 

V,iii,5S-  session.  At  this  time  We]  session  at  this  time,  wee  Qa  (Mus.  imp.). 

session  at  this  time ,  mec  Qa  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus.  per.  Sc  Bodl.  1,2). 

V,  iii,  58.  sharpness]  sharpnes  Qa  (Mus.  imp.),  sharfes  Qa  (Cap.  Dev.  Mus. 
per.  Sc  Bodl.  1,  2). 


DATE  OF  THE  COMPOSITION 


The  Date  of  the  Composition  of  this  play  can  be  ascertained  with  an  unusual  degree 
of  accuracy.  We  have  one  limit  fixed  by  external  evidence,  and  another  by  internal, 
and  the  term  between  the  two  consists  of  merely  three  years :  from  1603  to  1606. 

The  external  evidence  is  supplied  by  the  Stationers’  Registers,  which  give  us  the 
Christmas  holidays  in  1 606  as  the  earliest  date  before  which  the  play  must  of  course 
have  been  written.  To  the  internal  evidence  we  must  look  for  the  latest  date  after 
which  it  must  have  been  written. 

There  are  three  items  of  internal  evidence,  viz :  first,  the  references  to  Dr  Hars- 
net’s  book,  noted  by  Theobald  ;  secondly,  the  use  by  Edgar  of  *  British  man  ’  instead 
of  Englishman  in  the  popular  rhyme;  this  was  noted  by  Malone;  and  thirdly, 
the  reference  by  Gloucester  to  the  *  late  eclipses,’  to  which  attention  was  called  by 
Mr  Aldis  Wright. 

First,  Dr  Harsnet’s  book.  This  was  published  in  1603.  See  III,  iv,  53.  Of  the 
three  items,  this  is  really  the  only  one  that  is  sure  beyond  a  peradventure.  Concern¬ 
ing  the  other  two,  there  may  be  more  or  less  difference  of  opinion. 

Of  the  Second,  Malone  (vol.  i,  p.  352,  1790)  says:  ‘This  play  is  ascertained  to 
‘  have  been  written  after  October,  1604,  by  a  minute  change  which  Shakespeare  made 
‘  in  a  traditional  line  put  into  the  mouth  of  Edgar :  “  Fie,  foh,  fum,  I  smell  the  blood 
‘of  a  British  man.”  [See  III,  iv,  175.]  The  old  metrical  saying,  which  is  found 
‘  in  one  of  Nashe’s  pamphlets,  printed  in  1596,  and  in  other  books,  was :  “  Fy,  fa, 
‘  fum,  I  smell  the  blood  of  an  Englishman .”  Though  a  complete  union  of  Eng- 

*  land  and  Scotland,  which  was  projected  in  the  first  parliament  that  met  after  James’s 
‘  accession  to  the  English  throne,  was  not  carried  into  effect  till  a  century  afterwards, 

*  the  two  kingdoms  were  united  in  name ,  and  he  was  proclaimed  King  of  Great 

*  Britain,  24  October,  1604.’ 

Malone  therefore  assigns  the  composition  to  1605,  and  thinks  it  ‘  extremely  prob¬ 
able  ’  that  it  was  performed  for  the  first  time  in  March  or  April  of  that  year,  *  in  which 
‘year  the  old  play  of  King  Leir,  that  had  been  entered  at  Stationers’  Hall  in  1594, 

*  was  printed  by  Simon  Stafford  for  John  Wright,  who,  we  may  presume,  finding 

*  Shakespeare’s  play  successful,  hoped  to  palm  the  spurious  one  on  the  public  for  his.’ 
See  p.  353.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  Malone  did  not  furnish  the  proofs  of  his  asser¬ 
tion  that  the  old  play  of  1594  is  identical  with  that  which  was  afterwards  printed  in 
1603.  I  am  strongly  inclined  to  believe  that  it  is  a  fact,  but  I  think  it  can  only  be 
conjecture  when  we  assert  that  it  is  so.  After  imputing  to  Simon  Stafford  an  intention 
to  deceive  the  public,  Malone  is  obliged  to  put  the  date  of  the  performance  as  far 
back  as  March  or  April,  1605.  It  was  on  the  eighth  of  May  in  that  year  that  Stafford 
entered  his  book  at  Stationers’  Hall,  and  if  Shakespeare’s  Lear  was  then  on  the 
stage,  or  had  been  lately,  it  must  have  been  written  some  months  before.  If,  as 
Malone  supposes,  it  was  performed  in  March,  it  must  have  been  written  in  January 
or  February,  in  order  to  keep  it  within  the  year  1605.  I  do  not  remember  that 
Malone  anywhere  expresses  himself  quite  as  explicitly  as  this,  but  if  he  had  he  would 
have  carried  Chalmers  completely  with  him;  and  if  he  had  extended  the  compo¬ 
sition  over  a  little  longer  space  than  two  months,  and  stretched  it  into  December  or 

32*  377 


373 


APPENDIX 


November,  1604,  he  would  have  taken  with  him  Drake  also,  and  probably  all  others 
who  profess  to  detect  sharp  practice  between  the  lines  of  Simon  Stafford’s  title-page; 
but,  as  I  said  when  speaking  of  the  entry  of  Stafford’s  book  in  the  Stationers’  Regis¬ 
ters,  these  arguments,  founded  on  a  printer’s  chance  phrase,  are  to  me  only  ‘gracious 
fooling.’  Simon  Stafford,  in  all  likelihood,  tells  the  truth  when  he  says  his  King 
Leir  was  ‘  latelie  acted.’  I  dare  say  it  was  a  popular  play ;  it  is  quite  a  good  speci¬ 
men  of  the  third-rate  class  of  comedies,  and  its  success  was  sufficiently  marked 
to  suggest  to  Shakespeare  a  tragedy  on  the  same  subject.  And  as  to  Stafford’s 
calling  it  a  tragedy, — I  really  think  that  he  was  to  a  certain  extent  justified  in  retain¬ 
ing  the  impression  which  the  whole  drift  of  the  play  except  the  last  two  or  three 
scenes  left  upon  his  mind.  If  the  spectacle  of  a  respectable  elderly  king,  reduced 
to  such  an  extremity  of  hunger  as  to  induce  his  faithful  attendant  to  offer  him  his 
bare  and  living  arm  as  an  article  of  diet,  be  not  tragic,  it  is  difficult  to  say  what 
tragedy  is.  Moreover,  Dryden  in  his  Preface  to  The  Spanish  Friar  speaks  of  a 

*  Tragedy  ending  happily .*  The  half-title  of  Tate’s  version  of  this  very  play  reads, 

*  The  tragedy  of  King  Lear,’  and  we  all  know  that  the  declared  purpose  of  that 
version  was  to  turn  it  into  a  comedy;  and  when  we  find  even  Campbell,  the  poet, 
in  his  Remarks  on  this  play,  speaking  cf  this  same  King  Leir  as  *  a  tragedy,’  I 
think  we  ought  not  to  be  too  severe  on  an  Elizabethan  printer  for  applying  to  it  the 
same  title.  In  these  days,  when  Henry  VIII,  Nero,  and  Judas  Iscariot  find  vindi¬ 
cators,  I  really  think  a  faint  murmur  might  be  raised  for  humble  Simon  Stafford. 

As  I  have  said,  Chalmers  ( Supplemental  Apology ,  p.  413)  concurs  generally  with 
Malone  in  the  belief  that  Lear  was  written  early  in  1605,  but  he  thinks  Malone  is 
mistaken  in  some  of  his  premises.  For  instance,  he  says  that  the  argument,  derived 
from  the  change  of  English  to  *  British,’  that  the  play  was  written  after  October, 
1604,  is  not  absolutely  conclusive,  for  ‘the  fact  is  that  there  was  issued  from  Green- 

*  wich  a  royal  proclamation,  on  the  13th  of  May,  1603,  declaring  that,  until  a  com- 
*plete  union,  the  king  held,  and  esteemed,  the  two  realms,  as  presently  united,  and  as 

*  one  kingdom ;  and  the  two  poets,  Daniel,  and  Drayton,  who  wrote  gratulatory  verses 
‘  on  his  accession,  spoke  of  the  two  kingdoms  as  united,  thereby,  into  one  realm,  by 
‘the  name  of  Britain;  and  of  the  inhabitants  of  England  and  Scotland,  as  one 
‘  people,  by  the  denomination  of  British.  Before  King  James  arrived  at  London, 

*  Daniel  offered  tc  him :  ‘  A  Panegyrike  Congratulatory,  delivered  to  the  King>s  most 

*  excellent  Majesty  at  Burleigh- Harrington  in  Rutlandshire ,’  which  was  printed  in 
1603,  for  Blount,  with  a  Defence  of  Rhime: 

‘  Lo  here  the  glory  of  a  greater  day 
Than  England  ever  heretofore  could  see 
In  all  her  days.  .  .  . 

And  now  she  is,  and  now  in  peace  therefore 
Shake  hands  with  union,  O  thou  mightie  state. 

Now  thou  art  all  great  Britain,  and  no  more. 

No  Scot,  no  English  now,  nor  no  debate.' 

‘  This  very  rare  publication  of  Daniel  confutes,  by  the  fact,  the  Commentator’s  rea 
‘soning,  from  the  proclamation;  for  we  see  how  a  poet  did  write  before  any  procla- 

*  mation  issued  upon  the  point.’ 

Drake  ( Shakespeare  and  his  Times,  ii, 457)  thinks  it  ‘more  probable  that  its  pro¬ 
duction  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  close  of  1604,’  for  three  reasons :  First,  if  the  change 
from  English  to  British  were  made  out  of  compliment  to  the  king,  the  compliment 
would  be  all  the  greater  if  the  change  were  made  between  the  declaratory  proclama¬ 
tion  of  May,  1603,  and  the  definitive  proclamation  of  October,  1604.  Secondly,  the 


DATE  OF  THE  COMPOSITION 


379 


old  play  of  King Leir  was  entered  on  the  Stationers’  books  on  the  8th  of  May,  1605, 
*  as  it  was  lately  acted.’  Now,  as  the  publisher  hoped  to  impose  on  the  public  this 
old  tragedy  for  Shakespeare’s  successful  drama,  it  was  evidently  intended  that  the 
word  4 lately'  should  be  referred  by  the  reader  to  Shakespeare’s  play;  hence,  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  Lear  had  been  acted  some  months  before,  and  was  not  then  actually  per¬ 
forming.  This  inference  harmonises  with  the  supposition  that  Lear  was  written  about 
the  end  of  1604,  but  does  not  agree  with  Malone’s  theory  that  it  appeared  in  April, 
1605.  Thirdly,  * Cymbeline  is  assigned  to  1605,  and,  in  consequence  of  the  removal 
of  The  Winter’s  Tale  to  1613,’  the  year  1604  is  left  vacant  for  the  admission  of  Lear. 

Knight  observes  that  4  Malone  and  Drake  are  at  issue  on  a  question  of  merely  three 
months,  when  the  facts,  which  we  really  have,  give  us  a  range  of  three  years.’  ‘  It  is 
4  sufficient,’  adds  Knight,  ‘  for  us  to  be  confirmed  in  the  belief,  derived  from  internal 
4  evidence,  that  Lear  was  produced  at  that  period  when  the  genius  of  Shakespeare 
‘was  “at  its  very  point ‘of  culmination.’”  He  also  points  out  that  the  Folio  has 
‘English*  in  IV,  vi,  249  [see  his  note  ad  loc.],  despite  the  fact  that  the  Quartos 
changed  it  to  British,  not  only  here,  but  in  Edgar’s  4  Fee,  fa,  fum.’ 

Mr  Wright  thinks  it  well  not  to  Jay  too  much  stress  upon  the  change  from 
4  English  ’  of  the  Folio  to  British  of  the  Quarto,  and  to  infer  therefrom  that  the  line  in 
the  Folio  was  written  before  the  royal  proclamation  in  October,  1604,  and  corrected 
before  the  Quartos  were  printed  in  1608.  4  It  is  as  likely,’  says  the  Editor  of  the  Clar¬ 
endon  Edition,  4  that  Shakespeare,  writing  not  long  after  1604,  while  the  change  was 
4  still  fresh,  and  before  the  word  4  British  ’  had  become  familiar  in  men’s  mouths,  may 
4  have  inadvertently  written  4  English,’  and  subsequently  changed  it  to  4  British.’  ’ 

The  Third  item  of  indirect  internal  evidence  is  thus  set  forth  by  Mr  Aldis  Wright: 
4  We  are  helped  forward  another  step  in  determining  the  date  by  a  passage  in  Glon- 
4  cester’s  speech  (I,  ii,  98,  et  seq.) :  4  These  late  eclipses  in  the  sun  and  moon  portend 
4  4  no  good  to  us.’  By  those  who  observed  the  signs  in  the  air  and  sky  the  great 
4  eclipse  of  the  sun,  which  took  place  in  October,  1605,  had  been  looked  forward. to 
4  with  apprehension  as  the  precursor  of  evil,  especially  as  it  was  preceded  by  an 
4  eclipse  of  the  moon  within  the  space  of  a  month.  In  arguing  against  such  appre- 
4  hensions,  John  Harvey,  of  King’s  Lynn,  who  reasoned  with  the  4  wisdom  of  nature,’ 
4  in  his  book  called  A  Discoursive  Probleme  Concerning  Prophesies,  printed  in  1588, 
4  wrote  as  follows  (p.  119)  : 

4  44  Moreouer,  the  like  concourse  of  two  Eclipses  in  one,  and  the  same  month,  shal 
“hereafter  more  euidently  in  shew,  and  more  effectually  in  deed,  appeere,  Anna 
44 1590.  the  7.  and  21.  daies  of  Iuly:  and  Anno  1598.  the  II.  and  25.  daies  of  Feb¬ 
ruary;  and  Anno  1601.  the  29.  day  of  Nouember,  and  14.  of  December:  but  espe¬ 
cially,  and  most  notably  Anno  1605.  the  second  day  of  October,  when  the  sunne 
“shall  be  obscured  aboue  XI.  digits,  and  darknes  appeere  euen  at  midday, the  Moone 
44  at  the  very  next  full  immediately  preceding  hauing  likewise  beene  Eclipsed.  Wher- 
44  fore  as  two  Eclipses  in  the  space  of  one  month,  are  no  great  strange  nouities,  so  if 
“  either  they,  or  an  huge  fearefull  Eclipse  of  the  Sunne  were  to  iustifie  or  confirme 
“  this  oracle :  the  author  thereof  should  haue  staled  his  wisedome  vntill  after  the 
“  foresaid  yeere  of  Christ,  1605.  when  so  rare  a  spectacle  shall  be  seene,  or  the  yeeres 
44 1606.  1607.  or  1608.  immediately  following,  when  so  mightie  an  Eclipse  shall  so 
“  perlously  rage.” 

4  Reading  this  in  connection  with  the  speech  of  Gloucester,  which  has  been  re¬ 
ferred  to,  and  with  what  Edmund,  the  sceptic  of  the  time,  subsequently  (I,  ii,  120, 


38o 


APPENDIX 


*124,  125)  says,  *  0,  these  eclipses  portend  these  divisions,’  and,  *1  am  thinking, 
‘‘brother,  of  a  prediction  I  read  this  other  day,  what  should  follow  these  eclipses,’ 

*  it  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  Shakespeare  had  in  his  mind  the  great  eclipse,  and 

*  that  Lear  was  written  while  the  recollection  of  it  was  still  fresh,  and  while  the 
‘ephemeral  literature  of  the  day  abounded  with  pamphlets  foreboding  the  conse- 

*  quences  that  were  to  follow.  If  we  imagine  further  that,  in  Gloucester’s  words, 
‘  ‘  machinations,  hollowness,  treachery,  and  all  ruinous  disorders  follow  us  disquietly 
“to  our  graves,’  there  is  a  reference  to  the  Gunpowder  Plot  of  Nov.  5,  1605,  we 
« have  another  approximation  to  the  date.  But,  without  insisting  too  much  upon  this, 

*  it  is,  I  think,  highly  probable  that  Shakespeare  did  not  begin  to  write  King  Lear 
‘till  towards  the  end  of  the  year  1605,  and  that  his  attention  may  have  been  directed 
'to  the  story  as  a  subject  for  tragedy  by  the  revival  of  the  older  play  above  men- 

*  tioned,  which  was  published  in  the  same  year. 

'  Having  now  reduced  the  period  of  composition  to  the  narrow  limits  between  the 
‘end  of  1605  and  Christmas,  1606,  any  attempt  to  assign  the  date  more  exactly  must 
« be  purely  conjectural  and  derived  from  internal  evidence.  It  would  be  difficult  to 
‘  fix  the  precise  season  to  which  the  storm  in  the  third  Act  is  appropriate.  Various 
‘indications  in  the  previous  Act  seem  to  point  to  the  winter;  such  as  the  Fool’s 
‘speech  (II,  iv,  45),  *  Winter’s  not  gone  yet,  if  the  wild  geese  fly  that  way,’  though 
‘  of  course  this  had  also  another  meaning.  Again,  the  signs  of  the  gathering  storm 
« are  wintry,  ‘  the  bleak  winds  do  sorely  ruffle,*  *  ’tis  a  wild  night  * ;  but  Lear’s  apos- 

*  trophe  is  addressed  to  a  violent  summer  tempest,  and  so  Kent  describes  it.  And  in 

*  accordance  with  this  all  the  colouring  of  the  fourth  Act  is  of  the  summer.  Lear 
‘  is  seen 

Crown’d  with  rank  fumiter  and  farrow-weeds. 

With  hor-docks,  hemlocks,  nettles,  cuckow-flowers. 

Darnel,  and  all  the  idle  weeds  that  grow 
In  our  sustaining  corn.' 

‘ ‘  Search  every  acre  in  the  high-grown  field,’  points  to  July,  and  we  must  not  insist 

*  too  much  upon  strict  botanical  accuracy,  for  this  would  be  late  for  cuckoo-flowers,  as 
‘  well  as  for  the  samphire-gathering  in  a  subsequent  scene,  which  generally  takes  place 
‘in  May.  Perhaps  Shakespeare  began  the  play  in  the  winter  of  1605,  and  finished  it 
‘  in  the  summer  of  1606,  while  the  fields  were  still  covered  with  the  unharvested  corn, 
« and  the  great  storm  of  March  was  still  fresh  in  his  recollection.’ 

Mr  Moberly  thinks  that  the  play  must  have  been  written  in  1605-6,  *  in  the  midst 
‘of  the  stirring  events  connected  with  the  Gunpowder  Plot;  and  the  absence  of 

*  allusion  to  them  is  a  striking  instance  of  the  way  in  which  Shakespeare’s  mind,  like 
‘that  of  Goethe  in  after-time,  could  keep  aloof  from  subjects  of  absorbing  public 
‘  interest,  and  live  simply  among  its  own  creations.’ 

Dyce  adopts  Malone’s  view  (which,  however,  he  erroneously  attributes  to  Stee- 
yens),  that  its  date  is  March  or  April,  1605. 

Dr  Delius  thinks  that  it  must  have  been  written  in  1604  or  1605,  in  Shakespeare’s 
fortieth  or  forty-first  year. 

Mr  FLEAY  ( Shakespeare  Manual,  p.  47)  says  that  it  was  probably  produced  early  in 
1605,  as  the  old  play  was  then  reprinted,  and  entered  on  the  eighth  of  May  as  *  lately 
acted  ’  in  order  to  deceive  the  public. 

I  think  we  must  remain  content  with  the  term  of  three  years ;  no  date  more  pre¬ 
cise  than  this  will  probably  ever  gain  general  acceptance.  I  am  afraid  we  are  con- 


DATE  OF  THE  COMPOSITION 


3Sl 


sidering  too  curiously  in  attempting  to  ascertain  the  precise  year  or  time  of  the  year. 
To  suppose  that  when  Shakespeare  alludes  to  winter  there  must  be  actually  icicles 
hanging  by  the  wall,  or  that  when  he  mentions  flowers  the  meadows  must  be  painted 
with  delight  before  his  very  eyes,  is  to  put  a  narrow  limitation  to  his  imagination. 
His  allusions  to  contemporary  events  are  not  always  so  defined  as  to  be  at  once 
manifest  to  close  students  or  accomplished  scholars.  As  we  have  seen,  one  editor 
discovers  in  this  play  a  possible  allusion  to  the  Gunpowder  Plot,  while  another  dis¬ 
cerns  none.  To  a  certain  extent  this  same  vagueness  holds  true  in  regard  to  eclipses 
and  other  natural  phenomena.  I  cannot  but  think  we  deal  unworthily  With  Shake¬ 
speare’s  genius  when  we  suppose  that  he  needed,  or  that  he  himself  felt  that  he 
needed,  to  resort  to  such  allusions  in  order  to  produce  dramatic  effects.  While  we 
all  agree  in  believing  that  he  throws  around  his  dramas  the  atmosphere  of  the  times 
in  which  the  scenes  are  laid,  it  can  scarcely  be  but  that  his  auditors,  and  assuredly 
Shakespeare  himself,  would  have  felt  the  jar  that  an  allusion  to  an  event  of  yester¬ 
day  would  have  instantly  occasioned.  At  the  same  time,  so  truly  did  Shakespeare 
write  for  the  hour  then  present  that  it  is  presumptuous  to  say  what  he  would  not  do 
for  that  hour’s  success.  There  are  instances,  undoubtedly,  in  his  plays  where  he 
alludes  to  recent  local  events;  but  I  do  not  think  the  number  as  large  as  is  generally 
supposed. 

Since  the  foregoing  was  written  the  article  by  Mr  Fleay  appeared,  from  which 
extracts  were  made  at  the  close  of  the  preceding  article  on  The  Text.  Mr  Fleay  is 
so  eminent  in  all  that  pertains  to  metrical  tests,  and  has  devoted  so  much  learning  to 
the  discovery  of  the  dates  of  these  plays,  that  it  is  with  reluctance  that  I  acknow¬ 
ledge  my  inability  to  follow  him  to  his  exact  conclusion.  As  will  be  seen,  he  follows 
the  popular  tide  in  reading  fraud  in  Simon  Stafford’s  entry  on  the  Stationers’ 
Registers.  The  following  extract  from  Mr  Fleay’S  article  bears  upon  the  present 
subject: 

‘The  date  had  long  since  been  determined  by  Malone,  as  between  October,  1604, 
‘  and  the  8th  of  May,  1605,  on  satisfactory  grounds;  but  Mr  Aldis  Wright  has  shifted 

*  it  forward  to  the  summer  of  1606,  in  the  plausible  introduction  to  his  edition  of  the 

*  play.  Now,  the  whole  theory  of  metrical  tests  depends  on  the  date  of  this  play. 
‘Shakespeare  wrote  Pericles  (or  his  share  of  it),  in  1606;  and  Pericles  is  as  certainly 

*  in  his  fourth  manner  as  Lear  is  in  his  third ;  if  the  periods  overlap  my  theories  are 
‘  worthless ;  and  Lear  and  Pericles  written  within  a  few  months  would  bring  them 

*  dangerously  near.  Hence  I  have  examined  this  question  with  special  minuteness, 

*  and,  I  am  glad  to  add,  have  been  rewarded  by  a  positive  result.  The  play  was 

*  written  before  May  8,  1605.  For  the  old  play  of  Leir  (written  for  the  Queen’s 
‘men,  circa  1588,  played  by  the  Queen’s  and  Sussex’s  men  at  the  Rose,  1593,  April 
‘6;  entered  for  E.  White,  1594,  May  14;  entered  for  S.  Stafford,  and  printed  by  him 
‘for  J.  Wright,  to  whom  he  assigned  it,  1605,  May  8)  was  put  on  the  Stationers’ 

*  books  as  The  Tragical  History  of  King  Leir  and  his  three  daughters ,  6 ■’c.,  AS 
‘IT  WAS  LATELY  ACTED.  Now  Mr  Aldis  Wright  himself  noticed  that  no  writer 
‘  (historical  or  theatrical)  had  given  a  tragic  ending  to  this  story  till  Shakespeare 
‘  made  his  play ;  *  Cordelia’s  fate  and  character  are  all  his  own,’  says  he.  Hence  the 
‘old  ‘Chronicle  History’  could  not  have  been  described  as  * Tragical ’  in  1605  had 
‘  not  a  tragedy  on  the  subject  been  *  lately  acted,’  nor  could  the  tragedy  have  been 
‘any  other  than  Shakespeare’s.  Hence  Malone  was  right  in  his  date  and  in  his  in¬ 
ference  that  Stafford  (who  had.  to  do  with  the  surreptitious  editions  of  Pencles  and 
‘  Edward  III)  wished  to  pass  the  old  play  off  as  Shakespeare’s.  Wright,  however, 


382 


APPENDIX 


‘had  not  the  impudence  to  put  Stafford’s  ‘  Tragical  History’  on  his  title-page,  though 

*  he  kept  the  4  lately  acted,’  which  was  probably,  as  far  as  the  older  play  is  concerned, 

4  not  true.  Accordingly,  when  the  real  4  tragedy  ’  was  issued  in  1608,  Butter  marks 
'  his  edition  as  the  genuine  *  Dirty  Dick,’  by  putting  4  Chronicle  History  *  on  its  fore- 
4  bead;  only  in  the  Folio  does  the  real  name  of  ‘  Tragedy’  appear.  The  date, then, 

*  is  early  in  1605.’ 

Again  4  the  wheel  has  come  full  circle  ’ ;  the  same  is  true  of  Wright  and  Fleay 
es  of  Malone  and  Chalmers  :  they  differ  only  by  a  few  months.  Wright  supposes 
that  Shakespeare  began  the  play,  and  Fleay  that  he  ended  it,  in  1605. 

For  me  it  is  sufficient  that  we  have  the  play ;  and  all  these  discussions  as  to  the 
time  when  it  was  written,  even  if  they  could  give  us  the  very  day  of  the  week  and 
the  very  hour  of  the  day,  would  still  remain  among  the  extrinsic  facts  which,  it 
seems  fated,  are  to  be  all  that  we  shall  ever  learn  about  Shakespeare.  While  I  am 
reading  such  delightful  books  as  Shakspere,  His  Mind  and  Art,  1  yield  to  the  glamour 
and  confess  the  charm ;  and,  kindled  by  the  enthusiasm  of  the  Director  of  the  New 
Shakspere  Society,  and  of  his  fellow-workers,  I  am  persuaded  that  naught’s  had, 
all’s  spent,  when  our  researches  are  not  devoted  to  the  discovery  of  the  order  of  the 
plays;  but  I  turn  to  the  plays  themselves,  and,  lost  in  their  grandeur  and  their  beau¬ 
ties,  find  that  I  am  indifferent  as  to  when  they  were  written,  where  they  were  written, 
or  even  by  whom  they  were  written.  Standards  for  measuring  them  we  have  none ; 
they  stand  by  themselves,  written  by  no  mortal  hand.  Well  is  it  for  him,  and  for  us, 
that  the  man  Shakespeare  has  faded,  and  left  not  a  wrack  behind.  No  ouUvard 
life  could  rise  to  the  grandeur  of  these  plays. 

Shall  we  ever  outgrow  the  wisdom  of  Lessing?  In  one  of  his  Hamburg  criti¬ 
cisms,  speaking  of  the  pitiful  spectacle  made  by  Voltaire  when  suffering  himself  to 
be  shown  to  the  theatre  after  the  performance  of  one  of  his  plays,  Lessing  says: 
‘  I  know  not  which  strikes  me  as  the  more  pitiful,  the  childish  curiosity  of  the  public, 
‘  or  the  conceited  complaisance  of  the  poet.  How  then  do  people  think  a  poet  looks  ? 
‘Not  like  other  men?  And  how  weak  must  be  the  impression  which  the  work  has 
‘  made  when,  in  the  same  moment,  the  only  curiosity  is  to  hold  up  the  figure  of  the 
‘  master  alongside  of  it !  The  true  masterpiece,  it  seems  to  me,  fills  us  so  wholly 

*  with  itself  that  we  forget  the  author,  and  look  upon  it,  not  as  the  production  of  an 

*  individual,  but  of  universal  nature.  ...  I  suppose  the  true  reason  why  we  know  so 
4  little  that  is  certain  about  the  person  and  life  of  Homer  is  the  excellence  of  his 
1  poems.  We  stand  full  of  astonishment  by  the  broad,  rushing  river,  without  thinking 
‘of  its  source  in  the  mountains.  We  care  not  to  know,  we  find  our  account  in  for- 
‘  getting,  that  Homer,  the  schoolmaster  in  Smyrna,  the  blind  beggar,  is  the  very 
‘  Homer  who  so  enraptures  us  in  his  works.  He  leads  us  into  the  presence  of  the 
‘  gods  and  heroes ;  the  company  must  be  very  tedious,  we  must  be  greatly  ennuied 
‘by  it,  if  we  are  so  very  curious  to  know  all  about  the  doorkeeper  who  let  us  in. 
4  The  illusion  must  be  very  weak,  one  must  be  little  natural,  but  all  the  more  sophis- 
‘  ticated,  when  one  is  so  anxious  about  the  artist.’ 


THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


Of  the  two  tragic  stories  in  Lear,  the  source  from  which  Shakespeare  derived  the 
subordinate  one,  that  of  Gloucester,  is  well  known.  The  extract  from  Sidney’s  Arcadia, 
containing  the  story  of  *  the  Paphlagonian  unkind  king,’  will  be  found  on  p.  386 ;  it  was 
pointed  out,  as  similar  to  Gloucester’s,  by  our  countrywoman,  Mrs  Lennox,  in  1754, 
and  I  know  of  only  one  commentator,  Hunter  (see  IV,  vi,  66),  who  has  questioned, 
since  then,  the  general  belief  that  it  was  the  original  of  Shakespeare’s  secondary  plot. 

There  is  some  doubt,  however,  as  to  the  source  from  which  the  main  plot  of  Lear 
is  directly  derived.  The  story  itself,  in  its  broad  outlines  of  doting  paternal  kind¬ 
ness  repaid  with  filial  ingratitude,  and  paternal  harshness  requited  with  devoted  love, 
is  as  old  as  almost  any  story  in  English  literature.  It  is  told  by  Geoffrey  of  Mon¬ 
mouth  in  his  Historia  britomtm,  by  Layamon  in  his  Brut,  by  Robert  of  Gloucester, 
by  Fabyan  in  his  Chronicle,  by  Spenser  in  his  Faery  Queene,  by  Holinshed,  by 
Camden,  and  it  is  found  in  the  Mirour  for  Magistrates,  the  Gesta  Romano-rum, 
in  Warner’s  Albion's  England,  and,  I  dare  say,  elsewhere.  It  is  not,  however, 
likely  that  Shakespeare  went  to  any  of  the  older  of  these  authorities  for  his  ma¬ 
terials;  we  know  how  fond  he  was  of  Holinshed,  and  unless  there  were  a  drama 
ready  to  his  hand  to  be  remodelled,  we  should  look  to  Holinshed ;  and  there,  indeed, 
some  of  the  best  of  modern  editors  do  find  the  immediate  source  of  Shakespeare’s 
Lear.  But  I  am  afraid  I  cannot  agree  with  them.  Holinshed,  I  think,  furnished 
merely  the  indirect  source  of  Lear.  I  think  we  can  approach  one  step  nearer  and 
discern  the  direct  source  in  the  ante-Shakespearian  drama  of  the  Chronicle  History  of 
King  Leir,  which  Halliwell,  following  Malone,  says  was  dramatized  as  early  as 
1593  or  1594,  and  is  probably  the  same  that  Edward  White  entered  in  the  Stationers’ 
Registers  in  the  latter  of  these  years,  and  which  reappeared  as  the  *  tragecall  historic  ’ 
printed  by  Simon  Stafford  in  1605.  The  author  of  this  old  comedy  of  King  Leir 
undoubtedly  drew  from  the  old  chroniclers,  probably  Holinshed;  and  Shakespeare, 
I  think,  drew  from  him.  But  what  false  impressions  are  conveyed  in  the  phrases 
which  we  have  to  use  to  express  the  process  whereby  Shakespeare  converted  the 
stocks  and  stones  of  the  old  drama's  and  chronicles  into  living,  breathing  men  and 
women  !  We  say  he  *  drew  his  original’  from  this  source,  or  he  ‘  found  his  materials’ 
in  that  source.  But  how  much  did  he  ‘  draw,’  or  what  did  he  ‘  find  ’  ?  Granting 
that  he  drew  from  Holinshed,  or  from  the  old  comedy,  or  whence  you  please,  where 
did  he  find  Lear’s  madness,  or  the  pudder  of  the  elements,  or  the  inspired  babblings 
of  the  Fool?  Of  whatsoever  makes  his  tragedies  sublime  and  heaven-high  above 
all  other  human  compositions, — of  that  we  find  never  a  trace.  And  this  minds  me 
to  say  that  of  all  departments  of  Shakespearian  study  none  seems  to  me  more  profit¬ 
less  than  this  search  for  the  sources  whence  Shakespeare  gathered  his  dramas;  the 
distance  is  always  immeasurable  between  the  hint  and  the  fulfilment;  what  to  our 
purblind  eyes  is  a  bare,  naked  rock  becomes,  when  gilded  by  Shakespeare’s  heavenly 
alchemy,  encrusted  thick  all  over  with  jewels.  When,  after  reading  one  of  his 
tragedies,  we  turn  to  what  we  are  pleased  to  call  the  *  original  of  his  plot,’  I  am 
reminded  of  those  glittering  gems,  of  which  Heine  speaks,  that  we  see  at  night  in 
lovely  gardens,  and  think  must  have  been  left  there  by  kings’  children  at  play,  but 
when  we  look  for  these  jewels  by  day  we  see  only  wretched  little  worms  which 
crawl  painfully  away,  and  which  the  foot  forbears  to  crush  only  out  of  strange  pity. 

383 


384 


APPENDIX 


If  we  must  find  an  original  for  Lear,  I  think  it  is  in  the  old  drama,  and  not  in 
Holinshed;  and  I  mean  by  this,  that,  in  reading  this  old  drama,  every  now  and  then 
there  comes  across  us  an  incident,  or  a  line,  or  a  phrase,  that  reminds  us  of  Shake¬ 
speare’s  Lear ,  and  that  this  cannot  be  said  of  Holinshed’s  story.  For  instance,  in 
Leir  we  find  a  faithful  courtier  who  defends  Cordelia  to  her  father,  and  the  old 
king  replies,  ‘  Urge  this  no  more,  and  if  thou  love  thy  life.’  And  this  same  courtier 
afterwards  accompanies  the  old  king  in  his  exile  as  his  faithful  companion  and  ser¬ 
vant.  Again,  in  the  trial-scene  Cordelia  murmurs  aside  her  abhorrence  at  the  hypoc¬ 
risy  of  her  sisters’  asseverations  of  affection.  Again,  Leir  alludes  to  Gonorill’s  ‘  young 
bones.’  Again,  Perillus  says  of  Leir,  *  But  he  the  myrrour  of  mild  patience,  Puts  up 
‘  all  wrongs  and  never  gives  reply.’  Shakespeare’s  Lear  says :  *  No  I  will  be  the 
‘  pattern  of  all  patience,  I  will  say  nothing.’  Again,  when  Leir  recognises  Cordelia 
after  their  estrangement  he  kneels  to  her.  But  it  is  needless  to  multiply  instances.  I 
have  given  on  p.  393  et  seq.  an  abstract  of  the  old  drama,  much  too  long  and  tiresome 
to  be  reprinted  entire,  and  the  reader  can  judge  for  himself,  if  he  take  any  interest  in  a 
question  which  is,  I  repeat,  to  me  a  barren  one.  No  one,  I  think,  has  done  fuller  justice 
to  the  old  drama,  which,  by  the  way,  Capf.ll  called  a  ‘  silly  old  play,’  than  Campbell, 
the  poet,  who,  in  his  Remarks  on  Shakespeare’s  Lear,  says :  *  The  elder  tragedy  of 

*  King  Leir  is  simple  and  touching.  There  is  one  entire  scene  in  it,  the  meeting  of 
‘Cordelia  with  her  father  in  a  lonely  forest,  which,  with  Shakespeare’s  Lear  in  my 
‘  memory  and  heart,  I  could  scarcely  read  with  dry  eyes.  This  Leir  is  a  pleasing 
‘  tragedy,  and,  though  it  precedes  our  poet’s  Lear,  is  not  its  prototype,  and  its  mild 

*  merits  only  show  us  the  wide  expanse  of  difference  between  respectable  talent  and 

*  commanding  inspiration.  The  two  Lears  have  nothing  in  common  but  their  aged 

*  weakness,  their  general  goodness  of  heart,  their  royal  rank,  and  their  misfortunes. 
‘  The  ante-Shakespearian  Lear  is  a  patient,  simple  old  man,  who  bears  his  sorrows 

*  very  meekly,  till  Cordelia  arrives  with  her  husband,  the  King  of  France,  and  his 

*  victorious  army,  and  restores  her  father  to  the  throne  of  Britain.  ...  In  the  old 

*  play,  Leir  has  a  friend  Perillus,  who  moves  our  interest,  though  not  so  deeply  as 
‘  Kent  in  the  later  and  grander  drama.  But,  independently  of  Shakespeare’s  having 
‘  created  a  new  Lear,  he  has  sublimated  the  old  tragedy  into  a  new  one  by  an  entire 
‘originality  in  the  spiritual  portraiture  of  its  personages.  ...  In  fine, wherever  Shake- 
‘  speare  works  on  old  materials  you  will  find  him  not  wiping  dusted  gold,  but  extract- 

*  ing  gold  from  dust,  where  none  but  himself  could  have  made  the  golden  extraction.’ 

The  story  of  Leir,  as  told  by  Holinshed  ( The  second  Booke  of  the  historie  of  Eng* 
land,  chaps,  v,  vi,  ed.  1574)  is  as  follows: 

‘  Leir  the  sonne  of  Baldud,  was  admitted  ruler  ouer  the  Britaines,  in  the  yeeie  of 
‘the  world  3105,  at  what  time  Ioas  raigned  as  yet  in  Iuda.  This  Leir  was  a  prince 
‘  of  right  noble  demeanor,  gouerning  his  land  and  subiects  in  great  wealth.  He  made 

*  the  towne  of  Caerlier  nowe  called  Leicester,  which  standeth  vpon  the  riuer  of  Sore. 
‘  It  is  written  that  he  had  by  his  wife  three  daughters  without  other  issue,  whose 
‘names  were  Gonorilla,  Regan,  and  Cordeilla,  which  daughters  he  greatly  loued,  but 
‘  specially  Cordeilla  the  yoongest  farre  aboue  the  two  elder.  When  this  Leir  therefore 

*  was  come  to  great  yeeres,  &  began  to  waxe  vnweldie  through  age,  he  thought  to 
'  vnderstand  the  affections  of  his  daughters  towards  him,  and  preferre  hir  whome 
‘he  best  loued,  to  the  succession  ouer  the  kingdome.  Whervpon  he  first  asked 

*  Gonorilla  the  eldest,  how  well  shee  loued  him :  who  calling  hir  gods  to  record, 
‘  protested,  that  she  loued  him  more  than  hir  owne  life,  which  by  right  and  reason 


THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


385 


‘shoulde  be  most  deere  vnto  hir.  With  which  answer  the  father  being  well  pleased, 
*  turned  to  the  second,  and  demanded  of  hir  how  well  she  loued  him :  who  answered 
4  (confirming  hir  saiengs  with  great  othes)  that  she  loued  him  more  than  toung  could 
4  expresse,  and  farre  aboue  all  other  creatures  of  the  world. 

4  Then  called  he  his  yoongest  daughter  Cordeilla  before  him,  and  asked  of  hir  what 
4  account  she  made  of  him :  vnto  whome  she  made  this  answer  as  followeth :  Know- 
4  ing  the  great  loue  and  fathcrlie  zeale  that  you  haue  always  borne  towards  me,  (for 
4  the  which  I  maie  not  answere  you  otherwise  than  I  thinke,  and  as  my  conscience 
4  leadeth  me)  I  protest  vnto  you,  that  I  haue  loued  you  euer,  and  will  continuallie 
4  (while  I  hue)  loue  you  as  my  naturall  father  And  if  you  would  more  vnderstand 
4  of  the  loue  that  I  beare  you,  assertaine  your  selfe,  that  so  much  as  you  haue,  so 
4  much  you  are  worth,  and  so  much  I  loue  you,  and  no  more.  The  father  being 
4  nothing  content  with  this  answer,  married  his  two  eldest  daughters,  the  one  vnto 
4  Henninus,  the  Duke  of  Cornewal,  and  the  other  vnto  Maglanus,  the  Duke  of 
4  Albania,  betwixt  whome  he  willed  and  ordeined  that  his  land  should  be  deuided 
4  after  his  death,  and  the  one  halfe  thereof  immediatelie  should  be  assigned  to  them 
4  in  hand :  but  for  the  third  daughter  Cordeilla  he  reserued  nothing. 

4  Neuertheles  it  fortuned  that  one  of  the  princes  of  Gallia  (which  now  is  called 
4  France)  whose  name  was  Aganippus,  hearing  of  the  beautie,  womanhood,  and  good 
4  conditions  of  the  said  Cordeilla,  desired  to  haue  hir  in  manage,  and  sent  ouer  to 
4  hir  father,  requiring  that  he  mighte  haue  hir  to  wife :  to  whome  answere  was  made, 
4  that  he  might  haue  his  daughter,  but  as  for  anie  dower  he  could  haue  none,  for 
4  all  was  promised  and  assured  to  hir  other  sisters  alreadie.  Aganippus  notwith- 
4  standing  this  answer  of  deniall  to  receiue  anie  thing  by  way  of  dower  with  Cor- 
4  deilla,  tooke  hir  to  wife,  onlie  moued  thereto  (I  saie)  for  respect  of  hir  person  and 
4  amiable  vertues.  This  Aganippus  was  one  of  the  twelue  kings  that  ruled  Gallia  in 
4  those  daies,  as  in  the  Brittish  historie  it  is  recorded  But  to  proceed. 

4  After  that  Leir  was  fallen  into  age,  the  tv/o  dukes  that  had  married  his  two 
4  eldest  daughters,  thinking  long  yer  the  gouemment  of  the  land  did  come  to  their 
‘hands,  arose  against  him  in  armour,  and  reft  from  him  the  gouemance  of  the 
4  land,  vpon  conditions  to  be  continued  for  terme  of  life :  by  the  which  he  was  put 
4  to  his  portion,  that  is,  to  Hue  after  a  rate  assigned  to  him  for  the  maintenance  of  his 
4  estate,  which  in  processe  of  time  was  diminished  as  well  by  Maglanus  as  by  Hen- 
4  ninus.  But  the  greatest  griefe  that  Leir  tooke,  was  to  see  the  vnkindnesse  of  his 
4  daughters,  which  seemed  to  thinke  that  all  was  too  much  which  their  father  had, 
4  the  same  being  neuer  so  little :  in  so  much,  that  going  from  the  one  to  the  other,  he 
4  was  brought  to  that  miserie,  that  scarslie  they  would  allow  him  one  seruaunt  to  waite 
4  vpon  him. 

4  In  the  end,  such  was  the  vnkindnesse,  or  (as  I  maie  saie)  the  vnnaturalnesse 
4  which  he  found  in  his  two  daughters,  notwithstanding  their  faire  and  pleasant 
4  words  vttered  in  time  past,  that  being  constreined  of  necessitie,  he  fled  the  land,  and 
‘sailed  into  Gallia,  there  to  seeke  some  comfort  of  his  youngest  daughter  Cordeilla 
4  whom  before  time  he  hated.  The  ladie  Cordeilla  hearing  that  he  was  arriued  in 
4  poore  estate,  she  first  sent  to  him  priuilie  a  certeine  summe  of  monie  to  apparell 
4  himselfe  withall,  and  to  reteine  a  certein  number  of  seruants  that  might  attende 
4  vpon  him  in  honorable  wise,  as  apperteined  to  the  estate  which  he  had  borne :  and 
‘then  so  accompanied,  she  appointed  him  to  come  to  the  court,  which  he  did,  and 
‘was  so  ioifullie,  honorablie,  and  louinglie  receiued,  both  by  his  sonne  in  law 
‘Aganippus,  and  also  by  his  daughter  Cordeilla,  that  his  hart  was  greatlie  com- 

33  z 


386 


APPENDIX 


4  forted :  for  he  was  no  lesse  honored,  than  if  he  had  bcene  king  of  the  whole  cenn- 

*  trie  himselfe. 

*  Now  when  he  had  informed  his  son  in  law  and  his  daughter  in  what  sort  he  had 

*  beene  vsed  by  his  other  daughters,  Aganippus  caused  a  mightie  armie  to  be  put  in 

*  readinesse,  and  likewise  a  greate  nauie  of  ships  to  be  rigged,  to  passe  oucr  into 

*  Britaine  with  Leir  his  father  in  law,  to  see  him  againe  restored  to  his  kingdome 

*  It  was  accorded,  that  Cordeilla  should  also  go  with  him  to  take  possession  of  the 

*  land,  the  which  he  promised  to  leaue  vnto  hir,  as  the  rightfull  inheritour  after  his 
‘  decesse,  notwithstanding  any  former  grant  made'to  hir  sisters  or  to  their  husbands 
‘  in  anie  maner  of  wise. 

‘  Herevpon,  when  this  armie  and  nauie  of  ships  were  readie,  Leir  and  his  daugh* 

*  ter  Cordeilla  with  hir  husband  tooke  the  sea,  and  arriuing  in  Britaine,  fought  with 
4  their  enimies,  and  discomfited  them  in  battell,  in  the  which  Maglanus  and  Henninus 
4  were  slaine :  and  then  was  Leir  restored  to  his  kingdome,  which  he  ruled  after  this 
4  by  the  space  of  two  yeeres,  and  then  died,  fortie  yecres  after  he-first  began  to  reigne. 

*  His  bodie  was  buried  at  Leicester  in  a  vaut  vnder  the  chanell  cf  the  riuer  of  Sore 
‘beneath  the  towne. 

*  Cordeilla  the  yoongest  daughter  of  Leir  was  admitted  Q.  and  supreme  gouemesse 
‘of  Britaine,  in  the  yeere  of  the  world  3155, before  the  bylding  of  Rome  54,  Uzia 
4  was  then  reigning  in  Juda,  and  Jeroboam  ouer  Israeli.  This  Cordeilla  after  hir 

*  father’s  deceasse  ruled  the  land  of  Britaine  right  worthilie  during  the  space  of  fiue 
'yeeres,  in  which  meane  time  hir  husband  died,  and  then  about  the  end  of  those 

*  fiue  yeeres,  hir  two  nephewes  Margan  and  Cur.edag,  sonnes  to  hir  aforesaid  sisters, 
4  disdaining  to  be  vnder  the  gouemment  of  a  woman,  leuied  warre  against  hir,  and 
“  destroied  a  great  part  of  the  land,  and  finallie  tooke  hir  prisoner,  and  laid  hir  fast  in 
“  ward,  wherewith  she  tooke  suche  griefe,  being  a  woman  of  a  manlie  courage,  and 
“  despairing  to  recouer  libertie,  there  she  slue  hirselfe.’ 

The  following  extract  from  Sir  Philip  Sidney’s  Arcadia  (lib.  ii,  pp.  133-138,  ed. 
1598,  as  quoted  in  the  Clarendon  ed.)  contains  the  story  out  of  which  Shakespeare 
moulded  Gloucester’s  tragic  fate.  It  is  called,  in  ed.  1590,  ‘The  pitifull  state,  and 
‘  story  of  the  Paphlagonian  vnkinde  king,  and  his  kind  senne,  first  related  by  the  son, 

*  then  by  the  blind  father  ’ : 

4  It  was  in  the  kingdome  of  Galacia,  the  season  being  (as  in  the  depth  of  winter) 

*  verie  cold,  and  as  then  sodainlie  growne  to  so  extreame  and  foule  a  storme,  that 
‘neuer  any  winter  (I  thinlce)  brought  forth  a  fowler  child:  so  that  the  Princes  were 
4  euen  cOpelled  by  the  haile,  that  the  pride  of  the  winde  blew  into  their  faces,  to  seeke 

*  some  shrowding  place  which  a  certain  hollow  rocke  offering  vnto  them,  they  made 

*  it  their  shield  against  the  tempests  furie.  And  so  staying  there,  till  the  violence 

*  thereof  was  passed,  they  heard  the  speach  of  a  couple,  who  not  perceiuing  them, 
4  being  hid  within  that  rude  canapie,  held  a  straunge  and  pitifull  disputation,  which 
‘  made  them  step  out,  yet  in  such  sort,  as  they  might  see  vnseene.  There  they  per- 
4  ceiued  an  aged  man,  and  a  young,  scarcelie  come  to  the  age  of  a  man,  both  poorely 
4  arrayed,  extreamely  weather-beaten ;  the  olde  man  blind,  the  young  man  leading 
4  him :  and  yet  through  all  those  miseries,  in  both  there  seemed  to  appeare  a  kind 

*  of  noblenesse,  not  sutable  to  that  affliction.  But  the  first  words  they  heard,  were 
4  these  of  the  old  man.  Well  Leonatus  (said  he)  since  I  cannot  perswade  thee  to 
4  leade  me  to  that  which  should  end  my  griefe,  and  thy  trouble,  let  me  now  intreat 

thee  to  leaue  me :  feare  not,  my  miserie  cannot  be  greater  then  it  is,  and  nothing 


THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


387 


doth  become  me  but  miserie :  feare  not  the  daunger  of  my  blind  steps,  I  cannot 
'  fall  worse  then  I  am :  and  do  not  I  pray  thee,  do  not  obstinately  continue  to  infect 

*  thee  with  my  wretchednesse :  but  flie,  flie  from  this  region  only  worthie  of  me. 
'  Deare  father  (answered  he)  do  not  take  away  from  me  the  only  remnant  of  my 
4  happinesse :  while  I  haue  power  to  do  you  seruice,  I  am  not  whollie  miserable. 

*  Ah  my  sonne  (said  he,  and  with  that  he  groned,  as  if  sorrow  straue  to  breake  his 
4  heart)  how  euill  fits  it  me  to  haue  such  a  sonne,  and  how  much  doth  thy  kindnesse 

*  vpbraid  my  wickednesse  ?  These  dolefull  speeches,  and  some  others  to  like  pur- 
4  pose  (well  shewing  they  had  not  bene  borne  to  the  fortune  they  were  in,)  moued  the 
4  Princes  to  go  out  vnto  them,  and  aske  the  younger  what  they  were  ?  Sirs  (answered 
4  he  with  a  good  grace,  and  made  the  more  agreeable  by  a  certaine  noble  kind  of 
4  piteousnesse)  I  see  well  you  are  straungers,  that  know  not  our  miserie,  so  well  here 
4  knowne,  that  no  man  dare  know,  but  that  we  must  be  miserable.  Indeed  our  state 
4  is  such,  as  though  ndthing  is  so  needfull  vnto  vs  as  pitie,  yet  nothing  is  more  dan- 
4  gerous  vnto  vs,  then  to  make  our  selues  so  knowne  as  may  stirre  pitie ;  but  your 
4  presence  promiseth  that  crueltie  shall  not  ouer-runne  hats :  and  if  it  did,  in  truth 
4  our  state  is  sunke  below  the  degree  of  feare. 

4  This  old  man  (whom  I  leade)  was  lately  rightfull  Frince  of  this  countrie  of 
4  Pafihlagonia,  by  the  hard-hearted  vngratefulnesse  of  a  sonne  of  his,  depriued,  not 
‘onely  of  his  kingdome  (whereof  no  forraine  forces  were  euer  able  to  spoyle  him) 
4  but  of  his  sight,  the  riches  which  Nature  graunts  to  the  poorest  creatures.  Whereby, 
4  and  by  other  his  vnnaturall  dealings,  he  hath  bene  driuen  to  such  griefe,  as  euen 
4  now  he  would  haue  had  me  to  haue  led  him  to  the  top  of  this  rocke,  thence  to  cast 
4  himselfe  headlong  to  death :  and  so  would  haue  made  me,  who  receiued  my  life 
4  of  him,  to  be  the  worker  of  his  destruction.  But  noble  Gentlemen,  said  he,  if 
‘either  of  you  haue  a  father,  and  feele what dutifull  affection  is  engraffed  in  a sonnes 
4  heart,  let  me  intreat  you  to  conueigh  this  afflicted  Prince  to  some  place  of  rest  and 
4  securitie :  amongst  your  worthie  acts  it  shall  be  none  of  the  least,  that  a  king  of  such 
4  might  and  fame,  &  so  vniustlie  oppressed,  is  in  any  sort  by  you  relieued. 

4  But  before  they  could  make  him  answere,  his  father  beganne  to  speake.  Ah  my 
4  sonne,  said  he,  how  euill  an  Historian  are  you,  that  leaue  out  the  chiefe  knot  of  all 
4  the  discourse  ?  my  wickednesse,  my  wickednesse :  and  if  thou  doest  it  to  spare  my 
4  eares,  (fhe  only  sense  now  left  me  proper  for  knowledge)  assure  thy  selfe  thou  doest 
4  mistake  me:  and  I  take  witnesse  of  that  Sunne  which  you  see  (with  that  he  cast  vp 
4  his  blind  eyes,  as  if  he  would  hunt  for  light)  and  wish  my  selfe  in  worse  case  then 
4 1  do  wish  my  selfe,  which  is  as  euill  as  may  be,  if  I  speake  vntrulie,  that  nothing 
4  is  so  welcome  to  my  thoughts,  as  the  publishing  of  my  shame.  Therefore  know 
4  you  Gentlemen  (to  whom  from  my  heart  I  wish  that  it  may  not  prbue  some  ominous 
4  foretoken  of  misfortune  to  haue  met  with  such  a  miser  as  I  am)  that  whatsoeuer  my 
4  son  (3  God,  that  truth  binds  me  to  rsproch  him  with  the  name  of  my  son)  hath  said 
4  is  true.  But  besides  those  truthes,  this  also  is  true,  that  hauing  had  in  lawfull  mar- 
4  iage,  of  a  mother  fit  to  beare  royall  children,  this  sonne  (such  a  one  as  partly  you 
4  see,  and  better  shall  know  by  my  short  declaration)  and  so  enioyed  the  expectations 
4  in  the  world  of  him,  till  he  was  grov/ne  to  iustifie  their  expectations  (so  as  I  needed 
4  enuie  no  father  for  the  chiefe  comfort  of  mortalitie,  to  leaue  another  ones-selfe  after 
4  me)  I  was  caried  by  a  bastard  sonne  cf  mine  (if  at  least  I  be  bound  to  beleeue  the 
4  words  of  that  base  woman  my  concubine,  his  mother)  first  to  mislike,  then  to  hate, 

4  lastlie  to  destroy,  or  to  do  my  best  to  destroy  this  sonne  (I  thinke  you  thinke.)  vnde- 
•seruing  destruction.  What  wayes  he  vsed  to  bring  me  to  it,  if  I  should  tell  you,  I 


338 


APPENDIX 


4  should  tediouslie  trouble  you  with  as  much  poisonous  hypocrisie,  desperate  fraud, 
‘smooth  malice,  hidden  ambition,  and  smiling  enuie,  as  in  anie  liuing  person  could 
‘be  harboured:  but  I  list  it  not;  no  remembrance  of  naughtinesse  delights  me  but 

*  mine  owne ;  and  me  thinks,  the  accusing  his  traps  might  in  some  maner  excuse 

*  my  fault,  which  certainlie  I  lothe  to  do.  Eut  the  conclusion  is,  that  I  gaue  orders 
‘  to  some  seruants  of  mine,  whom  I  thought  as  apt  for  such  charities  as  my  selfe,  to 
4  leade  him  out  into  a  forrest,  and  there  to  kill  him. 

*  But  those  theeues  (better  natured  to  my  sonne  then  myselfe)  spared  his  life,  let- 
4  ting  him  go  to  learne  to  liue  poorely :  which  he  did,  giuing  himselfe  to  be  a  priuate 

*  souldier  in  a  countrey  here  by :  but  as  he  was  ready  to  be  greatly  aduanced  for 
‘  some  noble  peeces  of  seruice  which  he  did,  he  heard  newes  of  me :  who  (drunke 

*  in  my  affection  to  that  vnlawfull  and  vnnaturall  sonne  of  mine)  suffered  my  selfe  so 
4  to  be  gouerned  by  him,  that  all  fauours  and  punishments  passed  by  him,  all  offices, 
4  and  places  of  importance  distributed  to  his  fauorites ;  so  that  ere  I  was  aware,  I  had 

*  left  my  selfe  nothing  but  the  name  of  a  King :  which  he  shortly  wearie  of  too,  with 
4  many  indignities  (if  any  thing  may  be  called  an  indignitie,  which  was  laid  vpon  me) 
4  threw  me  out  of  my  seat,  and  put  out  my  eyes ;  and  then  (proud  in  his  tyrannie) 
‘let  me  go,  neither  imprisoning,  nor  killing  me;  but  rather  delighting  to  make  me 
‘  feele  my  miserie;  miserie  indeed,  if  euer  there  were  anie;  full  of  wretchednesse, 

*  fuller  of  disgrace,  and  fullest  of  guiltinesse.  And  as  he  came  to  the  crowne  by  so 
« vniu'st  means,  as  vniustlie  he  kept  it,  by  force  of  straunger  souldiers  in  Cittadels,  the 
‘neasts  of  tyrannie,  and  murderers  of  libertie;  disarming  all  his  owne  countrimen, 

*  that  no  man  durst  shew  himself  a  wel- wilier  of  mine :  to  say  the  truth  (I  Ihinke) 
4  few  of  them  being  so  (considering  my  cruell  follie  to  my  good  sonne,  and  foolish 
‘kindnesse  to  my  vnkind  bastard :)  but  if  there  were  any  who  felt  a  pitie  of  so  great 
4  a  fall,  and  had  yet  any  sparkes  of  vnslaine  dutie  left  in  them  towards  me ;  yet  durst 
4  they  not  shew  it,  scarcelie  with  giuing  me  almes  at  their  doores;  which  yet  was  the 
4  onlie  sustenance  of  my  distressed  life,  no  bodie  daring  to  shew  so  much  charitie,  as 
4  to  lend  me  a  hand  to  guide  my  darke  steps :  till  this  sonne  of  mine  (God  knowes, 
4  worthy  of  a  more  vertuous,  and  more  fortunate  father)  forgetting  my  abhominable 
4  wrongs,  not  recking  daunger,  and  neglecting  the  present  good  way  hee  was  in  of 
4  doing  himselfe  good,  came  hither  to  do  this  kind  office  you  see  him  performe  to- 
4  wards  me,  to  my  vnspeakeable  griefe;  not  onlie  because  his  kindnesse  is  a  glasse 
4  euen  to  my  blind  eyes  of  my  naughtinesse,  but  that  aboue  all  griefes,  it  grieues  me 
4  he  should  desperatelie  aduenture  the  losse  of  his  well-deseruing  life  for  mine,  that 
4  yet  owe  more  to  Fortune  for  my  deserts,  as  if  he  would  carie  mudde  in  a  chest  of 
4  Chrystall :  for  well  I  know,  he  that  now  raigneth,  how  much  so  euer  (and  with 
‘good  reason)  he  despiseth  me,  of  all  men  despised;  yet  he  will  not  let  slip  any  ad- 
4  uantage  to  make  away  him,  whose  iust  title  (ennobled  by  courage  &  goodnesse) 
4  may  one  day  shake  the  seat  of  a  neuer  secure  tyrannie.  And  for  this  cause  I  craued 

*  of  him  to  leade  me  to  the  top  of  this  rocke,  indeed  I  must  confesse,  with  meaning 
4  to  free  him  from  so  serpentine  a  companion  as  I  am.  But  he  finding  what  I  pur- 
‘posed,  onely  therein  since  he  was  borne,  shewed  himselfe  disobedient  vnto  me. 
4  And  now  Gentlemen,  you  haue  the  true  storie,  which  I  pray  you  publish  to  the 
4  world,  that  my  mischieuous  proceedings  may  be  the  glorie  of  his  filiall  pietie,  the 
4  onlie  reward  now  left  for  so  great  a  merite.  And  if  it  may  be,  let  me  obtaine  that 
4  of  you,  which  my  sonne  denies  me :  for  neuer  was  there  more  pity  in  sauing  any, 
4  then  in  ending  me,  both  because  therin  my  agonie  shall  end,  &  so  you  shal  preserue 
4  this  excellent  young  man,  who  else  wilfully  followes  his  owne  ruine.’ 


THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


389 


A  Mirour  for  Magistrates  (1586,  p.  60,  ed.  1610) : 

1  My  grandsire  Bladud  hight,  that  found  the  bathes  by  skill, 

A  fethered  King  that  practisde  high  to  soare : 

Whereby  he  felt  the  fall,  God  wot  against  his  will, 

And  neuer  went,  road,  raign’d,  nor  spake,  nor  flew  no  more. 
After  whose  death  my  father  Leire  therefore 
Was  chosen  King  by  right  apparent  heire. 

Which  after  built  the  towne  of  Leicestere. 

*  He  had  three  daughters  faire,  the  first  hight  Gonerell \ 

Next  after  her  his  yonger  Ragan  was  begot : 

The  third  and  last  was  I  the  yongest,  nam’d  Cordell. 

Vs  all  our  father  Leire  did  loue  too  well  God  wet. 

But  minding  her  that  lou’d  him  best  to  note, 

Because  he  had  no  sonne  t’  enjoy  his  land. 

He  thought  to  guerdon  most  where  fauour  most  be  fand. 

‘What  though  I  yongest  were,  yet  men  me  judg’d  more  wise 
Than  either  Gonerell,  or  Ragan  more  of  age : 

And  fairer  farre :  wherefore  my  sisters  did  despise 
My  grace  and  gifts,  and  sought  my  wrecke  to  wage. 

But  yet  though  vice  on  vertue  die  with  rage 
It  cannot  keepe  her  vnderneath  to  drowne : 

For  still  she  flittes  aboue,  and  reapes  renowne. 

‘  My  father  thought  to  wed  vs'vnto  Princely  peeres. 

And  vnto  them  and  theirs  diuide  and  part  the  land. 

For  both  my  sisters  first  he  call’d  (as  first  their  yeares 
Requir’d)  their  minds,  and  loue,  and  fauOur  t’vnderstand. 
(Quoth  he)  all  doubts  of  dutie  to  aband 

I  must  assay  your  friendly  faithes  to  prone : 

My  daughters,  tell  me  how  you  do  me  loue. 

‘Which  when  they  answered  him  they  lou’d  their  father  more 
Then  they  themselues  did  loue,  or  any  worldly  wight : 

He  praised  them  and  said  he  would  therefore 
The  louing  kindnesse  they  deseru’d  in  fine  requite. 

So  found  my  sisters  fauour  in  his  sight. 

By  flatterie  faire  they  won  their  fathers  heart. 

Which  after  turned  him  and  me  to  smart. 

*  But  not  content  with  this,  he  asked  me  likewise 
If  I  did  not  him  loue  and  honour  well.. 

No  cause  (quoth  I)  there  is  I  should  your  grace  despise  f 
For  nature  so  doth  bind  and  dutie  me  compell. 

To  loue  you,  as  I  ought  my  father,  well. 

Yet  shortly  I  may  chance,  if  Fortune  will. 

To  find  in  heart  to  beare  another  more  good  will. 

33* 


390 


APPENDIX 


Thus  much  I  said  of  nuptiall  loues  that  ment, 

Not  minding  once  of  hatred  vile  or  ire : 

And  partly  taxing  them,  for  which  intent 
They  set  my  fathers  heart  on  wrathfull  fire. 

Shee  neuer  shall  to  any  part  aspire 

Of  this  my  Realme  (quoth  he)  among’ st  you  twaine  : 
But  shall  without  all  dowrie  aie  remaine. 
***** 

But  while  that  I  these  ioyes  so  well  enioy’d  in  France, 

My  father  Leire  in  Britaine  waxt  vnwealdie  old. 

Whereon  his  daughters  more  themselues  aloft  t’  aduance 
Desir’d  the  Realme  to  rule  it  as  they  wold. 

Their  former  loue  and  friendship  waxed  cold. 

Their  husbands  rebels  void  of  reason  quite 
Rose  vp,  rebeld,  bereft  his  crowne  and  right : 

!  Betwixt  their  husbands  twaine  they  causde  him  to  agree 
To  parte  the  Realme,  and  promist  him  a  gard 
Of  sixtie  Knights  that  on  him  should  attendant  bee. 

But  in  sixe  moneths  such  was  his  hap  too  hard, 

That  Gcnerell  of  his  retinue  bard. 

The  half  of  them,  she  and  her  husband  reft : 

And  scarce  allow’d  the  other  halfe  they  left. 

f  As  thus  in  his  distresse  he  lay  lamenting  fates. 

When  as  my  sister  so,  sought  all  his  vtter  spoile : 

The  meaner  vpstart  courtiers  thought  themselues  his  mates 
His  daughter  him  disdain’d  and  forced  not  his  foile. 

Then  was  he  faine  for  succour  his  to  toile 

With  halfe  his  traine  to  Cornwall  there  to  lie 
In  greatest  need,  his  Pagans  loue  to  trie. 

*  So  when  he  came  to  Cornwall,  she  with  ioy 
Receiued  him,  and  Prince  Maglaunis  did  the  like 
There  he  abode  a  yeare,  and  liu’d  without  annoy: 

But  then  they  tooke  all  his  retinue  from  him  quite 
Saue  only  ten,  and  shew’d  him  daily  spite. 

Which  he  bewail’d  complaining  durst  not  striue, 
Though  in  disdaine  they  last  allow’d  but  fiue. 

1  What  more  despite  could  diuellish  beasts  deuise, 

Then  ioy  their  fathers  wofull  daies  to  see  ? 

What  vipers  vile  could  so  their  King  despise, 

Or  so  vnkind,  so  curst,  so  cruell  bee  ? 

Fro  thence  againe  he  went  to  Albany, 

Where  they  bereau’d  his  seruants  all  saue  one : 

Bad  him  content  himselfe  with  that,  or  none. 

*  Eke  at  what  time  he  ask’d  of  them  to  haue  his  gard, 

To  gard  his  noble  grace  where  so  he  went : 


THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


391 


They  call’d  him  doting  foole,  all  his  requests  debard, 

Demanding  if  with  life  he  were  not  well  content. 

Then  he  too  late  his  rigour  did  repent 

Gainst  me,  my  sisters  fawning  loue  that  knew 
Found  flattery  false,  that  seem’d  so  faire  in  vew, 

*  To  make  it  short,  to  France  he  came  at  last  to  mee, 

And  told  me  how  my  sisters  ill  their  father  vsde. 

Then  humblie  I  besought  my  noble  King  so  free, 

That  he  would  aide  my  father  thus  by  his  abusde. 

Who  nought  at  all  my  humble  hest  refusde, 

But  sent  to  euery  coast  of  France  for  aide. 

Whereby  King  Leire  might  home  be  w  ell  conueide, 

e 

*  The  souldiers  gathered  from  each  quarter  of  the  land 
Came  at  the  length  to  know  the  noble  Princes  will : 

Who  did  commit  them  vnto  captaines  euery  band. 

And  I  likewise  of  loue  and  reuerent  meere  good  will 
Desir’d  my  Lord,  he  would  not  take  it  ill 

If  I  departed  for  a  space  withall, 

To  take  a  part,  or  ease  my  fathers  thrall. 

‘  He  granted  my  request :  Thence  we  arriued  here, 

And  of  our  Britaines  came  to  aide  likewise  his  right 
Full  many  subjects,  good  and  stout  that  were. 

By  martiall  feats,  and  force,  by  subjects  sword  and  might, 

The  British  Kings  were  faine  to  yeeld  our  right. 

Which  wonne,  my  father  well  this  Realme  did  guide 
Three  yeares  in  peace,  and  after  that  he  dide. 

Spenser  {The  Faery  Queene ,  1590,  Second  Booke,  Canto  x,  27,  p.  130.  ed.  Kit* 
chin,  1877) : 

27.  ‘  Next  him  King  Leyr  in  happy  peace  long  raind. 

But  had  no  issue  male  him  to  succeed, 

But  three  faire  daughters,  which  were  well  uptraind 
In  all  that  seemed  fit  for  kingly  seed ; 

Mongst  whom  his  realme  he  equally  decreed 
To  have  divided.  Tho  when  feeble  age 
Nigh  to  his  utmost  date  he  saw  proceed. 

He  cald  his  daughters,  and  with  speeches  sage 
Inquyrd,  which  of  them  most  did  love  her  parentage. 

28.  ‘  The  eldest  Gonorill  gan  to  protest, 

That  she  much  more  than  her  owne  life  him  lov’d} 

And  Regan  greater  love  to  him  profest 
Then  all  the  world,  when  ever  it  were  proov’d; 

But  Cordeill  said  she  loved  him,  as  behoov’d: 

Whose  simple  answere,  wanting  colours  faire 
To  paint  it  forth,  him  to  displeasance  moov’d. 

That  in  his  crowne  he  counted  her  no  haire. 

But  ’twixt  the  other  twaine  his  kingdom  whole  did  shaire. 


392 


APPENDIX 


2Q.  *  So  wedded  th’  one  to  Maglan  King  of  Scots, 

And  th’  other  to  the  King  of  Cambria, 

And  ’twixt  them  shayrd  his  realme  by  equall  lots; 

But  without  dowre,  the  wise  Cordelia 
Was  sent  to  Aganip  of  Celtia. 

Their  aged  syre,  thus  eased  of  his  crowne, 

A  private  life  led  in  Albania 

With  Gonorill,  long  had  in  great  renowne, 

That  nought  him  griev’d  to  beene  from  rule  deposed  downs. 

30.  ‘  But  true  it  is  that,  when  the  oyle  is  spent. 

The  light  goes  out,  and  weeke  is  throwne  away ; 

So  when  he  had  resignd  his  regiment, 

His  daughter  gan  despise  his  drouping  day, 

And  wearie  waxe  of  his  continuall  stay; 

Tho  to  l)is  daughter  Regan  he  repayrd, 

Who  him  at  first  well  used  every  way ; 

But  when  of  his  departure  she  despayrd. 

Her  bountie  she  abated,  and  his  cheare  empayrd. 

31.  ‘  The  wretched  man  gan  then  avise  too  late, 

That  love  is  not,  where  most  it  is  profest ; 

Too  truely  tryde  in  his  extremest  state ; 

At  last  resolv’d  likewise  to  prove  the  rest. 

He  to  Cordelia  him  selfe  addrest, 

Who  with  entyre  affection  him  receav’d, 

As  for  her  syre  and  king  her  seemed  best ; 

And  after  all  an  army  strong  she  leav’d, 

To  war  on  those,  which  him  had  of  his  realme  bereav’d. 

32.  ‘  So  to  his  crowne  she  him  restor’d  againe, 

In  which  he  dyde,  made  ripe  for  death  by  eld, 

And  after  wild  it  should  to  her  remaine : 

Who  peacefully  the  same  long  time  did  weld, 

And  all  men’s  harts  in  dew  obedience  held; 

Till  that  her  sisters’  children,  woxen  strong 
Through  proud  ambition,  against  her  rebeld. 

And  overcommen  kept  in  prison  long. 

Till  wearie  of  that  wretched  life  her  selfe  she  hong.’ 


Mrs  Lennox  ( Shakespeare  Illustrated,  iii,  302,  1754) :  In  Shakespeare  Cordelia  is 
hanged  by  a  soldier :  a  very  improper  Catastrophe  for  a  Person  of  such  exemplary  Virtue. 

Malone  quotes,  from  Camden’s  Ronaines,  1674,  Cordelia’s  answer  to  her  father, 
and  thinks  it  ‘  more  probable  that  Shakespeare  had  it  in  his  thoughts  than  The  Mirour 
*for  Magistrates ,  as  Camden’s  book  was  published  recently  before  he  appears  to  have 
‘  composed  this  play,  and  that  portion  of  it  which  is  entitled  Wise  Speeches ,  where 
'  [the  answer]  is  found,  furnished  him  with  a  hint  in  Coriolanus .’  The  answer  is  as 
follows :  *  that  albeit  she  'did  love,  honour,  and  reverence  him,  and  so  would  whilst 
‘  she  lived,  as  much  as  nature  and  daughterlie  dutie  at  the  uttermost  could  expect, 
1  yet  she  did  think  that  one  day  it  would  come  to  passe  that  she  should  affect  another 


THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT  393 

‘more  fervently,  meaning  her  husband, when  she  were  married.’  Malone  also  notes 
that  it  is  in  Spenser  that  Shakespeare  found  the  name  softened  into  Cordelia. 

We  now  come  to  the  ante-Shakespearian  drama  of  King  Leir,  the  exact  title  whereof 
is  given  on  p.  353.  While  giving  an  abstract  of  each  Scene,  I  have  endeavored  to 
retain  all  words  or  phrases  that  the  ingenuity  of  an  ardent  partisan  could  convert  or 
pervert  into  a  suggestion  of  Shakespeare’s  Lear.  Skottowe  is  the  most  zealous  ad¬ 
vocate  that  I  know,  of  the  claims  of  King  Leir  ;  I  am  afraid  his  zeal  outruns  his  wisdom. 
I  believe  I  have  incorporated  in  the  abstract  every  passage  to- which  he  appeals  for  con¬ 
firmation  of  his  theory.  I  have  followed  the  text  given  in  Six  Old  Plays,  &c.,  1779. 

In  the  opening  scene  Leir  announces  to  his  assembled  court  that,  the  obsequies  of 
his  *  deceast  and  dearest  queen  ’  having  been  duly  performed,  his  care  now  is  to  see 
his  daughters  befittingly  married.  As  for  himself,  ‘  One  foot  already  hangeth  in  the 
'  grave,’ — 

And  I  would  faine  resigne  these  earthly  cares. 

And  thinke  upon  the  welfare  of  my  soule  ; 

Which  by  no  better  means  may  be  effected, 

Then  by  resigning  up  the  crown  from  me 
In  equal  dowry  to  my  daughters  three.’ 

A  courtier,  Skalliger  by  name,  theft  proposes  that,  since  his  majesty  knows  well 

*  What  several  suters  [the]  princely  daughters  have,’  he  should  ‘  make  them  eche  a 
‘jointer  more  or  lesse,  As  is  their  worth,  to  them  that  love  professe.’  To  which  Leir 
replies,  *  No  more,  nor  lesse,  but  even  all  alike.  My  zeale  is  fixt,  all  fashioned  in  one 

*  mould.’  Cornwall  and  Cambria,  ‘  two  neere  neighbouring  kings,’  *  motion  love  to 
‘  Gonorill  and  Ragan,’  but  Cordelia,  it  appears,  has  more  than  one  lover;  Leir  says  s 

*  My  youngest  daughter,  faire  Cordelia,  vowes 
No  liking  to  a  monarch,  unlesse  love  allowes. 

She  is  solliclted  by  divers  peeres ; 

But  none  of  them  her  partial  fancy  heares. 

Vet,  if  my  policy  may  her  beguile, 

He  match  her  to  some  king  within  this  ile, 

And  so  establish  such  a  perfit  peace. 

As  fortunes  force  shall  ne’er  prevaile  to  cease.” 

Perillus,  another  noble  courtier,  begs  his  majesty  not  to  *  force  love,  where  fancy 
■  cannot  dwell,’  and  Leir  replies  s 

*  I  am  resolv’d,  and  even  now  my  mind 
Doth  meditate  a  sudden  strategem, 

To  try  which  of  my  daughters  loves  me  best : 

Which  till  I  know,  I  cannot  be  in  rest. 

This  graunted,  when  they  jointly  shall  contend, 

Eche  to  exceed  the  other  in  their  love : 

Then  at  the  vantage  will  I  take  Cordelia, 

Even  as  she  doth  protest  she  loves  me  best, 

Ile  say,  then,  daughter,  graunt  me  one  request. 

To  shew  thou  lovest  me  as  thy  sisters  doe, 

Accept  a  husband,  whom  my  self  will  woo. 

This  said,  she  cannot  well  deny  my  sute. 

Although  (poore  soule)  her  sences  will  be  mute  : 

Then  will  I  triumph  in  my  policy. 

And  match  her  with  a  king  of  Brittany’ 

In  the  next  scene  Gonorill  and  Ragan  reveal  to  each  other  their  common  hatred 
of  Cordelia,  because  she  is  *  so  nice  and  so  demure;  So  sober,  courteous,  modest,  and 
precise,’  and  also  because  she  adopts  all  their  own  new-made  fashions,  and,  what  is 


394 


APPENDIX 


worse,  improves  on  them.  Skalliger  enters,  and  discloses  to  them  their  father’s 
device  for  providing  them  with  husbands  by  putting  their  affection  for  him  to  the 
test.  Whereupon  Ragan  exclaims : 

*  O  that  I  had  some  pleasing  mermaids  voice. 

For  to  inchaunt  his  sencelesse  sences  with  I ' 

Skalliger  takes  his  leave  of  them, 

*  Not  doubting  hut  your  wisdomes  will  foresee 
What  course  will  best  unto  your  good  agree.' 

The  sisters  accordingly  lay  their  plans  to  outbid  Cordelia  in  protestations  of  obedience 
to  their  father,  ‘who,’  as  Ragan  says,  *  dotes,  as  if  he  were  a  child  againe,’  Gonorill 
smiles  to  think  in  what  a  woful  plight  Cordelia  will  be  by  their  answers,  and  how 
her  refusal  to  accept  her  father’s  choice  will  convert  his  love  into  hate,  *  For  he,  you 
‘  know,  is  alwayes  in  extremes.’ 

In  the  next  scene  Leir,  having  summoned  his  daughters  before  him,  tells  them  that 
as  ‘  — pale  grym  death  doth  wayt  upon  his  steps,’  he  wishes  them  to  *  resolve  a  doubt 

*  which  much  molests  his  mind,  which  of  the  three  to  him  would  prove  most  kind ; 

*  which  loves  him  most.’  Gonorill  replies  that  her  love  ‘cannot  be  in  windy  words 
rehearst,’  that  she  would  willingly  sacrifice  her  life  at  his  command,  or  *  marry  the 

*  meanest  vassaile  in  the  spaceous  world.’  *  O,  how  I  doe  abhorre  this  flattery,’  say9 
Cordelia.  Ragan  then  reiterates  pretty  much  what  Gonorill  has  said,  and,  as  she 
finishes,  Cordelia  again  says :  ‘  Did  never  flatterer  tell  so  false  a  tale.’  Leir  then 
turns  to  his  youngest  daughter,  and  begs  her  to  make  *  his  joyes  at  full  ’ : 

'  Cordelia.  I  cannot  paint  my  duty  forth  in  words. 

I  hope  my  deeds  shall  make  report  for  me  : 

But  looke  what  love  the  child  doth  owe  the  father. 

The  same  to  you  I  beare,  my  gracious  lord. 

Gonorill.  Here  is  an  answere  answerlesse  indeed : 

Were  you  my  daughter,  I  should  scarcely  brooke  it. 

Ragan.  Dost  thou  not  blush,  proud  peacock  as  thou  art. 

To  make  our  father  such  a  slight  reply? 

Leir.  Why  how  now,  minion,  are  you  growne  so  proud  ?  ’  &C. 

Cordelia  tries  to  explain,  urging  that  her  1  toung  was  never  usde  to  flattery,’  but  Leir 
will  not  listen  to  her : 

‘  Leir.  Peace,  bastard  impe,  no  issue  of  King  Leir, 

I  will  not  heare  thee  speake  one  tittle  more. 

Call  me  not  father,  if  thou  love  thy  life, 

Nor  these  thy  sisters  once  presume  to  name : 

Looke  for  no  helpe  henceforth  from  me  or  mine  : 

Shift  as  thou  wilt,  and  trust  unto  thyselfe.' 

He  then  declares  that  he  will  divide  his  kingdom  equally  between  her  two  sisters, 
and  yield  to  them  his  throne.  After  Leir,  Gonorill,  and  Ragan  have  left  the  stage, 
Perillus  says: 

*  Oh,  how  I  grieve,  to  see  my  lord  thus  fond. 

To  dote  so  much  upon  vaine  flattering  words. 

Ah,  if  he  but  with  good  advice  had  weighed. 

The  hidden  tenure  of  her  humble  speech, 

Reason  to  rage  should  not  have  given  place, 

Nor  poore  Cordelia  suffer  such  disgrace.’ 

The  scene  then  shifts  to  Gallia,  where  the  king,  whose  name  is  not  given,  declares 
to  his  nobles  his  intention  of  visiting  *  Brittany  ’  in  disguise,  in  order  to  select  in  the 


THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


395 


surest  way  the  best  of  Leir’s  three  fair  daughters.  One  of  his  nobles  named  Mum- 
ford,  the  funny  man  of  the  play,  begs  to  accompany  him,  and  the  king  consents. 

The  scene  again  shifts,  and  we  find  the  kings  of  Cornwall  and  of  Cambria  hasten¬ 
ing  to  Leir’s  court  to  receive  their  brides  and  each  the  *  moity  of  halfe  of  Leir’s 
regiment.’ 

In  the  next  scene  Gonorill  and  Ragan  discuss  Cordelia’s  plight: 

*  Gonorill.  I  have  incenst  my  father  so  against  her. 

As  he  will  never  be  reclaimd  againe. 

Ragan.  I  was-  not  much  behind  to  do  the  like.’ 

Leir.  Perillus,  and  others  enter. 

'Leir.  Cease,  good  my  lords,  and  sue  not  to  reverse 
Our  censure,  which  is  now  irrevocable. 

We  have  dispatched  letters  of  contract 
Unto  the  kings  of  Cambria  and  of  Cornwall: 

Our  hand  and  seale  will  justify  no  lesse : 

Then  do  not  so  dishonour  me,  my  lords. 

As  to  make  shipwrack  of  our  kingly  word. 

I  am  as  kind  as  is  the  pellican. 

That  kils  it  selfe,  to  save  her  young  ones  lives : 

And  yet  is  jelous  as  the  princely  eagle. 

That  kils  her  young  ones,  if  they  do  but  dazell 
Upon  the  radiant  splendor  of  the  sunne.’ 

The  kings  of  Cambria  and  of  Cornwall  enter,  and  draw  lots  for  the  halves  of  the 
kingdom.  When  this  is  accomplished,  Perillus  speaks : 

'  I  have  bin  silent  all  this  while,  my  lord. 

To  see  if  any  worthier  then  my  selfe. 

Would  once  have  spoke  in  poore  Cor  delta:  s  cause: 

But  love  or  feare  ties  silence  to  their  toungs. 

Oh,  heare  me  speak  for  her,  my  gracious  lord. 

Whose  deeds  have  not  deserv’d  this  ruthlesse  doome. 

As  thus  to  disinherit  her  of  all. 

Leir.  Urge  this  no  more,  and  if  thou  love  thy  life  : 

I  say,  she  is  no  daughter,  that  doth  scorne 
To  tell  her  father  how  she  loveth  him. 

Whoever  speaketh  hereof  to  mee  againe, 

I  will  esteeme  him  for  my  mortal  foe.’ 

The  next  scene  discovers  the  ‘Gallian’  king  and  Mumford  in  *  Brittany,’  disguised  as 
‘pilgrims’;  Cordelia  enters  in  deep  dejection  at  the  unhappy  lot  which,  on  this  very 
marriage-day  of  her  sisters,  turns  her  into  the  world  to  seek  her  fortune.  But  she 
resolves: 

*  I  will  betake  me  to  my  threed  and  needle. 

And  earne  my  living  with  my  fingers  ends.' 

Of  course  the  Gallian  king,  at  the  first  sight  of  her,  falls  hopelessly  in  love,  and 
begs  to  know  the  cause  of  her  grief.  *  Ah  pilgrims,’  replies  Cordelia,  ‘  what  availes 
to  shew  the  cause,  When  there’s  no  meanes  to  find  a  remedy?’  ‘To  utter  griefe, 
doth  ease  a  heart  o’ercharg’d,’  answers  the  king,  and  then  Cordelia  tells  him  how 
her  father  had  cast  her  forth  because  she  would  not  flatter  him ;  and  that  he  was 
even  now  celebrating  her  sisters’  marriages. 

'  King.  Sweet  lady,  say  there  should  come  a  king 
As  good  as  either  of  your  sisters  husbands. 

To  crave  your  love,  would  you  accept  of  him? 


396 


APPENDIX 


•  Cordelia.  Oh,  doe  not  mocke  with  those  in  misery. 

Nor  do  not  thinke,  though  fortune  have  the  powers 
To  spoil  mine  honour,  and  debase  my  state. 

That  she  hath  any  interest  in  my  mind : 

For  if  the  greatest  monarch  on  the  earth 
Should  sue  to  me  in  this  extremity. 

Except  my  heart  could  love,  and  heart  could  like. 

Better  then  any  that  I  ever  saw, 

His  great  estate  should  no  more  move  my  mind. 

Then  mountaines  move  by  blast  of  every  wind.' 

The  disguised  palmer  then  confesses  that  his  master,  the  Gallian  king,  does  In 
reality  sue  for  her  hand.  But  Cordelia  declines  the  offer,  and,  with  that  straightfor¬ 
wardness  which  is  her  marked  characteristic,  declares  that  she  much  prefers  the 
palmer  to  his  royal  master,  and  concludes  with  saying ; 

*  Then  be  advised,  palmer,  what  to  do : 

Cease  for  thy  king,  seeke  for  thy  selfe  to  woo. 

King.  Your  birth 's  too  high  for  any  but  a  king. 

Cordelia.  My  mind  is  low  ynough  to  love  a  palmer. 

Rather  then  any  king  upon  the  earth. 

King.  O,  but  you  never  can  indure  their  life, 

Which  is  so  straight  and  full  of  penury. 

Cordelia.  O  yes,  I  can,  and  happy  if  I  might; 
lie  hold  thy  palmers  staffe  within  my  hand, 

And  thinke  it  is  the  scepter  of  a  queene. 

Sometime  lie  set  thy  bonnet  on  my  head, 

And  thinke  I  weare  a  rich  imperial  crowne. 

Sometime  lie  help  thee  in  thy  holy  prayers. 

And  thinke  I  am  with  thee  in  paradise. 

Thus  He  mock  fortune,  as  she  mocketh  me. 

And  never  will  my  lovely  choice  repent : 

For,  having  thee,  I  shall  have  all  content,' 

Although  this  speech  corresponds  to  nothing  in  Shakespeare’s  Lear,  yet  I  can¬ 
not  help  inserting  it,  for  a  certain  childlike  sweetness  in  it ;  here  Cordelia  is  more 
lovely  and  loveable  than  Cordelia  in  the  first  Act  of  Lear.--  The  Gallian  king  reveals 
himself,  and  Cordelia  accompanies  him  to  church,  ‘  because  the  world  shall  say,  King 
Leir’s  three  daughters  were  wedded  in  one  day.* 

In  the  next  scene  ‘  Enter  Perillus  solus.’ 

‘  The  king  hath  dispossest  himself  of  all. 

Those  to  advaunce,  which  scarce  will  give  him  thanks  J 
His  youngest  daughter  he  hath  turnd  away. 

And  no  man  knowes  what  is  become  of  her. 

He  sojourns  now  in  Cornwall  with  the  eldest, 

Who  flattred  him  until  she  did  obtaine 

That  at  his  hands,  which  now  she  doth  posscsse; 

And  now  she  sees  hee  hath  no  more  to  give, 

It  grieves  her  heart  to  see  her  father  live, 

Oh,  whom  should  man  trust  in  this  wicked  age, 

When  children  thus  against  their  parents  rage? 

But  he  the  myrrour  of  mild  patience, 

Puts  up  all  wrongs  and  never  gives  reply  : 

Yet  shames  she  not  in  most  opprobrious  sort, 

To  call  him  fool  and  doterd  to  his  face, 

And  sets  her  parasites  of  purpose  oft, 

In  scoffing  wise  to  offer  him  disgrace. 

Oh  yron  age  1  O  times  1  O  monstrous,  vilde. 

When  parents  are  contemned  of  the  child  I 


THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 

'His  pension  she  hath  halfe  restrain’d  from  him. 

And  will,  ere  long,  the  other  halfe,  I  feare ; 

For  she  thinks  nothing  is  bestowde  in  vaine. 

But  that  which  doth  her  father’s  life  maintaine.' 

An  interview  between  Gonorill  and  Skalliger  follows,  which  gives  us  an 
of  the  ‘quips  and  peremptory  taunts’  to  which  Gonorill  is  subjected  by  her 
*  he  checks  and  snaps  [her]  up  at  every  word.’  Again  her  mind  runs  on  her 

'  I  cannot  make  me  a  new  fashioned  gowne 
And  set  it  forth  with  more  then  common  cost; 

But  his  old  doting  doltish  withered  wit. 

Is  sure  to  give  a  sencelesse  check  for  it.' 

Skalliger  proposes  as  a  remedy  for  her  grievances  that  she  shall  ‘  abbridge  ’  half  of 
his  allowance. .  Gonorill  accepts  his  counsel,  and  says: 

t 

t 

‘  I  have  restrained  halfe  his  portion  already 
And  I  will  presently  restraine  the  other.' 

In  the  next  scene  Cornwall  appears  anxious  to  find  out  from  Leir  the  cause  of  his 
sadness,  but  in  vain.  Gonorill  enters  ‘  in  wished  time,’  as  her  husband  says,  *  to  .put 
‘  your  father  from  these  pensive  dumps.’  But  instead,  Gonorill  falls  into  a  high  rage 
on  the  suspicion  that  her  father  had  been  complaining  of  her,  and  carrying  tales  to 
her  husband : 

‘  Cornwall,  Sweet,  be  not  angry  in  a  partial  cause. 

He  ne'er  complain’d  of  thee  in  all  his  life. 

Father,  you  must  not  weigh  a  woman’s  words. 

Leir.  Alas,  not  I :  poore  soule,  she  breeds  yong  bones. 

And  that  is  it  makes  her  so  tutchy  sure. 

Gonorill.  What,  breeds  young  bones  already  1  You  will  make 
An  honest  woman  of  me  then,  belike. 

O  vild  olde  wretch !  who  ever  heard  the  like. 

That  seeketh  thus  his  owne  child  to  defame  ? ' 

And  she  angrily  departs,  telling  her  father : 

'  For  any  one  that  loves  your  company, 

You  may  go  pack,  and  seeke  some  other  place, 

To  sow  the  seed  of  discord  and  disgrace.' 

Leir  *  weepes,’  and  Perillus  tries  to  comfort  him : 

*  Leir.  What  man  art  thou  that  takest  any  pity 
Upon,  the  worthlesse  state  of  old  Leir  ? 

Perillus.  One,  who  doth  beare  as  great  a  share  of  griefv. 

As  if  it  were  my  dearest  father’s  case. 

Leir.  Ah,  good  my  friend,  how  ill  art  thou  advisde, 

For  to  consort  with  miserable  men.  .  .  . 

Did  I  ere  give  thee  living,  to  increase 
The  due  revenues  which  thy  father  left  ?  ,  .  . 

Oh,  did  I  ever  dispossesse  my  selfe. 

And  give  thee  halfe  my  kingdome  in  good  will  ?  .  .  , 

If  they,  which  first  by  nature’s  sacred  law 
Do  owe  to  me  the  tribute  of  their  lives ; 

If  they  to  whom  I  alwayes  have  bin  kinde. 

And  bountiful  beyond  comparison  ; 

If  they,  for  whom  I  have  undone  my  selfe. 

And  brought  my  age  unto  this  extreme  want. 

Do  now  reject,  contemne,  despise",  abhor  me. 

What  reason  moveth  thee  to  sorrow  for  me  f  ' 


397 


insight 
father: 
dress : 


39  8 


APPENDIX 


Perillus  cries,  and  appeals  to  his  tears  as  proof  of  his  affection,  and  reminds  Leir 
that  he  has  *  two  daughters  left.’ 

*  Leir.  Oh,  how  thy  words  adde  sorrow  to  my  soule. 

To  thinke  of  my  unkindnesse  to  Cordelia  l 
Whom  causelesse  I  did  dispossesse  of  all. 

Upon  th’  unkind  suggestions  of  her  sisters.' 

However,  he  consents  to  leave  Gonorill  and  to  try  Ragan.  His  departure,  which 
is  taken  secretly,  distresses  Cornwall,  who,  accordingly,  taxes  his  wife  with  having 
driven  her  father  away  by  some  great  unkindness.  Gonorill’s  suggestion  that  her 
father  has  but  *  stolne  upon  her  sister,  at  unawares,  to  see  her  how  she  fares,’  Corn¬ 
wall  mistrusts,  and  resolves  to  send  *  a  poste  immediately  to  know,  Whether  he  be 
*  arrived  there  or  no.’  Gonorill  intercepts  his  messenger^  and,  instead  of  his  letters 
to  Leir,  substitutes  letters  to  her  sister  to  the  effect  that  Leir  *  hath  detracted  ’  Ragan 
and  ‘  given  out  slaundrous  speaches  against  her.’ 

In  the  next  scene  Cordelia,  in  a  soliloquy,  taxes  herself  with  neglect  in  rendering 
thanks  to  God  for  all  His  benefits  to  her,  which  have  far  exceeded  the  reach  of  her 
deserts : 


'  I  cannot  wish  the  thing  that  I  do  want; 

I  cannot  want  the  thing  but  I  may  have. 

Save  only  this  which  I  shall  ne’re  obtairie. 

My  father’s  love,  oh  this  I  ne’re  shall  gaine. 

I  would  abstaine  from  any  nutryment. 

And  pine  my  body  to  the  very  bones  : 

Bare  foote  I  would  on  pilgrimage  set  forth 
Unto  the  furthest  quarters  of  the  earth. 

And  all  my  life-time  would  I  sackcloth  weare, 

And  mourning-wise  powre  dust  upon  my  head : 

So  he  but  to  forgive  me  once  would  please. 

That  his  gray  haires  might  go  to  heaven  in  peace. 

And  yet  I  know  not  how  I  him  offended. 

Or  wherein  justly  I  have  deserved  blame. 

Oh,  sisters  1  you  are  much  to  blame  in  this. 

It  was  not  he,  but  you  that  did  me  wrong  : 

Yet  God  forgive  both  him,  and  you,  and  me; 

Even  as  I  doe  in  perfit  charity. 

I  will  to  church,  and  pray  unto  my  Saviour, 

That  ere  I  die,  I  may  obtaine  his  favour.’ 

(Justice  has  never  been  done,  I  think,  to  the  unaffected  loveliness,  at  times,  of  Cor¬ 
delia’s  character  in  this  old  play.)  The  scene  shifts  to  the  neighborhood  of  Ragan’s 
castle,  and  Leir  and  Perillus  enter  almost  worn  out  with  fatigue.  Leir  tells  his  faithful 
counsellor  to  cease  to  call  him  lord,  *  And  think  me  but  the  shaddow  of  myselfe.’  The 
prince  of  Cambria  and  Ragan  come  upon  them  unawares,  and  his  daughter,  recog¬ 
nising  her  father,  dissembling  her  feelings  of  hatred  at  the  sight  of  him,  bids  him 
welcome.  Ragan  remains  on  the  stage  after  the  rest  have  entered  the  castle,  and 
receives  the  messenger  from  her  sister,  whose  lying  letters  highly  incense  her.  She 
determines  to  get  rid  of  her  father  by  assassination,  and  makes  an  appointment  with 
the  messenger  to  meet  her  and  arrange  the  method  of  the  deed  which  he  undertakes 
to  do. 

In  the  mean  time  Cordelia’s  distress  is  so  great  that  her  husband  promises  to  send 
a  message  to  King  Leir,  begging  him  to  forgive  his  daughter  and  to  come  and 
visit  her. 


THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


399 


At  the  appointed  hour  Ragan  meets  the  messenger  that  had  come  to  her  from 
Gonorill,  and  hires  him  to  kill  Leir.and  Perillus  in  a  thicket  some  two  miles  from 
the  court,  whither  she  will  send  them  on  some  pretext  or  other  on  the  morrow. 

The  scene  then  changes  to  Cornwall,  where  Gonorill  and  her  husband  receive  the 
ambassador  from  the  Gallian  king,  who  comes  with  a  message  to  Leir;  but  as  Leir 
is  absent,  Gonorill  and  Cornwall  persuade  the  ambassador  to  tarry  at  their  court  for 
a  few  days  until  Leir’s  return. 

We  now  go  back  to  Leir  and  Perillus,  whom  we  find  at  the  thicket  some  two  miles 
from  the  court.  The  assassin  appears  before  them  and  announces  his  design  of 
killing  them.  Leir  thinks  that  he  must  have  been  sent  by  Cordelia,  and  is  willing  to 
submit  to  what  he  cannot  but  consider  the  justice  of  Heaven.  He  is  Undeceived  by 
Gonorill’s  letter  which  the  assassin  shows  him.  While  the  two  old  men  are  praying 
for  their  lives,  some  highly  opportune  claps  of  thunder  so  terrify  the  assassin  that  he 
drops  his  daggers  and  departs,  after  calling  them  the  ‘  parlosest  old  men  that  ere  he 
heard.’  Perillus  then  persuades  Leir  to  try  his  fortune  with  Cordelia;  and 'while 
they  are  crossing  over  to  Brittany  we  find  that  the  Gallian  king,  Cordelia,  and  Mum- 
ford  devise  a  pleasant  little  excursion  to  the  seaside  for  recreation,  and  that  the 
Gallian  ambassador,  giving  up  all  hope  of  finding  Leir  at  Gonorill’s  court,  comes 
to  Ragan’s ;  there  he  finds  Ragan  trying  to  persuade  her  husband  that  her  father’s 
absence  is  due  to  Cordelia’s  machinations,  and  that  Cordelia  has  undoubtedly  killed 
Leir.  This  accusation  she  repeats  to  the  ambassador,  and  falls  into  a  great  rage  with 
him  for  attempting  to  defend  his  mistress,  and  strikes  him. 

When  Leir  and  Perillus  land  on  the  coast  of  Brittany,  they  are  obliged  to  pay  for 
their  passage  by  exchanging  their  cloaks  and  gown  for  the  *  sheep’s  russet  sea-gowne* 
and  ‘sea-caps’  of  the  sailors.  In  these  rude  garments  they  begin  their  inland 
journey,  but  have  not  gone  far  when  Leir’s  strength  fails  utterly  through  lack  of  food, 
and  it  is  reserved  to  Perillus  to  display  extreme  loyalty  by  ‘  stripping  up  his  arme  ’  and 
begging  his  royal  master  to  ‘feed  on  this  flesh,  whose  veines  are  not  so  dry,’  adding, 
'  lie  smile  for  joy,  to  see  you  suck  my  bloud,’  but  Leir  declines  to  be  tempted,  and  while 
they  are  talking  the  Gallian  king  and  Cordelia  approach;  Cordelia  recognizes  her 
father’s  voice,  but,  by.  the  advice  of  her  husband,  refrains  from  revealing  herself.  She 
gives  them  food  and  drink,  and,  when  their  strength  has  returned,  begs  to  know  their 
story: 

‘  Leir.  If  from  the  first  I  should  relate  the  cause, 

'T would  make  a  heart  of  adamant  to  weepe : 

And  thou,  poors  soule,  kind-hearted  as  thou  art. 

Dost  weepe  already,  ere.  I  do  begin. 

Cordelia.  For  Gods  love  tell  it ;  and  wnen  you  have  done, 

.lie  tell  the  reason  why  I  weepe  so  soone.' 

Leir  then  tells  his  story,  and  ends  with  describing  how  Ragan  has  induced  him  to 
go  to  a  certain  spot  some  distance  from  the  court, 

*  Pointing  that  there  she  would  come  talke  with  me  : 

There  she  had  set  a  shag  haird  murdring  wretch. 

To  massacre  my  honest  friend  and  me. 

■Then  judge  your  selfe,  although  my  talc  be  briefe. 

If  ever  man  had  greater  cause  of  griefe. 

King.  Ncr  never  like  impiety  was  done. 

Since  the  creation  of  the  world  begun. 

Leir.  And  now  I  am  constraind  to  seeks  relicfe 
Of  her,  to  whom  I  have  bin  so  unkind ; 

Whose  censure,  if  it  do  award  me  death. 


400 


APPENDIX 


*1  must  confesse  she  pays  me  hut  my  due: 

But  if  she  shew  a  loving  daughters  part 
It  comes  of  God  and  her,  not  my  desert. 

Cordelia.  No  doubt  she  will,  I  dare  be  sworne  she  will. 

Leir.  How  know  you  that,  not  knowing  what  she  is  t 
Cordelia.  Myselfe  a  father  have  a  great  way  hence, 

Usde  me  as  ill  as  ever  you  did  her; 

Yet,  that  his  reverend  age  I  once  might  see, 

Ide  creepe  along,  to  meet  him  on  my  knee. 

Leir.  O,  no  mens  children  are  unkind  but  mine. 

Cordelia.  Condemne  not  all,  because  of  others  crime : 

But  looke,  dear  father,  looke,  behold  and  see 

Thy  loving  daughter  speaketh  unto  thee.  [She  kneeles . 

Leir.  O,  stand  thou  up,  it  is  my  part  to  kncele. 

And  aske  forgivenesse  for  my  former  faults.  [He  kneeles. 

Cordelia.  O,  if  you  wish  I  should  enjoy  my  breath, 

Deare  father  rise,  or  I  receive  my  death.  [He  risetk. 

Leir.  Then  I  will  rise,  to  satisfy  your  mind. 

But  kneele  againe,  til  pardon  be  resignd.  [He  kneeles . 

Cordelia.  I  pardon  you :  the  word  beseemes  not  me : 

But  I  do  say  so,  for  to  ease  your  knee ; 

You  gave  me  life,  you  were  the  cause  that  I 
Am  what  I  am,  who  else  had  never  bin. 

Leir.  But  you  gave  life  to  me  and  to  my  friend. 

Whose  dayes  had  else  had  an  untimely  end. 

Cordelia.  You  brought  me  up,  when  as  I  was  but  young. 

And  far  unable  for  to  helpe  my  selfe. 

Leir.  I  cast  thee  forth,  when  as  thou  wast  but  young. 

And  far  unable  for  to  helpe  thyselfe. 

Cordelia.  God,  world,  and  nature,  say  I  do  you  wrong 
That  can  indure  to  see  you  kneele  so  long. 

King.  Let  me  breake  off  this  loving  controversy. 

Which  doth  rejoice  my  very  soule  to  see. 

Good  father,  rise,  she  is  your  loving  daughter,  [He  risetk. 

And  honours  you  with  as  respective  duty, 

As  if  you  were  the  monarch  of  the  world. 

Cordelia.  But  I  will  never  rise  from  off  my  knee,  [She  kneeles , 

Until  I  have  your  blessing,  and  your  pardon 
Of  all  my  faults  committed  any  way. 

From  my  first  birth  until  this  present  day. 

Leir.  The  blessing,  which  the  God  of  Abraham  gave 
Unto  the  tribe  of  Juda,  light  on  thee. 

And  multiply  thy  dayes,  that  thou  mayst  see 
Thy  childrens  children  prosper  after  thee. 

Thy  faults,  which  are  just  none  that  I  do  know, 

God  pardon  on  high,  and  I  forgive  below.  [She  risetk. 

Cordelia.  Now  is  my  heart  at  quiet,  and  doth  leape 
Within  my  brest,  for  joy  at  this  good  hap  ; 

And  now  (deare  father)  welcome  to  our  court. 

And  welcome  (kind  Pcrillus)  unto  me, 

Mirrour  of  vertue  and  true  honesty.’ 

The  King  and  Mumford  now  take  their  turn  at  kneeling  and  rising;  the  former  to 
register  his  oath  that  he  will  avenge  Leir’s  wrongs,  the  latter  that  he  will  bring  back 
a  wife  out  of  Brittaine. 

The  Gallian  king  at  once  puts  his  oath  into  practice,  and  lands  in  Brittaine  with  an 
army  and  takes  possession  of  a  town  on  the  sea-coast.  Before  the  fighting  begins, 
Cordelia  says : 

*  We  that  are  feeble  and  want  use  of  armes. 

Will  pray  to  God,  to  sheeld  you  from  all  harmes. 


THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


401 


'  Leir.  The  while  your  hands  do  manage  ceaselesse  tofle. 

Our  hearts  shall  pray,  the  foes  may  have  the  foile.' 

Cornwall,  Cambria,  Gonorill,  and  Ragan  appear  with  an  army,  but  before  the 
battle  begins  there  is  a  family  meeting,  at  which  Cordelia  terms  Gonorill  *  shamelesse,’ 
and  Gonorill  retorts  by  calling  Cordelia  a  *  puritan  ’  and  a  ‘  dissembling  hypocrite.* 
Perillus  calls  Gonorill  a  ‘monster,’  and  Ragan  says  she  never  heard  a  fouler-spoken 
man  than  Perillus.  Leir  interrupts  these  amenities,  and  adds  to  them,  by  addressing 
Ragan : 

'  Out  on  thee,  viper,  scum,  filthy  parricide, 

More  odious  to  my  sight  then  is  a  toade  : 

Knowest  thou  these  letters  ?  [She  snatches  them  and  teares  them* 

After  some  further  conversation  in  the  same  style,  they  proceed  to  business.  Corn¬ 
wall  and  Cambria  with  their  wives  and  soldiers  are  put  to  flight,  and  Leir  is  rein¬ 
stated  in  his  kingdom.  Pie  gives  thanks,  first  to  the  heavens  and  then  to  the  Gallian 
king,  acknowledges  that  Cordelia’s  ‘  modest  answere’  of  aforetime  waspf  the  true 
stamp,  promises  to  do  the  best  he  can  to  requite  Perillus,  and  then : 

*  Thanks  (worthy  Mum/ord)  to  thee  last  of  all, 

Not  greeted  last,  ’cause  thy  desert  was  small : 

No,  thou  hast  lion-like  laid  On  to-day. 

Chasing  the  Cornwall  king  and  Cambria: 

Who  with  my  daughter,'  daughters  did  I  say  t 
To  save  their  lives,  the  fugitives  did  play. 

Come,  sonne  and  daughter,  who  bid  me  advaunce. 

Repose  with  me  awhile,  and  then  for  Fraunce. 

[Sound  drumes  and  trumpets.  Exeunt  * 

In  his  Introduction,  Mr  Grant  White,  speaking  of  this  King  Leir ,  says  that  *  we 
J  may  be  sure  that  Shakespeare  was  acquainted  with  it.’  ...  *  [It]  is  a  tolerable  [play] 

*  for  the  time  in  which  it  was  produced — the  early  Elizabethan  period ;  but  it  has  no 

*  resemblance  of  construction  or  language  to  Shakespeare’s  tragedy,  except  that  which 

*  results  from  the  use  of  the  same  story  as  the  foundation  of  both.  But  in  the  great 

*  dramatist’s  work  there  is  yet  a  slight  vestige  of  his  insignificant  and  utterly  unknown- 

*  predecessor’s  labours  upon  the  same  subject.  It  might  have  been  fortuitous,  as  it 

*  was  most  natural,  that  in  both  Cordelia  should  kneel  to  her  father  when  she  first 

*  sees  him  upon  her  return  from  France;  but  that  in  both  the  father  should  manifest 

*  an  inclination  to  kneel  to  the  daughter  must  be  due,  it  would  seem,  to  a  reminis- 

*  cence  by  the  later  dramatist  of  the  work  of  his  predecessor.  So,  too,  when  Shake- 

*  speare’s  Lear  exclaims,  “  ’twas  this  flesh  begot  Those  pelican  daughters,”  we  may 
‘  be  quite  sure  that  we  hear  an  echo  of  these  lines  hy  the  forgotten  dramatist :  “  I  am 

*  as  kind  as  is  the  pelican  That  kills  itself  to  save  her  young  ones’  lives.”  And 
‘  having  found  these  traces  of  the  old  play  in  Shakespeare’s  memory,  faint  though 

*  they  be,  we  may  also  presume  that  in  Perillus ,  blunt  and  faithful  counsellor  and 

*  friend  of  the  monarch  in  the  elder  play,  we  see  a  prototype  of  the  noble  character 
‘  of  Kent  in  the  later.  But  in  their  scope,  spirit,  and  purpose,  aside  from  all  ques¬ 
tion  of  comparative  merit,  the  two  works  are  entirely  dissimilar;  and  after  the 

*  closest  examination  of  the  earlier,  I  can  find  only  these  trifling  and  almost  insig- 

*  nificant  points  of  resemblance  between  them,  except  in  incidents  and  characters 

*  which  both  playwrights  owed  to  the  old  legend.’ 

Mr  A.  W.  Ward,  in  his  admirable  History  of  English  Dramatic  Literature,  i,  1 26 
(a  work  almost  indispensable  to  the  Shakespeare  student),  speaking  of  this  King  Leir, 
says :  ‘  Yet,  with  all  its  defects,  the  play  seems  only  to  await  the  touch  of  a  powerful 
34  *  2  A 


402 


APPENDIX 


'  hand  to  be  converted  into  a  tragedy  of  supreme  effectiveness ;  and  while  Shake* 
‘spere’s  genius  nowhere  exerted  itself  with  more  transcendent  force  and  marvellous 

*  versatility,  it  nowhere  found  more  promising  materials  ready  to  its  command.’ 

In  Shakespeare  Illustrated  (iii,  301)  Mrs  Lennox  says:  ‘The  Chronicle  of  Holin* 
‘  shed  and  Sidney’s  Arcadia  are  not  the  only  resources  Shakespear  had  for  his  tragedy 

*  of  Lear,  if  we  may  believe  the  editor  of  a  collection  of  old  ballads,  published  in 

*  the  year  1726.  In  his  Introduction  to  an  old  ballad,  called  A  Lamentable  Sing  of  the 
'  Death  of  King  Lear  and  his  three  Daughters ,  he  has  these  words :  “  I  cannot  be  cer- 

*  tain  directly  as  to  the  time  when  this  Ballad  was  written ;  but  that  it  was  some  years 

*  before  the  play  of  Shakespeare  appears  from  several  circumstances,  which  to  men* 

*  tion  woulcj  swell  my  Introduction  too  far  beyond  its  usual  length.”  It  is  to  be  wished 
‘  that  this  writer,  since  he  resolved  not  to  exceed  a  certain  length  in  his  Introduction, 
‘  had  omitted  some  part  of  it,  in  order  to  introduce  those  circumstances  which  were 
4  of  infinitely  more  consequence  than  anything  else  he  has  said  on  the  subject  of  that 

*  old  ballad.  If  it  was  really  written  before  Shakespear’s  play,  that  great  poet  did 
‘  not  disdain  to  consult  it,  but  has  copied  it  more  closely  than  either  the  Chronicle  or 
‘  Sidney.  From  thence  (for  ’tis  mentioned  nowhere  else)  he  took  the  hint  of  Lear’s 

*  madness,  and  the  extravagant  and  wanton  cruelty  his  daughters  exercised  on  him ; 

*  the  death  of  King  Lear  is  also  exactly  copied.  .  .  .  [The  old  ballad]  bears  so  exact 

*  an  analogy  to  the  argument  of  Shakespear’s  King  L^ear,  that  his  having  copied  it 

*  cannot  be  doubted,  if  indeed  it  be  true  that  it  was  written  before  that  tragedy.’ 

The  friend  of  our  countrywoman  (Mrs  Lennox  was  born  in  New  York),  Dr  JOHN¬ 
SON,  says:  ‘The  story  of  this  play  is  derived  .  .  .  perhaps  immediately  from  an  old 

*  historical  ballad.  My  reason  for  believing  that  the  play  was  posterior  to  the  ballad, 
‘  rather  than  the  ballad  to  the  play,  is,  that  the  ballad  has  nothing  of  Shakespeare’s 

*  nocturnal  tempest,  which  is  too  striking  to  have  been  omitted,  and  that  it  follows  the 

*  chronicle ;  it  has  the  rudiments  of  the  play,  but  none  of  its  amplifications ;  it  first 
‘  hinted  Lear’s  madness,  but  did  not  array  it  in  circumstances.  The  writer  of  the  ballad 
‘  added  something  to  the  history,  which  is  a  proof  that  he  would  have  added  more  if  it 
4  had  occurred  to  his  mind,  and  more  must  have  occurred  if  he  had  seen  Shakespeare.’ 

This  ballad  Bishop  Percy  reprinted  in  his  Reliques  of  Ancient  English  Poetry ,  i, 
21 1,  ed.  1765,  and  says  of  it:  *  The  misfortune  is  that  there  is  nothing  to  assist  us  in 

*  ascertaining  its  date,  but  what  little  evidence  arises  from  within,  this  the  reader 

*  must  weigh  and  judge  for  himself.  After  all,  ’tis  possible  that  Shakespeare  and 
'  the  author  of  this  ballad  might  both  of  them  be  indebted  to  [the  older  play  of  King 

*  Leir],  This  ballad  is  given  from  an  ancient  copy  in  the  Golden  Garland,  bl.  let. 
« intitled  ‘A  Lamentable  Song  of  the  Death  of  King  Leir,  and  his  three  Daughters. 

*  To  the  tune  of  “  When  flying  fame.”  ’ 

Ritson  was  the  earliest,  I  think,  to  deny  Shakespeare’s  obligations  to  the  old 
ballad.  He  says  of  it,  that  it  *  by  no  means  deserves  a  place  in  any  edition  of 
'  Shakespeare,  but  is  evidently  a  most  servile  pursuit, — not,  indeed,  of  our  author’s 
‘  play,  which  the  writer  does  not  appear  to  have  read,  but — of  Holinshed’s  Chronicle , 
‘  where,  as  in  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,  the  King  of  France  is  called  Aganippus.  I 
‘suppose,  however,  that  the  performance  and  celebrity  of  the  play  might  have  set  the 
‘ballad-maker  at  work,  and  furnished  him  with  the  circumstance  of  Lear’s  madness, 
‘  of  which  there  is  no  hint  either  in  the  historian  or  the  old  play.  The  omission  of 
‘  any  other  striking  incident  may  be  fairly  imputed  to  his  want  of  either  genius  or  in- 
'formation.  All  he  had  to  do  was  to  spin  out  a  sort  of  narrative  in  a  sort  of  verse, 


THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


/ 


403 


4  to  be  sung  about  tbe  streets,  and  make  advantage  of  the  publick  curiosity.  I  much 
4  doubt  whether  any  common  ballad  can  be  produced  anterior  to  a  play  upon  the 
*  same  subject,  unless  in  the  case  of  some  very  recent  event.’ 

I  think  we  may  safely  trust  to  Ritson’s  judgement  when  so  good  a  critic  as  Hal- 
LIWELL  concurs  in  it.  Halliwell  says,  that  the  old  ballad  is  chiefly  4  founded  on 
4  the  story  as  related  by  Holinshed,  but  written  also  with  a  recollection  of  Shake- 
4  speare’s  tragedy.  This  ballad  was  probably  issued  early  in  the  seventeenth  century, 
4  although  no  copy  of  so  ancient  a  date  is  now  known  to  exist.  It  cannot,  of  course, 
4  be  reckoned  amongst  the  materials  used  by  Shakespeare  unless  it  be  supposed,  as 
4  it  is  by  some  critics,  to  be  anterior  to  the  year  1608.  It  is  far  more  likely  to  have 
4  been  written  in  consequence  of  the  popularity  of  the  tragedy.’ 

The  following  is  the  ballad,  reprinted  from  Percy’s  Reliques  : 

< 

KING  LEIR  AND  HIS  THREE  DAUGHTERS. 

4  King  Leir  once  ruled  in  this  land, 

With  princely  power  and  peace, 

And  had  all  things  with  hearts  content, 

That  might  his  joys  increase  : 

Amongst  those  things  that  nature  gave, 

Three  daughters  fair  had  he. 

So  princely  seeming  beautiful, 

As  fairer  could  not  be. 

*  So  on  a  time  it  pleas’d  the  king 

A  question  thus  to  move, 

Which  of  his  daughters  to  his  grace 
Could  shew  the  dearest  love : 

For  to  my  age  you  bring  content, 

Quoth  he,  then  let  me  hear 
Which  of  you  three  in  plighted  troth. 

The  kindest  will  appear. 

4  To  whom  the  eldest  thus  began, 

Dear  father,  mind,  quoth  she. 

Before  your  face,  to  do  you  good, 

My  blood  shall  render’d  be : 

And  for  your  sake  my  bleeding  heart 
Shall  here  be  cut  in  twain, 

Ere  that  I  see  your  reverend  age 
'  The  smallest  grief  sustain. 

*  And  so  will  I,  the  second  said  s 

Dear  father,  for  your  sake, 

The  worst  of  all  extremities 
I  ’ll  gently  undertake ; 

And  serve  your  highness  night  and  day 
With  diligence  ana  love : 

That  sweet  content  and  quietness  ; 

Discomforts  may  remove. 


404 


APPENDIX 


*  In  doing  so,  you  glad  my  soul, 

The  aged  king  reply’d ; 

But  what  sayst  thou,  my  youngest  girl. 
How  is  thy  love  ally’d  ? 

My  love  (quoth  young  Cordelia  then) 
Which  to  your  grace  I  owe, 

Shall  be  the  duty  of  a  child, 

And  that  is  all  I’ll  show. 

*  And  wilt  thou  shew  no  more,  quoth  he. 

Than  doth  thy  duty  bind  ? 

I  well  perceive  thy  love  is  small, 

When  as  no  more  I  find : 

Henceforth  I  banish  thee  my  court. 

Thou  art  no  child  of  mine  ; 

Nor  any  part  of  this  my  realm ; 

By  favour  shall  be  thine. 

{  Thy  elder  sisters  loves  are  more 
Than  well  I  can  demand. 

To  whom  I  equally  bestow 
My  Idngdome  and  my  land : 

My  pompal  state  and  all  my  goods, 

That  lovingly  I  may 
With  those  thy  sisters  be  maintain’d 
Until  my  dying  day. 

*  Thus  flattering  speeches  won  renown. 

By  these  two  sisters  here : 

The  third  had  causeless  banishment. 

Yet  was  her  love  more  dear: 

For  poor  Cordelia  patiently 
Went  wandring  up  and  down. 

Unhelp’d,  unpity’d,  gentle  maid. 

Through  many  an  English  town : 

•Until  at, last  in  famous  France 
She  gentler  fortunes  found ; 

Though  poor  and  bare,  yet  she  was  deem’d 
The  fairest  on  the  ground : 

Where  when  the  king  her  virtues  heard, 
And  this  fair  lady  seen, 

With  full  consent  of  all  his  court 
He  made  his  wife  and  queen. 

*  Her  father,  *  old  ’  king  Leir,  this  while 

With  his  two  daughters  staid, 

Forgetful  of  their  promis’d  loves, 

Full  soon  the  same  decay’d. 


THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


405 


And  living  in  queen  Ragan’s  court, 

The  eldest  of  the  twain. 

She  took  from  him  his  chiefest  means. 
And  most  of  all  his  train. 

*  For  whereas  twenty  men  were  wont 

To  wait  with  bended  knee : 

She  gave  allowance  but  to  ten, 

And  after  scarce  to  three : 

Nay,  one  she  thought  too  much  for  him: 

So  took  she  all  away, 

In  hope  that  in  her  court,  good  king. 

He  would  no  longer  stay. 

*  Am  I  rewarded  thus,  quoth  he, 

In  giving  all  I  have 
Unto  my  children,  and  to  beg 
For  what  I  lately  gave  ? 

I  ’ll  go  unto  my  Gonorell ; 

My  second  child,  I  know, 

Will  be  more  kind  and  pitiful. 

And  will  relieve  my  wod. 

*  Full  fast  he  hies  then  to  her  court ; 

Where  when  she  hears  his  moan, 
Return’d  him  answer,  That  she  griev’d. 
That  all  his  means  were  gone : 

But  no  way  could  relieve  his  wants  ; 

Yet  if  that  he  would  stay 
Within  her  kitchen,  he  should  have 
What  scullions  gave  away. 

*  When  he  had  heard  with  bitter  tears, 

He  made  his  answer  then ; 

In  what  I  did  let  me  be  made 
Example  to  all  men. 

I  will  return  again,  quoth  he. 

Unto  my  Ragan’s  court ; 

She  will  not  use  me  thus,  I  hope, 

But  in  a  kinder  sort. 

*  Where  when  he  came,  she  gave  command 

To  drive  him  thence  away ; 

When  he  was  well  within  her  court 
(She  said)  he  would  not  stay. 

Then  back  again  to  Gonorell, 

The  woeful  king  did  hie. 

That  in  her  kitchen  he  might  have 
What  scullion  boys  set  by. 


40  6 


APPENDIX 


t  But  there  of  that  he  was  deny’d. 

Which  she  had  promis’d  late : 

For  once  refusing,  he  should  not 
Come  after  to  her  gate. 

Thus  twixt  his  daughters,  for  relief 
He  wandred  up  and  down ; 

Being  glad  to  feed  on  beggars  food. 

That  lately  wore  a  crown. 

*  And  calling  to  remembrance  then 

His  youngest  daughters  words, 

That  said  the  duty  of  a  child 
Was  all  that  love  affords : 

But  doubting  to  repair  to  her. 

Whom  he  had  banish’d  so, 

Grew  frantick  mad;  for  in  his  mind 
He  bore  the  wounds  of  woe : 

‘Which  made  him  rend  his  milk-white  locks, 
And  tresses  from  his  head, 

And  all  with  blood  bestain  his  cheeks, 

With  age  and  honour  spread : 

To  hills  and  woods,  and  watry  founts, 

He  made  his  hourly  moan, 

Till  hills  and  woods,  and  senseless  things, 
Did  seem  to  sigh  and  groan. 

4  Even  thus  posse’st  with  discontents, 

He  passed  o’re  to  France, 

In  hopes  from  fair  Cordelia  there, 

To  find  some  gentler  chance : 

Most  virtuous  dame  1  which  when  she  heard 
Of  this  her  father’s  grief, 

As  duty  bound,  she  quickly  sent 
Him  comfort  and  relief : 

*  And  by  a  train  of  noble  peers, 

In  brave  and  gallant  sort. 

She  gave  in  charge  he  should  be  brought 
To  Aganippus’  court; 

Whose  royal  king,  with  noble  mind 
So  freely  gave  consent, 

To  muster  up  his  knights  at  arms, 

To  fame  and  courage  bent. 

*  And  so  to  England  came  with  speed, 

To  repossesse  king  Leir, 

And  drive  his  daughters  from  their  thrones 
By  his  Cordelia  dear : 


THE  SOURCE  OF  THE  PLOT 


407 


Where  she,  true-hearted  noble  queen. 

Was  in  the  battel  slain : 

Yet  he  good  king,  in  his  old  days, 

Possest  his  crown  again. 

*  But  when  he  heard  Cordelia’s  death* 

Who  died  indeed  for  love 
Of  her  dear  father,  in  whose  cause 
She  did  this  battel  move ; 

He  swooning  fell  upon  her  breast, 

From  whence  he  never  parted; 

But  on  her  bosom  left  his  life, 

That  was  so  truly  hearted. 

t 

*  The  lords  and  nobles  when  they  saw 

The  end  of  these  events, 

The  other  sisters  unto  death 
They  doomed  by  consents : 

And  being  dead,  their  crowns  they  left 
Unto  the  next  of  kin : 

Thus  have  you  seen  the  fall  of  pride. 

And  disobedient  sin.’ 

It  would  be,  I  think,  merely  a  waste  of  space  to  reprint  any  more  versions  of  the 
same  old  story,  such  as  are  to  be  found  in  Warner’s  Albion's  England ,  Layamon’s 
Brut,  the  Gcsta  Romanorum ,  &c.  &c.  Probably  more  versions  have  been  already 
given,  in  the  foregoing  pages,  than  Shakespeare  ever  read  or  would  have  cared  to 
read. 


Klein  ( Ceschichte  des  Italienischen  Dramas,  i,  891)  queries  whether  it  be  not 
possible  that  a  hint  of  the  idea  of  presenting  in  the  same  play,  and  in  the  same 
scene,  assumed  madness,  real  madness,  and  professional  folly,  may  not  have  been 
derived  from  Le  Stravaganze  d’ Amove  by  Cristoforo  Castelletti,  published  in  Rome, 
1585,  wherein  similar  types  are  to  be  found.  ‘Old  Metello,  insane  out  of  grief  for 

*  his  children,  Alessandro  an  assumed  Fool,  and  Bell’  Humore  a  professional  one, 

*  represent  in  Castelletti’s  comedy  a  trio  jangled  into  discord,  which  finds  its  reso- 

*  lution  in  that  infinitely  pathetic  terzetto  of  insanity  in  Lear ,  and  reveals  its  artistic 

*  and  tragic  capabilities  when  the  paroxysms  of  a  tragic  insanity,  simulated  at  the 
‘  same  time  by  a  fictitious  insanity,  are  soothed  into  tragic  sorrow  by  a  Fool.  The 

*  assumption  of  such  a  hint  is  all  the  more  allowable  since,  as  far  as  we  remember,  no 
‘  drama  is  to  be  found  before  Lear  wherein  these  three  varieties  of  mental  alienation 

*  are  employed  as  a  motif  in  one  and  the  same  scene ;  nay,  as  far  as  we  know,  no 

*  drama  exists  before  Lear  and  Hamlet  wherein  feigned  insanity  is  depicted  at  all, 

*  except  in  this  very  Stravaganze  d’ Amove  by  Castelletti.  Mock-insanity  belongs  to 
‘Comedy;  to  elevate  it  to  Tragedy,  to  make  it  a  potent  foil  to  real  insanity,  as  in 
•Edgar  and  Lear,  is  the  triumph  of  tragic  art.* 


DURATION  OF  THE  ACTION 


Eccles  was  the  first  to  reckon  the  time  consumed  during  the  action  of  this  tragedy. 
His  computation  is  briefly  as  follows : 

Of  course  the  first  scene,  containing  the  division  of  the  kingdom,  occupies  one  day. 

After  this  several  months  elapse,  during  which  Lear  may  have  taken  up  his  abode 
with  Goneril  and  Regan  several  times  alternately,  so  that  when  Lear  says,  ‘  What 
‘  fifty  of  my  followers  at  a  clap  !  Within  a  fortnight !  ’  he  may  refer  only  to  that  por¬ 
tion  of  the  current  month  during  which  he  has  been  staying  with  Goneril.  It  is 
‘  utterly  impossible  ’  that  this  ‘  fortnight  ’  can  refer  to  the  very  first  fortnight  after  the 
division  of  the  kingdom,  because  this  does  not  allow  sufficient  time  for  the  tidings 
of  Lear’s  cruel  treatment  to  reach  Cordelia,  or  for  her  to  undertake  that  invasion  of 
the  kingdom  which  is  already  on  foot.  If  the  scene  in  which  this  expression  occurs 
had  come  direetly  after  the  first  scene  all  would  have  been  well,  but,  unfortunately, 
Shakespeare  was  careless,  had  *  indistinct  ideas  concerning  the  progress  of  the  action, 
and  was  liable  to  *  unhappy  oversights,’  one  of  which  he  fell  into  here.  According 
to  Shakespeare,  directly  after  the  division  of  the  kingdom,  on  the  evening  of  the 
very  day,  or  on  any  part  of  the  following  day,  Edmund  persuades  Edgar  to  conceal 
himself  from  his  father’s  wrath.  Now,  if  this  order  of  scenes  be  retained,  Edgar 
must  lie  concealed  for  several  months,  according  to  Eccles.  Wherefore  Eccles  re¬ 
arranges  the  scenes,  whereby  that  in  which  Goneril  resolves  to  check  her  father 
(I,  iii)  follows  the  first;  then  comes,  after  a  ‘very  short  interval,’  the  scene  (I,  iv) 
where  Lear  uses  the  expression  ‘  within  a  fortnight.’  Of  course  followed  immediately 
by  that  wherein  Lear  sends  Kent  to  Gloucester,  and,  with  this,  the  First  Act  closes. 
See  Eccles’s  note  on  p.  42. 

Thus  far,  then,  the  time  is  as  follows :  The  first  scene  takes  up  One  Day.  Then 
several  months  elapse,  and  we  come  to  the  day  on  which  Goneril  tells  Oswald  to 
treat  her  father  when  he  returns  from  hunting  with  what  ‘  weary  negligence  ’  he  will, 
and  to  prepare  for  dinner.  A  few  minutes  after  Lear  enters,  and  then  ensues  the 
stormy  scene  between  him  and  Goneril.  A  few  hours  later  Lear  sends  Kent  to 
Gloucester  with  letters  to  Regan.  This  makes  Two  Days,  and  ends  the  First  Act. 

A  night  now  passes,  and,  at  *  any  part  of  the  day  succeeding  that  on  which  Lear 

•  hurries  from  Goneril,’  the  Second  Act  opens,  and  here  Eccles  places  the  scene  (I,  ii) 
which  he  omitted  from  the  First  Act,  namely,  that  in  which  Edmund  persuades  Glou¬ 
cester  of  Edgar’s  treachery,  and  persuades  Edgar  to  conceal  himself.  Edgar  remains 
in  concealment  until  nightfall,  when  Edmund  summons  him  forth,  and,  after  the 
mock  duel,  forces  him  to  fly.  This  closes  the  Third  Day.  No  sooner  is  Edgar  fled 
than  Regan  and  Cornwall  arrive  at  the  castle,  and  ‘  very  shortly  ’  after  them  come 
Kent  and  Oswald,  and  the  scene  ensues  where  Kent  is  put  in  the  stocks.  While 
Kent  is  thus  left,  Cornwall  prepares  the  proclamation  about  Edgar,  and,  after  ‘such 
‘  an  interval  as  this  circumstance  may  seem  to  render  necessary,’  but  still  in  the  same 
night,  Edgar  appears  (we  are  now  at  II,  iv,  of  Eccles)  and  decides  to  turn  Bedlam 
beggar.  When,  in  the  next  scene,  Lear  appears,  and  finds  Kent  stocked,  it  is  still 

*  a  continuation  of  the  same  night,  which  we  may  conclude  to  be  now  far  advanced.* 

Eccles  continues  this  night  through  the  Second  Act,  and  the  first  six  scenes  of  Act 
III.  Scene  vii  of  Act  III  (that  in  which  Gloucester  is  blinded),  Eccles  says,  ‘he  sup¬ 
poses  to  be  early  in  the  morning  after  Lear  has  been  exposed  to  the  tempest.’  This, 
408 


DURATION  OF  THE  ACTION 


409 


then,  is  the  morning  of  the  Fourth  Day.  In  the  course  of  it  Gloucester  meets  Edgar, 
and  gets  him  to  lead  him  to  Dover,  and  says,  *  I’  th’  last  night's  storm  I  such  a  fellow 
saw.'  This  is  IV,  i.  While  Gloucester  and  Edgar  are  going  to  Dover,  Goneril  and 
Edmund  are  journeying  to  the  Duke  cf  Albany’s  palace,  where  they  arrive  (IV,  ii)  on 

*  the  following  day.’  ‘  We  may  imagine  it  the  morning.’  This,  then,  is  the  Fifth  Day. 

Here  arises  a  difficulty.  As  the  scenes  now  stand,  we  have  in  Scene  v,  of  Act  IV, 
a  conference  between  Regan  and  Oswald  at  Gloucester’s  castle,  and  Oswald  leaves 
for  Dover.  Of  course  some  time  must  elapse  before  he  reaches  there,  Eccles  thinks 
a  night  at  least,  and  yet  in  the  very  next  scene  he  is  at  Dover,  and  is  killed  by  Edgar. 
Now,  there  would  be  no  objection  to  supposing  that  a  night  passes  between  these  two 
scenes,  were  it  not  that  a  previous  scene  leaves  Cordelia’s  century  searching  every 
acre  of  the  high-grown  field  for  Lear.  The  century  was  either  successful  or  it  was 
not.  If  it  was  not  successful,  Lear  must  have  passed,  in  the  open  air,  all  this  night, 
which  we  have  just  seen  had  to  elapse  between  Oswald’s  leaving  Gloucester’s  castle 
and  his  arrival  at  Dover.  But  Eccles  believes  that  the  century  was  successful,  and 
that  Lear  was  found  before  night.  The  order  of  scenes  is  therefore  wrong,  and 
Eccles  changes  them  so  as  to  bring  the  scene  at  Gloucester’s  castle  early  in  the  Act 
(see  p.  249),  before  Cordelia  sends  out  the  century,  whereby  time  will  be  given  for 
Oswald’s  journey  from  Gloucester  to  Dover,  and  for  Kent  to  have  his  conference 
with  the  Gentleman  who  had  delivered  his  letters  to  Cordelia,  and  for  Cordelia  to 
send  out  her  century  to  find  her  father,  which  the  century  succeeds  in  doing  just 
before  Oswald  reaches  Dover,  and  is  killed  by  Edgar.  This  certainly  makes  the 
story  connected  and  consistent. 

To  return  to  the  reckoning  of  time.  Eccles’s  Fourth  Day  finds  Lear  on  his  way  to 
Dover,  accompanied  by  certain  hot  questrists,  and  Gloucester  blinded,  guided  to  the 
same  destination  by  Edgar.  The  next  day,  the  Fifth,  Goneril  and  Edmund  reach 
the  Duke  of  Albany’s  castle,  and  Edmund  leaves  immediately  to  hasten  the  musters 
and  conduct  the  powers.  On  the  evening  of  the  next  day  (which  makes  the  Sixth) 
Regan  has  the  conference  with  Oswald,  and  tries  to  see  the  letter  which  Goneril  had 
sent  by  him  to  Edmund.  This  is  the  displaced  scene,  the  fifth  of  Act  IV,  which 
Eccles  places  as  the  third,  and,  to  quote  his  words,  *  suppose  it  to  pass  on  the  even* 
‘  ing  of  the  third  day  since  that,  inclusively  taken,  on  the  morning  of  which  Lear, 

*  attended  by  certain  of  his  knights,  began  to  be  conveyed  from  the  castle  of  Gloster 
«  on  his  route  towards  Dover.’  Eccles  makes  it  in  the  evening,  so  as  to  account  for 
Edmund’s  having  left  Regan  in  the  morning  to  dispatch  Gloucester’s  nighted  life, 
and  also  to  give  time  for  Oswald’s  journey  to  this  point  with  Goneril’s  letter  to  Ed¬ 
mund,  and  also  because  Regan  begs  Oswald  to  wait  the  safe  conduct  of  her  forces 
on  the  morrow. 

The  next  day  (the  Seventh),  or  ‘  the  fourth  morning  from  that  (both,  however,  in. 

*  clusively)  whereon  Lear,  with  Kent  and  the  rest  of  his  attendants,  began  his  progress 
‘  from  Gloster’s  castle,  Goneril  and  Edmund  from  the  same  set  out  for  the  palace  of 

*  Albany,  and,  later  in  the  day,  the  sightless  Gloster  began  to  proceed  to  Dover,’  we 
have  Kent’s  conference  with  the  Gentleman  who  had  seen  and  describes  Cordelia. 
Our  IV,  iii ;  Eccles’s  IV,  iv. 

The  next  scene,  where  Cordelia  sends  out  the  century,  Eccles  ‘conceives  to  be 

*  some  part  of  the  morning  of  the  same  day  with  the  last  scene.’ 

In  the  *  afternoon  of  the  same  day  ’  Gloucester  is  guided  by  Edgar  to  the  imagi 
nary  cliff  of  Dover.  *  This  will  allow  time  for  Oswald  to  have  performed  his  jour 
ney  ’  after  leaving  Regan  on  the  preceding  evening.  This  5s  IV.  vi. 

35 


4io 


APPENDIX 


The  next  scene  (IV,  vii),  where  Lear  is  restored  to  his  senses,  Eccles  imagines 
'  some  part  of  a  new  day,  viz :  the  fifth  since  the  night  of  the  storm.’  This  makes 
the  Eighth  Day. 

To  the  first  scene  of  Act  V  he  assigns  a  new  day,  viz:  *  the  sixth  since  the  night 
of  the  storm,’  and  this  day,  which  is  the  Ninth,  is  *  continued  to  the  end  of  the  play.’ 

The  number  of  days  taken  up  by  this  drama  has  been  computed  by  Mr  P.  A. 
Daniel  also,  and  printed  in  the  Transactions  of  tke  New  Sh.  Soc.,  1877-9,  P*  215. 
It  differs  somewhat  from  Eccles’s,  and  extends  the  time  over  one  more  day.  It  is 
substantially  as  follows : 

The  first  scene  occupies  one  day. 

The  second  scene,  in  which  Edmund  persuades  Edgar  to  conceal  himself,  and 
which  Eccles  transposed  to  the  next  Act,  Daniel  places  ‘  on  the  day  following  the 
opening  scene,’  and  Gloucester’s  exclamation,  *  the  king  gone  to-night,’  is  interpreted 
‘  in  the  sense  of  the  night  last  passed ,’  as  it  *  is  frequently  used  in  these  plays  ’  in 
that  sense;  and,  moreover,  *  Edmund,  who  here  promises  his  father  full  satisfaction 

*  as  to  Edgar’s  guilt,  “  without  any  further  delay  than  this  very  evening ,”  could  not 

*  say  this  if  the  night  of  the  day  on  which  he  is  speaking  were  already  come.’  As 
Edgar  goes  into  concealment  on  this  day,  Daniel  allows  him  there  to  remain,  in  the 
same  castle  with  his  father,  for  about  fourteen  days. 

After  this  Second  Day,  in  order  to  account  for  Lear’s  exclamation :  *  Within  a 
fortnight !  ’  Daniel  supposes  an  interval  in  the  action  of  something  less  than  that 
period. 

With  the  third  scene,  ‘  at  about  mid-day,’  the  action  recommences,  and,  ceasing  ‘  a 
little  after  noon,’  carries  us  through  the  rest  of  the  Act.  This  makes  the  Third 
Day. 

Towards  night  of  the  following  day,  therefore  the  Fourth  Day,  the  second  Act 
begins.  Edmund  has  the  mock  fight  with  Edgar,  and  Cornwall  and  Regan  arrive  at 
the  castle  *  during  the  night ;  and  this  fact  must  fix  the  time  of  the  second  scene  of 
‘this  day,’  in  which  the  quarrel  between  Kent  and  Oswald  takes  place.  *  It  will  be 

*  remembered  that  it  was  about  mid-day  in  Day  3  that  Kent  tripped  up  Oswald’s  heels, 

*  and  shortly  afterwards  Lear  sent  him  on  this  errand.  When  in  this  scene  he  again 

*  meets  Oswald,  he  says,  “  Is  it  two  days  ago  since  I  tripped  up  thy  heels,  and  beat  thee 
‘  before  the  king  ?  ”  We  may  suppose,  then,  that  about  a  day  and  a  half  has  been 
‘  occupied  in  his  journeying  to  Cornwall’s  palace,  and  from  thence  to  Gloucester’s 

*  castle,  and  that  this  is  the  second  night  or  early  morning  since  he  set  out  with  Lear’s 
‘  letters  :  midnight  of  Day  4,  or  x  or  2  A.M.  of  Day  5.’ 

On  the  morning  after  his  flight  Edgar  resolves  on  disguising  himself  as  Mad  Tom. 
This  is  in  III,  iii,  and  on  the  Fifth  Day.  And  on  this  same  morning  II,  iv,  begins, 
and  at  III,  vi,the  day  ends  at  night.  Here  we  see  Daniel  gives  one  more  day  to  the 
action  than  Eccles.  Eccles  makes  all  these  scenes  take  place  on  the  same  night  that 
Cornwall  and  Regan  arrive  at  Gloucester’s  castle.  Apparently,  Daniel  is  led  to  the 
supposition  that  it  is  the  following  day  because  when  Cornwall  and  Regan  *  make 
their  appearance,  Lear  bids  them  “  Good  morrow.”  ’  [This,  I  fear,  is  somewhat  in 
favour  of  Eccles.  The  time  of  day  that  was  at  hand,  not  that  which  was  present, 
was  commonly  (Delius  says  ‘always’)  used  as  a  greeting.  Thus,  in  Rom.  &  Jul. 
we  find  that  after  the  very  stroke  of  noon  *  good  evening  ’  was  the  proper  salutation. 
The  objection  to  Eccles’s  reckoning  is  that  we  have  an  excessively  long  night,  to 
Daniel’s  that  we  have  an  excessively  long  day.  I  doubt  if  upon  either  reckoning, 
or  upon  any  minute  reckoning,  Shakespeare  ever  bestowed  a  thought.  If  he  had,  it 


DURATION  OF  THE  ACTION 


411 

is  somewhat  derogatory  to  his  genius  to  suppose  that  he  would  not  have  made  his 
meaning  and  intention  clear. — Ed.] 

On  the  morning  of  the  Sixth  Day  (III,  vii),  Edmund  accompanies  Goneril  from 
Gloucester’s  castle  back  to  Albany,  Gloucester’s  eyes  are  put  out,  and  (in  IV,  i)  he 
is  led  by  Edgar  to  Dover. 

On  account  of  the  distance  between  Gloucester’s  castle  and  Albany’s  palace,  a  day 
is  given  to  Edmund  and  Goneril  to  accomplish  the  journey,  and  this  makes  the 
Seventh  Day,  and  IV,  ii. 

Here  Daniel  marks  *  An  Interval .* 

On  the  Eighth  Day  (IV,  iii)  we  are  in  the  French  Camp  near  Dover,  and  a  Gen¬ 
tleman  tells  Kent  of  his  interview  with  Cordelia.  *  Some  short  interval  between 

*  Days  7  and  8  should  probably  be  supposed ;  as  the  news  now  is  that  the  forces  of 
‘  Albany  and  Cornwall  are  afoot  (1.  50-1),  which  was  not  the  case  on  the  former  day. 

*  Lear  is  in  Dover,’  but  his  sovereign  shame  keeps  him  from  Cordelia. 

We  come  now  to  the  Ninth  Day  (IV,  iv),  and  of  it  Daniel  says:  *  I  am  not  sure 

*  that  I  am  right  in  making  this  scene  the  commencement  of  a  separate  day ;  it  may 
‘possibly  be  a  continuation  of  Day  No.  8,  or  it  may  be  separated  from  that  day  by 

*  an  interval  of  a  day  or  two.  Time  is  not  marked  except  by  the  succession  of  events, 
‘but  on  the  whole  they  induce  me  to  suppose  this  the  morrow  of  Day  No.  8.  Lear 
‘has  been  met  in  the  fields,  crowned  with  wild  flowers,  and  Cordelia  sends  out  in 
‘search  of  him.  The  news  is  that  “The  British  powers  are  marching  hither- 
‘ward”  (1.  21). 

*  [Act  IV,  sc.  v.  The  scene  shifts  to  Gloucester’s  castle,  or,  as  some  editors  make 
‘  it,  Regan’s  palace.  Goneril’s  steward,  Oswald,  has  arrived  with  a  letter  from  his 
‘mistress  for  Edmund;  but  “he  is  posted  hence  on  serious  matter”  (1.8).  Albany’s 
‘  troops,  it  seems,  are  already  in  the  field ;  Regan’s  are  to  “  set  forth  to-morrow  ” 
4  (1.  16).  Regan  warns  the  Steward  that  she  intends  to  take  Edmund  for  herself,  and 
‘  she  offers  him  preferment  if  he  can  cut  off  old  Gloucester.  The  position  of  this 
‘scene  should  mark  it  as  occurring  on  the  same  day  as  scenes  iv,  and  vi;  but  the 
‘news  as  to  the  movement  of  the  troops  favours  the  notion  that  it  represents  an 
‘  earlier  date ;  moreover,  if  it  is  allowed  to  retain  its  present  place,  we  are  called  on 

*  to  believe  that  Oswald,  who  again  makes  his  appearance  in  sc.  vi,  is  present  with 
‘Regan,  and  is  at  Dover  on  one  and  the  same  day.  Its  true  place  seems  to  be  in  the 
‘interval  I  have  marked  between  Days  7  and  8,  and  Eccles  actually  transposes  it  to 

*  that  position,  making  it,  however,  the  evening  of  the  day  represented  in  Act  IV, 
‘sc.  ii,  my  Day  7.  On  the  whole,  I  think  it  best  to  enclose  it  within  brackets,  as  in 
‘  other  cases  of  scenes  which  I  suppose  to  be  out  of  the  due  order  of  time.]  ’  On 
this- same  day  (the  Ninth)  Gloucester  supposes  that  he  has  leaped  from  Dover  Cliff, 
and  Oswald  is  slain  by  Edgar. 

Day  Tenth,  and  last.  ‘  Observe  that  this  must  be  a  separate  day  if  IV,  v,  is  prop- 
‘  erly  placed ;  for  Regan’s  troops,  which  then  were  to  set  forth  on  the  morrow,  are 

*  now  present,  led  by  Edmund.  Indeed,  but  for  the  almost  lightning-speed  of  the 

*  action,  some  little  interval  might  be  supposed  between  this  and  Day  9.  The  tap 
‘of  the  drum,  heard  in  the  last  scene,  is,  however,  against  such  an  arrangement  of 
‘the  time.’ 

This  day  extends  to  the  end  of  the  tragedy. 

Thus,  according  to  Daniel,  *  the  longest  period,  including  intervals,  that  can  be 
‘  allowed  for  this  Play  is  one  month ;  though  perhaps  little  more  than  three  weeks  is 

*  sufficient.’ 


412  APPENDIX 

His  division  of  time  is  thus  tabulated: 

Day  I.  Act  I,  sc.  i. 

“  2.  Act  I,  sc.  ii. 

An  Interval  of  something  less  than  a  fortnight 
“  3.  Act  I,  sc.  iii,  iv,  and  v. 

“  4.  Act  II,  sc.  i,  and  ii. 

“  5.  Act  II,  sc.  iii,  and  iv;  Act  III,  sc.  i-vi. 

“  6.  Act  III,  sc.  vii;  Act  IV,  sc.  i. 

"  7.  Act  IV,  sc.  ii. 

Perhaps  an  Interval  of  a  day  or  two. 

“  8.  Act  IV,  sc.  iii. 

“  9.  Act  IV,  sc.  iv,  v,  and  vi. 

“  10.  Act  IV,  sc.  vii;  Act  V,  sc.  i-iii. 

Eccles’s  scheme,  Daniel  thinks,  ‘  however  ingenious  in  some  respects,  cannot  be 
•reconciled  with. the  notes  of  time  the  Play  itself  contains.’ 


INSANITY 

Mrs  Lennox  was  the  earliest,  I  think,  to  assert  that  Lear  was  really  insane  from 
the  very  first.  She  says  ( Shakespear  Illustrated,  iii,  287) :  Lear  does  not  run  mad 
till  the  third  Act ;  yet  his  behaviour  towards  Cordelia  in  the  first  scene  has  all  the 
appearance  of  a  judgement  totally  depraved;  .  .  .  Lear  banishes  [Cordelia]  his 
sight,  consigns  her  over  to  want,  and  loads  her  with  the  deepest  imprecations.  What 
less  than  Phrenzy  can  inspire  a  rage  so  groundless,  and  a  conduct  so  absurd  ?  Lear, 
while  in  his  senses,  acts  like  a  madman,  and  from  his  first  appearance  to  his  last 
seems  to  be  wholly  deprived  of  his  reason. 

Joseph  Warton,  D.  D.  ( The  Adventurer,  5  Jan.,  1 754)  :  Madness  being  occasioned 
by  a  close  and  continued  attention  of  the  mind  to  a  single  object,  Shakespeare 
judiciously  represents  the  resignation  of  his  crown  to  daughters  so  cruel  and  unnatu- 
ral,  as  the  particular  idea  which  has  brought  on  the  distraction  of  Lear,  and  which 
perpetually  recurs  to  his  imagination,  and  mixes  itself  with  all  his  ramblings.  [This 
theory  of  the  cause  of  Lear’s  madness  brought  out  a  reply,  on  the  following  Satur¬ 
day,  from  Charles  Ranger  [Arthur  Murphy]  in  the  Gray's- Inn  Journal,  wherein  it 
was  contended  that  the  ingratitude  of  Lear’s  daughters,  and  not  his  loss  of  power, 
was  the  cause  of  his  madness.  To  this  an  Anonymous  correspondent  replied  in  the 
next  week’s  issue,  upholding  Warton.  Whether  or  not  this  Anonymous  contributor 
was  Warton  himself,  I  really  have  not  taken  sufficient  interest  in  the  discussion  to 
find  out.  Ranger  rejoined  in  the  course  of  the  next  few  months,  and  to  the  second 
volume  of  The  Gray' s-Inn  Journal  I  refer  all  who  are  interested  in  the  dispute, 
which  I  am  not. — Ed.] 

A.  Brigham,  M.  D.  {Shakespeare' s  Illustrations  of  Insanity,  Am.  Joum.  of  Insan¬ 
ity,  July,  1844) :  Lear’s  is  a  genuine  case  of  insanity  from  the  beginning  to  the  end; 
such  as  we  often  see  in  aged  persons.  On  reading  it  we  cannot  divest  ourselves  of 
the  idea  that  it  is  a  real  case  of  insanity  correctly  reported.  Still,  we  apprehend,  the 


INSANITY 


413 


play,  or  case,  is  generally  misunderstood.  The  general  belief  is,  that  the  insanity  of 
Lear  originated  solely  from  the  ill-treatment  of  his  daughters,  while  in  truth  he  was 
insane  before  that,  from  the  beginning  of  the  play,  when  he  gave  his  kingdom  away, 
and  banished,  as  it  were,  Cordelia  and  Kent,  and  abused  his  servants.  The  ill-usage 
of  his  daughters  only  aggravated  the  disease,  and  drove  him  to  raving  madness.  Had 
it  been  otherwise,  the  case,  as  one  of  insanity,  would  have  been  inconsistent  and  very 
unusual.  Shakespeare  and  Walter  Scott  prepare  those  whom  they  represent  as  insane, 
by  education  and  other  circumstances,  for  the  disease, — they  predispose  them  to 
insanity,  and  thus  its  outbreak  is  not  unnatural.  In  the  case  of  Lear  the  insanity  is 
so  evident  before  he  received  any  abuse  from  his  daughters,  that,  professionally 
speaking,  a  feeling  of  regret  arises  that  he  was  not  so  considered  and  so  treated.  He 
was  unquestionably  very  troublesome,  and  by  his  ‘  new  pranks,’  as  his  daughter  calls 
them,  and  rash  and  variable  conduct,  caused  his  children  much  trouble,  and  intro¬ 
duced  much  discord  into  their  households.  In  fact,  a  little  feeling  of  commiseration 
for  his  daughters  at  first  arises  in  our  minds  from  these  circumstances,  though  to  be 
sure  they  form  no  excuse  for  their  subsequent  bad  conduct.  Let  it  be  remembered 
they  exhibited  no  marked  disposition  to  ill-treat  or  neglect  him  until  after  the  con¬ 
duct  of  himself  and  his  knights  had  become  outrageous.  Then  they  at  first  reproved 
him,  or  rather  asked  him  to  change  his  course  in  a  mild  manner.  Thus  Goneril  says 
to  him :  *  I  would  you  would  make  use  of  that  good  wisdom  Whereof  I  know  you 

*  are  fraught ;  and  put  away  These  dispositions  which  of  late  transform  you  From  what 

*  you  rightly  are  ’ ;  showing  that  previously  he  had  been  different.  This,  however, 
caused  an  unnatural  and  violent  burst  of  rage,  but  did  not  originate  his  insanity,  for 
he  had  already  exhibited  symptoms  of  it,  and  it  would  have  progressed  naturally 
even  if  he  had  not  been  thus  addressed. 

Lear  is  not  after  this  represented  as  constantly  deranged.  Like  most  persons 
affected  by  this  kind  of  insanity,  he  at  times  converses  rationally. 

In  the  storm-scene  he  becomes  violently  enraged,  exhibiting  what  may  be  seen 
daily  in  a  mad-house,  a  paroxysm  of  rage  and  violence.  It  is  not  until  he  has  seen 
and  conversed  with  Edgar,  ‘the  philosopher  and  learned  Theban,’  as  he  calls  him, 
that  he  becomes  a  real  maniac.  After  this,  aided  by  a  proper  course  of  treatment,  he 
falls  asleep,  and  sleep,  as  in  all  similar  cases,  partially  restores  him.  But  the  violence 
of  his  disease  and  his  sufferings  are  too  great  for  his  feeble  system,  and  he  dies, 
and  dies  deranged.  The  whole  case  is  instructive,  not  as  an  interesting  story  merely, 
but  as  a  faithful  history  of  a  case  of  senile  insanity,  or  the  insanity  of  old  age. 

I.  Ray,  M.  D.  (. Am.  Journal  of  Insanity,  April,  1847) :  In  the  tragedy  of  King  Lear 
Shakespeare  has  represented  the  principal  character  as  driven  to  madness  by  the  un¬ 
expected  ingratitude  of  his  daughters;  or,  more  scientifically  speaking,  he  has  repre¬ 
sented  a  strong  predisposition  to  the  disease  as  being  rapidly  developed  under  the  ap¬ 
plication  of  an  adequate  exciting  cause.  It  is  no  part  of  his  object  to  excite  curiosity 
by  a  liberal  display  of  wildness  and  fury,  nor  awaken  our  pity  by  the  spectacle  of  a 
mind  in  ruins  and  unconscious  of  its  wretchedness.  He  aimed  at  dramatic  effect, 
by  opening  the  fountains  of  sympathy  for  a  being  of  noble  nature  and  generous  im¬ 
pulses,  cruelly  despoiled  of  the  highest  endowment  of  man,  but  not  so  far  as  to  lose 
all  trace  of  his  original  qualities,  or  cease  for  a  moment  to  command  our  deepest  re¬ 
spect.  In  Lear  we  have  a  man  of  a  hot  and  hasty  temper,  of  strong  and  generous 
passions,  of  a  credulous  and  confiding  disposition,  governed  by  impulses  rather  than 
deliberate  judgement,  rendered  impatient  of  restraint  or  contradiction  by  the  habit 
of  command,  with  a  nervous  temperament  strongly  susceptible  to  the  vexations  of 
35* 


4T4 


APPENDIX 


life,  and,  moreover,  with  all  these  moral  infirmities  aggravated  by  old  age.  With 
these  simple  elements  of  character  is  mingled  and  assimilated  more  or  less  of  mental 
derangement,  with  equal  regard  to  pathological  propriety  and  dramatic  effect.  And 
so  nicely  adjusted  are  the  various  elements  of  sanity  and  insanity,  and  so  admirably 
do  they  support  and  illustrate  one  another,  that  we  are  not  surprised  in  the  progress 
of  the  action  by  violent  contrasts;  and  we  feel  at  last  as  if  it  were  the  most  natural 
thing  in  the  world  that  Lear  should  go  mad,  and  precisely  in  the  way  represented  by 
the  poet.  Mad  as  he  becomes,  the  prominent  attributes  of  his  character  are  always 
to  be  seen.  Through  the  whole  play,  he  is  the  same  generous,  confiding,  noble- 
hearted  Lear.  In  short,  assuming  Lear  to  be  an  historical  portrait,  instead  of  a 
poetical  creation,  we  should  say  there  existed  in  his  case  a  strong  predisposition  to 
insanity,  and  that,  if  it  had  not  been  developed  by  the  approach  of  old  age  or  the 
conduct  of  his  daughters,  it  probably  would  have  been  by  something  else.  His  in¬ 
considerate  rashness  in  distributing  his  kingdom  among  his  children,  his  disinheriting 
the  youngest  for  the  fearless  expression  of  her  feelings,  and  his  banishment  of  Kent 
for  endeavoring  to  recall  him  to  a  sense  of  his  folly, — all  indicate  an  ill-balanced 
mind,  if  not  the  actual  invasion  of  disease.  This  view  of  the  case  is  confirmed  by 
the  conversation  between  the  sisters  immediately  after  the  division  of  the  kingdom 
[I,  i,  287-299].  With  a  knowledge  of  insanity  that  could  hardly  have  been  ex¬ 
pected  from  any  but  a  professional  observer,  Shakespeare  has  here  and  elsewhere 
recognized  the  fact,  that  very  many  of  those  who  become  insane  are  previously  dis¬ 
tinguished  by  some  of  those  mental  irregularities  that  pass  under  the  name  of  oddity 
or  eccentricity.  .  .  .  The  development  of  the  early  stage  of  Lear’s  insanity,  or  its 
incubation,  as  it  is  technically  called,  is  managed  with  masterly  skill,  the  more  sur¬ 
prising  as  it  is  that  stage  of  the  disease  which  attracts  the  least  attention.  And  the 
reason  is,  that  the  derangement  is  evinced,  not  so  much  by  delusions  or  gross  im¬ 
proprieties  of  conduct,  as  by  a  mere  exaggeration  of  natural  peculiarities,  by  incon¬ 
sistencies  of  behaviour,  by  certain  acts  for  which  very  plausible  reasons  are  assigned, 
though  they  would  never  have  been  performed  in  a  perfectly  sound  state  of  mind,  by 
gusts  of  passion  at  every  trifling  provocation,  or  by  doing  very  proper  things  at  un 
seasonable  times  and  occasions.  With  his  own  free  will  and  accord  he  gives  away 
his  kingdom,  but  finds  it  difficult  to  sink  the  monarch  in  the  private  citizen.  He 
attaches  to  his  person  a  band  of  riotous  retainers,  whose  loose  and  lawless  behaviour 
is  destructive  to  the  peace  and  good  order  of  his  daughter’s  household.  Goneril 
describes  them  as,  ‘  Men  so  disordered,  so  debauched  and  bold,  That  this  our  court, 
‘infected  with  their  manners,  Shows  like  a  riotous  inn.*  Under  such  an  infliction, 
it  is  not  strange  that  she  should  remonstrate,  and,  had  not  the  divine  light  already 
begun  to  flicker,  he  would  have  acknowledged  the  justice  of  the  reproof.  As  it  is, 
however,  instead  of  admitting  some  share  of  the  fault,  he  attributes  the  whole  of  it 
to  her,  flies  into  a  passion,  pours  upon  her  head  the  bitterest  curses,  upbraids  her 
with  the  vilest  ingratitude,  and  forthwith  proclaims  his  wrongs  to  the  public  ear. 
Like  most  cases  of  this  kind  in  real  life,  it  would  have,  to  a  stranger,  the  appearance 
of  a  family  quarrel  springing  from  the  ordinary  motives  of  interest  or  passion,  but 
where,  really,  the  ill-regulated  conduct  resulting  from  the  first  influences  of  disease 
provokes  restrictions  more  or  less  necessary  and  appropriate,  that  become  exciting 
causes  of  further  disorder.  Another  life-like  touch  is  given  to  the  picture  in  Lear’s 
attributing  all  his  troubles  to  filial  ingratitude,  not  being  aware,  of  course,  that  he 
was  on  the  high  road  to  insanity  long  before  he  had  any  reason  to  doubt  their  kind¬ 
ness.  In  fact,  nothing  is  more  common  than  for  the  patient,  when  telling  his 


INSANITY 


415 


story,  to  fix  upon  some  event,  and  especially  some  act  of  his  friends,  as  the  cause  of 
his  troubles,  which  occurred  long  subsequently  to  the  real  origin  of  his  disorder,  and 
might  have  had  but  an  accidental  connection  with  it. 

[P.  493.]  ‘Oh,  that  way  madness  lies.’  Unable  as  the  insane  are  to  perceive  their 
own  insanity,  yet  this  apprehension  of  its  approach,  so  frequently  repeated  by  Lear, 
usually  occui's  during  its  incubation.  While  still  able  to  control  his  mental  mani¬ 
festations,  the  patient  is  tortured  with  anticipations  of  insanity ;  but,  when  he  actually 
becomes  so  insane  that  the  most  careless  observer  perceives  the  fact,  then  he  enter¬ 
tains  the  most  complacent  opinion  of  his  intellectual  vigor  and  soundness.  And  yet 
this  is  one  of  the  nicer  traits  of  insanity,  which  the  ordinary  observer  would  hardly 
be  supposed  to  notice. 

[P.  495.]  Thus  far,  the  progress  of  Lear’s  insanity  is  represented  with  the  closest 
fidelity  to  nature.  It  is  not  more  different  from  the  disease,  as  daily  observed,  than 
Lear’s  moral  and  intellectual  constitution,  when  in  health,  is  different  from  ordinary 
men’s.  At  every  interview  reason  seems  to  have  lost  somewhat  more  of  its  control. 
The  mental  excitement  has  been  steadily  increasing,  until  now,  having  reached  its 
height,  he  goes  about  singing,  dancing,  and  capering  through  the  fields,  fantastically 
decorated  with  weeds  and  flowers,  looking,  acting,  and  talking  like  a  madman.  His 
perceptive  organs  are  deceived  by  hallucinations ;  and  his  discourse,  though  tinctured 
with  his  natural  shrewdness  and  vigor  of  thought,  is  full  of  incoherence  and  incon¬ 
gruity.  In  short,  he  is  now  what  is  called  raving.  In  the  representation  of  this 
condition  we  have  another  instance  of  Shakespeare’s  unrivalled  powers  of  observa¬ 
tion.  To  ordinary  apprehension  the  raving  of  a  maniac  is  but  an  arbitrary  jumble 
of  words  and  phrases,  between  which  no  connecting  threads  can  be  discerned.  But, 
in  fact,  discordant  and  heterogeneous  as  they  may  appear,  they  are  nevertheless  sub¬ 
jected  to  a  certain  law  of  association,  difficult  as  it  may  be  frequently  to  discover  it. 
The  phenomenon  may  thus  be  physiologically  explained.  In  consequence  of  the 
cerebral  excitement,  impressions  long  since  made, — so  long,  perhaps,  as  to  have  been 
forgotten  previous  to  the  attack, — are  so  vividly  and  distinctly  recalled  that  they  ap¬ 
pear  to  be  outward  realities.  So  long  as  the  intellect  retains  its  integrity,  it  is  able  to 
recognize  the  true  nature  of  this  phenomenon ;  .but,  when  touched  by  disease,  it 
ceases  to  correct  the  error  of  perception.  The  impressions  are  actually  considered 
to  be  what  they  appear,  and  the  patient  thinks  and  discourses  about  them  as  such. 

[P.  498.3  Bearing  in  mind  these  facts,  we  readily  see  how  there  may  always  be  some 
method  in  madness,  however  wild  and  furious  it  may  be — some  traces  of  that  delicate 
thread  which,  though  broken  in  numerous  points,  still  forms  the  connecting  link  be¬ 
tween  many  groups  and  patches  of  thought.  It  is  in  consequence  of  Shakespeare’s 
knowledge  of  this  psychological  law  that,  in  all  his  representations  of  madness,  even 
though  characterized  by  wildness  and  irregularity,  we  are  never  at  a  loss  to  perceive 
that  the  disease  is  real  and  not  assumed. 

[P.  499.]  It  is  not  uncommon  to  meet  with  madmen  of  the  most  wild  and  turbulent 
description  mixing  up  their  utterances  with  the  shrewdest  remarks  upon  men  and 
things,  and  the  keenest  and  coolest  invective  against  those  who  have  incurred  their 
displeasure.  The  poet,  perhaps,  has  used  the  utmost  license  of  his  art  in  the  present 
instance  [IV,  vi,  83-202],  but  if  few  madmen  have  exhibited  so  much  matter  mingled 
with  their  impertinency  as  Lear,  it  may  be  replied,  in  justification,  that  few  men  are 
endowed  like  Lear  with  such  a  union  of  strong  passions  and  natural  shrewdness  of 
understanding. 

Bucknill  [p.  164]  :  If  this  great  and  sound  critic  [Hallam,  see  p.  428]  had  pos- 


4i  6 


APPENDIX 


sessed  any  practical  knowledge  of  mental  pathology,  he  could  not  have  taken  this 
view  of  the  development  of  the  character.  Intellectual  energy  may,  indeed,  some¬ 
times  be  seen  to  grow  stronger  under  the  greatest  trials  of  life,  but  never  when  the 
result  of  these  trials  is  mental  disease.  So  far  as  eloquence  is  the  result  of  passion, 
excitement  of  passion  may  stimulate  its  display;  and  it  is  remarkable  that  so  long 
as  Lear  retains  the  least  control  over  his  passion,  his  imagination  remains  compara¬ 
tively  dull,  his  eloquence  tame.  It  is  only  when  emotional  expression  is  unbridled 
that  the  majestic  flow  of  burning  words  finds  vent.  It  is  only  when  all  the  barriers 
of  conventional  restraint  are  broken  down,  that  the  native  and  naked  force  of  the  soul 
displays  itself.  The  display  arises  from  the  absence  of  restraint,  and  not  from  the 
stimulus  of  disease. 

[P.  167.]  The  persistency  with  which  critics  have  refused  to  see  the  symptoms 
of  insanity  in  Lear,  until  the  reasoning  power  itself  has  become  undeniably  alien¬ 
ated,  is  founded  upon  that  view  of  mental  disease  which  has,  until  recently,  been 
entertained  even  by  physicians,  and  which  is  still  maintained  in  courts  of  law, 
namely,  that  insanity  is  an  affection  of  the  intellectual,  and  not  of  the  emotional, 
part  of  man’s  nature.  .  .  .  With  the  exception  of  those  cases  of  insanity  which  arise 
from  injuries,  blood-poisons,  sympathetic  irritations,  and  other  sources  of  an  unques¬ 
tionably  physical  nature,  the  common  causes  of  insanity  are  such  as  produce  emo¬ 
tional  changes,  either  in  the  form  of  violent  agitation  of  the  passions,  or  that  of  a 
chronic  state  of  abnormal  emotion,  which  pronounces  itself  in  the  habitually  exagge¬ 
rated  force  of  some  one  passion  or  desire,  whereby  the  healthy  balance  of  the  mind  Is 
at  length  destroyed.  From  these  and  other  reasons  founded  upon  the  symptoma¬ 
tology  and  treatment  of  insanity,  upon  the  definite  operation  of  the  reasoning  facul¬ 
ties,  and  their  obvious  inability  to  become  motives  for  conduct  without  the  intervention 
of  emotional  influence,  and  also  from  the  wide  chasm  which  intervenes  and  must 
intervene  between  all  the  legal  and  medical  definitions  of  insanity  foundeefupon  the 
intellectual  theory  and  the  facts  as  they  are  observed  in  the  broad  field  of  nature,  the 
conclusion  appears  inevitable  that  no  state  of  the  reasoning  can,  by  itself,  be  the 
cause  or  condition  of  madness;  congenital  idiocy  and  acquired  dementia  being  alone 
excepted.  The  corollary  of  this  is,  that  emotional  disturbance  is  the  cause  and  con¬ 
dition  of  insanity.  This  is  especially  obvious  in  the  periods  during  which  the  dis¬ 
ease  is  developing;  ‘in  the  prodromic  period  of  the  disorder  the  emotions  are  always 
‘perverted  while  the  reason  remains  intact.’  Disorders  of  the  intellectual  faculties 
are  secondary;  they  are  often,  indeed,  to  be  recognized  as  the  morbid  emotions 
transformed  into  perverted  action  of  the  reason;  but  in  no  cases  are  they  primary 
and  essential.  How  completely  is  this  theory  supported  by  the  development  of 
insanity,  as  it  is  portrayed  in  Lear!  Shakespeare,  who  painted  from  vast  observa¬ 
tion  of  nature,  as  he  saw  it  without  and  felt  it  within,  places  this  great  fact  broadly 
and  unmistakably  before  us.  It  has  indeed  been  long  ignored  by  the  exponents  of 
medical  and  legal  science,  at  the  cost  of  ever-futile  attempts  to  define  insanity  by  its 
accidents  and  not  by  its  essence;  and,  following  this  guidance,  the  literary  critics  of 
Shakespeare  have  completely  overlooked  the  early  symptoms  of  Lear’s  insanity,  and, 
according  to  the  custom  of  the  world,  have  postponed  its  recognition  until  he  is  run¬ 
ning  about  a  frantic,  raving  madman. 

Dr  Carl  Stark  {Koenig Lear.  Eine psychiatrische  Shakespeare-Studie.  Stuttgart, 
1871,  p.  53):  Only  rarely  do  trouble,  disillusion,  violent  affection,  alone  by  them- 
selves,  lead  directly  to  insanity  in  a  character  disposed  thereto;  but  generally,  in  ad¬ 
dition  to  these  causes,  there  is  a  condition  of  the  body  that  immediately  occasions  the 


INSANITY 


417 


outbreak  of  madness.  This  fact  Shakespeare  fully  recognizes,  and  it  is  strikingly 
observable  that  Lear,  shortly  before  the  bursting  forth  of  his  disease,  had  in  heavi¬ 
ness  made  a  fatiguing  journey,  that  in  this  condition,  bodily  and  mental,  consumed 
by  the  most  violent  emotions,  he  is  at  last  exposed  in  the  cold  night  to  the  rage  of  a 
fearful  storm.  Only  too  frequently  it  is  just  such  circumstance  of  bodily  or  mental 
exhaustion  that  gives  the  impulse  to  mental  disease  and  to  that  fnnr.  of  it  manifested 
in  Lear, — delirium. 

[P.  55.]  The  feeling  of  bodily  distress,  as  the  disease  approaches,  also  finds  expres¬ 
sion  when  Lear  exclaims :  ‘  O  how  this  mother  swells  up  toward  my  heart !  ’  as  also  the 
feeling  of  dizziness,  not  infrequently  observed  in  such  cases,  is  strikingly  clothed  in 
the  words,  *  My  wits  begin  to  turn.’ 

aB 


ENGLISH  CRITICISMS 


DR  JOHNSON 

The  tragedy  of  Lear  is  deservedly  celebrated  among  the  dramas  of  Shakespeare, 
There  is,  perhaps,  no  play  which  keeps  the  attention  so  strongly  fixed ;  which  so  much 
agitates  our  passions  and  interests  our  curiosity.  The  artful  involutions  of  distinct 
interests,  the  striking  oppositions  of  contrary  characters,  the  sudden  changes  of  for¬ 
tune,  and  the  quick  succession  of  events,  fill  the  mind  with  a  perpetual  tumult  of  in¬ 
dignation,  pity,  and  hope.  There  is  no  scene  which  does  not  contribute  to  the  aggra¬ 
vation  of  the  distress  or  conduct  of  the  action,  and  scarce  a  line  which  does  not  con¬ 
duce  to  the  progress  of  the  scene.  So  powerful  is  the  current  of  the  poet’s  imagina¬ 
tion,  that  the  mind  which  once  ventures  within  it,  is  hurried  irresistibly  along. 

On  the  seeming  improbability  of  Lear’s  conduct  it  may  be  observed,  that  he  is 
represented  according  to  histories  at  that  time  vulgarly  received  as  true.  And,  per¬ 
haps,  if  we  turn  our  thoughts  upon  the  barbarity  and  ignorance  of  the  age  to  which 
this  story  is  referred,  it  will  appear  not  so  unlikely  as  while  we  estimate  Lear’s  man¬ 
ners  by  our  own.  Such  preference  of  one  daughter  to  another,  or  resignation  of 
dominion  on  such  conditions,  would  be  yet  credible  if  told  of  a  petty  prince  of 
Guinea  or  Madagascar.  Shakespeare,  indeed,  by  the  mention  of  his  earls  and  dukes, 
has  given  us  the  idea  of  times  more  civilized,  and  of  life  regulated  by  softer  man¬ 
ners  ;  and  the  truth  is,  that  though  he  so  nicely  discriminates,  and  so  minutely  de¬ 
scribes  the  characters  of  men,  lie  commonly  neglects  and  confounds  the  characters 
of  ages,  by  mingling  customs  ancient  and  modern,  English  and  foreign. 

My  learned  friend  Mr  Warton,  who  has,  in  The  Adventurer,  very  minutely  criti¬ 
cised  this  play,  remarks  that  the  instances  of  cruelty  are  too  savage  and  shocking, 
and  that  the  intervention  of  Edmund  destroys  the  simplicity  of  the  story.  These 
objections  may,  I  think,  be  answered  by  repeating  that  the  cruelty  of  the  daughters 
is  an  historical  fact,  to  which  the  poet  has  added  little,  having  only  drawn  it  into  a 
series  by  dialogue  and  action.  But  I  am  not  able  to  apologize  with  equal  plausibility 
for  the  extrusion  of  Gloucester’s  eyes,  which  seems  an  act  too  horrid  to  be  endured 
in  dramatic  exhibition,  and  such  as  must  always  compel  the  mind  to  relieve  its  dis¬ 
tress  by  incredulity.  Yet,  let  it  be  remembered,  that  our  author  well  knew  what 
would  please  the  audience  for  which  he  wrote. 

The  injury  done  by  Edmund  to  the  simplicity  of  the  action  is  abundantly  recom¬ 
pensed  by  the  addition  of  variety  by  the  art  with  which  he  is  made  to  co-operate 
with  the  chief  design,  and  the  opportunity  which  he  gives  the  poet  of  combining 
perfidy  with  perfidy,  and  connecting  the  wicked  son  with  the  wicked  daughters,  to 
impress  this  important  moral,  that  villainy  is  never  at  a  stop,  that  crimes  lead  to  crimes, 
418 


COLERIDGE 


419 


and  at  last  terminate  in  ruin.  But,  though  this  moral  be  incidentally  enforced, 
Shakespeare  has  suffered  the  virtue  of  Cordelia  to  perish  in  a  just  cause,  contrary 
to  the  natural  ideas  of  justice,  to  the  hope  of  the  reader,  and,  what  is  yet  more 
strange,  to  the  faith  of  chronicles.  ...  A  play  in  which  the  wicked  prosper,  and  the 
virtuous  miscarry,  may  doubtless  be  good,  because  it  is  a  just  representation  of  the. 
common  events  of  human  life;  but,  since  all  reasonable  beings  naturally  love  justice, 
I  cannot  easily  be  persuaded  that  the  observation  of  justice  makes  a  play  worse ;  or 
that,  if  other  excellencies  are  equal,  the  audience  will  not  always  rise  better  pleased 
from  the  final  triumph  of  persecuted  virtue. 

In  the  present  case  the  publick  has  decided.  Cordelia,  from  the  time  of  Tate,  has 
always  retired  with  victory  and  felicity.  And,  if  my  sensations  could  add  anything 
to  the  general  suffrage,  I  might  relate,  that  I  was  many  years  ago  so  shocked  by  Cor¬ 
delia’s  death,  that  I  know  not  whether  I  ever  endured  to  read  again  the  last  scenes 
of  the  play  till  I  undertook  to  revise  them  as  an  editor. 

COLERIDGE 

{Notes  and  Lectures ,  p.  18S,  ed.  1S74.) — [In  the  first  scene  of  this  tragedy]  from 
Lear,  the  persona  patiens  of  his  drama,  Shakespeare  passes  without  delay  to  the 
second  in  importance,  the  chief  agent  and  prime  mover,  and  introduces  Edmund  to 
our  acquaintance,  preparing  us  with  the  same  felicity  of  judgement,  and  in  the  same 
easy  and  natural  way,  for  his  character  in  the  seemingly  casual  communication  of  its 
origin  and  occasion.  From  the  first  drawing  up  of  the  curtain  Edmund  has  stood 
before  us  in  the  united  strength  and  beauty  of  earliest  manhood.  Our  eyes  have 
been  questioning  him.  Gifted  as  he  is  with  high  advantages  of  person,  and  further 
endowed  by  nature  with  a  powerful  intellect  and  a  strong,  energetic  will,  even  with¬ 
out  any  concurrence  of  circumstances  and  accident,  pride  will  necessarily  be  the  sin 
that  most  easily  besets  him.  But  Edmund  is  also  the  known  and  acknowledged  son 
of  the  princely  Gloster;  he,  therefore,  has  both  the  germ  of  pride  and  the  conditions 
best  fitted  to  evolve  and  ripen  it  into  a  predominant  feeling.  Yet  hitherto  no  reason 
appears  why  it  should  be  other  than  the  not  unusual  pride  of  person,  talent,  and  birth, 
—a  pride  auxiliary,  if  not  akin,  to  many  virtues,  and  the  natural  ally  of  honorable  im¬ 
pulses.  But,  alas  !  in  his  own  presence  his  own  father  takes  shame  to  himself  for  the 
frank  avowal  that  he  is  his  father, — he  has  ‘  blushed  so  often  to  acknowledge  him  that 
*  he  is  now  brazed  to  it !  *  Edmund  hears  the  circumstances  of  his  birth  spoken  of 
with  a  most  degrading  and  licentious  levity, — his  mother  described  as  a  wanton  by  her 
own  paramour,  and  the  remembrance  of  the  animal  sting,  the  low  criminal  gratifica¬ 
tions  connected  with  her  wantonness  and  prostituted  beauty,  assigned  as  the  reason 
why  ‘  the  whoreson  must  be  acknowledged !  *  This,  and  the  consciousness  of  its 
notoriety,  the  gnawing  conviction  that  every  show  of  respect  is  an  effort  of  courtesy, 
which  recalls,  while  it  represses,  a  contrary  feeling ;  this  is  the  ever-trickling  flow  of 
wormwood  and  gall  into  the  wounds  of  pride ;  the  corrosive  virus  which  inoculates 
pride  with  a  venom  not  its  own,  with  envy,  hatred,  and  a  lust  for  that  power  which, 
in  its  blaze  of  radiance,  would  hide  the  dark  spots  on  his  disc ;  with  pangs  of  shame 
personally  undeserved,  and  therefore  felt  as  wrongs,  and  with  a  blind  ferment  of  vin¬ 
dictive  working  towards  the  occasions  and  causes,  especially  towards  a  brother,  whose 
stainless  birth  and  lawful  honors  were  the  constant  remembrancers  of  his  own  debase- 
ment,  and  were  ever  in  the  way  to  prevent  all  chance  of  its  being  unknown,  or  over¬ 
looked  and  forgotten.  Add  to  this,  that  with  excellent  judgement,  and  provident  foi 


420 


APPENDIX 


the  claims  of  the  moral  sense, — for  that  which,  relatively  to  the  drama,  is  called  poetic 
justice,  and  as  the  fittest  means  for  reconciling  the  feelings  of  the  spectators  to  the 
horrors  of  Gloster’s  after-sufferings, — at  least,  of  rendering  them  somewhat  less  un¬ 
endurable  (for  I  will  not  disguise  my  conviction  that,  in  this  one  point,  the  tragic  in 
this  play  has  been  urged  beyond  the  outermost  mark  and  ne  plus  ultra  of  the  dra¬ 
matic),  Shakespeare  has  precluded  all  excuse  and  palliation  of  the  guilt  incurred  by 
both  the  parents  of  the  base-born  Edmund,  by  Gloster’s  confession  that  he  was  at 
the  time  a  married  man,  and  already  blest  with  a  lawful  heir  to  his  fortunes. 

The  mournful  alienation  of  brotherly  love,  occasioned  by  the  law  of  primogeni¬ 
ture  in  noble  families,  or  rather  by  the  unnecessary  distinctions  engrafted  thereon, 
and  this  in  children  of  the  same  stock,  is  still  almost  proverbial  on  the  Continent,— 
especially,  as  I  know  from  my  own  observation,  in  the  south  of  Europe, — and  appears 
to  have  been  scarcely  less  common  in  our  own  island  before  the  Revolution  of  1688, 
if  we  may  judge  from  the  characters  and  sentiments  so  frequent  in  our  elder  comedies. 
There  is  the  younger  brother,  for  instance,  in  Beaumont  and  Fletcher’s  play  of  the 
Scornful  Lady ,  on  the  one  side,  and  Oliver,  in  Shakespeare’s  As  You  Like  It ,  on  the 
other.  Need  it  be  said  how  heavy  an  aggravation,  in  such  a  case,  the  stain  of  bas¬ 
tardy  must  have  been,  were  it  only  that  the  younger  brother  was  liable  to  hear  his 
own  dishonor  and  his  mother’s  infamy  related  by  his  father  with  an  excusing  shrug 
of  the  shoulders,  and  in  a  tone  betwixt  waggery  and  shame! 

By  the  circumstances  here  enumerated  as  so  many  predisposing  causes,  Edmund’s 
character  might  well  be  deemed  already  sufficiently  explained,  and  our  minds  pre¬ 
pared  for  it.  But  in  this  tragedy  the  story  or  fable  constrained  Shakespeare  to  intro¬ 
duce  wickedness  in  an  outrageous  form  in  the  persons  of  Regan  and  Goneril.  He 
had  read  nature  too  heedfully  not  to  know  that  courage,  intellect,  and  strength  of 
character  are  the  most  impressive  forms  of  power,  and  that  to  power  in  itself,  without 
reference  to  any  moral  end,  an  inevitable  admiration  and  complacency  appertains, 
whether  it  be  displayed  in  the  conquests  of  a  Buonaparte  or  Tamerlane,  or  in  the  form 
and  the  thunder  of  a  cataract.  But  in  the  exhibition  of  such  a  character  it  was  of  the 
highest  importance  to  prevent  the  guilt  from  passing  into  utter  monstrosity, — which 
again  depends  on  the  presence  or  absence  of  causes  and  temptations  sufficient  to  ac¬ 
count  for  the  wickedness,  without  the  necessity  of  recurring  to  a  thorough  fiendishness 
of  nature  for  its  origination.  For  such  are  the  appointed  relations  of  intellectual  power 
to  truth,  and  of  truth  to  goodness,  that  it  becomes  both  morally  and  poetically  unsafe 
to  present  what  is  admirable, — what  our  nature  compels  us  to  admire, — in  the  mind, 
and  what  is  most  detestable  in  the  heart,  as  co-existing  in  the  same  individual  with¬ 
out  any  apparent  connection,  or  any  modification  of  the  one  by  the  other.  That 
Shakspeare  has  in  one  instance,  that  of  Iago,  approached  to  this,  and  that  he  has 
done  it  successfully,  is  perhaps  the  most  astonishing  proof  of  his  genius  and  the 
opulence  of  its  resources.  But  in  the  present  tragedy,  in  which  he  was  compelled  to 
present  a  Goneril  and  a  Regan,  it  was  most  carefully  to  be  avoided; — and  therefore 
the  only  one  conceivable  addition  to  the  inauspicious  influences  on  the  preformation 
of  Edmund’s  character  is  given,  in  the  information  that  all  the  kindly  counteractions 
to  the  mischievous  feelings  of  shame,  which  might  have  been  derived  from  co-domes¬ 
tication  with  Edgar  and  their  common  father,  had  been  cut  off"  by  his  absence  from 
home,  and  foreign  education  from  boyhood  to  the  present  time,  and  a  prospect  of  its 
continuance,  as  if  to  preclude  all  risk  of  his  interference  with  the  father’s  views  for 
the  elder  and  legitimate  son; — ‘He  hath  been  out  nine  years,  and  away  he  shall 
again.’ 


LAMB 


421 


LAMB 

( Prose  Works ,  p.  121,  ed.  1836.) — So  to  see  Lear  acted, — to  see  an  old  man  totter¬ 
ing  about  the  stage  with  a  walking-stick,  turned  out  of  doors  by  his  daughters  in  a 
rainy  night — has  nothing  in  it  but  what  is  painful  and  disgusting.  We  want  to  take 
him  into  shelter  and  relieve  him.  That  is  all  the  feeling  which  the  acting  of  Lear 
ever  produced  in  me.  But  the  Lear  of  Shakspeare  cannot  be  acted.  The  con¬ 
temptible  machinery  by  which  they  mimic  the  storm  which  he  goes  out  in,  is  not 
more  inadequate  to  represent  the  horrors  of  the  real  elements  than  any  actor  can  be 
to  represent  Lear ;  they  might  more  easily  propose  to  personate  the  Satan  of  Milton 
upon  a  stage,  or  one  of  Michael  Angelo’s  terrible  figures.  The  greatness  of  Lear  is 
not  in  corporal  dimension,  but  in  intellectual :  the  explosions  of  his  passion  are 
terrible  as  a  volcano:  they  are  storms  turning  up  and  disclosing  to  the  bottom  that 
sea,  his  mind,  with  all  its  vast  riches.  It  is  his  mind  which  is  laid  bare.  This  case 
of  flesh  and  blood  seems  too  insignificant  to  be  thought  on;  even  as  he  himself 
neglects  it.  On  the  stage  we  see  nothing  but  corporal  infirmities  and  weakness,  the 
impotence  of  rage ;  while  we  read  it,  we  see  not  Lear,  but  we  are  Lear, — we  are  in 
his  mind,  we  are  sustained  by  a  grandeur  which  baffles  the  malice  of  daughters  and 
storms ;  in  the  aberrations  of  his  reason,  we  discover  a  mighty  irregular  power  of 
reasoning,  immethodised  from  the  ordinary  purposes  of  life,  but  exerting  its  powers, 
as  the  wind  blows  where  it  listeth,  at  will  upon  the  corruptions  and  abuses  of  man¬ 
kind.  What  have  looks,  or  tones,  to  do  with  that  sublime  identification  of  his  age 
with  that  of  the  heavens  themselves ,  when,  in  his  reproaches  to  them  for  conniving  at 
the  injustice  of  his  children,  he  reminds  them  that  *  they  themselves  are  old’?  What 
gesture  shall  we  appropriate  to  this  ?  What  has  the  voice  or  the  eye  to  do  with  such 
things  ?  But  the  play  is  beyond  all  art,  as  the  tamperings  with  it  show ;  it  is  too 
hard  and  stony;  it  must  have  love-scenes  and  a  happy  ending.  It  is  not  enough  that 
Cordelia  is  a  daughter,  she  must  shine  as  a  lover  too.  Tate  has  put  his  hook  into 
the  nostrils  of  this  Leviathan,  for  Garrick  and  his  followers,  the  showmen  of  the 
scene,  to  draw  the  mighty  beast  about  more  easily.  A  happy  ending ! — as  if  the 
living  martyrdom  that  Lear  had  gone  through, — the  flaying  of  his  feelings  alive,  did 
not  make  a  fair  dismissal  from  the  stage  of  life  the  only  decorous  thing  for  him.  If 
he  is  to  live  and  be  happy  after,  if  he  could  sustain  this  world’s  burden  after,  why 
all  this  pudder  and  preparation, — why  torment  us  with  all  this  unnecessary  sympathy  ? 
As  if  the  childish  pleasure  of  getting  his  gilt  robes  and  sceptre  again  could  tempt  him 
to  act  over  again  his  misused  station, — as  if  at  his  years,  and  with  his  experience, 
anything  was  left  but  to  die. 

Lear  is  essentially  impossible  to  be  represented  on  a  stage. 

HAZLITT 

(1 Characters  of  Shakespear’s  Plays,  1817,  p.  153.) — We  wish  that  we  could  pass 
this  play  over  and  say  nothing  about  it.  All  that  we  can  say  must  fall  far  short 
of  the  subject;  or  even  of  what  we  ourselves  conceive  of  it.  To  attempt  to  give 
a  description  of  the  play  itself,  or  of  its  effect  upon  the  mind,  is  mere  impertinence; 
yet  we  must  say  something. — It  is,  then,  the  best  of  all  Shakespear’s  plays,  for 
it  is  the  one  in  which  he  was  the  most  in  earnest.  He  was  here  fairly  caught  in 
the  web  of  his  own  imagination.  The  passion  which  he  has  taken  as  his  subject 
is  that  which  strikes  its  root  deepest  into  the  human  heart ;  of  which  the  bond  is 
36 


422 


APPENDIX 


the  hardest  to  be  unloosed;  and  the  cancelling  and  tearing  to  pieces  of  which 
gives  the  greatest  revulsion  to  the  frame.  This  depth  of  nature,  this  force  of 
passion,  this  tug  and  war  of  the  elements  of  our  being,  this  firm  faith  in  filial  piety, 
and  the  giddy  anarchy  and  whirling  tumult  of  the  thoughts  at  finding  the  prop  failing 
it,  the  contrast  between  the  fixed  immoveable  basis  of  natural  affection,  and  the  rapid, 
irregular  starts  of  imagination,  suddenly  wrenched  from  all  its  accustomed  holds  and 
resting-places  in  the  soul,  this  is  what  Shakespear  has  given,  and  what  nobody  else 
but  he  could  give.  So  we  believe. — The  mind  of  Lear,  staggering  between  the 
weight  of  attachment  and  the  hurried  movements  of  passion,  is  like  a  tall  ship  driven 
about  by  the  winds,  buffeted  by  the  furious  waves,  but  that  still  rides  above  the  storm, 
having  its  anchor  fixed  in  the  bottom  of  the  sea ;  or  it  is  like  the  sharp  rock  circled 
by  the  eddying  whirlpool  that  foams  and  beats  against  it,  or  like  the  solid  promontory 
pushed  from  its  basis  by  the  force  of  an  earthquake. 

The  character  of  Lear  itself  is  very  finely  conceived  for  the  purpose.  It  is  the 
only  ground  on  which  such  a  story  could  be  built  with  the  greatest  truth  and  effect. 
It  is  his  rash  haste,  his  violent  impetuosity,  his  blindness  to  everything  but  the  dic¬ 
tates  of  his  passions  or  affections,  that  produces  all  his  misfortunes,  that  aggravates 
his  impatience  of  them,  that  enforces  our  pity  for  him.  The  part  which  Cordelia 
bears  in  the  scene  is  extremely  beautiful;  the  story  is  almost  told  in  the  first  words 
she  utters.  We  see  at  once  the  precipice  on  which  the  poor  old  king  stands  from  his 
own  extravagant  and  credulous  importunity,  the  indiscreet  simplicity  of  her  love 
(which,  to  be  sure,  has  a  little  of  her  father's  obstinacy  in  it),  and  the  hollowness  of 
her  sisters’  pretensions.  Almost  the  first  burst  of  that  noble  tide  of  passion,  which 
runs  through  the  play,  is  in  the  remonstrance  of  Kent  to  his  royal  master  on  the 
injustice  of  his  sentence  against  his  youngest  daughter :  *  Be  Kent  unmannerly,  when 
Lear  is  mad !  ’  This  manly  plainness,  which  draws  down  on  him  the  displeasure  of 
the  unadvised  king,  is  wrorthy  of  the  fidelity  with  which  he  adheres  to  his  fallen 
fortunes.  The  true  character  of  the  two  eldest  daughters,  Regan  and  Goneril  (they 
are  so  thoroughly  hateful  that  we  do  not  even  like  to  repeat  their  names)  breaks  out 
in  their  answer  to  Cordelia,  who  desires  them  to  treat  their  father  well :  *  Prescribe 
not  us  our  duties  ’ — their  hatred  of  advice  being  in  proportion  to  their  determination 
to  do  wrong,  and  to  their  hypocritical  pretensions  to  do  right.  Their  deliberate 
hypocrisy  adds  the  last  finishing  to  the  odiousness  of  their  characters.  It  is  the 
absence  of  this  detestable  quality  that  is  the  only  relief  in  the  .character  of  Edmund 
the  Bastard,  and  that  at  times  reconciles  us  to  him.  We  are  not  tempted  to  exagge¬ 
rate  the  guilt  of  his  conduct  when  he  himself  gives  it  upas  a  bad  business  and  writes 
himself  down  ‘  plain  villain.’  Nothing  more  can  be  said  about  it.  His  religious 
honesty  in  this  respect  is  admirable.  .  .  . 

It  has  been  said,  and,  we  think,  justly,  that  the  Third  Act  of  Othello  and  the  first 
three  Acts  of  Lear  are  Shakespear’s  great  master-pieces  in  the  logic  of  passion;  that 
they  contain  the  highest  examples,  not  only  of  the  force  of  individual  passion,  but 
of  its  dramatic  vicissitudes  and  striking  effects  arising  from  the  different  circum¬ 
stances  and  characters  of  the  persons  speaking.  We  see  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the 
feeling,  its  pauses  and  feverish  starts,  its  impatience  of  opposition,  its  accumulating 
force  when  it  has  time  to  re-collect  itself,  the  manner  in  which  it  avails  itself  of  every 
passing  word  or  gesture,  its  haste  to  repel  insinuation,  the  alternate  contraction  and 
dilatation  of  the  soul,  and  all  the  ‘dazzling  fence  of  controversy,’  in  this  mortal  com¬ 
bat  with  poisoned  weapons  aimed  at  the  heart,  where  each  wound  is  fatal.  We  see 
in  Othello  how  the  unsuspecting  frankness  and  impetuous  passions  of  the  Moor  are 


HAZLITT 


423 


prayed  upon  and  exasperated  by  the  artful  dexterity  of  Iago.  In  the  present  play, 
that  which  aggravates  the  sense  of  sympathy  in  the  reader,  and  of  uncontrollable  an¬ 
guish  in  the  swollen  heart  of  Lear,  is  the  petrifying  indifference,  the  cold,  calculating, 
obdurate  selfishness  of  his  daughters.  His  keen  passions  seem  whetted  on  their 
stony  hearts.  The  contrast  would  be  too  painful,  the  shock  too  great,  but  for  the 
intervention  of  the  Fool,  whose  well-timed  levity  comes  in  to  break  the  continuity 
of  feeling  when  it  can  no  longer  be  borne,  and  to  bring  into  play  again  the  fibres  of 
the  heart  just  as  they  are  growing  rigid  from  over-strained  excitement.  The  imagi¬ 
nation  is  glad  to  take  refuge  in  the  half-comic,  half-serious,  comments  of  the  Fool,  just 
as  the  mind,  under  the  extreme  anguish  of  a  surgical  operation,  vents  itself  in  sallies 
of  wit.  The  character  was  also  a  grotesque  ornament  of  the  barbarous  times  in  which 
alone  the  tragic  ground-work  of  the  story  could  be  laid.  In  another  point  of  view 
it  is  indispensable,  inasmuch  as  while  it  is  a  diversion  to  the  too  great'  intensity  of 
our  disgust,  it  carries  the*pathos  to  the  highest  point  of  which  it  is  capable,  by  show¬ 
ing  the  pitiable  weakness  of  the  old  king’s  conduct  and  its  irretrievable  consequences( 
in  the  most  familiar  point  of  view.  Lear  may  well  ‘  beat  the  gate  which  let  his  folly 
in  ’  after,  as  the  Fool  says,  ‘  he  has  made  his  daughters  his  mothers.’  .  .  . 

Shakespear’s  mastery  over  his  subject,  if  it  was  not  art,  was  owing  to  a  knowledge 
of  the  connecting  links  of  the  passions,  and  their  effect  upon  the  mind,  still  more 
wonderful  than  any  systematic  adherence  to  rules,  and  that  anticipated  and  outdid 
all  the  efforts  of  the  most  refined  art,  not  inspired  and  rendered  instinctive  by 
genius.  ... 

Four  things  have  struck  us  in  reading  Lear  : 

1.  That  poetry  is  an  interesting  study,  for  this  reason,  that  it  relates  to  whatever  is 
most  interesting  in  human  life.  Whoever,  therefore,  has  a  contempt  for  poetry,  has 
a  contempt  for  himself  and  humanity. 

2.  That  the  language  of  poetry  is  superior  to  the  language  of  painting,  because 
the  strongest  of  our  recollections  relate  to  feelings,  not  to  faces. 

3.  That  the  greatest  strength  of  genius  is  shown  in  describing  the  strongest  pas 
sions ;  for  the  power  of  the  imagination,  in  works  of  invention,  must  be  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  force  of  the  natural  impressions  which  are  the  subject  of  them. 

4.  That  the  circumstance  which  balances  the  pleasure  against  the  pain  in  tragedy 
is,  that  in  proportion  to  the  greatness  of  the  evil,  is  our  sense  and  desire  of  the  op¬ 
posite  good  excited ;  and  that  our  sympathy  with  actual  suffering  is  lost  in  the  strong 
impulse  given  to  our  natural  affections,  and  carried  away  with  the  swelling  tide  of 
passion  that  gushes  from  and  relieves  the  heart. 

The  Plain  Speaker ,  1826  (p.  479,  ed.  1870). — Nobody  from  reading  Shakespeare 
would  know  (except  from  the  Dramatis  Persona)  that  Lear  was  an  English  king. 
He  is  merely  a  king  and  a  father.  The  ground  is  common:  but  what  a  well  of  tears 
has  he  dug  out  of  it!  There  are  no  data  in  history  to  go  upon;  no  advantage  is 
taken  of  costume,  no  acquaintance  with  geography  or  architecture  or  dialect  is  neces¬ 
sary;  but  there  is  an  old  tradition,  human  nature — an  old  temple,  the  human  mind, 
. — and  Shakespeare  walks  into  it  and  looks  about  him  with  a  lordly  eye,  and  seizes 
on  the  sacred  spoils  as  his  own.  The  story  is  a  thousand  or  two  years  old,  and  yet 
the  tragedy  has  no  smack  of  antiquarianism  in  it.  I  should  like  very  well  to  see  Sir 
Walter  give  us  a  tragedy  of  this  kind,  a  huge  *  globose  ’  of  sorrow  swinging  round 
in  mid  air,  independent  of  time,  place,  and  circumstance,  sustained  by  its  own  weight 
and  motion,  and  not  propped  up  by  the  levers  of  custom,  or  patched  up  with  quaint, 
old-fashioned  dresses,  or  set  off  by  grotesque  backgrounds  or  rusty  armour,  but  in 


424 


APPENDIX 


which  the  mere  paraphernalia  and  accessories  were  left  out  of  the  question,  and 
nothing  but  the  soul  of  passion  and  the  pith  of  imagination  was  to  be  found.  *  A 

•  dukedom  to  a  beggarly  denier,'  he  would  make  nothing  out  of  it.  Does  this  prove 
that  he  has  done  nothing,  or  that  he  has  not  done  the  greatest  things  ?  No,  but  that 
be  is  not  like  Shakespeare.  For  instance,  when  Lear  says,  ‘  The  little  dogs  and  all, 

‘  Tray,  Blanche,  and  Sweetheart,  see  they  bark  at  me  !  ’  there  is  no  old  Chronicle  of 
the  line  of  Brute,  no  black-letter  broadside,  tattered  ballad,  no  vague  rumour,  in 
which  this  exclamation  is  registered ;  there  is  nothing  romantic,  quaint,  mystericus 
in  the  objects  introduced;  the  illustration  is  borrowed  from  the  commonest  and  most 
casual  images  in  nature,  and  yet  it  is  this  very  circumstance  that  lends  its  extreme 
force  to  the  expression  of  his  grief,  by  showing  that  even  the  lowest  things  in  crea¬ 
tion,  and  the  last  you  would  think  of,  had  in  his  imagination  turned  against  him. 
All  nature  was,  as  he  supposed,  in  a  conspiracy  against  him,  and  the  most  trivial  and 
insignificant  creatures  concerned  in  it  were  the  most  striking  proofs  of  its  malignity 
and  extent.  It  is  the  depth  of  passion,  however,  or  of  the  poet’s  sympathy  with  it, 
that  distinguishes  this  character  of  torturing  familiarity  in  them,  invests  them  with 
corresponding  importance,  and  suggests  them  by  the  force  of  contrast.  It  is  not  that 
certain  images  are  surcharged  with  a  prescriptive  influence  over  the  imagination  from 
known  or  existing  prejudices,  or  that  to  approach  or  even  mention  them  is  sure  to 
excite  a  pleasing  awe  and  horror  in  the  mind  (the  effect  in  this  case  is  mostly  me¬ 
chanical) — the  whole  sublimity  of  the  passage  is  from  the  weight  of  passion  thrown 
into  it,  and  this  is  the  poet’s  own  doing.  This  is  not  trick,  but  genius.  Meg  Mer- 
rilies  on  her  death-bed  says,  *  Lay  my  head  to  the  East !  ’  Nothing  can  be  finer  or 
more  thrilling  than  this  in  its  way,  but  the  author  has  little  to  do  with  it.  It  is  an 
Oriental  superstition ;  it  is  a  proverbial  expression ;  it  is  a  part  of  the  gibberish  (sub¬ 
lime  though  it  be)  of  her  gypsy  clan.  ‘  Nothing  but  his  unkind  daughters  could  have 

*  brought  him  to  this  pass !  ’  This  is  not  a  cant  phrase,  nor  the  fragment  of  an  old 
legend,  nor  a  mysterious  spell,  nor  the  butt-end  of  a  wizard’s  denunciation.  It  is 
the  mere  natural  ebullition  of  passion,  urged  nearly  to  madness,  and  that  will  admit 
no  other  cause  of  dire  misfortune  but  its  own,  which  swallows  up  all  other  griefs. 
The  force  of  despair  hurries  the  imagination  over  the  boundary  of  fact  and  common 
sense,  and  renders  the  transition  sublime,  but  there  is  no  precedent  or  authority  for 
it,  except  in  the  general  nature  of  the  human  mind.  I  think,  but  am  not  sure,  that 
Sir  Walter  Scott  has  imitated  this  turn  of  reflection,  by  making  Madge  Wildfire 
ascribe  Jeanie  Dean’s  uneasiness  to  the  loss  of  her  baby,  which  had  unsettled  her 
own  brain.  Again,  Lear  calls  on  the  Heavens  to  take  his  part,  for  ‘  they  are  old 
like  him.’  Here  there  is  nothing  to  prop  up  the  image  but  the  strength  of  passion, 
confounding  the  infirmity  of  age  with  the  stability  of  the  firmament,  and  equalling 
the  complainant,  through  the  sense  of  suffering  and  wrong,  with  the  Majesty  of  the 
Highest.  This  finding  out  a  parallel  between  the  most  unlike  objects,  because  the 
individual  would  wish  to  find  one  to  support  the  sense  of  his  own  misery  and  help¬ 
lessness,  is  truely  Shakespearian;  it  is  an  instinctive  law  of  our  nature,  and  the 
genuine  inspiration  of  the  Muse.  Racine  would  make  him  pour  out  three  hundred 
verses  of  lamentation  for  his  loss  of  kingdom,  his  feebleness,  and  his  old  age,  coming 
to  the  same  conclusion  at  the  end  of  every  third  couplet,  instead  of  making  him 
grasp  at  once  at  the  Heavens  for  support. 


BLACKWOOD'S  MAGAZINE 


425 


BLACKWOOD’S  MAGAZINE 

(Vol.  v,  p.  228,  May,  1819.) — We  have  yet  to  speak  of  the  most  pathetic  of  the 
plays  of  Shakespeare — Lear.  A  story  unnatural  and  irrational  in  its  foundation,  but, 
at  the  same  time,  a  natural  favourite  of  tradition,  has  become,  in  the  hands  of  Shake¬ 
speare,  a  tragedy  of  surpassing  grandeur  and  interest.  He  has  seized  upon  that  germ 
of  interest  which  had  already  made  the  story  a  favourite  of  popular  tradition,  and 
unfolded  it  into  a  work  for  the  passionate  sympathy  of  all — young,  old,  rich,  and 
poor,  learned,  and  illiterate,  virtuous,  and  depraved.  The  majestic  form  of  the  kingly- 
hearted  old  man — the  reverend  head  of  the  broken-hearted  father — *  a  head  so  old 
and  white  as  this  ’ — the  royalty  from  which  he  is  deposed,  but  of  which  he  can  never 
be  divested — the  father’s  heart  which,  rejected  and  trampled  on  by  two  children,  and 
trampling  on  its  one  most  young  and  duteous  child,  is,  in  the  utmost  degree,  a  father’s 
still — the  two  characters,  father  and  king,  so  high  to  our  imagination  and  love, 
blended  in  the  reverend  image  of  Lear — both  in  their  destitution,  yet  both  in  their 
height  of  greatness — the  spirit  blighted,  and  yet  undepressed — the  wits  gone,  and  yet 
the  moral  wisdom  of  a  good  heart  left  unstained,  almost  unobscured — the  wild  raging 
of  the  elements,  joined  with  human  outrage  and  violence  to  persecute  the  helpless, 
unresisting,  almost  unoffending  sufferer ;  and  he  himself  in  the  midst  of  all  imagin¬ 
able  misery  and  desolation,  descanting  upon  himself,  on  the  whirlwinds  that  drive 
around  him — and  then  turning  in  tenderness  to  some  of  the  wild,  motley  association 
of  sufferers  among  whom  he  stands, — all  this  is  not  like  what  has  been  seen  on  any 
stage,  perhaps  in  any  reality,  but  it  has  made  a  world  to  our  imagination  about  one 
single  imaginary  individual,  such  as  draws  the  reverence  and  sympathy  which  should 
seem  to  belong  properly  only  to  living  men.  It  is  like  the  remembrance  of  some 
wild,  perturbed  scene  of  real  life.  Everything  is  perfectly  woeful  in  this  world  of 
woe.  The  very  assumed  madness  of  Edgar,  which,  if  the  story  of  Edgar  stood 
alone,  would  be  insufferable,  and  would  utterly  degrade  him  to  us,  seems,  associated 
as  he  is  with  Lear,  to  come  within  the  consecration  of  Lear’s  madness.  It  agrees 
with  ail  that  is  brought  together : — the  night — the  storms — the  houselessness — Glo’ster 
with  his  eyes  put  out — the  Fool — the  semblance  of  a  madman,  and  Lear  in  his  mad¬ 
ness,  are  all  bound  together  by  a  strange  kind  of  sympathy,  confusion  in  the  elements 
of  nature,  of  human  society,  and  the  human  soul. 

Throughout  all  the  play  is  there  not  sublimity  felt  amidst  the  continual  presence 
of  all  kinds  of  disorder  and  confusion  in  the  natural  and  moral  world, — a  continual 
consciousness  of  eternal  order,  law  and  good  ?  This  it  is  that  so  exalts  it  in  our 
eyes.  There  is  more  justness  of  intellect  in  Lear’s  madness  than  in  his  right  senses, 
as  if  the  indestructible  divinity  of  the  spirit  gleamed  at  times  more  brightly  through 
the  ruins  of  its  earthly  tabernacle.  The  death  of  Cordelia  and  the  death  of  Lear 
leave  on  our  minds,  at  least,  neither  pain  nor  disappointment,  like  a  common  play 
ending  ill ;  but,  like  all  the  rest,  they  show  us  human  life  involved  in  darkness,  and 
conflicting  with  wild  powers  let  loose  to  rage  in  the  world,  a  life  which  continually 
seeks  peace,  and  which  can  only  find  its  good  in  peace — tending  ever  to  the  depth 
of  peace,  but  of  which  the  peace  is  not  here.  The  feelihg  of  the  play,  to  those  who 
rightly  consider  it,  is  high  and  calm,  because  we  are  made  to  know,  from  and  through 
those  very  passions  which  seem  there  convulsed,  and  from  the  very  structure  of  life 
and  happiness  that  seems  there  crushed — even  in  the  law  of  those  passions  and  that 
life — this  eternal  Truth,  that  evil  must  not  be,  and  that  good  must  be.  The  only 
tiling  intolerable  was,  that  Lear  should,  by  the  very  truth  of  his  daughter’s  love,  be 
36* 


426 


APPENDIX 


separated  from  her  love ;  and  his  restoration  to  her  love,  and  therewith  to  his  own 
perfect  mind,  consummates  all  that  was  essentially  to  be  desired — a  consummation 
after  which  the  rage  and  horror  of  mere  matter-disturbing  death  seems  vain  and 
idle.  In  fact,  Lear’s  killing  the  slave  who  was  hanging  Cordelia — bearing  her  dead 
in  his  arms — and  his  heart  bursting  over  her, — are  no  more  than  the  full  consumma¬ 
tion  of  their  reunited  love ; — and  there  father  and  daughter  lie  in  final  and  imper¬ 
turbable  peace.  Cordelia,  whom  we  see  at  last  lying  dead  before  us,  and  over  whom 
we  shed  such  floods  of  loving  and  approving  tears,  scarcely  speaks  or  acts  in  the  play 
at  all;  she  appears  but  at  the  beginning  and  the  end,  is  absent  from  all  the  impres¬ 
sive  and  memorable  scenes ;  and  to  what  she  does  say  there  is  not  much  effect  given, 
yet,  by  some  divine  power  of  conception  in  Shakespeare’s  soul,  she  always  seems  to 
our  memory  one  of  the  principal  characters;  and  while  we  read  the  play  she  is  con¬ 
tinually  present  to  our  imagination.  In  her  sisters’  ingratitude,  her  filial  love  is  felt; 
in  the  hopelessness  of  the  broken-hearted  king,  we  are  turned  to  that  perfect  hope 
that  is  reserved  for  him  in  her  loving  bosom  ;  in  the  midst  of  darkness,  confusion, 
and  misery,  her  form,  like  a  hovering  angel,  is  seen  casting  its  radiance  on  the  storm. 

MRS  JAMESON 

(i Characteristics  of  Women,  second  ed.  1833,  ii,  88.) — There  is  in  the  beauty  oi 
Cordelia’s  character  an  effect  too  sacred  for  words,  and  almost  too  deep  for  tears ; 
within  her  heart  is  a  fathomless  well  of  purest  affection,  but  its  waters  sleep  in  silence 
and  obscurity, — never  failing  in  their  depth  and  never  overflowing  in  their  fulness. 
Everything  in  her  seems  to  lie  beyond  our  view,  and  affects  us  in  a  manner  which 
we  feel  rather  than  perceive.  The  character  appears  to  have  no  surface,  no  salient 
points  on  which  the  fancy  can  readily  seize ;  there  is  little  external  development  of 
intellect,  less  of  passion,  and  still  less  of  imagination.  It  is  completely  made  out  in 
the  course  of  a  few  scenes,  and  we  are  surprised  to  find  that  in  those  few  scenes 
there  is  matter  of  a  life  of  reflection,  and  materials  enough  for  twenty  heroines.  If 
Lear  be  the  grandest  of  Shakespeare’s  tragedies,  Cordelia  in  herself,  as  a  human 
being,  governed  by  the  purest  and  holiest  impulses  and  motives,  the  most  refined  from 
all  dross  of  selfishness  and  passion,  approaches  near  to  perfection;  and  in  her  adapta¬ 
tion,  as  a. dramatic  personage,  to  a  determinate  plan  of  action,  may  be  pronounced 
altogether  perfect.  The  character,  to  speak  of  it  critically  as  a  poetical  conception, 
is  not,  however,  to  be  comprehended  at  once,  or  easily ;  and,  in  the  same  manner, 
Cordelia,  as  a  woman,  is  one  whom  we  must  have  loved  before  we  could  have  known 
her,  and  known  her  long  before  we  could  have  known  her  truly. 

Most  people,  I  believe,  have  heard  the  story  of  the  young  German  artist  Miillei, 
who,  while  employed  in  copying  and  engraving  Raffaelle’s  Madonna  del  Sisto,  was 
so  penetrated  by  its  celestial  beauty,  so  distrusted  his  own  power  to  do  justice  to  it, 
that  between  admiration  and  despair  he  fell  into  a  sadness;  thence,  through  the 
usual  gradations,  into  a  melancholy,  thence  into  madness ;  and  died  just  as  he  had 
put  the  finishing-stroke  to  his  own  matchless  work,  which  had  occupied  him  for 
eight  years.  With  some  slight  tinge  of  this  concentrated  enthusiasm  I  have  learned 
to  contemplate  the  character  of  Cordelia;  I  have  looked  into  it  till  the  revelation  of 
its  hidden  beauty,  and  an  intense  feeling  of  the  wonderful  genius  that  created  it, 
have  filled  me  at  once  with  delight  and  despair.  Like  poor  Muller,  but  with  more 
reason,  I  do  despair  of  ever  conveying,  through  a  different  and  inferior  medium, 
the  impression  made  on  my  own  mind  to  the  mind  of  another.  . .  . 


MRS  JAMESON 


427 


Amid  the  awful,  the  overpowering,  interest  of  the  story,  amid  the  terrible  convul¬ 
sions  of  passion  and  suffering,  and  pictures  of  moral  and  physical  wretchedness 
which  harrow  up  the  soul,  the  tender  influence  of  Cordelia,  like  that  of  a  celestial 
visitant,  is  felt  and  acknowledged  without  being  understood.  Like  a  soft  star  that 
shines  for  a  moment  from  behind  a  stormy  cloud,  and  the  next  is  swallowed  up  in 
tempest  and  darkness,  the  impression  it  leaves  is  beautiful  and  deep,  but  vague. 
Speak  of  Cordelia  to  a  critic  or  to  a  general  reader,  all  agree  in  the  beauty  of  the 
portrait,  for  all  must  feel  it;  but  when  we  come  to  details,  I  have,  heard  more  vari¬ 
ous  and  opposite  opinions  relative  to  her  than  to  any  other  of  Shakespeare’s  cha¬ 
racters — a  proof  of  what  I  have  advanced  in  the  first  instance,  that  from  the  sim¬ 
plicity  with  which  the  character  is  dramatically  treated,  and  the  small  space  it  occu¬ 
pies,  few  are  aware  of  its  internal  power,  of  its  wonderful  depth  of  purpose. 

It  appeal's  to  me  that  the  whole  character  rests  upon  the  two  sublimest  principles 
of  human  action — the  love  of  truth  and  the  sense  of  duty ;  but  these,  when  they 
stand  alone  (as  in  the  Antigone ),  are  apt  to  strike  us  as  severe  and  cold.  Shakespeare 
has,  therefore,  wreathed  them  round  with  the  dearest  attributes  of  our  feminine 
nature,  the  power  of  feeling  and  inspiring  affection.  The  first  part  of  the  play  shows 
us  how  Cordelia  is  loved,  the  second  part  how  she  can  love. 

[P.  97.]  What  is  it,  then,  which  lends  to  Cordelia  that  peculiar  and  individual 
truth  of  character  which  distinguishes  her  from  every  other  human  being  ? 

It  is  a  natural  reserve,  a  tardiness  of  disposition,  ‘  which  often  leaves  the  history 
*  unspoke  which  it  intends  to  do ;  *  a  subdued  quietness  of  deportment  and  expres¬ 
sion,  a  veiled  shyness  thrown  over  all  her  emotions,  her  language,  and  her  manner, 
making  the  outward  demonstration  invariably  fall  short  of  what  we  know  to  be  the 
feeling  within.  Not  only  is  the  portrait  singularly  beautiful  and  interesting  in  itself, 
but  the  conduct  of  Cordelia,  and  the  part  which  she  bears  in  the  beginning  of  the 
story,  is  rendered  consistent  and  natural  by  the  wonderful  truth  and  delicacy  with 
which  this  peculiar  disposition  is  sustained  throughout  the  play. 

In  early  youth,  and  more  particularly  if  we  are  gifted  with  a  lively  imagination, 
such  a  character  as  that  of  Cordelia  is  calculated  above  every  other  to  impress  and 
captivate  us.  Anything  like  mystery,  anything  withheld  or  withdrawn  from  our 
notice,  seizes  on  our  fancy  by  awakening  our  curiosity.  Then  we  are  won  more  by 
what  we  half  perceive  and  half  create  than  by  what  is  openly  expressed  and  freely 
bestowed.  But  this  feeling  is  a  part  of  our  young  life;  when  time  and  years  have 
chilled  us,  when  we  can  no  longer  afford  to  send  our  souls  abroad,  nor  from  our  own 
superfluity  of  life  and  sensibility  spare  the  materials  out  of  which  we  build  a  shrine 
for  our  idol — then  do  we  seek,  we  ask,  we  thirst  for  that  warmth  of  frank,  confiding 
tenderness,  which  revives  in  us  the  withered  affections  and  feelings,  buried,  but  not 
dead.  Then  the  excess  of  love  is  welcomed,  not  repelled ;  it  is  gracious  to  us  as 
the  sun  and  dew  to  the  seared  and  riven  trunk,  with  its  few  green  leaves.  Lear  is 
Old — ‘  four-score  and  upward  ’ — but  we  see  what  he  has  been  informer  days;  the 
ardent  passions  of  youth  have  turned  to  rashness  and  wilfulness;  he  is  long  passed 
that  age  when  we  are  more  blessed  in  what  we  bestow  than  in  what  we  receive. 
When  he  says  to  his  daughters,  ‘  I  gave  you  all !  ’  we  feel  that  he  requires  all  in  re¬ 
turn,  with  a  jealous,  restless,  exacting  affection  which  defeats  its  own  wishes.  How 
many  such  are  there  in  the  world !  How  many  to  sympathize  with  the  fiery,  fond 
old  man,  when  he  shrinks  as  if  petrified  from  Cordelia’s  quiet,  calm  reply ! 

1 14.]  In  the  Antigone  there  is  a  great  deal  of  what  may  be  called  the  effect 
of  situation,  as  well  as  a  great  deal  of  poetry  and  character ;  she  says  the  most  beau- 


423 


APPENDIX 


tiful  things  in  the  world,  performs  the  most  heroic  actions,  and  all  her  words  and 
actions  are  so  placed  before  us  as  to  command  our  admiration.  According  to  the 
classical  ideas  of  virtue  and  heroism,  the  character  is  sublime,  and  in  the  delineation 
there  is  a  severe  simplicity  mingled  with  its  Grecian  grace,  a  variety,  a  grandeur,  an 
elegance  which  appeal  to  our  taste  and  our  understanding,  while  they  fill  and  exalt 
the  imagination;  but  in  Cordelia  it  is  not  the  external  colouring  or  form,  it  is  not 
what  she  says  or  does,  but  what  she  is  in  herself,  what  she  feels,  thinks,  and  suffers 
which  continually  awaken  our  sympathy  and  interest.  The  heroism  of  Cordelia  is 
more  passive  and  tender — it  melts  into  our  heart;  and  in  the  veiled  loveliness  and 
unostentatious  delicacy  of  her  character  there  is  an  effect  more  profound  and  artless, 
if  it  be  less  striking  and  less  elaborate,  than  in  the  Grecian  heroine.  To  Antigone 
our  admiration,  to  Cordelia  our  tears.  Antigone  stands  before  us  in  her  austere  and 
statue-like  beauty  like  one  of  the  marbles  of  the  Parthenon.  If  Cordelia  remind  us 
of  anything  on  earth,  it  is  of  one  of  the  Madonnas  in  the  old  Italian  pictures,  ‘  with 
*  downcast  eyes  beneath  th’  almighty  dove ;  ’  and,  as  that  heavenly  form  is  connected 
with  our  human  sympathies  only  by  the  expression  of  maternal  tenderness,  or  ma¬ 
ternal  sorrow,  even  so,  Cordelia  would  be  almost  too  angelic  were  she  not  linked  to 
our  earthly  feelings,  bound  to  our  very  hearts,  by  her  filial  love,  her  wrongs,  her 
sufferings,  and  her  tears. 

PIALLAM 

(. Introduction  to  the  Lit.  of  Europe ,  iii,  308,  1837;  London,  1869,  eighth  ed.) — 
If  originality  of  invention  did  not  so  much  stamp  every  play  of  Shakespeare  that  to 
name  one  as  the  most  original  seems  a  disparagement  to  others,  we  might  say  that 
this  prerogative  of  genius  was  exercised  above  all  in  Lear.  It  diverges  more  from 
the  model  of  regular  tragedy  than  Macbeth  or  Othello,  and  even  more  than  Hamlet ; 
but  the  fable  is  better  constructed  than  in  the  last  of  these,  and  it  displays  full  as 
much  of  the  almost  superhuman  inspiration  of  the  poet  as  the  other  two.  Lear  him¬ 
self  is,  perhaps,  the  most  wonderful  of  dramatic  conceptions,  ideal  to  satisfy  the  most 
romantic  imagination,  yet  idealized  from  the  reality  of  nature.  Shakespeare,  in  pre¬ 
paring  us  for  the  most  intense  sympathy  with  this  old  man,  first  abases  him  to  the 
ground;  it  is  not  CEdipus  against  whose  respected  age  the  gods  themselves  have 
conspired ;  it  is  not  Orestes,  noble-minded  and  affectionate,  whose  crime  has  been 
virtue ;  it  is  a  headstrong,  feeble,  and  selfish  being,  whom,  in  the  first  Act  of  the 
tragedy,  nothing  seems  capable  of  redeeming  in  our  eyes ;  nothing  but  what  follows, 
intense  woe,  unnatural  wrong.  Then  comes  on  that  splendid  madness,  not  absurdly 
sudden  as  in  some  tragedies,  but  in  which  the  strings  that  kept  his  reasoning  power 
together  give  way  one  after  the  other  in  the  frenzy  of  rage  and  grief.  Then  it  is 
that  we  find  what  in  life  may  sometimes  be  seen,  the  intellectual  energies  grow 
stronger  in  calamity,  and  especially  under  wrong.  An  awful  eloquence  belongs  to 
unmerited  suffering.  Thoughts  burst  out,  more  profound  than  Lear  in  his  prosperous 
hour  could  ever  have  conceived ;  inconsequent,  for  such  is  the  condition  of  madness, 
but  in  themselves  fragments  of  coherent  truth,  the  reason  of  an  unreasonable  mind. 

Timon  of  Athens  is  cast  as  it  were  in  the  same  mould  as  Lear;  it  is  the  same 
essential  character,  the  same  generosity,  more  from  wanton  ostentation  than  love  of 
others,  the  same  fierce  rage  under  the  smart  of  ingratitude,  the  same  rousing  up  in 
that  tempest  of  powers  that  had  slumbered  unsuspected  in  some  deep  recess  of  the 
soul ;  for  had  Timon  or  Lear  known  that  philosophy  of  human  nature  in  their  calmer 
moments,  which  fury  brought  forth,  they  would  never  have  had  such  terrible  occa- 


SHELLE  Y—SWINB  URNE— SNIDER 


429 


sion  to  display  it.  The  thoughtless  confidence  of  Lear  in  his  children  has  something 
in  it  far  more  touching  than  the  self-beggary  of  Timon;  though  both  one  and  the 
other  have  prototypes  enough  in  real  life.  And  as  we  give  the  old  king  more  of  our 
pity,  so  a  more  intense  abhorrence  accompanies  his  daughters  and  the  evil  characters 
of  that  drama  than  we  spare  for  the  miserable  sycophants  of  the  Athenian.  .  .  .  There 
seems  to  have  been  a  period  of  Shakespeare’s  life  when  his  heart  was  ill  at  ease,  and 
ill-content  with  the  world  or  his  own  conscience;  the  memory  of  hours  mis-spent, 
the  pang  of  affection  misplaced  or  unrequited,  the  experience  of  man’s  worser  nature 
which  intercourse  with  unworthy  associates,  by  choice  or  circumstance,  peculiarly 
teaches; — these,  as  they  sank  down  into  the  depths  of  his  great  mind,  seem  not  only 
to  have  inspired  into  it  the  conception  of  Lear  and  Timon,  but  that  of  one  primary 
character,  the  censurer  of  mankind. 


SHELLEY 

(. Defence  of  Poetry ,  Essays,  &c.,  1840,  p.  20.) — The  modem  practice  of  blending 
comedy  with  tragedy,  though  liable  to  great  abuse  in  point  of  practice,  is  undoubt¬ 
edly  an  extension  of  the  dramatic  circle ;  but  the  comedy  should  be,  as  in  King 
Lear ,  universal,  ideal,  sublime.  It  is  perhaps  the  intervention  of  this  principle 
which  determines  the  balance  in  favour  of  King  Lear  against  CEdipns  Tyrannies,  or 
the  Agamemnon,  or,  if  you  will,  the  trilogies  with  which  they  are  connected ;  unless 
the  intense  power  of  the  choral  poetry,  especially  that  of  the  latter,  should  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  restoring  the  equilibrium.  King  Lear,  if  it  can  sustain  this  comparison, 
may  be  judged  to  be  the  most  perfect  specimen  of  the  dramatic  art  existing  in  the 
world;  in  spite  of  the  narrow  conditions  to  which  the  poet  was  subjected  by  the 
ignorance  of  the  philosophy  of  the  drama  which  has  prevailed  in  modern  Europe. 

SWINBURNE 

(. Fortnightly  Rev.,  I  Jan.,  1876,  p.  34.) — I  am  not  minded  to  say  much  of  Shake¬ 
speare’s  Arthur ;  there  are  one  or  two  figures  in  the  world  of  his  work  of  which 
there  are  no  words  that  would  be  fit  or  good  to  say.  Another  of  these  is  Cordelia. 
The  place  they  have  in  our  lives  and  thoughts  is  not  one  for  talk;  the  niche  set  apart 
for  them  to  inhabit  in  our  secret  hearts  is  not  penetrable  by  the  lights  and  noises  of 
common  day.  There  are  chapels  in  the  cathedral  of  man’s  highest  art  as  in  that  of 
his  inmost  life,  not  made  to  be  set  open  to  the  eyes  and  feet  of  the  world.  Love  and 
death  and  memory  keep  charge  for  us  in  silence  of  some  beloved  names.  It  is  the 
crowning  glory  of  genius,  the  final  miracle  and  transcendent  gift  of  poetry,  that  it 
can  add  to  the  number  of  these,  and  engrave  on  the  very  heart  of  our  remembrance 
fresh  names  and  memories  of  its  own  creation. 

DENTON  J.  SNIDER 

(System  of  Shakespeare' s  Dramas,  vol.  i,  p.  131,  St.  Louis,  1877.) — The  general 
action  of  the  play  has  essentially  two  movements,  which  pass  into  each  other  by  the 
finest  and  most  intricate  network.  There  is  in  it  a  double  guilt  and  a  double  retri¬ 
bution.  The  first  movement  (embracing  mainly  three  Acts)  exhibits  the  complete 
disintegration  of  the  family.  It  portrays  the  first  guilt  and  the  first  retribution — the 
wrong  of  the  parents  and  its  punishment.  Lear  banishes  his  daughter;  his  daugh- 


43° 


APPENDIX 


ters  in  turn  drive  him  out  of  doors.  Gloster  expels  from  home  and  disinherits  his 
true  and  faithful  son  in  favour  of  the  illegitimate  and  faithless  son,  and  is  then  him¬ 
self  falsely  accused  and  betrayed  by  the  latter.  Cordelia,  too,  falls  into  guilt  in  her 
attempt  to  avenge  the  wrongs  of  her  father.  Thus  the  disruption  is  complete — the 
parents  expelled,  the  false  triumphant,  the  faithful  in  disguise  and  banishment.  Such 
is  the  first  movement — the  wrong  done  by  the  parents  to  their  children,  and  its 
punishment. 

The  second  movement  will  unfold  the  second  retribution,  springing  from  the 
second  guilt — the  wrong  done  by  the  children  to  their  parents,  and  its  punishment. 
It  must  be  observed,  however,  that  the  deeds  of  the  children  which  are  portrayed  in 
the  first  movement  of  the  drama  constitute  their  guilt.  On  the  one  hand  they  are 
instruments  of  retribution,  but  on  the  other  hand  their  conduct  is  a  violation  of 
ethical  principles  as  deep  as  that  of  their  parents.  They  are  the  avengers  of  guilt, 
but  in  this  very  act  become  themselves  guilty,  and  must  receive  punishment.  The 
general  result,  therefore,  of  the  second  movement  will  be  the  completed  retribution. 

Lear  and  his  three  guilty  daughters — for  we  have  to  include  Cordelia  under  this 
category — as  well  as  Gloster  and  his  guilty  son,  perish.  The  faithful  of  both  families 
come  together,  in  their  banishment,  in  order  to  protect  their  parents;  thereby,  how¬ 
ever,  Cordelia  assails  the  established  State.  The  consequence  of  her  deed  is  death. 
The  faithless  of  both  families  also  come  together;  though  they  triumph  in  the 
external  conflict,  there  necessarily  arises  a  struggle  among  themselves — for  how  can 
the  faithless  be  faithful  to  one  another?  The  jealousy  of  the  two  sisters  leads  to  a 
conspiracy,  and  to  their  final  destruction.  Edmund,  faithless  to  both,  falls  at  last  by 
the  hand  of  his  brother,  whom  he  has  so  deeply  wronged.  .  .  . 

[P.  152.]  The  Fool,  too,  is  present  in  the  tempest,  trying  to  divert  the  king  from 
his  thoughts,  and  to  jest  away  his  approaching  insanity:  but  it  is  to  no  purpose. 
Wisdom — though,  to  effect  its  design,  it  has  assumed  the  garb  of  folly — has  not  suc¬ 
ceeded.  The  Fool,  therefore,  drops  out  now ;  his  function  must  cease  when  Lear  is 
no  longer  rational,  but  has  himself  turned  fool.  It  was  his  duty  to  reflect  the  acts 
of  the  King  in  their  true  character,  so  that  the  latter  might  behold  what  he  was 
doing.  When  intelligence  is  gone  this  is  impossible. 

[P.  160.]  It  is  manifest  that  Cordelia  is  different  from  what  she  was  in  the  First 
Act ;  a  new  element  of  her  nature  seems  to  have  developed  itself.  Previously  we 
saw  her  rigid  moral  code  and  her  intellectuality  brought  into  the  greatest  prominence; 
now  her  character,  in  its  softer  and  more  beautiful  features  is  shown;  we  behold  her 
devotion  to  parent  as  well  as  her  intense  emotional  nature,  which,  however,  she  is 
able  to  keep  under  perfect  control.  Still,  the  germ  of  this  new  trait  can  be  found  in 
her  earlier  declarations  and  demeanour.  In  the  first  Scene — that  of  the  partition — 
ohe  repeatedly  expresses  her  affection  for  her  father:  *  What  shall  Cordelia  speak? — . 
*  Love  and  be  silent,’  &c.  It  is  not  merely  the  physical  repose  prescribed  by  the 
doctor  which  clears  up  the  clouded  intellect  of  Lear — it  is  the  presence  of  Cordelia, 
who  brings  with  her  a  double  restoration — that  of  subjective  affection  on  the  one 
hand,  and  that  of  objective  institutions  on  the  other.  It  was  the  loss  of  these, 
through  the  conduct  of  Regan  and  Goneril,  which  shattered  his  reason;  sanity,  there¬ 
fore,  returns  with  the  return  of  Cordelia. 

But  her  third  purpose  is  that  which  ruins  her  cause.  She  brings  a  French  army 
into  England  to  secure  to  her  father  his  right,  as  she  says,  by  which  she  evidently 
means  to  place  him  again  on  the  throne.  She  thus  assails  the  highest  ethical  insti¬ 
tution  of  man — the  State — and  unwittingly  commits  herself  the  greatest  wrong. 


SNIDER— HUDSON 


431 


Moreover.  Lear  had  resigned  his  power  and  divided  his  kingdom;  he  had  no  longer 
any  just  claim  to  the  crown.  Her  invasion  of  the  country  rouses  up  against  her  the 
head  of  the  State,  Albany,  who  was  otherwise  favourable  both  to  her  and  to  Lear. 
But  he  had  to  defend  his  own  realm,  though  he  hates  his  associates  and  loves  those 
who  are  fighting  against  him.  Had  Cordelia  been  satisfied  with  the  restoration  of 
her  father  to  his  reason  and  to  his  family,  Albany  would  have  given  her  both  aid 
and  sympathy.  However  much  we  may  admire  her  character  and  regret  her  fate, 
however  indignant  we  may  be  against  her  two  sisters,  still  we  must,  in  the  end,  say 
she  did  wrong — she  violated  the  majesty  of  the  State.  In  her  affection  for  parent, 
she  attempted  to  destroy  the  higher  principle  for  the  sake  of  the  lower.  The  result 
is,  she  loses  the  battle,  is  taken  prisoner,  and  perishes. 

[P.  166.]  The  action  has  now  completed  its  revolution,  and  brought  back  to  all 
the  leading  characters  the  consequences  of  their  deeds;  the  double  guilt  and  the 
double  retribution  have  been  fully  portrayed.  The  treatment  of  children  by  parents, 
and  of  parents  by  children,  is  the  theme ;  both  fidelity  and  infidelity  are  shown  in 
their  most  extreme  manifestation.  Two  families  are  taken — that  of  the  monarch 
and  that  of  the  subject;  the  former  develops  within  itself  its  own  collisions,  free 
from  any  external  restraint,  and  hence  exhibits  the  truest  and  most  complete  result; 
the  latter  is  largely  influenced  and  determined  in  its  course  by  authority,  but  an 
authority  which  is  itself  poisoned  with  domestic  conflict.  The  exhaustiveness  of  the 
treatment  is  worthy  of  careful  study.  Regan  is  faithless  to  parent ;  Goneril  is  faith¬ 
less  to  both  parent  and  husband;  Cordelia  is  true  to  both,  yet  assails  another  ethical 
principle — the  State.  The  two  sons  and  the  two  sons-in-law  exhibit  also  distinct 
phases  of  the  domestic  tie;  they  are  still  further  divided,  by  the  fundamental  theme 
of  the  play,  into  the  faithful  and  faithless — that  is,  a  son  and  a  son-in-law  belong  to 
each  side.  But  it  is  a  curious  fact,  that  one  very  important  relation  of  the  family  is 
wholly  omitted — no  mother  appears  anywhere ;  sonhood,  daughterhood,  wifehood, 
fatherhood,  are  all  present,  but  the  tenderest  bond  of  existence — motherhood — is 
wanting.  The  poet  evidently  does  not  need  it,  for  the  action  is  already  sufficiently 
full  and  complicated ;  perhaps,  too,  the  character  of  the  mother  may  be  supposed  to 
reappear  in  some  of  her  children,  as,  for  example,  in  Cordelia,  who  is  so  different 
from  her  father.  But  one  cannot  help  commending  the  true  instinct,  or,  what  is  more 
likely,  the  sound  judgment,  v/hich  kept  such  a  mild  and  tender  relation  out  of  the 
cauldron  of  passion  and  ingratitude  which  seethes  with  such  destructive  energy  in 
this  appalling  drama. 

HUDSON 

{Tragedy  of  King  Lear,  4*0,  p.  14,  Boston,  1879.) — There  is  no  accounting  for 
the  conduct  of  Goneril  and  Regan  but  by  supposing  them  possessed  with  a  strong 
original  impulse  of  malignity.  The  main  points  of  their  action  were  taken  from  the 
old  story.  Character,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  term,  they  have  none  in  the  legend, 
and  the  poet  invested  them  with  characters  suitable  to  the  part  they  were  believed  to 
have  acted. 

Whatever  of  soul  these  beings  possess  is  all  in  the  head ;  they  have  no  heart  to 
guide  or  inspire  their  understanding,  and  but  enough  of  understanding  to  seize  oc¬ 
casions  and  frame  excuses  for  their  heartlessness.  Without  affection,  they  are  also 
without  shame ;  there  being  barely  so  much  of  human  blood  in  their  veins  as  may 
suffice  for  quickening  the  brain  without  sending  a  blush  to  the  cheek.  With  a  sort 
of  hell-inspired  tact,  they  feel  their  way  to  a  fitting  occasion,  but  drop  the  mask  as 


432 


APPENDIX 


soon  as  their  ends  are  reached,  caring  little  or  nothing  for  appearances  after  their 
falsehood  has  done  its  work.  There  is  a  smooth,  glib  rhetoric  in  their  professions 
of  love,  unwarmed  with  the  least  grace  of  real  feeling,  and  a  certain  wiry  virulence 
and  intrepidity  of  mind  in  their  after-speaking  that  is  fairly  terrific.  No  touch  of 
nature  finds  a  response  in  their  bosoms ;  no  atmosphere  of  comfort  can  abide  their 
presence;  we  feel  that  they  have  somewhat  within  that  turns  the  milk  of  humanity 
to  venom,  which  all  the  wounds  they  can  inflict  are  but  opportunities  for  casting. 

The  subordinate  plot  of  the  drama  serves  the  purpose  of  relieving  the  improba¬ 
bility  of  their  behaviour.  .  .  .  The  agreement  of  the  sister-fiends  in  filial  ingratitude 
might  seem,  of  itself,  to  argue  some  sisterly  attachment  between  them.  So  that,  to 
bring  out  their  characters  truly,  it  had  to  be  shown  that  the  same  principle  which 
unites  them  against  their  father  will,  on  the  turning  of  occasion,  divide  them  against 
each  other.  Hence  the  necessity  of  setting  them  forth  in  relations  of  such  a  kind  as 
may  breed  strife  between  them.  In  Edmund,  accordingly,  they  find  a  character 
wicked  enough,  and  energetic  enough  in  his  wickedness,  to  interest  their  feelings  j 
and,'  because  they  are  both  alike  taken  with  him,  therefore  they  will  cut  their  way  to 
him  through  each  other’s  life.  And  it  is  considerable  that  their  passion  for  him  pro¬ 
ceeds  mainly  upon  his  treachery  to  his  father,  as  though  from  such  similarity  of  action 
they  inferred  a  congeniality  of  mind.  For  even  to  have  hated  each  other  from  love 
of  any  one  but  a  villain,  and  because  of  his  villainy,  had  seemed  a  degree  of  virtue 
in  beings  such  as  they  are.  .  .  . 

As  a  portraiture  of  individual  character,  Lear  himself  holds,  to  my  mind,  much 
the  same  pre-eminence  over  all  others  which  I  accord  to  the  tragedy  as  a  dramatic 
composition.  The  delineation  reminds  me,  oftener  than  any  other,  of  what  some 
one  has  said  of  Shakespeare, — that,  if  he  had  been  the  author  of  the  human  heart, 
it  seems  hardly  possible  he  should  have  better  understood  what  was  in  it,  and  how 
it  was  made.  And  here,  I  think,  maybe  fitly  applied  to  him  one  of  his  own  descrip¬ 
tions  from  his  poem  entitled  A  Lever3 s  Complaint: 

‘  So  on  the  tip  of  his  subduing  tongue 
All  kind  of  arguments  and  questions  deep. 

All  replication  prompt,  and  reason  strong, 

For  his  advantage  still  did  wake  and  sleep : 

To  make  the  weeper  laugh,  the  laugher  weep. 

He  had  the  dialect  and  different  skill. 

Catching  all  passions  in  his  craft  at  will.' 

The  poet  often  so  orders  his  delineations  as  to  start  and  propel  the  mind  back¬ 
wards  over  a  large  tract  of  memory.  As  in  real  life,  the  persons,  when  they  first 
come  to  our  knowledge,  bring  each  their  several  dower  of  good  or  evil  inherited 
from  their  past  hours.  What  they  are  now  remembers  what  they  were  long  ago,  and 
in  their  to-day  we  have  the  slow  cumulative  result  of  a  great  many  yesterdays.  Thus 
even  his  most  ideal  characters  are  invested  with  a  sort  of  historic  verisimilitude ;  the 
effects  of  what  they  thought  and  did  long  before  still  remain  with  them,  and  in  their 
present  speech  and  action  is  opened  to  us  a  long-drawn  vista  of  retrospection.  And 
this  is  done,  not  in  the  way  of  narrative,  but  of  suggestion;  the  antecedent  history 
being  merely  implied,  not  related,  in  what  is  given.  Sometimes  he  makes  the  per¬ 
sons  speak  and  act  from  their  whole  character  at  once;  that  is,  not  only  from  those 
parts  of  it  which  are  seen,  but  from  those  which  lie  back  out  of  sight,  from  hidden 
causes,  from  motives  unavowed,  and  even  from  springs  and  impulses  of  which  the 
subject  himself  is  not  conscious.  The  effect  of  this  is  quite  remarkable,  and  such  as 


HUDSON 


433 


to  outstrip  the  swiftest  wing  of  analysis.  It  sends  us  right  beyond  the  characters  to 
Nature  herself,  and  to  the  common  elementary  principles  of  all  character,  so  touch¬ 
ing  the  mind’s  receptive  powers  as  to  kindle  its  active  and  productive  powers. 

Lear  is  among  the  poet’s  finest  instances,  perhaps  his  very  finest,  in  this  art  of  his¬ 
torical  perspective.  The  old  king  speaks  out  from  a  large  fund  of  vanishing  recol¬ 
lections  ;  and  in  his  present  we  have  the  odour  and  efficacy  of  a  remote  and  varied 
past.  The  play  forecasts  and  prepares,  from  the  outset,  that  superb  intellectual  ruin 
where  we  have  ‘matter  and  impertinency  mix’d,  reason  in  madness;’  the  earlier 
transpirations  of  the  character  being  shaped  and  ordered  with  a  view  to  that  end. 
Certain  presages  and  predispositions  of  insanity  are  manifest  in  his  behaviour  from 
the  first,  as  the  joint  result  of  nature,  of  custom,  and  of  superannuation.  We  see  in 
him  something  of  constitutional  rashness  of  temper,  which,  moreover,  has  long  been 
fostered  by  the  indulgences  and  flatteries  incident  to  his  station,  and  which,  through 
the  cripplings  of  age,  is  now  working  loose  from  the  restraints  of  his  manlier  judg¬ 
ment.  He  has  been  a  wise  and  good  man,  strong  in  reason,  just  in  feeling,  and  recti¬ 
tude  of  purpose,  but  is  now  decidedly  past  his  faculties ;  which  however,  as  often 
happens,  is  unapparent  to  him  save  as  he  feels  it  in  a  growing  indisposition  to  the 
cares  and  labours  of  his  office.  So  that  there  is  something  of  truth  in  what  Goneril 
says  of  him;  just  enough  to  make  her  appear  the  more  hateful  in  speaking  of  it  as 
she  does :  *  The  best  and  soundest  of  his  time  hath  been  but  rash;  then  must  we  look 
*  to  receive  from  his  age,  not  alone  the  imperfections  of  long-ingraflfed  condition,  but 
‘therewithal  the  unruly  waywardness  that  infirm  and  choleric  years  bring  with  them.’ 
He  is  indeed  full  of  inconstant  starts  and  petty  gusts  of  impatience,  such  as  are  ex¬ 
cusable  only  in  those  who  have  not  yet  reached,  and  those  who  have  plainly  outlived, 
the  period  of  discretion  and  self-restraint.  .  .  . 

The  first  two  speeches  of  the  play  inform  us  that  the  division  of  the  kingdom  has 
already  been  resolved  upon,  the  terms  of  the  division  arranged,  and  the  several  por¬ 
tions  allotted.  This  fact  is  significant,  and  goes  far  to  interpret  the  subsequent  action, 
inasmuch  as  it  infers  the  trial  of  professions  to  be  but  a  trick  of  the  king’s,  designed, 
perhaps,  to  surprise  his  children  into  expressions  which  filial  modesty  would  else  for¬ 
bid.  Lear  has  a  morbid  hungering  after  the  outward  tokens  of  affection :  he  is  not 
content  to  know  that  the  heart  beats  for  him,  but  craves  to  feel  and  count  over  its 
beatings.  The  passion  is  indeed  a  selfish  one,  but  it  is  the  selfishness  of  a  right 
generous  and  loving  nature.  Such  a  diseased  longing  for  sympathy  is  not  the  growth 
of  an  unsympathizing  heart.  And  Lear  naturally  looks  for  the  strongest  professions 
where  he  feels  the  deepest  attachment.  .  .  . 

Men  sometimes  take  a  strange  pleasure  in  acting  without  or  against  reason ;  since 
this  has  to  their  feelings  the  effect  of  ascertaining  and  augmenting  their  power;  as 
if  they  could  make  a  right  or  a  truth  of  their  own.  It  appears  to  be  on  some  such 
principle  as  this  that  arbitrariness,  or  a  making  of  the  will  its  own  reason,  sometimes 
becomes  a  passion  in  men.  Such  a  stress  of  self-will  proceeds,  I  apprehend,  on  much 
the  same  ground  as  Sir  Thomas  Browne’s  faith,  which  delighted  in  making  honours 
for  itself  out  of  impossibilities.  That  certain  things  could  not  be,  was,  he  tells  us, 
his  strongest  argument  for  believing  them ;  that  is,  he  felt  the  surer  of  his  creed  as 
it  reversed  the  laws  of  thought,  and  grew  by  the  contradictions  of  reason.  The  very 
shame,  too,  of  doing  wrong  sometimes  hurries  men  into  a  barring  of  themselves  off 
from  retreat.  And  so  it  appears  to  be  with  Lear  in  his  treatment  of  Cordelia.  In 
the  first  place,  he  will  do  the  thing  because  he  knows  it  to  be  wrong;  and  then  the 
uneasy  sense  of  a  wrong  done  prompts  him  to  bind  the  act  with  an  oath;  that  is, 
37  2  C 


434 


APPENDIX 


because  he  ought  not  to  have  driven  the  nail,  therefore  he  clinches  it.  This  action 
of  mind  is  indeed  abnormal',  and  belongs  to  what  may  be  termed  the  border-land 
of  sanity  and  madness ;  nevertheless,  something  very  like  it  is  not  seldom  met  with  in 
men  who  are  supposed  to  be  in  full  possession  of  their  wits.  .  .  . 

But  the  great  thing  in  the  delineation  of  Lear  is  the  effect  and  progress  of  his 
passion  in  redeveloping  his  intellect.  For  the  character  seems  designed  in  part  to 
illustrate  the  power  of  passion  to  reawaken  and  raise  the  faculties  from  the  tomb  in 
which  age  has  quietly  inurned  them.  And  so  in  Lear  we  have,  as  it  were,  a  handful 
of  tumult  embosomed  in  a  sea,  gradually  overspreading  and  pervading  and  convul¬ 
sing  the  entire  mass.  .  .  . 

When,  however,  the  truth  is  forced  home,  and  he  can  no  longer  evade  or  shuffle 
off  the  conviction,  the  effect  is  indeed  terrible.  So  long  as  his  heart  had  something 
to  lay  hold  of  and  cling  to  and  rest  upon,  his  mind  was  the  abode  of  order  and 
peace.  But,  now  that  his  feelings  are  rendered  objectless,  torn  from  their  accus¬ 
tomed  holdings,  and  thrown  back  upon  themselves,  there  springs  up  a  wild  chaos  of 
the  brain,  a  whirling  tumult  and  anarchy  of  the  thoughts,  which,  till  imagination  has 
time  to  work,  chokes  down  his  utterance.  Then  comes  the  inward,  tugging  conflict, 
deep  as  life,  which  gradually  works  up  his  imaginative  forces,  and  kindles  them  to  a 
preternatural  resplendence.  The  crushing  of  his  aged  spirit  brings  to  light  its  hidden 
depths  and  buried  riches.  Thus  his  terrible  energy  of  thought  and  speech,  as  soon 
as  imagination  rallies  to  his  aid,  grows  naturally  from  the  struggle  of  his  feelings,— 
a  struggle  that  seems  to  wrench  his  whole  being  into  dislocation,  convulsing  and 
upturning  his  soul  from  the  bottom.  Thence  proceeds,  to  quote  Mr  Hallam,  *  that 
‘  splendid  madness,  not  absurdly  sudden,  as  in  some  tragedies,  but  in  which  the  strings 

*  that  keep  his  reasoning  powers  together  give  way  one  after  the  other  in  the  frenzy 

*  of  rage  and  grief.’ 

In  the  transition  of  Lear’s  mind  from  its  first  stillness  and  repose  to  its  subsequent 
tempest  and  storm ;  in  the  hurried  revulsions  and  alternations  of  feeling, — the  fast- 
rooted  faith  in  filial  virtue,  the  keen  sensibility  to  filial  ingratitude,  the  mighty  hunger 
of  the  heart,  thrice  repelled,  yet  ever  strengthened  by  repulse ;  and  in  the  turning-up 
of  sentiments  and  faculties  deeply  imbedded  beneath  the  incrustations  of  time  and 
place; — in  all  this  we  have  a  retrospect  of  the  aged  sufferer’s  whole  life;  the  abridged 
history  of  a  mind  that  has  passed  through  many  successive  stages,  each  putting  off  the 
form,  yet  retaining  and  perfecting  the  grace  of  the  preceding.  .  .  . 

In  the  trial  of  professions  there  appears  something  of  obstinacy  and  sullenness  in 
Cordelia’s  answer,  as  if  she  would  resent  the  old  man’s  credulity  to  her  sisters’  lies 
by  refusing  to  tell  him  the  truth.  But,  in  the  first  place,  she  is  considerately  careful 
and  tender  of  him;  and  it  is  a  part  of  her  religion  not  to  feed  his  dotage  with  the 
intoxications  for  which  he  has  such  a  morbid  craving.  She  understands  thoroughly 
both  his  fretful  waywardness  and  their  artful  hypocrisy ;  and  when  she  sees  how  he 
drinks  in  the  sweetened  poison  of  their  speech,  she  calmly  resolves  to  hazard  the 
worst,  rather  than  wrong  her  own  truth  to  cosset  his  disease.  Thus  her  answer  pro¬ 
ceeds,  in  part,  from  a  deliberate  purpose  of  love,  not  to  compete  with  them  in  the 
utterance  of  pleasing  falsehoods. 

In  the  second  place,  it  is  against  the  original  grain  of  her  nature  to  talk  much 
about  what  she  feels,  and  what  she  intends.  Where  her  feelings  are  deepest,  there 
her  tongue  is  stillest.  She  ‘  cannot  heave  her  heart  into  her  mouth,’  for  the  simple 
reason  that  she  has  so  much  of  it.  And  there  is  a  virgin  delicacy  in  genuine  and 
deep  feeling,  that  causes  it  to  keep  in  the  background  of  the  life;  to  be  heard  rather 


HUDSON 


435 


in  its  effects  than  in  direct  and  open  declarations.  They  love  but  little  who  can  tell 
how  much  they  love,  or  who  are  fond  of  prating  about  it.  To  be  staling  itself  with 
verbal  protestations  seems  a  kind  of  sacrilege  and  profanation.  Thus  love  is  apt  to 
be  tongue-tied ;  and  its  best  eloquence  is  when  it  disables  speech,  and  when,  from  very 
shame  of  being  seen,  it  just  blushes  itself  into  sight.  Such  is  the  beautiful  instinct 
of  true  feeling  to  embody  itself  sweetly  and  silently  in  deeds,  lest  from  showing 
itself  in  words  it  should  turn  to  matter  of  pride  and  conceit.  For  a  sentimental  cox¬ 
combry  is  the  natural  issue  of  a  cold  and  hollow  heart. 

It  is  not  strange,  therefore,  that  Cordelia  should  make  it  her  part  to  *  love  and  be 
silent.’  Yet  she  is  in  no  sort  a  pulpy  structure,  or  one  whom  it  is  prudent  to  trifle 
with,  where  her  forces  are  unrestrained  by  awe  of  duty :  she  has,  indeed,  a  delect¬ 
able  smack  of  her  father’s  quality ;  as  appears  in  that  glorious  flash  of  womanhood, 

when  she  so  promptly  switches  off  her  higgling  suitor ; 

* 

€ 

*  Peace  be  with  Burgundy  I 
Since  that  respects  of  fortune  are  his  love, 

I  shall  not  be  his  wife. 

What  I  have  said  of  Cordelia’s  affection  holds  true  of  her  character  generally. 
For  she  has  the  same  deep,  quiet  reserve  of  thought  as  of  feeling;  so  that  her  mind 
becomes  conspicuous  by  its  retiringness,  and  draws  the  attention  by  shrinking  from 
it.  Though  she  nowhere  says  anything  indicating  much  intelligence,  yet  she  always 
strikes  us,  somehow,  as  being  very  intelligent ;  and  even  the  more  so,  that  her  intel¬ 
ligence  makes  no  special  report  of  itself.  It  is  as  if  she  knew  too  much  to  show  her 
knowledge.  For  the  strongest  intellects  are  by  no  means  the  most  demonstrative; 
often  they  are  the  least  so.  And  indeed  what  Cordelia  knows  is  so  bound  up  with 
her  affections,  that  she  cannot  draw  it  off  into  expression  by  itself:  it  is  held  in  per¬ 
fect  solution,  so  to  speak,  with  the  other  elements  of  her  nature,  and  nowhere  falls 
down  in  a  sediment,  so  as  to  be  producible  in  a  separate  state.  She  has  a  deeper  and 
truer  knowledge  of  her  sisters  than  any  one  else  about  them ;  but  she  knows  them 
by  heart  rather  than  by  head ;  and  so  can  feel  and  act ,  but  not  articulate ,  a  prophecy 
of  what  they  -will  do.  Ask  her,  indeed,  what  she  thinks  on  any  subject,  and  her 
answer  will  be  that  she  thinks, — nay,  she  cannot  tell,  she  can  only  show  you  what 
she  thinks.  For  her  thinking  involuntarily  shapes  itself  into  life,  not  into  speech.  .  .  . 

Therefore  it  is  that  Cordelia  affects  us  so  deeply  and  so  constantly  without  our 
being  able  to  perceive  how  or  why.  And  she  affects  those  about  her  in  the  same 
insensible  way ;  that  is,  she  keeps  their  thoughts  and  feelings  busy,  by  keeping  her 
own  hidden  beneath  what  she  does :  an  influence  goes  forth  from  her  by  stealth,  and 
stealthily  creeps  into  them ;  an  influence  which  does  not  appear,  and  yet  is  irresist¬ 
ible,  and  irresistible  even  because  it  does  not  appear ;  and  which  becomes  an  under¬ 
current  in  their  minds,  circulates  in  their  blood,  as  it  were,  and  enriches  their  life 
with  a  beauty  that  seems  their  own,  and  yet  is  not  their  own :  so  that  she  steals  upon 
us  through  them ;  and  we  think  of  her  the  more  because  they,  without  suspecting  it, 
remind  us  of  her. 

*  Powers  there  are, 

That  touch  each  other  to  the  quick  in  modes 
Which  the  gross  world  no  sense  hath  to  perceive. 

No  soul  to  dream  of.’ 

No  one  can  see  Cordelia,  and  be  the  same  he  was  before,  though  unconscious  the 
while  of  taking  anything  from  her.  It  is  as  if  she  secretly  deposited  about  his 
person  some  mysterious,  divine  aroma  which,  when  he  is  remote  from  her  and  not 


436 


APPENDIX 


thinking  of  her,  keeps  giving  out  its  perfume,  and  testifying,  though  he  knows  it  not, 
that  he  has  been  with  her. 

Accordingly,  her  father  loves  her  most,  yet  knows  not  why;  has  no  conscious 
reasons  for  the  preference,  and  therefore  cannot  reason  it  away.  Having  cast  her 
off  from  his  bounty,  but  not  out  of  his  heart,  he  grows  full  of  unrest,  as  if  there  were 
some  secret  power  about  her,  like  magic,  which  he  cannot  live  without,  though  he 
did  not  dream  of  its  existence  when  she  was  with  him.  And  *  since  her  going  into 
France  the  Fool  has  much  pined  away';  as  though  her  presence  were  necessary  to 
his  health :  so  that  he  sickens  upon  the  loss  of  her,  yet  suspects  not  wherefore,  and 
knows  but  that  she  was  by  and  his  spirits  were  nimble,  she  is  gone  and  his  spirits 
are  drooping.  .  .  . 

Finally,  I  know  of  nothing  with  which  to  compare  Cordelia,  nothing  to  illustrate 
her  character  by.  An  impersonation  of  the  holiness  of  womanhood,  herself  alone 
is  her  own  parallel ;  and  all  the  objects  that  lend  beauty,  when  used  to  illustrate  other 
things,  seem  dumb  or  ineloquent  of  meaning  beside  her.  Superior,  perhaps,  to  all 
the  rest  of  Shakespeare’s  women  in  beauty  of  character,  she  is,  nevertheless,  second 
to  none  of  them  as  a  living  and  breathing  reality-  We  see  her  only  in  the  relation 
of  daughter,  and  hardly  see  her  even  there ;  yet  we  know  what  she  is,  or  would  be,  in 
every  relation  of  life,  just  as  well  as  if  we  had  seen  her  in  them  all.  *  Formed  for 
4  all  sympathies,  moved  by  all  tenderness,  prompt  for  all  duty,  prepared  for  all  suffer 
4  ing,’  we  seem  almost  to  hear  her  sighs  and  feel  her  breath  as  she  hangs,  like  a  min¬ 
istering  spirit,  over  her  reviving  father :  the  vision  sinks  sweetly  and  quietly  into  the 
heart,  and,  in  its  reality  to  our  feelings,  abides  with  us  more  as  a  remembrance  than 
an  imagination,  instructing  and  inspiring  us  as  that  of  a  friend  whom  we  had  known 
and  loved  in  our  youth.  .  .  . 

There  is  a  strange  assemblage  of  qualities  in  the  Fool,  and  a  strange  effect  arising 
from  their  union  and  position,  which  I  am  not  a  little  at  a  loss  how  to  describe.  It 
seems  hardly  possible  that  Lear’s  character  should  be  properly  developed  without 
him ;  indeed,  he  serves  as  a  common  gauge  and  exponent  of  all  the  characters  about 
him, — the  mirror  in  which  their  finest  and  deepest  lineaments  are  reflected.  Though 
a  privileged  person,  with  the  largest  opportunity  of  seeing,  and  the  largest  liberty  of 
speaking,  he  everywhere  turns  his  privileges  into  charities,  making  the  immunities 
of  the  clown  subservient  to  the  noblest  sympathies  of  the  man.  He  is,  therefore,  by 
no  means  a  mere  harlequinian  appendage  of  the  scene,  but  moves  in  vital  intercourse 
with  the  character  and  passion  of  the  drama.  He  makes  his  folly  the  vehicle  of 
truths  which  the  king  will  bear  in  no  other  shape,  while  his  affectionate  tenderness 
sanctifies  all  his  nonsense.  His  being  heralded  by  the  announcement  of  his  pining 
away  at  the  banishment  of  Cordelia  sends  a  consecration  before  him ;  that  his  spirit 
feeds  on  her  presence  hallows  everything  about  him.  Lear  manifestly  loves  him, 
partly  for  his  own  sake,  and  partly  for  hers,  for  we  feel  a  delicate,  scarce-discernible 
play  of  sympathy  between  them  on  Cordelia’s  account ;  the  more  so,  perhaps,  that 
neither  of  them  makes  any  explicit  allusion  to  her;  their  very  reserve  concerning 
her  indicating  that  their  hearts  are  too  full  to  speak. 

I  know  not,  therefore,  how  I  can  better  describe  the  Fool  than  as  the  soul  of  pathos 
in  a  sort  of  comic  masquerade ;  one  in  whom  fun  and  frolic  are  sublimed  and  idealized 
into  tragic  beauty;  with  the  garments  of  mourning  showing  through  and  softened  by 
the  lawn  of  playfulness.  His  ‘  labouring  to  outjest  Lear’s  heart-struck  injuries’  tells 
us  that  his  wits  are  set  a-dancing  by  grief;  that  his  jests  bubble  up  from  the  depths 
of  a  heart  struggling  with  pity  and  sorrow,  as  foam  enwreathes  the  face  of  deeply. 


HUDSON 


437 


troubled  waters.  So  have  I  seen  the  lip  quiver,  and  the  cheek  dimple  into  a  smile, 
to  relieve  the  eye  of  a  burden  it  was  reeling  under,  yet  ashamed  to  let  fall.  There 
is  all  along  a  shrinking,  velvet-footed  delicacy  of  step  in  the  Fool’s  antics,  as  if 
awed  by  the  holiness  of  the  ground ;  and  he  seems  bringing  diversion  to  the  thoughts, 
that  he  may  the  better  steal  a  sense  of  woe  into  the  heart.  And  I  am  not  clear 
whether  the  inspired  antics  that  sparkle  from  the  surface  of  his  mind  are  in  more 
impressive  contrast  with  the  dark  tragic  scenes  into  which  they  are  thrown,  like 
rockets  into  a  midnight  tempest,  or  with  the  undercurrent  of  deep  tragic  thoughtful¬ 
ness  out  of  which  they  falteringly  issue  and  play. 

Our  estimate  of  this  drama,  as  a  whole,  depends  very  much  on  the  view  we  take 
of  the  Fool ;  that  is,  on  how  we  interpret  his  part,  or  in  what  sense  we  understand 
it.  Superficially  considered,  his  presence  and  action  can  hardly  seem  other  than  a 
blemish  in  the  work  and  a  hindrance  to  its  proper  interest.  Accordingly,  he  has 
been  greatly  misunderstood,  indeed  totally  misconstrued,  by  many  of  the  Poet’s  critics. 
And  it  must  be  confessed,  that  the  true  meaning  of  his  part  is  somewhat  difficult  to 
seize;  in  fact,  is  not  to  be  seized  at  all,  unless  one  get  just  the  right  point  of  view. 
He  has  no  sufferings  of  his  own  to  move  us,  yet,  rightly  seen,  he  does  move  us,  and 
deeply  too.  But  the  process  of  his  interest  is  very  peculiar  and  recondite.  The 
most  noteworthy  point  in  him,  and  the  real  key  to  hfs  character,  lies  in  that,  while 
his  heart  is  slowly  breaking,  he  never  speaks,  ncr  even  appears  so  much  as  to  think, 
of  his  own  suffering.  He  seems,  indeed,  quite  unconscious  of  it.  His  anguish  is 
purely  the  anguish  of  sympathy ;  a  sympathy  so  deep  and  intense  as  to  induce  abso¬ 
lute  forgetfulness  of  self;  all  his  capacities  of  feeling  being  perfectly  engrossed  with 
the  sufferings  of  those  whom  he  loves.  He  withdraws  from  the  scene  with  the 
words,  ‘And  I’ll  go  to  bed  at  noon,’  which  means  simply  that  the  dear  fellow  is 
dying,  and  this,  too,  purely  of  others’  sorrows,  which  he  feels  more  keenly  than  they 
do  themselves.  She  who  was  the  light  of  his  eyes  is  gone,  dowered  with  her  father’s 
curse  and  strangered  with  his  oath ;  Kent  and  Edgar  have  vanished  from  his  recog¬ 
nition,  he  knows  not  whither,  the  victims  of  wrong  and  crime ;  the  wicked  seem  to 
be  having  all  things  their  own  way;  the  elements  have  joined  their  persecutions  to 
the  cruelties  of  men ;  there  is  no  pity  in  the  Heavens,  no  help  from  the  earth ;  he 
sees  nothing  but  a ‘world’s  convention  of  agonies’  before  him;  and  his  straining 
of  mind  to  play  assuagement  upon  others’  woes  has  fairly  breached  the  citadel  of  his 
life.  But  the  deepest  grief  of  all  has  now  overtaken  him ;  his  old  master’s  wits  are 
all  shattered  in  pieces :  to  prevent  this,  he  has  all  along  been  toiling  his  forces  to  the 
utmost ;  and,  now  that  it  has  come  in  spite  of  him,  he  no  longer  has  anything  to  live 
for :  yet  he  must  still  mask  his  passion  in  a  characteristic  disguise,  and  breathe  out  his 
life  in  a  play  of  thought.  I  know  not  whether  it  may  be  rightly  said  of  this  hero  in 
motley,  that  he 

*  hopes,  till  Hope  creates 
From  its  own  wreck  the  thing  it  contemplates.’ 

Need  it  be  said  that  such  ideas  of  human  character  could  grow  only  where  the 
light  of  Christianity  shines?  The  Poet’s  conceptions  of  virtue  and  goodness,  as 
worked  out  in  this  drama,  are  thoroughly  of  the  Christian  type, — steeped,  indeed,  in 
the  efficacy  of  the  Christian  Ideal.  The  old  Roman  conception  of  human  goodness, 
as  is  well  known,  placed  it  in  courage,  patriotism,  honesty,  and  justice, — very  high  and 
noble  indeed;  whereas,  the  proper  constituents  of  the  Christian  Ideal  are,  besides 
these,  and  higher  than  these,  mercy,  philanthropy,  self-sacrifice,  forgiveness  of  in- 
37* 


438 


APPENDIX 


juries,  and  loving  of  enemies.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  Shakespeare  gives  us  the  best 
expressions  of  the  Christian  Ideal  that  are  to  be  met  with  in  poetry  and  art.  I  am 
really  unable  to  say  what  divines  may  have  interpreted  more  truly,  or  more  inspir- 
ingly,  the  moral  sense,  the  ethos  of  our  religion.  [I  cannot  refrain  from  here  record¬ 
ing  my  thorough  admiration  for  Mr  Hudson’s  aesthetic  criticisms.  No  Shakespeare* 
student  can  afford  to  overlook  them. — Ed.] 


ACTORS 

Collier  {Eng.  Dram.  Poetry ,  iii,  274,  second  ed.  1879) :  To  the  list  of  characters 
in  plays  by  Shakespeare  sustained  by  Burbage,  we  have  still  to  add  Lear  and  Shylock, 
so  that  we  may  safely  decide  that  he  was  the  chosen  representative  of  all,  or  nearly 
all,  the  serious  parts  in  the  productions  of  our  great  dramatist.  .  .  .  How  far  the 
knowledge,  on  the  part  of  Shakespeare,  that  he  had  a  performer  at  his  service,  on 
whom  he  could  always  rely,  may  have  tended  to  the  perfection  of  some  of  the  great 
works  he  has  left  us,  is  matter  of  interesting  speculation.  .  .  .  [In  a  list  of  the  parts 
which  4  we  now  know  Burbage  represented,'  and  4  the  dates  at  which  we  have  rea- 
4  son  to  believe  they  were  brought  upon  the  stage,’  Collier  gives  4  Lear  1605.’  On  p. 
299  of  this  same  volume,  Collier  gives  an  4  Elegy  upon  Burbage,  which  was  copied 
4  many  years  ago  from  a  manuscript  in  the  possession  of  the  late  Mr  Heber.’  The 
lines  referring  to  Lear  are  as  follows]  : 

4  Thy  stature  small,  but  every  thought  and  mood 
Might  thoroughly  from  thy  face  be  understood; 

And  his  whole  action  he  could  change  with  ease 
From  ancient  Lear  to  youthful  Pericles.' 

[Another  version  of  this  Elegy,  or  rather  an  extract  from  another  Elegy,  is  given 
in  Ingleby’s  Centurie  of  Prayse  (p.  131,  second  ed.  1879),  which  contains  the  fol¬ 
lowing  : 

4  no  more  young  Hamlett,  ould  Heironymoe 
kind  Leer,  the  Greued  Moore,  and  more  beside, 
that  liued  in  him ;  haue  now  for  euer  dy’de.’  &c. 

The  next  actor  of  Lear,  of  any  note,  was  probably  Betterton.  Downes,  in  bis 
P.oscius  Anglicanus ,  in  a  list  of  the  plays  acted  between  1662  and  1665,  gives  4 The 
4  Tragedy  of  King  Lear  as  Mr  Shakespear  wrote  it  before  it  was  altered  by  Mr  Tate. 
When  afterwards  Downes  mentions  Lear ,  as  acted  in  1671  or  1672,  4  as  Mr  Shake* 
4  spear  wrote  it,’  Davies,  in  a  foot-note,  says,  4  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  Betterton 
'  acted  the  part  of  Lear,’  and  that  probably  4  Nokes  acted  the  Fool.’  Twenty  years 
after  this,  we  find  Betterton  still  acting  it,  but  in  Tate’s  version.  The  next  great 
actor  was  Garrick.] 


GARRICK 


439 


GARRICK 

Murphy  ( Life  of  Garrick,  i,  27) :  [When]  Garrick  undertook  the  difficult  character 
of  King  Lear,  he  was  transformed  into  a  feeble  old  man,  still  retaining  an  air  of  royalty. 
Quin,  at  the  time,  was  admired  in  that  character,  but  to  express  a  quick  succession 
of  passions  was  not  his  talent.  Barry,  some  years  after,  ventured  to  try  his  strength 
in  this  bow  of  Ulysses,  and  certainly,  with  a  most  harmonious  and  pathetic  voice,  was 
able  to  affect  the  heart  in  several  passages,  but  he  could  not,  with  propriety,  repre¬ 
sent  the  old  king  out  of  his  senses.  He  started,  took  long  and  hasty  steps,  stared 
about  him  in  a  vague,  wild  manner,  and  his  voice  was,  by  no  means,  in  unison  with 
the  sentiment.  It  was  in  Lear’s  madness  that  Garrick’s  genius  was  remarkably  dis¬ 
tinguished.  He  had  no  sudden  starts,  no  violent  gesticulation ;  his  movements  were 
slow  and  feeble ;  misery  was  depicted  in  his  countenance;  he  moved  his  head  in  the 
most  deliberate  manner;  his  eyes  were  fixed,  or,  if  they  turned  to  any  one  near  him, 
he  made  a  pause,  and  fixed  his  look  on  the  person  after  much  delay ;  his  features,  at 
the  same  time,  telling  what  he  was  going  to  say  before  he  uttered  a  word.  During 
the  whole  time  he  presented  a  sight  of  woe  and  misery,  and  a  total  alienation  of 
mind  from  every  idea  but  that  of  his  unkind  daughters.  He  was  used  to  tell  how 
he  acquired  the  hints  that  guided  him  when  he  began  to  study  this  great  and  difficult 
part ;  he  was  acquainted  with  a  worthy  man,  who  liyed  in  Leman  Street,  Goodman’s 
Fields;  this  friend  had  an  only  daughter  about  two  years  old;  he  stood  at  his  dining¬ 
room  window,  fondling  the  child,  and  dangling  it  in  his  arms,  when  it  was  his  mis¬ 
fortune  to  drop  the  infant  into  a  flagged  area,  and  killed  it  on  the  spot.  Fie  remained 
at  his  window  screaming  in  agonies  of  grief.  The  neighbours  flocked  to  the  house, 
took  up  the  child,  and  delivered  it  dead  to  the  unhappy  father,  who  wept  bitterly, 
and  filled  the  street  with  lamentations.  He  lost  his  senses,  and  from  that  moment 
never  recovered  his  understanding.  As  he  had  a  sufficient  fortune,  his  friends  chose 
to  let  him  remain  in  his  house,  under  two  keepers  appointed  by  Dr  Munro.  Garrick 
frequently  went  to  see  his  distracted  friend,  who  passed  the  remainder  of  his  life  in 
going  to  the  window,  and  there  playing  in  fancy  with  his  child.  After  some  dalliance 
he  dropped  it,  and,  bursting  into  a  flood  of  tears,  filled  the  house  with  shrieks  of 
grief  and  bitter  anguish.  He  then  sat  down,  in  a  pensive  mood,  his  eyes  fixed  on 
one  object,  at  times  looking  slowly  round  him,  as  if  to  implore  compassion.  Garrick 
was  often  present  at  this  scene  of  misery,  and  was  ever  after  used  to  say,  that  it  gave 
him  the  first  idea  of  King  Lear’s  madness.  This  writer  has  often  seen  him  rise  in 
company  to  give  a  representation  of  this  unfortunate  father.  He  leaned  on  the  back 
of  a  chair,  seeming  with  parental  fondness  to  play  with  a  child,  and,  after  expressing 
the  most  heartfelt  delight,  he  suddenly  dropped  the  infant,  and  instantly  broke  out 
in  a  most  violent  agony  of  grief,  so  tender,  so  affecting,  and  pathetic  that  every  eye 
in  the  company  was  moistened  with  a  gush  of  tears.  *  There  it  was,’  said  Garrick, 
*  that  I  learned  to  imitate  madness;  I  copied  nature,  and  to  that  owed  my  success  in. 
4  King  Lear.’  It  is  wonderful  to  tell,  that  he  descended  from  that  first  character  in 
tragedy  to  the  part  of  Abel  Drugger ;  he  represented  the  tobacco-boy  in  the  truest 
comic  style ;  no  grimace,  no  starting,  no  wild  gesticulation.  He  seemed  to  be  a  new 
man.  Hogarth,  the  famous  painter,  saw  him  in  Richard  III,  and  on  the  following 
night  in  Abel  Drugger;  he  was  so  struck  that  he  said  to  Garrick,  ‘You  are  in  your 
‘  element  when  you  are  begrimed  with  dirt  or  up  to  your  elbows  in  blood.’ 


440 


APPENDIX 


KEAN 

R.  H.  Dana  ( The  Idle  Min*  p.  35,  New  York,  1821) :  A  man  has  feelings  some* 
times  which  can  only  be  breathed  out, — there  is  no  utterance  for  them  in  words.  I 
had  hardly  written  this,  when  the  terrible  and  indistinct  *  Ha !  *  with  which  Mr  Kean 
makes  Lear  hail  Cornwall  and  Regan,  as  they  enter,  in  the  fourth  scene  of  the  Second 
Act,  came  to  my  mind.  It  seemed  at  the  time  to  take  me  up  and  sweep  me  along  in 
its  wild  swell.  No  description  in  the  world  could  give  a  very  clear  notion  of  the  sound. 
It  must  be  formed  as  well  as  it  may  be,  from  what  has  just  been  said  of  its  effect. . . . 

It  has  been  so  common  a  saying,  that  Lear  is  the  most  difficult  of  all  characters  to 
personate,  that  we  had  taken  it  for  granted  no  man  could  play  it  so  as  to  satisfy  us. 
Perhaps  it  is  the  hardest  to  represent.  Yet  the  part  which  we  have  supposed  the 
most  difficult,  the  insanity  of  Lear,  is  scarcely  more  so  than  the  choleric  old  king. 
Inefficient  rage  is  almost  always  ridiculous;  and  an  old  man,  with  a  broken-down 
body,  and  a  mind  falling  in  pieces  from  the  violence  of  its  uncontrolled  passions,  is 
in  constant  danger  of  exciting  our  contempt  along  with  our  pity.  It  is  a  chance 
matter  which  we  are  moved  to.  And  this  it  is  which  makes  the  opening  of  Lear  so 
difficult. 

In  most  instances,  Shakspeave  has  given  us  the  gradual  growth  of  a  passion,  with 
all  such  little  accompaniments  as  agree  with  it,  and  go  to  make  up  the  •whole  man. 
In  Lear,  his  object  being  to  represent  the  beginning  and  course  of  insanity,  he  has 
properly  enough  gone  a  little  back  of  it,  and  introduced  us  to  an  old  man  of  good 
feelings,  but  who  had  lived  without  any  true  principle  of  conduct,  whose  ungoverned 
passions  had  grown  strong  with  age,  and  were  ready  upon  any  disappointment  to 
make  shipwreck  of  an  intellect  always  weak.  To  bring  this  about,  he  begins  with 
an  abruptness  rather  unusual,  and  the  old  king  rushes  in  before  us,  as  it  were,  with 
all  his  passions  at  their  height,  tearing  him  like  fiends. 

Mr  Kean  gives  this  as  soon  as  a  fit  occasion  offers  itself.  Had  he  put  more  of 
melancholy  and  depression,  and  less  of  rage,  into  the  character,  we  should  have 
been  very  much  puzzled  at  his  so  suddenly  going  mad.  The  change  must  have  been 
slower;  and,  besides,  his  insanity  must  have  been  of  another  kind.  It  must  have 
been  monotonous  and  complaining,  instead  of  continually  varying ;  at  one  time  full 
of  grief,  at  another  playful,  and  then  wild  as  the  winds  that  roared  about  him,  and 
fiery  and  sharp  as  the  lightning  that  shot  by  him.  The  truth  with  which  he  conceived 
this  was  not  finer  than  his  execution  of  it.  Not  for  an  instant,  in  his  utmost  violence, 
did  ne  suffer  the  imbecility  of  the  old  man’s  anger  to  touch  upon  the  ludicrous ; 
when  nothing  but  the  most  just  conception  and  feeling  of  the  character  could  have 
saved  him  from  it. 

It  has  been  said  that  Lear  was  a  study  for  any  one  who  would  make  himself 
acquainted  with  the  workings  of  an  insane  mind.  There  is  no  doubt  of  it.  And  it 
is  not  less  true  that  Mr  Kean  was  as  perfect  an  exemplification  of  it.  His  eye,  when 
his  senses  are  first  forsaking  him,  giving  a  questioning  look  at  what  he  saw,  as  if  all 
before  him  was  undergoing  a  strange  and  bewildering  change  which  confused  his 
brain — the  wandering,  lost  motions  of  his  hands,  which  seemed  feeling  for  something 
familiar  to  them,  on  which  they  might  take  hold,  and  be  assured  of  a  safe  reality— 

*  *  When  a  number  of  a  periodical  published  by  the  poet  Dana,  called  The  Idle  Man,  was  put 
into  his  [Kean’s]  hands,  he  read  an  analysis  of  his  acting  which  it  contained  with  the  greatest  atten¬ 
tion,  and  at  the  close  said,  with  evident  gratification:  ‘This  writer  understands  me;  he  is  a  philo¬ 
sophical  man.  I  shall  take  his  work  across  the  water.' — Hawkins’s  Life  of  Kean,  ii,  16S. — Hd, 


KEAN 


441 


the  under  monotone  of  his  voice,  as  if  he  was  questioning  his  own  being,  and  all 
which  surrounded  him — the  continuous,  but  slight  oscillating  motion  of  the  body, — 
all  expressed,  with  fearful  truth,  the  dreamy  state  of  a  mind  fast  unsettling,  and 
making  vain  and  weak  efforts  to  find  its  way  back  to  its  wonted  reason.  There  was 
a  childish,  feeble  gladness  in  the  eye,  and  a  half-piteous  smile  about  the  mouth  at 
times,  which  one  could  scarce  look  upon  without  shedding  tears.  As  the  derange¬ 
ment  increased  upon  him,  his  eye  lost  its  notice  of  what  surrounded  him,  wandering 
over  everything  as  if  he  saw  it  not,  and  fastening  upon  the  creatures  of  his  crazed 
brain.  The  helpless  and  delighted  fondness  with  which  he  clings  to  Edgar  as  an 
insane  brother  is  another  instance  of  the  justness  of  Mr  Kean’s  conceptions.  Nor 
does  he  lose  the  air  of  insanity  even  in  the  fine  moralizing  parts,  and  where  he 
inveighs  against  the  corruptions  of  the  world.  There  is  a  madness  even  in  his 
reason. 

The  violent  and  immediate  changes  of  the  passions  in  Lear,  so  hard  to  manage 
without  offending  us,  are  given  by  Mr  Kean  with  a  spirit  and  fitness  to  nature  which 
we  had  not  imagined  possible.  These  are  equally  well  done  both  before  and  after 
he  loses  his  reason.  The  most  difficult  scene  in  this  respect  is  the  last  interview 
between  Lear  and  his  daughters,  Goneril  and  Regan — (and  how  wonderfully  does 
Mr  Kean  carry  it  through !) — the  scene  which  ends  with  the  horrid  shout  and  cry 
with  which  he  runs  out  mad  from  their  presence,  as  if  his  very  brain  was  on  fire. 

The  last  scene  which  we  are  allowed  to  have  of  Shakspeare’s  Lear,  for  the  sim¬ 
ply  pathetic,  was  played  by  Mr  Kean  with  unmatched  power.  We  sink  down  helpless 
under  the  oppressive  grief.  It  lies  like  a  dead  weight  upon  our  bosoms.  We  are  de¬ 
nied  even  the  relief  of  tears ;  and  are  thankful  for  the  startling  shudder  that  seizes 
us  when  he  kneels  to  his  daughter  in  the  deploring  weakness  of  his  crazed  grief. 

Mr  Kean  is  never  behind  his  author;  but  stands  forward  the  living  representative 
of  the  character  he  has  drawn.  When  he  plays  out  of  Shakspeare,  he  fills  up  where 
his  author  is  wanting,  and  when  in  Shakspeare,  he  gives  not  only  what  is  set  down, 
but  all  that  the  situation  and  circumstances  attendant  upon  the  being  he  personates, 
could  possibly  call  forth.  He  seems  at  the  time  to  have  possessed  himself  of 
Shakspeare’s  imagination,  and  to  have  given  it  body  and  form.  Read  any  scene 
of  Shakspeare — for  instance,  the  last  of  Lear  that  is  played,  and  see  how  few  words 
are  there  set  down,  and  then  remember  how  Kean  fills  it  out  with  varied  and  mul¬ 
tiplied  expressions  and  circumstances,  and  the  truth  of  this  remark  will  be  too 
obvious  for  any  one  to  deny.  There  are  few  men  living,  I  believe,  let  them  have 
studied  Shakspeare  ever  so  attentively,  who  can  say  that  Mr  Kean  has  not  helped 
them  as  much  to  a  true  conception  of  him,  as  their  own  labour  had  done  for  them 
before. 

Hawkins  ( Life  of  Kean,  ii,  1 16) :  The  death  of  George  III.  [in  1820]  removed  the 
taboo  constituted  by  the  applicability  of  King  Lear  to  the  mental  derangement  which 
clouded  the  latter  days  of  that  firm,  just,  and  equitable  prince,  and  the  tragedy  was 
forthwith  put  in  rehearsal  both  at  Covent-garden  and  Drury-lane  theatres.  At  the 
former  an  excellent  cast  was  provided,  Lear  being  assigned  to  Booth,  Edmund  to 
Macready,  and  Edgar  to  Charles  Kemble.  .  .  .  He  [Kean]  ordered  King  Lear  to  be 
announced  for  the  24th  of  April.  He  assigned  the  Earl  of  Kent  to  Dowton,  Edgar 
to  Rae,  and  Cordelia  to  Mrs  W est.  During  his  absence  from  the  metropolis,  his  private 
rehearsals  of  the  character  had  been  almost  unintennittent ;  and,  as  an  illustration 
of  his  painstaking  care,  it  may  be  recorded  that  on  one  occasion  he  acted  scene  after 


442 


APPENDIX 


scene  before  the  pier-glass  from  midnight  to  noonday.  Since  his  first  appearance  at 
Drury  Lane  he  had  never  lost  an  opportunity  of  improving  his  attainment  in  Lear; 
so  anxious  was  he  to  impart  truth  and  natural  colouring  to  his  performance  that,  in 
order  to  observe  the  details  and  manifestations  of  real  insanity,  he  constantly  visited 
St.  Luke’s  and  Bethlehem  hospitals  ere  he  appeared  in  the  old  king;  and,  tranquilly 
relying  upon  the  unfailing  fertility  of  his  intellectual  resources,  he  anticipated  this 
effort  as  the  last  seal  of  his  theatrical  renown.  .  .  .  He  knew  that,  when  he  came  to 
the  trial,  his  mind  would  be  thoroughly  imbued  with  the  properties  of  the  character 
. .  .  and,  fearless  as  to  the  result,  he  quietly  said  ‘  that  he  would  make  the  audience 
‘as  mad  as  he  himself  should  be.’  .  .  .  The  expectation  excited  by  the  announcement 
on  the  Covent-garden  bills  was  doomed  to  be  but  partially  realized,  inasmuch  as  a 
just  interpretation  of  the  character  continued,  as  far  as  Booth  was  concerned,  to  re¬ 
main  a  desideratum  to  the  stage.  In  Lear  his  talents  were  buried.  .  .  .  George  Fred* 
erick  Cooke,  unapproachable  in  his  day  as  Iago  and  Richard,  overrated  his  powers 
when  he  thought  he  could  play  Lear.  .  .  .  On  the  24th  of  April  [1820]  Kean  appeared 
in  the  character  of  Lear  for  the  first  time.  .  .  .  Bannister  adjudged  it  superior  to  Gar¬ 
rick’s;  an  enthusiastic  admirer  of  Kemble  allowed  that  it  surpassed  the  fine  delinea¬ 
tion  given  by  his  idol. .  .  .  Who  that  once  heard  can  ever  forget  the  terrors  of  that 
terrific  curse,  where,  in  the  wild  storm  of  his  conflicting  passion,  he  threw  himself 
on  his  knees,  *  lifted  up  his  arms,  like  withered  stumps,  threw  his  head  quite  back 
‘  and,  in  that  position,  as  if  severed  from  all  that  held  him  to  society,  breathed  a 
‘  heart-struck  prayer,  like  the  figure  of  a  man  obtruncated  ?  ’ 

[A  criticism  on  this  performance  appeared  in  Blackwood's  Magazine,  from  which 
the  following  extracts  are  taken :]  *  In  the  first  scene  there  was  nothing  to  call  for 
very  particular  notice.  There  was  no  approach  to  mock  dignity,  yet  nothing  like  a 
want  of  the  real,  but  a  perfect  propriety  of  conception  and  demeanour  throughout. 
The  rebuke  to  Cordelia,  and  the  sudden  change  of  his  intentions  towards  her  in 
consequence  of  her  apparent  coldness,  were  the  evident  results,  not  of  the  violated 
affections  of  a  father,  but  the  wounded  pride  of  a  king,  accustomed  throughout  a 
long  life  to  believe  that  his  wishes  and  his  will  are  essentially  entitled  to  bear  sway 
in  all  things.  When  he  exclaims,  *  So  be  my  grave  my  peace,  as  here  I  give  My 
‘  heart  from  her,’  &c.,  it  is  not  the  outraged  parent  cut  off  for  ever  from  fhe  undu- 
tiful  child,  but  the  *  choleric  king,*  pettishly  spurning  the  control  of  reason  and  of 
right,  because  he  had  not  been  used  to  listen  to  them.  And  it  was  the  same  in  the 
expression  of  his  anger  against  the  interference  of  Kent.  It  was  not  the  real  indig¬ 
nation  resulting  from  violated  confidence,  but  the  conventional  appearance  of  it  in 
the  vindication  of  affronted  majesty. 

‘After  this  follows  the  scene  with  Goneril  and  Albany,  in  which  he  observes  that 
they  purposely  slight  him.  Here  the  pride  of  the  insulted  monarch  begins  to  give 
way  before  the  rage  and  agony  of  the  outraged  father;  or,  rather,  the  two  cha¬ 
racters,  with  the  feelings  attendant  upon  them,  are  blending  together  in  the  most 
extraordinary  and  impressive  manner.  The  fearful  curse  at  the  close  of  this  scene 
was  given  with  tremendous  force.  It  seemed  to  be  screwed  out  of  the  bodily  frame 
as  if  by  some  mechanical  power  set  in  motion  by  means  independent  of  the  will, 
and  at  the  end  the  over-excited  and  exhausted  frame,  sinking  beneath  the  supernatural 
exertion,  seemed  to  crack  and  give  way  altogether. 

*  The  next  scene  is  the  finish  of  the  whole  performance,  and  certainly  it  is  the 
noblest  execution  of  lofty  genius  that  the  modem  stage  has  witnessed, — always  ex¬ 
cepting  the  same  actor’s  closing  scene  in  the  Third  Act  of  Othello.  It  is  impossible 


KEAN 


443 


for  words  to  convey  anything  like  an  adequate  description  of  the  extraordinary  act¬ 
ing  in  the  whole  of  this  scene — of  the  electrical  effect  produced  from  the  transition 
from  *  Bid  ’em  come  forth  and  hear  me,’  &c.  to  *  O !  are  you  come  ?  ’ — the  mingled 
suspicion  and  tenderness  with  which  he  tells  Regan  of  Goneril’s  treatment  of  him  ; 
the  exquisite  tone  of  pathos  thrown  into  the  mock  petition  to  Regan,  *  I  confess  that 
*  I  am  old,’  &c. ;  the  wonderful  depth  and  nobility  of  expression  given  to  the  ironical 
speech  to  Goneril,  ‘  I  did  not  bid  the  thunder-bearer  strike,’  &c. ;  the  pure  and  touch¬ 
ing  simplicity  of  *  I  gave  you  all  ’ ;  and  lastly,  the  splendid  close  of  this  scene  with 
the  speech,  ‘  Heavens,  drop  your  patience  down,’  &c.,  in  which  the  bitter  delight  of 
anticipated  revenge,  and  the  unbending  sense  of  habitual  dignity,  contend  against 
the  throes  and  agonies  of  a  torn  and  bursting  heart. 

*  Of  the  Third  Act,  containing  the  scenes  with  Kent  and  Edgar  during  the  storm, 
we  must  speak  more  generally.  There  may  probably  be  some  difference  of  opinion 
as  to  the  manner  in  which  these  scenes  were  given,  but,  to  our  thinking,  Mr  Kean 
never  evinced  more  admirable  judgement  than  in  choosing  what  appears  to  us  to 
have  been  the  only  practicable  course  which  the  nature  of  his  subject  left  him.  The 
Lear  of  Shakespeare, — at  least  this  part  of  it, — requires  to  be  made  intelligible  to 
the  senses  through  the  medium  of  the  imagination.  The  gradual,  and  at  last  total, 
breaking  of  the  waters  from  the  mighty  deep  of  the  human  heart  which  takes  place 
during  these  scenes  would  be  intolerable  in  all  the  bareness,  and  with  all  the  force, 
of  reality.  If  it  were  possible  to  exhibit  the  actual  Lear  of  Shakespeare  on  the 
stage,  the  performance  must  be  forbidden  by  law.  We  really  believe  Mr  Kean  felt 
something  of  this  kind,  and  studied  and  performed  these  scenes  accordingly.  He 
did  not  give  a  portrait,  but  a  shadow  of  them.  They  came  upon  us  in  their  different 
aspects,  not  as  animated  images  of  Lear,  but  as  dreamlike  recollections  of  him.  Not 
so  the  scenes  which  remain  to  be  spoken  of,  viz :  the  mad  scene  in  the  Fourth  Act, 
and  that  in  which  he  recovers  his  senses  and  recognizes  his  daughter  Cordelia,  in  the 
Fifth.  These  were  as  true  to  nature  and  to  Shakespeare  as  the  most  exquisite  delicacy 
of  conception,  consummate  judgement  and  taste,  and  an  entire  command  over  the 
springs  of  passion  and  pathos,  could  make  them.  In  particular,  the  short  scene  where 
Lear  wakes  from  slumber  and  recognizes  Cordelia  was  beautiful  in  the  highest  de¬ 
gree.  The  mild  pathos  of  his  voice,  and  the  touching  simplicity  of  his  manner,  when 
he  kneels  down  before  her  and  offers  to  drink  poison  if  she  has  it  for  him,  can  never 
be  forgotten.  In  speaking  of  what  is  (rather  coarsely)  called  the  mad  scene,  we  ne¬ 
glected  to  note  the  noble  burst  of  dignified  energy  with  which  Lear  exclaimed,  *  Ay, 
‘  every  inch  a  king,’  and  also  the  action  all  through  the  scene.  His  hands  were  as 
wandering  and  as  unsettled  as  his  senses,  and  as  little  under  the  control  of  habit  or 
will.  This  was  a  very  delicate  touch  of  nature,  and  perfectly  original.  . .  . 

‘The  only  plausible  objection  that  has  been  or  that  can  be  made  to  any  part  of  this 
performance  is,  that  in  the  mad  scenes  there  is  too  little  vehemence  and  variety. 
But  this  objection  is  made  by  persons  who  forget  that  Lear  was  a  very  foolish,  fond 
old  man,  fourscore  and  upwards ;  and  the  profound  knowledge  of  human  life,  and 
the  piercing  glance  into  the  human  heart,  which  he  exhibited  in  these  scenes,  might 
be  supposed  to  have  come  to  him, — as  they  came  to  Shakespeare  himself, — not  by 
observation  and  sentiment,  but  by  something  which  ordinary  mortals  can  conceive  of 
as  nothing  less  than  a  species  cf  direct  inspiration, — some  mysterious  influence  totally 
independent  of  the  immediate  state  of  the  actual  feelings  and  faculties, — and  that 
therefore  they  would  be  likely  to  be  dealt  forth,  not  amidst  the  throes  and  agonies 
of  the  priestess  delivering  the  sacred  oracles  from  the  tripod,  but  with  the  calm  and 


444 


APPENDIX 


collected  fervour  of  the  priest  who  was  appointed  to  repeat  those  oracles  to  the 
people.’ 

(Hawkins’s  Life ,  ii,  p.  212.) — Acting  upon  his  own  fine  notion  of  the  pencil  and 
genius  of  Shakespeare,  and  stimulated  by  Hazlitt’s  remonstrances  and  Charles  Lamb’s 
Essays,  Kean  now  [1823]  determined  to  restore  the  previously  rejected  text  of  King 
Lear  to  the  Fifth  Act,  thereby  saving  the  audience  from  the  unnatural  and  impossible 
recovery  of  the  old  king,  and  the  consummation  of  the  mawkish  and  improbable 
loves  of  Edgar  and  Cordelia.  ‘That,’  said  he  on  one  occasion  to  his  wife,  during 
their  residence  at  Bute  in  the  previous  summer,  indicating  with  his  finger  the  last 
scene  in  Lear , 4  is  the  sacred  page  I  am  yet  to  expound.’  The  delight  with  which 
the  intellectual  world  hailed  this  judicious  restoration  was  great  and  unequivocal.  .  .  . 
Considerable  disappointment  was  felt  when  it  was  found  that  the  return  to  originality 
did  not  extend  to  the  removal  of  the  inconsistent  love-scenes  which  deface  the  daugh¬ 
terly  excellence  of  Cordelia,  together  with  the  despicable  trash  of  poetical  justice 
introduced  by  Tate  in  justification  of  his  absurd  alterations;  but  the  original  catas¬ 
trophe,  as  written  by  Shakespeare,  afforded  Kean  an  opportunity  of  making  what 
proved  in  his  hands  to  be  one  of  the  most  powerful  appeals  to  the  heart  of  which  the 
stage  has  ever  boasted.  4  The  London  audience  have  no  notion  of  what  I  can  do 
4  until  they  see  me  over  the  dead  body  of  Cordelia.’  That  had  been  his  invariable 
exclamation  whenever  it  was  contended  that  nothing  could  be  more  sublime,  more 
grand,  more  impressive  than  his  Othello;  and  there  he  knelt,  the  cherished  hope  of 
years  converted  into  reality  at  last,  a  dense  and  overflowing  audience  hanging  with 
breathless  attention  on  every  word  that  fell  from  his  lips,  and  many  and  many  a 
tearful  eye  bearing  testimony  to  the  power  with  which  he  delineated  the  agonies  of 
a  broken  heart.  No  language  can  do  justice  to  his  excellence.  There  was  no  rant, 
no  violence  of  action;  all  was  characteristic  only  of  the  child-changed  father.  Stu 
pefied  with  grief  and  years,  he  was  dead  to  all  but  the  corpse  before  him ;  and  tb 
this  the  last  glimmerings  of  sense  and  feeling  were  directed.  His  first  intent  gaze 
upon  the  dead — his  childish  yet  earnest  action  in  watching  for  the  motion  of  the 
feather  which  should  denote  that  the  vital  spark  still  smouldered — his  involuntary 
clasping  of  her  hands, — his  address  to  her  in  the  very  dotage  of  despair, — his  familiar 
yet  pathetic  exclamation, 4  Oh,  thou  wilt  come  no  more,  never,  never,’  as  if  he  had 
caught  up  some  household  words  and  fitted  them  to  the  sad  emergency — his  last 
pointing  to  her  lips  with  his  finger  trembling  in  death ; — description  is  set  at  defiance. 

DEVRIENT 

Ulrici  ( Sh .  Jahrbuch,  1867) :  Louis  Devrient  was,  in  the  estimation  of  the  great 
public,  as  well  as  in  that  of  the  critics,  one  of  the  most  distinguished  representatives 
of  Shakespeare  on  the  stage  in  recent  times,  not  indeed  in  all  the  leading  characters 
cf  the  Poet, — he  lacked  the  physical  strength  and  stature  for  Macbeth,  Othello,  and 
Coriolanus, — but  Lear,  Richard  III,  Mercutio,  Iago,  Hubert,  Shylock,  Falstaff,  he 
played  to  the  end  of  his  professional  career.  I  well  recollect  here  on  the  Berlin 
stage,  and  also  at  a  later  period,  his  spare  figure  of  ordinary  height,  his  intellectual 
countenance,  his  sharp-pointed,  aquiline  nose,  his  finely-cut  mouth,  his  large,  fiery 
eyes,  his  peculiar  flexibility  of  body,  his  long,  lean  hands,  so  full  of  expression.  His 
hands  and  his  powerful  eyes,  joined  with  the  play  of  his  features,  were  almost  his 
only  means  of  representation.  He  could  not  produce  any  effect  by  attitudinizing,  for 
there  was  nothing  imposing  in  his  personal  presence;  neither  did  his  power  lie  in 


DEVRIENT 


445 


vocal  force  and  fulness,  for  there  was  no  melodious  ring  in  his  voice;  although 
capable  of  manifold  modulation,  it  was,  rather,  somewhat  sharp,  and  apt  to  pass  into 
a  cutting,  shrieking  tone;  and  violent  movements  of  his  body  or  limbs  he  never 
used,  when  they  were  not  absolutely  necessary, — mindful,  doubtless,  of  Hamlet’s 
rule  to  the  players.  Thus  there  were  left  to  him  only  those  organs  of  the  body 
which  stand  in  closest  relation  to  the  soul.  Hence  his  acting  was  at  once  a  sublima¬ 
tion  of  physical  expression  and  an  incarnation  of  the  spiritual;  it  was  upon  this 
ascendency  of  the  power  and  authority  of  the  spiritual  over  the  sensuous  appearance 
that  the  peculiar  charm  of  his  artistjc  productions  especially  rested. 

One  of  his  most  distinguished  parts  was  the  representation  of  Lear, — a  part  in 
which,  as  in  no  other  part,  the  heaviest  weight  of  tragic  suffering  stands  opposed  to 
the  smallest  measure  of  action  and  power  of  endurance,  a  part  in  which  all  depends 
upon  giving  full  expression  to  this  deep,  agonizing  suffering  by  which  the  king  is 
crushed.  I  mention  this  part  in  particular  because  a  comparison  of  Devrient’s  acting 
with  that  of  other  celebrated  actors  affords  me  an  opportunity  of  offering  some 
remarks  upon  the  much-criticised  first  scene  of  the  first  Act, — the  exposition  of  the 
piece.  As  well  as  I  can  remember,  in  his  appearance  in  this  scene  Devrient  shows 
no  trace  of  sadness,  of  ill-humor,  or  of  a  rough,  despotic  demeanor;  with  the  expres¬ 
sion  of  kingly  dignity  there  was  united  rather,  one  of  gentleness,  contented  and  serene. 
Indeed  the  character  of  the  king  must  have  had,  originally,  a  happy  element,  a  fond¬ 
ness  for  jesting  and  merriment;  his  relation  to  the  Fool,  whom  he  evidently  loved 
almost  as  much  as  the  Fool  loved  him.  In  this  temper,  glad  to  be  able  to  relieve 
himself  of  the  burthen  of  the  government,  with  no  foreboding  of  the  fearful  future, 
he  sets  himself  to  execute  the  act,  which  is  to  prove  so  calamitous  to  him.  The 
determination  to  abdicate  and  divide  his  kingdom  among  his  daughters,  he  had  come 
to  some  time  before,  which  plainly  appears  from  the  words  with  which  the  piece 
opens,  and  to  which  Shakespeare  certainly  did  not  give  so  significant  a  place  at  the 
very  beginning  of  the  whole  without  design.  .  .  . 

Devrient’s  acting  in  the  scenes  of  Lear’s  madness  presented  no  unnatural  or  exag¬ 
gerated  motions ;  he  acted  those  scenes  almost  wholly  with  his  eyes,  supporting  the 
expression  of  his  looks  only  by  a  corresponding  play  of  feature  and  by  a  singu¬ 
larly  significant  motion  of  his  fingers  and  hands.  That  by  such  simple  means  he 
produced  such  a  powerful  effect,  he  owed  altogether  to  the  fact  that  by  nature  he 
possessed  large,  full  eyes.  To  any  one  not  possessed  of  this  gift,  it  would  be  diffi¬ 
cult,  if  not  impossible,  to  produce  like  striking,  effects.  But  it  only  follows  that  one, 
not  thus  gifted,  must  either  renounce  the  acting  of  Lear,  or  content  himself  with  a 
less  effect ;  together  with  the  mad  scenes,  the  part  offers  places  enough  to  attest  the 
mastery  of  the  artist ;  and  when  that  is  apparent,  it  will  not  fail  to  command  the 
approval  and  applause  of  the  public.  At  all  events,  let  no  artist,  who  desires  to 
deserve  the  name,  permit  himself  ever  to  speculate  upon  the  ignorance  of  the  public, 
and  aim,  by  a  false  representation,  at  effects  which  the  nature  of  the  subject  and  his 
own  personality  deny  to  him.  This  principle  is  the  more  strictly  to  be  held  to,  the 
more  urgently  our  realistic  age  insists  upon  nature  and  the  truth  of  nature,  and 
demands  of  the  artist  that  he  shall  banish  all  idealistic  elements  from  his  acting. 
For  bare  nature  is  only  artistic  when  it  appears  in  clear,  unsophisticated  truth,  because 
the  kernel  of  truth  bears  at  the  same  time  the  germ,  although  only  the  germ,  of 
beauty. 


38 


446 


APPENDIX 


COSTUME 

Sir  WALTER  Scott  ( Quarterly  Review,  April,  1826) :  Before  Kemble’s  time  there 
was  no  such  thing  as  regular  costume  observed  in  our  theatres.  The  actors  repre¬ 
sented  Macbeth  and  his  wife,  Belvidera  and  Jaffier,  and  most  other  parts,  whatever 
the  age  or  country  in  which  the  scene  was  laid,  in  the  cast-off  court  dresses  of  the 
nobility.  Kemble  used  to  say,  that  the  modern  dresses  of  the  characters  in  the  well- 
known  print  of  a  certain  dramatic  dagger-scene,  made  them  resemble  the  butler  and 
housekeeper  struggling  for  the  carving-knife.  Some  few  characters,  by  a  sort  of  pre¬ 
scriptive  theatrical  right,  always  retained  the  costume  of  their  times — Falstaff,  for 
example,  and  Richard  III.  But  such  exceptions  only  rendered  the  general  appear¬ 
ance  more  anomalous.  We  have  seen  Jane  Shore  acted,  with  Richard  in  the  old 
English  cloak,  Lord  Hastings  in  a  full  court  dress,  with  his  white  rod  like  a  Lord 
Chamberlain  of  the  last  reign,  and  Jane  Shore  and  Alicia  in  stays  and  hoops.  We 
have  seen  Miss  Young  act  Zara  incased  in  whalebone,  to  an  Osman  dressed  properly 
enough  as  a  Turk,  while  Nerestan,  a  Christian  knight  in  the  time  of  the  Crusades, 
strutted  in  the  white  uniform  of  the  old  French  guards.  These  incongruities  were 
perhaps  owing  to  the  court  of  Charles  II.  adopting,  after  the  Restoration,  the  French 
regulation  that  players,  being  considered  as  in  the  presence  of  their  sovereign,  should 
wear  the  dress  of  the  court  drawing-room,  while  in  certain  parts  the  old  English 
custom  was  still  retained,  which  preserved  some  attempt  at  dressing  in  character. 
Kemble  reformed  all  these  anachronisms,  and  prosecuted  -with  great  earnestness  a 
plan  of  reforming  the  wardrobe  of  the  stage,  collecting  with  indefatigable  diligence 
from  illuminated  manuscripts,  ancient  pictures,  and  other  satisfactory  authorities, 
whatever  could  be  gleaned  of  ancient  costume  worthy  of  being  adopted  on  the 
theatre.  Rigid  and  pedantic  adherence  to  the  dresses  of  every  age  was  not  possible 
or  to  be  wished  for.  In  the  time  when  Lear  is  supposed  to  have  lived,  the  British 
were  probably  painted  and  tattooed,  and,  to  be  perfectly  accurate,  Edgar  ought  to 
have  stripped  his  shoulders  bare  before  he  assumed  the  character  of  Poor  Tom. 
Hamlet,  too,  if  the  Amlethus  of  the  Saxo  Grammaticus,  should  have  worn  a  bear¬ 
skin  instead  of  his  inky  suit ;  and,  whatever  Macbeth’s  garb  should  have  been,  of 
course  a  philabeg  could  have  formed  no  part  thereof.  But,  as  the  poet,  carrying 
back  his  scene  into  remote  days,  retains  still,  to  a  certain  extent,  the  manners  and 
sentiments  of  his  own  period,  so  it  is  sufficient  for  the  purpose  of  costume  if  every¬ 
thing  be  avoided  which  can  recall  modem  associations,  and  as  much  of  the  antique 
be  assumed  as  vyill  at  once  harmonize  with  the  purpose  of  the  exhibition,  and  in  so 
far  awaken  recollections  of  the  days  of  yore  as  to  give  an  air  of  truth  to  the  scene. 
Every  theatrical  reader  must  recollect  the  additional  force  which  Macklin  gave  to 
the  Jew  at  his  first  appearance  in  that  character,  when  he  came  on  the  stage  dressed 
with  his  red  hat,  peaked  beard,  and  loose  black  gown,  a  dress  which  excited  Pope’s 
curiosity,  who  desired  to  know  in  particular  why  he  wore  a  red  hat.  Macklin  re¬ 
plied  modestly,  because  he  had  read  that  the  Jews  in  Venice  were  obliged  to  wear 
hats  of  that  colour.  ‘  And  pray,  Mr  Macklin,’  said  Pope,  *  do  players  in  general 
‘ take  such  pains  ?  ’  ‘  I  do  not  know,  sir,’  said  Macklin,  *  that  they  do,  but,  as  I  had 

*  staked  my  reputation  on  the  character,  I  was  determined  to  spare  no  trouble  in 
‘getting  at  the  best  information.’  Pope  expressed  himself  much  pleased. 


COSTUME 


447 


During  his  whole  life  Kemble  was  intent  cn  improving,  by  all  means  which  oc¬ 
curred,  the  accuracy  of  the  dresses  he  wore  while  in  character.  Macbeth  was  one 
of  the  first  plays  in  which  the  better  system  of  costume  was  adopted,  and  he  wore 
the  Highland  dress,  as  old  Macklin  had  done  before  him.  Many  years  afterwards 
he  was  delighted  when,  with  our  own  critical  hands,  which  have  plucked  many  a 
plume  besides,  we  divested  his  bonnet  of  sundry  huge  bunches  of  black  feathers, 
which  made  it  look  like  an  undertaker’s  cushion,  and  replaced  them  with  the  single 
broad  quill-feather  of  an  eagle  sloping  across  the  noble  brow ;  he  told  us  afterwards 
that  the  change  was  worth  to  him  three  distinct  rounds  of  applause  as  he  came  for¬ 
ward  in  this  improved  and  more  genuine  head-gear. 

With  the  subject  of  dress,  modes  of  disposing  and  managing  the  scenes  are  nat¬ 
urally  connected,  and  here  also  Kemble,  jealous  of  the  dignity  of  his  art,  called  in 
the  assistance  of  able  artists,  and  improved  in  a  most  wonderful  degree  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  the  stage,  and  thp  general  effect  of  the  piece  in  representation.  Yet,  in  our 
opinion,  the  Muse  of  Painting  should  be  on  the  stage  the  hand-maid,  not  the  rival, 
of  her  sisters  of  the  drama.  Each  art  should  retain  its  due  predominance  within  its 
own  proper  region.  Let  the  scenery  be  as  well  painted,  and  made  as  impressive  as 
a  moderate-sized  stage  will  alford ;  but,  when  the  roof  is  raised  to  give  the  scene- 
painter  room  to  pile  Pelion  upon  Ossa,  when  the  stage  is  widened  that  his  forests 
may  be  extended,  or  deepened  that  his  oceans  may  flow  in  space  apparently  in¬ 
terminable,  the  manager  who  commands  these  decorations  is  leaving  his  proper  duty, 
and  altering  entirely  the  purpose  of  the  stage.  Meantime,  as  the  dresses  ought  to  be 
suited  to  the  time  and  country,  the  landscape  and  architecture  should  be  equally 
coherent.  Means  may  besides  be  discovered,  from  time  to  time,  tending  to  render 
the  scenic  deception  more  effective,  and  the  introduction  of  such  must  be  advan¬ 
tageous,  provided  always,  that  this  part  of  theatrical  business  be  kept  in  due  subordi- 
tion  to  that  which  is  strictly  dramatic. 

Ver?LANCK:  The  talc  of  Lear  and  his  ‘three  daughters  fair’  belongs  to  the 
domain  of  old  romance  and  popular  tradition,  and,  told  in  poem,  ballad,  and  many 
ruder  ways,  had  become  familiar  to  the  English  people.  It  belongs  to  that  unreal 
*  but  most  potently  believed  history  ’  whose  heroes  were  the  household  names  of 
Europe, — Saint  George  and  his  brother-champions,  King  Arthur  and  Charlemagne, 
Don  Belliani,  Roland  and  his  brother- Paladins,  and  many  others,  for  part  of  whom 
time  has  done,  among  those  ‘  who  speak  the  tongue  that  Shakespeare  spoke,’  what  the 
burning  of  Don  Quixote’s  library  was  meant  to  do  for  the  knight.  .  .  .  Now,  who 
that  is  at  all  familiar  with  the  long  train  of  imaginary  history  does  not  know  that  it 
all  had  its  own  customs  and  costume,  as  well  defined  as  the  heathen  mythology  or 
the  Roman  history  ?  All  the  personages  wore  the  arms  and  habiliments,  and  obeyed 
the  ceremonials,  of  mediseval  chivalry,  very  probably  because  these  several  tales  were 
put  into  legendary  or  poetic  form  in  those  days ;  but  whatever  was  the  reason,  it  was 
in  that  garb  alone  that  they  formed  the  popular  literature  of  Europe  in  Shakespeare’s 
time.  It  was  a  costume  well  fitted  for  poetical  purposes,  familiar  in  its  details  to 
popular  understanding,  yet  so  far  beyond  the  habitual  associations  of  readers  as  to 
have  some  tinge  of  antiquity ;  while  (as  the  admirers  of  Ariosto  and  Spenser  well 
know)  it  was  eminently  brilliant  and  picturesque.  Thus,  whether,  like  Chaucer,  the 
poet  laid  his  scene  of  Palamon  and  Arcite  in  Pagan  Athens,  under  Duke  Theseus ; 
or  described,  with  the  nameless  author  of  Morte  d’ Arthur,  the  adventures  of  the 
Knights  of  the  Round  Table:  or  with  Ariosto,  those  of  the  French  Paladins;  or 


448 


APPENDIX 


whether  some  humbler  author  told  in  prose  the  tale  of  Saint  George,  or  the  Seven 
Champions ;  the  whole  was  clothed  in  the  same  costume,  and  the  courts  and  camps 
of  Grecian  emperors,  British  kings,  Pagan  or  Turkish  soldans,  all  pretty  much 
resembled  those  of  Charles  of  Burgundy,  or  Richard  of  England,  as  described  by 
Froissart  and  his  brethren. 

To  have  deviated  from  this  easy,  natural,  and  most  convenient  conventional  cos¬ 
tume  of  fiction,  half  believed  as  history,  for  the  sake  of  stripping  off  old  Lear’s 
civilized  ‘  lendings,’  and  bringing  him  to  the  unsophisticated  state  of  a  painted 
Pictish  king,  would  have  shocked  the  sense  of  probability  in  an  audience  in  Eliza¬ 
beth’s  reign,  as  perhaps  it  would  even  now.  The  positive  objective  truth  of  history 
would  appear  far  less  probable  than  the  received  truth  of  poetry  and  romance,  of  the 
nursery  and  the  stage.  Accordingly,  Shakespeare  painted  Lear  and  his  times  in  the 
attire  in  which  they  were  most  familiar  to  the  imagination  of  his  audience.  .  .  .  Such 
is  our  theory.  ...  To  the  reader  it  clears  away  all  anxiety  about  petty  criticisms  or 
anachronisms,  and  ‘such  small  deer,’  while  it  presents  the  drama  to  his  imagination 
in  the  most  picturesque  and  poetical  attire  of  which  it  is  susceptible.  The  artist,  too, 
may  luxuriate  at  pleasure  in  his  decorations,  whether  for  the  stage  or  for  the  canvas, 
selecting  all  that  he  judges  most  appropriate  to  the  feeling  of  his  scene,  from  the 
treasures  of  the  arts  of  the  Middle  Ages  and  the  pomp  and  splendour  of  chivalry, 
without  having  before  his  eyes  the  dread  of  some  critical  antiquary  to  reprimand  him, 
on  the  authority  of  Pugin  or  Meyrick,  for  encasing  his  knights  in  plate-armour,  or 
erecting  Lear’s  throne  in  a  hall  of  Norman  architecture,  a  thousand  years  or  more 
before  either  Norman  arch,  or  plate-armour,  had  been  seen  in  England. 

E.  \V.  Godwin  ( The  Architecture  and  Costume  of  Shakespeare' s  Plays,  The  Archi¬ 
tect,  28  Nov.  1874) :  The  early  Celtic  period,  or  a  time  at  least  from  100  to  400 
years  before  Christ,  is  the  time  best  fitted  to  the  story  of  Lear.  To  that  early  time 
belongs  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  bronze  implements  in  the  British  remains 
preserved  in  Great  Russell  Street.  The  metals  of  that  age  were  chiefly  gold  and 
bronze,  although  swords  and  daggers  might  possibly  be  of  iron — a  soft  kind,  easily 
bendable.  Of  the  architecture  of  such  a  time  it  is  hardly  possible  to  say  a  word,  for 
much  the  same  reason  that  ‘  the  Spanish  fleet  could  not  be  seen,  because  ’twas  not  in 
sight.’  Stonehenge  would  appear  to  have  been  the  limit  of  their  powers  in  building, 
both  in  design  and  execution ;  their  decoration  consisted  of  dots  and  lines  concentric, 
zigzag,  or  hatched;  everything  was  planned  upon  the  circle — the  temple  and  the 
house  or  hut,  the  shield  and  the  tore.  Of  the  costume  of  such  a  remote  time  we 
know  this  much,  that  it  was  not  of  that  abbreviated  character  that  we  were  once 
asked  to  believe.  From  the  discoveries  of  late  years  we  learn  that  the  early  Celts 
(otherwise  called  Britons,  Irish,  Welsh)  wore  necklets  (tores),  armlets,  bracelets,  and 
brooches  (or  fibulae) ;  that  in  warfare  they  carried  circular  shields,  two-edged  but 
pointless  swords,  spears,  daggers,  javelins,  and  arrows;  that  (for  the  ladies  possibly) 
they  formed  singularly  delicate  gorgets,  or  perhaps  head-tires,  of  gold,  and  imported 
beads  of  amber  and  glass.  The  dresses  were  doubtless  chiefly  made  of  homespun 
wool,  full  and  without  any  shaping  other  than  that  obtained  by  belt  of  gold  or  bronze. 
The  dresses  would  be  probably  sleeveless  and  fastened  by  fibulae.  The  bronze  swords 
were  short,  thirty-one  inches,  including  handle,  being  an  extreme  size.  The  bronze 
circular  shields  vary  in  diameter  from  two  feet,  or  thereabouts,  to  nine  inches.  In 
the  centre  is  a  conical  boss  about  four  or  five  inches  high,  and  between  this  and  the 
margin  the  space  is  relieved  by  circles  of  smaller  bosses  divided  by  concentric  ridges. 


A.  IV  SCHLEGEL 


449 


the  whole  being  of  beaten  woilc  or  repoussl.  It  is  supposed  that  no  helmets  of  an 
age  prior  to  the  Roman  invasion  have  as  yet  been  discovered  in  this  country ;  those 
few  which  have  been  found  in  Germany  are  of  a  plain  conical  form,  quite  near 
enough  for  any  practical  purposes  of  the  stage. 


GERMAN  CRITICISMS 


A.  W.  SCHLEGEL 

(. Lectures  on  Dramatic  Art,  &c.,  x8o8.  Trans,  by  J.  Black,  ii,  204.  London, 
1815.) — As  terror  in  Macbeth  reaches  its  utmost  height,  in  King  Lear  the  science  of 
compassion  is  exhausted.  The  principal  characters  here  are  not  those  who  act,  but 
those  who  suffer.  We  have  not  in  this,  as  in  most  tragedies,  the  picture  of  a  calamity 
in  which  the  sudden  blows  of  fate  seem  still  to  honour  the  head  whom  they  strike,  in 
which  the  loss  is  always  accompanied  by  some  flattering  consolation  in  the  memory 
of  the  former  possession ;  but  a  fall  from  the  highest  elevation  into  the  deepest  abyss 
of  miser}',  where  humanity  is  stripped  of  all  external  and  internal  advantages,  and 
given  up  a  prey  to  naked  helplessness.  The  threefold  dignity  of  a  king,  an  old  man, 
and  a  father  is  dishonoured  by  the  cruel  ingratitude  of  his  unnatural  daughters ;  the 
old  Lear,  who,  out  of  a  foolish  tenderness,  has  given  away  evexything,  is  driven  out 
to  the  world  a  wandering  beggar;  the  childish  imbecility  to  which  he  was  fast 
advancing  changes  into  the  wildest  insanity;  and  when  he  is  saved  from  the  dis¬ 
graceful  destitution  to  which  he  was  abandoned,  it  is  too  late :  the  kind  consolations 
of  filial  care  and  attention  and  true  friendship  are  now  lost  on  him;  his  bodily  and 
mental  powers  are  destroyed  beyond  all  hope  of  recovery,  and  all  that  now  remains 
to  him  of  life  is  the  capability  of  loving  and  suffering  beyond  measure.  What  a 
picture  we  have  in  the  meeting  of  Lear  and  Edgar  in  a  tempestuous  night  and  in  a 
wretched  hovel !  Edgar,  a  youth,  by  the  wicked  arts  of  his  brother  and  his  father’s 
blindness,  has  fallen  as  low  from  the  rank  to  which  his  birth  entitled  him,  as  Lear ; 
and  he  is  reduced  to  assume  the  disguise  of  a  beggar  tormented  by  evil  spirits  as  the 
only  means  of  escaping  pursuit.  The  king’s  Fool,  notwithstanding  the  voluntary 
degradation  which  is  implied  in  his  situation,  is,  after  Kent,  Lear’s  most  faithful 
associate,  his  wisest  counsellor.  This  good-hearted  Fool  clothes  reason  with  the 
livery  of  his  motley  garb;  the  high-born  beggar  acts  the  part  of  insanity;  and  both, 
were  they  even  in  reality  what  they  seem,  would  still  be  enviable  in  comparison  with 
the  king,  who  feels  that  the  violence  of  his  grief  threatens  to  overpower  his  reason. 
The  meeting  of  Edgar  with  the  blinded  Gloster  is  equally  heart-rending ;  nothing 
can  be  more  affecting  than  to  see  the  ejected  son  become  the  father’s  guide,  and  the 
good  angel,  who,  under  the  disguise  of  insanity,  by  an  ingenious  and  pious  fraud, 
38*  2D 


450 


APPENDIX 


saves  him  from  the  horror  and  despair  of  self-murder.  But  who  can  possibly  enu* 
merate  all  the  different  combinations  and  situations  by  which  our  minds  are  stormed 
JbY  the  Poet  ?,■  I  will  only  make  one  observation  respecting  the  structure  of  the  whole. 
The  story  "of  Lear  and  his  daughters  was  left  by  Shakspeare  exactly  as  he  found  it 
in  a  fabulous  tradition,  with  all  the  features  characteristical  of  the  simplicity  of  old 
times.  But  in  that  tradition  there  is  not  the  slightest  trace  of  the  story  of  Gloster 
and  his  sons,  which  was  derived  by  Shakspeare  from  another  source.  The  incorpo¬ 
ration  of  the  two  stories  has  been  censured  as  destructive  of  the  unity  of  action. 
But  whatever  contributes  to  the  intrigue  or  the  dinouement  must  always  possess  unity. 

And  with  what  ingenuity^nd  skill  the  two  main  parts  of  the  composition  are  dove¬ 
tailed  into  one  another  1  The  pity  felt  by  Gloster  for  the  fate  of  Lear  becomes  the 
^ftv^WAvdndr?'naBle5ilfs  son  Edmund  to  effect  his  complete  destruction,  and  affords 
the  outcast  Edgar  an  opportunity  of  being  the  saviour  of  his  father.  On  the  other 
hand,  Edmund  is  active  in  the  cause  of  Regan  and  Goneril,  and  the  criminal  passion 
which  they  both  entertain  for  him  induces  them  to  execute  justice  on  each  other  and 
on  themselves.  The  laws  of  the  drama  have  therefore  been  sufficiently  complied 
with,  but  that  is  the  least.  It  is  the  very  combination  which  constitutes  the  sublime 
beauty  of  the  work.  The  two  cases  resemble  each  other  in  the  main :  an  infatuated 
father  is  blind  towards  his  well-disposed  child,  and  the  unnatural  offspring,  to  whom 
he  gives  the  preference,  requite  him  by  the  destruction  of  his  entire  happiness.  But 
all  the  circumstances  are  so  different  that  these  stories,  while  they  make  an  equal  im¬ 
pression  on  the  heart,  form  a  complete  contrast  for  the  imagination.  Were  Lear 
alone  to  suffer  from  his  daughters,  the  impression  would  be  limited  to  the  powerful 
compassion  felt  by  us  for  his  private  misfortune. 

But  two  such  unheard-of  examples  taking  place  at  the  same  time  have  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  a  great  commotion  in  the  moral  world :  the  picture  becomes  gigantic,  and  fills 
us  with  such  alarm  as  we  should  entertain  at  the  idea  that  the  heavenly  bodies  might 
one  day  fall  out  of  their  regular  orbits.  To  save,  in  some  degree,  the  honour  of  human 
nature,  Shakspeare  never  wishes  that  his  spectators  should  forget  that  the  story  takes 
place  in  a  dreary  and  barbarous  age;  he  lays  particular  stress  on  the  circumstance 
that  the-  Britons  of  that  day  were  still  heathens,  although  he  has  not  made  all  the 
remaining  circumstances  to  coincide  learnedly  with  the  time  which  he  has  chosen. 
From  this  point  of  view  we  must  judge  of  many  coarsenesses  in  expression  and 
manners;  for  instance,  the  immodest  manner  in  which  Gloster  acknowledges  his 
bastard,  Kent’s  quarrel  with  the  Steward,  and,  more  especially,  the  cruelty  personally 
exercised  on  Gloster  by  the  Duke  of  Cornwall.  Even  the  virtue  of  the  honest  Kent 
bears  the  stamp  of  an  iron  age,  in  which  the  good  and  the  bad  display  the  same  un¬ 
governable  strength.  Great  qualities  have  not  been  superfluously  assigned  to  the 
king;  the  Poet  could  command  our  sympathy  for  his  situation  without  concealing 
what  he  had  done  to  bring  himself  into  it.  Lear  is  choleric,  overbearing,  and  almost 
childish  from  age,  when  he  drives  out  his  youngest  daughter  because  she  will  not 
join  in  the  hypocritical  exaggerations  of  her  sisters.  But  he  has  a  warm  and  affec¬ 
tionate  heart,  which  is  susceptible  of  the  most  fervent  gratitude,  and  even  rays  of  a 
high  and  kingly  disposition  burst  forth  from  the  eclipse  of  his  understanding.  Of 
the  heavenly  beauty  of  soul  of  Cordelia,  pronounced  in  so  few  words,  I  will  not  ven¬ 
ture  to  speak ;  she  can  only  be  named  along  with  Antigone.  Her  death  has  been 
thought  too  cruel ;  and  in  England  the  piece  is  so  far.  altered  in  acting  that  she  re¬ 
mains  victorious  and  happy.  I  must  own,  I  cannot  conceive  what  ideas  of  art 
and  dramatic  connection  those  persons  have  who  suppose  that  wc  can.  at  pleasure. 


HORN 


451 


tack  a  double  conclusion  to  a  tragedy;  a  melancholy  one  for  hard-hearted  spectators, 
and  a  merry  one  for  souls  of  a  softer  mould.  After  surviving  so  many  sufferings, 
Lear  can  only  die  in  a  tragical  manner  from  his  grief  for  the  death  of  Cordelia;  and, 
if  he  is  also  to  be  saved,  and  to  pass  the  remainder  of  his  days  in  happiness,  the 
whole  loses  its  signification.  According  to  Shakspeare’s  plan  the  guilty,  it  is  true, 
are  all  punished,  for  wickedness  destroys  itself;  but  the  auxiliary  virtues  are  every¬ 
where  too  late,  or  overmatched  by  the  cunning  activity  of  malice.  The  persons  of 
this  drama  have  only  such  a  faint  belief  in  Providence  as  heathens  may  be  supposed 
to  have,  and  the  Poet  here  wishes  to  show  us,  that  this  belief  requires  a  wider  range 
than  the  dark  pilgrimage  on  earth  to  be  established  in  its  utmost  extent. 


FRANZ  HORN 

(Shakspeare's  Schauspiele  erlautert,  1823.  i,  185.) — To  this  arbitrary  heathen  king 
comes  at  last  the  idea  of  resolving  to  reign  no  longer,  and  yet  to  remain  in  a  manner 
still  king.  He  has  no  pleasure  any  longer  in  attending  to  affairs.  He  attributes  it 
to  old  age  that  he  feels  thus,  but,  nevertheless,  he  will  continue  invested  with  royal 
dignity,  with  the  splendor  of  royalty.  .  .  .  Herein  is  his  great  error,  and  hence  a  great 
sin;  for,  except  in  rare  cases,  when  a  higher  will  makes  itself  manifest,  man  is 
bound  never  to  desert  his  post  in  the  State — it  is  not  accident  that  has  placed  him 
there.  But  what  follows  when  a  king,  from  the  impulse  of  a  whim  or  some  error, 
resigns  his  great  office  before  God  calls  him  to  lay  it  down  ?  History  instances, 
and  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  mention,  Charles  V.  and  Christina  of  Sweden. 

It  is  entirely  in  character  with  the  fantastic  character  of  Lear,  that  he  should  re¬ 
solve  to  divide  his  kingdom  according  to  the  measure  of  love  which  he  receives ; 
and,  as  he  would  settle  the  matter  at  once,  the  measure  must  be  determined  bywords. 
The  censorious,  as  some  critics  have  recently  done,  pronounce  him  offhand  an  old 
fool.  We  are  not  disposed  to  judge  him  harshly,  but,  without  being  too  tender,  we 
may  charge  him  with  a  great  error.  There  is  a  love  with  words,  and  a  love  without 
words,  neither  of  which  can  take  the  place  of  genuine  love.  For  this,  Lear  cares 
nothing,  and,  because  he  cares  nothing  for  it,  he  commits  a  great  sin  against  Cor¬ 
delia,  and  almost  as  great  a  sin  against  Kent. 

[P.  191.]  Lear,  in  his  agony,  preserves  his  sense  of  justice  perfectly.  It  is  only 
what  his  daughters  have  done  to  him  that  afflicts  him,  not  the  elements  that  rage 
against  his  grey  hairs.  *  I  blame  you  not,  I  never  gave  you  kingdoms.’  It  is  only 
pure  sympathy  which  Nature  manifests  in  her  wild  uproar.  She  alone  stands  by 
him,  when  nearly  all  human  sympathy  fails  him. .  .  .  Even  the  madness  which  comes 
over  the  old  man  is  to  be  considered,  in  a  sense,  as  the  sympathy  of  Nature,  and  it 
is  not  wholly  without  solace,  as  it  not  only  does  not  overcome,  but  rather  exalts, 
Lear’s  sense  of  royalty.  *  Ay,  every  inch  a  king.’  With  this  feeling  he  still  wears 
the  crown,  though  invisibly. 

[P.  193.]  It  would  be  an  interesting  subject  for  a  prize  essay  which  of  the  two 
is  the  worse,  Regan  or  Goneril.  I  confess,  I  am  not  able  to  answer  the  question 
satisfactorily.  I  believe  Shakspeare  meant  to  leave  it  a  question.  It  may  be  said 
that  Goneril,  as  she  was  the  first  to  ill-treat  her  father,  was  the  worse ;  but  it  may  be 
justly  replied,  that  Regan  was  still  worse,  inasmuch  as  the  sight  of  the  tortured  old 
man,  so  far  from  moving  her,  only  causes  her  to  torture  him  anew,  so  that  nothing 
is  left  but  madness,  which,  as  we  have  already  intimated,  can  be  regarded  as 
only  a  relief.  On  the  whole,  the  Fool  was  in  the  right  when  he  said  that  both 


452 


APPENDIX 


were  of  a  height,  and  that  one  tasted  as  much  like  the  other  as  a  crab  does  to 
a  crab.  ’ 

[P.  196.]  But  why  should  Cordelia  suffer  defeat?  Is  it  not  almost  too  painful 
to  witness  the  failure  of  the  plan  for  the  protection  of  her  father,  and  for  the  punish¬ 
ment  of  her  sisters  ?  And  is  it  not  a  very  natural  feeling  that  has  led  some  English 
and  German  critics  to  desire  for  the  piece,  or  rather  to  give  it,  a  different  ending? 

I  answer,  it  is  reasonable  that  we  should  wish  that  virtue  should  he  always  victo¬ 
rious;  but  it  is  in  accordance  neither  with  history  nor  ethics  always  to  give  to  virtue 
the  victory.  The  world,  with  all  *  its  powers,’  is,  upon  its  own  native  soil,  the  earth, 
stronger  and  more  powerful  than  the  soft-hearted  imagine,  for  it  is  every  moment 
drawing  new  strength  from  its  mother,  the  earth,  and  it  is  just  on  this  account  that 
*  the  world  with  all  its  powers  ’  is  to  be  conquered  only  in  the  sphere  in  which  it 
does  not  reign  (the  ancients  would  say  *  in  the  air’).  Is  the  poet  then  to  be  false  to 
this  eternal  law,  as  history  proclaims  it,  in  order  to  gratify  a  praiseworthy,  yet  false, 
feeling?  Was  he  to  allow  England  to  be  conquered  by  France,  so  that  the  Prince 
of  France  should  ascend  the  British  throne  with  his  wife  Cordelia?  Or  was  he 
bound  to  give  us  the  pleasure  of  seeing  the  aged  Lear  restored  to  health,  and  again 
wielding  the  sceptre  ? 

This  is  indeed  what  people  have  demanded,  and,  in  truth,  it  would  have  been, 
easy  for  the  poet  to  gratify  us  on  this  point;  and  after  this  fashion  perhaps:  the 
guilty  all  to  fall  in  the  fight,  the  physician  to  give  us  the  assurance  that  Lear’s  good 
constitution  is  entirely  sound  again ;  Lear,  in  order  not  to  convict  the  Doctor  of 
lying,  to  publish  certain  good  laws,  the  trumpets  to  sound,  and  the  curtain  to  fall. 
As  we  have  said,  this  ending,  or  something  like  it,  would  have  been  infinitely  easy 
to  the  poet — if  only  he  were  not  a  poet.  This  circumstance  alone  prevented  him. 

How  could  we  have  put  faith  in  him  had  he  so  carried  out  the  piece  ?  There  are 
sufferings  after  which  the  heart  can  never  again  be  wholly  sound,  nor  feel  itself  able 
to  enjoy  life.  Whoever  carries  this  mark  of  misfortune  on  his  brow  and  in  his  heart 
will  only,  with  extreme  trouble,  find  strength  for  the  duties  of  life ;  to  these  he  is 
bound,  and  no  misfortune  can  absolve  him  from  their  obligation;  but  the  sooner  God 
calls  him  away,  the  sweeter  is  it  for  him,  and  it  were  a  sinful  weakness  on  our  part 
not  to  acquiesce  in  his  quiet  despair.  Thus  Lear.  Whoever  has  undergone  what 
he  underwent  cannot  suffer  death ;  he  welcomes  it. 

[P-  199.]  Even  the  poorest  and  humblest  servant  still  has  a  respectable  name,  but 
Kent  takes  no  such  title;  he  calls  himself  Caius.  Of  all  names,  this  is  the  meanest; 
it  is  hardly  a  name,  as  in  all  schools,  in  Manuals  of  Logic,  Grammars,  &c.  it  stands  as 
a  makeshift  for  all  names.  Just  on  this  account,  it  is  here  excellently  chosen,  for 
Kent  who,  as  a  count  and  knight,  is  banished,  will  be  nothing  now,  and  believes 
there  is  no  need  that  he  should  be  anything  else  than  a  mere  helper  of  the  king,  and, 
by  this  pure  self-abnegation,  he  becomes  the  most  faithful  friend  of  the  miserable  king. 

[P.  216.]  In  Shakspeare’s  rich  gallery  of  fools,  the  Fool  in  Lear  is  the  grandest 
and  most  tragic.  He  has  more  sense  than  all  the  rest  of  the  men  in  the  play  put 
together.  His  disposition  is  truly  noble  and  loveable.  No  one  can  see  more  clearly 
the  great  weakness  of  the  old  king,  fast  growing  childish,  than  he,  but  no  one  can 
cherish  towards  him  a  more  faithful  love.  Wonder  not  at  the  many  cutting  and 
bitter  speeches  that  he  makes ;  he  must  say  them,  for  it  is  his  office.  We  may  be 
sure  that  he,  the  wise  fool,  knows  that,  in  such  terrible  sufferings  as  those  of  the  old 
king,  a  momentary  annoyance  is  a  sort  of  relief;  at  all  events,  far  more  easily  borne 
than  a  state  of  constant  depression. 


SCHICK—  ULRICI 


453 


ERNEST  SCHICK 

{Shakespear3 s  King  Lear,  1833,  p.  203.) — We  have  yet  a  few  words  to  say  of  a 
chief  person  of  the  piece,  which,  because  this  person  stands  by  himself,  a  single 
specimen  of  the  kind,  we  have  kept  for  the  last ;  we  mean  the  Fool.  His  appearance 
in  this  tragedy  is  very  significant,  as  the  tragic  effect  is  heightened  in  the  greatest  de¬ 
gree  by  his  humour  and  the  sharpness  of  his  v/it.  No  one  but  the  Fool  dared  venture 
to  turn  Lear’s  attention  to  his  great  folly  (the  resignation  of  his  power  in  his  life¬ 
time).  It  is  of  the  greatest  importance  that  this  unwise  proceeding  of  the  king  should 
be  directly  pointed  at,  as  with  the  finger  of  another,  and  it  is  made  ever  plainer  to 
him  how  foolishly,  and,  in  relation  to  Cordelia,  how  unjustly  he  has  acted.  But  the 
shrewd  Fool  knew  how  to  clothe  his  mockeries  so  skilfully,  and  to  produce  them  so 
opportunely,  that,  although  they  are  none  the  less  cutting,  their  design  is  not  so 
prominent,  and  the  king  takes  them  because  they  come  from  the  Fool,  who  is  bound 
to  speak  truth,  and  to  whom  Lear  is  attached,  even  as  the  Fool,  with  the  most  de¬ 
voted  love,  is  attached  to  Lear.  But  it  is  not  only  his  wit,  never  running  dry,  although 
indeed  alloyed  by  many  a  platitude,  nor  his  invariable  good  humor  and  his  clear 
understanding,  by  which  the  Fool  commands  our  sympathy,  but,  in  an  almost  still 
higher  degree,  it  is  the  loveableness  of  his  character  that  interests  us.  He  has  pined 
away — as  we  learn  before  he  appears — after  the  youngest  of  the  princesses  has  gone 
to  France,  and  has  sorrowed  the  more  for  what  the  knight  who  relates  his  condition 
cannot  mention  to  the  king,  namely,  the  unhappy  circumstances  under  which  the  de¬ 
parture  of  Cordelia  has  taken  place.  And  how  faithfully  does  he  cling  to  the  king 
in  that  fearful  night,  and,  by  forcing  himself  to  appear  merrier  than  he  possibly  could 
be  in  that  condition,  try  in  every  Way  to  calm  the  wild  excitement  of  his  master,  and 
lure  him  from  his  heartrending,  maddening  pain  at  the  shameful  ingratitude  of  his 
degenerate  daughters.  But  the  more  the  Fool  is  saddened  at  the  sight  of  Lear’s 
failing  mind,  the  fewer  are  his  words,  until  at  last  the  Poet,  and  with  perfect  truth, 
lets  him  disappear  from  the  scene,  as  his  later  appearance  would  be  without  signifi¬ 
cance,  and  have  a  disturbing  effect.  But  that  we  do  not  learn  what  becomes  of  him 
certainly  seems  strange,  but  it  is  not  hard  to  explain  it.  It  remained  only  for  Lear 
to  inquire  for  him,  or,  in  one  way  or  another,  to  make  mention  of  him,  but  Lear  is 
subsequently  so  entirely  engrossed  with  his  own  fortunes  and  Cordelia’s,  and  so,  as  it 
were,  buried  in  them,  that  he  could  not  turn  his  thoughts  to  anything  which  was  re¬ 
mote  from  these  fortunes.  It  is  highly  probable  that  the  Fool’s  heart  was  broken  by 
trouble  and  grief  at  Lear’s  cruel  fate. 


ULRICI 

[Shakespeare' s  dramatis  eke  Kunst,  1839.  Trans,  by  L.  Dora  Schmitz.  London, 
1876,  vol.  i,  p.433.) — In  King  Lear,  love  is  once  more  made  the  fundamental 
motive  of  human  life,  but  it  is  again  a  different,  a  new  manifestation  of  the  divine 
power;  it  is  the  third  and  last  main  form  in  which  love  directly  and  actively  influ¬ 
ences  the  development  of  human  existence,  and  in  which  it  is  revealed  as  the  first 
and  most  natural  bond  of  the  great  organism  of  humanity,  as  the  basis  and  funda¬ 
mental  condition  of  all  mental  and  moral  culture.  In  Romeo  and  Juliet  it  is  the 
devotion  of  betrothed  persons  and  the  passionate  enthusiasm  of  youthful  love;  in 
Othello  it  is  the  manly  strength  and  fulness  of  conjugal  affection,  esteem,  and  fidelity; 
in  King  Lear,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  parental  love  and  filial  reverence  that  are 
regarded  as  the  centre  of  all  human  relations.  Here  the  family  bond,  in  its  deep, 


454 


APPENDIX 


historical  significance,  is  the  ground  upon  which  the  Poet  takes  his  stand.  To  repre* 
sent  the  aspect  of  life,  presented  by  this  point  of  view  in  a  poetico-dramatic  form, 
and  from  within  the  tragic  conceptions  of  life,  is  the  intention,  the  leading  thought, 
the  fundamental  idea  of  the  tragedy 

The  high  noonday  sun  of  love  has  sunk  into  the  still  glowing  but  fast-fading  tints 
of  evening.  Lear,  in  mind  and  body,  is  still  a  vigorous  old  man,  but  nevertheless 
an  old  man,  and  one  who  has  not  yet  overcome  the  failings  of  his  nature — obstinacy 
and  love  of  dominion,  quickness  of  temper,  and  want  of  consideration ;  his  heart 
alone  has  retained  the  fulness  and  freshness  of  youth.  Therefore  the  rich  portion 
of  love  which  has  fallen  to  his  lot  he  lavishes  wholly  upon  his  children ;  he  gives 
them  his  all,  hoping  to  find,  in  their  love  and  gratitude,  rest  from  the  storms,  anxieties, 
and  troubles  of  life.  But  this  love,  which  leads  him  to  forget  his  position  as  king 
in  that  of  the  father,  and  to  neglect  all  other  duties  in  his  anxieties  as  head  of  the 
family,  which  confounds  the  inward  inclination  with  the  outward  affection — not 
merely  erring  momentarily,  but  in  its  obstinacy  proving  itself  so  prejudiced  that 
Kent’s  endeavour  to  bring  it  to  a  true  knowledge  of  itself  fails  completely  in  spite 
of  the  pertinacity  with  which  he  urges  it, — this  love,  as  in  Othello  and  Romeo  and 
Juliet,  is  here  also  involved  in  one-sidedness  and  contradiction.  Here,  too,  it  is  of 
a  passionate  character,  devoid  of  all  self-control,  which  is  manifested  in  Lear’s  over- 
hasty  banishment  of  Cordelia  and  Kent.  Nay,  his  love  is  not  even  altogether  true 
in  itself,  and  for  this  very  reason  forms  a  wrong  estimate  of  truth,  and  rejects  genuine 
pure  love  and  exchanges  it  for  semblance,  falsehood,  and  hypocrisy.  In  short,  love 
here,  at  the  same  time,  falls  into  contradiction  with  itself.  The  tragic  conflict  has 
increased,  and  from  having  been  confined  to  external  circumstances,  has  now  sunk 
into  the  deepest  depths  of  the  heart;  the  question  in  the  present  case  does  not  (as  in 
Othello  and  Romeo  and  Juliet )  turn  merely  upon  the  contradiction  between  the 
inward  justification  of  their  loves  and  the  right  of  parents  which  stands  externally 
opposed  to  it ;  it  does  not  turn  merely  upon  the  conflict  into  which  Lear  falls  by  fol¬ 
lowing  the  beautiful  and  perfectly  justified  impulse  of  his  paternal  heart — thus  neglect 
ing  his  duties  as  king,  whereby  the  right  of  his  paternal  love  becomes  a  wrong  to  his 
kingdom — but  in  Lear’s  very  paternal  love,  the  substance  stands  in  contradiction 
with  the  form,  the  father’s  right  with  the  right  of  the  lover.  As  father,  as  head  of 
the  family,  whose  will  determines  the  outward  life  of  the  children,  in  what  they  do 
or  leave  undone,  Lear  cannot  only  have  demanded,  but,  in  accordance  with  his 
nature,  must  even  have  imperiously  and  inconsiderately  required,  that  his  love  should 
be  returned  by  his  children’s  affection,  even  in  the  external  acts  of  obedience  and 
submission.  However,  Lear  makes  this  demand  not  as  a  father,  but  as  a  lover ;  he 
confounds  the  external,  obligatory,  legal  relation  subsisting  between  a  father  and 
children  with  the  internal,  free,  ethical  relations  of  lovers,  whose  rights  consist  in 
the  very  fact  that  all  outward  rights  and  duties  cease  between  them.  He  transfers 
the  one  relation  to  the  other,  and  thereby  places  paternal  and  filial  love  in  contradic¬ 
tion  to  one  another,  inasmuch  as  the  child  cannot  perform  what  perhaps  it  ought  and 
must  do,  because  it  is  not  addressed  to  its  filial  obedience,  but  to  its  free  love,  and 
thus  opposes  it.  For  love,  in  accordance  with  its  very  nature,  lies  in  the  deepest 
depths  and  freedom  of  the  mind;  it  is  itself  this  very  depth  and  freedom  expressed 
by  communion  of  life,  in  which  each  seeks  his  inmost  self  and  its  ideal  complement 
in  that  of  another.  The  outward  deed  in  itself  is,  therefore,  of  no  consequence  to 
it ,  as  love,  it  is  no  outward  action,  but  an  inward,  independent,  and  a  self-sufficient 
life,  which,  owing  to  its  very  nature,  expresses  itself  only  in  feelings  and  impulses. 


ULRICI 


455 


It  may,  therefore,  be  that  love  is  the  motive  of  actions,  and  that  it  speaks  and  acts 
itself,  but  it  is  not  increased  by  this  outward  action ;  this  outwardness  is,  in  itself,  of 
no  value  to  it,  but  is  the  perfectly  accidental,  indifferent,  unintentional  expression  of 
its  want  to  seek  its  own  happiness  in  the  happiness  of  the  beloved.  Hence  it  does 
not  act  for  its  own  sake,  in  order  to  show  and  to  prove  itself,  but  purely  for  the 
sake  of  the  beloved  object.  For  the  same  reason,  also,  it  does  not  demand  of  the 
beloved  any  outward  action,  any  palpable  proof  of  love,  but  is  merely  concerned 
about  the  communion  of  souls,  about  their  union  in  life  and  action.  Nay,  in  its  full 
strength  and  undimmed  purity — such  as  we  see  in  Cordelia,  after  her  banishment— 
it  does  not  even  demand  love  in  return,  but  rejoices  in  it  only  when  it  is  a  free  gift. 

Tfjis  true  form  of  love  is,  indeed,  active  in  Lear;  the  substance  is  there,  but  it 
stands  in  contradiction  with  its  form,  and  thereby  with  itself.  In  consequence  of  his 
confounding  filial  piety  with  free  filial  love,  Lear  not  merely  demands  the  love  of  his 
children  as  his  due  righ't,  but  also  demands  its  outward  confirmation  in  word  and' 
deed,  corresponding  with  the  way  and  manner  in  which  his  own  love  manifests 
itself.  He  values  love  according  to  its  outward  actions,  and  hence  forms  a  wrong 
estimate  of  its  entirely  inward  nature,  which,  in  fact,  cannot  be  estimated.  But  this 
apparent  fault  of  the  understanding,  this  confusion  of  ideas,  is,  at  the  same  time,  the 
result  of  a  defect  of  the  heart  in  wishing  not  only  to  be  loved,  but  also  to  appear  to 
be  loved,  in  order  that  in  the  measure  of  his  children’s  love,  and  in  the  greatness  of 
their  affection,  he  may,  as  in  a  mirror,  behold  and  enjoy  the  greatness  and  worth  of 
his  own  person.  His  love,  consequently,  is  not  pure  and  unconditional,  for  it  is  con* 
ferred  conditionally  only;  that  is,  on  condition  of  love  in  return  and  its  outward 
testimony ;  it  is  not  free  and  spontaneous,  for  it  is  not  merely  a  direct  feeling,  but  is 
reflected  in  itself,  places  the  value  on  itself.  Thus  it  becomes  either  weakly,  sensi¬ 
tive  to  every  rude  touch,  and  unable  to  bear  frankness  and  truth,  or  it  becomes  pre¬ 
tentious  ;  and  as  a  virtue  becomes  a  vice  through  pride  of  virtue,  so  Lear’s  love, 
owing  to  its  demands,  is,  at  the  same  time,  egotism ;  in  giving  itself  up,  it  at  the 
same  time  withholds  itself ;  thirsting  for  and  greedy  of  love,  it  is,  at  the  same  time, 
selfish  and  filled  with  hate.  This  inner  contradiction,  this  unconscious  and  yet 
actual  cause  of  the  discord  in  the  nature  of  Lear’s  paternal  love,  is  the  ethical  foun¬ 
dation  upon  which  the  action  is  raised.  The  object  and  aim  of  the  dramatic  action 
is  to  solve  this  contradiction,  to  conciliate  the  old  man’s  love  with  itself,  to  purify  and 
to  restore  to  its  disturbed  state  as  a  father  and  king,  in  an  ideal  form. 

A  firm,  a  sincerely  affectionate  family  bond,  embracing  equally  all  members,  is  a 
matter  of  impossibility  with  such  a  species  of  paternal  love.  A  love  like  this,  which 
demands  love  and  external  proofs  of  love,  calls  for  a  contradiction  in  love  on  the  other 
side,  while  it  bears  and  fosters  a  contradiction  within  itself.  In  its  selfishness  it  either 
produces  egotism,  and,  in  its  untruth,  calls  forth  hypocrisy  and  sanctimoniousness,  or 
it  drives  the  true  love  on  the  other  side  back  into  its  inmost  self,  and  leads  it  to  resist 
all  external  proofs,  in  sharp  opposition  to  the  false  and  unreal  love.  The  contradic¬ 
tion  in  Lear’s  paternal  love,  therefore,  produces  in  his  children  also  an  external  sep¬ 
aration  ;  in  Regan  and  Goneril  we  find  selfishness  and  falsehood,  in  Cordelia  a  pure, 
frank,  sincere,  but  silent  and  retiring  love,  sharply  and  distinctly  prominent.  Thus 
Lear’s  paternal  love,  in  place  of  calling  forth  the  uniting  bond  of  family  love,  rather 
itself  produces  the  discord.  The  relation  between  father  and  daughters  is  not  broken 
for  the  first  time  on  the  occasion  of  the  division  of  the  kingdom ;  it  had  already  been 
internally  destroyed  by  Lear’s  own  conduct,  by  the  peculiar  nature  of  his  love ;  it  is 
he  who  has  not  fastened  the  bond  in  its  right  place,  it  is  tied  merely  by  external  i e- 


456 


APPENDIX 


lations  and  considerations;  when  these  break  down  it  unavoidably  falls  to  pieces. 
This  not  only  points  to,  but  actually  determines,  the  tragic  fate  of  the  hero  and  the 
complication  of  the  main  action,  for  all  that  follows  is  but  the  necessary  consequence 
of  the  destruction  of  the  family  bond.  Thereby,  however,  Lear  himself  appears  the 
first  cause  of  the  whole  tragic  complication;  he  himself  is  to  blame  for  his  children’s 
doings  and  sufferings ;  he  falls  owing  to  the  one-sidedness,  the  errors  and  contradic¬ 
tions,  in  his  own  loving  heart. 

[P.  440.]  Lear  and  Gloster  must  be  represented  infinitely  more  as  sinned  against 
than  sinning,  so  that  the  spectator  may  clearly  perceive  the  terrible,  but  infallible, 
truth,  that  it  is  the  nature  of  evil  to  spring  up  to  an  incalculable  magnitude,  like  rank 
weeds  from  small  seeds,  and  that  it  is  not  so  much  the  crime  itself  as  the  cause  of  the 
crime  that  is  the  chief  fault  of  evil ;  moreover,  that  this  cause  invariably  proceeds 
more  especially  from  a  want  of  moral  firmness  and  a  wrong  state  of  family  life. 

[P.  446.]  But  this  murder  of  Cordelia — -this  veiled  angelic  form,  with  the  tender 
beauty  of  her  loving,  maidenly  soul,  and  yet  so  manly  in  her  resolution  and  self- 
reliance,  with  her  deep,  peaceful  heart  which  is  so  strong  and  pure  in  feeling,  with 
her  silent  love  and  self-denial,  with  her  heroic  royalty — does  her  death  not  seem  like 
that  of  an  innocent  victim,  and,  though  not  without  a  motive,  does  it  not,  however, 
appear  unreasonable  and  devoid  of  all  internal  necessity  ?  It  certainly  does  seem 
so ;  and  yet,  when  more  carefully  examined,  it  is  evident  that  Cordelia  did  not,  from 
the  beginning,  stand  upon  that  height  of  pure  love  and  devotion,  of  self-control  and 
self-denial,  to  which  she  subsequently  rises.  She,  too,  like  all  Shakspeare’s  cha¬ 
racters,  is  not  a  pure,  ideal  form,  but  undergoes  an  inner  development,  a  process  of 
purification.  Cordelia  has  inherited  something  of  her  father’s  hasty  temperament, 
of  his  pride  and  self-will.  Shocked  at  the  hypocrisy  and  dissimulation  of  her  sisters, 
too  proud  even  to  endure  the  semblance  of  it,  as  if  she  too  wanted  to  win  favour 
and  interest  by  similar  flattering  speeches  and  declarations  of  love  (by  ‘  such  a  tongue 
*  that  I  am  glad  I  have  not,  though  not  to  have  it  hath  lost  me  in  your  liking  ’),  she, 
in  the  excitement  of  the  moment,  meets  her  father  with  undutiful  defiance,  and  an¬ 
swers  his  loving  questions  with  undeniable  harshness  and  abruptness,  in  place  of 
affectionately  humouring  his  weakness.  This  she  was  not  justified  in  doing,  even 
though  she  did  not  understand  his  behaviour,  and  thought  his  conduct  foolish.  She 
is  as  well  aware  of  the  violence,  the  impetuosity  and  domineering  spirit  of  her 
father’s  nature,  as  Goneril,  and  yet  she  continues,  regardless  of  his  repeated  entreaties 
to  consider  what  she  is  saying,  to  reply  in  her  obviously  offensive  and  provoking 
manner,  and  finally  to  give  an  explanation  which  could  not  but  irritate  him  even 
more,  as  it  contained  a  distinct  reproach  against  himself  and  his  demands.  What 
she  must  have  expected,  must  have  foreseen,  occurs :  Lear  bursts  out  into  a  fit  of 
rage;  she  does  nothing  to  check  it,  to  calm  it;  she  lets  its  full  force  fall  upon  her. 
By  this,  however,  she  draws  upon  her  own  head  a  share  of  the  great  misery  which 
must  follow  upon  her  being  disinherited,  and  which,  with  some  little  thoughtfulness, 
she  might  have  foreseen ;  nay,  to  a  certain  extent,  she  is  chiefly  to  blame  for  the 
whole  of  the  terrible  catastrophe ;  it  could  not  possibly  have  happened  had  she  not 
been  disinherited  and  banished.  By  her  own  fault,  therefore,  she  has  become  en¬ 
tangled  in  the  tragic  fate  which  is  hanging  over  her  father’s  house;  she  herself 
called  it  forth,  and  has,  accordingly,  also  to  fall  with  it.  Her  transgression,  when 
compared  with  the  misdeeds  and  crimes  of  those  around  her,  does  indeed  appear 
next  to  nothing;  she  has  certainly  atoned  for  it  by  the  tenderest  love  and  devotion 
with  which  she  hurries  to  the  assistance  of  her  aged  father,  and  by  which  she  saves. 


RAPP—GER  VINES 


45  7 


tends,  and  cures  him.  But  it  was  she  who  unfettered  the  power  of  evil,  and,  con¬ 
sequently,  she  too  is  drawn  along  by  it  amid  the  general  destruction.  And  yet  hot 
tragic  fate  does  not  appear  at  all  in  proportion  with  the  degree  of  her  wrong-doing. 
But  who  will  blame  the  Poet  for  being  of  the  opinion,  that  it  is  a  nobler  fate  to  suffer 
death  to  save  a  father  than  to  live  in  the  remembrance  of  the  horrors  which  have 
fallen  upon  her  home,  and  for  which  she  has  been  partly  to  blame  ?  Or  for  his 
having  referred  the  solution  of  the  incongruity  between  the  wrong-doing  and  the 
consequent  evil — an  incongruity  which  in  this  world  so  frequently  remains  unsolved 
—to  a  future  state  of  existence;  and  for  having  considered  such  a  death  as  Cor¬ 
delia’s,  not  as  a  misfortune,  but  as  the  mere  mode  of  transition  to  a  better  existence  ? 

[P.  449.]  It  may  be  aslced  why  the  Fool  and  his  humour  are,  in  this  tragedy, 
placed  so  decidedly  and  so  prominently  in  the  foreground.  ...  It  is  evident,  that 
Lear’s  insanity  is  partly  occasioned  by  the  strange,  fantastic  ideas  with  which  the 
Fool  constantly  keeps  lashing  the  king’s  folly;  with  these  Edgar’s  assumed  madness 
co-operates  even  more  effectually. 

MORITZ  RAPP 

( Shaksperfs  Schauspicle ,  Einleitung.  Stuttgart,  1843,  p.  7.) — What  Lear  has  in 
common  with  Othello  is  the  soul  of  the  Poet,  dark,  melancholy,  deeply  wounded, 
well-nigh  shattered  by  the  world;  only  here,  in  Lear ,  still  more  than  in  Othello , 
has  he  concentrated  in  his  work,  painted  in  burning  colors,  all  the  bitterness  which 
the  depravity  of  human  nature  must  generate  in  a  sensitive  heart.  The  Poet  had 
daughters ;  that  he  had,  perhaps,  similar  experiences  may  be  supposed ;  divested  of 
the  historical  costume,  the  features  of  Lear  look  out  upon  us  with  the  naturalness 
of  ordinary  life,  so  that  we  seem  to  see  an  unhappy  citizen  of  the  year  1600 
wrestling  with  madness  rather  than  an  old  English  king,  much  as  Lear  insists  upon 
his  regal  dignity.  Here  is  the  charm  which  the  poem  has  for  the  great  public : 
Lear  suffers  from  the  domestic  cross  which  is  never  wholly  absent  in  any  single 
family.  It  needs  but  a  small  quantity  of  hypochondria  to  magnify  a  situation  of 
small  occasions  into  such  giant  proportions.  In  this  view,  the  poem  may  be  styled 
the  poetry  or  the  tragedy  of  the  choleric  temperament,  as  Plamlet  is  of  the  melan¬ 
cholic,  and  Romeo  of  the  sanguine  nature.  In  Lear  all  is  precipitous,  in  wild 
haste,  thundering  on,  and  this  is  the  case  even  in  tire  subordinate  parts. 


GERVXNUS 

(. Shakespeare ,  1849,  Fourth  edition,  ii,  1S7.  Leipzig,  1872.) — The  rupture  of  these 
family  relations  is,  in  a  manner,  the  central  point  of  this  tragedy,  and,  at  first  sight, 
one  is  prompted  to  regard  as  its  ruling  thought  the  representation  of  filial  ingratitude. 
But,  in  truth,  the  idea  of  this  work  is  far  more  comprehensive,  and  these  domestic 
conflicts  are  rather  the  body  than  the  soul  of  the  play.  But  they  add  to  the  horror 
of  the  subject;  the  like  condition  of  things  among  strangers  would  not  have  had 
equal  power.  These  troubles,  so  heaped  together,  so  gathered  all  into  the  bosom  of 
the  closest  of  kindred,  represent,  as  Schlegel  says,  ‘a  great  insurrection  in  the  moral 
‘world;  the  picture  is  gigantic,  and  the  horror  it  awakens  is  kin  to  that  which 
*  would  be  felt  were  the  heavenly  bodies  to  rush  away  from  their  appointed  courses.’ 

If  we  are  right  in  saying,  that  to  depict  the  shock  of  mighty  passions  contending 
against  the  natural  and  moral  boundaries  of  humanity  is  the  special  task  of  tragedy, 
39 


45  3 


APPENDIX 


then  this  task,  in  the  piece  before  us,  appears,  as  it  were,  generalized ;  while  other 
tragedies  treat  of  single  passions,  this  tragedy  deals  with  passion  in  general,  so  tliat 
the  thoughtful  reader  must  feel  more  or  less  deeply  that  it  may  be  styled  the  tragedy 
par  excellence.  In  no  other  tragedy,  in  which  there  are  so  many  characters,  are 
they  all  equally  given  over  to  the  most  violent  emotions. 

[P.  191.3  At  first  sight  no  difference  is  discernible  between  the  two  sisters  (‘as  like 
‘as  a  crab  is  to  a  crab,’  says  the  Fool) ;  upon  a  closer  view  it  is  surprising  what  a 
broad  and  clearly-defined  contrast  there  is  between  them.  The  elder,  Goneril,  with 
the  wolfish  visage  and  the  dark  frontlet  of  ill-humour,  is  a  masculine  woman,  full  of 
purposes  and  intrigues  of  her  own,  whilst  Regan  seems  more  womanly,  under  the 
lead  of  Goneril,  more  passive,  more  dependent.  Goneril’s  boundlessly  ‘  unbordered  ' 
nature,  rendering  her  a  true  offspring  of  that  terrible  age,  shows  itself  in  bloody  under, 
takings  bred  in  her  own  brain,  while  Regan’s  evil  nature  is  seen  in  her  urging  on  the 
atrocities  of  others,  as  when  Kent  is  set  in  the  stocks  and  Gloster’s  eyes  are  put  out. 
The  worse  of  the  two  is  united  to  a  noble  gentleman  (Albany),  whom  she  reviles  as 
‘  a  moral  fool,’  and  the  mildness  and  repose  of  whose  character  seem  to  her  ‘  milky 
‘  gentleness,’  and  whose  quiet  power  and  resolute  manliness  she  is  only  at  a  later 
period  aware  of.  The  better  sister  has  the  worse  husband,  whose  fierce  temperament 
tolerates  no  opposition  and  no  remonstrance.  Goneril,  at  the  first,  lords  it  over  her 
husband,  who  recognizes  her  foresight,  and  yields  to  her  wild  temper,  so  long  as  he 
does  not  understand  her;  she  pursues  her  own  way,  hardly  listens  to  him,  scarcely 
deigning  him  worthy  of  an  answer;  while  Regan  is  submissive  to  the  sullen  and 
violent  Cornwall,  who  is  resolute  and  immoveable  in  his  purposes.  At  the  very  first 
(sc.  i)  Goneril  appears  as  the  prime  mover,  and  Regan  as  her  echo.  She  it  is  who 
subsequently  puts  restraints  upon  the  king,  she  is  the  first  to  treat  him  with  disrespect, 
to  halve  and  dismiss  his  attendants,  while  Regan  shows  some  lingering  awe  of  him. 
But  she  is  more  afraid  of  her  sister  than  her  father,  and  suffers  her  father’s  messenger 
rather  than  her  sister’s  servant  to-be  ill-treated.  Pier  sister  knows  her  weakness;  she 
docs  not  think  it  sufficient  to  write;  she  goes  to  her  and  goes  after  her,  to  be  sure  of 
her  joining  in  her  plans.  Regan  cannot  hurl  forth  stinging  speeches  like  Goneril, 
she  has  not  the  same  fierce  eyes,  her  look  (which  Lear  in  his  madness  calls  a  squint) 
is  comforting  rather,  her  nature  softer ;  and  Lear  hardly  ventures  to  look  closely  at 
her  when,  in  his  madness,  he  sits  in  judgement  upon  her;  he  would  have  her  heart 
anatomized.  She  says  in  a  simple  way  far  ruder  things  to  her  father  than  Goneril  does, 
and  yet  her  father  hesitates  to  pronounce  his  curse  on  her  as  he  does  upon  her  sister, 
and  that  twice  repeated.  Goneril  receives  it  with  marble  coolness,  but  Regan  shud¬ 
ders  and  dreads  to  draw  upon  herself  the  like  imprecation.  Only  when  Goneril  has 
laid  bare  in  her  presence  her  utter  shamelessness  and  barbarity  towards  her  old  father, 
does  Regan  grow  bolder  also,  and  drive  away  the  king’s  knights ;  him  alone  will 
she  harbour.  When  Goneril  determines  that  the  old  man  shall  taste  the  consequences 
of  his  obstinacy  and  folly,  and  forbids  Gloster,  in  spite  of  the  raging  storm,  to  detain 
him,  Regan,  with  her  characteristic  -weakness,  falls  in  -with  her  sister.  After  the 
serpent  brood  are  relieved  of  their  old  father,  then  begins  a  strife  in  their  families. 
Goneril  mines  deeper ;  the  ill-treatment  of  Lear  is  only  the  prelude.  She  will  have 
possession  of  the  whole  kingdom,  she  betroths  herself  to  Edmund,  her  husband  still 
living,  exults  in  Cornwall’s  death,  poisons  Regan,  joins  with  Edmund  in  putting  Cor¬ 
delia  to  death,  and  plots  at  last  against  her  husband’s  life,  whom  she  now  fears  since 
he  has  learned  with  horror  her  evil  deeds.  Here  again,  in  the  contrast,  Regan  ap¬ 
pears  simpler  and  less  bold ;  only  after  Cornwall’s  death  does  she  engage  herself 


GERVINUS 


459 


to  Edmund,  to  whom  she  sends  letters  by  Goneril’s  servant,  whose  good  faith  she 
does  not  suspect ;  she  falls  a  victim  to  the  poison  administered  by  her  sister,  herself 
free  from  the  suspicion  of  like  murderous  designs;  in  every  respect,  she  is  of  a 
more  constrained  nature  than  her  sister,  whose  *  woman’s  will  is  of  indistinguished 
*  space.’ 

[P.  205.]  To  play  the  part  of  Edgar  requires  a  man  to  be  *  every  inch  an  actor.’ 
He  changes  at  least  six  different  times.  At  first  he  is  Edgar;  then  Poor  Tom;  then, 
forgetting  this  part  in  his  devotion  to  his  father,  he  loses  sight  of  it ;  then  he  describes 
the  immeasurable  depths  of  the  pretended  cliff,  as  if  he  himself  stood  dizzily  upon 
it ;  next  he  is  the  dweller  on  the  shore,  where  Gloster  thinks  he  has  fallen ;  then, 
after  the  meeting  of  his  father  with  Lear,  he  is  another  beggar,  and,  in  the  presence 
of  the  steward,  he  is  changed  into  a  peasant;  in  the  lists  with  Edmund,  he  is  an  un¬ 
known  champion,  and  last,  he  is  himself  again.  In  all  these  parts  he  is  cunning  in 
the  extreme ;  his  fathef,  on  first  meeting  with  Poor  Tom,  is  dimly  reminded  of  his 
son  Edgar,  then,  and  every  time  the  danger  of  his  being  recognized  appears  to  in¬ 
crease,  he  aims  to  keep  his  disguise  the  more.  But  his  dissembling  does  not  partake 
of  the  fear  and  excitability  of  Hamlet ;  from  his  father’s  dead  body,  from  Kent’s 
mortal  agony,  from  scenes  of  the  deepest  emotion,  Edgar  goes  to  do  battle  with  Ed¬ 
mund,  and  he  comes  off  victorious.  Having  such  self-command,  Edgar,  we  feel,  is 
equal  in  his  disguise  to  the  discharge  of  the  most  important  services  in  his  father’s 
behalf;  he  is  the  support  of  his  father  in  body  and  mind. 

[P.  209.]  In  this  play  ethical  justice  is  especially  emphasized  by  the  Poet  himself. 
But  where  is  justice  in  the  death  of  Cordelia  ?  Why  does  a  better  fate  fall  to  Edgar, 
when  he  is  to  his  father  what  Cordelia  is  to  hers  ?  But  it  is  precisely  this  differ¬ 
ence  in  their  fates  that  helps  us  to  the  meaning  of  the  Poet.  The  wise  and  prudent 
forethought  evinced  by  Edgar  places  him  in  strong  contrast  with  Cordelia.  His 
means  are  always  well  adapted  to  his  ends ;  not  so  is  it  with  Cordelia.  She  attacks 
England  with  a  French  army  to  reinstate  her  father.  The  whole  responsibility  of 
this  step  falls  upon  her.  She  has  besought  her  husband,  with  *  important  tears,’  to 
give  her  this  army.  To  him  this  war  was  no  pressing  affair;  he  does  not  appear 
(and  this  Steevens  and  Tieck  do  not  perceive,  although  it  is  obvious)  with  Cordelia 
in  England ;  he  occupies  himself  with  other  matters  of  State.  We  need  not  be  told 
by  her,  that  *  no  blown  ambition  incites  ’  her  arms ;  we  believe  it  already,  but  when 
she  should  have  declared  it  to  Albany  she  says  nothing.  Only  the  one  thought  of 
her  filial  love  moves  her.  When  she  has  found  her  father  in  Dover  she  resigns  her 
army  to  her  Marshal ;  this  renders  the  attack  the  more  serious,  as  it  is  directed  on  a 
kingdom  divided  and  in  peril.  The  brothers-in-law,  hostile  to  each  other,  and  op¬ 
posite  as  they  are  in  their  characters,  join  forces  against  it;  the  noble  Albany  unites 
with  the  terrible  Edmund.  Bat  Albany  is  far  more  circumspect  than  Cordelia.  At 
variance  with  Goneril  and  Edmund,  he  has,  after  Cornwall’s  death,  the  prospect  of 
the  sole  sovereignty  when  he  has  conquered  and  set  aside  Lear  and  Cordelia.  He 
declares,  however,  to  the  allies,  that  he  separates  the  French  invasion  from  the  cause 
of  Lear;  this  Cordelia  had  declared  to  no  one.  ‘The  business  of  this  war,’ says 
Albany,  ‘toucheth  us  only  as  France  invades  our  land  not  bolds  the  king;  ’  him  will 
he  favour,  and  treat  the  prisoners,  moreover,  according  to  their  deserts,  and  in  refer¬ 
ence  to  his  own  safety.  A  similar  declaration  made  by  Cordelia  to  Albany  could 
have  stopped  the  war  and  changed  the  result.  But  Cordelia,  from  her  peculiar  nature, 
makes  it  not.  Her  fault  at  the  last  is  her  fault  at  the  first.  What  is  self-evident  she 
cannot  utter;  to  that  which  fills  her  heart  she  cannot  give  words.  So  long  as  she 


460 


APPENDIX 


lived  and  made  war  Albany  must  needs  fear  that  she  would  subject  the  whole  king¬ 
dom  to  France;  but  this  idea,  of  the  possibility  of  a  French  army’s  being  victorious 
on  English  soil,  the  patriotism  of  Shakespeare  would  not  admit.  Like  Desdemona, 
Cordelia  falls  a  sacrifice  to  her  own  nature;  in  Cordelia’s  case  the  peculiar  circum¬ 
stances  connected  with  her  death  reconcile  us  to  it  in  a  greater  degree.  Although 
conquered  in  battle,  she  has  gained  the  better  victory  which  alone  she  sought;  she 
has  outwardly  restored  her  father.  She  has  come  with  boundless  thanks  for  Kent 
who  had  supported  him,  and  with  promises  of  all  her  treasures  to  the  physician 
who  would  heal  him;  all  these  things  show  that  her  mind  is  full  to  overflowing 
of  one  thought,  her  father’s  restoration,  in  which  all  concern  for  her  own  safety  is 
forgotten. 


DR  CARL  C.  HENSE 

( Vortrag e  iiber  ausgeivahlte  dramatische  Dichtungen  Shakespeare's,  Schiller's, 
ut:d  Goethe's.  Halberstadt,  1856,  p.  43.) — Genuine  humour  breaks  forth  only  out  of 
a  loving  heart,  and  through  his  unbounded  love  for  his  master  the  Fool  has  purchased 
the  right  to  tell  him  the  bitter  truth,  and  hold  up  the  mirror  before  the  wrong  that  he 
has  done. 

As  the  Fool  represents  truth  in  the  guise  of  humour,  he  cannot  be  brought  forward 
until  the  rupture  with  the  moral  law  has  taken  place ;  the  disguised  truth  waits ;  the 
king  has  not  for  two  days  seen  the  Fool.  In  his  grief  for  Cordelia’s  banishment,  the 
Fool  has  almost  forgotten  his  part,  and  this  affords  us  a  pledge  that,  under  the  veil 
of  humour,  the  deepest  earnestness  is  concealed.  Only  in  slight  allusions  does  he 
touch  the  fault  of  the  king,  for  roughly  to  waken  up  the  injury  done  were  the  office 
not  of  love  but  of  scorn.  Hence  the  Fool  makes  the  folly  of  the  king  the  target  of 
his  humour ;  the  harmless  words  he  throws  out  conceal  a  deep  and  penetrating  sig¬ 
nificance.  When,  immediately  after  Goneril’s  first  rude  speech  to  her  father,  the 
Fool  breaks  out  with  the  apparently  random  words,  ‘  Out  went  the  candle,  and  we 
were  left  darkling  ’ — the  words  of  an  old  song — the  point  is,  that  the  light  of  the 
moral  world  has  now  ceased  to  shine,  and  the  darkness  incessantly  increases  (com¬ 
pare  the  words  addressed  to  Kent  by  the  Fool,  Act  II,  sc.  iv,  with  the  words  :  ‘  We’ll 
set  thee  to  school  to  an  ant,’  &c.).  As,  however,  the  old  king  draws  ever  nearer  to 
the  brink  of  the  abyss,  the  arrows  of  the  Fool,  aimed  at  the  folly  of  the  king,  grow 
fewer,  he  catches  oftener  at  some  harmless,  jesting  remark,  to  cheer  the  suffering  of 
his  master,  and  to  lighten  the  burthen  of  his  own  grief.  The  whole  depth  and  power 
of  his  sorrow  he  crowds  into  a  little  song,  for  he  has  become  thus  rich  in  songs  since 
the  king,  as  he  says,  has  made  his  daughters  his  mothers.  In  a  similar  way  he 
expresses  his  impregnable  devotion  to  the  king  in  those  deeply  significant  verses  in 
which  he  promises  not  to  desert  the  king  in  the  storm,  and  the  particular  theme  of 
which  is  that  the  wise  are  fools  before  God,  but  the  fools  in  the  eye  of  the  world 
are  justified  by  a  higher  Power. 

The  Fool  has  his  place  in  the  tragedy  only  so  long  as  the  king  is  able  to  perceive 
the  truth  veiled  by  the  Fool’s  humour.  There  is  no  longer  room  or  need  for  him 
after  the  king  becomes  crazed.  This  crisis  is  the  end  of  the  Fool.  He  vanishes, 
‘gees  to  bed  at  mid-day,’  when  his  beloved  master  is  hopelessly  lost. 


KREYSSIG 


461 


KREYSSIG 

(  Vorlesungen  uber  Shakespeare,  See.,  1S62,  ii,  316.) — Goethe  has  pronounced  the 
first  scene  absurd.  More  recent  criticism,  certainly  in  view  of  that  judgment  harsh, 
but  not  without  reason,  has  defended  it  as  unobjectionable,  but  yet  hardly  with  a  con¬ 
vincing,  decisive  result.  It  is  doubtless  only  too  natural  that  a  hot-blooded  gentle¬ 
man,  long  accustomed  to  the  exercise  of  irresponsible  power,  should  reward  his 
children,  as  well  as  his  servants,  not  according  to  their  services,  but  according  to  their 
address  in  flattering  his  self-love.  When  did  not  the  flatterer  feather  his  nest  more 
successfully  than  the  faithful,  outspoken,  independent  servant  ?  But  in  poetry,  and 
especially  in  the  drama,  the  subject-matter  of  a  scene  is  not  to  be  separated  by  the 
understanding  from  its  form.  And  the  form,  in  which  Lear’s  arbitrary  humour 
expresses  itself  in  this  scene,  finds  its  natural  and  true  significance  only  in  fact  as  the 
symbol  of  a  whole  series  .of  presumable  precedents.  Is  it  not  the  behaviour  of  a 
man  already  unsettled  in  his  understanding,  when  a  father,  in  solemn  assembly,  sets 
his  children  a  lesson  in  flattery,  and  when  he  formally  proposes  for  the  required 
display  of  bombast  a  downright  cash  premium,  so  that  for  the  blast  vanity  of  the 
monarch  grown  old  in  the  habit  of  being  worshipped,  there  is  no  possibility  of  delu¬ 
sion  ?  And  is  the  scene  the  first  of  the  part  which  he  plays  ?  It  notifies  us  to  expect 
a  reigning  king,  and  the  very  first  words  are  the  words  of  a  man  with  a  crack  in  his 
brain.  It  appears  to  me  that  Shakespeare  here,  in  giving  motive  and  a  dramatic  form 
to  the  legend,  is  lacking  in  his  usual  care.  This  want  is  assuredly  considerably  alle- 
viated  by  the  excellent  elucidations  of  the  scenes  that  follow.  But  the  satisfaction 
subsequently  afforded  to  the  understanding  cannot  be  any  compensation  to  us  if  the 
imagination  has  previously  had  just  reason  to  be  offended. 

[P.  318.]  So  much  at  least  is  clear.  It  is  only  the  burthen  and  duties  of  empire 
that  the  tired  old  king  wishes  to  be  rid  of.  That  his  regal  rights  can  suffer  changes, 
never  occurs  to  him.  This  is  evident  from  the  utter  overthrow  of  his  self-possession 
when  the  idea  of  this  personal,  ind.efeasible  claim  to  absolute  power  is  for  the  first 
time  openly  crossed  by  the  complaints  of  Goneril.  Very  strikingly  for  his  view  of 
the  situation,  he  makes  not  the  remotest  allusion  to  the  substance  of  her  complaint. 

*  Art  thou  my  daughter  ?  ’  This  is  his  only  reply  when  she  complains  of  the  beha¬ 
viour  of  his  retinue.  It  was  a  monstrous  illusion  which  drove  him  to  that  eventful 
abdication — the  idea  of  the  indestructible,  all-embracing  nature  of  his  personal 
authority,  which  he  imagines  to  be  wholly  independent  of  what  he  possesses  and  can 
do.  He  recognizes  no  other  relation  to  society  but  claim,  right,  mercy  on  his  side, 
prayer,  gratitude,  devotion  from  all  others.  Naturally,  the  whole  airy  edifice  tumbles 
into  ruins  so  soon  as  the  open  secret  becomes  clear  to  him  that  that  mystic  regal  great¬ 
ness  falls  to  the  ground  with  the  loss  of  material  power,  and  that  the  despot’s  arbi¬ 
trary  humour  educates  its  favourites,  even  though  they  be  his  own  children,  to  be 
intriguing  slaves,  when  he  sets  aside  their  nobler,  self-respecting  natures  as  disagree¬ 
able  opponents,  as  creatures  without  court-manners.  To  the  first  contradiction  which 
he  has  met  perhaps  for  many  years,  Lear  opposes  a  rage,  boundless  and  incapable  of 
all  consideration.  He  raves  and  foams  like  some  wild  torrent  around  the  rock  which 
has  rolled  down  into  its  waters.  To  the  inquiries  of  the  well-meaning  Albany  he 
returns  no  answer.  His  wrath  blazes  out  in  a  half-insane  curse  upon  Goneril,  ‘the 

*  thankless  child  who  has  stung  him  sharper  than  a  serpent’s  tooth.’  Who  does  not 
feel  the  horror  of  his  position  ?  And  yet  the  reckless  outburst  of  his  passion  cer¬ 
tainly  qualifies  our  tribute  of  sympathy  by  the  violence  to  which  it  drives  him.  We 

39* 


462 


APPENDIX 


are  involuntarily  reminded  of  the  old  experience  that  ingratitude  rarely  wounds  the. 
true,  that  is,  the  disinterested,  benefactor,  or  that  its  poison  has  no  effect  upon  the 
blessed  consciousness  of  genuine  humanity,  which  has  its  foundation  in  a  free  devo¬ 
tion  to  moral  necessity,  and  not  in  the  quicksand  of  selfish  interest,  driven  hither 
and  thither  by  the  waves  of  passion.  Of  that  devotion  there  is  no  trace  in  the  beha¬ 
viour  of  the  irascible  king.  Revenge,  violence,  a  taking  back  what  he  has  given — 
these  are  his  first  thoughts.  That  by  his  abdication  he  has  taken  a  position  no  longer 
wholly  independent,  finds  no  place  in  his  mind.  The  presentiment  of  madness  comes 
over  him  in  the  fearful  collision  of  the  blind,  raging  thirst  for  revenge  with  the  laming 
consciousness  of  his  lack  of  power.  We  are  almost  tempted  to  excuse  the  unfilial 
fye !  fye !  of  the  hard-hearted  Regan,  when  the  old  man,  at  the  bare  mention  of  the 
strife  with  Goneril,  breaks  out  into  the  well-known  curse.  And  it  needs  the  whole, 
overpowering  impression  of  his  weakness  and  helplessness,  it  needs  the  symbolism 
of  the  corresponding  uproar  of  the  element,  to  secure  the  fulness  of  tragic  sympathy 
for  the  despairing  old  man,  exposed  on  the  barren  heath  to  the  fury  of  the  storm. 
The  fearful  magnificence  of  this  celebrated  scene  requires  no  word  of  praise  from  the 
commentator,  and  its  terrible  truth  to  nature  makes  every  word  expended  upon  it 
sound  impertinent.  His  pain  at  the  ingratitude  of  those  whom  he  has  heaped  with 
favour  and  fortune,  all  the  keener  for  the  humiliating  consciousness  of  his  own  un¬ 
questionable  folly,  passes  into  the  fatal  stability  of  the  fixed  idea,  by  the  hot  breath 
of  which  the  springs  of  his  spir'tual  life  are  dried  up,  until  the  phantom  of  madness 
settles  weirdly  down  upon  the  dry,  burnt-out  waste. 


RUMELIN 

(. Shakespeare-Studien ,  1866,  p.  61.) — The  conduct  of  old  Gloucester  is  not  a  whit 
more  rational.  That  the  lawful  son  of  his  father,  grown  up  under  his  father’s  eyes, 
and  always  regarded  by  him  as  true  and  amiable,  should  all  at  once  engage  in  a  con¬ 
spiracy  with  a  vagabond  bastard  brother  against  his  father's  life,  should  even  commit 
this  design  to  paper,  and  throw  the  letter  at  random  into  that  brother’s  window,  should 
seem  to  the  old  man  utterly  incredible ;  but  that  the  old  man  banishes  this  son,  without 
seeing  and  hearing  him,  that  Edgar  consents  to  have  anything  to  do  with  the  silly  hocus- 
pocus  of  the  sword-drawing,  and  flees  without  exposing  the  clumsy  farce  to  his  father, 
. — in  a  word,  these  are  circumstances  past  all  belief,  and  hardly  rise  above  nursery 
tales.  As  all  proceeds  so  rapidly,  and  Edgar,  one  hardly  understands  how,  is  driven 
by  lies  from  his  father’s  house,  it  is,  as  represented  on  the  stage,  scarcely  intelligible. 
That  Edgar  comes  on  the  stage  as  a  crazy  beggar  is  no  more  clearly  explained,  yet 
the  reasons  of  it  may  be  imagined;  but  that,  in  this  disguise  of  a  madman,  he  utters, 
without  any  necessity,  so  much  useless  talk,  becomes  extremely  wearisome,*  while 
the  much-admired  scene  in  the  hut,  through  its  length,  and  the  inexhaustible  stream 
of  crazy  speeches,  is,  according  to  our  feeling,  equally  fatiguing.  It  might  even  be  con¬ 
jectured  that  Shakespeare  intended  to  give  us  here  a  sort  of  dramatic  extravaganza, 
showing  us  specimens  of  three  different  kinds  of  fools  all  together,  one  really  crazy, 
one  pretending  to  be  crazy,  and  one  a  Fool  by  profession — these  he  sets  upon  the 
scene  side  by  side,  and  lets  all  three  figure  away  in  the  finest  style. 


*  Klein,  of  whose  wide  range  of  scholarship  I  am  incompetent  to  judge,  hut  whose  pages  charm 
me  with  their  sparkling  wit,  in  his  Geschichte  dts  IUilietiischen  Dramas,  vol.  i,  p.  890,  quotes  in  a 
foot-note  this  remark  by  Rtimelin  about  Edgar’s  wearisome  platitudes,  and  slyly  adds :  ‘  Edgar  was 
just  the  very  man,  then,  to  write  Shake's/ care -St udien." — Ed. 


OECHELHA  USER 


463 


Kent’s  behaviour  is  so  ummannerly  towards  the  chamberlain  that  the  chastisement 
which  he  incurs  does  not  impress  us,  as  it  should,  with  a  sense  of  a  wrong,  or  of 
an  insult  to  the  king.  That  afterwards  this  Oswald,  when  mortally  struck,  in  the 
last  moment  of  his  life,  thinks  of  nothing  but  how  he  shall  fulfil  a  command  of  his 
lord’s,  presents  a  touching  instance  of  fidelity,  not  at  all  in  accord  with  the  pre¬ 
vious  baseness  of  his  character.  That  any  one  should  be  made  to  believe  that,  by  a 
jump  on  the  level  ground,  he  has  leaped  a  thousand  fathom  down,  and  come  off  un¬ 
injured,  is  against  all  probability. 

Finally,  the  savage  cruelty  of  digging  out  the  eyes  of  Gloster  with  the  leg  of  a 
chair  on  the  stage !  [*  Die  wilde  Grausamkeit,  dass  dem  niedergeworfenen  Gloster 

auf  der  Biihne  mit  einem  Stuhlfuss  beide  Augen  ausgednlckt  werden  !  ’  Comment 
is  needless. — Ed.]  Of  the  eleven  chief  persons  of  the  piece  only  three  remain  alive ! 
The  whole  action  in  King  Lear  has  the  character  of  a  nursery  tale  of  the  horrible 
sort,  only  that  it  is  lacking  in  the  wonderful. 

But  nursery  stories  are  not  fit  subjects  for  tragedy.  The  effect  of  the  serious  drama 
depends  upon  the  supposition  that  we  ourselves  are  of  the  same  stuff,  susceptible 
of  the  same  feelings,  passions,  and  motives,  as  the  persons  whom  the  poet  brings 
before  us,  that  the  same  forces  rule  over  our  lives,  that,  consequently,  the  case  put 
before  us  is  of  like  concern  to  all.  This  illusion  the  poet  can,  at  no  price,  suffer 
to  be  destroyed.  He  does  not  disturb  it,  or  he  hardly  disturbs  it,  even  when  he 
introduces  a  supernatural  element,  so  long  as  it  is  related  or  natural  to  the  his¬ 
torical  basis  on  which  the  piece  rests.  Gods,  ghosts,  oracles,  &c.  appear,  under 
this  condition,  in  agreement  with  fate  and  accident,  which  always  have  for  us 
an  irrational  side.  But  one  thing,  under  all  circumstances,  must  remain  intact, 
namely,  the  psychological  basis  of  all  human  action.  In  dramatic  incidents  we  must 
recognize  our  own  life  mirrored ;  our  logic,  as  of  universal  weight.  The  poet  must 
not  attribute  to  his  persons  a  higher  degree  of  infatuation,  of  perverseness,  and  short¬ 
sightedness  than  we  hold  ourselves  and  mankind  at  large  liable  to.  When  to  the 
heroes,  for  whom  he  claims  my  reverence  and  my  sympathy,  I  am  compelled  to 
object,  that  neither  I  nor  any  man  in  his  senses  would,  in  the  given  case,  think  of  so 
acting,  then  is  the  illusion  irretrievably  ruined.  It  is  just  this  that  distinguishes  the 
nursery  tale  from  the  legend,  myth,  and  fable,  that  the  actions  of  the  hero  of  the 
tale  are  determined  by  motives  which  have  force  only  in  the  world  of  dreams  or  of 
childhood.  Hence  the  stuff  of  which  nursery  tales  are  composed  may  indeed  be 
treated  epically  or  lyrically,  or  be  made  available  in  fantastic  comedies  or  musical 
pieces,  as  Shakespeare  has  employed  it  in  the  most  brilliant  manner.  But  it  is  re¬ 
pugnant  to  the  very  nature  of  the  grave  drama.  From  this  point  of  view,  the  play 
of  King  Lear  is  of  an  entirely  false  kind,  and  Tieck’s  attempt  to  reanimate  it  for 
the  German  stage  must  necessarily  remain  without  effect  and  success. 

WILHELM  OECHELHAUSER 

{Shakespeare  dramatische  JVerke,  Einleitung ,  1871,  p.  30.) — The  Fool  is  the  last 
and,  at  the  same  time,  the  noblest  creation  of  the  kind  in  Shakespeare ;  he  is  by  far 
the  most  intellectual  and  noblest  of  his  fools.  Two  prevailing  currents  of  feeling  are 
conspicuous  in  the  Fool.  The  first  is  his  sorrow  over  Cordelia,  to  whom  he  is  as 
faithful  as  a  dog.  *  Since  my  young  lady’s  going  into  France,  the  Fool  hath  much 
*  pined  away.’  This  sorrow  is  expressed  by  the  merciless  blows  which,  far  exceed¬ 
ing  his  traditional  privilege,  he  deals  at  the  king  for  his  folly  in  abdicating  his  crown, 


464 


APPENDIX 


and  for  his  lack  of  just  appreciation  of  his  youngest  daughter.  We  should  hold  the 
Fool  to  be  hard-hearted,  malicious,  if  it  were  not  for  his  motive.  But,  with  the  in¬ 
creasing  misfortunes  of  the  old  king,  the  tone  of  the  Fool  changes;  sympathy  with 
his  old  master  gives  another  direction  to  his  mind,  and  sweetens  his  bitterness.  In 
the  fearful  night  on  the  heath  he  still  plays  the  fool  only  to  meet  the  humour  of  the 
king  in  the  usual  way;  for  the  rest  he  is  all  anxiety  for  his  unhappy  lord.  He 
•  labours  to  outjest  his  [the  king’s]  heartstruck  injuries.’  The  r6le  requires  a  skilful 
portrayer  of  character.  Comic  actors  hardly  ever  know  how  to  master  this.  It  is 
all  the  more  difficult,  as  we  have  quite  lost  the  understanding  of  this  class,  which 
still  flourished  even  in  Shakespeare’s  time.  The  endeavour  to  support  this  rfile 
by  nonsensical  mimicry  should  cease ;  the  part  is  sustained  by  its  own  intellectual 
power.  I  would  have  the  Fool  represented  as  an  elderly  man,  as  a  sort  of  family 
piece  in  the  house  of  the  eighty-year-old  king.  His  office  would  naturally  have 
become  less  perfunctory  and  easier.  His  probable  years  released  him  from  the 
traditional  demands  made  upon  his  class  for  physical  activity.  His  speeches  bear 
the  stamp  of  the  biting  irony  which  is  not  an  acquired  thing,  but  which  usually  comes 
with  age  in  one  whose  humble  station  does  not  correspond  with  his  intellectual 
abilities.  However  this  may  be,  the  effect  of  this  r5le  would  be  greatly  increased  if, 
in  the  stormy  night,  the  mask  of  the  Fool  is  allowed  ever  more  and  more  to  fall  off, 
and  the  sad,  faithful  servant  becomes  more  and  more  prominent,  as  in  this  scene  the 
surroundings  of  the  unhappy  king  must  render  the  sympathy  and  concern  of  the 
Fool  more  lively.  With  this  scene,  alas!  the  Fool  vanishes  from  the  stage;  he  is  in 
this  piece  treated,  as  his  class  were  in  actual  life,  as  a  simple  object,  having  no  claim 
upon  one’s  personal  interest. 

[P.  36.]  Cordelia  should  have  yielded  to  Lear’s  bizarre,  yet  harmless  idea  of  plea¬ 
sing  himself  with  his  children’s  protestations  of  love,  and  should,  as  she  knew  her 
father,  have  foreseen  the  consequences  of  her  refusal  to  contribute  to  this  pleasure. 
Following  that  first,  one-sided  impulse,  she  does  not  do  so,  and  indirectly  all  the 
after  misery  springs  from  her  refusal.  Although  man  is  answerable  only  for  the  nat¬ 
ural,  foreseen  consequences  of  his  actions,  and  not  for  those  which  result  from  the 
concatenation  of  circumstances  and  the  collision  with  the  evil-doing  of  others,  yet 
tragic  criminality  has  another  standard  of  punishment  than  that  of  the  earthly  judge. 
In  this  dark  tragedy,  tragic  guilt  knows  no  result  but  death ;  whoever  in  passing 
touches  only  the  hem  of  its  garment  falls  a  victim  to  the  powers  of  darkness.  Thus 
is  Cordelia’s  death  justified.  But  how  nobly  does  she  atone  for  her  fault !  With 
what  fulness  of  love  and  tenderness  does  she  call  back  her  aged  father  to  life  and 
mental  soundness !  Thenceforth  they  are  one ;  the  whole  life  of  the  one,  the  whole 
life  of  the  other,  so  interwoven  the  one  with  the  other,  that  it  is  at  once  the  highest 
poetry  and  the  highest  truth  when  they  die  together. 

The  part  of  Cordelia  is  in  every  respect  the  opposite  of  that  of  Goneril.  While 
the  latter,  a  deep  study,  requires  great  acquaintance  with  the  business  of  the  stage, 
the  former  may  be  acted  by  a  talented  beginner,  if  she  only  has  a  flexible  organ 
united  with  deep,  warm  feeling.  It  is  especially  a  r6le  of  feeling,  which  must  be 
played  with  the  greatest  simplicity  and  naturalness,  and  necessarily  by  an  actress  of 
very  youthful  appearance.  Many  passages,  for  example,  the  recognition  scene,  be¬ 
long  to  the  most  pathetic  scenes  which  the  stage  has  to  offer.  An  angelic  loveliness 
is  the  atmosphere  in  which  Cordelia  has  her  being.  But  in  the  introduction  a  differ¬ 
ent  tone  is  to  be  struck,  which  most  actresses  miss.  Here,  by  the  intonation  of  her 
answer  to  Lear,  *  Nothing,’  must  be  expressed  the  defiant  emotion,  which,  although 


VICTOR  HUGO 


4<55 


from  the  noblest  motives,  has  sprung  up  in  her  mind  (its  rise  may  be  intimated  by  her 
dumb  play  while  her  sisters  are  speaking),  but  then  also  there  must  be  shown  the 
mental  conflict,  the  result  of  which  is  that  laconic  answer.  To  help  this  I  would  in¬ 
sert  before  her  first  answer,  ‘  Nothing,’  the  query,  ‘  I  ?  ’  followed  by  a  pause,  expres¬ 
sive  of  the  inward  struggle,  before  she  breaks  out  quickly  and  suddenly  with  the 
‘  Nothing.’  Once  having  committed  herself  so  far,  she  becomes  calm  and  composed, 
without,  however,  manifesting  her  deep  pain  at  her  father’s  cruelty.  It  must  appear 
how  her  heart  still  clings  to  her  father,  how  fearfully  she  suffers  under  his  curse. 
The  insensibility  of  many  of  our  Cordelias  in  this  scene  is  not  in  place ;  it  is  not  in 
harmony  with  her  subsequent  appearance.  Her  dumb  play  in  the  first  Scene  is  the 
most  difficult  in  the  part. 


VICTOR  HUGO 

(  William  Shakespeare ,  1864,  p.  322.) — Lear,  c’est  1’ occasion  de  Cordelia.  La  ma¬ 
ternity  de  la  fille  sur  le  pyre;  sujet  profond;  maternity  vynyrable  entre  toutes,  si  ad- 
mirablement  traduite  par  la  Rgende  de  cette  romaine,  nourrice,  au  fond  d’un  cachot, 
de  son  pyre  vieillard.  La  jeune  mamelle  prys  de  la  barbe  blanche,  il  n’est  point  de 
spectacle  plus  sacry.  Cette  mamelle  filiale,  c’est  Cordelia. 

Une  fois  cette  figure  ryvye  et  trouvye  Shakespeare  a  cr£y  son  drame.  Oil  mettre 
cette  rassurante  vision?  Dans  un  siyde  obscur.  Shakespeare  a  pris  l’an  3105  du 
monde,  le  temps  oil  Joas  ytait  roi  de  Juda,  Aganippus  roi  de  France  et  Leir  roi 
d’Angleterre.  Toute  la  terre  ytait  alors  mystyrieuse ;  reprysentez-vous  cette  ypoque : 
le  temple  de  jyrusalem  est  encore  tout  neuf,  les  jardins  de  Symiramis,  bfttis  depuis 
neuf  cents  ans,  commencent  k  crouler,  les  premiyres  monnaies  d’or  paraissent  it  Lgine, 
la  premiyre  balance  est  faite  par  Phydon,  tyran  d’ Argos,  la  premiyre  ydipse  de  soleil 
est  calculye  par  les  chinois,  il  y  a  trois  cent  douze  ans  qu’  Oreste,  accusy  par  les  Eu- 
mynides  devant  l’Aryopage,  a  yty  absous.  Hysiode  vient  de  mourir,  Homyre,  s’il 
vit  encore,  a  cent  ans,  Lycurgue,  voyageur  pensif,  rentre  k  Sparte,  et  l’on  aper<;oit 
au  fond  de  la  sombre  nuye  de  l’Orient  le  char  de  feu  qui  emporte  Elie ;  c’est  dans 
ce  moment-la.  que  Lyir — Lear — vit  et  rygne  sur  les  iles  tynybreuses.  Jonas,  Holo- 
pherne,  Dracon,  Solon,  Thespis,  Nabuchodonosor,  Anaximyne  qui  inventera  les  signes 
du  zodiaque,  Cyrus,  Zorobabel,  Tarquin,  Pythagore,  Eschyle,  sont  k  naitre;  Coriolan, 
Xerxys,  Cincinnatus,  Pyriciys,  Socrate,  Brennus,  Aristote,  Timolyon,  Dymosthyne, 
Alexandre,  Epicure,  Annibal,  sont  des  larves  qui  attendent  leur  heure  d’entrer  parmi 
les  hommes;  Judas  Macchabye,  Viriate,  Popilius,  Jugurtha,  Mithridate,  Marius  et 
Sylla,  Cysar  et  Pompye,  CiyopfLtre  et  Antoine,  sont  le  lointain  avenir,  et  au  moment 
oil  Lear  est  roi  de  Bretagne  et  d’lslande,  il  s’ycoulera  huit  cent  quatre-vingt-quinze 
ans  avant  que  Virgile  dise :  Penitus  toto  divisos  orbe  Britannos ,  et  neuf  cent  cinquante 
ans  avant  que  Synyque  dise :  Ultima  Thule.  Les  pictes  et  les  celtes — les  ycossais  et 
les  anglais, — sont  tatouys.  Un  peau-rouge  d’&  prysent  donne  une  vague  idye  d’un 
anglais  d’ alors.  C’est  ce  crypuscule  que  choisit  Shakespeare;  large  nuit  commode 
au  r£ve  oil  cet  inventeur  ii  l’aise  met  tout  ce  que  bon  lui  semble,  ce  roi  Lear,  et  puis 
un  roi  de  France,  un  due  Bourgogne,  un  due  de  Cornouailles,  un  due  d’ Albany,  un 
comte  de  Kent  et  un  comte  de  Glocester.  Que  lui  importe  votre  histoire  il  lui  qui  a 
l’humanity?  D’ailleurs  il  a  pour  lui  la  lygende,  qui  est  une  science,  ello  aussi;  et, 

2  E 


466 


APPENDIX 


autant  que  l’histoire  peut-etre,  mais  a  un  autre  point  de  vue,  une  v6rit£.  Shakespeare 
est  d’accord  avec  Walter  Mapes,  archidiacre  d’Oxford,  c’est  bien  quelque  chose;  il 
admet,  depuis  Brutus  jusqu’a  Cadvalla,  les  quatre-vingt-dix-neuf  rois  celtes  qui  ont 
prbcbdb  le  scandinave  Hengist  et  le  saxon  Horsa;  et  puisqu’il  croit  a  Mulmutius,  a 
Cinigisil,  a  Ceolulfe,  a  Cassibelan,  a  Cymbeline,  a  Cynulphus,  a  Arviragus,  a  Gui- 
derius,  a  Escuin,  a  Cudred,  a  Vortigerne,  a  Arthur,  a  Uther  Pendragon,  il  a  bien  le  droit 
de  croire  au  roi  Lear,  et  de  crder  Cordelia.  Ce  terrain  adopts,  ce  lieu  de  sc£ne  d6- 
signb,  cette  fondation  creusbe,  il  prend  tout,  et  il  batit  son  ceuvre.  Construction  inoule. 
Il  prend  la  tyrannie,  dont  il  fera  plus  tard  la  faiblesse,  Lear;  il  prend  la  trahison, 
Edmund;  il  prend  le  dbvouement,  Kent;  il  prend  l’ingratitude  qui  commence  par 
une  caresse,  et  il  donne  a  ce  monstre  deux  t£tes,  Goneril,  que  la  l£gende  appelle 
Gomerille,  et  Regane,  que  la  Ibgende  appelle  Ragaii ;  il  prend  la  paternity ;  il  prend 
la  royautb;  il  prend  la  f£odalit6;  il  prend  l’ambition;  il  prend  la  dbmence  qu’il 
partage  en  trois,  et  il  met  en  presence  trois  fous,  le  bouffon  du  roi,  fou  par  metier, 
Edgar  de  Glocester,  fou  par  prudence,  le  roi,  fou  par  misbre.  C’est  au  sommet  de  cet 
entassement  tragique  qu’il  dresse  et  penche  Cordelia. 

Il  y  a  de  formidables  tours  de  cathbdrales,  comme,  par  exemple,  la  giralda  de 
Seville,  qui  semblent  faites  tout  entires,  avec  leurs  spirales,  leurs  escaliers,  leurs 
sculptures,  leurs  caves,  leurs  ccecums,  leurs  cellules  abriennes,  leurs  chambres  sonores, 
leurs  cloches,  leur  plainte,  et  leur  masse,  et  leur  flbche,  et  toute  leur  bnormitb,  pour 
porter  un  ange  ouvrant  sur  leur  cime  ses  ailes  dories.  Tel  est  ce  drame,  le  Roi  Lear. 

Le  pire  est  le  pritexte  de  la  fille.  Cette  admirable  creation  humaine,  Lear,  sert 
de  support  &  cette  ineffable  creation  divine,  Cordelia.  Tout  ce  chaos  de  crimes,  de 
vices,  de  cfemences  et  de  misires,  a  pour  raison  d’etre  l'apparition  splendide  de  la 
vertu.  Shakespeare,  portant  Cordelia  dans  sa  pensie,  a  cr£6  cette  tragidie  comme 
un  dieu  qui,  ayant  une  aurore  h  placer,  ferait  tout  expris  un  monde  pour  l’y  mettre. 

Et  quelle  figure  que  le  pire !  quelle  caryatide  !  C’est  l’homme  courbi.  Il  ne  fait 
que  changer  de  fardeaux,  toujours  plus  lourds.  Plus  le  vieillard  faiblit,  plus  le  poids 
augmente.  Il  vit  sous  la  surcharge.  Il  porte  d’abord  l’empire,  puis  l’ingratitude, 
puis  l’isolement,  puis  le  disespoir,  puis  la  faim,  et  la  soif,  puis  la  folie  puis  toute  la 
nature.  Les  nuies  viennent  sur  sa  tite,  les  forfits  l’accablent  d’ombre,  l’ouragan  s’abat 
sur  sa  nuque,  l’orage  plombe  son  manteau,  la  pluie  pise  sur  ses  ipaules,  il  marche 
plii  et  hagard,  comme  s’il  avait  les  deux  genoux  de  la  nuit  sur  son  dos.  fiperdu  et 
immense,  il  jette  aux  bourrasques  et  aux  grSles  ce  cri  ipique :  Pourquoi  me  halssez- 
vous,  tempetes  ?  pourquoi  me  persicutez-vous  ?  Vous  n'ltes  pas  tries  Jilles.  Et  alors, 
c’est  fini,  la  lueur  s’iteint,  la  raison  se  dicourage  et  s’en  va,  Lear  est  en  enfance. 
Ah  !  il  est  enfant,  ce  vieillard.  Eh  bien !  il  lui  faut  une  mire.  Sa  fille  paratt.  Son 
unique  fille,  Cordelia.  Car  les  deux  autres,  Regane  et  Goneril,  ne  sont  plus  ses 
Giles  que  de  la  quantiti  nicessaire  pour  avoir  droit  au  nom  de  parricides. 

Cordelia  approche. — Me  reconnaissjz-vous,  sire  ? — Vous  2tes  un  esprit,  je  le  sais, 
ripond  le  vieillard,  avec  la  clairvoyance  sublime  de  l’igarement.  A  partir  de  ce 
moment,  l’adorable  allaitement  commence.  Cordelia  se  met  &  nourrir  cette  vielle 
&me  disespirie  qui  se  mourait  d’inanilion  dans  la  haine.  Cordelia  nourrft  Lear 
d’amour,  et  le  courage  revient;  elle  le  nourrit  de  respect,  et  le  sourire  revient;  elle  le 
nourrit  d’esperance,  et  la  confiance  revient ;  elle  le  nourrit  de  sagesse,  et  la  raison  re¬ 
vient.  Lear,  convalescent,  remonte,  et,  de  degri  en  degri,  retrouve  la  vie.  L’enfant 
redevient  un  vieillard,  le  vieillard  redevient  un  homme.  Et  le  voili  heureux,  ce 
misbrable.  C’est  sur  cet  ipanouissement  que  fond  la  catastrophe.  Hilas,  il  y  a  des 
traitres,  il  y  a  des  parjures,  il  y  a  des  meurtriers.  Cordelia  meurt.  Rien  de  plus 


TATE'S  VERSION 


467 


navrant.  Le  vieillard  s’6tonne,  il  ne  comprend  plus,  et,  embrassant  ce  cadavre,  il 
expire.  Il  meurt  sur  cette  morte.  Ce  d£sespoir  supreme  lui  est  6pargn6  de  rester 
derrtere  elle  parmi  les  vivants,  pauvre  ombre,  thtant  la  place  de  son  cceur  vid£  et 
cherchant  son  &me  emport£e  par  ce  doux  etre  qui  est  parti.  O  Dieu,  ceux  que  vous 
aimez,  vous  ne  les  laissez  pas  survivre. 

Demeurer  apr£s  l’envolement  de  1’ange,  Stre  le  pi  re  orphelin  de  son  enfant,  itre 
l’ceil  qui  n’a  plus  la  lumiire,  etre  le  cceur  sinistre  qui  n’a  plus  la  joie,  itendre  les 
mains  par  moments  dans  l’obscuriti,  et  tacher  de  ressaisir  quelqu’un  qui  itait  la,  od 
done  est-elle?  se  sentir  oublii  dans  le  dipart,  avoir  perdu  sa  raison  d’etre  ici-oas, 
£tre  disormais  un  homine  qui  va  et  vient  devant  un  sepulchre,  pas  re<;u,  pas  admis ; 
e’est  une  sombre  destinee.  Tu  as  bien  fait,  poete,  de  tuer  ce  vieillard. 


NAHUM  TATE’S  VERSION 

AN  edition  like  the  present  would  be  incomplete  without  some  notice  of  the  version 
of  King  Lear  which  held  the  stage  for  a  hundred  and  sixty  years,  and  in  which  all 
our  greatest  actors,  Garrick,  Kemble,  Kean,  and  others,  won  applause,  and  which 
was  discarded  only  about  forty  years  ago.  It  is  so  much  easier  to  blame  than  to 
praise  that  we  echo  very  readily  the  anathemas  that  are  now  heaped  on  the  name 
of  Tate.  But  really  Tate  was  little  to  blame;  he  was  merely  the  exponent  of  the  age 
in  which  he  lived,  and  no  genius.  ‘  You  must  think  of  this,  look  you,  the  worm  will 
*  do  his  kind.’  We  must  remember,  too,  that  Lear  is  the  sublimest  tragedy  ever 
written,  so  awful  in  its  grandeur  that  it  almost  passes  into  a  realm  by  itself.  Charles 
Lamb  avers  that  it  ought  not  to  be  acted  at  all,  and  in  thus  saying  he  exonerates  Tate, 
to  a  certain  extent,  in  the  very  breath  with  which  he  condemns  him.  Tate’s  Version 
is  better  than  none;  if  we  had  not  Shakespeare’s  play  to  read,  surely  it  were  better 
to  listen  to  Tate  than  not  to  know  the  play  at  all.  There  is  more  of  Shakespeare  in 
Tate’s  Version  than  there  is  of  Tate. 

At  any  rate,  I  cannot  but  think  that  others,  however  hard  they  may  be  upon  Tate  for 
his  laughable  attempts  to  be  Shakespearian  in  his  changes,  will,  like  myself,  be  a  little 
softened  towards  him  after  reading  his  Dedication;  a  tone  of  reverence  for  Shake¬ 
speare  runs  through  it  that  quite  took  me  by  surprise.  It  is  as  follows :  To  my  Esteemed 
Friend  Thomas  Boteler,  Esq;  Sir,  You  have  a  natural  Right  to  this  Piece,  since  by 
your  Advice  I  attempted  the  Revival  of  it  with  Alterations.  Nothing  but  the  Pow'r  of 
your  Persuasions,  and  my  Zeal  for  all  the  Remains  of  Shakespear  cou’d  have  wrought 
me  to  so  bold  an  Undertaking.  I  found  that  the  New-modelling  of  this  Story  wou’d 
force  me  sometimes  on  the  difficult  Task  of  making  the  chiefest  Persons  speak  some¬ 
thing  like  their  Character,  on  Matter  whereof  I  had  no  Ground  in  my  Author.  Lear’s 
real  and  Edgars  pretended  Madness  have  so  much  of  extravagant  Nature  (I  know 
not  how  else  to  express  it),  as  cou’d  never  have  started  but  from  our  Shakespear1 s 
Creating  Fancy.  The  Images  and  Language  are  so  odd  and  surprizing,  and  yet  so 
agreeable  and  proper,  that  whilst  we  grant  that  none  but  Shakespear  could  have 
form’d  such  Conceptions;  yet  we  are  satisfied  that  they  were  the  only  Things  in  the 
World1  that  ought  to  be  said  on  those  Occasions.  I  found  the  whole  to  answer  your 


468 


APPENDIX 


account  of  it,  a  Heap  -of  Jewels,  unstrung,  and  unpolisht;  yet  so  dazling  in  their 
Disorder,  that  I  soon  perceiv’d  I  had  seiz’d  a  Treasure.  ’Twas  my  good  Fortune  to 
light  on  one  Expedient  to  rectify  what  was  wanting  in  the  Regularity  and  Probability 
of  the  Tale,  which  was  to  run  through  the  whole,  as  Love  betwixt  Edgar  and  Cor¬ 
delia  ;  that  never  chang’d  a  Word  with  each  other  in  the  Original.  This  renders 
Cordelia's  Indifference,  and  her  Father’s  Passion  in  the  first  Scene,  probable.  It 
likewise  gives  Countenance  to  Edgar’s  Disguise,  making  that  a  generous  Design  that 
was  before  a  poor  Shift  to  save  his  Life.  The  Distress  of  the  Story  is  evidently 
heightened  by  it;  and  it  particularly  gave  Occasion  of  a  New  Scene  or  Two,  of  more 
Success  (perhaps)  than  Merit.  This  method  necessarily  threw  me  on  making  the 
Tale  conclude  in  a  Success  to  the  innocent  distrest  Persons :  Otherwise  I  must  have 
incumbred  the  Stage  with  dead  Bodies,  which  Conduct  makes  many  Tragedies  con¬ 
clude  with  unseasonable  Jests.  Yet  was  I  wract  with  no  small  Fears  for  so  bold  a 
Change,  till  I  found  it  well  receiv’d  by  my  Audience ;  and  if  this  will  not  satisfy 
the  Reader,  I  can  produce  an  Authority  that  questionless  will. 

Neither  is  it  of  so  Trivial  an  Undertaking  to  make  a  Tragedy  end 

happily ,  for  ’tis  more  difficult  to  save  than  'tis  to  Kill :  The  Dagger  j.  r< 

and  Cup  of  Poison  are  always  in  Readiness  ;  but  to  bring  the  Action 

to  the  last  Extremity,  and  then  by  probable  means  to  recover  All,  will  require  the 

Art  and  Judgment  of  a  Writer,  and  cost  him  many  a  Pang  in  the  Performance. 

I  have  one  thing  more  to  apologize  for,  which  is  that  I  have  us’d  less  Quaintness 
of  Expression  even  in  the  Newest  Parts  of  this  Play.  I  confess,  ’twas  Design  in  me, 
partly  to  comply  with  my  Author’s  Style,  to  make  the  Scenes  of  a  Piece,  and  partly 
to  give  it  some  Resemblance  of  the  Time  and  Persons  here  Represented.  This,  Sir, 
I  submit  wholly  to  you,  who  are  both  a  Judg  and  Master  of  Style.  Nature  had 
exempted  you  before  you  went  Abroad  from  the  Morose  Saturnine  Humour  of  our 
Country,  and  you  brought  home  the  Refinedness  of  Travel  without  the  Affectation. 
Many  faults  I  see  in  the  following  Pages,  and  question  not  but  you  will  discover 
more;  yet  I  will  presume  so  far  on  your  Friendship  as  to  make  the  whole  a  Present 
to  you,  and  Subscribe  myself  Your  obliged  Friend  and  ausnoie  Servant,  N.  Tate. 

PROLOGUE 

Since  by  Mistakes  your  best  delights  are  made 
(For  e’en  your  Wives  can  please  in  Masquerade), 

’Twere  worth  our  while,  to  have  drawn  you  in  this  Day 
By  a  new  Name  to  our  old  honest  Play ; 

But  he  that  did  this  Evenings  Treat  prepare  ) 

Bluntly  resolv’d  before  hand  to  declare  > 

Your  Entertainment  should  be  most  old  Fare,  j 
Yet  hopes  since  in  rich  Shakespead  s  soil  it  grew  ) 

’Twill  relish  yet,  with  those  whose  tasts  are  true,  > 

And  his  Ambition  is  to  please  a  Few.  ) 

If  then  this  Heap  of  Flow’rs  shall  chance  to  wear 
Fresh  beauty  in  the  Order  they  now  bear. 

Even  this  Shakespead  s  Praise ;  each  rustick  knows 
’Mongst  plenteous  Flow’rs  a  Garland  to  Compose 
Which  strung  by  this  Course  Hand  may  fairer  show 
But  ’twas  a  Power  Divine  first  made  ’em  grow, 


TATE’S  VERSION 


469 


Why  should  these  Scenes  lie  hid,  in  which  we  find 
What  may  at  once  divert  and  teach  the  Mind ; 
Morals  were  always  proper  for  the  Stage, 

But  are  ev’n  necessary  in  this  Age. 

Poets  must  take  the  Churches  Teaching  Trade, 
Since  Priests  their  Province  of  Intrigue  invade  ; 
But  we  the  worst  in  this  Exchange  have  got, 

In  vain  our  Poets  Preach,  whilst  Churchmen  Plot. 


THE  PERSONS 


King  Lear, 
Glosthr, 

Kent, 

Edgar, 

Bastard, 

Cornwall, 

Albany, 

Gentleman  Vsher, 
Goneril, 

Regan, 

Cordelia, 


Mr.  Betterton. 
Mr.  Gillo. 

Mr.  Wiltshire. 
Mr.  Smith. 

Mr.  Jo.  Williams, 
Mr.  Norris. 

Mr.  Bowman. 

Mr.  Jevon. 

Mrs.  Shadwel. 
Lady  Slingsby. 
Mrs.  Barry. 


When  the  play  opens  Gloucester  is  already  convinced  of  Edgar’s  treachery,  ana 
Edmund  is  in  high  favour. 

As  the  royal  procession  is  entering,  before  the  division  of  the  kingdom,  Edgar, 

*  speaking  to  Cordelia  at  Entrance,’  declares  his  love  for  her,  and  is  assured  by  her 
that  his  love  is  returned,  so  ardently,  indeed,  that  Cordelia’s  blunt  replies  to  her 
father  are  prompted,  not  so  much  by  detestation  of  her  sisters’  hypocrisy,  as  by  a  de. 
sire  to  avoid  marriage  with  Burgundy : 

* Cordelia. .  [Aside']  Now  comes  my  trial.  How  am  I  distrest. 

That  must  with  cold  speech  tempt  the  chol’rick  king 
Rather  to  leave  me  Dowerless ;  then  condemn  me 
To  loath’d  embraces.’ 

Cordelia  is  cast  off,  and  Burgundy  refuses  her;  of  the  King  of  France  there  is  no 
mention  throughout  the  play.  Kent  is  banished. 

Now  that  Cordelia  is  in  disgrace  Edgar  renews  his  suit,  but  Cordelia,  true  to  the 
fashionable  propriety  of  the  last  century,  at  once  becomes  coquettish,  and  thinks  she 
must  test  Edgar’s  love  by  coldness,  and  alleges  that  she  is  now  no  longer  *  the  darling 

•  of  a  king.’  Whereupon  Edgar : 

‘  Thus  Majesty  takes  most  State  in  Distress  1 
How  are  we  tost  on  Fortune’s  fickle  floud ! 

The  Wave  that  with  surprising  kindness  brought 
The  dear  wreck  to  my  arms,  has  snatched  it  back. 

And  left  me  mourning  on  the  barren  shoar.’ 

The  Bastard  persuades  Edgar  to  conceal  himself,  and  then  shows  the  forged  letter 
to  Gloucester;  and  here  Tate  so  polishes  up  one  of  Shakespeare’s  ‘jewels’  as  to  make 
40 


470 


APPENDIX 


it  dazzling;  in  the  original  Gloucester  says  to  Edgar  ‘wind  me  into  him.’  Thus 
Tate: 

‘  wind  me  into  him. 

That  I  may  bite  the  Traytor’s  Heart,  and  fold 
His  bleeding  Entrals  on  my  vengeful  arm.’ 

The  version  now  follows  the  original  with  tolerable  fidelity,  through  Kent’s  en¬ 
trance,  in  disguise,  on  Lear’s  service,  and  through  Lear’s  curse  on  Goneril,  of  course, 
as  is  well  known,  with  the  omission  of  the  Fool. 

In  the  next  Act  the  Bastard  induces  Edgar  to  fly,  and  Gloucester  in  his  rage  tells 
the  Bastard  to  ‘  pursue  the  villain  And  bring  him  peace-meal  to  me.’ 

Kent  and  Oswald  arrive  at  Gloucester’s  castle  and  have  their  quarrel ;  Kent  calls 
Oswald,  ‘Thou  Escence-Bottle !  ’  and  offers  to  ‘tread  the  muss-cat  into  mortar.’ 
Kent  is  put  in  the  stocks. 

In  the  next  scene  Edgar  enters,  and,  after  uttering  the  first  four  or  five  lines  of  his 
soliloquy,  *  I  heard  myself  proclaimed,’  &c.,  says : 

— How  easte  now, 

*  'Twere  to  defeat  the  malice  of  my  Trale, 

And  leave  the  griefs  on  my  sword’s  reeking  Point : 

But  Love  detains  me  from  Death’s  peaceful  Cell, 

Still  whispering  me,  Cordelia's  in  distress ; 

Unkind  as  she  is,  I  cannot  see  her  wretched. 

But  must  be  near  to  wait  upon  her  Fortune. 

Who  knows  but  the  white  Minute  yet  may  come. 

When  Edgar  may  do  service  to  Cordelia, 

That  charming  hope  still  ties  me  to  the  Oar 
Of  painful  Life,  and  makes  me  to  submit 
To  th’  humblest  shifts  to  keep  that  Life  a  Foot; 

My  (ace  I  will  besmear,'  &c. 

Again,  the  original  is  adhered  to  tolerably  close  throughout  the  rest  of  the  Act. 
When  Regan  says,  ‘  What  need  one  ?  ’  and  Lear,  in  the  original,  replies  in  those 
musical  words  of  saddest  pathos,  ‘  Oh,  reason  not  the  need,’  we  have  instead  in  the 
Version : 

‘ Regan.  What  need  one? 

Lear.  Bloud  !  Fire  I  here — Leprosies  and  bluest  Plagues  I 
Room,  room  for  Hell  to  belch  her  Horrors  up 
And  drench  the  Circes  in  a  stream  of  Fire; 

Heark  how  th’  Infernals  eccho  to  my  rage 
Their  Whips  and  Snakes. - 

Regan.  How  lewd  a  thing  is  Passion  I 

Goneril.  So  old  and  stomachful.’ 

The  Third  Act  opens  with  Lear,  demented,  on  the  heath,  and  again  the  original 
is  followed  in  his  speeches :  ‘  Blow  winds  and  burst  your  cheeks,’  &c. 

In  the  next  scene  the  Bastard  receives  love  letters  from  both  Regan  and  Goneril, 
and  to  him  enters  Gloucester,  who  reveals  that  he  is  plotting  to  restore  Lear.  As 
Gloucester  is  going  out  he  is  met  by  Cordelia,  while  the  *  Bastard  observes  them  at  a 
‘  distance.’ 

*  Cord.  Turn,  Gloster,  Turn,  by  the  sacred  Pow’rs 
I  do  conjure  you,  give  my  griefs  a  Hearing, 

Vou  must ;  you  shall,  nay  I  am  sure  you  will, 

For  you  were  always  styl’d  the  Just  and  Good. 

Glost.  What  would’st  thou.  Princess  ?  rise  and  speak  thy  griefs. 

Cord.  Nay,  you  shall  promise  to  redress  'em  too 
Or  here  i’ll  kneel  forever ;  I  entreat 


TATE'S  VERSION 


47* 


*  Thy  succour  for  a  Father,  and  a  king, 

An  injur’d  Father  and  an  injur’d  king. 

Bast.  O  Charming  Sorrow  !  how  her  Tears  adorn  her. 

Like  Dew  on  Flow’rs,  but  she  is  vertuous. 

And  I  must  quench  this  hopeless  Fire  i’  th’  kindling. 
dost.  Consider,  Princess, 

For  whom  thou  begg*st,  'tis  for  the  king  that  wrong’d  Thee. 

Cord.  O  name  not  that ;  he  did  not,  cou’d  not  wrong  me. 

Nay,  muse  not,  Gloster,  for  it  is  too  likely 
This  injur’d  king  e’er  this,  is  past  your  Aid, 

And  gone  distracted  with  his  Savage  Wrongs. 

Bast.  I’ll  gare  no  more, — and  yet  my  Eyes  are  charm’d. 

Cord.  Or,  what  if  it  be  Worse  ? 

As  'tis  too  probable,  this  furious  Night 

Has  pierc’d  his  tender  Body,  the  bleak  Winds 

And  cold  Rain  chill’d,  or  Lightning  struck  him  Dead; 

If  it  be  so,  your  promise  is  discharg’d. 

And  I  have  only  one  poor  Boon  to  beg. 

That  you’d  convey  me  to  his  breathless  Trunk, 

With  my  tom  Robes  to  wrap  his  hoary  Head, 

With  my  tom  Hair  to  bind  his  Hands  and  Feet 
Then  with  a  show'r  of  Tears 

To  wash  his  Clay-smear’d  Cheeks,  and  dye  beside  him. 

dost.  Rise,  fair  Cordelia ,  thou  hast  Piety 
Enough  t’  attone-for  both  thy  sisters  Crimes. 

I  have  already  plotted  to  restore 

My  injur’d  Master,  and  thy  Vertue  tells  me 

We  shall  succeed,  and  suddenly.  {Exit. 

Cord.  Dispatch,  Aranie, 

Provide  me  a  Diguise,  well  instantly 
Go  seek  the  King  and  bring  him  some  relief. 

Arante.  How,  Madam !  Are  you  ignorant 
Of  what  your  impious  Sisters  have  decreed? 

Immediate  Death  for  any  that  relieve  him. 

Cord.  I  cannot  dread  the  Furies  in  this  case. 

Ar.  In  such  a  Night  as  this  ?  Consider,  Madam, 

For  many  miles  about  there’s  scarce  a  Bush 
To  shelter  in. 

Cord.  Therefore  no  shelter  for  the  King, 

And  more  our  Charity  to  find  him  out : 

What  have  not  Women  dar’d  for  vicious  Love? 

And  we’ll  be  shining  proofs  that  they  can  dare 

For  Piety  as  much.  Blow  Winds,  and  Lightnings  fall. 

Bold  in  my  Virgin  Innocence,  I'll  flie 

My  Royal  Father  to  relieve,  or  dye.  [Exit. 

Bast.  Provide  me  a  diguise,  we'll  instantly 

Go  seek  the  King : - ha  1  ha  I  a  lucky  change 

That  Vertue  which  I  fear'd  would  be  mv  hindrance. 

Has  prov'd  the  Bond  to  my  Design ; 

I’ll  bribe  two  Ruffians  shall  at  distance  follow. 

And  seise  'em  in  some  desert  Place ;  and  there 

Whilst  one  retains  her  t’other  shall  return 

T’  inform  me  where  she’s  Lodg'd ;  I’ll  be  disguis’d  too. 

Whilst  they  are  poching  for  me.  I'll  to  the  Duke 

With  these  Dispatches,’  &c.,  &c.  {Exit. 

In  the  next  Scene  we  have  Lear  before  the  hovel  where  he  meets  Mad  Tom,  thai£ 
eats  the  *  Wall-nut  and  the  Water-nut.’  The  original  is  again  followed,  but.  be  it 
always  remembered,  with  the  omission  of  the  Fool. 

Lear,  Edgar,  Kent,  and  Gloucester  depart,  and  Cordelia  and  her  mold,  Arante. 


472 


APPENDIX 


enter,  and  immediately  after  the  Bastard’s  two  ruffians.  *  They  sieze  Cordelia  and 

*  Arante,who  shriek  out.’  Now  comes  Edgar’s  ‘  white  minute,’  and  he  rushes  in,  and 
crying  to  the  Ruffians,  ‘  Avaunt  ye  Bloud-hounds !  ’  ‘  Drives  ’em  with  his  Quarter- 

*  staff,’  and  they  run  off  bawling,  ‘  The  Devil,  the  Devil !  ’  Edgar  recognizes  the 
Princess,  but  is  obliged  to  keep  up  his  disguise,  with,  ‘Who  relieves  poor  Tom ,  that 
‘sleeps  on  the  Nettle,  with  the  Hedg-pig  for  his  Pillow? 

4  Whilst  Smug  ply’d  the  Bellows 
She  truckt  with  her  Fellows, 

The  Freckle-fac’d  Mab 
Was  a  Blouze,  and  a  Drab, 

Yet  Swithin  made  Oberon  jealous.' 

He  does  not  hold  out  long,  however,  but  soon  reveals  himself,  and  explains  the 
reason  for  his  disguise,  not  forgetting  to  refer  to  her  injunction  upon  him  to  trouble 
her  upon  the  Theme  of  love  no  more.  This  proves  too  much  for  Cordelia,  and  she 
exclaims : 

*  Come  to  my  Arms,  thou  dearest,  best  of  Men, 

And  take  the  kindest  Vows,  that  e'er  were  spoke 
By  a  protesting  Maid. 

Edgar.  Is 't  possible? 

Cord.  By  the  dear  Vital  Stream  that  baths  my  Heart, 

T which,  by  the  way,  reminds  us  of  Gray’s  Bard,'] 

*  These  hallow’d  Rags  of  thine,  and  naked  Vertue, 

These  abject  Tassels,  these  fantastick  Shreds, 

(Ridiculous  ev’n  to  the  meanest  Clown) 

To  me  are  dearer  than  the  richest  Pomp 
Of  purple  Monarchs. 

Edgar.  Generous,  charming  Maid/  &c.,  &c. 

And  the  Scene  closes  with  Edgar’s  offer  to  protect  the  two  women  while  they  re* 
tire  to  the  hovel  for  the  night. 

'Meanwhile  the  Stars  shall  dart  their  kindest  Beams, 

And  Angels  visit  my  Cordelia’s  Dreams.’  [ Exeunt . 

In  the  next  Scene  Gloucester’s  eyes  are  put  out,  and  the  unfortunate  nobleman 
finds  relief  at  the  close,  in  a  long  speech  bewailing  his  loss  of  sight : 

‘  N.o  more  to  view  the  Beauty  of  the  Spring, 

Nor  see  the  Face  of  Kindred,  or  of  Friend,’  Sic.,  Sic. 

But  he  resolves  upon  revenge,  by  exhibiting  himself  to  the  crowd,  and  enlisting  their 
pity  for  himself  and  the  King,  and  then,  when  his  mission  is  accomplished,  he  will 
throw  himself  from  some  precipice  on  *  the  ragged  Flint  below, 

*  Whence  my  freed  Soul  to  her  bright  Sphere  shall  fly, 

Through  boundless  Orbs,  eternal  Regions  spy, 

And  like  the  Sun,  be  all  one  glorious  Eye.’ 

The  opening  of  the  Fourth  Act  finds  *  Edmund  and  Regan  amorously  Seated,  list- 
4  ening  to  Musick.’  Mutual  vows  are  exchanged,  and  before  Edmund  departs  he  gives 
Regan  ‘  a  happy  Image  to  lodge  in  that  breast  where  all  his  Treasure  lies  [. Pulling 
4  out  a  picture,  drops  a  Note.'  Of  course  this  is  Goneril’s  note,  and  Regan’s  jealousy 
is  confirmed.  An  Officer  enters,  who  announces  a  great  rebellion,  stirred  up  by 
Gloucester,  whom  we  find  in  the  next  scene,  led  to  Dover  by  Edgar,  but  on  the  way 


TATE'S  VERSION 


473 


they  meet  Kent  and  Cordelia;  the  latter  is  filled  with  grief  that  she  has  been  even 
remotely  the  cause  of  Gloucester’s  misfortune,  but  Gloucester  forgives  her,  and  bids 
her  ‘  take  a  dark  Man’s  blessing.’ 

Kent  is  urged  to  assume  command  of  the  rebellion  which  is  now  afoot,  and  leaves 
for  that  purpose  with  Cordelia.  The  scene  on  the  supposed  Cliff  of  Dover  is  fol¬ 
lowed  closely,  and  the  description  of  the  Cliff  is  exact,  except  the  omission  of  the 
line,  *  That  on  the  unnumbered  idle  pebble  chafes.’  Lear  enters  and  raves  as  in  the 
original;  is  found  by  Cordelia’s  messengers.  Oswald  enters,  and  is  slain  by  Edgar, 
and  Goneril’s  letter  found. 

In  the  next  scene  *  Lear  is  asleep  on  a  couch ;  Cordelia,  and  attendants  standing 
4  by  him.’  The  original  is  retained  quite  closely  until  Lear  says,  ‘  I  fear  I  am  not 
‘  in  my  perfect  mind,’  when  Cordelia  exclaims :  ‘  Nay,  then  farewel  to  Patience ; 
‘witness  for  me  Ye  mighty  Pow’rs  I  ne’er  complain’d  till  now!  ’  When  Lear  says, 

*  I  think  that  Lady  To  be  my  Child  Cordelia,’  Cordelia  replies,  ‘  O  my  dear,  dear 

*  Father !  ’ 

'Lear.  Be  your  Tears  wet?  Yes  faith;  pray  do  not  Weep, 

I  know  I  have  giv’n  thee  Cause,  and  am  so  humbled 
With  Crosses  since,  that  I  cou’d  ask 
Forgiveness  of  thee,  were  it  possible 
That  thou  cou’dst  grant  it ;  but  I'm  well  assur’d 
Thou  canst  not ;  therefore  do  I  stand  thy  Justice; 

If  thou  hast  Poison  for  me  I  will  drink  it 
Bless  thee  and  dye. 

Cord.  O  pity.  Sir,  a  bleeding  Heart,  and  cease 
This  killing  Language. 

Lear.  Tell  me.  Friends,  where  am  I  ? 

Gent.  In  your  own  kingdom.  Sir. 

Lear.  Do  not  abuse  me. 

Gent.  Be  comforted,  good  Madam,  for  the  Violence 
Of  his  Distemper’s  past ;  we’ll  lead  him  in. 

Nor  trouble  him,  till  he  is  better  settled. 

Wil’t  please  you.  Sir,  walk  into  freer  Air? 

Lear.  You  must  bear  with  me,  I  am  Old  and  Foolish.  {They  lead  him  off , 

Cord.  The  Gods  restore  you. — Heark,  I  hear  afar 
The  beaten  Drum,  Old  Kent’s  a  Man  of 's  Word.. 

O  for  an  Arm 

Like  the  fierce  Thunderer’s,  when  the  Earth-born  Sons 
Storm'd  Heav’n  to  fight  this  injur’d  Father’s  Battle  1 
That  I  cou’d  shift  my  Sex,  and  die  me  deep 
In  his  opposer’s  Blood  1  But  as  I  may. 

With  Women’s  Weapons,  Piety  and  Pray'rs, 

I’ll  aid  his  Cause. — You  never-erring  Gods 
Fight  on  his  Side,  and  Thunder  on  his  Foes 
Such  Tempests  as  his  poor  ag’d  Head  sustain’d; 

Your  Image  suffers  when  a  Monarch  bleeds. 

'Tis  your  own  Cause,  for  that  your  Succors  bring. 

Revenge  your  selves,  and  right  an  injur’d  King.’ 

End  of  the  Fourth  Act. 

The  next  Act  opens  with  a  short  scene  between  Goneril  and  her  •  Poisoner,' 
in  which  the  former  is  assured  that  the  banquet  and  the  poison  for  her  *  imperious 

*  Sister’  are  ready.  Exeicnt.  Then  Edmund,  alone  in  his  tent,  exults  in  language 
somewhat  too  warm  for  modem  taste  over  the  success  of  his  amours  with  the  two 
sisters.  In  the  next  scene,  after  Edgar  has  left  Gloucester  in  the  shadow  of  a  tree 
while  he  goes  off  to  the  fight,  Gloucester  soliloquises  thus ; 

40  * 


474 


APPENDIX 


*  The  Fight  grows  hot ;  the  whole  War’s  now  at  Work, 

And  the  goar’d  Battel  bleeds  in  every  Vein. 

Whilst  Drums  and  Trumpets  drown  loud  Slaughter’s  Roar; 

Where’s  Gloster  now  that  us’d  to  head  the  Fray, 

And  scour  the  Ranks  where  deadliest  danger  lay.' 

And  some  ten  or  fifteen  more  lines  quite  as  despairing  and  quite  as  tedious.  Can 
these  be  the  lines  which  Spedding  (see  anti ,  p.  313)  says  were  spoken,  in  Macready’s 
version,  by  Gloucester  while  the  battle  was  in  progress  ?  I  have  searched  in  vain 
through  Macready’s  Journal  for  any  notice  of  his  stage-arrangement  in  this  respect. 

Edgar  returns  with  the  news  that  the  battle  is  lost,  and  Albany  and  Goneril,  &c. 
enter  with  Lear  and  Cordelia  prisoners.  Goneril  in  an  Aside  tells  a  captain  to  dis¬ 
patch  the  prisoners,  and  Edgar  enters  in  disguise  and  impeaches  Edmund  of  treason, 
and  challenges  him  to  fight.  All  depart  to  witness  the  duel,  and  leave  Kent  and 
Cordelia  guarded. 

*  Lear.  O  Kent,  Cordelia  1 
You  are  the  only  Pair  that  I  e’er  wrong’d 
And  the  just  Gods  have  made  you  Witnesses 
Of  my  Digrace,  the  very  shame  of  Fortune 
To  see  me  chain’d  and  shackled  at  these  years  1 
Yet  were  you  but  Spectators  of  my  Woes, 

Not  fellow-sufferers,  all  were  well  1 

Cord.  This  language.  Sir,  adds  yet  to  our  Affliction, 

Lear.  Thou  Kent,  didst  head  the  Troops  that  fought  my  Battel, 

Expos'd  thy  Life  and  Fortunes  for  a  Master 
That  had  (as  I  remember)  banisht  Thee. 

Kent.  Pardon  me.  Sir,  that  once  I  broke  your  orders/  &c. 

On  learning  that  Kent  had  followed  him  as  a  servant  Lear  weeps  and  almost  faints, 
but  recovers,  and  bids  the  guards  conduct  them  to  prison,  where  they  ‘  will  sit  alone 
*  like  Birds  i’  th’  Cage,’  &c.,  and  departs,  asserting  that 

'  Together  we’ll  out-toil  the  spight  of  Hell 
And  dye  the  Wonders  of  the  World;  Away.’ 

The  duel  between  Edgar  and  Edmund  takes  place,  after  much  boasting  on  both 
sides  of  their  legitimate  and  illegitimate  births.  Edmund  falls,  and  Regan  and  Gon¬ 
eril  avow  their  love  and  jealousy  over  his  bleeding  body.  Goneril  reveals  her  attempt 
to  poison  Regan  at  the  banquet  on  the  previous  evening,  and  expresses  a  desire  to  see 

*  How  well  that  blasted  Beauty  will  become 
Congealing  Blood,  and  Death’s  convulsive  Pangs/ 

Whereupon  Regan  retorts  that  she  has  dona  the  same  thing  by  Goneril,  and  poisoned 
her  at  her  own  banquet.  Edmund  stops  what  he  terms  their  *  untimely  strife,’  and 
is  borne  out  in  a  resigned  frame  of  mind,  sustained  by  the  reflection ; 

*  Who  would  not  chuse,  like  me,  to  yield  his  Breath 
T'  have  Rival  Queens  contend  for  him  in  Death. 

In  the  next  and  last  scene  Lear  is  discovered  in  prison  asleep,  with  his  head  in 
Cordelia’s  lap.  Cordelia  apostrophises  the  sleeping  king,  and  wonders  what  fate  has 
seized  Edgar  ‘  in  this  general  Wreck.’ 

*  O  Godsl  a  sudden  Gloom  o’erwhelms  me,  and  the  Image 
Of  Death  o’er-spreds  the  Place. — Hal  Who  are  These? 


TATE'S  VERSION 


475 


Enter  Captain  and  Officers  with  Cords, 

*  Capt.  Now,  Sirs,  dispatch,  already  are  you  paid 
In  part,  the  best  of  your  Reward’s  to  come. 

Lear.  Charge,  charge  upon  their  Flank,  their  last  Wing  halts. 

Push,  push  the  Eattel,  and  the  Day’s  our  own. 

Their  Ranks  are  broke,  down  with  Albany. 

Who  holds  my  Hands  ?— O  thou  deceiving  Sleep, 

I  was  this  very  Minute  on  the  Chace; 

And  now  a  Prisoner  here. — What  mean  the  Slaves  ? 

You  will  not  murther  me? 

Cord.  Help,  Earth  and  Heaven ! 

For  your  Souls  sake,  dear  Sirs,  and  for  the  Gods. 

Offic.  No  Tears,  good  Lady,  no  pleading  against  Gold  and  Preferment. 

Come,  Sirs,  make  ready  your  Cords. 

Cord.  You,  Sir,  I’ll  seize. 

You  have  a  humane  Form,  and  if  no  Pray’rs 
Can  touch  your  Soul  to  spare  a  poor  King’s  Life, 

If  there  be  anything  that  you  hold  Dear, 

By  that  I  beg  you  to  dispatch  me  first. 

Capt.  Comply  with  her  Request ;  dispatch  her  First. 

Lear.  Off  Hell-hounds,  by  the  Gods  I  charge  you  spare  her. 

'Tis  my  Cordelia,  my  true  pious  Daughter ; 

No  pity? — Nay,  then  take  an  old  Mans  Vengeance. 

[Snatches  a  Partisan,  and  strikes  down  two  of  them  ;  the  rest  quit 
Cordelia,  and  turn  on  him.  Enter  Edgar  and  Albany. 

Edg.  Death  I  Hell  I  ye  Vultures,  hold  your  impious  Hands, 

Or  take  a  speedier  Death  than  you  wou’d  give. 

Capt.  By  whose  Command  ? 

Edg.  Behold  the  Duke,  your  Lord. 

Alb.  Guards,  seize  those  Instruments  of  Cruelty. 

Cord.  My  Edgar,  Oh  1 

Edg.  My  Dear  Cordelia  /  Lucky  was  the  Minute 
Of  our  Approach,  the  Gods  have  weigh'd  our  SufF’rings  ; 

W’  are  past  the  Fire,  and  now  must  shine  to  Ages. 

*  Gent.  Look  here,  my  Lord,  see  where  the  generous  King 
Has  slain  two  of  ’em. 

Lear.  Did  I  not,  Fellow? 

I’ve  seen  the  Day,  with  my  good  biting  Faulchion 
I  cou’d  have  made  'em  skip;  I  am  Old  now, 

And  these  vile  Crosses  spoil  me ;  out  of  Breath  ? 

Fie,  Oh  I  quite  out  of  Breath,  and  spent. 

Alb.  Bring  in  old  Kent;  and,  Edgar,  guide  you  hither 
Your  Father,  whom  you  said  was  near.  [Ex.  Edgar. 

He  may  be  an  Ear-Witness  at  the  least 

Of  our  proceedings.  [Kent  brought  in  her * 

Lear.  Who  are  you  ? 

My  Eyes  are  none  o’  th’  Best,  I’ll  tell  you  streight ; 

Oh  Albany  1  Well,  Sir,  we  are  your  Captives, 

And  you  are  come  to  see  Death  pass  upon  us. 

Why  this  Delay  ? — or  is ’t  your  Highness  pleasure 
To  gives  us  first  the  Tortour  ?  Say  ye  so  ? 

Why  here 's  old  Kent  and  I,  as  tough  a  Pair 
As  e’re  bore  Tyrants  Stroke : — But  my  Cordelia, 

My  poor  Cordelia  here,  O  pity  1— 

Alb.  Take  off  their  Chains. — Thou  injur’d  Majesty, 

The  Wheel  of  Fortune  now  has  made  her  Circle, 

And  blessings  yet  stand  'twixt  thy  Grave  and  Thee.’ 

Albany  goes  on  to  tell  Lear  of  the  wickedness  of  Regan  and  Goneril,  and  that  he 
has  just  left  Edmund  mortally  wounded,  and  continues : 


476 


APPENDIX 


*  Since  then  my  Injuries,  Lear,  fall  in  with  Thine, 

I  have  resolv’d  the  same  Redress  for  both. 

Kent.  What  says  my  Lord  ? 

Cord.  Speak,  for  me  thought  I  heard 
The  charming  voice  of  a  descending  God. 

Alb.  The  Troops  by  Edmund  rais’d,  I  have  disbanded  ) 

Those  that  remain  are  tinder  my  Command. 

What  Comfort  may  be  brought  to  chear  your  Age, 

And  heal  your  Savage  Wrongs,  shall  be  apply’d; 

For  to  your  Majesty  we  do  resign 

Your  Kingdom,  save  what  part  your  Self  conferr’d 

On  us  in  Marriage. 

Kent.  Hear  you  that,  my  Liege  ? 

Cord.  Then  they  are  Gods,  and  Vertue  is  their  Care. 

Lear.  Is  *t  possible  ? 

Let  the  Spheres  stop  their  Course,  the  Sun  make  halt. 

The  Winds  be  husht,  the  Seas  and  Fountains  rest ; 

All  Nature  pause,  and  listen  to  the  Change. 

Where  is  my  Kent,  my  Cajus? 

Kent.  Here,  my  Liege. 

Lear.  Why  I  have  News,  that  will  recall  thy  Youth ; 

Ha  !  Didst  thou  hear’t,  or  did  th'  inspiring  Gods 
Whisper  to  me  alone  ?  Old  Lear  shall  be 
A  King  again. 

Kent.  The  Prince  that  Like  a  God  has  PowT,  has  said  it. 
Lear.  Cordelia  then  shall  be  a  Queen,  mark  that : 

Cordelia  shall  be  a  Queen  :  Winds  catch  the  Sound, 

And  bear  it  on  your  rosie  Wings  to  Heav’n. 

Cordelia  is  a  Queen. 

Re-enter  Edgar  with  Gloster. 

Alb.  Look,  Sir,  where  Pious  Edgar  comes. 

Leading  his  Eye-less  Father :  O  my  Liege  1 
His  wondrous  Story  will  deserve  your  Leisure; 

What  he  has  done  and  suffer’d  for  your  Sake, 

What  for  the  fair  Cordelia,’ s. 

dost.  Where  is  my  Liege?  Conduct  me  to  his  Knees,  to  hitH 
His  second  Birth  of  Empire ;  my  dear  Edgar 
Has,  with  himself,  reveal’d  the  King’s  blest  Restauration. 

Lear.  My  poor  dark  Gloster. 

Glost.'  O  let  me  kiss  that  once  more  Sceptred  Hand ! 

Lear.  Hold,  Thou  mistak’st  the  Majesty,  kneel  here ; 

Cordelia  has  our  Pow’r,  Cordelia’s  Queen. 

Speak,  is  not  that  the  noble  Suff’ring  Edgar? 

Glost.  My  pious  Son,  more  dear  than  my  lost  Eyes  1 
Lear.  I  wrong’d  him  too,  but  here ’s  the  fair  Amends. 

Edg.  Your  Leave,  my  Liege,  for  an  unwelcome  Message; 
Edmund  (but  that’s  a  Trifle)  is  expir’d  ; 

What  more  will  touch  you,  your  imperious  Daughters 
Gcneril  and  haughty  Regan ,  both  are  Dead, 

Each  by  the  other  poison’d  at  a  Banquet. 

This,  Dying,  they  confest. 

Cord.  O  fatal  Period  of  ill-govem’d  Life  I 
Lear.  Ingrateful  as  they  were,  my  Heart  feels  yet 
A  Pang  of  Nature  for  their  wretched  Fall 
But,  Edgar,  I  defer  thy  Joys  too  long : 

Thou  serv’dst  distrest  Cordelia;  take  her  Crown’d : 

Th’  imperial  Grace  fresh  blooming  on  her  Brow ; 

Nay  Gloster,  Thou  hast  here  a  Father’s  Right, 

Thy  helping  Hand  t’  heap  Blessings  on  their  Heads. 

Kent.  Old  Kent  throws  in  his  hearty  Wishes  too. 


TATE'S  VERSION 


47? 


*  Edg.  The  Gods  and  You  too  largely  recompence 
What  I  have  done ;  the  Gift  strikes  Merit  dumb. 

Cord.  Nor  do  I  blush  to  own  my  self  o'er-paid 
For  all  my  suff ’rings  past. 

Glost.  Now,  gentle  Gods,  give  Gloster  his  discharge. 

Lear.  No,  Gloster  Thou  hast  business  yet  for  Life ; 

Thou,  Kent,  and  I,  retir’d  to  some  close  Cell, 

Will  gently  pass  our  short  reserves  of  Time 
In  calm  Reflections  on  our  Fortunes  past 
Cheer’d  with  Relation  of  the  prosperous  Reign 
Of  this  celestial  Pair;  Thus  our  Remains 
Shall  in  an  even  Course  of  Thought  be  past 
Enjoy  the  present  Hour,  nor  fear  the  Last. 

Edg.  Our  drooping  Country  now  erects  her  Head, 

Peace  spreads  her  balmy  Wings,  and  Plenty  blooms. 

Divine  Cordelia,  all  the  Gods  can  Witness 
How  much  Ihy  Love  to  Empire  I  prefer  I 
Thy  bright  Example  shall  convince  the  World 
(Whatever  Storms  of  Fortune  are  decreed) 

That  Truth  and  Vertue  shall  at  last  succeed.'  [Ex.  Omnet* 

The  Epilogue,  spoken  by  Mrs  Barry,  concludes  with  : 

*  This  Play's  Reviver  humbly  do’s  admit 
Your  abs’lute  Pow’er  to  damn  his  part  of  it : 

But  still  so  many  Master-Touches  shine 

Of  that  vast  Hand  that  first  laid  this  Design 

That  in  great  Shakespear' s  Right,  He’s  bold  to  say. 

If  you  like  nothing  you  have  seen  this  Day, 

The  Play  your  Judgment  damns,  not  you  the  Play,' 


ADDISON,  in  The  spectator  (No.  40,  April  16,  1 71 1),  says,  *  King  Lear  is  an  admir¬ 
able  tragedy  ...  as  Shakespeare  wrote  it ;  but  as  it  is  reformed  according  to  the 
chimerical  notion  of  poetical  justice,  in  my  humble  opinion  it  has  lost  half  its  beauty.’ 

Davies  (Dram.  Misc.,  ii,  212) :  Though  Tate’s  alterations  are,  in  many  places, 
mean  and  unworthy  to  be  placed  so  near  the  composition  of  the  best  dramatic  author, 
it  must  be  confessed,  that  in  the  conduct  of  some  Scenes,  whether  contrived  by  him¬ 
self  or  hinted  to  him  by  his  friend  Dryden,  he  is  not  unhappy.  One  situation  of  his 
is  particularly  affecting;  where  the  Scene  opens  and  discovers  Lear,  with  his  head 
on  Cordelia’s  lap,  and  the  king  in  his  sleep,  attacking  the  forces  of  his  enemies.  The 
bringing  that  action  forward  to  the  audience,  which  is  only  related  in  the  old  play, 
of  Lear’s  killing  the  two  soldiers  employed  to  murder  him  and  Cordelia,  is  a  circum¬ 
stance  that  gives  pleasure  and  exultation  to  the  spectators.  The  half-breathing  and 
panting  of  Garrick,  with  a  look  and  action  which  confessed  the  infirmity  of  old  age, 
greatly  heightened  the  picture.  To  speak  in  Shakespeare’s  phrase,  this  incident  will 
be  locked  in  the  memory  of  those  who  have  the  pleasure  to  remember  it.  Barry,  in 
this  Scene,  was  a  lively  copy  of  Garrick’s  manner,  and  had  the  superior  advantage 
of  a  more  important  figure.  Who  could  possibly  think  of  depriving  an  audience, 
almost  exhausted  with  the  feelings  of  so  many  terrible  Scenes,  of  the  inexpressible 
delight  which  they  enjoyed,  when  the  old  king  in  rapture  cried  out, — 

*  Old  Lear  shall  be  a  King  again '  t 


47S 


APPENDIX 


Arthur  Murphy,  whom  Dr  Johnson  pronounced  a  very  judicious  critic,  thus 
speaks  of  Tate’s  Version  (Gray s-Inn  Journal ,  ii,  222,  1754):  The  close  of  this 
Tragedy  is  full  of  Terror  and  Commiseration,  and  our  great  Poet  has  here  given  us 
a  Death,  which  is  not  often  to  be  found  in  the  Play-house  Bill  of  Mortality,  viz., 
the  Death  of  Lear  without  the  Dagger  or  the  Bowl.  But,  perhaps,  after  all  the 
Heart-piercing  Sensations  which  we  have  before  endured  through  the  whole  Piece, 
it  would  be  too  much  to  see  this  actually  performed  on  the  Stage ;  from  the  actor 
■whom  I  have  already  named  [Garrick]  I  am  sure  it  would,  though  I  should  be  glad 
to  see  the  Experiment  made,  convinced  at  the  same  Time  that  the  Play,  as  it  is  altered, 
will  always  be  most  agreeable  to  an  Audience,  as  the  Circumstances  of  Lear’s  Res¬ 
toration,  and  the  virtuous  Edgar’s  Alliance  with  the  amiable  Cordelia,  must  always 
call  forth  those  gushing  Tears  which  are  swelled  and  ennobled  by  a  virtuous  Joy. 

Macready  in  his  Reminiscences  (p.  697,  New  York,  1875)  says  that  ‘Tate’s 

*  King  Lear  was  the  only  acting  copy  from  the  date  of  its  production  until  the  res- 
‘  toration  of  Shakespeare’s  tragedy  at  Covent  Garden  in  1838.  Previously  to  that, 
‘  I  think,  in  the  year  1823,  or  a  little  later,  the  play,  Tate’s,  was  acted  by  Kean,  with 

*  the  last  Scene  of  the  original  restored.  I  believe  the  elder  Colman  put  out  an 
‘alteration,  but  I  question  whether  it  was  acted;  certainly  it  did  not  hold  its  place 
‘on  the  stage.’ 


LIST  OF  EDITIONS  COLLATED  IN  THE 
TEXTUAL  NOTES 


The  First  Quarto  (‘  The  Pide  Bull.’ 

Ashbee’s  Facsimile)  .  .  . .  [Q,] . 1608 

The  Second  Quarto  (‘'N.  Butter’)  [QJ . .  ..  1608 

The  First  Folio  . .  . .  .  .  [F,]  . .  . .  . .  . .  1623 

The  Second  Folio  .  .  .  .  .  .  [Fa]  . .  1632 

The  Third  Quarto  (Jane  Bell’s  Ed.)  [Q3]  . .  1655 

The  Third  Folio . [F3]  . .  . .  . .  . .  1664 

The  Fourth  Folio  .  .  . .  . .  [F,]  . .  . .  . .  . .  1685 

Rowe  (First  Edition)  .  .  .  .  [Rowe  i]  . 1709 

Rowe  (Second  Edition)  , .  . .  [Rowe  ii]  . 1714 

Pope  (First  Edition)  . .  . .  [Pope  i]  . 1723 

Pope  (Second  Edition)  . .  . .  [Pope  ii]  . 1728 

Theobald  (First  Edition)  . .  [Theob.  i]  . 1733 

Theobald  (Second  Edition)  . .  [Theob.  ii]  . 1740 

Hanmer . [Han.] . 1743 

Warburton  . .  . .  . .  [Warb.]  .  *  . .  . .  1747 

Johnson . [Johns.]  . ,  . .  . .  1765 

Capell . [Cap.] .  (?)  1768 

Jennens . [Jen.]  •  •  •  •  •  •  . .  1770 

Johnson  and  Steevens  . .  . .  [Steev.  ’73] . 1773 

Johnson  and  Steevens  . .  . .  [Steev.  ’78] . 1778 

Johnson  and  Steevens  . .  . .  [Steev.  ’85] . 1785 

Malone . [Mai.] . 1790 

Eccles  . [Ec.] . 179 2 

Steevens  . .  . . [Steev.]  . 1793 

Rann  .  . .  [Rann] .  (?)  1794 

Reed’s  Steevens . [Reed  ’03]  . .  . .  . .  1803 

Reed’s  Steevens . [Reed  ’13]  1813 

Boswell’s  Malone  . .  . .  [Var.  or  Bos.] . 1821 

Singer  (First  Edition)  . .  . .  [Sing,  i]  . .  . .  . .  1826 

Knight  (First  Edition)  . .  .  .  [Knt,  i]  . .  . .  (?)  1841 

Collier  (First  Edition)  . .  . .  [Coll,  i]  . 1843 

Deltus  (First  Edition)  . .  . .  [Del.  i]  . .  . .  . .  1854 

Hudson  (First  Edition)  . .  . .  [Huds.  i]  . .  .  •  . .  1856 

Singer  (Second  Edition)  . .  . .  [Sing,  ii]  . 1856 

Dvce  (First  Edition)  . .  . .  [Dyce  i]  . .  . «  . .  1857 

Collier  (Second  Edition)  . .  £Coll.  ii]  . 1858 

Staunton . [Sta.] . i860 

Richard  Grant  White  . .  . .  [Wh.]  . .  1861 


479 


4S0  EDITIONS  COLLATED  IN  TEXTUAL  NOTES 


The  Globe  Edition  (Clark  and 


Wright) . 

[Glo.] 

•  • 

•  • 

•  ♦ 

1864 

Charles  and  Mary  Cowden  Clarke 
The  Cambridge  Edition  (Clark  and 

[Clarke] 

•  • 

•  • 

(?)  I864 

Wright) . 

[Cam.] 

•  • 

•  • 

•  • 

1865 

Halliwell  (Folio  Edition)  . . 

[Hal.] 

•  • 

#  . 

•  • 

1865 

Knight  (Second  Edition) 

[Knt,  ii'J 

•  • 

0  • 

•  • 

1865 

Keightley . 

[Ktly.] 

•  • 

•  • 

•  • 

1865 

Dyce  (Second  Edition) 

[Dyce  ii] 

•  • 

•  • 

•  • 

1866 

Hudson  (School  Edition) 

[Huds.] 

9  • 

«  • 

•  • 

1871 

Delius  (Third  Edition) 

[Del.  ii] 

•  • 

•  • 

•  • 

1872 

Moberly  (Rugby  Edition)  .  . 

[Mob.] 

•  • 

•  • 

•  • 

1876 

W.  Aldis  Wright  ( Clarendon  Edition) 

[Wr.] 

•  • 

•  • 

•  • 

18  77 

Collier  (Third  Edition) 

[Coll,  iii] 

•  • 

•  • 

•  • 

1877 

Schmidt  . 

[Sch.] 

•  • 

•  • 

•  • 

187Q 

The  Agreement  of  the  Folios  is  indicated  by  the  symbol  Ff;  that  of  Qt  and  Q. 
by  Qq. 

The  sign  +  after  Ff,  or  F4,  indicates  the  agreement  of  Rowe,  Pope,  Theobald, 
Hanmer,  Warburton,  and  Johnson. 

The  same  sign  -after  Glo.  indicates  the  agreement  of  the  Globe  Edition ,  the  Cam¬ 
bridge  Edition ,  and  Wright’s  ( Clarendon )  Edition. 

The  abbreviation  (subs.)  indicates  that  the  reading  is  substantially  given,  and  that 
immaterial  variations  in  spelling,  punctuation,  or  stage-directions  are  disregarded 

When  Warburton  precedes  Hanmer,  in  the  Textual  Notes,  it  indicates  that 
Hanmer  has  adopted  a  suggestion  of  Warburton’s. 

When  the  Variorum  of  1821  follows  Malone’s  edition  of  1790,  Var.  stands  for 
both ;  when  they  disagree,  Bos.,  i.  e.,  Boswell,  stands  for  the  former  only. 

Coll.  ( MS )  refers  to  Mr  Collier’s  annotated  F2. 

Quincy  (MS)  refers  to  Mr  Quincy’s  annotated  F^. 

The  words  et  cet.  after  any  reading  indicate  that  it  is  the  reading  of  all  other 
editions. 

The  frequent  omission  of  the  apostrophe  in  the  Fa,  a  peculiarity  of  that  edition,  is 
not  generally  noted. 

An  Emendation  or  Conjecture  which  is  discussed  in  the  Commentary  is  not  repeated 
in  the  Textual  Notes;  nor  is  * conj.’  added  to  any  name  in  the  Textual  Notes  unless 
it  happens  to  be  that  of  an  editor,  in  which  case  its  omission  would  be  misleading. 

In  the  matter  of  punctuation  the  colon  is  used  as  it  is  in  German,  as  equivalent 
to  ‘  namely.’ 

A  dash  at  the  close  of  a  sentence,  in  the  Text,  indicates  that  the  speaker  changes 
his  address  from  one  person  to  another. 

All  citations  of  Acts,  Scenes,  and  lines  in  Romeo  and  yuliet,  Macbeth,  and 
Hamlet  refer  to  this  edition  of  those  plays ;  in  citations  from  other  plays  the  Globe 
Edition  is  followed. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF  KING  LEAR 


ENGLISH* 

SEVENTEENTH  CENTURY 

The  tme  Chronicle  Hi9torie  of  the  life  and  death  of  King  Lear,  &c. 

[The  Pide  Bull  edition.  See  p.  354.]  . 1608 

Lithographed  by  ASHBEE,  1 368. 

The  true  Chronicle  History  of  the  life  and  death  of  King  Lear,  &c. 

[The  N.  Butter  edition.  See  p.  355.]  . :6o8 

Reprinted  by  Steevens:  ‘Twenty  Plays,’  Stc.,  1766. 

Lithographed  by  Ashbee,  1867. 

True  Chronicle  History  of  the  life  and  death  of  King  Lear,  &c.  [The 

Jane  Bell  edition;  see  p.  358.]  . .  ..  1655 

The  History  of  King  Lear,  Acted  at  the  Queen’s  Theatre.  Revised 

with  Alterations,  by  N.  Tate.  . 1681 

Reprinted  in  1689, 1699,  1712,  1723,  1734,  1735,  1756,  1759,  1760,  at  Cork, 

1761,  1767,  1771,  1779. 


EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY 

Gildon :  Remarks  on  the  Plays  of  Sh.,  p.  404. .  . .  17:0 

Considerations  on  the  Stage  in  Tragedy,  a  Criticism  on  King  Lear.  . .  . .  1731 

Peck:  Explanatory  and  Critical  Notes . ..  ..  1740 

Upton :  Observations,  &c . .  .  ,.l  746 

Edwards :  Canons  of  Criticism . . . 

Other  editions,  1750,  1753,  1758,  1765. 

Upton :  Observations,  &c . .  . .  . .  . .  ..1 748 

Mrs  Lennox:  Shakespear  Illustrated .  1753-4 

Grey:  Critical,  Historical,  and  Explanatory  Notes.  . 1753 

Warton :  The  Adventurer,  8  December,  et  seq,  .  «  ..  ..  ..  ..  1754 

Murphy:  Gray's- Inn  Journal,  vol.  ii,  15  June,  et  seq.  .  .  . *754 

Capell:  Notes  and  Various  Readings.  ..  ..  ..  . .  ..  ..  1759 

Heath:  A  Revisal,  &c.  ..  ..  1765 

Ring  Leir,  1605 ;  reprinted  by  Steevens  in  Twenty  Plays,  &c.  . .  , .  1766 

Reprinted  by  Nichols  in  *  Six  Old  Plays?  &c.,  1 779. 


*  This  English  portion  of  the  Bibliography  was  kindly  prepared  by  my  friend  J.  Parker  Norris 
Esq.  The  titles  of  Shakespeare’s  complete  Works  are  omitted  as  surplusage. — Ed. 

41  2F  481 


4^2 


APPENDIX 


Tyrwhitt:  Observations  and  Conjectures . .  ,,  1766 

Colman’s  Acting  Edition . ..  .  .  ..  1768 

Another  edition,  1 77 1. 

Mrs  Montagu :  An  Essay.  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  .  .  1 769 

Other  editions,  1770,  1772,  1777,  1785,  iSlO. 

Jennens:  King  Lear,  collated  with  old  and  modem  editions.  ..  .  ..  1770 

Jennens :  A  Vindication  of  King  Lear  as  lately  published,  See.  .  .  .  .  1772 

Hopkins’  Acting  Edition .  1774 

Griffith:  The  Morality  of  Shakespeare’s  Drama .  . .  1775 

Capell:  Notes  and  Various  Readings . .  1779 

Ritson:  Remarks,  Critical  and  Illustrative.  . 17S 3 

Davies:  Dramatic  Miscellanies.  London,  and  Dublin.  . 17S4 

Richardson:  Essays,  &c .  ,.1784 

Other  editions,  1797,  179S,  1812. 

Mason :  Comments.  London,  and  Dublin.  . 17S5 

Other  editions,  179S;  Dublin,  1807. 

Altered  by  Garrick . 1786 

Eccles :  Illustrations  and  Variorum  Commentaries.  .  .  , .  . .  .  .  1792 

Republished,  Dublin,  1793;  London,  1 794,  1801,  1805. 

Ritson:  Cursory  Criticisms .  . .  ..  ..  1792 

Players’  Edition.  . 1 794 

Ireland :  ‘  Miscellaneous  Papers,’  &c.,  ‘  Kynge  Leare.’  Svo,  and  Folio.  ..  1796 
Dubois:  The  Wreath.  ..  ..  . . .  ..  1799 

NINETEENTH  CENTURY 

Altered  by  Tate  and  revised  by  Kemble.  London .  ?  1800 

Waldron :  The  Shakespearian  Miscellany  (containing  Downes’s  Roscius  Atigli- 

canus ) .  ,  .  1802 

Chedworth:  Notes . .  .  ..  1805 

Seymour:  Remarks . 1805 

Douce :  Illustrations . 1807 

Another  edition,  1839. 

Lamb:  Tales  from  Shakespeare .  . . 1 807 

Other  editions,  1816,  1822,  1831,  1S39,  1843,  1S49,  1853.  1S57,  1858,  1876. 

Pye  :  Comments  on  the  Commentators . 1807 

Revised  by  Kemble . 1808 

Players’  Edition.  Manchester . .  ..  1808 

Mrs  Inchbald’s  Edition . 1S0S 

Weston:  Short  Notes.  . 1S0S 

Croft:  Annotations.  York.  ..  ..  ..  ..  ..  1S10 

Deverell:  Discoveries  in  Hieroglyphics  and  other  Antiquities . 1S13 

Another  edition,  1816. 

Schlegel:  Dramatic  Art,  &c.  Trans,  by  Black .  . . 1815 

Other  editions,  1 840,  1 846,  I S6 1 . 

Becket:  Shakespeare’s  Himself  Again . 1815 

Drake:  Shakespeare  and  his  Times.  ..  ..  ,,  1817 

Hazlitt:  Characters  of  Shakespeare’s  Plays.  ..  ,,  1817 

Other  editions,  1818,  1S3S,  1854,  1870. 

Nichols:  Literary  Illustrations,  &-c.,  vol.  ii.  . .  .  .  ,,  1817 


BIBLIOGRAPHY— ENGLISH  4^3 

Jackson :  Shakespeare’s  Genius  Justified . 1818 

Another  edition ,  1819. 

Annotations  illustrative  of  the  Plays  of  Shakespeare . .  . .  1819 

Oxberry’s  Edition . 1820 

Another  edition,  1823. 

Altered  by  Tate  (Oxberry’s  Edition).  Boston . 1822 

Daniel’s  Edition  (*  Cumberland’s  Theatre  ’).  ..  ..  . . 1824 

Skottowe:  Life  of  Shakespeare .  . .  ..  ..  ..  ..  1824 

Hazlitt:  Plain  Speaker .  .  ,  ..  1826 

Reprinted,  1851,  1869. 

Drake :  Memorials  of  Shakespeare.  . . .  ..  1828 

Farren:  Essays  on  Mania . .  ..  1829 

Collier:  History  of  English  Dramatic  Poetry.  ..  ..  ..  ..1831 

Second  edition,  1879. 

Mrs  Jameson :  Characteristics  of  Women.  . .  . .  ..  1832 

Other  editions,  1833,  1836,  1846,  1858.. 

Players’  Edition.  New  York.  . .  ..  . .  ..  ..  1835 

Patterson :  Natural  History  of  the  Insects  mentioned  in  Shakespeare . 1838 

Another  edition,  1842. 

Brown:  Shakespeare’s  Autobiographical  Poems . 1838 

Rankin :  The  Philosophy  of  Shakespeare.  . 1841 

Collier:  Shakespeare’s  Library . 1843 

New  edition  by  W.  C.  Hazlitt,  1875. 

Dyce :  Remarks,  &c.  . .  ..  ..  ..  . .  ..  1844 

Hunter:  New  Illustrations . 1845 

Badham :  Criticism  applied  to  Shakespeare.  ..  . . 1846 

Ulrici:  Shakespeare’s  Dramatic  Art  (translated).  London.  ..  ..  ..  1846 

New  edition ,  London,  1876. 

Birch :  Inquiry  into  the  Philosophy  and  Religion  of  Shakespeare . 1848 

Hudson:  Lectures.  New  York . 1848 

Players’  Edition  (Modem  Standard  Drama).  New  York . 1848 

Coleridge :  Notes  and  Lectures . 1849 

Reprinted,  Liverpool,  1874. 

Mrs  Cowden  Clarke:  Girlhood  of  Shakespeare’s  Heroines .  1850-52 

C.  Gillmor:  Reflections  from  Shakespeare’s  Cliff.  . . 1851 

Hartley  Coleridge :  Essays  and  Marginalia.  . 1851 

Three  Essays  on  King  Lear  (by  Seeley,  Young,  and  Hart) . 1851 

Collier :  Notes  and  Emendations . 1852 

Second  edition,  1853. 

Bell:  Shakespeare’s  Puck,  &c .  1852-60 

Dyce:  A  Few  Notes.  .  . . 1853 

Singer:  The  Text  of  Shakespeare  Vindicated . 1853 

White:  Shakespeare’s  Scholar.  New  York . 1854 

Walker:  Shakespeare’s  Versification . 1854 

Burlesque  “  King  Queer.”  . . 1855 

Stephens:  Shakespeare’s  Story-teller . 1856 

Collier:  Seven  Lectures.  ..  ..  .  .•  ••  1856 

Badham  :  The  Text.  ..  ..  . .  .  •  ••  *856 

Mitford:  Cursory  Notes.  ..  ..  . 1856 


484 


APPENDIX 


Bathurst :  Shakespeare’s  Versification.  ..  .  *  . ,  .  .  1857 

Another  edition,  1850. 

Players’  Edition . .  . .  ?  1857 

Lloyd:  Essays  (reprinted  from  Singer’s  second  edition.)  . 1858 

Charles  Kean’s  edition . 1858 

Rushton  :  Shakespeare  a  Lawyer.  Liverpool . 185S 

Lord  Campbell :  Shakespeare’s  Legal  Acquirements.  ».  1859 

Walker:  Critical  Examination  of  the  Text.  .  ..  . .  1859 

Bucknill :  The  Psychology  of  Shakespeare,  , .  ,,  ..  ..  1859 

Dyce :  Strictures,  &c.  .  . .  ,,  1859 

Jervis:  Proposed  Emendations.  ..  i860 

Bucknill:  Medical  Knowledge  of  Shakespeare.  .  .  i860 

Nichols:  Notes,  &c . .  ,,  ,,  1861-62 

Gervinus:  Shakespeare  Commentaries  (translated).  ..  1862 

A notker  edition,  1875. 

Bailey:  The  Received  Text.  . .  , .  1862-66 

Cowden  Clarke :  Shakespeare  Characters . .  ..  1863 

Hackett :  Notes,  Criticisms,  &c.  New  York.  ..  ..  ..  . .  1S63 

Edited  by  Rev.  John  Hunter.  (Longman’s  Series.) . ■.  , .  1865 

Steams :  Shakespeare’s  Medical  Knowledge.  New  York . 1865 

Heraud:  Shakespeare:  his  Inner  Life . 1865 

Players’  Edition.  .  , .  ,,  . .  ?  1S66 

Cartwright:  New  Readings.  . 1866 

Kellogg :  Delineations  of  Insanity.  New  York.  ..  ..  ..  ..1866 

Keightley:  The  Shakespeare  Expositor .  ..  ..  1867 

Eorsyth:  Shakespeare:  Some  Notes.  Edinburgh.  «,  . ,  . .  1867 

Ross:  Studies.  . 1867 

Bucknill:  The  Mad  Folk  of  Shakespeare.  .  .  1867 

Giles:  Human  Life  in  Shakespeare.  Boston . .  • »  1868 

Preston:  Studies.  Philadelphia . .  ,  ,  ..  1869 

King  Lear;  or  the  Undutiful  Children.  ..  ♦.  ..  1870 

Daniel:  Notes  and  Conjectural  Emendations.  . .  ..  ..  1870 

Players’  Edition  (Cumberland’s  Theatre) .  , ,  ♦  .  .  .  ?  1870 

Rushton:  Shakespeare’s  Euphuism.  ..  . . 1 87 1 

Edited  by  Moberly.  (Rugby  Edition.) . 1871 

Ray:  Contributions  to  Mental  Pathology.  Boston.  ..  1873 

Lloyd :  Critical  Essays.  . 1875 

Snider:  Shakespeare’s  Tragedies.  {Journal  of  Speculative  Philosophy!)  St. 

Louis . 1S75 

Reprinted  in  a  collected  form  as  *  System  of  Shakespeare  Dramas,’  1877. 

Dowden:  Shakespeare:  His  Mind  and  Art.  .  1875 

Ward:  History  of  English  Dramatic  Poetry.  .  .  . 1 875 

Edited  by  Kemshead.  . 1875 

Edited  by  W.  Aldis  Wright.  (Clarendon  Edition.)  Oxford.  .  .  «  .  . .  1875 

Weiss:  Wit,  Humor,  and  Shakespeare.  Boston.  . 1876 

Fleay :  Shakespeare  Manual.  . .  ,.  1876 

Edited  by  Moberly.  (Rugby  Edition.)  .  ..  ..  , .  ..  1876 

Mayou:  Natural  History  of  Shakespeare.  Manchester.  . 1877 

Dowden :  Shakespeare  Primer .  .  1877 


BIBLIOGRAPHY— ENGLISH 


485 


Fie  ay  j  Introduction  to  Shakespearian  Study . .  ..  1877 

Edwin  Booth’s  Prompt-Book.  . 1878 

Bulloch:  Studies  on  the  Text . 1878 

Ellacombe:  Plant-lore  and  Garden-craft  of  Shakespeare.  Exeter . 1878 

Stokes:  Chronological  Order  of  Shakespeare’s  Plays . 1878 

Cowden  Clarke :  The  Shakespeare  Key . .  ..  ..  1879 

Herr:  Scattered  Notes  on  the  Text.  Philadelphia . 1S79 

Edited  by  Hudson.  Boston.  . ,  . 1879 


ARTICLES  IN  ENGLISH  AND  AMERICAN  PERIODICALS 

Academy.  Rossi  as  King  Lear .  6  May,  1876 

“  . .  V  .  28  Dec.  1878 

American  Journal  of  Insanity .  July,  1844 

Architect.  Godwin:  The  Architecture  and  Costume  of  Shakespeare’s  Plays. 

28  Nov.  1874 

Athcnaum.  Hales:  Cordelia  [in  an  Epitaph] .  2  Sept.  1870 

“  Venables :  To  *  gallow.*  .  13  Nov.  1875 

£ aily's  Monthly  Magazine  of  Sports  and  Pastimes .  Gem :  Shakespeare  as  a 

Sportsman.  .  ,  .  August  8c  September,  1S72 

Blackwood's  Magazine.  Campbell’s  Specimens  of  Eng.  Poetry.  . .  May,  1819 

Characteristics  of  Women . Feb.  *833 

New  Readings  in  Shakespeare.  . .  .  .  Oct.  1853 

Colburn's  New  Monthly  Magazine.  Jacox :  The  Physic  prescribed  to  Pomp 

by  Ex-King  Lear.  ..  . July,  1867 

Literary  World.  J.  C.  on  IV,  vii,  27,  .  X  June,  1S7S 


it 

66 


I,  iv,  31 :  4 1  can  keep  honest  counsel,’  . 

I,  iv,  107:  ‘  Lady,  the  Brach,’ . 

II,  i,  58 :  *  uncaught,  and  found — dispatch,* 


i,  158 :  *  Comest  to  the  warm  sun,’ 


I, 

iv. 

31: 

I, 

iv, 

107: 

II, 

i, 

58: 

II, 

i, 

58: 

II, 

i, 

58: 

II, 

ii, 

29: 

II, 

ii. 

29: 

II, 

ii. 

29 : 

II, 

ii, 

158: 

II, 

ii, 

158: 

II, 

ii. 

15S: 

II, 

ii, 

158: 

II, 

iv, 

159: 

II, 

iv, 

221 : 

II, 

iv, 

221 : 

II, 

iv, 

221 : 

II, 

iv, 

221 : 

II, 

iv, 

221 : 

II, 

iv, 

221 : 

II, 

iv, 

221 : 

II, 

iv, 

221 : 

II, 

iv, 

221 : 

64 

46 


64 

46 


44 

44 


46 

44 


44 

46 


44 

44 

44 


44 

44 

44 


46 

46 

46 


44 

44 

66 

64 

64 

44 

44 

44 


Sib 

Ser. 

V, 

444 

4th 

46 

xi, 

72 

2d 

46 

V, 

202 

1st 

44 

vi, 

6 

1st 

44 

vi, 

4i 

1st 

44 

vi, 

82 

4th 

44 

xii, 

43 

4th 

46 

xii. 

84 

4th 

46 

xii, 

113 

3<I 

44 

xi, 

413 

3<I 

44 

xi, 

463 

3<i 

44 

xii. 

399 

5th 

64 

iv, 

223 

3<I 

64 

xi, 

251 

4th 

44 

i, 

454 

4th 

66 

i. 

543 

4th 

46 

xi, 

210 

4th 

44 

xi, 

321 

4th 

44 

xi, 

349 

4th 

66 

xi. 

391 

4th 

46 

xi. 

5°7 

4th 

44 

xii, 

29 

4th 

44 

xii, 

ll7 

41 


486 


APPENDIX 


Notes  and  Queries  (continued). 
II,  iv,  221 ! 


II,  iv,  221 
II,  iv,  221 
III,  iv,  73 
III,  iv,  174 
III,  iv,  174 
III,  iv,  174 

III,  iv,  174 

IV,  i,  20 
IV,  i,  20 
IV,  i,  20 
IV,  i,  20 
IV,  i,  20 
IV,  i,  20 
IV,  i,  20 
IV,  ii,  46 
IV,  ii,  57 
IV,  ii,  57 
IV,  ii,  62-  * 
IV,  ii,  62 
IV,  iii,  19 
IV,  vi,  83 
IV,  vi,  98 


tt 

tt 


( Pelican  daughters/  ♦  #  • ,  #  # 

*  Child  Rowland  to  the  dark  tower  came/ 
n 


it 

ti 

it 


a 

a 

a 


it 

it 

it 


tt 

it 


tc 

ft 

it 


tt 

it 

a 


a 

it 

a 

a 

a 

u 


tt 

a 

it 

it 

tc 

tt 


a 

tt 

it 

it 

u 

a 


it 

it 

a 

it 

it 

it 


If  that  the  heavens,* 


*  They  cannot  touch  me  for  coining,’ 


1  • 

,  XII. 

T7S 

ii 

xii, 

218 

it 

xii, 

297 

a 

ix, 

445 

.  5th 

it 

fi, 

329 

.  5th 

a 

ii. 

476 

.  5th 

it 

iv, 

427 

.  5th 

a 

vi, 

345 

u 

vh, 

592 

it 

VUl, 

4 

it 

viii, 

97 

a 

xi, 

153 

u 

xi, 

234 

it 

xi, 

473 

u 

xii, 

97 

.  5* 

u 

iii. 

103 

it 

vii, 

0 

O 

a 

vu, 

45 

.  5th 

tt 

vi, 

22$ 

.  5th 

a 

vi, 

303 

.  5th 

a 

viii. 

262 

.  4th 

tt 

x, 

246 

it 

iii, 

XO3 

.  5* 

it 

v, 

202 

-  •  1857 

1860-1 


V,  iii,  24:  ‘Goujerc,’ . 

Philological  Society's  Transactions. 

Interpretation  of  *  forks,’  Lear  IV,  vi,  Il8,  by  W.  C.  Jourdain,  p.  134, 
Emendations  proposed  by  W.  C.  Jourdain,  p.  141.  . , 

Robinson's  Epitome  of  Literature. 

Crosby :  Note  on  I,  i,  52;  I,  1,33,  ..  ..  ,,  15  May,  1879 

“  “  II,  iii,  172,  .  I  July,  1879 

“  “  III,  iii,  22;  III,  vii,  63,  ..  ..  ..  J  June,  1879 

Furness:  **  I,  iv,  218,  .  August,  1878 

The  Cornell  Review.  Cluck:  The  Clown  in  Shakespeare.  . .  March,  1875 
The  Fortnightly  Review.  Swinburne:  The  Three  Stages  of  Shakespeare. 

May,  1S75,  &  Jan«  1876 

The  Galaxy.  Richardson :  Shakespeare  as  a  Plagiarist.  . .  . .  December,  1870 

“  White :  On  Reading  Shakespeare.  Oct. &Nov.  1876,  &  Jan.  &  Feb.  1877 
The  Gentleman' s  Magazine.  Clarke :  Shakespeare’s  Philosophers  and  Jesters. 

March,  April,  May,  June,  1873 

«<  «  «  . .  .  .  August,  1845 

The  Quarterly  Review.  life  of  Kemble .  April,  1826 

«  «  M  Sir  Henry  Halford’s  Essays,  p.  197,  . .  April,  1833 


BIBLIOGRAPHY— GERMAN 


4$7 


GERMAN  * 

Wieland  :  Shakespear  theatralische  Werke,  vol.  i.  . Zurich,  1 762 

Herder:  Von  Deutscher  Art  und  Kunst,  p.  93 .  Hamburg,  1773 

Eschenburg:  Shakespear’s  Schauspiele,  vol.  xi . Zurich,  1776 

Schroeder:  Koenig  Lear,  nach  Shakespeare  bearbeitet  ( — Gen6e).  ..  ..1778 

Bock:  Koenig  Lear,  nach  Shakespear  ( — Genee) . Leipzig,  1779 

Dr  H.  E.  Warnekros  :  Der  Geist  Shakespear’s,  2ter  Theil,  p.  224.  Greifswald,  1786 
Kuchler:  King  Lear.  [English  Text  and  German  Notes.]  ..  ..  Zeiz,  1794 

Dr  J.  H.  Voss:  Konig  Lear  [with  music  for  ‘Then  they  for  sudden  joy  did  weep,’. 

and  *  Sleepest  or  wakest  thou,  jolly  shepherd,’  composed  by  Zelter],  Jena,  iScS 

Tieck:  Alt-Englisches  Theater,  p.  x . Berlin,  1811 

H.  Voss:  Shakespeare/s  Schauspiele,  vol.  iii  (mit  Erlauterungen).  .  .  Leipzig,  1819 
Franz  Horn:  Shakspeare’s  Schauspiele  erlSutert,  i,  183.  .  .  .  .Leipzig,  1823 

Beauregard  Pandin  :  Koenig  Lear,  fur  die  Biihne  ( — Gen6e).  ..  ..  1824 

L.  Petz:  Koenig  Lear,  ubersetzt  ( — Gen6e) .  .  .  1824 

J.  Bapt.  von  Zahlhas:  Koenig  Lear,  frei  bearbeitet .  Bremen,  1824 

Meyer:  Shakespeare’s  Sammtliche  Werke,  frei  bearbeitet,  vol.  xiv.  .  .  ?  1824 

Benda :  Shakespeare’s  dramatische  Werke . Leipzig,  1825 

Kaufman:  Shakespeare’s  dramatische  Werke,  vol.  i . Berlin,  1830 

Echtermeyer,  Henschel,  and  Simrock :  Quellen  des  Shakespeare,  &c.,  vol.  iii, 

p.  1 . Berlin,  1831 

Second  edition ,  by  Simrock  alone.  Bonn,  1870. 

Baudissin :  Koenig  Lear.  [This  is  in  vol.  viii  of  Schlegel’s  translation,  super¬ 
vised  by  Tieck.]  . Berlin,  1832 

J.  M.  Pierre:  [English  Text  with  German  Notes.]  .  .  Francfort  O.  M.,  1832 
Schick:  Konig  Lear :  Mit  einer  Abhandlung  iiber  dieses  Trauerspiel.  Leipzig,  1833 
Dr  H.  T.  RStscher:  Abhandlungen  zur  Philosophic  der  Kunst,  p.  73.  Berlin,  1837 
Ortlepp:  Shakespeare’s  dramat.  Werke,  vol.  iii.  .  .  .  .  Stuttgart,  1839 

C.  A.  West:  Konig  Lear,  fiir  die  Darstellung  eingerichtet . Wien,  1841 

Dr  Al.  Schmidt:  SacherklSrende  Anmerkungen,  u.  s.  w.,  p.  352.  .  .  Danzig,  1842 

Keller  and  Rapp :  Shakespeare’s  Schauspiele,  vol.  ii.  [Lear  was  translated  by 

Moritz  Rapp.] .  Stuttgart,  1843 

Lichtenberg:  Briefe  aus  England,  1776  (Mrs  Barry  as  Cordelia,  p.  252). 

Gbttingen,  1844 

Dr  H.  T.  Rotscher :  Cyclus  dramatischer  Charaktere,  Cordelia,  p.  334.  Berlin,  1844 

Dr  F.  T.  Vischer:  Aesthetick  oder  Wissenchaft  des  Schonen,  vol.  i,  pp.  264, 

272,  2S9f,  307 f,  312,  372,  461 ;  vol.  ii,  pp.  166,  168,  175,  206,  368,  376; 
vol.  iii,  pp.  28,  35f,  46-49,  53,  233,  “9°,  *335,  *384,  i396f,  1400,  1425, 

1427 .  Reutlingen  and  Leipzig,  1846 

Delius:  Die  Tieck’sche  Shaksperekritik,  p.  126.  .  .  .  .  .  .  Bonn,  1846 

Tieck:  Kritische  Schriften,  I,  5;  iii,  226.  1852 . Leipzig,  1848 

Gervinus:  Shakespeare . Heidelberg,  1849 

Gerth :  Warum  hat  Shakespear  seinem  Lear  keinen  gliicklichen  Ausgang  gege- 

ben?  . Putbus,  1S49 

Dr  E.  W.  Sievers:  Konig  Lear,  fiir  weitere  Kreise  bearbeitet.  .  .  Leipzig,  1851 


*  The  German  and  other  Foreign  portion  of  this  Bibliography  is  compiled  almost  wholly  from  the 
present  Editor’s  Library.  The  references  which  he  owes  to  Gen£e,  Thimm,  Bohn,  or  Cohn  are 
duly  credited. — Ed. 


488 


APPENDIX 


Der  arme  Mann  im  Tockenburg,  p.  402.  . .  *  •  • .  . .  Leipzig,  1852 

Delius :  Shakspere’s  Werke,  vol.  i.  .  Elberfeld,  1854 

Vehse :  Shakespeare  als  Protestant,  Politiker,  Psycholog,  und  Dichter,  vol.  i, 

p.  288 ;  vol.  ii,  pp.  58,  68,  337.  . .  Hamburg,  1854 

Jenken :  Shakespeare’s  Dramen,  vol.  v.  .  .  .  ,  . Mainz,  1855 

Dr  C.  C.  Hense :  Vortrage  iiber  ausgew&hlte  dramatische  Dichtungen  Shake¬ 
speare’s,  Schiller’s,  und  Goethe’s,  p.  40 .  . .  Halberstadt,  1856 

Eduard  Hiilsmann :  Shakespeare.  Sein  Geist  und  seine  Werke,  p.  38.  Leipzig,  1856 

R.  H.  Westley:  [English  Text  and  Notes.]  . Leipzig,  1861 

Kreyssig:  Vorlesungen  iiber  Shakespeare,  ii,  303 .  .  .  Berlin,  1862 

J.  L.  F.  Flathe :  Shakespeare  in  seiner  Wirklichkeit,  p.  441 . Leipzig,  1864 

Rotscher :  Shakespeare  in  seinen  hochsten  Charaktergebilden,  u.  s.  w.,pp.  106, 

1 12,  158.  .  Dresden,  1864 

Bodenstedt:  Koenig  Lear  ( — Gen6e) . Berlin,  1864 

Moltke:  Shakespeare’s  ausgew&hlte  dramat.  Werke,  vol.  vi.  (Circa?),  1865 

Prof.  Dr  Neumann:  Ueber  Lear  und  Ophelia.  . .  Breslau,  1866 

Rttmelin:  §hakespeare-Studien,  p.  60 .  Stuttgart,  1 865 

Gustav  Hauff:  Shakespeare- Studien.  Konig  Lear. 

Deutsches  Museum,  17  Mai,  1866 

J.  L.  Klein :  Geschichte  des  Italienischen  Dramas.  Erster  Band,  s.  S90. 

Leipzig,  1 865 

[Rev.]  M.  Petri :  Zur  Einfiihrung  Shakespeare’s  in  die  christliche  Familie,  p. 

159 . .  Hannover,  1868 

Georg  Herwegh:  Konig  Lear  (Bodenstedt’s  edition,  vol.  xx).  . .  Leipzig,  1869 
Jordan:  Shakespeare’s  dramat.  Werke, vol.  viii.  ,.  Hildburghausen,  1869 
Gende :  Geschichte  der  Shakespeare’schen  Dramen  in  Deutschland,  pp.  255, 

260,  309,  3x0,  321,  325,  333 . Leipzig,  1S70 

Dr  Carl  Stark :  Konig  Lear.  Eine  psychiatrische  Shakespeare- Studie,  u.  s.  w. 

Stuttgart,  1871 

Kreyssig:  Shakespeare  Fragen,  p.  126 .  . . Leipzig,  1871 

Ed.  Tiessen:  Konig  Lear . Stettin,  1871 

W.  OechelhEuser :  Konig  Lear.  Fur  die  deutsche  Biihne  bearbeitet.  Berlin,  1871 
Schlegel  and  Tieck :  Herausgegeben  durch  die  Deutsche  Shakespeare-Gesell- 
schaft.  Vol.  xi,  Konig  Lear,  bearbeitet,  eingeleitet,  und  erl&utert  von  A. 

Schmidt.  . ..  . .  . »  .  .  Berlin,  1871 

Otto  Ludwig:  Shakespeare-Studien,  p.  102 . Leipzig,  1872 

Deetz :  Versuch  zur  Beseitigung  des  scheinbareh  Widerspruch  ifn  Charaktcr 

Lear’s.  (Deutsche  Schaubiihne).  ( — Cohn) . ?  1873 

Max  Moltke :  Die  Erste  Lear-Scene.  Ein  Uebersetzungsvergleich. 

Shakespear-Museum,  Nos  9  and  10,  1873 


Benedix :  Die  Shakespearomanie.  Zur  Abwehr.  .  ..  .  . 

Bodenstedt:  Shakespeare’s  Frauencharaktere,  p.  151.  .  , 

Liebau :  ErzShlungen  aus  der  Shakespeare-Welt,  p.  107.  .  . 

Ernst  Possart :  Konig  Lear.  Fur  die  Darstellung  bearbeitet. 

Freih.  von  Friesen:  Will.  Shakspere’s  Dramen,  &c.,  p.  75.  .  . 

Tiessen:  Beitrage  zur  Feststellung  und  Erkl&rung  des  Shakespeare-Text. 

[Archiv  f.  d.  Studium  d.  n.  Sprachen,  lviii,  2  Heft,  p.  159.]  Braunschweig,  1877 
Dr  Richard  Kcppel :  Textkritische  Studien  iiber  Richard  III  und  King  Lear, 

p.  63 . ,  .  Dresden,  1877 


•Stuttgart,  1S73 
.  Berlin,  1874 
.  Berlin,  1S75 
Miinchen,  1875 
.  Wien,  1876 


BIBLIOGRAPHY— BOHEMIAN,  BANISH,  DUTCH  4$ 9 


Liebau:  Die  Shakespeare-Galerie,  p.  151.  . Berlin,  1878 

Malkewitz :  Die  erste  AufFiihrung  des  Konig  Lear  in  Berlin. — National-Zeitung. 

30  Nov.  ( — Cohn) . Berlin,  1878 

Dr  V.  Knauer :  Shakespeare  der  Philosoph  der  Sittlichen  Weltordnung,  p.  255. 

Innsbruck,  1879 

Dr  Alex.  Schmidt:  King  Lear . Berlin,  1879 

Max  KSchy:  Konig  Lear.  Eine  deutsche  Biihnen-Ausgabe.  .  .Leipzig,  1879 


jfahrbucher  der  deutschen  Shakespeare-  Gesellschaft : 

Essays  : 

Ulrici :  Devrient  als  Lear .  ii,  292 

Delius :  Ueber  den  ursprunglichen  Text  des  Lear.  . .  . .  x,  50 

Elze :  Note  on  *  look  a  mouse,’  IV,  vi .  xi,  29S 

Freih.  v.  Friesen :  Ueber  Shakespeare’s  Quellen  zu  Kflnig  Lear.  xii,  169 

Minor  Notices  ; 

Neumann :  Ueber  Lear  und  Ophelia.  .  iii,  406 

Lear  als  Speisekarte.  [Bill  of  Fare  of  the  Philadelphia  Shakspere  Soc.]  v,  369 

Stark:  Eine  psychiatrische  Studie,  &c . .  vi,  361 

Miss  Beever :  Lear.  .  .  .  vi,  364 

Tiessen :  Lear . .  ..  vii,  365 


BOHEMIAN 

Ladislav  Celakovsky:  Dramaticka  Dila  Williama  Shakespeara.  Kr&l  Lear. 

Dil  i .  V  Praze,  1856 


DANISH 

Kong  Lear:  Oversat  efter  N.  Tates  Omarbeidelse.  ( — Thimm).  .  .  .  .  1794 

Peter  Foersom:  Shakespeare’s  Tragiske  Wserker.  Kong  Lear.  Anden  Deel. 

Kidbenhavn,  1811 

Reprinted,  1850,  1859. 

S.  Beyer:  Kong  Lear,  Lystspil  en  5  Act.  . Kiobenhaven,  1850 

VVosemose:  Kong  Lear.  ( — Thimm) .  ..  1854 

Studier  over  Kong  Lear.  Af  Clemens  Petersen  (Nord  Univer.  Tidskrift,  III, 

iv).  .  Upsala,  ?  1S53 

Kong  Lear:  Oversat  af  Edv.  Lembcke . Kjobenbavn,  1878 


DUTCH 


Koning  Lear,  Treurspel  in  vyf  Bediyven.  Gevolgt  naar  het  Fransch  door 

Mevrouwe  M.  G.  de  Cambon.  .  In  ’sGravenhage,  1791 

Bloemlezing  uit  de  dramatische  Werken  van  Shakspeare.  Door  Mr  L.  Ph.  C. 

van  den  Berg,  p.  no.  . Amsterdam,  1834 

W.  van  Loon:  Koning  Lear . Utrecht,  1861 

H.  de  Beer:  A  Short  Account  of  the  Plots,  &c.,  p.  20.  . .  Amheim,  1S71 


A.  S.  Kok :  Shakespeare’s  Dramatische  Werken.  Koning  Lear,  4  Aflevering. 

Amsterdam,  1871 


49° 


APPENDIX 


FRENCH  * 

Ducis:  Le  Roi  Lear,  Tragedie  en  cinq  Actes,  represents  pour  la  premiere  fois 

en  1783 . 1783 

Le  Roi  Lear,  tragedie,  conform^  aux  representations  donees  &  Paris.  ( — Bohn).  1828 

Deschamps:  Scenes  de.  ( — Bohn) .  ..  1841 

Carlhant:  Tragedie.  Avec  le  text  Anglais  en  regard.  ( — Bohn).  ..  ..  1847 

Devicque  et  Crisafulli :  Le  Roi  Lear,  drame  en  5  actes  et  douze  Tableaux. 

( — Thimm).  . .  .  .  1857 

Victor  Hugo:  William  Shakespeare,  p.  322 .  ..  1864 

Jules  Lacroix :  Le  Roi  Lear,  drame  en  cinq  Actes,  en  vers  imit6  de  Shakspeare.  1868 
Le  Chevalier  de  Chatelain:  Le  Roi  Lear.  Traduite  en  vers  francais.  London,  1S73 

GREEK 

"LcuKonfipov  '0  B ao&evg  Aqp,  pzkzTT}  2.  N.  BaoL?.ZLa6p)  ducqyipov.  'Ey  ’A ■dtjvcup, 


2v/Uoyof  Bvayyehtapig.  .  1870 

0  BA2IAET2  AHP,  TPAH2AIA  EK  TOT  AITAIKOT  META4>PA20EI2A 

YIIO  AHMHTPIOY  BIKEAA.  EN  A0HNAI2 . 1876 

HUNGARIAN 

Mich.  Vorosmarty :  Lear  Kiraly.  ( — Cohn) .  .  .  ..  ..  1855 


ICELANDIC 

Lear  Konungur,  Sorgarleikur  epter  W.  Shakspeare,  I  islenzkri  hydingu  epter 

Steingrfm  Thorsteinsson .  . . Reykjavik,  1878 


ITALIAN 


Leoni :  II  Re  Lear.  ( — Bohn) .  ..  ..  Verona,  1821 

Teatro  Completo  di  Shakspeare,  voltato  in  prosa  Italiana  da  Carlo  Rusconi. 

Padova,  1831 

Fourth  edition,  Torino,  1859;  Sixth  edition,  Firenze,  1S74. 

Teatro  scelto  di  Shakspeare,  tradotto  da  Giulio  Carcano,  vol,  i,  p.  I.  Firenze,  1857 
First  illustrated  edition,  Milan,  1878. 

POLISH 

Dramata  Willjama  Shakspear’a.  Przeklad  z  Pier  wot  worn.  Krol  Lear.  Tom. 


II.  p.  291.  .  Warszawa,  1858 

Dziela  Dramatyczne  Szekspira.  Przeklad  Stanislawa  Kdzmiana.  Kr61  Lyr. 

Tom.  I,  p.  95.  . .  ,  .  .  .  . .  .  .  .  .  Poznan,  1866 

Adam  Plug:  Kr6l  Lir.  Tragedja  Szekspira  w  5  Aktach . Lw6w,  1870 


•  The  French  translations  of  Shakespeare's  Complete  Works  are  given  in  Hamlet,  vol.  ii,  p.  4*5. 
It  seems  superfluous  to  repeat  them  here. — Ed. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY— RUSSIAN,  SWEDISH 


491 


Dziela  Dramatyczne  Williama  Shakespeare  (Szekspira).  Wydanie  illustrowane, 
ozdobione  545  drzeworytami  Rysunku  H.  C.  Selousa.  Przeklad  St.  Kozi- 
miana,  J.  Paszkowskiego  i  L.  Ulricha.  Z  dodaniem  fyciorysu  poety  i 
objasnied  pod  redakcya  J.  I.  Kraszewskiego.  Tom.  II,  p.  141.  Warszawa,  1876 

RUSSIAN 

Koroly  Lere,  Tragadiya  ef  Pyate  Daystviyakhe.  Cotshenania  Shakspera.  Para- 

vale  se  Ar.gliyskago  Vasiley  Yakimof.  .  .  .  .  Sanktpatarburge,  1833 

Polnoa  Sobrania  Dramatetsheskekhe  Shakspera  ef  parabodya  Russkekhe  Pesa- 

talay  Ezdania  N.  V.  Garbalya.  Tome  Parvyiy,  p.  233.  Sanktpatarburge,  1865 
Koroly  Lere,  Tragadiya  ef  Pyate  Daystviyakhe  Shakspera.  Paravode  A. 

Drushenena.  •>  . n.  d. 

Koroly  Lere,  Tragadiya  ef  Pyate  Daystviyakhe  Shakspera.  Paravode  V. 

Lazaravskago.* .  Sanktpatarburge,  1S65 


SWEDISH 

Anonymous:  Konung  Lear.  ( — Bohn).  . Upsala,  1818 

Hagberg :  Shakspeare’s  dramatiska  Arbeten.  Konung  Lear.  Ellofte  bandet. 

Lund, 1861 


*  As  well  as  I  can  make  out,  this  is  the  same  translation  as  the  preceding.  It  is,  perhaps,  need¬ 
less  to  add  that  my  knowledge  of  Russian  barely  extends  beyond  the  alphabet,  and  that  the  foregoing 
attempt  to  convert  these  Russian  titles  into  English  letters  is  simply  laughable.— Ed. 


' 


INDEX  TO  SOME  OF  THE  MORE  IMPORTANT  NOTES, 
AND  TO  THE  APPENDIX. 


Able  ’em  . 

iv, 

vi, 

166 

Assured  loss . 

Ill, 

vi, 

93 

Abused  . .  . . 

iv, 

vii, 

53 

At  each  . 

IV, 

vi. 

53 

Accent  speech 

•  • 

II, 

ii, 

106 

At  gate  [absorption  of  article]  III, 

vii, 

16 

Accommodate 

•  • 

IV, 

vi, 

81 

At  heels  . 

II, 

ii. 

*53 

A-cold 

III, 

iv, 

57 

At  legs  [absorption  of  article] 

II, 

iv, 

9 

Action-taking 

•  • 

II, 

fi, 

15 

At  point  . 

I, 

iv, 

3*9 

Actors 

438 

At  point  . 

III, 

i. 

33 

Addition  =  external  observance  I, 

i, 

135 

At  task  . 

I, 

iv, 

338 

Addition = title 

•  • 

II, 

ii, 

22 

Avert  . 

I, 

*, 

210 

Admiration  =  astonishment 

I, 

iv, 

230 

A-worlc  . 

III, 

v, 

6 

Advise 

II, 

i, 

27 

*  Ay  ’  and  *  no  ’  too  . . 

IV, 

vi, 

99 

Affliction  =  infliction 

•  • 

III, 

ii, 

49 

Aged . 

IV, 

iv, 

28 

Ballow  . 

IV, 

vi, 

240 

A-hanging  .  . 

V, 

iii, 

275 

Bandy  . 

I, 

iv, 

81 

A-height  .  .  .  . 

IV, 

vi, 

58 

Bans  . 

II, 

iii, 

*9 

Ajax  [pronunciation  of] 

•  • 

II, 

ii. 

121 

Barbarous . 

I, 

i, 

*  *5 

Albany  [accent  of]  . . 

•  • 

I, 

i, 

40 

Barber-monger 

II, 

ii. 

30 

Albany  [origin  of]  .  . 

•  • 

I, 

i, 

2 

Bark  . 

III, 

vi, 

61 

All  [adverbial  use]  .  . 

•  • 

IV, 

vii, 

42 

Bastard  . 

I, 

ii. 

6 

Allow  . .  .  . 

II, 

iv, 

188 

Be  [subjunctive]  .  ,  . . 

I, 

v, 

3* 

Allowance  .  . 

I, 

iv. 

201 

Beard  . 

IV, 

vi, 

95 

Altogether  fool  [concrete  for 

Bearing  . 

III, 

vi, 

105 

abstract]  . .  . . 

I, 

iv, 

I46 

Bed  and  warm  .  .  .  . 

III, 

iv, 

47 

Am  bethought 

•  • 

II, 

iii, 

6 

Bedlam  . 

III, 

vii, 

102 

Among  . .  . . 

I, 

iv. 

171 

Bedlam  beggars  .  .  .  . 

II, 

iii, 

*4 

Ancient  of  war  .  . 

•  • 

V, 

i. 

32 

Begot  . 

I, 

i, 

95 

And  [used  emphatically] 

•  • 

III, 

ii, 

74 

Believed . 

IV, 

iii, 

29 

Anguish  .  . 

IV, 

iv, 

15 

Be-met  . 

V, 

i, 

20 

Answer  . .  . . 

I, 

i, 

150 

Benediction . 

IV, 

vii, 

58 

Answer 

IV, 

ii. 

14 

Beseech  [omission  of  nomi- 

Apollo 

I, 

i, 

159 

native] . 

I, 

*, 

209 

Arch  . . 

II, 

i, 

59 

Be-weep  . 

I, 

iv, 

296 

Are  you  there  with  me 

•  • 

IV, 

vi. 

143 

Be-wray  . 

II, 

*, 

107 

Aroint 

III, 

iv, 

11S 

Bids . 

III, 

i, 

S 

Array’d 

IV, 

vii, 

20 

Big  =  loud . 

V, 

iii, 

209 

Arrest  . .  .  . 

V, 

iii, 

84 

Bird . 

IV, 

vi. 

9* 

As  =  as  if  .  .  .  . 

II, 

ii. 

77 

Blackwood’s  Magazine  . . 

• 

• 

425 

As  “  CIS  if  •  •  •  • 

•  • 

III, 

iv, 

15 

Blank  . 

I, 

i, 

*58 

Aspect  [accent  of]  . . 

•  • 

II, 

ii, 

IOX 

Block  . 

IV, 

vi, 

181 

A-squint 

V, 

iii. 

73 

Blood  =«=  disposition  .  . 

IV, 

ii, 

64 

494 


INDEX 


Boil  •  •  •  • 

•  • 

..  II, 

iv,  220 

Chill . 

IV, 

vi, 

234 

Bosom  . . 

•  • 

..  IV, 

v,  26 

Choice  and  rarest  .  . 

•  • 

I, 

iv, 

257 

Bosom  .  • 

•  • 

..  V, 

iii,  50 

Clamour  .  .  .  . 

I, 

i, 

164 

Bound  . . 

•  • 

. .  Ill, 

vii,  10 

Clamour  moisten’d 

•  • 

IV, 

iii, 

3i 

Bourn  .  * 

•  • 

. .  Ill, 

vi,  25 

Clearest 

IV, 

vi, 

73 

Bourn  ♦ . 

•  • 

..  IV, 

vi,  57 

Climb  up  it  .  , 

IV, 

vi. 

2 

Brach  . . 

•  • 

I, 

iv,  107 

Closet 

I, 

ii, 

5S 

Brach  . , 

•  • 

. .  Ill, 

vi,  67 

Clothier’s  yard 

•  • 

IV, 

vi, 

S3 

Brains  . . 

•  • 

..  I, 

v,  7 

Clout 

IV, 

vi, 

9i 

Break  . . 

•  • 

..  V, 

i”.  3 1 3 

Cock  .  .  . . 

IV, 

vi, 

19 

Brief  . . 

•  • 

..  V, 

iii,  246 

Cockney 

II, 

iv, 

11S 

Bring  away  .  , 

•  • 

..  II, 

ii,  135 

Codpiece  .  . 

III, 

ii, 

27 

Brown  bills  .  . 

•  • 

..  IV, 

vi,  91 

Codpiece 

III, 

ii, 

40 

Brow  of  youth 

•  • 

..  I, 

iv,  278 

Cohorts 

I, 

ii, 

141 

Buoyed-up  . . 

•  • 

. .  Ill, 

vii,  59 

Coleridge  [on  Edmund] 

•  • 

9 

• 

419 

Burbage 

•  • 

•  •  • 

•  433 

Comfortable  .  . 

•  • 

I, 

iv, 

300 

Burdocks  .  . 

•  • 

..  IV, 

iv,  4 

Comforting  .  , 

•  • 

III, 

v, 

17 

Burgundy  [pronunciation  of]  I, 

i,  32 

Commit  .  .  .  , 

III, 

iv, 

79 

But  =  merely 

•  • 

..  IV, 

vi,  125 

Common  saw  .  . 

•  • 

II, 

ii, 

156 

Button 

•  • 

..  V, 

iii,  310 

Compact  .  .  ,  . 

I, 

iv, 

334 

Buzz  -. .  . . 

..  I, 

iv,  320 

Compact  .  .  .  . 

II. 

ii, 

”3 

By  day  and  night 

•  • 

..  I, 

iii,  4 

Conception  ... 

I. 

iv. 

64 

By  the  heads 

•  9 

..  II, 

iv,  8 

Condition  .  .  .  . 

I, 

i, 

295 

Conditions  .  .  .  . 

•  • 

I, 

i. 

205 

Cackling  .  . 

9  9 

..  II, 

ii,  79 

Conditions  .  .  .  . 

IV, 

iii, 

33 

Cadent 

9  9 

..  I, 

iv,  279 

Confine  , .  .  . 

II, 

iv, 

144 

Camden’s  Remaines 

•  •  • 

•  392 

Confined  .  .  .  . 

IV, 

i, 

72 

Camelot  .  . 

0  9 

..  II, 

ii.  79 

Consort  .  .  .  . 

II, 

i, 

97 

Can  •  •  •  • 

9  9 

..  I, 

v,  IS 

Constant  pleasure  .  . 

•  • 

V, 

i, 

4 

Constant  will  .  . 

•  9 

I. 

i, 

41 

Capable  . . 

9  9 

..  II, 

CO 

Continents  .  . 

Ill, 

ii. 

53 

Carbonado  .  . 

9  9 

..  II, 

ii,  34 

Convenient  seeming 

9  9 

III, 

ii. 

56 

Case  of  eyes 

9  9 

..  IV, 

vi,  142 

Converse 

I, 

iv, 

15 

Cat  .  .  . . 

. .  Ill, 

Convey 

I, 

ii. 

96 

Cataracts  . . 

9  9 

. .  Ill, 

ii,  2 

Cope . 

V, 

iii, 

125 

Catastrophe  . . 

0  9 

..  I, 

ii,  127 

Cordelia  .  .  .  remedies 

9  9 

II, 

ii, 

162 

Censure  .  . 

9  9 

..  V, 

3 

Corky 

III, 

vii, 

28 

Censured  .  . 

9  0 

. .  Ill, 

v,  2 

Corn  .  . .  harm  [rhyme] 

9  9 

III, 

vi, 

41 

Chambermaids 

9  9 

..  IV, 

i,  61 

Coronet 

I, 

i, 

133 

Champains  . . 

9  9 

..  I, 

•  i,  63 

Costard  .  .  .  . 

IV, 

vi. 

240 

Chance  [as  an  adverb] 

..  II, 

iv,  6  r 

Costume 

446 

Character  . . 

9  9 

..  I, 

ii*  59 

Course 

III, 

vii, 

53 

Character  . . 

0  9 

..  II, 

i,  72 

Courtesy  .  .  .  . 

•  9 

III. 

vii, 

2$ 

Charity  .  . 

0  9 

..  V, 

iii,  167 

Court  holy  water  . . 

9  9 

Ill, 

ii, 

IO 

Charms  .  . 

0  9 

..  II, 

i*  39 

Cover  faults  . .  .  . 

I, 

i, 

2S0 

Che  vor*  ye  . . 

9  9 

..  IV, 

vi,  239 

Cowish  . .  . , 

IV, 

ii, 

12 

Child-changed 

0  9 

..  IV, 

vii,  17 

Coxcomb  ,  .  . . 

I, 

iv, 

93 

Childed  .  . .  father’d 

. .  Ill, 

vi,  10S 

Crab . 

14 

Child  Rowland 

0  0 

. .  Ill, 

iv,  174 

Crack  . .  , » 

III, 

ii, 

8 

INDEX 


495 


Croak  •  •  •  • 

. .  Ill, 

vi, 

31 

Crow-keeper  .  . 

..  IV, 

vi, 

87 

Cruel  garters 

..  II, 

iv. 

7 

Cruels  else  subscribe 

.  .  Ill, 

vii. 

64 

Cub-drawn  .  . 

.  .  Ill, 

i, 

12 

Cuckoo-flowers 

..  IV, 

iv, 

4 

Cue  •  #  •  •  •  • 

..  I, 

ii, 

128 

Cullionly  . .  .  ♦ 

..  II, 

ii, 

29 

Curiosity  .  .  .  . 

..  I, 

i. 

5 

Curiosity 

..  I, 

ii, 

4 

Curiosity  . .  . . 

..  I, 

iv. 

66 

Curious 

..  I, 

iv, 

3i 

Curled  my  hair  . . 

..III, 

iv, 

84 

Curse  of  Lear  . . 

..  I, 

iv, 

269 

Cut  to  th’  brains 

..  IV, 

vi, 

191 

Darker  . .  . . 

..  I, 

i, 

34 

Darkling  . .  . . 

..  I. 

iv, 

210 

Darnel  . . 

..  IV, 

iv, 

5 

Date  of  Composition 

• 

377 

Daub  it  .  . 

..  IV, 

i. 

5i 

Dawning  .  .  . . 

..  II, 

ii. 

1 

Deadly  . .  . . 

..  IV, 

fi. 

36 

Dear . 

266 

Dear  •  •  •  •  •  • 

. .  Ill, 

i. 

19 

Dear  cause  . . 

..  IV, 

iii, 

5i 

Death-practised  . . 

..  IV, 

vi, 

275 

Deathsman  .  .  .  . 

..  IV, 

vi, 

257 

Deboshed  .  .  . . 

..  I, 

iv, 

235 

Decay 

..  V, 

iii, 

298 

Decline  .  .  .  . 

..  IV, 

ii, 

22 

Deed  of  love  . . 

..  I, 

i, 

70 

Defend  .  .  . . 

..  V, 

i, 

69 

Deficient 

..  IV, 

vi, 

23 

Defuse  . .  .  . 

..  I, 

iv, 

2 

Dejected  thing  . . 

..  IV, 

i, 

3 

Delicate  •  •  •  • 

. .  Ill, 

iv, 

12 

Demanding  .  .  .  . 

. .  Ill, 

ii. 

65 

Deny  =  refuse 

..  II, 

iv, 

84 

Depend  .  .  .  . 

..  I. 

iv, 

243 

Deprive  . .  .  . 

..  I, 

», 

4 

Derogate 

..  I. 

iv, 

274 

Desperately  .  . 

..  V, 

iii, 

293 

Devrient  . . 

•  •  • 

• 

444 

Did  [transitive  use] 

..  I. 

iv, 

98 

Diffidences  . . 

..  I, 

fi, 

140 

Diligence 

..  I, 

iv, 

34 

Disclaims  in .  .  . . 

..  II, 

fi, 

50 

Disoovery  . .  . . 

..  V, 

i, 

53 

Discretion . II,  iv,  145 

Diseases  . I,  i,  173 

Disnatured . I*  iv,  277 

Dispatch  . II,  i,  58 

Disposition . I,  i,  302 

Disposition . I,  iv,  215 

Disquantity . I,  iv,  242 

Distract  .  .  . .  .  .  IV,  vi,  279 

Ditch-dog . Ill,  iv,  126 

Division  . I,  i,  4 

Do,  de  . Ill,  iv,  57 

Dog . IV,  vii,  36 

Dolours  . II,  iv,  52 

Dolphin,  my  boy  . .  .  .  Ill,  iv,  96 

Do  thou  for  him  stand  .  .  I,  iv,  138 

Doubted  . V,  i,  6 

Down,  insulted  [omission  of 
nominative]  ..  ..II,  ii,  1 14 

Dover  Cliff . IV,  vi,  1 1 

Dr  Johnson  [criticism  on 

the  Tragedy]  . 418 

Dragon  . I,  i,  121 

Drew  [omission  of  nomina- 

live]  . II,  iv,  4! 

Dropped  . IV,  iii,  22 

Duration  of  Action  . .  . .  408 

Duteous  . IV,  vi,  252 

Ear-kissing . II,  i,  8 

Ear,  Light  of  .  .  . .  Ill,  iv,  90 

Earnest  . I,  iv,  90 

Easy -borrowed  pride  .  .  II,  iv,  182 

Eclipses  . I,  ii,  98 

Effects  . I,  i,  130 

Elbows  him . IV,  iii,  42 

Election  makes  not  up  . .  I,  i,  205 

Elements . Ill,  i,  4 

Elf  all  my  hair  .  .  .  .  II,  iii,  10 

Embossed . II,  iv,  221 

Engine  .  .  .  .  .  .  I,  iv,  262 

English  =  British  . .  .  .  IV,  vi,  249 

Enguard  . I,  iv,  321 

Enormous  state  .  .  .  .  II,  ii,  165 

Enridged . IV,  vi,  71 

Entire  . I,  i,  238 

Epicurism . I,  iv,  237 

Epileptic . II,  ii,  76 

Essay  or  taste  . .  .  .  I,  ii,  44 

Even  but  now  . .  .  .  Ill,  ii,  65 


496 


INDEX 


Even  o’er  . .  . . 

•  • 

IV, 

vil. 

So 

Fops . 

I, 

ii, 

14 

Exhibition  . . 

I, 

ii, 

25 

For  =  on  account  of 

•  • 

II, 

iv, 

52 

Expense  and  waste  . . 

•  • 

II, 

i, 

100 

Forbid  thee  .  . 

•  • 

III, 

iii, 

19 

Eyes,  Wantest  thou . . 

•  • 

HI, 

vi, 

23 

For  my  state  .  . 

•  • 

v. 

i. 

68 

Fordid  .  .  .  , 

V, 

iii, 

256 

Faery  Queene  , . 

391 

Fordone  .  .  . . 

•  • 

V, 

iii/  292 

Faint . 

I, 

iv. 

65 

Fork . 

•  • 

I, 

i, 

143 

Faith’d  . .  . . 

II, 

i, 

70 

Forks .  .  .  .  . . 

IV, 

vi, 

118 

Falchion  ,  .  . , 

V, 

iii, 

277 

Fortnight 

I, 

iv, 

2S9 

Fall  and  cease 

•  • 

V, 

iii. 

265 

Foxes  .  .  ,  . 

V, 

iii, 

23 

Fare  thee  .  .  .  . 

I, 

», 

179 

Frateretto 

III, 

vi, 

6 

Fa,  sol,  la,  mi 

•  • 

I, 

ii, 

129 

Fraught 

I, 

iv. 

214 

Fast  «= fixed  ..  , , 

I, 

i. 

36 

Free . 

IV, 

vi, 

80 

Father  .  .  , . 

IV, 

vi. 

218 

Freedom  .  .  .  . 

I, 

i, 

180 

Fathom  and  a  half  .  . 

«  • 

III, 

iv, 

37 

Free  things  .  .  ,  . 

III, 

vi, 

103 

Fault . 

V, 

iii, 

193 

From  our  home 

•  • 

II, 

i, 

124 

Fear  =  fear  for 

•  • 

IV, 

ii, 

3i 

From  this  = from  this  time 

•  • 

I, 

i. 

>>5 

Fear’d  of 

II, 

i» 

iii 

Frontlet  .  .  .  , 

I, 

iv, 

182 

Fears . 

III, 

v, 

3 

Fruitfully 

IV, 

vi, 

263 

Feature 

IV, 

ii. 

63 

Fumiter  . .  . , 

IV, 

iv, 

3 

Feelingly  . .  . , 

IV, 

vi, 

147 

Feet . 

III, 

i, 

32 

Gad . 

I, 

ii, 

26 

Felicitate 

I, 

i. 

74 

Gait  .  . 

IV, 

vi, 

236 

Fell’d  [omission  of  nom.] 

•  • 

IV, 

ii. 

76 

Gallow 

III, 

ii, 

44 

Fellow  . .  . . 

III, 

i. 

48 

Garb  =  dialect 

•  • 

II, 

ii, 

92 

Felt . 

IV, 

vi, 

183 

Garrick 

439 

Festinate 

III, 

vii, 

9 

Gasted 

II, 

i. 

55 

Fetches 

II, 

iv, 

85 

Generation  . . 

I, 

i, 

116 

Fire  and  food  is 

•  • 

III, 

iv, 

145 

Gervinus  .  . 

457 

First . 

III, 

iv, 

26 

Give  you  good  morrow 

•  • 

II, 

ii, 

154 

First  cock  . .  .  . 

III, 

iv, 

iii 

Glass-gazing .  . 

II, 

ii, 

16 

First  of  difference  .  . 

•  • 

V, 

iii, 

289 

Glib . 

I, 

i, 

223 

Fish . 

I, 

iv. 

16 

Gloucester  [city  of] 

•  « 

I, 

v, 

1 

Fitchew 

IV, 

vi, 

121 

Gloucester  [spelling  of] 

•  • 

I, 

i, 

32 

Five  wits  .  .  .  . 

III, 

iv, 

56 

Goneril  [derivation] 

•  • 

I, 

i, 

51 

Flaws  .  .  *  . 

II, 

iv, 

2S2 

Gone,  sir  . . 

IV, 

vi, 

41 

Flax  and  white  of  eggs 

•  • 

III, 

vii, 

105 

Good-years  . .  .  , 

•  • 

V, 

iii, 

24 

Flesh . 

II, 

ii, 

42 

Gorgeous  . .  . . 

II, 

iv, 

265 

Flesh  .  ,  . .  .  . 

III, 

iv, 

7i 

Gossamer  .  .  .  . 

IV, 

vi, 

49 

Fleshment  . .  . . 

II, 

ii, 

118 

Go,  you 

I, 

v, 

1 

Flibbertigibbet  . . 

•  • 

III, 

iv, 

no 

Go  you,  call .  . 

I, 

iv, 

73 

Foins . 

IV, 

vi, 

244 

Gloves 

III, 

iv, 

84 

Fool . 

I, 

iv, 

9i 

Grace 

III, 

ii, 

40 

Fool  of  fortune 

•  • 

IV, 

vi, 

189 

Graced  palace 

•  • 

I, 

iv, 

239 

Fools  do  those  villains  pity 

•  • 

IV, 

ii, 

54 

Gracious  my  lord  .  . 

•  • 

III, 

ii, 

61 

Fools  had  ne’er 

•  • 

I, 

iv, 

160 

Great . 

II, 

ii, 

IOI 

Footed  . .  . . 

III, 

iii, 

12 

Greater 

V, 

iii, 

2 

Foppery 

I, 

ii, 

112 

Great  vices  .  .  .  . 

IV, 

vi,  162 

Foppish . . .  apish  [rhyme] 

•  • 

I, 

iv. 

161 

Great  world  ■*=  macrocosm 

9  9 

IV, 

vi. 

>33 

INDEX 


497 


Groom  « .  .  • 

..  II, 

iv,  214 

I  am  a  man  more  sinn’d 

•  • 

HI, 

», 

59 

Guardians  . .  .  • 

..  II, 

iv,  248 

I  am,  lam  .  . 

IV, 

vii, 

70 

Ice  =  I shall.  . 

•  • 

•  • 

IV, 

vi, 

239 

Halcyon  . .  .  • 

..  II, 

ii.  73 

If  for  I  want 

•  • 

•  • 

I, 

i, 

223 

Hallam  . .  . . 

If  thou  lovest  me 

•  • 

•  • 

II, 

ii, 

5 

Handy-dandy  , . 

..  IV, 

vi,  151 

Idle  . . 

I, 

iii. 

17 

Harsnet's  Declaration ,  &c.  Ill, 

iv.  53 

Idle  . . 

IV, 

iv. 

5 

Hate . 

i,  11 

Idle  .  . 

IV, 

vi, 

21 

Hath . 

..  I, 

i,  190 

Idle  and  fond 

•  • 

•  • 

I, 

ii, 

48 

Have  you  wisdom  . . 

..  I, 

iv,  88 

Images  . . 

II, 

iv, 

86 

Hazlitt 

Immediacy  , . 

V, 

iii, 

66 

Hearing  of  .  .  . . 

..  V, 

iii,  205 

Impertinency 

•  • 

•  • 

IV, 

vi, 

172 

Hear,  nature  . . 

..  I, 

iv,  269 

Important  .  , 

IV, 

iv, 

26 

Heart  . . 

iv,  4 

Impossibilities 

•  • 

•  • 

IV, 

vi, 

74 

Heat 

..  I, 

i.  305 

Impress’d  lances 

•  • 

•  • 

V, 

iii, 

5i 

Hecate  [dissyllable] 

..  I, 

i,  109 

In  [with  verb  of  motion] 

•  • 

V, 

iii, 

5i 

Hell-black  .  . 

vii,  59 

In  contempt  . . 

II, 

iii, 

8 

Helps 

..  IV, 

iv,  10 

Influence 

I, 

ii, 

11S 

Hemlock  .  . 

..  IV, 

iv,  4 

Ingenious 

IV, 

vi, 

27S 

Hence  and  avoid  my  sight 

..  I, 

i,  123 

Ingrafted  . . 

I, 

i, 

295 

Hence  to-night 

..  I, 

i,  283 

In  mercy  . . 

I, 

iv, 

322 

Hense 

Innocent  .  . 

III, 

vi. 

7 

Here’s 

Insanity 

412 

Here . . .  where  [as  nouns' 

..  I, 

i,  260 

In  such  conditions 

•  • 

•  • 

I, 

i, 

205 

He  that  keeps  nor  crust 

..  I, 

iv,  190 

Intelligent  .  . 

III, 

i. 

25 

Hide  3.11  •  •  •  • 

..  IV, 

vi,  163 

Intelligent  .  . 

III, 

vii, 

11 

High  noises  . . 

, .  Ill, 

vi,  109 

Intelligent  party 

•  • 

•  • 

III, 

v, 

9 

Hill . 

vi,  1 

Interess’d 

I, 

i, 

84 

Him,  them ,  and  'em  con- 

Intermission  .  . 

II, 

iv. 

32 

founded  .  .  • . 

. .  Ill, 

vii,  81 

In  the  confined  deep 

•  • 

IV, 

i, 

72 

History  . .  . . 

..  I, 

i,  235 

In  the  least  ,  . 

I, 

i. 

190 

Hit  together  . . 

..  I, 

i,  301 

Into  . .  i  . 

I, 

iv, 

70 

Hog  in  sloth 

. .  Ill, 

iv,  90 

Intrinse  . . 

II, 

ii, 

70 

Hold,  sir  . .  . . 

..  V, 

iii,  156 

In  your  liking 

•  • 

•  • 

I, 

i, 

232 

Holinshed  . . 

Is  [emphatic] 

•  • 

•  • 

IV, 

vi, 

139 

Holy  cords  . .  . . 

..  II, 

ii,  69 

It 

IV, 

ii. 

32 

Hoppedance  . . 

. .  Ill, 

vi,  30 

It  head 

I, 

iv, 

209 

Horn 

I . . .  whistle  . . 

•  ♦ 

•  0 

IV, 

ii, 

29 

Horn  is  dry  .  .  . . 

vi,  73 

Horrible  .  .  . . 

..  IV, 

vi,  3 

Jameson,  Mrs 

426 

Horse’s  health  .  . 

, .  Ill, 

vi,  19 

Jealous 

V, 

i, 

56 

Hospitable  favours  .  . 

. .  Ill,  vii,  39 

Jealous  curiosity 

•  • 

•  • 

I, 

iv, 

66 

House,  Becomes  the 

..  II, 

iv,  149 

Jewels  . . 

I, 

i. 

267 

How  fearful  [Dover  Cliff] 

..  IV, 

vi,  11 

Judgement  .  . 

I, 

iv, 

16 

Howl . 

..  II, 

iv,  207 

Judicious  . . 

III, 

iv. 

72 

Hudson 

Joint  stool  . . 

III, 

vi. 

50 

Hugo 

Jupiter  .  . 

•  • 

•  • 

I, 

i. 

177 

Hundred  pound  . . 

..  II, 

ii,  14 

Justicer 

III, 

vi, 

21 

Hurricanoes  . . 

. .  Ill, 

ii,  2 

Justicers 

IV, 

ii, 

79 

42  *  2  G 


498 


INDEX. 


Kean 

Madded  .  .  . . 

IV, 

ii,  43 

Kent . 

IV,  iii,  28 

Made  good  .  .  .  . 

I, 

i,  171 

Kill . 

Made  intent  „ .  .  , 

IV, 

vii,  9 

Kill’d  in  him  . , 

• 

IV,  vii,  79 

Mad,  not  mad  . . 

•  • 

I, 

v,  43 

Kill,  kill, 

• 

IV,  vi,  185 

Main  . .  . .  . . 

III, 

i,  6 

Kind  gods  . .  .  . 

III,  vii,  34 

Main  descry  . .  . . 

IV, 

vi,  212 

Kindly 

L  v,  13 

Majesty  [dissyllable] 

♦  ♦ 

I, 

i,  91 

King  Leir  [Ballad] 

•  • 

..  403 

Majesty  [dissyllable] 

•  ♦ 

I, 

i,  148 

King  Leir  [Drama] 

•  • 

393 

Manhood  ,  ,  . . 

0  0 

IV, 

ii,  68 

Knapped  . . 

•  • 

II,  iv,  119 

Manners  . .  . . 

V, 

iii,  235 

Knee  his  throne  . . 

•  « 

II,  iv,  21 1 

Many 

•  • 

III, 

ii,  30 

Kneel  . .  , . 

• 

IV,  vii,  59 

Marry  her 

I, 

i,  128 

Knives  . .  . . 

HI,  iv,  53 

Material  sap .  .  .  , 

IV, 

ii,  35 

Known  and  feeling  sorrows 

IV,  vi,  221 

Mature  .  .  . , 

IV, 

vi,  273 

Know  you  . .  . . 

I,  i,  268 

Maugre  .. . 

•  • 

V, 

iii,  132 

Kreyssig  . .  , , 

Means  . .  .  , 

III, 

vii,  29 

Means  secure  us  . . 

•  • 

IV, 

i,  20 

Labours  . . 

I,  iv,  7 

Means  to  lead  it 

•  • 

IV, 

iv,  20 

Ladies 

I,  iv,  149 

Measure  fail  me 

0  0 

IV, 

vii,  3 

Lamb 

Meiny  . .  . , 

II, 

iv,  34 

Lanced  . . 

II,  i,  52 

Memories 

IV, 

vii,  7 

Last  and  least  . . 

•  • 

I,  i,  82 

Merlin's  prophecy  . , 

0  0 

III, 

ii,  80 

Lender’s  books  . . 

•  • 

III,  iv,  94 

Messenger  . . 

II, 

ii,  4*3 

Less  advancement  . . 

•  -  • 

II,  iv,  197 

Messengers  . . 

II, 

i,  124 

Let-alone 

V,  iii,  80 

Mild . 

IV, 

ii,  I 

Lette- 

III,  vii,  2 

Milk . 

I, 

i,  83 

Letters 

IV,  vi,  247 

Milky  gentleness  .  . 

0  0 

I, 

iv,  336 

Life  in ’t  . .  .  . 

•  • 

IV,  vi,  201 

Minces  virtue 

0  0 

IV, 

vi,  1 19 

Lightning  . . 

IV,  vii,  35 

Minikin  .  .  .  . 

III, 

vi,  42 

Like . 

I,  i,  199 

Mir  our  for  Magistrates 

0  0 

• 

•  389 

Like  a  better  way  . . 

•  • 

IV,  iii,  19 

Miscreant 

I, 

i,  160 

Lily-livered  . .  . . 

•  • 

II,  ii,  15 

Modest 

II, 

iv,  24 

Lipsbury  pinfold 

•  • 

II,  ii,  8 

Modest  truth  . , 

0  0 

IV, 

vii,  5 

List . 

V,  iii,  182 

Modo  .  .  .  Mahu 

0  0 

III, 

iv,  133 

Little  world  of  man  =  micro • 

Moiety  . .  , , 

I, 

i,  6 

cosm  « ,  . . 

III,  i,  10 

Monopoly  . .  . , 

I, 

iv,  148 

Look  . .  .  c 

III,  iii,  12 

Monsters  it  .  .  .  . 

I, 

i,  219 

Looks  fearfully  in  . . 

•  • 

IV,  i,  72 

Mopping  and  mowing 

0  0 

IV, 

i,  60 

Look  you  . .  . . 

III,  vii,  93 

Moral  =  moralizing  ,  . 

0  0 

IV, 

ii,  58 

Loop’d 

III,  iv,  31 

More  [dissyllable]  .  . 

0  0 

I, 

iv,  334 

Lord’s  dependants  . . 

'•  • 

III,  vii,  17 

More  corrupter 

0  0 

II, 

ii,  97 

Lose  . .  . . 

I,  iv,  297 

More  headier 

0  0 

II, 

iv,  106 

Lusts  . .  . .  . . 

IV,  vi,  160 

More  worse  . . 

0  0 

II, 

ii,  144 

Luxury  . .  . . 

IV,  vi,  1 16 

More  worthier  . . 

0  0 

I, 

i,  210 

Lym . 

III,  vi,  67 

Mortified  .  ,  .  . 

II, 

iii,  15 

Most  poorest . .  . . 

II, 

iii,  7 

Machination .  . 

V,  i,  46 

Mother’s  pains  .  . 

0  0 

I, 

iv,  2S0 

Madam  .  .  .  . 

II,  i,  97 

Mother,  swells  up  toward 

0  0 

II, 

iv,  54 

Madam’s  . .  .  < 

I,  ii,  9 

Motion  . .  . . 

II, 

i,  50 

INDEX  499 


Much  •  •  •  •  •  • 

•  • 

II, 

ii, 

137 

On’s . 

I, 

V, 

*9 

Mumbling  of  . . 

•  * 

II, 

i, 

39 

On’t . 

IV, 

i, 

50 

Murderers  . .  .  . 

•  • 

v, 

m, 

270 

One-trunk-inheriting 

•  • 

II, 

ii, 

17 

Music  . .  . . 

•  • 

IV, 

vii, 

25 

One’s . 

I, 

iv, 

95 

My  poor  fool  is  hanged 

•  • 

V, 

iii, 

306 

Operation 

I, 

i. 

no 

Opposeless  .  .  . , 

IV, 

vi, 

38 

Natural  . .  » , 

84 

Opposites 

V, 

iii, 

43 

Nature 

•  • 

I, 

>, 

5i 

Oppress’d  nature  sleeps 

•  • 

III, 

vi, 

95 

Nature,  art  my  goddess 

•  ♦ 

I, 

ii, 

1 

Or  =  nor 

•  • 

III, 

iii, 

5 

Nature’s  above  art  . . 

•  • 

IV, 

vi, 

86 

Ordinance  .  .  . , 

IV, 

i, 

66 

Neat  .  .  . .  .  * 

37 

Other . 

I, 

iv, 

194 

Need . 

267 

Our  wishes  .  .  , . 

IV, 

ii, 

14 

Nero . 

III, 

vi, 

6 

Out . 

I, 

iv, 

148 

Nether-stocks 

•  • 

II, 

iv, 

10 

Out  nine  years 

•  • 

I, 

i. 

30 

Nettles  . .  . . 

•  • 

IV, 

iv, 

4 

Overture 

III, 

vii. 

88 

Nicely  ♦ ,  . , 

II, 

ii. 

99 

Owes . 

I, 

i, 

201 

Nightingale  . .  . . 

III, 

vi, 

3° 

Owes  nothing 

4  • 

IV, 

i, 

9 

Ninefold  . .  . . 

III, 

iv. 

US 

Owest  . , 

I, 

iv, 

115 

No,  no,  no,  no  .. 

•  • 

V, 

iii, 

8 

No  tearing  . . 

•  • 

V, 

iii, 

158 

Packs  and  sets 

•  • 

V, 

iii, 

18 

Nobly 

V, 

>, 

28 

Paphlagonian  vnkinde  king 

« 

• 

386 

Noon . 

83 

’Parel 

IV, 

• 

l, 

49 

Nor  ndfcnan  else 

•  • 

V, 

iii, 

291 

Particular  .  .  .  . 

I, 

iv, 

332 

Not  an  hour  more  nor  less 

•  • 

IV, 

vii, 

61 

Particular  .  .  .  . 

II, 

iv, 

289 

Note . 

III, 

>, 

18 

Particular 

V, 

i. 

30 

Note . 

IV, 

v. 

29 

Parting  them  [stage*direction]  II, 

ii. 

40 

Note  . .  . .  . . 

V, 

m, 

28 

Pass . 

•  • 

IV, 

vi, 

47 

Nothing  . .  . . 

I, 

>, 

86 

Pass  upon 

III, 

vii, 

23 

Nothing  sees  miracles 

•  • 

II, 

ii, 

161 

Pawn . 

I, 

i. 

154 

Not  i’  th’  stocks.  Fool 

•  • 

II, 

iv. 

83 

Peascod  .  .  , , 

I, 

iv. 

192 

Not  met 

IV, 

ii. 

2 

Pebble 

IV, 

vi, 

21 

Not  thought .  .  . . 

II, 

I, 

75 

Pelican  .  .  . . 

III, 

iv, 

73 

Nuncle  . .  .  . 

100 

Pelting  . ,  . . 

II, 

iii, 

18 

Perdu  .  .  . , 

IV, 

vii. 

35 

Obidicut 

IV, 

i, 

58 

Perdy  .  ,  , , 

II, 

iv. 

81 

Object  , .  , . 

213 

Perforce  .  .  . , 

I, 

v, 

37 

Observants  .  .  . . 

II, 

ii, 

98 

Perjured  .  .  .  . 

III, 

ii. 

54 

Oechelhauser 

463 

Persever  .  ,  .  , 

III, 

v, 

18 

CEiliads  .  .  .  . 

IV, 

v, 

25 

Persian  attire  ,  , 

•  • 

III, 

vi, 

78 

Of  [following  verbal  noun] 

I, 

iii, 

1 

Pestilent  gall  ,  . 

•  ♦ 

I, 

iv. 

109 

Of  =  proximity  . . 

•  • 

I, 

v, 

21 

Pew . 

III, 

iv, 

53 

Oh! . 

III, 

vii. 

90 

Picture 

II, 

i, 

81 

Oh . 

IV, 

ii. 

26 

Pieced  .  ,  , . 

I, 

i. 

198 

Old  course  . .  . . 

III, 

vii, 

100 

Piece  of  nature 

•  • 

IV, 

vi, 

133 

Old  fools  . .  . . 

•  • 

I, 

iii. 

21 

Pight . 

11, 

i, 

65 

Oldness  .  .  . . 

I, 

ii, 

47 

Pillicock  .  .  .  , 

III, 

iv, 

74 

On . ; 

V, 

iii. 

166 

Pities . 

III, 

ii, 

12 

On  necessity  . . 

•  • 

I, 

ii, 

"5 

Plackets  . .  .  , 

III, 

iv, 

94 

On’s . 

98 

Plague  of  custom  ,  . 

•  • 

I, 

ii, 

3 

500  INDEX 


Plate  .  . 

• 

163 

Remediate  .  ,  ,  , 

*7 

Plighted 

•  • 

•  • 

0  0 

I» 

i. 

279 

Remember  , .  ,  , 

0  0 

IV, 

vi. 

228 

Plural  by  attraction 

0  0 

HI, 

vi. 

4 

Remorse  . .  . . 

IV, 

ii. 

73 

Poise  .  . 

120 

Remotion  . .  * . 

II, 

iv, 

no 

Policy 

•  • 

•  • 

0  0 

I, 

ii. 

45 

Renege  . .  , . 

II, 

ii. 

73 

Ponderous 

•  • 

•  • 

J0  0 

I, 

i. 

77 

Report  . . 

IV, 

vi, 

*39 

Power 

•  • 

•  « 

0  0 

I, 

• 

», 

169 

Reposal 

II. 

i. 

68 

Practice 

•  • 

•  • 

0  0 

II, 

i» 

73 

Reserve  thy  state  , . 

0  0 

I, 

i, 

148 

Practice 

•  • 

•  • 

0  0 

II, 

i. 

107 

Resolution  . .  . . 

95 

Practice 

•  • 

•  9 

0  0 

II, 

iv, 

iii 

Respective  construction 

0  0 

I. 

iv, 

237 

Practices 

0  • 

0  0 

•  • 

I, 

ii. 

172 

Respects  , .  .  ♦ 

II, 

ii, 

126 

Practised 

•  • 

0  • 

•  0 

HI, 

ii. 

57 

Respects  of  fortune 

0  0 

I, 

i. 

247 

Prefer 

•  • 

0  0 

0  0 

I, 

i, 

273 

Restoration  hang  , . 

0  0 

IV, 

vii, 

26 

Pregnant 

«  • 

0  0 

0  0 

II, 

i. 

76 

Retention  . . 

9  9 

V, 

iii. 

48 

Pregnant 

•  • 

9  ♦ 

0  0 

IV, 

vi, 

222 

Revenging  gods  . . 

9  % 

II, 

i. 

45 

Prescribe  not  ’  us 

•  • 

0  0 

I, 

i. 

275 

Reverbs 

I, 

i. 

*53 

Presently 

•  • 

•  • 

0  0 

II, 

iv, 

33 

Riddle 

V, 

i. 

37 

Press  money .  . 

•  • 

0  0 

IV, 

vi. 

«7 

Ripeness 

V, 

ii. 

11 

Pretence 

•  • 

•  • 

0  0 

I, 

ii. 

S4 

Rivall’d 

I, 

i. 

190 

Prevent 

•  • 

•  • 

0  0 

III, 

iv, 

*5i 

Rogues  . .  . , 

IV, 

vii. 

39 

Pricks 

«  • 

♦  • 

0  0 

II, 

ill. 

16 

Rotundity  ,  .  , , 

III, 

ii, 

7 

Privilege 

•  • 

•  • 

0  9 

V, 

iii, 

130 

Rubb’d  , .  , , 

II, 

ii, 

*5° 

Profess 

•  « 

•  » 

9  0 

I, 

iv, 

11 

ROmelin  .  .  ,  , 

462 

Professed 

•  • 

•  • 

0  0 

I, 

i. 

271 

Professes 

•  ♦ 

•  • 

0  0 

I, 

i, 

73 

Sa,  sa  . ,  . , 

IV, 

vi, 

202 

Proper 

•  • 

•  • 

0  0 

I, 

i. 

*7 

Safer  sense  . .  . . 

IV, 

vi. 

81 

Proper  deformity 

•  • 

0  9 

IV, 

ii. 

60 

Sallets  . ,  , , 

III, 

iv, 

126 

Property 

•  • 

•  • 

0  0 

I, 

i, 

**3 

Salt . 

IV, 

vi, 

*93 

Provoking  merit 

•  • 

0  9 

III, 

v, 

5 

Sampire  , .  ,  . 

IV, 

vi. 

*5 

Pudder 

•  • 

•  ♦ 

0  0 

III, 

ii, 

5o 

Sapient  ,  ,  , , 

III, 

vi. 

22 

Punishment 

•  • 

•  ♦ 

0  0 

III, 

iv. 

72 

Savour  ,  .  . , 

230 

Puppet 

•  • 

•  0 

0  0 

II, 

ii. 

33 

Savour  , ,  , , 

IV, 

ii, 

39 

Pur  .  . 

44 

Say . . 

V, 

iii. 

*44 

Put  him  on 

•  • 

0  • 

0  0 

II, 

i, 

99 

Scatter’d  . .  .  . 

III, 

i, 

3* 

Put  it  on 

•  • 

•  • 

0  0 

I, 

iv, 

200 

Schick 

453 

Schlegel  . . 

449 

Qualities 

•  • 

•  • 

0  0 

I, 

>» 

5 

Scythian  .  ,  ,  . 

I, 

i, 

**5 

Quality 

•  • 

♦  • 

9  0 

II. 

iv. 

88 

Sea-monster , .  , , 

I, 

iv. 

255 

Quarrel 

•  • 

•  * 

0  0 

Ill, 

vii. 

76 

Seeming  .  .  , . 

I, 

i. 

*97 

Queasy 

♦  • 

•  • 

0  9 

II, 

i. 

*7 

Self =same  .. 

I, 

i. 

68 

Question 

•  • 

•  0 

0  0 

IV, 

iii. 

24 

Self-covered . .  . , 

IV, 

ii, 

62 

Question 

•  • 

0  0 

9  0 

V, 

iii. 

34 

Self-mate  and  mate  . . 

9  0 

IV, 

iii. 

34 

Questrists 

•  • 

0  0 

9  0 

III, 

vii. 

16 

Sepulchring  . ,  .  , 

II, 

iv, 

128 

Serpent’s  tooth  .  , 

9  9 

I, 

iv, 

282 

Rake  up 

•  • 

0  0 

9  9 

IV, 

vi. 

272 

Serving-man  , , 

9  9 

III, 

iv, 

83 

Rapp  . . 

457 

Sessa ,  .  . ,  .  , 

III, 

iv, 

96 

Rebel 

•  • 

0  9 

0  9 

II, 

», 

7* 

Sessa . 

III, 

vi. 

72 

Regards 

•  • 

•  0 

0  9 

I, 

i. 

237 

Set . 

I, 

iv. 

118 

Remainder 

. .  to  be 

9  0 

I. 

iv. 

243 

Set  -00  00  00 

0  0 

III, 

iv. 

80 

INDEX 


Set  my  rest  . ,  . « 

..  I, 

i, 

122 

Settling  , .  .  . 

..  iv, 

vii, 

82 

Seven  stars  .  .  .  . 

..  I, 

v. 

34 

Shall . 

126 

Shall  =  I  am  bound  to 

..  I, 

i. 

33 

Shall  =  I  am  bound  to 

..  I, 

i, 

133 

Shelley  . .  . . 

429 

Short  . .  • . 

..  IV, 

vii, 

40 

Should  •  •  •  • 

..  II, 

ii.  143 

Side . 

..  V, 

61 

Silly-ducking  .  . 

..  II, 

ii, 

98 

Similar  . .  . . 

. .  Ill, 

ii, 

54 

Since  that  . .  . . 

. .  I, 

247 

Sinews  . .  . » 

. .  Ill, 

vi, 

96 

Sir  [rhythm]  . . 

..  I, 

i, 

53 

Sir  [rhythm]  . . 

..  I, 

iv, 

196 

Sir  [rhythm]  .  . 

.  .  II, 

ii, 

123 

Sir  [substantive]  .  . 

..  II, 

iv, 

74 

..  I, 

i, 

179 

Sith . 

iv, 

236 

iv, 

172 

Slave .  .  .  .  . . 

19 

Slaves  .  .  . . 

66 

Sleepest  .  .  . . 

. .  Ill, 

vi, 

40 

Slipshod  .  .  . . 

..  I, 

v, 

2 

Smile  once  more  . . 

..  II, 

ii, 

169 

Smile  you  . .  .  . 

ii, 

77 

Smooth  . .  . . 

ii, 

70 

Smulkin  . .  .  . 

iv. 

133 

Snider  . .  . . 

429 

Snow  .  .  . . 

.  .  IV, 

vi, 

118 

Snuffs  . .  .  . 

. .  Ill, 

i, 

26 

i, 

195 

Soiled  .  .  .  . 

vi. 

121 

Something  [used  adverbially]  I, 

i, 

20 

Sometime  =  formerly 

..  I, 

«, 

119 

Some  year  . .  . . 

..  I, 

i, 

iS 

So  much  .  .  . . 

..  I, 

i, 

60 

Sons  at  perfect  age .  . 

..  I, 

ii. 

69 

So  out  went  the  candle 

..  I, 

iv, 

210 

So  •  •  •  To  •  •  •  • 

..  II, 

iv, 

11 

So  •  •  •  To  •  •  •  • 

..  II, 

iv. 

272 

Sop  0’  th’  moonshine 

..  II, 

ii. 

29 

Sorry . 

ii, 

73 

Source  of  the  Plot 

•  •  • 

• 

383 

Space  .  .  . . 

..  I, 

>, 

55 

Space  .  .  . . 

vi. 

269 

Spare  . .  . . 

62 

Speak  . .  . . 

i, 

61 

501 


Speculations  . . Ill,  i,  24 

Spies . V,  iii,  17 

Spill  . .  • «  •»  •  •  III,  ii,  S 

Sport . II,  i,  35 

Square  of  sense  •  . .  I,  i,  73 

Squiny  . IV,  vi,  136 

Stars. . I,  ii,  115 

StelPd  . .  .  .  Ill,  vii,  60 

Stem . Ill,  vii,  62 

Stiberdigebit  • .  . .  IV,  i,  59 

Stick . II,  iii,  15 

Stick . Ill,  vii,  57 

Still . I,  i,  230 

Still . II,  iv,  102 

Stocking . II,  ii,  128 

Stomach  . V,  iii,  75 

Stones  . .  . .  . .  V,  iii,  258 

Store . .  . .  Ill,  vi,  52 

Strain  . .  .  .  .  .  V,  iii,  41 

Strange  . II,  i,  77 

Strangeness  .  .  . .  . .  IV,  vi,  66 

Stranger’d  . .  .  .  . .  I,  i,  203 

Subject  .  .  .  ,  .  .  IV,  vi,  107 

Subscribed . I,  ii,  24 

Subscription..  ..  ..Ill,  ii,  18 

Succeed  . I,  ii,  136 

Such  [Omission  of  as  after]  I,  i,  208 

Such  ...  That  ..  ..II,  ii,  115 

Suggestion . II,  i,  73 

Suited  . IV,  vii,  6 

Summoners  . .  . .  .  .  Ill,  ii,  59 

Sumpter  . II,  iv,  213 

Sun . I,  i,  10S 

Superfluous  . .  . .  . .  II,  iv,  262 

Superfluous . IV,  i,  65 

Superflux . Ill,  iv,  35 

Super-serviceable  . .  .  .  II,  ii,  1 6 

Surfeit  ..  ..  ..  I,  ii,  113 

Suum,  mun . Ill,  iv,  96 

Swear’ st  . I,  i,  160 

Swinburne . 429 

Swithold . Ill,  iv,  114 

Tadpole  . Ill,  iv,  124 

Tailor  made  thee  .  .  .  .  II,  ii,  50 

Taint . I,  i,  220 

Take  all  .  .  . .  . .  Ill,  i,  15 

Taken  . I,  iv,  325 

Take  physic,  pomp . .  . .  Ill,  iv,  33 


502 


INDEX 


Taking  . .  . . 

•  • 

II, 

iv, 

160 

Thought-executing  . . 

Ill, 

•  • 
11, 

4 

Taking  * .  . . 

•  • 

III, 

iv, 

5S 

Thoughts  defile  . .  . . 

III, 

vi, 

no 

Tame  . ,  . . 

•  • 

IV, 

ii, 

47 

Thou  wert . 

HI, 

iv, 

98 

Tame  •  •  •  • 

•  • 

IV, 

vi, 

220 

Threading . 

II, 

i, 

119 

Tate’s  Version  . . 

467 

Three-suited .  .  .  .  .  . 

II, 

ii, 

14 

Tell . 

S3 

Three  suits . 

HI, 

iv, 

129 

Tenant  . ,  . . 

« 

IV, 

i, 

IA 

Through  the  sharp  hawthorn 

HI, 

iv, 

45 

Tend  •  •  »  • • 

•  • 

II, 

i, 

95 

Thunu'er  . 

HI, 

iv,  147 

Tender-hefted  . . 

•  • 

II, 

iv, 

16S 

Thwart  .  .  .  .  . . 

I, 

iv. 

277 

Tender .  .  .  weal  . . 

•  • 

I, 

iv, 

203 

Thy . 

IV, 

i, 

53 

Tenth  day  . .  . , 

I, 

i, 

175 

Thy  state  begins  to  threat  . . 

IV, 

ii, 

57 

Terrible  .  .  . . 

I, 

ii, 

32 

Tied  .  .  . .  .  .  .  . 

II, 

iv, 

130 

That  = for  that  .  . 

•  • 

I, 

i, 

167 

Tike . 

HI, 

vi, 

68 

That  =  in  that  .  . 

•  • 

I, 

i, 

7i 

Till . . .  death  . .  . . 

II, 

iv, 

”5 

That = so  that  .  . 

0  0 

IV, 

vii, 

47 

Time,  Soundest  of  his  . . 

I, 

i, 

293 

That  =»  -where  » . 

0  0 

II, 

iii. 

4 

Time,  Greet  the  .  .  . . 

V, 

i, 

54 

That . .  .  as  . .  . . 

I, 

iv, 

56 

Time,  Shall  find  . .  . . 

II, 

ii, 

164 

That  I  am  wretched 

0  0 

IV, 

i, 

63 

Times*  . 

IV, 

i, 

46 

That  makes  .  .  . . 

III, 

vi, 

76 

Times,  The  best  of  our  . . 

I, 

ii. 

46 

That  nature  which  contemns 

IV, 

ii, 

32 

’Tis  so  . 

IV, 

iii, 

49 

That  patience  . . 

0  0 

II, 

iv, 

268 

Tithing  . 

III, 

iv, 

128 

That  stirs  . .  . . 

0  0 

II, 

iv, 

271 

To  be  just . 

III, 

v. 

8 

That  thing  . .  , . 

0  0 

IV, 

vi, 

77 

T’  obey  . 

III, 

iv, 

141 

That*  worthied  .  * 

0  0 

II, 

ii, 

1 16 

To  blame . 

I, 

ii. 

41 

The  case  . .  , . 

IV, 

vi, 

142 

To  effect . 

III, 

i, 

52 

The  creating 

0  0 

I, 

ii, 

14 

To  fall  [transitive]  . . 

II, 

iv, 

164 

The  man  that  makes  his  toe 

III, 

ii, 

3i 

To  the  charge  . .  . . 

I, 

ii, 

121 

The  more  . .  *  * 

V, 

iii, 

169 

To  who  . 

V, 

iii, 

249 

The  promised  end  . , 

0  0 

V, 

iii, 

264 

Tom  ...  am  [rhyme]  . . 

II, 

iii. 

20 

The  restoring  . . 

0  • 

IV, 

iv, 

9 

Too  short . 

I, 

i, 

71 

The  Text  , .  . . 

353 

Top  the  legitimate  . .  . . 

I, 

ii, 

21 

Thee  . .  . .  « « 

179 

Tough  . 

V, 

iii, 

315 

Thee  =  thyself  . . 

•  • 

I, 

iv, 

254 

Toward  . .  . .  . . 

II, 

i, 

IO 

Thee  . . .  ye  . . .  thee 

0  0 

IV, 

vi. 

30 

Toward  . 

III, 

iii, 

17 

Theft . 

IV, 

vi, 

44 

Treachers  . . 

I, 

ii, 

Il6 

Their  evidence  • . 

0  0 

III, 

vi, 

34 

Trial . 

III, 

vi, 

34 

Their  papers  is  . . 

•0  0 

IV, 

vi. 

260 

Trick . 

IV, 

vi, 

105 

Their . . .  that 

0  0 

V, 

iii, 

2 

Trill’d  .  .  . .  . . 

IV, 

iii, 

12 

Then  they  for  sudden  joy 

0  0 

I, 

iv, 

168 

Trowest  . 

I, 

iv,  1 17 

Thereat  enraged  . . 

0  0 

IV, 

ii. 

75 

Trundle-tail . 

III, 

vi, 

6S 

There  is  a  cliff  . . 

0  0 

IV, 

i. 

7i 

Tucket  . 

II, 

i, 

73 

These  kind  of  knaves 

0  0 

II, 

ii, 

96 

Tucket  . 

II, 

iv, 

179 

This’  a  good  block . . 

0  0 

IV, 

vi, 

1S1 

Turlygod . . 

II, 

iii. 

20 

This  *  a  dull  sight  .  . 

0  0 

V, 

iii, 

283 

Tut . 

I, 

ii. 

124 

This  two  days  . . 

0  0 

I, 

iv. 

69 

Tutors  . 

III, 

ii. 

83 

Those ...  as  [ellipsis] 

0  0 

I, 

i, 

96 

Two  hours . 

II, 

ii, 

55 

Those  wicked  creatures 

0  0 

II, 

iv, 

253 

Though  that .  .  . . 

0  0 

IV, 

vi, 

2x4 

Ulrici  . 

453 

Though  ...  to 't  . . 

0  0 

II, 

ii. 

107 

Unaccommodated  . .  . . 

III, 

iv, 

103 

INDEX 


503 


Unbolted  . . 

•  • 

..  II, 

ii, 

Unbutton  here 

•  • 

. .  Ill, 

iv, 

Unfee’d  lawyer 

•  • 

..  I, 

iv, 

Unfortunate  .  . 

•  • 

..  IV, 

vi, 

Ungovemed . . 

•  • 

..  IV, 

iv, 

Unkind  .  . 

•  • 

..  I, 

i, 

Unkind  [accent] 

s  • 

. .  Ill, 

iv, 

Unnecessary 

•  • 

..  II, 

iv, 

Unnumbered 

•  • 

..  IV, 

vi, 

Unpossessing 

•  • 

..  II, 

i, 

Unprized  . . 

•  • 

..  I, 

i, 

Unsanctified  .  . 

•  • 

..  IV, 

vi, 

Unsophisticated 

•  • 

. .  Ill, 

iv, 

Unspoke  . . 

•  • 

..  I, 

i, 

Unstate  » .. 

•  • 

..  I, 

ii, 

Untented  . . 

•  • 

..  I, 

iv, 

Upon 

9  ♦ 

. .  Ill, 

vi, 

Upon  his  party 

4  • 

..  II, 

i> 

Upon  respect 

•  • 

..  ri, 

iv, 

Upright  .  . 

•  • 

..  IV, 

vi. 

Usage 

•  • 

..  11, 

iv, 

Validity  . . 

•  • 

..  1, 

i, 

Vanity  . . 

•  • 

n, 

ii. 

Vary  .  .  .  . 

•  • 

..  11, 

ii, 

Vaunt  couriers 

•  • 

. ,  hi, 

ii, 

Villain  . . 

•  • 

. .  hi, 

vii, 

Virtue  . . 

•  • 

..  V, 

iii, 

Voice  . . 

•  • 

..  V, 

iii, 

Vulgar 

m  • 

..  IV, 

vi, 

Wage 

•  • 

•  •  I> 

i, 

Walk 

•  • 

..  IV, 

vii, 

Walking  fire 

•  • 

. .  Ill, 

iv, 

Walks  at  first  cock 

•  • 

. .  Ill, 

iv, 

Wall-newt  . . 

•  • 

. .  Ill, 

iv, 

Walls 

•  • 

..  V, 

iii, 

Wantest  . . 

•  • 

. .  Ill, 

vi, 

Warrant  . . 

•  • 

..  I, 

iv, 

Wash’d  eyes 

•  • 

..  I, 

i, 

Water  . . 

•  • 

. .  Ill, 

iv, 

Waterish  . . 

•  • 

..  I, 

Wawl  . . 

•  • 

.  .  IV, 

vi, 

Weary  .  0 

•  • 

..  I, 

iii, 

Web  and  pin 

•  ♦ 

. .  Ill, 

iv, 

Weeds 

..  IV, 

vii, 

7 

Well  are  worth 

..  I, 

i# 

278 

What  =  whatever  .  . 

.  .  Ill, 

vi. 

112 

What  =  whoever  .  . 

..  v, 

iii, 

98 

What  like  .  .  offensive 

..  IV, 

ii. 

11 

Whelked  .  . 

..  IV, 

vi, 

7* 

Whe’r 

..  II, 

i, 

53 

Where  —  to  where  .  . 

..  v, 

iii, 

151 

Where  =  whereas  .. 

..  I, 

ii. 

79 

Wherefore  ,  .  ,  . 

..  II, 

iv, 

108 

Which 

..  I, 

iv, 

228 

Which  =  as  to  which 

..  V, 

iii, 

149 

White  herring.  . . 

. .  Ill, 

vi, 

3* 

Who  =  which  ,  . 

..  I, 

ii, 

49 

Who  =  whom  .  . 

..  IV, 

iii, 

7 

Who  =  whom  ,  . 

..  I, 

iv, 

23 

Who  [personifying  irrational 

antecedent] 

..  IV, 

iii, 

*4 

Who  seem  no  less  ,  . 

. .  Ill, 

i, 

23 

Whoop,  jug  .  . 

..  I, 

iv, 

218 

Wide . 

iv, 

107 

Wind  me  .  .  .  . 

..  I, 

ii. 

93 

Wisdom  of  nature  .  . 

..  I, 

ii, 

99 

Wonder  =  wonderful 

..  IV, 

vii, 

41 

Word 

..  IV, 

vi, 

92 

Word  can  wield  .  , 

..  I, 

i, 

54 

Word  justly 

. .  Ill, 

iv, 

79 

World  .  .  .  age 

..  IV, 

i, 

10 

Worships  .  .  . . 

..  I, 

iv, 

260 

Worst  .  . 

..  IV, 

*> 

28 

Worsted-stocking  .  . 

..  II, 

ii, 

15 

Worth 

..  I, 

i, 

69 

Would  [omission  of  relative]  III, 

iv, 

25 

Write  happy 

..  V, 

iii. 

36 

Yeoman  • .  . , 

. .  Ill, 

vi, 

13 

Yet . 

337 

Yet  better  thus  . . 

..  IV, 

i, 

1 

You  less  know  how 

..  II, 

iv, 

135 

You  were  best  .  , 

I, 

iv, 

93 

Young  bones  .  , 

..  II, 

iv, 

159 

Your  honour  . , 

..  I, 

ii, 

83 

Zed  .. 

59 

61 

105 

124 

68 

19 

259 

69 

iSi 

21 

67 

258 

272 

102 

235 

95 

294 

87 

26 

23 

27 

25 

80 

33 

74 

5 

77 

104 

273 

209 

155 

83 

109 

tn 

124 

77 

23 

304 

267 

124 

257 

178 

*3 

112 


FINIS 


‘ 


05 

CD 

CO 

''3' 

^r 

o 

o 

o 

h- 

CD 

CO 


CO 


J3  hakes  id  ear  e 

author  ' 


20678 


-Jg^j^MsaitlCTl  Of 

Shakes  pe«  _ 

26feT© 


S  U  o-ke-Sjjp&ajre. 

r^ewT  >/*-*■• oru.*n  e_cA,it«lov> 

a  f  tilVke^peo-/'e- 


V.5 

B2.2..3 

S  5"a.V 

V.  S' 


